A

COMMENTARY


ON  TUB


HOLY  SCEIPTUEES:

CRITICAL,  DOCTRINAL,  AND  HOM!  LEXICAL,

WITH  SPECIAL  REFERENCE  TO  MINISTERS  AND  STUDENTS.

BY

JOHN  PKTEU  LANGE,  D.D.,

1*    CONNECTION-    WITH    A    NUMBKP.    OF    KMINEST    EfKOl'EAN    DIVINES.

TRANSLATED   FROM  THE  GERMAN,  AND  EDITED,  WITH  ADDITIONS,


miLir  SCITAFF,  D.IX,

,S    CONNECTZON    WITI,    AMEIUCAN    BCHOLARS    OK    TARIOCS    KVANOEL1CAL    DOMINATIONS


VOL.  I.  OF  THE  OLD   TESTAMENT:    CONTAINING  A  GENERAL   INTRODUCTION,
AND   THE  BOOK   OF   GENESIS.


NEW    YORK:
CHARLES   SCEIBNER  &  CO.,  C54  BROADWAY.

1869.


GENESIS,

OR,

THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES,


TOGETHER  WITH  A  GENERAL   THEOLOGICAL  AND  HOMILETICAL
INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


BY


JOILN  PETER  LANGE,  D.D.,

PROFESSOR  IN  ORDINARY  OF  THEOLOGY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  BONN.


TRANSLATED    FROM   THE   GERMAN,   WITH  ADDITIONS,

BY

FEOF.   TAYLER  LEWIS,  LL.D.,

SCHENECTADY,    N.  Y.,
AND

A.   GOSMAN,  D.D.,

LATVRENCEVILLE,    N.  J.
FOURTH  EDITION.

NEW    YORK:

CHARLES  SCRIBNER  &  CO.,  054  BROADWAY.

1SG9.


ESTLKEI.,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1S63,  by

CIIARLKS  SCRIBXEB  &  CO.,

the  Clerk's  0;lice  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the  Southern  District

of  New  "\  ork.


THE    TROW    k   SMITH

K   MA.vrF.4crr;i/,v(!    COMPACT,
46,  4?,  50  Gruene  Street,  N.  Y.


PREFACE  OF  THE  GENERAL  EDITOR.


THE  favor  with  which  the  volumes  of  the  New-Testament  division  of  Dr.  LANCE'S  "  Bible-
work  "  have  been  received  by  the  American  public,  has  encouraged  the  editor  and  publishers
to  undertake  also  the  preparation  of  the  Old-Testament  division,  on  the  same  principles  of
enlargement  and  adaptation  to  the  wants  of  the  English  reader.  A  good  theological  and  homi-
letical  commentary  on  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  is  even  more  needed  than  on  the  Greek  Testament.
Of  the  German  work,  the  following  parts  of  the  Old  Testament  have  so  far  appeared,  and
have  been  assigned  to  competent  American  scholars  :

GENESIS  ;  by  Dr.  LANGE.     1864.

DEUTERONOMY;  by  TV.  J.  SCHRODER.     I860.

JUDGES  and  RUTH;  by  Prof.  PAULUS  CASSEL.     1865.

The  PBOVERBS  ;  by  Dr.  Q:  ZOCKLER.     1807.
Besides  these,

The  Books  of  KINGS;  by  Dr.  BAIIR,

The  PSALMS  ;  by  Dr.  MOLL,

JEREMIAH  ;  by  Dr.  NAGELSBACII,

ECCLESIASTES  and  the  SONG-  OF  SOLOMON  ;  by  Dr.  ZOCKLER,
are  in  the  hands  of  the  printer,  and  will  soon  be  published.

The  Commentary  on  GENESIS,  which  is  now  presented  to  the  English  reader,  involves  a  vast
amount  of  labor  both  on  the  part  of  the  author  and  on  the  part  of  the  translators,  and  will,  no
doubt,  command,  in  no  ordinary  degree,  the  respectful  attention  of  biblical  scholars.  No
other  book  of  the  Bible  stands  more  in  need  of  an  exhaustive  commentary  just  at  this  time.
No  one  is  so  much  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  modern  science  in  its  temporary  conflict  with
revealed  truth.  "We  say,  temporary  conflict ;  for  there  can  be  no  essential  or  ultimate  discord
between  science  and  religion,  philosophy  and  theology.  The  God  of  reason  and  the  God  of
revelation  is  one  and  the  same,  and  cannot  contradict  himself.  The  difficulty  lies  only  in  our
imperfect  knowledge  and  comprehension  of  the  book  of  nature,  or  of  the  Bible,  or  of  both.*

The  mighty  problems  which  the  interpretation  of  GENESIS  involves,  are  here  discussed  in  a
manly  and  earnest  spirit ;  and  I  venture  to  assert  that  no  single  commentary  on  this  book  pre
sents  so  much  original  thought  and  research  as  the  combined  labors  of  the  author  and  the
translators  of  this  volume.

Professor  TAYLEE  LEWIS  prepared  the  Special  Introduction  and  the  Commentary  on  Ch.
i.-xi.,  and  Ch.  xxxvii.-l.  Dr.  GOSMAN  translated  the  General  Introduction  and  the  Commentary
on  Ch.  xii.-xxxvi.  The  original  work  numbers  Ixxxii  and  460,  in  all  542  pages.  The  English
edition  has  665  pages,  or  fully  one  fourth  more ;  the  English  pages  being  a  little  larger  than  the

"  The  abnegation  of  reason  is  not  the  evidence  of  faith,  but  the  confession  of  despair.  Reason  and  reverence  are
natural  allies,  though  untoward  circumstances  may  sometimes  interpose  and  divorce  them."— J.  B.  LIOIITFOOT,  D.  D..
St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  2d  ed.,  London  and  Cambridge,  18G6.  Preface,  p.  si.


PREFACE   OF   THE   GENERAL  EDITOR.


German.     IJ^h  translators  Lave  embodied  the  results  of  their  independent  study  and  extracts
from  works  not  noticed  by  Dr.  LAXGE.

Prof  T  VYI  EI.  LEWIS  so  long  and  well  known  as  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  learned  classical
and  biblical  scholars  of  America,  has  scattered  through  this  volume  the  fruits  of  long-continued
Btudy  with  a  freshness  and  vigor  of  thought  and  style  that  is  truly  surprising  in  one  whose
feeble  health  has  made  such  a  work  peculiarly  difficult  and  laborious.  For  the  convenience  of
(he  reader  I  present  a  list  of  his  principal  additions,  which  touch  upon  the
and  most  difficult  questions  in  the  interpretation  of  GENESIS  :

,r^±;-rL^^^

of  Nature  and  the  Supernatural.    V.  How  was  the  Creation-Account  Revealed  ?  pp.  1-

I.  Excursus  on  the  Paradise  Rivers,  217-222.

,    Vvf,         ,  on  UK-  Flood,  its  subjective  truthfulness,  its  partial  extent,  ol

I  Excursus  o"  the  Hebrew  Chronology.    Condition  of  the  Primitive  Man.     The  Rapid  Beginnings  of

U1™r^f«^^^

C    The  CreaiioM-Sabbaih,  10  '•

7.  The  Jehovistic  and  the  Klohistic  Distinction,  Int.  107.

8.  Astronomical  Objection   to  the  Bible,  1^.
9    Scriptural   Heavens   and   Earth,  ISo.

lo!  The  Creation-Summary,  or  the  Account  of  the  Second  Chapter,  201.

II.  Time-Successions  of  the  Sixth  Day,  210.

12!  Idea  of   I'uture  Life  in   the  Old   Testament,  2U.

;  ;.  Abel's  Blood  Crying,  2,77.

14.  Earliest  Ideas  of  Death.     Case  of  Enoch,  '273.

1  ->  Tin-  Spirit   and   the   Flesh,  Ch.   vi.,  •>•>•  .  .     _       ,_,

it  1^^^  of  Human  Depravity.     Psychological  Distinctions  made  in  Ch.  vi.  5,  2,7.

17.  The  Divine  Repenting*,    2S8.

18.  The  Bible  Idea  of  Covenant,  300.

i'J.  The  Week  and  the  Seven-Day  Observance  in  the  Ark,  Gil.

20.  The  Noachian  Sacrifice,  ;;•_'!.

21.  The  Noachian  Blessings  and   Cursings,
iij.  The  Law  of  Homicide,  332.

23.  Arabian  and  other  Oriental  Traditions  on^the  Destruction   of  Sodom,  44
°1    The  Rainbow  and  its  Appointment  as  a  Sign,  32^.

°Y.  Development  of  the  Idea  of  Sheol.    Jacob's  Language,  Ch.  xxxy,.  C,,  534-587.
20.  The  Interview  between   Jacob  and  Pharaoh.     The  Patriarchal  Theology.     Ihe  ]
Life  as  a  Pilgrimage,   Ch.    xlvi.,   xlvii.,  007-040.

fs!  SSp^^Sn  of  Ih'eVoid';  Goel,  Malak-IIaggocl,  Redeemer,  Angel-Redeemer,  Ch.  slviii.  10,  040,  047.
2  '.  Jacob's  D;.  ing  Vision  of  the  Tribes  and  the  Messiah,  Cli.  xlix.  1-S3,  C,;     554.

Besides  tho  translators  have  added  a  large  number  of  marginal  notes,  many  of  which  might
have  been  placed  in  the  body  of  the  pages,  and  copious  text-notes  on  Hebrew  words
phrases  with  illustrations  from  a  rich  store  of  oriental  and  classical  learning.

I  congratulate  my  esteemed  co-laborers  on  the  successful  completion  of  their  difficult  task,
and  commit  this  first  volume  of  the  Old-Testament  division  of  the  "  Biblowork  "  to  the  blessing
of  God,  and  the  use  of  His  ministers  in  the  study  and  application  of  this  most  ancient  am


5  BIBLE-HOUSE,  NEW  YORK,  March  10,  18G8.


AUTHOR'S   PREFACE,


THE   author  has    been  much  longer   occupied   in  the  preparation   of    Genesis    for    the
"Biblework,"  than  he  at  first  supposed  would  Le  necessary;    and  this,  together  with   tho
detention  in  reference  to  two  of  the  New-Testament  books,  has  seemed  to  bring  the  wholo
work  to  a  stand  for  a  time.     This  delay,  however,  has  only  been  apparent  and  transient,  since,
in  the  meantime,  different  well-approved  co-workers  have  carried  on  the  work  in  the  Old-
Testament  divisions,  and  will  now,  right  soon,  it  is  hoped,  present  the  public  with  the
wished-for  results  of  their  labors,  while,  at  the  same  time,  several  Xcw-Testament  boo!
again  in  course  of  preparation.    "

I  was  especially  detained  upon  the  Introduction.     The  want  of  scientific  method  in  t.
culture  of  biblical  theology  which  has  prevailed  until  the  present  time,  appeared  to  me  to
make  it  imperative  that  the  questions  necessarily  belonging  to  the  Introduction  should
treated  under  the  form  of  this  branch  of  theological  science-presenting  the  points,  however,
for  the  most  part,  merely  in  outline,  witli  a  reference  to  the  authorities,  but  treating  more
fully  and  thoroughly  the  great  theological  life-questions  of  the  day.  *  In  the  preparatory

introduction,  I  believed  that  a  proper  view  and  statement  of  the  character  of  the  people
Israel  should  occupy  the  very  first  place  in  archeology,  since  an  archeology  which  leaves
out  of  view  the  one  vital,  unifying,  central  point,  the  life  of  the  people  in  question,  mu;
mere  lifeless,  conglomerate  mass  of  knowledge.     Thus,  e.  g ,  no  one  can  have  a  true  conception
and  estimate  of  the  chronology  of  the  people  of  Israel,  who  has  not  first  rightly  conceived
and  appreciated  the  characteristics  of  the  people  itself.     I  was  especially  anxious  to  open  tl
question  of  Old-Testament  hcrmeneutics,   since  the  great  and    destructive  errors,  as  to  the
fundamental  principles  of  biblical,  and  particularly  Old-Testament  hermeneutlcs,  threaten
make  a  very  Babel  of  our  modern  Exegesis.     The  Sacred  Scriptures  never  leave  a  doubt  as
the  fact  that  they  communicate  to  us  only  words  of  life,  and  thus  facts  and  doctrines  which  fin,
their  expression  in  the  light  of  their  religious  idea  ;    but  this  key  to  all  exposition  of  the  !
tures  is  thrust  aside  by  both  theological  extremes.     The  letter  is  not  only  put  under  prc
but  even  strangled,  lest  it  should  say  something  more  than  it  appeared  to  express  according
to  the  most  restricted  and  limited  interpretation.     In  this  thought  the  two  extremes  rival
ench  other  in  the  effort  to  make  a  mere  natural  astronomical  day  of  twenty-four  hours
of  the  divine  days  of  the  creation  (Gen.  i.).     The  one  side  thus  seeks  to  secure  the  mos
complete  orthodox  locus  of  the  creation,  the  other  to  make  the  Bible  begin  with  a  fict
legendary   description   of  the   creation,  under  the  form   of   the  Jewish  sabbath-institutic

*  Bishop  Colenso  represents  this  antithesis  in  one  theological  life  ;  first  serving  the  letter  with  an  orthodox  purpose,
-nd  then  using  it  for  mere  critical  ends.


viii  AUTHOR'S   PREFACE.


If  I  have  succeeded  merely  iu  giving  an  impulse  towards  a  proper  and  satisfactory  revision
of  hermeneutics,  I  shall  hope  for  a  special  blessing  from  this  part  of  my  labor.

In  the  preparation  of  my  work  I  have  consulted  particularly  the  commentaries  of  I)B
LITZSCH,  KEIL,  and  KXOBEL,  and,  whenever  it  appeared  necessary,  those  of  VON  BOIILEN  and
others.  I  have  frequently  allowed  the  authors  to  speak  for  themselves;  whenever,  indeed,
the  briefest  explanation  of  important  remarks,  or  the  peculiar  characteristic  expression  of  the
commentators  made  it  proper  and  best.  In  this  respect,  also,  the  "Bible work"  must  be
many-sided.  But  in  the  exposition  I  have  never  spared  myself  the  labor  necessary  to  ac
quire  and  state  my  own  personal  views;  and  unprejudiced  readers  and  critics  will  find  that
the  work  is  not  without  its  calling,  nor  without  its  influence  as  one  among  the  independent
laborers  in  this  exegetical  field.  I  have  not  permitted  myself  to  be  swayed  by  the  singular
and  strong  prejudice  of  the  moment,  which  regards  the  sons  of  God  (Gen.  vi.)  as  angels,
and  the  Malcach  Jehovah  as  a  mere  creature-angel.  In  regard  to  both  these  questions  I  am
brought  into  coniliot  with  the  interpretation  of  KUKTZ.  *  *  *

In  the  practical  division  of  the  work,  as  in  the  theoretical,  we  have  found  it  necessary
to  practise  the  utmost  restraint  in  the  use  of  helps.  In  this  respect  the  work  of  J.  FCHKODEU
upon  GENESIS  (Berlin,  184C)  has  been  of  essential  service,  partly  through  its  well-cho.vcn
extracts,  and  partly  from  the  judicious  remarks  of  the  author;  we  have  often,  indeed,  been
embarrassed  by  the  very  richness  of  its  contents.

May  this  "Biblework,"  in  its  Old-Testament  division,  meet  with  the  same  reception,
and  enter  upon  the  same  path  of  usefulness,  which  the  New-Testament  divi.-ions  have
already  found;  may  this  work  upon  GENESIS  introduce  a  series  of  commentaries  by  ster
ling  and  valued  co-laborers,  and  stimulate  the  progress  and  completion  of  the  joint  work,
which  is  faithfully  devoted  to  the  service  of  the  Church  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord.

BONN,  May  12,  1864.


THEOLOGICAL  AND  HOMILETICAL  INTRODUCTION.


TO


THE     OLD     TESTAMENT


PEELIMIXAEY  REMARKS.

THE  RELATION  OF  THIS  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE

NEW  TESTAMENT.

WE  prefixed  to  the  Commentary  on  Matthew  a  sketch  of  the  General  Introduo
tion  to  the  Holy  Scripture,  since  for  Christians  the  New  Testament  is  the  key  to  the
Old  (L  VKGE'S  Matthew,  pp.  1-20,  Am.  ed.).    But  it  is  necessary,  in  preparing  a  Special
Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,  that  we  should  again  proceed  upon  as
of  th»  whole  field  of  Biblical  Science  and  Biblical  Theology.     For  the  Introduction
to  the  Old  Testament,  necessarily  points  back  to  the  Introduction  to  the  New.
the  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,  moreover,  particular  points  wcrc_  imply
alluded  to,  which  must  now  be  more  thoroughly  discussed.     But  to  explain  tl
points  in  their  systematic  order,  we  shall  have  to  make  a  general  statement  ,
questions  of  Introduction;    only  so  far,  however,  that  we  shall  merely  refer  1
points  already  explained.     The  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament  was  modelled
upon  the  definition  of  Exegetics.     For  our  present  purpose  it  seems  better  1
low  the  outline  of  a  living  Biblical  Theology.     We  shall,  however,  ovei  top  the
ordinary  limits  of  Biblical  Theology,  and  embrace  the  Sciences  of  Intr
which  Biblical  Theology  viewed  by  itself  presupposes.     For  the  Literati
following  works  may  be  consulted,  in  addition  to  those  referred  to    i
(LAXGE'S  Matthew,  Am.  ed.  p.  17).

BLEEK  :  Einleitung  m's  Alto  wid  New  Testament,
Berlin  (1SGO-'G2) ;  NAST:  Critical  and  Practiced
Commentary,  Cincinnati  (1800) ;  [!LEVERNICK'S  In-
induction,  Edinburgh  Translation  (1852);  HORNE'S
Introduction,  New  York  (1860) ;  DAVIDSON'S  Intro
duction  ;  JAIIS'S  Introduction,  with  References  by
S.  H.  Turner.— A.  G.]

2.  Directions  for  Reading  the  Bible.— W.
HOFFMANN  :  Utbcr  den  redden  Gebrauch  der  Bibel,
Berlin  (1854) ;  OSTERTAG:  Zugeausdem  Werke  der
Bibelvcrbrcitung,  Stuttgart  (1857);  SEELBACH  :  Bibcl-
scgcn,  Bielefeld  (1851-'55) ;  HOLLENBERG  :  Ermun-
icrung  imd  Anleitung  zum  Bibcllescn,  Berlin  (1862);
[FRANCES'S  Guide  to  the  Study  of  the  Scriptures;
TALBOT'S  Bible  ;  LOCKE'S  Commonplace  -  Book  ;


1.  Introduction  to  the  Bible.— SCHUMANN  :
Praktische  Einleitung  i?t's  AUcundNcv.e  Testament;
STEGLICII  :  Bibclkundf,  Leipzig  (1853) ;  STAUDT  :  Fin-
f/irzeiric  in  den  Inhalt  und  Zusammenhang  dor  Hci-
\ujcn  Schrift,  Stuttgart  (1851) ;  WETZEL  :  Die  Spra-
che  Luther s  in  seiner  Bibelubersetzung,  Stuttgart
(1859);  The  Bible  and  its  History,  llth  edition,
v.iih  a  preface  by  F.  V,'.  KRUMMACIIER,  Elbcrfeld
(1858);  WATSON:  Apology  for  the  Bible,  Letters  to
Paine,  New  York  ;  KIRCHHOFEE  :  Leltfadcn  zur  Bi-
belkunde,  Id  ed.,  Stuttgart  (18CO).  Similar  works
by  HAGENBACII,  Lcipsig  (1850);  HOLLENBERG,  Ber-
iin  (1854);  HCHXEIDER,  Bielefeld  (1800);  Lisco :
Einleitung  in  die  Bibd,  Berlin  (1861);  Blbelwcgwci-
scr,  Einleitung  in  die  Ilcilige  Schrift,  Calw  (18G1);
1


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


TOW.NSI:M/S  Arrangement ;  the  Paragraph  Bibles;
COLLYEU:  The  Ktcrcd  Interpreter,  Oxford  (1S31);
Companion  to  the  Bible,  Phila.  (1S.V2).— A.  C.]

3.  General  and  Special  Bible  works.— ,See
LANCKS  Matthew,  Am.  Ed.  pp.  19  ;  STARKK:  -4%-
fwetHcs  llujlftif  illcr  die  fie. >f  Tlnilc  seines  Blbd-
wcrkcs,  ]>}>.  I-!'1-;  "\VAM-II:  r/tUt"th«",i  Tlnol.\\.
pp.  1S-2,  :;7'.>.  DAN/.  :  t/r;u><rsaZ- Jr6VA  /-iw/f,  pp.  120,
13-1  ff.  ;  V.'INF.II,  i.  p.  "3  F'i'1-  li'2,  Appendix,
p.O.

]('<;  <•«//  special  attention  to  ihc  well-known  works
of  carl  in-  dotes.  Poi.rs  :  The  Cuma  SACRI ;  Die
BKRi.KMtriua-u  Buna,  new  ed.,  Stuttgart  (1856);
Das  Bib,  /("./•/•  von  L.  MAISTUI;  PE  SACV  ;  PEILKU:
Das  !/)•< "<••:•'  biblische  Erbauunysbuch,  Krlnn-rn  (17v;S-
'!»'2),  in  17  vols. ;  />''-  Wiirtemlerrfcr  Summaricn,  Niirn-
berg  (185',i).  7>/e  Pi-cdif/cr  JJibel  by  FISCMKH  and


WOHI.FAHUT,  marks  the  transition  to  our  time.  The
antagonistic  works  by  DINTER  and  BRANDT.  The
Bibleworks  of  KICIITKR,  Lisco,  GKULACII  ;  CAUVER
HANPIH-CII  ;  the  unfinished  BiUcwi  rk  by  ECNSEN  ;  T/tc
Historical  and  Theological  Kibdwcrk,  by  WKHKR,
Schafl'hausen  (ISijO);  the  newly  published  Worterbuch
of  Or.iisi.r.r. ;  1)1- •  JJib<  /,  an  article  from  EKSCII'S  and
('•r.n;i:n'sKncyclepe(.lia;  LKinmCsExptanatiotmoftlic
!!,,!</  Scrlptim  s,  ?i'lccted  from  his  Expository  Work?,
IK'i-lin.  [He*ides  the  Cdinmentavies  of  HKMIY  and
SCOTT,  we  may  ivfer  to  those  of  J.  (\  ILL,  ADAM  CLAKKH,
PATRICK:  LOWTII  and  \Vnrn;y,  Brnniai's  Kerijiturc
Exposition,  POOI.K'S  Aitnutttl'/oiis,  i\\c  Biblical  Cuin-
Mcntary,  by  KKII.  and  DKLIT/SCII,  no\v  in  course  of
publication  iunl  translation  in  Clarke's  foreign  library.
D'Ovi.Y  and  MANT  :  Tlir  ]L>';;  Hih!,;  v',lh  Xofes,  rrit-
ri>,  London  (185'').— A.  (J.J


FIRST    DIVISION.

THEOLOGICAL  INTRODUCTION    TO   THE   OLD  TESTA
MENT  UPON  THE  PLAN  OF  JHBLICAL  THEOLOGY.


II  l^IAKKS.


Definition  and  Stwtnre  of  Biblical  Ecology.

IViljlicul  Theology,  embracing  the  doctrines  and  elliu-s  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  in
th-ir  unity  as  the  biblical  rule  of  lii'o,  is  an  historical  science  ;  the  history,  /.  c.,  of  the
actual   and  uniform  development   of  Biblical  doctrine   from   its  earliest  form  t
canonical  completion.

Its  sources  arc  the  canonical  books  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  ;  with  which  we  may
connect  the  Old  Testament  Apocrypha,  as  a  historical  auxiliary,  winch  furnish.
with  the  knowledge  of  biblical  doctrine  during  its  transition  period,  from  its
Testament  form  to  its  Xcw  Testament  completion.     But  to  assign  it  its  true  worth
and  position,  we  must  compare  the  Bible  with  its  surroundings;  «•  ™  the  Apo-
crypha,  I.  with  the  Apostolical  Fathers,  c.  with  the  Talmud,  and  the  Old  Testament
text  with  the  Septuagint.     It  occupies  in  Theology  the  transition  ground  between
Exegesis  and  Church  History.     Its  last  antecedent  is  Biblical  History,  its  neare
result  the  History  of  Dogmas.

As  to  its  origin  and  history,  it  springs  out  of  the  total  development  oi  riie-

olo-y      The  way  was  opened  for  it  through  the  whole  Theology  before  the  Ref

ormation,  through  the  biblical  character  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformers  throi

the  dicta  probantia  which  marked  the  Dogmatics  of  the  iTth  century,  and  through

he  effort  of  the  Pietistic  school  to  confine  the  Christian  dogmas  to  their  Scriptural


THE   SCRIPTURES   IX   THEIR  DIVINE   ASPECT.


basis.  In  the  second  half  of  the  18th  century  it  became  an  independent  science^
formed  at  first  upon  the  loci  theologici,  then  regarded  as  purely  historical,  finally
assumed  the  form  of  an  historical  science,  conditioned  upon  the  grand  norm  or  prin
ciple  of  Christian  doctrine  and  of  the  Scriptures.  [Upon  the  idea  of  the  God-Man
— the  Incarnation. — A.  G.]

Biblical  Theology  is  the  history  of  Biblical  doctrine  in  its  unity,  and  in
its  particular  doctrines.  It  may  be  divided  therefore  into  General  and  Special;
but  these  are  united  again  by  the  Christological  principle,  the  Incarnation,  which
is  the  grand  fundamental  thought  of  Holy  Scripture.  We  have  the  reflection
of  the  God-Man,  i.  e.,  the  unity  of  the  eternal  divine  being  and  its  finite  human
manifestation,  of  the  one  and  absolute  Spirit  and  the  manifold  life,  in  Biblical  doc
trine  as  in  Biblical  History.  It  follows,  of  course,  that  General  Biblical  Theology
treats  1.  of  the  divino  unity  of  Holy  Scripture,  2.  of  the  human  diversities  of
Holy  Scripture,  3.  of  the  divine-human,  Christological  theology  of  the  Holy  Scrip
ture,  and  its  course  of  development.  Accordingly  Special  Biblical  Theology
embraces  1.  the  history  of  the  Biblical  doctrine  of  God,  in  its  Christological  form,
2.  the  history  of  the  Biblical  doctrine  of  Man,  3.  the  history  of  the  Biblical  doctrine
of  the  God-Man,  and  his  redeeming  work,  4.  the  history  of  the  expansion  of  the  life
of  Christ  in  his  Kingdom ;  or  Theocratology,  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,
to  its  Escliatological  completion.

For  the  position  of  Biblical  Theology  in  the  system  of  Theological  Sciences,  see
LAXGE'S  Matthew,  Am.  eel.,  p.  17.  It  must  be  observed  here,  however,  that  Biblical
Thcoloo-y,  with  its  parallel  science,  Biblical  History,  is  the  result  and  crowning  glory
of  Exegetical  Theology  ;  and  further,  that  Biblical  Theology  is  no  more  to  be  con
founded  with  systematic  biblical  Dogmatics  (?.  e.,  the  ground  of  Ecclesiastical  Dog
matics),  than  Biblical  History  with  the  history  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  which  latter
embraces  the  entire  history  of  the  Church  and  the  world,  to  the  end  of  time.  We
must,  therefore,  avoid  confounding  with  each  other  the  periods  of  the  history  of  the
Kingdom  of  God,  of  Biblical  History,  and  of  Biblical  religion,  which  is  still  often
the  case.


For  the  literature  of  Biblical  History,  sec  DA.NZ  :
Uiurcrsal-Wortcrbuch,  p.  1".5.  Also  the  Biblical
Histories  of  HUBXER,  RATJSCIIENBUSCII,  KOIILRAUSCII
ZAUN.  Biblical  History  is  often  treated  under  the
name  of  the  History  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  See


CRCBE  :  Charaetcrbilder  dcr  htUiycn  Schrlft,  Leip
zig  (1853).

For  the  History  and  Literature  of  Biblical  Theol
ogy,  see  HAGENBACH:  Theol.  Encyclopedia,  p.
101.


FIRST  SECTION.

THE  CANONICAL  CHARACTER  OR  DIVINE  ASPECT  OF  THE  HOLY
SCRIPTURES,  ESPECIALLY  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT,  OR  THE
UNITY  OF  BIBLICAL  DOCTRINE.


THE   SACRED   WRITINGS   AS   THE   HOLY   SCRIPTURE.
The  records  of  Revelation,  especially  of  the  Old  Testament  Revelation,  or  the


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


saared  writings,  notwithstanding  their  endless  diversity,  as  to  authors,  time,  form,
lano-na<--e,  constitute  one  Holy  Scripture  perfectly  consistent  with  itself,  and  pel
fectly  distinct  from  all  other  writings;  yet  entering  into  such  a  relation  and  inter-
change  with  them  as  to   manifest  as  perfect  a  unity   of  spirit  as  if  they  had  been
written  by  one  pen,  sprung  from  one  fundamental  thought,  in  one  year,  in  a  sinj
moment     This  unity  of  the  Holy  Scripture  rests  upon  the  unity  of  its  eternal  Spirit,
of  its   eternal  norm   or  principle,  its  eternal  contents,  its  eternal  object.     What
ever  is  eternal  forms  a  living-,  concrete  unity  under  the  diversities  ol  tune  ;
the  eternal  divine  purpose  of  redemption  in  Christ-tile  soul  of  the  Holy  Scripture-
forms  its  living  unity  under  the  diversities  of  the  sacred  writings.

§2.
THE  ONE  PERVADING    SUBJECT  OF  THE    HOLY  SCRIPTURE  IX    ITS  OBJECTIVE  ASPECT

The  Holy  Scripture  in  its  objective  aspect  is  one  only  through  its  one  pervading
idea  of  God  or   rather  through  the  living  revelation  of  the  one  personal  God  ot
revelation  which  runs  through  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.      \\  hen,  therefore,  on
the  one  hand  the  Gnostics  make  the  Cod  of  the  Old  Testament  a  subordinate  deity
(Marcion:3£isSiVcaioS),ora  God  of  a  lower  nature,  a  Demiurge,  or  even  an  Evil
Spirit  (the  Ophite,),   and  the  nationalists  distinguish  the   Old  Testament  Je
as  a  Jewish  national  Deity,  from  the  Xcw  Testament  God  and  Father  of  ou
Jesus  Christ;  and  on  the  o'ther  hand  the  Jews  in  the   Cod  of  the  New  r\
the  Ebionitcs  in  the  Cod  of  Paul,  could  not  recognize  the  Jehovah  ot  the  (
lament,  they  simply  failed  to   perceive-owing   to  their  spiritual  blindnes
one  grand  common  life,  underneath  the  great  objective  antil
and  New  Testaments.  .

The  God  of  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  that  of  the  Xew  i.

the  Creator  Upholder  and  Ruler  of  the  world,  above  the  world  and  yet  in  it,  the
(iod  of  all  nations,  the  God  of  love,  grace,  and  redemption;   although  in  a  pee
sense  the  God  of  Israel,  and  although  omnipotence,  holiness,  and  rightc
the  predominant  features  in  his  earlier  revelation.

The  Cod  of  the  Xcv/   Testament,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a   God  viewed
relations  to  man,  the  God  of  the  Elect,  primarily  of  the  Elect  One,  as  the  God  :
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the.  Cod  of  his  own  people,  the  Holy  (
justice  a  consuming  fire  (Ilcb.  xii.  20),  while  love,  grace,  and  mercy  prc
his  final  and  complete  revelation.

The  Jehovah  of  the  Old  Covenant   is  more  illustriously  re  A
Amen  of  the  Xew  Covenant  (Rev.  iii.  14).

As  the  one  biblical  idea  of  God-imparting  unity  to  the  Scriptures-
tirelv  consistent  with  itself,  so  it  is  clearly  distinguished  from  the  heathen  :
God,  from  all  pure  abstract   Monotheism,  post-Christian  Ju
anism  (see  Melanchthon's  loci,  the  preface).

Compare  the  mythological  systems,  the  Talmud,  the  Cabbalah,  and  tue  Koran.


5.     THE   OPPOSITIONS   OF  SCRIPTURE.


THE  ONE  PERVADING  SUBJECT  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURE  IN  ITS  SUBJECTIVE  ASPECT.

The  Holy  Scripture  in  its  subjective  aspect  is  animated  by  one  pervading,  pecu
liar  religious  consciousness— Faith.  Faith,  as  here  used,  is  the  knowledge  of  God
awakened  by  the  self-revelation  of  God,  and  corresponding  to  it,  of  God  not  as  exist-
in"-  merely,  but  as  manifesting  himself  vividly  afar  off  and  near  at  hand  ;  and  the  con
fidence  in  him  having  its  root  in  this  knowledge  and  agreeing  with  it,  a  confidence  not
resting  upon  him  inVs  general  character,  but  upon  him  in  the  promise  of  salvation
in  his°word.  In  this  confidence,  as  it  leads  to  the  yielding  of  the  will  to  the  will  and
Providence  of  God— not  to  any  arbitrary  human  will— and  thus  to  a  living  obe
dience  to  the  commands  of  God,  lies  the  root  of  love  and  of  all  virtue.  In  this  sense
the  faith  of  Abraham  and  Paul  are  the  same.  Indeed,  Abraham  is  the  father  of  be
lievers  (Rom.  iv.  1) ;  although  his  faith  both  in  its  objective  and  subjective  aspects
was  merely  the  living  seed  which,  under  the  Xew  Covenant,  unfolded  itself  to  the
perfect  fruit  of  saving  faith.

As  the  biblical  idea  of  God  is  clearly  distinguished  from  all  untheocratic  concep
tions  of  the  Deity,  so  this  religious  consciousness  or  the  faith  of  the  theocratic  people,
is  clearly  distinguished  from  all  heathen,  Jewish,  or  Mohammedan  forms  of  this

•/  O

consciousness.

§4-

THE  ONE  PERVADING  THEANTIIROPIC  SUBJECT  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURE,  CHRIST  AND  THE

KINGDOM  OF  GOD.

Both  the  personal  aspect  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  the  expectation  of  the  Mes
siah,  until  his  appearance,  and  until  the  hope  of  his  second  coming,  and  the  univer.
ml  aspect  of  the  Messiah;  the  old  promise  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  confirmed  in
the  covenant  of  God  with  Abraham  and  Israel,  and  the  new  promise  of  his  appearing
in  '--•lory after  bis  appearance  in  the  form  of  the  crucified — confirmed  in  the  cove
nant  of  God  with  believers,  runs  throughout  the  Scriptures  as  the  grand  constituent
principle,  and  final  aim  of  Revelation  and  the  Holy  Scripture.  Still,  there  is  an
endless  development  which  lies  between  the  paradisaic  destination  of  man  in  Genesis
(chap,  i.),  especially  in  the  Protevangelium  (chap,  iii.)  and  the  completed  City  of
God  of  the  Apocalypse  (Rev.  chap.  xxi.  xxii.)

The  Kingdom  of  God,  as  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  as  the  synthesis  of  the  glory  of
God  and  the  blessedness  of  his  children  (since  the  glory  of  God  shines  in  their  bles
sedness,  and  their  blessedness  consists  in  the  open  vision  of  his  glory),  is  distinct
as  possible  from  all  the  religious  conceptions  of  the  future  of  heathenism,  Judaism
'  and  Mohammedanism.  It  rests  upon  the  eternal  covenant  of  God  with  humanity,
which  was  prefigured  in  the  old  covenant,  and  Mulled  in  the  new.  The  Bible,
therefore,  is  the  record  of  this  eternal  covenant  in  its  twofold  form.


g  5.

THE  OPPOSITIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE.
The  revealed  religion   of  the  Bible  stands  in  the  most  direct  and  irreconcilable


INTRODUCTION'   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


opposition  to  the  various  unscriptural  religions,  cons  dercd  in  their  da  ke    aspec  ,
,'  e    so  far  as  they  are  the  false  religions  of  false  gods  (Ehlim)  ;  or  dead,  1  feless  eon
cep'tions  of  God;    but  in  a  relation   of  friendship,   as    to  the  divine  elements  or
tn™  truths,  they  may  embrace.     This  will  define  its  relation  to  the  different  my-
tholoo-ies,  to  the  Talmud,  and  the  Koran.

The  recorded  expression  of  this  revelation  in   the  Bible,  stands  ma  specific  op
position  to  all  the   derived   ibrms,  statements,  and  outgrows   of  «'»  ™to>£
This  is  the  relation  which  the  Old  Testament  sustains  to  the  Septuagmt,  and  the
New  Testament  to  the  Apostolical  Fathers,  having  out  of  view  in  one  case  the
Testament  Apocrypha,  and  in  the  other  the  New  Testament  Apocrypha  and

diturbVvh"is  inexhaustible  riches  of  lite,  en^radng  the  whole  history  of
the  world  and  eternity,  the  Holy  Scripture  itself  is  distinguished  into  the  harmo-
ou  antithesis  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments:  the  Old,  which  points  on  to  the
Ne",  into  which  it  pies  and  finds  its  fulfilment  ;  the  New,  winch  is  ever  referring
to  the  Old,  and  in  a  historical  sense  is  grounded  in  it.

§6.

IMPORT  OF  THE  UNITY  OF  THE  1JIIH.K  IN  ITS  DIVERSITY.

The  unity  of  the  Holy  Scripture  according  to  its  divine    theanthropic  origin,
rests  upon  it's  Inspiration.     (Lean's  Vat'hc^  Am.  ed   p.  11.)

Recent  writers  upon  Inspiration,  e.  ff.,  Bunsen,  Rothe,  and  others,  haxo  not


Christ  •  each  particular  book  in  its  fundamental  idea.  To  wrest  any  part  out  ot  Us
connection,  for  subordinate  purposes,  is  a  misconception  of  the  Bible.  ^  *?  Pf"
tectly  definite  design  and  end,  agreeably  to  its  sacred  origin  and  contents,  it

ll0TlfeCuSyof  the  Holy  Scripture  according  to  its  divine,  theanthropic  contents,
constitutes  i't  the  Canon.  (See  LANGE'S  Matthw,  Am.  ed  p  13.)

The  Bible  is  beyond  question  the  canon,  but  not  merely  the  canon,  not  a  ca
in  the  sen  eo    a  lawlok.     The  canonical,  as  a  rule  and  direction,  always  points  to
*at  which  is  above  itself,  the  principle  of  life,  and  the  life  ot  the  principle;  to  the
source  of  free  love,  free  life,  and  free  blessedness  from  which  it  flows

Viewin*  the  Holy  Scripture  as  to  its  effects,  its  unity  proves  it  to  b3  the  word
of  God      It  exerts  a  power  within  and  beyond  itself;  it  sheds  hght  upon  itself;  it

Wk  from  itself  to  its  orisi",  tl,o  living  revelation.     As  a  word  of          i    ro.
beyond  i"elf  to  the  HvingChrist.     It  is  no  idol  which  fctlcr.  tbo  h«rt.rf  men  to
itself  i'»  a'daVi.1,  manner.    Neither  is  it  a  mere  canon,  a  wr.tmg  ot  gemune  antho,


8.     THE   RICHES   OF   THE   SCRIPTURES   IN  THEIR   ENDLESS   DIVERSITY.


ity,  which  simply  as  a  law,  fixes  the  rule  what  we  are  to  believe,  and  how  we  should!
live.  As  the  word  of  God,  it  is  the  book  of  life,  in  the  authentic  form  of  writing,
which  gives  testimony  to  the  book  of  life  in  the  hand  of  God — the  purpose  of  re
demption to  the  book  of  life  in  the  heart  of  the  Church — Christ  in  us  ;  and  awakens,

strengthens  and  enriches  the  life  from  God  through  Christ.  It  is  not  only  the  ground
upon  which  the  Cultus  of  the  Church  rests,  but  the  book  through  which  it  edifies
itself,  and  fulfils  its  great  mission  to  the  world.

The  unity  of  the  Holy  Scripture  in  the  harmony  of  its  great  opposition  con
stitutes  it  the  one  book  of  the  Covenant,  or  the  Eternal  Testament,  in  the  opposition
of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.

THE  BIBLE  AS  THE  BOOK  OF  BOOKS.

The  Bible  then,  as  the  Book  of  Books,  is  as  the  sun  in  the  centre  of  all  other  re-
lio-ious  records;  the  Kings  of  the  Chinese,  the  Vedas  of  India,  the  Zendavesta  of  the
Persians,  the  Eddas  of  the  Germans,  the  Jewish  Talmud,  and  the  Mohammedan
Koran ;  judging  all  that  is  hostile  in  them,  reconciling  and  bringing  into  liberty
whatever  elements  of  truth  they  may  contain.

It  stands  also,  with  a  like  repelling  and  attracting  force  in  the  centre  of  all
literature,  as  well  as  of  Theology.  In  the  same  power  and  dignity  it  exercises  its
critical  authority  upon  all  historical  traditions.

As  the  ideal  Cosmos  of  the  revelation  of  Salvation,  it  forms  with  the  Cosmos  of
the  general  revelation  of  God  an  organic  unity  (Ps.  viii. ;  xix. ;  civ.).  It  is  the  key  of
the  World-Cosmos,  while  this  again  is  the  living  illustration  of  the  Cosmos  of  the
Scripture.

But  as  that  is  subordinate  to  the  living  God,  as  an  organ  of  his  manifestation,  so
is  the  Bible  to  the  living  Christ.  It  holds  the  same  relation  to  him  as  the  copy  to
the  original,  and  is  coordinate  with  the  eternal  word  of  Christ  in  the  total  life  of
the  Church— as  a  fully  accordant  testimony.  But  whoever  will  utter  anything  from
that  mystical  writing  in  the  heart  of  the  church,  must  derive  his  credentials  from
the  written  word.

§8.
THE   RICHES   OF   THE   SCRIPTURES   IX  THEIR  ENDLESS   DIVERSITY.

The  grand  opposition  of  the  Old  and  ISTew  Testaments,  upon  a  closer  view,
branches  itself  into  an  endless  number  of  oppositions,  distinctions,  and  differences,
which  meet  us  not  only  in  the  Old  Testament  generally,  but  in  its  particular
divisions,  and  also  in  the  New.

In  this  human  aspect  the  Bible  appears  as  an  historical  growth,  and  is  open  to
an  historical  examination  and  criticism.  In  this  aspect  is  is  connected  with  human
imperfections.  But  in  this  aspect  alone,  the  endless  riches  of  its  all-pervading
divine  fulness  unfolds  itself  to  our  view.

From  the  reciprocal  influence  of  the  divine  unity  of  the  Scriptures,  and  its  human
diversities,  results  the  living  force  or  movement  in  the  development  of  Biblical


INTRODUCTION   TO   TEE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


Theology;  and  thus  it  comes  to  be  the  authentic  copy  of  the  advent  and  life  of
Christ  flowin^  out  of  the  connection  between  the  God  of  revelation  and  believing

O

humanity.


SECOND  SECTION.

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  IS  AGOGICS,  OR  THE
DIVERSITIES  AND  HISTORICAL  GROWTH  OF  BIBLICAL  DOCTRINE.


Biblical  Introduction  treats  of  the  Scriptures  in  their  historical  aspect.  If  we
distinguish  between  a  preparatory  (taking  that  Avord  in  its  widest  sense)  and  an
historical  and  critical  introduction  (which  regarded  as  general  includes  Loth  parts,
but  as  special  only  the  latter),  there  is  no  room  for  the  question  which  has  been
agitated  (ILvGEXBACii's  Encyclopedia,  p.  MO),  whether  the  literary  history  of
the  Scripture  as  a  whole  and  in  their  individual  parts  alone,  or  the  scientific  aids  to
Exegesis  also,  properly  belong  to  such  an  introduction/"


FIRST  CHAPTER.

Preparatory  Introduction.

^      0

ITS  CONSTITUENT  ELEMENTS.

The  direct  auxiliaries  to  theFxplar.ation  of  the  Scriptures  are  biblical  antiquities,
and  the  sacred  languages  ;  and  as  regards  the  present  form  of  the  text,  biblical
criticism  and  hcrmeneutics.  Exegesis  presupposes  all  these,  sciences,  and  they  in
turn  presuppose  exegesis.  The  circle  which  is  involved  in  this  statement  is  not
logical  but  real,  ?.  eT,  science  must  learn  to  know  the  particular  through  the  uni
versal,  and  the  universal  through  the  particular.  From  the  central  point  between
the  universal  and  the  particular,  it  oscillates  between  the  two  extremes,  which  intui
tion  harmon'r/es.

SECOND  CHAPTER,

Preparatory  Introduction  :  Its  constituent  parts  so  far  as  the  text  is  concerned.
1.  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  AKCII^SOLOGY.

Q      o

BIBLICAL  ANTIQUITIES  OF  THE  OLD   TESTAMENT.
It  is  denned  mainly  by  the  forming  principle  which  constitutes  its  unity:  here,


§4.     THE   ISRAELITISH   PEOPLE   AND   SURROUNDING  NATIONS.  9

the  character  of  the  Jewish  people.  Regarding  this  people  in  its  local  relations
we  have  Biblical  Geography  (especially  physical),  and  in  its  relations  to  time,
Biblical  Chronology;  then  in  its  relations  to  nature,  the  physical  science  of  the  Bible,
and  in  its  relation  to  the  race,  Biblical  Ethnography ;  then  in  its  more  vital  relations,
the  Theocracy,  embracing  the  history  of  the  Biblical  Cultus  and  Civilization;  and
lastly  in  its  relations  to  History,  biblical  history  and  international  relations.


For  the  literature  of  the  Old  Testament  Antiquities  :
DE  WETTE  :  Lehrbuch  dcr  hcbraisch-judischcn  Arch-
w'loyie  (1842). — EV/ALD:  Die  Alter thumer  dcs  Volkcs
Lrael,  1818,  1854.  [This  is  a  very  suggestive  work.
— A,  G.]  KEIF. :  Ilandbuch  dcr  bibliscJien  Archaoloyie,
1853.  BEKTHKAU  :  Zur  Gcschichtc  dcr  Israclitcn,


1842;  UAGKNBACU'S  Encyclopedia,  p.  130  ;  and  in
KI:IL,  p.  13.  LANCE'S  Matthew,  Am.  ed.  p.  17.
Archteulogy,  [PRESTOS  :  Student's  Theological  Man*
ual,  London,  1850.  JAHX'S  Biblical  Archccology,
translated  by  Upham,  New  York,  1853. — A.  G.]


§4.
THE  ISRAELITISII  PEOPLE  AND   SURROUNDING  NATIONS.

Heathen  nations,  in  their  pride  and  presumption,  trace  their  origin  back  through
various  steps  to  the  Gods,  or  demigods  (Tuisko,  Brahma,  Deucalion,  &c. );  but  the
Israclitish  people  is  satisfied  to  trace  its  origin  from  Abraham,  the  Friend  of  God.
Because  it  enters  into  the  history  of  the  world  as  the  people  of  faith,  therefore,  also
as  the  people  marked  by  humility  in  its  claim:.-.

Heathen  nations  speak  of  ancient  historical  glory  which  is  entirely  fabulous ;
the  people  of  Israel  with  a  far  truer  historical  sense,  acknowledges  the  comparatively
recent  date  of  its  origin.  According  to  Jewish  tradition  ;:;:<1  hi,-tory  Abraham
lived  about  2000  years  B.  C.  China  and  Egypt  were  then  thoroughly  developed,
well-known  historical  kingdoms,  with  the  tradition.-;  of  a  thousand  years  in  the  past.

In  their  historical  name,  as  they  are  known  in  the  language  of  other  nations  the
Israelites  are  Hebrews  (c^?)  ;  according  to  Ewald,  Lengerke  and  others,  from
the  Patriarch  Heber  (Gen.  x.  25;  xi.  1C) ;  but  according  to  Hengstenberg,  Kurtz
(Geschichte  des  Alton  Bundes,  p.  132),  they  were  called  by  this  name  since  they
came  from  the  other  side,  i.  e.,  across  the  Euphrates  (i=»  the  land  upon  the  other
side,  here  the  other  side  of  the  Euphrates).  It  may  be  urged  in  favor  of  this
derivation  that  they  were  so  called  by  foreign  nations,  who  would  naturally  be
better  acquainted  with  their  geographical,  than  their  genealogical  origin.  They
always  called  themselves  after  the  theocratic  honored  name  of  their  ancestor
Israel.  They  were  a  people  who  wrestled  with  God  in  faith  and  prayer.  After
the  exile,  the  name  Jews  passed  from  the  tribe  of  Judah  to  the  whole  people,  of
whom  that  tribe  was  the  central  point,  and  they  were  usually  so  called  by  foreign
nations.

See  WIXKK  :  Article  Hebrews.  BLEEK  :  Einlcitung
in's  Ailc  Testament,  p.  72.  An  article  protesting
against  the  prevailing  view,  may  be  found  in  the

The  Israelites,  as  Hebrews,  or  immigrants  into  Canaan,  may  have  exchanged
their  original  Aramaic  tongue  for  the  Hebrew  as  their  first  historical  language.
(BLEEK'S  Einleitunf/,  p.  01.)

This  would  be  only  in  accordance  with  what  actually  occurred  under  the  ISFew
Covenant,  when  the  Hebrew  Christians  exchanged  their  own  language  for  tho
classic  language  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  world.  In  both  cases,  is  the  appropriated


Hebriicr.


1Q  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.  ^^

lan<niao-e  moulded  into  an  "entirely  new  language,  through  the  power  of  the  religious
spirit.  DWe  leave  it  undetermined  however  how  far  this  question  must  be  regarded
as  already  settled.

[There  is  a  very  able  article  in  the  2d  vol.  of  the  Biblical  Repertory  in  which  the  author  defends  the
antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  language. — A.  d.]

\slo  their  genealogy,  the  descent  of  Israel  from  Abraham,  und  more  remotely
from  Shem,  forms  the  vc'ry  kernel  and  soul  of  their  authentic  traditions;  while  the
relation  of  other  Semitic  tribes  to  their  ancestors  is  involved  in  uncertainty.

Sec  Genealogical  table  Gen.  Ch.  10.    KUKTZ  :  History  of  the  Ohl  Covenant.     The  origin  of  the  Covenant
people,  i.  p.  !-'•'.

The  essential  question  here  is  this:  what  is  the  fundamental  characteristic,  the
distin.niishing  feature  of  the  Israelitish  people.  When  God  chose  this  people  as  his
own  although  it  was  a  stiff-necked  people  (K*.  xxxii.  9;  xxxiii.  3);  although  it
possessed  no  art,  science,  political  system,  like  that  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  (see
Introduction  to  Ruhr's  Geography  of  Palestine) ;  it  does  not  follow  that  the  choice
was  arbitrary  without  a  reason  in  the  divine  mind.  Corresponding  to  the  divine
choice  there  was  a  human  disposition  or  quality,  which  God  from  eternity  had
designed,  for  the  individual  or  people  of  his  choice,  and  which  he  actually  communi
cated  in  its  origin.

The  striking  peculiarity  of  Israel  is  the  great  prominence  ol  the  religious  (Semiti
Clement  i"  reference  to  God,  which  is  found  in  its  highest  and  most  genial  form  m
this  people  ;  ill  contrast  to  the  prominence  of  the  Ethical  (Japhetic)  element  m  refer-
(.nce  to  the  world.     Israel  therefore  is  preeminently  a  people  of  religion,  not  of  art
and  science  like,  the  Greeks,  nor  of  politics  and  law  like  the  Romans.     We   may  say
indeed   that  it  is  a  people  of  dy,,,,,,^  ,„*  nfj.,,,t  formal  force*  or  j,,-;,,,;^*      A*
the  people  of  God,  which  out    of  a   proibunder  originality,  introduces  and  unfo
amon*  the  hoary  nations  .1  new  life,  it   places  its  living  religion  in  opposition  to  the
forma!  and  lifeless  Cultus  of  the  heathen  ;  its  dynamic  poetry,  and  its  science  of  the
one  all  pervading  principle  of  the   world,  to   the   formal  poetry  and   science   of  the
Greeks;    and   its  warfare  and  politics,  animated  and  exalted  by  the  great  principles
which  actuate  them,  to   the   technical  and   unmeaning  Roman  politics  and  warfa
\s  it  is  itself  an  element  of  regeneration  to  the  nations,  so  are  its  gifts  for  the  :
and  arts  of  the  nations.     Hence  it  follows  that  Israel  must  possess  that  comprehensive
nationality,  in  which  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  different  nations  must  be  mixed.
Thus  it  was  destined  and  prepared  to  be  the  maternal  breast  for  the  Son  of  Man,  tl
man  from  heaven,  the  head  of  all  nations.     Thus  for  the  Father's  sake,  whose  pro-
foundest  peculiarities  it  represents,  and  for  the  Son  of  Jesse,  who  is  the  flower  and
.rlory  of  humanity,  it  is  the  beloved  people,  the  Elect  One,  Jeshurun,  the  favorite  of
heaven,  the  Apple  of  God's  eye,  the  typical  Son  of  God,  the  type  of  the  true  Son  of
God  to  come,  who  is  the  fulfilling  of  its  deepest  faith  and  desire.     Hence  too  in  lit
d-irker  aspect,  its  falls  and  crimes,  it   must  represent  the   darkest  side  of  humanity,
und  its  worst   characters,  just   as  in  its  peculiarly  chosen   ones,  its  patriarchs  and
prophets,  it  may  claim  the  noblest  and  most  heroic  spirits  of  the  race.     (See  LANGK  t,
Verjinslerung  der  Welt,  p.  110.)

The  mo«t  distorted  features  of  the  Hebrew  Nation-  Jcm*h  State;  in  FEUKBBACH :  Tractate  vpon  the
d  Character  are  found  in  HITZIO  :  Introduction  to  Nature  of  Christianity.  The  old  heathen  utterances
Isaiah-  in  LEO:  Prelection*  on  the  Hitter, ,  of  the  of  contempt  for  the  Jews  are  recorded  m  KAUMEK  S


§  5.  THE  LAND  OF  CANAAN  AND  ITS  POSITION  ON  THE  EARTH.


11


Palestine,  p.  396.  HERDER,  HKGEL  in  his  Prelections
upon  the  Philosophy  of  Religion,  2d  part,  pp.  42,  5Y.
EWALD,  and  others  have  contributed  to  a  more
correct  estimate  of  the  Israelitish  people.  FUANKI'S


Libanon,  the  family  book  of  poetry,  forms  a  collcc
tion  of  the  poetical  glories,  and  exalted  estimate  foi
the  Jewish  people  (1855).


The  people  of  Israel  must  therefore  from  its  very  destination  come  into  contact
with  the  most  diverse  nations,  with  the  astrological  Chaldees  from  whom  the  family
of  Abraham  sprang  (Ur,  Light  in  Chaldea.  Abraham,  in  the  starry  night.  Gen.
xv.  5) ;  with  the  Babylonians  and  Syrians,  ever  oscillating  between  pleasure  and
despair  (devotees  of  lust  and  moloch) ;  with  the  cultivated  but  depraved  Canaanites
(Kurtz:  History  of  the  Old  Covenant,  i,  p.  120)  ;  witli  the  wisdom  and  lifeless  Cultus
of  the  Egyptians ;  with  the  excitable  and  prudent  Midianites ;  with  the  kindred  but
still  dangerously  hostile  Edomites,  Moabites,  Ammonites  and  Samaritans  ;  Avith  the
haughty  and  contracted  Philistines  (for  whose  origin,  see  Kurtz,  p.  185) ;  with  the
skilful  and  ingenious  Phoenician ;  with  the  pride  and  haughtiness  of  the  Assyrian  and
Babylonian  monarchies ;  with  the  moral  intuitions,  and  tolerant  spirit  of  the  Persian
world-power;  with  the  culture  and  reason-worship  of  the  Greek;  and  at  last  with  the
fateful,  mighty,  and  cruel  power  of  Rome.  Upon  this,  as  its  fatal  rock,  after  it  had,
under  all  these  interchanges  and  influences,  unfolded  its  whole  character,  in  both
good  and  evil,  it  broke  to  pieces  as  to  its  historical  form  or  nationality,  in  an  exter
minating  contest  between  the  Judaic  religious,  legal  spirit,  and  the  strong  political,
and  legal  spirit  of  the  Roman  power.

S  '•'•
THE  LAND  OF  CANAAN  AND   ITS  POSITION  ON  THE  EARTIL

The  land  of  Canaan,  or  the  lowlands  of  Syria,  in  opposition  to  Aram  or  the  high
lands  (Gesenius,  Lexicon,  "i":s),  the  promised  land,  the  Holy  land,  designated  by  many
names  (Raumer's  Palestine,  p.  32),  was  appropriated  as  the  chosen  home  of  the  chosen
people,  as  the  land  holding  a  central  geographical  position,  connected  with  the
different  countries  of  the  civilized  world  by  the  Mediterranean  sea,  and  yet  insulated
from  them  (C.  HITTER  :  Der  Jordan  uncl  die  Beschiffung  des  Todten  Mccres,  Berlin,
1850);  central  also  as  to  climate,  lying  midway  between  the  debilitating  tropical
heats,  and  those  colder  climates  within  which  life  is  supported  only  by  hard  labor;  and
central  further  as  to  its  physical  qualities  between  paradisaic  fruitfulness,  and  sterile
wastes.  But  so  much  has  been  written  upon  this  land,  in  so  many  respects  different
from  Asia,  Africa,  Europe,  and  yet  so  closely  connected  with  them  all,  that  we  need
only  refer  to  the  literature  here.


HAGEXBACII:  Encyclopedia,  p.  135.  VON  RAU-
MER  :  Palestine,  p.  2.  The  Bible  Atlas  of  WEILAXD
and  ACKERMAN,  2d  e:L  (1815).  BERXATZ  :  Album
des  heiligen  Landes  (1856).  Bible  Atlas,  by  KIEPERT
(1858.)  The  plates,  plans  of  Jerusalem,  alluded  to
in  Raumer's  Palestine.  Also  the  Periodicals  upon
this  subject.  The  Laiids  and  States  of  Holy  /Scripture,
in  selected  engravings  with  an  explanatory  text  by
FKETVK  and  OTTO  STRAUSS  (1861).  The  description
of  the  land  in  KURTZ'S  History  of  the  Old  Covenant,
i.  p.  103.  ZAUN  :  Das  Reich  Gottes,  i.  Thl.  p.  105.
LAXGE  :  Life  of  Christ,  ii.  i.  p.  24.  Bible  Diction
aries  by  WINER  and  ZELLER.


We  would  call  special  notice  to  the  article  upon
Palestine  in  HEIIZOG'S  Real-Encyclopedia.  KEIL  :
Handbuch  dcr  Biblischen  Archiiologie,  p.  15  ff.  The.
Holy  Land,  by  C.  TISCIIEXDOKF  (1S62).  LANGE'S
Biblework  upon  Joshua.  [Ronixsox :  Researches,
with  the  maps.  The  articles  by  the  same  in  the
Bibliotheca-Sacra.  The  articles  upon  Palestine  by
THOMSON  and  PORTER  in  the  same  periodical.  COLE-
MAN  :  Biblical  Geography,  Text-book  and  Atlas.
Wall-map  by  COLEMAX.  THOMSON  :  The  Land  and
the  Book.  Article  Geography  in  ANGUS'  Hand-Book.
WILSON  :  Lands  of  the  Bible.  KITTO  :  History  of
Palestine.  Travels  by  Oi.ix,  DVRBIN,  BAUSUAXN


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


BARTLETT:  Walks  about  Jerusalem.  AITON:  TJic
Lands  of  the  Messiah,  London  (1851).  BONAK  :  TJie
desert  of  Sinai.  HACKETT  :  Illustrations  of  Scrip


ture.     ROHR'S  Palestine,   Edin.  (1843).      STANLEY:
Sinai  and  Palestine. — A.  G.]


CHRONOLOGY  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  OLD  COVENANT,  OR  OF  THE  JEWISH  PEOPLE.


Die    Jliojrapkic.i  <L>r  P.'ibd  (1858).     HUFF-


(1817).     AUCHINARD:  A  la  Chronologic  sacric,


1  :  Chronologic  mil  Fortsctzung  li*  a-if  unsere  '/Air,

Tubingen  (1S.31).      BKCKKU:    Chart  of  Clironoloyu,

i,,-i;>x,:'4  (1,S,")7).     Beitraiic  zur  Gcschickte  des  Altai

's,   1-y   A.    vox    GL-TSCHMID,    Leipzig   (1S5T).

:        '       Yichtv    dt*    Volkes    Israel,    \.    p.    -71.


Blbdwcrk,  i.  p.  ''-01  ff.      BMische  Jahrbueher


Gesclucldcn  t'oin  AU*~I«J  ihr  hradl'en  aus  Afffi'ptcn


.  p.  C-15.  [BROV.-XK:  Ordo  &tc'»n'.m.  WALTON:
Prolegomena.  BEDFORD  :  S'-ri^t".rc  Chronology.
The  Chronologies  of  USIIKR,  UAI.KS,  uml  Chrono-
loffj/,  as  Introductory  to  his  Church  Ili.-tory,  by
JAUVIS.—  A.  G.]


The  Chronology  of  the  Old  Testament,  us  it  lies  in  the  records,  was  not  intended  for
the  purposes  of  Science,  but,  determined  throughout  by  the  religious  point  ol  new,  to
which  nil  <n>o,Taphic-:il,astronomic;il,an.lscieutiHc  interests  are  hold  subservient.  Hence
;  has  been  said  by  the  author  of  the  Biographies  of  the  Bible,  "  that  among  the
mist-ikes  of  those  who  would  find  everything  in  the  Bible,  no  one  is  more  dangerous
and  wide-spread,  than  the  attempt  to  construct  a  chronology  from  its  pages."
later  investigations,  however,  ho  has  seen  reason  to  modify  his  judgment,  and  says
"  In  the  Bible,  Genealogy  has  far  greater  importance,  and  occupies  much  more  space
than  Chronology.  The  value  which  the  Hebrews  placed  upon  their  genealogical
tables  harmonizes  with  the  whole  system  of  their  religion  and  law,  and  will!  their
expectation  of  the  Messiah.  They  had  their  genealogists,  from  the  time  that  they
became  a  definitely  formed  state,  and  this  rcm«rt<Me  feature  in  their  customs  has
iredsuch  a  prominence,  that  they  sometimes  used  the  same  word

"•encalo^v  and  history."

'  It  is'this  very  remarkable  feature  which  imparts  ils  distinguishing  character,  its
spccifi  •  i  -  ;  worth,  its  perfection  even,  to  Biblical  Chronology.  In  regard  to  this
character  the  Xew  Testament  also  in  its  dates  holds  closely  to  the  Chronological
key-note  of  the  Old  Testament ;  although  in  the  Evangelists  and  Acts  it  frequently
connects  the  Biographical  Chronology  of  primitive  Christianity,  with  the  Chronological
dates  of  contemporary  general  history.  .  .

We  can  thus  speak  of  a  scientific  imperfection  of  Biblical  Chronology,  winch  is
perfectly  consistent  with  its  religious  perfection,  and  which  on  this  very  ac<
of  orcfit  service  to  the  chronology  of  general  history.

"The  first  imperfection  is  the  want  of  an  unbroken  series  of  dates  by  years,  starting
from  some  fixed  point  in  the  history.  The  second,  is  the  absence  of  a  reference  oi  the  dates
in  the  history  of  Israel,  to  the  contemporary  dates  of  general  history.     1  he  parti,
enumeration  of  years  of  the  Israelites  are  fragments,  which  are  only  joined  together
with  difficulty.     The  references  of  Israclitish  dates  to  those  of  foreign  nations,  cspcc
ally  of  the  Egyptians,  sustain  the  most  diverse  combinations.     Hencctfic  results  ol
the  later  determinations  of  Jewish  Chronology  differ  so  widely.     It  is  only  subse-
quent  to  the  exile  that  the  Jews  have  placed  their  mode  of  computation  m  connection
with  the  chronology  of  general  history  by  the  adoption  of  the  Era  of  the  Solenoid*.


SO.     CHRONOLOGY   OF   THE   JEWISH  PEOPLE.


But  in  tliis  precisely,  consists  the  religious  superiority  of  the  Jewish  Chronology,
that  it  is  throughout  genealogical,  just  as  the  whole  biblical  monotheism  is  grounded
in  the  principle  of  personality.  The  Israelitish  history  proceeds  upon  the  assumption
that  persons,  (we  might  say  even  personal  freedom),  are  the  prime  forming  elements
of  history  ;  that  the  persons  determined  the  facts,  and  not  the  facts  the  persons.
Every  nation,  as  indeed  every  religion,  has  its  characteristic  computation  of  time,
through  which  it  manifests  its  peculiar  nature.  Ilenco  the  Greek  computes  his
time  after  the  Olympiads,  the  Roman  al  uric  condita,  the  Mohammedan  from  the
flight  of  the  prophet,  with  which  the  success  of  his  religion  was  insured.  The  Israelite
computes  time  by  the  genealogy  of  the  Fathers  of  the  race  (nib-in),  by  the  ago;?
of  the  Patriarchs,  by  the  life  of  Moses,  by  the  reigns  of  the  kings.  In  addition  to
this  there  appear  in  the  history  general  genealogies.  But  when  all  the  Christian
world  reckons  time  from  the  birth  of  Christ,  it  only  raises  to  its  highest  power  the  .
Old  Testament  principle  of  personality ;  since  the  years  of  redemption  are  the  years
of  the  universal  life  of  Christ ;  a  continuous  fulfilment  of  the  word,  "  who  shall
declare  his  generation  ?  "

But  in  this  peculiarity  the  Jewish  chronology  has  been  of  essential  service  to
the  chronology  of  general  history.  Just  as  generally  the  Old  Testament  lias
given  the  death  blow  to  heathen  mythology,  so  the  Old  Testament  chronology,  by
fixing  the  antiquity  of  the  human  race  to  about  4000  years  B.  C.  (for  the  different
computations  see  tho  Biblical  chronology,  Tubingen,  1851,  Preface,  p.  1),  has  forever
refuted  the  fabulous  chronology  of  various  heathen  nations,  e.ff.,  the  Indian,  Chinese,
Egyptian.  The  general  historical  view  of  the  periods  of  the  development  of  the
human  race  before  Christ  confirms  the  correctness  of  the  biblical  assumption  as  to
the  remoteness  of  its  origin.

In  Ewald's  view,  the  determination  of  the  yearly  feasts,  which  was  in  the  hands
of  the  priests,  is  of  great  aid  in  perfecting  the  Jewish  method  of  computation.
To  the  determination  of  particular  years,  was  added  the  regulation  of  the  periods
of  years,  tho  Sabbath  year  (7  years) ;  the  year  of  Jubilee,  which  probably  began
with  the  fiftieth  year  (see  Note  3,  Ewald,  p.  276).  Then  the  Exodus  from  Egypt
became  a  starting  point  for  a  continuous  era,  and  (1  Kings  vi.  1)  480  years  were
counted  from  the  Exodus  to  the  founding  of  the  temple  in  the  fourth  year  of  the
reign  of  Solomon.  So  the  residence  in  Egypt  was  fixed  at  430  years  (Ex.  xii.  40).
In  establishing  these  points  the  Israelites  could  avail  themselves  of  the  guidance
of  the  Egyptian  method  of  computation.  According  to  Ewald,  these  two  periods,
the  residence  in  Ep-ypt,  and  the  interval  between  the  Exodus  and  the  building  of

_  -_.-

the  temple,  form  the  axes  about  which  all  the  other  determinations  revolve,
as  to  the  relations  of  the  ancient  Israelitish  history  to  the  history  of  other  nations,
Ewald  points  to  the  Egyptian  Era  of  Mancthon.  To  this  Egyptian  parallel  Bun-
sen  adds  that  of  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian.  After  the  exile  the  Jewish  era  runs
in  close  connection  with  the  Persian,  through  the  reckoning  of  the  reigns  of  the
kings  (Ezra  iv.  24  ;  vi.  15).  Since  the  Syrian  Empire  the  Jews  fall  more  com
pletely  within  the  era  of  the  Scleucida?  (1  Mace.  i.  10).

It  is  not  our  purpose  to  form  a  new  chronological  system  of  the  history  of  tha
Old  Testament,  but  rather  to  vindicate  the  idea  of  Old  Testament  chronology.
We  throw  out  here  however  some  brief  remarks  upon  the  method  of  ascertaining
some  of  the  general  points  just  alluded  to.

1.  It  is   dccUedly  in.iorrcct  for  the  author  of  "The  Dates  of  the  Bible,"  1  a


14  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

regard  to  the  chronology  of  the  Old  Testament,  to  place  the  Samaritan  text  of  the
Old  Testament,  and  the  Septuagint,  by  the  side  of  the  Hebrew  text,  so  that  from
their  great  diversities,  he  might  infer  that  the  biblical  chronology  was  in  the  same
decree  unreliable.  It  is  impossible  that  the  Septuagint  should  rest  upon  traditions
which  will  bear  comparison  with  those  of  the  Hebrew  text.  The  same  is  true  of
the  Samaritan  Pentateuch.  The  Hebrew  text  has  throughout  the  priority,  and
must  therefore  have  the  preference  in  any  case  in  which  they  may  be  com
pared.

2.  It  is  incorrect  again  to  attempt  to  rectify  Old  Testament  declarations  by
what  arc  supposed  to  be  diilerent  declarations  of  the  Xew  Testament,  as  has  been
done  by  Usher,  Ludov.  Capellus  and  others,  more  recently  by  Becker,  in  his  Chart
of  biblical  chronology.     The  declaration  of  Paul   (Gal.   iii.   17)   agrees  with  that
made  (Ex.  xii.  40),  if  we  take  into  account  that  the  promise  was  not  only  confirmed
to  Abraham,  but  to  Isaac  and  Jacob.     The   4:30   years   would  thus   date  from  the
origin  of  the  Israelitish  people,  after  the  death  of  Jacob,  to  the  Exodus.      It  is
more  difficult  to  explain  the  relation   of  the  450  years  which  the  Apostle   (Acts
xiii.  20)   defines  as  the  period  of  the  Judges,  to  the  declaration  (1  Kings   vi.  1),
that  the  period  from  the  Exodus  to  the  erection  of  the  temple  was  about  480  years.
A  diversity  exists  here  in  the  Jewish  tradition,  since  even  .Tosq.hns  (Antiq.  viii.
3,  1)   reckons  592  years  from  the  Exodus  to  the  building  of  the  temple:  thus  as
signing  -1  13  years  as  the  period    of   the  Judges,  while  1  Kings  vi.   1    fixes   331
years  as  the  length  of  that  period.     Either  the  Apostle  intimates  in  the  <!K,  that  he
fell  in  with  the  Traditional  indefinite  reckoning,  or  the  declaration  reaches  back,  and
includes  Moses  and  Joshua  among  the  Judges,  (as  they  in  fact  were,)  as  it  reaches
forwards,  and  includes  Samuel.     In  the  determination  of  the  bondage   in  Egypt  to
400  years  in  the  speech  of  Stephen,  it  is  probable  that,  according  to  the  promise,
(Gen.  xv.  13),  the  round  number  of  30   years  at  the  beginning  of  the  residence  in
Egypt,  was  fixed  as  the  period  of  the  happy  existence  of  the  Israelites  there,  and
must  be  subtracted  from  the  entire  period  of  their  residence.

3.  It  is  not  our  province,  nor  are  we  in  a  position  to  criticise  the  assertions  which
Bunsen  makes  in   regard  to   the  Egyptian,  Assyrian  and  Babylonian   chronologies
(compare  the  criticism  by  Gutschmid).     In  any  case  he  has  performed  a  great  service
in  bringing  the  Jewish  era  in  relation  with  these  chronologies  ;  which  he  has  done  at
a  vast  expense  of  learning  and  toil.     We  must,  however,  bring  out  more  clearly  the
doubt  which  a  more  complete  scientific  combination  has  to  remove.     In  the  first
place,  it  seems  without  any  adequate  foundation  that  a  chronology  beyond  the  influence
of  the  Theocracy  should  "be  presented  as  an  infallible  measure  for  the  biblical  decla
rations,  as  much  so  indeed,  as  if  generally  an  unquestioned  right  should  be  conceded
to  Joscphus  against  the  Old  Testament,  and  Evangelic  history.     In  the  second  place,
the  determination  upon  this  ground  of  the  dates  of  Jewish  history  seems  to  us,  to  a
orcat  extent,  questionable.     In  the  third  place,  it  is  a  result  which  no  one  should
hastily  concede,  when  the  480  years  (1  Kings  vi.  1),  from  the  Exodus  to  the  founding
of  the  temple  are  here  reduced  to  less  than  352  years.     We  must  leave  it  to  a  specia
investigation,  to  ascertain  these  points  more  certainly.

The  most  certain  dates  for  the  determination  of  Jewish  Chronology,  are  those  of
Nebuchadnezzar  and  Cyrus.  The  conquest  of  Jerusalem  by  the  former  monarch,  or
the  beginning  of  the  Babylonian  captivity,  is  assigned,  not  only  by  Bunscn,  but  by
Scheuchzer  and  Brinkmeycr,  to  the  year  58G  (not  588)  B.  C.  The  return  of  the


6.     CHROXOLOGY   OF   THE   JEWISH   PEOPLE.  15


Jews  from  Babylon,  according  to  the  ordinary  computation,  took  place  530  B.  C
according  to  Bunscn  and  Scheuchzer  538.

From  that  time  downwards,  the  Jewish  computation  is  determined  by  the  Era  of
the  Selcucidse,  which  follows  the  era  from  the  beginning  of  the  Captivity  in  Babylon,
or  the  destruction  of  the  first  temple.  It  begins  with  the  year  312  B.  C.  A  follow
ing  era,  reckoning  from  the  deliverance  in  143  B.  C.,  gives  place  again  to  the  com
putation  used  under  the  Seleucidre,  upon  which  follows  the  present  computation  of
the  Jews,  the  world  era,  beginning  3701  B.  C.,  and  divided  into  three  great  periods,
the  first  reaching  to  the  Babylonian  Captivity,  the  second  from  that  event  to  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  the  third  from  that  time  to  the  present.

From  the  Babylonian  Captivity,  going  backwards,  we  reach  the  first  point  in  the
Jewish  computation,  through  the  sum  of  the  reigns  of  the  Jewish  Kings.  It  has  usually
been  iixed  at  387  years,  and  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Rehoboam  placed  at  9/5
B.  C.  Bunscn  places  it  in  968,  and  thus,  if  we  follow  his  method  of  determinations,
as  it  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  the  Egyptian  dates  of  King  Shishak  (Sisak,  who
plundered  Jerusalem  in  the  third  year  of  Rehoboam,)  we  bring  out  the  round  number
of  382  years  for  the  reigns 'of  the  Kings.  Solomon  reigned  forty  years,  and  laid  the
foundation  of  the  temple  in  the  fourth  of  his  reign  (1  Kings  vi.)  This  would  give  1004
as  the  date  of  the  founding  of  the  temple.  Connecting  the  480  years,  the  interval
mentioned  between  the  Exodus  and  the  founding  of  the  temple,  and  the  Exodus
must  have  occurred  about  1484  B.  C.  It  is  usually  placed  in  round  numbers  at  1500,
but  more  accurately  at  1493.  Bunsen,  however,  places  the  Exodus  between  the  years
1324-1328,  more  definitely  1326,  (Lepsius  1314.)  But  the  confidence  with  which
this  determination  is  fixed,  is  based  principally  upon  the  fabulous  narrative  by  Man-
etho,  of  the  events  in  the  reign  of  the  Egyptian  King  Mcnophthah,  (Bunscn,  p.  ccxii.)
It  is  not  credible  that  the  simple,  sober  narratives  of  the  Old  Testament,  are  to  be
corrected  by  such  a  fabulous  record  as  this  (see  Gutschmid,  pp.  2,  10, 11,  and  103,  also,
Knobel,  Exodus,  112,  116  if. ;  upon  the  more  extended  argument  of  Bunscn,  215,  see
Gutschmid,  p.  23).  If  we  add  the  period  of  the  residence  in  Egypt  (Ex.  xii.  40),  430
years,  to  the  number  (1  Kings  vi.  1),  the  entrance  into  Egypt,  or  the  death  of  Jacob
nmst  have  happened  1914  B.  C.  For  the  residence  of  the  patriarchs  in  Canaan,
according  to  Knobel's  computation,  we  may  allow  190,  or  at  the  most  215  years.
Abraham  must  therefore  have  entered  Canaan  about  2129.  Knobel  is  inclined  to
reduce  the  215  years,  since  in  his  view,  the  age  of  the  patriarchs  is  placed  too  high,
but,  with  Beer,  Koppe,  Ewald,  and  others,  defends  the  430  years,  as  the  period  of
the  residence  in  Egypt,  against  those  chronologists,  who  follow  the  reckoning  of  the
later  Jews,  and  especially  of  Josephus,  in  whose  view  the  residence  in  Egypt  was
only  215  years,  with  this  remark,  "  that  in  these  diverging  computations  too  much
stress  has  been  laid  upon  uncertain  genealogies."

The  date  of  the  entrance  of  Abraham  into  Canaan  points  to  a  period  still  more
remote,  which  may  be  fixed  with  considerable  accuracy,  through  the  declarations  in
Genesis  as  to  the  lives  of  the  Patriarchs,  and  which,  beyond  question,  gives  a  vastly
more  probable  age  of  the  race  than  20,000  years,  assumed  by  Bunsen.

For  the  lunar  year  of  the  Ancient  Israelites,  see  WINER'S  Real-W<Jrterbuch^  Article  Year.  For  thsii
months,  the  article  Months.  Also  BIUNKMEYEK,  pp.  43,  44.


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


THE  NATURAL  IILSTORY  OF  PALESTINE  (FlIYSICA  fLVCRA).

sox  :  I<\'*:'(ii-<-7n.-;  ;  TJie Land  and  tltc F.ool:,  by  TIIOM
SON,  a  very  interesting  and  instinctive  book  ;  Denn

other  Ceo-raphieal  works.     Tor   the    literature,  sec    Stanley's  work.      l'i>on  this  and  all  other  kindred

subjects,  the  valuable  Bible  Dictionary  by  Suith,  8

JJic  C<tlt<-cr L'M'ische  Nalu,- :  -  '  -cJi '    :i:ay  be  rec-

'  BORN:  Plants  of  the  Hohj  Land.—\.  G.]


§0
O.

BIBLICAL  ETHN'OGRAniY.
Bee  above,  §  1.     KruTZ  :  History  of  the  Oil  Cov      int.  ii.  p.  4  1 1.     LT.-VO  :  0.  T.,  p.  200,  Vollccrsliau.

§9.

THE  TIIE'U'RACY.

\Te  cannot  comprehend  the  hi-tory  of  Israelitish  civilization,  without  embracing
the  history  of  its  worship,  which  lies  at  its  fouiulation  ;  nor  this  a^ain  Avilliout  a  prior
view  of  the  common  root,  out  of  Avhicli  spring  both  branches,  the  history  both  of
the  worship  :ni<l  civilixnlion  of  Israel,  /.  c.,the  Theocracy.

It  is  the  faith  of  Abraham,  that  faith  by  which  he  left  his  home  (Gin.  .\ii.  1),  nut
knowing  wliither  lie  went,  which  makes  him  an  historical  personage.  Israel,  also,  from
nameless,  mihistorical,  servile  tribes,  became  the  most  glorious  people  of  history  through
the  reception  of  the  legally  developed  Theocracy  at  the  hands  of  Moses.  The  obe-
•  >f  faith  wa.s  the  constituent  principle  of  the  people.  Hence  it  is  the  type  of  tin;
-  iiurch,  that  one  people  which  the  gospel  has  gathered  out  of  all  nations.  Josephus
ascribes  the  founding  of  the  Theocracy,  or  the  reign  of  God  over  Israel,  to  Moses  (  Con-
fra  Ap'onoa  ii.  1,  G,  see  de  AWtle's  Archaologie,  p.  1TO).  But  Moses  stands  to  the
Theocracy,  or  the  religious  community  of  the  Old  Covenant  under  the  immediate
guidance  and  control  of  Jehovah,  just  as  he  does  to  the  Old  Covenant  itself,  i.e.,
lie  is  not  the  starting-point  or  founder,  but  one  who  develops  it  under  its  legal  form:
the  mediator  for  the  people  of  the  grand  theocratic  principles,  in  the  form  of  the  fun
damental  laws  of  the  Theocracy.  The  Old  Covenant  law  or  right,  according  to  which
the  Church  of  God,  at  its  very  beginning,  recognized  its  conscious  dependence  upon
the  Divine  Providence,  and  entrusted  itself  with  entire  confidence  to  Ilis  marvellous
care,  while  it  walked  in  the  obedience  to  His  commands  Avhich  faith  prompts  and
works,  began  with  Abraham,  with  whom  the  Old  Covenant  itself  began.  The  symbols
of  this  supernatural  order  of  things,  are  the  starry  heavens  over  the  house  of  Abra
ham,  and  circumcision,  the  religious  and  profoundly  significant  rite  of  his  house.  Abra
ham  was  justified  by  his  faith  in  the  word  of  promise,  and  in  this  begins  the  germ-
like  organic  growth  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  which  hitherto  only  in  sporadic  portents,
like  individual  stars  in  the  night,— in  the  saints  of  the  earlier  times— had  irradiated
the  nights  of  the  old  world.  Hence  the  term  THEOCRACY,  as  Aristocracy,  Democracy ,
and  similar  terms,  designates  the  principle  of  the  government,  not  its  form  ;v  which  is


8  iu.     RELIGION    AND    WORSHIP   OF   ISRAEL   AND    OF   SURROUNDING    NATIONS.


designated  by  the  terms  Monarchy,  Hierarchy,  Oligarchy.  It  is  not  the  outward  form
of  a  political  power  or  government.     We  cannot  say,  therefore,  that  the  Theocracy
ceased  in  Israel  with  the  erection  of  the  Kingdom.     The  division  of  Jewish  history
into  the  reign  of  God,  the  reigns  of  the  Kings,  and  the  reigns  of  the  Priests,  rests  upon
an  error,  which  confounds  the  distinction  between  the  immutable  Old  Testament  prin
ciple  of  government,  and  the  mutable  political  forms  under  which  it  appears.     The
reign  of  God  does  not  exclude  the  reign  of  the  Kings,  as  a  form  in  which  it  appears ;
on  the  contrary  it  blooms  and  flowers  in  its  representation  through  the  regal  power  of
David  and  Solomon,  as  before  in  its  representation  through  the  prophetical  and  judi
cial  power  of  Moses  and  Joshua,  and  in  later  times  in  its  representation  through  the
priestly  dominion  of  the  Maccabean  Judas  and  Simon.     The  organic  principle  of  the
divine  dominion  branches  itself  into  the  three  fundamental  forms  under  which  Israel
was  led  ;  the  prophetic,  kingly  and  priestly.  Ilcncc  the  Providential  leading  of  Israel,
we  may  say  indeed,  the  consciousness  of  the  dominion  and  leading  of  Jehovah,  endured
in  [srael,  under  the  Kings  as  under  the  Judges,  in  the  Kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  as  in
Judah,  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon  as  in  Canaan,  however  much  the  prevailing  unbelief
and  apostasy  of  the  many  could  transiently  obscure  that   consciousness;  and  it  was
only  when  Jerusalem  was  destroyed  by  Titus,  that  despair  tilled  the  hearts  of  the
people,  in  the  consciousness  that  for  some  long,  indefinite  period,  it  had  been  rejected
by  Jehovah.     But  the  typical  form  of  the  Old  Testament  theocracy,  as  it  was  estab
lished  by  Moses  (Ex.  xix.  0),  has  now  passed  into  the  real  New  Testament  Kingdom
of  God,  the  /3acnAa'a  TWV  ot'parwr,  which  had  been  already  predicted  by  the  prophets,
especially  by  Daniel  (chap.  ii.  and  vii.).     The  typical  appearance    of  a  people  formed
by  God  to  the  obedience  of  faith  through  His  revealed  word,  led  and  protected  by
Him,  has  reached  its  fulfilment  in  the  people  of  God,  founded   by  His  saving  virtue
and  power,  a  holy  commonwealth ;  and  in  truth,  by  the  word  of  God,  united  in  a  hu
man,  spiritual  life,  and  led  to  an  eternal  glorious  Kingdom,  which,  in  its  introductory
form,  is  begun  here,  and  has  its  continuous,  efficient  organ  in  the  Christian  Church.

Thus  Abraham,  in  his  righteousness  of  faith,  stands  as  the  living  type  of  the  King
dom  of  God,  but  the  type  of  the  whole  theocratic  culture  is  its  altar,  as  the  type  of
the  whole  theocratic  civilization  is  the  shepherd's  tent.


§  10.
RELIGION  AND  WORSHIP  OF  ISRAEL  AND  OF  SURROUNDING  NATIONS.

Abraham  appears  as  an  historical  personage  only  through  his  religion,  and  the  Is-
raelitish  people  takes  its  origin  from  religion.  Other  nations  have  formed  their  own
human  religions  in  their  own  way,  but  here  the  divine  religion,  viewed  in  its  relation
to  general  history,  makes  its  own  point  of  departure,  the  father  of  the  faithful,  and
the  organ  of  its  growth— the  people  of  Israel.  As  the  Greek  tribes  were  formed  into
a  people  through  their  Hellenic  culture,  and  the  Roman  tribes  through  the  city  of
Rome  and  the  Roman  State,  so  in  a  more  marked  way  has  Israel  grown  to  be  a  his
torical  people  through  its  religious  calling.  Even  its  natural  origin  was  conditioned
through  faith  (Gen.  xv.).

It  is  not  our  purpose  here  to  dwell  particularly  upon  the  faith  of  Abraham  and
Isaac  ;  we  will  only  give  those  periods  which  are  noticeable  in  an  archaeological  point
of  view.  In  the  first  place  faith  itself.


IS  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


Monotheism  and  the  Apostasy,  or  Symbolism          4.  The  Mosaic  legal  institutions,  and  their  conn-


and  its  heathen  form,  Mythology.

2.  Calling  of  Abraham  and  the  heathen,  or
Symbolical  Typology,  and  Symbolical  Mythology.
Abraham  separated  from  the  people  for  their  sal


vation.  and  thc  AP°staP-v-


3.  The  Patriarchal  faith  in  its  development,  and
heathenism  in  its  ramifications.


terpart  in  thc  Heathen  world.

5.  Thc  development  of  tho  Mosaic  law,  and  the
idolatrous  service  of  the  surrounding  nations.

(j.  Thc  Prophetic  elevation  of  the  national  spirit


The  rending  of  the  common  public  religic
spirit,  and  its  true  concentration.


Then  follows  the  more  direct  solemn  expression  of  faith,  the  Cultus  :  its  pre-con
dition  circumcision,  its  central  point  the  sacrifice,  its  spiritual  consecration  prayer  and

instruction.

The  different  stages  of  the  Cultus  are  marked  by  thc  temporary  and  const;
movhi"  tents  of  the°Patriarchs  (simple  sacrifice),  thc  tabernacle  of  Moses  (the  legal
sacrificial  system),  the  temple  of  Solomon  (the  fully  developed  liturgy),  thc  second
temple  (thc  martyr  sorrows  of  the  people  pointing  on  to  the  real  sacrih

•Vll  these  points  will  be  more  thoroughly  treated  in    and  197  ;  for  the  literature  of  Biblical  Theology,  p.
their  proper  places.     For  the  literature  of  Biblical    200.     Also  KKIL:  Ardwoloyy,  p.  47.
history,  see  ILuitNiiArii :  Encyclopedia,  pp.  189, 194,

§11.


S ACHED  ART.


We  have  already  designated  the  sacred  art  as  dynamic.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that
Poetry  must  here  hold  the  first  place,  and  after   this  thc  Song  and  Music  :  and  then
the  Sac-red  Chorus  or  religious  dances.    Symbolical  Architecture  and  Sculpture
the  series  as  painting  seems  to  have  been  almost  entirely  neglected.

For  a  correct  estimate  of  Theocratic  Art,  the  following  points  arc  of  importance  :
1    Thc  religious  element  always  outweighs  and  controls  the  moral.     It  is  framed
the  purposed  worship,  not  civilization.    2.  The  dynamic  principle,  as  in  a
oratic  relations  of  life,  is  of  far  greater  moment  than  the   formal.     3.  All  feymbo
Art  has  a  tvpical  signification,  t.  <?.,  it  not  only  serves  the  purpose  of  an  aesthetic  nf
•uid  of  philosophic  contemplation,  but  by  virtue  of  a  real  efficient  principle,  of  a  s.
of  true  spiritual  life,  ever  strives  to  give  the  beautiful  appearance  or  rcprc
its  complete  corresponding  reality  in  life.

For  the  literature  of  Hebrew  Art  and  Music,  see  ;  GcschicJde  der  bilJcndcn  Kunstc,  i.   241.     [Thc  ar-
,-vr  vru  -    Encyclopedia  p  139.     KKIL  :  Arehce-    tides  Music  and  Musical  Instruments  in  KITTO  :

cyclopedia.  SMITH:  Bible  Dictionary.  Also  thc Bibk
dictionaries  of  the  American  Tract  Society,  Presby
terian  Boards  and  Sunday  School  Union;  JAHN  :  AT-
chccoloyy. — A.  G.]


ology,  2d  vol.  p.  182.  Compare  the  articles  Music
and  Musical  Instruments  in  WINER.  Also  the  articles
upon  thc  temple.

For  the  Hebrew  Architecture,  see  the  article  upon
that  subject  in  HAGEXBACH  :  Encyclopedia;  SCIINAASE


§12.

THEOCRATIC  LAW  AND  JURISPRUDENCE.

The  fundamental   principle  of  theocratic  law  and  jurisprudence,  is  that  estimato
of  personal  life  grounded  in  the  vivid  knowledge  of  a  personal  God  which  leads
to  a  recognition  of  the  fully  developed  personal  life  (personal  rights),  then  t<


§  14.     THE   HISTORY   OF   ISRAELITISH   CIVILIZATION.


19


tection  and  culture  of  the  undeveloped,  or  as  a  matter  of  history,  outraged  (marriage
rights),  then  to  the  awakening  of  the  suppressed  (rights  of  strangers),  and  lastly  to
the  judgment  upon  those  individuals  and  tribes  who,  through  their  unnatural  sins  and
abominations,  have  subjected  themselves  as  persons  to  the  curse  and  destruction.


See  HAGENBACH,  p.  139,  under  the  heading,  Staats-
verfassung  (Miekadis,  Hiillmann,  Saalschutz) ;  J.
SCQNELL  :  Das  israelitische  TiccJit  in  scinen  Grund-
zuyen  dargestcllt,  Basel  (1853).  Compare  KEIL  :
Archceologie,  ii.  p.  190.  [Commentaries  on  the  Laws
of  Moses,  J.  D.  MICHAELIS,  English  Translation,  Lon


don  (18 1-4),  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  the  An
cient  Hebrews,  by  E.  C.  WINES,  2d  edition,  New
York.  The  Biblical  Encyclopedia  and  Dictionaries.
JAIIX  :  Hebrew  Commonwealth,  translated  by  C.
E.  Stowe,  Andover  and  London ;  LOTVTUE  :  Tlie  He
brew  Lawgiver. — A.  G.]


ISRAELITISH  WISDOM  AND  SCIENCE.

In  no  region  is  it  clearer  that  all  the  developments  of  life  among  the  Israelites  are
preeminently  dynamic,  than  in  the  intellectual.  The  wisdom  of  the  Hebrews  has
upon  its  theocratic  grounds  failed  to  reach  the  true  science,  as  Greek  science,  upon
its  merely  human  grounds,  has  failed  to  reach  the  last  and  highest  principles  of  true
wisdom.  But  the  theocratic  faith,  working  in  its  dynamic  direction,  has  laid  the
ground  for  the  new  birth  of  the  ante-Christian,  heathen  science,  as  it  has  thoroughly
refuted  the  theory  of  two  eternal  principles,  of  the  eternity  of  matter,  or  as  it  has  estab
lished  that  one  profound,  all-pervading  view  of  the  world  which  rests  upon  the  living
synthesis  of  the  ideal  and  real,  upon  the  assumption  of  the  absolute  personality.  Since
science  is  the  striving  after  the  highest  intellectual  or  ideal  unity,  it  cannot  dispense
with  the  Old  Testament,  if  it  would  attain  to  its  perfect  freedom  under  the  New  Tes
tament.


We  must  be  careful  not  to  confound  the  relation
of  Theocratic  Judaism,  and  post-Christian  Judaism  to


science,  with  each  other.    For  the  Jewish  science,  sea
KEIL  :  Archaeology,  ii.  p.  162;  HAGEXBACH,  p.  134.


THE  HISTORY  OF  ISRAELITISH  CIVILIZATION.

Periods.— The  Nomadic  state— the  Bondage— the  Conquest— time  of  the  settlement  and  agriculture
— commerce — the  dispersion.

I.  DOMESTIC  LIFE.


1.  Marriage. — Its  religious  and  moral  signifi
cance.     The  Law  of  Marriage.     The  Marriage  cere
mony.     The  Marriage  state  in  its  moral  influence
and   development.     The  family.     Training  of  chil
dren.     Domestics.     Slaves.     The  house.

2.  The  house  as  a  tent.— The  dwelling.     The
village.     The  market  place.     The  city.

3.  The  care  and  ornaments  of  the  faaiily. —
Clothing.     Jewelry.     Luxuries.


4.  The    work   of  the   family. — Production.
Agriculture.      Pastoral     life.      Hunting.      Fishing.
Mining.

5.  The    festivals    of    the    family. —  Home
pleasures  and  joys.     Society.     Sports.     Hospitality.
Household  sorrows.  Sickness.  Death.  Burials.  Usages
of  mourning.

C.  Food    of   the  family. — Laws   relating   to
food.     Meal  times.


*  We  reserve  the  subject  of  Jealousy,  and  of  the  sexual  offences,  as  indeed  of  the  assumed  difficulties  in  the  Old
Testament  generally,  for  a  separate  Excursus.


20


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


II.    ISKAEL  AS  A  SxATK.


The  principle.— The  Theocracy  as  above.  1.
The  organization  of  a  community,  a.  The  organic
union  of  the  tribes  in  Hie  land.  4.  The  organic
division  of  the  land  among  the  tribes,  c.  The  law  of
inheritance  or  primogeniture.  2.  The  establishment
of  government.  The  three  state?  or  conditions.  Priest
ly.  Prophetic.  Royal.  Urim  and  Thnmmirn.  3.  The


establishment  of  law  and  jurisprudence.  Laws.
Judgments.  Punishments.  The  place  of  judgment.
The  Sanhedrim.  Lav,-  of  the  Zealots.  [Nazarenes.—
A.  G.]  The  Prophetic  Judgments.  Judgment  au
act  of  worship.

For  the  literature,  sec  IIAGEXBACH,  p.  138;  KEII-,

ii.  p.  1.


III.  SOCIAL  IXTEKCOUKSE.


1    Commerce.-!.,  conditions,  weights,  meas-  ;        2.  Personal  intercourse.-In  the  gate,  visits,
ures,  money.  Its  form.*.  Barter,  caravans,  traffic  by    journeys,  modes  ot  travel.
land,  trade    by   sea.    For  the  Israelitish  measures,
BEUTHKAU,  BINSKN,  i.  vol.


3.  Intellectual    intercourse.— Writings    and

literature,     theological     schools,     science,    special
sciences,  cultus.

4.  Art. — See  Cultus.


§   15-
HISTORY  OF  ISRAEL.


Sec  HAGKXBACII  :  Encyclopedia,  p.  185.    LANGK  :
Matthac,  Am.  ed.,  the  Introduction  and  the  follow


ing  paragraphs  upon  the  theological  and  homilet-
ical  literature  of  the  Old  Testament.


THE  INTERNATIONAL  LAW   OF  THE   ISRAELITES.

The  root  of  this  international  law  lies  in  the  first  promise  (Genesis  iii.  15),  in  the
blessings  of  Noah  (Gen.  ix.  25),  especially  in  the  promise  to  Abraham:  "In  thy  seed
.hall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed  (Gen.  xii.  3-7) ;  and  in  its  fuller  explana
tion  (Gen  xxii.  18),  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  bless  themselves."  The  iirst  declara
tion  in  what  form  this  promise  should  fulfil  itself,  viz.  through  a  holy  Kingdom,  is
found  in  the  blessing  which  Isaac  gave  to  Jacob  (Gen.  xxvii.  27) ;  the  second  and  more
deiinite  declaration  in  the  blessing  which  Jacob  pronounces  upon  Judah  (
S)  After  establishing  the  pre-conditions  (Kx.  xix.  a  legal  separation  from  the  nations
and  a  legal  association  with  them),  Moses  organized  the  tribes  of  Israel  into  a  sacred
camp,  a  warlike  host,  destined  to  carry  on  the  sacred  wars  of  the  Lord.  It  enters  at
first  upon  the  removing,  or  in  a  modified  sense  the  uprooting,  of  a  corrupt  heathen
people,  for  the  purpose  of  founding  a  free  Israelitish  national  life.  The  wider  relations
of  Israel  to  the  nations  must  be  determined  through  its  contact  with  them-m  war
and  peace,  according  to  the  laws  of  war  and  treaties  of  peace.

The  victories  of  David  awakened  in  him  and  in  the  people,  for  a  time,  the  thought
that  he  was  called,  with  a  theocratic  political  power,  to  found  a  sacred  world-power,  to
which  all  nations  should  be  in  subjection.  (2  Sam.  xxiv.)  But  the  thought  met  the
severe  punishment  of  Jehovah,  who  thus  turned  the  mind  of  the  Israelitish  people
before  the  declining  of  its  political  glory,  to  a  spiritual  conquest  of  the  nations,
onion  entered  this  path  as  a  Prince  of  Peace,  and  reached  great  results,  but  he  rashly


§  17  and  18.     THE   OLD   TESTAMENT   LANGUAGES.  21

anticipated  the  New  Testament  future,  the  premature  individual  religious  freedom,
which  produced  similar  destructive  results  in  Israel,  with  the  later  idolatrous  intoler
ance.  Since  then  the  Jewish  public  mind  has  ever  oscillated  in  uncertainty  between
the  two  thoughts  of  a  spiritual  and  political  conquest  of  the  world  ;  ever  falling  more
decidedly  under  the  influence  of  the  latter  thought  —  which  even  prior  to  the  extermi
nating  Jewish  wars  had  made  them  the  odium  generis  humani  j  —  although  the
prop/hots  with  increasing  distinctness  and  emphasis  had  made  the  external  world-
dominion  dependent  upon  the  inward  spiritual  conquest  of  the  world,  and  therefore
promised  it  only  to  the  true  seed  of  a  spiritual  Israel.

The  strict  legal  separation  of  Israel  from  the  nations  stands  in  contrast  with  its
position  between  the  nations,  and  its  blessed  intercourse  with  those  who  differed  most
widely  from  each  other,  in  their  whole  spirit  and  tendency.

Its  Pharisaic  and  fanatical  separation  from  the  nations  stands  in  contrast  with  its
outward  geographical  connection  with  them  (See  LAXGE  :  Geschichte  des  Apost.
Zeitaltcrs,  i.  p.  208  ff.)  and  its  mingling  with  heathen  notions  of  the  most  diverse  tend
ency  and  spirit.

It  is  by  pushing  its  particularism  to  its  utmost  limits,  that  Israel  has  brought  about
its  own  dispersion  among  the  nations.

Concerning  the  Israelitish  international  law,  its  warfare,  the  celebration  of  its  victories,  and  the  treat
ies  of  peace,  see  KEIL,  ii.  p.  289  ff.  [The  popular  works  on  Biblical  antiquities  may  be  consulted,  but  the
information  which  they  give  is  —  perhaps  necessarily  —  imperfect  and  unsatisfactory.  —  A.  G.]

2.  THE  LANGUAGES.


THE  PROVINCE  OF  OLD  TESTAMENT  LANGUAGES.

In  determining  the  province  of  Old  Testament  languages,  it  is  essential  that  we
should  have  a  correct  idea  of  the  distinction  between  the  genius  of  the  Semitic
languages,  and  that  of  other  languages,  especially  the  Indo-Gcrmanic  family.  It
appears  from  this,  that  the  Semitic  idiom,  owing  to  its  directness,  heartiness,  and  so
to  speak  inwardness,  possesses  in  a  high  degree  a  fitness  to  express  the  religious  and
moral  aspects  of  doing  and  suffering,  the  moral  affections  and  distinctions  ;  Avhile  it
wants  in  an  important  sense,  the  opposite  characteristic  of  indirectness  and  reflective
ness.  In  particular,  the  Hebrew  language,  with  the  Greek,  thus  the  language  of  the
Old  Testament,  with  that  of  the  Xew,  forms  the  broad  contrast  of  the  most  complete
direct  method  of  expression,  with  the  most  perfect  vehicle  for  expressing  the  results
of  philosophic  thought  and  reflection.  Both  peculiarities  are  however  fused  into  one,
in  the  language  of  the  New  Testament,  as  the  higher  and  new-created  form  of  speech.

For  the  literature,  see  HAGENBACH,  p.  122;  BLEEK:  Eirile'dung,  pp.  37  and  103  [also  HAVERNICK  :
Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament.  —  A.  G.]

§  18-
THE   OLD   TESTAMENT   LANGUAGES.—  LEXICONS.


See  the  list  of  Hebrew  Dictionaries  and  Con
cordances  in  the  Commentary  on  Matthew,  p.  17
(Amcr.  ed.).  J.  FURST  :  Hebrew  and  Chaldce  Dic
tionary  of  the  Old  Testament,  with  an  appendix
containing  a  brief  history  of  Hebrew  Lexicography,


2  vols.  Leipzig,  1857.  [Second  ed.,  1863.  English
translation  by  DAVIDSON,  London  and  Xew  York,
1867.  Ftirst  docs  not  supersede  Gescuius.  Comp.
also  B.  DAVIDSON  and  BAGSTER'S  Analytical  ana
Chaldec  Lexicon.  London,  1848. — A.  G.]


22  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

§   19.
THE   OLD   TESTAMENT   FORMS   OF   SPEECH.— GRAMMARS.


OLSHAUSEX  :  Hebrew  Grammar.  Grammaire
Hebraique  de  J.  M.  RABIUXOWICZ.  Park,  1862.  See
LANGE'S  Matthew.  Am.  ed.  page  It.  [GESEXIUS,


E\VALI>,  BCSII,  STUART,  NORDHEIMER,  CONAXT,  TKK-
GELLES,  GREEN. — A.  G.]


§  20.
REMARKS.

The  development  of  the  Old  Testament  forms  of  speech  is  pervaded  throughout
by  a  profound,  earnest,  moral  and  religious  spirit.  Even  if  the  heathen  nations  of
Canaan  used  this  language,  and  notwithstanding  all  these  moral  treasures,  have,
through  their  awful  corruption,  grown  ripe  for  judgment,  this  does  not  alter  the
fact.  For  these  tribes  may  have  put  on  the  Semitic  language  as  a  strange  garment,
or  they  may  have  fallen  even  from  the  heights  of  its  spirituality,  and  therefore  have
fallen  so  low.  The  Scripture  itself  testifies  that  their  decline  was  gradual.  We  must
distinguish  also  between  the  elementary  ground  forms  of  the  language,  and  its  reli
gious  and  moral  development  in  Israel.  We  call  attention  here  to  a  few  striking  exam
ples  of  the  profound  spiritual  significance  of  the  Hebrew  forms  of  speech,  cm  is  in
Kal,  to  groan,  sigh,  be  moved  by  suffering,  in  Niphal  is  to  have  compassion,  in  Pi  el
to  comfort.  The  spirit  of  the  language  thus  informs  us,  that  the  power  to  give  com
fort  depends  upon  our  compassion,  and  this  in  turn  grows  out  of  our  suffering ;  cr£
is  in  Kal  to  cat,  to  consume,  in  Niphal  mutually  to  devour,  i.  <•.,  to  carry  on  war  ;
•j-c  is  in  Kal  to  bow,  to  bowr  the  knee,  to  beg,  to  implore,  in  the  intensive  Pi  el  to
bless,  to  secure  one's  happiness.  The  so-called  different  species  have  the  peculiarity
that  they  bring  into  view  the  moral  act,  in  all  the  distinctions  of  doing  and  suffering,
and  of  the  reflecting  self-determination  of  the  man.  And  how  rich  moreover  is  the
Hebrew  language  in  its  expressions,  fitted  to  convey  the  more  direct  life  of  the  soul
and  spirit.

Sec  STIEP.  :  Neugeordndes  Lchrgclaitdc  dcr  Ilcbrutschcn  Sprache.  For  the  literature  of  the  Philologia
sacra,  sec  HAGENIUCII,  p.  122  ff.

THIRD  CHAPTER.

Preparatory  Introduction.     Its  constituent  ports,  so  far  as  the  form  of  the  Text  is  concerned.
OLD  TESTAMENT  HERMEXEUTICS.

§  21.
LITERATURE.

See  HAGEXBACII  :  Encyclopedia,  pp.  162  and  165  ff.  [The  principal  English  Works  are  W.  VAN  MIL-
DERT,  An  Inquiry  into  the  general  principles  of  Scripture  Interpretation  (Oxford) ;  T.  T.  COXTBEARE'S
Bampton  Lectures;  DAVIDSON:  Sacred  Hermeneutics ;  FAIRBAIRX  :  Hermeneutical  Manual;  ERNESTI  :
Principles  of  Biblical  Interpretation,  translated  by  C.  H.  Terrot,  Edinburgh  (1843);  SEIIER:  Biblical  Her
meneutics,  London  (1855). — A.  G.]


22.     OLD    TESTAMENT    HERMENEUTICS.


§22.


THE    NECESSITY     FOR    A    NEW    CONSTRUCTION     OF    BIBLICAL,    ESPECIALLY     OF    OLD

TESTAMENT,  HERMENEUTICS.

•  That  there  is  sonic  reform  needed  here  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  modern  criticism,
•is  the  assumed  last  sound  result  of  the  grammatical  and  historical  explanation  of  the
Scripture,  rejects  from  the  sacred  records  of  the  anti-heathen  concrete  monotheism,  i.  e.,
from  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  any  heathenish  idea  or  representation,  or  rather
briu«-3  these  same  notions  and  representations  into  the  whole  sacred  text.  As  heathen
ism  sprino-s  directly  from  this,  that  the  idolatrous  mind  lays  undue  stress  upon  the  bare
letter  in  The  book  of  creation ;  that  it  separates  and  individualizes  its  objects  as  far
as  possible  ;  that  it  places  the  sense  of  the  individual  part,  in  opposition  to  the  sense
of  the  whole,  to  the  analogia  fidei  or  tpiritus  which  alone  gives  its  unity  to  the  book
of  nature,  while  it  dilutes  and  renders  as  transitory  as  possible  the  sense  of  the
universal  or  the  whole  ;  so  precisely  modern  unbelief  rests  upon  an  exegesis  which  op
poses  all  analoo-y  of  faith,  which  presses  and  even  strangles  the  letter  until  it  is  re
duced  to  the  most  limited  sense  possible,  while  it  suffers  the  more  universal  and  his
torical  in  a  great  measure  to  evaporate  in  empty,  general,  or  ideal  notions.

As  heathenism  laid  great  stress  upon  the  letter  in  the  book  of  nature,  it  fell  into
polytheism.  The  particular  symbol  of  the  divine,  or  of  the  Godhead,  became  a  myth
of  some  special  deity.  A  God  of  the  day  and  the  light  was  opposed  to  a  God  of  the
nio-ht  •  a  God  ef  the  blessings  of  life  and  of  happiness,  to  a  God  of  calamities  and  of
evil ;  a  God  of  the  waters,  to  a  God  of  the  fire ;  and  finally,  the  God  of  one  idea  to
the  God  of  another;  the  God  of  one  thing  to  the  God  of  other  things;  t.  ?.,  one
Fetisch  to  another.  The  final  goal  of  Polytheism  was  Fetischism.

On  the  other  hand,  the  grand  unities  of  the  text  of  nature,  and  with  these  of  his
tory,  the  revelations  of  mercy,  truth,  peace,  and  beauty  were  not  embraced  in  one
living  concrete  unity,  in  the  idea  of  a  personal  revelation,  but  were  diluted  into  the
abstract  unity  of  tile  one  pantheistic  one  ;  the  one  everywhere  appearing  and  then
vanishing,  formless,  impersonal,  divine  being.  Pantheism  ends,  when  pushed  to  its
legitimate  consequences,  in  Atheism.

The  two  fundamental  laws  of  human  thought,  a  true  analysis  and  synthesis,  were
used  in  a  false  method,  since  they  place  in  their  room  an  abstract  absolute  analysi:
and  synthesis,  and  then  to  escape  from  the  intolerable  opposition,  they  mingled  all
distinctions  and  combinations  into  a  confused  mass,  and  then  separated  the  mass
again  in  the  same  fantastical  manner.  This  could  only  issue  ^  on  the  one  hand  in  a
pantheistic  polytheism,  and  on  the  other  in  a  pantheistic  dualism.

Modern  criticism  presses  the  letter  of  scripture  in  a  direction  opposed  to  Cocceian-
ism.  If  Cocccius  transforms  all  places  in  the  scripture,  from  the  seed  to  a  tree,  and
forces  into  it  an  utterance  of  the  whole  developed  truth  of  revelation  (e.  g.,  the  Prot-
evangelium),  this  criticism  inverts  his  whole  method,  since  it  circumscribes  the  letter
within  the  narrowest  signification  possible.  Thus,  according  to  its  method,  Christ,
according  to  the  gospel  by  Matthew,  must  have  ridden  upon  two  asses  at  once  ;  the
Apostle  Paul  must  have  conceived  of  Christ  as  in  his  being,  physical  light ;  John  must
have  denied  him  the  human  soul  and  spirit,  because  he  says :  "  the  word  was  made
flesh ;  »  Jehovah  must  have  in  heaven  a  literal  palace  ;  and  the  speaking  with  tongues
must  have  been  a  mere  stammering  or  jargon.  This  is  the  mere  logomachy  into  which


21  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


this  modern  Talmudism  relapses,  like   the  Jewish  Talmud,  seeking  to  interpret  the
scriptures  in  a  heathen  method.

On  the  other  hand,  this  same  criticism  evaporates  the  more  general  truths  of  sacred
scripture,  especially  those  which  arc  at  the  same  time  historical,  into  mere  abstract/
"•cneralities.  Thus,  c.  //.,  the  birth  of  the  Godman,  is  nothing  more  than  the  birth  of
the  theanthropic  consciousness;  the  resurrection  of  Christ  only  the  re-awakening  of
the  idea  of  Christ ;  the  whole  eschatology  nothing  more  than  the  symbolism  of  the
immanent  and  progressing  world-judgment.

The  Alpha  and  Omega  of  Christianity,  as  indeed  of  all  revealed  religion,  is  the
living  synthesis  of  spirit  and  nature,  of  idea  and  tact,  of  the  divine  and  human,  iinally
of  the  Doily  and  humanity  ;  and  the  central  point,  the  key  and  measure  of  all  the  doc
trines  of  revelation,  and  of  all  true  interpretations  of  scripture  is  the  great  watch
word  :  "  The  word  was  made  ilesh."  The  modern  pseudological  criticism  consists  in
the  disruption  of  this  synthesis.  The  letter  is  taken  as  the  mere  word  of  man,  and
the  historical  fact  as  a  purely  human  event,  while,  in  truth,  in  the  form  of  symbolical
declarations,  the  universal  religious  ideas,  the  eternal  facts  of  the  spirit,  are  brought
into  light  only  through  these  ever  varying  human  ideas  and  tacts.  There  is  no  unity.
For  both  the  personality  lying  at  the  foundation,  the  alpha,  and  the  glorified  personality,
the  omega,  are  wanting;  and  instead  of  this,  there  is  only  within  the  disturbing  and
blinding  inlluence  of  the  material  world,  the  gradual  progress  from  one  ideal  unknown
to  another,  lying  still  further  in  the  region  of  the  unknown.  The  last  result  of  all
spiritual  hopes  and  expectations  is  the  absolute  riddle.

It  must  be  granted  that  this  exegetical  method  has  its  precursor  in  the  poverty
and  shortcoming  of  the  orthodox  exegesis.  Even  here  we  iind  to  a  great  extent,  an
extreme  literal  exegesis  in  a  perpetual  interchange  with  a  fabulous  allegorizing  of  the
scripture.  Wh:it  this  literal  exegesis  makes  comprehensible,  and  to  some  degree  im
presses,  is  the  sense  of  the  infinite  importance  of  the  biblical  word,  in  its  definite  and
individual  form.  What,  on  the  other  hand,  the  whole  history  of  the  allegoric  inter
pretation  of  the  scripture  declares  is,  that  conviction,  living  through  all  ages  of  the
church,  of  the  divine  fulness  and  symbolical  infinitude  of  the  scripture  word.  The
four-fold  and  seven-fold  sense  of  the  allcgorixers  of  the  middle  ages,  is  the  rainbow
coloring,  into  which  the  pure  white  light  of  the  symbolical  and  ideal  sense  of  scripture
is  resolved,  to  the  medieval  longing  and  faith.  But  when  adherence  to  the  letter
becomes  so  rigid  that  it  denies  any  room  for  poetry  in  the  historical  statement,
because,  it  mistakes  the  idea,  whose  clothing  is  this  symbolical  poetry  ;  when,  e.  //.,  it
insists  with  stiff-necked  obstinacy  that  the  six  creative  days  are  six  ordinary  astro
nomical  days  ;  when  it  sees  in  the  stopping  of  the  sun  at  the  command  of  Joshua,  a-
new  astronomical  event :  when  it  makes  Lot's  wife  to  become  a  real  particular  pillar
of  salt,  and  Balaam's  ass  actually  to  speak  in  the  forms  of  human  speech  ;  then  it  is
justly  chargeable  with  being  dead  and  spiritless,  and  places  weapons  in  the  hands  of
unbelief.  It  is  only  pushing  this  view  to  its  consequences,  when  the  literal  inter
pretation  involves  itself  in  absurdity.  Moving  in  its  circuit,  this  same  unspiritual
criticism  change,;  the  allegorical  interpretation  of  particular  parts  of  the  solid  words
of  the  bible,  into  an  allegorical  interpretation  of  the  entire  Avord,  and  thus  spreads
over  the  firm  monotheistic  ground  of  the  holy  scripture,  the  variegated  cloud  covering
of  a  pantheistic  view  of  the  world  and  theology.  Although  the  text  sounds  through
out  monotheistic,  the  idea  must  be  taken  in  a  pantheistic  sense,  since  the  text  is  nothing
else  than  the  polytheistic  dismembered  form  of  the  one  pantheistic  spirit.  The  spirit  of


22.     OLD    TESTAMENT   IIERMEXEUTICS.


this  criticism  indeed  so  daringly  inverts  the  true  relation,  that  it  transforms  an  entire
historical  apostolic  letter,  like  that  to  Philemon,  into  an  allegorical  point  of  doctrine,
while  it  inversely  interprets  an  entirely  allegorical  and  symbolical  book,  like  the
Apocalypse,  as  if  we  must  understand  it  literally  throughout.  But  the  assumption  of
the  mythical  character  of  the  sacred  books  is  the  grand  means  by  which  this  fleeting
misty  spirit  of  modern  pantheistic  ideas  is  bound  in  with  the  rigid  crass  literal  sense.

In  reference  to  the  Old  Testament,  many  theologians  who  are  firm  believers  in,
revelation,  have  held  that  the  theory  of  mythical  portions  could  not  be  erroneous,  if
they  would  not  be  involved  in  the  untenable  results  of  the  literal  exegesis.  The
modern  interpreter  of  the  scriptures,  in  his  explanation  of  large  portions  of  the  Old
Testament,  thinks  it  necessary,  as  the  only  solution  of  difficulties,  to  choose  between
the  mythical,  or  purely  literal  theory.  This  alternative  is  accepted,  especially  as  to  the
creative  days,  paradise,  the  marriage  of  the  sons  of  God  with  the  daughters  of  men,
and  points  like  these.

Hut  even  this  alternative  is  fundamentally  erroneous.  It  mistakes  the  ABC  for  the
full  understanding  of  the  principle  upon  which  the  bible  is  written,  the  truth,  viz.,  that
the  peculiar  subject  matter  of  the  theanthropic  revealed  word  must  have  a  peculiar
form.  The  bible  contains  cura^  Aeyo/xei/a  not  only  as  to  its  subject  matter,  the  miracles,
and  as  to  its  form,  peculiar  forms  of  expression,  but  is  itself,  in  whole  and  in  part,  an
a7ru£  Aeyo/xeiw  as  to  its  contents,  and  therefore  necessarily  as  to  its  form.  We  apply
this  to  the  Old  Testament.

The  Old  Testament,  as  containing  the  records  of  concrete  monotheism,  or  rather
of  the  concrete  monotheistic  revealed  faith,  cannot  contain  any  myths.  It  can  and
must  indeed  contain  historical  statements,  which  so  far  and  no  farther,  resemble
myths  as  the  melon  resembles  the  gourd,  or  the  parsley  the  hemlock.  But  no  one
need  be  deceived  by  the  most  striking  resemblances.

Is  it  not  true,  in  the  first  place,  that  mythology  is  the  peculiar  living  garment,  the
unalterable  form  of  heathenism,  especially  of  heathen  polytheism?

Is  it  not  true,  secondly,  that  the  Old  Testament,  with  its  monotheism,  forms  the
great  historical  antagonistic  contrast  to  the  heathen  polytheism  ?

Is  it  not  true  also,  thirdly,  as  Hegel  has  said,  that  the  true  form  can  never  be
separated  from  the  contents,  but  must  be  determined  throughout  by  them  ?

But  then  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  Old  Testament  should  have  carried  out  its
antagonistic  opposition  to  the  subject  matter  of  heathenism,  by  using  the  specific
form  of  heathenism,  i.  <?.,  by  the  use  of  myths.

It  is  inconceivable  because  the  myth  is  a  religious  statement,  in  which  the  con
sciousness  has  lost  the  distinction  between  the  symbol  and  the  symbolized  idea.  In
other  words,  the  myth  as  such  is  never  barely  a  form.  In  it  the  idea  has  lost  itself
in  the  image,  and  is  bound  there  until  the  day  of  future  redemption.  On  the  other
hand,  the  very  nature  of  the  Hebrew  view  and  idiom  consists  in  this,  that  it  first
clearly  grasps  the  distinction  between  God  and  the  world,  between  his  spirit  and  his
signs,  and  then  establishes  the  distinction  firmly.  Hence  even  in  all  its  individual
parts  as  a  revelation  of  faith,  it  has  kept  itself  ever  awake  to  the  consciousness  of  the
distinction  between  its  images  and  the  realities  to  which  they  correspond..  To  such
an  extent  is  this  true,  that  to  avoid  being  entangled  in  any  one  figure,  even  when  it
is  purely  rhetorical,  the  Hebrew  in  some  way  changes  his  poetical  statements  and
expressions,  a  fact  which  appears  strange  to  one  accustomed  to  the  constancy  with
which  figures  are  used  by  classical  writers,  e.  </.,  see  the  18th  and  21st  Psalms,


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


Mythology  not  only  elaborates  individual  figures,  but  strings  one  to  another  until  it
forms  a  complete  mythical  circle.

Finally,  the  myth  as  such  has  no  historical  efficiency  or  results.  It  is  tho  form  of
n  passive  lifeless  religion.  Religion,  having  life  and  activity,  must  have  a  form  suited
to  its  inward  nature.

The  Old  Testament,  as  the  record  of  the  revealed  faith,  contains  no  merely  h
historical  statements,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  profane  history  contains  them,  which
records  facts  for  the  sake  of  the  facts,  and  in  its  practical  instruction  goes  no^  further
back  than  to  second  causes,  and  oftentimes  to  those  only  which  are  most  obvious  and
familiar.'     AVe  must  distinguish  clearly  between  the  religious  history  of  the  scriptures
and  common  history.     Xut  of  course  in  the  sense  that  it  is  less  historical,  or  less  a  nar
rative  of  fuels,  but  in  the  sense  that  it  presents  the  fact  in  the  light  of  its  highest  first
cause,  its  idea,  its  symbolical  import,  and  therefore  in  a  somewhat  poetically  elevated
style.'  The  biblical  fact  wears  a  poetical  dress  in  its  presentation,  from  a  threefold  point
of  view  •   1.  through  its  relation  to  the  fundamental  religious  thought  or  idea,  in  which
the  writer  comprehends  it  in  the  light  of  divine  illumination  ;  2.  through  its  relation
to  Hi-   fundamental  religious  thought   of  the  book,  f.  c.,  its  special  connection  with
revelation  in  which  the  writer  states  it  ;  3.  through  its  relation  to  the  central  thought
of  divine  revelation  itself,  with  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  connected  it,  whether  the
author  was  conscious  of  it  or  not.     We  take,  6.  //.,  the  passage  which   speaks  of  the
Cherubim,  who  after  the  expulsion  of  Adam  and  Eve,  guarded  the  gate  of  Paradise,
especially  the  way  to  the  tree  of  life,  with  the  flaming  sword,     The  fact  is  this,  that
the  first  man  as  :|  sinner,  was  through  the  terror  of  God,  driven  forth  from  the  original
place  of  blessedness  which  he  had  polluted  by  sin.     Viewed  according  to  the  religious
thought  or  idea  of  the  passage  in  and  by  itself,  these  terrors  are   angels  of  the  Lord,
personal  manifestations  of  the  personal  and  righteous  God,  who  keeps  man,  guilty  and
subject  to  death,  from  any  return  to  the  tree  of  life  (Ps.  xviii.  and  civ.).     \  iewed
connection  with  the  fundamental  thought  of  Genesis,  these  Cherubim  are  destined  to
keep  man  from  the  heathen  longings  after  the  old  Paradise,  and  to  impel  him  onward
to  the  new  tree  of  life,  the  religion  of  the  future  as  it  came  to  be  established  in  Abra
ham  (Gen.  xii.  1,  Go  out  of  the  land  of  thy  fathers).     Viewed,  finally,  111  its  relation
to  the  o-cncral  spirit  of  the  scriptures,  these  Cherubim  introduce  not  only  the  doctrine
of  ano-els  o-0nerally,  but  also  the  doctrine  of  the  fundamental  form  of  the  Old  Testa
ment  "evehation  through  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  and  the  angel  of  the  divine  judgments
who  is  ever  impelling  humanity,  through  all  history,  from  the  threshold^  of  the  old
paradise,  to  the  open  gate  of  the  new  and  eternal  paradise.  Asto  the  relation  of  a  defi
nite  fact  to  the  special  religious  idea,  e.j.,the  expression,  Lot's  wife  looked  behind  her
and  became  a  pillar  of  salt,  not  only  records,  that  through  her  indecision  and  turning
back  she  was  overtaken  by  the  storm  of  fire,  but  also  contains  the  thought  that  inde
cision  as  to  the  way  of  escape,  begins  with  the  first  look  after  the  old,  forsaken  goods  of
this  life  ;  and  that  every  judgment  of  death  upon  those  who  thus  turn  back,  is  erected
alono-  the  way  of  escape  as  a  warning  to  others.     As  to  the  relation  of  the  particular
expression  to  the  individual  book,  i.  e.,  the  fundamental  view  or  purpose  of  the  author,
modern  criticism  would  save  itself  a  hundred  vexed  questions,  from  an  inadequate
conception  and  treatment  of  the  sacred  text,  if  it  would  proceed  from  tms  fund
mental  thought,  and  thus  understand  the  arrangement  of  particular  books,  what
include  and  omit,  their  connections  and  transitions.    These  vexatious  questions,  eg
-Which  of  the  three  evangelists  is  the  original  ?— Which  of  them  is  correct  ?— ^  nicn


OLD    TESTAMENT    HERMENEUTICS.  07


preserves  the  true  connection  and  the-  original  expression  ?  would  cease  in  a  great
measiire,  if  we  will  only  concede  to  the  sacred  writer,  what  we  usually  concede  tc
other  writers  and  artists,  viz. :  that  he  has  a  fundamental  thought — a  prevailing
principle  upon  which  he  constructs  his  work.  That  the  history  of  Joseph,  e.  rj.,  is
more  particularly  related  than  that  of  Isaac  or  the  patriarchs,  is  closely  connected
with  the  fundamental  thought  or  principle  of  Genesis,  that  it  should  narrate  the
history  of  the  origin  of  all  things,  down  to  the  origin  of  the  holy  people  in  Egypt,  as
that  was  brought  about  through  the  history  of  Joseph  ;  and  not  only  the  history  of
the  origin  of  this  people,  but  of  its  exodus  from  bondage,  which  was  inwoven  with  the
great  crime  of  Joseph's  brethren,  who  sold  him  into  bondage.  As  to  its  connection
with  the  principle  of  scripture  as  a  whole,  this  history  is  an  expressive  image  of
divine  Providence,  in  its  relation  to  human  innocence  and  guilt,  as  it  is  destined  to
be  the  type  of  all  the  subsequent  providential  leadings  of  this  nature,  down  to  the
history  of  Christ.

In  every  particular  fact,  the  religious  idea  of  the  absolute  divine  causality  risca
into  prominence  above  all  natural  second  causes.  As  the  heathen  is  entangled  and
lost  in  second  causes,  so  the  theocratic  believer  must  ever  go  back  to  the  sovereignty
and  providence  of  God.  lie  docs  not  deny  the  second  cause,  since  he  rejects  all  one
sided  supernaturalism,  but  clothes  it  in  a  new  form  in  the  splendor  of  Divine  Provi
dence.  The  Cherubim  with  the  flaming  sword  appear  later  as  the  symbolic  forms  of
Divine  Providence  (Ps.  civ.),  as  the  Cherubim  of  the  storm  upon  which  Jehovah  rides
(Ps.  xviii.),  as  the  seraphim,  the  angels  of  fire,  who  should  consume  the  temple  of  hard
ened  and  obdurate  Israel  (Isa.  vi.).  Even  moral  second  causes,  human  freedom  and
human  guilt,  must  be  placed  under  the  divine  causality,  and  this  not  according  to  the
assumption  of  a  crushing  fatalistic  idea  of  Providence  (Wegsch eider),  but  according
to  the  fundamental  law  of  Divine  Providence  itself.  When  the  Bible  records  that
God  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh,  it  informs  us  also  that  Pharaoh  was  a  despot
and  hardened  his  own  heart ;  and  further,  that  all  his  guilt  was  foreseen,  and,  under
the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  set  for  the  glorifying  of  his  name  in  the  execution
of  the  plan  of  his  kingdom.  That  is  a  strong  one-sided  supernaturalism,  which
utterly  denies  not  only  natural  but  moral  second  causes,  when  they  are  not  made
prominent  in  the  statement  of  Divine  Providence,  or,  perhaps,  notwithstanding  they
are  made  prominent.  For  the  same  reasons,  the  authors  of  the  books  of  the  Bible
have  not  recorded  all  the  facts  of  the  sacred  history  remarkable  to  human  view,  with
the  same  minuteness,  but  only  the  principal  points  in  the  development  of  the  king
dom  of  God,  through  a  given  period  of  time.  They  devote  themselves  more  to  the
pictures  of  personal  life  than  to  the  description  of  their  impersonal  surroundings;  to
the  creative  epochs,  than  to  the  lapse  of  time  between ;  to  the  turning-points  of  a
grand  crisis,  more  than  to  the  after  progress  and  development ;  rather  to  the  great
living  picture  of  individuals  illustrating  all,  than  to  an  external  massing  together  of
particular  things.  The  method  of  writing  the  sacred  history  of  the  Bible  is  like  its
chronology,  its  view  of  the  world,  throughout  living,  personal,  dynamic.  As  to  the
connection  of  the  particular  books  of  the  Bible,  it  is  undeniable  that  the  great  pro
found,  all-pervading  formative  element  is  the  ideal  fact  of  the  saving  self-revelation
of  God  even  to  his  incarnation,  i.  c.,  the  soteriological  messianic  idea.  As  the
direction  of  any  given  mountain  range  is  determined  by  a  certain  concrete  law  of
nature  :  so,  much  more  is  the  formation  of  any  individual  part  of  the  Canon.  But  :>
to  its  relation  to  the  other  parts,  its  outward  connection  and  articulation,  it  cannot  be


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


denied  that  in  the  region  of  revelation,  there  must  have  been  not  only  an  inspiration  of
the  records  themselves,  but  of  the  records  in  their  present  form,  and  that  it  is  just  as
one-sided  to  deny  the  traces  of  this  inspired  editing  of  the  sacred  records  (Luke  i.
1),  as  to  enfeeble  their  testimony,  by  the  supposition  of  an  uncanonical  biblical  book-
's  of  a  painful  and  laborious  compilation  and  fusion  of  diverse  elements  or


parts  into  one.  .

Biblical  hennencutics  cannot  well  deny  that  the  monotheistic  and  theocratic  trac
tions  are  older  than  the  oldest  written  records.     Neither  can  it  deny  that  even  since
the  art  of  writing  was  known,  the  living  discourse,  the  oral  narrative,  the  revelation
through  facts,  is  older,  and  in  some  sense  more  original,  than  the  written  word.    But
it  a«sc°rls  and  must  assert,  that  the  written  word  throughout  belongs  to  the  region  of
rcvelation-to  the  very  acts  through  which  the  revelation  is  made—  and  forms  indeed
the  acme  and  the  limits  of  sacred  revelation.     And  as  to  the  sacred  tradition,  it  is  not
to  be  confounded  with  the  idea  of  tradition  as  it  is  usually  associated  with  the  idea  of
the  myth.  The  sacred  tradition,  in  its  wealth  of  religious  ideas,  lies  back  of  the  myth  ;  the
popular  tradition,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  lies  on  this  side  of  the  myth,  nearer  to
authentic  history.    The  heathen  myth  is  the  heathen  dogmatics,  as  they  belong  to  the
earlier  a^e  of  any  given  heathen  people.     The  popular  traditions  are  the  heathen
ethics  oAhc  same  people,  an  ethics  exemplified  in  fabulous  personages  as  they  were
concerned  in  the  chief  events  of  that  people  during  the  transition  period,  from  its
mythical  to  its  historical  age.     We  can  trace  this  relation  both  through  the  Greek
and  the  German  traditionary  period.     In  the  blooming  period  of  the  ethical  traditions
the  poetic   sceptical,  triflinir,  even  ironical  transformation  of  the  myth  takes  its  origin.
We  can  now  distinguish  by  certain  fixed  characteristics  the  Old  Testament  sym
bolical  statements  from  the  mythical  statement".

The  acute  attempt  of  RCUMIEDKII  to  determine  the  ,  minary  to  the  Biblical  history,  1837,  does  not  lead  to
relation  between  the  religious  method  of  writing  his-  satisfactory  results.  See  LASGE:  Positiv  Dogmctik,
tory,  and  the  ordinary  methods  in  his  cs.-ay  :  Prdi-  p.  SSo.

The  <rCncral  distinction  :—  it  is  all  true  but  is  not  all  actual  -leaves  the  relation  both
as  to  quantity  and  quality,  between  the  ideal  truth  and  the  historical  events,  so  un
determined,  that  it  will  not  avail  to  fix  firmly  the  characteristics  of  Scripture,  11
distinction  from  all  myths,  as  from  all  ordinary  historical  writings  in  which  ever
traced  to  their  cause's.     We  have  treated  hitherto  only  of  the  biblical  method  of
writin-   history,  but  wo  must  now  treat  of  the  biblical  method  of  stating  things
o-enerallv,  in  order  that  we  may  place  in  contrast  the  idea  of  the  myth,  and  the  coun
ter  idea  of  the  scripture  word,  according  as  they  stand  connected  with,  or  oppo.

to,  each  other.  .     ,

We  may  distinguish  the  historical  and  philosophical  (or,  more  accurately,  ph;

or  philosophical)  myths,  and  according  to  this  distinction,  we  may  view  t

word  in  contrast  to  them,  as  to  its  facts,  and  as  to  its  doctrines.

The  affinity  between  all  mythology  and  the  whole  scripture,  according  to  w  ncJ

the  scripture  and  especially  the  evangelical  history,  may  be  viewed  as  t

of  all  myths  ;  is  the  union  of  the  idea  and  the  fact,  or  of  actual  signs,  or  o  ds,  t<

a  symbol  of  the  eternal,  in  the  language  of  poetry.

But  even  here  the  biblical  fact  is  clearly  distinguished  from  the  historical  myth.

The  latter  has  the  minimum  of  reality  only,  perhaps  the  mere  moral  longing  or  wish

or  it  may  be  some  facts  of  the  popular  or  heroic  natural  life,  brought  by  a  po<


§  22.     OLD    TESTAMENT   1IERMEXEUTICS.  29


symbolism  into  union  with  an  idea,  and  made  to  Le  the  bearer  of  that  idea ;  while  the
biblical  fact  always  has  an  historical  basis,  whose  greatness  and  importance  is  felt
throughout  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  one  particular  event,  which  lias  reached
its  peculiar  definite  expression  in  the  light  of  its  universal  significance.  The  biblical
fact  through  its  ideal  transparency  has  been  raised  from  an  individual  to  a  general
fact,  and  thus  become  a  biblical  doctrine.  Its  unessential  individual  form  may  have
disappeared  in  the  splendor  of  its  idea,  but  the  total  fact  remains.  On  the  contrary,
the  element  of  reality  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  historical  myth,  is  to  such
an  extent  transformed  by  the  ideal  poetry,  and  its  historical  actuality  is  so  far  un
susceptible  of  proof,  that  it  becomes  more  or  less  a  question  whether  there  is  such  an
element  or  not.

But  as  the  biblical  facts  have  throughout  the  splendor  of  ideal  truths,  so  the
biblical  doctrines  have  throughout  the  energy  of  facts.  They  are  facts  of  the  active
religious  consciousness,  clothed  with  so  decisive  an  energy  and  significance,  that  we
may  view  them  as  the  eternal  deeds  of  the  Spirit,  presented  in  the  clear  distinct  li<iht
of  particular  passages,  e.  <j.,  the  Psalms,  Proverbs,  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  This
historical  character  of  the  action  is  wanting  in  the  philosophic  myths.  We  under
stand  them  first,  when  we  have  rescued  through  Christianity  the  philosophical  and
moral  doctrines  which  they  contain.  The  myth  itself  waits  for  redemption  from  its
bondage  through  the  idolatrous  sense,  by  the  virtue  of  the  scripture  word.  In  its
free  form  it  appears  as  an  ancient  symbol.

As  to  the  chief  distinction,  we  would  prefer,  for  our  own  part,  to  distinguish  in  all
myths  physical,  historical,  and  religious  elements,  and  hence  would  class  them  as
preeminently  scientific,  historical,  or  religious,  as  one  or  the  other  of  these  elements
might  come  into  prominence.

To  the  style  of  the  historical  myth  we  would  oppose  the  style  of  the  Old  Testa
ment  histories,  to  the  style  of  the  scientific  (philosophical)  myth  the  Old  Testament
doctrinal  writings,  to  the  predominantly  religious  myth  the  Old  Testament  prophetic
word.  As  the  preeminently  religious  myth  forms  the  synthesis  of  the  physical  and
historical,  so  the  prophetic  word  forms  the  higher  unity  of  the  historical  and
didactic  word.  The  science  of  hermeneutics  therefore,  as  the  hermcneutics  of  the
prophetic  word,  must  bring  out  clearly,  that  in  this  region  all  the  historical  is  in  the
highest  measure  ideal  and  symbolical  (c.  </.,  the  temple  of  Ezekiel,  the  concubine  of
Hosea)  arid  all  the  didactic  is  destined  in  its  eternal  actual  energy  and  results  to
reach  beyond  the  Old  Testament  limits.

We  trust  that  these  suggestions  for  the  wider  culture  of  biblical,  especially  Old
Testament  hermeneutics,  may  find  useful  illustration  in  our  Biblcwork.  But  this
must  be  borne  in  mind :  we  hold  that  particular  parts  of  the  Old  Testament  must
remain  to  us  in  a  great  measure  dark  and  inexplicable,  so  long  as  the  distinction
between  the  ordinary  style  of  history,  and  the  higher  religious  style,  is  not  more
firmly  established,  and  consistently  carried  out.  This  holds  true  in  our  opinion
especially  of  the  looJts  of  Chronicles  and  the  book  of  Esther,  and,  among  the  prophet
ical  books,  of  Daniel  and  Jonah.

Finally,  as  to  the  well-known  distinction  between  the  Semitic  and  Japhetic  modes
of  speech,  there  is  not  only  at  the  foundation,  that  misconceived  and  misapplied
difference,  the  opposition  between  oriental  directness  and  occidental  reflectiveness,
and  further  the  opposition  between  the  religious  and  secular  view  of  the  world  in  a
mediaeval  sense,  of  the  old  and  new  time,  ?.  e.,  of  the  spontaneous  development  of


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


Pagan  culture,  and  the  derivative  culture  of  'Christian  civilization;  but  also  the
opposition  between  the  religious  method  of  presenting  history  and  doctrine,  and  the
more  pragmatic  view  of  history,  and  the  dialectic  mode  of  teaching  doctrine.  It  is
evident,  however,  that  such  a  distinction  does  not  destroy  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  the
communion  of  ideas  and  faith  "between  the  two  spheres.  By  the  faith,  Abraham  must
have  understood  essentially  the  same  truths  which  any  enlightened  Christian,
whether  a  theologian  or  philosopher,  understands  to-day.

(For  the  promotion  of  Old  Testament  Exegesis  through  more  correct  hermeneutical
principles,  see  Appendix.)

OLD  TESTAMENT  CRITICISM.

§  23.
BIBLICAL  CRITICISM  AND  ITS  RELATED  LITERATURE.

Compare  n.vr.Kxn.vcn  :  Encyclopedia^  pp.  14.r>,  150,  151.

Hacrenbach  makes  the  science  of  Introduction  preliminary  to  that  of  Criticism.
We  hold  that  this  order  must  be  inverted,  since  Introduction  is  impossible  without
Criticism.  Biblical  Criticism  is  the  scientific  examination  of  the  Bible  as  to  its
Historical  and  traditional  form.  It  decides  according  to  historical  or  outward,  and
according  to  real  or  inward,  signs,  as  to  the  biblical  origin  of  the  sadVed  books,
as  one  whole,  and  as  individual  parts,  i.  <?.,  as  to  their  authenticity  and  integrity.
In  the  course  of  its  procedure  it  passes  from  the  examination  and  purging  of  the
text,  to  its  construction,  confirmation  and  its  re>toration  to  its  original  form.
It  is  thus,  to  follow  llagenbach,  according  to  its  sources  of  determination  (or  rules)
o;;t  \vard  and  inward,  according  to  its  results  (decisions)  negative  and  positive,
Criticism.  We  must  observe,  however,  the  manifold  signification  which  lias  been
attached  to  the  contrasts  between  negative  and  positive  Criticism  (used  now  in  a
historical,  and  then  in  a  dogmatic  sense)  ;  between  a  lower  and  higher  Criticism
(now  as  a  question  upon  the  integrity  and  authenticity,  now  as  a  decision  according
to  the  existing  witnesses,  manuscripts,  translations,  or  according  to  scientific  com
bination,  upon  the  spirit  of  various  writings  and  passages).  There  can  be  no  ques
tion  that  Criticism  belongs  to  the  most  essential  and  vital  functions  of  biblical
theology.  It  is,  1.  Necessary;  2.  not  merely  a  modern  Criticism  of  recent  date,  but
has  existed  from  early  time  ;  and  3.  like  every  theological  function,  it  has  been  sub
jected  to  great  errors,  and  requires  therefore  a  criticism  upon  itself.

[There  is  a  large  class  of  English  works  here,  among  which  those  of  HAMILTON,  JOXKS,  WALTON  :  Prolego
mena;  KEXNICOTT:  Dissertations;  STUART:  Ernesti  ;  DAVIDSON:  Criticism;  GEKARD:  Institutes  of
Billical  Criticism;  HOKSLEY  :  Biblical  Criticism,  London,  1810,  may  be  consulted.  —  A.  G.]


DESIRABLENESS  OF  AN  ORGANON  OF  CRITICISM.

It  is  remarkable  that  Theology,  with  an  immense  activity  of  the  critical  processes,
is  still  without  any  well-formed  theory  of  Criticism.  We  have  on  several  occasions
suggested  that  such  an  organon  is  still  wanting.  It  should  aim  to  establish  all  the
leading  principles  for  the  theological  and  critical  process,  and  then  to  exclude  all


§  24.     DESIRABLENESS   OF  AN   ORGANON   OF   CRITICISM.  31

unnecessary  critical  principles.  The  first  fundamental  position  would  be,  that
there  must  bo  an  agreement  as  to  the  religious  and  philosophical  criticism  of
Revelation  and  of  Christianity  itself.  Starting  from  the  modern  philosophical
assumptions  of  Deism  and  Pantheism,  some  have  criticised  cxcgetically  and  historically
the  biblical  records,  i.  e.,  they  have  mingled  in  an  unscientific  manner  philosophical
arid  purely  infidel  prejudices,  with  real  critical  principles,  in  an  unfair  procedure.
And  it  has  occurred  that  the  results  of  this  critical  blundering  have  been  sot  forth
and  commended  as  the  results  of  a  higher  criticism  of  the  historical  view  (see  LAXGE  :
Apostol  Zeit alter,  \.  p.  9).  It  is  most  important  therefore  to  determine  first  of  all,  in
order  to  meet  satisfactorily  the  religious  and  philosophical  preliminary  questions,
whether  one  recognizes  or  not  the  idea  and  reality  of  a  personal  God,  of  his  personal
revelation,  of  his  personal  presence  in  the  world,  and  his  personal  communion  with
the  Elect,  i.  e.,  the  souls  of  men  awakened  to  the  consciousness  of  their  eternal  per
sonality.  The  organon  of  criticism  places  this  recognition,  or  rather  knowledge,  at
the  very  summit  of  its  system,  and  denies  to  those  who  reject  the  living  idea  of
revelation,  the  right  and  the  power  to  engage  in  any  scientific  exegetical  and  historical
criticism.

Then  it  would  be  the  aim  in  this  first  division  of  the  Organon  of  criticism,  to  fix
firmly  the  ideas  of  the  originality,  especially  of  the  authenticity  and  integrity  of  the
Bible.  The  first  fundamental  characteristic  of  biblical  originality  is  defined  in  the
Evangelic  word,  "the  Word  was  made  flesh,"  i.  e.,  by  the  supposition  that  in  the
whole  region  of  revelation,  we  arc  dealing  with  an  indissoluble  synthesis  of  idea  and
fact,  i.  e,,  with  personal  life;  but  never  with  ideas  without  historical  facts,  and  never
with  historical  facts  without  an  ideal  foundation  and  significance.  This  is  the  very
A  B  C  of  a  sound  criticism,  over  against  which  the  latest  spiritualistic  critical  fraud,
which  has  spread  from  Tubingen  through  a  part  of  the  Evangelical  church,  must  be
viewed  as  a  paganistic  idealism,  modified  by  its  passage  through  Christianity ;  and
according  to  which  also  the  ultra  supernaturalistic  interpretation  of  biblical  history,
as  a  mere  narration  of  events  in  their  order  from  cause  to  effect,  without  ideal  contents
or  form,  appears  a  lifeless  and  unspiritual  tradition  of  a  fundamentally  worldly
Empiricism.  The  succeeding  question  as  to  the  authenticity,  is  determined  accord
ingly  by  this,  that  in  every  biblical  book  we  must  take  into  view  its  peculiar  inward
form  derived  from  the  spirit  of  the  book,  as  well  as  its  historical  declarations.  Still
further,  the  different  Genera  scribendi  must  be  determined  as  they  are  ascertained
from  the  actual  appearance  of  the  biblical  books,  and  from  the  spirit  of  Revelation.
It  is  accordingly  critically  incorrect  to  insist  that  the  book  Ecclesiastes,  according  to
its  declaration,  must  be  regarded  as  the  work  of  Solomon,  since  we  are  here  dealing
with  a  poetical  book,  which  may  put  the  experience  of  the  vanity  of  the  world  in  the
mouth  of  the  Son  of  David.  But  it  is  critically  incorrect  also  to  deny  that  the
Apocalypse  is  the  work  of  John,  since  we  are  here  concerned  with  prophetic  announce
ments,  which  rest  expressly  upon  the  authority  of  the  Apostle.  True  poetry  does
not  assume  a  fictitious  name,  when  it  puts  its  words  in  the  mouth  of  a  symbolical  and
fit  personage,  but  prophecy  would,  should  it  resort  to  the  same  procedure.  Then  as
to  the  integrity  of  the  biblical  books,  criticism  must  determine,  as  is  evident  from  the
countless  variations  in  the  text  of  the  New  Testament,  and  from  the  free  relation  of
the  Septuagint  to  the  Old  Testament,  that  from  the  earliest  time  the  records  of
revelation  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  church  of  God,  were  not  regarded  as  literal  and
inviolable  documents,  but  as  the  leaves  and  words  of  the  Spirit,  and  that  notwith-


32  IXTROUUCTIOX   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT. ^^

standin-  this  freedom  the  authentic  word,  as  to  all  essential  points,  was  held  sacred,
For  with  all  the  differences  of  the  Septuagint,  it  is  not  possible  to  bring  out^oi
Old  Testament  any  essentially  modified  Old  Covenant,  and  amid  all  the  variations  <
the  New  Testament,  we  still  discern  the  same  gospel  in  all  its  essential  features.        _
In  reference  to  both  questions,  however,  it  is  evident  from  the  relation  ot  Genesis
to  the  orio-inal  traditions,  of  the  Gospel  of  Luke  to  the  records  he  had  before  him,  ol
the   second  Epistle  of  Peter  to   the  Epistle  of  Judo,   from  the   resemblance
thought  and  form  in  many  passages  between  different  authors   (eg  .one  between
Isaiah  and  Micah),  that  we  must  explain  not  only  the  first  origin  and  elements  of
biblical  records,  but  also   the   theocratic  and   apostolic  form  in  which  we  now  1
them,  as  properly  belonging  to  the  region  of  canonical  revelation

With  regard  to  the  rules  or  criteria  of  biblical  criticism,  the  idea  ot  actual  revela
tion  /  e  of  the  effects  of  the  living  interchange  between  the  personal  God  and  the
personal  'human  spirit,  forms  the  first  rule.  This  involves  first  the  recognition  of
historical  focts  belonging  to  true  human  freedom,  as  the  Pantheist  cannot  regard
them-  secondly,  tlio  original  religious  facts,  which  are  entirely  foreign  to  Deism ;
hirdlv  the  specific  actual  revelation  as  it  rends  asunder  the  supposition  of  Dualism.
Without  the  recognition  of  the  historical,  the  religious,  the  theocratic  heroism,  we
have  no  rule  for  the  critical  examination  of  the  contents  of  the  sacred  scripture.

Then     in   the  second  place,  we   must    fix   firmly  the   idea  ot  human   personality
awakened  and  freed  through  the  personality  of  God,  as  it  involves  a  compete  origin-
,litv  both  as  to  its  own  views  and   productions.     As  the   Bible  throughout    s  an
original  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  so  each  individual  book  is  an  original  work  of  1
choker  human  spirit  who  wrote  it.     Innumerable  questions  which   criticism  is  made-
qua  e  to   solve/find   their  solution  here.     To  ascribe,    e.  ff.t   the   production  of  tin
second  part  of  Isaiah  to  the  Scribe  Baruch,  or  to  Mark  the  authorship  of  the  original
Gospel,  after  which  the  other  synoptics  in  a  most    extraordinary  way  have  copied    or
the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  to    an  imperfect   impression  taken  from  that  to  th
Colossus,   or  the  Apocalypse  to   John   Mark  as  its  author,  rests  upon  the   failure
,  Uma  e  propcrlv  the  originality   of  the  biblical   writer,   the  originality   of  Ins
work,  and  the  connection  between  the  two.     It  is  clear  that,  with  orig  nality,  we  con-
cede  to  the  writers  of  the  Bible  that  thorough  consistency  of  Spirit  winch  is  pe<
to  a  living,  spiritually  free  personality.  .  .

From  the  originality  of  Revelation  as  a  whole,  in  its  connection  with  the  original.
itv  of  the  writers  of  the  particular  books  of  Revelation,  anscs  the  originality  of  lh<
collection  of  the  biblical  books.  They  are  the  closely  connected  products  of  one
peculiar  intellectual  creative  forming  principle;  and  therefore  form  one  complete
Canon,  as  thev  are  one  complete  Cosmos,  i.  ,.,  the  organon  of  criticism  presupposes


tll01'°'


10  But  ^presupposes  this  analogy,  it  has  at  the  same  time  to  ascertain  its  essentia
elements  out  of  its  fundamental  thoughts,  i.  «.,  the  peculiar  fundamental

^wfth  th°e°Sstence  of  the  analogy  of  faith,  which  reveals  itself  further  in  thr
analog  of  the  Scriptures,  is  determined  the  human  side  of  the  Holy  Scripture.,
agreeably  to  the  historical  differences  and  manifold  forms,  i.  <,,  the  germ-like  mcipi
ence,  the  historical  gradual  growth,  the  regular  development,  the  mdissolubl c .con
nection,  finally  the  perfect  completion  of  its  facts  and  doctrines  according  t
idea  of  revelation.


25.     CRITICAL   QUESTIONS   IX   THE   TREATMENT   OF   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


THE  PRINCIPAL  CRITICAL  QUESTIONS  IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.

In  the  introduction  to  the  Old  Testament  the  following  important  critical  ques
tions  bold  a  prominent  place :  the  unity  of  Genesis,  the  Mosaic  authenticity  of  the
"Pentateuch,  the  authentic  historical  character  of  the  historical  books  following  the
Pentateuch,  the  age  of  Job  (also  as  to  its  historical  basis),  the  limits  as  to  time  of  the
collection  of  the  Psalms,  the  authenticity  of  the  writings  of  Solomon  (and  the  import
of  the  Song  in  particular),  the  relation  between  the  first  and  second  parts  of  Isaiah
(ch.  xl.-lxvi.),  between  the  Hebrew  text  of  Jeremiah  and  the  text  of  the  Septuagint,
between  the  book  of  Daniel  and  Daniel  himself,  the  import  of  the  book  of  Jonah,  and
finally  the  relation  of  the  first  part  of  Zcchariah  to  the  second  (ch.  ix.-xiv.).

The  ecclesiastical  and  theological  interest  in  these  questions  will  be  essentially  met
and  satisfied,  if,  in  the  first  place,  genuine  historical  records  of  revelation,  flowing  from
the  time  at  which  the  revelation  was  made,  are  recognized  as  the  foundation,  and  to
some  extent  essential  component  parts,  of  the  writings  in  question  ;  and  if,  in  the  second
place,  it  is  firmly  held  that  the  bringing  of  these  records  into  their  present  form  took
place  on  canonical  ground,  within  the  sphere  of  Old  Testament  revelation,  under  the
direction  and  guarantee  of  the  prophetic  Spirit.  Under  the  energetic  influence  of
these  two  positions,  the  canonical  faith  in  the  Bible,  and  a  free  critical  examination,
have  approximated  each  other,  and  under  their  more  perfect  influence  they  will  cele
brate  their  full  reconciliation.  And  if  in  the  process  some  prejudgments  of  the
ecclesiastical  tradition  must  be  conceded,  so  criticism  in  its  turn  must  yield  up  a  mass
of  thoughtless  errors  and  exaggerations.  Traditional  theology  will  come  into  liberty
through  a  proper  estimate  of  the  historical  character  of  the  biblical  books;  and
criticism  itself  will  be  freed  from  the  mistakes  into  which  it  has  thoughtlessly  fallen
through  a  low  estimate  of  the  ideal  contents  of  the  sacred  writings.

Although  there  is  much  in  Genesis  in  favor  of  the  distinction  of  Elohistic  and
Jehovistic  records,  yet  the  fact  made  prominent  by  Hengstenberg  and  others  cannot
be  denied,  viz.,  that  the  names  Elohim  and  Jehovah  are  throughout  so  distinguished,
that  the  one  prevails  in  those  passages  which  speak  of  the  general  relation  of  God  to
the  world,  the  other  in  those  in  which  the  theocratic  relation  of  God  to  his  people  and
kingdom  rises  into  prominence.  This  contrast,  embraced  by  the  unity  of  the  con
sciousness  of  faith  in  revelation,  not  only  runs  through  the  Pentateuch,  but  appears
in  a  marked  form  in  the  opposition  between  the  general  doctrine  of  wisdom  as  viewed
by  Solomon,  and  the  Davidic  theocratic  doctrine  of  the  Messiah.  It  pervades  the
Old  Testament  Apocrypha,  in  the  New  Testament  celebrates  its  transfiguration  in  the
contrast  between  the  Gospel  of  John,  his  doctrine  of  the  logos  on  the  one  side,  and
the  synoptical  and  Petrino-Pauline*view  on  the  other ;  and  finally,,  in  the  opposition
between  the  Christian  and  ecclesiastical  dogmatism,  and  the  Christian  and  social  human-
itarianism,  runs  through  the  history  of  the  church,  manifesting  itself  in  the  Reformation
through  the  twin  forms,  Luther  and  Melanchthon,  Calvin  and  Zwingle.  The  full
influence  of  the  increasingly  perfect  view  of  the  great  harmonious  oppositions  or  con
trasts  in  revelation,  and  the  history  of  revelation,  upon  the  minute  analysis  of  the
biblical  test,  is  yet  to  be  experienced.

On  the  present  state  of  the  investigation,  see  BLEEK:  Einldtung,  p.  227  ff.
3


34


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


As  to  the  Pentateuch,  we  recognize  the  following  limiting  positions  of  Block,  while
we  differ  from  him  in  many  particulars:  1.  That  there  are  in  the  Pentateuch  very
important  sections  which  were  written  by  Moses  and  in  his  time,  in  the  very  form  in
which  we  now  read  them.  2.  That  Moses  did  not  compose  the  Pentateuch,  as  one
complete  historical  work  as  it  lies  before  us.  The  clearest  instance  in  favor  of  the
last  position  is  obviously  the  record  of  the  death  and  burial  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxxiv.).  As
to  the  marks  in  Deuteronomy  which  point  to  a  later  origin,  we  must  bear  in  mind
that  Moses  was  not  only  the  Lawgiver,  but  the  Prophet,  and  that  at  the  close  of  Ins
career  in  life,  in  the  solemn  review  of  his  work,  he  would  have  a  motive  to  prophetic
ally  explain  and  glorify  the  particularism  of  that  economy  which  he  had  founded  un
der  the  divine  direction,  by  bringing  out  into  bolder  relief  its  universal  aspect,  which
he  does  in  Deuteronomy.  In  the  essential  portions  of  Deuteronomy,  which  we  ascribe
to  Moses,  he  obviates,  as  far  as  possible,  that  pharisuic  particularism  which  might
crrow  up  from  a  barely  legal  and  literal  interpretation  of  the  books  of  the  law,  Exo
dus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers.  Deuteronomy  is  the  repetition  of  the  law,  under  the
illumination  of  the  prophetic  spirit,  in  the  light  of  the  future  of  prophecy.

As  to  those  older  records  quoted  in  the  Old  Tes
tament  itself,  as  a  basis  for  its  statements,  compare
BLEEK,  p.  MS  fr'.  We  refer  here  to  1.  The  look  of
the  wars  of  Jehovah  (Numbers  xxi.  14,  15,  compare
v.  17,  18  and  27-oO);  '2.  The  book  of  JASIIER
(Josh.'  x.  13;  2  Sam.  i.  IS);  3.  The  book  of
the  history  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi.  -11)  ;  -1.  1  Chron.
xxix.  2!>,  :;>',  for  the  history  of  David,  a.  The  book  of
Samuel  the  seer,  b.  The  book  of  Nathan  the  prophet,
c.  The  book  of  Gad  the  seer ;  5.  For  the  history  of
Solomon,  2  Chron.  ix.  29,  a.  The  prophecy  of  Ahijah
the  Shilonitc,  b.  the  book  of  Iddo  the  seer  against
Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat ;  G.  Tor  the  history  of
Kehoboam,  2  Chron.  xii.  15,  the  book  of  Shemaiah
the  proplu-t  and  Iddo  the  seer  ;  7.  For  the  history

If  the  post-Mosaic  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament  are  rearrangements  of
original  records,  which  belong  to  unknown  authors,  still  the  supposition  of  contra-
diction*  of  mythical  portions,  of  the  extremely  late  dates  assigned  as  the  time  ol
their  ori"-in  is  closely  connected  with  a  failure  to  estimate  their  more  recondite  histor
ical  relations,  and  their  ideal  and  symbolical  aspect.  This  is  especially  true  in  regard
to  the  judgments  formed  upon  the  two  books  of  Chronicles,  and  the  book  of  1

That  in  the  military  sections  of  the  book  of  Joshua  he  alone  is  spoken  of,  while  in
those  which  record  the  geographical  divisions  of  the  land,  Elcazcr acts  with  him  ;
that  in  one  place  the  official  elders  and  judges  cooperate,  and  in  another  the  natural
hoads  of  the  tribes;  that  under  the  military  point  of  view  the  tribes  arc  otherwise
described  than  under  the  geographical,-these  are  distinctions  grounded  in  act

differences.  .  .  .

In  the  Ion-  period  which  the  book  of  Judges  embraces,  the  orthodox  criticism
obviously  injures  its  own  cause,  when  it  denies  the  basis  of  more  historical  sources;
since  the  supposition  of  such  sources,  so  far  from  weakening,  actually  strengthens  t
trustworthiness  of  the  book.     That  the  point  of  view  of  the  episode,  ch.  xvn.-xxu,
is  nntheocratic,  is  entirely  untenable.

The  two  books  of  Samuel,  which  are  plainly  distinguished  by  the  contrast  between


of  Abijah,  2  Chron.  xiii.  22,  the  story  (commentary)
of  the  prophet  Iddo;  8.  There  arc  constantly  cited
in  the  books  of  Kings:  a.  The  book  of  the  history
of  the  Kings  of  Israel ;  b.  The  book  of  the  history  of
the  Kings  of  Judah.  The  latter  seems  to  be  that  re
ferred  to  in  the  books  of  Chronicles,  as  the  book  of
the  Kings  of  Jndah  and  Israel :  cited  also  2  Chron.
xxiv.  27  ;  0.  2  Chron.  xx.  ol.  The  historical  book  of
the  prophet  Jehu,  which  is  inserted  in  the  book  of
the  Kings  of  Israel ;  10.  2  Chron.  xxxii.  152,  a  book  of
Isaiah,  upon  the  Kings  of  Judah  and  Israel;  11.
For  the  history  of  Manassch,  the  histories  or  sayings
of  Ilosai  or  seers;  and  in  1  Chron.  xxvii.  2-1-,  a  book
of  the  Chronicles  of  David  the  King.


§  25.     CRITICAL   QUESTIONS   IN   TILE   TREATMENT   OF   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


Saul  and  David,  the  rejected  King,  and  the  man  after  God's  own  heart,  point  hack
through  their  ingenious  and  throughout  characteristic  style,  to  rich  original  records-
lying  at  their  source.  The  books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles  refer  in  various  ways  to  the
records  upon  which  their  statements  rest.

The  books  of  Ezra  and  ISTehemiah  bear  these  names  especially  (as  the  books  of
Samuel),  only  because  they  speak  of  these  men.  This  is  obvious,  first,  because  they
were  originally  bound  in  one  whole,  and  secondly,  because  in  their  present  form  they
contain  portions  which  point  to  a  later  date.  It  is  equally  clear  that  the  original  part
of  these  books  must  belong  to  the  men  whose  names  they  bear.

The  book  of  Esther,  in  the  regulations  for  the  feast  of  Purira,  refers  back  to  a  re
markable  historical  event.  It  contains  too  many  historical  indications  to  be  regarded
with  Semler  as  fiction,  and  too  much  which  appears  literally  improbable,  to  be  re
garded  as  pure  history.  It  is  probably  the  fruit  of  a  fact,  represented  allegorically  for
the  illustration  of  the  truth,  that  the  true  people  of  God,  even  in  its  dispersion,  is
wonderfully  preserved,  and  made  victorious  over  the  most  skilful  assaults  of  its
enemies.*  In  this  respect  the  book  of  Esther  forms  a  contrast  with  the  book  of  Jo
nah,  which  also  represents  allegorically  a  wonderful  event,  in  order  to  illustrate  the
mercy  of  God  to  the  heathen,  and  in  opposition  to  the  narrow-minded  exclusivenes.s
of  the  Jews.  Hence  we  are  able  to  explain  the  fact  that  the  name  of  God  does  not
occur  in  Esther,  as  indeed  it  scarcely  occurs  in  the  Song.

The  connection  of  an  allegorical  and  poetical  explanation,  with  the  basis  of  histor
ical  fact  on  which  it  rests,  is  now  generally  admitted  in  reference  to  the  book  of  Job.
But  here  the  character  of  a  didactic  poem  comes  into  prominence.  In  the  critical
examination  of  this  book,  doubts  in  regard  to  the  speech  of  Eiihu  will  have  to  yield  to
any  profound  insight  into  its  nature,  since  it  obviously  forms  the  transition  from  the
preceding  speeches,  to  the  closing  manifestation  of  God.  From  its  universal  charac
ter  in  connection  with  its  theme,  the  innocent  suffering  of  Job,  it  is  well-nigh  certain
that  its  origin  belongs  to  a  time  when  the  glory  of  Israel,  culminating  in  Solomon,
was  on  the  decline:  the  time  of  the  fading  glory  of  the  Kingdom.

That  the  Psalter  in  its  original  portions  belongs  to  David,  as  the  Proverbs  to  Sol
omon,  is  conceded  even  by  the  modern  criticism.  But  it  is  evident  from  the  division
into  five  books,  that  the  collection  grew  gradually  to  its  present  form.  The  existence
of  Psalms  originating  during  the  Exile  is  beyond  question  (Ps.  cii.,  cxxxvii.).  But  the
attempt  to  place  a  large  part  of  the  Psalms  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees,  has  been
triumphantly  refuted  by  EWALD  and  BLEBK  (BLEEK,  p.  019).  The  supposition  that
the  heroic  uprising  of  a  people  for  its  faith,  must  always  have  as  its  consequence  a
corresponding  movement  of  the  poetic  spirit,  is  groundless.  The  Camisards,  e.  </.,
have  sung  the  Old  Testament  Psalms  of  vengeance.  But  the  Maccabees  stand  in  a
similar  relation  of  dependence  upon  the  Old  Testament  Canon,  as  the  Camisards.

Solomon  stands  beyond  question  as  the  original  prince  of  proverbial  poetry,  as
David  is  the  first  great  master  of  lyric  poetry.  They  shared  in  founding  the  highest
glory  of  the  sacred  poetry  and  literature  of  Israel,  just  as  they  shared  in  the  highest

[*  The  internal  character  of  any  book  must  of  course  have  great  weight  in  deciding  the  question  whether  it  is  to  be
received  as  tho  word  of  God  or  not ;  but  having  so  received  it,  the  mere  improbability  to  us  of  the  events  it  narrates  will
not  justify  us  in  holding  that  to  be  an  allegory  which  claims  to  be  a  history.  This  is  certainly  dangerous  ground  on
iich  to  stand.  For  if  the  mere  fact  that  there  is  so  much  that  is  improbable  here,  authorizes  us  to  assume  that  the  book
is  an  allegorical  representation  of  an  important  and  precious  truth,  it  will  bo  easy  to  reduce  large  portions  of  the  Biblical
History  to  allegorical  representations.  Nor  is  the  supposition  in  any  sense  necessary  here,  since  the  narrative,  viewed  ai
literal  history,  teaches  the  same  truth  with  equal  or  greater  force.— A.  G.]


3G


INTRODUCTION   TO   TIIE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


cdory  of  the  theocratic  and  politico!  kingdom—  in  war  and  peace.     They  have  indeed
through  their  sacred  poetry  transferred  the  typical  character  of  their  political  power
into  ap-ophecy  of  the  true  Messianic  Kingdom,  militant  and  peaceful.     But  just  a
later  Psalms  have  been  grafted  on  to  the  original  stock  of  the  Davidic  Psalms,  so
later  proverbs  have  been  added  to  the  collection  of  Solomon.    (1  Kings  v.  12  11.)     On
this  oround  the  didactic  poem-the  Preacher  of  Solomon-in  the  use  of  poetical  license
is  represented  to  he  the  work  of  Solomon.     That  the  book  is  of  later  origin  is  clear
both  from  its  language  and  its  historical  relations  (BLEEK,  p.  042).     ihat  the,
also  is  not  correctly  attributed  to  Solomon  as  its  author  may  be  inferred  from  its
fundamental  thought.*     The  virgin  of  Israel-the  theocracy-will  not  suffer  herself
to  be   included   among  the  heathen  wives,    religions,  as  the   favorite   ot    Solo.
but  ever  turns  to  her  true  beloved,  the  Messiah  who  was  yet  to  come.     We  hold,
therefore    that  this  poem  takes  its  origin  in  that  theocratic  indignation  which  the
reli-ious  freedom  of  Solomon-going  in  this  before  his  time-and  Ins  numerous  mar-
ria-es  through  which  lie  mingled  with  heathenism,  occasioned.   We  may  trace
^expression  of  a  similar  sentiment  in  the  nuptial  Psalm.     (Ps.  xlv.  11-13.)

Mod.rn  criticism  doubts  less  as  to  the  originality  and  authenticity  of  the  Prophetic
writhe.  But  it  exercises  its  analy/ing  activity  especially  upon  the  prince  of  all  Messianic
prophets,  the  Evangelist  of  the  Old  Testament,  Isaiah.     We  pass  over  here  the  ait
Lent  exceptions  which  have  been  made  in  the  iirst  part  ot  the  book  which  is  re-
cocmized  in  the  main  as  belonging  to  Isaiah  (eh.  i.-xxxix.).     We  remark  m  general  that
alf  critical  -rounds  growing  out  of  the  prejudice  against  any  prediction  are  unworthy
of  notice    '  The  whole  iirst  part  is  throughout  organically  constructed  upon  that  pro-
foundly  significant  fundamental  thought  of  the  prophet,  viz,  that  out  ot  every  judg
ment  of  God   there  springs  to  the  same  extent  a  corresponding  redemption,  so  that
we  cannot  easily  assign  the  construction  of  this  main  part  to  a  stranger.     As  to  In
second  part  of  the  book  (ch.  xl.-lxvi.)  we  hold  that  the  collected  reasons  urged  against
i.s  genuineness  will  not  stand  the  test.     The  lirst  reason   is  this:  the  prophet  would
in  these  prophecies  have  placed  himself  upon  that,  to  him,  far  distant  standpoint  ot
the  Babylonish  captivity  as  in  his  historical  present,  in  order  from  that  point  to  pre-
diet  events  still  more  distant  in  the  future.     This  is  not  the  method  ot  the  prophets,
but  it  is  the  method  of  the  Apocalyptic*.     If  we  distinguish  the  definite,  arti.
of  the  apocalyptic  vision  from  the  more  general  form  of  prophecy,  the  first  distinctive
feature,  as  to  form,  is  clearly  the  all-prevailing  artistic  construction,  with  which  a
poetical  and  symbolical  expression  corresponds.    The  second  distinctive  feature,  as  to
form  appears  in  the  regular  progress  from  epoch  to  epoch  in  such  a  way  tha  the  see,
ever  makes  the  new  point  of  departure  in  his  vision,  his  ideal  present.     This  latter
formal  distinction  points  to  the  first  real,  or  material  distinction  between  the  two
Apocalyptic  prophecy,  more  definitely  than  general  prophecy,  looks  beyoi


.

Lange's  view  as  io  its  fundamental  thought  does  not  justify  the  inferences  ^hich  ho  oraws  from  it.    ^  ^there  ^      =

<


unnatuwil  in  the
and  si;i.~,  or  tha
taught. -A.  G.]


CRITICAL   QUESTIONS   IN   THE   TREATMENT   OF   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


restoration  of  Israel  and  the  first  coming  of  the  Messiah,  to  the  final  restoration  and
completion.  But  with  the  more  developed  Christology,  is  closely  connected  a  clearer
and  more  definite  statement  of  the  great  Antichristian  power,  which  enters  between
the  first  and  second  coming  of  Christ.

We  regard  then  the  second  part  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  (ch.  xl.-lxvi.)  as  the  first
OH  Testament  Apocalypse.  That  peculiar  and  easily  distinguished  part  of  the
prophecy  of  Jeremiah  (ch.  xlv.-li.)  is  clearly  an  apocalypse  representing  especially
the  typical  Antichristian  power.  The  apocalypse  of  Ezekiel  presents  in  contrast
the  deep  valley  of  death  (and  indeed  the  valley  of  death  of  the  people  of  God  still
lighted  by  hope,  and  that  of  Gog  and  Magog  into  which  hope  sheds  no  ray  of
light)  and  the  high  mountain  of  God  Avitli  its  mystical  temple  thereon  (from  ch.
xxxvii.  to  the  close  of  the  book).  The  book  of  Daniel  is  one  peculiar  Apocalypse.
Among  the  minor  prophets,  Obadiah,  Nahum,  Uabakkuk,  and  Zephaniah,  may  be
viewed  as  apocalyptic  books,  which  portray  in  a  peculiar  style  the  judgment  of
God  upon  Antichrist,  as  whose  type,  the  first  regards  the  people  of  Edom,  the  second
Nineveh,  the  third  Babylon,  while  the  last  sees  the  day  of  wrath  breaking  out  upon
the  whole  Antichristian  power  of  the  Old  world.  Edom  is  viewed  also  as  the  type  of
Antichrist  in  Isaiah  (Ixiii.  1-0)  and  in  Jeremiah  (xlix.  7-22).  The  entirely  apocalyptic
nature  of  Gog  and  Magog  in  Ezekiel  (xxxviii.,  xxxix.)  is  recognized  and  fixed  in  its  place
in  the  New  Testament  Apocalypse  (ch.  xx.  8),  as  indeed  the  stream  issuing  from  the
temple  (Ez.  ch.  xlvii.)  is  then  again  taken  up  in  its  New  Testament  completion.  As  to
the  time  which  Isaiah  in  the  second  part  of  his  book  viewrs  as  present,  he  has  the  pro
phecy  of  the  Babylonian  exile  (ch.  xxxix.)  as  a  presupposition.  He  takes  his  departure
from  this.  In  a  similar  way  we  find  the  future  viewed  as  present  in  the  Apocalypse
of  John  ;  indeed,  in  the  form  in  which  he  introduces  the  vision,  I  saw,  the  whole
cschatological  future  in  ideal  progress  passes  before  him.  The  most  serious  difficulty
which  meets  us,  in  the  second  part  of  Isaiah,  is  the  prediction  of  Cyrus  by  name,  un
less  Cyrus  is  a  symbolical  and  collective  name.  As  to  the  differences  in  style,  it  would
be  a  matter  of  some  moment  if  the  first  part  was  marked  by  a  soft,  flowing  expression,
while  the  second  was  more  intense,  fiery,  violent.  But  as  the  reverse  is  the  case,  the
stylo  of  the  first  part  belongs  evidently  to  a  young  man,  that  of  the  second  to  riper
years.  Now  and  then  indeed  the  youthful,  ingenious  play  upon  words,  which  marks
the  first  part,  appears  in  the  second.  It  has  been  objected,  that,  upon  the  supposition
of  the  genuineness  of  the  second  part,  it  is  impossible  to  explain  why  in  the  justification
of  the  threatcnings  of  Jeremiah  (ch.  xxvi.  17,  18),  the  elders  did  not  refer  to  Isaiah
as  well  as  to  Micah.  But  if  according  to  tradition  Isaiah  suffered  martyrdom  in  his
old  age  under  Manasseh,  such  a  reference  would  have  been  out  of  place.  That  re
ference  to  the  example  of  Micah  seems  to  say,  pious  kings  would  never  allow  a  bold,
true  prophet  to  be  executed.  The  king  of  Jeremiah  still  claimed  to  be  a  pious  king.
The  example  of  Manasseh  therefore  (we  speak  only  of  the  possibility  that  the  tradi
tion  was  true)  could  neither  be  a  proper  measure,  nor  a  fitting  reference  in  the  case.

In  favor  of  its  genuineness  we  present  the  following  argument.  Men  of  the  in
tellectual  heroism  of  the  authors  of  the  second  part  of  Isaiah,  and  the  New  Testament
Apocalypse,  cannot  attribute  their  \v<  rks  to  a  name  already  renowned,  if  these  works
are  presented  as  historical  or  prophetic  testimonies.  They  must  from  their  greatness
stand  in  their  own  time  as  acting  persons,  who  could  not  conceal  themselves  if  they
would,  and  would  not  if  they  could.  A  city  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid.  There  is
the  widest  difference  between  the  wretched  apocryphal  works,  and  such  works  of


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


the  highest  grade  in  their  kind.     It  is  entirely  another  case  also,  when  a  poet  mtro
duceslomc  historically  renowned  person  as  speaking.     In  his  own  time  he  was  known
generally  as  an  author,  and  if  a  later  time  is  not  careful  to  preserve  his  name  but
Slows  a  poetical  speaker  to  take  his  place,  that  is  a  peculiar  literary  event,  from  which
no  general  principle  can  be  drawn.     As  to  the  case  of  the  poems  of  Ossian,  McPherson
owes  his  best  thoughts  to  the  old  Celtic  popular  songs;  his  mystifying  of  1m  contem
poraries  was  connected  with  peculiarities  of  character,  of  which  we  lnul  no  trad
the  canonical  apocalyptics.

Tor  the  difference  between  the  Hebrew  text  of  Jeremiah  and  the  text  of  the  Scptuagint,  compare
BI.EEK,  p.  4S8.

Our  point  of  procedure  in  the  decision  of  this  question  is  the  principal  diilerence,
viz    that  the  Scptuagint  inserts  the  peculiar  Apocalyptic  close  of  Jeremiah  (ch.  xlvi.-

"niu'r  (ch  xxv  13).  We  rcgord  this  interpolation  as  a  decided  weakening  of  the
peculiar  significance  and  importance  of  that  whole  section;  and  we  think  that  as  with
this  chief  pomt  of  diilerence,  so  all  the  others  must  be  decided  in  favor  ol  the  Masoretic


text.


Since  the  prophecy  of  Daniel,  as  a  whole,  makes  the  impression  of  an  apocalyptic
work,  retaining  its  unilj  throughout,  this  circumstance  must  not  be  left  out  of  view
in  "the  critical  examination  of  the  book.     It  does  not  however  enable  us  to  decide
between  the  original  predictions  of  the  prophet,  and  the  casting  of  them  into  thcii
present  form.     Three  cases  are  possible.     First,  that  a  later  prophet  has  attached  Ins
visions  to  the  name  of  the  historical  Daniel.     Against  this  supposition  see  the  re-
marks  above  upon  the  second  part  of  Isaiah.     Secondly,  it  may  be  held  that  some
later  person  has  wrought  the  original  prophetic  works  coming  down  from  Daniel  into
a  new  apocalyptic  form.     The  perfect  unity  between  the  contents  and  iorm  of  the
book   lies  against  this  supposition.     Then  it  remains  that  the  book  must  be  from
Daniel  himself.     The  difficulties  which  oppose  this  supposition  are   the   foUowing:
1   Why  does  the  book  stand  among  the  Kethubbim  and  not  among  the  prophets .   ]
seems  probable,  that  at  the  time  of  the  collection,  the  highly  apocalyptic  nature  of  I
book,  which  connects  it  closely  with  sacred  poetry,  determined  those  who  formed  the
collection  to  distinguish  it  from  the  prophets  in  a  narrower  sense    with   their  k
highly  colored  apocalyptic  works.     It  may  be  urged  in  favor  oi  tins,    hat  it  has  been
interpolated  by  portions* -most  probably  at  the  time  of  the  Maccabees-which  in
their  style  are  plainly  in  contrast  with  the  rest  of  the  book.     The  entire  paragraphs
(cll    x   i  to   xi.  44,  and  xii.  5-13)  are  thus  interpolated.     Grave  circumstances
the  thne  have  probably  occasioned  this  interpolation,  drawn  from  actual  appearances
in  history,  as  also  an  interpolation  in  the  second  Epistle  of  Peter  (ch.  i,  xx.-i:  i  3)  from
the  Epistle  of  Judo,  was  occasioned  by  similar  circumstances        t  grew  out  ot  tli
interpolation,  that  the  book  should  have  its  place  among  the  Kethubbim  if  it  had  not
always  stood  there.     2.  Why  has  Jesus  Sirach  (ch.  xlix.)  not  even  named  the  book  ot
Daniel  ?-This  would  be  decisive  certainly,  if  there  were  not  generally  serious  de
ficiencies  in  this  author,  and  if  in  making  his  selection  he  had  not  m  his  eye  those  men
Who  had  gained  renown,  in  respect  to  the  external  glory  of  Israe  .    In  las  view  Darnel
had  by  far  a  too  free-unrestricted  by  Jewish  notions-universal  character  and  tend-
eLv      3    Why  do  we  not  find  some  trace  of  the  use  of  Daniel  by  the  later  prophes?
In  this  connection  it  should  be  observed  that  the  four  horns  (Zech.  i.  18)  and  the

*  [Compare,  however,  upon  this  point  HESOSTESBEBO  :  Authentic  dea  DanieL-A.  G.I


§  25.     CRITICAL   QUESTIONS   IX   THE   TREATMENT   OF   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.      30

four  opposcrs  of  Zion  (Zcch.  vi.  1)  appear  certainly  to  presuppose  the  representatior
of  the  four  world-monarchies  (Dan.  cli.  ii.  and  vii).  And  so  also  the  more  definite
revelation  of  the  idea  of  a  suffering  Messiah  in  the  second  part  of  Zechariah  presup
poses  the  previous  progress  of  that  idea  in  prophecy  (Isaiah  liii.;  Daniel  ix.  20),
4.  The  difficulties  which  some  have  raised  from  the  historical  particularity  of  ch.  x.
•and  xi.,  are  met  by  the  supposition  above — that  these  chapters  are  a  part  of  the  in
terpolation.  The  intimation  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  in  the  little  horn  (ch.  viii.),  con
tains  certainly  a  striking  prediction,  although  not  a  prediction  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes
himself,  but  of  that  despotic  Antichristian  power  which  should  arise  out  of  one  of  the
three  world  monarchies  (not  out  of  the  last)  which  was  fulfilled  in  that  Antiochus.
But  it  is  certainly  incorrect  to  identify  the  preliminary  Antichrist  Antiochus  (ch.  viii.
8)  with  the  Antichrist  imaged  in  ch.  vii.  7.  This  last  springs  out  of  the  ten  horns
of  the  fourth  beast.  On  the  contrary  the  goat  (ch.  viii.),  i.  e.,  the  Macedonian
monarchy,  has  one  horn,  out  of  which  come  the  four  horns,  the  monarchies  into  which
the  kingdom  of  Alexander  was  divided.  Since  the  number/our  is  the  number  of  the
world,  this  can  only  mean  that  the  one,  third-world  power  should  divide  itself  into
its  chief  component  parts.  With  this  goat  of  four  horns,  whose  form  is  clearly  de
fined  throughout,  the  fourth  animal  (ch.  vii.),  whose  form  is  very  indefinite  (and  in
which,  in  the  face  of  the  modern  exegesis,  we  recognize  the  Roman  world  power),  has
no  resemblance,  but  the  third  animal  (ch.  vii.),  the  leopard  with  his  four  wings  of  a
bird,  and  the  four  heads.  The  wings  of  the  leopard  correspond  to  the  swiftness  of
the  goat,  and  the  number  four  of  his  wings  and  heads  with  the  four  horns  of  the  goat ;
wThile  the  fourth  animal  (ch.  vii.)  has  ten  horns.  The  image  of  the  Antichrist  (in  ch.
vii.)  and  of  his  judgment  is  much  more  significant  than  the  image  of  the  typical  An
tichrist  (ch.  viii.)  and  his  judgment — which  forms  only  an  episode.

Since  at  the  time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  the  Maccabeean  family  of  the  tribe  of
Levi  gradually  attained  regal  power,  and  therefore  the  announcement  of  the  Messiah
out  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  must  have  been  thrown  into  the  background  (see  the  timid
clause  in  favor  of  the  future  Messiah,  1  Mace.  xiv.  41),  it  is  very  bold  in  the  critics  to
refer  a  book  so  full  of  the  Messiah,  and  in  which  all  hope  in  any  temporal  Jewish
dynasty  disappears,  to  this  very  period  of  the  Maccabees.

In  regard  to  the  controversy  as  to  the  authenticity  of  the  second  part  of  Zechariah
(ch.  ix.-xiv.),  it  deserves  to  be  considered,  that  the  first  suspicions  against  this  section
arose  out  of  a  purely  theological  misunderstanding.  Since  the  quotation  of  the  pro
phet  Jeremiah  by  Matthew  (ch.  xxvii.  9,  10)  is  not  found  verbally  in  Jeremiah,  but
appears  to  be  taken  from  Zechariah  (ch.  xi.  12,  13),  Mode  conceived  that  the  section
(Zech.  ix.-xi.)  was  written  by  Jeremiah.  But  Matthew  actually  intended  to  refer  to
Jeremiah,  since  for  his  purpose  the  chief  thing  was  the  purchase  of  the  potter's  field,
of  which  he  found  a  type  in  the  purchase  of  the  field  at  Anathoth  made  by  Jeremiah
(ch.  xxxii.).  In  this  citation  he  now  inserted  the  allusion  to  the  passage  in  Zechariah
which  speaks  of  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  without  any  express  reference  to  it  (see
LAXGE:  Leben  Jem,  ii.  Bd.  3.  Thl.  p.  1496).  Out  of  this  erroneous  supposition  that
Zech.  ix.-xi.  must  have  been  written  by  Jeremiah,  has  arisen  the  prevailing  question
as  to  the  second  part  of  this  prophet.  Later,  it  was  not  so  much  the  New  Testament
citation,  as  a  collection  of  internal  marks,  which  occasioned  the  doubt  of  the  critics.
But  the  criticism  is  so  unfortunate  as  to  undertake  to  transfer  the  second  part  of
Zechariah  to  a  much  earlier  date,  and  hence  comes  into  collision  with  an  important
principle  of  biblical  hermeneutics.


40


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


The  principle  is  this  :  The  great  biblical  idea  makes  no  retrograde  movement  in  the
course  of  its  development,  i.  <?.,  no  movement  from  a  more  to  a  less  developed,  or
from  a  more  to  a  less  definite,  form.   But  as  it  would  be  a  retrograde  movement  of  the
Messianic  idea,  if  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  (Isa,  liii.)  should  be  taken  merely  for  a  col
lective  name  for  the  prophets,  while  already  a  definite  developed  announcement  of  a
personal  Messiah  existed  in  the  first  part  of  Isaiah,  so  it  would  be  a  much  more  strik
ing  retrograde  movement  of  the  Messianic  idea,  if  the  second  part  of  Zechariah  were
to°be  regarded  as  an  earlier  composition  than  the  first.    For  here,  in  the^eopnd  part,
we  havenearly  a  continuous  biographical  portraiture  of  the  personal  Messiah  in  typical
images.     la  ch.  ix.  9,  the  Messiah  comes  to  his  city  Jerusalem  as  an  humble  king  of
peace,  riding  upon  a  peaceful  animal,  the  foal  of  an  ass;  in  x.  11,  he  goes  before  his
returning  people  through  the  sea  of  sorrow,  beating  down  the  waves  of  the  sea;  in
xi.  12  he  is  as  the  shepherd  of  his  people  valued  at  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  the
silver  pieces  were  left  in  the  potter's  chest  (see  L.VNUK:  Ld>en  Jcsu,  ii.  »,  p.  1494);  m
ch.  xii!  10  is  the  deed  done,  because  one  has  pierced  him,  and  they  begin   to  mourn
for  him  as  one  mourns  for  his  only  son;  in  xiii.  G,  7,  he  complains :  lo !  I  have  been
wounded  in  the  house  of  my  friends  ;  the  sword  has  awakened  against  the  shepherd
of  God ;  the  flock  is  scattered,  and  now  he  gathers  his  little  ones;  in  xiv.  he  appears
for  judgment  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives;  it  is  light  at  the  evening  time  ;  a  new  holy
time  begins,  in  which  the  bells  upon  the  horses  bear  the  same  title  as  that  upon   the
mitre  of  the  High  Priest:  "Holiness  to  the  Lord."

The  critics  propose  to  transfer  this  fully  developed  Christology  back  to  the-  time
of  U///iah,  when  the  doctrine  of  a  personal  .Messiah  began  to  unfold  itself.  If  some
critics  remove  the  section  in  question  to  a  later  date,  or  divide  it  into  two  parts  and
two  periods,  they  do  not  change  the  case  at  all.  They  still  deny  the  above-quoted
fundamental  principle  of  hermeneutics.  If  they  turn  us  to  the  fact  that  the  symbol
ism,  which  so  clearly  marks  the  first  part,  is  less  prominent  in  the  second,  we^  may
remark  the  same  receding  of  the  symbolic  text  in  Jeremiah  and  llosea.  But  if  ch.
x.  6,  7,  speaks  of  the  kingdom  of  Jiulah  and  Israel  as  still  in  existence,  ch.  xii.  G  of
Jerusalem  as  still  standing,  it  must  be  observed,  that  for  the  symbolical,  not  for  the
purely  historical,  view  of 'the  prophet,  these  forms  arc  permanent  in  the  kingdom  of
God.  We  can  only  refer  briefly  to  the  fact,  that,  with  respect  to  the  original  mysteri
ous  coloring,  their  obscurity  and  profoundness  of  statement,  and  other  similar  marks,
the  first  and  second  parts  of  Zechariah  have  the  same  type  and  character.


§  20.

CRITIC  \L  AIDS  FOR  ASCERTAINING  AND  CONFIRMING  TIIE  INTEGRITY  OF  THE  BIBLICAL

"    BOOKS.


Here  belong  the  records  which  form  the  internal
history  of  the  text  of  the  biblical  books :  the  Hebrew
text,  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  the  translations,


the  ChalJce  paraphrases,  the  Greek  translations,  the
Vulgate,  the  Masoretic  text,  and  the  printed  text.
Compare  BLEEK:  JZinldtunff,  p.  746  ff.


§  23.     ELEMENTS  OF  THE  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL  SCIENCE  OF  INTRODUCTION.  41


FOURTH    CHAPTER.

Historical  and  Critical  Exegetics  in  the  narrower  sense,  or  the  human  side  of
Holy  Scriptures :  the  Holy  Scripture  as  Sacred  Literature.


§  27.
LITERATURE  OF  THE  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL  SCIENCE  OF  INTRODUCTION.


See  BLEEK  :  Einlcitung  in  das  Alte  Testament,  p.
5;  KEIL  :  Einleitung  in  das  Alte  Testament,  p.  6;
HAGEXBACII  :  Encyclopedia,  p.  139  ;  HARTWIG  :  Ta-
bcllcn  zur  Einleitung  in  die  kanonischcn  und  apo-
kryphischen  Bilchcr  des  Alien  Testaments,  Berlin


(1S5G,  p.  1 ) ;  [  HAYERXICIC  :  Introduction,  of  which
there  is  an  English  translation ;  HORNE  :  Introduction  ;
the  recent  edition.  An  Introduction  by  Prof.  Stowe
of  Andover. — A.  G.j


§  28.
ELEMENTS  OF  THE  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL  SCIENCE  OF  INTRODUCTION.

The  two  essential  elements  of  exegetics,  both  in  reference  to  the  Old  Testament
and  the  New,  are  general  Introduction,  or  the  history  of  the  contents  of  the  "books
in  question,  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  Canon,  and  special  Introduction,  or  the
history  of  particular  Looks.  We  now  inquire  in  what  order  these  -parts  should  scien
tifically  be  placed.  De  Wette  places  general  Introduction  first,  and  this  seems  to  be
systematic.  On  the  other  hand  it  appears  more  scientific,  according  to  the  genesis
of  the  Canon,  to  treat  first  of  individual  books  and  then  of  the  whole.  Hagenbach
says  the  method  of  Reuss  is  preferable,  but  Reuss  in  his  introduction  to  the  New
Testament  furnishes  a  general  substructure  for  the  literature  of  individual  books.
This  is  undoubtedly  the  correct  method  which  Block  and  Kcil  have  followed.  First
we  have  the  fundamental  Introduction,  which  treats  of  the  historical  region,  origin,
character,  limits,  and  means  (language  and  writing)  of  sacred  literature.  Upon  this,
special  Introduction  proceeds  in  its  work,  as  it  treats  of  the  history  of  particular  books.
Finally  general  Introduction  embraces  all  the  results  attained,  in  the  history  of  i\\Q  form
ation  of  the  Canon,  in  the  history  of  the  preservation  of  the  Canon,  in  the  history  of  the
text,  in  the  history  of  the  spread  of  the  Canon,  of  translations,  in  the  history  of  the
explanation  of  the  Canon,  or  of  the  exposition  or  interpretation  of  the  scriptures,  and
in  the  history  of  the  energy  and  results  of  the  Canon,  for  which  still  the  greater  part
remains  to  be  done.

In  regard  to  these  different  elements  we  must  here  limit  ourselves  to  a  few  sug
gestions.

As  to  the  introduction  which  is  fundamental,  in  that  it  underlies  both  special  and
general,  the  first  question  is  as  to  the  sphere  of  revelation,  as  to  the  ground  and  limits
within  which  the  sacred  literature  has  grown  up ;  then  as  to  the  homogeneous  rela
tion  of  the  sacred  word,  as  the  word  of  the  Spirit,  to  the  scripture,  as  the  language
of  the  Spirit;  then  as  to  the  specific  character  of  the  sacred  writings  as  such,  of  their
limitations,  or  of  their  opposition  to  apocryphal  writings ;  and  then  finally  of  the
means  used  in  its  formation,  of  the  language  itself,  and  of  the  art  of  writing,  in  their
reciprocal  influence  and  development.


42


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


The  history  of  the  individual  book  must  be  introduced  by  a  definition  and  distinc
tion  of  the  different  modes  of  statement,  the  historical,  poetic,  didactic,  and  prophetic.


For  the  ciitieal  part  of  this  history,  compare  the
paragraphs  upon  criticism  above.  For  the  or
ganic  part,  sec  the  following  paragraphs.  For  the
history  of  the  Oil  Testament  Canon,  compare  BLEEK:


ments  in  den  Jahrbuchcrn  fiir  Deutsche  Thcolo^e,
1858  (iii.  Heft,  p.  419)  ff. ;  KKIL,  p.  5^8  IT. ;  BuNSEy,
p.  51.  [LARDKER'S  Credibility,  JONES,  WORDSWORTH,
ALEXANDER,  GAI'SSEX,  MCCLKLLAND,  on  the  Canoii.


On  the  history  of  tlie  text,  sec  BLKEK,  p.  717;  KKIL,  p.  507.

This  history  for  a  long  time  runs  parallel  with  tlie  periods  of  Hebrew  literature.  We
may  distinguish  a  Jewish  period  of  the  history  of  the  text,  in  the  behalf  of  Christians,
and  a  Christian  period,  in  behalf  of  the  Jews.  The  first  period  may  be  divided  again
into  the  period  in  which  the  canonical  text  assumed  its  present  form,  the  period  ofthe
formation  ofthe  Synagogue  manuscripts  (Babylonian  writings),  of  the  Targums,  of  the
Talmud  (division  into  l^rr.-.ha  and  Ilaphtora),  of  the  Masora  (punctuation),  of  the
Hebrew  grammarians,  and  of  the  transition  in  the  study  of  the  Hebrew  text  to  the
Christians  (division  into  chapters).  The  latter  period  falls  into  the  history  of  the  trans-
inisMon  of  the  manuscripts  and  ofthe  printed  editions.


For  tin-  history  of  the  translations,  sec  BLEKK,  p.
750;  KKIL,  p.  5'.'1 ;  lir.NSKN,  p.  72.

For  the  history  of  the  interpretation  of  the  scrip
ture,  see  paragraph  hcrmcncull,'x ;  KKIL,  p.  710;
N,  p.  '.'1  ;  the  full  list  LAXCK'S  Jr«r?/tcic,  Am.  cd.


p.  18.


For  the  history  of  the  results  ofthe  Old  Testament


or  of  the  Bible  in  an  ecclesiastical  and  practical  point  of
view,  sec  the  references  under  §  1,  and  also  the  para
graphs  on  the  theological  and  homilctieal  literature
to  the  Old  Testament.  The  articles  Bible  and  Bible
text  in  HERZOO  :  Hcdcnryklopad'ie,  by  DANZ  and
WINKK — [which  is  in  course  of  translation. — A.  G.].


29.


THE  DATES  OF  THE  ORIGIN   OF  THE  BIBLICAL  BOOKS.

We  must  defer  the  discussion  of  these  dates,  to  the  works  upon  the  particular
books,  but  give  here  a  table  of  the  different  dates  accepted  by  Do  Wette,  Keil,  Bleek,
and  add  a  closing  remark.


DE  WETTE.


KEIL.


The  Elohistic  writing  lying  at  the
foundation  of  the  Pentateuch  dates
after  the  death  of  Joshua  and  the
expulsion  of  the  Canaauitcs.

The  Jehovistic  portions  originate
during  the  kings,  down  to  Joram,
but  not  to  Ilczekiah.

Deuteronomy  dates  after  the  exile
of  the  two  tribes.


Mosaic  composition.


BLEEK.

Genesis.  The  Elohistic  original
writings,  which  reach  down  to  the
possession  of  Canaan.  Revised  with
Jehovistic  interpolations.  The  first
originated  probably  in  the  time  of
Saul.  The  revision  and  enlarge
ment  before  the  division  of  the
kingdom.

The  following  books  were  a  con
tinuation  of  the  original  Elohistic
writings.  Their  revision  probably
by  the  same  writer  who  made  the  re
vision  of  Genesis.  Leviticus  as  in
deed  Exodus  (so  far  as  the  giving
of  the  law  is  concerned)  contains
much  that  is  originally  Mosaic.
Deuteronomy  belongs  to  the  Jehov
istic  revision.  Distinction  between
Deuteronomy  and  the  earlier  books.
The  rearrangement  belongs  to  a
later  time,  but  took  place  before
the  Babylonian  exile.


§  29.     THE   DATES   OF   THE   ORIGIN   OF   THE   BIBLICAL   BOOKS.  43

DE  WKTTK.  KEIL.  BLEEK.

f     The  work  of  the  Elohistic  author
The  book  of  Joshua  also  comes]      N     ,  ,       .        ,    bp(rmnmo.  of     Revision  in  the  time  of  David.   Ro.

.,  ,  .  f»         *  i       i       1  J.~V«   I.  ILL!    Llliill   LI1C   UC&lJJULllLllf   Ul       I          v±*  1  j.1  j.1  C*     T\         L

down    from   the    time    of   Ahab  I  tl        .        f  s    ,     p^,,,0       I  edition  by  the  author  of  Deuter-
to  the  time  of  the  origin  of  Deutcr-  f  [JJ  rci°n  c  'r  1  onomy.     Separated  from  the  Pen

onomy.  J  tateuch   at  a  later  period.     Last

[redaction.

The  book  of  Judges  doubtful.  |     At  thc  latcst  at  the  boginning
The  original  essential  portions  be-  ^  f  ft    ^^  of  Davi(L
lore  Deuteronomy.  j

The  books  of  Samuel  later  than  j     Not  bcforo  thc  t-me  of  Rcho_  ,      Aftcr  thc  divigion   f  thc  t      kino,
Judges      The  last  form  after  the  Vfe         or  Abijam<  j  d  }

composition  of  Deuteronomy.          J

The  books  of  Kings  during  thc  )      In  thc  last  half  of  the  Babylo-  f      In  thc  last  half  of  the  exile.  Per-
Babylonian  exile.  J  nian  captivity.  |  haps  by  Baruch.


The  books   of    Chronicles    low  )  f     rrobably  the  saine  author  who

down  in  the  Persian  period.  t     In  Ezra  s  timc'  ^  m/^c  the  la  °^  revisionof  the  books


and  Nehcmiah.

Book  of  Ruth  a  long  time  after  )      Not  before  the  last   years  of  j      Centuries  after  the  period  of  the
David.  f  David's  reign.  |  Judges.


Ezra  and  Nehemiah  the  work  of
a  late  collector.


J    I      Ezra,  Nehemiah.  Thc  last  revision  quite  late.


Esther.    Very  late  date.    Proba-")      «•  *  •          r  ,-  i      n  ,     f     Esther.     Probably   immediately

bly  the  times  of  the  Ptolemys  and  I  .  ^?*  ^mediatel^after  the  sub-  J    f       ,     p     .        J.  d      p    fa    J

Seleucidae.  J  Jcctlon  of  thc  Pcraan  klDSdom-    [much  later.

Isaiah  from  759-710,  B.  C.  The  "I      From  the  year  of  Uzziah's  death  f     rru

second  part  of  Isaiah  during  the  Ldown  tothe  lothyearof  HezekiahJ    ,  Thc  scc"nd  part  <lunnS  the  Bal>
early  times  of  Cyrus.  J  (758).  \  Jiomau  Cxllc'

Jereiniuh  from  the  13th  year  of  1

Josiah  to  the   subjection  of  the  L     The  same.  \      ^,ie  A1efandrian  recension  pref-

kingdom  (588).  J  (  crable  to  the  Masoi-et;c  text

Ezekiel.    From  five  years  before']  ,

the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  until  V     The  same.  -j      After  the  taking  of  Jerusalem.

16  years  after.  J  '

Hosea  presupposes  the  state  of  j      Hno_h9-  j      Probably  in  the  last  time  of  Je-

things  under  Jeroboam  II.  j  |  roboam  II.'

Joel.     Under  Uzziah  about  the  )  (      During   the    reirn    of    Uzziah.

year  800.  \  \  About  800  B.  C.

Amos.   About  790.   A  few  years  )  (      ,T

after  Joel.  f      810-783.  -j      Nearly  contemporary  with  Joel

Obadiah.   Aftcr  the  captivity  of  )  (      Immediately  after  the  destruction

the  Jews.    After  588.  [  |  of  Jerusalem.

f     Commonly  referred  to  the  time

Jonah.    One  of  the  later  books.  "|  of  Jeroboam  II.    The  origin  of  the

Uncertain  whether  before  or  after  V     824-783.  \  book  fulls  at  least  in  the  Chaldaic

the  exile.  J  period  ;  perhaps  in  the  beginning

|_  of  the  Persian.
I

Micah.    The  first  years  of  Heze-)      ,-Q  *™  5      In  the  reign  of  ITezckiah.     Thf

kiah(758).  f      i^-100.  |  declarations  in  the  title  not  reliable.

Nahum.    After  the  14th  year  of  )      f.in  j      Before  the  year  600,  or  before

Hczekiah.  j  \  the  conquest  of  Nineveh.

Habakkuk.    A  younger  contem-  )      rrr.  R0>7  <      Probably   during  the   reign  c'

porary  of  Jeremiah.  \  Jehoiakim.


44


INTRODUCTION  TO   THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


DE  WETTE.

Zephaniah.   In  the  first  years  of  (_      ciO-025.
Josiah  (Go'.)).  )

Flaggai.     At  the  lime  of  Zerub-  )       ,-ig
babel  and  Joshua  (5oO).  /


KEIL.


Zechariah.     Some  months  latera
than  Ilaggai.     The  second  half  of
Zechariah  probably  belongs  to  the
time  after  the  exile.


Malachi.     Probably  in  the  time  )
of  Nehemiah  (441).    "  f


FrQm  51Q


43G-424.


BLEEK.
Thc  timc  of  Josiah,  G42-611.

;The  second  year  of  Darius  Hys-
taspcs.

The  second  half  (ch.  9)  proba
bly  earlier  than  Joel.  The  oldest
part  of  written  prophecy  ?  Time
of  the  king  Uzziah  ! !  Ch.  1 0.  Time
-  of  Ahaz.  Ch.  xi.  1,  and  2,  later
than  the  foregoing  and  following.
Ch.  xi.  4,  17,  same  as  eh.  ix.  and
x.  With  a  full  misconception  of
symbolical  representations.

The  collection  at  the  timc  of
Ni-hemiah.  A  somewhat  earlier
origin.

C     Probably    not    long    after    tha
erection  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offer-


,        .

Daniel.     At  the  lime  of  Antio-  /      At  thc  timc  of  lhc  exilc_  •  ;„„  in  thc  tcmple  ()t-  jei.u?alein  for

elms  Epiphanes.


tlu,  worship  Of  Jupiter.     The  Mac-
cabeean  age.


The  Psalms.    Down  to  the  exile  "I      From  r)aviil  to  ,ho  ,ime  af(or,      ^ainst  the  reception   of  Mac-
and  probably  alter.     JSot  ie  y  thc  cxij     but  not  afu,r  x0heniiah.  1  cabeean  Psalms.

Maccabcean  period.  J


•:  'atioiis  by  Jeremiah  (583).  '-      The  same.

The  Son"1.  The  time  of  Solomon,  t      Solomon.


The  same.

The  time  of  Solomon.     Not  by
Solomon.

i      The    oldest    collection.      Many
,Q  genuine  proverbs  of  Solomon.    Still

of  Solomon.     Time  of  llczekiah.  I      From  the   time  of  Solomon  to  j^     coiicction    not    by    Solomon.
Last  chapter  probably  three  years     Ilezekiah.
later.


Collection  at  the  time  of  Ilezekiah.
The  rest  probably  later.


:s  to  a  late,

unhappy,  but  m  rehg.ous  and  lite-
rary  culture,  advanced,  age.          '


The  book  of  Job.  The  time  of
the  decline  of  the  kingdom  of
Judah,  near  to  the  Chaldaic  period.


(      It  falls  perhaps  in  the  last  time
I  ^    dominion  ;  but  per-

^  }         s{iu  ^  in  (he  t;^c   of  \]lQ

g'  ^  doniinioiK


The  timc  of  Solomon.


Probably  between  the  Assyrian
and  Babylonian  captivity.  The
speech  of  Elihu  a  later  interpola
tion.


Concluding  Remarks. — In  the  investigation
of  the  dates  of  thc  biblical  books,  the  history  of
the  development  of  the  biblical  ideas  has  not  been
allowed  sufficient  weight.  This  is  true  emphatically
of  the  idea  of  a  personal  Messiah.  In  its  more  de
finite  form  it  enters  with  the  prophets  Isaiah  and
Micah,  i.  c.,  about  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century,
B.  C.  It  is  perhaps  credible  that  the  idea  of  the
Messiah  should  not  appear  in  a  later  historical  book.
But  it  is  incredible  that  thc  Messianic  idea  in  a  later
book  should  recede  again  to  the  idea  of  a  typical
Messiah,  which  meets  us  in  2  Sam.  vii.  Indeed,  since
the  idea  of  the  typical  Messiah  first  appears  here,  and


a  whole  period  lies  between  the  appearance  of  the
typical  Messianic  image,  and  the  ideal  Messianic
image,  the  origin  of  the  2d  book  of  Samuel  must  be
this  whole  period  earlier  than  that  of  Isaiah  and  Micah.
Generally  the  prophets  form  the  strongest  bulwarks
against  the  excesses  of  the  critics,  llengstenberg,
Delitzch,  and  others,  show  how  frequently  they  use
the  historical  books,  especially  the  Pentateuch,  in
cluding  Deuteronomy,  and  how  therefore  they  pre
suppose  the  existence  of  these  books.  But  what
long  periods  must  have  elapsed  between  the  founding
of  the  legal  theocracy,  between  its  culminating  point
under  David  and  Solomon ;  and  thc  prophetic  doubts


§  30.  PERIODS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  LOOKS.  45


and  despondency  as  to  its  eternal  and  legal  appear
ance  ! — Let  us  take  the  idea  of  personal  repentance
as  the  measure.  If,  on  good  grounds,  we  view  the
51st  Psalin  as  the  penitential  Psalm  of  David,  is  there
any  similar  development  of  the  idea  of  personal  re


pentance  in  Deuteronomy  ?  So  likewise  there  is  no
similar  statement  of  a  personal  experience  of  grace.
Criticism  rightly  uses  the  citations  of  the  prophets,
but  it  should  use  also  with  greater  care  the  history
of  religious  ideas.


§30.
THE  PERIODS  WEIGH  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  BOOKS  EMBRACE.

1.  Genesis.     The  time  of  primary  hist 017  from  the  beginning  of  the  human  race,
to  the  death  of  Jacob.

2.  Exodus  to  Deuteronomy.    The  interval  between  Jacob  and  Moses.    (See  above,
6,  Chronology.)     Then  40  years.     (Numbers  with  a  space  of  37  years.)

3.  Joshua.     A  period  of  about  17  years.

4.  The  books  of  Judges  and  Ruth.     Various  estimations.    See  the  §  6.  Chronolo
gy.     Das  Cahver  Ilandbuch,  320  years.

5.  The  two  books  of  Samuel.     About  100  years.

6.  The  two  books  of  Kings.     About  380  years.

7.  The  two  books  of  Chronicles.     From  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  the  end
of  the  Babylonian  exile.

8.  Ezra,  Nehcmiah,  Esther.     Omitting  the  period  of  the  Babylonian  captivity  (70
years,  or  deducting  the  14  years  of  the  removal  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,
56  years),  a  period  of  about  130  years.

§  31.

THE  ORGANIC  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  BIBLICAL  BOOKS.
See  the  IV.  Division.


THIRD  SECTION.

THE  THEANTHROPIC  CHARACTER  OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURE  AS
TO  ITS  FORM  AND  CONTENTS,  OR  THE  BIBLICAL  CHRISTOLOGI-
CAL  THEOLOGY,  ESPECIALLY  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.

GENERAL  BIBLICAL  THEOLOGY  OP  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.

§32.

CONTENTS.

It  treats:  1.  Of  the  nature  of  the  revealed  salvation,  its  fundamental  forms,  and
.ts  foundation  ;  2.  Its  development,  and  the  steps  in  that  development ;  3.  Of  its  aim
md  tendency.


40


INTRODUCTION   TO   TIIE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


A.   The  revealed  Salvation,  its  fundamental  forms  and  its  foundation.

§33.
TIIE  REVELATION  OF  GOD  IN  TIIE  WIDEST  SENSE.

The  revelation  of  God  is  both  objective  :inJ  subjective,  i.  <?.,  the  God  of  revela
tion,  in  revealing  the  knowledge  of  himself,  stands  over  against  the  minds  fitted  to:
receive  the  revelation.  God  cannot  reveal  himself,  without  placing  over  against  him-i
self  the  glass  upon  which  the  rays  of  light  fall,  viz.,  angels  and  men.  Xo  created  mind
fan  know  God,  unless  he  reveal  himself  to  him.  But  in  the  mutual  action  and  influence
between  ihc  spiritual  and  human  world,  the  revelation  of  God  progresses  through
different  stadia.


1.  The  most  general  revelation  of  God;  objee-
.ive  :  The  civutijn.  Hum.  i.

•2.  General  revelation  of  God;  objective:  The
i.i.-tory  of  the  xvorld.  Rom.  ix.-.-d.

:;.  S;-vial  revelation  of  God,  or  the  revelation
«f  salvation  in  its  progress;  objective:  The  old
covenant.

•!.  The  ni(»t  special  revelation  of  Goil,  or  the
revelation  of  salvation,  in  its  introductory  perfec
tion  :  Cod  ir.  Christ  reconciling  the  world.

."..  The  final,  complete,  iiitroih'.etory  perfection  of
t  lie  revelation  of  God  in  Christ;  objective:  The  great
epiphany.  Cod  all  in  all.  The  consummation  and
tr.insiiguration  of  the  general  revelation  through  the
special.


1.  The  most  general  revelation  of  God;    subjec
tive  :   The  mind  and  conscience.     Rom.  ii.

2.  General  revelation  of  God;  subjective:  Livea
of  individuals.

".  Special  revelation  of  God,  or  the  revelation  of:
salvation  in  its  progress  ;  subjective  :  1'}w  faith  iu  the=
promise.

•\.  The  most  special  revelation  of  God  in  its  in-
troductory  or  first  consummation  ;  subjective  :  Jus
tifying  and  saving  faitli.

.">.  The  final,  complete  consummation  of  the
subjective  revelation  of  God  in  Christ.  The  in
tuition  of  God  in  Christ,  and  in  the  whole  city  of
God.


Through  the  sin  of  man  the  most  general  revelation  of  God  is  veiled  and  hidden
(Isa.  xxv.  7).  Even  the  more  definite,  moral  revelation  of  God  in  history,  and  his
own  destiny,  becomes  to  man  a  further  obscuration  of  the  Deity  (Fs.  xviii.  20).  Thi^
blindness  or  darkness  appears  in  the  views  of  man  concerning  the  enigma  in  history,
and  in  man's  evil  destiny.

Through  the  objective  side  of  the  special  revelation  this  darkening  of  the  mincLi
through  unbelief  often  completes  itself  in  hardness.  The  world  is  hell,  viewed  fromi
the  stand-point  of  hellish  spirits.  On  the  contrary,  all  the  subjective  and  objective!
circles  of  revelation  meet  in  ever  increasing  splendor,  in  the  special  sphere  of  revela-j
tion,  in  faith.  But  the  special  revelation,  in  its  objective  and  subjective  aspects.j
not  only  facilitates  the  knowledge  of  the  general  revelation,  but  carries  on  the  gen-i
oral  revelation  to  its  consummation  and  glory.


OPPOSITION  AND  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  GENERAL  AND  SPECIAL  REVELATION.

General  revelation  is  the  foundation  on  which  the  special  rests  ;  the  special  is  the
reproduction  and  realization  of  the  general.

Within  the  historical  circle  of  the  general  revelation  there  arises,  in  consequence
of  the  fall,  the  obscuration  of  the  revelation  of  God,  through  nature  and  conscience,
bince  the  primeval  religion  of  man  was  thus  changed  into  a  mere  capacity  for  religion,


§  35.     THE  SUBJECT   OF  REVELATION".  47

But  within  the  same  circle  arc  formed  the  sources  of  special  revelation,  since  the
primeval  religion  of  the  chosen  becomes  an  active,  practical  exercise  of  their  religious
nature.

General  revelation  as  a  natural  revelation,  looking  to  the  past,  is  an  unveiling  of
the  foundations  of  the  world  and  life;  of  the  original  divine  institutions.  Special
revelation,  looking  to  the  future,  is  a  revelation  of  salvation,  and  therefore  always
both  an  ideal  revelation  and  an  actual  redemption.

General  revelation  uses  as  its  instruments  symbolical  signs  and  events,  whose
bloom  and  flower  in  the  life  of  the  spirit  is  the  divine  word.  Special  revelation
makes  use  of  the  divine  word,  whose  bloom  and  seal  is  the  sacramental  symbol  and
acts.  There  the  symbol  is  prominent,  here  the  word.

§35.
THE  SUBJECT  OF  REVELATION.

In  the  most  general  sense,  the  subject  of  revelation  is  the  relation  of  God  to  man,
as  a  foundation  for  religion,  which  is  the  relation  of  man  to  God.  God  reveals  him
self  to  man  according  to  his  living  relations  to  him,  according  to  his  will  in  reference
to  him,  hence  in  his  purpose  of  salvation,  the  actual  salvation,  the  promise  of  salvation  ;
but  also  according  to  his  claims  upon  man,  in  his  law  and  in  his  judgment.  He  makes
plain  to  man  his  peculiar  destiny,  his  sinful  nature,  his  guilt,  since  he  plainly  reveals
his  own  will  to  man  in  order  to  prepare  him  to  receive  his  salvation.  This  salvation  is
thus  the  central  theme  of  revelation,  and  indeed  as  a  fact,  as  a  personal  life,  as  an
eternal  inheritance,  is  destined  to  extend  from  the  chosen  until  it  becomes  the  com
mon  good  of  humanity.  The  subject  of  revelation  is,  therefore,  redemption.


THE  INTERCHANGE  BETWEEN  REVELATION  AND  REDEMPTION.

As  the  eternal  living  spirit,  God  communicates  himself,  his  life,  when  he  com
municates  the  living  knowledge  of  himself.  Man,  as  a  spiritual  being  allied  to  God,
cannot  rightly  know  God  without  receiving  into  himself  the  divine  life.  But  as  man
is  sinful,  he  is  blinded  as  to  his  intelligence,  to  the  same  extent  that  he  is  perverted
and  enslaved  in  his  will.  Hence  there  cannot  be  a  revelation  of  salvation  to  him  with
out  redemption,  nor  redemption  without  revelation.  It  follows  also  that  the  intro
duction  of  this  revelation  must  be  very  gradual.  With  the  spiritual  eye  the  heart
must  be  purified,  with  the  heart,  the  eye.  Revelation  is  the  ideal  redemption,  re
demption  the  actual  revelation.

In  this  interchange  between  revelation  and  redemption,  in  general,  revelation
precedes  redemption,  but  at  the  same  time  it  must,  through  its  preliminary  redemp
tion,  prepare  the  way  for  every  new  stage  in  its  development.  And  just  as  in  the
chosen  spirits,  the  channels  of  the  revelation  of  saving  truth,  revelation  precedes  re
demption,  so  with  the  great  mass  of  those  who  are  the  subjects  of  redemption,  the
redemption  precedes,  as  a  preparatory  discipline,  the  illumination  through  revelation.


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


§37.
THE  OBJECTIVE  FORM  OF  THE  REVELATION  OF  SALVATION.

The  objective  form  of  this  revelation  is  throughout  the  Thcophany ,  as  it  rises
from  the  form  of  the  ideal,  dynamic  theophanies,  to  the  grand  real  Iheophany  of  (
in  Christ  It  manifests  itself  in  the  elements  of  human  faith,  strengthened  to  open
vision  or  si-lit.  Its  first  form  is  the  miraculous  report,  the  divine  voice,  the  word,
whose  clulUcho-the  Bath  AW_meets  us  only  in  the  region  of  the  Apocrypha.  Its
Bccond  more  developed  form  is  in  the  miraculous  vision  in  a  narrower  sense,  angelic
•WDcaranccs  as  an  ideal  dynamic  Chnstophany,  surrounded  and  even  represented  by
viler  e  Srmg  angelophanies  and  symbolical  signs.  Its  third  and  perfect  form  is
0  nearn.tion of  God  in  Christ.  Its  effect  throughout  is  prophecy  ;  the  miracle
of  prophecy  But  the  Urim  and  Thummim  is  the  theocratic,  legal  enlargement  ot
p4ZiVi^vhich  it  was  made  permanent,  and  accessible  to  the  people  whenever

it  might  be  needed.

s ;;^-

TIIE  SU1MKI.TIV1-:  F011M  OF  REVELATION.

This  is  throughout  the  vision,  whose  basis  or  real  aspect  is  ecstasy,  the  sudden
transposition  of  The  mind  from  the  stand-point  of  faith  to  that  of  sight.
generally  appears  as  a  day-vision,  during  which  the  usual  consciousness  of  sense  is
Sowed  or  suspended  as  in  the  night.  But  it  appears  in  children,  m  common  a-
borer,  or  men  sunken  in  fatigue,  as  a  dream  of  the  night,  in  whom,  however,  the
mor!ll  'consciousnCSs  shines  as  clear  as  in  the  day.  Its  pre-condition  is  the  higher  in-
tuition  possessed  by  chosen  religious  minds,  by  the  spirit  of  God  made  fruitful  in
some  groat  historic;,!  moment,  which  indeed  contains  the  seeds  of  the  future,  winch
the  seer  filled  bv  the  Thcophany  prophetically  explains.

There  is  no  Conceivable  theophany  without  a  corresponding  disposi
.option  of  visions  ;  no  vision  without  the  energy  and  effect  of  a  theophany.  But
the  one  form  may  prevail  at  one  time,  the  other  at  another.  In  general,  revelation
advances  from  the  Old  to  the  Xew  Testament,  from  the  prevailing  objective  form,  or
theophany,  to  the  prevailing  subjective  form,  or  the  vision.  Hence  the  succession  m
the  names  of  the  prophets:  Koeh,  Nabi,  Chozeh.

§39.

THE  OBJECTIVE  FORM  OF  REDEMPTION.

The  objective  form  of  redemption  appears  in  a  series  of  saving  judgments,  intro
duced  through  revelation  by  means  of  theophanies.  Its  fundamental  *e
miracle.

§  40-

THE  SUBJECTIVE  FORM  OF  REDEMPTION.

It  manifests  itself  in  a  heroic,  divine  act  of  faith,  whose  symbol  is  the  sacrifice,
•whose  result  is  conversion.


§41.     THE   HISTORICAL   GRADUAL   PROGRESS   AXD   FORM   OF   REVELATION.        40

§  41.
THE  HISTORICAL  GRADUAL  PROGRESS  AXD  FORM  OF  REVELATION.

The  realization  in  history  of  the  revelation  of  salvation  is  gradual,  fundamentally
the  same  with  the  gradual  growth  of  history  itself.  This  gradual  progress  is  con
ditioned :  1.  Through  the  fundamental  law  of  all  human  growth,  into  which  the
divine  revelation  as  a  revelation  of  salvation  necessarily  enters.  In  this  point  of  view
revelation  is  the  grandest  nature,  the  crown  and  glory  of  nature  ;  for  the  regular
unfolding  of  the  Old  Testament  advent  of  Christ,  of  the  personal  life  of  Christ,  and
of  that  kingdom  of  heaven  founded  by  him,  reaches  from  the  beginning  to  the
end  of  the  world,  and  transcends  all  the  limits  of  the  events  of  natural  history.
2.  This  gradual  growth  is  conditioned  through  the  necessary  interchange  between  a
holy  God  and  unholy  men,  in  whom  the  grace  of  God  first  gradually  forms  according
to  the  law  of  freedom  for  itself  a  point  of  union  and  a  point  of  departure  for  its  wider
progress,  i.  c.,  it  is  conditioned  through  the  constant  interchange  between  revelation
in  a  narrower  sense  and  redemption,  we  may  say  even  between  prophecy  and  miracle,
between  the  vision  and  the  sacrifice.  3.  Then  it  is  conditioned  through  the  slow
process  of  the  interchange  between  the  chosen  as  the  starting-point  of  revelation,  and
the  popular  life,  or  the  interchange  between  the  apocalypse  and  the  manifestation
(phanerpsis).  Generally,  however,  its  history  is  embraced  in  two  periods.  1.  From
the  beginning  of  the  introductory  revelation  to  its  completion,  i.  c.,  to  the  completion
of  the  personal  life  of  Christ,  i.  e.,  to  the  introductory  or  first  end  of  the  world/  This
is  the  special  history  of  revelation  in  the  narrower  sense.  2.  From  the  beginning  of
the  final  complete  revelation,  or  the  historically  introduced  revelation,  i.  e°fronAhe
beginning  of  the  church  to  its  completion,  the  second  advent  of  Christ,  «.  c.,  the  fina?
end  of  the  world.

We  now  speak  only  of  the  periods  of  revelation  in  the  narrower  sense.

1.  The  period  of  that  in  one  aspect  symbolical,  in  the  other  mythical,  primary  reli
gion  :  from  Adam  to  Abraham,  2000  years  B.  C.     The  lighter  aspect  of  this  period  is
the  symbolical  religion,  the  knowledge  of  God  in  the  light  of  nature  and  history,  with
sporadic  lights  of  revelation  through  the  word.

2.  The  period  of  the  patriarchal  religion  of  promise  in  its  genealogical  descent,
introduced  and  established  through  the  word  of  God  and  human  faith':  from  Abra
ham  to  Moses,  1500  B.  C.     In  the  first  period  the  symbol  is  prominent,  the  word
subordinate  ;  ^in  this  the  word  holds  the  first  place,  the  symbol  the  second.     In  the
first  period  faith  was  sporadic ;  in  Abraham  and  his  seed  it  becomes  genealogical.

3.  The  period  of  the  Mosaic  legal  religion  :  from  Moses  to  Elijah,  or  to  the  de
cline  of  the  glory  of  the  Israelitish  kingdom.     The  symbol  preponderates  above  the
word.     The  internal  character  of  the  religion  of  promise  at  the  beginning,  is  now
surrounded  by  the  external  forms  of  the  law,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  a  whole
people  to  share  in  the  Abrahamic  faith,  and  at  the  same  time  secure  its  wider  develop
ment,     Elijah  turns  himself  to  the  past,  as  the  last  restorer  of  the  law  through  the
miraculous  judgment  by  fire.

4.  The  period  of  prophecy,  or  in  which  the  law  began  to  be  viewed  in  its  internal
character,  in  which  the  word  preponderates,  not  the  symbol :    from  the  miracles  of
Elisha,  marked  by  their  design  to  save,  pointing  to  the  future,  and  from  the  Messi
anic  prophecies  of  Isaiah  (Hosea,  Joel,  Amos)  to  Malachi.


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


the  national  realization  of  the  prophetic


poiut  is  the  Virgin,  and  around  her  the  truly  p,ouS   especially
as  in  a  shell,  by  Pharisaic,  Sadduceeism,  Essemsm,  Sama-


'-ndr,A;,n,  and  Heltem,  wbU*  in  "

'


rrtanism,  ^lu.van  .  -v^,,-  iv<

as  Bpiiniin"  from  one  another.     The  history  previous  to  the  ^  c*   let

T  The  eriod  of  the  life  of  Christ  to  its  completion  in  his  ascension,  and  to  the
grel;  seal  o'ft  common  in  the  founding  of  the  Christian  church,  through  the  out-
pouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit.


42.


THE    CONTRASTS   BETWEEN   THE   ANNOUNCEMENT   AND   THE   FULFILMENT  OF

SALVATION.

As  nature  found  its  goal  in  the  first  man,  and  the  primeval  time  in  Abraham  and


>  -

the  Kcw  Tesu-nen.;  the  etc,'nal  gospel,  the  second  coming  and  cpiphanj  o

is  the  reliion  of  the  future.    As  ,„  the  word  of  promise,  it


im;'"'cs  of  good  things  t
'  Hence  it  follows  that  the  Old  Covenant,  as  t


,  gospel  itself  is  a  provisional  law  for  the  unbeliever,  so  the  Old  Testament
law  was  a  provisional  gospel  for  the  believer.

§  43-

THE  FUNDAMENTAL  FORMS  OF  THE  PREFIGURATION  OF  SALVATION.
These  forms,  in  words,  are  the  original  traditions,  the  promise,  the  law,  prophecy,


r'are  the  allegories,  symhols,  types,  ,  „  «/„  *-,  the


&c  1  mssel  on  to  the  historical  types  (the  sacrifice  of  Isaac,  the  exodus  from  Egypt)
tds  Central  point  in  the  types  of  the  law  (the  Mosa.c  cote),  and  complete,


45.     THE   DKVTLOl'MMNT   OF   BIBLICAL   THEOLOGY.


itself  in  the  mental  type,  arid  types  in  disposition,  the  pre.innouncements  in  the  in
ward  state  and  feeling,  of  New  Testament  states  (Ps.  xxii. ;  Isa.  vii.,  &c.).

The  types  and  the  word  stand  in  relations  to  each  other,  similar  to  those  between
redemption  and  revelation.


THE  FULFILLING  OF  SALVATION.

The  fulfilling  of  salvation  is  the  completion  of  the  theanthropic  life  of  Christ,  in
s  world-atoning,  world-redeeming,  and  world-glorifying  power  and  result.  It  may
;e  divided  into  the  introductory  fulfilling  and  the  final  completion,  i.  e.,  into  the  time-

of  the  first  and  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ.     The  first  period  embraces  the  history
f  the  one  peculiar  completion  of  the  life  of  Jesus,  and  its  development  in  the  four

fundamental  forms  of  the  four  gospels,  and  the  varied  doctrinal  fundamental  forms  in

the  different  apostolical  types  of  doctrine,  especially  of  James,  Peter,  Paul,  the  author

of  the^  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  and  of  John,  to  which,  however,  we  must  add,  in  their

historical  significance,  the  doctrinal  types  of  the  other  apostles,

The  wider  and  final  completion  of  the  life  of  Christ  extends  through  the  different

periods  of  the  Xew  Testament  kingdom  of  heaven.    (See  LAXGE  :  Matthew,  Am.  ed.,

pages  3,  4,  5.


B.  Revelation  of  Salvation  ;  its  Development  and  its  Goal

§  45.
THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  BIBLICAL  THEOLOGY.

Biblical  ^theology  develops  itself  in  essentially  the  same  way  with  biblical  reli
gion.  But  it  develops  itself  according  to  its  nature  after  the  following  fundamental
principles :

1.  Biblical  doctrine  proceeds  in  its  essential  development,  as  in  its  chronological
divisions,  from  a  fundamental  Christologic.il  principle  :  Man  destined  to  the  image  of
God,  or  to  the  perfection  of  his  life  in  the  revelation  of  the  God-man.

2.  The  essential  development  of  biblical  doctrines,  e.  g.,  the  doctrines  of  the  name
of  God,  of  his  attributes,  of  man,  of  sin,  etc.,  advances  in  the  same  measure  with  the
chronological  development  of  biblical  doctrine  in  different  periods  of  time.

3.  Every  biblical  doctrine  in  its  germ-form  existed  already  in  the  earliest  period
of  revelation,  e.  </.,  the  doctrine  of  immortality.

Xo  biblical  doctrine  reaches  its  perfect  form  until  the  latest  period  of  revela
tion,  i.  e.,  the  New  Testament  fulfilment ;  and  this  fully  developed  form  is  reached
in  the  apostolical  period,  e.  y.,  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.

5.  Every  biblical  doctrine  in  its  course  of  development  presents  a  marked,  distinct

continuity;  although  one  doctrine  may  now  rise  into  prominence,  and  then  another.

fence  a  break  and   opposition  between  the  Old  and  New  Testament  would  be  a

monstrous  supposition,  if,  e.  g.,  the  central  part  of  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  Old

estament  (the  angel  of  the  Lord),  should  be  regarded  as  a  created  angel,  and  not

Christ,  himself  in  the  preparatory  stages  of  his  incarnation,  while  the  central  figure

'.n  the  New  Testament  revelation  is  the  God-man.


F0  IXTUOUICIIUX  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


theocratic   doctrines,  ^^^
ivav  for  the  development  of  revelation,  and  promote  its  progress.     Ihej  have  s

•          r  1  ,   tVon/the  beginning  onwards  (Chaldean   Syrian  Palesthu.n   Egypian
V,  Ln)   imt  the   .rand    Forming   principle  of  revelation  would  never   ^owany  in-
tnZn  of  foreign  element,      It  is  only  in  the  apocrypha  that  we  find  any  tra

SUCl;^erdtelopment  of  biblical  doctrine  is  ever  in  the  direction  of  an  onward
process  anm  ohing,from  the  germ,  of  a  growing  spirituality  of  a  rejection  of
:^',rv   orms,  hut  never  the  form  of  a  progress  and  grojvth  through  opposition
AUthe  antUheses  of  sacred  scripture,  even  that  between  the  Old  and  *o«

cnts   are  harmonious,  not  antagonistic  or  contradictory  oppositions.

8  VitLiu  the  period  of  any  individual  biblical  doctrine,  there  is  an  opposition
and  ;  progressive  mov<  mcnt,  and  between  the  most  diverse  periods  there  exist
where  tluTumty  of  the  spirit,  and  hence  an  indissoluble  connection.

"V     Tli..   ;oli  of  God)  or  the  principle  of  revelation,  rules  and  shapes  the  books  of
"  g  active,  moulding  principle.     But  in  the  relations  of  that  word


ser


t


uv,  s  ,u.r  m  ,

,,K1  in  its  spirituality  proceeds  from  one  stage  of  revelation  to  another,  to  realize  its
Divine  fulness,  in  a  more  complete,  transparent  human  perfection.

'  j  .    The  ,V(,,,1  of  God  in  its  development  never  destroys  human  nature,  while  it

..  8iuldows  within  which  it  lies.     It  rather  sets  free,  in  the  measure  of  its

d.velunment,  the  original  powers  of  the  human  nature.     Hence  these  marks  of  ongi-

.  ,  y  w°™  already  evident  in  the  characters  of  the  patriarchs,  appear  in

:•";,:     ost  Striking  forms  in  the  lives  of  the  prophets.     It  is  an  absurd  and  monstrous

•;.:,,;,„„,  thellrc   of  which  they  are  guilty  who   denying  the  perfect  ongm:  i  y

.  four  gospels,  view  the  gospels  of  Matthew  and  Luke  as  copies  iron,

0n!l!'Thc  doctrine  of  Jesus  passes  through  well-defined   periods  of  development

We  can  distinguish:  1.  The  explanation  of  the  law  in  its  inward  all-prevailing  s

,  ,  ,     ,    V  The  explanation  of  the  Old  Testament  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven

-The  explanation  of  the  Old  Testament   types   of  circumcision,  and  the  Passover.

i  T      explanation  of  the  Old  Testament  cultus.     5    The  explanation   of  the  entire

Old  TeZient  symbolism,  and  of  the  whole  symbolism  of  creation.     These  chronolo-

,./:::,  of  the  development  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  are  made  the   essen  ial

I    damenll  forms  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  in  the  doctrinal  types  of  the  apostles,

Ja          l>eter,  Paul,  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  John.     These  types  of  doctrine  sup-

pleml  and  complete  each  other,  but  they  are  as  far  removed  as  possible,  in  their

harmonious  agreement,  from  correcting  each  other.

1  2  in  the  book  of  Genesis  biblical  doctrine  is  a  union  of  the  word  of  God  with
the  purest  expression  of  human  artlcssncss  ;  in  the  Apocalypse,  it  is  the  union  of  the
same  word  with  a  conscious,  and,  as  to  the  Hebrew  form,  perfected,  sacred  art.


Remark.— The  fmubmcT.tal  laws  of  the  develop
ment  of  the  introductory  revelation  in  the  sacred
Bcviptures,  arc  also  the  fundamental  laws  controlling


the  introduction  of  this  revelation  into  humanity,  in
the  course  of  the   development  of   the   Christian


Church.


§  1,;.     W1JL1CAL   DOCTRINE   OF   GOD,  OR   THEOLOGY   IN   THE   NARROWER   SEXSE.    53


SPECIAL  BIBLICAL  THEOLOGY  IN  OUTLINE.

§  40.
BIBLICAL  DOCTRINE  OF  GOD,  OR  THEOLOGY  IN  THE  NARROWER  SENSE.

Biblical  theology  in  the  narrower  sense,  or  (lie  doctrine  of  God,  may  be  divided
:iito  the  doctrine  of  the  knowledge  of  God  founded  upon  his  revelation  of  himself;  of
the  name  of  God,  which  has  its  ground  and  reasons  in  his  nature;  of  the  demonstra
tion  of  the  being  of  God,  resting  upon  the  evidence  of  his  universal  existence,  perfec
tion,  and  power;  *  of  the  method  of  his  providence,  and  of  the  attributes  of  God,  or  the
fundamental  form  of  his  vital  relations  to  the  world  and  man,  grounded  ultimately  in
his  peculiar  personality,  or  the  threefold  personal  distinction  in  his  essence.


Remarks.— 1.  The  revelation  of  God  is  the  ground
upon  which  all  our  knowledge  of  God  rests.  2.  The
name  of  God  is  not  the  nature  of  God,  but  designates
objectively  the  entire  revelation,  and  subjectively  the
whole  of  religion.  3.  The  nature  of  God  is  designated
by  the  fundamental  distinctions  :  The  Lord,  Love,  Spir
it.  4.  The  name  of  God,  proceeding  from  the  uni
versal  to  the  particular,  passes  through  the  names
Elohiiii,  Eloha,  El  Eljon,  El  Schadai,  Elohim  Zcba-
oth,  to  the  name  Father  in  heaven  ;  and  proceeding
from  the  theocratic  to  the  universal,  it  passes  from  the
names  Jehovah,  Adonai,  Jehovah  Zebaoth,  to  the
name  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
5.  The  Holy  Scriptures  recognize  and  distinguish  defi
nite  fundamental  forms  of  the  revelation  of  the  di
vine  Providence,  which  lay  the  foundation  for  the
proofs  of  the  divine  existence.  The  general  relation
of  Gcd  to  the  world  may  be  divided  into  creation  and
providence.  The  creation  nuy  be  viewed  as  the
original  creation  and  as  the  new  formation  of  that
which  was  originally  created.  Providence  may  be
regarded  as  the  supporting,  ruling,  co- working:  and


the  co-working  a.-;  judgment,  redemption,  and  glori
fication.  6.  With  the  unfolding  of  providence,  the
definition  of  the  divine  being  according  to  his  attri
butes  comes  clearly  into  view,  in  which,  however,
we  must  carefully  distinguish  between  the  essential
and  merely  nominal  marks  or  designations.  In  every
period  there  prevails  a  peculiar  definition,  determined
according  to  the  divine  attributes.  In  the  primitive
period  God  is  designated  as  the  exalted  one  (El  El
jon).  In  the  period  of  the  promise  as  the  Almighty
(El  Schadai).  In  that  of  the  law  as  the  Holy  one.
In  the  transition  to  tiie  prophetic  as  the  righteous,
wise,  good.  In  the  period  of  the  prophets  as  the
most  glorious,  the  Majesty.  In  the  national  period
as  the  condescending;  and  in  the  New  Testament  as
the  gracious  and  merciful.  7.  The  distinctions  in  the
divine  nature  or  essence  pass  through  different  stages  :
God  and  his  Angel;  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  (Gen.
xvi.  7  ff.) ;  of  his  countenance  (Exodus  xxxiii.  1-1  ff.) ;
of  the  covenant  (Malachi) ;  God  and  his  own  Son ;  God
and  his  threefold  name.


BIBLICAL  DOCTRINE  OF  MAN,  OR  ANTHROPOLOGY.

The  world  as  the  basis  and  birthplace  of  man  comes  first  into  view  here,  and  the  world
as  Creation,  as  Nature,  as  the  Cosmos,  as  the  Aeon,  or  as  the  natural  world  defined
through  the  spiritual.  Then  man  in  his  normal  state,  in  his  nature  (Biblical  Anthro
pology  and  Psychology),  in  his  destination,  his  paradisaic  origin  and  condition,  and
his  fitness  for  trial.  Then  further,  man  in  his  sin,  his  fall,  his  sinfulness,  and  his  original
sin ;  and  corresponding  to  this,  on  the  one  hand,  the  guilt,  judgment,  death,  condcmna-
bility,  and  on  the  other  his  inward,  discord  and  strife,  his  fitness  as  a  subject  of  re
demption,  his  outlook  into  the  spiritual  world,  both  as  one  of  wretchedness  and  bliss,
his  cooperation  with  divine  grace,  or  his  preparation  for  the  Advent  of  Christ.

!  is  a  very  inadequate  rendering  of  the  expressive  terras  which  Dr.  Lange  uses:  Daseins,  Soseins,  Hicrscins,  in
which  he  includes  the  whole  field  from  which  we  draw  the  arguments  for  the  being  of  God  :  not  merely  his  existence,  hut
his  existence  such  as  he  is,  the  concrete  idea  of  God  given  us  in  the  Bible.— A.  G.]


54


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


Keraark-J. — I.  The  creation  is  a.  a  single  act,  b.
acts,  work-,  c.  a  continuous  energy  or  work,  </.  it
marks  the  we,i!d  a-  conditioned  in  the  highest  sense.

2.  Nature  is  the  relative  independence  of  the  world.
Its  first  i'eauiu:  callii  g  for  notice  is  the  principle  of
nature.  It.s  second,  the  law  of  nature.    Its  third,  the
stages  in  the  development  of  natui  •.    Jts  fourth,  the
goal  of  nature:  the  sphere  of  freedom  i;i  which  the
grand  nature  of  the  kingdom  i.f  C.od  is  developed.

3.  The  Cosmos  is  the  beautiful  harmony  of  the  world.
It  holds  its  celebration  in  its  ideal  perfection.     The
sacred  reflection  of  the  Cosmos  i>  the  Sabbath — the
sacred  human  festivals.     4.  In  the  Aeon  the  living
spiritual  principles  of  the  world  are  represented.  We
must  distinguish  first  the  spiritual  and  human  world,
and  then  further  the  Onl  il  ;  .'•  of  the  spiritual  world
from  the  experience  cf  man  in  regard  to  it,  as  it  first
enters  with    the  f.dl.       r>.  Biblical  Anthropology  is
both  duali-i!.-  and  a  system  of  trichotomy.     As  to
its  duali-m  man  belongs  in  one  aspect  to  the  ma
terial,  in  t',  the  spiritual,  world.     Accord
ing  t>  the  tiicho;  imy  man  is,  as  to  his  divine  quality
or  nature,  spirit,  as  to  his  heavenly  or  supercarthly

soul,   and  as    to  his  earthly   organism,  body.

t'>.  lu  the  destination  of  man  to  the  image  and  like-

,   we  must  maintain,   that  in. in,   as    the

iin;i'"e  of  (iod,  is  destined  to  his  self-realization  in

union  \\ithGod;  and  that  particularly,  as  to  his

nature,  he  is  destined  to  a  generic  self-realiza-

1  he  spread  of  humanity  from  one  pair,  and  as  to

':itu-.dity,  to  his  ideal  self-realization  in  the  God-


man,  and  as  to  his  soul,  to  his  social  scU'-rcal'.zation
in  the  kingdom  of  God.  7.  With  the  paradisaic  state
of  man  comes  into  consideration  the  pure  beginning
of  his  life,  which  is  both  potential  and  actual,  i.  f.,
in  one  aspect  innocence,  in  another  righteousness  ;
then  his  need  of  being  tested,  and  finally  his  iitne.-H
for  the  test.  8.  In  the  doctrine  of  sin  \ve  must  dis-
tinguish  the  ideas  of  sin,  of  evil  in  the  wide  sense,
and  strict  moral  evil.  Then  the  nature  of  sin,  its
genesis,  and  its  development.  '.).  The  consequences
of  sin  may  be  viewed  as  natural  and  positive,  or  as
death  and  as  judgment  in  the  following  stages:

Guilt  and  its  imputation.     This  again  branches  it
self  a.  into  the  continuation  of  sin  :

].    Smfuh'.ess,  or  the        '  •<>ll<>nix,  and  pun

ishment  ;

'2.    original  sin,  and  the  curse  of  sin;

0.  the  hardening  (stage  of  unbelief)  and  the  re
jection,  fitness  for  condemnation  ;

•1.    The  second  death  or  condemnation.
I.  into  the  reaction  against  sin  ;  the  natural  reaction,
or  the  consciousness  of  guilt  on  the  part  of  man,  the
p'ositive  reaction,  or  the  preparative  grace  of  (iod  :

1.  the  de.-ire  after  the  lost  1'aradise  and  the  Cher
ubim  ;

~2.    the  desire  after  a  new  and  higher  salvation  :iTid

ths  Protevangelium  ;
3.    faith  and  the  promise  ;
-1.    the  stages  of  faith  and  the  stares  of  the  advent

of  Christ.


BIHLICAL  CimiSTOLOGY,  AND   SOTEPJOLOliY.

Christology  may  naturally  be  divided  into  the  typical  and  prophetic  Old  Testament
messianic  Christology,  the  evangelical  Christology,  or  the  history  of  the  conscious  being
and  revelation  of  Christ  in  his  life,  and  the  apostolic  Christology.  or  the  biblically  com
pleted  doctrine  of  his  person.

Soteriology  embraces  the  doctrine  of  the  three  Messianic  offices  of  Christ,  of  the
historical  unity  of  the  work  of  Christ,  and  of  his  eternal  theanthropic  work,  in  which
he  descends  into  the  abyss  of  human  judgments  through  his  compassion,  and  raises
believing  humanity  to  the  inheritance  of  his  Sonship  and  blessedness.

Remarks.— 1.  The  Old  Testament  Christology
flows  from  the  fact,  that  from  every  judgment  of  God
there  springs  a  divine  promise,  and  that  thus  the  re
ligion  of  the  past  is  transformed  into  a  religion  of
the  future.  This  religion  of  the  future,  under  the
providence  of  God,  ever  moves  onward  to  the  future
in  acts  and  in  consciousness  :  iii  the  one  through  the
miracles,  or  in  the  allegorical,  symbolic,  and  typical
history  of  salvation  ;  in  the  other  through  prophecy
in  its  different  stag.s.  As  to  the  allegory,  the  forms


of  the  higher  nature  arc  in  opposition  to  the  forms
of  the  lower  nature,  and  thus  represent  the  opposi
tion  of  the  kingdom  of  God  to  the  kingdom  of  dark
ness.  In  the  symbolical  acts  and  works,  the  human
civilization  becomes  the  image  of  the  divine  cultus.
In  the  region  of  the  types,  i.  e.,  of  the  germlike  pro-
figuration  of  that  which  is  to  be  completed  in  the  fu
ture,  we  must  distinguish  the  typology  of  the  Covenant
(Covenant  or  Testament),  the  typology  of  the  kingdom,
and  the  typology  of  the  Messiah.  Messianic  prophecy


-19.  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.


proceeds  from  the  prophecy  of  the  human  conflict,  the
Semitic  reverence  for  G  oil,  the  blessing  upon  Abraham,
the  warlike  and  peaceful  sceptre  of  Judah,  the  typical
Messiah  in  the  genealogy  of  David,  to  the  prophecy
of  the  ideal  personal  Messiah  ;  and  again  from  the
one  prevailing  form  of  the  Messiah,  it  advances  to
the  distinction  of  the  lowly  and  suffering,  and  the
exalted  glorious  Messiah.  But  with  the  idea  of  a
suffering  Christ  there  appears  the  idea  of  Antichrist
and  his  typical  signs  or  marks.  "With  the  prophecy
of  the  Messiah  there  is  unfolded  also  a  prophecy
of  the  redemption  and  transfiguration  of  the  world
through  a  series  of  saving  judgments  proceeding  from
those  which  are  introductory,  to  those  which  are  uni
versal  and  complete.  2.  In  the  Evangelical  Christo-
logy,  or  the  Christology  of  the  life  of  Christ,  we  may
view  the  Christology  of  the  stages  of  his  personal
life  (his  miraculous  birth,  baptism,  transfiguration,


resurrection,  ascension),  and  of  his  self-consciousncs?
in  his  teachings,  of  his  Christological  acts,  his  miracles,
and  his  redeeming  work.  3.  In  the  biblical  Soteri-
ology  we  must  distinguish  the  unity  of  the  work  of
Christ,  from  its  division  into  his  three  offices.  The
one  entire  work  of  Christ  has  been  profoundly  de
scribed  by  Luther  and  others  as  an  exchange  of  re
lations.  Christ  has  taken  our  sin,  i.  e.,  the  conscious
ness  of  condemnation,  upon  himself,  in  order  that
he  might  make  us  sharers  in  his  righteousness ;  i.  e.,
in  his  great  compassion  he  has  entered  into  our  con
sciousness  of  guilt,  as  a  consciousness  of  judgment,
that  he  might  take  us  into  the  consciousness  of  his
righteousness.  As  to  the  offices,  we  must  distinguish
his  prophetic  redemption  or  world-atonement,  his
priestly  expiation,  and  his  kingly  redemption  in  a
narrower  sense.  (Sec  LANGE  :  Positiv  Dogmatik,  p.
793  ff.)


§  49.

BIBLICAL  rXEUMATOLOGY  AND  THEOCRATOLOCY,  OR  THE  DOCTRINE   OF  THE

KINGDOM  OF  GOD.

The  doctrine  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  his  operations,  treats  of  the  Old  Testament
typical  kingdom  of  God,  based  upon  his  universal  and  absolute  kingdom  over  the
world,  in  its  friendly  and  hostile  relations  to  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  (Daniel,  cli.
ii.,  vii.) ;  of  the  New  Testament  kingdom  of  heaven  established  by  Christ,  in  its
opposition  to  the  kingdom  of  Satan,  and  of  the  final  appearance  of  the  perfected  king
dom  of  God,  in  the  glorified  world,  and  in  its  complete  triumph  over  the  kingdom  of
darkness.

The  doctrine  of  the  Old  Testament  kingdom  of  God  treats  of  the  historical  signifi
cance  and  importance  of  the  opposition  between  Judaism  and  Heathenism.

The  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  kingdom  of  God  branches  into  the  doctrine
of  the  particular  definite  method  of  salvation,  the  definite  founding  and  saving  insti
tutions  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  application  and  spread  of  this  completed  salvation
to  the  utmost  boundaries  of  the  world.

Its  stages  are  the  following :


1.  a.  individual  death  ;


b.  intermediate  state ;


2.  «.  social  death,   or  the  fall  of    i      b.  Anti-Christendom ;
Babel ;


3.  a.  death  of  the  old  world.    End
of  the  world ;


b.  the  final  completed  resurrec
tion,  and  the  separation  in
the  judgment ;


c.  the  individual  progressive  re
surrection  ;

c.  the  appearance  of  Christ  and
the  millennial  kingdom ;

c.  the  eternal  energy  and  result
of  the  city  of  God,  and  its
glory  to  the  honor  of  God.
(Rev.  xxii.)


The  doctrine  of  the  completed  kingdom  of  God  rests  upon  the  biblical  disclosure
of  the  Aeon  of  the  blessed,  and  the  Aeon  of  the  condemned,  over  which  rules,  im
parting  to  them  unity,  the  absolute  fulfilment  of  the  divine  purposes,  of  the  end  of
the  world,  and  the  glory  of  God.


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


Remarks. — 1.  Fueumatology  is  more  widely  de
veloped  through  the.  doctrine  of  the  Spirit,  for  •which
theology  has  as  yet  done  comparatively  little  (.w
LANGE :  Ilicd.  ]>/><j),i«itL\  p.  '.>-2>'<},  \.<-r  also  OWE.V  :
Work  on  the  $i>irlt. — A.  G.  [.  2.  The  doctrines  of
the  absolute  dominion  of  God,  of  the  kingdom  of  the
grace  of  God,  and  the  kingdom  of  glory,  must  be
more  accurately  distinguished  than  has  been  clone
hitherto.  3.  The  intc:  •.  een  the  progress

of  the  kingdom  of  Clod  and  the  kir.gdem  of  darkness,
how  they  serv<i  to  facilitate  each  other's  progress,
how  in  critical  moments  they  reject  and  exclude  each
Other,  how  the  apparent  ,-ul  jeclion  of  the  first  is  al
ways  the  real  subjection  of  the  last,  how  the  victory
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  th;-ough  the  cross  of  ('hri>t,
is  as  a  prelii:ii:;:;ry  vie.ory  decided,  how  tlic  two
kingdoms  move  on  side  by  side  to  their  wide-'
plction,  and  how  the  last  apparent  triumph  of  the


kingdom  of  darkness,  in  the  revelation  of  Antichrist,
introduces  his  final  judgment  under  the  triumph  of
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  all  this  needs  a  more  adequate
estimation,  explanation,  and  statement.  4.  The  si"--
nificance  of  the  historical  opposition  between  Juda
ism  and  Heathenism,  Hebraism  and  Hellenism,  re
quires  a  clearer  and  more  detailed  statement.  Above
the  hostile  opposition  between  Shem  and  Ham,  there
may  be  seen  also  the  fiiendly  opposition  between
Shem  and  Japhet,  ten-ling  to  supplement  each  other.
.">.  For  the  organism  of  the  individual  method  of  sal
vation,  which  generally  lies  still  in  great  confusion
(see  LIXGE:  Posiliv  Dogmatik,  p.  '.»50).  [This  is
less  true  p<  rhaps  in  England  and  in  this  country,
than  in  Germany. — A.  G.]  Tor  the  t'lnistologieal
,-tnietuve  of  the  chinch  iu  hs  various  stages — the
same,  p.  HOT,  and  finally  for  iis  organism  during
i;s  eschatological  stages,  p.  1:^5.


SECOND  DIVISION.

PRACTICAL  EXPLANATION,  AND  HOMILETICAL
USE  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.

In  the  apostolic  communities,  and  through  the  entire  apostolic  age,  the  reading
•••I'  the  Old  Testament  was  confessedly  an  essential  foundation  for  the  public  solemn
•-•diiicatiou  of  Christians.  Hence  wo  iind,  in  the  Xc\v  Testament  writings,  the  first
fundamental  outlines  of  the  practical  explanation  of  the  Old  Testament.  AVe  may  go
still  further  back,  and  say,  that  just  as  the  Xew  Testament  gives  a  doctrinal  and
practical  explanation  of  the  Old,  so  the  later  writings  in  the  Old  Testament  serve  to
explain  the  earlier  and  more  fundamental  portions.  But  as  Christ  enters,  or  is  intro
duced,  in  the  New  Testament,  as  the  absolute  interpreter  (Matt.  v.  17),  so  his  Apos
tles  carry  on  his  work  as  interpreters  of  the  Old  Testament.  We  call  special  atten
tion,  in  this  view,  to  the  Gospels  by  Matthew  and  John,  the  Acts,  the  Epistle  to  the
Galatians  and  that  to  the  Hebrews.

The  apostolic  Fathers  also  have  proved  in  a  lai'gc  measure  interpreters  of  the
Old  Testament.  Besides  some  allegorical  fancies  in  the  epistle  of  Barnabas,  we  re
cognize  some  very  valuable  and  profound  suggestions.  Clement  of  Home,  in  his  first
letter  to  the  Corinthians,  after  he  has  exhorted  the  Corinthians  to  repentance,  quotes
testimonies  and  examples  from  the  Old  Testament,  from  ch.  viii.-xiii.  and  passing
over  other  citations,  even  in  reference  to  the  life  of  Christ,  ch.  xvii.-xix.  and  still
further  on,  he  constantly  mingles  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament  with  those  from
the  Xew.  This  is  true  also  in  some  measure  of  the  second  epistle  bearing  the  same
name.  The  Ignatian  epistles  are  in  this  respect  remarkably  reserved,  perhaps  out  of
regard  to  the  Judaizers.  In  Polycarp  also  the  citations  from  the  Xew  Testament  are
very  prominent.  The  anonymous  letter  to  Diognctus  represents  still  more  strikingly


PRACTICAL   EXPLANATION  AND   IIOUILETICAL   USE   OF  THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.     57

in  this  respect,  au  anti-judaistic  stand-point,  although  there  is  no  necessity  for  im
puting  to  its  author  a  Gnostic  antagonism  to  the  Old  Testament.  In  the  Pastor  of
Hernias  there  are  not  wanting  Old  Testament  allusions,  still  he  is  more  closely  related
to  the  Old  Testament,  in  his  imitation  of  the  prophetic  forms,  and  in  his  legal  view
than  in  that  living  appropriation  of  it  which  characterizes  the  New  Testament.  The  book
of  Hernias  points  to  the  great  Christian  apocryphal  literature,  in  which  the  Jewish
Apocrypha  perpetuates  itself,  and  in  which  indeed  the  most  diverse  imitations  of  the
Old  Testament  writings  are  continued.  (The  SyTbellincs,  the  4th  book  of  Ezra,  tho
book  of  Enoch,  and  others.)

Among  tho  Apologists,  Justin  Martyr,  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century,
appears  as  a  Christian  philosopher  who  was  familiar  with  tho  Old  Testament.  This]
is  clear  from  his  dialogue  with  Trypho.  But  also  in  his  Cohortatio  ad  G-raecos  he,
as  also  others  of  the  Fathers,  not  recognizing  the  better  peculiarities  of  heathenism,
traces  back  the  monotheism  and  wisdom  of  Plato  to  Moses  and  the  prophets.  In  his
apologies,  which  were  directed  to  heathens,  he  makes  use  of  Old  Testament  prophe
cies.  Tatian,  notwithstanding  his  Gnosticism,  refers  to  the  Old  Testament.  Theophi-
lus  of  Antioch  (ad  Autolycum]  contrasts  the  Old  Testament  account  of  the  creation,
with  that  of  Ilesiod  (ii.  13),  in  which,  although  an  Antiochian,  and  before  that  school,
he  explains  the  historical  facts  symbolically,  while  retaining  at  the  same  time  the
historical  sense.  He  continues  the  history  of  Genesis,  and  of  the  Mosaic  system,  with
constant  reference  to  heathenism.  Generally  speaking,  his  representation  moves
upon  the  line  of  the  sacred  scriptures  from  the  Old  to  the  New  Testament,  Besides
the  general  free  use  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the  Fathers,  which  even  becomes  exces
sive,  in  so  far  as  the  Old  Testament  conception  of  the  cultus,  its  hierarchical  and
sacrificial  ideas,  and  certain  legal  precepts,  have  been  adopted  in  a  more  or  less  ex
ternal  way  into  the  New  Testament  doctrine,  order  of  worship,  and  constitution ;
there  are  special  portions  made  prominent,  in  which  the  Old  Testament  continues  its
life  in  the  New  Testament  theology,  and  in  the  cultus  of  the  church.  The  first  of
these  is  the  manifold  exposition  and  explanation  of  the  work  of  creation,  especially
of  the  six  days'  work,  by  which  we  oppose  both  the  heathen  dualistic  view  of  the
world  and  Polytheism.  The  second  is  the  Christian  development  of  the  doctrine  of
the  kingdom  of  God,  especially  of  the  Messianic  prophecies.  The  third  is  the
Christian,  human,  pastoral,  and  catechetical  development  of  the  decalogue.  The
fourth  is  the  transmission  of  the  Old  Testament  Psalmody  in  the  Xew  Testament
Hymnology  and  Cultus  of  the  Church.  To  these  we  must  add  that  allegorical  method
of  exposition,  which  culminated  in  the  Alexandrian  school,  by  means  of  which  tho
Christian  consciousness  appropriates  to  itself  and  reproduces  in  a  Christian  way  the
whole  contents  of  the  Old  Testament.  Finally  the  culture  of  the  biblical  method
and  style  of  preaching,  under  the  influence  of  the  Old  Testament,  in  connection  with
the  Greek  and  Roman  rhetoric.  As  to  the  first  point,  Clemens  of  Alexandria  had
in  view  a  commentary  upon  Genesis.  There  was  a  work  of  Tertullian,  now  lost,
upon  Paradise.  About  the  year  190  Candidus  wrote  upon  the  hexomieron.  Besides
a  work  upon  Genesis,  Hippolytns  published  several  works  upon  the  Old  Testament
scriptures.  Origcn  prepared  a  commentary  upon  Genesis,  and  also  a  scries  of  mystical
homilies  upon  the  same  book,  as  also  upon  a  large  number  of  other  biblical  books.
Cyprian  published  a  song  upon  Genesis.  Victorinus,  about  290,  wrote  a  Tractatus  da
Fabrica  mundi.  Methodius,  about  the  same  time,  Commentarii  in  Gencsln.  Hie-
racus  (the  heretic),  in  302,  I/ucubrationes  in  Ilcxoemeron.  Eustathius,  325,  Com-


58


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


mentarixs  in-  Ifexcemeron.  James  of  Edessa,  about  the  same  lime,  J[cxa~r/ieron  ad
'.•it.  Basil  the  Groat,  about  .".TO,  nine  Homilies  upon  the  six  clays.  His
brother  Gregory  of  Xyssa  also  wrote  upon  the  six  days'  work.  About  37-1,  Ambrose
wrote'  six  books  upon  the  same  theme.  Jerome,  towards  the  cud  of  the  4th  eentnrv,
prop-in  -d  uucslions  upon  Genesis.  Chrysostom  wrote  07  Homilies  upon  Genesis.
August  me  wrote  upon  Genesis  in  many  of  his  works.  These  works  show  clearly  how
imponaut  Genesis,  the  doctrine  of  the  creation,  the  statement  of  the  six  days'  work,
appeared  to  the  Fathers,  in  their  controversies  with  heathenism.

That  ihe  explanation  of  the  ten  commandments  was  in  like  manner,  next  to  the
gradually  perfected  apostles'  creed,  one  of  the  oldest  branches  of  Christian  catechet
ical  instruction,  needs  scarcely  any  proof.

The  idea  of  one  prevailing  view  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  kingdom  of  God
appears  already  in  the  apology  of  Theophilus  of  Antioch.  The  Chronography  of
Julius  Africamis,  the  Chronicon  of  Eusebius  of  Ccsarea,  as  well  as  his  arrangement
and  demon-;  ration  of  the  gospel,  lay  a  wider  foundation  for  the  same  idea.  The  great
work  of  Augustine,  Do  CivitatG  Dei,  belongs  here,  as  also  the  sacred  history  by  Sulpi-
tius  Sever  us,  and  generally  the  prevailing  character  of  the  historical  statements  or
eliroul:-!.--;  of  the  West,  miming  clown  through  the  middle  ages,  since  they  all  go
back  to  th;-  Old  Testament  and  even  to  Adam.

pare    Orro    Sru.vcs :     j'7,.c   .Av?,Vr  a.i  a  Sony  ani
Prayer  SouJ:.     A  hislur'.cal  trxcintc.     Berlin,  1859.

Through  {he  allegorical  explanation  of  the  scripture  in  the  Alexandrian  School,
r.nd  still  more  in  the  middle  ages,  the  entire  Old  Testament  assumed  a  Xew  Testa
ment  form  and  meaning,  as  to  the  inner  Christian  life  and  spiritual  experience,  while
at  the  same  time,  as  to  the  organization  of  the  church  and  the  eultus,  the  New  Testa
ment  became  simply  a  new  publication  of  the  old.


On  the  Medkcval  exposition  of  the  scriptures,
compare  The  Allegorical  Explanation  of  the  Bible,
illy  in  Priftch'ing,  by  Vox  MOGELIN  (1011).
ELSTKU  :  Tlie  h'.reye/ical  Theology  of  the  Middle  Ages
(1855).  THOLUCK:  The  Old  Testament  in  the  JV'c<v,
4th  edition  ^IStVl).  J.  G.  ROSEXMIT.LEU  :  History
of  Interpretation  in  the  Christian  Church  (1795-
181-1).  MKYER:  Gcschiehle  der  SchriflerHdruna,
5  vol.  LSi  1-2-1809.  SCIIULKR:  Gcschichtc  der  Ver-
andcr>'.:,i  ,',  ,•  Ceschmackcs  in  Prcdigcn,  1792.  For


the  critical  and  theological  exposition  of  the  Old
Testament  generally,  consult  M.  BAUMGAUTKN:  Com
mentary  -upon  the  Old  Testament,  the  General  Intro
duction  to  the  Old  Testament.  [Sec  also  upon  the
use  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the  Xe\v.  FAIRBAIF.N:
Typology,  2d  edition,  and  Hermeneutical  Manual.
ALEXANDER,  W.  L. :  Connection  and  Harmony  of  the
Old  and  New  Testa/neat.  London  (1833).  PRI-
DEAUX:  Connection,  now  cd.  London  (1850)  —
A.  G.]


The  media3val  mystics  especially  gave  the  widest  limits  to  the  letter  of  the  Old
Testament,  and  brought  out  into  the  light  the  multiplicity  of  the  ideas  lying  at  its
root,  as  they  rightly  conjectured,  through  the  theory  of  the  fourfold  sense  of  scrip
ture.

Litter  a  gesta  clocef,  quid  credas  allegoric^
Moralis  quid  agas,  quo  tendas  anagogia.

The  Song  of  Solomon  was  a  favorite  book  for  spiritual  exposition,  even  in  the
time  of  the  Fathers.  It  was  still  more  so  during  the  middle  ages,  and  has  retained
its  position  in  the  field  of  homiletical  and  ascetic  literature  to  this  day.  The  cata«
logue  of  the  literature  of  this  book  alone  would  make  a  small  volume.  •


PRACTICAL   EXPLANATION   AND   HOMILETICAL   USE   OF   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.    5!)


There  has  lately  been  republished :  The  words  of  ST.  BERNARD  upon  the  Sony;  German,  by  IYr:i
bacher,  1862.

The  exposition  of  tlie  Bible  was  generally,  during  the  middle  ages,  to  a  great  ex
tent  practical,  or  designed  for  edification,  and  this  indeed  for  the  most  part  in  a  mys
tical  way.  This  was  true  even  with  the  expositions  of  the  scholastics.  This  is  in
accordance  with  the  practical  direction  of  the  middle  ages,  with  the  ignorance  of  the
original  languages,  with  the  prevalence  of  dogmatics  and  church  institutions  and
laws,  and  with  that  throughout,  repressed  respect  for  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Gregory
the  Great,  in  this  point  of  view,  opens  the  middle  ages,  Avhen,  after  the  canon  of  Origen
as  to  the  threefold  sense  of  scripture,  he  composed  his  Moralla  in  Jbbiem,  after  hav
ing  provided  in  a  collection  of  excerpts  (Procopius  of  Gaza  about  520  ;  Primasius  of
Adrymettum  about  550;  Aurelius  Cassiodorus  after  5G2),  the  so-called  Catenae  for
a  necessary  aid  to  the  learned  exposition  of  the  scripture.  Isidorus  of  Hispalis,  the
venerable  Bede,  and  others,  follow  later.  A  certain  peculiarity  attaches  itself  to  the
British  method  of  exposition,  as  it  was  founded  by  the  Archbishop  Theodore  of
Canterbury;  to  the  German  exposition  as  it,  e.  </.,  is  represented  in  the  Saxon  Evan
gelical  poetry  of  Ileliand ;  and  later  to  the  French  and  German  mystics,  who  take
their  origin  from  the  mystical  writings  of  the  Pseudo-Dionysius.  The  clear  reference
of  the  Holy  Scriptures  to  the  inner  life,  especially  as  a  contemplative  life,  may  be  re
garded  as  the  great  acquisition  of  the  middle  ages.

This  practical  exposition  of  the  Scriptures,  it  is  true,  as  practised  by  Claudius  of  Turin,
Alcuin,  Paul  Warnefried,  Rabanus  Maurus,  Christian  Druthmar,  Peter  Lombard,
Cardinal  Hugo,  Abclard,  John  of  Salisbury,  Thomas  Aquinas,  Albertus  Magnus,  but
especially  by  the  mystics  Bernard  of  Clairvcaux  and  his  followers,  was  used  for  the
advantage  of  priestly  and  monkish  classes.

Meanwhile  the  reformation  of  the  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  was  prepared  dur
ing  the  middle  ages.  It  must  first  of  all  be  brought  back  to  the  original  languages
and  the  grammatical  sense.  The  learned  Jews  of  the  middle  ages,  with  their  lin
guistic  studies  and  expositions  of  the  Old  Testament,  provided  for  this  return  (Aben
Esra,  Jarchi,  Kimchi,  and  others).  As  to  the  New  Testament,  whose  learned  expo
sition  in  the  spirit  of  Chrysostom,  QEcumcnius,  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius  Ziga-
benus,  had  prosecuted,  that  human  learning,  transplanted  from  Greece  to  the  West,
and  awakened  and  cultivated  in  the  West  itself,  served  the  same  purpose  which  tho
labors  of  the  Jews  did  for  the  Old  Testament.  Thus  there  was  prepared,  since
Nicholas  of  Lyra  (who  died  about  1340),  Wicliffe,  Huss,  with  Laurcntius  Valla,
Rcuchlin,  Erasmus,  ti  scientific  exposition  of  the  Scriptures,  which  began  at  once  by
its  critical  process  to  free  itself  from  medieval  traditions.

But  the  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  must  at  the  same  time  be  made  popular,  and,
in  the  form  of  Bible  readings,  sermons,  catechisms,  household  instructions  and  training,
be  introduced  among  the  people.  Besides  a  few  great  popular  preachers  (Berthold,
the  Franciscan,  1272,  John  Tauler,  1361,  Vincentius  Ferreri,  1419,  Leonard  of  Utino,
1470,  and  others),  the  pious  sects  of  the  middle  ages,  especially  the  Waldenses,  and
the  well-known  forerunners  of  the  Reformation,  labored  to  secure  this  result.

The  last-mentioned  class  prepared  that  introductory,  profound,  and  scientific
exposition  of  Scripture  in  which  the  Reformation  arose,  and  through  which  alone
it  could  successfully  assert  that  full,  new  unveiling  and  revelation  of  the  Holy  Scrip
ture  as  it  lived  in  the  heart,  the  word  of  justification  by  faith,  and  thus  established
its  sole  authority  in  matters  of  faith.


GO  INTRODUCTION   TO   TIIE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


With  the  great  reformers,  that  introductory  exposition  of  the  Bible,  purified
through  its  critical  processes,  brought  Lack  to  the  grammatical  and  historical  sense,
while  at  the  same  time  mystical  and  inward,  on  one  side  learned,  on  the  other  popular,
first  entered  into  the  popular  life,  however  the  fetters  of  ecclesiastical  exegetical
tradition  may  have  restrained  the  freedom  of  individuals.  This  exposition  in  its
.scientific  aspect  led  to  a  new  construction  of  the  entire  theology,  in  its  ecclesiastical
aspect  to  the  laying  anew  all  the  foundations  of  church  institutions  and  order,  in
its  popular  aspect  to  the  production  of  countless  sermons  and  hymns.  Flaccus  Illyr-
ifus  reduced  these  acquisitions  to  their  rules  in  the  first  protestant  ITermcncutics  in
his  Clai-is  /Scrijit'/i-ce  /.Vcra-,  15G7.

From  this  time  onward  the  history  of  the  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  is  so  com
prehensive  that  we  can  only  describe  it  after  its  periods.  To  the  period  of  the  Re
formation,  in  winch  the  prevailing  principle  wasiheAnalogriafidei,  and  during  which
the  Lutheran  I  sis  struck  into  a  synthetical  and  critical  direction,  and  the  Re
formed  into  an  analytical  and  practical,  succeeded  at  first  the  period  of  interpreta
tion  according  to  the  Orthodox  symbols,  and  in  which  the  different  confessions
shaped  and  determined  the  exegesis.  This  period  extends  through  the  ultra-critical
exegesis  of  the  Unitarians,  and  partially  also  that  of  the  Arminians,  and  through  the
allegorical  exposition  both  of  the  Catholic  and  of  the  Protestant  mystics  (Madame
Guion,  Antoinette  Bourignon,  Jacob  Boehme),  Avhich  here  again,  as  in  the  middle
agi-s,  forms  the  side-stream  to  the  new  scholastic  main  current.  This  last  tendency
parsed  over  partially  into  the  subjectively  practical  pictistic  school,  whose  principle
of  interpretation  was  the  word  of  God,  the  word  of  personal  salvation,  as  the  seed  of
personal  regeneration.  The  Lutheran  interpretation,  as  it  was  pre-eminently  dog
matic,  was  ever  seeking  to  find  the  Xew  Testament  dogmas  in  the  Old  Testament,
i.  <?.,  it  distinguished  less  accurately  the  times.  The  Reformed,  with  a  more  correct
estimate  of  the  historical,  distinguished  definitely  times  and  economies,  and  found,
therefore,  in  the  Old  Testament  the  typical  prefigurations  of  the  Xew,  but  fell  also,
in  the  Cocccinn  school,  into  a  typology  which  knew  no  rules,  or  into  allegorical  fan
cies  and  excesses.  This  distinction  was  reversed  in  their  views  of  the  law.  Luther
made  the  opposition  between  Moses  and  Christ  too  great,  while  Calvin  suffered  him-
<elf  to  be  influenced  by  the  Mosaic  system  even  in  questions  of  ecclesiastical  law.  For
the  orthodox  the  Bible  was  a  mine  of  dicta  probantia,  for  the  mystics  it  was  a  record  of
a  visionary,  inspired,  mysterious,  all-pervading  view  of  the  world.  Pietism  strove
to  unite  these  in  its  method  of  interpretation.

That  Rationalism,  in  its  period,  has  both  corrupted  and  promoted  criticism,  has
made  exegesis  more  shallow  and  superficial,  while  it  has  made  it  more  pure  and
simple,  has  both  falsified  and  uprooted  scripture  doctrine  in  its  reference  to  life,  as  it
has  developed  it  practically  and  morally,  is  now  confessed,  i.  e.,  it  is  confessed  that  it
forms  in  one  total  representation  a  revolution  of  unbelief,  and  a  reform  of  the  believ
ing  consciousness.  But  if  it  advances  from  that  grammatical  historical  principle,  illy
understood  (since  the  biblical  letter  was  not  seen  in  its  peculiar  depth,  the  biblical
facts  or  persons  in  their  complete  originality),  to  the  last  destructive  results  of  the
pseudo-criticism,  so  also  it  has  in  its  interchange  with  supernaturalism  from  the  same
principle,  correctly  understood,  wrought  a  more  profound  exposition  of  the  scripture,
according  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  scripture.  It  has  introduced  the  Christoloir-
ical  explanation  of  the  scripture,  which  forms  the  living  centre  of  the  present  exposi
tion  of  the  Bible.  However,  it  hac  not  interrupted  the  flow  of  biblical  investigation


^ACTICAL   EXPLANATION  AND  IlOiULETICAL  USE   0;'  TFTE   OLD   TESTAMENT.     01


and  exposition,  but  urged  it  on  more  rapidly,  since  it  was  animated  by  the  idea,  that
the  doctrine  of  the  Bible  would  prove  the  most  efficient  means  of  overthrowing  the
churchly  dogmatics.  A  striking  testimony  for  the  extraordinary  activity  in  the  inter-
pretation  of  the  Scriptures,  from  the  Reformation  until  our  own  time,  is  found  in  the
commentaries,  the  collections  of  sermons,  concordances,  systems  of  biblical  theology,
and  especially  the  Biblcworks,  which  arc  now  appearing  so  rapidly.


Catalogues  of  collected  Bibleworks,  exegetical  raid
homiletical,  may  be  seen  in  WALCII  :  Bibliolheca  thcol.
vol.  iv.  p.  181.  WIXKR:  llandbuch  dcr  theologischen
Literati'.i;  i.  p.  180.  lice  Supplement,  p.  *7v.  DAXZ,
p.  IS-t.  In  STARKE:  Biblework  we  find  named  as  liis
predecessors  the  Bibleworks  (Lutheran)  of  BUXE-

MAXX,     CRAMER,     DlETEICn  VEIT,    NlCOLAUS    IlASIUS,

JOACHIM  LAXGE,  IIoRCir  (Mystical  Bible,  Marburgh),
OLEARIUS,  the  two  OSIANDERS,  ZELTXER  (Reformed),
CASTELLIO,  TREHELLIUS,  PISCATOR,  TOSSAXCS  (Cath
olic),  WALAERIED  STRABO,  LYRA,  PAULUS  A  SAXCTA
MARIA.  Further,  the  Ernestine  Bible,  theWiirtemburg
Bummarien,  Die  Tiibingischc  Bibel,  under  the  direc
tion  of  Matthew  Pfaff  (Lutheran). — Reformed  works :
Die  Bcrleburgische  Bibel,  the  English,  Belgic,  Ge
nevan  (with  notes  by  MARESIUS)  Bibles.  Das  Deut
sche  oder  Hcrborn'sche  Bibelwerk. — Besides  these,
HALL  :  Practical  Applications,  Freibergische  Parallel-
bibel,  Ilccidi  thesaurus.  Also  a  scries  of  special
Bibleworks  upon  the  New  Testament.  HEUIXGER,
MAJUS,  MULLER,  QUESXEL,  Znisius.  Of  modern


Bibleworks  we  name:  Vox  HETZEL  (10  Theile,  1*80
-IT'JI),  with  2  Theile  iiber  die  Apokryphen  (von
FUHBMANX  in  seincm  Handbuch  dcr  theoloy.  Literatur
unyunstiy  Lcurthcllt).  Altenburgcr  Bibel  Commeu-
tar  fiir  Prcdiger,  1709  (von  einem  Verein  von  Pre-
digeru).  Those  of  OERTEL,  FISCHER,  and  WOIIL-
FAHRT.  DIXTI-R  and  BRAXDT.  Also  the  list  in  LAXGE  :
Biblcworl;  Matthew,  Am.  ed.  p.  19.  For  the  great
number  of  works,  preparatory  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,
Lexicons,  Concordances,  and  similar  aids,  sec  DAXZ
and  WIXKR.  LAXGE:  Matthew,  Am.  ed.  pp.  IS,  19.
English  Biblcworks  :  Niasox  :  An'.ldcistlc  Bible.
BURXET:  New  Testament.  HEXRY:  Exposition  [in
England,  the  general  commentaries,  by  I'OOLE,  GILL,
the  two  CLARKES,  Samuel  and  Adam,  PATRICK  LOWTII,
and  WHITLY,  SCOTT,  BUKDER,  and  others  of  less  note.
In  this  country  the  literature  is  rich  in  special  com
mentaries,  while  there  arc  no  general  commentaries,
unless  we  include  in  the  term  popular  works,  like
that  published  by  the  American  Tract  Society.—  \
G.]


The  practical  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  was  limited,  in  the  Lutheran  church  by
the  order  in  which  they  were  read  in  the  church  service,  in  the  Reformed  by  its  stronger
dogmatic  tradition.  But  in  the  end  the  more  profound  view  of  the  Analog  la  fidei
there,  and  of  the  Analogla  scripturac  here,  led  to  the  great  reform  in  biblical  criticism,
exposition,  theology,  preaching,  and  catechetical  instruction,  which  places  us  to-day
on  the  very  threshold  of  a  new  epoch.  (See  Remarks,  §  1.)

Recently  the  study  of  the  Old  Testament  centres  again  upon  Genesis,  the  Mosaic
records  of  the  creation,  the  six  days;  since  the  conflict  with  modern  unbelief,  for  the
defence  of  these  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  are  here  laid  down  in  the
beginning  of  the  Scriptures,  must  be  met  and  settled  here.


For  the  literature :  sec  LUDWIO  :  Uclcr  die,  prak-
tisckeAmleyuny  dcr  heiligcn  Schrlft,  Frankfurt,  1 859.
DICKIXSOX  :  Phyxica  vetm  ct  rera,  sine  tractates  dc  na-
turall  vcritate  Ilcxaemcri  mosaici,  London,  1702.
[The  works  of  HITCHCOCK,  HUGH  MILLKH,  DAXA,  J.
PYE  SMITH.  The  Brklgewater  treatises,  LORD,  the
articles  in  the  Bibliotheca  sacra,  urging  the  view  of
Prof.  GIIYOT.  The  Commentary  on  Genesis,  by  JA
COBUS.  WISEMAN  :  Lectures.  TAYLEU  LEWIS  :  Six


Days  of  Creation,  and  The  Bible  and  Science.
MURPHY  :  Bible  and  Geology.  PATTISOX  :  The  Earth
and  the  Word.  KURTZ  :  Bible  and  Astronomy.
SCMXER  :  The  Records  of  the  Creation.  BIRKS  :  On
the  Creation.  HANCOCK  :  On  the,  Deluge.  The  con
troversy,  started  by  Colenso,  has  already  been  fruitful
in  its  literary  results.  See  MAHAX  :  the  spiritual
point  of  view.  GKEEX  :  T?tc  Pentateuch  vindicated
(against  Colenso).— A.  G.]


62*


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


THIRD  DIVISION.


THEOLOGICAL  AND  IIOMILETTGAL  LITERATURE
UPON  THE  OLD   TESTAMENT.


^•••t:  LANCE  :  Maf'hcir,  AIM.  oil.  pp.  17,  18.  For  the
f-ldei1  literature  consult  the  catalogue  in  STARKE :
liibl<.n:ork,  the  appendix  to  (he  lii'ih  part,  entitled
General  register,  <vc.,  pp.  1 -•!'.'>.  Also  HEIDEGGER:  Kn-
ci'i-riJion,  pp.  !,">,  !'">.  VI'A.'.II;  :  Bibliothcca  thcolog.
vol.  iv.  p.  2  !,';.  ;  .  '.'.,,  ",'cA  dcr  thcolog.

Literalur,  ii.  p.  ".  DAXZ  :  I!7;/'',  -.-bitch,  p.  938,  Supple
ment,  p.  10.  WI.VKU  :  i.  p.  07,  Supplement,  p.  31.
ILujEXBAni :  l-'.!U'ii<:'<q>adir,  p.  176,  to  which  is  added
the  literature  of  biblical  Philology,  p.  122.  Compare
also  ;i  sketch  of  a  history  of  Old  Testament  exegesis
inBf.KEK:  .'  '  /,  p.  129.  KURTZ  :  JI!sto,->/  <->f

•',  p.  C>2.     D::  WKTTK  :    E'uil

;>.  1 .",'.'.      [>'•,•  ;,!.-o  the  comparatively  full  li.-ts  of  the

"iire,  given  in  HOKXK:  Lifrm'iicfi^n,  and

th  '  pariial  li-t.-s  in  KITTO  :    Cyclopedia,  and  Sv.ini  :

/V  .'V,    Dictionary,  DAYI!>S:<?X  :  Ilcrmencutics,  the  his-

•'.— A.  G.]

1.    Introduction.  — I  )K    WKTTK,    HAEVERXICK,
..    SI'AKIIELIX  (1SC.2). — Special  critical  works.
.      :  Krilische  Unicrsuchiii  /",-,/-

'  if(  tick,  Joshua,  Jml'jcs,  Ktimtcl,  Kinys  (1SI3).  KOE-
M<;:  Atttcstamcntliche  Studien,  1.  Heft:  Authentic
•!:-  TJuches  .Tosua  (183r,);  2.  Heft :  Das  Deutcrono-
iniuni  und  dcr  Prophet  Jeremias  (ISoO).  Also  G.  A.
llAt'Fi',  JIiKiiM,  CAHPARI:  Cotitfiliu'H,/^  to  //"«•  hn'i-o-
ni.  to  Isaiah.  IlKN(iST;:N!>Ki:<:  :  Jl'lu-iir/?.  GI:ICEII
(•M'-.V):  Vr,vlt/>jt  und  Uchcffi-l^/oiyi.n  <A  /•  HIM.,  &c.
'!v'"'7).  [DAVIII-O.N  :  Ldro'hi.dion.  McDoxAi.o:  I/i-
'roihictlon  to  tlic  Pentateuch.  The  Introduction  to
BAUSIGARTEN  :  Commentary — in  the  1st  vol.  HAMIL
TON:  The  friend  of  Moses. — A.  G.]

2.  General  examination  of  the  Old  Testa
ment. — CKATPUIS,  Lausanne (1838).    KOIILBRUEGGE,
ElhevfeKl  (1853).     BOKTINEK,  Zih-ich  (1859).    FRIED-
uicn,      (ii'Mi-Acn,      WESTERMEYEK.      Schaffhausen
(1860).

3.  More  general   Commentaries.  —  Kurzyc-
fassfcs  cxegetisches  Handhuch,  by  HITZIG,  HIRZEL,
OLSIIAUSEN,     TIIEXIUS,     KNOBEL,     BERTHEAU,    &c.
(Leipzig,   1841,  ff.,  embraces  also  the  Apocrypha).
The   Commentary   now   in   progress   by  KEIL   and
DELITZSCH.     For  special  commentaries  :   see  LANGE  :
Matthew,  Am.  ed.  p.   19.      [Besides  those  referred
to,  there  may  be  consulted :  On  the  Old  Testament,
on    Genesis,    and    the    Pentateuch:    BONAR,    CUM-
VIXGS,    GRAVES,    HAMILTON,    JACOBUS,     JAMIESON,
Sluiirirr,  WORDSWORTH. — Also  ABBOTT  :   On  Jonah.


'.<«  and  L'cclcsiastcs.     P.CV.  J.

BURROUGHS:  'OnJ{»g:\i.  LYi-.ROws:  On  the  Sony.  CA
RYL:  On  Job.  DAVIDSON:  0,,.  Esther.  DRAKE:  On  Jo
nah  and  Hosca.  GRi-:Ex;iii.L  uiul  GUTIIRIE:  On  Ezc.-
kid.  HOI:.--M:V:  On  the  Psalms.  MOORE:  On  the  Pro-
of  the  liistoration.  TKEGELLES:  On  Danid.
Yorxf;:  On  Ecdcsiaxtcx. — A.  G.]

4.  Bibleworks.— BUKMANN  :   The  jive  books  of
Moses  Jo;>'n  to  Esther  (If  3C).     MICIIAELIS  :  Transla
tion  of  the  Old  and  New  Tcx.'am,  //,',  with  explanations.
BERGER  and  AUCLSTI  :  P,-aktixche  Elnlcit.  i,Cs  Alle.
Testament  (1799).     BLKCKKUT:   Das  Gextiz  und  die
Vcrh  isswH#(1852).  PniLLirsox  ;  Die  hcilige  Schrift

in  deutschcr  Uebcrsctzunff,  &c.  3d  ed.  (1802).  The
saurus  biblicxs,  I  Dan.,  SI-KSS.KIXD  (1850).  General
Bibleworks,  L.VMJK:  Ma!thc>",  Ani.  ed.  p.  19.

5.  Works  embracing  the  principal  points  in
question.— a.  The  kingdom  of  God ;  Jewish  History :
Josr  (1S59).     DESSAUER  (1852).     DA  COSTA  (1855).
CJIR.  HOKMAXX.     KURT/:  Sacred  History  of  the  Old

int.  HOI-MANX:  Wcismiyung  intd  Erfullung.
Bi;::in:ixG  (.l8i'>2).  [EDWARDS:  History  of  Redemp
tion.  ALEXANDI'R  :  Jli.it  or  i/  of  the  hradilixh  Nation.
BI.AKIE:  lliblc  History.  COE  :  Sacred  History  and
J>i"in-(i/ih>f,  London,  1850.  FI.KETWOOD  :  History  of
the  Jjible.  KITTO,  JOHNSTOX  :  Israel  in  the  Y\rorld.  G.
SMITH  :  Hd/rcw  I'copie.  STANLEY  :  History  of  the  Jew
ish  Church. — A.  G.J

(i.  The  History  of  the  kingdom  of  God. —
WHATI-.LY  :  Kingdom  of  Christ.  Histories  of  the  king
dom  of  God,  by  HESS,  ZAHX,  BRAI-M,  and  others.
Structure  of  General  History,  by  WEITBRECIIT,  EII-
REXFEUCIITER,  EvTii,  and  others.  APEL  :  Die  Epochen
der  Geschic/ite  dcr  MenscJthcit.  (The  Gospel  of  the
Kingdom,  Leipzig.)  EIIRLICII  :  Lehfaden  fur  Vor-
lesuny'en  fiber  die  0/cnbarnny  Gotics  (18CO).  Lisco
(1830).  KALKAR  (1838).  KIRCIIER  (1845).  APEL
(18GO).  CAiRDandLuTz(185S).  TnEURER(1862).— b.
Christology.  NAEGELSBACII:  Dcr  Gottmcnsch,  thefun-
damental  idea  of  Revelation  in  its  unity  and  historical
development  (1853).  TRIPS:  Die  Thcophanien  in  the
historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament  (1858).  BADE  :
Christologie  des  Alien  Testaments.  SCIIOLZ  :  Hand-
buch  dcr  Tftcologic  des  Alien  Bundes  (1801).  Thco-'
logics  dogmatical  Judaiorum  brevis  Expositio,  by
PiOETii.  BERTIIOLDT:  Christologia  Jud&orum.  Ew-
AI.D,  HEXGSTEXBERG,  HOFMAXX,  COQUEREL,  LVTZ.
STEUDEL,  OEIILER,  HAEVERXICK.  MAYER:  Die patri-


THEOLOGICAL   AND   HOMILETICAL   LITERATURE   UPOX   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.     Go


archalischen  Verheissungen  und  Mcssianischen  Psal
men.  Ilrr/.iG  :  Die  prophetischen  Backer  dcs  Altc
Testaments  (185-1).  SCIIEGG:  Die  klcincn  Prophctci
(185i). — c.  Messianic  types.  KAXNE  :  Chrislus  im  Al

ten  Testament.  KILLER  :  Die  Rcihc  dcr  Vorbildcr  Jcs
Ckristi  im  Altcn  Testament,  new  cd.  by  A.  KNAPP
Lisco :  Das  Ceremonial gcsctz  dcs  Altcn  Testament
(1842).  BAEIIR:  Symbolik  (1837).  BAEIIR.  Sato
monischc  Tcmpcl, — also  KURTZ,  FRIKDRICH,  SARTO
RIUS,  KI:IL,  KLIEFOTII,  and  others. — A  more  partic
ukr  icference  will  be  made  in  the  Biblework  upon
Leviticus.  [FAIRBAIRN:  Typology.  MARSH  :  Lectures
and  works  of  less  note  and  importance.  MATTHEWS,
KEACH,  J.  TAYLOR,  Goui.D.-A.  G.] — d.  Messianic  pro
phecies.  XKWTON:  Lecture  onthe  Prophecies.  KCESTER,
KNOBEL,  EWALD,  TiiOLUCK.  SiAEHELiN :  Die  Mcssia-
mschcn  Weissagungen,  &c.  (1847).  MEINERTZHAGEN  :
Vorlesungen  ubcr  die  Christologie  dcs  Alien  Testa
ments  (1843).  REIXKE:  Die  Messianischcn  Psalmcn
(1857). — Die  Wcissaffutiffcn(18G2). — HENGSTENBERG  :
Chrislology,  2d  cd.  BAUR:  History  of  the  Old  Tes
tament  Prophecy  (1 861).  [SMITH  :  Scripture  testimony
to  the  Messiah ;  MAGKE  :  On  the  Atonement ;  FADER  :
On  the  Prophecies  ;  WARBURTON  :  Divine  Legation;
HURD  :  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Prophets  ;
JONES  :  Lectures  ;  GRAVES  :  Lectures  on  ihe  Penta
teuch  ;  3I;-Ev,-EN:  Essay  ;  SAMUEL  FATHERS:  On  the
figures  and  types  of  the  Old  Testament;  KIDD  :  Chris-
tophany;  STEWARD:  Mediatorial  Sovereignty ;  TURN-
BULL:  Thcophani;. — A.  G.]

7.  Principal  writers  of  recent  times. — J.  D.

MlCIIAELTP,     ROKKXMULLF.R,    DATHE,    MKUREPx,      J.  J.

HESS  :  Of  the  kingdom  of  God  (1774-1791).  HKXG-
STENBERG  :  Christology ;  Beitrage  ;  Authenticity  of  the
Pentateuch  ;  of  Daniel ;  Books  of  Moses  and  Egypt ;
History  of  Balaam  and  his  prophecy  ;  on  the  Psalms  ;
work  upon  the  sacrifices  ;  on  Job  ,-  Ecclcsiastes  ;  the
Song  of  Solomon;  and  a  work  upon  the  Apocrypha.
EWALD:  History  of  tlie  people  of  Israel ;  Poetical
book;  Prophets;  Jahrbucher  der  biblischcn  Wisscn-
schaft,  11  vols.  UMBREIT  :  Praktischer  Commentar
zu  den  Prophcten.  HUPFELD  :  Die  Genesis;  die  Psal-
men.  PELIT/SCH  :  Genesis;  Psalms;  Song  of  Solo
mon.  BAUMGARTEN  :  Commentary  upon  Pentateuch
and  Zachariah.  [On  Genesis :  BUSH,  HACKETT,  JACO
BUS,  —  on  Psalms  :  J.  A.  ALEXANDER,  —  on  Job  :
BARNES,  COXA  NT, — on  Proverbs :  M.  STUART,  BRIDGES,
—on  the  Song:  BURROUGHS,— on  Ecclcsiastes:  YOUNG,
— on  Isaiah :  BARNES,  HENDERSON,  DRECHSLER,  ALEX
ANDER,— on  Ezckiel :  HAEVERXICK,  FAIRBAIRN,— the
minor  Prophets :  HENDERSON,  PERCY,  MOORE. — A.  G.]

8.  Sermons  upon  Old  Testament  Books S.

FUIIRMANX  :  Jlandbuch,  p.  263.     HOIINBAUM  :  Prcdig-
ten,  2  vols.  (1788-1789).     BEYER  :  Die  Gcschichte  der
Urwelt  in  Predigten,  2  vols.  (1795).     The  History  of


Israel  in  Sermons  (1811).  Prcdigtcn,  von  STURM
(1785).  [GRAVES:  Lectures  on  l^cntatntch.  FUL
LER  :  Discourses  on  Genesis.  LAUSON  :  Lectures  on
Rutli  and  Esther.  SCOTT  :  Lectures  on  Daniel.  Me-
DUFF:  On  Elijah.  NORTON  and  CHANDLER  :  On  David,
BLUXT:  On  Abraham  ;  and  a  very  wide  literature  of
this  kind  in  the  works  of  the  older  English  divine?.
—A.  G.]

9.  Homilotical  and  practical  writings  on  the
Old  Testament. — BEYER  :  Prcd'/gten,  an  attempt  to
guard  the  unlearned  against  the  attacks  of  enemies
and  scoffers.     BEXDER  :   Old  Testament  examples  in
Sermons,  3  vols.  (1857-1858).     GOLLITARD:  Outlines
of  sermons  upon  the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Tes
tament  (1854).  W.  HOFMANN:  Prcdlglcn,  vols.  4  and
5.     F.  W.  KRUMMACHER  :  Neue  Predigten,  book  of
the  advent  (1817).     II.  ARNDT  :    Christus  im  Altcn
Bunde    (1861).      G.    D.  KKUJIMACIIER  :    Predigten.
EMIL    KRUMIIACIIER:     Gideon,    dcr   Richlcr  Israels
(1861).  NATORP :  Prcd'-g'cnubcrdas Bnch Ruth  (1 803).
ARNDT:  Dcr  Mann  nach  dem  IIvr~.cn  Gottcs  (1836).
DISSKLIIOF  (1850) :    Upon  Saul  ami  David.     BAUM
GARTEN  :  David  dcr  Kwiiy  (18G2) ;  Introduction  to  the
book  of  Kings,  Halle  (1801).     PAVLUS  CASSEL:  K'<J-
nig  Jeroboam  (1857).    F.  W.  KUUMMACHER  :  Homilies
upon  Elijah  and  Elisha  [published  by  Tract  Society,
X.  Y.— A.  G.].     DIEDP.ICH  :  Dan  Luch  Hiob  (1858).
EBRARD:   Tlie  sct.nc.     The  Ps<t7,/if:,  by  J.  D.  FRISCII,
new  ed.  (1857).    BURK  :  Gnomon  I'cal/norum  (1760).
OETIXGER:  Die  I'salincit  Davids,  nciuly  revised  (I860).
VEILLODTER:  Prcdigten  (1820).  Ixi:.\:  Trosibibdfilr
Krankc,  in  einem  passenden  Auszug  aus  den  Psalmen
(1835).     Psalmen  von  TIIALIIOFER  [Catholic]  (I860).
TAUBE  andGuEXTHEu:  On  the  Psalms.  HAMMER:  Die
Psalmen  dcs  Alien  Testaments  ;  The  words  of  Si.  Ber
nard  upon  the  Sonj  (1S82).     F.  W.  KRUMMACHER,
JAIIN,  MAYDORX  :  Das  Hohc  Lied.  W.  HOFMANN  :  Die
grossen  Propheten,  explained  by  the  writings  of  the
Reformers.   SCHROEDER  :  Die  Prophcten  Ilosca,  Joel,
Amos,  ubersctzt  und  erlautcrt.     DIEDRICII  :   Daniel,
Hosca,   Joel,    Amos,    briefly    explained  (1S61).     J.
?CHLIER  :  Upon  the  Minor  Prophets.    LAVATER  :  Pre
digten  ubcr  das  Buck  Jonas.     BRIEGER  :   The  53<2  Ch.
if  Isaiah  (185S).  Riscx.:  Dcr  Prophet  Haagai(l85>J).
CHAXDLER  :  Life  of  David;  HALL  :  Contemplations  ;
?ABER:   Horae  Mosaicac ;   RYDER:   Family  Bible;
3LUNT :  Coincidences  of  the  Old  and  Nciv  Testament.
The  Royal  Preacher.  HAMILTON.    One  of  the  volumes
n  EDWARDS'  works  contains  suggestive  notes  upon
various    passages.     GUTHRIE  :    Gospel    in    E::ckicL
BROWN:  Evenings  with  the  Prophets.  BURT:  Rcdemp-
ion's  Dawn.     CALDWELL  :   Lectures  on  the  Psalms.
CHALMERS  :  Daily  Readings.   CUMMIXGS,  KITTO,  HUN-
•ER:    Sacred  Biography.     MAURICE:  Prophets  and
Kings.     Patriarchs  and  Lawgivers. — A.  G.]


x  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


is  and  in  a  great  measure  for  the  Pentateuch,  will  be  found  it


Remark.— The  literature  upon  (
the  special  Introductions.


10.


Apocrypha.  —  P,I:CKII.U-S  :    Semerkungen


Dax


FUITSCIIE     and


GBIMSIK.— (VOLKMAB  :  Uandlnch,  1.  Thai.)    Against


WILD  (1.


OSCH\VAI.I>,   and  others.      For  the


same  IlEXGSTExnF.RG.  Fib-  Bcibr.li.nltunrj  der  Apo-
kryphen  (1853).  STIER  (1833).  SCIIEKLK  (1855),
and  others.  [Joy ts:  On  th»  Canon.  ALEXANDER:
On  the  Canon.  WORDSWORTH:  On  il>c  Canon.
THOUNTVKLL  :  On  tlic  Apocrypha.  TRIPEAUX:  Con-


FOURTH  DIVISION.

THE  ORGAXIS.V,   Oil    THE  AHBANQEMENT  OF  THE
BIBLICAL  BOOKS.


law,  prophets,  and  other  writings,  the  prologue  of
Jesus  Sirach.  The  law,  prophets,  and  the  Psalms :
Luke  xxiv.  4-1.  The  book  of  the  law:  Jos.  viii.  34,
The  law  in  many  cases  designates  the  giving


Tlic  Oil  Testament:  the  Law,  Josh.  i.  i-';  Matt.
sxii.  36;  1's.  cxix.  92;  Matt.  v.  IS;  Luke  xvi.  17;
John  x.  34;  xii.  34.  The  Scripture,  or  Holy  Scrip
ture,  John  v.  39;  Horn.  xv.  4;  Gal.  iii.  22,


/(.     Tl!K    DlKKKTHNi     I'lliLKS.

When  we  speak  of  the  Bible-  it  is  presupposed  that  we  are  treating  of  one  definite
fixed  object.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  In  reference  to  the  Old  Testament  we  must
Sin'ufch  the  Bible  of  the  Jews  in  Palestine,  the  Bible  of  the  Alexandrine  Hellenists,
the  Scptuarint  and  that  Christian  arrangement  of  the  Bible  already  introduced  by

L       w  |  £-5  j

^apprehend  the  Bible  first  preeminently  as  the  book  of  the  Religion  of  tho
future      Hence  upon  the  basis  of  the  Thorah,  law  (the  five  books  of  Moses),  there  is
laid  the  great  group  of  the  prophets, Nebiim.     Tho  earlier  or  former  prophets  follow
upon  the  earlier  historical  books,  Joshua,  Judges,  the  two  books  of  Samuel  and  the
two  books  of  Kings,  not  only  because  these  books  were  written  by  the  prophets,  but
much  more  because  the  Israelitish  history  was  recognized  as  typical  and  prophetic.
Then  follow  the  later  prophets-our  minor  and  greater  prophets-wHh  the  exception
of  Daniel.     The  third  division  includes  the  Kethubbim,  i.  e.,  the  writings  regarded
purely  as  writings,  not  so  named  merely  as  the  latest  collection,  writings  in  a  general
sense,  but  destined  from  the  very  beginning  to  work  as  writings  m  a  higher  rank
To  the  later  historical  books,  Chronicles,  Ezra,  Xehemiah,  are  added  the  poetical,
books  :  Psalms,  Job,  Proverbs,  then  the  prophet  Daniel,  and  the  Megilloth  (rolls),  the
Son-,  Ecclesiastes,  Ruth,  Lamentations,  Esther.     The  introduction  of  the  theocratic
life  "the  unfolding  of  that  life  to  the  New  Covenant,  the  bloom  and  flower  of
theocratic  life,  this  is  unquestionably  the  ideal  ground  and  source  of  the  arrangement.
That  the  Alexandrine  Bible  rests  upon  a  theory  of  inspiration,  more  free  and  wider

than  the  canonical  limits,  is  evident  from  its  embracing  the  Old  Testament  Apocryphi


ORGANISM   OF   THE  BIBLICAL   BOOKS.  65


with  the  canonical  Looks,  which  the  Septnagint  could  never  have  done,  had  it  held
fast  the  pure  Hebrew  idea  of  the  Canon.  From  the  circumstance  that  the  Seventy
have  not  made  the  canonicity  of  the  apocryphal  books  of  special  importance,  some
have  drawn  the  groundless  inference  that  they  held  the  same  position  as  to  the  Canon
with  the  Hebrew  Jews.  They  were  kept  from  asserting  the  canonicity  of  the  Apoc
rypha  by  their  ecclesiastical  prudence,  just  as  the  Sadducees  were  prevented  by  the
same  prudence  from  denying  the  canonicity  of  the  Old  Testament  books  beyond  the
law.  The  Christian  arrangement  of  the  Old  Testament  into  historical  books  (from
Genesis  to  Esther),  didactic  books  (from  Job  to  the  Song),  and  prophetic  books  (from
Isaiah  to  Malachi),  corresponds  better  with  the  Christian  point  of  view,  since  a  paral
lel  is  thereby  secured  to  the  arrangement  of  the  New  Testament.  The  term,  didactic
books,  answers  better  to  this  parallel,  than  the  expression  poetical  books.

But  even  as  to  the  Hebrew  Jews,  and  their  judgment  upon  the  Hebrew  Bible,
the  Pharisees  had  a  different  Bible  from  the  Sadducees,  and  these  again  from  the
Essenes.  The  first  enlarged  and  obscured  the  Old  Testament  through  their  tradi
tions.  Their  direction  ended  legitimately  in  the  Talmud.  The  second  emptied  the
law  of  its  deeper  living  contents,  since  they  expounded  it  as  exclusively  a  moral,  and
in  that  sense  only  a  religious,  law-book.  They  were  the  forerunners  of  the  modern
deistic  Judaism.  The  third  allegorized  the  Old  Testament  and  divided  it,  with
thorough  rationalistic  arbitrariness,  into  canonical  and  uncanonical  portions.  In  their
dualistic  theosophy,  as  the  Alexandrine  philosophy  of  religion,  they  were  the  fore
runners  of  the  Cabbalah.

That  the  Bible  of  the  post-Christian  Jews,  i.  e.,  the  Old  Testament  obscured  and
enlarged  by  their  traditions,  is  an  entirely  different  Bible  from  the  Old  Testament
which  unfolds  and  glorifies  itself  in  the  New  Testament,  is  as  clear  as  day.

The  injurious  effects  of  the  Catholic  tradition  upon  the  Holy  Scripture,  Avhich  is
obscured  by  the  attempt  to  place  the  Apocrypha  upon  a  level  with  the  Old  Testa
ment,  is  confessed.  The  Greek  church  at  the  synod  at  Jerusalem,  1672,  emphatically
adopted  the  same  view  of  the  Bible,  as  the  way  had  been  prepared  for  this,  through
its  traditional  development.

It  cannot  be  denied,  indeed,  that  the  evangelical  Protestant  Bible  maybe  and  has
often  been  obscured,  e.  g.,  when  it  is  explained  in  accordance  with  a  one-sided  view
of  the  Lutheran  doctrine  of  Justification,  or  the  Reformed  doctrine  of  Predestination.

The  manifold  sufferings,  obscurations,  disfigurations,  and  crucifixions  of  Christ  in
his  church,  are  reflected  in  the  entirely  homogeneous  sufferings  of  the  Bible.  In  the
evangelic  sects  of  the  middle  ages  and  the  forerunners  of  the  Reformation,  the  buried
Bible  was  unearthed  from  its  tomb.  With  the  profound  development,  spiritual  quick
ening,  and  culture  of  the  church,  will  it  first  be  recognized  in  all  its  glory.

c.    THE   OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS.

The  one  word  of  God,  or  Holy  Scripture,  falls  into  the  records  of  the  Old  and
New  Covenants,  into  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.

The  unity  of  the  two  as  the  word  of  God  is  conditioned  upon  the  nisus  of  the  Old
Testament  towards  the  New  (the  promise,  the  prophecy  of  the  Messiah,  Jer.  xxxi.  31,
&c.)  and  upon  the  reference  of  the  New  Testament  to  the  Old  (Matt.  i.  1 ;  ii.  5,  &c. ;
Isa.  vi.  39,  and  similar  places).

In  this  way  the  absolute  superiority  of  the  New  Testament  to  the  Old  is  as  cer-
5


G6  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

tainly  preannounccd  in  the  Old  (Ps.  li. ;  Jer.  xxxi.  31 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  3  ff. ;  Dan.  vii.),  as  it
is  expressly  declared  in  the  New  Testament  (Matt.  xi.  11 ;  xii.  41,  42  ;  John  i.  IV,  18  ;
Acts  xv.  10,  11 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  G  ;  the  Epistles  of  James  and  the  Hebrews).

With  this  it  is  taught,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  value  of  the  Old  Testament  as
to  its  external  aspect  and  for  itself,  in  reference  to  the  Jewish  national  and  exclusive
religion,  is  abolished.  (Gal.  iii.  19  ;  iv.  5  ;  Ephcs.  ii.  15  ;  Col.  ii.  44;  Heb.  viii.  13.)

But  it  is  taught  also,  on  the  other  hand,  and  with  the  same  distinctness,  that  the
New  Testament  firmly  establishes  the  Old  in  its  eternal  value,  as  the  foundation,  the
preparation,  the  introductory  revelation,  on  which  it  rests.  (Matt.  v.  17  if. ;  John  v.
39;  Rom.  iii.  31.)

</.    THE  ORGANISM  OF  THE  NKW  TESTAMENT.
See  LANGK  :  Matthew,  Am.  cd.  p.  24.

e.   THE  ORGANISM  OB'  THE  OLD  TKSTAMENT.

The  book  of  the  Old  Covenant  as  the  preliguration  of  the  New  Covenant,  or  of
the  Advent  of  Christ.

1)  The  Announcement  of  the  New  Covenant  in  the  Old.   The  Thorah  (the  law).
<t.  Genesis,  or  the  universal  foundation  of  the  theocratic  particularism,  and  of

the  particularism  in  its  universal  destination  or  aim  and  tendency.

b.  Exodus,  or  the  prophetic  and  moral  form  of  the  law  of  the  Old  Covenant  (the
tabernacle  in  Exodus  is  regarded  chiefly  as  the  place  for  the  law,  and  the
law -givers.     It  is  the  place  of  the  human  cultus  only  in  a  secondary  point  of
view.     Hence  the  tabernacle  appears  here,  and  not  first  in  Leviticus).

c.  Leviticus,  or  the  priestly  and  ritual  form  of  the  law  of  the  Old  Covenant.

d.  Numbers,  or  the  kingly  and  political  form  of  the  law  of  the  Old  Covenant
(the  martial  host  of  God  and  its  march.     Typical  imperfection).

c.  Deuteronomy,  as  the  reproduction  of  the  law  in  the  solemn  light  of  the  pro
phetic  spirit.

2)  The  actual  typical  development  of  the  Old  Covenant  until  the  decline  of  its
typical  glory  and  the  preparation  for  its  ideal  glory.     Historical  books.

a.  The  book  of  Joshua.  The  introduction  of  the  theocratic  people  into  the
typical  inheritance  of  the  people  of  God.  The  conquest.  The  division.

I.  The  book  of  Judges.  The  independent  expansion  of  the  Israelitish  tribes  in
the  land  of  promise.  The  stages  of  apostasy,  and  the  appearance  of  the
theocratic  heroes,  judges,  in  the  different  tribes.  The  tribes  after  their  dark
side.  As  an  appendix,  a  gleam  of  light,  the  little  book  of  Ruth.

c.  The  books  of  Samuel,  or  the  collection  of  the  tribes  and  the  introduction  of
the  kingdom  by  Samuel,  the  last  of  the  judges  (the  desecration  of  the  priest
hood,  the  introduction  of  the  kingdom,  the  preparation  for  the  prophets  in
the  stricter  sense,  through  the  schools  of  the  prophets).  The  first  book,  Saul
the  rejected  king.     The  second  book,  David  the  king  called  of  God.

d.  The  two  books  of  Kings.     The  theocratic  kingdom  from  its  highest  glory  to
its  decay.     The  first  of  Solomon,  the  type  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  and  of  the
kingdom  of  peace,  until  Elijah,  the  type  of  the  judgment  by  fire;  the  second
from  the  ascension  of  Elijah,  or  the  apotheosis  of  the  law,  to  the  decline  of
the  kingdom,  of  the  people  of  the  law.


ORGANISM   OF   THE  BIBLICAL  BOOKS.  (57

e.  The  two  books  of  Chronicles.  The  Old  Testament  history  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  in  a  theocratic  point  of  view,  from  Adam  until  the  order  for  the  re
turn  of  Israel  from  the  Babylonian  captivity.

f.  The  t)ook  of  Ezra.  The  priestly  and  ritual  restoration  of  the  holy  people  and
the  temple.

(j.  Nehemiah.  The  theocratic  and  political  restoration  of  the  people  and  the
holy  city.

h.  Esther.  The  wonderful  salvation  and  change  in  the  history  of  the  people
of  God,  during  the  exile,  dispersion,  and  persecution.

3)  The  preliminary  New  Testament  bloom  of  Old  Testament  life  in  its  course  of
development.

1 .  The  theocratic  and  Messianic  Lyrics.     The  Psalms.

2.  The  didactics  of  Solomon  in  their  universal  scope  and  tendency.

a.  Job.     The  inscrtvtableness   and   vindication   of  the   divine   wisdom   and

righteousness,  especially  in  the  trials  of  the  pious.
I.    The  trilogy  of  Solomon.

a.  The  foundation  and  regulation  of  the  natural  and  moral  world  in  the

wisdom  of  God.     Proverbs  of  Solomon.
p.  The  vanity  of  the  world  in  the  folly  of  human  designs,  which  do  not

recognize  the  eternity,  in  the  (every)  divine  moment.     Ecclesiastes.
-/.  The  transfiguration  of  the  world  through  love  (as  the  Old  Testament

church  was  turned  away  from  Solomon  and  his  polygamy  and  mixed

religion,  to  its  New  Testament  friend).

4)  The  prophetic  images  or  representations  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  Old.

a.  The  four  great   prophets,  or  the   fundamental   relations   of  the   Messianic
prophecy.

1.  Isaiah.   The  personal  Christ  as  prophet,  priest,  and  king.   The  Apocalypse
of  Isaiah  (ch.  xl.-lxvi.).

2.  Jeremiah.     The  prophetic  Messianic   kingdom    (ch.  xxx.-xxxiii.).      The
prophetic  Martyrdom.     The  Apocalypse  of  Jeremiah  (ch.  xlv.-li.).     The
Lamentations.

,'.  Ezekiel.  The  priestly  Messianic  kingdom.  The  Apocalypse  of  Ezckiel.
The  death-valley  of  Israel,  and  that  of  Gog.  The  glorious  life  of  Israel.
The  new  temple,  and  the  living  stream  issuing  frOm  it  for  the  heathen
world.

4    Daniel.     Throughout  Apocalyptic.     The  royal  Messianic  kingdom.     The
world-monarchies  in  the  light  side  (ch.  ii.),  and  in  the  dark  side  (ch.  vii.).
Christ  and  the  typical  and  final  Antichrist.     The  present  and  future  age.
1).  The  twelve  minor  prophets,  or  the  special  relations  of  the  future  of  the  Mes
sianic  kingdom.
1.  The  portal  of  the  prophetic  period.    The  book  of  Jonah,  or  the  raising  of

the  universalism  above  the  particularism.
1.  The  oppositions  of  the  old  sins  and  the  new  salvation.

a.  Ilosea,  or  the  marriage  covenant  broken  by  the  people,  and  the  new

marriage  between  Jehovah  and  his  people.

£.  Joel.  The  locust-march  as  an  image  of  the  march  of  the  hosts  of  the
Lord  for  the  destruction  of  all  the  glory  of  flesh.  The  new  blossoming
of  the  world  through  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of  God.


(Jg  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

-y.  Amos.  The  completed  sins  and  the  completed  punishment  upon  the
old  world,  even  upon  the  glory  of  the  old  temple,  and  the  redemption
and  collecting  of  all  the  remnants  from  the  Heathen  and  Jews,  into  the
plain  tabernacle  of  David.

S.  Micah.  The  judgment  of  God  upon  the  mountains,  and  all  the  high
places  and  things  of  the  earth,  and  the  appearance  of  the  new  Saviour
and  salvation  out  of  little  Bethlehem,  for  the  exaltation  of  the  lowly.

3.  The  visions  of  judgments.

a.  Obadiah.  The  judgment  upon  Edom — as  the  type  of  Antichrist — filled
Avith  envious  joy  over  his  fallen  brother.

(3.  Nahum.  The  judgment  upon  Nineveh  as  the  type  of  the  fleshly  Anti
christ,  the  apostate  world-power.

y.  Ilabakkuk.  The.judgmcnt  upon  Babylon,  as  the  type  of  the  demoniac,
self-deifying  Antichrist.

o.  Zephaniah.  The  day  of  anger  upon  the  whole  old  world.  The  judg
ment  of  Judah,  introducing  the  dawn  of  salvation.

4.  The  three  prophets  of  the  second  temple,  as  the  clearest  revealers  of  the
advent  of  the  Messiah.

a.  Haggai.  The  glory  of  the  second  temple  in  contrast  with  that  of  the
first.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  to  his  temple.  The  polluted  people.
The  necessity  for  purification.

/?.  Zechariah.  The  future  of  the  Messiah  in  contrast  with  the  duration
of  the  world-kingdoms.  1.  The  Messianic  kingdom  in  opposition  to
the  kingdom  of  the  world  (ch.  i.-viii.  2).  The  Messiah  in  his  progress
from  his  humiliation  to  his  exaltation,  ch.  ix.-xiv.

y.  Malachi.  The  coming  day  of  the  Lord.  The  forerunner  of  the  Mes
siah.  The  Messiah.  His  day  a  fiery  oven  for  the  godless.  A  sun  of
righteousness  for  the  pious.  The  turning  of  Fathers  to  the  Children,
of  Children  to  the  Fathers ;  the  connection  between  the  Old  and  New
Covenant.

APPENDIX.
THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  APOCRYPHA.

1)  In  relation  to  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old  Testament.

Additions  to  the  books  of  Chronicles :  the  book  Judith,  Tobiah,  Baruch,  the|
prayer  of  Manasseh.

Additions  to  the  book  of  Esther.

Additions  to  the  writings  of  Solomon :  the  wisdom  of  Solomon.

Additions  to  Jeremiah  :  the  book  Baruch.

Additions  to  Daniel:  history  of  Susannah,  of  the  Bel  at  Babylon,  of  the  Dra-J
gon  at  Babylon,  the  prayer  of  Azariah,  the  song  of  the  three  men  in  the  furnace  j

Viewed  as  original  writings  through  the  claims  of  the  Septuagint :  the  booki-l
of  Maccabees,  the  wisdom  of  Jesus  Sirach.

2)  In  the  opposition  of  Hebraism  and  Alexandrianism.

Hebraic :  Judith.  Hellenistic :  The  wisdom  of  Solomon.

The  book  Tobiah.  The  2d  book  of  Maccabees|

Jesus  Sirach.


APPENDIX— THE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES   IN   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        69

The  1st  book  of  Maccabees.
Additions  to  Esther.
Additions  to  Daniel.
Additions  to  the  prayer  of  Manasseh.
3)   In  the  division  :  historical  books,  didactic  books,  prophetic  books.

a.  Historical  books :  the  books  of  Maccabees.

b.  Poetical  or  didactic  books :  the  book  Judith,  wisdom  of  Solomon,  Tobiah,
Jesus  Sirach.     Additions  to  Esther,  to  Daniel,  the  prayer  of  Manasseh.

c.  Prophetic  books :  elementary  parts  of  Tobiah,  the  book  Baruch.

There  was  a  complete  disappearance  of  prophecy  until  its  last  point,  John  the
Baptist.  The  repression  of  Messianic  hopes  was  due  to  the  eminence  of  the  Macca-
bean  house  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  in  consequence  of  which  the  expectation  of  a  Messiah
out  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  was  only  a  secret  hope  of  the  pious  in  the  land.

See  the  timid  clause  1  Mace.  xiv.  41.  Compare  the  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,  by  RICHTES,
Lisco,  GERLACII,  in  the  Calmer  Handbook.


FIFTH  DIVISION.

AN  APPENDIX  ON  THE  SO-CALLED  DIFFICULT
PLACES  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT,  AS  THE  CEN
TRAL  POINTS  OF  THE  GLORY  OF  THE  OLD  TES
TAMENT  RELIGION*

To  the  paragraph  Archaeology  (see  §  14).

The  so-called  difficulties  in  the  Old  Testament  have  been  brought  out  with  special
distinctness  ha  modern  times  by  the  Freethinkers  and  kindred  opposers  of  the  doctrine
of  revelation:  these,  namely,  the  acquisition  of  the  Egyptian  jewels,  Balaam's  ass,  and
the  arresting  of  the  sun  by  Joshua.  Although  the  most  renowned  attacks  upon  these
and  similar  places  bear  upon  their  face  the  character,  partly  of  careless  malevolence,
partly  of  childish  absurdity,  still  it  cannot  be  denied  that  these  difficulties  lie  as
hindrances  in  the  way  of  faith,  to  many  cultivated  persons,  and  even  to  many  honest
and  scientific  thinkers  of  our  day.  But  these  honest  sceptics  find  themselves  in  a
truly  critical  position.  For,  while  on  one  side  they  are  driven  over  into  unbelief  by
hypcrcritics  and  witlings,  there  is  offered  them  from  the  other  side  the  helping  hand
of  an  apologetic  exegesis  which  has  created  in  many  cases  the  very  misconceptions
from  which  it  would  free  doubting  spirits.  Thus,  on  the  one  side,  stand  the  sceptical
investigator  of  nature,  who  brings  the  nebula}  of  the  heavens  and  the  strata  of  the
earth  as  witnesses  for  the  boundless  antiquity  of  the  world,  in  order  that  he  may
charge  the  Bible,  even  in  its  first  line,  with  error  in  its  computation  of  time  ;  the  pan
theistic  worldling,  who  finds  in  the  human-like  tongue  of  the  biblical  God  the
characteristic  mark  of  childish  tradition ;  the  deistic  moralist,  who,  in  the  history  of
the  marriages  of  the  patriarchs,  and  in  the  supposed  robbery  of  the  Egyptian  treasures
at  the  command  of  God,  detects  with  boasting  the  original  conflict  of  the  Bible  with

*  Taken  from  the  author's  article  in  the  German  Journal  for  Christian  Science  and  Christian  Life  for  1857.


70  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD  TESTAMENT.

pure  morals ;  the  infidel,  who  from  of  old  has  always  taken  his  most  cheerful  ride  upon
Balaam's  ass;  the  swaggering  skirmisher,  who  uses  the  arresting  of  the  sun  by  Joshua
in  order  that  he  may  put  the  host  of  the  Lord  to  flight.  But,  on  the  other  side,  the
apologetic  exegesis  seeks  in  nearly  all  cases  to  rescue  the  assaulted  positions  only  by
the  most  modest  defensive,  while  it  brings  into  view  now  the  incorrect  excgctical
understanding  of  the  word,  then  the  figurative  allegorical  expressions  of  the  writer,
then  the  natural  side  of  the  extraordinary  events,  and  lastly  the  wonderful  power  of
God.  It  cannot  be  denied  indeed  that  in  this  way, very  important  aid  has  been  gained
to  the  clearing  and  justification  of  the  Old  Testament  text.  But  neither  can  it  be
denied  that  these  isolated  processes  leave  the  difficulties  in  their  totality  essentially  un-
removed,  while  in  many  ways  they  contribute  to  them,  and  confirm  them.  We  are
very  far  from  demanding  that  the  Apologetics  in  this  field  should  make  the  darkest
secrets  unobjectionable  to  the  unbeliever,  or  plain  and  comprehensible  to  the  sceptic.
The  offence  of  the  cross  of  Christ  will  have  its  eternal  significance  for  the  ungodly  world,
even  in  these  questionable  places.  But  this  isolated,  disconnected  method  of  defence
can  never  bring  into  clear  view,  that  it  is  the  divine  understanding  of  revelation  itself
which  brings  forward  these  very  facts,  at  which  the  human  understanding  in  its
worldly  direction  must  take  offence.  The  generic,  that  which  is  common  in  all  these
difficulties,  and  the  divine  reason  and  wisdom  which  appear  distinctly  in  them — in  a
word,  the  positive  glory  of  revelation  is  not  sufficiently  insisted  upon.  The  studied
way  in  which  they  (the  apologists)  only  defend,  but  do  not  glorify  them  as  the  great
proof  of  the  work  of  God,  the  hurried  joy  with  which  they  pass  from  them,  the  em
barrassment  with  which,  they  gladly  avoid  the  dark  riddles,  in  that  they  rest  in  general
upon  the  almighty  miraculous  strength  of  God,  neither  meets  the  necessities  of  inquir
ing  spirits,  nor  the  requirements  of  faith  in  the  church,  nor  the  necessities  of  knowledge
in  theology.  It  is  only  when  the  central  point  of  the  offence  at  the  Old  Testament
in  our  day,  has  been  proved  to  be  the  central  part  of  the  glory  of  revelation,  that  we
can  satisfy  the  honest  doubt,  or  answer  the  very  end  of  the  Old  Testament.

A  glance  at  the  most  considerable  difficulties  in  the  New  Testament  will  illustrate
what  has  been  said.  Here  truly  we  meet,  first  of  all,  the  miracles  of  Christ,  his  super
natural  birth,  his  resurrection,  in  a  word  the  chief  facts  of  his  life,  and  the  doctrines
connected  with  them  of  his  deity,  the  trinity,  the  atonement,  and  his  coming  to  judg
ment,  i.  <?.,  all  the  great  mysteries  which  appear  to  the  sceptic  as  pre-eminently  an
offence  and  foolishness.  The  old  apologists  have  limited  themselves  here  generally  to
a  discursive  defence;  they  have  taken  refuge  even  here  on  one  side  in  evasions  andl
mere  attempts  to  invalidate  objections,  and  on  the  other  side  in  the  direct  support  off
God,  and  for  the  most  part  passed  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  at  any  price,  by  th<
great  riddles  which  they  should  have  solved.  But  the  modern  churchly  theology  has
long  since  risen  above  this  miserable  defensive.  It  brings  out  the  mysteries  and  those
things  full  of  mystery,  at  which  men  stumble,  as  the  very  heart  of  the  history  am
doctrine  of  Christ ;  it  shows  that  the  very  glory  of  the  New  Testament  reveals  itselfj
in  them.

The  same  must  be  altogether  true  of  the  difficulties  of  the  Old  Testament.

o

how  much  more  remarkable  the  phenomenon,  darker  the  riddle,  stronger  the  objection!
by  so  much  greater  must  be  the  significance  of  the  fact  in  question,  so  much  richej
its  revealed  contents,  so  much  more  glorious  its  divine  fulness  of  the  spirit.

The  difficulties  in  the  Old  Testament  are  the  central  points  of  the  glory  of  thj
Old  Testament  religion.     Each  difficulty  marks  a  peculiar  rejection  of  false  heathej


APPENDIX— TOE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES  IN   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        71

views  of  the  world,  through  the  very  point  of  the  difficulty,  in  which  the  true  revealed
view  of  the  world  is  disclosed.  We  will  endeavor,  from  this  point  of  view,  to  sketch
the  chief  stages  in  the  development  of  the  Old  Testament  religion.


The  Account  of  the  Creation.  The  Records  of  the  pure  idea  of  the  Creation,  of  the  pure  idea  of  God,  of  the
ideas  of  Nature  and  the  World  in  opposition  to  the  heathen  view  of  the  World,  especially  to  the  Theo-
gonistic,  Cosmogonistic,  Deistic,  Naturalistic,  Pantheistic,  and  Dualistic  Assumptions  (Gen.  i.).

The  Pantheist  takes  offence  here,  because  the  record  speaks  of  an  eternally  present
God,  and,  in  opposition  to  his  view,  of  a  temporal  world  which  the  eternal  God  has
called  into  being  through  his  word  ;  the  dualist  stumbles  at  the  assumption  that  even
matter  itself,  the  original  substance  of  the  world,  has  sprung  from  the  creative
power  of  God;  the  deist,  on  the  contrary,  finds  in  the  assumption  that  God,  after  the
days'  works  were  completed,  had  then  rested,  a  childish  dream,  which  ignores  the
idea  of  omnipotence  ;  the  naturalist  believes  that  with  the  co-working  of  omnipotence
from  moment  to  moment  the  idea  of  the  natural  orderly  development  of  things  is
destroyed ;  philosophy  generally  thinks  that  it  is  here  dealing  with  a  myth,  which  is
arranged  partly  through  its  orthodox  positiveness,  and  partly  through  its  sensuous
pictures  or  images;  the  modern  sceptical  natural  philosoper  makes  it  a  matter  of
ridicule  that  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  should  first  be  formed  in  the  fourth  creative
day,  and  indeed  that  the  whole  universe  is  viewed  as  rendering  a  service  to  this  little
world ;  that  the  heavenly  light  should  have  existed  before  the  heavenly  lights,  but
especially  that  the  original  world  should  have  arisen  only  COOO  years  ago,  and  that
its  present  form,  for  which  millions  of  years  are  requisite,  should  have  been  attained
in  the  brief  period  of  six  ordinary  days.  But  the  opponents  who  differ  most  widely
agree  in  this,  that  it  is  fabulous,  that  the  Bible  should  make  an  entirely  new  report
of  prc-historical  things,  with  the  most  perfect  assurance.

We  shall  not  enumerate  the  insufficient  replies  made  from  the  stand-point  of  the
earlier  apologetics.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  however,  that  the  theology  of  the  schools
has  here  occasioned  a  circle  of  misconceptions,  which  the  latest  theology  of  the  church
has  in  great  measure  removed.

The  deciding  word  as  to  this  first  doctrinal  portion  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  has
already  been  uttered  long  since  in  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  By  faith  we  under
stand  that  the  world  was  made  (prepared)  by  the  word  of  God,  so  that  the  things
which  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear.*  The  record  of  creation
is  therefore  a  record  of  the  very  first  act  of  faith,  and  then  of  the  very  first  act  of  rev
elation,  which,  as  such,  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  the  following,  and  in  its  result
reproduces  itself  in  the  region  of  faith,  from  the  beginning  on  to  the  end  of  days.  It
is  the  monotheistic  Christian  creative  word,  the  special  watch  word  of  the  pure  believ
ing  view  of  the  world.  Ex  itngue  leonem.  The  first  leaf  of  scripture  goes  at  a
single  step  across  the  great  abyss  of  materialism  into  which  the  entire  heathen  view  of
the  world  had  fallen,  and  which  no  philosophic  system  has  known  how  to  avoid,  until

*  When  Delitzsch  (Gon.  p.  42)  opposes  to  the  view  of  Kurtz,  that  the  account  of  the  creation  is  the  result  of  a  circle
of  vision*,  looking  backward*,  the  assertion,  that  it  is  an  historical  tradition,  flowing  from  divine  instruction,  the  ques-
tlan  still  remains  open,  by  what  means  that  instruction  was  made  available  to  man.  "We,  with  Delitzsch',  are  hero
opposed  to  the  vision.  For  in  the  vision  there  is  a  voluntary  subjective  state,  wishing  to  see,  when  there  should  be
only  a  subjectivity  or  possibility  of  sight.


72  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

perfected  by  this.  Pantheism  here  meets  its  refutation  in  the  word  of  the  eternal
personal  God  of  creation,  who  established  the  world  by  his  almighty  word ;  abstract
theism,  in  the  production  of  the  world  out  of  the  living  word  of  God;  dualism,  in  the
doctrine  that  God  has  created  matter  itself;  naturalism,  in  the  clear  evidence  of  the
positive  divine  foundation  of  the  world,  in  the  origin  of  every  new  step  in  nature.
With  the  pure  idea  of  God,  we  win  at  the  same  time  the  pure  idea  of  the  world,  and
with  the  pure  idea  of  creation,  the  pure  idea  of  nature.  Creation  goes  through  all
nature,  in  so  far  as  God,  from  one  step  in  nature  to  another,  ever  produces  in  a  crea
tive  way  the  new  and  higher;  at  last  man,  after  his  bodily  organic  manifestation.  On
the  other  hand  also  the  idea  of  nature  runs  through  the  whole  idea  of  creation,  in  so
far  as  God  has  endowed  every  creative  principle  Avhich  he  has  placed  in  the  world
with  its  own  law  of  development,  and  with  a  conditioned  independence ;  to  plants,  to
animals,  and  to  man.  The  creation  reaches  its  perfection  and  glory  in  the  human  spir
ituality,  since  in  this  it  is  prepared  for  the  revelation  of  the  divine  life ;  in  his  freedom
nature  is  glorified,  since  its  relative  independence  is  here  raised  to  the  free  blessed  life
of  men  in  God.  Just  as  the  biblical  idea  of  God  is  free  from  the  heathen  element  of  a
passive  deity,  who  suffers  the  world  to  flow  out  from  himself,  so  the  biblical  idea  of  the
world  is  free  from  the  heathen  assumption  that  the  world  is  some  magical  transforma
tion  of  existing  material,  or  even  of  a  positive  nonentity.  And  as  the  biblical  idea
will  not  tolerate  the  absolutist's  assumption  of  an  abstract  deified  omnipotence,  which
neither  limits  nor  communicates  itself,  so  the  biblical  idea  of  nature  cannot  be  recon
ciled  with  the  naturalistic  assumption,  which  derives  all  the  forms  in  nature  out  of  one
general  creative  act,  and  holds  that  one  step  in  nature  produces  another.

We  will  not  dwell  upon  the  objections  which  the  most  illustrious  and  popular
natural  philosophers  have  raised  against  the  work  of  the  fourth  creative  day.  That
the  light  was  before  the  light-bearers;  that  the  appearance  of  the  firmament  to  the
earth  Avas  first  manifested  in  the  same  day  in  which  the  earth  was  discovered  to  the
firmament;  that  for  man,  from  his  stand-point,  the  earth  formed  an  important  contrast
with  the  vastness  of  the  heavens ;  this  docs  not  require  many  words.  But  the  day-
works  and  the  age  of  the  world  ?  The  Mosaic  computation,  it  is  said,  allows  about
GOOD  years  for  the  history  of  man.  For  the  entire  universe  there  is  then  the
higher  antiquity  of— an  added  week — the  six  creative  days.  But  these  six  days,  the
most  recent  scientific  churchly  exegesis  *  says,  are  symbolical  days,  i.  e.,  six  periods
of  the  development  of  creation.  The  evenings,  it  is  said  further,  mark  the  epochs
of  destruction,  the  revolutions  of  the  world  in  its  progress ;  on  the  other  hand,  the
mornings  mark  the  epochs  of  the  new  and  higher  structure  of  the  world.  The  fact
that,  in  the  Hebrew  designation,  day  often  denotes  a  period  of  time,  and  that  these
days  are  here  spoken  of  before  the  cosmical  organization  of  the  world  into  the  planetary
system,  favors  this  view.  To  this  we  must  add  the  prophetic  biblical  style  of  the  nar
rative.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  the  defender  of  the  pure  sense  of  scripture  can  hear
these  natural  philosophers  speak  of  the  thousands  and  millions  of  years  of  the  earth's
development  with  a  serene  smile,  as  an  investigator  of  the  Bible,  namely :  but  whether
as  an  investigator  of  nature  is  another  question.  For  the  recent  natural  philosophy  ap-

*  Baumgarten  indeed  still  holds  to  the  ordinary  days  (Com.  upon  the  Pentateuch  i.  14).  "The  word  day  (c'P)
is  primarily  day  and  not  period,  and  here  this  word  is  used  for  the  first  time."  But  we  say  that  just  for  this  very
reason  the  word  day  must  here  designate  a  period.  The  ordinary  day  of  the  earth  is  not  the  original  form  of  the  day,
but  the  day  of  God,  the  day  of  heaven.  Thus  even  the  light  precedes  the  light-bearers.  How  endlessly  diversified
are  the  days  in  the  universe  !  But  the  original  form  is  the  day  of  God.  Compare  also  DELITZSCH,  Genesis,  p.  61.—
[But  also  KEIL,  in  his  Commentary  upon  Genesis. — A.  G.]


APPENDIX— THE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES  IX  THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        73

pears  extremely  rash  in  surrounding  itself  with  its  millions  of  years,  not  in  the  spirit
of  nature,  nor  in  accordance  with  its  formation.  The  defender  of  the  biblical  text,  as
the  friend  of  nature,  may  be  allowed  the  word :  We  grant  you  willingly  your  thou
sands  of  years  for  the  formation  of  the  earth  and  the  world.  But  bethink  yourselves
well.  According  to  the  laws  of  present  nature,  it  develops  itself  very  rapidly  in  all
the  first  effusions  and  stages  of  its  life ;  on  the  contrary,  you  require  for  the  first  glow
ing  seeds  of  life  and  living  structures  an  endlessly  slow  lapse  of  time.  In  nature  we  see
all  subordinate  things  arise  and  disappear  quickly ;  you  require  aeons  for  the  first  rudest
fundamental  forms  of  creation.  If  the  spirit  of  scripture  absolve  you  in  this  lavish  use
of  millions  of  years  for  the  cooling  of  the  globes  of  gas,  and  the  formation  of  primitive
monsters,  ask  yourselves  whether  the  spirit  of  nature  will  grant  you  absolution !

But,  from  the  records  of  creation,  you  can  learn  that  nature  rests  upon  the  prin
ciples  of  creation,  unfolds  itself  in  living  contrasts,  completes  itself  in  ascending  lines,
and  is  glorified  in  man  and  his  divine  destination,  i.  c.,  in  other  words,  that  nature
springs  out  from  the  miracle,  through  miraculous  stages  (new  principles  of  creation),
ascends  from  step  to  step,  and  in  the  miracle  of  the  perfect  image  of  God  reaches  its
new  birth.

II.

Paradise,  or  the  Records  of  the  original  ideal  state  of  the  Earth  and  the  Human  Race.  (Gen.  ii.)

Paradise,  it  is  said,  is  a  beautiful  myth,  growing  out  of  mythical  ideas  of  the  earth
which  the  oldest  geographers  entertained.  Thus  also  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good
and  evil,  the  tree  of  life,  and  the  serpent  are  regarded  as  mythical  traditions.  Thus
the  great  theocratic  element,  which  lies  in  the  account  of  Paradise,  is  entirely  lost.
Of  the  first  great  historical  type  we  have  only  left  a  fantastic  philosophic  hypothesis
concerning  the  commencement  of  the  race,  and  the  origin  of  evil.  The  theology  of
the  schools,  which  views  the  account  of  Paradise  not  only  as  throughout  historical,
but  as  barely  historical,  in  opposition  to  its  symbolical  import,  has  here  pre-eminently
prepared  the  way  for  misconceptions  and  misinterpretation.

As  the  fourth  stream  of  Paradise,  the  Euphrates  and  its  source  cannot  be  a  myth,
so  neither  can  the  four  streams  generally.  And  as  the  first  man  is  not  a  myth,  so
neither  is  his  first  residence.  But  on  the  other  side  also  the  streams  and  trees  of
Paradise  are  just  as  little  to  be  regarded  as  barely  natural,  or  belonging  to  the  nat
ural  history  of  Paradise,  or  the  mere  individual  forms,  particularities,  of  the  pre-histor-
ical  world.

The  significance  of  Paradise  is  this,  that  it  declares  the  original  ideal  state  of  the
earth  and  the  human  race,  the  unity  of  the  particular  and  the  general,  the  unity  of
spirit  and  nature,  the  unity  of  spiritual  innocence  and  the  physical  harmony  of  nature,
the  unity  of  the  fall  and  the  disturbance  of  nature— lastly,  the  unity  of  facts  and  their
symbolical  meaning,  which  both  the  barely  literal  and  mythical  explanations  of  the
record  rend  asunder.

There  was  a  paradise  and  it  was  local,  but  it  was  at  the  same  time  the  symbol  of
the  paradisiac  earth.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  four  streams.  Whether  the
original  source  of  tho  four  streams  is  not  marked  by  the  stream  in  the  midst  of  the
garden  may  be  left  undecided ;  it  is  enough  that  it  was  actually  one,  and  at  the  same
time  the  symbol  of  all  the  fountains  of  blessing  upon  the  earth.  Whether  the  tree
>f  life  was  one  physical  plant,  or  rather  the  glorification  of  nature,  in  the  determinate


^4  INTRODUCTION  TO    THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

™"!  7OI^±  SL  c  eaU™  a  S  fhfoppSn  and  harmony  be*veen  God
1  tl  1  ITTo  the  teount  o    Paradise  declares  tho  opposition  and  the  harmony
and  the  world,  no    he  acco  connection  between  the  actual

between  tho  SPm  and  natme     Heie  >  ^^  ^  ^  ^

prim.t.vcn.anandthe.Joal  «a  ,beucc  a  sonscs>  the  consecrated,

a'  If  the  other  Z  human  talent,  freedom,  and


k,;Ul,lc,,  —I  between  spirit  and  nature,  between  the  -tual  fact  and
the  svmbo  nd  yon  fall  back  into  that  old  accursed  onposiuon  between  sp,r,  uahsm
W  i±kta,  which  burdened  the  heathen  world  and  will  run  through  all  your
moral  restbctic  and  philosophic  ideas  as  a  fata


III.


U,  JM  //-»»«»  l»>  -»  Accords  of  «,«  idea,  a,,,.  -«,  Unity  of  tt.  n^  Race,  and  of  ,1,0

and  female  Nature  in  the  true  Marriage  (Gen.  n.).

J--*'^

o'v  s   h    en,,ality  by  birth  of  the  male  and  female  sexes,  the  myst.cal  na  ure  of

he     motitv  of  tin-  married  and  domestic  life,  and  condemns  tho  hoa-

true  7™f  '  ^e?7'2n  the  S  lawlessness  or  lust,  as  also  the  theosophic  and

"


.

l^,   nn,v  become  anew  the  common  doctrine  of  the  natural
old  abongmal  trad.Uons       s  now  become  -e^v  ^  Cllvicl.  shllbcrt>


h7ve     uht  the  generic  unity  of  tho  human  race,  are  not  natural  p


r  tW  Records  of  the  historical  character  of  the  Sin  of  the  Creature,  opposed  to

^  S  if/ltS;  0?  ^SloSS  of  U»  Divine  ^c.,,  and  of  U»  connection  md  opposHlon
between  Sin  and  Evil  (Gen.  Hi.)-
The  record  of  the  actual  fall  stands  there  as  an  eternal  judgment  upon  the  the-


n  evS  deity,  fro-.n  dark  matte,  or  from  the


APPENDIX— THE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT  PLACES  IN   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        75

acy  of  sense.  Although  the  serpent  sustains  the  doctrine  that,  prior  to  the  fall  of
man,  sin  had  existed  in  a  sphere  on  the  other  side,  working  through  demoniac  agency
upon  this  (for  the  serpent  was  not  created  evil,  Gen.  i.  25,  generally  not  even  fitted
for  evil,  and  can  only  be  regarded  therefore  as  the  organ  of  a  far  different  evil  power),
yet  the  visible  picture  of  the  fall  in  this  sphere,  is  a  certain  sign  that  the  fall  in  that
could  only  have  risen  through  the  abuse  of  the  freedom  of  the  creature.  But,  if  we
observe  the  progress  of  sin  from  the  first  sin  of  Eve  to  the  fratricide  of  Cain  ;  if  we
view  the  opposition  between  Cain  and  Abel,  and  the  intimation  of  the  moral  freedom
of  Cain  himself,  so  the  Augustinian  view,  raising  original  sin  to  absolute  original
death,  receives  its  illumination  and  its  just  limits.  But  how  every  Pelagian  view  of
life  falls  before  this  record,  as  it  brings  into  prominence  the  causal  connection  between
the  sin  of  the  spirit  world  and  that  of  man,  between  the  sin  of  the  Avoman  and  the
man,  between  the  sin  of  our  first  parents  and  their  own  sinfulness  and  the  siufulness
of  their  posterity!  If  we  take  into  view  the  stages  of  the  development  of  evil  in  the
genesis  of  the  first  sin,  how  limited  and  vapid  appears  the  modern  view,  which  re
gards  the  senses  as  the  prime  starting  point  of  evil !  But  when  Pantheism  asserts
the  necessity  of  sin,  or  rather  of  the  fall,  as  the  necessary  transition  of  men  from  the
state  of  pure  innocence  to  that  of  conscious  freedom,  the  simple  remark,  that  the
ingenuousness  of  Adam  would  have  been  carried  directly  on  in  the  proper  way,  if
he  had  stood  the  test,  just  as  Christ  through  his  sinlcssness  has  reached  the  knowl
edge  of  the  true  distinction  between  good  and  evil,  and  has  actually  shown  that  sin,
notwithstanding  its  inweaving  with  human  nature,  does  not  belong  to  its  very  being,
clearly  refutes  the  assertion.  But  how  clear  is  the  explanation  of  evil,  of  punish
ment  and  of  judgment,  as  it  meets  us  in  this  account !  that  the  natural  evil  does
not  belong  to  the  moral,  but,  notwithstanding  its  inward  connection  with  it,  is  still
the  divine  counteracting  force  against  it ;  that  punishment  is  to  redeem  and  purify ;
that  from  the  very  acme  of  the  judgment  breaks  forth  the  promise  and  salvation.
These  truths,  which  are  far  above  every  high  anti-christian  view  of  the  world,  make  it
apparent  that  the  first  judgment  of  God,  as  a  type  of  the  world-redeeming  judgment
of  God,  has  found  its  completion  in  the  death  of  Christ  upon  the  cross.


V.

Ilie  Macrobioi,  or  the  long-lived  Fathers  and  Enoch,  or  the  Revelation  of  the  Difference  between  the  ideal

and  historical  Human  Death.

The  long  lives  of  the  Fathers,  the  years  of  Methuselah,  the  translation  of  Enoch,
are  difficult  riddles  to  the  common  view  of  the  world,  which  recognizes  no  distinction
between  the  ideal  death  (i.  e.,  the  original  form,  resembling  a  metamorphism,  of  the
transition  from  the  first  to  the  second  human  life),  and  the  historical  death.  But
this  difference  is  here  clearly  made  known  in  these  facts.  Originally,  there  was  grant
ed  to  man  a  form  of  transition  from  the  first  to  the  second  life,  which  is  closed
through  the  historical  death,  until  it  appears  again  in  the  glorification  of  the  risen
Christ  and  the  declaration  of  the  Apostles  (1  Cor.  xv. ;  2  Cor.  v.).  With  sin  the
historical  death  makes  its  inroads  upon  humanity.  But  it  can  only,  slowly  creeping
from  within  outward,  break  through  the  strong  resistance  of  the  original  physical
human  nature ;  hence  the  long  lives  of  the  primitive  fathers.  Here  the  spiritual
power  of  death  has  first  gradually  penetrated  the  physical  nature ;  this  is  the  sig-


7G  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

nificancc  of  the  long  lives  of  the  antediluvians.  The  spiritual  power  of  the  life  of  Christ,
as  it  runs  parallel  with  the  old  death  in  its  progress  from  within  outward,  will  at  the
last  permeate  the  physical  nature  again ;  and  then  will  the  long  lives  appear  again.
But,  as  the  last  Macrobioi  shall  attain  the  original  form  of  the  ideal  death,  the  trans
lation,  so  in  an  exceptive  way  P^noch  through  his  piety  obtained  it  of  old.  Therefore
he  stands  also  as  the  citadel  of  immortality,  of  the  victory  over  death,  and  of  the  ideal
form  of  translation,  in  the  midst  of  the  death  periods  of  the  primitive  fathers  ;  in  him
self  alone  a  sufficient  voucher,  that  the  Old  Testament  in  its  very  first  pages  is
stamped  with  this  idea.

In  these  leaves  also  we  possess  the  records  of  that  idea  of  death  by  which  the
faith  of  revelation  strides  victoriously  away  from  all  the  ordinary  ideas  of  death  in
ancient  or  modern  times.

VI.

The  Flood,  and  the  Ark,  or  the  Glorification  of  all  the  great  Judgments  of  God  upon  the  World ;  and
of  all  the  counter-working  forms  of  Salvation,  as  they  begin  with  the  Ark  and  arc  completed  in  the
Church  (Gen.  vi.-viii.).

The  great  water-flood  is  established,  through  the  concurrent  testimony  of  ancient
people,  as  the  great  event  of  traditionary  antiquity.  But  the  deluge  and  the  ark  !
Let  it  be  observed  here,  however,  that  just  as  the  idea  of  punishment  explains  the
undeniably  existing  natural  evil,  so  the  light  of  the  deluge  illuminates  the  wild  waves
of  the  great  water-flood.  And  just  as  out  of  the  first  curse  sprang  the  blessing  of
the  promise,  so  salvation,  the  saving  ark,  was  borne  upon  the  waves  of  the  first  iinnl
judgment.  In  this  light  the  deluge  is  the  great  type  of  all  the  judgments  of  God
upon  the  earth,  and  therefore  especially  of  baptism,  which  introduces  the  Christian
into  the  communion  of  the  completed  redeeming  judgment  of  God,  the  death  of
Christ  upon  the  cross.

The  first  general  world  judgment  was  introduced  through  the  universal  dominion,
and  tho  unshaken  establishment,  of  human  corruption.  But  this  was  brought  about
through  the  ungodly  marriages,  the  misalliances  between  the  sons  of  God  and  the
daughters  of  men,  i.  c.,  the  posterity  of  Seth  and  of  Cain.  It  is  evident,  indeed,  that
the  Alexandrian  Exegesis  and  that  of  the  earliest  Church  Fathers  have  introduced
the  difficulty  into  the  text,  that  the  sons  of  God  were  angels.  Kurt/  still  asserts
that  the  Bni  Elohirn  are  elsewhere  only  used  of  angels.  But  if  the  vicegerents  of  God
on  the  earth  (Ps.  Ixxxii.  G)  are  called  Elohim,  and  Bni  Eljon,  they  may  even  much
more  be  called  Bni  Elohirn,  in  a  position  in  which  they  should  have  defended  the  di
vine  upon  the  earth,  but  rather  betrayed  it.  The  connection,  according  to  which  the
fourth  chapter  treats  of  the  descendants  of  Cain,  and  the  fifth  of  those  of  Seth,  author
izes  us  to  expect  that  here  both  genealogies  are  united.  After  the  history  has  shown
how  the  curse  of  sin  has  spread  itself  with  the  human  arts,  in  the  line  of  Cain
namely,  even  polygamy  and  murder  glorified  through  the  abuse  of  poetry,  how
.on  the  contrary  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  advanced  for  a  long  time  in  the  line
of  Seth,  and  with  it  the  hope  of  redemption,  it  now  shows  how,  through  the
misalliances  referred  to,  the  corruption  became  not  only  prevalent  but  giant-like  and
incurable.  These  false  unions,  based  upon  a  principle  of  apostasy,  and  which  made
evident  the  profound  connection  between  idolatry  and  whoredom,  produced  a  race  of
spiritual  bastards,  who  turned  the  very  spirituality  inherited  from  their  fathers  into


APPENDIX— THE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES   IN   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        77

sin.  To  look  away  from  the  fabulous  in  the  assumption  of  a  marriage  connection  be
tween  angels  and  men,  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  deception  of  the  daughters  of  men
through  heavenly  angelic  forms,  should  be  stated  as  a  phenomenon  of  obduracy,  and
a  cause  of  the  flood.  Hero  also  the  idea  of  apostasy,  the  yielding  of  the  kingdom
of  God  to  the  ungodly  world,  and  the  judgment  springing  therefrom,  was  intro
duced  in  the  first  great  historical  type ;  a  significant  portent,  for  the  history  of  Israel  as
for  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church,  to  the  end  of  the  world.  But  that,  in  the  very
moment  of  the  breaking  forth  of  the  judgment  upon  the  world,  an  election  from  all
creatures  should  enter  into  the  ark,  furnishes  an  example  of  the  fact,  that  with  the
election  of  humanity  a  pure  kernel  of  the  creature  world  should  be  carried  through
the  last  final  judgment,  into  a  higher  order  of  things.  It  should  be  observed  by  the
way,  that  the  three  birds,  the  raven  and  two  doves,  must  be  regarded  as  the  symbols
of  the  three  different  exodes  from  the  external  church,  so  soon  as  we  view  the  ark
itself  as  the  symbol  of  the  church  of  salvation.  This  significance  is  not  far-fetched.
In  the  Roman  Catholic  view  only  ravens  flee  from  the  Church,  in  the  assurance  of
antichristian  spirits  only  doves,  or  the  children  of  the  Spirit.


VII.

The  Tower  of  Babel,  the  Confusion  of  Tongues,  and  the  Teleology  of  Heathenism  (Gen.  xi.).

The  monotonous  Augustinian  view  of  the  hereditary  relations  of  humanity  finds
already  its  correction  in  the  opposition  between  Cain  and  Abel,  and  still  more  in
that  between  the  line  of  Seth  and  the  line  of  Cain.  We  see,  indeed,  how  death
reigns  through  sin,  in  the  line  of  Seth,  and  how  at  last  corruption,  working  in  the
line  of  Cain,  brought  it  to  destruction.  While,  however,  the  typical  saviour  of  the
race  and  of  the  earth,  Noah,  came  from  the  line  of  Seth,  and  out  of  its  ruins,  and
while  before  him  there  was  opposed  only  a  line  of  blessing  and  of  the  curse  (both
moreover  only  in  a  relative  degree),  there  is  formed  in  the  sons  of  Noah  a  threefold
spiritual  genealogy  :  the  line  of  the  curse,  of  which  Ham  or  more  definitely  Canaan
is  the  representative,  stands  opposed  not  only  to  a  genealogy  of  divine  blessing  in
Shem,  but  also  of  worldly  blessings  in  Japheth.  Still,  both  are  girt  around  by  the
circle  of  sin  and  death.  And  as  in  the  primitive  race  the  earliest  development  appears
in  the  line  of  Cain,  so  now  in  the  new  race  in  the  line  of  Ham.  Nimrod  founds  the
old  Babylonian  kingdom.  But  the  people  assemble  at  Babel  in  order  to  found,  in
the  tower  reaching  to  heaven,  the  symbol  of  an  all-embracing  human  world  mon
archy.*

Beauty,  lust,  anarchy,  brought  the  first  race  to  destruction ;  an  enthusiastic  civili
zation,  lust  of  empire,  glory,  desire  for  display,  and  despotism  threaten  to  destroy
the  second.  And  now  Shem  and  Japheth  are  in  danger  of  losing  their  blessing  in  the
earliest  development  of  the  power  of  Ham,  in  the  Hamitic  phantom  of  human  glory.
Hence  the  dispersion  of  the  people,  which  as  truly  springs  out  of  the  deep  spiritual
errors  of  the  people,  as  it  was  positively  sent  from  above.  Now  Shem  and  Japheth
could  each  in  their  own  direction  cultivate  the  blessing  of  spiritual  piety  which  was

*  Delitzsch  says  of  Nimrod  (p.  223).  "  through  his  name  11533  (from  "no,  to  rise  up,  disturb),  be  represents  the
revolution,  in  his  dominion  the  despotism.  These  two  extremes,  the  monarchical  state  has  never  been  able  to
remove,  from  its  impure  beginning  onwards."  What  he  says,  however,  avails  only  in  its  full  sense  of  the  great
world  monarchies.


73  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

their  inheritance.  And  even  within  the  race  of  Ham  the  curse  of  impiety  was  inter
rupted  through  the  mutual  relations  and  influence  in  which  it  was  placed  with  Shem
and  Japheth.  Scattered  around  the  tower,  the  people  spread  themselves  into  the
world,  according  to  their  peculiarities,  after  the  outline  of  the  table  (Gen.  x.).  The
great  value  of  this  table  has  been  recognized  again  in  recent  times.  But  this  also
must  be  kept  in  view,  that  in  the  dispersion  of  the  people  we  have  revealed  the  pecu
liar  teleology  of  heathenism.  It  has  a  prevailingly  admonitory,  and  yet  preserving
character.  The  people  should  not  lose  their  peculiar  character  under  the  despotism
of  imperial  uniformity.  They  should  develop  themselves  according  to  all  their
peculiarities,  in  their  different  languages.  Above  all,  the  way  was  prepared  for  the
development  of  Shcm.

VIII.

The  Separation  of  Aura/nun,  and  of  the  Israclitisli  People  in  him  ;  the  Teleology  of  Judaism  (Gen.  xii.  ff).

The  lucre  worldly  culture,  down  to  the  most  recent  times,  lias  found  great
difficulty  with  the  biblical  doctrine  that  Gpd  had  chosen  Abraham  from  amonn-  the
people,  and  in  him  chosen  the  people  of  Israel  to  be  an  elect  people,  above  all  the
most  cultivated  nations.  Critics,  who  usually  find  no  difficulties  in  the  diversities  of
the  nations,  and  praise  beyond  measure  the  peculiar  prerogatives  of  the  Greeks  and
Romans,  will  not  see  in  these  facts,  that  Israel  was  in  Abraham  the  chosen  people,  in
a  religious  point  of  view.  But  even  here  historical  facts  correspond  to  the  divine
purpose,  and  bear  practical  testimony  to  it.  Israel  has  realized  the  blessing  of  its
peculiar  religious  disposition  in  its  revealed  religion.  But  in  this  blessing  the  good
pleasure  of  God  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  has  been  made  known.

The  later  Jews  have  indeed  prevcrted  their  election  into  the  caricature  of  phar-
isaic  particularism.  And,  in  many  cases,  unbelief  and  doubt  have  been  contending
with  this  caricature,  while  they  supposed  that  they  were  contending  with  the  scripture
doctrine  itself.  But  the  word  of  the  scripture  runs  thus  :  "  In  thee  (Abraham)  and
in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  (Ch.  xii.  6.)  That  this  pas
sage  does  not  say :  "  In  thee  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  bless  themselves,  or
wish  themselves  blessed,"  is  evident  from  the  preceding  words:  "  I  will  bless  them,
that  bless  thcc"  (Ch.  xii.  3  *).  This  then  is  the  teleology  of  Judaism.  As  the  heathen
are  scattered  into  all  the  world,  in  order,  through  their  peculiar  forms  of  culture,  to
prepare  the  vessels  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  in  Israel,  so  Israel  is  separated  from
among  the  nations,  to  be  a  peculiar  people  of  faith,  in  order  to  become  the  organ  of
salvation  for  all  nations.


The  Offering  of  Isaac,  or  the  Sanctification  of  the  Israelitish  Sacrifice,  and  the  Rejection  of  the  Abomina
tion  of  the  Heathen.

We  have  here  the  most  striking  instance,  in  which  the  orthodox  school  theology,
through  its  insufficient,  narrow,  literal  explanation,  has  brought  into  the  Bible  difficul
ties  at  which  even  the  noblest  spirits  have  stumbled.  The  actual  histoiy  of  the
offering  of  Isaac  forms  the  peculiar  starting  point  of  the  Israelitish  religion,  the
glorious  portal  of  the  theocracy,  the  division  between  the  sanctified  Jewish  sacrifices

*  The  here  rejected  explanation  may  certainly  be  received  where  the  Hithpael  of  "pS  is  used.   (Ch.  xxii.  18;
xxvi.  4.)


APPENDIX— THE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES  IN   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        79

in  their  nature  Messianic,  and  fulfilled  in  the  atoning  death  of  Christ,  and  the
abomination  of  the  human  sacrificial  worship  of  the  heathen.  What  has  the  school
theology  made  of  this  glorious  history,  the  type  of  the  whole  Old  Testament  cultns?  It
has  changed  this  in  the  highest  sense  isolated  peculiar  remarkable  fact,  into  a  dark
and  frightful  riddle,  which  indeed  appears  like  the  heathen  sacrifices,  and  through
which  already  more  than  one  has  been  betrayed  into  the  path  of  fanatical  sacri
fices.

The  author  here  refers  to  the  exegetical  treatise  of  Hcngstenberg,  who  has  the
merit  of  establishing  the  correct  interpretation  of  this  passage  in  his  explanation
of  Jephthah's  vow.*  Hengstenbcrg  has  in  our  view  proved  clearly  that  Jephthah  did
not  kill  his  daughter,  when  he  sacrificed  her  to  the  Lord,  but  devoted  her  entirely,
under  the  usual  consecration  of  a  sacrifice,  to  perpetual  temple  service  as  a  virgin,
and  he  illustrates  his  method  of  proof  through  a  reference  to  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac.f
The  special  proof  lies  in  a  reference  to  the  fact,  that  the  Hebrew  cultus  distinguishes
between  the  spiritual  consecration  of  man  as  a  sacrifice,  and  the  visible  slaughter  of
an  animal.  Thus,  c.  g,,  according  to  1  Sam.  i.  24,  25,  the  boy  Samuel  was  brought
by  his  parents  to  Eli  the  priest,  and  consecrated  at  the  tabernacle,  since  the  three
bullocks  were  slain  there  as  burnt  offerings.  The  special  grounds  for  the  correct
understanding  of  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac  are  these :  the  root  of  the  sacrifice,  as  to  its
nature,  is  the  concession  of  the  human  will  to  the  will  of  God  (Ps.  xl.  7-9) ;  fallen  man
cannot  make  this  pure  concession,  therefore  he  represents  it  in  a  symbolical  and
typical  way  in  the  outward  sacrifice.  lie  brings  at  first  to  the  deity  fruits  and
animals.  But  a  vague  feeling  assures  him  that  Jehovah  has  claims  upon  the  life  of
man  itself  Meanwhile,  however,  he  has  lost  the  spiritual  idea  of  sacrifice.  The  no
tion  of  sacrifice,  or  consecration,  has  become  one  to  him  with  that  of  to  slay  and  burn.
Hence  he  falls  upon  the  literal  human  sacrifice  which  he  must  offer  the  deity  as  a
personal  substitute.  But  the  Old  Testament  rejects  this  literal  human  sacrifice
throughout  as  an  abomination.  The  Canaanites  were  punished  especially  for  this
abomination.  This  is  not,  as  Ghillany  thinks,  that  they  themselves  were  offered  to
God  as  human  sacrifices,  as  a  punishment,  because  they  had  slain  human  sacrifices.
The  devotion  of  such  idolaters  to  the  curse  and  destruction,  proves  that  the  human
sacrifice  was  the  greatest  abomination.  Thus  also  the  law  treats  this  heathen  cor
ruption.  But  this  corruption  is  thus  unquestionably  great,  because  it  is  the  demoniac
distortion  of  that  thought  of  light,  that  God  requires  the  sacrifice  of  the  human
heart,  and  in  default  of  this  the  spiritual  sacrifice  of  the  substituted  life  of  the
atoning  priest,  or  of  the  first-born  in  Israel,  at  last  the  absolute  atonement  of  the  con
cession  of  a  pure  man  for  sinful  humanity.  Hence  this  thought  of  light  must  bo
rescued  from  its  distortion,  and  through  the  sacred  care  for  its  fulfilment,  be  pre
served.  The  sacrifice  of  Isaac  was  destined  to  this  end.  God  commanded  Abraham  :
"  Sacrifice  to  me  thy  son."  Abraham,  as  to  the  kernel  of  his  faith,  is  the  first  Israel
ite,  but,  as  to  his  inherited  religious  ideas,  he  is  still  a  heathen  Chaldee,  who  knows
nothing  else  than  that  to  offer,  is  to  slay.  But  as  he  already,  by  his  germ  of  faith,
has  distinguished  the  spiritual  sacrifice  from  the  abomination  of  the  heathen,  so  in
the  critical  moment  ho  received  the  second  revelation,  which  enlarges  the  first,  since

*  HEKGSTESBEP.G  :  Dcitrdge,  3d  vol.  The  moral  and  religious  life  of  tlie  period  of  the  judges,  especially  on  Jeph
thah's  vow,  p.  127  ff.

t  Delitzsch  follows  the  traditionary  view  of  the  schools,  and  is  not  inclined  to  fall  in  •with  the  modern  churchly
correction  of  that  view  (p.  300).  The  objection  of  Kurtz  is  answered  in  the  places  quoted  below.


80  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

it  prohibits  the  bodily  killing  of  his  son,  with  the  declaration  that  he  had  already
completed  his  spiritual  sacrifice  (Ch.  xxii,  12).  Nothing  remains  for  him  now,  to
meet  his  fullest  religious  necessities,  than  that  he  should  enlarge  and  complete  sym
bolically  the  spiritual  sacrifice  of  his  son  through  the  corporeal  sacrifice  of  the  ram
which  the  foresight  of  God  had  provided  at  hand  (without  commanding  him  to  taJce
its  life).  Now,  the  distinction  and  connection  between  the  ideas  of  to  sacrifice  and
to  kill,  which  forms  the  peculiar  consecration  of  the  Israelitish  sacrificial  death,  is
made  perfect.  In  tlii.s  sense  the  human  sacrifice  of  Abraham  runs  through  the  whole
Israelitish  economy,  down  to  the  New  Testament  (Luke  ii.  23,  24).  And  the  distinc
tion  between  the  holy  sacrifice  of  the  people  of  God,  and  the  sacrificial  abominations
of  the  heathen,  is  completed.  In  the  crucifixion,  these  two  sacrifices  outwardly  come
together,  while  really  and  spiritually  they  are  separated  as  widely  as  heaven  and  hell.
Christ  yields  himself  in  perfect  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  Father,  in  the  judgment
of  the  world.  That  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Israelitish  sacrifice.  Caiaphas  will  suffer
the  innocent  to  die  for  the  good  of  the  people  (John  xi.  50).  and  even  Pilate  yields
him  to  the  will  of  men  (Luke  xxiii.  25) ;  this  is  the  completion  of  the  Moloch-
sacrifice.""


The  Sexual  Difficulties  in  the  History  of  the  Patriarchs,  as  they  arise  out  of  the  Israelitish  striving  after  the
true  ideal  Marriage,  and  after  the  consecrated  Theocratic  Birth ;  in  Revolt  against  the  cruel  service
of  Lust,  and  the  unsanctified  Sexual  Unions  and  Conceptions  in  the  Heathen  World.

In  the  review  of  the  known  sexual  difficulties  also,  it  is  the  Israelitish  rejection
again  of  the  heathen  nature,  on  which  one  sits  in  judgment,  with  the  modern  devel
oped  view  of  intellectual  heathenism.  But  here  the  Apologists  believe  that  they
have  fully  met  the  demands  of  the  case,  when  they  remark,  that  we  must  not  measure
the  life  of  the  ancient  saints  by  the  standard  of  Christian  morals.  But  that  the  germina
ting  seeds  of  the  Christian  ideal  life  and  morals  occasion  these  very  difficulties,  that  we
are  thus  here  also  dealing  with  the  phenomena  of  Old  Testament  glory  (which  stands
indeed  far  below  the  spiritual  glory  of  the  New  Testament),  this  is  evident  from  the
very  contrasts  in  which  these  facts  are  brought  before  us.

The  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament  places  the  natural  sexual  desire  in  opposition  to
the  unnatural ;  the  object  of  the  sexual  desire,  procreation,  in  opposition  to  the  pas
sion  for  its  own  sake ;  the  true  marriage — based  upon  the  mind's  choice,  to  the  com
mon  or  even  barely  external  union  of  the  sexes  ;  the  consecrated  holy  birth,  in  oppo
sition  to  the  birth  or  conception  "  after  the  will  of  the  flesh."  In  other  words,  it  seeks
the  true  sacred  marriage,  perfected  indeed  through  its  destination,  the  conception  of
the  consecrated  child  of  promise.  It  sanctifies  the  traditional  marriage  through  the
true  sacred  character  of  the  higher  union  of  soul,  and  the  sexual  desire  through
spiritual  and  conjugal  consecration.

Thus  the  espousal  of  Hagar  into  the  life  of  Abraham,  which  indeed  Sarah,  the  wife
of  Abraham,  suggests,  is  explained  by  the  unlimited  desire  for  the  heir  promised  by
Jehovah.  The  fruitless  marriage  falls  into  an  ideal  error  which  is  far  above  faithless
ness  or  lust,  subordinated  to  the  end  of  the  union  of  the  sexes,  the  attainment  of  the
heir.  In  this  ethical  thought  we  must  understand  the  error  of  Sarah  and  Abraham.

*  For  the  untenableness  of  the  ordinary  view  I  refer  to  HESQSTENBERO  :  Beilrdge  \  LANGE  :  Positive  Dogmatik,  p_
S18.  Compare  also  the  legal  Catholic  Church,  p.  60.


APPENDIX— THE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES  IX   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        81


But  then  the  Lord  brings  the  true  sacred  marriage  of  Abraham  with  Sarah  into  op
position  with  the  transient  sexual  union  of  Abraham  with  Ilagar,  when  lie  opposes  the
consecrated  spiritual  fruit  of  the  first  union,  to  the  wild  genial  fruit  of  the  last,  Isaac
to  Ishmael.     It  is  remarkable  how  Jacob  under  the  dialectic  form  of  the  Israclitish
principles  obtains  his  four  wives.     He  seeks  the  bride  after  the  choice  of  his  heart.
JTheu  was  Leah  put  into  the  place  of  his  beloved  Rachel.    Now  he  wins  in  Rachel  his
second  wife,  his  first  peculiar  elected  bride.     The  idea  of  the  bridal  marriage  leads
him  to  his  second  wife.     But  now  enters  the  still  stronger  idea  of  obtaining  children.
Leah  is  fruitful,  Rachel  unfruitful,  therefore  she  will  establish  her  higher  claims  upon
Jacob  with  the  jewels  of  children.     She  imitates  the  example  of  Sarah  and  brings  to
him  her  own  maid  Bilhah.     Then  Leah  appeals  to  the  sense  of  justice  in  Jacob,  and
strengthens  her  side  in  that  she   enlarges  it  through  Zilpah.     The  sin,  the  error,  is
here  abundantly  clear.     But  we  must  not  overlook  the  fact  that  Jacob  obtains  his
four  wives  under  the  impelling  dialectic  force  of  noble  Israelitish  motives  misunder
stood.     The  first  is  the  pure  sacred  marriage,  the  second  the  theocratic  blessing  of
children.     If  now,  we  view  the  most  serious  difficulties,  the  incest  of  Lot  with  his
daughters,  of  Judnh  with  his  daughter-in-law  Tamar,  we  name  as  the  first  explana
tory  principle  element  the  overlooked  facts,  that  in  both  cases  the  morally  proscribed
union  of  sexes  stands  opposed  to  the  most  unnatural  and  revolting  crimes.     The  op
position  to  the  sin  of  Lot  was  sodomy,  which  he  shunned  with  holy  horror ;  in  this
respect  he  escaped  the  judgment,  and  is  a  saint.     Thus  also  the  act  of  Judah  stands
in  opposition  to  the  sin  of  his  son   Onan  (Gen.  xxxviii.  9).     lie  was  punished  with
death  for  his,  even  in  a  natural  sense,  abominable  misdeed,  just  as  in  a  similar  way  the
people  of  Sodom  were  destroyed.     But  Judah  and  Lot  live.    And  even  in  their  error
they  defend  the  judgment  of  the  Israelitish  spirit  over  the  sodomy  and  onanism  and
the  like  abominable  lusts  of  the  heathen  world.    Moreover,  they  were  ignorant  in  both
cases  of  the  incest  which  they  committed,  although  the  one  in  drunkenness,  raid  the
other  in  the  joyful  exultation  of  the  feast  of  shearing,  fell  into  lewdness.     But  the  fe
males,  who  in  both  cases  knew  of  the  incest  and  come  into  view  as  the  chief  figures,
did  not  act  from  lust,  but  from  fanatical  error,  under  which  lay  the  moral  motive  of
the  theocratic  desire  for  children.     Lot's  daughters,   after  the   destruction  of  their
home,  fell  under  the  delusion  that  the  world,  at  all  events  the  theocratic  race,  was  in
danger  of  perishing.     Tamar  plainly  fanatically  seeks,  under  the  noblest  impulse,  as
a  heatheness,  the  house  of  Judah,  and  the  promises  which  were  given  to  him.    Ilcnco
the  unwearied  perseverance  with  which  she  repeatedly,  at  last  in  the  boldest  form,
pushes  herself  into  this  family.    Finally,  we  may  notice  here  still  the  well-known  writ
ing  of  divorcement  of  Moses.     According  to  the  way  in  which  the  Romish  church,
or  even  the  latest  legal  spirit  in  the  evangelic  church,  identifies  the  churchly  or  conse
crated  union  of  the  sexes,  with  the  perfect  marriage,  Moses,  in  the  permission  of
divorce,  comes  very  nearly  into  conflict  with  his  own  law,  "Thou  shalt  not  commit
adultery."     They  say   this  law,  minus   the  writing  of  divorce,  constitutes  marriage.
The  Bible  on  the  other  hand  teaches  that  the  theocratic  marriage  institution  rests
upon  the  seventh  command,  plus    the  ordinance  for  writings  of  divorce,  under  the
permission  of  separation.     That  is,  Moses  knew  a  higher  perfection  of  marriage  than
the  barely  legal  and  literal,  and  this  he  strove  to  attain,  just  as  the  whole  Old  Testament,
with  the  higher  spiritual  marriage,  strove  also  after  a  higher  spiritual  procreation.
Under  this  spirit  and  its  moral  motives,  the  patriarchal  families  in  succession  fell  into
fanatical  errors ;  but  in  these  errors,  the  ethical  spirit  of  the  whole  sexual  life  is  re-
6


82  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.

fleeted,  winch  corrects  the  heathen  disorderly  sexual  life,  arid  its  low  view  of  the  nature
of  conception.

XI.

The  Mosaic  System,  the  Giving  of  the  Law,  the  Threatening  of  the  Curse,  or  the  Glorification  of  all  the  Li-
vine  Education  of  Men,  through  the  Teaching  and  Leading  Power  of  the  Free  Religion  of  the  Covenant.

A  very  wide-spread  prejudice,  since  the  days  of  Marcion,  confounds  the  Old  Testa
ment  religion  of  faith  with  the  Mosaic  giving  of  the  law,  and  then  caricatures  this
law-giving  itself,  since  it  regards  it  as  a  despotic  or  dictatorial  bending  of  an  unwilling
people  under  absolute  statutes,  which  were  strengthened  by  intolerable  curses  which
should  pass  over  to  children  and  children's  children  (see  HEGEL:  Pfiilosophie  dcr  Re
ligion,  ii.  pp.  70  and  7-1).

History  and  the  scripture  teach  on  the  contrary  :  1.  that  it  is  not  the  Mosaic  giv
ing  of  the  law,  but  the  covenant  of  faith  of  Abraham  with  God,  which  is  the  founda
tion  of  the  Old  Testament  religion  (Gal.  iii.  19);  2.  the  Mosaic  law  is  not  the  first
thing  in  the  Mosaic  system  (viewing  it  as  a  stage  of  development  of  the  Abrahamic
religion,  in  its  transition  as  a  system  of  instruction  and  training  to  a  neglected  people),
but  the  Mosaic  typical  redemption,  the  miraculous  deliverance  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt
(Ex.  xx.  2) ;  3.  the  Mosaic  law-giving  itself  rests  upon  repeated  free  communication?
between  Jehovah  and  his  people  (Exodus  xix.  8  ;  xxiv.  3) ;  4.  the  Mosaic  commands
are  not  immediate  abstract  and  positive  statutes,  but  are  mediate,  as  religious  funda
mental  commands,  through  the  religious  spirit,  as  moral,  through  the  conscience  ;
5.  transgressions  were  not  visited  immediately  with  the  curse,  but  so  far  as  they  were
not  bold  and  obstinate,  were  taken  away  through  an  atonement;  G.  to  the  curse
which  was  spoken  against  the  obstinate  persistence  in  sin,  stands  opposed  the  super
abundant  blessings  which  were  promised  to  the  well-behaved  Israelite  ;  7.  the  Mosaic
system,  witli  its  own  peculiar  stages  of  development,  proclaims  its  own  goal,  in  the
prophetic  continuation  and  Messianic  completion,  and  forms  in  its  impelling  strength
the  direct  opposition  to  all  laws  of  an  absolute  nature.  "  Moses  wrote  of  Christ."
As  to  the  addition  to  the  second  command,  which  visits  the  misdeeds  of  the  fathers
upon  the  children,  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  mo  (Ex.  xx.
5),  this  threatening  is  opposed  by  the  promise  which  extends  the  blessing  of  the  pious
to  the  thousandth  of  his  successors.  But  in  their  violent  passion  over  the  threaten
ing,  these  ungracious  humanists  have  overlooked  that  it  is  the  same  law  of  tragical
connection  between  guilt  and  the  curse,  which  the  tragic  poets  of  Greece,  in  a  much
more  cruel  form,  have  poetically  glorified.  Let  them  first  come  to  an  arrangement
with  the  idea  of  the  tragedists,  they  will  then  find,  that  even  here  the  partially  fatal
istic  element  of  heathen  tragedy,  is  laid  aside,  while  its  sad  features  are  glorified.

But  the  Mosaic  system  generally  stands  as  the  system  of  instruction  and  prepara
tion  for  the  religion  of  promise,  as  it  trains  an  uninstructcd  people  to  the  culture  of
Christendom,  and  hence  also  as  the  glorification  of  all  divine  systems  of  preparatory
instruction  and  training.

XII.

The  Egyptian  Miracles  and  Plagues,  or  the  Typical  Revelation  of  the  Fact,  that  all  the  Visitations  of  God
upon  the  Nations  are  for  the  Good  of  the  People  and  Kingdom  of  God.

Hengstenberg  has  shown  in  his  thorough  and  learned  work  (Egypt  and  the  books


APPENDIX— THE  SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES   IN   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


of  Moses,  pp.  93-129)  that  the  Egyptian  plagues  and  miracles  arc  not  to  be  regarded
as  absolute  miraculous  decrees  of  God,  but  as  extraordinary  divine  leadings  and  judg
ments,  conditioned  and  introduced  through  the  nature  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  There
was  a  natural  foundation  for  the  miracles,  for  the  blood-red  color  of  the  Nile,  the  ap
pearance  of  the  frogs,  the  plagues  of  flies,  murrain,  sores,  the  hail  and  thunderstorm,
the  locusts,  the  Egyptian  darkness  (the  darkening  of  the  air  through  the  sandstorm)'
and  the  death  of  the  first-born  (the  plague).

This  connection  of  natural  events  in  an  extraordinary  succession,  form,  and  extent,
is  not  obscured  but  strengthened  through  their  reference  to  the  providence  of  Je
hovah,  and  the  redemption  of  his  people.  Rather  the  dark  events  of  the  earth  are
explained  and  glorified  in  the  idea  of  punishments,  and  the  judicial  punishment  glori
fies  itself  in  its  purpose  and  goal  to  awaken  and  save.

But  in  this  form,  the  visitations  of  God  upon  Israel  serve  to  bring  out  clearly  the
final  end  of  all  his  judicial  providence  over  the  individual  kingdoms  of  the  world,  in
their  opposition  to  his  church.


XIII.


The  Egyptian  Treasures,  or  the  Inheritance  of  the  Goods  of  this  World  by  the  Kingdom  of  God,  at  the
culminating  Points  of  the  Redemption  of  his  People.

In  the  first  place,  as  to  the  text,  it  does  not  say  that  the  Israelites  borrowed  the
gold  and  silver  jewels  of  the  Egyptians,  but  that  they  demanded  or  by  entreaties  ob
tained  them.*     In  favor  of  this  may  be  urged  first  the  expression  Schaal  (bxai),  which
retains  the  same  sense  throughout  the  passage  in  question  (Ex.  iii.  22  ;  xi.  2  ;*  xii.  35).
Tbc^ignification:  to  ask,  demand,  entreat,  is  the  prevailing  sense  of  the  word.     The
signification :  to  borrow,  is  scarcely  ever  used.     In  the  usual  acceptation,  indeed,  the
Iliphil  of  the  word  (=sibxa|^),  in  the  sense,  they  lend  to  them,  would  seem  to  require  the
corresponding  meaning  of  the  Kal :  they  Ion-owed  the  jewels.     And  Bauingartea  in
this  view  calls  (i.  p.  473)  Hengstenberg's  explanation  (Authentic,  ii.  p.  524)  very  arti-
The  word  in  question,  in  the  mouth  of  Hannah  (1  Sam.  i.  28),  cannot  well
I  lend  him  (the  son  prayed  for)  to  the  Lord  for  the  whole  of  his  life.     The
Eliphil,  in  its  correspondence  with  the  Kal,  to  entreat,  must  still  mean  to  give  richly
or  freoly,  to  grant,  especially  to  encourage  the  prayer.     Moses,  moreover,  if  he  had
been  speaking  of  borrowing  or  of  theft,  would  not  have  announced  it  so  long  before
hand,  as  a  prominent  event  in  the  freeing  of  the  people  (ch.  iii.  22);  and  the  attain
ing  of  the  desire  would  scarcely  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  people  found  or
should  find  favor  in  the  eyes  of  the  Egyptians  (ch.  iii.  21 ;  xi.  3 ;  xii.  30).    Thus  it  can
only  be  an  entirely  extraordinary  asking  which  is   here   spoken   of,    and  the  expres
sion  which  records  the  result  can  consequently  hardly  be  to  steal.     The  term  (bsa)
points  in  its  various  forms  rather  to  a  strong  and  violent  snatching  than  to  a  stealthy
theft.J    And  since  in  this  case  it  cannot  be  violence  which  is  spoken  of,  so  the  term
must  express  the  intellectual  ascendency  of  those  who  gained  the  inheritance,  a  mighty
appropriation  to  themselves.

*  Compare  HKNOSTENBERG  :  Authenticity  of  the  Pentateuch,  2  vol  p  507.

t  ,J  "Jh.°  V6rb  £**)»  t0  def e'  can  only  be  in  H'Phil  t°  cauBo  another  to  deS:re.    It  designates  then  a  freely  of-
ed  g,ft  m  opposition  to  one  which  is  given  only  from  outward  constraint,  or  only  from  shameless  bogrfn-     Who
ever  freely  grvcs  thereby  invites  the  other  to  ask ;  he  cannot  ask  too  much,  not  enough  indeed."     This  i,  surely  in


Hx-ngstenberg,  p.  525.


INTRODUCTION    TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


not    u   a.     The  first  demand  of  Moses  foi
nly  lor  a  brief  journey  into  the  wilderness,  for  the  purpose  oi  holding^
s    (Ex         v    1);  but  aftenvard  the  demand  increased  in  the  same  measure  in
i      imnrl   M.   viii  1  •  ix   1  •  x.  24).     JJut  after  the  judgment
"''''^'"r'T'^U   :"i"  -    ^"   -  V-MM-Uion  t,,!lt  they  wonld  re,,,,,,  as

r:,  ';:;:  ;  ,"  ±  .-  ^  ^  T"'  E^itiaus  drovc  tbc  ISTIUCS  ;;•;'•

,    ;          d,     U   ro  ection  of  their  God,  had  boco.no  u  tenor  to  them.       bo
::  v     'l,  l>l,:n-h  could  perhap.  have  mado,  ho  abandons  immedate.y  after-

:,   i      h  •    i  o  ,«,»««  tho  I.n.olitos,  makes  War  upon  tbom,  and  pensho,
We  IT-  i:.    ovk,v  ,ho  .liilin-ont  explanations  of  this  passage.     Iho  o  do,  ,  ox-

-.  ......  "


.

orv  ol'  this  oarlul  moment  to  show,  in  which  U,c  despised  s  aves,  tlio  J  «s,  „  ,
,.    roml  oppressors,  now  hnmbled  by  God,  pass  into  a  people  01  <
.  ,„  I'o     ';    1  v,  ho  onl    neod  to  ask,  whether  as  ,  favor,  or  as  a  loan,  or  as  n  demand
"',;      .     ,,,     R  .Uvcr  Iroasuros,  and  they  ate  cast  before  thorn  as  an  a,K,,owl,,  ;^
rilmtc  ..I'  reveronec  un.l  lea.-.  Their  sous  and  daiiylilers  an-  loaded
"'"'V    '"i:'Ur;;i,        ,';,     TlMosos  „,  Lg  «>«»*  Ibi.  -„»«,*  marks  the
:'""    ""'""-::.  S'use     t    ho"  not  only  his  hmnau  prndouco,  but  even  his

:.;;;;  r;;.1;;;  ^^11  ^  ",  .....  t  ^  -,„«,  ^^  ^  r  ^  i—,

,;        '     ol.U.  who  will  provide  for  him,  after  his  long  sorrows  and  doprivat  ions  the
,  ,d  -it  tho  very  foundation  of  hi-  lungd.m,  appropnul.-s  with

;;:;;::;;';'::;:;  ;  «  ,  r,.,,  won:;:  i»  >,^,,  ^  ,-,„,.,  A,,,,^,  ,,.1  .„-

„•„„  th    hoatho,,,  ,l,us  Jacoh  by  Laban,  and  thus  s  nco  the  chnrch  o
tl,e  tine  of  Constantine,  after  its  victory  over  the  Roman  empire;  and
n  H  c  —  the  cl-ch  of  the  middle  ages,  after  the  irvuption  o.  tho  ba,  .ana,,

'  u»


ki  .....  ,lom  of  Cud.  a,nl  civilization  shall  be  absorbed  m  worship.


XIV


of  the  Kingdom  of  God.     Balaam's  speaking  Ass.


he   account  of  the  contest  of  Moses  with  the  Egyptian  conjurers.


APPENDIX— THE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES   IN   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        85


at  his  command.*  Moses,  with  his  miraculous  rod,  or  staff,  works  in  the  three  re
gions  of  life  miracles  of  punishment  and  salvation  ;  in  the  region  of  elementary
nature  (changing  water  into  blood,  bitter  water  into  sweet) ;  in  the  region  of  organic
nature  (making  the  rod  to  become  a  serpent,  and  the  serpent  a  rod) ;  in  the  region
M'  human  life  (calling  forth  the  leprosy  and  healing  it).  He  can  do  this  truly  only
in  the  service  of  the  Lord,  and  therefore  only  in  decisive  preordained  moments.  But
then  lie  can  do  this  with  an  evidence  Avhich  puts  to  shame  all  magical  art  and
worldly  culture.  Thus  gradually,  and  step  by  step,  the  Egyptian  conjurers  were
pr.t  to  naught  before  him.  The  first  distinction  is,  that  they  could  only  imitate
what  Moses  did  before  them;  the  second,  that  they  could  only  do  upon  a  small  scale
what  Moses  did  upon  a  large ;  the  third,  that  they  could  imitate  in  the  destructive
miracles,  not  in  those  which  delivered  and  saved;  the  fourth,  that  they  could  not
imitate  the  great  destructive  miracles;  the  last,  that  they  themselves  perished  in  the
destructive  miracles  of  Moses.  At  the  very  beginning,  their  rods  were  devoured  by
the  terrible  rod  of  Moses,  and  at  the  end  they  stand  there  without  power,  they
themselves  filled  with  sores,  and  their  first-born  given  to  death.

Balaam  undoubtedly  represents  the  ideal  character  of  the  art  and  culture  of  the
world  ;  f  as  it  places  and  defines  itself,  in  its  common  or  ordinary  life,  as  in  the
sphere  of  its  conscious  thought  or  purpose,  it  opposes  the  people  of  God  and  his
kingdom,  and  especially,  by  the  device  ol  lustful  and  drinking  banquets,  it  could  work
great  injury  to  the  church  of  God ;  and  yet  must  ever,  in  the  sphere  of  its  con-
sclous  feeling,  in  the  impetus  of  its  inspiration  through  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  be  car
ried  beyond  itself,  bless  the  people  of  the  kingdom,  and  testify  of  its  salvation  and
victory.  This  opposition  between  the  purpose  and  the  inspiration  in  the  spheres
of  worldly  genius  and  culture  is  world-historical,  not  less  so  than  the  fact  that  even
the  worldly  genius  in  its  philosophic  systems,  with  its  poetical  and  artistic  culture,
prophesies  of  Christ  and  blesses  his  kingdom.

But  Balaam's  ass  is  destined  to  portray  the  fact,  that  the  ass  itself  must  become
a  prophet,  when  the  worldly  prophet,  who  rides  him,  will  become  an  ass.  This
grand  irony,  according  to  which  Genius  in  its  fallen  state  is  more  blind  and  dumb
than  the  ass  which  it  rides,  according  to  which  the  prophet  who  rides  the  ass  is
changed  into  an  ass  who  rides  the  prophet,  does  not  stand  there  as  a  perplexity  to
the  believer  and  a  sport  to  the  unbeliever.  And  it  is  truly  the  guilt  of  the  apologetic
school  theology  if  it  falls  into  distress  about  the  ass  of  Balaam,  when  the  free-thinkers
lustily  ride  upon  it.

That  the  species  of  the  horse,  to  which  the  ass,  especially  the  oriental  ass,  be
longs,  is  inclined  to  be  timid,  and  through  its  fright  can  draw  attention  to  hidden
dangerous  circumstances— indeed,  that  it  has  an  inexplicable  power  to  recognize
ghost-like  appearances,  or  even  in  its  way  to  see  spirits,  all  this  is  confirmed  through
the  strangest  things.  More  than  once  has  the  stumbling  of  a  horse  been  an  evil
omen  to  his  rider,  and  Napoleon  played  the  part  of  Balaam  on  the  other  side  of  the
Niemen.

That  the  voice  of  an  act  or  event,  thus  even  of  the  mighty  utterance  of  the  animal
soul,  may  become,  in  the  plastic  forming  impulse  of  a  visionary  genius,  a  miracle  of
vision,  and  most  easily  the  .Bath  ICol,  the  voice,  this  needs  no  detailed  explanation.]:

*  The  books  of  Moses,  p.  71.

Especially  the  wisdom  of  the  Chaldces  upon  the  Euphrates,  see  BAUMGARTKN,  ii.  p.  349.
I  We  may  not  here  think  of  a  barely  inward  event.     The  way,  however,  in  which  BAUMGARTKJT.  ii.  p.  359,  defends


"fin-lily  repeated  terrors  of  conscience  may  awaken  the  inward  life  of  the
•pi£^£±tt  -tchf.1,  f-  the  reception  of  the  higher  and  dearer  rnan*s  -
rtion.  of  the  Spirit,  thus  in  the  prophetic  region,  even  for  an:
ee  tenches


the  expedition  to  destroy


XV.


7Vtc  Arresting  of  the  Sun  by  JusJnia  (Joshua  x.)-

We  will  no.  speak  here  of  the  great  exegetic.l  hi.tory  of  this  place.     The  papal
eJ"  which  IcC  fish  not  to  he  flesh,  ,nd  once^ejected  t  ^ocUnjc    f  t^  .  u


of  its  true  religious,  indeed


::,;;;


If  it  is  allowed


f  the  ass  asalnst  HENGSTESBEKG,  appears  to  us


\    ItS   rL'll     (JlliUllluapiivw    iyj. -./ 1.^-,"-  -—     „  j

1  For  the  different  explanations  compare  W.KKB,  ^rffcte  J<w7.w».


APPENDIX— THE   SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES   IX   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.       87


Leaven,  and  earth,  are  in  covenant  with  the  people  of  God,  and  ever  aid  them  to
victory  in  the  wars  of  his  kingdom.

Although  we  do  not  share  the  view  of  those  interpreters  who  think  that  we  are
only  dealing  here  with  a  poetical  and  symbolical  style  of  expression  (which  the
papal  exegesis  conld  not  use),  which,  in  the  sun  of  Gibeon  and  the  moon  of  Ajalon,
.glorifies  the  sunniest  and  through  midnight  protracted,  brightest  day  of  victory,  AVC
would  not  deny  the  relation  of  the  text  to  a  song  of  victory.  It  has  been  overlooked
perhaps,  that  in  our  history  the  storm  of  hail  which  terrifies  and  follows  the  hostile
Amorites,  is  placed  significantly  over  against  the  sun  and  moon  of  Joshua,  which
give  light  to  the  people  of  Israel.  When  the  theocratic  hero  and  conqueror,  in  the
view  of  such  a  terrible  storm  of  hail,  on  the  part  of  heaven,  utters  the  prophecy :
we  shall  have  the  clearest  sunshine  upon  our  line  of  battle,  and  at  the  evening  the
light  of  the  moon,  that  is  a  peculiar  miracle,  which  is  closely  joined  as  to  its  stamp
and  character  with  the  great  Mosaic  miracles  of  victorv.*


Tlie  Old  Testament  Theocratic  Miracles  of  Salvation,  as  parallel  Miracles,  or  as  extraordinary  Phenomena
of  Nature,  which  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy  recognizes,  announces  and  uses  as  Saving  Ordinances  of  God,
and  in  which  it  proclaims  the  Truth,  that  the  miraculous  points  in  the  Earth's  Development,  from  the
Flood  on  to  the  Final  Grand  Catastrophe  at  the  End  of  the  World,  runs  parallel  with  the  Development
of  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  its  Great  Eventful  Moments,  and  promotes  its  Salvation  and  Glorification.

That  I  may  not  unduly  enlarge  this  essay,  I  remark  that  the  above  paragraph,
while  it  may  be  regarded  as  clearly  intelligible  in  the  outline  given,  finds  its  de
tailed  explanation  in  the  work  of  the  author  upon  miracles  (Lelen  Jesu,  2  Bd.).  In
some  particular  Old  Testament  miraculous  deeds,  the  signs  of  the  NCAV  Testament
miracles  appear,  i.  e.,  the  signs  of  the  absolute  victory  of  the  theanthropic  spirit
over  the  human,  natural  world.


The  Destruction  of  the  Canaanitish  People.

This  must  be  viewed  as  the  symbol  of  the  continuous  destruction  of  malefactors
in  the  Christian  state.  They  were  destroyed  so  far  as  they,  as  Canaanites,  that  is
here  as  the  servants  of  Moloch,  claimed  the  holy  land,  and  would  live  under  the
establishment,  or  in  defiance  of  the  establishment  of  Israel.  Two  ways  of  escape
were  opened  to  them :  the  way  of  flight  from  the  land,  or  the  way  of  conversion
to  the  Faith  of  Israel.  The  cunning  of  the  Gibeonitcs  found  a  third  way  (Josh,
ix.).

[  *  The  great  Mosaic  miracles  were  wrought  indeed  in  connection  with  natural  agencies  or  forces,  but  were  none  the
less  real  miracles.  The  fact,  that  tho  storm  was  miraculous,  does  not  meet  the  demands  of  the  narrative  of  the  arrest
ing  of  the  sun  and  moon.  There  arc  great  difficulties,  unquestionably,  involved  in  such  a  miracle  as  this,  hut  difficul
ties  are  not  a  matter  of  great  weight,  to  any  one  who  admits  the  miracle  at  all,  and  when  therefore  the  question  is
merely  one  of  the  power  of  God.  Keil,  who  holds  strongly  that  if  the  passage  in  question  is  to  he  taken  as  a  part  of
the  historical  narrative,  we  are  not  to  be  troubled  by  the  difficulties  supposed,  contends  with  great  ability,  and  as  a
caere  exegetieal  question,  that  the  passage  must  he  regarded  as  a  quotation  from  the  poetical  book  of  Jashcr,  which
is  introduced  into  the  narrative,  "not  as  a  historical  statement,  but  as  a  poetical  description  of  the  great  victory.  See
KEIL  :  The,  book  of  Joshua.  If,  however,  we  may  take  the  passage  as  historical,  and  then  of  course  hold  to  tho  literal
miracle,  that  tho  earth  was  stayed  in  its  course  by  the  hand  of  God,  how  grandly  it  brings  out  the  fact,  aa  Lango  states
it,  "that  heaven  and  earth  are  in  connection  with  the  people  of  God,  and  ever  help  them  to  victory  in  the  wars  of  hie
kingdom."— A.  G.  ]


INTRODUCTION'   TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.


XVIII.


The  Ascension  of  Elijah  in  a  Chariot  of  Fire,  .is  the  culminating  Point  of  the  consistent  Development  of

the  Mosaic  Law.

The  consistent  unfolding  of  the  Mosaic  law,  in  its  judicial  punitive  righteous
ness  is  completed  in  the  form  of  the  prophet  Elijah.  Hence  the  punitive  miracle  is
the  prevailing  typo  of  his  work.  lie  punishes  the  people  of  Israel  for  its  apostasy,
with  a  three-years'  drought  and  famine,  he  slays  the  priests  of  Baal,  announces  to
the  house  of  Ahab  its  destruction,  and  calls  down  lire  from  heaven  upon  the  two
captains  of  U.aziah  with  their  companies.  In  this  consistent  unfolding  of  the  pro.
phetic  judicial  procedure,  he  is  on  the  way  to  the  final  calling  of  the  fires  of  the
Lament  upon  the  corrupt  of  the  world.  The  third  captain  of  fifty,  sent  by  the
kin  ,7  of  Israel  to  bring  the  prophet,  w<  eps  an  1  clings  to  his  knees  praying
aud°E]  lg  tiiat  he  milst  arrest  the  judgment.  But  therewith  he  has  the  pre

sentiment  that  he  is  about  to  leave  the  earth.     He  can  no  more  endure  the  earth,
nor  the  earth  bear  him,  and  the  fiery  spirit  is  borne  to  heaven  in  a  storm  of  fire.
The  first  persecution  by  Ahab  drove  him  into  the  loneliness  of  the  heathen  world
the  second  by  Je/.ebel,  when  she  threatened  him  with  death,  drove  him  to  Ilorc-b,
the  cradle  of  the  law,  where  he  would  willingly  have  died.     In  his  fiery  triumph
over  the  oilicers  of  the  third  persecution,  he  appears  already  as  a  lofty  Cherub  with
a  flamin"  sword,  who  sends  down  from  the  mountain  the  fiery  judgments  of  heaven.
And  stilt  this  is  only  the  consistent  fulfilling  of  his  true  Mosaic  office.
tolerant  heart,  otherwise  he  could  not  have  dwelt  with  a  heathen  widow  and  among  a
people  tint  had  given  to  his  land  the  corrupt  princess  Jezebel  as  queen ;  a  loviiiff  heart,
•is  is  shown  in  his  miraculous  raising  of  the  dead,  a  heartopened  for  the  presentiments
of, 'he  go^l,  which  appears  in  his  trembling  and  awe  at  the  still  small  voice,  in  the
feclincr  that  Jehovah  was  now  to  appear,  which  he  had  not  experienced  in  the  s
and  earthquake,  and  fire;  a  merciful  heart,  and  therefore  he  pauses  in  the  imu
his  fiery  judgments  and  takes  his  departure  from  the  earth.     But  the  Lord  prepare
for  him  a  worthy  end,  when  he  permits  him  to  vanish  from  the  earth  in  a  f
sio-n  from  heaven.     We  cannot  so  paint  this  history  for  ourselves  as  that
which  speaks  even  of  the  Jtoof*  of  these  fiery  hor.          Had  the  friends  of  Elijah  sc
the  hoofs  of  the  horses,  they  would  surely  not  have  sent  fifty  men  for  three  days  to
search  for  the  vanished  prophet.     But  just  as  little  arc  we  to  understand  the  na:
rative  as  a  mere  description  of  a  disappearance  in  some  peculiar  storm.  ee,

in  this  grand  moment,  a  kind  of  'end  of  the  world,  we  shall  also  recognize  in  tins
chariot  of  fire  the  mystery  of  a  primitive  original  phenomenon.*

The  opposition  between  Elijah  and  Elisha  marks  the  turning  point  in  the  history
of  Israel,  with   which  the  judicial  office  and  rank  of  the  law  retires  into  the
-round,  and  the  providence  of  mercy  comes  into  relief,  out  of  which  the  prophecy
of  salvation  unfolds  itself.     Elisha  inherits  a  double  portion  of  the  spirit  of  -bJgah,
and  this  appears  clearly,  since  he  with  his  miracles  of  healing  and  salvation  (in  oppo-
«ition  to  the  punitive  miracles  of  Elijah)  forms  the  type  of  the  coming  gospel,
punitive  miracle  indeed  still  appears  in  his  life,  but  the  essential  and  determining  char
acter  of  his  work,  forms  a  circle  of  helping,  healing,  and  delivering  miracles.     Elijah
enters  the  history  as  a  glorified  Moses,  Elisha  as  the  type  of  the  Christ  to  come.

[•  That  is,  pcrhap,,  the  mystery  of  the  ideal  death  or  of  the  mode  of  transition  to  the  higher  life,     i
-A.  G.]


APPENDIX— THE  SO-CALLED   DIFFICULT   PLACES   IN    THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.        89


TJie  Types  of  the  New  Tisiamcnt  Miracles,  and  of  the  Victory  of  the  JVtw  Tegument  Spirit.     Book  of

Daniel.

There  appears  very  early  in  the  Old  Testament  a  definite  kind  of  helping  and
saving  miracles,  which  grows  more  distinct  in  the  life  of  Elisha,  and  reaches  its
highest  culture  and  perfection  in  the  book  of  Daniel.  Elisha  appears  as  one  who
raises  from  the  dead,  in  a  greatly  higher  measure  than  Elijah ;  even  his  grave
restores  the  corpse  to  liiV.  lie  heals  the  fountains  of  bitter  waters  with  salt,  and
the  poisonous  meal  in  the  pot.  makes  the  waters  of  Jordan  a  healing  bath  to
Xaaman  the  Syrian,  raises  the  lost  axe  from  the  bottom  of  Jordan  in  a  miraculous
way,  proves  himself  a  spiritual  reprover  and  saviour  of  Israel,  triumphs  over  the
hostile  hosts  who  were  besieging  him,by  the  help  of  the  hosts  of  the  Lord,  and
sends  away  his  enemies  who  fell  into  his  hands,  with  mercy,  to  their  homes.  In
the  miracles  of  the  book  of  Daniel,  which  bear  more  distinctly  the  character  of  the
N"ew  Testament  miracles,  because  they  arc  the  victorious  miracles  of  suffering,  the
Now  Testament  time,  the  victory  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  over  the  monarchies  of
the  world,  is  clearly  announced.  The  three  men  in  the  fiery  furnace,  especially,  pro
claim  with  the  greatest  clearness,  and  in  the  grandest  symbolism,  the  victory  of  the
Christian  martyrdom.


I.

GENESIS


OR,

THE   FIKST   BOOK   OF   MOSES,


INTRODUCTION.


§  1.     GEXERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO   GENESIS.

GENESIS  is  tlie  record  of  the  creation  of  the  material  world,  of  the  founding  of  the  spiritual
world,  or  kingdom  of  God,  and  of  general  and  special  revelation;  as  such  it  stands  at  the  head
of  all  Scripture  as  the  authentic  basis  of  the  whole  Bible.  It  is  consequently,  in  the  first  place,
the  basis  for  all  the  books  of  the  Old  and  the  Xew  Testament  in  general,  a  root  whose  trunk
cxtends  through  all  Scripture,  and  whose  crown  appears  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  new  Genesis,
or  the  prophetic  record  of  the  completed  new,  spiritual  world  and  city  of  God.

In  the  special  sense,  then,  it  is  the  basis  of  the  whole  Old  Testament;  in  the  most  special
sense  it  is  the  basis  of  the  Pentateuch.  The  Introduction  to  the  Sacred  Scriptures  in  general,
we  have  already  given  in  the  "Commentary  on  Matthew."  The  Introduction  to  the  Old
Testament  precedes  the  present  exposition.  We  have  yet  to  treat  of  the  Introduction,  to  the
Pentateuch,  or  the  Five  Books  of  Moses.

OBSERVATION.— Compare  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  Introduction  of  the  "  Commen
tary  of  DELITZSOH.  The  author  has  said  many  valuable  tilings  of  the  deep  significance  of
Genesis.  For  example :  "  Genesis  and  Apocalypse,  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  the  canonical
writings,  correspond  to  each  other.  To  the  creation  of  the  present  heaven  and  the  present
earth  corresponds  the  creation  of  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth  on  the  last  pages  of  the
Apocalypse.  To  the  first  creation,  which  has  as  its  object  the  first  man  Adam,  corresponds
the  new  creation  which  has  its  outgoing  from  the  second  Adam.  Thus  the  Holy  Scriptures
form  a  rounded,  completed  whole ;  a  proof  that  not  merely  this  or  that  book,  but  also  tho
Canon,  is  a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit."

But  Delitzsch  confounds  here  and  elsewhere  (as  also  Kurtz)  the  significance  of  the  biblical
book  of  Genesis,  with  the  significance  of  the  living  Divine  Revelation  that  throughout  precedes
the  biblical  books  themselves  and  their  historical  covenant  institutions.  It  might  be  going  too
far  to  say:  "The  edifice  of  our  salvation  reaching  into  eternity,  rests  accordingly  on  the  pillars
of  this  book."  Tim  edifice  rests,  indeed,  on  the  living,  personal  Christ,  although  the  faith  in
Him  is  effected  and  ruled  by  the  Holy  Writ.  In  a  similar  manner  it  must  appear  one-sided,
when  the  Pentateuch,  as  a  book,  is  made  the  basis  of  the  Old  Covenant,  or  even  of  the  New ;
although  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  quite  as  wrong  if  we  do  not  count  the  records  of  divine
revelation  within  the  sphere  of  revelation.

LITERARY  SUPPLEMENTS  TO  THE  BIBLE  IN  GENERAL. — Sec  Literary  Catalogue  in  HEP/TWIG'S
labelhn;  KURTZ :  " History  of  the  Old  Covenant,"  Introduction;  KIRCIIHOFER  :  Eilelkunde,
pp.  1,  2,  19  ff. ;  WINER,  i.  p.  75.  Works  on  this  subject  by  Griesinger,  Cellerier,  Kleuker.—
K.OPPEN:  "The  Bible,  a  Book  of  Divine  Wisdom."  Prideaux,  Stockhouse,  Lilienthal,  etc.
URAM:  "  Surveys  of  Universal  History,"  Strasburg,  1885:  BEKTSCH:  "History  of  the  Old  Cove-
nant  and  its  People,"  Stuttgart,  1857.


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


A.     THE   PENTATEUCH.

§ .-.   xin:  ri:."ri  A  ri;ucir,  on  THI:  FIVE  BOOKS  01-'  MOSES-THE  TIIOIIAH.   ORGANIC  XJXITYT  A>;D

AllEAXGEMEXT.

The  Hebrew  Thorali  (.•'.  £.,  doctrine,  especially  doctrine  of  the  law,— law),  or  the  record  of
(lie  covenant  reli'.-ion  of  the  Old  Testament  (.'/  TraXnia  Sui^/a;,  2  Cor.  iii.  11;  SUI^K?/  -  r^-i2),
lias  its  real  principle  not  so  much  in  the  Mosaic  law  as  in  the  Abraluimic  covenant,  of  faith  ad
cifected  hy  the  first  preparation  of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  ereation  of  tin:  world  and  of  man
(sec  Kom.  iv.  1.  If. :  (lid.  iii.  17).

Genesis  is,  therefore,  not  the  introduction  to  the  five  books  of  Moses,  especially  to  the  la\v-
givin-  portion,  as  Kurz  supposes  (-'Compendium  of  sacred  history,"  p.  94;  it  is  true,  with  the
restriction:  "For  the  Israelitish  standpoint  the  first  book  has  only  the  import  of  an  historical
introducti  >n  "),  for  this  would  correspond  to  a  specific  and  Jndaistic  view  of  the  Old  Testament;
l,r,t  it  i3  tl  /  foundation  for  it  ;  /.  e.,  for  the  temporary  economic  particularity  of  the

patriarchal  state  and  of  the  law-giving.     Genesis  is  the  special  root  of  the  Thorah.  and  the  pen-
oral  root  of  the  Holy  AVrit.

Hence  the  Pentateuch,  including  this  basis,  is  developed  in  five  books;  (Ilcbraice:
.__.__,  .,^-rn  rr-.'-r  ,  the  five  fifths  of  the  law  in  rabbinical  notation.  Grece:  »/  •n(,.'Tar(vXus
's<\  Piti\os.  '  Latin':  lit'cr  I'cnt^fcuch'/i).  The  number  five  is  the  half  number  ten.  Ten  is  the
number  of  the  perfect  moral  or  historical  development;  live  is  the  number  of  the  hand,  of
action,  of  freedom,  and  so  then  also  of  their  legal  standard.

The  founding  of  the  law  in  Genesis  unfolds  itself  in  the  triple  form  of  legislation.  Exodus
Exodi;  f,!£<>8os;  Hebrew:  p.vri)  presents  the  prophetic  side  of  the  law  throughout.
Even  the  Tabernacle,  whoso  construction  is  described  from  eh.  xxxv.-xl.,  belongs  not  mainly
on  the  side  of  the  priestly  service,  but  on  that  of  the  prophetic  legislation  of  God,  as  the  place
of  the  living  presence  of  the  lawgiver,  and  of  the  law  itself  (in  the  ark  of  the  Covenant ;  hence:
Olid  mf>c<l,  Ohcl  haaluth,  tent  of  meeting,  tent  of  testimony).

Leviticus  (Ileb. :  x-pv,  (Jr.:  Xfvi™«V)  embraces  the  priestly  side  of  the  law,  the  holy
order  of  service  for  the  Israeliti-h  people,  according  to  its  symbolical  and  universal  significance
,n  iis  most  comprehensive  sense.

The  book  of  Numbers  (Ileh.:  nanss,  Or.:  a^tyo.')  is  ruled  throughout  by  the  idea  ot  the
princely  or  royal  encampment  of  the  people  of  Israel  as  an  army  of  divine  warriors,  in  which
are  presented  its  prcconditionings  and  its  typically  significant  characteristics,  revealing,  as  they
do, 'by  manifold  disorder,  that  tins  people  is  not  the  actual  people  of  God,  but  only  the  type  of

that  people.  .

These  three  fundamental  forms  of  the  symbolical  Messianic  law,  namely  the  prophetic,  tJ
priestly  and  the  royal,  are  embraced  in  Deuteronomy  (TIeb.:  n-nan,  Or.:  8evrfpoi»o/*i'ov),  or
in  the  solemn  free  reproduction  of  the  whole  law  again  as  a  unity,  in  order  to  point  from  the
sphere  of  the  legal  letter  into  the  sphere  of  the  inner  prophetic  force  of  the  law  (compare  Dent,
iv.  25  ;  ch.  v.  15,  21— the  ordering  of  house  and  wife ;  ch.  vi.  5  ;  x.  18-19  ;  xi.  1 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xviu.
15  ;  on.  xxviii.  ft*,  xxx.  G;  xxx.  2-14;  ch.  xxxiii.  2-3).

As  in  Exodus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers,  the  historical  period  of  Israel  is  opened,  so  Deuter
onomy  points  forward  to  the  prophetic  period.

From  the  foregoing  it  appears  that  we  can  divide  the  Pentateuch  into  three  main  divisions;
namely,  into  Genesis  as  the  universal  foundation  of  the  law,  next  into  the  particular  law  that
shows^  with  its  Messianic,  significant,  triple  division,  the  symbolical  background  of  its  whole
appearance  (/.  c.,  into  the  divisions  Exodus,  Leviticus,  Numbers),  and  finally  into  Deuteronomy,
in  which,  along  with  the  intrinsic  character,  the  universal  import  of  the  law  again  propn(
ically  appears.

OBSERVATION  1.  For  the  more  general  category,  Historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament  *»
the  division  in  the  general  Introduction.  In  respect  to  the  literature,  see  Literary  Catalogue.


2.     THE   PENTATEUCH,  OK   THE   FIVE   BOOKS   OF    MOSES.


OBSERVATION  2.  The  present  division  into  five  books  is  considered  by  some  (Berthold)  a*
original  and  peculiar  to  the  Hebrew  collection  of  the  Canon.  According  to  others  (IKivernick.
Lengcrke)  it  proceeds  from  the  Alexandrians.  In  favor  of  the  first  view  is  the  fact  that  Josephus!
who  retained  the  Hebrew  canon,  was  acquainted  with  this  division  (contra  Apion.  i.  8,  also
Philo).  De  WUte  seems  also  to  incline  to  this  opinion.  Michaelis  considered  this  division
older  than  the  Septuagint,  but  not  original.  According  to  Vaihinger  (see  the  article  Pentateuch
in  HER/DO'S  Real- Lex  icon),  the  division  of  the  Pentateuch  into  five  books  was  made  before  the
captivity.  But  the  same  learned  authority  supposes  it  not  to  have  been  made  until  after  t!;«
division  of  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  into  four  parts,  because  the  conscious  influence  of  symbol
ical  numbers  had  not  favored  the  number  five  until  after  that  period,  as  with  the  division  of  the
Psalms  into  five  books,  and  the  presentation  of  the  five  Megilloth.

We  do  not  consider  this  argument  conclusive  against  the  earlier  division  of  Closes  into  five
books.  The  Jew  could  distinguish  a  significant  number  four,  and  a  significant  number  five,
even  according  to  this  numerical  symbolism.  In  the  Pentateuch  the  number  five  seems  to  have
been  indicated  from  the  beginning  by  the  variety  of  the  originals.  That  Genesis  is  actually  in
contrast  with  the  following  books,  and  that  Deuteronomy  is  quite  as  specific,  is  evident.  Tho
fundamental  ideas  of  the  three  middle  books,  do  not  contrast  less  specifically  with  each  other,
as  appears  from  our  division.

It  serves  even  to  a  better  appreciation  of  the  import  of  the  Tabernacle,  when  we  consider
that  it  is  an  annex  of  the  Decalogue,  and  of  the  whole  fundamental  lawgiving  connected  there
with,  and  that,  in  accordance  with  this,  it  is  represented  in  the  second  book  as  the  place  where
in  Jehovah,  as  lawgiver,  is  present  to  his  people.  The  contents  of  the  fourth,  again,  are  in
strong  contrast  with  Leviticus  (as  the  book  of  the  tribes).  The  ethical  prophetical  book  of
Exodus  is  especially  the  book  of  God  and  his  prophet,  Leviticus,  or  the  book  of  the  divine
office,  refers  especially  to  the  priests.  [Numbers,  or  the  book  of  the  tribes,  more  especially  con
cerns  the  people  in  a  theocratic,  political  sense.

OBSERVATION-  3.  If  we  mark  the  number  ten  as  the  number  of  perfection,  or  completion,
and  consequently  the  number  five  as  the  number  of  half  completion  (Vaihinger),  such  classifica
tion  scorns  much  too  general  and  indefinite,  since  the  numbers  three,  seven,  and  twelve,  are  also
numbers  of  perfection,  or  completion,  each  in  its  kind.  It  will  be  our  duty  to  treat  of  symbol
ical  numbers  in  Exodus.  II ere  we  will  simply  anticipate  that  clearly  "  the  tl-n  words  "  *  indicate
moral  completion,  or  perfect  development,  and  so  also  the  ten  virgins  in  the  gospel  parable.
When,  however,  there  appear  five  as  foolish  and  five  as  prudent  or  wise,  the  number  five  may


indeed  mark  the  number  of  the  freely  chosen  religious  and  moral  development  of  life.  Five
books  of  Psalms  indicate  the  moral  and  religious  life-prime  of  the  Old  Testament,  just  as  the
five  Megilloth  indicate  five  periods  of  the  development  of  Israelitish  life.  The  five  fingers  of


naming  of  the  Septuagint,  followed  by  the  vulgatc  (only  that  the  gender  of  Pentateuch  and
Exodus  in  Greek  is  feminine  on  account  of  tfipXos  and  ciSJr,  in  Latin  masculine  on  account  of
liber).

The  five  books,  which  were  comprised  by  the  Jews  under  the  above  names:  the  five  fifths
of  the  law,  were  individually  designated  by  them,  according  to  the  initial  words :  Breschith,  &c.,
as  this  naming  has  passed  into  the  Masoretic  Bibles.  But  the  Jews  had  also  a  designation  for
the  five  books,  according  to  the  contents,  i.  c.,  Genesis  was  called  the  book  of  the  creation  (see
VAIHIXGEB  in  HERZOG'S  Encyclopedia,  Art.  Pentateuch,  p.  2(J:J).

OBSERVATION  5.  Vaihinger  seeks  for  the  five  books  of  Moses  a  second  half,  and  finds  it  in
the  prophets  (law  and  the  prophets,  Matt.  xxii.  40).  Thi-i  division  is  interfered  with  by  the  inter
vention  of  the  Kethubim.  Then  he  finds  the  second  half  in  the  additional  idea  of 'the  law  as
promise  in  the  New  Testament.  Without  doubt,  the  New  Testament  is  the  converse  of  the  Old ;
that,  however,  the  number  five,  as  such,  requires  a  complement,  becomes  doubtful  by  the  num
ber  of  the  bo  >ks  of  the  Psalms,  unless  we  are  to  consider  the  writings  of  Solomon  as  the  comple
ment  of  these  five  books  of  Psalms.  It  is  true,  a  complement  follows  the  fiva  historical  books,
in  the  Apostolic  writings  of  the  New  Testament,

OBSERVATION'  G.  It  has  been  maintained  by  Ewald,  Bleek,  Knobel,  and  others,  that  the  basis
of  the  Pentateuch  was  originally  connected  with  the  book  of  Joshua,  and  that  the  work  was  in
six  parts  (see  VAIIIINGKE,  p.  293;  KEIL,  Introduction,  §  42,  p.  US).  It  is  curious  that  the  same
•iticism  which  on  the  one  hand  considers  these  books  of  Moses  too  brge  to  have  been  original,
on  the  other  hand  again  thinks  them  dismembered  out  of  larger,  and"  comparatively  modern,
historical  writings.

*  [The  Hebrew  phrase  for  the  ten  commandments,  C'n^irt  fl"!  r.?.  5  ESO(IUS  sxxiv.  28.— T.  L.]


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


5  3.     OKIG1X  AND  COMPOSITION  OF  THE


In  the  introductory  paragraphs  on  the  Old  Testament  criticism,  it  has  been  said,  that  in
treatin-  the  point  in  question,  we  neither  feel  dependent  on  tradition  and  the  orthodox  rule,

hat  it  Is  necessary  for  the  belief  of  the  canonical  word  of  God  to  attribute  to  Moses  all  the  five
books  of  Moses  in  the  present  form  (except  the  report  of  his  death),  nor  on  the  critical  con-

lectures  which  in  various  ways,  through  their  false  suppositions,  then-  want  of  intelligence  of
the  more  profound  relations  of  the  word,  and  their  great  divergence  from  each  other,  prov


Th      oneTntr  .  canonical  recension  of  the  originals  of  Moses  (i.  ,,  a  recension  foiling

within  the  prophetic  sphere  of  the  Old  Covenant),  appears  from  the  manifold  indications  of
;;.;':,  •!•;  tU  Ll^ns  beLg*  above  all,  the  account  of  the  death  of  Moses  ;  the  judg
ments  on  Mo.es,  however,  as  of  a  third  person,  which  is  the  object  of  the  sta  en.ent  Ex.  xi  3  ;
seem  to  us  to  decide  nothing.  Then  there  is  the  great  chasm  of  38  years  in  the


x


,  seem  .

of  the  wanderings  of  Israel  through  the  desert  (Num.  xx.),  as  also  other  enigmatical
ities  (^Vaihinger).     Farther,  the  manifold  indication*  of  the  combination  of  various
al    -  initial  and  concluding  formulas;  the  marks  of  a  later  period  (Gen.  xii.  6;  xii.  ^  ;
°    4    xxiii.  2,  at  that  time  the  Canaanites  were  in  the  land;  Dan,  Hebron,  seem  no  conclusive
nar  cteds     s)     the  presumption  of  a  hook  of  the  wars  of  Jehovah  (Nuxn  xx  .  14     the  great
tl  men!  of  'the  genealgy  of  Edom  carried  even  to  the  appearance  of  i  s  k  ngs  (  Gen  xxx,
11).     The  ambiguity  of  the  expression  "unto  this  day-  (Gen.  xix.  M  ;  xxii.   14,  11.).  is


of  criticism  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  clear  that  we  cannot  yiehi
to  i  M-t  views.    Here  place  especially  the  rationalistic,,  starting-point  of  most  critics,  and  the.
,-   n  t  c  prejudice*.     This  is  1.  the  prejudice  against  supernatural  revelation  in  genial     con-
:::^2   a,  ;un,t  miracles;  and  3.  against  prophecies;  through  these  many  are  impelled   o
do  y  to  U.c  Pentateuch  not  only  authenticity,  but  also  its  historical  character.     <  >n    his  point
,  ,     !  "•„  p.  40.     Here  belongs  also  the  ignoring  of  the  great  contrast  between  the  names
n.hnd  Jehovah,  which  in  its  essential  significance  extends  not  only  through  the  whole  Old
T    i  men"  (the  Solomonic  umversalism,  the  bavidic  theocratic  Messianism  ,  and  through  the
Testament  (the  Johanne.au  doctrine  of  the  Logos,  the  Petrine  doctrine  of  the  Messiah),
the  whole  Christian  church  to  the  contests  in  the  immediate  present  (ecclesias-


valuable  references  of  Sack  and  Hengstenber,  to

,  Tlolnm  a«d  Jehovah      AVe  also  reckon  here  the  supposition,  that  Moses,
the  contrast  between  E  lol  md  Jcl  na  ^


°  .  caUin,  to  amo»nce  in  fo,,n  of  ,»,,  according  to


to  which  the  original  theocratic  revelation  was  falrij


§  3.     ORIGIN   AND   COMPOSITION   OF   THE   PENTATEUCH  or,

c'U

fied  by  later  interpolations,  passed  naturally  over  to  the  gnostic  writings  of  the  Jews,  and  the
Alexandrian  gnostics.  From  this  we  may  explain  a  similar  account  of  Bleek,  relative  to  the
gnostic  Valentinus,  the  Xusoncans  (as  given  by  Epiphanius  and  Damascenus),  the  Clementines
and  Bogomiles.  The  source  of  these  views  is  everywhere  the  same  gentile,  dualistic  representa
tion.  They  also  coincide  with  those  judgments  of  the  gnostics,  which  in  their  various  grades
are  so  inclined  to  throw  away  the  Old  Testament.

3.  Doubts  of  certain  Jewish  authorities  of  the  middle  ages  about  the  authorship  of  the  whole
Pentateuch  by  Moses,  Isaac,  Ben  Jasos,  and  Aben  Esra.     The  commencement  of  a  genuine  crit
icism  is  seen  with  them.    They  accepted,  however,  only  later  additions  in  certain  passages,  i.  c.
Gen.  xxxvi.  31.

4.  The  first  critical  doubts  after  the  reformation,  IGth  century:  CAKLSTADT:  De  canonicis
scripturis,  Moses  non  fwisse  scriptorem  quinque  librorum.    AXDREAS  MASIUS  :  "The  Pentateuch
in  its  present  form  is  the  work  of  Ezra  or  another  inspired  man."— 17th  century:  HOUSES  in  his
Leviatfian:  "The  Pentateuch  a  work  about  Moses,  not  ly  Moses,  yet  based  on  originals  by  the
hand  of  Moses."    So  also  ISAAC  PEYRERIUS,  at  first  a  reformed  divine,  then  Roman  and  Jesuit :
Systcma  theologicum  ex  Prccadimitorum  hypothesi,  1655.     SPIXOZA  in  his  Tractates  theologico-
politicus:  "Ezra  is  the  author  of  the  Pentateuch  and  of  the  remaining  historical  books  in  their
present  form."     RICHARD  SIMOX  :  "  Critical  History  of  the  Old  Testament "  :  "  Moses  wrote  the
laws ;  the  history  of  his  time  he  had  written  by  annalists,  from  which  followed  the  later  com
position  of  the  Pentateuch."    CLERICTTS,  in  his  Sentimem,  went  still  further,  though  in  his  "  Com
mentary  on  Genesis  "  he  took  it  mostly  back,  holding  that  only  a  few  additions  are  Post  Mosaic.
Anton  Van  Dale,  Menonite:  "The  Pentateuch  was  written  by  Ezra  on  the  basis  of  the  Mosaic
book  of  the  law,  and  other  historical  documents." — 18th  century:  At  first  a  long-continued
reaction  in  favor  of  genuineness  :  Carpzov,  Michaelis,  Eichhorn  (Introduction,  1-3).     Then  fol
lowed  renewed  attacks:  HASSE,  Professor  at  Konigsberg:  "Prospects  of  Future  Solutions  of  the
Old  Testament,"  1785 ;  at  the  time  of  the  exile  the  Pentateuch  was  composed  from  old  rec
ords."  Later  retractations  (following  the  example  of  Clericus),  according  to  which  he  accepted
only  additions   to  the  documentary  Pentateuch.     Fulda,  whose  conjectures  are  likeBleek's;
Corrodi,  Nachtigall  (pseudonym,  Otmar),  whose  sweeping  assertions  were  modified  by  Ecker-
man,  Bauer,  and  others.— 19th  century:  To  great  lengths  now  went  Sovcrin  the  father,  and  De
Wette ;  these  then  were  variously  opposed  under  the  confession  of  additions  and  interpolations
by  Ivelle,  Fritzsche,  Jahn,  Rosenmullcr,  Pustkuchen,  Kanne,  Hug,  Sack,  and  others.     Reconcil
ing  or  medium  views  were  presented  by  Herbst,  Bertholdt,  Volney,  and  Eichhorn,  4th  Edition.
We  then  have  the  investigations  of  Bleek:  "A  few  aphoristic  supplements  to  the  investigations
of  the    Pentateuch"  (in   ROSENMLLLER'S  Repertorium,   1822).     Later:    "Supplements  to  the
investigations  of  the  Pentateuch  "  (Studies  and  Criticisms,  1831).     The  proof  that  a  great  number
of  the  laws,  songs,  and  similar  pieces,  were  originally  Mosaic,  was  not  recognized  by  Ilartman,
von  Bohlen,  Vatke,  and  George.     Bleek  wrote  against  von  Bohlcn:  De  lllri  Gcncseos  Originc,
&c.,  Bonn,  1836.     The  complete  Mosaic  composition  of  the  Pentateuch  was  on  the  contrary
again  maintained  by  Ranke,  Hengstenberg,  Drechsler,  Huvernick,  Wette,  Keil,  and  LudwigKonig.
Movers  and  Bertheau  here  follow  with  peculiar  investigations  and  views.     Tuch,  in  his  com
mentary  on  Genesis,  follows  in  all  material  respects  the  views  of  Bleek,  who  also  designates  the
labors  of  Stiihelin,  De  "VVette,  Ewald,  and  von  Lengerke,  as  the  latest  investigations  of  the  Pen
tateuch.     The  latter  is  eclectic,  leaning  on  Bleek,  Tuch,  Stahelin,  Ewald,  and  de  Wette.

Stiihelin  passes  over  the  authorship  of  Moses  himself,  and  makes  as  the  basis  of  the  Pen
tateuch  and  the  following  books  an  older  writing,  which  extends  from  the  creation  to  the  occupa
tion  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  The  recension  of  the  day  falls  in  the  time  of  king  Saul,  and  may
have  been  by  Samuel  or  one  of  his  pupils.

De  Wette,  in  the  edition  of  his  Introduction,  5  and  6.  supposes  a  threefold  recension  of  tho
whole  work,  at  the  same  time  with  the  book  of  Joshua,  1.  the  Elohistic,  2.  the  Jehovistic,
3.  Deuteronomistic.  The  latter  made  at  the  time  of  Isaiah.  The  sources  of  the  first  treatise
could  have  been  partly  Mosaic,  though  it  is  questionable  if  in  the  present  form.

Ewald  (History  of  the  People  of  Israel):  "by  Moses,  originally,  there  was  but  little— merely


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


~T~j     i     ^"nd  a  few  other  short  utterances."     Bases  of  the  present  form  of  the  Pen-

^  i      i\  ;,,™lvr.f1  in  each  other.     See  below  the  treatises  on  Genesis.

tST    :  fmT  1  Inisto!;  rf  t£  Old  Sonant."  in  the  supplement  to  Delitzsch,  has  taken  the
view  thlt  Moses  did  not  write  the  Pentateuch,  but  only  the  passages  in  the  middle  books  where

1 }ven  as  writtcn  by  him,  and  besides  that,  Deuteronomy,  cb.  i.-xxxii.;

\Tptn"ftoud!Phowever,  was' written  partly  under  Moses,  and  partly  under  Joshua,  or  not  long

aftei;  Jo^"!|-"    ,  ,.,  ff>)  Las  .h-en  very  interesting  and  evident  proof  of  genuine  Mosaic  originals,
n'nbers  and^Exodus.     At  first  it  is  shown  of  the  sacrificial  law,  Leviticus  i.-vii.,

leVHlCUS,  .\  uin    -   •  ,  <  ,,.:i.i    -,.,,,•.•    oc;  onr>nnra  frnm


e          s  Num        ,  ^       xo.

'    ,"    ,  i      i  er  J  accoi.tanco  only  with  the  relations  in  the  wilderness,  as  appears  from
hrco:;:;":  :;:^     ^u^hrases  as  i;  camp  and  outside  the  camp,';  "Aaron  and  his
S''  ''    ells  o       eh-  fathers'  houses"  (Ex.  vi.  14),  &c.     In  Leviticus  xvi.  it  is  commanded  tha
ff  tl  c  ±ts  s  all  be  s.nt  into  the  wilderness.     Shmlar  indications  of  or  g  nality  are  found
?no       ;  i    Sv!  &c   "meek  ind.es  in  the  same  way  concerning  the  relations  of  the  campinNnm-
"i     "  U  re  mTy  I  a<lded  single  songs,  vi,,  the  Ihrce  songs.  Num  xxi.-T  hen  arc


,         ,


he  citv  of  Hebron  is  mentioned.     According  to  Joshua  xiv  15;  xv.  lo    the

aS^HSiJ^sSSs

n  G  n   xiv.  14,  the  city  is  called  Dan,  on  the  contrary  we  read  Judge    xviiL    iO  :


.....  ;^^r;r,.r-


i

,1  Introduction   given  the  results  of  Week's  investigations,  which  we  cite  as  iimt

HSHSHSSS5S;


~-


Delzsclu    A  o»r,fnllv  reared  tabular  presentation  of  the  va
-IT.Tt-.vi'.'s  "  T-ililcs  to  the  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,     p.  26  ft.


alo  baled  npon  the  natnre  of  the  case.    The  patriarchal  religion  i


the  assc
and  53.


OPJGIX    AND    COMPOSITION    OF    THE   PENTATEUCH.  97


of  an  inner  life  of  revelation  and  faith,  according  to  its  beginnings  in  the  sphere  of  life,  as  devel
oped  in  chosen  heads  of  families.  It  is  clear  that  this  theocratic  religion  of  promise  must  bo
distinguished  again  from  the  earlier  universalistic  religion,  which  it  presupposes.  It  must  also
present  itself  objectively  in  a  form  of  law,  externally  commanding  for  a  whole  nation  grown  up
in  slavish  oppression  and  moral  desolation.  Since  this  rested,  however,  on  the  basis  of  an  inner
character  in  the  chosen  ones  of  the  people,  it  was  necessary  that  there  be  a  transition  period,
.'.by  means  of  the  impulse  of  the  inner  life  of  faith),  from  the  legal  stage  to  the  period  of  a  new
and  more  general  internal  feeling,  /.  c.,  to  the  prophetic  period.  When  finally  the  spiritual  life
of  this  prophetic  period  became  more  general,  according  to  the  popular  measure  among  the
pious  of  the  nation,  then  it  was  necessary  to  make  the  records  of  it,  in  their  entirety,  effective
for  the  canonical  guidance  of  the  national  life.  The  course  of  the  development  of  the  Christian
church  forms  throughout  a  parallel  to  this  legal  development  of  the  Old  Testament  economy,
?,nd  it  lies  in  the  slow  manner  of  this  development,  that  its  separate  stages  must  be  indeed  last
ing  historical  periods.  But  what  follows  from  this,  in  reference  to  the  literature  of  the  individual
periods?

It  is  clear  that  Genesis,  in  its  essential  character,  does  not  point,  in  the  least,  beyond  the
patriarchal  standpoint.  It  consists  of  originals,  which  partly  represent  the  universalistic  view
of  the  primitive  religion,  partly  the  theocratic  view  of  the  religion  of  promise.  Though  these
originals  may  not  have  been  conceived  until  the  age  of  Moses  as  fixed  and  lasting  traditions  in
the  house  of  Abraham,  it  appears  settled  that  a  Genesis  could  not  have  been  invented  in  the
prophetic  period,  nor  even  in  the  transition  period  (from  Samuel  to  Elijah),  nor,  indeed,  in  the
legal  period.  The  intercourse  of  the  Abrahamites  with  the  Caruumites,  the  relations  of  race,
the  religious  forms,  everything  speaks  against  it.  The  book  of  Job,  it  is  true,  transfers  its  rep
resentations  from  a  later  period  into  an  earlier  one,  or  into  what  is  still  a  universalistic  relig
ious  faith-view;  but  with  all  the  art  of  representation,  how  openly  appears  the  more  developed
religions  stage  which  points  to  the  period  after  Solomon.  In  view  of  the  sacredness  of  the
originals  of  Genesis  it  is  not  probable  that  their  compilation  into  one  work  should  have  fallen
beyond  the  age  of  Samuel,  or  even  that  of  Moses.

As  regards  further  the  three  books  of  the  law  (Exodus,  Leviticus,  Numbers),  they  bear  in
their  entire  contents  so  decidedly  the  impress  of  the  stern  legal  standpoint,  that  only  the  com
pilation  of  them  (not,  however,  the  collection  of  their  material  parts)  could  fall  beyond  the
Mosaic  rge.

Finally,  as  above  shown,  it  is  not  all  inconsistent  with,  but  corresponding  to,  the  spiritual
life,  if  we  suppose  that  towards  the  end  of  his  days,  and  in  his  prophetic  character,  Moses  may
have  prepared  the  way,  through  a  series  of  original  writings,  for  the  mediation  of  his  legislation
with  the  future  period  of  prophetic  subjectivcness,  and  thus  laid  the  foundation  of  the  transi
tion  period  beginning  with  Samuel.  The  moulding  of  these  originals  then  belonged  to  a  later
period.  Should,  hoAvever,  Deuteronomy  have  been  made  in  the  prophetic  period,  it  must  have
unfailingly  betrayed  itself  through  Messianic  traits,  if  not  in  reference  to  the  personal  Messiah,
at  least  in  reference  to  the  Messianic  kingdom,  which  is  not  in  the  least  the  case.

The  frequent  quotation  of  Mosaic  passages  in  the  prophets  (see  Delitzsch,  p.  11  ff.)  may  cer
tainly  prove  the  existence  of  such  written  originals,  not,  however,  the  existence  of  the  respective
hooks  in  their  present  form  (Vaihinger,  p.  313).  The  fulness  of  these  quotations  ever  remains
a  proof  that  the  written  sources  in  question  had  such  a  degree  of  sacredness  and  respect,  that  wo
cannot  easily  assume  that  at  a  period,  later  as  compared  with  the  quotations,  they  bad  been  dis
membered  in  the  most  various  manner,  and  then  again,  as  new  material,  been  worked  up  into
new  books.  That  the  service  in  High  Places  was  not  completely  abolished  until  the  time  of
ITezekiah,  is  no  proof  that  Deuteronomy,  with  its  prohibition  of  this  service,  did  not  appear  until
his  time  (Vaihinger).  In  the  same  manner  the  manifold  apostasy  of  the  people  from  Jehovali
would  speak  against  the  authenticity  of  the  legislation  from  Sinai  itself.*  It  must  be  taken  into
consideration,  that  the  legal  nature  of  the  Mosaic  faith  would  urge,  in  the  most  decided  manner,

*  The  silence  ahout  Korah,  Bout.  xi.  6,  is  explained  as  forbearance  towards  the  remaining  children  ol  Korah,  the
devout  Korahites,  who  afterwards  appear  so  prominently  as  psalm-singers.

7


to  the  putting  m
this  it  does  not  follow,  a>  Deht;
of  developments  of  law.     Iho  s
diet  this.     It  is  perhaps  also  tal'cn  too
tuitions   vith


t

to


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


many  a  later  o


all  definitions  and  explanations  of  the  law.  But  from

p.  6,  that  the  Post-Mosaic  history  shows  no  traces
I     ^  ^  ^  ^.^  contra.

o  consideration,  that  the  contact  of  the  Israelitish
nto  c  ^^  ^   .^^

^tf-    ^;-  j;  ^  to  ^      ^

eof  its  religious  development,  its  marks  of  inward
_     notwithstanding  the  groat  theocratic


Prayer  of  Solomon,  1  Kmgs  vm.  22).

We  must,  there-lore,  supposo  that  the
the  .oga!  10  ,,,.  pn,.,ctic  ^
the  >mity  of  the  place  ol  »o,»h,p      _,

mon's  temple;  as  the  regal  law  eh  17,  c<       n'»PP.     '  .

of  Solomo,,    Tl,e  same  U  true  of  the
r  „  adhered  to  ,h,  po.ut


tKmsltioll  llcrM  from
T,       l(,rn  viu,:ication  of

Si  of  So,o-
,o  th(J  cn.0,.a

.       t,         „],„  mislead  to
beside  the  Song  of


form  as  a  closed  canon  (Preface,


as  already  compiled,  also  the  constituent  p


book  of  an  older  period  (2  Kings  xxii.  *£.
1ust  this  book,  with  its  emphatic  curses  of
in  the  depths  of  the  temple  at  the  tune  of
The  various  conjectures  wluch  mode™
from  the  vpSw  ^58oS  that  the  Oh


2  Macc>  iL  18i
an      i  tl.o  PC  nUtcac     C  m  ^  ^  ^  &   ^  ,

e      !    of  ^c^n       )  .        ^  ^  ^

^

™™  'h    ^e  that  was  forgotten  or  concealed

t  ^  ^  ^.  ^

*™    ^     circumstance  proceed
,verc  at  that  time  hierarchs  in
so,  according  to  Vatke,


•   *  [This  remark,  and  the  th«mBht  with  which  it  is  ^^^^ll
scntedjust  above  for  assigning  the  book  of  ^uteronomy  to  the  htcrata
the  connection  of   Dcut.  12th  with  the  founding  of  Solomon     tcm      ,
royal  office,  and  other  things  of  a  similar  kind    *<


_
of  Wg  life  wotc  and  spoke  in  the  prophetic  spu,  ,


4.     THE   PENTATEUCH   OF  THE   SAMARITANS.


93


collections  with  respect  to  the  Psalms  tuul  the  books  of  the  law.  Hence  Isaiah  can  about  this
rime  go  back  with  his  prophecy  to  tlie  predictions  of  Deuteronomy.  With  the  wonderful  dis
appearance  of  Elijah  (890  u.  c.)  is  in  reality  the  purely  legal  period  closed.  His  shower  of  fire,
prefiguring  the  end  of  the  world,  i.s  followed  by  the  prophetic  period,  which  tlie  vision  of  Elijah
on  Iloreb,  and  much  more  the  labors  of  Elislia  in  his  healing  miracles,  had  presignalled.  Elijah,
looks  backwards  as  the  final  landmark  of  the  death-bringing  and  destroying  influence  of  the
law;  Elisha  looks  forwards  with  evangelical  omens  which  the  evangelizing  words  of  the  Messi
anic  prophets  must  soon  follow.  When  David  was  departing  this  life  (1015  B.  c.),  lie  could
already  lay  to  the  heart  of  his  son  Solomon,  the  law  of  Moses  as  a  written  one  (1  Kings  ii.  3).
The  promise  of  the  typical  Messiah-king  (2  Sam.  vii.)  presupposes  already  the  promise  of  the  typ
ical  Messiah-prophet  (Deut.  xviii.  15),  and  the  promise  of  the  Messiah-priest  (Dent,  xxxiii.  8  if.),
/.  e.,  determinate  originals  of  Deuteronomy;  since  the  prophets  and  priests  are  present  in  Israel
before  the  kings.

OBSERVATION:  It  is  not  with  entire  justice  that  Kurtz  remarks  (History  of  the  Old  Covenant
1,  p.  40) :  ''It  is  an  historical  fact  that  stands  more  firmly  than  any  other  fact  of  antiquity  that
the  Pentateuch  is  the  living  foundation,  and  the  necessary  presumption,  of  the  whole  Old  Testa
ment  history,  not  less  than  of  tlie  entire  Old  Testament  literature.  Both  of  these,  and  with  them
Christendom,  as  their  fruit  and  completion,  would  resemble. a  tree  without  roots,  if  the  compo-i-
tion  of  the  Pentateuch  were  transferred  to  a  later  period  of  Israelitish  history."  *  Does  the
Old  Testament  theocracy  rest  then  on  the  completed  compilation  of  scriptural  books  or  indeed
on  writings  at  all,  or  does  it  n»t  rather  rest  on  the  living,  actual  revelation  of  God,  'which  pre
ceded  all  writings?  And  now  all  Christendom!  The  church  also  rests,  indeed,  not  on  the
authenticity  of  the  New  Testament  books,  but  on  the  living  revelation  of  God  in  Christ,  although
it  is  regulated  by  the  canon  of  the  Few  Testament.  Moreover,  it  is  well  verified  that  the  Pen
tateuch,  as  the  earlier  foundation,  is  attested  by  all  the  following  scriptural  books.  The  inter
nal  testimony  of  the  Pentateuch  to  the  written  compositions  of  Moses,  to  which  Kurz,  after
Delitzsch,  refers,  is  also  of  great  import.  He  has  also  justly  remarked  that  the  canonical  charac
ter  ot  the  scriptural  books  would  stand  firmly,  even  if  Ezra  were  to  be  regarded  as  their  com
piler.

The  Avhole  of  the  present  question  is  largely  influenced  by  tho  distinction  between  the  rec
ords  of  Elohim  and  Jehovah,  to  which  we  must  return  in  the  introduction  to  Genesis.

§  4.    THE  PENTATEUCH  Ol'  TliE  SAMA'UTAXS.

It  is  a  fact  that  the  Samaritans  [see  article  in  question  in  Ilerzog,  Winer,  &c.)  distinguished
themselves  from  the  Jews  by  having  a  Pentateuch  different  from  theirs  in  many  particulars,

*  [The  importance  of  this  remark  cannot  be  overrated.     The  Old  Testament  is  a  unity  of  designed  falsehood  through
out,  or  it  is  a  unity  of  historical  truth.    The  patched-up  legendary  vk  w  of  mingled  traditions,  subjective  foncics,  pure
ors,  and  later  compilations  made  from  them,  cannot  account  for  it.    Tho  idea  of  an  entire  and  continued  forgery  might
tically  explain  its  existence,  were  it  not  for  one  thing,  namely,  its  utter  incredibility  beyond  any  of  the  marvellous
t  would  require  a  superhuman  power  of  inventive  falsehood.    The  supposition  of  a  forged  Pentateuch,
at  whatever  time  made,  demands  a  forged  history  following  it,  a  forged  representation  of  a  consistent  national  life  growiii"
fit,  a  forged  poetry  commemorative  of  it  and  deriving  from  it  its  most  constant  and  vivid  imagery,  a  forged  ethics
onnded  upon  it,  a  forged  scries  of  prophecy  continually  referring  to  it,  and  making  it  the  basis  of  its  most  solemn  warn-
here  must  have  been  a  specific  forgery  of  an  incredible  number  of  minute  events,  episodes,  incidental  occurrences,
having  every  appearance  of  historical  truth,  of  countless  proper  names  of  men  and  places,  far  too  many  to  be  carried  down
by  any  traditi<ra,-a  forgery  of  proverbs,  national  songs,  memorials,  apothegms,  oath-fonns,  judicial  and  religious  observ
ances,  &c.,  Arc.,  all  made  to  suit.   It  is  incredible.  Ko  human  mind,  or  minds,  were  ever  capable  of  this.  There  is  no  place  for
it  to  begin  or  end,  unless  we  come  square  up  to  an  admitted  time  of  an  existing,  historical,  well-known  people,  for  whom
1  this  is  forged,  and  who  are  expected  to  receive  it,  and  who  do  receive  it,  as  their  own  true,  veritable  history,  antiquity
and  national  life-development,  although  they  had  never  before  known  or  heard  of  it.

The  idea  of  compilations  from  the  legendary  and  tho  mythical  explains  well  those  early  fabulous,  indefinite,  and
unchronological  accounts  of  other  nations,  which  arc  sometimes  spoken  of  as  parallel  to  what  is  called  the  mythical,  of  the
Hebrews.  Nothing,  however,  could  show  a  greater  overlooking  of  what  is  most  peculiar  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  The
statistical  and  strictly  chronological  character  of  tho  Old  Testament  utterly  forbids  the  parallel.  It  shuts  us  up  to  tho
conclusion  of  its  entire  forgery,  or  its  entire  truthfulness  and  authenticity.  If  the  first  is  incredible,  as  even  the  Rational-
ire  compelled  to  acknowledge,  the  second  must  be  true.  There  may  be  points,  here  and  there,  where  such  a  general
view  may  be  supposed  to  bo  assailable,  but  the  mind  that  once  fairly  receives  it  in  its  most  general  aspect,  must  find  in  it
a  power  of  conviction  that  cannot  easily  be  disturbed.  It  compels  us  to  receive  what  may  be  called  the  natural  facts  oi'
the  Bible  history,  and  then  the  supernatural  cannot  he  kept  out.  Such  a  people  and  such  a  book  lying  in  the  very  hea/i
5f  history,  and  regarded  in  its  pure  human  aspect,  or  simply  in  its  natural  and  historical-marvellous,  demands  the  super-
natural  as  its  most  fitting,  and  we  may  even  say,  its  most  natural,  accompaniment  and  explanation.—!.  L.]


1STKOBIXTION    TO   GENESIS.


'8  this,  regarding  it  as  the  only  Holy  Writ  (other  separate
and  that  they  p,,  and        1      -o,s  t  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^        ^  .

'


c  o    a  oamanian  u<  .  ,,        ,       i

'   i,e     i^h-md0 support  the  authority  of  our  canonical  Pentateuch,  and  on  the  other

i       i      '   1  t  •  1  •(>  create  a.  prejudice  against  it.

'      '  *  L  -J-   u  (,f  tjK.  I'ont-iteiich  has  been  inferred  from  the  circumstance  that  t

Samaritans  hadTpentateuch   in  common  with  the  Jews.     The  Samaritans,  it  was  supposed
rwiJod  their  Uoly  Writ  as  a  relic  of  the  Israelites  of  the  ten  tribes,  whose  remains  raingh
xnhiins  whv  they  possess  only  the  Pentateuch.

separated  from  the  kingdom  of  Jndah,  accepted  from  the  Jews  no  other
emience  of  their  national  hatred.     Therefore  the  Pentateuch  must  have
separation  of  the  two  kingdoms  (John).     If  now  Yaihingcr  is  of  opinion
is  contradicted  by  the  proof  of  Hengstenberg  that  the  Samaritans  pro-
then  colonists   and  not  from  a  mixture  of  Jews  and  heathen,  the  argument
t  ,1  li.hed  •  for  this  matter  compare  the  article  "  Samaritans"  in  U  iner.  Again,
ihTcironmstancc  Iliat  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  contains  elements  which  are  intended  tor  the
, -  fi c,"   ,   ortheu-  mountain  Garizim,  does  not  oblige  us,  with  Potcrmann  (^article  <  Sama-
'      -  .'„...,.,  „  -,  /Vt  a-Encyclopcdie),  to  transfer  the  whole  present  compilation  of  the  1  entateuch
to  the  time7the  separation  of  the  Samaritans  from  the  Jews,  that  is,  between  Nehemiah  an,

AlGK  we  presuppose  among  the  Samaritans  a  far  earlier  existence  of  the  Pentateuch,  according
InlirctV   nevertheless  the  paganizing  character  of  the  people,  which  vacillated
'  C  •    Y  •    ]  -L  tic  institutions  and  a  heathen  fondness  for  fables,  would  prefer  the
""^"lon^vhlch  are  peculiar  to  their  versions.     On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  easy  to  per-
LvTo  ten  tribes  on  the  separation  from  Jndah,  should  have  been  in  possession  only  o
"-  thc.tcl!;ri        _  ^       't  harmony  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  witli  the  Septuagint,
Jewish  revisions,  which  would  make  the  old  text  more  pleasant


11

c  live  v.


'llliUllJ.    ueiiL  .     ,  .         ,-,

biBh-priest  of  their  newly-erected  worship  on  the  mountain  of  Garizim.     At  the
f  ,1  5  or  later  a  more  acceptable,  falsified  compilation  of  the  Pentateuch  might  easily

1        ( n    wd j;   out     pu      'and  more  ancient  one  ;  for  it  is  neither  historical  that  the  Samaritans
crov  dea  out  a  pur  ^nv.Linnprs  of  Jehovah,  had  remained


have  cro


ded  out  a  pnrer  an    ,»o,-  rcmnillca

!'!l?Tt»SS'  TheT,  a°S  ishpri  "  "Lnt  to  iLt'ult  them  in  the  ,-eligion  of  tho
without  a  book  of  the  law.    lh     -rael         1  foim  ^  .m    o  aml  ca]f_

loml  ,m,,ht  also  have  .  Wtaod.    ^.  «  °       ^  «  ^       .sevcrnllco  of  tllo  Samaritm3

"          "  '    '  "  tliel'  1Val"  °'


c',  Halle,  1815.


G.     THE   CHARACTER   OF   GENESIS.


§  5.     THEOLOGICAL  AXD  HOMILETICAL  LITERATURE  OX  THE  PENTATEUCH.

See  WALCII,  Lililiotlt.  thcol.  iv.  p.  444  if.

The  Unicerml  Wdrterluch,  by  DAXZ,  under  the  article  "Pentateuch,"  p.  754;  also  the  supple-
merit,  p.  81.— VUXER,  Thcol.  Literature  i.,  p.  190  IK  ;  Supplement,  p.  31  ff.— KURZ,  History  of
the  Old  Covenant,  pp.  22  and  53.  A  survey  of  the  writings  on  the  Old  Testament  in  Keil's  In
troduction  (i>.  01)  to  the  Pent'iteuch,  p.  04. — Separate  works:  Clcrici  Comincntarim  in  Jlosi*
Pi-Odette  libros  •?'.,  Tubingen,  1733.  MOLDEXIIAUEI:,  Translation  and  Explanations  of  the  Boo'ki
of  Jfoscs,  Quedlinburg,  1774  to  1775.  Jerusalem,  "Letters  on  the  Mosaic  writings  and  Philoso
phy,1'  3d  ed.,  Braunschweig,  1783.  HESS,  "History  of  the  Israelites,  and  Moses  in  particular,"
see  Danz,  p.  075.  VATEI:,  "  Commentary  "  (1802-1 805),  3  vols.  KAXKE,  "  Investigations  of  the
Pentateuch,"  2  vols.,  1834-1840.  HEXGSTENBEUG,  "Authenticity  of  the  Pentateuch,"  1830-1839.
The  same :  "  The  most  important  and  difficult  sections  of  the  Pentateuch  explained,"  1vol.
"  History  of  Balaam  and  his  Prophecy,"  Berlin,  .1838.  The  same:  "The  Books  of  Moses  and
Egypt,"  with  supplement ;  "Manetho  and  the  Ilyksos,"  Berlin,  1841.  E.  BERTHEAU,  "The  seven
Groups  of  Mosaic  Laws  in  the  three  middle  books  of  the  Pentateuch,"  Gottingen,  1840  (the
writings  of  George,  Bruno  Bauer,  The  Religion  of  the  Old  Testament.  Yatke).  BAI;:,IGARTEX,
"  Theolog.  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament,"  2  vols.,  Kiel,  184-3.  KURZ,  "  History  of  tho
Old  Covenant,"  1  and  2  vols.,  2d  Ed.,  Berlin,  1853.  BAKU,  "tiymlolik  of  the  Mosaic  worship,"
Heidelberg,  1837.  Also  other  works  to  be  hereafter  named,  referring  to  the  Mosaic  Avorship.
KXOBKL,  "Genesis,  Exodus,  and  Leviticus;"  also  "Numbers,  Deuteronomy,  and  Joshua;"  "Con
cise  Manual,"  Leipzig,  1801.  DELITZSCII  and  IVEIL,  "Biblical  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testa
ment,"  1st  vol.  "  Genesis  and  Exodus,"  Leipzig,  1801;  2d  vol.  "Leviticus,  Xumbcrs,  and  Deuter
onomy,"  Mecklenburg.  Scriptura  ac  Tradilio,  Commentarius  pcrpctuus  in  Pcntaicuchum,  Leip
zig,  1839.  Schusehan  Ed  nth,  i.  c.,  "Exposition  of  the  five  books  of  Moses,"  Heb.  and  Gorman,
with  notes  by  AR.VIIEIM.— Herzheimer,  1853-1854.  Thomth  Emeth,  "The  live  books  of  Moses,"
by  UEIXEMAXX,  Berlin,  1853.  The  works  on  "Church  History,"  by  NATALIS  ALEXANDER,  and
many  other  older  theologians,  especially  of  the  reformed  church ;  also  Lutheran,  Buddeus,  <fec. ;
Catholic,  Stollberg,  &c. — Humiletical,  see  WINER,  ii.  p.  115  ff.  "  Sermons,"  by  HOHXBAUM,  BAL-
DAL-F,  SAILER,  &c.  ZIXZEXDORF,  Extracts  from  his  "Discourses  on  the  five  books  of  Moses  and
the  four  Evangelists."  Published  by  Clemens,  9  vols.,  1703.  BEYER,  "History  of  the  Israelites
in  Sermons,"  2  vols.  Erfurt,  1811.  G.  D.  KRUMMACIIER,  "The  Wanderings  of  Israel  through
the  Wilderness,"  Elberfeld,  1828.  MEURER,  "Moses,  the  servant  of  God.  Spiritual  Discourses,"
Leipzig,  1830.  APPUIIN,  "Moses,  the  servant  of  God,"  Magdeburg,  1845.  OOSTERZEE,  "Moses,
12  Sermons,"  Bielefeld,  1800.  Treatises  on  the  Doctrine  of  Immortality  of  the  Old  Testament,
especially  that  of  Moses,  and  on  the  separate  books,  will  be  mentioned  in  their  respective
places.

B.     A  SPECIAL  VIEW  OF  GENESIS.

§  6.     THE  CHARACTER  OF  GEXESIS.

If  we  can  regard  as  the  conclusive  mark  of  the  genuine  canonicity  of  the  scriptural  books,
the  fact  that  the  spirit  of  divine  revelation  (which  in  the  historical  sphere  has  gradually  entered
into  human  nature  until  the  perfect  union  of  the  Godhead  and  humanity)  has  appeared,  and  that
this  spirit,  consistently  progressing,  has  entered  into  human  writing  belonging  to  revelation,
then  it  appears  quite  in  accordance  with  nature  that  such  a  spirit  of  revelation  has,  in  Genesis,
united  with  the  very  earliest  and  most  childlike  form  of  human  authorship,  and  that  it  does  not
manifest  itself  as  a  completed  sacred  work  of  art  of  theocratic  Christian  authorship,  until  the  end
of  the  whole  biblical  literature  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  accounts  of  Genesis,  taken  in  their
human  aspect,  seem  like  loosely  arranged  and  simple  narratives  of  childlike  speech,  in  con
trast  with  that  perfect  symbolical  composition  of  the  Apocalypse,  whose  deep  significance
surpasses  the  comprehension  of  the  most  celebrated  judges.  But  thouirh  Genesis  forms  a  self-


IQO  INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


inclusive  and  connected  whole,  which  sheds  a  bright  divine,  infallible  light  over  all  beginning*
of  primitive  time  (see  §  1),  we  nevertheless  see  therein  the  fact  that  here  the  living  God  has,  m
*e  most  emphatic  sense,  prepared  his  praise  «  out  of  the  mouth  ot  babes  and  sucklings'      A
the  same  time  this  fact  gives  us  a  satisfactory  solution  of  the  character  of  inspiration  ;  how  at
every  period  it  is  perfect  in  the  sense,  that  on  the  divine  side  it  is  continually  the  voice  of  the
same  divine  spirit  (and  in  truth  of  a  spirit  which  completely  commanded,  in  thor  respective
tasks    those,  human  mind,  that  were  apprehended  and  held  by  its  influence),  whilst  on  the
human  side   it  was  to  proceed  from  the  imperfection  of  childlike,  pious  utterance  and  story
through  a  series  of  degrees,  until  it  had  reached  the  full  adult  age  in  the  new  covenant;  and  all
this  the  more  -o   as  on  the  line  of  its  chosen  ones  it  had  continually  to  break  through  the  opposi
tion  of  human  sinfulness,  which  ever"  surrounded  its  nucleus  of  light  with  colored  borders  and
shadows      With  respect  to  what  is  centrally  fundamental  in  the  Old  Testament  looks,  it  may
be  said  that  one  Godlike  thought,  or  thought  of  God,  ranges  itself  on  the  other  in  proportion
to  the  decree  of  divine  revelation,  or  to  that  of  human  development.    As  regards  the  outer  circie
of  these  writing   we  may  lind  them  burdened  with  all  kinds  of  human  imperfections,  if  we  will
•|U(1,,e  them  according  to' the  New  Testament,  or  draw  them  on  the  model  of  practical  historical
tritln-  or  of  natural  science,  &c.     We  must  then,  however,  at  the  same  time,  well  understand
that  those  supposed  imperfections  are  controlled  by  the  principle  of  revelation  in  the  books,  and
ha,    in  our  criticism  of  the  stylo  of  revelation,  we  toil  towards  heterogeneous  points  of  view.
fcjuV,  a  process  has  a  relative  justification  only  in  presence  of  an  orthodoxy  winch  emphasi*
the  said  literal  meanings  in  order  to  make  from  them  abstract  history,  geography,  natural  >       LCO,

^c.,  for  the  authoritative  belief.

ben.sis  corresponds  now  to  its  design,  according  to  which  it  is  the  revelation  of  God  con-

cerniii"  the  origin  of  tlio  world,  of  mankind,  of  the  fall,  of  the  judgment,  and  the  redemption.
Not  onlv  that  it  presents  these  origins  purely  in  their  ethical  idea  and  physical  development,  m
accordance  with  the  monotheistic  principle,  but  also  that  whilst  on  the  one  side  it  clearly  bring*
out  the  periods  in  the  economy  of  the  preparatory  redemption  (Adam,  Setli,  Enoch,  Isoah,
Shorn   Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Joseph),  and  connects  these  periods  with  persons,  wholly  in  ac
cordance  with  the  principle  of  personality  in  the  kingdom  of  God  (according  to  which  each  par-
ticular  form  of  religion  is  the  form  of  a  covenant  between  the  personal  God  and  the  pcrso.  :
maii;.  it  also  presents  practically,  on  the  other  side,  the  great  contrast  between  univei-salism,
accordin-  to  which  God  is  Elohim  for  all  the  world  and  all  mankind,  and  theocratic  particular
ism    according  to  which  lie  is  Jehovah  for  His  chosen  ones,  His  covenant  people,  and
to  of  salvation,  in  its  full  redemptory  historical  significance.     Tims  the  history  of  Genesis
sses  through  a  series  of  contrasts,  in  which  that  particularism,  which  in  the  second  book  oi
Moses  becomes  legal,  appears  ever  more  defined,  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  there  is  seen  more
clearly  the  mutuaW  of  this  economic  particularity  and  of  the  tcleological  universalism  as  it
rests  on  principial  universalism  (Genesis,  i.-iii.).     Thus  the  promised  seed  of  woman,  ch.  i  ,
confronts  the  fall  of  the  human  race.     Then  the  line  of  Cain  with  its  God-forsaken,  wor  dly
culture  (ch   iv  )  is  confronted  by  the  line  of  Seth  with  its  sacred  worship,  elevatmg  the  duration
of  life  (ch   y  )      The  line  of  Seth  was  to  become  a  salvation  to  the  line  of  Cam,  but  the  former
conduces  to  the  perdition  of  the  latter  through  its  overhasty  carnal  and  spiritual  intercourse
,ch  vi )      The  house  of  Noah  in  the  ark  forms  then  a  contrast  to  the  mass  of  mankind  sinking
n  the  ilood;  but  even  to  these  the  saving  of  the  ideal  humanity  in  fcoah's  house  was    o  b<
advantage,  according  to  1  Peter,  iii.  19,  20.     A  new  and  twofold  contrast  is  then  formed  amor
the  sons  of  Noah ;  to  the  contrast  of  piety,  and  pious  culture,  and  barbarism  (Shem  and  Japhe  h
as  opposed  to  11am),  is  presented  now  the  contrast  of  a  one-sided  worship  (Shem)  West  o    C  od,
and  o    a  one-sided  culture,  also  blest  of  God  (Japheth).     The  culture  of  Japheth  is ,  no  longer
accursed,  as  that  of  Cain ;  after  its  propagation  in  the  world,  it  is  to  return  to  the  tens  of  Shem
and  be  b  ought  into  unity  with  the  perfected  faith  of  revelation  (ch.  ix.)      Thus  is  the  fo  ma
tion  of  the  contrast  between  theocracy  and  heathendom  introduced,  as  it  is  unfolded  on  the
lal  of  the  universal  genealogical  table  (ch.  *.).     With  the  development  of  heathendom  (ch
x       s  contrasted  the  founding  of  theocracy  (ch.  xii.)-     That,  however,  the  contrast  thus  opened


§  6.     THE   CHARACTER   OF   GENESIS.  103

is  no  absolutely  hostile  one,  appears  not  merely  from  the  preventive  thought  of  the  dispersion
of  nations  (Gen.  xi.  G-7),  but  rather  from  the  whole  series  of  antitheses  against  heathendom,  or
heathenish  characteristics,  which  now  runs  through  the  Ufa  of  Abraham.  The  first  antithesis
is  formed  between  Abraham  and  his  father's  house,  with  its  heathenish  indecision  in  respect  to
the  true  faith  (ch.  xii.).  His  father,  Terah,  was  already  on  the  way  to  Canaan  ;  but  he  let  him
self  be  detained  by  the  fertile  Mesopotamia.  The  second  antithesis  of  Abraham  is  Pharaoh  in
Egypt  and  heathen  despotic  caprice  (ch.  xii.).  The  third  antithesis  is  Lot  and  heathen  selfish
ness  and  worldlinoss  (ch.  xiii.).  In  the  fourth,  Abraham  meets  the  heathenish,  robber-like  war
fare,  with  the  liberating  holy  war  of  freedom,  and,  in  consequence  of  this,  is  greeted  by  the
prince  of  heathen  piety,  Melchisedek,  as  the  prince  of  the  theocratic  faith  (ch.  xiv.).  Then  the
antithesis  enters  into  the  very  house  of  Abraham  himself.  ISTot  the  son  of  his  faithful  servant
Eleazcr  shall  be  his  heir  (ch.  xv.),  not  the  son  of  his  body  begotten  of  Ilagar  the  maid  (ch.  xvi.),
not  even  Ids  posterity  itself  in  unconsecrated  birth  ;  no, — circumcision  must  distinguish  between
the  consecrated  and  the  unconsecrated  in  his  own  lite  and  race  (ch.  xvii.).  So  far  the  contrast  be
tween  Abraham  and  the  heathen  world  is  clearly  softened  through  the  light  of  peace,  as  he,  in
deed,  lias  been  separated  from  the  heathen  world,  in  order  that  in  his  seed  all  races  of  the  earth  may
be  blest  (ch.  xii.).  Pharaoh  and  Lot,  and  the  men  allied  to  him  in  war,  were  no  godless  heathen ;
Melchisedok  could  even  surpass  him  in  certain  respects.  But  now  the  contrast  opens  between
Abraham  ar.d  a  Sodom  ripe  for  judgment.  Abraham,  the  highly  favored  confidant  and  friend
of  God,  pleads  for  Sodom  in  an  extremely  persistent  manner.  His  intercession  shows  in  what
sense  he  is  chosen,  and  at  least  profits  Lot  and  his  daughters  (ch.  xix.  xx.).  The  position  of
Abraham  in  respect  to  Abimelech  of  Gerar  is  again  no  contrast  between  bright  day  and  dark
night;  the  weakness  of  Abraham  in  the  duty  of  protecting  his  wife,  is  contrasted  with  the  ar
bitrariness  of  Abimelech  in  matters  of  sex  (ch.  xx.).  In  what  a  mild  light,  however,  appear
Ishmael  and  Abimelech  (ch.  xxi.),  and  Hagar,  to  whom  also  the  angel  of  the  Lord  as  such  ap
peared  at  an  earlier  period  in  her  great  necessity  (ch,  xvi.) !  And  later,  Abraham  must  distinguish
between  the  human  sacrifice,  as  offered  in  the  heathenish  spirit,  and  the  theocratic  devotion  of
the  soul  (ch.  xxii.),  as  he  was  previously  obliged  to  distinguish  between  unconsecrated  and  con
secrated  connection  of  sex,  generation,  and  birth.  The  manner  in  which  Abraham  buries  Sarah
is  not  the  heathen  manner  of  interment;  and  so  also  his  seeking  a  wife  for  his  son  has  its  the
ocratic  traits  (ch.  xxiii.  xxiv.).  The  antipathy  against  heathendom,  together  with  a  friendly
relation  to  the  heathen  themselves,  runs  throughout  the  life  of  Abraham,  as  this  meets  ns  finally
in  the  children  of  his  second  marriage.  Here  follows  now  the  great  contrast  between  Isaac  and
Ishmael.  Ishmael  cannot  be  the  theocratic  heir  ;  he  has  his  inheritance,  however,  and  also  his
blessing.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  contrast  between  Jacob  and  Esau.  The  latter  is  only
rejected  under  the  point  of  view  of  the  theocratic  hereditary  power  ;  he  also  has  his  blessing.
Finally,  a  contrast  is  even  formed  between  Joseph  and  his  brethren.  And  then  also  between
Joseph  and  Judah ;  and  Judah  becomes  inferior  to  Joseph  the  very  moment  he  gives  himself  up
as  security  for  Benjamin  (ch.  xliv.  18  ff.).  Thus  in  Genesis  throughout  there  is  presented  the-
relation  between  theocratic  particularism  and  heathendom.  The  heathen  element  is  rejected,
what  is  noble  and  pious  in  the  heathen  is  acknowledged.  The  bond  of  humanity  in  relation  to
the  heathen  is  retained  in  illustration  of  real  sympathy,  just  reception,  and  kindly  treatment.
But  where  the  economic  particularism,  ordered  by  God,  tends  to  become  a  human  or  inhuman,
pharasaical  fanaticism  (as  in  the  crime  of  the  brothers  Simeon  and  Levi  at  Shechem),  there  the
spirit  of  revelation  pronounces  through  the  mouth  of  the  patriarch  a  verdict  of  decided  con
demnation  (ch.  xxxiv.  80;  xlix.  5-7).

Already,  therefore,  docs  Genesis  constitute  an  economic  and  conditional  contrast  between
Judaism  and  Heathendom,  and  consequently  also  a  religion  which  is  at  the  same  time  theocratic
in  its  particularism  and  human  in  its  universalism,  resting,  as  it  does,  on  a  self-revelation  of
God,  according  to  which  he  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the  God  of  the  whole  world  and  all  nations ;
on  the  other  hand,  the  God  of  the  chosen  ones,  the  God  of  Israel,  of  his  covenant  people,  of  his
kingdom.

The  simplicity  with  which  Genesis  presents  the  whole  history  of  antiquity  in  biographical


INTRODUCTION    TO    GENESIS.


forms,  is,  at  tlie  same  time,  its  sublimity.  Its  Cod  is  a  personal  God,  and  its  world  and  history
do  not  consist  of  persons  who  arc  puppet  images  of  impersonal  things,  but  of  personalities  from
whose  reciprocal  action  with  Cod  are  developed  the  real  relations.  Thus  is  unfolded  that  his
tory  of  the  heroic  acts  of  faith,  with  which  the  dd  heroes  of  the  faith  introduce  the  revelation,
piece  by  piece,  into  the  world,  according  to  He!),  xi.  The  faith  of  Adam  raid  of  all  primeval
mankind  in  the  creation,  is  followed  by  Abel's  faith  in  sacrifice,  Enoch's  faith  in  immortality.
Koah's  faith  in  judgment  and  deliverance,  Abraham  and  Sarah's  faith  in  promise,  the  faith  of
Abraham  in  a  resurrection,  and  the  faith  in  hope  and  blessing  of  the  patriarchs  in  genera!.
Abraham,  however,  is  especially  the  father  of  the  faithful,  because  he  not,  only  believed  for  him
self,  as  Melchisedek  did,  but  also  for  his  race  (Rom.  iv.).  lie  is,  consequently,  at  the  same  time
thc'man  of  active  obedience  to  the  faith,  the  man  of  deed  or  doing.  Isaac,  on  the  contrary,  is
the,  type  of  all  sufferers  or  waiters  in  faith.  In  the  life  of  Jacob  iinally,  acting  and  suffering  in
the  faith  alternate  in  the  most  manifold  style,  /.  <'.,  he  is  preeminently  the  faith  lighter,  or  one
who  lights  the  fight  of  faith  ;  his  name  Israel  implie-  this.  !n  the  wonderful  story  of  provide  nee
which 'expresses  it  self  in  the  history  of  Joseph,  we  meet,  more  decidedly  than  in  the  life  of  Jacob,
the  type  of  humiliation  and  exaltation,  which  hereafter  continues  to  be  the  basis  of  the  conduct
of  the  faithful,  and  which  finds,  therefore,  it-  last  and  highest  fulfilment  in  Christ.

The  characters  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Ja-ob  are  individually  presented  to  us  in  such  firm  and
practical  features,  that  we  receive  the  decided  impression  that  Ave  have  everywhere  to  do  with,
person^,  not  with  personifications.  Those  critics  who  will  transfer  the  personifications  of
heathen'  mythology  to  patriarchal  history  (Xork,  Ked.slob,  &(.-.),  overlook  the  great  world-histor
ical  contrast,  according  to  which  the  heathen  consciousness  has  lost  itself  in  the  impersonal,
the  maierial.  the  worldly;  whilst  the  history  of  theocratic  consciousness  ix  the  history  of  the
religious  spirit  raisin?  itself  above  nature,  or  of  the  self-comprehension  of  significant  personalities
in  the  communion  of  the  personal  God.  For  this  consciousness  the  remembrance  of  great  ;/.  /'-
sons  was  more  indelible  than  that  of  yrcat  masses  f>fj>coj>k;  the  remembrance  of  great  j
experience  of  faith,  and  of  deeds  of  faith,  more  important  than  that  of  great  events.  As  the  mono
theistic  faith  was  peculiar,  so  also  was  the  monotheistic  memory.  The  faith  of  the  patriarchs
could  not  have  become  the  religion  of  the  future,  had  it  not  struck  correspondingly  strong  roots
in  tiie  past.  Their  faith  in  the  future  went  beyond  the  end  of  the  world ;  their  faith  reminding
were,  therefore,  obliged  to  go  back  beyond  the  beginning  of  the  world.

We  must  not  forget  that  the  illumination  of  God  corresponded,  throughout,  to  the  inquirie:
and  efforts  of  the  religious  spirit  of  man.  Therefore  visions  were  seen  backwards  as  well  as
forwards,  and  the  power  of  personal  interest  explains  the  gradually  rctroceding  propheti.
significance  of  many  names.

Supplement.     The  nomenclature  of  Genesis,  see  in  the  translation  itself.


TRADITION.


Genesis,  which  in  its  age  surpasses  all  monuments  of  old  religious  literature,  although  the
oldest  manuscripts  x>f  it  do  not  go  back  of  the  ninth  century  after  Christ  (see  DEUTZSCII,  p.  5),
comprises  a  space  of  more  than  2,000  years  (according  to  DKLITZSCII,  p.  4,  comp.  p.  15,  2,300
years).  In  its  contents  it  touches  only  the  beginnings  of  the  art  of  writing ;  *  its  real  basis  can
therefore  be  no  other  than  tradition,  or  sacred  legend,  and  even  this  is  not  sufficient,  in  so  far
it  goes  back  beyond  the  origin  of  the  human  race  to  the  beginning  of  the  creation.

Genesis  has"  therefore,  in  the  first  place  a  basis,  which  precedes  all  human  tradition.  This
basis  rests  without  doubt  on  divine  communication;  the  only  question  is  through  what  human
mediation.  These  communications  of  the  earliest  chapters  of  Genesis,  which  precede  all  priinc-

*  For  the  art  of  writing  anon-  the  Hebrews,  compare  HENGSTEXBI:™  :  "Authenticity  of  the  Pentateuch,"  i.  p.  415  ;
V/iNEit :  "Article  :  the  Art  of  Writing  ;  "  DELITZSCH,  pp.  20,  21  (^pcckUly  against  Yon  Bohlcn  and  Vatke' :  'i  e  Egyp-
tian*  had  at  that  time  already  a  priestly  and  secular  literature.


§  7.     SOURCES   AND   COMPOSITION   OF   GENESIS.  105

viil  traditions,  Kurz  has  referred  to  a  prophecy  looking  back\vartls.  Delitzsch  does  not  contest
the  prophetic,  but  the  vision  conception  (009).  This  contrast  does  not  rest  on  a  good  prophetic
psychology,  for  it  appears  from  many  passages  of  the  se-ipture  that  the  human  side  of  the  facts
of  revelation  is  al \vays  the  vision,— the  vision,  as  in  so  flu-  the  human  mediation  of  all  prophecy.
See  Introduction,  §  33.

Sacred  legends  are  ranged  beside  the  visions  of  the  past;  legends,  riot  in  the  sense  of  the
mythological  system  (in  which  legends  follow  myths,  as  a  concrete  heathen  moralily  follows  a
concrete  heathen  dogmatics),  but  narratives  of  the  patriarchs  in  a  religious  symbolical  form.
The  process  of  this  tradition  would  in  the  highest  degree  be  placed  in  doubt,  if  we  were  to  sup
pose  a  series  of  ordinary  generations  through  2,000  years.  But  we  are  here  speaking  of  long-
lived  men  who  continued  through  centuries  (concerning  the  subsequent  abbreviation  of  the  line
of  generations,  that  communicated  the  ancient  sacred  legends,  see  ZAUN,  "the  kingdom  of  God  "
p.  03,  and  the  precious  words  of  Luther  andllamann,  p.  24),  of  patriarchs,  whose  favorite  think
ing  was  religious  contemplation,  hope,  and  recollection,  of  heirs  of  the  faith,  whose  most  sacred
inheritance  was  the  religious  legacy  of  their  ancestors,  of  sola-  anti-mythological  spirits,  by
whom,  with  the  fable-matter  of  heathendom  the  fable-form  also  was  hated  in  their  very  soul.  *
It  lies,  however,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  that  for  the  beginnings  of  the  art  of  writing  there
could  be  known  no  more  pressing  use  than  the  fixing  of  the  sacred  legends  in  sacred  memora
bilia.

13.     THE  DIITEIIE.V^E  BETWEEN  THE  SECTIONS  OP  ELOHISI  AND  THOSE  OF  JEHOVAH.

The  character  of  Genesis  itself  seems  to  refer  to  the  difference  of  said  memorabilia  in  con
nection  with  the  fact  that  in  it  the  name  Elohira  (God)  alternates  in  a  very  remarkable  manner
with  the  name  Jehovah  (to  which  neither  the  translation:  the  Lord,  nor  the  Eternal,  clearly
corresponds).  It  is  the  same  in  Exodus  to  ch.  xiv.  G.

We  have  first  concisely  to  present  the  fact,  then  the  critical  endeavors  to  explain  it.

"With  respect  to  the  fact  itself,  Delitzsch  distinguishes  from  three  to  four  classes  of  sections,
p.  03.  Comj).  also  the  supplement  to  his  commentary.


Ki.oiii3Ttc  SECTIONS.  JEHOVISTIC  SECTIONS.

Ch.  i.-<  h.  ii.  0.     The  rrorld    and   man  under  the  Ch.  ii.  4-ch.  iii.  24,     Man,  the  Paradise  world   the

universal  cosmo-genetic  point  of  view.  ]oss  of  Paradise,  and  the  beginning  of  the  ceouomy  of

salvation.     Theocratic  point  of  view

Ch.  v.     Tholedoth  of  Adam.     The  Sethites.    The          Ch.  iv.    Eve's  theocratic  hope.    Abel's  theocratic

religious  men  ot  the  universal  religion  of  the  first  era.     sacrifice.     Cain's  banishment  and  the  Cainitcs  under

329.    Glance  at  the  judgments  of  Jehovah.  the  ban  of  sin.    At  the  conclusion  (ver.  25)  Eve  thanks

Elohim  for  her  son  Seth,  because  her  theocratic  hope
seems  darkened.  The  calling  upon  Jehovah  revives
with  Enos,  son  of  Seth,  ver.  26.

Ch.  vi.  9-22.  Tholedoth  of  Noah.  He  with  his  three  Ch.  vi.  1-8.  The  destruction  of  the  first  race  of  man
sons  and  their  posterity  are  to  be  saved.  Therefore  The  Lord  rejects  the  old  race,  but  Noah  finds  favor  with
universalistic.  j^

Ch.  vii.  10-24.     The  beginning  of  the  flood.     The  Ch.  vii.  1-9.    The  deliverance  of  Noah,  through  en-

entrance  of  Noah  with  the  pairs  of  all  flesh  is  ordered     trance  into  the  ark,  guaranteed  on  account  of  Ids  up-
Aim,  but  Jehovah,  the  deliverer  of  the  theocracy,     Tightness.     The  special  command,  that  the  clean  ani-
n  in,  as  God  of  the  Covenant.  Ver.  G6.  mals  shall  enter  the  ark  by  seven  pairs,  with  reference

to  the  theocratic  covenant  of  sacrifice.

Ch.  viii.  1-19.  The  egress  of  Noah  from  the  ark  as  Ch.  viii.  20-22.  The  thank-offering  of  Nouh  and
egress  of  mankind  and  of  the  beasts ;  universalistic.  the  resolution  of  Jehovah  to  have  mercy  on  men.  The

order  of  nature  now  theocratic.

Chap,  ix    .-17.     Blessing  on  Noah  and  the  new  race  Ch.  x.-ch.  si.  31.    The  genealogical  table.  Jehovah

Universal  right  of  man.  Universal  covenant  only  twice  mentioned,  ch.  x. ;  with  reference  to  Nim-
of  divine  mercy  with  men.  Universal  sign  of  peace,  rod,  ch.  x.  9 ;  and  twice,  ch.  xi.,  with  reference  to  the
HW  rainbow.  Universalistic.  confusion  of  languages  at  Babel.  Theocratic.


106


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


Cb   xvii   ;:^7.     The  order  of  circumcision  on  the
part  of  Eloliim.     The  founding  of  the  covenant  of  cir
cumcision  for  all  the  posterity  of  Sarah  (/.  <J.  Esau)
also  for  Ishmael.     Uuivcrsalistic.


Ch  xix  29-33.  A  glance  at  tbc  destruction  of  Sod
om  with  reference  to  the  deliverance  of  Lot,  and  the
incest  with  his  daughters.  Moab.  Ammon.  Univer-

salistic.

Ch.  xxi.  1  21.  U.mael's  expulsion.  Only  vcr.  1,
Jehovah.  Mostly  ur.iversalistic.


Ch.  xxv.  1  IS.  SonsofKeturah.  Abraham's  death.
Tholcdoth  of  Ishmael.  Vcr.  11,  Klohiui  blesses  Isaac.
Also  with  reference  to  Esau.

Therefore  univcrsalistic.

(Mi.  xxvii.  !>;-xxviii.  0.  Jacob's  wandering.  Esau  a
marriage.  Once  Elohim,  once  El  Schadai.

(Mi.  xxx.     Kachel.     Kce  the  mixed  Sections.

Ch.  xxxi.  Jacob's  departure  from  Laban.  Only
vcr.  :;  and  10,  .Jehovah.

(Mi.  xxxiii.     .Jacob's  return.

(Mi.  xxxv.  11.  Cod  blesses  Isaac.  Univcrsalistic,
with  reference  to  Esau.

Ch.  xli  1.  History  of  Joseph  in  Egypt.  (Only  ch.
xlix.  IS  Jehovah.)

Exodus,  i.  and  ii.  Israel's  oppression  in  Egypt.
Universalistic.

"  With  Elohim  alternate  in  these  sections  El  Scha-
dai  and  El  in  combinations,  as  El  Elohe  Israel,  ch.
xxxiii  20  and  El  Loth-El,  ch.  xxxv.  7  (comp.  Jehovah
El  Olam,  ch.  xxi.  D3),  or  El  by  itself,  ch.  xxxv.  1,  3 ;
only  one  single  time  Adonai,  ch.  xx.  4."


Ch.  xii.  1-ch.  xvii.  8.  Abraham's  call,  ch.  xii.  1-8.
The  protection  of  Sarah  in  Egypt,  ver.  10-20.  Abra
ham's  settlement  in  Bethel  and  separation  from  Eot,
ch.  xiii.  The  deliverance  of  Lot,  ch.  xiv.  It  docs  not
alter  the  character  of  the  section  that  Melchisedek
calls  on  El  Elion.  Abraham  praises  Jehovah  as  El
Schadai  (a  name  which  forms  the  transition  to  tho
name  of  Jehovah,  according  to  Ex.  vi.  3).  The  cov
enant  of  Jehovah  with  Abraham,  its  condition,  the
righteousness  of  faith,  ch.  xv.  Sarah  and  llagar,  with
reference  to  the  heir  of  promise,  ch.  xvi.  The  Lord  as
the  Almighty  God,  ch.  xvii.  8.  Throughout  theo
cratic.

Ch.  xviii.-xix.  23.  The  appearance  of  Jehovah  to
Abraham  in  the  plains  of  Mamrc.  Jehovah's  judg
ment  on  Sodom.  Theocratic.

(Mi.  xxiv.     Isaac's  marriage.

(Mi.  xxv.  1'.!  2C.     The  twins.

Ch  xxvi.  '2,  !•_',  -\,  25.  Theocratic  testimonies  and
promises.

Ch.  xxix.  31-3.".  Jehovah  takes  Leah,  into  favor.
The  covenant  Cod  in  reference  to  the  covenant  sons.
,s. .;  the  mixed  sections.

Ch.  xxx.  2.1-43.     New  treaty  between  Jacob  and

""  Ch!  xxxviii.     Jehovah  punishes  the  sons  of  Judah.


Ch.  xxxix.    Jehovah  with  Joseph  in  Egypt.    Once
Elohim.     See  the  mixed  sections.


3.  Mixed  sections,  in  which  there  is  the  use
ix.  18-27.  Important  passage:  "Blessed  be
enlarge  Japheth."


Exodus  ir.  15-31.   Returnof  Moses  to  Egypt.  Thco-

criit  Ic.

Exodus   v.     Pharaoh's  scornful   treatment   of  the
messengers  of  Jehovah.     Theocratic.

'•  Among  these  sections,  Gen.  ii.  4  till  ch.  iii.  is  dis-
tin"-uished  by  the  predominance  of  the  name  Jehovah
Elohim,  which  in  the  whole  Pentateuch  only  again  oc
curs  in  Ex.  ix.  CO.     The  name  of  Elohim  is  found  in
th.t  section  only  in  the  mouth  of  the  serpent  and  of
the  woman.     There  are  very  few  exceptions  to  the  pre-
vailino-  lisc  of  Jehovah  in  the  remaining  sections,  and
these  "arc  partly  necessary,  or  of  easy   explanation.
Adonai  alternates  most  frequently  with  Jehovah  (al
ways  in  the  address),  ch.  xviii.  2,  27  ;  SO-G3  ;  ch.  xix.
IS      Both  combined,  Adonai  Jehovah,   is  Jchovist.c
Deuteronomic,  Gen.  xv.  2,  8;  Dcut.  iii.  24;  ix.  26,  and
nowhere  else  in  the  Pentateuch.     The  two  sections  are
also  distinguished  by  the  alternation  of  the  Elohisti
with  El  as  the  Jehovistic  with  Adonai  (comp.  however,
Adonai  in  the  mouth  of  Abimelech,  ch.  xx.  4)."-
Lmscn.

of  Jehovah  and  Eloliim  as  equally  divided.    Ch.
,  the  Elohim  of  Shem.     May


§  7.     SOURCES  AND   COMPOSITION   OF   GENESIS.  107

CJi.  xiv.  Melchisedelc  is  a  priest  of  El  Elion,  and  blesses  Abraham  in  tins  name.  But  Abra-
ham  speaks  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  El  Elion.

Ch.  xx.     Elohim  punishes  Abimelech.     The  latter  addresses  him  as  Adonai.

Oh.  xx.  1-19.  Also  Abraham  speaks  of  the  fear  of  God  (Elohirn).  lie  prays  to  Elohim  for
Abimc'leeh's  house  ;  for  Jehovah,  the  protecting  God  of  Abraham,  has  closed  up  the  wombs  of
the  mothers.

Ch.  xxvii.  The  words  of  Isaac  as  reported  by  Rebecca :  to  bless  before  Jehovah.  Jacob:
Jehovah,  thy  God.  Ver.  27  and  28  remarkable.  Jacob  is  already  theocratically  blessed  bj
Jehovah,  Isaac  gives  him  imiversalistically  the  blessing  of  Elohim.

Ch.  xxviii.  10-22.  The  angels  of  God.  I  am  Jehovah,  the  Elohim  of  Abraham  and  the
Elohim  of  Isaac.  Jacob:  Jehovah  is  in  this  place.  ILrc  i*  Elohhn's  house.  Further  on:  So
God  will  be  with  me.

Ch.  xxix.  31-xxx.  24.  Jehovah  takes  Leah  into  favor  with  reference  to  the  theocratic  son?.
And  thus  she  gives  the  honor  to  Jehovah.  The  blessing  of  fruitful  ness  in  itself  is  the  concern
of  Elohim.  Ch.  xxx.  2.  Rachel  speaks  of  the  blessing  of  Elohim  (comp.  ch.  xxxi.  34).  Elohim
gives  ear  to  Leah  in  reference  to  the  birth  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  son.  Kachel  thanks  Elohim  for
Joseph,  but  she  pleads  for  another  son  from  Jehovah.

Ch.  xxxii.  Elohim  of  my  father  Abraham,  Jehovah. — Thou  hast  wrestled  with  God  and
with  man.  lie  named  the  place  Peniel,  for  I  have  seen  Elohim  face  to  face.

Ch.  xxxix.  Jehovah  is  with  Joseph  in  Egypt.  Joseph  says  to  the  wife  of  Fot'phar :  IIo\v
should  I  sin  against  Elohim? — Jehovah  is  also  with  Joseph  in  prison.  Ver.  21.

4.  Latent  sections,  in  which  no  name  of  God  appears.

Ch.  xi.  10-:.) 2;  xxii.  20-2 i;  xxiii.  (exception  ver.  G:  Thou  art  a  prince  of  God  [Elohim]
among  us.  Ch.  xxv.  1-10 :  God  blesses  Isaac.  Univcrsalistic  with  respect  to  Isaac's  entire  pos
terity).  Ver.  12-20;  21-2-4;  27-31;  ch.  xxvii.  41-10;  xxix.  1-30;  xxxiv. ;  xxxvi. ;  xxxvii. ;  xl.  ;
Ex.  ii.  1-22,

"The  name  of  Elohim  as  characteristic  of  entire  large  sections  disappears  from  Exodus  vi.  2
to  ch.  v.'i.  2  (the  preparation  of  Moses  and  Aaron  for  their  calling).  Nevertheless  a  few  allusions
are  still  found,  among  which  is  prominent  the  small  Elohistic  section  Ex.  xiii.  17-20  (beginning
of  the  wanderings  of  Israel)." — DELITZSCH.

According  to  the  foregoing,  the  name  of  Jehovah  appears  so  entirely  in  a  theocratic  relation,
and  the  name  of  Elohim  so  entirely  in  an  Elohistic  one,  that  wo  might  easily  assume  these
various  relations  to  be  there  intended  where  their  Hebrew  and  canonical  subtiliiy  escape  the
eye  of  the  critic.

[This  exegfctical  distinction  in  the  divine  name  is  quite  old,  but  it  is  only  of  late  that  it  has
been  made  to  assume  much  importance  in  interpretation.  It  has  been  favored  in  Germany  by
two  widely  different  schools.  Those  who  set  the  least  value  on  the  idea  of  inspiration  find  here
a  fancied  support,  not  only  of  what  is  called  the  documentary  theory  of  Genesis,  but  also  of  their
favorite  notion  of  earlier  and  later  periods  in  the  composition  of  the  whole,  and  even  of  particular
parts.  The  other  school,  denying  this  inference,  at  least  in  the  extent  to  which  it  is  carried,
are  still  fond  of  the  distinction  as  favoring  the  notion,  or  rather,  we  may  say,  the  precious  doctrine,
of  a  twofold  aspect  in  the  divine  relation  to  the  world,  or  universe  at  large,  in  contrast  with
that  which  is  borne  to  a  divine  people  chosen  out  of  the  world  from  the  very  beginning,  and
continued  in  its  subsequent  history,  as  a  means  of  the  ultimate  regeneration  of  the  world,  and
of  nature  regarded  as  disordered,  or  under  the  curse.  Hence  the  terms  universalistic  and
theocratic.  Elohim  has  regard  to  the  first  aspect ;  Jehovah,  or  Jahveh,  to  the  second.

Admitting  the  distinction,  we  may  still  doubt  whether  it  has  not  been  carried,  on  both  sides,
to  an  unwarranted  extent.  The  first  view  is  already  curing  itself  by  its  ultra  rationalistic  extrav
agance.  It  reduces  the  Old  Scriptures  not  only  to  fragments,  but  to  fragments  of  fragments
in  most  ill-assorted  and  jumbled  confusion.  Its  supporters  find  themselves  at  last  in  direct
opposition  to  their  favorite  maxim  that  the  Bible  must  be  interpreted  as  though  written  like
other  books.  For  surely  no  other  book  was  ever  so  composed  or  so  compiled.  In  the  same
portion,  presenting  every  appearance  of  narrative  unity,  they  find  the  strangest  juxtapositions


108  IXTRODITTION   TO   GENESIS.


of  pas-a-c<  from  different  authors,  and  written  at  different  times,  according  as  the  one  name  or
the  othe°  is  found  in  it.  There  are  the  most  sudden  transitions  even  in  small  paragraphs  having
riot  only  a  logical  but  a  grammatical  connection.  One  verse,  and  even  one  clause  ot  a  verse  u
written  by  the  Elohist,  and  another  immediately  following  l.y  the  Jeliovist,  with  not
this  difference  of  names  to  mark  any  difference  in  purpose  or  in  authorship.  Calling  it  a  com-
nihti-m  will  not  help  the  absurdity,  for  no  other  compilation  was  ever  made  in  this  way.  lo
make  the  confusion  worse,  there  is  brought  in,  occasionally,  a  third  or  a  fourth  writer,  an  editor,
or  reviewer  and  all  this  without  any  of  those  actual  proofs  or  tests  which  are  applied  to  other
ancient  writings,  and  in  the  use  of  which  this  "higher  criticism,"  as  it  calls  it:  elf,  is

inclined  to  vaunt.  ,

The  other  school  is  more  sober,  but  some  of  the  places  presented  by  them  as  evidence  ot  such
intended  distinction  will  not  stand  the  test  of  examination.     What  first  called  attention  to  this
point  was  the  difference  between  the  first  and  second  chapters  of  Genesis.     In  the  first   Elohim
is  used  throughout  ;  in  the  second,  there  seems  to  be  a  sudden  transition  to  the  name  Jehovah-
Elohim   which  is  .Maintained  for  some  distance.     This  is  striking;  but  even  here  the  matter  has
been  overstated      In  the  first  chapter,  we  arc  told,  the  name  Elohim  occurs  thirty  tm.es,  wit!
out  -i  single  interruption;  but  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  is  each  time  so  exactly  m  the
same  connection,  that  they  all  may  be  regarded  as  but  a  repetition  of  that  one  with  which  the
account  commences.     We  should  have  been  surprised  at  any  variation.    In  this  view  they  hardly
amount  to  more  than  one  example,  or  one  use  of  the  name,  carried  through  by  the  repetition  ot
the  c  •:  junctivc  particle.     Thus  regarded,  the  transition  in  the  second  passage  i
stril  in-      It  i.  not  well  to  say  that  anything  in  the  composition  of  the  scriptures  is  accidental
or  capricious,  yet,  as  far  as  « the  Bible  is  written  like  other  books,"  we  may  suppose  a  g
variety  of  causes  that  led  to  it  as  well  as  the  one  assigned.     It  might  have  been  for  the  sake  ot
an  euphonic  variety,  or  to  avoid  a  seeming  tautology.     It  might  have  been  some  subjective  fee!-
in.  which  the  writer  would  have  found  it  difficult  to  explain,  and  that,  whether  there  was  one
writer  or  two.     Again,  it  might  have  been  that  the  single  name  suggested  ,
more  simple  and  sublime  standing  alone,  and,  in  this  way,  more  universalistic,  as  i   is  styled;
whilst  in  the  second  general  resume  the  thought  of  the  national  name  comes  in,  and    he  writer,
W]  eth.  r  (he  same  or  another,  takes  a  holy-  pride  in  saying  that  it  was  the  national  God,  our  (  od,
our  Jehovah-Elohim,  that  did  all  this,  and  not  some  great  causa  cavtarum,  OT  power  sepanv
from  him.     There  might  be  a  feeling  of  nearness  in  respect  to  the  one  name  that  1
under  such  circumstances.

So  in  the  New  Testament,  Christ  is  a  wider  name  than  Jesus,  Ic  is  near,  h
sonal ;  and  this  difference  may  have  led  to  the  almost  unconscious,  yet  still  real  though  subjective,
choice  of  the  one  rather  than  the  other  under  varying  circumstances.     Something  made  Paul
especLnv  fond  of  the  name  Jcsns,  though  he  generally  attaches  it  to  Christ.    So  this  name  occurs
alone  more  frequently  in  John  than  in  the  other  Gospels.     It  is  found  more  in  some  parts  of  o
Gospel  than  in  others,  and  yet  this  would  be  very  poor  evidence  that  such  parts  were  by  different
authors.     The  cases  may  not  be  perfectly  parallel,  yet  they  present  suheient  resembaneo
show  how  insecure  is  any  argument  for  or  against  authenticity  that  is  based  on  such  a  demotion
In  the  parallelism  of  passages  presented  by  Lange,  some  are  quite  striking,  and  it  would  seem
rational  to  suppose  that  the  more  general  or  the  more  national  feeling,  as  it  predominated  in  one
or  the  other,  may  have  occasioned  the  difference  in  the  suggestion  and  the  use  of  the  names.

Again,  there  are,  other  cases  given,  in  which  it  is  not  ea<y  to  discover  tins,  and  even  some
where  the  reasons  assigned  would  seem  capable  of  a  direct  reversal      Ihus,  m  Gen   x.   the
genealogical  table  of  the  nations  has  the  name  Jehovah  and  is  pronounced  theocratic      C
ft  would  seem  to  be  just  the  other  way.     So  the  mention  of  Nimrod  becomes  theocratic,  and  ye
what  name  more  remote  from  the  idea  of  the  people  of  God.     Equally  inconsistent  would  be
that  view,  or  that  argument,  which  ranks  the  ordinance  of  circumcision  in  Abraham  s  fam,  y  as
universalistic.     Surely  if  there  is  any  one  thing  preeminently  theocratic,  it  is  this  and  yet  the
name  here  used  is  Elohim.     Another  example  :  the  blessing  of  Isaac  by  Jacob  is  put  m  the
realistic  or  Elohistic  column.     The  inconsistency  of  this,  with  any  rigid  theory  of  the  names,


§  7.     SOURCES  AND   COMPOSITION   OF   GENESIS.  109


is  attempted  to  bo  explained  by  Haying  that  it,  was  with  relation  to  Esau.  This  only  shows.
however,  if  it  has  any  weight  at  all,  that  the  same  event  may  stand  in  relation  to  either  aspect.
according  as  it  is  viewed  from  this  or  that  standpoint— a  concession  that  Avould  destroy  the
exegetical  value  of  a  large  number  of  these  references,  although  enough  might  remain  to  show
that  there  was  some  good  ground  for  the  distinction. — T.  L.j


C.     THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  XAJIDS  OF  GOD.


The  diversities  of  the  name  of  God  presented  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  induce  us  to  pref
ace  the  further  discussion  with  a  short,  treatise  on  the  names  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament.  We
divide  them  into  three  classes.

1.  Universalistic:  Ei-onnr,  EL  ELOAIT,  EL  ELIOX,  EL  SCHADAI,  ELOIIIM  ZEBAOTII.

In  respect  to  trn'bx  ,  see  below,  bx,  very  old  Semitic  name  of  the  Godhead.  A  name  of
Jehovah,  Nnm.  xii.  13  ff.,  &c.  Also  of  the  gods  or  idols  of  the  heathen,  Isa.  xliv.  10,  15,  &c.
For  Jehovah,  usually  Ila-el  bxn  (Geri.  xxxi.  13),  or  El  Elohiin.  Jehovah  El  Elohiin.  El  Elim.
Dan.  xi.  30.  Or  El  with  epithets:  ",^V,  *••?£,  sb-ir,  &c.,  on  account  of  the  universality  of  the
name  itself.  Thence  also  El  Israel,  El  Jeshurun.  Usual  derivation  from  bsix  to  be  strong.
According  to  Fiirst  b'lX,  a  primitive.  It  occurs  in  many  proper  names,  rrbx  is  predominantly
poetical,  instead  of  the  plural  Elohiin;  namely,  in  the  Psalms,  Job,  Isaiah,  llabakkuk,  as  also  in
later  writings:  Daniel,  Nehemiah,  Chronicles.  Additional  formation  from  bx  mainly  occurs
with  secondary  attributes:  God  of  Jacob,  God  of  strong-hold?,  strange  God,  etc.  "Most  frequently
in  the  plural,  C"!-f>£.  1.  It  is  used  of  the  true  God,  especially  Avith  the  article.  It  is  construed
with  the  singular  of  the  verb,  though  also  with  the  plural,  Gen.  xx.  13.  Afterwards  this  con
struction  with  the  plural  was  avoided  as  sounding  polytheistic.  2.  As  protecting  God  or
covenant  God,  referring  to  Abraham,  Israel,  &c.,  with  other  epithets,  indicating  the  absolutism
and  universality  of  God  :  God  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  God  Zebaoth,  &c.— In  such  relations
it  was  also  used  adjectively,  in  order  to  indicate  the  highest,  c.  g.,  mountain  of  God.  3.  Of
heathen  gods,  when  more  closely  defined  by  the  context.  So  also,  4,  though  only  conditionally,
of  vicegerents  of  God  ;  kings,  judges,  angels ;  such  examples  very  doubtful.  In  these  cases  there
is,  however,  an  adjective,  symbolical  signification.  Concerning  the  derivation,  Delitzsch  says,
p.  SO:  "  Elohim  is  plural  from  Eloah,  customary  only  in  the  higher  poetic  style,  and  this  is  not
from  the  verb  nbx,  to  be  strong,  formed  from  b"x,  but  is  an  infinitive  noun  from  ,-bx  in  the
signification  of  the  Arabic  alifia,  to  fear."  *

We  decidedly  prefer  the  objective  derivation  to  this  subjective  one  (from  the  fear  of  God);
since  all  other  names  of  God  have  an  objective  derivation  ;  this  is  especially  so  with  the  prefix


connection  with  the  Arabic  aliha  is  far-fetched.  It  is  the  same  root,  doubtless,  but  worskiji,  or  religious  service,  in  alaUn,
and  terror  in  alclia,  are  later  and  secondary  senses  ;  just  as  that  of  swearing  is  a  later  or  derived  meaning  both  in  the
Hebrew  and  the  Arabic  usage.  The  idea  of  creative  power  is  most  fundamental  in  the  word  :  a  great  being  dwelling  in  the
[leavens  above,  and  who  made  and  rules  the  world.  "With  this  are  easily  associated  adoration,  and  awe,  but  the  idea  of
«rror  is  foreign  to  every  conception  that  Genesis  gives  us  of  the  Sethitic  and  patriarchal  life.  Enoch's  "  walking  with
God,"  the  calm,  holy  communion  of  Abraham  and  Jacob  !  nothing  could  be  more  opposed  to  the  idea  and  the  feeling  of
the  Greek  Setcn.S<u/j.of  t'a.

Power,  greatness,  vastness,  height,  according  as  they  are  represented  by  the  conceptions  of  the  day,  carried  to  the  farthest
extent  allowed  by  the  knowledge  of  the  day ;  this  is  the  idea  of  El  and  Elohim,  as  seen  iu  the  etymological  congru'ty  of  tho
'pithets  joined  to  them  in  Genesis.  There  are  three  nsnpp.in  11  vflint.  T.n.no-n  hn=!  mnii-Hnnnd  nrul  wliifTi  «,,•,»  ,1™,


Imagination.

For  the  derivations  of  Allah  by  Arabic  writers  and  philologists,  see  SrEF.xoEK  :  "Leben  und  Lehrc  dos  Mohamme  V
fol.  i.  p.  286.— T.  L.]


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


El. EI  Elion  ---Vr,  ."'ipfrior,  sr.prarMs,  {tyiirror;  El  Schadai,  -^ir  potentissimva.     Plur.  Excell.

a  _.._.  r.Ki_  *fT$*Scptuarjihtn.,iTavTQ<pu.Ta>p.  Vulgate,  omnipotcns.  Eloliira  Zebaoth,  rviiOX
Singular  ^r^ .  '  1.  The  host  of  heaven,  the  angels,  1  Kings  xxii.  19;  2.  Sun,  moon,  and  stars,
Dent.  iv.  rJff. :  ".  generally  all  beings,  Gen.  ii.  1;  Xeh.  ix.  2.  Cod  can  make  all  things  his
ho.- is.  Eloaim  Zebaoth  is  in  so  far  the  most  universal  designation  of  Cod.

2.  Theocratic:  JKHOVAII,  -'AM,  Ei.  SCHADAI,  ADOXAI  (MAU-ACMI  JEHOVAH).  !~vri':  •
a.  The  pronouncing  the  name:    the   very  sacred  name  of  God   as  the  covenant  God  of
Israel.     Througb  superstitious  fear,  the  Jews  early  began  to  avo'd  pronouncing   this   name.
Such    a   motive    seems   to    be   the    .'.-round   of  the   transition   of  the    Septuagint    (itvpios   for

Jehovah).

Snbscquc  fitly  a  prohibition  <  f  the,  utterance  of  this  name  was,  hy  false  exposition,  supposed
to  be  found  i';  the  > '<  tnmandnients,  Ex.  xx.  7,  and  Lev.  xxiv.  11  (L'hilo,  ~]"J.«  Mvsis,  torn.  iii.).
Then.-''  they  d  tins  name  as  Tctragrammaton,  as  -•;«  simply,  or  as  i-b^n  cfi,  and  read

in  plaee  of  it  -;-:x  .      Hence  also  the  Masorites  punctuated  the  text-name  rvrp  with  the  vowels
of  Adonai,  whereby  the  componnded  Schewa  became,  according  to  the  rules  of  Hebrew  gram
mar,  a  simple  Schewa.     On  the  combination,  however,  of  the  word  with  prefixes,  the  A-sound
a'rain  appeared.     Instead  of  Jehovab  the  Samaritans  said  Schimah,  that  is  Sehem  (name).     But
where  Adonai  Jehovah  occurs  in  the  text,  there  they  read  Adonai  Elohim.     In  consequence  of
thus  avoiding  the  utterance  of  this  name,  the   original  pronunciation  of  it  has  been  called  in
question.     On  this  point  compare  the  lexicons  (Diodorus  on  the  word  JHO  ;  the  Samaritans,  ac-
ling  to  Theodon  t,  Jabt  ;  Jao  in  Clemens  Alex. ;  in  Michaelis  and  llolemann  J<1,orali,  Poland
,-  :id  IV.itz-'ch,  p.  G8.     According  to  Caspar!  (on  Mich  a  the  Morathitc)  one  has  the  choice
n  ".'H.j  (n".n?)  n^:-   (n'nr).    Delitxscb  decides  for  Jahavah.

h.  Origin  of  the  name.  For  its  dcriva'.ions  from  foreign  religious  names,  compare  Cesenius,
Delitxsch,  but  especially  Tholuck  :  ''Miscellaneous  V,"ri; ing--, "  1  vol.  p.  377.— Here  the  deriva-
tion  of  the  name  from  foreign  names  of  gods  i-  dis'inctly  denied.  But  the  origin  of  the  name,
it>  ; lie  fn.'l  development  of  its  signilieance,  coincides  clearly  with  the  origin  of  the  theocratic
consciousness,  o.  Etymological  signification  of  the  name.  The  verb  lying  at  the  bottom  of  it
is  a;i  ancient  one,  but  subsequently  became  prominent  again,  rrn  ___  rrri.  Delitzsch  asserts  that
'.is  word  does  not  signify  eircn  but  ylyvf^ai,  Jehovah,  therefore,  him  "whose  Ego  is  an  ever
^•ll'-continuing  one."  Is  then  this  the  signification  <f  7/yi'ea2<u?  And  might  not  a  future  of
yi'yr'fu-rjiu  contain  the  progressive  idea  of  an  ever  becoming  Cod  ?  ISut  the  future  of  rr,~  cannot
exactly  indicate  the  existing  one  (Ilcngstenberg).  It  indicates  one  who  is  ever  to  be  or  to  live;  who
is  (,'vei-  going  to  be  or  live.  With  the  future,  in  effect,  its  present  is  at  the  same  time  fixed,  as
in  Ehjch  archer  Ehjch  (Ex.  iii.  M).  And  this  then  also  refers  back  to  a  corresponding  past.
Hence,  the  true  realistic  interpretation  of  Revelation  i.  4,  8:  o  &v  KU\  o  7^  KU\  6  e^x^fvos  (a  cor
respondence  with  the  inscription  of  the  temple  at  Sais:  e'yco  eipi  T<>  ytyovus  KH\  tv  KCU  fcro^fviw).
In  earlier  times  some  were  disposed  to  find  the  three  tenses  in  the  form  of  the  word  itself;  but
this  was  an  ignoring  of  the  grammar.  4.  Theocratic  signification  of  the  word.  We  have
already  observed  above,  that  the  name  Jahavah  expresses  the  theocratic  relation  of  God  (as  the
God  of  revelation  and  the  covenant)  to  bis  people,  in  contrast  with  the  universalistic  designation
of  the  name  Elohim.  For  more  on  this  head,  see  below.— n;  abridged  from  rrirP,  or  proceeding
from  an  older,  or  abridged  pronunciation  of  the  word  ?,rn  .  It  occurs  especially  in  the  poetic
and  solemn  style,  hence  Ilallelu-Jah.  Besides,  Jab,  like' El,  is  found  in  many  proper  names.
i-.ix  Lord.  In  this  form  it  is  used  only  of  God,  Avhilc  the  human  possessor  or  lord  is  called
y'nx  (from  -px  allied  to  -p).  The  form  Adonai  is  explained  by  many  as  Pluralist  majestatis,  by
others  as  a  suffix  of  the  plural :  my  lords  =  my  lord,  and  further  lord  absolutely,  which  explana
tion  Gesenius  prefers,  for  weighty  reasons.  The  word  especially  occurs  1.  in  addresses  of  God,
2.  iu  self-presentations  of  God,  3.  in  treating  of  God  generally,  and,  indeed,  frequently  with  the
addition  of  Jahavah  or  Elohim.— About  the  phrase  "j^  "»^»  see  the  proper  place.

o.  Theocratic  universalistic  designations.     JEHOVAH  ELOHIM,  JEHOVAH  ZEBAOTH,  FATHER.
Jehovab  Elohim  indicates  the  covenant  God  of  Israel  as  God  of  all  the  world  (1  Kings  xviii.
21).   From  the  «'gnincation  of  Jehovah  it  is  plainly  evident  that  Elohim  is  also  Jehovah.   Comp.


§  7.     SOURCES   AND   COMPOSITION   OF   GENESIS.


Ex.  vi.  3,  Jehovah  Zebaoth.  "\Vhen  the  Ged  of  the  kingdom  of  salvation  summons  the  hosts  of
heaven  and  of  earth  to  realize  his  judgments  and  the  aims  of  redemption,  he  is  called  Jehovah
Zebaoth. — rx  Isa.  Ixiii.  10 ;  xiv.  V,  &c.,  God  as  the  source  of  the  spiritual  existence  of  Israel,
especially  of  its  spiritual  life.

D.     ELOHIM  AND  JEHOVAH.

The  scholastics  of  the  middle  ages  were  mainly  of  opinion  that  the  Trinity  was  indicated  in
the  name  of  Elohim,  i.  c.,  the  idea  of  the  God  of  revelation  (Petrus  Lombardus,  especially).  The
Jewish  author  of  the  book  "  Cosri  Rabbi  Jehuda  ITallev,"  of  the  twelfth  century,  taught,  on  tho
contrary,  that  the  name  Elohim  had  a  relation  antithetical  to  the  heathen  plurality  of  Gods
(which  had  arisen  because  the  heathen  made  a  God  of  every  appearance  of  godlike  power  in  the
world).  The  name  Elohim  was  thus  the  most  general  name  of  the  Godhead;  Jehovah,  on  the
contrary,  the  covenant  God.  This  distinction  has  been  brought  back  again  in  our  time  by
K.  II.  SACK  :  De  usu  nominum  del  n^nbx  ft  niFP  in  libra  Geneseos,  in  his  Commentationes  ad
ilieologicam  Mstoricam,  Bonn,  1821. — To  this  may  be  added  the  treatise  of  Hengstenberg  in  his
work  :  "  Contributions  to  the  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,"  vol.  2d,  entitled  :  "  The  Names
of  Gcd  in  the  Pentateuch,"  p.  181.  Ilengstenberg  makes  the  word  Jehovah,  as  future  form,
Jahve  from  the  Hebrew  mn=rrin  .  But  that  this  future  shall  have  only  the  signification  "  tlic
Being,"  does  not  appear  from  the  examples  connected  with  it,  Jacob,  Israel,  Jabin.*  Rather  do
these  examples  give  to  the  future  here  the  significance  of  the  being  which  is  continually  realiz
ing  itself,  consequently  of  the  being  who  is  going  to  be,  and  thus  also  the  passage,  Eev.
i.  4-,  interprets  the  name.  Jehovah  is  the  God  who  becomes  man  in  his  covenant-faith-
fulnes-,  or  that  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  be.  Accordingly  then  as  the
name  Elohim  (not  as  plural,  but  as  denoting  intense  fulness)  expresses  the  truth  that  is
found  in  heathendom,  or  the  concrete  primeval  monotheism,  Avhilst  Jehovah,  on  the  contrary,
expresses  the  peculiarity  of  tho  Jewish  religion,  whose  God,  in  the  power  of  his  being  ever  re
maining  the  same  with  itself  (that  is  his  truthfulness)  enters  info  the  alsohitc  future  furm  in  tlic
"becoming  man,  so  again  does  the  name  Jeliotali  Eloldm  embrace  in  its  higher  unity  both  Judaism
and  heathenism,  whilst  it  so  far  represents  Christianity  as  already  budding  in  the  Old  Tost  amen  t
(LAXGE:  "Positive  Dogmatics,"  p.  56).

The  plural  t  Elohim  has  been  variously  explained.  1.  BAUMGARTEX  (Richers) :  It  is  numerical

*  [The  names  to  which  Dr.  I/mge  hero  refers  are  all  Hebrew  futures  in  form,  "P""1,  b  XI  w'l,  V-"1,  but  it  is  not  easy
to  see  how  any  inference  could  be  drawn  from  them  in  respect  to  the  divine  name.  The  letter  1  hi  some  of  them  may  be
merely  prosthetic— in  others  it  may  merely  indicate  something  hopeful  or  prophetic  in  the  naming.— T.  L.]

t  [Thcio  may  be  a  question  whether  it  is  strictly  a  plural  at  all,  as  thus  frequently  used,  and  not  a  very  early  euphonic
abbreviation  of  the  construct  phrase  QinbX'bx,  as  we  find  it  occurring  in  all  its  emphatic  fulness,  I's.  1.  Him  trn'bx  bx
God  of  Gods  Jehovah  (El-Elohim  Jehovah)  God  of  all  superhuman  powers,  or  of  all  that  may  bo  called  God's.  The  "easy
doubling  of  the  b,  of  which  the  Hebrew  furnishes  such  plain  examples,  and  its  being,  from  its  peculiar  liquidity,  pro
nounced  as  one,  would  be  in  favor  of  such  an  idea.  It  is  thus  in  the  word  fTi-lbbn,  which  is  pronounced  hallelujah,  if
we  give  to  the  5  its  double  sound,  though  it  is  written  rT^bbn,  as  though  it  were  to  bo  pronounced  ha-lelu-jah.  The
rsgular  piel-form  would  be  "ib^fl  hal-lc-lu.  An  analogous  case  is  furnished  by  the  manner  in  which  the  divine  name  has
come  to  be  written  and  pronounced  in  the  Arabic.  It  is  in  full  KJ  JM  Al-elah  or  Al-alah,  with  the  article,  and  so  it  is  un
derstood  etymological! y,  whilst  it  is  not  only  pronounced,  but  written,  xJUl  Allah.  So  Enn'bx  bx  El-Elohim,  by  vowel
changes  easily  explained,  might  come  to  be  pronounced  rapidly  CT^X  El-llo-him,  then  El-lo-him,  and  finally  Elohim,
80  as  to  bec-ome  identical  in  appearance  with  the  simple  plural  form  of  ri'bx  .  AVc  are  reminded  here  of  that  unusually
solemn  invocation  Josh.  xxii.  22,  twice  repeated,  m,T  C^nbx  bx,  El  Elohim  Jehovah— El  Elohim  Jehovah.  Tho
question  is  whether  the  two  first  are  to  be  taken  as  separate,  or  to  be  read  together  as  one  name,  Deus  deorum.  Easchi  and
Kimchi  take  the  latter  view,  though  itiehaelis  thinks  it  is  forbidden  by  the  accent  pisik,  which  is  very  slightly  disjunctive.
We  need  not,  however,  pay  much  attention  to  it  when  it  is  thus  disregarded  by  the  best  Jewish  commentators.  This  was
the  solemn  pronunciation,  resorted  to  on  very  solemn  occasions ;  but  this  does  not  forbid  (it  rather  favors)  the  idea,  that
the  ordinary  pronunciation  was  but  a  rapid  abridgment  of  the  formula.  The  name  'I'lbs  bx  El-Elion  might  have
suffered  the  same  abridgment,  but  for  two  reasons :  it  is  much  less  common,  and  the  more  indelible  guttural  2J  stands  in
the  way.  There  is  something  like  it  in  the  joining  of  ,T"  with  mm  or  iT.ni,  so  as  to  make  it  javjah-Vah,  as  we  find
it  in  a  few  places  of  more  solemn  and  emphatic  import.

The  fact  that  plural  verbs  or  plural  adjectives,  as  in  Josh.  zxiv.  19,  are  in  a  few  cases  joined  with  C^bX,  where  it
undoubtedly  denotes  tho  One  God,  does  not  militate  seriously  against  this  view.  The  phrase  by  such  abbreviation  ha<r-


110  INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.

1  1  <v


or  collective  and  denotes  originally  God,  including  the  angels,  or  God  in  as  far  as  he  reveal
,ra  d  'works  through  a  plurality  of  spiritual  beings.     The  first  definition  has  a  sense  d*

f  rent  f  om  the  second  ami  sound,  almost  polytheistic.     2.  HOFMAN,  partly  opposed  and  partly
nC  ,  '     T     V'uml  is  attractive,  neutral  ;  it  is  the  Godhead  including  a  spiritual  plurality  a.
.      ,  .;,,,  v.    3.  ABEN  EZRA  :  An  original  designation  of  the  angels  then


nts  thtn  i  Pl»raU,  trinilatls  ;  hut  it  may  he  said  with  perfect  correctness  <  the  7W-
Ss  plTrSty  of  Elohhn  which  becomes  manifest  in  the  Xcu-  Testament  "  (see  DKUTZSCH  :
Gen  M  0  ffi).  \Ye  assume,  on  the  contrary,  that  Elohim  relates  to  the  circumferentia  rev-
cli  "<  /God  i  ,  the  world  and  its  powers  (Isa.  xl.  28),  as  Jehovah  relates  to  the  central  re,-

•


,

God  in  Cl,ist.-Concerning  the  name  Jehovah,  Delitzsch  declares  :    •  1  *»,
fnding  Hensstenberg  (Revelation,  i.  p.  80)  and  Ilolemann  (Bible  Studies  vol.  i.  p  59),  st  11  ,

";;„„,   ,;r!t  n,n;  indicates  not  so  much  the  becoming  as  the  being  (tins  should  read    not
0  mth      ;  Icing  ,,    A    1,-co.ni^  or  naturally  nut  him  whose  existence,  hut  whose  res.  a  ion
of  ex?       ce        tfll  in  the  process  of  becoming."     According  to  Baumgarten  and  Kurtz,  Wolam
de^  ,    God  of  the  beginning  and  the  end,  Jeho.ah  the  God  of  the  middle   ie.   ot

™:  :,  mol    from  the  beginning  to  the  end.     Delitzsch  coincides  :        1,  crea  '.n  is  tb
beaming  and  the  completion  of  everytbing  created,  according  to  its    dea  is  the  end.

of  power  is  to  become  the  kingdom  of  glory.     In  the  nndst  lies  the  k  ngdom  o    ^
ntkl  content  is  the  redemption,     n^  is  the  God  who  mediates  between  middle  and
nd        h    course  of  this  history,  in  one  word,  the  Redeemer."    And  yet  the  name  moreover  of
unfolded  trlnitoB  '     How  then  could  Jehovah,  he  who  was,  is,  and  is  to  be,  he  analogous  t
t  ;9  S,  yestday,  to-day,  a,d  in  eternity  ,     Jehovah  is  also  in  the  bc.innm^  t  and
from  eternity  V,  Ev.  John,  i.  1),  as  also  at  the  end  of  days  (Lhje  ascher  Elje,  Ex.  8
11  a  :  thrtgb  the  whole  conrse  of  universal  history.     We  repeat  it:  the  pure
oufcontrast  of  Elohim  and  Jehovah  will  he  recognized  only  in  the  contras    oi    he  un  ^i>a

comh.nat        o


ml    he  theocratic  revelation  of  God  and  idea  of  religion  -only  in  the  c

dek  and  Abraham,  of  hnman  culture  and  theocracy,  civilization  and  churchdom  _(not  ,  i,  ,1,/a   o.
"nd  Christia,nty,  because  Christianity  embraces  both,  jus:  as  the  religious  consciousness

iH   TL^ZinrLtb  the  while  to  follow  the  change  of  the  two  names  through  the  Old
Test  Jin   beyond  Exodus,  vi.  3.     We  can  only  give  hints  for  this.    It  s  to  be  expected  accoi-
in!   L,  our  distinction,  that   the  universalistic  books,  Koheleth,  Dame,  Jonah,  have  E
almost  exclusively.    And  also  that  the  strong  theocratic  historical  books,  Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel

'  :       ,ave  mainly  Jehovah.     In  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  the  wisdom  of  God  £  «p^ented
as   ending  from  the  founding  of  the  world  to  theocracy  (sec  ch  ix.    and  to    be    o-ding  of
right  theocratic  deportment;  hence  we  find  Jehovah.     Also  the  hook  ot  Job  «i  it    P^sa
introduction,  proceeds  from  the  basis  of  the  Jehovah  faith  ;  it  ^^L?W™'^P^

lement  unh'ersalistic  with  the  name  El  Eloal,     The  change  in  the  Psalms  is  rem    Ub  ^e^    D
litzsch  remarks  on  this  point,  p.  83  (comp.  also  Gesenius,  Thesaurus):      Ve  mee  U    the  PsaU

^^i~3r^
S^":el:t^^

hovah-Psalms,  which  include  these,  and  with  few  exeptions  use  the  name  Jel


viohim  even  if  we  rcsar.1  it  as  a  plural,  is  not

The  idea  of  there  hcing  anything  polytheisUe  m  tins  common  uS,        Elohun  even  U  *e  }mScs.

only  at  war  with  the  whole  spirit  of  Genesis,  hut  al?o  the  inf™  t    he  d«nv  od  f  h»a  .  M


All

e<ir'
Arabic  by


SOURCKS   AND    COMPOSITION    OF   GENESIS.


different  authors  from  the  use  of  Elohira  or  Jehovah,  would  here  he  an  error;  for  though  the
Asaph-Psalms  are  all  Elohim-Psalms,  we  have  from  David  and  the  Korahites  Psalms  of  Jeho
vah  as  well  a-3  of  Elohim.  One  and  the  same  author  at  one  time  (?)  pleased  himself  in  the
use  of  the  divine  name  Elohim  and  at  another  time  in  the  use  of  the  divine  name  Jehovah.  This
cannot  he  explained  from  any  inner  grounds  king  in  the  contents  of  the  Psalms,  llengstcn-
berg  explains  the  use  of  Elohim  in  the  Psalms  from  this,  namely,  that  in  the  Davidical-Solo-
wonian  times,  when  the  honoring  of  Jehovah  was  predominent  in  Israel  the  absoluteness  of
Jehovah  was  made  prominent  as  against  the  heathen  ;  whereas  in  a  later  time  (when  even  in
Israel  itself  the  honoring  of  the  heathen  Elohim  was  pressing  in),  even  the  divine  name  Elohim
became  distasteful  to  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah.  But  this  does  not  explain  how  just  such  and
such  psalms  have  the  name  Elohim."  The  Elohistic  Psalms  extend  from  the  beginning  of  the
second  book  of  Psalms  (xlii.)  till  towards  the  end  of  the  third  book  (Ps.  Ixxxiv. ;  the  end  is
Ixxxix.).  If  we  examine  the  Elohistic  Psalms  more  closely,  the  universalistic  feature  of  them
soon  meets  us  in  manifold  ways.  Longing  for  the  living  God,  Ps.  xlii. ;  xliii.  The  contrast
of  the  people's  God  with  the  heathen,  Ps.  xliv. ;  xlv. ;  xlvi.  The  calling  of  the  heathen,  Ps.
xlvii.,  and  the  victory  over  their  resistance,  Ps.  xlviii. ;  xlix.  A  lesson  for  all  nations  in'  the
fall  of  tiie  godless,  &c.

That  the  love  of  both  sacred  mimes  has  induced  the  writers  alternately  to  honor  God  under
both,  and  to  adorn  themselves  with  both,  as  Delitzsch  maintains,  is  not  confirmed  by  the  pas
sages  quoted  by  him.  For  example:  Gen.  vii.  16  :  They  went  in  (into  the  ark)  as  Elohim  (the
God  of  prominent  natural  events)  had  commanded  him,  and  Jehovah  (the  God  of  the  covenant
faithfulness,  or  of  the  yet  to  be  delivered  kingdom  of  God)  shut  him  in.  Genesis,  xxvii.  27:
•'The  smell  of  my  son  is  as  the  smell  of  a  field  which  Jehovah  (the  God  of  the  theocratic
inheritance)  has  blessed."  Therefore  "  Elohim  "  (the  God  of  every  universal  blessing  of  heaven
and  the  world)  ';  give  thce  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  and  the  fatness  of  earth,"  &c.  "  Nations  must,
serve  thee."  Ex.  iii.  4:  u  Then  Jehovah  (the  covenant  God  founding  the  holy  awe  in  Israel)
s:i\v  that  he  turned  aside  to  see,  and  Elohim  (the  God  of  the  world-fire  in  the  bush  Israel)  called
unto  him  out  of  the  midst  of  the  bush."  Still  more  clear  is  the  distinction  between  the  protect
ing  Jehovah  and  Elohim  as  ruling  in  the  dispensations  of  nature.  The  temple  is  Jehovah's,  the
ark  of  the  covenant  Elohim's  (the  moral  law  embracing  all  mankind).  1  Kings,  iii.  5  :  'The  Lord
appeared  to  Solomon;  and  God  said,  "Ask  what  I  shall  give  thce  ;  "  because  it  is  permitted  him
to  ask  for  worldly  things.  The  passage  Ps.  xlvii.  6  is  explained  by  Ps.  xlvii.  Y.  We  would
observe  as  especially  significant,  that  Eve  in  her  enthusiastic  hope  on  the  birth  of  Cain  names
J.-hovah,  but  in  her  depression  at  the  birth  of  Seth,  Elohim,  the  God  of  the  universal  human
blessing.  In  this  spirit  also  Rachel  speaks,  ch.  xxx.,  of  Elohim's  blessing  the  birth,  while  it  is
Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  theocratic  blessing,  who  gives  Leah  her  first  theocratic  sons.  At  Bethel,
however,  Jacob  exclaims:  Jehovah  is  in  this  place,  meaning  he  who  appears  as  the  covenant
Cod;  here  is  the  house  of  God  (Beth-El),  and  the  gate  of  heaven.

With  the  consciousness  and  significance  of  the  distinction  between  the  two  names,  is  then
also  naturally  connected  the  consciousness  and  significance  of  their  combinations  as  they  so
frequently  occur  in  the  Psalms  and  the  Prophets.

^  Moreover  it  must  be  remarked  that  the  distinction  of  a  twofold  record  in  Genesis  favors  the
originality  of  the  Mosaic  tradition  rather  than  the  supposition  of  a  direct  composition  of  it,  in
which  naturally,  along  with  the  other  indices  of  later  additions,  the  records  lying  at  the  base
are  also  removed  from  their  original  sphere.  But  the  question  also  arises  on  the  distinction  of
the  records,  or  in  how  far  the  same  author  at  a  later  period  of  his  life  can  have  assumed  modifica
tions  of  style  which  were  not  found  in  him  at  an  earlier  date.  This  transition  of  stylo  to  new
U7ra£  Aeyo^cz/u  in  the  process  of  composition,  is  mainly  to  be  noticed  in  the  letters  of  Paul.  A
•elation  similar  with  that  which  exists  between  Isa.  i.  ff.  aud  Isa.  xl.  ff.  could  obtain  between
the  Mosaic  records  before  and  after  those  appearings  of  Jehovah  which  form  a  tiu-nin-point  in
.he  life  of  Moses.

In  their  respective  places  wo  will  treat  of  the  c^n?x  *:z  (1  Mos.  vi.)  and  the  -xba  Ti-v
ch.  xvi.  V).


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


of  th


Simon).    EWALD:  -  The  composition  of  Gcnc.is     ^J^!
B]eekp.2B2).     Sack,  in  the  work  previously  quoted.     HE

:;,-  tio  ^.LeuJ,  «  1S36  to  1839.     llavorni,!c,   Ranke,  Drech


o  p^          of  the  IMy


§  8.     THEOLOGICAL    AND    HOM1LETICAL   L1TERATUKE    OF   GENESIS.  H5


and  embodied  in  it  the  whole  of  Deuteronomy,  wMch  Moses  had, mainly  written  himself  and

indeed  a  Jehovistic  recension  of  the  whole  (p.  23),  p.  38.

The  adherents  of  the  complementary  hypothesis  lie  under  manifold  imputations  of  having
abandoned  the  presumption  of  Mosaic  originals;  the  adherents  of  the  unity  hypothesis  are
chargeable  with  permitting  the  canonical  authorship  to  commence  at  the  beginning  without  the
originals  forming  the  basis.  The  hypothesis  of  Delitxsch  is  injured  by  the  improbable  assump
tion  that  Deuteronomy  is  to  be  attributed  to  Moses  in  great  part,  and  much  more  earlv  and
literally  than  the  preceding  books.  On  the  contrary,  we  can  by  no  means  set  aside  the  supposi
tion  of  the  representatives  of  the  unity  hypothesis  that  the  names  Elohim  and  Jehovah  alter
nate  with  each  other  in  consequence  cf  their  internal  significance.  ^Ve  believe  rather  that  this
significance  will  receive  new  importance  when  we  more  clearly  appreciate  the  contrast  between
(he  univerealistic  and  the  theocratic  designation  of  the  Old  Testament  covenant  God,  of  the
covenant  and  the  spirit.  Without  this  contrast,  the  significant  names  yet  want  their  substruc
tion.  Delitzseh  distinguishes  thus  :  "  This  only  is  true,  that  the  two  narrators  bring  out  diverse
yet  equally  authorized  sides  of  the  one  truth  of  revelation.  The  Jehovist  seizes  with  preference
whatever  brings  out  the  world-historical  position  and  destiny  of  Israel,  its  mediating  calling  in
the  midst  of  the  nations  of  the  world,  and  the  universalistic  (!)  tendency  of  revelation.  He
notes  just  those  patriarchal  promises  of  God,  which  extend  beyond  the  possession  of  Canaan,
and  pronounce  the  blessing  of  all  nations  through  the  mediation  of  the  patriarchs  and  their
seed  (ch.  xii.  2,  £c.).  On  the  contrary  all  the  promises  of  God,  that  kings  will  descend  from
the  patriarchs,  belong  to  the  report  of  the  Elohist  (ch.  xvii.  6,  &c.).  lie  has  more  to  do  with
the  priestly  royal  glory,  which  Israel  has  in  itself,  &c."  This  appears  to  us  to  be  just  about  the
opposite  of  the  real  state  of  the  case.  The  universalistic  relation  is  the  relation  of  God  to  the
Logos  in  the  whole  world,  to  the  Sophia,  to  the  godlike  in  the  foundation  of  humanity  and  the
creation,  the  circumferential  form  of  revelation.  The  theocratic  relation  is  the  central  form
of  revelation,  its  relation  to  the  covenants,  the  theocracy,  the  historical  appearance  of  the
kingdom  of  God.

V,'e  have   it  undecided,  how  far  this  contrast  here  also,  separately  taken,  might  give  an
insight  into  the  difference  between  the  Elohistic  and  the  Jehovistic  Psalms.

If  Musos,  as  a  learned  man,  according  to  the  Egyptian  cultivation  of  his  time,  and  familiar
with  the  art  of  writing,  could  write  down  the  basis  of  his  legislation,  or  could  cause  it  to  be
written  -down  (according  to  Bleck),  then  we  may  confidently  distinguish  t\vo  periods  in  the
writing  of  Moses,  the  composition  of  Elohistic  memorabilia  before  the  ne\v  period  of  revelation
(Gen.  vi.  ;)),  and  Jehovistic  memorabilia  and  laws  after  it.  By  considering  the  effect  of  Egyptian
culture,  we  can  easily  explain  how  (apart  from  its  great  significance  in  itself)  the  memorabilia
of  the  life  of  Joseph,  on  whose  life-history  reposed  the  origin  of  the  nation  in  Egypt,  and  all
right  and  tiilc  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  have  received  so  wide  an  extension.  The  settlement  of  the
Israelites  in  Egypt  may  have  also  been  an  inducement  to  gradually  fixing  the  sacred  legends  of
the  people.  Vt'e  permit  ourselves  therefore  to  assume  a  fourfold  group  of  memorabilia  (not  of
complete  books),  as  the  foundation  for  the  first  four  books  of  the  Pentateuch.  First,  primitive
legends  reduced  to  writing;  secondly,  memorabilia  of  the  life  of  Joseph ;  thirdly,  Mosaic
records  from  the  Elohim  or  El  Schadai  period  of  Gen.  vi.  3  ;  fourthly,  Mosaic  records  from  the
Jehovah  period.  The  last  group  is  continued  in  a  fifth,  namely,  in  the  Denteronomic  prophesies
of  Moses.  The  recension  of  these  parts  in  the  form  of  the  Pentateuch  would  fall,  then,  at  the
latest,  into  the  time  of  the  prophets  of  the  school  of  Samuel,  i.  c.,  into  the  last  days  of  the  era
of  the  Judges ;  and  the  recension  of  Deuteronomy,  perhaps,  into  the  period  of  the  development
of  the  Solomonic  mode  of  view.


§  8.    THEOLOGICAL  AND  IIOMILETICAL  LITERATURE   OF  GENESIS.

See  the  General  Commentaries  preceding.  Then,  WALCII:  "Biblioth.  Theol."  iv.  p.  452  ff.
WISER:  "Theol.  Literature,"  i.  p.  199.  Supplement,  p.  31.  DAXZ:  "Dictionary,"  p.  312.
Supplement,  p.  38.  BI.EEK:  "  Introduction,"  p.  110  ff.  KEII,:  "  Introduction,"  p.  64.  KCKTZ:


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.
110  . —


mOU  I     '  ]    1,    •'    ho  lost  Eeeord  of  iho  Human  Kace,"  liisn,  17T4),  Hama,m,

'•',  •'  \     ;rmnm,chor-3  'Tavagn,!,!^  on  Sacred  History"  (1318;,  the

ii^SSSSiSBS


'3',        i    r    .i.e.     htorica  Critical  Investigations,  Halle,  1823,-Critica  Investiga  ons  ,  ,  o    -
l'.iiil-o  ])roc!i«K-r  Kurlz,  1S-10.     (Si'.rcnsi.ii,  |.rofanc,  occx.itru-.)     Hup-

fs;iis^^::S5H=s

US,   «  Pen^S:  Nvrigh.,  S  £*  S  SS,^  I  ......  .on,  Willl^.  and  Korga.o,  !8M.


L'ip/.i:-",  IlartDiann.

'J  ni;(iu;.TK'.u,  PUAC-TICAI.  LiTi:r..wuuK.


r  f?     A*  ,1   ir.i-        ,•!•   IVvcr   1'i^tory  of  the  Primal


lament  and  the  Pentateuch.  followinjr:  En-'lisli:  The  Holy  Bible,  Genesis

I  To  this  list  of  special  works  ticb  i,  ad  dWio^  ^  ^^.^  ^^  1864>     A  critical

ami  Exodus,  by  CHARLES  WOEDSWOI  ^  .,  JAMES  MURPHY  Professor  of  Ilehrew,


THE  FIRST  CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

-W    OF    THE    WOP.LD,    AND    NATURAL    SCIENCE.       THE    SIX
THE   CREATION.      THE   SCRIPTURAL   YIL.W   0

DAYS'  -wor.K.


g  8.     THEOLOGICAL   AND   IIOMILETICAL   LITERATURE   OF   GENESIS.


c<1it.  Gorderiu*,  Vienna,  1(530.  Eichhorn :  Primeval  History,  2  vols.  Altorf,  1790.  Ilasse :  Discover-
ics  in  the  Field  of  the  Oldest  History  of  Earth  and  Man,  2  pts.  Halle  and  Leipzig  1801.     Wer
ner,  Historical  Comprehension  of  the  first  three  chapters  of  Genesis;  with  a  Supplement  on  tha
Gennineness  of  Deuteronomy,  Tubingen,  1829.  HUG  :  DC  operesexdicrum,  Freiburg,  1827.  Boko:
Oriyuies  Ullicae,  or  Researches  in  Primeval  History,  London,  1834.     Buckland:  Geology  and
Mineralogy,  considered  with  reference  to  Natural  Theology,  London,  183G.      Hitchcock:  The
Religion  of  Geology,  etc.,  Glasgow,  1857.     Hugh  Miller :  The  Testimony  of  the  Rocks  on  Geolosy,
Edinburgh,  1857.     Reginald  Stuart  Poole  :  The  Genesis  of  the  Earth  and  of  Man,  etc.,  London,
1800  (see  the  notice  of  Zockler:  Periodical  of  Thcol.  Literature,  N.  5  and  6,  1801).     Kalisch:
Historical  and  Critical  Commentary  of  the  Old  Testament  Genesis,  London,  1858.     Godefroy:
La  Cwmogonie  de  Reflation,  Paris,  1801.     Marcel  de  Sencs :  The  Cosraogonio  of  Moses,  in  Ger
man,  Tubingen,  1841.     Waterkeyn :  Kosmos  likros.     Quoted  by  Delitzsch  (p.  G09)  :  American
writings  of  Hitchcock,  Smith,  Crofton  ;  especially  the  Treatise  by  Means:  The  Narrative  of  the
Creation  in  Genesis,  in  the  American  Bibliotheca  Sacra,  with  special  reference  to  Guyot's  Lec
tures  on  the  Harmony  of  the  Mosaic  account  of  the  Creation  with  modern  Science,  delivered  in
srew  York,  1852.     Tholuck :  What  is  the  result  of  Science  in  reference  to  the  primeval  world?
At  the  same  time  a  catalogue  of  the  most  important  writings  on  this  subject.     In  his  miscella
neous  writing?,  2d  part,  p.  143  ff.      Lange's  Miscellaneous  Writings,  vol.  i.  p.  49  ff. ;  p.  74  ff.
Lange :  The  Land  of  Glory,  with  reference  to  Pfaff :  Man  and  the  Stars.     Kurtz :  The  Bible  and
Astronomy.     (Schaden  :  Theodicy,  Karlsruhe,  1842.)    Keil :  Apologia,  Hosaicae  Traditions,  etc.,
Dorpat,  1839.     0.  Heer:  Harmony  of  the  Creation,  Zurich,  1847.     Fred,  de  Rougcmon't  (see
"Matthew,"  p.  v.)  :  Fragment  (Tune  Histoire  do  la  terrc,  d\tpres  la  Bible,  Neufchatel,  1811.    The
same  :  Lu,  month  dans  scs  rapports  avcc  Dicu,  Neufchatel,  1841.    JTisloire  dc  la  tcrrc,  1856,  Ger
man,  by  Fabarius  Mutzl :  The  Primeval  History  of  the  Earth,  Landshut,  1843.     Hugo  Rei'nsch  :
The  Creation,  185G.     Euen :   The  History  of  the  Creation,  according  to  the  Researches  of  Mod
ern  Science  in  its  Connection  with  the  Faith  and  the  Church,  Refcrat,  Stettin,  1855.     Flasbar:
Whether  the  astronomical  contradicts  the  Christian  View  of  the  World,  Berlin,  1857.     Ebrard :
The  Faith  in  the  Holy  Writ  and  the  Result  of  Researches  into  Nature,  Konigsberg,  1861.     (The
writings  on  this  subject  by  Richers.   Wolf:  Primeval  History  of  Genesis,  ch.  i.  ver.  G-8.)     Jabn :
Nature  in  the  Light  of  Divine  Revelation,  and  the  Revelation  of  God  in  Nature,  Berlin,  Schulze.
Nature  and  Revelation,  organ  for  the  mediation  between  natural  researches  and  faith  (a  period
ical),  Minuter,  Aschendorf,  1S55  ff.     Buhner :  1.  The  Freely  Inquiring  Bible  Theology  and  its
Opponents,  Zurich,  Orel],  Fiissli.  2.  Researches  of  Nature  and  Civilized  Life.  3.  Kosmos,  Bible  of
Nature,  Hanover,  Rumpler,  1802,     Zockler:  Thcologia  naturalis.    Plan  of  a  systematic  natural
Theology,  Frankfort  on  the  Main  and  Erlangen,  18GO.     Holler:  History  of  the  Cosmology  in
the  Grecian  Church  until  Origen,  with  Special  Investigations  of  the  Gnostic  Systems,  Halle,  I860
Keerl :  Man  the  Image  of  God.     His  relation  to  Christ  and  the  world.     An  Essay  on  Primeval
History,  Basle,  1861 .    Wisemann :  On  the  Connection  between  the  Results  of  scientific  Investiga
tion  and  Religion.   Pianciani  (of  the  Collegium  Romanum) :  Elucidations  of  the  Mosaic  History
of  the  Creation.     Yon  Schrank :  Hexaemcron,  Augsburg,  1838.     Gfrorer :  The  Primeval  History
of  the  Human  Race,  Schaffhausen,  1855.     Reinke:  The  Creation  of  the  World,  1859.    Reusch:
Lectures  on  the  Mosaic  History  and  its  Relation  to  the  Results  of  Investigations  in  Nature,  Bonn,
Freiburg,  18G2.     Works  on  the  Creation  from  the  scientific  stand-point,  by  Andreas  Wagner
Neptunism),  and  others.    See  Delitzsch,  p.  110.    Schubert:  The  Structure  of  the  World.     Quen-
stedt:  Epochs  of  Nature,  Tubingen,  1860.  Pfaff:  History  of  the  Creation,  Frankfort  on  the  Main,
L855.     (Hudson  Tuttle:  History  and  Laws  of  the  Process  of  Creation,  German,  Erlangen,  18GO.
A  flood  of  kindred  popular  writings  and  periodical  articles.)     Treatises,  see  Kurtz,  p.  55.     Of
?reat  merit  is  the  recension  of  the  work  of  Buckland,  Geology  and  Mineralogy,  considered  with
-efcrence  to  Natural  Theology,  by  W.  Hoffmann  in  Tholuck's  Literary  Advertiser,  1838,  Nr.  44  ff,
3aer:  Which  comprehension  of  animated  nature  is  the  just  one?  Berlin,  1862.


INTUODUCTTON   TO   GENESIS.

• • —

Y,-OI:KS  coNCEUNixu  MATERIALISM.


M-aeru-li*-,:  Moie^ott,  Bacl-ner    Yo;,    O^o    4,     Ma,,r  in  Mcnt,  Matcri

Spiritual^,,,  Gi^en,  1801-    ^ri;;^^Z;';«^and;i,bstin,ce  of  the  Bod.    A.  W.
Counter-publications:  1..  «  .  ,  K    M  .  u^t  ^       ^  o{  Matc,.ia,isn,.     W();-s,h  :

Uebig,  1-al.ri:  t-ctteri  °S''  "s\  5  atcnf  "'         ,     ^.CI   ];criin  1S50.    Bd.aUcr,  TTcber  i  51»-

Mrf  ,„,,,  r;,  n,  ^:»--.1  :;;  ;-^;;;  ^  (i),,:s  (,,,„,,  ^™*  «»*«

terialism  and  the  1  copu  '  u  rirmlir  to  the  Representatives  of  Mod-

MaVogt,     M^:  M»t,™,^  :,„  ,    I,^,c,       «,     .       U  -    ^-  -.^  ^»     ^
era  Materialism  in  Gonna..;-,    t'ot  a,    >.  ";  .  ^v..,,,,,,.',,,-  ,;„,„:,„  Materialists,  Monster

'


Gazette,  135G,


(i^cursivo  texts.     The


Deuteronomy,  and  the  General  Introduction.

SECOND  CIUrTEU  OF


ription  of  Paradise,  U  von  Raumcr :  Palestine.   Maydora :

Conn.    Kurtz:  History  of  tho  Old  Covenant,  p.  61  ff.    K.VOI

rhc  Gospel  of  Paradise.     Eight  Lent-Sermons,  Brcslau,  DQl   ^^.^


Kaco,..an.


IC"'  P'  -  The  Mosaic  History  of  Man,  Frankfort  and  Leipzig,
Sacred  Writ,  by  HOOP.  From  the  Latin.
:ine  of  the  Soul,  2d  ed.  Zeller:  Concise


Doctrine  of  Man,  founded  on  Divine  Revelation.

Leipzig,  1 858.     Schubert :  History  of  the  Soul.     II.  A.  Hahn  :


Grimm:  The  Origin  of  Language,  Berlin,
God  in  Man,  Gotha,


Add


?fbe:LT'\NS  L    Th   l2t  «™n^  and  conti,,uod  Individual  Exigence  Elbe,
Berlin,  1857.     A.  Fichte:  ^  .     }     philosophical  Mystery  of

fcld,  1834.     Lange's  Philosophical  Dogmat.es,  p  243.     ^  Entertaming  Instruction,

eligion.     See  AViner:  Theological  Literature,  i.  p.  28.     Supplement,  p.  45,  &c.


55  8.     THEOLOGICAL   AND   HOMILETICAL    LITERATURE   Oy   GENESIS.  H£


THIRD  CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

THE    FALL.       LOST    PARADISE.       DEATH.

Nysa:  Philosopliic-liistorical  Treatise  on  Genesis  2d  and  3d.  Eleutheropolis,  1790.  Schel-
.ling:  Antiquissimi  Je  priina  malorum  liumanorum  oriyine  PMlosoplicmatis  Gen.  3  cxplicatio.
Tubingen,  1T92.  Writings  on  the  Sin  of  Man,  Krabbe,  J.  Miiller.  See  also  the  catalogue  in
Kurtz:  History  of  the  Old  Covenant,  p.  Cl.  Umbrcit :  Sin.  Supplement  to  the  Theology  of  the
Old  Testament,  Hamburg,  1853.  Brurn :  The  Fall.  Illustration  of  the  3d  chapter  of  Genesis,
Barmen,  1857.  Gra'ber  :  Sermons  on  the  Lost  Paradise.

FOURTH  CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

OX    SACRIFICE.

See  Literature,  Kurtz,  p.  71.     On  the  extension  of  the  Human  Race.

FIFTH   CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.
On  the  Macrubians.     See  Kurtz,  p.  73  If.

SIXTH   CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

Fr.  dcRougemont:  Le  Fcuple  prlmitif.  Several  volumes,  Paris  and  Geneva.  II.  Kurtz:
The  Marriages  of  the  Sons  of  God  with  the  Daughters  of  Men,  Berlin,  1857.  The  same:  The
Sons  of  God,  in  Genesis  vi.  1,  4,  and  the  Sinning  Angels,  in  2  Pet.  ii.  4,  5,  and  Jude,  ver.  G  and
7.  Polemic  treatise  against  Ilengstenberg,  Mitau,  1S5S.  See  also  Kurtz:  History  of  the  Old
Covenant,  pp.  76  and  77.

SIXTH  TO  NINTH  CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

THE   FLOOD.

Buttmann:  On  the  Myth  of  the  Flood,  Berlin,  1812  ('19).  Stollberg:  History  of  Religion
and  the  Church,  1  vol.  Further  literature :  Kurtz,  p.  80  ff.  Croner :  18  Sermons  from  the
History  of  the  Flood,  Erfurt,  1508.  Gessner:  Noah,  Five  Addresses  to  Christians,  Basle,  1823.

TENTH  CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

TUB    GENEALOGICAL    TABLE.

See  Kurtz:  History  of  the  Old  Covenant,  p.  88  ff.  A.  Feldhoff:  The  Line  of  Epochs  of  the
Holy  Writ,  from  Adam  to  the  Pentecost,  Frankfort  on  the  Main,  1831.  The  Genealogical
Table  of  Genesis  in  its  Universal  Historical  Significance,  Elberfeld,  1837.  Kriicke  :  Illustrations
of  the  Genealogical  Table,  Bonn,  1837.  Knobel :  The  Genealogy  of  Genesis,  Giessen,  Ricker,
1850.  Breiteneicher  :  Nineveh  and  Nahum.  With  reference  to  the  latest  discoveries,  Munich,
1861.  Layard:  Popular  Report  on  the  Excavations  at  Nineveh,  German  by  Meissner,  Leip-
sic,  Dyk,  1852.

ELEVENTH  CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

BUILDING    OF    TIIS    TOWER    OF    BABEL.       GENEALOGY.       CONFUSION    OF    TONGUES.

Kurtz,  p.  86  if.     Kaulen:  Confusion  of  Tongues  at  Babel,  Mainz,  1861.    Niebuhr:  Babylon


INTRODUCTION   TO    GENESIS.


JIui'Jiendoin.  Dollinger :  Heathendom.  Stiefelhagen.  Writings  of  Lasaulx,  Nagelsbach,
Wuttkc,  Mohler,  and  ethers.  See  Kurt/,  p.  91.  Fabri :  The  Rise  of  Heathendom  and  ^thc
Problem  of  Heathen  Missions,  Barmen,  1S5'J.  Lubkcr:  lectures  on  Civilization  and  Christian
ity,  Hamburg.  180:3.

TWKI.FTII  TO  THIRTY-SIXTH  CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

IKE    HISTOIiY    OF    THE    r.YTlUAKCHS.

Sec  Kurt/,  pp.  104  and  110.  specially  119  and  120.  1!-  1.1  >gger:  />.  Jiist,  ria  sacra  Patrlar-
chirum,  Extrcitationcs  selcctne,  Amsterdam,  1GG7.  J.  J.  Hess:  History  of  the  Patriarchs,  with
maps,  2' vote.  Zurich,  177G.  M,l:  The  Life  of  the  Patriarchs,  2  part-.  Frankfort,  171-i  (on  the
last  Chapters  of  Gci  is).


Sec  Danz:  Abraham,  p.  14.  AYiner:  Scriptural  L'otl-hxicen.  Biblical  Dictionary,  by  Zel-
ler.  llerzog:  Theological  Encyclopedia.  So  also  the  following  mimes.  Roos:  Footsteps  of  the
Faith  of  Abraham  in  the  Descriptions  of  the  Life  of  the  Patriarchs  and  the  Prophets.  Iscwly
published,  Tubingen,  18:;7.  Bachmann  :  Sermons  on  tlio  liistory  of  Abraham.  Fassavant:
Abraham  and  Abraham's  Children.  By  the  author  of  Naeman,  2d  ed.  Basle,  18GI.  AV.  Hen-
ser:  Abraham's  Doings,  in  12  sermons.  A  parting  Gift,  Barmen,  1801.  Boswinkel:  Fourteen
Sermons  on  the  Life  of  Abraham,  Barmen,  Bertdsman.  Brain  :  Traits  of  the  Domestic  Life


B.     Isaac.

Sec  Kurtz,  p.  203  IT.  The  Talmud  accounts  of  him  in  Oiho:  Lexicon  Talmud.  Passages  of
the  Koran  in  llottingerV  B'tlliotli.  Orient.

C.     J<ic'jl<.     TJic  PJc-slnfj  cf  Jncoli.

Sec  Danz,  p.  315.  Jacob's  lli-tory,  by  Secger  (in  Klaibers  Studies  i.  iii.  GO-81).  G.  D.
Krummacher:  Jacob's  Contest  raid  Victory,  4th  ed.  Elbcrfeld,  1857.  Alting  Schilo,  Franeker,
10GO  Chr  Schmidt,  Giessen,  1793.  Friedricli,  Hoffmann  (Andivas  Wilhelm),  Stiihelin,  Wcr-
lin,  Zirkel,  Peterson  (see  Danz  :  Genesis,  and  Winer  i.  p.  199).  Dicstcl :  The  Blessing  of  Jacob,
Braunschweig,  Schwetsche,  1853.

1).     JvsqJi.

Scs  Danz,  p.  315  and  p.  4713.     Winer:  Biblical  Dictionary.     Zeller :  Biblical  Dictionary.

Ilerzog.     Felix  Herder:  The  History  of  Joseph  in  Sermons,  Zurich,  1784.     Teachings  from  the
History  of  Joseph.     First  part,  Frankfort  on  the  Main,  1S1G.

5  y.    THE  FUXDAMEXTAL  THOUGHT  AND  DIVISION  OF  GENESIS.

Under  the  universo-cosmical  point  of  view,  Genesis  is  divided  into  two  main  divisions:  the
history  of  the  primeval  world  before  the  flood  (ch.  i.-viii.)  and  the  liistory  of  the  theocratic
primeval  period  after  the  flood  (ch.  viii.-l.).

Heidegger:  Enchiridion;  1.  Historia  originis  rcrum  omnium,  ch.  i.  11.  2.  ffistoria  mund^
priori*,  ch.  iii.-viii.  3.  Historia  posteriori  mundi,  ch.  ix.-l.  Delitzsch :  "  If  we  divide  all
history'into  the  two  great  halves  of  a  history  of  primeval  time  and  a  history  of  the  mid-world,
separated  by  the  beginning  of  sin  and  the  plan  of  redemption  going  into  effect  (Cocceius),  Genesis
embraces  the  complete  history  of  the  early  world  (ch.  i.-iii.)-  It  also  follows  the  liistory  of  the


FUNDAMENTAL   THOUGHT   AND   DIVISION   OF   GENESIS.


after-world  through  tlirco  periods,  whose  first  extends  from  tho  Fall  to  the  Flood  (cli,  iv.-viii.
14),  tho  second  from  the  covenant  with  Xoah  to  the  dispersion  of  the  human  race  in  nations  an<J
languages  (cli.  viii.  lo-ch.  xi.),  the  third  from  the  choosing  of  Abraham  to  the  settlement  of  tho
family  of  Jacob  in  Egypt  (ch.  xii.-L).  These  first  three  periods  are  the  first  three  stages  of  the
history  of  salvation,  into  which,  through  divine  mercy,  the  world  and  the  history  of  nations  is
shaped."

In  the  mean  while  the  theocratic  point  of  view  predominates,  and  under  it  also  Genesis
appears  to  fall  firstly  into  two  halves:  The  history  of  primal  religion,  from  ch.  i.-xi.,  and  tho
history  of  the  patriarchs,  ch.  xii.-l.

Thus  Khvhofer:  Bibliology,  p.  1C  :  ':Gene3'3  is  consequently  divided  into  general  and  special
history.''

If  we  look  however  more  closely,  there  are  three  main  divisions  in  contrast  with  each  other.
1.  The  history  of  tho  primeval  world  and  earliest  period  of  the  human  race,  as  the  history  of  the
primal  religion  (or  the  Tholedoth  of  heaven  and  earth  (Gen.  ii.  4),  and  the  Tholedoth  of  Adam
(ch.  v.  1)  until  the  development  of  heathendom  (ch.  xii.) ).  2.  The  history  of  the  patriarchal*
faith  or  the  religion  of  promise,  or  the  Tholedoth  of  Shorn,  &c.,  to  the  Tholedoth  of  Jacob,  from
ch.  xii.-ch.  xxxvi.  43.  3.  The  history  of  the  Genesis  of  the  people  of  Israel  in  Egypt  out  of  tho
t\velvo  tribes  of  Israel:  from  the  Tholedoth  of  Jacob,  ch.  xxxvii.,  to  the  death  of  Joseph  in
Egypt,  under  the  prophetic  prospect  of  the  return  of  Israel  to  Canaan  (ch.  1.  2G).

Schneider:  Compendium  of  the  Christian  religion  (Bielefeld,  1SGO) :  "  TVe  would  divide  Gen
esis  most  simply  according  to  its  five  heroes:  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  did  it
not  contain  in  itself  a  decimal  division  (the  ten  Tholedoth)."

If  we  keep  in  view  their  different  relapses  into  sin  and  their  turning  again  to  redemption,  it
may  be  appropriate  to  distinguish :  a.  the  foundation-laying  in  creation,  ch.  i.  and  ii. ;  b.  the  gen
eral  fall  of  man,  ch.  iii.-v. ;  c.  tho  fall  of  the  first  human  race,  ch.  vi.-x. ;  d. 'the  building
of  the  tower  of  Babel  (heathendom  and  the  patriarchal  state),  ch.  xi.-xxxvi. ;  e.  the  sin  of  the
brothers  of  Joseph  and  its  event,  ch.  xxxvii.-l.  (Isaac's  error  and  its  event,  an  episode,  ch.  xxviii.
-xxxvi.)

The  name  Genesis,  referring  to  the  initial  word  of  the  book  (rvvi'sr,::)  and  to  its  foundation,
may  indicate  in  the  first  place  the  origin  of  the  world  and  the  human  race.  But  we  can  also
conclude  from  the  frequent  headings  "  Tholcdoih"  (n^b'r)  which  mark  individual  sections,
that  it  is  especially  chosen  in  reference  to  the  contents  of  the  entire  book,  or  the  human  origins
in  general  (origin  of  sin,  of  judgment,  salvation,  final  judgment,  renewal  of  the  world,  heathen
dom,  covenant  religion,  and  the  Israelitish  nation).  Hence  Vaihinger  (in  Ilerzog's  Seal-Lexicon)
and  Delirzseh  in  his  Commentary  have  divided  Genesis  according  to  the  separate  Tholedoth.
Delitzsch  counts  ten  Tholedoth.  1.  Tholedoth  of  heaven  and  earth,  ch.  i.  1-ch.  iv.  20 ;  2.  Tho
ledoth  of  Adam,  ch.  v.-ch.  vi.  8;  3.  Tholedoth  of  Xoah,  ch.  vi.  9-ch.  ix.  29;  4.  Tholedoth  of
the  sons  of  Noah,  cli.  x.  1-ch.  xi.  9;  5.  Tholedoth  of  Shorn,  ch.  xi,  10-20  ;  0.  Tholedoth  of
Terah,  ch.  xi.  27-ch.  xxv.  11 ;  7.  Tholedoth  of  Ishmael,  ch.  xxv.  12-18 ;  8.  Tholedoth  of  Isaac,
ch.  xxv.  1 9-ch.  xxxv.  20;  9.  Tholedoth  of  Esau,  ch.  xxxvi.  10;  10.  Tholedoth  of  Jacob,  ch!
xxxvii.-l.

Besides  the  headings  Tholedoth,  ch.  ii.  3  ;  v.  1 ;  vi.  9,  &c.,  the  fact,  that  the  Bible  throughout
has  tho  point  of  view  of  the  personal  life,  and  that  the  Tholedoth  as  generations  seem  to  cor-
respond  to  it,  would  especially  favor  this  division.  But  in  that  case  we  should  not,  at  least,
speak  of  the  Tholedoth  of  heaven  and  earth  before  the  Tholedoth  of  Adam,  as  Delitzsch  does.
And  it  is  just  this  Genesis  of  heaven  and  earth,  which  cannot  properly  bo  designated  by  the
word  Tholedoth,  that  has,  nevertheless,  mainly  given  to  the  book  its  name.  We  ought  also  to
distinguish  between  the  documentary  genealogical  foundations  of  Genesis,  its  ideal  unitary  com
position,  jiml  the  ideal  construction  which  proceeds  from  it.  Therefore  we  seek  such  a  division
of  Genesis  as  results  from  the  actual  distinction  of  its  principal  periods,  and  the  essential  arrange
ments  of  these  periods.


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


1  [KST  PERIOD.

History  of  the  primeval  world,  of  the  earliest  period  of  the  hr.man  race  as  history  of  the
earliest  religion  till  the  development  of  heathendom  and  its  contrast  in  tho  budding  patriarch-
dom.  ch.  i.-xi.

i.  DIVISION.     The  Genesis  of  the  world,  of  the  contrast  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  cf  tho

first  m::n,  ch.  i.  and  ii.
I,'  Skftum.     Heaven,  earth,  find  man.     The  physico  g  netical  creation  and  world  development,

07  ^!i,in      Man,  Paradise,  the  pair,  and  the  institutions  of  Paradise.     'Ihc  reversed  principal

'development,  proceeding  from  man.     The  symbol  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  ch.  ii.  4-25.

IT   DIVISION.     The  Genesis  of  the  world-history,  of  the  temptation,  of  the  sin  of  man,  of  the

judgment,  of  death,  of  salvation,  of  the  contrast,  between  a  divine  and  worldly  direc-

*  tion  in  humanity,  of  the  common  ruin.     The  anomism  of  antediluvian  sin,  ch.  ili.  1-ch.

vi.  7.

]••'  Section      Tlie  I.">t  Paradise,  ch.  ili.

2d  Section      Cain  and  Abel.     The  Camitcs.     The  ungodly,  secular  first  culture,  ch.  iv.  1-
3  /  ,9,  ction'.     Adam  and  Seth.     The  Sethitcs  or  Macroblans.     The  living  worship  and  t

.  f  renewed  life  in  the  line  of  the  sons  of  God,  ch.  iv.  25-ch.  v.  32.
4<r  s  I/:..,..     T!ie  universal  godless  ruin  in  consequence  of  the  mixture  of  both  Ii  ics,  ch.  vi.

i    7.

in    DIVISION.     The  Genesis  of  the  judgment  of  the  world  and  its  renewing  by  means  of  the
.  ,;,  rating  Hood.     The  flo-d  and  the  drowned  race.     The  ark  and  the  saved  humanity.
(The  ark'a  type  of  the  pious  house,  of  the  pious  state,  of  the  church.)     The  first  typical
covenant,  ch.  vi.  S-ch.  xi.  19.
1st  &  ction.     The  calling  of  Xoah  and  the  ark,  ch.  vi.  8-ch.  vii.  10.

;  ,,.     The  Hood  and  the  judgment  of  death,  ch.  vii.  V-24.
•••/  :,      The  ark.  the  saved  and  renewed  humanity,  ch.  viii.  1-19.

tion.     The  first  typical  covenant.     The  original  moral  law  (commandmen  ih).

The  symbol  of  the  rainbow,  ch.  viii.  20-ch.  xi.  19.

iv  DIVISION  Genesis  of  the  new  world-historical  human  race;  of  the  contrast  between  tho
new  sin  and  the  new  piety,  as  they  respectively  appear,  between  curse  and  blessing.  J  he
Genesis  of  the  contrast  between  the  blessing  of  Shem  (worship,  germinating  theocracy)
and  the  blessing  of  Japheth  (culture,  humanism),  of  the  contrast  between  the  dispersion
of  nations  and  the  Babylonian  union  of  nations,  between  the  Babylonian  dispersion  of
nations,  or  the  mythical  heathendom,  and  the  united  symbolical  faith  in  God  or  patriarch-
dom,  ch.  xi.  20-ch.  xi.  32.
l,t  S,  ction  The  revelation  of  sin  and  piety  in  Noah's  house.  1  he  curse  and  the  bless

Noah.     The  double  blessing  and  the  blessing  in  the  curse  itself,  ch.  XL  24-29.
2<Z  Section.     The  genealogical  table,  ch.  x.  1-22.
Zd  Section.     The  building  of  the  tower  of  Babel,  the  confusion  of  tongues,  and  the  d.spcrsu

nations,  ch.  xi.  1-9.  ^      ,

Vh  Section.    The  history  of  Shem,  and  the  wandering,  commenced  and  interrupted,  ot  Terah
to  Canaan.     The  Genesis  of  the  contrast  between  heathendom  and  the  budding  patn
dom,  ch.  xi.  10-32.

SECOND  PERIOD.

The  Genesis  of  the  patriarchal  faith  in  promise,  and  the  covenant  religion ;  of  the  hostile
ccntrast  between  faith  in  promise  and  heathendom;  of  the  friendly  contrast  between  the  patn
archs  and  the  humanity  of  the  heathen  world.     Patriarchal  religion  and  patriarchal  custom,  d
xii.  1-ch.  xxxvi.  43.


§  9.     TUB   FUNDAMENTAL   THOUGHT   AND   DIVISION   OF   GENESIS.


A.    Au:tA:iAa  TJIIJ  I-'KIEXD  OF  GOD  AND  ms  Acis  OF  PAITII,  Cn.  xn.  1-Cn.  xxv.  10.

l,v£  Section.  Abraham's  journey  to  Canaan.  His  call.  The  iirst  promise  of  God.  His  fellow-
ship  with  Lot.  First  appearance  of  God  iu  Canaan,  and  lirst  homeless  alienage  in  tha
promised  land.  Abraham  in  Egypt,  Pharaoh,  ch.  xii.

2d^t'cti<in.  Abraham  as  a  testimony  of  God  in  Canaan,  and  his  self-denying  separation  from
Lut.  Xew  promise  of  God.  IJis  altar  in  the  plains  of  Mamre,  ch.  xiii.

8d  Section.  Abraham  and  his  war  of  deliverance  for  Lot  against  heathen  robbery.  The  vic
torious  warrior  of  the  faith  and  his  greeting  to  the  prince  of  peace  Mclchisedek.  His  bear
ing  towards  the  king  of  Sodom  and  his  confederates,  ch.  xiv.

4th  Section.  Abraham  the  tried  warrior  of  the  faith,  and  God  his  shield.  His  longing  for  an
heir,  and  his  thought  of  adoption.  The  great  promise  of  God.  Abraham's  faith  in  view
of  the  starry  heaven.  The  symbol  of  the  starry  heaven.  The  righteousness  of  faith,  tl;o
covenant  of  the  faith,  and  the  repeated  promise,  ch.  xv.

5th  Section.  Abraham's  yielding  to  Sarah's  impatience.  Abraham  and  Ilagar.  Ilagar's  llight.
The  angel  of  the  Lord.  Ilagar's  return  and  Ishmael's  birth,  ch.  xvi.

6th  Section.  Abraham  and  the  repeated  promise  of  God.  The  name  Abram  changed  to
Abraham.  The  personal  covenant  of  faith  now  a  covenant  institution  for  him,  his  house
and  his  name.  Circumcision.  The  name  Saivii  changed  to  Sarah.  Xot  Ishmacl  but
Isaac  the  promised  one,  ch.  xvii.

1th  Section.  Abraham  i;i  the  plains  of  Mamre  and  the  three  heavenly  men.  Hospitality  of
Abraham.  The  distinct  announcement  of  the  birth  of  a  son.  Sarah's  doubt.  The  an
nouncement  of  the  judgment  on  Sodom  connected  with  the  promise  of  the  heir  of  blessing.
The  angel  of  the  Lord,  or  the  friend  of  Abraham,  and  the  two  angels  of  deliverance  for
Sodom.  Abraham's  intercession  fa?'  SoJorn.  Sodom's  fall.  Lot's  deliverance.  Lot  and  his
daughters.  Moab  and  Ainmon,  ch.  xviii.  and  xix.

Bth  Section.  Abraham  and  Abimclech  of  Gerar.  His  and  Sarah's  renewed  exposure  through
his  human  calculating  foresight,  as  in  Egypt  in  the  presence  of  Pharaoh.  Divine  preserva
tion.  Abraham's  intercession  for  Abimelech,  ch.  xx.

9tt  Section.  Isaac's  birth.  I>hmael's  expulsion.  The  covenant  of  peace  with  Abimelcch  at
Beer  Sheba,  ch.  xxi.

10th  Section.  Sacrifice  of  Isaac.  The  sealing  of  the  faith  of  Abraham.  The  completion  and
sealing  of  the  divine  promise,  ch.  xxii.  1-19.

llth  Section.  Abraham's  family  joy  and  suffering.  News  of  birth  in  the  home  land.  Sarah's
dea'h.  Her  burial  at  Hebron;  the  germ  of  the  future  acquisition  of  Canaan,  ch.  xxii.  20-
ch.  xxiii.  20.

12th  Section.  Abraham's  care  for  the  marriage  of  Isaac.  Eleazer's  wooing  of  Rebecca  for
Isaac.  Isaac's  marriage,  ch.  xxiv.

13th  Section.  Abraham's  second  marriage.  Keturah  and  her  sons.  His  death  and  burial,  ch.
xxv.  1-10.

]?.     ISAAC  AND  HIS  ITAiTH-ExDunANC",  Cir.  xxv.  11-Cn.  xxvm.  2!).

1st  Section.     Isaac  and  Lshmacl,  ch.  xv.  11-18.

M  Section.     Jacob  and  Esau,  ch.  xxv.  19-34.

od  Section.  I-aac  in  the  territory  of  Abimelech  at  Gerar.  Appearance  of  God  and  confirmed
promise.  His  constrained  imitation  of  the  maxims  of  his  father.  Exposure  of  Rebecca.
His  yielding  to  the  injustice  of  the  Philistines,  ch.  xxvi.  1-22.

4f7/.  Section.     Isaac  in  Beer  Shcba.     Treaty  of  peace  with  Abimelech,  ch.  xxvi.  23-33.

5th  Section.  Isaac's  sorrow  at  Esau's  marriage  with  the  daughters  of  Canaan,  ch.  xxvi.  34
and  35.

Gth  Section.  Isaac's  prepossession  in  favor  of  the  fir^t-born,  Esau.  Rebecca  and  Jacob  deprive
him  of  the  theocratic  blessing.  Esau's  blessing.  Esau's  hostility  to  Jacob.  Rebecca's  pre
paration  for  the  flight  of  Jacob  and  Ids  journey  with  a  view  to  a  theocratic  marring^


124


INTRODUCTION   TO   GENESIS.


1st,  Section.  Jacob's  journey  to  Mesopotamia  and  the  ladder  of  Leaven  at  Bethel,  cL.  xxviii.
10-22.

Id  Section.  Jacob  and  Rachel,  Laban's  younger  daughter.  First  and  second  treaty  with  La-
ban.  His  involuntary  consummation  of  marriage  with  Leah.  The  double  marriage.  Leah's
sons.  Rachel's  dissatisfaction.  The  strife  of  the  two  women.  The  concubines.  Jacob's
blessing  of  childix-n,  ch.  xxix.  1-ch.  xxx.  2-1.

5d  Section.  Jacob's  thought  of  returning  liomc.  New  treaty  with  Laban.  His  clo.-ely  cal
culated  propo.-hion.  (Prelude  to  the  method  of  acquiring  possession  of  the  Egyptian  ves
sels.)  God's  command  to  return  home,  ch.  xxx.  25-ch.  xxxi.  3.

4th  Sectivn.  Jacob's  flight.  Laban's  persecution.  The  alliance  between  both  on  the  mountain
of  Gilcad.  Departure,  ch.  xxxi.  4-55.

5i7i  Section.  Jacob's  journey  home.  The  appearance  of  the  hosts  of  angels  (as  on  his  setting
out).  Fear  of  Esau.  His  wrestling  in  the  night  with  God.  The  name  Israel.  Meeting
and  reconciliation  with  Esau,  ch.  xxxii.  1-ch.  xxxiii.  1C.

Gth  Section.  Jacob's  settlement  in  Canaan-  At  Succoth.  At  Sichem.  Dinah.  Simeon  and
Levi.  The  first  appearance  of  Jewish  fanaticism.  Jacob's  reproof,  and  departure  for  Bethel,
ch.  xxxiii.  17-ch.  xxxv.  15.

7th  Section.  Journey  from  Bethel  to  beyond  Bethlehem.  Benjamin's  birth.  Rachel's  death,
ch.  xxxv.  18-21.

St/i  Si  ction.  Reuben's  transgression.  Jacob's  sons.  His  return  to  Isaac  at  Hebron.  (Rebecca
no  more  among  the  living.)  Isaac's  death.  Burial  of  him  by  Esau  and  Jacob,  ch.  xxxv.


T1IIIUJ  I'Kltl


The  Genesis  of  the  people  of  Israel  in  Egypt  from  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  or  the  history
of  Joseph  and  his  brothers.     Joseph,  the  patriarch  of  the  faith-guidance,  through  humiliation  to
(-filiation,  ch.  xxxvii.-l.
\*t  Siction.     Jacob's  error  in  respect  to  Joseph.     Joseph's  dreams.     The  envy  of  the  brothers.

Joseph  sold  into  Egypt,  ch.  xxxvii.
2a7  Section.     Judah's  transient  separation  from  his  brothers  (probably  in  dissatisfaction  at  their

deed).     His  sons.     Trimar,  ch.  xxxviii.

3d  Section.     Joseph  in  the  house  of  Potiphar  and  in  prison,  ch.  xxxix.
4th  Section.     Joseph  as  interpreter  of  the  dreams  of  his  fellow-prisoners,  ch.  xl.
5th  Section.     Joseph  as  interpreter  of  the  dreams  of  Pharaoh.     He  is  advanced  and  cared  for,

ch.  xli.

6th  Section.     The  famine,  and  the  first  journey  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  to  Egypt,  ch.  xlii.
7th  Section.     Second  journey.     With  Benjamin.     Joseph  makes  himself  known  to  his  brethren.

Their  return.     Jacob's  joy,  ch.  xliiii.-xlv.
8/7i  Section.     Israel  goes  with  his  house  to  Egypt.     He  settles  in  the  land  of  Goshcn.    Jacob

before  Pharaoh.     Joseph's  political  economy.     Jacob's  arrangement  for  his  burial  in  Ca
naan,  ch.  xlvi.  and  xlvii.

Qth  Section.     Jacob's  sickness,  his  blessing  of  his  grandchildren,  Joseph's  sons,  ch.  rlviii.
10th  Section.     Jacob's  blessing  on  his  sons.     Judah  and  his  brethren.    Jacob's  last  charge.    His

burial  in  Canaan.     His  end,  ch.  xlix.
llth  Section.     Joseph's  mourning.     Jacob's  funeral  in  Canaan.     The  fear  of  Joseph's  brethren

and  his  word  of  peace  and  faith  concerning  them  and  his  history.     Joseph's  last  charge ;

provision  for  his  return  to  Canaan  in  death,  similar  to  the  provision  of  his  father,  ch.  1.


SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION


TO    THE


FIRST    CHAPTER    OF    GENESIS

BY  THE  AMERICAN  EDITOR.


As  there  is  no  chapter  in  the  Bible  more  important  than  the  First  of  Genesis,  so  also  may
it  be  said  that  there  is  no  one  whose  interpretation  is  more  likely  to  be  affected  by  the  prejudg-
ments,  popular,  scientific,  or  philosophical,  which  the  reader  brings  with  him.  "Dr.  Lange  is
remarkably  full  and  clear  on  this  portion  of  Holy  Writ,  but  as  its  great  subject  has  given  rise  to
much  discussion  in  this  country,  the  American  Editor  has  deemed  it  no  disparagement  to  the
learned^  author  of  this  commentary  to  present  a  few  general  and  fundamental  ideas  by  way  of
special  introduction  to  the  American  reader.

It  has  been  found  convenient  to  divide  it  into  five  purts.

PART  I.

Essential  Ideas  of  Creation.  Creation  as  the  origin  of  matter.  As  the  giving  form  to  mat
ter.  Relative  importance  of  the  two  ideas.  Question  in  relation  to  the  principium  mentioned
in  Genesis.  Whether  to  be  regarded  as  the  absolute  or  a  particular  beginning.  Opinions  of
Jewish  interpreters.  Is  the  creation  mentioned  in  the  first  verse  infra  sex  dies  ?

PART  II.

The  Ilexaemeron.  Nature  and  duration  of  the  days.  The  distinction  of  Augustine.  The
account  self-interpreting.  The  Light,  the  Darkness.  The  word  Day.  The  Morning  and  the
Evening.  Each  Day  an  Appearing.  Each  Day  a  Beginning,  but  its  work  continuing  in  those
that  follow.  Ps.  cxxxix.  15,  1G.

PART  III.

Jlelps  in  the  interpretation  of  the  First  of  Genesis  to  be  derived  from  other  portions  of
'.cripVire.  The  Fourth  Commandment.  Proverbs viii.  Micah  v.  1.  Psalm  civ.  Job  xxxviii.,
ixviii.,  &c.

PART  IV.

The  Ideas  of  Law,  of  Nature,  and  the  Supernatural,  as  found  in  the  Bible.  Distinction
etween  the  Idea  of  a  Law  and  its  Science.  Distinction  between  the  Supernatural  and  the
liraculous.  «  The  Finger  of  God.1'  The  Great  Natural.


[•2Q  SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   FIRST   CHAPTER   OF   GENESIS.


PART  V.

How  was  the  creative  account  revealed  ?  Its  Grandeur  and  Simplicity.  Other  Cosmogonies
copies.  This  an  Original  Picture.  The  Vision  theory.  Internal  Evidence.  Compared  with
the  Apocalypse.  Objective  am!  Sui  jectivc  Revelation.  A'ision  of  the  Pa-t  analogous  to  Proph
ecy,  or  Vision  of  the  Future.


PART  1.

I-SSKNTIAL  IDEAS  OF  CUFATIOX.

lie  who  made  one  world  in  space,  made  all  worlds  in  space.  He  who  made  one  world  in
lime,  made  all  worlds  in  time.  He  who  gave  matter  its  forms,  gave  it  its  origination,  or  that
which  is  the  ground  of  all  its  forms.

The--'1  truths  are  so  inseparably  linked  together  by  the  laws  of  our  thinking,  that  the  revela
tion  of  die  is  the  revelation  of  the  rest;  since  we  cannot  believe  one  spcculatively  without
believing  all  the  rest,  or  deny  one  logically  without  losing  our  faith  in  all  the  rest.  Whatever
view,  then,  a  true  exegesis  may  most  favor.' — whether  the  account  in  Genesis  be  found  to  have
in  view,  mainly  or  solely,  a  universal  or  a  partial  creation,  whether  the  principinm  there  men
tioned  be  (he  particular  beginning  of  the  special  work  there  described,  or  the  principinm  prin-
;.!.  the  beginning  of  all  beginning-. — the  P>ible  is,  in  either  case,  a  protest  againt  the
dogma  of  the  eternity  of  the  world,  or  of  the  eternity  of  matter.  In  the  fact  clearly  revealed
;:d  believed  that  a  personal  divine  power  was  concerned  in  the  creation,  even  of  a  plant,  we
have  the  essential  faith.  As  a  dogma  merely,  the  great  truth  might  have  been  here  expressed
in  a  .Dingle  sentence:  "God.  made  all  things  to  be,  and  without  him  there  wr.s  nothing  made  that
is" — even  as  it  i>  given  to  us  in  John  i.  2.  "Why  then  this  most  graphic  and  detailed  account
of  the  creative  wo;k.'  It  is  the  same  design,  we  answer,  that  appears  in  the  other  historical  rev-
l;i  ions  that  are  made  to  us  in  the  Scripture.  It  is  to  impress  us  with  the  glory  of  the  creat  v,
to  make  the  thought  something  more  than  a  speculative  belief,  to  give  it  strength  and  vividness
o  ,-H  to  become  a  living  power  in  our  souls.  Whatever  exegesis  has  the  greatest  tendency  to
do  this,  is  most  likely  to  be  true  in  itself,  and  is  the  most  favorable  to  the  absolute  verity.

The  best  Jewish  commentators,  such  as  Aben  Ezra  and  Rabbi  Schelomo.  attach  much  ira-
portance  to  the  fact  that  r^rsi ,  Gen.  i.  1,  is  grammatically  in  the  construct  state,  and  there
fore  limited  by  something  of  irhicli  it  is  the  beginning.  It  really  is  so  in  form  here,  and  in
actual  regimen  everywhere  else,  except  in  Dent,  xxxiii.  21,  which  Lange  cites.  Even  there,
however,  the  construct  form  has  its  limiting  meaning:  \?  nM'X"  N^'T  ''and  he  provided  the
chief  part  for  himself  "—that  is,  the  chief  part  of  the  territory.  It  was  no  poverty  of  language
that  compelled  the  choice  of  r'-JO .  A  word  used  absolutely,  and  of  the  undoubted  absolute
form,  such  as  n"rxi  or  nr  w'X~:,  might  have  been  employed  to  denote  an  absolute  principinm,
.inlimited,  ante  omncs  res  alins.  unconditioned  by  any  other  things  or  times, — first,  and  first  of
all.  The  construct  form  (since  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  language)  must  denote,  or  would
best  denote,  the  beginning  of  a  creation,  or  of  some  creation,  or  some  assumed  point  of  commence
ment  in  it,  which  is  determined  by  the  context.  Thus  these  learned  Jewish  commentators  hero,
although  of  all  thcists  the  most  free  from  any  tinge  of  pantheism,  or  belief  in  the  eternity  of  mat
ter,  interpret  this  account  as  setting  forth  simply  the  creation  of  our  world  and  heaven,
regarded  too  as  commencing  with  them  in  a  certain  unformed  condition.  So  that  by  these  writers
creation  (the  Mosaic  creation)  is  regarded  as  formation  rather  than  as  primal  origination  of
matter.

In  accordance  with  this  view  of  r.-£X-,  Rabbi  Schelomo  (Raschi)  interprets  the  whole  pas
sage  :  i"  y-xi  :r~w'  r,x->~-  rrrx",  "In  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  tho


PART   L— ESSENTIAL   IDEAS   OF   CREATION.  127


earth,  when  the  earth  was  tohu  and  boliu,  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep,  and  the
spirit  was  brooding  over  the  waters,  then  God  said,  Let  there  be  light,"  &c.  Or,  "  In  the  begin
ning  when  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  the  earth  was,  etc.,  God  said ; ''  that,
according  to  them,  was  the  beginning  with  which  we  here  have  to  do.  All  before  is  descriptive
and  determinative  of  it,  Eabbi  Schelomo  compares  it  to  Kosea  i.  2,  rrf-p  1-1  nbnn  "In  the
beginning  of  God's  speaking  by  Ilosea,1'  or  literally  (for  --^  is  the  preterit  and  not  the  infin
itive),  '•  The  beginning  God  spake,''  that  is,  which  he  spake,  or  icheti  he  spake.*  So  also  Exodus
vi.  28,  n- m  i=T  nv=  ,  "  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  spake,"  where  the  construct  state  of  the  noun
may  be  regarded  as  in  like  manner  put  in  regimen  with  the  verb.  Aben  Ezra  supports  the  same
view  of  rri'x-i  being  grammatically  in  regimen  with  the  verb  x-i3,  or  rather  with  the  whole
following  context,  by  the  example  of  Isaiah  xxix.  1,  Yn  ,-:n  r.^p,  where  the  construct  n^-
seems  to  stand  in  precisely  the  same  relation  to  the  verb  n:n  as  n^X-i  to  x~3

But  the  word  x-,r,  it  is  maintained,  denotes  primal  origination,  and  some  would  even  con
tend,  in  defiance  of  etymology,  that  such  is  its  primary  and  radical  idea.  It  is  certain,  however,
that  everywhere  else  in  this  account  it  must  mean  something  quite  diiFercnt.  It  is  constantly
afterwards  used  of  divine  acts  or  works  which  could  only  have  been  the  giving  form  to  matter
that  already  is.  In  all  the  dividing*,  the  gatherings,  the  evolutions  of  the  plants  and  animals,
the  ordaining  and  disposing  of  the  heavenly  lights,  the  firmament,  and  even  the  making  of  the
human  body,  there  is  no  new  matter.  This  is  well  represented  by  Aben  Ezra  in  his  comment
on  the  word  x-z.  "  There  are  those,"  lie  says,  "  who  maintain  that  ns^-.r,  creation,  is  (ety-
mologieally)  the  bringing  out  of  nothing,  and  they  refer  to  Numb.  xvi.  SO.  rrrn  x-,--"  nxi-Q  ex
'if  the  Lord  make  a  new  thing'  (literally  create  a  creation.  &e.),  but  they  forget  how  it  is  said
here  that  God  cwttad  the  great  monsters  (Aug.  whales),  and  how  it  is  said  three  times  in  one
v-rse  (27),  God  c:\ated  man,  and  how  also  it  is  said,  lie  creates  the  darkness  (Isai  xlv.  7,  xT-,2
-r~),  though  the  darkness  is  only  the  negation  of  light,  which  is  the  real  existing  thing."  Com-
•::icntari!  on  Gat.  1.

All  T.he<e  are  constructions  formations,  dispositions  of  matter ;  and  this  is  certainly  creation,
whilst  there  is  no  evidence,  except  an  assumption  (not  exegetical  but  rationalizing),  of  its  mean
ing  something  else  quite  different  in  the  first  verse.  It  dues  indeed  denote,  as  its  most  usual
sense,  a  divine  supernatural  act,  such  as  man,  or  any  nature  of  itself,  could  not  do,— although  in
the  distinct  piel  form,  and  in  its  primary  sense  of  cutting,  it  is  sometimes  applied  to  human
works,  as  in  Joshua  xvii.  15.  It  is  the  divine  supernatural  making  of  something  new,  and  which
did  not  exist  before.  But  new  forms,  especially  as  divinely  established,  are  new  things;  and
this,  in  fact,  is  the  only  proper  sense  in  which  they  become  things,  res,  realities,  manifestations
of  something,  vehicles  of  ideas,  by  which  alone  any  material  object  becomes  an  object  of  thought,
that  is,  a  thiny.  The  opposite  notion  is  born  of  the  prejudice  which  would  make  the  forms  ot
matter  lower  tilings  than  the  formless  matter  itself,— if 'that  can  be  called  a  thing  instead  of  a
substratum,  power,  or  capacity  for  receiving  forms,  and  thus  becoming  things.

Besides,  this  idea  of  primal  origination  of  matter  could  have  been  otherwise  well  expressed
in  Hebrew.  Such  language  as  we  have,  Psalms  xxxiii.  9,  "  lie  commanded  and  it  was  "  (though
that  also  may  be  used  of  formal  creation),  would  have  been  better  adapted  to  such  a  purpose.
By  contrast,  at  least,  with  the  decided  structural  or  formative  style  that  succeeds,  it  might  have
made  it  less  doubtful  whether  the  creation  mentioned  in  the  first  verse  was  really  and  essentially
different  from  that  of  the  verses  following.  So  also  the  language,  Isaiah  xlviii.  13,  "I  call  to
them,  they  stand  up,"  which  probably  was  intended  to  express  this  very  idea  of  primal  origina
tion  ;  though  in  the  context  it  may  be  taken  as  simply  a  reference  to  these  Mosaic  formations  :
They  stand  up  together"  (-nm  or  at  once,  5/za  as  thoLXX.  render  it,  Vulgate  simul),  or  it  may
mean  tno  whole  creation,  from  first  to  last,  as  brought  into  being  by  the  divine  command,
represented  as  one  and  instantaneous,  though  running  through  a  vast  chain  of  sequences.  Just

*  In  tha  same  way  the  Judaico-Aral>ian  translator,  Arabs  Erpcnianus,  as  ho  is  commonly  called,   (Q-Li.  Lo   J.f
U^^'J   '^  ^*MJ  I?  "  The  beginning  of  God's  creating  the  heavens  and  the  earth  "-or  the  first  creating  of  the  heavens


j.nd  the  earth  which  God  created.


SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   FIRST   CHAPTER   OF   GENESIS.


before  this,  however,  the  prophet's  language  is  in  the  highest  degree  formative  and  structural:
«  Mv  hand  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth,  my  right  hand  spanned  the  heavens

It  may  he  admitted  that  the  author  of  the  account  in  Genesis  probably  regarded  himself
describing  the  creation  of  the  all,  since  to  his  knowledge  our  immediate  cart!,  and  heaven,  with
the  phenomenal  luminaries  appearing  as  fixed  in  it,  and  belonging  to  it,  were  the  all  ;  but
lie  meant  to  tell  us  of  the  first  matter,  even  of  this,  or  of  its  coming  out  ot  nothing   cannot  be
certainly  determined  by  any  etymology  of  words,  or  by  any  infallible  exegesis  ot  the  passage.
There  are  certainly  some  things  that  look  the  other  way.     The  implication,  however,  of  the
great  fLl  is  enough  for  us,  oven  though  the  bare  words  of  Moses  might  be  thought  to  confine
themselves  to  a  more  limited  sphere.     So  Lange  holds  to  the  creation  in  the  Bible  being  the
absoTt    lirst  origination,  yet,  from  some  things  he  has  said,  he  seems  to  be  content  with  the
ast  mentioned  as  answering  the  theological  inquiry,  without  enlarging  the  words  in  Genesis
ye^etical  strain  which  they  may  not  be  able  to  bear.     This  is  shown  particularly  in
t  ]1(,  :;;j,   LG5,  about  "the  earth-light,  or  the  earth  becoming  light,"  as  hung  the  analogue
'wherein  is  presented  the  primal  origination  of  light,  just  as  in  the  creation  of  man  there  is  sym-
bolLd  the  creation  of  a  spirit-world  collectively.     The  argument  or  implication  is  :  He  who
Se  light  to  he  at  one  place  or  time,  mad,  it  to  he  at  all  lin.es,  even  at  that  tune  winch  was
rhe  absolute  beginning  of  its  existence;  He  who  made  the  human  spirit  m,M  have  made  all
spirit,  whether  coeval  with  or  immeasurably  more  ancient  than  man.

Since  then  it  is  very  difficult  to  make  the  fair  verbal  exegesis  speak  decided!}  either  way,
raay  Wc  not  infer  from  this  that  we  overrate  the  importance  of  one  aspect  of  the  question  as
;'•;      v,,    w.tl    tho   other.     Besides  the  clear  implication  aforesaid,  which  would  make  the
e  0P,       on  of  a  structural  creation  a,  some  particular  time  inseparable  from  the  recognition  ot
au  ab  olu     fir     origination  of  matter  in  its  own  time  or  times,  there  may  he  a  question  as  to
w  n  1,          ally  the  .reater  work,  or  more,  worthy  of  revelation,  or  winch  ought  to  have    he
'    ,       '.     m,r  mhlas  -this  bare  origination  of  the  first  matter,  or  the  giving/,™  to  that
'niter      The  first,  many  would  s,y.  unhesitatingly  ;  the  second,  they  would  regard  as  the  lower,
the  S  in       -tant   the  less  mamfestive  of  the  divine  power  and  glory,  or,  in  a  word  as  the  eas.er
^  V     or  philosophical  thinking,  in  which  we  so  much  pride  ourselves  and  wh,h  we  -woul,
lin  ascribe  to  God,  whose  "  ways  are  so  far  above  our  ways  and  Ins  thoughts  above  on    thoughts,
I';  ;         t  s   a"o"d  hi  certain  metaphysical  notions  which  are  not  recognized,  or  but

tt    ecogn  zed,  m  the  usual  style  of  the  Scriptures.     This  first  matter,  hyle,  force,  heat  nebu  ar


,.,,    •  t  f  «    ***»  ^  u»  ^  »-,-.    .O    .  .ocs  not  t.ik  t.  -«,  M»

,    fo      V  ll,c  n-otl-er  uf  matter,  the  substance  tint  ],.is  ,10.10  of  tl.o  prol.crt.os  of  ra.it-
•lato  ,,t  the  1,  le,  ^™*°r  °  ™>       '  .,Vjf  as  soractlling  (listhl(.t.  ,•„„„  M,j  ;  it

rr^t::;::^^

lirst  moved  nor  iloe?  it,  after  tho  more  modern  manner,  have  mnch  to  say  of  the  f

to  ^  ±Uon.  throlvin,  a,,  eansality  after  it  into  the  inferior  *"£%££££*%£

nature.  On  the  other  ],«,,d,  itsl.igl.  design  is  to  impress  ns  »,th  tl.osnncnor  greatness      this  latter

*':


^


PART   I.— ESSENTIAL   IDEAS   OF   CREATION.  ]oj)


ator  of  force  and  matter,  but  God  the  Great  Architect;  this  is  the  idea  which  the  Scripture
language  aims  to  impress  so  as  to  make  it  a  living  and  controlling  power  in  the  soul,  giving  life
and  valuo  to  the  other  ideas,  and  preventing  them  from  becoming  mere  scientific  abstractions
on  the  one  hand,  or  dead  naturalistic  or  pantheistic  notions  on  the  other.  The  abstract  notion
is  ever  assumed  in  the  Bible  as  included  in  its  creative  representations,  whilst  it  makes  vivid  the
other  and  greater  thought  as  the  quickening  power  of  all  personal  theistic  conceptions.

The  only  notion  we  can  form  of  matter  in  its  lowest  or  primal  entity  is  that  of  resistance  \<.
space,  or  the  furnishing  bare  sensation  to  a  supposed  sentioncy,  without  anything  beyond  it,  either
as  form  for  the  intellect,  or  as  qualifying  variety  for  the  sense.  The  manner  of  putting  tliis
forth,  we  may  not  know,  but  that  does  not  give  it  the  higher  rank.  Taken  as  a  fact  it  is  the
lowest  thing  in  the  scale  of  the  divine  works,  if  we  may  be  allowed  to  make  any  relative  com
parisons  among  them.  It  is  simply  an  exercise  of  the  divine  strength.  On  the  other  hand,  the
giving  form  to  matter,  which  is  so  clearly  and  sublimely  revealed  as  the  true  creative  stage,  is
the  work  of  the  Divine  Wisdom,  and  might  be  supposed  worthy  of  God,  as  an  exercise  of  his
infinite  intelligence,  even  if  it  had  no  other  than  an  artistic  end.  The  carrying  these  forms  into
the  region  of  the  moral,  or  the  impressing  moral  designs  upon  them— in  other  words,  building
the  world  as  the  abode  of  life  and  the  residence  of  moral  and  spiritual  beings  capable  of  witness
ing  and  declaring  the  glory  of  the  Creator — is  the  work  of  the  divine  Love.  In  reversing  this
scale  of  dignities,  the  actually  lower  work  comes  to  be  regarded  as  the  higher  and  the  greater
merely  because  it  is  the  more  remote  from  us.  Nothing  but  some  such  feeling  as  this  could
have  led  to  the  strong  desire,  in  modern  times,  of  finding  here  a  revelation  of  the  metaphysical,
as  though  this  alone  were  creation  proper,  or  as  though  the  divine  power  and  wisdom  were  not
even  more  sublimely  manifested  in  the  creative  evolution  and  formation  of  the  physical.  The
painting  is  a  much  greater  and  higher  creation  than  the  canvas,  even  though  the  making  of
both  were  admitted  as  belonging  to  the  same  artist.

In  discussing  these  questions  excgetically  much  also  depends  on  the  correct  interpretation  of
the  substantive  verb  rtn^n  (and  was)  in  the  second  verse.  Does  it  denote  a  time  cotemporaneous
with  the  verb  503  in  the  first  verse,  or  does  it  denote  something  succeeding,  either  as  state  or
event,— namely,  that  the  earth  and  heaven  which  had  been  created  by  a  distinct  and  separate
act  there  related,  was  afterwards  (whether  as  having  been  left  so,  or  as  having  become  so  by
some  cause  or  causes  not  mentioned)  tohu  and  holm  ?  Or  does  it  mean  (as  the  Jewish  authorities
maintain)  that  this  condition,  whose  time  is  denoted  by  np.in,  was  the  beginning  of  the  creation
described,  or  the  chronological  date  when  this  creation  (called  the  Mosaic)  began?  In  other
words,  can  the  expression  nrnn  pixm  denote,  grammatically,  a  succeeding  instead  of  a
cotemporaneous  event?  Certainly  the  far  more  usual  form,  if  an  after  event,  or  an  after  state,  had
been  intended^  would  have  been  inn^  with  i  conversive,  as  in  all  the  steps  following,  each

distinctly  marking  succession,  or  one  event  coming  out  of  and  after  another,  as  in-' i^m

50  pr — X-IT — a:^! — -i-xi^  and  so  throughout.  The  usage  in  this  very  chapter  is  sufficient  to
establish  the  rule,  even  if  it  were  not  so  common  everywhere  else  when  a  series  of  successive
acts  are  thus  laid  down.

^  Another  question  arises.  Was  all  the  creation  that  Moses  intends  to  describe  intra  sex  dies,
within  six  days,  or  was  that  part  mentioned  in  the  first  verse  extra  dies,  as  it  must  bo  if  the  six
days  chronologically  began  in  the  evening,  that  is,  in  the  tohu  and  bobu,  or  when  darkness  was
upon  the  face  of  the  deep  ?  But  such  exclusion  would  seem  to  be  in  the  face  of  the  express
declaration  in  the  fourth  commandment :  "  in  sis  days  (within  six  d.-iys)  God  created  the  heavens
and  the  earth."  If,  then,  there  was  anything  extra  dies,  or  before  the  chronological  beginning
of  the  first  day,  which  is  so  distinctly  marked  by  its  evening,  it  could  not  be  intended  here  as
part  of  this  account;  for,  from  the  time  God  began  this  creative  work  (whatever  it  might  include)
until  he  rested  in  the  evening  after  the  sixth,  there  were  six  days,  be  they  long  or  short,  and  no
more.  The  reasoning  is  plain.  The  six  days  began  with  the  evening  of  the  tohu,  followed  by
the  -,~xi ,  or  command  for  the  shining  of  the  light,  which  was  the  first  act  in  the  formation  of
the  heavens  and  the  earth  afterwards  described.  If,  then,  the  first  verse  denotes  a  beginning
before  this,  it  must  have  been  extra  sex  dies.  If  we  would  bring  it  within,  then  it  must  bo
9


130


SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   TIIE   FIRST   CHAPTER   OF   GENESIS.


regarded  as  caption  to  the  whole  account,  or  as  a  summary  of  the  process  afterwards  in  detail  set
forth.  If  it  is  without,  then  what  is  meant  by  the  heavens  and  the  earth  (especially  the  earth)
therein  mentioned?  Or  it  might  be  asked  (and  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  answer  the  question)
what  part  of  the  first  day,  or  how  are  we  to  get  any  part  of  the  first  day,  or  first  night,  between
the  x-c  of  the  first  verso  and  the  nmn  of  the  second?

Again in  the  expression  rr,"n  ",r~X"'<  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  subject  stands  before  the

verb,  which  makes  it  emphatic,  or  is  designed  to  call  attention  to  it  as  being  the  very  same  earth
mentioned  before,  and  whose  creation  is  now  going  to  be  more  particularly  described:  and  as
for  the  earth  (or,  but  as  for  the  earth,  as  there  is  abundant  authority  for  rendering  the  particle
•,),  it  was  so  and  so,— in  such  a  condition,  as  though  to  separate  it  from  the  heavens  (the  earth
heavens)  which  is  not  created,  th^t  is,  divided  from  the  general  mass,  until  the  second  day,  when
God  first  named  it  historically  by  calling  the  firmament  heaven.

But  can  we  conclusively  rest  on  such  a  grammatical  exegesis?  Certainly  not.  The  usual
law  of  the  Hebrew  tenses,  though  strongly  favoring  it  (aided  as  it  is  by  the  other  considerations
mentioned;,  is  not  sufficiently  fixed  and  without  exceptions,  seeming  or  real,  to  warrant  any  inter
preter  in  speaking  positively  from  such  data  alone;  but  certainly  this  applies  with  still  greater
force  to  those  who  would  be  dogmatically  positive  in  maintaining  the  other  view.  Grammatical
exegesis,  even  when  most  thoroughly  pursued,  may  fail  of  reaching  the  absolute  truth,  for  that
truth  mny  be  in  itself  ineffable.  It  is,  however,  the  true  way,  and  the  only  way,  of  getting  at
the  order  of  the  conceptions  as  they  existed,  or  as  they  arose,  in  the  mind  of  the  writer;  and
this  is  of  the  utmost  value,  even  though  it  may  have  to  be  determined  by  the  bare  collocation
of  a  word  or  a  particle.  Still,  the  conation  is  itself  but  a  species  of  language  representing  the
•idea  even  as  it  is  itself  represented  by  the  words.  It  is  the  last  thing  in  language  to  which  we  can
reach,  and  we  must  take  it  as  standing  most  immediately,  if  not  most  infallibly,  for  the  truth
that  lies  still  behind  it.

'•And  darkness  was  upon  the  faco  of  the  deep,"  the  c'nn,  or  formless  waste.  Parkin-.-  is
nothing  of  itself,  yet  still  it  denotes  something  more  than  a  mere  negation,  or  a  mere  absence.
It  indicates  rather  the  olstruciion,  of  something  that  already  in.  As  its  Hebrew  name  implies
(with  the  ^lightest  etymological  variation  -'•yn  for  ~^r,),  it  is  a  hoMiny  Ixtcl;  like  the  Latin  tcne-
Ime  from  teiieo  (the  ni  in  *!/;.•< ''?••",  ciulra',  being  phonetically  lost  in  its  kindred  labial  b,  as  in
lambda,  labda),  and  the  Greek  o-Koroy  with  the  same  ultimate  radix  (SK^ISK).  This  darkness  was
chronologically  the  first  or  commencing  night  of  the  Ilexaemeron,  just  as  the  light  that  follows
is,  beyond  all  question,  the  first  morning  of  the  first  day.  It  was  even  then  the  shadow  of  some
thing  coming  (its  skadus,  Gothic,  or  shade,  same  as  Greek  SK,  ova,Vor).  During  all  this  night  it  was
the  obstruction  of  a  power,  or  the  sign  of  such  obstruction,  until  the  brooding  spirit  loosed  its
,m/)cW  fotfwu,  or  "chains  of  darkness''  (2  Tet.  ii.  4),  and  the  voice  of  the  Word  was  heard  com
manding  that  power  to  come  forth.  Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  in  the  Mosaic  account
the  liglit  there  mentioned  comes  phenomenally,  and  historically,  after  the  darkness,  and  even
after  the  water  of  the  tehom,  whether  we  regard  it  as  gas-form  or  liquid-form,  that  is,  water
proper,  according  to  Lange's  distinction.  What  a  most  serious  difficulty  is  this  for  those  who
say  that  the  Mosaic  account  in  its  first  mention  of  light  has  respect  to  its  primal  original,  or  first
being,— whether  it  be  the  material  or  dynamical  entity  merely,  or  that  glorious  form  of  power
which  is  called  God's  garment  (Ps.  civ.  2),  and  in  Avhich  he  is  said  to  dwell  (1  Tim.  vi.  16)  as  in  an
element  most  real  yet  unapproachable  by  human  vision !  Can  we  doubt  that  light  was  even
then  a  latent  power  in  the  tehom  before  it  was  commanded  "  to  shine  out  of  darkness,"  «K  CTKU-
•rovs  -(2  Corinth,  iv.  G),  and  upon  the  darkness,  and  that  it  had  existed  before  this  earthly  morn
ing,  and  that,  too,  not  as  a  formless  hyle  merely,  or  first  matter,  but  informs  ineffably  bright
and  glorious,— not  as  a  mere  force  or  dynamical  entity  which  never  before  had  had  visibility,  but
as  recognized  by  the  angels  and  sons  of  God  who  shouted  for  joy  (Job  xxxviii.  7)  at  this  its  new
.form,  and  that  first  appearance  upon  the  earth  which  God  called  day?


PART  II.— THE  IIEXAEMEROX,  OR  THE  CREATIVE  DAYS.          131

PART    II.

THE   IIEXAEMEROX,  OR   THE   CREATIVE  DAYS.

What  mean  these  days,  says  the  groat  father  Augustine,  long  before  geology  was  born— thesa
strange  sunless  days:  quid  vohint  dies  transacti  sine  lumlnnribus?  An  ista  dicrurn  cnumemti)
ad  distinctionem  valet  inter  illam  naturam  yacr  non  facia  est,  et  ecu  (pi®  facia  sunt,  ut  marie
nominarentur  propter  spec/cm,  rcycni,  <oero  propter  privationem :  "  does  the  enumeration  of  days
and  nights  avail  for  a  distinction  between  the  nature  that  is  not  yet  made  (not  yet  formed  or
brought  into  form)  and  those  which  arc  made,  so  that  they  should  be  called  morning,  propter
s::eciem  (i.  c.,  in  reference  to  manifestation,  coming  out,  receiving  form,  or  species)  and  evening
propter  privationem  (i.  e.,  their  want  of  form,  or  formlessness,  total  or  comparative)."  De  Gcnesi
al  Litcram,  Lib.  ii.  ch.  14.  Hence  he  does  not  hesitate  to  call  them  naturce,  natures,  births  or
growths,  also  mow,  delays,  or  solemn  pauses,  in  the  divine  work.  They  are  dies  ineffabilcs  ;
their  true  nature  cannot  be  told,— dies  cvjusmodi sunt,  aut  pcrdiffioile  nobis  aut  etiam  impossilile
est  cogilare,  quanta  magis  diccre.  Hence  they  arc  called  days  as  the  best  symbol  by  which  the
idea  could  be  expressed.  They  arc  God-divided  days  and  nights,  inter  qua  divisit  Deus,  in
distinction  from  the  sun-divided,  inter  qua  dint  ut  du'tdant  luminarta.  Common  solar  days,
he  says,  are  mere  vicissitudincs  ccdi,  mere  changes  in  the  positions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and
not  solatia  morc.nnn  or  evolutions  in  nature  belonging  to  a  higher  chronology,  and  marking  their
epochs  by  a  law  of  inward  change  instead  of  incidental  outward  measurements.  As  to  how  long
or  how  short  they  were  he  gives  no  opinion,  but  contents  himself  with  maintaining  that  day  is  not
a  name  of  duration;  the  evenings  and  the  mornings  are  to  be  regarded  not  so  much  in  respect
to  the  passing  of  time  (tcmporis  prceteritionem),  as  to  their  marking  the  boundaries  of  a  period
ical  work  or  evolution,  per  qucndam  terminum  quo  intclUgitur  quousquc  sit  nature}  proprius
modus,  et  undo  sit  naturce  altcrim  exordium.  Tiiis  is  not  a  metaphorical,  but  the  real  and  proper
sense  of  the  word  day — the  most  real  and  proper  sense,  the  original  sense,  in  fact,  inasmuch  as
it  contains  the  essential  idea  of  cyclicity  or  rounded  periodicity,  or  self-completed  time,  without
any  of  tho  mere  accidents  that  belong  to  the  outwardly  measured  solar  or  planetary  epochs,  be
they  longer  or  shorter:  ac  sic  unus  est  dies  (one  day,  a  day  by  itself)  non  istorum  dicnim  intel-
ligendus  quos  videmiis  eircuitu  soils  detcrminari  atque  numemri,  scd  alio  quodam  modo.

It  is  sometimes  said,  if  Moses  did  not  intend  the  common  solar  day  here,  why  did  he  not  give
us  some  intimation  to  that  effect?  The  devout,  scripture-loving  and  scripture-revering  Augustine
saw  such  intimations  in  abundance,  saw  them  on  the  very  face  of  the  account.  There  was  -no
doubt-raising  science  then,  nor  anything  in  philosophy,  that  drove  this  most  profound  yet  most
humble  and  truth-seeking  mind  to  such  conclusions.  He  could  not  read  the  first  of  Genesis  and
think  of  ordinary  days.  It  was  the  wondrous  style  of  the  narrative  that  affected  him,  the
wondrous  nature  of  the  events  and  times  narrated;  it  was  the  impression  of  strangeness,  of  vast-
ness,  as  coming  directly  from  the  account  itself,  but  which  so  escapes  the  notice  of  unthinking,
ordinary  readers.  Wonderful  things  are  told  out  of  the  common  use  of  language,  and  therefore
common  terms  are  to  be  taken  in  their  widest  compass,  and  in  their  essential  instead  of  their
accidental  idea.  It  is  the  same  feeling  that  affects  us  when  we  contemplate  the  language  of
prophecy,  or  that  which  is  applied  to  the  closing  period,  or  great  day  of  the  world's  eschatology.
No  better  term  could  be  used  for  the  creative  mores,  pauses,  or  successive  natures,  as  Augustine
styles  them ;  and  so  no  better  words  than  evening  and  morning  could  be  used  for  the  antithetical
vicissitudes  through  which  these  successions  were  introduced.  See  Augustine  wherever  the
subject  comes  up,  in  his  books  De  Gcncsi  ad  Litcram,  Contra,  Nanichms,  and  De  Chitate  Dei.

Carrying  along  with  us  these  thoughts  of  the  great  father,  we  get  a  mode  of  exegesis  which
is  most  satisfactory  in  itself,  and  which  need  not  fear  the  assaults  of  any  science.  It  transcends
science ;  it  cannot  possibly  have  any  collision  with  it,  and  can,  therefore,  never  have  any  need  of
what  is  called  reconciliation.  It  treats  of  origins  or  beginnings  in  nature,— things  to  which  science
can  never  reach.  It  is  a  mode  of  exegesis  most  satisfactory  as  being  most  exclusive,— that  is,


SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION    TO   THE   FIKST


things  related,  based  directly  on  the  account,  itself  as  mainly  and
Notions  in  science,  notions  in  philosophy  or  in  theology,  that
on  etvmologies  or  modes  of  iiaming  that  become  fixed  in  language

s  but  thev  are  not  to  control  the  interpretation  ol1  a  document

Jaier  uei  luu^,  nu-.j   •••'--•-    '

,]  ,tod  from  -11  other  writings  and  of  such  exceeding  antiquity.

As  with  the  account  as  a  whole,  so  is  it,  in  great  measure,  with  each  part.     "  interprets
itself.     Thus  in  the  ilrst  day:   eac
(u-terinining  their


JIVj     ms     Ak       il)     J'1     D  -j

h  name  is  so  connected  with  the  others  as  to  present    ittte  or


in      u,,n,:i;  ,

'if  sei,aratc  ;  them  from  their  ordinary  use  in  other  applications.     Keep  within  the  accon
b.curity  and  the  difficulty  increase  when  we  resort  to  helps  outs.de  ot

'


.cu
f  .:';•:;     :  cm,  erl,    o         day,  even**  and  morning  .0  find  them

n\le;eyorL"andmntuairy^

u  facts  however  iueffable  in  their  comparative  magnitude  and  evolving  causal  ties

"  xm          ear.h  was  t,  hu  and  bohu."     What  was  that?     It  was  the  opposite  of  the  form-

„«„„*,     ,        ditions  and  evolutions  immediately  afterwards  described.    ,nn  occurs  besides^

!ht    n  t  mes  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  the  general  idea,  to  ,  .u-h  we  are  led  o  contex


^

'  c         "          s  zz


long  the  night,  01  the  dark


n  ,\ ••  ion<T  wi    ;he  dav?     llow  long  uie  mynu,  vi

•  b  it  it  Thtre  is  Bometliing  on  its  face  which  seems  to  repel  any  such  question.  1
lirit  and  BtYkof'tho1  account  are  at  war  with  the  narrowness  ^d  "^"^  ^
computation:  Where  are  we  to  get  twelve  hour, .for  tms  ^ ,»&* •<  •

commencement,  when  darkness  legan  to  be  on  the  fa  o  of  t       waters


PART   II.— THE   HEXAEMEROX,   OR   THE   CREATIVE   DAYS.  133

ao  other  argument.  And  yet  the  decision  here  settles  the  whole  question.  This  first  day  is  tlia
model,  in  this  respect,  for  all  the  rest.  There  is  certainly  no  determined  time  hero,  unless  -wo
assume  that  a  fixed  duration,  as  now  measured  by  the  sun,  is  not  merely  an  incident,  but  the
essential  and  unchangeable  idea  of  the  word  day,  never  departing  from  it,  whatever  may  be  the
condition  and  circumstances  to  which  it  is  applied.  And  for  this,  neither  the  essential  laws  of
language,  nor  the  usages  of  language,  give  us  any  authority,  whilst  everything  looks  the  other
way.  All  is  indefinite  except  the  fact  of  the  great  separation  accomplished,  with  its  two  con-
trasU"!  states  and  one  completed  period,  to  which  the  names  ereb,  loycr,  yom,  evening,  morning,
day,  are  respectively  given.  Our  English  translation  of  the  closing  formula  is  deficient.  It  fails
to  present  the  reason  of  its  own  introduction,  and  the  relation  it  bears  to  what  preceded:  "And
tin'  evening  and  tlie  morning  were" — there  is  no  article  to  justify  this;  there  is  no  mention  of
evening  and  morning  before  to  which  it  might  be  supposed  to  refer.  The  evening  and  the
morning  may  indeed  be  said  to  have  made  the  day  qnantitively,  but  that  is  not  what  is  here
express d;  otherwise  the  verb  should  have  been  plural,  as  in  ch.  ii.  24,  inx  ~'~zb  vn,  "they
shall  be  one  flesh.'1  Neither  is  day  the  predicate  after  irri,  but  stands  by  itself  as  the  time
when.  The  Hebrew,  to  correspond  to  the  English  as  given  in  our  version,  would  bo
Irx  c*i  ~p-m  "-i-'n  Wl.  The  true  rendering  is:  '-and  there  was  an  evening,  and  there  was
a  morning,  the  first  day."  So  the  Syriac  and  the  Septuagint :  KOI  fyive™  cane  pa  KOI  eyeWo  Trpon.
In  like  manner  Maimonides:  "and  there  was  an  evening  and  there  was  a  morning  of  the  first
day."  But  why  is  the  assertion  made  here,  and  what  is  its  force?  It  is  not  a  mere  tautology,
such  as  our  English  version  would  seem  to  make  it,  It  is  exegetical;  it  is  designed  to  give  us
an  intimation  of  something  strange  and  peculiar  in  the  language,  and  to  explain  its  application.
This  ante-solar  day,  marked  by  no  sunrising  or  sunsetting,  or  any  astronomical  measurement,
and  without  any  computed  duration,  had  still  an  evening  and  a  morning  of  its  own,  and  might
therefore,  be  justly  called  a  day.  What  this  evening  and  morning  were,  is  left  for  the  reader  to
discover  in  the  account  itself.  As  applied  to  a  supposed  ordinary  day,  the  assertion,  especially
as  it  reads  in  our  version,  would  have  little  or  no  discoverable  force.  On  the  other  supposition,  it
has  a  most  emphatic  meaning,  and  this  we  may  regard  as  the  reason  of  its  formal  utterance,  and
its  solemn,  repetition  at  the  close  of  each  similar  period.  In  a  similar  manner  they  all  had  an
evening  and  a  morning,  however  strange  it  might  seem,  without  a  shining  sun.  Each  is  marked
by  the  same  great  antithetical  distinction;  each  has  a  new  appearing;  but  as  this  is  somewhat
different  in  each  creative  stage,  so  is  there  a  demand  in  each  for  the  same  essential  announce
ment.  And  there  was  an  evening,  and  there  was  a  morning,  second  day, — third  day, — fourth
day,  and  so  on.

The  clear  apprehension  of  the  first  day  opens  up  all  the  rest.  The  same  exegesis  would  bear
repetition  in  every  one.  "  And  God  said  :  '  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the  midst  of  the  waters,
and  led  it  be  a  dividing  between  the  waters  and  the  waters,  &c. ; '  and  it  was  so ;  and  God  called
the  firmament  heaven  ;  and  there  was  an  evening,  and  there  was  a  morning,  day  second."  We
look  back  to  find  them.  Where  was  the  morning  here?  It  was  this  second  dividing  and  the
appearing  of  this  now  glory  as  its  result,  It  is  the  sky,  the  atmosphere,  with  its  auroral  light.
It  is  the  causality  represented  in  this  purely  phenomenal  language  by  which  Moses  describes  it,
according  to  the  conceptions  he  had  of  it,  and  which  no  more  guarantees  any  vulgar  notion,  than
it  does  any  science  or  philosophy,  perfect  or  imperfect,  that  might  be  brought  to  explain  it.
The  more  clear  determines  that  which  is  less  so.  The  new  appearing  of  the  firmament  being
the  morning,  that  from  which  it  had  been  divided,  or  that  preceding  state  in  which  the  earth
had  been  left  after  the  separation  of  the  light,  and  in  which  the  liuid  masses  of  air  and  water
yet  remained  in  their  chaotic  formations,  is  the  night.  And  so,  as  the  formula  seems  to  imply,
each  time  it  is  repeated ;  in  this  way  there  was  also  an  evening  and  there  was  a  morning,  second
day,— in  this  way,  or  the  only  way  that  exegesis  will  allow;  for  there  was  no  visible  sunrisiug
or  sunsetting,  no  astronomical  measurements  to  make  a  morning  and  an  evening  of  any  other
kind.  The  appearing  of  the  dry  land  as  it  rose  out  of  the  waters,  and  the  quick  growth  of  bloom
ing  vegetation  that  covered  it,  was  the  third  morning.  And  then  that  scene  of  glory,  the  first
appearing  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  in  the  firmament,  now  prepared  for  their  revelation, -this


134


SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   FIRST   CIIAPTEPw   OF   GENESIS.


was  tlie  fourth  great  morning  to  which  the  name  is  given,  and  not  to  any  particular  rising  of  the
turn  in  the  east  as  the  beginning  of  a  common  day.  As  there  had  been  a  commencement  of  I't'jltt,
of  life,  hO  now  there  is  a  commencement  of  astronomical  time  with  its  subordinate  periods  of
aun-divided  days,  not  to  be  confounded,  as  Augustine  says,  with  the  great  God-divided  days  of
.vhich  the  fourth  was  one  as  well  as  the  rest.  Life  moving  in  the  waters,  and  soaring  in  the
air,  this  was  the  fifth  a;  pearing;  and  so,  according  to  the  ever-preserved  analogy,  the  fifth  great
morning  of  the  world.

Again  a  solemn  pau.-e,  with  nature  left  to  its  repose,  how  long  or  short  is  not  revealed,  and
the  sixth  morning  breaks.  It  is  the  latter  portion  of  the  sixth  day.  Now  man  appears,  whether
in  its  earlier  or  later  stage.  He  is  surrounded  by  the  animal  world,  over  which  he  is  to  exercise
his  more  immediate  dominion.  The  seventh  is  the  morning  of  the  divine  rest.  The  evening
that  precedes  is  not  named  in  the  first  chapter,  but  perhaps  we  may  find  it  in  the  supplementary
account  of  the  second,  where  there  are  mentioned  two  remarkable  evolutions  that  seem  to  have
,10  other  period  to  which  they  can  be  assigned.  They  are  the  naming  of  things,  or  the  divine
aiding  the  human  in  the  development  of  language,  and  that  my.-terious  sleep  of  humanity  (was
it  Ion-;  or  short  0  in  which  by  a  process  most  concisely  symboli/.ed,  but  utterly  ineffable  in
respect  to  the  manner,  the  female  human  is  brought  out  as  the  closing  work,  and  man  awakes
complete  in  the  likeness  of  God.  ';  In  the  image  of  God  created  he  tii;n  ;  male  and  female  created

i ,//.

it  may  he  said  that  such  a  representation  seems  to  make  the  days  run  into  each  other.
may  he  admitted  without  regarding  it  as  any  valid  objection.  The  darkness  st'll  left  is  the
remains,  gradually  diminishing,  of  the  primeval  chaos.  Each  night  is  a  daughter  of  the  anci-i.t
N«ix,  whilst  each  new  morning  is  a  rising  into  a  higher  light.  In  other  words,  the  evening  to
each  day,  though  Mill  a  disorder  and  a  darknc-s,  is  a  diminution  of  the  darkness  that  went  before,
whilst  tiie  positive  light  of  each  new  morning  continues  on,  adding  its  glory  to  the  mornings
that  follow,  and  "shining  more  and  more  unto  the  =y.n  V-3,  the  perfect  day,"  or  perfection  of
the  day  (Prov.  iv.  18),  the  finished  ami  finishing  day— the  all-including  day,  mentioned  Gen.  ii.
1,  as  the  day  when  God  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  And  so,  as  Lange  observes  (and  it  is
a  most  important  remark,  both  for  the  scientific  and  scriptural  view),  each  is  "a  glory  that  ex-
celleth,''  but  still  a  building  on,  and  a  carrying  on,  the  energies  that  preceded.  Each  is  a  new
swell  of  the  mighty  organ,  combining  all  the  former  times,  and  raising  them  to  a  higher  and  still
higher  chorus,  until

Tl;o  diapason  C\'>M:~,  full  on  man.

Each  day  is  a  new  beginning,  bringing  out  a  new  state  of  things  to  be  blessed,  or  called  got.d,
but  it  is  not  necessarily  a  finishing  of  that  work  until  the  "heavens  and  earth  arc  finished
with  all  their  hosts/'  and  there  is  pronounced  that  closing  benediction  (~x~  --j;  all  good,  "very
good  ")  which  ushers  in  the  sabbath.  Each  day,  as  a  beginning  by  itself,  contains  the  incipient
powers  and  elements  of  its  peculiar  work,  but  does  not  exhaust  those  energies.  The  light  is
still  evolving  in  the  second  day;  the  iluids  are  still  parting  in  the  third;  the  firmament,  though
having  its  auroral  light  before,  is  becoming  still  brighter  in  the  fourth;  vegetable  and  animal
life  are  coming  to  still  greater  perfection  in  the  fifth  and  sixth.

May  not  the  same  be  said  of  man?  On  the  sixth  day,  his  "bringing  into  the  kosmos''  be
comes  complete ;  the  divine  allocution,  "Let  us  make  man,"  receives  its  accomplishment,  and
the  process  by  which  his  material  and  physical  structure  is  educed  from  the  earth  is  finished;
but  may  we  not  suppose  that  the  preparation  for  this  last  and  crowning  work,  and  so  the  work
itself,  runs  through  all  the  previous  cycles?  "  Thine  eyes  did  see  my  substance  yet  unfinished,  and  in
thy  book  all  my  (members)  were  written,  the  days  they  were  fashioned,  when  there  was  not  one  in
them,"  Ps.  cxxxix.  16.  This  remarkable  passage  may  apply  primarily  to  the  individual  genera
tion  ;  it  doubtless  includes  it ;  and  yet  there  is  something  about  it  which  seems  to  indicate  a  wider
and  a  deeper  application  to  the  origin  of  our  generic  physical  humanity,  and  to  its  first  germ  or
material,  as  it  lay  in  the  formlessness  of  the  chaos.

The  Septuagint  has  rendered  naba  (Ps.  cxxxix.  1C)  by  a  word  very  similar  to  that  by  which  it


TART   III.— ALLUSIONS   TO   THE   SIX   DAYS   IX  OTHER   PARTS  OF   THE   MULE.    13a

describes  the  toliu,  aKaTe/jyaoTov  /^ov,  nay  unformed  or  unwrought — Vulgate:  imperfccbum  mcum,
my  unmade.  But  the  most  striking  rescmhlanco  is  suggested  by  the  c^a*1,  the  days,  which  our
translators  have  rendered  '-in  continuance,"  (hereby  greatly  impairing  the  force  and  significance1
of  the  language.  "  Thine  eyes  saw  it  then  unfinished,"  during  all  the  days  in  which  it  was  receiv
ing  formation,  11 31  ci£',  when  they  were  being  formed,  or  written  down  in  thy  book,
crn  inx  sb\  These  last  words  have  puzzled  all  the  commentators.  If  the  passage  may  be
'referred  to  the  primal  formation  of  humanity,  then  it  would  be,  not  only  a  fair  view,  but  even
the  most  legitimate  one,  grammatically,  to  refer  "rr.X,  as  also  the  pronoun  in  cna  to  d-<£">  just
preceding — "diiririrj  lite  days  they  were  formed,  and  even  when  there  was  no  one  (no  first  day)
among  them."  "Even  before  the  day"  (compare  Isaiah  xliii.  13)  God  was  writing  or  preparing
this  book  of  the  human  record ;  it  dates  from  the  very  foundation  of  the  world — Eph.  i.  4.  Ileb.
iv.  3,  Rev.  xiii.  8.

The  full  formation  of  man  in  the  sixth  day  docs  not  oppose  the  idea  that  the  powers  and
evolutions  of  matter  that  were  finally  sublimated  into  the  imperishable  germ  of  the  human  body,
and  the  types  from  lower  forms  that  finally  went  into  the  human  physical  constitution,  were
being  prepared  during  all  the  days.  This  was  his  being  formed  out  of  tJie  earth,  that  is,  out  of
nature  in  its  evolving  series.  Here,  too,  it  may  be  said  (though  with  the  diffidence  that  becomes
every  exegctieal  attempt  to  penetrate  these  creative  mysteries),  we  have  some  light  upon  that
dark  and  puzzling  language,  '•  when  I  was  made  in  secret  and  curiously  wrought  in  the  lowest
parts  of  the  earth"  Ps.  cxxxix.  15 — in  inferioribus  terra'. — in  profundissimis  naturcc.  The
common  explanation,  that  refers  this  language  to  the  maternal  womb  docs  not  satisfy,  and  it  has
no  exegetical  authority  in  any  similar  use  of  such  a  metaphor  in  the  Bible  Hebrew.  It  becomes
more  easy,  if  we  regard  it  as  the  womb  of  nature,  the  earth  out  of  which  the  Lord  God  formed
man.  In  the  language,  too,  of  the  thirteenth  verse  i:2CFi  (compare  Ezck.  xxviii.  14,  16 — -",13
•pian— e.Tiu-Kiaaa,  Luke  i.  85),  "thou  didst  overshadow  me  in  my  mother's  womb,"  there  is  a
striking  resemblance  to  the  image  of  the  spirit  brooding  or  hovering  over  the  formless  tchom.
It  is  not  strange  that  the  author  of  this  most  sublime  Psalm  should  have  had  in  view,  either
primarily  or  suggestively,  this  remoter  generation.  Man,  generically,  in  his  appointment  to
dominion,  is  clearly  the  subject  of  Psalm  viii.  4,  5,  6 ;  why  should  his  generic  origination  be
thought  too  remoto  an  idea  for  the  profound  and  contemplative  cxxxixth?


PAIIT  III.

ALLUSIONS  TO  THE  SIX  DAYS  IX  OTHER  PARTS  OF  THE  BIBLE.

The  most  clear  and  direct  is  found  in  the  Fourth  Commandment,  Exod.  xx.  11 :  "Six  days
shalt  thou  labor  and  do  all  thy  work,  for  in  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth."  This
language  is  held  to  be  conclusive  evidence  of  the  latter  having  been  ordinary  days.  They  aro
of  the  same  kind,  it  is  said,  or  they  would  not  have  been  put  in  such  immediate  connection.
There  could  not  be  such  a  sudden  change  or  rise  in  the  meaning.  This  looks  plausible,  but  a
careful  study  shows  that  there  is  something  more  than  first  strikes  us.  It  might  be  replied  that
there  is  no  difference  of  radical  idea — which  is  essentially  preserved,  and  without  any  metaphor
in  both  uses — but  a  vast  difference  in  the  scale.  There  is,  however,  a  more  definite  answer
furnished  specially  by  (lie  text  itself,  and  suggested  immediately  by  the  objectors'  own  method
of  reasoning.  God's  days  of  working,  it  is  said,  must  be  the  same  with  man's  days  of  working,
because  they  are  mentioned  in  such  close  connection.  Then  God's  work  and  man's  work  must
also  be  the  same,  or  on  the  same  grade  for  a  similar  reason.  The  Hebrew  word  is  the  same  for
both :  "  In  six  days  shalt  thou  labor  and  do  (i-Pi'S)  all  thy  work  ;  for  in  six  days  the  Lord  made
(nr".  made,  wrought)  heaven  and  earth."  Is  there  no  transition  here  to  a  higher  idea?  And
so  of  the  resting :  "  The  seventh  shall  be  to  thco  a  sabbath  (m\!3,  a  rest),  for  the  Lord  thy  God
rested  (na^i)  on  the  seventh  day," — words  of  the  same  general  import,  but  the  less  solemn  or
more  human  term  here  applied  to  Deity.  What  a  difference  there  must  have  been  between  God's


SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   FIRST   CHAPTER   OF   GENESIS.


work  and  man's  work,-abovo  all,  between  God's  ineffable  repose  and  the  rest  demanded  for
Human  weariness.  Must  we  not  carry  the  same  difference  into  the  times,  and  make  a  similar
Ineffable  distinction  between  the  divine  working-days  and  the  human  working-days,-the  God-
divided  days  as  Vugustine  calls  them,  and  "  the  sun-divided  days,"  afterwards  appointed  to  us
for  «  signs  and  for  seasons,  and  for  days,  and  for  years,"'  of  our  lower  chronology?  Such  a  point-
in-  to  a  higher  scale  is  also  represented  in  the  septennial  sabbath,  and  in  the  great  jubilee  period
of°seven  times  3  ven.  They  expand  upwards  and  outwards  like  a  series  of  concentric  circles,
but  the  greatest  of  them  u  still  a  sign  of  something  greater;  and  how  would  they  all  collapse,
and  lose  their  sublime  import,  if  we  regard  their  antitype  as  less  than  themselves,  or,  in  act
no  greater  than  their  least!  The  other  analogy,  instead  of  being  forced,  has  in  it  the  highest
reason  It.  is  the  true  and  effective  order  of  contemplation.  The  lower,  or  earthly,  day  is

a  memorial  of  the  lii   licr.     Wo  are  called  to  rer, •  r  by  it.     In  six  (human)  days  do  ail  thy

work  .  for  in  six  (divine)  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth.    The  jiistapositi  ,n  of  the  words,
and  the  -raduated  correspondence  which  the  mind  is  compelled  to  make,  aid  the  reminiscence
o'-  the  hMicr  idea      An  arc  of  a  degree  on  the  small  earthly  circle  represents  a  vastly  wider
,u.c  ,s  mcLured  on  the  celestial  sphere.     A  siffn  of  our  swiftly  passing  times  corresponds  to  one
ineffably     rcater  in  the  higher  chronology  of  world-movements,  where  one  day  is  a  thousand
years   and  the  years  are  reckon,  d  from  Olarn  to  Olam  (IV.  xc.  2),  whilst  the  Olams  themselves
become  units  of  measurement  («J^«  ™*  alavw)  to  the  Malonth  col  Olamim,*  <     "kingdom  ol
all  eternities  "  Psalm  cxlv.  13,  and  1  Tim.  i.  17.     There  is  a  harmony  in  this  which  is  not
sublim.  ly  rational,  but  truly  Biblical.     It  is  the  manner  of  the  Scriptures  thus  to  make  times
and  things  on  earth  representatives,  or  under-types,  of  things  in  the  heavens -^0^^,™  ™»
iv  rait  uVjamt    Ik-b.  ix.  23.     Viewed  from  such  a  standpoint  these  parallelisms  in  the  languay
of  the  Fourth  Commandment  suggest  of  themselves  a  vast  difference  between  the  divine  and  the
human  days,  even  if  it  were  the  only  argument  the  Bible  furnished  for  that  purpose.     As  t
work  to  the  icork,  as  the  rest  to  the  rest,  so  are  the  times  to  the  times.

But  what  was  the  impression  on  the  ancient  Jewish  mind?  It  is  important  to  understand
this  if  we  can.  Had  the  Jews  commonly  conceived  of  these  creative  days  as  being  of  the  ordinary
kind  could  the  fact  have  been  so  utterly  unnoticed  in  the  frequent  references  we  iind  to  the
account  of  cr  nation,  and  the  frequent  use  of  its  imagery,  in  the  Hebrew  poetry.  Almost  all  the
other  wonders  of  the  narrative  are  alluded  to  in  Job,  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Isaiah,  Amos  and  such
passages  in  the  historical  hooks  as  Xchemiah  ix.  G.  Every  other  striking  feature  of  the  account
i',-  dwelt  upon  but  this  wondrous  brevity,  the  greatest  marvel  of  them  all,  as  it  would  impress
itself  upon  the  mere  human  imagination  picturing  it  on  its  sense-scale.  All  creation  begun  and

shed  hi  six  solar  days!  The  earth,  the  air  and  seas,  with  all  their  swarming  spheres  of
ghosts  of  heaven,  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  angels  and  men.  all  called  from  non-existence,  from
nothingness  we  may  say,  and  their  evolution  completed  in  one  week,  such  weeks  as  those  that
',r '  now  so  rapidly  passing  away!-a  week  measured,  as  to  extent,  by  our  present  tune-scale,
thou  -h  the  index  "of  that  scale-ami  this  adds  still  to  the  wonder-had  not  yet  been  set  in  its
commencing  stages.  It  is  hard  to  believe  this.  Xot  the  fact  itself,  we  mean,  of  such  a  creation
-for  there  is  nothing  repugnant  to  reason  either  in  its  shortness  or  its  instantancousness,  if  God
had  so  willed  it-but  the  utter  silence  respecting  such  a  wonder  in  every  other  part  of  the  Bible.
There  must  have  been  something  in  the  most  ancient  conceptions  of  time,  especially  of  ffiomc  or
world-times  that  led  to  this.  It  is  shown  by  their  use  of  the  great  Olamic  plurals  before
referred  to,  and  the  transfer  of  the  same  usage  to  the  scons  of  the  New  Testament.  Our  most
modern  thought  of  eternity  is  that  of  blank,  undivided  duration,  ante-mundane  and  post-mundane
with  only  a  short  week  (measured,  too,  on  the  scale  of  the  thing  yet  uncreated),  and  the  brief
secular  human  history  intervening  like  a  narrow  isthmus  between  two  unmeasured  and  immeasur
able  oceans.  Without  our  saving  which  is  the  true  view,  it  may  with  great  confidence  be  mam-
tallied  that  a  mode  of  thinking  and  conceiving,  so  blank  in  the  one  aspect,  and  so  narrow  in  the

»      ,„•.,,.  V '?r,   rs   cslv  13      Our  translators  have  rendered  this,  everlasting  Kingdom.  It  is  a  specimen  of  the

manner  hT  which  these  mighty  Hebrew  pluralities  are  covered  up,  and  their  vast  significance  obscured,  by  vague  aa
ceptionlcss  terms.


PART   I1I.-ALLUSIOXS   TO   THE  SIX   DAYS   IN   OTHER   TARTS   OF   THE   BIBLE.    13-)


otlicr,  would  never  have  given  rise  to  such  an  Olamic  language  (if  we  may  call  it  so)  as  wo
actually  find  in  our  Hebrew  Bible,  even  in  its  most  ancient  parts.  The  very  fact  that  our
modern  translation  everywhere  avoids  expressing,  or  covers  up  these  Olamic  and  a-onic  plurals,
shows  the  change  in  the  modern  conception.  Our  authorized  version  is  more  defective  hero
than  the  old  Wickliffe,  which  being  made  from  tho  Vulgate,  resembles  more  in  this  the  old
versions.

The  Jewish  mind,  prophetical,  contemplative,  and  poetical,  seems  always  to  have  conceived
of  creation  r,s  va4,  indefinite,  and  most  ancient.     We  see  this  especially  in  that  sublime  passage
Prov.  viii.  22 :  "  The  Lord  possessed  me,"  says  the  eternal  Logos,  or  Wisdom,  v-,x   ia*ipa  "  from
the  antiquities  of  the  earth,"— as  though  that,  instead  of  being  about  three  thousand  years  and
one  week  over,  were  the  remotest  conception  to  which  the  human  mind  could  reach.     I  was
with  Him,  cv— =-.",-day— day— day  after  day,  even  with  "the  Ancient  of  days,"  before  each
of  his  '•  works  of  old."     Before  the  tehom,  before  the  springing  of  tho  fountains,  before  the
mountains  were  settled,  before  the  hills  arose,  before  the  b=n  MIES  B5SO,  or  primeval  dust  of
—when  he  was  preparing  the  heavens,  when  he  was  setting  a  compass  upon  the
face  of  the  deep,  when  he  made  tho  rakia,  or  established  the  clouds  to  stand  above,  when  he
made  strong  the  fountains  of  the  deep,  and  put  his  law  upon  the  sea;  during  all  this  time  I  was
there,  yorn,  yum ;  I  was  the  Architect  (the  Mediator,  6  /cara/mcrr/}^,  as  -pax  should  be  rendered,
see  Heb.  xi.  3),  rejoicing  always  before  Him.   But  the  greatest  joy  of  the  Logos  was  in  the  human
creation,  "My  delight  was  in  the  Sons  of  Adam,"— he  "loved  us  before  the  foundations  of  the
world."     How  it  fills  the  mind  to  overflowing  with  its  ever-ascending,  ever-expanding  climaxes,
its  mighty  preparations,  and  preparations  for  preparations!     How  it  goes  continually  back  to
the  more  and  more  remote !     How  it  seems  to  tax  language  to  convey  a  conception  of  vast  and
ineffable  antiquities !     What  a  chain  of  sequences!     If  we  would  fix  it  still  more  impressively
on  the  mind,  in  one  all-embracing  declaration,  tarn  to  Hebrews  xi.  3 :  "By  faith  we  understand
that  the  worlds  Avere  formed  (/ca^/m'rr^u  roir  alums)  by  the  Word  of  God."     How  has  it  escaped
so  many  commentators  here,  that  the  word  for  worlds  is  not  «uVMo^,  worlds  of  space,  and  never
used  thus  in  the  plural,  but  aluvas,  corresponding  to  tho  Hebrew  tnabs,  and  presenting  an  idea
unknown  to  its  classical  usage,  or  worlds  in  time?     "By  faith  we  understand  that  3ie  ages,
ihe  eternities,  the  saicula,  or  great  world-times,  were  mediated  Ocar^nVSaO,  or  put  in  order,  by
.he  Word  of  God."

There  is  an  allusion  to  the  creative  days  in  Micah  v.  1,  although  it  is  unnecessarily  obscured
aourEngish  version:   "And  thou  Bethlehem  Ephratah,— out  of  thee  shall  He  come  forth
vhose  goings  forth  have  been  of  old,  from  the  daijs  of  eternity  "—or  "from  the  days  of  the
vorld '' :  ~^-J  la^a,  d/r'  dpx^  e'£  ^p^  m'cW,  Vulg. :  cgrcssm  cjns  al>  initio,  a  diclus  ctcrnitatis.
lese  expressions,  cipa  and  dbw  ia->a,  may  denote  an  ancient  time  generally  in  tho
istpry  of  the  earth,  or  of  the  chosen  people,  as  in  Isaiah  Ixiii.  9,  11,  Micah  vii.  20;  but  here,  if
be  passage  refers  to  the  Logos,  as  it  is  understood  by  all  Christian  commentators,  the  reference
3  the  still  greater  antiquity  of  tho  creative  times,  or  the  creative  days,  is  unmistakable     It  is
10  contrast  between  the  humble  going  forth  at  Bethlehem,  and  those  ancient  outgoings  of  the
ford,  which  are  recorded  each  day  in  the  First  of  Genesis,  from  the  first  emphatic  lax'!   of
.  3,  until  the  crowning  one,  ver.  26,   where  tho  plural  is  used  in  the  solemn  allocution
IS  rvusa  tnnbx  lasn,  "  and  God  said,  Let  us  make  man."     Thus  regarded,  the  parallelism
stween  it  and  Prov.  viii.  and  Hebrews  xi.  3,  seems  very  clear.     We  need  only  revert  to  tho
town  fact,  that  the  ancient  Targumists  or  paraphrasts  explain  these  declarations  by  the
na->a  (Mimra),  or  Verbum  Dei,  which  is  doubtless  the  same  with  what  is  intended  by  tho  Lo-os
>hn  i.  1,  2.     The  language  of  Prov.  viii.  22  IT.  and  tho  cV  dpx^  of  the  LXX.  in  Micah  v.  1
lent  to  explain  the  origin  of  the  phraseology  in  John  i.  1,  Hcb.  xi.  3,  and  Colossians  i.  16,
o  aid  of  any  Platonic  or  Philonic  suggestion.     80  Rabbi  Schelomo  (Bashi)  interprets
i  v.  2,  of  the  Messiah,  and  explains  tnpa,    and   obw  -^a,  by  a  reference  to  Psalm  Ixxii.
'   T^  '^V^'^  ":£^'  Which  the  Cnaldaic  interpreter  renders,  "before  the  sun  his  name  was
lamed."     Dbis  -^a  "from  the  days  of  eternity;  from  everlasting  was  I  anointed  (inaos
<  the  same  word  Ps.  ii.  6),  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was  "


138  SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   THE  FIRST   CHAPTER   OF   GENESIS.

The  manner  in  which  the  creative  days  appear  in  the  civ.  Psalm  has  drawn  the  attention  of
commentators  ancient  and  modern.  It  is  noticed  by  Stcir,  Hengstenberg,  and  Ewald.  It  is
dwelt  upon  by  Geier  and  Kimchi.  It  is  expressly  admitted  by  Ilnpfeld,  one  of  the  most  rational
izing  of  German  interpreters.  The  author  of  the  Psalm  seems  to  have  had  it  in  mind  throughout,
though  he  does  not  present  the  days  in  the  formal  methodical  order,  but  gives  much  more  prom
inence  to  some  parts  than  to  others.  It  colors  his  conceptions,  and  give  much  of  its  sublimity
to  his  pictorial  language.  Here  are,  the  creative  days  in  all  the  greatness  of  their  evolutions,  but
no  mention  of  the  brevity,  no  hint  of  any  such  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  writer,  nothing  to
suggest  anything  of  tho  kind  to  the  mind  of  the  render.  There  is  the  feeling  of  vastncsp,
power,  immensity.  We  recogni/e  great  works  and  great  processes,  but  without  any  signs  of
measurement  or  computation,  such  as  could  hardly  have  been  kept  out  by  one  who  carried  with
him  all  along  the  limited  time-conception  of  one  ordinary  week,  or  of  six  ordinary  solar  days.
There  is  no  wonder  expressed,  no  sense  of  tho  difficulties  that  we  experience  in  the  attempt  to
reduce  the  first  great  movements  to  such  a  scale, — /.  <?.,  to  think  of  measurement  without  a
measure,  or  »f  s  >hir  days  without  a  sun.  From  the  Psalm  itself,  certainly,  if  we  carried  nothing
else  into  the  interpretation,  no  such  impression  of  brevity  would  be  obtained.  All  is  the  other
way.  There  is  the  formless  abyss,  the  light  taking  the  place  cf  darkness  upon  the  face  of  the
waters,  the  building  of  the  upper  chambers,  the  separation  of  the  air,  the  spreading  out  of  the
sky,  the  establishment  of  tho  firmament*  with  the  clouds  therein,  the  calling  into  ministerial
ageney  of  the  new  forces  of  nature,  the  making  the  winds  his  messengers,  his  servant  tho  fiam-
ing  fire.  There  is  the  going  forth  again  of  the  mighty  Word,  "the  thunder  of  his  power,"  in
the  dividing  and  gathering  of  the  waters  that  before  had  stood  above  the  mountains,  or  the  places
•where  they  afterwards  appeared.  The  abyss  had  covered  them  as  a  garment,  but  now  the  hills
emerge,  the  valleys  sink,  the  process  goes  on  until  they  reach  the  "  places  formed  for  thcm."t
Then  comes  the  era  of  life,  and  it  should  be  remembered  that  they  are  not  Promethean  plastic
formations  here  ej'ebrafed.  but  life  in  its  long-settled  habits  and  locations;  the  beasts  of  the
fields  are  drinking  of  the  waters  that  run  in  the  valleys,  the  wild  asses  are  roaming  the  desert,
the  birds  are  living  in  the  air  and  singing  between  the  branches.  It  is  a  most  vivid  picture  of
the  luxuriant  growth  of  the  early  species,  both  animal  and  vegetable,  with  tho  rich  provisions
for  its  support,  ver.  lo-lS.  Again,  there  is  the  appointment  of  the  moon  for  seasons,  the  giving
to  the  sin  his  law  for  rising  and  setting  (vcr.  19),  and  at  last  man  going  forth  to  the  work  and
labor  of  humanity.  Throughout  it  all  there  is  tho  one  animating  life,  the  Euah  Elohim,  from
whose  quickening  power  proceed  all  these  lower  orders  of  vitality,  and  at  whoso  withdrawal
they  gasp  (•|^«;i)  and  return  again  to  their  dust,  ver.  29.  Tho  creative  doxology  too  is  not
omitted  :  "  llow  great  are  thy  works,  O  Lord!  in  Wisdom  (or  by  Wisdom  nsrro,  through  the
eternal  Logos)  hast  thou  made  them  all."  {See  John  i.  2,  Coloss.  i.  17,  ra  iruv-ra  iv  ai>r<!>  crvvftmjKf.)
It  is  but  the  repetition  of  the  nx-a  "•::  n:n,  the  "good,  lo,  very  good,"  of  Gen.  i.  31 :  "The
glory  of  the  Lord  is  forever,  the  Lord  rejoices  in  his  works."  t

There  is  no  mistaking  hero  the  outline  of  the  creative  picture,  and  of  the  creative  times,  yet

*  All  this,  it  is  true,  is  expressed  in  optical  language  in  respect  to  space,  but  there  is  no  conceptual  limit  in  regard  to
time.  The  reason  of  this  may  be  inferred  from  tlie  very  position  of  the  ancient  mind.  Their  want  of  outward  science
limited  their  r-pace  conceptions,  but  time  belonging  mainly  to  the  inner  sense,  there  was  not  only  no  conceptual  hindrance,
'out  an  actual  freedom  of  thought  leading  on  to  those  vast  Olamie  ideas  which  arc  a  characteristic  of  the  Hebrew  language.
And  thus  it  i,  that  tho  space  conceptions  of  the  Bible  fall  greatly  behind  those  of  science,  whilst  its  time  ideas  went  so  far
beyond  them.  This  was  the  case,  at  least  until  quite  lately,  or  since  certain  discoveries  of  the  world's  antiquities  have
given  us  a  new  impression  of  the  Olams  and  JEons,  the  ages  and  ages  of  ages,  or  the  aiiaves  rav  alutvuv,  of  the  Scriptures.

t  Nothing  can  more  clearly  denote  a  process  extending  far  beyond  a  solar  day  than  this  kind  of  language  :  mO"1  fit
CH3,  the  very  places  they  now  occupy,  and  which  were  of  old  appointed  for  them.  There  is  the  same  significance  in  the
"settling  of  the  mountains,"  Prov.  viii.  25,  "l?-13n  E^TH  C"IU3.  Ascendant  mantes,  dcscendunt  campi.  Our  version,
which  is  the  opposite  of  all  the  ancient,  and  directly  opposed  to  the  Hebrew  (n""p3  1*T"P  Cn"lH  ib?"1),  could  only
have  come  from  an  erroneous  prcjudginent  that  this  language  referred  to  the  flood.  Even  in  that  case  it  would  have  been
false  to  the  optical  conception.

t  It  might  not  do  to  rely  upon  it  alone,  but  after  such  a  clear  reference  to  creation  and  the  creative  days  in  other  '
parts  of  tho  Psalm,  it  does  not  seem  forced  if  we  regard  vcr.  33,  34  as  suggested  by  the  thought  of  the  creation-sabbath,  and
filled  with  the  emotion  it  would  naturally  inspire :  "  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord ;  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord ;  and  my  medita
tion  shall  be  sweet," — "S  i  it  shall  be  like  the  evening  time,  the  hour  of  calm  yet  joyous  feeling.


PART   III.— ALLUSIONS   TO   THE   SIX   DAY'S  IX   OTHER  PARTS  OF  THE   BIBLE.


the  impression  is  not  one  of  brevity.  There  is  order  here,  succession  and  evolution  on  a  v;.bt
scale;  but  no  intimation  of  a  crowding  into  times  out  of  harmony  with  the  conception  of  tho
works,  or  the  scale  of  duration  which  the  conceptual  truthfulness  of  the  picture  demands.  If
wo  had  nothing  but  this  passage,  no  one  would  think  of  solar  days  in  connection  with  its  great
transitions.  No\v,  what  we  want  to  get  at  is  the  thought  of  tho  writer,  the  subjective  state  out
of  which  arose  such  language  and  such  a  mode  of  conceiving.  We  study  him  as  a  very  old
interpreter  of  Gen.  i.,  who  is  the  best  witness  to  us  of  the  ancient  feeling.  Eationalizing  com
mentators  recognize  here  the  creative  days,  but  they  somehow  fail  to  see  that  the  writer's  con
ception  of  the  work,  and  his  manner  of  setting  fortli  the  vast-ness  and  sublimity  of  its  successions,
are  not  easily  reconciled  with  tho  notion  of  common  solar  days,— a  meaning  these  commentators
are  determined  to  fasten  on  Gen.  i.,  for  the  obvious  reason  that  it  discredits  the  account,  and
i  seems  to  give  them  some  ground  for  calling  it  a  myth.  It  was  a  similar  blindness  that  led  Rosen-
•  mailer  to  derive  the  Bible  cosmogony  from  the  Persians,  whilst  at  the  same  time  contending
for  the  interpretation  of  short  21-hour  days.  According  to  his  own  showing  the  Persians  (Zen°
davcstaj  held  that  the  world  was  generated  in  six  periods  (sex  tanporibus),  or  times,  left  altogether
j  indefinite.  If  the  Mosaic  account  must  bo  traced  to  a  Persian  paternity,  let  it  at  least  have  tho
Persian  width.

There  is  the  same  grandeur  of  power  and  causality  in  the  creation-pictures  we  find  in  the
.    latter  part  of  Job ;  and  if  we  had  nothing  ab  extra  to  give  us  a  different  thought  there  would  be
the  same  impression  of  vastness  in  the  times.     How  utterly  different  this  early  style  from  tho
later  Talmudic  and  Mohammedan  trifling  about  the  times  and  imagined  incidents  of  creation!
The  old  impression  had  been  lost,  and  there  took  its  place  the  petty  wonder  which  grows  out  of
the  narrow  conception;  just  as  in  modern  times  every  kind  of  fanciful  hypothesis  has  been
|    resorted  to  to  account  for  the  first  three  days,  and  their  morning  and  evening  phenomena,  so
puzzling,  so  inexplicable,  it  may  be  said,  on  the  supposition  of  their  being  ordinary  solar  days.
There  is  nothing  of  this  trilling  in  Job.     In  a  style  of  highest  poetry  it  gives  us  ideas  and  siig-
I   gestions  that  yet  transcend  any  discoveries  in  science:  "Where  wast  thou  when  J  laid  the
foundations  of  the  earth?     Who  appointed  its  measures,  and  stretched  the  line  upon  it?     Upon
what  are  its  pillars  settled,  and  who  laid  the  corner-stone  thereof?    when  the  stars  of  the  morn
ing  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.     Or  who  shut  up  the  sea  with  doors
I  in  its  gushing  forth,  when  it  issued  from  the  womb  ?  when  I  made  tho  darkness  its  robe,  and
1  thick  darkness  its  swaddling-band;  when  I  Brafo*  upon  it  my  law,  and  set  bars  and  doors'  and
said,  Here  shalt  thou  come,  and  no  farther,  and  here  shalt  thou  stop  in  the  swelling  of  thy  waves.
Hast  thou  given  command  to  the  morning?  hast  thou  caused  the  dawn  to  know  its  place?
I  Kuowest  thou  tho  way  where  light  dwelleth  ?    Understandest  thou  the  path  to  its  house  ?   Hast
I  thou  entered  into  the  treasures  of  the  snow  or  the  hail?     Hath  the  rain  a  father?  and  who  hath
begotten  the  drops  of  the  dew?  "  Job  xxxviii.     Ancient  as  these  challenges  are,  science  has  not
ret  answered  them,  probably  never  will  fully  answer  them.     Congelation  is  not  yet  understood
.n  its  essential  mystery;  there  is  a  store  of  unrevealed  science  in  the  snow-drop,  and  as  for  light,
;hough  it  has  been  shining  on  us  for  GOOO  years,  we  do  not  yet  "know  the  path  to  its  house?"

We  stand  in  awe  of  such  language ;  wo  recognize  it  as  superhuman  speaking.  There  are  no
larrow  computations  here,  no  petty  fancies,  or  ingenious  hypotheses.  Neither  is  there  any
illing  up  of  what  is  left  blank  in  the  great  outline  given  by  Moses,  except  that  wo  have  occa-
ionally  the  intimation  of  a  law  or  process  when  the  other  gives  us  only  tho  bare  fact  expressed
Q  the  plainest  phenomenal  language  which  was  adapted  to  be  the  vehicle  of  its  conception.  Thus
.Iso  in  another  passage,  Job  xxviii.  25,  26,  God  is  represented  as  determining  the  quantity  and

*  Some  wou.0.  give  ^2'i'S  hero  tho  sense  of  appointment  or  decision  merely,  as  -that  idea,  in  most  languages,  ia
ttmdary  to  that  of  cutting.'  But  IS  35  is  never  so  used  in  Hebrew,  although  such  general  idea  suits  the  passage.  Tho
;th  of  the  word,  and  the  vividness  of  the  imagery,  are  lost  in  what  is  after  all  but  a  smooth  tautology.    There 'is  in
flated  a  conflict  of  forces.    There  was  a  terrible  disturbance  in  the  old  nature  of  the  lehom  before  the  sea  became  obedient
he  waters  quietly  settled  to  their  established  bound.    "  There  is  something  hard  about  it,"  says  Umbreit,  "  if  we  give
le  usual  Hebrew  sense  ;  »  but  this  is  tho  very  reason  for  preferring  the  literal  image.    Tho  word  is  emphatic,  and  then
an  importance  m  its  choice  as  showing  the  real  conception  in  the  mind  of  the  writer.


140  SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   FIT!?T   CHAPTER   OF  GENESIS.


force  of  the  elemental  powers,  and  appointing  tlie  method  of  their  physical  action.  It  is  another
of  the  Scriptural  allusions  to  the  Creative  Wisdom :  "  God  knew  the  place  thereof  when  he  made
for  the  winds  their  irc!<jlit<  and  fixed  for  the  waters  their  measure,  when  he  made  a  law  for  the
rain,  and  a  tr-nj  for  the  thunder  llaines:  ;'  Vulgate:  viam  proccllis  so  nautilus,  a  passage  for  tho
sounding  storms.

In  this  connection  no  portion  of  Scripture  is  more  worthy  of  attention  than  Psalm  xc.  It  is
especially  important  as  being,  on  the  best  authority,  ascribed  to  that  same  Moses  who  gives  us,
whether  through  direct  authorship  or  tradition,  the  account  of  creation:  "O  Lord,  thou  hast
been  our  dwelling-place  in  all  generations."  The  words  mi  m±  here  evidently  refer  to  old  his
torical  times  upon  the  earth,  but  it  is  equally  clear  that  what  follows  carries  ns  back  to  the
creative  or  ante-creative  periods,  lie  was  "his  people's  dwelling-place,"  they  were  ''chosen  in
Him  before  the  foundations  of  the  world."  "Before  the  mountains  were  lorn,  before  the  earth
and  the  tebel  were  Irmcjlit  forth  bx  nrx  eb'5  in  cb':.":,  from  Olam  to  Olarn,  from  world*  to
world,  thou  art  God,"  or  "  thou  art,  O  God."  bb*nn  here  is  wrongly  rendered  by  the  second  per
son.  It  is  the  third  feminine,  and  has  for  its  collective  subject  brni  •px,  earth  and  the  world,
or  earth  and  the  orlia  tcrrarum.  Both  lib11  and  bbinn  denote  a  generative  process, — both
words,  as  remarked  in  another  place,  presenting  the  same  radical  etymological  conceptions  of
birth,  growth,  parturition,  with  the  Latin  natus,  natura,  and  the  Greek  </n'a>,  tfivuis,  yewnia,  yiVo-
jtuu,  yfWif.t  For  this  parturitive  sense  of  bb'nn  see  such  passages  as  Isaiah  li.  2,  Job  xv.  7,
Prov.  viii.  2"),  Ps.  li.  7,  Isaiah  Ixvi.  8,  where  this  word  (in  Ilophal)  and  i-n  come  together,
r~x  c"S  "l"3  "ib-p  nx  inx  Cl^S  "px  bn'.Ti,  numquid  parturiet  terra,  the  Vulgate  renders  it;
but  it  is  passive,  "shall  earth  be  brought  forth  in  a  day,  shall  a  nation  be  born  at  one  time?11
it  is  used  of  one  of  the  common  generative  processes  of  nature,  as  Prov.  xxv.  23,  "the  n<>rth-
wind  generates  (bb'nn)  rain"  (verb  in  the  active  conjugation).  It  is  applied  to  Deity,  I'eut.
xxxii.  13,  and  in  connection  again  with  *i±t  ;  "Wilt  thou  forget,  -pbi  -PS,  the  Iloek  that  begat
thee"  (1,'cum  qui  te  gemdt.Vulfj.)  -jbbin-  bx,  who  bore  thce,  literally  who  travailed  with  tlice
in  birth.  The  expression  may  seem  a  harsh  one,  but  it  denotes  the  tender  love  and  care  mani
fested  in  the  formation  and  culture  of  the  divine  people.  So  when  applied,  in  its  more  literal
sense  to  natural  or  creative  movements,  it  denotes  a  travailing  in  nature,  strong  processes,  indic
ative  of  convulsion?,  violence,  and  opposition,  in  passing  from  one  form  of  matter,  or  from  one-
stage  of  life,  to  another.  We  dwell  upon  this,  because  the  power  and  significance  of  such  words
have  been  so  slighted  in  our  translation,  and  are,  therefore,  so  overlooked  by  the  reader.  It
amounts  to  nothing  to  say  that  they  are  figures,  even  if  this  were  true.  They  are  certainly  not
fancy  figures  or  rhetorical  figures  merely,  but  used  because  no  other  language  could  so  well
convey  their  vast  and  tremendous  import.  When  the  Scriptures  use  poetry  it  is  not  for  the  sake
of  ornament,  but  from  necessity;  it  is  because  all  other  language  fails.  But  it  may  be  said  that
the  poetry  here  is  in  the  style  and  in  the  collocation  of  ideas.  The  words  themselves  meet  us
in  their  most  literal  etymological  conceptions;  just  as  such  words,  and  such  primitive  concep
tions  have  formed  the  roots  of  all  philosophical  and  scientific  language,  as  it  lias  been  developed
in  other  tongues.

*  Tho  Fcnsc  world,  given  to  this  word  tbl?,  it  is  said,  belongs  to  the  later  Hebrew,  but  there  are  quite  a  number  of
passages  in  the  Old  Testament,  besides  Eccles.  iii.  11,  where  this  sense  is  the  most  apposite  (sec  Ts.  cxlv.  13,  cvi.  48),  and  the
later  usage  (if  it  may  be  so  called,  for  it  is  undoubtedly  most  ancient  in  the  Syriac  ]  V\J^)  grows  directly  out  of  the
primitive  conception.  The  Rabbinical  usage  differs  in  this,  that  it  is  employed  for  space-worlds  (KOO>IOS)  and  thus  per
verted  from  that  original  idea  of  a  lime-world  which  it  has  given  to  the  New  Testament  aluv.

t  Hence,  from  lbn  the  noun  Hllbln  ,  used  in  Gen.  ii.  4,  of  "the  generations  (ycveo-eiy,  naturae)  of  the  heavens  andi
the  earth."  The  idea  of  the  earth  as  a  growth,  liirtli,  or  generation,  did  not  shock  cither  the  Jewish  or  Patristic  feeling  I
as  is  shown  by  the  reception  of  the  LXX.  word  Genesis  as  a  name  for  the  first  book  of  Moses.  Gen.  i.  abounds  in  th"
kind  of  generation  language.  The  earth  brings  forth  (XXln),  the  waters  breed  (iJJTiU)  (swarm  with  life),  the
germinates  (X'jin),  and  the  trees  and  plants  seminate  (jllTO),  each  after  its  genus  or  species  ("pE),  which  is  the  result)
of  the  generative  law  or  process.  Nature  is  everywhere,  but  God  over  all,  the  Logos  in  all,  commencing  a  new  nature,!
changing,  modifying,  or  elevating  an  old  one.  The  Hebrew  writers  employ  such  terms  without  scruple,  and  without  anyl
dread  of  naturalism.  The  natural  and  supernatural  were  not  so  sharply  drawn  as  in  modern  times.  Nature  had  its  super-;
natural,  and  the  supernatural  showed  itself  in  nature.  These  are  tho  literal  meanings ;  but  they  would  have  been  th«|
germs  of  a  philosophical  and  scientific  language  had  the  Hebrew  been  ever  so  developed.


TART  III.— ALLUSIONS   TO   THE   SIX  DAYS   IN   OTHER   PARTS   OF   THE   JJIIJLE.    141


"Before  the  mountains  were  born,  and  the  earth  brought  forth,1'— before  creation  was  fin.
ished,  and  brought  to  its  full  birth,— ebis  in  cbij-a  "from  Olam  to  Oiam,  from  world  to  world,
OTTO  TOV  alavos  Kal  (us  TOV  ulavos  ('i  mculo  et  uvjuc  in  scuculum),  tliou  art,  0  Mighty  El."     ij^x
in  the  first  verse  is  tho  name  of  administration;  s><  is  the  older  name  of  power  and  causality
"From  everlasting  unto  everlasting,"  says  our  translation,  as  though  both  expressions  made  merely
a  general  phrase  for  eternal  duration,  regarded  as  blank  continuity,  to  the  entire  neglect  of  tho
plurality  and  the  transition.     Some  might  fancy  it  the  idea  of  a  past  and  a  future  eternity,  but
this  past   had   its  divisions.      It  was  before  the  creation,    or  before    the    completion  of  tho
creation,  that  El  existed  thus  from  Olam  to  Olam,  from  rcon  to  joon,  a  saculo  in  saculum,  from
world  to  world;  just  as  our  word  world  is  used  as  a  time-word  in  the  oldest  English.     See
Wickliffe's  translation  of  1  Tim.  i.  17  "  kynge  of  worldis,  l^r^h  T^  aluvw"     It  is  intended
here  to  mark  most  emphatically  the  contrast  between  God's  times,  and  our  times,  the  brevity  of
which  is  so  afrectingly  set  forth  in  verses  9  and  10  below:   "The  days  of  our  years  are'three-
score  years  and  ten."     We  live  from  year  to  year;  God  lives  from  Olam  to  Olam.*     The  times
of  our  history  are  reckoned  as  annual,  centennial,  millennial ;  God's  times  are  Olamic  or  Eeonian,
— aitiwos  being  an  adjective  whose  unit  of  measurement  is  alt>v  (i.  c.,  time  measured  by  rcons)'
just  as  annual  is  time  measured  by  years.     The  divine  life-time  (not  in  itself,  but  as  given  to
our  conceptions)  is  reckoned   by  worlds,  and  worlds  of  worlds,  until,  through  their  mi-lit v
reduplications,  rather  than  by  any  conceptionless  abstract  or  negative  terms,  we  approach,  as  near
as  the  human  imaging  faculty  can  approach,  to  the  thought  of  an  absolute  eternity.     All  this  is
confirmed,  as  sober  and  rational  exegesis,  by  that  remarkable  declaration  in  this  Psalm  (ver.  4),
which  furnishes  the  key  of  interpretation  for  all  passages  that  speak  of  the  greater  chronology'
whether  it  be  the  immense  past  as  intimated  in  the  pluralities  of  the  Old  Testament,  or  the
unknown  periods  of  the  Olamic  eschatology  as  referred  to  in  the  New  (sec  2  Pet.  iii.  8,  2  Thess.
ii.  2,  Ileb.  x.  37) :  "For  a  thousand  years  in  thine  eyes  are  as  a  day  (=«=),  as  yesterday  when  it
13  past,  and  as  a  watch  in  the  night,"  t     How  slow  to  us,  and  yet  how  sublimely  the  faith  of
this  nirtbx  a^,  or  man  of  God,  waits  and  watches  for  the  day  (ver.  K-) :   "  O  satisfy  us  (ip-<-<)
in  the  morning  with  thy  mercy."     ip-  here  may  very  easily  mean  an  ordinary  morning,  if' one
is  contented  with  it,  or  chooses  to  render  it  adverbially  (as  our  translation  does:   "0  satisfy  us
j  early,")  but  certainly  there  is  much  in  this  wonderful  Psalm,  and  in  the  general  scale  of  its
:  language,  that  points  to  the  higher  idea  and  to  the  higher  day.     The  most  careless  reader  can
j  hardly  fail  to  see  that  it  abounds  in  great  contrasts  :   "  We  spend  our  years  as  a  sigh,"  }  but  thon
i  art  from  Olara  to  Olam."  «  Our  life  is  as  a  watch  in  the  night  compared  with  thy  millennial  day/'
•We  are  as  a  sleep."  "O  satisfy  ns  in  the  morning  with  thy  mercy;"  then  "make  us  glad
according  to  the  days  wherein  thon  hast  afflicted  ns,  the  years  wherein  we  have  seen  evil."  '  So
I  n  another  place,  Ps.  xxx.  6:  "Weeping  may  tarry  for  the  night,  but  joy  (n:n  a  shout  of  jubilee)
"I  shall  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness,  I  shall  be  satisfied  when

.  awake,  with  thy  likeness,"  Ps.  xvii.  15.     The  rationalist  may  interpret  all  these  on  the  lower
•cale  and  give  consistent  reasons  for  his  philology.     Let  him  be  content  with  it,  but  there  is

*  -Whether  such  language  is  use,!  of  mundane,  ante-mundane,  or  post-mundane  ages,  or  of  all  toother,  must  be  dcter-
:xt ;  the  word  DS13  being  in  itself  wholly  indefinite.    It  is  distincuishcd  simply  from  ordinary  astro-
omically  computed  time.    Here,  in  Ps.  xc.  2,  it  can  have  no  other  than  a  creative  or  antc-crcativc  reference.    In  Ps.  ciii.


!  ages,  the  eternities  of  the  eternities,  to  come.    There  is  the  same  contrast  in  I's.  ciii.  17,  as  in  Ps.  sc  2— our  fleeting
lys  and  the  duration  of  ffim  who  livcth  from  Olam  to  Olarn.    See  the  verses  above.

t  The  idea  is  found  in  tho  Koran,  and  is  applied  to  creation.    See  Surat  xxxii.  4,  "  the  day  whose  length  is  a  thousand

rs  such  as  ye  reckon."    Compare  also  Surat  Ixs.  3,  -i,  "the  degrees  by  which  the  angels  and  the  Spirit  ascond  to  Him

ich  a  day  in  which  there  is  50,000  years.    They  arc  the  intervals  between  the  going  forth  of  the  word  (the  ruah  or  spirit!


eptii

Han  I^D.  Like  a  low  murmuring  sound,— like  a  long-drawn  sigh,  commencing  with  the  first  inhalation  and  cnd-
g  with  the  last  gasp  of  the  departing  breath.  So  the  Syriac,  ]T  o  i,,  ^.f  as  It  should  be  pointed  aft  gu-wo-go,  life
jroan,  like  a  murmur.


142  SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE  FIRST   CIIArTER   OF   GENESIS.


nothing  to  prevent,  there  is  much  to  favor,  that  higher  and  wider  view  which  the  ever-ascend
ing  style  of  Scripture  (even  when  it  seems  to  speak  of  temporal  things)  and  the  ever-expanding
power  of  Hebrew  words,  offer  to  the  spiritual  mind.  Again,  there  is  "  the  morning  (Ps.  xlix.
15)  in  which  the  righteous  shall  have  the  dominion."  How  frigid  is  the  comment  of  the  rational
ist  here!  and  how  far  it  falls  short  of  all  the  ideas  suggested  by  the  context!  "  ip-b,  max  subito"
says  Rosenmuller ;  and  then  he  refers  to  Fs.  xlvi.  G  (God  shall  help  her,  the  Church,  the  civilas
Del,  ip-  r-isb  at  the  turning  of  tho  morning),  which  he  has  in  like  manner  to  diminish  from
the  higher  scale  before  it  will  answer  his  purpose.  So  Ilupfdd  :  "  Snpcrst itcs  sunt."  Accord
ing  to  him,  all  this  striking  imagery,  and  this  strong  word  '"•>,  mean  no  more  than  that  good
men  shall  survive  the  wicked  ;  they  shall  visit  their  graves  the  morning  after  they  have  been
buried.

Tho  morning,  in  Fs.  xlix.  15.  when  "the  righteous  shall  reign,"  i>  the  great  dies  retr'tbutionia,
so  prominent  in  Scripture,  and  acknowledged  too  (like  the  conception  of  great  times)  in  the
earliest  language  and  thinking  of  the  race.*  Such  an  interpretation  may  seem  forced  to  one
who  looks  at  it  from  tho  lowest  stand-point,  and  feels  the  need  of  nothing  higher.  It  was  other
wise  wi:h  the  early,  musing,  meditative  mind.  The  more  dim  and  indefinite  their  faith  in  another
world,  the  more  vast  their  conception  of  its  times  and  its  parallelisms  (in  these  respects)  with
the  present  vicissitudes  of  our  being.  To  such  minds,  even  without  revelation,  the  idea  rose
niitarally  out  of  the  most  obviously  suggested  contrasts.  The  brevities  of  our  present  state  gave
birth  to  the  idea  of  the  eternities.  From  this  there  grew  a  corresponding  language  which  in  modern
times  we  have  failed  justly  to  interpret.  The  shortness  of  the  human  life  was  more  thought  of

:rlie.-t  days  than  it  is  now,  although  men  then  lived  longer.  Hence  that  wailing  language
ing  it,  we  find  in  Job  and  in  the  Fsalm.s.  Away  back  in  the  patriarchal  times,  when,  as
s  'me-  say,  this  world  was  all  they  knew,  men  confessed  more  readily  and  more  feelingly  than
they  do  now,  that  they  were  pilgrims  and  sojourners  on  earth.  Nothing,  therefore,  was  more
natural  for  such  souls  than  the  attempt  to  transfer  these  brevities  and  the  language  that
••  ;.r.  sc  :  1  them,  to  the  higher  scale.  Their  very  despondency  in  respect  to  their  having  any
r-haro  themselves  in  this  higher  chronology,  would  the  more  strongly  suggest  to  the  mind  its

rations.  Hence  the  z.~-'~"  r'r'J,  "the  years  of  the  eternities,"  Fsalm  Ixxvii.  G,  tho
"•';::'  Y'-^  r,"T,  "the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  most  High,"  Fsalm  Ixxvii.  11.  Hence
the  thought  of  the  ;ecn,  or  higher  world-time,  of  a  greater  day,  of  a  more  glorious  morning.

*  The  use  of  the  word  morning  for  the  great  day  of  light  and  retribution  is  very  marked  in  the  early  Arabian  poets,
before  the  time  of  Mohammed  and  the  Koran.  It  has  no  appearance  of  having  been  invented  by  them,  but  carries  tho
evidence  of  long-established  usage,— a  mode  of  speech  which  no  one  thought  of  explaining  because  of  any  obscurity  or
novelty  in  it.  There  is  no  reason  why  we  may  not  suppose  it  as  ancient  as  any  phrase  in  the  language,  and  to  have  gone
back  to  the  days  of  Job,  as  well  as  many  other  Arabic  expressions,  which  the  Geologists  always  find  in  abundance  for  that
time  when  it  suits  other  purposes  they  may  have  in  view.  Thus  Lokman,  as  quoted  in  the  Kitab  ul-agany  :  "  0  my  son,
despise  not  small  things;  for  they  shall  be  great  in  the  morning."  So  also  the  old  poet  and  orator  Koss,  as  given  by
S!i;ir:i.4<mi  437  (Curctoii's  Ed.)  fcXc.  ul+Jf  2UJL  L<ScXjt«  t>l.£.t  tX^-t*  «Jt  xXJf  "God  is  one;  He

.  "        S      ^" '  "V  <r

\  o:-r.  (lif, ) ;  He  causes  it  to  come  back  (from  death) ;  to  Him  is  the  returning  in  the  morning."  See  also  Sprengcr's
"  Lebcn  des  Mohammed,"  vol.  i.  p.  97.

Tor  examples  in  the  Koran,  see  Surat  lix.  18  :  "0  believers,  fear  God,  and  let  every  soul  see  to  it  what  it  sends  before
it  for  tk".  morning"  (or  the  morrow,  inpos'.nrum  diem).  It  is  used  as  an  ancient  and  settled  phrase  for  " the  day  of  judg
ment,"  according  to  that  frequent  Koranic  idea  that  a  man's  sins  arc  sent  on  before  him,  and  that  they  will  be  all  there  to
meet  him  in  the  morning  of  retribution,  or  the  dies  ires.  See  also  the  commentary  of  Al-zamakhshari  on  the  passage :  "  It
is  the  day  of  the  resurrection,"  he  says,  "  called  the  morning,  to  impress  us  with  a  sense  of  its  nearness."

Hariri  uses  the  same  ancient  form  of  speech,  not  merely  as  a  chance  poetical  phrase,  but  as  having  place  among  the
settled  idioms  of  the  language.  The  vagrant  Abu  Zeid  is  represented  as  saying  of  the  man  who  will  give  him  a  robe  to
sever  his  nakedness,  that  in  return  for  it  he  shall  be  well  clad  in  the  morning,— that  is,  both  in  this  world  and  in  the
day  of  retribution  that  is  to  come.


rtr'  L<*"^^J


"  He  shall  be  covered  to-day  (that  is,  in  this  world)  with  my  grateful  praise,  and  in  the  morning  (or  the  morrow)  shall  he
be  enrobed  with  the  silk  of  paradise."    Hariri  Seance,  xxv.  p.  300,  ed.  of  De  Sacy.

The  idiom,  traced  in  this  way  from  the  earliest  Arabian  poets,  shows  the  antiquity  of  the  language  and  of  the  idea,


PART  IV.—  IDEAS  OF  NATURE  AND   THE   SUPERNATURAL.  143


Messiah's  throne  is  to  he  cnro  lEPa,  "like  the  days  of  Ileaven,"  Psalm  Ixxxix.  30,  "his  kingdom,"
D^bs  b=  naltt,  "a  kingdom  of  all  Olams."  Hence,  too,  the  ancient  cyclical  ideas  of  great
times  when  all  things  should  come  round  again,  and  that  belief  in  a  future  renovation  of  the
earth  and  heavens  that  Pareau  has  shown  to  have  belonged  to  the  early  Arabians  and  E"rp-
tians,*  and  which,  though  in  another  form,  is  not  obscurely  alluded  to  and  sanctioned  in  the
Scriptures  themselves.

This  latter  idea  is  plainly  enough  presented  by  the  Prophet  :  "  Behold,  I  create  new  heavens  "
or  rather  "I  create  the  heavens  new,  c^rin  C^a  s-.in,  and  the  earth  anew;  "  £-n  denoting
rather  the  idea  of  renewal  f  than  that  of  an  origination  de  now.  We  find  it  elsewhere  all  the
stronger  because  it  comes  in  incidentally,  as  a  thing  firmly  believed.  Thus  Ps.  oil.  2G  which
Paul,  it  should  be  noted,  applies  to  the  creative  Logos,  Itcb.  i.  10  :  "  Of  old  didst  thou  'lay  the
foundation  of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  (the  atmosphere,  the  rakia,  the  sky,)  are  the  work  of
thy  hands.  They  perish  (it  is  not  a  prediction,  but  a  description  in  the  present),"  they  flow  or
chanye;  there  is  no  stability  in  nature,  whatever  science  may  say;  it  is  necessarily  finite  in  time
as  well  as  in  space.  "But  thou  standest  (lasn,  permanes,  atidcst  through);  yea,  all  of  them
wax  old  as  dotii  a  garment,  and  as  a  garment  thou  shalt  renew  them,  and  they  shall  be  renewed  "
Spsnn  ;  ifc  is  ever  in  sucl1  connection  the  change  of  renewal,  of  regermination,  of  reviviscence.
Passing,  or  succession,  is  the  radical  idea  of  the  root  in  all  the  Shemitic  tongues  ;  it  is  one  thing,
or  one  state,  taking  the  place  of  another,  but  it  is  ever  a  passing  from  death  to  life,  from  loss  to
gain,  from  decay  to  vigor,  from  torpor  to  activity.  See  such  passages  as  Psalm  so.  5  :  ^r>Z2
ri'srp  T^ns,  "in  the  morning  like  grass  it  growethup,"  Jobxiv,  jpr,i  m  m:^  ex  "if  it  be
cut  down  it  shall  sprout  again,"  and  Job  xiv.  14,  where  the  noun  from  the  same  verb,  'just  before
applied  to  the  regerminating  plant,  is  used  by  Job  to  denote  his  own  renewal:  "0  that  thou
wouldst  lay  me  up  in  Hades  ;  "  »  all  the  days  of  my  set  time  would  I  wait  until  my  lallpah  come."
Compare  also  Isaiah  ix.  9,  and  the  places  where  it  is  used  of  the  renewal  or  change  of  raiment,
Gen.xli.14,  xxxv.  2,  and  others,—  also  of  moral  or  spiritual  renovation,  as  L;ai.  xL  31-xli.  1.

There  is  no  mistaking  these  Scriptural  analogies  of  the  past  and  the  future.  Earth  shall  be
rehabilitated;  nature  shall  put  on  her  new  robe;  there  shall  be  a  new  creative  dav,  a  new  light,
a  new  atmosphere,  a  new  firmament,  a  new  glory  in  the  sun  and  stars,  a  ne\v  Adam,  Prince  of
a  new  life,  a  new  human  kind  over  whom  death  shall  reign  no  more,  a  new  Eden-world
"  rfcerein  dwclleth  righteousness."

PAET  IV.

THE  IDEAS  OF  MATURE  AND  THE  SUPERNATURAL  AS  PRESENTED  IN  THE

SCRIPTURES.

THE  idea  of  law  in  nature  is  given  in  the  Bible  in  its  own  peculiar  language,  but  it  is  as

tanetly  to  be  found  there  as  in  Newton's  "Principia."    The  details  were  unknown,  as  they

ire  yet  m  their  vast  extent  unknown  to  our  best  science,  but  both  the  idea  and  the  fact  were

lone  the  less  firmly  held,     i'  For  ever,  O  Lord,  thy  Word  is  settled  in  the  heavens  "  (Psalm  cxix.

$9),  that  is,  m  the  remotest  or  highest  apace;  "from  age  to  age  is  thy  truth"  (thy  truthfulness)

.  ft,  throughout  all  time.     That  the  language  has  reference  to  natural  things  may  be  seen  by

.    :omparing  it  with  Psalm  xxxiii.  G,  "  By  the  Word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made  and  all

heir  host  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth  "  (^fi  nil),  the  utterance  of  his  month,  that  is,  the  origin-

ting  Word,  and  its  going  forth  or  prolonged  sounding  in  the  nature  originated,  the  Xo>f  npo-

>op«or  of  Coloss.  i.  17,  eV  cS  T*  irdm-a  oWonjKf,  uin  whom  all  things  consist,"  or  stand  together

nere,  Psalms  cxix.  89,  ^  is  the  word  of  God,  giving  law,  as  it  gave  origin,  to  nature  ;  naisx


I44  SPECIAL   IXTIIOULTTIOS    TO   THE   FIRST   CIlAPTKIi   oF   <>EXESIS.

is  the  divine  faithfulness  in  the  preservation  of  that  law,  and  the  constant  execution  of  that
word.  The  numerical  ratios  of  this  hok  olam,  or  cosmical  ordinance,  were  undetermined  by  the
early  mind;  it  was  not  known  whether  its  energizings  were  according  to  the  squares  or  the
cubes  of  the  distances,  but  of  such  a  harmony  existing  in  the  heavens  there  was  no  doubt.
"  Their  line  had  -one  out  into  nil  the  world ; "  the  author  of  the  19th  Psalm  was  as  sure  of  thu
as  Keiiler,  who  derived  his  scientific  inspiration  from  it.  A  mighty  law,  a  universal  law,  was
there.1  That  \vas  known  to  David  as  well  as  to  Newton.  The  same  idea  appears  in  what  fol
lows  :  '•  Thou  also  hast  founded  the  earth,"  r::-=  statuisli;  then  hast  given  it  an  order,  a  genesis,
an  establishment.  Hence,  from  this  same  root,  the  Syriuc  jJUi  (le-yn-no)  nntura,  comlltio  na
tural^.  Again,  in  the  verse  following  (Psalm  cxix.  91),  "they  stand  (that  K  things  stand)  accord-
in"-  to  thin,*  ordinances;  for  are  they  not  all  thy  servants?  "  This  is  not  a  mere  figure  to  denote
o  mere  mechanical  forcing ;  there  is  a  real  law,  and  a  real  natural  obedience.  "  He  constituted
the  wind  his  minister,  the  llaming  fire  (the  lightning)  his  servants,"  Ps.  civ.  4.  "Thou  sendest
them  forth  :  they  go  and  return  to  thee,  saying,  IVhold  us,  here  we  are."  Job  xxxviii.  35.  Poetical
as  the  language  may  be,  there  is  something  more  than  a  fact  rcprc-'-cntod,  or  a  phenomenon.  There
is  an  abiding  nature,  an  obedience  to  law.  a  command  and  a  response,— not  a  capricious  move
ment,' hut  an  invariable  doing.  "He  appointeth  the  moon  for  seasons,  the  sun  knoweth  his

going  down."

Our  modern  science  has  discovered  much  in  respect  to  the  manner,  but  has  revealed  nothing
miw  'in  respect  to  the  essence  of  the  idea.  We  have  similar  language,  Job  xxviii.  25  :  "  He  made
a  weight  for  the  winds"  (fecit  rcntis pontu8),—l\6  determined  the  gravity  of  the  most  seemingly
imponderable  substances,— "he  established  (-pr,  regulated)  the  waters  in  their  measure,"  their
proportions,  their  relations,  their  quality,  as  well  as  their  quantity.  "When  he  made  a  law  for
'  ;}u,  rahl)  _._.._-.  _r  (quando  '  '.Tits  legem)  and  away  (-"  a  constant,  course,  an  immutable

rnlc)'for  the  "lightning  and  its  voice."     Il   is  the  same  idea  in  that  most  sublime  declaration,  Jol?

xxv  o    -~-  --Vj'n-r,  "He.  maketh  peace  in  his  high  places,"  conconliam  in  snUimibus  suis,

he  hath  established  a  harmony  in  the  heavens.     Compare  Ps.  xix.  5;  Hos.  ii.  22,  23.

It  was  this  style  of  thought  and  language  that  led  to  nature's  being  called  a  c»rc>,ftnt,  whether
such  covenant  or  law  was  regarded  as  made  with  nature,  or  with  man,  and  for  man's  sake,  toe
Jeremiah  xxxiii.  20.  It  is  God's  "  covenant  of  the  day  and  night ;  "  they  are  expressly  called
•r-jo  c— -  r- n  the  statutes,  "the  laws  of  the  heaven  and  earth,"  in  their  relations  to  each
other,  as'compared  with  the  higher  covenant  of  the  Messiah.  One  of  the  most  invariable  things
in  the  physical  world  is  the  rainbow,  ever  appearing  when  the  sun  shines  forth  after  a  ttorm;
and  it  is  this  beautiful  phenomenon  that  is  made  the  symbol  of  nature's  constancy,— not  as  a  new
thing,  when  pointed  out  to  Noah,  but  chosen,  from  the  very  fact  of  its  invariableness,  as  the  best
representative  of  the  great  idea  thus  grounded  on  the  eternal  promise.

There  is  a  twofold  idea  in  creation  which  the  mind  cannot  separate,  and  which  the  Bible
does  not  separate.  It  is  the  giving  form  by  the  immediate  operation  of  the  Word,  and  then  the
infixing  that  form  as  a  permanent  principle  working  on  until  the  whole  is  finished,  and  afterward
remaining  as  an  unchanging  law.  The  rudimentary  expression  for  this  we  find  in  that  repeated
formula  of  Gen.  i.  -p^m,  rendered,  "  and  it  was  so."  That  would  simply  denote  the  fact;  but
it  is  more  than  this.  The  particle  -p  (or  the  adjective  rather)  never  loses  the  primary  idea  of
fixedness  establishment,  order,  that  is  everywhere  prominent  in  the  verb  -p=,  from  which,  X
before  remarked,  comes  the  earliest  Shemitic  word  for  nature,  unless  we  may  regard  it  as  rep
resented  by  the  Hebrew  m?:r.  "And  it  was  so,"-rather,  "and  it  became  firm,  fixed
established."

Another  germ  of  the  same  thought  we  find  in  the  nVfiaa  of  Gen.  i.  1C,  the  rule  or  law  ol
the  heavenly  bodies  in  the  regulation  of  the  seasons,  and  their  general  influence  upon  the  earth
It  appears  still  more  clearly  in  Job  xxxviii.  33:  "Knowest  thou  the  ordinances  of  heaven;  cans
thou  set  the  dominion  thereof  in  the  earth."  Here  we  have  again  the  trsw  nipn,  the  statute
or  laws  of  the  heavens  (Vulgate,  ordinem  cceli,  LXX.  rporr<k  ot>™r,  the  turnings  or  tropics  of  tb
heavens),  latin  is  a  still  more  significant  word  than  rVm.  It  denotes  a  canon,  a  rule,  a  roarke
series  or  ordo.  Taken  in  connection  with  what  is  said  above  of  the  influence  (or  bands)  of  Pie


PART  I V.  -IDE AS  OF  NATURE  AND  THE  SUPERNATURAL.         145

ados,  it  might  seem  to  refer  to  the  old  belief  in  astrology;  but  this  had  in  it  nothing  of  the
magical.  "Whatever  scientific  errors  it  involved,  it  was  precious  as  containing  the  idea  of  the
unity  of  the  Kosmos,  or  of  a  whole,  in  which  each  part  had  an  influence  upon  the  whole  and
upon  every  other  part.

This  faith  in  nature  which  the  old  Shemitie  mind  possessed,  was  all  the  stronger,  it  may  be
said,  in  proportion  to  the  want  of  exact  knowledge.  David,  and  Isaiah,  and  Moses,  had  a  belief
'in  the  constancy  of  nature,  founded  on  better  grounds  than  that  of  the  sceptical  naturalist.  It
was,  too.  more  truly  a  recognition  of  law  than  that  generalization  of  mere  inductive  science
which  can  only  regard  nature  as  simply  that  which  is,  or  appears,  and  law  as  nothing  more  than
a  state  of  present  facts,  or  relative  sequences,  that  might  have  been  any  other  state  of  facts,  or
any  other  order  of  sequences,  and  which  would  still  have  been  nature,  still  have  been  law,  from
the  mere  fact  of  its  being  so.  The  natural  law  of  the  Bible,  on  the  other  hand,  was  a  real
causative  power,  a  real  ruling  or  dominion  in  itself,  though  inseparable  from  the  will  and  wis
dom  of  a  lawgiver.

The  true  notion  of  the  natural  cannot  be  held  without  the  complementary  idea  of  the  super
natural,  since  nature  can  have  no  beginning  in  itself  (the  thought  involving  a  contradiction),
and,  therefore,  demands  a  power  older  than  itself,  beyond  and  above  itself.  It  is  thus  that  the
Scripture  not  only  gives,  but  necessitates,  the  idea  of  the  supernatural,  although  there  is  no  parade
of  philosophical  language  in  setting  it  forth.  There  are  also  to  be  found  therein  the  specific
diversities  of  the  idea.  The  supernatural,  as  origin,  is  described  as  the  Word  going  forth.  It  is
thus  all  through  creation  acting  part  passu  with  the  natures  it  originates.  When  it  is  referred
to  among  post-creative  acts  it  is  characterized  as  "making  something  new  upon  the  earth "
(nsonr) ;  see  Numb.  xvi.  30 ;  Jerem.  xxxi.  22  ;  though  this,  as  before  remarked,  denotes  a  new
event,  a  new  form  of  things,  rather  than  new  matter.  As  a  change,  interruption,  or  metamor
phosis  in  nature,  in  distinction  from  a  permanent  new  power  introduced  into  it,  it  becomes
simply  the  idea  of  the  miraculous.  For  this  there  is  a  peculiar  expression.  It  is  called  "  the
finger  of  God,"  intimating  that  the  merest  touch  of  Deity  can  cause  a  deflection  in  nature,  though
nothing  in  nature  is  really  broken  or  destroyed.  See  Exodus,  viii.  15,  the  language  of  the  baffled
.us,  who  thereby  confessed  that  their  art,  whatever  it  might  be,  was  not  the  finger  of
God,— that  is,  had  nothing  of  the  supernatural  about  it.  See  also  Exod.  xxxi.  18  ;  Dent.  ix.  10.
Sometimes  the  figure  contained  in  the  expression  is  applied  to  some  great  natural  event  of  the
more  sudden  and  stupendous  kind,  as  to  the  volcano,  Psalms,  civ.  32:  "lie  touches  the  moun
tains  and  they  smoke  "-the  lightness  of  the  effort  implying  the  mightiness  of  the  power.

lo  term,  however,  for  the  miraculous,  or  wonderful,  is  ^5 ,  whose-  primary  idea  is

f  a  thing,  or  an  act,  separate  and  standing  ly  itself,  out  of  the'"chain  of  causation,  though

term  is  sometimes  applied  rhetorically  to  a  stupendous  natural  event.*    And  this  leads  us

to  the  mam  thing  we  wish  here  to  remark,  that  though,  in  idea,  the  Scriptural  distinction

between  the  natural  and  the  supernatural  is  clear,  there  is  not,  in  practical  speech,  that  sharp

rawn  between  them  that  distinguishes  our  modern  thinking.     In  celebrating  the  praises

of  God  xbs  fTW,  "who  doeth  wonders"  (Ex.  xv.  11),  the  Bible  writers  are  as  apt  to  take  one

ts  as  another,  though  one  or  the  other  may  predominate  in  certain  books  in  conse-

ence  of  the  peculiar  connections.     In  the  Law,  and  in  the  Prophets,  the  supernatural  is  more

i  is  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  the  fire  and  voice  from  Sinai,  the  smiting  of  the

:  m  the  Wilderness,  &c. ;  in  Job,  it  is  the  great  natural  as  exhibited  in  the  elements,  the  storm

bunder,  and  the  marvellous  productions  of  the  animal  world.    So  also  often  in  the  Psalms-'

especially  Ps.  xxix.     One  class  of  events  is  regarded  as  much  the  work  of  God  as  the  other

h  representations,  moreover,  is  there  a  mingling  of  the  two  ideas.     In  the  supernatural

There  h  another  Hebrew  term,  of  a  very  peculiar  kind,  used  to  denote  the  bringing  about  an  event,  special  and
Die,  by  a  scries  of  causes  strictly  natural  or  moral,  or  mainly  such,  yet  continually  deflected,  or  turned  round,  to

•rtf^r      a  °TCr-ain  rOSUlt'    ThCrG  haS  bCCn  n°thins  startlinf?'  °r  Suddcn'  but  tho  fin^r  of  God  has  been  upon  h«

tos  all  the  way.    It  ,s  called  rt2O  (Sibbah),  the  etymology  itself  being  its  clearest  definition.    It  is  a  bringing  about  or

rom  3-0)  a  causality,  yet  with  a  constant  deviation  produced  by  other  causes,  physical  and  moral.      For

examples,  «e  the  story  of  Itehoboam,  1  King,  xii.  25,  also  2  Chron.  x.  15,  and  other  passages.  In  Arabic  the  primary  sense

W  330  is  lost,  and  the  secondary  idea  of  causation,  thus  derived,  becomes  predominant

10


146  SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   TEE   FIRST   CIIArTER  OF   GENESIS.


displays,  such  as  that  of  the  ilooil,  the  crossing  of  the  Ped  Sea,  the  Egyptian  plagues,  the  pro
viding  food  in  the  Wilderness,  there  is  more  or  less  of  natural  intervention  linked  in  and  dis
tinctly  mentioned  as  forming  a  part,  at  least,  of  the  process.  And  then  again  the  groat  natural
is  so  described  in  Job  and  the  Psalms,  that  the  awe  of  the  supernatural  is  upon  us,  and  we
receive  the  impression  of  a  divine  presence-  as  distinctly  as  though  it  had  been  all  miracle.

But  it  is  in  the  creative  account  that  this  blending  becomes  most  remarkable.  The  young
nature,  though  strictly  a  nature,  seems  as  near  to  God  as  the  supernatural.  Still  are  thev  clearly
distinguishable.  Two  false  notions  have  warped  our  thinking  here.  It  may  be  said,  too,  that
they  are  as  anti-biblical  as  they  are  false.  All  in  creation  we  have  been  accustomed  to  regard
as  supernatural ;  all  since  creation  as  the  uninterrupted  natural,  with  the  exception,  here  and
there,  of  a  few  interspersed  miraculous  events.  An  excessive  naturalism  on  the  one  hand  has
been  the  counterpart  to  an  excessive  supernaturalism  on  the  other.  >,'ow  the  more  thoroughly
wo  study  G'v. n.  i,  the  more  it  will  be  found  that  the  strictly  supernatural  is  in  the  beginnings,  or
rather  in  the  ni"rnings,  of  each  day,  whilst  the  carrying  on,  or  the  completion  of  each  process,
is  strictly  nature,  the  ?/<»>w,  as  St.  Augustine  calls  it,  the  pause,  quiescence,  or  evening  in  creation.
There  is  in  each  of  these  days,  or  these  mornings,  whether  wo  regard  them  as  following  or
preceding  the  repose,  a  word  going  forth,  and  then  a  process  of  obedience  to  a  new  law.  Thus
each  word  is  a  new  power  dropped  into  the  stream  of  a  previous  nature  which  had,  in  like  man
ner,  a  word  for  its  beginning.  Hence  creation  is  a  succession  of  growths,  generations,  r,"lbp.
This  word  is  derived  from  I;"1,  to  give  birth,  just  as  natura  from  nascor,  (pvtns  from  f/>ro>,  or
genesis  (-yiVc(rti)  from  yr/i/o/uu.  Had  the  old  Jlobreu'  become  a  philosophical  language  this
would  have  been  the  order  of  development.  Langs  intimates  that  tolcdutli,  as  applied  to  the
generations  of  the  earth  and  heavens,  was  taken  retroactively  from  the  human  genealogies  alter
mcn'iunc',1.  Y>'e  cannot  think  so.  It  would  seem  to  be  a  starting  or  model  name  for  all  generative
succes.-ions.  First  the  genesis  of  the  heavens  and  earth,  then  of  the  human  nice,  as  involving
ever  in  their  reproductions  the  same  mingling  of  the  natural  and  the  supernatural.

AVe  find  a  nature  in  the  very  beginnings  of  life.  It  is  all  prepared  and  waiting  for  the  word,
but  it  is  nature  when  it  moves.  ''Let  the  earth  bring  forth'' — "let  the  waters  bring  forth."
The  first  plants  grow,  whether  slowly  or  suddenly.  They  arc  a  production  from  the  earth.
They  are.  brought  forth  according  to  their  specie.--,  with  their  crder  or  law  in  them.  As  nipin
corresponds  to  <J>I<TLS  and  natnra,  so  docs  the-  Hebrew  -p~  to  the  Greek  «(($<>?,  i8«f«,  and  the  Latin
fpccics.  This  is  etymologically  clear  in  the  derivative  n:'"n.  It  is  the  outward  form,  as
representative  of  and  produced  by  the  inward  form  which  is  the  real  idea,  or  species.  Thus  it  is
law  from  the  start,  producing  organization,  and  not  law  as  a  more  name  for,  and  life  as  a  mere
result  of,  an  outward  mechanically  formed  organic  structure.  That  would  be  sheer  materialism.
The  process  presented  in  the  Scripture?,  however  difficult  to  bo  understood  conceptually,  is  the
opposite  of  the  idea  of  mechanical  formation.  As  Cud  worth  forcibly  though  quaintly  expresses
it  in  his  distinction  between  human  and  divine  art,  God  does  not  stand  on  the  outside  like  a
human  artist,  and  moliminously,  by  means  of  shaping  tools  and  processes,  introduce  his  idea  into
the  work.  It  is  the  word  and  the  idea  working  from  within.  The  outward  material  organiza
tion  is  its  product  instead  of  its  cause.

It  matters  not  that  this  is  in  another  place  spoken  of  as  a  making.  That  is  merely  a  summary
ot  the  manner  of  making  as  here  set  forth  in  the  more  detailed  account.  God's  making  a  thing
intends  every  step  in  its  production.  Thus  the  whole  creation  of  the  heavens  and  eartli  is  set
forth  as  a  making  (Gen.  ii.  4),  and  a  making  in  one  day  ;  yet  the  whole  of  the  first  chapter  i»
occupied  with  the  six  great  days,  or  successions,  that  intervene  between  the  darkness  and  the
shaos  on  the  one  side,  and  man  and  paradise  on  the  other.

Again,  there  are  cases  which  might  seem  the  reverse  of  this,  where  God  is  represented  as  mak
ing,  forming,  &c.,  in  processes  which  are  not  only  natural — so  supposed  to  be — but  ordinary.
Thus  not  only  the  generic  production  of  humanity,  but  the  individual  generation  is  ascribed  to
him,  just  as  though  it  were  a  creative  process ;  and  in  fact  we  do  not  see  how  the  idea  of  their
being  the  creative  or  the  supernatural  somewhere  in  each  individual  human  generation  can  be
denied  by  those  who  condemn  traducianism.  "Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  womb,"  Jer.  i.  6;


PART  V.— HOW    WAS  THE  CREATIVE   HISTORY   REVEALED?  147

it  is  that  same  word  131  which  has  been  regarded  as  peculiarly  employed  of  direct  outward  or
mechanical  formation,  as  the  artist  forms  a  statue  or  a  picture.  It  is  so  only  when  applied  to
human  works,  where  the  artist,  as  Cudworth  says,  stands  on  the  outside,  but  as  used  of  God  it
is  ever  the  inward  formation,  the  eiSor,  or  idea,  of  which  the  outward  shape  is  but  the  image  or
«§u>Xoi>,  the  mere  representative  of  the  unseen.  Sec  also  Isaiah  xliv.  2,  24;  Isaiah  xliii.  1,  where  it
is  used  as  synonymous  with  son.  See  especially  Ps.  cxxxix.  16 :  1-121  Gin*1,  "the  days  they  were
formed  when  there  was  not  one  in  them,"  which  carries  the  same  idea,  whether  it  refers  to  the
generic  or  the  individual  formation.  Had  there  been  no  other  place  in  the  Bible  where  the
human  generation  is  spoken  of  than  the  one  cited  from  Jerem.  i.  5,  it  might  have  been  thought
(if  we  follow  the  mode  of  interpretation  which  some  will  insist  upon  applying  to  Genesis)  that
the  prophet  was  directly  and  mechanically  created.  Ilenco  the  idea  as  well  as  the  interpretation
is  capable  of  reversal.  If  it  means  a  process,  as  it  undoubtedly  does  when  thus  used  of  the
individual  gestation,  it  may  denote,  and  probably  docs  denote,  an  analogous  process  in  the  creative
account,  where  it  is  used  of  man,  just  as  rri'j>  and  jn3,  with  no  more  of  the  outward  or  mechan
ical  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other.

Only  let  us  keep  to  the  old  Ilebrew  modes  of  thinking  and  speaking,  and  we  need  not  bo
afraid  of  naturalism.  It  is  God's  nature  that  we  read  of  in  Genesis.  If  life  is  said  to  come  from
the  waters,  let  us  remember  that  it  was  upon  these  same  waters  the  Spirit  brooded  in  the  first
mysterious  night  of  creation.  If  it  is  naturalism,  it  is  the  naturalism  of  the  Bible ;  and  the
wonder  is  that  such  plain  declarations  of  birth,  growth,  succession,  lav,-,  generation— one  thing
coming  out  of  another — should  have  been  so  much  overlooked.  It  is  because  the  Scripture
doctrine  of  the  Word,  or  Logo?,  in  nature,  has  so  fallen  out  of  our  theology,  that  we  dread  so
much  the  appearance  of  naturalism.  In  proportion  as  we  have  lost  that  true  Scriptural  idea  of
Bupernaturalism,  which  sees  no  inconsistency  in  such  blendings,  are  we  driven  to  the  dogmatic
or  arbitrary  supernaturalism  to  defend  our  religious  ideas  from  the  equally  dogmatic  and  arbitrary
naturalism  of  modern  science.  We  have  endeavored  to  be  brief,  but  the  render  is  requested  to
compare  the  hints  here  given,  with  the  unmistakable  language  of  the  Scripture.  Instantaneous
creations  there  might  have  been,  for  anything  our  reason  could  say  to  the  contrary;  but  the
actual  creation  in  the  Bible  is  sot  forth  as  a  succession.  It  is  a  series  of  nilbr,  or  generations
each  one  revealing  those  unseen  things  of  God  from  which  are  made  the  things  that  do  appear.
The  other  mode  would  have  been  to  us  the  revelation  of  a  fact  or  facts  alone.  As  we  have  it
given  unto  us,  it  is  a  revelation  of  something  more  and  higher,— of  law,  of  process,— of  artistic
beauty,— of  architectural  wisdom.  It  is  not  the  power  alone,  but  the  very  mind  of  God,  that  is
shown  to  us.  The  one  would  have  been  a  creation  simply  in  space ;  God  has  seen  fit  to  reveal
to  us  a  creation  in  time,  as  well  as  in  space,  and  this  is  inseparable  from  the  ideas  of  succession,
series,  causation— in  a  word,  of  nature,  beginning  in  the  supernatural,  yet  having  its  law  given
to  it,  and  capable  of  yielding  obedience  to  that  law.


PART  V.

HOW  WAS  THE  CREATIVE  HISTOEY  REVEALED  ?

HOLINESS,  sublimity,  truthfulness,— these  are  the  impressions  left  upon  the  mind  of  the
thoughtful  reader  of  the  First  of  Genesis.  There  is  meant  by  this  its  subjective  truthfulness.
It  is  no  invention.  The  one  who  first  wrote  it  down,  or  first  spoke  it  to  human  ears,  had  a  per
fect  conscious  conviction  of  the  presence  to  his  mind  of  the  scenes  so  vividly  described, -whether
;iven  to  him  in  vision  or  otherwise,— and  a  firm  belief  in  a  great  objective  reality  represented
jy  them.  It  is  equally  evident,  too,  that  it  is  the  offspring  of  one  conceiving  mind.  It  never
,'rew  like  a  myth  or  legend.  It  is  one  total  conception,  perfect  and  consistent  in  all  its  parts.
t  bears  no  evidence  of  being  a  story  artificially  made  to  represent  an  idea,  or  a  system  of  ideas.
Jiere  is,  in  truth,  nothing  ideal  about  it.  It  presents  on  its  very  face  the  serious  impression  of
"act  believed,  and  given  forth  as  thus  believed,  however  the  original  representation  may  have


148                RTOCIALIKTRODUCTION^O   THE  FIRST   CHAPTER   OF  GENESIS.  _

>~^r^

time  ;  they  have  a  growth^  v,  ,   an  ro  gen  ^  ^.^  ^^.^  UluugU  bottr.

manner  they  have  recewed  the  rmjt  ,


manner     ey  ^  ^^  ^^^  !)n

ing  ^rDf  f  j°e'  ^na    ™  Id  mythoS  slrata.    T1.U  staads  alone  in  the  world  like
ots  of  ,,,        1    cnd,  '  5         =  .m


D  e    na  d  myto  sraa.

depots  of  ,,,5,        1    cnd,  '  5         =  ,    ica,  fomatio,,,.    It  has  nutl.mg


D  e

depots  o    ,,,5,         ^  ;  =         ,ato       ,    ica,  fomatio,,,.    It

the  pnmeval  gn.to  „    t  elm  «      ^  ^  .^^  ohddffi       Iaai«,,


or


8,1  this  sablime  imagery  transformed  and  deformed  ,  th.my  h^     ^»-    S^  ^^  ^

r.  horn-  1  1  »J  E  e!,     and  ho  .


Chaos  (the  jawntag  abySS)  «r.  horn-g  1  1


^tss^

carnations,  except  the  contmm.  go.ng  for  h  of
"


«a

,  is  inconsistent  with  every  notrnn  „    can  fo  ,,    o  th   tl          ,  ^


was


of  a  most  devout  and  reverent  sp.n  -


PART   V.— HOW   WAS   TIIE   CREATIVE   HISTORY   REVEALED?  149

presents  a  question  of  deepest  interest.  But  whence  came  it?  Not  simply,  who  first  wrote  it?
but  who  or  what  first  put  into  the  human  mind  the  wondrous  ideas  contained  in  that  early  writing
y-.xn  nsi  aiauft  nx  crnb^  XTJ  rHEX-a ,  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the
earth?"  To  ascribe  it  to  tradition  amounts  to  nothing.  It  is  only  going  back  upon  our  steps,  to
come  at  last  to  one  who  first  gave  it  as  a  whole;  for,  as  before  remarked,  there  is  no  appearance
of  growth  about  it.  No  knowledge  of  it  could  have  come  from  tradition.  Other  parts  of
Scripture  either  fall  within  historical  times,  or  they  narrate  events  whose  story  might  have  come
down  from  eye-witnesses.  This  could  have  had  no  witnesses,  and  could  appeal  to  none.  It
relates  to  things  transcending  a.ll  human  experience,  all  possible  human  knowledge.  The  very
assuming  to  narrate  is  a  claim  to  inspiration,  or  of  knowledge  believed  to  have  been  obtained  in
some  divine  or  preternatural  way.  As  something  thought  out  by  the  human  soul  alone,  even
in  the  highest  exercise  of  its  highest  genius,  it  could  have  commanded  no  respect.  It  would
immediately  have  been  met  by  the  challenge,  Job  xxxviii.  4:  "Where  wast  thou  when  God  laid
the  foundations  of  the  earth?  Knowest  thou  it  because  thou  wast  then  born,  or  because  the
number  of  thy  days  is  great  ? "

We-  are  driven  then  to  the  same  supposition  that  is  indulged  in  respect  to  prophecy.  If  that
is  vision  in  the  future,  this  is  vision  in  the  past.  It  was  an  impression  made  upon  the  soul,
whether  regarded  as  wholly  subjective,  or  as  connected  with  some  outward  vocal  causality.
Viewing  it  as  a  revelation,  there  comes  strongly  to  us  the  conviction  that  it  must  have  been
something  more  than  a  message  in  bare  words.  Without  the  vision  conceptions  which  they  call
up,  words  are  powerless,  and,  though  necessary  in  the  ordinary  transmission  to  other  minds,
would  have  been  an  inferior  medium  for  the  first  conveyance  of  the  ideas  or  images  to  the  first
conceiving  human  soul.  We  are  always  to  remember,  too,  that  the  image  or  conception  is  itself
a  language  representing  the  remoter  fact,  or  the  remoter  idea,  even  as  it  is  itself  represented  to
others  by  understood  words.  In  ordinary  historical  revelation,  words,  articulated  or  suggested,
may  be  first,  since  the  conceptions  linked  with  them  are  familiar  and  easily  follow ;  though  in
this  case  it  would  still  be  revelation,  still  entitled  to  the  name  inspiration,  even  if  the  higher
divine  author  employed  merely  the  truthful  memory  of  holy  truthful  men.  In  considering,  how
ever,  the  case  of  the  original  presentation  of  facts  utterly  unknown,  and  of  which  the  human
mind  had  previously  no  types  or  conceptions,  the  question  assumes  a  new  aspect.  It  comes  to  us
in  this  form:  Will  revealing  words,  merely,  call  up  the  most  vivid  picture  (for  in  cither  method
it  is  only  a  picture  that  the  mind  has),  or  will  revealing  pictures,  on  the  other  hand,  necessarily
suggest  the  best  words  as  the  only  medium  of  transmission  to  other  minds?  Will  word-painting
give  the  most  distinct  conceptions  of  this  terra  incognita,  or  will  vision-painting  call  out  the  best
language  wherewith  to  describe  it?  If  the  latter  view  seems  the  most  rational,  as  well  as  more
in  analogy  with  the  style  of  the  prophetic  Scriptures,  then  may  we  believe  that  creation  was
thus  presented  to  this  prophet  of  the  past,  this  SEER  of  the  unknown,  or  rather  of  the  utterly
unknowable,  ante-creative  history.  We  may  go  farther  than  this.  It  may  well  be  doubted
whether,  without  vision  in  the  first  place,  or  as  dependent  solely  on  naked  words,  it  would  not
have  given  the  dimmest  images  to  the  first  imaging  mind,  if  it  had  not,  rather,  failed  to  impart
any  conception.

Behind  this  picture,  or  this  vision  representation,  lay  the  ineffable  ideas ;  and,  therefore,  the
bare  facts  in  their  grand  outline,  or  the  bare  succession,  are  thus  vividly  limned,  as  best  repre
senting  what  words,  without  such  successive  scenes,  would  have  much  less  adequately  conveyed.
Or  we  may  suppose  it  presented  subjectively  to  both  senses.  There  were  vision  voices  as  well
as  vision  sights.  Certain  awful  words  were  heard,  and  the  callings  and  the  namings,  about
which  there  has  been  so  much  speculation,  and  which,  when  regarded  as  actual  parts  of  creation,
have  given  rise  to  so  much  difficulty,  were  as  subjectively  real  (that  is,  real  parts  of  the  vision).
as  the  gatherings  and  the  dividings.  They  were  heard  as  John  "heard  a  great  voice  out  of
heaven,"  or  as  Daniel  heard  "  the  speaking  between  the  banks  of  Ulai,"  or  as  Ezekiel  heard
"  the  noise  of  the  cherubic  wings,  like  the  noise  of  great  waters,  as  the  voice  of  speech,  the  voice
of  the  Almighty."  So  Balaam  "heard  the  words  of  God  and  saw  the  visions  of  El  Shaddai; "
ho  "  leJield  that  which  was  not  niyh,  and  saw  that  which  was  not  now.'11  Remote  time  and


130  SPECIAL


tllis  of  tho  srcate


lt  has  been  desc  i  P  tliemselvcs,  though  well  translated,  show  tho

wabholm,  a  void  and      unU^    ;   th  er  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^

Te    G    r,ptd   ^  u-^o  t  o  because  most  directly  suggested  by  the  inspired  vision.     The
^  n  ^    ^f  initial  contemplation  to  which  the  prophet  Jeremiah  is  carried  back  n
he  rvt   1  Picture,  where  he  sees  the  earth  returning  again  to  the  pnmeva    desolation:      I
beLTd  t  e     '       and  o  it  was  without  form  and  void,  ^  inn  ;  and  I  looked  to  the  Leavens,
'      i     IMit  "  Jercm  iv.  23.    This  is  the  beginning.   It  is  a  vision  of  darkness  resting  on
^^  ^  llr  ^something,  whether  sound  or  vision,  or  both  combined  that  gives

of  a  Snirit  hovering  over  the  waters,  or  breathing  upon  their  vast  surface,  or

"     •


enct  p    ,      »  ^  ^    *.  •.

nullity  voice  saying:  "Let  there  be  light."     Obedient  to  the  A\ord  the

7


,


,     ,

iv.  6)  out  of  the  darkness.     The  first  elemental  division  is  seen  taking  place.

^  S-,";:  voice6  U^^  it  good,  and  isheardgivingthe  names  ^  n^V,  W  .  fcj*-*S  1^,

,r-  ff  p  t  creative  contrast.     A  solemn  pause  succeeds.     One  creative  period,  one  great

xnd  t  in  goes  forth  the  Word.     And  now  a  sky,  a  heaven,  presents

^TrTT-l   -U    •  Sd  still      I    is  a  phenomenon  as  strange  as  it  is  beautiful  and  sublime.
TL  f  I     C  !  a±  of  iaters  abov/and  waters  below,  with  an  optical  iirma^nt,  like  tl,

PcvcUf'on  s-a  of  glass,  seeming  to  divide  them  from  each  other.  We  may  regard  it  a  a  phe-
:  01  i  ^>  cal,  representation  of  the  atmosphere  with  the  clouds  sailing  in  it,  and  the  rain
"  u  onded  in  the  upper  spaces,-a  matter  which  even  now  science  finds  it  d,  fhcu.lt


,o    ti  on     g,,M,  r.nd  wl.ich  has  little  or  nothing  corresponding  to  it  in  any

5  eefo    the  ™r  d     4,c  '''wateri  above  and  waters  below"  ma,  l.aveLeen  an  actud
,,1  ct,,.o  in  the  creative  process  thus  reveale,'.  hi  vision,  as  no  science  could  over
M™   ™cld     -an    °o  d  ,  avens,"  in  fact,  that  passed  a,vay  at  or  before  the  introduction  of
h    "nmv  tlvcns"  and  n«  firmament  of  the  fourth  day.   For  it  seems  clear  that  ,n  tie
tv          a  Sn    to  ,he  very  consistency  of  the  account  itself  fl*
,von,I  not  he  in  or

hy  such  a  conception,  let


,  wa        ahove


ersa
i&raKonwnufcium,  the  weighings  or  suspensions  of  the  cl   aas,    iiovv       ,  i  u  wlicn  ilc  TOakcth  small  the  dropB  of


aaswercd.


PART   V.— IIOVV   WAS   THE   CREATIVE   HISTORY   REVEALED?  151

exactly  to  the  language  of  tlie  text,  and,  it'  so,  the  possibility  of  our  earth  having  once  presented
a  similar  appearance  would  not  be  unworthy  the  attention  either  of  the  Biblical  student  or  the
man  of  science.

But  to  return  to  the  creative  scene;  at  this  stage  again  there  comes  in  the  imago  wcis. — •
"  And  God  called  the  firmament  heaven"  (ci^rzJ,  heights).  There  is  another  naming,  another
voice  of  benediction,  another  solemn  pause;  the  second  vision  closes,  and  thus  "there  is  an
evening  and  a  morning,  day  second."

And  now  a  third  command  is  heard,  like  the  voices  that  attest  the  opening  of  the  Revelation
seals,  and  a  new  earth  appears  emerging  from  the  waters.  It  should  be  remarked  that  there  is
no  time  here, — time,  we  mean,  as  estimated  or  measured  duration;  for  there  is  nothing  whereby
to  measure  it  outside  of  the  events  themselves.  There  is  no  fixed  index  of  movement,  whether
constant  or  changing,  or  of  any  constant  or  varying  rate  of  change.  It  is  time  only  as  succession,
or  rather  the  successions  are  themselves  the  times, — the  great  dividings,  the  solemn  pauses,  the
new  appearing?,  making  the  evenings  and  the  mornings  of  the  numbered  days.  It  is  "from
Olam  to  Olam"  (Ps.  xc.  2),  from  age  to  age.  The  unit  of  measurement  is  the  change  in  nnturo
produced  by  the  "Word,  and  the  number  and  order  of  these  changes  and  successions  is  the  great
matter  of  revelation.  "Not  how  long"  as  Delitzsch  well  says,  "but  how  many  times  God
created,"  is  the  essential  idea  intended  to  be  set  forth.  There  is  no  absolute  standard  either  of
time  or  space.  An  hour,  regarded  as  blank  duration,  has  no  more  reality  than  an  unrelated
inch  or  foot.  Since,  then,  an  outside  measured  time  is  one  of  the  tilings  created,  it  cannot  be  the
measure  of  creation  itself.

But  again  the  vision  changes,  and  lo,  a  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth.  The  old  ralcia,  has
passed  away,  and  a  new  firmament  appears,  with  its  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  They  r.ro  lights  in
the  heavens  (m-iixs).  So  the  SEER  calls  them, — lights  of  greater  and  of  lesser  splendor.  He
does  not  speak  of  them  as  globes,  or  solid  lod.ies,  according  to  the  ideas  derived  from  our  modern
astronomy,  of  which  ho  had  no  knowledge,  no  conception,  and,  if  we  may  trust  the  simplicity
and  silence  of  the  account,  no  revelation.  They  were  to  him  simply  lights  in  the  firmament,
and  nothing  more;  even  as  to  us,  with  all  our  science,  they  are  still  but  imaires  in  our  near
heavens,— optical  appearances  comparatively  close  by  us,  though  made  by  a  far-ofF  causality.
Such  a  statement  may  not  seem  easy  or  natural  to  some  minds  affected  by  certain  scientific  pre-
judgments ;  but  that  does  not  prevent  its  being  literal  fact.  The  sun  we  sec  is  simply  an  appear
ance.  These  heavenly  lights,  as  they  are  reflected  and  refracted  in  our  near  atmospherical  sky,
or  rakhi,  are  just  as  much  images  as  the  spectrum  that  is  artifically  cast  in  the  astronomer's  observ
atory.  Their  ruling  or  dominion,  as  mentioned  Gen.  i.  1C,  is  not,  primarily,  a  phys'cal  or  dy
namical  power  (though  this  may  be  included  in  the  language  when  science  discovers  it),  but  a
time-regulating,  and,  in  this  way,  a  life-regulating  dominion.  As  lights  t:>  this  earth,  the  only
point  of  view  in  which  they  are  earliest  regarded,  the  ajonic  date  of  their  appearance  is  all  that
is  given  in  this  creative  vision,  whilst  their  antecedent  materiality  in  time,  as  well  as  iheir  remote
causality  in  space,  are  left  to  the  inference  of  human  reason,  and  the  discoveries  of  human  science.
The  one  of  these  ideas,  namely,  that  the  material  origin  of  the  sun  and  stars  dates  from  tho
earliest  creative  period,  antecedent,  remotely  antecedent,  perhaps,  to  their  appearance  in  our
terrene  firmament,  is  commonly  received  without  difficulty,  and  seems  to  be  demanded  by  the
literal  consistency  of  the  account  itself.  It  has  never  been  maintained  that  the  matter  of  the
sun  was  created,  or  even  organized,  on  the  fourth  day.  This  being  so  held  in  respect  to  the
remote  time  origin  of  this  firmamental  light,  there  is  really  no  more  difficulty  in  regarding  in  a
similar  manner  that  distant  power,  or  entity,  in  space  with  which  the  phenomenon  is  connected.
Both  are  extra  visionem  ;  both  lay  equally  on  the  outside  in  this  account  of  the  fourth  day  hav
ing  relation  only  to  tho  phenomenal  changes  which  took  place  in  our  earth  or  its  near  surround
ing  atmospherical  heavens.  The  connection  between  this  light  in  the  celestial  mirror,  and  a  vast
body  95,000,000  miles  distant,  was  left  to  the  progress  in  knowledge  to  be  made  by  the  human
faculties  which  God  meant  should  be  exercised  in  such  discoveries.  We  see  in  this  a  reason,  it
may  be  reverently  said,  why  the  time  element,  especially  as  order  of  succession,  enters  so  much
more  into  tho  creative  account  than  any  revelation  in  space.  The  relative  distances  and  magni-


SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   FIRST   CHAPTER   OF   GENESIS.


tudes  of  the  worlds  Ho  more  within  the  range  of  human  knowledge  ;  the  ages  or  periods  of  the
kosmos  involving  as  they  do  the  supernatural,  are  almost  wholly  heyond  it.  «  By  faith  we  under-
sfind  that  the  worlds  (the  aZ«m  or  time  worlds)  were  framed  (put  in  order,  ^prl^aC)  by  the
Word  of  God  "  Ileb  si.  3.  Science  can  never  get  out  of  the  natural  as  a  fixed  course  of  things
once  established  and  no.  continuing,  of  which  it  may  he  said  -p  ^v  «  and  it  was  so,"  or  became
firm  She  can  never  attain  to  the  supernatural,  and  therefore  it  is  that  she  has  ever  had  more
to  do  with  the  space  than  with  the  time  process,  with  things  as  they  are,  than  as  they  came  1
be  The  ten  times  repeated  way-yomer  (and  God  said),  the  mighty  utterances  of  "Him  whose
outgoings  are  of  oh!,  from  the  days  of  eternity"  (Mia  v.  1)  the  six  great  ovo  utions  in  the
earth's  genesis,  no  science  could  ever  determine,  or  hope  to  determine  ;  although,  f  om  the
thl  tha  a,wet  wen,"  or  from  footprints  that  are  left  of  those  "outgoings,'  she  might  infer,
in  general,  tit  the  earth  had  a  vast  antiquity,  immeasurable  by  any  computations  drawn  from


n  we  miS  proceed  through  all  the  subsequent  pictorial  stages  in  the  supposed  vision
process  but  reverence  would  require  us  to  stop  with  what  is  sufficient  to  give  an  intimation  of
the  P  obahle  method  of  revealing.  It  closes  with  the  appearance  of  man,  the  divine  presence
"he  contemplation  of  the  completed  work,  and  the  solemn  benediction,  as  ^™^™Q
in-  to  the  superlative  in  the  utterance  :  "  all  good,"  XX*  n'J,  -  exceeding  good.  Ihus  th
Heavens  and  the  Earth  are  finished,  with  all  their  hosts,"  as  these  appeared  in  the  optical  firm-
*  i;  bounded  the  «'.  view,  as  it  does,  in  strictness  all  human  vision.  Sc.cnce  claims

to  l,n  d  beyond  it,-to  have  thrown  back  the  fiammaniia  wnia  m^/  and  to  have

:       e  far-off    righ        All  that  she  has  yet  discovered,  however,   is  relative  d.sfcuice
de    not  on,  dynamical  laws,  and  mathematical  ratios.     She  has  constructed  a  splendid
in  the  heavens     but  in  all  that  relates  to  life,  and  rationality,  and  spiritual  being
re  a    silent  as  of  old.     They  still  shut  us  in,-our  earth  and  near  surrounding  optical
Of  their  real  l^osts  we  know  no  more  than  God  has  seen  fit  to  reveal  to  us  m  other
Of    nytldng  above  man,  or  1  eyond  man,  we  have,  from  science,  no  greater  facil  ties  of
tion  than  belonged  to  David,  or  Daniel,  or  Pythagoras.    Number  motion,  space  relations,
d  a>  "e     serving  as  diagrams  for  the  ^position  of  mathematical  idc^-the*  are  all  we
n      ;  ^  JnVall  v    L  »      It  is  indeed  much,  scientifically,  but  it  adds  little  or   nothing
to  our  knuwS  of  "bsltial  being.      For  this,  in  all  beyond  our  earth,  we  are  as  much

'd       o    revelation,  or  on  the  imagination,  as  the  first  recipients  of  the  creative  vision.
1     tg  nerallv  admitted  that  the  language  u'sed  in  reference  to  the  fourth    ay  is        nom

or  les


nerav  a
but  a  careful  study,  we  think,  will  discover  that  this  feature  exists,  more  or  less,  t  l"

V^  it  a      he  more  easy  to  receive  the  vision  theory  of  its  insiration.    It  is  <  by  faith  in  the


and  to  the  sense  prim,  ll     having  to  the  later


•    r>        •    •         la  through  the  sense  and  to  tue  sense,  primarily,  «=

M^and  to  se^a? employed  by°it,  to  divide  a  priori,  or  to  ^°^^f^^  ™™
interior  causalities,  or  the  more  remotely  distant  powers  which  these  primarj  u

^  Whh  SrSL  c  however  of  this  old  narrator  we  have  little  to  do.     For  the  purposes  of
interpretation  all  tjiat  is  necessary  to  be  maintained  is  the  subjective  truthfulness  and  consist
of  the  picture!    It  was  not  a  theory,  not  a  fancy,  or  a  guess-much  less  a  designed i  forgery.
Such  sights  were  seen,  such  voices  were  heard,  by  some  one  in  the  early  time  and  he .has .most
faithfuny  and  graphically  narrated  them  to  us.     The  style  bears  the  strongest  testimony  to  this.
It  carries  the  internal  evidence  that  it  is  a  telling  from  the  eye,  whether  the  out,  aid  01  the
inward  eye,  rather  than  from  the  ear.     Calling  it  a  dream,  or  a  vision,  does  no   detract  from  i
significance  or  its  glory.     But  we  are  not  concerned  with  that  here      The  view  taken  of  the
probable  subjective  process  is  simply  in  aid  of  interpretation  which  is  nothing  ™re  nor  les
than  getting  at  the  true  conception  of  the  writer  from  the  language  employed,  whether  that


PART   V.— HOW   WAS   THE   CREATIVE  HISTORY  REVEALED?  153

language  was  the  effect  or  the  cause  of  such  conception.  The  absolute  truthfulness  of  the
account,  or  of  that  which  it  represents,  presents  another  question.  This  is  connected  with  the
absolute  verity  of  the  Holy  Scripture  in  general,  as  grounded  upon  its  whole  external  and
internal  evidence.

We  have  already  alluded  to  the  analogy  of  prophecy.  If  the  vision  theory  is  in  harmony
with  the  best  view  of  prophetical  inspiration,  as  sanctioned  by  so  many  passages  of  Scripture,  it
is  still  more  demanded  in  the  present  case  ;  since  the  future  is  not  so  sharply  divided  from  the
present,  as  the  present  and  the  future  both  from  the  ante-creative  past.  In  both  the  prophetic
and  the  creative  representation  words  may  form  a  part  of  the  vision,  as  res  gcsta,  whilst  the
^general  narrating  language  is  that  which  is  prompted  by  the  vision.  lu  such  case,  though  called
the  writer's  own  language,  it  is  none  the  less  the  language  of  revelation,  and  none  the  less  may
the  Scripture  that  records  it  be  said  to  be  verbally  inspired.  The  sights  seen,  the  voices  heard,
the  emotions  aroused,  are  just  those  adapted  to  bring  out  the  very  words  the  SEEK  actually  uses
and,  in  both  cases,  the  very  best  words  that  could  have  been  used  for  such  a  purpose.  Hence
we  may  truly  say  it  is  the  language  of  the  divine  inspirer  as  well  as  that  of  the  human  narrator.
The  description  being  given  from  the  bare  optical,  rather  than  from  any  reflexive  scientific  stand
point  more  or  less  advanced,  becomes,  on  this  very  account,  the  more  vivid  as  well  as  the  more
universal.  It  is  a  language  read  and  understood  by  all.  What  lies  behind  it  will  be  conceived
according  to  the  state  of  knowledge,  true  or  false.  "We  may  confess  the  inadequacy  of  such
language,  not  because  better  could  have  been  employed,  or  other  words  could  have  done  as  well,
but  because  the  best  words  which  the  inspired  mind  can  use,  or  the  uninspired  mind  receive
necessarily  fall  short  even  of  the  vividness  of  the  vision  reality,  and  still  farther  short  of  the
ineffable  truth  which  that  vision  represents.  Any  use  of  scientific  language,  whether  the  Ptol
emaic,  or  the  Newtonian,  or  that  of  a  thousand  years  hence,  would  be  still  remote  from  this
ineffable  truth,  whilst  it  would  be  a  seeming  endorsement  of  its  absolute  accuracy.  Indeed,  the
language  may  be  rightly  said  to  be  inspired,  though  no  words  at  all  are  used,  or  even  when  the
inspiration  itself  may  be  pure  vision,  or  even  pure  emotion  elevating  the  thoughts  and  concep
tions.  In  cither  case,  the  words  which  arc  the  result  are  God's  words,  the  last  bo.<;t  product  of
the  inspiring  power,  all  the  more  vivid  and  emotional  in  the  reader  from  the  very  fact  of  their
having  come  through  such  a  process  of  spiritual  chemistry  (as  we  may  call  it)  in  the  real  human
life  and  human  emotion  of  the  inspired  medium.  In  this  way  all  the  words  of  the  Holy  Scripture
are  inspired  words,— "  pure  words,  as  silver  tried,  purified  seven  times,"  Ps.  xii.  7.

Whatever  bo  the  human  faculty  employed  as  the  medium,  whether  it  be  the  understanding
elevated  and  purified  by  a  divine  emotion,  or  a  vivid  imaging  power  supernaturally  aroused  in
a  state  of  trance  or  ecstasis,  or  simply  a  holy  and  truthful  human  memory,  the  words  resulting
have  passed  through  a  refining  process  in  which  they  carry  with  them  the  divine  truth,  not  as  a
mere  mechanical  massage,  but  in  all  the  vividness  and  fulness  of  the  human  conception.  Thus
.;hey  are  divine  words,  although  at  the  same  time,  most  human.  We  may  therefore  study  them
tvith  confidence.  They  are  not  arbitrary,  and  open  to  disparaging  criticism,  except  as  to  their
extual  accuracy.  Human  as  the  language  of  the  Bible  is,  it  is  still  God's  medium,  and  we  can
lever  exhaust  its  meaning.  The  process  of  learning  from  it,  therefore,  must  be  the  reverse  of
hat  by  which  it  is  communicated.  It  is  a  going  back,  up  the  stream,  and  towards  the  fountain-
lead.  Through  the  words  of  the  inspired  writer  we  get  at  his  images,  from  these  we  ascend  to
as  thoughts  and  their  inspiring  emotions,  and  in  these,  again,  the  soul  draws  nigh  to  that  higher
ife  and  verity  of  which  the  inspired  conception  is  the  best  human  representative.

"Words  suggesting  images,  or  images  suggesting  words:  the  first  would  be  called  the
•bjective  method  (whether  such  words  were  miraculously  articulated  to  the  ear,  or  whispered
so  the  mind),  and  yet  it  is  not  easy  to  see  why  it  would  not  be,  to  a  certain  extent,  as  subjec-
jive  as  the  other,— since  in  both  cases,  the  imperfect  human  conception,  whether  of  words  or
lungs,  or  of  words  or  images,  must  make  a  necessary  part  of  the  revealing  process.  In  this
bjective  view  there  remains,  in  all  its  force,  the  great  difficulty  arising  from  those  passages  in
fhich  God  is  represented  as  speaking,  calling,  naming,  &c.  We  are  compelled  to  take  it  as  an
iternal  articulate  speaking,  in  the  Hebrew,  or  in  some  other  language,  or  else  to  hold  that  there


154  SPECIAL   INTRODUCTION   TO   TEE   FIRST   CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS.

is  in  the  account  a  mixture  of  the  figurative  and  the  literal  style.  In  the  subjective,  or  vision
view,  the  difficulty  vanishes ;  and  this  is  a  great  argument  in  its  favor.  In  vision,  one  part  is  as
real,  that  is,  as  much  seen  and  heard  by  the  SEER,  as  the  other.  A  great  power  dividing,  a  great
voice  speaking,  a  great  presence  surveying  the  effects  produced  and  pronouncing  it  good,  are  all
represented  to  his  ecstatic  con-ciou-ness,  and  he  relates  it  just  as  it  was  beheld  and  heard.  Thus,
too,  there  vanishes  all  that  difficulty  which  so  much  perplexes  Delitzsch  (ace  p.  80)  in  respect  to
tho  part:-  employed.  It  was  the  SEEU'S  own  language,  whether  the  Hebrew,  or

any  older  ton;/

If  it  be  said  thai  ;  •  .  h  or  Word,  as  thus  used,  denotes  something  more  than  mere  articulate
language,  it  may  readily  be  admitted.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  substance  of  the  distinction  made  by
Pareus  (Comment.  Cen.  p.  91)  and  many  others,  ancient  and  modern,  between  the  rcrfotm  c*sen-
tiale,  and  I '  nanidus  ex  ore  Dei  non  proccdcm.  It  is,  however,  something  more  real  than

a  comparison.  Nature  as  a  motion,  a  pulsation,  a  continued  throbbing  energy  in  time  and  space,
mav  well  he  calle  1  an  uttt  ;v/;<v,  and  the  primal  power  by  which  it  is  commenced  and  prolonged,
a  Vonl  '/  ' .  Without  any  figure,  it  is  an  articulating  voice  in  the  great  co-mical  medium,

even  a-  our  hum  :n  voice  sounds  through  the  prolonged  undulations  of  the  terrestrial  atmosphere.
It  may  1  e  c<  nc  'ivcd  as  spok-n,  and  at  the  same  time  as  continually  responding  to  the  primal
utterer,  thus  constituting  the  verlum  ess  ntiale  of  which  the  vision  voice  (imnyo  rocw,  Tleb.
Up  --x  as  uttered  in  human  language,*  may  be  regarded  as  the  representative.  It  is  like
the  (  :•  cycle,  of  which  the  phenomenal  solar  cycle  is  the  type.  If  such  a  mode  of

intcrpre'.:  <>d  for  the  one  case,  what  right  has  any  one  to  deny  its  iit:;e-  in  the  other?

Whatever  be  the  smaller  scale  of  representation,  there  must  he-  harmony  and  analogy  in  the
things  represented.  There  mu-t  not  bo  a  trans 'eliding  vastness  in  the  one  direction,  and  a
narrownt  all  proportion  in  the  other.  The  ineffable  ro.'cc,  the  ineffable  worl;  the  ineffable

n  .,',  demand  as  their  fitting  accompaniment  the  ineffable  evening  and  morr.ing,  making  the
ineffable  day.

Thn>  regarded,  Gen.  i.  is  an  apocalypse  of  the  great  past,  even  as  the  revelation  to  John  in
Patmos  is  an  apocalypse  of  the  great  future.  Had  the  latter  not  used  the  first  person  in  stating
what  he  saw  and  heard,  we  should  none  the  less  have  regarded  it  as  a  vision.  It  has  the  vision

*  Metaphors  in  other  writings  are  forornamenfsorfor  rhetorical  impression.  Such  language  in  Scripture  hasahighe
use.  It  is  t  o  express  ineffable  truths  (or  vivid  emotions  in  view  of  such  truths),  for  which  other  modes  of  speech  are  inade
quate.  "  Their  line  ha'.h  gone  out  to  the  ends  of  the  world,"  Ts.  xix.  5.  C;P_— the  LXX.  have  rendered  it  their  voice,
(^fluyyos)  their  sound,  whether  reading  cb'p  ,  or  re;:  irding  "p  here  as  equivalent  to  it  in  the  expression  of  prolonged  utter
ance.  Symmaehus,  foos  >  Vulgate,  sonus.  It  suggests  the  old  idea  set  f;,rth  in  the  Orphic  or  Pythagorean  myths  of  the
music  of'thc  spheres,  and  which  appears  in  the  Ilieronomian  or  Vulgate  Version  of  Job  xxxviii.  37,  conccnlum  cccli  (the
song  or  harmony  of  heaven),  where  b~l  is  taken  in  its  other  and  more  usual  sense  of  cithara  or  harp,  ip ,  in  Ps.  xix.  6,
may  be  also  rendered  a  measuring  line,  or  even  a  writing  (Linien  =  Schriflzuge),  according  to  Calvin  and  Cocceius  (set
I  Iii'ifem).  Thi.i  would  correspond  to  the  opening  language  of  the  Psalm,  f~EDE  C^ECJ , "  the  heavens  are  telling,"  which
nay  also  be  rendered  picturing,  describing  ("SO,  primary  sense,  scalpsit,  scripsil),  "and  the  firmament  dcclarelh  (T^~)
his  handy  u-nrl;,"  literally  the  work  of  his  fingers.  What  follows  is  in  exquisite  harmony  with  the  same  idea:  "Vay  unto
Da-/  (we  think  of  the  great  days)  uilcreth  speech  (pourcth  it  out),  and  night  unto  night  showeth  knowledge,"—  f^rl1? ,  primary
sense,  cjflai- it— whence  the  sense  pronunliavit,  fortasse  prnprie,  as  Gcscnius  says,  de  rebus  arcanis— that  is,  breathes  forth
knowledge,  whispers  knowledge,  (compare  "C'l  yr'CJ ,  Job  xxvi.  H),  and  hence  the  sense  of  the  cognate  Arabic


!o  reveal  mysteries.    It  is  a  transcending  or  ineffable  voice  :  "  No  speech— no  voice  (that  is,  no  audible  voicc)-and  yet  their
line  has  yonc  out  to  the.  ends  of  the  world."    It  vibrates  through  all  space.

Compare  al-o  Ilosea  ii.  °2,  where  there  are  the  same  thoughts  and  images.  Nature,  through  all  her  departments,  is
represented  as  likening  for  the  divine  voice,  and  responding  to  it,  whilst  God  is  represented  as  listening  to  its  petitions:
<«  I  ,.  ,t  t:,e  Lord,  I  will  hoar  the  heavens  (the  skies  or  clouds),  and  tho  heavens  shall  hear  the  earth,  and  the

earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil,  and  they  shall  hear  Jczrcel."  It  describes  the  ordinary  course  of  *"'
providence  as  one  continuous  chain  of  utterances  and  responses.  God  listens  to  the  heavens  petitioning  for  the  rain,  t
they  may  send  it  down  upon  the  petitioning  earth,  that  the  earth  may  transmit  its  influence  to  the  petitioning  corn  f
oil,  that  they,  in  turn,  may  supply  the  wants  of  Jezrcel.  So  the  Chaldoe  Targum,  with  Rashi  and  the  Jewish  commentators
generally  :  "  I  will  hear  and  command  the  heavens,"  &c.  It  is  not  a  breach  of  nature,  like  the  miracle  used  as  a  sign  OJ
attestation,  hut  the  divine  proceeding  in  the  general  providence  made  up  of  all  particular  providences.  It  is  the  constant
living  Word,  'O  Adyos  &v  «<u  eyepyrjy,  "  tho  quick  and  powerful  word,"  penetrating  all  the  recesses  of  nature,  yet  hrcaMBj
no  law,  passing  over  no  link.  It  is  all  law,  all  nature  still,  through  all  the  length  of  the  mighty  chain,  and  yet  tho  Won
of  Gocl,  as  distinct  and  sovereign  as  when  it  first  went  forth  in  creation.  Science  is  atheistical  until  she  acknowledges  thl
doctrine  of  the  Logos  in  nature,  not  as  a  metaphor  merely,  but  as  the  most  vital  and  most  important  of  all  physica
truths.


*


PART   V.— HOW   WAS  THE   CREATIVE   HISTORY   REVEALED?


155


style  in  its  mystic  numbers,  its  solemn  repetitions,  its  regular  succession  of  voices,  seals,  and
vials.  There  is  not  so  much  of  this  in  Genesis,  but  there  is  a  great  deal  that  reminds  us  of  it  in
the  regular  dividings  and  namings,  in  the  sublime  enunciations,  in  the  parallelism  of  day  and
night  successions  so  constantly  given  in  the  samo  language,  in  that  rhythmical  movement  which
ever  seems  more  or  less  an  accompaniment  of  the  ecstatic  condition,*  in  the  heraldic  announce
ment  of  an  established  order  (p-i?rn),  like  a  responsive  amen  succeeding  each  new  going
forth  of  the  Word,  and  in  the  solemn  benediction  at  eacli  close,  until  tho  great  finale,  where  it
is  all  declared  good,—"  very  good."  Another  resemblance  is  in  the  time  aspect.  In  Genesis  as
in  Revelation  there  is  the  same  impression  of  a  strange  chronology  that  cannot  be  measured  by
any  historical  or  scientific  scale  out  of  its  own  movement.  It  is  like  distance  in  a  picture.  It
is  there,  but  we  cannot  bring  it  either  into  miles  or  inches.  It  lias  succession;  height  appears
beyond  height,  but  there  is  no  estimating  the  valleys,  the  immense  valleys,  it  may  be,  that  lie
between.  In  view  of  all  this,  it  might  be  said,  on  the  other  hand,  that  had  the  author  of  Gen.  i.
used,  like  John,  the  first  person  directly,  it  would  have  made  little  or  no  difference  in  the  stylo
of  the  narrative,  or  in  the  pictorial  effect  produced  by  it.

This  analogy  between  the  opening  and  closing  portions  of  Scripture  may  be  carried  through
out.  As  the  scenic  or  vision  view  in  the  prophetic  picture  does  not  warrant  us  in  regarding  it
as  scene  merely,  or  do  away  with  the  idea  of  a  great  reality  lying  behind,  so  neither  does  such
a  vision  theory  of  the  creative  account  detract,  in  the  least,  from  a  like  reality  in  the  great  past,
and  of  which  such  vision  was  the  most  fitting  representative  to  our  limited  powers  of  conception
as  well  as  to  our  ever  imperfect  science  regarded  as  ever  falling  short  of  the  ultimate  facts  of
origin,  whether  called  creative  or  purely  physical.  We  may  suppose  it,  therefore,  chosen  on  this
very  account,  as  not  merely  the  best,  but  the  only  way  in  which  the  ineffable  facts  might  be
nade  shadowly  conceptual  to  the  human  soul.  Still,  the  fact,  whether  we  rightly  conceive  it
)r  not,  is  in  the  representation,  and  he  who  takes  the  two  as  in  all  respects  identical,  or  reduces
;hem  to  the  same  measurement,  has  the  essential  faith,  only  he  should  not  condemn  as  heretical
)r  unscriptural  the  one  who  preserves  the  same  ultimate  facts  but  interprets  t!;e  representation
)f  them  on  the  vaster  and  remoter  scale.

In  most  cases,  however,  it  is  not  difficult  to  separate  between  what  we  have  called  the  mode

>f  representation  and  the  ineffable  truth  (believed,  though  in  a  great  degree  unknown,)  that  lies

>ack  of  it.  We  read,  for  example,  in  Genesis,  that  God  "  formed  man  in  his  own  image."  Now,

ione  but  the  grossest  gnosticizing  heretics  have  regarded  this  as  a  plastic  formation  of  clay  into

n  outward  molded  likeness.     So  also  when  we  are  told  that  "  God  'breathed  into  man's  nostrils

be  breath  of  life,"  the  representation  is  most  clear  and  perfect;  we  have  a  distinct  image  of  a

ivine  mouth  breathing  into  the  as  yet  inanimate  human  nostril ;  there  is  something  very  lender

i  it,  denoting,  as  Lange  poetically  says,  the  Father  of  Spirits  awaking  man  to  existence  with  a

iss  of  love ;  but,  after  all,  the  mind  goes  back  of  the  representation  in  both  these  cases.     The

icre  language  is  transcended  even  by  the  mystery  of  the  human  physical  life  as  expressed  in  the

ae  instance,  much  more  so  by  that  of  the  rational  or  spiritual  life  as  set  forth  in  the  other.

ow  there  is  nothing  to  forbid— in  fact,  there  is  everything  to  require— a  similar  mode  of  intcr-

retation  when  it  is  said  "God  formed  man  from  the  earth,"  or  out  of  tho  dust  of  the  earth.

)he  image  is  similar  to  that  employed  in  the  other  cases,  and  we  may  suppose  that  the  SEER

;A«W,  even  as  the  reader  conceives,  a  plastic  formation,  a  mold,  shaped  but  inanimate,  beginning

•  move^  under  a  pneumatic  inspiration;  but  the  thoughtful  mini!,  again,  goes  back  to  something

jyond  it.     It  is  helped  by  this  picture,  but  it  does  not  rest  in  it.     It  finds  little  or  no  difficulty

taking  this  coming  "  from  the  earth,"  or  this  being  "  formed  from  the  earth,"  as  denoting  a

vine  process  in  nature,  resembling  the  other  processes  similarly  represented  in  this  wonderful

count  (see  Remarks,  p.  135  on  Ps.  cxxxix.  15).  It  is  a  mode  of  setting  forth  the  contrast  between

»1  and  body,  between  tho  physical  and  the  rational,  the  animal  and  the  pneumatical,— one  from

'e  divine  life  and  the  divine  spirit,  the  other  from  nature,— "  from  the  earth  earthy"  (oc  yfjs

*  See  this  exemplified  in  tho  Visions  of  Balaam,  Numb,  sziii.,  xxiv.,  and  in  the  prophetical  Scriptures  generally.    It
T  not  be  easy  to  explain,  but  it  is  a  fact  of  deep  significance,  that,  in  all  high  or  ecstatic  states  of  soul,  there  is  this  tend-
i  y  to  rhythmical  motion  and  utterance.


SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION   TO   THE  FIRST   CHAPTER   OF  GENES!


,  47)  even  as  the  plants  and  the  animals  came  originally  from  the  earth  and
.  xv.  4j,  e  en  a          i  h    fac


any  wonder  or  difficulty  that  ™V  «"»*  ^  fak,;  ..And  j  saw  them.n  cas,

,:  °f  t!'°,"urCt  "l"o  o"n  'f  I"*  "'Ina  out  of  .be  ground  C  od  formed  every  boast  of  tl,e  W.


narration,  it  would  seem  to  represent  a  second  creation  of  animals  for
somctldng  given  in  vision,  it  sets  itself  wholly  free  from  the  necessity  of  any  such  anfe
becomes  similar  to  the  trance  vision  of  the  annnals   as  seen  by  ^^     ^^
is  the  method  of  revealing  to  us  that  there  is  an  ineffable  my^rj  -  m  ^^  ^

led  into  it  by  the  divine  guidance,  or  that  ^superhuman  Jto^^S  cries  of  fte
as  the  ^i^Icont  naming  of  things  and  ideas  in  dl3t\nctl0^fl7fot^fec^evreen;lon  Of  language,  if
sense  from  which  some  would  derive  it.    Language  is
regarded  as  merely  human,  and  that  involves  a  paradox
therefore,  must  have  helped  man  in  his  first  nammgs  and


divine  or

ing  :•    Sue  h  »


v.-now  WAS  THE  CREATIVE  HISTORY  REVEALED?  lr>7

transcendent  facts  arc  sot  forth,  and  whether  there  is~that  in  the  very  thought  and  aspect  of  the
passage  which  favors  the  idea.  We  know  that  the  great  future  transition  from  the  present
world,  alb*  or  Olam,  to  the  ali,v  or  world  to  come,  is  thus  set  forth,  and  it  may  be  deemed  in
accordance  with  the  analogy  of  Scripture,  that  the  engines  or  great  beginnings  of  the  present
Olam,  as  it  proceeds  from  those  that  are  past  (dn6  TSV  alww,  Eph.  iii.  9 ;  Col.  i.  26 ;  1  Cor.  i  i.  7)
should  be  given  to  us  in  a  similar  apocalyptic  form.


GENESIS,


OR    THE


FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES


FIRST  PERIOD.

THE  Genesis  of  the  World  and  of  the  Primitive  Time  of  the  Human  Race,  as  the
Genesis  of  the  Primitive  Religion  until  the  Development  of  Heathendom,  and
of  its  Antithesis  in  the  Germinating  Patriarchalism.  Cn.  I. -XI.


FIRST    PART.

THE    GKVESIS    OF    THE    WORLD,   OF    THE  ANTITHESIS  OF  HEAVED  AND  EARTH,  AND
OF  THE  PRIMITIVE  MEN.    Cir.  I.  AND  II.

FIRST    SECTION.

Tlie  Heaven,  the  Earth,  and  Man.     TJie  Creation  and  the  World  in  an  Upward  Series  of  Physical  and

Generic  Development.     Universalistic.


CHAPTER  I.  -II.  8.

A.—  The  Antithesis  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Symbol  of  all  Religion.
IN  the  beginning  God  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth.

B.-The  Three  First  Creative  Days.  The  Great  Divisions  (by  means  of  Light,  Heat,  and  Chemical  Affinity)
or  the  Three  Living  Contrasts:  Light  and  Darkness  (or  the  Dark  Spherical  Material);  the  ^thcrial
Waters  (or  the  Vapor-Form)  and  the  Earthly  Waters  (or  the  Fluid  Precipitate)  ;  the  Water  Proper  and
the  Land.  The  nearest  Limit  of  these  Divisions  :  the  Vegetable  World  as  a  Symbolic  of  Commencin-
Life  analogous  to  the  Result  of  the  Three  Last  Creative  Days  in  the  Appearing  of  Man.

QG  ea/th  ™as  nwithout  form>  and  void  J  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep.
bpint  of  God  moved  [hovered,  brooded]  l  upon  the  face  of  the  waters      And  God

1^  be  liht)  alld  ther<3  WaS   HSht'      And  G°d   SaW  ^6  light  f  the  beauty  of  the


'

'


5  tP      u  f      T  ?°       31Jr'  •"*"««';  -a-a^-^idr.a.Dod];  and  God  divided
111  J¥S     l    ^.  ^  darknCSS  [made  a  division  between  the  Iuminou3  and  the  dark  element].      And  God

the  light  Day  and  the  darkness  he  called  Night  [source  of  day,  source  of^ight]       V-'


1GO  GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSF.S.

the  CVdlino1  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day  [i.  c.,  by  this  division  is  measured  one  divine  day_
G    or  day  of  God— one.  day  here  is  for  first  day].       And  God  said:    Let  there  be  a  firmament  [extension,

expansion]   in  the  midst   of  the  water?,  and  let  it  divide  the  waters   from  the  waters.

7  And  God  made  the  firmament,  and  divided  the  waters  which  were  under  the  firmament

8  from  the  waters  which  were  above  the  firmament;  and  it  was  so.2     And  God  called
Ihe   firmament  Heaven.     And   the   evening  and    the  morning  were  the   second  day.

9  And  God  said:   Let  the  waters  under  the  heaven  be  gathered  together  into  one  place,

10  and  let  the  drv  land  appear;  and  it  was  so.     And  God  called  the  dry  land  Earth,  and
•  the     eatlu'ring    together    [combining]    of    the    waters    [as  water  proper]    called    he    Seas;

11  and  God  saw  that  it  was  good   [second  pause  of  contemplation].     And  God  said:   Let  the
earth  bring  forth  grass  [grow  grass],  the  herb  yielding  seed,  and  the  fruit-tree  yielding

12  fruit  after  its  kind,  whose   seed  is  in  itself  upon  the  earth;  and  it  was  so.     And  the
earth  brought  forth  grass,  and  herb  yielding  seed  after  his  kind,  and  the  tree  yielding
fruit  whose  seed  was  in  itself  after  his  kind.     And  God  saw  that  it  was  good   [third

13  pause  of  contemplation].     And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  third  day.

C. — The  Three  Last  Creative  Days.  The  Three  Great  Combinings:  1.  The  Heavenly  Luminaries  and  the
Earth  p_Micrallv;  2.  the  Heavenly  Luminaries  and  Water  and  Air;  ".the  Heavenly  Luminaries  and
the  Earth-Soil  as  a  Frc-Conditioning  of  Individual  Formations.  Or  the  Three  Parallelisms  of  the
Thivo  First  Creative  Days.

1st  day.  The  Light ;  4th  day,  The  Luminaries  ;

2d  day,  The  Waters  under  and  above  the  Firma-  5th  day,  The  Fishes  in  the  Seas  and  the  Birds  of  the
ment;  Heavens;

3d  day,  The  Liberated   Earth-Soil,  and   the    Plants     Gth  day,  The  Land-Animals,  and  over  them  Man.
upon  it ;

14  And  God  said:   Let  there  be  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  henvcn,  to  divide  the
day  from  the  night;  and  let  them  be  for  signs,  and  for  seasons,  and  for  days,  and  for

15  years.     And  let  them  be  for  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven,  to  give  light  upon
1C   the  earth.      And  it  was  so.      And  God  made  two  great  lights ;   the  greater  light  to  rule

17  the  day,  and  the  lesser  light  to  rule  the  night;  he  made  the  stars  also.     And  God  set

18  them  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven,  to  give  light  upon  the  earth;  And  to  rule  over
trie  day,  and  over  the  night,  and  to  divide  the  light  from  the  darkness.     And  God  saw

19  that  it  was  good   [fourth  pause  of  contemplation].     And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were

20  the    fourth    day.      And    God    said :     Let  the    waters  bring    forth  abundantly    [Lange:
Let  the  waters  swarm]    the    moving    creature    that    hath    life,    and    fowl    that    may    fly

[Lange  and  English  nmrg.  rendering:    Let  fowl  fly]    above    the    earth   ill    the    Open  firmament  of

21  heaven.     And  God  created  great  whales,  and  every  living  creature  that  moveth,  which
the  waters  brought  forth  abundantly  after  their  kind,  and  every  winged  fowl  after  his

22  kind.      And  God  saw  that  it  was  good  [fifth  pause  of  contemplation].      And  God    blessed
them,  saying :   Be  fruitful  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  waters  in  the  seas ;  and  let  fowl

23  multiply    in    the    earth.     And    the    evening    and    the    morning    were    the    fifth    day.

24  And  God  said :  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  creature  after  his  kind,  cattle,  and

25  creeping  thing,  and  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind.     And  it  was  so.     And  God  madd
the  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind,  and  cattle  after  their  kind,  and  every  thing  that
creepeth  upon  the  earth  after  his  kind.     And  God  saw  that  it  was  good  [sixth  pause  of

contemplation].

D. — The  Limit,  Aim,  of  all  the  Creative  Days  (especially  of  the  three  last),  the  Antitype  of  the  Vegetable]
Creation  at  the  End  of  the  Third  Day :  which  Antitype  is  Man,  the  Likeness  of  God,  and  the  Sabbath,
in  which  God  rests  from  His  Work.

26  And  God  said:  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image  after8  our  likeness;  and  let  then:
have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  over  the
cattle  and  over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  th<

27  earth.     So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image;  in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him

28  male  and  female  created  he  them.     And  God  blessed  them,  and  God  said  unto  them


I


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


30
31


1G1


Be  fruitful  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it;   and  have  dominion
over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  livii><,-  -Jung  that

29  movcth  upon  the  earth.     And  God  said  :   Behold,  I  have  given  you  every  herb  bearing
seed  which  is  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,  and  every  tree  in  the  which  is  the  fruit
of  a  tree  yielding  seed;   to  you  shall  it  be  for  meat;   And  to  every  beast  of  the  earth
and  to  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every  thing  that  crcepeth  upon  the  earth    wherein
there  is  lite,  I  have  given  every  green  herb  for  meat.     And  it  was  so.     And  God  saw
every  thing  that  he  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good  [seventh  pause  of  contemplation]
And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  sixth  day.

CH.  II.  ],  2     Thus  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  finished  and  all  the  ho^t  of  th»m     And

on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his  work  which   he  had  made,  and  he  rested   on  the

3  seventh  day  from  all  h,s  work  which  he  had  made.     And  God  blessed  the  seventh  day

and  sanctified  it  ;  because  that  in  it  he  had  rested  [had  begun  to  rest]  from  all  his  work

Winch     [he  asj     God    created    and    made     [Lango:    um  es  ZU  machonj    English  mar?.  :    created  to
makcj.


d'  •**»***  though  he  afterward,  reject,  the  meta-


['  "\  er.  2. — Brooded  (FISH™^)

[»  Ver.  l.-And  it  was  so.    Lange  :  TJnd  es  ward  also,  rather  better  than  our  translation,  since  also  differs  from
as  denoting  more  of  reason  and  consequence.    Both,  however,  foil  of  the  full  force  of  the  Hebrew  13      This  to  be  surr
most  commonly  a  particle,  ita,  oim«,  etc.,  but  it  never  loses  the  other  or  adjective  sense  of  firmness  riaJtlness  soundn^-
(mteger),  as  more  allied  to  tho  primary  sense  of  the  verb  -pa  which  becomes  the  Arabic  verb  for  bein-     And  it  was  firm  •
be  word  was  accomplished;  the  firmament  stood  just  as  commanded.     It  was  the  be-innin- nf  i  n  -D

"  He  commanded  and  it  was,  he  spake  and  it  stood."    So  Maimonides  on  the  passage :  '"  Vii 1  vliy  doS  hel  dd*'

IwT.ll  -t-!3  T/?10^  ^T?  tlUt  "r3  t0  b°  S°  continually  al1  thc  ^*  of  ">e  worid  as  cohering  with  th'at  which
come:  alter  it."  It  takes  its  fixed  place  m  the  system.  So  also  the  verb  -,13  itself,  in  the  1'ilol  form,  i"  used  as  a  word
of  creation.  Sec  Dout.  xxxu.  G  :  -JH  =  -.I  r,a3  SOT,  He  made  thee  and  established  thee.-T  1  |

[3  Ver.  2G.-Langc  renders  here,  als  unscr  Gleichniss,  as  our  likeness,  and  in  a  sentence  in  brackets  denies  tho  correct-
ne,s  of  the  other  rendermg,  ^r  o«r /to,CM.     The  Hebrew  2  in  ^^3  may  give  either  shade  of  m.amn-     The
isrcucc  rnnv  sr1'"**"  r-i^^-*- .  «.  j ^  •«-  -         •«  .-         -  =  •


shown  by  the  use  of  tho  name  Jehovah  Elohim.


EXEGETICAL  AND  CRITICAL.

1.  See  on  the  Introduction  to  Genesis,  and  under
the  head  of  Literature,  the  catalogue  of  cosmological
works  that  belong  here.     Compare,  especially,  the
Literature  Catalogue  given  by  Knobel  and  Delitzsch

2.  The  passages  of  Scripture  that  have  a  special
connection:    Job;    Ps.  viii.,  xix.,  and  civ  •    Prov
vm. ;    Is.  xl. ;    John  i.  1;   Col.  i.  1C:    Ileb  i   "•   xi'
3;  Rev.  xxi.  1.

3.  This  account  of  the  world's  creation  evidently
torus  an  ascending  line,   a   series   of  generations
whose  highest  point  and  utmost  limit  is  reached  in
man.    The  six  days'  works  arrange  themselves  in
orderly  contrast ;  and  in  correspondence  to  this  arc
the  sections  as  they  have  been  distinguished  by  us  •
a.  The  creation  of  heaven  and  earth  in  general  and
which  may  also  be  regarded  as  the  first  constituting

t  the  symbolical  opposition  of  the  two ;  b.  the  three
Brst  creative  days,  or  the  three  great  divisions  which
xmstitute  the  great  elementary  oppositions  or  polari-
les  of  the  world,  and  which  are  the  conditioning  of
Jl  creature-life:  1.  The  element  of  light  and  "the
ark  shadow-casting  masses,  or  the  concrete  dark-
ess,  and  which  we  must  not  confound  with  the  eve-
ing  and  the  morning;  2.  the  gaseous  form  of  the
-ther,  especially  of  the  atmosphere,  and  the  fluid
mn  of  the  earth-sphere;  3.  the  opposition  between
11


the  water  and  the  firm  land.  In  respect  to  this  u
must  be  observed  that  the  water*,  of  ver.  2,  are  a
different  thing  from  the  waters  of  vcrs.  0  and  9,
since  it  still  encloses  the  light  and  the  matter  of  the
earth.  Moreover,  "  the  waters  "  of  ver.  G  is  not  yet
properly  water ;  since  it  encloses  still  the  earth  ma
terial.  The  first  mention  of  elementary  water  in  the
proper  sense,  is  at  ver.  9.  c.  The  three  last  creative
days,  wherein  the  above  parallel  is  to  be  observed ;
d.  the  limit  or  aim  of  creation — man — the  sabbath
of  God.

4.  Yers.  1  and  2,  the  ground-laying  for  the  crea
tion  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth.     Considered  cos-

mologically  and  geologically. — In  the  beginning.

The  construction  maintained  by  Bunsen  and  others
(Raschi,  Ewald,  Abeu  Ezra)  is  as  follows:  In  the
beginning  when  God  created  heaven  and  earth  and
when  the  earth  was  waste  and  desolate,  and  darkness
was  over  the  primeval  flood,  and  the  breath  of  God
moved  upon  the  waters,  then  God  said,  Let  there  bo
light,  and  there  was  light.  This  construction  is,  in
the  first  place,  opposed  throughout  to  the  language
of  Genesis,  as  in  its  brief  yet  grand  declarations  it
proceeds  from  one  concluded  sentence  to  another.
Secondly,  it  contradicts  the  context,  in  which  the
creation  of  light  is  a  significant,  yet  still  an  isolated,
moment.  If  we  were  to  follow  Bunsen,  it  would  be
the  introduction  of  the  Persian  light-religion  rather
than  the  religion  of  the  Old  Testament.  And,  final-


GENESIS,  OR  TUB  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


iv,  in  the  third  place,  it  obliterates  that  distinguish.

S2  ..round-idea  of  the  theocratic  monotheism  with
which  in  the  very  start,  the  word  ot  revelation  con
fronts' all  pagan  dualism -in  other  words  the  truth,
regard  to  the  manner  of  creation,  God  is  the
i-iTlity  of  heaven  and  earth  in  an  absolute
suuac.  The  view  of  Aben  Ezra  that  rrisna  is  ever
In  the  construct  state,  and  that  it  means  here  m
Se  beginning  of  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the
earth  '"etc.,  is  contradicted  by  the  occurrence  of  the
1  •  state  Deut.  xxxm.  21. —


that
ole

<ense.
"


lous  in  so  far  that  the  former  would  mean  a  creating
in  respect  to  initial  form,  the  latter  in  respect  to  noy-
cltv  of  production.  (On  the  kindred  expressions  m
the  Zendavesta,  see  Delitzsch.)  It  is  to  be  noted  how
-,2  differs  from  niSS  and  m&  (<*.  »•  -  alld  vcn


word    in    the


Tlic   substantive


without  :the  article,  'it  is  true,  tins  cannot  be  ren
dered  i-.i  the  beginning,  taken  absolutely,  so  that  tin
beginning  should  have  a  significance,  or  an  existence
for  it-u-lf  1'  woul  1  be,  moreover,  a  tautology  to  saj

(,f  thin^  when   God   created   them,


,

That  in  this  creating  there  is  not  meant,  at  all,  any
dcmiurgical  forming  out  of  pre-existing  material,
appears  from  the  fact  that  the  kind  oi  material  as
something  then  or  just  created,  is  strongly  signified
in  the  first  condition  of  the  earth  ver.  2  and  in  ,.io
creation  of  light.  This  shows  itself,  m  like  ma-iner,
in  the  general  unconditioned  declaration  that  God  is
the  creative  author,  or  original,  of  heaven  and  earth.—
Flohim,  see  the  Divine  Names  in  the  Introduction.—
_'  ----  :^  \ccording  to  the  Arabic  it  would  denote
the"  antithesis  of  the  High  (or  the  heigh.)  to  the
Lowcr-that  is,  the  earth.  The  plural  form  is  s-gmfi

i     _        ____  i    4.1,^  i-.n.mtv  t\\    th*


^s^r&™«s^!'£?  s'jrfSthTrrrl!'

orclSwe  must   take  bercshith  mystically:  in  prin-     upper  spaces.*      fliis  appcais  £
cinio,  that  is,  in  filio,  as  Uasil,  Ambrose  and  others
face  Leon   Schmid,  Explanation  of  the  Holy  Scrip-
;urcs    „   4)    which   is   not   allowable,  although   it   is
true  thai  the  New  Testament  doctrine  advances  at
once  to  the  determination  that  God  created  all  things
through   the  bon  (John  i.  3,  11  ;    Heb.i.2;    con.p.
I>s    xxxiil.  0).     U   is  not  easy  to  take  the  word  ad
verbially  :  orkrinally,  or  in  the  first  place  (Knobel) ;
for   the  immediately   following  enumeration   ot   the
creative  days  shows  that  the  author  would  have  tune
lH-'in  with  "the  creation  of  the  world.     According  to
IMit/.<eh  the  author  does  not  mean  "  to  expres
doctrinal  proposition  that  the  world  had  its  beginning
in  time,  and  is  not  eternal,  but  only  that  the  creation
of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  wa  ning  of

•ill   history."     This    interpretation    seems    arbitrary.
Bercshith  relates  especially  to  time,  or  to  the  old,  t.;
first    time   (Is.  xlvi.  10;    Job  Xlii.  12).       It   may   b
further  sail  that  S  can  mean  v,th  or  through.^
therefor.',  the  most  obvious  way  to  interpret  it:   in  a
beginning  and  that,  too,  the  first,  or  the  ^ginning
of  time   God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth  (with
the  time  the  space;  the  latter  denoted   through  the
antitheses   of  heaven   and   earth).     From   tha     firs
beginning  must    be  distinguished   the  six  new  begin-
ninWof  the  six  days'  works ;  for  the  creating  goes
on  through  the  M  days.     In  a  Beginning  ot   time-
thcrefor.'s  that  lies  back  of  the  s.x  days'  works,  mu,t
a    first   foundation-plan  of  the  world   have   been
made  along  with  the  creation  of  the  heaven  and  the
u  iV  in   their  opposition.     The  first  verse  is    nere-
forc  not  a  superscription  for  the  represei ita   o     that
follows,  but  the  completed  ouranology  despatched  in
,,A,  general  declaration,  xlthough  the  cosmical  gene
ration,  which  is  describe*  ver.  3  and  ver.  14,  is  agai.
enoted  along  with  it.     That  the  sun,  moon,  and
ars  are  ,, ejected  for  the  earth  on  the  fourth  day
is  an  indication  that  God'r,  creating  still  goes  on  in  the
heavens,  even  as  the  creating  of  the  periods  ot  devel


...  variety  of  tht
more  in  the  ex-


(Uie  suii  uun-io   mivAv-.y  . - —  ,

from  the  world  or  sky  l-olow  the  earth).    Comp


it'sform  in  all  the  other  Ehemi'u. •

:c  «f  the  n'  as  it  appears  in  the  root
/,    l,iuJ,.


ea,

opment  in  the  earth,  after  its  first  condition  as  waste
Jid  desolate,  when  it  went  forth  from  the  hand  ot
(iod  as  a  spherical  form  without  any  distinct  mwari
configuration.— sna  ,  in  Piel  to  cut,  hew,  form ;  bu
hi  Kal  it  is  usually  employed  of  divine  production
new,  or  not  previously  existing  in  the  "sphere  o
nature  or  history  (Ex.  xsxiv.  10;  Is  urn ,.  xvi.  30  ar
frequently  in  the  Prophets:),  or  of  spirit  (1  s.  u. ,  1-,  an
the  frequent  KT^V  in  the  N.  T.) ;  but  never  deuotin
human  productions,  and  never  used  with  the  accus
live  of  the  material."  Delitzsch.  And  thus  th
concepiioa  of  creating  »  'iin  to  that  of  the  miraCU


Since  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  lan^age.


na  \ i- rv  curly  «*  —  -7  --  f

the  ralda  itself  was  merely  an  optical


nYoCrTofC  topography  and  Bccnery,  whilst  upor L  Uic  HebrtJ


the  unseen.


tlie    UJIHGUU.!        a-'iviii     i  D  *  -

JS-ST,  SSSPfW  $&£  £iX  n

S'rS'^-pr^-f^^

hi-h  (n-rb    TraSH),  who  stoopeta  so  low  (V  *~,*M
even  to  looVdown  into  these  lo«r  earth  ^^(^Q

C'l'2>i.:2)    a3  though  immeaseiy  remote
superlative  a  height.    The  very  an  "


:ebr<*


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


pression,  the  heaven  of  heavens  (Deut.  x.  14,  ;md  Ps.
Ixviii.  34).

5.  Vers.    2-5.      Preparation   of    the   geologico-
eosinological  description  of  the  days'  works.     l'Ji

mind,  until  there  camo  out  of  it  a  number  of  other  words
lenotiiig  different  supposed  departments  of  the  great  spaces
above.  Still  later  the  Jewish  Rabbins  got  from  these  their
notion  of  the  Gilgallim,  or  seven  heavens  (regarded  as
wheels,  Ezek.  i.  16,  or  spheres),  and  to  which  they  give
distinct  names  having,  most  of  them,  some  philological  and
conceptual  ground  in  the  old  scriptures.  They  are  thus
reckoned  by  them  :  "JO,  tl^T,  L^pntt;,  "np"l,  ""^",
ni— "1",  "•-"-,  Vilon,  Rakia,  Shehakim,  Zcbtil,  Maon,
Makon,  Araboth.  The  first  of  these  is  the  only  one  not
found  in  the  Bible.  It  is  a  Rabbinical  word  from,  the  I/atin
velum.  It  is  used  for  the  very  lowest  heavens,  or  the  sup
posed  sphere  below  the  rakia.  It  is  the  veil,  or  sky  of  clouds
which  intercepts  the  light  but  permits  the  heat  to  pass
through,  and  in  this  sense  Jarchi  alludes  to  it  in  his  inter
pretation  of  Ps.  xix.  7  :  "  there  is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat
thereof."  So  also  Rabbi  Jehoshuah  says,  lierach  58, 1 :  "  the
"j"?nT  is  that  space  or  sphere  through  which,  when  broken
and  rolled  away,  there  appears  the  light  of  the  open  expanse."
All  the  rest  of  these  names  belong  to  the  old  Hebrew,  and
arc  found  in  the  Old  Testamc_nt  Scriptures  in  such  connec
tions  as  to  justify  the  Rabbins  in  regarding  them  as  denoting
different  regions,  to  say  the  least,  in  the  upper  spaces  or
heavens.  See  Ps.  Ivii.  11 ;  sxxvi.  G ;  Job  xxxviii.  37  ;  xxxvii.
18;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  7  ;  Ilab.  iii.  11;  Ps.  xxxiii.  13,  1 1 ;  Isaiah
Iviii.  13;  Ps.  Ixviii.  6;  Deut.  xxvi.  15;  2  Chron.  xxx.  27  ;
Ps.  xc.  1 ;  Isaiah  Ixiii.  15.  The  word  ri"iL~i3J  ,  Ps.  Ixviii.  5,
is  rendered  heavens  in  our  version :  To  Him  who  ridcth  upon
Arabolh  in  his  name  Jah,  Jehovah;  ride'h  upon  the  highest
or  outer  heaven,  according  to  the  Jewish  scale.  Almost  all
the  modern  commentators  give  it  a  different  sense  here,  and
with  apparently  fair  reasons.  Our  English  translation,
however,  is  countenanced  by  the  old  versions,  besides  being
fully  sustained  by  the  traditional  rendering  of  all  the  Jewish
commentators  and  translators,  ancient  and'modcm.  Accord
ing  to  them,  it  is  the  highest  sphere  corresponding  to  the
8fSefj.fi.fvri  oi?  the  Greeks,  or  the  fixed  sphere,  where  all  is
immovable,  whilst  everything  below  is  undergoing  change.
It  is  where  God  specially  dwells,  13  "~'^,  inhabiting  eter
nity,  sedans  in  perpetuum,  Is.  Ivii.  15.  Hence  they  render
it,  not  riding,  though  that  would  give  a  most  sublime  imnge
if  we  regarded  this  great  sphere  as  rolling,  but  silling,  like
one  throned,  and  that  corresponds  well  to  the  primary  sense
°1'  -2 "I  in  all  the  Shcmitic  tongues,  which  is  not  motion,  a
meaning  which  it  never  has,  unless  demanded  by  something
else  in  the  contest,  but  super-position.  Comp.  with  Is.  si.  22,
Vv^  a!|rr^?  -'4'^!)  "He  that  sittcth  upon  theorbof
the  earth,"  though  so  high  that  "the  inhabitants  thereof
are  as  grasshoppers."  The  other  words  are  also  used  to
denote  the  divine  throne  or  the  divine  dwelling.  This  Rab
binical  astronomy  may  be  said  to  have  its  germ  in  the
Scriptures,  though  its  expansion  and  arrangement  are  to  be
ascribed  to  the  later  imagination.  It  was  the  natural  out
growth  of  that  mode  of  thinking  and  conceiving  that  first
gave  rise  to  the  plural  C^TSCJ .  Comp.  also  the  word  HlbfO  ,
2  Kings  xxiii.  5,  as  used  for  the  heavenly  spheres  or  houses
(from  bT3  with  its  Arabic  sense  of  dwelling),  and  PiTlTE
Mazzaroth  (which  is  the  same  word  etymologically),  Job
XKxviii.  32.  See  also  the  Arabian  tradition  of  the  seven
heavens  as  given  in  the  Koran,  Surat  xvii.  4G ;  more  fully,
Surat  xli.  11 ;  also  xxiii.  17,  with  Alzamakshari's  comment
on  the  upper  stories  or  gradations  of  the  heavens.  These
Arabian  traditions  have  every  appearance  of  being  ancient,
and  of  having  aided  the  Rabbinical  scheme,  rather  than  of
having  been  derived  from  it.  The  Shemitic  languages  are
certainly  peculiar  in  these  plural  words  for  heaven.  The


zon,  or  the  horizon  above.  The  Latin  ccalum  is  simply  con
cavity  (TO  KOI\OV)  ;  so  is  the  Saxon  heaven  (heave  arch).  In
the  Hebrew,  the  natural  image  is  height,  and  this  reduplicated
and  earned  upward  by  the  plural  form.  In  this  respect  the
Ittebrew  words  for  the  great  spaces  are  like  the  great  time
Dlurahties  to  which  we  have  referred  in  the  Introduction  to
:hc  First  Chapter  of  Genesis.  The  heavens  and  heavens  of
leavens,  the  ni£tt)  and  fW  Tea  ,  are  like  the  CblS
md  the  Ci^bs  ,  the  olam,  and  olam  of  olams,  so  frequent
n  the  Old  Testament,  yet  so  obscured  in  the  translations.
Luere  is  another  Shemitic  plural  equally  suggestive,  and


Creative  Day. — Hfihj  snh.  The  earth  was.  This
is  spoken  of  its  unarranged  original  or  fundamental
state,  or  of  heaven  and  earth  in  general.  Thohu
Vabohu,  allitcratives  and  at  the  same  time  rhymes,
or  like  sounding;  similar  alliteratives  occurring  thus
in  all  the  Pentateuch  as  signs  of  very  old  and  popu
lar  forms  of  expression  (Gen.  iv.  12;  Exod.  xxiii.  1
5;  Numb.  v.  18;  Deut.  ii.  15).  We  find  them  alsc
iu  Isaiah  and  elsewhere  as  characteristic  features  of  :\
poetical,  artistic,  keen,  and  soaring  spirit.  They
are  at  the  same  time  pictorial  and  significant  of  tho
earth's  condition.  For,  according  to  Ilupfeld  and
Delitzsch,  nnn  passes  over  from  the  primitive  sense
of  roaring  to  that  of  desolatencss  and  confusion.
The  last  becomes  the  common  sense,  or  that  which
characterizes  the  natural  waste  (Deut.  xxxii.  10)  as
a  positive  desolation,  as,  for  example,  of  a  city  (Is.
xxxiv.  11).  It  is  through  the  conception  of  voidness,
nothingness,  that  Thohu  and  Bohu  are  connected.
Delitzsch  regards  the  latter  word  as  related  to  crc ,
which  means  to  be  brutal.  Both  seem  doubtful,  but
the  more  usual  reference  to  nCC  in  the  sense  of  void
or  emptiness  is  to  be  preferred.  We  have  aimed  at
giving  the  rhyming  or  similarity  of  the  sounds  in  our
translation  (German :  oden-wiist  and  wiisten-od).
The  desert  is  waste,  that  is,  a  confused  mass  without
order ;  the  waste  is  desert,  that  is,  void,  without  dis
tinction  of  object.  The  first  word  denotes  rather  the
lack  of  form,  the  second  the  lack  of  content  in  the
earliest  condition  of  the  earth.  It  might,  therefore,
be  translated  form-less,  matter-less.  "Rudis  indi-
gestaque  moles,  in  a  word,  a  chaos,"  pays  Delitzsch.
It  would  be  odd  if  in  this  the  biblical  view  should  so
cleanly  coincide  with  the  mythological.  Chaos  de
notes  the  void  space  (as  in  a  similar  manner  the  old
Northern  Ginnun-gagap,  gaping  of  yawnings,  the
gaping  abyss,  which  also  implies  present  existing
material),  and  in  the  next  place  the  rude  unorganized
mass  of  the  world-material.  There  is,  however,  al
ready  here  the  world-form,  heaven  and  earth,  and
along  with  this  a  universal  heaven-and-earth-form  is
presupposed.  It  is  not  said  that  in  the  beginning
the  condition  of  the  heavens  was  thohu  and  bohu, —
at  least  of  the  heavens  of  the  earth-world,  as  De
litzsch  maintains ;  at  all  events,  the  earth  goes  neither
out  of  chaos,  nor  out  of  "  the  same  chaos  "  as  the
heavens.  It  is  clean  against  the  text  to  say  that  the
chaos,  as  something  that  is  primarily  the  earth,  cm-
braces,  at  the  same  time,  the  heaven  that  exists  with
and  for  the  earth.  For  it  is  very  clear  that  the  lan
guage  relates  to  the  original  condition  of  the  earth,
although  the  genesis  of  the  earth  may  serve,  by  way
of  analogy,  for  the  genesis  of  the  universe.  "CJHV
the  first  condition  of  the  earth  was  finri  (from  Gin ,
to  roar,  be  in  commotion),  wave,  storm-flood,  ocean,
abyss.  The  first  state  of  the  earth  was  itself  the
Thchom,  and  over  this  roaring -flood  lay  the  darkness
spread  abroad.  It  is  wholly  anticipatory  when  we
say  that  "  this  undulating  mass  of  waters  was  not
the  earth  itself  in  the  condition  of  thohu  and  bohu,
but  that  it  enclosed  it ;  for  on  the  third  day  the  firm

which  is  not  found  in  other  families  of  languages.  It  is  tlrf
word  for  life  (D^TI  ?  lives),  denoting  a  plurality  in  this  idwt
as  well  as  in  the  words  for  heaven  and  eternity.  Instead
of  being  despatched  as  a  mere  usus  loqiiandi,  this,  and  other
peculiarities  of  the  earliest  tongues  are  well  worthy  our
deepest  attention.  The  plurality  of  life,  of  the  great  spaces,
and  the  great  times,  seem  all  to  have  come  from  a  way  of
viewing  the  works  of  God  which  has  no  parallel  in  the  rep«
resentations  of  other  human  languages.— T.  L.J


1G4


OH   THE   FIRST   BOOK   Oi<'   MOSES.


'•uid  (V-K)  "-ocs  forth  from  the  waters."     Delitzsch.
Further 'on,  I's.  civ.  0  U  cited  to  show  that  original-
Iv   water  proper  surrounded   the   lirm   earth-kernel,
•>nd  Job  xxxviii  8  according  to  which  the  sea  breaks
forth  out  of  the  mother's  womb  (the  earth)— poetical
representations  that  are  true  enough,  if  one  docs  not
take  them  according  to  thc  letter;    m  which  case
thev  are  in  direct  contradiction  to  each  other.     Jhc
,,„<«-,,  of  ver.   2,  is   quite  another  thing  than  the
water  proper  of  the  third  creative  day;  it  is  the  fluid
(o-  caseous)  form  of  the  earth  itsc-lt  m  its  first  condi
tion      2  Pot.  iii.  *  i*  «ot  opposed  to  this ;  for  as  the
wUer  takes  form,  the  earth  breaks  out  of  the  water,
just  as  the  water  comes  forth  from  the  earth  in  con
sequence  of  the  creative  division.     Ihe  darkness  is
just  the  absence  of  the  phenomenal,  or  the  absence
of  light  Cor  thc  vision  view)  in  the  condition  ot  the
earth    itself,— in   other   words,    iiiyht.— n^l ,  But
the  sniHt  of  God  hovered  over  (Ang.,  moved
,,port\      The  breath  .if  man,  the  wind  of  the  earth,
a;i(1  ,  pccially  the  spirit  of  God,  are  sym-

,,..,!;,...  .     The  breath  is  the  life-unity  and

life-motion  of  the  physical  creature,  the  wind  is  the
U11it3    .  itiou  of  the   earth,  the  spint  is  the

lotion  of  the  life  proper  t»>  \\  i  i  :h  n
;  the  s].irit  of  <:<>.!  is  the  unity  and  life-mo-
ivc  divine  activity.     It  is  not  a  wind
,  :;  i,,,  i   to  which  the  language  here  primarily  relates
,,i,    fcJaadia,    I!e:der,    and    others),    but    the
spirit    ..f  God   truly  (wherefore   the  word  m,  IV-
liizsch;    coinp.  L's.  xxxiii.  C,).      From  this  place  on
ward,  and   throughout  th.c  whole  Scripture,  the  spirit
,,-    God    is  the   single  foimutive  principle    evermore
iting   itself  with  personal  attributes   in   all   the
-  creative  constitutions,  whether  of  the    earth,
of  nature,  of  thc  theocracy,  of  the  Tabernacle,  of  the
';,  of  the  new  life,  or  of  the  new  man.      Ihe
Grecian   analo-ue  is   that  of  Eros  (or  Love)  in   its
reciprocal  action  with  the  Chaos,  and  to  this  purpose
have   the  later  Targums  explained  it  :  (he  spirit  <>t
l,i;:     It   was  -Srr-2  (hovering)    over   the  waters.
The  conception  of 'brooding  cannot  be  obtained  out
of  Dent,  xxxii.  11  (Delitzsch),  for  the  eagle  does  not
brood  ovi  r  the  living  voting  but  wakes  them,  draws
out  (educates),  makes  them  lively.*  The  mytho
logical  world-eu'g  of  the  Tertians  Las   no  place  here
,  we  adopt  any  view  of  this  formative  energy
of  th.c  spirit  of  God  (which  may  have  worked  upoi

*  [Still  th.c  collection  of  brooding,  cherishing  (fovcns),  i
fundamental  in  the  word  rm  .  Its  primary  sense  is  a  vi
brating,  throbbing  motion,  most  emblematic  of  the  begin
Sine  of  life-especially  as  traced  in  thc  egg-form— trio  n
fccginning  of  heat  and  pulsation.  Its  primary  significanc
is  onomatopical-rahap,  to  flutter  (regular  pulsatile  mo
tion).  Hence  it  becomes  very  early  one  of  the  verbs  of  lov
h-iv,  being  closely  allied,  both  in  sound  and  sense,  to  th
,  A-  -r.-,  .  In  Syriac  it  is  thc  common  word  for  loving
v.-armi.u,  cherishing.  In  the  AiaUc  the  middle  guttun

has  softened  down  to  aleph,  and  we  have  oty  dcnotin

intense  an<l  cherishing  love.    No  word  could  have  been  be
tcr  adapted  to  the  idea,  intended  in  this  place,  of  an  mwar
life-giving  power,  rather  than  a  mere  mechanical  outwai
motion,   such  as  is  given  by  the  translation   "blew
"moved  upon."    Nowhere  else  in  all  thc  usage  of  the  H
brew  or  Syriac  is  qm  ever  employed  in  the  sense  of  blow
inn     Tho  Tiel  form  here  makes  thc  inward  sense  of  thro
inir  the  more  intensive.     We  see  no  harm  to  the  Scriptur
from  the  supposition  that  this  idea  of  thc  cherishing  spi
was  the  ori  4  of  the  fable  of  Kros,  or  of  the  mythologica
irorld-egg,   whether  rc-ardod  as  Persian  or  Greek
Aristophanes,  Aves,  691.— T.  L.]


the  unorganized  mass  through  the  medium  of  a  great
wind  of  God)  it  would  consist  in  this,  that  by  its
inflowing  it  differentiated  this  mass,  that  is,  con
formably  to  its  being,  called  out  points  of  unity,  and
divisions  which  fashioned  the  mass  to  multiplicity  in
the  contrasts  that  follow.  It  separated  the  hetero-
"•cnou*  and  bound  together  the  homogenous,  and  so
prepared  the  way  for  the  dividing  the  light  from  the
darkness.  It  cannot  be  said,  however,  that  "  all  tho
co-cneroizim:  powers  in  the  formation  of  the  world
were  the  emanations  or  determinations  of  this  spirit
of  God/'  For  we  must  distinguish  the  crcatt  re  words
wiih  S--  from  IS^,  or  \\icfvrmwy  by  the  spirit  of
God.*  'The  object,1"  however,  of  this  forming  is  not

*  (The  word  "'4"1  i';  miv-  o  foiniative  than  JOD  ,  but  not
loss  creative.  The'latt,  r  is  used  more  of  the  primary  divi
sions,  if  not  of  tho  primary  matter  itself.  The  former  do-
notes  generally  the  morn  artistic  or  architectural  work,  th
handy0  work,  -pi"  ir^E,  1'.-:.  xix.  2,  or  STr?^
rT"i"~U5<  ,  I's.  viii.  i,  "the  work  of  thy  lingers."  It  is,
accordinl  t.n  •  we  may  take  of  creation  (sec  Introd.  to

'coVi     Jl^-.t  :,-l.i  -her  v.-ofk,  the  greater  wo,kot  the  divine
rti-tic  »•/,  /  ,m  as  J.i.-tiiiKiiished  from  the  men-  divine  power.
its  most  outward  primary  applications,  -,X.7  denotes  the
bond,'  shaping  formations,  such  as  that  of  a  statue,  or
;i.  Hob    ii.   1»;  Is-  xliv.  !),   10.     Hence  it   becomes  the
ropria  e  word  to  express  inwarf  Jorniatioii   -Jon*  m  the
ru  interior  icnse-  law,  structure,  constituting  state-in  a
nto.muWon.    As  a  word  of  physical

eive  c,  n.-tnution,  it  is  variedly  and  "yrressively  used  to
note  the  appointed  arrangements  in  the  seasons,  as
xiv   17,  cms"  r.r.X  r-r,"    V"-p,  "summer  and  win-
oubWyomed  thorn  "-fB.jV.'T.^'ia    -,1S  ~'^
,"who  formed  the  ii^lit   and  created  darkness'
the  more  ideal  or  artistic  creation).     "He  made  the
a    firs,  and  his  hands  formed,  "-^-  ,  the  dry  land,"-
lv'c  it  Its  £  r«  atcr  variety  and  beauty  of  form.     So  Amos  IT.
"who  created  the  wind,  or  air  (X^  —  ),  who  formal  the

ountuins  "  r-  "')•    1  '  ia  uscd  to  drl")tc  thc  fo!mat!on  of
by  law  and  ]  rovi.Uiitwl   guidance:    Is.  xlm.  21,
,•   ---.^    -n-ir,  "this  people  that  I  have  formed  ft
-clf  '»'  Is.  xiv.  18;  S-2  is  used  of  thc  heavens,  and  -,S1
f  the  earth.    This  might  seem  opposed  ^  the  distinction
ohavc  made,  but  tho  contrxt  that  tollou.sh,  ^.^"JJ^
i,,re  ideal  or  formative  word  is  thus  used  ot  thc  eartn-
___s-.3    n..^-_llwllo  formed  the  earth  and  made  it,
-ho  estal  li  hed  it  (gave  it  a  nature,  Syr.  sr  =  )  that  it  might
not  be  a  tohu  (a  foimlcss  waste),  who  made  it  to  be  inliab-
ted."     It  !s  used  of  the  human  body,  or  rather  of  tU     hoto


•  d  fomcd  "1  is,  in  like  manner,  most  impressively
applied  to  the  most  ex<iui,ite  and  divine  processes  m  tho
human  structure.  Ps.  xciv.  9  :  V^  sbn  *&  IST"  CX  ,
'  He  that  formed  the  eve,  shall  he  not  we  ?  "  Hence,  ma
more  in  torior  sense  stili,  it  is  used  of  the  very  constitution
of  the  soul  :  /ach.  xii.  1,  "who  strctchcth  out  the  heavens,
and  foundeth  the  earth,  and  forineth  the  spint  of  man
within  him,"  -i2^p2  ,  in  interior!  ins  cjus.  Deeper  still,  ,  it
s  used  of  thc  hearl,'or  thc  moral  constitution  :  Ps.  xxxm.  15,
C~3  ""•<  ~^"H  ,  "that  foi-ms  their  heart  alike."
can-ics  the  Fame  idea  as  a  noun,  and  this  gives  ,  ri<o  to  to
use  as  denoting  the  forminy  or  imaging  facultj  oij]lo^'
as  in  the  striking  passage,  Ocn.  vi.  o  :  rYCttJna  "S"  ?3
iab,  "and  everj-  imaging  of  the  thoughts  of  his  hear

X"  is  thc  form  of  the  thought,  as  the  thought  is  the  form
of  the  emotion,  or  of  tho  deep  heart  that  lies  below  all.

One  of  the  most  noteworthy  uses  of  thc  verb  IX"1  is  i«
application  to  the  human  generative  process  ;  it  is  ;  also  ,  to  b
observed  how  this  is  ascribed  directly  to  Ood,  as  though,  in
cvcrv  case  of  the  individual  gestation  m  the  womb,  there
Something  of  a  creative  power  and  process  :  ECC  Jcr.  i.  ^
"J32  TilSSt  C-iu3,  "  before  I  formed  thee  in  the  womb.
Compare  feccfes.  ii'  6,  whore  this  formative  process  is  pro-
sented  as  one  of  thc  deep  mysterious  things  known  only  n


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


1G5


the  primitive  matter,  but  the  flowing  earth-sphere

Just  as  little  can  one  say  that  the  six  days'  work

have  their  beginning  in  ver.  3  ;  for  the  result  of  th

first  day  is  not  the  light  merely,  but  also  the  dark

ness   (sec   Is.  xlv.  7).     Concerning   the   theosophi

interpretation  of  thohu  vabohu  as  a  world  in  ruin

which  had  come  from  God's  judgment  on  the  Fall  o

the  Angels  (see  ver.   3).  —  Ver.   3.    Let  there  bo

light.  —  Here  begin  the  gcologico-cosmical  creative

periods.      This  new  beginning,  therefore,  must  b<

distinguished  from  that  first  creation  of  the  heaven

and  the  earth  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  having  nc

creative  beginning  before  it.     Henceforth  the  treat

ment  is  that  of  a  sacred  geology,  yet  regarded  in  its

biblical  sen-c  as  geologico-cosmological.     Hence,  in

ver.  3,  the  creation  of  the  light-heaven  ;  ver.  8,  the

creation  of  the  air-heaven  ;  ver.  14,  the  creation  o:

the  star-heaven  ;  ver.  26,  the  creation  of  the  heaven

ly  core  of  the  earth  itself.*  —  And  God  said.  —  "  Tei

times  is  this  word,  "EX**  ,  repeated  in  the  history

of  the  seven  days."     The  omnipotence  of  the  creative

word,  1's.  xxxiii.  9  :   He  spake  and  it  was  done,  h

commanded  and  it  stood  (Rom.  iv.  17).     The  creative-

word  in   its  deeper  significance  :    Ps.  xxxiii.  6  ;    Is.

xl.  20;    John  i.  1-3;    Hub.  i.  2  ;    xi.  3  ;    Col.  i.  10.

The  licjld,  the  first  distinct  creative  formation,  and,

therefore,  the  formation-principle,  or  the  pre-condi

tioning  for  all  further  formations.     Of  this  formative

dividing  power  of  light,  physical  science  teaches  us.

It  is  now  tolerably  well  understood,  that  the  light  is

not  conditioned  by  perfected  luminous  bodies,  but,

on  the  contrary,  that  light  bodies  are  conditioned  by

a  preceding  luminous  element.     Thus  there  is  set

aside  the  objection  taken  by  Cclsus,  by  the  Mani-

ch&ans,  and  by  rationalism  generally,  namely,  the

supposed  inversion  of  order  in  having'lirst  the  light

and  afterwards  the  luminous  body.     And   yet  the

light  without  any  substratum  is  just  as  little  con

ceivable  as  the  darkness.     The  question  arises,  how

the  author  conceived  the  going  forth  of  the  light,

whether  out  of  the  dark  bosom"  of  the  earth-flood^  or

out  of  the  (Lirk  bosom  of  the  forming  heaven  V     As

the  view  of  the  heavenly  lights  (light  bodies)  ver.  14,

is  geocentric,  so  may  the  same  view  prevail  here  of

the  heaven-light  itself.     By  this  is  meant  that  in  the

fact  of  the  first  illumination  of  the  earth  the  author

presents  the  fact  of  the  birth  of  light  generally  in  the

world,  without  declaring  thereby  that  the  date  of  the

genesis  of  the  earth's  light  is  also  the  date  of  the

genesis  of  light  universally.     But  we  may  well  take

the  birth  of  light  in  the  earth  (or  the  earth  becoming

light)  as  the  analogue  whereon  is  presented  the  birth

of  light  in  the  heaven,  just  as  in  the  creation  of  man

there  is  symbolized  the  creation  of  the  spirit-world

collectively.     We  let  alone  here  the  question  whether

the  light  is  an  emanation  (an  outflowing)  of  a  lurni-

God,  and  especially  Ps.  cxxxix.  13-10,  whether  the  language
there  denotes  the  individual  or  generic  formation,  or  both—
when  I  was  curiously  wrought,"  etc.  ;  "  ami  in  thy  book
ill  my  members  were  written,  11  2i?  D^p,  the  days  they
.vera  being  formed  "  (see  remarks  in  Inlrod.  to  Genesis,  p.


c,  an     in       e
Ubbiuical  Hebrew,  only  they  have  employed  for  this  pur-

osc  the  kindred  "HX  ,  which  connects  the  idea  ot  formation
it!i  that  of  binding  or  inward  unity.—  T.  L  ]


HP  nth          ,f    C!lll'd  by  Lanse  as  the
ae  other  earth  Ajnnations.—  T.  L.]


iusa  fmalis  of  all


nous    clement,   or  an  undulation   from  a  luminous
body;  only  it  may  be  remarked  that  sound  goes  on
all  sides,  and  may,  therefore,  be  supposed  to  undu
late  in  sonorous  waves,  whilst  the  ray  of  light,  on  the
other  hand,  goes  directly,  for  which  reason  the  appli
cation  to  it  of  such  an  undulation  of  sonorous  waver
would   seem   unsuitable.     The   idea  of  an  ictheria
vibration  may   make  a  medium  between   emanation
and  undulation.     Without  doubt,  however,  the  mean
ing  here  is  not  merely  a  light-appearing  which  goes
forth  out  of  the  heaven-ground,*  and  breaks  through
the  dark  vapor  of  the  earth,  or  from  heavenly  clouds
of  light  (such  as  the  primary  form  of  the  creation
may  have  appeared  to  be),  but  an  immediate  lighting
up  of  the  luminous  element  in  the  earth  itself,  some
thing  like  what  the  Polar  night  gives  rise  to  in  the
northern    aurora;    enough   that  It    is   said   of    the
contrast    presented   between    the    illuminating   and
the  shade-producing  clement.     The  light  goes,  how
ever,  in  the  first  place,  out  of  the  dark  world-forms
(not  the  mere  world  material)  after  that  the  spirit  of
God,  as  formative  principle,  has  energized  in  them.
The  spirit  of  God  is  the  spiritual  light  that  goes  out
from  God ;   therefore  its   working  goes  before  the
creation  of  the  outer  light ;  and  therefore,  too,  it  is
that  this  light  is  the  symbol,  and  its  operation  simi
lar  to  the  operation,  of  the  spirit — that  is,  the  forma
tion  and  the  revelation  of  beauty. — And  there  was
light. — The  famed  sublimity  of  this  expression  as
given  by  Longiaus  (in  a  somewhat  doubtful  text)
and  others,  is  predicated  on  the  pure  simplicity  and
confidence  with  which  it  sets  forth  the  omnipotence
of  the  creative  word. — And  God  saw  the  light
that  it  was  good. — The  first  beauty  is  the  light
itself.     For  the  Hebrew  213  denotes   the   beautiful
along  with  the  good,  even  as  the  Greek  KxKlv  de
notes  the  good  along  with  the  beautiful.     The  sense :
thai  it  was  good,  does  not  seem  easy;  and  therefore
Tertullian  (and  more  lately  Neumann)  have  accepted
the  quia  of  the  Itala,     On  the  other  hand,  Uelitzsch
remarks :  "  The  conclusion  is  that  to  God  each  sin
gle  work  of  creation  appears  good."     The  conclusion
ics,  perhaps,  in  the  pause  of  solemn  contemplation,
out  of  which,  at  the  end,  goes  forth  the  perfect  sab-
jath.     It  is  because  the  religious  human  soul  recog
nizes  the  fair  and  the  good  in  the  event  of  the  ap
pearing,  that  there  is  therein  reflected  to  it  the  foun
tain  of  this  spiritual  ethical  satisfaction,  namely  the
jpntemplation  of  God  Himself,     ijtill  the  contempla-
ion  of  God  does  not  regard  the  object  as  though
japtivated  by  it  because  it  is  fair,  but  it  rejoices
herein  that  it  is  fair ;  or  we  may  say  that,  in  a  cer-
ain  manner,  it  is  the  very  efficacy  of  this  contempla-
ion   that    it    becomes    fair. — And   God  divided
Between  the  light  and  the  darkness. — Although
t  is  farther  said  that  (Jod  named  the  light  day  and
he  darkness  night,  still    it  must  not  be  supposed
hat  here  there  is  meant  only  the  interchange  between
[ay  and  night  as  the  ordaining  of  the  points  of  clivi-
ion  between  both,  namely  morning  and  evening.
Vlthough  light  and  darkness,  day  and   night,   are
ailed  after  their  appearing,  yet  are  they  still,  all  the
uore,  very  day  and  night,  in  other  words,  the  very
ausalities  themselves.     The  light  denotes  all  that  is
imply  illuminating  in  its  efficacy,  all  the  luminous
lenient;  the  darkness  denotes  all  that  is  uutraus-

{nimmdscjrundi.  "We  fail  in  translating  this  to  get
ny  better  word  to  represent  the  frequent  German  Grund
in  composition)  than  our  word  ground.  Foundation  pre-
cnts  an  incongruity  of  figure  which  is  less  in  the  more  gen-
ral  term  ground.  Plane  would  be  too  indefinite.— T.  L.]


f)-  8G8  T/-«Ti  «  w  "  "  '  '

non  est  silcnlium  aicuur,*"

3?«-W  ......  ''•'"Yi-j'riTvV,

must  be  presupposed  for  the  ^  >  1  -
soureeorloun.uu.o       ,;t    a   .l.o  ^

shadow-casting  cau    ht  >     J.  ^  -      ^  ^  ;u

be  quitc  wrong  to  '.  t     g  ^  thc  ^.

two  principles  ISH  A     In       o  &  latcr         o()1

"


not  the  wit


the


from    Gnostic    traditions-is    Jacob    Bolnn    (MysU
yivn    p    67)  and  the  Gnostic  tcacncra  that  arose
a  fe    h  n,  Friedrich  von  Meyer,  Baumgarten    Gene
sis),  and  others.     With  peculiar  zeal  hath  Kurtz  al  0
taken  part  in  these  theosophie  phantasies,  as  also  c
those  other  of  the  miscegenations  or  sexual co .nfu-
sions  between  the  angels  of  heaven  and  the  daugti-
Ss  of  earth  (Gen.  vi.).     The  grounds  presented  _by
Delitzsch   in  opposition  to  his  earlier  contrary  view
(aTrivOT  in  the  first  two  editions  of  his  Commentary)
ire  the  following:   1.  In  the  interpretation  aforesaid
one  would,  to  be  Mire,  expect  TIB]  instead  of  nn^
but  the  conscious  connection  need  not  he  prec.se  y
in  the  consciousness  of  the  writer;  he  relates  simply
matter  ot  fact      And  vet  he  must  have  been  more
Lightened  in  resneet  to  the  nature  of  things  than
°  -ientilie  man.     A  blind  narration  of  facts  would
icrc  be   as  inconsistent  as   at  pun.   indi^Uono    a


,         "


,U  «he  tckorn  with  the  dav
in  the  divine  call  mto


e  nigh


,;„]„.  heaven  in
"


traon  (world-brand    quonchm
Plulonisn,  ,„»!  "f=Ptmfam,h'!f,r?

men  to  till  up  the  vacuum  in  the  tail-.    .  nS      ^
It   must,   however,   become    very    cvi,  e  :  t      ^  ^


condition  of  the  earth,  as  it  became


chaos,  or  the  divine  reaction  through


onto,    for   a   eenain   Uieoaopblc
dualism  willi  Us  Wo  principles  can


the  idea  that  matter  too  is  good,  because  it  is  from
r  nd       n  so  far,  indeed,  as  we  can  speak  of  pur
matter  m  general  terms.'    The  mo,e  particular  foun
S  of  this  view-after  certain  older  preludes  one
popular      presentations  (Delitzsch,  p.  106)  denved


first  eTCiiing  and  mormog  so       mg   _  lhlnV

sclTca  to  such  a  contrast,    fatill  less  aic  we  to
ofthe  .sual  evening  ^  .""""rfanS    E'*


CHAP.  I.— II.


reckoning ;  the  day  is  reckoned  from  sunset.  The
morning  that  follows  stands  for  the  second  half  of
the  day  proper.  In  the  same  manner  was  the  day
reckoned  by  the  Arabians,  the  Athenians  (wx^-
fj..f>av),  the  Germans,  and  the  Gauls.  It  is  against
the  text  for  Delitzsch  to  put  as  the  ground  here  the
Babylonish  reckoning  of  the  day,  namely  from  the
dawning  cf  the  morning.  The  earlier  theological
'  representation,  that  by  the  creative  periods  were  to
be  understood  the  usual  astronomical  days,  is  now
only  held  by  individuals  (Baumgarten,  Calwer  Iland-
buch,  Kcii's  Genesis).  It  is  opposed  to  this,  in  the
first  place,  that  the  creative  days  are  already  num
bered  before  the  determination  of  the  astronomical
relation  of  the  earth  to  the  sun,  although  on  other
grounds  must  we  hold  that  the  days  from  the  fourth
onward  were  not  astronomical;  there  are  in  the  way,
secondly,  the  idea  of  the  first  day  whose  evening  had
its  beginning  in  that  dark  thohu  vabhohu  which  had
no  evening  before  it,  as  well  as  the  idea  of  the  sev
enth  day,  the  day  of  God's  rest,  which  is  not  defined
by  an  evening  and  a  morning,  but  runs  on  through
the  ordained  course  of  the  world ;  there  is,  thirdly,
the  idea  of  the  day  of  God  as  it  is  given  to  us  in  the
90th  Psalm,  which  is  traditionally  ascribed  to  Moses
(ver.  4).  That  this  time-determination  of  a  thousand
years  does  not  denote  an  exactly  measured  chrono
logical  period,  but  still  a  period  defined  by  essential
marks  of  time,  appears  from  the  converse  of  Ps.  xc.
in  2  Pet.  hi.  8  (a  thousand  years  as  one  day,  and  one
day  as  a  thousand  years),  and  also  from  the  thousand
years  of  the  judgment-time  as  the  transition  period
from  the  present  state  of  the  world  to  that  which  lies
beyond  (Rev.  xx.).  This  comprehensive  significance
has  the  divine  day  (God's  day)  or  the  judgment-day
pre-emincn:ly  in  the  Old  Testament  (Is.  ii.  12;  Joel
i.  15;  Ezek.  xiii.  5).  Delitzsch,  who  also  holds  that
the  creative  days  are  periods,  reckons,  as  another
argument,  that  in  Gen.  ii.  4  the  six  days  are  denoted
as  one  day.  Add  to  this  the  very  usual  mode  of
speech,  according  to  which,  day  in  the  Old  Testa
ment  often  denotes  a  longer  duration  of  time,  for
example,  in  the  formula  even  to  this  day.  We  are
not,  however,  to  conceive  of  the  evening  and  morn
ing  of  the  single  creative  days  as  merely  symbolic
intervals  of  the  day  of  God.  According 'to  the
analogy  of  the  first  day,  the  evening  is  the  time  of  a
peculiar  chaotic  fermentation  of  things,  whilst  the
morning  is  the  tune  of  that  new,  fair,  solemn  world-
building  that  corresponds  to  it.  With  each  evenin^
there  is  also  indicated  a  new  birth-travail  of  things,
a  new  earth-revolution  which  elevates  the  old  forma
tion  that  went  before  it — a  seeming  darkening,  a
seeming  sunset  or  going  down  of  the  world ;  and  so
later  with  this  same  appearance  came  on  the  flood  ;
and  so,  too,  in  Zach.  xiv.  7,  the  day  of  the  com
mencing  judgment  is,  with  the  highest  significance,
denoted  an  evening.  Xo  less  significant  is  it  in  the
eschatological  words  of  our  Lord :  and  the  sun  shall
withdraw  its  light,  Matt.  xxiv.  29.  With  each  morn
ing,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a  new,  a  higher,  a  fairer,
and  a  richer  state  of  the  world.  In  this  way  do  the
evening  and  morning  in  the  creative  periods  have
the  highest  .significance  for  an  agreement  of  the
sacred  geology  with  the  results  of  the  scientific  geol
ogy.  The  meaning  would  seem  to  be  incorrectly
taken  by  Delitzsch  when  he  says :  "  With  each  effort
of  the  divine  creating  is  it  morning,  with  each  remis
sion  it  is  evening"  (p.  106).  The  most  peculiar
work  of  God,  we  may  rather  say,  would  appear  to  be
each  of  those  stormy  revolutions,  in  which  the  spirit


of  God  hovers  like  an  eagle  over  the  chaotic  fcrmen
tations ;  in  the  creative  mornings,  on  the  contrary.
come  in  the  holy  rests  when  God  surveys  the  new
work  and  sees  how  good  it  is.  (Comp.  Vox  ROC(;E.
MONT,  History  of  the  Earth,  p.  7:  "Evening:  a  daru
return  of  chaos."  Doubtless  the  designation  lacks
propriety  in  all  respects,  and  yet  it  may  lead  to  the
right.)  "

[NOTE  ON  THE  RELATION  OF  THE  FIRST  VERSE
OF  GEN.  I.  TO  THE  REST  OF  THE  CHAPTER. — Among
all  the  interpretations  of  Gen.  i.,  the  most  difficult  as
well  as  the  most  unsatisfactory  is  that  which  regards
the  first  verso  as  referring  to  a  period  indefinitely
remote,  and  all  that  follows  as  comprised  in  six  solar
days.  It  is  barely  hinted  at  by  some  of  the  patris
tic  writers,  but  has  become  a  favorite  with  certain
modern  commentators,  as  furnishing  them  with  a
method  of  keeping  the  ordinary  days,  and  yet  avoid
ing  the  geological  difficulty,  or  seeming  to  avoid  it,
by  throwing  all  its  signs  of  the  earth's  antiquity  into
this  chasm  that  intervenes  between  the  first  and  sec
ond  verses.  The  objections  to  it  may  be  thus
stated :

(1)  Besides  the  peculiar  difficulties  that  attend  any
view  of  ordinary  solar  days,  such  as  a  morning  and
evening  without  a  sun,  or  the  language  of  succession,
of  growth,  and  of  a  seeming  nature,  without  any  con
sistent   corresponding  reality,  there  is   another  and
greater  incongruity  in  connecting  this  with  a  former
and  very  different  state  of  things,  or  mode  of  pro
ceeding,  with  which,  after  all,  it  has  no  real  connec
tion  either  in  the  realm  of  nature  or  of  divine  provi
dence.

(2)  It  is  a  building  of  this  world  on  t'.ie  ruins  of  a
former,  without  any  natural  or  moral  reasons  there
for.     The  states   preceding,  as   understood   by  this
hypothesis,    were   in    no    sense    preparatory.     The
catastrophe  which  makes  way  for  it  seems  entirely
arbitrary,    and   in   no   sense   resembles   the   pauses
described  in  Genesis,  each  one  of  which  is  in  the
upward   order,  and   anticipatory  of  the   work   that
follows.

(3)  It  is  evidently  brought  in  as  a  possible  escape
from  the  difficulties  of  geology,  and  would  never
have  been  seriously  maintained  had  it  not  been  for
them.

(4)  It  has  to  make  the  heavens  of  the  first  verse  a
different  heavens  from  that  of  the  eighth,  without
any  exegetical  warrant  therefor.     This  is  a  rational
izing  interpretation,  carrying  with  it  a  conception  of
our  modern  astronomy,  and  almost  wholly  unknown
to  the  Scriptures,  which  everywhere  speaks  of  the
heavens  and  the  earth  therein  mentioned  as  one  sys
tem.     It  is  the  heavens  of  our  earth,  built  upon  it  as
described  in  Gen.  i.  6,  8  ;  Ps.  civ. ;  1  Sam.  ii.  8,  etc.,
and  always  taken  in  connection  with  it ;  not  a  far-off
astronomical  heavens,  though  the  rudiments  of  such
an  idea  come  afterwards  into  the  Hebrew.     Thus  in
predictions,  whether  of  destruction  or  of  renovation,
the  heavens  and  the  earth  go  together.     "  I  create
new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,"  Is.  Ixvi.  22 ;  Ps.  cii.
27,   and   other  passages.     The  language  is  exactly
parallel  to  that  of  Gen.  i.  1,  and  yet  we  cannot  sup"-
pose  that   there  is   included  here  the  astronomical
heaven  of  stars  and  planets,  at  least  according  to  the
conceptions  of  our  modern  astronomy.     It  is  a  re
newal  of  the  earth,  in  some  way,  together  with  those
celestial  or  sky  phenomena  that  are  in  connection
with  it,  as  parts,  in  fact,  of  the  tellurian  system.     It
is  the  same  language,  the  same  mode  of  conceiving,
as  late  down  in  Scripture  as  the  2d  Epistle  of  Peter


GENESIS,  OK   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


iii.  5-7— the  "  earth  and  heavens  "  that  were  of  old
ueibre  the  ilcod  are  put  in  contrast  \vith  "the  earth
and  heavens  that  are  now,"  and  whieh  are  to  _be
changed  for  "  a  new  earth  ami  heavens  "  "  according
to  the  promise  (ver.  1-)  to  which  \ve  look."  It  is
the  same  language  that  occurs  repeatedly  in  the
Revelations  (xxi.  1),  and  which,  whatever  we  may
think  of  its  prophetic  me-ini:ig,  shows  the  fixedness
of  the  conception  down  to  the  latest  times  of  the
scriptural  canon.

(5)  It  violates  the  principles  of  a  rational  and
grammatical  exegesis,  in  making  a  separation  between
the  first  and  second  verses,  of  which  there  is  no  trace
or  reason  iu  tin;  language  itself.  If  u.-ed  in  the  same
way  in  narrating  historical  events,  in  any  other  part
of  the  Lible,  no  one  would  have  thought  of  the  verb
N"2,  i:i  the  first,  ;;nd  nrTI,  in  the  second  verse,
otherwise  llvin  as  cotemporaneous  or,  t»i  (ii,-<
tinuatio'.i  at.  least,  uiih  no  chasm  of  time  between
them  long  or  short.  1 1  would  have  been  inlerpreied
like  the  precise! v  similar  sentence.  Job  i.  1 :  ''There
was  a  man  in  the  land  of  I'/,  and  the  man  rw,  etc.,

urxn  rrry  ""'-y-xr  c^x  rrn.     Who  would

think  of  separating  the  second  n"H  here  fro;:!  the
first,  or  .-undcring  the  evident  continuity?  If  it  be
said  thai  the  f  nlext  in  Job  controls,  and  the  very
nature  of  the  subject,  so  should  it  also  in  Genesis,
unless  we  make  a  new  context  after  our  own  imagi
nations,  especially  as  there  arc  clear  ways  in  lie'uew
of  expressing  such  a  parting  of  the  terms,  had  it  been
dc:  igueil  to  do  so.

Besides  this,  it  is  opposed  to  the  usual  force  of
the  conjunction  " .  Taken  even  as  a  mere  copulative,
:•„  would  r.ot  allow  of  such  a  sharp  and  remote  sever-
.•!(•".  Hut  1  is  much  more  than  this  in  Hebrew.
It  is  seldom  without  a  time  sense,  or  an  inferential
.  ing  a  connection,  not  only  of  mere  event,
but  a\$o  of  reason  and  rxnsallh/.  So  here  it  shows
bh.e  reason  for  the  use  of  N"2  in  the  preceding  verse.
"In  the  beginning  God  created"  formed,  fashioned,
the.  earth  ;  for  it  was  formless  and  void,  or  wh.cn  it
formless  and  void,  etc.  Let  one  take  Noldius'
•'  meordanee  of  the  Hebrew  Particles,  and  see  how
often  (in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  we  may  :  ayj  the
conjuuaion  wau  has  this  close-joining  inferential
sense.  It  is  much  more  usual  than  its  bare  copula
tive  force,  but  even  this  is  out  of  harmony  with  the
hypothesis  of  severance  as  commonly  presented.
Sec  also  Introd.  to  Gen.  i.  pp.  1:29,  ISO.— T.  L.  ]

0.  Vers.  6 — 3.  Second  Creative  JJa;;. — Let
there  be  a  firmament. — Rakla  (from  "£^  ,  to
stretch,  spread  out,  beat  out)  an  extension  or  ex
pansion,  rendered  in  the  LXX  and  by  others,  arepf-
*,ua,  and  in  the  \u\gztcjirmamcnlum,—  names  which
are  more  material  than  J^p1}  •  KNOBEL  :  "  The
heaven  was  to  the  Hebrews  a  material  substance
(Exod.  xxiv.  10),  a  fixed  vault  established  upon  the
•waters  that  surrounded  the  circle  of  the  earth  (Prov.
viii.  27),  firm  us  a  molten  mirror  (Job  xxxvii.  18),
and  borne  up  by  the  highest  hills,  which  are  there
fore  called  the  pillars  and  foundations  of  the  heaven
(2  Sam.  xxii.  8;  Job  xxvi.  11);  openings  or  doors
are  ascribed  to  it  (eh.  vii.  11 ;  xxviii.  1*7  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii
'23).  There  are  the  same  representations  elsewhere.'
But  we  must  not  forget  that  Hebrew  modes  of  ex
pressiou  for  objects  that  have  a  religious  bearing,  do
ever  contain  a  symbolical  element  which  disdains  the
literal  pressure.  Therefore  the  stars  which  in  Gen.


.  17  are  fixed  in  the  heaven,  can  nevertheless,  accord-
ug  to  Isaiah  xl.  26,  set  themselves  in  motion  as  a
lost  of  God  ;  and  hence  it  is  that  the  one  heaven  ex-
)ands  itself  into  a  heaven  of  heavens.  And  thus  the
leavens  bends  down  to  the  earth  (Ps.  xviii.  10),  or  is
spread  out  like  tapestry  (Ps.  civ.  2),  or  its  beams  are
waters  (ver.  3),  whilst  the  same  heaven  again  is  called
the  footstool  of  God.— In  the  midst  cf  the  waters.
— We  must  beware  here  of  thinking  of  a  mass  of
elementary  water;  quite  as  little  could  a  thud  mass
which  is  yet  identified  with  the  light  be  elementary,
and  just  'as  little  can  it  be  a  Hood,  or  collection  of
water,  which  consists  of  the  three  factois  air,  earth,
and  water.  At  this  point  then  is  completed  the
seconel  division.  The  true  standpoint  of  contempla
tion  would  semi  to  be  the  view,  that  in  the  azure
welkin  of  the  sky  the'  ennuis  appear  to  give  out  their
evaporation,  and  to  \\ithdraw  themselves  behind  the
blue  cxpar.se  like  a  superce-lestial  gathering  of  water
'Ps.  civ.  3,  Hi).  1(  follows  from  this,  however,  that  the
visible  clou, Is  and  the  rain  may  be  assigned  to  the
lower  collection  of  v. aters,  and  that  there  is  meant
here  the  gaseous  water  as  it  forms  a  unity  with  the
air,  and  so  makes  an  ethereal  atmosphere  (not  "  the
water  masses  that  hover  over  the  air-strata  of  the
atmosphere").  Delit/.sch  here  mistake's  the  symbol
ical  element.  '  "  It  must  be  admitted,''  he  says,  "that
in  this,  the  did  Testament  is  chargeable  with  a  defect,
for  a  physical  connection  between  the  descending
rain-waters  and  the  heavenly  waters,  which  is  also
indicated  in  the  New  Testament  (Rev.  iv.  0)  cannot  be
maintained."  Indeed,  it  is  with  the  actual  physical
connection  between  the  invisible  colkclion  of  water
(the  gas-formed)  and  the  visible',  that  the  contrast  is
established;  it  is  the  polaric  tension  which  even  the
phcii'imetiologkal  extension  brings  to  view.  Bui,
why  should  the  Septuagiut  correct  the  text  here  with
the  addition,  ver.  8  :  And  God  suit;  whilst  the  Hebrew
text  has  it  not?  Had  the  prophetic  author  some
anticipation  that  the  blue  vault  of  heaven  was  merely
an  appearance,  whilst  the  savans  of  the  Septuagint
had  no  such  anticipation,  and,  therefore,  proceeded
to  doctor  the  passage?  There  may,  indeed,  be  an
exaggeration  of  this  conception  of  the  upper  wateis,
since  Phihiponus  and  the  other  church  fathers  under
stand  bvthe  same  the  ether  that  is  beyond  the  earth's
atmosphere  ;  nevertheless,  their  view  would  seem  to
be  more  correct  than  that  which  refers  the  expression
to  a  proper  cloud-formed  atmospheric  water. — And
God  named  the  firmament  heaven,  C'^ir .  See
ver.  1.  Delitzsch:  II ere  is  meant  the  heaven  of  the
earth-world;  ver.  1,  on  the  contrary,  refers  to  the
heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens.  But  if  the  firma
ment  is  "  the  immeasurable  far-reaching  height,"  (hero
is  a  failure,  or  falling  short,  in  the  limiting  of  the
conception.  A  main  point  appears  to  be,  that  the
rakia  is  presented  to  view  as  the  symbolic  dividing
of  the  super-earthly  heaven,  a  phenomenal  appear
ance  of  that  house  of  God  to  which  all  who  pray  to
God  look  up.  For  the  later  cosmological  interpreta
tions  of  the  upper  waters,  see  Delitzsch,  p.  108.

7.  Ycrs.  9-13.  Third  Creative  Day. — Ver.  9.  Let
the  waters  be  gathered  together.— The  bringing
the  earth  into  form  and  the  creation  of  the  vegetable
W0rld. — That  the  physical  dividing  of  the  earth-mass
and  of  the  water-mass  is  here  presented,  is  clear.
There  would  appear,  however,  to  be  signified  a  pre
ceding  chemical  separation  of  both  elements,  which
had  withdrawn  themselves  from  the  inner  or  under
core  of  the  earth.  The  expression  trsrj  V^_


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


169


w

demotes  properly  not  merely  an  outward  assembling,
but  an  intensive  close  combining  (see  Gcsenius,  nip).
Upon  the  formation  of  the  water  proper,  as  it  is  now
introduced,  is  conditioned  the  firm  underlying  of  the
earth.  The  completing  of  this  division,  however,  has
for  its  consequence  that  flowing  together  of  the  water
into  its  peculiar  place,  with  which  immediately  the
self-forming  earth-soil  now  comes  into  visibility.
It  is  thereby  implied  that  the  elevations  and  depres
sions  of  the  earth's  surface — the  hills  and  vales,  the
highlands  and  the  ocean-depths — are  here  formed,
just  as  it  is  so  precisely  set  forth,  Ps.  civ.  6-8  (with
which  compare  Prov.  viii.  24).  And  so,  too,  the  crea
tion  of  the  hills  is  here  only  indicated,  or  rather  pre
sented,  as  a  consequence  of  the  creation  of  the  sea
(see  Ps.  xe.  "2  ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  15  ;  Habak.  iii.  3).
Thus  much  is  clear :  as  long  as  the  water  and  the
earth-mans  are  not  divided,  there  can  be  no  mention
of  any  origination  of  the  hills.  With  the  sea-life,
however,  must  begin  also  the  earth-life,  that  is,  the
working  of  the  inner  earth-fire  that  causes  the  up-
heavings.  It  is  a  wrong  apprehension  of  the  waters
of  vcr.  2  and  ver.  (>,  when  one  takes  the  story  of  cre-
tion  as  favoring  a  one-sided  Neptunism  (Wagner).
The  volcanic  action  of  the  earth  in  the  formation  of
the  earth,  is  not  expressed,  indeed,  but  it  is  through
out  freely  implied ;  it  would  appear  to  be  indicated,
Ps.  civ.  8.  There  is  truly  no  difficulty  in  supposing
that  the  formation  of  the  hills  kept  on  through  the
succeeding  creative  days.  In  respect  to  this,  De-
litzseh  expresses  himself  better  than  Hofmann:
'^Generally,"  says  he,  "the  works  of  the  single  crea
tive  days  consist  only  in  laying  foundations ;  the
birth-process  that  is  introduced  in  each,  extends  its
efficacy  beyond  it,  and,  in  this  sense  we  say  with
Hofmann  (i.  p.  '278):  'Not  how  long,  but  how  many
times,  God  created  is  the  thing  intended  to  be  set
forth.'  "  Much  more  have  we  to  distinguish  between
the  distinct  creative  acts  and  the  creative  evolutions.
Even  after  fie  creative  division  of  the  first  day  the
2volving  of  light  may  still  go  on,  and  the  same
thought  holds  good  of  the  efficacy  of  the  succeeding
lets  of  each  of  the  other  days.  The  act  itself  means
,he  introduction  of  a  new  principle  out  of  the  word
)f  God,  which,  as  such,  has  the  form  of  an  epoch-
ircating  event.— Ver.  10.  And  God  named  the
iry  earth  land,  that  is,  earth-soil  in  the  narrower
ense,  and,  therefore,  it  is  that  ^15$  has  no  article. —

Vnd  the  water  named  he  sea Properly  seas,

'  or  rather  ocean ;  for  it  is  more  intensive  than  a
umerical  plural,  and  is  therefore  (as  in  Ps.  xlvi.  4)
onstrued  in  the  singular."  Delitzsch.  On  the  other
and,  Knobel  would  make  prominent  the  singleness
f  the  seas  in  the  rendering  Weltmeer,  or  world-sea,
lain  sea,  or  ocean. — And  God  saw.— Now  has  the
irth-formation  come  into  visibility,  though  only  in
s  first  outlines,  or,  according  to  the  idea  of  the
aturalist,  as  an  insular  appearing  of  the  land-region
3  it  unfolds  itself  to  view.— Let  the  earth  bring
>rth  (sprout,  germinate).— It  is  agreeable  to  the
xturc  of  the  earth  as  well  as  of  the  plant  that  both
•e  together  as  soon  as  possible.  The  earth  has  an
clination  to  germinate,  the  plant  to  appear.  In
uth,  its  origination  is  a  new  creative  act.  In  the
•oper  place  is  this  creation  narrated ;  for  the  plant
:iiotes  the  transformation  of  the  elementary  mate-
as,  earth,  air,  water,  which  are  now  present  in
game  life  through  the  inward  working  of  the  light,
forms  the  preconditioning,  as  the  sign  or  prognos-
!,  of  the  awaiting  animal  creation.  And  though  it


has  need  of  the  light  too  in  some  measure,  it  does
not  yet  want  the  sunshine  in  its  first  subordinate
kinds.  The  question  now  arises,  whether  we  must
distinguish  three  kinds  of  plants :  Xttjn  ,  tender  green;
Iw2 ,  herbs  and  shrubs,  vegetables  and  grain  (or
the  smaller  growths  generally),  and  113  vy ,  fruit-
tree,  according  to  the  view  of  Knobel,  embracing  all
trees  inasmuch  as  they  all  bear  seed.  Delitzsch,  as
well  as  Knobel,  assumes  this  threefold  division.
Farther  on,  however,  we  see  that  the  more  general
kinds  precede  (lights,  water-swarmiiigs),  in  order
that  they  may  become  more  or  less  specific.  And
here  XttJn  may  present  the  universal  conception  of
all  vegetable  life  in  its  first  germination  (although
including  along  with  it  the  more  particular  kinds  of
cryptogamic  and  the  grasses),  whilst  in  this  way  the
contrastjpetween  the  herbaceous  plants  and  the  trees
becomes  more  prominent  (Umbreit,  Ewald).  Thence,
too,  it  appears  that  the  sign  of  seed-formation,  of
propagation,  and  of  particular  specification,  is  ascrib
ed  to  all  plants.  Closer  observations  in  respect  to
single  particulars  may  be  found  in  Knobel.  We
must  protest  against  the  exposition  of  Delitzsch :
"Its  origination  follows  in  that  way  which  is  un
avoidable  to  a  creative  beginning,  and  which  is  to  it
essentially  what  is  called  a  gcncratio  cquivoca ;  that
is,  it  does  this  in  measure  as  the  earth,  through
the  word  of  the  divine  power,  receives  strength  to
generate  the  vegetable  germ."  The  sentence  con
tains  a  contradiction  in  so  far  as  the  question  still
relates  to  the  divine  word  of  power ;  but  this  divine
word  of  power  creates  not  merely  a  strength,  or
force,  in  general ;  *  each  new  and  distinct  creative

*  [The  argument  from  exegesis  here  would  depend  very
much  upon  the  view  taken  of  the  words  Sit  3 n1 7 73  .  They
are  rendered  by  the  LXX.  <nrelpov  a-irepfjia.  Tlie  Vulgate,
facienSjSemen,  and  our  translation,  yielding  srcd,  are  better,
since  the  Hiphil  form  seems  to  demand  a  causative  or  pro
ducing  sense.  The  rendering  of  the  LXX.  would  do  for  the
other  form  SIT  Silt ,  which  occurs  vcr.  29,  representing
the  plant,  after  it  was  made,  as  casting  its  seed  upon  the
earth.  If  we  take  it  in  the  causative  or  seminative  sense,
there  is  still  the  question,  whether  it  is  merely  descriptive
of  the  plant  in  general  as  distinguished  from  other  created
things,  or  whether  it  sets  forth  something  in  the  very  crea
tive  or  first  generative  process.  If  it  were  the  former,  it
would  seem  to  demand  the  article,  S^IT/SH  >  the  plant  that
bears  or  geminates  seed.  As  it  stands,'  however,  the  whole
force  of  the  word  (as  emphatic)  and  of  the  contest,  would
favor  the  latter  idea  :  "Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  plant
as  seminating,"  or  in  its  semination,  that  is,  as  growing
from  a  seminal  power  in  the  very  beginning.  It  may  not  bo
easy  to  understand,  conceptually,  how  this  can  be  without
a  previous  material  seed  (seed-vessel)  or  a  previous  plant
from  which  the  seed  came,  but  still,  as  a  fact,  it  may  be
clear,  and  clearly  stated.  The  opposite  notion  is,  that  the
plant  was  outwardly  and  mechanically  formed  with  its  stem,
leaves,  limbs,  seed-vessel,  etc.,  all  perfect,  and  then,  in  some
way,  connected  with  the  ground,  which,  after  all,  has  noth
ing  to  do  with  its  first  production.  Or  it  might  be  thought

id


these  latter  views  is  attended  with  great  difficulties,  increas
ing  ever  the  more  they  are  contemplated,  though  as  a  mere
conceptual  view  it  might  seem  at  first  the  easiest.  It  may
be  said,  too,  that  they  are  not  favored  by  the  language
which  assigns  to  the  earth  an  important  part  in  the  process,
and  seems  to  make  the  very  semination  an  original  act.
We  gain  nothing  by  regarding  it  as  the  mechanical  creation
of  the  seed-vessel,  since  that  is  not,  in  itself,  the  seminatiug
power,  any  more  than  the  entire  plant,  but  only  the'seat  of
its  nearer  residence,  or  its  more  interior  wrapper  as  it  may
1)0  called.  Every  plant  that  now  grows  springs  from  an
immaterial  power  (and  that  not  a  blank  force,  but  condition
ed  by  an  idea)  brought  in  certain  relations  to  the  earth.
This  power  is  not  the  seed  as  seed-vessel,  for  that  dies  (dis
solves)  in  the  process  (see  John  sii.  24),  and  by  such  disto-


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   HOSES.


»ord  introduces  a  new  ar.d  distinct  p-mciple  into
the  already  existing  sphere  of  nature—a  principle
which  hitherto  had  not  bccii  present  in  it.  Along


unchandn?  -,"=  -    ;  ccic  ;,  dcV,  law,  or  idea.     In  the  begin-

,-;  T,I  !i">s  it  in  immediate  con-

HI      :iK!a;H!HS

florin*".    M  ••'      -i  tiV'T  :'  Hliou-'U  it  tMv*  n.uch  Intro  Sk>n--
K      It  ii  Erdor  "S  tc  imliiml  l»  think  of  Gnd  «  m.k-
i      h     o  S  m  ™l,B.r,llT,  or  i,™,,Jiutcy,  mrfml  ,.l    ..•


]  which  it  »;!/>™ iv.     It  may  be  re
garded  too,  u  itli  a]  ,  M  the  sanic  process,  except
that  at  each  ii                  '     !  ei.ar.nmg  it  starts  with  its  iwra
t  on  fn.ni  the  holding  s,,,L-vcssel  to  work  anew  in  bu   dmg
itself -i  new  house,  but  iu  the  same  manner,  after  such  HI
critio'i    as  when  it  first  issued  from  the  divine  fiat.     1
mom.  n't    too,  may  this  immaterial  power  be  said  to  becon:
(li:(1                           the  instant  .>!  pass  ng  from  the  old  pel
Ration  into  the  commencing  new-each  oein
v  -  y  its  work,  deriving  from  it  structure,  form,  an
ties      It  is  not  made  by  th<-  orpanization-fo
tvtfindit.     It  is  before  the  or,an,x;d,o,J
thus  making  the  latter  a  real  organism  produced,  as  at  first
bv  a  force  and  a   law  working  Irom  within,  and  buildin
around  itself,  instead  of  an  artificial  semblance  bavin;,'  it
idea  outwardly  or  mechanically  introduced  into  the  matte
'lUYr  the  wav  l(  human  art.    We  may  say,  therefore,  that  i

is  the  ««nn  "ri!  in:i1  1H''''  1bo  "oin?  f"rth  ' i  41'i' *1T  unTn
encrgv  the  pri.1.  nged  Jtterancc  of  the  same  Word  soundin
o  n  ,',  u:c.  and  obeyed  now,  each  time,  with  the  sam
alacrity  as  vb.  n  it  first  felt  the  pulsations  of  the  voice  th:
•-id-  "-S"  N-- in,  "Let  the  earth  germinate,"  let  tl
earth  hriuVforth/  It  is  mother-earth  that  gives  the  plai
itTbodv  '  manifestation,  so  far  as  that  alone  nui

I ».  Mllcd  he  plant,  but  not  its  idea,  its  law,  or  even  its  m
mate  •  1  lover  And  it  is  this  which  makes  it  somcthn
^  it  i  r,  r en  from  the  oeneratio  cquivoca  (,f  some  natura
U\fs  and  to  Vhich  Delitzsch  unfortunately  compares  i
The  very  crn!  implies  a  blank,  blind,  and  doubttul  fon
that  might  produce  one  thing  as  well  as  another.  But  he
there  is  a  conditioning  power  bringing  out  the  plant  inS1^,

•rordin"  to  it  5  species.    It  is  God's  word  appearing  (speak-
ShTou-h  the  earth;  it  is  "the  Lord  hearing  thelieavcns,

d tl      1 ivcn    hc'irin-  the  earth,  and  the  earth  htarmg


dew  of


Hebrew  names  for  plants.    They  called  them
maniMatio,,*,  sec  Is.  sxvi.  10,  niTIS   P»  ,  the


oririnal


first

starting  out  of  tl
cal  causal io
of  the  speci


w

"far  less  than  that  which  attends  the


independent  of  any  nexuj  ,  of


>c  cartn  muepemieiit  u»  ""j  — »  — •-  «•—•>-
We  must  also,  in  that  case,  give  up  the  idea
of  the  species  determining  the  construction  instead  of  the
construction  the  species.  But.  the  strongest  argument  for
the  commentator  is  that  the  exegesis  will  not  bear  it.  in
such  an  outward  mechanical  view  the  words  Xtt5"lF)  ,  Sp"!  5?
lose  all  their  causative  force,  and  thus  become 'merely  re
dundant  cyphers  iu  the  account.  The  language  of  causation
where  there  is  in  reality  no  causative  process  is  simply


ith  the  various  species  and  seeds,  along  with  th«
eterminate  propagation  of  plants,  each  after  its
nd  there  clearly  and  distinctly  comes  in  that  con-
eption  of  nature  which  is  already  announced  m
ie  great  contrasts.  The  words:  upon  the  earth,
-ixfr?S  (ver.  11),  arc  interpreted  by  Knobel  of
ie  hiu-h  growth  of  the  trees  (over  the  earth)  in  con-
•ast  with  the  plants  which  cleave  closer  to  the
round  and  which  are  regarded  by  Delitzsch  as  a
resent  clothing  of  the  earth.  With  respect  to  ver..
i)  we  may  assume  that  Knobel  is  right.  In  the
ontemplation  of  the  young  world,  this  majestic  rising
bove  the  earth  in  the  case  of  the  tall  trees,  as  in  that
f  the  birds,  has  a  peculiar  excitement  for  the  imagi-
ation.  With  the  plants  there  appears  the  first
hin-  that  is  distinctly  symbolic  of  life  as  well  as  of
heir  individual  beauty.

8    Yers    1-1-19.    Fourth  Creative  Day.     Begin
ning  of  the  second  triad.— The  preconditions  of  the
low  expectant  animal  and  human  life,  are  the  lights
of  heaven,  the  stars,  or  heavenly  bodies,  partly  as
>hvsical  quickening  powers,  and  partly  as  signs  of
he  division  of  time  for  the  human  culture-world.    It
s  theirs,  in  the  first  place,  to  make  the  distinction
jctwecn'day  and  night,  between  light  and  darkness,
and  to  rule  over  the  day  and  night— to  make  that
orcat  contrast  upon  which  the  human  developments,
as  well  as,  the  animal  nature-life,  arc  essentially  con
ditioned,  such  as  sleep,  waking,  generation   diversi
ties  in  the  animal  world— animals  of  the   day  and
animals  of  the  night,  etc.     It  agrees  well  with  the
text    that  again,  whilst  it  makes  a  more  special  nicn-
tion'of  the  ordinance  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  it  gives
the  chief  prominence  to  their  spiritual  or  humane
appointment :  let  them  be  for  signs  and  for  festivals,
and   for  days,  and  for  years.     The   .|ue,t,on   arises
here   whether  these  appointments  are  to  be  taken  as
four   (Luther,    Calvin,  Delit/.seh,    Knobel);    or  that
three  are   meant:    namely,   for  signs   of  times,  lor
davs    and    for   years   (Rosenmiiller,    Eichhorn,   Da
Wette    Bininigarten);   or  only  two:    lor   vf/ns,  ior
times,  'including  in  the  latter  both  days  and   years
(Schumann,  Maurer).     For  the    first  view,   indeed,
here  speaks  the  simple  scries  of  the  appointments,
but  there  is,  too,  the  consideration  that  the  spiritual
or    ecclesiastical)    appointments    of    the  _  heavenly
Bodies  arc  not  exhausted  in  the  chronological,     me
si<m  riX  has  oftentimes  in  the  Old  Testament  a  relig
ious  significance.     Thus  the  rainbow  is  established
for  the  sign  (r.-.S)  of  the  covenant  between  Jehovah
and   Noah,    toccthcr    with    his    sons   (Gen.  ix.  1»
Later,  Abraham  receives  in  the  starry  heaven  a  Sign
of  the  divine  promise.     But  when  it  is  said  (Jcr.  x
2):  Ye  must  not  be  afraid  of  the  signs  of  heaven
there  is  not  reprobated  therein  the  meaning  of  HP
signs  of  heaven  iu  their  right  significance  but  only
the  heathenish  misconception  of  them.     Ihc  pru*
., i *  o,TT,,i,r>lin  •   it  was,  a  con-


magical  and  unmeaning.  Had  S"HtB  here  meant  nothing
more  than  casting  or  sowing  seed,  as  tire  LXX.  interpret  it,
there  would  only  have  been  need  of  the  present  Jtal  pan
ciple  r-iTT  ,  as  in  ver.  29,  -where  the  plant  is  spoken  of  after
its  creation,  and  as  carrying  on  its  processes  of  reproduction
Had  "yielding  seed"  been  the  sense  intended,  there  are
other  words  that  would  have  better  expressed  it.  ihis


te    eatens     m  .

five  religion  was  throughout  symbolic;  it  .was  a  con
temptation  of  the  invisible  deity  through  symbolic
signs,  and  the  most  universal  of  hem  we  re  sun
m°oon,  and  stars.  It  was  thus  that  the  primidW
symbolic  religion  became  heathenish;  the


symoc  regon

symbolic  degenerated  into  an  irreligious   mythic*?

the  glory  of  God  was  suffered  to  pass  away  in


from,  or  as  contained  in,  the


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


171


form  of  transitory  signs ;  it  became  identified  with
them,  whilst  men  utterly  lost  the  consciousness  of  the
difference.  The  true  representatives  of  the  primitive
religion  on  its  light-side  held  fast  this  consciousness,
as  in  the  example  of  Melchizcdek ;  but  they  reve
renced  <jod  as  such  under  the  name  El  Elion  (God
Most  High).  It  is  an  improper  inference  when
Knobel  here  would  refer  this  to  the  unusual  phenom
ena  of  the  heaven,  such  as  the  darkening  or  eclipse
of  the  sun  and  moon,  the  red  aspect  of  the  latter  (in
an  eclipse),  the  comets,  the  fiery  appearances,  etc.
Moreover,  we  cannot  find  indicated  here,  as  Delitzsch
does,  an  astrological  importance  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  on  which  he  remarks :  "  This  ancient  univer
sally  accepted  influence  is  undeniable,  a  thing  not  to
be  called  in  question  in  itself  considered,  but  only  in
its  extent."  The  question  refers  to  the  signs  of  the
theocratic  belief,  such  as  are  celebrated  Ps.  viii.  and
Ps.  xix.,  from  which  the  culture-signs  of  agriculture,
navigation,  and  travel,  must  not  be  excluded.
Thence,  by  right  consequence,  must  be  added  the
festival  signs,  ni'll'l'a  .  Moed,  it  is  true,  denotes,  in
general,  an  appointed  time,  but  it  comes  in  close
connection  with  the  word  Jehovah  before  the  festival
seasons.  The  significant  time-sections  of  the  Israel
ites  were,  moreover,  religious  sabbaths,  new  moons
(Ps.  civ.  19),  and  yearly  festivals  which  were  likewise
regulated  by  the  moon.  Upon  the  two  religious
appointments  of  the  heavenly  bodies  (signs  of  belief,
signs  of  worship)  follow  the  two  ethical  and  humane:
the  determination  of  the  days  and  therewith  of  the
days-works — the  determination  of  the  years  and
therewith  the  regulation  of  life  and  its  duration.
Hereupon  follows  the  more  common  determination
of  the  heavenly  lights  for  the  animal  life  in  general.
— To  give  light  upon  the  earth — With  the  light
"f  the  sun  there  is  also  determined  its  vital  warmth.
Thus  the  text  speaks  first  of  the  appointment  of  the
\eavenly  bodies  for  the  earth-world  (vers.  14,  15),
»nd  then  of  the  creation  of  the  luminaries  in  their
variety  and  distinct  appointments,  in  which  the  stars
form  a  special  class,  ver.  16.  After  this  there  is
mention  of  their  location  and  their  efficacy ;  their
place  is  the  firmament ;  their  primary  operation  is  to
give  light ;  next  follows  their  government,  that  is,
that  peculiar  determination  of  the  day  and  night  that
is  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  life.  The  third
thing  is  the  division  between  light  and  darkness,  the
instituting  of  the  vicissitude  of  day  and  night.  For
here  must  the  dividing  of  light  from  darkness  denote
something  (mite  different  from  that  of  ver.  4 ;  it  is
not  the  division  of  the  luminous  and  the  shadowy,
but  of  the  day-light  and  the  night-shadow  them
selves.  P>ut  now  arises  the  question :  How  comes  it
that  the  first  mention  of  the  creation  of  the  heavenly
bodies  is  on  the  fourth  day?  It  follows  from  the
fundamental  cosmical  laws  that  the  earth,  before  the
sun,  was  not  prepared  for  bringing  forth  the  plants.
It  is  saying  too  little  to  affirm  that  this  place  must
only  be  understood  phenomenally,  or  that  the  earlier
created  heavenly  bodies  make  their  first  appearance
on  the  fourth  day  along  with  the  clcaring-up  of  the
atmosphere.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  surely,  it  is
saying  too  much,  when  we  assume  that  the  formation
of  the  starry  world,  or  even  of  our  own  solar  and
planetary  system,  had  its  beginning  in  the  fourth
creative  period.  This  representation  is  inorganic,
abnormal.  It  is  just  as  little  supported  by  any  sound
cosmogony  as  demanded  by  the  scriptural  text.  As
little  as  the  text  requires  that  in  general  the  first


light  of  the  universe  should  have  its  origination
cotcmporaneous  with  the  light  out  of  the  thohu
vabkohu  of  the  earth,  just  as  little  does  the  place
before  us  demand  that  we  should  date  the  absolutely
first  formation  of  the  heavenly  bodies  from  the  fourth
creative  day.  This,  however,  agrees  well  with  our
text,  that  both  the  appearing  of  the  starry  world,
and  the  development  and  operation  of  the  solar  sys
tem,  were  first  made  ready  for  the  earth  on  that
same  day  in  which  the  earth  became  ready  for  the
sun.  On  the  fourth  creative  day,  therefore,  there  is
completed  the  cosmical  regulation  of  the  world  for
the  earth,  and  of  the  earth  for  the  world.  See  more
under  the  Theological  and  Ethical.

9.  Vers.  20-23.  Fifth  Creative  Day. — Corre
sponding  then  to  the  second  day  (of  the  first  triad)
we  have  here  (on  the  second  day  of  the  second  triad)
the  animation  of  the  water  and  the  air  in  the  marine
and  winged  creatures.  The  creation  of  the  marine
animals  begins  first.  It  is  not  only  because  they  are
the  most  imperfect  creatures,  but  because  the  water
is  a  more  quickening  and  a  more  primitive  condition
ing  of  life  than  the  earth.  The  like  holds  tuic  of  the
air.  It  is  clear,  moreover,  that  the  land-animals  in
their  organization  stand  nearer  to  men  than  the  birds;
nevertheless  they  are  not,  in  all  respects,  more  per
fect  than  the  birds;  and  of  these  latter,  as  of  the
trees,  it  is  emphatically  said  that  they  hover  high
over  the  earth.  Indeed,  as  birds  of  the  heaven,  they
are  assigned  to  the  heaven,  as  the  fish  to  the  water,
as  the  land-animals  to  the  earth,  and  so  far  correctly,
since  they  not  merely  soar  above  the  earth,  and  have
their  proper  life  in  the  air,  but  also  because  they  are
in  part  water-fowl  and  not  merely  land-birds.  This
graphic  nature-limning  is,  moreover,  to  be  noticed
here  in  the  formation  of  the  fishes  and  the  birds,  as
at  an  earlier  stage  in  the  formation  of  the  plants.
The  first  animals  are  now  more  carefully  denoted  as
living  souls,  rnn  C33  (soul  of  life).  On  this  De
litzsch  remarks :  "  The  animal  does  not  merely  have
soul,  it  is  soul;  since  the  soul  is  its  proper  being,
and  the  body  is  only  its  appearing."  That  might
hold  in  respect  to  men,  but  it  could  hardly  be  said
of  the  animal  (see  Ps.  civ.  29,  30).  It  is  true,  the
beast  is  animated ;  it  has  an  animal  principle  of  sen
sation  and  of  motion  which  is  the  ground  of  its
appearing,  but  as  soul  it  is  inseparably  connected
with  all  animal  soul-life,*  that  is,  the  life  of  nature.
Knobel  translates :  Let  the  waters  swarm  a  swarm.
This  conception  is  still  more  lively  and  pictorial  than
that  of  our  translation  (es  sollcn  wimmcln.  die  Wasser
vom  Gewimmel,  let  the  water  swarm  with  or  from  a
swarm) ;  nevertheless  we  hold  the  latter  to  be  more
correct,  since  the  causality  of  the  swarm  cannot  lie
in  the  water  itself,  f  but  in  the  creative  word. — And

*  [Thierseclcnlclcn.  Langc  evidently  forms  this  Gor
man  word  with  reference  to  the  peculiar  Hebrew  phrase
PIT!  1TEJ  ,  nephcsh  hayya,  or  soul  of  life,  rendered  in  our
English  Version  living  soul.  "We  use  the  word  animal,  in
translating,  from  an  aversion  to  the  English  word  beast,
which  has  fallen  much  below  the  German  T/tier. — T.  L.]

t  [This  reasoning  seems  doubtful.  There  is  no  more
need  of  such  an  argument  to  avoid  naturalism  hero  than  in

interpreting  the  similar  language  y"lNn  NIU'IF),  .Let  the
earth  bring,  vor.  11.  The  causality  here,  as  there,  is  dou
ble,  but  there  is  certainly  a  secondary  causality  in  the
earth  which  justifies  us  in  giving  its  obvious  active  transitive
meaning  to  the  denominative  verb  VTCJ  :  Let  the  waters
swarm  a  swarm.  The  verb  is  evidently  made  from  the  noun
|'"H1J  ,  reptilia,  the  lowest  and  most  prolific  kind  of  animals.
So  the  Jewish- Arabic  translator  renders  it  by  a  similar


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


let  birds  5y  and  fly  (fly  about). — The  strong  sense
of  the  Hebrew  conjugation  Filel  (rsrs^)  cannot  be
expressed  by  the  simple  words  /<  /  _/'//.  The  clement
of  the  formation,  the  air,  is  not  here  given  ;  for  it  is
clear  that  they  arc  not  referred  to  the  water  in  their
origin.*  One  might  think  here  in  some  way  of  the
upper  waters;  but  the  bin's  are  nit'ftr  the  firma
ment.  Tlu-ir  dement  is  the  very  firmament  of  hea
ven,  just  where  the  two  waters  are  divided.  On  its
underside,  or  that  which  is  turned  towards  the  earth
(•^Q-br),  must  the  birds  fly.  They  belong  just  as
much  to  the  earth  as  to  the  water  and  the  air;  there
fore  are  they  assigned  to  no  special  district,  vcr.  21.
The  great  water-animals  ("pin ,  long-extended),  a
word  which  is  elsewhere  used  of  the  serpent,  the
crocodile,  I  he  marine  monsters,  but  not  specially  of
fishes.  "These,  with  the  insects  that  live  in  the
water,  worms,  etc.,  are  all  here  to  be  understood
under  rrn  £E:  (soul  of  life)."  Knobel.  That  the
animal  creation  had  its  beginning  mainly  with  the
water-animals  we  learn  from  natural  science;  but
whether  witli  the-  vertebrated  animals?  (Delit/.scli.)
All  birds  <>f  whir/,  translates  Knobel.  We  would
rather  take  r:2  as  a  more  general  designation:
u-inyc 7,  which  would  also  include  the  insects.  Dc-
litzsch  correctly  rejects  the  old  view,  which  is  re
stored  by  Knobel,  namely  that  the  author  meant  to
nt  God  as  having  always  created  each  species
of  animals  in  one  pair;  for  one  pair  cannot  swar?n,
a:id  with  a  swarm  the  animal  creation  begins.  With
good  ground,  however,  does  Delitzsch  maintain  that
for  the  animals  there  were  determined  central  points
of  creation,  p.  117.  None  the  more,  however,  can
we  approve  v,  hat  he  fays  of  the  ytncrnlio  aquivoca
of  the  water  and  air-animals  out  of  water  and  earth  ;


Linat'.vc  verb  made  iV.>m  iOWO ,  a  lizard,  y^/.AASJ
i^ ^AA-O  f-  L»J  | ,  Let  the  water  bring  forth  lizards,  or
swarm  with  lizards. — T.  I,.]

*  [Thi-i  is  not  so  clear  as  Dr.  Langc  may  think,  although
he  has  on  his  side  most  of  the  modern  commentators.     The
Hebrew  words  TEI""1  rp>"l  >  as  they  stand  connected,  can
not,  we  think,  be  properly  rendered  in  any  other  way  than
as  we  find  it  in  our  English  Version  :  and  birds  Ihatjly,  and
in  all  the  ancient  Versions  ;  LXX.  :  TTCTCH'OL  Trcrd/tieva  ;  Vul
gate  :  producnnl  aqiut  reptile  et  volatile;  the  Syriac  is  cxact-
tlic  Hebrew  in   its  construction,  and  can  have  but
•ible  sense,  birds  that  fly.     So  Luther:  es  errcye  fich
das  Wassr.r  mil  Thiertn  und  mit  Gccijyel  das  Jltcye.       The

valuable  translation,  Arabs  Erpcnianus,  has  it   folJ2«

f  '  *

ji [* _s  ,  which  can  only  be  rendered,  in  the  connection,

birds  that  fly.  The  idiom  of  the  Hebrew  seems  fixed,  requir
ing  us  in  such  a  case  to  regard  the  future  as  descriptive,  like
participle  or  an  adjective.  In  the  Arabic  the  correspond-
.ng  usage  is  so  established  as  to  put  any  other  translation
out  of  the  question.  It  occurs  frequently  in  the  Koran  with
the  same  subject,  and  in  just  such  a  connection  as  we  have
it  here.  The  other  rendering,  and  let  birds  Jly,  would  re
quire  a  different  order  of  the  words,  CpSi"!  PST^l,  as  just
before  C^Sn  "U*1'CJi  let  the  waters  swarm.  The  more  mod
ern  rcmlcrh.g  has' come  from  the  fear  of  what  would  seem
gross  naturalism,  namelv  the  eduction  of  the  birds  from  the
water;  but  we  know  nothing  here  except  as  we  are  taught.
There  is  nothing  more  incredible  in  such  an  eduction  than
there  would  be  in  affirming  it  of  any  other  form  of  that
unknown  and  wonderful  thing  we  call'life.  It  may  be  very
far  back,  this  coming  of  the  bird-nature  out  of  the  waters,
but  the  naturalist  finds  the  fish-type  in  the  birds,  all  of
which  may  have  been  originally  water-fowl,  and  this  would
seem  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  declaration  of  the  text,
strange  as  it  may  sound  to  us.  Dr.  Conant,  we  find,  trans
lates  as  Langc  does ;  but  with  all  our  respect  for  that  excel
lent  Hebrew  scholar,  we  are  compelled  to  think  bim  wrong.
So  Bush,  Jacobua,  and  others.— T.  L.]


since  we  must  throughout  acquiesce  in  the  opinion
that  the  creative  word  establishes  something  new —
new  life-principles,  and  here  also  the  respective  ani
mal-principles,  in  water  and  air. — Vcr.  2'j.  And
God  blessed  them,  and  said. — We  must  hold  as
scholastic  the  question  started  and  debated  by  Cha
teaubriand  and  others,  whether  God  blessed  also  the
animals  that  were  buried  in  the  hills.  The  special
consecration  to  fertility,  in  the  case  of  the  lishes  and
birds,  carries  back  a  fact  of  the  nature-life  to  the
divine  causality  ;  we  refer  to  their  infinitely  abundant
multiplication.  Besides,  it  suits  well  the  fifth  day,
or  the  number  live,  that  the  symbols  of  mightiest
life-motion,  the  lishes  and  the  birds,  are  created  on
this  day.  The  animals  of  lesser  physical  motion,  but
of  more  intensive  individual  sensation,  come  after
them.

10.  Vers.  '2-1,  25.  Sixth  Creative  Da;/.  First
half. — The  creation  of  the  laud-animals  stands  in
parallelism  with  the  creation  of  the  linn  land  on  the
third  day.  On  the  third  day,  remarks  Delitzsch,
irX']  (and  he  said)  is  repeated  only  twice,  but  on
the  sixth  day  four  times.  "  Truly  is  this  day  there
by  denoted  as  the  crown  of  the  others  (the  crown  of
all  is  the  sabbath).  The  sixth  day's  work  has  its  eye
on  man.  In  advancing  nearness  to  him  are  the  ani
mals  created."  The  general  creation  of  P.*!"]  ttJEIJ
(soul  of  life,  or  living  soul)  divides  itself  here,  1.  into
cattle  (nrr]2  from  crc),  the  tame  land-animals  (not
utterly  dull  or  stupid  ;  for  the  horse  is  less  dull  than
the  sloth)  to  whom  in  their  intercourse  with  men
speech  appears  wanting;  2.  into  the  reptile  that
ciawls  upon  the  soil  (whether  it  be  the  footless  or
the  thousand-footed)  and  the  other  animals  that
move  about  upon  the  earth  as  the  birds  fly  about  in
the  heaven  ;  3.  beasts  of  the  earth,  or  the  wild  beasts
that  roam  everywhere  through  the  earth. — Let  the
earth  bring  forth:  That  is,  in  the  formative  mate
rial  of  the  earth,  in  the  awakened  life  of  the  earth,
the  creative  word  of  God  brings  forth  the  land-ani
mals.  According  to  the  older  opinions  (see  Knobel)
it  was  the  greater  power  of  the  sun  that  woke  up
this  new  annual  life;  according  to  Ebrard  it  was  the
volcanic  revolutions  of  the  earth.  Delitzsch  disputes
this,  p.  110.  We  must  distinguish,  however,  be
tween  a  volcanic  commotion  of  the  earth's  crust  and
its  partial  eruptions.  At  all  events,  the  land-animalfl
presuppose  a  warm  birth-place.  And  yet  the  Vulcan-
ism,  or  volcanic  power,  must  have  been  already
active  at  a  far  earlier  period,  on  the  third  day  at
least,  and  as  long  as  the  water  was  not  water  (proper)
must  the  creative  power  of  fire  have  been  in  the
water  itself.

11.  Vcrs.  20-31.    8ixtli    Creative  Day.     Sccont
half.     The  Creation  of  Man. — Wherefore  does  the
creation  of  man  and  of  the  land-animals  fall  on  one
and  the  same  creative  day  ?     It  is  because  man,  as
to  his  bodily  appearance,  has  his  being   from  the
•arth  in  common  with  the  animals,  and  because  the
formations  of  the  sixth  day  correspond  to  that  forma
tion  of  the  earth  which  took  place  on  the  third  day
From  this  it  follows  that  on  the  third  day  the  forma
tion  of  the  earth  was  the  main  thing  rather  than  that
of  the  sea.     At  all  events,  there  comes  here  between
the  two  creative  acts  a  solemn  pause  resembling  a  j
creative  evening.     God,  as  it  were,  stays  his  hand,
and  holds  a  special  counsel  before  he  goes  on  with  I
the  work ;  whereas  he  had  always,  until  now,  irnme-  •
diately  uttered  the  creative  word.     The  idea  of  man  i
oecomcs   the   clear   decree  for   his   creation. — We


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


173


would  (or,  We  will)  make  man. — It  must  not  bo
read  as  though  it  were  a  rousing  of  Himself:  Let  us
make  num.     But  why  the  plural?     There  are  various
explanations :    1.    The   plural    is  without   mcanino-
(Rosentuiiller,  and  others) ;  2.  it  is  a  self-challenging
(Tuch) ;  3.  the  three  persons  of  the  Trinity  (church-
fathers,  Paschasius,  and  others  in  the  middle  a«-cs ;
Calvin,    Gerhard,    etc.).      That   the   Old   Testament
knows  nothing  of  a  divine  tri-unity,  as  Knobcl  will
have  it,  is  not  true ;  yet  the  trinitarian  idea  only  un
folds  itself  germinally  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  here
it  had  not  yet  coine  to  its  development.     4.  God's
taking  counsel  with  the  angels  (Targuin  of  Jonathan,
the  Jewish  interpreters ;  *  Delitzsch,  with  reference  to
the  Babylonian  and  Persian  myths ;  yet  the  passage
must  not  be  so  understood  that  the  angels  take  part
in  the  creation  except  by  way  of  communication;
God  communicates  to  them  his  resolution).     Of  an
gels,  however,  the  text  has  no  trace,  and  the  places
cited  by  Delitzsch,  Ps.  viii. ;  Heb.  ii.  7  ;  Luke  xx.  36,
prove   nothing.      Although   the   angels    are    called
spirits  and  sons  of  God,  yet  the  Scriptures  accurately
distinguish   between  the  angelic    and    the    huraa
nature,  and  there  seems  to  be  an  impropriety  in  th
mingling  of  the  divine  and  the  angelic  image.     More
over,  from  this  human  creation  it  is  that  we  have  th
first  disclosure  of  the  existence  of  any  spirit-world  in
general.     5.  Pluralis  majestaticus,  or  pluralis  inten
rims   (Grotius,    Gesenius,    Neumann,    Knobel).      I
nust  be  noted  that  the  plural  is  carried  into  the  won


_  [Among  the  Jewish  interpreters  the  view  of  Maimoni
.es  is  peculiar  and  noteworthy,  though  it  may  at  first  strike
is  as  strange  and  irreverent.  It  is  God,  he  thinks,  spoukin"
o  the  earth,  or  rather,  to  the  nature  already  brought  into
emg  by  the  previous  utterances  of  the  word,  and  which  in
le  commands  preceding,  had  been  addressed  in  the  imne.ra-
ve  third  person  :  "  Let  the  eartli  bring  forth,"  etc.  2sTow

,  -hen  man  is  to  be  made,  there  is  a  change  to  the  first  person
imperative,  that  is,  nature  is  addressed  more  as  a'n  associate

.-  lan  as  a  servant :  "  Let  us  make  man,"  the  higher  work  in


hich  both  co-operate— God  directly  and  sovereignly,  iiatur
tediately  and  obediently  through  the  divine  word.  From
ie_  one  comes  his  body,  his  physical,  from  the  other  his,
vmcr  life  and  image.  "In  regard  to  the  lower  animal
id  vegetable  life,"  says  this  great  critic,  philosopher,  and
.oologian,  "the  language  OBStan  ,  the  word)  was  !^_  ,..
-IXn  ,  let  the  earth  bring  forth  ;  but  in  respect  to  man  it
changed  to  HE  £3  ,  '  [et  us  make  maQ),  that  ig  to  _^  ^
id  the  earth,'— let  the  latter  bring  forth  his  body  from  the
tiny  elements,  even  as  it  did  in  the  case  of  the  lower
.^gs  that  preceded  him.  For  this  is  the  moaning  of  that
3h  ,s  written  (ch.  11.  7)  :  'Jehovah  Elohim  formed  man
X?l ,  see  note,  p.  164)  from  the  dust  of  the  earth,  but  he
ye  him  a  spirit  from  the  mouth  of  the  Most  Hitch  • '  as  it  is
itten,  '  He  breathed  into  man,'  etc.,  and  said,  moreover
lour  image,  according  to  our  likeness,'  moaning  that  he
!  uld  be  like  to  both,  that  is,  in  the  composition  of  his
ly  a  likeness  of  earth  (or  nature)  from  which  ho  was
cen  and  in  his  spirit  like  to  the  higher  order  of  beinj?  in
it  it  13  incorporeal  and  immortal.  And  so  in  what  foiloV
i  says,  in  the  image  of  God  (alone  or  unassorted)  created
1  him,  to  set  forth  the  wonderful  distinction  (X^S,  the
'  r^r^oT^,,™11:11  is  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the


to  Dcitv  and


'

,  it  is  degrading  instead  of


we  depart  at  all  from  the  patristic


i3r^3  (in  our  image),  etc.     This  appears  to  go  b»
yond  the  pluralis  majestaticus,  and  to  point  to  tha
germinal  view  of  a  distinction  in  the  divine  personali
ty,  directly  in  favor  of  which  is  the  distinction  of
Elohim  and  Ruah  Elohim,  or  that  of  God  and  hia
Wisdom,  as  this  distinction  is  made,  Prov.  viii.,  with
reference  to  the  creation.    Although  Din  and  niai
as  well  as  the  particles  2  and  3 ,  are  used  promiscu
ously  (Knobel,  Delitzsch)1,  yet  still  the  double  desi«na-
tion  does  not  serve  merely  to  give  a  stronger  emphasis
to  the  thought  (Knobel).     In  that  case  the  stronger
expression   c=:s    ought   to  come  last,     cbs   is   the
shadow  of  the  figure,  the  shadow-outlin;,  the  copy,
and  therefore  also  the  idol.     Wan  is  the  resem
blance,  the  comparison,  the  example,  the  appearance.
And  whilst  3  denotes  the  near  presence  of  an  object,
as  in,  or  within,  close  to  or  in  it,  into,  whether  in  a
friendly  or  a  hostile  sense,  near  by,  etc.,  3  expresses
the  relation  of  similarity  or  likeness,  as  as,  in  some
degree,  like  as,  instead  of,  etc.     The  former  preposi
tion  denotes  the  norm,  the  form,  mass,  number  and
kind  of  a  thing;  the  latter  its  relation,  similarity
equality,  proportion,  in  reference  to  some  other  thin^'
According  to  this,  in  our  imane  means,  after  the
principle,  or  the  norm  of  our  image ;  but  as  our  UH-
ness  means,  so  that  it  be  our  likeness.     The  image
denotes  the  ideal,  and  therefore  also  the  disposition
the  being,  the  definition;  the  likeness  denotes  the
actuality,  the  appearing.     As  the  likeness  of  God
man  is  set  (placed,  appointed) ;  but  the  image  of  God
he  is  made  to  become  (fit,  factus  esf)  through  his  most
interior  assimilation,  his  ideal  formative  impulse  (or
that  tendency  that  forms  him  to  the  idea).*     For


T«« [^  \          it  difficult  to  express  the  thought  of

Langc  here,  and  especially  to  give  the  force  intended  'in  tho
German  warden.  "  The  image,"  he  says,  "is  the  ideal,  die
Anlarjt,  das  Wcscn."  So  Maimonides  here  culls  C5S  the
specific  form,  mren  mi*,  tho  species  determining
form,  or  that  which  makes  a  thing  inwardly  what  it  is,  in
distinction  from  STPSSlXn  mi 21  PI  ,  the  architectural
form.  The  manner  in  which  the  two  word*  are  used  would
wan-ant  tho  interpretation  that  cbs  (image)  is  to  man  what
"pa  is  to  the  vegetable  and  animal  species,  or  rather,  that
in  man,  as  created  after  this  higher  idea,  tho  rVjf  (image)
is  tho  'pa  (species).  This  is  most  important  in  respect  to
the  question :  in  what  consists  the  unity  of  tho  human
race  ?  Oneness  of  physical  origin  and  physical  life  (p£)  un
doubtedly  belongs  to  the  idea  of  species,  but  in  a 'much
higher  sense  is  this  unity  conserved  by  the  cibs  ,  the  higher
species,  the  one  spiritual  humanity  in  nil  men.  It  is  on
>roofs  of  this,  and  not  on  facial  angles  or  length  of  heels
hat  the  argument  should  be  built.  Of  tho  ifnimals  it  is
aid,  SlfTJIBb  ,  each  cno  according  to  his  kind.  This  is

never  said  of'man,  but  instead  of  it,  it  is  *I3£ bj£2  ,  in  our
mage.  In  the  next  verse  it  is  said  God  created  mau
!J!3  ,  "in  his  image"— that  is,  God's  image,  though
ome  of  the  Jewish  interpreters,  as  referred  to  by  ATjen

Ezra,  would  make  the  pronoun  in  I'aiS!  relate  to  man  (his
mage,  man's  image),  but  still  that  which  God  had  specifl-
ally  given  as  his  divinely  distinguishing  idea.  So  also

in  the  1323 ^  ,  our  image,  they  interpret  it,  tho  image  that

we  have  giVen,  as  in  Gen.  vi.  3,  Trtl ,  my  spirit,  is  tha
pirit  or  life  that  I  have  given.  So  in  Ts.  civ.  29  30  •
Thou  gathcrest  in,  crVpl,  their  spirit  "-again ':'  "Thou

sendest  forth,  ^-1,  thy  spirit,"  tho  life  that  thou,  hast

given.    It  is  the  same  spirit  in  both  verses.

There  is  in  -pa  ,  also,  the  radical  sense  of  image,  as  wa

see  in  the  derivative  HMan  ,  Ps.  xvii.  15,  joined,  too,  with

a  pronoun  referring  to  God,'  ^nilm  ,  "  thy  image."     "  I


174


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


the  dogmatic  treatment  of  this,  sec  farther  below.
Knobel  and  Dclitzsch,  following  the  Syriac  Version,
are  of  opinion  that  r*n  (beast)  has  fallen  out  before
I'-'Xn  (the  earth) ;  but  wherefore  should  the  domin
ion  of  man  be  limited  merely  to  the  animal-world?
Through  his  lordship  can  man  domesticate  the  wild
beast;  he  may  al.-o  rule  over  the  plant-world,  and
over  the  earth  absolutely.  This,  in  its  widest  accep
tation,  is  set  forth,  ver.  '28.  In  this  divine  viceroy-
ship  must  his  po.^ession  of  the  image  iirst  reveal
itself;  it  must  be  the  likeness  of  his  higher  and  more
intense  conformity. — Ver.  27.  Very  explicitly  is
this  divine-imaged  nature  of  man  presented  in  a  two
fold  manner  along  '.\iih  his  creation. — As  man  and
woman. — Properly,  as  male  and  female  created  he
them.  Rightly  docs  I  :i<l>ivit  remark:  "The  lan
guage  here  soars  to  a  most  concise  song  of  tri
umph,  and  we  meet,  for  the  first  time,  with  the
parallelism  of  members.'1  In  three  parallel  mem
bers,  and  therefore  in  the  highest  poetical  form,  does
the  narrative  celebrate  the  creation  of  man.  Con
cern!:'  ..;iou  of  men  from  one  pair,  see  be-

shall   '  •  when   I  awake,  thy  likeness."    So  in  a

frirl'u'.  J  •     tly  the  reverse  of  this,  EPS  seems  to  be

used  i'rr  the  bad  im-iLre,  or  the  stamp  of  the  Evil  One  in
'<  men,  as  in  1's.  Ixxiii.  20:  "As  a  dream  when  one
awake:!.,  io,  0  I.-'i-.l.  in  the  awaking  (not  "  thy  awaking,"
1'jr  whioii  there,  is  r.u  pronoun  and  nu  warrant  whatever),  in
the  great  awaking  CP"2),  in  the  arousing  (the  dies  rclri-

.  ),  thou  v.-ilt  reject  their  image,"  HJ.IF)  EEbjt  .

In  what  this  imau-o  consists,  and  whether  lost,  or  to  what

extent   lost,  by  tho  1'all,  are  mainlv  questions  of  theology

ition,  but  that  there  i<  .-till  in  man  what

::i  a  1:1  >st  important  and  specific,  or  constituting,  sense,  is

•  •alli'.l  "  the  linage  of  God,"  most  clearly  appears  fruiu  Cn-n.
ix.  (i,  w]u:c  it  is  made  the  ground  in  the  divine  denounce
ment  of  the  aToi'ity  oi'murdi  r.

Th<    :  strong  for  interpreting  "  man  from  the

earth,"  as  we  interpret,  the  fish  and  the  reptile  from  the
waters.     If  the  formative  word  "IS11  is  used  in  the  on
so  is  X~2  ,  which  some  regard  as  the  more  directly  creative,
employed'  in  the  other  :  "  And  God  created  the  great  whales,

•  aid  the  moving  thiiu'  wlii"h  the  waters  swarmed,"  that  is,
all  the  marine  animals  from  1h<?  greatest  to  the  least.     The
one  language  is  no  more  inc. insistent  with  the  idea  of  a  ^re
cess  than  the  other.     There  is  nothing  then  to  shack  us  as
anti-scriptural  in  the  thought  that  man,  too,  as  to  his  phys
ical  and  material,  is  a  product  of  nature.     As  such  physical
l;eing  he  has  his  ""52  (physical  species),  and  may  be  said  to
be  !|n:'1'Cb  ,  as  well  as  the  other  animals.    But  he  is  also  a
metaphysical,  a  supernatural,  a  spiritual  being,  and  here  it
may  be  questioned  whether  he  can  be  said  to  be  1!"Ii^B3  .
To  describe  him  in  this  respect  there  is  used  the  higher  word
Cbs  ,  the  image,  the  image  of  God,  in  distinction  from  his
maV  and  female  conformations  which  belong  wholly  to  the
physical.     We  are  expressly  taught  that  this  latter  does  not
belong  to  angels,   or  any  "purely  spiritual  beings.     They
Irive  no  sex,   and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  they  can
properly  lie  said  to  have  species,  unless  it  may  be  affirmed
of  bad  spirits  who  are  greatly  mingled  with  the  physical,
and  -whose  dcfoimcd  image  God  despises    or  rejects,   Ps.
Ixxiii.  20.    That  there  is  specific  variety,  or  species,  among
such  may  be  inferred  from  our  Saviour's  language,  Matt.
xvii.  '21  :  "  This  kind  (TO  yevot)  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer
and  fasting."

The  image  of  God  the  distinguishing  type  of  man  :  Tlold
fast  to  this  in  all  its  spirituality  as  the  mirror  of  the  eternal
ideas,  and  we  need  not  fear  naturalism.  Many  in  the  church
are  shivering  with  alarm  at  the  theories,  which  are  con
stantly  coming  from  the  scientific  world,  about  the  origin
of  species,  and  the  production  of  man,  or  rather  the  physical
that  may  have  become  man,  through  the  lower  types.  The
quieting  remedy  is  a  higher  psychology,  such  as  the  fair
interpretation  of  the  Bible  warrants,  when  it  tells  us  thai
the  primus  homo  became  such  through  the  inspiration  (the
inbreathing)  and  the  image  of  God  lifting  him  out  of  nature,
and  making  him  and  all  his  descendants  a  peculiar  "p
species,  by  the  possession  of  the  cbx,  or  image  of  the
supernatural. — T.  L.]


ow. — Ver.  28.  And  God  blessed  them
them,  not  irvix ,  him,  according  to  the  Scptuagint)
and  said  to  them. — "God  blesses,  too,  the  new
:reated  man  but  with  two  blessings.  For  besides
he  power  of  propagation  which  they  have  in  com
mon  with  the  beasts  (ver.  22),  they  hold  moreover
the  dominion  over  them.  The  same  is  enlarged  after
:he  flood."  Knobel.  "The  striving  after  the  rhyth
mical-poetical  parallelism  presents  itself  in  these
words :

and  ETohim  blessed  them,

and  Elohini  said  unto  them."    Delitzsch.

Yet  the  blessing  sounds  hardly  "  like  a  summons  to  the
subjection  of  hostile  powers."    The  relation  of  the  soul
to  the  outer  world,  especially  "  the  feature  of  self-hood
n  all  creature-life,''  was  not  originally  adverse,  as  is
held   by  Bellarmin,  or  even  by  Zwingli.     And  thus
is  man  first  pictured  to  us,  and  then  his  calling,  to
which  it  belongs  that  he  must  rule  his  own  proper
ensual  nature,  as  he  rules  all  living,  or  all  that  is
animal  in  the  earth — the  word  being  taken  here  in  ita
most  universal  sense.     The  laborer  is  worthy  of  his
reward.     The  ruler  of  the  earth  is  himself  condition
ed,     lie  needs  nourishment,  and,  therefore  (ver.  29),
there  is  pointed  out  to  him  his  sustenance. — Behold,
I  have  given  you  (I.ange's  translation:  I  have
appointed  for  you). — Together  with  the  nouri.-hment
of  man  (ver.  2H)  there  is  appointed  the  nourishment
of  the  beasts  (ver.  SO).     What  is  common  to  both
is  the  appointment  of  the  use  of  vegetable  food;  the
distinction  is  that  man  shall  have  the  use  of  the  herb
with  its  seed,  that  is  in  itself,  and  of  the  fruit-tree,
whilst  the  beast,  on  the  other  hand,  has  the  green
of  tin-  herb.     The  meaning  of  this  is,  that  for  man
there  is  the  corn  (or  core)  of  nature,  for  the  beast
the  .-hi'll  or  husk.     "According  to  the  Hebrew  view,
therefore,  men,  at  first,  lived  only  upon  vegetables,
and  at  a  later  time  there  first  came  in  the   ive  of
flesh  (eh.  ix.  o).     The  rest  of  antiquity  agreed  with
this."     Knobel.     For  the  citations  from  Plato,  Plu
tarch,  etc.,  that  belong  here,  see  p.  2o.     According
to  Delitzsch,  this  is  not  a  mere  view  of  antiquity,
but  farther,  he  says,  "  God  did  not  originally  will  the
violent  breaking  up  of  the  life  of  one  living  thing  by
another  for  the  purpose  of  enjoying  its  flesh,  since
that  would  be  utterly  against  his  clearly  expressa
will  in  their  creation."     Oerstedt,  (in  his  "Spirit!
Nature  ")  avers  "  that  we  have  clear  proofs  that  cor
porcal  evil,  ruin,  sickness,  and  death,  were  older  thai
the  fall."      Delitzsch  characterizes  this"asashpu
of  triumph  which  ever  becomes  clearer  in  favorin
the  grossest  materializing  atheism."     And  so  also  h
says,  with  A.  Wagner  (in  his  "Primitive  World"
that  as  the  body  of  man  after  his  fall  underwent  an
essential  alteration  in  its  material  ground,  so  like
wise   there  must   have   gone   before   an   analogot
change   and    transformation    in    the   animal-world
We  sec  not  how  a  naturalist  can  think  of  such
transformation  of  organic  nature ;  still  less  how  w<
can  call  in  question  the  fact  of  a  death  that  ha
come  upon  all  species  of  animals  before  the  fall  o
Adam,  without  taking  along  with  it  the  theosophi
interpretation  of  the  thohu  vabhohu  as  a  Golgotha  ol,
the  Devil's  kingdom.     On  this  supposition,  too,  it  H|
not  easy  to  explain  the  difference  of  the  cattle  an
the  wild  creature  in  our  chapter— just  as  little,  toe
the  fact  that  immediately  alter  the  fall  the  skins  o
animals  are  at  hand  for  the  clothing  of  man ;  or  ins
it  is  the  pious  Abel  who  brings  the  animal  sacrific
to  the  altar,  and  not  Cuin.     Again,  it  will  help  ;
very  little  to  call  in  aid,  as  Delitzsch  does,  the  Bra


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


175


manic  and  the  Buddistic  laws,  and  the  Pythagorean
doctrines  (p.  125).     In  truth,  there  la  still  a  grea
chasm  between  the  tenable  supposition  that  the  para
disaieal  man  put  to  death  no  animal,  or  could  do  so
and  the  arbitrary  inference  that  even  within  the  ani
mal-world  itself  everything  was  so  disposed  that  no
beast  even  ate  another.     Moreover,  in  this  view,  the
representation   of  death   itself  is   not  wholly  freec
from  the  fear  of  death.     The  consequence  of  this
same  theory  would  be,  that  even  an  insect  that  had
once  lived  could  never  die.     But   shall   a   natura
death,  so  called,  as  when  an  old  hind  expires  from
want  of  air,  or  from  hunger,  be  regarded  as  any
more  natural  than  the  death  which  takes  place  under
the  jaws  of  the  lion  ?     In  this  all  too  gentle  repre
sentation  there  lacks  the  heroic   power— the   spirit
of  sacrifice.     May  one  suppose  that  the  first  speci
mens  of  the  beasts  had  not  been  disorganized  like
the  later  animal,  and  that  they  did  not  experience
any  important  transformations,  still  a  literal  change
of  a  grass-eating  into  a  flesh-eating  lion  must  be  re
garded  as  a  radical  transformation.     As  for  the  rest
our  text  denotes  only  the  basis  of  the  law  of  nourish
ment  for  the  animal  existence,  and  this  basis  is  for
man  the  fruit,  the  herb,  the  grain,  for  the  cattle  the
pasturage  and  the  fodder.     In  indulging  our  idealiz
ing  view  of  the  primitive  world,  that  it  was  wholly
without  death,  we  should  not  overlook  the  fact  that
it  was  an  ill  habit  of  the  old  heathenism,  in  its  view
of  the  world,  to  confound  sin  with  death   or  even
with  the  natural  unfolding  of  life.     Thus  the  poems
that  Knobel  too  makes  mention  of,  and  according  to
winch  even  the  ravenous  beasts  originally  lived  upon
vegetable   food.— Ver.   31.   And,  behold,  it  was
very  good.— At  the  seventh  time  it  is  said  not
merely  good,  but  very  good,  because  in  man  the  key
stone  ol  creation  is  reached.     The  possibilities  of  the
rum  of  man  and  of  the  world  are  for  the  pure  para-
hsaical  state  curce  posteriory,  just  as  the  destinies
ot  manhood  are  for  the  thinking  of  the  child      For
the  theosophic  view,  the  undivine  lay  only  bound
under  the  new  order  of  things.     That  in  general  the
demoniac  evil  was  already  in  the  world  is  not  denied,
out  the  six  days'  work,  taken  as  the  world  in  o;eu-
iral   or  as  God  had  made  it,  was  very  good,  that  is
perfect;  KOO-^OS,  KaKXiarov  (Thales).*


12.  Ch.  ii.   1-3.     TIic  Divine  Ralbaih.     Ver    1
Thus  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  finished!

— A  solemn  retrospect  introducing  the  sabbath  of
God.— And  all  their  host.— A  concrete  denoting
ot   the   universe  from   the   predominant   terrestrial
etand-pomt.     The  host  has  reference  to  the  heaven
so  far,  at  all  events,  as  the  stars  are  meant.     As  the
host  of  the  earth,  however,  denotes  its  inhabitants
(Is.  xxxiv.  2),  so  the  thought,  moreover,  gives  au
intimation  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  heaven.     " The
passage  in  the  book  of  Nehemiah  (ch.  ix.'  6)  that
treats  of  the  creation  supposes  correctly  that  in  the
host  of  heaven   (j«S)   the   angels   are  included."
Delitzsch.     When  he  says  farther:  "  The  stars,  ac-
)rdmg  to  the  more  ancient  representation  (Babylo
nian   Assyrian,  Persian)  are  set  forth  as  a  host  for
battle,  or  that  together  with  the  angels  they  are  as
signed  a  portion  in  the  conflict  of  light  with  darkne=s
whose  theatre  is  the  earth  created  within  the  sur
rounding  sphere  of  the  luminous  heavenly  bodies,"—
all  such  remarks  may  be  taken  as  Parsic  rather  than
purely  Biblical.*— Ver.  2.  And   on   the  seventh
day  God  ended  His  work.— The  difficulty  that
arises  from  the  mention  here  of  a  completion  of
God  s  work  on  the  seventh  day,  as  before  it  seemed
to  have  been  on  the  sixth,  has  given  occasion  to  the
beptuagmt,  the   Syriac,  and   many  exegetes  to  put
the  sixth  day  in  place  of  the  seventh.     Others  (Cal
vin,  Drusius,  etc.)  have  read  i^l  as  pluperfect  (had
finished)  contrary  to  the  grammar.     Knobel  explains
he  word  with  Tuch  and  others:   God  let  it  come  to
an  end  on  that  day.     Delitzsch  in  a  similar  manner.
iichers  wrongly  places  a  completion  of  the  creation
on  the  seventh  day.     Kurtz  speaks  of  a  heptccmeron.


*  [1XS  213  :  "Good  exceedingly."    It  would  seem  to
>e  not  merely  a  benediction,  but  an  expression  of  admin

?4%sst^'iltt°!S\i'S«S

yaLuu    aviou  U      Tl  C°U  l  m  th°  ^rccli  language,

spress'ious  the  TTr  1  scc™s,  too,  to  be  implied  in  both

ad  this,  as  it  were  redmw-il-th^i    '  th°  cmotionof  love,
^^^Il^^^^^^t


he  Bible  language:  "And  God  beheld  everything  that  He
hr Tmf''C',  'f  ?,', J!  T^  K°od>  exceeding  good."'  With  all
in  l,fl  •  of  1lla*°?  language  in  the  Tiinspus,  there  is
lought^omethL  e'vi'  l'csot.Ul!g  ^consist, ncy-the

It  may  be  said,  too,  that  this  great  problem  of  evil  seems
to  haunt  some  of  our  best  commentators  in  their  exegesis  of
fcus  passage.  I  bey  find  here  an  implied  reference  to~  future

t^;.         f  -P    g'ooc1'  thcy  would  liavo  i(;  to  mean,  and  so
thej  regard  it  as  a  Verwa hrung,  or  defence  of  God  against
the  authorship  of  evil.     See  Delitzsch,  p.  126.    But    this
mars  the  glory  of  the  passage.     It  is  simply  a  burst  of  ad
miration  and  benediction  called  out  by  the  Creator's  sur
veying  His  works.     The  antliropopathism  is  for  us  its  power
hint  or     •  1   •<•'<  -which,  ,aro  lessened  by  any  such  supposed
*  [We  get  the  best  order  of  senses  in  the  root  N3X  and
its  cognate  M32J  ,  by  regarding,  as  the  primary,  the'  idea
of  splendor,  or  glory,  as  it  remains  in  the  noun  13^  .    See
its  use,  Is.  iv.  2,  where  it  seems  synonymous  with  T133
Is.  xiii.  19,  and  a  number  of  other  places.     The  secondary
sense   of  host,  orderly  military  array  (comp.  Canticles  vi
10),  comes  very  easily  and  naturally  from  it.    Or  we  miv
say  that  along  with  the  idea  of  holts,  as  in  the  freqS
niX2X  Ml'PP  ,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  it  never  loses  the  primary
conception.     ".Thus  the  earth  and  the  heavens  were  finish
ed  and  all  their  glory,"  or  their  glorious  array.    Compare
the  Syriac  J^wD^,  decus,  ornamentum,  where  the  servile
tea  has  become  radical.    The  LXX.  and  Vulgate  transla
tors  Bcem  to  have  had  something  of  this  idea  •  n-ic  6  /cdo-uoc
O.VTUV— omnis  ornatus  corum.    There  is  a  grand  <n™ificari(
in  the  Greek  KOCTMOS  and  Latin  mundus  as  thus  used  for  tho
world  or  the  array  (artistic  unity)  of«thc  worlds.     N32
is  the  Hebrew  for  KoV^or,  and  thus  there  is  a  most  sublime
parallelism  presented  by  its  two  expressions  :  1T1JQX  iTirP
and  O^p?3?  ^3»— Lord  of  the  worlds  in  space,  King  of  tho

T'  iT™' l'  17>    XIie  Hcbrew  far  transcends 'the'  Greek.-


170


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


It  seems  to  us,  however,  that  the  rest  of  God  does
not  denote  a  remaining  inactive  merely,  or  a  d<
nothing     The  perfecting  of  the  work  on  the  seventh
is   likewise  something   positive:    namely,  that  God
celebrated  His  work  (kept  a  hob'  day  oi  solemn  tri
umph  over  it)  and    blessed    the  sabbath,     lo    cele
brate'  to  bless,  to  consecrate,  is  the  finishing  sabbath-
work— a  living,  active,  priestly  doing,  and  not  merely
a   laving    aside    of    action.     "The   Father    worketh
hitherto"  ,av,  Christ  h»  relation  to  His  healings  on
the  sabbath"  (John   v.   17).     The  doing  of  God  in
respect  to  Ihe  completed  creation  is  ..1  a  festive  kind
(solemn    stately,  holy),  a  directing  of  motion  and  of
an  unfolding  of  things  now  governed  by  law,  m  con
trast  with  that  work  of  God  which  was  reflected  m
the  pressure  of  a  stormy  development  and  in  the
great  revol  itions  and  epochs  of  the  earth  s  formation.
"His  rcsb-c  (His  work)  was  the  completion  of
task   which'  lie    had    proposed."      Delitzsch.      <;<>d
rests"    now  and  triumphs  in  that  last  finish  of  1!

*  l«Thi:  Pi  i-i]  tuxes,"  says  De'.ibvch  in  his  comm<  nl  on
r,2'£""  .  P-  :  ,  "do  n  ••  hesitate  to  speak  anthr<.;-..p:ithi-
cally'of  Cod's  entrance  into  rest."  As  far  as  the  word  r^'Z
is  concerned,  there  is  no  anthropathism  here  except  as  all
human  language,  and  all  human  conception,  in  respect  t,
IXitv  is  !)'.<••  irily  such -that  is,  necessarily  ropresentiiip
him  "in  space  and  time.  The  primary  sense
r" -'  i  simply  t"  cease,  came  dving—z*  the  I.XX.  r<  n  b  r  it,
a:4al)(IC  i,.'t  arc-.iucre  wiiich  carries  the  idea  of  recrea
tion  "or  refreshment  alter  fatigue,  like  ixa^uxw,  or  the  -11
brew  Xii.hal  '^  =::n  •  When  joined  with  this  latter  verb,  as
I  xvxi  17,'tho  wliole  language  may  be  called  anthro-

EfsSt  ;£;,»";.!

ll£||?  ™^'°'

v •   vin-  al    such  inconceivable  subtleti,  s  .t  may  be  truly

','  1  t h":»     vS),  of  itself,  is  a  higher  and  m  .re  p,  rfect  state

than  outward    action-if   we  may  speak  oi    anything  a?

:     ,-     M, i,l  lower  in  respect  to  God.     Host  is  not  in.-rtia

«S  in   Dhvsics  is  the  equilibrium  of  power,  and  so  the

nvAimum  oV  power  (rc-Ho,  re-sisto).  Motion  is  the  yielding,

iVttiu"  out  of  power,  necessary,  indeed,  lor  its  manitesta-

tion  or  patent  effect,  yet  still  a  dispersing  or  spcndine  of

BtaSccncrey  which  was  in  the  quiescence.    Absolute

vest  in  the  kosmos  (tlio  bringing  it  into,  or  keeping  it  in,

«Mt   st-ito)    woul.1  be   the   highest   excreisc   of  the   divine

mufht '  but  a-  it  would  preclude  all  sensation,  and  all  scn-

ti'ncv  both  «if  which  are  inseparable  from  change  or  motion

of  some  kin  1   it  would  be  an  absence  of  all  outward  mam-

. '  •    „       t  hat   is,  it  would  be   non-phenomenal  or  non-

:  ,:      s    also  rest  is  the  highest  power  (activity)  of

mmd  oi  sTirit  and  thus  its  highest  state.   This  is  Aristotle's

i  t    11     Ktluc.   Kiehomach.  k.   8,    7  :    ^  reAaa   Mupo™

a  ,.  ^'^  Ttc  ^\V  cv«pv«a,  "the  perfect  blessedness  i's  a


to  this  must  be  most  blessed  .

way,  too,  may  we  strive  to  obtain  a  concc! 'ti-n  of  t he  sab
bath  or  "  res.  of  i  he  saints."  The  Scripture  thought  ot  t
w^uld  seem  to  be  as  much  opposed  *»  tajMLf  ™fti^
the  one  band,  n*  it  is,  on  the  other,  to  that  busy  doing
which  enters  so  much  into  somo  modern  conceptions  of  the
future  life.  They  that  believe  have  entered  into  rest.
There  can  be  no  doubt,  too,  that  the  idea  of  holy -contem
plation?  or  sabbath-keeping  in  the  festal  sense  of  the  word,
on  which  Lange  so  much  insists,  enters  into  the  idea  of  POO
here  in  Genesis,  although  derived,  perhaps,  froni  its  subso-
oucnt  use.  In  this  sense,  there  is  something  of  a  sabbath
whenever  there  come  the  words :  and  God  saw  (surveyed,
contemplated),  "saw  that  it  was  good."  It  is  a  solemn
musing  to  behold  the  divine  ideas  in  their  outward  appear-
-nCt  as  a  change  iu  Deity,  as  though  with  him  lu= ;  took


work,  the  paradisaical  man;  God's  great  festival  «
reflected  in  Adam's  holy-day.     In  accordance  with
his  supposition  that  the  creative  days  were  not  num
bered  from  evening  to  morning,  but  in  the  contrary
order  (which  is  opposed  to  the  text),  Delitzsch  holds
that  not  the  evening  of  the  sixth  day,  but  the  morn-
in<*  of  the  seventh,  was  the  real  beginning  ot  the
sabbath  (p.  1'27).     Hut  the  evening  of  the  sixth  day
lies  back  before  the  sixtli  day,  whilst  of  an  evening
and  a  morning  of  the  seventh  day  there  is  no  men
tion  at  all.     Had  we  taken  the  creative  days  as  pen-
ods  ..vi-erally,  or  the  evenings  as  merely  remissions
of  the  creative  activity,  the  question  about  the  even-
in"  and  the  morning  of  the  seventh  day  would  have
ruul  no  ri"ht  sense.     If  we  truly  take  the  evenings
as  denoting  creative  crises,  then  may  it  be  asked:
did  not  a  crisis  follow  upon  the  creation  of  Adam?
and    this   may  we  iind   intimated  (eh.  ii.  '21)  in  the
deep  sleep  of  Adam.     Still  must  we  suppose  that  the
completion  of  Adam's  creation  took   place  towards
the  evening  or   decline  of  the  sixth  day.— Ver.  3.
And  God 'blessed  the  seventh  day.— '1  he  bless-
in"  of  the  seventh  day  may  of  itself  denote  primarily
that  it  was  appointed  for  rest  and  re-creation,  "which
is  ;l  blessing  for  the  laboring  man  and  beast  (Kxod.
xx    10-    ivut.   v.  M)."     But   the    earlier   blessings
say:  Be  yc  fruitful  av.d  multiply,  and  to  ifrs*  means
to"  wish  for,  and  to  promise  one  infinite  multiplica
tions  in  the  course  of  life,  as  to  curse  means  to  wish
for  one  :MI  infinite  multiplication  of  evil— that  is,  to
imprecate,  or  pray  against  him.     The  blessing  of  the
-abbath  must  consist  in  this,  that  it  gives  birth  to  all
the  festivals  (or  rests)  of  Cod,  and  all  the  festivals
Of  H,(T.— that    it    endlessly    propagates    itself    as   a
heavrnly  nature  above  the  self-propagating  earthy
nature   until   it   has   become  an  everlasting  sabbattu
Its  most  distinct  birth  is  the  New  1Y,-,!amcnt  Sunday.
Hut  this  Sunday  must  mediate  the  heavenly  Sunday,
"it   males    it    to   In:   an   inexhaustible  fountain  ot
re-creation"  (or  new  life).     Uclitzsch.— And   hal
lowed  it.— To  hallow  is  to  take  an  object  out  of
worldlv  relation,  and  to  devote,  it  to  (iod.     There  1^
indeed   nothing  before  us  here  of  a  worldly  relation
in  a  profane  sense,  and  so  far  can  the  negative  foroj
here    have   no    place    in    the    hallowing.       \\uhout
doubt,  however,  the  contrast  is  this:  he  withuraws
it  from  labor  for  the  sake  of  the  world,  and  estab-
lUlx  s  it  as  the  festival  for  God.     In  bix  days  work
had  God  condescended  and  given  Himself  up  to  live
for  the  world ;  on  the  sabbath,  lie  ordains  that  the
world  must  live  for  God.     He  Messed  and  hallowed
it  because  He  rested  therein— lint  is,  lie  appointed
Ilis  own  rest,  as  a  ground  and  rule  for  the  rest  ol
man   and  of  the  creatures,  on  the  seventh  day  (see
Exod.  xx.  11 ;  xxxi.  17).     "According  to  the  author
God  made  this  appointment  at  the  creation,  but  H«
leaves  its  execution  to  a  time  after  Moses,  when,  in
the  desert  of  Sin,  He  practically  leads  Israel  to  £
festival  of  the  seventh  day,  and  thereupon  makes
publication  of  the  law  of  the  sabbath  on  Sinai  (hxOO.
xxxi   12  •  xxxv.  1).     There  is  nothing  known  ot  any
observation  of  the  sabbath  before  the  time  of  Moses.


s  lorin  ni'  in  LUI  >  ci-jio  i-Ji  v»-j. ~

tn  ever  shining  calmly  above  the  clouds,  yet  now  and
then  revealing  itself  through  them  as  they  break  away  over


our  changing  world  of  nature  and  of  time.    It  is  rach  a  toe-
less  sabbath  that  is  intended  by  Rabbi  Simeon,  as  qu otca  u;
ll'ischi  in  his  comment,  on  the  words  stvenilt  day,   j     •
?•»  Flesh  and  blood  has  need  to  add  the  common  to  the
holy  time  (to  reckon  them  by  passing  interval  0  '>«<  ™  th
Hofy  One,  blessed  be  He,  it  L  as  the  thread  that  binds ttj
hair,  and  all  days  appear  as  one."    Compare  i
_n,nn  -ri  j  «,thc  bundle  of  life,"  or  lives,  1  Sam.  »
29,  'ami' which 'is  so  often  referred  to  by  the  Rabbinical «
tcrs.— T.  L.]


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


177


Knobel.  This  holds  good  only  of  the  legal  establish
ment  of  the  sabbath,  for  the  custom  of  keepin
day  of  rest  was  not  confined  to  the  Jews  only.  (Jon
ceruing  the  name  n3'iJ ,  which  the  creative  accoun
docs  not  contain,  see  DELITZSCII,  p.  130.  Dcriva
tions:  1.  From  -in2'l\an  old  name  of  Saturn;  2
from  rj.'3'iJ  (p3.'T£),  the  seventh  day  (Lactantius)
3.  contracted  from  nn3£j ,  the  time  of  holy  rest
which  is  the  most  likely. — Which  He  had  createc
and  made  (marginal  reading  in  English  Bible
created  to  make).  Grammatically  the  infinitivi
construct  P"—  ?5  is  rendered  by  the  Latin  facicndo
Still  the  explanation  :  which  God  being  active  (that  is.
by  doing,  or  by  an  effort)  had  created,  would  be  quite
idle,  were  it  not  that  one  would  find  in  the  language
the  recognition  of  an  antithesis  to  the  doctrines  o:
emanation,  or  generally,  to  the  supposed  heathenish
pathological  and  fatalistic  modes  of  creation.  I)e-
litzsch  thus  modifies  the  faciendo  (or  niitiy?):  the
creating  is  fundamental,  whilst  the  making,  or  the
brining,  is  consequential.  Then  there  would  be  de-
iioted  thereby  the  continuing  of  the  divine  activity
>eyoud  the  time  of  the  creative  wc/k.*  In  respect

0  the  four  verses  that  follow,  which  Delitzsch,  too,
s  well  as  Ewald  and  others,  would  make  the  sub-
cription  of  the  previous  section,  not  the  supcrscrip-
on  of  the  one  that  follows  (as  Tueh,  DC  Wette,  and
thers),   compare  DELITZSCII,  p.  133.     Knobel  says
).   7):    "The  Elohist  has  a  superscription  before
rery  principal  section  in  Genesis,  and  so  much  the
tore  must  he  have  had  such  a  superscription  placed
3forc  his  first  narration."     Ilgen,  Pott,  and   Schu-
ann  have  rightly  found   the  same  (ch.  ii.  4)  in  the

j  ords:  "these  are  the  origincs  of  the  heaven  and
e  earth,"  etc.     The  word   tholcdoth,  then,  must
i.ve  suffered  a  misplacement.      According  to  De
ll  zsch  it  is  a  closing  formula.     We  hold  it  to  be  the
1   perscription   to  what   follows,   because  the  word
oledoth  must  otherwise  have  regularly  preceded,
;  d  because  our  text  regards  the  tholedoth,  or  gen-
utions  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  as  conditioned

1  its  principles  through  the  creation  of  the  earth
id  the  heavens— that  is,  the  earth,  and  especially
•'••m   as   the   principial  f    point   of   view   for   the


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.J

1.  The  contrast  which  is  at  once  drawn  between
h  ven  and  earth,  and  whose  symbolical  significance
c  not  be  ignored,  proves,  in  the  first  place,  that  the
*)le  period  before  us,  from  ch.  i.-xii.,  is  to  be  con-

.   [The  simplest  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  here  would

gi  the  easiest  and  the  plainest  sense.     It  is  that  presented

inir  marginal  reading,  taking  r,VC5?b  ,  not  as  a  gerund

O  i'endo),  but  literally,  as  an  infinitive  of  purpose  :  viltirh

<*<  had  created  to  make.    It  suggests  nearly  the  distinction

Ri,  i  by  Delitzsch  between  the  fundamental  and  that  which

to.  n-s— the  ground-laying  and  the  finishing,  the  matcrial-

?a  jrmg  and  the  architectural  arrangement  of  the  struc-

L     So  the  Vulgate  :    Quod  Deus  creavit  ut  faceret,  and

'  Oilos:  132333   11  K~3  "H  .— T.  L.]

[This  word  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  English  dictiona-
n  we  are  compelled  to  Latinize  here,  and  form  a  word
"TO  prmcipimn  principia,  to  correspond  to  Lange's  word
pr  'ipitlle.    Our  "  principal "  is. too  vague,  and  used  in  too
na  senses,  to  answer  the  purpose.— T.  L.]
of  NVKth  rf.sP°ct  to  dogmatical  literature  on  the  account
Creation,  examine  BRETSCHNEIDEH  :   «« Systematical
JC  opmont  of  Dogmatic  Ideas,"  p.  450


12


sidercd  under  the  point  of  view  of  the  history  of  pri
meval  religion.  Secondly,  the  constitution  of  man  in
the  image  of  God,  the  history  of  Adam,  of  Abel,  of
the  Sethites,  etc. ;  and,  further,  the  contrast  openly
appearing  at  the  close  of  this  section  between  the
uniting  and  separating  of  the  peoples  on  the  one  h  ind,
and  the  budding  theocracy  on  the  other.  Tlmdly,
all  periods  lying  in  the  middle  between  these  two
extreme  points.  Within  this  section,  which  presents
the  contrast  between  the  primeval  religion  and  the
patriarchal  religion  of  Abraham,  now  appear  individ
ual  contrasts  :  1.  The  contrast  between  the  para
dise-world  and  the  sin-world ;  2.  the  contrast  between
the  anomism  of  the  human  race  before  the  flood,  and
the  heathenism  of  man  after  the  flood.  And  to  these
add  the  more  special  contrasts  which  are  to  be
brought  out  by  the  separate  sections.

The  primitive  religion  is  to  be  distinguished  from
the  religion  of  Abraham  by  the  following  points:
1.  In  the  primitive  religion,  the  symbolical  sign  is
first,  and  the  word  second  ;  in  the  patriarchal  religion,
the  word  of  God  is  first,  and  the  symbolical  sign  is
second.  (See  Gen.  xii.  1,  V.)  2.  In  the  primitive
religion  the  continuance  of  the  living  faith  in  God  is
sporadic.  This,  it  is  true,  is  in  connection  with
genealogical  relations  (Seth,  Xoah,  Shcm),  as  the
appearance  of  Jlelchisedek  especially  proves  (comp.
Hcb.  vii.  3) ;  and,  as  a  gradually  fading  twilight,  it
goes  on  through  the  times  until  the  days  of  Abra
ham,  forming  continually,  as  natural  religion,  the
background  of  all  the  heathenism  of  humanity.  The
faith  of  Abraham,  on  the  contrary,  forms  with  the
patriarchal  religion  a  genealogical  and  historical  se
quence.  The  aurora  of  the  morning  in  Abraham
contrasts  with  the  twilight  of  the  evening  in  Melchis-
edek.  Melehisedek  looks,  with  the  faithful  of  the
heathen  world,  back  to  the  lost  Paradise ;  Abraham
looks  forward  to  the  future  city  of  (iod— his  religion
is  the  religion  of  the  future.  3.  The  symbolical  prim
itive  religion  is  yet,  in  its  exterior,  overgrown  with
mythological  heathendom.  While  it  forms  the  bright
side  of  the  primal  religious  world,  its  dark  side
arises  from  the  mythologizihg  of  the  symbols  (Rom.
i.  19-23).  With  the  patriarchal  religion,  however,
the  contrast  between  the  theocratic  faith  and  hea-
;hcndom  has  become  fixed.  4.  With  the  historic
form  of  this  contrast,  it  is  at  the  same  time  conclu
sive  that  heathendom  maintains  its  relative  light  side
.n  the  history  of  humanism,  and  the  theocratic  popu-
ar  history  its  relative  dark  side,  which  increases  to .
the  rejection  of  the  Messiah  and  the  death  on  the
?ross.  The  material  development  of  salvation  among
,he  Jews,  and  the  formal  development  of  the  human
brm  of  salvation  among  the  heathen  (Greeks  and
iomans),  are  for  each  other,  just  as  the  evil  tendencies
of  heathendom  and  Judaism  unite  with  each  other  in.,
he  crucifying  of  Christ.

2.  Within  our  division  appears  the  beautiful  con-
rast  that  the  creation  of  the  world  is  once  represent
ed  in  the  genetic  order  as  an  ascending  development
of  life,  so  that  man  seems  the  aim  (re'Aos)  of  all

hings;  then,  from  chs.  ii.,  iii.,  onward,  in  principial
srder,  according  to  which  man,  as  a  divine  idea,  ia
he  principle  with  which,  and  for  which,  the  world,
and  especially  Paradise,  was  created.  The  first  view
s  unwersalistic,  and  hence  Elohislic  ;  the  latter  i?  the-
>cratic,  and  hence  Jehovistic.

3.  The  form  of  the  account  of  the  creation  :  re-
igious  symbolical  chronicle ;  its  source :  a  revealed
vord  or  image  e-ftected  by  the  vision  of  a  prophecy
ooking  backwards  (see  Introduction).    The  objections


178


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


of  Delitzsch  against  the  mediation  of  the  knowledge
of  creation  to  men  through  divine  revelation  in  hu
man  vision  (see  79  sqq.),  rest  on  a  want  of  apprecia
tion  of  the  scriptural  idea  of  vision,  as  already  indi
cated.  Delitzsch,  with  the  more  ancient  catholic
supeniaturalis.m,  explains  our  account  from  a  divine
teaching,  which  is  defined  as  the  interposing  voice  of
the  Spirit  of  Cod,  and  the  guidance,  through  it,  of
man's  own  spirit.  To  this  ultra-supernaturalistie
view  of  Delitzsch  and  Keil  is  opposed  the  rationalistic
one  of  Hofmann,  namely,  that  the  account  of  the  cre
ation  is  the  transposed  impression  in  history  which  the
world  made,  on  the  iirst-creatcd  man  reflecting  on  _its
origin.  To  the  purely  historical  conception  of  a
wonderfully  preserved  or  regenerated  (Delitzscli)  tra
dition  of  revelation  or  ligeml,  is  contrasted  the  myth
ical  conception  in  various  forms,  effected  through
the  allegorical  interpretation  of  1'hilo  ;  which  is  fol
lowed  by  many  church  Fathers,  and  by  Herder  in  his
adoption  of  a  parabolic  hieroglyphic,  a.  Moral  myth
as  a  ground  for  the  commandment  of  the  sabbath
(Paulus).  /'.  rhilosophieal  myth,  especially  the  nat
ural  philosophical  (Kichhorn  and  others).  We  have
already  shown  in  the  Introduction  why  we  cannot
join  in  either  the  purely  historical  or  the  mythieal
view,  Itiit  must  insist  on  the  specific  of  a  religious
symbolical  history.  The  vision  might  be  designated
as  intuition,  in  so  far  as  we  carry  back  the  respective
knowledge  to  the  unl'allen  man.

4.  In  our  section  the  world  is  represented  accord-
ini:  to  its  lour  different  relations  :  1.  As  creation  ;  2.
as  nature;  "..  as  cosmos;  4.  as  ;eon  (see  LANCE'S
"Do"inatic?,"  p.  ---  sqq.).  1''ie  '"''"  '!/"'<'  ''(''''{"t  's  cx~
pressed  by  the  word  XI  2,  as  well  as  by  the  going
furth  ten  times  of  the  Oinnifie  Word  of  God.  God
said,  ''  Let  there  be,  and  there  was."  The  ac
count  of  nature,  1.  through  the  great  contrasts,
separations,  and  combinations:  heaven  and  earth,
darkness  and  liidit,  atmospheric  waters  and  terres
trial  waters,  firmament  and  terra  finna,  land  and
water,  sky  and  earth.  "2.  Through  the  designation
of  plants,'  that  they  should  bear  seed,  each  according
to  its  kind.  3.  through  the  blessing  on  animals:
be  fruitful  and  multiply,  and  the  distinction  of  vari
ous  kinds  of  animals,  iis  also  finally  the  blessing  0:1
men.  1.  Through  the  relation  of  the  various  crea
tures  to  the  sphere  of  birth  or  life  corresponding  to
them  (especially  water  and  earth),  through  tlieii
coming  forth  from  these  spheres  at  the  creating
word.  °  Especially  belong  here  the  picturesque  cx-
prcssions:  Tho/ni,  Vabhohu.—Xti^  -p.xn  xr


uii-n.  :>'.  the  six  days'  \rork  itself.—  The  idea  of
the  cosmos.  It  appears  distinctly  in  all  the  solemn
pauses  of  ihe  creative  work,  as  they  are  marked  witr
tlie  sevenfold  repetition  of  the  words:  and  God  sa^i
that  it  was  good.  The  celebration  of  the  sabbatl
also  belongs  here,  as  it  points  back  to  the  beautifu
completion  of  the  universe.  —  But  the  idea  of  the  asoi
appears  with  the  fact  that  man  is  made  the  end  and
aim  of  all  days  of  creation,  by  which  it  is  clearly  pro
nounced  that  he  is  the  real  principle  in  which  th
world  and  its  origin  is  comprehended.  The  historj
of  the  earth  is  thus  made  the  lifetime  of  humanity
Its  profoundest  principle  of  development  and  mcas
ure  of  time  is  the  support  of  man.

B.   11  LC  Creation.  —  On  the   dogmatic  doctrine  o
the  creation,  see  Hase,  Ilutter,  HAHN:    "Doctrin


f  Faith,"  and  LANCE'S  "  Positive  Dogmatics."     Here
omes  especially  into  consideration  1.  the  relation  of  the
octrine  of  the  creation  to  the  Logos,  John  i.  1-3.
'he  first  verse  of  Genesis  clearly  forms  the  ground
presupposed  in  that  passage,  God  spake  ;  through  His
vord  He  created  the  world,  says  Genesis ;  His  word
s  a  personal  divine  life,  says  John,  and  the  New
Testament  in  general,  especially  Col.  i.   15-19  ;   ch.
i.  3-9.     According  to  Genesis  everything  is  created
hrough    the    idea    of   man    in    the    image    of    God
svith  a  view  to   this   man;    according  to  the  Nev
Testament  it  is  through  the  idea  of  Christ,  who  is
he  principal  of  humanity,  with  a  view  to  Christ.    A\\
Adam  was  the  principle  of  the  creation,  so  is  Christ
.he    principle    of   humanity.       Therefore    it   reads  :
'God  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation
of  the  world"  (Eph.  i.  4  ;   comp.  John  xvii.  0).     Tho
creation  is,  in  its  most  essential  point,  the  production
of  the  eternal  God-Man  in  the   eternal  to-day.      In
nan  nature  has  passed  beyond  itself,  from  the  relative,
symbolical  independence,"  to  the  perfected  and  real,  to
freedom  ;  it  has  in  him  the  mediator  of  its  redemp
tion,  of  its  glorification.     The  beautiful  cosmos,  this
unity  of  all  varieties,  which  combines  in  it  an  endless
complex    of  unities,   to   the   production  of  external
liarmony  and  beauty,  has,  in  Christ,  the  most  beau
tiful   of   the  children  of  men,  its  middle  point,  the
centre   of  its   ideal  beauty.     Finally,  the  first  icon,
which  is  fixed  by  the  life  of  Adam,  has  for  its  core,
its  root,  and  its  aim,  the  second  ivon  fixed  by  Christ.
'2.    The    relation    to    the    Holy    Ghost.       The    spirit
is  the  living,  self-inipeliing  unity  of  spiritual  life,  the
breath  of  tiie  soul,  as  the  wind  forms  the  spirit  of  the
earth,  the  vital,  ever-active  unily  of  its  varieties.    The
Spirit  of  God  hovering  over  the  waters,  is  the  divine,
creative,  living  unity,' which  rules  over  the  ferment
ing  process  of  the  Thohu  Vabhohu ;   huice,_as  the
peripheral  principle  of  formation  (at  one  with   the
central  principle  of  formation,  the  Logos),  it  effectu
ates  the  separations  and  the  combinations  by  which
the   formation  of  the  earth  is  determined.     In  the
New  Testament,  however,  it  appears  in  its  personal
strength,  as,  the  unity  of  all  works  of  revelation  of
the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  as  the  absolute,  spiritual
principle  of  formation  which  effects  the  glorification
of  the  world  through  the  separation  of  the  ungodly
and  the  godly,  and  through  the  combination  of  every
thing  godly  m  the  church  and  the  kingdom  of  God.
;>.  The"  relation    of  the    creation  to  the  Divine  Be
ing.     In   the  creation,  God  appears  as  the   creator,
who  calls  forth  things  as  out  of  nothing.     But  from
the  genesis  out  of  the  pure  nothing,  are  distinguished
the  creative   things  as  proceeding  from  the  life  or
breath  of  the  creator's  word,  with  which  they  come
forth  into  existence  (Fs.  civ.  30) ;  and  finally  man
stands  complete  with  the  features  of  divine  affinity,
proceeding  from  the  thought  of  His  heart,  from  His
counsel,  as  created  in  His  image,  and  intended  to  be
His   visible   administrator   on   earth.      In  the  New
Testament,    however,    the   paternal  feature   of  the
Divine  Being  has  unvailed  itself  as  a  paternity,  from
which  all  paternity  in  heaven  and  on  earth  proceeds,
but  which,  in  the  most  special  sense,  refers  to  Christ,
the  image  of  the  Divine  Being.     By  the  relation  of
the  work  of  creation  to  the  coming  Christ,  the  whole
creation  becomes  an  advance  representation,  a  sym
bol  of  Christ  in  a  series  of  symbolical  degrees,  tf
which  each  represents  in  advance  the  next  following  j
one.     Through  the  relation  of  Christ  to  the  Father,!
the  whole  creation  receives  the  mark  of  the  human,
especially  of  revelation,  or  of  the  wonderful  (as  de>


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


179


noted   by  the   lion),  of  resignation,  or  of  sacrific

(as  denoted  by  the  ox),  and  of  the  reflection  of  ligh

that  is,  the  idea  (as  denoted  by  the  eagle).*     But^tl

spirit,  as  the  unitary  life  of  the  revelation  of  th

Father  and  of  the  Son,  is  reflected  as  creative  wi

dom  in   all  creative  movements  of  the  world,  am

indeed,    in    the    fundamental    forms   of   scparatio

and    combination,    of    centrifugal    and    centripcti

force,  of  repelling  and  attracting  operations. — Th

i  account  of  the  creation,  Gen.  ch.  i,  is  not  a  dogm

of  the  trinity  of  God ;  the  completed  creation,  how

j  ever,  as  a  work  of  God  and  revelation,  is  a  mirro

1  of  the  trinity,  and   a   prophecy  of  the  revelation  r

its  future  (see  LANCE'S  "Positive  Dogmatics,"  p.  20

!  ft0.     4.  The  relation  of  the   creation   to  revelation

'•  The  most  general  sphere  of  the  revelation  of  God

that  which  forms  the  basis  of  all  future  revelations

is  the  creation  of  heaven  and  earth  as  the  objcc

live  revelation  of  God,  which  corresponds  with  th

subjective   revelation   of  God   in   his   image,    man

5.  The  relation  of  the  doctrine  of  the  creation  t

the  heathen  and   post-heathen  view  of  the  world

It  denies  polytheism,  for  the   creator  of  all  thing

appears  as  the  only  one,  and  if  his  name  stands  in  tlu

plural  (Elohim),  the  element  of  truth  in  polytheism

(in  contrast  to   Judaism)   is   therewith   recognized

namely,  the  variety  of  the  revelation  of  the  one  Goc

in  the  variety  of  his  strength,  works,  and  signs,  an<

the  variety  of  the  impressions  which  he  thereby  pro

duces.

It  denies  pantheism,  for  God  distinguishes  himself
by  his  creation  of  the  world ;  he  creates  the  worlc
through  his  conscious  word,  consequently  freely,  ant
stands  in  personal  completion  before  his  work  and
over  it,  so  that  the  world  is  neither  to  be  regarded
as  an  emanation  of  his  divine  being,  nor  especially
as  a  metamorphosis  of  the  divine  being,  (the  second
fprm  of  it,)  or,  vice  versa,  God  as  the  emanation  of
the  world.  But  it  emphasizes  also  the  true  in  pan
theism  (in  contrast  to  deism) :  the  animating  omni
presence  and  revelation  of  God  in  the  world,  with  his
creating  word,  with  his  spirit  hovering  over  the  form
ation  of  the  world,  with  his  image  in  the  dispositions
and  destination  of  man.  It  denies  dualism,  for  God
appears  as  the  creator  of  all  things  directly.  He  is  al«o
the  originat  or  of  the  Thohu  Vabhohu  of  fermenting  ele-
inents ;  he  finds  in  the  creation  no  blame,  and  at
the  end  of  the  sixth  day,  everything  is  very  good.
The  true  in  dualism  is,  however,  also  retained  (against
:ahsm),  namely,  the  contrast  between  the  materials
md  the  formative  power,  between  the  natural  decrees


and  the  natural  principles,  between  nature  and  spirit.
But  the  doctrine  of  creation  denies  much  more  the
antichristian  polytheism,  that  is,  atomism,  even  to
its  most  modern  form  of  materialism,  as  such  mate
rialism  rejects  not  only  the  truth  of  the  spirit,  of
personal  life,  of  the  Godhead,  of  the  immortality  of
the  soul,  and  of  liberty,  consequently  all  ethical  prin
ciples,  but  also  the  physical  principia  of  crystal  form
ation,  of  the  formation  of  plants  and  animals.  It
does  this  by  making  matter  regarded  as  devoid  of  all
visibility,  and  in  so  far  thoroughly  hypothetical  and
abstract,  or  rather  the  infinity  of  feigned  abstract
substances  (with  which  the  Thohu  Vabhohu,  as  a
living  fermentation  of  appearing  elements,  is  not  to
be  confounded),  the  sole  God-resembling  factor  of  all
phenomena  of  life,  such  phenomena  consisting  of  two
classes,  of  which  the  physical  and  abstract  spiritual
is  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  play  of  matter,  the
ethical,  on  the  contrary,  a  bare  appearance,  having
no  conceivable  or  comprehensible  reality.  The  living
God  here  stands  in  contrast  with  the  multitude  of
these  dark  idols  of  a  feigned  deity,  and  he  places
opposite  the  subordinate  elements  of  life  the  super-
ordinate  vital  principles,  which  give  the  elements
their  cosmical  form,  whilst  over  all  he  places  the
ruler  man,  with  his  godlike,  spiritual  nature.

The  only  thing  that  endures  as  an  clement  of
truth  in  materialism  is  the  infinite  and  subtle  con
formity  to  law  that  is  found  in  material  tilings,  a  fact
which  spiritualism  nowadays  far  too  much  disre
gards.  The  doctrine  of  creation  also  denies  with
increased  emphasis  the  intensified  pantheism,  i.  e.,
the  most  modern  pantheism  as  opposed  to  personal
ity — the  pantheism  which  makes  everything  proceed
'rom  an  impersonal  thought,  in  order  to  let  every
thing  again  disappear  through  continual  metamor-
ihoses  (morphologism)  in  impersonal  thoughts  ;  for
;he  scriptural  doctrine  makes  all  thoughts  of  crea-
ion  proceed  from  an  unconditioned  personality,  pass
through  fixed  forms,  and  culminate  in  a  conditioned
personality.  The  truth  that  lies  in  such  self-deifica-
ion  is  recognized  in  this,  that  all  works  of  the  abso-
ute  thinking  are  themselves  thoughts.  He  has
ipoken  thoughts  which  have  become"  works  of  crea-
ion.  Finally,  it  denies  the  dynamical  dualism  (or
he  dualism  of  power),  i.  e.,  that  hierarchical  abso-
utism  which  holds  aS"  evil  not  only  the  material
vorld,  but  still  more  the  entire  realm  of  spirit  and
piritual  life  regarded  as  something  to  be  controlled
vith  infinite  care,  and  with  the  infinite  art  and  power
f  an  abstract  authority ;  for  it  testifies  for  the  word
f  God  as  immanent  in  the  world,  and  thereby  holds
xst  the  element  of  truth  in  that  hierarchism,  accord-
ig  to  which  the  spirit  of  God  hovers  over  the  waters,
nd  man  as  the  administrator  of  God  is  commanded,
•ith  reference  to  all  animal  life  in  the  world  :  Eule
ver  them,  and  make  them  subject  to  you.

At  the  very  first  verse  and  word  of  Genesis,  it
(early  steps  over  that  impure  sink  of  dualism  beyond
"Inch  the  entire  heathen  and  philosophical  view  of
ie  world  could  never  go.  It  docs  this,  by  contrast-
ig  God  in  his  eternal  self-perfection  to  the  creation
Inch  arose  with  time.  The  doctrine  of  the  creation
the  first  act  of  revelation  and  of  faith  in  the  history
f  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  would  lead  too  far,  should
e  attempt  to  show  how  the  three  heathen  errors  of
eligion  are  ever  present  with  each  other,  although  at
ne  time  polytheism,  at  one  time  pantheism,  and  al
lother  time  dualism,  prevails.  We  make  this  observ-
.ion,  however,  to  indicate  thereby  that  we  do  not
more  the  pantheistic  basis  of  Gnosticism,  even  wher


180


Oli   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   M05?ES.


it  plays  with  polytheism,  since  we  present  it  accord
ing  to"  its  prevailing  characteristic  as  dualism.     But
not  only  are  the  coarse  ground-forms  of  the  ancient
and  modern  darkening  of  the  doctrine  of  the  creation
to  be  judged  by  the  iirst  chapter  of  Genesis,  but  also
the   more   subtle,  Christiauly  modified  forms,  as,  on
the  one  hand,  they  present  themselves  in  Gnosticism,
(with  which  we  also  reckon  ilanicbseism  and  its  later
shoots,  extending  to  our  time:  Priscillianism,  Paul-
icianiMn,  Hogomiles,  Albigenses,  dualistic  theosophs
of  Jacob  Bohm),  and,  on  the  other  hand,  in  Ebion-
itism,  as  it   l'.;is  found  its  continuation  in  the  later
Mouarchianism,  and  stiil  mure  modern  deism.     The
Gnomics  ground  their  opposition  to  the  Old  Testament
on  a  paganistic  misinterpretation  of  the  New,  and
thus  they  may  be  ranged  according  to  their  more  or
K-s   hostile  attitude    to  the   Old  Testament,  and  as
representing  various  heathenish  views  of  the  world
which,  after  the  manner  of  old  Palimpsests,  placed  one
upon  the  Other,  ;i|>]>''ar  through  the  overlying  Chris
tianity.      Among  such  Palimpsests,  on  which  a  form
of  i'lul-tia'iity  has  been  overwritten,  may  lie  reckoned
the  Samaritan    (Simon    Magus),  Syrian  (Saturninus,
etc. ),  Alexandrian  (Basilides),  old-Egyptian  (Ophiten),
Hellenic  (Karpoerates),  Ponto-Asiatic  (Marcion),  and
Persian    Gnostics  (Manes).     Finally,  in   Mohammed,
the  Arabian  Gnosticism  and  Ebionitism  ran  together,
a-  the  i!-_rain  l>roken  forms  oi'  Subordinatianism  and
.Monarehianism  ran  together  in  Arianism.     Through
tiie   manifold  modifications  which  Christian  dualism
experienced  immediately,  and  especially  in  the  course
of  time,  one  must  not  he  led  astray  in  respect  to  the
unity  of  tiiy  genus.     Just  so,  pure  Ebionitism,  whose
naked  image  is  Jewish  Talmndism  (as  it  is  to  be  rec
ognized  throughout  by  its  oblique  position  to  the  New
Testament  and  the    New  Testament  elements  in  the
Old),   has    pa-'d   through  various   mutations  whose
ground-thought  remains  the  same:   namely,  a  fatal-
istic,    eternalized,  ontologieal   divorcement    between
God'  and  the  world,  through  the  law  of  religion  or
nature,  whether  the   form    of   the  change   be   called
deism,  naturalism,   or   rationalism.      And,  finally,  the
mixed  form  of  gnostic  Ebionitism,  which  was  prepared
through  the  Alexandrian  system  of  1'hilo,  and  whose
naked"  image  is   the  Jewish  Kabbah,  has  remained
unchanged,  through  all  mutations,    in    its   ground-
thoughts,  whether  they  appear  as  Montanism,  Donat-
ism,  or  pseudo-Dionysian,  mediaeval  and  modern  ultra-
supernaturalism,  as'inflexible  baptismism,  or  yielding
spiritualism.     Together  with  the  true  difference  be
tween  God  and  the  world,  the  doctrine  of  creation
expresses  also  the   true  combination  between  both,
and  finds  the  living  mediation  of  this  contrast  in  the
man  created  in  the  image  of  God  ;  whereas,  dualism
makes  the  difference  a  separation,  while  pantheism
makes  the  combination  a  mixture,  and  the  still  ob
sen-aide,   polytheistic  reminiscence  in    Christendom
vacillates,  in' its  love   of  fables,  between   creature
deification  and  creature  demonizing.

G.  The  relation  of  the  temporal  creation  to  the
eternity  of  Cod.  It  is  quite  as  wrong  to  transfer
gnostic-ally  the  origin  of  the  real  world  to  the  eternity
of  God,  to  iix  the  existence  of  God  according  to
theogony  by  speaking  of  a  becoming  of  God,  or  of  an
obseurc'basis  in  God  (Bohm),  or  of  an  origin ^of  th
material  contemporary  with  the  self-affirmation  o
God  (Rothe),  as  it  is  to  declare,  with  scholastic  super
naturalism,  that  God  indeed  might  have  left  th
world  uncreated.  Against  the  first  view,  there  is  th
declaration  that -the  world  had  a  beginning,  whicl
a  little  farther  on,  is  fixed  as  the  beginning  of  time


Against  the  latter,  there  is  the  declaration  that  GoJ
chose  believing  humanity  from  eternity  in  Christ,  as
it  is  also  indicated  in  our  text,  by  the  decree  of  God
at  the  creation  of  man,  and  by  the  image  of  God.
The  world  rests  therefore,  as  an  actual  and  temporal
world,  on  an  eternal  ideal  ground.*  Its  ideal  prepa
ration  is  eternal,  but  its  genesis  is  temporal,  for  it  ia
conditioned  by  the  gradual  growing,  and  the  beauti
ful  rhythm  of  growth  is  time.

7.' In  the  significant  number  ten,  the  number  of
actual  historical  completion,  the  account  is  repeated.
Cod  said,  Let  there  be,  aud  there  was.  The  speak
ing  of  God  now  certainly  indicates  the  thinking  of
God,  and  it  thence  follows  that  all  works  of  creation
arc  thoughts  of  God  (ideah.-m).  But  it  indicates  also
a  will,  making  himself  externally  known,  an  active
operation  of  God,  and  thence  it  follows  that  all  the
works  of  creation  are  deeds  of  God  (realism).  Both,
however,  thinking  and  operating,  are  one  in  the  di
vine  speaking,  the  primal  source  of  all  language,  his
personally  making  himself  known,  although  we  cau-
not  bring  up  the  thought  of  this  speaking  to  the  con
ception  (personalism).  Through  creating,  speaking,
making,  forming,  the  world  is  ever  again  and  again
denoted  as  the  free  deed  of  God.

8.  Theological  definitions  of  the  creation.  The
erait'io  is  distinguished  as  a  single  act  and  as  a  per
manent  fact.  A  third  period  is.  however,  at  the
same  time  pointed  out,  namely,  the  continuance  of
the  doing  in  the  deed,  so  that  the  world  would  not
nlv  fall  t.)  pieces,  but  would  pass  away,  if  God  wi  th
rew  himself  from  it.  The  thought  that  he;  cannot
•ithdrawiVomitin  his  love,  should  not  be  confound-
d  with  the  untenable  thought  that  he  might  not  be
ble  to  withdraw  from  it  in  his  omnipotence.  Th(
bsolute  dependence  of  the  world  on  God  is  at  al.
rrnes  the  same  (see  Ps.  civ.  30;  Col.  i.  17;  Heb
;;)  On  the  relation  of  the  creation  to  the  trinity
ompare  II use,  HUTTKR,  p.  HO,  and  LANCK'S  "Posl
live  Dogmatics,"  p.  20G  IV.— The  expression,  crea
ion  from  nothing,  is  borrowed  from  the  apocryphica
vord,  -1  -Mace.  vii.  '28:  t'£  oi-K  VVTUV  ;  comp.  Heb.  x
1.  It  denies  that  an  eternal  material,  or  indeed  tha
inything,  was  present  as  a  (material)  substratum  o
he  creation.  One  can,  however,  misinterpret  tl
expression  by  making  the  act  of  creation  one  of  al
tract  will,  absolved  from  any  divine  breath  of  hi
(Gunthcrianism).  On  determining  the  creatio  ex  n
kilo  we  distinguish  the  nihil  negativum,  by  denym
the  eternity  of  matter  as  substratum  of  the  crcatioi
and  the  nihil  pra'ativiim,  by  assuming  that  God  i
first  created  matter  as  nihil  privatlvum,  then  tl
forms  in  the  hcxucmcron.  This  the  modus  creatiom.
first,  matter ;  then,  the  form.  This  idea  of  a  matt
as  something  before  form,  does  not  correspond,  hoi
ever  to  the  idea  of  a  quickening  or  life-giving  a
tivity  in  creation.  With  the  beginning  of  ere
tion  there  is  immediately  established  the  contrast
heaven  and  earth,  i.  c..  different  spheres,  which
such  are  not  mere  matter ;  and  with  the  fholiu  V
bhohu  of  the  first  earth-form  there  is  immediate
established  the  constructive  activity  of  the  spirit


*  f\Vc  have  placed  this  sentence  in  italics  as  contain:
a  truth  of  vast  importance,  transcending  all  science  01
one  hand,  and  all  theology  that  places  itself  in  antag
to  science  on  the  other.    If  it  contains  truth  m  respect
the  world,  then,  a  fortiori,  is  it  true  in  respect  to  man,  v
is  the  final  cause,  or  "the  spiritual  core  of  the  world, ,  ,
Ijann-e  elsewhere  styles  him.    There  is  an  eternal  R
for  the  world ;  much  more  is  there  an  eternal  groffl
humanity  (Adam-ity) ;  beyond  all,  is  there  an  eternal  UK.,  ;
for  the  new  humanity  (Christ-ianitv).     "Chosen  in  H
before  the  foundation  of  the  world."—'!'.  I-"-]


CHAP.  I. -II.  3.


God.  The  demiurgic  conception  presupposes  an  etc,
nal  world-matter,  whether  regarded  according  to  th
Persian  idea  as  evil,  or  according  to  the  Greek  a
blind,  heterogeneous,  and  antagonistic,  or  according  t
the  Indian  idea  as  magically  mutable,  which  eterna
world-matter  must,  in  all  cases,  make  the  demiurgi
formation  a  thing  of  mere  arbitrary  sport.  The  tru
idea  of  the  work  of  creation  lies  between  this  and  th
theurgo-magical,  according  to  which  Gcd  had  mad
the  universe,  in  abstract  positivcness,  a  pure  mate
rial  contrast  of  His  divine  being.  This  is  a  concep
tion  in  which  the  creating  word,  the  spirit  of  Got
hovering  over  the  waters,  the  image  of  God,  or  evei
the  omnipresence  of  God  in  the  world,  do  not  receive
their  just  due.  As  the  aim  of  the  creation  finalh
(finis  creatioiiifi),  there  have  been  distinguished  the
highest  or  last  aim,  God's  glorification,  and  the  inter
mediate  aim,  the  welfare  of  his  creatures  and  the
happiness  of  man.  But  it  must  be  observed  tha
God  glorifies  himself  in  the  happiness  of  men,  anc
that  the  latter  should  find  their  happiness  in  contem
•  plating  the  glory  of  God.

(J.  The  Relation  of  the  Mosaic  Account  of  the
Creation  to  the  Mythological  Legends  of  the  Creation.
—  The  cosmogonies  of  the  heathen  are  confounded
with  their  theogonics,  as  their  gods  with  primeval
man.  Sec  LUCKKX  :  "  The  Traditions  of  the  Human
Kace,  or  the  Primitive  Revelation  of  God  among  the
Heathen,"  Minister,  1856.  "These  cosmogonies  are
all  very  similar  to  eacli  other.  At  first  chaos  is
placed  at  the  head  as  a  disordered  mass  (chaos
alone?).  This  chaos  develops  or  forms  itself  into
the  world-egg.  This  egg,  which  plays  a  certain  part
in  the  cosmogonies,  is  only  a  conception  called  forth
by  the  apparent  form  of  the  earth,*  go  that  the  sky
presents  itself  as  the  shell  and  the  earth  as  the  yolk
of  this  great  egg.  With  this  shaping  of  chaos  into  a
world-egg,  or  earth-sphere,  arises  then,  according  to
the  representation  of  these  cosmogonies,  the  first
being,  the  'first-born,'  or  the  first  man.  This  first
man  originating  with  (out  of)  the  world-egg,  the
father  and  founder  of  all  life,  is  now,  according  to
the  popular  conception,  a  giant-like  being.  As°the

*  [This  conception  seems  to  he  sanctioned  by  Laura,  hut
hero  is  no  proof  of  it.  Instead  of  being  suggested  by  the
figure  oi  tl  c  mundus  (which  is  not  like  an  e--,  or  the  earth
like  its  yolk,  unless  we  make  very  ancient  the  knowledge,
or  notion,  of  the  earth's  sphericity),  this  so  common  feature
of  the  old  cosmogonies  came  mo.st  probably  from  the  idea
of  a  brooding,  cherishing,  life-producing  power,  represented
in  Genesis  ly  the  rsrr.ri  fin  ,  the  throbbing,  pulsating,
moving  spirit—  from  *rn  ,  primary  sense  in  Piel,  paJpilare,
secondary  sense,  yet  very  ancient  in  the  Syriae,  to  love
warmly,  or  with  the  strongest  allccuon.  Hence  in  the
Greek  cosmogony  the  first  thin-  born  of  this  e-g  wrs  cows
the  primitive  love,  which  shows  that  the  c-g  had  nothing  to
do  with  the  ,  fijruro  of  the  earth,  cither  real  or  enpnoscd.  lee
the  Birds  of  Aristophanes,  G97,  where  the  poet  culls  it  v^vd-
("oi',  the  egg  produced  without  natural  impregnation  :  '

'Ef  ou  JrepiTcAAo^cVais  wpais  t^aarcv  'Epwy  6  noBeivos,
From  which  sprang  Love  the  all  desired,—


™i  ooks'  as  usual'  inverted  the  primitive  idea,  and
made  the  generating  cause  itself  the  effect.  Eros  then  pro
duced  the  human  race,  etc.  In  other  respects  the  heathen

SaTdo'th  VCry  fa!rl7  ?iTCn  hcre  ^Lncken  ;  but  S

ontrast  do  these  monstrosities  present  to  the  rmrp   Inr

rnomous,  monotheistic  grandeur  of  the  BilSo  account  !    If

nto,T,lCr<m°g0ny.Was  dorivcd  from  thc  heathen  as  is

£1  Wh^ii     -W  Ty  ;str?nS°  U  h'  and  co«nter  to  what  takes

ce  m  all  similar  derivations,  that  the  Hebrew  mind  fi

mi7o  fr,°i  S  mm?'  th1y  8ay)  shouid  llavc  taken  it  in  «ft£
^S^SSS"^  confusc(1  state,  and  refined  it  bad  ™o
teat  chaste  and  sublime  consistency  which  the  Bible  narra-

'       C  thOUh   °f  it3  ab?0lutc  truth?  may  so


present  man,  according  to  primitive  conception,  is  a
microcosm,  so  is  that  first  being,  in  heathen  concep
tion,   the   macrocosm   itself,  originating  all   life   in
nature  by  developing  from  himself  the  various  parts
of  the  world-organism,  heaven  and  earth,  sun  and
moon,  mountains  and   rivers.     Now  by  dividing  or
killing  this  macrocosmic  being,  or  by  mingling  its
generating  parts  with   earthly  things  (especially  fer
tilizing  water,  as  in  the  story  of  Chronos),  the  lower
life  of  nature  begins,  and  things  can  multiply  in  sex
ual    division   and   separation.  '  This    is    the   whole
nucleus  of  all  cosmogonies.     And   we  would   here
observe,  how  frequent  it  is  in  heathen  conceptions
that  all  primitive  generating  being  is  imagined  under
the  form  of  a  great  world-animal  (as  an  immense  ox
or    goat,    for    example),    and    as    such    worshipped.
Thus  the  first  being  of  the  Persians  is  the  ox  Abu-
dad,  and    the  Egyptians  worshipped   it   as  a  goat
under  the  name  of  Mendes."     Here,  however,  the
following  is  to  be  observed:  1.  Behind,  beside,  or
over  the  chaos,   or  the  disordered  matter,   usually
stands  a  mysterious  form  of  the  highest  divinity":
Brahma  among  the  Indians,  Fimbultyr  among  the
Teutons,  Orrnuzd  among  the  Persians.     2.  With  the
Ilesiodic   Gaia,  which   proceeds   from   chaos   (i.  c.,
from  boundless  empty  space),  there  is  also  Eros ;  so  in
the  Chinese   legend   the   first   macrocosmic  man  or
jiant  (Panku)  is   formed  with   the   earth.     In  like
manner  Brahma  with  the  Indians,  and  Ymer  with
the  Teutons,  become,  by  the  division  of  their  limbs,
;he  foundation  of  the  world.     3.  Matter  is  always
ixed  with  the  divinity,  or  the  divinity  with  matter.
But  matter  is  coherent  with  God  in  the  predominant-
y  pantheistic  systems  of  emanation.     According  to
the  Indo-Brahmic,  Platonic,  and  Alexandrian  system
of  emanation,  matter  emanates  with  the  world" from
divinity^  according  to  the  Egyptian  and  inythologi-
co-Grecian  system,  divinity  emanates  from  the  world,
rom  chaos,  or  the  ocean.     According  to  thc  pre
dominantly  dualistic  systems,  the  world  arises  from  a
mixture  in  the  conflict  between  the  emanations  of
he  predominantly  spiritual,  light,  good  God,  and  the
animations    of   the   predominantly  material,   dark,
yicked  God — sometimes  in  a  decidedly  hostile  posi-
ion  of  the  two  powers,  as  in  the  Persian  mythology,
ometimes  in  a  more  peaceful  parallelism,  as  in  tlie
Slavonian.     For  the  various   cosmologies,   compare
he  quoted  work  of  LVCKEN,  p.  33 ;  DELITZSCH.  pp.
>1,  83,  and  609;  HAHN  :   Compendium,  p.  374,  with
cfercnce   to  WCTTKE  :    "  The  Cosmogonies  of  the
leathcn  Nations  before  the  Time  of  Jesus  and  the
Apostles,"  Hague,  1850.     The  Chaldean  myth  of  the
rcation,  as  given  by  Berosus,  is  found  in  ECSEBIUS  :
Chronicles,"  i.   p.   22;    SYNCELLUS,  i.   p.  25;    the
'henician  myth  as  given  by  Sanchouiaton  in  EUSE-
ics:  Prceparatio  Eiangdica,  i.  p.  10;  the  Egyptian
nyth  in  DIODORUS  SICULUS,  i.  7  and  10;  a  Grecian
aytli  in  HESIOD'S  Theoyony,  ver.  116  sqq. ;  the  In-
ian  myths  in  P.  VON  B'OHLEN  :  "Ancient  India,"  i.
.  158;  LASSEN:  "Indian  Antiquities,"  iii.   p.    387
at  the  beginning  of  the  code  of  Manu) ;  the  Zend
lyth  in  Avcsta,  the  Etrurian  myth  in  SUIDAS  under
yrrhcnia   (see   thc    "Commentary"    of  KEIL   and
)KLITZSCII,   p.   8);    the  Scandinavian   myth   in   the
dda,  etc.

According  to  thc  older  conceptions  of  thc  days
f  creation  as  combined  with  biblical  chronology,
ne  could  speak  of  a  date  of  the  creation.  Starke  is
atisfied  with  the  correctness  of  thc  date :  23d  of
ctober,  4004  before  Christ.  Schroder  makes  the
ate  the  1st  or  17th  of  September,  4201,  but  adds'


182


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


"  The  Son  of  Mun  knew  not  the  day  nor  the  hour  when
heaven  and  earth  should  pass  away,  but  the  child  of
man  would  know  the  year  ami  the  day  when  heaven
and  earth  arose."  The  autumn  seems  to  have  been
chosen  on  account  of  the  ripe  fruits,  without  reflecting
that  on  the  entire  earth  it  must  ever  be  autumn
somewhere.

10  The  ]]'<:,•!<./  «*  Nature,  a.  1  he  Ancient  T  uw
of  the  World,  thai  of  the  Jli/./e  and  ,,f  Modern  Times.
—The  world-view 'of  the  ancients  was  based  on
appearance,  according  u>  "Inch  the  earth  formed  a
centre  reposing  under  the  moving,  rolling  _  Starry
world;  this  lyoiviitiie  view  received  a  scientific
expression  in'  the  well-known  Ptolemaic  system.
This  system  was  abandoned  in  the  time  of  the  Refor
mation  for  the  helio-ccntric  system  of  Copernicus.
But  because  the  Hible,  with  respect  to  astronomical
matters,  speaks  the  language  of  common  life,  which
is  yet  authorized  in  accordance  with  appearances  (the
sun  rises,  sets,  etc.),  it  was  supposed  that  the  Coper-
nican  system  contradicted  the  teaching  of  Holy  AN  rit,
and  not  onlv  the  papal  council  imagined  that  in  its
treatment  of  (ialileo,  but  even  Melancthon  was  of
the  same  opinion,  and  to  the  present  day  such  pro
tests,  even  on  the  Protestant  side,  have  not  entirely
died  away  (see  the  attacks  on  Dr.  Franz  in  Sanger-
hausen  in  Dir.sTKi-.wr.ii's  "Astronomy,"  p.  101  ;  also
p.  •_!<»,  especially  p.  VIZ).  These  prove  how  often  a
contracted  Bible-  belief  can  injure  more  than  profit
the  faith.  The  Coperniean  theory  was  especially
supposed  to  lie  in  contradiction  with  the  passage  in
.Jos!  x.  12,  l:i.  While  men  were  torturing  them
selves  with  this  dilliculty  springing  from  a  blind
adherence  to  the  literal  rendering,  a  much  greater
one  was  gradually  stepping  forth  out  of  the  back
ground.  The  consequences  of  the  Coperniean  system
were  developed,  according  to  the  discoveries  of  ller-
schel,  in  this  wise :  the  sun  among  its  planets  is  only
a  single  star  of  heaven,  and  the  earth  is  one  of  its
smallest  planets.  Since  now  the  fixed  stars  of  hea
ven  are  nothing  but  sun?,  and  these  suns  are  all,
according  to  the  analogy  of  ours,  surrounded  by
planetary  groups,  there  appear  to  be  countless  num
bers  of  planets,  of  which  very  many  are  larger  than
our  earth.  How  shall  we  now  retain  the  thought,
that  the  earth  is  the  sole  scene  of  the  revelation  of
God,  as  Holy  Writ  declares:  the  scene  of  the  incar
nation  of  God,  and  the  centre  of  a  reconciliation,
dissolution,  and  glorification  of  the  world,  embracin~
heaven  and  earth.

The  Hegelian  philosophy  sought  at  first  to  meet
this  difficulty  in  its  own  interest.  In  order  to  make
the  earth  the  sole  arena  of  the  evolutions  of  mind,
which  was  to  reach  the  full  glory  of  its  self-con
sciousness  in  the  Hegelian  system,  the  whole  starry
world  was  declared  to  be  destitute  of  spirits  and  in
he  main  spiritless — mere  films  of  light,  etc.  (see
LANGK'S  "Positive  Dogmatics,"  p.  279).  The  effort
was  made  to  render  this  barren  view  agreeal>le  to
theology  with  the  pretence  that  it  was  in  accordance
with  the  Bible,  and  favored  the  faith  ("Land  of
Glory,"  p.  12  ff.).  Against  this  insinuation  the
author  wrote  the  articles  which  are  collected  in  the
work:  "The  Land  of  Glory"  (Meurs),  Bielefeld
1S38,  with  reference  to  the  work  of  PFAFF:  "Man
and  the  Stars."  The  results  of  modern  astronom;
(according  to  Struve,  Miidlcr,  Schubert,  etc.),  viz.
that  the  "other  planets  of  our  solar  system  have  not
in  the  first  place,  the  same  plastic  consistency  no
the  same  planetary  relations  as  our  earth,  and  sec
ondly,  that  the  stellar  world  is  divided  into  a  sola


ilanetary  region  like  our  solar  system,  and  a  solar
stral  region  (the  world  of  double  stars,  of  eternal
unshine),  were  applied  to  the  biblical  Christian  view
f  the  world  as  recognizing  (in  its  conception  of
•arious  places  of  discipline  and  punishment)  a  place
icneath  the  world  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  place
bovc  it  on  the  other ;  consequently  the  contrast  of
a  region  of  growing  and  a  region  of  perfected  life,
jf  the  church  militant  and  the  church  triumphant,
)?  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly,  of  the  cai  tidy-human
nd  the  angelic  life.  Above  all,  it  was  observed  that
vith  the  doctrine  of  the  ascension  of  Christ  the  exist-
•nce  of  a  land  of  glory,  in  contradistinction  to  the
.'iirthly  sphere  of  day  and  night,  birth  and  death,  or
he  sphere  of  the  creative,  was  settled.  This  work
vas  followed  by  the  work  of  KUIITZ  :  "Bible  and
Vslronomy,"  l;-t  id.  1M2.  In  the  meanwhile  there
sprung  up  a  third  representation  of  cosmology,
vhich  was  again  to  fix  the  geocentric  stand-point  ir
spiritual  respect.  This  was  mainly  induced  l>y  A
ron  Schaden,  but  diligently  prosecuted  by  Dr.  EIUIARD
•ecently  in  his  work:  "The  Results  of  Natural  Sci
ence,"  Konigsberg,  lSi',1.  With  respect  to  our  plan
etary  system,  the  said  work  endeavors  to  prove  tha
the  earth  is  its  ideological  centre,  and  to  that  end
arther,  that  the  other  planets  could  be  either  not  a
all  or  only  partly  inhabitable ;  that  they  arc  only  ac
cretions  to  the  planetary  nature,  having  their  place
there  simply  on  account  of  the  earth;  and  that  con
<idered  under  any  other  point  of  view  they  couli
only  appear  as  caricatures  of  the  planetary  nature.

"iKlit/.sch  (p.  till)  is  in  general  inclined  to  thi
view.  He  permits,  liowcver,  a  natural  philosophc
liv  profession  (Prof.  Franz  Pfaff),  to  speak  for  him
who  nevertheless  acknowledges  (after  a  severe  crit
cism  of  the  plant-family)  that  there  may  be  imagine
elsewhere  such  beings  as  are  organized  in  correspoi
dence  to  the  prevailing  relations  on  other  heavenl
bodies.  But  one  cannot  see  how  the  conceptions  i
question  can  be  called  ''''creatures  nffiiiifasi/."

We  consider  the  view  of  the  pure  unreality  of  t>
extra-earthly  planetary  world  as  neither  cosmolog
cally  grounded,  nor  of  wholesome  tendency  in  aid  c
a  biblical  view  of  the  world.  As  respects  the  fir
point,  one  must  clearly  distinguish  between  an  i
liabitability  of  the  planets  of  our  solar  system  f<
beings  of  our  earthly  organization,  and  a  similar  i
habitability  for  spiritual  beings  in  general.  If  tl
earthly  organization  of  man  is  to  fix  the  measure  f<
the  habitableness  of  supra-terrcne  bodies,  then  mu
we  also  apply  the  analogy  to  the  most  beautiful  ar
brilliant  stellar-world.  "And  what  must  become  (
the  departed  human  souls,  separated  from  the
bodies?  How  shall  there  be  found  a  native  regie
for  angelic  spirits?  But  it  would  redound  little
the  glorification  of  the  living  God  of  Holy  Writ
consider  the  whole  planetary  group  of  our  sun,^  tl
earth  alone  excepted,  as  spiritless  wastes.  Whi
ever  in  this  respect  is  true  of  the  Hegelian  system
"•encral,  in  its  relation  to  the  stellar-world,  is  true
the  said  view  in  special  reference  to  our  planeta
system.

[NOTE  ON  TIIK  ASTRONOMICAL  OBJECTION
REVELATION.— The  question  of  the  planets'  inhabit
bility,  especially  in  its  religious  and  biblical  bearin<
has  "been  very  ably  and  scientifically  discussed  in
work  entitled  "The  Plurality  of  Worlds"  by  Pr
WIIEWELL  of  Oxford.  The  author  maintains  a  vij
similar  to  that  of  Dr.  Ebrard,  that  the  earth  is  f
advanced  planet  of  the  system,  and  that  the  m«
scientific  evidence  goes  to  show  that  the  oth'


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


183


(especially  the  largest,  or  those  of  least  density)  arc
in  a  rudimentary  or  inchoate  state.  The  same  may
be  true  of  all  the  visible  bodies  of  the  stellar  spaces.
The  only  reasoning  against  it  is  simply  the  question,
why  not,  pourquoi  non,  as  Montaigne  employs  it,
without  any  inductive  evidence.  This  author  employs
also  the  modern  view  hi  geology  with  great  perti
nence  and  force  :  Immense  times  without  life  or  with
only  the  lowest  forms  of  life  !  If  this  is  not  incon
sistent  with  the  divine  wisdom  and  goodness,  then
immense  spaces  without  life,  or  with  only  the  lowest
forms  of  life,  for  a  certain  time,  is  no  more  incon
sistent.

So  far,  however,  as  this  presents  a  difficulty  to
revelation  and  Christianity,  it  is  not  due  to  modern
science  alone,  or  even  mainly.  The  inhabitability
of  the  planets,  and  the  "  plurality  of  worlds,"  are  as
much  a  priori  thoughts,  that  is,  rising  of  themselves
to  the  musing  meditative  miad,  as  they  arc  the
results  of  any  scientific  or  inductive  reasoning.  In
both  cases,  imagination  is  the  chief  power  of  the
mind  employed,  though  modern  science  has  furnished
it  with  its  stronger  stimulants.  As  such  a  priori  or
independent  thought,  the  notion  of  a  plurality,  or
even  an  infinity,  of  worlds,  was  very  ancient.  It
was,  however,  larger  than  the  modern  notion,  being
rather  a  plurality  of  /cotrjuol,  or  inundi  (that  is,  total
visible  universes)  than  of  worlds  used,  as  the  name
is  now  used,  of  planetary  or  stellar  bodies.  It  was
the  old  question  of  the  soul  demanding  a  sufficient
reason  for  the  non-existence,  the  absence  of  which
reason  seemed  to  be  itself  a  proof  of  the  actual  exist
ence.  Why  not?  If  one  world,  why  not  two  —
three  —  more  —  numberless?  See  PLUTARCH:  De
Placiiis  Plulosophorum,  vol.  v.  p.  2o9,  Leip.  ed.,
where  among  other  statements  and  arguments  he
quotes  the  saying  of  Mctrodorus  :  &TOTTOV  ei^ai  eV
/j.eyd\?a  Trebly  tva.  ffrd^uv  •yfvqSriva.i,  Kal  kva  /COIT.UOJ/
eV  r<f  a-xelpy,  "  it  is  absurd  (incredibly  strange)  that
there  should  be  but  one  head  of  wheat  in  a  great
plain,  and  no  less  so,  that  there  should  be  but  one
cosmos  in  infinite  space."  The  other  idea  of  the
planets'  inhabitability  appears  also  in  the  Greek
poetry.  See  especially  the  fragment  given  by  Pro-
elus:


a^aj'aroi  K\jovcny,  fwi^ovioi  5e  -re  \w\vr\v

T]  woAA'  ovpt   ex6')  ""oAA*  &<rrfa  iroAAa  /xe'AaSpa.

Another  land  of  vast  extent,
Immortals  call  Selene,  men,  the  moon,
A  land  of  mountains,  cities,  palaces.

The  Bible  is  charged  with  narrowness  in  its  space
conceptions,  but  how  narrow  is  that  science,  or  that
philosophy,  which  while  vaunting  itself,  perhaps,  on
its  superior  range  of  view,  has  no  idea  of  any  higher
being  than  man,  and  sometimes  would  seem  to  reject
any  other  conception  of  deity  than  that  of  a  devel
oped  humanity,  slowly  becoming  a  god,  an  etre  su
preme,  to  the  nature  still  below.  How  glorious  the
Scripture  doctrine  appears  in  the  contrast,  as  start
ing  with  an  all-perfect  personal  being:  Jehovah
Tzebaoth,  Jehovah  of  Hosts,  with  cherubim  and
seraphim,  apxai,  KvpdrrjTfs,  living  principles,  ruling
energies,  angels,  archangels,  thrones,  dominions,
principalities,  and  powers.  If  not  in  space  concep
tions,  yet  how  sublimely  in  the  higher  idea  of  ascend
ing  ranks  of  being  do  the  Scriptures  surpass  the  low
and  narrow  views  of  Herbert,  Comte,  and  Darwin
After  a  past  eternity  of  progress,  nature  and  the


cosmos  have  just  struggled  up  to  man  !  This  is  tho
highest  limit  yet  reached  after  a  movement  so  im
measurably  long,  yea,  endless  in  one  direction ;  and
that,  too,  not  man  as  the  Scripture  represents  him,
a.  primus  homo,  an  exalted  being,  so  constituted  by
tho  inspiration  that  gave  him  birth,  and  signed  him
with  the  image  of  the  eternal  God,  but  man  just
rising  above  the  ape,  just  emerging  from  that  last
growth  of  nature  that  preceded  him  in  this  intermina
ble  series  of  chance  selections  at  last  falling  into
ie  seeming  order,  and  of  random  developments
that  never  came  from  any  preceding  idea.  Man  as
lie  now  appears  on  earth,  and  whom  Scripture  pro
nounces  a  fallen  being,  the  highest  product  of  an
endless  time!  Such  is  "the  positive  philosophy,"
so  boastful  of  its  discoveries  in  width  and  space,  but
so  exceedingly  low  and  narrow  in  respect  to  the
other  and  grander  dimension  !  It  discards  theology
and  metaphysics  as  belonging  to  a  still  lower  stage
of  this  late-born  child  of  nature,  but  alas  for  man  if
all  the  glory  of  his  being,  all  his  higher  thinking,  has
already  thus  passed  away  !  We  may  thank  the  Liv-

God  for  giving  to  us  an  ideal  world,  as  in  itself  a
proof  of  something  above  nature,  and  of  a  higher
actual  even  now  in  nature  than  our  sense  and  our
science  ever  have  drawn,  or  may  ever  expect  to
draw,  from  it.

The  objection  to  revelation  to  which  Lange  here
alludes  as  drawn  from  the  modern  astronomy  is
itself  simply  anthropopathic.  They  who  make  it
imagine  Deity  to  be  just  such  a  one  as  themselves.
If  He  has  two  worlds  to  take  care  of,  it  is  incredible
that  His  providence  should  be  as  particular,  and  His
interest  as  near,  as  though  He  had  but  one  to  govern.
Such  a  mode  of  thinking  makes  worth,  too,  and  rank,
wholly  quantitative  and  numerical,  banishing,  in  fact,
all  intrinsic  quality,  and  intrinsic  value,  from  the
world  of  things  and  ideas.  The  bigger  the  universe
in  space,  the  less  the  worth  in  each  part,  as  a  part,
and  this  without  any  distinction  between  the  purely
physical  or  material  to  which  such  a  quantitative
rule  of  inverse  proportion  might  apply,  and  the
moral  and  spiritual,  which  can  never  be  measured
by  it.

The  force  of  this  objection  comes  from  the  fact
of  the  imagination  overpowering  the  reason.  The
lower  though  more  vivid  faculty  impedes  or  silences
for  a  time  the  higher.  Reason  teaches  intuitively,
or  as  derived  from  the  very  idea  of  God,  that  His
care  and  providence  towards  any  one  rational  and
moral  agent  cannot  be  diminished  by  the  number  of
other  rational  and  moral  agents,  or  be  any  less  than
it  would  be  if  such  agent  had  been  alone  with  Deity
in  the  universe.  The  light  and  heat  of  the  sun  are
the  same  whether  the  recipients  are  few  or  many.
The  case,  therefore,  may  be  thus  stated :  If  a  certain
manifestation  of  the  divine  care  for,  and  interest  in,
our  world  and  race  (namely,  such  as  is  revealed  in
the  Bible)  would  not  be  incredible  on  the  supposition
of  their  being  but  one  such  world  or  race,  then  such
credibility  is  not  at  all  diminished  by  the  discovery
that  there  are  others,  few  or  many,  to  any  extent
conceivable.  We  must  hold  firmly  to  this  as  a  pure
rational  judgment  against  the  swaying  imagination
invading  the  reason,  and  even  assuming  to  take  its
place.  If  the  interest  revealed  by  Christianity  could
be  pronounced  credible  before  the  discoveries  of
astronomy  (and  this  is  assumed  as  the  ground  of  the
argument),  then  such  measure  is  equally  credible
now,  or  we  are  convicted  of  judging  God  anthropo-
pathically,  however  we  may  dignify  the  feeling


184


GEXESIS,  OR   TIIE   FIRST   COOK   OF   MOSES.


with  the  name  of  an  enlarged  and  liberal  philos-
•phy.

Besides,  there  is  no  end  to  the  argument  until  it
banishes  all  providence,  all  government,  all  divine
interest  conceivable  in  the  cosmos — everything,  in
short,  which  distinguishes  the  divine  idea  from  that
of  a  wholly  impersonal  nature.  <  >n  a  certain  scale
of  the  universe  the  Old  Testament  becomes  incredible.
On  a  wider  sweep  Christianity,  the  old  Christianity
of  the  Church,  can  no  longer  lie  believed.  The  in
carnation  and  the  atonement  must  be  thrown  out;
God  could  not  have  eaivd  to  that  extent  for  this
petty  world.  Tuni  the  telescope,  so  as  to  enlarge
the  iirld,  or,  through  its  inverted  h  uses,  behold  the
objects  sii!l  i'.irthcr  oil',  and  "liberal  Christianity "
disappears.  Even  that  has  too  much  of  divine  inter
est  lor  the  new  \iew.  Draw  out  the  slide  still
farther,  and  the  very  latest  and  faintest  ''phase  of
faith''  departs.  Everything  resembling  a  providence
or  care  of  any  kind  for  the  individual  become-  incr  -
dilile  in  this  lime  and  space  ratio.  Frayer  is  gone,
and  hope,  and  all  remains  of  any  fear  or  love  of  (iod.
Further  on,  and  races  are  thrown  out  of  the  scale  as
well  as  indhiduals;  even  a  general  provide::/,  of
any  kind  becomes  an  obsolete  idea.  Not  or.lv  the
earth  but  solar  and  stellar  systems  become  infinitesi
mals,  or  quantities  that  may  be  neglected  in  the  cal
culus  that  sums  the  series.  There  is  no  end  to  this.
We  ha\e  no  right  to  limit  it  by  the  present  si/e  or
jiowcr  of  our  telescopes.  The  present  visible  worlds
of  astronomy  may  be  no  more — they  probably  are  no
more — to  the  whole,  than  a  single  leaf  to  the  fores; s
of  the  Orinoco.  The  false  idea  mn.-t  be  carried  on
until  every  conception  of  every  relation  of  a  personal
deity  to  iinite  beings,  of  any  rank,  utterly  disappears,
and  a  view  no  better  than  blank  atheism — yea,  worse
than  at!iei~m,  for  that  does  not  mock  us  with  any
pretense  of  theism — takes  the  place  of  all  moral  fear
;LS  well  as  of  all  religion.

And  this  raises  the  farther  question :  If  sue1.'  be
the  diminishing  effect  on  the  religion,  what  must  it
be  on  the  science  and  the  philosophy?  If  human
.-ins  and  human  salvation  become  such  small  things
\\hen  s.vn  through  this  inverted  glass,  what  becomes
of  all  human  knowledge,  human  genius,  and  human
boar-ting  of  it  ?  We  do  not  find  that  the  men  who
make  these  objections,  as  drawn  from  the  magnitude
of  the  universe,  are  more  humble  than  others;  but
surely  they  ought  to  be  so,  after  having  thus  shown
their  own  moral  and  physical  nothingness,  and,
.dong  with  it,  the  utter  insignificance  of  their
science.

In  one  aspect,  his  mere  physical  aspect,  man  is
indeed  insignificant.  The  Scripture  does  not  hesitate
to  call  him  a  worm.  It  pronounces  all  nations
"vanity'' — "the  small  dust  of  the  balance,"  unap-
preciable  physically  in  the  great  cosmical  scales —
"less  than  nothing  and  emptiness."  Such  is  its
view  of  mail  in  one  direction,  whilst  in  the  other  his
value  is  to  be  estimated  by  the  incarnation  of  Christ,
and  the  very  fact  that  the  Infinite  One  condescends
to  make  a  revelation  of  Himself  to  such  a  being. —
T.  L.]

The  cosmology  of  the  Bible  is  gcocosmic  in  its
practical  point  of  view.  After  it  has  presented  to  us
the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  it  lets  us
conclude  from  the  development  of  the  earth  the
development  of  the  heavens,  namely  in  respect  to
the  creation  of  light  and  of  man.  From  the  spirit-
world  of  earth  we  are  to  conclude  a  spirit-world  of
heaven.  But  it  superabundantly  indicates  a  develop


ment  of  the  earthly  solar  system  parallel  with  the
development  of  the  earth  (eh.  i.  1-1).  That  heaven
is  an  inhabited  region,  appears  from  many  passages,
c.  g.,  (Jen.  xxviii.  12 ;  and  also  that  this  region  is
divided  into  a  rich  multitude  of  various  departments.
And  the  question  is  not  only  of  heaven,  but  also  of
the  heaven  of  heavens  (1  Kings  viii.  27).  Christ
teaches  us  too:  In  My  father's  house  are  many  man
sions  (John  xiv.  '_!).  But  finally  the  Holy  Writ  in
forms  us  clearly,  that  notwithstanding  the  changea
bility,  and  necessity  for  rejuvenation,  of  the  entire
universe  (I's.  cii.  '21  ;  Is.  h.  (1),  there  is  yet  a  contrast
between  the  regions  of  growth  on  this  side,  and  of
perfection  on  the  other  (E/ek.  i.  21  ;  1  I'et.  i.  4  ;  li
1'et.  iii.  ]'•',,  etc.).  In  this  respect  the  newest  and
puivst  astronomical  view  of  the  world  corresponds
entirely  to  thi<  biblical  distinction  between  the
regions  of  growth  here,  and  of  perfection  beyond.
But  the  Bible  al.-o  pri,mi-es  for  the  form  of  the
world,  even  on  this  side,  a  new  r-truciure  and  perfec
tion.  Once  a!l  was  night;  but  in  the  present  order
of  things  day  and  night  alternate;  in  the  future  the
new  world  shall  be  raised  beyond  the  contrast  of
day  and  nigln(Itev.  xxi.).  Formerly  all  was  sea;
the  present  order  consists  in  the  contrast  of  land  and
sea  ;  in  the  new  world  the  sea  shall  be  no  more.

b.  Tic  II  a  of  Sat X re  in  ilm  Jiililc.  Tin'  D',lh
null  tin'  Lii'(Kli<iitt'nii  of  Xit/urc. — We  have  shown  in
passing  that  the  Scriptures  fully  recogr.i/e  the  id  .:
of  nature,  i.  c.,  of  the  conditioned  going  forth  of  the
fixed  life  of  nature  from  a  fundamental  piinciple
peculiarly  belonging  to  it.  Every  creative  word  be
comes  the  ideal  dynamical  basis  of  a  real  principle.
At  first  appear  the  principles  of  the  separation.  The
separation  of  heaven  and  earth  has  the  more  general
signification  of  universe  on  the  one  side,  and  of  a
special  world-sphere  on  the  other  as  represented  by
the  earth,  of  which  we  now  speak.  At  the  second
separation  (light  and  darkness)  the  co-operation  of
the  spirit  of  God  is  brought  out,  i.  c.,  of  the  creative
formative  activity  of  God;  at  the  third  separation
(water  and  land)  the  co-operation  of  light  is  presup
posed.  The  natuial  law  set  up  by  Harvey  (see
LANCE'S  "I'ositive  Dogmatics,"  p.  259):  omne  vivum
ex  oro,  has  been  again  brilliantly  restored  in  modern
times  by  the  exact  investigation  of  nature  in  opposi
tion  to  the  theory  of  r/rncralio  (rquivoca,  which  nat
ural  philosophy  had  taught  (see  SoBERNUEiM:  "Ele
ments  of  General  I'hysiology,"  Berlin,  18-14).  In
Pelitzsch  also  the  conception  of  the  (jeneratio  ccqui-
voca  plays  a  part  in  the  account  of  the  creation  (p.
Ill),  because  he  has  not  sufficiently  considered  that
the  creative  words,  in  the  ideal  they  carry,  form  the
foundation  of  the  actual  principles  of  nature.

From  the  last-quoted  principle  it  appears  as  fol
low.-;  :

1.  Every  grade  of  nature  is  fixed  by  a  correspond
ing  principle  of  nature,  the  natural  principle  of  the
plant,  etc.

12.  By  its  unfolding,  this  principle  brings  to  light
the  standard  of  its  development  as  the  natural  law
of  its  grade.  The  natural  principle  is  the  first,  the
natural,  law  is  the  second.

'3.  By  the  new  principle  of  the  higher  grade  of
nature,  the  natural  law  of  the  preceding  grade  is
modified  in  accordance  with  the  new  and  higher  life.
The  plant  modifies  the  natural  law  of  gravity,  the
animal  modifies  the  local  attachment  of  the  plant;
in  man  the  animal  instinct  is  effaced.

4.  With  each  new  life-principle  God  creates  a
new  thing.  The  creation  of  the  new  is  however  the


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


185


most  general  idea  of  the  miracle,  as  the  announcc-
tficnt  of  what  in  new  is  the  most  general  idea  of
prophecy.  Consequently,  each  new  natural  principle
is  to  the  preceding  surpassed  grade  of  nature  as  a
miracle.  "  The  animal  is  a  miracle  for  the  vegetable
world  "  (Hegel).  From  this  relation  of  the  new  nat
ural  principles,  as  they  form  the  new  degrees  of
nature,  it  follows  that  all  nature  is  a  symbolical  sup
port  and  prophecy  of  the  ethical  miracle  of  the  king
dom  of  God.  For  as  the  first  man,  Adam,  miracu
lously  changes  the  natural  law  of  the  animal  world,
that  is,  changes  instinct  into  human  freedom,  thus
does  Christ,  as  the  new  man  from  heaven,  as  the
completed  life-principle  and  miracle,  change  the
Adainic  lu\vs  oi'  life  into  fundamental  laws  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  It  is  in  accordance  with  his  nature
to  perform  miracles  within  the  Adarnic  sphere  (1
Cor.  xv.).

5.  But  what  is  true  of  the  laws  of  nature,  is  also
true  of  the  matter  of  nature.     Principle  is  the  first
thing  iu  nature,  law  is  the  second,  matter,  as  we
know  it,  is  the  third.     For  through  the  intervention
of  a  new  and  higher  natural  principle  in  the  world
by  means  of  the  creative  word   supporting   it,  the
life  of  tiie  preceding  grade  is  reduced  to  the  grade
of  matter.     Thus  by  the  appearance  of  the  vegetable
principle,  the  elementary  world  becomes  matter  for
new  formations;    so,  too,   the   animal   reduces   the
vegetable  world  to  the  grade  of  material,  and  in  like
manner  docs  man  change  the  grade  of  the  animal
world.     But  the  man  from  heaven  makes  from  the
elements  of  the  Adainic  world  the  matter  for  a  new
world.     The  materialists  of  our  day  have  ridiculed
the  idea  of  a  life-power  which  should  be  different
from  the  supposed  fundamental  matter  of  the  world.
Instead  of  the  life-power,  there  should  have  been
opposed  to  them  something  more  real :  the  life-prin
ciple.      The   life-principle   is   fundamentally   distin
guished  in  the  contrast  of  plastic  formative  power
and  material  substratum.     They  arc  both  mutually
established  each  with  the  other,  but   above  them
stands  the  principle.     The  materialist,  therefore,  as
he  explains  everything  from  a  force  of  matter,  which
no  man  has  ever  yet  seen  (see  LAXGE'S  "Miscel
laneous  Writings,"   1st  vol.   p.   51),  does  not  only
deny  -Jie  existence  of  the  human  soul  and  its  ethical
nature  and  highest  causality,  the  Godhead,  but  he  is
also  the  antagonist  of  the  genuine  zoologist  who  be
lieves  in  the  reality  of  the  animal  principle,  as  he  is
of  the  genuine  botanist  who  does  not  consider  the
vegetable  formations  a  shadowy  play  of  matter  on
the  wall,  and  of  the  crystallography  who  connects
imponderable  forces  and  polarity — yea,  of  the  genuine
chemist  too,  who  has  perceived  that  the  relations  of
elective   allinity  in   substances   extend   beyond   the
atomistic  conceptions.    May  it  not  possibly  be  explain
ed,  that  as  the  material  side  of  the  natural  principle  is
formed  by  the  creating  word,  so  is  the  reference  of  the
origin  of  matter  to  a  pure  thought  of  God  somethin"-
else  than  the  reference  to  the  difficult  enigma  of  a  crea^
tive  matter  ;  and  experience  proves  that  the  coarser
matter  everywhere,  as  outside   or  precipitate,  pro
ceeds  from  finer  formations.     It  is  a  radical  contra
diction  that  matter  should  generate  spirit,  and,  never
theless,  be  everywhere  subjected  to  spirit,  even  to
the  disappearance  of  its  original  nature.

6.  The  ascending  line  of  natural  principles  is  an
ascending  line  of  acts  of  creation,  with  which  the
principles  always  the  more  strengthen,  deepen,  o-on-
eralize,    and     individualize    themselves,    and  '  with
which,  at   the   same   time,  new   forms   of  the  nat


ural  law  and  new  combinations  of  substances  ap
pear.

7.  The  finished  lower  sphere  of  nature  does  not
produce  the  newly  appearing  principle  of  the  higher
sphere,  but  it  is,  however,  its  maternal  birth-place.
And    because   the   lower   sphere   prepares    for   the
higher,  in  order  to  serve  as  its  basis,  it  is  full  of  indi
cations   of  it,    and   becomes   throughout   a   symbol
which  represents  in  advance  the  coming  new  worli!-
form.

8.  With  respect  to  the  development  of  the  nature-
principles  into  the  realization  of  the  conditioned  self-
generation  of  nature,  we  must  distinguish  the  follow
ing  kinds  of  development :  a.  The  development  of
the  world-creation  in  general;   b.  the  development
of  our  solar  system ;  c.  the  spherical  development  of
the  earth ;  d.  the  gradual  development  of  the  indi
vidual  life  on  earth  ;  e.  the  natural  development  of
the  individuals  themselves ;  /.  the  development  of
nature  in  the  narrower  and  the  broader  sense,  or  1.
apart  from  human  life,  and  2.  in  connection  with  it.

a.  The  Development  of  the  Creation  of  the  World
in  general— Through  the  analogy  of  the  development
of  the  earth,  the  Scripture  permits  us  to  infer  also  a
development  of  heaven.  The  heavens  are  created
(Gen.  i.  1 ;  1  Chron.  xvii.  20 ;  Neh.  ix.  6 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.
C ;  cxxxvi.  5 ;  Prov.  iii.  19) ;  the  heavens  grow  old
and  pass  away  (Ps.  cii.  27;  Is.  li.  C);  the  heavens
arc  renewed  (2  Pet,  iii.  13  ;  Ilev.  xxi.  5).  Astronomy
also  teaches  a  continuous  growth,  and  in  the  same
way  recognizes  indications  of  passing  aw;iy  in  the
stellar  world.  But  there  is  a  difference  between  the
various  celestial  regions.  The  old  Jewish  and  Ma-
hommcdan  tradition,  and  the  Christian  Apocryplias
know  seven  heavens  (the  Koran,  the  Kabbala,  the
Testament  of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs).  But  the  He
brews  admitted  in  general  three  heavens  as  in  accord
ance  with  the  Scripture  (Paul  also  2  Cor.  xii.  2-4 ;
the  third  heaven  the  paradise) :  1.  The  heaven  of  the
air  (the  clouds,  birds,  changes  of  the  atmosphere) ;

2.  the  heaven  of  the  stellar  world,  the  firmament;

3.  the  heaven  in  which  God  dwells  with  His  angels,
paradise.     Of  the  latter  heaven  it  must  be  observed
that  it  is  a  symbolico-religious  idea,  and  by  no  means
excludes  the  stellar  world  (see  LAXGE'S  work :   "  The
Laud  of  Glory  ").     The  Scripture  recognizes  also  the
distinction  between  an  earlier  heavenly  stellar  world
and  the  system  to  which  this  earth  belongs,  as  we
find  it  indicated  in  the  fourth  day's  work.     When
the  earth  was  founded  the  morning-stars  sang  to
gether,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy  (Job
cxxviii.  7).     Consequently  before  the  foundations  of
the  earth  those  morning-stars  were  there.     Also  the
"  Heaven  of  heavens,"  as  well  as  the  ascension  of
Christ,  point  to  a  heavenly  region  which  lies  beyond
the  cosmical  sphere  of  the  world,  to  a  region  "of
eternal  sunshine."     See  the  above  quotations.

b.  The  Development  of  our  Solar  System. — Al
though  on  the  fourth  day  of  the  creation  the  whole
stellar  world  is  introduced  into  the  circle  of  vision  of
the  earth,  nevertheless  the  cosmical  completion  of
the  system  belonging  to  the  earth  is  especially  indi
cated.  Special  allusion  is  made  to  this  system  whei
the  New  Testament  biblical  eschatology  treats  of  th
end  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  their  renewal
(Joel  iii.  4 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  29 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10).

[NOTE  ox  THE  SCRIPTURAL  HEAVEXS  AND  EARTH.
— Wre  think  Dr.  Lange  carries  too  far  what  may  be
called  the  cosmological  view  of  the  Mosaic  account.
It  either  gives  the  writer  too  much  science,  or,  in
order  to  get  a  ground  of  Interpretation  independent


186


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


of  his  conceptions,  makes  him  to  be  a  mere  automa
tic  medium — thus  taking  away  the  human,  or  that
subjective  truthfulness  which  is  so  precious  in  any
view  -we  may  take  of  this  narrative.  Hence  the  ten
dency  to  regard  the  Bible  heavens  as  the  astronomi
cal  heavens" of  modern  science,  instead  of  the  heavens
of  the  earth,  nearly  connected  with  the  earth,  and  in
which  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  appear  as  lights,
whatever  may  be  the  near  or  remote  causes  of  those
appearances.  See  remarks  in  note  <>n  the  Hebrew
plural  C^-r,  ]  p.  1C2,  1C3.  The  symbolic  contrast  of
the  heavens  and  the  earth,  witli  which  l>r.  Lunge  starts
in  the  interpretation,  has  all  the  value  lie  attaches  to
it;  but  it  is  not  at  all  lost  in  what  he  might  regard
as  the  narrower  view.  The  optical  heavens,  with
the  appearances  in  it,  was  all  the  writer  knew,  or  was
inspired  to  know,  or  describe.  It  was  to  him  the
cosmos.  As  this  enlarges,  by  science,  or  otherwise,
the  conception  of  the  heavens  enlarges  with  it,  but
only  as  a  conception.  The  idea  remains  as  in  the
beginning.  In  keeping  up  this  contrast,  however,
we  are  not  to  regard  the  scientific  bodies  discovered
in  the  remot,  i- spaces,  as  the  heavens  in  distinction
from  oar  own  home,  as  though  the  heavens  were
simply  all  that  is  oil',  and  away  from,  the  earth.
The  planet  Mars  is  no  more  a  heaven,  or  heavens,^  to
us  than  we  are  a  heavens  to  it.  As  knowledge  lifts
up  the  everla.-tiug  gates,  the  conception  of  the  mun-
dus  enlarges  to  take  in  other  earth-like,  bodies  in
Space;  but  the  old  idea  travels  forth  unchanged.
The  great  svmbolic  contrast  yet  remains.  The  hea-
vens,  too,  enlarge  their  seale,  and  the  peculiar  divine
residence,  once  thought  to  be  in  the  near  sky  just
above  us,  is  carried  farther  oil',  beyond  the  sky  of
clouds,  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  moon,  the  sun,  the
planets,  the  s<,lar  system.  Science  adds  the  stellar
bodies;  the  hea\  en's,  the  great  symbolic,  or  rather
symboli/ed,  heavens,  are  .--till  beyond,  high  over  all,
embracing  all.  "Who  hast  set  Thy  glory  ab»rc  the
heavens,"  E":rr!  '~  (compare  ^  as  used  Gen.  i.
'20;  six.  '2:!,  ""Xrr;"  '^~'4');  "Who  stoopeth
down  to  behold  the  things  that  are  in  the  heavens
(the  lower  heavens)  and  the  earth,"  1's.  cxiii.  ('..
Solomon's  language,  "The  heaven  and  heaven  of
heavens  cannot  contain  Thee,"  may,  or  may  not,  be
surpassed  in  its  local  conception,  but  no  science,  it
may  be  repeated,  will  ever  transcend  it  in  idea.
Whatever  the  number  of  spheres,  real  or  imaginary,
the  C^'i  m1 ,  the  heaven  of  heavens,  is  still  the
great  heaven  above  them  all. — T.  L.]

c.  The  Kphericid  Development  of  the  Earth,  or
(he.  Sir  />,;//.•,•'  H '•//•/.-. — As  was  above  indicated,  the
six  days'  work  have  been  represented  in  the  sequence
of  a  twofold  ternary,  in  which  is  mirrored  the  signifi
cance  of  the  number  three.  We  construct  these
ternaries  in  the  following  manner:  1.  Light  and  the
lights;  -2.  water  and  air,  and  the  animals  of  water
and  air;  3.  the  solid  land  and  over  it  the  vegetable
world  ;  the  land-animals  and  over  them  man.  As  to
the  strict  consistency  of  these  days'  works,  the
most  celebrated  naturalists,  as  Cuvier,  have  expressly
acknowledged  it.  Now  we  find  these  days'  works
construed  'in  the  most  manifold  way  ;  in  part  purely
according  to  the  Scriptures,  in  part  purely  according
to  natural  science,  and  partly  in  distinct  comparison
whereby  the  harmony  between  the  Bible  and  natura
science  is  contested  or  maintained. — Scriptural  repre
sentations  of  the  six  days'  work.  Here  the  104th
Psalm  exceeds  all.  First  day,  vers.  1 ,  2 ;  second  day,
vers.  3,  4;  third  day,  vers.  5-18;  fourth  day,  vers


19,  20.  The  fifth  day  and  the  first  half  of  the  sixth
re  freely  inlaid  into  the  picture  from  the  fourteerith
verse.  The  sixth  day  also  from  vcr.  14  ;  but  in  ver.
23  man  appears  more  distinctly  in  his  rule.  Here
follows  an  accurate  picture  of  the  whole  creation
?rom  vcr.  24.  The  creation  of  the  new  world,  which
is  the  aim  of  the  Apocalypse,  passes  also  through  a
sevenfold  stage.  Here  an  accord  in  the  order  of  the
six  days'  work  is  not  to  be  misunderstood.  1.  Thi
seven  congregations  as  the  seven  candlesticks  of  the
earth,  Christ  in  a  figure  of  light  in  their  midst,  with
seven  stars  in  His  hands — an  allusion  to  the  creation
of  light  of  the  first  day  (eh.  i.-iii.).  2.  The  seven
seals.  The  council  in  heaven  and  the  seven  seals  or
decrees  of  sorrow  on  earth — an  allusion  to  the  crea
tion  of  the  firmament  between  the  waters  above  (ch.
iv.  C>,  the  "sea  of  glass";  comp.  vii.  17)  and  the
waters  beneath  (the  blood  of  the  lamb,*  ch.  vii.  M),
ch.  iv.-vii.  The  seven  trumpets.  Decrees  of  judg
ment  on  the  earth  preaching  repentance  (ch.  viii.  7)
and  on  the  sea  (ver.  8) — allusion  to  the  separation
of  land  and  sea  (see  also  ch.  x.  '2),  ch.  viii.-x.  2.
The  seven  thunders  (voices  of  awaking  whose  speech
had  been  sealed).  The  angel  who  had  awakened
the  seven  thunders,  raises  his  hand  to  heaven  and
swears  that  hereafter  time  shall  be  no  more. f  Epi
sodes  from  the  stag;-  of  the  seven  thundcis:  the
swallowed  scroll,  the.  measuring  of  the  temple  of  God,
the  two  olive  trees,  the  woman  in  heaven  clothed
with  the  sun,  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  a  crown
of  twelve  stars  on  her  head — nn  allusion  to  the
lights  created  to  mark  the  seasons  (ch.  x.  I]  to  ch.
x'ii.  '2).  5.  The  seven  heads  of  the  dragon.  The
(flvimr)  dragon  in  heaven,  the  woman  with  eagles'
wings,  and  the  beast  out  of  the  sea  with  seven  heads,
the  "earthly  anti-Christ  representative  of  the  seven
heads  of  the  dragon — allusion  to  the  birds  of  the
heavens  and  the  beasts  of  the  sea  (ch.  xii.  3-xiii.  K>).
6.  The  seven  last  plagues  or  vials  of  wrath,  hitro-
duction:  the  animal  out  of  the  eaith,  the  number
066  (with  reference  to  the  significance  of  the  number
0;  perhaps  also  the  sixth  day);  the  lamb  on  Mount
Sion,  the  image  of  God  with  the  144,000  virgins  who
bear  on  their  foreheads  the  name  of  the  lamb  and
the  name  of  the  father,  i.  e.,  arc  images  of  God;  the
announcement  of  the  judgment,  of  the  seven  last
plagues;  the  judgment  on  the  earth;  the  whore,  her
counterpart  the  bride  and  her  bridegroom,  heroes
and  deliverers,  judges  of  spirits  and  associates  in  the
apostasy — allusion  to  the  animals  of  the  earth  and
to  man  "created  in  the  image  of  God,  with  the  com
mand:  Rule  over  them  and  make  them  subject  to
you,  ch.  xiii.  11-xix.  21)4

*  [Dr.  Langc's  fancv  hero  seems  altogether  too  exuberant.
Tlie  parallelism  with  the  Mosaic  account  in  the  101th  I'salm
is  too  striking  to  be  mistaken.  It  was  doubtless,  too,  in  the
mind  of  the  writer  of  the  Apocalypse,  as  it  is  also  evident  in
the  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of  John,  but  many  of  the
resemblances 'here  traced  by  Dr.  Large  altogether  fail  to
satisfy.— T.  L.]

t  [Dr.  Lnnge's  rendering  here  is  that  of  Luther,  and  is
the  same  with  our  English  translation.  But  there  can  be
hardly  a  doubt  of  its  being  erroneous.  It  should  be,  "  that
there  shall  be  no  more  delay  "—that  is,  in  what  is  to  follow.
See  Bloomfield.— T.  L.]

t  [It  may  seem  strange  that  Dr.  Lange,  while  laying  so
much  stress  on  these  remoter,  if  not  altogether  lunciful,
parallelisms  with  the  creative  account  which  he  finds  in  the
Apocalypse,  should  have  overlooked  the  much  more  distinct
reference  in  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of  John.  Whether
the  principium  there  is  the  same  with  that  in  Genesis,  may
admit  of  discussion,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  paral
lelism,  and  the  mention  of  light  and  lite  immediately  fol
lowing  makes  it  unmistakable.  It  is  a  higher  light,  indeed,
for  "  the  darkness  overtakes  it  not,"  as  it  should  be  ren-


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


187


7.  The  great  Sabbath  of  God  (ch.  xx.  and  xxi.).
It  is,  of  course,  understood  that  so  original  a  crea
tion  as  the  Apocalypse  could  not  be  an  allegorical
i;opy  of  the  six  days'  work.  In  the  Epistle  of  Bar
nabas  (among  the  writings  of  the  Patrcs  apostolici)
we  find  ch.  xv.  the  incorrect  literal  interpretation  of
the  passages  Ps.  xc.  4  and  2  Pet.  iii.  8  (according  to
which  a  thousand  years  of  earth  should  make  one
day  of  God,  consequently  six  thousand  years  of  his
tory  the  great  spiritual  week  of  God  which  is  to  pre
cede  the  divine  millennium  sabbath).  This  became
later  a  standing  presumption  of  the  chiliastic  com
putations.  One  of  the  first  patristic  representations
of  the  hexaemeron  with  polemical  references  to  the
heathen  view  of  the  world,  we  find  in  the  apology  of
TiiKoriiiLus  OF  ANTIOCII  :  Ad  Autolycum,  lib.  ii.  cap.
12  sqq.  Many  others  have  followed  these  (see  Intro
duction).  Among  the  modern  biblio-thcological
representations  of  the  six  days'  work,  that  of  HERDER
("Oldest  Record  of  the  Human  Race")  occupies  a
prominent  place.  It  rejects  all  combinations  of  the
scriptural  text  with  natural  science.  It  traces  back
the  account  to  the  teaching  of  God ;  but  it  arose  by
means  of  human  observation  of  the  rising  sun,  as  in
this  the  picture  of  creation  is  ever  unrolled  to  the
eyes  of  the  observer.  The  representation  itself  he
calls  a  hieroglyphe  for  the  instruction  of  man  in  the
great  pictures  of  creation,  as  presented  to  his  con
templation  in  the  order  of  life,  first  •work,  then  rest
(the  sabbath-law),  and  in  the  numbering  of  days
(with  reference  to  the  week)  as  given  to  him  in  lan
guage,  etc.  He  finds  in  the  account  the  symbols  of
the  first  religion,  natural  science,  morality,  politics,
chronology,  writing,  and  language.  In  his  poetic
diction  there  is  much  that  is  beautiful ;  but  the  pic
ture  he  gives  us  of  the  terror  of  the  Orientals  in
respect  to  darkness  and  labor  is  very  partial  and
exaggerated.  The  same  may  be  said  of  many  other
things  in  his  book.  The  ignoring  of  the  reality  of
the  six  days'  work  is  rationalistic.  The  construction
Li  as  follows :

I.  Light.

II.  Firmament.     III.  Terra  firma.
IV.  Lights.

V.  ^.'        (•  of  heaven.     VI.  Creatures  of  earth.
VII.  Sabbath.

In  the  spirit  of  Herder,  but  independent  in  its
view,  and  determination  of  the  individual  parts,  is  the
representation  in  F.  A.  KRUMMACIIER'S  "  Paragraphs
on  Sacred  History  "  (p.  22  ft'.).  The  six  days,  as
such,  and  in  themselves  understood,  are  to  him  divine
days.  ZAUN  also  falls  back  on  Herder  in  animated
representation  ("  History  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  p.
1  ft'.).  GRCBE'S  delineation  of  the  six  days'  work  is
very  comprehensive  and  full  of  meaning  ("Features
from  Sacred  History,"  p.  1 1  ff. — Scientific  represent
ation  of  the  six  days'  work.  On  the  historical  devel
opment  of  the  doctrine  of  the  cosmos,  see  ALEX.  VON
HUMBOLDT,  iii.  p.  3  ff.  STEFFENS  :  "  Polemical
Sheets  for  the  Advancement  of  Speculative  Physics."
Second  number,  on  Geology,  Berlin,  1835  (here  are
quoted,  p.  6,  the  respective  geological  works  of
Cuvier,  Boue,  Brogniart,  Elie  de  Beaumont,  De
la  Beche,  and  Von  Leonhard).  MERLEK.ER:  "Cos-

dercd.  There  is  no  night  following  that  new  and  eternal
day,  and  so  there  arc  no  mornings  and  evenings  to  succeed.
It  is  a  new  creation,  and  a  new  chronology,  but  this  idea
only  makes  more  clear  the  reference  to  the  o'ld  Mosaic  crea
tion  and  the  Mosaic  days.— T.  L.]


mography,"  Leipzig,  1848,  p.  3.  There  is  also  the  his
torical  part  of  L  YELL'S  "Principles  of  Geology,"  and
VOGT'S  "  Compendium  of  Geology  "  (Braunschweig,
1854,  2  vols.);  REUSCII:  "Bible  and  Nature,"  p.  71.
— Here  belong  QUENSTEDT:  "Then  and  Now."  A
popular  treatise  :  UARTING:  "The  Antemundane  Crea
tions  compared  with  the  Present."  From  the  Dutch,
Leipzig,  Engelmann,  1 859.  See,  moreover,  the  prelim
inary  literature.  We  must  distinguish  those  treatises
which  regard  the  Hexaemeron  of  Moses,  and  those
which  do  not.  And  further,  we  must  distinguish  the
systems  which  assume  the  formation  of  the  earth  by
radical  revolutions  in  a  steady  sequence  of  new  crea
tions  (Cuvier),  and  those  which  assume  a  gradual
transformation  with  partial  revolutions.  Ilarting  be
longs  to  the  latter.  We  must,  however,  certainly
maintain  that  a  seed  or  germ  of  creation  (for  the
transformation)  must  have  passed  through  the  ca
tastrophes  out  of  the  earlier  stage  into  the  later,
analogous  to  the  process  at  the  flood,  but  transform
ed  in  a  creative  way  during  the  metamorphosis  of
the  earth.  But  the  doctrine  of  the  great  catastrophes
is  not  therewith  excluded.  In  respect  to  those  who
deny  the  existence  of  any  harmony  between  the  Bible
and  natural  science,  it  may  be  said,  that  a  few  the
ologians  in  Germany,  witli  shallow  scientific  acquire
ments,  have  undertaken  the  work;  such  as  BALLEN-
SIIEDT  (in  the  notorious  book  :  "  The  Primitive
World  "),  Brctschueider,  and  Strauss.  In  England
recently  GOODWIN  (in  the  Essays  and  Reviews).
SCHLEIERMACHER  has  also  in  this  respect  expressed
anxieties  which  prove  that  he  was  not  well  posted
on  the  point  ("  Studies  and  Criticisms,"  1829,  p.
489).  Most  recently  has  this  assumed  opposition
become  a  special  dogma  of  the  Hegelian  school  of
Tubingen,  which  has  its  main  altar  in  Eastern  Swit
zerland.  On  the  side  of  natural  science  the  harmony
has  been  mainly  contested  by  French  authors ;  in
Germany,  by  Vogt  and  Burmeistcr.  On  the  side  of
the  naturalists,  who  at  the  same  time  were  scientific
ally  learned  and  Bible-believing  men,  stand  Coperni
cus,  Kepler,  Newton,  Pascal,  Haller,  and  Euler;  at
a  later  period  the  Frenchmen  Cuvier,  Brogniart,  De-
luc,  Biot,  Ampere ;  in  Germany,  Stefiius,  H.  von
Schubert,  A.  Wagner,  and  others.  (See  REUSCH,  p.
G3  ff.)  To  these  add  also  the  Bible-believing  cos-
mologists — the  Frenchmen  Marcel  de  Serres,  de  Blain-
ville,  the  Belgian  Waterkeyn,  and  especially  many
Englishmen  and  North  Americans  (REi'scii,  p.  67  ;
see  especially  also  DELITZSCH,  p.  009).  A  significant
position  is  taken  by  the  already  quoted  work  of
BUCKLAND:  "Geology  and  Mineralogy,"  etc.,  as  given
by  WERNER,  in  the  German  edition  of  the  well-known
"Bridgewater  Treatises,"  vol.  v.,  with  which  com
pare  the  valuable  criticism  of  it  by  W.  HOFFMANN,  in
"Tholuck's  Literary  Advertiser,"  1838,  Number  44.
"  The  conditions  on  which  the  great  geologist  treats
with  his  timid  brothers  in  the  theological  world  arc
(according  to  W.  Ilolfmann)  the  following:  1.  Ge
ology  has  evidently  proved  that  the  surface  of  our
planet  has  not  been  from  eternity  in  its  present  con
dition,  but  has  passed  through  a  series  of  creative
operations,  which  followed  each  other  in  long,  fixed
periods  of  time.  2.  There  is  an  exposition  of  natural
phenomena  which  stands  so  little  in  contrast  with  the
Mosaic  history  that  it  even  throws  light  on  dark-
parts  of  it,  and  thereby  confirms  it.  3.  The  authen
ticity  of  the  Scriptural  text  must  remain  unscathed,
but  the  exposition  demands  concessions  from  the
literal  expositor ;  the  reader  must  make  this,  and
indemnify  himself  therefor  by  the  accession  which


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


ecology  supplies  to  natural  theology.     4.  The  Bible
does  not  aim  to  give  solutions  of  geological  and  other
questions  of  natural  science.     Else,  God  would  have
found  it   necessary  to  endow  man  \viih  omniscience,
because  he  was  obliged,  at  the  same  time,  to  impart
to  him  all  degrees  and  kinds  of  human  knowledge,  it
the  revelation  were  not  to  remain  :m  insufficient  one.'
In  several  points  Hoffmann  has  corrected  the  author
with  a  free  and  lanre  survey,  namely,  in  the  endeavor
of  Buekhvnd  to  transfer  all  the  periods  of  the  geolog
ically  determined  earth-formation  into  the  undefinable
be-nimin-  before  the  first  day  of  the  creation,  although
to  those  geological  periods  the  long  biblical  day-peri
ods  are  still  to  be  added.    HolVinann,  on  the  contrary,
alleges  that  then  the  eyes  of  the  trilobites,  for  exam
ple  "must  have  existed  before   the   creation  of  light.
The  same  is   true  of  the  first  vegetable  and  animal
world  throughout.     The  same  untenable  view,  how
ever,  that  will  transfer  the  geological  periods,  \\ith
their  relation   10   each   other,  into  the   time   of   the
Iliohu  }ral,/t<>/t«,  meets  us  also  now  in  various  forms.
It  is  represented  by  Andreas  Wagner  and  Kurtz  (see,
on  the  contrary,  llF.UT/sm,  p.  11'2).     The  more  de
fined  combination  of  geological  results  and  the  bib
lical   account  appears   in  a  form  sometimes  mainly
scientific,  and  again  mainly  theological ;  but  the  two
series  cannot  be  strictly  separated  from  each  other.
Hensch  places  here  Marcel  de  Serres,  "\Vaterkcyn,  An-
drcas  Waiter,  Wiseman,  NICOLAS:    "Philosophical
Studii  -  of  Christendom,"  SOKKJNET  (La  Cosmoffonic
,[,•  la   lliblc  iio-'inf  I'x  sciences  perfectionies,  Paris,
1854),   1'ianciani,   KIRTZ:   "Bible  and  Astronomy/'
Keerl   :i:;d  \Vestermeyer,  whose  work,  in  his  view,  is
without    scientific   va'lue.     So    also   Mut/1,  Michelis,
Ebrard,  ;;nd  a  series  of  Essays  in   the  Periodicals:
"Nature    and.   Revelation"  (MuDStcr,  1855  if.),  and
"The  Catholic''   (Mentz,  1858  sqq.).      We   also    cnu-
meraie  here,   Ln   C<,x>/«ifft,ti!?   dc  la  Rirelation,  par
Godffoy,  I 'am,    18-11,  the  previously  (|iioted  works
of  0.  Reinsch,  Fr.  von  Rougement,  and  Buhner  (with
cl    to   the  cosmogonai  theory  of  Kant  and  La
Place).      The    newest    commentary    on    Genesis,    by
Kcil,  shows  no  progress.     Keil  insists  on  regarding
•••utint  of  creation  as  an  historical  record  in  the
snictest  sense;  he  opposes  the  division  of  the   six
days'  work  according  to  ternaries,  he  sets  the  act  of
civation  in  excluding  contrast  with  the  idea  of  the
natural  process,  boldly  questions  the  evidence  of  the
various  periods  of  the  creation,  and  contends  that  the
days  of  the  creation  arc  simple  earth-days.     With  this
continued  darkening  of  the  present  view  of  the  state
of  the  case,  it  is  a  small  merit  that  the  thcosophic
view    of  the  Tholiu  Valhohu   seems   sets   aside  (p.
16).

The  six  days'  works  are  above  all  things  to  be
comprehended  as  six  consecutive  acts  of  creation,  in
which,  every  time,  a  new  creation  is  placed  as  a  new
appearance  of  the  cosmos.  For  the  -world  is  to  be
regarded  throughout  as  being,  in  respect  to  its  founda
tion,  the  act  of  (!od,  w  creation  (in  the  stricter  sense);
according  to  its  development,  nature,  whilst,  accord
ing  to  its  appearance,  coxmos,  and,  according  to  the
plastic  life-principle  lying  at  its  base  (the  future  of
man  and  the  God-Man),  it  is  cron.  The  creation  is
in  the  first  place,  and  in  general,  represented  as  ere
ation  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  then  the  history  of  the
earth  is  specially  brought  out  with  reference  to  its
relation  to  heaven,  and  also  to  give  an  idea  of  the
cosmical  creation  beyond  the  earth  in  our  planetary
system.  The  characteristic  traits  arc  the  following
The  First  Day. — The  separation  of  darkness  auc


ight,  i.  e.,  of  dark  and  light  matter.     We  must  here
^reserve  the  text  from  the  terrifying  pictures  of  dark
ness  in  Herder,    and  the  conceptions    of   darkness,
\pproaching  dualism,  of  certain  theologians  of  the
M-escnt  day.    The  Scripture  speaks  also  of  a  "  smiting
)f  the  sun"  (Ps.  cxxi.  0;  Jonah  iv.  8),  and  of  a  gar
cred  obscurity,  also  of  a  beneficent  shade,  as  Chris
tendom   recognizes  a  holy  night  ;   it  knows  also  a
n'gher  unity  of  day  and   night  (Revelation  xx.  '21 ;
•<ce  "The  Land  of  Glory,"  p.  150  ;  NOVALIS:  "Hymns
to  the  Night'').     Nothing  is  more  dangerous  to  life
:han  the  commingling  of  physical  and  ethical  dark
ness  (sec  Isaiah  xlv.j.     God  did  not  make  physical
larkness  in  so   far  only  as  it  is  privative,  mere  ab-
<^ence  of  liirht,  but.  he  made  it  in  so  far  as  he  made
the  earth,  the  darkness  in  general,  and  the  order  of
ife  :  day' and  niL'ht.     With  respect  to  light  and  its
effects,  c'omp.  PciiunKRT:  "Minor  of  Nature,"  p.  457
;!'. ;  also  F.  A.  KRUMMACIIER'S  poem:   "The  Light,"
and  MILTON'S  "  Salutation  to  Light."     The  light  is
in  the  Scripture  as  an  image  of  the  Godhead,  or  of
its  indwelling  ('  Tim.  vi.   1(1).      It   is  God's  garment
(I's.  civ.  •!},  an  image  of  the  being  and  life  of  Christ
and  of  its  efficacy."    Not  without  reason  have  :l,me
designated  liirht  as  the  first  creature  of  God,  and  dis
tinguished  between  latent  light  — material  darkness,
and  free  light-matter.     Com]),  what  HofVmann  \\-.\~  ob
served,  in  his  quoted  criticism,  about  the  visible  crc-
ation   proceeding  from   the  invisible   sphere  of  the
m-ative  powers,' the  imponderable  substances  dynam
ically  ivirardcd.     (Comp.  Heb.  xi.  I?.)     The  unity  of
the  "contrast   of  centripetal    and    centrifugal   power
(sympathy  and   antipathy),    attraction   (gravity)  and
repulsion  (motion),  warmth  and  light,  appears  to  be
in   something  beyond   the   relative  contrast  of  elec
tricity,    where    warmth  predominates,   and    that,    of
magnetism,  where   light   predominates  (although  in
both  one  is  set  with  the  other);  whi.ch  remoter  prin
ciple  we  may  designate  as  a  breath  of  life,  whose  mate
rial  product  is  an  inconceivably  minute,  fundamental
form  of  the  luminous  world-body  which  is  to  spring
from  it,  as  the  cell  or  the  fundamental  form  of  organic
life,  in'  an   element   of  growing  light,  that  is,  which
becomes  li-ht,  or  an  ether,  which  as  earth-matter  has
attractive   power,  and,  as   a  medium  of  light,  repul
sive  power.     With  respect   to  the  evenings  and  the
mornintrs,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  Kurt/,  has  also
effaced"  their    optical    reality.     By   the    evenings    is
meant  the  goin-  out    or  departure  of  the  separate
visions.     The  permanent  reproduction  of  the  word,
"Let  there  lie  light,"  is  not  so  much  the  rising  of
the  sun,  according  to  Herder,  as  rnthcr  the  electric
spark,  the  lightning  proceeding  from  the  dark  thun
der-cloud,  the  northern  light  of  the  long  polar  night,
just  as  every  meteoric  revelation  of  the  light-nature
of  the  earth.     For  this  is  clearly  intimated,  that  the
earth,  until  its  arrangement  into  cosmical  dependence
on  the  sun,  found  itself  in  a  condition  of  self-illumi
nation,  like  that  towards  which  it  ever  strives  to  rise
in  the  polar  night,     Physical  darkness  is  undoubtedly
made  by  the  Scriptures*  an  image  of  ethical  darkness,
for  it  is  the  comparatively  imperfect.     But  we  again
distinguish  the  black  night,  which  may  be  in  measure
illuminated  by  every  spark ;  the  gray  night  of  mist,
which  is  in  positive  opposition  to  the  light,  and  the
white  night,  or  blinding  light,  by  which  the  light  is
corrupted  into  the  worst  darkness,  or  the  most  evil
night.  .

Second  Day. — About  the  upper  waters,  see  the
Exegesis.  The  allusion  they  contain  to  the  matter
of  the  distant  world-space,  the  space  of  heaven,  is


CHAP.  I.— II.  b.


found  also  in  mythology  (see  DKLITZSCH,  p.  G14).
But  it  is  questionable  whether,  along  with  the  upper
waters,  there  is  also  presupposed  here  a  world-mat
ter  out  of  which  the  lights  are  formed  on  the  fourth
day  of  creation  (A.  Guyot,  with  the  addition  of  the
mist  theory  of  La  Place ;  Fr.  de  Rougement,  trans
lated  from  Fabarius,  p.  01,  with  distinct  reference  to
our  planetary  system;  Buhner,  p.  158,  a  clear  and
instructive  representation).  But  it  is  to  be  observed
that  the  lights  of  the  fourth  day  clearly  refer  to  the
light  of  the  first  day,  consequently  not  to  the  upper
waters  of  the  second.  The  rakia,  as  firmament,
indicates  the  boundary  line  behind  which  water,  air,
and  aether,  flow  together.  Consequently,  this  firma
ment  indicates,  at  the  same  time,  the  boundary  line
between  the  centripetal  and  centrifugal  force  of  mat
ter,  between  its  impulse  to  become  earth,  and  its
impulse  to  become  light.  But  this  is  just  what
makes  the  rakia  a  symbol  of  the  real  heaven  :  it  is
the  equator  which  spirits  pass  in  their  passage  to  the
home  in  light.  The  second  day  is  therefore  the  sep
aration  of  the  atmosphere  and  the  element  of  liquid
earth  (dividing  the  substance  of  light  and  the  sub
stance  of  darkness),  and  probably  still  glowing  hot.
With  the  firmament,  between  the  coldness  of  the
aether  and  the  warmth  of  the  earth,  as  between  light
and  gravity,  arc  built  the  first  formations  of  the
earth  as  the  vessel  of  its  liquid  nucleus ;  neither
Plutonic  nor  Neptunian,  because  fire  and  water  are
not  yet  separated.  For  the  contest  between  Pluto-
nism  and  Neptunism,  see  DELITZSCH,  p.  009.  The  con
trast  of  both  systems  does  not  begin  till  the  third
day  of  the  creation,  with  the  separation  of  water  and
land.  The  beginning  of  the  third  day  of  creation
(the  evening)  probably  marks  the  period  of  the  ac
tual  water-formation  from  the  precipitates  of  the
recent  atmosphere,  with  which  the  entire  new  sur
face  of  the  earth  is  overflowed.  In  the  transition
from  light  days,  and  rain-storms,  and  hurricanes,  is
mirrored  the  creation  of  the  second  day.  The  crys
tals  and  precious  stones  children  of  night.  "  On  the
second  day  God  made  nothing,"  says  Rougemont,  "  he
only  caused  a  separation."  But  such  a  separation,
was  a  creation.

Third  Day. — Separation  between  land  and  water.
In  accordance  with  this,  the  development  of  fire,  which
brings  forth  the  earth,  and  combines  with  water,  to
continue  the  formation  of  the  earth.  The  first  ap
pearance  of  plants  on  points  of  earth  in  insular  dis
persion.  Remains  of  the  general  flood  :  deserts,
sandbanks.  (Question,  whether  the  plants  through
out  were  created  before  coal,  or  whether  coal  is  not
mainly  to  be  considered  as  pre-existing  as  a  formative
substance  of  the  plants.)

Fourth  Day. — The  cosmical  combination  of  the
lights  of  heaven  and  the  earth.  Cosmico-atmospheric
and  chemical  completion  of  the  earth  for  the  condi
tions  of  a  higher  life.  Ecliptic.  Beginning  of  the
relations  of  the  zones.  Continued  operation :  the
zones,  the  seasons,  the  periods.  The  metals  children
of  light.

Fifth  Day. — Animals  of  the  water— birds.  The
conclusion  of  this  period  and  the  first  half  of  the
following ;  the  main  period  of  the  strata-formation
and  the  petrifactions,  although  this  period  begins
with  the  end  of  the  third  day.

Sixth  Day. — The  catastrophe  introducing  this
closes,  with  its  completion  not  manifest  before  the
appearance  of  man,  or  the  cycle  of  the  great  general
revolutions.and  introduces  the  world  which  is  intended
to  be  Adam's  home.  The  natural  law,  in  its  central


'  effect  as  a  law  of  necessity,  is  abolished  in  the  destina
tion  and  freedom  of  man.

Seventh  Day. — God  reposes  and  rests  in  man.
Man  reposes  and  rests  in  God.  God's  sabbath  ij
reflected  in  the  sabbath  of  the  world.  Just  as  the
geology  of  the  first  day  represents  the  cosmogony
through  the  universality  of  light,  so  the  firmament
of  the  second  day  represents  the  heaven  above  and
the  earth  beneath.  Then  the  fourth  day,  in  contrast
to  the  third,  points  up  again  to  the  cosmos.  On  'the
fifth  day  of  creation  the  birds  of  heaven  must  at
least  indicate  the  cosmical  relation  ;  on  the  sixth
day  man,  the  special  representative  of  the  spirit-
world.

d.  The  Gradual  Development  of  the  Individual
Life  on  Earth. — The  idea  of  the  natural  life  is  the
idea  of  a  relative  independence  communicated  by  God
to  the  world,  which  passes  through  the  stages  of
symbolical  independence  to  actual  independence,  or
that  freedom  of  man  in  which  nature  is  abolished.
We  distinguish,  accordingly,  the  following  degrees
of  independence  in  an  ascending  line:  1.  The  cle
ment:  or  dependent  self-existence  to  be  annulled
(through  chemistry);  2.  the  chemical  combination:
or  the  mutual  relation  of  the  one  element  to  the
other,  i.  e.,  to  its  related  opposite ;  3.  crystals  :  self-
formation  in  forms  and  colors  ;  4.  plants  :  self-
production,  reproduction  ;  5.  animals  :  self-motion
inwardly  (self-perception),  outwardly  (motion  in  the
narrower  sense)  ;  0.  man  :  self-consciousness  and
power  of  self-control ;  7.  the  power  denoted  points  to
the  man  from  heaven,  the  God-man:  or  complete
self-control  in  complete  self-comprehension  in  the
unity  with  God,  nature,  and  humanity  (see  LANGE'S
"Positive  Dogmatics,"  p.  247).

In  respect  to  the  classification,  we  remark,  1.
That  every  lower  grade  reappears  in  all  higher
grades  in  a  continually  modified  form ;  2.  that  it  is
the  coming  grade. as  a  symbol  and  actual  prophecy;
and  3.  that  it  takes  the  lower  place  of  a  serving  and
supporting  substance  for  the  higher  grade.  In  man
all  grades  arc  combined  and  subordinated  to  spirit.
As  he  is  an  image  of  God,  so  also  is  he  an  image  of
the  earth  ;  so  also  of  the  universe.  Microcosm.
The  idea  of  the  lower  grade  is  not  so  to  be  understood
as  if  the  stamp  of  divine  authority  were  wanting  to
it.  5.  Every  grade  comprises  again  lower  and  higher
formations  ;  with  the  lowest  it  reverts  to  the  pre
ceding  grade,  but  with  the  highest  it  presents,  in  its
solemn  pauses  of  formation,  a  preliminary  or  provi
sional  completion  which  becomes  the  symbol  of  the
completion  of  life  in  general.  Through  those  relaps
ing  or  bastard-like  formations  arise  the  poisons,
according  to  H.  von  Schubert  and  K.  Sncll  (see  LAN
GE'S  "  Dogmatics,"  p.  2C6),  which  are  an  allegory  of
moral  discord  and  relapse  into  sin.  The  completed
types  of  a  fixed  grade  of  nature  are,  on  the  contrary,
the  precious  stone,  the  palm,  the  rose,  the  eagle,
the  dove,  the  lamb,  etc.,  becoming  with  their  tran
sient  completion  symbols  of  the  highest  life.  The
period  which  is  peculiar  to  each  grade,  appears  with
it  in  full  power ;  hence  in  the  element,  the  obscure,
enigmatical,  apparently  isolated  existence ;  in  chemis
try,  the  whole  irresistible  power  of  physical  elective
affinities ;  in  the  crystal,  the  stately  play  of  the  sternest
forms  and  the  most  beautiful  colors ;  in  the  plant,
the  whole  power  of  reproduction  (through  root,  seed,
and  branch),  and  of  growth  high  into  space,  and  far
into  time ;  in  the  animal,  the  motion  in  all  kinds  and
in  all  grades ;  in  man,  finally,  the  self-consciousness
in  that  perfected  intensity  which  makes  it  the  most


190


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


peculiar  characteristic  of  his  being.  7.  The  individual
formation  appears  in  every  grade  in  greater  power.
Hence  the  elements  have  mostly  lost  themselves  in
chemical  combinations,  and  these  again  submit  to
the  most  manifold  separations.  Hence  crystals  are
mostly  altered,  arrested,  or  distorted  through  disturb
ing  influences  or  checks,  and  seldom  appear  pure.
Hence  plants  are  capable  of  greater  degeneracy  in
their  kinds  than  animals,  and  the  metamorphoses  of
the  subordinate  annuals  greater  than  those  of  the
higher.  This  disposition  to  degeneracy  and  to
variety  has  lately  become  an  inducement  to  dispute
the  idea  of  fixed  species,  as  we  see  it  in  the  work  of
the  English  naturalist  l>;in\in,  on  the  origin  of  species
in  the  animal  and  vegetable  world  by  natural  genera
tion,  translated  into  Gorman  by  Bronn,  Stuttgart,
1SC.O.  This  vnrk,  doubtless,  will  only  be  able  to
induce  more  exact  formulas  as  to  the  grade  of  the
individuality  of  the  species  and  the  susceptibility  of
modification  in  their  pure  ground-types  through
antagonistic  or  favoring  influences.

c.  The  y<tt>ir«l  Development  of  the  Individual;*
thanxdctx. — It  passes  through  a  regular  series  of
stages  or  metamorphoses  in  which  the  metamorphoses
of  growth  t •>  maturity,  of  the  transition  from  one
ground-form  into  another  (analogous  in  the  inscet-
\v(,;ii  t-)  the  passing  through  various  natural  grades)
are  to  be  distinguished  from  a  higher  state  of  perfcc-
tion.  li  lias  indeed  been  doubted  whether  from  the
beginning  our  nobler  grains  have  not  been  distin
guished  iVoni  the  wild  species,  and  also  the  tame
tic  animals  from  the  wild.  The  Scripture
seems  to  speak  in  this  tone  in  the  distinction  appear
ing  in  the  very  beginning  between  cattle  and  will
animal-,  and  farther  on  in  the  distinction  of  certain
plants  of  Paradise  (see  DKMTZSCII,  p.  ('<'!'!  and  ch.  ii.).
!'.  77,'  /A  r<l<>]>iiniit  <>f  Xaturc  at  lanje. — 1.  Apai't
That  nature  wails  patiently  for  man
appears  from  the  fact  that  left  to  itself  it  grows  wild,
;,nd  in  boundh-ss  luxuriance  threatens  to  overwhelm
and  smother  iiself,  as  is  proved  by  the  primitive  for-
(  -ts,  the  mar.-hes,  and  the  miasmas.  2.  In  reference
'<>  until.  Nature  is  intended  to  develop  itself  in
accord  with  man.  It  therefore  sympathizes  in  his
fall  (Gen.  Hi.  17  ft".;  xix.  128;  Dent,  xxviii.  15  ff. ;
Is.  xiii.  0  If. ;  Rom.  viii.  lit  ff.),  and  in  his  resurrec
tion  (Dent,  xxviii.  8  ;  1's.  Ixxii. ;  Is.  xxxv. ;  Ixv.  00  ;
Horn.  viii.  til;  1  Cor.  xv.  -15  if.;  2  Pet.  hi.  lo;
Rev.  xx.  21).  See  I)i:  ROUGKMONT,  pp.  2  and  3.

Therefore  also  has  man  in  his  individual  form,
and  man  in  his  totality,  his  natural  side;  and  there
fore  it  is  that  the  most  sublime  idea  of  nature  (for
the  idea  of  nature,  see  the  quotation  from  Aristotle
in  LAN  UK'S  u  Dogmatics,"  p.  258),  or  the  idea  of  an
inceptive  founding,  of  a  gradual  development,  and  a
final  completion  of  animal  life,  does,  for  that  very
reason,  present  itself  to  us  in  the  history  of  the  king
dom  ol  God,  as  the  miraculous  tree,  which  continues
to  grow  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  world,
with  its  crotm  rxn-hh/g  into  eternity.  And  especially
in  the  history  of  the  God-Man,  does  it  thus  appear
as  a  tree  whose  roots  go  back  into  the  foundation  of
creation,  and  whose  boughs,  branches,  blossoms,  and
fruits  spread  throughout  the  new  humanity.  The
natural  sciences  have  not  yet  attained  to  the  great
ness  of  the  scriptural  idea  of  nature.

Of  the  Relation  of  the  Account  of  the  Creation
and  of  the  Holy  Writ  in  general  to  the  Natural
Sciences. — In  this  relation  a  fourfold  collision  may
be  conceived  :  1.  An  incorrect  exegesis  of  the  Scrip
ture  may  clash  with  an  incorrect  exegesis  of  nature


(the  investigation  pf  nature  is  indeed  only  exegesis,
and  its  teachings  are  to  be  distinguished  from  the
objective  facts  themselves).  2.  An  incorrect  scrip
tural  exegesis  can  contradict  the  ground-text  of  the
life  of  nature,  r>.  A  false  exegesis  of  nature  can
come  in  conflict  with  the  text  of  the  Scripture.  The
fourth  case,  that  the  sense  of  the  Scripture  itself,  or
the  text  of  nature  itself,  might  be  in  contradiction
with  each  other,  could  only  be  imagined  on  the
ground  that  Scripture  and  nature  were  not,  both  of
them,  books  of  revelation  of  the  same  God.  The
thorough,  scientific,  and  theological  investigation
confirms  more  and  more  their  harmony. — Pretended
incongruities  in  the  account  of  creation"  itself  arc:  1.
Light  before  the  lights  or  illuminating  bodies.  This
is  thoroughly  removed  (sec  Exegesis).  2.  The  earth
proceeding  from  the  water  in  contrast  to  Plutonism.
This  objection  reposes  on  the  misunderstanding  of  the
waters  ver.  2  and  vcr.  G,  and  exaggeration  of  the
demands  of  Plutonism.  :?.  The  firmament  on  the
fourth  day.  See  the  Exegesis  and  the  fundamental
thoughts.  4.  The  days  of  creation:  Also  removed
by  the  correct  exposition  which  makes  them  pecu
liar  days  of  God.  When,  however,  naturalists  fill
their  mouths  with  millions  of  years  as  a  necessity  for
the  formation  of  the  earth,  they  fall  into  contradic
tion  with  the  spirit  and  the  laws  of  nature  itself.  It
is  a  law  of  nature  that  the  subordinate  formations
arise  more  rapidly  than  the  higher  ones.  And  fur
ther,  that  life  in  the  glowing,  warm  moments  of  its
origin,  moves  more  rapidly  than  in  its  development.
If  man  continued  to  grow  in  the  same  proportion  as
in  the  maternal  womb,  he  would  increase  beyond  the
highest  trees.  f>.  The  relation  between  the  heliocen
tric  and  the  geocentric  view,  see  above. — Pretended
collisions  between  the  scriptural  miracles  and  nature.
ec  "  Bible-Work,"  Matthew;  "Life  of  Jesus,"
ii.  p.  2,"i8;  "Philosophical  Dogmatics,"  p.  407.  On
the  prophetic-symbolical  parallel-miracles,  see  more
particularly  in  the  "Bible-Work,"  Exodus.

11.  'J'lf'  \\\>r!d  as  Cosmos. — The  idea  of  the
cosmos,  i.  e.,  of  the  regulated,  unitary,  beautiful
appearance  of  the  world,  makes  itself  known,  at  first,
through  the  sevenfold  verdict:  "God  saw  that  it
was  good."  In  this  we  must  bear  in  mind  that,  with
the  good,  the  adjective  -"U  means  also  the  appro
priate,  the  agreeable,  the  beautiful.  But  when  it  is
said  for  the  seventh  time,  after  the  creation  of  man,
and  with  enhanced  emphasis:  Behold  everything  was
cry  good,  there  lies  therein  a  reference  to  the  fact
:hat  the  great  world,  the  macrocosmos,  has  reached
m  man,  as  the  microcosmos,  its  living  point  of  unity.
A  variety,  however,  which  with  its  appearance  rises
into  an  ideal  unity,  forms  the  very  idea  of  the  beau
tiful.  But  here  this  idea  is,  at  the  same  time,  in  its
ompleteness,  the  idea  of  the  good ;  for  in  man  the
inite  world  has  reached  its  unending  eternal  aim.
And  then  there  is  what  may  be  called  the  poetical
account  of  man  affirming  his  appearance  in  that
larallelism  of  phrases,  vcr.  27,  of  which  it  has  been
observed,  it  is  the  first  example  of  religious  poetry,
as  the  song  of  Lamcch,  ch.  iv.  23,  is  the  first  exam
ple  of  secular.  The  solemnity  of  the  cosmical  ap-
icarance  of  the  world  is  then  again  specially  expressed
n  the  delineation  of  the  rest  of  God  on  the  seventh
day.  The  sabbath  of  God  is  the  primitive  picture  of

human  days  of  rest  and  festivity,  in  which  the
adorning  of  the  world  appears  in  the  reflection  of
iiuman  adornment,  and  human  worship  endeavors  to
unite  in  itself  all  forms  of  the  beautiful,  of  art,  as  it
also  unites  with  the  most  beautiful  periods  of  the


CUAP.  I.— II.  3.


191


life  of  nature  in  the  course  of  the  year.  The  Holy
Writ  retains  also  this  view  of  the  world  especially
in  the  appreciation  of  the  beautiful,  even  of  female
beauty,  and  in  the  reverence  of  the  sublime  and
beautiful  nature  (Fs.  viii.  19  and  civ. ;  Is.  xl.,  etc.),
in  the  glorifying  of  the  beautiful  service  of  Jehovah
(who  Ilimself  is  adorned  with  light,  Ps.  civ.),  and  in
its  own  festal  robes  of  beauty.  It  may  be  observed,
hi  passing,  that  the  Jewish  Rabbinism  has  discov
ered  strange  reasons  why,  in  the  account  of  the  sec
ond  day,  there  does  not  also  stand  the  expression:
"  He  saw  that  it  was  good ; "  it  was  because,  say
they,  O7i  that  day  the  apostate  angels  fell,  because  on
it  God  created  hell,  or  because  the  waters  brought
the  Hood  over  the  world.  It  is  generally  assumed
that  the  sentence  of  approbation  of  the  firmament
on  the  second  day  is  comprised  with  that  pronounced
on  the  formation  of  the  land  on  the  third  day,  and
on  the  firmament  on  the  fourth.  This  is  pursued
farther  in  the  preceding  exegetical  illustration. — It  is
known  that  the  Grecian  idea  of  beauty  and  of  the
cosmos  is  elevated  far  above  that  of  the  Chinese,
satisfied  as  it  is  only  with  the  delicately  formed,  the
variegated,  and  the  cheerful,  and  whilst  it  detests
the  shadows  in  the  picture.  Certain  representations
respecting  the  darkness  and  night  in  the  treatment
of  the  six  days'  work  remind  us  of  the  Chinese  or
Persian  views ;  for  instance,  in  Herder,  Delitzsch,
ROUG.KMONT  (p.  11),  and  in  CHRISTIANUS  ("Gospel  of
the  Kingdom,"  p.  5).  In  one  respect,  again,  is
there  presented  a  similar  difference  between  the
Grecian  and  the  scriptural  idea  of  the  cosmical.
The  former  throws  the  obscure  into  the  background,
because  it  cannot  resolve  it  into  higher  unities.  For
the  Hebrew,  that  which  is  the  ugly  in  a  smaller  unity
is  only  the  picturesque  shadow  in  a  general  higher
unity  (see  Ps.  civ.  20 ;  cxlviii.  7,  8).  The  obscurity
of  the  cosmos,  originating  with  sin,  is  quite  as  well
to  be  regarded  subjectively,  according  to  which  the
world  meets  the  sinner  in  an  uneasy  threatening
form  (Ecelesiastes  i.  8),  as  objectively,  according  to
which  the  creature,  as  suffering,  must,  in  reality,
with  fallen  man,  sigh  for  redemption  (Horn,  viii
19).

12.  The  World  as  ^Eon.— That  the  world  also  in
its  truest  and  most  inward  principle  of  life  and  devel
opment  is  comprised  in  man,  appears  already  from
the  strong  emphasis  with  which  man  is  introduced
in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  as  end  or  aim  of  the
creation,  but  still  more  from  his  principial  position
at  the  head  of  things,  which  is  given  to  him  in  the
second  chapter.  The  idea  of  the  scon  is  a  develop
ment  and  a  developing  period  of  life  placed  with  the
power  of  life  in  the  principle  of  life.  The  world  as
a)on  has  also  the  principle  of  its  life-power,  its  dura
tion,  form,  and  development  in  man.  And  thus  is  it
explained  that  with  the  distinction  of  universal  his
tory  into  the  history  of  the  first  and  second  man,  or
Adam  and  the  Messiah,  there  is  also  distinguished  a
twofold  a)on.  But  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  idea
of  the  aeon,  that  the  new  aeon  of  Christ  can  have
principially  begun  with  His  appearance  and  redemp-
iory  act,  whilst  the  old  aoon  still  externally  continues.
The  life -development  of  the  aeon  starts  from  the  be
ginning  and  appears,  at  first,  gradually,  but  not  per
fectly,  until  the  close.  Just  so  it  is  explained  that
the  world  in  the  course  of  its  development  depends
oil  the  bearing  of  man,  and  that  the  history  of  man
is  the  history  of  the  earthly  cosmos.  The  sinless  man
and  Paradise,  Adam  and  the  field  burdened  with  the
«urse,  the  rzin  of  the  first  race  and  the  flood,  Noah's


generation  and  the  rainbow,  the  people  of  promise
and  the  promised  land,  the  renewal  of  humanity,
through  Christ,  and  the  renewal  of  the  earth,  the
judgment,  and  the  end  of  the  world,  these  are  only
the  principal  epochs  of  a  chain  of  events  which  are
expressed  in  the  most  manifold  separate  pictures  and
traits  (see  LAXGE'S  "  Life  of  Jesus :  "  the  Baptism  of
Jesus,  the  natural  events  at  His  death  and  ascen
sion).

13.  That  the  Scriptures  neither  know  nor  will
know  of  pro-Adamites  (see  KAIIX  :  "  Compendium  of
Faith,"  ii.  p.  24),  nor  of  various  primitive  aboriginal
races,  appears  not  only  from  Genesis  i.  and  ii.,  but
also  from  the  consistent  presumption  and  assertion
of  the  entire  Holy  Writ ;  for  example,  Matt.  xix.  4 ;
Acts  xvii.  2(5 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  47.  Here  we  can  bring
out  only  the  following  points:  1.  The  original  unity
of  the  human  race  coincides  with  the  doctrine  of  the
unity  of  the  fall  of  man  in  Adam,  and  the  unity  of
the  redemption  in  Christ.  It  also  accords  with  the
biblical  and  Christian  idea  of  the  unitary  destination
of  the  earth.  2.  The  autochthonic  doctrine  of  the
ancients  stands  in  intimate  connection  with  their
polytheism;  the  special  race  of  any  certain  land  cor
responds  with  the  special  gods  of  said  land,  as  the
speech  of  Paul  in  Athens  clearly  shows  (Acts  xvii.
25,  26).  3.  The  greatest  naturalists  have  mostly  de
clared  themselves  against  the  originality  of  different
human  races,  see  LANGK'S  "Dogmatics,"  p.  330;  the
greater  part  of  the  earlier  defenders  of  said  view
belonged  to  the  department  of  natural  philosophy.
With  the  distinction  of  the  various  ground-type's,
which  arc  formed  from  the  one  human  species,  the
most  serious  difficulties  are  banished,  though  not
solely  by  reference  to  climatic  relations ;  and  so  in
regard  to  the  alleged  fruiti'ulness  of  scxu;il  combina
tions  among  the  various  races,  the  proof  of  such
fruitfuluess  is  justly  pronounced  one  of  the  strongest
proofs  of  unity.  5.  The  autochthonic  theoiy  has
never  been  able  to  harmonize  itself  in  relation  to  the
ground-forms  to  be  presented  ;  and  it  can  also,  6.  not
deny  the  fact  that  the  origin  of  the  various  types  of
men  points  back  to  a  common  home  in  Asia.

14.  As  to  the  doctrine  of  the  original  image,
compare  the  dogmatic  works.  The  following  dis
tinctions  need  special  attention:  1.  cbli  and  nis'n ,
image  and  likeness.  The  Greek  expositors  referred
the  first  to  the  dispositions  of  man,  and  the  latter  to
his  normal  development ;  thus  also  the  scholastics
referred  the  former  to  the  sum-total  of  the  natural
powers  of  man  (reason,  liberty),  and  the  latter  to  his
pious  and  moral  nature.  This  distinction  appears
again  in  another  form  in  the  older  Protestant  dogma-
ties,  when  it  distinguishes  between  an  image  that
man  has  not  lost  by  sin  (Gen.  ix.  6 ;  James  iii.  9),
and  such  a  one  as  he,  in  fact,  has  lost,  although  this
Protestant  distinction  does  not  refer  itself  back  to  those
words  image  and  likeness.  Image  has  already  been
made  to  refer  to  the  similitude  to  God  in  man  (the
so-called  /j.iKp6&eos),  likeness  to  man  as  microcosm  in
so  far  as  he  unites  the  whole  world  in  himself  and
presents  it  in  a  reduced  scale,  because  the  world  is  a
likeness  of  God  on  a  grand  scale  (A.  FELDHOFF:
"  Our  Immortality,"  Kempten,  1836).  We  maintain
rather  that  the  image  designates  the  principle  in
accordance  with,  and  with  a  view  to  which,  man  has
been  created — consequently,  the  dynamic-plastic  idea
of  the  God-Man  (which  view  is  supported  by  the  fact
;hat  man,  according  to  Gen.  iii.,  wished  arbitrarily
to  realize  this  idea).  We  maintain,  therefore,  that
the  image  denotes  the  primitive  image,  as  in  Christ


192


GENESIS,  Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


alone  is  it  plainly  so  called,*  and  comes  in  Him  to
its  realized  appearance.     Therefore  is  it  said  in  the
image  that  is,  the  determinable  similitude  of  man  in
proportion  to  the  image  of  Christ.     The  likeness,  on
the  contrary,  is  the  real  appearance  of  the  copied
similitude,  as  it  was  peculiar  to  the  first  man  m  the
condition   of  innocence   from    the  beginning.     The
older    Protestant    dogmatics    distinguished,    as    said
(without  reference  to  the  words  image  and  likeness),
the  substantial  human  aflinity,  to  Hod,  especially  in
spiritual  powers,  reason,  etc.,  and  the  image  in  the
narrower   souse,    the  j»xtit'«t   orir/inalis,   the   stains
intfririla''*  with    its   separate    attributes   (especially
impassibility,  immortality).     They  Laid  the  emphasis
on  the  fact'   that    the  image   in    this   stiicter  sense
was   lo-t.     Thereby   has    this  opinion,  for  its    part,
represented    the   -lory   of  the   first  man   in  various
ways  as  too  much  developed,  whilst  the  Socinians,
contrary  to  the  nature  of  the  spirit,  would  consider  it
as  a  mere  abstract  power  (see  LAXGK'S  "  Positive  Dog
matics,"  p.   :;"!).     -•    To  say  nothing  now  of  the
Encrat'ites  and  Serbians,  who  denied  to  the  female
sex  a  share  in    the  similitude,  there  may  be  farther
noted    the  strange   contrast   between  such  as  would
find  the  iin^e  merely  in  the  bodily  appearance  of
man  (The  Audians,  and  lately  Hofmann),  or  merely  in
his  spiritual  nature  (Alexandrians,  Augustine,  Zw^i-
gli),  since  here  the  simple  observation  suffices,  that
the  body  of  man  is  above  all  an  image  of  his  pecu
liar  spiritual  nature.     In   accordance  with   this   the
similitude  can  naturally  he  understood  only  of  man
in   his   totality.     Its   root  is  the  spiritual  nature  or
tlu:  di\ine  affinity,  its  appearance  is  the  bodily  form
in  which  man  effects  his  dominion  over  nature,  and
although  this  does  not  fulfil   the  idea  of  his   simili
tude,  it  certainly  appears  as  the  first  and  most  com
mon  realization  of  it.     Man  is  the  administrator  of
God  on  earth.     The  similitude,  i.  c.,  the  disposition
and  designation  of  man  to  the  image,  has  remained
to  him;  'the  imaire  in  its  integrity  (5o£a)  Iif  Ixi*  l»xf.
Hill,  an  obscure  outline  of  it,  especially  of  the  like
ness,  has   remained   to  him,  as  is  proved  by  the  re
mains  of  the  manifoldly  evil   administration   of  men
on  earth.     The  distorted  image  of  the  divine  assume.-*
various   forms  in  sinful  man,  even  to  the  image  ot
evil  spirits.     One  must  make  the  distinction  betweer
the  primitive   image,  Christ,    and   the  copy,   humar
nature,  but  not  so  as  if  the  primitive  image  were  the
exclusive  Godh'cad,  or  the  copy  pure  creature,     i-'ec
also  the  article  "  Image"  in  HERZOG'S  Real- Lexicon.
15.   Man  (~1i*)  indicates  here  collectively  human
ity  according  to  its  origin  in  the  first  human  pair,  o:
in  the   one 'man   in   general,  who  was  certainly  tin
universal  primitive  man  and  the  individual  Adam  n
one  per. -on.     Adam,  referring  ioAdamah;  the  m
one,  from  the  red  earth  taken.     Or  is  it,  m  fact,  a
Starke  maintains,  the  beautiful,  the  brilliant  ?     It  i
true,  C~X  in  Aral uc  may  also  mean  to  be  beautiful
to  shine,  and  Ge-eiiius  remarks  :  solcntArabcs  duplex
genus  hontinnm  distinguere,  alterum  rubrum,  quo
nos    album   ttj>pr!/<tmus,    alterum    nigrum.     If    th
earth  had  the  name  of  Adam,  Adamah,  as  might  b
inferred  from  the  first  appearance  of  the  word  in  ch
ii.  7,  the  conception  of  Adam  had  a-good  sense,  a
brilliant,  beautiful,  analogous  to  the  commcndator
appellations  of  man  in  other  nations.     But  it  is  clea


hat  Adam  is  named  according  to  Adamah,  ch.  ii.  7,
nd  so  Paul  has  comprehended  him  as  the  xoi'/co?  (1
or.  xv.  47).  On  the  word  Adam,  comp.  DKI.ITZSCII,
p.  141  and  619.  The  Scripture  indicates  by  this
amc  that  it  is  in  unity  with  the  wonderful  fact,  that
nan  was  created  by  God,  though  he  went  forth  from
he  earth  in  the  form  of  a  natural  growth  under  an
inspiration  of  the  earth,"  as  Stefl'cns  expresses  him-

elf.

Ifi.  The  Sabbath.  The  view  set  up  by  Schroder
nd  Gcrlaeh  of  the  late  origin  of  the  sabbath  in  the
iving  of  the  law,  finds  a  contrast  in  the  exaggerated
nportanee  of  the  significance  of  the  word  sabbath
i  DKI.IT/SI  H  (p.  !"•!  if.),  where  he  says,  "Sunday  has
churehly  solemnization,  but  the  sabbath  remains
he  blessed  and  hallowed  day  of  days,"  etc.  The
ense  of  these  and  similar  words  is  not  entirely  clear,
specially  when  one  considers  that  under  the  days
f  creation  Delit/.seh  does  not  understand  real  days
nit  periods.  Also  the  beautifully  expressed  parallel,
n  Delit/sch,  of  the  creative  Friday  when  everything
vas  finished,  and  the  Friday  of  the  redemption,  when
Ihrist  died  with  the  words:  "It  is  finished ;"  that
-s  the  sabbath  of  creation  and  the  day  of  rest  of
'inist  in  the  grave,  as  bringing  up  with  the  rcsurrce-
ion  of  Christ  the  now  prominent  and  deep  signiti-
.ancc  of  that  first  Sunday,  when  God  said:  "Let
turebi  //''//</.''  For  historical  particulars,  see  WISER,
rticle  "Sabbath;"  HKNCSTKNBEKC;  :  "The  Pay  of
lie  Lord."  See  especially  the  article  "Sabbath"
,v  (),:I:I.KII  in  ilKi:/.o<;'ri  "  Real-Encycloptedia,"  where
ho  existence  of  a  clearly  marked  pre-Mosaic  solem-
li/.ation  of  the  sabbath  among  the  Jews,  and  the
inalo-ous  existence  of  a  heathen,  that  is,  an  Egyp-
ian  wiekly  festival,  is  decidedly  questioned.  That
he  heathen  nevertheless,  from  time  immemorial,
lave  known  certain  festive  periods,  appears  from
their  mythological  svstems.

17. 'As  siuniiieant  figures,  as  signs  of  a  future
sacred  symbol  of  numbers  already  appearing  in  our
section,  aie  to  be  observed  the  number  two,  appear-
in  "•  in  the  various  contrasts  (heaven  and  earth,  etc.)
as  the  number  of  nature  or  of  life;  the  number  three
in  the  contrast  of  the  two  ternaries  ;  the  number
four  as  number  of  the  world  in  so  far,  as  on  the
fourth  day  the  cosmos  in  the  whole  was  completed ;
the  number  six  as  the  number  of  labor,  and  seven
as  the  sacred  number  of  the  divine  labor  concluded
and  perfected  in  the  solemn  rest  of  God.  The  num
ber  seven  appears  besides  in  the  sevenfold,  solemn
expression:  God  saw  that  it  was  good.  But  the
number  ten  also  is  seen  in  the  tenfold  introduction
of  the  creative  word :  "  God  spake :  Let  there  be.

18.  The  so-called  anthropomorphisms  of  the.
present  chapter :  God  spake,  God  saw,  God  made,
God  rested,  form  the  foundation  of  the  whole  anthro
pomorphic  and  anthropopathic  style  of  delineation  m
Sacred  Writ.  We  must  here  observe  that  the  anthro
popathic  expression  may  not  be  understood  as  literal-
dogmatic  (anthropopathists)  neither  as  mythical
(spiritualists),  but  as  religio-symbolical,  representing
the  divine  ideal-doing  under  the  figure  of  human
action,  not,  however,  in  the  sense  as  if  human  life,
action,  and  image  were  the  original  that  shadow-,
itself  in  the  similarities  of  divine  action,  but  in  the
sense  that  the  divine  speaking,  working,  and  resting
form  the  foundation  for  the  analogous,  comparative
doings  of  man  (see  "  Bible-Work,"  John) ;  just  as
God's  day  is  the  original  image  for  the  day  of  man,
but  not  vice-versa.  .

19.  The  first  chapter  of  Genesis  clearly  contain?


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


193


the  germs  of  all  fundamental  doctrines  of  theology
in  the  stricter  sense,  as  well  as  of  anthropology ;
that  is,  it  is  the  basis  for  the  doctrine  of  God  (the
first  article  of  the  apostolic  Confession  of  Faith),  of
His  attributes  and  His  personality,  of  the  world,  of
the  religious  and  earthly-real  side  of  the  world ;  fi
nally  of  man,  his  nature,  dignity,  and  destiny.  With
the  image  of  God,  in  which  man  is  created,  is  also
expressed  the  future  of  Christ,  as  it  lay  in  its  ideal
destination  in  the  divine  counsel  from  eternity  (see
LANGE'S  "Dogmatics,"  p.  211).  The  possibility  of
sin  is,  moreover,  alluded  to  in  the  words :  Kulc
over  them  and  make  them  subject  to  thce.  It  ap
pears,  however,  more  clearly  in  the  second  chapter.


IlOill  LEXICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

(KLKIST:  "  Hymn  to  God  ;"  GELLERT:  "God  is
my  Song ;  "  KLOPSTOCK'S  "  Odes  to  Creation  ; "  FR.
AD.  KUUMMACIIER:  "The  Days  of  Creation"). —
Homily  on  the  six  days'  work  from  cli.  i.-ii.  3.
Point  of  view :  The  creation  as  a  revelation  of  God :

1.  His  omnipotence  (Let  there  be!);  2.  His  wisdom
(means  and  end,  the  grades  of  nature  and  the  image
of  God) ;    3.  His  goodness  (the  living  beings  and
their  movement  and  nourishment) ;  His  love  (man).
— The  creation  as  a  future  of  man  (the  preparation
of  the  house  of  God  for  man  and  man  for  the  house
of  God). — The  creation  as  the  advent  of  the  God-
Man:  1.  The  days'  works  of  God  a  prophecy  of  man;

2.  the  perfected  man  on  the  sabbath  of  God  a  proph
ecy  of  the  God-Man. — The  first  creation  a  prefigura-
tiou  of  the  second  creation  or  the  redemption. — The
week  of  God:  1.  God's  work  in  nature;  2.  God's  rest
in  man. — The  sabbath  of  God  a  prophecy  of  the  di
vine  Sunday. — The  week  of  God  in  the  history  of
the  world. — The  appointment  of  the  whole  course  of
the  world  as  a  work  of  God:  1.  The  Chiliastic  error
therein :  the  chronological  computation,  etc. ;  2.  the
truth  therein:  the  expectation  of  the  divine  period
of  rest  (Rev.  xx.). — The  world  according  to  its  various
forms:  1.  As  creation;  2.  as  nature;  3.  as  cosmos;
4.  as  aeon. — The  work  of  God  and  the  work  of  man.
What  is  different,  and  what  is  common  to  both:  a.
The  order ;  b.  the  constancy ;  c.  the  gradual  progres
sion  ;  d.  the  aim. — The  account  of  the  creation  con
trasted  with  ancient  and  modern  errors  (see  Doctrinal
and   Ethical). — The   account  of  the   creation  in  its
truth  and  sublimity. — The  basis  of  all  the  days'  works :
Heaven   and   earth. — The   contrast  of    heaven   and
earth  running  through   the  entire  Holy  Writ  as  a
symbol  of  religion. — Heaven  as  the  home  of  man
whilst  on  the  earth :  1.  The  sign  of  his  origin  ;  2.  the
direction  of  his  prayer ;  3.  tiie  goal  of  his  hope. —
The  first  three  days'  work  as  the  preparation  of  the
last  three. — The  word  of  God  as  the  word  of  power
in  the  creation. — The  spirit  of  God  as  the  formative
strength  of  all  God's  works. — Creation  as  a  mirror  of
the  Trinity. — The  creation  a  revelation  of  life  from
God:  1.  The  foundations  of  life  in  the  elementary
world;  2.  the  symbolical  phenomena  of  life  in  the
animal  world ;  3.  the  reality  and  truth  of  life  in  the
human  world.— The  glory  of  the  Lord  in  the  work
of  creation :  1.  The  co-operation  of  all  His  qualities
(omnipotence,  omnipresence,  omniscience,  etc.);    2.
the  unity  of  all  His  attributes.—  Separate  Sections
and  Verses.     Ver.  1 :  In  the  beyinninff.     The  birth
of  the  world  also  the  birth  of  time.     1.  The  fact
ihat^  the  world  and   time  are  inseparable;    2.   the
application:    a.  the    operations    in    the   world   are

13


bound  to  the  order  of  time,  b.  time  is  given  for
labor.  To-day,  to-day ! — The  relation  of  worldly
time  to  the  eternity  of  God  (Ps.  xc.  1). — The  begin
ning  of  the  Scriptures  goes  back  to  the  beginning
of  the  world,  as  the  end  of  the  Scriptures  extends  to
the  end  of  the  world. — The  outline  of  creation:  Hea
ven  and  earth  :  1.  Heaven  and  earth  in  union ;  2.
earth  for  heaven;  3.  heaven  for  earth. — The  primary
form  of  the  earth  and  the  creation  of  light  a  picture
of  the  redemption:  1.  The  redemption  of  mankind  in
general,  2.  of  the  individual  man. — Waste  and  void
the  first  form  of  the  world. — Laying  the  foundations
of  the  world  (Eph.  i.  4,  and  other  passages), — The
spirit  of  God  the  sculptor  of  all  forms  of  life. — The
word  of  God:  Let  there  be:  1.  How  the  growth  of
the  world  points  back  to  the  eternal  existence  of  the
word ;  2.  how  the  eternal  word  is  the  foundation  for
the  growth  of  the  world. — The  word — let  there  be —
in  its  echo  through  time  as  the  word  of  the  creation,
of  the  redemption  and  glorification. — The  first  clear
ly  defined  creation :  the  light. — The  significance  of
light ;  its  physical  and  religious  significance. — God's
survey  of  light. — Light  a  source  of  life:  1.  Its  good
as  existing  in  its  ground ;  2.  its  beauty  as  disclosed
in  its  appearing. — The  creation  of  light  at  the  same
time  the  creation  of  physical  darkness  (see  Is.  xlv.).
— How  carefully  we  must  guard  against  the  commin
gling  of  natural  and  spiritual  darkness. — The  natural
darkness  as  it  were  a  picture  of  the  spiritual. — But
also  a  picture  of  the  "  shadow  of  His  wings." — Even
ing  and  morning,  or  the  great  daily  phenomenon  of
the  alternation  of  time. — The  creation  of  light  a
day's  work  of  God:  1.  The  first  day's  work;  2.  a
whole  day's  work;  3.  a  continuous  day's  work;  4.  a
day's  work  rich  in  its  consequences. — The  first  day.
Vers.  6-3  :  The  second  day's  work,  or  the  firmament
of  heaven. — The  firmament  in  its  changing  phenome
na  a  visible  image  of  the  invisible  heaven. — Vers.  9
and  10 :  Land  and  sea.  The  beauty  of  the  land,  the
sublimity  of  the  sea.  The  symbolical  s-iguilicance  of
the  land :  the  firm  institutions  of  God;  of  the  sea:
the  wave-like  life  of  nations. — The  second  day  of
God.  A'ers.  9-13:  The  earth  and  the  vegetable
world.  The  green  earth  a  child  of  hope. — The  plant
the  prelude  and  symbol  of  all  life  (of  animal,  human,
and  spiritual). — The  providence  of  God  in  the  crea
tion  of  the  vegetable  world  before  the  creation  of
animals  and  man. — This  providence  a  picture  of  the
same  providence  with  which  he  thought  and  com
manded  our  salvation  from  eternity. — The  store
houses  of  the  earth  supplied  before  the  appearance
of  man,  according  to  the  Scriptures  and  natural  sci
ence  (coal,  minerals,  salts,  etc.). — The  third  day..
Vers.  14-19  :  The  creation  of  the  heavenly  lights  for
the  earth. — The  sun.  The  moon.  Sun  and  moon
(Ps.  viii.  19).  The  stellar  world. — A  glance  of  faith
into  the  stellar  world. — The  office  of  the  stars  for
the  earth:  1.  God's  sign  for  faith;  2.  sacred  signs
for  the  festive  periods  of  the  solemnization  of  the
faith  ;  3.  spiritual  watchers  and  guides  for  the  spirit
ual  life  of  man;  4.  homes  of  life  for  creature-life. —
The  fourth  day.  Vers.  20-23  :  The  life  of  tiie  fishes
in  the  sea  and  the  birds  under  the  heaven  a  sign  of
the  possibility  of  an  endlessly  diversified  existence  of
spiritual  being-;. — The  blessing  of  God  on  the  animal
world  (in  every  climate  and  sea). — The  fifth  day.
Vers.  24  and  25 :  The  animals  of  the  earth  as  the
forerunners  of  man;  1.  The  first  signs  and  pictures
of  human  life ;  2.  its  most  intimate  assistants ;  3.  ita
first  conditions. — Vers.  20-31 :  The  creation  of  man :
1.  A  decree  of  God;  2.  an  announcement  of  the


194


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSES.


image  of  God;  3.  the  last  work  of  Cod.— The  office
of  man  :  1.  God's  image  in  his  power  and  perfection;
2.  God's  likeness  in  his  appearance. — The  perfect
fulfilment  of  this  destiny.— The  one  divine  similitude
in  the  contrast  of  man  and  woman. — The  blessing  of
God  on  man:  1.  His  future;  2.  his  calling;  _ 3.  his
possessions  and  his  sustenance. — The  institution  of
marriage  (see  ch.  ii.).— The  calling  of  man,  through
out,  a  call  to  dominion:  1.  In  representing  God;  2.
in  ruling  over  the  beasts;  ','>.  in  the  free  self-control.

The  purity  of  the  firs;   creation. — The  verdict  of

God:  Very  good.— Vers.  24-31.  The  sixth  day. —
The  completion  of  the  world,  the  sabbath  of  God. —
The  significance  of  the  rest,  of  God  on  the  seventh
day.— "The  sabbath  of  God,  the  sabbath  of  man:  1.
Man  a  sabbath  of  God  ;  2.  God  the  sabbath  of  man.
The  contrast  between  struggling  creation  and  joy
ful  labor,  also  in  the  life  of  man. — The  blessing  of
God  on  the  sabbath.— The  sabbath  in  its  significance  :
1.  Its  source  in  tin;  heart  of  God,  like  the  life  of  man
(the  bliss  of  God);  2.  its  signs:  the  solemn  pauses
(Cod  saw  that  it  \\  as  £0od),  like  the  evening-re.-!,
preludes  of  the  Sunday;  3.  its  fruitfulness  :  the  festi
vals  of  the  Old  Covenant,  the  Sunday  of  the  New
Covenant,  the  eternal  sabbath-rest,  and  celebration
of  the  Sunday  ill  eternity. — The  festal  demeanor
according  to  the  pattern  of  God:  1.  Reposing;  2.
blessing;  3.  hallowing. — The  first  completion  of  the
world  a  presage  of  its  final  completion.

STAUKF.  vn-.   1  :   The  question  what  God  did  be
fore   the  creation.      He  chose  us  (Kph.  i.   1),  He  pre
pared  for  us  the  kingdom  (Matt.  xxv.  34),  He  gave
us  grace  in  Chri.-t  (2  Tim.  i.  II),  He  made  the  decree
of  the  creation. — Some  understand   by  the  beginning
the  Son  of  Cod  (Col.  i.  10;  Rev.  i.  ,s  i,  at  which  al.-->
the   Cluldaic   translation   aims   by   rendering   it:     in
•wigiloin   u-onip.  Wisdom    of  Solomon   ix.  1  ;  Ps.  civ.
21;   Frov.  viii.  22);   but.  because  the  Son  of  God   is
nowhere*  absolutely  called  the  beginning  (see,  how
ever,  Col.  i.,   u/>\'i)>  ;U1('    Moses,   besides,   intends   to
describe  the  origin  of  tin-  world,  the  first  explanation
LJ  reasonably  preferred  to  the  second  (namely,  from
the   beginning  of  the  creation). — Moses,  with  these
words:   in  tic'  beginning,  overthrows  all  the  reasons
of  the  heathen  philosophers  and  atheists  with  which
they  maintain   the  eternity  of  the  world,  or   that  ic
;>erch:uice    has    arisen    from  numberless  atoms  (see
Rom.  i.  1'.'  and  '20). — That  the  world   is   not   eternal
may  be  seen  from  the  following  passages:  Fs.  xe.  2;
Frov.  viii.  22,   21-,   25;  Is.  xlv.   11,   12;  cornp.  ver.
I'.i  ;    Matt.  xiii.  35;    xxiv.  21  ;    xxv.  34;  Mark  x.  f. ;
2  Tim.  i.  '.' ;  2  Fet.  iii.  4  ;    John  xvii.  24;    Eph.  i.  4  ;
1  i'et.  i.  20.— The   spirit   of  God   (Fs.  xxxiii.  (5).—
Ver.  :; :  Of  the  speaking  of  God.     Although  God  dii
no;  speak  as  \ve  do,  nevertheless  the  speaking  of  Cm
was  a  real  genuine  speech,  in  a  higher  but  also  more
appr.>p-/.,'.ie    sense    than    speaking   is   said    of  man
For  as  Cod  really  and   properly,  although  not  in  i
natural    manner,   generates    like    man,  so  also  is  i
with  divine  speech. — Ver.  5  :  God  created  light  on  i
Sunday,  and  on  that  day  the  children  of  Israel  passei
through  the  Red  Sea,  etc. — God  is  a  father  of  light

*  [Unless  it  be  Prov.  viii.  22,  -JSI^  rPCiO  "OJ|2  Hjn^
which  can  only  be  rendered  "Jehovab  possessed  me,  c
•begat  mo,  the  beginning  of  his  way."  This  probably  wa
the  ground  of  the  translation  in  the  Jerusalem  Targum,  an
there  would  seem  to  be  something  in  it,  if  we  would  in  an
•way  connect  the  creation  of  the  world  with  the  eterna
beginning,  as  Lange  does  in  respect  to  the  creation  of  th
diurch— chosen  in  Him,  created  in  llim.  The  expressions
6eem  parallel. — T.  Ii.]


James  i.  17),  of  the  external  light,  of  the  internal,
atural  light  of  reason,  of  the  spiritual  light  of  grace,
nd  the  eternal  light  in  yonder  world  of  glory. — Ver.
1 :  The  herbs  not  only  a  house  of  supply,  but  also
store  for  healing. — To  this  third  day  belong  also
ic  subterranean  treasures,  as  precious  stones,  metals,
nd  other  minerals. — Yer.  2'J :  We  cannot  say  that
hey  had  not  the  liberty  of  eating  flesh.  Whether
icy  really  used  this  or  preferred  to  cat  fruits  and
cr'bs,  wc'can  reasonably  refer  to  its  proper  place. —
Ver.  31  :  Since  God  could  have  created  everything
n  a  moment,  no  reasonable  cause  can  be  given  why
^e  preferred  six  days,  unless  we  reflect  that  it  had
erhaps  a  reference  to  the  six  great  changes  in  the
iiurch,  to  which  will  finally  succeed  the  sabbath  of
ic  saints.  Thus  the  first  day  is  a  prefiguration  of
ic  time  from  Adam  to  Noah,  etc.)— A  Christian  can
se  the  creatures,  but  he  must  not  misuse  them  (1
or.  vii.  31)  that  they  groan  not  against  him  (Rom.
iii,  i;i). — ch.  ii.  :; :  Discussion  whether  the  first  men
-ere  bound  to  respect  the  sabbath.  0/t  tin:  contra
il :  1.  Every  service  of  Cod  connected  with  certain
imes  and  places  had  a  view  to  man  after  the  fall;  2.
lan  in  a  state  of  innocence  has  served  God  at  all
imes  and  in  all  places;  the  sabbath  was  first  insti-
uted  in  the  wilderness:  God  gave  the  sabbath  only
o  the  Jews.  Reasons  for  it :  Appeal  to  the  contents
f  our  passage,  etc. — The  sabbath-day  a  favor  of
iod.

citiK'imcu  to  ver.  3  :  Then  spake  God,  says  Chry-
ostom,  ''let   there    be   light,"  and   there  was   light,
>ut  now  He  has  not  spoken  it,  but  Himself  has  bc-
ome  our  light. — From  Valerius  Herberger:  Uut  it
-  much  more  that  the  Lord  Jesus  will  finally  trans-
>ort  us,  after  this   temporal    light,   into    the   eternal
ii:lit  of  heaven,  where  we  shall  see  God  in  His  light
';ice  to  face,  and   praise  Him  in  the  everlasting   hea
vily  light  and  glory.— From  Luther:   II"  niters  not
grammatical    words,  but    real   and    ntdtcrin'   Ihiii'ju.
Thus  sun,  moon,  heaven,   earth,  Peter,  Paul,  I   and
lion  are  scarcely  to  be  reckoned  words  of  God,  yea,
lardly  a  syllable"  and   letter  (?)  in  comparison^  to  the
entire   creation. — From  Michaelis:  Moses  endeavors
n  the  whole  history  of  the  creation  to  present  God
lot  merely  as  almighty,  but  at  the  same  time  as  per
fect,  wise,  and   good,  Who   considers  all   His  works
and'  has   created   the  best   world. — Vers.  (i-8 :    The
conclusion    of   the  first  day's   work  was  an   actual
irophcey  of  the  work  of  the  second  day  of  creation.
It  was  on  the  basis  of  the  light  shining  inland  sep
arating  the  moist  chaos  of  the  world,  that  God  made
the  division.— From  Calvin :  We  well  know  that  tor
rents  of  rain  arise  in  a  natural  manner,  but  the  flood
sufficiently  proves  how  soon  we  can  be  overwhelmed
by  the  violence  of  the  clouds,  if  the  cataracts  of  hea
ven  are  not  stayed  by  the  hand  of  God. — God  named.
The  subsequent  naming  on  the  part  of  man  is  only
the  prophetic  fulfilment  of  the  naming  of  God  here
and  elsewhere.— Vers.  9-13:   The  first  (rather  the
second)  division  (vers.  6-8)  is  followed  by  a  second,
both  closely  and  intimately  clinging  to  and  antithet
ically   conditioning    each   other,    for   which   reason
some  would  even  reckon  vers.  9  and  10  to_the  pre
ceding   day. — VALENTIN   HERBERGER  :    Is   it  not   a
miracle?     We  take  a  handful  of  seed   and   strew
them  on  one  earth  and  soil,  where  they  have  the
same  food,  sap,  and  care,  nevertheless  they  do  not
commingle,  but  each  produces  its  kind :  the  one  white,
the  other  yellow,  the  fruit  sweet  and  sour,  brown
and  black,  red  and  green,  fragrant  and  offensive,
high  and  low.    Thus  we,  though,  like  the  seeds,  buried


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


195


in  one  consecrated  ground  (Sirach  xl.  1),  will  never
theless  at  the  day  of  judgment  not  be  confounded
with  each  other,  but  each  will  go  forth  in  his  flesh,
yet  incorruptible  (1  Cor.  xv.  38). — Vers.  14-19.
From  LUTHER:  He  maintains  the  same  order  as  in
the  three  preceding  days,  in  that  lie  first  adorns  the
heavens  with  lights  and  stars,  and  afterwards  the
earth.  Even  the  heathen  philosopher  Plato  says,
that  eyes  are  especially  given  to  men  that,  by  the
observation  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  their  move
ments,  they  may  be  to  them  as  guides  to  the  know
ledge  of  God.  It  is  by  the  heavenly  bodies  that  men
judge  of  the  weather;  by  their  help  they  find  their
way  on  the  water  and  on  the  laud.  So,  too,  a  star
led  the  wise  men  to  the  manger,  etc. — MICIIAKLIS  :
They  (the  stars)  are  the  great  and  almost  infallible
clock  of  the  world,  ever  moving  at  the  same  rate. —
From  LUTUER  :  Hereby  is  developed  and  shown  to  us
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  from  the  fact  that,  with
the  exception  of  man,  no  creature  can  understand  the
movement  of  the  heavens,  nor  measure  the  heavenly
bodies.  The  hog,  the  cow,  and  the  dog  cannot  mea
sure  the  water  that  they  drink,  but  man  measures
the  heavens  and  all  their  hosts.  Therefore  there
shows  itself  here  a  spark  of  eternal  life. — From  CAL
VIN:  "Moses  paid  more  attention  to  us  than  to  the
stars,  precisely  as  became  a  theologian." — The  true
morning-star  is  Christ  (Rev.  xxii.  16),  the  sun  of
righteousness  (Mai.  iv.  2). — The  animals  of  the  water
are  in  marked  contrast  with  the  animals  of  the  air.
Water  and  air.  The  latter  is  as  it  were  the  embodied
liquid  light,  the  former  embodied  darkness ;  in  its
depths  there  is  neither  summer  nor  winter,  it  is  the
heavy  melancholy  element,  whilst  the  air,  light  and
cheerful,  gives  life  and  breath  everywhere.  The  in
habitants  of  the  former  are  opposed  to  those  of  the
latter,  the  fish  to  the  birds,  as  water  and  air,  dark
ness  and  light.  The  fish  is  cold,  stiif,  mute ;  the
bird  warm,  free,  and  full  of  melody.  Yet  not  with
out  rec-son  were  both  created  on  one  and  the  same
day.  They  have  many  things  in  common,  and  are
in  structure  and  movement  closely  and  intimately
allied  ;  the  variegated  scaly  mail  of  the  fish  points  to
the  cobred  feathery  coat  of  the  bird,  and  what  the
wings  are  to  the  latter,  the  fins  are  to  the  former.
Water  and  air  once  lived  together,  and  do  so  now;
as  the  air  descends  into  sea  and  earth,  and  vivifying-
ly  penetrates  the  water,  the  latter,  for  its  part,  rises
into  the  air,  and  mingles  with  the  atmosphere  to  its
remotest  border. — That  God  blesses  the  animals,  ex
presses  the  thought,  that  God  creatively  endows  ani
mals  with  the  power  of  propagating  their  kind,  and
also  points  to  the  work  of  preserving  the  world.
"  Here  we  see  what  a  blessing  really  means,  namely,
a  powerful  increase.  When  we  bless  we  do  nothing
more  than  to  wish  good ;  but  in  God's  blessing  there
is  a  sound  of  increase,  and  it  is  immediately  efficacious ;
so  again,  His  curse  is  a  withering,  and  its  effect  in
like  manner  immediately  consuming."  Luther. —
Only  the  largest  water-animals  are  introduced,  be
cause  from  them  the  greatness,  omnipotence,  and
glory  of  the  creator  most  clearly  shine  forth.  The
land-animals  a  product  of  the  earth — with  heads
bent  downwards.— Various  views  as  to  the  time  of
the  creation  of  the  angels  (p.  20). — The  Redeemer
rests^  also  through  the  seventh  day  in  the  grave. —
In  divinely  solemn  stillness  lay  the  young  world,  a
mirror  of  the  Godhead,  before  the  eyes  of  the  still
anfallen  first  human  pair,  as  with  Him  they  kept
loly  day,  representing  in  their  divine  similitude  the
labbath  of  God  in  the  creation,  and  the  sabbath  of


the  creation  in  God,  harmoniously  joined  in  one.
— Of  a  sabbath-law,  there  is  nothing  said  in  the  text
Israel's  later  sabbaths  (as  the  whole  law  was  tc
awaken  a  sense  of  sin)  were  reminding  copies  of  this
sabbath  of  God  after  the  creation,  and  unfulfilled
prophecies  not  only  of  the  completion  of  the  theocra
cy  of  the  Old  in  the  Christocracy  of  the  New  Cove
nant,  but  also  of  the  final  consummation  of  the  pres
ent  order  of  things,  especially  on  the  last  great
sabbath,  etc. — The  ancient  allegorizing  of  the  days
of  creation  according  to  the  periods  of  the  kingdom
of  God  (p.  23). — "Six  days,"  says  Calvin,  "the
Lord  occupied  in  the  structure  of  the  world,  not  as
if  He  needed  these  periods,  before  whom  a  moment
is  a  thousand  years,  but  because  He  will  bind  us  to
the  observing  of  each  one  of  His  works.  He  had
the  same  object  in  His  repose  on  the  seventh  day."
(Augustine  had  already  expressed  himself  in  the
same  way.  There  lies  at  the  base  of  this  an  abstract
comprehension  of  the  divine  omnipotence,  and  a
great  ignoring  of  the  idea  of  nature.  Luther's  con
jecture  :  The  fall  occurred  on  the  first  day  of  crea
tion,  about  noon.)

Lisco :  Death  is  nothing  in  the  creation.  Every
thing  lives,  but  in  very  manifold  modification. — Man
is  created  in  the  image  of  God,  i.  c.,  so  that  all  divine
glory  shines  forth  in  him  in  a  reduced  scale.  He
has  a  nature  allied  to  God,  and  therein  lies  the  pos
sibility  and  capability  of  becoming  ever  more  like
God. — The  whole  human  race  is  one  great  family.
All  are  blood-relations. — The  dominion  of  man  over
nature  obtains,  in  progressive  development  and  ex
tension,  by  the  arts  and  sciences,  by  investigation  of
nature's  laws,  and  by  using  its  powers  (of  course,
under  the  conditioning  of  life  in  the  spirit  through
community  with  God).

GERLACH  :  The  whole  subsequent  history  is  writ
ten  only  for  men  (i.  c.,  according  to  the  human
stand-point);  therefore  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  the
host  of  heaven  (ch.  ii.  1),  appear  merely  as  lights  in
the  firmament  of  heaven,  and  nothing  is  told  us  of
the  inhabitants  of  heaven,  although  even  in  this  book
the  angels  frequently  appear,  and  the  fall  of  some  is
already  in  ch.  iii.  presupposed,  etc. — All  things  have
had  a  beginning. — The  world  was  to  develop  itself  in
the  contrast  of  heaven  and  earth,  which  repeats  itsc*f
on  a  small  scale — on  earth,  in  spirit  and  nature,  and
in  man,  in  spirit  and  flesh. — It  is  self-evident,  there
fore,  that  God's  speaking  is  not  the  production  of  an
audible  sound,  but  the  realization  of  His  thoughts
through  an  act  of  His  will. — The  "naming"  is  equi
valent  to  determining  something  in  accordance  with
its  nature  or  its  appearance.  There  is  thereby  indi
cated  the  power  of  God  as  ruling  and  thinking  all
things.  (The  naming  here  is  not  meant  as  a  creative
calling,  but  as  an  expression  of  the  divine  adaptation.)
— The  upper  firmament  from  which  descend  light  and
warmth  and  fertilizing  moisture,  casting  blessings  on
the  earth,  attracting  with  its  wonderful  moving  and
fixed  lights  the  observation  of  the  rudest  man,  and
drawing  forth  the  anticipation  of,  and  longing  for,
a  higher  home  than  this  earthly  one,  is  the  visible
pledge,  yes,  perhaps  the  distant  gleam,  of  a  heavenly
world  of  light.  It  bears  with  it,  therefore,  a  nama
which  is  the  same  with  the  kingdom,  where  in  un-
dimmed  light  "our  Father  in  heaven"  reveals  Him
self. — As  originally  everything  was  sea,  thus  in  the
glorified  earth  there  will  be  no  more  sea. — It  is  ab
surd  to  suppose,  because  fruit-trees  only  are  here
spoken  of,  that  the  others,  as  thorns  and  thistles,  did
not  appear  until  after  the  fall  of  man.  (Only  the  fac*


10G


GENESIS,  Oil   THE  FIRST   LOOK   OF   MOSES.


that  they  at  a  later  period  burdened  the  field,  is  al
luded  to  by  Augustine  as  a  punishment.)  A  very
fittin"  distinction  of  a  similitude  of  man,  which  can
not  be  lost,  and  of  such  a  one  as  has  been  lost.— The
reader  must  carefully  guard  against  the  Jewish  fables
which  have  also  found  their  way  among  Christians,
uamclv,  that  man  was  at  liivst  created  as  man  and
woman  in  one  person,  and  afterwards  both  sexes
were  separated  from  it.— C/-/  rcsli  /,  etc.  Perfect
re*t  and  the  greatest  aeiivity  are  one  in  Him  (sec
John  v.  17).— Whether  a  fixed  observance  ot  the
seventh  day  was  ordered  with  the  revelation  of  the
historv  of  creation,  or  whether  this  was  first  given  to
the  people  of  the  l:i\y  with  the  other  laws,  presents
an  obscure  question,  but  the  hi'tcr  view  is  the  more
probable;  in  GI  uesis,  at  le.ist,  there  is  found  no  trace
of  the  observance  of  the  sabbath,  and  still  less  among
heathen  na'i  us;  the  division  of  weeks,  as  found
amol;  ,  ',:  have  been  made  according  to

the  quarters  of  the  moon.  (The  knowledge  of  the
wcck  and  the  religious  consecration  of  this  know-
lej<ve'  >;,;••  .  in  Iced,  the  patriarchal  religious  basis
of  The  sabbath-law,  which  no  more  came  into  the
n-orld  abruptly  than  any  oilier  religious  institution.)
Caf  Krpoxit'ton:  The  number  seven,

important  through  the  whole  old  Testament,  reminds
I,  e  and  the  rest  of  the  sabbath

v;  :,.:  i,j  the  people  of  God  above,  whither

h;is    gone    before  to  prepare  a  place  for  liis
own.— Bt'NSK.N  :  The  days  of  creation  go  from  light
m  one  (on [streaming)  of  light  to  ai
real  creature  of  light  is  the  last   progres
sive  step.— Fruits  of  trees  "above  the  earth"  in  con
trast  with  bulbous  plants,  which  are  included  in  the
I,,M.!,S  (••>.— V  ms.     Sim,  moon,  and  stars;   especially
;,j'  m0on  arc  to  be.  signs  for  three  important
;   for  f.-stive  periods  (new  moons  and  sabbaths),
for  days  <  f  the  month,  and  for  the  new  year  (begin
ning  of  the  solar  and  lunar  year).— The  week  has  its
natural  ha.-is  in  the  approximate  duration  of  the  four
-  or  appearances    of  the    moon's   disk,  whose
unity  forms  the  lirst  measure  of  time,  or  the  month,
according    to   the   yeneral   view   of    all    She-mites.
Astronomically  the  number  seven  lias  in  the  ancient
wr.rld    and  especially  among  the  Shemitcs,  its  repre
sentation   in  the  seven  planets,  or  wandering  stars,
ling  to  the  view  of  the  senses  (r):  the  moon,
ry,  Venus,  the  sun,  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn.
Thcnc"'  comes  also  the  series  of  our  week-days.—
VRNDT   (.Christ    in  the   Old   Covenant):    As  long  as
;..  ;l  world   there  is  an  advent.— The  birth  ot
the  world  is  the  great  moment  of  which  it  is  declar
ed:    God  said:    Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was
jght.

[XOTK  ON  THE  CKEATION-SABBATH.— The  question
of  the  sabbath  in  all  its  aspects  stands  wholly  clear
from  any  difficulty  as  to  the  length  of  the  creative
days.  VVe  hm  e  already  shown  that  there  is  not  only
a  bar  :y  but  a  beautiful  scriptural  harmony

in  the  less  being  made  a  manorial  of  the  greater.
See  Introd.  to  Gen.  i.  pp.  135,  130.  God's  great  rest,
or  ceasing  from  Ills  work  of  creation,  commences
with  the  lirst  human  consciousness  following  the
inspiration  that  makes  the  primus  homo.  Then  the
heavens  and  the  earth  arc  finished.  Nature  and  the
world  are  complete  in  this  crowning  work,  and  tin
divine  sabbath  begins.  This  is  llcsscd  and  AaKowea
Time,  as  a  part  of  nature,  is  now  proceeding  in  it
regular  sun-divided  order,  and  from  this  time  a  sev
cnth  returning  part  is  also  blessed  and  hallowed  fo
man,  as  a  season  in  which  he  is  to  rest  from  hi


works,  and  contemplate  that  now  unceasing  sabbatl'
of  God,  which,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  .case,  can
have  no  such  shorter  recurring  intervals.  Hence  tha
force  of  our  Saviour's  words  that  the  sabbath,  the
weekly  solar  sabbath,  was  made  for  man.  They  who
contend  that  the  divine  sabbath  is  simply  the  first
twenty-four  hours  after  creation  is  finished,  make  it
unmeaning,  as  predicated  of  God  and  His  works.  In
this  sense  God  no  more  rested  on  that  solar  day  than
on  every  one  that  follows  until  a  new  creative  icon,
or  a  new  creative  day,  arises  in  the  eternal  counsels.
Such  a  view  destroys  the  beautiful  analogy  pervading
the  Scripture,  by  which  the  less  is  made  the  type  of
the  greater,  the  earthly  of  the  heavenly,  the  temporal
of  the  eternal.  It  makes  the  earthly  human  sabbath
a  memorial  of  something  just  like  itself,  of  one  long-
past  solar  day,  of  one  single  transient  event,  instead
of  being  the  constantly  recurring  witness  of  an  jeonian
state,  an  eternal  vest,  ever  present  to  God,  and  re
served  for  man  in  the  unchanging  timeless  heavens.

But  the  question  with  which  we  are  most  con
cerned  is  in  ivtrard  to  the  sabbath  as  established  for
man.     Does  this  seventh  day,  or  this  seventh  portion
of  time,  which  God  blessed  and  hallowed,  have  thus
an  eternal  ami  universal  ground  as  a  memorial  of  the
creative  work  with  its  sevenfold  division,  or  does  it
derive  its  sanction  from  a  particular  law  made  long
after    for   a    particular    and    peculiar  people?     The
question   must  be  determined   by  exegesis,  and   for
this   we    have    clear  and    decisive,  if  not  extensive,
•.••rounds.     It  demands  the  close  consideration  of  two
horl  passages,  and  of  a  word  or  two  in  each.     "  And
iod   llcsscd  the   seventh   day,"   Gen.  ii.  !'-.     "Which
•  •venth  d:>y  V  <  "e  might  ask,  the  greater  or  the  less,
he  divine"  or  the  human,  the  toonian  or  the  astro-
oinical?     Both,  is  the   easy  answer ;  boil:,  as  com-
iencinur  at  the  same  time,  so  far  as  the  one  connects
vith  astronomical   time  ;  both,  as  the  greater  induci
ng  the  less  ;  both,  as  being  (the  one  as  represented,
he    other    as    typically    representing)    the    same    in
•sscncc  and  idea".     The  attempt  to  make  them  one  in
cale,  or  in  measure,  as  well  as  in  idea,  does  in  fact
lestroy  that  universality  of  aspect  which  comes  from
he  recurrimr,  inoi-htr/  type  as  representing  the  stand-
in-/  antitype.'    Take'  away  this,  and  all  that  we  can
mike  out  of  the  words,  as  they  stand  in  Gen.  ii.  3,  is
hat  Cod  blessed  that  one  seventh  day  (be  it  long  or
short),  or,  on  the  narrower  hypothesis,  that  one  day
of  twenty-four  hours  which  first  followed  His  ceasing
to  create,  and  left  it  standing,  sacred  and  alone,  away
back   in  'the   flow   of   time."    But   blessing   the   day
means  blessing  it  for  some  purpose :  it  is  the  expres
sion  of  God's  love  to  it  as  a  holy  and  beneficent
thing  among  the  things  of  time,  as  carrying  ever
witlfit  something  of  God,  some  idea  of  the  Blcsser,
and  of  the  love  and  reverence  due  to  Him  as  the
fountain  of  all  blessedness  and  of  all  blessed  things.
So  the  blessing  upon  man  looks  down  through  all  the
generations  of  man.     No  narrower  idea  of  the  bless
ing  of  the  sabbath  can  be  held  without  taking  from
the  word  all  meaning.   "  And  hallowed  it,  inS  V?p_^  ,
and  made  it  h»!>/.     This  also  is  a  very  plain  Hebrew
word,  especially  'in  its  Piel  form,  as  any  one  may  see
by  examining  it  with  a  concordance.     We  have  given
to  the  word  unholy  (the  etymological  opposite)  too
much  the  vague  'sense  of  wickedness  in  general,  tc
allow  of  its  fairly  representing  the  opposite  in  idea.
The  holy  throughout  the  Old  Testament  is  oppose
to  the  common,  however  lawful  in  itself  it  may  _be
To  hallow  is  to  make  uncommon.     To  hallow  a  time
is  to  make  it  a  time  when  things  which  are  common


CHAP.  I.— II.  3.


<tt  otlicr  times,  and  peculiar  to  other  times,  shouk
not  be  done,  but  the  time  so  hallowed  should  be  de
voted  to  other  and  uncommon  uses.  Of  course
things  essential  and  necessary  at  all  times  are  no
included,  or  excluded,  in  such  distinction.  Neither
will  it  hold  of  days  or  times  that  mere  human  author
ity  thus  devotes  to  any  separate  uses.  Such  devotio;
ruay  be  as  partial,  or  us  indefinite,  as  the  authorit}
chooses  to  make  it.  But  when  God  hallows  a  time
it  is  for  Himself.  Not  simply  whatever  man  does,
but  whatever  he  does  for  himself,  or  for  his  indi
vidual  worldly  interest,  at  other  times,  that  must  he
not  do  on  the  times  that  God  has  hallowed  for  His
own  special  remembrance ;  but  he  must,  on  the  con
trary,  do  other  things  which  are  more  immediately
connected  with  that  special  remembrance.  Anything
less  than  this  as  a  general  principle  leaves  the  word
to  hallo  in  or  make  holy,  as  used  by  God,  and  of  God
(unless  specially  limited  to  some  partial  application),
an  unmeaning  utterance.  It  is  the  portion  of  time
which  the  Creator  of  time  keeps  for  Himself,  out  of
the  time  He  has  given  to  man.  It  is  elevating  a  por
tion  of  the  human  time  to  the  standard,  or  in  the
direction  at  least,  of  God's  own  eternal  sabbath.
There  can  be  no  hallowed  time  to  God  alone;
there  can  be  no  hallowed  time  in  itself  irrespective
of  any  agents  in  time.  Therefore,  the  expression,
He  hallowed  it,  must  be  for  men,  for  all  men  who
were  to  be  on  the  earth,  or  it  is  a  mere  blank.  It  is
God's  day  in  which  men  should  live  specially  for
Him.  It  is  sometimes  said,  we  should  live  every  day
for  God.  If  it  be  meant  that  there  should  be  no
special  times  in  which  we  live  to  God  as  we  do  not,
and  cannot,  at  all  times  (when  God  permits  us,  in
living  for  Him,  to  live  also  for  ourselves),  then  is  it  a
hyper-piety  which  becomes  profanity  in  claiming  to
be  above  the  need  of  a  provision  instituted  by  the
divine  wisdom  and  grace.  Like  to  this  is  the  plea,
that,  if  there  be  a  sabbath  at  all,  it  should  be  spent,
not  in  religious  acts,  so  called,  but  in  the  study  and
the  contemplation  of  nature.  This  cavil  has  a  high
sound,  but  it  would  soon  be  abandoned,  perhaps,  by
many  that  use  it,  if  the  contemplation  of  nature
spoken  of  were  what  it  ought  to  be,  a  contemplation
of  the  very  sabbath  of  God— nature  itsslf  being  that
holy  pause  in  which  God  rests  from  His  creative
energies,  that  ineffable  repose  in  which,  though
superintending  and  preserving,  He  provides  for  man
through  law  that  he  can  comprehend,  and  an  execut
ing  Word  that  he  can  devoutly  studv.

If  we  had  no  other  passage  than  this  of  Gen.  ii.  3,
there  would  be  no  dillicu'.ty  in  deducing  from  it  a
precept  for  the  universal  observance  of  a  sabbath,  or
seventh  day,  to  be  devoted  to  God,  as  holy  time,  by
all  of  that  race  for  whom  the  earth  and  its  nature
were  specially  prepared.  The  first  men  must  have
known  it.  The  words  "He  hallowed  it,"  can  have
no  meaning  otherwise.  They  would  be  a  blank
unless  in  reference  to  some  who  were  required  to
keep  it  holy.  After  the  fall,  the  evil  race  of  Cain,
doubtless,  soon  utterly  lost  the  knowledge.  In  the
line  of  Seth  it  may  have  become  greatly  dimmed.
Enoch,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  believe,  kept  holy  sab
bath,  or  holy  seventh  day  (whether  the  exact  chrono
logical  seventh  or  not),  until  God  took  him  to  the
holy  rest  above.  It  lingered  with  Noah  and  his  fam
ily,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  seven-day  periods  ob
served  in  the  ark.  Of  the  other  patriarchs,  in  this
respect,  nothing  is  directly  told  us.  They  were
devout  men,  unworldly  men,  confessing  themselves
pilgrims  on  earth,  seeking  a  rest.  Nothiiv  is  more


probable,  prima  facie,  than  that  such  men,  as  we
read  of  them  in  Genesis,  and  as  the  Apostle  has
described  them  to  us,  should  have  cherished  an  idea
so  in  harmony  with  their  unearthly  pilgrim-life,  even
though  coming  to  them  from  the  faintest  tradition.
To  object  that  the  Bible,  in  its  few  brief  memoranda
of  their  lives,  says  nothing  about  their  sabbath-
kecping,  any  more  than  it  tells  us  of  their  forms  of
prayer  and  modes  of  worship,  is  a  worthless  ar"-u-
ment.  The  Holy  Scripture  never  anticipates  cavils;
it  never  shows  distrust  of  its  own  truthfulness  by
providing  against  objections — objections  we  may  say
that  it  could  have  avoided,  and  most  certainly  would
have  avoided,  had  it  been  an  untruthful  book  made
either  by  earlier  or  later  compilers.  The  patriarchs
may  have  lost  the  tradition  of  the  sabbath ;  it  may
not  have  come  to  them  over  the  great  catastrophe  of
the  flood;  or  they  may  have  lost  the  chronological
reckoning  of  it;  but,  in  cither  case,  it  would  not
affect  the  verity  of  the  great  facts  and  announcements
in  Gen.  i.  and  ii  however,  or  by  whatever  species  of
inspiration,  the  first  author  of  that  account  obtained
his  knowledge.  For  all  who  believe  the  Old  Scrip
tures,  as  sanctioned  by  Christ  and  supported  by  the
general  biblical  evidence,  there  it  stands  unimpaired
by  anything  given  or  omitted  in  the  subsequent
history.

But  there  is  another  passage  which  shows  con
clusively  that,  through  whatever  channel  it  may  have
come,  such  a  knowledge  of  the  sabbath  was  in  the
world  after  the  time  of  the  patriarchs.  The  language
of  the  fourth  commandment  (Exod.  xx.  8),  to  say
nothing  of  Exod.  xvi.  iiU-ilY,  cannot  be  interpreted
in  any  other  way.  Remember  the  sabbath-day,
tSH  CT  nx  -,-=7 .  The  foice  of  the  article  is
there,  though  omitted,  in  the  Hebrew  syntax,  because
of  the  specifying  word  that  follows.  It  is  just  as
though  we  should  say  in  English:  Remember  sab
bath-day.  Take  the  precisely  similar  language,  Mai.
hi.  22,  rr:;:2  rnin  spCT:  Remember  the' law  of
Moses,  or,  Remember  Moses"  law.  As  well  might
one  contend  that  this  was  the  first  promulgation'  of
the  Pentateuch,  as  that  Exod.  xx.  8  was  the  first
setting  forth  of  the  sabbatical  institution.  There
was  no  call  for  such  language  had  that  been  the  case.
It  would  have  been  in  the  style  of  the  other  com
mands  :  '  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods ;  Thou  shalt
not  take  the  name,  etc. ;  Thou  shalt  keep  a  sabbath,
or  rest,'  etc.  We  dwell  not  upon  the  distinct  refer
ence  that  follows  to  the  creation-sabbath,  and  the
perfect  similarity  of  reason  and  of  language.  The
artless  introduction  is  enough  to  show  that  those  to
whom  it  was  addressed  are  supposed  to  have  known
something  of  the  ancient  institution,  however  much
its  observance  may  have  been  neglected,  or  its  reck
oning,  perhaps,  been  forgotten.  The  use  of  the  word
"li;T  (remember)  would  seem  to  point  to  some  such
danger  of  misreckoning,  as  though  the  Lawgiver
tieant  to  connect  it  back  chronologically,  by  septen-
dal  successions,  with  the  first  sabbath,  or  the  first
lay  of  the  conscious  human  existence.  Or  he  may
lave  had  in  view  future  reckonings.  The  old  law  of
a  seventh  day,  or  a  seventh  of  time,  being  preserved
is  an  immutable  principle,  there  might  have  been  f
peculiar  memorial  reckoning  for  the  Jewish  people.
as  there  afterwards  was  for  the  Christian  churct
vhen  the  resurrection  of  Christ  was  taken  for  the
nitial  day  of  reckoning,  as  being,  in  a  most  solemn
,ensc,  to  the  church,  what  the  creative  finishing  had
been  to  the  world.  So  that,  in  this  respect,  the


198


GENESIS,  OU   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   HOSES.


Christian  seventh  day  may  have  been  no  more  a  sub-  j
stitution  than  the  Jewish.

\  seventh  part  of  time  is  holy  for  man.  Uod
blessed  it  and  hallowed  it.  Such  is  the  deduction
from  the  language  of  Gen.  ii.  X.  There  are  other
questions  relating  to  the  sabbath,  its  adaptation  to
the  human  physical  constitution,  and  the  change  of
reckoning  as  between  the  Jewish  and  Christian  dis-
pensations,  but  they  would  come  more  in  place  in
commeutiii"  on  some  other  parts  of  the  sacred  vol
ume,  to  which  they  may  be,  therefore,  referred.
The  rt'liyivu*  aspect  appears  more  in  the  universal
hallowing  in  Genesis  than  in  the  more  national  estab
lishment0  among  the  Jew.-,  where  mere  rest  from
la]J01.  i  prominent  than  religious  worship,

or  that  holy  contemplation  of  the  divine  which  is  the
livin"  thought  in  the  creative  account,  and  which
comes  out  'aoiin  .-o  emphatically  in  the  Christian
institution  as  more  suggestive,  than  the  Jewish,  ol
the  eternal  rest.  It  is  a  great,  though  very  common,
mistake,  that,  the  Jewish  aspect  of  the  sabbath  is  the
more  severely  religious,  as  compared  with  the  Chris
tian,  which  is"  sometimes  claimed  to  be  more  free  in
this'respeet.  Strict  as  the  Jewish  institution  was,  in
it-  prohibitions  of  labor,  it  was  in  fact  the  less  u-li-
gious;  it  had  less  of  holy  contemplation ;  it  had  no
worship  prescribed  to  it;  it  was,  in  a  word,  more
secular  than  the  prinfuive  or  the  Christian,  as  being
enjoined  more  for  secular  ends,  namely  bodily  rest

J


and  restoration  for  man  and  beast,  and  even  for  the
land.  These,  indeed,  are  important  ends  still  remain
ing.  The  connections  between  the  sabbath  and  the
physical  constitution  of  man  form  a  most  valuable
part  of  the  general  argument,  but  as  they  bear  upon
the  biblical  view  as  collateral  confirmation  rather
than  as  connected  with  its  direct  sanctions,  we  would
simply  refer  the  reader  to  some  of  the  more  instruc
tive  works  that  have  been  written  on  this  branch  of
the  subject.

JAMKS  AUG.  HKSSKY:  "Sunday,  its  Origin,  ins
tory,  and  Present  Obligation"  (Hampton  Lectures
preached  before  the  University  of  Oxford),  London.
18GO;  JAMES  (in.Fii.i.AN:  "The  Sabbath  viewed  in
the  Light  of  Reason,  Revelation,  and  History,  with
Sketches  of  its  Literature,"  Edinburgh,  1802,  repub-
lished  by  the  N.  Y.  Sabbath  Committee  and  the
American  Tract  Society,  New  York,  1802;  Pim.ir
SCIIAFF:  "The  Anglo-American  Sabbath  (an  Essay
read  before  the  National  Sabbath  Convention,  Sara
tov,  Ant:.  11,  1863),  New  York,  18015  (republished
in°English  and  in  German  by  the  American  Tract
Society);  MARK  HOPKINS:  "The  Sabbath  and  Free
Institutions"  (read  before  the  same  Convention),
New  York,  180J5;  ROI:KUT  Cox:  "The  Literature  on
the  Sabbath-Question,"  Edinburgh,  180">,  -  vols.
On  the  practical  aspects  of  the  sabbath-question,
conip.  the  Documents  prepared  and  published  by  the
X.  Y.  Sabbath  Committee  from  Ib57  to  1807. — T.  L.j


SECOND     SECTION.

Man-Paradlsc-thc  Paradisaical  Pair  and  the  Paradisaical  InstlMlons.-neocraliC-Jchovlstlc.


ClIAl'TKU    II.    4-2:5.

A. — The  Earth  waiting  for  Man.
4         These  are  the  generations  [genealogies]1  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth  when  thcy

were  Created    in  Ihe  day  [here  the  six  clay,  arc  one  day]  that  the  Lord  God  [not  God  Jehovah,  nm<*

L  ood  L  Elal   L^L  as  cod  of  all  the  Ld]  Jade  the  earth  and  the  heavens  [the  theo-
Ravens  are  coveted  f™  the  earth],  And  every  plant  of  the  field  before  it  ™jn  the
earth,  and  every  herb  of  the  field  before  it  grew;   for  the  Lord  God  had  not  .au^
to  rain  upon  the  earth,  and  there  was  not  a  man  [Adam]  to  till  the  ground  [al

B.— The  Creation  of  the  Paradisaical  Man.

6  But  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth  [including  the  sea]  and  watered  the  wholo  face

7  of  the  earth  [the  adJLh  ortheiand].     And  the  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  Just  of  the

ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  became    a  In  ing  s

C. — The  Creation  of  Paradise.

8  And  the  Lord  God  planted  a  garden  eastward  in  Eden  [land  of  delight],  and  there  he

9  put  the  man  whom  he  had   formed:  And  out  of  the  ground  made  the  Lo  d  God
grow  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the  sight  and  good  for  food;  the  tree  of  hfe  also  m

10  the  midst  of  the  garden,  and  the  tree   of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.     And

went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  garden;  and  from  thence  it  was  parted  and  became  mto


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


11  four  heads.     The  name  of  the  first  is  Pison  [spreading];  that  is  it  which  compasseth

12  [winds  through]  the  whole  land  of  Havilah,  where  there  is  gold.     And  the  gold  of  that

13  land  is  good  [fine]  ;   there  is  bdellium  and  the  onyx  stone.     And  the  name  of  the  second
river  is  Gihon  [gushing],  the  same  is  it  that  compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Ethiopia  [Cush].

14  And  the  name  of  the  third  river  is  Hiddekel  [swift-flowing]  ;  that  is  it  which  goeth  toward
the  East  of  Assyria.     And  the  fourth  river  is  Euphrates.

D.—  The  Paradise  Life.

15  And  the  Lord  God  took  the  man,  and  put  him  into  the  garden  of  Eden,  to  dress  it

16  and  to  keep  it.     And  the  Lord  God  commanded  the  man  saying,  Of  every  tree  of  the

17  garden  thou  mayest  freely  cat  [bssn  brs].     But  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and
evil,  thou  shult  not  eat  of  it;  for  in  the  day  that  thou  catest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely
die  [nv2n  rvs].

E.  —  Paradisaical  Development  and  Institutions.

IS          And  the  Lord  God  said,  It  is  not  good  that  the  man  should  be  alone;  I  will  make

19  him  a  help  meet  for  him  [n:,DD  ,  his  contrast,  reflected  image,  his  other  l].     And  out  of  the  o-round
the  Lord  God  formed  every  beast  of  the  field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  brought
them  unto  Adam  to  see3  what  he  would  call  them;   and  whatsoever  Adam  called  every

20  living  creature,  that  was  the  name  thereof.     And  Adam  gave  names  to  all  cattle,  and
to  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every  beast  of  the  field  ;  but  for  Adam  there  was  not

21  found  a  help  meet  for  him.     And  the  Lord  God  caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam,

22  and  he  slept;   and  he  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up  the  flesh  instead  thereof.     And
the  rib  which  the  Lord  God  had  taken  from  man,  made  he  a  woman  and  brought  her

23  unto  the  man.     And  Adam  said.  This  is  now  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my  ilesh  ;
she  shall  be  called  woman,  because  she  was  taken  out  of  man  [iscftafi,  man-ess,  because  taken

24  from  isc-h,  man].     Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  shall  cleave

25  unto  his  wife;   and  they  shall  be  one  ilesh.     And  they  were  both  naked,  the  man  and
his  wife,  and  were  not  ashamed.


[!  Ver.  4.—  rnn.  Rendered  by  Lange  genealogies.  More  properly  generations  in  the  primary  sense,  and  without
any  reference  to  time,  like  TH  ,  or  vci-ea.  Births,  Greek  :  yeye'tms,  whence  the  name  of  the  book  in  the  Septuagint.  It  is
directly  applied  to  births,  or  successions  (one  thing,  or  event,  proceeding  from  another),  in  nature,  and  this  may  be
regarded  as  primary.  For  example,  see  Ps.  xc.  2,  !H|?  Ci~in  ,  lefbre  the  mountains  were  lorn,  generated.—  T.  L.]

["  Vcr.  7.—  Lange  renders:  "und  so  ward  der  Mensch  cine  lebendige  Seelc."  Luther  has  alfo.  The  Hebrew  has
simply  ifTn  ,  which  we  render  :  and  man  became,  like  the  Vulgate  and  LXX.  ;  but  the  verb  seems  to  have  an  emphasis,
which  Lange  rightly  aims  to  give,  and  so  man  became,  etc.:  in  this  special  manner,  namely  by  the  divine  inspiration
directly  ;  since  the  animals  also  are  called  rpn  CS3  ,  living  soul,  though  their  life  comes  mediately  through  the  general
life  of  nature  or  the  C^nSX  mi  ,  as  mentioned  ch.  i.  2.  See  Ps.  civ.  29.—  T.  L.]

[a  Ver.  19.—  mX"l3  ,  to  sec.  Lange  :  "urn  zu  schen."  Some  of  the  Jewish  commentators  raise  the  question  whether
this  has  for  its  subjcct'God  or  Adam.  If  the  latter,  then  riX~ib  has  the  sense  of  judging,  determining,  which  it  will  well
bear.—  T.  L.]


EXEGETICAL  AXD   CEITICAL.

1.  The  present  section,  ch.  ii.  4-25,  is  connected
with  the  one  that  follows  to  the  end  of  ch.  iii.,  by
the  peculiar  divine  designation  of  Jehovah  Elohim.
It  has  also  a  still  closer  connection  with  ch.  iv.,  inas
much  as  the  next  toledoth,  or  generations,  begin
with  ch.  v.  1.  That,  however,  ch.  ii.  25  is  really  a
separate  portion,  appears  from  the  strong  contrast  in
which  the  history  of  the  fall,  ch.  iii.,  stands  to  the
history  of  Paradise,  ch.  ii.  Keil  denotes  the  whole
division,  even  to  the  next  toledoth  (ch.  v.  1),  as  the
history  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Upon  the
completing  of  the  creative  work,  ch.  i.,  there  follows
the  commencing  historical  development  of  the  world,
with  the  history  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  in  three


sections :  a.  Of  the  primitive  condition  of  man  in
Paradise  (ch.  ii.  5-26);  b.  of  the  fall  (ch.  iii.);  c.  of
the  breaking  up  of  the  one  human  race  into  two  dis
tinct  and  separately  disposed  races  (ch.  iv.).  It
must  be  remarked,  however,  in  the  first  place,  that
in  ch.  ii.  there  is  not  yet  any  proper  beginning  of
historical  development  in  the  strict  sense,  and,  sec
ondly,  that  chs.  iv. — vi.  1-7  do  evidently  cohere  in  a
definite  unity  presenting,  as  consequence  of  the  his
tory  of  the  fall,  1.  the  unfolding  of  the  line  of  Cain,
2.  the  unfolding  of  the  line  of  Seth,  and  3.  the  inter-
folding  of  both  lines  to  their  mutual  corruption.  So
far,  therefore,  does  the  history  of  the  first  world  pro
ceed  under  the  religious  point  of  view.  But  the
generations  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  go  on  from
the  beginning  of  our  present  section  to  ch.  v.  In
respect  to  this,  Kcil  rightly  maintains  that  the  phrase


200


GENESIS,  Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   ilCSES.


elth  tJu>hdi,th  (these  the  generations)  must  be  the
superscription  to  what  follows  (ver.  '<>'•'>).  The  ques
tion  arises:  in  what  sense?  On  good  ground  docs
Keil  insist  that  toledoth  (a  noun  derived  from  the
Hiphil  "nb*n  ,  in  the  construct  plural,  and  denoting
properly  the  generations,  or  the  posterity  of  any  one)
means  not  the  historical  ori;:m  of  the  one  named  in
the  genitive,  but  ever  the  hi  -tory  of  the  generations
and  the  life  that  proceeds  from  him— or  his  series  of
descendants  (we  may  add)  us-  his  o\\n  genesis  still
going  on  in  his  race.  This  word,  therefore,  in  i's
relation  to  heaven  and  earth,  cannot  denote  the  origi
nal  bcginmm:  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth  (Delitz-ch
think.-  nlythe  hi-torical  development

of  heavtn  and  earth  after  they  are  iini-hed.     For  the
toledoui  or  "generations  of  Noah.,"  for  example,  do
not  denote  his  own  birth  and  begetting,  but  his   his
tory  and  the  beg<  iting  of  his  sons.     From  what  has
been  said  it  follous,  therefore,  that  the  human  hi.- lory,
from  eh.  ii.  to  the  end  of  eh.  iv.,  is  not  to  be  regi
as  a  hi.-tory  of  the  earth  only,  but  also  of  the  hea-
rens.     And   in   a  mystical   sense,   truly,    Paradise,    is
and  i  a;!h  together.    Let  us  now  keep  sp'rial-
y  in  view  t'ae  section  of  Jehovah  Elohim,  ehs.  ii.  and
iii.     \Vhen  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  name  Jehovah
Klohim  occurs  twenty  times  in  this  section  in  place
[rim  that  had  been  used  hitherto  (the  excep-
tions,   eh.  iii.   1,  '!,  5,  arc  very  characteristic),   and
that,  besides  this,  it  is  found  only  once  in  the  Penta-
t'-uch  (Mxod.  i\.  :;D),  the  significance  of  this  conn.-'c-
tion  becomes  very  clear.     When  once,  however,  the
documentary  unity  of  the  Elohim  and  Jehovah  sec
tions  is  clear;;.   cnl-Haiiied,  this  section   becomes  im-
'.y    a   declaration   that    the    Covenant-Cod    of
l--ael,  originally  the  Covi-mint-God  of  Adam  in  Paia-
dise,  is   one  with  Klohim   the  God  of  all  the  world.
Immediately,  too.   is    there    established    the    central
-t:i:id-point    of   the    theocratic    spirit,    according    to
which.   .Jehovah   is    the   God   of  all   the   world,   and
Ad;>.m,  with  his  Paradise,  is  the  mierocosmie  centre
of  all  the  world  (in  respect  to  the  names  Jehovah  and
Klohim,  sec  KEIL,  p.  o.">).      As  far  as  specially  con
cerns  our  section,  ch.  ii.,  Knobel  gives  it  the  siiner-
reription:    ''The   Creation,  Narration   Second."     It
must  be  remarked,  however,  that  here  the  genesis  of
the  earth,  in  contrast  with  the  generative  series  that
follows,  is  presented  according  to  the  princ'jtlc  that
determines  the  ordering  of  tilings;  so  that  Adam,  as
such  principle,  stands  at  the  head.     (It  is  according
lode's  proposition:   the  po-terior  in  appear
ance,  (he  prior  in  idea.)     The  representation  mu-t,
indeed,  give  him  a  basis  in  an  already  existing  earth;
yet  still  for  the  paradisaical  earth  is  it  true  that  the
earth  is  iir.-t  through  man.     The  paradisaical  earth
with  its  institutions,  uniting  as  they  do  the  contrast
of  heaven  and  earth,  or  rather  of  earth  and  heaven,
is  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  second  chapter.     For
an  apprehension  of  this  contrast,  in  part  akin  to  and
partly  variant,  see  DELITZSCFI,  p.  138.      From   the
very  supposition  of  the  earth  as  existing,  it  appears
that  the  author  presupposes  still  another  representa
tion  of  the  creation,  and  that  the  present  is  only
meant  to  give  a  supplement  from  another  side.     It  is
incorrect  to  say  here,  as  Knobel  docs,  that  the  origin
of    plants    in    general    goes    before    the    origin   of
man.

2.  Yer.  4.  The  construction  of  De  Wette  is  to
this  effect :  "  At  the  time  when  God  Jehovah  made
earth  and  heaven,  there  was  no  shrub  of  the  field,"
etc.  Still  harsher  and  more  difficult  is  the  construe-


tion  of  Bunsen:  "At  the  time  when  God  the  Ever
lasting  made  heavtn  and  earth,  and  there  was  not
yet  any  shrub  of  the  iield  upon  the  earth,  and  nc
herb  of  the  Iield  had  yet  sprouted  (for  Jehovah  God
had  not  yet  made  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth,  etc.),
then  did  God  the  Everlasting  form  man,"  etc.  Both
of  these  are  untenable  and  opposed  to  the  simple  ex
pression  of  the  te.st.  (See  ah-o  I  eiit/sch  and  Kei!.)
Ver.  4  is  indeed  not  altogether  easy.  On  t/ic  dai/  hi.
vh/ck  the  Lord  'ntdilc  the  earth  and  tl/c  /,,</.  <//*,  that
is,  on  the  one  gieat  day,  in  which  here  the  hc.xal'me-
ron  is  included  (with  special  reference,  indeed,  to  its
closing  period),  there  commenced  the  history  of  the
heavens  and  the  eaith  in  their  becoming  created—
that  is,  in  the  same  period  in  which  they  became
created.  Out  of  the  paradisaical  history:  Earth  and
heaven,  arose  the  coim  rse  history:  Heaven  and
earih,  in  a  rc'igious  sense,  just  as  in  a  genetic  sense
there  was  the  same  order  tiom  the  beginning.

;>.  Vers.  r>  and  (i.  And  every  plant  ot  the
field. — The  word  ;~  with  the  negative  particle  is
;uiv;;lent  to  the  German  yar  ?tic/</x,  ni,t  at  nil.  The
Hebrew  conjunction  "  leaves  it  at  first  view  unde
cided,  whether  the  superscription  goes  on  so  as  to
take  in  the  words,  and  u\i\i/  herb,  etc.  And  yet,  on
that  view,  there  would  be  a  failure  of  any  concluding
sense.  The  most  probable  view,  therefore,  is  that
which  regards  the  conjunction  as  mcieh  a  tran.-hion
particle,  and  passes  it  over  in  the  translation.  Ac
cording  to  Knobel  and  others  this  i;arra'.ion  is  aetual-
Iv  at  variance  with  that  i  f  eh.  i.,  as,  for  example,  m
its  \!ew  of  the  dryness  of  the  earth  before  the  iutro-
luctlon  of  the  plants,  etc.  (see  ver.  2ii),  and,  thert-
ibre,  we  mu.-l  conclude  that  it  belongs  to  another
narrator.  In  regard  to  this  assumption  of  different
document:;,  we  may  refer  to  the  Introduction  (for  the
modes  of  representation  in  the  Jehovisiic  portions,
see  KNO!:;:I.,  p.  2",;  likewise  the  head  Kitciature,  p.
:!-!).  The  designed  unity  of  both  representations
appears  from  the  manner  and  way  in  which,  even
according  to  Knobel,  the  second  of  these  narration-,
in  many  of  i.s  references,  presupposes  the  iir.-t.  The
full  explanation  of  this  unity  becomes  obvious  from
the  harmonic  contrast  which  arises  when  the  univer
sal  creation  of  the  world  is  regarded  from  the  ideal
stand-point  of  the  Jthovah  belief  (see  John  xvii.  5;
Kph.  i.  4).  The  author  carries  us  back  to  the  time
of  the  hexae'ineron,  \\hen  no  herb  of  the  iield  had
yet  grown.  Nevertheless  there  is  not  meant  by  this
the  beginning  of  the  third  creative  day,  but  the  time
of  the  sixth.  The  apparent  contradiction,  however,
disappears,  when  we  lay  the  emphasis  upon  the  ex
pression  "o/  ihcjiM"  and  by  the  herbs  and  plants
of  t/tejichl  that  are  here  meant,  understand  the  nobler
species  of  herbs  that  are  the  growth  of  culture.  In
opposition,  to  Delitzsch,  Keil  correctly  distinguishes
between  nir  and  y~iX.  Delitzsch  has  not  suffi
ciently  removed  the  difficulty  that  arises  when  we
carry  back  the  date  of  this  to  the  time  befoie  vegeta
tion  existed.  There  would  be  (apparent)  contradic
tion  (he  admits)  between  the  two  narratives,  but  not
an  inexplicable  one — then  it  is  no  contradiction  at
all.  It  is  the  paradisaical  plants,  therefore;  these
did  not  yet  exist;  for  they  presuppose  man.  See
other  interpretations  in  LAXGE'S  "  Positive  Dogmat
ic,"  p.  242.  Keil  connects  our  interpretation  with
that  of  Baumgarten :  "  By  the  being  of  the  plant  is
denoted  its  growth  and  germination."  This  is  ever  j
wont  to  follow  very  soon  after  the  planting  of  the
Terra.  By  assuming,  indeed,  a  certain  emphasis  on


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


iOl


the  verbs  FP!"P  and  naa"1 ,  we  may  get  the  sense
the  herbs  of  the  field  were  not  yet  rightly  grown,  th
plant  was  not  yet  come  to  its  perfection  of  form  or
feature,  because  the  conditions  of  culture  were  as  ye
wanting.     But  this  thought  connects  itself  more  or
less   with   that   of  plants    produced  by  cultivation
which,  as  such,  presuppose  the  existence  of  man. —
Had  not  caused  it  to  rain. — To  the  human  culti
vation  of  the  world  belong  two  distinct  things  :  firsl
the  rain  from  heaven  together  with  sunshine,  and
secondly  the  labor  and  cure  of  man.     Both  condi
tions  fail  as  yet,  but  now,  for  the  first  time,  comes  in
the  first  mode  of  nurture.     The  fog-vapor  that  arose
from  the  earth  (ha-arctz,  including  the  sea)  waters
the  earth-soil  (the  adamah).     It  is  rightly  inferred
<rom   ver.  6  that  the  vapor  which  arose  from  the
earth  indicates  the  first  rain.     If  it  means  that  the
mist  then   first  arose  from  the  earth,   there  would
seem  to  be  indicated  thereby  the  form  of  rain,  or,  at
all  events,  of  some  extraordinary  fall  of  the  dew.
From  this  place,  and  from  the  history  of  the  flood
(especially  the   appearance  of  the  rainbow),  it  was
formerly  inferred  that  until  the  time  of  the  deluge
no  rain  had  actually  fallen.     But  from  the  fact  that
the  rainbow  was  first  made  a  sign  of  the  covenant
for  Noah,  it  does  not  at  all  follow  that  it  had  not
actually  existed  before ;  just  as  little  as  it  follows
from  the  sign  of  the  starry  night  which  Abraham  re
ceived  (Gen.   xv.),  that  there  had   been  no  starry
night  before,  or  from  the  institution  of  the  covenant-
sign  of  circumcision,  that  circumcision  had  not  ear
lier  existed  as  a  popular  usage  (two  points  which
the  Epistle  of  Barnabas  has  well  distinguished,  al
though  the  critics  have  partially  failed  in  understand
ing  it.     Epistle  of  Barnabas  ix.).     A  similar  view
must  be  taken  of  the  previous  natural  history  of  the
paschal  lamb,  of  the  dove,  and  of  the  eucharistic
supper ;  they  were  ever  earlier  than  the  sacramental
appointment.     In  fact,  there  is  in  this  place  no  ex
press  mention  made  of  rain  proper,  and  it  may  well
suggest  here  one  of  those  heavy  falls  of  dew  that
take  place  in  the  warmer  climates.     Our  text  may
fairly  mean,  not  that  the  rain  was  a  mere  elementary
phenomenon,   but  that  it  belonged  to  the  divinely
ordered  economy  of  human  cultivation  in  its  inter
change  with  the  labor  of  man.     The  most  we  can
say  is,  th  it  the  watering  of  the  soil  was  a  precondi
tion  to  tha  creation  of  man  himself.     Just  as  cultiva
tion  after  this,  so  must  also,  primarily,  the  cultiva
tor  of  the  soil  come  into  existence  under  the  dew  of
heaven.     Moreover,  the  earthly  organization  of  man
consists,  in  good  part,  of  water.     The  words  Adam
and  adamah  are  used  here,  as  we  may  well  believe
to  denote  a  close  relationship  of  kin.     As  Adam,  how
ever,  is  not  simply  from  the  earth  (ha-aretz),  so  the
adamah  is  not  simply  the  theocratic  earth-soil  pre
pare^  by  the  God  who  created  man.     Adam  is  the
man  in  his  relation  to  the  earth,  and  so  is  adamah
the  earth  in  its  relation  to  man.

[NOTE  ON  THE  SUMMARY  OP  THE  FIRST  CREATIVE
ACCOUNT  IN  TIIK  SECOND.— Knobel  has  to  admit  the
internal  evidence  showing  that  this  second  account
recognizes  the  first  and  is  grounded  upon  it,  thereby
disproving  the  probability  of  a  contrariety  either  in
tended  or  unseen.  The  attempt,  however,  of  Lange,
and  of  others  cited,  to  reconcile  the  seeming  difficul
ties,  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  giving  full  satisfac
tion.  Another  method,  therefore,  may  be  proposed
which  we  think  is  the  one  that  would  most  obvious-
y  commend  itself  to  the  ordinary  reader  who  believed


in  the  absolute  truthfulness  of  the  account,  and  kue\»
nothing  of  any  documentary  theory.     The  two  narra.
tives  are  a  continuation  of  the  same  story.     The  sec
ond  is  by  the  same  author  as  the  first,  or  by  one  in
perfect  harmony  with  him,  and  evidently  referring  to
all  that  had  been  previously  said  as  the  ground-work
of  what  is  now  to  be  more  particularly  added  respect
ing  man,  and  which  may  be  called  the  special  sub
ject   of  this   second   part.     Hence   the  preparatory
recapitulation,  just  as  Xenophon  in  each  book  of  the
Anabasis  presents  a  brief  summary  of  the  one  pre
ceding.     This  reference  to  the  previous  account  thus
commences :  "  These  are  the  generations  of  the  hea
vens  and  the  earth  " — that  is,  as  has  been  already
told.     That  nin'pn  refers  to  the  creative  growths,
births,  evolutions,  or  whatever  else  we  might  call
them,  would  be  the  first  and  most  obvious  thought.
When  told  that  they  mean  the  generations  of  Adam,
as  subsequently  given,  and  this  because  "  Paradise  is
heaven   and   earth   together,"  or  "Adam   with   his
Paradise  is  the  microcosmic  centre  of  the  world,"  we
admit  the  justness  and  beauty  of  the  thoughts,  but
find  it  difficult  to  be  satisfied  with  the  exposition.
Again,  whoever  will  examine  the  uses  of  nbx  (these)
in  NOLDIUS'  "  Concordance,"  will  find  that  it  refers
as  often,  and  perhaps  oftener,  to  what  precedes  than
to  what  follows.     The  context  alone  determines,  and
here  it  decidedly  points  to  the  first  chapter.     There
is,  however,  no  difficulty  in  taking  it  both  ways,  as  a
subscription  to  the  first  passage,  or  as  a  superscrip
tion  to  the  second,  at  the  same  time.     That  "the
generations  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth "  means
the  previous  creative  account,  and  not   that  which
comes  after,  would  seem  to  be  decided  by  the  words
immediately  added,  CJj"i±!-;S  ,  "in  their  being  creat
ed  " — "  in  the  day  (that  is,  the  time  or  period  taken
as  a  whole)  of  the  Lord  God's  making  the  earth  and
heavens."     To  seek  for  mysteries  here  in  the  trans
position  of  the  words  "  earth  and  heavens,"  would  be
ike  a  similar  search   by  the   Jewish    Masoritcs  of
something  occult   in  the  little  fi  (xnil'T  'n)  of  the
word  CX"C!12.     Either  the  whole  previous  time  is
referred  to,  or,  as  is  more  probable,  the  earliest  part
of  it,  before  not  only  man  but  vegetation  also.     Or,
in  the  day,  may  mean,  as  some  have  thought,  the
irst  day,  when  the  material  of  the  earth  and  heavens
lad  been  created,  but  all  was  yet  unformed.     Now
,his  seems  to  be  very  much  what  is  meant  by  what
rollows  in  vers.  5  and  C.     In  the  day  when  God  made
:he  earth  and  heavens ;  here  the  writer  might  have
stopped,  so  far  as  his  main  design  was  concerned,
and  gone  on  immediately  to  give  the  intended  more
mrticular  account  of  man ;  but  he  is  led  to  enlarge
lis  recapitulating  summary  by  an  addition  that  may
)e  regarded  either  as  parenthetical  or  exegetical —
'  the  earth  and  heavens,  and  every  shrub  of  the  field
Before  it  was  in  the  earth,  and  every  herb  before  it
;rew,"  etc.     He  puts  the  greatest  and  the  smallest
-hings  together  to  denote  totality.     All  was  made
before  man.     And  then,  to  make  the  language  more
emphatic  in  the  assertion  of  its  being  a  divine  work,
md  that  it  was  before  man,  who  is  excluded  from  all
igency  in  its  production,  it  is  further  declared  that
his  first  appearance  of  the  vegetable  world  was  not,
n  its  origin,  an  ordinary  production  of  nature  (such
as  growth  produced  by  rain),  and  was  wholly  inde
pendent  of  human  cultivation.     It  had  not  yet  rained
n  the  ordinary  way,  that  is,  the  regular  production
md  reproduction  of  the  seasons  had  not  yet  taken


202


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


place,  and  there  was  no  man  to  till  the  ground.  It  ^
was  after  this  first  supernatural  vegetation  that  the
irrigating  processes  commenced,  -when  God  made  "a
law°for  the  rain  (i-^  pi,  lyon  jJuviis,  Job
xxviii.  2(5),  ami  caused  the  mist  to  go  up  (the  evapora
tion  and  condensation)  that  watered  the  whole  face
of  the  rr;~X ,  the  earth's  soil.  This  assertion  of
supernatural  growths  l>ci:ig  premised  as  antecedent
summary,  the  writer  immediately  proceeds  to  the
main  and  direct  subject  of  this  second  section  :  ISp*'  ,
and  after  this  (as  is  demanded  by  the  1  convcrsive
denoting  sequence  <;f  event)  tlie  Lord  God  formed
man."

The  language  is  irregular  and  parenthetical,  hut
artless  and  clear,  at  least  in  its  general  design.  The
terms  cmpleved  are  those  that  a  writer  with  those
primitive  conceptions  would  use  in  impressing  the
idea  of  the  supernatural.  The  lir.-t  plants  were  made
to  UTOW  without  that  help  of  rain  and  of  human  cul
tivation  which  they  now  require.  A  striking  dift'er-
ince  bctwe  IM  this  and  the  first  account  is  that  it  is
jvhollv  iinchronoliv/ical,  just  as  would  lie  expected  in
a  summary  or  a  recapitulation.  It  is  an  introduction
to  man,  as  showing  briefly  what  was  done  for  him
before  he  is  brought  into  the  world,  and  then  what
,-ri  is  wholly  confined  to  him.  Thus  viewed,
there  is  the  strongest  internal  evidence  that  the  two
accounts  are  from  one  and  the  same  author,  who  has
neither  desire  nor  motive  to  enlarge  upon  what  he
had  previously  said.  It  is  the  style  of  one  who
understand."  himself,  and  who  has  no  fear  of  bein
misunder-t.iod,  or  taken  for  another,  by  his  reader.

Perhaps  the  best  view  of  the  whole  case  would  be
gained  by  making  a  fair  paraphrase,  which  is  only
putting  it  into  a  more  modern  style  of  language  and
conception:  '  Such  were  the  generations  of  the  hea
vens  and  the  earth  in  that  early  day  when  God  made
not  only  the  great  earth  and  heavens,  but  even  the
lowly  shrub  and  plant — made  them  by  His  own  divine
WOI.("l — made  them  when  they  yet  were  not  (as  Raschi
gives  the  sense  of  CIO  ,  without  preceding  causality'
without  the  aid  of  rain— before  the  rain  and  before
any  human  cultivation.  For  it  was  after  this  early
day  ('  in  ~S'  being  grammatically  both  illative  and
denoting  sequence)  that  the  mists  began  to  go  up
(rfc"1,  the  unconnected  future  form  here  dcnotm;:
series,  habit,  or  continuance,  see  Job  i.  5  ;  Judg.  xiv
10 ;  1's.  xxxii.  4),  from  which  come  the  descending
rains  that  now  water  the  earth.  And  it  was  after  al
this  that  the  Lord  God  made  man,  his  body  from  tin
earth  (from  nature),  his  spirit  from  His  own  divim
inspiration  ;  and  thus  it  was  that  man  became  a  liv
ing  soul.1

The  "IX  or  mist  here  that  went  up  can  meai
nothing  but  the  rain  itself.  It  is  the  same  process
and  that  the  word  is  to  be  so  regarded  is  eviden
from  its  use,  Job  xxxvi.  27  :  "For  He  maketh  smal
the  drops  of  water,  when  thgy  pour  down  the  rain  c
its  vapor"  "liO  "i^-o  '.pr  .  It  may  be  a  questio:
whether  rra  b=>  (vcr.  4)  is  to  be  taken  as  the  objec
of  r.Vi'S ,  vcr.  3,  as  it  commonly  is,  or  is  to  be  re
garded  as  connected  with  what  follows,  so  as  to  b
the  subject  of  the  verbal  force  that  is  in  C1I3 .  Th
word  is  not  well  rendered  before,  as  though  a  thin
could  be  before  it  was,  unless  in  an  ideal  sens
which  we  cannot  suppose  to  be  the  writer's  meanin
here.  The  being  in  the  earth  was  essential  to  i


eing  a  plant ;  otherwise  it  is  but  the  idolon  or  imago
'  a  plant,  according  to  the  crude  and  untenable  view
mt  would  represent  God  as  outwardly  or  mcchaui-
ally  making  it  and  then  putting  it  in  the  earth  to  be
rough t  forth  (see  Introduction  to  the  First  Chapter,

. ).     The  word  cia  ,  says  Raschi,  is  equivalent

^  1?,  until  not,  or,  not  yet,  and  contains  a  ver-
al  assertive  force.  So  the  Targum  of  Onkelos  renders
and  the  H-yriac  by  a  similar  idiom,  }J  "^jiji..
t  would  then  read :  And  as  for  the  shrub,  it  (was)
ot  yet  in  the  earth,  the  herb  had  not  yet  begun  to
row  ;  thus  giving  to  C~l!  the  force  of  a  negative
erb,  like  "pX,  only  with'  the.  idea  of  time.  And
hen,  with  this  negative  force  in  C"L5 ,  the  b=  ,  ac-
ordiug  to  the  Hebrew  idiom,  makes  a  universal  nega-
ive  of  the  strongest  kind,  being  equivalent  to  (jar
ichls,  as  Langv  says — nothing  at  all.  Thus  the  ex
ression  :  every  shrub  was  not,  etc.,  which  with  v.s
vould  be  a  particular  or  partial  negative  equivalent
o  not  ffv;-//,  is  the  widest  universal  in  the  Hebrew  :
11  the  day  of  God's  making  the  earth  and  the  hea-
•ns,  irhcn  (as  1  may  well  be  rendered)  there  was  not
lie  least  sign  of  shrub  or  plant  growing  in  the  earth.
See  Li  n.  !>;•:  DIKI::  L'rtticn  tincm,  in  lac.

This  is,  in  the  main,  the  view  of  Delitzsch,  though
1C  still  seems  to  have  some  perplexities  about  the
imc.  We  get  clear,  however,  of  the  difficulties  of
,an<;e  and  others.  There  is  no  need  of  bringing  this
e-vtation  down  to  the  sixth  day,  and  referring  it  to
he  growth  of  cultivated  plants  from  the  adamah.
The  language  will  not  bear  it.  In  like  manner  there
s  disposed  of  the  explanation  of  some  of  the  Jewish
Jabbis,  that  the  plants  barely  came  to  the  surface  on
the  third  day,  but  for  the  want  of  rain  did  not  comf
forth  and  reach  their  perfection  until  the  sixth.
Maimonides  says  justly,  that  this  is  against  the  posi-
:ivc  declaration  that  the  "  earth  did  bring  than  forth  "
ch.  i.  12).  In  refuting  it,  however,  he  lays  the  em
phasis  on  m-J ,  the  field,  in  distinction  from  the
earth  generally,  and  so  regards  it  as  spoken  of  culti
vated  plants. "  But  this  seems  forced,  and  there
stands  in  the  way  of  it  the  word  H"-',  which  is  espe
cially  used  of  uncultivated  growths,  as  of  the  desert,
Job  xxx.  4,  7,  or  of  the  wild  bushes  in  the  wilderness
of  Beer-Sheba,  Gen.  xxi.  15.

See  the  attempts  to  reconcile  the  two  accounts  m
Wordsworth,  Murphy,  and  Jacobus.  The  trouble
Brings  from  the  assuming  of  a  chronology,  and  en
deavoring  to  find  it,  when  the  chief  feature  of  this
second  narrative,  or  of  the  summary  that  precedes  it,
is  its  wholly  utichronological  character.  There  is  no
time  in  it.  The  near  and  the  remote  are  brougl
together :  In  the  day  when  God  made  the  heavens
and  the  earth,  from  the  firmament  down  to  the  shrub
— or,  when  there  was  not  a  sign  of  a  plant  in  the
earth — made  them  by  His  divine  word,  before  there
was  any  rain  (compare  Trov.  viii.  24,  rl3"™«  T X-
C""2  ITZIJ ,  when  there  were  no  fountains  full  of
water),  though  afterwards  "  He  made  a  law  for  tlu
rain,"  and  the  mists  went  up  and  descended  to  fer
tilize  the  earth,  etc.  This  absence  of  rain  was
somewhere  in  this  summed-up  day  of  creation^;  it
place,  however,  is  not  fixed  in  the  series,  and  it  i.
alluded  to  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  in  connectio-  |
with  the  plants  as  originating  from  a  higher  causality  j
— T.  L.]

4.  Ver.  7.   The   Lord   Gcd  formed  man.-  j
Knobel:  "  As  the  principal  creation  of  the  earth  tl


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


203


author  has  him  created  before  all  his  fellow-crea
tures."  This  is  incorrect,  inasmuch  as  the  represen
tation  evidently  has  in  view  no  genealogical  or  chro
nological  order.  It  only  presents  him  as  the  chief
divine  thought,  at  the  head  of  the  Paradise-creation.
'•  In  respect  to  the  mode  of  origin  of  the  divine-form
ed  man  the  first  chapter  says  nothing ;  it  only  indi
cates  that  man  is  of  a  higher,  and,  at  the  same  time,
of  an  earthly  nature,  without  being  a  product  of  the
earth.  But  now,  on  the  threshold  of  a  history  rising
and  revealing  its  purposes,  there  is  need  to  know
something  more  particular  in  respect  to  his  mode  of
origin,  so  that,  along  with  the  fact  of  his  existence,
we  may  understand  his  established  relation  to  God,
to  the  surrounding  vegetable  and  animal  world,  and
to  the  earth  in  general."  Delitzsch.  The  spirit  of
the  Old  Testament,  with  ail  correctness,  represents
the  nature  of  man,  in  respect  to  his  bodily  substance,
as  earthly ;  and  just  so  does  physiology  determine.
In  the  matter  of  his  body  man  consists  of  earthly
elements ;  in  a  wider  sense  he  is  out  of  the  earth
(ch.  xviii.  27  ;  Ps.  ciii.  14),  and  at  his  death  he  goes
back  to  his  mother-earth  (ch.  iii.  19,  23;  Job  x.  9;
xxxiv.  15;  Ps.  cxlvi.  4;  Ecclesiastes  iii.  20;  xii.  7).
"According  to  the  classical  myth  Prometheus  formed
the  first  man  of  earthy  and  watery  material  (Apollo-
dorus,  Ovid,  Juvenal),  and  in  the  same  manner  Vul
can  made  the  first  woman  (Pandora)  out  of  earth
(Ilesiod).  In  other  places  the  ancients  represent
man  as  generated  out  of  the  earth  (PLATO  in  the  Kri-
tias,  and  others,  Virgil)  as  well  as  the  beasts."
Kuobel.  The  name  Adam  does  not  denote  precisely
one  taken  from  the  earth  (1jr~iX,  yriyevr/s),  but  one
formed  from  the  adamah,  the  soil  of  cultivation  in  its
paradisaical  state;  just  as  the  Latin  homo  from
humus,  and  the  Greek  XOIKO'J  from  x«<^,  do  not  refer
back  to  the  earth-matter  generally,  but  to  the  earth-
soil  as  adapted  to  cultivation.  This  derivation  from
adamah  is  adopted  by  most  (Kimchi,  Rosenmuller,
and  others).  On  the  contrary,  others,  after  Josephus,
derive  the  word  from  the  verb  ~1X ,  to  be  red,  with
reference  to  the  ruddy  color  of  man,  or  the  reddish
soil  of  Palestine.  Knobel,  again,  explains  it,  with
Ludolf,  from  the  ^Ethiopian  C1X ,  to  be  pleasant,
agreeably  according  to  which  it  would  denote  some
thing  of  comely  form.*  One  Jewish  Doctor,  and

*  [Why  should  we  go  to  the  remote  ^thiopic  here,  and
take  a  secondary  sense  of  a  secondary,  when  the  primary
derivation  seems  to  lie  right  before  us  in  the  Hebrew:
C1X  frum  ns~X  ,  man  from  the  earth,  whether  homo  be
from  Jiumus  or  not.  The  reasoning  of  Gescnius  will  not
bear  close  examination.  "There  must  have  been  a  name
for  m:m,"  he  says,  "nmoh  earlier  (multo  antiquior)  than


nished  the  ground  of  the  most  popular  names  as  anything
else.    The  question,  however,  is  not  about  "a  name"  for


man  (any  name),  but  this  name  Adam  which  seems  th
established  one  in  the  Hebrew  books.  What  more  natural
origin  than  the  traditional  could  there  have  been,  even  with
out  deriving  it  from  a  cosmogony  ?  Names  ever  have  a
reason  for  them,  though  that  reason,  in  many  cases,  may  be
lost  or  undisooverable.  They  are  given  from  that  fact  or
Duality  which  most  impresses  us  in  the  thing  named.  Man
a  over  returning  to  the  earth,  and  this  might  easily  suggest
name,  and  the  idea,  too,  that  in  some  way  he  also  came
out  of  the  earth  :  «  Who  am  but  dust  and  ashes,"  1£5
1SJO,  Gen.  xviii.  27  ;  Job  xxx.  19;  Ps.  ciii.  14.  Homo
and  Jiumus  certainly  suggest  each  other,  and  the  etymolo-v
is  not  wholly  impaired  by  the  n  in  the  genitive.  Those
names  are  most  impressive  and  likely  to  be  most  ancient
that  are  taken  from  the  sorrowful  aspect  of  humanity.  Such


after  him  Eichhorn  and  Richers,  would  make  the
word  m  (Ezek.  xix.  10  =  rim)  the  etymological
ground,  and  would,  therefore,  give  it  pre-eminently
the  meaning  of  image  or  likeness.  The  two  first
explanations  are  in  so  far  one  as  the  primitive  con
templation  saw  the  reflection  of  the  reddish  earth  in
the  glow  of  the  ruddy  cheek  or  in  the  color  of  the
blood.  In  this  it  must  be  maintained  that  the  earth
ly  lowliness  of  man,  as  thereby  expressed,  becomes
modified  by  the  superior  excellence  of  the  primitive
paradisaical  earth.  First  after  the  fall  does  it  thus
properly  become  the  lowliness  of  this  lower  earth.
As,  therefore,  in  respect  to  one  half,  the  lower  des
cent  of  the  outward  human  nature  is  expressed  by
the  name  Adam,  so  also,  on  the  other  side,  there  is
the  hidden  nobleness  of  the  adamah,  and  the  destiny
of  man  to  draw  the  adamah  along  with  it  in  its
development  to  a  higher  life.  In  respect  to  the
Greek  word  for  man,  aj>dpo>7ros  (=  <5  avu  adpiav,  the

is  the  case  with,  that  other  Hebrew  appellation  for  man,
^"2I<  ,  weal;  sick,  afflicted.  Compare  it  with  Homer's
|3poToi  (jnorlalcs),  which  he  seems  so  fond  of  using,  and  in
similar  connections  of  thought.  'C'X  ,  although  having  the
more  exalting  sense  when  in  contrast  with  D~i<  (sec  Fs.
xlix.  3;  Is.  ii.  9  ;  v.  15),  is  clearly  allied  to  £.' 3X  (the  n  lost
or  compensated  by  the  long  vowel).  The  plural  C^'JJJX  .
the  n  in  the  Arabic  t «  LAWJ  I  >  and  in  the  Arabic  name  for

woman    <_XJ!  =  H'^X  ,  show  this  beyond  a  doubt.    The

first  name  for  man,  or  the  more  common  one,  would  not  be
from  strength,  or  from  a  ruddy  color.  These  do  not  disiin-
gufsh  him,  at  least,  to  the  emotions.  They  are  not  such  as
would  affect  the  soul,  like  his  sorrowful  return  to  the  earth.
Afterwards,  when  he  forgot  himself  in  his  pride,  and  began
to  boast,  he  might  call  himself  "123  (~|12"0,  ri'r,  avijp—  hero,
strong  one — but  these  names  are  not  the  primitive  ones.
Least  of  all  would  he  think  of  calling  himself  anmuthig
according  to  Knobel' s  notion,  that  is,  pleasant,  agreeable,
handsome,  one.  Certainly  not,  if  his  primitive  condition
were  that  which  the  "  higher  criticism,"  in  spite  of  history
as  well  as  of  revelation,  is  determined  it  shall  be.  The
squalid  dweller  in  the  cave,  surrounded  by  wolves,  and
bones,  and  stone-axes,  and  hardly  distinguishable  from  his
beastly  companions,  would  bo  the  last  one  to  be  called,  or
who  would  think  of  calling  himself,  (lie  agreeable  one,  accord
ing  to  this  derivation  for  which  the  rationalists  go  to  tho
JEthiopic.

The  same  thought  of  depression,  lowliness,  and  depend
ence,  may  be  traced,  if  we  mistake  not,  in  the  Greek
av#po>7ro5  as  contrasted  with  tho  later  di^p.  The  etymology
favored  by  Lange,  6  avia  a.9pZ>v,  is  untenable.  So  we  may
say  of  the  kindred  one  sometimes  given,  avta  Tptmov  o/j./j.a,
turning  the  eye  upward,  to  denote  tho  proud  commanding
look  (comp.  OVID  :  Alctam.  lib.  i.  85).  It  is  not  only  unphil-
plogical,  but  also  too  artificial  for  a  common  name,  though
it  might  do  for  a  poetical  epithet.  It  would  rather  seem  to
come  directly  from  Tpe'</>w,  to  feed,  nourish,  bring  up.  The
alpha  is  probably  an  article,  as  contracted  in  ia  V0pu>7ros,  or
avOptaTros  with  tho  rough  aspirate  and  the  nun  euphonic.
'Av&pwn-os,  man,  a  nursling,  a  foundling,  a  child  of  earth  and
nature.  So  from  the  same  verb  is  0pc>ju.<z,  often  used  for  the
feeble  young  of  animals,  and  so  applied,  especially  by  the
comic  poets,  to  a  feeble,  worthless  man.  In  this  way  we
account  for  what  otherwise  seems  strange,  the  contemptuous
use  of  oLvdptaitoi;  as  distinguished  from  dyijp ;  as  w  dvdpuure,
Oh  fellow,  Oh  poor  creature  !

The  higher  we  ascend  in  language,  the  more  numerous,
in  all  departments,  as  well  as  the  more  impressive,  do  w.
find  names  derived  from  this  sense  of  human  frailty.  It  i
tho  wailing  cry  called  out  of  man  by  a  feeling  of  the  contra^
between  his  hopes  and  his  apparently  dark  earthly  dcstin
— between  his  ideal  and  his  actual,  his  young  vigorous  li:.
and  the  certainty  of  the  death  that  awaits  him.  "  Who  ai
but  dust  and  ashes !  "  Notwithstanding  what  Gcsenii
would  maintain  in  respect  to  its  improbability,  this  style  o
naming  belongs  to  the  earliest  patriarchal  speech.  Whcthc
it  was  before  or  after  any  cosmogonical  traditions  (a  ques
tion  on  which  Gesenius  and  Knobel  would  seem  to  lay  s
much  stress),  it  certainly  points  to  an  older  idea  as  its  origin
and  what  more  likely  to  have  been  such  than  the  Scriptui
favored  derivation  on  which  we  have  been  dwelling  ?— T.  L


20.


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES.


upward   looking),  compare  DKUTXSCH,  p.   141,  am
KXOKKI,,  p.  '.25.  Soalso  for  the  Indo-Germanic  Mcnsch
in  the  Sanscrit  inanu  (troin  ntna,  to  think,  related  tc
niauas,  spirit),  sec   the   notes  in  UEI.ITZSCII,  p.  019
The  translations  of  ~t"  ,  dt;xt,  also  clay,  soil  (Lev
xiv.  42,  45  ;  English  Version,  mortar),  are  exegeti
cal;    VuL'aV:  Jl<    lino  t<  rrn- ;  Luther:  Out  of  the
earth-clod;    S^mn.achus  and  Thcodolion :  x°^v
TV",S  ooauu,  (iod  fi/rnud  him  out  of  the  dust  of  the
earth.     The  verb  "li"1  must  certainly  have  its   cm
phatic  distinction  here  from  N"  and  nr".     It  de
notes  the  curious  structure  of  man  according  to  his
idea,  as  an  act  of  the  divine1  conscious  wisdom  (1's
cxxxix.    ]:;;    l'n>v.  viii.  ;;]).— And  breathed  into
his  nostrils. — "  The  inbreathing  takes  place  throuirl
the  no-!  HI.-;   tin-  this  is  the  organ  of  the  breath,  but
the  breath  it.-elf  is  the  cx])ression  and  sign   of  tin
inward  existing  life.     From  the  breath  of  God  comes
the  life  oi'  man   (Job  xxxiii.  4;  Is.  xlii.  5),  and   the.
breath  in  the  ii"s'rils,  of  man  is  the  divine  breathing
(Job  xxvii.  ',',).     In  a  similar  manner  does  the  Chal-
iaie  myth  make  the  creature  to  be  formed  of  earthy
matter  and   the  divine  blood  ;  the  blood  is  taken  for
the  seat   of  life  (see  ch.  ix.  4)."     Knobel.     The  ex
pression  evidently  presents  the  formative  agency  ot
(iod    in    an    anthropomorphic   form.     There    is  "the
mouth   of  (iod   ami   the  nostrils   of  the   man  as  he
comes  into  existence;  it  is  as  though  He  had  waked
!.im  into  lite  with  a  kiss  (compare  I  Kings  xvii.  21).
It  evidently  means  the  impartation  of  the  divine  life,
on  which  depends   the  divine   kinsmaiiship  of  man
(Acts  xvii.  2S,  '_'!)).     n~r3  (from  =r:)(  l»;;it!>,  spirit,
breath  of  the  spirit,  breath  of  man,  life  of  the  spirit
is  more  specific  than  mi,  more  universal  than  '^23
but  may   be  interchanged  with  both,  as  something
that  stands  between  them;  yet  only  in  relation  to
man.     Here  it  evidently  denotes  something  which  is
common    both    to   God   and  man,    something  which
goes   forth    from    God   and   enters   into   man — God's
"  Lmalh  of  life,"  that  is,  the  spirit  of  God  in  its  active
Hell-motion,  as  in  man  it  calls  out  the  spiritual  prin
ciple,  the  spirit  of  his  life,  but  none  the  less  as  the
spirit  in  its  actual  personality.     The  fll-S ,  or  breath
of  God,  has  the  predicate  C^P!  (life  or  lives)  from
the  adjective  n*n  (ch.  i.),  in  order  to  distinguish
primarily  the  living  subject,  and,  in  the  next  place,
tlie  life  itself.     The  life,  in  its  most  intensive  sense,  is
the  unity  of  the  life  in  all  living  persons,  and  in  any
living  thing ; — it  is  the  personality.     C23  (from  £•::'
to  breathe),  the  life's  breath,  the  soul  ot'  life,  anima,
$VXTI,  the   principle  of  the  animal  vitality,  and,  in
this  respect,  the  life  itself;  in  a  wider  sense  it  is
animus,  the   personal   spiritual   soul,  the  psychical
affection,  the  man  himself.     In  our  text  it  denotes
the  man  in  his  totality  as  living  soul.     In  consequence
of  the  formation   of  the  human  figure  out  of  dust
from  the  earth-soil,  and  the  animation  of  this  figure
through  the  impartation  of  the  life  from  God,  does
man  become  a  living  soul.     For  the  psychology  of
the  passage,  see  the  Fundamental  Ideas.

5.  Ver.  8.  Planted  a  garden  in.  Eden.— As
Jehovah-God  (farther  on,  vers.  15  and  16)  is  named
as  the  establisher  of  the  order  of  life,  of  natural
science,  or  of  the  human  knowledge  of  it  (ver.  19),
of  marriage  and  the  law  of  the  family  (vers.  21,  24),
as  the  judge  and  founder  of  the  religion  of  the  prom
ise  and  of  the  moral  conflict  on  the  earth,  of  the
earthly  state  of  sorrow  and  discipline  (ch.  iii.  7),
and,  finally,  as  the  immediate  director  of  human


chastity  and  the  author  of  the  human  clothing  (ver.
21),  so  also  here,  in  the  beginning,  is  He  represented
as  the  first  Planter,  the  Founder  of  human  culture,
which^  is  as  yet  identical  with  the  human  cultus  or
worship.     Delitzsch   transfers    this    planting    to    the
time  _  of  the  first  vegetable  creation  (p.   140 1;    but
this  is  not  agreeable  to  the  sense  of  the  text,  which
does  not  relate  things  chronologically,  and  presup
poses  the  creation  of  man.     Inconsequence  of  the
previous   preparation  for  the  future  of  man    in   the
bedewing  of  the  earth,  an  Eden  is  already  oiiginatcd.
The  name  Eden  (enjoyment,  pleasure,  delight),  as  the
region  of  Paradise,  would  denote,  according  to  De-
lit  /.sch,  a  land  determinate  but  no  longer  ascertaina-
ble   by    us;    since    the    Assyrian    Eden,   he    thinks,
which  is  voeali/.ed  by  the  doubled  segol  and  men
tioned  Is.  xxxvii.  12,  and  the  Coelo  Syriac  Eden  men
tioned  Amos  xv.,  are  altogether  different.     But  if  the
garden  in   Ed,  n.   had   its  name  from  a  determinate
boundary    and    enclosure,    and    if    the    paradisaical
streams  went  forth  in  all  the  world,  then  it  becomes
a_vcry  serious  question  whether  the  author  had  in
view  any  distinct   boundary  of  Eden  itself,  as   any
determinate  land.     It  appears,  at  all  events,  to  have
been  his  intention  to  represent  the  whole  paradisaical
adamah  as  an  Eden  in  respect  to  its  nature  and  laying
out,  although  he  meant  by  it,  primarily,  the  undeter
mined  wide  environs  that  surrounded  man,  whilst,  at
the  same  time,  supposing  a  distinction  bet, v.  ecu  Eden
and  the  earth  generally.     There  is  also  the  passage,
ch.  iv.  10,  which  seems  to  presuppose  a  limitation  of
Eden   to   one   determinate  region ;    still  it  must  be
noticed,  in   the  mean  time,  that   the  soil   becomes
cursed  for  man's  sake.     According  to  the  represen
tation,   it   is   a   view   that  takes   the  form   of   three
spheres:  the  earth,  the  Paradise,  the  garden.     At  all
events,  the  best  supposition  in  regard  to  man  is  that
he  was  created  in  Eden,  although  by  a  new  act  of
God  he  is  early  transferred  to  the  centre  of  Eden,
that  is,  of  the  Paradise.     Besides  this  place,  the  name
Eden  occurs   vers.  10   and    15;    ch.  iii.  2:j  ;    iv.  10;
xiii.  10;    Joel  ii.  o;    Ezek.  xxxi.  ]('>,  Us. — ^1  garden,
T;  .     The   Septuagint    translates   it  -napdoetiro^  ;    the
Vulgate  :    I'anidiKiis.     "  Spiegel  explains  this  word
[Arcal'i,  i.  p.   ii'.i.'J)  according   to  the  Zend:    1'a'iri
daeza,  is  a  heaping  round,  an  enclosing,  with  which
the  Hebrew  "3  (properly,  something  covered  or  shel
tered)  well  agrees.     It  is  carried  out  of  the  Indo-
Germanic.  into   the  Shcmitic,   and    is    found    in   the
Hebrew,    where    it    has    the    pronunciation     CT~S
Par-dlies),  Cantic.  iv.  1J5;  Neh.  ii.  8;  Ecclesiastes  ii.
r>."     Knobel.     An  explanation,  now  set  aside,  is  that
which  derives  it  from  the  Sanscrit  paracliya  (alien,
'orcign,  wondrous  land).     The  conceptions — Garden!
of  Eden,  Eden  Garden,  Garden  of  God — by  reason
)f  the  symbolical  significance  of  these  expressions,  I
olay  into  each  other.     By  the  garden,  according  to|
Knobel,  is  to   be  understood  "a   garden   of  trees." i
Thus  much  is  clear,  that  the  garden  of  the  paradisai-n
2al  nature  was  distinguished  for  its  trees.     The  gar- 1
len  lay  in  the  eastern  district  of  the  Eden  region!
GTp~) ;  there  is  probably  indicated  along  with  thisii
he  stand-point  of  the  reporter.     The  Eastern  land  isi:
he  home-land  of  humanity. — There  He  put  thai
man. — As  the  creation  of  Eve  is  transferred  to  Para-||)
disc,  it  is  as  well  not  to  lay  stress  upon  the  fact  of|i.
Adam's  having  been  created  outside  of  Paradise;!
he  fundamental  idea  consists  in  this,  that  Adam  was!
mmcdiately  transferred  from  his  state  of  nature  (oijf
lis  universal  relation  to  tho  adamah)  into  the  state;!


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


205


of  culture,  or  his  particular  relation  to  Paradise.
•'Both  facts  are  announced  before  in  a  summary
way,  but  are  unfolded  in  what  follows ;  just  as  the
facts  summarily  announced  in  the  first  verse  of  ch.
i.  receive  afterwards  a  wider  explanation."  Dc-
litzsch.

C.  Vei'S.  9-14.  And  out  of  the  ground  made
the  Lord  to  grow. — We  must  not  regard  this  act
as  a  chronological  following  of  the  preceding.     Man
finds  himself  well-cared  for  in  Paradise  by  means  of
its  abundance.     This  consists  in  fruit-trees  of  every
kind.     It  may  fairly  be  regarded  here  as  an  indica
tion  of  the  spirituality  of  the  human  enjoyment,  that
the  lovely  aspect  of  the  trees  is  named  first,  then  the
good  that  is  given  along  with  it— that  is,  agreeable
and  healthsome  food — but  this  spiritual  side  of  the
human  enjoyment  comes  out,  in  its  perfection,  with
the  mention  of  the  two  trees  that  form  a  contrast  in
the  midst  of  the  garden;  for,  according  to  ch.  iii.  3,
the  tree  of  knowledge  stands  likewise  in  the  midst
of  the  garden.     The  significance  and  efficacy  of  the
tree  of  life  are  more  particularly  given  ch.  iii.  22  ;  it
could  have  procured  for  Adam  the  power  of  living  on
forever.     That  this  efficacy  is  not  to  be  regarded  as
something  purely  physical  appears  from  the  contrast
of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  whose
efficacy,  again,  on  its  own  side,  is  not  to  be  regarded
as   purely   spiritual   (see  ch.  iii.  22).     The   spiritual
side  of  the  tree  of  life  is  also  supposed  Rev.  ii.  7  ;
xxii.  2.     It  is,  therefore,  just  a  false  contrast  when
Knobel  tells  us  that  "  the  narrator  supposes  in  Para
dise  two  trees,  of  which  the  fruits  of  the  one  strengthen
the  physical  power  of  life  o.nd  sustain  the  life  Hself,
whilst  that  of  the  other  arouses  and  advances  the
spiritual  power,  and  thereby  induces  a  higher  know
ledge."  (!)     Truly,  the  garden  appears  a  "region  of
wonder^on  account  of  this  tree  not  only,  but  as  the
place  of  God's  personal  presence,  the  place  of  the
vocal  utterance  of  a  spiritual  voice  by  the  serpent,
and  on  account  of  the  cherubim,     the  wonderful
consists,  in  the  first  place,  in  this,  that  here  is  the
region   of  innocence,   of  the  integrity  both  of  the
human  spirit  and  of  the  surrounding  nature,  and  that,
consequently,  here  the  spiritual  and  the  natural  are
embraced  in  perfect  union;  whilst  therefore  it  is,
that   outward   things   become  of  typical  and   sym
bolical   significance  in  their  potential   measure.     It
belongs  now  to  the  perfection  of  the  garden,  not
merely  that  it  is  watered  with  its  own  Paradise  rivers,
but  also,  that  by  means  of  the  four  streams  that  go
out  from  its  one  united  stream  it  stands  in  close  con
nection  with  the  whole  earth,  and  sends  forth  to  it
its  own  peculiar  blessings.     From  the  reading  of  the
text :  a  stream  went  out,  instead  of,  a  stream  goes
out,  Delitzsch  finds  proof  that  the  author  speaks  of
Paradise  as  of  a  thing  purely  past.     Much  rather,
however,  does  he  speak  of  Paradise  after  the  fall,  as
of  a  place  at  least  still  existing,  but  closely  shut  up
by  means  of  the  cherubim.     That  is,  the  representa
tion  is  not  now  purely  geographical ;  it  is  also,  at
the  same  time,  throughout  symbolic.     According  to
our  representation,   the   stream   originates,    not"   in
Paradise  itself,  but  outside  of  it,  in  the  land  of  Eden-
and  so  here,  too,  as  in  the  case  of  Adam,  must  we
Ustmguish  between  the  origin  in  nature,   and  the
destiny  that  was  to  have  its  development  in  culture
In  Paradise  itself,  therefore,  does  this  one  stream
on  its  going  out  of  the  garden,  divide  itself  into  four
^OX-i)     flood-heads     (not     "rain-streams,"     nor
brooks"),  which  as  four  rivers  part  themselves  in
all  the  world,  the  stream-heads  become  head-streams.


—The  name  of  the  first  is  Pishon :  The  free-
flowing  (Fiirst);  the  full-flowing  (Gesenius).     By  the
name  Pishon  has  been  understood  1.  the  Phasis   2,
the  Phasis-Araxes  of  Xenophon,  3.  the  Bisynga'  or
Fradatti  (Buttmaim),  4.  the  Indus  (Scbulthess),   5.
the  Ganges  (Josephus,  Eusebius,  Bertheau),  6. 'the
Hyphasis  (Ilaneberg),  7.  the  Nile  (the  Midrash),  8.
the  _  Goschah   (C.  Hitter).      Sec    the   Doctrinal   and
Ethical. — That    is  it  which   encompasses    the
whole  land  of  Havilah.— According  to  Fiirst,  it  is
the  same  with  circuit,  region.     (This  is  what  Havilah
probably  signifies ;  according  to  Delitzsch  it  means
sandy  land.)    The  word  220  (primarily,  to  surround)
may  be_  interpreted  of  a  circuitous  flowing  round,
though  it  also  occurs  in  the  sense  of  surrounding  on
one  side.     The  verb  may  also  denote  a  winding  pas
sage  through   (Is.  xxiii.  16,   "113120,    "Go   round
about^  through  the  city  "),  and  here  it  may  be  better
conceived  of  as  a  winding  through  than  as  an  encom
passing.     We  choose  an  expression  that  at  the  same
time  calls  to  mind  a  region  of  streams.— Where
there  is  gold. — That  is,  especially  or  abundantly —
the  mother-country  of  gold,  not  only  in  respect  to
quantity,  but  also  in  respect  to  quality. — The  gold
of  that  land  is  good.— Besides  its  fine  gold,  Havi
lah  is  also  famous  for  its  spices,  such  as  JJdolach
(Num.  xi.  7),  similar  to  manna,  or  according  to  Jose
phus  Bddlion,  and,  similarly  named  (see  Knobel),
"an  odoriferous  and  very  costly  gum,  which  is  in
digenous   in   India   and   Arabia,  in   Babylonia   and
Media,  and  especially  in  Bactriana.     It  must  have
been  well  known  to  the  Hebrews."     To  this  is  added,
in  the  third  place,  the  precious  stone  C~iJ,  schoham.
According  to  most  interpreters  it  is  an  onyx  stone,
sardonyx,  or  sardius,  which  belong  together  to  the
species    chalcedon.      The    Targumists    and    others
would  understand  by  schoham  "the  sea-green  beryl.
The  onyx,   on   the  contrary,   has  the  color  of  the
human  finger-nails,  and  that  is  denoted  by  the  name.
With  this  agrees  rrrij  as  "  signifying  something  thin,
delicate,  pale"  (Knobel).    In  respect  to  the  geography,
sec  further  on. — The  name  of  the  second  river  is
Gihon.— "  According   to   Josephus,    An',   i.    1,    '3,
Kimchi,  and  others,  also  as  might  be  inferred  from
the  Septuagint  translation  of  Jer.  ii.  18,  Ben  Lira
24,  27,  there  was  understood  by  it  the  Nile,  which
flows   through   all   the   south-lands  (\yr)  that   fell
within  the  circuit  of  the  narrator's  view"  (Fiirst).
Under  the  Gihon,  moreover,  according  to  the  Sheru-
itic  use  of  the  word,  there  have  been  understood  the
Oxus,   the   Pyramus,   and   the    Ganges.     UTS ,    the
dark-colored  (?),  is  a  proper  name  for  the  oldest  son
of  _  Ham,  the  ancestor  of  the  ^Ethiopians.     Thence
it  is  given  to  the  south-land,  especially  Meroc,  and,
thereupon,  to  xEthiopia  and  the  south-region  general
ly.     And  yet  under  the  like  name  may  be  understood
a  dark-colored  people  that  dwelt  in  "southern  India,
in  Upper  Egypt,  and  in  South  Arabia  (Ktosias  and
An-ian).     In  like  manner  are  there  different  geogra
phical  districts  under  this  name  (see  FUKST  :  Lexi
con). — The  name  of  the  third  river  is  Hiddekel.
— The  Tigris,  the  rushing,  so  named  from  its  violent
flowing.     Dan.  x.  4,  it  is  called  the  great  river— -so
also  the  Euphrates.     The  Zend  form  is  tiyra,  t'ujr,
tigira,  swift,  raging.* — Toward  the  east  of  As
syria  (Lange :  Before  or  in  front  of  Assyria).     The


*  [There  would  scorn,  at  first  view,  but  a  faint  resem
blance  between  iiiddekel  and  Tigris.  There  can  bo  but  lit
tle  doubt,  however,  of  their  etymological  connection.  The


200


GENESIS,  OK   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


word  r~-lp  before  Assyria  can  also  mean  to  the
-i*t  but  as  a  preposition  it  has  the  more  common
sense  before,  frontward.  The  latter  sense,  taken
freelv,  is  here  to  be  preferred;  since  the  ligns  m
fact/forms  the  western  boundary  ot  Assyria.  Ac
cording  to  some,  Assyria  is  to  be  taken  here  in  a
wider  sense.-The  fourth  river  is  Euphrates.-
The  outbreaking,  the  viol  nt.  It  is  the  greatest  river
Of  Western  Asia,  and,  therefore,  called  the  yrr.it
river,  or  the  rivtr,  without  anything  more  The
origin  of  the  Greek  form  Eftftutn,,  is  explained  either
from  mBX  =  r"S  ,  or  from  the  Persian  If  rat,  Ufrat.
For  thc'ditfcvent  derivations,  see  Fiirst  _

7    VIT«  1  ">-l  7.  Took  the  man  and  put  him.  in
the  garden.— The  author  takes  up  again  what  is
oud  in  the  Mh  verse  about  the  transfer  of  Adam  to
P  indite   but  adds  to  it,  at   the  same  time,  the  pur
pose  for  which  it  was  done,  namely,  to  dress  it  ami
to  I-,,,,  ;.'      According  to  Delitzsch  man  was  created
outside  of  Paradise  ;  since  he  must  first  see  the  extra-
paradisaical   earih,  in  order  that  he  might  have  a
worthy  estimation  of  the  glory  of  Paradise,  and  of
his  own  vocation  as  extending  thence  over  the  whole
<h  ,1-Ul      Such  an  assi'rnment  of  a  purpose  is  altogether
;oo  didactic.     The  garden  is  the  place  of  the  human
vocation,  and  of  tlie  human  enjoyment  in  its  undivid
ed  unity.     This  enjoyment  has  two  sides,  to  cat  and
to    refrain      In   like"  manner  the  vocation   has  two
sides;   to  dress  and  to  kn-t,.     The  first  thing  is  to
i  ess   it;  for  nature,  which  grows  wild  or  rank  with
out    the 'cure  (if  man,  becomes  ennobled  under  the
human  hand  (Delit/.seh).     Says  the  same  writer,  Mis
work  was   as  widely  different  from   agriculture   pro
per   as  Paradise  itself  differed   from  the  later  cult i-
,  uid,  bul  it  was  still  tcork  ;   "and  work  was  so
fur  from  being  unparadisaical,  that,  according  to  ch
ii.  ]  -  :;,  even   the   creation  is   regarded   as  a  work  ot
God.'1     \Ve  must  distinguish,  however,  work  in  its
narrower  sense,   as    it    stands    under  the  burden  of
vanity  (made  subject  to  vanity,  Rom.  vih.  20)  in
Ihe  paradisaical  work,  or  activity.     Even  of  the  later
Ni-i-1  is  it  said:  There  is  no  toil  in  Zion.*     Accord-
-  to  Dclit/seh,  the  whole  earth,  from  Paradise  out,
was  to  become  a  Paradise:  "The  garden  is  the  most
holy  (or  the  holy  of  holies),  Eden  is  the  holy  place,
whilst  the  whole  earth  around  is  its  porch  and  court.
The    comparison    is   not   wholly   applicable;    since
where  there  are  no  spiritual  orders,  there  could  bi
no  proper  mention  of  court  and  sanctuary.— And  t
keep  it.— The  garden,  as  such,  is  uninclosed  and
unwalled;    still   must  Adam  watch   and   protect    it.
This  is,  in  fact,  a  very  significant  addition,  and  seems
to  give  a  strong  indication  of  danger  as  threatening
man  and  Paradise  from  the  side  of  an  already  exist-
in"  power  of  evil  (Delitzsch  and  others),  although,
even  in  that  case,  the  guarding  of  the  garden  belong
ed  to  man's  vocation ;  since  against  the  misuse  of  Ins
freedom,  he  had  only  to  take  care  of  his  own  tree
will,  and,  with  it,  the  possession  and  the  integrity  oi


n  in  bpin  may  be  the  article  hardened,  or  it  may  be  part
of  the  syllable  HP!  (sharp,  swift)  in  composition.  The  re
mainder  bpn  and  Tigris  have  cognate  letters—  DKX,  TOR.
The  intermediate  or  transition  form  is  seen  in  the  Aramaic
?;  Arabic,  £jLs^  ;  DigW'',  DGI"  The  Zcnd  TGR


'b  *erThe  reference  here  would  seem  to  be  toJNum.  xxiu.
21,  which  the  German  Version  gives  :  "  KeineMuhe  in  Jacob,
und  Iceine  Arbeit  in  Israel;  no  toil  in  Jacob  no  labor  m
Israel,"  instead  of  our  more  correct  Version  :  "no  iniquity
in  Jacob,  no  pcrvcrseness  in  Israel."—  T.  L.]


Paradise.     Knobel  refers  the  care  with  which  Adam
was  charged,  to  the  task  appointed  him  of  guarding
Paradise  against  the  mischief  of  the  wild  beasts.—
Of  every0  tree   of   the  garden.— Says   Knobel:
"  The  author  clearly  assumes  that  in  the  early  period
men  lived  alone  from  the  fruit  of  trees,  and  at  a  later
period  first  advanced  to  the  use  of  herbs  and  gram
(ch  iii  17)  whilst  the  Elohist,  in  the  very  beginning,
assigns  both  to  men  (ch.  i.  29).     According  to  the
classical  writers,  such  as  Plato  (Polit.  272),  Strabo,
and  others,  men  in  the  beginning  ate  herbs,  berries,
bark  and  fruit  of  trees,  especially  acorns;  the  raising
of  .-rain  came  in  later."     That  the  paradisaical  man
did  not  eat  herbs  is  nowhere  said ;  but  the  irmt  of
the  trees  is  prominently  presented  because   of  i
symbolic  relation  to  the  two  mysterious  trees  in  the
midst    of  the   u'urdcn.     The    free    enjoyment  of  all
trees  is  strongly  expressed  by  the  intensive  idiom,
brsn  V:X  .     So  much  the  more  precise,  therefore,
is 'the  limitation  of  the  freedom.— But  of  the  tree  of
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.— According  tc
Hoffmann  and  Riehcrs,   "V,   ="J  means   good    aiid
bad    simply.       Delitzsch    denies    this,    and    rightly
"The  good"  says  he,  "is  obedience  with  its  good,
the  bad  is  disobedience  with  its  evil  consequences.
Here  it  must   be  remarked,  that  the  conception  ot
physical  evil  can  be,  at  the  most,  only  as  a  conse
quence  of  moral  evil,  and  that,  therefore,  the  ethical
contrast  is  the  main  thing,  though  not  to  the  exclu
sion  of   the  physical    side.      The  tree,  in  any  case
was  a  tree  that  might  produce  this  knowledge;  that
is  it  was  the  tree  of  probation,  through  which  Adam
might  conn-  to  a  conscious  distinction  ol  good  ana
evil    and,  thereby,  to  a   moral   transition   troin   the
state  of  innocent  simplicity  into  a  state  ot  conscious,
religious  virtue.     Did  he  not  sin,  then  he  learned,  m
•i  "oYmal  way,  to  know  the  distinction  between  good
.llul  evil— the  <n»,d  as  the  actuality  of  believing  obe
dience   towards  God,  which  was   at   the   same   time
the  maintaining  of  his  own  life  in   its   self-command
and  freedom— the  evil,  as  the  possibility  of  an  unbe
lievin"     and    disobedient     behavior    towards    God
which  must  have  for  its   consequent,  slavish  desin
and  death.     The  opinion  of  llilarius  cannot  be  sus
Mined  (Smcilegium  Solesmense,  i.  1V2):  Arbor  futur
i,  ,,  mendacii  nomen  accepit.     For,'  not  to  kno*
rood  and  evil,'  is  the  sign  of  the  infantile  childish
ness  (I lent.  i.  an)  or  of  senile  obtuseness  (2  bam.  MX
36);  the  conscious  free  choice  of  the  one   or  th
other  indicates   the  most  mature  period  of  hie  (o
that  of  the  so-named  anni  discretions,  Is.  vn.  10
Ileb   v    14)      So  to  know  good  and  evil,  and  to  dit
tin-uish  between  them,  is  called  the  duirixma  or  gif
of  a  king  (1  Kings  iii.  9),  the  wisdom  of  the  angel  (
Sam.  xiv.  17),  and,  in  its  higher  exercise,  ot  Go
Himself  (Gen.  iii.  5,  22).     By  the  tree  of  knowledg
of  good  and  evil  man  is  to  attain  to  a  consciousnes
and  to  a  confirmation  of  his  freedom  of  choice,  am
in  fact  (according  to  God's  purpose  m  his  determuu
tion  for  good),  to  a  freedom  of  power-that  is  to
true  freedom  available  for  the  choice  of  good  or  i
opposite.     It  was  designed  to  bring  out  the  necessai
self-determination  of  a  creature  choosing  freely,  eith,
for  or  against  God,  either  for  the  God-wdled_good
the  possible  evil— and  so  to  make  perfect  its  md
pendence.     The  very  idea  of  a  free  personal  ben
carries  with  it  the  necessity  that  its  relation  to  G«
be  a  relation  of  free  love  "  (Delitzsch).     It  is  an  t
tire  perversion  of  the  meaning  of  this ,  probation-tr
to  teach,   as  the  Gnostic   Ophites   did,   that,   or


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


207


Ihrougk  the  eating  of  this  tree,  is  man  enabled  to
attain  to  his  self-conscious  free  development,  or,  as
Hegel  and  his  school  have  taught  in  modern  times,
that  sin  is  a  necessary  transition-point  to  good.  The
victory  of  Christ  in  the  temptation  shows  us  how  it
is  for  man  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  good  and
evil  in  a  normal,  and  not  in  an  abnormal,  way.  The
knowledge  of  the  distinction  which  Adam  obtained
in  this  way,  was  in  him  from  the  beginning,  though
dark  and  confused.  Along  with  his  freedom  of
choice,  heretofore  undeveloped,  there  was  established,
not  only  his  capability  of  probation,  but  also  his  need
of  such  probation.  This  probation  does,  indeed,
suppose  the  previous  existence  of  a  divine  PO/AOS,  or
law  (DELITZSCH,  p.  154);  but  we  err  when  we  con
found  this  paradisaical  v6[j.os  with  the  law  of  Moses
as  it  was  given  to  sinners.  Moreover,  the  Mosaic
commands  are  not  mere  positive  instructions ;  they
are,  to  the  extent  of  the  ten  commandments,  moral
laws  of  nature  precisely  adapted  to  the  human  state,
but  because  of  their  having  become  foreign  and  ob
jective  to  the  consciousness  of  the  sinner,  they  are,
therefore,  placed  before  him  in  the  way  of  positive
revelation.  In  the  v6uoi,  or  institutions  of  Paradise,
however,  must  the  abiding  laws  of  life  constitute  the
ground  of  that  revelation-form  which  is  adapted  to
the  commands.  That  is,  in  relation  to  the  tree  of
probation,  God  could  not  have  made  it  to  be  a  tree
of  probation  in  the  exercise  merely  of  an  arbitrary
positiveness ;  there  must  lie  in  the  tree  itself  an  in
nate  efficacy ;  and  a  natural  speech,  that  may  serve
as  a  warning  to  man  against  its  use.  The  sign-word
of  the  tree  (or  the  designating  name)  would,  through
the  divine  interpretation,  become  to  man  a  positive
paradisaical  prohibition.  Even  granting,  moreover,
that  the  tree  was  not  properly  a  poison-tree,  still  the
explanation  that  belongs  to  it  has  been  too  lightly
treated,  since  it  might  have  led  us  upon  the  proper
track  ;  but  that  its  tendency  must  have  been  to  pro
duce  a  change  in  the  human  spiritual  frame,  is  a  doc
trine  to  be  firmly  held  (see  LANGE'S  "  Dogmatics,"  p.
409).  It  becomes  important  as  an  elucidation  of  this
mysterious  fact,  when  we  are  told  that  the  sin  of
Noah,  the  second  head  of  our  race,  became  manifest
through  the  enjoyment  of  wine.  To  say  nothin"-  of
the  coarse  conceptions  of  Bohme  and  others  as  lately
taken  in  a  mythical  sense  by  Sorensen,  we  must
decidedly  protest  against  the  theosophical  dualistic
representation  of  the  probation-tree  as  we  find  it  in
Baumgarten  (p.  43),  and  still  later  in  IMitzsch.
"  When  _  we  remember,"  says  Delitzsch,  "that  the
paradisaical  vocation  and  destiny  of  man  had  for  its
aim  the  overcoming  of  evil  that  had  intruded  into
the  creation,  we  cannot  wonder  at  there  being  a  tree
in  Paradise  itself,  created  indeed  by  God,  but  whose
mysterious  background  was  a  dark  ground  of  death
and  evil  placed  by  God  in  ward ;  which  tree,  in  order
that  man  might  not  fall  into  the  participation  of  evil,
and  thereby  of  death,  is  hedged  around  by  the  divine
prohibition,  not  as  by  an  arbitrary  sentence,  but  as
by  a  warning  rather  of  holy  love"  (p.  155).  We
may  not  resort  to  the  myths  of  the  Thibetans,  Hin-
dus;  etc.  (p.  155),  in  support  of  an  assertion  of  such
a  nature  that,  according  to  it,  we  cannot  think  of
anything  determinate  or  ordained,  without  setting
forth  under  it,  in  opposition  both  to  the  Scriptures
and  to  the  monotheistic  consciousness,  a  material
evil  (or  an  evil  inherent  in  matter).  According  to
Delitzsch,  the  tree  actually  carried  in  it  "  the  power
of  death."  The  question  arises :  What  is  meant  by
the  threatening :  "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  there


of  thou  shalt  surely  die."  Knobel  holds  the  sense  to
be,  that  he  should  die  immediately ;  because  the  in
finitive  absolute  before  the  finite  verb,  he  says,  ex
presses  the  undoubted,  the  certain,  the  actual.  But
notwithstanding  this,  Adam  must  have  lived  quite  a
long  time  after  the  fall.  In  vain  is  it  attempted  to
set  aside  this  difficulty  either  by  the  rendering  to
become  mortal  (Targum,  Symmachus,  Ilieronymus,
and  others),  or  by  making  it  that  introduction  of
pain  and  sorrow  into  life  which  goes  before  death  in
our  conception  of  it  (Calvin,  Gerhard,  and  others).
Still  less,  indeed,  can  we  think  of  a  death-penalty  ta
be  positively  inflicted  (Batav.,  Tuch,  Ewald,  and  otk
ers).  The  nearest  solution  is  overlooked,  namely,
that  the  expression  must  have,  even  here,  an  ideal
symbolical  force ;  in  other  words,  that  death  here,
corresponding  to  the  biblical  conception  of  death,
must  be  taken  primarily  to  mean  a  moral  death
which  goes  out  of  the  soul,  or  heart,  and  through  the
soul-life,  gradually  fastens  itself,  in  every  part,  upon
the  physical  organism  (LAXGE'S  "Dogmatics,"  p.
471).  The  sign  of  becoming  suddenly  dead  does  not
necessarily  belong  to  the  conception  of  death.  It
allows  too  of  a  long  dying  in  the  physical  depart
ment.  Hoffmann  has  not  thought  of  this  in  that  very
strange  exposition  of  his,  which  it  is  hardly  worth
while  to  cite.  Knobel  lays  much  stress  upon  it,  that
man,  according  to  ch.  iii.  1»,  22  (as  he  insists),  was
not  created  immortal.  It  is  true,  that  after  the  fall
the  tree  of  life  is  named  as  the  condition  of  perma
nent  duration ;  but  the  possibility  of  falling  into
death,  under  the  supposition  of  transgression  and
separation  from  the  tree  of  lift.1,  is  something  quite
different  from  what  we  embrace  under  the  conception
of  mortality.  Knobel,  with  Clevicus  and  others,
would  refer  the  threatening,  in  the  first  place,  to  the
hurtful,  life-endangering  power  of  the  fruit,  and  sup
poses,  therefore,  that  the  strong  expression :  thou
shalt  immediately  die,  is  to  be  understood  in  a  peda
gogical  sense  (or  as  a  warning  is  given  to  children) ;
and  yet  it  would  be  rightly  an  announcement  of  death,
since  man,  through  his  sin,  throws  from  him  the  en
joyment  of  the  tree  of  life.  Let  it  be  then  a  repre
sentation  of  the  Hebrew  mode  of  thinking ;  but  the
connection  of  the  promise  of  long  life  to  the  observ
ance  of  the  divine  commands  throughout  the  Old
Testament  (KXOBEL,  p.  33)  is  not  a  mere  Hebraic
representation ;  it  is  carried  still  farther  in  the
New  Testament  in  the  words:  Whosoever  believ-
eth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life.  And  yet
it  must  be  perceived  that  already  in  the  Old  Tes
tament,  and  so  certainly  here,  the  conception  of
life,  as  also  the  conception  of  death,  hath  its  ethical
and  ideal  ground ;  on  account  of  which  the  tree
of  life  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  having  a
merely  physical  efficacy.  Rightly,  too,  has  Kcil,
who  is  here  in  special  opposition  to  Delitzsch,  de
fended  the  spiritual  propriety  of  the  ethical  concep
tion.

8.  To  vers.  18-25.  It  is  not  good  that  the
man  should  be  alone. — Keil:  "As  the  creation  of
man  is  introduced  by  a  divine  decree,  so  the  creation
of  woman  is  preceded  by  God's  declaration :  It  is  not
good,  etc."  On  the  supposition  that  the  second
chapter,  like  the  first,  presents  the  genesis  of  man  in
a  generic  chronological  series,  as  we  find  it  in  De
litzsch,  there  arises  a  difficulty  in  respect  to  the  sec
ond.  Then  must  man  have  existed  so  long  a  time
before  the  creation  of  the  trees  of  Paradise  that  he
must  have  died  of  hunger ;  since  he  wo'ald  have  had
around  him  only  a  plant-producing  district,  and


208


GEXESI?,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


would  have  existed  then  for  himself  alone  as  the  one
onlv  completed  being ;  just  as  the  body,  too,  of  this
man  would  have  been  something  first  completed  and
then  the  soul  imparted  to  this  body  from  without
Without,  doubt,  however,  this  genetic  chronological
conception  of  the  second  chapter  is  a  misapprehen
sion  of  its  antithetical  and  complementary  relation  to
the  first.  It  is  not  flood  tl.it  man,  etc.  \\  hat  can
this  mean  after  it  had  been  so  often  said  m  the  first
chapter,  He  saw  that  it  was  good?  The  expression
does  not  denote  :i  condition  positively  bad,  but  rather
an  incor.ipk-toi.css  of  being,  whose  continuance  would
eventual! v  pass  ovi  r  fn  m  the  negative  not  good,  or
a  manifest  want,  into  the  positive  not  good,  or  a
hurtful  impropriety.  It  must  be  observed  that  this
point  of  time  lies  bctw.  en  the  In.-t  preceding  declara
tion  respecting  God  on  the  fifth  day:  and  lie  saw
that  it  vis  «•••</.  and  the  final  judgment  reri,  f><wl,
at  the  el  se'of  the  sixth.  According  to  Knobel  the
sense  would  bo  this:  Jehovah  shows  that  a  solitary
existence  is  not  irood  for  man  ;  He  determines  upon
the  creation  '"'h^  that  may  correspond  to

him    and    forms   tirst  the   beasts  for  the-  purpose  of
seeiii"-  whether  thcv  wr.'dd  satisfy  the  human  want.  (!)
To  tins  conception  the  text  is  throughout  opposed,
and  especially  in  the  words :  I  will  make  a  help  for
him  ("•>"")  as  his  oppose  (Jiis  converse),  not  mere
ly  ///.s  1,'k'c  VlVliU'sch).     The  exposition  of  Helitxsch  :
He  needed  such  a  one  that  when  he  had  it  before
him  he  might  red  '.rui/.e  himself,  obliterates  the  pecu
liar  point  of  the  expression.     It  allows,  too,  of  its
application  to  the  relation  of  one  man  .to  another.
The  oj>p«si<(  (or  converse)  here   spoken  of,  depends
;,ut  upon  any  if,  or  casual  condition.      What  is  meant
by    this    obliteration    becomes    evident    farther   on.
The  primary  thin-  (he  seems  to  think)  is  to  provide
u  help  for  man  in  his  vocation-destiny  ;  but  then  there
comes   also   into   view    the   possibility   that   he   may
transgress  the  comma-id   of  God,  and  die  the  death,
in  whieh  case  the  aim  of  the  creation  would  be  ren
dered  vain.      How   suspicious   this!  the  making   the
motive  for  the  creation  of  the  woman  to  be  this  lu-^
ture  pos.-ible  eventuality— especially  since  Eve  herself
it  is   who   realizes   that   possibility.     Moreover,  De-
litzsch  means  that  Adam  would   then,  as  the  second
seduced   have  been  rather  the  object  of  the  divine
compassion  (but  Eve,  the  first  seduced,  what  of  her!),
and   finally  leaves  us  to  conclude  that  it  does  not
mean-    I  will  make  one  like  to  him  that  he  may
propa-ate   his   race.     But  see   ch.  i.  28,  where   the
theosophic   deriving  of  the  propagation  of  the  race
from  the  eventuality  of  the  fall  is  clear,  and  without
reserve,  and  forever  cut  off.     When  there  is  given  to
TS.-  the  sense  to  be  conformable,  or  correspondent
(seVKnobel),  it  does  not  bring  out  the  emphasis  of
the  word,  in  this  place,  according  to  the  original  im
port  of  the  root  1i3;  although,  on  the  other  side,
the  sensual  meaning,  antcriora,  i.  e.,  pudenda  (Schul-
tens,  and  other.,),  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  coarse
exaggeration  of  the  expression.— Ver.  19.  And  out
of  the  ground  the  Lord  God  formed  every
beast  of  the  field.— Obviously  docs  the  representa
tion  that  follows  serve  as   an  introduction  to  the
representation  of  the  creation  of  the  woman  ;  that  is,
the  order  observed  in  mentioning  the  creating  of  the
beasts  is  determined  by  a  motive  not  at  all  chrono
logical,  but  looking  only  to  the  fact  itself.     But  m
what  could  this  motive  lie  ?     In  bringing  the  beasts
before  him,  was  there  something  of  a  purpose  in  the
Creator  to  awaken  in  man  a  consciousness  of  the


need  of  some  help  of  kindred  birth  to  himself?     This
is  the   supposition   of  Michnclis   and   Rosenmullcr.
Delitzsch   and   Keil   have   something   of   the   same
thought  (p.  48).     On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  sup
position  of  Jacob  Bohme  and  other  theosophists  that
from  looking  at  the  beasts  in  pairs,  there  w~as  awak
ened  a  sinful  desire  in  the  as  yet  androgynic  Adam.
These  wild  phantasies  (Mi/st.  Mag.  p.  1H'>)  have  yet
been  able  to  influence  the  latest  representations  of
the  paradisaical  relations.    Bohinc's  views  of  the  sex
ual  relations  arc  perfectly  abominable.     It  has  been
maintained  that  in  the  "first  chapter  the  creation  of
the  stars  is  laid  on  the  fourth  creative  day  for  the
purpose  of  counteracting  the  heathen  star-worship;
since  the  stars,  or  heavenly  bodies,  are  brought  in  as
conditioned    by   the    preceding   creations,  especially
that  of  liifht.     In   analogy  with   this   view,   and  in
opposition    to   the   animal-worship    of  the   heathen-
world,  would  the  passage  before  us  represent  the
beasts  as  creations  subordinate  toman:  m  the  first
place    because  man  had  to  give  them   names,  and,
secondly,  because  among  them  all  he  found  nothing
of  like' birth  with  himself,  to  say  nothing  of  any
superiority.     At  all  events,  for  the  Oriental  mind,  the
pa-"-a<-c  presents  a  very  significant  elevation  of  the
woman,  as  human,  over  the  lower  animal-world,  and
her  (  nuality  of  birth  with  the  man.     It,  is  no  real
difference,  as  Knobel  holds  it  is,  that  here  the  Crea
tor  forms  the  beasts  out  of  the  ground,  whilst  in  the
first  chapter  they  come  forth  (and  yet  in  consequence
of  the  creative  word)  from  the  mrth.      Crcatnir,  and
/',  rminq  are  just  diilerent  points,  of  view  of  the  same
'conception.     The  apparent  difference  proceeds  partly
from  this  that  here  we  have  the  more  definite,  namely
the  formin"  of  the  beasts   out  of   the  earth.     J he
beasts  of  the  field ;  taken  here  in  the  comprehensive
Bcnsc— the  wild  and  the  tame.— And  every  fowl
of  the  air  (the  heavens).— The  fish  of  the  sea  and
the  reptiles  arc  passed  over.     Keil  finds  the  ground
of  it  in  this,  that  both  classes,  the  luasts  of  the  fa
and  the  birds  of  heaven,  are  like  men  m  being  formed
out  of  the  earth,  and,  therefore,  stand  to  him  m  nearer
relation   than    the   water-animals    and    the  reptiles.
But  the  earthy  matter  is  found  ;'.!M>  in  the  two  last,
although  it  may  not  be  without  meaning  that  both
the  elates  here  preferred  were  formed  out  ot
•ulamah      More  to  the  purpose  is  the  second  ground
mentioned  by  Keil,  that  "God  brought  the  beasts
\d'im  to  show  him  the  creatures  that  had  been  or
dained  to  his  sen-ice."     At  all  events,  the  domestic
mimals  are  of  these  two  classes.     It  is  specially  to
be  considered,  moreover,  that  in  these  beasts  there
is  already  a  more  distinct  pairing,  which  is  a  symbol
of  human  marriage;  especially  is  this  the  case  with
the  birds.     Still  the  main  purpose  set  forth  is:   to
«ce  how  he  would  name  them.     With  the  intuitive
knowledge  of  the  beasts  there  follows  the  naming  of


H110WieO."e   <J1     l«C    u^aaoa    i'  i-         1  *

them  •  fSr  speech  is  the  thought  outwardly  realized
(on  the  essential  connection  of  thinking  and  speaking,
«ce  KFIL  p  47) ;  and  with  the  naming  commences
the  dominion.  Consequently  the  first  science  to
which  God  introduces  man  is  the  science  of  nature ;
his  first  speech,  to  which  he  is  led  for  the  mention  ot
zoological  properties,  is  the  naming  of  the  animals
That  this  his  naming  was  an  actual  calling  out,  and
that  the  assigned  domestic  animals  followed  his  call,
lies  included,  as  matter  of  fact,  in  the  very  represen-
tation  itself.  From  this  centre  spreads  out  the  kno-

*  [For  a  very  able  and  a  very  full  Discussion  of  thbj
primitive  naming-the  philosophy  and  the  theology  of  it-  S
iee  KAt  LEU'S  Sprachverwirrunp,  pp.  90-106.— 1-  ^-


CHAP.   II.  4-25.


ledge  of  man  over  all  nature. — Vcr.  20.  And  th
man   gave  names. — Here  the  cattle  have  the  fin
place  in  the  selection,  because  their  place,  in  tl
future,  is  next  to  man. — But  for  Adam. — We  do  n<
translate  for  man,  since  the  principal  thing  here
the  care  for  the  individual  man,  for  Adam.     The  ne
knowledge  satisfied  his  need  but  not  his  heart. — Vc
21.  A  deep  sleep  to  fall. — n "^"in  ,  a  deep  sleep
in  which  the  consciousness  of  the  outer  world,  an
of  his  own  inward  life,  is  wholly  gone.     "Sleep,  i
and  of  itself,  is  ordained  for  the  divinely  create
human  nature,   and  is   as  necessary  for  man,  as
creature  of  earth,  as  the  change  of  day  and  night  fo
the  universal  earthly  nature.   "But  this  dap  sleep  i
different  from  natural  sleep,  and  God  causes  it  to  fa:
upon  man  in  the  day-time,  in  order  that  out  of  hir
he  might  create  the  woman."    Keil.     Thereto  th
remark  of  Zicgler  :  "Everything  out  of  which  som
new  thing  is  to  come,  sinks  down  before  the  even
into  such  a  deep  sleep."     In  fact,  this   preparatioi
for  a  new  being  suggests  to  our  minds  the  preceding
creative  evening.     In  Job  iv.  13,  JVC  inn  denotes  i
deep  sleep  in  which  a  dream-vision  (a  clairvoyant  o
seeing  dream)  unfolds  itself.     On  this  account,  prob
ably,  have  some  interpreters  thought  that  here  arso
there  was  intended  an  ecstasy  or  vision. — And  took
one  of  his  ribs.— According  to  Bohinc,  man  hai
lost  the  magical  propagation  (of  which  he  was  capa
ble  by  means  of  his  androgynic  nature),  through  hit
longing  in  sleep  (the  forty-days'  sleep  of  the  tempta
tion)  for  the  sexual  contrast,  and  that  the  woman
proceeded  from  him  not  in  consequence  of  a  creative
act,  but  by  means  of  the  divine  fiat  remaining  in
Adam ;  because  God  saw  that  now  he  must  have  the
object  of  his  desire,  since  he  could  no  more  propa
gate  himself  magically.     The   confident  theosophist
here  becomes  Moses'  tutor  (p.  111).     According  to
Hoffmann,  God  must  have  made  the  woman  not  out
of  parts  of  man's  breast,  but  out  of  his  abdomen,
where  there  might  be  found  a  portion  of  the  body
capable   of  being  lost.     Keil   strives   in   a  manner
worthy  of  acknowledgment  to  express  himself  fairly
in  respect  to  these  fantasies  (p.  49).     As  in  them
selves  tiiey  wrong  not  only  the  scriptural  text,  her-
meueutics,  and  reason,  but  also  the  moral  feeling,  so
are  they  still  more  strange  through  their  combination
with  the  consequences  of  the  fall.     On  the  other
hand,  Delitzsch  finds  something  of  an  ideal  human  in
the  manner  and  way  of  the  woman's  creation  (p.
160).     Still  as  to  the  further  formation,  or  restora
tion  of  Adam,  it  is  not  perhaps  to  be  understood  that
"he  closed  the  cavity  that  was  made  by  putting  flesh
in  the  place  of  the  rib  that  was  taken  away  "  but
rather,  with  De  Wette,  "  he  closed  the  flesh  in  its
place."     In    respect  to   the   literal   conception,  the
question  must  still  arise,  Whence  could  such  flesh
have  been  taken?     But  it   is  just  this  filling  from
without,  by  which  that  vacuity,  or  that  want,  which
was  ordained  to  man,  is  removed.     Delitzsch  lays
stress  upon  this,  that  Adam  must  have  been  already
complete  as  man  before  Eve  was  taken  from  him.
But  thereby  the  symbolical  side  of  the  representation
is  marred.     So  far  as  the  fact  is  concerned,  it  is  sat-
1  by  recognizing  that  the  sexual  contrast  is  first
jailed  into  being  in  the  way  of  the  unfolding  of  the
it  human  form.     This  fact,  on  its  physical  side  is
reflected   in   the   child-world.     Delitzsch   pre-
ts  the  view  that  the  outward  form  of  Adam  was
not   double-sexed.     "  To   speak    generally,    it   was
nthouc  sex.     In  its  most  refined  nature  Adam  had
14


the  sexual  contrast  in  himself.  With  its  going  forth
from  the  unity  of  his  personality,  there  necessarily
connected  itself  that  configuration  which  was  de
manded  for  the  then  commencing  sexual  life."  The
expression  :  he  built  (fi32),  indicates  the  farther  ma
ternal  appointment  of  the  woman  (from  Pi:; ,  to  build,
comes  -jr,  ben,  a  son).  In  respect  to  the  wide-spread
view  of  antiquity  concerning  the  sexual  unity  of  man,
see  KNOBEL,  p.  35.— Ver.  22.  And  brought  her
unto  the  man.— "In  the  passage  above  we  recog
nize  God  as  the  first  teacher  of  language ;  hero  he
appears  as  the  first  bridesman ;  speech  is,  in  some
respects,  emblematical  of  the  divine,  and  so  too  is

marriage."     Delitzsch.— Ver.  23.  This   is    now

Literally :  tins  once,  or  this  time.     In  contrast  with
the  long  missing  of  his  help,  he  finds  at  l,,st  his  de
sire  realized.     Shu  it  is— or  this  is  it.     The  demon
strative   pronoun    TXT    not  only  expresses,    by  its
threefold    repetition,    the    joyful     appropriation    of
Adam,  but  also  serves  as  a  specific  feminine  indica
tion.     He  immediately  recognizes  the  fact  that  she
is  formed  out  of  his  being,  out  of  his  solidity  (his
bone),  out  of  his  sensibility  (his  flesh),  and  yet  his
counterpart;  therefore,   in  correspondence  with  the
fact  of  her  derivation  from  him,  and  her  belonging  to
him,  does  he  give  her  the  name  maness  (woman,  as
the  old  Latin  has  it,  vira  from  vir).     It  is  not  exact
ly  certain  that  the  woman  was  taken  from  the  heart-
side:  nevertheless  it  is  a  probable  interpretation  of
this  symbolically  significant  narration.     At  all  events
is  she  taken  out   of  his  breast,  and  not  out  of  the
lower  part  of  his  body.     According  to  Knobel  it  is,
because  she  stands  by  his  side  (Ps.  xlv.  10)  and  is
lis  attendant,  his  companion,  and  his   helper.     The
Hebrew  readily  expresses  the  conception  of  attend
ance  through  such  phrases  as   at  hand,  b;/  the  side
'Job  xv.  2i> ;  xviii.  12),  yby  -,r^  ,  to  be  a  compan-
on,  a  friend  (Jer.  xx.    10).— Ter.  21.    Therefore
shall  a  man. — The  question  arises  whether  this  is
something   farther    said,  and   to  be   understood  as
Idam's   speech,  or  whether  it  is  the  remark  of  the
larrator.     In  Matt.  xix.  f>,  Christ  cites  this  language
as  the  word  of  God.     That,  however,  makes  no  dif-
crencc ;  since  Adam  may  utter  the  word  of  God  de-
ived  from  the  divine  fact,  as  well  as   the   narrator.
t  seems  to  favor  the  idea  of  the  narrator's  speaking,
hat  he  so  often  inserts  his  remarks  with  ;:n  *3~b~
wherefore ;  ch.   x.  9 ;  see  Delitzsch).     On    this  ac"
ouut  Keil  decides  that  it  is  the  language  of  the  nar-
ator,  especially  since  it  is  spoken  of  father  and
lothcr.     Delitzsch,  however,  insists  that  the  words
nust  be  taken  as  a  prophetic  or  divining  expression
f  Adam  himself.     The  word  must  evidently  have
lie    significance   of   a  moral  life-ordering    for    all
umanity — a  meaning  which  results  from  this  expres-
:on  maness,  or  woman.     It  is,  therefore,  most  closely
onncctcd  with  what  precedes,  and  suits  better  here
le   mouth  of  Adam    than   that   of  the  narrator.
Vith  the  latter  it  would  have  been  merely  a  histori-
al  remark,  with  which,  moreover,  the  future  tense
-ould  not  have  been  consistent.     In  the  mouth  of
.dam  it  is  a  law  of  life  for  all  human  time,  and,  in-
eed,  of  such  a  nature  that  it  expresses,  at  the  same
me,  a  feeling  of  self-denial  in  that  he  gives  to  his
lildrcn,  in  the  conclusion  of  marriage,  a  free  depar-
ure   from  the  ancestral  home.     It  is   evident  that
ere  all  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  marriage-life  are
idicated.     1.  The  foundation  of  the  same,  the  sex-
al  affinity;  2.  the  freedom  of  choice  (as.  this  avails


210

monogamic  form  oi  mam  age  ;u d  i  >  on  mal


GENESIS,  OR   TUB  FIEST   BOOK   OF  MQSES.




Sher  are  found  in  Knobcl  and  Delitzsch      '  Ihey
h    Itl  erel  re,  in  the  beginning,  no  fooling  of  shame
and  none  0^  hat  moraf  insight  to  the  beginning  o
which   such   feeling   of  shame   belongs.     Alter  the
Tur  ne'e  of  the  latter  they  made  themselves  aprons
to  co  or  their  shame  (oh.  in.  7),  and  at  a  later  period
thev  were  furnished  with  clothing  from  the  skins  of
beaysts       [•,    pic  wholly  uncultivated   go  perfectly
naked    those  that  are  somewhat  cultivated  have  par-
Sal   coverings,  whilst   those  who   have  a  complete
civilization    go  wholly  clothed."     Knobol.     On  the
oAe   hand,  Delitzsch :  •'  Their  bodies  were  the  cloth-
toTof  Iheir  inner  glory,  and  this  glory   rightly  under
stood )  was  the  clothing  of  their  nakedness.       And,
finallv    Keil   with  a  more  apt  conception  ol  the  case
«  Their  bodies  were  made  holy  through  the  spirit  that
animated  them,     ^hame  first  came  in  vith  sin,  whteh
took  away  the  normal   relation   ol   the   s-pmt  to  the
body    be-at   an  inclination  and  a  desire  in  conflict
with  'the  soul,  and  turned  the  holy  order  ot  God  mo
•nuful  enticement  and  the  lust  ot  the  flesh.       In  the
view  of  Knobt-1,  Grecian  art  must   be  accounted  a
coarser  thing  than  many  a  crude  mythological  repre
sentation       Hut  as  the  iir.-t  men  must  be  Uisti!
cdtVom  mere   naked  savages,  so  also  are  they  no
to  bcTgarded,  according  to  a  Jewish  Midrash  cited
by  Delitzsch,  as  something  transparent  or  luminous
''which  the  clouds  of  glory  must  have  overshadow
ed"     Nakedness  i*  here  the  expression  of  perfect
innocence,  which,  in  its  ingenuousness,  elevates  the
body  into  the  spiritual  personality  as   ruled  by  it,
whilst  on  the  contrary,  the  feeling  of  shame  enters
v    1,  the  consciousness  of  opposition  between  spirit
Ind  sensual   corporeity,  whilst  shame   itself  comes
hi  with  the  presentiment  and  the  actual  feeling  c

gU"l\oTF  ON  THE   TIME-SUCCESSIONS  OK  THE   SIXTH
DAY  AND  OF  THE  Ei>EN-LiKE.-This  second  account,
n    ts  Later  part,  appears  to  be  an  enlargement  or
magnified  picture,  of  the  sixth  day.     Taking  it  in  U
intrinsic  character,  or  apart  Irom  ^y  outside  diffi
culties  of  science,  it  strongly  suggests  two  thoughts:
First,  its  pictorial  aspect,  on  which  we  have  already
Velt  (Introd.  to  Gen.  i.  p.  153),  and,  secondly     hat
the  events  here  narrated,  or  painted,  could  not  have
been  re-arded  by  the  narrator  himself  as  all  taking
place,  in  their  consequential  nexus,  withm  the  time
If  a  few  solar  hours,  or  the  latter  half  of  one  solar
-tav      He  could  not  so  have  told  the  story  had  such
a  View  been   constantly  present   to  his  own  mmu.
The  consistency  of  impression  would  be  utterly  de-
Btroved  bv  the  rapidity.     Here  is  a  consecution  o
events  growing  regularly  out  of  each  other,  each  one
preparing  the  way  for  what  follows.     Here  are  forma
tions,  growths,  seeming  natures,  conditio


wants  growing  out  of  such  conditions,  adaptations  to
such   wants,   preparations   for   such   adaptations,   a
course  of  discipline  for  man,  a  development  of  know-
led-e  and  of  language   out  of  such  discipline    th
means  for  such  development,  a  strange  state  of  hu
manity,  called  a  trance  or  deep  sleep,  a  wondrous
change  in  the  previous  human  nature  arising  out  ot
it-all  most  briefly  sketched,  but  all  there,  m  cohe
rent  continuity.     Besides  this,  there  is_  the  prepara
tion  of  a  part  of  the  earth  for  the  new  inhabitant,,  a
state  of  conscious  innocence  without  shame   nnpi?-
in-  Some  course  of  life,  longer  or  shorter  to  g  no   he
representation  anv  moral  signincance-thc  ordaining
aw  Sating  some  course  of  life  according  to  it,  a


.

nt  answer  to  say  that  ^l'-f  '?  S
mi-rht  have  caused  such  a  rapid  shifting  oi
I   fs  i  question  of  style,  of  consistency,  ot  deseriptive
,  mri    '  i      It  might  have  toon  so;  but  then  the
Sect  Sven  of   causation,  of   series,  of  adaptation,
be  but  a  show,  a  seeming.     It  would  be  an
arance  of  a  causation  without   that   consistent
s  th  t  makes  it  easily  conceivable  ;    t  woul     be
<eemin-  succession  without  that  proportion  of  uitc-
;     r^dcou^^ontwhiehwetinditchnicutto

vD-ntc  frcm  it;  events,  great  events,  growing
^-  e  di  o    or-<o  treated-and  yet  without  any  rea
±wt      o      hat   proportional    gradualness   wuhon
rowth  has  no  true  meaning      There  would

r  a  re-lorma  ,on  o  1tf.c


iuo-h  Their  unhkeness  to  hmisi..  ...
!3  for  rational  human  intercourse,  there  is  awaken
ed  in  him  the  do-ire  for  Mg»cr  society.     And^then

thereni?vSkdeifrom  him,  as  now  from  all  science
hat  ineffable  transformation  out  of  which  conic,  the
duality  of  our  human  nature.     Tnc  tact ,  u,  told I  us
according   to   the   easiest   conception,  but  it  was
trance-vision  to  Adam,  and  we  have  no  rewon  M
suppose  that  his  narrating  descendant  had  the  know-
le  .'e  of  it  in  anv  revelation  more  obiective  than  was


caruin  uuiuiv,.      - o     y  d  ^tVrrin"    of  his

the   vehemence   ot   his  desire,  uu^uuc    ^n     _.^
hope,  and  the  patience  of  his  waiting:  D?C«     y
diesmal,  this  not,,  ipsa  tancfcm-thcre  is  an  intense
SnTficance  in  th'is'small  Hebrew  particle-come  ^
last,  bone  of  my  bone,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh      Three
times   does  he   repeat   this   feminine  TXT  (
LITZSCH  p   161).     Bone  of  my  bone:— can  we  doubt
as  to  the  origin  of  the  peculiar  symbolism  m  w  n<
Jhe  narrative" is  clothed?     His  want  was  satisfied,
and  the  vivid  picture  of  his  dream  becomes  the  Ian
.ua-c,  the  only  possible  language,  perhaps,  o    a  d.
vine"  work  which  no  merely  human  speech  could  aot
ouately  set  forth-one  of  the  deep  mysteries  of  Gou
itself  shadowing  forth  the  still  deeper  mysteries  of
the  Incarnation  and  the  Church.

Similar  suggestions  of  time  present  themselves  ui


CHAP.   II.  4-25.


211


what  is  said  of  the  planting  of  Paradise :  And  tl
Lord  God  caused  to  grow,  etc.     Did  the  great  tre<
grow  in  the  same  time  with  the  herb  and  the  flower
Confine  it  all  to  a  few  hours  and  the  difference  is  a
nothing;  yet  growth,  without  proportion  accordin
to  the  natures  or  products  grown,  is  in  itself  bot
conceptionless  to  the  sense  and  idealess  to  the  reason
We  may  conceive  it,  however,  from  a  picture,  or
vision,  and  such  a  mode  of  representation,  therefor
as  appearing  in  the  style,  is  one  of  the  strongest  cri
ical  arguments  for  the  vision-theory  of  the  creativ
revelation.     It  is  perfectly  consistent,  too,  for  in  th
subjective  delineation  time  is  given  in   perspective
But  the  grouping  shows  that  the  great  things  rcpre
sentcd  could  not  have  been  thus,"  unless  the  pictur
itself  be   but   a   phantasy,  or  phantasmagoria,  no
supernatural  or  contranatural  merely,  but  wholly  uu
natural,   according   to  any   conceptions    our  human
faculties  can  form  of  time,  succession,  cause,  am
effect.     Great  truths,  great  facts,  ineffable  truths,  in
effable  facts,  are  doubtless  set  forth.     We  do  no
abate  one  iota  of  their  greatness,  their  wonderful  ness
by  supposing  such  a  mode  of  representation.     It  L
not  an  accommodation  to  a  rude  and  early  age,  bu
the  best  language  for  every  age.     How  trifling  tin
conceit  that  our  science  could  have  furnished  an1
better !     Her  field  is  induction,  and,  by  this  creeping
process,  though  she  may  travel  far  relatively,  she  can
never  ascend  to  the  great  facts  of  origin  that  belong
to  the  supernatural  plane.     Her  language  will  ever
be  more  or  less  incorrect;    and,  therefore,  a  divine
revelation  cannot  use  it,  since  such  use  would  be  an
endorsement  of  its  absolute  verity.     The  simpler  and
more  universal  language  of  the  Scripture  may  be  in
adequate,  as  all  language  must  be ;  it  may  fall  short ;
but  ir,  points  in  the  right  direction.     Though  giving
us  only  the  great  steps  in  the  process,  it  secure,
that  essential  faith  in  the  transcendent  divine  work
ing,  v/hich  science— our  science,  or  the  science  of
ages  hence— might  only  be  in  danger,  to  say  the
least,  of  darkening.     It  saves  us  from  those  trifling
tilings  commonly  called  reconciliations  of  revelation
witli  science,  and  which  the  next  science  is  almost
sure  to  unreconcile.     It  does  so  by  placing  the  mind
on  a  wholly  different  plane,  giving  us  simple  though
grand  conceptions  as  the  vehicle  of  great  ideas  and
great  facts  of  origin  in  themselves  no  more  accessible
to  the  most  cultivated  than  to  the  lowliest  minds.
There  i.s  an  awful  sublimity  in  this  Mosaic  account  of
the  origin  of  the  world  and  man,  and  that,  too,  whe
ther  we  regard  it  as  inspired  Scripture  or  the  grand
est  picture   ever  conceived   by  human  genius.     To
those  who  cannot,  or  who  do  not,  thus  appreciate  it,
it  matters  little  what  mode  of  interpretation  is  adopt
ed—whether  it  be  one  of  the  so-called  reconciliations
or  the  crude  dogmatism  that  calls  itself  literal  because
it  chooses  to  take  on  the  narrowest  scale  a  laii"-ua"-e
so  suggestive  of  vast  times  and  ineffable  causalities.


DOCTRINAL  AXD  ETHICAL.

1.  In  respect  to  the  opposition  between  this  sec
tion  and  the  preceding,  see  the  Exegetical  and  Crit
ical  Notes  of  the  former.     It  must  be  very  clear  that
in  the  present  section  the  chronological  order  stands
in  the  background,  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  the  sym
bolical  presents  itself  in  a  more  significant  degree".

2.  The  present  section  is  distinguished  °by  the
name  Jehovah-Elohim :  The  meaning  is,  that  Jehovah


the  Covenant-God  of  His  people,  is  also  the  God  of
all  worlds,  the  Lord  of  all  creatures,  who  made  Adam
for  His  first  Covenant-child,  and  appointed  him  Ilig
vicegerent  in  this  dominion.  Adam  is  the  princeps
and  so  the  ideal  priiis  of  the  creaturcly  world.  This
point,  of  the  Covenant  of  God  with  Adam,  appears  in
Cocceius  as  the  foundation  of  the  federal  theology.
With  Schleiermacher,  again,  it  is  modified  into  the
representation  of  a  religiousness  overlying  the  con
trast  of  sin  and  mercy.

3.  Nature  presupposes  man,  if  it  would  be  pre
vented  from  running  wild.  Only  in  man,  through
him,  and  with  him,  can  it  find  its  glorious  transforma
tion.  Therefore  was  man  also,  in  his  integrity,  the
presupposing  of  nature  in  her  integrity  ;  his  religious
and  moral  destiny  is  tho  condition  of  her  higher  des
tiny,  his  cultus  the  foundation  of  her  culture.  In
pure  nature,  moreover,  are  the  nobler  plants  as  well
as  the  nobler  animals  to  be  regarded  as  in  a  special
sense  an  appurtenance  of  man ;  in  a  special  measure,
therefore,  are  they  conditioned  in  their  being  and
well-being,  by  his  being  and  well-being.  Whatever,
too,  there  might  have  been  before  man,  it  was  still
as  though  it  were  not,  so  long  as  it  found  not  in  him
its  cosmical  destiny.  It  was  all  ;m  enigma;  the
solution  was  first  to  be  found  in  man.

4.  The  moistening  of  the  earth's  soil  before  the
creation  of  man  points  to  the  share  of  the  waters  in
the  creaturely  formations  (and  sustenance),  especially
the  human.     Through  the  observation  of  this  came
Thales  by  his  system.

5.  The  creation  of  man.     It  is  rightly  regarded
is  an  entirely  new  creative  act,*  and^indced,  as  the
very  highest.     And  yet  it  is  a  falsely  literal  view  of

he  anthropomorphic  and  symbolical  representation,
when  in  this  act  of  God  we  are  led  to  regard  the
earthly  nature  as  wholly  passive.  Kather  does  this
act,  in  ^  its  truest  realization,  presuppose  the  highest
excitation  and  effort  of  the  earth — we  mav  even  say

*  [This  is  doubtless  true  of  that  decisive  act  of  God
whether  the  inspiration,  or  the  image,  or  both)  that  in
i  moment  constituted  the  first  man,  and  the  species  homo,
vhich,  a  moment  before,  was  not.  But  this  docs  not  cx-
lude  the  idea  that  the  human  physical  was  connected  with
he  previous  nature,  or  natures,  and  was  brought  out  of
hem.  That  is,  it  was  made  from  the  earth  in  tho  widest
ignification  of  the  term.  That  it  was  not  a  mere  plastic
haping,  or  outward  mechanical  structure,  is  implied  in
'hat  Lange  says  just  below  in.  respect  to  the  non-passivity
f  the  earth.  There  are  immense  difficulties  connected  with
lie  idea  of  an  outward  Promethean  image,  a  dead  organiza-
wn  which,  although  having  the  appearance,  is  really  no
rganizatioii  at  all  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  any  more
lan  the  marble  statue  or  the  waxen  image.  No  ono  sup-
oses  that  the  making  of  the  human  body  was  an  immediate
naking  de  nihilo.  It  was  made  from  earth,  and  this  earth
Iready  had  its  nature  according  to  its  varieties  of  carbon,
itrogen,  etc.,  and  these,  as  natures,  connected  with  other
atures,  entered  into  the  human  body.  If  it  is  not  a  crea-
on  de  nihilo,  which  is  expressly  contrary  to  the  language
f  the  account,  we  must  suppose  a  connection  with  nature
o  a  certain  extent.  "What  difficulty  or  danger,  then,  in
iving  to  the  phrase  "from  the  earth,"  the  widest  sense
onsistcnt  with  the  idea  of  man's  having  an  earthly  as  well
s  a  heavenly  origin?  It  is  this  latter  idea,  and  the  higher
sychologjr  connected  with  it,  that  furnishes  to  the  faith  its
neld  against  all  mere  theories  of  development  that  may
rocced,  with  weaker  or  stronger  evidence,  from  a  natural-
ing  science.  From  the  one  thus  first  inspired,  and  con-
ituted  Urmia,  came  all  humanity — the  one  humanity,  as  a
ansmission  of  that  one  inspiration  and  that  ono  spiritual
nage  (see  Remarks,  Introduction- to  the  First  Chapter  of
encsis,  p.  156).  Even  on  this  view,  however,  the  human
ody  did  not  precede  tho  human  soul,  as  Lange  observes  in
hat  follows  ;  since,  whatever  may  have  been  the  precedent
uisation,  it  was  not  a  human  body,  any  more  than  it  was  a
uman  soul,  before  that  decisive  man-creating,  man-consti-
tiug  act  which  made  the  species,  or  the  specific  character,
both.— T.  L.]


212


GENESIS,  Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSES.


with  Stefiens,  its  animation.  The  representation  has
for  its  leading  fundamental  idea:  -Man  the  prime
thing  of  the  earthly  creation;  not  that  it  can  or
ought  to  be  carried  out  into  its  philosophical  conse
quences,  for  then  man  must  have  been  introduced
before  the  earth-soil,  and  the  formation  pi  his  body
mu«t  have  been  before  the  creation  ot  las  soul.  On
this  account  we  arc  not  authorized  to  assign  separate
ly  the  formation  of  the  body  and  ot  the  soul  to  two
acts  following  each  other  in  a  temporal  series-as
was  held  in  some  respects  by  the  Gnostic  Saturm-


1     6    The   unthropoloii-ieal,   physiological,  and   psy
chological  ideas  of  the  passage    Compare  the  writings
before    cited:     Von    Roos,   Zeller,  Beck,  Dehtzsch,
Yon  Rudolf,  and  others.     Before  all  things  Joes  the
pn^'i-e  'illirm  that  man  became  an  indissoluble,  that
is,  a'cleatively  established,  unity— a  living  soul  pro
ceeding  out  of  the  contrast,  or  the  duality,  of  the  dust
of  the  earth,  un  the  one  side,  and  the  divine  breath  ot
life  on  the  other  (r,— :),  and  that  these  were  the  sub-
stances  out  of  which  he  was  formed.     He  is,  in  his
one  tot  ,1  appearing,  a  living  soul ;  that  is,  the  body
too    in    this   human   constitution,    is  only   a  special
grJiota-r'oriH  of  the  whole  man,  as  the  divine  breath
01    life,' on    its   side,    is   the   ground-principle   of  the
whole    man.     Spirit   and   body   arc  joined    together
ul.     These  three  are  mutually  inseparable,
v  to"(ther  make  the  individualized  unity  of
i;,  .,,      To  this  extent  may  we  deny  that  man  consists
alone  ot   body  and  soul.     He  is  always,  and  at  any
moincnl     body,   soul,  and   spirit;    though   the   outei
,  i    the  body  may,  by  death,  be  loosed  irom  its
life,  and   the  spirit,  by  sin,  may  sink   into  a  latent
rta'.e   (see    1   Cor.  xv.  44;   LANCE'S   "Dogmatics,    p.
As  man,  in  respect   to  his  inner  life,  is  not
divided    into    feding,    IntM^ncc,   and    will,    but  _  is
i  resent  in  each  of  these  ground-forms  as  the  entire
man,  so  also  is  he  ever  the  entire  man  in  respect  to
1,N  outi  r  or  concrete  life  ;  as  body  lie  is  related  to  his
earthly  appearing,  and  to  the  sphere  of  such  appear-
in"  •  as  spirit,  in  the  relation  of  his  principial  unity
to°his  unitary  ground,  he  is  related  to  God  and  divine
thin"<-   as  soul,  or  essential  form  and  life,  he  is  re
lated  to  the  world  of  souls  and  the  life  of  the  whole
universe.     Man  is  a  one  with  himself:  individuality
iu   his   singleness,  personality   in  his   universalness,
subjectivity  in  the  mode  and  way  of  mediating  be
tween    his    singleness    and    his    universal    relation.
\nd  -o  far  is  the  passage  atomic,  as  it  represents
man  as  becoming  a  living  soul  (monndo)  through  the

!  and  most  intensive  creative  act  oi  God.
In  reference  to  the  essential  elements  and  rela-
tions   of  human  life,  however,  it   is  predominantly
dichotomic,  as  other  places  of  Holy  Writ  (Ecclcsiastes
xii.  7  ;  Matt.  x.  28)  distinctly  represent.

Concerning  the  relation  of  the  corporeity  of  man
to  the  earthly  nature,  compare  SCHUBERT'S  "History
of  the  Soul,"  g  10.  The  constituents  of  the  animal
body:  Calcareous  earth  (bone),  nitrogen,  oxygen,
hydrogen,  oxygen  gas,  iron  (in  the  blood),  sulphur,
phosphorus  (m  the  nerves),  silica  (in  the  teeth),  and,
combined  with  this,  fluoric  acid.

In  respect  to  the  spiritual  nature  of  man  as  akin
to  God,  compare  Gen.  iii.  6 ;  Matt.  xxii.  32 ;  Jer.
xxxi  3;  Luke  xv.  11;  John  i.  49 ;  Acts  xvii.  28,
2'.);  Rom.  viii.  16;  2  Pet.  i.  4 ;  Rev.  i.  6 ;  ii.  17,
and  other  places. — Dclitzsch  disputes  against^  the
supposition  that  there  is  in  man  an  uncreated  divine
(p.'  144);  for  the  word  X-"'  ,  eh.  i.  27,  embraces,


he  says,  the  essential  being  of  the  entire  man.     Of
the  man,  certainly,  as  a  whole,  but  is  it  so  especially
of  his  spiritual  nature?     Is  man,  moreover,  as  an
eternal  individual  thought  of  God,  by  virtue  of  his
election  in  Christ,  a  thought  in  some  way  created  ?
We  cannot  say  that  God  has  created  the  thought  ot
his  love.     The  older  theology  was  very  much  afraid
of  the  idea  of  emanation.     If  God  imparted  anything
to  man  from  his  own  being,  it  meant  either  that  God
must  have  given  away  some  of  His  own  being,  or
that  something  still  of  His  being  could  have  sinned
in  man      We  must,  by  till  means,  avoid  both  repre
sentations   as  we  must   generally  do   in  respect   to
every  emanation-view.     But  does  there  follow  from
this  the  pure  crcaturclincss  of  the  human  spirit— that
is   of  its  God-likeness  (or  that  in  it  called  divine,  or
which  is  supposed  to  have  come  from  God)?     Or  is
it  only,  as  Delit/.seh  says,  the  w^i  of  the  -nvtv^a  (the
breathing  of  the  Spirit)?     Still  it  is  a  we^a,  a  hu
man  spirit.     And  certainly  this  needs  the  spirit  of
God  for  its  well-being— for  its  own  life  (sec  1  Cor.  n
14-    Jude  10).     The  mere  existence  of  the  human
soul  docs  not  fail  from  the  fact  of  its  unspiritualness
(the  want  of  the  higher  spirituality,  or  its  sensuality).
Delitzsch  touches   upon   the    true  relation  when  he
<nv«   "a  creative  word,  although  of  a  divine  being,  is
noV'the  Loo-os  clothed  with  the  eternal  being  of  the
Father"     Yet  still  does  the  decree  concerning  hu
manity  embrace  in  Christ  the  individual  elect.     Be
tween"  the    emanation-representations,    on    the    one
<-ide  and  the  pure  creatureliness  on  the  other,  lies  the
conception  of  the  free  impartation  of  life  in  the  mys
tery   of  the   quickening:    life   from   life,   light  from
li.'ht   spirit  from   spirit.     Man  may  be  begotten  of
Cod  by  the  seed  of  the  new  birth,  which  is  the  word
of  God-  and  when  we  take  this  as  the  basis  of  our
belief  that  he  can  receive  the  Jlohi  Spirit,  we  cannot
deny  that  original  state  of  man  which  corresponds

J  'But  the  passage  contains  already  the  Rcnn  of  a
trichotomy-bo.lv,   soul,   and   spirit,   which   implied  y
pervades  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  is  most  expressly
set  forth   1   Thess.  v.  i!3 ;    llc-b.  iv.  12  (see  LAJJGKS
"Dogmatics,"  p.  307).     A  similar  trichotomy,  as  is
well  known,  is  found  in  the  writings  of  the  I  latomsts
and  so   too,  in  connection  with  biblical  doctrines  and
Platonic   ideas,   among    the    oldest    church-fathers.
This  continued,  until  through  the  heresy  of  Apolh-
naris,  the  trichotomy  became  suspected,  and  in  the
following  time  of  the  middle  ages,  gave  place  to  the
more  popular  dichotomy.     In  modern  tmies   again,
in  connection  with  a  deeper  study  ot  psychology
trichotomic   views   presented   themselves.     It   must
herewith   be   remarked   that   the   dichotomy,   when
simply   held,   is   no   more   in   contradiction   to   the
trichotomy,  than  those  dual  places  of  Holy  Scripture
in  which  only  God  and  His  Logos,  or  the  Wisdom,
or  the  Ansel  of  the  Lord,  are  named,  contain  a  con-
tradiction  of  the  trinity.     The   triad  just  as   easily
holds  together  for  a  dual  (soul  and  spirit  being  taken
as  one)  as  for  a  monad.     Or  rather,  the  monad  re
solves  itself  over  all,  first  into  a  duality,  then  ir


a  the  spirit  is  the  principle  and  the  form  of
unity  in  man— his  derivation  from  God,  and  his  rela
tion  to  God— is  declared  in  Ecclcsiastes  xn.  7.  It  is
God  who  has  given  the  spirit.  In  like  manner  does
the  same  text  of  the  Preacher  say  that  the  body  ia
the  finishing  and  the  form  of  appearing  for  man
showing  his  descent  from  the  earth,  and  his  relatioi
to  the  earthly  sphere.  But  that  the  soul  is  the /or*


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


213


of  being  in  man,  the  configuration  and  the  form  of
life,  his  descent  from  and  his  reciprocal  relation  to
the  whole  world,  is  declared  in  the  very  expression
"  living  soul."

The  c^n  n^'^3  (breath  of  lives),  as  the  divine
principle  of  all  life,  imparted  to  man  an  individual
divine  principle  of  life,  and  in  consequence  thereof  it
became,  in  the  whole,  a  living  soul,  and  in  the  vitali
ty  or  vitalizing,  a  conscious  self-revealing  soul.
Man,  as  related  to  the  eternal  and  the  divine,  is
Sjiirlt ;  man,  as  related  to  the  universe,  is  soul;
man,  as  related  to  the  earth,  or  to  any  particular
world-sphere  wherein  he  dwells,  is  body.  Concerning
the  relation  of  the  psychological  system  of  Dclitzsch
to  the  conception  of  Von  Rudloff,  sec  "Notice  of  Re
markable  Writings,"  in  the  German  Periodical,  edited
by  Von  Ilollenberg,  No.  3,  185',).

For  the  various  defective  and  marring  statements
respecting  the  triune  form  of  man's  being,  see
LANCE'S  "  Dogmatics,"  p.  307.  Gnosticism  refuses
to  regard  the  corporeity  as  belonging  to  the  essen
tial  being  of  man  (so,  too,  the  Book  of  Wisdom,  eh.
is.  15).  Hegelianism  regards  the  soul  as  only  the
band  that  connects  body  and  spirit.  Later  psychol
ogists  and  theologians  (Hcinroth,  Hoffmann,  and
others)  have  denied  to  man,  in  himself,  a  spirit-being;
he  has  spirit,  they  say,  only  so  far  as  the  spirit  of
God  enlightens  him.  Beck  speaks  of  a  spiritual
power,  at  least,  as  belonging  to  the  human  soul.  It
must  be  held  fast,  however,  that  man  could  not  re
ceive  the  spirit  of  God  if  he  was  not  himself  a  spirit
ual  being  ("  were  not  the  eye  adapted  to  the  sun,"
etc. ).  It  is,  at  all  events,  a  supposition  of  the  Scrip
ture,  that  since  the  fall  the  spiritual  nature  is  bound
in  the  natural  man,  and  does  not  come  to  its  actuali
ty  (see  Jude  vcr.  10;  LANGE'S  "Dogmatics,"  p.  311).
In  relation,  however,  to  the  body  of  man,  we  must
distinguish  between  his  o-i'/xa,  the  organism,  and  his
flesh  <rap£,  the  material  merely,  the  filling  out  of  his
appearance.  In  relation  to  his  soul,  we  must  distin
guish  between  soul  as  the  animal  principle  of  life,
and  as  conscious  form  of  being.  In  relation  to  his
spirit,  we  must  distinguish  between  his  spiritual
nature  and  the  element  of  the  spiritual  in  which  the
individual  spirit  lives,  and  which  enters  into  it.

1.  For  the  doctrine  of  the  divine  image,  see  the
remarks  on  the  first  chapter.  For  what  belongs
specially  to  the  immortality  of  man,  see  the  title
Literature  as  above  given.  We  must  distinguish,
however,  a  threefold  conception  of  immortality:  1.
The  paradisaical  immortality  of  Adam;  2.  the  onto-
logical  immortality  of  human  nature ;  3.  the  religious
ethical  immortality  which  is  shared  by  man  through
his  communion  with  God — the  life  in  its  deeper  signif
icance,  or  the  eternal  life.  As  to  what  concerns  the
immortality  of  Adam,  the  Scripture  supposes  that  he
could  avoid  death  under  the  condition  of  continued
normal  rectitude  in  the  strength  of  his  communion
with  God,  or  that  he  might  fall  into  death  through
an  abnormal  conduct  conformable  to  his  connection
with  the  earth.  But  the  Scripture  does  not  suppose
that  man  could  have  remained  immortal  without  ob
jective  conditionings  for  the  eternal  renewal  of  his
life.  These  conditionings  are  embraced  in  the  sym
bol  of  the  tree  of  life  (see  below).  There  is,  too,  the
further  disclosure,  that  man,  in  the  case  of  the  con
firmation  of  his  innocence,  must  undergo  a  meta
morphosis  resembling  death,  and  yet  not  death,  in
order  that  he  might  pass  out  of  his  first  physical
state  of  existence,  where  there  is  yet  a  possibility  of


his  dying,  into  a  second  spiritual  state  of  existence
which  is  raised  above  the  sphere  of  death.  This
appears  from  the  translation  of  Enoch,  in  connection
with  the  long  enduring  of  the  Macrobii  (the  early
long-living  antediluvian  patriarchs),  from  the  trans
lation  of  Elias,  and,  above  all,  from  the  glorified  form
of  Christ  after  his  resurrection.  It  appears,  too,
from  the  passage,  2  Cor.  v.  2,  3  (see  LAMUC'S  "Dog
matics,"  p.  318),  and  from  the  doctrine  of  the  apos
tles  respecting  the  transformation  of  Christians  who
should  be  living  at  the  end  of  the  world  (1  Cor.  xv.).
The  form  of  death  that  proceeds  from  sin  had  op
posed  itself  to  this  tendency  of  man  to  transforma
tion — had  changed  and  subverted  it.  In  respect  to
the  various  ecclesiastical  views  of  the  original  immor
tality,  compare  WIXKK:  "Comparative  Representa
tion,"  p.  4'J.  2.  The  ontological  immortality  of  man.
At  the  bottom  of  the  wide-spread  prejudgment  that  the
Mosaic  books,  as  also  the  Old  Testament  generally  in
its  first  period?,  did  not  teach  the  doctrine  of  a  per
sonal  immortality,  lie  the  following  misunderstand
ings :  1.  In  various  ways  was  the  ontological  supposi
tion  of  the  imperishable  continuance  of  man  which
pervades  the  whole  Old  Testament  (namely,  in  the
doctrines  of  Shcol,  of  the  Rephaim  in  Sheol,  of  the
conscious  condition,  ami  in  the  expressions  for  life,
in  Sheol),  confounded  with  the  doctrine  of  the  ethical
eternal  life.  This  has  also  occurred  to  one  of  the
latest  writers  on  the  .subject  before  us  (II.  SCHULTZ:
"  The  Presuppositions  of  the  Christian  Doctrine  of
Immortality,"  Gottingen,  18G1).  As  we  must  distin
guish,  however,  between  the  conceptions  of  the
physical  and  the  ethical  life  in  the  Scriptures  (a  life
without  God  no  life,  but  death),  and  between  the
conceptions  of  the  physical  and  the  ethical  death  (a
death  without  the  sting  of  conscious  guilt  no  death),
so  also  must  we  distinguish  between  the  conceptions
of  the  physical  and  the  ethical  immortality.  Although
the  Scripture  does  not  acknowledge  the  physical,
without  the  ethical,  as  the  true  immortality,  still  it
denotes  it  as  continuous  individual  existence  with  the
two  attributes  of  consciousness  and  imperishability
(Is.  Ixvi.  24;  Rev.  xiv.  11).  2.  The  pathetic  and
poetical  expressions  for  the  mournful  condition  in
Shcol  have  been  regarded  purely  as  dogmas,  without
calling  to  mind  that  there  are  praises  of  the  rest  in
Sheol  of  a  directly  opposite  character  (as  in  Job  iii.),
and  that,  in  like  manner,  the  dogma  of  the  perfect
nothingness  of  the  present  worldly  life  may  be  de
duced  from  many  of  the  songs  of  the  Church.  3.
The  fact  has  been  overlooked  that  the  immortality
of  the  soul  is  just  as  distinctly  a  supposition  of  the
Old  Testament  as  the  existence  of  God,  and  that  on
this  account  neither  article  is  expressly  taught,  but
only  appears  in  language  on  occasions  which  call  it
out,  and  then  wholly  as  something  thus  presupposed.
4.  No  distinction  has  been  made  between  the  first
germ-form  which  is  peculiar  to  this  doctrine,  as  it  is
to  most  others  in  the  earlier  books  of  the'  Old  Testa
ment,  and  its  later  development ;  and,  therefore,  too,
has  there  been  no  distinction  made  between  the  rami
fying  ontological  definitives  (such  as  Sheol,  Rephahr,
appearings  of  the  dead,  awakenings  of  the  dead,
questionings  of  the  dead),  the  ethical  definitives
(such  as  covenant  with  God,  confidence  in  God)  and
the  synthetic,  out  of  which  the  doctrine  of  the  resur
rection  gradually  came  forth  (such  as  the  tree  of  life,
the  translations  of  Enoch  and  Elijah,  together  with
the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  that  prevailed  in  the
prophetic  period).  Still  less  has  it  been  considered
how  gradually  Sheol  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  place


214


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


«)f  life,  how  gradually  the  shades  come  to  form  two
divisions,  those  that  arc  enjoying  the  holy  rest,  and
those  that  are  the  subjects  of  penal  suffering — how
gradually  laith  in  the  living  God  becomes  faith  in
that  eternal  life  which  consists  in  communion  with
him  (I's.  xvi.),  and  how  gradually  the  resurrection
comes  to  its  most  definite  form  (2  Mace.  vii.).  The
decisive  word,  as  Christ  interprets  it,  Matt.  xxii.  32,
is  the  designation  which  God  gives  to  Himself,  Exoil.
iii.  (>.  Its  meaning  is  that  l!i<'  doctrine,  of  covenants
made.  U'llh  tfif  jiinux  /v/  »  personal  (A/7  contains  hi
itself  tit?  Ki'i i/i»xit"»i  <>;'  tli:  lr  oii-ii  pn-s'inal  tmptrixliu-
ole  nature.  For  an  explanation  of  this  point  it  must
be  observed:  1.  That  the  abode  in  Slieol  is  to  be  re
garded  primarily  as  the  continuance  of  the  death-doom
incurred  by  MM.  Just  as  death,  the  wages  of  MII  ac
cording  to  i'aul,  or  the  birth  of  .-in  according  to  James,
begins  in  this  world  with  sin  (the  inner  death  accord
ing  to  John),  with  ]:;o:1;:li'y  and  sickness,  so  docs  it
also  continue  on  hi  the  other  world  under  the  relative
ideas  of  nakedness,  imprisonment,  restlessness — in  a
word,  uiidt-!1  tin-  inteiisilied  form  of  a  penal  or  disci
plinary  iclatii'ii  to  a  future  redemption.  Therefore
it  is  that  even  in  the  pious  of  the  Old  Testament,  the
condition  beyond  the  grave  is  reflected  in  this  world-
msness,  presenting  itself  in  a  form  for  the
mosl  part  gloomy,  sad,  trembling,  and  terrific.  2.  It
ni';-'  in'  kept  iu  mind  that  Moses  had  to  cstabli.--h
the  i he' rralie  belief  of  the  Jews  in  direct  contrast
with  heathenism,  and  especially  the  heathenism  of
the  Egyptians,  from  the  midst  of  whom  they  came,
and  was  therefore  led  to  give  the  strongest  and  most
significant  emphasis  to  the  present  life;  because  the
K:;\p:ian  religion  was  most  specifically  a  worship
having  relati  >n  to  the  state  beyond  the  grave — that
is,  to  death.  :;.  Add  to  this  that  it  was  in  entire
correspondence  with  the  disciplinary  degrees  by
which  Israel  was  to  be  educated  that  Moses  should
represent  the  retiibution  as  being  principally  in  this
world,  and,  indeed,  as  in, pending  every  moment,  like
something  that  followed  close  upon  every  step  of  hu
man  conduct.  In  entire  conformity  to  truth  did  he
direct  the  people  in  this  first  step  of  belief  in  retribu
tion;  for,  in  i'aet,  retribution  is  an  immediate  (or
ever-impending)  tiring.  Everywhere,  however,  the
hope  of  a  future  life  gleams  out  of  his  doctrines  r.nd
iiis  institutions.  The  promise  of  long  life  was  the
outward  hull  of  the  promise  of  eternal  life;  the
symbolic  death-offering  was  the  emblem  of  hopeful
iv.-iunation  to  God  in  death  ;  and  how  shall  piety  in
deatli  find  its  reward  otherwise  than  in  the  time  be
yond  the  grave?  Above  all,  it  was  the  covenant  of
God  that  furnished  the  richest  guaranty  (Exod.  iii,
13).

|Im:.v  or  A  FiTnu:  Lira  IN  THE  Ou>  TESTAMENT.
— The  doctrine  of  a  future  life  is  in  the  Old  Testament
as  well  as  iu  the  New,  but  in  a  different  manner.  In
the  latter  it  is  i'or  all  who  read,  declared  undeniedly,
if  not  dogmatically ;  in  the  former  it  is  for  the  devout
and  believing.  There  is  thrown  over  it  a  vail  of  holy
reserve,  making  it  all  the  more  impressive  when  the
truth  is  seen  through  it.  But  for  this  the  Sadducee
had  no  eyes.  He  could  not  find  texts  declaring  it
preemptively  as  he  found  the  law  laid  down  for  mar
rying  a  brother's  widow.  He  came  to  oilr  Saviour
with  his  puzzle,  and  doubtless  deemed  it  unanswera
ble.  The  course  taken  by  Christ,  Matt.  xxii.  29,  is
very  remarkable,  and  it  is  astonishing  how  little
weight  it  seems  to  have  had  with  writers  of  the  War-
burton  school.  lie  docs  not  meet  the  caviller  with
the  texts  we  would  have  expected.  He  does  not


cite  such  passages  as  Ps.  xvii.  15  :  "I  shall  be  satis
lied  when  I  awake  in  thy  likeness;"  or  Ps.  xvi.:
''  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  Sheol ; "  or  Ps.  Ixxiii.
24 :  "  Thou  shall  guide  me  with  thy  counsel  and
afterward  receive  me  to  glory;"  or  Is.  xxvi.  1(J
where  a  resurrection  seems  to  be  spoken  of;  or  Dan
xii.  2,  where  it  is  expressly  declared.  The  Sadducee
would  probably  have  been  prepared  with  some  ex
planations  of  these,  such  as  are  now  ottered  by  the
modern  rationalist.  Instead  of  them  our  Saviour
quotes  one  of  the  most  common  passages  in  the  Old
Testament :  /  tun  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Imcic,  and
of  Jacob.  The  Sadducee  had  heard  it  read  hundreds
of  times  in  the  synagogue,  but  saw  nothing  in  it
about  a  future  life.  It  may  have  been  to  him,  in
other  respects,  a  favorite  passage;  for  though  called
infidels  in  modern  times  they  were  the  strictest  of
.lews,  glorying  Mrongly  in  their  ancient  patriarchal
descent.  "1  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of
Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  :  "  this  they  were  famil
iar  with  ;  but.  Ch;i-;'s  appendix  was  as  startling  to
them  as  it  was  conclusive:  lie  is  'not  Ike  God  of  the
dead  but  of  //,<:  lii-in<i.  God's  covenant  with  man
proves  His  immortality.  He  does  not  deal  thus  with
beings  of  a  day.  He  does  not  thus  solemnly  declare
Himself  the  God  of  things  non-existent.  Abraham,
and  Isaac,  and  Ja"oh,  are  still  present  realities,  not
living  in  their  children,  simply,  but  rather  their  chil
dren  living  in  them.  The  divine  care  of  a  chosen
people  thus  continued  from  generation  to  generation
implies  a  continued  being  in  the  individuals  that
compose  it,  and  without  which  the  whole  series
would  have  no  more  spiritual  value  than  any  linked
sueet  s-ion  in  the  animal  or  vegetable  world.  They
still  "  live  unto  Him."

Let  the  reader  test  this  by  endeavoring  to  fix  in
his  mind  the  idea  that  the  Old  Testament  wiiters  all
regarded  themselves  as  beings  destined  soon  to  de
part  into  nothingness — in  oilier  words,  that  they  were
all  sheer  animal  materialists.  Let  him  carry  along
this  impression,  and  keep  it  constantly  present  in
reading  the  Psalms,  the  Prophet-1,  or  even  the  Book
of  Proverbs.  What  a  discord  will  arise  between  it
and  many  of  their  vivid  utterances,  even  though
there  is  nothing  in  them,  dogmatically  or  didactively,
about  a  future  life.  Did  men  who  believe  in  no
hereafter  ever  talk  so?  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven
but  Thee,  and  there  is  none  in  all  the  earth  that  I  de
sire  beside  Thee:  Flesh  and  heart  fail,  but  Thou  art
the  strength  (the  rock)  of  my  soul :  Thy  favor  is  life  :
Thy  loving-kindness  is  more  than  life:  My  soul  faints
for  Thee,  the  living  God:  For  with  Thee  is  the  foun
tain  of  life,  and  in  Thy  light  do  we  see  light:  Thou
art.  our  dwelling-place  in  all  generations :  Doubtless
Ti.ou  art  our  Father  even  though  Abraham  be  igno
rant  of  us  and  Israel  acknowledge  us  not;  Thou,  Oh
Lord,  art  our  Father  and  our  Redeemer:  Art  Thou
not  from  everlasting,  Jehovah,  my  God,  my  Holy
One?  we  shall  not  die."  Or  take  that  oft-repeated
Hebrew  oath  :  As  the  Lord  livcth  and  as  thy  soul  liv-
etli ;  what  meaning  in  such  a  connection  of  terms?
How  does  all  this  lofty  language  immediately  collapse
at  the  presence  of  the  low  materializing  idea !  Even
the  language  of  their  despondency  shows  how  far
they  were  from  the  satisfied  animal  or  earthly  state
of  soul:  Shall  dust  praise  Thee?  Shall  Thy  loving
kindness  be  declared  in  the  grave,  or  Thy  righteous
ness  in  the  land  of  oblivion  ?  It  was  bidding  farewell
to  God,  not  to  earth,  it  was  losing  the  idea  of  the
everlasting  covenant  and  its  everlasting  author,  that
imparted  the  deepest  gloom  to  their  seasons  of  seep-


CUM'.  II.  4-25.


215


ticism.  It  was  in  just  such  travail  of  the  spirit  that
the  hope  was  born  within  them.  This  was  the  sub
jective  mode  of  its  revelation;  and,  thus  regarded,
the  very  texts  which  the  Sadducee,  ancient  or  mod
ern,  would  quote  in  favor  of  his  denial,  testify  to  a
true  spirituality — to  a  state  of  soul  most  opposite  to
Iris  own.  And  this  style  of  language  is  not  confined
to  the  devotional  or  prophetical  Scriptures.  It
gleams  out  in  expressions  interspersed  among  the
historical  details  of  the  Jewish  home-life.  What  a
people,  says  Rabbi  Tanchum  (citing  the  words  of
Abigail,  1  Sam.  xxv.  2'J),  where  even  the  women
spcalv  so  sublimely,  and  beyond  even  the  philosophers
of  other  nations,  about  souls  bound  up  in  the  bundle
of  life  (or  lives,  C^nn  -,r,S).  See  POCOCKE'S
"Notes  to  Porta  Mosis,"  p.  93.  It  may  be  very  easy
for  the  rationalizing  interpreter  to  put  another  face
on  sucli  a  passage  as  this,  but  it  may  be  only  because
in  his  case,  as  in  that  of  the  Sadducee  of  old,  there
is  a  vail  upon  his  heart  in  the  reading  of  the  Old
Covenant.

Such  an  expanding  spiritual  sense  (in  distinction
from  the  merely  fanciful  or  the  cabalistical)  is  for
those  who  have  eyes  to  see  and  ears  to  hear ;  and,
thus  regarded,  it  may  be  said  that  the  future  life  of
the  Old  Testament,  even  with  this  vail  thrown  over
it,  has  far  more  of  moral  power  than  the  Greek
Hades,  or  any  spirit-world  mythology  of  other  ancient
nations  whom  the  rationalist  would  represent  as  sur
passing  the  Jews  in  this  respect.  The  latter  were
doubtless  far  behind  the  Greeks  in  distinctness  of
conception  and  locality  ;  but  this  was  because  God  did
not  mean  to  leave  His  people  to  their  fancies.  He
gave  them,  and  especially  the  pious  among  them,  the
spirit  of  the  doctrine,  but  so  kept  it  in  holy  reserve
that  they  could  not  turn  it  into  fables. — T.  L.]

8.  From  the  circumstance  of  its  not  being  said
that  the  woman  was  inspired  by  the  breath  of  God,
Delitxsch  is  inclined  to  follow,  with  Tertullian,  the
so-called  traducian  theory,  or  the  generic  propaga
tion  of  the  human  soul.     This  argument,  however,
de  silently,  proves  nothing ;  since  Adam,  in  relation
to  Eve,  also  is  the  type  of  the  creation  of  humanity.
And  so  we  adhere  to  this :  The  body  of  man  proceeds
from  propagation  (tradueianism),  the  soul  is  created
(creatiouism),  the  spirit  is  pre-existent  as  the  idea  of
God.

9.  Paradise. — See  the  article  "Eden"  in  WINER,
and   the  literary  catalogue   there  given.     See   also
HEKZOU'S  "Real-Encyclopedia."     Paradise  (Hebrew,
~fi  ;  Septuagint,  irupdoeKro?,  that  is,  a  walling  or  fenc
ing  round,  a  place  enclosed  as  a  garden),  like  all
facts  in  Genesis,  especially  of  its  earlier  history,  was,
on  the  one  side,  an  actuality,  on  the  other  a  symbol ;
and  the  latter,  indeed,  in  a  special  degree.     In  favor
of  its  actuality  there  is,  first,  the  fundamental  thought :
there  was  a  home  of  the  human  race ;  secondly,  the
territory    of   this   home,    the   region   in   which   the
Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  had  their  sources,  or  West
ern  Asia  as  appears  probable  from  other  reasons ;
thirdly,  the  mention  of  the  well-known  rivers  Phrat
(Euphrates)  and  Hiddekel  (Tigris),  together  with  other
features.    In  favor  of  the  clear  symbolical  significance
of  Paradise  there  is  the  figure  of  the  one  stream  that
afterwards  divided  itself  into  four  different  streams
running  out  from  thence  into  the  world,  as  also  the
Inclosure  of  the  garden,  and  especially  the  two  trees
with  their  wonderful  significance.     The  theological
views   respecting  Paradise   embrace  two  extremes :
whilst  some  would  regard  it  as  extending  over  all  the


earth  (Ephraim  the  Syrian ;  and  a  multitude  of  suet
extravagant  opinions  as  cited  by  CALMKT  :  Comment
Utter,  in  Gfcnesin,  p.  81),  others,  on  the  other  side
would  reduce  it  to  one  common  section  so  appropri
ated  as  to  have  a  «ommensurate  influence  upon  the
first  men.  Between  these  lies  the  sound  view  of  the
church,  which  supposes  for  the  pure  a  pure  sphere  of
nature,  for  the  care-needing  a  motherly  bosom  of
nature,  for  the  innocent  a  heavenly,  peaceful,  holy
region,  for  the  child-like  a  garden  with  its  fruits  (see
LAXGE'S  "  Dogmatics,"  p.  396).  The  exegetical
views  respecting  the  passage  divide  themselves  into
the  historical,  the  allegorical,  and  the  mythical.  The
historical  views,  again,  fall  into  two  classes :  those
that  maintain  the  possibility  of  yet  determining  the
region  of  Paradise,  and  such  as  suppose  the  configu
ration  of  the  earth  to  have  been  so  changed  by  the
fiood  that  the  place  of  union  of  the  four  rivers  can
not  now  be  pointed  out.  Both  assume  a  significant
change  of  the  earth,  especially  since  the  i'all  of  Adam,
or  the  beginning  of  the  human  race.  The  allegorical
views  divide  themselves  into  the  Gnostic  or  the  theo-
sophic-allegorieal  (Philo,  Jacob  Bohin,  and  others),
and  into  the  mystic-allegorical  (Swedcuborg  ami
others).  The  mythical  views  may  be  divided  into
the  predominantly  theological  or  philosophical,  or
the  predominantly  geographical.  First  Class:  a.
Calvin,  lluetius,  Bochart,  and  others :  Paradise,  they
say,  lay  in  the  district  in  which  the  Euphrates  and
the  Tigris  unite  (Schat  id  Arab) ;  the  Pishou  and  the
Gihou  are  the  two  principal  mouths  of  Schat  al  Arab.
b.  Hopkinson  :  Paradise  was  the  region  of  Babylon ;
the  two  canals  of  the  Euphrates  form  half  of  the
number  of  the  four  rivers,  c.  Rask :  The  same
region  probably,  only  let  there  be  added  to  the  two
well-known  streams  the  two  subordinate  streams  of
the  Schat  al  Arab.  d.  Harduin  :  Galilee,  e.  Ilasse :
Paradise  lay  in  East  Prussia.  Second  Class :  Change
in  the  course  of  the  rivers.  Clerieus,  and  others:
Paradise  lay  in  Syria  (Kohlreif  and  others :  Damas
cus).  Third  Class :  PHILO  :  Ue  Mundi  Opificio ;
JACOB  BOIIM:  Mysterium  Magnum.  Fcurt/t  Class:
See  the  article  "'Swedenborg  "  in  HEUZOU'S  "  Real-
Encyclopedia."  Fifth  Class:  The  mythico-theologi-
cal,  or  strictly  mythological,  view,  which  makes  it
the  story  of  the  four  world-rivers  that  corne  from  the
hills  of  heaven,  and  wander  over  the  earth  (Von
Bohlen  and  others).  Sixth  Class:  The  mythico-
geographical.  Sickler,  Buttmann,  Bcrtheau  :  "  Geo
graphical  Views  that  form  the  Ground  of  the  Descrip
tion  of  the  Situation  of  Paradise,"  Gottingen,  1848.
Winer  distinguishes  a  literal  view  (Hcngstenberg,
Tiele,  Baumgarteu),  a  half-literal,  which  attempts  to
separate  the  distribution  of  the  streams  from  the
matter  of  fact  contained  (Less,  Cramer,  Werner,  and
others),  an  allegorical  (Von  Gerstenberg),  and  a
hieroglyphical,  not  very  distinguishable  (J.  G.  Rosen-
muller  and  others),  p.  290,  wherein  he  protests
against  the  conjectures  of  Iliilhnann  and  Ballen-
stedt.

According  to  Vcrbrugge,  Jahn,  and  others,  the
one  Paradise-stream  may  be  understood  of  a  region
abounding  in  streams.  We  suppose  that  the  stream
has  a  most  special  symbolical  importance,  and  de
notes,  generally,  the  well-ground  of  the  Paradise-
earth.  With  this,  however,  there  is  easily  connected
the  historical  view  of  Eeland  and  Calmet.  Accord
ing  to  this,  Pishon  denotes  the  Phasis  which  rises  in
the  Moschian  mountains,  stands  in  connection  with
the  gold-land  of  Colchis  so  famed  in  antiquity  (Colchis
=  Chavila),  and  flows  into  the  Black  Sea ;  Gihon  is  the


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  JjJOSES.


Aras  or  Araxes  (the  Phasis  of  Xeuophon,  H"  ,  to
break  forth  ~  apdrrui),  which  likewise  ri-es  in  Arme
nia,  mill  Hows  into  the  Caspian  Sea.  Jiut  Cu^h  is  the
•and  of  the  Kossicans,  which  Strabo  and  Uiodorus
place  hi  the  neighborhood  of  Media  and  the  Caspian
Sea.  According  to  this,  Armenia  v,-i>idd  have  been
the  territory  of  the  aiici.'iit  Paradise.  Kno'iel  also
had  first  presented  the  grounds  (p.  '2,S),  which  are
iu  favor  of  Armenia,  out  of  which,  moreover,  the
postdiluvian  men  proceeded.  On  this  arcount  have
Reland,  Link,  Von  Leimvrke,  Kurtz,  Itunsen,  and
Others,  supposed  it  to  I",1  Armenia.  It  is  objected,
however,  lo  tiii.s :  1.  'i'ii:it  tie.'  names  llavila  and
Cush,  in  other  plmvs,  belong  to  the  Sotitli.  The
name  Havila,  it  may  be  .-aid  generally,  is  i>ot
phically  delci'Miined ;  but  the  name  Ctish,  toother
with  the  Cu.-hi!  •.•*,  t.m  just  as  well  be  extended  from
the  north  to  the  .-nulli  a-;  that  of  the  Normans  (see
KUUT/.  :  "History  of  the  old  Testament,''  p.  5'J).  '2.
No  Armenian  di.Mrict  can  be  summarily  denoted  as
the  native  land  of  gold,  bdellium,  and  the  onvx.  In
regard  to  t::e  i:old,  iiowever,  Colchis  presenis  no  diili-
eulty.  .hi-,1  as  little  are  the  bdellium  and  the  onyx
to  be  denied  of  this  district,  since  it  evidently  has
something  symbolical.  Objection  '•><}  :  It  is  said  that,
tiie  cheraliim  are  not  to  be  found  in  Armenia:  but
where  on  the  earth  was  the  home  of  these?  And
the:),  to,),  niu-t  many  indications  point  to  a  more
nortaeMi  highland,  lint  the  places  commonly  cited
for  this  purpose,  Ps.  xlviii.  » ;  Is.  xlviii.  Improve
nothing,  anil  E/ek.  xxviii.  Hi  is  a  pure  ideal  painting.
Moivove.r,  il.i!  analogies  of  the  Allmrdi,  the  .Yiedo-
Per.-ia:i  moiiiMah-:  of  God,  and  the  Indian  mountains
/A/-'-,  appear  to  be  merely  reflexes  of  the  Paradise-
story;  a;id  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  Chinese
mountain-tract  l\n<  .dun.  In  other  respects  the
s  and  combinations  collected  by  Knobel  arc
communications  of  great  interest.  Keii  states  a
reuse  in  why  the  Cyrus  (now  the  Kur)  ,-hould  be  put
in  place  of  the  Piiasis  (p.  4li)  ;  it  is  the  fact  that  the
lising  of  the  Piiasis  lies  beyond  Armenia.  This  rea-
:-jn  would  be  decisive,  if  we  had  to  insist  upon  the
imre  lii  •lalne-:;  of  the  origin  of  the  Paradise  rivers,
i!,'  holds,  in  like  manner,  that  the  Gihon  is  the
Ai-axes:  the  sundering  of  the  four  .-(.reams  lie  ex
plains  by  changes  in  the  earth's  surface,  yet  not
alone  through  the  flood  (Note,  p.  -1-1).  Fimillv,  ac
cording  to  i)clitzsch,  the  Pison  must  relate  to  the
Indus  and  its  river  territory  to  India,  whilst  the
Ciln.n  is  the  Nile  (pp.  Ml),  0^0).  Afterwards  he
came  to  regard  the  combination  oi'Bunsen  as  having
a  go.)d  degree  of  probability  (p.  150),  and  then  he
represents  the  mutually  opposing  diflieulties  bv  the
concluding  alternative  :  We  must  cither  acknowledge
the  incomprehensibility  of  the  narration,  or  accom
modate  ourselves  with  the  admission  that  the  certain
knowledge  of  the  four  rivers  has  been  lost  in  the
disappearance  of  Paradise  itself. — The  actual  and
/symbolical  intporlaua:  of  Paradise.  The  yardcn  in
jfilcn.  Historical.  Tin:  /nucculy  carth-biooni  which
surrounded  the  new-born  man,  who  is  to  be  regarded,
indeed,  as  full-grown,  and  yet  childlike  and  inexpe
rienced.  The  point  of  the  earth's  congeniality,
wherein  the  divine  earth-culture  is  in  unity  with  the
earthly  nature— when  the  fruit-trees  are  of  the  noblest
quality,  the  grain  grows  wild,  the  beasts  attach  them
selves  to  men  iu  the  domestic  state,  whilst  there  is
allotted  to  men  an  abundance  of  simple  food  (fruit
of  trees,  the  nourishment  of  children)  to  be  procured
by  an  eayy  labor  of  the  body,  and  a  thoughtful  care
ou  the  part  of  the  mind. — /Symbolical  siynijicance  of


Paradise.  The  general  correspondence  between  the
pure,  peaceful,  serene,  and  blessed  man,  and  the
pure,  peaceful,  serene,  and  blessed  world  of  God  .  or
the  inward  communion  with  God,  and,  corresponding
to  it,  the  outward,  sensible  presence  of  God  in  the
surroundings  of  humanity.  In  its  more  special  signif
icance  :  1.  The  heavenly  disposition  of  the  earth,
the  rich  paradisaical  soil;  U.  the  objective  paradisia
cal  aspects  of  the  earth,  as  the  subjective  in  the  con
templation  of  children  and  of  men  attuned  to  a  festal
life;  8.  the  promised  laud,  the  consecration  of  the
earth  through  the  salvation;  4.  the  kingdom  of  glory
above  (Luke  xxiii.  4:;;  li  Cor.  xii.  4);  5.  the  earth
glorified  for  its  union,  at  some  future  time,  with  the
heavens  (2  IVt.  iti.  l:j;  Rev.  xx.). —  The  vocation  in
AuW/.-r.  Historical:  The  serene,  free  activity  of
the  child  iu  contrast  \viih  the  necessity  and  the
pains  of  labor  proper.  The  true  keeping  of  entrusted
good  against  u  damage  yet  unforeseen,  especially
through  sell-keeping  in  contrast  with  the  later  anxious
watching,  tiyinb(jli<:al :  The  calling  of  the  pious
and  blessed,  according  toils  poshive  an  1  negative
sides.  A  holy  oliic  •  of  labor,  a  holy  ollicc  of  defence,
and,  through  both,  a  holy  ministry  of  instruction. —
The  Paradise-rivers:  I.  Historical  (see  above).  ^.
Symbolic.  The  lour  world-streams  in  their  high
significance,  as  the  streams  of  life  and  blessing  that
tlow  conditionally  from  the  paradi.-aic.il  home  of
man. —  The  ti\L»  -in  //<<.  //«;•./</«.  Histor':* -<i> :  The
.  tnce  that  .-urrounded  the  first  man  still  simple
and  conformable  to  his  childlike  degree;  food  both
lovely  to  the  eye  ana  ennobling  in  its  eliicacv.  /v/m-
bolical:  'The  riches  of  the  pious  and  their  freedom
from  want  (Ps.  xxiii.).—  The  two  trees  ///.  the  inl

Historical:  Nature  in  its  centre  endowed
witn  a  wonderful  power  of  health,  as  also  with  intoxi
cating  gifts  of  dangerous  eliicacv,  which,  through  an
enjoyment  rash  or  immoderate  (or,  in  general,  having
only  the  form  of  nourishment),  exert  a  Destructive  in
fluence,  and  both  alike  represented  there  by  a  cen
tral  vegetable  formation,  whether  it  be  tree  or  bush.
Symbolical:  The  tree  of  life:  The  power  of  health
and  life  in  nature,  which,  in  connection  with  the
word  of  God,  rises  to  a  fountain  of  everlasting  lite  in
Chri>t  sotyiologically,  and  to  be  the  nourishment  of
eveilasiing  life  in  Cliri.-t  sacramentally. —  The.  tree  of
knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  Nature  as  the  tree  of
probation  every  way,  namely  in  excessive,  iu  dan
gerous,  and  in  iorbhidcii  means  of  enjoyment.  —  The
paradisaical  coiiuitmiil.  Historical:  The  warning,
inviting,  and  dissuading  signs  of  God  in  the  produc
tions  of  nature  themselves,  and  the  transformation
of  the  signs  into  miraculous  words  for  the  ear  through
the  present  spirit  of  God.  The  mention  of  all  the
trees  in  the  garden  is  in  so  far  a  command  as  the
arbitrary  abstinence  from  permitted  enjoyment  has
for  its  consequence  the  inclination  to  forbidden  en
joyment.  There  is  also  a  reminder  in  it  that  he  has
no  need  of  the  forbidden  enjoyment.  Symbolical:
The  revealed  will  of  God,  in  general,  not  a  constraint
nor  an  abridgment,  but  only  a  healthful  barrier  for
the  sake  of  freedom  and  happiness. — The  leasts
bronyld  before  Adam  in  Paradise.  Historical:
Original  sympathy  between  the  animal  and  the  human
worlds.  Symbolical:  The  destiny  of  man,  to  learn
to  understand,  through  the  gospel,  the  sighing  of  the
creature,  or  to  have,  in  general,  a  right  knowledge
of  the  animal-world  and  of  nature,  and  how  rightly
to  use  them. — The  naming  of  the  beasts.  Historical:
First  exercise  of  the  human  spirit — and  especially  of
speech.  Symbolical:  'The  religious  and  scientific


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


21-J


development  of  man  through  nature. — Human  speech.
Historical :  Hereditary  disposition  taking  root  in  the
very  life  of  the  spirit  and  its  plastic  organization,
awakened  through  the  most  excited  contemplations
of  childhood — such  as  that  of  life  in  the  beast.
Symbolical:  Man's  (irst  prophecy  of  nature,  a  presage
of  his  destiny  to  know  aud  predict  perfectly  the  law
and  gospel  of  nature. —  The  creation  of  woman.
Historical:  The  formation  of  the  human  pair  falls  in
the  period  of  the  physiological  creation  of  the  man.
Not  after  the  manner  of  ready-made  or  at  once  com
pleted  being,  but  in  the  way  of  becoming,  does  the
one  developing  human  form  become  perfected  in  the
contrast  ot  one  man  and  woman.  Man,  as  a  per
sonality,  is  not  conditioned  through  sexual  comple
tion  or  integration  ;  and  man  and  wife  are  not,  some
how,  only  two  halves  which  make  one  whole  in  a
personal  sense,  but  perhaps  in  a  social.  The  wife,
however,  is  just  as  much  whole  man  as  the  man
himself.  She  proceeds  not  only  from  the  substance
of  the  man,  but  also  from  his  trance-vision  in  that
deathlike  sleep  into  which  he  had  been  cast  by  God.
In  respect  to  substance,  as  formed  from  one  of  man's
ribs,  she  comprehends  less  than  Adam ;  in  respect  to
form  she  is  a  creation  of  secondary  power  in  the
region  of  paradise.  God  brings  Eve  to  Adam.  Mar
riage  is  instituted  by  God,  not  only  in  respect  to  the
divine  creation  of  its  contrast,  but  also  in  respect  to
the  divine  guidance  of  the  individual  choice.  Man
must  not  anticipate  the  decision  of  God,  but  neither
is  he  to  reject  the  destined  one  whom  God  brings
before  him — the  one  who  through  a  divine  revela
tion,  as  it  were,  and  a  divine  consideration,  is  marked
out  for  him  as  his  counterpart. — Adam's  salutation
and  blessing.  Symbolical :  The  first  of  all  high  and
sacred  songs  of  love.  Marriage  the  principle  of  the
family  state,  superordinate  to  all  other  domestic  rela
tions.  Marriage  in  contrast  with  the  sins  of  sodomy
and  fornication — in  contrast  with  incest  (leaving
father  and  mother,  etc.) — in  contrast  with  an  arbitra
ry  and  sinful  taking  and  forsaking.  (The  paradisai
cal  indissol ability  of  marriage  is  conditioned  upon  its
paradisaical  infallibility.)  Duties  to  father  and  mo
ther  receive  an  emphasis  from  the  fact  that  they  are
measured  by  the  law  of  love.  The  greatness  and  the
limit  of  the  parental  right.  It  extends  to,  but  not
into,  the  marriage  state. —  The  nakedness  of  the  first
human  beings.  Symbolical:  The  childlike  simplicity,
the  free  loin,  beauty,  and  majesty  of  innocence.

[EXCURSUS  ox  THE  PARADISE  PavERS. — The  search
for  the  Gihon  and  the  Pishon  in  the  north  is  attended
with  the  greatest  difficulties.  Chief  among  them  is
the  necessity  it  involves  of  finding  another  Cush  in
the  same  direction.  The  language  of  the  writer  gives
the  impression  of  a  territory  of  great  comparative  ex
tent,  and  that  could  not  easily  be  misunderstood  by  a
reader  familiar  with  the  geographical  terms  employed.
O1 3  "pi*  ba  n'On  Xin :  that  is,  the  river  that
goes  round  the  whole  land  of  Cush — clear  round  it —
a  wide  and  notable  circuit.  The  sense  of  winding  or
meandering  through  cannot  be  got  from  the  verb,
and  the  references  to  Is.  xxiii.  16,  and  other  places
("PS  "0,-p::  ISO  ,  Ps.  xlviii.  13  :  Go  round  about
the  city — round  about  Zion),  do  not  support  it.  The
ancient  view  that  the  Gihon  was  the  Nile,  and  Pishon
the  Indus,  though  having  difficulties  of  another  kind,
is  more  near  to  what  would  seem  to  be  the  general
idea  of  the  passage :  four  great  rivers  (waters  rather)
^rominent  in  the  earth,  and  having  their  courses,  in
.  )me  way,  connected  with  Eden.  Even  if  the  Nile


and  the  Indus  are  not  the  rivers,  it  is  more  easy  t«
see  how  they  came  to  be  anciently,  and  almost  uni
versally,  so  regarded,  than  to  find  anything  corre
sponding  to  this  graphic  representation  in  the  region
north  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Hiddckel  or  Tigris.
One  thing  is  clear  on  the  very  face  of  the  account :
the  writer  himself  had  no  difficulty,  and  thought  of
none  for  the  reader.  He  is  certainly  not  speaking
of  things  supposed  to  be  obliterated  by  the  deluge,
but  of  places  recognized,  however  vaguely,  in  the
knowledge  of  the  day.  To  this  assumed  knowledge
the  picture  is  presented,  though  with  that  inadequacy
of  conception,  and  that  generality  or  undefinednesa
of  language,  which  necessarily  marked  the  first
geographical  notions  of  mankind.  It  was  very  much
as  an  early  Greek  writer  would  have  done,  in  a  simi
lar  case,  who  had  nothing  else  to  go  by  but  the  map
of  Eratosthenes,  or  the  still  older  one  of  Hecatseus.
This  does  not  at  all  detract  from  the  inspiration  of
the  account,  whether  we  adopt  the  vision-theory,  or
some  more  objective  mode  of  raising  the  conceptions
in  the  narrator's  mind.  In  either  case  such  concep
tions  would  be  shaped  by  his  supposed  knowledge,
as  this  would  also  be  the  ground  of  presentation  to
other  minds.  The  picture  which  St.  John  had  of  the
Euphrates,  in  his  apocalyptic  vision,  was  doubtless
according  to  the  geographical  ideas,  more  or  less
correct,  which  he  had  previously  possessed  of  that
river.  Geographical  language  has  undergone  a  great
change..  Everything  now,  and  for  a  long  time,  has
been  so  precisely  defined  that  we  need  to  get  out  of
our  modern  conceptions  to  be  in  a  condition  to  under
stand  satisfactorily  the  most  ancient  modes  of  divid
ing  and  describing  the  earth.  The  nomenclature  has
become  greatly  enlarged  and  varied.  We  have  rivers,
lakes,  seas  (the  Greeks  in  Homer's  time  called  these
two  last  by  one  name,  Ki^vri\  oceans,  friths,  arms  of
the  sea,  gulfs,  bays,  sounds,  etc.  In  the  earliest
times  they  were  not  fixed,  and  we  cannot  be  always
certain,  therefore,  that  a  general  name  like  ~H3 ,  a
flood  or  flowing  water,  presented  just  that  limited
conception  in  every  case  that  we  now  invariably  con
nect  with  river,  flumcn,  7roTa,ubs,  etc.  For  examples
of  the  wide  sense  of  1fi3,  see  such  passages  as  Ps.
xciii.  3:  The  floods  lift  up  their  voice,  nTim ,  lift
up  their  dashing  waves,  C"3T;  Ps.  Ixvi.  6,  it  is  join
ed  with  C11 ,  and  most  obviously  used  of  the  lied
Sea;  see  also  Ps.  Ixxxix.  20.  So  Hub.  iii.  8,  where
D"nn:2  and  C^3  are  spoken  of  in  the  same  way;
comp.  Is.  xlviii.  18.  \Ve  deduce,  too,  this  wide
primitive  sense  from  its  employment  in  metaphors
where  there  is  to  be  denoted  width,  enlargement,
fulness:  Peace  like  a  river,  "in: 3  ,  Is.  Ixvi.  12,  like
a  flood;  so  Is.  lix.  19,  enemy  come  in  like  a  flood.
Beyond  the  floods  of  Cush,  Is.  xviii.  1 ;  the  same
expression,  Zeph.  iii.  10.  See  especially  Jonah  ii.  4:
"O-^D"1  "in: ,  the  flood  went  round  me  (the  deep
sea) ;  compare  with  this  Homer's  wKea.:>ov  pe'edpa.
streams  of  ocean,  Iliad  xiv.  245.  So  it  seems  to  be
used,  not  so  much  of  a  river,  in  the  limited  sense,  as
of  any  great  water,  in  such  passages  as  Job  xxii.  16,
Ps.  xlvi.  5.  In  Ps.  xxiv.  2  it  denotes  the  floods  of
chaos,  the  old  Tehom  rabbah,  or  "  great  deep,"  and
is  put  in  direct  parallelism  with  O^E1 :  For  lie  hath
founded  it  upon  the  seas,  and  built  it  upon  t\ic  floods,
ni"in:  ^y .  See  the  same  word  used  in  the  same
way,  Ezek.  xxxi.  15.

Thus  the  ~n: ,  or  great  water,  in  the  passage  be-


218


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  .JIOSE3.


fore  us,  Gen.  ii.  10.  In  the  Eden  territory  itself  it
might  h:ivc  had  the  form  of  a  Like — an  idea,  in  fact,
which  the  whole  aspect  of  the  account  greatly  favors.
It  was  certainly  not  a  spring  or  fountain-head  to  four
commencing  streams,  but  rather  a  reservoir  in  which
all  were  joined,  whether  as  flowing  in  or  flowing  out.
From  thence  they  were  parted,  or  began  to  be  parted
("I""1  ,  see  remark  on  r'~V*  and  references,  p.  202)
into  lour  ~"r  X~  .  This  is  rendered  heads  in  our  ver
sion,  and  so  the  Vulgate,  In  'jiiatnor  capita.  But  they
both  mislead  in  their  literalncss ;  the  Hebrew  w'N"!
never  having,  like  our  word,  the  sense  of  fountain-
head  or  spring;  the  Slieinitic  tongues  called  the  re
mote  upper  part  of  a  stream  a  font  orajinyrr  rather
than  a  head.  It  became  four  principal  waters  or
floods,  four  arms  (/jr<.'<-/t><t)  or  great  branches.  Two
of  these  were  rivers  within  the  modern  limits  of  the
term,  but  very  great,  rivers;  so  that  one  conies  after
wards  to  be  almost  constantly  called  "in  3  with  the
article  a-  a  proper  name — the  great  river,  the  sea  or
flood.  See  (leu.  xv.  IS;  xxxi.  21;  Num.  xxii.  5;
Dent.  I.  7;  xi.  -I  ;  <'<>sh.  xxiv.  2,  3,  14,  15;  2  Sam.
x.  1C) ;  Neh.  ii.  7;  1^.  vii.  2<>;  xi.  15;  x\\ii.  12  and
others.  From  such  a  use  as  this,  perhaps,  came  the
.•.••.union  secondary  or  specific  application  of  "HS
to  rivers  proper.  The  other  two,  probably,  presented
a  different  appearance.  Beyond  the  bounds  of  the
E'!i  n  ten-nun  they  may  have  become  friths,  or  arms
of  the  sea,  or  two  diverging  shores  of  a  great  water
soon  lu.-ing  sight  of  each  other,  yet  each  still  keeping
the  name  ~,r,3  as  more  applicable,  in  fact,  to  them
(if  we  may  jud'.re  from  its  primary  sdi.-e)  than  to  the
streams  uu  the  :i»rth.

Such  a  vie-.v  may  not,  at  first,  seem  in  harmony
v.  iih  our  preconceptions,  but  there  are  considerations
to  be  mentioned  which,  on  closer  examination,  will
more  and  more  divest  it  of  any  strange  or  forced
appearance.  In  the  first  place,  two  of  these  C^Ti:
are  determined,  and  we  may  regard  them  as  furnish
ing  the  necessary  data  for  the  determination  of  the
others  according  to  some  sense  once  clearly  recog
nized.  They  are  waters  in  close  and  even  immediate
connection  with  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  not  at
their  obscure  sources,  or  springs,  where  they  could
not  be  recognized  as  ni"~3 ,  but  where  they  both
appear  as  parting  from  a  common  junction  in  the
Eden-land.  The  two  well-known  branches  are  north
of  this  junction  ;  we  must,  therefore,  look  for  the
o'.hers  on  the  south,  and  the  region  first  to  be  exam
ined  in  our  search  for  Eden  is  that  in  which  the
Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  come  together.  This  was
near  the  head  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  where  most  of  the
ancient  authorities  agreed  in  fixing  it,  and  to  which
place  also  there  points  a  concurrence  of  Arabian  and
Persian  tradition.  Here  Calvin  and  Bochart  find  it.
But  where,  then,  are  the  two  southern  c'nns ,  one
of  which  goes  round  the  land  of  Havilah,  the  land  of
gold  (India,  says  the  Jerusalem  Targuni),  and  the
other  goes  round  the  whole  land  of  Cush,  that  is,
Southern  Arabia  (see  Gen.  x.  7  ;  1  Kings  x.  1  ;
HOMER:  ()d>/ss.  i.  20)?  The  branches  of  the  Schat
al  Arab,  which  completes  the  junction  of  the  Eu
phrates  and  the  Tigris,  fall  altogether  short  of  this
graphic  description.  We  might  regard  this  delta  as
the  remains  of  the  ancient  confluence  in  Eden,  but  it
will  not  answer  for  Pishon  and  Gihon.  The  key  to
the  difficulty,  we  think,  will  suggest  itself,  if  the
reader  will  keep  in  mind  the  view  here  taken  of


^!~I3 ,  and  carry  it  with  him  in  a  steady  contemplation
of  all  the  waters  that  meet  in  this  region  of  the
earth.  An  ancient  map,  such  as  that  of  Ptolemy
or  Strabo,  or  the  still  earlier  one  of  Hecatasus,  would
be  best  for  this  purpose ;  but  the  simplest  delineation
could  hardly  fail  to  awake  the  thought  that  in  the
general  contour  of  the  system  of  waters  presented  by
these  two  mighty  streams  as  they  come  down  from
the  north,  and  the  two  diverging  seas,  or  shores  of
seas,  that,  parting  just  below  their  junction,  sweep
round  the  land  of  India  on  the  one  side,  and  Arabia
on  the  other,  we  have  the  data  that  determine  for  us
the  location  of  the  ancient  Eden-land.  It  suggest?,
too,  the  origin  of  the  general  language,  and  of  this
special  naming.  Knowledge  has  not  yet  introduced
geographical  distinctions;  the  internal  wastes  of  sens
and  their  connections  are  unknown;  the  pioneers  or
travellers  on  either  diverging  shore  simply  recognize
them  as  two  great  waters,  two  mighty  C^in: ,  and
they  name  them  according  to  their  most  visible  char
acteristics  and  directions.  Hence  the  earlie:-t  repre
sentation,  which  is  afterwards  enlarged  and  becomes
a  fixed  tradition,  (hie  is  the  broad-spriading  Pishon,
trending  far  away  to  the  eastern  land  of  gold  and
diamonds,  the  oilier  is  the  decp-jlowin<j  Gihon  (com
pare  the  favorite;  epithet  of  HOMER'S  "Ocean-River,"
/3advpf>uui>  'n.Kea.i'ulo,  Oil./xti.  xi.  13;  Iliad  xiv.  oil),
surging  far  lound  to  the  south  and  the  west.  Ob
serve,  too,  the  contrast  they  present  to  the  other
names,  the  j»V/vV/7,:v;/</  Euphrates  (n~E),  and  ti\z swift-
darting  Hiddekel  or  Tigris.  The  inland  and  mari
time  features  could  hardly  have  been  distinguished
by  more  significant  epithets.*

But  such  an  opinion  should  be  fortified  by  histor
ical  argument,  and  this,  we  think,  is  found  in  a  fact
of  Greek  archaeology,  having  much  interest  for  its
own  sake,  but  to  which  sufficient  attention  has  not
been  given  in  its  bearing  on  the  names,  and  the
primitive  significance,  of  these  neharim.  Homer
calls  Oceania  a  river.  It  had  been  so  called,  doubt
less,  long  before  his  time.  He  connects  with  it,  in
deed,  much  wild  mythology,  but  that  does  not  affect
the  fact,  nor  the  interest,  of  such  a  naming.  Whence
came  it?  It  is  not  a  sufiicicnt  explanation  to  call  it
poetical.  All  early  conceivings  of  nature  were  poeti
cal  in  this  sense  of  vastness  and  wonder.  The  great
unknown  of  things  was  full  of  it,  and  the  wonderful
was  ever  divine.  Hence  HOMKB'S  divine  ether,  divine
fire,  divine  sea  (aid epos  ««  S/TJS — SecrTi-iSaej  Tti'p — els
aAa  5?ai',  Iliad  xvi.  305;  xii.  177;  Odyss.  v.  2G1 — >
compare  bx  i~;^fl ,  monies  Dei,  Ps.  xxxvi.  7).  But
Homer,  though  a  poet,  speaks  here  in  the  most  mat
ter-of-fact  style.  He  believes  in  Oecanus  as  he  be
lieves  in  the  1'eneus  and  the  Eurotas.  Ulysses  navi
gates  this  ocean-river  in  a  black  ship;  he  sails  along
its  one  shore  until  he  leaves  it  and  enters  the  KVUCI
StaXdaffys.  the  swell  of  the  inland  sea,  Odyss.  x.  039;
xi.  1.  Homer's  poetry  makes  him  none  the  less  a
good  witness  for  the  most  ancient  geographical  ideas,
and  to  this  purpose  does  the  prosaic  Strabo  speak  in
quoting  him :  "Homer,"  he  says,  "not  only  calls  the
great  ocean  a  river  (noTa^tiv  KO.\  irora^olo  poov),  but
gives  the  same  name  to  a  part  of  it ;  otherwise  he
would  have  (absurdly)  represented  Ulysses  as  going
out  of  the  ocean  into  the  ocean."  Sec  STRABO  :  lib.
i.  75  ;  also  lib.  5.  3  ;  ii.  3,  5  ;  ii.  18,  where  he  speaks
of  the  four  great  sinuses  which  were  regarded  as  in-

*  [The  annexed  fipure  would  present  the  outline  appear
ance  of  the  supposed  Edeu-resion,  with  its  four  great  waters,
or  neharim,  as  given  by  the  modem  maps :


CUAP.  II.  4-25.


lets  from  the  ocean-stream,  the  Caspian  and  the  Pon-
tus  on  the  north  and  the  Persian  and  Arabian  sinus
on  the  south.  See,  also,  how  he  speaks  in  other
places  of  the  Northern  Oceanus,  and  its  supposed
connections.  It  is  worthy  of  note,  too,  how  Homer's
frequent  jWo?,  and  Strabo's  use  of  it  in  his  remarks
upon  him,  corresponds  to  the  primary  sense  of  the
Hebrew  IMS ,  as  a  full,  majestic;  flowing  rather  than
a  gliding  or  rapid  running  stream,  like  riv/is  or
amnis.  It  would  take  up  too  much  space  to  cite
other  passages  from  the  Greek  poets,  Herodotus,  etc.,
where  similar  language  is  used.  One  reference,  how
ever,  may  be  made  to  PINDAR:  Pyth.  Carm.  iv.  '250,

tv  T'  canfavov  Tre\a.ye<T(n  itovTia  r'  fpv&ptp,


because  in  it  this  river  Oceanus  is  directly  connected
with  the  Persian  Gulf.  Jason  is  represented  as  re
turning  "  by  the  channels  of  Oceanus  and  the  Ery-
thrian  or  lied  Sea,"  by  which  name  the  Greeks  de
nominated  not  the  Egyptian  but  the  Persian  sinus,
JOSEPHUS  names  it  in  the  same  way,  Ant.  lib.  i.  ch.  i.
3,  where  he  says  "  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  go
down  into  the  Red  Sea,  whilst  Gihon  (Geon,  as  he
calls  it)  runs  through  Egypt,  the  Greeks  calling  it  the
Nile."  lie  seems  to  have  regarded  the  Egyptian
river  as  in  some  way  connected  with  the  Scripture
Gihon  on  the  unknown  South.

This  IKUS  loquendi  may  be  explained  by  suppos
ing  that  the  sons  of  Javan,  Elisa  and  Tarshish,  Kit-
tirn  and  Kodanim,  carried  it  with  them  from  the  old


It  is  expressly  said  to  have  been  mp73  ,  and  it  is  not  at  all  easy  to  suppose  a  place  for  the  narrator  to  which  Arme
nia  would  have  hccn  cither  east  or  north-cast.— T.  L.]


220


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  HOPES.


home-hind  in  the  cast,  and  applied  it  in  (heir  pioneer
ing  among  the  friths  and  sounds  of  the  Mediterranean.
The  Egyptians,  or  sons  of  Ham,  had  it  in  the  game
way;  and  this  makes  simple  and  natural  what  other
wise  might  seem  forced  or  far-fetched,  in  such  an
interpretation  of  the  earliest  geographical  language.
Tiiis  idea,  too,  of  a  great  Oceanus  river  with  its  one
far-stretching  continuity  of  shore  winding  round  an
extensive  portion  of  the  earth,  must  have  had  its
origin  in  the  east,  and  in  that  region  of  iUwhere  two
such  vast  shores  met  each  other,  and,  at  the  same
time,  some  irreat  inland  water.  It  would  never  have
come  from  any  aspect  of  thinirs  presented  to  the  first
migration*  i'i  tin-  Mediterranean  with  its  many  islands,
sinuses,  filths,  and  sounds,  ever  breaking  up  such
continuity,  and  seldom  affording  a  view  in  which
land  docs  ;.ot  show  itself,  however  distantly,  in  some
direction.  Hence  it  was  that  this  part  of  the  earth
got  the  name  of  '•  the  i.-les  of  the  sea,''  so  fi  (-4110111  in
Scripture.  .As  siich,  it  became  opposed  to  the  conti
nent  or  n..;i:i  eastern  hind  of  Asia;  the  two  together
making  up  the  world,  or  orlii.t  lerrarum,  suul  thus
presented  in  the  parallelism  of  Ps.  xcvii.  ]  :

J.  '   •••    'i  !••  i  ms,  ]•'(  i!v  earth  (the  land)  rejoice,
Let  tlio  many  isles  be  glud.

If  we  suppose  that  the  Phoenicians  in  their  earliest
voyages  >  ..ried  with  them  this  idea  of  the  Ocean-
rivcr,  thev  must  have  had  it  from  some  more  primi
tive  sou  ice,  and  this  is  the  more  ca>ily  understood  it'
we  ad'-pt  the  tradition  mentioned  by  Strabo,  lib.  i.
eh.  ii.  •••..">,  that  the  Phoenicians,  in  di.-tinriioii  from
l!;p  Sidonians,  came  to  the  Mediterranean  from  the
neighborhood  of  the  Indian  Ocean  and  the  Persian
Gulf.

The  ro\ing  Greek  imagination,  as  usual,  carried
the  thing  farther  than  the  no  le.-s  vivid  but  more
Shemitic.  They  prolonged  the  couise  of  the
Ocean-river,  not  only  round  the  Arabian,  but  also
<!:••  Western  or  African  .Ethiopia  (see  HUM.  :  (></</.«.
i.  :.!:;;  ///</-/  i.  4^:j;  PINO.:  J'i///i.  iv.  IV.  ;  HKUOH.  iv.
42),  and  so  clear  round  Africa  itself  as  they  conceived
it  to  be.  On  the  other  hand,  the  eastern  flood  turned
north,  and  encompassed  the  boreal  regions,  and  so
the  idea  became  complete  of  a  TTOTO/UOS,  or  pno?,  that
encircled  the  earth,  according  to  the  Orphic  or  Ho
meric  description:


The  idea  appears  in  all  the  old  representations  of
the  world  down  to  the  map  of  Ptolemy,  and  in  this
point  of  view  it  is  not  extravagant  to  regard  the
scriptural  account  of  the  Paradise-streams  as  the  seed
from  which  it  all  grew.  Once  loosed  from  its  sober
scriptural  moorings  and  become  a  myth,  there  was
no  limit  to  the  fancy.  It  was  transferred  to  every
great  and  unknown  sea,  and  the  legend  of  Jason,  the
old  ocean  circumnavigator,  arose  from  the  desire  ever
manifested  by  the  Greeks  to  give  to  every  world-idea
that  came  to  them  a  national  aspect.  Hence  it  took
so  many  traditional  forms.  Pindar,  as  we  have  seen,
makes  him  return  home  by  the  way  of  the  Persian
Gulf  and  .'Ethiopia;  Appollonius  Rhodius  brings  him
back  by  the  Istcr,  or  Danube,  and  a  branch,  or  brcak-
off,  of  the  ocean-stream  (airoppu£  'nKfavolo  ;  see
Arffonautica  iv.  2s3,  637),  into  the  Ionian,  and  so,
round  again,  into  the  dangerous  Libyan  Sea  ;  whilst
the  writer  of  the  other  Aryonautica  (falsely  ascribed
to  Orpheus)  gets  him  somehow  into  the  boreal
regions,  making  him  return  by  the  German  Ocean
and  'It'p'"?)  tne  most  ancient  name  for  Ireland.  See


also  the  treatise  Da  HI  undo,  falsely  ascribed  to  Arig-
totle  (ARIST.  :  Opera,  Leip.  iv.  sect.  3d).  So  again.
Strabo  tells  us  (lib.  i.  ch.  ii.  10)  that  Homer  trans.
ferred  some  things  from  the  Pontus,  such  as  the
Symplagades  and  the  Aa^an  isle  of  Circe,  to  the  voyage
of  Ulysses — that  sea  having  been  anciently  regarded
as  another  Oceanus.  It  may  be  said,  too,  that  when
the  primitive  idea  began  to  float  away  into  the
boundless  and  unknown,  Cush  went  with  it,  pass
ing  over  into  Easteili  Africa,  the  land  of  the  HabeSEC-

nians  (Abyssinians),  Xw^Lt  i  jO>t>  as  the  Judaico-

Arabic  translator  (Arabs  Erpenianus)  renders  this
very  name  U.'"  in  the  place  before  us,  (Jen.  ii.  13.
./Ethiopia  is  afterwards  carried  still  farther  south  and
west,  and  the  name  is  sometimes  given  to  what  was
obscurely  known  of  We-tern  and  Central  Africa,  or
the  land"  of  the  Niger  and  Senegal.  Thus  it  be
comes  a  word  for  the  remote  and  unknown  regions
of  the  South,*  us  Tarshish  is  used  for  "the  distant
West.  In  this  way,  we  think,  it  is  employed  Zeph.
iii.  10,  and  Is.  xviii.  1,  the  land  of  the  shadow  of
wings,  ~'^:z  bubs  |r~X  (so  the  Syriac  renders  it,

j.— 3-=?  U^»-6?  l-^-'Di  terra  itntbrtc  alarum,  that  is,
as  Abulwalid  explains  it,  whose  wings  or  sides  are
shaded  (obscure  or  unknown) — the  land  ""in:  5  "1Z"£
~"~  ;  bi-yond  the  faoiL-t  "/"  O.'.v/i.  The  thought  gives
force  and  vividness  to  the  passage  Ps.  Ixviii.  Sli :
Even  Cush  .-hall  stretch  forth  ("'~r,  cause  to  run
swiftly  or  eagerly)  her  hands  unto  God.  The  two
lands  of'  Cu>h,  ''the  one  at  the  rising  (the  Arabian
Cush)  and  the  other  at  the  setting  MIH  "  (the  African),
were  distinguished  in  Homer's  day,  and  it  is  not
dillieult  to  sec  how  the  African  ./Ethiopians  came
from  the  Arabian,  or  Sab;ean,  Cush,  by  cio>sing  the
lower  narrow  part  of  the  Red  Sea  (one  of  the  u  hid
ing*  of  the  Gihon),  instead  of  being  derived  IVom  the
Egyptians  above,  that  is,  from  Mi/raim,  the  younger
brother  of  Cush.  In  thus  regarding  the  Red  Sea  :>g
a  continuation  of  the  Gihon,  as  in  fact  it  was,  if  our
view  be  correct,  we  may  understand  how  the  Nile
may  have  become  connected  with  the  name,  and
afterwards  been  taken  for  the  Gihon  itself.

The  Indian  Ocean  in  the  most  ancient  times  wag
the  widest  extent  of  water  known.  It  was,  too,
nearer  the  primitive  birth-place  of  man  in  the  East,
and,  therefore,  known  before  the  Mediterranean.
Even  after  men  became  acquainted  with  the  latter,
it  was,  in  comparison  with  the  older  water,  but  a
Ai'ui/rj,  or  a  i&aAao-rra,  an  irregular  broken  mass  of
bays  and  islands  instead  of  one  long  continuous  flow.
Here,  therefore,  in  this  earlier  region  of  the  Indian
and  Persian  seas  should  we  naturally  look  for  the
origin  of  that  name  Okeanos  which  it  is  so  difficult
to  deduce  from  the  Greek.  This  is  what  Diodorus
Siculus  does,  Lib.  i.  19,  in  what  he  says  of  the  jour
ney  of  Osiris  to  India.  The  derivation  of  Okeanos
from  ti-Kuy  vdu,  as  we  find  it  in  some  of  our  lexicons,
is  wholly  untenable,  since  va.w  denotes  only  the  trick-


*  Our  English  version  of  Is.  xviii.  1  mars  tho  passag
by  its  rendering  of  the  interjection  ^'il  :  "  Woo  to  the  land
etc."  It  should  bo  Ho,  as  in  Is.  Iv.  1,  XE2  i=3  Vfl :
Ho,  every  one  that  thirstcth."  Whc'.her  it  is  n  particle
of  threatening,  of  lamentation,  or  of  invitation,  defends  en
tirely  on  the  context.  Here  it  is  a  call  to  the  far-oii':  Ho,
to  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  wings — the  land  of  the  expand
ed  wings — hcyoiid  the  floods  of  Cush— beyond  the  Gihon,  that
ancient  river  that  went  round  tho  whole  land  of  /Ethiopia.
llo,  to  the  remotest  Cush!— T.  I,.]


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


22.


ling  flow  of  a  fountain,  and  WKVS  never  enters  into
any  of  the^nany  epithets  of  ocean  used  by  the  poets,
which  it  could  hardly  have  avoided  doing  had  it  be
longed  to  the  radical  idea  of  the  name.  'fl«6aj/<5s  is
Pa'di'ppuos,  /3j&vKvLiiai',  /Sadi/SiVrjs,  fvppoos,  etc.,  but
never  uKvp'puos.  Besides,  the  co  has  every  appearance
of  a  prefix,  being  cither  a  privative  (turned  into  co),
as  Suidas  holds  to  accommodate  it  to  an  absurd  deri
vation  of  his  own,  or,  as  is  far  more  likely,  the  ar
ticle  lengthened — the  kean,  or  keon.  The  etymology
which  traces  it  to  ogyges,  ogen,  uy'ivos  (if  there  ever
was  such  a  word  in  Greek)  has  as  little  support  in
any  traceable  significance,  as  in  any  tenable  phonetic
ground.  A  word  meaning  ancient  could  never  have
been  a  primitive  name,  although,  inversely,  such  a
name  as  Okeanos,  when  its  primitive  significance
had  been  lost,  might  be  used  for  the  old  and  the  un
known.  We  may  disregard,  in  the  same  way,  what
is  said  of  the  Coptic  oukame  and  the  Arabic  kamus.
The  true  explanation  of  this  name  will,  we  think,
suggest  itself  in  a  careful  consideration  of  four
things  :  1.  The  obvious  fact  that  the  o>  is  a  prefix,  as
Suidas  regards  it,  and  that  it  must,  therefore,  be  the
article;  2.  what  Joseplms  says  when  he  calls  Gihon
yew,  Geon,  as  mentioned  in  the  scriptural  descrip
tion  of  this  great  encompassing  water ;  3.  the  graphic
nature  of  the  Scripture  language  as  suggesting  an
idea  held  and  emotionally  conceived  by  the  writer
and  his  first  readers ;  4.  the  part  of  the  world  in
which,  even  according  to  Greek  historians,  the  name
Okeanos  had  its  origin.  In  the  light  of  these  con
siderations  there  is  no  extravagance  in  saying  that
'fi.-Kea.v-os  is  u  Yi-bv — a  Tewv — o  Kecoi/ — 6  Keaj/.~*  In
other  words,  it  is  the  old  full-flowing  Gihon  that  was
connected  with  the  Eden-territory,  and  whose  long
winding  shore  went  round  that  land  of  Gush  in  the
neighborhood  of  which  the  name  was  first  i'ound.
This  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  usage  of  the
root  t"P5  ,  or  ms ,  wherever  it  occurs.  It  does  not
denote  turbulence  (an  angry  river).  That  notion  has
come  from  the  effort  to  connect  the  Gihon  with  the
Araxes  (Greek :  apdrru).  It  denotes,  rather,  force
and  fulness  (see  Job  xxxvii.  8),  like  the  fio.dvppoo'i,
which  is  such  a  favorite  epithet  for  'fl/ceai'o's,  and
hence  stateliness,  as  in  the  Aramaic,  where  it  is  used
of  a  soldier  or  an  army  issuing  forth  to  battle.  So
Pishon,  the  spreading  (rcdundans),  the  wide-flowing,

urropoy,  from  UTS  ,  dispcrgcrc — a  fluvio  redun-
dante,  Gcs. ;  comp.  Hab.  i.  8 ;  Mai.  iii.  20  or  iv.  2  ;
Jer.  1.  11.  The  image  is  wholly  lost  in  the  Phasis,
or  any  other  stream  in  the  mountains  of  Armenia,
where  some  have  so  earnestly  sought  to  find  it.

The  difficulty  of  finding  any  other  place  for  Eden
3Ut  the  neighborhood  of  the  Persian  Gulf  is  shown
n  the  labored  effort  to  transfer  the  famed  Gush  of
the  Scriptures,  or  the  "land  beyond  the  floods  of
Gush"  (the  terra  obumbrata,  or  "land  of  the  shadow
of  wings,"  Is.  xviii.  1,  with  its  expanding  bounds),  to

f  [The  Greeks  never  allow  the  /;,  cither  as  aspirate  or  as
guttural,  to  stand  in  the  middle  or  at  the  end  of  a  word,
either  native  or  derived.  Such  a  word,  therefore,  as  Gihon,
Kihon,  or  Kehan,  would  necessarily  become  Goon,  as  wo
have  it  in  Josephus,  Kewv,  or  iceov.  Just  so  the  Hebrew
D3T1  ij  ,  Ge-blnncm,  Gehenna,  becomes  yecvva;  "jIlTr
Johanan,  lohan,  becomes  Itaav,  'Icoavirj?.  In  root's/too,
allied  to  the  Shcmitic,  they  have  K  for  y,  as  Hebrew :  bbj
—Greek  :  KV\— KvAi'w,  KvAiVSu>  ;  Hebrew  :  bsb}— Greek :

Ao?.  The  article  having  become  constant  as  a  prefix  in
O-KCCU/O?,  and  lengthened  because  of  its  emphasis,  shows  the
former  particularity  of  the  name,  and  at  the  same  time  its
celebrity  :  The  Gihon,  the  Kchan,  the  «eaj>,  the  Oceau-
rivor.— T.  L.]


the  Caucasian  tribe  of  the  Cossrcans  (Kima-atot)  bare
ly  mentioned  by  Diodorus  and  Strabo  along  with  the
Mardi,  the  Uxii,  the  Elymaei,  and  other  predatory
hordes  of  like  insignificance  who  inhabited  the  sterile
plains  near  the  Caspian  lake.  If  we  studiously  com
pare  Is.  xviii.  1  and  Zeph.  iii.  10  with  Gen.  ii.  18,  the
inference  can  hardly  be  avoided  that  "nnsb  "C2B
uTD  ,  "beyond  the  floods  of  Cush,"  can  mean  noth
ing  more  nor  less  than  beyond  the  encompassing
Gihon,  £-0  -px  ^3  nx  anon  -in:n,  "the  flood
or  water  that  goes  round  the  whole  land  of  Cush."
In  truth,  what  other  floods  or  water  can  it  mean?
Such  a  description  would  never  have  been  lost,  and
must  be  supposed  to  have  been  in  the  mind  of  every
subsequent  writer,  prophet,  or  historian,  that  refers
to  a  land  so  surrounded.  A  like  studious  contempla
tion  will  convince  us  that  Ps.  Ixviii.  32 ;  Is.  xviii.  1,
and  Zeph.  iii.  10,  arc  all  one  prophecy,  the  gathering
of  God's  chosen,  His  suppliant  people,  m  "nn:?
11  SI  S ,  as  Zephaniah  calls  them,  dispersed  to  the  re
motest  regions  of  the  earth — beyond  the  floods  of
Cush,  beyond  the  Gihon,  even  from  the  remoter
.^Ethiopia,  just  as  "Tarshish  and  the  isles,"  Ps.  Ixxii.
10,  are  used  to  indicate  remoteness  in  the  other
direction.

It  only  remains  to  fortify  what  has  been  said  by
adverting  to  the  fact  that  this  mode  of  speech  (that
is,  calling  the  sea  a  river,  or  a  stream,  and,  inversely,
a  great  river  a  sea)  remained  in  the  Hebrew  down  to
its  latest  use  as  a  living  language.  We  may  refer  to
Is.  xix.  5,  where  the  Nile  is  called  both  C"1  and  "in 3
in  the  same  verse  ;  Is.  xxvii.  1,  the  leviathan  or  croc
odile,  Qi2,  in  the  sea;  Is.  xxi.  1,  the  burthen  of
the  desert  of  the  sea,  supposed  to  mean  Babylon  on
the  Euphrates;  Job  xli.  23,  where  the  Nile  is  indi
cated;  Nali.  iii.  8,  the  same;  see  also  E/.ck.  xxxii.  2,
Zcch.  x.  11,  and  others,  and  compare  Koran  Surat

xx.  39,  where,  in  the  same  manner,  the  Arabic  ivA- 1
(s^n)  is  given  as  a  name  to  the  river,  when  it  is  said
that  Moses  was  cast  into  the  sea,  and  the  sea  cast
him,  with  the  ark,  upon  the  shore.  See  also  Lui>.  DE
DIEU  :  Critica  Sacra,  555,  and  BOCHART:  Hierozoi-
can,  vol.  ii.  789,  where  he  cites  Pliny  as  calling  the
shore  of  the  Nile  not  ripam,  but  litun,  a  name  usual
ly  given  to  the  shore  of  the  sea.  Compare,  more
over,  the  long  note  on  the  oceanic  streams  of  West
ern  Asia  in  R.YWXINSOX'S  Herodotus,  Appendix,  vol.
i.  p.  416.  The  usage  still  exists  in  the  Oriental  lan
guages.  To  this  day  -<v^f| ,  the  sea,  is  applied  in

Arabic  not  only  to  the  Nile,  but  to  any  great  flumen,
or  wide-flowing  water ;  and  they  speak  of  the  shore
of  such  a  river  as  they  would  of  the  shore  of  the
sea.  If  the  account  in  Genesis  had  been  originally
given  in  the  Arabic  language,  whether  in  its  oldest
or  latest  forms,  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  it
would  have  been  expressed  in  similar  terms.  The

word     «cvji  would  have  been  alike  applicable  to  the

great  inland  rivers  and  the  two  long  winding  oceanic
shores.

Nor  is  such  usage  so  strange  as  it  might  at  first
seem  to  our  stricter  occidental  logic.  Kigo.rously
defined  as  inland  streams,  our  greatest  and  our
smallest  rivers  have  the  same  specific  appellation.
To  the  eye,  too,  that  views  them  merely  as  traced
upon  the  map,  they  all  appear  as  single  lines.  To
the  actual  sight,  however,  and  to  the  emotion,  tho


222


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


case  is  quite  different.     These  refuse  the  logic  that
would  place  the  Amazon  and  the  Tweed  in  the  same
category.     Such  mighty  sea-like  Sowings  as  the  St.
Lawrence  and  the  Mississippi  claim  more  affinity  to
the  Atlantic  and  the  oceanic  Gulf-stream  than  to  the
canal-like  Mohawk,  or  to  the  mountain-torrent  of  the
ilousatouic.     From    the   actual  and   the    emotional,
thus  regarded,  arose  this  early  language  which  is  still
continued,   in   the  East,   in   its   application    to  such
rivers  as  the  Euphrates,  the  Indus,  and  the  Nile.     In
the    same    manner,   in    our   North-American    Indian
tongues,  is  the  term  "  great  water,"  like  the  Hebrew
^l-^-i  ^;-:;-|  5  used  not  only  of  an  arm  of  the  sea,  or
of  the  great  likes,  Hit  even   of  such  rivers  as  the
Ohio  ami  tin-   Missouri.     Such  a  mode  of  speech  is,
in  fact,  one  of  the  striking  evidences  of  the  subjec-
tivc  truthfulness  of  this  early  scriptural  account.  _  It
represent*    an    actual,    though    perhaps    indefinite,
knowle'L',-,   and   the   emotional    naming    that  grows
naturally  out  of  it.     It  shows  that  it  is  not  itself  a
myth,   t'houirh,  doubtless,   the   seed   of  myths   that
afterwards   came   out   of  it.     Legends,  historical  or
"•coirraphieal,  are  the  result  of  a  later  process.     They
do  not  'in-long  to  the  ni<>st  primitive  ages,  occupied,
as  tli  -y  must  be,  with  the  greatness  and  novelty  of
id   as  it  lies  before  the  sense.     The  mythical
Is.     It  betrays  a  semi- philosophizing  spirit,  a
disposition  to  eremite  an  ideal  by  carrying  the  actual
beyond   its   ascertained  or  supposed    bounds,  or  to
make  some  primitive  knowledge,  or  event,  the  repre
sentative  of  .-i  wide  unknown.     In  this  early  story  of
the  Eden-streams  there  is  the  seed  of  the  Egyptian
and   tlie(ire.-k  oceanic  legends.      IN   sober  truthful
character,  like  that  of  the  modest  Hebrew  chronology,
is  shown  by  its  matter-of-fact  limitation,  and  its  evi-
denl   anpoa'l  to  existing  observation.     The  mythical
spirit  would  have  carried  the  Pishon  and  the  Gihon
not  only  round  llavilah  and  the  whole  land  of  Cush,
but,    as  it  afterwards   did,   round   the   whole    earth
known  or  unknown.     This  Eden  account,  too,  may
be  regarded   as    the   beginning    of  geography.     We
need  only  trace   the  successive   delineations   of  the
earth,  from  the  earliest  map  of  llccatECiis  down  to
mat  of  I'tolemy  and  the  modern  charts  of  the  world,
to  have  the  thought  suggested  that  their  cvcr-widcn-
m<*  scales  were  simply  expansions  from  this  primitive
central  sketch. — T.  L.J

HOMILKTICAL  AND  PllACTICAL.


In  relation  to  the  whole  section.—  God's  govern
ment  of  men  in  the  beginning.— His  covenant  with
Adam.  1.  His  gift  and  blessiugs:  a.  The  soil  of  the
earth  prepared  for  man  ;  b.  the  hand  of  God  the  in
strument  of  his  formation  ;  c.  the  breath  of  God,  his
innermost  life  ;  d.  Paradise  his  home,  the  wide  earth
his  country ;  c.  the  abundance  of  Paradise  his  food ;
f.  the  beasts  his  school  for  the  study  of  form,  and  his
attendant  service ;  g.  the  wife  his  helper.  2.  The  com
mands  laid  upon  him  in  Paradise :  a.  To  dress  the  gar
den  and  to  keep  it ;  b.  to  beware  of  the  tree  of  know
ledge  of  good  and  evil ;  c.  to  give  names  to  the
beasts  (that  is,  contemplate,  recognize,*  and  distin
guish  the  nature  of  things) ;  d.  to  keep  holy  the  soci-

*  [Gen.  ii.  19  :  To  sec  what  bo  would  call  them,
X^P"1  FiE  •  As  this  is  commonly  road  and  understood,
r,1Slb  ,  to  sec,  is  referred  to  God.  It  corresponds,  how
ever  better  with  the  context,  and  the  view  that  Lange  takes
of  it' to  refer  it  to  Adam  in  the  sense  of  judging— the  Bigot
af  the  mind— an  easily  derived  secondary  sense,  appearing  in


ety  of  marriage. — The  glory  of  God  as  displayed  in
the  first  paradisaical  world  (His  power,  wiidcm,  good
ness,  love).— The  creation  of  man  :  1.  So  grand  the
preparation  made  for  him  (vers.  4-0) ;  2.  so  wonder
fully  and  richly  grounded  (ver.  7),  so  carefully  es
tablished  (vers.   8-18),  and  so  gloriously  completed
(vers.    19-25).  —  The  appearing  of    man   upon  the
earth  as  the  revelation  of  its  destiny :   1.  The  presen
tation  of  its  fundamental  idea,  of  its  purport,  its
aim  ;  2.  the  perfection  of  its  structure ;  3.  the  solving
of  its   enigma;    4.    the   consecration   of   its  being;
5.  the  bond  of  its  connection  with  heaven ;    G.  the
beginning  of  its  transformation  from  a  state  of  pure
nature    to    a   paradisaical    spirit-world.  —  Man  end
nature.     Man:   1.   The  elevation   of  nature ;  2.   the
exaltation  of  nature,   and  at  the  same  time,   3.  the
pupil  of  nature.— The  first  transformation  of  nature
through  the  entrance  of  the  first  man  a  prognostic
of   its'   second   transformation  through   the    second
man,  the  one  from  heaven  (1  Cor.  xv.).— The  history
of  Adam  a  history  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth.—
The  reflected   splendor  of  the  glory  of  the  first  hu
manity  in  the  glory  of  Paradise. — The  inward  connec
tion  and  reciprocity  between  man  and  nature  :  1.  His
innocence,  its  beauty  and   its  peace  ;  2.  his  fall,   its
ruin    or    subjection   to  the  "law  of  vanity ;  "   3.  his
resurrection,  its  hope  of  renewed  glory. — The  man
and   his  wife  as  the    crowning  work   of  creation. —
The  bridal    of  Adam  a  presignal    of  the   marriage
supper  of  the  Lamb  (Rev.  xix.  7).— The  old  as  well
as  the  new  world  prepared  for  a  marriage  chamber.

The  J-'lrnt  Section  (vers.  4-C).— The  earth  waiting
for  man,  a  figure  of  the  humanity  waiting  for  the
God-Man.

The  Second  Sect  inn  (ver.  7).— The  creation  of  man.
1.  The  formation  of  man  the  work  of  God's  master-
hand;  "2.  the  nature  of  man :  akin  to  the  caith  and
akin  to  God,  or  at  the  same  time  earthly  and  divine ;
3.  the  character  of  man  as  a  unit,  a  living  soul.—
Man  in  his  unity,  in  his  duality,— in  his  threefold

nature. The  original  human  dust  of  the  earth  in  the

splendor  of  heaven.

The  Third  Sec/ion  (vers.  8-1  i).— Paradise.—
Paradise:  1.  As  a  fact  in  the  e»rth,  the  bloom  of  the
earth,  the  home  of  the  first  man  ;  2.  as  an  emblem,
of  the  paradisaical  disposition  of  the  earth,  of  its
paradisaical  power,  namely  for  children  and  in  festal
contemplation,  of  its  paradisaical  prefiguration,  as  of
the  new  paradise  in  the  other  world  and  in  this.

The  Fourth  Section  (vers.  15-1 8).— The  first  man  in
Paradise.  His  relation  to  the  earth-world,  to  Paradise,
to  the  vegetable  world,  to  the  animal  world,  to  Eve.
—The  Paradise-life,  moreover,  not  an  unrestricted
state:  1.  Limitation  of  action :  the  calling  (to  dress
and  keep) ;  2.  limitation  of  enjoyment  (not  to  cat  of
the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil) ;  3.  limitations
in  the  treatment  of  nature  and  especially  of  the
beasts  (no  enclosing);  4.  limitations  on  human
society  (regulation  of  marriage  and  domestic  l"e)--"
The  restrictions  upon  life  the  measure  and  the  de-


other  places  in  the  use  of  this  common  verh,  and  becoming,
in  fact,  predominant  in  the  Rabbinical  Hebrew.    It  is  sim
ply  the  transfer  that  takes  place  in  the  Greek  «i 8-otS :  <to
see,  to  know),  and  perhaps  in  most  languages  :  that  Adam
might  see  (judge),  what  he  would  call  them.    It  denotes  an
intuition  or  an  intuitive  judgment— the  first  calling  out
his  faculties  in  the  observation  oi  things.    It  is  no  °t'je<*>o»
to  the  other  sense  that  it  is  anthropopathic,  although
would  seem  to  represent  something  like  curiosity  on  the  paii
of  Deity.    The  view  taken,  however,  which  is  equally  cp.
root,  lexically  and  grammatically,  makes  it  the  beginning
of  the  first  development  of  language  in  the  perception  oi
come  intuitive  fitness  between  names  and  things  named.
T.  L.]


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


223


rclopmcnt  of  freedom.  The  ground  features  of  the
paradisaical  life :  heavenly  innocenee,  festal  work,
pure  enjoyment,  clear  knowledge,  quiet  waiting  (the
deep  sleep),  inward  love  and  greeting,  unconstrained
and  childlike  being.  —  Single  verses  and  themes.
Ver.  4.  The  history  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth  in
the  history  of  man. — The  rich  significance  of  the
name  Jehovah-Elohim :  1.  Jehovah  is  Elohim ;  2.
Elohim  is  Jehovah  (analogous  to  the  New  Testament
in  respect  to  the  name  Jesus  Christ,  that  is,  Jesus  is
Christ,  Christ  is  Jesus). — Ver.  6.  The  world  without
man  a  desert ;  the  world  everywhere  incomplete  until
man  comes  (the  child  of  the  election).  The  first
dewy  rain  and  its  blessing  a  presignal  for  all  times
(children  yet  believe  that  they  grow  from  the  rain). —
Ver.  7.  The  creation  of  man  as,  1.  a  divine  forming ;
2.  a  divine  inbreathing  (so  goes  the  ideal  before  the
life,  art  before  the  realization,  the  shadow  or  the
type  before  the  truth). — The  descent  of  man,  his
earthly  descent  (Adam  from  adamah) ;  his  divine
descent  (a  soul  from  God's  breath  of  life). — The  ori
ginal  harmony  and  unity  of  the  earthly  and  heavenly
nature  of  man.  How  we  ought  to  be  on  our  guard
against  those  suspicions  of  matter,  of  the  body,  and
of  the  sense-nature,  which  claim  to  be  profound,  and
yet  are  not  taught  in  the  Scriptures. — Why  the
church  has  always  held  dualism  to  be  spiritually
dangerous.  Man,  in  his  being  an  exaltation  of  the
dust,  a  humility  of  the  spirit.  The  nature  of  man  a
type  of  his  destiny  :  1.  To  build  the  dust  into  form;
2.  to  reveal  the  inspiration  of  God  in  his  life.  The
lowliness  and  the  sublimity  of  the  first  man  Adam
without  father  and  mother,  a  foreshowing  of  the
wonderful  descent  of  Christ. — Paradise  (vers.  8-14,
see  number  9  of  the  Doctrinal,  etc.).  Paradise  at  the
beginning  of  the  world,  and  Paradise  at  the  end  (the
tree  of  life  in  the  beginning  and  the  tree  of  life  at
the  end,  Uev.  xxii.). — The  rivers  of  Paradise,  figures
of  the  spiritual  life  that,  proceeding  from  Paradise,
spreads  through  the  world.  Gold,  spices,  and  precious
stones  according  to  their  higher  paradisaical  appoint
ment,  or  the  riches  of  the  earth  an  emblem  of
the  higher  heavenly  riches. —  TJiQ  calling  of  Adam
(ver.  1.3) :  In  the  first  chapter  he  is  appointed  ruler
of  the  earth.  This  divides  itself  here  into  two  as
pects,  1.  to  dress,  2.  to  keep.  The  calling  of  Adam
a  type  of  our  calling.  The  entrusted  goods  (spiritual
talents,  outward  goods  of  culture,  spiritual  goods) :
First  to  dress  it,  that  is,  to  increase,  ennoble  ;  second
to  keep  it,  that  is,  to  guard  it  against  injury  and  loss.
— Ver.  1C.  In  Adam's  life,  calling  and  enjoyment  are
united ;  therefore  are  they  both  paradisaical ;  so  in
a  still  higher  degree  are  calling  and  enjoyment
united  in  the  life  of  Jesus  (John  iv.  34). — Ver.  17.
The  paradisaical  freedom  not  without  limitation.
Outward  restraint  educates  to  a  free  self-restraint.
As  God  binds  Himself  in  His  love  to  man,  so  also
should  man  bind  himself  in  love  to  God  and  to  obe
dience.  "  For  it  is  the  self-limitation  that  first  shows
the  master."  Freedom  and  limitation,  right  and  duty,
inseparably  united.  The  tree  of  probation,  1.  a  fact
(a  hurtful  enjoyment  of  nature,  as  explained  from
God's  spirit  and  word) ;  2.  an  emblem  of  all  natural
enjoyment  that  is  hurtful  and  destructive.  Ac
cording  to  God's  will,  the  tree  was  primarily  only  a
tree  of  probation  ;  it  first  became  a  tree  of  tempt
ation  by  the  coming  of  the  serpent.  The  threaten-
ng  of  death  is  indirectly  a  promise  of  imperishable
He.  Death  is  the  wages  of  sin. — The  animal  world,
'low  the  right  treatment  of  these  rests  upon  the
•ight  knowledge  and  naming  of  them.  Peace  in  the


paradisaical  nature  (all  the  animals  arc  brought  be
fore  Adam). — Ver.  18,  etc.  It  is  not  good  that  mar
should  be  alone.  God's  judgment  respecting  the
unmarried  state,  1.  as  universal,  2.  as  conditional. —
How  all  the  riches  of  nature  leave  man  still  alone
in  the  failure  of  kindred  society.  Man  alone,  in  the
midst  of  all  the  beasts,  with  all  his  knowledge.  The
true  helper  of  man,  1.  As  his  image ;  2.  as  his  coun
terpart  (his  antithetical  complement). — The  marriage
of  man,  how  grounded,  1.  on  the  judgment  of  God ;
2.  on  the  solitary  state  of  man ;  3.  on  his  deep  sleep
(trance-vision,  see  Job  iv.  13)  ;  4.  on  the  divine
creating  of  the  woman  out  of  the  side  of  the  man  ;
5.  on  God's  bringing  Eve  to  him;  6.  oiitlie  love-greet
ing  of  Adam ;  7.  on  its  rich  and  noble  destiny. —
Ver.  25.  The  clothing  of  innocence :  1.  The  purest,
2.  the  fairest,  3.  the  most  substantial.  The  infinite
contrast  between  innocence  and  coarseness.  The
nobility  of  marriage  :  communion  of  the  spirit,  the
consecration  of  the  sexual  association.

STARKE  (ver.  7) :  Out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,
which  by  moistening  with  water  is  capable  of  an  easy
moulding.  How  thoughtless  the  conduct  of  men,  who
adorn  their  body  made  from  earth  and  to  earth  again
returning,  whilst  losing  all  care  of  their  immortal
souls  ! — Ver.  15.  Even  in  a  state  of  innocence  man
must  work,  and  not  go  idle.  1.  lie  must  be  ever  ac
tive  like  God  ;  2.  he  must  have  joy  in  the  work  of  his
hands,  as  God  has  (Gen.  i.  31) ;  3.  he  must  have  op
portunity  to  show,  as  God  does,  wisdom,  power,  and
goodness  to  the  creatures  committed  to  him. — Ver.
17.  This  is  the  covenant  which  God  established  with
Adam.  On  the  one  side  was  God,  and  on  the  other
side  Adam,  who  in  his  own  person  represented  the
whole  human  race. — Sec  that  thou  dost  immediately
choose  the  best  way,  and  hold  fast  to  the  tree  of  life
which  is  Christ.  Taste  this  fruit,  so  sluilt  thou  be
come  well. — God  the  first  lawgiver. — Vei1.  20.  Is  the
question  asked  what  language  did  Adam  employ  in
this  transaction  ?  the  most  probable  answer  is  that  it
was  the  Hebrew. — Ver.  21.  Since  at  the  present  day
a  man  has  twelve  ribs  on  each  side,  some  have  sup
posed  that  Adam  irust  originally  have  had  thirteen
ribs  on  one  side.  It  is,  however,  more  probable  that
God  must  have  given  him  another  in  place  of  the
one  he  took  away.

Ver.  22.  LUTIIBU  :  Therefore  stands  fast  this  con
solation  against  all  the  teaching  of  the  devil,  namely,
that  the  marriage  state  is  a  divine  state,  that  is,  or
dained  cf  God  Himself.  As  Adam  gave  names  to  the
beasts,  so  also  did  he  name  his  wife,  and  that,  too,  af
ter  himself:  "«iareess"  (woman);  on  this  ground  is
the  custom  to  be  defended  whereby  a  wife  lays  aside
the  paternal  name,  and  takes  that  of  the  husband. —
Ver.  24.  Some  would  deduce  from  this  merely  a  pro
hibition  of  incest  with  father  and  mother.  (!)  Others
would  derive  from  it  a  proof  that  in  contracting  mar
riage  children  need  not  trouble  themselves  about  the
approbation  of  their  parents.  As  this,  however,  is
clearly  opposed  both  to  divine  and  human  commands  (it
is  still  more  opposed  to  the  divine  command,  we  may
add,  when  parents  force  their  children  to  a  marriage)
so  is  it,  on  this  account,  the  more  strongly  indicated
that  the  man  as  well  as  the  wife,  go  forth  from  the  fa
ther's  house  and  commence  a  family  of  their  own.  To
this  we  may  add  that  with  the  vocation  of  marriage,
the  childlike  dependence  must  also  cease,  though  the
filial  obligations  of  love,  reverence,  and  care,  do  still
remain.  Col.  iii.  19;  Eph.  v.  25  ;  Matt.  xix.  4  ;  1
Cor.  vii.  2.

BURMANX  :  The  rest  of  God  in  the  week  is  a  type


224


GENESI.-,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


of  the  heavy  week  and  labor  of  our  Mediator  Jesus
Christ,  who  in  the  hard  toil  of  His  soul  was  weaned
even  unto  death  for  our  salvation,  and,  finally,  on
this  seventh  day,  entered  into  his  rest  (Isaiah  lui.
11).  So  arc  then  here  also  created  a  new  heaven
and  earth,  and  creatures,  namely,  new  men ;  a  new
li-ht  of  the  Gospel,  new  fruits  of  righteousness,  new
water  wcllin-  up  to  everlasting  life.— Wherein  docs
Paradise  asrcc  with  heaven  ?— And,  therefore,  is  the
family  state  established  as  the  fountain-head  ar.c
origin  of  all  human  society.

Semi .".I>E n:  Moses  makes  the  primeval  history
of  the  microcosm  follow  the  history  of  the  macro
cosm.— The  hints  already  obscurely  given  here  and
there  in  the  iirst  section  (comp.  ch.  xxii.  21)  in  re
lation  to  the  fall,  assume  a  more  distinct  form  in
the  sccor.d,  as  though  it  were  designed  as  a  prologue
to  that  world-historical  tragedy  which  begins  with
chapter  iii.— The  hypothesis  of  the  so-called  Prc-
Adamites,  that  is,  of  men  who  lived  before  Adam,  is
clearly  and  ni-tinetly  excluded  by  the  remark  at  the
end  of  ver.  5,  that  "before  Adam  there  was  no  man
to  till  the  ground.  As  a  proof  to  the  contrary  there
is  also  1  Cor.  xv.  -15,  and  Acts  xvii.  2ii.— The  bodj
of  man  appears,  therefore,  as  a  fine  artistic  structure
Of  God.—"  Stand  in  awe,  oh  man  !  for  upon  each  ^>
thy  consecrated  members  was  the  finger  of  God!'
]I01.,KT._A>  Isaiah  .says:  Thou  art  our  father
Thou  art  our  potter,  and"  we  are  Thy  clay  (Is.  Ixiv.)

Luther. The  spirit   of   life    comes   to   the   humai

soul  as  a  gift  from  God  immediately  received  into
the   human   frr.inc   (ch.  i.  26,  27).     The   soul  of  th
beast,  at  God's    command,    has    its  origin  in    tha
breath  rf  God  which  pervades  the  elements  of  natur
(ch.  i.    2,   2i>,  21).— Only   as   inspired  by   God    doc
the  soul  live  its  true  life,  its  human   life  ;  only  b
me.ms  of  a  vitalizing  communion   with    the    divin
spirit  has   it    true  independence,  and   a  blessed  coi
tiniiance.— Vers.  8-15.    The   whole   earth  as    "m-.
<;oo>V  was  created  to  be  a  garden  of  God.  _  But  the
Father,  out  of  His  abundant  goodness  to  His  human
child,  plants  in  this  garden  a  little  garden  more  pecu
liarly  His  own— a  little  Paradise  in  the  greater.— God
planted  •    The  imai^e  is  grounded  on  that  of  a  human
gardener    (John   xv.  1 ;    Isaiah  v.).— Elsewhere  the
Scripture  gives  the  name  Paradise  to  the  abode  of  the
ble^t  when  we,  perhaps,  would  say  "  to  be  in  heaven"
(Luke  xxiii.  4!5 ;    2  Cor.  xii.  4;    Ilev.  ii.   7).  —  A
o-firden-  And  what  could  have  been  a  fairer  place
for   the  planting  of  our  race?  " The  schools  of  wis
dom  in  the  East  arc  usually  gardens,  blooming  places
by  the  side  of  rivers."  Herder.    "  Moses  expressly  tells
us    how  this    nardeii  was    gloriously    filled  by   the
Lord  with  fruit-trees  of  every  kind,  that  the  appetite
of  man  mHit  have  no  excuse."     Calvin.—"  The  de
scription  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees:  Captivating  to  the
sisrht  and  stood  for  food,  is  not  without  its  purpose  ;
it'show.s  that  inclination  and  the  proof  of  sense  in
respect,  to  food  and  drink  should  be  guides  to  men.
Herder.— Among  the  trees  of  Paradise  two  enigmat
ical  names  strike  us.  Both  belong  to  the  same  place ;
both  are  found  in  the  middle  of  the  garden. — Ver.  17.
The  God  of  the  covenant  is  called  Jehovah-Elohim.
A  covenant  requires  two  sides. — Dying,  death,  the
sense  of  these  words  he  can  only  anticipate,  accord
ing  as   their  contrast  with  the  sense  of  the  tree  of
life  grows  more  clear.   At  the  moment  of  the  fall  be
gan  the  death  of  man.     Death  waxes  stronger  with
us  until  it  outgrows  life,  and  conquers  it. — Ver.  20.
In  his  wedded  wife  man  receives  what  no   help  or
friendship,  however  fair  it  might  be,  could  otherwise


ave  given  him. — One  heart  and  one  soul. — Man
ives  names  to  the  beasts. — As  the  son  of  God  he
iscerns  his  father's  footsteps,  that  is,  the  divint
deas  in  the  things  created. — Vers.  21-25.  The  bc-
oming  many  out  of  one.  This  is  the  way  of  God.
Roos  :  The  sleep  of  Adam.

RAM  BACH  :  God  acts  like  a  painter  or  a  sculptor
who  draws  a  curtain  before  him  when  he  is  working
ipon  an  excellent  picture  or  an  artistic  statue. —
Adam's  eyes  arc  veiled  that  God's  love  may  un-
•cil  itself.'  The  old  writers  noted  six  examples  in
he  Scriptures  whore  a  miraculous  work  follows
sleep :  1.  The  case  of  Adam,  2.  of  E15as(l  Kings  xix.),
3.  of  Jonah  (ch.  i.),  4.  of  Christ  (Matt,  viii.),  5.  of
Peter  (Acts  xii.),  f>.  of  Eutyches  (Acts  xx.).  "  More
over,  the  Son  of  God  is  become  weak  that  He  might
have  His  members  strong."  Calvin.  (Eph.  v.  25  ;
Col.  iii.  10). — The  wife  is  from  a  rib;  she  is  taken
from  near  man's  heart.  As  in  man  there  appcars^an
image  of  the  Creator,  so  docs  the  wife  present  an  im
age  "of  His  providence.  The  man  was  created  with
out  ;  the  wife  was  created  in  Paradise.  Her  place  is
by  the  fireside  and  in  the  nursery,  but  nevertheless
most  true  it  is  that  the  world  is^  ruled,  in  a  most
peculiar  manner,  from  the  mother's  bosom.

God  bxilihl.  (Ver.  22.)  "Designedly  does
Moses  use  the  expression  i<~>  build,  that  he  may  teach
us  how  in  the  person  of  the  wife  the  human  .race
finally  becomes  perfected  ;  whereas  before  it  was
like  to  a  building  only  begun.  Others  refer  it  to  the
domestic  economy,  as  though  Moses  meant  to  say,
that  at  that  time"  the  right  ordering  of  the  family
state  became  complete — a  view  which  does  not  de
viate  much  from  the  first  interpretation."  Calvin. —
"  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  what  Moses  adds  :  and
brought  her  to  him,  is  an  elegant  description  of
the  espousal,  or  the  marriage  presentation.  For
Adam  does  not  rashly  follow  his  liking,  but  waits  for
God,  who  brings  her  to  him;  as  Christ  also  says:
what  God  hath  joined  let  not  man  put  asunder."

Luther. Ver.    23.     "Love   here     makes    the    first

poet,  lawgiver,  and  prophet.  It  is  the  song  of  songs
proceeding  from  the  mouth  of  Adam."  Herder.—
Adam  makes  himself  known  to  his  wife,  in  that  he
gives  her  a  name  in  the  very  act  of  declaring  her
origin.  With  their  name  the  beasts  become  the
jroperty  of  Adam  ;  with  her  name  does  the  wife  be
come  his  own  (Is.  xliii.  1 ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  4).  He  names
:iimself  man  ;  the  relation  to  woman  causes  man  now
to  become  a  man,  in  a  peculiar  sense.  Through
marriage  the  circuits  of  human  love  arc  made  wider
'Eph.  v.  25 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  3,  39  ;  Matt.  xix.  6,  9).—
In  the  Scriptures,  idolatry  and  the  denial  of  God  are
called  fornication  and  adultery.  The  hieroglyphs  of
the  anti-Mosaic  law  of  marriage  have  been  renewed
by  Chri-t  in  their  full  splendor.  To  the  Gospel  docs
humanity  owe  the  restoration  of  its  original  worth.
In  our  old  German  speech  the  word  marriage  is  the
stem-word  of  all  law,  fidelity,  order,  religion,  cov
enant  ;  not  so  in  the  new.— Naked.  In  the  nobler
class  of  men  the  bodily  formation  still  reveals  itself
through  its  spirituality.

Lisco:  The  development  of  individuals,  and  (
the  whole  race,  is  grounded  on  society.  The  mo
nastic  solitariness  is  not  the  will  of  God  (Eccl.  iv.  9).
If  man  would  reach  his  destiny,  he  needs  help  in  the
sphere  of  the  bodily  as  well  as  that  of  the  spiritual.
The  root  of  all  other  society  is  that  marriage  state,
established  by  God,  out  of  which  are  evolved  the
three  relations  of  the  family,  the  church,  and  the
state ;  in  like  manner,  on  account  of  their  root  (is  it


CHAP.  II.  4-25.


merely  on  this  account  ?)  arc  they  divine  institutions.
All  determinations  of  God  have  for  their  aim  the
highest  good  of  man;  but  how  greatly,  through  sin,
ar°  the  blessings  of  communion,  the  advantages  of
society  perverted  into  mischief !  This  peace  between
man  and  beast  belongs  also  to  the  prophetic  Para-
d'r=e  (Is.  xi.  6).  Before  the  fall  nakedness  was  moral,
modest',  chaste;  after  the  fall  it  becomes  indecorous,
'  a  remembrance  of  the  fall,  an  enkindling  of  sin.

GERLACII  :  In  the  Hebrew  writings,  the  first  man
is  called  simply  Adam,  that  is,  man  ;  for  man  is  just
as  much  the  designation  of  the  human  race  as  it  is
me  proper  name  of  the  first  man.  In  the  first  man
there  was  contained  the  whole  human  race,  which  on
that  account  is  called  children  of  Adam  (sons  of
man  or  Adam  (man)  simply  (just  as  it  is  with  the
names  Israel,  Edom,  Moab,  Ammon).— Adam  from
adamali.  Nature  must  be  ruled  by  one  like  herself,  but
who,  nevertheless,  belongs  to  a  higher  order,  even  as
humanity  has  for  its  lord  a  God-Man.— The  breath,
the  condition  of  the  bodily  life,  is  an  emblem  of  the
divine  life  which  is  breathed  into  man.— Just  as
heaven  and  earth  were  originally  created  as  a  con
trast  whose  two  sides  must  more  and  more  interpen
etrate  each  other,  so  also  in  man  is  there  the  body
from  the  dust,  and  the  spirit  from  God. — Man  must
not  be  simply  a  living  soul ;  he  must  also  have  a  life-
making  spirit,  even  as  the  second  Adam  possessed
it,  and  all  believers  receive  it  from  Christ  (1  Cor.  xv.

47). AS  being  from  the  dust,  man  belongs  to  the

earth,  and,  therefore,  to  corruptibility  ;  like  the  other
animals  which  die  in  respect  to  their  individual  being
and  only  live  on  as  creations,  he  has  a  natural  life ;
as  far  as  that  was  concerned  he  could  die,  but
through  the  spirit  derived  from  God  was  he  related  to
Him  as  an  imperishable  personality,  and,  therefore,
also  could  he  keep  from  dying  (there  was  given  to
him  the  possibility  not  to  die) ;  for  even  the  dust  in
its  relation  to  him,  as  also  the  earth  itself,  was  cre
ated  for  a  higher  life  of  glory.— Garden-work  in  a
mild  climate  is  the  easiest  and  the  most  appropriate
for  the  childhood  of  humanity.  In  this  may  the  act
ive  powers  exercise  themselves  for  the  more  severe
employments  of  agricultural  labor.  The  oldest  known
fruit-trees,  the  domestic  animals,  and  the  grain,  were
the  portion  that  remained  to  him  out  of  this  original
time. — F0r  the  tree  of  knowledge,  etc.  To  know  good
and  evil  is  the  conscious  freedom  of  the  will  (Is.  vii.
16  ;  1  Cor.  viii.  3). — No  want  (for  he  lived  in  abun
dance),  no  enticement  of  the  sense  merely  (for  that
arose  first  after  the  fall  (ch.  iii.  6),  could  mislead
him  to  transgress  the  command,  but  only  his  self-ex
altation,  his  striving  after  a  false  self-sufficiency  and
independence. — In  a  way  of  childlike  feeling  does
Luther  regard  the  tree  of  knowledge  (standing  as  it


did  in  the  midst  of  the  garden)  as  the  church  of  the
yet  innocent  man. — "  This  tree  of  the  knowledge  of
^ood  and  evil  has  become  Adam's  altar  and  pulpit,
n  which  he  ought  to  have  learned  the  obedience  he
owed  to  God,  to  have  known  God's  word  and  will,
and  to  have  thanked  Him  for  it ;  and  so,  if  Adam
lad  not  fallen,  this  tree  would  have  become  like  to  a
:ommon  temple  and  cathedral."  Therefore  must  we
je  on  our  guard  against  every  view  that  would  re
present  the  tree  as  proceeding  from  the  devil's  king-
lorn,  or  as  being  hurtful  in  itself.

Calwer  Manual:  The  body  from  the  dust  of  the
earth,  the  spirit  inbreathed  by  God  :  Thus  man  bc-
;ongs  to  two  worlds,  the  earth  and  heaven ;  he  ia
akin  to  the  least  of  all  created  things  and  to  the
highest,  the  uncreated,  from  whose  efflux  is  his  spirit.
— The  work  in  Paradise  :  There  for  them  was  their
desire  and  joy,  which  afterwards  becomes  a  burden,
care,  and  toil. — The  forbidden  fruit.  God  only  for
bids  us  that  which  brings  to  us  danger  and  hurt,  _and
that  is  often  in  the  proportion  of  one  to  many  things
allowed  and  right,  and  which  is  useful  and  healthful
to  us. — The  threatening  of  death.  Not  a  sudden  dy
ing  like  an  immediately  accomplished  fact,  but,  them
wilt  become  subject  to  death ;  it  means,  to  become
mortal.  With  us,  too,  is  death  only  the  end  of  dying,
which  last  begins  often  long  before.  That  the  man
was  created  before  the  woman,  and  that,  therefore,  a
precedence  is  adjudged  to  him,  is  clear  from  1  Tim.
ii.  13.— Ver.  19  :  God  the  Creator  is  also  man's  first
schoolmaster.  It  is  also  indicated  in  this  place  that
before  the  fall  the  animal  world  had  been  more  con
fiding  and  dependent  on  man  than  it  is  now,  and
that  it  gladly  yielded  itself  to  his  dominion  ;  whilst
now,  in  part,  it  stands  to  him  in  a  hostile  attitude
(Rom.  viii.  19,  20).— Not  all  marriages  are  from  God,
decided  in  heaven,  but  all  can  become  sharers  in  its
blessings  if  they  seek  it.

BUNSEN:  There  follows  now  the  representation
of  the  thought  of  creation,  in  connection  with  Para
dise  and  the  fall,  in  contrast  with  what  precedes  as
the  work  of  creation  in  its  chronological  progress.
There  man  was  necessarily  the  last  thing,  here  he  is
necessarily  the  first.  For  God  as  eternal  reason  can
only  think  Himself  (or  He  must  ever  be  essentially
His  own  thought),  and,  therefore,  in  creation  He  can
only  think  His  image,  the  conscious  finite  spirit.
What  lies  between  is  the  mediation  of  the  eternal
with  the  finite.  This  second  history  of  creation  is
neither  addition  nor  complement  to  the  one  preced
ing  ;  it  is  not,  to  say  the  least,  its  repetition.  It  is
the  figurative  representation  of  creation  as  proceeding
outward  from  the  central  point  of  the  everlasting
idea  (the  doctrine  of  the  fall  that  follows  this  [in
Bunsen]  is  Platonising  and  Gnostical).


226  GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


SECOND    PAKT.

THE  GENESIS  OF  THE  WORLD-HISTORY,  OF  THE  TRIAL,  OF  THE  SIN  OF  MAN,  OF  THE
JUDGMENT,  OF  DEATH,  OF  THE  SALVATION-TRIUMPH,  OF  THE  CONTRAST  BETWEEN
A  DIVINE  AND  A  WORLDLY  TENDENCY  IN  HUMANITY,  LASTLY  OF  THE  UNIVER
SAL  CORRUPTION.

5    KST    SECTION,

Tb  Loxt  Paradise.


CIIAPTEII  III.  1-21.

A. — The   Temptation.

Cn.  ITT.  1      Now  the  serpent1  was  more  subtle  [properly:  aiono  subtle  among  all  beasts]  than  all  the
beasts  of  the  field  which  the  Lord  God  had  made;   and  he  paid  unto  the  woman,  Yea,

2  hath  God  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden.     And  the  woman  said  unto

3  the  serpent,   \V"e  may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  the  garden.     But  of  the  fruit  of  the
tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  God  hath  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither

4  shall  ye  tnueli  it,  lest  ye  die.     And  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman,  Ye  shall  not  snrc-

5  ly  die.     Fur  God  doth  know  that  in   the  day  ye  cat  thereof,  then  your  eyes  shall  be
opened  and  ye  shall  be  as  Gods  knowing  good  and  evil.

B.— The  Sin.

6  And  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good5  for  food,  and  that  it  was  pleasant
to  the   ovos,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise,  she  took  of  the  fruit  thereof
and  did  eat,  and  gave  also  to  her  husband  [to  partake  with  her]  and  he  did  eat.

C.— The  Guilt.

7  And  the  eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,  and  they  knew3  that  they  were  naked,  and

8  they  sewed  fig  leaves  together,  and  made  themselves  aprons.     And  they  heard  the
voice  of  the  Lord  God  walking4  in  the  garden  in  the  cooi  of  the  day  [the  evening  breeze]  :
and  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  f'vom  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God  among  the
trees  of  the  garden.

D. — The  JndErmeiu  r.za  the  Promise

9  And  the    Lord   God   cancel  unto   Adam,    and   said   unto   hr,r>,    TFjere    art    thou?

10  And  he  said,  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was  afraid,  because  I  was  naked,

11  and  I  hid  myself.     And  he  said,  "Who  told  thce  that  thou  wast  naked?     Hast  thou

12  eaten  of  the  tree  whereof  I  commanded  thee  that  thou  shouldst  not  eat?     And  the
man  said,  The  woman  whom  thou  gayest  unto  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree  and  I  did

13  eat.     And   the  Lord  God   said  unto  the  woman,  What  is  this  that  thou  hast  done?

14  And  the  woman  said,  The  serpent  beguiled  me  and  I  did  eat.     And  the  Lord  God  said
unto  the  serpent,  Because  thou  hast  done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cattle,8  and
above  every  beast  of  the  field :  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all

15  the  days  of  thy  life:  And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  and  between
thy  seed  and  her  seed  :  it  [vulgate:  rpsate,  etc.]  shall  bruise8  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise

16  his  heel.     Unto   the  woman  he  said,  I  will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and  thy  concep
tion ;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth  children  :  and  thy  desire7  shall  be  to  thy  husband,


CIIA,P.  in.  1-24.  227

1  7  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee.  And  unto  Adam  he  said,  Because  thou  hast  hearkened  unto
the  voice  of  thy  wife,  arid  hast  eaten  of  the  tree  of  which  I  commanded  thec,  saying.
Thou  slialt  not  eat  of  it,  cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake  [from  its  connection  with  thee]  ;  ir

18  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat  of  it   [get  food  from  it]   all  the  days  of  thy  life.8     Thorns  also  and
thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee;  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  herb  of  the  field  [instead of  the

19  garden].     In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread  until  thou  return  unto  the  ground  ;
for  out  of  it  wast  thou  taken,  for  dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return.

E. — The  Hope  and  the  Compassion.

20  And  Adam  [man  from  the  earth]  called  his  wife's  name  Eves  [life,  life-giving]  because  she

21  was  the  mother  of  all  living.     Unto  Adam  also,  and  to  his  wife  did  the  Lord  God  make

22  coats  of  skins  and  clothed  them.     And  the  Lord  God  said,  Behold,  the  man  has  become
as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and  evil ;  and  now  lest10  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  take  also
of  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat  and  live  forever  [as  the  everlasting  nan,  according  to  the  idea  of  the  ever
lasting  Jew].

F. — The  Merciful  Decree  of  Punishment  and  Discipline.

23  Therefore  the  Lord  God  sent  him  forth  "  [the  intensive  Piel  form  of  the  verb]  from  the  garden

24  of  Eden  [the  blissful  garden]  to  till  the  ground  from  whence  ho  was  taken.     So  he  drove
out  the  man:   and  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  cherubims  [cherubs]  and
a  flaming  sword  which  turned  every  way   [yet  ever  maintaining  its  place]   to  keep  the  way  of

the  tree  of  life  [Seraphim  ;  comp.  Ps.  civ.  4. ;  xviii.  10-15  ;  Is.  vi.  2].

['  Vcr.  1. — '^n  .  Primary  sense  :  keen  sight  (secondary :  intuition,  divining).  Greek  :  Spdicuv  (5c'p;«o)  5£is  (o^/ojLtai).
"O  TS  ;  expressing  great  surprise:  yea  truly,  can  it  be  possible?  Comp.  Greek  i^  on  with  its  simplicity  and  abrupt-
ness.-T.  L.]

[2  Ver.  6. — !"I1Sn  rendered  desirable:  strictly  a  noun:  a  desire,  a  beauty,  a  lovely  thing. — T.  L.]

[3  Ver.  7. — IS"!"1"  ,  and  they  knew.  Before  it  was  the  verb  !~iX~! ,  to  see;  a  higher  knowledge  than  that  of  sense —
con-science.-*]?.  L.]

[4  Ver.  8. — "iPi"in"2  may  refer  to  Pip— the  voice  going.  It  would  suit  very  well  the  interpretation  which  would  make
itirp  P'p  here  a  name  for  the  thunder,  as  in  Ps.  xxix.  3,  4,  5,  7,  8,  9;  xlvi.  7;  Ixviii.  34;  Job  xxxvii.  2.  This  is  the
view  of  Aben  Ezra,  who  cites  Jcr.  xlvi.  22 ;  Exod.  xix.  19  (voice  of  the  trumpet,  going  and  waxing)  as  examples  of  ~j~!"l
joined  with  Pip  .  It  is  thus  expressly  applied  to  inanimate  things,  Gen.  viii.  3  (the  waters  going,  etc.),  in  other  places  to
the  light,  as  I'rov.  iv.  18.  Even  in  the  Hithpacl  form  it  would  suit  the  description  of  a  long  roll  of  thunder,  which  seems
to  go  all  round  the  horizon,  comp.  Job  xxxvii.  3.  What  follows  can  only  be  interpreted  of  an  actual  speaking,  but  this
may  have  been  the  first  thunder  they  ever  heard,  coming  in  black  clouds,  perhaps,  towards  the  evening  of  their  sinning
day,  and  it  would  have  been  very  startling,  even  as  it  has  been  over  since  to  guilty  consciences.  Some  of  the  Rabbis  (see
Abcn  Ezra)  would  connect  ~bn~E  with  Adam :  He  heard  the  voice  as  he  was  walking  in  the  cool  of  the  day ;  but  tha
grammar  is  directly  against  this. — T.  L.]

[5  Ver.  14.— i"l<£n~n  P3}3  ;  Lange  rightly  renders  it  :  among  all  cattle.— T.  L.]


and,  in  this  sense,  a  looking  to  or  running  after  one  (see  the  uses  of  the  root  pYO).  Comp.  Gen.  iv.  7,  where  it  cannot
have  tho  sense  of  libido.  So  in  Cant.  vii.  11  it  does  not  mean  carnal  desire  as  Gcsenius  would  render,  but  the  willing  con
jugal  dependence,  or  submission  to  the  conjugal  rule ;  inpllDn  1?3  ,  LXX.  well  renders  it :  d;roc7Tpo$>) ;  Vulgate  :  sub
viri polcitale  em. — T.  L.]

[8  Ver.  17. — "p^n  ;  for  remarks  on  the  plural  form  of  the  word  for  life  in  Hebrew,  see  Note,  p.  1G3. — T.  L.]

[9  Ver.  21.— fn*n  >  Hawaii.  LXX.  have  translated  the  word  by  the  Greek  ZIOT/  :  lie  called  her  Zoe,  life;  Vulgate  :
Hera.— T.  L.]

[10  Ver.  22. — *Q  ,  lest — only  tho  particle  without  any  verb.  This  silence,  or  aposiopesis,  is  very  expressive  ;  compare
the  similar  Greek  use  of  fiij  for  an  imperative  of  caution. — T.  L.]

[u  Ver.  23.— Inn^ttJ'1'!  .  Langc  regards  the  Piel  form  as  intensive,  to  denote  a  violent  sending  forth,  a  thrusting  out ;
but  there  is  no  need  of  that,  the  Piel  differing  but  little,  if  any,  from  the  Kal,  and  being  used  for  an  ordinary  sending.
The  word  following,  tti'lj"1'!  ,  may  have  that  sense,  but  there  is  nothing  in  the  context  of  harshness,  or  anything  to  carry
It  beyond  tho  general  idea'  of  dismissal.— T.  L.]

continues  here  also  in  the  third ;  since  the  subject  is
the  primeval  history  of  Adam,  as  it  is,  at  the  same
time,  the  primitive  history  of  man,  or  of  humanity.
The  fact  of  the  first  temptation  is  the  symbol  of  every
human  temptation ;  the  fact  of  the  first  full  is  the
symbol  of  every  human  transgression ;  the  great


EXEGETICAL  AND  CRITICAL.

1.  The  comparatively  stronger  symbolical  that
appeared  in  the  representation  of  the  primeval  facts,
and  which  we  have  noted  in  the  second  chapter,


2-28


GENESIS,  OR   TUB  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


mistake  that  lay  in  the  first  human  sin  is  the  symbol
of  every  effect  of^  ^   Berpcnt_The   trcc     f

knowledge,  a  part  of  the  vegetable  world,  ^3  niadc
by  God  the  medium  of  probation ;  from  the  am,  a
world  proceeds  the  serpent  as  the  instrument  of  the
temptation  which  God  did   not   make      lruc   ll  ^,
that  the  serpent  appear,  as  the  probable  author  of
this  temptation,  but  such  probability  is  weakened  bj
what  is'said  ch.  L  25  and  ii.  20.     "  It  was  (hough
Kiehers  denies  it)  a  good   creation  ot  God   though
different,  as  originally  created,  from  what  it  after-
wards  became"  (Dclitzsch).     Through  this  supposi
tion     however,    of  another    created    quality,    he
brought  nearer  to  the  view  of  Riehers.  _  Does  it  ap-
puar  as  the  mere  instrument  of  a  tempting  spirit  be-
on«nn»  to  the  Other  world,  then  must  the  decree  (.1
jud"  iu°nt,  as  pronounced,  have  regard  not  so  much
to  ft  as  to  the  spirit  of  sin,  whose  instrument  and
allegorical  symbol  it  had  become.     How  it  could  be
,.,,•;   .,.,    instrument    may    be  briefly  explained  by
it?  craftiness ;  how  it  becomes  an  allegorical  repre-
B  "ntation  of  the  Kvil  One  is  taught  us  afterwards  in
the  cnmitv  that  is  proclaimed  between  the  woman
un,]  the  serpent.     According  to  NOUK  (Etym.-Symb.-
']/.;'/(     Utal-W'orterbuch),    "the   serpent    is  just   a
v  ,'.'1  the  1;  rure  of  health  ami  renovation,  as  of  death;
il  every  year  changes  its  skin,  and  ejects  more-
i  \  en,  .m.     Tliis  double  peculiarity,  and  double
as  a-/a$o5ai.u.tev  and  KaKoSai'.ucw,  is  indi
cated   not  only   hi  language,  but   also  in   myths,  in
sculpture   and  in  modes  of  worship.'     In  this  rela-
tion    however,  we   must   distinguish  two  diverging
views  of  the  ancient  peoples.     To  the  Egyptian  reve
for  the  serpent  stands  in  opposition  the  ao.ior-
.    lor   it    among   the   Israelites  (see  the   article
••  -  ;rpenl  "  in  the  "  liiblical  Dictionary  for  Christian
People"),  Greeks,  Persians  and  Germans.     Among
the  Slavonians,  too,  docs  the  serpent  appear  to  have
be.  i  an  object  of  religious  fear;  and  from  them  may
there  have  come  modified  views  to  the  Germans,  as  from
•  he  r.-'vptians  to  the  Greeks.     Concerning  the  species
rpcnta  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  see  Winer.     It
may  not  be  without  Mgniiicancc  that  Genesis  (ch.  m.)
i,  hi  such  distinct  contract  with  the  Egyptian  views,
not  onlv  in  respect  to  the  serpent,  but  also  in  respect
to  the  E-vptian  cultus  of  death  and  the  other  world.
Delitzsch  thinks  that  the  serpent  could  hardly,  at
that  time,  have  had  such  a  name  as  enj,  since  this
m:,  to  hiss*)  is  derived  from   its  present
c.  ;>iHution.     In  this  way  the  original  constitution
of  the  seductive  serpent  is  regarded  by  him  in  a  more
favorable  IHit  than  the  nature  of  the  tree  of  proba
tion.     Knobel,  on  the  contrary,  is  of  opinion  that
"the  choice  of  the  serpent  was  occasioned  by  the
IVixmu  myth,  then  known  to  the  Hebrews,  which


*  [So  Gcscnius-o  sitilandn.  It  is  far  more  likely,  how-
cver,  to  have  had  for  its  primary  sense  that  from  winch
comes  the  secondary  meaning  of  brass,  or  »ther  of  bro^e-
thining  ineUil.  This  Rives,  as  the  pniiwry,  toe  idea  ol
splendor,  glistening.  The  name  may  have  bom  gi ,  en  to  the
serpent  from  its  glossy,  shining  appearance,  °rmore  likely
from  the  bright  glistening  of  the  eye.  This  would  bring  it
into  analogy  with  the  Greek  5pd*w»  from  ?eP*r5*gf°'i<^C
sharp  Piercing  sight.  There  is  the  same  derivation  trom  the
eve  in  the  Greek  8*15,  or  from  the  general  shining ^PPear-
Vr  ce  (5  Jus)  as  a  striking  and  beautiful  though  terrible  object
'•Yn.l  to  this  correspond  well  the  epithets  which  in  the  Greek

i_l_    •      • .1 :i.U      :i        -.,,  .i1,     nc>    f,in\nf       TTnitf  L-


totho  serpent  were  of  the  splendid  and  terrible  kind-beau
ty  and  awe. — T.  L.  ]


makes  the  evil  being  Ahriman  to  be  the  tempter  of
the  lirst  man  (giving  to  him  the  form  and  designation
of  the  serpent),  and  represents  him  as  the  mtrpdu
of  monstrous  serpent  forms."     Nevertheless,  since  m
his  time  (according  to  Knobel),  the  belief  m  a  devil
was  still  foreign  to   the   Hebrews,  the  author,  ho
maintains,  meant  a  real  serpent,  "  as  Josephus  als<
ri-htlv  supposes  (Antiq.  I  1,  4),  as  well  as  Abet
Ezra,  Jarchi,  Kimchi,  and  most  of  the  later  commen
tators."     There  is,  however,  not  the  slightest  reason
for  derivin^  the  primitive  tradition,  here  given  in  it
original  Hebrew  form,  from  any  Persian  myth,  nor,
in  the  second  place,  for  ascribing  to  the  Hebrews
not  only  a  dependence  on  such  Persian  myth,  bi
also  an  acknowledgment  of  its  symbolical  character
or  demoniacal  background  without  any  reasons  for
such  anticipation;  and,  thirdly,  is  the  alternative  of
its  bein-  either  an  actual  serpent,  or  the  devil  him
self  whollv  untenable.— A'ow  the  serpent  wa*  more
subtle.     The   question  arises   whether  the  adjective
here  stands  in  connection  with  -ft  as  express-
in"    the    comparative    degree.     At   all   events,   the
wholly  analogous  passage,  ver.  14  (reminding  us
tliis  even  by  similarity  of  sound,  Vr"2  -ilix— rii?
Vsi:)  cannot  mean:    cursed  more  than  every  beast
of  the  field.     Among  the  beasts,  the  serpent  was  just
a  single  example  of  cunning;  and  so  is  it  afterwards
said  of  the  curse.     "  Wisdom  is  a  native  property  of
the  serpent  (Matt.  x.  If,),  on  account  of  which   the
Evil  One  chose    it    his  instrument.     Nevertheless.
the  predicate  Z-~"r  is  not  given  to  it  here  in  the  good
sense  of  fptvipos  l^'Pt-)>  prudent,  but  in  the  bad
sense  of  irairolpyoi,  callidus,  crafty.     For  its  wisdom
presents  itself  as  the  craft  of  the  tempter  in  this  re
spect   that  it  applies  itself  to  the  weaker  woman.
Keil  —And  he  said  unto  the  woman.— The  idea
that'  the  wife  had  a  wish  to  be  independent,  and,  for
the  sake  of  release,  had  withdrawn  herself  out  ot  tue
man's  si"ht,  as  we  find  it  in  Milton,  is  original  indeed,
but  sets°up,  when  closely  examined,  a  beginning  ot
the  fall  before  the  fall  itself.-Yea,  hath  God  said.

The  deluding  ambiguity  of  his  utterance  is  adnnra

bly  expressed  by  the  particles  ~3  ?*  .     The  word  in
question  denotes  a  questioning  surprise,  which  may
have  in  view  now  a  yes,  and  now  a  no,  according  to
the  connection.     This  is  the  first  striking  feature  m
the  beginning  of  the  temptation.     In  the  most  cau
tious  manner  there  is  shown  the  tendency  to  excite
doubt      Then  the  expression  aims,  at  the  same  time,
to  awaken  mistrust,  and  to  weaken  the  force  of  the
prohibition:  Not  eat  of  every  tree-  of  the  gar
den!     But,  finally,  there  is  also  intended  the  lower-
of  belief  through  the  bare  use  of  the  single  name
Fiohim      The  demon  that  has  taken  possession  of
the  serpent  cannot  naturally  recognize  God  as  Jeho
vah    the   Covenant-God  for  men.     Knobel  thinks
that  the  author  left  out  the  name  Jehovah  to  avoid
profanin^  it.     Keil  interprets :  In  order  to  reach  his
aim  must  the  tempter  seek  to  transform  the  personal
livin"   God  into  a  universal   numen  divmnm.     but
would  then,  the  Elohim  of  ch.  i.  be  merely  an  uni
versal'  numen  divinum?      The   assault  is   directed
against  the  paradisaical  covenant  ol  God  with  men
therefore  it  is  that  the  serpent  cannot  utter  the  name
Jehovah.

3    Vers.  2,  3.  And  the  woman  said  tinto  the
serpent.— That    the   serpent    should    address    the
woman,  and  not  the  man,  is  explained  from  the  c
cumstance  that  the  woman  is  the  weaker  and  the


CHAP.  III.   1-24.


Reducible  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  The  text,  however,  sup
poses  that  the  woman  know  the  prohibition  of  God,
and  in  some  way,  indeed,  through  the  man.  Still,
Jie  woman  does  not  offer,  in  her  defence,  this  medi-
atcness  of  her  knowledge,  as  neither  does  Adam  pre
sent  as  an  excuse  that  he  saw  that  Eve  did  not  die
from  the  eating  of  the  fruit.  The  answer  of  both
appears  to  be  wholly  right,  and  to  correct  the  serpent
she  would  seem  to  make  the  prohibition  still  stronger
by  the  addition :  Neither  shall  ye  touch  it.  And
yet  by  this  very  addition  does  her  first  wavering  dis
guise  itself  under  the  form  of  an  overdoing  obe
dience.  The  first  failure  is  her  not  observing  the
point  of  the  temptation,  and  the  allowing  herself  to
to  be  drawn  into  an  argument  with  the  tempter;  the
second,  that  she  makes  the  prohibition  stronger  than
it  really  is,  and  thus  lets  it  appear  that  to  her,  too,
"the  prohibition  seems  too  strict"  (Keil);  the  third
is,  that  she  weakens  the  prohibition  by  reducing  it
to  the  lesser  caution :  lest  ye  die,  thus  making  the
motive  to  obedience  to  be  predominantly  the  fear  of
death.  Or  simply  thus :  She  begins  herself  to  doubt,
and  to  explain  away  the  simple  clear  prohibition  of
God,  instead  of  turning  away  from  the  author  of  the
doubt.  There  is  something,  too,  in  the  thought  that
the  woman  does  not  denote  God  as  her  Covenant-
God.  And  yet  many  have  regarded  her  first  answer
as  a  sign  of  steadfastness  in  the  beginning.

4.  Vcrs.  4,  i).  Ye  shall  not  surely  die. — This
bold  step  in  the  temptation  seems  to  suppose  a  wav
ering  already  observable  in  the  woman ;   although,
in  truth,  it  may  be  noted,  that,  in  spite  of  the  perfect
readiness  of  answer,   the  temptation  of  our  Lord,
Matt,  iv.,  even  advances  in  increasingly  bolder  forms.
Still  those  forms  are  properly  co-ordinate,  whilst  here
the  gradation  is  very  strongly  marked.     Moreover,
Christ,  as  the  perfect  man,  could  allow  Satan  to  come
out  in  all  his  boldness,  whilst  here  the  unprotected
woman  can  only  find  safety  in  an  immediate  turning
away.

5.  And  the  serpent  said. — The   temptation
steps  out  from  the  area  of  cautious  craft  into  that
of  a,  reckless  denial  of  the  truth  of  God's  prohibi
tion,  and  a  malicious  suspicion  of  its  object.     Ye
shall  not  die  at  all ;  *  thus  is  the  truth  of  the  threat
ening  stoutly  denied ;  that  is,  the  doubt  becomes  un
belief.     The  way,  however,  is  not  prepared  for  the
unbelief  without  first  arousing  a  feeling  of  distrust
in  respect  to  God's  love,  His  righteousness,  and  even
His  power.     Along  with  this,  and  entering  with  it,
there  must  be  also  a  proud  self-confidence;  and  a
wilful  striving  after  a  false  independence.     For  the
transition  from  doubt  to  unbelief  the  way  is  spe
cially  openeu  through  a  false  security.     The  serpent
denies  all  evil  consequences  as  arising  from  the  for
bidden  enjoyment,  whilst  he  promises,  on  the  contra
ry,  the  best  and  most  glorious  results  from  the  same.
—For  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day,  etc. —
The  imitation  of  the  divine  language  contains  a  spe
cies  of  mockery.     Your  eyes,  says  the  voice  of  the
tempter,  instead  of  closing  in  death,  will  be,  for  the

*  [Langc's  German  translation  of  the  passage  is  stronger,
or  rather  more  peremptory,  than  our  own :  Hit  nichten  wer-
det  *hr  dts  Todes  sterben.  Our  Version,  Ye  shall  not  surely
tie,  makes  the  rendering  tho  same  as  it  is  in  the  prohibition,
and  seems  to  have  reference  to  the  fulness  or  completeness
ot  the  dying  rather  than  to  the  certainty  of  it.  Tho  woman
nod  not  repeated  the  wojds  of  the  prohibition,  and  of  tho
penalty,  in  its  doubled  or  intensive  Hebrew  form,  but  Satan
repeats  it  in  blaspncmous  mockery,  as  though  ho  had  heard
it  in  some  other  way.  Tho  German  does  not  seem  to  "ivc
tais.— T.  L.]


first  time,  truly  opened.     Here  it  is  to  be  remarked,
that  the  hour  when  unbelief  is  born  is  immediately
the  birth-hour  of  superstition.     The  serpent  would
have  the  woman  believe,  that  on  eating  of  that  fruit
she  would  become  wonderfully  enlightened,  and,  at
the  same  time,  raised  to  a  divine  glory.     And  so,  in
like  manner,  is  every  sin  a  senseless  and  superstitious
belief  in  the  salutary  effects  of  sin.     The  promise  of
the  tempter's  voice  is  first  regarded  for  its  own  sake
and  then  as  a  complaint  against  God.     Against  the
immediate  deadly  effect  it  sets  the  immediate  plea
surable  effect,  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  it  represents
the  condition  of  men  hitherto  as  a  lamentable  one —
as  an  existence  with  closed  eyes.     Against  the  fear
ful  threatening:  to  die  the  death,  it  sets  the  opened
eyes,  and  the  being  like  God,  as  a  caricaturing,  as  it
were,  of  that  promise  which  had  appointed  men  to
the  image  of  God.     The  eyes  were  opened — a  biblical
expression  which  in  the  'Old  Testament  frequently
denotes  a  high  spiritual  seeing,  either  as  an  enlight
enment  in  respect  to  truth,  or  as  the  seeing  of  some
theophanic  manifestation  in  prophetic  vision  (ch.  xxi.
29;    Num.  xxii.  21).     The  knowledge,  however,  of
good  and  evil,  as  the  words  are  employed  by  Satan,
must  here  denote  not  merely  a  condition  of  higher
intelligence,  but  rather  a  state  of  perfect  independ
ence  of  God.     They  would  then  know  of  themselves
what  was  good  and  what  was  evil,  and  would  no
longer  need  the  divine  direction.     To  the  same  effect
the  assurance  :  for  God  doth  know,  etc.     This  must
mean :  He  enviously  seeks  to  keep  back  your  happi
ness  ;  and  He  is  envious  because  He  is  weak  in  oppo
sition  to  nature,  because  the  fruit  of  the  forbidden
tree  will  make  you  independent  of  Him,  and  because
He  is  tyrannical  and  without  love  iu  His  dealings
with  you.     In  this  distorting  of  the  divine  image,
there  is  reflected  the  darkening  of  the  divine  con
sciousness  which  the  temptation  tends  to  call  out  in
the  woman,  and  actually  does  call  out.     In  all  this
it  must  be  noted,  that  the  temptation  here  is  already
at  work  with  those   crafty  lies  (see  2  Thess.  ii.  9*)
which  it  has  employed  through  the  whole  course  of
the  world's  history — that  is,  with  lies  containing  ele
ments  of  the  truth,  but  misplaced   and   distorted.
Already  that  first  question  of  the  serpent  contains  a
truth,  so  far  as  man  ought  to  become  conscious  in
himself  of  the  certainty  and  divine  suitableness  of
God's  commands.     The  doubt,  however,  which  tends
to  life,  is  to  be  distinguished  from  that  which  tends
to  death,  by  its  design  and  direction.     The  tendency
of  the  devil  is  to  scepticism.     But  in  this  bold  assu
rance   of    the   serpent  which   immediately   follows,
namely,  that  no  evil  effects,  but  only  good,  would
result  from  the  eating,  there  lies  the  truth  that  the
outward  death  would  not  immediately  succeed  the
snjoyment  of  the  forbidden  fruit ;  that  with  the  con-
.ciousness  of  guilt  there  comes  in  a  conscious  though
a  disturbed  distinction  between  good  and  evil,  and
that  the  sinner  has  placed  himself  in  a  false  inde
pendence  through  his  own  self-wilfulness  (comp.  ch.
iii.  22).     When  we  take  it  all  together,  however,  it  is
the  appointment  to  the  divine  image  which  the  spirit
of  the  tempter  perverts  into  a  caricature :  Ye  shall
be  as  gods,  and  into  an  anticipation  of  immediately
reaching  their  aim :  "A  Satanic  amphiboly,  in  which
truth  and  falsehood  are  united  to  a  certain  degree  of
coincidence."     Ziegler.     Comp.  Job  viii.  44.     Very
dark   is   Knobel's  comprehension  of  this   passage:
"In  the  account  of  the  Jehovist,"  he  says,  "God
appears  to  be  jealous  of  ambitious  men  (ver.  22  ;  ch.
vi.  3  ;  xi.  1  G).     This  same  view  of  the  jealousy  of  the


230


GENESIS,  OR   TIIE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


gods  appears  also  among  the  Grecian  writcrs,_e.  g.,
HEROD,  i.  32;  iii.  40;  vii.  10,  4(5;  I'AVSAN.  iL  88 ;
iii. ;  comp.  NAGELSHACH :  'Homeric  Ilieology,  p.

33  "  *

'  6  Vcr  G  And  when  the  woman  saw.— There
is  truly  indicated  by  the  words,  according  to  Luther's
translation,  the  lustful  looking  of  the  woman;  but
the  expression  presents,  besides,  the  spiritual  dis
turbance  that  attended  it.  She  beheld  it  now  with
u  "lance  made  false  by  the  germinating  unbehet,  or,
60  to  speak,  enchanted  by  it.  "  The  satamc  promise
drove  the  divine  threatening  out  of  her  thought
Now  she  behold-;  the  tree  with  other  eyes  (vcr.  6).
Three  times  is  it  said  how  charming  the  tree  appeared
to  her."  " The  words  brrsni)  yrn  lenai  (to  be
desired  to  make  one  wise)  arc  taken  by  Hofmann
for  a  remark  of  the  narrator."  Delitzsch  rightly  re
jects  this  view.  First,  there  is  painted,  in  general,
the  overpowering  charm  of  the  tree.  It  appears  to
jic,,  .^  something  from  which  it  would  be  good  to
eat.  ',!;.;,  j..  good  for  food.  The  charm  has  now,
too'its  se  The  tree  is,  moreover,  pleasant

,,-,  the  eye.  It  appears  also  to  have  a  special  worth
iu  supplying  a  want;  it  is  to  be  de.-ire.l  to  make  one
v'-j.-e.  The  sensual  det-ire  and  the  demoniacal  spirit
ual  interest  (j-.-pecially  ciiriosiiy  and  pride)  unite  in
leading  her  to  the  fall.  Tuch,  Heck,  Baumgartcn,
uiid  others,  </ive  to  ^"^-H?  the  sense  of  making
wise:  it  appeared  to  her  as  a  means  for  spiritual  ad
vancement.  Jlelit/.sch  (as  also  Knobelj  di.-pute.>  this,
with  the  remark  that  it  does  not  agree  with  the  word
-~r,:  (a  thing  to  be  desired).  I'.ut  why  should  there
not  be  supposed  a  charm  in  this  property  of  making
wi-e?  Herein  is  indicated  not  only  the  common
which  the  charm  of  novelty  has  for  our  human
r,  uure  in  "vneral,  but  also  its  special  influence  on  the
female  nature.— She  took  of  the  fruit  thereof
and  did  eat.— The  decisive  act  of  sin  (.lames  i.  15).
Knobel:  The  heart  follows  the  eyes  (Job  xxxi.  7;
Kcelesiastes  xi.  '.').—  And  gave  also  unto  her  hus
band.— The  addition  HS"  is  interpreted  by  Dclit/sch
as  denoting  "an  actual  presence,  instead  of  mere
iation."  We  hold  both  suppositions  to  be
wron".  An  actual  presence  of  the  husband  standing
mute°in  the  very  scene  of  the  temptation  presents
-reat  diiliculty  ;  "whilst  the  second  view  amounts  to
nothing.  If  it  is  taken,  however,  as  the  ivpre.-eiita-
tion  of" an  eating  together,  then  the  language  is  an


*  !  \nothcr  example  of  the  way  in  which  this  .
commentators  love  to  pervert  thinfpTmoking  a  tnjslcron
>,,,  or  a  putting  the  later  first,  in  their  endeavor  to
Bible  ideas  from  KnTptians,  Greeks,  and  Persians.
Xo  one  .an  carefully  study  this  Greek  maxim  Wovtpov  TO
etlov  dl,f.  ilivinc.  is  cnrious),  which  so  frequently  meets  us  m
the  Greek  ports  and  in  Herodotus,  without  seeing  in  it  a  fol
from  a  higher  and  holier  idea.  The  marks  of  human  dogen-
(  racy  are  upon  it.  It  has  become  a  tupcrstitioiu  or  fatalistic
fear  of  the  godd  as  jealous  of  mere  human  prosperity  per  se.
Hi  -h  strife?  iu  their  view,  was  dangerous,  not  because  of
-its  leading  to  "  pride  which  God  rcsUeth"  for  man's  goou,
but  sim  pi  v  as  threatening  a  reverse  destiny  (see  UEBODOTCS
"  Story  ot'  1'olycrates  of  Samoa  and  King  Aniasis,'  Herod,
iii.  40).  It  was  unlticky,  and  foreboded  evil.  There  was  m
it  a  consciousness  uf  something  very  wrong  m  man,  but  how
different  this  more  jealousy  of  human  prosperity  from  the
holy  attribute  of  jealousy  against  human  pride  and  sm
ascribed  to  God  in  the  Bible!  Herodotus,  as  he  was  more
oriental  in  his  stylo  and  feeling  than  the  fatalistic  dramatu
poets,  comes  nearer  the  Scripture  representation,  or  the
Scripture  original,  we  may  say,  of  the  great  truth  thus  dis
torted.  Espedallv  is  this  the  ca;e  In  the  speeches  of  Arta-
banus  dissuading  Xerxes  from  his  expedition  against  Greece,
Lib.  vii.  10,  5.  lie  talks  there  of  the  jealous  God  (o  0«os
ij>eovri<7a<s),  and  his  bringing  down  of  human  pride,  almost  in
the  style  of  Isaiah.— T.  L.I


abridgment ;  after  that  she  had  eaten  she  gave  it  to
her  husband  to  eat  thereof  after  her,  or  to  eat  with
her.  In  the  very  moments  of  temptation,  as  we  must
take  the  account,  there  conies  in  the  perception  ol
the  fact,  that  she  does  not  die  from  the  eating;  and
so  it  is  that  the  wife's  power  of  persuasion,  and
Adam's  sympathy  with  her,  are  net  made  specially
prominent.

7.  Vcrs.  7,  8.  And   the   eyes   of  them  both
were  opened,  and  they  knew  that  they  were
naked. — In  the  relation  between  the  antecedent  here
and  what  follows  there  evidently  lies  a  terrible  irony.
The  promise  of  Satan  becomes  half  fulfilled,  though,
indeed,  in  a  different  sense  from  what  they  had  sup
posed  :  Their  eyes  were  opened ;  they  had  attained
to  a  developed  "self-consciousness.     13ut  all  that  they
had  reached  in  the  lirst  place  was  to  become  con
scious  of  their  nakedness  as  now  an  indecent  expo
sure.     It  is  here  in  this  first  irony,  as  appearing  in
the  divine  treatment  of  the  consequences  of  sin,  that
we  get  a  clear  view  of  that   ironical  aspect  in  the
divine  penal  righteousness  winch  shows  itself  in  the
Scripture,  and  in  the  whole  history  of  the  world  (see
Ps.  ii.  4 ;  Acts  iv.  24  ;  LAM;K\S  "  Dogmatics,"  p.  460).
Knobel  would  really  regard  the  new  knowledge  as  a
pure  step  of  progress.     "As  a  consequence  of  the
enjoyment  they  knew  their  nakedness,  whereas  be
fore,  like  unconscious,  unembarrassed  children,  they
had  no  thought  of  their  nakedness,  or  of  their  per
sonal  contrasts.     At  once  did  they  perceive  that  to
•ro  naked  was  no  longer  proper  for  them.     They  had
attained,  in  con.-equence,  to  a  moral  insight.     Shame
entered  into  men  in  near  cotemporaneity  with  their
knowledge  of  right  and  wrong,  good  and  evil ;  it  be-
lon"-s  to  the  very  beginning  of  moral  cognition  and
development.      This   shame,    in   its   lowest   degree,
limits  itself  to  the  covering  of  the  sexual  nakedness."
The  question  here,  however,  is  not  respecting  a  moral
reform,  but  a  religious  deterioration.     The  reflection
upon  their  nakedness  and  its  unseemliness  becomes,
in  the  li^ht  of  the  symbolical  representation,  neces
sarily  known  as  the  'lirst  form  of  the  entering  con
sciousness  of  iruilt.     They  have  lost  the  unconscious
dominion  of  the  spirit  over  the  bodily  and  sensuous
appearance,   and    henceforth  there    enters    into   the
conscience    the   world-historical   strife    between   the
spirit  and  the  flesh—a  strife  whose  prime  cause  lies
in  the  fact  that  the  spirit  came  out  of  the  communion
of  the  spirit  of  (iod,  whose  form  consists  in  the  fact
that  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  whose
effect  (the  feeling  of  hateful  nakedness)  is,  indeed,
attended   by   a   reaction   of  the   shame-feeling,  but
which  can  only  manifest  itself  in  the  effort  to  cover,
in  the  most  scanty  way,  the  nakedness  revealed.     In
this  part  of  the  body  the  feeling  of  nakedness  mani
fests  itself  as  a  sense  of  exposure  that  needs  covering,
not   because  that   fruit   poisoned   the  fountain   of
human   life,  or,  by  means  of  an  innate   property,
immediately  effected  a  corruption  of  the  body,  so  far
as  propagation  is  concerned  (Von  Hoffmann,  Jiaum-
gartcn),  nor  because,  in  consequence  of  the  fall,  a
physical  change  had  taken  place  ;  but  simply  because,
in  the  taking  away  by  sin   of  the  normal   relation
between  the  soul  and  the  body,  the  body  ceases  to  be
any  longer  a  pure  instrument  of  the  spirit  which  ia
united  to  God.     "This  part  of  the  body  is  called
rvnr  (e.  g.,  ch.  ix.  22)  and  1U3  (e.  g.,  Lev.  >:v.  2 ;
co'mp.  Exod.  xxviii.  42),  because  'nakedness  and/esA,
which  shame  bids  men  cover,  culminate  iu  them.
Delitzsch.     In  what  follows,  wherein  he  says  that
here  the  contrast  between  the  spiritual  and  the  nat-


CHAP.  III.  1-24.


ural,  having  lost  its  point  of  unity,  is  of  the  sharpest
kind,  and  that  the  beastlike  in  the  human  appearance
appears  here  most  bestial,  Delitzsch  is  approachin
again  the  theosophic  mode  of  view ;  although  it  is
true  that  man,  from  his  demoniacal  striving  after
something  too  great  for  him,  falls  back  into  a  beastly
laxity  of  behavior,  which,  however,  even  here  shame
contends  against,  and  seeks  to  veil.  As  the  death  of
,man,  in  its  historical  aspect,  stands  in  counter-rela
tion  to  the  human  generations  in  their  historical
aspect,  so  it  would  seem  that  whilst  the  first  presenti
ment  of  death,  in  the  first  human  consciousness  of
guilt,  must  give  a  shock  to  men,  there  would  also  be,
in  conuectioii  with  this  foreboding  of  death,  another
presentiment  of  a  call  to  sexual  propagation;  but
along  with  this,  and  in  order  to  this,  there  would  be
a  feeling  which  would  seek  to  veil  it,  with  its  acts
and  organs,  as  by  a  sacred  law.  This  modesty,  or
bashfulness,  of  man,  however,  relates  not  merely  to
natural  generation,  but  also  to  the  spiritual  and  the
churchly ;  as  though  all  origin  demanded  its  covering
— its  creative  night.  The  commendation  of  the  first
growths  of  intelligence  in  a  man's  soul  produces  a
feeling  of  blushing  diffidence,  and  so,  too,  the  church
ly  birth  hath  its  reverent  and  modest  veiling.  When,
therefore,  along  with  the  presentiment  of  death,  and
of  the  generic  or  sexual  destiny  (which,  nevertheless,
we  cannot  make  independent  of  man's  historical
death),  there  comes  in  the  feeling  of  shame  in  the
first  men,  so  also,  as  a  symbolic  expression  therefor,
there  enters  into  them,  along  with  the  guilt,  an  inner
death,  and  the  sense  of  the  want  of  renovation.  For
the  refutation  of  Knobel's  view,  that  by  the  fig-tree
here  is  not  meant  the  usual  fig-tree,  but  the  plant
named  pisang,  or  banana,  see  DKLITZSCH  and  KEIL.
See  also  more  particularly,  respecting  the  tree  in
question,  KXOBKL  and  DELITZSCH.  —  And  they
hoard  the  voice.— Knobel,  Keil,  and  Delitzsch  ex
plain  the  word  b"!p  here,  not  of  the  voice  of  the  Lord,
but  of  the  sound  or  rustling  noise  made  by  the  Deity
as  he  walked ;  and  they  compare  it  with  Lev.  xxvi.
33 ;  Num.  xvi.  84 ;  2  Sam.  v.  24.  By  such  an  inter
pretation  is  the  symbolical  element  left  entirely  out
of  view.  For  beings  in  their  condition,  this  sound
of  God  walking  must  evidently  have  become  a  voice;
but  besides  this  it  is  said,  farther  on,  that  God  called
to  Adam.  At  all  events,  the  voice  here  becomes
first  a  call.  "  In  the  cool  of  the  day,  that  is,  towards
evening,  when  a  cooling  breeze  is  wont  to  arise."
Keil.  To  this  we  may  add:  and  when  also  there
comes  to  man  a  more  quiet  and  contemplative  frame
of  soul.  So  Delitzsch  remarks  very  aptly :  "  God
appears,  because  at  that  time  men  are  in  a  state  most
susceptible  of  serious  impressions.*  Every  one  ex
periences,  even  to  this  day,  the  truth  of  what  is  nar
rated.  In  the  evening  the  dissipating  impressions  of
the  day  become  weaker,  there  is  stillness  in  the  soul ;
more  than  at  other  times  do  we  feel  left  to  ourselves'
and  then,  too,  there  awake  in  us  the  sentiments  of
sadness,  of  longing,  of  insulation,  and  of  the  love  of
home.  Thus  with  our  first  parents ;  when  evening
comes,  the  first  intoxication  of  the  satanic  delusion
subsides,  stillness  reigns  within ;  they  feel  themselves
isolated  from  the  communion  of  God,  parted  from
their  original  home,  whilst  the  darkness,  as  it  comes
rushing  in  upon  them,  makes  them  feel  that  their
inner  light  has  gone  out."  Farther  on  Delitzsch
*  [Compare  Ps.  civ.  34 :  "  My  meditation  of  Him  shall  be
sweet,  3-131  "-literally,  like  the  calm  evening  hour.  So
too  Greek  poets  called  the  night  ev<J>pdr7j-the  time  of  calm
•ooer  iflougut!.— i.  J_j,]


maintains  that  God  appeared  to  man  as  one  man  ap
pears  to  another,  though  this  had  not  been  the  ori
ginal  mode  of  the  divine  converse  with  him.     Tho
thcophanies  had  their  beginning  first  after  the  fall ;
and  according  to  his  explanation,  "  God  now  for  the
first  time  holds  converse  with  men  in  an  outward
manner,  corresponding  to  their  materialization  and
alienated  state."     On  the  other  hand,  Keil  maintains,
"that  God  held  converse  with  the  first  men  in  a  visi
ble  form,  as  a  father  and  educator  of  his  children,
and  that  this  was  the  original  mode  of  the  divine
revelation,  not  coming  in  for  the  first  time  after  the
fall."     In  neither  can  we  suppose  that  there  is  taught
a  twofold  incarnation  of  God,  first  in  Paradise,  and
then  in  Christ.     In  like  manner,  too,  must  we  regard
the  question  here  as  unanswered,  in  what  respect  the
theophanies  (which  were  mediated  in  all  cases  through
vision-seeing  states  of  soul)  are  to  be  distinguished
from    real    outward    appearances   in  human   form.
Hofmann  would  complete  the  knowledge  of  Paradise,
by  taking  as  the  appointed  mode  of  revelation  God's
appearance  to  them  as  soaring   on  the   cherubim.
Delitzsch,  moreover,  informs  us  (after  Hofmann,  per
haps)  that  God,  at  this  time,  did  not  come  down  from
heaven,  since  he  yet  dwelt  upon   the  earth.    •  More
worthy  of  our  confidence  is  the  language  of  Keil:
"Men  have  separated  themselves  from  God,  but  God
cannot  and  will  not  give  them  up." — And  Adam
and  his  wife  hid  themselves. — Clearly  an  expres
sion  of  guilt-consciousness,  as  also,  an  indication,  at
the  same  time,  of  the  fall  into  sin,  and  of  the  decline
into  a  state  of  corruption.     The  particular  character
istics  are  these :  consciousness  of  their  transgression,
of  its  eiFect,  of  their  spiritual  and  bodily  nakedness,
of  their  separation  from  God — of  a  feeling  of  dis
trustful,  selfish,  and  servile  fear,  in  the  presence  of
God,  and  of  the  loss  of  their  spiritual  purity,  as  ori
ginating  in  their  guilt,  together  with  the  false  notion
that  they  can  hide  themselves  from  God.     Moreover,
the  regular  consistency  which  appears  in  this  prog
ress  of  sin  must  not  be  overlooked.     Through  this
status  corruptionis,  the  first  common  act  of  sin  passes
over  into  a  second.     Taken  symbolically,  this  is  the
history  of  every  individual  fall  into  sin.     "They  hid
themselves  through  modesty,"  says  Knobel.     With
all  this,  there  is  presented  in  the  flight  of  the  sinner
from  God  a  feeling  of  exculpation  ;  yet  still,  again,  it
is  attainted  with  self-deception,  with  a  want  of  truth
and  humility. — Amongst  the  trees. — In  the  deep
est  density  and  darkness  of  the  garden,  which  now
becomes  an  emblem  of  the  world,  and  of  that  worldly
enjoyment  in  which  the  sinner  seeks  to  hide  himself.
8.  Vers.    9 -19.   Where  art  thou  ?  -7-  Knobel :
"  Jehovah  must  now   call  for   man,  who,  at  other
times,  was  ever  there."    Delitzsch  :  "  It  is  clear,  that
not  for  his  own  sake  docs  God  direct  this  inquiring
call  to  man,  but  only  for  man's  sake.     God  does  in
truth  seek  them,  not  because  they  are  gone  from  his
knowledge,  but  because  they  are  lost  from  his  com
munion."     It  is  a  consequence  of  the  very  being  of
God  as  a  person,  if  he  would  not  violently  surprise
man  with  his  omnipresence  and  his  omniscience,  that
he   should  freely  assume  the  form  of  seeking  him,
that  is,  of  drawing  nigh  unto  him  gradually,  in  a  way
of  mercy ;  since  man  must  seek  and  find  Him.     The
Good  Shepherd  seeks  and  finds  the  lost  sheep ;  the
sinner  must  seek  and  find  God ;   the  relation  must
be  an  ethical  covenant  relation.     Delitzsch  says  far
ther  :  "  This  word,  H2*X  (where  art  tho  a  ?)  echoes
through  the  whole  human  world,  and  in  each  indi
vidual  man."    That  is,  ia  a  symbolical  sense,  the


GENESIS    OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


passage  denote*  every  case  of  a  sinner  seeking  his
divine  homo.  Dclitzsch :  "  The  heathen  world  feel
ing  after  God  (briKaipw,  Acts  xvii.  27)  is  the  conse-
qucnee  of  this  evening  call,  ~"N,  and  of  the  long
ing  for  home  that  is  thereby  evoked.— I  heard  thy
voice  in  the  garden.— Knobel :  "  His  slight  cover
ing  is  sufficient  as  against  the  fitmiliar  wife,  but  not
as  against  the  high  and  far-seeing  Lord  of  the  Gar
den."  ( ! )  The  question  may  be  asked,  why  God
called  to  Adam,  though  Eve  had  been  first  in  sin?
Without  doubt  is  Eve  included  in  the  more  universal
significance  of  the  word  Adam  (man),  yet  still  the
call  is  directed  to  the  individual  Adam.  In  a  certain
sense,  however,  is  this  Adam,  as  the  household  lord
of  the  wife,  an-werable  for  her  .-tep,  notwithstanding
that  ho  himself  is  ensnared  with  her.  The  ethical
arraignment  for  the  complaint  against  the  wife  pro
ceeds"  throir.h  Ad.iin.  Hut  thus  appears  also  here
the  additional  indication  that  Adam  is  denoted  as  the
first  author  of  the  hiding,  as  Eve  was  iirst  in  the  sin
itself.  According  to  the  men,-  laws  of  modesty
(Knobel)  the  wife  should  rather  have  appeared  in  the
foreground  here.  According  to  Keil,  " when  Adam
says°that  he  hid  himself  for  fear,  on  account  of  his
nakedn-ss  (thereby  seeking  to  hide  his  sin  behind  its
con-<'<iue:ices,  and  his  disobedience  behind  his  feeling
of  shame),  it  is  not  a  Mgn  of  special  obduracy,  but
may  easily  be  taken  psychologically;  as  that,  in  fact,
the"  feeling  of  nakedness  and  shame  were  sooner  pres
ent  to  his  consciousness  than  the  transgression  of  the
divine  command,  and  that  he  i'elt  the  consequences  of
sin  more  than  he  recogni/ed  the  sin  itself."  Delitzsch
would  amend  this  by  adding:  "although  all  that  he
says  is  purely  involuntary  self-:iccu-a:ion."  It  is  to
he  ob-erved  that  here  <i]'j>  ars  ///'•  fit:  I  /«/X'//;".7  ""^
confusion  nf  sin  an-l  of  •  rit,  that  />-,  t]i at  punishment
of  Kin  ordain  /  of  (''"•/,  and  which  is  t!«-  peculiar
('•/iiirii<-'i  ristic  <•/'  <•'//•  rrJi  mplion-m  <  </'/<;/  humanity. —
\'er.  11.  Who  told  thee  that  thou  wast  naked?

Knobel :   "  From  this  behavior  Jehovah  recognised

at  once  what  had  happened."     Hardly  can  any  such
anthropomorphism  be  found  in  the  sense  of  the  text.
Keil  says  better:    '•  It  is  for  the  sake  of  awaking  this
recognition  of  sin  that  God  speaks."     The  question,
however,  concerns  not  merely  the  means  by  which
the  recognition  of  sin  may  be  brought  out,  but  in  a
special  manner  the  methods  through,  which  its  <.-.//(-
fession  may  be  educed.    So  also  Delitzsch.    "His  ex
planation,  however,  of  the  interrogative  "^  as  indi
cating  that  a  personal  power  was  the  final   original
cause"5 of  the  change  that  had  passed  upon  man,"  i>
far  beyond  the  mark.     For  it  is  not  the  occasion  ol
sin  that  is  referred  to  here,  but  the  occasion  of  the
consciousness  of  nakedness.     This,  however,  comes
not  from  without,  but  from  within.    There  lies,  more
over,  in  the  question  that  immediately  follows  :  Hast
thou  eaten  of  the  tree?  the  explanation  of  the
meaning  of  the  first.—  Ver.  1-2.  And  the  man  said
the  woman  whom  thou  gavest. — An  acknowl
odirment  of  sin  by  Adam,  but  not  true  and  sincere
The  guilt  proper  is  rolled  upon  the  woman,  and  indi
rectly  upon  God  himself;  in  which,  however,  there  is
naturally  expressed  a  general  exculpation,  only  God
is  put  forward  as  the  occasion  of  the  calamity  that
has  arisen.     The  loss  of  love  that  comes  out  in  this
interposing  of  the  wife  is,  moreover,  particularly  de
noted  in  this,  that  he  grudges  to  call  her  Eva,  or  my
wife  (see  this  form  of  grudging,  Gen.  xxxvii.  32  ;  Job
til.  20,  where  he  says  he*  instead  of  God;  Luke  xv.
*  [This  does  not  appear  in  our  translation,  which,  like


30;  this  thy  son,  John  ix.  12  ;  where  is  he?  namely,
Tesus,  etc.).     "  That  woman  by  my  side,  she  whc
was  given  to  me  by  God  as  a  trusty  counsellor,  she
gave  me  the  fruit ; "  in  this  form,  again,  is  Eve  in
)art  excused  by  an    imputation  to   God. — A'er.   13.
And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  the  woman,
what  is  this  that  thou  hast  done  ?  * — G  od  fol-
ows  up  the  transgression,  even  to  the  loot — not  the
psychological  merely,  but  the  historical  root. — The
serpent  beguiled  me. — Although  temptation  is  a
joauiling,  yet  here,  in  the  gross  delusions  of  the  ser-
iciit,  and  the  wife's  inclination  to  excuse  herself,  the
latter  conception  i-;  the  more  obvious  one. — Ver.  1-1.
To  the  serpent  he  said,  because  thou  hast  done
this. — It  is  no  more  said  here,  u-hcrefore  hast  thou
done  thin'  although  the  serpent  is  previously  intro
duced    as    speaking,  and,  therefore,  as   capable   of
maintain!;!!,'  coi.ver.-alion.     Therein  lies  the  supposi
tion,  that  the  trial  has  now  reached  the  fountain-head
of  sin,  the  purely  evil  purpose  (the  demoniacal)  hav
ing  no  deeper  ground,  and  requiring  no  further  inves
tigation.      Accordingly,  there  follow  now   the  fatal
dooms,  according  to  the  consequences  of  each  par
ticular  evil  act.     The  serpent  receives  his  sentence
first :  thou  art  cursed. — The  sense  of  ••3  (rendered
in  the  English  transition  «7<c.iv,  or  comparatively)  is
clearly  that  of  selection  :  among  all  cattle,  or  out  of
all    cattle  (Clericus,   Tuch,    Knobel).      It    does    no:
mean,  therefore,  cursed,  that  is,  abhorred,  by  all  cat
tle  (Gesenius,  I)e  Wette,  ct  al.)  or  above  all  cattle,
that  is,  comparatively  more  cursed  (lloscnmiiller  ct
al.).      The   sentence   pronounced   upon  the  serpent
proceeds  in  a  threefold  gradation.     Its  explanation
brings  up,  of  itself,  the  question,  whether  the  whole
sentence  bears  upon  the  serpent  alone,  or  i'i  connec
tion   with  something  else,   or   only  in  a   symbolical
sense.     Surely  the    general    doom,    cursed    bo  Ihoa
(r-in-ular)  among  all    cattle,  and   among  all    beasts
(corresponding  with  the  causality:  subtle  among  all
beasts,    prominently),    indicates   a  symbolical  back
ground  of  the  whole  judgment.     1.  Quidam  xtatun.-i
malcdiclltinciii  luftitn.  in  xerpcntem   Kolmn  (quia  hit
confcrinr  c>'in  <(/.'<'••;  bcstiis)  noit,  in  d'uilo'um,  qma  is
maledictus  crat.     2.  Alii  in  dialolum  i,olum,
qma  ornf'ta  x,  ,•/><•, <s  non  poierat  juste  puniri.     3.  Alii
applicant  v.  1 1  <fl  scrpcntcm,  v.  15  in  diabolum.   At
rcro  tu  ct  Ic  idem  stint  in  uirorjuc  vcrxu.     4.  Alii
cxtstiinaiti  cam  in  titrumque  latam.      Quam  seittcn-
ti'tiii  vcrisnmam  judico.     MKDUS  in  Poll  Commentar.
ad  h.  I.     The   inconsistency   that  arises   when   we
would  understand  v.    M  of  the  serpent  only,  and
v.  15,  on  the  contrary,  of  Satan,  is  very  apparent.

most  other  versions,  ancient  or  modern,  renders  it  in  the
•native  It  has  arisen  from  a  desire  to  avoid  the  apparent
harshness ;  but  it  is  strictly  in  the  Hebrew  of  Job  lii.  20  as
Lan^e  gives  it,  and  it  shows  his  careful  observance  oi  every
thing  in  the  biblical  text.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  temper
of  mind  in  which  Job  is  represented.  He  grudges  to  name
God,  though  there  is  no  other  subject  for  the  verb  'rp  —
"why  docs  he  give  light  to  the  wretched?"  It  is  the  lan-
gua"-e  of  sullen"  complaint,  afraid  or  ashamed  to  name  the
one  complained  of.  So  Adam  here  says  :  She  gave  it  to  me,
the  woman  gave  it  to  mo.  The  other  examples  correspond.

~~  *  [Lange's  translation  here  is:  "Wherefore  hast  thou
done  this  ?' "  Our  version,  "  What  hast  thou  done  ? "  would
seem,  at  first  view,  to  be  a  more  literal  rendering  of  the  lie-
brew  rra  ,  but  that  given  in  the  Vulgate  (quarc  hoc  fecisti)
and  by  Luther,  as  well  as  by  Lange,  is  more  in  accordance
with  the  spirit  of  the  question,  since  fl«3  may  be  taken
as  a  general  as  well  as  a  particular  interrogatory.  Or  it
may  be  regarded  as  exclamatory  :  What  a  thing  have  you
done !  Uow  could  you  do  it !— T.  L.]


CHAP.  III.  1-24.


233


The  various  diversities  of  interpretation  are  a  conse
quence  of  a  want  of  clearness  in  respect  to  the  fun
damental  exegetical  law,  that  here  an  historical  fore
ground  is  everywhere  connected  with  a  symbolical
background.     Accordingly,  both  the  historical  and
the  symbolical   go   together  through  all  the  three
dooms  imposed  upon  the  serpent ;  it  is  in  the  third
act,  however  (the  protcvangel,  as  it  is  called),  that
the  symbolical   becomes  especially  prominent,  and
casts  its  light  over  the  whole  passage. — Fir  at  judg
ment  doom  :  Upon  thy  belly  shait  thou  go ;  that
is,  as  the  worm  steals  over  the  earth  with  its  length
of  body,  u  as  a  mean  and  despised  crawler  in  the
dust  (Deut.  xxxii.  21;  Micah  vii.  17)."     It  is  a  fact
that  the  serpent  did  not  originally  have  this  inferior
mode  of  motion  like  the  worm,  and  it  is  this  circum
stance  partly,  and  partly  the  consideration  that  alon_
with  his  speaking  the  serpent  presented  to  Eve  the  ap
pearance  of  a  trusty  domestic  animal,  that  appears  to
have  given  occasion  to  the  expression :    among  all
cattle,  as  a  complement  to  which   there  is  added :
among  all  the  beasts  of  the  field.     And  to  this  effect
is  the  remark  of  Knobel,  that  "for  the  time  before
the  curse,  the  author  must  have  ascribed  to  the  ser
pent  another  kind  of  movement,  and  perhaps  another
form.     It  is  reckoned  here  with  the  fl~rc  (cattle),
v.  1  with  the  mm  n"H  (or  beasts  of  the  field)."
In  respect  to  this,  it  must  be  noticed,  that  there  has
also  been  maintained  the  supposition  of  his  having
before  gone  erect  (Luther,  Miinster,  Fag.   Gerhard,
Osiander)  and  been  possessed  of  bone  (JOSEPH.,  Ant.
i.  1,  4  ;'  Ephraim,  Jarchi,  Merc.).    Delitzsch  andKeil,
moreover,  favor  the  view,  that  the  serpent's  form
and   manner   of  motion   were   wholly   transformed
(Delitzsch)  or  changed  (Keil).     Delitzsch :    "  As  its
speaking  W;is  the  first  demoniacal  miracle,  so  is  this
transformation  the  first  divine."    Instead  of  that,  we
hold  that  this  exposition  only  works  in  favor  of  the
mythical  interpretation  (Knobel),  since  it  mistakes
the  symbolical  of  the  expression ;  on  which,  beside,
it  can  only  touch  in  the  phrase  to  "  eat  the  earth."
According  to  Delitzsch,  "  the  eating  of  dust  does  not
denote  the  exclusive  food  of  the  serpent,  but  only  the
involuntary  consequence  of  its  winding  in  the  dust."
So,  moreover,  the  expression,  "On  thy  belly  slialt
thou  go,"  cannot  denote  that  he  was  deprived  of  bone
and  wing,  but  only  the  involuntary  consequence  of
the  manifestation  of  the  serpent's  hostile  attitude  to
men,  namely,  that  it  should  now  wind  about  timor
ously  upon  its  belly,  or  go  stealing  about  in  the  most
secret  manner ;  whereas,  before  this,  it  could,  with
impunity,  perform  its  meanderings  before  their  eyes,
yea,  even  stand  upright  in  some  respects,  and  twine
itself  round  the  trees.     The  older  exegesis  had  some
excuse,  since  it  did  not  always  know  how  to  separate
the   conception  of  a  biblical  miracle   wrought  for
judgment,  or  deliverance,  from  a  magical  metamor
phosis.     The  assumption,  however,   at  the  present
day,  of  such  a  metamorphosis,   has  to  answer  the
question,  whether  through  it  the  conception  of  a  mir
acle  is  not  changed,  as  well  as  that  of  nature  itself.
That,  in  fact,  in  consequence  of  the  fall,  and  of  their
changed  attitude  towards  men,  the  forms  of  animals
can  undergo  monstrous  changes,  and  have  often  been
thus  changed,  though  still  remaining  on  the  basis  of
their  generic  organization,  is  shown  in  the  case  of
dogs  who  run  wild  ;  but  the  exposition  above  men
tioned  extends  itself  inimitably  beyond  any  concep
tion  of  deterioration.     As  far  as  concerns  the  sym
bolical  side  of  the   first  sentence,  it  is  clear  that


before  any  wider  relation  (to  Satan),  we  must  hold  tc
the  specific  appointment,  that  the  tempting  evil  shall
no  longer  meander  about  the  world,  bold  and  free,
but,  in  correspondence  with  its  earthly  meanness,  and
bestial  association,  shall  wind  along  the  ground  in
the  most  sly,  and  sneaking,  and  secret  manner,  eat
ing  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  feeding  itself  upon  th'j
coarsest  elements  of  life,  or  the  very  mould  of  death.
This  sentence,  then,  in  the  next  pluce,  avails  not  only
against  evil  in  general,  but  the  Evil  One  himself.    And
therewith  is  denoted,  at  the  same  time,  The  second
doom.     Knobel:  "  According  to  the  older  represen
tations,  serpents  licked  the  dust,  and  enjoyed  it  as
their  food.     (Compare  Micah  vii.  17  ;  Isaiah  Ixv.  25  ;
BOCHART:  Hicroz.  iii.  p.  245)."     Here  it  is  supposed
that  Micah  and  Isaiah  have  merely  taken  Genesis  too
literally ;    whereas   Knobel  interprets  :  "  it  is  com
pelled  to  swallow  down  the  dust  as  it  moves  here  and
there  with  its  mouth  upon  the  ground."     As  the  ser
pent,  the  allegorical  type  of  the  temptation,  is  sen
tenced  to  have  its  mouth  in  the  dust,  so  is  the  genius
of  the  serpent  condemned  to  feed  on  elements  which
arc  a  coarse  prelude,  or  a  nauseous  after-game,  of  life.
—  Tldrd  doom  of  the  serpent  ;  the  Protevangel.     The
rationalistic  interpretation,  which  is  last  defended  by
Knobel,  finds  here  denoted  only  the  relation  between
the  serpent-nature  and  the  human  race.      That  is,
Genesis  here,  in  one  of  its  most  ethically  significant
passages,  flattens  down  into  a  mere  physical  anthro
pological  observation.     It  is  true  that  the  physical
here  forms  the  point  of  departure.     "Enmity  shall
exist  between  the  serpent  and  the  woman,  and  be
tween  the  descendants  of  both.     Man  hates  the  ser
pent  as  a  creature  in  direct  contrariety  to  himself,
persecutes  and  destroys  it."    (To  this  point  the  words
of  PLAUTUS  :  Mcrcat.  iv.  4,  21,  alijvci/i  odisse  ccquc
atquc  anrjues.)     It  is  also  hostile  to  man,  and  bites
him  when  unciiarmed.     In  PLIXT:  Xat.  Hist.  x.  90,
it  is  called  immitissimum  animalium  gcmcx.     Com
pare  also  OVID,  Mdamorph.  xii.  804:  "calcato  immi-
tior  hydro.     It  appears,  as  matter  of  fact,  to  have
been  the  creature  of  the  primitive  world  that  was  the
most  absolutely  opposed  to  culture,  and  which,  pro
ceeding  from  the  dragons  of  the  earlier  earth-periods,
found  its  way  through  the  last  catastrophes  into  the
newly  prepared  world,  or  had  been  organically  meta
morphosed — like  "the  den-inhabiting  brood  of  the
old  dragons,"  which,  in  a  worse  sense  than  any  other
beast  could  have  done  it,  render  the  earth  uncom
fortable,  destined  as  it  was  to  culture  ;  and  therefore
is  it  devoted  to  destruction  in  the  world  into  which
it  had  passQd  over.    In  connection  with  this  fact,  the
thought  readily  occurs,  how  very  appropriate  that  the
natural  relation  between  the  serpent-brood  and  the
human  race,  destined  ever,  and  here  anew,  to  the
"  ingdom  of  God,  should  become  a  symbol  of  the  re
ligious  ethical  conflict  between  the  evil  and  the  good,
upon  earth.     In  opposition  to  the  rationalistic  stands
the  orthodox  interpretation  of  our  passage,  which  re
fers  it  to  Satan  on  the  one  side,  and  to  Christ,  the
personal  Messiah,  on  the  other.     According  to  most
of  the  older  interpreters,  the  seed  of  the  woman  de
notes  directly  the   Messiah.     (See  HENGSTENBERG  :
"Christology  of  the  Old  Testament,"  i.  p.  21.)     Li
respect  to  it,  however,  the  Romish  interpreters  make
a  very  bold  variation.     They  do  this  in  correspond
ence  with  the  translation  of  the  Vulgate:  ipsa  (in
stead  of  ipse)  contcret  caput  tuum,  which  is  condemn
ed,  not  only  by  the  Hebrew  text,  and  the  Septuagint,
but  in  the  "Quest.  Ilcb."  of  HIEKONYMUS,  who" wag
himself  the  author  of  the  Vulgate,  as  also  by  Petrus


234


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF-  MOSES.


Chrysologus  and  Pope  Leo  tlic  Great  (see  CALMKT'S
t'omm.  p.  120);  whilst  Augustine,  Ambrose,  Gregory
the  Great,  and  others,  have  ranged  themselves  on  the
side  of  the  Vulgate.  Calmet  interprets  :  in  eundcm
tensnm  (namely,  the  right  sense  of  the  Hebrew  text)
rcd'li  potent  vulyata;  neque  aliter  B.  Virgo  conterere  va-
luit  serpentem  quam  ]>•  rjHii'm  suumJcxum  Christum.
So  also  says  VON  SCHUANX  in  his  "  Commentary  :"  in
Hcbrao  tjniJon  habetur,  il'<'  ( S'H )  conttrd  capxt
tuum:  crqo  w men  unt'itrix,  i.  e.  Jeans  Chrislus  conte-
ret  Metres  ('>'!<•, n  re  lit :  >i<nn  neqite  sanctissima  Virgo
aliter  I/mini  partu  xn»,  i.  e.  in  r/rtute  Jc.tu  ('!<r<x!>
Jilii  sui,  C'.ij-n:/  xer/it-iitis  conli-'trixsc  credtiula  cxf.  Both
authors,  indeed,  gave  tliese  wrested  interpretations
before  tip-  latest  Papistical  glorification  of  Mary.  In
modern  time-  has  the  interpretation  which  refers  the
seed  of  the  woman  to  the  personal  Messiah  been  de
fended  bv  I'hilippi.  In  the  primary  sense,  says  l>e-
lit/sch,  it  is  only  promised  that  humanity  shall  win
this  victory,  fur  XI"  (he)  relates  back  to  r.'i'S  "~T
(seed  of  the  woman);  as.  however,  the  seed  of  the
serpent  has  its  unity  in  Satan,  so  it  may  be  fairly
conjrrtmvd  that  the  conquering  party,  the  seed  of
t!ie  woman,  has  also  a  person  for  its  unity — a  con
jecture  which,  as  we  readily  concede  to  1'nn.irri
("Treatise  concerning  the  Protevangel  in  Kiiefoth-
Meicr's  Church  Periodical,"  18.">5,  ]>]).  ,r>  1 ',)-.">  I M,  i.-
the  more  obvious;  since  in  this  second  sentence  the
pronoun  X"H  has  for  its  object  not  the  seed  of  the
serpent,  but  the  serpent,  and  in  it  Satan  himself.  It
is,  however,  an  incorrect  opinion,  that  X"n  has  im
mediately,  and  exclusively,  a  personal  sense.,  and
that  the  organic  process  of  die  annunciation  of  re-
dtmption  demand-;  this.  The  conception  of  N*n  is
th.at  of  a  circle,  and  .Jesus  Christ,  or,  as  the  Targnm
says,  Kiier  Mc-:ah,  is  evermore  in  tiie  course  of  the
redemptive  hi>torv  the  prominent  centre  of  this  cir
cle.  So  I>rli;/sch  says,  too,  that  Christ  is  essentially
meant  a-  (lie  centre  of  humanity,  or  as  the  head  of
humanity,  especially  of  the  redeemed,  as  Keil  says.
We  miss  h"re  the  distinct  exposition,  whether  the
prophecy  directly  applies  to  Christ  as  a  conscious  an
nouncement,  or  only  impliedly,  in  as  far  as  Christ  is  the
kernel  and  the  star  of  the  woman's  seed.  Hengsten-
berg  regards  the  place  as  more  decidedly  relating  to
the  collective  posterity  of  the  woman  ("  Christology,"
i.  p.  '22).  ll  Truly  hast  thou  inflicted  a  sore  wound  upon
the  woman  (such  would  be  the  import  of  the  words
addressed  to  the  serpent),  and  thou,  with  thy  fellow-
serpents,  wilt  continue  to  lie  in  ambush  for  her  de-
Bcendnn'-',  Nevertheless,  with  all  thy  desire  to  hurt,
wilt  thou  be  only  able  to  inflict  curable  wounds  upon
the  human  race|  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  pos
terity  cf  the  woman  shall  at  last  triumph  over  thee,
and  make  thee  feel  thine  utter  impotency.  This  in
terpretation  is  found,  indeed,  in  the  Targum  of  Jona
than,  and  in  the  Jerusalem  Targum,  which,  by  the
peed  of  the  woman,  understand  the  Jews  who  in  the
days  of  the  Messiah  shall  vanquish  Sammael.*  _  Paul
seems  to  proceed  on  this  view,  Romans  xvi.  20,
where  the  promise  is  collectively  referred  to  Christ.
More  lately  has  it  found  an  acute  advocate  in  Calvin,
and  then  in  Herder."  As  the  interpretation  of  the
whole  Protevaugel  is  specially  conditioned  en  the

*  [In  the  Tareum,  and  by  MAIMOXIDF.S  in  his  More  Jfc-
vochim,  Lib.  ii.  chap,  xxx.,  Sammael  is  called  the  angel  of
death,  nrTET  ^X5T3  .  Says  Mtiimonides  :  "  He  took  the
ancient  serpent  for  his  vehicle,  and  seduced  Eve."  Else
where  he  says,  that  he  is  no  other  than  Satan,  who  caused
death  to  the  world.— T.  L.J


choice  of  expressions  in  detail,  we  apply  ourselves  to
the  analysis  of  the  passage.  As  it  is  the  third  and
most  important  part  of  the  doom,  taken  collectively,
so  does  it  also  divide  itself  again  into  three  parts,
whose  point  of  gravity  may  also  be  said  to  be  in  three
divisions.  1.  Enmity  between  thee  and  the
woman. — In  place  of  the  false,  ungodly,  and  man-
destroying  peace  between  the  serpent  and  the  woman,
must  there  come  in,  between  them,  a  good  and  salu
tary  enmity,  established  by  God.  That  the  woman
may  have  a  special  abhorrence  of  the  serpent,  after
her  experience  of  the  deception  which  she  charges
back  upon  him,  and  that  the  falsehood  of  the  ser
pent,  which  had  all  along  before  been  enmity,  should
now  be  unmasked, — this  is  the  point  of  departure.
But,  since  this  enmity,  as  occasioned  by  an  ethical
event,  must  be  itself  substantially  ethical — since  the
serpent  is  denoted  as  permanently  present  in  his  ser
pent-seed — since,  finally,  there  is  mention,  at  the  end,
of  one  head  of  the  same — so  does  the  whole  passage
have  for  its  aim  the  ethical  power  of  temptation,
which  must  have  worked  in  some  way  through  tho
physical  serpent,  notwithstanding  that  a  being  mor
ally  evil  is  characterized,  chap.  iii.  l,aud  throughout
the  whole  process  of  the  temptation.  The  woman,
however,  is  set  in  opposition  to  the  serpent,  in  tho
first  place,  because  she  has  been  seduced  by  him,
but  then,  too,  in  order  to  set  forth  more  prominently
the  ethical  character  of  the  human  enmity  against
the  serpent.  We  must  take  into  view  here  the  pre
dominant  susceptibility  of  the  woman,  which,  in  its
curiosity,  had  become  a  special  susceptibility  tc
temptation,  but  which  now  must  become  a  prcdomi
nant  susc'.'ptibility  for  the  divine  appointment  of  en-
niitv  between  them;  add  to  which  that,  in  general,
man  becomes  master  of  evil  only  through  a  feminine
susceptibility  for  the  assistance  of  God.  2.  Be
tween  thy  seed  and  her  seed. — That  is,  the  a;>
pointment  of  this  enmity  shall  work  on  pennanentlj
through  the  generations  that  are  to  come;  the  strife
shall  never  cease.  And  truly,  it  thus  continues  as  a
war  between  the  serpent-seed  in  its  one  totality,  and
the  woman's  seed  in  its  out;  totality.  And  now  here
the  symbolical  sense  presents  itself  much  stronger;
for  in  all  the  occasional  conflicts  between  men  and
serpents  there  is  no  universal  and  generic  war  be
tween  both.  But  this  indicates  a  working  of  the
power  of  temptation  as  a  unit  against  the  unitary
moral  power  of  the  woman's  seed  in  the  conflict.  Iii
general,  it  is  a  contrast  between  the  mysterious  pow
er  of  evil  from  the  other  world,  and  the  human  race
altogether  in  this.  Since,  however,  men  alone  can
belong  to  the  genuine  seed  of  the  woman,  as  it  car
ries  oil  the  enmity  of  the  woman  against  the  serpent,
so  it  is  clear,  that  from  the  opposite  direction  it  must
be  men  that  fall  in  with  the  society  of  the  serpent's
seed  (that  is,  the  demons  and  their  powers),  or  in
other  words,  become  ethically  children  of  the  power
of  temptation.  3.  It  shall  bruise. — Here  now  the
question  arises :  what  is  the  meaning  of  that  enigmat
ic  verb  CpE:  ?  The  Scptuagiut  translates :  avT6s  aov
r-npriffd  Kf(pa\^f  KOI  ail  rrjpricreii  OLVTOV  Tntpvav;  the
Vulgate :  ipsa  conteret  caput  tuum  ct  tu  imidiabem
calcanco  ejus.  The  Septuagint  is  consistent  in  having
the  same  expression  (rrjp-n^et-^)  in  both  cases,  but^it
is  the  one  which,  in  view  of  the  Alexandrian  spirit
ualism,  is  the  weakest  of  them  all.  The  Vulgate
chooses  for  both  members  of  the  sentence  interpre
tations  of  the  same  word  that  lie  too  far  apart.  Thiaj
is  evidently  done  in  order  that,  on  the  one  side,  thej
ipsn  (the  she,  or  the  Virgin  in  that  translation)  majj


CHAP.  III.   1-24.


235


exhibit  the  highest  possible  degree  of  heroism,  whils
on  the  other  side,  under  the  protecting  veneration
of  the  monastic  theology,  she  does  not  suffer  th
least  injury  to  her  heel.  The  word  C]1'I3  is  interpret
ed  in  various  ways:  1.  tcrere,  conterere.  So  the  Syr
iac,  the  Samaritan,  and  others  (such  as  our  Gcrmar
and  English  versions).  So  also  Clcricus,  Tuch,  Banm
garten,  Rodiger ;  also,  with  special  reference  to  Horn
xvi.  20,  Hengstenberg,  Delitzsch,  Keil.  In  any  case
it  would  he  an  epcxegetical  translation,  if  we  woul
find  the  expressions,  to  tread  with  the  foot,  and  to
pierce,  in  one  common  conception,  lying  at  the
ground  of  both.  Moreover,  this  same  word,  as  usec
Psalm  cxxxix.  11,  and  Job  ix.  17,  cannot  denote
either  to  tread,  or  to  pierce.  Just  as  little,  on  the
other  side,  can  it  mean  insidiari,  or  inhiare,  to  assai
or  pursue  in  a  hostile  manner — as  Umbreit,  Gcse-
nius,  and  Knobel  explain  the  word  with  reference  to
its  supposed  affinity  with  CjX'J.  The  middle  con
ception,  which  suits  both  places  here,  and  which
commends  itself  as  suitable  to  the  two  parallel  pas
sages,  Job  ix.  and  Psalm  cxxxix.,  is  to  lay  hold  of,
seize,  hit.  Kcil :  "The  same  word  is  used  in  rela
tion  to  the  head  and  the  heel,  to  indicate  that  the
enmity  on  both  sides  is  aimed  at  the  destruction  of
the  opponent — for  which  purpose  by  head  and  heel
are  expressed  majus  and  minus,  or,  as  Calvin  says
supcrius  and  inferius.*  This  contrast  arises,  indeedj
out  of  the  very  nature  of  the  foes.  The  serpent  who
crawls  in  the  dust,  if  he  would  destroy  man  walking
in  his  uprightness,  can  only  seize  him  by  the  heel ;
whereas,  man  can  crush  his  head.  But  this  differ
ence  itself  is  already  a  consequence  of  the  curse  pro
nounced  upon  the  serpent,  and  its  crawling  in  the
dust  is  a  premonition  that  in  the  strife  with  man  it
must,  at  last,  succumb.  Be  it  even  that  the  bite  of
the  serpent  in  the  heel  is  even  deadly  when  its  poi
son  penetrates  throughout  the  whole  body  (Gen.
xlix.  IT),  yet  it  is  not  immediately  mortal,  nor  incur
able,  like  the  crushing  of  the  serpent's  head.  There

*  [The  general  sense  in  this  passage  is  plain,  but  there  is
great  difficulty  in  fixing  on  the  precise  action  intended  by
the  word  5)10,  in  consequence  of  its  occurring  but  three
times  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  ;  and  one  of  these  places,  Ps.
cxxxix.  11,  is  most  probably  a  wrong  reading  for  iJSTw"1
(from  -pT),  differing  from  it  very  slightly,  and  exactly
suiting  the  context.  The  sense  of  bruising  will  do,  as  used
of  the  storm,  Job  ix.  17,  but  is  quite  alien  to  any  effect  of
darkness,  us  used  Ps.  cxxxix.  The  difficulty  is  shown  by
the  variety  of  special  interpretations,  though  all  a.-rceing  in
the  general  thougiit.  Onkelos  has  two  different  words  for  it :
"He  shall  be  mindful  (  "|131)  of  what  thou  hast  done  to
him  Of  old  (taking  £JX"I  paraphrastically  for  beginning),  but
thou  shalt  be  watchful  ("lnI33)  for  him  in  the  end."  From
this  probably,  or  from  some  older  Targum,  came  the  LXX
rendering.  The  Arabic  translation,  commonly  called  Arab's
Erjtenianm,  made  by  an  ancient  anil  learned  Jew,  and  "cn-
erally  very  accurate,  also  uses  two  words  :  "He  shall  break
thy  head,  and  thou  shalt  sting  him  on  the  heel,"— as  though
inthe2d  clause  he  had  read  133'iTn  (long  vowel)  from  -j'l'J
to  Trite ;  and  such  also  is  the  conjecture  of  Jarchi,  who  thinks
that  the  variation  was  made  originally  to  render  the  expres
sion  memorable  from  such  a  suggested  paronomasia,  or  re
semblance  m  sound.  Head  and  lied  are  evidently  used  to
denote  a  strong  contrast,  but  not  the  one,  we  think,  pointed
S?  »y  talym  and  Lango.  May  it  not  rather  denote  that


comes  also  into  consideration :  1.  The  contrast :  head
and  heel.     The  life,  like  the  poison,  of  the  serpent,
is  in  its  head,  and  is  destroyed  with  it.     The  heel  of
man  is  the  least  vulnerable,  whilst  it  is  that  part  of
the  body  which  is  the  most  easily  healed.     2.  The
conscious,  adaptive  aiming  of  the  woman's  seed,  the
blind,  brutal,  and  ill-directed  assault  of  the  serpent.
The  seed  of  the  woman  seizes  the  power  of  evil  in
its  central   life,  in   its   principle;    the  seed  of  the
serpent  attacks  the  power  of  good  in  its  most  out
ward  and  assailable  appearance.     3.  The  very  mo
ment  in  which  the  serpent  bites  at  the  heel  of  the
man,  is  the  one  in  which  the  latter  brings  down  the
crushing  foot  upon  its  head.     It  is,  indeed,  not  with
out  significance,  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  is  pre
sented  in  the  singular,  and  in  fact,  in  the  last  deci
sive  moment,  set  in  opposition,  not  to  the  seed  of  the
serpent,  but   to  the  serpent  himself— as  is  pointed
out  by  _Hengstenberg  and  others.     Here  now  must
we  distinguish  between  the  prophetical  and  the  typi
cal   elements  of  prophecy— as  also  the  prophecies
that  are  strictly  verbal.     The  prophetic  element  is
present  in  the  prophet's  consciousness ;  the  typical
element  is  not,  although  it  may  be  consciously  pres
ent  to  the  spirit  of  revelation  that  guides  him.     Our
text   appears   primarily,    indeed,    as  the  immediate
speech  of  God,  the  all-knowing,  who  sees  beforehand
every  thing  in  the  future  ;  but  still,  the  measure  of
consciousness  in  our  prophecy  can  become  determin
ate  to  us  only  according  to  the  presumable  degree  of
consciousness  in  the  author  of  Genesis,  or,  still  fur
ther,  in  those  who  actually  brought  down  the  tra
dition  contained  in  chapter  iii.      In  relation,  there
fore,  to  this  human  prophetical  consciousness,  and  its
germinal  state  of  development,  must  we  distinguish
between  the  conscious  prophecy  of  the  word  and  the
unconscious  prophecy  of  the  typical  expression.     So
in  Psalm  xvi.  the  conscious  prophecy  says,  through
my  communion  with  God  I  shall  possess  immeasura
ble  joys  of  life ;  the  typical  expression,  however,  is
fulfilled  hi  the  resurrection  of  Christ  (Acts  ii.).     So
also  says  the  prophet,  Isaiah  vii. :  the  young  prophet
wife  shall,   1.  conceive;  2.  bear  a  son,  whose  name,
3.  with  joyful  hope  they  shall  call  Immanuel.     The
typical  expression,  however,  is  a  prediction  of  Christ,
the  son  of  the  virgin.     In  this  sense,  also,  does  Paul
allow  himself  to  interpret  the  singular,  in  thy  seed,
as  a  typical  prophecy  of  Christ.     And  we  doubt  not,
that  here,  too,  the  spirit  of  the  type  chose  this  ex
pression,  the  seed  of  the  woman,  with  an  asonian  con
sciousness  of  its  rich  significance.     If  we  go  back,
tiowcver,  to  the  conscious  prophecy,  so  it  may  be  safe
to  say,  that  with  the  humanity  in  general,  on  its  light
side,  there  is  also  placed  its  core* — as  it  is  with  Ju-
dah  (Gen.  xlix.  10),  and  Israel  (llos.  xi.  1).    In  truth,
the  core,  or  heart,  is  ever  embraced  in  concrete  unity
with  the  hull,  but  to  the  biblical  view  is  this  gravi-
;ation  to  the  unity  peculiar  from  the  very  beginning.
3n  the  other  side,  however,  according  to  the  New
Testament,  and  the  patristic  unveiling  of  its  si'mifi-
^ance,  is  the  seed  of  the  woman  not  exclusively  to  be
•eferred  to  the  individuality  of  Christ.    Christ,  as  the
Christ  in  the  universal  humanity,  is  here  to  be  under
stood;  especially  in  the  second  clause,  at  least,  as
also,  therefore,  in  the  third  according  to  Paul  (Hem.
xvi.  20).

There  remains,  finally,  the  question  how  the  tempt-

*  [This  is  an  expression  that  Dr.  Lange  is  fond  of.  He
eems  to  mean  by  it  something  representing  humanity  con-
retely  and  centrally— or  some  aspect  of  humani  ty ;  as  Judai
n  the  prophecy,  Gen.  xlix.  10.— T.  L.]


23G


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


ation  of  the  first  pair  by  the  serpent  is  to  be  undei-
stood.     According  to  Knob,l  there  is  found  in  our
passage  just  as  little  reference  to  the  devil  as  .0  tl
Messiah  (P  48).    Consequently  would  the  whole  pas-
6a*e  become  a  mere  physical  myth.     Von  Bohlen
go^s  back  to  the  kindred  traditions  of  the  ancients
and  finds  it  of  the  deepest  significance  that  m  tl
printed  Samaritan  text  there  is  tins,  liar,  instead  of
En  j ,  serpent.    According  to  one  of  the  Indian  myths,
Krishna   in  the  form  of  the  sun,  contends  with  the
Evil  On.',  in  the  form  of  serpent.     In  like  manner  in
E"vpt    Tvphon,  whose  name  is  interpreted  by  fccr
pent,  persecutes  Ins  brother  Osiris  or  the  sun  Her-
culespos  i'sses  himself  of  the  golden  apple  of  the
Hesperides   which  the  Serpent  guarded.     According
to  Bohlen,' however,  the  nearest  source  of  our  nar
rative     as    of    Paradise    in    general,    lies    in    Iran,
ihriman,  according  to  the  Zendavcsta,  in  the  form
of  a  serpent  brought  of  his  fruits  to  rccn,  who  were
of  the  pure  creation  of  Ormu/.d.     And  so,  according
to  him   as  also  according  to  Rosenmiiller,  must  the
author  of  our  account  have  had  that  as  a  model  bc-
forc   \i\i   eyes.     And   yet,   somehow,  we  know  not
how  lie  distinguishes  from  it  the  simple  sense  of  the

i, ,1-tish   narrator.     The  reference  of  Bohlen  only

shows  how  our    i)rimitive  tradition  spreads  itself  m
the  manifold  adumbrations  and    transformations  ot
the  most  varied  mythological  systems,  even  as  the
true  in  respect  to  the  cosmogony,  the  first
i  ,,air,  Paradise,  and  still  further  on  in  respect
to  the  ii'.x.d.     In  opposition  to  all  this    stands  the
ti-aditioiid  view  of  the  Church,  that  under  the  ser
pent  as  instrument  and  symbol  our  passage  conseious-
i      intends   the   devil  (sec   HKM;STKNI;KK(;  :   "Chns-
tolo-V-'  p.  5;  PKI.ITZSCII,  p.  1<>S;  KKIL,  p.  51).     In
rt  to  tb.is,  there   is   no  doubt  that  in  the  Holy
Scripture  there  lies  before  us  a  connected  line  of  tes-
timonies  whuse  object  is  ever  the   same  demoniac
tcmpthi"  spirit— a  lino  which,  going  out  from  tl

:ut 'in  the  passage  before  us,  reaches  even  to  the
c'o<e  of   the  New  Testament   in   the  Apocalypse,  ch.
xii   o    '.'    13;  ch.  xx.    2,10.     T!ie   identity   is  estab
lished  by  the  cited  places  of  the  Apocalypse,  by  2
Cor  xi.  'o   (compare  vcr.  14)  by  the  Book  of    Wis
dom  ii   "»  ;    with  which   again  in  connection  stands
John  viii.  41;  though  to  this  have  been  objected
certain  weakening  interpretations  (Liickc,  and  others).
It  is  so  also  in  Rom.  xvi.  20.     Here  is  every  where
evident  the   relation  of  the  fall   to  the   serpent   ac-
cordin"  to   its   symbolical  significance.      In   many
move  wavs,  as  in  "the  Book  of  Wisdom  ii.  24 ;    John
viii  44 -"'2   Cor.  xi.  3  ;  Rom.  xvi.  '20,  there  appears
the  identity  of  the  tempting  Spirit,  which  worked
throu-h  the  serpent,  with  the  figure  of  the  devil  as
he  appears  later  in  the  Scripture.     That,  indeed,  the
physical  serpent  could  not  have  been  meant,  as  the
tempter  in  our  passage,  shows  itself  from   the  dis
tinct  appearance  of  consciousness  in  respect  to  the
creat  separation  between  man  and  the  animal  worK
(ch.  ii.  l'J,  20),  as  it  is  rightly  presented  by  Hengsten-
berg;  it  also  appears  from  the  collective  declaration
that  every  creation  of  God  was  good  (ch.  i.),  and
from  the  ethical  features  which  in  the  third  chapter
the  serpent  assumes  as  a  maliciously  subtle  creature,
as  well   as   from  the  symbolical  background  which
ever  shows  itself  stronger  and  stronger  in  the  prim
itive   condemnation.    'Next  to  the  identity  of  the
temptin^  spirit  behind  the  serpent  and  Satan,  comes
now  its  continuity.    Before  all,  in  the  Old  Testament.
First  Stage  of  the  idea :   Indication  of  evil  spirits


and  of  one  especially  as  an  apostate,  pre-eminently  in
Azazel,  Levit.  xvi.  "s  ;   in  symbols  of  the  Evil  One,
Deut.  xxxii.  17;  in  the  Schcdim  (Septuagint,  5cu,ud-
via,  properly,  master-gods),  and  the  Seirim,  Is.  xiii.
21.     Second  Stage:  The  appearance  of  Satan  as  the
foe  of  man,  as  the  tempter  and  accuser,  Job  i.  and  ii ;
1  Chron.  xxi.  1.     Mird  Stage:  The  designation  oi_
Satan  as  the  enemy  of  God,  as  the  fallen  founder  of
an  evil  dominion  "in  opposition  to  the  establishment
of  the  divine  kingdom,  Zech.  iii.  1  ;  Is.  xxvii.  1 ;  ser
pents  and  dragon-forms  as  symbols  of  the  reign  of
Antichrist ;  Dan.  vii.,  the  beasts  out  of  the  sea.    The
New  Testament  clearly  introduces  the  doctrine  of  Sa
tan  with  a  counterpart  of  the  temptation  of  Adam  m
Paradise,  when  it  represents  the  temptation  of  Chrirt
in  the  wilderness,  Matt.  iv.     After  this,  in  the  per
fecting  the  doctrine  of  Satan,  there  is,  first,  the  men
tion    Matt.  xii.  43,  of  his  connection  as  chief  with
the  'individual  evil  spirits  in  the  demoniacs.     Then,
n  the  second  stace,  Satan  is  especially  designated  as
the  foe  of  man  (John  viii.  44  ;  Matt.  xii.  29  ;  xiii.  W ;
Acts  x.  ::S).     In  the  third  stage  comes  forth  the  fin-
shed  form  of  the  doctrine,  when  Satan  is  represented
as  the  enemy  of  God  and  Christ,  and  the  prince  of
the  kingdom  of  darkness,  making  complete  his  reve
lation,  'first    in    secret   influences,    then    in    pseudo-
Christian    organs,  and    filially   in    one  Antichristmn
or-an    (John  xii.   31;    2  Cor.   iv.  4;    Eph.  vi.   12;
2  Thess.  ii.  0,  ami  the  Revelation).

A  chief  (iUestion  lure,  however,  is  this  :  whether
we  are  to  suppose  that  in  the  passage  before  us  there
is  already  indicated  a  developed  consciousness  in  re-
sncct  to'tlic  nature  of  the  devil.     Since  in  the  Old
Testament,  the  New  Testament  doctrines  have  not
yet  come  to  their  full  development,  and  since  the  be-
igs  of  them  on  the  first  pages  of  Genesis  meet
us  throughout  in  a  very  dark,  veiled,  and  germinal
form    so  would  it  be  a  gross  inorganic  anomaly,  if
developed  knowk-d-re  of  the  devil  has  to  be  supposed
in  this  place.     Just  .such  an  anomaly,  however,  ap
pears  to  be  assumed  by  DELTTZSCH,  along  with  others,
when  he  says  (p.  168) :   "  The  narrator  keeps  his  po
sition  on  the  outer  appearance  of  the  event  without
liftin^  the  veil  from  the  substance  that  lies  behind.
He  mav  well  do  this,  since  even  the  heathen  sages
present  an  express  though  deformed  notice  of  the
truth  •  but  the  author  throws  a  veil  over  it,  because
the  unfolding  would  not  have  been  suitable  for  those
people  of  his  time  who  were  inclined  to  a  heathenish
superstition  and  to  a  heathenish  intercourse  with  the
demon-world  (still  would  there  have  arisen  a  super
stition  from  it,  even  if  the  narrator  had  had  the  pur
pose  to  stand  purely  by  the  literal  serpent).     It  is  a
didactic  aim  that  determines  the  narrator  to  rest  sat
isfied  with  the  objectivity  of  the  outward  event  as  it
becomes  perceivable,  and  to  be  silent  in  regard  to  its
remoter  ground."     In   maintaining  this  view,   De-
litzsch  himself  refers  (p.  025)  to  the  Church  f


IHZSUil  uiuiacii    *<-*•  /   --  -

Keil  presents  a  more  striking  ground  for  this  didac-
t'c  aim  "  of  silence  in  respect  to  Satan,  both  here  ana
further  on  in  the  Old  Testament;  "it  had  respect.


urer  on  .,

he  «-ivs  "  to  the  inclination  which  men  have  to  roll
the  guilt  from  themselves  upon  the  tempting  spirit ;
it  was  to  allow  them  no  pretext."  We  may,  how
ever  iust  as  well  trust  the  spirit  of  the  divine  revela
tion 'with  a  didactic  aim  in  relation  to  the  narrator
as  the  narrator  himself  in  relation  to  his  readers ;  ant
it  is  in  accordance  with  the  divine  mode  of  mstruc
tion  that  revelation  should  unfold  itself  in  exact  cor
respondence  with  the  human  state  of  development
The  assumption  of  an  objective  development  of  evil


CHAPTER  III.  1-24.


237


in  the  spirit-world  has  in  it  nothing  irrational ;  yet
ifcnsstcnbcrg  rightly  remarks :  "  moreover,  the  posi
tion  held  by  most  of  those  who  deem  themselves
compelled  to  regard  the  book  of  Job  as  originating
before  the  captivity,  namely,  that  the  Satan  of  that
book  is  not  the  Satan  of  the  later  Old  Testament
books,  but  rather  a  good  angel,  only  clothed  with  a
hateful  office,  is  becoming  more  and  more  acknowl
edged  as  correct;  so  that  we  may  wonder  how  BECK
(Lehricissenschaft,  I.  p.  240)  can  be  impressed  with
the  supposed  fact,  and  seek  to  adapt  himself  to  it,
through  the  assumption  that  the  alienation  of  a  part
of  the  angels  from  God,  and  their  kingdom  of  dark
ness,  develops  itself  in  a  progressive  unfolding."
Yet  clearly  is  the  commencement  of  the  tempting
spirit,  Gen.  iii.  1,  devilish  enough.  Moreover,  must
we  distinguish  the  conception  of  the  development  of
the  demoniacal  kingdom,  from  that  of  the  develop
ment  of  the  demoniacal  character.  The  measure  of
the  knowledge  of  demons,  or  demonology,  which  dis
tinctly  presents  itself  in  "Our  text,  is  the  recognition
of  an  evil  that  stands  back  of  the  serpent,  and  of  a
malicious  spirit  of  temptation  which  henceforth  ever,
more  and  more,  shall  become  acknowledged  as  the
crafty,  lying  foe  of  man  ("  and  I  will  put  enmity  "),
but  who  betrays  himself  already  as  the  foe  of  God
and  the  adversary  of  his  counsels,  as  connected  with
the  human  race.  The  more  definite  unveiling  of  this
last  point,  and  its  wider  consequences,  such  as  a
fallen  angel-prince  of  a  fallen  angel-host,  and  of  a
kingdom  of  darkness,  belong  to  the  later  develop
ment  of  the  doctrine.

When,  finally,  the  question  is  asked,  in  what  man
ner  must  we  think  of  the  working  of  this  foe  of  man
as  taking  place  through  the  serpent,  vre  encounter
again  the  abstract  opposition  of  the  pure  actuality  as
against  the  supposition  of  a  fact  under  the  relations
of  a  vision.  Next  to  such  views  as  these :  the  devil
spoke  in  the  phantom  shape  of  a  serpent  (Cyril  of
Alexandria) ;  the  devil  spoke  through  the  serpent,
or  made  it  speak  by  a  diabolical  agency  (DELITZSCII'S
"  First  Demoniac  Miracle  ") ;  the  serpent  is  only  an
allegory  (Grotius:  the  representation  of  an  old  poem);
or,  an  outward  eating  by  the  serpent  of  the  fruit  of
the  tree  of  knowledge,  and  a  simultaneous  whispering
by  Satan  to  the  soul  of  Eve,  happened  together  (Cler-
icus,  Hetzel) — next  to  such  as  these  we  place  the
view  that  Satan  worked  through  a  sympathetic  influ
ence  upon  the  mind  of  Eve,  and  thereby  made  the  in
determinate  acts  of  the  serpent  to  become  speaking
signs,  to  such  a  degree,  that,  in  the  excited  visionary
temperament  of  the  woman,  they  became  transformed
into  a  dialectical  process  of  speech  and  reply.

To  conclude,  it  is  especially  to  be  borne  in  mind,
against  the  assertions  of  Delitzsch  in.  respect  to  the
imposition  of  punishment  upon  the  serpent  (p.  179),
that  every  application  of  the  idea  of  punishment  to
beasts  takes  away  its  peculiar  conception;  so  much
so,  that,  even  on  the  ground  of  the  Old  Testament
consciousness,  can  we  boldly  affirm  that,  from  the
very  fact  of  Jehovah's  pronouncing  a  doom  upon  the
serpent,  the  meaning  must  be  of  something  more  than
a  serpent.  Bather,  may  we  say,  that  the  future  of
the  serpent-brood  is  announced  in  a  way  which  un
mistakably  expresses  the  sentence  of  the  man-hating
spirit  in  a  symbolical  form.  Indeed,  Delitzsch  him
self  says:  Not  as  though  beasts  were  capable  of
the  imputation ;  but  none  the  less  is  there  repeated
the  mention  of  the  infliction  of  punishment  upon  the
serpent,  and  we  can,  therefore,  read  :  the  beast  that
Save  itself  for  this  purpose,  to  lead  astray  to  an  un


godly  deed  him  who  is  called  to  be  lord  of  the  ani
mal  world,  and  his  helpmeet,  is  also  to  be  punished,
though  in  a  different  way.  Delitzsch  refers  to  Lev.
xx.  15:  "It  is  truly  an  Old  Testament  law,  that
contra-natural  lust  must  be  punished,  not  only  in
man,  but  also  in  the  beast  with  which  it  is  practised ;
and,  in  general,  the  beast  is  to  be  punished  through
which  a  man  has  suffered  any  harm  whatever  in  body
or  soul  (ch.  ix.  6;  Ex.  xxi.  28;  Deut.  xiii.  15;
1  Sam.  xv.  o)."  In  the  passage  from  Leviticus,  tho
killing  of  the  abused  beast  is  denoted  by  5~n  .  The
notion  that  in  this  and  the  other  places  cited  the  de
struction  of  the  beast  is  ordered  for  the  sake  of  the
man,  or  in  company  with  the  man,  rests  upon  the
idea  of  the  personal  elevation  of  man  above  the  beast,
in  accordance  with  which  it  is  that,  in  the  symboli
cal  expression,  a  beast  that  has  killed  a  man  is  like
wise  put  to  death,  and  the  beasts  of  multitudes  of
men  devoted  to  death  are  put  to  death  with  them.
It  is,  moreover,  as  a  symbolical  expression  of  anger
and  abhorrence,  as  "  when  a  father  breaks  in  pieces
the  sword  with  which  his  son  has  been  slain."  The
symbolical  in  those  acts  arises  out  of  the  contrast  be
tween  the  New  Testament  and  the  Old.  The  Pctro-
brusians  treated  even  the  sign  of  the  cross  as  a  sign
of  ignominy,  because  Christ  had  been  put  to  death
on  the  cross.  The  Christian  church,  however,  has
never  acknowledged  this  view.  Moses  also,  at  ono
time,  established  a  type  in  the  New  Testament  sense,
in  the  lifting  up  of  the  brazen  serpent.

Vcr.  10.  Unto  the  woman  he  said. — The
sentence  pronounced  upon  the  woman  contains  a
painful  modification  and  transformation  of  the
womanly  calling,  as  farther  on  the  sentence  pro
nounced  upon  Adam  is  a  similar  modification  of  the
manly,  or,  we  may  say  generally,  of  the  human
calling  [since  Adam  embraces  at  once  the  common
human  nature] ;  and  so,  accordingly,  is  the  earlier
mode  of  life  of  the  serpent  made  to  become  a  modifi
cation  of  the  sentence  pronounced  upon  it.  What
they  do  according  to  their  nature,  that  must  now
bring  upon  them  the  punishments  that  are  in  corre
spondence  with  thcirnatures.  Delitzsch  distinguishes
a  threefold  retribution  in  the  sentence  upon  the  wo
man.  We  follow  him  therein,  only  taking  the  mem
bers  in  a  different  way.  The  punishment  falls  :  1.
Upon  the  relation  of  the  womanly  organism  in  and  for
itself;  2.  on  the  relation  to  her  children  ;  and  3.  on
the  relation  to  her  husband.  1.  I  will  greatly
multiply  thy  sorrow.  The  expression  "j313Jl:J
"Dlim  is  generally  taken  as  a  hendyadis.  "The
frequency  of  pregnancy  can  be  no  punishment."
The  Samaritan  translates  :  The  burden  that  is  con
nected  with  pregnancy.  And  yet  we  are  not
justified  here  in  limiting  the  whole  doom  of  the
womanly  distress  and  sorrow  directly  to  the  state
of  pregnancy.  Still  it  may  be  more  safe  to  say
with  Delitzsch  :  Thy  burden,  and  especially  thy
pregnancy  with  its  burden.  The  womanly  calling
is  an  endless  multiplicity  of  little  troubles,  and  the
womanly  destiny  is  loaded  with  the  most  manifold
sexual  pains.  The  pains  of  a  woman  with  child,
Jer.  xxxi.  8. — 2.  With  sorrow.  [Lange  translates
it,  with  difficulty,  itoth.]  We  maintain  that  the
translation  of  2I£2  by  trouble  or  pain  is  too  weak.
It  is  the  state  of  birth-travail,  which  is,  all  at  the
same  time,  labor,  pain,  difficulty,  and  danger  (see
Is.  xiii.  8 ;  xxi.  3 ;  Hos.  xiii.  13  ;  Micah  iv.  <J  ;  John
xvi.  21).  "  Gravida  et  pancus,"  says  an  old  proverb,
"  est  sicut  (xrtrota  ct  moriens."  Delitzsch.  The  con-


238


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


trast   between   the  lightest   (Exod.  i.  19)  and   the
most  difficult  births,  may  help  to  give  us  an  idea  of
(he  contrast  between  the  normal  paradisaical  way
of  birth,  and  the  birth-sorrows  that  have  prevailed
in  human  history  ;  and  this  too  without  our  having
to   suppose,    with    Pelitzsch,    a    change   in    "the
physiological  constitution  of  the  woman."     Hence
forth  must  the  woman  purchase  the  gain  of  children
with   the   danger   of  her  life,— in  a  certain  degree,
with  spiritual  readiness  for  death,  and  the  sacrifice
of  her  life  for  that  end.— 3.  And  thy  desire  shall
be  to  thy  husband.     This   sentence   obtains   its
full  significance  in  its  embracing  that  which  follows,
and  in  its  contrast  to  it.     It   is,  emphatically,  that
her  desire  should  be  to  the  man  as  though  she  were
magically  bound  to  him.     Pl^VJin  may  denote   the
longing    of    the    woman's    dependence    upon   man.
npvrn  comes  from  p''3 ,  to  run,  run  after,  pursue,
wa'nt.*'    It  is  further  emphatic  that  the  man  shall
rule  over  her  in  a  strong  way  ;  and  finally  that  she,
in  her  bound  and  destined  adherence  to  man,  shall
find    in    him    a    strong   and    severe    master.      The
woman   had   specifically  sinned,  "  not  for  the   sake
of    earthly    enjoyment  merely  "  (Delitzseh),  but   in
high-flown  aspiring,  as  though  she  would  emancipate
herself  from    man,    get   before   him,  and  take  him
under  her  guardianship.     Her  punishment,  therefore,
must  con-ist  in  this,  that  she  must  become  subject
in  the  normal  line  of    her   sexual  being,   her  con
sciousness,    adhesiveness,   and    dependence.     "The
man  can  command  in  a  lordly  way,  and  the  wife  is
inwardly    and    outwardly   compelled    to    obedience.
In  consequence  of  sin  thus  arises  that  subjection  of
the  wife  to  the  husband,  bordering  on  slavery,  that
was  cu-tomary  in  the  old  world,  as  it  still  is  in  the
East,  and  which   through  the  religion  of  revelation
becomes  gradually  more  tolerable,  until,  at  last,  in
the   increasing   worth  of   the   woman,    it    becomes
entirely  evened  "  (Delit/.sch).     "  Among  the  Hebrews
a  wife'was  bought  by  the  husband  (?  cli.  xxxiv.  12;
Exod.  xxii.  10  ;  Hos.  iii.  3,  2),  and  was  his  possession
(female   slave,  ?  ch.  xx.  3  ;    Dent.    xxii.  22).     lie   is
called  her  lord  (ch.  xviii.  12  ;  Exod.  xxi.  3),  and  he
can  divorce  her  without  much  ceremony  (Dent.  xxiv.
1).     This   subordinate   and   depressed    condition  of
the  wife  the  author  (!)  regards  as  the  punishment  of
sin."     Knobel.— Ver.  17.    And    unto   Adam    he
said. — Sentence    against   Adam.     In  the    case    of
Adam  (whose    name  here  first  appears  as  a  proper
name)  there  is  an  indictment  or  declaration  of  his
guilt  going  before  the  sentence  of  condemnation.
His  guilt  culminates  in  this,  that  he  had  listened  to
the  voice  of  his  wife  who  was  placed  under  him,
and  this,  too,  in  direct  opposition  to  that  obedience
which  lie  owed  to  the  voice  and  the  command  of  his
God.     Instead  of    the  protector  and   guide  of  his
wife,  to  guard  her  from  the  fall,  or,  after  her  fall,  to
bring  her  back  to  God,  he  becomes,  in  his  cowardly
renunciation  of  his  dignity,  subject  with  her  to  evil.
Mediately  is  this  also  a  rebuke  of  his  self-exculpa
tion  :  "the  wife  whom  thou  gavest  unto  me,"  as  it
is  also  of  the  seductive  voice  of  his  wife,  and  her
obedience  to  the   voice  of  the  serpent.     As,  how
ever,  the  woman  is  punished  through  the  derange
ment  of  the  smaller  subjective  world  of  her  womanly
calling,  so  is  Adam  punished  through  the  disorder
of    the   greater   objective  world  of  his  masculine

*[Knoljcl  has  a  gross  sensual  view  in.  respect  to  this
word,  which  its  etymolopy  and  use  do  not  warrant.  See
Etymological  Notes,  p.  227. — T.  L.]


calling.  The  adamah  (the  soil  of  Eden)  which,
with  his  wife,  he  was  to  carry  forward,  in  a  normal
unfolding,  to  imperishable  life  and  spiritual  glory,  is
now  cursed  for  his  sake,  and  therewith  changed  ta
a  position  of  hostility  to  him,  and  of  power  over
rim.  Like  a  sick,  disordered  woman,  it  becomes  to
a  capricious  and  hard  stepmotherlike  tutoress,
swinging  the  rod  over  him  with  thorns  and  thistles.
Here,  too,  may  we  distinguish  a  threefold  act  in  the
one  sentence.  1.  The  curse-state  of  the  adamah,
and  the  harm  endured  by  it  for  Adam's  sake,  out
wardly,  on  its  surface,  and  in  its  peculiar  adamitic
nature,  even  to  its  very  life, — especially  as  the
endurance  of  unfruitfulness,  decay,  and  impoverish
ment,  to  such  a  degree  that  it  can  only  afford  to  him
its  food  in  a  scanty  manner.  2.  The  positive  strife
which  the  curse-loaded  adamah,  with  its  thorns  and
thistles,  opposes  to  Adam's  labor,  and  the  resulting
failure  and  deterioration  of  its  nourishing  product:
the  herb  of  the  field.  3.  The  fruitless  efforts  of
man,  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  to  sustain  his  life  in
perpetuity  through  his  daily  bread;  since  it  has
become  subject  to  the  power  of  death,  which  now
impends  as  doom  upon  the  very  substance  of  the
adamah.— 1.  Cursed  be  the  ground.  KNOBEL:
"Agriculture  among  the  Hebrews  was  a,  divine
institution  (Is.  x xviii.  20),  but  at  the  same  time  a
heavy  burden  (Siraeh  vi.  1'J;  vii.  K>),  that  pressed
especially  on  servants  (1  Sam.  viii.  12;  Is.  Ixi.  5;
Zach.  xii'i.  15),  and  presented  the  idea  of  punishment
when  compared  with  the  primitive  golden  age.
Classic  antiquity,  too,  assumed  that  in  the  golden
nyc  the  earth  brought  forth  spontaneously  every
tiiinu'  necessary  for  man,  and  that  agriculture  proper
came  in  first  at  a  later  period  (e.  g.  Iii:sion,  ()/,.  ct
yy/V.s-,  p.  118  f;  I'LATO,  rditlciis,  p.  27-1  f;  YIKC.,
Geoff/,  i.  27  ;  Ovm,  Met.  i.  lr>2;  MACHOD.,  Ho/it,  tic
ii.  lu).— 2.  Cursed  the  earth  for  thy  sake.
That  is,  in  order  to  punish  thy  transgression  through
it,  shall  she  no  more  be  blessed  with  fruit  fulness,
but  shall  be  unfruitful,  .lust  so  do  the  Prophets
derive  the  desolation  and  barrenness  of  the  land
from  a  divine  curse  (Is.  xxiv.  G;  .Jer.  xxiii.  In). —
3.  In  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat  of  it.  With  pain
ful  labor  shalt  thou  hereafter  derive  thy  food  from
it  (comp.  Is.  i.  7  ;  v.  17;  xxxvi.  16;  Jer.  xxiii.  10)."
PKi.iTzsnt  takes  it  in  a  deeper  sense  :  "Man  hail  for
his  grand  vocation  to  guard  the  creation  of  God,
all  pood  from  1'aradise  down,  against  the  entrance
of  evil,  and  to  be  the  medium  of  its  gradual  trans
figuration.  As  a  spirito-corporeal  being,  he  was  to
the  material  world  as  CTX  to  n^nx,  being  placed
in  a  relation  of  essentially  mutual  adaptivcness  and
casual  reciprocity.  Even  from  this  it  becomes  clear,
how,  in  consequence  of  the  fall,  the  material  in
man,  the  direct  opposite  of  this  transforming  power,
takes  possession  first  of  his  corporeity,  and  then
propagates  itself  upon  the  surrounding  material,
that  is,  the  universal  nature."  It  is,  however,  not
wholly  correct  to  say  that  the  doom  of  the  curse  is
represented  as  going  out  from  the  nature  of  man
against  the  outer  nature  ;  much  rather,  according  to
the  representation,  does  the  curse  of  the  adamah
come  nigh  to  man,  as  a  new  divine  ordering  of
nature  (comp.  also  Rom.  viii.  20).  We  must,  there
fore,  distinguish  those  special  deteriorations  of
nature  which  in  their  ethical  causality  proceed
immediately  from  m;m,  from  that  doom  of  God
which  was  pronounced  collectively  upon  the  adamitic
aosmos.  In  correspondence  wtth  the  above  idea,
Delitzseh  continues:  "This  curse  of  sin  consists;


CHAP.  III.  1-24.


239


firstly  in  this,  that  the  soil  of  the  earth,  now  far
from  producing  what  man  needs  with  its  original
ease  and  abundance,  demands  painful  exertion,  and
this  often   in    vain."     Keil    makes    the   point   still
sharper  when  he  says  that  "  Adam,  in  the  act  of  lis
tening  to  the  voice  of  his  serpent-befooled  wife,  had
renounced  his  superiority  to  the  creature.     On  this
account  shall  nature  henceforth  array  herself  against
him  for  his  punishment.     Through  his  transgression
of  the  divine  command  hath  he  set  himself  against
God  ;  therefore  shall  he,  by  falling  under  the  power
of  death,  become  conscious   of  the  vanity   of  his
being."     Since  we  have  recognized  the  conception
of  blessing  (chap,  i.)  as  the  conception  of  an  endless
fertility  and    multiplication,  as  an    unceasing    and
wonderful  reproduction,  so  must  we  here  regard  the
curse  that  comes  in  as  the  opposite, — even  as  it
appears   from    the    divine   explication    itself.      The
doom  of  untlmftiness,  or  of  mysterious  self-genera
ting  unfruitfulness,  as  pronounced  upon  the  adamah,
unfolds  itself  unitedly  in  the  ground-forms  of  deteri
oration,  sickliness,  perishability  ;  negatively  in  the
ground-forms  of  impoverishment,  disorder,  malform
ation,  and  decay  ;  positively  in  the  forms  of  crudity,
coarseness,    deformity,   and    self-destruction.      This
curse  is  the  adjustment  of  a  causal  nexus  between
sin   and   evil    in    its   objective,   physical,    cosmical
appearance.     As  on  the  one  side  it  is  a  mysterious
fatality,  so,  on  the  other  side,  as  matter  of  contem
plation  and  conception,  is  it  an  ethical  consequence.
The   first   ground:    the  negative  side,  the  spoiling
or  disordering,  presents  itself  in  the  first  act.— 1°
With  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat,  that  is,  derive  thy
food    (see   Is.   i.   7).— 2.    Thorns    and    thistles.
"^n1?"  "fV  terms  that  occur  in  connection  only  here
and  in  Ilosea  x.  8,  where  they  are  repeated  from
this  place ;  the  ancient  -n-n  became  obsolete,  being
of  like  significance  with  n^l  liB'jj    as    used    in
Isaiah."     Keil.     In    their   ground   type,    doubtless,
thorns  and   thistles  must  have  already  existed  be
fore  ;  but  it  is  now  the  tendency  of  nature  to  favor
the  ignoble  forms  rather  than  the  noble,  the  lower
rather  than  the   higher,  the  weed  rather  than  the
herb.     In  place  of  the  ennobling   tendency  which
would  produce  a  fruit-tree  or  a  rose-bush  out  of  a
thorn-shrub,  or  that  wonderful  flower  of  the  cactus
out  of  the   thistle,  there  comes  in  a  tendency   to
mldnesa  or  degeneracy  which  transforms  the  herb
.into  a  weed.     The  sickliness  of  nature:    a  fallin^
back  upon  its  subordinate  stages,  as  a  punishment
i   man  for  his  contra-natural  falling  back  into  a
iiemoniacal,  bestial  behavior.    Here  now,  along  with
:he  thorns  and  thistles,  there  is,  at  the  same5  time
he  positive  opposition  of  nature  to  man.     In  place
)f  the  garden-culture,  there  is  introduced  not  a«ri-
:ulture_  simply,  but  an  agriculture  which  is,  at  the
came  time,  a  strife  with  a  resisting  nature,  and  in
•lace  of  the  fruit  of  Paradise,  is  man  now  directed
o  the  fruit  of  the  field.     There  stands,  besides  the
urden  cast  upon  the  field  as  an  expression  for  the
lore  universal  deterioration  of  nature,— namely  in
ie  animal  world  (see  the  note  from  Calvin  cited' by
,-EIL,  p.  01).     In  like  manner  the  burden  cast  upon
ie  human  agriculture  stands  for  that  which  is  im-
ased  upon  every  branch  of  the  human  vocation
-5.  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face.     An  emblematical
Jnotmg  ot  tho  daily  toil  and  burden  of  labor  even
r  the  necessary  daily  bread.     It  shall  not  merely
!  earned  by  the  sweat  of  the  face ;  the  sweat  shall
«  and  upon  his  brow  even  in  his  meal;  that  is    he


shall  have  only  a  brief  respite  for  recreation.     Th(j
face   is   the   most   peculiar   representative    of    the
human  dignity.     It  may  reflect  the  light  of  a  holy
spiritual  life  ;  on  the  contrary,  like  the'  dark,  gloam
ing  shadow  of  distress  and  care,  must  now  the  sweat
veil  the  countenance  and  moisten  the  bread  of  toil
Therefore  is  it  well  said,  the  sweat  of  the  face.     The
eating  of  bread   denotes  here,  as    throughout   the
Scripture,  the  sustaining   of   life  generally,  or  the
assuaging  its  wants  (Eccles.  v.  10  ;  Amos  vii.  12).
—Till  thou  return  unto  the  ground.     That  inaii
must  return  unto  the  earth,  that  is,  must  die,  is  now
taken  for  granted,  and  therewith  it  is,  at  the  same
time,  expressed,  that  now  from  the  power  and  rule
ot  immortality,  he  has  fallen  under  the  law  and  rule
of  death.     The  appointment  of  the  time :  till  thou
return  unto  the  earth,  says  not  merely  that  even
to  the  grave  his  life  should  be  pain  and  labor  (Ps.
xc.  10),  but  this  moreover,  that  it  shall  be  a  fruitless
effort  for  the  maintaining  of  his  existence,  until  at
last  he  shall  be  wholly  subdued  by  the  overpowerin^
might  of  death.— For  dust  thou  art.     This  is  the
culminating  point  in  the  penal  sentence,  expressed
nevertheless  in  the  form  of  a  confirmation  of  what
precedes:  not  as  a  new  or  repeated  doom;   since
after  the  threatening  (eh.  ii.  17),  it  is  understood  of
course.     The  declaration  here  especially  makes  clear
the_fact  that  death  had  already  secretly  commenced
in  life.     Knobel  affirms  that  "neither  this  passage
nor   the    Old  Testament   in   general,   teaches    that
death   belongs   solely   to   the   punishment   of  sin."
What  else  is  said  in  Psalm  xc.  ?     The  possibility,
indeed,  that  Adam  might  become  dust  again,  that
is,  that  he  might  die,  is  made  clear  from  this,  that
he  was  taken  from  the  earth ;  but  it  does  not  there
fore  follow  that  before  this   time  the  necessity  of
dying  must  have  been  imposed  upon  him.   Moreover,
the  terminus  in  death  which  is  here  appointed,  must
clearly  be  regarded,  not  as  primarily  the  limit  of
misery,  but  as  the  culminating  point  of  the  neces
sity  ;  notwithstanding  a  glimpse  of  promise  presents
itself,  as  well  in  this  place  as  throughout  the  differ
ent  sentences.    Knobel  thus  explains  himself  further
on:  "He  might  have  gained  immortality  through
the  tree   of  life  (ch.  ii.  9),  but  only  as  something
lying  above  the  plane  of  his  nature,  only  as  some
superior  excellence  of  the  heavenly  powers,  just  as
it  was  imparted  to  Enoch  and  Elijah."     So  that,  even
according  to  Knobel,  when  through  his  guilt  man
lost   the  tree   of  life,  he  thereby  fell  into  death.
This  is  just  the  way  the  text  presents  it,  as  the  nor
mal  destiny  of  man,  that  he  should  eat  of  the  tree
of  life,  and  not  of  the  tree  of  death.     It  is  a  per
version  of  relations,  when   out   of  the   conditional
posse  mori  we  would  make  a  conditional  posse  vivere.
Keil.     "  The  fact  of  man's  not  immediately  coming
to  an  end  after  eating  the  forbidden  fruit  has  not  its
ground  in  this,  that  through  the  creation   of  the
woman,  coming  between  the  death-threatening  and
the  fall,  the  fountain  of  human  life  was  parted  and
that  the  life  which  in  the  beginning  had   been  shut
up  in  the  one  Adam  became  divided,  and  thereby  tho
deadly  effect  of  the  fruit  in  them  was  weakened  and
rendered  more  mild  (!!OFMANN,  '  Prophecy  and  Ful
filment,'  I.  p.  07;  'Scripture  Proof,' I.  p.  519).  De-
litzsch  seeks  some  rational  support  for  this  poetical
fancy,  but  finds  the  true  reason  in  the  divine  long-
suffering  and  grace,  which  gives  space  for  repent
ance,  and  so  rules  and  orders  even  the  sins  of  men
and  their  punishment  as  may  best  serve  the  realiza
tion  of  his  counsels  in  creating,  and  the  glory  of  his


240


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


name  "  It  must,  nevertheless,  before  all  things,  be
maintained,  that  the  text  would  have  us  recognize
the  bo-inning  of  death,  the  root  of  death,  the  inward
ethical  beginning  of  the  same,  as  the  matter  ot  chief

moment.

9  Yers  20-22.  The  hope,  and  the  compression.
And  Adam'  called  his  wife's  name  Eve.—
Throughout  the  pronunciation  of  doom,  Adam  had
kept  his  eve  fixed  upon  the  brightest  spot,  the  word
of  promise  in  respect  to  the  seed  of  the  woman,  and
with  this  he  consoles  himself  now  against  tue  per
ceived  announcement  of  death,  in  that  he  names  Ins
wife  hai<,<h.  Just  as  his  own  generic  name  had
become  a  proper  name  (v.  17)  in  the  declaration  ot
punishment,  so  now  does  he  give  his  wile  a  proper
name  after  the  promise  as  received  not  only  in  its
.',-ncrie  sense  but  also  in  its  deeper  significance.
"According  to  this,  r,sn  =  rvn  is  either  life,  fry
(g  {  )  _  life-spring,  or  it  is  to  be  taken  as  abbre
viated  participle:  the  sustenance,  that  is,  propagation

of  lit'.- 1  (or  rrn-c  from  r,?n=n*n  (ch.  xix.  ;.;-J,  ;;i),

w!':ch  I  prefer  as  being  more  significant  than  -;rn'j
7«Y«  and  femina   from /co,  although    essen
tially  of  li:  c  M-niilieancc.     Symm.  froyovos,       JJe-
K  •'!  d  'dares  himself  for  tlic  former  aceen-
tatiou,  an  1  against  the  latter.     Knobcl  hints   at  an
expression   for  the  wife:  :nT   rvn ,  to  quicken  the
,.,,'/   il,,t   H,  to  propagate  the  race,  and  decides  for
t.VkhV    it    as    an    adjective:     qniekener,    life-giver,
propa°gatist,  which  also  is  nearer  the  truth  than  the
indeterminate  and   too    extensive  fry.     In   the   ex
planatory  addition  of  the  narrator,  there  appears  to
bi>  indicated,  along  with  the  cxlaisirc  promise  of  the
name:    mother    <>f  M   liviny,    also    the    intensive:
mother  of  life,  as  mediatrix  of  life    in    the    higher
Vnih   irrcat   pertinency   remarks  Deh'tzsch :
'"•  The  promise  purports  truly  a  seed  of  the  woman.
In  the  very  fur,  therefore,  of  the  death  with  which
he  is  threatened,  the  wife  is  for  Adam  the  security
of   both    as  well  for  the  continuance,  as   for   the
victory   of    his    race ;  and   it  is,  therefore,  a  laying
hold  of  the  promise  and  of  the  grace  in  the  midst
.  if  wrath  and  with  a  consciousness  of  death  incurred  ;
in  a  word,  it  is  an  act  of  faith  that  Adam  names  his
wife  rin,  havah— Eve."     In  distinction  from  nt;S
(woman)  this  is  a  proper  name  which  as  a  memorial
of  promised  grace,  as  Melanchthon  calls  it,  expresses
the   peculiar  significance  of  this  first  ot  wives  tor
humanity   and  'its   history.— For  Adam  and  his
wife  made  coats    of   skins.— Knobcl :
of  <kins  that  is,  clothes  from  the  skins  of  beasts,
which  elsewhere,  throughout  antiquity,  were  used  as
the  earliest  human  clothing  (Dioo.  Sic.  I.  p.  43 ;  11.
33  •   VRRI  \N  Ixn.  vii.  2  ;  LUCIAX.  AMOK.  34  ;  BUSDEH
15  in  KLKUK  III.  p.  85).     In  this  the  clothing  makes
an  advance  corresponding  to  the  increasing  moral
knowledge."     In  the  connection  of  events  our  pas
sage  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  along  with  the
word  of  death  there  is  introduced  the  immolation  of
the  animal  for  the  need  of  man.     They  are  on  the
point  of  being  compelled  to  leave  Paradise ;  they
need  now  a  stronger  clothing  for  their  entrance  upon
the  climate  of  the  outer  land.     And  finally,  in  place
of  the  insuilicient,  easily  fading,  and  easily  destroyed
covering  of  their  nakedness,  as  practised  in  _  their
self-willed,  servile  shame,  there  must  now  be  intro
duced,  under  the  divine  direction,  a  sufficient  cover
ing,  adapted  to  a  freer  and  more  ingenuous  modesty.
In  this  sense  it  is  God  who  makes  their  clothing,
ilthough  it  is  done  by  means  of  their  own  hands.


It  is  an  act  of  inspiration,  of  divine   revelation  find
guidance,    out    of  which   proceeds    their    becoming
clothed  as  though  from  themselves.     According  to
Ilofmann,  Drechsler,  Delitzsch,  this    clothing  would
appear  to  be  a  sacramental  sign  of  grace,  a  type  of
the  death  of  Christ,  and  of  the  being  clothed  with
the  holy  righteousness  of  the  God-man  (DKLITZSCU,
p.  192).     Keil  disputes  this,  although  firmly  main
taining  that  in  this  act  of  God  there   was   laid    the
ground    of   the   sacrificial  offering   of  beasts.     The
idea  of   the    sacrificial   offering   of   animals   points
indeed  to  a  vast   remote ;  here,  at   least,    it  is  an
obvious  expression  to  the  effect  that  the  restoration
of  the  human  dignity,  purity,  and  divine  acceptable-
ness,  is  not  too  dearly  bought  even  by  the  shedding
of  blood,  and   that   it   presupposes  a   suffering  of
death.     It  becomes  necessary,  moreover,  that,  even
before  his  departure  from  Paradise,  man  should  see,
in  the  spectacle  of  the  bleeding  beasts,  how  serious
his  history  has  become.— Behold   the   man    has
become  like  one  of  us. — "  That  is,  a  being  pos
sessed  of  a  similar  attribute,  therefore  like  me,  so
far   as    I    belong  to    the    class    of   higher   spiritual
beings."  (!)     Knobel. — As  one  of  us. — According
to  Delit/.sch  the  language  is  communicative  in  rela
tion  to  the  included  angels.     We  are  inclined  here
to  be  satisfied  with  the  conception  of  the  anthropo-
morphising  jiluralis  mujcxtntls.     But  in  how  far  has
he  so  become?     Only  in  relation  to  the  knowledge
of  good  and  evil,  says  Keil.     Again,   says  Knobel,
"it  is  the   commencing   moral    recognition,  which,
therefore,  makes  him  like  God."     Says  Chrysostom,
he  speaks  this,  bve&lfrv   avrw    Kal   Tyv   &voiav   aiiTov
Kci-.uwSiij'  (reproaching  him  and  mocking  his  folly).
Delitzsch  might  find  something  strange   in  such  an
irony.     Richers    says   strongly:   ''Irony   against  an
unfortunate,  seduced  soul !    Satan  might  cherish  such
a  disposition,  not  the  Lord."     The  opinion  proceed?,
in  the  first  place,  from  a  misunderstanding  of  the
irony,  as  also,  in  the   second   place,  of  the  "  poor
seduced  "  soul.     According  to  GoseheH's  more  cor
rect  and  profounder  representation,  a  divine  irony  is
everywhere  the  second   stage  in  all  divine   acts  of
punishment    (Zerstrcitte    HUittcr,    vol.    i.    p.    468).
As  the  serpent  had  lyingly  promised  :  ye  shall  be  as
gods,  so  is  it  clear  that  God  cannot  simply  confirm
This  by  sayincr,  his  promise  is  established.     When  he
serves  himself,  therefore,  with  the  same  words,  it
must  be  meant  ironically.     That,  however,  irony  and
malicious  sarcasm  are  two  quite  distinct  things,  we
may  learn  everywhere,  and   out  of   the  Scriptures
themselves.     In'  this  way  the  expression   becomes
more  distinctly  clear :  he  has  become  one  like  us
that  is,  as  we  become  represented  in  different  form
and  transformations.     He  is  become  like  God  ;  true
alas!  God   pity  him,  he  knows   now  in   Ins   guilt
consciousness  the  difference  between  good  and  evi
None  the  less,  too,  in  this  ironic  word  lies  the  rccod
nition  that  he  has  broken  through  the  limits  of  h:|
proper  development,  and  prematurely  obtruded  upo
the  consciousness  of  the  spiritual  realm.— And  HOT
lest  he  put  forth.— We  do  not,  with  Dehtzsc
regard  "E  as  denoting  an  anakolouthon,  since  thj
is  not  necessary  according  to  Isaiah  xxxviii.  18  ;  Jd
xxxii.  13;  and  since  the  assumption  of  anakoloutlj
is   only   allowable   in   cases   of  necessity,— a  v«
which  is  specially  applicable  to  the  simple  diction
Genesis.*      Knobel:  "Jehovah  is   concerned,  1


*  r Anakoloutha  and  other  idiomatic  expressions
to  the  simple  as  well  as  to  the  rhetorical  cir  animated  d
tion.    They  may  therefore  occur  in  Genesis  as  well  asi


CHAP.  III.   1-24.


241


-
:


they  may  be  able  to  enjoy  also  the  tree  of  life,  an
thereby  get  to  themselves  the  farther  advantage  o
a  higher  being  (immortality),"  —  a  wholly  paganis
representation  of  Jehovah  which  we  have  no  rigli
to  lay  as  a  burden  upon  the  text.  Keil  says  better
"After  he  had  become  the  property  of  death  throng
sin,  the  fruit  that  produces  immortality  could  onl
redound  to  his  destruction.  For,  in  a  state  of  sin
undyingncss  *  is  not  the  (carj  alwvius  (the  eternal  lii
of  the  soul)  which  God  has  designed  for  men,  bu
endless  pain,  never-ceasing  destruction  (everlasting
destruction),  which  the  Scripture  calls  the  seconi
death  (Rev.  ii.  11  ;  xx.  G,  14;  xxi.  8).  The  banish
rnent  from  Paradise  was,  therefore,  a  punishmen
having  for  its  aim  the  salvation  of  man,  —  a  banish
ment  which,  indeed,  exposes  him  to  temporal  death
but  shall  be  a  protectionf  to  him  against  the  ever
lasting  death."  Nevertheless  there  is  overlooked  bi
Keil  the  difficulty,  that  there  appears  to  be  mean
such  a  mere  physical  eating  from  the  tree  of  life  ai
would  produce  a  physical  undyingncss  in  contradic
tion  with  the  spiritual  state.  Clearly,  though  sym
bolically,  is  there  here  expressed  the  possibility  tha
even  sinners,  through  a  mysterious  power  of  health
may  attain  to  a  marvellous  longevity.  In  the  ful
sense  of  the  word,  the  paradisaical  tree  of  life  was.
lost  for  man.  "  But  the  tree  of  life,"  says  Delitzsch,
"  which  takes  away  the  death-power  of  the  tree  o:
knowledge,  is  already  sown  in,  and  with,  the  pro
claiming  of  the  prot-evangel."

10.  Vers.  23,  24.  Therefore  the  Lord  G-cd
sent  him  forth  —  His  new  state  has  also  a  mission,
and  before  there  is  mention  made  of  his  being  driven
put  of  Paradise,  is  his  new  task  laid  before  him.  lie
is  sent  forth  quickly  to  cultivate  the  ground  from
which  he  was  taken,  and  as  the  earth  had  borne  him,
so_must  it  now  nourish  him,  and  as  he  laid  his  origin
(his  physical  origin)  from  her,  so  must  he  now  serve
her,  and,  in  the  dust  of  the  ground  which  he  culti
vates,  have  his  birth  and  his  future  home  ever  before
his  eyes.  Per  cruccm  ad  litcan  is  now  the  watch
word.—  And  he  drove  out  the  man  __  Eastward
of  Eden  God  places  the  cherubim;  on  the  east,

Isaiah  or  Job.  The  objection  of  anthropomorphism  is  to
be  disregarded.  It  is  in  just  such  forms  of  speech  that  the
strength  of  language  is  brought  out.  The  ellipsis  shows
that  the  thought  is  too  great,  or  too  strong,  for  the  words.
There  is  more  force  in  the  simple  particle  ',3  (lest  =  beware
lest)  than  in  the  fullest  or  most  correctly  guarded  diction
Iho  cases  cited,  Isaiah  xxxvi.  18,  and  Job  xxxii.  13,  are  of
the  same  land,  and  instead  of  being  opposed  to,  confirm  the
propriety  ot  calling  it  an  anakolouthon,  or  rather  an  aposi-
opesis,  or  expressive  silence,  here.  —  T.  L.]

*  [Wo  pi-efcr  this  apparently  uncouth  Anglo-Saxon  coin
ing  lor  Lange's  unslM-Uichke.it,  instead  of  the  word  immor
tality,  which,  although  etymologically  the  same,  has,  in
general,  obtained  too  high  and  spiritual  a  sense  to  suit  the
Idea  intended.  This  is  especially  the  case  in  our  English
version  of  such  passages  as  1  Cor.  xv.  53,  54  ;  1  Tim  vi^lG  •
where  it  is  used  for  the  Greek  dflcuWa.—  T!  L  1

t[In  view  of  this  position  of  Lange  and  Keil,  the  an

thropomorphic  expression  of  the  divine  solicitude  by  the

elliptical  particle  -jB  becomes  perfectly  startling.    It  is  as

though  the  thought'  of  the  awful  consequences  of  one  in

uch  a  state  of  death  eating  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  thereby

making  hw  ruin  irreparable,  or  his  death  incurable,  was  so

overpowering  as  to  hide  for  a  moment  from  the  divine  mind

;he  consciousness  of  his  perfect  foreknowledge.     As  thou-h

'  \    f"^      d  su^,clll>:  occurred,  and  with  it  a  sense  of

n  **'      \  frT-^W  h°  shoilld  Put  forth  his  hM«l!

hn  ™,T  iff   ti°  TV0?11  h13,  h:md  in  sorao  rash  moment

ho  put  it  forth  to  the  tree  of  knowledge  !  And  then  the

remedy  promptly  follows,  that  there  may  be  no  delay  i^

Jfsffih

Bible>  aud  a  largo  6hare  of


16


therefore,  we  must  hold  to  have  been  the  departure
of  man  from  Paradise.     Nevertheless,  they  did  not
leave  the  district  Eden ;  "  Cain  was  the  first  who  did
that  (ch.  iv.  16)."  Knobel.     First  of  all,  then,  is  to
be  noted  here,  the  distinction  of  a  twofold  guard  of
Paradise :  the  cherubim  aud  the  flaming  sword  ;  also
that  the  meaning  is  not  the  cherubim  wilh  the  flam
ing  sword  in  hand  (Kuobel),  although  there  are  places,
sometimes,  in  which  the  Hebrews  use  the  connective
Vau  (and)  where   we  would  expect   the  preposition
with.     In  the  interpretation  of  the  cherubim,  there  is
to  be  first  kept  in  view  the  Bible  analogies,  before
taking    into    account    the    mythological   analogies.
When  now  the   cherubim  make  their   appearance,
further  on,  in  the  two  golden  cherub-forms  which
hovered  over  the  ark  of  the  covenant  (Ex.  xxv.  18 ;
xxxvii.  7),  and  which  also  appear  in  the  temple  of
Solomon,   only  in  greater  proportions  (1  Kings  vi.
23  ;  viii.  6),  though  not  fourfold  (as  is  maintained  by
Biblical  Dictionary  fur  Christian  People)— we  must
call  to  mind  the  command  of  God,  Ex.  xx.  4,  so  as
not  to  be  led  away  by  the  idea  that  they  are  images
of  some  peculiar  kind  of  heavenly  angels,  as  Ilof-
rnann,  Delitzscb,  Niiglesbach,  and  Kurtz  have  sup
posed,  in  opposition  to  Uiihr,  Ilengstenberg,  Hiiver-
nik,  and  others.     How  would  the  images  of  heavenly
angels  figure  here   as   guardians  of  the  command":
"  Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself  any  likeness  of  any
thing  that  is  in  heaven  above."     These  two  ceremo
nial  cherub-forms  were  winged  ;  their  wings  hovered
over  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  their  faces,  as  they
stood  opposite  to  each  other,  looked  down  upon  the
covering  of  the  ark,  Ex.  xxv.  20,  or  the  mercy-seat,
whilst  between  them  appeared  the  shckinah  of' Jeho
vah's  presence  (Lev.  xvi.  2;  Num.  vii.  89).     Then-
form  is  not  more  particularly  described;     like  the
most  holy  place  itself,  they  appear  to  have  previously
belonged  to  the  mysteries  of  the  people.     We  have
here  presented  to  us  in  worship  the  first  unfolding
of  the  paradisaical  form.     Just  as  thc.se   cherubim
guarded  Paradise,  with  the  tree  of  life  that  was  there
in,  and  protected  them  from  the  approach  of  sinners,
so  do  the  cherubim  watch  and  guard  the  holy  place
of  God's  personal  presence,  or  of  the  appearing  of
Jehovah,  especially  the  mercy-seat,  and  the  essential
unity  of  the  law  that  was  comprehended  in  it.     The
inner  is  parted  from  the  tree  of  life.     There  is  the
amc  meaning  here  ;  he  is  separated  from  the  behold-
ng  of  God,  from  the  full  enjoyment  of  his  mercy,  and
rorn  the  possession  of  the  essential  life  of  the  law,
hat  is,  the  righteousness  that  avails  with  God.     In
his  sense  arc  they  called,  Hcb.  ix.  5,  cherubim  of
;lory,  5o|r;s-.     The  poetical  and  didactic  references  to
he  cherubim,  Ps.  xviii.  1 1  ;  Ixxx.  2  ;  xcix.  1  ;  civ.  4  ;
s.  xxxvii.  16,  form  the  transition  to  the  fully  devel-
iped  prophetic,  apocalyptic  symbolical  of  the  cheru-
iim,  as  we  find  it  in  Ezek.  i.  10 ;  x.  4 ;  xli.  18 ;  and
n  Rev.  iv.  6;    v.  6-14;    vi.  1-7;    vii.  11;    xiv.  3;
tv.  7  ;  xix.  4.    The  passage,  Ps.  xviii.  10,  11,  appears
o  have  the  highest  significance  in  respect  to  the  sym-
>olical  of  the  cherubim.     Jehovah  comes  down  the
eavcns,  it  says — the  dark  cloud  beneath  his  feet,
"Text,  3!P39-bs  -37*1,  he  rode  upon  a  cherub.    God
ides,  therefore,  upon  the  storm-driven  thunder-cloud,
s  upon  his  chariot.     On  this  account,  we  hold  that
hat  derivation  of  the  word  is  the  right  one  which
rings  3113  in  closest  connection  with  "1  to  ride,
nd  regards  the  word  as  formed  by  a  metathesis  of
etters*  from  3i=n  =  32-1   chariot,  team,  and  not

[As  far  as  etymology  is  concerned,  Dr.  Lange,  we  think,


242


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


from  r--r  ?««  *>«>  propuiqwx  cst,  d  mhlat,  nor  as
the  same  V.th  the  7P**c.  of  *e.rc.«  as  very
ccncr-illv  held  (see  GESESIUS'  Lexicon).  Since  here,
?t"l  event^  the  swift-moving  thunderclouds  appear
asSe  char  ot  of  God,  and  very  significantly,  too,  m
the  2n'  mar  so  also  the  fact  must  not  be  over-
ooked,  that  in  connection  with  tins  cherub,  there  .a
rentfon  of  the  wrath  of  God,  of  the  consumingjre
that  o-oeth  out  of  his  mouth,  oi  the  glowing  names
ha  burn  before  him,  of  the  lire-flash,  of  the  burning
coal  God's  aiows,  and  finally,  of  the  1  ghtmng.  1  o
th s  we  mav  add  the  pa-sago,  l>s.  civ.  4,  where  it  is
sa  d  »d  n  fact  with  Special  reference  to  the  creative
Sor7:  Who  maketh  the  winds  Ins  messengers  the
of  lire  his  servants.  Keeping  tins  m  view
cherubim  have  their  nature  =  symbols  m


leranhim    which  appear  here  in  thc  train  o    Jehovah,
are  U  cwise  symbolical  angel-forms,  is  evident  Iron,
hei    configuration  itself,  wherein  they  appear  as  en-
owed  with   six  wings,   an  arrangement  which  evi-
cntlv  has  a  svmbofical  significance,     'lhat,  more-
ver  they  are  not  to  be  regarded  in  connection  with
the  serpents  mentioned  Numb.  xxi.  6   appears  from
the  fact    that  these  have  their  na.*e  simply  iron,  the
burn'in"'  poison.     Neither  can  they  (to  say  nothing
of   the° groundless  identification  of   the  name  with
C-^-r  p^ncipcs,  nobilex)  mean  //,.  burning,  the  shin
ing,  according  to  Kiuchi  and  others;  lor  r-2  docs
not  .  ican  to  bum,  to  shine,  but  to  scorch   to  burn  up,
crcmare.combunrc.    When  we  consider  that  in  chv.
Isai.lh    •  ;  forth  his  general  prophetic  man-

^ration,  but  his  special  calling  to  denounce  the  ob
duracy  of  the  people,  and  to  set  before  them  the
iud-'inc-nts  that  must  follow,  we  understand  how  it  is
that  he  sees  thc  appearance  of  Jehovah  m  the  tem
ple   and  in  the  midst  of  the  seraphim  or  burning  an-
KCls,  whilst  he  i\  els  thc  door-sills  of  the  temple  trem
ble  at  their  call,  and  beholds  the  house  filled  w  th
smoke      The  meaning  is,  that  in  spirit  he  anticipates
hc  future  burning  of  thc  temple  as  the  infliction  ot
Jehovah's  judgment.     In  IV.  Ixxx.  'J,  it  is  said  :
shepherd  of  Israel,  appear,  thou  that   sittest  above
the1  cnerubim,  awake   thy  power      Thc  cherubim
therefore,  arc  symbols  of  thc  actual  putting  forth  oi
the  divine   authority.     To  this  corresponds    too   the
expression,  1's.  xcix.  1:  He  sittcth  above  the  cheru
bim   therefore  does  the  world  tremble.     \\  holly  in  a
similar  sense  does  Hezckiah,  in  his  extreme  neces
sity  ca'l  upon  Jehovah  as  the  one  who  rules  over  all
kingdoms,  when  he  addresses  him  as  Jehovah  to;

is  wrong  bore.   Such  a  metathesis,  although  it  seen
wuu'd  be  i".  trarvto  clear  phonetic  principles.    Hadthegut-
u»"l  t^'-i,-  iii-st,  itwould  have  been  more  plausible,  but  such
,  syllable  as  ~r\  (rat)  would  hardly  pass  into  13  (A-ar).   Be-
,i,ies,  the  pi  imary  sense  of  ^  =  T  is  not  riding  nor  motion  at


n  t '.:  ,me  wordyiu  th^abic  and  Sy  riac,  although  i
plainly  appears  also  in  the  Hebrew.  It  is  for  more  easy  and
natural  to  derive  thc  name  311=,  not  from  anything  m  the
form  or  office  of  the  cherubim,  but  from  their  be  in?  remark
able  engraved  figures,  hence  called  pre-eminently  the >e»0™-
ingt.  See  the  account  of  these  representations  in  the  tem
ple  of  Solomon.  This  would  bring  them  very  naturally  from
--,=  ,  tl.e  sense  of  which  in  thc  Syriac  is,  to  plough,  cut,  en-
nrarc  It  is  then,  clearly,  the  tame  root  with  the  Greek
S-0r"e-OBi>,  Lat/SCCRiBo).  They  are  the  re
markable  forms,  figures,  sculptures-engravings.- i.  L.J


oth,  the  God  of  Israel,  who  sitteth  above  the  cheru-
bim.    In  Ezekiel,  the  cherubim  are  denoted  in  sti
symbolical,  allegorical  forms,  no  longer  as  angels,
but  as  rri'n,   fi-a,  living  things  (Luther:  beasts;
Moreover,  in  Ezekiel  x.  there  arc  again  set  forth  in
connection  with  the  cherubim,  the  coals  of  nre  tl
are  to  be  cast  over  the  city.     And,  finally,  in  the  tem
ple  of  Ezekiel,  do  we  find  the  cherubim  again  as  t
key-note  for  the  symbolical  destruction  ot  the  tem
ple  (eh  xli   IS).     We  have  in  Ezekiel  thc  cherubim
Lures  especially  set  forth  in  their  full  development
(man  the  lion,  thc  ox  or  bullock  for  sacrince,  am
the  ca"-le)  whilst  in  thc  Revelation  they  arc  rccog
nized  as  the  -round-forms  of  the  divine  ruling  m  th
world  as  svmbolizcd  in  thc  four  ground-form^ ot  thc
creatuvelv  life  (sec  "  Lite  of  Jesus,"  i.  p.  23 1 ,  Dogma-
tik  D   COM)      If  any  one  is  disposed  to  regard  these
as  the  CTOund-rbrms  of  the  spiritual  life  in  the  world,
because  the  beasts  bear  up  the  throne  ol  the  divine
rule  in  the  world,  or  because,  according  to  the  anal-
0"-v  of  tl'.e  Anocalvpse,  they  pray  unto  God,  there
no" objection  to  be  made  to  it.    But  they  arc  not  thus
denoted  as  containing  thc  idea  of  the  highest  crca-
turclv  lifo.     Thus  also  here,  in  Accordance  with  all
thc  related  places  of  Scripture,  must  we  firmly  bold
fast  the  view  that  the  cherubim  arc  only  symbolical
an-el-tbrms;   as  we  must  also  distinguish   the  scra-
nhhn  even-where  from  personal  angels;  altliougn  in
the  manifest  at  ion  of  the  cherubim,  there  was  disclosed
to  thc  first  men  a  glimpse  of  thc  angel-world.     As
.vmbolical  forms,  they  must  be  here  regarded  as
pointed  to  form  a  permanent  post  of  watching
order  to  keep  men  from  approaching  1
especially  the  tree  of  life.     When  we  perceive  the
fact  that" the  cherubim  everywhere  form  the  acco
nanVing  g^rd  and  watch  of  the  divine  throiic,  we

ire  under  the  necessity  of  bringing  Farad  ,e  also  and
c-neciallv  the  tree  of  life,  which  they  are  appointed
to  -uard"  in  special  relation  to  this  throne
may  it  be  explained  how  Jacob  says:   '   1  have  seen
Hod  face  to  face,  and  my  life  is  preserved  (<  on.  xxxn
30)  —also  how  the  beholding  ot  God  especially  brui:
death,  because  ii   is  through  death  that  the  highest
life  is  attained  (Ex.  xxxiii.20;  1's  xvi.  11  ;  fviul5;
1  John  iii.  -^  ;  and  the  history  ot  thc  visions   Is.  vi.  o  ,
Dan    vii    15     viii.  17;  Rev.  i.  17).     The  cloud  and
Sr  of  fire  which  led  the  children  of  Israe  1  thi-ouph
the  desert  was  also  a  siirn  of  the  presence  of  bod,  aa
Jvdl  as  a  dividing  between  the  glory  of  God  and  sm-
f,,l  men  :  in  other  words,  it  was  the  guard  t.mt  kept
off  from  the  divine  glory  the  profane  entrance  and
thc  profane  look.     For  that  reason,  it  seems  to  st;
in  connection  with  the  cherub  m  ot  the  ntua    sym
bolic   as  it  is  connected  with  thc  cherubim  and  t
phim  of  tho  religious  symbolic,  vitnv.

The  mytholoLTical  analogies  of  the  cherub"
ures  are,  in  fact/most  striking.  "  On  the  mountains
north  of  India,»'says  Knobel  ''or,  m  gencnd ,  m  ho
re-ion  of  thc  mountain  and  Eden  of  God,  do  tl.e
Sents  (e.g.  KTKSXAS,  Judca,  xii ;  AKIUAN ,  /^  .
Anlm  iv  27:  compare  also  PIIILOSTKAT.  \  it  A  poll,
UL  S)  pace  the  fabulous  griffins,  which  they  describe
as  feathered  beings  with  lions'  claws,  thc ,  wings  and
beaks  of  eagles,  flaming  eyes  &c.  -mak mg  them
the  cuardiana  of  the  gold  that  there-abounds  Ot
er  reibr  them  to  the  higher  North  to  the  Ar-mas-
plan  country,  describing .them  pardy  m  a  .mdar


in.  1-24.


flavilali,  wliich  he  mentions."   Delitzsch  cites  besides
MIC  Persian  stories,  according  to  which  99,999  Fer
vors  (that  is,  a  countless  number)  keep  watch  over  the
tree  ho»i,  which  contains  in  itself  the  power  of  the
"esurrection.     In  regard  to  the  connection  between
(he  Bible  tradition  and  this  legend,  Dclitzsch  regards
as  significant  the  comparison  (Ezek.  xxviii.  14)  of  the
king  of  Tyre  to  the  protecting  cherub  with  its  out
spread  wings.     This  comparison,  however,    has  its
ground  simply  in  the  face   that  the  history  of  the
king  of  Tyre  is  presented  in  analogy  with  the  history
of  the  fall  in  Eden.     Delitzsch  supposes  that  the  ap
pearance  of  the  analogous  legends  which  have  come
down  to  ns,  has  its  origin  in  this,  that  humanity,  as
it  went  forth  in  tribes,  ever  spreading  farther  and
farther  asunder,  took  along  the  representation  of  the
cherubs   from  the  ancestral  home,  and  continually
made  mythological  additions  to  it.     It  appears  to  us",
nevertheless,  that  the  analogies  of  the  griffin  legends
are  only  apparent,  since  there  is  a  great  difference
between  the  idea  of  a  lost  tree  of  life,  and  that  of
gold  mines  which  may  yet  become  the  booty  of  man
kind.     The  story  of  the  tree  horn  may  be  very  easily
connected  with  the  later  Persian  legends,  which  may
bo  referred   back  to  the  Hebrew  traditions  rather
than  to  any  early  and  universal  tradition  of  Paradise
— to  say  nothing  of  Knobel's  opinion,  that  the  He
brew  idea  of  the  cherubim,  so  consistently  maintained,
should  be  explained  from  the  very  indefinite  form  of
the  Greek  legend  of  the  griffins,  "in  our  opinion,  the
story  of  Prometheus  has  much  more  of  an  inner  re
lationship  to  the  Paradise  history. .  To  conclude,  as
Keil  remarks  on  the  chapter  before  us  :  "  With  the
banishment  from  the  Garden  of  Eden,  Paradise,  as
far  as  men  were  concerned,   disappeared  from  the
earth.     God  did  not  withdraw  from  the  tree  of  life
•  supernatural  power,  neither  did  he  lay  waste  the
garden  before  their  eyes,  but  he  guarded  it  against
their  return,  to  indicate  that  it  must  be  preserved  and
permanently  guarded  to  the  time  of  the  consumma
tion,   when  sin  should  be  destroyed  through  judg
ment,  death  taken  away  by  the  conqueror  of  the  ser
pent  (1  Cor.  xv.  2(5),  and  the  tree  of  life  crow  again
and  bear  fruit  upon  the  new  earth  of  the  heavenly
Jerusalem  (Rev.  xx.  21)."     This  is  clearly  a  right
symbolical   understanding.      And  yet  we  must  not
2  sight  of  the  historical  fact,  that  for  sinful  man
the  central  and  collective  power  of  health  in  nature
as  in  a  t  till  higher  sense  the  beholding  of  God  is'
through  sin,  and  through  the  divine  judgment,  hid
den  and  vanished,  though  not  absolutely  lost      The
individual  man,  like  the  collective  humanity  mav  in
many  wiiys  draw  nigh  to  Paradise;  but  he  is  ever
driven  back  as  by  a  divine  tempest  and  fiery  iud"--
nt  to  the  outer  field  of  labor,  of  conflict,  and  of
death.      Not   backwards   must   he   look,    but   ever
onwards.


BOCTKINAL  AXD  ETIIICAL.

1.  The  meaning  of  the  narrative  of  the  lout
f&radue.  Like  the  biblical  histories  everywhere
and  especially  the  primitive  traditions  of  Genesis  it
13  an  historical  fact  to  be  taken  in  a  religious  ideal
that  is,  a  symbolical  form.  It  is  just  as  little  a  mere
allegory  as  the  human  race  itself  is  a  mere  allegory
it  is  just  as  httle  a  pure,  naked  fact,  as  the  speaking
ol  the  serpent  is  a  literal  speaking,  or  as  the  tree
life,  in  itself  regarded,  is  a  plant  whose  eatin-
mparted  imperishable  life.  That  sin  began  with  the
Degmmng  of  the  race,  that  the  first  sin  had  its  ori-in


in  a  forbidden  enjoyment  of  nature,  and  not  in  the
Cainitic  fratricide  or  similar  crimes,  that  the  origir.
of  human  sin  points  back  to  the  beginning  of  the
human  race,  that  the  woman  was  ever  more  se-
ducible  than  the  man,  that  along  with  sin  came  in
the  tendency  to  sin,  consciousness  of  guilt,  aliena
tion  from  God,  and  evil  in  general,— all  these  are
affirmations  of  the  religious  historical  consciousness
which  demand  the  historicalness  of  our  tradition,
and  would  point  back  to  some  such  fact,  even  though
it  were  not  written  in  Genesis.  It  is  then  the  actual
historical  influences  of  our  narration,  in  their  world-
historical  significance,  which  wholly  distinguish  it
from  a  myth.  The  symbolical  understanding  of  the
history  appears  in  this,  that  the  universal  existence
of  sin,  of  the  fall,  and  of  the  fall  of  every  individual,
are  reflected  in  it.  Here  come  especially  into  con
sideration:  1.  The  various  mythological  analogies
of  the  biblical  tradition  of  the  fall.  2.  The  various
exegetical  understandings  of  the  Jewish  and  the
Christian  theology.  3.  Modern  interpretations.

1.  In  respect  to  fJie  mythological  analogies,  com
pare  LUCKEN,  "The  Traditions  of  the  Human  Race,"
p.  74  n.,  having   the   superscription  :    La   chute   de
r/iomme  degenere  e.it  lefondement  de  la  ideologic  de
prcsque    toutett    lex   ancicnnts    nations.     VOLTAIRK,
Phitos.  de  Vhist.     In  the  first  place,  Liicken  shows
why  it  is  that  the  heathen  legends  respecting  these
facts  must   present  themselves  as  transformations.
Then  follow,  first  the  legends  of  the  old  Persians.'
''  According  to  the  Zendavesta,  or  the  sacred  writ
ings  of  the  old  Persians,  the  peoples  of  this  race,
namely  the   old  Medcs,  Persians,  and  Bactrians,  as
well  as  all  the  Indogcrmanic  peoples,  had  primarily
the  doctrine  of  four  ages  of  the  world.     In  the  first,
which  lasted  3,000  years,  the  world  was  without  evil'
and  Ormuzd,  the  good  principle,  reigned  alone;  in
the  second,  Ahriman   began    the   conflict    with  Or
muzd  •,  in  the  third  lie  divides  with   him  the  domin
ion  ;  in  the    fourth    he  is    apparently    to    twin  the
victory,  then  to  be  subdued,  after  wliich  is  to  follow
the  burning  of  the  world.     To  the  universal  legend,
how  Ahriman  brings  death  to  Rajomord,  the  first
man,  there  is  attached  the  special  story  of  the  fall
of  the  Meschia  and  the  Mcschiane  (p.  81).     So  the
Indian  legends  also  number  four  ages.     The  myth
ical  Indian  tendency  has  presented  the  fall  in  mani
fold  myths,  as  well  Brahniinic  as  Buddhistic.     Here
upon  follow  the  Chinese  legends,  the  Grecian  legends
(the  Ilesiodic  ages  of   the  world:  the  golden,  the
silver,  the  brazen,  the  iron,  the  Titan  legend,  the
Prometheus  legend,  the   Tantalus  legend),  then  the
Romish  legends  (the  ancient   time  of  Saturn),  the
Germanic  legends  (the  gold  thirst,  the  fall  of  ASCII,
to  which  may  be  added  the  admittance  of  Lock  into
the  Asenbund,  death  of  Baldur,  and  other  similar
things),  then  ^Egyptian  legends,  as  also  those  of  the
Negroes,   of  the  polar  nations,  of  the  Iroquois,  of
the   Mexicans,   &c.,   &c."     In  conclusion,  there  is  a
treatise  on  the  dominion  of  the  demons,  the  origin
of  sorcery  and  idolatry,  concerning  woman  and  her
place  in  heathendom,  the  restoration  to  pardon  of
the  first  men.    In  a  shorter  method,  DELITZSCII  gives
an  account  of  the  myths  in  relation  to  the  fall,  p.
169,  KNOBEL,  p.  40.— 2.    Exegetical  understanding
of  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  theology.     "  It  was
a  universally  prevailing   opinion   among    the   Jews
that  Satan  was  active  in  the  temptation  of  the  first
men.     This  is  found  in  Philo,  and  in  the  '  Book  of
Wisdom,'  ch.  ii.  24  :   '  through    envy  of  the  devil
came  sin  into  the  world.'     In  later  Jewish  writings


•244


GENESIS,  Oil   TilK   FIRST    BOOK    OF    M^SKS.


Sammacl,   the   head   of    the   evil    spirits,  is    called
-:-~npn  £n:n,  the  old  serpent,  because  he  tempted
Eve  in  the  form  of  a  serpent,  or  -'"  (the    serpent)
alone  (compare   the  places  in  E.SKNMKXGKR,  '  Keve-
ation   of    Judaism,'   i.    p.    82i).»     HKNGSTKNKKUG,
••riiristolosrv,"  i.  p-  7.     It  must  nevertheless  be  ob
served,  thateven  among  the  Jews  there  had  already
come  in  a  twofold   conception  of  tins  history  pi  the
temptation.     1'hilo  (J>e  Uundi  Opifieio)  saw  m   the
serpent  an  allegory  of  the  evil  lust  (1;5^).     In  the
?a,ne  manner  does  Maimonides  interpret  the  place
allt-o.icallv  ;    whilst     Joscphus     understands     the
speaking  of  the  serpent  as  a  proper  speaking,  and
other  Jew-  again  are  inclined  to   see  in  the  serpent
an  apparent  form  merely  of  Satan   himself.  _  Abar-
bancl  and  others  connect  a  di.vetly  seductive  ad
dress  of  Satan   to   the   woman  with   the  fact  Oi  ins
windin"  himself  about  the  tree,  and   tasting  of  its
fruit     rCvril  of  Alexandria  supposes  the  serpent  to
have  been  only  an  assumed   outward   appearance   ot
Satan    whilst  'liasil,  Chrysostom,  Augustine,  and,  in
.;',!    the   lat'T   father's,  regard   Satan   as   havinr
served 'himself  of  the  serpent,  and   spoken   througl
ni,n-     The    inclination    of  the    Alexandrians   to  an
alle"-ori/.ins;  inierjii elation  continues  in  a  progressive
',',„  [-'-re     in    the    school    of    the   (inostics,   namely,
,he  Ophites  (sec  Mri.LKR,  "  History  of  Cos-
v."  n    11)0),  and    in  like   manner  in   the  mter-
ions   of   the    later    mystics    and    thcosophists.
'According   to    Grotius,    Moses    found    the  narration
,    us  in  the  form  of  an  ancient,  poem.     Clericus
jned   to   agree  with    those  who  hold  that  the
serpent   di.l  not" actually  speak,  but  only  cat  of  the
tVuit    before  the  eyes  of  Kve,  and  that  with  this  was
connected   ihe  temptation  of    Satan  (as  Abarbanel
maintains);   l>nt  it  appears  to  him  that  in  re  obsntra
.,„,/,,  iynorantice  confessio.     Concerning
the  modern  views,  an  account  is  given  by  the  author
of  the  article  u  Sin,"  in  Ib:  u/oc's  "Real  Encyclope
dic  "  as   follows:    The  tempter    is   the    devil  (John
via'.  •!  I  :   Kev.  xii.  '.» ;  Hook  of  Wisdom,  n.  21),  who
uVd    the    ferpent  as  his  instrument  ( '2  Cor.  xi.  8) ;
the    serpent    is,    therefore,   neither   alone   active  as
such(T  Miiller,  Schcnkel),  nor  is  he  an  incorpora
tion    (,f    Satan  (Cerhardt,    Philippi),    nor   the   mere
,  niblem  of  the  cosmical  principle  (Martensen).     1
influence  of  Satan  upon  men  wa<  by  way  ol  dialogue,
wheiein  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  serpent  was  taken
advantage  of  and  with  which  his   alluring  motions
mav    have   cooperated   (Hengstenberg,    Thomasms,
Dclit/<ch   Ebrard),  not  a  mere  physical  influence  in
that  the  unrecognized  voice  of  Satan  like  a  vision-
i-eflcction   passed  over  upon  the  serpent  (in  which
case  the  -peakin"  serpent  would  have  been  merely  a
symbolical  liu-me),  nor  something  at  the  time  unob
served  by  the  first  formed  men,  but  afterwards,  m
the  later  recollections  of  the   tradition,   taken   for
Satanic  influence  (Hofmann).    The  tree  of  knowledge
,,f  "ood  and  evil  is  neither  a  poison-tree  (Remhard,
Doderlehi,  Morns)  nor  otherwise  a  tree  of  knowledge
of  good  and  evil  in   such    special   sense   that  the
consequences  of  the  enjoyment  must  have  been  an
intoxication,  a  disturbance  of  the  pure  equilibrium
in   the   harmony   of   the   first   man  (Lange),  nor  a
mystical  tree  whose  fruit,  for  the  one  who  enjoys  it,
is  the  reception  of  evil  into  his  being,  and  therewith
t'he  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  (Martensen),  nor  an
emblem  of  the  world  darkened   to  the  perdition  of
death    in   its  false  influence  upon  man  (Schenkel),
but— an    ordinary   tree,  which   had    its   significance


only  through  the  command  of  God."     In   this   dry,
idcalless   positivism    must    such    an    understamhnd
come  to  its  stop.     We  must,    however,   distinguish
at    present  three   or  four  principal   views:     1.  'Ihe
traditional,    orthodox,    popular    representation,    ac
cording  to  which  the  serpent,  under  the  influence  of
Satan     literally    spoke,    or   Satan,    in    fact,    in    the
appearance  of    the   serpent-form.     2.  The  Gnostic
allegorical,    farther    developed    into    the    mythical
allegoric,  and,  in  fact,  at  one  time  in  a  sense  akin  to
Ophitism  (the  view  of  Hegel,  according  to  DKLITZSCH,
p.  171),  and  auain,  in  a  more  churchly  and  ethical
sense.     8.  The  connection  of  the  definite  dialectical
speaking  of  Satan  with  corresponding  motions  of  the
serpent,  such  as  its  eating  the  fruit.     4,  An  influence
of  Satan,  exemplified   in   acts  of  the   serpent,  inca
pable  of' being  farther  defined,  and  thus   becoming
a  dialogue   through   the   visionary  or  ecstatic  condi
tion  of  the  woman.     This  is  our  view  (Dogmatic,  p.
4IJ9)   for  the  understanding  of  which  there  must  be
previously  an  insi-ht  into  the  essential  nature  of  this
visionary"  state  of  soul.      In  respect   to  the  design
of  our  narration,  there  are,  in  like  manner,  various
views    presented.      According   to  BEK«EI;    ("Prac
tical  introduction  to  the  Old   Testament,  continued
from  Au-nisti  "),  uho  is  disposed   to   see  here,  not
the  history  of  the  first  men  generally,  but  only  that
of  an  ancestor  of  the  Abrahamitic  race  (a  hereditary
legend,  in  fact,  of  the  family  of  Abraham,  which  pre
supposes   an   already   previous  longer  existence    of
humanity;    Kains,    Ackerhau,   Stadtbau),   the    most
usual  decision  in  respect  to  the  aim  of  our  narration
is  that  which  re-ards  it  as  containing  a  doctrine  oj
the  origin  <>f  evil.     As  a  modification   of  this  view,
however,  Toft  sets  forth  the  proposition  that  its  aim
is  to  represent  the  transition  from  the  golden  to  the
silver  age.     For   the   old   narrator   this  is  much  too
general  a  view.     If  he  intended,  which  is  the  most
likely,  something  more  than  narrating  merely  for  the
sake  of  the  story,— in  other  words,  it    he  meant  also
to  teach  us  something  along  with  it,  then  his  purpose
could  have  boon  nothing  else  than  to  show  how  man
mav    have    been    led   into   transgression,   and   what
eonseqncnces  it  must  have  had  (i.  p.  55).    According
t(,  the   .Irrnsalem   Targnm,   Eichhorn,    and   Paulus,
the  design  of  our  narration  was  to  paint  the  loss  oi
the  "oliien  age,  whilst  Von  Bohlen,  Hegel,  Knobel,
and  others,  in  exact  accordance  with   the    Gnostic
Ophites    would   represent   it  as  an  advance  (an  ad
vance  indeed,  attended  by  calamities)  from  the  state
of   savage   beastliness.     The    representation  clearly
presents  itself  as  the  religious  symbolical  primeval
history  of  humanity,  holding  the  key  of  all  history
that  follows  it,   according    to  the    contrast  of    the
fall    and    the    resurrection,  or  of   sin  and  death,  as
also  redemption  and  renovation,  whilst  it  gives  the
-round  for  the  unveiling  of  the   demon  and   angel-
world,  as  the  appointed  means  for  introducing  the
deepest  understanding  of  the  history  of  the  kingdom
of  God      According  to  its  most  peculiar  key-note,
it  is  a  representation  of  the  beginning  of  the  king
dom   of  grace.     For   a  catalogue    of    the   modern
literature  in  respect  to  the  different  interpretations
of  the  fall,  see  BF.ETSCHNKIDER,  "  Systematic
opment,"  n.  p.  520.  .

2  Me  Probation-Tree,  the  Probation  and  i.*
Temptation.  "  The  Rabbins  and  Mohammedans  un
derstood  by  the  probation-tree,  the  vine ;  the  Gre
cian  church  fathers  understood  it  of  the  fig-tree;
the  Latins,  in  the  first  place,  of  the  apple.  1  he  tree
horn  plays  the  same  part  in  the  Zcndavesta.


CHAP.  III.  1-24.


245


Hindoos  speak  of  a  knowledge  and  creation  tree
the   Tibetans  of  a  sweet,  whitish   herb,  or  marrow
from  the  enjoyment  of  which  originated  the  feeliiu
of  shame,  and  the  custom  of  wearing  clothes."  Yoi
Bohlen.     We  have  elsewhere  alluded  to  the  analog)
between  the  falling  into  fin  of  the  second  ancesto
Noah,  who  became  intoxicated  by  the  fruit  of  th
vine,  and  in  consequence  thereof  lay  in  his  naked
ness,  and  the  falling  into  sin  of  the  primitive  ancer
tor  who  became  aware  of  his  nakedness  after  eatinr
of  the  forbidden  fruit.     This  analogy  does  not  just  if}
us  iu  concluding  that  it  was  the  vine,  but  some  othe
fruit,   perhaps,  whose   effect,  for  the   first  men,  wa
too  strong,  being  of  an  intoxicating  or  disturbing
nature.     If  we  do  not  find  in  that  unknown  frui
some  immanent  ground  of  the  divine  command,  it  is
clear  that  we  must  adopt  the  idea  of  a  purely  arbi
trary  ordinance.     Nature  itself  is,  indeed,  and  in  the
most   general  sense,  a  tree  of  probation  for  man
this  peculiarity  of  it  has  always  had  its  special  types
and  there  arc  yet  various  probation  trees  for  different
nations — such  as  opium,  hashisch,  the  coco  plant,
etc.     So  Beyer,  in  his  sermon  on  the  History  of  the
Primitive  World  (p.  90),  takes  the  contrast  between
the  tree  of  life  and  the  tree  of  probation  to  consist
in  this,  that  the  first,  although  it  had  not  the  power
to   make  men  ever  healthy  and  young,  possessed,
nevertheless,  a  healing  and  strengthening  efficiency
(analogous  to  similar  medicine  trees),  whilst  the  pro
bation-tree  was,  in  these  respects,  the  opposite.     He
supposes  it,  indeed,  without  any  ground,  to  have
been  a  poison-tree  ; — without  any  ground,  we  say,
for  the  human  race  is  not  poisoned  corporeally,  but
distempered  and  disordered  physically  through  an
ethical  consequence  of  its  effects.     Besides  this,  the
probation-tree   is  distinguished  from  the  serpent,  as
the  probation  from  the  temptation.     The  probation
is  from  God,  as    the  temptation  is   from  the    evil
one.     The   probation,  along   with  the   demand  for
watchfulness,  presents  an  alternative  for  the  good.
The  temptation  increases  the  danger  of  the  alterna
tive  with  an  instigation  to  the  evil.     The  probation
has  in  view  that  man  should  be  on  his  guard  ;  it  is
intended  to  lay  the  ground  of  his  normal  develop
ment.     The  temptation  has  in  view  the  fall  of  man ;
its  purpose  is  to  entice  him  into  an  abnormal  devel
opment,    or  rather,  entanglement.     Since  the  time
that  sin  is  in  the  world,  has  each  probation  also  in
itself  the  force  of  a  temptation,  because  there  is
added  to  it  the  enticement  to  sin  on  the  part  of  the
devil,  the  world,  and  one's  own  peculiar  evil  lusts.    In
this  sense  of  probation  can  it  be  said  God  tempted
Abraham.    And  just  on  this  account  is  it  that  the  sins
of  a  man  already  perpetrated  become  for  him  a  tempt
ation  to  future  crimes  ;  therefore  do  we  pray  :  Lead
us  not^  into  temptation.      Moreover,  the   hereditary
sin  is  itself  one  great  universal  temptation,  which
lies  as  a  load  upon  the  human  race.     From  all  this
it  follows  that  the  temptation  which  was  added  to
the  first  probation  of  man  came  not  from  God,  nei
ther  from  any  physical  creature,  and  just  as  'little
from  anything  within  the  soul  of  innocent  man,  but
solely  from  a  malignant  spirit.     In  this  fact,  how
ever,  he  two  consequential  inferences :  the  first  that
there  are  spirits  besides  men  endowed  with  reason  (the
angel-world),  the  second  that  in  this  spirit-world  there
must  have  been  already  a  fall  preceding  that  of  man

3.  Wit.  Serpent  and  Satan.  The  former  has
been  thus  described  :  "  The  serpent,  a  beast  like  to
an  embodied  thunderbolt  that  has  had  its  origin  in
the  deepest  night,  parti-colored,  painted  like  fire,  as


black  and  dark  as  night,  its  eyes  like  Blowing  sparks
its  tongue  black,  yet  cloven  like  a  flame,  its  jaws  a
chasm  of  the  unknown,  its  teetli  fountains  of  venom
the   sound  of  its  mouth  a  hiss.     Add   to  this  the
strange  and  wonderful  motion,  ever  striving   like  a
flash  to  quiver,  and  like  an  arrow  to  fiee,  were  it  not
hindered    by    its    bodily    organization.     It    appear?
among  (he  beasts  like  a  condemned  and  fallen  angel;
in  the  heathen  world  of  false  gods,  it   hath    found]
and  still  finds,  ever,  awe  and  adoration  ;  its  subtlety
has  become  a  byword,  its  name  a  naming  of  Satan',
whilst  the  popular  feeling,  even  now,  as  in  all  times
past,  connects  a  curse  and  an  exorcism  with  its  ap
pearance."   F.  A.  KRCTMMACHER,  "  Paragraphs  for  the
Holy  History  "  (p.  (>5).    In  this  splendid  painting  there
is  left  out  the  brutal  clumsiness  and  obtuseuess  of  the
serpent  which    stand    in   such    remarkable   contrast
with  its  mobility  and  its  guile.   (See  It.  S.VKU,,  "  Phi
losophical  Observations  of  Nature,"  Dresden,' 1839.)
Respecting  the  presence  and  the  significance  of  poison
in  nature.     "  There  arc,  in  inorganic  nature',  a  class
of  substances  which   destroy  life,  not  through  any
mechanical  injury  and  rending,  but  rather  by  insinu
ating  themselves  smoothly  and  gently  into"  the  or-
gr.ns  of  the  living  thing  ;— thus  forcing  their  way  in
with  a  subtle  and  malignant  power,  they  invade  the
life  in   its  most  interior  and   invisible  "laboratories,
throwing  into  disorder  all  their  functions,  and  there
by  bringing  in    sickness    and    most    painful    death.
And  so,  too,  are  there  beasts  that  never  attack  their
foe  with  plain  and  open  weapons,  killing  the  organs
by  mechanically  breaking  them  up  ;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  with  weapons  concealed,  underhand,  sly-dart
ing,    and   apparently   weak,  seem  to  infi!<-t  only  a
slight  injury  upon  their  foe,  and,  in  fact,  to  be  only
playing  with  him,  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  through
this  insignificant  hurt  introducing  a  horrible   power
of  destruction,  ever  inwardly  growing,  until  finally
it  breaks  out  in  tormenting  sickness,  and  ends  in  a
wretched  death.     These  beings  and  products  of  na
ture  which  thus  destroy  life,  not  mcdiatelv  through
an  outer  breaking  of  its  parts  and  organs,  but  by  a
hostile    effect    upon    the   very   life   functions,  and
which,  consequently,  must  possess  an  enmiiv  directly
aiming  at  the  life  itself, — we  denote  by  the' name  of
poisonous." — "  Schubert    lias    well    remarked,    that
the  poisonous  beasts  are  beings  that  appear' to  be
placed    ambiguously    and    doubtfully    between    two
otherwise  quite  distinct  classes,  each  of  which,   in
"hcir^own  sphere,  present  a  distinct,  perfect,  and  free
ndividuality.     In  such  middle   beings  there  neces
sarily  lies  a  striving  for  a  higher  form,  though  ever
cleaving  to  the  lower.     Thus  shows  itself  in  them,
often,  an  aberration  from  an  otherwise  sound  natu-
•al  tendency,  whilst  their  very  enjoyment  is,  for  the
most  part,  attended  with  pain  and  disgust.    On  their
)odily  side  they  exhibit  a  nature,  ever,  in  some  re
jects,  infirm  and  sickly,  and  never  rightly  attainiu"
o  repose." — "  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  there°
"ore,  that  in  the  collected  organism  of  nature,  as  well
is  in  individual  creatures,  there  comes  in,  at  the  tran-
iition  point,  an  infirm,  ambiguous  organization,  inter-
jenctrated  by  evil  fluids,  which  are  able  to  inoeu-
ate   other  creatures  with  the  malady  of  their  own
on  fusion  and  disorder.     And*  this  is   nothing  else
han  poison.     Since  each  poison  is  a  sensible5  sub-
tance,  or  so  presented,  which  has  become  an  origi-
lal  cause  of  disease."     Under  this  point  of  view  tins
iiithor  now  treats  of  arsenic,  of  mercury,  of  prussic
cid,  of  spiders,  and  of  snakes.     "  All  poisonous  ani-
lals    carry  with   them   a  sluggish,   and   apparently


240


GENESIS,  OPv   THE   FIRST   BOOK   01*   MOSES.


loathin"  life.     The  most  of  them  seldom  or  never
eT  Ssclvos  in  motion  towards  the  object  of  their
nation    although  there  is  no  failure  in  them,  cither
of  strength  or  swiftness,  when  they  let  out  upon
.heir  prcTv.     This  strong  contrast  ol  sluggish  rest  and
angry  vehemence,  produce's  upon  us  the  impression
ofVome    irreconcilable  biformity  m    their  nature
They  arc  lurking   beasts,  lying    n   the  darkest  and
most  unclean  recess.     Along  with  tins     hey  s
especially  to  love  the  dump  and  mouldy  place  where
death  riots.     Thus,  for  example,  do  the  rattlesnakes
love  to   lav  themselves   behind    some   foul   stump
whilst  others  seek  the  (.1.1  mouldy  wall,  or  tl
of  ruins,  or  the  foul  dusty  corner.     It  is  worth  re-
markin"  that  almost  all  of  them  have  lor  the  lower
organization  of  the  belly  a  greatly  disproportion,
extension   whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  breast  and
he-ill    or  the  organs  that  correspond  to   these,  are
shrivelled  and  contracted,     hi  the  most  dangerous
and  most   poisonous  among  (hem,  the  last  trace  ol
'any  interior  breast  formation  has  disappeared  win
thev  show  not    the   least  rudiments  oi   any  shoulder
!„„•„      We   sec    them    dait   with    iury  upon    their
,,,.v   'then   laboring  under  it  with  inlinite  p;.m    and


Hi.  i  .

stess    whilst  for  each  gorging  they  pay  with  fee
hk-uess  and  torpidity.      In  this  condition   they  gaze
,,,,,,,,,1  thi-m  stupid  and  blear-eyed,  whilst  they  suff.  r
|v«  -  to  be  killed  with  sticks  without  making
.,,,v  Defence."— "These  giant  serpents,  the  crocodiles
.  alligators-,  have  wneraily.  and  in  an  extraor-
ee,  the  look  of  a  former  world.    They  are
fin-  limn-   that,  under  the  dominion  "f  the  new  cre
ated  race  of  gods,  arc  thrust  down  into   the  deep,
'  IK]   into  darkness,  whence  many  a   time   still    there
forih   the  lire  of  their  rage.     The  croaking  ol
the  frozs    the  icrnntinir  of  the  toads,  the  shrill  shai'i
,>ipinL''~of  the  lizard,  the  hiss  <.f  the  serpent,  give
none  of  them  any  special  conception  of  the  emotions
of  which  they  arc  the  expression.     The  serpents  are
without  doubt  the  most  wonderful,  and,  so  to  speak
the  most  like  fable,  of  any  beings  of  the  present  ere
ation."     Next  follows  the   depicting  of  the  singulai
contrasts  in  the  nature  of  the  serpent  :   its  rude  ele
mcntary   form  and   its  line,  sniritual   expression    it
Mibtle  look,  which  never  carries  itself  out  in  action
it,   enchantment   or  fascination  of  its  prey,  and  it
capability  of  becoming  transported  whilst  itscli  m  ;
«t-ite  of  fascination  and  torpidity  (p.  In,  etc.).     I
'the  above  remarks  and    the  article  "Serpent,     b
WINER     }\'»rtcrbu'-li    frf    <1"*   ChristJiehe
Satan      Iletween  the  two  contradictory  supposition
o  „.  of  which  is  that  our  text  recognizes  only  a  tempt
ution  of    the'  serpent,  but    not,  at  all    oi    any  ev
spirit  expressing  itself  through  it,  and  the  other,  n-j
resenting  it  to  contain  a  full  knowledge  of  Satan
lies  the  'hypothesis  that  corresponds  to  the  idea  o
an  or-anie  unfolding  of  biblical  doctrine  ;  it  is,  tha
we  ha've  here  the  first  germ  of  the  doctrine  ot  ^atai
as  we  also  have  before  us  the  first  germ  of  a  BOtei
ological  Christolosy— that  is,  of  a  Christ  of  salv
tion.     P.oth  germs  arc  throughout  placed  m  a  r
markable  relation  to  each  other;   the  destroyer  o
the   serpent  is  announced   in  the   seed  ot   woma
But  the  actual  conscious  knowledge,  winch  is  nj
expressed  in  a  symbolical  form,  consists  in  this,  th
it  represents  the  serpent  as  a  malignant  spirit,  craft
lyin",  and  rejoicing  in  mischief,  who  shows  himsc
audVill  continue  to  show  himself,  the  foe  of  m
and  the  foe  of  God.     Concerning  the  farther  dev
opmeut  of  the  doctrine  of  Satan,  see  the  excgetic
annotations.


4.  The  Temptation  of  Christ  in  the  Wilderness  aa
antetype  of  the  temptation  of  Adam  in  Paradise.

5.'   The   Orl'i'm  of  Sin.     Our   text  gives  us  the
eround  of  supposing,' in  the  first  place,  a  distinct  ori
gin  of  sin,  in  opposition  to  the  system  which  would
make  the  origin  of  sin  to  happen  concurrently  with
the  initial  constitution  of  human  nature   itsclt.     It
gives  us  occasion  to  distinguish  a  threefold  origin  ol
sin:    1.  The  cosmieal-demonic;  2.  the  physiological
genesis  of  sin  ;  ">.  the  Adamic-historicnl.     ] .  Evident
ly  is  the  first  human  sin  to  be  referred  back  to  a  pre-
cedin"  demoniacal  temptation ;  therefore,  also,  to  a
preceding  demoniacal  sin,  and  accordingly,  too,  to  an
earlier    fall    in  the   spirit-world.      Nevertheless,  the
essential  origin  of  sin  is  not  thereby  explained,  for
ere  comes  up  the  further  question:  how  sin  origin-
ed  in  the  spirit-world?     According  to  the  Apocry-
al  books,  the  essential  root  of  sin  is  mainly  pride,
Wtwia,  which  is  always  an  assuming  oi  a  false
d,  that  is,  of  idolatry.     (This  is   expressed  some-
iat  obscurely,  Wisdom  of  Sirach,  x.  15:  cpx*)  1'"rfP"
(jxw'as  auafTi'a.      Hook  of  Wisdom,  xiv.  12;  v.  27  :
irupyeius  ^.rifoia  eiSwAaJV.— f)  yap  ra'v  wuvvpuv
uv  SpTjtTKe.'a   irai/rus    vpXV    KaKov   xa.1   alfia.   KOI
tffriv).     According  to  this  the  first  motive  to
e  leading  astray,  throu-h  temptation  or  seduction,
is  envy  (Hook  of  Wisdom,  ii.  2-1).     With  this  agrees,
so    2. 'the  psvchological  oiigin  of.sin  as  our  tcT
unn-s  it   before  us.     It  certainly  does  not  commit
m-l'f  to  the  crude,  elementary  representation,  tha
c-'innin"  of  sin  is  to  be  explained  from  any  over-
ihmce  of  sensuality  or  materiality.     The  process  ot
n's    devehipmi'iit  "proceeds    from   a  spiritual    self-
sordcring,  wherein  doubt,  together  with  self-exa.ta-
on,    constitutes   the    ground-form   which    dcvel<
^clf  into  an  enviously  malignant  pride,  and  unb
ef  that  it  may  become  complete  in  superstition  and
•nsnal  concupiscence,  in  lawlessness  and  seduction,
onccrning  the  ground-form  of  sin,  how  it  dcgcner-
tcs  from  the  demoniacal  into  the  bestial,  from  t.iu
niritval  Pelf-exaltation  to  the  sensual  sclf-degraaa-
u>n    see  LANGK'S  Uogmntik,  p.  -1S7.      Hut  our  text,
-or!  over    3.  would  recou'tiixe  the  psychological  com-
.Iction  of  sin,  regarded  as  the  historical  beginning
f  the  same  in  the  human  world.     rlhis  is  proved  by
lie  continuation  of   the    first   ^  in   the   guilt-con
cionsness  of  the  first  man,  by  his  self-deception  and
clf-han!enintr,  by  his  exculpations  and  his  cnmma-
i,in«      Vu-^t  fully  is  it  shown  in  the  announcement
,f  the  conilict  between  the  seed  of  the  serpent  and
hc  Seed  of  the  woman,  in   the  banishment  of  man
rom  Paradise,  an.l  in  the  fratricidal  murder  of  Cam,
that  follow  so  soon  after.     Confronted  by  the  sim-
,]0  greatness  and   clearness  of  cur  tradition  of  the
ccnesifl    of   sin,    stand   the   most    diversely  varying
views,  such  as  the  doctrine  of  the  pro-existent  ghost
ly  fall    into  sin   (Plato,  Origcn,   Schellmg,    Stei  ens,
j    Midler),  of  the  pre-existent  corporeal   smtulncss
(Rationalism,  R.  Rothc),  of  the  idealistic   origin  ot
the  conception  of  sin  in  the  element  of  repentance
(Schleiermachcr),  or  in  the  element  of  the  advancing
consciousness  (Hegel),  or  of  its  monstrous  cosmical
ground  in  nature  (Martenscn)-and  others  of  a  si

^  61D!sm,  Sinfnlnauf—Wffinal  Sin.  Our  history
tells  us  plainly  that  sin  in  its  formal  relation  is,  be
fore  all  things,  a  transgression  of  the  divine  com-
mand  •  whilst  in  its  material  relation  it  is  a  wounding
of  the'propcr  personal  life,  even  unto  death,  and,  in
consequence  thereof,  a  hostile  turning  away  from
God  a  self-entanglement  in  the  love  oi  sclt  and  <


CHAPTER   III.  1-24.


2-Ti


the  world,  as  flowing  from  the  abuse  of  the  freedom
of  the  will  to  an  apparent  freedom  which  degenerates
into  bondage.  That  sin,  after  it  becomes  fixed,  is
especially  to  be  regarded  as  selfishness,  is  prominent
ly  taught  by  Zwingli ;  see  FAURAOO,  "Annotatlonum
in  Genesin  ex  ore  Zivingli,'11  p.  56  :  habemus  mine
prcKvaricationisfontcm,  <pi\avriav  videlicet,  hoc  estsui
ipsius  amorem.  The  signs  of  the  sinfuluess  (status
'  corruptions)  that  come  in  with  sin  are  clearly  pre
sented  in  our  account.  At  its  proper  focus  appears
the  consciousness  of  guilt,  in  which,  at  the  same
time  with  alienation  from  God,  there  becomes  fixed
the  dependence  on  the  sinful  appetite.  The  essential
cause  is  the  vacuum  that  comes  into  the  soul,  the
failing  of  life  in  the  spirit,  the  physically  unbridled
and  ungovcrned  behavior  whereby  the  predominance
is  given  to  the  flesh  over  the  power  of  the  spirit.
Out  of  the  permanence  of  a  sinfulness  which  contra
dicts  the  idea  as  well  as  the  original  nature  of  man,
there  comes  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  doc
trine  of  original  sin,  whose  point  of  gravity,  misap
prehended  by  Pelagius,  lies  in  the  organic  unity  of
humanity,  but  whose  limitation,  moreover,  misappre
hended  by  Augustine,  lies  in  the  personal,  voluntary,
human  individuality.  On  the  one  side,  humanity  is
no  more  an  atomistic  pile  of  spirit,  than  it  is  capable
of  being  disintegrated  atomistically  into  its  isolated
sinnings.  And  so,  again,  on  the  other  side,  it  is  no
more  a  mas*a  in  the  general,  than  it  can  be  a  massa
perditionis.  The  whole  weight  of  the  organic  con
nection,  as  it  appears  to  have  overwhelmed  the  born
Cretin  (and  yet  not  wholly  so,  since  he  is  irrespon
sible  according  to  the  measure  of  his  imbecility),  hath
revealed  itself  in  the  fact,  that  the  burden  of  human
guilt  has  fallen  on  the  sinless  Jesus.  The  whole  im
portance  of  the  individual  freedom  of  choice  is,  in
like  manner,  to  be  recognized  in  the  personal  posi
tion  of  the  man  in  its  various  degrees  of  advance
ment  from  the  lowest  step  of  the  human  gradation
even  to  the  highest,  that  is,  the  holiness  of  Christ.
Within  the  organic  connection,  which,  with  its  his
torical  curse,  winds  round  all,  there  still  remains
room  for  the  contrast  between  good  and  evil  (Book
of  Wisdom,  ch.  x.  1),  and  for  genealogies  of  blessing
as  well  as  for  repeated  falls,  or  special  genealogies
of  the  curse.  This  contrast  connects  itself  with  the
contrast  of  human  conduct  in  guilt  consciousness  and
in  shame.  Shame  and  the  consciousness  of  sin  draw
men  towards  God,  just  as  they  also  draw  them  from
him.  On  this  it  depends  whether  the  man,  through
the  aid  of  the  gratia  prceveniens,  should  encourage
himself  to  follow  the  drawings  of  God,  or  in  cowardly
flight  from  the  divine  penal  righteousness  should  give
himself  up  to  an  unholy  repulsion.

7.  The  First  Judgment,  and,  in  the  same  time,  the
First  Promise  of  Salvation.  It  must  be  observed,
that  the  first  presented  judgment  of  God  remains
the  typo  for  all  following  judgments.  The  holy
Scripture  does  not  separate  in  an  abstract,  dogmati
cal  manner,  between  the  rule  of  the  divine  righteous
ness  and  that  of  the  divine  love  and  mercy.  The
judgments  of  God  which  avail  for  the  separation  of
the  lost,  are  ever  the  purifying  and  the  deliverance
of  the  elect.  For  the  judgments  of  God  are  separa
tions.  Thus  here,  they  separate  between  the  seed
of  the  serpent  and  the  seed  of  the  woman.  Farther
on,  there  is  a  separation  between  the  house  of  Noah
and  the  first  lost  race.  Still  farther,  and  another
takes  place  between  the  heathen  at  the  Babylonian
tower-building,  and  Abraham  with  his  race,  the  heirs
of  thn  blessing.  Next  it  was  between  the  unbeliev


ing  Israelites  who  fi'll  in  the  desert,  and  the  preserved
remnant  which  came  into  the  possession  of  Canaan.
A  similar  crisis  is  made  by  the  Assyrian  and  Baby
lonian  captivities.  The  highest  and  the  deepest  crisis
is  presented  by  the  cross  of  Christ ;  it  is  the  division
that  takes  place  between  the  believing  and  the  unbe
lieving.  The  last  is  that  which  takes  place  at  the
end  of  the  world  ;  it  is  the  judgment  that  divides  be
tween  the  blessed  and  the  damned.  This,  then,  is
the  ground-reason  why  the  divine  promises,  smd  the;
beginnings  of  salvation,  break  forth  from  the  sen
tences  of  judgment.  Such  is  the  case  here  in  the
sentences  pronounced  on  the  guilt  in  Paradise.  In
the  very  front  stands  the  obscure  yet  mighty  prom
ise  of  the  so-called  protevangel.  Moreover,  the  pro
nunciation  of  judgment  against  the  woman  has  like
wise  its  blessing  and  its  promise.  With  pain  shalt
thon — bear  children  ;  this  curse  has  the  New  Testa
ment  changed  into  a  blessing  (1  Tim.  ii.  15);  and  so
it  is  with  her  dependence  upon  man  (Eph.  v.  22).
The  judgment  pronounced  on  Adam  burdened  the
field  with  the  curse  of  thorns  and  thistles  ;  but  thorns
and  thistles  are  the  progenitors  of  the  rose  and  of  the
wonderful  cactus-flower.  The  primitive  sentence  of
Adam  to  the  hard  labor  of  his  life's  calling  is  become
a  blessing  to  the  human  race.  The  calling  and  the
labor  become  the  ground-forms  for  the  education  of
man  (Ps.  xc.  10).  And,  finally,  the  return  to  earth
through  death  contains  not  only  a  judgment,  but
also,  in  the  judgment,  the  prospect  of  deliverance
from  the  sufferings  of  the  earthly  sojourn  (2  Cor.  v.
8 ;  Philip,  i.  23).  The  separation  of  man  from  the
tree  of  life,  by  means  of  the  cherubim,  prevented  him
from  looking  backwards  to  the  lost  paradi.se  ;  it  im
pels  him  to  look  forward,  and  to  aspire  to  the  new
paradise  and  its  trees  of  life  (Rev.  xxii.  2).  The  ban
ishment  from  Paradise  lays  the  foundation  for  the
religion  of  the  future,  or,  as  it  has  been  called,  the
theocratic  faith  in  God  of  pious  Jews  (Heb.  xi.  8).

The  protevangel,  moreover  (see  the  Excgetical  an
notations),  contains  the  germ  of  all  later  M  cssianic
prophecies  ;  therefore  is  it  so  universal,  so  compre
hensive,  so  dark,  and  yet  so  striking  and  distinct  in
its  fundamental  features.  As  the  ground  outline  of
the  future  of  salvation,  it  denotes  :  1.  The  religious
ethical  strife  between  good  and  evil  in  the  world,
and  the  sensible  presentation  of  this  strife  through
natural  contrasts — the  serpent,  the  woman.  2.  The
concrete  form  of  this  strife  and  its  gradual  gene
alogical  unfoldings :  the  seed  of  the  serpent,  the
seed  of  the  evil  one,  and  the  children  of  evil ;  the
seed  of  the  good  and  the  children  of  salvation.  3.
The  decision  to  be  expected  :  the  wounding  of  the
woman's  seed  in  the  heel,  that  is,  in  his  human
capability  of  suffering,  and  its  connection  with  the
earth,  the  treading  down,  or  the  destruction,  not  of
the  serpent's  seed  merely,  but  of  the  serpent  him
self,  and  that  too  in  his  head,  the  very  centre  of  his
life.  The  whole  is,  therefore,  the  prediction  of  an
universal  conflict  for  salvation,  with  the  prospect  of
victory.  From  this  basis  the  promise  proceeds  in
ever-narrowing  circles,  until  it  passes  over  from  the
general  seed  of  the  woman  to  the  ideal  seed,  and
from  that  again  draws  out  in  ever-widening  circles,
together  with  the  self-unfolding  promise  of  the  king
dom  of  God.  Thereby,  too,  does  the  conception
of  the  promise  assume  an  ever  deeper  and  richer
form.

1.  General  promise  of  salvation.

a.  The  posterity  of  the  woman :  battle  and
victory,  ch.  hi.  15.


248


GENESIS,  OH   THE   FIRST   F.OOK   OF  MOSES.


Noah    and    his    race :    rest    and    Sabbath,
ch   v   29.

Sh'em  and  his  tabernacle,  Japhet  and  his
enlargement:    the   name  of    God  and   the
conquest  of  the  world,  ch.  ix.  20,  27
Abraham  and  hi- race  :    the  race  of  bless
ing,  the  promised  land,  the  blessing  of
nations,  ch.  xii.  2,  7  ;  xiii.  15,  Hi ;  xv.  -1  ;
xvii    2-5  ;   xviii.  1<>;   xxii.  15.
Isaac  and  hn  descendants,  ch.  xv.  4  ;  xvn.

11);    xxvi.  3,4-

Jacob.     His    blessing    and    his    dominion

over  his  brother,  ch.  xxv.  2::  ;    xxvii.  29.

Judali    and    his    sceptre:     prince    in   war,
prince  of  peace,  ch.  xlix.  S.
pical    promise   of   the   Messiah:   Israel  and
the  sacerdotal  kingdom,  Exod.  xix.  0.     The
ptar  out  of  Jacob,  Numb.  xxiv.  17.

The  tvpical  prophet,  Deut.  xvili.  5.

The  tvpical  Levite,  Deut.  xxxiii.  9-11.

The  tvpiral  king,  2  Sam.  vii.  12.
ic   transition  from   the  typical  to  the  idea!
promise  of  the  Messiah  in  the  Psalms.
,  ,;1  promise  of  the  Messiah.

FIRST.

The  Ldorious  appearing.

a.  The  ideal  Messiah.    Hosea,  Joel,  Amos.
l>.  The  ideal   Messiah  as  prophet,  priest,  and

kii\Lr.      Isaiah,  Mieah.
c.  The  ideal  Me-sianic  prophecy  and  the  ideal

ptophet.      Jeremiah.
,/.  The  ideal  high  priest.     Ezekicl.
,.  The  ideal  king.     Daniel.

SECOND.

The  conflict.  The  Christ  and  the  Antichrist.
\pocalvptic  forms  in  Obadiah,  Nahum,  Habakkuk,
Zenhaniah,  with  isolated  examples  in  all  the  proph
ets  especially  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekicl,  Daniel.


ff-
2.  T\


:;.  Ti
4.   Id


THIRD.

The  -uTer'nit:  and  the  triumphant  Messiah,  Isaiah
liii.  ;  I).in.  ii.  ;  eh.  vii.  9,  25,  20;   Zach.  ix.-xiv.

8  The  earthly  calling  of  the  woman,  and  its  sub
jective  form  (see  Exegetical  annotations).

9  The  earthly  calling  of  the   man,  and  its  objec
tive  form  (see  Exegetical  annotations).

10  The  nature  of  the  vanity  to  which  the  crea
tion  was  made  subject  in  hope  for  mans  sake  (Rom.
viii   IS  •  L\M;K'S  Miscellaneous  AV  ritmgs,  i.  p.  21 1  :
Pela-ianism  ;  DELITZSCII,  p.  186).     Here,  however,
we   must   disregard   the  theosophic   extravagance?,
p  187  for  example,  such  sayings  as  that  ot  Jacob
Bohme  :  "  rage  hath  got  the  upper  hand  and  made
war  upon  the  government  above."     Here  it  may  be
remarked,  that  we  cannot,  in  a  purely  outward  way,
as  Delitzsch  and  Hofmann  have  done,  make  a  distinc
tion  between  God's  dwelling  in  heaven  and  on  earth
(DEI.ITZSCII,  p.  177).

11.  Death,  in  the  light  of  Paradise,  the  end  of
punishment ;  in  the  light  of  the  Gospel,  the  begm-
nin"  of  redemption  (1  Cor.  xv.  55).  It  must  be
remarked  that  the  separate  judgments  upon  the
woman  and  the  man  are,  at  the  same  time,  a  com
mon  judgment  upon  both.  Delitzsch  finds  it  worthy
of  note  that  the  divine  sentence  says  nothing  about
the  immortality  of  the  soul.  "  Hut  the  whole  Scrip-
fire  "  he  says,  "  knows  nothing  of  any  immortality
orounded  in"  the  nature  of  the  soul"  (p.  190),  there


fore   their  dona   sitpcradJH",    gifts    superaddcd,    in
Paradise !     Sec  to  the  contrary,  Acts  xvii.  28.

12.  The  banishment  from  Paradise  was  in  a
special  sense  a  sending  forth  to  the  cultivation  of
the  field  (see  the  Exegetical  explanations).  The
divine  clothing  of  the  first  man.  The  doctrine  of
Gratia  jirceveniens  (see  LANCE'S  "  Dogmatics _").
The  clothing  of  man  referred  back  to  the  divine
revelation  and  regulation.  And  yet  we  cannot,  on
this  account,  say  with  Delitzsch,  that  "a  pure  delight
in  the  beauty  of  the  divine-formed  human  figure  is
now  no  more'po.-sible;  that,  nakedness  is  full  of  fin
and  tempting  to  sin."  If  this  is  so  then  all  pure
interest  in  the  human  beauty  has  become  impos
sible.

l:;.  The  cherubim.     Seethe  Exegetical  explana-

14.  The  disclosure  of  a  spirit-world.  AVith  the
conseiousncx  of  iruilt  there  is  also  disclosed  to  _the
human  consciousness  the  demoniac  deep  of  its  being.
Man  has  entered  the  spirit-world,  he  has  partaken  ot
its  knowledge,  and  has  now  the  first  foreboding  look
into  the  angel-world,  and  the  world  of  fallen  spirits
("Dogmatics,"  p.  550).  In  this  place,  too,  the  Scrip
ture  opens  up  to  us  a  glimpse  of  a  spirit-world
created  before  man.  Especially  is  there  introduced
the  doctrine  of  the  angels,  although  we  must  not
regard  the  cherubim  as  personal  primarily,  but  only
as  svmbolieal  anirel-l'orms.

1.-,.  That  with  the  judgment  of  Cod  upon  man,
that  i<  with  the  ceasing  of  the  paradisaical  covenant.
Cod's  covenant  of  grace  begins,  is  perceived  witli
especial  clearness  by  Cocceius :  Summa  dodnnce  df.
ftederc  </  tcstamcnto  </•  /,  It'  IS.  Correctly  has  Zwm-
«'di  laid  stress  upon  the  idea,  that  the  promise  ol
salvation,  as  <nven  to  Adam  and  Eve,  carries  us  back
to  the  conclusion  that  eveu  up  to  them  there  extend
ed  a  retroacting  power  of  redemption.

1(1  The  divine  appearings  in  1'aradisc  form  the
point  of  commencement  for  all  theophanies  before
Christ  and,  as  such,  are  not  to  be  identified  with  the
actual'  incarnation  (or  man-becoming)  of  Cod  in
Chnst.  They  are,  however,  to  be  regarded,  perhaps,
as  tvpical  pie-representations  of  the  same,  and  as
haviii"  had,  therefore,  in  the  idea  of  Christ,  their
principle.  Compare  KKIL,  p.  55,  where,  however,
the  vision-side  of  the  theophanies  does  not  appear
to  be  properly  appreciated.


]I()M[LKTI('A-L   AM)   PRACTICAL.

See  the  literature  of  which  a  catalogue  is  before
criven  and  the  remarks,  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.
Homilies  on  the  whole  section  under  the  general
point  of  view :  Paradise  lost,  or  the  fall,  or  the
ori«nn  of  sin  and  evil,  or  the  solemn  beginning  of
human  history,  or  the  origin  of  the  earthly  order  of
thin^  or  the  first  disclosure  of  a  spirit-world  and
the  "connection  between  the  spirit-world  and  the
human,  or,  finally,  the  beginning  of  the  kingdom  ot
grace,  that  is,  the  gospel.-The  end  of  the  paradisa
ical  covenant,  the  beginning  of  the  covenant  of
redemption.— The  beginning  of  the  revelation  of
prevcntin"  grace,  or  the  gratia  prcevemens.—l,
first  history  of  sin  and  judgment,  and,  at  the  same
time,  the  first  history  of  punishment  and  of  cora-
pa«sion.— The  call  to  humanity:  onwards.  1.  Ine
ideal  process  (directed  towards  the  image  of  God
in  the  obedience  of  life).  2.  The  false  progress  (ye
shall  become  as  gods).  3.  The  health-bringing


CHAPTER   III.   1-24.


249


progress  (on  the  field  and  in  death,  yet  still  towards
the  redemption). — Religion  in  its  relations  to  the
world-time  :  1.  A  very  ancient  reminiscence  (knowl
edge  of  the  original  destiny,  and  a  knowledge  of
sin  back  to  the  fall  and  beyond).  2.  A  religion  of
the  present  as  made  clear  in  our  history  through
God's  word.  3.  A  religion  of  the  future  in  a  special
sense,  as  consisting  in  the  prospect  of  the  future
salvation. — Particular  sections  and  verses.  Vcrs.
1-13  :  The  sin  and  the  guilt.  Vers.  1-0 :  The  fall :
a.  the  temptation  of  the  serpent ;  b.  the  sinful  look
ing  of  the  wife  ;  c.  the  seduction  of  the  man. — The
threefold  origin  of  sin. — The  serpent  the  instrument
and  the  form  of  the  devil's  temptation:  1.  The
demoniac  subtlety  of  the  evil  one  in  its  beastly
grounding.  2.  The  tempting  words ;  lying  perver
sions  of  the  truth. — The  probation  and  the  tempta
tion. — The  murderer  from  the  beginning  (John  viii.
44). — The  elements  of  the  temptation :  lies,  hate,
death,  in  contrast  to  truth,  love,  and  life. — The
progress  of  sin's  development  from  the  first  evil
doubt  to  the  completed  evil  act. — The  mongrel  du
plicity  of  sin  as  it  perverts  truth  into  lies:  1.  The
question  pious  in  form,  yet  so  evil  in  the  doubt
implied.  2.  The  element  of  truth  and  the  lies  in
the  promise  :  ye  shall  be  as  gods. — How  sin  perverts
the  human  relations  :  It  makes  out  of  the  obedient
wife  a  directress  of  the  husband,  out  of  the  helper  a
temptress,  out  of  marriage  a  fountain  of  mischief,
out  of  the  man's  call  to  watchfulness  an  easy  cor
ruptibility,  out  of  Paradise  itself  a  state  of  guilt.—
Sin  as  seen  in  the  fall,  or  the  mournful  effects  of
the  first  sin:  1.  The  guilt  and  the  guilt-conscious
ness.  2.  The  divine  judgment  suspended  over  them
and  the  punishment  inflicted. — The  features  of  the
sinful  tendency  in  the  conduct  of  the  first  man  after
the  fall :  evil  terror,  blinding  loss  of  love,  &c. — The
evil  conscience  and  its  fears. — The  ground-feature
in  the  calamity  of  human  sin :  the  mingling  and
confusion  of  sin  and  evil,  in  that,  1.  evil  is  made
to  become  sin,  2.  sin  becomes  naked  evil ;  therefore
the  redemption,  that  is,  the  separation  between  sin
and  evil  (cross). — The  imperfect  confession,  which
is,  nevertheless,  through  the  grace  of  God,  a  turning
back  towards  spiritual  health.  How  God's  compas
sion  brings  the  first  man  to  the  knowledge  and  the
confession. — God's  righteousness  in  his  first  judg
ment :  1.  The  arraignment;  2.  the  consequences
of  the  judgment-deed;  3.  the  appointment  of  pun
ishment  according  to  the  guilt ;  4.  the  division  of
the  one  common  judgment  into  its  separate  sen
tences. — The  revelation  of  God's  grace  in  his  judg
ment.— The  first  gospel :  1.  The  root  of  all  the  ofd
Testament  promises  of  salvation;  2.  of  the  New
Testament  gospel  itself;  3.  of  the  history  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  of  the  announcements  of  the
end  of  the  world.— The  sorrows  of  the  woman  in
their  connection  with  sin  and  sinfulness  of  the
woman. — The  sorrows  of  the  man  in  their  connec
tion  with  the  sin  and  sinfulness  of  the  man. — The
suffering  of  one  party,  a  suffering  also  of  the  other.
— How  every  human  calling  has  its  own  special
burden,  or  its  conflict  with  its  own  special  curse. —
The  blessing  in  the  curse. — The  humiliation  of  the
human  race  the  pre-condition  of  its  exaltation. —
The  loss  of  Paradise  a  sending  forth  into  the  world.
—The  divine  preparation  of  man  for  his  state  of
exile. — The  looking  back  of  man  to  Paradise,  a
beholding  of  the  cherubim  and  of  the  naming  sword
of  an  indignant  righteousness. — With  the  separation
from  the  outer  tree  of  life  the  protevangel  becomes


the  germ  of  a  new  tree  of  life  for  them  and  their
race. — The  prospect  of  the  first  man  in  the  future
according  to  its  signification  for  us :  1.  A  prospect
of  immeasurable  sorrow,  and  yet,  2.  a  prospect  of
an  endless  hope.

STAKKK: — Ver.  1.  LUTHER:  So  did  the  devil  draw
and  tear  them  from  the  word  of  God.  As  long  as
the  word  stood  in  their  heart,  so  long  was  the  life
and  the  prospect  of  its  continuance. — -Yer.  3.  Vul
gate  :  Ne  forte  morlamini.  Were  this  the  true
sense  of  the  words,  Eve  must  have  already  treated
the  sentence  of  death  as  something  most  uncertain.
— Ver.  4.  It  was  a  great  sin  that  Eve  turned  away
from  God  and  his  word,  and  listened  to  the  devil ;
but  it  was  a  much  greater  that  she  fell  in  with  the
devil,  who  gave  God  the  lie,  and  as  it  were  struck
at  him  with  his  fists. — Ver.  5.  Satan  the  first  author
and  predecessor  of  Antichrist,  who  is  a  disputing
adversary  and  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is
called  God  or  worshipped  (2  Thess.  ii.  4  ;  Dan.  xi.
30). — Behold  now,  in  the  midst  of  the  fair  Paradise
there  appears  a  crafty  and  poisonous  serpent !  It
is  here,  it  may  be  even  by  thy  side.  Be  on  thy
guard  against  it  (Sirach  xxi.  2).  Unbelief  and
doubt  of  God's  word  are  the  sins  by  which  the  devil
at  first  sought  to  cast  men  down  (Matt.  iv.  3).  Hast
thou  already  obtained  the  victory  over  the  devil  ?
be  not  too  secure. — The  word  of  the  Lord  is  truth,
but  that  of  the  devil  is  lies. — LAX<;E  :  The  conceits
of  "opened  eyes,"  and  of  some  strange  wisdom,  are
the  snares  whereby  Satan  especially  seeks  to  stum
ble  the  learned. — Ver  6.  Lust  of  the  flesh,  lust  of
the  eye,  pride.  The  garment  of  righteousness  and
holiness  was  put  off. — The  fig-leaves.  It  is  not  yet
proved  that  they  were  fig-leaves  that  Eve  gave  to
her  husband.  The  Hebrew  word  denotes  twigs  as
well  as  leaves. — Untimely  curiosity  brings  commonly
great  sorrow  of  heart. — God  is  not  the  cause  of
man's  fall. — The  guile  and  cozening  of  woman  can
often  entice  the  strongest  men  (Jud.  xvi.  15). — Man
is  ever  seeking  fig-leaves  to  hide  his  shame  and
cover  his  sins,  but  they  are  ever  visible  to  the  all-
seeing  eyes  of  God  (1  Sam.  xv.  15). — Ver.  8.  The
interpreting  "  the  voice  of  God,"  of  the  thunder. —
Parallel  of  the  Garden  of  Adam  and  the  Garden  of
Christ :  1.  Adam's  sleep  in  Paradise  and  his  gain,
the  wife ;  Christ's  death-sleep  in  the  garden  of
Joseph,  and  its  fruit  in  the  resurrection,  his  bride
the  church.  2.  In  Paradise  Adam  was  bound  with
the  cords  of  the  devil ;  in  Gcthscmane  Christ  was
bound,  to  free  the  human  race  from  their  imprison
ment.  3.  In  the  garden  of  Eden  sin  began  ;  in
another  garden  was  it  buried  in  Christ's  grave. —
Ver.  9.  LUTHER  :  Adam  and  Eve  are  ruined  in  them
selves,  they  can  no  longer  help  themselves,  they  are
forsaken  of  all  creatures ;  the  reason  can  form  no
other  judgment  than  that  there  is  no  help  for  them
in  heaven  and  earth.  Yet  here,  from  this  very  ex
ample,  may  we  learn  that  God  will  help  though  wo
may  be  forsaken  of  all  creatures.  And  yet  He  gives
such  help  only  for  his  Son's  sake,  whom  even  here
He  has  promised  to  send  to  the  human  race.—  God
called  to  Adam.  LANGE  :  A  proof  of  the  pre-cmi-
nency  of  the  male  sex,  and,  therefore,  also,  of  the
higher  obligation  which  Adam  had  laid  upon  him,
not  to  follow  his  wife  into  evil,  but  rather  to  hold
her  back. — Though  God  a  long  time  winks  at  the
sinner,  and  keeps  silence  in  respect  to  his  sins,  yet
at  the  right  time  does  He  let  him  hear  his  voice,  and
seeks  to  awaken  him  out  of  his  sleep. — Ver.  1 3.  So
it  ever  goes;  disobedience  follows  unbelief  in  aU


250


GENESIS,  Oil   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


the  faculties  and  members  of  men ;  aft-  r  this  comes
concealment,  exculpation,  and,  perhaps,  apology  for
sin;  finally,  man  complains  of  God  and  would  make
him  the  cause  of  his  sins.  A  frightened  conscience
ever  mistakes  itself  the  worst  (Wisdom  of  Solomon
xvii.  12).  Man  never,  God  always,  has  the  blame
(Jcr.  ii.  o5). — Vcr.  15.  LmiEi; :  Christ  crushes  the
serpent's  head,  that  is,  his  kingdom  of  death,  sin,  and
hell;  the  devil  bites  him  in  the  heel,  that  is,  lie  slays
and  tortures  him  and  his  in  the  body  (Rom.  viii.  7).
Since  the  woman  Mimed  iir-t  (1  Tim.  ii.  1-!),  so  is
she  also  here  named  first,  and  iirst  assured  of  the
gospel.  Therefore  here,  also,  to  this  proud  and
mighty  foe,  and  for  his  greatest  ignommy  and
shame,  there  is  op-posed,  not  Adam  specially,  al
though  lie  is  not  excluded,  but,  in  preference,  the
weaker  vessel.  Such  a  piercing  of  the  heel  is  more
largely  described  Psalm  xxii. ;  Isaiah  liii.  Among
other'place-;  ihis  Iirst  gospel  is  described  in  the  ex.
Psalm;  al.-o  in  Is.  xxvii.  1  ;  John  xiv.  SO;  Col.  i.
13,  M  ;  i  Tim.  ii.  0  ;  1  John  iii.  S  ;  Rev.  xii.  •!,  K. —
Ver.  Iii.  The-  experience  here  described  was  that  of
Rachel,  Thuniar,  the  daughter-in-law  of  Eli,  and  the
wife  "I'  Phinehas  (1  Sam.'  iv.  !'.»,  2<>).  [The  question
whether  Mary  was  born  without  pain  is  one  that  does
not,  pertain  to  our  salvation  ;  individuals  may  affirm
whilst  otheis  deny  it.] — Ver.  1!'.  Since  human
nature,  through  sin,  is  so  frail  and  peiisbable,  it  is
a  good  and  \vi~e  act  of  God,  that  he  lets  the  separa
tion  of  soul  and  body  continue  I'm-  so  long  a  time,
even  to  the  reunion  and  resv.vrection  that  is  to
endure. — It  is  a  great  c»n-ol,ition  for  women  in
child-bearing  that  their  pains  before,  and  during,
and  after  the  birth,  are  laid  upon  them  by  God.  lie
who  smites  can  also  heal  again  (Col.  iii.  18;  1  Pet.
iii.  1).  Man,  tear  not,  death,  but  keep  the  thought,
rather,  that  it  is  ordained  by  the  Lord  of  all  flesh
(Sirach  xli.  -1 ). — Ver.  2O.  Jn  view  of  the  death  in
curred,  the  woman  might  rather  have  been  called
the  dead,  and  the  mother  of  the  dead.  Her  having
been  called  by  Adam  Jntvah  (Ki't\  the  livinrj  and  the
mother  of  the  living,  is  grounded  on  the  foregoing
promise  of  the  Messiah  (Mark  iii.  35). — It  is  a  con
solation  for  the  poor  and  the  low,  that  God  clothed
our  first  parents  with  skins. — As  often  as  thou
puttest  off  thy  garments,  think  on  Jesus  Christ's  coat
of  righteousness,  and  aspire  that  thou  mayest  be
clothed  therewith  (Is.  Ixi.  Id;  Rev.  iii.  17,  18;  Rom.
xiii.  If). — [Adam  is  become  like  one  of  us  ;  here  is
indicated  his  justification,  the  jmt'dia  imputnta.~\ —
Ver.  23.  The  punishment  here  declared  was  also
benevolently  intended;  for  though  it  is  bitter  to
man  to  obtain  his  food  from  the  labor  of  the  field,
still  does  this  labor,  while  it  supports  him,  contribute
to  the  promotion  of  his  health,  and  to  his  avoidance
of  many  sins,  such  as  those  that  proceed  from  idle
ness. — Ver.  21.  Paradise  was  an  impge :  1.  Of  the
kingdom  of  grace ;  2.  of  the  kingdom  of  glory.
The  tree  of  life  pre-eminently  typifies  Christ.— Com
parisons  between  Adam  and  Christ.  —  Agriculture
is  holy. — 0  man,  what  art  thou?  Earth,  and  again
to  become  earth.  Bethink  thee  oft  and  diligently
of  this ;  so  shall  every  proud  thought  be  gone.
The  earthly  joy  has  ceased,  yet  still  we  have  a  heav
enly.

VALKR.  UKRUKUGKR  :  Magnolia  Dei:  Ye  shall
not  die  at  all ;  that  was  the  'first  lie  in  the  world ;
the  devil  told  it ;  therefore  Christ  rightly  calls  him
a  liar  and  a  murderer  from  the  beginning  (John  viii.
44). — "  I  was  afraid."  That  was  the  first  lamenta
tion  in  the  world,  and  came  from  sin. — 0  how  often


must  we,  poor  men,  now  say  with  Eve,  the  serpent
beguiled  me  !

SCHRODER:  Every  creature  created  for  endless
perfectibility  is  also  exposed  to  corruption  (Job  iv.
18  ;  xv.  14).  Some  would  place  the  fall  of  angels  in
ch.  i.,  between  ver.  1  and  ver.  2,  since  they  suppose
an  original  creation  in  ver.  1,  and,  as  a  consequence
of  the  fall  of  the  spirits  in  the  same,  would  read  in
stead  of  the  words,  "  the  earth  was  waste,''  etc.,  ver.
2,  "the  earth  hrcoinc  waste."  Others  le.ok  for  the
angel-fall  in  the  intimation  supposed  to  be  conveyed
in  the  account  of  the  second  day's  work  by  the  omis
sion  of  the  words,  "And  God  saw  that  it  was  good."
To  others  airain,  by  re. '.sen  of  ch.  i.  31,  the  time  im
mediately  after  the  completed  world-creation  seems
more  suitable  for  this.  And  some  fathers,  again,
bring  the  fall  of  the  evil  angels  into  connection  with
the  temptation  of  man,  meaning  that  the  former  hap
pened  by  means  of  the  latter  (eh.  iii.  1-1).  God  bears,
with  inexpressible  long-suffering,  the  devil  and  his
kingdom,  because  to  him  the  good  and  right  of  the
development,  even  in  its  perversion,  is  a  holy  thing.
The  good  is  not  to  be  forced.  God's  power  and  love
bears  now  the  an  fob  ling  of  the  creaturely  life,  edu
cates  it  freely  and  gradually.— Vers.  1-0.  HKKDKR:
Eve  knew  not  yet.  that  the  subtlety  of  tho  serpent
was  an  evil  subtlety  ;  it  was  to  her  only  shrewdness
and  cunning.  She  took  the  serpent  for  her  tutor.
The  serpent  turns  it  all  round,  makes  the  prohibition
greater  than  the  gifts,  or  allows  her  only  to  hear  the
former.  The  sly  attack  of  Satan  is  directed  against
the  spiritual  citadel  of  the  soul,  against  I'dth  in  God;
since  with  faith  obedience  stands  or  falls,  Matt.  iv.
3  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  10).  The  lusts  follow  after  of  them
selves. — Vcrs.  0,  7.  LUTIIKU  :  i'li'  primi
tive  cause  and  source  of  all  sin,  and  whenever  the
devil  can  succeed,  cither  in  getting  away  the  word
from  the  heart,  or  in  falsifying  it,  and  thus  bringing
the  soul  to  unbelief,  he  can  easily  do  in  the  end  what
he  pleases.  Such  subtlety  and  wickedness  follow  all
false  teachers,  who,  under  the  appearance  of  good,
would  pluck  out,  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  God,  blind
ing  them  to  his  word,  or  painting  before  them  another
god  who  has  no  existence.  Whenever,  therefore,
God's  word  is  changed  or  falsified,  then,  as  Moses
says  in  his  song,  do  there  come  in  new  gods,  which
our  fathers  lieu-.'  reverenced.  He  would  have  man
regard  his  service  to  God  as  servile  bondage,  in  or
der,  by  deluding  him  with  the  phantom  of  his  own
proper  sove:\  'unity,  to  make  him  the  slave  of  sin,  and,
in  this  way,  like  "himself.  This  gives  us  a  glimpse,
perhaps,  of  the  cause  of  Satan's  ruin.  Through  the
desire  of  sovereignty  it  may  be  that  he  himself  he-
came  a  fallen  being.— RAMBACH  :  The  learned  snan
at  such  doubts  of  God's  word  as  the  cat  snaps  at  the
mouse,  regarding  them  as  most  excellent  dainties,
when,  in  fact,  it  is  a  feeding  on  death.  Out  of  envy
must  the  prohibition  have  flowed  ;  thus  would  he-
make  God  to  be  Satan  (Wisdom  of  Solomon  ii.  24),
and  himself  to  be  God.  Satan's  promise  begins  like
God's  threatening :  "  in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,"  etc.
— BACO  :  Man  allowed  himself  to  fancy  that  the  com
mand  and  prohibition  of  God  were  not  the  rules  of
good  and  evil,  but  that  good  and  evil  must  have  their
own  principles  and  beginnings,  and  so  he  lusts  after
a  knowledge  of  these  fancied  principles,  that  he  may
be  no  more  dependent  on  God's  revealed  will,  but
only  on  himself  and  his  own  proper  light  rather  than
on  God.  Pride  has  overthrown  itself  (that  is,  Satan).
His  words  invite  to  a  false  self-sufficiency,  and  to  a
bold  independence ;  he  preaches  rebellion,  his  most


CHAP.   III.  1-24.


interior  being. — HERDER  :  Though  here  an  apple  lay,
and  there  the  death,  whilst  in  God's  hands  the  bal
ance  hung  suspended,  as  soon  as  it  came  to  subtle,
casuistical  reasoning,  down  weighed  the  apple ;  the
light  word  die  flew  up,  and  in  the  apple  Eve  saw
nothing  less  than  divinity.  No  tree  in  all  the  garden
round  had  a  look  so  fair  or  so  desirable  to  the  woman
as  the  one  forbidden.  Now  is  her  unbelief  decided.
— THE  SAME  :  To  lust  after.  To  have  the  soul  over
powered  by  the  senses,  to  be  allured  or  fascinated,  to
be  in  a  state  of  fluttering  or  throbbing  agitation.  No
longer  in  thy  control ;  they  are  beyond  ;  the  soul  is
off  to  the  other  side;  thou  wilt,  thou  must  away  to
thy  parted  self,  which  dwells  there  in  the  beloved
fruit.  Wherefore,  at  first,  an  inward  selfish  turning
away  of  the  soul  from  that  divine  conformity  which
sustains  its  destination  to  a  higher  godlikeness.
Pride  an>l  self-sufficiency.  Of  this  inner  state  the
origin  appears  as  unbelief  in  God's  word,  and,  there
by,  as  an  erroneous  or  superstitious  belief  in  an  un
known  being.  Desire  follows  the  tickling  of  the
sense.  The  first  female  sinner  becomes,  after  Sa
tan's  fashion,  the  first  temptress. — KRUMMACIIER  :  In
the  first  sin  lie  concealed  the  three  cardinal  sins,  lust
of  the  flesh,  lust  of  the  eye,  and  pride  (that  is,  of  un
righteous  coveting  of  possession,  enjoyment,  and
power. — (Concerning  the  time  when  the  fall  took
place,  see  p.  47). — Ver.  7.  By  experience,  alas  !  did
they  become  aware  that  what  they  had  lost  was  the
good,  that  that  into  which  they  had  fallen  was  the
evil. — They  would  have  become  lords,  like  God,  and
now  they  are  no  longer  masters  even  of  their  own
bodies.  Man  fell  towards  evening.  At  this  season,
in  later  times,  the  paschal  lambs  were  slain  as  types
of  Christ  (Exod.  xii.  16).  Their  hiding  under  the  trees
in  the  garden  stands  parallel  to  their  making  them
selves  aprons.  What  the  one  was  in  the  small,  the
same  was  the  other  in  the  greater,  account.  The  one
betrays  their  ignorance  of  the  great  power  and  depth
of  sin,  the  other  their  lost  knowledge  of  the  omnipo
tence  and  omniscience  of  God  (Ps.  cxxxix. ;  Sirach
xiv.  2;  Book  of  Wisdom  xvii.  10-13).  Both  area
symbol  and  a  sign  of  their  falling  away,  and,  there
with,  of  their  shame.  Both,  moreover,  are  a  symbol
and  a  sign  of  their  divine  original,  and,  therewith,
of  a  glimmering  hope  of  redemption  from  the  body
of  death.  Satan  is  not  at  all  ashamed  of  himself;
Satan  does  not  hide  himself  before  God. — Vers.  9-13.
The  voice:  of  God  still  reaches  the  sinner  (Ps.  cxxxix.
7-13).  Adam  and  Eve  show  themselves  in  their
pure  sin-nakedness.  Dissatisfied  with  and  unjust
towards  his  nearest  friend  and  towards  his  God, —
they  who  before  had  been  his  joy  and  his  desire, — so
does  sinner  complain  of  sinner,  yea,  of  God  himself,
on  account  of  his  free  ordaining  and  his  very  kind
ness  (Lam.  iii.  39  ;  Ps.  xviii.  27). — LUTHER  :  God
calls  to  Adam,  since  to  him  alone  had  come  the  word
of  God,  on  the  sixth  day,  not  to  eat  of  the  forbidden
fruit.  As,  therefore,  he  alone  had  heard  the  com
mand  of  God,  so  is  he  the  first  summoned  to  judg
ment.  The  most  loving  gifts  of  God  (ch.  ii.  18,  20)
become  an  occasion  to  the  sinner,  and  are  used  as
weapons  against  the  giver.  Sin  loosens  all  bands,
even  the  most  excellent  and  the  most  holy.  He  calls
her  no  longer,  my  wife. — Vers.  14,  15.  LUTHER:  He
calls  not  upon  the  serpent;  he  asks  him  no  questions
respecting  sins  that  are  past ;  there  is  nothing  of  this
kind  to  bring  him  to  repentance;  but  he  is  condemned
on  the  spot.  (It  would  appear  from  this,  that  a  pre
vious  fall  of  Satan  is  already  here  supposed.) —
ER:  After  its  work  is  finished,  then  is  lust


divested  of  its  garment  of  light,  then  does  it  appeal
in  its  true  form  of  a  sneaking,  earth-eating  worm,
ever  crawling  upon  its  belly.  He  shall  be  given  up
(for  that  is  the  force  of  the  language  as  applied  to
Satan)  to  the  most  extreme  contempt,  to  the  deepest
shame  and  degradation,  and  shall  become,  in  all  re
spects,  like  a  serpent,  etc.,  until,  at  last,  he  is  cast
into  the  fiery  lake.  There  is  a  difference  between  the
fallen  man  and  the  fallen  angel ;  the  former  is  lyingiy
seduced,  the  latter  is  the  lying  seducer ;  the  one  be
comes  evil  from  without ;  the  other  is  the  author  of
evil  from  himself.  The  fiend  has  struck  us  only  on
the  heel ;  therefore  shall  his  head  be  crushed:  the
wounds  which  lie  inflicts  are  curable ;  the  wounds  in
flicted  on  him  must  bring  him  unto  death. — Vers.
16-19.  The  desire  becomes  a  burden.  Through
pain  does  lust  revenge  itself  upon  the  senses ;  and
yet,  too,  immediately  on  these  pains  there  follows
great  joy  (John  xvi.  21).  With  gentle  force  would
the  wife  rule  and  mislead  the  man  to  sin.  There
fore  is  she  cast  into  subjection,  into  a  state  of  con
stant  dependence  upon  the  man.  The  field  upon  the
small  scale  is  a  speaking  symbol  of  man's  earthly
condition  on  the  greater.  Adam's  transgression  was
a  breaking  of  the  whole  ten  commandments  taken
together  (then  follows  the  manner  in  which  this  is
deduced,  p.  63). — Ycr.  20.  Here,  as  earlier,  the  wife
has  her  name  from  the  man.  In  a  similar  manner
does  the  wife,  at  the  present  day,  exchange  the  pater
nal  name  for  that  of  the  man. — LUTHER:  It  is  the
world,  moreover,  that  in  these  signs  of  wretchedness
becomes  mad  and  foolish  ;  for  v/lio  can  easily  tell
how  much  of  care  and  expense  people  incur  on  ac
count  of  clothing  ?  Were  the  self-made  and  fig-leaf
aprons  a  figure  of  our  own  righteousness,  which  ex
poses  more  than  it  covers  our  nakedness,  so  are  the
clothings  made  of  skins  the  symbols  of  the  right
eousness  which  comes  through  the  life,  and  suffer
ings,  and  death  of  the  Redeemer  and  Mediator  (Is.
Ixi.  10  ;  Rev.  iii.  17,  18).  A  sharp  contrast  that  be
tween  the  first  Adam  who  would,  robber- like,  demand
of  God,  and  the  second  Adam,  who  thought  it  no
robbery  to  be  like  God  (Phil.  ii.  6).  God  now  un
dertakes  the  charge  of  the  garden.  Earlier  it  was
to  be  guarded  by  men ;  now  it  is  to  be  guarded
ayainst  them. — There  came  the  day  of  salvation.  It
opened  again  the  door  to  the  fair  Paradise.

GERLACII  :  The  immediate  consequence  of  the
fall  is  the  awaking  the  feeling  of  shame,  that  is,  the
consciousness  that  now  the  spirit,  torn  away  from
God,  can  no  more  have  power  over  the  flesh.  In
this  feeling  of  shame  the  awakened  conscience  now
clothes  itself;  it  is  the  fear  that  would  hide  from  God,
who  now  appears  as  an  adversary.  The  devil,  whose
corporeal  appearance  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Script
ure  (and  which,  therefore,  may  be  generally  said  to
be  impossible), — what  constrained  him  to  speak
through  the  beast?  It  (that  is,  the  serpent)  took
advantage  of  man's  divinely  imparted  consciousness,
that  he  was  destined  to  a  higher  godlikeness,  in
which  he  should  attain  to  perfect  security  against
every  temptation ;  this  was  for  the  purpose  of  blind
ing  him  by  a  deceptive  appearance,  giving  him  a
false  glimpse  of  the  glory  of  this  godlikeness  in  the
freedom  of  choice  (that  is,  an  apparent  freedom).
The  origin  of  sin  lies,  therefore,  not  in  the  sensitiv
ity,  as  this  history  shows,  but  in  the  spiritual  aspi
ration  after  a  false  self-sufficiency,  independent  of
God.

AUGUST; NE  :  After  they  were  fallen  out  of  their
lordly  state,  and  the  body  had  now  received  uitfl


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


itself  a  sickly  and  death-bearing  concupiscence,  even
then,  in  the  midst  of  the  punishment,  the  rational
eoul  cave  witness  to  its  noble  origin,  and  was  ashamed
Of  its  beastly  inclination.     Still   behind  this  fechng
of  «hamc,  it  evidently  seeks  to  hide  the  guilt  of  dis
obedience.     The  first  sin  shows  it,eH  immediately  as
the  mother  of  a  new  one.     Instead  of  acknowledging
his  guilt,  Adam  puts  it  upon  the  woman   yea,  even
upon  God  himself,  when  he  adds  the  words,     whom
thou  gavest  tome  for  a  companion.''     The  woman
carries  it  on  in  the  same  way  of  Mntul  exculpation.
At  that  time,  the  labor  of  the  field  afforded  the  sin-
cle  example  of  man's  outward  culling  upon  the  earth;
on  every  con  lition,  nevertheless,  on  every  call  ng  on
every  occupation  of  earth,  is  laid  the  curse,  that  is,
great  necessity  and  tribulation,  great  vanity  and  dis
appointment  "in    the  most  painful   toil.     Mnee  that
time,  moreover,  a  great  change  has  passed  upon  na
ture      The  death  of  the  body  is  the  visible  emblem
and  type  of  the  everlasting    destruction.     It  is  the
dark  'curtain    hung    before  the  world  beyond,   and
which,  to  (he  unconverted  sinner,  covers  notlimg  e.»c
than  hopeless  misery.

Lisco,  15.  1 :  It  is  no  less  satanic  when  Satan  use>
lan"-uage  respecting  God's  word  and  revelation  simi
lar  1o  that  which  is  found  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.—
Sin  from  sin.— In  place  of  wretched  lies,  man  ought
to  confess  ;  in  plaee  of  sinful  exculpation  he  ought  the

more    to    seek    forgiveness.— CALWKR,    Handt fc

Christ  the  serpent-crusher.  Ver.  19:  Here,  too
a^ain,  are  punishment  and  redemption.  V  er.  20
Man  clothed  in  the  skins  of  slain  beasts  ;  how  solcmi
now  to  liim  is  deatli  thus  contemplated  !— As  in  ver
15,  the  beginning  of  ]>rophecy,  so  in  ver.  21,  the  be
finning  of  sacrifice. — Comparison  of  the  three  fir
chapters  in  the  Bible  with  the  last.— BUNSEN  :  [l


rue  tree  of  life  is  the  knowledge  of  limitations,  that
s,  in  the  moral  government  of  the  natural  world,  etc.
L'nd  this  tree  would  grow  ever  more  in  Paradise  (V).
'he  limitation  of  the  law  (positive  law)  lay  rather  in
he    tree   of  knowledge.]      The  nature-side  of   the
mure  is  the  great  historical  event  that   laid  waste
very  territory  of  the  earth,  which  had   been  pre-
•iou'sly  blessed,   and   drove  out   the  inhabitants  to
vander  forth  to  other  lands.     Every  word  must  be
aken  as  the  indication  of  a  great  igneous  phenome
non  in  nature.     Natural  science  has  recognized  in
those  regions   the   effects   of  such   an  old  volcanic
lower,  thouuh  falling  in  the  historical  time.    The  old
raditi'ons  of  the  Bactains,  too,  seem  to  speak  of  the
upheaving  of  the  mountains,  when  they  tell  us  that
the  evil  spirit  of  their  fathers  made  the   lovely  cli
mate  almost  if  not  wholly  uninhabitable  by  reason
of  the  shuddering  cold.— MICHOW  ("  The  Primitive
History   of    the    Human    Race,"    1858):    The    fall.
We  distinguish  three  degrees  :     1.  The  preparation  ;
2    the  carrying  out ;    3.  the  nearest  effects.— TAUBE
("Sermon 'on  Gene-is,''  1855):   Marriage.    1.  How  it
was    established    in  a  state  of  innocence;    2.  what
changes  it  underwent  in  consequence  <>!'  the  iall ;  3.
how  it  is  again   restored   by  Christ.— How   Adam  is
the  type  and  an  antitype  of  Christ :    1.  \\  herein  we
see  the  type  ;  2.  wherein  the  antitype.— The  history
of  the  fall :    1.  How  exactly  it  represents  the  way  sin
takes  in  all  men;  2.  how  it  predicts,  moreover,  the
wav  that  grace  takes  in  us.— 'W.  HOFFMANN  ."  \  orccs
of  "the  Watchmen  in   the  Old    Testament,1'   1856):
The  primitive  word  of  the  divine  promise  (ver.  lo).
It  brings  us,  1.  curse  in  the  blessing  ;   2.  blessing  in
the  curse.     [Curse  in  the  blessing  :  it  goes  through
out  the  outward  and  the   inner  strife.     Blessing  in
the  curse  :  the  restoration  of  Paradise.]


SECOND     SECTION.

Gain  and  AUL-Tkc  Canutes.-^  ungodly  WorWines*  of  tie  First  Civilization.

CHAPTER    IV.    1-2G.


.

accepted?4       [Lango  translates  more  correctly,  lifting  up  of  the


i.     And  ||


CHAP.  IV.   1-2G.  253


10  am  I  my  brother's  keeper?     And  lie  said,  What  hast  thou  done?     The  voice  of  thy

11  brother's  blood"  [properly,  blood-drops, plural]  crieth  unto  me  from  the  ground.     And  now  thou
art    cursed   from   the    earth    [which  had  before  Been  cursed,  ch.  iii.  17 ;  Bunsen  :  away  from  this  ground]

12  which  hath  opened  her  mouth  to  receive  thy  brother's  blood  from  thy  hand.      When
thou  tillest  the  ground  it  shall  not  henceforth  yield  to  thce  her  strength  :  a  fugitive  and

a    vagabond    ["131  I'D  ,  frightened  and  driven  on,  shunned  and  abhorred]  shalt    tllOU    be    in    the    earth.
,$    And  Cain  Said  unto  the  Lord,   My  punishment  [Langc  renders  it  guilt,  which  is  certainly  nearer  tha

J4  Hebrew  isis]  is  greater  than  I  can  bear.      Behold  thou  hast  driven  me  out  this  day  from

the    face    of  the    earth    [from  the  open,  cleared,  inhabited  distiict  of  the  earth]  ;     and    from    thy    face

shall  I  be  hid;   and  I  shall  be  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  in  the  earth ;   and  it  shall  come

15  to  pass  that  every  one  that  findeth  me  shall  slay  me.    And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  There
fore  whosoever  slayeth  Cain,  vengeance   shall   be  taken  on  him  seven-fold.     And  the

16  Lord  set  a  mark  upon  Cain,  lest  any  finding  him  should  kill  him.     And  Cain  went  out
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Nod  [exile]  on  the  east  of  Eden.

17  And  Cain  knew  his  wife,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  Enoch  [ilanoch,  the  devoted,  initiated]
and  he  builded  a  city,  and  called  the  name  of  the  city  after  the  name  of  his  son  Enoch.

18  And  unto  Enoch  Was  born  Irad  [city,  "PS1,  IT'S,  townsman,  or,  with  elision  of  one  y,  prince  of  a  city]  ;
and    Irad    begat    MellUJael    [Furst  and  Gesenius  :  fin^D,  smitten  of  God;    questionable  whether  it  is  not
rather,  puriflcd,  formed  by  God]  ;  and  Mahujael  [Hebrew,  Mahujiel]  begat  Methusael  [man  of  God,  great
man  of  God,  P32,    W    for  TiJX,    and  bx]   :      and     Methusael     begat    Lamech    [strong  young  man ;

19  Gesenius].     And  Lamech  took  unto  him  two  wives:    the  name   of  the   one  was  Adah

[ornament,  decoration,  elegant],  and  the  name  of  the  Other  was  Zillah  [Gesenius:  shadow;  Fuerst:

20  sounding,  song,  from  bbs  ;  or  player].      And  Adah  bare  Jabal  [Fuerst:  rambler,  wanderer,  nomado,  from

21  b"]  :    he  was  the1   father  of  such  as  dwell  in  tents  and  of  such  as  have  cattle.     And  his
brother's  name  was  Jubal  [Fuerst:  one  triumphing,  harper,  from  b  2^].     lie  was  the  father  of

22  all  such  as  handle  the  harp  and   the  organ.     And  Zillah,  she   also  bare  Tubal-Cain

[Gesenius  :  smith,  mason,  or  lance-maker  ;  literally,  brass  of  kain,  that  is,  brass  weapons],  an  instructor  of
every  artificer  [Lange  more  correctly :  hammerer  or  polisher  of  all  cutting  instruments]  in  brass  and

23  iron;  and  the  sister  of  Tubal-Cain  was  Naamah  [loveliness,  the  lovely].     And  Lamech  said
unto  his  wives :

Adah  and  Zillah  hear  my  voice,
Ye  wives  of  Lamech  hearken  unto  my  speech ;
For  I  have  slain  a  man  to  my  wounding ;
And  a  young  man,  to  my  hurt.

24  If  Cain  shall  be  avenged  seven- fold,

Truly  Lamech  seventy  and  seven-fold  [Bunsen :  seven  times  seventy],

25  And  Adam  knew  his  wife  again,  and  she  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Sctli   [fixed,
compensation,  settled],  for  God  (Elohim),  said  she,  hath  appointed  me  another  seed  instead

2G  of  Abel  whom  Cain  slew.     And  to  Seth  also  was  there  born  a  son,  and  he  called  his

name  EnOS  [man,  weak  man,  son  of  man].  Then  began  men  to  Call  upon  [call  out,  proclaim]  tllO
name  of  the  Lord  8  [the  name  Jehovah,  in  distinction  from  Elohim,  though  not  accordingto  the  full  conception
oftheEMnc.  See  Exod.  vi.].

t1  Ver.  L— For  remarks  on  "pj5  flj^  and  PS ,  sec  the  Esegetical,  and  marginal  note.— T.  L.]
[2  Ver.  2.— Plbb  P|OP1  can  only'mcan  a  second  bearing,  and  not  the  birth  of  a  twin.— T.  L.]
[3  Ver.  4.— SU3^1  would  have  been  better  rendered  looked  at,  with  btt  ;  with  "p  or  b"~,  it  has  just  the  contrary
sense,  looked  away  from,  Job  vii.  19  et  al. — T.  L.]

[4  Ver.  7.—  PXb  ;  the  context  and  the  contrast  will  hardly  allow  any  other  sense  to  this  than  that  of  acceptance,  as
denoted  by  the  lifting  up  the  countenance ;  see  the  Exegetical.  Vulgate,  recipies.  1  Pp"CJP  must  refer  to  sin  personified
as  masculine  by  the  participle  "^2',"l.  Comp.  Gen.  iii.  10,  where  the  same  word  denotes  subordination,  that  which  is
ruled  over  ;  only  there  it  is  applied  to  persons,  whilst  here  it  means  the  appetite  or  passion,  represented  as  a  wild  beast,  in
subjection  to  the  righteous  will.— T.  L.J

t5  Ver.  8.— ""EX"1!.  See  the  Exegetical.  The  best  interpretation  is  that  of  Dclitzsch  and  of  some  Jewish  commenta
tors,  which  makes  the  elliptical  subject  (or  thing  said)  the  very  action  that  follows,  and  which  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate  hava
supplied  in  words.  It  is  not  at  all  probable  that  they  read  any  different  text.— T.  L.]

I*  Ver.  10.— lE'n  ,  plural  intensive;  comp.  Ts.  v.  7,  C">?2"l  ^^X  ,  man  of  bloods,  very  bloody  man,  Ps.  xxvi.  3  ;  lv.  2i.
p?S  agrees  grammatically  with  C^E'1 ,  and  not  with  blp,  voice,  as  would  seem  from  our  English  Version.    The  most
literal,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  most  impressive,  rendering,  would  be  obtained  by  taking  blp  as  the  nominative  indc-


it  denotes  all  Abel's  possible  posterity,  thus  murdered  with  him.    Other  Jewish  writers  have 'drawrTa  still  mo'ro  singular


254


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF 'MOSES.


,  Sanhedrin  fol.  37  :  "  The  plural  here  is  to  teach  us  that  every  DEC  who  destroys
against  him  as  though  he  had  destroyed  a  world  full  of  lives  >     Another  Jewish
at  tc  pHirul  form  represents  the  many  wounds  that  Cain  had  given  him,  because  he  did
Jbtiut.  i  ^  ^    ^  ^^  b  ^^  t    ^d,

in  every  o''     Comp°Shakcspcare,  Antony's  spcsci  over  the  dead  body  of  C*sar.     See  also  the  Exegetical,
"


»     Thus  it  is  "said  in  +hc  T


rVca-        —  Eln  means  the  smith  himself;  but  this  cannot  make  sense  unless  we  adopt  a  different  pointing  from
the  Masoretic,'when"it  may  read  :  a  sharpener  of  everything  (b  =  ),  a  smith,  or  worker  of  brass,  etc.-T.  L.J

[8  Ver.  26.-  CT  =  ;  see  the  Excgetical.    They  first  began,  or  there  was  then  a  beginning  of  the  invocation  or
Coinp.  it  with  the  Arabic  invocation  or  formula  jJJt


nSn^-=-«2  ,  lesJicmychowah

in-  ahhr"cviltion  in  Hebrew  would  have  been


J  (.1,'smilldh').    Aeorrespond-

N^'^3  (with  N  elided  f'~"'^IL  },  lishmcloali,  or  with  the  other  divine

ic  bWncvaJtrcri.    It  evidently  refers  to  some  solemn  form  of  address,"  wiiick  perhaps  came  to  be  denoted  by  a  single
abbreviated  word,  like  this  and  other  similar  forms  in  the  ancient  sister  laiigua-e. - 1 .  L. ]


KXKGKTICAL  AXB   CRITICAL.


1.  The  propagation  of  the  human  race  through
the  formation  of  the  family,  is,  in  its  beginning,  laid
outside  of  Paradise,  not  because  it  was  in  contradic
tion  with   the  paradisaical   destiny,  but   because  it
had,  from    the   beginning,  an   unparadisaical  Char
acter  (that  is,  not  in  harmony  with  the  first  life  as
lei  in    Paradise. — T.   L.).       Immediately,  however,
even  in  the  first  Adamic  generation,  the  human  race
presents  itself  in  the  contrast  of  a  godless   and  a
pious  line,  in  proof  that  the  sinful  tendency  propa
gates  iiself  along  with  the  sin,  whilst  it  shows  at  the
lime   th.u'  not    as  an   absolute  corruption,  or
i'atali-iic.  necessity,  does  it  lay  its  burden  upon  the
race.     This  contrast,  which  seems  broken  up  by  the
fratricide  of  Cain,  is  restored  again   at  the  close  of
our  chapter,  by  the  birth   and   destination  of  Seth.
In  regard  to  its  chief  content,  however,  the  section
.    us  is  a  characterizing  of  the  line  of  Cain.     It
is  marked  by  a  very   rapid  unfolding  of  primitive
cultuie,  but   throughout   in   a   direction  worldly  and
ungodly,  just  as  we   find   it  afterwards   among  the
IlaTnitcs.     The  /</<„•/','.'/  of  art,  to  which  the  Caiuites
in  their  formative  tendency  have  already  advanced,
appears  as  a  substitute  for  the  r«t!i'y  of  a  religious-
ideal  course  of  life,  and  becomes  ministerial  to  sin
and   to  a  malignant  pride.     Not  without  ground  are
the  decorative  dress  (the  name  Adah),  the  musical
skill  (the  name  Zillah)  and  beauty  of  the  daughters
of  Cain  brought  into  view.     For  after  the  contrast
presented  in  chapter  v.  between  the  Sethites,  who
advance  in  the  pure   direction   of  a  godly  life,  and
the  Cainites,  who  are  ever  sinking  lower  and  lower
in  an  ungodly  existence,  there  is  shown,  chapter  vi.,
how  an  intercourse  arises  between  them,  and  how
the  Sethites,  infatuated  by  the  charms  of  the  Cain-
itish  women,  introduce  a  mingling   of  both  _lmcs,
and,  thereby,  a  universal  corruption.     According  to
Knobel  the  chapter  must  be  regarded  as  the  genca-
lo"ical  register  of  Adam,  though  this  does  not  agree,
he°says,  with  the  genealogical  register  of  the  Elohist
(ch.  v.)   which  names  Seth  as  the  first-born  (!)  of
Adam.     The  ethnological  table  (ch.  x.),  he  tells  us,
can   only  embrace   the   Caucasian  race,  whilst   the
Cainites  can  only  be  a  legendary  representation  of
the  East  Asian  tribes  (p.  53),  the  author  of  which
thereby  places  himself  in  opposition  to  the  later  ac
count,  that  represents  all  the  descendants  of  Cain  as
perishing  in  the  flood.     The  traits  of  the  Caimtic
race,  as  presented  by  Knobel,  belong  not  alone  to
the  East  Asiatic  people.     They  are  ground-forms  of
primitive  woiidliness  in  the  human  race.     In  respect
to  the  genealogical  table  of  ch.  iv.  and  v.,  Knobel
remarks  "  that  the  Cainitic  table   agrees  tolerably
well  with  the  Sethic  "  (p.  51).     For  the  similarities
ivud  differences  of  both  tables,  cornp.  KEIL,  p.  71.


These  relations  will  be  more  distinctly  shown  in  the
interpretation  of  the  names.  Concerning  the  Jeho-
vistic  peculiarities  of  language  in  this  section,  see
KNOBEL,  p.  r>u.

2.  Yers.  1  and  2.  "  Men  are  yet  in  Eden,  but  no
longer  in  the  garden  of  Eden/'  Delitzsch.  Pro
creation  a  knowing.  The  moral  character  of  sexual
intercourse.  Love  a  personal  knowing.  _  The  love
of  marriage,  in  its  consummation,  a  spiritual  corpo
real  knowing.  The  expression  is  euphemistic.  In
the  Pentateuch  only,  in  the  supplementary  correc
tions  of  the  original  writing.  The  like  in  other
ancient  languages.  The  name  Cain  is  explained
directly  from  T^p? ,  the  go'lcn*  The  word  njp


*[Yer.  1.     T"3p.    The  sense  of   bearing    (j,n>-icns),
pro-ereatin",  lc.r^fii'7,  scons  to  he  older  in  this  word  than
that  of  </c(/V;i//,'or  roVsessing,  and  if  so,  it  should  guide  us
in  interpreting  the   language   of  this  very  ancient   docu
ment     It  is  a  case  in  which,  if  ever,  words  would  be  used
in  their  archaic   significance.     It  is,  moreover,  much  more
easy  to  sec  how  the  latter  senses  came  from  the  former  than
to  frace  them  in  the  opposite  direction.     There  is  the  saino
order  in  the  Latin  pc.rlo,  Greek  TIKTU,  rexos,  TOKO?,  lnr,n,
r>>r*i>ri>tti,  <l«in  (primum  par  it   mater . HI  ium—pciitrit   tUm-
tias).     i'or  decided  examples  of  the  eldn-  generative  sense
in  the  Hebrew  word,  see  Deut.  xxxii.  (i,  ~;p  ~"X  X'H,
th<i  father  thai  legal  tlicc,  where  it  is  u^ed  in  parallelism
with  "|i3  and  •j::'!3n,  and  in   precisely  tho   same  con
ncction  as  -p^  and  lfi>T\V  in  vcr.  IS  of  the  same  chap
ter      Compare  also  Gen.  xiv.  10,  22,  where  it  is  u-vd  both
by  Mclchizedck  and  by  Abraham,  as  an  antique  designation
of  the  Creator,  more  solemn  and  impressive  than  fcCTia,
"El  E!i,m,  <Jod  most  high,   Y~^    C^WS    HSIp,  Gen-
orator  ( Creator,  ancient  founder)  of  the  heavens  and  the
earth  •'     The  LXX.  there  renders  it  tKTitre,  and  the  Vulgate
creavit ;  so  interpreted  also  by  Kashi  and  Maimonides.    In
Ts.  cxxxix.  13,  in'Pba  n^lp  (rendered,  thou  hast  pos-
tessed  my  reins),  the  context  shows  that  it  must  have  this
older  and  deeper  sense  ;  since  the  reins  denote  the  most
interior  or  fundamental  being,  and  the  words  following
express  as  far  as  language  can,  the  supernatural  creative
action,  exclusively  divine,  and  that  supervenes  in  every
human  quickening  ;    >i:iCFl ,   thou  didst  overshadow  me,
JircaKicuw  (*ot ;  compare  Luke  i.  35.    This  is  also  tho  hest
sense  1'rov.  viii.  22,  ^3p  mm  ,  rendered,  the  Lord  pos
sessed  me  —rather,  la/at  me,  as  the  irpwrdroKos,  Col.  i.  15.
To  these  pasSges  we  arc  justified  in  adding  the  one  beforo
iis   Gen.  fv.  1.    The  i-lea  of  possession  or  acquisition,  M
outward  gain  or  property,  does  not  su,  ._   tvc  had  her  m  nd
upon  the  teed  of  the  woman,  Gen.  ui.  lo,  and  nothmg  could
be  more  natural  than  that  she  should  have  used  this  kind
of  language.    She  cries  out  in  her  joy,  ^p  TP3P ,  KaniM
Kain,  reVoica  TOKO,-,  or  T«OS,  genui  genilum,or  generation^
I  have  home  the  seed,  a  man,  the  Lord.     She  calls  him  «
man,  tJ^X  ;  for  the  child  as  a  distinctive  name  was  as  yet
unknown,  and  she  saw  only  the  image  of  tlic  humanity
without  regard  to  size  or  growth.     Notnmg  could  be  more
subjectively  truthful.    It  was  a  new  man,  and  she  connects
with  it,  as  with  her  own  being,  a.  creative  or  generative
process.    So  Rashi,  regarding  P  X  as  equivalent  to  C5> ,  para
phrases  the  words:  "When  God  created  me  and  my  man  j


CHAP.  IV.  1-26.


255


may  mean,  to  create,  to  bring  out,  also  to  gain,  to
attain,  which  we  prefer. — I  have  gotten  a  man
from  the  Lord. — The  interpretation  of  Luther  and
others,  including  Fhilippi,  namely,  "  the  man,  the
Lord,"  not  only  anticipates  the  unfolding  of  the
Messianic  idea,  but  goes  beyond  it ;  for  the  Messiah
is  not  Jehovah  absolutely.  And  yet  the  explana
tion  :  with  the  help  of  Jehovah  (with  his  helpful
presence,  Knobel),  is  too  weak.  So  too  the  Vulgate
is  incorrect :  per  Dcum,  or  the  interpretation  of
Clericus  :  TiX'O  ,  from  Jehovah,  that  is,  in  associa
tion,  in  connection  with  Jehovah,  I  have  gotten  a
inuii.  In  this  it  remains  remarkable,  that  in  the
name  itself,  the  more  particular  denotation  is  want
ing.  We  may  be  allowed,  therefore,  to  read :  a  man

(1'J^X)  he  created  us  alone,  or  by  himself,  "1^3,  but  in.
this  we  are  sharers  with  him  ;  that  is,  we  are  pro-creators,"
and  so  she  says  TPIp.  The  new  offspring  carries  the
"p13,tho  image  or  species  which  had  been  created  in  the
beginning;  and  so  Aben  Ezra  says  that  "Adam,  when  he
saw  that  lie  must  die,  felt  the  need  of  keeping  alive  the
"^72  ,  and  therefore  Eve  uses  this  language."  Maimonidcs,
without  denying  this,  somewhat  modifies  it  by  rendering
J*lX ,  as  Onkelos  does,  by  nii~P  CTp,  "before  the  Lord  :
for  when  wo  dio  he  shall  stand  in  our  place  to  worship  his
creator"  *XT13,  regarding  Cain's  birth,  as  a  creation,
though  in  it  qualified  sense.  If  f"i;p  ,  then,  is  TSTOKS,  gcnuit,
pcperil,  ""p  is  TOKOS,  re/cos,  genitus,  partus.  The  derivation
which  Gescnius  seems  to  favor  ("pp,  lancea,  2  Sam.  xxi.
1(>),  is  utterly  absurd.  "What  would  make  Eve  think  of
lances,  or  weapons  of  war,  before  there  had  been  a  human
birth  en  earth  !  besides,  as  thus  used,  it  is  evidently  a  much
later  word,  from  whatever  source  it  may  have  come.  Ge-
senius  himself  regards  !~l2p  as  cognate  with  "j"O?  "p^H  ;
hence  there  is  no  difficulty  in  connecting  it,  not  only  with
the  Arabic  ,.»O  ,  but  also  the  Greek  and  Latin  yev,  gen.
If  so,  then  Kain  {Kin,  Ken),  is  equn.l  to  yeVos  ctymologically
as  well  as  lexically.  The  particle  HX  is  generally  taken  by
the  Jewish  grammarians  as  a  preposition—  uul/i(C2),  or
as  denoting  the  closest  union  between  the.  verb  and  its  ob
ject,  and  in.  certain  cases  its  subject ;  though  sometimes  they
say  it  is  equivalent  to  C2SS ,  substance.  This  is  the  view  of
Goscnius.  It  has  the  force  of  a  reflex  pronoun  express
ing  ipscity,  or  selfhood,  an  individuality, —  C^C'^jn  PX
the  very  heavens  themselves.  A  close  examination  always
shows  some  kind  of  emphasis,  or  some  contrast,  stronger
or  weaker.  Or  at  least  it  may  be  said  it  calls  attention
to  a  thing  in  some  way.  The  cases  where  it  seems  to  bo
used  as  a  preposition,  or  where  it  is  used  to  make  the  sepa
rate  objective  pronouns,  can  be  easily  explained  from  this.

•pp  rX IV.ni   r,X  —  it  is  placed  here  before  both  in

precisely  the  same  way.  This  makes  it  harsh  and  diffi
cult  to  give  it  the  rendering  with  in  the  latter  case,  and
seems  to  shut  us  up  to  the  rendering :  I  have  borne  a  man,
the  very  Jehovah,  or,  1  have  borne  a  man,  the  very  God,
the  very  Jehovah.  The  supposition  would  not  be  extrava
gant  that  in  this  earliest  use  of  the  name  (earliest  as
spoken)  there  is  an  emphasis  in  its  future  form,  !"Pi"P  or
Mini  (yah-yeh  or  yah-vah),  the  one  who  shall  be,  as  in
Exodus  iii.  14 ;  except  that  in  the  latter  passage  it  is  in
the  first  person,  ("PilX  TCX  mnx.  The  greatness  of
Eve's  mistake  in  applying  the  expression  to  one  who  was
the  type  of  Antichrist  rather  than  of  the  Redeemer,  should
not  so  shock  us  as  to  affect  the  interpretation  of  the  pas
sage,  now  that  the  covenant  God  is  revealed  to  us  as  a  being
so  transcendingly  different.  The  limitation  of  Eve's  knowl
edge,  and  perhaps  her  want  of  due  distinction  between  the
divine  and  the  human,  only  sets  in  a  stronger  light  the
Intensity  of  her  hope,  and  the  subjective  truthfulness  of  her
language.  Had  her  reported  words,  at  such  a  time,  con
tained  no  reference  to  the  promised  seed  of  the  woman,  the
rationalist  would  doubtless  have  used  it  as  a  proof  that  she
could  have  known  nothing  of  any  such  prediction,  and
that,  therefore,  Gen.  iii.  13  and  Gen.  iv.  1  must  have  been
written  by  different  authors,  ignoring  or  contradicting  each
other.-  -T.  L.]


with  Jehovah,  that  is,  one  who  stands  in  connection
with  Jehovah ;  yet  it  may  be  that  the  mode  of  gain
ing  :  gotten  with  Jehovah,  characterizes  the,  name
itself.  The  choice  of  the  name  Jehovah  denotes
here  the  God  of  the  covenant.  In  the  blessed  con
fidence  of  female  hope,  she  would  seem,  with  evi
dent  eagerness,  to  greet,  in  the  new-born,  the  prom
ised  woman's  seed  (ch.  iii.  15),  according  to  her
understanding  of  the  word.  Lamei-h,  too,  although
on  better  grounds,  expected  something  immensely
great  from  his  son  Noah.  We  must  observe  here
that  the  mother  is  indicated  as  the  name-giver.  In
the  case  of  the  second  name,  Abel  (Habel),  which
denotes  a  swiftly-disappearing  breath  of  life,  or
vanity,  or  nothingness,  nothing  of  the  kind  is  said.
Yet  in  place  of  the  great  and  hasty  joy  of  hope,
there  seems  to  have  come  a  fearful  motherly  pre
sentiment  (DELmscir,  p.  199).  That  they  were
twins,  as  Kimchi  holds,  is  a  sense  the  text  does  not
favor.  Abel  as  shepherd,  especially  of  the  smaller
cattle  ('|XS),  is  the  type  of  the  Israelitish  patriarchs.
Cain,  as  the  first-born,  takes  the  agricultural  occupa
tion  to  which  his  father  was  first  appointed.  The
oldest  ground-forms,  therefore,  of  the  human  calling,
which  Adam  united  in  himself,  arc  divided  between
his  two  sons  in  a  normal  way  (Cain  vras,  in  a  certain
sense,  the  heir  by  birth,  and  the  ground-proprietor).
It  must  be  remarked,  too,  that  agriculture,  as  the
older  form,  does  not  appear  as  the  younger  in  its
relation  to  cattle-breeding.  "  Both  modes  of  living
belong  to  the  earliest  times  of  humanity,  and,  ac
cording  to  Varro  and  Dicfearchus  in  Porphyry,  follow
directly  after  the  times  when  men  lived  upon  the
self-growing  fruits  of  the  earth."  Knobel.  "  In  the
choice  of  different  callings  by  the  two  brothers,  we
seek  in  vain  for  any  indication  of  a  difference  in
moral  disposition."  So  ICeil  maintains,  against  Ilof-
mann,  that  agriculture  was  a  consequence  of  the
cursing  of  the  ground.  Lclitxsch,  however,  together
with  Hofmann,  is  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  in  the
brothers'  choice  of  different  callings  there  was  al
ready  expressed  the  different  directions  of  their
minds, — that  Abel's  calling  was  directed  to  the
covering  of  the  sinful  nakedness  by  the  skins  of
beasts  (Hofmann),  and  therefore  Abel  was  a  shep
herd  (!).  Delitzseh,  too,  would  have  it  that  Abel
took  the  small  domestic  cattle,  only  for  the  sake  of
their  skins,  and,  to  some  extent,  for  their  milk,
though  this  was  a  kind  of  food  which  had  not  been
used  in  Paradise.  It  would  follow,  then,  that  if  Abel
slew  the  beasts  for  the  sake  of  their  skins,  and,
moreover,  offered  to  God  in  sacrifice  only  the  fat
parts  of  the  firstlings,  it  must  have  been  that  he
suffered  the  tlesh  in  general  of  the  slaughtered
animals  to  become  offensive  and  go  to  corruption.
It  would  follow,  too,  that  the  human  sacerdotal  par
taking  of  the  sacrificial  offering,  which  later  became
the  custom  in  most  cases,  had  not  yet  taken  place  ;
not  to  say  that  the  supposition  of  the  enjoyment  of
animal  food  having  been  first  granted,  Gen.  ix.  3,  is
wholly  incorrect.

3.  Vers.  3-8.  The  first  offerings.  The  differ
ence  between  the  offering  pleasing  to  God,  and  thai
to  which  he  has  not  respect.  The  envy  cf  a  brother,
the  divine  warning,  and  the  brother's  murder.  The
fratricide  in  its  connection  with  the  offering,  a  type
of  all  religious  wars.  The  expression  O^m  ypo

denotes  the  passing  of  a  definite  and  considerable
time  (Knobel :  after  the  beginning  of  their  respective
occupations),  and  indicates  also  a  harvest-season;


256


GENESIS,  Ott  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


yet  to  take  it  for  the  end  of  the  year,  as  is  done  by
De  Wet  to  Van  Bohlen,  and  others,  is  giving  it  too
definite   a  sense.— It  came  to  pass   that   Cain
brought  of  the  fruits   of  the  ground,  HTOB  (from  j
n:-3  ;  Arabic  :  to  make  a  present,  "  the  most  general  j
name  of  the   offering,  as   also  m$~fc"     Dclitzsch).  j
Fruits  belonged  to  the  oldest  offerings.     Though  no
altar  is  mentioned,  as  also  in  eh.  viu.  20,  it  is  never
theless  to  be  supposed.     In   the  offering  of  Abel  it
is  prominently  staled  that   he  brought  of  the  first
born  of  his   herds  (rTl'rS),  but  it  is  not  said  oi
Cain   that    his  offerings  were  first  fruits— O-n  "3  S-
There   is   added,  moreover,  in   respect  to  Abel,  the
word  :  •"'---.-  (and  of  the  fat  thereof).     Knobcl
explains  'tins  as  meaning,  from  their  fat;  Keil,  on
the  contrary,  understands  it   of  the  fat  pieces,  that
is  of  the  fattest  of  the  firstlings.     The  ground  taken
by  some,  that  it  was  because  no  sacrificial  fea.rN  had
been  instituted,  or  because  men  had  not  yet   eaten
of  nVh    is  pure  hypothesis.      It  shows  rather    that
we  mus'f    not    think    here.  <>f  the  animal   offerings  of
Leviticus.     Here    arise   tno  (jucstions:   1.   I'.y  what
was  it  made  known  that  Cod  looked  to  the  offering
of  Abel  —that  is,  \\ith  gracious  complacency?  Many
commentators  say  th  >t  Jehovah  set  on  lire  the  oifer-
in"    of    \b.l    by    lire    from    heaven,    according    to
LeVni»us  ix.  24;  Jud.  vi.  21   (Theotlotion,  llierony-
:nns,  Ax-.).      Dvlit/M-h  :   the  look  of  .lehovali    was   a
fire-dance  that  set  on  fire  the  offering.      Keil,  how
ever   reminds  us  how  it  is  said,  that  to  Abel  himself,
us  well  as  to  his  offering,   the  look  of  Jehovah  was
directed      Knobcl  assumes,  with  Schumann,  that  it
suits  bitter  to  think  of   a  personal    appearance   of
Jehovah  at  the  time  of  the  offering,  with  which,  too,
corresponds  better  the   dealing   with   Cam  that  fol
lows      The  safest  way  is  to  stand  by  the  fact  simply,
that  God  graciously  accepted  the  offering  of  Abel ;
but  as  in  'later  times  the  acceptance  was  outwardly
actuali/ed    by    the    miraculous    sacrificial  flame    so
here   it  suits'  best  to   think  on  some  such  mode  of
acceptance,  though  not  on  the  "  fiery  glance;'  alone
o     Wherein    lay    the    ground    of    this   distinction?
Knobel-  "  Thc'gift  of  Abel  was  of  more  value  than
the  small   oHcring  of  Cain.     In  all  sacrificial  laws
the  offerings  of  animals  have  the  chief  place.       bo
also  the  Emperor  Julian,  according  to  Cyril  pi  Alex
andria  (DKI.ITZSCH,  p.  200).     According  to  Iloimann
( "  Scripture  Proof,"  i.  p.  584),  Cain,  when  he  brought
his  offerin"  of  the  fruits  of  his  agriculture,  thanked
God  onlv  "  for  the  prolongation  of  this  present  life,
for  the  support  of  which  he  had  been  so  laboriously
striving  whereas  Abel  in  offering  the  best  animals
of  his  "herd,  thanked  God  for  the  forgiveness  of  Ins
sins   of  which  the  continued  sif/n  was  the  clothing  that
had  b,en  qiven  of  God."     For   this   too   advanced
symbolic  of  the  clothing  skins,  there  is  no  Scripture
"round   and  rightly  says  Delitzsch :  the  thought  o
expiation  connects  "itself  not  with  the  skins,  but  with
the  blood  (see  also  KEIL'S  Polemic,— against  UOF-
MANN,   p.  Of,).      Yet  Delitzsch   contradicts  himself
when  he  says,  with  Gregory  the  Great:  omne   quod
datur  Deo  ex  danlis  rnente  pensatur,  and  then  adds:
"the  unbloody  offering  of  Cain,  as  such,  was  only
the  expression"  of  a  grateful  present,  or,_taken  in  its
deepest  significance,  a  consecrated  offering  of  sell :
but  man  needs,  before  all   things,  the  expiation  of
his  death-deserving  sins,  and  for  this  the  blood  ob
tained  through  the  slaying  of  the  victims  serves  as
a  symbol."    It  is,  however,  just  as  much  anticipating
to  identify  the  blood-offering  with  *he  specific  expia


tion  offering,  as  it  is  to  give  directly  to  the  living
faith  in  God's  pure  promise  the  identical  character
of  faith  in  the  specific  mode  of  atonement.     The
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  lays  the  whole  weight  of  the
satisfaction   expressed   in   Abel's  offering  upon  his
faith  (ch.  xi.  4).     Abel  appears  here  as  the  proper
mediator  of  the  institution  of  the  faith-offering  for
the  world.     As  the  doctrine  of  creation  is  introduced
to    the    world    through   the    faith    of  the  primitive
humanity,  so  in  a  similar  manner  did   Abel    bring
into  the  world  the  belief  in  the  symbolical  propitia
tory    offering   in    its    universal  form ;    as  after  him
Enoch  was  the  occasion  of  introducing  the  belief  of
the  immortal  life,  and  so  on.     Keil,  too,  contends
against  the  view  that  through  the  slaying  of  an  ani
mal  Abel  already  made  known   the  avowal   that  his
sins  deserved  death.     And  yet  it  is  a  fact  that  a  dif
ference  in  the  state  of  heart  of  the  two  brothers  is
indicated  in  the  appearance  of  their  offerings.      Keil
finds    as  a  siu'n  of  this  difference,  that  Abel's  thanks
come    from 'the   depths  of  his  heart,  whilst  Cain's,
offering    is  only   to  make    terms    with    God   in   the
choice  of  his  -i'l'ts.     Delitzsch  regards  it  as  emphatic
that  Abel   offered    the   firstlings  of  his  herds,  and,
moreover,  the    fattest   parts  of  them,  whilst  Cam  s
oiferinu;  was  no  offering  of  first  fruits.     This  differ
ence  appears  to  be  indicated,  in  fact,  as  a  difference
in  relation  to  the  carliness,  the  joyfulness,  and  fresh
ness    of   the    offerings.     After    the    course  of   some
time,   it    means,   Cain    offered    something    from    the
fruit's  of  the  ground,     lint  immediately  afterwards  it
is  said  expressly:   Abel  had  offered  (X^ri ,  preterite,
XirrZv.) ;  and  farther  it  is  made  prominent  that  he
brought  of  the  firstlings,  the  fattest  and  best.    These
outward    differences    in    regard   to   the   time  of  the
offerings,  and  the  offerings  themselves,  have  indeed
no  significance  in  themselves  considered,  but  only  as
expressing  the  difference  between  a  free  and  joyful
faith  in  the  offering',  and  a  leual,  reluctant  state  of
heart       It    has    too    the   look    as    though  Cam  had
brought    his  offering  in   a  self-willed   way,   and  for
limself  alone,— that  is,  he  brought   it  to  his  own
ihar   separated,  in   an   unbiotherly  spirit,  from  that
of  Abel.— And  Cain  was  very  wroth.— Literally,
lie  was  greatly  incensed  (inflamed).    ('SX  denotes  the
distended  nostril— T.  L.).     The  wrath  was  a  fire  in
his  soul  (Jer.  xv.  14;  xvii.  4).-And   his  counte-
nance  fell.— "Cain  hung  down  his  head,  and  lookei
upon  the  earth.     This  is  the  posture  of  one  darkly
brooding  (Jcr.  iii.  12  ;  Job  xxix.  24),  and  prevails  to
this  day  in  the  East  as  a  sign  of  evil  plottings    (BuRK-
IIAEDT,    "Arabian    Proverbs,"  p.  248).— And    the
Lord  said  unto  Cain.— This  presupposes  a  certain
measure   of   susceptibility  for  divine  revelation ;  as
docs  also  his  previous  offering,  though  done  in  his
own  Avay.     Jehovah,  in  a  warning  manner,  calls  his
attention  to  the  symptom  of  his  wicked  thoughts,—
his  brooding  posture.— If  thou  doest  well,  &c.—
The  explanation  of  Arnheim  and  Bunsen  :  \\  hether
thou  bringest  fair  gifts  or  not,  sin  lurks  at  the  door,
&c.,  does  not  take  the  word  ni«3  in  its  nearest  con
nection,  namely,  in  contrast  with  the  falling  of  the
countenance,  as  the  lifting  it  up   in  freedom  and
serenity.     Should  we  take  rxa  for  the  lifting  up
(the  acceptance)  of  the  offering,  still  would  its  better
and  nearer  sense  lie  in  the  idea  that  good  behavior
is  the  right  offering.     And  yet   on   account  of  the
contrast,  the  lifting  up  of  the  countenance   would
seem  to  be  the  meaning  most  obviously  suggested.
^^•c  need  not  to  be  reminded  that  along  with  good


CHAP.  IV.  1-20.


behavior  there  is  also  meant  an  inward  state,  yet  tl
expression  tells  us  that  that  inward  state  will  alt
actualize   itself  in  the   right   way. — Vcr,  8.     An
Cain  talked  with  Abel. — Knobel  represents  thc
words   as   a   crux   interpret u>n.      Rosenmliller    an
others  interpret  it:  he  talked  with  Abel,  that  is,  li
had  a  paroxysm  or  fit  of  goodness  and  spoke  agai
peaceably  with  his  brother.     It  is  against  this  tha
..the  use  of  *.EX  for  "Sn  cannot  be  authenticated  b
cure  examples.     Therefore  llieronymus,  Aben  Ezr
and  others,   interpret  it :  he  told  it  (namely,  wha
Jehovah  had  said  to  him)  to  his  brother.     On  th
contrary,  Knobel  remarks  :  it  does  not  seem  exactl
consistent  that  the  still  envious  Cain  should  thu
relate    his    own   admonition.      Here,    however,    th
question    arises  whether  we  are    required   to   tuk
irxil  in  that  manner.     The  sense  of  this  may  b
that  Cain  simply  preached  to  his  brother  in  a  mock
ing  manner  the   added  apothegm,  sin  lieth  at  th
door.     In  a  similar  manner,  to  say  the  least,  die
Ahab  preach  to  Elias,  Caiaphas  to  our  Lord  Christ
Cajctan  to  Luther,  &c.     The  Samaritan  text  lias  tin
addition  :  nyi'n  nsbs  (let  us  go  into  the  field).     I
has  been  acknowledged  by  the  Scptuagint,  the  Vul
gate,  and  certain  individual  critics.     But  even  an
cient  testimonies  show  it  to  have  bncn  an  interpola
tion.*    Knobel,  together  with  Bo'ttcher,  has  recourse
to    a   conjecture    that  the  reading  should  be  ""'£
(he    watched),  instead  of   -issi.     Dditzsch,    again,
supposes    that   the   narration    hastens    beyond   the
oratlo  d'l.rcda,  or  the  direct  address,  and  gives  im
mediately  its  carrying  out  in  place  of  the  thing  said,
that  is,  he_regards  the  invitation,  "  let  us  go  into  the
field,"  as  implied   or  understood  in  the  act.     In  a
similar   way,  Keil.     We   turn   back   to   the   above
interpretation  with  the  remark  that  the  narrator  had
no  need  to  state  precisely  that  Cain  preserved  the
penal  words  of  God  as  solely  for  himself,  if  he  meant
to  tell  us  that  out  of  this  warning  admonition  Cain
had  made  a   hypocritical  address  to  his  brother. —
Cain  rose  up  against  Abel  his  brother. — The
words  "  his   brother,"  how  many    times   repeated  !
The  sin  of  the  fall  has  advanced  quickly  to  that  of
fratricide.     The  divinely  charged  envy  in  the  sin  of
Eve,  wherein  there  is  reflected  an  analogue  of  the
envy  of  man  against  God,  is  here  again  advanced
from  envy  of  a  brother  to  hatred,  then  from  hatred
to  a  vile  obduracy  against  the  warning  words  of  God,
and   so  on,    even  to  fratricide.     Therein,  too,  it  is
evident  that  the  tempter  of  man  is  a  murderer  of
man.     Yet  still  this  is  not  in  the  sense  as  though
John  viii.  44  had  reference  only  to  this  fact.     In  the
scnse_of  this  latter  passage,  Satan  was  the  murderer
of  Cain, — a  thing,  however,  which  manifests  itself  in
the  murder  of  Abel.     The  fact  here  narrated  will
form  a  connected  unity  with  that  of  Gen.  iii.     The
working  of  Satan  in  Gen.  iii.  comes  fully  out  in  the
fact  narrated  in  Gen.  iv.    "  Cain  is  the  first  man  who
lets  sin  rule  over  him  ;  he  is  <=«  TUV  irovypov  (of  the
evil  one),  1  John  iii.  12."   Delitzsch.

4.  Vers.  9-1 G.    The  Judgment  of  Cain.    Where

[*  It  is  not  in  the  Syriae,  which,  closely  follows  the
Hebrew,  and  there  13  no  reference  to  it  in  the  Targuras
U  looks  more  like  something  added  (supposed  to  be  neces
sary  to  explain  1EX1)  than  like  something  left  out,  Thi


,-mt     See  the  conclusive  argument  of  Gesonius  as  agains
b.9  claims  of  this  Samaritan  Pentateuch.— T.  L.1


257

is  Abel  thy  brother?— The   divine   arraignment
analogous  to  the  arraignment  of  Adam  and  Eve.    But
C.iin  evades  every  acknowledgment.     !!(•  lies,  and
denies  in  an  impudent  manner  ;  then   copies  boldly
out  with  the  scornful  expression  :  Am  I  my  bro
ther's  keeper  ?   "  What  a  fearful  advance  from  the
resort  and  exculpation  of  our  first  parents  after  the
fall,  so  full  of  shame  and  anguish,  to  this  shameless
lying;  this  brutality,  so  void  of  love  and  feeling!"
Delitzsch.    Irreligiousness,  together  with  an  inhuman
want  of  feeling,  stand  out  in  continually  increasing,
reciprocal  action.     Upon  this  impudent  denial  fol
lows  the  accusation  and  the  judgment.     The  streams
of  his  brother's  blood  are  represented  as  his  accusers,
and  the  earth  itself  must  bear  witness  against  him.
—What  hast  thou  done  ? — So  we  read,  since  we
take  the  sense  of  that  which  follows  to  be  :  A  voice
hast  thou  made,  etc.     "The  deed  belongs  to  those
crimes Jhat  cry  to  Heaven  (ch.  xviii.  20;  xix.   13;
Exod.  iii.  9).     Therefore  does  Abel's  blood  cry  up  to
Heaven  that  God,   the  lord  and  judge,  may  punish
the  murderer.     All  blood  shed  unrighteously  must
be  avenged  (ch.  ix.  r>) ;  according  to  the  ancient  view
it  cries  to  God  continually,  until   vengeance  takes
place.     Hence  the   prayer,  that  the  earth  may  not
drink  in  the  blood  sh-d  upon  it,  in  order  that  it  may
not  thereby  be  made  invisible  and  inaudible  (Is.  xxvi.
21;  Ezck.  xxiv.  7;  Job  xvi,  IS)."    Knobel.     Com
pare  Ps.  cxvi.  15;  Heb.  xi.  4;  I!ev.  vi.  9.     CALVIN:
Ostendit  Devs,  se  dc  fartix  Jio.-n'num  coynoscere  ut-
cunque  nullus  qucratur  vd  accusct  ;  dcinde  si.bi  magis
caram  esse  hominum  vitam,  qnmn  id  sanyuhicm  in-
noxium   impunc    cffundl    sh/af ;    tcrfto,    cnram    sibi
piorum  esse  non  sol  ion  quanul'ni   v'triuif,  xed  elio.m
post  mortem.     The  blood  as  tiie  living  flow  of  the
life,  and  the  phenomenal  basis  of  the  soul  (primarily
as  basis  of  the  nerve-life)  has  a  voice  which  is  as  the
living  echo  of  the  blood-clad  soul  ituelf.     It  is  the
symbol  of  the  soul  crying  for  its  right  (to  live),  and
n  this  way  a  Meets  immediately  the  human  feeling.* —

["  Crying  for  Us  right,  lo  lire."  The  feeling  hero  earliest
manifested,  and  the  idea  of  demanded  retribution  that  grows
>ut  of  it,  pervades  antiquity  ;  but  as  exhibiU-.d  in  the  Greek  •
ragic  poetry  it  becomes  almost  terrific.  Compare  numerous
passages  in  the  Eumenidcs  of  /ESCHYLUS  ;  also  the  CUaphoret,
>98 :

aAAa  1'OfJ.os  fjiGV  (/>ort'a?  crrayora?
XUjUcVa?  <r?  TreSov  dAAo  TrpocnuTciV
ai>a.    _BOA"  yap  Aoiyoc  EPINN'YS
Trapa  TU>I>  TrpoTepoy  f/>$i/xcVujf  arryr
erepav  eTrdyovcrav  en-'  <XTIJ.

There  is  a  law  that  blood  once  poured  on  eiuth
By  murderous  hands  demands  that  other  blood
Be  shed  in  retribution.     I'rom  tlic  slain
Erynnys  calls  aloud  for  vengeance  still,
Till  death  in  justice  meet  be  paid  for  death.
n  another  passage  there  is  a  similar  reference  to  a  very  aa-
ient  law,  or  mythus,  which  the  poet  styles  Tpiye'puj',  from
*•"  exceeding  antiquity.    76.  310  :

'Avri  Se  TrAijyjj;  rfiovia.?  (fioviav
TV  \-riyriv  TivfTio  •    Spdaavn  jraOeiV
TPH'EPON  MY00S  TaSe  JHovfi.
Por  blood  must  blood  be  shed.    A. law  by  age
Thrice,  holy  011  the  murderer's  guilty  head
This  righteous  doom  demands.

lore  again,  as  has  been  before  remarked,  it  is  not  diffi-
ult  to  decide  which  is  the  original  and  which  is  the  copy.
Eschylus  drew  from  the  primitive  feeling  and  the  primitiva
dea,  but  how  greatly  had  it  become  deformed.  How  pure,
ow  holy,  how  merciful  even,  is  this  scriptural  presentation
f  the  first  murderer  and  his  doorny  as  compared  with  the
erce  revenge  (as  distinguished  from  vengeance,  or  pure  retri-
ution)  together  with  the  fatal  ism.  that  appears  in  the  (3  ro
an  Drama,  and  in  the  still  harsher  pictures  of  other
.ythologies.

The  allusion  to  the  blood  of  Abel,  Hcb,  xii.  24,  has  bee*
apposed,  to  intimate  the  blood  of  Abel's  sacrifice  (see  JA
onus,  p,  138),  but  the  more  direct  pura.tlelism  is  with  thv


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSB6.


A.nd  now  art  thou  cursed,  ctc.-Thc  words  follow-

in-  <n--xn   -,•=)  arc  explained  in  different  ways:

Vnurs^lal    smite  thcc  from  this  land;  that

b  Sc  sSbe  its  execution  (^^.

and  others-  Knobel,  Kcil,  more  or  less

L(hS«U^  the  district;  that  ij

by  the  curse  (Koscnnmller,  Inch,  Gerlach,  Dehtzsch).


dpcrrce  than  tlie  earth.     The  earth,   winch
\dam's  natural  sin  has  become  to  a  certain
nrtaker  of  his  "i:ilt.  shall  appear  innocent  m
3  of  thine  unnatural  crime;   yea,  it  becomes
,v  —Which  hath  opened  her  mouth
U,o  n  ovin"  reason  for  the  form  of  the  prc-
pc,,al  sentence.      So    Delitzsch   interprets:
,    has    drunk    innocent    blood,  and  so  is
u-ticipanl   in  tin-  sin  of  murder  (Is.  xxvi.
91      Kumb    xxxv    :il).     Keil  disputes  this,  and   on
Y  •  ',,.'•'       "U  is   because  the   earth  lias  been
lo  drink    the  innocent    blood  which  has
.,1   that,   therefore,  it  opposes   itself  to  tl

toy!  Id   its  strengthens  it!

fruits  or  crops,  Job  xxxi.  40)  to  his  cultivation  ;  so
hat  it  returns  him  no  p,-oduce,  just  as  the  land  o
Canaan  is  said  to  have  spit  out  tl,,.  Canaan,  es  on
account  of  the  abominable  crimes  with  which  they
'had  utterly  defiled  it  (Levit.  xviii.  '28)."


.

KpccTTO.aao,,..  .  ^.._-.  ^..^    ...

.uV-);anlthis

l-ythe  Hebraism  in  »apa,  for  IB,  or   -  com-
.v(  i  of  Christ  cries  louder  for  mercy  than

^SthcUood  the  life,  and


that  in  this  case  there  is  transferred  to  the  earth_a
ministration  of  punishment  against  Cam.    Since  Cam
has  done  violence  to  nature  itself,  even  to  the  ground,
in  that  it  has  been  compelled  to  drink  his  brothers
blood,  therefore  must  it  take  vengeance  on  him  m
refusin-to  him  its  strength.    The  curse  proper,  how-
ever   of  Cain  must  be,  that  through  the  power  of  Ins
guilt-consciousness  he  must  become  a  fugitive  and  a
vagabond  upon  the  earth.     ^   "=,  a  paranomasia
as  in  ch   i.  '2.     The  first  word  (participle
denotes'the  inward  quaking,  trembling,  and  unrest,
the  second  (from  -',:)  the  outward  fleeing,  roving,
restlessness.      The  interpretation,  therefore,  of   J
litzsch   is  incorrect,   "  that  the  earth  m  denying  to
Cain  the  expected  fruits  of  his  labor,  drives  lum  ever
on  from  one  land  to  another."     1  ho  proper  middle
int  „,-  his  curse  is  his  inner  restlessness.     More
correctly  says  Delitzsch:  "ban  of  banning,  wander
inc  ,,f  exile,  ^  the  history  of  Cain's  curse;  how  di-
re°tly  opposite  to  that  which  is  proclaimed  by  the
lll()(,a  of  the  other  Abel,   the   Holy  ana  Righteous
one  (Ac  s  «i.  1  1 1."     Knobel,  according  to  .the  view
Kve  noticed,   interprets  the  words  '' fugitive  and
;   ,;•  as  indicating  in  the  author  a  knowledge

is  greater  than  I  can  bear  [Langt
gui^  i:-«]._T!ie  question  arises  whether  this  ex
pression  means  my  sin,  or  my  punishment      The  old
Interpretations  (Septuagint,   Vulgate)   render  it  my
.in,  and  accordingly  give  X-':  the  sense  of  iorgiyc-
,csg      My  sin  is  too  great  to  be  ever  forgiven.    fliis
expression   of  despair  into  which  his   earlier  confi
dence  sinks  down,  has  been  interpreted  by  H  me  .is
deiiotin"  Cain's  repentance,  which,  analogous  to  Jie
renentancc  of  Judas,  tails  of  salvation  through  self-
will  -ind  want  of  faith,  or  rather,  bears  him  «
fully  to  destruction.     15ut  shu-e  V"  ",n>  denote  alst
the  punishment  of  sin  (ch.  xix.    15;  Is.  v.    8)    and
since  Cain  further  on   laments  the   greatness  o    las
punishment,  Delitzsch,  Kcil,  and  others,  with  Aben
Ezra   Kimchi,  Calvin,  etc.,  take  the  sense  to  he:  my
pui^hment  is  too  great,  that  is,  greater   ,han      c.m
Lear      But  now  the  question  arises,  whether  there  u
nothcroinvicwadoiibleBeDBe.asindic^jdbytho
very  choice  of  the  expression;   and  this  the  mo.e,
sine  i    in  fact,  there  lies  also  in  Cain's  repentance  a
ijnilar  double  sense.     The  sin  is  evidently  acknowl-
cd-ed,  but  only  in  the  reflex  view  of  the  punishment
ind  because  of  the  punishment  (aiMo  in  contrart
with  conlritio).     The  self-accusation,  therefore,  tii

lccusationhofdth7j"d^aforVa^ing  laid  upon  him  iuj

„  int-.t.lp  burden      The  reservation  ot   tlie  I
unenuuiiuue  uuiucn.


Ml,»v;nr«


Kv)  hccome*  Jr^doSntiy  rheCical.  If  «"«*  ^J^
S °l  Wddon  in  the  Apocalyptic  picture,  »»£»»£»««£
to  the  ftrst ;  and  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  the  two
pas'  apes  arc  connected  and  mutually  supgostwc.  Was  Abel  s

of  the  idea.— T.  L.1


thou  hast  driven  me  out.-Out  of  the  sentencj
of  his  own  conscience,  through  which  God  us  him
become  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  Urn  makes  »
clear,  positive,  divine  decree  of  banishment.  Inertj
bvdoes  it  appear  to  him  a  heavier  doom  that  tie
must  go  forthlfrom  the  presence  of  the  adamah  ij
Eden>an  his  departure  from  the  presence  o  God
(thou-h  before  he  had  put  the  latter  first) ;  and
fiSy  they  are  both  to  him  the  harder  punishment,
See  now  "  every  one  that  finds  shall  slay  him.  1


CHAP.  IVT.  1-2(5.


is  tho  full,  unbroken,  selfish  fear  of  death,  that  falls
upon  him  like  a  giant,  rather  than  the  wish  that  he
may  be  slain  by  the  avenger  of  blood,  whoever  he
may  be.     But  therein  does  his  outer  understanding
of  it  give  notice  of  the  sentence :    thou  shalt  be  a
fugitive  and  a  vagabond.     It  has  changed,  for  him,
into  the  threatening:  avengers  of  blood  will  every
where  hunt  and  slay  thee  (Prov.  xxviii.  1). — Behold
thou  drivest  me  forth  this  day  from  the  face  of  the
Adainah,  that  is,  out  of  Eden.     "In  Eden  dwelt  Je
hovah,   whose  presence   guaranteed  protection  and
security."  Knobel.     But  would  Gain  take  comfort  in
the  idea  of  the  divine  protection  ?    It  is  suffering  and
punishment,  in  itself,  that,  as  he  says,  he  is  directly
driven  fortli  (  w~,3  j  from  that  home  still  so  rich  and
charming,  where,  moreover,  through  his  tilling  of  the
ground  he  meant  to  become  a  permanent  possessor.
— And  from  thy  face  shall  I  be  hid. — KXOBEL  :
''Outside  of  Eden,  withdrawn  from  thy  look.     In  a
similar  manner  Jonah  believed  that  by  his  withdrawal
from  Canaan,  the  land  of  Jehovah's  habitation,  he
should  escape  from  his  territorial  jurisdiction."     On
the  contrary,  DEHTZSCII  and  KEIL  :  "  from  the  place
where  Jehovah  revealed  his  presence."     It  must  be
observed  that  he  mentions  this  suffering  as  of  second
moment.    It  sounds  partly  as  a  complaint,  and  partly
as  a  threatening;  for  it  is  the  specific  expression  of
the  morose  self-consciousness  that  it  flees  from  the
presence  of  God,  whilst  it  maintains,  in  order  to  have
some  plea  of  right,  that  it  has  been  forced  to  do  so.
When  I  lose  the  face  of  my  home,  then  also  am  I
compelled  to  flee  from  the  face  of  God.     Though  in
every  place  he  would  fain  hide  from  the  face  of  God,
yet  the  obvious  sense  here  is  neither  the  unbiblical
thought  that  God  dwelt  only  in  Eden  (or  in  Canaan),
nor  the  loss  of  the  beholding  of  the  cherubim.     The
idea  that  man  can  hide  himself  from  God  the  Scrip
ture  everywhere  treats  as  a  mere  false  representa
tion  of  the  evil  conscience.     It  is  clearly  growling
despair  tint  will  no  more  seek  the  presence  of  Jeho
vah  through  prayer  and  sacrifice,  under  the  pretence
that  it  is  no  more  allowed  to  do  so.     Cain,  however,
has  still  religious  insight  enough  to  know,  that  the
further  fro'n  God,  the  deeper  does  he  fall  into  the  dan
ger  of  death.— Every  one  that  findeth  me.— How
could  Cain  fear  lest  the  blood  avenger  should  slay  him
when  the  earth  was  uninhabited  ?    Josephus,  Kimchi'
Michael's,  have  referred  the  declaration  to  the  rav
enous  beasts.     Clcricus,  Dathe,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  and
Dthers,  have   referred   it   to   the   family  of  Adam
Schumann  and  Tuch  find  in  it  an  oversight  of  the
larrator.*     Knobel  takes  it  as  embracing  the  repre


sentation  of  their  having  been  primitive  inhabitants
of  Eastern  Asia  (Chinese  immigrants,  perhaps)  with
whom  Cain  had  fought.  DKUT/.SCH  savs :  "It  ia


[*  If  thesis  a  difficulty  hero,  it  is  one  that  the  writers
>f  the  account  must  have  seen  as  clearly  as  the  most  acuto
f  modern  critics.  The  narrative  excludes  the  idea  of  anv
ther  historic  human  race  than  that  derived  from  Adam.

there  had  been  before  this  any  other  creation,  or  crea-
ures  bearing  a  resemblance  to  man,  cither  physical  or  psy-

fe0^  °r    „    ?£°  \°rc  any  fc'uch  in  other  an(i  remote

rts  of  the  earth,  they  had  no  generic  connection  with  tho
oecies  homo,  or  that  Adamic  family,  afterwards  represent?

I  by  the  three  sons  of  Noah,  and  from  which  has  come  all
horn  history  lias  recognized,  and  now  recognizes,  as  prop-

ly  man,  CtX  ^53,  Sons  of  Adam,  according  to  the  Serin-
ml  designation  or  Sons  of  Man.  But  what  reason  have
e  to  suppose  that  Cam  knew  all  this  ?  The  inconsistency

some  commentators  here  is  very  striking.     They  hold  as

?  h'aA  ?otl°n  °f  S°m°. °f  thc  older  theologians,  .^cCing
,  ch  Adam  was  a  being  of  surpassing  knowledge,  and

tnnp^Cr  ttmak,e  rti«*i°*  to  the  ScriptnreMhey

e  to  Cam  a  knowledge  he  could  only  have  had  from
me  transcendent  experience  or  sonic  direct  divine  reve!^
>n.  To  establish  such  a  contradiction,  thev  suppose  h  m
have  known  or  that  he  ought  to  have  knoVn,  that  there
sre  no  other  beings  like  himself  anywhere  in  existence


Kow,  as  far  as  the  account  goes,  nothing  of  this  kind  had
ever  been  revealed  to  him,  and  he  had  no  means  of  lea-niii"
it.     There  is  nothing  to  show  that  even  Adam  him-^f  had
any  such  knowledge  of  his  own  earthly  solitariness     .Beyond
his  o\vn  Eden  he  knew  nothing  of  the  earth's  vast  extent  or
01  wnat  God  may  have  done  in  other  parts  of  it.     "Wo  are
carrying  into  the  narrative  our  own  definite  knowled"-  of
the  figure,  geography,  and  history  of  our  globe,  and"  this
some  would  cail  interpreting  rationally.     We  may,  indeed
have  a  high  view  of  Adam's  position  in  its  moral  as-iect  and
spiritual  grandeur,  but  this  does  not  demand  for  him
a  past  knowledge,  which  could  only  have  been  supcmatur-
ahy  acquire.],  and  of  which  the  account  gives  not  the  slight
est  intimation.     Awaking  to  a  human  consciousness  under
the  divine  inspiration  that  first  made  him  man,  he  finds
tiimseli  the  object  ot  a  tender  care  and  a  guiding  lav/,  pro
ceeding  from  a  being  higher  than  himself.     His  next  experi
ence  is  that  ui  a  companion  mysteriously  introduced  to  him
as  one  derived  from  himself.     lie  is  conscious  of  a  serene
happiness  and    a  blissful   home.      Then    comes    his  later
knowledge.      lie  remembers  thc  beautiful  Eden,  his   sad
transgression,  his  fall  from  that  blessed  state,  and  his  ban
ishment  into  the  wide  wilderness  world.     Ho  carries  with
him  the  thought  of  some  dark  malignant  power  from  whom
had    received    deadly  injury,   and  is  consoled  by  the
promise  that  one  of  his  descendants  shall  finally  triumph
over  him;  but  beyond  this,  nature  and  history  are  all  un
known.      The    vast    waste    may   have    other    inhabitants.
Aothmg  to  the  contrary  has  as  yet  been  revealed  to  him  o-
to  his  children.     His  geography  is  limited  to  the  lost  Kden
and  the  adarnah  that  lies  around  it ;  his  ethnology  takes  in
only  himself,  his  companion  tho  mother  of  life,  and  the  chil
dren  that  have  been  born  to  him.     To  Adam  himself  there
may  have  been  thc  thought  that  he  was  alone  with  God
upon  the  earth,  but  it  would  not  be  experience  or  revelation
-only  an  inference  from  the  care  and  government  of  which
he  found  himself  the  object.     'To   the   lawless,   vindictive
Cam,  on  the  other  hand,  nothhig  would  be  more  natural
than  the  thought  that,  somewhere  in  t  lie  unknown  waste
there  might  be  beings  like  himself,  ai.d  who  mi-ht  be  as
malignant  to  himself  as  he  had  been  i<,  his  slain  brother
1  bus  regarded,  Cain's  language,  instead  of  involving  a  con
tradiction,  or  an  oversight  on  tho  part  of  thc  mrrator  pre
sents  one  of  those  inimitable  features  of  truthfulness  that
characterize  the  account  the  moment  we  iret  in  the  ri^ht
position  for  viewing  it.     Had  not  thc  author  been  writin-
artlessly  and  truthfully  (that  is,  in  his  subjective  conscious
ness,  whether  coming   from  inspiration  or  otherwise),   he
would  have  provided  against  the  cavil  ;   for  he  could  not
have  failed  to  see  the  difficulty  if  his  stand-point  had  been
the  same  with  that  of  the  modern  objector.     Jlad  it  been
a  more  lancy,  he  would  have  supplied  the  required  knowl
edge,  as  Milton  has  done  by  the  conversation  of  the  aii'-el.

We  may  say,  too,  as  Lange  intimates,  that  Cain's  awful
guilt  gave  a  preternatural  power  to  his  imagination,  and
peopled  the  world  with  avengers.  This  is  periectiv  credible
and  m  accordance  with  human  experience.  The  .MI; -position,
too,  that  by  iXSi^  ^2  ,  whosoever  or  whatsoever  finds  me,
he  may  have  had  in  mmd  imagined  demonic  beings,  is  not
to  be  rashly  rejected.  To  say  nothing  now  of  any  outward
demonic  realm,  such  as  the  ISible  elsewhere  clearly  reveals
a  subjective  world  of  devils  is  created  by  the  guilty  human
conscience,  which  must  find  an  avenger,  an  aAacrriop,  some
where  ;  and  we  thus  regard  Cain  as  the  first  human  me
dium  of  this  awful  revelation,  just  as  other  doctrines  of  a
different  kind  have  been  brought  out,  first  as  emotional
consciousness  and  afterwards  as  expressed  dogma,  through
the  action  of  the  human  soul  itself  in  its  holy  experience.
This  has  been  the  method  of  their  inspiration,  or  the  germ
of  their  first  introduction  to  the  minds  of  men.  Thus  tho
doctrine  of  a  hell  originated  in  tho  human  soul  itself
just  as  thc  hope  of  some  final  rest,  in  holy  souls  like  Enoch
or  of  some  "  city  that  had  foundations,"  as  in  the  longings
of  the  pilgrim  patriarchs  (lleb.  xi.  10),  became  God's  morn
ing  star  of  revelation  to  the  whole  doctrine  of  a  future  life
growing  brighter  and  brighter  until,  in  thc  Kew  Testament
it  reaches  the  "  perfect  day."

When,  in  thc  Eumenides  of  jEschylus,  Orestes  sees  the
'Epivvvts  everywhere  pursuing  him,  we  recognize  it  as' dra
matically  true  to  nature.  It  is  indeed  a  strange  aspect  of
the  human  soul  that  the  poet  presents,  but  it  has  its  ground
in  its  deeper  consciousness,  and  wo  cannot  help  feelin-  that
there  must  be  something  objective  correspondm--  to  it  If
we  acknowledge  this  fitness  in  the  representations  of  tho
Greek  tragedian,  founded,  doubtless,  on  some  past  tradition,
why  may  wo  not  regard  it  as  a  truthful  interpretation  of  the
same  human  conscience  in  this  account  of  tho  first  mur
derer  : — 1 .  Jj.j


200


GENKSI.-J    Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF


clear  that  the  blood  avengers  whom  Cain  icarcd,
must  be  those  who  should  exist  in  the  future,  when
his  father's  family  had  become  enlarged  and  spread
abroad;  for  that"  the  murderer  should  be  punished
with  death  (we  mi-bt  even  say  that  the  taking  vcn-
ccance  for  blood  is  the  fountain  of  regulated  law  and
risht  respecting  murder)  is  a  righteous  sentence
w?Uten  in  any  mans  breast;  an  1  that  Cam  already
sees  the  earth  full  of  av<  n  ,'.  rs,  is  just  the  way  of  he
murderer  who  ^  himself  on  all  s,,  es  surrounde,
bv  avenging  spirits  fE,  ,^«),  and  tee  s  himsc  s  b-
jectedtoi  KKiLodds:  Thou

Adam  at  that  time,  had  not  many  grandchildren,
rrreat  "•randchildren,  and  great-great-grandchildren,
vet'  according  to  ver.  17,  eh.  v.  4,  he  must  at  that
time  doubtless,  have  had  already  other  children,
who'mHit  multiply,  and,  earlier  or  later,  avenge
ibel's  death."  In  aid  of  this  supposition  we  must
Ulkc  ,  ,  ntation  that  would  give  to  Cain  an

immenselv  long  I'1'1-  (';li"'*  <'(mrlllai!lt  was  !lH  il"h"
r(H.t"  prayer  for  th-  mitigation  of  the  punishment.
Jchovah'consents  to  tlie  |  .raver  in  his  sense,  that  is,
he  knows  that  the  fear  of  Cain  is,  in  great  part,  a
reflection  from  his  evil  conscience,  and,  consequent


ly   the   destiny  uhich  is   appointed   to   hi:n   appears
t-;  ,  .,  r  ,he  silencing  (not  giving  rest  to)

his  frantic  excitement,  than  as  designed  to  \
i  im  outwardly  iron,  any  danger.     For  not  absolutely
shall   In-  know  himself  protected,  but  only  through

ning   of    a    seven-fold    blopd-vei
:     his    pursuer,    whoever   he    might    be,  and
h  the  warning  of  the  same  as  given  by  a  sign.
Th,.,.'.  !M)pear    to  Kn  '>  -1  a  difficulty  in  the  question,
VTho  then  would  undertake  the  blood-vengeance  on
of    Cain,    seeing   he    had   no   companions?
Seven-fold    clnll   he   be  punished,  or  shall   he  (<  am)
::_-,  1.—  Set  a  mark  upon  Cain.—  Ae-
,to  the  traditional  interpretation,  God  put  a
si*n  on  Cain  himself,  which  would  make  him  known  ;
and  hence  the  proverbial  expression:    the  mark  of
Cain      On  the  contrary,  the  literal  language  has  the
5  (to  or  for).     Another  old  interpretation
U>en  Ezra,  Daumgartcn,  Pelitzsch)  will  have  it  that
God  gave  him  a  token  for  his  security,  in  order  that
he  might  not  be  slain.     The  language,  however,  does
not   denote   a   sign   of  security  for  Cam   that  would
him  absolutely  safe,  but  only  a  sign  of  warn-
in-   and  threatening,  tor  some  possible  pursuer,  and
which    might    possibly    remain    unnoticed,    though
6  wing  to  Cain  himself  as  a  conscious  sign  for  the
quieting    of  his   fears.     According   to   Knobel,  the
author  had  in  mind,  perhaps,  some  celestial  phenom
enon   which  should  every  time  make  its  appearance
ac  i  warn  away  the  assailant.     Such  a  divine  inter
vention,  however,  would  be  a  placing  the  murderer
in  absolute  security,  and  besides  a  thing  Simply  in
conceivable.     The  "warning  sign  for  the  pursuer  of
Lamceh,  whoever   he  might  be,  was  the  newly  in-
vented  weapons  of  his  son  Tubal-Cam.  .The  warn-
in"  si  .'n  that  should  serve  for  the  protection  ot  Lim,
must  disclose  to  the  pursuers  the  threatening  pros
pect  of  a  seven-fold  blood-vengeance.     Such  a  sign,
although  for  Cain,  may  be,  notwithstanding,  repre
sented  as  on  Cain  in  some  kind  of  threatening  de
fence  perhaps,  or  in  the  attendance  of  his  wite  ;   it
is  enouo-h  that  the  history  is  silent,  or  simply  means
to  tell  us  that  God  already,  immediately  after  the
first  deed  of  murder,  had  established  a  modification
of  the  natural,  impulsive,  and  impassioned,  taking
of  vengeance   for  blood  ;—  a  warning  sign,  m  fact
that  the  carrying  out  of  the  blood-vengeance  would


have  for  its  consequence  the  extirpation  nf  the  whole
human  race.       But  why   this   exemption  of  Cain?
To  this  question  every  kind  of  answer  has  been  given
(comp.  Dclit^ch  and"  Kcil).     The  chief  thing  was
that  this  banishment  had  in  itself  the  significance  of
a  social   human   death.     It  was  a  member  cut  off
from  the  human   community,  as   in  the   New  Testa
ment  history  of  .ludas.     Besides,  the  unfolding  of  the
Cainitish    existence  was  to  reveal   an  unfolding  of
death  in  a  higher  degree,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to
do  service  to  'human  culture  in  the  dissemination  of
the  Cainitish  talent,     Finally,  there  comes  into  con
sideration,    in    relation    to    Cain,    what   is    said   by
Delitzsch:    "He    was    gracious  to    him  in  the  pro
longation  of  his  time  of  grace,  because  he  recognized
the°sin  as  sin."     But  at  the  same  time,  (Sod  himself
o-ivcs  here  the  first  example  for  the  significance  of
the  law  of  pardon  in  the  later  society.     To  demand
the  death  of  <.  ain  was   properly  the  right  only  of
Abel's  parents.      Hut  these  were  also  Cain's  parents.
The  right  of  pardoning  is  the  right  of  modifying  or
mitigating  the  punishment  in  view  of  special  mitigat
ing  circumstances.— And  Cain  went  out.— "'ihe
name  *v:   denotes  a  land  of  escape  and  banishment,
and  is  therefore  the  contrast  to  the  happy  land  of
Fden     where  Jehovah   walks    and    communes   with
men  "    Keil.     The  land  lay  eastward  of  Eden.     In
other  respects   it  cannot  be  definitely  determined;
for  Cain   carried   everywhere   the   land  of  Nod  with
hi,,i  in   his   heart.     Knobel  thinks   here   again   o

China.  A     ,

5    Vcrs   17-2P,.    CAIN  AND  TOE  CAIXITKS. — Ana
Cain  knew  his  wife.— Here  comes  in  the  snpposi-
lion  that   Adam   must,  have    already  had  daughters
too.    Cain's  wife  could  only  have  been  a  .laughter
,f   Vlam,  consequently  his  sister,  and  Abel  s  sister.
She  still  adheres,  nevertheless,  to  the  fearful  man,
Hows  him  in  bis  misery,  winch  is  also  a  testi
mony  to  a  humane  side  in  his  life.     The  marriage  oi
was   in   the   beginning,   a  condition  lor  tne
propagation  of  the  human  race.     At  the  commence
ment  of  the  race,  the  contrasts  in  the  members  of  the
family  must   have   been  so  strongly  regarded    that
thereby  the  conditions  for  a  true  marriage  could  be
present  in  the  same  family  ;  whilst  the  most  significant
motive  for  the  later  prohibition  of  sister  marriages,
such   as   the   establishment  of  a  new  band  of  love
and   the   consequent   separation  of  the  sisterly  and
marria-e  relations,  could  not  yet  have  become  effec
tual      Keil,  moreover,   remarks  that   the  sons  and
'  '.hters  of  Adam  represent  not  merely  the  family,
the  race  ;   this  is  indeed  the  case,  even  in  single
families,  thouirh    on    a  reduced   scale.     Some  have


famines,  tnougn    on    u.  iw^~  ----

ought'it  strange  that  Cain  should  have  built a .city
for  his  son  But  in  this  objection  it  is  overlooked
that  the  main  conception  of  a  primitive  city  is  simply
hat  of  a  walled  fortification.  The  city  mus  have
been  a  very  small  one.  Cain  might  have  built  it  for
an  entire  'patriarchal  race.  Moreover,  it  reads,  as
Keil  calls  attention  to  it,  rW3  "ST;:,  ne  was  build-
ing.  It  was  the  thought  and  the  work  of  his  life,  in
proof  that  immediately  after  the  protecuon  offered
to  him  bv  God,  he  longed  for  something  to  fortify
himself  against  the  fear  of  his  conscience,  and  had
need  to  fix  for  himself  an  outward  station,  in  oppo
sition  to  his  inner  unsettled  condition.  •  hvcn  it
we  do  not,  with  Delitzsch,  regard  this  city  as
foundation-stone  of  the  worldly  rule  in  winch  tne
spirit  of  the  beast  predominates,  yet  we  must
misapprehend  therein  the  effort  to  remove  the  curse


CITAr.  IV.  1-20.


»f  _banMimcnt,  and  to  create  for  his  race  a  point  of  |  peacemaker.     With  Lamcch,  who  greeted  in  his  son


unity  as  a  compensation  for  the  lost  unity  in  societ
with  God  ;  neither  must  we  lose  sight  of  the  contin
ual  tendency  of  the  Cainitish  life  to  the  earth!}
The  mighty  development  of  the  world-feeling,  am
of  ungodliness,  among  the  Cainites,  becomes  conspic
uous  with  Lamech  in  the  sixth  generation."  Kcil
This  comes  to  be,  indeed,  the  ground  idea  of  tin
Cainite  development,  that  in  the  symbolic  ideality  o
culture,  it  seeks  an  off-ct  to  the  real  ideality  of  the
livii.g  callus  (or  worship),  even  as  this  is  generally
the  character  of  the  secularized  worldliness ;  that  is
it  makes  a  development  of  culture,  in  itself  legiti
niate,_to  be  its  one  and  all.  If  after  this  we  take
into  view  the  names  of  the  Cainitish  line,  it  will  serv<
1'or  a  confirmation  of  what  has  been  said.

1.  Henoch,  initiation,  the  initiated  and  his  city

2.  Irad,  townsman,  citizen,  urbanus,  cimlis.

3.  Mahujael,  or  Mahijael,  the   purified,   or  the
formed  of  God  (nn^2).

4.  Methusael,  the  (strengthened)  man  of  God.

5.  Lamech,  strong  youth.    His  two  wives :  Adah
the  decorated,  Zillah,  the  musical  player  (ac
cording   to    Schroder,   the    dark    brunette).
[Schroder  is  all  wrong. — T.  L.]

6.  The  sons  of  Lamech,  by  Adah :    Jabal,  the
traveller  (nomade),  and  Jubal,  the  jubilant,
the  musician.     By  Zillah  :  Tubal  Cain,  work
er  in  brass  or  iron  (according  to  the  Persian,
Thubal ;  Geseuius),  the  lance-forger  (accord
ing  to  the  Shcmetic,  mason) — if  not   more
probably  :  brass  (or  iron)  of  Cain,  that  is,  the
forger  of  the  weapons  hi  which  the  Cainites
trusted.     His  sister  Naamah,  the  lovely.

Cain  and  Adam  included,  this  is  eight  genera
tions  ;  whereas  the  line  of  Seth.  that  follows  (eh.  5)
embraces  ten  generations.  Ou  account  of  the  like
names,  Henoch  and  Lamech,  Irad  and  Jared,  Kain
and  Kenan,  Mahujael  and  Mahalael,  Methusael  and
Methuselah,  Knobel  supposes  a  mingling  of  both
genealogies,  or  one  common  primitive  legend  in  two
forms  ;  Kcil  contends  against  this  by  laying  empha
sis  on  the  difference  of  the  names  that  appear  to  be
similar,  and  the  different  position  of  those  that  are
alike.  For  the  sake  of  comparison  we  let  the  line
of  Seth  immediately  follow:  1.  Adam  (earth-man).
2.  Seth  (compensation,  or  the  established).  3.  Enoch
(weak  man).  4.  Cainan  (profit,  a  mere  like-soundin"-
of  Cain).  5.  Mahalaleel,  praise  of  God  (only  an
echo  of  Mahujael).  C.  Jarcd,  descending,  the  de
scender  (only  a  resemblance  in  sound  to  Irad).  7.
Enoch  or  Henoch,  the  consecrated.  Here  the  devo
ted,  or  consecrated,  follows  the  descending ,-  in  the
Cainitish  line  he  follows  Cain.  The  one  was  the
occupier  of  a  city  in  the  world,  the  other  was  trans
lated  to  God ;  both  consecrations,  or  devotions,
stand,  therefore,  in  full  contrast.  8.  Methuselah.'
According  to  the  usual  interpretation  :  man  of  the
arrow,  of  the  weapons  of  war.  As  he  forms  a  chro
nological  parallel  with  the  Cainitic  Lamech,  so  may
we  regard  this  name  as  indicating  that  he  introduced
these  newly  invented  weapons  of  the  Cainites  into
the  line  of  Seth,  in  order  to  be  a  defence  against  the
hostile  insolence  of  the  Cainites.  It  consists  with
this  interpretation,  that  with  him  there  came  into  the
line  of  Seth  a  tendency  to  the  worldly,  after  which
it  goes  down  with  it,  and  with  the  age.  Even  the
imposing  upon  his  son  the  name  Lamech,  the  stron"-
youth,  may  be  regarded  as  a  warlike  demonstration
against  the  Cainitic  Lamech.  Therefore,  9.  Lemech
or  Lamech.  10.  Noah,  the  rest,  the  quieter  or


the  future  pacificator,  there  appears  l<>  be  indicated,
in  the  line  of  Seth,  a  direction,  peaceful,  yet  troubled
with  toil  and  strife.  It  was  just  such  an  age  how
ever,  as  might  have  for  its  consequence  the  alliances
and  minglings  with  the  Cainites  that  are  now  intro
duced,  and  which  have  so  often  followed  the  exigen
cies  of  war.  This  Sethian  Lantech,  however,  forms
a  significant  contrast  with  the  Cainitic.  The  one
consoles  himself  with  the  newly  invented  weapons
of  his  son  Tubal  Cain,  as  his  security  against  the
fearful  blood-vengeance.  The  other  comforts  him
self  with  the  hope  that  with  his  son  there  shall
come  a  season  of  holy  rest  from  the  labor  and  pains
that  are  burdened  with  the  curse  of  God.  In  regard
to  both  lines  in  common,  the  following  is  to  be  re
marked  :  1.  The  names  in  the  Cainitic  line  arc,  for
the  most  part,  expressive  of  pride,  those  of  the
Scthic,  of  humility.  2.  The  Cainitic  line  is  carried
no  farther  than  to  the  point  of  its  open  corruption
in  polygamy,  quarrelsomeness,  and  consecration  of
art  to  the  service  of  sin.  The  Sethic  line  forms  in
its  tenth  period  the  full  running  out  of  a  temporal
world-development,  in  which  Enoch,  the  seventh,
properly  appears  as  the  highest  point.  3.  Against
the^mentioii  of  the  Caiuitic  Vivcs,  their  charms,  and
their  art,  appears  in  the  Sethic  line  only  the  mention
of  sons  and  daughters.  It  serves  for  an  introduction
to  the  sixth  chapter.

Concerning   the   repeated    appearance    of    like
names,  compare  what  is  said  by  KI;IL,  p.  71.     Zillah
can  just  as  well  mean  the  shadowy  as  the  sounding,
yet  the  latter  interpretation  is  commended  by  the
context.     By  the  invention  of  Jubal  a  distinction  is
made  between  stringed  and  wind  instruments.     In
its  relation  to  Tubal  Cain  the  word  ti~h  must  be
taken  as  neuter ;   since  otherwise  Tubal  Cain  would
appear  as  the  smith  that  forged  the   smiths.     The
song  of  Lamech  is  the  first  decidedly  poetic  form  in
ike  Scriptures,  more  distinct  than  ch.  i.  '21  and  eh.
li.  23,  as  is  shown  by  the  marked  parallelism  of  the
members.     It  is  the  consecration  of  poetry  to  the
lorification  of  a  Titanic  insolence,  and,  sung  as  it
was  in  the  ears  of  both  his  wives,  stands  as  a  proof
-hat  lust  and  murder  are  near  akin  to  each  other,
lightly  may  we  suppose  (with  Ilamann  and  Herder),
-hat  the  invention  of  his  son  Tubal  Cain,  that  is,  the
nvention    of   weapons,    made   him   so    excessively
laughty,  whilst  the  invention  of  his  son  Jubal  put
lim  in  a  position  to  sing  to  his  wives  his  song  of
late  and  vengeance.     This  indicates,  at   the   same
ime,  an  immeasurable   pride   in  his  talented   sons.
3e   promises   himself   the   taking    of  a  blood-ven
eance,  vastly  enhanced  in  degree,  but  shows,  at  the
ame  time,  by  the  citation  of  the  case  of  his  ances-
or  Cain,  that  the  dark  history  of  that  bad  man  had
"lecome  transformed  into  a  proud  remembrance  for
lis  race.     The  meaning  of  the  song,  however,  is  not,
have  slain  a  man  (Septuagint,  Vulgate,  &c.).     lie
upposes  the   case  that  he  were  now  wounded,  or
now  slain  ;  that  is,  it  looks  to  the  future  (Aben  Ezra,
Calvin,  &c.).     We  may  take  the  h£>  with  which  the
-..._,  begins  as  an  expression  of  assurance,  and  the
preterite  of  the  verb  as  denoting  the  certainty  of  the
eclaratiou  (see  DELITZSCII,  p.  214).     We   think   it
letter,  however,  to  take  it  hypothetically,  as  Nagels-
ach  and  others  have  done,  and  this  too  as  corrc-
ponding  to  the  sense  as  well  as  to  the  grammatical
xpression.     In   respect   to   the   inventions   of  the
Chinese,  and  the  discovery  of  music  as  coming  out


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.

2G"-2  ^ — • ~  '

,65      In  I  Works  of  Hieronymus,"  p.  20).     It  is  a  Rabbinical

,f   the   shepherd-life,  compare ,  KNOBKJ    p.  Co     £\^          rcsti        >pon   the  misinterpretation   ol    a
regard  to  the  conjectures  ^ncernmg^these^   ^^    ^  ^  ^  ^  ^^  ^


similarity  of  particu-
cannot  justify  us  in


SCTII.— And  called  his  name
denote  compensation  for  Abel
c  who  comes  in  the  place  of  Abel


i  "i  inVeaonncction  with  Enoch  (weak  man),  may
'        to  the  tlu-ught,  indeed,  of  a  lowering  o    hopes
,  there  lies  an  expression  of  hope  in  this,  that
•r  u    ,     s  Seth  as  a  permanent  compensation  tor
V,      -And  to  Seth ,i-to  him  also  was  born  a
son  _Fno''h  —a  decimation  of  weakness,   frailty;
Mrol'nbly  a'sorrowful  remembrance  of  Abel  (Ps.  vm.
5.  xc  :';)._Then  began  men  to  call.— 2  X^-,
primarily  to  call  on  the  name  of  Jehovah    and  then
foTroclaim  him,  to  announce.     Men  had  before  this
";  ve     and  called  upon  God,  but  now  they  begin  to
reverence  God  as  Jehovah.     Rut  why  not  before,  in
h    Se  Of  fclh  ?     God  as  Jehovah  is  the  covenant
God  of  a  pious   race,  of  a  future   full    of  prom.se.
tih  Enoch  does  there  appear  the  sure  pros
pect  of  a  new  line  of  promise,  after  the   me  of  Cain
ad  lost  it      With  a  new  divine  race,  and  a  new  be-
ation,   there   ever  preaento^teelf^the
li   and  ever  with  a  higher  ~


Sn?™Cnnow  caned  upon  Jehovah  in  the  direction
ohE"  (where  the  Cainites  made  their  scttlc-
nent).  Moreover,  it  must  bo.  that  here  is  narrated
•  of  a  formal  divine  worsnio.


revel  iti  n"  docs  "on  "the  other,  present  the  reflex
Ltr  revekt  on    n  the  human  religious  recognition,
that   "  (Religion  itself.     In  respect  to  the  supposi-
S  Ihat  the  primitive  religion  was  the  true  reh^on
as  we  find  it  in  Rom.  i.  l'J-21,  Knobel  give,  an  ac
count  in  its  historical  relation  (p.  67).     According  to
a   Hebrew   interpretation    of    the   word    ^H     as
though  from  the  word  Vpn,to  profane,  and  which
Hieronvmus   mentions,  though  he   rejects  it,  _there
must    ave  begun,  in  the  days  of  Enoch,  a  species  of
mage-worship,  as  a  profanation  of  the  name  of  Je-
ovah  see  RA  IMER,  "The  Hebrew  Traditions  in  the


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1  The  propagation  of  the  human  race  is  out
side  of  Paradise,  not  because  it  is  first  occasioned
by  sin  but  rather  because  it  supposes  a  distinct
development  of  mankind,  and  is  tainted  with  its

«  The  human  pairing  is  not  an  act  of  natural
necessity,  but  a  free  ethical  love,  a  knowing,  as  its
fruit  is  a  begetting,  a  witnessing.

S  The  first  mother's-)  "Y  after  the  first  mother  s-
an-u'ish,  is  a  spirit  of  high  enthusiasm,  and,  there
fore  an  expression  of  believing  hope  in  the  coming
salvation.  It  takes  the  form  of  womanly  precipi
tancy,  and  may  mean  that  now  she  has  borne  the
serpent-crusher  (gotten  him,  or  brought  him  forth).
This  is  the  fiivt  misrcckoning  in  respect  to  the  times
and  hours  of  God,  and  the  person  who  is  to  bring
salvation,  but  the  believing  hope  itself  is  not  a  viiiii
thin-.  Upon  this  high  soaring,  as  it  appears  in  the
mother's  naming  of  Cain  (e»P?««,_  see  John  i.  -  ,
there  follows,  after  the  human  fashion,  ^  great  lower
ing  of  hope,  as  shown  in  the  naming  of  the  second
son,  wherein  there  appears  to  be  indicated  a  tearful
motherly  foreboding,  which  may  have  been  already
occasioned  by  the  conduct  of  the  young  Cain.

4  The  formation  of  the  family :  the  fundamental
law  of  human  relations  ("next  to  the  conjugal  the
parental,  the  sisterly  and  brotherly  the  general  re  a-
tion  of  kindred,"  Pclitzsch)  and  of  a  1  human  ordi
nances.  Church  and  state,  with  their  binding  ce-
u-nt,  the  school,  all  in  the  embryo  form.  The
om-ri U  The  sentence  upon  Cam  lor  his  brot.icr  b
murde'r.'  The  first  moral  lesson,  an  admonition  or

f,  111  thel'osom  of  the  first  family  there  appears
the  first  contrast  between  the  two  ground-forms  of
the  human  cafling-between  worldly  power  and  a
divine  endurance,  between  an  ungodly  and  a  godly
direction,  between  one  who  was  godless  and  one  wo
was  pious,  between  one  who  was  loaded  in  life  with
the  curse  of  God  and  one  who  was  slain  for  his
piety,  yet  whose  death,  blood,  and  right,  had  still  an
abidin»  value  in  the  eyes  of  God.

6  The  religious  offering  is  indicated  and_mtro-
duced  as  early  as  humanity  in  the  state  of  sin  ch
H  21.  It  has  its  origin  in  thankfulness  for  Gods
gifts,  and  the  acknowledgment  that  all  belongs  to
him  and  must  be  presented  or  consecrated  to  him.
I  i,  moreover,  an  expression  of  the  feeling  that  the
failure  to  present  a  real  and  perfect  obedience  of  the
hear  and  will,  and  of  a  perfectly  holy  hie  w,  h
prayer,  is  attested  by  the  symbolical  oflerin, ^  which
as  such,  denotes  a  longing  for,  and  a  craving  need
of  restoration  to,  that  perfect  condition  whe,  em  We
and  offering  unite  in  one.  Concerning  the  ofk  ing,
see  Exodus  and  Leviticus.  .  T,«,  .lisnloa*

7  God's  pleasure  in  the  one  offering,  Ins  Uispiei
ure  at  the  other.     See  the  Exegetical  notes

8  God's  warning  to  Cain.     Sin  evidently  appears
in  Cain  in  an  advanced  stage  of  progress,  and  t

ndicate  hereditary  dnfalnSs.  The  divine  warning
moreover,  characterizes  this  hereditary  tendency  »
sn  in  its  most  peculiar  being,  not  as  a  fa  alistij
?orce  but  as  a  seducing  inclination  to  evil,  as  a


CHAP.  IT.  1-26.


2G3


tempting  power  which  already,  like  a  ravenous  wild
beast,  was  crouching  at  his  door,  and  ready  to  spring
upon  him.  Therefore  does  God  ascribe  to  him  a
capacity  to  rule  over  sin  by  the  aid  of  the  warning
word  of  God  standing  as  security  to  him  for  such
assistance.  It  does  not  depend  upon  his  choice
whether  he  shall  be  tempted  or  not,  but  it  does  be
long  to  his  choice,  whether  he  will  let  sin  have  its
'  will  in  him,  or  whether  he  himself  shall  rule  over  it.
Sin  (though  feminine)  is  presented  in  the  figure  of  a
male  beast,  or  of  a  masculine  nature, — as  a  lion,
dragon,  or  serpent.  On  account  of  a  supposed
strangeness  in  the  expression:  rule  over  him  (or  it),
Ewnl.1  takes  it  as  a  question:  Wilt  thou  be  able  to
rule  over  it '?  And  Delitzsch  holds  that  it  does  not
mean  the  ruling  over  the  sin  that  is  lurking  for  him,
but  only  over  the  inward  temptation.  But  this  in
ward  temptation,  in  so  far  as  it  is  temptation  only,  is
just  the  sin  that  is  crouching  at  the  door;  for  the
door  denotes  the  entrance  to  his  inclination,  or  to  his
will.  Kcil  corrects  Delitzsch  by  saying  :  "it  is  not
the  holding  down  of  the  inner  temptibility  which  is
commanded,  but  the  withstanding  of  that  power  of
evil  which  invades  man  from  without,'' — a  view
which  here  gives  1:0  proper  sense.  The  personifica
tion  of  sin,  and  what  is  said  about  its  desire  and  its
craving  after  men  (as  though  to  devour  them),  ap
pears  not  without  significance,  yet  still  the  remem
brance  of  1  Pet.  v.  S  should  not  lead  us  to  find
here,  as  Delitzsch  docs,  a  conscious  intimation  of
Satan.  More  rightly  does  the  Book  of  Wisdom
make  a  distinction  between  men's  being  raised  out
of  the  fall,  on  the  one  hand,  or  their  permitting  sin
to  charm  them,  increase  in  strength,  and  so  give
power  to  the  hereditary  sinful  tendency,  on  the  other
(Wisd.  of  Solomon,  i.  13-10;  ii.  24  ;"  x.  1).  What
is  said  Rom.  v.  12:  "Death  has  passed  upon  all
men,"  bears  alike  upon  all ;  but  what  follows  :  «V  $
•travra  ^uaprev,  allows  an  endless  diversity  of  indi
vidual  character,  and  within  the  ratios  of  its  grada
tions,  forms  that  contrast  between  the  pious  and  the
godless,  between  the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the
seed  of  the  serpent,  which  the  Scripture  everywhere
sets  foi-tli.

9.  The  Fratricide.     "Thus  sin  attains  to  its  do
minion,  and  in  the  outward  act  reveals  its  inhuman,
beastly,  diabolical  nature.     Devilish  hate,  brutal  sav-
ageness ;  it  is  in  these  two  together  that  murder  has
its  origin.    At  the  same  time  there  comes  out  openly
here,  for  the  first  time,  the  conflict  of  the  two  seeds
in  the  relations  of  man  to  man.     It  is  the  serpent-
nature  of  Cain  under  whose  stab  in  the  heel  Abel
falls — t'lc  first  example  of  martyrdom ;   in  appear
ance  a  defeat,  but  in  truth  a  victory.     From  the  in
nocent  murdered  man,  there  goes  on,  even  to  the
case  of  Zachariah  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  one  great
stream  of  blood  throughout  the  whole  history  of  the
Old  Testament  (Matt,  xxiii.  85).     At  the  very  head
of  the  New  Testament  history  does  the  bloody  deed
of  Cain  against  his  brother  Abel  again  repeat  itself
in  its  counterpart,  the  bloody  act  of  the  Jewish  peo
ple  as   committed  against   God's   most  'holy  child
Jesus,'  their  brother  in  the  flesh.    Thenceforth  flows
on  the  stream  of  martyr-blood  through  the  whole
history  of  the  Church.     Death  and  murder  proceed
ing  from  him  who  was   uvdpuiroK-ruvos   an'  apXTJr  (a
murderer  from  the  beginning,  John  viii.  44),   become
indigenous  in  the  history  of  man,  and  of  the  world,
and  rule  in  a  thousand  forms."    Delitzsch.

10.  The  death  of  Abel;  the  second  powerful  proof
of  the  prophetic  significance  of  his  bloody  offering.


Abel  appears  as  the  special  prophet  and  mediator  of
the  peculiar  idea  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation,  or
as  the  one  who  introduces  into  the  world  the  typical
sacrifice — that  is,  the  symbolical  representation  of  a
yielding  up  of  the  individual  will  and  life  to  God
through  death,  in  order  to  the  taking  away  the  sepa
ration,  between  God  and  man ;  and  which  representa
tion  (as  it  unfolds)  must  ever  become  more  and  more
the  type  of  the  real  propitiation  as  set  forth  in  the
New  Testament.  Therefore  would  Abel  be  justified
by  his  act  of  faith,  even  as  Abraham  was  (ileb.  xi.
4) ;  and  to  such  an  extent  must  the  offering  of  Abel
be  referred  back  to  a  divine  occasioning,  or  some
divine  institution.

11.  The  first  murder  of  a  brother  proceeded  from
a  strife  concerning  religion.     It  appears  to  1/e  lire-
supposed  that  Cain,  in  his   sacrificial  worship,  had
wilfully  separated  himself  from  Abel.     This  would
be  the  first  separation.     The  second  is  that  his  offer
ing,  whilst  it  appeared  in  a  stinted  form,  remained
throughout  an  unbloody  sacrifice.     Communion   in
the  offering  would  have  made  it  of  richer  value.    The
mark  of  servility,  legality,  joylessness,  and  an  envious
jealousy  of  his  brother's  altar,  appears  quite  promi
nent.     Therefore  it  is,  too,  that  he  fails  of  the  bless
ing,  and   the   seal  of  the  divine  acceptance.     The
effect,  however,  is  not  repentance,  but  envy,  fanati
cism,  hate,  obduracy  against  God's  word,  and,  finally,
the  murder  of  his  brother.     The  first  war  was  a  re
ligious  war.     From  thence  have  all  the  wars  in  the
world's  history  had  their  motive  and  their  coloring.
Even  with  the  most  modern  wars  religion  has  more
to  do  than  is  commonly  thought.    The  altar,  the  cen
tre  as  it  is  of  all  holy  sacrificial  acts,  is  the  centre
also  of  all  that  is  horrible  in  the  history  of  the  world ;
since  it  is  the  religious  idea,  in  some  form,  that  is  the
moving  power  of  human  history.

12.  Already  has  the  first-born  lost  his  birthright,
through  a  proud  confidence  in  its  prerogative,  out  of
which  is  developed  envy  of  his  brother's  preference,
and  from  this,  again,  in  the  course  of  its  progress,
scorn  and  hate.     In  this  form  goes  the  story  through
the  history  of  the  world,  through  the  history  of  reli
gion,  of  the  church,  and  of  the  state.     Thus,  many
a  time  does  the  prerogative  of  birth,  which  in  itself
and  normally  is  a  blessing,  become  transformed  into
a  prerogative   of    hereditary   sin   and    guilt  (Matt.
iii,  9).

13.  As  chapter  3d  presents  to  us  the  archetype
of  the  genesis  of  sin,  even  to  the  evil  act,  so  does
chapter  4th  give  us  the  form  of  the  genesis,  and  of
the  unfolding  of  obduracy.     The  commencing  point
is  irreligiosity,  that  is,  an  offering  worthless  and  hypo
critical  in  its  idea  (Rom.  i.  21).     The  consequences
that   immediately   follow   are    unfriendliness,  envy,
brotherly  hate,  rage,  grudging,  and.moroseness.     To
this  succeeds  an  impenitent  demeanor  towards  the
divine  voice  of  warning,  as  shown  in  a  wicked  silence.
Then  comes  the  consummation  of  his  evil  behavior
towards  his  brother.     The  first  example  of  this  was
probably  a  mocking  perversion  of  what  God  had  said,
into  a  presumptuous  retort  upon  his  brother ;  then
the  bold  throwing  off  the  mask  in  the  murder  itself,
as  it  took  place  in  the  field,  upon  the  boundaries  of
their  respective  callings.     Now  again,  on  God's  ar
raignment,  his  impudent,  diabolical  lying,  and  Titanic
presumption,  but  which  becomes,  after  the  imposition
of  the  penalty,  a  howling  despair.     Thus  it  is  that
while  in  his  presumption,  and  in  his  despondency,  he
becomes  an  enemy  of  God,  so  is  he  also  a  foe  of  man ;
seeing  that  his  disordered  imagination  peoples  the


GEXKSL-,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


2G4

world  with  human  beings  who  stand  to  h.im  on  a  foot-
in.  of  deadly  hostility.  When  in  this  sprnt  he  goe.
forth  as  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  ironi  the  land  of
Kden  to  a  land  of  solitary  exile,  and  there  builds  a
citv.  the  main  significance  of  it  lies  in  its  walls.  It
is  'a.  fortress  to  defend  himself  against  any  of  Adam  B
Ihtnrc  children  who  may  not  belong  u>  the  Camue

IUCCH  The  iuclsrmcnt  on  Cain,  a  parallel  to  the  first
rido-ment  ch  iii  just  as  the  behavior  of  Cam  is  a
counterpart  and  a  parallel,  to  the  behavior  of  his  par
ent-  \s  a'parallel  it  reminds  us  of  the  behavior  ol
the  serpent  «  rlaadtat  ad  calum  vox sanguinix,  etc.;
it  is  like  the  old  s.n  ing  of  the  four  heaven-crying  sms
When  the  Ei.isile  to  the  Hebrews  tells  us  that  bj
mei"  of  his  faith,  Abel,  though  dead,  yet  speaketl.
(\a\n  it  iii'i-t  mean  that  the-  cry  of  his  blood,  re
garded  as  slill  heard,  is  a  proof  that  even  after  death
he  is  still  an  object  of  the  divine  care,-  one  still  uu-

*  rrrir.Hi  >.-•>'"  w<  On.  iv.  10,  clnmat.  ml  w,  rnmi  la;ns
nnto  i  r-  This  is  one  ot  the  texts  which  the  blind  Satl-
duc o  i  -id  often  read,  but  with  the  veil  u,  on  his  heart  He
lad  se  n  ang  in  it.  It  was  no  proof  to  hnn  of  anything
-  ta  1  'ersonal  in  man  after  death.  Hut  what  a  llood  of

,1    : i     .  ;,,,i'.,^    lmi«ninrrp  m    ttlC    OlQ


life  th'u'c'riJ'.Vur.iu  God,"andThat  he  hears.    Al  el  vet  lived  .
1  ,.  vet  spake-  AaAcI.  in  the  present,  he  spcakcth  still.     Io
Christ,  in  whom  the  veil  is  taken  away,  it  was  no  figuie
,  '-r'lv    or  rhetorical  usus  loquendi,  as  it  was  to  the   Sad-
ami  as  it  has  become,  in  a  great  measure,  to  the  mo  .-
•',  .nterprcter  w   o  carries  hack  the  dead  „  a  ;  nd  frigidi  J
of  worn  out  modern  speech  to  chill  the  warmth  and  vitality
of  ancient  language.     In  Mich  primitive^fonns  tlierc  isnotli-


ttt.was  viroKa™  TOU     v<7ta-

aTTjpt'ou,  "under  the  altar"  of  the  Divine  Justice,  -,rD2
"1-b"  in  "the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High;"  it  was
!<  lotji'v,  ta^jing  ('^  P.,  xci.  1),  under  the  shadow
of  the  \lmi-htv."  It  was  not  for  Cain's  pake  that  this  is
°aid  for /^reformation,  or  for  his  punishment  merely,  or
or  any  Preventive  benefit  of  a  police  kind  in  the  check tag

tf  ool     the


forgotten,  not  lo-t— still  living."  Delitzsch.  At  the
same  time  is  the  ciy  of  this  martyr-blood  the  fr.-st
simial  of  that  voice,  whether  of  the  blood  or  of  the
spirit,  which  ever  calls  for  Cod's  judgment,  first  upon
Jerusalem  (Mali,  xxiii.  15;  eemp.  ch.  ii.  18),  and
finally  upon  th-.-  whole  world  (Rev.  vi.  It)).  Only
the  call  of  the  blood  of  Christ  it,  is  that  transfonns
this  judgment  into  a  judgment  of  deliverance  tor  ail
who  shall  receive  salvation  (lleb.  xii.  '2i).

15.  The  chiei'  points  in  the  sentence  against  Cam.
lie  is  cursed  from  the  ground.     The  very  natinc  of
the  ground,  so  to  speak,  becomes  an  angel  (or  min
ister)  of  penal  vt.-ngear.ce  against  the  unnatural  trans
gressor.     He  haih  aroused  it  against  him  in  its  inner
most  nature,  in  forcing  it  to  drink  his  brother's  blood.
Henceforth  will  earth  deny  to  him  it.-  fruits.     AVhero
the  murderer  perpetrated  the  murder,  the  grass  grows
no  more.     The  fratricide  makes  the  ground  the  place
of  judgment.      The    war   desolates    the  _lmd.  _  The
curse  proper,  however,  lies  on  the  conscience  ihelt.
liis  heavy  consciousness  of  guilt,  incapable  ot  being
healed,  and  in  iis  deceit,  its   presumption,  and   ltd
despondency,  driven   to  despair,  must  mala;  _him  a
fugitive  and  a  vagabond  upon  the  earth.     He  is  ban
ished  beyond   any  protecting  enclosure,  fiom  every
place  of  rest  ;  and  though  he  may  surround  himself
with  wal's  as  high  as   heaven,  he  is  i-till  a  banished
A/.a/.el  (Lev.  xvi.  112)— the  piince  of  e:;iks.     There
lies  in  the  passage  before  us  a  germ  ofthe  church's  ex
communication  and  of  the  civic  outlawry,    'ihc  ban
ishment  into  immeasurable  space  appeals  as  a  warn
ing  prelude  to  the  endless  exile  oi'  damnation.  _   \ V  o
may  ask:   \V'ny  \\as  not  the  iiunishmeiit  of  death  i.u-
posed  on   Cain,  as  is  demanded  by  the  later  law,  ch.
ix    (i,  instead  of  exile  '!     It  is  not  a  sufficient  ;
to  say,  that  the  parents  of  Cain  could  not  cxecu
such  "a  sentence;  the  cherubim  might  have  cru.-hed
liim.     But  it  becomes  evident,  already,  that  the  re-
Ii«'ioti3  social  death  of  absolute  banishment  from  hu
man  society,  constitutes  the  peculiar  essence  of  the
deal!)  penalty  (sec  LAM;I:,  Die  GesctzUch-Cathausc/i.e
Kin-he  ah  Siniibild,  p.  71).

1C).  In  respect  to  the    repentance   of  Cam   an<S
Judas,  see  the  Excgetical  annotations  to  v.  lo.

17.  The  Cainitic  race.     Development  of  the  car-


in-ulo  t  ll'lt  VO1CC  eHUtlU.Ul   ill  n---1  v  ..11.       '         • -~-  -

"a  pious  son  of  Uod,-thc  still  living  Abel,  m^hom    he

"mace  of  Ootl  had  been  assailed  (sec  Ucn.  is.  6  ;  Is.  cxvi.  15).

A  u    so  we  mav  say  of  other  expressions  m  the  Old  les-

t-nncnt    now   become  mere  metaphors,  or  dead  forms  of

S  but  anciently  full  of  life  and  reality,  representing

Iv  the  souls  of  the  pious,  as  yet  hayinpr  some

M    1  of  bcinK,  known  at  least  to  God  "to  whom  they  In

, ur  V  v  our  adds,  Luke  xx.  38.     They  are  «  gathered  to
tiu      .eop'e    "  they  have  "gone  to  their  lathers;"   they
-  v   -hi     the  ghost,"  not  as  a  thing  that  perishes,  but  as  a
most  precious  deposit  to  be  kept  (laid  up,  or  treasured  in
Shcol,  Job  xiv.  13),  "  until  the  set  time  when  God  shall  call
and  they  shall  answer;  for  he  will  have  a  regard  (7O2^
Tob  xiv  15  10,  will  have  a  longing  desire)  to  the  work  of
to  hands  »    T hev  call  themselves  "  pilgrims  and  sojourners
upon  earth  "-a  phrase  that  has  no  meaning  except  as  con
nected  v  iih  th(>  idea  of  another  state  of  beiug,  a  homeland,
a  r«T   This  is  the  salvation,  as  one  of  these  pilgruns  says  at
the  verv  close  of  his  earthly  life,  when  all  thought  of  .1  mere
worldly  deliverance  is  necessarily  excluded,  and  there  can
mnain  ou!y  the  hope  of  something  beyond  :  "  I  have  wait
ed  for  thv  salvation,  O  Lord."     See  how  it  breaks  from  the
dying  Jacob  in  the  verv  midst  of  his  prophetic  contempla-
llnot  the  future  worldly  destiny  of  his  sous,  Gen.  x  «  18.
What  could  thev  mean '.'  There  are  here  no  imagined  bounds
of  roace  and  t  ime,  no  localities ;  it  is  all  pure  subj  ectivencss
it  mav  be  said ;  but  such  a  hope,  indefinite  as  it  may  seem
has  far  more  of  moral  power  than  any  Elysbn  or  Hespen-
<  em  fancrcs.    It  was  security,  it  was  blessedness,  and  with
this  they  were  content.   It  was  the  idea  of  protection,  a  "  cov-
erinKOt  wings,"  being  under  "  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty.'
It  was  all  that  was  contained  in  that  most  mysterious  ex
prcssion  -pa    IHG,   "the  secret  of  thy   presence,"  Ps


cxxi.  -!">,  "the  liiiV.ng  (niCS)  in  God's  pavilion,"  where
hcv'havc  that  unimaginal'de    being  vhieh    Christ   c&ll?
'living  unto  God,"  ,r«WS  yap  ate*  frw  T.ukc  xx    ,,8.
ume  may  see  in  such  expressions  merely  the  hope  ot  t<  m-
,oral  deliverance,  ami  yet  even  the  most  unspiritual  intcr-
.reters  can  hardly  avoid  the  uelint,'  that  this  lower  .d<  a,  how
ever  it  may  be  partially  accommodated  to  a  seeming  secular
context,  does  not  satisfy  the  holy  earnestness  ot  the  lan-
,u-r-e   or  fill  out  that  idea  of  blessedness  and  protcc  ion  to
hr  hevond  what  could  be  afforded  by  any  earthly  taberna
cle,  or'in  any  temple  made  by  hands :  "  O  how  great  is  Ihy
goodness  which  Thou  hast  laid  up  (n:S^  comp.  Job  xiv.  13)
for  those  that  fear  tbce  !    Thou  wilt  hide  them  in  the  Mcretof
thv  prince,  thou  wilt  treasure  them  in  thy  Pavilion,  '  away
from  all  the  strife  and  censure  of  this  present  life,  1  s.  x^xi.
"'  -n      We  cannot  be  wrong  when  wo  have  our  Saviour  to
gu'ide'us  in  the  interpretation  of  such  ^n^' al  1™!?
a  belief  in  immortality,  or  a  continuous  ^'ing  fior,  the  ex
pression  of  the  divine  care  and  protection  tor  the  pious  In-
Fng  and  the  pious  dead.    Identity,  continuity,  persona hty,
ar?  inseparable  from  the  idea  of  such.au  interest,  ami  wo
must  Buppose  that  the  thought  was  vmdly  present  to  the
minds  of  those  in  earlv  times  who  so  passionately  expressed
it     One  thing  is  certain,  that  Sadduceeism  or  materialism
would  never  have  given  rise  to  ^\^c%^^\'±,
though  they  may  be  satisfied  with  them  after  they  have
divested  them  of  all  meaning.    We  may  say,  too,  that  after
such  an  exposition  as  Christ  has  given  us,  the  denial  of  there
being  any  idea  of  a  future  life  in  the  Old  Testament  is  down-
right  infidelity,  however  it  may  be  presented  by  professed
Christian  theologians,  or  even  by  learned  bishops  in  tH0
Church.— T.  L.]  "


CHAP.   IV.    1-26.


205


liest  world — culture  in  its  reciprocity  with  the  ad-
vaucing  Caiuitic  corruption.  Delitzsch  finds  it  sig
nificant  that  Cain  gave  the  same  name,  Henoch,  to
his  sou  and  to  the  city  which  he  built  lor  him,  and
that  he  must  have  had  regard  in  both  to  the  funda
mental  beginnings  of  a  peculiar  and  special  histori
cal  development.  He  cites  the  words  of  AUGUSTINE,
De  Oivitale  Dei,  ch.  xiv.  28  :  "  Fccerunt  iaitur  civi-
tates  duas  amorcs  duo,  tcrrenam  scilicet  amor  sui
usque  ad  contcmptum  dci,  ccclcstem  vcro  amor  Dei
usque  ad  cojitemptum  sui;  ilia  in  xe  ipm,  hccc  in
Domino  fflorialur."  Yet  still  even  Delitzsch  makes
prominent  the  value  of  each  Cainitic  advance  in  cul
ture.  In  writings  which  set  forth  the  origin  of  all
things,  there  could  not  fail  to  be  .something  in  rela
tion  to  the  origin  of  trades  and  arts.  At  a  later  time
would  these  inventions  come  into  the  possession  of
God's  people.  Still  the  Cainitic  race  has  the  honor
of  every  important  advance  in  worldly  culture;  be
cause  this  race  of  the  promise  has  suffered  in  the
ruin  of  the  world,  whilst  the  race  of  the  curse  falls
naturally  into  it,  or  make  it  their  home.  We  can
only  say,  however,  that  the  one-sided,  worldly  ten
dency,  favored  a  precocious  development  of  every
power  of  culture  among  the  Cainites — or  that  the
children  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  way  than
the  children  of  light.  It  is  not  the  inventions  them
selves,  but  their  morbidly  active  development,  and
their  abuse,  that  have  on  them  the  mark  of  the
curse.  Again,  it  is  in  the  direction  of  the  dualistic,
theosophic  assumption  of  a  deeper,  or  hidden  sense,
when  we  read  (DELITZSCII,  p.  213):  "Even  to  this
day  the  arts  cannot  disown  the  root  of  the  curse,  out
of  which  they  spring."  "  There  is,  moreover,  re
maining  in  all  music,  not  only  an  unspiritualized
ground  of  material  naturalness  merely,  but  a  Cainitic
element  of  impure  sensuality"  (p.  213).  Neverthe
less,  through  the  subjectivity  of  the  artist  shall  "  that
fundamental  being  of  art  which  in  itself  is  sinless  "
attain  that  to  which  it  is  morally  destined,"  p.  215.
Further  on  DELITZSCII  well  says:  "With  a  deed  of
murder  began,  and  with  a  song  of  murder  closes,  the
history  of  the  Cainites.  In  the  seventh  generation  all
is  forgotten  —  immersed  in  music,  revelry,  luxury,
decoration  and  outward  show,"  etc.  Again  he  says :
"  This  is  the  genesis  of  the  most  spiritual  art,  such
as  poetry,  music,  etc."  (p.  216).  More  happily,  at
least  in  respect  to  its  outer  consequences,  did  there
precede  all  this  that  pious  song  of  jubilee  at  the  cre
ation  of  the  iirst  man  (p.  123).  Thus  much  is  true,
that  as  art,  and  especially  poetry,  points  out  the  dis
tance  between  the  real  and  the  ideal  on  the  side  of
culture,  so  does  the  sacrificial  offering  do  the  same
on  the  side  of  cultus,  or  religion.

18.  Concerning  the  worship  of  Jehovah  as  begin
ning  among  the  Sethites,  see  the  Exegetical  explana
tions.

HOMILETICAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.

_  See  Doctrinal  and  Ethical. — Adam's  Family.  His
guilt,  his  suffering,  his  salvation,  and  his  hope. —
The  first  family  picture  in  the  Bible. — The  tragic
sorrow  in  every  family  (indicated  in  the  baptism  of
children) — The  family  the  root  of  every  human  ordi
nance—both  of  church  and  state. — The  first  form  of
education  as  it  makes  its  appearance  in  the  first  sac
rifice,  and  iu  the  varied  callings  of  Cain  and  Abel.
What  education  can  do,  and  what  it  cannot. — Unlike
children  of  like  parents. — Pious  parents  may  have
wicked  children  (Cam — Abel). — Eve's  precipitancy


even  in  the  utterance  of  her  faith. — Eve's  maternaj
joy,  in  its  divine  trust,*  and  in  its  human  mistakings.

1.  The  divine  truthfulness  in  her  hope  of  salvation;

2.  the  mournful  disappointment  in  her  expectations
of  Cain ;  3.  the  happy  disappointment  in  respect  to
Abel  (not  a  vanishing  vapor :  Abel  "  yet  speakcth  ").
— The  two  ground-forms  of  the  human  vocation. — The
acceptable  and  the  rejected  offering. — The  contrast
between  Cain  and  his  brothers  in  its  signiticance :

1.  Cain  lives,  Abel  dies;  2.  Cain's  race  perishes,  the
race  of  Seth  continues  (through  Noah),  even  to  the
end  of  the  world. — Cain  the  first  natural  first  born
(like  Ishmael,  Esau,  Reuben,  the  brothers  of  David,
etc.),  Abel  the  first  spiritual  first-born. — Cain  and
his  pride  in  the  carnal  birthright  and  prerogative,
a  world-historical  type  :   1.  For  the  religious  history,

2.  for  the  political. — Cain  and  Abel,  or  the  godless
and  the  pious  direction  inside  the  common  pecca
bility. — Cain  and  Abel,  or  the  history  of  the  first
sacrificial  offering,  a  prcfiguration  of  the  most  glori
ous  light-side,   or  of  the  darkest  and  most  fearful
aspect  in  the  world-history. — Cain   and  Abel :    the
separated  altars,  or  the  first  religious  war,  or  the
divinely  kindled  flame  of  belief  and  the  wrath-en
kindled  flame  of  fanaticism. — Cain,    or  the  world-
history  of  envy.     Abel,  or  the  world-history  of  mar
tyrdom. — The    brother's     murder. — The     brother's
blood. — The  first  slain. — And  death  with  sin. — The
first  appearing  of  death — War. — The  obduracy  of
Cain,  or  Cain  warned  by  God  in  vain. — Cain's  free
dom  and  bondage. — Cain's  sentence. — The  curse  of
Cain. — Cain's   repentance    (first   presumption,  then
despair). — The    evil    conscience  in  the    history  of
Adam  and  in  the  history  of  Cain.     Comparison. —
The  banishment  of  Cain. — The  sign  of  Cain. — Cain
and   his  race,  or  worthlessness  as  regards  religion
and  worldly  spiritual  power,  a  reflected  imago  of  the
satanic  kingdom. — The  progress  of  corruption  in  the
Cainitic  race. — It  was  not  the  worldly  cultivation  of
Cain  that  was   evil,  or  from   the   evil   one,  but  its
worldliness. — The  first  city. — Lamcch,  or  the  misuse
of  weapons,  or  the  misuse  of  art,  or  of  all  culture. —
Polygamy. — Seth,  or  the  one  remaining,  established,
compensation  for  Abel. — The  Sethites,  or  the  first
beginning  of  a  new  and  better  time  indicated  in  this,
that  men  begin  to  proclaim  the  name  Jehovah,  the
God  of  the  covenant. — Enosh,  denoting  frail  humani
ty,  a  name  of  humility. — When  God  becomes  great
at   any  time,  or   in  any   race,  then   man   becomes
small. — Docs  man  first  become  small,  then  God  be
comes  to  him  great.     At  the  birth  of  Cain,  Eve  was
hasty  in  her  joy  ;   at  the  birth  of  Abel,  hasty  in  her
despondency ;  at  the  birth  of  Seth,  quiet  and  confid
ing. — Seth,  or  the  established  people  of  God  ;  "  And
the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  them."

STARKE  :  Ver.  3.  God  himself  instituted  the  offer
ings,  as  we  see  from  Hcb.  xi.  4,  that  as  the  belief
of  Abel  in  his  offering  had  for  its  necessary  ground
the  divine  command,  promise,  and  revelation,  so  the
offerings  themselves  must  be  types  of  Christ. —
Ver.  4.  We  cannot  doubt  that  from  the  very  be
ginning  God  reserved  to  himself  the  firstlings  or
first-born.  Such  a  command  He  repeated,  Exod.
xiii.  2  ;  Numb.  iii.  13.  It  was  for  a  type  of  Christ
the  first-born  before  all  creations. — Ver.  5.  Cain
ever  oppresses  and  murders  Abel.  What  else  is  it
than  the  strife  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit,  the
enmity  between  the  seed  of  the  woman,  and  tho
seed  of  the  serpent  ?  ARXDT'S  "  Christianity." — Tilb.
Bible:  Wouldst  thou  that  thy  service  be  accept
able  to  God,  perform  it  with  unfeigned  belief,  and  a


*DL^--.  ;b-.  rw^,  ^hTtf^'nk     b.^  ''iVVi.x  :'   .— V~or.  14,  "  C.v-.ru-.-.

;'lv'k^"    'jTo^     ol-lr^  :..-  l.:.r..-.v:    eccfv:   him*-::   v  .

..^        -^  .  i  -          *i  i  >     '     -  v~    £  "SJ'.'U^l?.  In^Jlil.R   ^


i.^..>r--u-:5,  :.-:x  £.:  ~   :--

-

£T\"*— Iw      -  -'  t-LJw


.^!". .


-
.

!

"         ~  'JSi


-

-

.


_  _


•    -


•
•

-     '
-:— '-   -c J-

'

I


_

-  \.,    -    ,;     -

'    -  '  -.V    -r-

":-",rV  •?$£&

:^;"-;v:,,.-,::

•«    V---T   rn-    ill-.    :i.-'-.

-"/:ir,;;.;;:^;  .  ,-  v.T

Y^V7."kD-^  -,.->  jrt  ::«  f-;m

..  « :,«.  "-,,^^  -a.-  ,  T-  -.->-.; .    T:*

«*«£*  ErT?fS^«Vi  ,,,..:.--:^

:^r?  in>  p.:.  T^;^.;  af  o-   iii-f-  Viif   oui-   o:  ^e

.     .                         .'.uiscafiD.Te  in  ist-^r  n>  -  '-''-.  *  "^'"  k.^_- -  -jf'-v,.    xi'  -i— -  ;-.   i^.:d

-  *•>!=   ^  ST«          -  ""-WwLv  afibe  otbc^    'li'Oii  :..-«  "Je

as.    K-w    E^flr.-:  fi^fSSwwe  tl  brrix^E  isi   :•«•

...-   VS5    BT.lCMa;  V -1^  --'ir^-T    -Js-.   f-.v.u

-


-•«*•  bf  ifei  iu«o  I»£^-  '•"btir*-     mtj  ••s    r^rirJtC  *?  s   »— >

;    1C    Ttaf    OT^^lJ.ir    CX.    r-..— 'i   f»


I';  ™^iJ'v^S    «iT:L5rnfl  tbe>  ea3±«i :  iiifj  ^  J-"Tcr^.J:?'— ;

*\  rVf     1^    fi>     li^     **f '  ~£"1  •"*—     i-"

•  '.  T.  ^     iaw.T-K*  0-"  ibf   Oii   T«OCD-.  i
B  f-n,-    ^;^  rnswTK-    v^-


CHAP.     IT.     I-!;'..  QrVJ

EH-  ro.!ii:". tsi rod  in  ck"*??  prinnf'.v.ion  vi:.r.  n:»  T?or:  i.r  >"••;.:   :or  as  a  c "•-">-"-  confc.: er ..v   :?    r.;r.:".j   c-.r.e-d   s

tvir«"ird    and   visible  sici:    o:    crfioe,    tna".    n-on.  a?  wi..  o:  iron,  so  n't-itoyor  a  n'-inire-;  vi_*,  :  .:  £.5  m.in-*

rvri.rjdivi  t-T  sari  sar-f-inrcial  sum,  r..;.cb'.  tie  m.-re  fortresses,  can  pr\v.tv;  tie  £•:>;",  ess  fr.-m  -..be.lr  unre-st.

eon::d;CtI'T  teiie-re.     7:.erefo:Y  :t  if  iii:   after  lie  — Yers.  IS-If.    In  ibis  wsj.  ai.boucb  r.;t  exoizsir-.c

rlvxx.  ;iit  rainbow  aroe-irs.     .An-d  s-o  to  Abrii.irn  w^s  bis  sin,  d.vs  Oii2  oocnii:~  nevertitie'ss  -of  tie  :V.i>

ci^ec:  tie  s^n:  of   ci:  0:1:1:  elfloc..     l~.  r-ospevt  to  tie  f-i  Stv-orirT  of  tial  judJoial  sen-:e::oe  wbioi  c.rritoi

of  Go;  BIK«  Abel's  cit:jv-ktvpi£i:  in  tie  vtir  tis:  hide  fro:-;.  Go>;    ?s.  T.  $'„   tno  ;>et  bo   fin::.:    ?s.

follove-i  wiilst  Cii-_'?  :-.^~:.  .:'.:-rf  irirk-^rri-.-i.  or  cc  .'-ixxii.  T.     0  :•.:  5   fape   or  o-v^uci^v   :v.t-.^-.?    ':.:?


S4,  <S o  *,     In  i-i-t.  iA.:i.  ^-»\  v.  nrist  mi^es  A:*-.,  :_:-.  —  i^  n.v  i. oo.o;  win;  we&r>onf  :o  tii:e  ^ ;  7..r;  in-o^

Oain  .f  LII;  :»;-.c.nm:"i.c  o:  tie  oitirvn  ^  t:.e  mio.imint  wn^on  n>e  ;-we..n     ^r;  •>;w7sn  t-juiiuon  ni:ii-;s  nn2i

end  .:  ti-.  ^  o:ld_     Abel  is  no:  s..iic  on  iny  wcrioJj  mars    o:    d.         -             ;re   corveitirod   tii:    Go>d

or    d.<:oes-:-.    i. o-ount.  Vut    onlj  on  a^«"nnt  cc   tie  viiO:-;  nr>on      -              ne  of  :ie  loners  of  tie  nim-e

srrrio;  ;•:'  God.     Tiie  rood  and  tie  CT£  comKuono;  Jtbovai  ;  o::     -             .  :  i;  wij  a  ^o;  thr.:  oon:/on-

tiif,  i>  e i „"::;: .sioc  :  bnt  woon  be  -us-.s  tie  ninoe  of  :  J  i  rjoi  be^ad  o;'  biir. — C^i^                            r-.  tie

hronj-or.  w^;:  tise  is  ::  :n:  an  ioknowli'dzmen:  ti',it  origin  of  po' v ^~5.~- T  in    s   7>-;-'      -               ...r-.r.ers*e

pit_;n:  :.:  to-,  wr.  n^:  ^     Eow  is  it  that  be  who  before  b'^dlds   'be  irs:  eirtid-r  oitT.  ':•;:  i'^er^i-di  oonies  a

fcciioc  :      '.%:"7ir-.rs^..n  in;  ~i-.no;  ire  no  bdudrinoe  to  te-nts  in;  ie~ds  of  Alribn.::'.  :ie  birr  of  PaTid,  tie

O:>;  in  --; — :inj  n;;   ci'_s-.  -^nlon  tne  world  so   nds-  wi:oiwc>r;  of  Gideon-    "tie   f^.'rd  .:  tie  Lor;  an;

A.-in.  5  sin  --."-„.:  ~  "^-..:  in  Ciin'*  d-.-e4;  of  mnrder.  and    ti-.n   le-^-ends    oonoemivc    Ci.n's   ol-d  ace  and

Bsoon.:.     Cnrs--;  :>e  tion  :  :.:.;:  1*,  :ion  art  S.T»  tie  bo-is:ir.c  before-  :ieir  wiros.     Tie  £rss  pr'et  in  tie

B.T  tils  word  if  Ciin  esco>n^n"^d::i;e-i.  rr.5  o5  Ese  a  a  praise  r  of  himself.     Eif  son^:  is  witfc:c:  doni;  a

hope  :>:  tin;   ionor  wik-i  be   OOT-:,-!     Tii:  wni.i  Tie" Ariiliins  have  z  wiole  Ixvi  fuH  of  rinie?  in;

*^ti  A>;i  bid  a  ficcriiiTe  or    prs"i>ur£tiTe  power,  praises   of   tie   fworl — Z;rc-:_Es:  T:  e  fin   of  Ciin

Ac  eani  ii;  ctiike-""  i^Mitt.  iyrii.  j;j\.     Ad^m  had  Yers..  £^,  ir.    We  see  :is:  ec.lr.irv  r,rj;  f.le-v.o-c  ire

«lrea;r  !>£•:•  onae  a  siraacer  in  -»ie  earth;  Ciin  is  2ow  as  v-I;  as  i"iniinirj  r^seK     Kiriirisni  in;   :r-_:ii:T

»  rur.HT-r. — '.  i^ris ;  y,>t   to  boddlj  eidJe   alorje  is  f.  ll.w    aft^r   a   corrap'S    CTili:ar.ion.      Imnie-diittiT

Ciin  oocden^ied.  btn  miyect^c  10  a  tctieh  srvere-r  after  tie  efer-str.-vraceT  n.ani:'rftiuons   cf  a  Ciinit'.c

•woisiaieji: ;  tiere  is  nr»i  a  pp^t  of  earth  tiit  be  car  w.rld-f.  lr:t,  we  £2;   tie  snron^  rert'li:ionf  of  ti?


>GS


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


of  Adam's  daughters  Salmar.a  and  Deborah,  but  I
know  not  of  any  ground  for  believing  in  them.  Eve
had  Flighted  Abel,  whilst  she  thought  much  of  Cain
as  the  one  who  should  inherit  and  possess  the  prom
ise;  now  (on  the  birth  of  Seth)  she  holds  the  con
trary,  and  seems  to  say:  in  Abel  was  all  my  hope,
for  he  was  righteous  but  him  the  godless  Cain  hath
slain  ;  therefore  has  there  been  given  to  me  another
seed  in  place  of  Abel.  She  does  not  adhere  to  him
in  the  motherly  way,  and  after  the  motherly  heart.
She  docs  iv. t  excuse  or  palliate  the  sin  of  her  son.
The  &(/iif<:<:  They  unite  together  in  a  community ;
but  there  aviso  not'  therefrom  eities  full  of  lust  and
luxury;  n»,  no,  but  places  of  holy  meditation  and
devotion.  And  so  there  emerge  the  first  delicate
outlines  'of  a  church  and  community  of  life  among
the  pious.  Adam  and  Eve,  we  may  believe,  assem
bled  their  children  and  descendants  for  the  maintain
ing  of  a  solemn  divine  service.  In  contrast  to  the
serf-congregating  of  the  wicked  were  the  good  gath
ered  into  a  church  by  dud  himself.

GERLACH:  The  gross  deeds  of  individual  sin,  as
well  as  the  original  sin  of  Adam,  had  their  primary
ecat,  not  in  the  temptation.*  of  the  sense,  nor  in  any
momentary  outward  occasions,  but  in  the  disposition
of  the  heart  towards  God.  This  is  manifest  here  on
the  occasion  of  the  first  outward  divine  worship
through  the  sacrificial  offering,  in  which  man,  sepa
rated'  indeed  from  God,  yet  outwardly  feeling  his
need  of  him,  might  hope  to  merit  the  divine  accept
ance  in  such  religious  service' ;  whereas,  with  God,
Mich  a  wojk  has  worth  and  significance  only  as  the
outer  manifestation  of  the  inner  yielding  of  the
heart  to  him.— Ver.  ">.  The  use  of  the  earliest  do
mestic  animals,  and  the  cultivation  of  grain,  were
derived  to  man  out  of  their  primitive  condition.  Tht
eheep  cannot  live  without  the  human  care  and  pro
tcction  ;  the  grain  is  nowhere  found  vuld  upon  the
earth,  and  it  degenerates  without  human  cultivation

ycr.  .).      When    man   joins   in  covenant  with  thi:

divine  will,  nothing  can  ever  overcome  him,  for  he


has  omnipotence  on  his  side. — Ver.  10.    Here  cornea
n  now  the  division  of  works  and  occupations.

Lisco:  The  offerings.  As  offered  in  faith,  which
jver  rests  on  the  word  of  God,  they  are  to  be  re
garded  as  divinely  instituted.  Abel  is  God's  friend;
.us  cause  is,  therefore,  God's  cause,  and  God  is  his
avenger. — Ver.  13.  First  presumption,  then  de
spair";  both  are  contrary  to  Holy  Scripture.  Unbelief
in  God's  righteousness  before  the  evil  deed,  tends,
after  the  act,  to  unbelief  in  the  greatness  anil  power
of  the  divine  mercy  ;— to  a  repentance  that  is  full
of  despair. — A  tortured  conscience  fears  every
thing  :  the  murderer  fears  murder,  the  treacherous
fears  perfidy.

CALVER  HANDBOOK:  How  many  vain  offerings
and  gifts  in  the  heathen  world  '—Where  faith  is,
there  is  the  willing  mibd,  and  there  can  God  make
demands  of  men.— Instead  of  a  crusher  of  the  ser
pent,  Cain  is  one  of  the  serpent's  seed. — UUNSEN:
The  land  of  Nod,  that  is,  the  land  of  flight,  of  wan
dering  of  banishment,  the  strange  land  (the  inter-
pretation  that  refers  it  to  Turan  in  opposition  to  Iran).

MICHOW:  The  first  evil  fruit  of  the  evil  seed.
He  cites  the  saying  of  Schiller:

The  evil  deed's  avcnpinpr  curse  it  i;",
That  ivil  evermore  it  bhall  beget.

TAUBE:  1.  As  thou  standestin  relation  to  the  God
of  mercy,  so  art  thou,— cither  believing  or  unbe
lieving.  "  '2.  Piemaincst  thou  unbelieving,  then,  in
spite  of  all  attempts  to  obtain  deliverance  from  God,
thy  course  is  onward  from  sin  to  sin  until  it  lands
thec  in  despair.— W.  HOFMANN  :  The  seed  of  the
woman:  1.  Jn  its  first  manifestation;  "2.  in  its  re
mote  future  ;  3.  in  its  prefigurative  significance.

DELITZSCH:  Whilst  the  race  of  the  Cainitcs  de
veloped  itself  in  outward  show,  and  on  the  ground
of  a  corrupt  nature,  the  community  of  the  Setlntea
built  itself  up  through  the  common  calling  upon  the
name  Jehovah,— that  is,  of  a  God  revealing  himself
on  the  ground  of  mercy.


THIRD    SECTION.

Adam  and  Seth'.-The  Scthitcs  or  Macrobii  (the  long.Uved\-Tlic  living  Worship  and  the  Blessing
of  the  Life-renewing  in  the  Line  of  the  Sons  of  God.


CHAPTER  V.  1-32  (compare  1  Chron.  i.  1-4).

This  is  the  book  of  the  generations  of  Adam.     In  the  day  that  God  created  man,

2  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  he  him.     Male  and  female  created  he  them;  and  blesse,

3  them   and  called   their   name  Adam  [man]  in  the  day  when  they  were  created      And
Adam  lived  a  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his

4  ima-o   and  called  his  name  Seth  [fixed,  compensation].     And  the  days  of  Adam  after  he

5  hacfbegotten  Seth  were  eight  hundred  years;  and  he  begat  sons  and  daughters.     Anc

6  all  the  days  that  Adam  lived  were  nine  hundred  and  thirty  years;  and  he  d.ed      And

7  Seth  lived  a  hundred  and  five  years,  and  begat  Enosh'  [man  weak  man].    And  beth  ,n
after  he  becrat  Enosh  eight  hundred  and  seven  years  and  begat  sons  and  daughters

8  9    And  all  the  days  of  Seth  were  nine  hundred  and  twelve  years ;  and  he  d.ed      Anc
10  Enosh  lived  ninety  years  and  begat  Cainan  [gain,  gainful,  industrious].     And  Enosh  meet

after  he  be«mt  Cainan  eight  hundred  and  fifteen  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.


CHAP.  v.  1-32.  2G9

11,  12  And  all  the  days  of  Enos  were  nine  hundred  and  five  years;    and  lie  died.     And

13  Cainan  lived  seventy  years  and  begat  Mahalaleel2  [renown,  praise  of  God].     And  Cainan
lived    after  he  begat  Mahalaleel  eight    hundred     and    forty    years,    and    bcirat    sons

14  and  daughters.     And  all  the  days  of  Cainan  were  nine  hundred  and  ten  years";   and  he

15  died.     And  Mahalaleel  lived  sixty  and  five  years  and  begat  Jared  [descent,  one  descending J.
1C  And  Mahalaleel  lived  after  he  begat  Jarcd  eight  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  becat  sons

17  and  daughters.     And  all  the  days  of  Mahalaleel  were  eight  hundred  ninety  and  five

18  years;   and  he  died.     And  Jared  lived  a  hundred  and  sixty  and  two  year?,  and  he  begat

19  Enoch3  [the devoted,  mysterious].     And  Jared  lived  after  lie  begat  Enoch  eight  hundred

20  years,_and  begat  sons  and  daughters.     And  all  the  days  of  Jarcd  were  nine  hundred

21  and  sixty  and  two  years;    and  he  died.     And  Enoch  lived  sixty  and   five  years,  and

22  begat    Methuselah    [Oescr.ius:  man  of  the  arrow ;  Furst  :  man  of  v.-ar;  Delitzsch  :  man  of  growth].       And

Enoch  walked4  with  God  [lived  in  communion  with  God]  after  he  be  "-at  Methuselah  three

23  hundred  years  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.     And  all  the  days°of  Enoch  were  three

24  hundred    and  sixty  and  five  years.     And  Enoch  walked  with  God  and  he  was  not

25  [disappeared  suddenly],  for  God  took  him.     And  Methuselah  lived  a  hundred  oMitv  and

26  seven  years,  and  begat  Lamech  [the  strong  young  man,  or  hero].     And  Methuselah  lived  after
lie  begat  Lamech  seven  hundred  eighty  and  two  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.

27  And  all  the  days  of  Methuselah  were  nine  hundred  and  sixty  and  nine  years;    and

28  he    died.     And  Lamech   lived   a   hundred    eighty   and    two  years  and   begat   a   son.

29  And  he  called  his  name  Noah  [rest,  rest-bringer],   saying,   This  "same  shall  comfort  us6
concerning  our  work  and  toil  of  our   hands,   because  "of  the  ground  which   the  Lord

30  hath  cursed.     And  Lamech  lived  after  he  begat  Noah,  five  hundred  ninety  and  five

31  years  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.     And  all  the  days  of  Lamech  were  seven  hundred

32  seventy  and  seven   years;    and   he  died.     And    Noah   was   five  hundred   years  old;
and    Noah    begat  Shem    [name,  preserver  of  the  name]  and  Ham    [heat,  from  C^n]    and  Japheth
[wide-spreading,  room-making,  from


['  Vcr.  5.—  £  i:X  .  In  general  little  reliance  can  be  placed  upon  the  etymological  significance  of  these  early  names  as


.       .     .

Vcr.  12.-bxbbri2  :  Praise  of  God,  or  one  who  praises  God.  This  is  very  plain,  and  seems  to  be  followed  by
another  contrast  in  the  name  T^  ,  a  descending,  whether  it  denotes  degeneracy,  despondency,  or  a  plain,  pious  humility
without  the  high  rapture  which'  seems  to  be  indicated  in  that  of  the  predecessor.—  T.  L.]

[3  Ver.  18.-Tp:ri  :  rendered  devoted,  initialed.  This,  however,  seems  to  be  a  later  sense  of  the  root,  although  it  is
well  applicable  to  the  one  to  whom  it  is  applied.  From  the  Arabic  there  may  be  got  the  sense  of  instructed,  learned,  and
™rv^  V'^'tV  not101"  f.  th,°  Mohammedans  and  later  Jews  respecting  Enoch's  great  scientific  attainments,  as  also,

5SSS±0^£3%33LL&  with^^r  m  tho  Koran'  tllous'h  u  would  sccm  also  as  tLough  tbey  most

[•>  Ver.  22.—  r^nrr     Compare  the  similar  phrase  Gen.  xvii.  1,  xxiv.  -10,  xlviii.  15,  to  u-alk  before  God.     Here  and


pU.edGod.S-T  L?'  l  G°d'    In  b°th  CaSCS  "  dGn°tOS  C0ncord'  and  tho  LXX'  werc  justified  in  rendering  it  ci,pc<m,«,
[*  Ver.  SD.-ilsrn:?.    Tho   Jewish  interpreters  regard  this  as  explanatory  of  the  name  Noah  (rest),  but  not  its
etymological   ground.    'Otherwise,  says  Eashi,  he  should  have   been  called  cn:r,  Menahcm.     They  also  distinguish

'


them  on  the  words  of  Lamech,  and  on  what  was  said  of  Noah  after  the  flood,  that  he  was  nr"!Xri  l^X,  yeupybs,
agricola,  Gen.  ix.  20,  a  husbandman.  ^HS? ,  shall  comfort,  rather,  shall  revive,  restore,  make  us'lreathe  again,  like
the  Greek  aw^v'xu.  Compare  Ps.  xxiii.  4i  "Thy  rod  and  thy  staff  shall  rcvice  me."  It  is  tlie  good  shepherd
restoring  to  life  and  vigor  the  fainting,  dying  shcep-to  bring  back  tho  gasping  breath.  Hence  the  Syriac  J.LcI»i3
for  the  resurrection.  It  is  not  the  sense  of  consolation,  as  some  give  it,  but  resuscitation,  revivification.— T.  L.]

EXEGETICAL  AND  C1UTICAL.  j  not  the  superscription  placed  before  the  25th  verse

1  of  the  fourth  chapter?    The  documentary  hypothesis


_  1.  The  line  of  Scth,  as  the  line  of  the  pious  wor
shippers  of  God,  is  carried  on  to  ISToah,  with  whom
the  first  humanity  from  the  stem  of  Scth,  now  puri
fied  in  the  flood,  passes  over  to  a  new  age  :  so  that
the  name  Seth,  us  in  verification  of  Eve's  maternal
prophecy,  becomes  established  in  contrast  with  Abel
the  mere  breath  of  life,  and  the  line  of  Cain  drowned
in  the  flood.  The  question  may  be  asked,  Why  is


answers  :  it  is  because  here  again  the  Eloliim  docu
ment  takes  up  the  history.  We  let  that  question
rest,  though  here  verse  29th,  with  its  name  Jehovah,
does  not  have  the  look  of  an  interpolation.  It  must
be  remarked,  nevertheless,  that  in  the  preceding
section  it  was  necessary  for  Seth  to  appear  as  tho
representative  of  Abel.  But  here  again  bejrins  tho
history  of  Seth  as  the  history  of  Adam  himsel f ;  since


GENESIS,   OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


only  through  Seth  does  Adam  live  on  beyond  the
flood  and  even  to  the  world's  end.  In  respect  to  its
inner  nature,  therefore,  is  the  section  Elohistic ;
that  is,  it  presents  the  universal  grounding  ot  the
whole  human  race,  not  merely  that  of  the  line  of
Shem  or  of  the  theocracy  of  Abraham.  Knobel
represents  the  section  according  to  the  documentary
hypothesis:  "The  Klohist  ranges  the  genealogical
table  of  Adam  immediately  after  the  account  of  cre
ation  ch  i.  ('•),  and  connects  with  it  directly  his
history  of  the  Hood,  ch.  vi.  9,  etc.  ;  it  forms,  conse
quently,  an  essential  part  of  his  work,  without  which
it  would  have  had  a  hiatus  (rather  with  it,  we  may
add).  From  the  same  author  who  concerned  him
self  'with  the  connected  genealogies  and  chronolo
gies,  as  biinir  predominantly  Elohistic,  whilst  the
Jeliovist  took  little  notice  of  them,  originated  also
the  other  -vnealogical  tables  and  chronological  scries
that  are  introduced  in  their  order  throughout  the
Pentateuch."  The  section  before  us,  in  its  entire
contents,  evidently  presupposes  ch.  ii.  and  iii.  There
is  special  proof  of  this  in  verses  3,  '24,  and  2'.»,  as
also  in  the  constant  refrain:  and  he  died.  f

2.  Ye/.   1.   The  book  of  the  generation  of
Adam.— The  genealogies  of  Adam  ^  become  perma
nent  and  continuous  alone  through  Seth.

3.  Ver.  2.  In  the  likeness  of  God. — This  is
expressed  here  by  - ,  not  by  3,  as  in  ch.  5.    It  means,
when  lie  c;v,-i/M/ him  He  made  him  in  the  likeness,
etc.  ;  tint  is,  the  divine  ideal  form  was  tin-  model  of
i,;.;  „;„,(. ;/v/)_0,.  ,,f  the  Jhi/Ktthiy  of  his  human  form
in    distinction    from  its    cr<itt><,n.     The    name    man
(Adam)   is   ascribed   here  in  common   to  both   man
and  woman.     The  creation  in  the  divine  image   is
repeated,  because  the  line  of  God's  sons  is  grounded
on  its  divine  origin  (see  Luke  iii.  38).

•1.  Ver.  :>.  Seth. — For  the  significance  of  the
name  in  relation  to  the  names  of  the  Cainitic  line,
see  the  preceding  section.  Of  Seth  it  is  said,  He
besrat  him  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  image.  That
is,  a-  his  image,  Seth  was  similar  to  him,  indeed,  but
not  identically  like;  he  was  distinguished  from  him
individually,  he  was  like  him  in  his  Adamic  nature.
And  this  is  said,  doubtless,  with  a  consciousness  of
Adam's  fallen  state,  although  in  the  ground  ideas  of
this  fifth  chapter  the  nature  of  Adam  as  made  in  the
divine  image,  and  its  pious  direction,  are  still  made
prominent!  Even  if  the  names  further  on  denote,
in  the  average  probability,  the  first-born  of  the  gen
ealogies  (although  this  d'ocs  not  always  hold  good,
as  is  shown  by  the  examples  of  Ishmael,  Esau,  Reu
ben,  etc.),  yet  it  docs  not  follow  that  Seth  also  is  to
be  regarded  here  as  a  first-born  ;  just  as  little  as  the
three"  sons  of  Noah,  taken  together,  can  be  thus
regarded.  Seth  has  become  the  spiritual  first-born
ofthe  Adamitic  house  ;  he  is  the  continuance  of  the
line  of  Adam  in  its  pious  direction,  and  in  its  his
torical  duration.

5.  Yer.  4.  The  ages  of  the  Patriarchs  who  lived
before  the  flood  are  individually  stated  in  the  fol
lowing  manner:  1.  Adam  930  years,  2.  Seth  912
years,  3.  Enosh  905  years,  4.  Cainan  910  years,  5.
Mahalalcel  8i»5  years,  6.  Jared  902  years,  7.  Enoch
365  years,  then  translated,  8.  Methuselah  969  years,
9.  Lamech  777  years,  10.  Noah,  before  the  flood,  600
years  (ch.  vii.  6),  in  the  whole  950  years  (ch.  ix.  29).
In  relation  to  the  dates,  the  following  things  are  to
be  remarked.  Adam  is  130  years  old  at  the  beget
ting  of  Seth,  whom  Cain  and  Abel  naturally  pre
ceded.  Seth  begets  Enosh  when  105  years  old.
Enosh  is  presented  to  us  as  a  father  at  the  age  of  90


years,  Cainan  70  years,  Mahalalcel  65  years,  Jared  162
years,  Enoch  C5  years,  Methuselah  187  years,  La
mech  182  years,  Noah  even  500  years.     Since,  more
over,  there  is  mentioned  in  each  case  the  begetting
of  other  sons  and  daughters,  it  becomes  very  ques
tionable  whether  we  are  to  understand  all  these  gen
ealogical  heads  as  being  first-born.     The  numbers,  as
given,  do,    indeed,  indicate   late   marriages   having
proportion  to  the  length  of  life.     That,  however,  no
ascetic  idea  is  necessarily  bound  up  in  this,  is  shown
by  the   case  of  Enoch,  who  with   Mahalaleel   had  a
son  the  earliest  of  all  the  patriarchs.     Even  between
the  repeated  mention,  moreover,  that  he  walked  with
God,  it  is  said  that   he  begat  sons    and  daughters.
The   age  (55,  as  a  year  for  begetting,  is  also  worthy
of  note,  as  showing  to  be  impossible  every  attempt
to  reduce  these  patriarchal  years  to  shorter  sections
of  time.     This  numbering  of  their  years  is  of  richest
significance.     It   expresses  clearly   the  blessing  of
longevity    as    emphatically    exhibited    through    the
Sethic  paty  ;    it  is  the  history  of  the  devout  Macro-
bii,  or  long-livers  of  the  primitive  time.     In  Enoch
the  line  reaches  the  highest  point  of  its  life-renova
tion  ;    since    in    him  the    peculiar   death-form    falls
away  ;    he   departs  without  dying,  and   by  a  divine
translation.     In  Methuselah  tins  grand  inarch  of  life
reaches  its  extreme  longevity  in  this   world.     The
line  then  sinks  down  in  Lamech,  as  is  indicated  by
his  sighing  over  the  labor  and  pain  that  comes  from
the  curse-ladened  earth.     The  whole  lir.<>,  in  its  ap
parent  monotonv,  is  a  most  lively  expression  of  a
powerful    strife  of  life  with  death,  of   the  blessing
with  the  curse.     They  advance  far   in  years,   these
pious  sons  of  God  ;   the  numbers  reach  a  high  figure,
but  ever  again  there  comes  that  tragic  word  r~;1  :
and  IK-  died.    Once,  and  only  once,  is  there  reached
the   silver  glance  of  the  life-renewing,  and  of  that
life-transformation  without   death,  which  comes  up
to  the  original  form.     This  is  in  the  life  of  Enoch,
the  seventh  patriarch.     It  must  be  observed,  in  ac
cordance  wiih  what  is  implied  in  the  following  chap
ter,  that  the  line  of  Seth,  in  its  development,  suffers
a  gradual  disturbance,  which  does  not   permit  it  to
reach  the  ideal  aim,— a  fact  which  seems  to  be  indi
cated  by  this   name  Methuselah,  and  the  sighs  of
Lamech.'     When  in  respect  to  this  long  life-endur
ance,  we    add    the    consideration  of  the    enormous
breaking  up  that  was  suddenly  occasioned  by  the
3ood,  it  must  not,  lie  overlooked  that  Noah,  although
already  six  hundred  years  old  when  the  flood  took
place,  survived  its  storms  three  hundred  and  fifty
years.

Two  main  difficulties  are  objected  to  the  forego-
in^  statement :  1.  the  length  of  life  ;  2.  the  authen
ticity  of  the  chronology.  "The  highest  possible
a"-e,"  says  Valentine  ("  Compendium  of  Physiology,
ii°p  894)  "appears  to  be  from  about  150  to  160
years  •  and  in  fact,  none  of  the  highest  ages  which
men  are  known  to  have  reached  attain  the  height
of  200  years  (Pritchard's  '  Natural  History  of  the
Human  Race').  It  cannot  be  shown  that  men  after
the  flood  differed  in  any  remarkable  manner  from
those  who  lived  before.  In  ch.  xi.  10,  moreover,  the
narrator  represents  some  as  attaining,  even  after  tne
flood  to  the  age  of  400  or  600  years."  KnobeL


flood,  to  the  age  of  400  or  600  yea:
Special  treatises  on  the  preceding  question  are  con
tained  in  the  writing  of  DE  LAPASSE :  Essai  sur  la
conservation  de  la  vie,  Paris,  Mas.ion,  I860.  In
general,  there  is  no  deciding  this  question  by  any
appeal  to  strong  constitutions,  simple  modes  ot  life,
unweakened  powers  of  life,  &c.  First  of  all,  do


CHAP.    V.    1-32.


271


both  extremes  of  humanity  need  to  be  settled  ac
cording  to  the  Scriptures  and  the christological  ideas:
and,  in  fact,  in  correspondence  with  the  middle  point
of  humanity.  The  truth  of  Christ's  resurrection,  nol
as  a  return  out  of  death  to  the  life  of  this  world,
but  as  a  transition  from  the  first  form  of  human  life
into  a  second  imperishable  form,  casts  light  as  well
upon  the  paradisaical  beginning  as  upon  the  es-
chatological  end  of  humanity.  It  testifies  to  an
ideal  capability  for  the  preservation  of  life  even  to
the  point  of  a  death-like,  yet  not  deathly  transforma
tion  into  the  incorruptible.  To  this  testifies  also,  in
symbolical  form,  the  paradisaical  tree  of  life,  as  well
as,  in  its  dogmatic  acceptance,  the  words  of  Paul
concerning  the  longing  "to  be  clothed  upon"  (2
Cor.  v.  1-5)  that  lies  in  the  depths  of  human  nature
(compare  LANCE'S  Miscellaneous  Writings,  ii.  p.
232).  So  also  what  he  says  of  Christ  as  the  life-
giving  spirit  of  man  from  heaven,  and  of  the  trans
formation  that  awaits  those  who  live  long  at  the
world's  end  (1  Cor.  xv.  45,  51).  The  christological
idea  that  lies  at  the  foundation  is  this  :  As  the  his
torical  death,  the  death  of  corruption,  in  its  gradual
course  first  breaks  through  from  the  spiritual  sphere
of  sin  into  the  province  of  the  soul,  and  from  the
province  of  the  soul  into  the  corporeity,  so  also  does
the  healing  of  the  new  life  make  its  passage ;  first
in  renewing  the  spirit-life,  then  the  life  of  the  soul,
and  finally  becoming  visible  in  the  restoration  of  a
new  corporeal  capacity  for  transformation  at  the
world's  cud.  Thus  the  decreasing  longevity  of  the
primitive  time  furnishes  the  contrast  to  the  increas
ing  longevity  at  the  end  of  the  world  (see  also  Is.
Ixv).  Uut  it  was  not  only  through  the  original
pow«r  of  a  corporeity  not  yet  wholly  shattered  that
the  death  of  the  Sethites  was  retarded  ;  it  was  also
kept  back  through  the  progress  of  life  in  the  Jeho
vah-faith  of  the  Sethites,  as  it  culminated  in  Enoch,
and  had,  therefore,  already,  as  its  consequence,  a
typically  prophetic  pre-representation  of  the  trans
formation  and  the  resurrection  in  his  mysterious
taking.  The  difficulty  which  is  found  in  the  suppo
sition  of  such  long  life  in  the  Sethites,  has  given  rise
to  various  hypotheses.  Some  have  supposed  that
along  with  the  patriarchs  named  their  races  and
peoples  are  meant  to  be  included ;  Rosenmiiller,
Friedreich,  and  others,  think  that  from  these
orally  transmitted  genealogies,  many  names  had
fallen  out;  Ilensler  holds  that  the  expression  fiDTT
(year)  denotes  among  the  patriarchs  lesser  spaces' of
time,  namely,  three  months,  till  the  time  of  Abra
ham,  thence  to  the  time  of  Joseph  eight  months,
and  afterwards,  for  the  first  time,  twelve.  Raske :
from  Adam  to  Xoah  the  year  was  equal  to  one  month.
See  against  this,  KNOBKL,  p.  68  ff.  To  the  first  sup
position  is  opposed  the  definite  characterizing  of
single  persons ;  to  the  second  the  fact  that  in  the
same  manner  the  son  always  follows  the  father ;  to
the  third  the  constant  signification  of  the  year  as
tropical,  periodical.*  "No  shorter  year  than  the
period  of  a  year's  time  have  the  Hebrews  ever  had.

*  [Besides  the  reasons  given  by  Lange  against  the  idea
of  any  lesser  time  being  denoted  by  [13T3,  there  are  others
arising  from  the  etymology  of  the  word.    This  makes  it
ie  most  fixed  nnd  most  distinct  of  all  the  measures  of
time.    Not  only  in  the  Hebrew,  but  in  the  Greek,  the  radi
al  idea  of  the  word  for  year  is  repetition,  or  a  coming  over
again  m  a  second  recurrence  of   the  same  astronomical
series.    Thus  the  primary  sense  of  the  verb  HJttS   is  to  re
peat,  to  do  a  second  time ;  hence  the  word  for  the  numeral
two.    In  Greek  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  eros  has  the


Against  any  shortening  of  the  rtrr  stands  the  fact
that  in  that  case  some  of  the  patriarchs  must  have
begotten  children  at  an  age  in  which  they  were  not
cajiable."  Knobel.  By  him  and  many  of  the  mod-
cms  it  is  explained  as  a  mythical  conception,  with
reference  to  the  old  representation  that  in  the  more
happy  primitive  period,  men  lived  longer,  but  were
ever  becoming  weaker  and  of  shorter  life.  "This
representation  (of  the  brevity  of  life)  presents  itself
very  clearly  in  the  Old  Testament.  In  the  historical
time  a  man  among  the  Hebrews  became  TO  or  80
years  old  (Ps.  xc.  10);  in  the  Mosaic  and  patriarcha.
time,  when  there  meet  us  statements  of  luO,  120,
123,  133,  137,  147, 175,  and  180  years,  man  reached
an  age  between  100  and  200  years ;  for  the  time  of

same  idea,  as  we  see  it  in  Hon.  Odyss.  i.  10,  ITOS  5jA0e
7rept7rAo/i6vu)i/  enavTwy.  Compare  it  with  the  particle  e'ri
(Lai.  et,  ilcrum,  iterare,  Saxon  yet,  addition,  repetition).
So  also  in  the  word  etaavToj  (that  which  returns  into  itself),
an  etymology  which,  though  condemned  by  some,  is  not  to
be  rashly  rejected.  In  harmony  with  this  is  the  Latin
annus,  a  ring,  or  circle.  So  the  Gothic  iar,  jar,  jer,  tho
old  Anglo-Saxon  gear,  German  jahr,  English  year,  seem
all  to  carry  the  same  thought,  that  which  comes  as?ain,—
being  connected  with  the  Greek  tap  (Latin  ver),  the  sprint/,
the  repetition,  the  new  life,  and  not  with  the  indefinite
Greek  xatpds,  as  some  lexicographers  suppose.  So  marked
a  word  carrying  this  distinct  conception  in  all  these  lan
guages,  would  be  the  last  one  to  be  used  for  any  smaller,  or
less  marked  division,  and  this  view  is  confirmed  bv  the  fact
that  neither  in  the  Hebrew  writings  nor  anywhere  else  do
we  ever  find  any  such  substitution.  Years  in  the  plural,
m3'>y  ,  seems  sometimes  to  be  used  for  larger  designations,
or  for  oeonic  time;  as  in  such  expressions  as  "^12*  ni'3'CJ
"p"1?? ,  "  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High,"  Ps".
Ixxvii.  10,  or  "thy  years,  rpriri,  are  for  all  genera
tions,"  I's.  cii.  24 ;  though  even" in  these  cases  it  may  have
its  fixed  astronomical  measure,  denoting  God's  doings  in
time  and  human  history.

Wo  get  a  confirmation  of  these  views  by  ('•nl-idering
how  the  whole  idea  of  time  is  divided  for  us  into  the  as
tronomical  and  the  iconic,— the  former  measured  by  the  sun
and  other  heavenly  bodies,  the  latter  above  such  measure
ment,  entirely  independent  of  it,  having  its  division  from
inward  evolutions,  and  thus  presenting  a  higher  and  an
independent  chronology  of  its  own.  lii  astronomical  time
the  day  is  the  unit,  complete  in  itself  with  its  dual  evolu
tion,  and  having  no  smaller  astronomical  eubd:  visions,
although  it  may  be  cut  up  into  hours  and  watches  by  arbi
trary  numbcrings.  In  atonic  time,  the  single  aiujy  or  olam
is  the  unit,  and  the  greater  measures  arc  made  by  its  redu
plications  and  retriplications,  its  ages  of  ages  (aiJii'es  ^<av
aliavoiv)  and  worlds  of  worlds.  Wo  sec  from  this  why,  of
all  astronomical  measures,  the  d:iy  is  used  to  represent  the
iconic  unit,  and  to  stand  fur  an  aiuv  or  an  olam,  as  in  tho
fjntpa.  aiSivos  of  2  Peter  iii.  18.  From  its  peculiar  position
as  the  unit  in  tho  one  department,  it  becomes  the  most  easy
and  natural  term  for  this  purpose  in  represent!  ng  the  higher
chronology  on  the  earthly  scale.  1'or  tho  opposite  reason,
year  and  month  are  less  fitted  for  such  a  parallelism  ;  and
aence  we  find  the  usage  referred  to  so  strongly  verified  in
so  many,  perhaps  in  all,  languages.  A  year  is  not  only  as
tronomical  in  itself,  but  internally  divided  by  astronomical
periods.  Hence  it  is  generally  used  for  nothing  longer  or
shorter  than  its  own  solar  measurement.  Everywhere,
lowever,  day  is  thus  employed,  not  only,  in  philosophical
:anguage  where  a  magnus  annus  is  artilicially  spoken  of,
aut  in  common  idioms,  where  we  feel  its  natural  propriety
as  used  to  denote  any  long  internally  completing,  or  KClf-
evolving  time,  series,  or  cycle;  as  in  that  line  of  VIRGIL,

.  vi.  745  :

Douce  longa  DIES  pcrfecto  temporis  orbc,

it  in  that  peculiar  Latin  phrase  venire,  in  diem,  to  be  born,
.o  come  into  the  world,  or  in  the  still  greater  Scriptural
ahrases  "  before  the  day  I  am  He,"  Is.  xliii.  13,  or  the
jiue'pa  aiwi/os  already  cited.  "We  should  feel  it  as  a  philo-
ogical  discord  if  year  were  thus  used,  whether  in  poetry.
or'in  any  other  animated  language.  On  tho  same  ground
t  must  appear  as  forced  when  any  one  would  interpret
"I ltd  ,  eroy,  eiaav-rds,  jaJir,  year,  of  any  shorter  period.  Be
sides,  the  Hebrews  had  two  distinct  names  for  months,
neither  of  which  is  ever  used  in  giving  the  lengths  of  lives,
or  in  keeping  the  record  of  genealogies,  although  employed
n  the  designation  of  festal  times. — T.  L.J


272


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF -MOSES.


Abraham,  and  thence  up  to  Noah,  the  dates  maintain
themselves,  with  one  exception,  between  200  and
COO  years  (ch.  xi.  10-32)  :  whilst  in  the  time  from
Noah  to  Adam  (there  too  with  one  exception)  they
arc  between  7ou  and  10UO  years.  According  to  the
Hebrew  belief  therefore,  in  respect  to  the  duration
of  human  life,  it  became  worse  with  men  in  the
course  of  the  times.  Thence  the  hope  in  a  restora
tion  of  the  old  longevity  in  the  Messianic  time  (Is.
Ixv.  20;  xxv.  M).  Bo  also  the  rest  of  antiquity  as
sumed  a  greater  length  of  life  for  the  oldest  time,
and  JOSKPHI-S  (Ai.titj.  i.  3,  9)  names  Manetho,  Bero-
sus,  Most-has,  I!estiieus,  Ilieronymus,  llesiod,  &e.,
as  giving  accounts  similar  to  that  of  Genesis."  In
the  number  ten  of  the  patriarchs,  there  is,  in  truth,
a  gymb'.MH-al  signilicancy  (the  Chaldeans,  too,  accord-
in"-  to  Bei  •-!!-,  number  ten  antediluvian  patriarchs),
but  a  symbolical  number  is  not  on  that  account  a
mythical  number,  and  under  the  mythical  point  of
view  Knobel  does  not  know  what  to  do  with  the  un
like  and  uneven  nnmbi  PS.

Concerning  the  chronological  treatises  that  relate
to  our  section,  namely  the  assumed  rectification  of
the  Hible  chronology  through  the  yKgyptian,  com-
pare  l)i-:i.iT/.sni,  p.  220  If.  lor  the  motives  whieli
lie  at  the  ground  of  the  chronological  changes  of
our  text  iii~  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  the  Sep-
tuagint,  or  their  deviations  (as  well  ch.  xi.  as  ch.  v.,
compare  KXOHKI.,  p.  70)  the  reader  is  referred  to
KKIL,  p.  70.  According  to  our  chronology,  from
the  creation  to  the  flood  there  were  1050  years,*
according  to  the  Samaritan  text  13u7  years,  and  ac
cording  to  the  Septuagint  22-12  years.  The  time
after  the  ilood  until  Abraham  was,  according  to  the
Hebrew  text  M05  years,  according  to  the  Samaritan
1015,  according  to  the  Septuagint  1245.  "The
translation  of  Enoch  falls  nearly  in  the  middle  point
of  years  from  Adam  to  the  ilood, — that  is,  in  the
year  'J>S7  after  the  creation  of  Adam.  At  that  time
Seth,  Enosh,  Cainan,  Malialalecl,  and  Jared,  were
still  living,  as  there  was  also  living  his  son  Methuse-

*  fin   the   excellent    commentary  on    Genesis   by  Dr.
James   <!.  Murphy,  of  Belfast   College  (p.  196),  there  is  a
very  c'car  and  convincing  comparison  of  the  Hebrew  text
chronology   with   that  of  the   Septuagint,  the   Samaritan
and  Jusephup.     The  internal  evidence  is  shown  to  be  do-
cidodly  in  favor  of  the  Hebrew  from  its  proportional  con
sistency.  The  numbers  in  the  LXX.  evidently  follow  a  plan
to  which  they  have  been  conformed.    This  does  not  appear
ill  the  Hebrew,  and  it  is  greatly  in  favor  of  its  being  an
authentic   genealogical  record.    The  numbers   before  the
bit-Mi  of  a  successor,  which  are  chiefly  important  for  the
chronology,  are  enlarged  in  the  LXX.  by  the  addition  of
iu-t  one  hundred  years  in  each  of  six  cases,  making  Adam
230  years  old  at  the  birth  of  Beth,  Seth  205  at  the  birth  of
Enosh,  and  so  on,  whilst  the  sum-total  of  each  life  remains
the  same  as  in  the  Hebrew,  with  a  slight  exception  of  2i
years  in  the  case  of  I.amcch.    The  interest,  here,  is  evi
dent,  to  extend  the  total  chronology  without  changing  the
other  numbers  of   the  macrobiology.      It  is  not  easy  to
ima  trine  what  motive  could  have  led  in  the  other  direction
or  to  the  shortening,  if  the  original  had  been  as  given  in
the  Septua-int ;    since  all  ancient   nations    have    rather
shown   ...  disposition  to  lengthen    their  chronology.      On
phv-iolodcal  grounds,  too,  the  Hebrew  is  to  be  preferred
fcince  the  length  of  the  life  docs  not  at  all  require  so  late  :
manhood  as  those  numbers  would  seem  to  intimate.    There
is  no  proof  that  these  were  all  first-born  sons.    It  was  thi
line  of  the  pious,  of  those  that  had  the  spiritual   birth
right.     The  uuovenness  of  the  Hebrew  birth-figures,  vary
ing  from  Co  and  70  to  157,  shows  this,  whilst  the  added  101
years,  in  each  case,  by  the  Septuagint,  shows  a  design  t<
wing  them  to  some  nearer  proportional  standard,  groundci
on  some  supposed  physiological  notion,   and  the  unwar
ranted  idea  that  each"  is  a  natural  first-born.     To  all  thi
must  be  added  the  fact  that  the  Hebrew  has  the  best  claim
to  be  regarded  as  the  original  text,  from  the  well-known
scrupulous,  nnd  even  superstitious,  care  with  which  it  ha
been  textually  preserved.— X.  L.]


ah,  and  his  grandson  Lamech,  then  113  years  old;
S'oah  only  was  not  yet  born,  and  Adam  of  all  the
ine  was  the  only  one  dead."  Keil.  We  will  remark
n  general,  in  relation  to  our  treatment  of  the  chro
nology  in  the  Introduction,  that  the  genealogical
chronology  throughout  corresponds  to  the  funda
mental  biblical  ideas,  or  to  that  significance  of  pcr-
-onality  which  determines  everything  as  actual  fact,
n  their  experience,  however,  of  the  way  in  which
he  blessing  of  piety  advanced  their  length  of  life,
lie  Macrobii  must  have  found  a  special  warning  to
number  their  days,  and  in  the  unsymbolical  form  of
;hc  numbers  it  was  easier  to  admit  misreckonings
n  single  cases  than  any  arbitrariness  in  respect  to
the  whole.  In  consideration  of  the  extraordinary
mpression  which  tiie  year-period  must  have  made,
upon  the  first  men  of  our  race,  in  consideration  of
ts  symbolical  dying  and  living  again  with  nature,
as  well  in  the  change  [in  the  length]  of  day  and
light,  as  in  that  of  summer  and  winter,  they  could
.iave  had,  in  general,  no  occasion  or  inducement  to
learn  the  reckoning  of  numbers  more  vivid  than
that  which  was  furnished  by  these  annual  vicissitudes.

6.  Yer.  1.     This  is  the  book. — "  ^£0  means
any  finished  writing,  whether  it  consists  of  only  one
pair  of  leaves,  or  even  of  a  single  one  ;  as,  for  exam
ple,  the  book  (or  bill)  of  divorce,    Deut.  xxiv."    ])c-
litzsch. — The  generations  of  Adam. — The  nearest
bound  to  this  book  of  the  generations  of  Adam,  is
the  genealogical  register  of  Noah.     In  a  wider  sense,
then,  does  this  register  of  Adam  go  on  in  the  genea
logical  register  of  Noah  (ch.  x.)  and  in  the  genealo
gical  register   of  '-.hem  (ch.   x.),  even   to  Abraham.
Ai'ter  that  it  goes  on  through  the  whole  Old  Testa
ment,  until  it  becomes  the  genealogical  register  of
Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  i.).

7.  Yer.  4.    And  Adam  lived.— "  The  narrator
reckons  the  years  of  each  forefather  unto  the  beget-
tinir  of  his  first-born,  who  carries  on  the  main  line,
then  the  remainder  of  his  life,  and  after  that  he  reck
ons  both  periods   together,  so  as  to  give  the  whole
length  of  his  life  and  name."   Delitzsch.— Begat  in
his  likeness. — Adam  bore  the  image  of  (Jod.     Seth
bore  the  imatre  of  Adam:   1.  according  to  its  dispo
sition  in  respect  to  the  image  of  God;   '_'.  according
to  the  measure  of  its  deformity  by  sin  ;   3.  according
to  the  hereditary  blessing  of  his  piety.     "  In  thau
primitive  time  the  births  did  not  rapidly  follow  each
other— a  fact  which  had  not  a  physical,  but  only  an
ethical  ground,"  says  Delitzsch.     There  is,  however,
a  physical  cause,  since  in  exact  correspondence  with
the  increa.-ing  degeneracy  and    raukness  of  human
life,  is  there,  in  a  literal  sense,  the  increase  of  a  nu
merous  and  wretched  offspring.

8.  Yer.  fi.  And  he  died.— IUrMr,ARTi:N  :    "  In
its  constant  return  does  this  expression  rt^  prove
the  dominion  of  death,  from  Adam  onward,  as  an
immutable  law   (Rom.   v.   14).     Htill,   on  this   dark
background  of  a  conquering  death  shows  still  more
clearly  the  power  of  life.     For  man  dies  when  he  has
already  propagated  anew  the   life,  so   that  in   the
midst  of  the  death  of  the  individual  members,  the
life  of  the  race  holds  on,  and  the  hope  grows  strong
er  and  stronger  in  the  seed  that  is  to  conquer  the
author  of  death."      The  unceasing  refrain,  and  lie
died,  denotes  here  also  the  limit  of  the  long  and  ele
vated  line  of  life  that  seems  to  be  ever  mounting
towards  heaven,  but  ever  breaks  off  in  the  end,—
with  the  exception  of  Enoch.     And  so  we  get  a  clear
view  of  the  battle  of  life  with  death.


CHAP.  Y.  1-32.


273


9.    Vers.   22-27.    And  Enoch  walksd  with
God.  —  This  expression,  which  occurs  once  more  in
respect  to  Noah,  ch.  vi.  9,  is  afterwards  enlarged.    It
becomes  (ch.  xvii.  1  ;  xxiv.  40),  "  to  walk  before  the
face  of  God,"  —  "to  follow  Jehovah,"  Deut.  xiii.   5
—  and  similarly,  Malachi  ii.  6,  it  occurs  in  respect
to  the  priest.     It  denotes  the  most  intimate  inter
course  with  God,  or,  so  to  speak,  a  permanent  view
.of  a  present  deity,  a  continual  following  after  His
guidance.     The  word  occurs  hero  twice.     In  its  first
usage  it  denotes  the  character  of  his  life,  and  gives
assurance  of  the  perseverance  and  soundness  of  his
piety  ;  he  walked  with  God  three  hundred  years,  he
begat  sons  and  daughters.     In  the  second,  it  gives
confirmation  of  the  wonderful  translation  of  Enoch.
According  to  the  Jewish  tradition,  Enoch  had,  in  all
probability,  borne  witness  against  the  Oaiuitic  anti-
nomists  of  his  day,  and  had  announced  to  them  the
judgment  which  came  with  the  flood.     From  this
Jewish  tradition  the  book  of  Enoch  and  the  epistle
of  Judc  took  in  common  (DILLMAX.V,  Each  Henoch);
for  there  is  no  necessity  of  referring  the  place  in
Jude  to  the  apocryphal  book,  since  the  apostles,  as
is  well  known,  have  cited  popular  traditions  in  other
places,  although  even  Delitzsch  seems  to  connect  the
epistle  with  apocryphal  story.     With  this  prediction,
and   in   correspondence   with    fundamental    biblical
principles,  docs   the  epistle  of  Jude  make  him  the
type  of   tl'.o  prophetic  testimony  against  that  anti-
Christian  Antinomianism  of  the  New  Testament  day,
which  is  comprehended  in   its  unity  as  "  the   last
time,"   and  also  a  typical  prophet  of  the  last  day
itself.      The   translation   of  Enoch   has   two   sides.
ISrNl  means,  in  the  first  place:  he  was  no  longer
there,  he  had  disappeared  (ch.  xlii.  13,  36).     There
by  is  it  indicated  that  his  people  had  missed  him,  as
the  sons  of  the  prophets  missed  Elijah  when  he  was
taken  away  (2  Kings  ii.  16,  etc.).     Luther  has  pic
tured  in  a  most  vivid  manner  this  missing  of  Enoch
as  reflecting  itself  in  the  case  of  Jesus  in°IIis  death'
and  on  Easter  morning.     According  to  Luther,  they
had  some  thought  that  he  had  perished,  had  prob
ably  been  slain  by  the  Cainites,  and  then  received  a
special    revelation   concerning   his   taking   awav.  _
God  took  him.—  This  word  ripb  is  also  used  in"  the
talcing  up  of  Elijah  (2  Kings  ii.  9,  10  ;  Ts.  Ixxiii.  24  ;
xhx.  1C).     A  death   so  early  in  a  line  of  men  for
whom  life  was  a  blessing,  could  only  be  regarded   in
this  connection,  as  a  punishment.     It  would  seem  to
make  Enoch  of  least  worth  among  the  patriarchs
whereas,  on  the  contrary,  he  was  the  most  eminent'
It  is_  clear,  therefore,  that  there  is  narrated  here  a
transition  which  did  not   go  through  the   form  of
death.     The  Christian  tradition  (Ileb.  xi.  5)  as  well
as  the  Jewish  (Sirach  xliv.  15;    xlix.  16),  hold  fast
the  unmistakable  sense  of  the  text,  in  which  here  in
place   of  the   ever-returning  "and  he  died"  there
comes  in  that  other  expression,  "for  God  took  him  "
P  !.i  al™c,OIlffmcd  by  the  analogous  representations
t  the  Bible  (Elijah,  Christ,  the  transformed,  1  Thess
iv.  17  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  51).     But  whither  ?    and  to  what
state  was   Enoch  translated  ?     DEUTZSCII  •    "  To  a
closer  nearness  with  God,  with  whom  he  had  hitherto
walked  ;  not  that  he  became  a  partaker  of  that  glori-
hcation  which  awaits  the  justified  in  the  resurrection  •
or  in  this  glorification  Christ  is  the   first  fruits  »

M^°n«ra7;  *KIL  :    "  Xot  in  the  glorification  is
aribt  the  first  fruits  according  to  1  Cor  xv   20   23
Jut  m  the  resurrection."     By  a  transformation,  or
'


.  on,  o

'7  a  clothing  upon,  were  Enoch  and  Elijah  trans
18


lated  into  everlasting  life  with  God.     We-  must  dis
tinguish,  however,  between  the  transformation  and
the  glorification,  between  the  heavenly  region  of  the
pious,  that  is,  Paradise,  and  the  perfect  "heaven  of
Christ.     "His   365th  year  of  life  corresponds  prob
ably  to   our    33d,"    remark  Delitzsch   and  Knobel:
"Enoch  lived  as  many  years  as  the  year  1ms  days."
In  respect  to  the  legendary  parallels  in  the  extra
biblical  antiquity,  cornp.  KNOISKI,,  p.  72  ;  'in  which  it
is  clear  that  we  must  distinguish  the  biblical  tradi
tion  from  the  kindred  stories.     According  to  Knobel
the  motive  for  the  translation  was  probably  to  rescue
Enoch  from  the  age  in  which  he  lived,— with  relation
to  ch.  iv.  10.     Beyond  a  doubt,  however,  the  main
reason  was  the  fact  that  he  had  become  personally
ripe  for  transformation,  and  that  through  his  faith
there  might  he  introduced  into  this  world  the  faith
m   a  new  life   in   the  world  beyond  (Ilcb.  xi.  5,  6).
If  we   would    seek   farther,  we  must   compare   the
translations  that  follow  in  sacred  history.     Elijah  is
translated  because  his  consistent  legalis'm  must  be
come  a  judgment  of  fire,  and  a  Last  Day  for  the
apostate   Israel ;    Christ  is  translated,  because   His
staying  longer  in  this  world  must  have  come  to  a
sudden  conflict  of  life  and  death  with  the  old  world,
— that  is,  must  have   had  for  its  consequence  the
Last  Day  ;  the  believers  at  the  end  of  the  world  are
translated,  because  now  the   Last  Day  has  actually
appeared.     Judging  from  these  analogies,  we  may
conjecture  that  the  translation  of  Enoch  denoted  a
decided  turning-point  in  the  life  of  the  old  world.
At  all  events,   he  had   not  in  vain  announced  the
day  of  judgment  before  his  departure.     At  this  time,
it  is  probable,  there  was  the  beginning  of  the  corrupt
alliances  between  the  Sethites  and  the  Cainites.     It
is  the  probable  middle  time  between  Adam  and  the
flood.     The  Jewish  and  Arabian  fables,  according  to
which  Enoch  is  said  to  have  disco ve;v.i  tho  art  of
writing  and  book-making,  together  with  arithmetic
and  astronomy,  must  njst,  for  the  most  part,  on  his
name,   ~":n,   from  ~:n  (to  initiate,  educate),  and

uP°n  the   astronomical   significance  of  the  number
365.

10.  Vcr.  27.  Methuselah.— The    hHiest   a^c
969  years.

11.  Vcr.  28.  Lamech — "At   so  great  an  age
did  these  pious  forefathers,  who  hud  renounced  the
self-created  worldly  lust,  confess  their  experience  of
the  burden  and  painfulness  of  life,  in  all  its  gravity
and  in  all  its  extent ;  and  it  is  easily  explained  how
it  is  that  the  history  of  the  Sethites  closes  with  lan
guage  of  such  a  different  sound   from   that  of  the
Cainites.     Lamech   the   Cainitc   is   full    of  an   evil
drunken  confidence.      Lamech  the  Sethite,  on  the
contrary,  is  filled  with  the  most  extreme  dejection  in<
respect  to  the  present,  and  has  no  other  joy  than  in
the  promise  of  the  future."    Delitzsc'a.     The  name
Ob,  which  he  gives  to  his  son,  is  put  in  relation  to
CM: ,  from  which  it  does  not  follow  that  this  relation
is  etymologically  significant.     The  confident  hope  of
the  wearied  is  ever  some  bringer  of  rest.     Without
doubt  does  the   life-labor  and  toil  of  the  Sethites
stand  in  relation  to  the  pride  of  the  Cainites,  even  as
it  forms  a  contrast  to  their  confident  and  false  secu
rity.     It  is  this  pride  which  has  power  to  trouble
their  life  more  than  the  unfruitfulness  of  the  earth.
In  respect  to  Lamech's  language  in  which  he  greets
Noah   as   tho   bringer    of    rest,   LUTHER    remarks  :
Sicut  Hcvafallitur,  ita  quoque  dcsidcrio  rcsiitutionis
mundi  fallltur  etiam  bonus  Lamech,    Still  is  he  mis-


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


taken  in  supposing  that  Noah  was  to  bring  in  the
closhi"-  sabbath  of  humanity  ;  that  there  came  with
him  a  great  reckoning,  and  a  preliminary  new  world,
he  correctly  anticipated.

12  Vcr.  32.  And  he  begat  Shem.— RANKE:
"The  naming  of  the  three  sous  of  Noah  leads  us  to
expect  that  whilst  hitherto  the  line  has  moved  on
ever  throu-h  only  one  member,  in  the  farther  course
of  time  all  three  of  Noah's  sons  must  simultaneously
lay  the  foundations  of  a  new  beginning."  "The
order  of  the  ages  of  Noah's  sons  is  Shorn,  Japheth,
Ham  (sec  ch  x.  21).  In  the  enumeration,  however,
Japheth  ever  stands  last,  because  his  name  of  two
syllables  makes  the  best  close  in  the  collective  ar-
ran^ement."  Knobel.  The  series  of  the  three  sons,
however  in  regard  to  tin  ir  ago,  makes  a  difficulty  in
relation  'to  ch.  x.  21.  (Sec  KKII.,  p.  !"•!.)  Accord-
inn-  to  the  passage  before  us,  Noah  begat  Shem  first
when  he  was  Sou  years  old.  According  to  ch.  vii.
(',  he  was  (>00  year's  old  \vhen  the  flood  came.  Ac
cording  to  ch.'xi.  10,  Shem  was  100  years  old  two
vears  after  the  Hood.  Either  then  must  we  here  re
gard  the  lOit  years  of  Sln-m  as.  a  round  number,  or
the  word  '""',  ch.  >:.  21,  must  relate  to  Japheth,  as
'llichaclis  and  others  think.  On  the  contrary,  see
the  remarks  of  K.NOI;KI,,  p.  12",  and  of  KKII.,  p.  104.
Keil,  however,  would  take  "jpn  as  merely  a  com-
,  arative  designation  of  Ham,  ch.  ix.  2-1  :  the  >/oiu>r/-
n-  instead  of'the  ymmg<st;  so  that  the  series  Shem,
Ham,  Japheth,  would  be  the  actual  order  of  their
ages.  This  consequence  dues  not  appear  to  be
confirmed  by  the  5";:-  of  ch.  x.  21,  since  V-r"1"1
cxpre-sly  refers  to  Noah  in  connection  with  1:3,
a  position  that  fails  in  respect  to  V"5,  in  eh.  x.  21.
Assuming  it  a-  not  grounded  on  the  analogue  of  the
theocratic  history,  that  the  physical  firsMiorn  must
always.  IK-  the  spiritual  tir.-t-!iorn,  it  would  remain
doubtful  wh.-ther,  in  the  passage  before  us,  Shem
was  not  placed  tirst  on  the  ground  of  worth.

[XoTK  ON    THK  TKANSI.ATION    OF    ExnCII,  AND    TIIK
KAUMI.ST     IDEAS     OK     1>KAT1I     AMOVi     THE    PlllMITlVE

MEN.— ="n^X  "i~s  r'~^  ^  ^r"^:-    A  ri"ht  un~
der.-taiv',inj;  of  this  remarkable  language  respecting
Enoch,  depends  upon  our  getting  the   right,  stand
point    from  which  to  determine   the  earliest  notion
•"hat  man  must  have  had  of  death.     This  could  hardly
have  been  the  modern  idea,  either  iu  its  materializing,
or  in  i,  •  more  spiritual,  aspect.     That  is,  it  was  not,
on  the  one  hand,  a  cessation  of  being,  nor  was  it,  on
the  otlii  r,  any  distinctly  formed  thought  of  a  scpara-
tlon  of  tv.o  things,  soul  and  body,  one  of  which  no
longer  pertained' to  the  man,  or  the  selfhood,  and  the
other  passed  off  to  a  wholly  separate  and  immaterial
existence.     God  had  not  defined  to  them  the  nature
of  this  fearful  doom,  and  experience  showed  them
nothinu'  but  the  fact  of  an  awful  outward  change  on
the  once  moving  and  active  personality.     It  had  not
ceased  to  -V,  though  now  it  was  motionless  and  ghast
ly.     They  could  not  regard  it  as  a  fallen  tree,  or  a
slaw  animal,  not  from  any  metaphysical  or  physiologi
cal  distinction,  but  from  the  strong  feeling  of  social
per.-'jnality  which  they  had  ever  connected  with  the
living  man,  and  which  they  could  not  get  rid  of.
This  was  the  germ,  the  God-implanted  germ,  we  may
say,  of  the  idea  of  a  continuous  being,  or  a  future
life,  as  we  find  it  in  the  earliest  parts  and  throughout
the  Old  Testament.    To  this  they  held  on  even  against
appearances,  against  the  sense  we  may  say,  or  any  rea
soning  from  sense,  even  as  it  is  yet  found  among  the


rudest  and  simplest  nations,— the  very  antagonisms
it  has  had  to  encounter  from  the  outer  phenomenal
world  only  showing  the  strength  and  the  indestructi
bility  of  the  sentiment.    This  one  personality  had  not
wholly  vanished,  though  what  had  once  appeared  as
a  human  form  they  now  saw  undergoing  a  rapid  and
fearful   transformation.      Death  presented  itself  in
contrast  with  that  moving  outward  thing  they  called
life,  but  it  was  not  necessarily  a  breach  of  all  con-
tinuitv,  or  an  utter  extinction  of  all  selfhood,  with
its  rights  and  claims,  as  in  the  case  of  Abel's  com
plaining  blood.     The  srlf,  the  man  was  there,  but  he
was  dead,  or  in  the  state  of  being  they  called  death.
Or  he  was  still  somewhere-  near,  in  what  connection
with  the  bodv,   or  with  themselves,  they  could  not
imadne.     They  <ra/.cd  in  astonishment  at  this  won
derful  phenomenon,  but  they  did  not  reason  about  it,
or  draw  nice  distinctions.     They  had  no  data  from
which  to  draw  them.     It,  was  the  dread  penalty  of
which   they  had  heard  fiom  their  progenitors,  and
that  was  all  they  knew  about  it.     Of  its   extent,  or
its  consequences,  or  of  any  recovery  from  it,  they
had  little  or  no  conception.     Death  was  not  to  them,
as  it  has  come  to  be  regarded  in  our  thinking,  a  sin
gle  terminating  event,   but  a  state,  a  state  of  being,
very  strafe  indeed,  but  still  real  and  actual.     They
did' not  separate  it  into  ikath  (the  aft  of  dying)  and
something    after    death.       All    earliest   language^  is
grounded  on  the  idea  of  such  after  state  as  a  going
on,  or  linked  identity;  but  they  did  nol   distinguish
between  it  avid  its  incipicncy.     ITence,  among  all  an
cient   people,  the  gieat   care   for  funeral   rites,   not
merely  in  memory  of,  but  as  something  due  to  a  still
continued  being,  and  as  essential  to  its  quietude.     It
was   not   the   idea   of  resurrection,   as    some   have
thought,  that  made  this  so  ancient  and  so  universal.
but  the  ineradicable  f^'iny  of  a  personality,  or  self
hood,  as  somehow   inhering    in  the    poor    remains,
whether  embalmed  with  cos.tiiist  spices,  or  buried  in
the  bosom  of  their  mother  earth,  or  purified  and  so
preserved  by  (ire.      There  <'.•;  a  selfhood  in  the  body;
1'aul  affirms  it  strongly  of  the  sleeping  Christian  re
mains;  there  is  something  sacred  in  the  human  dust;
t  is,  not  like   other  matter,  though  sown  in  corrup
tion  ;    we  may  thank  Cod  that  the  feeling  still  lin
gers  in  our  souls,  in  spite  of  that  contempt  for  die
body  which  is  sometimes   manifested  by  a  reckless
-ciencc  on  the  one  hand,  or  a  hyper-spiritual  philoso
phy  on  the  other.

It  is  very  important  to  bear  in  mind,  that  to  the
early  view  there  could  be  no  distinctions  such  as  we
now  make.  It  was  all  death,  whatever  it  might  in
clude,  as  opposed  to  acting,  moving  being;  and
when  very  early  there  arose  the  thought  of  a  dwell-
in"  in  the  earth  (as  an  underworld),  of  a  Shcol  or
cavity,  of  a  Hades  or  the  Unseen— all  arising  from
the  act  of  burying  or  putting  out  of  sight— this  was
not  a  state  succeeding  death,  but  the  very  world  of
the  dead,  the  nVi  5  fP3 ,  the  House  of  Olam  (Ecclea
xii.  5),  the  House  of  Eternity,  not  as  a  figure  for  non-
existence,  but  as  real  continuous  being,  though  in
striking  contrast  with  the  busy,  knowing  (sense-
knowing),  remembering,  loving,  hating,  upper  h
"beneath  the  sun"  (Eccles.  ix.  5,  6).  Superstition
held  that  there  was  some  mode  of  intercourse  with
these  ^E3  irrvr,  or  dwellers  in  Sheol.  There  is
little  said  about  them  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  for
there  was  little  known  that  could  be  said ;  but  there
is  an  undercurrent  of  thought  and  feeling  throughout
the  Old  Testament  which  shows  that  they  arc  never


CHAP.  Y.  1-32.


forgotten.  They  were  dead,  but  still  in  being ;  they
had  \\otpcrished  (pcr-iit,  intcr-iit,  gone  through,  fallen
out),  become  extinct,  ceased  to  be.  Hence  they  called
them  the  DNNS"i ,  the  weak,  the  weary,  the  inactive,
us  the  Homeric  and  the  ante-Homeric  Greek  called
'hem  01  Ka/J.ovrfs,  and  Ojuepijva  Kaprjfa.  In  all  this
there  was  great  logical  inconsistency,  bewilderment
of  conception,  contradiction  even  of  the  sense,  so  far
as  the  phenomenal  body  was  concerned,  but  it  was  a
holding  fast  of  that  idea  of  continuous  being,  in  some
way,  which  was  from  the  beginning,  and  which  the
human  mind  never  gave  up  until  Christ  came  and
poured  light  upon  this  dark  Sheol,  this  gloomy  Hades,
or  world  of  the  unseen.  The  imagery  everywhere
was  drawn  mainly  from  the  last  appearances  in  life,
or  from  the  associations  of  sepulchral  acts,  but  the
real  underlying  idea  was  never  lost.  Very  early  a
better  hope  dawned  upon  the  pious,  or  it  came  as  a
revelation  from  God,  born  in  the  travail  of  their
earth-weary,  rest-seeking  souls,  but  it  was  mainly  of
a  deliverance  at  some  time  from  Sheol,  or  of  blessed
ness  therein  as  lying  under  the  shadow  of  the  divine
protection.  It  was,  however,  still  death,  doom,
(t.o'ipa,  the  great  penalty,  an  idea  expressed  somehow
in  the  most  ancient  tongues,  Shemitic  or  Japhetic,
with  which  we  are  acquainted.  It  was  the  great
wrath  for  whose  turning  the  pious  dead  are  repre
sented  as  waiting;  as  Job  prays,  "0  that  thou
wouldst  hide  me  in  Sheol  until  thy  wrath  be  past,
TjEX  STO  12  (until  thy  wrath  turn),  that  thou
wouldst  appoint  me  a  time  and  then  remember  me  "
(Job  xiv.  13).

From  such  a  doom  Enoch  was  spared.  No  grave
received  him.  He  disappeared  from  earth.  He  was
not  found,  as  the  LXX.  have  rendered  "53iX,  and  as
it  is  given  in  Hcb.  xi.  5 ;  that  is,  his  body  was  not
found,  though  men,  doubtless,  made  long  search  for
him,  as  they  did  afterwards  for  the  body  of  Elijah
(2  Kings  ii.  16,  17).  Enoch  may  be  said  to  have
shared  in  the  great  penalty  in  so  far  that  for  305
years  he  bore  a  dying  and  corruptible  body,  and  yet
it  is  te?tificd  of  him  that  he  did  not  see  death,  Ileb.
xi.  o,  that  is,  he  did  not  enter  into  Hades,  which  is
the  real  death,  although  the  change  that  his  body
must  have  undergone  in  the  translation  was  greater
than  that  which  passes  upon  the  dissolving  human
frame.  Sec  the  clear  remarks  of  Dr.  Murphy  on
"WX,  in  his  excellent  Commentary  on  Genesis.

Dr.  Lange  has  well  distinguished  between  this
Old  Testament  belief  of  a  future  life,  or  rather  of
continuous  being,  and  the  &T)  al<ai>ios,  the  eternal
life,  revealed  by  Christ.  Great  confusion  arises  from
confounding  the  two,  and  the  distinction  becomes
of  great  importance  in  refuting  the  reasoning  of  those
who  teach  the  annihilation  of  the  wicked.

The  word  nps  here,  though  a  common  one,  is  to
be  noted  as  used  in  a  strikingly  similar  connection
in  the  account  of  Elijah  (2  Kings  ii.  9,  rtpjrx),  Ps.
xlix.  15,  "  God  shall  redeem  my  soul  from  Sheol,  for
He  shall  take  me,"  ^njsn,  and  Ps.  Ixxiii.  24  :  "Thou
wilt  guide  me  by  thy  counsel,  and  afterwards  take
me  (to)  glory."  It  is  worthy  of  note,  too,  how  ex
actly  in  Ps.  Ixxiii.  24  the  Hebrew  "ifiX  corresponds
to  the  use  of  the  cognate  Arabic  y  ~^|  (Hcb.  rn^XX

Numb,  xxiii.  10  et  al.),  the  frequent  Koranic  and  ante-
Mohammedan  word  for  the  after  or  future  life.  In
these  two  passages  from  the  Psalms,  npb  may  not


denote  the  hope  of  a  translation,  yet  the  similarity
of  context,  which  strongly  seems  to  be  suggested  by
the  passage  in  Genesis,  takes  them  clearly  out  of  tht
nationalist's  limitation  to  a  mere  worldly  deliver^
ance.— T.  L.]


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  Concerning  the  line  of  Scth,  sec  the  Exegctica!
annotations,  No.  1.

2.  Concerning  the  meaning  of  the  image  of  Adam,
see  the  Exegetical  annotations,   No.  3 ;  as  also  for
the  significance  of  the  names  that  here  occur,  No.  4.

8.  Concerning  the  Macrobii,  or  the  long-lived  of
the  primitive  time,  see  Exegetical  annotations,  No.  f>.
It  ought  to  be  considered  that  not  only  had  death,
as  yet,  failed  to  make  his  full  breach  upon  them,
but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  through  their  inward
intercourse  with  God,  their  life-power  had  been
wonderfully  advanced  in  the  opposite  direction  of
the  transformation  form.  Concerning  the  chro
nology,  sec  No.  5.

4.  Eor  the  meaning  of  Enoch,  see  No.  7,  Exegeti
cal  annotations.     Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  Ls
a  very  ancient  witness :  1 .  For  the  degrees  oF  piety :
2.  for  the  truth  of  the  mystical  or  the  mysterious
core  of  religion,  communion  with  God;  3.  for  that
assurance  of  eternal  life  that  wells  out  of  a  life  of
faith  and  peace  in  God.     In  this  is  he,  in  a  special
sense,  a  type  of  the  life  of  Christ:  1.    His  divine
human  walk  ;  2.  his  glorification  and  translation  to
heaven.     Concerning  the  language  of  Lamcch,  see
No.  8.

5.  For  the  meaning  of  Noah,  sec   the   extracts
from  Stark c  below.     According  to  Ilcb.  xi.  7,  Enoch
is  the  mediator  of  the  idea  of  a  revelation  of  deliv
erance,  or  of  salvation  from  judgment.

G.  A  main  point  of  view  of  the  Holy  Scriptures
and  of  the  religion  of  revelation,  is  the  significance
of  the  personal  life.  This  presents  itself  in  the
genealogies  as  they  stand  in  their  simple  grandeur
even  to  this  day.  It  is  like  the  granite  of  the  earth
in  a  highland  landscape.

7.  Enoch,  Elijah,  Christ,  three  stages  in  the  un
folding   of  the   facts   of  the  world  beyond,  of  the
higher  life  of  the  world  beyond,  of  its  region  of
glory,  and  of  the  wonderful  transition  to  it,  as  well
as  of  the  belief  in  those  facts.     In  Christ  the  per
fection  of  what  is  here  prefigured.

8.  Noah  and  his  house  a  figure  of  the  pious  of
the  last  time  (Matt.  xxiv.  34).


IIOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

The  race  of  Adam,  according  to  the  ground-
features  of  its  life:  1.  Birth;  2.  marriage  and  the
family ;  3.  death. — The  constant  repetition,  and  he
died,  a  powerful  memento  mori.  [Through  this  con
stant  refrain,  and  ho  died,  the  reading  of  this  chapter
is  said  to  have  awakened  men  to  repentance.] — Adam,
through  Seth  and  Noah,  the  ancestor  of  the  human
race  :  1.  In  the  continuance  of  the  divine  vocation;
2.  of  .sinfulness,  pain,  and  labor  upon  the  earth  ;  3.
of  strife  with  sin :  Seth,  Enoch,  Lamcch,  Noah ;
4.  of  the  prospect  of  the  future  of  the  perfected
Seth  (meaning  compensation  and  established),  of  the
perfected  Enoch  (devoted),  of  the  perfected  Noah
(rest-bringcr). — The  conflict  of  life  with  death  in
the  line  of  the  Scthites :  1.  How  it  holds  back  death


276


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   I^OSES.


through  the  blessing  of  piety  (the  long-living);  2.
how  it  ever  opposes  to  death  new  generations  (and
he  be^at  sons  and  daughters) ;  ?>.  how  it  finds  a  way
of  life  beyond  death  (Enoch).— Seth  as  the  again-
risen  Abel.— The  time  of  Enosh,  that  is,  of  the  feel
ing  of  human  weakness,  as  a  time  of  the  first  glori-
fynV  of  the  divine  p-iwer  and  covenant  faithfulness.
—The  names  of  the  Pethites  (-ee  above).— Enoch
the  mediator  of  the  faith  of  a  new  life  in  the  world
bcvond  (Heb.  xi.  5,  0),  on  the  ground  of  the  experi
ence  of  the  divine  complacency  (justification  in  its
first  form),  through  faith,  that  is,  in  the  unfolding
of  his  communion  with  God,  and  in  the  1. earing  of
hi?  prophetic  testimony  against  ungodliness  (Jude).
— Enoch V  wall;  with  Cod  and  his  blessing.— The
Ion"  !!!'•  '  1  Km  eh  and  the  long  life  of  Methuselah.
—Enoch  thr  wonderful  height  in  the  experience  of
the  blc.-~'mg.  in  the  race  of  the  blessing. — Enoch  a
turning-point  in  the  primeval  history,  as  Elijah  in  the
history  of  I.-rad,  and  as  the  ascension  to  heaven  of
Christ  in  the  history  of  the  human  race  generally.

'1'he  hi.-tory  of  Enoch  the  first  germ  of  the  doc-

triii"  i'!'  a  heavenly  inheritance.— Enoch  as  a  tvpc
,,f  Christ.— The  Cainitic  Lamech  and  the  Sethitic
Lamech.— Lamech's  word  of  confidence  in  respect
to  \oah,  1.  a  delusion,  and  yet,  '2.  no  delusion. —
The  line  of  the  Scthites  and  the  line  of  the  Canutes:
1.  Worl  lliness ;  spirituality;  2.  pride  and  conn-
:  sorrow  and  patience;  ".  an  end,  v>ith  terror;
r,  fairer  beginning  of  life. — Noah  a-  a  type
,,[•  din-;. — Adam  tlie  ancestor  of  two  lines:  a  pious
and  a  trodle.-s. —  Noah  the  ance.-tor  of  thr<-e  lines:
a  line'  o'f  fiith  and  worship,  a  line  of  human  culture,
and  a  line  of  sensual  barbarity.

STAUKK:   It  is  this  genealogical  record   that  has
been  pr«-.-erved  by  Cod's  wonderful  care,  and  is  to
be   found,  1    Chro'n.  i.,  Matt,  i.,  Lnkr  hi.— CKAMKU  :
Thci.-  has  always  been  a  church  of  Cod,  and  will  re
main  even  to  tin-  last  day  (Matt.  xvi.  1M).     The  evan
gelical  relL'ion  is  the  oldest  and   the  truest  of  all.—
Vcr.  ::.    All    men   are   by  nature  children  of  wrath,
ar.d   stained  with   the  hereditary  sin  (Epli.  ii.  3). —
Lou-  life  is  al.-o  from  Cod;  wi-11  for  him  who  seeks
to  apply  it  to  his  honor.— OSIANDKU  :  We  have  lived
enough  when  we  know  how  to  learn  Christ. —
\  er.  5.      It  is  an  old  covenant:  thou,  0  man,  must
die  iSiraeh  xiv.  18).— Cainan.      lie  had  (Hl^  Enoch)
seen  all  the  patriarchs.— The  example  of  Enoch  is  a
Morions  proof  that  the  marriage  state  can  and  ought
to  be  holily  maintained.— Whether  now  children  and
b;ibes  en;oy  any  such  intimate  intercourse  with  Cod,
there  are  still  degrees  herein,  so  that  husbands  and
fathers   in    Chri.-'t   have  thereby  a  much  closer  com-
n    with    (iod.     Jewish,  as   well    as    some    old
patristic    and    papistical    interpreters    say,    that    lie
(Enoehi  was  carried  into  the  earthly  paradise,  where
he  will  remain  to  the  end  of  the  world,  when  he  will
come  back   and  be  slain  by  Antichrist,  and  there
upon  rise  again  and  be  taken  up  into  heaven.    We
may  readily  sec,  however,  what  a  mere  fable  this  is.
Rather  has  he  been  taken  up  into  this  heavenly  para-
di.-e  (I. uke  xxiii.  -1  :•!).— Aim  of  Enoch's  translation:
1.   Thereby  was  the  doctrine  that  the  good  man  was
rewarded  "in  a  future  life  established  as  against  the
prevalent   security  of  that   day;   2.  thereby,  in  the
seventh  from  Adam,  was  there  given  a  pattern  which
even  to  the  time  of  the  seventh  trumpet  should  serve
as  an  example  to  believers  whom  the  day  of  Christ
might  find  alive ;   3.  thereby  Enoch  was    set  before
us  as  a  type  of  Christ  in  his   ascension.     (Then  fol
lows  a  comparison  of  the  translation  of  Enoch  with


the  ascension  of  Christ.) — Methuselah.  No  one  of
the  patriarchs  readied  a  thousand  years,  for  that
number  is  a  type  of  the  perfection  to  which  no  man
in  this  life  can  attain. — He  died  in  the  year  lG5i»,
and,  therefore,  in  the  year  in  which  the  flood  broke
in  upon  the  world. — Noah  (Luke  iii.  3G  ;  1  Pet.  iii.
20  ;  Hcb.  xi.  7).  Noah  is  a  glorious  type  of  Christ:

1.  In  respect  to  his  name  :  Noah  signifies  rest   and
peace,  or  consolation  and  comforting  ;  so  is  Christ,
too,  our  Prince  of  peace,  who  makes  for  us  peace
and    tranquillity  (Is.  ix.  6;    Rom.  v.  1  ;  .Tor.  vi.  It'.).

2.  According  to   his  threefold   office  :  Noah  was   a
prophet  (2  Pet.  ii.  5),  and    announced   many    years
beforehand  the  destruction  of  the  first  world  and  its
sons,   which   was   to   befall    them  (Matt.    xxiv.    25).
Noah  was  a  priest,  for   he   otfered  sacrifice;  Christ
lias  offered  himself  (Heb.  vii.  27).     Noah  prayed  for
the  wicked  world  (E/.ek.  xiv.  M);  so  also  is  Christ
our  advocate   (Kom.  viii.  31  ;   1  John  ii.  1  ;  Heb.  v.
7).    Noah  blessed  Sliem  and  Japheth  ;  so  also  Christ
(Mark  x.  Id).     Noah   was   a  king,  the  head   of   his
family  and  of  the  new  world,  the  builder  of  an  ark
at  God's  command;  Christ  was  king  and  head  of  his
threefold  kingdom,  the  builder  of  the  church  (Ps.  ii.
6). — The  sons  of  Noah.     They  are   not  born   in  the
order  in  which  they  here  stand,  but  Japheth  was  the
first-born   (ch.  x.  21),  Sheni  the  middle  son  (eh.  xi.
10),  and  Ham  the  youngest  (eh.  ix.  2-1  >.

SniuomcK  :  Genealogies  may  be  called  the  threads
on  which  history,  chronology,  and  everything  else  in
the  first  book  of  Moses  moves.  The  Adamitic  gen
ealogical  table,  ch.  v.,  throws  a  bridge  between  the
fall  and  the  Hood.  In  the  plan  of  Genesis,  the  eye
of  Moses  is  firmly  directed  to  Israel.  The  object  of
this  constantly  keeping  the  eye  upon  Israel,  has  for
its  ground  the  placing,  in  the  moM  visible  manner,
before  the  eyes  of  the  latest  descendants,  Jehovah's
covenant  faithfulness  in  the  outer  as  well  as  inner
preservation  and  assistance  of  the  woman's  seed.
On  this  account,  the  genealogies  of  the  Old  Testa
ment,  and  of  Gem  .-is  especially,  form  a  part  not  to
be  overlooked  in  the  great  history  of  the.  divine  as
sumptions  of  humanity  before  the  incarnation  of  God
in  Christ.— Vers.  1  and  2.  According  to  Luke  iii.
:;s,  man  stands  in  a  genealogical  relation  to  God;
his  descent  loses  itself  in  the  divine  hand  of  the
Creator  (Acts  xvii.  28).— Vers.  3-5.  The  significance
of  the  time  depends  upon  the  significance  of  the
person  who  is  lorn,  lives,  and  dies  in  it.  The  mean-
in"  of  the  time  is  nothing  else  than  that  there  ap
pears  in  it  the  birth  and  life  of  the  human  person-
ality.  To  the  mere  dead  number  the  coining  man
first  gives  life  and  content,  and  so  too  he  first  makes
history.— Abel  is  murdered,  Cain  is  cursed  ;  and  now
Seth  e'nfcjrs,  a  first  birth,  as  it  were,  into  history.—
VAL.  HICKHKKCKK:  Adam  and  Eve  may  have  wept
long  for  the  death  of  the  pious  Abel,  and  the  wick
edness  of  that  wretched  son  Cain;  but  now  God
makes  them  to  rejoice  again  in  a  pious  child  whom
he  presents  to  their  eyes.  Such  vicissitudes  of  joy
and  sorrow  befall  all  pious  people.  Be  not,  there
fore,  proud  when  it  goes  with  thec  according  to  thy
heart's  wish  ;  be  not  cast  down  though  it  may  ram
and  snow  crosses.  God  will  again  rejoice  thee  wita
a  cheerful  sunshine  in  thy  long,  wearisome  domestic
trouble.— Whether  the  rest  of  the  patriarchs  who
followed  were  all  first-born  sons,  is  made  doubtful
bv  the  case  of  Seth.—"  From  Adam  onward  to  the
patriarch  Jacob,  hath  the  Holy  Spirit  signified  to  us
in  what  year  each  named  ancestor,  who  propagated
that  line  out  of  which  Christ  was  to  spring,  begat


CHAP.  V.  1-32.


that  son  who  in  turn  was  to  become  a  specially-named
Ancestor  in  the  course  of  descent."     Roos. — Seth's
genealogical  register  is  the  line  of  "  the  sons  of  God  "
that  is,  of  the  true  church.     "  With   reverence  and
Awe   do  I  draw  nigh   to   thee,  0  holy  people   who
dwell  under  his  shadow  and  before  his  presence,  0
thou  light  of  the  world,  thoti  salt  of  the  earth  !  Thou
wast  a  chosen  race,  a  patriarchal  priesthood,  to  make
known  the  virtues  of  Him  who  called  thee."   Herder.
— LrriiER :  Eve,  too,  it  is  probable,   lived    to  the
eight  hundredth  year,  and  so  must  have  seen  a  nu
merous  race.     How  much  care  must  she  have  had,
how  much  industry,  and  labor,  in  visiting,  dressing,
and  teaching,  her  children  and  her  children's  chil
dren  !     The  first  oral  fountain  of  oral  and  written
traditions  that  have  come  down  to  us,  could  in  this
way  maintain  itself  through  the  possibility  of  a  per
sonal  converse  between  Lamech  and  Shorn,  between
Siiem  and  Abraham.     The  original  undying  destiny
of  the  human  race  comes  powerfully  before  us  in  the
numbers  of  this  genealogical  register.     That  sharp
appendage,  and  he  died,  forms  a  standing  refrain  of
sorrow  to  the  joyful  picture  of  life  that  precedes. —
Roos :  So  should  the  thought  arise  in  us  :  I  too  must
die,  and  after  a  shorter  pilgrimage  than  that  of  these
fathers;  I  too  must  watch. — Vers.  6-20.     Arabian
stories  concerning  Seth  and- Jared,  p.  111.     Jarcd:
an  enigmatical  name,  out  of  which,  however,  as  out
of  most  of  the  Sethic  names,  there  evidently  enough
breathes  a  tone  of  sorrow  and  of  pain.     Sharp  con
trast  with  the  namings  of  the  Cainites,  which  express
might  and  pride.— Vcrs.  21-23.  Whilst   the   Enoch
of  eh.  iv.  17  bears  upon  himself  the  Cainitic  conse
cration,  and  gives  to    the  earthly   his  consecration
(say  rather  receives  it  from  the  earthly),  the  Enoch
of  our  chapter  shows  the  consecration  of  God(Sirach
xliv.  15  ;  Heb.  xi.  5).     The  subjective  side  of  patri-
archalism  is  its  faith,  the   objective  the  divine  ac
ceptance. — LUTHER  :  From  this  we  take  it  that  there
was_in   Enoch  a   peculiar   consolation  of  the  Holy
Spirit  and  an  excellent  and  noble  courage,  so  that
with  the  highest  confidence  and  boldness  he  bore
himself  against  the  church  of  Satan  and  the  Cainites,
in  the  presence  of  the  other  patriarchs.     For  to  walk
reverentially  with  God  means  not  to  roam  in  a  des
ert,  or  to  hide  oneself  in  a  corner,  but  to  come  forth
according  to  his  calling,  and  to  bear  himself  bravely
against  the  unrighteousness  of  Satan  and  the  world.
(In  this,  however,  the  question  still  remains,  whether
we  are  to  think  of  Enoch  as  having  the  contempla
tive  Johannean,  or  the   zealous   Petrine  form;  we
may  rather  suppose  the  first  than  the   second.)—
Roos  :  We  never  find  this  mode  of  speech,  to  walk
with  God,  after  the  giving  of  the  law,  but  rather  the
terms  perfect,  upright.    In  the  New  Testament  pious
men  are  called  holy  (saints),  and  beloved  of  God.
In  this  way  there  shines  clearly  before  the  eyes  the
difference  of  the  divine  economies,  namely:  before
the  law,  and  under  the  law,  and  under  the  grace  of
the  New  Testament.     In  respect  to  the  language,  to
walk  with  God,  it  expresses  the  patriarchal  piety  in
a  very  becoming  and  lovely  manner.    There  were,  at
that  day,  no  literally  expressed  prescriptions  as'  to
what  ought  to  be  done  or  left  undone.     God  himself
stood  in  place  of  all  such  prescriptions.— HENGSTEN-
BERG  :  The  main  thing  was  that  each  should  become
a  partaker  of  the  life  of  God.     When  this  took  place
then  had  he  eternal  life,  and  the  assurance  of  it  in  his
consciousness.     In  all  the  Holy  Scripture  this  term
(translation)  is  used  only  of  three  persons-  of  Enoch
m  the  old  world,  of  Elijah  in  the  old  covenant   and


of  Christ  in  the  new.     The  first  is  a  "  type  of  the
second,  and  both  are  Old  Testament  figures  "  of  tho


,  '  «    **!-)  »n\_0  VI     I  IH,

last.— HERDER  :    Tho  seventh  from  Adam  cannot  be
without  God  in  a  world  which  scorns  him;  God  for
got  _  him  not,  but  made  him  immortal  and  an  ever
lasting  monument  of  this  divine  truth.— HKXO-TEN-
nERo:    Everything  arbitrary   must   be  far  removed
from  a  religion  whose  God  is  the  unchangeable  Jeho
vah  ;  what  God  does  in  the  case  of  one  is,  at  (he
same  time,  a  prediction  of  what  he  will  do  to  all  who
occupy  with  him  a  like  stand-point.— BAUMGARTEN  •
When  we  confine  our  looks  to  the  bare  catalogue'
we  find,  indeed,  life  followed  close   by   death,  but
this  opens  up  to  us  a  series  in  which  we  see  no
close.     But  that  this  series  has  an  actual  conclusion
namely,  the  victory  of  life  over  death,  is  for  the  first
time  assured  to  us  through  the  translation  of  Enoch.
-LUTHER  :  So  shines  out,  in  the  midst  of  this  nar
ration  of  the  dead,  like  a  fair  and  lovely  star  the
pleasing  light  of  immortality.     The  old  doctors  of
the  church  say:    Abel  confessed  another  life  after
death,  for  his  blood  cries  out  and  is  heard  •  Cain
acknowledged  another  life  before  death,  for  he  was
afraid  to  die,  and  his  soul  foreboded  that  something
more  awaited  him  than  tin's   world's  unhapphW-
Enoch  confesses  another  life  without  death,  for,  out
of  this    world's   misery,    and    without    the  pain  of
dying,  he  goes  straight  to  everlasting  life.     In  tho
Koran  and  among  the  Mohammedans  Enoch  bears
the  name  of  Edris.     So  also  the  heathen  legends
mention  him  under  the  names  of  Annak,  Cannak
Nannak  (for  the  further  treatment  of  these  stories!
p.  119).    Methuselah  means  either  man  of  the  arrow-
shooting,  because,  by  standing  on  his  defence  and  using
his  skill  in  weapons,  in  these  last  times  of  the  first
world,  he  was  able  to  resist  the  robberlike,  murder
ous  Cainites ;  or  his  name  means  man  of  the  shoot  or
germ,  that  is,  of  a  great  posterity;  one  rich  in  child
ren  and  in  children's  children.— VAL.  IIKKBEUGKK:
God  can  prolong  our  life,  as  in  the  case  of  Hexekiah.
While  Methuselah  lived  the  great  distress  came  not
upon  the  world,  for  he  could  pray  from  the  heart
and  keep  back  the  wrath  of  God ;  but  as  soon  as
Methuselah's  white   snow  dissolves,    and   his    gray
hair  descends  into  the  grave,  then  grows  the  weather
foul,  the  rain  comes  down,  out  swells  the  flood,  and
all  the  world  must  drown. — At  the  speech  of  Lamech
ch.  iv.  1,  it  was  the  wife  whose  mother-feelings  sang
joyfully  together ;  in  the  passage  before  us  (of  the
Sethic  Lamech)   we  perceive  the  loud  pulse  of  a
father's   heart. — The  advancing    corruption  of   the
time,  and  of  his  cotemporaries,  give  no  doubtful  col
oring  to  his  soul's  longing ;  on  this  dark  background
first  falls  that  hard  fate  of  eating  bread  in  the  sweat
of  the  brow  (ch.  iii.  17). — In  such  a  consolation  of  a

pious  son  did  the  old  pious  fathers  find  their  rest.

Roos :  From  such  a  man  must  the  patriarchs  have
been  greatly  comforted,  and  gained  new  courage.
(Similar  examples  in  the  Old  Testament,  Moses,
Samuel,  Elias  ;  in  the  New  Testament  time,  John  the
Baptist,  the  Apostles;  in  modern  times,  Huss,  Lu
ther,  and  others.)  It  all  presupposes  Christ  the
middle  point. — Theodoret  names  him  (Noah)  the
other  or  second  Adam. — DRECHSLER  :  Here,  in  the
mention_of  Noah,  there  is  an  extension  to  the  whole
chapter  in  contrast  to  the  previous  concise  declara
tions.— (Comparison  of  the  three  sons  of  Adam  and
the  three  sons  of  Noah.)  Shorn  the  first-born,  the
most  like  to  his  father,  who  carries  farther  on
the  golden  thread;  he  is  the  representative  of  the
divine  principle  in  humanity,  p.  125.  The  opposite


278


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


riews  of  Luther  and  Calvin  respecting  tnc  declara
tion  that  Noah  was  five   hundred  years   old.      Lu
ther :  He  lived  so  long  unmarried,  because,  m  that
corrupt  time,  it  was  better  to  have  no  cUUlrmthan
evil,  degenerate  ones;  but  then  he  may  have  become
married' from  the  admonition  of  the  patvia
the  command  of  an  angel.     Calvin:  It  w  not  said
that  he  had  hitherto   been  unmarried,  nor  ni  wha
year  he  began  to  be  a  lather    but   on  the  occasion
of  noting  the  point  of  time  when  the  future  flood  is
announced  to  him    Moses  add,  that  at  this  time  he
had  already  become  the  lather  ot  three  sons  [tl  a
explanation,  however,   is  not  in  harmony  with  the
allegations  of  a  middle  time  which  ho  cues  as  analo-
goul  to  those  in  our  chapter] -IlERDEK :  Remark-
able  history  of  humanity;  the  ibrm  it  ever  presents
These,   under  the  curse  are    singing   their  song  ot
jubilcV;  those  others,  under  the  blessing  are  full  of
sighs.     These  are  building,  singing,  inventing ;  those
live    brinsr   up  children,  and  walk  with   God.      Hie
uumbcr    of    the  one    class   is    ever    growing   more
numerous,  the  gathering  of  the  other  grows  ever   c
•in-l  less      It  ends  with  one  race,  with  one  man,  and
the  S0ven  souls   that  are  with  him.     So  will  it  also
l,e   savs  Christ    at  the  end  of  the  days.     Be  not  dis-
,ic:u.t^cdi  little  tloek.-LrTi.Ku:  This  chapter  pre
sents  to  us  a  form  and  image  of  the  whole  world.
\<  therefore,  there  may  be  seen  in  our  chapter  a  lair
form  and  image  of  the  early  world,  so  also  is  it  God  &
overwhelming  wrath,  and  a  most   fearhd  rum    that
we  behold  in  the  fact  that  the  whole  race  ot  Uu
ten  patriarchs  peri,hed,  with  the  exception  ot  only
ei-ht  that  survived.— THE  SAMK:    We  ought  not  to
tliink  that  these  are    common  names  ot   mean   anil
common  men,  for,  in  fact,  they  are  great  hero
THK    SAMK:    Our   world  of   to-day,    the    third,    and
still  a  world  of  mercy,  how  full  of  blasphemy  and
cruelty!— It  must  be  punished  with  a  flood  ot  nre  ;
for  so"  prophesy  the  colors  in  the  rainbow  (then  fol
lows  an  interpretation  of  the  three  chief  colors).

Gut.  \<n:    (iod    himself  stands  at  the  head  ot

the  cencalogical   table,  not  merely  as  creator,  as  he

's'oAill  other  l,eings,  but  as  the  father  of  men,  a,

appears  Luke  iii.  38.     Not  without   purpose  .

mentioned  the  divine  origin  of  the  human  race  a

the  very  apex  of  this  series.     It  contains  the  patri

arehs  that  remained  true  to  the  covenant  ot   God

and  who,  on  that  very  account,  arc  called  the  boi

of    God  (eh.   vi.   2).-Ver.   5.     "  Who  was  like  hi

ima-'c  "    'This  expression  contains  no  allusion  to  th

fall  "but  there  is  rather  indicated  a  continuance  of

the'divine  image  according  to  the  original  positioi

of  man.     As  Adam  was  created  in  the  divine  image

so  could  he  also  beget  a  son  who  should  be  like  t

his  own  imatro.     That  the  predominance  ot  sin  i

inherited  along  with  it,  is  taken  for  granted  throtig

the  whole  history  (therefore  is  it  here  also  indicate

although  the  author  rightly  saw  that  here,  in   t.

representation  of  the  higher  Sethic  line  and  in  ac

cordance  with  its  connections,  there   should   be

epfccial  emphasis  given  to  the  continuance  <


of  light  in  humanity).— Enoch  :  Most  worthy  of  note
as  a  very  ancient  witnessing  to  the  earliest  human
race  of  a  blessed  eternal  life.

Lisco:  Enoch,  that  is,  devoted.  He  is  the  _sev-
enth  from  Adam,  wherein  there  may  be  some  indi
cation  that  after  the  six  long  woi Id-times  of  sin  and
death,  there  should  be  introduced,  in  the  seventh
period  of  the  world,  through  one,  that  is,  Christ,  a
divine  life,  with  freedom  from  death  ["Calculus  of
the  Biblical  Chronology,"  p.  '23].

CALWKII  IlANDBfdi :   S(t/i.     Eve  looks  upon  hhn
as  a  present  from  God;    but  thinks  no  more,  as  in
the  case  of   Cain,  that,  she  actually  hns   the  Lord.
Still  docs  her  faith  behold  a  new  beginning  for  the
romise,  of  the  seed  of  the  woman,  bearing  in  itself
lie  pledge  of  its  sure  ongoing,  whilst  she  believingly
eceives°this  "other  seed"  from  the  hand  of  God.
indication  that  in  the  birth  of  Cain  she  had  ascribed
;0  herself  too  invat  a  share,  j— Methuselah,  the  eighth
rom  Adam,  lives  nearly  one  hundred  years  cotempo-
aneously  with  Adam,  whilst  Noah  lives  eighty-four
ears  wit'h  Enoch,  the  grandson  of  Adam,  ami,  in  the
thcr  direction,  was  one  hum'.red  and  twenty-eight
ears  cotemporaneous  with  Terah  the  father  of  A  bra-
am —Abel  died  early  a  violent  death;  Adam  was
he  first  who  died  a  natural  death  (?);    fifty-seven
cars  after  him  was  Eiiosh  translated.     A  threefold
vav      [Enoch.     l'nder  the   name   of  Idris  (learned
nan)  he  is  said  to  have  been  the  inventor  of  letters
uul  wiitin",  of  arithmetic,  and  astronomy.]— BUNSEN,
on  the  word  of  Lcmech,  v.  29:  This  indicates  very
iard  times  and  trreat  disturbing  events  ot  nature,  ri
he  last  period  of  the  old  world.     Men  labor  hard,
,ut  nothing'  thrives.     They  toil  in  vain  ;  tin-  crop  is
iitlo   or  it' is  wholly  lost.     Now  there  is  a  hreatlmvj
m-iin    (according    to    the    root-meaning  ot    naham
(ens)  and  the  Arabic   usage)  after  the  fruitless  la-
',or      [Here,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  overlooked  that
the  object   of  Lameeh's  lamentation  has  an  ethical
background  (a  eommer.cing  corruption),  and  in  the
<econd  place,  that  the  destined  limitation  of  that  old
period  through  a  sudden  and  destroying  flood  i
eludes  earlier  catastrophes.]— From  the  name  of  the
Cainite   Mahujael,   eh.  iv.    18:    "  Hctruit  dc,  Dim,
and  with  refcivneo  to  a  Lydian  and  Indian  tradition,
Von   Rougemont   concludes   that:     sa  generation,  a
;•;    ,„    majcurc   partic  cntevte   par    u;,c    e/rcyable
stcherfsse    which    lasted   at   least    eighteen    years.
Uutoire  <!<•  l«.  Tare,  p.  98.     fin  reference,  however,
to  this  meaning  of  the  name  Mahujael,  it  is  to  be  re
marked  that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  analogy  Oi
the  Cainitic  names].— TAUHE:  What  Enoch's  lite  and
destiny    proclaims  to  us :    1.  That    a  godly  bio  in
faith  pleases  God ;  2.  that  God  in  his  grace  rewards
it  with  the  gift  of  everlasting  life.-The  name  of
Noah  •  1    A  significant  index  to  the  state  ot  soul  <
the  Se'thitcs  and  of  all  children  of  God;  2.  a  figure
of  Christ.— HOFMANN  (p.  40):  Fathers  ever  hope  lor
deliverance  in  their  sons.     [Then  follows  a  reference
to  Seth,  Enosh,  Enoch,  Noah.]


CHAP.  vi.  1-8.  279

FOURTH    SECTION.

The  Universal  Corruption  in  consequence  of  the  mine/liny  of  the  two  lines. — 17ie  anomism

(or  enormity)  of  sins  before  the  food. — Predominant  unbelief. — Titanic  pride. —

After  the  flood  prevailing  superstition.

CHAPTER    VI.    1-8.

1  And  it  came  to  pass  when  men  began  to  multiply  on  the  face   of  the  earth,  and

2  daughters  were   born  unto   them,   That  the  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  men
[looked  upon  them]  that  they  were  fair,  and  they  took  them  wives  of  all  which  they  chose

3  j  after  their  sensual  choice].    And  the  Lord  said,  my  spirit2  shall  not  always  strive1  with  man,

4  for  that  he3  also  is  tlesh;  yet  his  days  shall  be  an  hundred  and  twenty  years.     There
were  giants4  in  the  earth  in  those  days  ;   and  also  after  that,  when  the  sons  of  God  came
in  to  the  daughters  of  men,  and  they  bare  children  to  them ;  the  same  became  mighty

5  moil,  which  were  of  old,  men  of  renown.     And  God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man
was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was

G  only  evil  continually.  And  it  repented5  the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth,
7  and  it  grieved6  him  at  his  heart.  And  the  Lord  said,  1  will  destroy  man  whom  I  have

created  from  the  face  of  the  earth;  both  man  and  beast,  and  the  creeping  thing,  and
S  the  fowls  of  the  air;  for  it  repcnteth  me  that  I  have  made  them.  And  Noah  found

grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.

['  Ver.  3. — "|*Tn  X3.  This  word  has  given  rise  to  a  great  variety  of  interpretations.  Tho  most  unsatisfactory,  as
well  as  the  farthest  from  the  Hebrew  usage,  is  that  of  Geseuius,  who  renders  it,  non  humili'ibitur,  my  spirit  shall  not  be
humbled,  or  become  vile,  in  man,  regarding  it  as  cognate  with  the  Arabic  . . » '  c?  (  , .  t  •  i^  )  •  There  is  not  a  trace  of  such
a  sense  anywhere  else  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  It  is  directly  opposed  to  the  strong  sense  of  power,  superiority,  as  it
appears  in  the  frequent  "p1Jt ,  lord,  master,  "plE  ,  judicial  conjlict,  and  the  name  of  Deity,  "'STX  ,  Duminits.  Compare
also  pTj  ,  Job  xix.  29,judicium.  The  other  form  "pi  ,  if  it  is  not  rather  an  abbreviated  Iliphil  of  "p*l,  has  always  this


ruling  judicial  sense,  and  corresponds  to  the  other  Arabic  verb   ,.)lO    (,.O^).    The  Arabic  verb   ..»«<3  may  have

come  from  this  by  acquiring  a  modified  passive  sense.  It  may  be  said,  too,  that  the  view  of  Gescnius  is  out  of  harmony
with  tho  whole  spirit  of  the  Scriptures.  There  is  no  such  thought  in  the  Bible  as  God's  spirit  being  humble  1  by  dwelling
or  striving  with  men.  Its  philosophy  is  nil  the  other  way:  God's  "strength  is  made  perfect  in  our  weakness."  The
LXX.  have  rendered  it,  ou  /J.YI  KaraiJ.ei.vji,  shall  not  remain  ;  the  Vulgate  the  same,  non  permanebii  ;  the  Syriac  in  like

manner,  •  v.-V./  J] ,  shall  not  dwell.  The  LXX.  and  the  Syriac  were  probably  inf.ucnced  by  some  early  Jewish  Targum,
since  Onkelos  gives  it  substantially  the  same  sense,  "fTP."1  NP,  though  he  paraphrases  the  passage.  The  interpretation
of  "p.T1  has  been  much  influenced  by  the  interpreters'  view  of  "TiVl  following,  as  denoting  the  natural  life,  the  spirit  or
eoul  which  God  had  given  men  (see  Ps.  civ.  29,  30  ;  Eccles.  xii.  7),  and  they  have  accordingly  given  "pi"1  any  general
sense  that,  whilst  harmonizing  with  such  view,  would  not  bo  opposed  to  the  radical  idea  of  ruling  judicially.  Hence  we
need  not  regard  theso  old  interpreters  as  having  read  C1*P  or  "jlb^,  as  some  have  supposed.  Another  view  which  is
found  in  some  of  the  Jewish  commentators  would  refer  "Pl*^  to  the  spirit,  mind,  or  disposition  of  God  generally,  repre
sented  as  occupied  with  the  care  of  man,  and,  as  it  were,  wearied  with  it.  So  Rashi  :  my  spirit  within  me  shall  not  te
disturbed  on  account  of  man.  Another  very  strange  one  mentioned  by  Abcn  Ezra  connects  "JIT1  with  the  rare  noun
Pi 3 13  ,  meaning  a  sheath  (1  Chron.  xxi.  27),  as  though  the  body  were  the  sheath  of  the  spirit— shall  not  always  be  in-
shealhcd,  or  insliealh  itself—  from  the  root  p!3  ;  and  they  refer  to  tho  Aramaic  of  Dan  vii.  15,  "  my  spirit  was  grieved,
Pi  5  "13  "i^-i  within  my  body"— literally,  within  tho  sheath.  But  this  interpretation,  besides  being  ctymologically  false,
is  too  far-fetched  and  inconsistent  with  the  simplicity  of  the  early  language.  The  Arabic  translation  (Arabs  Erpenii)

renders  it  c  v-2J'>  ^°  ^c  w^"^y  occi'jjicd  with,  according  to  the  view  of  Kashi  above.  — T.  L.l

[2  Ver.  3.— Tl^n  .  Of  this  there  have  been  nearly  as  many  interpretations  as  of  m\\<~>*1-  It  may  mean  the  spirit  of
God  generally,  as  the  mind  of  God  ;  it  may  mean  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  power  or  influence,  or,  in  the  New  Testament
sense,  as  a  person.  It  has  been  interpreted  as  the  spirit  or  life  of  man,  which  God  calls  "iPlll  (my  spirit),  because  given
by  him  (as  in  Ps.  civ.  and  Eccles.  xii.,  before  referred  to).  This  latter  view  may  have  two  modifications  :  1.  as  the  life
generally,  or  nil  taken  for  tl)23  or  i//vx>) ;  or,  2.  in  the  higher  sense  of  nvevfj.a,  according  to  the  trichotomy— the  higher
or  rational  power  in  man,  and  more  nearly  allied  to  the  divine— the  reason  as  distinguished  from  the  sense,  and  from  tho
mere  inductive  intellect  judging  by  sense,  and  for  tho  sense.  The  decision  between  these  depends  on  the  context,  on  tho
force  of  cbll'P  ,  and  the  true  meaning  of  T»UD  &C1PI  C."  w1^ ;  also,  on  tho  question  whether,  taken  as  a  whole,  it  is  the
language  of  a  judgment  or  of  a  prediction  on  which  the  judgment  is  grounded.  On  this  see  the  Exegctical  and  Notes.— T.  L.]

[3  Ver.  3.— ~;  ~C_ 2 .  All  the  old  authorities,  versions,  commentaries,  etc.,  take  this,  as  it  is  rendered  in  E.  V.,  as  equivalent

to  CJ    "I'V.X.^,  in  MM  also,  or  because  also.    Thus  the  LXX.,  5ia  TO  ;  Vulg.,  quia  ;  Syrjac,  ?
Jonath.  bb;_3   "j^.    The  Arabic  of  the  Polyglotts,       ...,jVA£o    rWp^  5  Arabs  Erpenii,


280


GENESIS,  OK   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


SO,  "because  of  his  declination,  or  straying,  be  is  flesh."   The  objection  made  by  Gcsenius  and  Roscnmuller  to  the
"ibbrevhfon  ±  f  ,r  ~r  X  ,  thai  to  the  later  Hebrew,  has  little  weight.     There  are  examples  in  the  oldest  books,

•m'd  «'--  ronformitj  oFthe  writi;  g  to  thc  pronunciation  is  rather  a  mark  of  earlier  orthography,  though  it  may  W  after-
wards  imitated,  for  brevity,  in  the  liter  Rabbinical  writings.  There  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  Zl'ZZ  or  CITS  2,
bassliarjua.u.  would  [live  al  <  nt  the  actual  pronunciation  (especially  if  rapid)  of",  ~'^N2  if  written  m  f utt- laaslirr/jam,
lauhargam-m  which  the  s<  mi-vowel  sound  of  1  would  become  very  feeble  and  disappear,  as  is  the  ease  with  :  ir.  other
combin;i(ij:is  ,  ,am  would  i,  ,»;  the  duplication  by  the  dage,h  compensating  for  the  1

And  this  would  answer  the  question  why  it  is  not  more  frequent  in  the  early  hooks.     It  is  not  the  settled  use  of  a


i    i  ; it     •  o    iv-   (if  U  can  be  regarded  as  an  infinitive)  is  unexampled  in  the  Hebrew.     Besides,  this  verb  or  noun,

;,';;.;     c  ;,,;,,,,  U  always  used  of  the  more  venial  errors,  or  trey  .«,  ,,  an  I  i  ,  therefore,  unsuited  to  the  greatness

:;. \    ,     :  „,!••  ,,nh,.  B^J  here  denounced.     It  may  be  said,  moreover,  that  XT.,  with  the  plural  third  person  pronoun

--:  :T-^'  ^rsriisrr1^  "L  ^  b«,  i ,  /.  /, ,,.,,  uc  „**,,  a,  ^  *  r

S^el^andll?^

'  ;,  u,Ui  nSE,  X-£,  i.  much  more  clear  and  comlrtcnt.  C,  mpare  the  Xiphal,  P..  exxx.x.  1,,  rtE!,  and
^^E:  (contracted^:);  also  ESod.xxSiii.  1C,  crn  ts"?  r,W1  VX  ^bE=:., -and  I  and  thy  people  .hall  he
,,,/,;  .  ,  „  p;opie.-'  When  it  became  a  proper  name,  ^^\  or  ='  =  =  :  (JV/^Wm)  would  easily  be

;  ,  -'•":  iXephiUm),  the  shewn  be     mi   g  mo-,  il  le  in  the  frequent  use.     Thus  viewed,  we  may  regard  the  expre;sio-
1  of  the  x,—    - -H  ^r:S  ,  as  the  int.  ndcd  exegesis  of  the  word  uself  -=^  =  E:  ,  dislingui  '


.ntanverdon  strangely  renders  it  HEanS,  *«./«/«»,  be  was  .ft,  reel  y  e^ed,  matin- H


.IY  arKRTTOX,  KXKOKTIOA
THKOLoblCAL,  KESiMiCTIXG  T1IK  S
UOI).*


(H-


Tlu-  question,  wlnit  kind  of  Ix'in-s  are  we  to
understand  by  the  Sons  of  God,  has  been  answered
in  difVevcr.t  ways  from  the  earliest  time?,  and  has
1-itclv  (vain  "iven  occasion  to  lively  theological  dis-
cushions0  We  -ive  hero,  in  thc  first  place,  the  state
ment  <>f  Kurt/,,  who  has  engaged  in  the  question
with  peculiar  earnestness  (History  of  thc  Old
enant  i  r»  3<),  :Jd  ed.,  18C4,  and  in  a  long  Appen
dix  to  vol.  i.,  under  the  title:  Die  Ehenderkohne
CTV,Y.s  mH  <kn  Torhtcrn  dcr  Nenschen,  Berlin
1857)  "  In  respect  to  thc  Bne  Elohim,  we  find
three  principal  views:  1.  they  are  Jilii  mayna-
tum  pncllas  p/rtx-ias  rapieutes  ;  2.  they  are  angels  ;
3  thev  are  the  pions,  that  is,  the  Sethitcs,  m  con
trast  with  whom  the.  "  daughters  of  men  "  denote
Cainitish  women.  The  first  view  is  found  in  the
Samaritan,  Jonathan  (Targum),  Onkelos  (Targum),
Syinniachus,  Aben  Ezra,  Kashi,  Varenius,  &c.,  and

*  This  Discussion  has  been  somewhat  abridged  by  thc
translator.


mnv  now  be  rognrded  as  exploded.  The  second  view
is  mo-t  Ftron-ly  represented  in  the  old  synagogue
;-nd  church  It  would  seem  to  have  its  ground  m
tlu-  Sqilua-int.  At  least  thc  manuscripts  vary  be
tween  viol  rov  deof.  and  £77^01  ToDSeow.  Very
docidcdlv,  however,  it  is  presented  (and  mythically
improved  upon)  in  two  old  Apocryphal  books,  name-
Iv  thc  Hook  of  Enoch,  and  thc  so-called  Minor
Genesis,  of  which  Dillman  in  Ewald's  lear  Looks
has  ^iven  a  (Jcrman  translation  derived  from  the
Ethiopic  It  is,  moreover,  recognized  in  thc  Epis-
tie  of  Jude  (vers.  6  and  7  ?)  and  in  thc  Second
Epistle  of  Peter  (ch.  ii.  4,  5  ?).  It  was  also  presented
by  Philo,  Joscphus,  and  most  of  thc  Rabbinical
writers  (EISENMENGER'S  "  Judaism  Revealed,  i.  p.
380)  as  well  as  by  thc  oldest  church  fathers:  Jus
tin,  Clemens  Alex.,  Tcrtullian,  Cyprian  Ambrose,
and  Lactantius.  Since  then  it  fell  gradually  into
disfavor-  Chrysostom,  Augustine,  and  Theodoret
contended  zealously  against  it;  Pbilastrius  de
nounced  it  as  downright  heresy,  and  our  old  church
theologians  turned  from  it  almost  with  abhorrence.
It  found  also  in  thc  synagogue  vehement  opposers


CHAP.  VI.  1-8.


281


Rabbi  Simeon  Ben  Jocliai  pronounced  the  ban
against  all  who  adhered  to  it.  In  more  modern
times  it  has  been  seized  upon  by  all  excgetes  wh<
regard  the  early  history  of  Genesis  as  mythical
notwithstanding  which  a  decided  number  of  coin
mentators  who  are  believers  in  revelation  have  no
allowed  themselves  to  be  deterred  from  deciding  ii
its  favor, — for  example,  KOPPEN  ("  The  Bible  a  Wor]
of  Divine  Wisdom,"  i.  p.  104),  FR.  vox  MKYKR
(Blatter  fur  /where  WaJirhcit,  xi.  p.  (31  ff.),  TWESTK>
("Dogmatics,"  ii.  1,  p.  332),  NITZSCII  ("System,1
]).  234  f.)  DUESCHLER  (Elnhcit  der  Genesis,  p.  91)
HOFMANN  ("Prophecy  and  Fulfilment,"  i.  p.  85,  and
"  Scripture  Proof',''  i.  p.  374  If. ),  BADMGAIITKN  ("  Com
mentai y  on  the  Pentateuch,"  ad  h.  /.),  DEUTZSCI.
(Con<mcni.  ad  h.  L),  STIER  ("Epistle  of  Jude,"  p.  42
if.),  I):ETI,EIN  ("  Comment,  on  the  Second  Epistle  of
Peter,"  p.  149  IF.),  LUTHER  ("  Comment,  on  the  Epis
tles  of  Peter  and  Jude,"  pp.  204,  341).  The  thirt"
view  is  found  in  Chrysostom,  Cyril  Alex.,  Theodoret,
(on  the  special  ground  that  Seth,  on  account  of  hit
piety,  acquired  the  name  deo's,  and  that,  therefore,  his
descendants  were  named  viol  TOV  deoG).  It  was  hek
by  almost  all  the  later  church  theologians.  In  mod
ern  times  it  has  been  defended  with  special  zeal  by
HENGSTENBERG  ("  Contributions,"  ii.  p.  328  ff.),  HA-
VEUXIIC  ("Introduction,"  i.  2,  p.  265),  DETTINGER
("Remarks  on  the  Section,  Gen.  iv.  1-ch.  vi.  8,"  in
the  Tubingen  Journal  of  Theology,  1835,  No.  1),  KEIL
("Luther.  Periodical,"  1851,  ii.  p.  239),  and  many
others.

The  preceding  statement  has  been  made  complete
by  KURTZ  in  his  Book  ("  The  Marriages  of  the  Sons
of  God,")  Berlin,  1857,  p.  12;  as  likewise  by  KEIL
(p.  SO)  by  the  citation  of  the  treatise  of  HENGSTEX-
BEIIG  (''  The  Sous  of  God  and  the  Daughters  of  Men,")
in  the  Evangelical  Church  Gazette,  1858,  No.  29,  and
No.  35-37  ;  in  the  exposition  of  PHILIPPI  ("  Church
Doctrine  of  the  Faith,")  iii.  p.  176  ff,  and  the  con
troversial  writings  of  KURTZ  that  have  appeared
against  the  treatises  of  KEIL  and  HEXGSTENBERG
("  The  Marri-iges  of  the  Sons  of  God  with  the  Daugh
ters  of  Men),"  Berlin  1857,  and  "The  Sons  of  God,"
in  Gen.  vi.  1-4,  and  the  "  Sinning  Angels,"  in  2  Pet.
ii.  4,  5,  and  Jude,  vers.  6,  7.  Mitau,  1858.  Engel
hard  t  alto  takes  the  side  of  Kurtz  ("Lutheran  Period
ical,"  ly.jO,  p.  4u4).  Delitzsch  appears  as  the  latest
defender  of  the  angel  hypothesis  of  any  considerable
note  ("  Comment."  3d  Ed.,  1860,  p.  230  ff.).  Its
latest  opponent  of  note  since  KEERL  ("  Questions  on
the  Apocrypha,"  p.  200),  is  KEIL  ("Comment,"
1861,  p.  80  if.)

It  is  shown  by  Keil  (p.  80)  that  the  relation  of
our  passage  to  the  Sethitcs  had  its  defenders,  both
among  Jews  and  Christians,  before  the  time  of  Chry-
sostom ;  since  Josephus  knew  of  this  interpretation,
and  the  critical  Julius  Africanus  maintained  it  in  the
first  half  of  the  third  century.  So  also  did  Ephraim
the  _Syrian,  to  which  add,  among  the  Apocryphal
writings,  the  Clementine  Recognitions,  and  the  ori
ental  Book  of  Adam.

We  take  first  into  view  the  section  as  it  lies  be
fore  us,  with  its  connection  and  the  analogies  of  the
Old  Testament,  then  the  relations  to  our  passage  of
the  New  Testament,  farther  on,  the  exegetical  tradi
tions,  and  finally,  the  religious-philosophical,  do"-
matic,  and  practical  significance  of  the  question.

Ike  Place  itself  in  qmstion  ;  its  Connection,  and
tM  Analogies  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  Sons  of
God.  Bne  EloMm.  According  to  the  angel  hypo
thesis,  angels  alone  arc  here  to  be  understood  not


withstanding  that  there  is  no  mention  of  angels  im
mediately  before  this,  to  stand  as  its  antecedent,  but
only  of  the  pious  race  of  Sethites.  Chap.  5  gives  U3
an  account  of  pious  men,  of  chosen  mo/,  of  a  won*
derfully  glorified  man  of  God  ;  but  of  angels,  on  the
contrary,  there  is  not  a  word,  even  to  this  place,  ex
cept  the  mysterious  language  respecting  the  cheru
bim,  in  which  we  cannot  at  all  recognize  any  personal
angel-forms.  The  single  apparent  ground  for  a  sup
position,  at  first  view  wild  and  abrupt,  is  found  in  the
fact,  that  in  the  later  books  of  the  Old  Testament,
not  the  pious  arc  called  DTj'^xn  133 ,  but  the  an
gels.  It  is,  however,  simply  incorrect  to  say  that
anywhere  in  the  historical  scriptures  the  angels  are
called  sons  of  God  without  anything  farther  ;"  only  in
a  few  poetical  places,  and  in  one  nominally  prophetic
(Job  i.  2  ;  xxxviii.  7  ;  Ps.  xxix.  1 ;  Ixxxix.  7 :  Dan.
in.  25)  are  they  so  called ;  and  then,  too,  beside  the
poetical  language,  there  comes  into  view  the  eluci
dating  context.  In  Job  i.  they  form  the  council  of
God  represented  as  administering  government  (there
fore  not  bne  Eloldm,  as  nomen  naturae  in  distinction
from  Maleak,  as  nomen  officii)  and  in  fact  in  contrast
to  Satan.  In  the  same  way  in  chap.  ii.  In  chap,
xxxviii.  7,  they  hail  the  laying  the  foundation  of  the
earth  and  the  creation  of  man.  Ps.  xxix.  1,  they  are
called  upon  to  glorify  the  Lord  in  the  thunder-storm,
and  in  the  restoration  of  his  people.  Ps.  Ixxxix.  7,
are  they  thus  denoted  by  way  of  contrasting  their
dependent  state  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Dan.
iii.  25  hardly  belongs  here,  but  is,  perhaps,  to  be  in
terpreted  according  to  chap.  vii.  13.  In  respect  to
this,  Hongstenberg  has  already  shown  that  the  name
bne  Eloldm  belongs  to  the  poetic  diction.

Whilst,  therefore,  in  the  pure  historical  pieces  the
angels  are  never  styled  sons  of  God,  there  does  ap
pear  the  indication  of  a  filial  relation,  or  of  a  sonship,
in  respect  to  the  people  of  Israel,  to  the  Old  Testa
ment  kings,  to  the  pious  or  dependent  wards  of  God,
and  that,  too,  in  various  ways,  even  in  the  legal
sphere.  Delitzsch  remarks,  that  the  idea  of  a  filial
relation  in  the  Old  Testament  had  already  begun  to
win  for  itself  a  universal  ethical  significance  beyond
;he  limitation  to  Israel  (Ex.  iv.  22  ;  Deut.  xiv.  1)" — as
though  this  filial  relation  of  the  children  of  Israel,
under  the  law,  were  a  real  step  in  progress  in  respect
to  Abraham  and  the  Sethites.  But  the  case  is  ex
actly  the  other  way.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,
lie  patriarchal  standpoint  of  belief  in  promise  is  a
higher  one  than  that  of  the  Mosaic  legality  (Gal.  iii.
16).  It  is  to  be  specially  remarked  in  regard  to
£urtz,  that  he  knew  not  how  to  distinguish  the  differ
ent  economies  of  the  Old  Testament.  When,  for  ex-
imple,  the  Apostle  Paul  tells  us,  that  the  law  was
given  through  the  ministry  of  angels,  he  concludes
hat  the  angel  of  the  Lord  that  appeared  to  Abraham
nust  have  been  a  creaturely  angel  (History  of  the
Old  Testament,  p.  152).  And  yet  Paul  brings  for
ward  this  character  of  the  angelic  mediation  for  the
xpress  purpose  of  showing  that  the  revelation  of  the
iromise  was  a  more  essential,  and,  also,  a  hi  flier
orm  than  that  of  the  law-giving  ;  it  could  not,  there-
ore,  have  been  in  this  sense  (of  Kurtz)  that  the  law-
giving  is  referred  to  the  mediation  of  angels.  The
xplanatiou  consists  in  this,  that  the  promise  was  a
evelation  for  Abraham,  and,  generally,  for  the  elect
mtriarchs,  whilst  the  law-giving,  on  the  other  hand,
vas  for  a  whole  people  mingled  and  coarse,  or  at  all
vents,  greatly  needing  an  educating  culture.  But
s  the  patriarchal  economy,  in  respect  to  its  relation-


282


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  ?10SES.


ship  to  the  form  of  the  Gospel,  had  a  superiority  to
the  form  of  the  law-giving,  and  in  so  fur  appears  like
to  the  New  Testament,  so  again  hail  the  economy  of
the  Sethites  a  superiority  to  the  Abrahamic.     The
specific  distinction  is  the  separation  between  the  line
of  the  pious,  and   the  godless,  curse-loaded  line  of
Cain.     Therefore  it  is  that  (hat  peculiar  designation
of  Enoch's  piety:    "lie  walked  with  God,"  never  oc
curs  again  in  the  later  law-times  of  the  Old  Testa
ment.  °In  a  word,  the  Sethie  economy  is  a  U7ra|  \eyo-
pevov  in  the  Old  Testament,  which  has  been  funda
mentally  mistaken  by  (he  contenders  for  the  angel
hypothesis.     It  has  a  prefiguration  of  the  New  Tes
tament  state,  and  acknowledges,  therefore,  the  viol
Sfov  or  Konsof  God,  as  is  done  in  the  New  Testament
in  our  Lord's  sermon  on  the  mount.      If  (lie  objection
is  made,  that  the  redemption  is  not  yet  perfectly  in
troduced,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  faith  in  re
demption,  in  the  time  after  Christ,  is  not  to  be  meas
ured,  in  its   degrees,  by  (he  chronological  advance;
as  is' shown  in  the  examples  of  Enoch  and  Abraham.
Luther,   moreover,  knew  better  how  to  estimate  the
woith  of  this  singularity  in  the  economy  of  the  long
living  S.M  greatly  exalted  through  the  blessing  ol'Seth,
;i'id  \\hti  ivH.'eted  in  their  life  the  end  of  time:   '•  They
are  the  greatest  heroes  that,  next  to  Christ  and  John
the  Baptist,  ever  appeared  in  this  world,  and  at  the
List  day  we  shall  behold  their  majesty."    Since,  there-
even    the    law-period,   notwithstanding  Israel's
crvant-rolation,  did  r.ot  exclude  the  idea  of  Israel's
i-onship  generally,  or  of  the  believing  especially,  (as
the  places  Dcut.  xxxii.  5;  Hos.  ii.   1   (therefore  not
poetical)  an  1   Ps.  Ixxiii.    !;">  show  to  us,  how  much
more   clearly   nm>t  this  idea   have  appeared,   in  its
1  \pical  significance  and  beauty,  among  the  pious  de-
mis  of  Seth.      In  that   case  it  has   been   said,
;1  .  y  ouLrht  to  have  been  called  bne  Jehovah  (instead
of  bne  Eloliim);    but  this  is  not  to  keep  clearly  in
view,  that  the.  Sethites  represented  the  universal  re
lation  of  humanity  to  God,  and  that  they,  like  Mel-
chi/.edek  at  a  later  time,  disappeared  from  the  stage.
That   the   angels,  however,  in  a  physical  sense,  as
opposed  lo  an  ethical  sense,  could  be  called  sons  of
(j0j( — that  is,  could  be  referred  to  some  generation
of  a  phvsical  kind,  is  a  view  that  has  been  rightly  de
nounced  by  Keil  (p.  11).     And  in  this  way,  for  the
unprejudiced,  the  matter  might  seem  tolerably  well
disposed  of.     But  further  on  it  occurs  as  a  thing  to
l;c  considered,  that  the  sons  of  God  woo  the  daughters
of  men.     How,  it  is  asked,  when  it  is  said  in  its  gen
eral  sense  (ver.  2)  that  men  multiplied  themselves,
can  we  limit  the  expression  daughters  of  men,  ver.  2,
to  the  daughters  of  the  Cainites?     We  cannot  here
rest  upon  the  usual  mode  of  stating  this.     There  is
no  reason  why  the  sons  of  God  should  have  found  a
tempting  beautj  only  among  the  daughters  of  the
Cainites.     The  daughters  of  men  may,  in  the  first
place,  bo  women  in  general.     In  that  case,  however,
the  first  contrast  would  consist  in  regarding  the  ethi
cally  defined  sons  of  God  as  opposed  to  the  physic
ally  defined  daughters  of  men, — among  whom  the
Cainitie  women  might  be  primarily  understood,  espe
cially  since  the  Sethite  women   too  belong  to   the
children  of  God.     Their  fiist  transgression,  however
would  consist  in  this,  that  in  the  choice  of  wives  the)
let  themselves  be  determined  by  the  mere  charm  o
sensual  beauty.     From  this  follows  the  second  trans
gression,  that  they  took  them  wives  of  all  whom  thej
chose,  that  is,  of  all  that  pleased  them.    On  the  wort
VsiO ,  therefore,  rests  the  emphasis  of  the  exprcssioi
(out  of  all).     Instead  of  looking  at  the  spiritual  kins


nanship,  they  had  an  eye  only  to  the  pleasure  of
ense.     That    was    the   lirst    thing.     Then    there   is
othing  said  here  of  any  moral  satisfaction  in  beauty,
'his  appears  from    the    fact   that    they   took   them
vives  of  all  that  pleased  them,  of  all  that  they  de-
ired.     Instead  of  holding  pure  the  Scthic  line,  they
ook  wives  indiscriminately  (^SE),  and  that  was  the
econd  and  decisive  transgression.     By  this  was  the
lam  torn  down  which  stood  between  the  Cainites  and
he  Scthites, — that  is,  the  dam  which  kept  back  the
mivcrsal    corruption,  and  which   hitherto  had  pro-
ected  the  race  of  the  blessing.     Therefore  is  it,  ver.
3,  that  the  corruption  which  now  comes  is  charged
jpon  men,  and  not  at  all  upon  the  angels.     If  we
ook  for  a  moment  at  the  angel  hypothesis,  it  is  not
easy  to  sec  how  such  amours  with  individual  women
could  have  had  so  decided  an  effect  upon  the  destiny
of  the  whole  race,  at  a  time,  too,  when  more  than
now,  men  formed  tin1  deciding  factor;  and  this  may
we  say,  without  taking  into  view  the  fact,  that  in  the
listorical  style  angels  are  never  called  bne  Elohini,
hat  angels  do  not   seek  nor  are  sought  in  marriage
;Matt.    xxii.   :;i>),    and    that    the  expression:    "take
themselves  wives,"  denotes  marriage-ties,  not  by  way
of   unnatural    amours,   or  romantic  loves,    as   Kurtz
lietures  it  in  his  first   treatise  (p.  W).     But  indeed,
out  of  those  demoniacal,   fleshly   amours,  it  is  said,
must  have  proceeded  the  S^S?  and  C^SS,  and  thus
they  would  bring  the  whole  matter  to  a  decision.    In
;hc  first  place,  however,  must  we  remember,  that  the
sentence  of  God  respecting  the  desperate  condition
of  the  race  (ver.  '.'•)  precedes  this  mention  of  the  Ne-
philim,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  C^s:  must  already  de
note  a  special  form  of  the  evil,  which,  with  its  fleshly
lust,  stands  at  the  same  time  in  a  position  of  recipro
city.     According  to  almost   a-11  interpretations,  and
according  to  Numb.  xiii.  !>3,  "when  the  giant,  Ana-
kini  arc  reckoned  among  them,''  the   Nephilim  were
qigantic, — or,  more  accurately,  the  distinguished,  the
prominent  or  overpowering.     According  to  such  it  is
from  ^23 ,  a  near  form  to  N^S  ;  other  derivations  see
below.     In    their    bodily  appearance    the  Nephilim
were  not  exactly  what  arc  called  giants  in  the  mythi
cal  sense,  but  prominent  and  powerful  forms  of  men.
In  strength,  in  courage,  or  pride,  they  were  Gibborim,
that  is,  mighty  men,  heroes  ;  in  deeds,  they  were  men
of  renown';  but  their  deeds  were  especially  deeds  of
violence  C^n  (vv.  11,  1,'i),  unrighteousness,  and  op
pression.     The  meaning  is,  that  the  fleshly  nature
of  pride  and  cruelty  ever  associates   itself  with  the
ileslily  disorder  of  lust.     Lamcch  the  Cainitc  and  his
song  were  now  the  general  type  of  the  human  race.
But  as  the  tendency  to  violence  came  in  colempo-
raneously  with  the  lust,  and  not  as  a  generation  for
the  first  time  descending  from  it,  so  were  the  Nephi
lim  cotcmporaneous  with  these  fleshly  mesalliances,
having  been,  in  fact,  from  the  days  of  Cain  hitherto
"men  of  renown."    The  Hebrew  is  sptt  ,  not  !Pn*1 ;
there   were   Nephilim,   it  is   said,   CHH   C^D,  in
those  same  days,  not  there  became  or  came  to  be,  as
Knobel  translates  it.    Add  to  this  the  offspring  of  the
sons  of  God  and  the  daughters  of  men,  that  is,  of  the
Crossly   sensual  marriages  of  the  pious,   and  their
mingling  with  the  Cainitie  race.     Thus  flow  together
two  origins  of  the  Gibborim.     In  respect  to  the  first
were  they  men  of  renown,  or  men  of  old,  cbl"52 —
that  is,  the  Cainites.     Thus,  too,  in  the  easiest  way
docs  our  section  connect  itself  with  both  the  preccd-
in^  chapters.    In  the  fourth  chapter  there  is  described


CHAP.  VI.  1-8.


283


the  line  of  the  Cainitcs  as  still  divided  from  the  line
of  Seth ;  in  the  fifth  chapter  we  have  the  line  of  the
Sethites  in  its  devotedness  arid  elevation  ;  then,  final
ly,  in  the  section  before  us,  the  mingling  of  both  lines,
and  the  universality  and  flagitiousness  of  corruption,
as,  according  to  the  programme  of  the  Cainitic  La-
mech,  it  culminates  in  the  two  fundamental  features
of  carnality  and  cruelty.  Whoever  reads  Genesis,  to
the  passage  before  us,  without  any  prejudice  derived
from  opinions  alien  to  it,  would  never  think  of  under
standing  by  the  bne  Elohim  anything  else  than  the
pious  Setliitcs,  and  by  their  connection  with  the
daughters  of  men  anything  else  than  a  corruption  of
marriage  and  a  mingling  with  the  Cainites.  This
would  especially  appear  from  the  fact,  that  in  this
section  the  sharp  contrast  between  the  two  lines,
which  is  so  prominent  in  the  previous  chapter,  wholly
disappears.  If  we  read  further  we  find,  too,  that  not
the  Cainites  alone  perished  in  the  flood,  but  both
lines  together,  with  the  exception  of  Noah  and  his
house.  Further  on,  Ishmael,  who  is  a  "  wild  man,"
and  whose  "hand  is  against  every  man,"  appears  as
the  olfspring  of  Abraham  and  "  the  maid,"  a  copy,  as
it  were,  giving  us  a  clear  idea  of  the  Gibborim,  and  of
the  way  in  which  they  originated,  although  the  con
nection  of  the  patriarch  was  from  a  purer  motive,
and  more  excusable.  Hence  the  traditional  and  legal
abhorrence  of  untheocratic  marriages  in  the  theo
cratic  race;  as  we  find  it  in  Gen.  xxiv.  3;  xxvi.  34,
35 ;  xxvii.  40  ;  xxxiv.  9 ;  Dcut.  vii.  3 ;  Josh,  xxiii.
12  ;  Judg.  iii.  6  ;  1  Kings  xi.  1 ;  Ezra  ix.  2  ;  Nehem.
x.  30.  The  falling  away  of  the  Israelites  in  the  des
ert  came  not  from  any  amour  between  angels  and  the
daughters  of  men,  but  from  an  unlawful  intercourse
between  the  Israelites  and  the  women  of  Midian
(Numb.  xxv.).  So  the  apostasies  of  Israel  in  the
time  of  the  Judges  were  derived  from  the  mingling
of  the  Israelites  with  the  daughters  of  the  Canaan-
ites  (Judg.  iii.  6).  The  fall  of  Solomon,  and  the  fall
ing  away  of  the  people  that  followed  it,  came  from
Solomon's  connection  with  foreign  wives  (1  Kings
xi.  1).  So  the  ten  tribes  sunk  into  the  worship  of
Baal  in  consequence  of  the  connection  of  Ahab  with
the  Sidonian  Jezebel,  whose  horrible  significance  goes
on  even  to  the  Apocalypse  (1  Kings  xvi.  31 ;  Rev.  ii.
20);  an. I  so,  too,  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  after  the  great
visitation,  know  no  other  way  to  secure  their  people
against  a  new  degeneracy,  than  by  contending  earn
estly  against  foreign  marriages.  Thus  again  and
again  do  the  theocratic  mesalliances  of  one  section
reflect  themselves  in  the  Israclitish  history,  without
the  angels  playing  any  part  therein.  For  the  first
time,  in  the  apocryphal  Tobit  (Tob.  vi.  15),  does
there  meet  us  a  demoniac  interest  in  human  females,
and  this  is  characteristic  for  the  origin  of  the  angel-
hypothesis.  Here,  too,  it  must  be  remarked,  that
marriage  with  the  heathen  was  not  absolutely  forbid
den  to  the  Israelites.  When  the  principle  was  se
cured,  that  the  believing  party  might  make  holy  the
unbelieving  (1  Cor.  vii.),  such  marriages  appear  some
times  even  in  a  favorable  light.  It  was  only  union
with  the  Canaanites  that  was  absolutely  forbidden,
since  they,  as  well  as  the  Cainites,  were  sunk  in  in
curable  corruption;  and  Hengstenberg  has  rightly
supposed  that  our  history  here  was  given  for  the  pur
pose  of  warning  the  Israelites  against  such  marriages.
2.  rJ7ie  relations  of  the  New  Testament  to  the
passage  before  us.  There  is  the  passage  of  the
Epistle  of  Jude,  ver.  6,  which,  in  fact,  we  regard  as
the  original  in  its  relation  to  the  kindred  passage,
2  Peter  ii.  4.  Here,  too,  Kurtz  reasons  from  the


mode  of  speaking,  but  not  happily:  "Both  epistles
designate  the  actors  who  are  punished  as  simp!}
&yyf\oi.  When  we  interrogate  the  biblical  style  of
speech  it  shows  us  at  once  that  this  word  is  neve!
thus  nakedly  used  of  spirits  tV  apxii  who  have
fallen.  These  are  ever  called  Sal^oves,  and  their
head  8id£a\os  or  irarapas."  We  will  give  presently
the  simple  solution  of  this  objected  difficulty.
Wherever  there  is  mention  of  the  actual  existence
of  Satan's  kingdom  it  is  naturally  and  generally  of
Satan,  of  the  demons,  etc.,  although  variations  occur,
as  Eph.  vi.  12,  ct  al.  Here,  however,  when  the
original  fall  itself  of  the  demons  is  mentioned,  they
must  be  denoted  according  to  their  original  state  as
angels.  Otherwise  it  would  mean  that  the  devil  had
sinned,  and  thereby  became  a  devil.  In  that  case
our  catechisms  would  have  to  be  corrected  where
they  speak  of  fallen  angels.  When  it  is  said,  how
ever,  that  there  is  here  no  special  mention  of  Satan,
or  that  the  sins  of  the  angels  cannot  be  particularly
described,  or  that  the  fall  of  Satan  is  nowhere  desig
nated  as  a  leaving  his  habitation,  all  such  assertions
we  must  hold  as  having  no  significance  at  all.

The  Epistle  of  Jude  is  a  'prophetical  word  of  warn
ing  against  the  beginning  of  antinomianism.  Here
the  Israelites  who  loll  in  the  wilderness  are  the  first
example.  In  respect  to  these  it  is  confessed  that
they  did  not  fall  in  the  wilderness  merely  on  account
of  sins  of  sensuality.  Then  are  there  named  the
angels  who  kept  not  their  dominion  (apx^i)  but  for
sook  their  own  proper  habitation — that  is,  their
sphere  of  life.  The  contrast  in  the  guilt,  of  these
angels  is  made  clear  by  that  which  precedes.  The
Jews  in  the  wilderness  kept  not  their  salvation,  but
gave  themselves  up  to  unbelief  and  fell.  The  angels
kept  not  their  dominion,  but  lo.^t  their  station  and
fell.  To  this  corresponds  the  third  example  :  Sodom
and  Gomorrah  and  the  surrounding  cities  are  pre
sented  in  a  similar  manner  with  these  (TOWTOJS),  that
is,  the  angels  and  the  Israelites,  as  an  example  of  such
as  are  exposed  to  the  judgment  of  the  eternal  fire,
and  this  on  the  special  ground  of  their  excessive
sensuality,  and  their  degenerate  going  after  strange
flesh.  The  words  o^oiov  rponoi'  TOUTOIS  stand  in  re
lation  to  irp6Keu>Ta.i  Se7y/j.c>.,  and  the  parenthetical
ficTropvfvffacra.  has  its  special  interpretation  as  refer
ring  to  the  Sodomites.  The  Israelites  in  the  wilder
ness  furnish  an  example  of  a  lost  condition,  as  /J.TJ
TfvaavTts,  the  angels  as  /j.rj  rr}p^iravTesy  &C.,
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  as  eKwopveva-affai,  &c.  The
forms  of  antinomianism  are  different,  the  judgment
upon  it  is  throughout  the  same.  The  distinction,
however,  in  antinomianism  is  this,  that  the  Israelites
sinned  through  unbelief  in  the  word  of  revelation;
the  angels  sinned  against  the  divine  ordinance,
assigning  their  position,  and  in  striving,  beyond
their  sphere,  after  a  limitless  dominion ;  the  Sodom
ites  sinned  against  the  natural  law  of  the  sexual
relations,  established  as  a  moral  foundation  of  life
itself.  The  antinomists,  against  whom  Jude  con
tended,  resemble  the  before-named  in  this,  that  like
the  Sodomites  they  pollute  the  flesh ;  like  the  fallen
angels  they  contemn  authority  ;  like  the  unbelieving
Israelites  they  speak  evil  of  5o£as,  glories  (rendered
dignities — visible  proofs  of  the  revelation  of  God  in
Israel).  So,  too,  in  the  second  chapter  of  the
iccond  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  ground-idea  is  the  inex
orability  of  the  divine  judgment  against  an  obdurate
anomism,  without  giving  the  special  form  of  that  ano-
mism.  Of  the  angels  it  is  merely  said  that  they  sinned.
God  spared  them  not  although  they  were  angels.


284


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


And  so  he  spared  not  the  whole  old  world  (Gen.  vi.),
on  whom  there  is  here  no  other  charge  imputed
than  aoe&tia  (impiety).  So,  too,  Sodom  and  Gomor
rah  are  here  denoted  as  having  incurred  judgment
solely  under  the  same  point  of  view.  Clearly,  how
ever,  has  the  second  Epistle  of  Peter  distinguished,
in  addition,  the  judgment  of  the  fallen  angels  from
the  judgment  upon  the  old  world  (Gen.  vi.).  The
judgment  airninst  the  angels,  the  judgment  against
the 'old  world,  and  the  judgment  upon  Sodom,  are
three  judgment  periods.  And  these  places,  it  is  pre
tended,  exactly  confirm  the  angel-hypothesis  !  Com
pare  also  Fronmiillcr  on  the  respective  places,  in  the
Bible-work.

3.  Tin  ctegctical  tradition.     The  first  interpreta
tion,  in  \\hicii  the  bne  Elohim  were  sons  of  the
magnates,  or  great  ones,  who  wooed  the  daughters
of  '"the  low-born,  Keil   denotes  as   the  interpretation
of  orthodox    Judaism.       More    correctly,    however,
may    it    lie    denoted    as    the    interpretation    of    the
lleoru'stic   or   Palestinian   Judaism,  in  its  dry  story-
tellintr  tendency  as  represented  in  the  Talmud.     The
second  interpretation  Keil  rightly  describes  as  that
of  the    ethnmng,    cabbalistical    Judaism;    however
zealous    Kurt/,  may  be  on  its  behalf  (Part  i.  p.  8).
It  is  not  without  significance  that  the  first  trace  of
this  interpretation  appears  in  single  codices  of  the
Septuag'mt.     It  is  sufficiently  acknowledged  that  the
Alexandrian  Jews  took  pains  in  every  way  to  throw
a  bridge  between  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Greek
tradition.       Here    now     appears     a    fair    probable
occasion    to    introduce    into    the    biblical    text    an
analogous  story  of  Sons  of  God  and  of  divine  beget-
tings.     Thereupon  present    themselves  two  apocry
phal  books  as  the  first  defenders  of  the  angel-hypo
thesis  :    the  Book  of  Enoch  and  the  Lesser  Gcnesi-.
Without  doubt  Philo  found  it  already  in  existence,
and  it  suited  entirely  well  with  his  system;  whilst  it
is  acknowledged,   too,  by  the  more  Hebraistic  Jo-
scphus.     That  Christian  theologians  of  the  Alexan
drian  school,  like  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  uncritical
fathers    like    Tertullian,    Cyprian,  Ambrose,    should
find  the  angel-hypothesis   suited   to   their    peculiar
notions,  is  nothing  to  be  wondered  at.    The  fact  that
from  the  fourth  even  to  the  eighteenth  century,  with
some  isolated  exceptions,  the  taste  of  the  church
discovered  in  the  angel-hypothesis  a  suspicious  theo-
sophic  savor,  cannot  be  set  aside.

4.  The    religious,  philosophical,  dogmatic,    and
practical  significance  of  our  question.     In  its  rela
tion  to  the  philosophy  of  religion  the  angel-hypothe
sis  would  have  the  effect  of  confounding   all   the
ground  conceptions  of  revelation,  and  of  obliterating
its  distinctions.     It  authenticates  a  fact  which  per-
frctly  de.-troys  all  distinction  between  revelation  and
mythology,   between   a   divine  miracle  and  magic,
between  the  biblical  conception  of  nature,  as  con
formity  to    law,  and   the   wild   apocryphal   stories.
"We  stand  here,"  says  Deh'tzsch,  "  at  the  fountain
of  heathen   mythology  with  its   legends,  but  this
primitive   golden    age,    to  take  it  in  the   sense  of
heathenism,    is   divested   of    all    its    apotheosizing
gaudiness."     Rather  may  it  be  said,  if  we  take  that
view,  that  an  evident  myth  was  implanted  in  the
garden  of  the  primitive  religious  history ;  it  is  there-
lore  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  all  theologians  who
maintain  the   mythical  character  of  Genesis,   like
Knobel  for  example,  should  go  in  most  earnestly
for  the  angel-interpretation.     "And  no  less,"  adds
Delitzsch,  "  do  we  stand  here  at  the  fountain  of  a
dark  magic  that  carries  us  back,  if  not  to  a  sexual,


yet  still  to  an  unnatural  intercourse  with  the  de
mons."  We  stand  rather  by  the  troubled  waters  of
a  paganistic  apocryphal  superstition,  where  the  siren
of  an  apparent  theosophic  profundity  would  allure  U9
to  plunge  into  the  dark  floods  of  "baseless  para
dox."  With  what  sort  of  superstition  this  angel-
interpretation  had  already  connected  itself  in  early
times  we  may  learn  from  the  twenty-second  chapter
of  Tertullian's  Apologetic.  When  we  regard  it  in
its  dogmatic  relation  we  find  the  most  wonderful
things  proceeding  from  the  view  in  question  when
fully  carried  out.  There  would  be  a  double  fall
into  sin,  one  in  the  human,  the  other  in  the  angelic,
family.

The  effects  of  the  second  fall  must  be  destroyed
by  a  flood,  whilst  those  of  the  first  remain  through
and  after  it.  The  gnostici/.ing  darkening  of  this
place  has  for  a  consequence  that  there  should  be
gradually  drawn  from  it  series  after  scries  of  similar
deductions,  according  to  the  tenor  of  its  biblical  dog
matic  process  of  idealless,  anecdotical  inventiveness;
for  example,  what  is  said  on  the  passage  (1  Peter
iii.  19,  20)  respecting  Christ's  preaching  to  the  spirits
in  prison.

Instead  of  this,  we  hold  that  the  derivation  of  the
angcl-intcrpretation  from  an  ethnmng,  apocryphal,
gnostico-cabbalistical  tendency  in  Judaism  (as  we
find  it  shown  in  Keil)  is  the  correct  one.  We  hold,
too,  that  Ilcngstcnbcrg  had  grounds  for  the  affirma
tion,  when  he  said:  The  next  thing  is,  that  in  the
maintaining  of  this  supposed  remarkable  fact^incn
arc  led  into  uncouth  theories,  which  violate  the  limits
that  separate  the  church's  theology  from  the  chimer
ical  ideas  of  Jews  and  Mohammedans,  and  that  one
such  distortion  of  a  sound  theological  comprehen
sion  may  possibly  have  for  its  consequence  an  exten
sive  process  of  disorder.  In  like  manner  does  the
objection  appear  well  grounded,  that  the^angel-intcr-
pretation  robs  our  narrative  of  all  significance  and
practical  applicability.  The  same  practical  signifi
cancc  which  is  exhibited  in  the  history  of  the  I.-rael-
itcs  in  the  wilderness  (Numb,  xxv.),  and  in  the  time
of  the  Judges  in  the  history  of  Solomon,  in  the
history  also  of  Ahab,  in  the  history  of  Herod  Anti-
pas — that  same  significance,  though  in  a  more  pow
erful  and  original'  way,  is  presented  in  the  history
that  lies  before  us.  We  may,  therefore,  with  Cyril
of  Alexandria,  reckon  the  angel-interpretation  among
the  a-roTTa-Tarn,  things  most  strange  and  absurd.


EXEGETICAL  AND  CRITICAL.

1.  Vers.  1-3.  When  men  began. — The  increase
of  men  under  a  physical  point  of  view  ;  especially,
too,  an  increase  of  daughters.— The  Sons  of  God,
that  is,  the  Sethi tes  especially,  as  sons  of  Elohim,
not  of  Jehovah,  because  their  relation  to  God  was
more  universal  than  that  of  the  later  theocracy,  and
because  the  Scthic  religion  had  no  contrast  of  the
Elohistic,  as  the  later  Abrahamic  had,  since  the
opposin"  Cainitic  line  was  not  Elohistically  pious,
but  lived  an  utterly  lawless  life.— The  daughters
of  men.— Usually  taken  as  the  daughters  of  the
other  race,  that  is,  the  Cainites.  But  they  arc  the
daughters  of  men  wholly  in  the  physical  sense,  and
therefore,  too,  according  to  the  conception  of  the
natural  man,  in  contrast  with  the  sons  of  God  in  the
ethical  sense,  only  that  the  thought  is  mainly  upon
the  Cainites,  in  proportion  to  their  greater  multipli
cation.— Saw  that  they  were  fair  [Lange's  trans-


285


lation :  They  looked  upon  them,  how  fair  they
were]. — We  must  not  reduce  the  force  of  the  ex
pression  by  rendering:  "they  saw  that  they  were
fair."     The  sensual  beauty  captivated  them. — Took
them  wives  of  all. — The  phrase  iTi;X  npb  means,
everywhere  in  the  Old  Testament,  to  take  in  mar
riage,  but  never  occurs  in  the  sense  of  mere  scorta-
tory  intennarryinga  (from  which  also  we  must  dis
tinguish  the  sense,  to  take  as  concubines). — Which
they  chose.— The    emphasis   is  on   b'333   (of  all).
From  this  it  follows  that  the  sons  of  God  let  them
selves  be  determined  by  the  charm  of  sense  to  form
connections  also  with  the  Cainite  women,  and  so  to
rend  asunder  the  protecting  limits   which  hitherto
had  guarded  their  race  from  the  corruptive  conta
gion.       Moreover,    the  prevalence    of    polygamy  is
clearly   presented  in  the   expression. — My  Spirit
shall  not  always  strive  with  man. — We  cannot
understand  tvn   here  of  the  Spirit  of  God  as  the
spirit  of  life,  but  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  an  ethical
sense,   as  it  belongs  to  its  office  to  judge  and  to
punish  sinful  men.    Von  Gerlach  says,  indeed:  "the
contrast  of  spirit  and  flesh  in  the  moral  understand
ing,  ns  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  does  not  occur  in  the
Old  Testament."     But,  what  is  meant  here  by  say
ing,  my  spirit  shall  not  tarry  in  man  as  spirit  of  life,
for  he  in  flexh  ?     The  flesh  as  flesh  does  not  hinder
the  life-spirit,  but  the  flesh  as  corruption  repels  the
Spirit  of  God  (Ps.  cxxxix.  7  ;  cxliii.  10).     We  take
•p'"P  here  in  its  simplest  and  most  obvious  sense,
not  as  the  ruling  of  the  life-spirit,  nor  as  the  con
tinuance  of  the  same  in  man  (Septuagint),  nor  as  its
degradation  or  depression.     In  the  sinner  who  is  yet
capable  of  salvation  the  Spirit  of  God  exercises 'its
judicial  office.     But,  when  man  has  become  wholly
obdurate,    God    withdraws    from    him    his  judging
spirit,  and  thereby  he  falls   into  the  condemnation
of  corruption.      The  circumstance  is  here  inciden
tally  introduced.     This  is  shown  by  the  addition,
CS'1'2,  in  their  erring  (which,  without  any  necessity,
is  turned  into  a  conjunction:  C5  Tr^a  ,  eo  quod-
Knpbel  and  Delitzsch),  and  the  emphatic  expression :
\e  is  flesh,  that  is,  the  whole  species,  like  one  man'
s  sunk  in  its  flesh.     Still,  there  is  the  expression :
'  My  spirit  shall  not  always  strive  in  him  ; "  which
neans  that  there  is  yet  a  respite  appointed  for  the
;ace,  and  this  is  explained  by,  and  explains,  what
ollows:    And  his  days  shall  be  an  hundred  and
went)/  years.     According  to  Philo,    Josephus,   and
ithers,  along  with  Knobel,  it  means  that  henceforth
he  period  of  human  life  shall  be  reduced  to  one
iiradred  and  twenty  years.     (See  in  Knobel  a  series
f  quotations  from  the  views  of  the  ancients  respect-
Jg  the  life-endurance  of  man,  p.  83).     According
a  the  Targums,  Luther,  and  many  others,  as  well  as
•elitzsch  and  Keil,  God  appoints  a  reprieve  of  "race
>r  one  hundred  and  twenty  years,  which  is  yet  to
e  granted  to  men.     Beyond  a  doubt  this  is  the  cor-
;ct  view ;  since  the  age  of  the  first  patriarchs  after
ie  flood  extends  much  beyond  one  hundred  and
renty  years.     Another  reason  is,  that  the  supposed
lortcmng  of  life  would  be  no  countervail^"  rule
:armg  a  proportion  to  the  obduracy  of  the°race
hilst   the   time-reckoning   agrees   with   the    other
'pothesis,  if  we  assume    that  Noah  received   this
Delation  twenty  years  before  the  time  given,  ch   v
,  in  order  that  he  might  announce  it  as  a  th'reaten-
?  of  judgment  to  his  cotemporaries.
[NOTE  ON  THE  SPIRIT  AND  THE  FLESH  :  Gen  vi  3


—The  various  interpretations  of  ifis-i  here  must  bo
tested  by  their  harmony  with  words  in  the  context
'  The  life  that  I  have  given  shall  not  always  rule  (or
abide)  in  man."  This  docs  not  seem  to  suit  well
with  cbirb.  Shall  not  long  rule,  &c.,  would  have
been  consistent,  The  word  forever  makes  it  the
same  with  the  original  sentence  of  death  pronounced
upon  man:  he  shall  not  live  forever— he  shall  die.
'My  spirit  shall  not  strive  with  man"  (morally)
makes  a  good  sense  in  itself,  but  has  little  congruity
with  the  reason  given:  "because  he  is  flesh,"" or  is
inclined  to  the  flesh,  whether  we  take  the  old  or  the
later  interpretation  of  Di1^ .  That  alone  would
seem  to  be  a  reason  why  it  should  continue  to  strive;
since  man  had  been  flesh,  or  inclined  to  be  flesh,
ever  since  the  fall.  Unless  we  take  it,  as  Pareus
does,  as  denoting  a  feeling  of  hopelessness,  ratio  ab
inuhh:  it  is  Of  no  use;  but  this  would  be  a  form
of  the  anthropopathism  the  least  acceptable  of  all
that  are  presented;  unless  it  be  that  of  some
ot  the  Jewish  interpreters:  "My  own  mind,  or
thought,  shall  no  longer  be  occupied  or  troubled
with  him  " — I  will  have  no  more  care  about  him.

There  is  another  view  that  may  be  ottered,  and
which  would  scon  to  harmonize  these  difficulties.
Some  of  the  Jewish  interpreters  approach  it,  but  do
not  come  fully  up  to  it,  "  My'  spirit,"  meanino-
man's  spirit  (the  spirit  that  I  have  given  him),  but
in  the  higher  sense  of  irvevu.a  as  distinguished  from
fyvx-l},  according  to  the  trichotomic  view.  The  reason,
wherein  appears  the  image  of  God,  the  spirit  in  man
as  something  higher  than  the  animal  nature,  the
<j>p6in)na  irvev^aros  as  distinguished  from  the  ^pov^ua
ffapKos,  may,  with  a  high  propriety,  be  called  "  my
spirit,"  as  nearest  to  the  divine,  "or,  that  in  man
through  which,  or  in  which,  the  Holy  Spirit  strives,
or  comes  in  connection  with  the  human.  It  is  not
always  easy,  even  in  the  New  Testament,  to  deter
mine  whether  irvev/j.a,  in  certain  passages,  means  the
rational  spirit  of  man,  or  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  both
in  one  joint  communion.  Von  Gerlach  has  no  right
to  say  that  "  the  contrast  of  spirit  and  flesh  in  the
moral  understanding,  as  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  docs
not  occur  in  the  Old  Testament,"  unless  it  can  bo
shown  that  this  is  not  a  clear  case  of  it.

When  rm  is  thus  regarded  as  the  spiritual,  or
rational,  in  man,  in  distinction  from  the  carnal,  the
sentence  becomes  a  prediction,  instead  of  a  declara
tion  of  judgment — a  sorrowing  prediction,  we  may
say,  if  we  keep  in  view  the  predominant  aspect  or
feeling  of  the  passage.     The  spirit,  the  reason,  that
which  is  most  divine  in  man,  will  not  always  rule  in
him.     It  has,  as  yet,  maintained  a  feeble  power,  and
interposed  a  feeble  resistance,  but  it  is  in  danger  of
being  wholly  overpowered.      It  will   not   hold   out
forever ;  it  will  not  always  maintain  its  supremacy.
And  then  the  reason  given  suits  exactly  with  such  a
prediction:  He  is  becoming  flesh,  wholly  carnal  or
animal.     If  allowed   to   continue    he    will   become
utterly  dehumanized,  or  that  worst  of  all  creatures,
an  animal  with  a  reason,  but  wholly  fleshlv  in   its'
ends  and  exercises,  or  with  a  reason  which  is  but  the
servant  of  the  flesh,   making  him  worse   than   the
most  ferocious  wild  beast— a  very  demon — a  brutal
nature  with    a  fiend's  subtlety    only  employed    to
gratify  such  brutality.     Man  has  the  supernatural
and   this   makes  the  awful  peril  of  his  state.     By
losing  it,  or  rather  by  its  becoming  degraded  to  be
a  servant  instead  of  a  lord,  he   falls '  wholly  into
nature,  where  he  cannot  remain  stationary,  like  the


280


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  'MOSES.


animal  who  docs  not  "leave  the  habitation  to  which
God  first  appointed  him."  The  higher  being,  thus
utterly  fallen,  must  sink  into  the  demonic, -where
evil  becomes  his  god,  if  not,  us  Milton  says,  his
good.  In  this  sense  of  the  reason  in  man,  or  the
cppwvua  irvevfj.a.-ros,  ruling  over  the  flesh,  there  is  a
most  appropriate  significance  in  •,1TI ,  as  denoting
the  judicial,  power  of  the  conscience,  or  of  the
reason  as  the  imperative,  the  commanding  faculty.
On  these  deeper  a.-;ieeis  of  humanity,  consult  that
most  profound  psychologist,  John  ISunyaii,  in  Ids
Holy  War,  or  his  History  of  the  Town  of  Mansoul,
its  revolt  I'mm  King  Shaddai,  its  surrender  to  Dia-
bolus,  and  it.-  recovery  by  Tricee  Immanucl.  l!un-
y.in  was  IVii.le-tanght  in  these  matters,  and  that  _is
the  reason  \\iiv  his  kuowledge  of  man  goes  so  far
beyond  dial  of  Locke,  or  K;.;it,  or  Con-in.

The  whole  aspect  of  the  passage  gives  the  im
press  :!iing  like  an  apprehension  that  a
Teal  change  was  coming  over  t'no  race — something
so  awful  and  so  irreparable,  if  not  speedily  remedied,
that   i;  would  IK-  better  that  it  should  be  blotted  out
of  car'hly  existence,  all  but  a  remnant  in  whom  the
,;il,  or  the  divine  in  man,  might  yet  be  prc-
1.      Tliii-  regarded,   too,   as  a   prcd><-t'<o»,   it  is
round  of  the  judgment  rather  than  a  sentence
of  judgment  itself.     It   is  i:>    mercy   to    prevent    a
•.istrophc;  like  the  language  used  in  re-
i'erence  to  the  tree  of  life  ^ee  page  2-11,  and  note).
Men,   left  to  themselves,  might   have  reali/.ed   upon
earth  the  irrecoverable  state  of  lost   spirits,  or  that
combination  of  the  brutal  with  an  utterly  degraded
reason  that   makes   the   demon.     In   this  view,  too,
the  divine  sorrow  appears  heightened  in  such  a  way
that   we  can   better   nnd'-rstand    \\liat   is   meant   by
God's  ":;;ieving,"  and  being  "pained  in  heart."     A
ion  of  !:  .n  is   to  be  removed  to  prevent  the
utter  dehumanizing  of  the  race.     It  was  this  neces-

th.at  made  the  intensity  of  the  sorrow.
"l'c!it/.-ch  has  a  similar  view,  but  it  is  strange
that  he  did  not  sec  how  it  is  in  conflict  with  his
angel-hypothesis.  According  to  that,  the  dear.gel-
i/.ing,  if  we  may  use  the  term,  and  the  consequent
dehumanizing,  was  confined  to  these  higher  being.-,
and  sonic  of 'the  daughters  of  men.  And  yet  they
are  not  mentioned  as  having  any  part  in  the  catas
trophe,  or  in  the  immediate  evil  that  occasioned  it.
Men  alone  are  involved  in  it,  and  they  because  of
an  excessive  sensuality  that  had  made  it  inevitable.
This,  however,  was  purely  human ;  it  was  man  that
was  in  danger  of  becoming  wholly  flesh,  and  it  was
man  for  whom  God  grieved  with  a  divine  sorrow.
It  was  man  who  was  in  danger  of  descending  into  a
lower  grade  of  being,  even  as  the  ante-Adamic
angels  who  kept  not  their  first  estate.^  The  antedi
luvians  were  drowned  for  the  salvation  of  a  race,
but  for  some  of  them,  at  least,  1  Pet  in.  19,  20,
gives  us  the  glimpse  of  a  hope  that  their  condition
was  not  wholly  irrecoverable. — T.  L.]

2.  Yer.  4.  There  were  giants.— The  C^rJ .
from  Vs; ,  used  only  in  the  plural,  Numb.  xiii.  33.
All  the  old  interpretations  take  the  word  as  denoting
giants,  yiyavTfs.  If  we  put  out  of  view  the  mon
strous  popular  representations,  there  are  simply
iri cant  by  it  stately  and  powerful  men.  In  this
sense  Tuch  explains  the  word  as  mentioned  before,
namely,  the  distinguished.  Keil  understands  by
the  word,  invaders,  according  to  Aquila  (titivlir-
ravrfs),  Symmaehus  (jSioToi),  Luther  (tyrants).  De-
litzsch,  nevertheless,  together  with  Ilofmann,  pre-


'ers  to  explain  it  as  flic  fallen,  namely,  from  heaven,
Because  begotten  by  heavenly  beings.  Here  from
to  fall,  would  he  make  to  fall  from,  and  from  this
again,  to  fall  from  heaven;  then  this  is  made  to
mean  begotten  of  heavenly  beings  !  The  sense,  cadcn-
tcs,  dcfcctorcs,  apostate  (see  Geseuius),  would  be
more  near  the  truth.  "There  were  giants"  (Tin),
not,  there  became  giants,  which  would  have  re
quired  !pn*1  for  its  expression  (see  Keil).  These
giants,  or  powerful  men,  are  already  in  near  cotem-
poraneity  with  the  transgression  of  these  mesalliances
^in  those  very  same  days),  and  this  warrants  the  con
clusion  of  Luther,  that  these  powerful  men  were
doers  of  violent  deeds.—  And  also  after  that


.

[Lange  renders:  and  especially  after  that].  —
Keil  shows  that  Kurt/,  makes  trial  of  three  mutually
inconsistent  explanations  of  this  verse,  all  of  which,
too,  offend  against  the  law  of  language  (p.  81>,  note).
We  take  C»  as  denoting  a  climax  to  the  fact  already
stated.  "There  were  giants  in  those  days,  and
moreover,'"  etc.  Here  it  comes  nearly  to  the  same
thing,  whether  we  render  Trx  •p-'-.nx  postca-
quam  (2  Fain.  xxiv.  10)  or  postea  (mum;  the  fact
remains  established  that  the  Xephilim  were  already
before  the  mesalliances.  —  Carne  in  unto  :  an  euphe
mistic  phrase.  —  Mighty  men  [Lange  renders  it  hc-
rocx].  —  A  designation,  not  merely  of  offspring  from
the  mismarriages,  but  referring  also  to  the  Nephilim
who  are  earlier  introduced,  as  it  appears  from  the  ap
pended  clause.  The  author  reports  things  from  his
own  standpoint,  and  so  the  expression:  "they  were
of  old,  men  of  renown,"  affirms  their  previous  exist
ence  down  to  that  time.  Of  these  men  of  old,  men
of  renown,  Cain  was  the  first.  lint  now  there  are
added  to  the  Cainitcs  the  Cainitic  degenerate  off
spring  of  these  sensual  mesalliances.  It  was  true
then,  as  it  has  been  in  all  other  period-;  of  the
world's  history,  the  men  of  violent  deeds  were  the
men  of  renown,  very  much  the  same  whether  called
famous  or  infamous.  Knobel  will  have  iUhat  there
are  described  here  postdiluvian  races  of  giants.

:;.  Yets.  6-8.  And  God  saw  [Lange  correct
ly  :  And  Jehovah  saw].—  This  increase  and  uni
versal  predominance  of  evil  through  the  mismarriages
gives  occasion  now  for  a  more  decided  sentence  of
Jehovah  upon  the  incurably  lost  race.  The  wicked-
of  man  in  deeds  had  not  only  become  great,  but
the  think''  in!*  of  the  purposes  (the  phantasies  Oi|
imaged  deeds)  of  his  heart,  were  wholly  evil  all  th
day.°  Judging  from  the  singular  *£>,  we  hold  here
as  "intended,  a  concentration  of  the  sentence  agains
man.  For  this  reason  is  it  singular.

[NOTE  ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OP  TOTAL  DEPRAVITY
Gen.  vi.  5.  —  Every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  hi
heart,  "isb  fC^ni?  IX?  V>3.  The  Scriptures,  it  L
said,  were  not  given  to  teach  us  mental  philosophy
nor  do  they  affect  a  philosophical  language,  but  her
is  certainly  a  psychological  scala  going  down  as  deep
ly  into  the  human  soul  as  was  ever  done  by  an;
scholastic  treatise.  Here  are  the  three  stages  of  th
great  original  evil  :  the  fashioned  purpose,  the  thouft
out  of  which  it  is  born,  the  feeling,  or  deep  mothe
heart,  the  state  of  soul,  lying  below  all,  and  givin
moral  character  to  all.  Or,  to  reverse  the  order  o
the  statement,  there  is,  1.  the  tohu  vaboku,  tt
formless  abyss  of  evil,  2.  the  thought  (the  twow,  «
Heb.  iv.  12),  by  which  this  rises  into  generic  forn
3.  the  imaged  or  specific  purpose  (eVSt>/u'7<m))  tnrou§
which,  again,  this  thought  makes  itself  manifest  :


CHAP.    VI.    1-8.


28T


the   objective  sphere  of  the  active  life.     In  othe
words,  as  the  thought  is  the  form  of  i\\c  feeling,  so  i
the  shaped  purpose,  or  what  is  here  called  the  imagin
ation,  the  form  of  the  evil  thought.     Our  Saviou
gives  the  same  gradations,  Matt.  xv.  19 :  "  Out  of  tin
heart  proceed  evil  thoughts  "  (5ia\oyta-/j.oi  Trovripol,  evi
thinkings,  reasonings,  subjective,  not  yet  shaped  into
outward  intent),  and  then  follows  the  awful  brood  o:
the  later  born,  (povoi,  ^oixf^i,   KAoTra!,  /3\ampT]u.tcti
•'murders,    adulteries,    thefts,  blasphemies."     They
are  all  in  the  thought ;  they  are  all  in  the  mother-
heart,  that  deep  seat  of  moral  character  that  lies  be
low  the  formative  consciousness — that  is,  the  con
scious    thought  and   still   more   conscious   purpose.
Take   the  worst   one   apparently  of  these   hideous
births  ;  a  man  may  not  have  formed  the  purpose  of
murder,  fear  may  have  kept  him  from  this  extreme
stage;  he  may  never  have  entertained  the  thought
conscious^,  the  habitual  educating  power  of  law,  or
other  influences  of  a  social  or  of  a  gracious  kind,
may  have  prevented  even  this  objective  form  of  evil
from  rising  in  his  soul ;   but  it  may  lie  in  his  heart
nevertheless,  and  even  be  active  there,  for  this  dark
place  is  not  a  mere  blank  capacity,  or  receptacle,
but  has  its  processes,  its  choosings,  its  willings,  and
even  its  unconscious  reasonings.     Our  Saviour  de
clares  neither  more  nor  less  than  this  when  he  makes
it  the  procreative  source  of  evil  thoughts  (5iaAo7io-,uoi)
and  so  does  the  Apostle,  1  John  iii.  15:  "Whoso
ever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer."     This  idea
of  the  unconscious  heart,  as  underlying  all  moral
character,  is  deeply  grounded  in  the  Hebrew  lan-


|     guage.     Hence  the  peculiar  expression  nb  by

to  ascend,  come  up,  in  the  heart,  or  above  the  heart'
bee  Jer.  iii.  16  ;  2  Sam.  xi.  20,  with  other  places.
One  of  the  most  striking  is  in  Ezck.  xi.  5  :  "  Thus
shall  ye  say  to  the  house  of  Israel,  CSPni  rvibsa
•Tv'3:"?'?  n??>  tnc  upgoings  of  your  spirit,  I  know
every  one  of  them,"— implying  how  deeply  unknown
they  might  be  in  their  source,  even  to  those  who  were
;  the  subjects  of  them.

Crn   b$  ;n  p-i;    Only  evil,  nothing  but  evil
all  the  da,'/— every  day,  and  every  moment  of  every
day.     If  this  is  not  total  depravity,  how  can  lan«-ua"x
express  it?     There   is  an   intense  aversion  to   the
phrase  in  some  minds.     It  is  shared  by  many  who
would  admit  that  human  depravity  is  taught  in  the
Bible,  and  that  it  is  great.     This  term,  however  of
our  older  and  more  exact  theologians,  shocks  them
ihe  feeling  comes,  in  some  measure,  from  a  mi^p-
prenension  of  its  true  meaning.     It  is  a  term  of  ex-
tensity  rather  than  of  intcn^y.     It  i3  opposed   to
partial,  to  the  idea  that  man  is  sinful  in  one  moment
and  innocent,  or  sinless,  in  another,  or  sinful  in  some
aces  and  pure  in  others.     It   affirms   that   he   is   all
wrong  in  all  things,  and  alt  the  time.     It   does   not
mean  that  man  is  as  bad  as  the  devils,  or  that  every
man  1S  as  bad  as  every  other,  or  that   any  man  is  as
bad  as  he  possibly  may  be,  or  mny  become.     That  is
aere  are  degrees   of  intensity,  but  no   limit  to   the
niversah.y  orexlentof  the  evil  in  the  soul.     So  say
Be  Scriptures,  and  so  says  the  awakened  conscience
There  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  psycholo^-
cal  division  of  Gen.  vi.  5,  in  Heb.  iv.  12.    The  extent
mi  depth  of  human  sinfulness  are  kept  from  the  ob-
fQ  consciousness  by  the  ignorance  or  denial  of
the   threefold   distinction  here   conveyed—  the  pur
poses  the  thoughts,  and  the  heart.      According  to
the  Apostle,  it  is  the   office  of  « the   living   word
.<>  Ao7ov  frv  KCU  evfpyr]s,vivid  and  uncorking),  sharp-


er  than  a  two-edged  sword,  and  piercing  even  to  the
dividing  (the  division  line)  of  soul  and  spirit "  (WeD,ua
and  tyvxh)  to  make  these  distinctions,  and  brin"  them
home  to  die  human  conscience.     Hence  it  is  "called
KpiriKbs  fi'&u/j.7i<rewv  Kal  twoiuv  tcupSias — "a  critical
discerner  (and  exposer)  of  the  purposes  and  the  think-
ings  of  the  heart."    In  this  language  eV^Tj-m  corre
sponds  locally  to  12? ,  and  IWoicu  to  risrrra  .    The
terms  are  no  mere  redundant  tautology/  any  more
than  those  used  above  for  soul  and  spirit.    The  bare
dichotomic  view  fails  to  explain  the  language  of  the
Scripture,  whether  as  given  in  its  Greek  or  Hebrew
terms.     The  Greek  words,  however,  are  less  precise
than  the  Hebrew,  since  both  twoia  and  <Ww<m
may  be  used  for  the  purpose  or  the  thought.— T  L  \
And  ].t  repented  the  Lord.— Most  truly,  as
Keil  rightly  remarks,  is  this  sentence  so  pronounced
on  man  alone,  directly  against  the  angel-interpreta
tion.     On  that  hypothesis  the  angels  must  have  been
the  original  authors  of  the  corruption ;  and  so  in  con
sistency  with  Gen.  iii.,  where  the  serpent  is  first  sen
tenced,  ought  the  first  doom  here  to  have  been  pro
nounced   upon  the   sinning  angels.— It  repented
Jehovah — A  peculiarly  strong  anthropopathic  ex
pression,   which,    however,  presents  the  truth  that
God,  in  consistency  with  his  immutability,  assumes  a
changed   position  in  respect  to  changed  man  (Ps
xviu.  27),  and  that,  as  against  the  impenitent  man
who  identifies  himself  with  the  sin,  lie  must  assume
the  appearance  of  hating  the  sinner  in  the  sin,  even
as  he  hates  the  sin  in  the  sinner.    But  that  Jehovah
lotwithstanding,  did  not  begin  to  hate  man,  is  shown
n   the    touching    anthropomorphism   that   follows
and  it  grieved  him  in  his  heart."     The  first  kind'
if  language  is  explained  in  the  flood,  the  second  in
he  revelation  of  Peter,   1  Pet.  iii.  19,  20,  and  ch.
v.   6.     Against  the  corruption  of  man,  though  ex-
ending  even  to  the  depths  of  his  heart,  there  is
ilaced   in    contrast    God's   deep    "grieving  in   his
.eart."  _  But  as  the  repentance  of  God  docs  not  take
way  ID'S  unchangeableness   and   his   counsel,   but
rightly    establishes    them,    so    neither   does    God's
grieving  detract   from  his  immutability  in  blessed
ness,  but  shows,  rather,   God's  deep  feeling  of  the
distance  between  the  blessedness  to  which  man  was
appointed  and  his  painful  perdition.     Dclitzseh  does
indeed  maintain  it,  as  most  real  or  actual  truth,  that
God  feels  repentance,  and  he  does  not  equate  this
position  with  the  doctrine  of  God's  unchangeable-
ness,  unless  it  be  with  the  mere  remark  that  the  pain
and  purpose  of  the  divine  wrath  arc  only  moments
in  an  everlasting  plan  of  redemption,  which  cannot
become  outward  in  its  efficacy  without  a  movement
in  the  Godhead.     And  yet  movement  is  not  change.
—I  wiH  destroy  man.— To  man  in  the  wider  sense
pertains  the  human  sphere  of  life ;  therefore  it  is  said
that  the  beasts  too  shall  be  destroyed.     Of  any  cor
ruption  that  had  entered  into  the  animal  there  is  no
mention  (see  ver.  12).     The  perishing  of  the  beasts,
therefore,  can  only  have  meaning  as  a  sharing  in  the
atonement  for  human  sins  (Jer.  xii.  4  •  xiv.  5  •  Hos
iv.  3;  Joeli.  18;  Zeph.  i.  3.    Knobel).'     It'is  rather
as  a  consequence  of  the  dependence  of  the  animal
world  upon  man  that  it  is  joined  with  him  in  joy  and
sorrow.     We  are  not  to  think  of  it  as  something  per
sonified  together  with  man,  but  as  the  symbolic  im
personal   extension  of  his   organism.— But  Noah
.ound  grace.—"  In  these  words  there  breaks  forth
roin  the  dark  cloud  of  wrath  the  mercy  which  ^ives
security  for  the  preservation  and  restoration  of  hu-
namty."    Keil.


288


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


[NOTE  ON  THE  DIVIXK  Ri:rKvriNf;,  Gen.  vi.  0. —
We  do  not  gain  much  by  attempts  to  explain  philo
sophically  such  states  or  movements  of  the  divine
mind.     They  are  strictly  &pf>r)Ta— ineffable.     So  the
Scripture  itself  represents  them  :   "  For  my  thoughts
are  not  your  thoughts,  saith  the  Lord;  as  the  heav
ens  are  high  above  tho  earth,  so  high  are  ray  ways
above    your   ways,  and    my    thoughts    above    your
thoughts," — tliat"  is,  my  thinking,  my  mode  of  think
ing,  "above    your   thinking.      And  then  these  same
Scriptures,  so  far  transcending  all  philosophy  in  the
abstract  declaration  of  the  ineffable  difference,  fur
nish  us  helps  by  means  of  finite  conceptions,  human
representations,   anthropopathisms,  as  we  learnedly
call  them,  c<  ude.-cer.sions,  "accommodations."     Let
us  not  vainlv  attempt  to  get  above  them,  as  though
they  \vcri    made   for  lower   minds,  whilst  we,  fioin
some  higher  position,  as  it  were,  can  look  over  them,
or  see  I'lnt.Kgh   them,  and  are  thus  enabled  to  dis
pense  with  tl.eir  aid.     If  they  are  accommodations,
let  us  h"  accommodated  by  them  ;   since  here  all  hu
man  mir.d-  are  very  much  on  a  par.     Our  right  feel-
iiiLT  is  much   more  concerned  i;i  th ':.•••  than  our  right
understanding.     We    cannot    rise   to   God,   ;;;.d    we
should  reveicntly  adore  the  effort,  if  we  may  so  call
it,  which  lie  makes  to  come  down  to  us,  to  enter  into
the  sphere  of  the  finite,  to  think  ov.r  thinking,  and
thus    to    converse    with    us    in    our    own    language.
Without   tins  there  can  be  no  intercourse   between
the  infinite  and  the  finite  mind.     God's  putting  him
self  in  the  place  of  man  is  the  idea  and  the  key  of  all
revelation.     In  this  sense,  even  nature  itself  has  an
anthropopathic    language.      We  must  put   our  feet
upon  the  lower  rounds  of  this  ladder  thus  let  down
t,,  us, — in  other  words,  we  must  use  these  accommo
dations,   use   them  reverently,   honestly,  thankfully,
or  have  in  the  mind  a  total  blank  in  respect  to  all
those  conceptions  of  God  that  most   concern  us  as
moral  being-.     Talk  as  we  will  of  impassibility,  we
must  tltnik  of  God  as  having  Trad?;,  a/ed'mii::,  some
thing  connecting  him  with  the  human,  and,  therefore,
human    in   some   aspect  or   measure  of  agreement.
We  must  either  have  in  our  thoughts  a  blank  intel
lectuality  making  only  an  intellectual  difference  be
tween  irood  and  evil  (if  that  can  be  called  any  differ
ence  at  all),  or  we  are  compelled  to  bring  in  some
thing  emotional,  and    that,  too,  with  a  measure  of
intensity  corresponding  to  other  differences  by  which
the  divine  exceeds  the  human.     Without  this,  the
highest   form  of  scientific  or  philosophic  theism  has
mTmorc  of  religion  than  the  blankest  atheism.     We
could  as  well  worship  a  system  of  mathematics  a.-
such  a  theistic  indifference.     The  emotional  in  view
of  the  true  and  the  right,  the  evil  and  the  false,  is  a
higher  thing  than  the  intellectual  perception  of  them,
even  could  We    suppose   such  separable    cognition
We  do  not   rightly  see  the  true,   or  truly   see    the
right,  unless  we  lor?  it ;  we  do  not  truly  sec  the  cvi
or  the  false,  unless  we  have  the  opposite  affection
It  belon-s  to  the  very  essence  or  being  of  the  ideas
Such  emotional  is  the  highest  thing  in  man,  and  is  i
rational  to  suppose  that  all  this  is  a  blank  in  tin
higher  being  of  God?     Reason  may  sometimes  go
safely  in  affirming  what  it  cannot  define,  and  recon
cilc  with  other  and  lower  affirmations.     Thus  here
an  intellectual  and  a  moral  necessity  may  compel  u
to  say  that  the  idea  of  the  emotional  in  the  divine  ha
a  veritable  existence,  though  the  conception  utterly
fails  to  reach  it ;  just  as  reason  truly  affirms  the  infi
nite  in  mathematics,  and  with  as  clear  a  certainty  a
that  of  any  finite  ratio,  though  sense  and  imagina


on  are  both  transcended  by  it.  It  may  know  that
thing  is,  that  it  must  be,  though  not  how  it  is.  So
ere,  a  moral  necessity  compels  us  to  hold  that  there
s  such  a  region  of  the  divine  emotional,  most  in-
ensely  real, — more  real,  if  we  may  make  degrees,
lan  knowledge  or  intellectuality — the  very  ground,
n  fact,  of  the  divine  personal  being.

If  we  would  carefully  examine,  too,  our  own  feel-
ngs,  we  would  find  that  it  is  not  alone  a  supposed
cpugnancc  to  reason  that  is  the  ground  of  the  dim-
ulty.  We  do  not  raise  the  objection  of  anthropo-
lathism  when  love  is  ascribed  to  God,  and  yet  it  \3
s  strictly  anthropopathic  as  the  divine  indignation,
ir  the  divine  sorrow.  An  unemotional  love  is  utterly
nconceivalile.  It  is  inseparable,  too,  from  the  other
•lements.  Love  for  the  good  has  no  meaning  except
is  involving  displeasure  at  the  evil;  and  sorrow,  to
peak  humanly,  is  lint  the  blending  of  the  two  emo-
ions  in  vhw  of  the  loss  or  marring  of  the  lovely,  and
he  predominance  of  the  unloved.  And  in  this  we
une  the  thought  so  fearful,  whilst  so  attractive  and
sublime :  the  intensity  of  the  one  must  be  the  meas
ure  of  the  intensity  of  the  other.  Depart  in  the  least
rom  the  idea  of  indifferentism,  and  we  have  no  limit
jut  infinity.  God  either  cares  nothing  about  what
ve  call  good  and  evil — or,  as  the  heaven  of  heavens
s  hii_rh  above  the  earth,  so  far  do  his  love  for  the
4ood,  and  his  hatred  of  evil,  exceed,  in  their  intcn-
-ity,  any  corresponding  human  affection.

"The"  gnat  business,  therefore,  of  the  interpreter
)f  Scripture  is  to  determine  philologically  the  nature
if  the  emotion  expressed  by  these  words,  and_  then
the  theologian  is  to  take  them  in  their  highest  inten
sity,  and  iii  such  a  way  as  shall  not  be  in   contradic
tion'  with  other  divine  attributes,  whether  given  to
us  by  clear  reason,  or  revealed  to  us  in  the   Scrip-
tun  s.     Thus  it  will  be  found  that  this  word,  en;,
rendered  in  Xinhal  to  repent,  has  a  dual  relation,  the
Ih>t  and  primary  to  tl\c  feclinff,  the  second   to  the
purpose.     Tin-  first  connects  itself  with  what  may
be   culled    the   onoiuatepie    significance,  to  siyh,  to
draw  the.  breath  ;  hence  inpnntiit,  doluit,os  Gcscuius
•ives  it.     Hence  ]><i  n'<lii',i  cum,  it  repented  him,  in
the  sense  of  sorrow.     The  anthropopathism  thus  ex
pressed   is   the  more  touching  form,  and  the  whole
context  shows  that  it  is  the  one  predominantly  in
tended  here.     It  is  no  change  of  purpose,  no  confes
sion  of  mistake,  but  a  most  affecting  representation
of  the  divine  pity  and  tenderness.     The  language
following  shows  this:  "and  lie  was  grieved  at  the
heart,"  when  he  saw  how  this  fair  world,  which  he
had  once  pronounced  "good,  exceeding  good,"  had
become  marred  and  full  of  evil.     In  the  course  of
its  applications  the  word  naturally  gets  also  the  other
or  more  secondary,  yet  quite  common  sense  of  change
of  purpose.     It  is  thus  used,  1  Sam.  xv.  29 :   "  God
will  not  lie,  neither  does  he  repent ;  he  is  not  man
that  he  should  repent"— literally,  "man  to  repent,
—that  is,  he  does  not  repent  like  man  with  change
of  plan  or  purpose.     The  other,  and  more  primary
idea,  comes  also  in  this  very  passage  relating  to  Saul,
as  appears  ver.  35  ;  unless,  contrary  to  all  rules  oi
criticism,  we  would  bring  the  writer  in  immediate
and  palpable  contradiction  with  himself.     Sec  also
Ps.  ex.  4.     The  repenting  of  sorrow  is  the  anthropo-
pathism  that  is  always  to  be  supposed  when  the  lan
guage  is  applied  directly  to  Dtity  ;  as  Ps.  cvi.  45,
•flSt?  -~2  c~:1?->  "an(i  ne  repented  according  to
the  greatness  of' his  mercy;"  Ps.  xc,  13,  "Return


CHAP.   VI.   1-8.


289


Jehovah — how  long ! — and  let  it  repent  thec  concern
ing  thy  servants."

As  an  instance  of  the  way  in  which  words  branc
out  into  various  meanings,  till  they  sometimes  get  a
most  a  reverse  sense,  it  may  be  noted  how  this  wort
in  this  very  conjugation,  gets  the  meaning  of revcng
ing,  or  rather  of  avenging.  It  comes  from  the  prima
ry  idea  of  breathing,  finding  relief  from  the  letting  ou
>of  pent-up  indignation.  When  thus  applied  to  Deit
the  anthropopathism  is  terrific,  and  yet  the  contex
always  shows  that  no  other  term  could  so  expres
the  vehemency  of  the  indignation ;  as  in  Is.  i.  2
•ny-2  criiX,  well  rendered,  to  the  letter,  "I  wil
case  me  of  mine  adversaries ; "  yet  even  here  ther
is  something  touching  in  the  anthropopathism,  1'ron
the  greatness  of  the  long-suffering  that  appears  in  th
verses  preceding.  Compare  Ezek.  v.  13;  xxxi.  16
xxxii.  ;;i.  More  nearly  allied,  however,  both  to  th,
primary,  and  to  the  sense  we  have  traced  in  Gen.  vi
is  the  I'iel  idea  of  consolation.  It  is  the  sympathiz
ing  sorrow,  as  in  Gen.  1.  21,  where  Joseph  comforts
his  brethren  by  palliating  their  guilt.  Its  primary
sense,  as  well  as  its  tenderness,  appears  in  what  i:
immediately  added,  C2b  by  "2T;i  cnix  nn3
"and  hs  soothed  them,  and  spake' to  their  heart.'
Compare  Is.  xl  1,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  peo
pie,"  and  especially  Ps.  xxiii."  4,  where  it"  expresses
the  soothing  care  of  the  shepherd  for  the  wearied,
panting  sheep.  It  is  this  sense  of  Sj'mpathizing  sor
row  that  makes  the  exquisite  beauty  of  its  tender
ness.— T.  L.J


DOCTRIXAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  The  character  of  the  Alexandrian  Judaism,  a^
inclined  to  the  Gnostic  and  the  apocryphal,  needs  to
be  recognized  in  order  that  we  may  estimate  its  in
fluence  upon  the  old  and  traditional  exegesis  of  this
passage,  and  on  the  passage  itself  as  given  in  the
codices  of  the  Septuagint.

2.  There  is  a  difference  between  the  biblical  and
apocryphal  measure  of  the  doctrine  respecting  the
demons,  analogous  to  the  difference  between  faith
and  superstition,  or  the  difference  between  the  sensus
communis  of  a  sound  theology  and  the  hankerin^
taste  of  a  mere  theosophy.

3.  The  Scripture  distinguishes  between  corrupt
ing  mixed-marriages  of  the  pious  and  the  godless,
which,  according  to  their  point  of  departure  (that  is'
sensual  satisfaction),  draw  down  the  nobler  part  into
community    with   the   base,   and  unlike    marriages
among    those   of    different    religious    communions,
which  may  draw  up  those  of  lower  standing  to  the
stand-point  of  the  more  elevated.    It  is  because  there
lies  originally  at  the  ground  of  the  latter  a  moral
motive.     To  the  first  class  belong,  next  to  our  his
tory,  the  marriage  of  Esau,  the  Midianitic  connec
tions  (Numb,  xxv.,  yet  only  in  conditional  measure,
since,  in  this  case,  there  is  mention  only  of  licentious
amours),  the  marriages  of  the  Israelites  with  the  Ca-
naauitish  women  (Judg.  iii.),  the  Delilah  of  Samson,
the  foreign  wives   of  Solomon,  Jezebel  in   Israel,
Athaliah  in  Judah  (both  having  a  fearful  efficacy  for
:he  corruption  of  the  people),  the  daughters  of  "San-
.vallat  (Neb.,  xiii.  28),  who  gave  occasion  for  the  false
worship   on   Gerizim.     To  these,  if  we  regard  the
essence  of  the  matter,  we  may  add  the  case  of  Hero-
lias  in  the  Xew  Testament,  and  connect  with  them
malogous  examples  in  the  history  of  the  church  and
>f  the  world,  even  to  our  own  day.     To  the  other

19


'  class  belong  such  cases  as  that  of  Thamar,  the  mar
riage  or  the  marriages  of  Moses,  the  case  of  Kahab,
the  marriages  of  the  sons  of  Naomi  (see  Book  of
Ruth),  the  cases  mentioned  by  Paul,  1  Cor.  vii.  13
the  case  of  Eunice,  2  Tim.  i.  5,  and  many  examples
from  old  church  history,  where  Christian  princesses
have  been  the  means  of  converting  heathen  husb.mds,
and,  through  them,  of  the  conversion  of  whole  na
tions.  From  this  contrast  it  appears  that  a  mere
zeal  in  the  abstract  against  mixed  marriages  is  not
grounded  on  the  Bible,  but  that  it  depends  on  this
whether  the  motive  for  the  contraction  of  marriage
is  the  instruction  of  the  one  who  occupies  the  lower
position,  or  a  religious  apostasy  of  the  higher.  And  so,
too,  the  political  and  civic  conception  of  mesalliances
is  to  be  determined  by  fundamental  positions  of  a
moral  and  religious  kind.  In  the  universal  treatment
of  this  question,  there  comes  also  into  consideration
the  moral  predominance  and  the  social  priority  of
the  man,  as  well  as  the  great  religious  influence  of
the  wife,  especially  of  the  zealous,  or  of  the  bigoted
wife.

4.  Between  the  moral    and   ennobling   satisfac
tion  in  female  beauty,  as,  for  example,  in  the   love
of  Jacob  and  Rachel,  and  the  satisfaction  of  sensual
desire,    there    is    a   specific   difference.     Beyond   a
doubt,  a  satisfaction  of  the  latter  kind  is  meant  in
our  text,   as  plainly  appears  from  tiie  expression :
"  they  took  them  wives  of  all  (that  is,  without  ex
ception)  that  pleased  them."     Such  a  wide  choice  is
unknown  to  the  moral  love.     The  language  appears,
too,  to  hint  at  a  Cainite  polygamy.     The  "expression
rvnb,  as  used  of  the  daughters  of  men,  is  to  be
thus  determined.

5.  The   Bible    conception   of  whoredom,    as   it
becomes  a  symbolical  designation  of  a  falling  away
from  God  into  idolatry,  determines  itself— not  solelv
by  the  outward  mark,  that  is,  as  lacking  the  ritua'l
of  marriage — but  also  by  the  inwnrd  evidence  as  to
whether  the  spirit-life  sinks  into  sensuality  through
the  sensual  connection.     And  such  a  sexual  life" is
'icre  evidently  intended.     As  the  true  marriage  be-

jomes  a  symbol  of  the  connection  between  Jehovah
and  his  people,  because  in  its  looking  to  the  eternal
t  coheres  with  it  in  the  generic  bridal  idea,  so  does
,he  impure  sexual  connection  become  a  symbol  of
apostasy,  because  it  has  in  common  wuh  it  the

aracteristic  feature  of  unspirituality  an  1  carnality.

lies,  therefore,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing,
hat  the  first  kind  of  sexual  intercourse  conducts  to
awful  marriage  (the  marriage-law),  and  conforms  to
he  true  and  faithful  in  the  chastity  of  the  spirit,
vhilst  the  latter  hates  chastity  and  loves  change.

6.  Lust  and  cruelty  arc  psychologically  twin-
orms,  like  despotism  and  mesalliance,  or  the  harem
ife  in  all  its  forms.  Jezebel,  Athaliah,  Herodias,
re  world-historical  types.  Women  like  these  have
hown  themselves  to  be  murderesses  of  the  prophets,
o,  too,  the  authoress  of  Nero's  persecutions  had  to
e  his  wife  Poppjca,  a  bigoted  Jewish  proselyte
~ee  LEHMAN:  "Studies  in  the  History  of  Apostolic
'imes."  Greifswald,  1856).  In  this  tendency  of
ast  can  we  explain  the  common  disobedience  of
egeneratc  sons  towards  their  pious  parents,  the
isowning  of  modest  Sethite  maidens  in  favor  of
ainite  beauties,  the  existence  of  polygamy  and
ccntious  disorder,  and,  everywhere,  what  is  called
the  emancipation  of  the  flesh."  Therefore  is  it
mt  this  race  is  a  prefiguring  example  of  the  antino-
lists  of  "the  last  time"  (Matt.  xxiv. ;  Epistle  of
ude ;  2  Peter  ii.)  From  the  violence  of  action,


290


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


moreover,  can  we  explain  the  oppression  of  the
weak  and  miserable,  and  the  spreading  of  infinite
sorrow.

7.  A  physiologist  might  find  it  very  conceivable,
that  the  offspring  of  such  unbridled  lust,  as  exhibited
in  the  intercourse  of  the  hitherto  unimpaired  Sethites
with  the  Caiuite  women,  might  be  a  race  in  whom
bodily  strength  would  present  itself  in  an  unusual
degree,   in    connection    with    spiritual    savageness.
This,  however,  is  doubted  by  Kurtz  (Part  1,  p.  82).

8.  The  first  mention  of  the  divine  judicial  ollice
of  the  Spirit  of  Cod,  ver.  o.

9.  The  first  mention  of  worldly  favor  in  instruct
ive  and  warning  significance,  ver.  4.

lu.  In  respect  to  God's  repentance,  see  above
(comp.  Numb,  xxiii.  19;  1  Sam.  xv.  29).  A  well-
known  school  does  not  hesitate  to  bring  into  the
idea  of  the  divine  being  the  conception  of  muta
bility,  even  in  its  relation  to  other  questions  (for
example,  the  doctrine  of  Communlcatio  idiomatum).
We  should,  however,  always  distinguish  between
symbolic  and  dogmatic  anthropopathism.  Resides,
we  Jiiu-i  not  confound  the  judgment  of  God,  ver.  5,
with  the  judgment  of  God,  eh.  viii.  li  1 .

11.  \mth  found  grace.  As  innocent  children
died  in  the  Hood,  and  as,  moreover,  there  may  have
been  always  individuals  less  guilty  who  nevertheless
fell  under  the  judgment,  so  does  the  <jracc  in  the
exception  of  the  pious  Noah  become  still  more  con
spicuous.  Rut  in  Noah,  moreover,  the  kernel,  or
root-stem  of  humanity,  still  remaining  comparatively
sound,  was  the  subject  of  the  divine  mercy.  The
•n ,  the  gracious,  fair,  and  saving  condescension,
appears  here  for  the  first  time  in  full  distinctness.
TiiU  >liowing  grace  to  Noah  in  this  world  easts  a  ray
of  light  upon  the  destiny  of  the  innocent  ini'ant-
world  that  sunk  with  the  guilty,  and  of  tlu>  race
generally,  a-;  judged  in  the  other  world  (see  1  Pet.
iii.  19;  cli.  iv.  G).

liOMILKTICAL  AND   I'KACTICAL.


The  fall  and  perdition  of  the  first  human  race  in
its  detail:  1.  Ungodly  lust;  2.  wanton  deeds  of
violence ;  3.  the  lawless  commingling  of  the  pious
with  the  godless;  4.  disdain  of  all  warnings  from
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  impenitent  obduracy  in  their
sensual  course.— How  the  warnings  of  God  die  away
unheard  in  a  sinking  race.— The  higher  the  stand
point  the  deeper  tbe  fall.— The  sanctifying  of  the
true  feelinn-  of  beauty  in  contrast  with  the  wanton
disposition.— The  sanctifying  of  the  true  hero-power
In  contrast  with  the  wanton  love  of  violence.— The
deep  connection  between  carnality  and  cruelty.— The
sanctifying  of  marriage.  The  corrupting  effects  of
unchasiity.  The  contagious  power  of  evil,  especially
of  lust  and  injustice.— God's  beholding  it  at  all
times.— -How  the  divine  repenting  reflects  itself  in
tlie  heart  of  the  pious  Noah.— The  godly  mourning
of  the  pious  over  the  corruption  of  these  times;  it
high  significance:  1.  as  an  animating  sign  of  the
divine  compassion  ;  2.  as  a  terrifying  sign  of  the
divine  judgment. — How  man  draws  with  him,  in
his  doom,  the  surrounding  nature — even  in  his  cor
ruption. — The  sufferings  of  children  on  account  of
their  parents. — The  sufferings  of  the  animal  world
on  account  of  man. — Noah  the  chosen  of  God:  1.
As  the  prophet  of  the  divine  spirit  and  of  its  judg
ment  upon  the  earth ;  2.  as  the  priest  of  his  house
.and  of  a  new  humanity ;  3.  as  a  kingly  hero  in  his


steadfastness  against  a  whole  race. — The  grace  of
lod,  how  it  cxccpted  one  man,  Noah,  out  of  the
common  judgment. — Grace  for  the  one,  in  its  effect
grace  for  the  many,  that  is,  for  the  whole  coming
luman  race. — The  second  ancestor  a  child  of  grace
m  the  most  special  sense. — The  grace  in  its  first
manifestation,  how  all-powerful,  and  how  wondrously
saving. — Noah  found  grace  ;  therefore  he  must  havo
sought  it,  as  it  sought  and  found  him. — "/?t  his
et/cs  ;  "  consciousness  of  the  grace  of  the  all-knowing
God  as  ever  beholding  him  ;  this  through  his  com
munion  with  God.

STARKK:  Ver.  2.    LI;THKR:  It  is  a  great  mercy
when  the  Holy   Spirit   through  its  word  punishes,
and  strives  with,  men;  on  the  contrary,  the  highest
disfavor  and  punishment  when  it  \->  withdrawn  and
leaves  the   world  unpunished. — Ver.   3 :  After  the
time  God  trave  also  to   the  Amorites  four  hundred
years  (ch.  xv.  10),  to  the  Jews  also,  after  the  death
of  Christ,  forty  years,  to  Nebuchadnezzar  one   year
(Dan.  iv.  29),  and  to  Ninevah  forty  days,  for  repent
ance. — Ver.  4  :  The,  security  and  carnality  of  men  is
a  sign  of  God's  judgments  drawing  nigh  (Matt.  xxiv.
33-38). — Evil  examples  (Hook  of  Wisdom  iv.    12;
Sirach    xiii.    1).       Reckless    and    unlike    marriages
draw  after  them  only  clear  perdition.— The  contempt
of  the  divine  word  is  the  most  grievous  sin,  for  from
it    all    others    have    their    origin.      How    great  the
patience  and  long-suffering  of  God!    The  oppression
of  the  poor  and  wretched  is  a  great  sin,  and  draws
God's  judgment  after  it.— Ver.  7:   Though  the  little
ones  are  comprehended  in  the  calamity,  we  must
not,  on  that  account,  charge  God  with  unrighteous
ness  (he  might  have  foreseen  that  they  would  tread
in  the  footsteps   of  their   parents,  or  lie   may  have
taken  them  without  prejudice  to  their  soul's  ble.-sed-
ness)._Ver.  8.    LtrriiK!::  This  way  of  speaking  ex
cludes  merit  and  extols  faith.— Suu-.o i>i:u  :   The  fall
first  begins  its  course   in  the   sphere   of  Adam   i.nd
Kve's  single  personality,  then,  by   and  with   Gainst
enters  into  the  family  life,  thence  showing  itself  in
the  members  of  a  whole  line,  it  now  reaches  its  last
sta"e  of  antediluvian    development ;  it  advances  to
the^ fall  of  a  world.— Vers.  1,  2.  HEKDER:  The  more
intimate  they  arc,  the  nearer  they  live  together,  the
more  do  they  infect  each  other  with  their  breath,
and  defile  each  other  with  their  disease;  each  be
comes  to  the  other  the  instrument  of  a  more  multi
plied  and  subtle  evil.     All  great  kingdoms,  states,
and  cities  are  still  mournful  evidences  of  this  fact. —
CALVIN  :  Hy  such  a  title  of  honor  (sons  of  God)
Moses  upbraids  them  with  their  unthankfulncss,  in
that,  forsaking  their  heavenly  father,  they  become
outcasts,  as  it  were,  and  expose  themselves  to  rum.

LUTHER:  The  Hood  comes   not  on    this  account

merely,  that  the  race  of  Cain  was  corrupt  and  evil,
but  because  the  race  of  the  righteous,  who  had  be
lieved  God,  had  fallen  into  idolatry.  So  God  docs
not  hasten  the  last  day  because  heathen,  Jews  and
Turks  arc  godless,  but  because,  by  means  of  the
Pope  and  the  fanatics,  the  church  itself  has  become
full  of  errors.— From  all,  that  is,  whom  they  loved,
took  they  to  themselves  wives.  That  would  be  the
love  of  diversity.  Or,  before  all,  namely,  that  to
them  the  female  race  (the  sex  without  discrimination)
had  become  everything.  The  worth  or  unwortni-
ness  of  the  person  came  not  into  consideration.
Probably  it  was  incest ;  it  was  certainly  polygamy.
LUTHER  :  They  disdained  the  simplicity,  seriousness,
and  modest  deportment  of  their  young  women,
which  had  attracted  the  holy  patriarchs,  not  amor-


CHAP.    VI.    9— VIII.  19.


ously,  but  chastely,  and  suffered  themselves  to     ^
pleased  with  the  fondlings,  the  adorning,   and  the
wantoning  that  proceeded  from  the  latter  (that  is
the  Caiuite)  race. — Ve:1.  ;?.    CALVIN:  Moses  reprc
sents  God  himself  as  speaking ;  thereby  would  it  be
come  more  certain  that   that   punishment   was   as
righteous  as  it  was  fearful. — LUTHER:  (The  judging
(cr  striving)  of  the  spirit  relates  to  a  public  ollice  ii:
the  church,  or  the  preaching  of  the   truth,  perhaps
to  a  censure  pronounced  by  Methuselah  or  Lamech).
They  are  the  words  of  an  anxious  heart;  according
to  the  language  of  Scripture,  God  is  troubled,  thai
is,  the  heart  of  the  holy  people  which  is  full  of  love
to  every  man.     Such  sorrow  is  properly  the  sorrow
of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Eph.  iv.  30).— THE  SAME:  When
the  spirit  of  doctrine  is  gone  there  departs  also  the
spirit  of  prayer. — CALVIX :  As  long  as  God  holds
back  punishment  he  contends,  to  a  certain  extent,
with  men,  especially  if  he  would  draw  them  to  re
pentance  by  threatening,  or  with  light  chastenings
by  way  of  example.     Now  he  declares,  as  though  in
weariness,  that  he  desires  no  longer  to  contend. —
Berlenburger  Bible:   Where  the  Spirit  of  God  is,
there  it  condemns  sin.     His  presence  and  his  disci
pline  arc  inseparable  (Book  of  Wisdom  xii.) — The
name:  Let  no  one  believe  that  he  can  do  without
such  a  chastening  of  the  Almighty.      We  see  it  in
little   children. — CALVIN  :    This  contempt    of    God
gave  birth  to  pride,  and,  pride  full  blown,  they  be
gan  to  break  every  yoke.    They  glorified  themselves
in  their   deeds   of  shame,  and   became  robbers  of
renown,  so  called. — THE  SAME:  That  was  the  first
nobility  in  the  world  ;  so  that  no  one  might  please
himself  with  a  longer  or  more  renowned  series  of
ancestors.— THE    SAME:    There  is  nothing  in  itself
to  be  condemned  in  the  desire  of   celebrity,  it   is
useful  that  rank  should  have  place  in  the  'world  ;
yet,  as  inordinate  ambition  ever  deserves  blame,  so,
when  there  is  added  to  it  the  tyrannical  cruelty  of
the  more  powerful,  in  their  scorn  of  the  weak,  it
becomes  an  intolerable  evil. — Vers.  5-7.  Roos :  Be
fore,  the  flood  of  sins ;  after  it,  the  sin-flood.     With
out  a  doubt  has  God  impressed  this  feeling  upon  his
saints,  though  no  one  in  a  human  way  is  capable  of
it,  according  to  its  true  divine  nature.     Wrath  is
proper  for  a  king  and  a  magistrate,  but  pain  (for


sin)  is  peculiar  to  the  Creator,  who  has  love  for  hia
creature,  and  before  whose  eyes  that  creature  stands
as  one  utterly  corrupt,  unthankful,  and  apostate. —
THE  SAME  :  A  destruction  of  man  and  beast  must
be  their  end.  But,  whether  this  destruction  is  to
be  through  water  or  through  fire,  God  has  not  yet
in  these  words  revealed.

GERLACH  :  The  Sethites  are  here  presented  as  a
warning  to  the  Israelites.  God  allows  no  one  of
his  greater  judgments  to  take  place  without  giving
a  respite  _  for  repentance  after  its  announcement'
Luther's  interpretation  takes  the  repentance  and
the  grieving  as  the  same  with  that  which  precedes
in  the  genuine  children  of  God.  (Examples  which
Luther  presents:  Abraham's  prayer  for  Sodom;
Samuel's  sorrow  for  Saul;  Christ's  weeping  over
Jerusalem.)

LIKCO  :  Flesh ;  that  is,  a  people  wholly  sunk  ir;
sin.  Despise  not  thy  day  of  grace.

CALVER  (Manual) :  When  members  of  the  true
church  become  degenerate,  the  judgments  of  God
are  not  distant. — The  Nephilim:  ^Despising  God
above  ;  exercising  violence  and  oppression  towards
their  brethren  below.  Now  are  these  names  un
known,  like  the  names  of  many  others  who  have
sought  for  empty  fame.  In  the  heathen  world  there
are  such  people  as  heroes,  men  honored  as  demi
gods  ;  and  truly  there  lie  in  these  and  other  early
indications  of  Moses,  the  fountains  of  many  of  the
heathen  legends  concerning  the  gods.  (The  demi
gods  of  the  heathen  are, "  in  fact,  the  heroes  of
humanity,  such  as  Hercules,  for  example  ;  but  they
have,  doubtless,  an  original  national  origin  for  the
most  part  which  does  not  go  back  beyond  the  flood.)
— Noah,  the  one  righteous  man  in  an  entire  corrupt
world. — The  eyes  of  the  Lord  arc  upon  those  who
fear  him. — TAUBE  (p.  48):  The  judgment  of  God
upon  the.  first  world  a  warning  example  for  our
time:  1.  In  respect  to  the  first  world  being  ripe  for
judgment ;  2.  in  respect  to  the  manner  in  which
God  executed  this  sentence. — Micnow  :  This  is  the
very  climax  of  corruption,  when  men  will  not  suffer
themselves  to  be  reproved  by  the  spirit  of  God.  The
repenting  of  God  (see  Numb,  xxiii.  19).  It  denotes
God's  dealing  with  men,  which,  though  at  all  times
ust,  must  correspond  to  the  behavior  of  men.


THIRD    PART.

THE  GENESIS  OF  THE  WORLD'S  JUDGMENT  AND  OF  THE  WORLD'S  RENEWING  BY  MEANS
F  THE  FLOOD.     THE  FLOOD  AND  THE  DROWNED  RACE.     THE  ARK  AND  THE  SAVED
HUMANITY.     (THE  ARK  AS  A  TYPE  OF  THE   PIOUS  FAMILY,   OF"  THE  PIOUS  STATE
AND  OF  THE  CHURCH).     (CHAP.  VI.  9-CiiAp.  VIII.  19.)

FIRST  SECTION.

TJie  Calling  of  Noah.     The  Ark.


CHAPTER  VI.  9-CiiAPTER  VII.  9.


These  are  the  generations  [thoiedoth]  of  Noah  ;  Noah  was  a  just1  man  and  perfect  in
I  his  generations  [in  his  times],  and  Noah  walked  with  God.     And  Noah  begat  three  sons,


29o  GENE>1<,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


1 1    Shorn  Ham  and  Japheth.     The  earth  also  was  corrupt2  before  God  [in  relation  to  God],  and

^>>  the  earth  was  filled  with  violence  [in  relation  to  men].     And  God  looked    upon  the  earth

'   and  behold  it  was  corrupt  ;  for  all  flesh  had  corrupted 3  his  way  [walk  or  conduct]  upon  the

1  q   earth       <Ynd   God  said  unto  Noah,  the  end  of  all  ilesh4  is  come  before  me ;   for  the  carln

is  filled  with  violence  through4  them  [i-eforc  them]  ;  and  behold  I  will  destroy    them  with  the

1  !    nnrth       Al-ikc  thee  an  ark  of  p-ophor-wood  [cypress-a resinous  wood]  ;  rooms  shalt  thou  maice

t  -i    (.aim.       ~    i  .,..,!•  T       -,i   „       ...:<!,   ,  '(,,1,          A,,,]   tliu  TO  ilia    fftfhi'nn


WllCl    thOU    snail    iu.u\c  VL  ,     •  ^.bv..

1G  the  breadth  of  it  fifty  cubits,  and  the  height  of  it  thirty  cubits.     A  window  [arty-light]
shalt  thou  make  to  the  ark,  and  in  a  cubit  shalt  thou  finish  it  above  [downward-not  above

on  11,  .    id     but  from  (ho  top  surface  downwards  through  the  different  stories  j  ;  and  the  door  ot  the  ark  Shalt

thou  'set  in  the  side  thereof;  with  lower,  second  and  third  stories  shalt  thou  make  it.
•  hold  1  even  T,  do  bring  a  flood  of  waters  upon  the  earth,  to  destroy  all  flesh

,vh,rever  is  the  breath  of  life  under  heaven;  and  everything  that  is  in  the  earth  shall
IS,!-  [cxpire-yieid  the  breath]:  lint  with  ihee  will  I  establish  my  covenant;  and  thou  shalt
Jo  '  the  ark,  thou  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  wife,  and  thy  sons'  wives  with  ihee.  And

.,,-  ;>V(.rv  livin,,.  thin,  of  all  fh-sh,  two  of  every  sort  shalt,  thou  bring  into  the  ark  to  keep

20  Uulaiive  win,  thee;   they  shall  be  male  and  female.      Of  fowls  after  their  knd   and  of
t,  Ule  after  their  kind,  of  every  creeping  thing  of  the  earth  after  Ins  kind,  two  of  every

21  sort  shall  come  unto  thee,  to  keep  then,  alive.      And  lake   thou   unto   thee   of  all     nod

l,a,  i,  eaten,  and  thou  shall  gather  it,  to  thee  [fora  stove],  and  it  shall  be  for  food  for  the

22  ,'    i  for  ;]  ,.„-       Thus  did  Noah  according  to  all  that  God  commanded

n,  '  VII     i       And  the  Lord  said  unto  Noah,  come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark;  tor

2  'thee  'have  1  seen  righteous  before  me  in  this  generation.     Of  every   clean   beast  thou

S  take   to  thee  by  sevens,  the  male  and  his  female,  and  ol   boasts  that  are  no.  .can

3  by  two,  the  male  and  his  female.     Of  fowls  also  of  the  air  by  sevens     he  nude  am   the

4  female  ;    to  keep  seed  alive  upon  the  earth.     For  yet  seven  days,  and  1  wil   cause       to
rS  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty  nights;   and  every  living  Bubstance  ha   I  have

f,   made  will  I  destroy  from  the  face  of  the  earth.     And  Noah  did  according  to  a       hat
G  ,1,,    Lord    commanded  him.      And    Noah   was  ,,x  hundred  years  old  when  the  lloou    f

7  waters  was  upon  the  earth.     And  Noah   went   in,  and  his  sons  and  lis  v-,1,,  and  h,
sons'  wives  with  him,  into  the  ark,  because  of  the  waters  of   the    food  ['-  before-  or  *-

8  he  face  of  the  waters].     Of  clean  beasts,  and  of  beasts  that  are  not  clean   and  of   fowls,  and

9  of  every  thing   hat  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  There  went  in  two  and  two  \v  ,«H  unto
Noah  into  ihe  ark,  the  male  and  the  female,  as  God  [Elohim]  had  commanded  Noah.

I,M;I,,    InttJi  fulness       C"^P,  rrimnrv  s,  nse,  sninirlnets,  iiHrgri'y.     That  the
[i  Y,.r.9.-p--S,   prnnnvy  scn>c,  &****      ™"M£     =    ^   Wi5l3,  .'»  «.  generations.    The  language


...-,  l3,  .'»  «.  generatons.         e    angu

.,1  ,     ,o  o  far  as  to  say  that  he  would  not  have  been  so  calMin  comparison  with  Abraham.    s,*nrri  C  HPXH  TS  .

.-!.  L.


.    ,     ,o

a  on  this  phrase  as  used  in  the  account  of  Enoch.-!.  L.]


a  on       s  prase
er  it-rnVp!  ,  piimary  sense,  depression,  siting  down.    Hence,  corruption,  destruction.--!.  L.]


The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  up,  ^tb  ,  before  me  (to  my  face).-    Or  it  may  be  rendered
-  T .:  »„  v«  jTim-H'ii.in  iiTilras  nre-


.

wholo  human  race  without  exception)  unless  means  are

wickedness  and  corruption  there  w,  1  boa.  .  «d  of  ™»£^  ^  ^  aro  bccomitlg  dclmmanizc,d.    ert^M  ,

taken  for  the  preservation  of  a  sound  humanity  m  the  aestr  Wherovcr  they  spread,  violence  and  corrup-

p


,,


CHAP.    VI.    9— VII.  9.


293


rlo=cst  and  most  essential  union,  and,  on  this  ground,  it  is  that  it  conies  to  denote  the  nearest  arid  most  direct  object  of  tho
verb- "will  destroy  them,  the  very  earth,"  as  the  means  of  their  destruction.  Other  renderings  arc,  upon  the  earth,
(PX  for  52),  with  reference  to  1  Kings  ix.  20;  Ps.  Ixvii.  2  ;  and  from  the  earth  (PX  for  PX£),  2  Kings  xxiii.  35;  but
the  examples  cited  for  these  fail  to  bear  out  the  interpretation.  See  Roscnrn  filler.  It  may  he  offered  as  a  conjecture  entitled
to  some  attention,  that  the  Iliphil  participle  nTTi'E  may  have  the  permissive  sense  which  sometimes  belongs  to  it  (sea
Deut.  ii.  28;  Gen.  xxiv.  17  ;  xxv.  30;  Is.  Ixiii.  15  eta!.;  Glassii  Phil.,  p.  83G),  instead  of  the  caitsatirc,  and  then  it
would  be  a  case  of  double  government  :  "  And  lo  I  am  suffering  them  to  corrupt  the  earth  ;  "  in  which  case  PX  would
nave  ii's  usual  sense  of  the  direct  object,  and  there  would  be  no  need  of  tho  sudden  change  in  P^n'£,'£  from  the  sense  of
tornt.p'.i»tf  to  that  of  destroying,  although  they  are  nearly  allied  ;  as  though  it  were  a  reason  for  the  interposition  instead
of  a  tnreutening  of  it.  Lo  I  am  letting  them  ruin  the  earth,  if  they  are  permitted  thus  to  have  their  way.  The  inteipre-
tatioiij  generally  arc  against  this,  but  it  may  be  grammatically  supported,  and  has  some  grounds  in  the  context  as  giving
the  merciful  and  remedial  aspect  of  the  passage  the  predominance  over  the  retributive.  It  may  at  least  be  offered  as  a
conjecture.  The  P^ITm  of  ver.  12  scorns  to  he  against  it,  hut  even  that  may  be  rendered,  "all  flesh  is  letting  its  way
become  corrupt  upon  earth." — T.  L.]

[5  Ver.  11.— ~E3  "'X?.  Rendered  gopher-wood.  The  word  occurs  but  once  in  the  Scriptures.  It  i«,  however,
etymologically  the  same  with  the  Greek  KUTrapureros  (cypress,  the  same  radical  consonants,  g  p  r— k  p  r),  and  may  also
be  regarded  as  related  to  the  latin,  juniper  us  (g  (u)  pr).  It  may  denote  any  resinous  wood  which  is  at  the  same  time  light
and  firm.— T.L.]

[6  Ver.  17.— 512Sn  :  used  only  of  the  Great  Deluge,  except  Ps.  xxix.  10,  where  it  comes  in  as  a  hyperbole  in  the
description  of  a  great  storm  and  inundation.  Lanirc,  Gesenius,  and  others,  derive  it  from  b2n,  to  which  they  give  the
sense  tluxit,  though  it  occurs  only  in  some  noun  derivatives,  the  Iliphil  sense  being  remotely 'secondary.  The  sense  of
flowing,  however,  in  b2^  ,  if  it  has  it  at  all,  is  quite  different  from  the  conception  we  have  of  the  deluge.  It  is  the  flowing
of  streams,  rivers,  rivulets,  as  seen  in  the  derivative  bD"1 ,  flumen,  rivus.  Aben  Ezra  gives  us  the  views  of  the  older
Jewish  grammarians.  One  class  of  these  make  it  from.  b23,  comparing  it  with  Is.  xxiv.  4,  "/"jXtl  !~lb23  PibzX
"  iii  mourning  and  desolate  is  tho  earth,"— giving  to  b23  the  sense  of  ruin  and  wasteness.  This  acco'unts  for  'the  dagesh
in  2.  It  is  dagesh  compensative,  they  say,  for  the  swallowed  3,  or  bl2E  for  bl2:"2  ,  just  as  5",  2 -2  (from  S23)  foi-r^:^  .
It  is  certainly  much  easier,  ciymologically,  to  account  for  it  in  this  way,  than  by  making  it  from  b"-'1,  which  would  raiher
give  the  f.jrni  bs'n  .  Others  make  it  from  bb3  confundit,  and  regard  it  as  equal  to  blb2E  ,  the  dagesh  arising  from  the
swallowing,  as  the  Jewish  grammarians  call  it,  of  the  first  b'  following.  They  compare  it,  in  its  full  form,  to  b^bCE
from  b^O,  Is.  xxxv.  8,  or  ^'52'w  ,  Ps.  Iviii.  9.  Either  of  these  conceptions  of  ruin,  desolation,  and  confusion,  suits  better
with  t'ae  idea  of  the  great  catastrophe  than  simply  that  of  flowing,  especially  regarded  as  the  flowing  of  a  river.  And
then,  accordi  .g  to  these  acute  authorities,  we  have  a  reason  for  the  addition  of  CnE  ,  "the  mabbul  of  waters,"  which
would  be  a  mere  tautology,  and,  in  this  case,  a  feeble  tautology,  if  the  word  simply  meant  flowing.  It  was  a  wasteness,
a  ruin,  a  desolation,  a  confusion,  or  mingling  together  of  all  things  (b'b2),  by  means  of  waters.  Hence  the  special
descriptive  term  used  only  of  this  great  event,  and  intended  to  show  that  it  was  sui  generis,  so  that  it  comes  to  be  used
like  a  proper  name. — T.  L.]

['  Ver.  18.— P^"l2  .  Lango  makes  it  from  P~2  ,  a  root  not  found;  and  tho  metathesis  from  1P2  is  harsh  and
unexampled.  The  Jewish  grammarians  and  lexicographers  make  it  from  ill  3  =  X~Q  ,  primary  sense,  to  cuf,  referring
to  the  severance  of  tho  victim  in  sacrifice  on  the  making  of  a  covenant.  See  Ps.  1.  5,  P.2T  ^bs  •'P."."^2  "PI"1'",  "who
have  made  (cut)  a  covenant  (with  me)  by  sacrifice."  Further  on  this  word  and  idea,  see  Exegetical  and  Xolis.— T.  L.I


THE  FLOOD.    PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

1.  The  Literature. — See  Com.  on  Matthew,  p.  6.
The  present  work,  p.  ll'J.     WALUI.  :  Bibl.  Thcol.,  iii.
p.  100.   DANZ:  "Universal Lexicon," p. 918.   WINER,
Heal  Lexicon,  article,  Noah.     HF.RZOG,  Real  Ency
clopedia,  article,  Noah.    KURTZ  :  "  History  of  the  Old
Testament,"  i.  p.  81.    KXOBKL,  p.  81.— [Article,  Del-
wj<\   KITTO:  "Bib.  Eucyc."  vol.  i.  p.  542. — Article,
Noah,  SMITH'S  "Uib.  Diet."  vol.  ii.,  p.  502.— T.  L.]

The  Hebrew  name  of  the  Great  Flood  (b>12E)
Luther  rendered  by  the  word  Sin-flat,  or  Sindjiut.
The  latest  edition  of  the  German  Bible  contains  still
this  designation.  Through  a  misunderstanding  of  the
expression  ii,  became  afterwards  Sundfiut.  PISCIION
in  the  "  Theological  Studies  and  Criticisms,"  1834,  III.
DELITZSCH,  p.  628.  In  old  German  the  word  sin  is
found  only  at  the  beginning  of  compounds :  it  has
the  meaning  ever,  everywhere,  complete.  1'or  exam
ple,  sin-grim  means  ever-green.

2.  The  Stories  of  the  Flood.     No  fact  of  Sacred
History  reflects  itself  in  a  more  universal  and  mani
fold  manner  throughout  the  heathen  legendary  world
than  the  Noachie  Hood.     Compare  here  the  copious
account  of  LCCKEN  :  "  The  Traditions  of  the  Human
Race,"  p.  170;  also  KNOBEL,  p.  75;  DELITZSCH,  p.
242.     It  is  especially  interesting  to  study  how  the
different  nations  have  heathenized,  mythologised,  in
other  words,  nationalized  or  localized  the  sacred  and
universal   tradition   (since   by  the  very   nature   of


heathenism  tho  patriarch  of  the  flood  belongs  to
particular  nations  who  received  the  account  from
him,  and  who  also  regarded  him  as  their  national
middle  point),  and  how  they  have  co/tfoii/uled  it
with  the  story  of  Paradise,  or  of  the  creative  days.
From  this  comes  the  varied  deification  of  this  flood-
patriarch.  Delitzsch  distinguishes,  1.  the  West  Asia
tic  stories  of  the  Hood.  The  Babylonian  flood  of
Xisuthrus :  "  the  last  of  the  ten  antediluvian  chiefs,
as  given  by  Berosus  and  Abydenus,  and  the  Phoeni
cian  story  of  the  victory  of  Pontus  over  Demarns,
the  earth  sphere,  as  given  by  Sanchoniathon."
With  the  Babylonian  story  of  the  flood  he  compares
the  narrative  of  the  flood  as  given  in  the  first  of  the
Sibylline  books,  which,  in  its  ground  features,  has
some  resemblance  to  the  biblical.  Next  "  the  Phry
gian  story  of  King  'Awaicos  or  Narvajco's  (that  is,
Enoch)  in  Iconium,  who,  when  over  three  hundred
years  old,  announced  the  flood,  and  prayed  with
lamentation  for  his  people ;  with  which  are  connected
coins  of  Apamca  of  the  times  of  Septimius  Severus,
Macrinus,  and  Philip,  representing  a  floating  ark
and  bearing  the  partial  inscription,  Nfi."  So  also
the  Armenian,  which,  as  might  be  expected,  agrees
in  its  locality  with  the  biblical  (Nicol.  Damasceu.,
Strabo).  Then  a  Syrian  legend  of  which  LUCIAX
makes  mention  (Ue  Syra  Dea,  ch.  I",).  2.  East
Asiatic  stories  of  the  flood.  The  Persian,  the  Chi
nese ;  the  Indian  of  Menu,  to  whom  Vishnu,  taking
the  form  of  a  fish,  announces  the  flood,  and  whose


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


nhip   drawn   by  this  fish,  lands  up«n  Himarat      It
presents   itself    to   us   in   many  forms.     1  lie  oldest,
yet  the  latest  known  to  us,  is  the  story  in  Catapatha-
Brahmana  (\YEBER,  "  Indian  Studies,"  1850)    Next  to
that  is  the  story  in  Mahabhfmilu  U5"1>r.  "Diluvium,
1829),  and  in  the  Purana  ;  its  latest  form  is  present
ed  in  the  Blutgavata-Purana  (ed.  Bournout   !  827),
which,  according  to  Wilson,  does  not  go  back  of  the
twelfth  eenturv  after  Christ.     (In  respect  to  all  these
forms  of  the  story,  see  F*:ux  NAVE:   La  Tradition
Indienne  dn  Wlnyc,  Paris  ISM.)     3.    Grecian  sto
ries  of  the  !!<><)d.     "  In   the  first  place  the  story  of
0"V"ts    (Pi.ATo,  in   tin'  Timceus,)*  ;:lltl  tlic  "'°'L'  ('n"
lar-ed    account    of    Deucalion   and   Tyrrha  (fust   in
Pindar   then  l>v  Apollodorus,  brought  nearer  to  the
biblical    account,   also  given   by    I'lutarch,    Lucian,
aml  Ovid,t—  both,  in  their  ground  features,  stones
of  one  and  the  same  Hood,  but  wholly  llelleni/ed.
\    The  stories  of  the  people  who  were  outside  the
commerce  or  intercourse  of  the  Old  World.     The-  Cel
tic  story  of  D\vyvan  and  Dwyvach,  who,  in  the  Hood
that  arose  from  the  outbreaking  of  the  sea  of  Llion,
iiiid  which  swallowed  up  all  men,  made  their  escape
i,,  ;|   bare  boat   (without  :-ai  !•.<),  and    again    peopled
liriiain.     More  remote  still,  the  flood-stories  of  the
Mexicans,  of  tin-  i.-land  inhabitants  of  Cuba,  of  the
Peruvians,  of  the   races  on    the    upper  Orinoco,  of
the  Tahitians,  and  other  insular  peoples  of  the   S>-
,    1  -lands  Archipelago.     To  make  an  arrangement
i.ec.'iniin-  to  the  facts  narrated,  we  may  distinguish,
J.  Stories  of  the  Hood  which  identify  it  with  the  cre
ative  catastrophes,  namely  :  the  Germanic  story  of
the  blood  of  the  slain  Ymer,  which  deluged  the  earth,
and  destroyed  the  oldest  giant  race.     The   Persian
story  01  the  rain  of  /Mar,  which  Hooded   the  earth,
and  caused  the  death  of  the  beasts  of  Ahriman.    The
Chinese  story  of  Kiuhoa  (LtTKKX,  p.    1'.';);   see  on
the   other   hand   Bl'NSKN,   vol.  ii.   p.    til).      2.  Stories
of  the  Hood  in  which  the  Bible  Hood  is  specifically
an  1  distinctly  reflected,  Mich  as  the  Babylonian,  the
in    the   Indian,  the  Chinese  story  of  Jao,  the
Celtic  stories  (Lt'CKKN,  p.   '•>'>•!).     3.  Stories  of  the
Hoo  1  which   P  ii  m  to  connect  or  to  confound  it  with
the  deluge  accounts  of  later  Hoods.     The  stories  ot
the  Egyptians  and  the  Greeks  (LucKEN,  pp.  -2oi',  1'Jti).

I*  For  a  more  direct  and  fitmincant  mention  by  Plato  of
the  flood,  see  the  Dialogue,  De  ie<;i6us,  lib.  iii.  p.  677,  A.  B.
where  he  Mipposos  that  there  may  have  been  many  surl
ratastrophes  ii  the  immense  past  time,  but  speaks  speciallj
us  v.vll  known-  THUTTJK  iV  TV  KATAKAYZMO  wore
ycvopiW.  Alter  which  ho  speculates  upon  the  conditioi
of  those  who  may  have  escaped,  and  their  subsequent  cul-

^Tt^ho  description  of  Ovid  (although  he  takes  the  Ore.  1

n   -  .  •-)  is  noarcr  to  the  Scripture  account  than  that  of  1  m-

i    Vpollodorua,  and  it  may  be  inferred  that  he  had  ac-

,  other  traditional  sources,  Hebrew  perhaps,  or  Syrian

The  moral   ground  in  him  is  more  prominent;    and  thi

"matcous  iinn"  who  "found  grace"  is  brought  out  with

u  clearer  emphasis  —


sequl


Hhmamier,  too,  of  describing  the  subsidence  of  the  waters
and  the  hor.imim;  visible  of  the  mountains,  is  strikingly  lit
that  of  the  Scriptures,  and  makes  it  not  extravagant  to  sup
pose  that  he  may  have  had  some  knowledge  of  the  JI
iiccount,  audits  graphic  language,  C"~nn  ""^'X"J  "^"


Kin-nil


uhsi.lunt;


!


1'o.tquo  .1

-All  the  hiirh  hills  under  the  whole  heaven  were  covered.
Th'.'  Latin  poet  gives  the  same  optical  appearance,  though  i
aiC'ereut  language  :

Jam.iue  maro  ot  tcllus  nnllum  fllscrlmcn  liahebant ;
Uuiuia  poutus  erant ;  deeraut quoquo  litora  p'jnto.  —  T.  I..]


In  the  submersion  of  the  island  Atlantis,  as  given  _in
PLATO'S  Timaiis,  there  seems  to  be  reflected  likewise
the  tradition  of  the  lost  Paradise.     In  respect  to  the
facts  that  he  at  the  foundation  of  the  latter  stones,
compare   the   pamphlet    of  UNOER,    entitled  "The
Sunken   Island   of  Atlantis."    Vienna,   18(5".      The
fundamental  view  here  indicates  revolutions  of  the
earth,   npheavings   and  depressions  of  its    surface,
whose  effect  is  also  of  importance  in  the  history  of
the  Bible  deluge.     4.  Stories  of  floods  in  wliich  the
Bible  Hood  forms  the  central  point,  towards  which
11  traditions  and  legends  of  early  terrestrial  catas-
•ophcs    How   together,    and    in  which   the   original
•adition    cannot    always  be    separated    from    later
nodification    through    Christian    and    Mohammedan
lements.     Interior  African  and  American,  or  insular
ood  stories.     It  is  well  worthy  of  remark,  that  the,
thical  interpretation  of  the  Hood,  according  to  which
t  comes  as  a  judgment  upon  a  condemned  human
ace,  everywhere  prominently  appears  in  the  stories
)f  the  delude.     The  purest  copy  of  our  Bible  history
s  "iven    in  the    Chaldaie  narrative  of  Berosus,  the
indent  priest  of  Bel,  about  '200  years  before  Christ.
\isuthrus,  the  last  of  the  ten  primitive  kings,  behold
n  a  dream  the  appearance  of  Cronos  (in  Greek  ll
,amc  as  Bel  or  Baal),  who  announced  to  him,  that
m  the  l.'Hh  day  of  the  month  l),:isio,  men  would  bo
lestroyed  by  a  Hood.     It  was   commanded  him   to
vrite  down  all  the  sciences  and  inventions  of  mr.:i-
iind,  and  to  conceal  the  writings  in  Svparis,  the  city
of  the  Sun  ;  thereupon   he  was  to  build  a  ship,  and
0  embark  on  the  same  with  all  his  companions,  kin-
hvd   and   nearest   friends;  he  was  to  put   in  it  pro
visions  and  drink,  and  to  take  with  him  the  ai
the  birds,  as  well  as  the  quadrupeds.     If  any  one
should  ask   him  whereto   he  was   bound,  he   was   to
mswer:    To   the  gods;    to  implore   good  for   men,
He-  obeyed,  and  made  an  ark  live  stadia  in  length,
and  two  in  breadth,  put  together  what  was  command
ed    and  embarked  with,  wife,  children,  and  kindred.
As  the  flood  subsided,  Xisuthrus  let  fly  a  bird,  which,
when   it   neither   found    nourishment    nor    place   to
li"ht,  returned  back  into  the  ark.     After  some  days
he  let,  fly  another  bird  ;    this  came  back  with  slime
upon  its'  foot.     The  third  bird  sent  forth  never  re
turned.     Then   Xisuthrus  perceived  that   land   was
becomiii"  visible,  and   after  that  he  had  broken  an
opening  in  the  ship,  he  sees  it  driven  upon  a  mount-
aim  whence  he  descends   with  wife,  daughter,   and
pilot    and  when  he  had  saluted  the  earth,  built  an
altar  and  of,  red  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  he  disappeared.
Those  who  were  left  in  the  ship,  when  they  saw  that
Xisuthrus  did  not  return,  went  forth  to  seek  him,  and
called  him  by  name.     Xisuthrus  was  seen  no  more,
but  a  voice  sounded  from  the  air,  bidding  them  to
fear  "od,  and  telling  them  that  on  account  of  his
piety  he  had  been  taken  away  to  dwell  with  the  gods;
and" that   the   same   honor  was  given  to  his    wife,
daughter,  and  pilot.     (This  disappearance  has  rela
tion  to  his  deification,  or  probably  to  his  translation
among  the  stars,  where  the  forms  of  the  waterman,
the  young  woman,  and  the  carrier  (the  wagoner)  still
present  themselves  to  us).     They  were  commanded
to  return  back  to  Babylon,  where  it  was  appointed  tc
them  to  take  the  writings  from  Syparis,  and  impart
the  knowledge  they  contained  to  men.     The  country
where  they  found  themselves  was  Armenia.     In  re
spect  to  the  ship,  which  had  landed  in  Armenia,
Berosus  adds  that  there  was  still  a  portion  of  it  o
the  mountains  of  Kordyaer  (or  the  Kurdistan  mount*
ains)  in  Armenia,  from  which  some  persons  cut  off


CHAP.    VI.    9— VII.  9.


295


pieces,  took  them  to  their  houses,  and  used  them  as
amulets  (according  to  Liicken).     Amid  all  the-  simi
larity  which  this  story  presents  to  the  Bible  history,
there  is  no  mistaking  the  mythological  coloring ;  for
example,  in  the  huge  size  of  the  ark.     Just  :is  little
do  we  fail  to  hear  the  echo  of  the  history  of  Enoch.
5.  77ie  Fact  of  the  Flood.— The  narrative  of  the
flood,  like  the  history  of  Paradise,  has  in  a  special
measure  the  character  of  all  the  Bible  histories — that
is,  it  is  at  the  same  time  fact  and  symbol ;  and  it  is
the  symbolical  significance  of  this  history  that  has
formed  the  significant  expression  of  the  fact.     In  re
gard  to  the  fact  itself,  the  view  is  rendered  in  a  high
degree  difficult  by  reason  c*  the  mingling  with  it  of
the  following  representations,  restiug  solely  on  the
literal  interpretation  :    1.  the  supposition  that   the
history  narrates  not  merely  the  extermination  of  the
first  human  race,  and,  therefore,  the  overflowing  of
the  earth   according  to   the  geographical  extension
of  that  race,  but  an  absolute  universal  submersion
of  the  whole  earth  itself;  2.  the  idea  that  the  terres
trial  relations  were  the  same  at  that  time  that  they
are  now,  that  the  mountain  elevations  were  com
pleted,  and  that  the  mountain  Ararat  was  just  as  high
as  at  the  present  time;  3.  that  the  branching  of  the
animal  species  had  become  as  great  at  that  day  as  it
is  now:  add  to  these  a -ith,  the  ignoring  of  every
symbolical  imprint  in  the  representation.    As  to  what
concerns  the  first  two  points,  it  is  argued  by  EBRARD,
for  example  ("  Belief  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,"  p.  7o),
that  Ararat  was  10,000  feet  high.     The  waters  stand
fifteen  cubits  above  Ararat ;   consequently  must  the
whole  earth  have  been  covered,  though  it  may  still
remain  a  question  whether  single   peaks,  like    the
Dhawalagiri,  might  not  have   projected   above  the
water-surface  (in  a  literal  construction  of  the  text,
however,  such  a  doubt  cannot  remain),  since  a  bank
ing  limitation  of  so  high  a  flood  would  be  inconceiv
able.     This  conclusion  depends  upon  a  supposition
wholly  uncertain,  namely,  that  the  peak  of  Ararat
was  in  that  day  16,000  feet  high.     In  regard  to  the
first  point,  the  remark  of  Niigelsbach  (Art.  "Xoah,"
HKK/.wi's  Real-Encyclopedie)  coincides  wholly  with
the  view  of  Delitzsch,  namely,  that  the  theological
interest  does  not  demand  the  universality  of  the  flood
in  itself,  but  only  the  universality  of  the  judgment
that  was  executed  by  it.     In  respect  to  the  second
point,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  mountain  forma
tions  of  the  earth  had  been,  indeed,  begun  in  the
creative  period,  but  were  not  yet  fully  completed.
The  history  of  the  deluge  is,  without  doubt,  the  his
tory  of  a  catastrophe  in  which  the  terrain  of  the  earth
experienced  important  modifications  through  the  co
operation  of  fire.     The  deep  sinking  of  the  land  in
the  neighborhood  of  the  Armenian  paradisaical  re
gion,  which  is  denoted  by  the  Caspian  Sea,  might  alone
have  brought  on  a  deluge  catastrophe  analogous  to
that  which  must  have  had  a  connection  with  the  ruin
of  the  legendary  island  of  Atlantis.    In  respect  to  the
third  representation,  the  Darwin  theory  of  the  pro
gressive  origin  of  races,  though  in  itself  untenable,
does  nevertheless  contain  an  indication  of  the  truth
that  the  countless  unfolding  of  organic  memberships
in  the  animal  life  goes  back  to  great  individual  anti
types,  as  science  theoretically  sets  forth.     For  each
species,  perhaps,  there  may  have  been  a  ground  type
in  the  ark,  out  of  which  all  varieties  of  the  same
have  proceeded.   In  respect  to  the  fourth  false  repre
sentation,  which  confounds  the    style  of  the  Holy
History  with  the  notarial  expression  of  a  worldly
pragmatism,  we  refer  to  the  Introduction.


On  the  side  of  the  mythologizing  of  the  deluge
history  there  arc  similar  untenable  representations
that  call  for  remark.  1.  The  apprehension  in  respect
to  the  possibility  of  building  the  ark.  It  is  histori
cally  established  that,  at  all  times,  a  necessity  fun
damentally  perceived,  has,  under  the  guidance  of
God,  brought  to  discovery  the  helps  required  for  tha
accomplishment.  Necessity  learns  to  pray,  learns  to
build.  "2.  The  difficulty  of  assembling  such  a  multi
tude  of  beasts  in  the  ark.  In  reply  to  this,  allusion
has  been  made  to  the  instinct  of  animals,  which,  in  a
presentiment  of  natural  catastrophe,  seek  an  asylum,
sometimes,  almost  in  violation  of  their  natural  hab
its.  Birds,  in  a  storm,  fly  to  the  ships ;  wolves  come
into  the  villages,  etc.  3.  The  difficulty  of  the  animal
provisioning.  Answer:  This  would  be  of  least  weight
in  respect  to  animals  like  those  of  the  marmot  and
badger  species,  whose  winter  torpor  in  the  easiest
manner  keeps  them  through  the  wintry  storm-period.
But  the  deluge,  in  like  manner,  supposes,  in  the
main,  a  slumbering,  dead-like  transition  from  the
old  existence  into  the  new.  Darkness,  the  roaring
and  rocking  of  the  waters  in  so  peculiar  a  manner,
must  bring  on  a  benumbing  torpor,  and,  in  the  case
of  many  animals,  a  winter  sleep,  whereby  the  feed
ing  would  be  rendered  unnecessary.  The  ground
ideas  of  the  deluge  history  are  as  high  above  the
popular  representations  on  the  right,  as  they  are  be
yond  the  scholastic  thinking  on  the  left.  They  may
be  regarded  as  something  like  the  following:  1.  At
the  moment  when  the  first  human  race,  through  the
commingling  of  an  angel-like  elevation  of  the  Sethic
line  with  the  demonic  corruption  of  the  Cainitic,  is
ripe  for  judgment,  there  is  a  corresponding  catas
trophe,  having  its  ground  in  the  earth's  develop
ment,  forming  an  echo  to  the  creation  catastrophes,
and,  at  the  same  time,  imposed  by  God  as  a  judgment
doom  upon  that  human  corruption.  '2.  The  pro
phetic  spirit  of  a  pious  patriarch,  in  whom  there  is
concentrated  the  heart  of  the  old  world's  piety,  takes
into  its  belief  not  only  the  revelation  of  the  impend
ing  judgment,  but  also  the  deliverance  which  out  of
that  judgment  is  to  go  forth  for  this  world  itself  as
represented  in  his  person,  and  in  his  family,  whilst  it
denotes  thereby  the  progress  of  faith  in  revelation,
from  the  assurance  of  salvation  in  the  other  world
(which  Enoch  already  had),  to  the  confidence  of  sal
vation  in  this.  8.  The  inspiring  of  necessity  teaches
him,  under  the  divine  guidance,  to  build  an  ark,
which,  in  its  commencement,  is  to  be  a  preaching  of
repentance  to  the  cotemporaries  of  the  builder,  but
which,  in  its  completion,  is  distinguished  neither  by
oar  nor  helm,  but  only  by  its  great  spaciousness  and
water-tight  construction.  4.  In  this  use  of  the  ark,
as  a  common  asylum,  the  instincts  of  the  beasts  act
in  harmony  with  the  prophetic  presentiment  of  chosen
men,  whilst  the  rest  follows  through  God's  care  and
a  peculiar  success.  5.  The  history  of  the  flood  is  an
awa£  Xfyoufvov  in  the  world's  history,  analogous  to
the  creation  of  Adam,  the  birth  and  history  of  Christ,
and  the  future  history  of  the  world's  end.  Even
BUXSEN  (ii.  p.  63)  affirms,  in  general,  the  historical-
ness  of  the  biblical  tradition.

Therefore  is  this  unparalleled  fact  in  the  highest
degree  symbolic  or  ideal,  whilst  it  is,  at  the  same
time,  a  typical  prophecy.  1.  It  is  a  prophecy  of  the
deliverance  of  Israel  as  the  people  of  God  in  the
passage  through  the  Red  Sea ;  2.  a  prophecy  of  the
deliverance  of  the  Christian  church  from  the  corrup
tion  of  the  world,  through  the  washing  of  baptism
(1  Pet.  iii.  21);  3.  a  prophecy  of  the  deliverance  of


290


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


the  congregation  of  Christ,  at  tin1  world's  end,  out
of  tin-  lirr-ilood  of  the  world's  judgment.  TIio  ark
is  especially  reflected  in  the  ark  of  Muses,  in  the
ark  of  I  he  covenant  which  was  carried  through  the
Jordan,  in  the  household  of  the  church,  and  in  the
congregation  of  faith  at  the  end  of  tlu>  world.  Kno-
bel  thinks  that  in  the  na;  ration  ])eforc  us  there  is
to  be  recognized  a:i  J-.]..histic  foundation  which  the
Jehovist  must  have  elaborated,  not  without  a  con
tradiction  of  its  fundament;;!  ground.  Thus  the  de
scription  of  the  ctHTiip'ion,  in  ch.  vi.  11,  1'2,  he
says,  docs  not  a'jree  with  the  Jehovist,  who  repre
sents  the  wickedness  iu  human  life  as  having  com
menced  at  a  much  carla  r  day.  As  though  the  origin
of  evil  and  an  ineiiial'ie  corruption  were  not  two
distihci  grades!  So,  according  to  the  Jehovist,  it  is
(as  Knobel  would  have  it)  that  the  human  life-period
after  the  tlood  sinks  down  to  one  hundred  and  luei.ty
Years — an  idea  that  rests  upon  a  ial-e  interpreta
tion.  Moreover,  it  would  seem  not  to  agree  wiili  the
irround-scripture,  that  of  many  kinds  of  beasts  Noah
took  more  than  a  pair  (eh.  vii.  1>,  Ii,  8).  Kuobel
suppo-is,  therefore,  that  the  special  enlargement
was  a  contradiction  to  the  more  general  appoint
ment.  In  regard  to  the  fact  itself,  says  Knobel:
Unanswerable  are  the  questions,  how  Noah  came  to
expect  the  great  Hood,  and  was  led  to  the  building
of  the  ark.  So  also  would  it  be  incapable  of  an
answer,  how  at  any  time  one  could  attain  to  a  pro
phetic  prevision.  The  question  lie  regards  as  still
more  dilJicult  to  answer:  "How  he  was  enabled  to
produce  such  a  structure," — that  is,  such  a  great
quadrangular  box.  Further:  "How  he  got  the
beasts  in  his  power?"  Experience  shows,  that  in
extraordinary  catastrophes  of  nature,  the  wildest
animals  take  refuge  with  men.  Lastly  :  ''  How  could
they  all,  logeihcr  with  the  necessary  provisioning
for  a  whole  year,  iind  room  in  the  ark?"  This
point  carries  us  back  to  a  primitive  time,  when,  as
yet,  the  species  were  comparatively  less  divided,  and
to  a  stormy  death  of  nature,  which  intensified  to  its
mo.-;  extreme  degree  the  phenomenon  of  the  winter's
sleep;  to  say  nothing  of  the  point,  that  to  the  sym
bolical  expression  there  is  needed  only  the  general
iact  of  the  saving  of  the  animal  world,  along  with
man,  by  means  of  the  ark.  When  Ebrard  admits
that  possibly  the  highest  mountain-peaks  may  have
projected  above  the  surface  of  the  waters  of  the  del
uge,  it  would  allow  the  consequence  of  an  Alpine
liiuna  existing  outside  of  the  ark.  The  point  mainly
in  view  is  the  destruction  of  the  human  race,  and  tin-
sax  ing  of  the  Noaehian  family,  in  the  deluge.  Not
withstanding  his  objections,  Knobel  supposes  an
actual  ground  of  fact  in  the  narration,  even  as  an
after-piece  to  the  great  earth  revolutions  of  the  crea
tive  period  (p.  7S).  This  last  point  of  view  carries
us  bevond  the  supposition  of  mere  partial  historical
inundations.  A  concus.-ion  of  the  earth  permits  the
conclusion  that  a  displacement  occurred  in  its  conti
nental  idaiions,  whence  there  might  have  arisen  a
deluge  of  a  very  wide  character,  without  our  having
to  assume  a  corresponding  inundation  of  the  whole
earth's  surface.  Stormy  deluges  do  not  obey  the
law  of  standing  waters.  Such  a  deluge  might  have
passed  over  the  v,  hole  inhabited  part  of  the  earth,
without  making  a  like  height  of  water  as  standing
over  the  whole  sphere.

"  The  grounds,1'  remarks  Delitzsch,  "  on  which
the  Thora  (the  Pentateuch)  dwells  so  emphatically
upon  the  flood,  consist  in  their  signifieancy  for  the
history  of  God's  kingdom  in  general,  and  the  history


of  the  Old  Testament  theocracy  in  particular.  The
Hood  is  an  act  of  deepest  significance,  whether  re
garded  as  one  of  judgment  or  of  salvation.  It  is  a
common  judgment,  making  an  incision  in  history  so
deep  and  so  wide,  of  such  force  and  universality,
that  nothing  can  be  compared  with  it  but  the  final
judgment  at  the  extreme  limit  of  this  world's  history.
Hut  the  act  of  judgment  is,  at  the  same  time,  an  act
of  salvation.  The  sin-deluge  is,  at  the  same  time,  a
grace-deluge,*  and  so  far  a  type;  of  holy  baptism
(1  I'et.  iii.  .11),  and  of  life  rising  out  of  deaih  ;
therefore  it  i-,  that  old  ecclesiastical  art  was  so  loud
of  distinguishing  chapels  of  burial  by  a  representa
tion  of  it.  The  destruction  has  in  view  the  preserva
tion,  the  drowning  has  in  view  the  purification,  the
death  of  the  human  race  has  in  view  the  new  birth  ;
the  old  coirupied  earth  is  buried  in  the  flood  of
water,  that  out  of  this  grave  there  may  emerge  a  new
world.  In  this  way  Ararat  points  to  Sinai.  The
covenant  of  Kioh'.m,  which  God  then  made  with  (he
saved  liolv  seed,  and  with  the  universal  nature,  points
to  the  covenant  of  Jehovah."

4.  The  G'xJofficdl  /,>/;<•/*  of  tJic  ])(!IKJC.—\\\
earlier  times,  the  traces  of  earth  revolutions  that
took  place  in  the  creative  days  (for  example,  the
mountain  formations,  the  shells  on  the  highest  hills,
and  similar  phenomena)  were  brought  forth  as  proofs
of  the  Hood.  Such  a  mode  of  reasoning  must  now
be  laid  aside  by  those  who  would  reconcile  rc\ ela
tion  with  science.  Neither  can  the  assumption  be
proved,  that  it  rained  for  the  first  lime  in  the  flood,
and  that,  with  the  change  in  the  atmosphere,  human
life  suddenly  sunk  in  its  duration,  nor  the  supposi
tion  that  at  that  time  a  sudden  transformation  took
place  in  the  animal  woild,  or  that  new  animals  were
originated.  The  following  suppositions,  however,
mav  be  reiraided  as  more  or  less  safely  entertained:
1.  As  the  great  flood  denoted  an  epoch  in  the  life  of
humanity,  so  also  must  it  have  done  in  the  life  of  the
earth;  and  through  this  epoch  the  giant-like  in  the,
human  natural  powers  seems  to  have  been  moder
ated,  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  the  development  in  the
earth's  life  becomes  more  conformable  to  law.  2.  The
historical  indications  and  signs  of  great  changes  in
the  earth's  surface,  such  as  volcanic  mountain  forma
tions,  surface  transformations  (Caspian  Sea,  and  island
Atlantis,  for  example),  may  be  connected,  in  some
special  measure,  with  the  catastrophe  of  the  flood.
:;.  The  flood  in  itself  may,  perhaps,  have  been  par
tial  (sec  F.  I'K.UK,  "  The  Creative  History,"  p._C-iG),
Imt  the  earth-crisis,  on  which  it  was  conditioned,
must  have  been  universal.  With  the  opening  of
the  fountains  of  the  deep  stands  the  opening  of  the
windows  of  heaven  in  polar  contrast.  An  extraor
dinary  rain-storm  and  fall  of  water  over  the  Noachian
earth-circle,  was  probably  conditioned  by  an  extra
ordinary  evaporation  in  other  regions  of  the  globe.
This  must  have  been  followed  by  an  extraordinary
congelation  on  the  same  side.  Docs  the  "  ice-period,"
the  period  of  the  wandering  boulders,  stand  in  any
relation  to  this  ?  As  an  earth-crisis,  the  flood  was
probably  universal.


EXEGETICAL  AXD   CRITICAL.

1.  Noah  and  his  House,  in  contrast  with  the  Con
temporaries  of  Noah  (ch.  vi.  9-11).    The  history  that

[*  Lange  tells  us  (see  p.  203),  lh.it  Sundjlut  did  not  origin
ally  mean  in  German  a  sfn-di'.lui/f,  but  there  is  no  other  ren
dering  that  will  preserve  his  intended  contrast. — T.  L.}


CHAP.    VI.    9— VII.  9.


297


follows  is  distinguished  by  the  name  Tholedoth,  o
Generations  of  Noah.     For  Noah  is  not  only  the  1;
of  the  Sethic  patriarchs,  as  the  end  of  the  antedilu
vian  period ;   he  is,  moreover,  the  first  of  the  new
through  the  patriarchal  line  that  goes  on  in  Shem
and,  in  this  representation,  is  he  also  a  type  of  th
future  Christ,  the  finisher  of  the  old,  the  author  o
the  new,  world.     In  a  typical  sense,  Noah   is  th
second  ancestor  of  the  human  race,  as  Christ,  th-
Man  from  Heaven,  is  such  in  a  real  sense  (1  Cor.  xv.)
As  a  continuer  of  the  old  time,  Noah  is  virtually  i
repetition  of  Adam  ;  as  a  beginner  of  the  new  time
he  is  a  type  of  Christ.     He  was  a  righteous  man
According  to  Knobel,  the  author  (of  this  account  o
the  flood)  knew  nothing  of  any  fall  of  Adam.     One
might  deduce  a  like  conclusion  from  Luke  in  his  ac
count  of  Zaeharias  and  Elisabeth  (ch.   i.    6).     Bu
evidently  the  righteousness  here  meant  is  that  which
represents  him  as  justified  in  view  of  the  judgment
of  the    flood,  by  reason  of  his  faith  (Heb.  xi.  7),
Therefore  was  the  explanation  added:  he  was  CTCfi  ,
guiltless,  perfect,  blameless  among   his  cotempora-
ries  who  perished  in  the  judgment.     The  ground  oi
this  was :  he  walked  with  God  as  Enoch  did.     That
he  begat  three  sons,  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,  is  here
again  related,  as  in  eh.  v.  32,  because  in  them  the
continuance  of  a  new  race  is  secured ;  with  Noah,
therefore,  must  his  family  also  be  saved.     But,  more
over,  to  Noah,  and  his  house,  there  is  formed  a  con
trast  in  the  race  of  his  time,  and  in  the  old  form  of
the  earth  that  had  been  corrupted  by  it. — Ver.  5.  To
represent  the  wickedness  of  man,  our  text  goes  fur
ther,  and  expresses  the  incurable  perdition  of  the  old
earth  itself,  as  having  been  produced  by  it.     It  was
utterly  corrupt,  in  that  it  was  filled  with  wickedness,
acts  of  violence,  and  pride.     But  it  was  corrupt  be
fore  the  eye  of  God  in  its  most  manifest  form,  so
that   its  judgment  was    imperatively    demanded, —
And  God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and  lo De
litzsch    correctly   points   out  the  contrast  of  these
words  to  ch.  i.  31.     "Everything  stood  in  sharpest
contradiction  with  that  good  state  which  God  the
creator  had  established."     God's  looking  (or  seeing)
denotes  u  final  sentence.     The  earth  was  incurably
corrupt  because  all  flesh  had  corrupted  its  way,  that
is,  its  normal  way  of  life,  upon  the  corrupted  earth.
Herein  lies  the  indication,  that  as  men  grew  wild  and
savage,  the  animal  world  also  threatened  to  become
wild.     If,  however,  we  suppose,  with  Delitzsch,  an
universal  corruption  of  the  animal  world,  whence
could  Noah  have  taken  the  good  specimens  for  his
ark  V     Moreover,  it  cannot  be  concluded,  from  ch.  ix.
4,  that  msn,  in  their  greediness  for  flesh,  cut  out
pieces   from  the   yet  living  animal.     According  to
Knobel,  the  text  denotes  the  beasts,   inasmuch  as
they  originally  lived  upon  vegetables,  but  now  had
partly  degenerated  into  flesh-eaters.     This,  however,
would  be  all  the  same  as  introducing  a  representa
tion  into  the  text,  just  as  Delitzsch  maintains,  that
the  eating  of  flesh  had  not  yet  been  permitted.    Keil
understands  the  words  in  question  as  referring  gen
erally  to   men   only.     Thereby,   however,   there   is
loosened  that  organic  connection  of  man,  beast,  and
earth,  on  which  the  text  lays  stress.     More  correct
is  the  emphasis  he  lays  on  the  words  "  all  flesh:"
humanity  had  become  flesh  (ver.  3).

2.  T/te  Announcement  of  the  Judgment,  and  the
Direction  for  t/ie  Building  of  the  Ark  (vers.  13-22).
—And  God  said  to  Noah.— The  revelation  of"the
Jivine  displeasure  with  the  human  race,  which  ap
pears  first,  ver.  3,  as  a  conditional  and  veiled  threat-


ening  of  judgment  with  the  granting  of  a  space  fof
repentance,  and  which,  in  its  second  utterance,  has
already  become  a  resolution  to  destroy  the  human
race  (ver.  7),  becomes  here  an  absolute  announce
ment  of  approaching   doom.     There  had,  perhaps,
been  previous  revelations,  in  the  form  of  a  preaching
of  repentance,  made  by  other  patriarchs  (such  as
Methuselah   and   Lamech),   as  they,  one  after   the
other,  left  the  world.     These  had  been  gradually  ex
tended  in  time ;  but  now  are  they  all  concentrated
in  the  one   revelation   made   to  Noah.     With  this
there  was,  at  the  same  time,  connected  the  promise
that  Noah   and   his   family   should  be   saved.     As
God's  acts  of  deliverance  are  connected  in  time  with
his  acts  of  judgment  (since  his  judgments  are  ever
separations  of  the  godly  from  the  ungodly,  and,  in
this  sense,  salvations  and  deliverances),  so  also  are
the  revelations  of  judgment  at  the  same  time  revela
tions  of  deliverance,  and  the  faith  of  the  elect  which
corresponds  to  them  is,  at  the  same  time,  both  a
faith  in  judgment  and  a  faith  in  salvation.— The  end
of  all  flesh. — An  expression  which  strongly  conveys
the  idea,  that  the  positive  judgment  of  God  is  indi
cated  through  a  judgment  immanent  in  the  corruption
of  men.     The  self-abandonment  in  this  corruption,
the  clearly  visible  end  of  the  same,  is  so  fearfully  de
picted,  that  the  positive  end  which  God  is  about  to
impose   takes   the  appearance,  not  of  a  judgment
merely,  but  of  redress.     Still  is  the  first  conception
the  predominant  one,  as  appears  from  the  expression
which  tells  us  that  God  saw  the  end,  the  extreme
end  of  the  world's  corruption  (Keil). — Is  filled  with
violence  through  them  (Lango  renders  more  cor
rectly,  from  their  faces,  or,  before  them.    Vulg.,
a  facie  eorum).     As  it  is  said,  in  immediate  connec
tion,  "before  the  face  of  God,"  we  hold  it  unsatisfac
tory  here  to  render  nmssa  from  them,  or  through
them.    The  flood  of  wickedness  that  comes  up  before
God's  face  goes  out  from  their  face ;  that  is,  it  is  a
wickedness  openly  perpetrated ;  the  moral  judgment,
;he  conscience,  goes  utterly  out  in  the  direct  behold
ing  and  approbation  of  evil. — I  will  destroy  them
with  the  earth. — Destruction  as  set  against  cor
ruption  (1  Cor.  v.  5).     The  earth  as  such  can,  indeed,
suffer  no  penal  destruction.     As  one  with  man,  the
destruction  becomes  to  it  a  total  destruction,  which
comes  upon  men  along  with  their  earth.     And  so  in
the  renewal  of  humanity  must  the  earth  also  receive
a  renovation  of  its  form. — Make  thee  an  ark. —
An  indication  of  the  mode  of  salvation,  in  which  he
limself  must  co-operate.     Baumgarten :   "  He  must
30  not  only  the  preserved,  but  also  the  preserver."
"13F] ,  according  to  Delitzsch,  probably  (if  the  word
s  Shemitic),  from  n'n  =  SIS,  to  be  hollow.*   Chal-

[*  The  etymology  of  Delitzsch  cannot  be  sustained,  aa
no  such,  formation  can  bo  grammatically  made  from  ~"K  .
?ho  reasons  Rodigcr  gives  for  its  Egyptian  origin  are  in-
pnclusive,  and  if  something  like  it  existed  in  the  old  Egyp-
ian,  that  would  not  prove  that  it  had  not  come  into  it  from
he  still  older  language  of  Shem  and  Noah.  Fuerst  regards
t  as  Shemitic,  from  !~l"fn,  to  which  he  gives  the  sense  ex-
avare,  hence  hollowncss  and  capacity — cognate  to  the  Latin
uba,  taberna.  Kimchi  makes  it  from  SFl ,  but  this  is  not  at
11  easy.  The  word  is  doubtless  the  one  used  at  the  time,
—a  peculiar  archaic  term  for  a  very  unusual  thing,  like
3JI3E ,  the  term  for  the  flood  itself,— though  afterwards
ransferred  to  any  smaller  vessel.  It  is  not  likely  that  it
vould  be  ever  lost,  or  another  used  for  it  by  way  of  trans-
ation,  in  any  subsequent  version  of  the  tradition.  It  might

e  conjectured  to  be  cognate  to  the  Syriac  uS2_^  ,
avit,    supcrnaiavit  (lleb.    C]"S),    or    the    Arabic


298


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


dale,  xn-T,  Sept.  Kipuriis,  Yulg.  area  (other
meanings  sec  in  Dclitzsch).  Kcil  and  Kojincr  con"
jeeture  that  the  word  id  of  Egyptian  origin.  So
Knobel:  "In  Egyptian,  boat  is  called  tcpt.'  It  is
likewise  used  of  the  small  ark  in  which  Moses  was
paved  (but  which  in  the  Septuagint  is  rendered
Stipts  or  d.frj.— Of  gopher-wood  [Lange,  resinous
wood].  liic.'oiiymus:  /•';//.•"  bitwninata.  "Troba-
Lly,  cypress-wood."  Keil  (~S5,  cognate  to  *.£3  and
KUTTO^O-OS).— Rooms  shalt  thoa  make  [Lange,
cells].— Properly  in  cells,  as  cells  (literally,  nests-
little  cabin-),  or  cell-containing. — With  pitch. —
Sept.  od^aAT/u,  Yulg.  Wwwew.— And  this  is  which
(what)  thoa  shalt  make  it.—"  The  most  probable
supposition  is,  tliat  the  ark  w;:s  built,  not  in  the  form
of  a  ship,  but  ai'ier  the  manner  of  a  box,  without
keel  with  a  Hat  deck,  more  like  a  four-sided  moving
house  than  a  .-hip,  since  it  was  destined  nut  for  sail-
iiiLr,  but  only  for  floating  upon  the  water.  Thus
regarded,  the  measures  :;»0  cubits  long,  50  cubits
broad,  and  ',',<>  cubits  high,  give  a  ground-surface
of  1  TO'i MI  cubits  square,  and  a  cubical  content  of
450,000  cubits  solid,  taking  the  usual  measure  of  the
cubit  (Dent.  iii.  11),  as  the  length  from  the  elbow-
to  tin-  end  of  the  middle  finger,  or  about  18  inch
es."  Kcil.  Knobel  remarks:  "The  building  sur
passes  in  magnitude  the  greatest  ships-of-the-line.
it.,  arrangement,  however,  according  to  experiments
made  in  Holland,  would  be  found  in  harmony  with
its  design."  In  the  year  1609,  at  Iloorn,  in  Holland,
the  Netherlandish  Mennonitc,  1'.  .Janscii,  produced
the  model  of  a  vessel  ai';er  the  pattern  of  the  ark,
only  in  smaller  proportions,  whereby  he  proved,  that
although  it  was  not  appropriate  for  a  ship-model,  it
v.as  well  adapted  for  floating,  and  woidd  carry  a
cargo  greater  by  one  third  than  any  other  form  of
like  cubical  content.*  Sec  DKLIT/.SCII,  p.  250.—

,  mm,  wore  it  not  that  tin-  change  of

-  for  B  i  so  very  r;irc  a  thing  in  Hebrew,  although  they
are  letters  of  the  same  onran.  It  may  bo  difficult  to  trace
i',  to  ;mv  llelnvw  r.»,t  afterwards  in  commm  use  ;  but  that
<ho  woi'd  is  Shemitie  i-:  r.ndered  almo.-t  certain  from  its
being  BO  con  taut  111  all  the  branches  of  that  famjly.  Inus
the  Chaliial-  XT"'P  (the  Targum  word  for  fCP),  the

Arabic  Skjlj',  -T-thiopic  ifrP'l",  and  even  the  Maltese
tebut.  The  Syriac  Version,  instead  of  the  old  Shcmitio  root,
uses  |  ~.z.—]~Z,  or  |  ,Za£J ,  which  is  timply  the  Greek
Kij3cor6?  <  le-enius  regards  the  word  as  Shemitic,  though  he
expres-e--  some  doubt  about  it.— T.  L.)

*  I  Th«  dilliculty  which  some  have  in  respect  to  the  mag-
nitude  of  the  ark,  and  the  greatness  of  the  work,  arises  from
ov,  rlookir.g  the  extreme  simplicity  of  its  structure,  the
1,-ivth  of  time  allowed,  the  physical  constitution  of  the
fabricators,  and  the  facilities  for  obtaining  the  materials,
which,  it  is  easy  to  suppose,  may  have  existed  in  abundance
in  their  near  vicinity.  Four  men  of  primitive  gigantic
strength,  to  whom  the  architects  of  Stonehcnge,  the  raisers


of  the  pyramids,  and  the  diggers  of  the  deep  granite  caverns
of  Upper  Kirvpt,  were  junior  and  inferior,—  tour  such  men
(to  say  nothing  now  of  any  other  probable  help)  With  iron
tools,  simple  perhaps,  yet  well  adapted  to  cutting,  splitting
and  hewing  (see  Gen.  iv.  22),  and  surrounded  by  forests  o:
the  gopher-pine,  firm  and  durable,  yet  light  and  easy  foi
working—  could  certainly  have  built'  such  an  ark  in  much
less  time  than  is  allowed  for  it  in  the  Scripture.  It  is  noth
ing  incredible-,  nothing  even  strange,  that  they  should  have
laid  such  a  flooring,  300  cubits  long  (450  feet),  and  50  wide
and  that  they  should  have  raised  upon  it  walls  and  a  roof  3(
cubits  high,—  that  they  should  have  strengthened  the  whole
with  wedges,  spikes,  and  girding  timbers  (see  the  construe
tion  Df  Ulysses'  Schedia,  Odys.  v.  243-261),


apa  Trjrye  (cai


A  window  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark. — ".fjll ,
iOt  in  the  roof  (Uosenmullcr  and  others),  but  a  light-
pciiing  (S^.riX,  dual,  a  double  light);  see  ch.  viii.
i.  Baumgarten  supposes  that  it  must  be  regarded
is  a  light-opening  of  a  cubit's  breadth,  extending
ibove  the  whole  upper  length  of  the  ark;  Knobel
and  Keil,  on  the  contrary,  suppose  that  the  window
vas  lixed  on  the  side,  to  the  extent  of  a  cubit,  under
he  ridge  of  the  roof.  Then,  indeed,  according  to
L'uch,  would  only  one  cabin  have  received  light,  per-
iaps  that  of  Noah;  at  all  events,  only  the  highest
;tory  would  have  had  a  dim  twilight.  We  suppose,
.herefore,  with  Baumgarten,  that  it  must  be  regarded
is  a  light-opening  in  the  deck,  which  was  continued
hrough  the  different  stories.  Against  the  rain  and
.he  water  dashing,  must  this  opening  have  been
closed  in  some  way  by  means  of  some  transparent
<ubstanee;  for  which  purpose  a  trellis,  or  lattice
work,  would  not  have  been  sufficient.  The  expres
sion  "to  a  cubit,"  denotes  also  precaution.  In  this
view  of  the  ease,  moreover,  it  is  not  easy  to  take
collectively,  as  is  done  by  Gesenins  and  tho
Syriac,  and  to  fancy  a  number  of  light  r.pertuns,
iithonL:h  it  might  be  that  one  light-opening  in  the
deck  could  be  divided  into  a  number  of  light-opcu-
ngs  for  the  interior.* — The  door  of  tl?.e  ark. —

making  it  like  a  large  dry-*"!",  k  rather  than  a  ship— and  then
save  rendered  it  water-!i_'ht  bv  a  n .pious  use  of  the  rosin
and  bitumen  that  abounded  in  that  region.  What  is  there
incredible  in  it,  or  even  strange,  we  say  I  Add  to  this  tho
considerations  mentioned  by  Lauge,  l'ie  feo'.ing  of  necessity,
the  conviction  of  a  divine  impulse,  together  with  the  in
creased  vigor  that  ever  comes  fi-..m  the  consciousness  of  a
great  w.  rk,  and  the  difficulties  which  at  ih>t  a;  pear  BO  start
ling  arc  immediately  diminished,  if  tiny  d  -  i.<,;  ,,,  oily  dis-

There  is  more  force  in  the  objection  arising  from  the
stowage  of  the  ark,  if  we  take  the  common  c  timato  of  the
animals.  But  here,  again,  everything  depends  upon  the
theory  with  which  we  start.  Throughout  the  account  tho
several  aH*,  as  already  remarked  in  the  text-notes,  become
universal  or  spc.  ific,  widen  ore.  ntract,  according  to  ourpre-
judgment  of  the  universality  or  partiality -of  the  liood  itself.
See  remarks  on  this  in  the  l-'.xcur-us,  p.  31  H.

Had  the  narrator  been  more  guarded  and  specific  in  his
language,  it  would  have  justly  impaired  his  credit.  It  would
have  been  an  affectation  of  knowledge  he  could  not  have
possessed.  In  giving  his  divine  convictions,  as  derived  from
vi.-ions,  or  in  any  other  manner,  he  presents  them  according
to  hi-  conceptions  as  dependent  on  his  knowledge  of  things
around  him.  Greater  care  in  his  language  would  have
looked  like  distrust  in  himself— like  an  anticipation  of  cavil,
and  an  attempt  to  get  credit  for  accuracy.  And  this  is  the
peculiar  character  of  the  narrative.  Precise  is  it  even  to
minuteness  in  things  that  fall  directly  within  the  observa
tions  of  sense;  here  the  narrator  gives  us  numbers,  dates,
and  even  cubits  of  measurement ;  whilst  he  is  general,  even
to  the  appearance  of  hyperbole,  in  what  was  beyond  such


to  the  appearance  of  hyperbole,  in  what  was  beyon     suc
range.     It  is  the  characteristic  of  a  truthful  style,—  that  is,
truthful  to  the  conception  and  the  emotion.—  T.L.]

*  [In  interpreting  the  expression,  "to  a  cubit  smut  tnou
finish  it  above,  nbssba  HJ^n  -^  bxl,  much  do-
pcnds  on  getting  the  right  sense  of  the'  preposition,  or  ad
verb,  nbl-'^b'E  .  The  Hebrew  language,  so  tense  in  other
parts  of"  speech,  rejoices  in  double,  triple,  and  even  quad
ruple  forms  of  its  particles.  Thus,  ^S  upon,  ??T2  above,
nbr  TQ  with  local  H  ,  upward,  !"lb"7:b  lu  upward,  or  to  alwe,
nbS53b7D/rom  above  (o  above.  Thus,  in  Gen.  vii.  20,  T^S
C^En  the  waters  prevailed  r.bs'Eb^  from  higher  to  high
er,  from  the  top  of  the  mountain  to  the  summit  of  the  flood,
or  in  the  other  direction,  as  in  Josh.  iii.  13,  1C.  Ihere  is  an


closed.    There  is  also  an  emphasis  in  the  I'iel  verb


is  not  easy  to  understand  how  this  vacant  cubit  could  be  VI


CIIA?.    VI.    9—  VII.


290


Here  can  only  be  meant  an  entrance  which  was  after
wards  closed,  and  only  opened  again  at  the  end  of
the  Hood.  And  since  there  were  three  stories  of  the
ark,  the  word  is  to  be  understood,  perhaps,  of  three
entrances  capable  of  being  closed,  and  to  which  there
would  have  been  constructed  a  way  of  access  from
the  outside  on  the  outside.  "Is  it  held  that  so
colossal  a  structure  as  the  ark  would  have  been  im
practicable  in  this  very  early  time  ;  the  objection
may  be  met  with  the  answer,  that  some  of  the  most
gigantic  structures  belong  to  an  immemorial  anti
quity."  BaumgartcQ  (compare  also  KEIL,  p.  93
DEUTZSCII,  p.  25u).  —  And  behold  I,  even  I,  am
bringing.  —  Noah  must  make  the  ark,  for  lie,  Jeho-

tho  side,  or  at  the  cave.  In  the  other  way  wo  get  the  idea
which  would  seem  to  be  given  by  Aben  Ezra,  that  "the
roof  of  the  ark  was  triangular,  UIS'i'33  P"£T2  ,  (that  is,  in
its  section)  with  a  sharp  top,  In  11ZJX11  ,  and  so  also  its
corners  or  angles,  "Pnil'lltpB  ,  fio  that  it  could  not  turn  up
side  down  (~3firn  xb),  whilst  its  door  was  on  one  tide."
That  is,  the  roof  was  not  flat,  but  made  by  two  planes,  more
or  less  inclined.  "  To  a  cubit  shalt  thou  finish  it."  That  is,
it  was  to  be  left  open  (or  unfinished)  on  the  ridge,  to  the
breadth  of  a  cubit  extending  the  whole  length.  This  was
the  ins  (Zohar),  a  word  whose  strong  primary  sense  is
light,  splendor,  the  light  of  licavsn,  or  of  the  meridian  sun;
like  the  similar  Arabic  words,  -i\^o  ,  or  &L^P  .  So  it
was  emphatically  to  the  ark.  Their  light  was  from  above.
This  inn  showed  the  open  sky,  or  heaven,  through  its
whole  length,  like  a  meridian  lino,  and  this  suggests,  and
is  suggested  by,  that  other  use  of  the  word  in  the  dual,
E?in:j  ,  for  noon,  or  the  midday  light  (see  Gen.  xliii.  16.
25  ;  Vs.  xxxvii.  G  ;  Cant.  i.  7,  etc.),  like  another  Arabic  word,
till  more  closely  resembling  it.  Its  dual  form  in


Hebrew  denotes  exact  division,  or  the  noon  snlendnr  when
it  divides  the  day  (mcridics,  ju.e<n)/j.|8pivd?),  or  'the  lime  the
Greeks  culled  a-TaOepov  fj/j-ap,  when  the  day  appears  station
ary,  or  evenly  balanced.  It  may  be  also  said  that  the  Hebrew
dual  denotes  not  only  what  includes  two  things,  but  likewise
what  is  exactly  betwcin  two  things.  As  for  example,  w'^X
cr??~  lS:im.  xvii.  4,  23,  an  epithet  applied  to  Goliath.  It  is
the  dual  of  "pa  ,  as  though  we  should  say,  a  man  of  belweens.
The  LXX.  have  well  rendered  it  6  avrip  6  /xecratoj,  and  the
Vulgate,  most  absurdly,  vir  spuriua.  It  denotes  one  who


number  to  these  prepositions,  and  to  this  mode  of  conceiv
ing  is  also  due  the  double  use  of  "p3,  as  in  Gen.  i,  4,  "be-
ttycen  the  light  ar.d  between  the  darkness."

The  irjS  ,  thus  regarded,  was  a  dividing,  meridional


,  ,  ows

falling  in  the  line  of  the  ark's  longitude.helped  to  ascertain
the  course.  The  same  information  might  have  been  ob
tained  from  observing  tho  lino  of  stars  that  appeared  through
it  at  night.  In  this  way  it  may  have  imperfectly  answered
some  or  the  purposes  of  a  dial,  or  chronometer,  and,  of  a
compass.  Such  a  view  will  not  appear  extravagant,  when
we  bear  in  mind  that  the  observation  of  the  stars  for  time
purposes,  annual  aud  diurnal,  was  peculiar  to  the  earliest
periods,  and  that  the  very  names  now  given  to  the  constella
tions  are  lost  in  the  most  remote  antiquity.  The  necessity
Of  some  such  guide  for  the  year  and  its  seasons,  made  these
early  men  more  familiar  with  the  actual  aspect  of  the  heav
ens  than  many  in  modern  times  who  learn  astronomy  solely
from  books.  The  1HS  was  evidently  something  different
from  tho  "p^fl,  also  rendered  window,  Gen.  viii.  G.  We
need  give  ourselves  no  difficulty  about  the  covering  of  the
IfiS  ,  when  it  rallied.  Noah,  doubtless,  found  some  method
for  that  purpose,  whenever  it  was  needed.  The  Vulgate
rendering  of  Gun.  vi.  10,  comes  the  nearest  to  the  vFcws
stated,  although  it  does  not  exactly  express  them  :  Fencs-
tram  in  area  facies,  ct  in  cubito  consummabis  summitatem
ejus.—  T.  L.]


vali,  is  about  to  bring  a  flood  upon  the  earth,  but  ;tt
the  same  time  to  make  a  covenant  of  salvation  wit})
Noah.      V>t3B    from  ^3^    or  ^3,    to    undulate,   to
swell — an   antique   word,    used    expressly    for   the
waters  of  Noah  (Is.  liv.  9),  and  which,  out  of  Gene
sis,  occurs  only  in  Ps.  xxix.  10."   Keil.     Therefore
Keil  and  Delitzsch  take  for  its  explanation  the  words
that  follow:   "waters  upon  the  earth,"  regarding  it
as  in   apposition.      Kuobel,    again,    explains   it   as
meaning  the  Hood  of  water,    whilst   Miehaclis  and
others  have  changed  D'E  into  n*£  (from  the  sea)
without  any  ground,  although  in  this  conformation
of  all  collections  of  water  to  make  the  Hood,  tho
co-operation  of  the  sea  comes  into  account.     The  di
vine  destination  of  the  flood:  to  destroy  every  living
thing  under  the  heaven.     In  a  more  particular  sense :
whatever  in  upon  the  earth.     The  sea-animals  cannot
be  destroyed  by  water.     In  respect  to  them,  more
over,  the  symbolical   relation  in  which  the  beasts
stand  to  men,  docs  not  come  specially  into  consider
ation. — But  with  thee  will  I  establish  my  cov
enant. — !T>13,  Sept.  SiaS>-i)Ktj,  Vulg.  fcedus,  in  the
New  Testament,  tcstamcntum  (Rom.  ix.  4).     The  re
ligious  covenant-idea  here  presents  itself  for  the  first
in  literal  expression  ;  although  the  establishment  of
God's  covenant  with  Noah  presupposes  a  previous
covenant  relation  with  Adam  (Gen.  ii.  15;  iii.   15;
Sirach  xvii.  10).     In  the  repeated  establishment  of
the  covenant  with  Noah  (ch.  vi.  18;  viii.  1H  ;  ix.  9 ;
vers.   11,  16;  Sirach  xliv.   11),   with  Abraham,    ch.
xv.  18;  xvii.  9-14;  xxii.  15;  Ps.  cv.  8-10;  Sirach
xliv.  24 ;  Acts  iii.  25 ;  vii.  8),  with  Isaac  (eh.  xxiv.
25),  with  Jacob  (ch.  xxviii.  18,  14),  with  Israel  (Ex.
xix.  6;  xxiv.  7;   xxxiv.  li);    Dent.  v.  3),  thera  are
unfolded  the  different  covenants,  or  covenant  forms,
which  bring  into  revelation  the  ground-idea  of  the
covenant    between   God   and    humanity  in    Adam,
whilst  they  are,  at  the  same  time,  anticipatory  repre
sentations  of    that  true   covenant-making  which  is
realized  in  the  new  covenant  of  God  with  believing
humanity  through  Christ  (Jer.  xxxi.  3'2,  i]y  ;  Zach.
ix.  11 ;   Matt.  xxvi.  28  ;    2  Cor.  iii.  6  ;    Hob.  vi.  17,
18),  and  which  finds  in  the  perfected  kingdom  of
God  its  last  and  conclusive  development  (Rev.  xxi).
The  covenant  of  God  with  Noah,  and  that  with  Abra
ham,  form  a  parallel ;   the  first  is  the  covenant  of
compassion  and  forbearance  made  with  the  new  hu
manity  and  earth  in  general ;  the  last  is  the  covenant
of  grace  and  salvation  made  with  Abraham  and  his
believing  seed,  as  a  more  definite  covenant-making
on  the  ground  of  the  Noachian  covenant.     The  pa
triarchal  covenant  which,  in  its  specialty,  embraced
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  (Ex.  iii.  G)  as  the  cove
nant  of  promise,  takes  the  form  of  a  law-covenant
for  Israel ;  this  latter  is  the  old  typical  covenant  in
the  form  of  an  anticipatory  representation  of  the
new  covenant,  and  which,  therefore,  as  the  older  and
more  imperfect,  must  give  place  to  the  new  ;  where
as  the  covenant  with  Noah  and  that  with  Abraham,
as  beginnings  of  the  covenant  of  faith,  become  one,
finally,  with  the  new  covenant  of  Christ,  which,  in
its  stricter  sense,  embraces  the  children  of  faith  as
partakers  of  salvation,  but,  in  its  wider  sense,  the
children  of  men  as  called  to  salvation.     But  the  cov
enant  of  Christ  carries  on  the  foundation  covenant
made  with  Adam  to  its  perfect  realization  in  the  eter
nal  covenant-life  of  the  new  world  (Rev.  xxi).     The
revelation  and  recognition  of  the  divine  covenant
rests  on  the  revelation  and  recognition  of  the  fact
that  God,  as  the  absolute  personality,  places  himself


300


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


In  a  personal,  ethically  free,  covenant-relation  of  love
and  truth  to  man  as  personal,  and  to  the  human
race.  That  the  covenant  ol'  God  has  its  root  in  the
personal  relation  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  in  its
different  forms  such  covenant  ever  goes  out  from  a
person,  as  from  Noah,  Abraham,  etc.  Therefore  it  is,
that  ever  within  the  universal  covenant  relations,  as
they  widen  from  the  centre  out,  there  are  the  making
of  special  covenants,  such  as  that  with  Moses,  with
Phineas(Numl).  xxv.  i:i),  with  David.  It  is  a  con
sequence  of  the  ethical  significance  of  God's  cove
nant  as  forming  the  personal  foundation  of  the
chosen  kingdom,  that  the  assaults  of  the  kingdom
of  darkness  are  in  like  manner  comprehended  as
covenants  or  conspiracies  against  God  (the  troop  of
Korah,  1's.  ii. ;  Ixxxiii.  t'>  ;  Luke  xxiii.  12;  Acts  iv.
27).  The  word  r^~2  from  rir,  to  cut,  divide,  is
derived  from  the  sacrifices  of  animals  that  are  cut  in
twain  in  the  formation  of  a  covenant;  and  in  this  is
the  peculiar  explanation  of  the  word,  (Jen.  xv.  10,

17. And  thou  shalt  come  into  the  ark.— God

make,-  his  covenant  personally  with  Noah,  but  there
is  inch:  led  also  his  house,  which  lie  represents  as
\intilias,  and  with  it  the  new  humanity  medi
ately,'  as,  also,  in  a  remoter  sense,  the  animal  world
that  is  to  lie  preserved.  "The  narrator  supposes
that  the  beasts  of  themselves  (as  is  held  by  Jarchi
and  Alien  E/.ra),  or  at  the  instigation  of  God  (ac
cording  '0  Kimchi,  Fiscal.),  would  come  into  the
ark."  Knohel.  Rather  was  it  through  an  instinctive
t intent  of  catastrophe,  which  was,  at  the  same
time,  God's  ordering  and  an  impulse  of  nature.  The
eolKction  of  the  provisioning  is  distinguished  from
the  gathering  of  the  bca.-ts,  so  that  the  ark  repre
sents  a  perfect  economy  of  the  Noachian  household.
Noah's  obedience  in  faith  makes  the  conclusion  of

ion  (,-ce  lleb.  xi.  17).

:;.    '/'//'•  ,ii.]ii->"i>-/t.  dj'  the   /•'/-. ti'l,  ami  the.  Divine
]):,;  cl'.n/i  (<>  .\,,,ih   for  tnltrhi'i  into  tin'  Ark  (ch.  vii.
!-!>).     And  the  Lord   said  unto   Noah. — Here
K'.ohim   appears  as   the  covenant-God;  therefore   is
lie  named  .lehovah. — Come  thou  into  the  ark. —
The  signal  of  the  approaching  judgment.     Enter,  my
people,  into  thy  chamber  (Is.  xxvi.  20) /«r  th><>  !«(,••
/  seen  righteous!     In  the  divine  forum  of  the  judg
ment  of  the  deluge,  Noah  is  justified  before  God  by
means  of  the  righteousness  of  faith  through  the  word
of  the  promise;  therefore  is  he  saved,  together  with
Ins  whole  family,  because  his  faith  is  imputed    fo;
their  good. — Before  me  (lleb.  before  my  face)
denotes  the  divine  sentence  of  justification. — In  his
generation,  denotes  the  opposite  sentence  of  God
airainst  that  generation. — Of  every  clean  beast —
by  sevens. — This  appointment  is  a  special  carrying
out  of  the  more  universal  one,  ch.  vi.  20 ;  it  is,  there
fore,  wholly  in  correspondence  with  the  advancing
prophecy,  and  not  in  contradiction  of  it,  as  Knobe1
thinks.  "  Of  the  unclean  beasts  it  says,  "  by  two,  t
male  and  a  female;"  according  to  the  analogy  of
this  expression,  the  number  seven  (as  used  of  the
clean  beasts)  would  denote  also  the  number  of  indi
viduals   (Calvin,    Delitzsch,    Keil,  and  others),   no
seven  pair  (Vulgate,  AbenEzra,  Michaelis,  DeWctte
Knobcl).     The  prescription,  therefore,  is  three  par
and  one  over.     This  one  was  probably  destined  fo
a  thank -offering.     "  The  distinction  between  clean
and  unclean  beasts  is  not  first  made  by  Moses,  bu
only  becomes  fixed  in  the  law  as  corresponding  to  il
though  existing  long  before.     Its  beginnings  reac
back  to  the  primitive  time,  and  ground  themselve
on  an  immediate  conscious  feeling  of  the  human  sp'


it  not  yet  clouded  by  any  unnatural  and  ungodly  cul-
.ire,  under  the  influence  of  which  feeling  it  s-ees  in
lany  beasts  pictures  of  sin  and  corruption  which  fill
with  aversion  and  abhorrence."  Ke:l.  Rut  Mich  a
istinction,  so  grounded,  might  make  an  analogous
ivision  a  permanent  law  for  Christendom.  The
ontrast  of  clean  and  unclean  cannot,  surely,  have
ere  the  Lcvitical  significance.  More  to  the  purpose
•ould  be  the  contrast  of  beasts  tame  and  wild, — of
leasts  that  are  utterly  excluded  from  the  society  of
icn,  and  roam  about  independent  of  them,  although
liis  contrast  is  limited  by  the  physiological  concep-
ion  of  cleanness  and  uncleanness  (see  DELITZSCH,  p.
5t>).  The  interchange  of  the  divine  names  Jehovah
nd  Elohnn  in  our  section  makes  trouble,  as  might
veil  be  inferred,  for  the  documentary  hypothesis  (see
CKIL,  p.  (,M,  and  the  opposing  view  of  DELITZSCH,  p.
256).— For  yet  seven  days. — After  seven  days
nust  the  flood  break  out;  there  is  appointed,  there-
ore,  a  week  for  the  marching  into  the  ark. — Rain
upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty  nights. —
.'his  is  more  widely  expiessed,  ver.  11,  where  the
phenomenon  of  the  deluge  is  referred  back  to  its
riirinal  cause,  the  breaking  up  of  the  fountains  of
he  deep. — And  Noah  was  six  hundred  years
old. — According  to  ch.  v.  ",2,  he  was  five  hundred
ears  old  at  the  In  ginning  of  his  man  led  life.  The
•Jn  years,  therefore,  of  ch.  vi.  8,  go  back  beyond
his.— And  Noah  went  into  the  ark. — That  the
nembcrs  of  his  household  went  in  with  him,  denotes
.heir  connection  with  him  in  obedience,  and  in  their
itness  to  be  saved;  with  which  the  behavior  of
',ot's  sons  in-law,  and  of  his  wife,  forms  a  contrast,
fhat  the  beasts  follow  him  into  the  ark,  shows  a
wonderful  docility  proceeding  from  their  instinctive
iresentimeiit  of  the  catastrophe.

[NoTK     ON     TIIK     IJlHI.K     IllK.V    OF     CoVKNANT. It

s  a  most  important  remark  of  Dr.  LANCK  (p.  2'.i9),
that  "The  revelation  and  recognition  of  the  Divine
Covenant  rests  on  the  revelation  and  recognition
f  the  fact  that  God,  as  the  absolute  personality,
places  himself  in  a  personal,  ethically  free,  covenant-
relation  of  love  and  truth  to  man  as /wsottu/,  and  to
the  human  race."  It  is  strange,  indeed,  that  our
philosophy  should  have  so  overlooked  the  glory  of
this  covenant-idea,  whilst  our  more  ordinary  worldly
literature  has  so  often  treated  it  as  a  narrow  dogma
tic  of  an  almost  obsolete  theology.  God  raised  man
above  the  animal  by  endowing  him  with  moral,  ra
tional,  and  religious  faculties.  This  lifts  him  above
the  plane  of  nature,  and  prepares  him  for  a  still
higher  relation.  His  Creator  makes  a  covenant  with
him  as  being,  though  finite,  a  supernatural  person
ality,  lie  is  placed  upon  higher  ground  than  that
of  natural  law,  or  natural  right,  as  deduced  from
man's  relation  to  the  universe,  or  what  might,  be
called  the  universal  nature  of  things.  He  is  taken
out  of  this,  and  raised  to  a  higher  spiritual  glory.  No
longer  an  animal,  however  richly  endowed,  yet  bound
in  the  chain  of  cause  and  effect,  but  under  the  free
law  of  the  promise, — living  not  by  bread  alone,  but
by  every  word  that  proceedcth  from  the  Lord.  Child
of  dust  as  he  is  physically,  God  makes  a  covenant
with  him,  and  thus  gives  him  more  than  a  natural
ri-rht, — a  legal  or  forensic  right — making  him  a  son,
an  heir  of  glory  and  immortality.  Man  has  an  un
derstanding  with  his  Maker ;  he  is  elevated  to  a
platform  on  which  the  finite  and  infinite  personality,
the  finite  and  infinite  intelligence,  converse  together,
and  become  parties  in  the  same  voluntary,  spiritual
transaction.  True  it  is,  that  in  the  Bible  even  natu


CHAP.    VI.   9— VII.   9.


SOI


ral  law  is  sometimes  called  a  covenant,  as  in  Jcr
xxxiii.  20,  25,  but  in  such  cases  the  language  is  cv
dently  figurative,  and  derived,  by  way  of  analog}
from  the  higher  idea.  With  man  it  is  a  real  cove
nant,  a  convening,  or  coming  together,  of  the  Divin
and  human  mind.  The  transaction  belongs  to
higher  world.  It  brings  in  a  higher  class  of  ideas
In  nature,  and  natural  relations,  there  are  forces
gravities,  attractions,  affinities,  or,  as  we  approad
its  department  of  life  and  sentieucy  (though  still  na
ture),  there  are  appetites,  instincts,  susceptibilities
having  some  appearance  of  freedom,  yet  still  bonne
fast  under  the  fatality  of  cause  and  effect ;  in  tin
covenant,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  parties,  prom
ises,  agreements,  oaths,  conditions,  imperatives,  ful
filment-?,  forfeitures,  penalties,  rewards.  In  the  ten
dency  of  our  modern  ethics  to  become  converted  into
a  system  of  physics — making  all  duty  to  consist  in
the  study  and  observance  of  natural  law — we  lose
sight  of  this  higher  glory  of  positive  law,  covenant
or  promise  ;  we  fail  to  see  how  it  is  the  very  dignity
of  the  human  soul,  that,  unlike  the  animal,  it  can
through  faith,  be  in  this  forensic  or  covenant  rela
tion  to  the  universal  Lawgiver.  The  opposite  of
this  is  the  tendency,  now  so  common,  to  place  the
relations  between  God  and  man  on  the  general  basis
of  "  the  nature  of  things,"  and  to  determine  the  hu
man  place  therein  as  made  out  by  science  or  philo
sophy,  in  distinction  from,  if  not  in  opposition  to,
that  exprexs  revelation  which  is  itself  a  carrying  out
of  the  covenant-idea.  When  carefully  examined,  the
former  process  will  be  found  to  be  a  tracing  of  man's
obligation  to  the  universe,  rather  than  to  God  the
free,  personal,  sovereign  lawgiver  of  the  universe.

The  word  covenant  is  not  in  the  first  three  chap
ters  of  Genesis,  but  the  spirit  of  the  word  is  there,
and  the  term  itself  is  expressly  predicated  of  the
transactions  there  recorded  when  referred  to  in  other
parts  of  the  Old  Testament ;  see  IIos.  vi.  7.     Imme
diately  after  the  inspiration  that  made  the  human
creatioi^  we  find  this  language  of  cou-veuing,  of  mu
tual  intelligence,  showing  that  God  is  now  speakino-
to  a  supernatural  being,  and  in  a  style  different  from
that  which  had  been  used  in  the  commands  to  na
ture.     The  expression  Tiiia  PN  ipTOpn  Gen.  vi.
18,  "Iwill  establish  MY  covenant,  r.ns  with  THEE"
'.literally,  I  will   make  it  stand),  evidently  implies
something  preceding  that  had  been  impaired— the
•aising  up  of  something  that  had  fallen  down.     It
vas  the  Dfcfc  rrna  of  Is.  xxiv.  5,  or  covenant  of
iernity,  originally  made  with  man  as  an  immortal
>emg,  and  itself  an  evidence  of  his  designed  immor
ality;   or,  as  it  may  be  rendered,  world-covenant
utended  to  last  through  the  world  or  seonofhuman-
ty;  or  it  may  have  that  still  higher  sense  of  the
ovenant  made  "  before  the  foundations  of  the  world  "
rith  him  who  was  to  be  the  second  Adam,  and  whose
elight,  during  the  icons  of  creation  (see  Prov.  viii
1),  was  "  with  the  sons  of  men  "  who  were  to  crowii
•  all.     The   remarks  of  that  profound  critic   and
mlosopher,    Maimonides,    on    this  expression,    are
t  ery  noteworthy.    He  regards  p.-na  as,  from  its' very
[  'rm,  in  the  construct  state  (like  pi'irxn),  and  where
iere  is  no  other  expressed,  the  word  with  which  it
I    in  regimen  is  rfbiS  or  C^bi? ,  being  thus  equiva-
i  nt  to  C^\-J  rvna,  the  covenant  of  eternities,
because,  before  we  were,  he  commanded  that  it
ould  stand,   Bipnc,   and   be  forever  with   the
jhteous."


The  word  P'^a  has  been  derived  from  the  sense
of  nil  tiny  in  iOa,  as  Lange  explains  it,  but  there  ia
another  verb  of  cutting  (PH3)  usually  joined  with  it,
making^  the  common  phrase  exactly  like  the  Homeric
opKia  rd.u.i'fiv,  derived,  doubtless,  from  the  same  idea
of  dividing  the  victim  by  whose  death  the  covenant
was  made.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  derive  it,  as
Maimonides  seems  to  do,  from  the  creative  sense  of
XT".  It  is  making  anew  thing  in  the  moral  and
spiritual  world,  as  the  physical  creations  were  in  the
world  of  matter ;  and  so,  says  this  Jewish  commen
tator,  Tx-.l=  irD  Trna,  "my  covenant,  as  it
were,  my  creating."

There  is  no  religion  without  this  idea  of  a  person
al  covenant  with  a  personal  God,  and,  therefore,  all
such  views  as  those  of  Comte,  Mill,  and  Spencer  are,
for  all  moral  or  religious  purposes,  wholly  atheistical.
They  acknowledge  no  personality  in  God ;  they  can
not  use  the  personal  pronouns  in  speaking  of  him  or
to  him.     It  may,  in  truth,  be  said  that  all  religion  is
covenant,  even  when  religion  appears  in  its  most  per
verted  form.     It  has  some  appearance  of  being  in
the   very   etymology   of  the   Latin   word.      Cicero
makes  it  from  relego—religiosi  ex  relegendo—but  a
better  derivation  would  seem  to  be  from  rclirjo,  to
bind,  bind  back, — rcligio  is  a  positive  bond  (higher
than  nature)  between  straying,  fallen  man,  and  his
Maker.    We  find  traces  of  this  idea  of  covenant  even
in  the  heathen  religions,  as  in  rvna  bsSj  Baal  bcrith,
mentioned  Judg.  viii.  33,  whom  the  children  of  Is
rael,  in  their  apostasy,  took  instead  of  their  covenant
Jehovah.     It  seems  to  characterize  certain  peculiar
epithets  which   the  Greeks  attached  to  Zeu?,   their
supreme  God.     It  was  the  mode  they  took  to  inti
mate  more  of  a  personal  relation  between  the  deity
and  the  worshipper  than  was  afforded  by  the  general
or  merely  natural  view.     Or   it  denoted  a  greater
nearness  of  the  divine  in  certain  peculiarly  sacred  re
lations  which  men  held  to  each  other,  as  though  im
parting^  to   them  a  more  religious  sanction.  "  Thus
Zei/7  |eVioj,  who  calls  specially  to  account  for  the
violation  of  hospitality.     More  closely  still  suirgest-
ng  the  idea  of  the  Hebrew  covenant  God,  or  that  of
the  Phoenician  Baal  berith,  is  the  Greek  epithet  Zeus
jpt'or,  Zeus,  the  God  of  the  oath,  as  the  special  pun-
slier  of  perjury,  or  violation  of  covenant,  whether  as
against  himself,  or  as  a  breach  of  covenants  men
nake  with  each  other,  as  though  there  were  a  special
Tjuilt  in  it,  greater  than  that  of  any  natural  injustice,
or  ordinary  impiety.     The  very  essential  idea  of  the
oath  itself  is  that  of  covenant,  and  it  is,  therefore,
hat  part  of  religion  to  which  our  politico-naturalists
exhibit  the  most  deadly  opposition.     The  same  idea
may  be  traced  in  other  epithets,  such  as  Zei/y  (Taipe?oy,
he  God  who  avenges   treachery  to  friendship,  as
hough  the  obligation  of  fidelity  were  grounded  on  a
pecial  and  mutual  relation  to  something  higher  and
nore  positive  than  mere  human  likings.     Similar  to
his  Zeuy  ffpeffnos,  the  protector  of  the  hearth.     So
also  Zeus  fpKftos  (Jupiter  Herceus),  the  God  of  the
amily  enclosure,  or  of  the  sacred  domestic  relations,
is  founded  on  positive  institution,  transcending  any
nere  natural  or  individualizing  rights  that  m"ay  be
laimcd  against  it.     These  precious  ideas  are  akin  to
hat  of  covenant  as  the  everlasting  ground  of  the
hurch.     The  divine  covenant,  the  DSl'S  P^~a.  wag
onfirmed  with  Noah,  to  be  transmitted  by  him  ag
he  root  of  all  that  is  most  sacred  in  the  "relation!
f  man  to  God,  or  to  his  fellow-men. — T.  L.J


302


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  XlOSES.


DOCTKINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  The  flood  makes  a  division  between  the  Adamic
antiquity  and  the  primitive  time — between  the  first
(throughout  symbolical)  and  the  second  symbolical-
traditional  primitive  religion,  as  well  as  between  the
anomi;-t*c  and  the  nomistic  or  superstitious  forms  of
heathenism.  In  like  manner  is  there  a  division  be
tween  the  old  (antediluvian)  antiquity  and  the  post
diluvian  or  the  Noachian  human  race.  It  is  a  type
of  the  historical  incisions,  epochs,  and  periods  that
follow.

'2.  The  ilood  was  indeed  a  sin-flood  (Siindflut),  or
rather,  a  flood  ol' judgment,  and  us  the  first  wurld-
I.isioiical-ju  ig'.Kcnt,  it  was  a  type  of  all  following
judgments,  c.-pcciidly  of  the  world's  last  judgment.

':;.  'i'li,'  flood  is  a  synthesis  of  judgment  and  de
liverance,  forming  a  type  for  every  following  synthe
sis  of  judgment  and  deliverance,  especially  for  the
double  cileet  (of  judgment  and  deliverance)  of  the
exodus  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  Egypt — for  the
middle  point  of  the  world's  history,  the  cross  of
Christ,  and  for  the  final  deliverance  brought  out  by
the  I'r.'.al  judgment  at  the  world's  end.  To  the  judg-
irient  by  water  corresponds  the  judgment  by  fire  as
.  r  potency  of  judgment ;  to  the  baptism  by
water  corresponds  the  baptism  by  fire  as  the  second
poter.cv,  or  the  power  of  baptism  for  salvation.
Tims  the  judgments  are  deliverances,  inasmuch  as
they  separate  the  salvable  from  the  lost,  or  incura-
:  Ic  ;  an  1  -o  the  salvations  arc  judgments,  inasmuch
as  tl.ey  ;ire  ever  connected  with  some  separation  of
uiis  kind.

•1.  The  univeis.d  tradition,  among  men,  of  the
great  flood,  and  its  ethical  significance,  stands  in
lion  with  the  universal  expectation  of  human
ity  that  at  the  world's  end  there  will  be  a  world-
judgmcnt.

:>.  The  flood  at  the  same  time  fact  and  symbol.
See  the  previous  remarks,  No.  o.

(',.  The  meaning  of  the  name  Noah.  See  the
Kxe.rei ieal  annotations,  No.  1.

7.  The  announcement  of  the  flood,  or  the  whole
some  destruction,  as  a  means  of  salvation  from  the
incurable  corruption.     "The  end  of  all  flesh,"  not
so  much  a  judgment  of  condemnation  as  a  remedy
against  it  (see  1  Pet.  iii.   1'J  ;    ch.  iv.   0).     Thereby
docs  the  expression:   "the  end  of  all  flesh,"  denote
the  fact  that  the  immanent  judgment  of  natural  cor
ruption  has  for  its  consequence  the  positive  judg
ment.     "Wherever  the  carcass,  there  are  the  eagles
gathered  together."

8.  The  right  belief  in  the  judgment  is,  at  the  same
time,  a  belief  in  the  deliverance.     A  presentiment  of
the  flood  and  a  preparation  of  the  ark  went  together.

9.  The  plan  of  the  ark  was  imparted  to  Noah  by
God.     The  Spirit  of  God  is  the  author  of  all  ideal  or
pattern  forms  of  the  kingdom  of  God.     So,  for  ex
ample,  the   tabernacle,  or  ark  of  the  testimony. —
The  building  of  the  ark  was  not  merely  a  means  of
salvation  for  Noah  and  his  race,  but  also  a  sermon
of  repentance  for  his  cotemporaries.

10.  The  ark  was  not  a  ship  (in  form),  but  yet  it
was  the  primitive  ship  of  humanity ;  God's  teachin
men  navigation,  his  word  of  blessing  upon  it,  and  a
symbol  of  deliverance  in  all  perils  of  the  deep.

11.  Noah  was  not  only  saved,  but  also  the  savior
or  the  mediator  of  the  divine  salvation  for  his  house.
He  was  a  type  of  Christ,  the  absolute  mediator.

12.  Noah,  was  comprehended  with  his  household
in  the  one  baptism  of  the  flood.     Already  in  Noah's


history  there  conspicuously  appears  the  theocratic
ignificance  of  the  household  (Matt.  x.).

13.  The  religion  of  revelation  is  alone  the  reli-
jion  of  covenant.     It  alone  has  the  idea  of  the  cove
nant.     On  this  grand  and  peculiar  feature,  compare
BrciixER's  '' Concordance,"  art.  Bund.     But  it  is  a
covenant  religion  because  it  is  the  religion  of  a  per
sonal  God,  and  of  his  relation  to  personal  men  (see
the  Exegetical  annotations,  No.  2).     Here  we  are
reminded  of  the  covenant-theory  of  Cocceius.     The
divine    covenant   is   truly   a   divine  instituting,    not
merely  a  contract  (rP-i2   "jTS  he  yave  a  covenant);
but  this  instituting  is  also  a  covenanting.      ITc-  oblit
erate  the  personal  ethical  relation  between  the  personal
God  and  personal  man,  when  we  obliterate  the  cove
nant  idea.     This  has  special  force  in  respect  to  the
sacraments  of  the  covenant.    Through  them  man  re
ceives  the  promises  of  God,  which  he  appropriates
along  with  the  obligations  of  the  faith.     This  applies
to  the  tree  of  life  given  to  Adam,  to  the  rainbow  of
Noah,  to  the  stars  of  heaven  as  shown  to  Abraham,
and  to  circumcision,  to  the  passover  of  Moses,  as  well
as  to  the  Chtistian  sacraments.    When  we  leave  out
of  view  the  obligations  of  the   covenant,  as,  for  ex
ample,  that  of  the  initiation  of  children  in  baptism,  we
profane  the  covenant  (compare  BAUMGAKTKN,  p.  109).

14.  The  difference  between  the  clean  and  the  un
clean  animals  (see  the  Exeget.   annot.).      The  con
trast  between    the  cattle  and  the  wild  beasts  is  not
the  only  tiling  determined,  but,  at  the  same  time,  the
contrast  between  an  animally  pure,  and  an  animally
impure,    physiologically-physical,     disposition    (see
LAMJK'S  LfbtnJtxn,  vol.  ii.  p.  Gli'2).     Correctly  does
KI:II.  remark  (p.  252),  that  the  reception  by  pairs  of
"all  flesh''  into  the  ark,  may  be  reduced  to  a  certain
relativity.     The  measure,  however,  of  this  relativity
cannot  "be  particularly  determined  :    for  the  suppo
sition  of  EmiAKi)  (p.  85),  that  the  beasts  of  the  field
that  were  upon  the  earth  after  the  flood  did  not  come
out  of  the  ark,  but  were  originated  anew  by  G^d,  has
no  support  in  our  history.


1IOMILKTICAL  AX1)  1'KACTICAL.

See  the  Exegetical  notes,  and  the  Fundamental
Theological  Ideas.  The  great  flood  as  a  miraculous
sign  of  God :  1.  In  nature,  as  pointing  back  to  the  cre
ation,  and  forward  to  the  end  and  renovation  of  the
world.  2.  In  the  world  of  man  ;  pointing  backward
to  the  fall,  forward  to  the  last  apostasy.  3.  In  the
sphere  of  the  divine  righteous  government ;  a  copy
ing  of  the  first  judgment  of  death,  a  prefiguration  of
the  end  of  the  world.  4.  In  the  kingdom  of  grace;
pointing  backward  to  the  first  deliverance  in  the
first  judgment,  forward  to  the  completed  salvation
in  the  complete  and  final  judgment. — The  world  of
that  day  an  object  of  displeasure  in  the  eyes  of  God.
—Noah's  righteousness  of  faith.— Noah,  standing
alone  in  the  generation  of  his  day. — In  the  time  of
greatest  corruption,  there  are  the  chosen  of  God-
Noah  comprehended  with  his  house. — A  witness  for
the  significance  of  the  family  in  the  kingdom  of
God  and  in  the  Church. — The  covenant  of  God  with
Noah  in  its  significance,  and  the  unfolding  of  thia
covenant.— The  covenant  of  God  with  Noah  a  cove
nant  of  salvation  for  himself  and  his  house,  and  for
the  preservation  of  the  human  race.  The  direction
for  building  the  ark,  or  the  sacred  archetypes  of  fhe
kingdom  of  God.— The  ark  in  its  figurative  signifi
cance:  1.  An  image  of  a  house  consecrated  to  God,


CHAP.    VII.    10-24,


303


2.  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  3.  of  the  Christian  state.
— As  the  ark  floats  on  in  the  great  flood,  so  does  the
ship  of  the  Church  sail  on  amid  the  storm-judgments
of  the  world's  history. — As  the  ark  never  goes  under,
-o  never  sinks  the  Church. — The  ark  a  sermon:
1.  In  its  own  time,  2.  for  all  times,  3.  for  the  last
times,  and  especially,  4.  for  our  times.  Ham,  too,
was  in  the  ark,  so  also  the  unclean  beasts  (in  oppo
sition  to  the  Donatist  extravagances). — In  the  one
person,  Noah,  were  both  his  house  and  his  future
race  delivered ;  therefore  is  Noah  a  type  of  Christ
(s.  v.  18):  "Go  thou  into  the  ark,"  thou  and  thine
house,  that  is,  thy  sons.  Noah  as  the  middle  mem
ber  of  the  line  between  Enoch  and  Abraham  (with
reference  to  Hob.  xi.). — The  distinction  between  the
pure  and  the  impure  animals,  or,  that  which  is  proper
for  an  offering  to  God  is  also  proper  for  the  enjoy
ment  of  men. — How  the  instinct  of  safety  brings  to
gether  man  and  beast  into  the  asylum  of  deliverance.
— Through  death  to  life. — The  judgment  of  God  on
the  first  world  in  its  still  enduring  efficacy:  1.  as  a
sign  of  light  for  the  understanding  of  the  course  of
the  world;  2.  as  an  everlasting  sign  of  warning;
3.  as  a  sign  of  salvation  full  of  the  blessing  of  salva
tion.  The  humanity  baptized  to  humaneness.  The
heart  in  the  covenant  of  Elohim  is  the  covenant  of
Jehovah.  Through  faith  is  humanity  saved.

STAKKE,  eh.  vi.  9 :  The  ground  of  Noah's  piety
was  grace  on  the  side  of  God,  ver.  8,  but  this  was
obtained,  in  no  way,  through  his  chastity,  as  the
Papists  allege,  on  account  of  which  he  remained  five
hundred  years  unmarried.  Grace  went  before  all
his  works.  On  his  side,  faith  in  the  Messiah  was  the


ground  of  piety— faith  in  the  God  of  the  promise,
and  his  word  of  promise.  He  proved  it  iu  four
ways :  1.  He  was  possessed  by  a  holy  fear,  in  which
he  held  for  true  the  threatening  of  God  in  respect  to
the  flood,  although  the  event  was  yet  far  off';  2.  he
prepared  the  ark  according  to  the  divine  command,
although  he  had  to  contend  with  the  ridicule  of  the
Cainites  on  account  of  the  judgment  being  so  long
delayed;  H.  lie  preached  righteousness  to  others
(2  Pet.  ii.  5),  whilst,  4.  he  himself  walked  irreproach
ably.— Noah  walks  with  God.— What  God  says  to
Noah  has  three  parts  ;  the  first  is  the  announcement
of  the  flood,  the  second  the  command  to  build  the
ark,  the  third  a  promise  relating  to  the  preservation
of  his  life.

Lisco :  Noah's  life  deliverance  includes  in  it  that
of  the  whole  human  race ;  to  this  also  does  the  cov
enant  of  God  with  Noah  have  relation  in  its  widest
sense.— CALWER,  Handbuch:  Noah,  with  those  that
belong  to  him,  is  to  bring  from  the  old  into  the  new
world,  not  merely  naked  life,  but  the  pure  worship
of  God,  to  which  the  offerings  pertained. — SCHRODER.
v.  13  :  God  speaks  to  Noah  in  his  relation  to  him  as
creator  and  preserver.  And  so  his  covenant  with
him  has  in  view  the  whole  human  race.  The  whole
of  creature-life  is  embraced  in  this  voyage  from  the
old  to  the  new  world.

CALVIN,  ch.  vii.  6  :  Not  without  cause  is  the
statement  of  Noah's  age  repeated ;  for  among  other
faults  of  old  age,  it  renders  men  sluggish  and  obsti
nate  ;  therefore  Noah's  faith  comes  more  clearly  into
view,  in  the  fact  that  even  at  such  an  age  it  did  not
fail  him.


SECOND    SECTION

The  Flood  and  the  Judgment.


CHAPTER  VII.  10-24.

And  it  came  to  pass  after  seven  days  [literally,  seven  of  days]  that  tlie  waters  of  the  flood
were  upon  the  earth.  In  the  sixth  hundredth  year  of  Noah's  life,  in  the  second  month
the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month,  the  same  day  were  all  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep
broken  up,1  and  the  windows2  of  heaven  were  opened.  And  the  rain3  [era]"  heavy  rain,
imber,  cloud-bursting]  was  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty  nights.  In  the  selfsame  day4
entered  Noah,  and  Sliem,  and  Ham,  and  Japlieth,  the  sons  of  Noah,  and  Noah's  wife
and  the  three  wives  of  his  sons  with  them,  into  the  ark.  They,  and  every  beast6  after
his  kind,  and  all  the  cattle  after  their  kind,  and  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon
the  earth  after  his  kind,  and  every  fowl  after  his  kind,  every  bird  of  every  sort.  And
they  went  in  unto  Noah  into  the  ark,  two  and  two  of  all  flesh  wherein  is  the  breath  of
hfe.  And  they  that  went  in,  went  in  male  and  female  of  all  flesh,  as  God  had  com
manded  him  ;  and  the  Lord  shut  him  in.  And  the  flood  was  forty  days  upon  the  earth  •
and  the  waters  increased  and  bare  up  the  ark,  and  it  was  lift  up  above  the  earth.  And
the  waters  prevailed,  and  were  increased  greatly  upon  the  earth;  and  the  ark  went
[drove  here  and  there]  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.  And  the  waters  prevailed  exceedingly
upon  the  earth ;  and  all  the  high  hills  that  were  under  the  whole  heaven  were  covered
Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  prevail;  and  the  mountains  were  covered!
And  all  flesh  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth,  both  of  fowl,  and  of  cattle,  and  of  beast
and  of  every  creeping  thing  thai  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  and  everv  man:  All  in  whose


304


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


23  nostrils  was  the  breath  of  life,  of  all  that  was  in  the  dry  land.     Ami  every  living  thing

WIS  de-tl'OVed   [Laii"e  roads  H^i  in  Kal,  and  renders,  lie  destroyed]  wllich  was  upon  the  lace  01   the

n-rouncV  both  man° and  cattle,  and  the  creeping  tilings,  and  the  fowl  of  the  heaven;
•-nd  th.'v  were  destroyed  from  the  earth;  and  Noah  only  remained  alive,  and  they  that

24  were  with    him  in  the  urk.     And  the  waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth  a  hand
fiftv  da  vs.


passages,  such  as  Is.  Ix.  5  and  Eccles.


earth  with  rivers"— or  Hoods.— T.  L.]

r-  Vcr    11      rS~X  wi'ndow*,  opening;*- general  sense  very  clear  from  r"

xii-  3_  thl  ...  i,  in  ;,,,  hutc  r  pa:  sage  it  is  used  metaphorically  of  the  eyes  as  the  windows  o

-- '  the  verv  Teat  rain,  that  which  comes  down  in  a  body,  as  it  were.  VJi?  denotes  the  common  rain,
SC(L  v  '  :  "  ^'is  joined  with  it,  as  in  Job  xxxvu.  0,  V^  1^  ,  and  in  Zach.  x.  1,-when  it  is  mtensilied.  In
he  Aral  ic,  .^Cv^  is  nc  V(  r  used  for  the  rain,  but  it  keeps  the  primary  sense  of  mapnitude,  weight,  density,  pingmt,


tos  a  statistical  particularity,  which  takes  this


question.— T.  I/.l
'      i-  Ver.  23.-   ir^


b"      Ii«  ndered  in  our  Version,  "on  the  fare  of  the  ground."     Kathcr,  "on  the  face

from  "('-IS  ,  as  in  Gen.


WlH'Il    .          vV   '  "  '   KID,    '»-   ii'".'     •  ,.,     y     ,

edge  makes  us  attach  to  it.     See  further  on  this  in  the  Excursus,  at  the  end  of  the  account.-! .  L.]


r.xi:<r,-,TiCAL  AXD  CRITICAL.

1.   Tlf  Tune  (,f  flic  Flood—  The  beginning  of  the
flood'  is  fiist    determined  in  rcfercnc"  to  the  age  of
Noah.     It  was  in  the  sixth  hundredth  year  of  Noah's
Hie    that  is,  in  the  year  when  the  six  hundredth  year
of  his  life  would  be  coni])leted.      The  number   (',()()
appears  here  to  have  a  symbolical  meaning,  as  also
the  week  for  his  going  info  the  ark.    Six  is  the  num
ber  of  toil  and  labor!     Next  there  is  fixed  the  date
of  the  hctrinning:    on   the  seventeenth   day  of  the
second  month.    According  to  Knobel,  must  this  date
be  r<  ckoned  from  the  first  day  of  the  six  hundredth
year  of  Noah's  life.    For  this  there  appears  no  ground
here,  if  we  assume  that  the  narrator  had  in  view  a
known  and  determined  numbering  of  the  months.
The  question  is  this— whether  the  months  are  to  be
determined  according  to  the  theocratic  year,  which
the  Jews   kept  after  the  Exodus  from  Egypt,  and
which  be-an  with  Xisan  in  April  (so  that  the  begin
ning  of  the  flood  would  have  fallen  in  the  month
lira"  or  May),  or  whether  it  was  after  the  ceconomic
years''  reckoning,  according  to  which  Tisri  (September
"and  October)  made  the  end  of  the  year  (Exod.  xxni.
16  ;  xxxiv.  ".:>).    Rabbi  Joshua,  Lepsius,  and  others,
are  for  the  theocratic  time-reckoning.      According
to  this,  the  flood  began  in  the  month  that  followed
Nisan.     Keil  and  Knobel,  on  the  contrary,  are  for
the  ceconomic   reckoning,   according  to  which  the
second  month  would  have  fallen  in  our  October  or
November.     "  Josephus  (Antiq.  i.  3,  8)  has  in  mind
the  month  named  by  the  Hebrews  Marhezvan,  which
follows  after  Tisri :  so  the  Targum  of  Jonathan,  as


well  as  .Tarchi  and  Kimchi.  The  continuous  increase,
then,  or  swelling  of  the  waters  from  the  17th  of  tho
second  month,  to  the  17th  of  the  seventh  month,  a
period  of  five  months,  or  inn  days,  would  fall  in  the
winter  months."  Knobel.  Instead  of  this,  we  hold
that  in  a  cosmical  catastrophe,  such  as  the  Hood  ap
pears  to  have  been,  the  regard  paid  to  the  season  ot
the  year  becomes  fallacious;  and  then  we  are  nol
here" to  think  of  any  usual  climatic  events,  such  aa
took  place  in  the  case  of  the  Egyptian  plagues,
though  miraculously  effected.  It  appears,  there
fore  ^to  us,  to  have  no  bearing  on  the  case,  that  th«
Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  fall  towards  the  end  of
May,  and  in  August  and  November  reach  their  low-
est'point,  or  the  consideration  that,  for  the  ancients,
the  winter  season  was  a  mournful  time  of  desolation,
etc.  Knobel.  It  would  seem  from  ch.  viii.  22,  that
the  flood  broke  through  all  the  ordinary  constitution
of  nature.  In  the  first  place  must  we  endeavor  to
set  ourselves  right  with  respect  to  the  connection  M
the  dates  as  given  in  our  narration.  On  the  l<tft
dav  of  the  second  month,  then,  came  the  flood,  and
it  'rained,  from  that  time  on,  forty  days  and  forty
nights.  The  consequence  was  the  height  of  water
in  the  flood  which  continued  for  150  days  (ch.  vn.
24).  Then  began  the  waters  to  fall,  and,  on  the  1  <tb
day  of  the  seventh  month,  the  ark  rested  upon  tl
mountains  of  Ararat.  Thus  far  five  months  hat*
passed.  On  the  first  day  of  the  10th  month,  that  IJ
after  about  eight  months,  the  tops  of  the  mountains
appeared.  Finally,  in  the  six  hundred  and  first  year
of  Noah's  age,  in  the  first  day  of  the  first  month,  the
ground  was  becoming  dry,  and  on  the  sevcn-and


CHAP.  VII.  10-24.


305


twentieth  day  of  the  next  month,  it  had   bccom
wholly  dry  (ch.  viii.  14).     From  the  statement  tha
this   ensued  in  the  six  hundred   and  first  year  o
Noah's  age,  it  cannot  follow  that  his  birthday  fell  01
New  Year,  but  only  that  about  one  year  had  elapsec
The  extreme  end  of  the  flood,  however,  was  ten  day
after  the  full  year  which  the  flood  had  continued
Knobel  conjectures  that  the  flood  was  originally  reck
^oned  according  to  the  solar  year  of  365  days,  bu
that  the  Hebrew  narrator,  reckoning  by  lunar  years
transposes  the  account  to  one  year  and  eleven  day
(p.  81).     That  would  make  the  solar  yc.ir  to  hav<
been  before  the  lunar  year,  which  seems  to  us  im
possible.     It  would  seem  to  aid,  to  some  extent,  it
getting  a  right  view  of  the  times  of  the  year,  to  bea
in  mind  that  the  dove  which  Noah  lot  fly  the  seconc.
time   brought  back  a  fresh  olive-leaf  in  its  mouth
(ch.  viii.   11).     That  was  probably  forty  days,  ant
fourteen  days,  after  the  first  day  of  the  tenth  "month
and  therefore,  at  all  events,  towards  the  end  of  the
eleventh  month.     If  we  must  regard  this  fresh  olive
leaf  as  belonging  to  the  spring  season,  then  the  be
ginning  of  the  flood   may  have  well  fallen  clever
months  before,  or  in  the  time  of  May.     But  this  con
elusion  is  insecure,  because  the  olive-leaf,  in  its  bud
ding,  is  not  confined  to  the  spring.    For  the  opposite
view,  Delitzsch  (p.  -257)  presents  something  that  is
specially  worthy  of  notice,  namely,  that  the  observa
tion  of  the  earlier  oeconomic  reckoning  of  time  con
tinued  among  the  Jews  after  the  introduction  of  the
theocratic  computation.     If,  however,  the  flood  be
gan  with   the  autumnal  rainy  season,  it  must  have
ceased  exactly  as  the  rainy  season  of  the  next  year
commenced.    In  regard  to  the  reckoning  of  the  year,
Knobel  remarks  that  the  Hebrews  reckoned  it  ac
cording  to  lunar  months,  354  days,  other  nations  by
solar  months,  making  365  days",— for  example,  the
Egyptians  and  the  Persians,  and  also,  in  astronomi
cal  matters,  the  Chaldaoans.

In  regard  to  the  world-year  of  the  flood,  the  cita
tions  of  Delitzsch  (p.  244)  are  worthy  of  attention.
The  mythologically  enlarged  numbering  of  the  Baby
lonians,  Delitzsch  and  others,  reduce  to  the  2500th
year  before  Christ.  In  respect  to  the  day  when  the
flood  commenced,  the  Babylonian  legend  gives  the
15th  of  Dasios.*  This  statement  favors  the  Bible
reckoning  of  the  year  from  Nisan  (that  is,  according
to  the  theocratic  reckoning),  not  from  Tisri.  For  a
:able  of  the  different  monthly  suns,  see  DELITZSCII
\  246.

2.  Vers.  10-16.  The  opening  of  the  Flood  the
shutting  u/>  of  the  Ark.— All  the  fountains  of  the
preat  deep  were  broken  up.— The  Niphal  or  pas-
ive  form  of  rp2  is  to  be  noticed.  It  denotes  violent
Ganges  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  or  in  the  action  of
he  earth, — at  all  events,  in  the  atmosphere  (sec  the
'receding  Section).  Dinn,  the  deep  of  the  sea,
rhose  fountains  (Job  xxxviii.  16;  Prov,  viii.  28)  or
rigins  are  conditioned  by  the  heights  and  depths  of
ic  earth  itself.  This  fact  is  placed  first.  The  rain
ppears  to  be  mentioned  as  a  consequence.  "Simi-
ir  views  of  water  in  the  interior  of  the  earth  found
lace  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans ;  from  this,  too
iany  sought  to  explain  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the
ies."  Knobel.  Only,  here  there  is  expressed  no
fltinct  view  respecting  the  fountains  of  the  sca-


*  [Dasim,  was  the  eighth  month  of  the   Babylonian
d  Macedonian  year.      See  the  Table  of  Delitzsch,   p.

— 1.  -L.J

20


deep.*  The  expression,  too,  "the  windows  of
heaven,"  is  not  to  be  too  literally  pressed. — In  the
selfsame  day  entered  Noah,  etc. — That  is,  by  the

[*  "  The  great  dce.p,"  (IS1!  ClPtn,  vii.  21.  Gump.  Gen.
i.  2  ;  Prov.  viii.  27,  28 ;  Job  xxxviii'.  16  ;  Ps.  civ.  G :  Jonah
11.  6  ;  Is.  li.  10,  and  other  places.  Sometimes  Ichmn  is
joined  with  C"1 ,  and  seems  to  be  used  as  synonymous  with
the  great  sea,  as  in  Ps.  civ.  6  ;  Jonah  ii.  5  ;  but  ibi-  the  pri
mary  idea  we  must  look  to  Gen.  i.  2.  In  creation,  it  was  all
water,  or  fluid  (so  conceived).  Afterwards  tin-  land  (the
solid)  is  commanded  to  appear,  and  the  waters  are  gathered
to  one  place,  "injt  Cl'pE  ,  whether  it  moans  the  surface
sea,  or  the  supposed  great'  abyss  beneath.  In  the  poetical
parts  of  the  Bible,  the  conception  is  that  of  the  earth  (the
land  or  ground)  as  built  upon  the  waters  lying  below.  It
was  the  contrast  to  the  heaven,  or  skies  above,  as  in  Prov.

viii.  28,  ninn  ni'rs  tiTss  :  ;


In  regard  to  ail  this,  it  may  be  said,  that  the  Bible'is  responsi
ble  neither  lor  iS'eptunian  nor  Plutonian  theories.  Facts  are
given,  but  they  are  presented  according  to  the  conceptions
01  the  day.  Water  gushed  from  the  earth,  and  the  writer
describes  it  by  saying  that  the  foui, tains  of  the  leltom  rabba,
he  great  deep,  were  broken  up.  Aside  from  the  traditional
creative  account,  nothing  could  have  been  more  natural  than
the  idea  that  the  interior  earth,  or  the  space  under  the  earth
(whatever  notions  might  have  been  had  of  the  earth's  shape
or  support),  was  a  region  of  water.  It  was  a  direct  deduc
tion  (true  or  false)  from  the  phenomena  of  springs  and
wells,— and  that,  by  a  process  strictly  Baconian.  After
wards,  but  very  early,  the  sight  of  volcanoes  (see  Ps.  civ.
32)  must  have  given  also  the  idea  of  interior  fire.  We  know,
even  yet,  hardly  any  thing  about  it.  Researches  on  the
surface,  or  shell,  of  the  globe,  have  given  us  much  curious
knowledge  as  to  its  progressive  surface-formation,  and  the
great  periods  which  it  indicates  ;  but  beyond  this,  our  know
ledge  of  the  vast  interior  is  about  as  great  as  that  which  one
who  had  pierced  half  through  the  shell  of  an  cgir,  would,  by
such  means  alone,  have  obtained  of  that  most  curious  struct
ure.  He  might  conjecture  that  there  was  heat  and  fluid
there,  but  that  would  be  all.  Perhaps  it  is  well  that  we
have  so  little  means  of  penetrating  this  vast  unknown.  We
could  not  rest  very  securely  if  we  knew  all  that  was  going
on  inside  the  earth,  or  had  even  a  glimpse  of  the  surging,
boiling,  or  burning,  that  may  be  taking  place  ten  miles,  or
even  ten  furlongs,  right  beneath  our  feat.  There  is  a  tc'iom
rabba  there,  filled  with  something  that  might  make  a  rapid
ruin  of  our  earth,  if  we  had  nothing  to  trust  to  but  the  un
known  nature,  and  no  other  insurance  against  it  but  our
much-lauded  science.  Our  only  secure  trust  is  in  One  in
whom  we  believe,  as  having  a  higher  than  a  physical  purpose
ii  the  continuance  of  the  earth,— one  who  "  binds  the  floods
iom  overflowing,"  and  the  fires  from  yet  bursting  forth.
This  conception  of  the  teltom  rallia  is  most  graphically
presented  Gen.  xlix.  2.5.  It  is  there  called  r^~T  Clfin
7\  ,  "the  abyss  couchant  below,"  like  a  wild  beasi
crouching  down  and  ready  to  spring  upon  his  prey,  just  as
n  Gen.  iv.  7  sin  is  described  as  ^H"!  ,  ready  to  spring  upon
i  man  at  any  moment.— In  the  Arabian  tradition  the  waters
ire  represented  as  coming  out  of  an  oven  (the  vaulted  interior
•arth),  and  as  being  boiling  hot.  See  Kuran,  Smut  xi.  41,


.

\ft,AX-l


<-    [?'  u
JY«O

7         '    "  &


I-      1

<-)wOj


i  •  i

10  1  ,


when  our  com-

nand  went  forth,  then  boiled  the  furnace."  This  came
rom  the  idea  of  Geysers,  or  hot  springs,  and  may  have  hacli
ome  truth  in  it,  since  it  does  i;ot  detract  from  Scripture  to
upposo  that  there  may  have  been  other  minor  facts  rcspcct-
ng  the  flood,  preserved  in  other  arid  independent  accounts.
ale  says  that  the  Arabians  got  this  from  the  Jews  ;  and  so
Iso  Reckendorf  states  in  the  Introduction  to  his  Hebrew
ranslation  of  the  Koran,  citing  from  the  Talmud  (Sanhe-
rin),  but  this  does  not  bear  them  out,  since  the  word  nni  ~
here  used,  means  simply  the  effervescence  or  tumultuous
oiling  motion  which  Maimonides  says  came  from  the  vio-
cnce  of  the  eruption,  and  not  from  heat.  It  is  by  him,  and
he  Talmud,  compared  with  the  violent  fermentations  and
ruptions  of  sensuality  that  brought  on  such  an  out  bursting
ood  as  a  fitting  judgment;  and  so  Bays  Rabbi  Hasada,  i  i
ho  passage  quoted  from  the  Sanhedri'n:  "  They  corrupted
verything  (1pnn1n2),  in  the  boiling  sensuality  of  their
-ansgrcssion,  and  by  the  boilings  of  an  all-desrroyin?
•ater  were  they  judged."  Such  a  mode  of  interpretation  is
ecuhariy  Rabbinical,  but  the  fact  of  hot  eruptions  (lika
hose  of  the  Icelandic  geysers)  may  well  have  been,  or  of
oiling  water,  as  the  Arabian  account  states  it.—  T.  L.]


306


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


time  of  the  breaking  out  of  the  flood  was  the  diffi
cult  embarkation  accomplished  —  happily  accom
plished,  rrn  denotes  here  the  wild  beast.  All
birds,  all  winded  creatures,  Knobcl  takes  as  synony
mous.  But  since  the  kind  is  named  before,  there
would  seem  to  be  intended  a  subdivision  of  the  kind,
and  that  what  is  said  relates  to  birds  in  a  narrower
and  in  a  wider  sense.— As  God  had  commanded
him,  and  the  Lord  shut  him  in.— Here  most  dis
tinctly  presents  itself  the  contrasting  relation  of
these  "two  names.  Elohim  gives  him  the  prescription
in  relation  to  the  pairs  of  animals  for  the  preserva
tion  of  the  animal  world,  but  Jehovah,  the  covenant
God,  shuts  him  in,  that  is,  makes  sure  the  closing
of  the  ark  for  the  whole  voyage,  and  for  the  salva
tion  of  his  people.  This  inclusion  was,  at  the  same
time,  an  exclusion  of  the  race  devoted  to  death.

3.  Vers.   17-21. —  The  full  Development  of  the
]'1,,<,,1  and  Its  /.'//'«•/,  tin-  It^trnctiun  of  cvcri/  L'n-'uiy
Tliimi.    And  the  flood  was  forty  days  upon  the
earth.— 'fhc  first  forty  days  denote  the  full  develop
ment  of  the  tlood,  which  lifted  up  the  ark  and  set  it
in  motion.     The  advance  of  the  (lood  is  measured  by
reference  to  the  ark.     It  is  lifted  up;  it  is  driven  on.
With  the  waves  she  sails,  and  over  the  high  hills.
The  last  is  said  in  a  general  acceptation,  as  a  meas
urement  of  the  height  of  the  Hood  by  the  height
of  the  hills.     The  estimate  that  seems  to  be  expressed
by  saying,  "fifteen  cubits  did  the  waters  prevail  over
the  high'  hills,''  would  neither  give  sense  if  taken  lit-
erally,  since  the  high  hills  have  very  different  heights,
nor  could  it,  mean'  that  the  Hood  was  fifteen  cubits
above  the  highest  mountain  on  the  earth.     But  since
now  Noah  could  hardly  have  sailed  directly  over  the
highest  mountain  of  the  earth,  much  less  have  known
the  fact,  we  must  suppose   that  this  exact  ostim.ite
was    imparted  to  himself,   or  to   some   later  writer,
through   direct  revelation — an  idea  which  is  little  in
harmony  with  the  true  character  of  a  divine  revela
tion.     We  must,  therefore,  suppose    that  the  epic-
svmbolieal  view  according  to  which  the  flood  rose
high  over  all   the  mountains   of  the   earth,   became
connected  with  the  tradition  that  Noah  found  out
the  measure  denoted,  by  some  kind  of  reference  to
the  mountain  on  which  the  ark   settled.     KNOHEL  :
"  The  representation  may  amount  to  this :  since  the
ark  drew  about  fifteen  cubits  water,  its  first  settling
on  Ararat   iu  the  falling  of  the  flood  would    givi
that  measure.     The  150  days,  within  which  the  de
struction  was  accomplished,  include  the  forty  da\>
of  storm  at  the  beginning.     According  to  ch.  viii.  -2
the  rain  continued  all  through  these  loO  days.     Stil
must  we  distinguish  its  more  moderated  continuanct
from  the  first  storm  of  rain  in  the  forty  days."     li
respect  to  the  universality  of  the  flood,  see  Keil
whose  judirment  about  it  is  similar  to  that  of  Ebrard
whereas  Helit/.sch  is  unwilling  to  insist  upon  it  as  ai
article  of  faith,  especially  the  geographical  univer
sulity  (p.  2GO).     Compare  the  preceding  Section.


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  The  threatenings  of  God  are  as  certain  as  hi
promises  ;  for  God's  word  is  certain.     As  sure,  hov
ever,  as  is  the  word  of  God,  so  sure  is  faith  in  it
holv  fear,  its  holy  confidence  and  joy.

2.  As  God  has  provided  help  and  deliverance  fo
men  by  means   of  exposed   infants,  or  abandone
orphans,  so  also  through  old  men,  as  in  the  case  c


Abraham,  Moses,  Noah.     The  like  wonders  happen
in  all  times.

3.  When  the  necessity  is  greatest,   then  is  the
help  at  the  nearest,  and  the  highest.      When  sin
(and  the  flood)  become  most  powerful,  then  grace,
and  the  miracles  of  grace,  become  most  mighty  foi
t  eliverancc.

4.  The  safe  embarkation  of  a  little  world  ra  the
.•k  before  the  breaking  out  of  the  flood.     A  won-
crful  instinct,  a  still  more  wonderful  procession,  ;i
-onderful  peace  as  the  consequence  of  a  wonderful
error.

5.  The  animal-world  in  the  ark,  type  and  symbol
f  the  animal-world  in  general:  the  mention  of  man
nd  woman,  man  and  wife,  presents  prominently  the
act  that  the  ark  was  to  become  the  point  of  dcpart-
re  for  new  generations.

6.  Ji-liovah  xlin.t  him  in.— The  innermost  motive
or  the  salvation  of  every  living  thing  is  God's  covc-
.ant  with  his  own.     Christ  is  here  the  head  and  sUv
f  history.

7.  The  ark,  with  its  souls,  in   the  waters  of  the
great  flood  (sintflut),  which  was  at  the  same  time  a

in-flood  (siindfiut),  a  destroying  flood  of  wrath  and
udgmcnt;  in  like  manner  Moses  in  the  ark  upon  the
N'ile,  and  Christ  on  the  cross  and  in  the  grave.—
There  are  moments  in  which  the  kingdom  of  God
eems  lost,  or  in  the  most  fearful  peril,  and  yet  is
t  all  the  more  securely  hidden  and  protected  in  the
ruthfulness  of  God  himself,  in  the  everlasting  love
ic  has  for  his  people.

8.  The  terror  of  judgment  in  the  flood  immensely
;reat,  and  yet  not   equal  to   the  terror  of  the  last
udgmcnt-day  (1  Pet.  iii.  4).

<).  The  waters  <>f  the  jiood  as  a  symbol  of  the
nd-ment  of  redemption,  of  the  baptism  at  (he
orld's  end,  and  generally,  of  the  passage  of  believer.-:
with  Christ  through  death  to  life  (1's.  l>:ix.  77),  is  to
ie  distinguished  from  t/ir  waters  of  the  .s<v<  as  the
-ymbol  of  peoples  and  nations,  their  births  and  rev-
'.utions,  as  compared  with  the  kingdom  of  God  (IV
Kciii ;  Dan.  vii;  Rev.  xiii.  1).

10.  The  most  fearful  sorrows  are  measured   b)
comparing    them   with   the   height   of  water   in  the
Hood,  ami  the  hardest  days  of  sorrow  are  reckoned
as  the  days  of  the  deluge.

1 1 .  The  symbolic  of  the  forty  days.     Four  is  the
number  of  the  world,  ten  the  number  of  the  com
pleted  development.     It  therefore  denotes  the  fulness
of  the  world-times,  and  of  the  world's  judgment.

12.  God's  dominion  as  great  as  God  himself.


IIOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  the  preceding. — The  embarkation  into  the
ark.— Jehovah's  shutting  in. — The  measured  deeps
of  terror,  the  numbered  days  of  trouble.— The  ark  as
the  cradle  of  the  new  human  race  rocked  by  the  bil
lows  :  1.  a  frail  chest,  an  infinitely  precious  content;
2.  fearfully  threatened,  securely  protected;  trem
bling  in  the  deep  abyss  of  waters,  lifted  high  on  the
wave  of  consecration.— The  help  of  God  in  the  floods
of  distress.— The  watery  grave :  1.  deep  for  the  hu
man  eye ;  not  too  deep  for  the  eye  of  God. — The  sea,
too,  shall  give  up  her  dead.— Noah's  faith  ;  its  grand
eur:  as  in  contrast,  1.  to  the  universal  apostasy,
2.  to  the  impending  judgment,  3.  to  its  once  great
task  and  labor,  4.  to  the  sport  of  the  world,  5.  to
the  terrors  of  the  flood,  <5.  to  the  terrors  of  the  am-


CHAP.  VIII.  1-19.


307


mal  world  inclosed  with  him — the  ark  a  lion's  den.

Noah  in  the  floating  ark,  and  Moses.     Both,  though
seeming  lost,  preserved  for  the  greatest  things.

STARKE  :  As  God  suffered  the  waters  to  increase
cradually,  so  had  the  ungodly  time  for  repentance  •
a  thing  which  may,  perhaps,  have  happened  in  the
case  of  many,  so  that  the  soul  was  saved  in  the  de
struction  of  the  flesh.     According  to  this,  it  would
be  false  what  the  Jews  say  of  the  men  who  perished
in  the  flood,  that  they  have  neither  part  in  the  eter
nal  life,  nor  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, — a  con
clusion  which  they  draw  from  an  improper  interpre
tation  of  ch.  vi.  3.     It  may  be  easily  believed  that
the  fish  in  great  part  died,  not  because  the  waters
were  seething  hot,  as  the  Rabbins  say,  but  because,
with  the  fresh  water,  there  mingled  itself  the  salt,'
which  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  many  kinds  of  fish!
Lisco:    God  shut  Noah  in;  so  was  the  pressure
into  the  ark  prevented  as  against  the  godless,  whilst
Noah  was  made  safe.

GERLAOI  :  The  clean  beasts.     Before  their  use  as


food  they  were  offered  in  sacrifice,  devoted  to  God  •
partly  because  in  each  enjoyment  thanks  should  be
offered  to  God,  and  partly  because  thereby  even  the
enjoyment  itself  becomes  sanctified.

CALWER,  Handbuch:  The  first  judgment  of  the
world  through  water,  the  last  through  fire  (2  Pet
viii.  6).— So  sinks  the  old  world  in  its  grave  ~Jeho-
vah,  the  trusted,  shuts  him  in.  So,  too,  watches  over
us  the  shepherd  of  Israel,  who  slumbers  not  nor
sleepeth.— SCHRODER:  There  seest  thou  that  all  the
words  of  God  have  the  power  of  an  oath  (Val  Her-
berger).  —  A  night  of  death  reigns  over  a  "world
abandoned  to  its  doom.  Because  "the  earth  was  cor
rupt,  morally,  the  Lord  destroys  it— (that  is  gives  it
up  to  physical  corruption).  So  Luther.  To  say  the
fountains  were  broken  up,  and  the  flood-gates  were
opened,  is  a  biblical  mode  of  speech  whereby  is  ex
pressed  the  fact,  that  the  waters  were  not  suffered  to
flow  in  their  wonted  manner  (Calvin).— The  Lord
preserved  the  ark  and  Noah  therein  as  a  treasure
(Verleb.  Bibel).


THIRD    SECTION.

The  Ark,  and  the  Saved  and  Renewed  Humanity.


CHAPTER  VIII.  1-19.

1  And  God  remembered  Noah,  and  every  living  thing,  and  all  the  cattle  that  was
with  him  in  the  ark;  and  God  made  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth  and  the  waters

^  l  The  ^untams  also  of  the  deep  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  stop-

i  pea,  and  the  ram  from  heaven  was  restrained.  And  the  waters  returned8  from  off
the  earth  continually  [to  go  and  return,  DW  TVn] ;  and  after  the  end  of  the  hundred  and
.try  days  the  waters  were  abated.  And  the  ark  rested3  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the

5  seventeenth  day  of  the  month,  upon  the  • mountains  of  Ararat.  And  the  waters  de-
teased  continually  until  the  tenth  month;  in  the  tenth  month,  on  the  first  day  of  the

7  TJ     1  TV*    r      PS  °f  tthe  mountains  seen-     And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  forty

that  Noah  opened  the  window  of  the  ark  which  he  had  made.     And  he  sent  forth
a  raven  which  went  to  and  fro6  until  the  waters  were  dried  up  from  off  the  earth

8  Also  he  sent  forth  a  dove  from  him  to  see  if  the  waters  were  abated  from  off  the  face

01  mnd  L-Dpn ,  had  become  light  or  shallow,  not  had  disappeared,  as  Lange  says].       But  the  dove

bund  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  foot,  and  she  returned  unto  him  into  the  ark,  for  the

waters  were  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth ;  then  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  her

10  and  pulled  her  in  unto  him  into  the  ark.     And  he  stayed  (imi)  yet  other  seven  days'

id  again  he  sent  forth  the  dove  out  of  the  ark.     And  the  dove  came  in  to  him  in  the

evening;  and  lo,  in  her  mouth  was  an  olive-leaf  plucked  off;  so  Noah  knew  that  the

2  waters  were  abated  from  off  the  earth.     And  he  stayed  [>-  Kiphai]  yet  other  seven

13  days6  and  sent  forth  the  dove;  which  returned  not  again  to  him  any  more      And  U

came  to  pass  in  the  six  hundredth  and  first  year,  in  the  first  month,  the  first  day  of  the

month,  the  waters  were  dried  up  from  off  the  earth;  and  Noah  removed  the  covering

5  montTon'  th  "d'  ^  ™^  ^  ^  °f  th°  Sro»nd  ™s  dl7-     And  in  the  second

th   on  the  seven-and-  wentieth  day  of  the  month  was  the  earth  dried.     And  God

7  I  t     V?l        Unt>°      °ah'  Sf|ying)   G°  f°rth  °f  the  ark'   thou>  and  %  wife,  and  thy
17  sons,  and  thy  sons'  wives  with  thee.     Bring  forth  with  thee  every  living  thin-  that  is

with  thee   of  all  flesh,  both  of  fowl  and  of  cattle,  and  of  every  creeping  thin-  th^at  creep
eth  upon  the  earth;  that  they  may  breed  abundantly  in  the  earth,  all  be° fruit ful  aifd


GEXESI?,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSEP.


forth    and  his  fon>',  and  his   wife,  and  hia
'       U,ing  audW  aid  what-


ver  ereepeth  up,,  the  earth,  after  their  kinds,  went  forth  out  of  ll

.V.:,.  w,7     it  differs  from  "lOn  ,  to  ebb  or  fail  (as  used  in  vcr.  8).    r^'l'  refer*  tc  tt»

b-:^^

..™t,r.u,^


rested;"  the  late  Arabic  Translation  (Amer.  Bib.  Boa),  very  beautifully  ana  signifi


the  peeu   ar  Hebrew  idiom  "-'•    TpH  •     T-  L-l  mountains  of  Ararat  in  the  very  height  of  the  Hood  (whether

[3  v,  ,  t_  r:  :-,- .    The  ark's  grounding  on  one  of  th    m0™^  ^       liav,,.  (,()V(,rcd  mountains  known

one  d  the  iower,  or  on  its  highest  peak),  is  BO  'ncon-t_e»t  wH^the  ul, .  oUhe^iloo  ^  £~  ^  ^  ^^  R  ^

If  ttievo  were  r.o  other


higher,  that  so,ne  have  .nam


.«tnv.rU,  B,Wy  atqiu
,       „,  ,,,c  ,|0,Hl  „««


;:„„  Miows.          .  -  ....     ,„„„„„,„  ,„„,,.  ,,,,1,  »

„„!  con,i»  r  II,.  m,cl™  «.  l..,md  l.j  tbo    <•<••'      -


*  v  o  ----  _  •

odern  commentators  and  lexicographers


ver   Id.  has  the  form  of  the  IJipliil  o


,  .  _  K  SCems  strange,  however,  that  whore

f  wait  .     .,        ,fe,,_  .......  .*.«».  ti«t


From  bin,  do?ui<,  they  get  the  sense  o


'  ,    -,.„      V«^    like  Staffer  SSJPl .    Ahen  Ezra,  however,

,  becoming  by  assnn^t „»    rV  U  ,  «  '


in  Hebrew),  p.  28.  -T.  "L.]


CHAP.  VIII.  1-19.


309


EXEGETICAL  AXD  CRITICAL.

1.  Stages  of  the  Flood  as  taken  in  their  Order.
fc.  To  its  highest  point  :  1,  Seven  days,  the  going
In  to  the  ark  ;  2.  forty  days  of  the  flood-storm  ;
3.  one  hundred  and  ten  days,  thereupon,  of  steady
ruin,  and  of  the  steady  rising  of  the  flood  —  so  in
general  one  hundred  and  fifty  days.  Threefold
grade  of  advance:  1.  The  ark  is  lifted  up  from  the
ground  ;  2.  the  ark's  going  upon  the  face  of  the
waters  ;  8.  its  rising  fifteen  cubits  high  above  the
mountains,  b.  To  the  disappearance  of  the  waters:
In  the  seventh  month,  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the
month,  that  is,  after  five  months,  or  one  hundred  and
fifty  days,  just  as  the  waters  begin  to  fall,  the  ark
rests  on  Ararat.  On  the  first  day  of  the  tenth  month,
that  is,  after  two  months  and  about  twelve  days
(Knobel  :  seventy-two  days  after  the  settling  of  the
ark),  the  mountain-peaks  project*  above  the  surface
of  the  water.  After  forty  days  Noah  opens  the  win
dow  and  lets  fly  the  raven.  Next  goes  forth  the
dove.  It  is  not  directly  said  how  long  after  the
flight,  of  the  raven  was  the  first  flight  of  the  dove.
The  second  flight  of  the  dove,  however,  was  seven
other  days  after  the  first,  and  therefore  it  is  inferred
that  there  were  seven  days  between  the  flight  of  the
raven  and  that  of  the  dove  ;  the  third  flight,  again,
was  seven  days  after  the  second.  We  must  either
reckon  in  here  an  unnamed  portion  of  time,  or  the
time  between  the  flight  of  the  raven  and  the  flight
of  the  first  dove  must  have  been  longer  than  seven
days.  Hereupon  follows  the  last  section  of  time,
from  the  first  day  of  the  first  month  to  the  seven-and-
twentieth  day  of  the  following,  or  the  period  of  the
full  drying  of  the  earth.  In  the  six  hundred  and  first
year,  etc.  Luther,  following  the  Septuagint,  and  by
way  of  explanation,  adds,  "  of  Noah's  age."

2.  Vers.  1-4.  The  first  Decrease  of  the  jflood
to  the  Resting  of  tJie  Ark  upon  Ararat.  And  God
remembered  Noah  and  every  living  thing.  —
God's  remembering  must  be  understood  in  an  em
phatic  sense.  God  has  always  remembered  Noah  ;
but  now  he  remembers  him  in  a  special  sense  —  that
he  may  accomplish  his  deliverance.  There  comes  a
turn  in  the  flood,  and  the  ground  of  it  lay  in  the
government  of  God.  To  the  rule  of  judgment  upon
the  human  world,  succeeds  the  rule  of  compassion
for  the  deliverance  of  Noah  and  humanity,  as  also  of
the  annual-world.  It  is  his  compassion,  not  simply
his  grace..  For  God  remembered  also  the  beasts.
Thus  did  he  remember  them  all,  as  Elohim,  in  his
most  universal  relation  to  the  earth.  Had  there
been  a  longer  continuance  of  the  flood,  there  would
not  only  have  been  want  in  the  ark,  but  the  ark
itself  would  have  been  destroyed.  A  wind  must
blow  to  disperse  and  dry  up  the  flood,  whilst,  on  the
other  side,  the  fountains  of  the  flood  were  closed.
With  the  shutting  of  the  fountains  of  the  deep,  or
with  the  restoring  of  the  continental  tranquillity  of
the  earth,  and  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  atmosphere,
there  ceases  also  the  extraordinary  rain  ;  and  be
sides,  the  windows  of  heaven  were  closed.  It  is  an
inexactness  of  the  narration,  but  which  gives  it  an


*  [The  Hebrew  IX1!  3  here,  in  Kiphal,  would  seem  to  havo
a  more  emphatic  sense—  became  distinctly  visible.    It  is  an-


now,  on  this  day— perhaps  the  first  clear  day  that  afforded
Noah  an  opportunity  for  taking  an  observation— they  stood
irth  as  conspicuous  objects,  in  open  sight. — T.  L  ]


unmistakable  historic  character,  that  the  time  of  the
flood's  advance  is  given  as  one  hundred  and  fifty
days,  and  that  the  point  of  time  when  the  ark  settles,
and  when,  therefore,  the  actual  sinking  of  the  watera
must  have  commenced,  falls  in  like  manner  at  the
end  of  the  one  hundred  and  fifty  days.  For  Noah,
indeed,  the  first  turning-point  in  the  sinking  of  the
waters,  which  had  commenced  already  before  the
running  out  of  the  one  hundred  and  fifty  days,  could
not  have  been  a  matter  of  observation.  For  him,  the
first  sure  sign  of  the  sinking  of  the  waters  was  the
grounding  of  the  ark.  —  And  the  waters  returned.

—  Here  is  the  whole  process  preliminarily  described

—  how    the  waters,    in   their   undulations  here  and
there,  kept  steadily  settling  more  and  more.     Then
follows  the  indication  of  the  first  decrease.  —  Upon
the  mountains  of  Ararat  __  "  ^niX  is  the  name
of  a  territory  (2  Kings  xix.  37)  which  is  mentioned
Jer.  li.  27,  as  a  kingdom  near  to  Minni  (Arroenia),  —
probably  the  middle  province  of  the  Armenian  terri
tory,  which  Moses  of  Chorene  calls  Arairad,  Araratia.
The  mountains  of  Ararat  are,  doubtless,  the  mount
ain-group  which  rises  from  the  plain  of  the  Araxes
in  two  high  peaks,  the  Great  Ararat,  16,254  feet,  and
the  Lesser,  about  12,000  feet,  above  the  level  of  the
sea.     This  landing-place  of  the  ark  is  of  the  highest
significance  for  the  development  of  humanity,  as  it
is   to  be   renewed   after   the   flood.     Armenia,   the
fountain-land  of  the  Paradise  rivers,  a  '  cool,  airy,
well-watered,  insular  mountain-tract,'  as  it  has  been
called,  lies  in  the  middle  of  the  old  continent.     And
so,  in  a  special  manner,  docs  the  mountain  of  Ara
rat  lie  nearly  in  the  middle,  not  only  of  the  Great
African-Asiatic  desert  tract,  but  also  of  the  inland  or
Mediterranean  waters,  extending  from  Gibraltar  to
the  sea  of  Baikal,  —  at  the  same  time  occupying  the
middle  point  in  the  longest  line  of  extension  of  the
Caucasian  race,  and  of  the  Indo-Germanic  lines  of
language  and  mythology,  whilst  it  is  also  the  middle
point  of  the  greatest  reach  of  land  in  the  old  world
as  measured  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  Behr-
ing's  Straits  —  in  fact,  the  most  peculiar  point  on  the
globe,  from  whose  heights  the  lines  and  tribes  of
people,  as  they  went  forth  from  the  sons  of  Noah,
might  spread  themselves  to  all  the  regions  of  the
earth  (compare  VON  RAUMER,  'Palestine')."     Kcil.
See  also  DELITZSCU,  p.  2G<>.    The  Koran  has  wrongly
placed  the  landing-place  of  Noah  on  the  hill  Judhi*
in  the  Kurd  mountain-tract  ;  the  Samaritan  version
locates  it  on  the  mountains  of  Ceylon  ;  the  Sybilline
books  in  Phrygia,  in  the  native  district  of  Marsyas.

*  [There  is  no  evidence  of  any  hill  so  called  among  tho
Kurd  mountains,  or  in  any  other  region.  In  a  note  on  tho
Koran,  xi.  46,  Sale  regards  it  as  a  corruption  for  Jordi,  or
Giordi,  but  there  is  no  trace  of  tliis  in  the  Arabic.  Ill
the  Koran  and  elsewhere,  wherever  the  Arabian  tradition

"       'Jt
appears,  it  is  constantly  written    i£  £  »-3>-  1  j  and  is  evi

dently  a  descriptive  name  from  c>L>-  ,  prxslans,  bonus
fuit.  It  is,  therefore,  an  epithet  denoting  yaodncss,  liber


ality,  or  mercy:  f£i^m.^-  (_\A^  j  the  hill  of  Mercy,  or
mount  Mercy,  as  we  say,  the  cape  of  Good  Hope.  Com
pare  the  Hebrew  appellative,  Dcut.  iii.  25,  HUH  "fl  ,  and
especially  such  epithets  as  we  find  in  Gen.  xxii.  14,
nN~^  itjn1?  "if},  Mount  Jehovah  Jiraeh,  Mount  in  which
the  Lord  appears.  On  Al-jude,  sec  Uerbclot,  Bib.  Orient.
375.  A.  He  calls  it  Giouda,  and  finds  a  dilh'culty  in  locating
it,  but  conjectures  it  to  be  near  a  village  called  Thamanin,
from  the  Right  persons  saved  in  the  ark,  as  is  supposed.—
T.  L.I


310


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


The  Hindoo  story  of  the  flood  names  the  Himalaya,
the  Greek  Parnassus,  as  the  landing-place  of  the  de
livered  ancestor."  Knobel.  Delitzseh  and  Keil  agree
in  the  supposition  of  the  Armenian  highlands.

a.  Vers.  5-12.  The  lime  of  the  Siyns  of  Ddii<er-
ance,  and  of  the  increasing  JIoj>e,  from  the  first  De
crease  until  the.  Disappearance  of  the  Flood.  The
first  sign  of  deliverance  was  the  resting  of  the  ark
upon  Ararat.  Now  it  continues  still  until  the  first
day  of  the  tenth  month  (Tammuz),  or  from  seventy
to  seventy-three  days,  when  there  appears  the  second
sign:  the  peaks  of  the  Armenian  highlands  become
visible  ;  at  all  events,  the  ark,  on  their  summit,  had
become  free  IVuin  the  influence  of  the  water.  Noah,
however,  is  not  >atisfied,  until  after  forty  days  more,
that  the  flood  will  not,  return;  and  then  he  opens  the
window  ("Sri)  of  the  sky-light  ("fj'jl).  Fresh  light
and  air  awaken,  or  rather  gradually  reanimate,  the
torpid  animal-world,  and  Noah's  longing  desire  sends
forth  the  raven  through  the  opened  window.  (It  is
to  be  remarked  that  the  ark  had  only  one  male  ra
ven,  because  from  the  unclean  animals  there  was
taken  but  one  pair.  From  the  staying  out  or  return
ing  of  the  ra\e:i  Noah  might,  at  all  events,  draw
inf'Tenees;  but  this  bird  is  noted  for  his  appetite,
th:U  which  makes  all  life  in  the  ark  strive  for  free
dom.  The  raven,  therefore,  may  be  first  ventured
on  this  craving  flight,  since  he  can  find  food  from
the  dead  bodies  left  by  the  flood  upon  the  inoun-
t;i  us.  "  In  the  ancient  world,  the  raven  was  regard
ed  as  a  prophetic  bird,  and  was  therefore  held  sacred
to  Apollo.  Something  of  this  appears  (1  Kings  xvii.
4,  6)  in  his  connection  with  the  prophet  Ellas.  He
was  thus  esteemed  among  the  Arabians,  who  as
sumed  to  understand  the  voice  and  flight  of  the
birds.  Especially  was  he  regarded  as  a  prophet  of
the  weather,  as  inferred  from  his  flight  and  cry.
Pliny  describes  him  as  a  wild  aud  forgetful  bird,*


*  [This  is  rather  from  Sen-ins,  in  his  Note  on  Virg,  Gfnr-
pir.  lib.  i.  410,  and  who  incorrectly  ascribes  it  to  Pliny.  See
i;.i,  hart,  Hi,-rtiz.  it.  2(17.  B.  The  idea,  however,  may  have
iroin  the  tradition  of  the  raven's  not  returning  to
the  ark,  as  the  story  isto'd  in  ether  accounts  than  that  of
tho  Hebrew.  There  was  another  wide-spread  ancient  be
lief  respecting  him,  which  is  given  by  1'liny,  x.  1'2,  by
Ari-toile,  Jlisl.  JVa/.  ix.  31,  anil  mentioned  by  tho  Hub-
bins,  as  well  as  the  Christian  Fathers,  that  this  bird  is
cruel  to  its  young,  nnd  early  ejects  them  from  the,  ne>t
before  they  are  prepared  to  gather  food  for  themselves.
Whether  true  or  false,  it  seems  to  have  furnished  the  ground
for  one  of  the  most  touching  illustrations  of  the  divine
care  for  the  helpless  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures.  Sue  Ps.
es.vii.  9,  "who  giveth  to  the  young  ravens  when  they
cry,"  Job  xxxviii.  41,  "  who  provideth  for  the  raven  his
f  i'i  1,  when  his  young  ones  cry  unto  God,  they  wander  for
lack  of  meat."  The  Arabians  had  the  same  tradition,  nnd
em-.iloy  it  in  a  similar  illustration  of  the  divine  compassion,
giving  it  in  almost  the  very  words  of  the  Hebrew.  Thus  in
it  verse  lo  be  found  in  Hariri,  Seance  xiii.  p.  151  (De  Sacy  ed.),


"O  Tin >u  '.lint  providcst  for  the  young  raven  in  his  nest."
On  whirh  the  Scholiast  makes  a  very  singular  comment :
"  When  the  young  raven,"  he  says,  "  or  the  naabu,  breaks
the  egg,  it  comes  out  white,  which  so  frightens  the  parents
that  they  fly  far  away  ;  for  the  raven  is  the  most  timid  and
cautious  of  birds.  When  this  takes  place  Allah  sends  to  it
the  Hies  that  fall  into  the  nest.  And  so  it  lives  for  forty
days,  until  its  feathers  are  grown,  and  it  becomes  black,
•when  the  parents  again  return  to  it,"  etc.  Tho  truth  or
falsehood  of  such  a  belief,  or  of  the  fact  of  abandonment  in
any  way,  does  not  affect  the  force  or  beauty  of  the  illustra
tion  drawn  from  it.  Our  Saviour  most  tenderly  makes
use  of  it,  Luke  xii.  24.  On  the  prophetic  powers,  or  the
weather-foretelling  powers,  of  the  raven,  see  the  striking
passage,  Virg.  Georgic.  i.  410,  and  the  philosophic  explana-


who  forgets  to  come  back  to  his  nest.  And  so  he
came  not  back  to  the  ark ;  but  Noah  could  know
from  this  that  the  earth  was  no  longer  wholly  cov
ered  with  water."  Knobel.  We  may  refer  here  to
the  two  ravens  on  the  shoulders  of  Odin.  Without
returning  into  the  ark,  he  flew  here  ac<l  (here  be
tween  the  ark  (to  which  he  was  bound  by  fear  and
sympathy,  the  attraction  of  his  mate  perhaps,  and
on  the  outside  of  which  he  could  rest)  and  the
emerging  mountain-tops,  where  he  found  food  and
freedom. — And  he  sent  forth  the  dove. — The
raven  lights  everywhere ;  therefore  his  remaining
out  furnishes  no  proof  of  the  drying  of  the  lower
places.  But  the  dove  lights  upon  the  plains,  and
not  in  the  slime  and  marsh;  therefore  does  its  flying
abroad  give  information  whether  or  no  the  plains
are  dry.  The  Septuagint  translates  "i FIX 73  by  oiriau
avrov,  the  Vulgate,  ]><>xt  cum,  Luther  correctly,  from
himself.  (So  the  English  translation,  from  him.)  It
is  perhaps  indicated  that  he  had  to  drive  it  from
him.  The  time  of  sending  away  is  reckoned  by
Baumgarten,  Knobel,  and  others  (after  Aben  Ezra
and  Kimchi!,  as  being  seven  days  after  the  sending
of  the  raven;  because  it  is  said,  ver.  10,  he  waited
other  seven  days.  The  delicate  dove  finds  no  place
fit  for  her  lighting,  because  all  the  lower  lands  are
yet  covered,  and  so  she  turns  back.  And  Noah
drew  her  back  again  into  the  ark.  The  question
may  be  asked:  Since  the  top  of  Ararat  was  free
from  water,  why  did  not  Noah  go  out  with  the
beasts?  It  is,  hov, ever,  a  truthful  characteristic
that  he  did  no  such  thing  ;  since  a  hasty  disturbance
of  the  beasts  might  have  yet  brought  the  whole  in
danger  of  destruction,  liut  the  second  sending
forth  of  the  dove,  after  seven  other  days,  brings  to
him  the  fourth  and  fairest  sign  of  deliverance:  the
dove  returns  with  a  fresh  olive-leaf  in  its  mouth,
•'brrsi  fut.  7//y /<// from  bin,*  to  be  in  trouble,  to
wait  painfully  and  longingly."  Delitzsch.  "  The
olive-tree  has  green  leaves  all  the  year  through,  and
appears  to  endure  the  water,  since  TIIEOPHRASTUS,
Hist.  Plant.  4X,  and  PLINY,  Hist.  Nat.  K3,  50,  give

tion  the  poet  there  attempts  to  give  of  tho  animal  signs  of
the  weather  in  general.

It  might  be  :\  question  -worth  studying  :  how  far  the
whole  xrii-iif-  of  bird-divination,  so  prevalent  in  the  an
cient  world,  may  have  had  its  origin,  like  that  of  other
perverted  beliefs,  in  the  use  Noah  made  of  the  ravc.i  and
the  dove  in  determining  (.ilirininy,  we  might  say)  the  natu
ral  signs  of  safety  for  himself  and  the  ark,  and  so  iho
gracious  signs  of  the  divine  mercy  and  promise.  So  preva
lent  was  the  belief  and  the  practice,  that  oiuvos  ibinl)  in
Greek  becomes  a  name  for  omen,  or  fortune,  good  or  bad.
Bo  the  Latin  aunpicium  (arisrricium)-our  words  auspice,
auspicious,  though  the  latter  is  generally  taken  in  a  favor
able  sense.  The  Hebrew  words  "j^T",  part.  "(SiSE  .  (de
noting  divination  by  clouds,)  as  used  Lev.  xix.  2(i,  ])eut.
xviii.  10,  et  al.,  show  the  prevalence  of  a  precisely  similar


serpent.  There  may,  however,  nave  been  another,  or  a
concurrent,  ground  of  these  bird-divining  practices  of  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  in  a  primitive  notion  that  the  inhab
itants  of  the  air  (the  birds  of  heaven,  as  Scripture  calls
them)  were  nearer  to  the  divine,  or  that  from  their  super-
earthly  position  they  may  have  had  a  superhuman  sight
and  knowledge  of  things  on  the  earth.  Comp.  Job  xxviii.
7,  "  a  path  which  no  fowl  knoweth,  which  the  eagle's  eye
hath  not  seen."  Also  ver.  21,  where  of  the  mysterious
wisdom  it  is  said  :  "  it  is  hid  from  tho  eyes  of  all  living,
and  concealed  from  the  birds  of  the  heavens  " — a  poetical
mode  of  saying,  it  is  beyond  all  human  divining,  or  human
investigation.— T.  I..]

*  [Sec  remarks  on  this  derivation  in  the  textual  notes,
No.  (J,  page  308— .T.  L.]


CHAP.   VIII.   1-19.


311


an  account  of  olive  trees  in  the  Red  Sea.  It  comes
early  in  Armenia  (Strabo),  though  not  on  the  heights
of  Ararat,  but  lower  down,  below  the  walnut,  mul
berry,  and  apricot  tree,  in  the  valleys  on  the  south
side  (RiTTER,  "Geography,"  10.  p.  920)._  The  dove
must,  therefore,  have  made  a  wide  flight  in  search  of
the  plains,  and  on  this  account  have  just  returned
.  at  evening  time.  This  olive-leaf, — which  was  not
something  picked  up  on  a  mountain-peak,  where  it
might  have  been  floated  by  the  water,  but  (Cp-)
something  torn  off,  and,  therefore,  fresh  plucked
from  the  tree, — taught  Noah  what  was  the  state  of
things  in  the  earth  below.  It  was  the  more  fitting
here,  since  the  olive-branch  was  an  emblem  of  peace
(2  Mace.  xiv.  4;  Dion.,  Halic.,  Virg.,  Liv.),  and  yet
in  the  text  it  is  not  an  olive-branch  (Symm  ,  Vulg.),
but  only  an  olive-leaf."  Knobel. — The  sign  gave
intelligence  that  at  least  the  lower  olive-trees,  iu  the
lower  ground,  were  above  the  water;  the  olive-leaf,
moreover,  in  the  mouth  of  the  dove,  was  a  fair  sign
of  promise. — Yet  seven  other  days. — This  time
the  dove  returns  no  more.  The  attraction  of  free
dom  and  the  new  life  outweighs  the  desire  to  return ;
in  which  it  is  presupposed  that  it  is  an  attraction
which  the  others  will  follow.  "  The  dove  is  found  also
in  the  classical  myths.  According  to  PLUTARCH  (Do
Soleii.  Animal.  13),  Deucalion  had  a  dove  in  the
ark,  which  indicated  bad  weather  by  its  return,  and
good  weather  by  its  onward  flight."  Knobel.  It
was,  in  like  manner,  a  prophetic  bird  at  Dodona,  ac
cording  to  Herodotus  and  others ;  and  the  ancients
were  also  acquainted  with  its  use  as  a  letter-carrier,
according  to  yElian  and  Pliny.  On  the  significance
of  the  dove  in  the  New  Testament,  see  the  account
of  the  baptism  of  Jesus. — In  the  six  hundred
and  first  year. — This  reckoning  completes  the  old
life  of  Xoali.  His  seventh  hundred  is  the  beginning
of  his  sabbath-time. — In  the  first  month,  in  the
first  day,  etc. — This  date  looks  back  to  the  be
ginning  of  the  flood,  in  the  second  month  of  the
previous  year,  on  the  seventeenth  day.  Now  Noah
removes  the  covering  of  the  ark,  and  takes  a  free
look  around  and  upon  the  new  earth.  The  waters,
no  longer  flowing  back,  were  evaporating  from  the
earth,  and  the  ground  was  in  the  process  of  becoming
dry.  Yet  still  he  waited  a  month  and  twenty-seven
days,  that  he  might  not  too  hastily  expose  to  injury
the  living  seminarium  of  the  ark,  the  precious  seed
of  the  new  life  that  had  been  entrusted  to  his  care.
But  he  waited  only  for  the  clear  direction. — And
Noah  removed  the  covering  of  the  ark. —
!"IO3£ .  Because  this  word  is  used  elsewhere  only  of
a  covering  made  of  leather  and  skins  with  which  they
covered  the  holy  vessels  on  the  march  (Numb.  iv.  8,
12),  and  of  the  third  and  fourth  covering  of  the  ark
of  the  testimony  (Exod.  xxvi.  14,  etc.),  it  does  not
follow,  as  Knobel  supposes,  that  the  author  had  in
view  a  similar  covering.  The  deck  of  an  ark  on
which  the  rain-storms  spent  their  force,  must  surely
have  been  of  as  great  stability  as  the  ark  itself. —
And  God  (Elohim)  spake  to  Noah.— It  is  Elohim,
because  this  revelation  belongs  to  the  universal  rela
tion  of  God  to  the  earth.  "  The  time  of  the  flood,
according  to  verse  14,  amounted  to  twelve  months
and  eleven  days,  that  is,  three  hundred  and  sixty-
five  days,  or  a  full  solar  year ;  consequently  in  the
course  of  one  full  circuit  of  the  natural  change  or
period  (!"!3 '£),  does  the  earth  become  destroyed  and
renewed.  In  the  fact  that  Noah  might  not  leave  the
ark  from  his  own  free,  arbitrary  will,  there  is  ex


pressed  his  preservation  of  the  seal  of  the  divina
counsel,  and  of  the  divine  work."  Baumgarten.
New  blessings  upon  the  creatures,  similar  to  thos«
which  were  pronounced  at  the  creation,  are  connect
ed  with  his  going  forth  at  the  divine  command ;  it  is
the  beginning  of  a  new  world.  "As  in  creation  the
beasts  were  blessed  before  man,  so  is  it  here."
Baumgarten.  In  the  beasts  going  out  of  the  ark  in
pairs  there  is  given  to  us  a  clear  idea  of  the  stability
of  the  new  order  in  nature,  and  of  the  security  for
its  continuance.

[NOTE  ON  THE  WEEK,  AND  ON  THE  SEVENTH  DAY
OBSERVANCE  IN  THE  ARK. — "And  he  waited  seven
days,"  ver.  10.  "  And  he  waited  seven  ot/icr  days."
Dr.  Lange  gives  little  attention  to  the  important
question  connected  with  this  language,  as  he  passes
over,  with  a  very  few  remarks,  the  whole  question  of
the  sabbath  in  Gen.  i.  There  is  certainly  indicated
here  a  sevenfold  division  of  days,  as  already  recog
nized,  whatever  may  be  its  reasons.  Of  these,  no  one
seems  more  easy  and  natural  than  that  which  refers  it
to  the  traditionary  remembrance  of  the  creation,  and
its  seventh  day  of  rest,  although  some  of  those  who
claim  to  be  "  the  higher  school  of  criticism  "  reject  it.
Had  such  a  reference  to  a  sevenfold  division  been
found  in  some  ancient  Hindoo  or  Persian  book,  and
along  with  it,  or  in  a  similar  writing  closely  connected
with  it,  an  account  of  a  hexamcral  creation  with  its
succeeding  day  of  rest,  they  would  doubtless  have
discovered  a  connection  between  the  ideas.  But
here  they  do  not  hesitate  to  violate  their  own  famous
canon,  that  "  the  Bible  is  to  be  interpreted  like  any
other  ancient  writings."  Now  it  may  be  regarded
as  well  settled  that  such  a  division  of  time  existed
universally  among  the  Shemitie  and  other  Oriental
peoples.  (See  this  clearly  shown  in  the  article
Week,  in  Smith's  "  Dictionary  of  the  Bible.'1)  It  is
a  fact,  too,  well  established,  that  a  similar  division
existed  among  the  Egyptians,  as  is  particularly
stated,  with  the  names  given  to  the  days  of  the
week,  by  DION.  CASSIUS  (Hist.  Horn,  xxxvii.  18).
They  are  the  names  of  the  seven  celestial  bodies,
and  yet  there  are  no  astronomical  phenomena  that
could  of  themselves  have  given  rise  to  it.  It  is  evi
dently  an  after-thought.  The  things  named  must
have  been  known  before,  and  when  the  original
reason  of  the  division  was  lost,  the  planetary  series
was  adapted  to  it,  although  it  had  to  be  taken  in  an
irregular  and  disproportioned  manner.  This  was  to
give  it  mystery  and  interest,  and  to  accommodate  it
to  the  astrological  superstition,  which  early  came  in,
of  lucky  and  unlucky  days.  The  same  names  came
into  the  Roman  (ecclesiastical)  and  Saxon  calendars.
They  could  not  so  readily  have  found  place,  had
there  not  been  some  previous  ground  in  the  Occi
dental  heathen  ideas  (Roman  and  Scandinavian),
although  they  do  not  appear  in  classical  literature.

But  how  shall  such  a  division  be  explained  ?  The
reference  to  the  lunar  phases  seems  plausible,  but
will  not  bear  close  examination.  It  is  true  that  a
lunation  (about  twenty-nine  and  one-half  days)  is
approximately  divisible  into  four  parts,  of  nearly
seven  days  each,  but  the  beginnings  and  endings,
especially  of  the  second  and  fourth  quarters,  are  so
obscure,  and  incapable  of  easy  determination,  that
it  could  never  have  been  adjusted  with  the  required
practical  precision  to  any  settled  weekly  reckoning
of  definite  days.  Besides,  in  that  case,  the  week
would  have  had  its  series  commence  and  end  with
the  divisions  of  the  lunation.  But  we  find  nowhere
any  such  reckoning.  The  week  has  no  reference  to


312


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


the  month.  Such  a  day,  of  such  a  month,  is  in  all
calendars,  but  first  or  second  week,  of  such  a  month,
is  nowhere  found.  Ajrain,  there  were  adjustments  of
the  months  to  the  solar  year  by  admitted  inequalities
and  intercalations,  but  there  is  no  trace  anywhere  of
any  such  attempts  to  regulate  (he  days  of  the  w\
with  reference  to  the  month.  A  seventh  portion  of
time  computed  from  an  ever-shifting  beginning
would  have  been  of  no  use,  or  would  only  have  in
troduced  coiifu.-ion.  The  week,  therefore,  mu.-t
have  had,  and  did  have,  its  reckoning  from  some
point  entirely  independent  of  any  annual,  monthly,
or  even  astronomical  calculus.  It  must,  too,  have
been  from  some  remote  period,  iixe.l  in  itself  (or
supposed  to  be  so  iixed),  just  as  we  reckon  our  Weeks
from  the  day  of  t'hri.-t's  resurrection,  in  a  series
continuing  sieadily  on,  though  there  has  bei-n,  .-inee
then,  rcpi  a(ed  r.-eiiiieatinns  of  the  month  (or  moons),
and  even  u  change  of  style  in  uspect  to  the  year.
The  weekly  scries  has  b<  en  unbroken.

'1  lie  .Jewi.-h  reckoning  of  the  seven  days,  a'.id  of
the  .-abhath,  we  know,  was  thus  independent,  hi
Exod.  xvi.  -'•',  \ve  find  the  particular  sabbath  there
mcntionel  as  coming  on  the  sixteenth  day  of  the
-  !coiul  monili  (the  day  after  they  came  to  the  Wil
derness  of  Sin),  and  on  the  twenty-third  following,
as  reckoned  without  reference  to  any  monthly  or
annual  beginning.  It  comes  on  such  a  day,  but
computed  by  itself,  and  seems  to  have  been  thus
known  us  something  dating  from  some  ancient,  re
mote  period,  and  kept  in  remembrance  even  during
the  ignorance1  and  debasement  of  a  servile  bondage.
It  must  have  come  by  tradition  from  their  patriarch
al  ancestors,  and  was  probably  the  same  seventh
day  which  was  ivcogni/cd  by  the  Egyptians  (their
day  of  Saturn,  Remphan,  Hebrew  'fi'3 ,  Arabic

f^A5^  KL'e  Amos  v.  2('>,    Septua'.'int    version,  and

t^J  ;  -.

Acts  vii.  4G),  although  with  them  the  observance
may  have  lo.-t  its  original  idea  and  reason,  and  be
come  wholly  idolatrous  or  superstitious.  Therefore
does  Moses  tell  the  Jews  to  remember,  and  keep  it
A.///,  calling  back  their  minds  to  the  primitive
ground  of  its  institution.  So  Kimchi  and  Abcn
K/.ra,  in  their  comment  on  Amos  v.  20,  say  "  that
"p*3  (Kiynii)  is  the  same  with  "PS 'I',  Mtall<itu't
(Saturn,  or  the  sabbath-god),  for  they  made  to  him
an  image,  whilst  another  interpretation  makes  it  to  be
Tl'l'  2-"-  ,  the  star  of  Saturn,  and  so  is  he  callid
•jXVD  ,  Khivan,  in  the  tongue  of  the  Arabians  and
the  Persians."  In  the  earliest  Egyptian  mythology,
as  in  the  most  ancient  Greek  derived  from  it,  the
dynasty  of  Saturn  (Kp6vos=xp6vos,  time),  or  the  old
creative,  generative  power,  was  before  that  of  Zeuv,
the  light,  or  the  Sun;  that  is,  his  day  (dies  Saturni)
was  before  the  dies  Solis,  or,  sun-day,  the  primitive
dies  .Tovis.*  So  docs  the  darkened  mirror  of  heathen
ism  give  to  nil  these  early  things  both  a  pantheistic
and  a  polytheistic  hue.  The  Hebrew  revelation  alone
preserves  them  truthful,  pure,  and  holy.  The  silence
of  the  Scriptures  in  respect  to  the  patriarchal  ob
servance  of  the  sabbath,  religiously  or  otherwise
(unless  this  that  is  said  of  Noah  be  an  exception),
furnishes  no  answer  to  the  strong  inference  to  be
derived  from  Exod.  xvi.  and  xx.  See  remarks  on
this  in  Note  on  the  Sabbath,  page  197.

*  [This  nnmc  was  also  given  to  Thursday,  ns  ruled  by
the  planet  Jupiter,  but  in  the  most  ancient  mythology  it
mubt  have  come  directly  after  Satui-n,  as  dies  Solis. — T.  L.]


The  more  we  examine  these  acts  of  Noah,  the
more  it  will  strike  us  that  they  must  have  been  of  a
religious  nature.  He  did  not  take  such  observations,
and  so  send  out  the  birds,  as  mere  arbitrary  acts,
prompted  simply  by  his  curiosity  or  his  impatience.
God  had  "shut  him  in,"  and  as  a  man  of  faith  and
prayer  he  looks  for  the  divine  directions  in  deter
mining  the  times  of  waiting.  Every  opening,  there
fore,  of  the  ark,  and  every  sending  forth  of  the
birds,  may  be  regarded  as  having  been  accompanied
or  preceded  by  a  divine  consultation.  lie  "  inquired
of  ike  7,'<n/,''  as  the  Scripture  records  other  holy
men  as  having  done.  What  more  likely,  then,  than
that  such  inquiry  should  have  its  basis  in  solemn  re
ligious  exercises,  not  arbitrarily  entered  into,  but  on
days  held  >;,cred  for  prayer  and  religious  rest.
AVhcn  this  was  done,  then  the  other,  or  more  human
means  of  inquiry  that  were  in  accordance  with  it,
woidd  be  ivsoi  t'.-d  to.  In  this  point  of  view,  the
sending  forth  of  the  raven  and  the  dove  mav  be  rev
erently  regarded  as  divine  aici>p!i-(iti(>nx.  (See  re
marks  in  marginal  note,  p.  :>lo.)  They  immediately
followed  such  stated  religious  exercises,  and  hence
his  periods  of  waiting  would,  in  the  most  natural
and  appropriate  manner,  be  regulated  by  tin  m.  On
any  ether  view,  his  proceedings  would  seem  wholly
reasonless  and  arbitrary.  The  idea  gives  an  interest
to  the  life  ('f  this  1-nely,  "righteous  man, "dining
his  long  sojourn  in  the  ark.  lie  did  r.ot  _/.' ,;y/,  /  God,
nor  God's  ancient  hallowing  of  a  certain  day  in
seven,  and,  therefore,  is  tin  re  the  stronger  emphasis
in  what  is  said  ver.  1,  that  "the  Lord  rcmonl-ired
Noah."  See  Langi 's  most  striking  and  lua'.itiful
remarks  on  this  expression,  p.  ;;n;i.

There  must  be  reasons  for  such  a  srve:.-d:ivs'
waiting,  and  what  more  natural  and  consistent  ones
could  there  be  than  those  here  stated:1  It  amounts
to  nothing  to  say  that  seven  is  a  sacred  or  mystic
number.  How  came  it  to  be  such?  Though  after
wards  thus  used  in  Scripture,  there  could  have  been
nothing  of  this  i-acredness  at  that  early  day,  unless
it  had  come  from  the  still  earlier  account  of  the  cre
ation.  It  must  have  been  founded  on  some  great
fuc! ;  for,  of  all  the  elementary  numbers,  seven  may
be  said  to  have1  tin1  least  of  any  mathematical  or
mi  iv'.v  numerical  interest,  such  as  gave  rise  to  pecu
liar  speculations  in  the  earliest  thinking.  There
was  a  mystery  about  the  number  one,  as  the  foun
tain  of  the  infinite  numerical  series,  or  as  represent
ing  a  point,  the  principium  of  all  magnitude.  'Ju-o
had  an  interest  as  representing  the  line,  and  as  the
root  of  that  most  regular  of  all  scries,  the  binary
powers.  Three  was  the  binding  of  unity  and  dual
ity,  and  represented  the  triangle,  the  simplest  or
most  elementary  plane  figure  in  space.  Four  (the
Mructi/s  of  Pythagoras)  represented  the  tetraedron,
or  the  most  elementary  solid.  Five  was  the  number
of  the  fingers  on  the  hand,  and  thus  became  the
origin  of  the  universal  decimal  notation.  8ix  was
the  double  triad,  and  so  on.  l!ut  it  is  not  easy  to
find  any  such  mathematical  or  numerical  peculiarity
in  seven  that  could  have  drawn  special  attention  to
it,  as  having,  in  itself,  anything  mystical  or  occult.
It  is  not  a  square,  nor  a  power  of  any  kind  ;  it  is  not
what  is  called  an  oblong  number,  or  one  that  can  be
divided  into  factors.  It  represents  no  figure  that,
like  the  hexagon  or  pentagon,  can  be  geometrically
produced.  Its  sacrcdness,  or  mystery,  therefore,
could  only  have  arisen  from  some  great  historical
truth,  or  institution,  supposed  to  have  been  con
nected  with  it;  and  if  we  "interpret  the  Hebrew


CHAP.  VIII.  1-19.


313


books  like  other  ancient  writings,"  this  origin  could
have  been  no  other  than  a  belief  in  the  great  events
mentioned  Gen.  i.,  as  laying  the  foundation  for  all
subsequent  veneration  of  the  hebdomadal  number
and  period. — T.  L.]


DOCTRINAL  AJsD  ETHICAL.

1.  The  great  turning.     As  the  first  half  of  the
flood  pictures  especially  the  judgment  of  death,  so
the  second  half  presents  the  redemption  from  judg
ment,  as  it  goes  forth  in  its  gradual  development,
with  its  redemptive  and  anticipatory  signs.

2.  God    remembered  Noah.     Everything  (every
affliction  of  the  pious)  endures  its  time  ;  the  good
ness  of  God  endureth  forever.     God's  remembering
in  a  special  sense.     His  righteousness  makes  a  spe
cial  knowledge,  and  a  special  beholding,  inside  of  his
general  omniscience  and  omnipotence  ;  so  his  mercy
and  his   compassion  make  a  special  remembrance
within  his  consciousness,  wherein  there  are  known  to
him  all  Ids  works  from  the  beginning.     That  is,  God
is  a  living,  personal  God,  showing  himself  to  be  such
in  his  government,  and  in  his  revelation  which  makes
joyful  again  the  believers  in  his  grace,  after  they  had
been  exposed  to  temptation.     Each  deliverance,  each
help,  especially  each  experience  of  salvation,  rests
upon  a  remembrance  of  God.    God's  remembrance  of
man  and  man's  remembrance  of  God  meet  each  other,
as  eye  meets  eye,  in  the  actual  manifestation  of  sav
ing  acts.     The  compassion  of  God  embraced  also  the
animal-world,  but  conditions  itself  through  the  grace
that  embraces  believing  men.

3.  As  the  spirit  of  God  moved  over  the  waters  at
the  beginning  of  creation,  so  goes  forth  here,  over
the  floods  of  the  deluge,  the  wind  that  saved,  as  an
emblem  of  the  same  divine  spirit.     It  was  a  wind  of
life — a  vernal  wind — for  the  new  earth.

4.  As  the  fountains  of  the  deep  were  broken  up
before  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened,  so  also
were  they  closed  before  -them.     In  order  that  the
rain  might  cease  at  Ararat,  it  was  necessary  that  be
fore  this  the  evaporation  in  the  opposite  regions  of
the  earth  should  have  come  to  an  end.

5.  Ararat.     The  home  of  Adam,  the  home  of
Noah.     Our  first  home  the  heights  of  Paradise,  our
second  home  the  salvation  hills  of  Ararat,  our  third
home  Golgotha,  our  everlasting  home  the  highest
heavens.

6.  Tiie  salvation  is  unfolded  gradually,  and  an
nounced  in  a  gradual  series  of  saving  signs:   1.  The
resting  of  the  ark ;  2.  the  appearance  of  the  mount
ain-tops  ;    y.  the  flying  forth  of  the  raven ;    4.  the
olive-leaf  of  the  dove ;  5.  the  dove's  not  returning.
Thus  it  is  that  the  time  of  deliverance  is  a  time  of
patience,  and  of  alternate  desire  and  hope.    *'  Blessed
in  hope"  (Rom.  viii.).

7.  The  raven  and  the  dove.     The  sympathy  and
the  co-operation  of  the  beasts  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
The  unity  of  the  raven  and  the  dove,  and  at  the
same  time  their  contrast,  denotes  the  community  of
creaturely  interests,  as  well  as  the  contrast  between
the  interests  of  the  creature  generally,  and  the  king
dom  of  God  in  particular  ;  for  the  raven  is  a  figure  of
the  universal  life,  the  dove  an  emblem  of  the  church.

8.  The  signs  of  hope  increase  from  seven  to  seven
lays— an  indication  of  the  idea  of  the  Sabbath  and
)f  Sunday.

9.  "  The  fresh  leaf  from  the  olive-tree  is  the  first
iign  of  life  from  the  buried  earth.    A  significant  si<m :


for  the  oil,  as  a  gentle  yet  penetrating  substance,  is
the  symbol  of  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This
is  brought  by  that  purest  bird  of  the  heavens,  which
even  among  the  heathen  is  held  sacred  (sec  Herod.
2.  55).  The  green  olive-leaf  in  the  mouth  of  the
dove  is  a  sign  that  the  earth  is  not  merely  laid
waste  (we  may  rather  say  purified),  but  also  conse
crated  by  the  waters."  Baumgarten.  And  yet  we
must  distinguish  between  the  symbolic  significance)
of  the  oil,  of  the  olive-tree,  and  of  the  olivc-leuf.
The  oil  denotes  the  spirit,  the  olive-tree  (Zach  iv.
11-14;  Rev.  xi.  3,  4)  denotes  spiritual  men,  the  holy
Israel ;  and  in  correspondence  with  this  the  olive-
branch  denotes  the  partakers  of  the  spirit  (Rom.  xi.),
the  blossoms  of  the  spirit,  the  signs  of  love  and
peace.

10.  "If  we  take  the  human  race  and  the  earth  as
a  totality,  the  flood  is  the  dividing  of  the  old  from  the
new.     The  old  earth,  with  the  humanity  that  had  be
come  flesh,  the  apxcuos  KO'O-MOS,*  is  destroyed,  but
even  this  destruction  is  the  preservation  of  the  right
eous  man,  of  Noah,  in  that  he  is  delivered  from  the
corruptive  community  of  the  flesh.     On  this  account
is  it  said,  1  Pet.  iii.  20,  '  eight  souls  were  saved  by
water,'  and  even  there  (ver.  21),  the  flood  is  named
a  type  of  baptism.    The  water  of  the  flood  is,  there
fore,  the  baptismal  water  of  the  earth,  which  drowns
the  old  whilst  it  preserves  and  quickens  the  new.
This  view  of  the  flood,  moreover,  has  passed  over
into  the  consciousness  of  the  Church.     In  the  prayer
for  the  consecration  of  the  baptismal  water  in  the
Sacramentarium  Grcgorianum  it  is  said :  Dtus  qui
noccntis   mundi   crimina  per  aquas  ablucns,  etc."
Baumgarten.

11.  As  baptism  makes  a  distinction  between  the
old  and  the  new  man,  so  did  the  flood  make  a  distinc
tion  between  the  old  and  the  new  humanity,  which
were,  therefore,  types  on  both  sides.     So  did  the  Red
Sea  divide  the  children  of  Israel  from  the  Egyptians,
who  were  drowned  in  the  same  (1  Cor.  x.  2).

12.  As  Noah  went  into  the  ark  at  the  command
of  God,  so  also  must  he,  at  the  same  command,  go
out.     That  he  was  in  no  perturbation,  did  not  wil
fully  and  hastily  go  forth  from  the  ark,  is  a  sign  that
we  must  not  anticipate  the  hour  of  God's  help,  nor
throw  ourselves  hastily  out  of  the  ark  of  the  church
in  sectarian  impatience,  but  wait  the  Lord's  time  in
which  to  go  out  of  the  ark  into  a  new  world.

13.  The  renewal  of  the  blessing  of  propagation
upon  the  creature  is  a  confirmation  of  the  first  bless
ing  (Gen.  i.),  a  repeated  expression  of  God's  good
ness,  and  of  his  complacency  in  life.     Contrast  as
against  dualism  and  a  sickly  asceticism.


HOMILETICAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.  The  figures  of
the  coming  salvation.  1.  The  resting  of  the  ark,  the
firmly  grounded  church ;  2.  the  emerging  of  the
mountain-tops,  the  mountains  of  God  as  the  sign  of
heaven ;  3.  the  flight  of  the  dove,  "  the  longing  of
the  creature;"  4.  the  dove  with  the  olive-leaf,  tin
spirit  of  life,  with  the  announcement  of  peace;
5.  the  remaining  out  of  the  dove  and  the  opening  of

*  [This  word  KO<TT*O?,  as  used  by  Peter.,  does  not  necessa
rily  denote  tho  earth  as  a  ivhole.  It  means  a  former  stato
of  things  as  distinguished  from  the  present.  As  employed,
it  has  tho  same  generality,  and  the  same  limitation,  al
oiKovfj.ei'-ri,  when  used  for  the  inhabited  world,  real  or  sup
posed. — T.  L.


314


GENESIS,  OK   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


the  ark,  the  free  intercourse  between  the  church  and
the  consecrated  world;  C.  the  going  forth  from  the
ark,  the  passing  over  of  the  church  into  the  new
world.

STARKE:  It  is  certain  that  Hod  had  not  forgotten
Noah ;  but  the  Scripture  is  wont  to  speak  after  the
manner  of  men,  namely,  as  man,  sometimes,  repre
sents  to  himself  God  as  speaking.  According  to  this,
God's  remembrance  denotes  the  revelation  of  his
gracious  will  and  pleasure,  according  to  which  he  re
veals  to  the  wretched  that  help  which  before  was
hidden  (Hicronymus).  A  life  of  faith  is  the  most
difficult  of  all,'— such  a  life  as  Noah  and  his  sons
must  have  lived,  who  could  only  cling  to  the  hope
of  aid  from  heaven,  since  the  earth  was  covered  with
water,  so  a-  to  give  them  no  ground  of  trust.  It
was,  therefore,  no  vain  word  when  the  Holy  Spirit
Bays  that.  "God  remembered  Noah."  For  it  shows
that  from  the  day  in  which  he  first  went  into  the  ark,
God  had  UK!  ,-poken  to  him,  nor  made  to  him  any
revelation,  lie  could  see  no  ray  of  the  divine  mercy,
but  inu-r  si^tain  himself  alone  upon  the  promise  lie
had  received,  whilst,  in  the  meantime,  the  waters  of
death  are  raging  all  around  him,  as  though  God  had

ind 1  forgotten  him  (Luther).     The  leaf  represents

the  gospel,  for  oil  denotes  compassion  and  peace,  of
which  the  go-pel  teaches. — Bibl.  \Virt:  "0,  my
Christian  friend,  hast  thou  been  a  long  time  confined
in  a  weari.-ome  ark,  whether  it  be  of  some  dillicult
calling,  or  some  painful  state  ;  a.-k  not  counsel  of  the
charmer,  but  wait  with  patience  until  God,  through
righteous  means,  shall  bring  tliee  help  therefrom."

GKKI.AOI  :  God  does,  indeed,  remember  all  his
works,  in  all  times,  and  in  everyway,  but  the  prayer
"remember  me"  (I's.  xxv.  7;  Luke  xxiii.  4'J)  goes
forth  from  the  image  of  God  in  man;  and  by  reason
of  tliis  we  have  no  rest  until  we  can  rejoice  in  all  the
attribute-;  of  God  through  an  inward,  personal  com
munion  with  him.  The  word  here  denotes  the  trials
of  Noah,  \\hen  God  hid  himself,  and  the  enjoyment
of  his  gracious  favor,  when  he  again  reveals  himself.

Calii'n-  H  t,-ili,itrh  :  The  olive-leaf  has  been  ever
held  as  a  symbol  of  peace.

SCHRODER:  God  had  exercised  Noah's  faith  and
patience  (Calvin),  What  is  said  of  the  raven,  Luther
makes  to  correspond,  allcgorically,  with  the  office  of
the  law.  [''  In  the  blackness  of  the  raven  is  a  sign  of
sorrow,  and  its  voice  is  unlovely.  So,  therefore,  are
all  preachers  of  the  law  who  teach  the  righteousness
of  works;  they  are  ministers  of  death  and  sin,  as
Paul  names  the  ministry  of  the  law  (2  Cor.  iii.  6  ;
Rom.  vii.  10).  Nevertheless,  Moses  was  sent  out
with  this  doctrine  even  as  Noah  sent  forth  the  raven.
And  yet  such  teachers  are  nothing  else  than  ravens
that  fly  round  the  a'-k,  bringing  no  certain  sign  that
God  is  reconciled.  But  what  Moses  says  of  the  dove
is  a  very  lovely  figure  of  the  gospel."]


[EXCIHSUS  ON  THE  PARTIAL  EXTENT  OF  THE
FLOOD,  AS  DEDl'CED  FROM  THE  VERY  FACE  OF  THE

HEBREW  TEXT.* — This  account  of  the  flood  fur
nishes  a  happy  illustration  of  what  may  be  called
the  subjective  truthfulness  of  the  Scripture  narra
tives.  There  is  meant  by  this  that  the  language  is
a  perfect  representation  of  an  actual,  conceptual,  and

*  [The  prpat  importance  of  the  question,  and  the  fact  that
Dr.  Lanprc  fills  to  {rive  a  decided  view,  funn  the  plea  for  the
length  of  this  Excursus.  Bclitzseh  also  seems  undecided,
though  he  presents  some  views  strongly  favorable  to  the
theory  of  limitation. — T.  L.]


emotional  state  in  the  mind  of  the  author.  By  tho
author  is  meant  the  one  in  whose  soul  such  emo-
;ions  and  conceptions  were  first  present,  from  what
ever  cause,  outward  or  inward,  they  may  have  been
derived.  "Whether  this  was  ecstatic  vision,  or  a  con
viction  in  the  mind  supposed  to  come  from  a  divine
influence,  or  an  actual  eye-witnessing,  it  is  all  faith
fully  told,  just  as  it  was  conceived  in  vision,  impress
ed  upon  the  thought,  or  seen  by  the  sense.  The
words  are  in  true  correspondence  with  such  a  state
of  soul,  an  honest  imprint  of  it,  according  to  tho  in
fluences  felt,  and  the  degree  of  knowledge  by  which
those  influences  might  be  affected,  or  the  choice  of
language  controlled.  In  either  case,  too,  may  the
term  inspiration  be  applied  to  it,  if  we  admit  the
idea  of  a  divine  purpose  as  specially  concerned  in
the  communication.  It  is  a  special  series  of  divine
acts  in  the  physical  world,  and  in  the  souls  of  men,
that  makes  revelation  strictly,  or  in  that  higher  sense
to  which  the  term  is  limited  in  connection  with
the  scriptural  narrations.  It  is  this  extraordinary
doing,  whether  in  nature  or  above  nature,  commenc
ing  with  creation  and  continued  in  a  series  through
the  whole  history  of  the  Church,  which  constitutes
the  real  manifestation  of  the  divine  in  the  human,
of  the  infinite  in  the  finite,  in  distinction  from  that
ordinary  course  in  nature  and  history  which  cannot
thus  reveal  God  per-oiially,  because  it  is  merged  in
the  totality,  or  the  one  general  movement,  of  the  uni
verse.  This  common  movement  may  be  called  a  re
velation,  but  it  is  addressed  to  the  universal  reason,
and  reveals  only  a  general  intelligence  having  nothing
special  for  man,  either  as  a  race  or  as  individuals.
The  other  is  a  special  epistle  to  humanity  and  to  in
dividual  men,  having  our  name  throughout,  attested
by  chosen  witnesses  taken  from  a  chosen  people  who
are  the  spiritual  first-born,  or  representatives  of  the
race.  But  still  it  is  this  extraordinary  iloint/  wl.ich
is  the  revelation  properly,  whilst  the  biblical  writings
are  only  the  human  record  of  it,  sharing  in  the  fini-
ty  of  the  medium,  or  more  or  less  imperfect  accord
ing  to  the  necessary  imperfections  of  knowledge,
conception,  and  language,  in  those  to  whom  such  re
cording  is  given.  Had  writing  never  been  invented,
it  might  have  been  a  purely  oral  or  traditional
account,  and  then  it  would  have  been  still  more  im
perfect,  but  the  actual  revelation  would  have  remain
ed  the  same,  to  be  ascertained  in  the  best  way  we
could  amidst  the  deficienecs  and  obscurities  of  such
oral  or  monumental  modes  of  transmission.  Surely
the  absence  of  writing  could  no  more  have  prevented
God's  having  his  witness  in  this  world,  than  the  ab
sence,  for  so  many  centuries,  of  the  art  of  printing;
and  the  want,  neither  of  types  nor  of  alphabets,
could  have  been  an  absolute  bar  to  that  witnessing
being  in  the  human,  and  throw/h  the  human,  as  well
as  to 'the  human.  Now  in  such  record  of  revelation
the  great  thing  required  for  the  satisfaction  of  our
faith  is  a  conviction  of  this  perfect  subjective  truth
fulness  on  the  part  of  the  human  media.  It  is  a  far
higher  thing,  a  much  more  precious  thing,  than  any
scientific  correctness,  or  any  outward  verbal  accura
cy,  which,  even  if  it  could  be  secured  through  human
language  and  human  conceptions,  could  only  be  by  a
mechanical,  automaton-like  process,  or  with  the  loss
of  all  that  is  truly  human  in  the  transmission.  It
would  not  be  a  revelation,  or  the  history  of  a  revela
tion,  given  to  men  through  men,  and  so  it  would  not
be  truly  God  speaking  in  humanity.  The  element
of  most  value,  through  which  we  most  truly  draff
nigh  unto  God,  and  He  unto  us,  would  be  lacking  in


CHAP.  VIII.  1-19.


315


the  process.  With  this  distinction  between  the  re
relation  strictly,  and  the  record  of  such  revelation,  w
are  the  better  prepared  to  understand  the  import  o
that  third  term  which  is  so  often  confounded  with
them.  Inspiration  has  respect  to  the  manner  an
means  by  which  such  human  conceptions  are  callet
out  and  employed,  whilst  still  remaining  strictly  hu
man.  This  may  be  in  various  ways,  and  we  may
apply  the  terms  higher  and  lower  to  them,  bu
with  danger  of  error,  if  in  so  doing  we  make  any  on<
of  them  to  be  less  a  true  inspiration  than  the  other
All  the  faculties  of  man  may  be  used  for  this  pur
pose.  God  may  employ  the  imagination  (the  ec
static  imagination,  for  that  is  still  human,  and  ii
another  state  may  be  ordinary  and  normal),  the  men
tal  convictions  impressed  by  a  divine  power,  or,  wher
no  other  means  are  required,  the  sense  and  memon
of  holy,  truthful  men,  whose  holiness  and  truthfulness
in  such  case,  are  as  much  an  effect  of  divine  inspira
tion  as  any  afflatus  more  immediately  affecting  whai
are  called  the  higher  or  deeper  faculties  of  the  soul.
Thus  may  we  believe  that  all  the  Scripture  is  in
spired,  that  it  everywhere  has  this  subjective  truth
fulness,  whether  it  appears  in  holy  visions  of  the
past  and  future,  or  in  rapt  devotional  exercises,  or  in
the  sublime  doctrinal  insight  of  souls  drawn  heaven
ward,  or  in  the  pictures  it  gives  us  of  musing,  solilo
quizing  minds,  presenting  now  their  exulting  faith,
and  then  again  their  fears  and  sad  despondencies  in
view  of  the  dark  problems  of  life.  It  shows  itself  in
its  plain,  unpretending,  unsuspicious  narratives  oi
events,  whether  it  be  the  supernatural,  the  great  na
tural,  or  that  filling  in  of  the  ancient  home-lift
which,  though  so  far  from  us,  we  recognize  as  so  true
and  so  consistent,  calling  out  the  feeling  that  it  is  in
deed  a  reality  that  lies  before  us,  and  that  these
words  represent  actual  scenes  and  actual  emotions
as  true  and  vivid  as  any  that  now  occupy  our  own
minds.  Thus  may  we  believe  all  Scripture  to  be  an
honest  record  from  beginning  to  end,  from  the  most
astoundingly  marvellous  to  its  minutest  historical,
geographical,  biographical,  and  genealogical  details.
This  view,  although  admitting  human  imperfections
of  language  and  conceiving,  is  very  different  from
that  theory  of  partial  inspiration  that  assumes  to
choose  what  portions  it  shall  accept,  rejecting  others
as  fabricated,  false,  and  legendary.  It  is  all  faithful,
all  ecoirvftffTos,  all  given  to  us  for  our  "instruction
in  righteousness,"  constituting  in  its  totality  the  ple
nary  word  of  God,  the  honest  human  record  of  that
great  scries  of  divine  doings  in  the  world,  in  nature,
in  history,  and  in  the  souls  of  men,  to  which  we  give
the  special  name  of  a  divine  revelation.  Thus  re
ceived  and  firmly  held  in  its  truthful  human  aspect,
the  belief  in  a  great  objective  truth  corresponding  to
it  is  irresistible  for  all  sober,  thoughtful,  truly  ra
tional  souls.  The  human  in  the  Bible  compels  the
Acceptance  of  the  divine ;  the  ordinary  and  the  na-
:ural  in  its  life-like  narratives  demands  the  superna-
:ural  as  its  complement.  We  are  forced  thus  to  be-
ieve  or  to  admit  that  the  very  existence  in  the  world
)f  such  a  record  so  kept,  so  attested  through  the  ages,
;o  lying  in  the  very  heart  of  human  history,  is  as
;reat  a  marvel  for  the  reason,  as  any  supernatural  or
mraculous  which  it  contains  for  the  sense.

It  is  this  subjective  truthfulness  of  the  Scriptures
hat  furnishes  the  matter  of  interpretation.  The  great
id  is  to  get  at  the  conceptual  and  emotional  s°tates
rnich  the  words  originally  represented  in  the  minds
the  first  narrators.  The  objective  truth  they  re-
resent  in  the  natural  or  supernatural  belongs  to  the


theological  reasoning  as  guided  in  its  inferences  bj
the  general  truths  of  the  Scriptures,  or  other  know-
ledge  we  may  have  of  nature  and  of  God.  The  ono
interpretation  is  to  be  according  to  the  laws  of  rhe
toric  and  language  in  their  widest  sense,  the  other
according  to  "  the  analogy  of  faith,"  in  all  by  which
God  makes  himself  known  to  the  human  mind.*

Thus  should  we  aim  at  interpreting  the  Scripture
narrative  of  the  flood.  We  have,  as  an  outward
ground,  the  world-wide  tradition  of  such  an  event  far
greater  than  any  inundation  of  waters,  or  change  in
nature,  recorded  in  any  later  or  more  partial  history.
The  classical  story,  the  Indian,  the  Persian,  etc.,  are.
well  known  ;  but  it  is  found  everywhere.  In  the  re
motest  and  most  isolated  region  to  which  the  travel
ler  penetrates,  there  meets  him  this  tradition  of  a
great  catastrophe  by  water,  and  of  a  "righteous
man  "  who  was  saved  in  an  ark.  It  is  told  with  the
same  general  features,  and  often  with  a  surprising
similarity  of  detail,  whether  it  be  in  the  wilds  of  s£
beria,  by  the  rivers  of  southern  Africa,  or  in  the  isles
of  the  Pacific.  Xo  other  event  ever  made  such  an
impression  on  the  ethnological  memory  ;  and  hence
it  has_  survived  through  wastes  of  historical  silence
in  which  other  facts,  however  great  their  local  or
tribal  interest,  have  utterly  perished.  One  of  two
conclusions  is  inevitable :  either  the  catastrophe  was
of  vast  extent,  reaching  almost  every  portion  of  the
globe  as  now  known,  or  it  took  place  in  the  earliest
times  of  the  human  existence,  when  men  were  con
fined  to  a  comparatively  small  part  of  the  earth;
whence  each  wandering  people  carried  it,  localizing
it  afterwards  in  their  own  history,  their  own  geogra
phy,  and  ascribing  the  deliverance,  each  one,  to" the
ancestral  head  of  their  own  race.

There  is  a  ground  of  truth  in  all  these  stories.
Xo  rational  mind  can  doubt  it.  The  most  sceptical
of  the  German  critics  have  felt  themselves  compelled
to  admit  its  substantial  verity.  Now  let  any  one
compare  them  all  with  this  sublime  scriptural  narra
tive,  and  then  let  his  reason,  his  rhetorical  taste,  his
judgment  of  the  truthful  in  style,  the  subjectively
real  in  conception,  and  the  life-like  in  narration,  de
termine  which  is  the  original,  severely  simple  in  its
chasteness  and  grandeur,  and  which  arc  the  legendary
copies, — which  is  the  editio  princess,  prei-erved  (by
some  strong  influence  in  opposition  to  the  ordinary
human  tendency)  from  grotesque  exaggeration,  from
mythical  indistinctness  and  confusion,  from  false  em
bellishment,  from  interpolated  deformities,  from  all
that  characterizes  the  story-telling,  wonder-making
style — and  which  are  the  spurious  addenda,  betray
ing,  by  all  these  marks  of  their  secondary  character,
that  they  are  the  far-off,  dimly-seen,  and  monstrous-
.y  disproportioned  impressions  of  what,  to  the  scrip-

*  [In  respect  to  the  first  kind,  the  famous  canon  of  the
rationalist,  undoubtedly  holds  true  :  the  Scriptures,  in  their
mman  language,  are  to  be  interpreted  as  other  books.
"When,  however,  it  is  applied  to  the  second,  or  what  may  be
called  the  theological  exegesis,  it  ignores  and  denies  what
"s  most  peculiar  in  the  IHble  as  a  book  composed  during  two
thousand  years,  by  different  writers,  in  widely  different
styles,  and  embracing  a  vast  variety  of  ideas,  yet  prescrv-
ng,  from  beginning  to  end,  a  holy  aspect,  and  a  religious
unity,  that  no  other  writings  possess,  and  which  have
,4veii  it  a  place  in  the  very  core  of  human  history,  such  as
10  other  book,  no  other  literature,  or  literary  series,  can,
ay  any  claim  to.  Not  less  absurd  would  it  be  than  to  inter-
jret  Homers  Iliad  as  an  accidental  or  arbitrary  scries  of
ragmciitary  unconnected  ballads,  after  the  profoundest
riticism,  grounded  on  the  truest  Homeric  feeling,  has
.ocided  it  <o  possess  an  epic  unity  and  an  epic  harmony
worthy  of  the  high  poetical  inspiration  from  which  it  flows.
— T.  L.]


316


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


tural  narrator,  was  an  actual  scene  Ml   of  a   soul-
awing  and  fancy-restraining  emotion.

The  Bible  story  lias  nothing  of  the  wonder-mak
ing  about  it.     It  is  too  full  of  the  overpowering  real  to
allow  of  such  a  secondary  excitement  of  the  mind  and
the  imagination.     The  emotion  is  too  high  to  admit  of
any  play  of  fancy.     It  is  contemplation  in  its  most
exalted  state,  having  no  room  for  anything  but  the
great  spectacle   before   it,  and  that   as   seen  in  its
grandest  features.     Hence  so  calm  and  yet  so  full
of  animation,  so  severely  chaste  yet  so  sublime.      It
is  a  telling  from  the  eye,  and  it  speaks  to  the  soul's
eye  of  the  thoughtful  reader,  giving  the  impression
of   an  actual    spectacle.     The    style    throughout   is
adapted  to  produce  such  impression.    It  is  a  truthful
effect,  or  the  narrative  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  most
skilful  (i ••  'i  HI,  a  most  ingenious  forgery,  exhibiting
a  life-lik.'  power  of  painting  and  invention  utterly  in
consistent  with  any    antiquity  to  which  it   can    be
ascribed.     The  writer  or  relator  is  one  who  stands
in  in>  i  /*  r<?ins.     The  awful  spectacle  is  present  to
his  abs'irb-L-d  K'lise  or  to  his  vivid  memory.      lie  is
startled  by  it  to  abruptness  of  description.     Though
long  expected,  the  catastrophe  is  sudden  in  its  com
ing.     ToiT'T.ts  descend  from  the  heavens  like  burst
ing  clou  Is  ;  cha-ins  arc  seen  in  the  opening  earth,
and  floods  issuing  from  their  subterranean  reservoirs.
A  writer  less    interested,  less    awed    by  the    actual
scene,  would  have  used  comparisons  here,  or  indulg
ed  in  redundancy  of  language.     The  Scripture  his
torian  gives  it  all  in  one  brief  verse  :  "  The  fountains
of  the  great  abyss  (the  tehom  rabba)  were  broken
(?,:-p~:  ,  were  durai),  the  windows  of  heaven  were
opened.''     The   attempt  to  reconcile    this  with  any
scientific  correctness  is  worse  than  trilling.     To  re-
Eolve  it  into  a  poetical  metaphor,  or  any  rhetorical
artilice  of  language,  takes  away    all    its    emotional
power.      Me  speaks  according  to  his  conception   as
grounded  on  the  state  of  his  knowledge.     lie  evi
dently  had  the  old  idea  of  waters  above  the  firma-
mcntum,  now  descending  through  the  parted  barrier,
llow  ill-judging  the  interpretation  that,  for  any  fancied
reconciliation  with  present  knowledge,  would  oblite
rate  the  marks  of  this  precious  subjective  truthful
ness,  so  full  of  evidence  for  the  great  antiquity  of
the  account,  and  the  actuality  of  the  scene  as  con
ceived    and    described.       One    all-absorbing    image
of  power  is  before  him.     The  deluge  from  above  and
the    eruptions  from    the  earth,  whatever  may  have
been  their  cause,  have  an  awful  rapidity  of  effect ;
and  with  what  graphic  touches  is  this  set  forth  in
the  vivid  Hebrew  idioms !     The  ark  is  lifted  clear
from  the  earth  (^IXfl  bsE),  and  goes  forth   (Tjbn
walks  forth),  C^n  ^E'b?  ,  on  the  face  of  the  wa
ters.      C'Sn  :p3l*1 ,  the  floods  prevail  exceedingly
IX^    lio  ,  stronger,    stronger — higher,    higher —
;n;i  ~ibn ,  "go  and  increase"  constantly  waxin
gradual  but  irresistible,  steadily  visible  in  their  rise
as  measured  by  the  submerged  plains,  the  disappear
ing  hills,  until  to  the  remotest  extent  of  the  visible
horizon,  C'^rn   b3   PHP,  "under  the  whole  hea>
vens,"  it  is  water  everywhere  as  far  as  eye  can  see
one  vast  sky-bounded  waste,  shoreless  and  illimitabh
aa  it  appeared  to  the  absorbed  and  wondering  gazt
of  the  one  from  whose  sense  and  memory  this  storj
has  come  down  to  us.     This  is  what  he  saw,  and  this
is  all  that  the  interpreter  can  get  from  his, language
What  he  may  have  thought,  we  know  not.     He  may
have  supposed  the  flood  to  be  universal.      Probably


ic  did  so  ;  but  then  his  universality  must  have  been
very  different  thing  (in  conception)  from  the  notion
hat  our  modern  knowledge  would  connect  with  the
erm.     He  knew  of  no  land  that  was  not  covered  by
vater ;  he  had  been  told  that  God  meant  to  destroy
he  human  race,  and  so  far  as  the  extent  of  the  flood
was  necessary  for  that  purpose,  he  doubtless  suppos-
d  the  judgment  executed.*  But  we  have  only  to  do,
as  interpreters,  with  what  he  actually  saw,  the  lan-
;uage  in  which  he  has  recorded  it,  the  iivcessary  con-
eptions  which  it  suggests,  and  by  which  it  was  itself
uggcstcd.  We  have  no  right  to  force  upon  him,  and
upon  the  scene  so  vividly  described,  our  modern  no
tions,  or  our  modern  knowledge  of  the  earth  with  its
Alps  and  Ilimnialayas,  its  round  figure,  its  extent  and
diversities,  so  much  beyond  any  knowledge  he  could
lave   possessed   or  any   conception   he   could   have
formed.     It  may  be  said  that  such  idea  of  terrestrial
universality  is  included  in  his  words,  such  as  yiS
earth, — "  under  the  whole  heavens,"  D^E'i'n  22  nriP  ,
— "  ail  the   high    mountains  under  the   whole:   hea
vens ;"  but  then  the  question  arises,  On  what  scale
of  knowledge  are  they  to  be  interpreted  V     If  we  say
the  modern,  calling  it  the  absolute  sense  (on  the  sup
position  that  such  absolute  scale  has  even  yet  been
reached),  then  we  make  him  a  mere  mechanical  ut-
terer  of  sounds  whose  intended  meaning  lay  not  in
his  understanding,  or  a  writer  of  words  representing,
in  their  truthfulness,  neither  the  emotions  felt,  nor
the  spectacle  that  lay  before  his  eye.       A  very  slight
change  in  our   English  translation,  and  that  a  very
justifiable  one.  greatlv  affects  this  impression  of  uni
versality.     Read  land  for  earth  wherever  the  word
occurs,  as,  for  example,  the  whole  land,  or  the  face  of
the  whole  land,  and  the  scale,  to  our  imagination,  is  at
once  reduced.     Thus  we  actually  have,  in  one  place,
ch.  vii.  23,  mix  instead  of  yiX  ,  and  yet  nothing  is
more  evident  than  that  in  the  previous  chapters  the
first  word  is  used  of  the  Eden-territory  and  the  region
adjacent.     In  like  manner  is  this  word  n^TX  used
in  the  account  of  the  general  corruption  of  the  race
by    the    intermarriages    of    the     Sethites    and    the
Cainites,   ch.  vi.   1  :    "  When   men  began   to  multi
ply  upon  the  face  of  the  adamah,"  !~'^~^n  "-3  i>?.
It  is  not  only  without  any  warrant  from  Scripture,
but   in  the   lace  of  the  fair  inferences  to  be  drawn
from  its  artless  language,  that  some  have  regarded
the  antediluvian  human  race  as  spread  over  the  wide
sin  face  of  the  earth  according  to  our  present  know
ledge.     Equally,  too,  against  the  impression    to  be
fairly  derived  from  the  account,  is  the  idea  of  a  vast
population  as  in  any  way  to  be  compared  with  that
which  has  since  existed  and  now  exists.     We  know
nothing  of  any  physical  or  moral  reasons  that  may
have  accelerated  or  retarded  it.  The  Scripture  simply
says,  in  its  introduction  to  the  account  of  the  flood,
that  men  lerjan  to  multiply,  S~ib  bnn ,   evidently
implying  that  they  had  not   been   very  numerous
before  in  either  line,  and  that  the  mixture  and  the
multiplication  were,  at   the  same   time,  cause   and
effect  of  the  corruption.     The  fair  inference,  there
fore,  is,  that  it  took  place,  together  with  the  judgment
that  followed,  whilst  they  were  yet  confined  to  this

*  [Delitzsch,  though  undecided  in  the  main,  presents
the  whole  case,  or  the  whole  ground  of  argument  for  ana
against,  when  he  Pays,  page  262  :  "The  Scripture  demand
the  universality  of  the  flood,  only  for  the  earth  as  ^nhuUMa,
not  for  the  earth  as  such  ;  and  it  has  no  interest  in  the  urn-  \
vcrsality  of  the  flood  in  itself,  but  only  in  the  universality
of  the  judgment  of  which  it  is  the  execution."— T.  L.J


CHAP.    VIII.    1-19.


Bit


tract,  whatever  may  have  been  its  extent.     It  wa
the  open,  easily  cultivated  part  of  the  earth  (thougl
it   had   already  become   sterile  in  the  days   of  th
Sethite  Lantech),  to  which  the  early  men  in  thei
gregarious  habits  yet  adhered.     There  had  not  come
the  roving,  migrating,  pioneering  impulse  which  was
first  given  after  the  flood,  and  for  the  very  purpose
of  breaking  up  -the  gregarious  tendency  which  again
manifested  itself  in  the  plain  of  Shinar.      This  reluc
tance   to  leave   the   adamah,  or  the  old  homelanc
of  the  race  near  Eden,  shows  itself  in  Cain's  Ian
guagc,  Gen,  iv.  14  :  "  Behold   thou   art   driving  me
forth  this  day,  n^Xtt  T3Q  bra,  from  the  face  of
the  adamah,  that  I  may  become  a  wanderer   VI
in  the  (wide)  earth,"  as  distinguished  from  the  father
land  where  the   protecting  divine  presence  (?p.32)
was  supposed  still  to  dwell.     Cain,  bold  and  evil  as
he  was,  felt  this.     The  thought,  even  though  coining
from  his  own  vengeance-haunted   imagination,  was
|  a  terror   to   him,   and  we  may    rationally  suppose
that  the  feeling  was  still  more  strongly  shared  by
his  descendants,  whom   the   account   represents   as
still  living  near  the  Sethites  and  corrupting  them  by
!  their  vicinity.     All  great  movements  in  the  world
I  have  come  from  a  superhuman  impulse,  breaking  up
previous  habits,  and  strangely  changing  those  fixed
conditions  of  human  society  into  which  races,  when
left  to   themselves,    are   ever   tending ;    sometimes
1  even  when   their   talk   is   loudest   of"  progress  and
change   as   ever    coming    from    themselves.      The
course  of  history  is   marked   by  such   new  move
ments,  unaccountable  in  their  beginning  from  any
thing  in  the  previous  human  (which  may  probably
have  been  tending  strongly  in  the  opposite  direction),
yet  afterwards,  from  the  very  fact  of  sequence,  seem
ing  to  fall  inductively  into  the  natural  flow  of  events.
At  all  events,  if  we  take  the  Scripture  text  for  our
;uide,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  any  of  the
mtediluvians  (with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  a  few
solitary  rovers),  had  ever  crossed  the  deserts,  or  ven-
;ured  upon  the  seas,  or  scaled  the  mountains,  or  pen-
:trated  far  into  the  dense  wildernesses  that  separated
he  primitive   adamah  from   the  vast  unknown   of
•arth   around   them.     We   may  fairly  suppose,  too,
hat  it  was  one  of  the  designs  of  the  deluge-judgment
o  prevent  a  race  which  had  so  dehumanized  them-
elves,  or,  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  "  corrupted  its
,-ay,"  from  spreading  over  the  surface  of  the  globe,
tut  how  different  was  it  when  the  movement  came
'hich  is  recorded  Gen.   xi.  8,  whether  we  regard
ic  "  confounding  of  languages  "  there  mentioned  as
le  cause  or  the  effect  of  the  dispersion.     It  was,  in
.ther  view,  equally  supernatural,  or,  if  the  term  is
referred,  an  extraordinary  divine  intervention,  de-
ecting  the  course   of  the  human  movement  from
hat  it  would  have  been  had  it  been  left  solely  to
te  antecedent  human  tendency.    They  were  settlino-
Jwn   into   the   old  adamah   gregariousness,  to  be
llowed  by  the  same  impieties,  not  only  (for  that
mid   be   borne   with),   but   by   the   dehumanizin^
ces  that  demanded  extinction.      "  Wherefore  the
>rd  scattered  them  from  thence  over  the  face  of  all
e  earth."     The  Hebrew  verb  is  a  very  strong  one,
"s    V?^  >  "IIe  drove  them  asunder" — He  sent
em  far  and  wide— He  broke  them  up.     Compare
Kit  xxxii.  8,  Acts  xvii.  26.      Their  reluctance  to
;.vc  the  old  home-land,  like  that  of  Cain  in  the  ear-
r  time,  is  shown  by  the  same  word,  and  that  strong
Irticle  -,a  BO  expressive  of  caution  and  alarm ;  xi.  4°


3  ^Q  b?  ysiES  -,B ,  "  lest  we  b«  scattered
over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth," — the  wide  earth,
the  unknown,  unbounded  earth.  We  must  take  the
language  according  to  the  feeling  and  knowledge  of
the  day.  It  was  der  unabsehbare  Bann,  as  Lange
expresses  it,  No.  15,  p.  264,  the  illimitable  exile  Tn
space  which  had  something  of  the  terror  des  endloscn
-Banncs,^  of  the  endless  exile  in  time.  But  though  the
pioneering  elTort  needs  something  extraneous  to  start
it,  it  is  afterwards  carried  on  by  its  love  of  novelty,
which,  when  once  excited,  ever  feeds  the  impulse,
overcoming  the  sense  of  insecurity  until  it  becomes
a  passion  instead  of  a  dread.  Thus,  as  the  terror  of
the  unknown  gives  way,  the  new  impetus  soon  ac
quires  a  rapidity  more  strange  even  than  the  former
reluctance,  as  is  attested  by  other  and  more  modern
examples  in  the  world's  history.  In  the  long
stagnation  of  the  middle  ages  geographical  know
ledge,  at  least  among  the  Europeans,  had  actually
receded.  Less  was  known  of  the  world  in  the  days
of  Bode  and  Alcuin  than  in  those  of  Ptolemy.  But
how  soon  after  the  start  given  to  Di  Gama  and"  Colum
bus,  and  by  these  to  others,  was  the  state  of  things,
in  this  respect,  wholly  changed  !  The  orbis  tcrrarum
immediately  began  to  expand,  and  so  rapidly  was  the
horizon  extended,  that  less  than  half  a  century  added
more  to  the  knowledge  and  civilized  occupation  of
the  earth  than  a  thousand  years  hud  done  before.
In  less  than  thirty  years  after  Columbus  had  seen  the
light  upon  the  shore  of  the  first  West  India  isle,  Ma
gellan  had  advanced  to  the  southern  extremity  of  the
American  continent  and  accomplished  the  circumnavi
ation  of  the  globe.  It  was  not  because  the  men  of
the  tenth  and  twelfth  centuries  lacked  vigor  of  boilv
or  mind,  but  because  God's  time  had  not  yet  C3me.  "

So  was  it  when  the  first  great  dispersion  of  man
kind  commenced.  Before  the  flood,  (here  is  no  evi
dence  that  even  Egypt  was  known  or  inhabited — wo
mean  scriptural  evidence ;  and  notwithstanding  the
assertions  of  Bunsen  and  others,  we  think  it  c'ui  be
shown  (in  its  proper  place)  that  there  is  no  reliable
evidence  of  any  other  kind.  Dwelling  as  they  did,
mainly,  in  the  region  between  the  Euphrates  and  the
Indus,  the  antediluvians  had  never  ventured  upon
the  wide  desert  that  intervened,  nor  attempted  the
long  way  up  the  rivers  and  by  the  mountains  of  the
North.  But  now  the  tribes  of  Ham  are  streaming
down  the  Persian  Gulf,  following  the  Gihon  as  it  winds
round  Southern  Arabia,  until  they  reach  the  narrow
part  of  the  Red  Sea.  The  new  impulse  soon  carries
them  over  into  upper  Egypt  or  the  ancient  Ethiopia,
whence  they  find  their  way  down  into  Mitxraim  (the
Narrows),  the  country  of  the  lower  Nile,  whilst  others
start  off  again  for  the  vast  regions  of  Central  Africa.
3ne  branch  of  the  sons  of  Japheth  direct  their  course
to  the  dense  Northern  wilds,  and  thence  dividing,  be
gin  their  long  march  through  Middle  and  Northern
Europe  in  the  one  direction,  or  through  Middle  Asia
and  towards  the  American  continent  in  the  other.
Another  branch  of  the  same  family  roam  through
Asia  Minor,  one  part  crossing  at  the  Bosporus  (/Soos
Tropor,  as  the  Greeks  afterwards  translated  the  old
name,  in  accordance  with  one  of  their  fables),  the
ancient  Ox-ford,  or  cattle-passage,  whence  they  pro
ceed  into  the  Thracian  and  Danubian  forests ;  whilst
another  host  of  pioneers  make  the  JEgcan  isles  their
stepping  places  to  Greece,  Italy,  and  Spain.  The
bold  sons  of  Canaan  have  ventured  upon  ships,  and
arc  making  their  way  to  the  extremities  of  the
Mediterranean  and  even  to  the  Atlantic.  In  the


318


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


mean  time  the  descendants  of  Shorn  keep  nearer  to
the  old  homeland,  barely  diverging  into  Elam
(Persia)  and  Assyria,  moving  mainly  up  the  Euphrates
to  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  Palestine,  and  thence  to
Northern  Arabia.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe
that  under  this  mighty  impulse  that  drove  them
from  Shinar,  more  was  done  in  two  or  three  centuries
towards  settling  the  earth  than  had  been  accomplish
ed  in  thel,G(M)  or  '2,000  years  of  the  antediluvian
period  ;  and'  this  fact  alone,"  when  taken  in  connection
•with  its  divine  causality,  is  a  sufficient  answer  to
those  who  think  that  the  Hebrew  chronology  docs
not  give  time  enough  for  the  great  historical  be
ginnings  that  so  soon  made  their  appearance.  The
world  has  ever  moved  by  starts,  and  races,  like
individuals,  oftentimes  do  more,  and  live  more,  in
very  short  periods  than  they  do  in  others  compara
tively  long.

This  is  dwelt  upon  here  as  having  a  bearing  upon
the  po.-ition  of  the  human  race,  and  the  spread  of  its
population,  before  the  flood.  The  emphasis  with
which  the  new  movement  is  announced  in  the  xith
chapter,  and  more  fully  described  in  the  xth  (see
especially  vcr.  :i-2),  furnishes  the  strongest  reason  for
beli  \lng  that  nothing  of  the  kind,  or  on  such  a
.-call-,  had  ever  taken  place  upon  the  earth  before.
"  From  ///. •.•><?  (n'iX1)  were  parted  (were  divided,
SITE:  ,  isolated),  the  nations  in  the  earth  after  the
iloo  i."

In  the  antediluvian  period  there  seems  to  have
been  a  distinction  between  "fix  and  H^IX,  but  the
former  word  had  not  acquired  the  greater  deiiniteness
of  after  usage.  In  fact,  it  must  have  been  utterly
indefinite.  This  is  safely  inferred  from  the  view.-
w.'  are  compelled  to  form  of  the  primitive  territorial
noti:>ns  of  mankind.  In  the  earliest  times  the  concep
tion  of  the  earth  must  have  been  that  of  unlimited
exieni,  and  of  an  undivided  wild  or  waste.  Nothing
to  the  contrary  had  been  made  known,  either  by  ex
perience  or  by  revelation.  It  was  simply  the  con
trast  of  the  sky  above  and  the  ground  beneath,  like
the  conception  presented  in  the  earliest  Greek  anti
thesis  of  ovpavfa  and  xSJ"'-  We  must  cvcr  ^car  tn.is
in  mind  when  we  attempt,  as  we  ever  ought  to  do  i
interpreting,  to  get  back  into  the  conceptions  of  the
ancient  narrator.  In  no  other  way  shall  we  get  the
imaire  of  which  the  language  is  the  necessary  as  wel
as  the  only  adequate  reflexion.  There  had  not  even
come  in  the  greater  definiteness  which  belongs  to  the
Greek  7<«a,  although  the  Noachian  conception,  wit!
its  heaven  above  and  its  abyss  below,  resembles  vcn
much  that  which  is  presented  in  the  Homeric  oath
Odyss.  v.  184:

'lore  v vv  roSf  Tata  xai  Qvpavbt  tvpiit  virfpdev,
KOJ.  TO  Ka.rtifi6p.evov  Srvyos  vSup —

still  less  was  it  (in  conception,  at  least,  whatever  may
have  been  the   speculative  thought),  the   tellurian
idea  (see  Cicero's  use  of  the  word  tellus,  Repub.  vi
17,  tellus  media  d  infima  et  in  quam  feruntur  omnia
of  a  body,  whether  spherical  or  otherwise,  lying  in
limited  space  with  space  all  around  it.     This  is  no
rationalizing  against  the  authority  of  Scripture.     W
must  judge  of  this  old  writer's   conception  by  hi
knowledge,  real  or   supposed,    which  we  have   n
reason  to  think  was  in  any  way  changed  by  that  d
vine  afflatus  of  truth  and  holiness  which  made  him
the  faithful  recorder  of  this  wonderful  scene.     Thi
is  the  very  ground  on  which  we  trust  its  graphica
correctness,  as  representing,  not  a  mechanical  know


dge  (connected  with  no  sense-experience  or  actual
icmory  in  the  narrator),  but  a  vivid  seeing,  with  a
orresponding  vividness  of  emotion.

The   same   may  be   said  of  other  parts  of  the
ccount,  which  carry  an  air  of  absolute  universality,
imply  because  we  interpret  them  by  the  absolute  or
cientific  notion  of  our  own  day.     Thus  the  expres-
ion  already  referred  to,  "  under  the  whole  heaven,"
s  the  primary  optical  language  for  the  visible  hori-
on.*     It  might  have  been  regarded  as  the  real  hori-
on,  but  if  so  it  would  only  be  the  writer's  thought,
us   speculative  notion,    and  we  have  no   right,  as
nterpretcis,  to  substitute  this  for  what  he  actually
ces  and  evidently  means  to  describe  as  seen.     If  any
vill  insist  upon  this  language  as  denoting  an  absolute
ellurian  universality  (as  Wordsworth,  Keil,  and  Ja-
obus  have  done),  let  them  turn  to  the  same  words,
Job  xxxvii.  o,  where  they  are  applied  to  the  thunder
and  the   lightning,  and   connected  with   other  lan
guage   still   more    suggestive   of    extent   in   space.
'  Hark,  the  trembling  of  his  voice,  and  the  deep  mutter-
ng  (n:n)  that  goeth  forth  from  his  mouth  ;  under
he  whole  heavens,  C'rCH  bs  rnn ,  he  directeth
t,  and  its  lightning,  "~^  f,'£:3  br  ,  to  the  wings
or  extremities)  of  the  earth."      It  is  the  long  rever
berating  roar  that  is  heard  all  round  the  sky,  and
the  vivid   flash  which  for  a  moment  lights  up  the
whole  horizon.     There  arc  other  passages  where  the
expression  would  seem  to  take  in  more  than  the  im
mediate  sense,  but  it  never  goes  beyond  the  concep
tual  limit  which   is   determined  by  the   knowledge,
real  or  supposed,  of  the  utterer,  or  of  those  to  whom
it  is  addressed.      As  in  Deut.  iv.  10  :    it  means  there
generally  the  nations  far  and  near,  according  to  the
geographical  ideas  of  the  times.     Its  absolute  uni
versality  would  require  us  to  believe  that  there  is  not
an  island  in  the  Pacific,  nor  a  region  in  the  Arctic  or
Torrid    Zone,  to  which    the    Jews  were    not    to  be
dispersed.     And  so  in  Deut.  ii.  '25,  where  the  same
wide  words,  "  under  the  whole  heavens,"  are  used  in
a  still  more  limited  sense  of  the  nations  immediately
surrounding  the  Jews,  though  in  every  direction, —
around  them  on  all  sides.

In  a  similar  manner  arc  we  justified  in  interpreting
the  seemingly  universal  terms  which  relate  to  the
animals.  They  were  all  that  the  narrator  knew.
He  receives  the  divine  command  as  measured  by  his
knowledge  and  convictions,  and  executes  it  accord
ingly.  They  were  the  familiar  animals  by  which  he
was  surrounded  in  the  district  where  he  lived.  In
the  terror  produced  by  the  great  catastrophe,  they
instinctively  come  to  the  ark ;  as  in  all  great  com
motions  of  nature  the  most  ferocious  beasts  are
known  to  seek  the  protection  of  human  shelter.  Or
we  may  rationally  suppose  (taking  the  supernatural
as  an  essential  part  of  the  account),  that  they  were
determined  by  a  peculiar  divine  instinct,  which  would
be,  to  the  lower  nature,  in  analogy  with  the  prophetic
insight  given  to  the  higher.  So  far  as  mere  natural
signs  are  concerned,  their  keener  and  more  instinct
ive  senses  would  discern  the  coming  on  of  the  deluge  in
its  terrestrial  and  aerial  symptoms  sooner  than  it  would
become  manifest  to  the  human  cognition,  and  as  they

*  [It  is  the  appearance  BO  graphically  described,  though
in  other  language,  Job  xxvl.  10:  "VSQ  by  5n  pH
r^n  E5>  -ll'X  fpbrn  IS  nM5?tt,  "  The  circle  he  halt
marked  upon  the  face  of  the  water*,  at  the  ending  of  the
light  in  the  darkncKs,"— or  -where  the  visible  disappears  to
the  invisible.— T.  L.j


CHAP.   VIII.    1-19.


319


crowd  towards  the  ark  or  flutter  around  its  protec

ing  roof,  there  would  be  given  just  that  imprcssio

of  universality  which  the  language  conveys.     Th

conviction  he  had  upon  his  mind  of  the  divine  con

mand,  though  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case  limi

ed  by  his  knowledge  of  the  living  things  immediatelj

around    him,    would   express    itself   in    the    sam

general   terms.     He   was   directed   to   take   of  th

n^ria  ,  the  cattle,  the  common  or  domestic  animals

clean  and  unclean.*     It  was  to  be/rom  all,  b'sia  ,

term  general  instead  of  distributive,  and  those  taken

of  the  n^na  were  to  be  in  pairs  of  species.     Thu

regarded,  the  language  is  all  truthful  in  the  highes

sense  of  the  word  truthfulness.     It  is  subjectively

truthful,  that  is,  it  gives  the  fact  and  the  spectacle  a;

it  is  seen  and/eft,  —  not  as  calculated,  or  with  tha

logical  and  arithmetical  precision  whose  tendency,  in

a  matter  of  such  indeterminateness,  would  have  been

to  produce  distrust  rather  than  the  confidence  o

faith.     Greater  precision  would  have   betrayed  the

mere  wonder-maker,  or  the  mere   story-teller,  noi

speaking  from  any  conceptual   experience  ;  whilst

on  the  other  hand,  the  largeness  of  the  terms,  ever

where  it  looks  like  hyperbole,  is  evidence  of  the

actuality  and  truthfulness  of  the  emotion  that  pro

duced   them.     Thus   the   impression   made   on   the

mind  of  the  beloved  disciple  by  his  constant  con

templation  of  the  person  and  the  acts  of  his  adored

Muster:  "And  there  are  many  other  things  which

Jesus  did,  the  which  if  they  were  written  every  one,

I  suppo.se  that  not  even  the  world  would  contain  the

books  that  should  be  written."     What  words  could

more  truthfully  convey  this  inward  state  of  soul  !

"  And  all  Judea,  -n-aaa  TJ  'JouSaio,  went  out  to  him,

and   all  the   country  round   about  Jordan,  mura  7)

*eptxu>pos  rod  'lopSdvov,  and  were  baptized."     Matt.

iii.    5.      "Acd   there    were   dwelling   in   Jerusalem

Jews,  devouf   men,  from  every  nation,  a?rb  Travrbs

fovovs,  under  the  heaven."    Actsii.  5.    The  language

in  these  cases  is  the  true  and   natural   expression

of  emotion  produced  by  a  vast  and  exciting  spec

tacle.     How  much  more  worthy  of  our  trust  it  is  —

how  much  stronger  a  conviction  of  an  eye-witnessed

actuality  docs  it  produce,  than  it  would  have  done

had  the  writers  been  more  guarded   and  exact  in

*  [There  is  no  mention  of  "  the  wild  animals  as  includ
ed  "  in  the  nEiia,  as  that  judicious  commentator,  Murphy,
well  observes  (p.  '211).  There  were  "the  fowl,  and  the
creeping  thing/'  The  first  included  the  birds  in  general
(who  would  be  most  defenceless,  and  who  would  most  na
turally  <,t  themselves,  resort  to  the  ark  for  shelter),  and
the  smaller  well-known  animals,  who  would  come  under
the  general  denomination.  There  is  no  evidence  of  its
here  including  insects  or  reptiles.  And  then  again,  it  must
be  ever  borne  m  mind  how  our  view  of  the  universal  terms
m  respect  to  the  animals  is  affected  by  the  prejudgment  of
the  absolute  universality  of  the  flood  as  covering  all  the
globe.  1  he  all  in  the  one  case  is  very  much  modified  bv
the  aW  m  the  other.  If  the  flood  was  confined  to  the  basin
of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  it  would  have  swept  awav  the

ha?  rnX1  /  fhuman  ?'\ce'  but  not  thc  auhnal  races  who
had  roamed  further  into  the  wildernesses  and  deserts
There  is  not  a  syllable  to  show  that  lions  came  from  AfriS
™trShfr°m  s.lb?™-  The  generality  of  the  terms,  then*
cannot  be  carried  farther  than  the  ends  intended,  which
were  the  preservation  of  Noah  and  his  family,  as  tkeTeed

*here  hi  MvT"  «?>?'  ^  °f  th°  ™™^in  the  Strict

tfnere  ne  lived  as  "  the  seed"  of  other  aninrils  tint  wmii.i

»  wanted  for  the  new  population,  either  tatffiSSJSto

tboir  more  remote  and  indirect,  utilities.  '

Un  the  question  of  the  universality  of  the  flood    the


u^«™

f.  Alurphy,  LUD.,  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Belfast  'Ou  this
abject  especially  is  he  learned  and  judicious  yet  with  a  re!
erence  far  removed  from  latitudinarianiom  -T  L  ]


their  numerical  proportion  So  is  it  in  the  mode
of  representation  that  we  find  m  the  account  of  the
flood.  There  is  something  in  this  subjective  truth
fulness  far  more  precious  for  our  faith  in  the  old
document  than  any  objective  or  scientific  accuracy
could  have  been;  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  it  leaves
us  perfectly  free  to  draw,  from  other  ideas  connected
with  the  event,  such  inferences  of  universality,  or  of
partiality,  as  its  relation  to  other  theological  truth,
as  well  as  to  later  knowledge,  may  demand.

Again :  those  parts  of  this  account  which  relate
the  prophetic  knowledge,  or  the  prophetic  conviction,
present,  indeed,  something  different  from  the  optical
representations,  but  are  nevertheless  to  be  inter
preted  substantially  on  the  same  principle  of  their
subjective  truthfulness,  leaving  the  higher  objective
truth  for  which  they  stand,  or  of  which  they  are  the
human  language,  to  be  interpreted  by  what  we  have
called  the  higher  method  of  theological  exegesis.
Now  this  is  what  we  truly  gather  from  the  words
given  to  us :  A  righteous  and  holy  man,  living  in  the
midst  of  a  profane  and  sensual  generation, — a  lonely
man,  holding  high  communion  with  God,  and  con
stantly  in  spiritual  conflict  with  the  earthly  and  the
vile  around  him, — has  impressed  upon  his  soul  a
conviction  that  the  end  of  the  world,  or  of  the  race,
is  near.  It  is  so  strong,  so  deep,  and  constant,  that
he  feels  it  to  come  from  God.  It  does  come  from
God.  It  is  so  vivid,  that  it  is  to  him  the  actual  divine
voice  to  his  inmost  soul.  It  comes  so  near,  that  he
recognizes  in  tl*3  sharp  impression  which  it  makes  the
very  times  in  which  the  great  catastrophe  is  to  come,
and  has  impressed  upon  his  soul,  as  by  a  divine  direc
tion,  the  way  and  the  means  through  which  he  and
his  family  are  to  be  preserved.  Thus  "  warned  of
God  in  respect  to  things  not  as  yet  seen,  he  prepares
an  ark  for  the  salvation  of  his  house  (Heb.  xi.  7),  by
which  he  condemned  the  world,  and  became  an  heir
of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith."  These
divine  convictions  are  all  truthfully  told,  just  as  they
are  truthfully  felt,  and  given  to  us  from  the  sense  or
memory  of  the  first  narrator.  We  cannot  doubt  that
he  was  thus  impressed,  that  he  thus  felt,  that  he  thus
acted,  that  the  events  following  corresponded  to  this
vivid  impression,  and  that  they  are  most  faithfully
narrated.  Thus  believing  in  the  subjective,  the  con
viction  of  an  objective  supernatural,  and  of  a  divine
objective  reality,  and  of  a  great  divine  purpose  con
nected  with  the  history  of  the  world  and  the  Church,
comes  irresistibly  to  the  spiritual  mind  having  faith
n  a  personal  God  constantly  superintending  the
affairs  of  earth  through  a  constant  superintending
jrovidence,  both  general  and  special.

As  compared  with  other  stories  of  the  great
lood,  it  is  the  very  simplicity  of  the  account  which
urnishes  the  convincing  evidence  of  its  having  been
an  actual  telling  from  the  eye.  Myths,  so  called,
ire  never  told  in  this  way.  There  is  no  conceptual
ying  back  of  them,  presenting  the  appearance  of
laving  ever  come  from  any  sense  or  memory,
'hey  arise,  we  know  not  how,  like  national  songs
hat  never  had  any  individual  composer.  They
epresent  ideas,  notions,  strangely  combined,  rather
han  conceptions  having  their  ground  in  any  scnse-
pectacle,  real  or  supposed.  In  poetical  picturing,
n  the  other  hand,  or  in  rhetorical  description,  th:-fe
s,  indeed,  a  distinct  conceptual,  but  it  is  one  for  the
most  part  artificially  made  by  the  writer  or  narrator
imself.  However  accurate  its  limning  may  be,
t  carries  with  it  its  own  testimony  that  it  never
ame  from  any  actual  or  even  possible  seeing.


320


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


"bus  Ovid's  description  of  the  flood  is  most  vivid,
-,nd  in  some  respects  most  true  to  nature,  or  what
.nay,  very  probably,  have  been  the  actual  state
of  things — such  as  fishes  swimming  among  the
oranches  of  the  elm,  or  the  sea-calves  sporting
.n  the  vineyards;  but  no  eye  ever  saw  this;  it
8  wholly  imagined,  whilst  the  power  of  thus  imagin-
.ng,  and  of  thus  painting  it  in  language,  is  wholly
inconsistent  with  that,  emotion  which  belongs  to
the  actual  spectacle  of  such  an  event.  Especially
is  this  true  of  the  more  labored,  or  artistically
poetical,  in  such  descriptions.  Ovid's  picture  of
the  soutli  wind  is,  indeed,  most  admirable,  but  we
recognize  in  it  only  the  highest  style  of  art,  won
derful,  indeed,  in  its  grouping  and  in  its  coloring,
yet  without  feeling,  and  producing  no  impression
of  reality.


"The  S'i'.ith  \\ind  (lie.-,  abroad  with  humid  wings,  his
dreadful  face  covered  with  pitchy  darkness;  his
'>eard  is  loaded  with  showers;  the  Hood  pour.-
_is  hoary  hairs  ;  clouds  sit  upon  his  brow  ;  his  wings
«ind  robes  are  dripping  with  the  rain."  We  know  at
once  that  a  man  who  writes  thus  never  savr  the  Hood,
or  anything  like  it.  It  is  all  poetry,  not  in  the  Bible
style,  as  the  name  is  applied  to  the  more  emotional
portion.;  o!  the  Scriptures,  but  in  the  (Ireek  sense  of
TrtHTjffis,  TrmSjua,  something  //«,••/<•,  a  fictitious  compo
sition  artificially  colored  and  invented.  Some  have
regarded  the  language,  (!en.  vii.  11 — ''the  windows
of  heaven"  and  'Mhe  fountains  of  the  great  deep,"
as  of  this  poetical  or  rhetorical  kind.  Thus  .lacobus
compares  the  iirst  to  an  "eastern  expiv.-sion  "  denot
ing  that  "the  heavens  are  broken  up"  with  storms,
and  even  Murphy  speaks  of  it  as  a  "  beautiful  figure  ;"
but  all  such  views  detract  from  the  real  grandeur,  as
they  also  do  from  the  truthfulness,  of  the  account.
This  opening  of  the  heavens,  and  breaking  up  of  the
deep,  were  realities  to  Noah,  so  conceived  by  him,
and  as  honestly  related  as  the  lifting  up  of  the  ark
and  the  disappearing  of  the  mountains.  The  awful
scene  itself  would  never  have  called  out  such  irnag-
iiigs  as  those  of  Ovid,  or  suggested  such  language.
The  Syrian  tradition,  as  given  by  LUCIAN  in  the  JSyria
I >(''t,  comes  nearest  to  the  simplicity  of  the  scriptural
narrative;  but  even  there,  there  are  parts  of  the  repre
sentation  which  we  feel  instinctively  could  never  have
come  from  any  actual  eye-witnessing.  The  rising  of
the  rivers,  for  example,  on  which  this  tradition  dwells,
must  have  breii  a  very  insignificant  part,  if  any  part
at  all,  of  so  sudden  and  terrific  a  spectacle,  as  it  is
set  forth  in  the  Bible,  and  as  it  must  have  been,  from
the  very  nature  of  the  case,  when  the  floods  from
above  came  like  bursting  clouds  or  water-spouts,  and
the  breaking  and  sinking  of  the  earth  made  a  scene
so  different  from  anything  that  could  have  been  pro
duced  by  a  freshet,  even  of  the  most  extensive  kind.
So,  too,  in  the  Arabian  tradition,  though  in  most
things  closely  resembling  the  scriptural,  we  find  the
same  tendency  to  embellishment.  See  it  as  given  in
the  Kvran,  Surat  xi.  40.  There  is  also  a  mingling
with  it  of  the  romantic  or  sentimental  which  shows
the  legendary  or  mere  story-making  style  of  perver
sion.  It  represents  Noah  as  having  a  fourth  son  who
is  an  unbeliever,  and  it  attempts  to  make  an  affect
ing  scene  between  this  lost  child,  -who  flies  to  the
mountain,  and  his  imploring  father,  as  the  ark  is


borne  past  him  by  the  separating  waters.  The  Chal-
daoan  is  evidently  a  magnified  copy  of  the  Hebrew
narrative,  but  in  its  enlargement  all  proportion  .s
lost  sight  of.  The  ark  is  represented  as  a  stadium,
or  furlong,  in  length.  It  is  in  the  same  way  t'ncy
have  treated  the  modest  Hebrew  chronology,  keep
ing  its  genealogical  division  in  the  account  of  the  ten
generations  before  Xisuthrus,  but  running  its  deci
mals  and  hundreds  into  thousands  and  hundreds  of
thousands  to  agree  with  the  excessive  antiquity  of
their  fabled  annals.  It  is  the  Bible  record  swelled
out  by  the  inflated  Oriental  imagination,  which  every
where,  except  in  the  case  of  the  Hebrews,  was  unre
strained  by  any  divine  check  upon  the  tendency  oi
each  nation  to  give  itself  a  mythical  antiquity.

There  is  one  point  in  the  Scripture  narrative  of
the  flood  which  would  seem  to  establish  the  fact  of
its  limited  extent,  had  it  not  been  for  that  prejudg-
ment  of  universality  which  has  influenced  so  many
commentators.  In  ver.  19  the  narrator  seems  to
hurry  towards  the  climax  of  the  scene :  "  And  me
waters  prevailed  exceedingly,  TN"2,  "IN'O,  and  aJl
the  high  hills  under  the  whole  heaven  were  covered."
The  verse  following  explains  and  confirms  this  by  an
additional  particular:  "Fifteen  cubits  upward  did
the  waters  prevail  ("H~3,  they  were  fifteen  cubits
xlrojiff,  or,  as  we  say,  fifteen  cubits  deep),  and  the
hills  (the  same  word,  "~n,  thus  rendered  ver.  lit)
were  covered."  Now  take  this  in  connection  with
ver.  4  of  eh.  viii:  "And  the  ark  rested  (n:rn)  in
the  seventh  month,  the  seventeenth  day  of  the
month  (at  the  i  ;u!  of  five  months,  one  hundred  and
fifty  days,  or  at  height  of  the  flood)  upon  the  mount
ains  of  Ararat "  (-"IS  n~H  in  the  plural — or  one
of  llu-  iiiotnii'tiit.t  of  Ararat  taken  as  the  name  of  a
nn lire  or  mountainous  country,  one  of  wdiose  peaks
afterwards  obtained  the  name  by  way  of  eminence.*
Here  we  evidently  have  the  place  from  which  the.«e
fifteen  cubits  were  reckoned,  and  it  furnishes  the  key
to  the  right  understanding  of  what  the  writer  meant
to  convey  as  the  extent  of  his  knowledge  and  experi
ence,  whatever  might  have  been  his  opinions  as  to
anything  beyond.  There  is  no  evidence  that  this
was  the  high  peak  of  Ararat;  the  impression  (from
the  use  of  the  plural)  is  all  the  other  way.  Taking
all  these  things  into  consideration,  the  explanation  is
most  natural  and  easy.  The  ark  had  drifted  up  the
basin  of  the.  Euphrates  and  Tigris  until  it  grounded
on  the  highlands  that  formed  its  northern  bank  or
border,  and  that,  too,  not  far  from  a  land  of  the
olive  and  the  vine.  The  surrounding  mountains,  or
high  hills,  had  previously  been  in  sight,  but  at  this
time,  or  just  before  it,  they  disappeared.  These
are  the  same  "mountains  under  the  whole  heaven"
mentioned  ver.  19.  Fifteen  cubits  strong  were  the
waters,  and  the  mountains  were  covered.  When  the
ark  rested,  there  was  no  land  anywhere  in  sight.
Noah  ascertains  the  depth  bymcasmemcnt,  or  by  his
knowledge  of  the  ark's  draught  of  water,  and  as  it
did  not  float  again,  he  takes  this  time  as  the  summit
of  the  flood.  He  may  have  supposed  the  whole  earth
covered,  as  far  as  he  knew  anything  about  the  earth
as  a  whole ;  but  we  must  take  what  he  saw,  what  he
knew,  and  what  he  describes  as  coming  evider.tly
from  his  experience.  Without  some  such  view  we
have  no  standard.  It  may  be  said,  too,  that  this
mountain  on  which  the  ark  rested  could  not  have

*  [See  the  marginal  note  on  these  words,  I3"I"J<  *Hn  ,
page  308.— T.  L.J


CHAP.    VIII.    1-19.


321


been  the  high  peak  of  Ararat,  nor  one  from  which
that  peak  was  in  sight ;  since,  in  the  one  case,  the
surrounding  mountains  must  have  disappeared  much
earlier,  and,  in  the  other  case,  the  declaration  of
their    disappearance    would    uot    have    been    true.
Again,  had  it  been  the  high  peak  of  Ararat,  then,  in
the  going  down  of  the  waters,  a  very  large  part  of
it  must  have  been  wholly  bare  before  the  others  be-
^came  visible  (TX"i3),  as  is  said  viii.  5;   but  this  is
contrary  to  the  whole  impression  derived  from  that
part  of  the  account.     All  these  difficulties  (difficul
ties,  we  mean,  on  the  i'ace  of  the  account)  become
greatly  increased,  if  we  suppose  that  the  flood  was
not  only  above  Ararat,  or  one  of  the  mountains  of
Ararat,  but  also  covered  the  whole  globe,  and  mount
ains  known  to  be  twelve  thousand  feet,  or  more  than
two  miles,  higher  than  any  in  Armenia.    In  such  case,
besides  there  being  no  standard  of  measurement  for
the  fifteen  cubits,  there  would  be  a  strangeness  and
inconsistency   in   the   language,    since  this   highest
mountain  would  be  as  much  covered  by  a  rise  of  one
cubit  above  its  summit  as  by  fifteen.    The  expression
implies  excess,  as  measured"  from  some  known  condi
tion,  or  it  lias  no  meaning.     How  did  the  describer
know  it  ?

This  may  be  answered  by  saying  that  Noah  knew
it  divinely,  that  is,  by  ;i  knowledge  and  a  memory
having  no  basis  in  any  actual  knowing  or  sense-ex
perience.     It  was  an  impression  made  upon  his  mind.
Now,  had  it  been  so  related,  it  would  have  been  per
fectly  consistent  with  that  subjective  truthfulness  on
which  we  insist.     Other  things  arc  thus  stated  among
the  immediate  antecedents  of  the  flood,  but  this  ap"
pears  in  the  midst  of  the  vividly  optical,  and  in  di
rect  connection  with  facts  having  every  appearance
of  being  described   from  sense.     As  a  thing  utterly
unknown  and  unknowable  without  such  divine  inti
mation,  or  as  a  face  that  might  have  been,  but  which
sense  necessarily  failed  to  'reach,  it  would  be  like
Ovid's  "  dolphins  in  the  subaquean  woods,"  or  his
''sea-calves  swimming  in  the  vineyards,"  except  that
it  has  an  air  of  statistical  particularity,  which    as
thus   given,   affects   its   credit,  either  "as   prose'  or
poetry.  ^  There  are  other  things  that,  on  the  suppo-
ition  of  universality,  must  have  been  utterly  beyond
experience,  but  which  are  very  confidently  stated,
and  vividly  described,  just  as  things  would  be  that
fall  directly  under  the  observation  of  the  eye.*     A
sphere  of  water  covering  the  entire  globe  would  have
left  no  means  of  determining  the  time  of  greatest
elevation,  or  the  period  of  abatement  before  the  hills
again  appeared.    The  Jewish  commentators  maintain
the  universality  as  essential  to  the  honor  of  their
Scriptures.     But  they  are  critics  who  overlook  noth
ing,  and  they  therefore  keenly  see  these  difficulties.
In  order  to  avoid  them,  they  distinguish  between
what   was    known    from   the    spirit   of    prophecy,
nxscs.  and  what  is  narrated  from  sense,  i1tt5i;n'
or  experience.     Our  Rabbins,  says  Maimomdes,Vere
led  to  this  from  the  knowledge  (afterwards  obtained)
that  there  were  mountains  in  Greece  (Europe,  he
means)  higher  than  Ararat,  which,  he  tells  us,  was
in  the  lower  part  of  the  earth-sphere  (TTPS),  not


*  [Such,  for  example,  as  the  lion1]    T.'ibn  ,  viii.  u,  a
Jeculiiir  Hebrew  idiom,  denoting  most  graphically  a  gradual

21


far  from  Babylon.  To  overcome  the  objection,  ha
adopts  the  singular  view,  that  the  resting  on  Ararat,
though  at  the  height  of  the  flood  when  the  waters
became  even,  was  some  time  after  the  highest
mountains  were  submerged.  This  submersion,  or
rather  supermersion,  came  from  the  great  commotion,

the  tossing  or  boiling  of  the  waters  (PiPpr^), the

violent  eruption  from  the  earth  Causing  them  "to  dash
and  surge  over  the  highest  parts,  thus  covering  them,
but  not  as  an  even  mass  or  icqxor.  He  makes  a  dis
tinction,  which  has  some  ground,  between  ~3~\  the
calming  of  the  waters,  and  IDP! ,  theii  abating.'  It
was  after  the  going  down  of  this  wild  commotion,  or
when  the  waters  came  to  a  level,  that  the  ark  hap
pened  to  be  (mpvD  ipi)  OVer  the  region  of  Ararat,
and  settled  down  upon  it.  It  was  also  a  part  of  this
singular  view  that  the  ark,  in  consequence  of  its  load
and  its  great  specific  gravity,  did  not  truly  float,  but
was  lifted  up  by  the  great  force  of  the  up-pouring
waters,  and  this,  he  holds,  is  what  is  meant  by  the
words  vii.  18,  =^n  1:3  }>y  -brr  ,  "ft  wcnt  upon
the  face  of  the  witters,"— wherever  the  waters  drove
it.  Such  views,  from  so  sober  a  commentator,  are
only  of  value  as  showing  the  immense  difficulties  at
tending  this  opinion  of  universality— difficulties  that
come  not  more  from  outside  objections  than  from
the  face  of  the  account  itself,  if  wo  depart  from  the
plain  optical  interpretation.

The  whole  argument  may  be  brivilv  summed  by
a  careful  consideration  of  the  three  main  aspects  of
the  Noachiau  account:     1.  The  divine  communica
tions  warning  Noah  of  the  impending  judgment,  and
directing  him  to  prepare  an  ark  lor  the   savin"  of
himself  and  his  house.     Whether  these  were  made
in  vision,  or   by  vivid   impressions  uix.n   the   mind,
they  are  truthfully  received   and    truthfully  related,
that  is,  translated  into  human  speech  as  representing
the  conceptions  and  knowledge  of  the  iviator  in  re
spect  to  the  subjects  of  such 'divine  communication.
The  human  race  were  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  earth,
or   laud,  they    inhabited,   was   to  "be    covered  with
water.     In  such   warning,   God  did   not   teach  him
geography,  nor  give  him  the  figure  of  the  earth,  nor
the  height  of  the  unknown,  far-distant  mountains.
2.  The  directions  in  respect  to  the  animals.     These
are  to  be  interpreted  in  the  same  way,  and  with  the
same  limitations  of  knowledge  and  conception.     He
was  to  take  of  the  living  thing  (or  the  animals)  under
the  threefold  specification  of  the  bchimn  (the  cattle),,
the  fowl,  and  the   creeping  thing.     They  were  the-
animals  with  which  he  was  familiar,  as  belonging  to
the  region _  in  which  he  lived,     lie  was  aided  by  a
divine  instinct  in  the  creatures,  supernaturally  given
in  the  beginning,  and  now  supernaturally  excited.
But  God  did  not  teach  him  zoology,  nor  the  vast
variety  of  species,  nor  is  there  any  evidence  that  ani
mals  came  from  the  distant  parts  of  the  unknown
earth,  such  as  the  giraffe  from  Southern  Africa,  the
elephant  from   India,  or  the  kangaroo  from  Austra
lia.     3.  The  actual  event  itself,  and  this  under  two
aspects :  a.  The  flood  as  optically  described  by  some
one  in  the  ark  (Noah  or  Shem).     Hero  we  have  cer
tain  data  which  seem  unmistakable  in  the  inferences
to  be  deduced  from  them.    If  we  look  steadily  at  the
connections  of  events  as  they  are  most  artlessly  nar
rated,  the   conclusion  appears  almost   unavoidable,
that  the  mountains  mentioned,  vii.  20,  as  covered  by
fifteen  cubits,  and  that  come  again  in  sight,  viii.  5,
as  seen  from  the  same  place  whence  they  disappeared.


322


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES.


at  the  height  of  the  flood,  and  when  the  ark  ground
ed  on  the  seventeenth  of  the  seventh  month,  are  the
eame  "high  hills  under  the  whole  heaven,"  that  are
mentioned  vii.  19.  We  have  here  what  Noah  saic,
or  knew  from  sense,— the  visible  objects  around  him,
the  grounding,  the  disappearing,  the  reappearing—
all  referring  to  the  same  phenomena,  one  part  being
as  much  optical  as  another,  and  the  knowledge  of
any  one  of  thc?c  facts,  as  they  appear  on  the  face
of  the  narrative,  us  much  referrible  to  experience  as
that  of  any  other,  b.  The  inferred  extent.  Noah  had
no  means  "of  measuring  the  distance  to  which  the  ark
drifted.  \Ye  judge  of  it  from  what  can  be  ascer
tained  of  its  termini.  It  started  from  a  place  near
the  old  Eden-land  (in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Per
sian  Gulf  j,  and  it  struck  on  one  of  the  mountains  of
Armenia  in  the  north.  This  could  not  have  been
the  hiuh  Ararat,  for  then  the  lesser  Ararat,  which  is
only  seven  miles  distant,  and  four  thousand  feet,  or
nearly  a  mile,  lower,  must  have  been  long  under
water,  contrary  to  the  vivid  impression  made  by
what  is  siid  vi'i.  'JO  and  viii.  5.  It  could  not  have
been  the  lesser  peak,  for  then  the  higher  (only  seven
miles  distant)  would  have  been  clearly  visible,  and
four  thousand  feet  above  the  water  during  the  whole
time  of  the  ark's  resting.  It  must,  therefore,  have
been  some  high  land  on  the  borders  of  the  mountainous
region,  and  at  quite  a  distance,  S.  or  E.,  from  either.
This  distance  of  the  ark's  sailing  before  it  grounded
(taking  into  view  the  fact  that  there  was  no  land


then  visible  from  it  in  any  direction,  although  there
had  been  just  before)  would  give  a  flood  which  prob
ably  covered  the  old  adamah,  together  with  Baby
lonia,  Assyria,  the  neighboring  parts  of  Persia  and
Media,  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  Palestine,  Egypt,  Arabia,
and  a  good  portion  of  Asia  Minor,  with  peaks,  per
haps,  here  and  there,  projecting  above  its  surface.
Subsequent  events  seem  to  confirm  this  view.  From
the  unknown,  rugged,  mountainous  region  where  the
ark  rested,  the  Noachida;  soon  found  their  way  back
(at  a  time,  too,  when,  as  appears  from  xi.  •!,  the
flood  was  in  fresh  remembrance)  to  the  plain  of
Shinar.  To  this  they  were  led  by  the  primitive  gre
garious  tendency  (see  remarks,  p.  317),  and  their
aversion  to  being  driven  into  the  unknown,  until
there  came  that  remarkable  divine  impulse  which,
for  the  first  time,  sent  them  far  and  wide  to  the  re
motest  regions  of  the  earth.  Each  pioneering  family
carried  with  them  the  story  of  the  terrible  judgment,
locating  it  in  different  lands  according  to  the  tradi
tions  of  their  ancestors,  and  each  distorting  or  em
bellishing  it  after  their  own  mythical  or  legendary
fashion.  The  Bible  alone  gives  us  the  veritable  ac
count,  truthfully  and  vividly  told,  carrying  every
mark  of  being  an  actual  eye-witnessing,  and  furnish
ing  the  best"  data  for  determining  its  locality,  its
probable  extent,  its  true  chronology,  and,  what  is  of
greater  value  than  all  else,  its  theological  bearing,  as
one  of  the  great  divine  interventions  in  the  history
of  the  world  and  of  the  church. — T.  L.]


FOURTH    PART.

THE  GENESIS  OF  THE  NEW,  WORLD-HISTORICAL,  HUMAN  RACE;  OF  THE  CONTRAST
BETWEEN  THE  FORM  OF  SIN  THAT  NOW  COMES  IN,  AND  OF  THE  NEW  FORM  OF
PIETY;  OF  THE  CONTRAST  BETWEEN  THE  BLESSING  OF  SIIEM  (CULTUS,  THEOCRACY)
AND  THE  BLESSING  OF  JAPHETH  (CULTURE,  HUMANISM);  OF  THE  CONTRAST  BE
TWEEN  THE  DISPERSION  OF  THE  NATIONS,  AND  THE  BABYLONIAN  COMBINING  OF
THE  NATIONS;  BETWEEN  THE  BABYLONIAN  DISPERSION,  OR  THE  MYTHICAL  HEA
THENISM,  AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL  SYMBOLIC  FAITH  IN  GOD  OF  THE  PATRIARCHS.
THE  FIRST  TYPICAL  COVENANT.  CH.  VIII.  20-XI.  32.


FIRST    SECTION.

Tlic  Fii-*t  Typical  Covenant.     The  Primitive  Precepts  (XoacJdan  Laws).     The  Symbol  of  the  Jtainbow.


CHAPTER  VIII.  20-IX.  17.


20  And  Noah  buildod  an  altar  unto  the  Lord,  and  took  of  every1  clean  beast  and  of

21  every  clean  fowl  and  offered  burnt  offerings  on  the  altar.     And  the  Lord  smelled  a
sweet  savour,2  and  the  Lord  said  in  his  heart,  I  will  not  again  curse  the   ground  any
more   for  man's  sake;    for  the  imagination  of  man's  heart  is  evil  from  his  youth  [here,

22  excusing]  ;  neither  will  I  again  smite  any  more  everything  living  as  I  have  done.    While
the  earth  rcmaineth  [ail  the  days  of  the  earth]  seedtime  and  harvest  [the  order  of  nature],  and
cold  and  heat,  and  summer  and  winter,3  and  day  and  night,  shall  not  cease.


CHAP.    VIII.    20— IX.    1-17.


323


CK.  IX.   1     And  God  [Eiohim]  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said  unto  them.  Be  fruitful

2  and  multiply  and  replenish  the  earth.     And  the  fear  of  you  and  the  dread  of  you   shall
be  upon  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  upon  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  upon   ?11  that
moveth  upon  the  earth,  and  upon  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea;  into  your  hands  are  they

3  delivered.     Every  moving  thing  that  liveth  shall  be  meat  for  you;   even  as  the  green
:  herb  have  I  given  you  all  things.     But  flesh  which  is  the  life  thereof  [its  soul,  its  animation]

5  which  is  the  blood  thereof,    shall  ye  not  cat.     And  surely  your  blood  of  your  lives'

[of  each  single  life]  will  I  require;  at  the  hand  of  every  beast  will  I  require  it  [take  vengeance-

3  hand  of  man;    at  the  hand  of  every  man's  brother  will  I  require  the

;  life  of  man      Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man6  shall  his  blood  be  shed:  for  in

i   the  nnage  of  God  made  he  man.     And  you,  be  ye  fruitful,  and  multiply  ;   brino-  forth

8  abundantly  in  the  earth,  and  multiply  therein.      And  God  [Eiohim]  spake  unto  Noah

9  and  to  his  sons  with  him,  saying  [ntxb],   And  I,  behold,  I  establish  my  covenant  with

0  you    and  with  your  seed  after  you;  And  with  every  living  creature  that  is  with  you,
of  the  fowl,  of  the  cattle,  and  of  every  beast  of  the  earth  with  you  ;   from  all  that  go  out

1  ot  the  ark,  to  every  beast  of  the  earth  [that  shall  proceed  from  tbcm  in  the  future]      And*!  will
establish  my  covenant  with  you;    neither  shall  all  flesh  be  cut  off  any  more  by  the
waters  of  a  flood;    neither   shall  there    any  more  be  a  flood   to   destroy  the    earth!
And  God  [Eiohim]  said,  llns  is  the  token  of  the  covenant  which  I  make  between  me

o  and  you  and _ every  living  creature  that  is  with  you,  for  perpetual   generations:  I  do

set  my  bow    in  the  cloud,  and   it  shall  be  for  a  token  of  a  covenant  between  me  and

ie  earth.     And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  I  bring  a  cloud    over  the  earth,  that   the

la  bow  shall  be  seen  in  the  cloud: 7   And  I  will  remember  my  covenant,  which  is  between

_  me   ana  you  and  every   living  creature  of  all  flesh  ;    and   the  waters  shall  no  more

16  become  a  flood  to   destroy  all  flesh.     And  my  bow  shall  be  in  the  cloud;  and  I  will
_  look  upon  it,  that  I  may  remember  the  everlasting  covenant   between  God  and  every

17  hying  creature  of  all  flesh  that  is  upon  the  earth.     And  God  [Eiohim]  said  unto  Noah
1  his  is  the  token  of  the  covenant,  which  I  have  established  between  me  and  all  flesh
that  is  upon  the  earth.

Z^SS^^1^'1001^11^^^'^^^^^^'^  inhabiting  the  portion  of  the  earth  v4cd
[*  Ve''  21  -


tO/ry  °a^f^t^

ume,  and  r0vScXeim^rto  h*"    ^     ^E^i  S«*«a«rt<nftftr  tow.     The  word  nn^3  occurs  here  for  the  first
nrP3)  to  din  t    tl  •    °1  me  a  cction_  ^'i'h  the  name  fp  (Nonh),  but  becomes  the  common  phrase  (PP1

seen  in  the  word  eiL'iTLh  ^L^L^l00;,-^  i^^1^1*100*  1"' .  11™C°  th°  Xow  '^tamcnt  Hebraism
iv.  18,  as  also
afraid  of  the


^™^%^^°r^™  a"  their  reverence  for  their  old  Se'rip!
n  a  desire  to  smooth  over  all  such  hmguagt-T.  L.]         P  J>  °      Clr  Phl!onic  fastidiousness,  as  ever  manifested

he  £S-T.~2?"  '  rend°rCd  KuWer-r"orc  Pr°Per]y  ««<«*»,  though  it  may  include  the  winter,  as  ^  may  include


Maimonides  renders  it  X
'  llood  <*


•„  5    •-,  ,  -  "os^e  sold/orhisthcft,"  as  also,  among  many  other  places,  tc  ici,.

»i  seems  a  Sie  S^JLfeS  '^  •?  "  ^'"^  ^  "'"  M  "  °Uf  ^^  VCrsi°nS  and  tho  Vulgate'  hc  Sivcs

s  in  his  pos^on    he    !  /  diVin°  ^  ""  ^*">>  ^  *  W  out  by  dMnalivn,  who

t  cup.    Such  also  seems  to  have  been  the  idea  of  the  LXX.  in  Gen.  ix.  G,  where  they  have


324


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


nothing  for  "IXS  but  ami  TOV


s  avrov,  in  return  for  hisblood.     Arabs  Erponian  us  renders  it


Iff  word  of  judgment,  and  so  also  liashi  and  Aben  Ezra,  C^TTi  C~X3,  ly  man,  that  is,  ly  the  witnesses.  -T.  L.]

[6  Ver.  13.—  TVi  JT  ,  my  L'-f,  a*  just  before,  vcr.  11,  "•ri1"12  ,  my  covenant.  The  language,  seems,  cm  the  very  fu(V
of  it,  to  imply  a  thin\'  previoii.-ly  exi.-ting,  called,  from  its  remarkable  appearance,  the  6010  of  Go/!,  and  now  appointed
as  a  sijrn  of  the  pio\  ;  u-!y  exiting  covenant.  Had  it  been  a  new  creation,  the  language  would  more  properly  have  been:
I  will  make,  or  set.  n  /<•<»'  in  the  cloud.  See  remarks  (in  the  Introd.  to  the  i.  ch.  p.  144)  on  the  rainbow  as  the  symbol
of  constancy  in  nature,  fioni  it*  constant  anil  regular  appearance  whenever  the  sun  shines  forth  after  the  rain.  Fee
further  views  on  this  ;.!!•!  for  the  opinions  of  the  Jewish  commentators,  see  also  note,  p.  3.8.  —  T.  1j.]

['  Ver.  14.—  This  ver.-c  should  be  connected,  in  translation,  with  the  one  following.  As  it  is  rendered  in  1C.  V.,  the
appearing  of  the  1  nw  is  made  the  .subject  of  the  sentence  (though  apparently  the  predicate),  whereas  the  sequence  of  the
conjunction  "  ,  and  of  the  tenses,  would  give  the  sense  thus:  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  I  bring  the  cloud,  etc.,  and
whenever  the  bow  appears  in  the  cloud,  that  I  will  remember  my  covenant  ;  the  conjunction  before  "FT"CT  having  an
illative  force.—  T.  1-1


EXEGETICAL   AND   CRITICAL.

1.  Ye;.-,  'jn-^-j.  Tltc  ofju-'nifj  of  Xoah  and  the
acccptniif  and  j.rinniac  of  Jt:!«n'a]i.  The  offering
of  N-  ,  ',  i-  not,  as  lias  lx.ni  maintained,  to  be  refer
red  back  iVoir.  tin.1  later  time  of  (lie  la\v,  to  the  primi
tive  hi.-toi'y.  It  retleets  itself,  moreover,  in  the  my-
thologiral  stories  of  the  flood  (I)Ki.nxscH,  p.  '2(58).
An  altar  to  the  Lord.  The  altar  is  culled  ~Zl?  ,
place  of  slaying  the  victim,  from  rt"T,  as  dvcnamr,-
finv  from  AV-IV.  That  the  sons  of  Adam  oii'crcd
without  ;ri  altar  is  a  mere  supposition.  According
to  Kril  t!ie;e  was  no  i:eed  of  an  altar,  because  (!od
\\  is  ^i!l  present  in  paradise  to  men.  In  the  judg-
of  the  flood  was  paradise  destroyed;  ttie  place
nf  his  pivsi-iuv  was  withdrawn,  and  lie  had  taken
l:is  throne  in  the  heavi  n,  that  from  thence,  hereafter
he  might  reveal  hiins -If  to  men.  (Comp.  ch.  ii.  5,7).
••Towards  heaven  must  now  the  hearts  of  the  pious
lif  up  themselves  ;  their  offerings  and  their  prayers
must  go  up  on  high,  if  they  would  reach  (iod's
throne.  In  order  to  ;:ive  the  offcrinirs  this  upward
direction,  elevated  places  were  fixed  upon,  from
which  they  miu'ht  ascend  heavenwards  in  fire.
Hence  the  offerings  derived  their  name  of  nl'bs  ^
from  !~>^",  the  <ti«-rii<1h>g,  not  so  much  because  the
animal  offered  was  laid  upon  the  altar,  or  made  to
ascend  the  altar,  but  rather  because  of  the  ascending
(of  the  flume  and  smoke)  from  the  altar  towards
l.i  aven.  ^('omp.  Judg.  xx.  40;  Jer.  xlviii.  15;  Amos
iv.  10).  In  like  manner  Delit/seli  in  relation  to  Ps.
x\ix.  lit;  (according  to  HOKMANX  :  "Prophecy  mid
rnliilmeiit,''  pp.  80,  88).  If  by  this  is  meant  that  the
religious  consciousness,  which  once  received  God  as
pre.-ciu  in  paradise,  must  now,  through  its  darkness
by  sin,  revere  him  as  the  Holy  One,  far  off,  dwelling
on  high,  and  only  occasionally  revealing  himself  from
heaven,  there  would  be  nothing  to  say  against  it ;
but  if  it  is  meant  as  a  literal  transfer  of  the  place  of
the  divine  dwelling  and  of  the  divine  throne,  it
becomes  a  mythologizing  darkening  of  the  divine
id. >a  (see  Ps.  1  :;<)).  Christ  was  greater  than  the
pnradis::ic-:i  Adam  ;  notwithstanding,  in  prayer,  he
lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven  (John  xi.  41);  and  al
ready  is  it  intimated,  Gen.  i.  1,  that  from  the  begin
ning,  the  heaven,  as  the  symbolical  sign  of  God's
exceeding  highness,  had  precedence  of  the  earth.
That,  however,  the  word  nb'i3  iray  have  some  re
lation,  at  least,  to  the  ascendency  of  the  victim  upon
the  altar  is  shown  by  the  expression  ilb?n  in  tiie
Hiphil.  The  altar  was  erected  to  Jehovah,  whose
worship  had  already,  at  an  earlier  period,  commenc
ed  (eh.  iv.  4).  Everywhere  when  Elohim  had  re
vealed  himself  in  his  first  announcements,  and  had


thus  given  assurance  of  himself  as  the  trusted  and
the  constant,  there  is  Jehovah,  the  God  amen,  in
ever  fuller  distinctness.  As  Jehovah  must  he  es
pecially  appear  to  the  saved  Noah,  as  the  one  to
whom  he  had  fulfilled  his  word  of  promise  in  the
wonderful  relation  he  bore  to  him. — Of  every
clean  beast. — According  to  Uoscnmuller  and  otlieia,
we  must  regard  this  as  referring  to  the  five  kinds  of
offerings  under  the  law,  namely,  bullock,  sheep,
(Kits,  doves,  turtle  doves.  This,  however,  is  doing
violence  to  the  text  ;  there  appears  rather  to  have
been  appointed  for  offering  the  seventh  surplus
example  which  he  had  taken,  over  and  above  the
three  pairs,  in  each  case,  of  clean  beasts. — And
offered  it  as  a  burnt  offering.—' We  are  not  to
think  here  of  the  classification  of  offeiings  as  deter
mined  in  the  levitical  law.  The  burnt  offering  form-.)
the  middle  point,  and  the  root  of  the  different  offer
ings  (comp.  ch.  xxii.  Io);  and  the  undivided  unity
is  here  to  be  kept  in  view.  There  is,  at  all  events,
contained  here  the  idea  of  the  thank  offering,  al
though  there  is  nothing  said  of  any  participation,  or
eating,  of  the  victim  offered.  The  extreme  left  side
of  the  offering  here,  as  an  offering  for  sin  and  guilt,
was  the  Herein  or  pollution  of  the  carcases  exposed
in  the  flood  (like  the  lamb  of  the  sacrifice  of  Moses
as  compared  with  the  slain  first-born  of  the  Egyp
tians)  ;  the  extreme  right  side  lay  in  that  consecrat
ed  partaking  of  flesh  by  Noah  which  now  commenc
ed. — And  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  smelled  a  sweet
savor. — The  savor  of  satisfaction.  An  anthropo
morphic  expression  for  the  satisfied  acceptance  of
the  offering  presented,  as  a  true  offering  of  the  spirit
of  the  one  presenting  it.* — And  said  in  his  heart.
— Not  merely  he  said  to  himself  or  he  thought  with


*  [The  flame  mounting  heavenward  from  the  great  altar
of  Xoah,  the  vast  column  of  smoke  and  incense  majestically
ascending  in  the  calm,  clear  atmosphere,  transcending  seem
ingly  the  common  law  of  gravity,  and  thus  combining  the
ideas  of  tranquillity  and  power,  would  of  itself  present  a
striking  image  of  the  natural  sublime.  But,  beyond  tills,
there  is  a  moral,  we  may  rather  say,  a  spiritual  sublimity,
to  one  who  regards  the  scene  in  those  higher  relations  whldh
the  account  here  indicates,  and  which  other  portions  of
Scripture  make  so  clear.  It  offers  to  our  contemplation  the
most  vivid  of  contrasts.  There  comes  to  mind,  on  the  one
hand,  the  gross  selfishness  of  the  antediluvian  world,  ever
tending  downward  more  and  more  to  earth  and  a  sensual
animality — in  a  word,  devoting  life  to  that  which  is  lower
than  the  lowest  life  itself;  whilst  now,  on  the  contrary,
there  rises  up  in  all  its  rich  suggestivenes.-*,  the  idea  of
sacrifice,  of  life  devotion  to  that  which  is  higher  than  all
life,  as  symbolized  in  the  flame  ascending  from  the  ottered
victim.  It  is,  moreover,  the  spirit  of  confession,  of  peni
tence,  of  perfect  resignation  to  the  will  of  God  as  the  ration
al  rule  of  life, — all,  too,  prefiguring  One  who  made  the  great
sacrifice  of  himself  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  and  who,  al
though  historically  unknown  to  Noah,  was  essentially  cm-
braced  in  that  recognition  of  human  demerit,  and  of  the
divine  holiness,  which  is  sty  led  "the  righteousness  of  faith."


CHAP.   VIII.   20— IX.    1-17.


325


himself;  it  ir,eans  rather,  he  took  counsel  with,  his
heart  and  executed  a  purpose  proceeding  from,  the
emotion  of  his  divine  love. — I  will  not  again
curse. — In  words  had  he  done  this,  Gen.  iii.  17,  but
actually  and  in  a  higher  measure,  in  the  decree
of  destruction  Gen.  vi.  7,  13.  With  the  last,  there
fore,  is  the  first  curse  retracted,  in  as  far  as  the  first
preliminary  lustration  of  the  earth  is  admitted  to  be
a  baptism  of  the  earth.  According  to  Knobel,  the
pleasing  fragrance  of  the  ottering  is  not  the  moving
ground,  but  merely  the  occasion  for  this  gracious  re
solve.  Hut  what  docs  the  occasion  mean  here  ?  In
so  far  as  the  saving  grace  of  God  was  the  first  mov
ing  ground  for  Noah's  thank  offering,  was  this  latter
also  a  second  moving  ground  (symbolically,  causa
meritoria)  for  the  purpose  of  God  as  afterwards  de
termined. — For  the  imaginations  of  man's  heart.
— The  ground  here  given  for  God's  forbearance  and
compassion  seems  remarkable.  Calvin:  u  llic  in-
constantice  vidclur  deus  accusari  posse.  Supra  pun  i-
turns  hominem,  causam  consilii  elicit,  quia  jigmeutum
cordis  liutnani  malum  est.  Hie  promissurus  homini
graliam,  quod  posthac  tali  ira  uti  nolit,  candem  cau
sam  allcffitf."  Between  this  passage,  however,  and
the  one  ch.  vi.  6,  there  is  a  twofold  difference.  In  the
latter  there  precedes  the  sentence  :  Jehovah  saw  that
the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  upon  the  earth ;  in
connection  with  this  corruption  of  actual  sin,  the  evil
imagining  of  the  human  heart  itself,  is  reckoned  for
evil,  as  being  its  fountain.  Here,  however,  the  burnt
offering  of  Xoah  goes  before.  In  connection  with
this  sacrificial  service,  expressing  the  feeling  of  guilt
and  the  want  of  forgiveness,  the  evil  imagination  of
the  human  heart  appears  as  a  sufferer  of  tempta
tion.  The  innate  sinfulness  is  not  disease  merely,
but  as  it  stands  in  organic  connection  with  the  actual
sin,  is  also  guilt.  It  is,  however,  disease  too;  and
precisely  in  its  connection  with  the  disposition  for
pardon,  and  the  better  desire  of  man,  is  it  regarded
as  disease  by  God,  and  as  being,  therefore,  an  object
of  his  compassion.  Moreover  it  is  called  here  simply
"b  "IIP  ,  the  involuntary  unconscious  sense  and  ima
gination,  but  there  (Gen.  vi.  6),  it  was  "  the  ima
gination  of  the  thoughts  (the  purposes)  of  his  heart,"
and,  therefore,  a  matter  of  consciousness  ;  here  it  is
wickedness  from  his  youth  up,  there,  it  is  only  wicked
ness,  notaing  else  but  wickedness,  wickedness  through
out  and  continually.  In  the  effect  of  the  flood,  and
in  the  light  of  the  sacrificial  offering,  which  Noah
offers  not  only  in  his  own  name,  but  in  that  of  his
family  and  race,  the  guilt  of  the  innate  sinfulness  of
the  human  race  appears  typically  weakened  in  the
same  way  as  in  the  evangelical  church-doctrine,  the
condemnation  of  hereditary  sin  is  taken  away  by

Whilst  thus  the  new  spirit  of  sacrifice  ascends  from  the  bap
tized  earth,  heaven  is  represented  as  bending  down  to  meet
the  symbol  of  reconciliation ;  the  infinite  descends  to  the
finite,  and  humanity,  in  vorificatien  of  the  Scripture  para
dox,  rises  through  its  very  act  of  lowliness  and  se(/"-abasc-
ment.  The  wrath  all  gone,  infinite  compassion  takes  now
its  place,  and  this  is  expressed  in  that  striking  Hebraism,
ni~P3  n^T  "tbo  odor  of  rest,"  typifying  the  euioSui
Xpio-Tou  (2  Cor.  ii.  4)  "the  sweet  savor  of  Christ  in  them
who  are  saved."

The  writer  of  this  old  account  knew  as  well  as  Philo,  or
Strauss,  or  any  modern  rationalists,  that  God  did  not  smell
nor  eat ;  but  the  emotional  truthfulness  of  his  inspiration
made  him  adopt  the  strongest  and  the  most  emotional  lan
guage  without  fear  of  inconsistency  or  anticipated  cavil.
"  How  gross ! "  says  the  infidel,  "  this  representation  of  God,
snuffing  up  the  odor  of  burning  flesh;"  but  it  is  he  who
"  snnffs"  at  God's  holy  altar  (Mai.  i.  13).  It  is  he  who  is
''  gross"  in.  his  profane  mockery  of  a  spirituality  which  his
carnal  carthliness  utterly  fails  to  comprehend. — T.  L.]


baptism,  of  which  the  flood  is  a  type.*  Knobel  lays
stress  on  the  fact  that  it  is  said  from  his  youth  up^
not  from  his  mother's  womb  ;  but  the  word  evidently

*  [There  is  no  need  hero  of  labored  attempts  to  remove
apparent  inconsistencies.  The  most  simple  and  direct  inter
pretation  of  Scripture  is  generally  that  which  is  most  con
servative  of  its  honor  as  well  as  of  its  truthfulness.  The
passage  seems  to  assign  the  same  reason  for  sparing  the
world  that  is  given  vi.  5,  6,  for  its  destruction  ;  and  in  both
cases  there  is  used  the  same  particle  ^3  .  Some  would
render  it  although:  "I  will  not  again  smite,  cte.,  aUhon/jh
the  imagination  of  the  heart  of  man  is  evil."  Others,  like
Jacobus,  would  connect  it  with  the  words  ClXH  "I^Ci'S,
for  man's  sake,  intimating  that  it  should  never  more  be  dona
for  this  reason.  liut  nothing  of  the  kind  helps  the  difficul
ty,  if  there  be  any  difficulty.  There  arc  but  very  few  places
(if  any)  where  "3  can  be  rendered  although.  The  passages
cited  by  Noldius  under  this  head  in  almost  every  case  fail  to
bear  him  out.  It,  is  ft  particle  denoting  a  reason,  and  some
times  a  motive,  like  the  two  senses  of  the  Greek  O'TI  and  the
Latin  quod,  or  the  two  English  conjunctions  because  and
that.  The  idea  presented  by  Langc  gives  the  key.  Sin  is  both
guilt  and  disease.  Jinn's  depravity,  therefore,  is  the  object
both  of  vengeance  and  compassion,  two  states  of  feeling
which  can  exist,  at  the  same  time:,  perfect  and  uuweakcned,
only  in  the  divine  mind,  but  which  are  necessarily  present
ed  to  us  in  a  succession,  produced  by  varying  circumstances
on  the  finite  or  human  side.  It  is  in  reference  to  the  former
that  the  language  is  used,  Gen.  vi.  5,  G,  where  ^3  denotes
the  reason  of  the  vengeance.  Hero,  in  like  manner,  it  ex
presses  the  reason  of  the  mercy.  Noah's  olt'vrinor  had  made
the  ditfcrence,  not  changing  God,  but  placing  man  in  a  differ
ent  relation  to  him  us  viewed  under  a  changed  aspect.  He
is  the  poor  creature,  as  well  as  the  guilty  creatme.  He  is
depraved  from  his  youth,  not  meaning,  \ve  think,  a  less
severe  description  of  his  sinl'ulness,  as  Lange  seems  to  inti
mate,  but  giving  a  deeper  view  of  it,  as  a  greater  calamity.
It  is  not  the  mere  habit-hardening  or  world-hardening  of
manhood  and  old  age,  as  contrasted  with  the  comparative
innocence  o_f  childhood  ;  but  the  see  is  of  the  evil  lie  deep,
away  back  in  his  very  infancy.  It  i-  the  hereditary,  or
disease,  aspect  that  induces  the  language,  which  seems  like
regret  on  the  part  of  Deity  for  an  act  so  calamitous,  though
so  just  and  necessary  :  "neither  will  1  a.u'ain  tmite  every
living  tiling  as  /  have  done."  It  is  as  though  hi*  heart
smote  him,  to  use  a  transplanted  Hebraism  elsewhere  cm-
ployed  of  man,  or  as  it  is  said  of  David,  1  Sam.  xxiv.  (i.  it
would  not  be  a  stronger  expression,  er  more  anthropopathic,
than  that  used  Gen.  vi.  6,  "  awl  he  waxgricn'tlat  hi*  heart.''
It  is  not,  however,  simply  the  idea  of  hopelessness  in  view
of  man's  incorrigibility,  but  an  expression  of  holy  and  in
finite  compassion,  such  aa  the  closest  criticism  will  more
and  more  discover  as  abounding  in  this  old_  hook  of  Genesis,
even  in  the  midst  of  the  severest  threatening  of  judgment.
The  greatness  of  man's  sin  reveals  the  greatness  of  the  di-
vine_ sorrow  on  account  of  it.  The  sinner,  too,  is  a'lowed  to
feel  it,  pnd  make  it  a  ground  of  his  pleading  for  forgiveness;
as  the  Psalmist  prays,  1's.  xxv.  11  "-pardon  mine  iniquity,
for  ( 13 )  it  is  great.''''  In  that  pa-'sago,  too.  some  would
render  ">3  although,  to  the  great  marring  of  the  force  and
pathos  of  the  supplication.  Chri.-t  did  not  die  for  small
gins,  as  Cranmer  has  well  said.

It  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  thus  to  set  forth
unshrinkingly  the  sharp  contrasts,  as  we  may  reverently  call
them,  in  the  divine  attributes.  None  hut  inspired  writers
could  venture  to  do  this;  ami  how  boldly  do  they  present
them!  often,  too,  in  closest  connection  without  betraying
any  fear  of  cavil,  or  charge  of  inconsistency.  The  tremen
dous  wrath,  and  the  most  melting  mercy  appear  in  the  same
chapters,  and  sometimes  in  immediately  succeeding  verses.
Among  others,  compare  Nahu'n  i.  1,  7.  What  a  burning
stream  of  indignation  finds  its  closing  cadence  in  the  words  :
"  Jehovah,  be  is  good,  a  stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble,  he
knoweth  them  that  put  their  trust  in  him."  Such  6-trong  con
trasts  appear  especially  in  portions  of  Scripture  which  the
careless  reader  passes  over  as  indelicate,  like  Kzck.  xvi.,
that  awful  picture  of  impurity  and  utter  depravity,  as  pre
sented  in  the  history  of  the  meretricious  and  utterly  aban
doned  woman  who  symbolized  the  Jewish  a-xl  Isi-aelitish
people.  A  too  fastidious  taste  would  forbid  the  reading  of
that  chapter,  at  least  in  any  public,  religious  service,  but  it
is  this  most  revolting  representation  (as  some  would  style  it)
which  is  the  very  thing  that  makes  the  divine  forgiveness
and  compassion  at  the  close  so  full  of  a  melting  tenderness,
beyond  what  any  other  kind  of  language  could  express  :
"Nevertheless  I  will  remember  my  covenant  with  thee  in
the  days  of  thy  youth,  and  I  will  establish  with  theo  a


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  'MOSES.


moans  that  just  as  soon  us  the  heart  comes  to  its
peculiar  imagining,  or  the  sensual  imagining  that  is
appropriate  to  it,  then  immediately  appears  the  in
nate  Binfulncss-— Whilst  the  earth  remaineth.—
"The  three  first  pairs  ol'  words  do  not  denote,  as  the
Jewish  interpreters  (see  Kaschi)  explain  it,  six  tunes
of  the  vear  reckoned  by  two  months  each  (a  division
found  in  the  Vedas  and  the  Avesta),  but  they  di
vide  the  year  h.tu  two  halves  each,  as  the  old  Greeks
did  into  dt>«s  and  Xf"""  (iu  Hesiod  it  is  S^TOJ  and
dooms)  namely  the  summer  (including  the  autumn),
beginning  with'  the  early  rising  of  the  Pleiades,  and
the  winter  (including  the  spring,  see  .lob  xxix.  1  i  be-
i/mniiiic  with  the  early  setting  (!DELER,  Chron.  1,  p.
241).""  J>eli!/sch.  And  yet  the  antitheses  are  not
tautological.  •"*-"  '1-liii"'  and  harvest  denote  the  year
according  to  i'.*  1'iost  obvious  significance  for  man.
Cull  unAlteat  are  according  to  the  equilibrium  of  the
vear,  Ivini:  at  the  ground  of  seed-time  and  harvest,
and  'conditioned  by  the  regular  change  of  tempera
ture.  titiHuntr  and  winter  present  the  constant  ap-
ice  of  this  change,  the  order  of  which  is  imaged
in  the  small  ami  ordinary  changes  of  day  ami  ,  'ght
,  long  to  the  general  course  of  nature,  relit/scli
:es  that  this  new  course  of  nature,  consisting  in
-  (,['  temperature,  is  opposed  to  a  "serene
or  uninterrupted  warmth  that  prevailed  before  the
flood."  That  the  earth  in  the  primitive  period  had
an  .  ven  temperature  may  be  regarded  as  very  prob
able  ;  but  not  that  the  flood,  in  this  respect,  made
any  sudden  turning  point,  although  such  an  epoch  in
the  earth's  life  must,  at  the  same  time,  denote  the
b  'ginning  of  a  change  At  all  events  the  new  order
ure  i-  not  denoted  as  a  ci  feet  earth,

for  this  purified  earth  will  God  never  again  cover
with  a  Mood.  Delit/.sch  admirably  remarks:  "  they
are  God's  thoughts  of  peace  which  lie  gives  to  Noah's
inner  perception  as  an  answer  to  hid  offering ;  as
.  veil  now  i  very  one  who  prays  in  faith  g.  ts  from  the
of  God  an  inward  perception  that  his  prayer  is
answered."  The  doubled  form,  T~X  SO  ,  has  as  in
Is.  liv.  '.).  the  power  of  an  oath.  As  an  establish
ment  of  the  new  order  of  nature,  this  promise  cor
responds  to  tiie  creative  words  eh.  i.

2.  Tli-  blessing  <>f  (.;<>d  <»/  //"'  HW  humanity,  >'.'.s
dominion,    //.<    1'ra"lom    and  Us  laws  (eh.   ix.   1-7).
fhe  benediction  of  Noah  and  his  sons,  ver.  1,  corre
sponds  to  the  blessing  of  Adam  and  Eve,  i.  1>S.     Ir
like  manner,  the  grant  of  dominion  over  the  anima
;     corresponds    to    the   appointment    there   ex
•d.       The   distinct   license  here  given  for    tin
slaying  of  the  beasts  corresponds  to  ch.  i.   '2'.»,  am
ch.'ii.'  1C,.     The  prohibition  of  eating  blood  corre
sponds  to  the  ])rohibition  of  the  tree  of  knowledge
rmally,  the  command  against  murder  has  relation
without  doubt,  to  the  murder   committed  by  Cain
(ch.  iv).     ihlit/sch:    "After  that  the  general  rela
tions  of  nature,  in  view  of  such  a  ruin  as  has  hap
pened  in  the  tlood,  arc  made  secure  by  promise,  there
are  giv-n  to  men  new  physical,  ethical,  and  legal


•  .  •',  •  .  ,">/.  Thi-n  slwlt  thou  remember  thy  ways,
•iml  bo  a^Y.imod.  ;ind  tlmu  shalt  know  that  I  am  thy  Lord,
that  thou  juavcst,  remember  and  bo  confounded,  and  never
uiH-a  thv  mouth  any  more  Ixvause  cf  thy  shame,  when  I  am
•i- rificd"  toward  thcc  for  all  that  tlon  hast  done,  saith
Adonai  Elohim,  thy  Lord  and  thy  God."  The  Hebrew  is,
literally,  when  I  have  made  an  atonement  (TJP  "HE 2 3  )
for  thee.  or  a  covering  for  thce.  Ezck.  3vi.  03.  It  is  in
these  strorg  contrasts,— in  these  apparent  inconsistencies,
us  some  would  call  them,— that  the  great  power  and  pathos
•jf  the  Scripture  appear.— T.  L.]


foundations."— And  the  fear  of  you.— Your  fear,
as  the  effect,  SO  "is .     The  exciting  of  fear  and  terror
are  to  be  the  means  of  man's  dominion  over  the  ani-
nals.     Delit/sch  remarks:    "It  is  because  the  ori
ginal  harmony  that  once  existed  between  man  and
lature  has  been  taken  away  by  the  fall  and  its  con-
equences.     According  to  the  will  of  God,  man  is
odll  the   lord  of  nature,   but  of  nature   now  as  an
unwilling  servant,  to  be  restrained  by  effort,  to  be
subjugated  by  force."     Not  throughout,  however,  is
nature  thus  antagonistic  toman;  it  is  not  the  case
vith  a  portion   of  the   animal   world,  namely^  the
domestic  animals.     It  is   true,  there  has  come  in  a
Breach  of  the  original  harmony,  but  it  is  not  now  for
the  first  time,  and  the  most  peculiar  striving  of  the
creature  is  against  its  doom  of  perishability  (Rom.
viii.   '20).     Moreover,  it  is  certainly   the   case,  that,
the  influence  of  the/an-  of  man  upon  the  animals  is
undamcntally  a  normal  paradisaical  relation.     But  a
severer   intensity  of  this  is  indicated  by  the  word
IrcaJ.     Knobel  explains  it  from  the  fact,  that  hence
forth  the  animal  is  threatened  in  its  life,  and  is  now
exposed  to  be  slain.     Since  the  loss  of  the  harmonic
relation  between  man  and  the  animals  (in  which  the
human  majesty  had  a  magical  power  over  the  beast),
the  contrast  between  the  tame  and  the  wild,  between
the  friendly  innocence  ami  the  hostile  dread  of  the
wilder  species,  had  increased  more  and  more,  unto
the  tune  of  the  iiood.     Now  is  it  formally  and  legally
presented  in  the  language  we  are  considering.     Man
is  henceforth  legally  authori/.ed  to  exercise  a  forcible
dominion  over  the  beasts,  since  he  can  no  longer  rule
them  through  the    sympathy  of  a  spiritual  power.
Also  the  eating  of  flesh,  which  had  doubtless,  existed
before,  is  now  formally  legali/cd  ;  by  which  fact  it  is,
at  the  same  time,  commended.     A  limitation  of  the
pure  kinds  is  not  yet  expressed.     V.'hen,  however,
there  is  added,  by  way  of  appendix,  all  ili«i  lirclh
(that  is,  is  alive),"  the'  dead  carcase,   or  that  which
hath  died  of  itse-lt',  is  excluded,  and  with  it  all  that  is
oil'ciisive    gem  rally.     There   is,  however,  a  distinct
restriction  'upon   this  flesh-eating,  in  the  prohibition
of  the  blood :  But  flesh  with  ttie  life  thereof.—
Dcht/.sch  explains  it  as  meaning,  "  that   there  was
forbidden  the  eating  of  the   flesh   when  the  animal
was  yet  alive,  unslaiu,  and  whose  blood  had  not  been
poured  out, — namely,  pieces  cut  out,  ^according  to  a
cruel  custom  of  antiquity,  and  still  existing  in  Abys-
syuia.     Accordingly  there  was  forbidden,  generally,
the  tating  of  flesh  in  which  the  blood  still  remained,"
It  is,  however,  more  to  the  purpose  to  explain  this
text  according  to  Lev.  xvii.  11,11,  than  by  the  sav-
a"e  practices  of  a  later  barbarous  heathenism,  or  by
Rabbinical   tradition.      "With    its  life,"   therefore,
means  with  its  soul,  or  animating  principle,  and  this
is  explained  by  its  blood,  according  to  the  passage
cited  (Dent  xii.  23);  since  the  blood  is  the  basis,  the
element  of  the  nerve-life,  and  in  th'.s  sense,  the  soul
The  blood  is  the  fluid-nerve,  the  nerve  is  the  con
structed  blood.     The  prohibition  of  blood-eating,  the
first  of  the  so-called  Noachian  commands  (see  below),
is,  indeed,  connected  with  the  moral  reprobation  of
cruelty  to  animals,  as  it  may  proceed  to  the  mutila
tion  of  the  living ;  it  is,  therefore,  also  connected  with
the  avoidance  of  raw  flesh  pn  "it1 2,  or  living  flesh,
1  Sam.  ii.  15.    Knobel).     "  The  blood  is  regarded  as
the  seat  of  the  soul,  or  the  life,  and  is  even  denoted
as  CB3,  or  the  soul  itself  (Lev.  i.  5),  as  the  anima
purpurea  of  Virgil,  -/!"«.  ix.  IMS  ;  even  as  here  1SJ2J
is  explained  by  the  apposition  ten .     Cut  the  life  be-


CHAP.  VIII.  20— IX.  1-17.


longs  to  God,  the  Lord  of  all  life,  and  must,  there
fore,  be  brought  to  him,  upon  his  altar  (Deut.  xii.
27),  and  not  be  consumed  by  man."    Knobel.     This
is,  therefore,  the  second  idea  in  the  prohibition  of
the  blood.    As  life,  must  the  life  of  the  beast  go
back  to  God  its  creator;  or,  as  life  in  the  victim
offered  in  sacrifice,  it  must  become  a  symbol  that  the
soul  of  man  belongs  to  God,  though  man  may  par
take  of  the  animal   materiality,    that  is,  the  flesh.
Still  stronger  is  the  restriction  that  follows:    And
surely  your  blood  of  your  lives.—  "The  soul  of
the  beast,  in  the  blood  of  the  beast,  is  to  be  avoided,
and  the  soul  of  man,  in  the  blood  of  man,  is  not  to
be  violated."    Delitzsch.     At  the  ground  of  this  con
trast,  however,  lies  the  more  general  one,  that  the
slaying  of  the  beast  is  allowed  whilst  the  slaying  of
man  is  forbidden.—  Will  I  require;    that  is,  the
corresponding,    proportionate   expiation  or  punish
ment  will  I  impose  upon  the  slayer.     The  expression
=rT'T-2?^,  Knobel  explains  as  meaning  "for  your
souls,"  for  the  best  of  your  life  (comp.  Lev.  xxvi.  45  •
Deut.  iv.  15;  Job  xiii.  7).     According  to  Delitzsch
and  Kcil  b  expresses  the  regard  had  for  the  individ
ual.     And  this  appears  to  be  near  the  truth.     The
blood  of  man  is  individually  reckoned  and  valued
according  to  the  individual  souls.—  At  the  hand  of
every  beast,—  The  more  particular  legal  regulation
is  found  hi  Exod.  xxi.  28.     Here,  then,  is  first  <nven
a  legal  ground  lor  the  pursuit  and  destruction  of
human  murderous  and  hurtful  beasts.    Still  there  is
expressed,  moreover,  the  slaying  of  the  single  bea«t
that  hath  lulled  a  man.     "In  the  enactments  of  So
lon  and  Draco,  and  even  in  Plato,  there  is  a  similar
provision."   Delitzsch.—  And  at  the  hand  of  man.
-"  nx  EIX,  brother  man,  that  is,  kinsman;  comp
ch.  xiii.  5  ;  so,  -ri3  ttSix  ,  a  priest-man,  etc.     By  the
words  -Pnx    -"-^  is  not  to  be  understood  the  next
ol  km  to  the  murdered  man,  whose  duty  it  was  to
execute   the   blood-vengeance  (Yon   Bohlen    Tuch
Baumgarten),  as  the  one  from  whom  God  required  the
blood  that  was  shed,  but  the  murderer  himself     In
order  to  indicate  the  unnaturalncss  of  murder  rnd
ts  deep  desert  of  penalty,  God  denotes  him'  (the
murderer)  as  in  a  special  sense  the  brother  of  the
murdered."   Knobel.     Besides  this,  moreover,  there
is  formed  from  tt)\x  the  expression  every  man  (De
litzsch,  Keil).    Every  man,  brother  man.—  The  life
**?•—  Ma?  is  emphasized.     Therefore  follows


more  man  (=nxn)  prominently  prcscntcd.-By  man
shall  his  Mood  be  shed:  "namely,  by  the  next
of  km  to  the  murdered,  whose  right  and  toy  S
it  was  to  pursue  the  murderer,  and  to  slay  him.  He
is  called  CW  bxh.the  demander  of  the  blood  or
the  blood-avenger.  The  Hebrew  law  imnosed  the
penalty  of  death  upon  the  homicide  ExoTif  12
Lev  ?X1V  17)i  wh.ch  the  blood  avenger  carried
out  (tab.  xxxv.  19,  21)  ;  to  him  was  the  murderer

(S.re4U?  "/  fli6  C°"87Satir  to  ^  put  to  death

But.  xix.  12).     Among  the  old  Hebrews,  the  blood-

vengeance  was  the  usual  mode  of  punishin


setn    1     .1      i       SpUte  the  rcla«on  of  this  pas-
Sndcd    "ood-yengeance.     *  »  not  to  be  misap-

£f  sSfr  -I      *    here'  ln  a  widcr  sensc'  humanity

lett,  seeing  it  is  always  next  of  kin  to  the  murdered

is  appomted  to  be  the  avenger;  and  2.  tlmt  the  ap


pointment  extends  beyond  the  blood-vengeance  and
becomes  the  root  of  the  magisterial  right  of  punish
ment.     On  the  other  hand,  it  cannot  be  denied  that
m  the  patriarchal  relations  of  the  olden  time  it  was  a
fundamental  principle  that  the  next  of  kin  were  not
only  justified  in  the  execution  of  the  law  of  blood
but  on  account  of  the  want  of  a  legal  tribunal  were
under  obligation  to  perform  the  office.     This  primi
tive,  divinely-sanctioned  custom,  became,  in  its  ideal
and  _  theocratic  direction,  the  law  of  punishment  as
magisterially  regulated  in   the   Mosaic   institution
(but  which  still  kept  in  mind  the  blood-vengeance),
whereas,  m  the  direction  of  crude  heathenism,  which
avenged  the  murder  even  upon  the  relations  of  the
murderer,   it  became    itself  a  murderous  impulse.
Delitzsch  remarks,  that   God  has  now  laid   in  the
hands  of  men  the  penal  force  that  belonged  to  l.im
alone    because  he  has  withdrawn  his  visible  pres
ence  from  the  earth,— according  to  the  view,  before
cited,  of   Ins  transfer   of  the  divine  throne  to  the
heavens  —  For  in  the  image  of  God  made  he
man — lius  is  the  reason  for  the  command  against
murder.     In  man  there  is  assailed  the  image  of"  God
the  personality,  that  which  constitutes  the  very  aim
of  his  existence,  although  the  image  itself,  as  such
is  _mviplable.     In  murder  the  crime  is  against  the
spirit,  m  which  the  divine  kinsnmnship  reveals  itself
and  so  is  it  a  crime  against  the  very  appearing  of'
God  in  the  world  in  its  most  universal  form,  or  as  a
prelude  to  that  murder  which  was  committed  against
the  perfect  form  of  man  (or  image  of  God  in  man)
Zach.  xii.  10;  John  iii.  10,  15).— But  be  ye  fruit,
lul — Ihe  contrast  to  the  preceding.     The  value  of
human  life  forbids  its  being  wasted,  and  commands
its  orderly  increase.— Bring  forth  abundantly  in
tne  earth— In  the  spreading  of  men  over  the  earth
and  out  of  its  supplies  of  food  (by  which,  as  it  were'
the  life  of  the  earth  is  transformed  into  the  life  of
man)  are  found  the  conditions  for  the  multiplication
of  the  human  race.     Thus  regarded,  there  is  only  an
apparent  tautology  in  the  verse,  not  an  actual  one.

_   8.  Vers.  8-1 V.      The  covenant  of  God  with  Noah
with  his  race,  and  with  the  whole  earth.— To  Noah
and  to  his  sons  with  him.— Solemn  covenanting
form.     Ihc  sons  are  addressed  together  with  Noah"
tor  the  covenant  avails  expressly  for  the  whole  hu
man    race.— And  I,   behold    I    establish.— The
words,  and  /,  ( i:xi )  form  a  contrast  to  the  claims
of  God  on  the  new  humanity  as  an  introduction  to
:he   promise.     According   to    Knobel,  God  had  es
tablished  no  covenant  with  the  antediluvians.      Not,
indeed,  in  the  literal  expressions  here   employed-
since  it  was  after  men  had  had  the  experience  of  a
Destroying  judgment.     According  to  the  same  (Kno
bel),    the   Jehovist,   in   ch.   viii.  21    presented   the
matter  in  a  way  different  from  that  of  the  Elohi^t
here.     Clearly,  however,  docs  the  offering  of  Noah
there  mentioned,  furnish  the  occasion  for  the  entire
transaction  that  follows  in  this  place.     The  makin°-
of  a  covenant  with  Noah  is  already  introduced   and
announced  ch.  vi.  13  ;    it  stands  in  a  development
conditioned  on  the  preservation  of  Noah's  faith  just
as  a  similar  development  is  still  more  evident  in  the
:e  of  Abraham  (see  Jas.  ii.  20-23).     Kcil  remarks
that  "  n-na  C^rr  is  not  equivalent  to  n^a  rn5>
that  is,  it  does  not  denote  the  formal  concluding  "but
the  establishing,  confirming,  of  a  covenant,— in  other
words,  the  realization  of  the  covenanting  promise  »
comp.  Gen.  xxii.  with  Gen.  xvii.  and  xv.).    Delitzsch :
There  begins   now  the   era  of  the   divine  wov


328


GENESIS,   OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


(Hum.  iii.  -0)  of  which  Paul  preached  in  Lystria
[Acts  xiv.  15)."  In  its  most  special  sense,  this  era
begins  with  the  origin  of  heathenism,  that  is,  from
the  Babylonian  dispersion.  With  a  rijjit  fulness  is
thu  animal  world  also  included  in  this  covenant,
for  it  is  elohistic, — univcr.-alistic  ;  it  keeps  wholly
predominant  the  characteristic  of  compassion  for  the
creaturely  life  upon  the  earth,  although  man  forms
its  ethical  middle  point,  with  which  the  animal  world
and  the  kosmos  arc  connected.  The  covenant  with
the  beasts  subsists  not  for  itself,  a;id,  in  respect  to  its
nature,  is  only  to  lie  taken  symbolically. — Shall
not  be  cut  off  any  more. — This  is  the  divine
covenant  promise — no  new  destruction. — no  end  of
the  woi  11  a^a'.n  produced  by  a  llood. — My  bow  in
the  cloud,  it  shall  be  for  a  token.— In  every
divine  covenant  there  is  a  divi'ie  sign  of  the  cov
enant;  in  this  covenant  it  is  said  :  my  bow  do  I  set.
According  to  Kiiohcl  the  rainbow  is  called  (iod's
bow,  because  it  belongs  to  the  heaven,  (iod's  duelling
place.  It.  is  a  inoie  correct  interpretation  to  say,  it
is  because  ilod  has  made  it  to  appear  in  tl:e  hravtii,
as  the  sign  of  his  covenant.  According  to  the  same,
the  author  of  the  account  must  have  entertained  the
Mippi'.-ition  that  there  had  never  been  a  rainbow
before  I  lie  time  of  the  llood.  Delit/.sch  is  of  the  same
opinion.-'  It  i-,  indeed,  a  phenomenon  ot  refraction,
which  may  be  supposed  of  a  fall  of  water,  and  sonic-
times,  also,  of  a  dew-distilling  mist.  But  the  far
visible  and  overarching  rainbow  supposes  the  rain-
cloud  as  its  natural  conditioning  cause.  \Ye  have
already  remarked  that  from  the  appointment  ol  the
rainbow,  as  the  sign  of  the  covenant,  it  by  no  means
follows  that  it  had  not  before  existed  as  a  phenome
non  of  nature  (eh.  ii.).  The  starry  night,  too,  is  made
the  sign  of  a  promise  lor  Abraham  (eh.  xv.).  Keil
is  not  milling  to  infer  that  hitherto  it  had  not  rained,
but  only  presents  the  conjecture  that  at  an  earlier
period  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere  may  have
been  diilercnt. — And  I  will  look  upon  it  that  I
may  remember. — An  anthropomorphising  form  of
expression,  but  which  like  every  other  expression  of
the  kind,  ever  gives  us  the  tenor  of  the  divine
thought  in  a  symbolical  human  form.  Here  it  is  the
expression  of  the  self-obligating,  or  of  the  conscious
covenant  truthfulness,  as  manifested  in  the  constant
sign.  "In  his  presence,  too,  have  they  power
and  most  c-sential  significance."  (Von  Gcrlach).

[Noli:  ON  THE  AITOINTMK.NT  OK  pn  IK  KAIM;O\V  AS
TIII-:  SK;X  or-  TIIK  COVENANT. — I*  regard  to  this  it
may  be  Well  to  give  the  views  of  .some  of  the  older
Jewish  commentators,  if  for  no  other  purpose,  to
show  that  what  is  really  the  most  easy  and  the  most
natural  interpretation  comes  from  no  outside  pres
sure  of  science,  but  is  fairly  deducible  from  the  very-
let  ter  of  the  passage.  Thus  reasons  .Maimonides
respecting  it:  "For  the  words  are  in  past  time,
"PP:  "nz'p  PX  ,  my  bow  have  I  set  (or  did  set)  in  j
the  cloud,  not,  /  ai.-i  -note'  setting,  or  about  to  set,
which  would  be  expressed  by  "PIS  "'JX  ,  according  as

he  had  said  just  before,  "jri  "^x  irx  rvnan ,

the  covenant  which  /  am  now  establishing.  More
over  the  form  of  the  word  "'F'ij?  my  bow,  shows
that  there  was  something  to  him  so  called  from  the
beginning.  And  so  the  Scripture  must  be  interpret


ed  :  the  bow  which  I  put  (  TP3  )  in  the  cloud  in  the
day  of  creation,  shall  lie,  from  this  day,  and  hence
forth,  for  a  sign  of  the  covenant  between  me  and  you,
so  that  every  time  that  it  appears,  I  will  look  upon  it
and  remember  my  covenant  of  peace.  II  it  is  asked
then,  what  is  meant  by  the  bow's  being  a  sign,  1  answer
that  it  is  l.ke  what  is  said  Gen.  xxxi.  -is,  in  the  cov
enant  between  Jacob  and  Laban,  IV  ~;~  ;;,n  n:n  .
lo,  this  h«rp  is  a  wlt'iicxs,  rfc.,  or  Gen.  xxxi.  tf2,
resort  r-fJ  ,  and  this  pUhn-  Khali  J.,,-  „  ,-•;/,.,. w,  etc.
And  so  also  Gen.  xxi.  ou,  "-p"  P'i^Pi  Pv;:~s  ™~ui  rx .

seven  lainds  xhalt  than  Idlcc  from  n/>/  >«;;!<!,  rn"5
/or  a  w't'itisx.  in  like  manner  everything  that  ap
pears  as  thus  put  before  two,  to  cause  them  to  re
member  something  promised  or  covenanted,  is  called
PilX  .  Ami  so  of  t!ie  circumcision;  God  say?,  it
shall  be  a  sign  of  the  c  ivenaii^,  P""^  p-ixa  ,  between
me  and  you.  Thus  the  bow  that  is  now  visible,  and
the  bow  thai  was  in  nature  (  "Z~-Z  )  from  the  be
ginning,  or  from  of  old  (  rb"^"3  )  are  one  in  this,  that
the  sign  which  is  in  them  is  one."  lie  then  proceeds
to  say  that,  there  are  other  and  mystic  interpreta
tions  made  by  some  of  the  Rabbins,  but  this  great
critic  is  satisfied  with  the  one  that  he  has  given.
Abcn  E/.ra  sa\s  that  the  most  celebrated  of  the
Jewish  Rabbin-  held  the  same  opinion  as  Maimonides,
namely,  that  the  rah, how  was  in  nature  from  the  be
ginning,  though  he  himself  seems  to  dissent.

"And  I  will  look  upon  it  to  remember  the
C?*r  Pn"i3  ,  the  covenant  of  eternity.''  I, ft  us  not,
be  troubled  about  tiie  anthropopathism,  hut  receive
the  precious  thought  in  all  its  inexpressible  ("iider-
ness.  Lange  most  beautifully  characterizes  such
mutual  remembrance  as  eye  meeting  eye.  We  all
know  that  (iod's  memory  takes  in  the  total  universe
of  space  at  every  moment  of  time:  but  there  are
some  things  v\hich  lie  remembers  as  standing  out
from  the  great  totality,  lie  remembers  the  act  of
faith,  and  the  sign  of  fahh,  as  he  remembers  no
other  human  act,  no  other  finite  phenomenon.  May
we  not  believe  that,  there  is  the  same  mutual  re
membrance  in  the  Euchari.-t  V  The  "renumber  me"
implies  "1  \\i!l  renumber  thcc."  The  eye  of  the
mcr  lookii.g  into  the  eye  of  the  believer,  or
both  meeting  in  the  same  memorial :  this  is  certainly
a  "  real  presence,"  whatever  else  there  may  be  of
depth  and  mystery  in  that  most  fundamental  Chris
tian  rite — the  evangelical  cbi"  P"1"  Pl'X ,  or  sign
of  the  eveilasiing  covenant.

The  Hebrew  P1X  is  not  used  of  miraculous  signs,
properly,  given  as  proofs  of  mission  or  doctrine.  It
is  not  a  counteraction  of  natural  law,  or  the  bringing
a  new  thing  into  nature.  Any  fixed  object  may  be
used  for  a  sign,  and  here  the  very  covenant  itself,  or
a  most  important  part  of  it,  being  the  stability  of
nature,  there  is  a  most  striking  consistency  in  the
fact  that  the  sif/n  of  such  covenant  is  taken  from  na
ture  itself.  The  rainbow,  ever  appearing  in  the
''  sunshine  after  rain,"  is  the  very  symbol  of  constan
cy.  It  is  selected  from  all  others,  not  only  for  its
splendor  and  beauty,  but  for  the  regularity  with
which  it  cheers  us,  when  we  look  out  for  it  after  the
storm.  Noah  needed  no  witness  of  the  supernatural.
The  great  in  nature,  in  that  early  age  when  all  was
wonderful,  was  regarded  as  manifesting  God  equally
with  the  supernatural.  Besides,  in  the  flood  itself
there  was  a  sufficient  witness  to  the  extraordinary.


CHAP.   VIII.   20— IX.    1-17.


329


There  was  wanted,  then,  not  a  miracle  strictly  as  an
attestation  of  a  message,  or  as  a  sign  of  belief,  like
the  miracles  in  the  New  Testament  (when  there  was
a  necessity  for  breaking  up  the  lethargy  of  natural
ism),  but  a  vivid  memorial  for  the  conservation
rather  than  the  creation  of  faith.  The  Hebrew  word
for  miracle  is  more  properly  Nt-Q  ,  though  it  may  be
used  simply  for  prodigy,  like  the  Greek  re'par,  in  dis
tinction  from  the  New  Testament  errj^eToc,  which  is
properly  a  proof  or  attestation  of  a  miraculous  kind.
T<fpas  simply  means  anything  wonderful,  whether  in
nature  or  not.  Superstition  converts  such  appear
ances  into  portents,  or  signs  of  something  impending,
but  in  the  Bible  God's  people  are  expressly  told
"  not  to  bo  dismayed  at  the  signs  of  the  heavens  as
the  heathoti  arc."  Jer.  x.  1.  The  word  there  used
is  this  same  M'rlX  in  the  plural,  but  accommodated
to  the  heathen  perversion.  To  the  believing  Israelites
the  signs  of  the  heavens,  even  though  strange  and
unusual,  were  to  be  regarded  as  tokens  of  their  cove
nant  God  above  nature  yet  ruling  in  nature,  and  ever
regulating  the  order  of  its  phenomena.  There  is  a
passage  sometimes  quoted  from  HOMER,  12.  xi.  27,  28 :

*Ipicr<ric  eoiKores  aore  Kpoviiav
'"Ef  vdfjic'i  crjjpife  TEPA2  pepOTHav  o.v0pu)iriai>.

"  Like  the  rainbows  which  Zeus  fixed  in  the  cloud  a
sign  to  men  of  many  tongues."  But  repay  there  has
the  sense  of  prodigy,  or  it  may  denote  a  wonderful
and  beautiful  object.  We  cannot,  therefore,  certainly
infer  from  this  any  traditional  recognition  of  the
great  sign-appointing  in  Genesis.  So  Plato  quotes
from  Ilesiod  the  genealogy  of  Iris  (the  rainbow),  as
the  daughter  of  Qa.v/j.as  or  Wonder,  as  a  sort  of
poetical  argument  that  Wonder  is  the  parent  of
philosophy,  as  though  the  rainbow  were  placed  in  the
heavens  to  stimulate  men  in  the  pursuit  of  curious
knowledge.  But  it  is  the  religious  use  that  is  prom
inent  in  this  as  in  all  the  Bible  appeals  to  the  obser
vation  of  nature.  It  is  for  the  support  of  faith  in  the
God  of  nature,  "  that  we  may  look  upon  it  and
remember;"  and  this  is  admirably  expressed  in  a
Rabbinical  doxology  to  be  found  in  the  Talmudic
Kidduschin,  I'ol.  8,  and  which  was  to  be  recited  at
every  appearance  of  the  rainbow,  mm  fir,X  "p*a
"1  i:Tibx,  "Blessed  be  thou  Jehovah  our  God,
King  of  eternity  (or  of  the  world),  ever  mindful  of


translates  Gen.  ix.  13  :  "And  it  shall  be  a  sign,  "pa
N"1X  "p-l  "H^a,  between  my  word  and  the  earth."
It  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  some  reference
to  this  place  in  that  difficult  passage  Hab.  iii.  9,
JjPl'iJp  "l"?n  Fi^5> ,  most  obscurely  rendered  in  our
English  version,  "thy  bow  was  made  quite  naked —
the  oaths  of  the  tribes — the  word."  Kimchi  trans
lates  it  revialed)  made  manifest.  It  is  commonly
thought  that  all  that  is  said  in  that  sublime  chapter
has  reference  to  events  that  took  place  during  the
exodus,  but  there  is  good  ground  for  giving  it  a  wider
range,  so  as  to  take  in  other  divine  wonders,  in  crea
tion  and  in  the  patriarchal  history. — T.  L.]

DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  There  are  the  most  distinct  indications  that
the  flood,  a.nhc  greatest  epoch  of  the  primitive  time,
made  a  turning  point,  not  only  in  the  spiritual  life


of  humanity,  but  also  in  its  physical  relations, — yea,
in  the  very  life  of  the  earth  itself.  Only  we  may  not,
in  the  first  place,  regard  this  turning  point  as  a
sudden  change  of  all  relations;  just  as  little  as  the
fall  ((Jen.  iii.)  suddenly  brought  in  death,  or  as  tha
confusion  of  tongues  produced  immediately  the
wide-spread  diversities  of  language.  And,  in  the
second  place,  again,  it  must  not  be  regarded  as  a
change  of  all  relations  for  the  worse.  There  is  sup
posed  to  have  been  a  change  of  the  atmosphere  (con
cerning  the  rain  and  the  rainbow,  see  above).  At  all
events,  the  paradisaical  harmony  of  the  earth  had
departed  at  an  earlier  day.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
there  comos  in  now  a  more  constant  order  of  the
atmospherical  relations  (ch.  viii.  22).  Again,  some
have  called  it  a  sudden  change  in  the  duration  of
human  life.  But  to  this  is  opposed  the  fact  that  the
aged  Noah  lived  350  years  after  the  flood.  It  is
evident,  however,  that  during  the  period  of  Noah's
life  the  breaking  through  of  death  from  the  inner  to
the  outer  life  had  made  a  great  advance.  And  to
this  the  fear  which  the  flood  brought  upon  the
children  and  grandchildren  of  Noah  (not  upon  him
self)  may  have  well  contributed.  As  far  as  relates  to
the  increasing  ferocity  of  the  wild  beasts  towards
men,  the  ground  of  their  greater  estrangement  and
savageness  cannot  be  found  in  their  deliverance  in
the  ark.  Already  had  the  mysterious  paradisaical
peace  between  man  and  beast  departed  with  the
fall.  Moreover,  the  words:  "all  flesh  had  corrupted
its  way,"  (ch.  vi.  12)  indicate  that  together  with
men's  increasing  wickedness  the  animal  world  had
grown  more  ferocious.  But  if  the  mode  of  life  as
developed  among  men  made  the  eating  of  flesh  (and
drinking  of  wine)  a  greater  necessity  for  them  than
before,  then  along  with  the  sanctioning  of  this  new
order  of  life,  must  there  have  been  sanctioned  also
the  chase.  And  so  out  of  this  there  must  have  arisen
a  state  of  war  between  man  and  the  animal  world,
which  would  have  for  its  consequence  an  increased
measure  of  customary  fear  among  the  animals  that
were  peculiarly  exposed  to  it.

2.  Immediately  after  the  flood,  Noah  built  an
altar  to  Jehovah,  his  covenant  God,  who  had  saved
him.  The  living  worship  (cultus)  was  his  first
work,  the  culture  of  the  vineyard  was  his  second.
The  altar,  in  like  manner,  was  the  sign  of  the  ances
tral  faith,  as  it  had  come  down  from  paradise  and
had  been  transmitted  through  the  ark.  This  faith
was  the  seed-corn  as  well  as  sign  of  the  future
theocracy  and  the  future  church.  It  was  an  altar
of  faith,  an  altar  of  prayer,  an  altar  of  thanks
giving,  for  it  was  erected  to  Jehovah.  But  it  was
also  an  altar  of  confession,  an  acknowledgment  that
sin  had  not  died  in  the  flood,  that  Noah  and  his
house  was  yet  sinful  and  needed  the  symbolic  sancti-
fication.  In  this  case,  too,  was  the  offering  of  an
animal  itself  an  expression  of  the  greater  alacrity  in
the  sacrifice  since  Noah  had  preserved  only  a  few
specimens  of  the  clean  animals.  This  readiness  in
the  offering  was  in  that  case  an  expression  of  his
faith  in  salvation,  wherein,  along  with  his  prayer  for
grace  and  compassion,  there  was  inlaid  a  supplication
for  his  house,  for  the  new  humanity,  for  the  new
world.  His  offering  was  a  burut-oU'ering,  a  whole
burnt-offering  (Kalil)  or  an  ascending  in  the  flame
(Olah),  as  an  expression  that  he,  Noah,  did  thereby
devote  himself  with  his  whole  house,  his  whole  race,
and  with  the  whole  new  earth,  to  the  service  of  God.
The  single  kinds  of  offering  were  all  included  in  this
central  offering.  It  was  this  sense  of  his  offering


330


GEXES1S,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSES.


which  made  the  strong  burnt  odor  of  the  burning
flesh,  a  "sweet  savor"  for  Jehovah  in  a  meta
phorical  sense.  The  attestation  of  Jehovah  makes  it
evident  in  what  sense  Noah  ottered  it.  It  expresses
1.  an  averting  of  the  curse  from  the  ground,  2.  the
fact  that  the  hereditary  sinfulncss  of  man  was  to  be
an  object  of  the  divine  compassion.  The  sinful  ten
dency  in  its  connection  with  the  act  of  sin  is  guilt,
but  in  its  connection  with  the  need  of  salvation  and
salvation  it-elf,  it  N  an  evil,  the  sorest  of  diseases  and
sufferinL' ("i"  above);  :>.  the  promise  that  Jehovah
would  not  a '.rain  dcs  troy  every  living  thing;  4.  the
establishment  of  a  constant  order  of  nature  ;  such  as
the  prospnity  of  the  new  human  race  demanded.
On  this  promise  of  sparing  eompasMon  for  Mnl'nl
men  and  which  <-od  as  Jehovah  pronounces,  there
is  groun  cJ  the  renewed  relation  into  which,  as
Elohini,  he  enters  with  all  humanity,  and  the  creature
world  comn  ctcd  with  it.  This  relation  is  denoted  by
grant-;  made  by  (!.id  to  man,  and  demands  which  he
makes  of  man,  whereupon  follows  the  establishment
of  the  Klohis'.ie  covenant  with  Xoah  and  all  living.
Tli-1  Crants  of  Co  1:  1.  the  repetition  of  the  blessing
upon  Noah  and  upon  all  his  lic.use,  as  before  upon
t'.ie  animals;  _.  the  renewed  grant  of  dominion  over
i?ts  ;  th-  sanction  given  to  the  eating  oHh-sh.
!-i  contrast  uith  these  grants  that  guainnlce  the
existence  a;:d  well-being  of  the  human  race,  stand
ilic  demands  or  claims  made  in  respect  to  human
conduct.  The  first,  is  the  avoidance  of  the  eating
of  llesh  with  the  blood,  whereby  there  is  together
ished  the  sanctifieation  of  the  enjoyment,  the
avoidance  of  savageue.-s  as  against  nature,  and  of
cruelty  ;;s  against  the  beast.  The  second  r.ot  only
forl)id's  the  .-bedding  of  human  blood,  but  commands
also  the  punishment  of  murder;  it  ordains  the  ma
gistracy  with  the  sword  of  retribution.  Kut  it  ex-
j,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  humane  civil
organization  of  men  must  have  a  moral  basis, namely
the  acknowledgment  that  all  men  are  brothers
(1"nx  Ui'X  every  man,  Ids  brother  man),  and  with
this  again,  a  religious  basis,  or  the  faith  iu  a  person
al  God,  and  that,  inviolability  of  the  human  person
ality  which  rests  in  its  imaged  kinsmanship  with
God.  On  this  follows  the  establishment  of  the  cov
enant.  Slid  it  is  not  made  altogether  dependent  on
the  establishment  of  the  preceding  claims.  It  is  a
covenant  of  promise  for  the  sparing  of  all  living  that
reaches,  beyond  this,  because  it  is  made  not  for  in
dividuals  but  for  all,  not  merely  for  the  morally  ac
countable  but  for  infants,  not  merely  for  men  but
also  for  the  animal  world.  Notwithstanding,  how
ever,  this  transcending  universality  of  the  divine
covenant,  it  is,  in  truth,  made  on  the  supposition
(hat  faith  in  the  grace  and  compassion  of  Jehovah,
piety  in  respect  to  the  blessing,  the  name  and  the
image  of  Elohim,  shall  correspond  to  the  divine
faithfulness,  and  that  men  shall  find  consolation  and
composure  in  the  sign  of  the  rainbow,  only  in  as  far
as  they  preserve  faith  in  God's  word  of  promise.

3.  In  the  preceding  Section  we  must  distinguish
between  what  (Jod  says  in  his  heart,  and  what  Elo
him  says  to  Xoah  and  his  sons.  The  first  word,
which  doubtless  was  primarily  comprehensible  to
Noah  only,  is  the  foundation  of  the  second.  For
God's  grace  is  the  central  source  of  his  goodness  to
a  sinful  world,  as  on  the  side  of  men  the  believing
are  the  central  ground  for  the  preservation  of  the
world,  as  they  point  to  Christ  the  absolute  centre,
the  world's  redeemer,  having,  however,  his  preserv


ing  life  in  those  who  are  his  own,  as  his  word  testi
fies:  Ye  arc  the  salt  of  tlie  c-irth.  We  must,  thcvn,
again  distinguish  between  the  word  of  blessing,
which  embraced  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  wish  them
humanity  in  general,  and  the  word  of  the  covenant
which  embraced  all  living  (eh.  ix.  10).

4.  The  institutions  of  the  new  humanity :  1.  At
the  head  stands  the  altar  with  its  burnt-ottering  as
the  middle  point  and  commencing  point  of  every
ottering,  an  expression  of  feeling  that  the  life  which
God  gave,  which  he  graciously  spares,  which  ho
wonderfully  preserves,  shall  be  consecrated  to  him,
and  consumed  in  his  service.  2.  The  order  of  na
ture,  and,  what  is  very  remarkable,  as  the  ordinance
of  Jehovah,  made  dependent  on  the  foregoing  order
of  his  kingdom  of  grace.  3.  The  institution  of  the
marriage  blessing,  of  the  consecration  of  marriage,  of
the  family,  of  the  dispersion  of  men.  4.  The  domin
ion  of  man  over  the  animal  world,  as  it  embraces  the
keeping  of  cattle,  the  chase,  manifold  use  of  the
beasts.  5.  The  holding  as  sacred  the  blood — the
blood  of  the  animal  for  the  altar  of  God,  the  blood
of  man  for  the  priestly  service  of  (Jod;  the  institu
tion  of  the  humanitat,*  of  the  humane  culture  and
order,  especially  of  the  magistracy,  of  the  penal  and
judicial  ollice  (including  personal  self-defence  and
defensive  war).  6.  The  grounding  of  this  humanitat
on  the  religious  acknowledgnunt  of  the  spiritual
personality,  cf  the  relation  of  kinsman  that  man
bears  to  God,  of  the  fraternal  relation  of  men  to  each
other,  and,  consequently,  the  grounding  of  the  state
on  the  basis  of  religion.  7.  The  appointment  of  the
humamzation  of  the  earth  (ver.  7)  in  the  command
to  men  to  multiply  on  the  earth — propeily,  upon  it,
and  by  means  of  it.  As  men  must  become  divine
through  the  image  of  (iod,  so  the  earth  must  be
humanized.  8.  The  appointment  of  tin-  covenant
of  forbearance,  which  together  with  the  security  of
the  creature-world  against  a  second  physical  ilood,
expresses  ako  the  security  of  the  moral  world  against
perishing  in  a  deluge  of  anarchy,  or  in  the  Hoods  of
popular  commotion  ^1's.  xciii).  '.'.  The  appointment
of  the  sign  of  the  covenani,  or  of  the  rainbow  as  God's
bow  of  peace,  whereby  there  is  at  the  same  time  ex
pressed,  in  the  first  place,  the  elevation  of  men  above
the  deification  of  the  creature  (since  the  rainbow  is  not
a  divinitv,  but  a  sign  of  God,  an  appointment  which
even  the  idolatrous  nations  appear  not  to  have  wholly
forgotten,  when  they  denote  it  God's  bridge,  or  God's
messenger);  in  the  "second  place,  their  introduction
to  the  symbolic  comprehension  and  interpretation  of
natural  phenomena,  even  to  the  symbolizing  of  forms
and  colors ;  thirdly,  that  God's  compassion  remembers
men  in  their  dangers,  as  indicated  by  the  fact,  that,  in
the  sign  of  the  rainbow  his  eye  meets  their  eye ;  fourth
ly,  the  setting  up  a  sign  of  light  and  lire,  which,  along
wi'th  its  assurance  that  the  earth  will  never  again  be
drowned  in  water,  indicates  at  the  same  time  its  future
transformation  and  glorification  through  Ijght  and  fire.
5.  In  the  rainbow  covenant  all  men,  in  their  deal
ings  with  each  other,  and,  at  the  same  time,  with  all
animals,  have  a  common  interest,  namely,  in  the
preservation  of  life,  a  common  promise,  or  the  assur
ance  of  the  divine  care  for  life,  and  a  common  duty
in  the  sparing  of  life.

0.  The   ottering  as  acceptable   to  God,  and  its
prophetic  significance.

*  [Our  word  humanity  will  not  do  hero  at  all ;  as  it  corre
sponds  to  the  German  incnschhe.il;  whilst  our  human! tan-
anism,  on  account  of  its  abuse,  would  be  still  worse.  It  is
denned  by  what  follows.—!'.  L.]


CHAP.    VIII.    20— IX.   1-17.


7.  The   disputes   concerning    original    sin   have
variously  originated  from  not  distinguishing  its  two
opposing  relations.     These  are,  its  relation  to  actual
sin,  Horn.  v.  12,  and  to  the  desire  for  deliverance,
Horn.  vii.  23-25.

8.  The  magical  or  direct  power  of  man  over  the
beasts  is  not  taken  away,  but  tlawed,  and  thereupon
repaired  through  his  mediate  power,  derived  from
that   superiority  which   he  exercises   as  huntsman,
fisher,  fowler,  etc.     In  regard  to  the  lirst,  compare
LAXGK'S  "Miscellaneous  Writings,"  vol.  iv.  p.  189.

9.  The  ordinance  of  the  punishment  of  death  for
murder,  involves,  at  the  same  time,  the  ordinance  of
the  magistracy,  of  the  judicial  sentence,  and  of  the
penal  infliction.     But  in  the  historical  development
of  humanity,  the  death-penalty  has  been  executed
with  fearful  excess  and  false  application  (for  exam
ple,  to  the  crime  of  theft) ;  since  in  this  way,  gener
ally,  all  humane  savageuess  and  cruelty  has  mingled
in  the  punitive  office.     From  this  is  explained  the
prejudice  of  the   modern   humanitarianism   against
capital  punishment.     It  is  analogous  to  the  prejudice
against  the  excommunication,  and  similar  institutes,
which  human  ignorance  and  furious  human  zeal  have
so  fearfully  abused.     Yet  still,  a  divine  ordinance
may  not  be  set  aside  by  our  prejudices.     It  needs
only  to  be  rightly  understood  according  to  its  own
limitation  and  idea.     The  fundamental  principle  for
all  time  is  this,  that  the  murderer,  through  his  own
act  and  deed,  has  forfeited  his  right  in  human  soci
ety,  and  incurred  the  doom  of  death.     In  Cain  this
principle  was  first  realized,  in  that,  by  the  curse  of
God,  he  was  excommunicated,  and  driven,  in  self-
banishment,  to  the  land  of  Nod.     This  is  a  proof,
that  in  the  Christian  humanitarian  development,  the
principle   may    be   realized  in  another   form    than
through  the  literal,  corporeal  shedding  of  blood  (see
LAXGE'S  treatise  Gcsctsliche  Kirche  als  Slnnbild,  p.
72).     It  must  not,  indeed,  he  overlooked,  that  the
mention  is  not  merely  of  putting  to  death,  but  also
of  blood-shedding,  and  that  the  latter  is  a  terrific
mode  of  speech,  whose  warnings  the  popular  life
widely   needed,  and,  in  many  respects,  still  needs.
Luther:  "There  is  the  first  command  for  the  em
ployment  of  the  secular  sword.     In  the  words  there
is  appointed  the  secular  magistracy,  and  the  right  as
derived   from    God,    which  puts   the   sword  in  its
hands.''     Kvery   aet   of  murder,    according   to  the
Noachian  law,  appears  as  a  fratricide,  and,  at  the
same  time  as  malice  against  God.

10.  To  this  passage :  "  for  in  the  image  of  God
made  hj  man,''  as  also  to  the  passage,  James  iii.  9,
has  the  appeal  been  made,  to  show  that  even  after
the  fall  there  is  no  mention  of  any  loss  of  the  divine
image,  but  only  of  a  darkening  and  disorder  of  the
same.     Others,  again,  have  cited  the  apparently  op
posing  language,  Coloss.  iii  10,  and  similar  passages.
But  in  this  there  has  not  always  been  kept  in  mind
the  distinction  of  the  older  dogmatics  between  the
conception  of  t!ie  image  in  its  wider  sense  (the  spirit
ual  nature  of  man)  and  the  more   restricted  sense
(the  spiritual  constitution  of  man).     In  like  manner
should  there  be  made  a  further  distinction  between
the  disposition  of  Adam  as  conformed  to  the  image
(made  in,  or  after  the  image)  and  the  image  itself  as
freely  developed  in  Christ  (the  express  image,  Ilcb.
xiii.),  as  also  finally  between  the  natural  man  consid
ered  in  the  abstract,  in  the  consequences  of  his  fall,
and  the  natural  man  in  the  concrete,  as  he  appears  in
the  operation  of  the  gratia  prcevenicns.     This  perfect
developed  image  Adam  could  not  have  lost,  for  he


had  not  attained  to  it.  Neither  can  men  lose  tin
ontological  image  as  grounded  in  the  spiritual  na>
ture,  because  it  constitutes  its  being;  but  it  may
darken  and  distort  it.  The  image  of  God,  however,
in  the  ethical  sense,  the  divine  mind  (</>pocrjuo  irvev-
/UUTOS),  this  he  actually  lost  to  the  point  where  the
gratia  pntveniens  laid  hold  on  him,  and  made  a  point
of  opposition  between  his  gradual  restoration  and
the  full  in  abstract*).  But  to  what  degree  this  image
of  God  in  fallen  man  had  become  lost,  is  shown  in
this  very  law  against  murder,  which  expresses  the
inalienable,  personal  worth,  that  is,  the  worth  that
consists  in  the  image  as  still  belonging  to  man,  and
thus,  in  contrast  with  grace,  must  man  become  con
scious  of  the  full  consequences  of  his  sinful  corrup
tion  according  to  the  word :  what  would  I  have  been
without  thce  '1  what  would  I  become  without  thee  ?

11.  With  this  chapter  has  the  Kabbinical  tradi
tion  connected  their  doctrine  of  the  seven  Noaclue
precepts.     (BUXTOKF  :  Lexicon  Talmudicum,  article,
Gcr,  15).     They  are:  1.  De  judiciis ;  2.  dc  benedic-
tione  Dei;    3.   </.•>  idolatiia  fugienda  ;   4.  de  sccrta-
tionc ;    5.   dc    effusione   sangu'mis  ;    6.  de  rapina  ;
7.  dc  membra  de  anhnali  vivo  sc.  non  tollcndo.     The
earlier  supposition,  that  the  Apostolical  decree  (Acts
xv.)  had  relation  to  this,  and  that,  accordingly,  in  its
appointments,  it  denominated  the  heathen  Christians
as  proselytes  of  the  gate  (on  whom  the   so-called
Noaehian  laws  were  imposed)  is  disputed  by  METER,
in  his  "  Commentary  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles"
(p.  278),  though  not  on  satisfactory  grounds.     The
matter  of  chief  interest  is  the  recognition,  that  in  the
Israelitish  consciousness  there  was  a  clear  distinction
between  revealed  patriarchal  precepts  and  the  Mo
saic  law.     Such  a  distinction  is  also  expressed  by
Christ,   John  vii.  22,  23.     So,  too,  did  the  Lcvitica'l
law  make  a  distinction  between  such  precepts  as
were  binding  upon  aliens  (proselytes  of  the  gate)  and
such  as  were  binding  upon  the  Jews  (Lev.  xvii.  14;
sec  Bibdwcrk,  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  p.  215).     It  lies
in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  that  in  Acts  xv.  the
seventh  precept   of  the  tradition,  according  to  its
wider  appointment,  was  divided  into  two  (namely,
abstinence  from  blood  and  from  things  strangled),
and  that,  moreover,  only  those  points  came  into  the
general  view,  in  respect  to  which  heathen  Christians,
as  freer  Christians,  might  be  liable  to  fail.     It  was,
in  fact,  a  monotheistic  patriarchal  custom,  which,  as
the  expression  of  the  patriarchal  piety  and  humane
ness,  became  the  basis  of  the  Mosaic  law,  and  on
this  basis  must  the  heathen  Christians  have  come
together  in  ethical  association,  if,  in  their  freedom
from  the  dogmas  of  the  Mosaic  law,  they  would  not
endanger  even  the  churchly  and  social  communion
of  the  Jewish  Christians  (see  LANGE  :   Gcschichte  des
Apostolischcn  Zeitaltcrs,  ii.  p.  187).     The  prohibition
of  blood-eating  has  here  no  longer  any  dogmatic  sig
nificance,  but  only  an  ethical.     The  Greek  Church
mistook  this  in  its  maintenance  of  the  prohibition
(Tnillanic    Council,    G92),   whereas,    the   Western
Church,  in  the  changed  relations,  let  the  temporary
appointment  become  obsolete.

12.  On  the  symbolical  significance  of  the  rain
bow,  see  DELITZSCII,  p.  277,  and  LANGE'S  "  Miscella
neous   Writings,"  i.  p.    277,  from  which  Delitzsch
gives  the  following  passage:   "The  rainbow  is  the
colored  glance  of  the  sun  as  it  breaks  forth  from  the
night  of  clouds ;  it  is  its  triumph  over  the  floods — a
solar  beam,  a  glance  of  light  burnt  into  the  rain-cloud
in  sign  of  its  submission,  in  sign  of  the  protection  of
all  living  through  the  might  of  the  sun,  or  rather  the


332


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


compassion  of  God."  To  this  adds  Pelitzsch:  "As
it  lights  up  the  dark  ground  that  just  before  was  dis
charging  itself  in  flashes  of  lightning,  it  gives  us  an
idea  of  the  victory  of  God's  love  over  the  black  and
fiery  wrath  ;  originating  as  it.  does  from  the  effects
of  the  sun  upon  the  sable  vault,  it  represents  to  the
senses  the  readiness  of  the  heavenly  light  to  pene
trate  the  earthly  obscurity,  spanned  "between  heaven
and  earth,  it  announces  peace  between  God  and  man;
arching  the  horixon,  it  proclaims  the  all-embracing
universality  of  the  covenant  of  grace."  lie  then
cites  some  of  the  mythical  designations  of  the  rain
bow.  It  is  called  by  the  Hindoos,  the  weapon  of
Indras;  by  the  Greeks,  Iris,  the  messenger  of  the
gods;  by  the  Germans,  Uifrost  (liriny  ;'•«,'/),  and
Asen-brucke,  "  lir'i<l<j?  of  AM « /"  by  the  Samoeids,
the  Mam  or  "  bonier  of  God's  robe."  There  are,  be
sides,  many  significant  popular  sayings  connected
witli  its  appearance.  K.NOIIKL:  "The  old  Hebrews
looked  upon  it  as  a  great  band  joining  heaven  and
earth,  and  binding  them  both  together;  as  the  Greek
/pis  comes  from  <-fy>a',  to  tie  <>r  bind,*  they  made  it,
therefore,  the  ,-ign  of  a  covenant,  or  of  a  relation  of
peace  between  God  in  heaven,  and  the  creatures  upon
the  earth.  In  a  similar  manner  the  heavenly  ladder,
Gen.  xxviii.  12.''  On  ibis,  nevertheless,  it  must  be
remarked,  that  the  Hebrews  were  conscious  of  the
s;.  :nb(ilic  sdi-e  <;f  the  designation;  not  so,  however,
'he  Griek.-,  who  were  taken  with  the  fable  merely.
In  like  manner,  too,  did  the  Hebrew  view  rest  upon
a  divine  revelation.  How  far  the  mere  human  inter
pretation  may  be  wide  of  the  truth,  is  shown  by  the
fact,  that  classical  antiquity  regarded  the  rainbow  as
for  the  most  part  announcing  "rain,  the  wintry
storm,  and  v.  ar."

[NorK     ON     TIIK     AXCIKXT,    THE     l".S  I V  KI1SAL,    AND

in;:  IM-IIAMIINI;  LAW  OK  HOMICIDE. — The  divine
s'.;u;ite,  recorded  eh.  ix.  C>,  is  commonly  assailed  on
grounds  t'.at  are  no  less  an  abuse  of  language,  than
they  are  a  perversion  of  reason  and  Scripture.  The
taking  the  life  of  the  murderer  is  called  revenge — no
distinction  being  made  between  this  word,  which
ever  denotes  something  angry  and  personal,  and
vengeance,  which  is  the  requital  of  justice,  holy,  in
visible,  and  free  from  passion.  On  this  false  ground
there  is  an  attempt  to  set  the  Old  Testament  in  oppo
sition  to  the  New,  notwithstanding  the  express  words
of  Christ  to  the  contrary.  This  perverse  misnomer,
and  the  argument  grounded  upon  it,  apply  equally  to
all  punishment,  strictly  such — to  all  retributive  jus
tice,  or  to  any  assertion  of  law  that  is  not  resolvable
into  the  merest  expediency,  excluding  altogether  the
idea  of  </<,->•  rf,  and  reducing  the  notion  of  crime  sim
ply  to  that  of  mischief,  or  inconvenience.  It  thus
becomes  itself  revenge  in  the  lowest  and  most  per
sonal  sense  of  the  term.  Discarding  the  higher  or
abstract  justice,  giving  it  no  place  in  human  law,
seveiing  the  earthly  government  wholly  from  the
divine,  the  proceeding  called  punishment,  or  justice,
is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  setting  the  mere
personal  convenience  of  the  majority,  called  society,
against  that  of  the  smaller  numbers  whom  such  soci
ety  calls  criminals.  This  has  all  the  personality  of
revenge,  whether  with  pass:ion,  or  without;  whereas,
the  abstract  justice,  with  its  moral  ground,  and  its
idea  of  intrinsic  desert,  alone  escapes  the  charge.
Intimately  connected  with  this  is  the  question  re
specting  the  true  idea  and  sanction  of  human  gov-

*  [Plato,  in  the  Cratylu?,  fancifully  connects  it  with
e'/xo,  eipo/uai  =  <f>7jfii,  to  speak,  and  (rives  it  the  idea  of  messen
ger  (liormes],  or  interpretation. — T.  L.]


ernmcnt, — whether  it  truly  has  a  moral  ground,  or
whether  it  is  nothing  higher  than  human  wills,  and
human  convenience,  by  whatever  low  and  ever  falling
standard  it  may  be  estimated.  If  the  murderer  id
punished  with  death  simply  because  he  deserves  it,
because  God  has  commanded  it,  and  the  magistrate
and  the  executioner  are  but  carrying  out  that  com
mand,  then  all  the  opposite  reasoning  adverted  to
falls  immediately  to  the  ground.  It  lias  neither
force  nor  relevancy.

The  same,  too,  may  be  said  in  respect  to  much
of  the  reasoning  in  favor  of  capital  punishment,  so
far  as  it  is  grounded  on  mere  expediency,  and  is  not
used  as  a  collateral  aid  to  that  higher  principle  by
which  alone  even  a  true  expediency  can  be  sustained.
Should  it  even  be  conceded  that  this  higher  princi
ple  is,  in  itself,  and  for  its  own  sake,  above  the  range
of  human  government,  still  must  it  be  acknowledged
in  jurisprudence  as  something  necessary  to  hold  up
that  lower  department  of  power  and  motive  which  is
universally  admitted  to  f.dl  within  it.  Reformation
and  prevention  will  never  be  ell'ected  under  a  judi
cial  system  which  studiously,  and  even  hostilely  (for
there  can  be  no  neutrality  here)  shuts  out  all  moral
ideas.  There  may  be  a  seeming  relbim  in  such
case;  but  it  has  no  ground  in  the  conscience,  be
cause  it  is  accompanied  by  no  conviction  of  desert,
to  which  such  influences  must  lie  wholly  alien.  The
d-tcrrhtr/  power,  on  the  other  hand,  must  constantly
lose  its  vigor,  as  the  terror  of  the  invisible  justice
fades  away  in  the  ignoring  of  the  law,  and  there  takes
its  place  in  the  community  that  idea  of  punishment
which  is  but  the  warring  of  opposite  conveniences,
and  the  collision  of  stronger  with  weaker  h::man  wills.

Men  are  not  merely  permitted  to  take  the  life  of
the  murderer,  if  the  good  of  society  require  ii,  but
they  are  commanded  to  do  so  unconditionally.  In
no  other  way  can  the  community  itself  escape  (lie
awful  responsibility.  Wood  rests  upon  it.  Impunity
makes  the  whole  land  guilty.  A  voice  cries-  to  hea
ven.  Murder  unavenged  is  a  pollution.  Numb.  xxxv.
33;  Ps.  cvi.  38;  Mie.  iv.  11.  Such  is  the  strong
language  of  the  Scripture  as  we  find  it  in  Genesis,  in
the  statute  of  the  Pentateuch — which  is  only  a  par
ticular  application  of  the  general  law — and  in  the
Prophets.  Such,  too,  is  the  expression  of  all  anti
quity — so  strong  and  clear  that  we  can  only  regard
it  as  an  echo  of  this  still  more  ancient  voice — the
rpiytpwi'  ni&osj  as  yEsehylus  styles  it  in  a  passage
before  referred  to,  Note,  p.  257.  The  Greek  dra
matic  poetry,  like  the  Scriptures,  presents  it  as  the
crime  inexpiable,  for  which  no  lesser  satisfaction  was
to  be  received  :  "  Moreover  ye  shall  take  no  satisfac
tion  for  the  life  of  the  murderer,  who  is  guilty  of
death."  Numb.  xxxv.  31.

TO.  TTO.V7O.  yap  Tis  eK\eas  di'fl'  aijiiaTos
cvo'?,  (iaTrjy  o  fj-oxOos —

Lavish  nil  wealth  for  blood,  for  one  man's  Wood—
'Tia  all  in  vain.  jEscn.,  Choypli.  518.

And  this  gives  the  answer  to  another  false  argu
ment  :  It  was  only  a  law  for  the  Jews,  it  is  said.
The  first  refutation  is  found  in  this  passage,  which  ia
certainly  universal,  if  anything  can  be  called  such.
It  was  just  after  that  most  fearful  judgment  which
had  been  brought  upon  the  earth  by  lust  and  mur
der.  It  is  not  a  prediction,  but  a  solemn  statute
made  for  all,  and  to  all,  who  then  constituted  the
human  race.  It  has  the  strongest  aspect  of  univer
sality.  The  reason  for  it,  namely,  the  assailing  the
image  of  God,  not  only  embraces  all  earthly  human-


CHAP.   VIII.   20— IX.   1-17.


333


ity,  but  carries  us  into  the  spiritual  and  supernatural
world.  The  particular  law  afterwards  made  for  the
Jews  refers  back  to  this  universality  in  that  repeated
declaration  which  makes  it  to  differ  from  all  other
Jewish  laws  that  do  not  contain  it  :  "  This  shall  be  a
statute  to  you  in  all  your  places,  in  all  generations."
The  language  'js  universal,  the  reason  is  universal,
the  consequences  of  impunity  are  universal.

Such,  too,  was  the  sentiment  of  all  antiquity,  a
thing  we  are  not  to  despise  in  endeavoring  to  ascer
tain  what  is  fundamental  in  the  ideas  of  ethics  and
jurisprudence.  The  law  for  the  capital  punishment
of  homicide  was  everywhere.  The  very  superstitions
connected  with  it,  as  shown  in  the  expiatory  cere
monies,  are  evidence  of  the  deep  sense  of  the  human
mind,  that  this  crime,  above  all  others,  must  have  its
adequate  atonement  ;  and  that  this  could  only  be,
life  for  life,  blood  for  blood  —


Even  in  the  case  of  accidental  homicide,  an  expia
tory  cleansing  was  demanded.  These  ideas  appear
sometimes  in  harsh  and  revolting  forms.  The  lan
guage  is  occasionally  terrific,  especially  as  it  appears
in  the  ancient  tragedy  ;  but  all  this  only  shows  the
strength  and  universality  of  the  feeling,  together
with  the  innate  sense  of  justice  on  which  it  was
grounded.  Aristotle  reckons  the  punishment  of
murder  by  death  among  the  vu^i^a.  &ypa-rrra,  the
universal  "  unwritten  laws,"  as  they  are  styled  by
Sophocles  in  the  Antigone,  454,  although,  in  the  lat
ter  passage,  the  reference  is  to  the  rights  of  burial,
and  the  sacredness  of  the  human  body  —  ideas  closely
connected  with  the  primitive  law  against  murder  as
a  violation  of  the  divine  image  in  humanity.  All  of
this  class  of  ordinances  arc  spoken  of  as  very  an
cient.  No  man  knew  from  whence  they  came,  nor
when  they  had  their  oriin.


ov  yap  TI  vvv  ye  Ka
£r;  raura,  /coiiSeis  ol


6es,  dAA'  dei  TTOTS
v  <;£  OTOV  '(/laioj.


Xot  now,  nor  yesterday,  but  evcrmoro
Live  these  ;  no  memory  tracks  their  birth.

To  the  s:ime  effect  docs  the  philosopher  quote  the
lines  of  Empedocles,  irtpi  TOV  /j.ij  ureivem  T),  Z/j.fyv\ov,
"  on  the  crime  of  taking  life,"  or  slaying  that  which
has  soid  in  it,  —  very  much  in  the  language  of  the
Hebrew  phrase  £23  rrih  ,  Xumb.  xxxi.  19.  For
this,  he  says  —  namely,  the  punishment  of  homicide
by  death  —  is  not  the  law  iu  one  place,  and  not  in
another,


dAAa  TO


a.vT(av  vojui(uo>'.


See  ARISTOTLE'S  Rhetorica,  lib.  i.  ch.  xiii.  Comp.  also
SOPHOCLES:  Ajax,  1343,  and  the  (Edipus  Ti/ran.  867.
The  "blood  revenge,"  or  rather,  "the  blood
vengeance,"  as  it  should  be  called,  Die  Blulrache,
has  an  odious  sound,  because  pains  have  been  taken
to  connect  with  it  odious  associations,  but  it  is  only
a  mode  of  denoting  this  strong  innate  idea  of  justice
demanding  retribution  in  language  corresponding  to
the  horror  of  the  crime,  —  the  enormity  of  which,
according  to  the  Scripture,  is  not  simply  that  it  is
productive  of  inconvenience  —  pain  and  deprivation
to  the  individual  and  loss  to  society—  but  that  it  is
assailing  the  image  of  God,  the  distinguishing  essence
of  humanity.  So  that  it  seems  to  justify  the  Rab
bins  in  what  might  otherwise  appear  an  extravagant
saying,  namely,  that  "  he  who  slays  one  man  inten
tionally  is  as  though  he  had  slain  all  men."  He  has
assailed  humanity  ;  as  far  as  lies  in  his  power,  he  has


aimed  at  the  destruction  of  the  human  race.     Th«
same  thought,  Koran,  v.  35.

The  crime  of  murder  must  be  punished,  the  land
must  be  cleansed ;  and  so  before  organized  human
government  had,  or  could  have  had  existence,  to  a
sufficient  extent  for  prompt  and  methodical  judicial
processes,  it  was  not  merely  permitted,  but  enjoined
upon,  those  nearest  the  transaction,  to  execute1  the
divine  sentence.  Those  who  were  disobedient  to  this
command  were  themselves  stained  with  blood,  or
as  long  as  it  was  unexecuted.  Hence  the  phrase
C^n  bxi'5,  which  becomes  the  general  name  for
the  pursuer  or  prosecutor ;  whence  it  has  passed
into^  the  law  language  of  almost  all  criminal  codes.
He  is  also  called  the  Redeemer  or  rescuer.  In  this
sense  it  is  transferred  to  the  Great  Redeemer,  our
next  of  kin,  the  avenger  of  the  spiritual  murder  of
our  race,  as  against  the  great  demonic  homicide  who
is  called  d^paTro/croVos  ctTr"  apxris — "a  manslayer
from  _the  beginning,"  John  viii.  44  ;  compare  also
Job  xix.  25.  From  the  criminal  side  of  justice,  we
may  say,  this  term,  by  a  very  natural  transition  of
ideas,  is  carried  to  the  civil,  and  so  the  Goel,  or
Redeemer,  is  also  the  next  of  kin  who  buys  back  the
lost  inheritance.

Sometimes  the  objection  to  capital  punishment
assumes  a  pious  tone,  and  quotes  the  Scriptural
declaration:  "Vengeance  is  mine."  See,  however,
the  true  interpretation  of  this  phrase,  as  given  by
the  Apostle  himself,  Rom.  xii.  19,  and  in  what  imme
diately  follows  in  ch.  xiii.,  about  the  magistracy  as
ordained  of  God.  It  is  God's  justice,  not  merely
delegated  to,  but  imposed  upon,  human  society,  thus
making  it  the  very  antithesis  of  that  revenge  with
which  jt  is  so  sophi'stically  confounded.  The  odious
term,  it  may  be  repeated,  is  far  more  applicable  to
that  doctrine  of  expediency  which,  in  discarding  the
idea  of  desert,  has  nothing  deeper  or  firmer  to  build
upon  than  the  shifting  notions  of  human  conven
ience,  and  the  antagonism  of  human  wills.  There  is
undoubtedly  given  to  men  great  freedom  in  determ
ining  the  details  of  jurisprudence,  and  in  fixing  the
gradations  of  punishment.  Here,  to  a  cirhun  ex
tent,  expediency  may  come  in  as  a  modifying  influ
ence,  harmonizing  with  the  higher  moral  principle
which  cannot  be  kept  out  of  law  without  destroying
all  its  healthy,  conserving  power.  But  some  things
are  fundamental ;  and  they  cannot  be  changed  with
out  weakening  all  the  sanctions  of  human  govern
ment.  Among  these  is  the  punishment  due  to  the
crime  of  blood-shedding.  God  has  fixed  it.  The
State,  indeed,  may  disobey;  it  may  contemn  other
social  ordinances  having  a  like  divine  institution ;
but  in  so  doing  it  discards  its  own  highest  idea,  and
rejects  the  oidy  foundation  on  which  it  can  perma
nently  rest.  It  builds  alone  on  human  wills,  and
that  is  building  on  the  sand.

The  reason  here  given  :  "  for  in  the  image  of  God
made  he  man,"  seems  to  have  an  intensity  of  mean
ing  which  forbids  its  being  confined  to  the  spiritual
or  immaterial.  It  penetrates  even  the  corporeal  or
organic  nature,  as  Lange  appears  to  intimate.  There
is  a  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  to  inhere  even  in
the  body,  and,  through  it,  to  be  directly  assailable.
The  human  body  itself  is  holy,  as  the  residence  of
the  Spirit,  as  the  temple  in  which  this  divine  image
is  enshrined,  and  through  which  it  is  reflected.  Com
pare  the  vabs  0(oD,  1  Cor.  iii.  16.  Something  like
this  seems  to  be  implied  in  the  strange  expres
sion  C23  S^h.  as  it  occurs,  Numb.  xxxi.  19,  and


J34


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


which  is  identical  with  the  ancient  Arabian  phrase
(  u^jii  <\£s  ,  as  found  in  the  Koran.  Sec  Surat.
v.  r,


slays  a  soul  except  for  a  soul,"  that  is,  unless  in
retribution  for  a  soul.  This  is  the  literal  sense,
strange  as  it  may  soim^  ;  but  C;E3  may  be  taken
here  in  the  general  sense  of  person,  as  fyvxb  is  used
in  several  passages  of  the  New  Testament  —  the  soul
put  for  the  whole  personality.  Or  there  may  be  the
ellipsis  of  some  such  word  as  bfiX  ,  the  tabernacle
of  the  soul,  an  assault  upon  which  is  an  assault  upon
the  soul  itself;  and  this  may  also  lie  the  explanation
of  the  Id-Mew  phrase  U.:E3  "2w,  he  who  smiteth  a
soul.  Compare  Gen.  xxxvii.  21,  t'E3  ^"3  xb  .
"let  us  ii'>t  smite  him  (Joseph)  the  soul."  But  in  a
still  closer  sense  the  Inaly  may  be  called  the  C.IUKJC
of  the  soul,  the  reflection  of  the  soul,  even  as  the
soul  i-  tin1  image,  or  in  the  image  of  God.  And
tliH  furnishts  good  ground  ibr  such  transfer  of  the
sense,  even  to  that  which  is  most  outward  in  the
human  constitution.  We  may  trace  the  shadow  of
the  idea  as  surviving  even  in  the  Greek  poetry,
where  the  human  body  is  styled  &ya\ua  &e£r.  See
EiT.iriDES  :  "Suppliants,"  <'>1f>,  where  it  is  applied
'o  the  decomposed  and  mouldering  remains  of  the
Arrive  warrior  when  carried  to  the  funeral-pyre;

TO  acv  aya^fj.0.  irdAeo?  cVKO/j.'';>"oMa'
rrpo?  irvpap  i>|3plcr0eV.

To  the  funeral-pyre  thine  image  bear  I  forth
M;iiT'-;l  ;ti  it  is.

It  is  spoken  of  as  something  sacred  to  the  patron
deity  of  the  Argive  state,  like  a  statue  or  a  shrine.
See  also  PLATO:  Phwlrus,  251  A.  The  expression
'i'E3  5~n  may  also  have  some  connection  with  the
old  idea  of  the  blood  as  the  seat  of  the  soul,  regard
ed  as  representing  it,  and  thus  indirectly  bearing  the
image  of  God.  In  any  view,  there  is  implied  some
thing  holy  in  humanity,  and  even  in  the  human
body  —  something  in  it  transcending  matter  or  mate
rial  organization,  and  which  is  not  thus  inherent  in
any  other  organic  life,  or  corporeal  structure.

But  the  murderer,  too,  it  may  be  said,  is  made
in  the  image  of  God,  and  therefore  should  he  be
spared.  The  answer  to  this  is  simply  the  citation  of
the  divine  command.  His  life  is  expressly  demanded.
lie  is  -~n,  dvadeyua,  one  devoted.  See  1  Kings  xx.
42  :  "  Because  thou  hast  sent  away  "^"iH  CJ^X  ,  the
man  of  my  doom  (or  of  my  dooming),  therefore  shall
thy  soul  be  in  place  of  his  soul,"  If  S3  rfjF)  ^11:E3.
See  also  "1t:"in  C5,  "the  people  of  my  doom,"  Is.
xxxiv.  5.  The  judicial  execution  of  the  murderer  is
truly  a  sacrifice,  an  expiation,  whatever  may  be  ob
jected  to  such  an  idea  by  a  false  humanitarianism
which  seems  to  have  no  thought  how  it  is  belittling
humanity  in  its  utter  ignoring  of  anything  above  man,
or  of  any  relation  between  the  human  and  the  eternal
justice.

Harsh  as  they  may  seem,  we  need  these  ideas  to
give  the  necessary  strength  to  our  relaxing  judicial
morality,  and  a  more  healthy  tone  to  the  individual
and  social  conscience.  The  age  is  fast  going  into
the  other  extreme,  and  crime,  especially  the  crime
of  blood-shedding,  is  increasing  in  the  ratio  of  our
spurious  tenderness.  The  harshness  is  now  exhibit
ing  its  other  and  more  hypocritical  phase.  Those


who  speak  with  contempt  of  the  divine  law,  are  con
stantly  railing  at  society  as  itself  the  criminal  in  the
punishment  of  crime,  and  as  especially  malignant
and  revengeful  in  discharging  the  divinely  imposed
duty  of  executing  justice  upon  the  murderer. — T.  L.T


HOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

Sec  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.  Ch.  viii.  20  would
present  a  good  text  for  a  thanksgiving  sermon.  In
connection  with  ver.  21,  it  would  be  suitable  for  an
exposition  of  thankfulness.  Ver.  21  would  be  adapt
ed  to  a  sermon  on  human  sinfulness  in  the  light  of
the  divine  compassion.  How  God's  speaking  in  his
heart  re-echoes  in  the  innermost  heart  of  the  be
liever.  Ver.  22  would  be  suitable  for  a  representa
tion  of  the  connection  between  the  kingdom  of  grace,
and  the  kingdom  of  nature  with  its  laws.  Ch.  ix.  1,
A  marriage-blessing  at  the  celebration  of  a  wedding.
Vers.  2  and  ;>,  The  worth  and  sacredncss  of  the
creaturely  life  (sparing  of  the  animal,  consecration
of  all  enjoyment).  Ver.  5,  The  holy  estimation  of
human  life.  The  chief  point  of  view  in  the  whole
Section  is  the  covenant  of  God  with  Xoah  as  the  type
of  all  covenants  that  follow;  since  they  all  rest  upon
the  personal  relation  of  God  to  man  ;  all  are  of  God's
free  institution;  all,  moreover,  as  ethically  personal
alliances  (after  the  manner  of  a  contract),  are  an  in
terchange  of  divine  promises  and  human  vows,  of
divine  claims  and  human  faith  ;  all  are  saeramcntally
sealed.  How  God  binds  himself  in  his  sacramental
signs,  and  in  them  truly  remembers  the  man  who  re
members  him.  How  the  divine  eye  of  grace  and  the
human  eye  of  faith  meet  each  other  in  the  sacra
ment.  The  rainbow,  the  extraordinary  phenomenon
of  heaven,  and,  on  that  account,  an  image  of  the
divine  kindness,  compassion,  and  friendship.  The
light  of  the  heavenly  sun  in  the  colors  of  the  earthly
rainbow.

STAIIKE:  Ch.  viii.  20.  The  building  of  the  altar;
probably  upon  the  mountains  of  Ararat.  Noah  val
ued  thankfulness  before  all  earthly  business.  It  is
not  said  through  what  means  God  made  known  to
Noah  his  acceptance  of  the  offering.  We  may  con
jecture  that  the  offering  was  set  on  fire  by  fire  from
heaven  (but  the  expression  of  satisfaction  here  fol
lows  the  burning  of  the  offering). — Ver.  21,  concern
ing  the  abuse  of  these  words  in  the  exculpation  of  sin
(in  many  ways  does  the  clement  of  mildness  in  them
become  misapprehended). — Ch.  ix.  1,  Because  before
the  flood  God  was  provoked  at  the  sin  of  uncbastity,
it  becomes  necessary,  yi  consideration  of  the  fearful
display  of  wrath,  to  show  that  he  is  not  hostile  to  the
lawful  connection  of  man  and  woman,  nor  does  he
condemn,  but  rather  designs  through  it  the  multipli
cation  of  the  human  race.  Therefore,  in  this  text
is  the  marriage-state  praised  and  celebrated,  since
thereout  flows  not  only  the  order  of  the  family  and
the  world,  but  also  the  existence  of  the  church. —
Ver.  8,  Just  as  every  herb  does  not  serve  for  food,
so  also  is  not  everything  thereto  serviceable  that,  by
means  of  life,  moves  upon  the  earth. — Ver.  4,  The
aim  of  the  prohibition  is  mainly  that  the  way  of  cru
elty  may  be  barred  to  men. — Ver.  6,  The  magistracy
is  God's  ordinance,  and  derives  the  sword  from  no
other  authority  (Rom.  xiii.  14).  Starke  prefers  the
view  that  the  rainbow  had  existed  before  the  flood,
as  in  like  manner  he  supposes,  that  before  the  flood
men  might  eat  of  flesh. — Ver.  15,  LUTHER:  When
the  Scripture  eays  "  God  remembers,"  it  means  thai


CEAP.   IX.   18-29.


335


we  foci  and  are  conscious  that  he  remembers  it,
namely,  when  he  outwardly  presents  himself  in  such
a  manner,  that  we,  thereby,  take  notice  that  he
thinks  thereon.  Therefore  it  all  comes  to  this  :  as  I
present  myself  to  God,  so  docs  he  present  himself  to
me.

SCHRODER:  After  God's  curse  on  the  occasion  of
the  fall,  we  meet  with  the  offerings  of  Cain  and  Abel ;
again  do  offering  and  altar  connect  themselves  with
the  judicial  curse  of  the  flood. — "The  Lord  smelled
a  sweet  savor,"  in  the  Hebrew,  a  savor  of  rest  (rest
ing,  or  satisfaction) ;  ("  it  denotes  that  God  rests
from  his  wrath  and  has  become  propitiated."  Luther).
Therefore  is  it  a  savor  of  satisfaction — -a  chosen  ex
pression  that  becomes  fixed  in  its  application  to  the
burnt-offering. — "  Jehovah  spake  to  his  heart,"  that
is,  he  resolved  with  himself.  In  the  creation  of  man,
ch.  i.  26;  ii.  18,  and  also  in  his  destruction,  there


precedes  a  formal  decree  of  God ;  and  no  less  doea
the  divine  counsel  precede  the  covenant  for  man's
preservation.  Prayer  was  always  connected  with  the
sacrifice ;  in  fact,  every  offering  was  nothing  else
than  an  embodied  prayer. —  While  (tie  earth  remain-
eih.  There  is,  therefore,  even  to  the  earth  in  its
present  state,  a  limit  indicated  (2  Pet.  iii.  5,  7,  10 ;
Isaiah  Ixvi. ;  Rev.  xx.  11;  xxi.  1). — Ch.  ix.  1,  The
Noachian  covenant  is  a  covenant  of  Elohim,  a  cove
nant  with  the  universal  nature.  Luther  finds  in  our
Section  the  inauguration  of  an  order  of  instruction,
of  economy,  and  of  defence  (Noah's  offering,  the
blessing  of  the  family,  inauguration  of  the  magis
tracy). — Ver.  7,  God  does  not  love  death,  but  life.
The  covenant  is  re-established,  for  as  made  with
Adam  it  had  failed.  According  to  Calvin  the  rain
bow  had  existed  before,  but  was  here  again  conse
crated  as  a  sign  and  a  pledge.


SECOND    SECTION.

Tha  Revelation  of  Sin  and  of  Piety  in  Noah's  Family  —  The  Curse  and  the  Blcssi-ny  of  Noah—
The  twofold  Blessing,  and  the  Blessing  in  the  Curse  itself.

CHAPTER   IX.  18-29.

And  the    sons  of  Noah  that  went  fortli  of  the  ark  were  Shem,   and   Ham,   and

19  Japheth;  and  Ham  is  the  father  of  Canaan.     These  are  the  three  sons  of  Noah  ;  and

20  of  them  was  the  whole  earth  overspread.     And  Noah  began1  to  be  a  husbandman,  and

21  he  planted  a  vineyard;  And  he  drank  of  the  wine,  and  was  drunken;  and  he  was  un-

22  covered  within  his  tent.     And  Ham,  the  father  of  Canaan,  saw  the  nakedness  of  his

23  father,  and  told  his  two  brethren  without.     And   Shem  and  Japheth  took  a  garment,
and  laid  it  upon  both  Oieir  shoulders,  and  went  backward,  and  covered  the  nakedness  of
their  father  ;  and  their  faces  were  backward,  and  they  saw  not  their  father's  nakedness.

24  And  Noah  awoke  from  his  wine  [his  sleep  of  Intoxication],  and  knew  what  his  younger  son

25  had  done  unto  him.     And  he  said,  Cursed  be  Canaan;  a  servant  of  servants2  shall  he
20  be  unto  his  brethren.     And  he  said,  Blessed  be  the  Lord   God  of  Shem  [  Jehovah,  God

27  of  the  name,  or  who  preserves  the  name]  ;  and  Canaan  shall  be  his  servant.      God  shall  enlarge
Japheth3  [one  who  spreads  abroad],  and  he  shall  dwell4  in  the  tents  of  Shem;  and  Canaan

28  shall  be  his  servant.     And  Noah  lived  after  the  flood  three   hundred  and  fifty  years.

29  And  all  the  days  of  Noah  were  nine  hundred  and  fifty  years  ;  and  he  died.


t1  Ver.20.—  Sin'IJt.fl  fcjix  fib  b  rrn,  rendered  "and  Noah  began  to  be  a  husbandman,  "—man  of  the  adamaJi,  or
?°£  of.  lh<;  sott-yfupyfc-agricola.  It  cannot  mean  that  this  was  the  first  time  he  had  practised  husbandry,  but  tho
beginning  of  it  alter  the  flood,  when  he  and  his  sons  had  descended  into  the  low  country.-T.  L.]

."  Ver.  25.—  C^H?.  12S  ,  "  a  servant  of  servants,"—  a,  Hebraism  to  denote  the  intensity  or  degradation  of  Canaan'a
servitude—  the  lowest  and  vilest  of  servants,  or,  as  they  are  afterwards  characterized,  "hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of
water,"  in  distinction  from  the  ordinary  subjugation  of  a  conquered  people.  For  remarks  on  -ja^n  i22  ,  "his  younger
ton,"  or  little  son,  and  its  reference  to  Canaan  alone,  see  appended  Note,  p.  337,  on  Noah's  curse  and"  blessings.—  T.  L.]

[3  Ver.  27.—  PEPS  -  FB?  ,  "  shall  enlarge  Japheth."  Europe  (evpoumj),  wide-faced,  extensive,  spacious.  This  sup-
w^llflvl-l0^^3-1*  mainly>as'  ?'  the  sons  of  Japhcth,  had  this  name  very  early.  From  its  unknown  extent  it  was
fated  tho  wrlv  KSi  ?*^°n  WV  tetter  lmown  Parts  of  contiguous  Asia.  The  Greeks  may  have  simply  trans-
by  'one  of  their  absurd  tables  ^-T°l  ]"*  nam6  rip<ilnh  and  aftcrward  Parted  it,  according  to  their  usual  course,

[4  Ver.  27.—  •)  3ttj  11,  "and  he  shall  dwell,"  etc.    Who  shall  dwell?    The  Jewish  authorities,  with  few  exceptions,

Aben  Ez^^shin^  °/Kthc  VC?  just  PrcccdinS.  and  this  is,  doubtless,  according  to  grammatical  regularity.    Seo
Auen  jam,   Kabhi,   and  others.      Sometimes,   to  avoid   the   seeming  anthropopathism,  they  substitute  for  God  tho
IX,  his  light,  or  npSti  (.Shekinah),  deriving  it  from  this  veiy  verb  'pttJl.    Thus,  -the  Targum  of  Onkelos,
W   MSOSa   WnSl      "i      "His  Shekinah  [or  indwelling-)  shall  abide  in  the  dwelling  (mashkench)  of  Shem."

•'  His  Light  shall


•  the  Arabic,  both  of  the  Polyglott  and  of  Arabs  Erpcnianus,
iwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem,"    See  further,  appended  note,  p.  337.  on  the  blessing  of  Noah.  -T.  L.]


5jj_J


336


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


EXEGET1CAL  AND  CRITICAL.

1.  The   Siiinificancc   of  this  Jtfiovlstic  Section.
This  second  event  in  the  life  of  Noah  after  the  flood
is  evidently  of  the  highest  meaning;  as  was  the  first,
namely,  Noah's  offering  and  God's  Messing  and  cov
enant."    In  the  fir<t  transaction   there  are  delineated
the  ground-fe.itures  of  the  new  constitution  of  the
earth,  as  secured  by  the  covenant  of  Cod  with  the
pious  Noah.     In  the  present  Section  we  learn  the  ad
vance  of  culture,  but  we  recognize  also  the  continu
ance  of  sin  in  the  new  human  race;  still,  along  with
the  earlier  contrast  between  piety  and  perverseness,
there  comes  in  now  the  new   contrast  of  a  blessed
life  of  ciiHiu-i  as  compared  with  the  religious  life  of  a
divine  <•/•  'tux,  or  worship.     In  what  Noah  says  of  his
sons,  we  read  the  ground-forms  of  the  new  state,  and
of    the    wurld-hi.-torical    partition   of   mankind.     In
Knohel's    reiiiv.M'titation    of  it,    this    higher   signifi
cance    of    the    Section    is   wholly    effaced.       In    the
cur.-c  upon  Canaan  (according  to  this  view),  and  in
ins    appointment   to  servitude,  the   Jehovist  would
give  an  explanation  of  the  fact,  that  the  Canaanites
were  .-uhjugated   by  the    lit  brews,  and  that  Phu-ni-
ciau  settlers  amung  the  Japhethites  *  appear  to  have
had    a  similar    fate.     But  that    the    curse   was   pro
nounced   upon  Canaan,  and  not  upon  Ham,  was  be
cause  other  Hamitic  nations,  such  as  the  Egyptians,
et:>.,  wen.1  not  in   the  same  evil  case.      Still,  it  is  not
Canaan,   but  Ham   himself,  who   is  set  forth  as  the
shameless  author  of  the  guilt,  (V)  because  the  writer
would  refer  c'-rtain  shannli-ss  usages  of  the  Hamitic
nations  to  th-ir  first   ancestor.     Now,  on  the  simple
supposition  of  the  truth  of  the  prediction,  and  of  the
connection  brt  ween  the  guilt  of  the  ancestor,  and  the
corruption  of  his  defendants,  this  construction  must
fall  to  the  ground.      Knobel  cites  it  as  "an  ancient
view,"  that  the  cursings  of  those  who  are  distinguished
a.s  men  of  God,  have  power  and  effect  as  well  as  their
blessing-:.

2.  Ver.  ID.     By  them  was  the  wholo  earth
overspread. — A  main  point  of  our  narration.    "  The
second  even:    in  the  life    of  Noah    after  the  flood
shows  us  the  germs  for  the  future   development  of
the  human  race  in  a   threefold  direction,  which  is
prefigured  in  the  character  of  his  three  sons."     To
this  end  the  repetition  of  their  names.     The  mention
of  Canaan  introduces  the  mention  of  the  land  in  the
following  verse,  as  used  for  the  inhabitants  of  the
land;  as  in  ch.   x.  25;  xi.  1,  and  other  passages  in
which  cities  and  lands  are  frequently  named  instead
of  their  population."    Kcil.

".  Veis.  2i>,  '21.  Jfcah\t  Work,  his  Indulgence
and  hi-<  Error.  The  translation:  "  and  Noah  began
to  be  a  hu.-bandman"  is  rightly  set  aside  by  Delitzseh
and  Kcil.  The  word  for  husbandman  has  the  arti
cle,  and  is,  therefore,  in  apposition  with  Noah.
Noah,  sis  husbandman,  began  to  plant  a  vineyard.
The  agriculture  that  had  been  interrupted  by  the
flood,  he  again  carries  on,  and  makes  it  more  com
plete  by  means  of  the  new  culture  of  the  vine.  Ar
menia,  where  he  landed  with  the  ark,  is  an  anciently
known  vine-land.  "The  ten  thousand  (XKN.,  Anab.
4,  4,  0)  found  in  Armenia  old  and  well- flavored


*  (The  Phoenicians,  as  di.stin<ruishcd  from  the  Canann-
itcs  and  Hidonians,  were  probably  Sliemites,  as  they  spake
the  Shrmitie  lanpmagc,  and  thus  mndo  it  the  lrm<ruagc  of  the
whole  district.  This  corresponds  to  what  is  said  by  Herodo
tus  and  StraVio,  that  they  came  from  the  Persian  Gulf — the
land  of  Shinar.  the  old  home-land. — T.  L.]


wines:  even  at  this  day  the  vine  grows  there,  pro
ducing  wine  of  great  excellence,  even  at  the  height
of  four  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea
RITTER:  Geography,  x.  p.  551).  That  the  culture
of  the  vine  came  from  Asia  is  well  known.  The
reek  myth  ascribes  it  to  Dyonysus  or  Bacchus,
representing  it,  sometimes,  as  derived  from  the  In
dians,  and  again,  as  belonging  to  the  Phrygians,  who
were  related  to  the  Armenians  (Dion.  Sic.  3(12;
3TRABO,  10)."  Knobel.  The  story  designates  a  hill
on  the  northwest,  adjacent  to  the  Great  Ararat,  and
furnishing  the  means  of  its  ascent,  as  the  region
where  Noah  set  out  his  vine-plants.  The  village  of
Arguri  (Agorri),  which  in  18-10  was  destroyed  in  an
eruption  of  Ararat,  stood  upon  the  place  referred
to.  Frequent  projections  of  stones,  and  outpouring
streams  of  lava  and  mud,  have,  in  the  course  of
time,  destroyed  all  the  fertile  soil  of  Ararat  (K.  KOCH,
in  "Piper's  Year  Book,"  1852,  p.  28)."  Delitzseh.
The  wine-garden  of  Noah  is  a  mild  rellex  of  paradise
in  the  world  of  the  fallen  human  irce  ;  and  this
enjoyment,  in  its  cxec.-sively  sinful  u^e,  lo  which
Noal'i  led  the  way,  although  he  was  not  aware  of  its
effect,  has  become  a  reflex  of  Adam's  enjoyment  of
the  tree  of  knowledge;  with  this  difference,  how
ever,  that  Noah  erred  in  ignorance,  and  not  in  the
form  of  conscious  transgression.  Intoxication  by
wine  makes  men  lax  in  respi  ct  to  sexual  sin;  and
this  connection  is  gently  indicated  it)  the  fact,  that
Noah,  as  he  lay  unguarded  in  his  tent,  exposed  him
self  contrary  to  the  law  of  modesty.  In  the  error
of  the  father  there  reveals  itself  the  ch;'.raeler  of  the
sons.

4.  Vcrs.    22,   2-'i.       The   l>flnri»r   of  inc.  Sons.
Ham's  conduct  was,  at  fiivt,  a  sin  of  omission.     He
saw   the  nakedness  (the  shame)  of  his  father,  and
neither  turned  away  his  eyes  nor  covered  him  ;  then
he  told   it  to  his  brethren  without,  and   this  was  his
sin  of  commission.     His  behavior  had  the  character
not  merely  of  lustful  feeling,  but  of  utter  shameless-
ness  ;   whereas  the  act  of  the  two  brothers  presents  a
beautifully  vivid  image  of  delicacy,  being  at  the  same
time  an  act  of  modesty  and  of  piety.     Reverence,
piety,  and  chastity,  are,  in  children,  the  three  foun
dations  of  a  higher  life  ;  whereas  in  impiety  and  sen
sual    associations,  a   lower  tendency  reveals   itself.
Out  of  the  virtues  and  the  vices  of  the  family  come
the  virtues  and  the  vices  of  nations,  and  of  the  world.
At  the  same  time,  the  manner  in  which  the  two  sons
treat  the  case,  presents  a  charming  image  of  prudence
and  quick  decision.     They  seize  the  first  best  robe
that  comes  to  hand,  and  that  was  the  fl;^ .  spread
it  out,  and  as  they  go  backward  with  averted  faces,
lay  it  upon  the  nakedness  of  their  father.

5.  Vers.    24-29.     Noah's    Curse   and   Messing.
His  end. — And  Noah   awoke  from   his   wine  j
that  is,  the  intoxication  from  wine  (see  1  Sam.  i.  14;
xxv.  37). — And  knew. — This  seems  to  suppose  that
his  sons  had  told  him,  which,  however,   may  have
been  occasioned  by  his  asking  about  the  robe  that
covered  him.     The  whole  proceeding,  however,  must
have  come  to  light,  and  that,  too,  to  his  own  humili
ation. — His  younger  son  (literally,  his  son,  the  lit
tle,  or   the  less ;   see  ch.  v.  32). — The  effect  upon
him  of  the  account  is  an  elevated  prophetic  state  of
soul,  in  which  the  language  of  the  seer  takes  the
form  of  poetry. — Cursed  be  Canaan. — The  fact
that  he  did  not  curse  the  evil-doer  himself,  but  his
son,  is  explained  away,  according  to  Origcn,  in  a  He
brew  Midrash,  which   says  that  the  young  Canaan
had  first  seen  his  grandfather  in  this  condition,  and


CHAP.  IX.  18-29.


337


told  it  to  his  father — clearly  an  arbitrary  exegesis.
According  to  Ilavernik  and  Keil,  all  the  sons   of
Ham  were  included  in  the  curse,  but  the  curse  of
llam  was  concentrated  on  Canaan.     Keil  and  Ileng-
stenberg  find,  moreover,  a  motive  in  the  name  "jSjS
which  does  not  mean,  originally,  a  low  country,  but
the  servile.     "  Ham  gave  to  his  son  the  name  of  obe
dience,  a  thing  which  he  himself  did  not  practise.
Hengstcnberg  supposes  that  Canaan  was  already  fo
lowing  his  father's  footsteps  in  impiety  and  wicket
ness.     According  to  Hofiuann  and  Delitzsch,  Cauaa
had  the  curse  imposed  upon  him  because  he  was  tli
youngest   son  of  Ham  (ch.  x.  G),   as  Ham  was  th
youngest  son  of  Noah.     "'The  great  sorrow  of  heai
which  Ham  had  occasioned  to  his  father  was  to  b
punished  in  the  suffering  of  a  similar  experience  from
his  own  youngest  son."     Uightly  does   Keil  rejec
this.     The   exposition  of  Knobel  we  have   already
cited ;  according  to  it  the  later  condition  of  the  Ca*
naanitcs  was  only  antedated  in  the  prophecy  of  Noah
Before  all  things  must  we  hold  fast  to  this,  that  tin
language  of  Noah  is  an  actual  prophecy ;    and  no
merely  an  expression  of  personal  feeling.     That  the
question  lias  nothing  to  do  with  personal  feeling  is
evident  from  the  fact,  that  Ham  was  not  personally
cursed.     According   to    the    natural    relations,    the
youngest  grandchildren  would  be,  in  a  special  man
ner,  favorites  with  the  grandfather.     If  now,  not
withstanding  this,  Noah  cursed  his  grandchild,  Ca
naan,  it  can  only  be  explained  on  the  ground  that  in
the  prophetic  spirit  he  saw  into  the  future,  and  thai
the  vision  had  for  its  point  of  departure  the  then
present  natural  state  of  Canaan.     We  may  also  say,
that  Ham's  future  was  contained  in  the  future  of
Canaan ;  the  future  of  the  remaining  Karaites  he  left
undecided,  without  curse  and  without  blessing,  al
though  the  want  of  blessing  was  a  significant  omen.
Had,  however,  Noah  laid  the  curse  on  Ham,  all  the
sons  of  Hum  would  have  been  denoted  in  like  man
ner  with  himself;  even  as  now  it  is  commonly  as
sumed   that   they   were,    though   without   suflicicnt
ground  (see  DKLITZSCII,  p.   281).     There  is  no  play
upon  the  name  Canaan,  as  upon  the  name  Japheth
— a  thing  which  is  to  be  noted.     But  that  in  the
behavior  of  Canaan  Noah  had  a  point  of  depart-
i  ure  for   his   prophecy,   we   may  well   assume   with
Hengstenberg. — A  servant  of  servants ;  that  is,
,  the  lowest  of  servants.     If  the  language  had  had  in
j  view  already  the  later  extermination  of  the  Canaan-
I  ites,  it  must  have  had  a  different  style.     The  form  of
[  the  expression,  therefore,  testifies  to  the  age  of  the
prophecy.     We  must  also  bear  in  mind,  that  the  re
lation  of  servant  in  this  case  denotes  no  absolute
relation  in  the  curse,  or  any  developed  slave  relation,
•  any  more  than  the  relation  of  service  which  was  im
posed  upon  Esau  in  respect  to  Jacob.     There  even
lies  in  it  a  hidden  blessing.     The  common  natures
'  must,  of  themselves,  take  a  position  of  inferiority ;
through  subordination  to  the  nobler  character  are
'  ;hey  saved,  in  the  discipline  *and  cultivation  of  the
Spirit.— Blessed  he  Jehovah,  God  of  Shem.—
The  blessing  upon  Shem  has  the  form  of  a  doxology
.  o  Jehovah,  whereby,  as  Luther  has  remarked,  it' is
listinguishcd  as  a  most   abundant  blessing,  which
iually  reaches  its  highest  point  in  the  promised  seed.
1  If  Jehovah  is  the  God  of  Shem,  then  is  Shorn  the
ecipient  and  the  heir  of  all  the  blessings  of  salvation
'hich  God,  as  Jehovah,  procures  for  humanity."  Keil.

-And  Canaan  shall  be  his  servant The  word

-3  (regularly  tnb)  is  taken  by  Gesenius  as  a  poeti-
il  expression  for  ib ;  Delitzsch  refers  it.  as  plural
22


to  both  brothers — Keil  and  Knobel  to  their  descend
ants.     The  descendants,  however,  are  represented  in
the  ancestor,  and,  therefore,  the  explanation  of  Gese
nius  gives  the  only  clear  idea, — God  shall  enlarge
Japheth,  [or,  as  Lange  ryyiders  it],  God  give  en
largement  to  the  one  who  spreads  abroad.—
In  the  translation  we  retain  the  play  upon  the  word
and  the  explanation  of  the  name  Japheth.     Keil  ex
plains  the  word  (meaning  literally,  to  make  room,  to
give  space  for  outspreading)  as  metaphorical.     To
make  room  is  equivalent  to  the  bestowmcnt  of  hap
piness  and  prosperity.     It  must  be  observed,  how
ever,  that  the  name  Shem,  and  the  blessing  of  Shem,
denotes  the  highest  concentration;  whilst  in  opposi
tion  to  this  the  name  Japheth  and  the  blessing  of
Japheth,  denotes  the  highest  expansion,   not  only
geographically,  but  also  in  regard  to  the  spread  of
civilization  through  the  earth,  and  its  conquest  both
outwardly  and  intellectually.     This  is  the  spiritual
mission    of  Japhethism   to    this   day— namely,   the
mental  conquest  of  the  world.     The  culture  life  of
Japheth,  as  humanitarian,  scientific,  stands  in  liar-
monious  contrast  with  the  cnltux,  or  religionism,  of
Shem.    Therefore,  too,  must  Japheth's  blessing  come
from  Elohim.— And  he  shall  dwell  in  the°tents
of  Shem.— The  words,  he  shall  dwell,  arc  by  some
(Onkel,    Dathe,    Baumgarten)   referred   to   Elohim.
But  this  had  already  been  expressed  in  the  blessing
of  Shem,  and  had  therefore  nothing  to  do  with  the
blessing  of  Japheth.     What  is  said  relates  to  Ja
pheth  ;  and  that,  too,  neither  in  the  sense  that  the
Japhethites  shall  settle  among  the  Shcmitcs,  or  that
they  shall  conquer  them  in  their  homes  (Clericus,
Von  Bohlen,  and  others),  but  that  Japheth's  dwell
ing  m  the  tents  of  Shem  shall  be  in  the  end  his
uniting  with  him  in  religious  communion  (Targum
Jonathan,  Ilieronymus,  Calvin,  and  others).    The  op
posite  interpretation  (Michaelis,  Gesenius,  De  Wette,
Knobel,  and  others),  which  explains  Shem  here  (CE)
as  meaning  literally  name,  or/ante  (dwell  in  the  tents
of  renown),  appears  to  have  proceeded  from  a  mis
apprehension  of  the  prophetic  significance  of  the
anguage.     To  dwell  in  the  tents  of  any  one,  Knobel
lolds,    cannot   mean   religious    communion.      That
would  be  true,  if  the  one  referred  to  had  not  imme
diately  before  been   denoted  as  an  observer  of  the
.rue   religion.     That   the   Japhethites,  that   is,   the
jrccks,  early  dwelt  in  the  tents  of  renown,  is,  in  this
-espcct,  a  matter  by  itself,  which  had  already  been
set  forth  in  Japheth's  own  blessing,  as  implied  in
what  is  said  of  his   expansion.     As   the   brothers,
whatever  contrast  there  might   have  been  in  their
characters,  had  been  one  in  their  piety  towards  their
athcr,  so  must  their  posterity  become  one  in  this,
hat  they  shall  finally  exchange  with  each  other  their
espcctive  blessings — in  other  words,  that  Japhetb
hall  bring  into  the  tents  of  Shem  what  he  has  woa
rom  the  world,  and,  in  return  for  it,  share  in  the
Blessing  of  the  Name — the  name  Jehovah,   or  the
rue  religion. — And  Noah  lived — In  the  Armenian
egend,  Arnojotcn,  in  the  plain  of  the  Araxcs,  has
he  name  of  his  place  of  burial.     With  the  death  of
Voah,  the  tenth  member  of  the  Genealogical  table,
h.  v.,  finds  its  conclusion.  .

[NOTE  ox  THE  CUKSE  OF  CANAAN— THE  scr-
OSED  CURSE  OF  HAM— THE  BLESSING  OF  SIIKM
sro  JAPJIETII.  (Jen.  ix.  24.  And  Noah  awoke  from
Is  wine,  and  knew  what  his  youngest  son  had  done
nto  him.  y £*•*'<,  LXX.  efeVrj^f,  became  fully  con-
;ious  of  his  condition.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  24.  3H*1 ,
new,  became  sensible  of.  It  is  not  the  word  that


J58


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSES.


would  have  been  employed  Lad  he  learned  it  from
the  information  of  others.  It  denotes  intelligence —
by  the  eye,  as  Is.  vi.  '.»,—  by  the  touch,  (ien.  xix.  33,
— experience  by  any  sense,  Dent.  xi.  '2, — or  by  the
excreise  of  the  mind  as  following  such  experience,
Judg.  xiii.  21.  JIad  done  unto  him,  ib  nbS.  This
is  something  more  than  an  omission  or  a  neglect.
The  word  is  a  very  positive  one.  Something  unmis
takable,  something  very  shameful  had  been  done
unto  the  old  man  in  his  unconscious  state,  cither  the
stripping  oil'  his  robe,  or  some  act  of  abuse  or  mock-
cry  of  such  a  nature  that  it  becomes  manifest  to  him
immediately  on  his  recovery.  It  imy  be  remarked,
too,  that  I'iX  TX  may  more  properly  be  rendered,
indefinitely,  a  thing  which,  or  something  which,  his
youngest  son  had  done  unto  him.  But  who  was  the
culprit  V  Of  this,  too,  the  patriarch  appears  to  have
been  immediately  sensible,  or  to  have  immediately
inferred  it  from  something  he  must  have  known  of
the  supposed  perpetrator.  He  seems  to  have  had  no
doubt.  Now  Ham  had  done  nothing  to  his  father.
On  discovery  of  his  state  he  hastens  to  his  brothers,
it  may  be  with  the  same  lilial  intentions  that  they
more  promptly  carried  out.  The  sight  appears  to
have  been  accidental  and  involuntary.  The  word  is
S~*",  In'  saw,  not  ^""*,  lie-  l<>r>k><l  (if,  spectavit,
fZedfraTo,  i/'i-i'd  at,  implying  interest,  emotion.
There  is  i-i'the  account  no  intimation  of  any  of  that
scoiling  demeanor  that  some  commentators  have  so
gratuitously  charged  upon  him.  He  saw  and  told  his
brothers.  "At  all'  events,  his  fault,  if  there  was  one,
\vas  Dimply  an  omission,  which  seems  to  fall  alto
gether  short  of  the  force  of  the  words  "13  ""^'"i  had
(/<»,.'<  11,,/u  him,  regarded,  too.  as  something  obvious
or  immediately  discoverable  by  the  one  who  had  suffer
ed  the  indignity.  There  seems  to  be  a  careful  avoid
ance  of  particularity.  The  language  lias  an  euphe
mistic  look,  a.-  though  intimating  something  too  vile
and  atrocious  to  be  openly  expressed.  Tims  regard
ed,  everything  seems  to  point  to  some  wanton  act
done  by  the  very  one  who  is  immediately  named  in
the  severe  malediction  that  follows:  "Cursed  ],e
Canaan."  He  was  the  youngest  son  of  Ham,  as  he
was  also  the  youngest  son  of  Noah  according  to  the
well-established  Shemitic  peculiarity  by  which  all
the  descendants  are  alike  called  sons.  Beside  the
general  designations,  sons  of  Israel,  bSfiO"1  "'IS ,
sons  of  Judah,  etc.,  see  such  particular  cases  as
(Jen.  xxix.  r>,  where  Laban  is  called  the  son  of
Nahor;  K/.ra  v.  1,  where  the  prophet  Zachariah  is
called  the  son  of  Iddo ;  whereas,  as  appears  from
7.;:ch.  i.  1,  he  was  his  grandson,  "^H  *!2  is  ren
dered  in  our  English  version,  his  younger  son,  to
make  it  applicable  to  Ham,  on  the  supposition  that
he  was  the  middle  son,  younger  than  Shem.  But
this  will  not  do.  It  would  be  a  vague  way  of  desig
nating  him  at  any  rate,  even  if  the  language  would
allow  it.  But  the  term  "j~p  can  only  denote  the
younger  (minor)  when  used  of  one  of  two,  and  stand
ing  in  contrast  with  bn3.  Standing  alone,  as  it
does  here,  or  in  connection  with  three  or  more,  it  can
only  be  rendered  minimus,  the  little  one  distinctively,
the  least  or  youngest  of  all.  The  terms  are  derived
from  the  early  family  state  with  its  disparity  of  ap
pearance  in  size,  though  afterwards  retained  or  trans-
i'erred  to  express  simply  juniority,  as  the  Latin
major  and  minor  in  like  eases.  The  primitive  asso
ciation,  however,  is  not  wholly  lost,  and  this  makes
;he  term  such  a  favorite  to  express  the  very  young


est  in  the  family,  who  is  regarded  as  the  little  one  long
after  he  has  grown  up  to  maturity  of  age  and  size.
So  Benjamin,  even  when  he  was  twenty-three  years  of
age,  was  still  *|M^rt ,  the  little  one.  The  term,  it  is
true,  denotes  comparative  juniority,  yet  still  it  de
rives  its  etymological  emphasis  from  the  fact  that  he
was  C^ipf  *lb^ ,  TTj\vytros,  the  late-born,  the  child
of  old  age,  and  so  still  thought  of  as  the  little  one
of  the  family.  To  the  father,  especially,  or  to  the
grandfather,  an  epithet  of  this  kind  retains  all  its
force.  Such,  most  likely,  was  the  relation  between
Noah  and  the  young  Canaan,  until  his  vile  abuse  of
it  called  out  the  greater  severity  of  malediction.
So  David,  too,  was  specially  named  after  he  had  ar
rived  at  robust  manhood.  The  other  sons  of  Jesse
are  called  collectively  Cn?13,  and  are  named,  more
over,  first,  second,  third,  etc.,  but  of  David  it  is  said
"l^i?n  N^n ,  he  was  the  little  one,  minimus,  youngest
of  all.  See  also  Hen.  xxix.  18,  where,  from  a  similar
association  of  ideas,  Rachel  is  called  Mili^ri  "F'2.
thy  little  daughter,  though  in  that  case  there  were
but  two  of  them.

Everything  points  to  Canaan  as  the  youngest
son,  at  that  time,  of  all  the  Xoachic  family,  lie
was  the  direct  object  of  the  curse,  which,  instead  oi
ascending  to  the  father,  contrary  to  everything  else
of  the  kind  in  the  Bible,  was  so  fully  accomplished
in  Canaan's  own  direct  descendants.  So  clear  is  this,
that  some  of  the  be>t  commentators,  including  most
of  the  Jewish,  although  still  keeping  Ham  as  the
main  figure,  in  consequence  of  the  old  prepossession,
represent  Canaan  as  playing  an  active  part  in  the
business.  It  is  the  current  Jewish  tradition,  that  he
first  saw  the  exposure  and  told  it  to  his  father.
Others  ascribe  to  him  a  shameful  act  of  mutilation,
from  whence  it  is  thought  came  the  old  fable  oi'
Saturn.  "It  was  Canaan  that  did  it,"  says  Aben
Ezra,  "although  the  Scripture  does  not  in  words  re
veal  what  it  was."  Rashi  also  gives  the  story  of
mutilation,  ID^O  C^n^l'x  f,  and  he  refers  to  the
Sanhedrin  of  the  Talmud.  That  most  acute  critic,
Scaliger,  not  only  ascribes  the  act  to  Canaan,  whether
it  was  a  positive  exposure  or  anything  else,  but
acquits  Ham  of  all  positive  blame:  ''  Quid  Chant
ficit  nntri  SHO  ?  Nihil ;  tanttim  fratrilus  Je  patris
probro  niineinx  ftiit."  SCALIG.,  Elcuch.,  p.  54.

Ham  might  have  been  called  the  younger  son  in
respect  to  Shcm,  as  he  was  the  elder  in  respect  to
Japhcth,  but  this  would  neither  answer  to  "pp  "p
here,  nor  suit  the  evidently  intended  distinctiveness
of  the  designation.  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  in
no  sense  minimus  or  youngest,  unless  there  is  wholly
disregarded  the  order  in  which  the  names  occur  at
every  mention  of  the  three :  Shem,  Ham,  Japhcth.
See  Gen.  v.  32;  vi.  10-,  vii.  13;  ix.  18;  x.  1.  This
would  make  him  the  middle  one,  at  all  events,
whether  Shorn  or  Japheth  were  regarded  as  the  eld
est.  The  determination  of  the  latter  question  would
depend  upon  the  interpretation  t>f  Gen.  v.  32,  and
x.  21.  "Noah  was  five  hundred  years  old  and  begat
Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth."  It  is  not  at  all  credible
that  the  births  of  these  sons  should  have  been  so
near  together  that  they  all  took  place  at,  or  even
about,  the  time  when  Noah  was  five  hundred  years
old.  It  appears  from  Gen.  xi.  10,  that  Shem  was
born  about  this  time,  making  him  about  one  hundred
years  old  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  after  the  flood.
Now,  if  we  render  Gen.  v.  32 :  "Noah  was  five  hun
dred  years  old,  and  had  begotten,"  or,  when  he  had


CHAP.    IX.    18-29.


339


begotten,  etc.,  making  the  scries  end  at  that  time,
tvhich  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  Hebrew  idiom,
then  the  first-named  would  probably  have  been  the
youngest,  as  last  begotten,  and   marking  the  date.
If  they  were  all  born  afterwards,  the  inference  would,
for  the  same  reason,  have  been  just  the  other  way.
*n  favor  of  the  first  view,  which  would  make  Japheth
the  elder,  there  is  the  rendering  which  our  English
version  gives  to  Gen.  x,  21:  Skem,  the  brother  of
Japhtth  the  elder,  instead  of,  the  elder  brother  of  Ja-
phe'h.    Some  commentators  have  favored  this  on  th
ground  that  Shem  must  have  been  born  after  lsroa
was  five  hundred  years  old,  because  his  own  age  i
stated  as  being  one  hundred  years,  two  years  (CTO  w
or  the  second  year,  or,  as  the  dual  form  more  strong! '
implies,  between  one  and  two  years)  after  the  flooc,
But  besides  the  minute  trifling  of  such  an  intcrpre
tation,  there  is  a  grammatical  difficulty  in  the  wa
which  is  insuperable.     In  the  expression  ns^  ">n
-ilSf! ,  the  two  first  words  being  in  regimen,  th
epithet  bl'lWl  must  belong  to  the  whole  as  a  com
pound  :    JaphetK's  brother,  the  elder  ;  otherwise  i
would  be  like  making  the  adjective  in  English  agret
with  the  possessive  case.      Compare   Judges  u.  1
bvi:.rt  rrtrP  n^r^  1=2 ,  every  great    work  of  th
Lord;  1  Sum.  xvii.  23,  blli.ri  THX   -5O5X  ,  Elial
Ms  elder  brother,  where  the  pronoun  corresponds  to
the  noun  in  regimen,  and,  especially,  such  cases  as
Judges  i.  13;    iii.  9,  which  are  precisely  like  this
logically    and    grammatically:    pi?  Pi    153     "TIN.
Caleb' n  younger  brother,  not,  the  brother  of  Caleb
the  youiirjer.     So  i'ar  the  sense  may  be  said  to  be
fixed  grammatically,  but  the  fair  inference  from  the
context,  and  the  fact  that  appears  in  it  that  there
were  three  brothers,  would  seem  to  give  it  not  only
,  a  comparative,  but  a  superlative  sense :  the  brother
of  Japheth,  the  elder  one, — implying  that  there  were
two  brothers  older  than  Japheth,  and  that  Shem  was
the  oldest  of  them.     If  we  look  at  the  whole  context
(Ham  and  his  genealogy  having  been  just  disposed
of),  we  shall  see  that  there  was  more  reason  for  the
narrator's   saying  this  than  for  merely  mentioning
that  Shem  was  older  than  Japheth.     These  consider^
ations  would  seem  to  fix  the  position  of  Ham  as  the
middle  son ;  although,  without  them,  it  might  have
been  reasonably  argued  that  Ham  himself  was  the
Oldest^  from  the  fact  that  his  descendants,  with  the
exception   of  Canaan   (unless  we  may  reckon   the
Phoenicians  among  them),  so  get  the  start,  in  history
and  civilization,  of  both  Shem  and  Japheth.

A  very  strong  argument  against  the  hypothesis
that  Ham  was  cursed  here  instead  of  Canaan,  arises
from  the  want  of  allusion,  in  all  other  parts  of  the
Scripture,  to  any  such  sweeping  malediction  as  in
volving  all  Ham's  descendants.  The  accomplishment
of  the  curse  upon  Canaan  is  mentioned  often,  and
the  frequent  allusion  to  them  as  "hewers  of  wood
and  drawers  of  water,"  is  only  an  emphatic  repetition
of  Noah's  words,  ni^  13;? }  servant  of  servants
—not  slave  of  slaves,  as  some  would  take  it,  but  an
intensive  Hebrew  idiom  to  denote  the  most  complete
subjugation,  such  as  the  Canaanites  were  reduced  to
m  the  days  of  Joshua  and  Solomon.*  How  utterly

*  [The  fact  that,  of  all  the  descendants  of  Ham,  Canaan
JWtte  nearest  object  of  interest  to  the  Jews,  and  so  Mstor-

™J  f  m°St  1"1IJOI*u?c°  to  them,  give,  the  reason  of  the
Bomejhat  peculiar  dosijmntion,  Gen.  ix.  18,  where  a  kind

fothor  n?n  t0  JIam  s  nam:?>  HtRtinK  thilt  hc  ™»  the

father  of  Canaan,  or  rather  that  this  was  another  name


strange  would  such  language  have  sounded,  had  it
been  applied,  at  any  time  during  the  national  exist
ence  of  the  Jews,  to  the  lordly  descendants  of  Gush.
Mitzraim,  and  Nimrod  !    "  Shall  be  servant  to  them,"
I'^b ,  a  collective  term  for  the  descendants  of  Shem,
who  had  just  been  blessed.     So  is  it  taken  by  all  the
Jewish    expositors,   who   regard   the  antecedent  in
ver.  20  as  being  Shem  alone,  no  other  being  men
tioned  or  implied,  and  in  ver.  27,  as  being  Shem  and
tae  God  of  Shem  who  should  dwell  in  his  tents     See
also  GESENIUS,  Lehrgeb.,  p.  221.     Instead  of  bavin"
ever  been  servant  to  Shem,  either  in  the  political  or
commercial  sense,  Mitzraim  held  the  Israelites  for
centuries  in  bondage;  Cush  (the  .Ethiopians  and  the
Lubims)  conquered  them  (see  2  Chron.  xii.  3 ;  xvi.  8)  •
the  nation  that  Ximrod  founded  sacked  their  cities
and  brought  their  land  under  tribute:     Instead  of
being  servants  to  Japheth,  the  descendants  of  Ham
were  founding  empires,  building  immense  and  popu
lous  cities,  whilst  the  sons  of  the  younger  brother
with  the  exception  of  the  Mediterranean  or  Javanic'
line,  were  roaming  the  dense  wilds  of  Middle  and
Northern^  Europe,  or  the  steppes  of  Central  Asia,
ever  sinking  lower  and  lower  into  barbarism,  as  each
wave  of  migration  was  driven  farther  on  by  those  that
followed.    The  more  abject  race,  as  some  would  hold
them,  were  the  pioneers  of  the  world's  civilization
advancing  rapidly  in  agriculture  and  the  arts,  organ
izing  governments  admirable  for  their  order  though
despotic  in  form,  digging  canals  and  lakes  to  fertilize
the  desert,  everywhere  turning  the  arid  earth  into  a
luxuriant  garden,  whilst  the  early  Gomerites,  and
those  who  followed  them  in  their  wilderness  march
to  the  extreme  west  of  Europe,  were  falling  from
iron  to  copper,  from  copper  to  stone,  from  the  im
plements   of  Lamech,  and  of  the  ark  and  tower-
builders,  to  the  rude  flint  axes  and  bone  knives  that
some  have  regarded  as  remains  of  pre-adamite  men.
The  Samites   go    down   to   Egypt,    or   ascend   the
Euphrates,  and  how  soon  uprise  the  pyramids,  the
immense  structures  of  Thebes,  the  palaces  of  Baby
lon  and  Nineveh,  whilst  the  other  wretched  wander
ers  of  the  wild  woods  and  marshes  were  building
rude  huts  on  piles,  over  lakes  and  feus,  to  protect
themselves  from  the  wild  beasts,  or  herding  in  caves
with  the  animals  whose  bones  are  now  found  min
gling  with  their  own.     Such  was  their  progress  until
there  met  them  again  that  primitive  central  light,
which  had  been  preserved,  especially  in  the  Shemitic,
and  had  never  gone  wholly  out  in  the  Hamitic  and
Javanic  lines.     Even  this  Greek  or  Javanic  branch
of  the  Japhcthan  family,  though  ever  preserving  a
position  so  much  higher  than  that  of  their  Northern
consanguinii  (this  coming  from  their  Mediterranean
•oute  furnishing  greater  facilities  of  intercourse,  and
ceeping   up   an   accessible   proximity  between   the
different  pioneering  waves  and  the  source  whence
hey  came)  derived,  nevertheless,  their  earliest  cult
ure,  from  the  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians,  as,  in  still
ater  times,  they  received  their  highest  cullus  from  a
Shemitic  source.    The  wisest  among  the  Greeks  ever
raced  their  best  thinking  to  the  East,  that  is,  to  a


pecially  given  to  him  by  the  Israelites,  as  being  best  known
o  them,  or  called  to  mind  to  them,  through  his  son;
?33  "13X  Nin  Cm,  "Ham,  that  is,  the  father  ol
anaan"  or  Ham,  that  is,  'Abi-Canaan,— according  to  a
method  of  naming  that  has  ever  prevailed  among  the  Ara-
lans,  down  to  this  day,  as  Abu-Beker,  Abuhvalid,  or,  as  in
nis  case,  Abu-Canaan,  where  the  son  is  better  known,  or
n  object  of  nearer  interest  than  the  father  who  is  thus
amed  after  him. — T.  L.]


340


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


Ham's  n
carncstn

the  MM
blessed,
sequent
:ill  i  tha


Shemitie  or  Ilaniitic  origin.  They  were  ever  kept  in
jonnection  with  die  primitive  light  and  primitive
spiritual  vigor,  and  tliis  was  the  chief  respect  in
which  they  differed  from  our  Japheihan  ancestors  who
were  so  early  lost  hi  the  woods,  and  who  had  no
fresh  emanations  from  this  eeinral  life  until  long  after,
when  it  had  been  renewed  to  more  than  its  primitive
power  by  the  coming  of  Christ  and  Christianity.

The  application  of  this  curse  to  Ham  was  early
made  by  commentator.-,  but  its  enormous  exten.-ion
to  the  whole  continent  of  Afiicii  belongs  to  quite
modem  times.  The  iirst,  though  having  so  little
i.i  the  letter  of  the  Scripture,  hud  some
ijoimd  in  the  unfavorable  contrast  that
Li'lecl,  or  caieles.-ness,  presents  to  the  pious
.-.-<  of  his  two  brethren  ;  and  this  may  give
in  \\.hv  lie  is.  personally,  neither  cursed  nor
It  derived  countenance,  also,  from  the  sub-
r.  :ckeii:ic.-s  of  the  great  llamitic  nations,
nit  aiitagoni-in  lietween  them  and
I-rarl  \\hieh  appears  throughout  the  Bible.  The
second  f'lTiiin'  ;-cen.s  ahno.-t  wi;olly  due  to  certain
hi.~:i. lie  phenomena  that  have  presented  themselves
sii  tlie  discovers"  of  America.  'What  has  i'avored
tlii-  tendency  has  not  been  alone,  or  mainly,  the  de-
fonce  of  slavery,  as  ,-ome  would  allege;  since  men
have  .-nppuried  it,  like  Dr.  Lange  and  others,  who
red  the  idea  of  human  bondage  in  all  its  forms.
It  has  been,  rather,  the  desire  to  give  a  worldly,
i  importance  to  the  Scriptural  predictions,
i  :  i  cially  tin;  eiuly  ones,  thus  magnifying  the  Scrip
ture-',  as  they  suppose,  and  furnishing  remarkable
evidences  of  the  truth  of  revelation.  Very  modern
change-  in  the  relative  position  of  continents  are
seixed  upon  for  this  purpose,  to  the  ignoring  or  ob-
.-curing  t'ne  true  dignity  of  the  Divine  "Word.  It  is
safe.-t  to  regard  prophecy  as  ever  being  in  the  direct
the  church,  and  to  judge  of  the  relative  im
portance  of  world-historical  changes  solely  by  this
-tand-ird.  Except  as  standing  in  visible  relation  to
the  cho-en  people,  the  chosen  church,  or  to  that
< .:-!r.i<>r<l'>n<iri/  divine  doing  in  the  world  which  is.
staled  revelation,  the  greate.-t  earthly  revolutions
have  no  more  super-earthly  value  than  have  to  us
the  di>sensions  of  African  chiefs,  or  the  wars  of  the
Hrp'.archy.  To  the  divine  eye,  or  to  the  mind  that
guided  the  Biblical  inspiration,  human  politics,
whether  of  monarchies  or  republics,  and  nil  human
political  changes,  in  them&elvts  considered,  or  out  of
this  vi-ible  relation,  must  be  very  insignificant  thing-*.
•Judged  by  such  a  rule,  Trojan  wars,  IVloponnesian
\y,us,  or  the  wars  of  Bonaparte,  fall  in  importance
below  the  wars  of  Canaan,  or  Hiram's  sending  cedar-
rafts  to  Joppa  to  aid  Solomon  in  the  construction  of
tin'  temple.

It  is  this  feeling  which  has  also  affected  the  in
terpretation  of  Noah's  blessing  of  Shem  and  Japheth,
Gen.  ix.  20,  U7,  especially  the  words  E'r  "^nxa  '£'3'*.
<•</'</  fir  .v/c'/'  tfirdl  in  the  tents  of  Shem.  It  is  some
what  remarkable  that  the  Jewish  authorities  should
have  givni  what  seems  the  more  spiritual,  and  even
evangelical,  interpretation  here,  whilst  so  many  Chris
tian  commentators  have  been  fond  of  what  may  be
called  the  political  or  secular  aspect  of  the  proph
ecy,  referring  it,  as  many  of  them  do,  to  the  mere
predominance  of  European  power  and  culture  among
the  Asiatic  nations  in  these  latter  days.  To  support
thi>  there  is  carelessly  assumed  an  ethnological  view
untenable  in  the  wide  extent  given  to  it.  Europe  is
Japheth,  Shem  Asia,  Ham  Africa.  At  all  events,  the


prophecy  is  supposed  to  set  forth  three  types,  em
bracing  all  mankind.  It,  is  thought  to  be  greatly  to
the  honor  of  Scripture  that  it  should  display  such  a
philosophy  of  history  bearing  upon  the  remote,  latter
ages,  as  though  this  were  a  greater  thing  than  that
fixed  spirituality  of  view  which  is  the  same  for  all
ages,  and  for  less  or  greater  territory  in  space.  It
is  easy  to  find  events  which  are  regarded  as  supposed
fulfilments.  The  English  in  India,  the  French  in
Tonquiu,  Opium  wars  in  China.  Russia  forcing  its
way  into  Central  Asia  ;  it  is  all  Japheth  dwelling  in
the  tents  of  Shem  ;  it  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Scrip
tures.  There  is  a  bad  moral  influence  in  this.  An
interest  in  the  prediction,  or  in  its  supposed  interpre
tation,  blinds  the  moral  sense  to  the  enormity  of
some  of  t'ne  acts  by  which  it  is  thought  to  be  veri
fied.  Much  of  it,  moreover,  is  false  ethnology.  The
British  subjugation  of  the  Hindoos,  instead  of  being
Japheth  dwelling  in  the  tents  of  Shem,  is  nothing
more  than  Japheth  dwelling  in  the  tents  of  Japheth.
This  political  mode  of  interpretation  has  affected
other  prophecies  of  the  Bible,  and  there  is  reason  to
believe  that  it  has  been  especially  blinding  in  the
study  of  the  Apocalypse.  It  proceeds,  often,  upon
the  idea  that  events  which  seem  very  large  to  us,
greatly  magnified  as  they  are  by  nearness  or  other
perspective  influences,  must  have  the  same  relative
rank  in  the  divine  estimation.  Now,  the  Scriptures
teach  us,  that  it  is  ofttimes  directly  the  reverse  ;  see
Luke  xvi.  15,  what  is  said  about,  "  things  highe.-t  in
the  sight  of  men,"  TO  tv  if^pdnrois  I'^ijAoV.  (Ircat
as  they  may  seem  io  us,  they  may  have  c"inpara-
tively  little  bearing  upon  that  which  is  the  special  ob
ject  of  tho  divine  care  in  human  history;  whilst  their
over-estimate  favors  the  false  idea,  that  tin1  church
is  for  the  world,  and  not  the  world  for  (he  church.
They  may  even  have  much  less  to  do,  than  is  gener
ally  imagined,  with  the  highest  secular  progress  of
mankind.  One  political  eruption  may  )>e  the  mere  fill
ing  up  of  a  vacuum  produced  by  another,  leaving
unaffected  the  general  hi.-torieal  evenness,  or  making
even  less  deflection  from  the'  general  course  of  things
than  other  events  of  seemingly  much  less  show  and
magnitude.

Now,  in  distinction  from  the  political,  there  is
what  m-.'v  be  called  the  spiritual  interpretation  of
this  very  ancient  prophecy,  as  given  by  some  of  the
bc.-t  Christian  commentators  (see  the  references  to
them  in  I'ot.r's  "S\nopsis,"  and  the  PJtilofagica
Sacra  of  GLASSIUS,  p.  19'.>8),  and  held,  with  few  ex
ceptions,  by  the  Jewish  authorities.  The  Targurn
of  Onkelos  interprets  the  Hebrew  by  making  3"!~!^r*
the  subject  of  V3  ••?'?>  and  renders  it  paraphrastically,
cr^i  tt:~'r~2  np::-;  n")^"},  His  Shekinah  shall
dwell  in  the  dwelling  of  Shem  (or  of  the  Name).
Maimonides,  Rashi,  and  Aben  Ezra,  all  follow  this,
though  they  also  allude  to  a  secondary  sense :  that
Japheth  should  learn  in  the  schools  of  Shem,  which
is  also  expressed  in  the  Targum  of  Jonathan.  This,
however,  is  founded  on  the  former  idea  of  the  divine
indwelling  light,  in  the  blessing  of  which  all  nations
are  ultimately  to  share.  So  the  Judaico-ArabUJ
translation  of  Arabs  Erpcnianns:  His  Light  shall
dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem ;  the  words  light  and
Shekinah  being  interposed  to  avoid  the  seeming
anthropomorphism.  The  rendering,  the  Shekinah,
is  suggested  to  them,  moreover,  by  the  etymological
connection  between  "C  (Shakan),  the  verb  here  for
dwelling,  and  Pipsia ,  the  Shekinah:  as  though  such


I


CHAP.   IX.    18-23.


341


language  as  we  have  Deut.  xii.  11,  cd  1'x'J  "i~
and  Ps.  Ixxxv.  10,  ":*°1N3  Ti=3  prb ,  came  di
rectly  from  this  passage.  Some  Christian  commen-
.ntors  carry  this  still  farther,  recognizing  the  same
etymology  in  the  Greek  f<richi>caa-e  (root,  s  K  N)  of
John  i.  14.  Surely  the  fact  has  been  so.  God  has
jpecially  dwelt  in  the  tents  of  Shorn  ;  "  He  hath  put
his  glory  there."  The  Shemite  family  alone  pre
served  the  pure  monotheism  as  against  the  Eastern
pantheism  and  the  Western  polytheism  lying  on  each
side  of  it.  Even  the  Arabians  and  the  Syrians  kept
the  holy  Name.  A  chosen  branch  had  the  Shekinah,
the  visible,  divine  presence,  the  temple,  the  promise,
and  the  type  of  the  Messiah.  There  is,  finally,  the
presence  and  dwelling  of  the  Messiah  with  the  spirit
ual  Israel  down  to  this  day.  The  interpretation,  too,
must  have  been  very  ancient,  antecedent  to  Targums
and  Talmuds,  as  it  seems  to  have  colored  every
where  the  poetry  and  language  of  the  Old  Testament.
Hence  that  frequent  imagery  of  God's  dwelling  with
his  psoplc,  or  the  converse  in  expression,  though
essentially  the  same  in  thought,  His  being  his  peo
ple's  "  dwelling-place  in  all  generations."  See  1  Kings
vi.  13;  viii.  29;  Exod.  xxv.  8;  Ps.  xc.  1  ;  Ezck.
xliii.  ',> ;  Zech.  viii.  8.  Such  was  Shcni's  blessing
here  literally  expressed,  though  clearly  implied  in
the  previous  verse:  "blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of
Shciu  (the  name),  which  was  the  highest  mode  of
saying,  blessed  be  Shcrn  himself,  the  people  whose
(jlod  is  Jehovah.  Ps.  xxxiii.  12;  cxliv.  15.

But  besides  its  Scriptural  and  evangelical  fitness,
this  interpretation  has  the  strongest  grammatical
reasons.  Two  verbs  in  Hebrew,  like  PS'  and  "p  w"1 .
joined  by  the  conjunction,  whether  taken  copulatively
or  disjunctively  (that  is,  whether  rendered  and  or
but),  must  have  the  same  grammatical  subject,  unless
a  new  one  clearly  intervenes,  or  the  context  necessa
rily  implies  it.  Neither  of  these  exceptions  exist
here,  and,  without  them,  it  is  irregular  to  make  the
object  of  the  lirst  verb  the  subject  of  the  second.
lie  (God)  will  enlarge  Japhcth,  but  he  will  dwell  in
the  tents  of  Shorn.  The  contrast  is  between  the  two
acts  of  Deity,  the  enlarging — the  indwelling — an
antithesis  that  seems  demanded  by  the  parallelism,
but  is  wholly  lost  in  the  other  version.  If  it  is  the
same  subject  (the  blesser),  then  there  are  two  ob
jects  ;  and  two  distinct  blessings  stand  in  striking
contrast.  It  is  outer  growth  and  inner  sacrcdness.
Two  states,  moreover,  and  two  dispositions  are  de
scribed  :  Japheth,  the  foreign  rover,  Shorn,  the  home
devotee,  abiding  mainly  in  the  old  father-land,  pre
serving  the

Sacra  Dei,  sanctosquc  patres.

Japheth  is  to  have  enlargement  of  territory,  and,
ultimately,  worldly  power;  Shem,  though  small,  is
to  have  the  special  divine  presence  and  indwelling.
He  is  the  divine  inheritance  (see  Deut.  xxxii.  9)
among  the  nations.

The  more  secular  interpretation  lias,  indeed,
some  strong  points  of  seeming  fulfilment,  which  may
affect  the  sense  and  the  imagination ;  but  for  the
reason,  as  well  as  for  faith,  how  much  greater  is  the
idea  of  such  divine  indwelling  than  that  of  any  out
ward  changes,  whether  of  power  or  culture,  in  the
relations  of  mankind !  Our  estimate  of  causes,  as
great  or  small,  even  in  their  earthly  aspect,  is  much
affected  by  an  after-knowledge  of  the  effects  with
whjch  they  are  seen  to  be  connected.  As  we  look
back  they  appear  greatly  magnified  through  the


medium  of  such  sequence.  It  is  like  the  mind  cor
recting  the  perspective  errors  of  the  sijrht  in  respect
to  size  and  distance.  What  Philosophy  of  History,
written  three  hundred  years  before  Christ,  even
though  it  had  been  more  acute  than  any  modern  pro
duction  of  the  kind,  could  have  given  the  true  place
of  the  Jewish  people  of  that  day,  or  would  even  have
taken  any  notice  of  them,  or  regarded  them  as  hav
ing  any  rank  among  the  potent  causalities  of  the
world  !  How  small,  how  secluded,  hoy  unrecognized
their  earthly  position  at  that  time  !  Nothing  short
of  prophetic  insight  could  discover  what  then  lay
concealed  from  all  the  learning  and  wisdom  of  the
age, — the  divine  Name  and  the  divine  presence,
unfigured  on  Egyptian  monuments,  unknown  in
Athenian  temples  (see  Acts  xvii.  23),  but  dwelling,
as  a  reserve  power,  in  the  sequestered  tents  of
Shcin.—  T.  L.]


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  See  the  preceding  Annotations.

2.  Noah  the  cnlarger  and  the  ennobler  of  human
culture.     The    dangers   of  progress  in   civilization.
Men  become  intoxicated  with  the  success  of  their
worldly  efforts — especially  in  the  beginning.     After
the  waters  of  the  flood  the  gift  of  wine.     Under  the
sacrament  of  the  rainbow,  Noah  as  husbandman  and
vineyard-keeper,  prepares  the  elements  of  the  New
Testament  sacrament,  bread  and  wine.

3.  The  vine  is  a  mild  reflex  of  the  tree  of  knowl
edge;  how  Noah's  sin  becomes  a  mitigated  figure  of
the  sin  of  Adam.

4.  Noah,  whom  all  the  waters  of  the  Hood  did  not
harm,  received  hurt  through    his   unguarded  indul
gence  iu  a  small  measure  of  wine.     The  history  of
Adam  teaches  us  the  sacrcdness  of  limitation,  the
history  of  Noah  teaches  us  a  holy  carefulness  in  re
spect  to  measure  or  degree.     Moderation  was  a  fun
damental  law  of  the  ancient  Chinese,  as  the  piety
that  preserved  Shem  and  Japheth.

5.  The  intimate  connection  between  intoxication
by  wine  and  sexual  unguardedness,  or  sensual  indul
gence  in  the  sins  of  voluptuousness  (see  the  history
of  Lot).

0.  The  three  sons  of  Noah.  The  simple  contrast:
Cain  and  Abel,  or  godless  culture  and  a  holy  cnltus,
develops  itself  in  a  more  manifold  contrast :  Shem
and  Japheth,  Shem  and  Ham,  Japhcth  and  Ham.
For  the  interpretation  of  these  contrasts,  see  just
above.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  many  Christians
even  now  recognize  only  the  contrast  of  Cain  and
Abel;  that  is,  they  do  not  recognize  that  the  lino  of
Japheth  had  likewise  its  blessing  from  God,  although
he  can  only  reach  the  blessing  of  Shem  after  great
wanderings.  In  the  heart  of  the  prophecy,  Japhcth
has  already  taken  up  his  abode  in  the  tents  of  Shem,
when,  on  the  contrary,  Shem  himself,  in  the  unbe
lieving  Jews,  has  been  given  up  to  a  long-lasting
alienation.

7.  Shem  and  Japheth  are  very  different,  but  are,
in  their  piety,  the  root  of  every  ideal  and  humane
tendency.     The  people  and  kingdom  of  China  are  a
striking  example  of  the  immense  power  that  lies  ii.
the  blessing  of  (filial)  piety;   but  at  the  same  time
a  proof  that  filial  piety,  without  being  grounded  in
something  deeper,  cannot  preserve  even  the  great
est  of  peoples  from  falling  into  decay,  like  an  old
house,  before  their  history  ends.

8.  The  blessing  of  Shorn,  or  the  faith  in  salvation,


.142


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


tlmll  avnil  for  the  good  of  Japlieth,  oven  as  the  bless
ing  of  Japhoth,  humanitarian  culture,  shall  in  the
end  avail  tor  Shorn.  These  two  blessings  are  recip
rocal,  and  it  is  one  of  the  deepest  signs  of  some  dis
ease  in  our  times,  that  these  two  are  in  so  many
ways  estranged  from  earh  other,  even  to  the  extent
of  open  hostility.  What  Co, I  has  joined  together,
let  not  man  put  asunder.

9.  It  is  a  fearful  abuse  of  God's  word,  when  men
refer  to  the  curse  of  Canaan  in  defence  of  American
slave-traffic,  and  slave-holding — as  is  done  in  the
southern  portions  of  the  I'nited  Slates.  For  in  the
first  place,  Canaan  is  not  the  same  as  Ham;  in  the
second  place,  the  conception  of  a  servant  in  the  days
of  Noah  is  not  that,  ot  a  slave  in  modern  times;  in
the  third  place,  Canaan's  servitude  is  the  service  of
Shem,  therefore,  of  the.  Prince  of  Sheni,  that  i<,  lie
becomes  tin'  servant  of  Christ,  and  in  Christ  is  fiee;
fourthly,  as  servant  of  Shem,  and  servant  of  Japheth,
he  become-:  a  domestic  partner  in  the  religion  of
Shem,  as  v,  oil  as  in  the  civili/ation  of  .Japheth.  On
the  other  side,  however,  it  is  a  misapprehension  of
the  curse  as  exhibited  in  history,  when  the  essential
equably  of  all  men  before  God  is  regarded  as  a  di-
reet  ab.-tract  equality  of  men  in  their  political  rela
tions.  This  comes  from  not  taking  rightly  into
account  the  divine  judgments  in  history,  and  the
:'.'  '"lalness  of  the  wot  Id's  redemption  (see  Rom.  x.
l-j.).  The  reader  is  referred  to  Mirnxi.'s  "History
of  the  Cuisi'd  Races  of  France  and  Spain"  (1'aris,
•^•17),  as  also  the  "History  of  the  Cursed  Villages"
illeh-SMTt.  Paris).  I.ut  such  histories  lio  not  weigh
merely  uu  Canaan,  or  even  generally  on  Ham.  They
are  always  economic,  that  is,  tempo: ary.  not  perpet
ual  d'.oms.  They  are  districts  in  which  human  eom-
n  ^iall  yet  appear  as  a  prophet  announcing  the
turning  away  of  the'  divine  wrath,  or  as  a  priest  in
terceding  against  it.

]»>.  The  sons  of  Noah  do  not  appear  to  clear  up
:ho  tacts  in  respect  to  the  race-formations.  It  is
quite  evident,  however,  that  Ham  (the  hot,  the  dark,
the  southern)  forms  a  special  race,  and  that  with  the
.•Ethiopian  type  the  Malayan  stands  in  close  relation.
On  this  side  there  I"  comes  evident  the  whole  power
of  tin;  life  from  nature,  as  the  spiritual  life  becomes
subservient  to  it.  Whilst,  therefore,  it  is  partly  an
imperfect  distinction  when  we  regard  the  Shemitie
and  the  Japhethic  race  (the  people  of  renown,  as
consisting  in  the  name  of  God,  the  5d£a  rov  dtov,  and
the  people  of  the  outward  and  hold  dispersion  over
the  earth)  as  having  become  blended  in  the  Cauca
sian,  it  is  also  in  part  a  proof  of  the  fact  that  com
munity  in  the  higher  spiritual  tendency  may  cause
very  great  con:r.ists  to  lose  themselves  in  almost  im
perceptible  distinctions.  It,  is,  however,  quite  con-
M«'!it  with  the  nature  of  the  "outspreading,"  that
Japheth,  that  whilst,  on  the  one  side,  he  may
become  one  with  Shem  in  the  Caucasian,  he  may,  on
the  other,  represent  the  Mongolian,  and  in  the  Ameri
can,  even  make  a  near  approach  to  the  race  of  Ham.
On  the  question  of  races,  see  LANGE'S  "Posit.  Dog
matic,"  ]>.  32-1.  On  the  theocratic  significance  of
Shem,  Ham,  .Japheth,  compare  DELITZSCH,  p.  282.

11.  The  fact  that  Noah  lived  three  hundred  and
fifty  years  after  the  flood,  is  a  proof  that  the  cosmical
change  which  was  brought  on  by  the  Hood  is  not  to
be  regarded  as  sudden  in  all  respects — not,  at  least,
in  its  relation  to  human  life.

12.  The  poetical  form  of  Noah's  blessing  shows
that  he  spake  in  a  highly  rapt  state  of  soul,  in  which
he  was  as  much  elevated  above  any  passionate,  in


human  wrath  against  Canaan,  as  above  any  weak
human  sympathy  for  him.  The  form  of  curse  and
blessing,  where  both  are  divinely  grounded,  indicate
a  prophetic  beholding  of  the  curse  and  blessing,
but  not  a  creating,  much  less  any  arbitrary  or  mag
ical  production  of  the  same.

13.  The  tenor  of  the  Noaehian  blessing  in  its
Messianic  significance,  cannot  be  mistaken.  It  cot:
nects  itself  with  the  name  Shem.  The  Protevangel
announced  a  future  salvation  in  the  seed  of  the
woman ;  the  language  here  connects  the  same  with
the  name  of  God  which  was  to  be  entrusted  to  Shem.
Shem  is  to  be  the  preserver  of  the  name  of  God,  of
Jehovah — the  preserver  of  his  religion,  of  his  revela
tion.  With  this  office  is  he,  as  the  thoughtful,  the
contemplative  one,  to  dwell  in  tents,  whilst,  in  some
way,  God  is  to  lie  glorified  in  him,  a  fact  which  Noah
can  only  express  in  the  form  of  a  doxology.  In  this
way  Shem  has  it  as  his  task  :  1.  to  rule  over  Canaan,
and  to  eduea'e  him  as  the  master  the  servant ;  '2.  to
receive  Japheth  as  a  paternal  guest  who  returns  after
a  long  wandering,  and  to  exchange  with  him  good
for  good — the  goods  of  cultns  and  the  goods  of
culture.

1-1.  The  number  of  Noah's  sons  is  three,  the  num
ber  of  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  will  get  the  victory  in
the  post-diluvian  humanity  that  has  been  baptized  in
the  flood.


IIOMILKTITAL   A>TI)   PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.  The  form  of  life
in  Noah:  1.  Wherein  similar  to  that  of  Adam?
•_'.  wherein  similar  to  that  of  Christ  ''.  f>.  whvre'n  it
possesses  something  peculiar,  that  lies  bet  ween  them
both.  Noah's  wine-culture — the  sign  of  a  new  step
in  progress  in  the  life  of  humanity. — The  vine  in  its
significance:  1.  In  its  perilous  import;  ii.  in  its
higher  significance.- — God  hath  provided  not  merely
for  our  necessity,  but  also  for  our  refreshment  and
festive  exhilaration.  The  more  refined  his  gifts,  so
much  the  more  ought  they  to  draw  us,  and  make  us
feel  the  obligation  of  a  more  refined  life.  Noah's
weakness  ;  its  connection  with  his  freedom,  his  strug
gle  and  inquiry.  The  watchfulness  and  discipline  of
the  Spirit  is  the  only  thing  that  can  protect  us  against
the  intoxication  of  the  sense. — How  one  sensual  ex
cess  is  connected  with  another. — How  the  sins  of  the
old  nave  for  their  consequence  the  sins  of  the  young.
Impiety  (irreverence,  want  of  a  pious  fear*,  a  root
of  every  evil,  especially  those  of  an  impure  tendency.
— Piety  a  root  of  everything  noble.  It  has  two
branches:  1.  devoutness  ;  2.  moral  cultivation.  The
harmony  of  Shem  and  Japheth.  0,  that  it  were  so  in
our  times.  How  they  should  mutually  feel  the  obli
gation  to  cover  their  father's  nak'edness  ;  that  is,  in
this  case,  the  harm  of  the  earlier  time  and  tradition.
What  glorious  effects  would  come  from  the  harmony
of  Christendom  and  civilization  ?  Shem,  Ham,  and
Japheth:  1.  All  three  distinct  characters  and  types;
2.  regarded  as  two  parts,  they  arc  two  sons  of  bless
ing,  one  child  of  the  curse ;  3.  as  one  group.  Ca
naan  the  servant  of  Shem  and  Japheth.  Japheth
the  guest  and  the  domestic  inmate  of  Shem. — The
blessing  of  Noah  :  1.  Its  most  universal  significance;
2.  its  Messianic  significance. — Noah's  joy,  sorrow,
and  consolation  after  the  flood :  1.  The  expanding
race;  2.  the  new  development  of  evil;  3.  the  pre-
pignal  of  the  patriarchal  faith.  •

STARKE  :    Inebriatus  ext,  non  quod  vitiosus  essct,


CHAP.    IX.    18-29.


ssd  quod  incxpertus  mensural  assumendcs,  Basil. —
Noah  ad  unius  horcc  clrictatem  nudavit  fcmoralia
sua,  qiae  per  nexcentos  annos  contexcrat.  Ilieron. —
Qucni  tanf(C  moles '  aquarum  non  vicerant,  a  modico
vino  victus  est.  EPIIRAEM  (Xatitlis  Alexander  i.  p.
228  :  Ebrietas  hccc  non  solum  innoxla  scd  ct  mystica
fail.  Hieronymus  interprets  the  planting  of  the
vine  of  the  planting  of  the  Church  ;  Noah  exposed,
he  interprets  of  Christ  on  the  cross  ;  Ham,  of  the
•lews,  and  so  on.  In  a  similar  manner  Augustine).
(As  ir,  happens  to  people  in  sleep,  when  they  become
warm;  they  uncover  themselves  unconsciously  to  get
air;  and  so  it  happened  to  Noah.)  -The  sin  of  ex
cess  cannot  be  excused  by  the  example  of  Noah.
This  transgression  did  not,  however,  cast  him  out  of
the  grace  of  God  ;  for  we  see  that  in  the  prophetic
spirit  he  announces  the  future  destiny  of  his  sons,
which  certainly  could  never  have  happened  if  the
Spirit  of  God  had  departed  from  him.  But  none  the
less  holds  true  in  this  respect  what  Luther  says,
namely,  that  they  who  go  too  far  in  excusing  the
patriarch  throw  away  the  consolation  which  the
Holy  Spirit  has  deemed  it  necessary  to  give  the
Church  in  the  fact  that  the  greatest  saints  do  some
times  stumble  and  fall  (Ps.  xxxiv.  9).— The  nobler
the  gift,  the  worse  the  abuse  (1  Cor.  ix.  7 ;  Sirach
xxxi.  M5  ;  I  Tim.  v.  1'.3). — Ham  :  Sic  in  sacro  Dei
asijlo  inter  tam  paucos  diabolus  unus  servatus  est.
Calvin. — HKDINGKR:  The  spreading  of  sin  is  just  as
much  an  evil  as  the  perpetration  of  sin. — LANGE  :  The
curse  went  not  forth  properly,  against  the  spiritual
in  men,  as  though  beforehand  they  had  been  declared
to  have  forfeited  eternal  life,  but  properly  against  the
corporeal  only.  So  it  was,  that  among  the  Canaau-
ites  there  were  some  who  were  actually  blest  (there
are  cited  as  examples  the  cases  of  Melchisedek  and
the  Gibeonites).  Even  at  this  day,  it  is  true  that
Japheth  dwells  in  the  tents  of  Shem,  since  the  prom
ised  land  has  come  into  the  hands  of  the  Turk  in
stead  of  the  Egyptian  sultan.  This  appears  also  in
a  more  spiritual  manner,  since  in  the  New  Testament
heathen  and  Jews  have  become  one  in  their  conver
sion  to  Christ.  (Noah's  long  life  after  the  flood  is
represented  as  designed  to  instruct  his  posterity  in
the  knowledge  of  God.)

GKULACH  :  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  father
of  Prometheus  in  the  Grecian  fable,  and  who  was  a
giant,  bears  the  name  of  Japetus. — BUXSEN:  Ver.  18
is  the  introduction  to  an  old  family  tradition  con
cerning  the  irreverence  and  dissoluteness  in  the  fam
ily  of  Hani,  with  special  reference  to  Canaan.

CALWER  HANDBUCII  :  Noah's  human  sin  regarded
as  excusable,  gives  occasion  to  Ham's  inexcusable
sin.  The  curse  comes  mainly  upon  Canaan,  since  it
was  just  in  his  race  that  the  most  shameless  and  un
natural  abominations  prevailed.  At  the  present  day
the  last  trace  of  this  people,  together  with  their
name,  has  disappeared  from  the  earth.  The  highest


distinction  is  that  which  God  hath  appointed  for
Shcm.  It  is  the  propagation  of  the  kingdom  of  God
by  means  of  his  descendants  (John  x.  1(1).  LUTHER:
And  so  there  was  a  real  scandal  in  the  case,  in  that
when  Ham  stumbled  upon  his  father's  drunkenness,
he  judged  him  wrongly,  and  even  took  satisfaction
in  his  sin.

SCHRODER:  VALER.  HERIIERGER:  Here  will  the
reviler  say,  this  is  the  text  for  me :  Noah  behaved
himself  in  a  sottish  and  unseemly  way,  and  there
fore  may  I  do  the  same.  Hold,  brother.  Noah's
example  serves  not  at  all  your  turn.  Only  once  in
his  life  had  Noah  overshot  the  mark ;  but  how  oft
hast  thou  already  done  as  much  ?  Noah  did  not  do
it  purposely  or  wittingly.  The  lesson  thou  art  to
learn  from  Noah  is  not  drunkenness,  but  to  guard
thyself  from  drunkenness,  that  thou  maycst  not,
through  his  example,  come  to  mischief,  and  cause  a
scandal.  Wouldst  thou  be  joyful,  so  let  it  joy  re
main.  Pleasant  drink,  and  wholesome  food  God
grudges  not  to  thee.  Drink  and  eat,  only  forget  not
God  and  thine  hour  of  death.  Neither  forget  the
death  of  Christ ;  on  this  account  it  was,  that  formerly
the  image  of  the  cross  was  made  in  the  bottom  of  the
tankard.  Let  a  man  come  to  the  table  as  to  an
altar,  says  Bcrnhard.  In  the  weakness  of  Noah  there
is  enkindled  the  wickedness  of  Ham.  "  Then  saw
Ham."  Love  covers  ;  he  (Ham),  instead  of  veiling
his  father's  nakedness,  only  the  more  openly  exposes
what  he  had  left  uncovered.  As  a  son  he  trans
gresses  against  his  father ;  so,  as  a  brother,  would
he  become  the  seducer  of  his  brother. — CALVIN  :  His
age  did  not  excuse  him.  He  was  no  merely  mis
chievous  boy,  who,  in  his  inconsiderate  sport  be
trayed  his  own  thoughtlessness,  for  he  had  already
gone  beyond  his  hundredth  year.  LUTHER  ;  Whilst,
in  other  cases,  the  servant  has  only  one  master,  Ca
naan  here  is  the  servant  of  two  lords,  therefore
doubly  a  servant.  (In  this  way,  indeed,  it  is,  that
by  Shem  he  is  drawn  to  piety,  whilst  by  Japheth  he
is  educated  to  a  human  civilization.) — The  sins  of
Ham,  as  the  deep  stain  of  the  Ilamitic  race  in  gen
eral.  Farther  on  the  writer  speaks  of  the  corruption
of  Canaan,  and  the  evil  reputation  of  the  Phoenicians
and  Carthaginians.

CALVIN  :  Shcm  holds  the  highest  grade  of  honor.
Therefore  it  is  that  Noah,  in  blessing  him,  expresses
himself  in  praise  of  God,  and  dwells  not  upon  the
person.  Whenever  the  declaration  relates  to  some
unusual  and  important  pre-emincncy,  the  Hebrews
thus  ever  ascend  to  the  praise  of  God  (Luke  i.  68). —
Japheth:  God  gives  enlargement  to  the  enlarged. —
LUTHER  :  Since  Abraham,  in  his  fiftieth  year,  had  so
good  and  excellent  a  teacher  in  Noah,  he  must  have
had  quite  a  growth  in  doctrine  and  religion. — HER-
BERGER  :  Fear  not  the  cross,  since  here  thou  hast
before  thee  one  who  bore  it  for  nine  hundred  and
fifty  years.


344  GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


THIRD     SECTION.

The  Etluioloyical  Table.

ClIAl'TER    X.     1-32.

1  NOW  these  are  the  generations  [sencalogies]  of  the  sons  of  Noah;   [they were]  Shem.
Ham,  and  Japheth;   and  unto  them  were  sons  born  after  the  ilood.

1.    The  Japhctliitcs  (vers.  2-5).

2  The  sons  of  Japhoth  ;  Gomel'  [the  Cimmerians,  in  the  Taurian  Chcrsonesus ;  Crimea],  and  Magog
["sv-.Cii .in-],  and  Maelai    [Medes],  and  Javan    [lonians],  and    Tuba!    [Tibcreni],  and    Meschech

?>    I  Jlo-chi],  and  Tiras  [Thracians],      And  tin:  sons  of  Gollier ';    AshkenaZ1   [Germans,  Asen],  and
•4    Iiiphath  [Celts,  Paphlagonians],  and  Togarmah  [Armenians].      And  the   sons  of  Javan'-';    Eli-
shalr   [  Klis,  .V../i;::i-],  and  Tarshish    [T.n-U-^-us;  Knobcl:  Etruscan*],  Kitlilll   [Cyprians,  Carians],  and
5    Dudanim    [Dardanians].       Bv  those  Were    the    isles    [dwellers  on  the  islands  and  the  coasts]    etf  the:
Gentiles  [the  heathen]  divided"  in  th^ir  lands;  every  one  after  his  tongue,  after  the-ir  fami
lies,  iu  their  nations.

2.    The   II;unites  (vers.  C-20).

G  And   the   sons  of   Ham:    dish    [.Ethiopians],   and   Mi/.raim  4    [Egyptians],   and   1'l.u!

7  |  T.yiii  i:  •;  I.  and  Canaan  [Canaanitcs,  Lowlandcrs].  And  the  sons  of  Cnsh  ;  Seba  [Mcroc],
and  Ilavilah  [  Ai>y.--sinians  |,  and  Sabtah  LEthiopians  in  Sabotha],  and  llaainali  [Eastern  Arabians],
and  Sahterha  [.Ethiopian  Caramanians]  :  and  the  sons  of  Raamah  ;  Sheba  and  Dedan

S    [ Sabrcan  and  Dadanic  Cushitcs,  on  the  Persian  Gulf].      And  Cush    begat    Nitnroel    [we  will  rebel]  :    ho

<j  began  to  be  a  migh:  v  one  in  the  earth.  He  was  [he  became]  a  mighty  hunter  be-fore  the
Lord0;  wherefore;  it  is  said.  Even  as  Nimrod  fishe]  the  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord.

10  And  the   beginning  <>f  his   kingdom  was   Babel  [Babylon,  see ch.  xi.  9],  and   Ereeh    [Orchoe],

11  and   Accad,  and  Calneh  [Kt-.-ii.hon],  in  the  land  of  Shinar  [nabylonia].      Out  of  that   land
went  ibrlh  Asshur "  [A.s.yrians],  and  builded  Nineveh  [city of Kinus],  and  the  city  llehoboth

12  [ritv  inariccts],  and  Calali   [Kelach  and  Chalach ;  completion],  And   Uesen   [bridle]  between   Nine-
}?,   veh  and  Calah  ;   the'  same  is  a  great  city.      And  Mi/.raim   begat,  Ludini  [Berbers?  Maurita-

nian  races],  and   Aliamini   [inbabitants  of  the  Delta],   and    Loliabiin   [Libyans  of  Egypt],   and    Napll-
14    tuhim  [middle  or  lower  Egyptians],    And  ratlirusim    [upper  Eprptians],  and  Caslnhim    [Cholcians

out  of  whom  came  Pllilistim  [emigrants,  new  comers],  and  Caphtonm  [ Cappadocians  ?  Cretans?
If)  And  Canaan  begat  Sielon  [Sidonians,  fishers]  his  iirstljorn,  and  Hetll  [llittites,  terror
\(>  And  the  Jebnsite  [jebus,  Jcrusalcrn,  threshing-floor],  and  the  Amonto  [inhabitants  of  the  hills

17  and  the  Girgasite   [clay,  or  marshy  soil],    And  the  Hivitc    [paganus?],  and  tlie  Arkito    [inhabit-

18  antsofArka,  at  the  foot  of  Lebanon],    and    the    Sillite    [hi  Sinna,  upon  Lebanon],    And    the    Arvadit.C
Arabians  on  the  island  Arados,  north  of  Tripolis],  and   the  Zemarite    [inhabitants  of  Sunyra,  on  the  western
foot  of  Lebanon],   and  the  Hamathite    [llamath,  on  the  northern  border  of  Palestine]  ;    anel   afterwards

19  were  the  families  of  the  Canaanites  spread  abroad.      And  the  border  of  the  Canaanites
was  from  Sidon  as  thou  comest  to  Gerar  [city  of  the  Philistines],  unto  Gaza  [city  of  Philistines,

etron-l.old]  ;    as  tllOll    gOCSt  UlltO  Sodom    [city  of  burning],   and    Gomorrah   [city  of  the  wood],  and
Adtnall    [in  the  territory  of  Sodom,  Adamah  ?],    and    Zeboirn  [city  of  gazelles  or  hyenas],    even    unto

20  Lasha    [onthecastof  the  Dead  Sea,  earth  cleft].      These  arc  the   sons  of  Ham,  after   their  fami
lies,  after  their  tongues,  in  their  countries,  and  in  their  nations.

;>.    The  Shemitcs  (vers.  21-31).

21  Unto  Shem  also,  the  father  of  all  the  children  of  Eber  [on  the  other  side],  the  brother

of  Japheth  the  elder    [Lange,  more  correctly,  translate?,  elder  brother  of  Japheth^,   even  to    him  were

22  children  born.     The  children  of  Shem  ;  Elam  [Eiymccans,  Persians],  and  Asshur  [Assyrians],


CHAP.   X.    1-32.


and    Arphaxad     [Arrapachltis,  in  Northern  Assyria,  fortress,  or  territory  of  the  Chaldccans],    and     Luc

23  [f,ydians  in  Asia  Minor],  and  Aram  [Aramaeans  in  Syria,  highlanders].      And  the  children  of  Aram  .
Uz    [Aisitcs?  native  country  of  Job],    and    Hill    [Celo-Syria],    and    Getlier    [Arabians],    and    Mash

24  [Meshes:,  Syrians].     And  Arphaxad  begat  Salah  [sent  forth];   and  Salah  begat  Klier  [fromtha

25  other  side,  emigrant,  pilgrim].     And  unto  Eber  were  born  two  sons  :  the  name  of  tlie  one  was
Peleg  [division]  ;    for  in  his  days  was  the  earth  divided  ;    and  his  brother's  name  wag

26  Joktan    [diminished  ;  by  the  Arabians  called  Kachtan,  ancestor  of  all  the  Arabian  tribes]  .       And    Joktan
begat  Almodad  [measured],  and  Sheleph  [Salapcnians,  old  Arabian  tribe  of  Yemen,  drawers  of  the  sword],
and  llazarmavclll  [lladramath,  in  S.  E,  Arabia,  court  of  death],    and  Jerah  [worshipper  of  the  moon,  on

27  the  Red  Sea],    and  Hadoram  [Atramites,  on  the  south  coast  of  Arabia],  and  Uzal  [San<c,  a  city  in  Yemen],

28  and    Diklall    [a  district  in  Arabia,  place  of  palm-trees],    And    Obal    [in  Arabia,  stripped  of  leaves],    and
Abimael    [in  Arabia,  father  of  Macl,  the  Hinrcans?],   and    Slieba    [Sabaans,  with  their  capital  city,  Saba],

29  And  Opliir  [in  Arabia,  probably  on  the  Persian  Gulf],  and  Havilah  [probably  Chaulan,  a  district  between
Sana?  and  Mecca,  or  the  Chaulotae,  on  the  border  of  stony  Arabia],   and  Jobab  :    all  these  were    SOUS    of

30  Joktan.       And   their  dwelling   was  from   Mesha   [according  to  Gesenius,  Meeene,  on  the  Persian
Gull],  as  tllOU   goest  unto    Sephar    [Himyaric  royal  city  -in  the  Indian  Sea,  Zhafar],  a  mount  of  the

31  east.     These  are  the  sons  of  Shorn,  after  their  families,  after  their  tongues,  in  their  lands,

32  after  their  nations.     These  are  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Noah,  after  their  generations
[genealogies],  in  their  nations:  and  by  these  were  the  nations  divided  in  the  earth  after
the  ilood.


['  Vcr.  3.---IE5,  Corner  (G  M  E).  These  radical  letters  are  found  extensively  combined  in  the  history  and  geography
of  Europe  ;  as  though  some  early,  roving  people  had  left  the  mark  of  their  name  from  the  I'ontus,  or  Black  Sea,  to  Ire
land  :  G  M  R.,  K  M  K.,  K  y  M  JI  c  II  1  1  (Ct/mmeriant),  by  metathesis,  K  R  M.,  C  11  i  M  e  a  ,  G  E,  M.,  Gi'rmani  C  y  M  R  I
Cymri,  Cimbn,  Cumbn,  Cumberland,  ffumberland,  Northumberland,  Cambria,  etc.  They  may  not  be  all  etymologicallv
connected,  but  there  is  every  probability  that  they  were  left  by  the  same  old  people,  ever  driven  on  Westward  by  suc
cessive  waves  of  migration.  T3?'i'X  ,  Ashkenaz,  by  metathesis  TD1T2N  ,  Akscnaz,  Axenas,  may  be  the  old  name  for  the
Black  Sea,  or  the  country  lying'upon  it.  The  Greeks  called  it  Zfevos,  for  which  they  accordingly  found  a  mcanin^  in
their  own  language—  Me  inhospitable—  afterwards  cuphemized  to  evfeii/os—  the  Euxine.—  T.  L.]

[»  Vcr.  4.—'^,Jwan,  Jai-an,  Iwan,  Ton.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  Greece.  Compare  Joel  iv.  G;  Ezek.
xsvii.  13  ;  Dan.  viii.  21.  It  is  the  name  or  patrial  epithet  of  Greece  in  the  cognate  languages,  as  given  to  it  in  historical

.  ">   !>       V  )     .    ^       )

Byriac,  J.^J2.j  ,  Chald.  i3Vi,  Arab.  ^jUjJ  ,  and  also  by  the  Greeks  themselves,  when  they  would  present
the  name  in  its  old,  Oriental  form;  as  in  the  Persae  of  yEschylus,  when  the  mother  of  Xerxes  is  made  to  call  them
louW,  and  their  land  yr,v  laovw  (line  175),  and  in  another  place,  563,  «td  6'  'ladywi/  x^'pas.  Sec  also,  HKEOD.,  i.  56,  58.
Iligi?*t,  'EAAas.  -*3"J~I,  in  some  Hebrew  copies  G'1}1!"!,  which  the  LXX  read,  and  rendered  Pdfiioi.—  T.  L.]

.—  SlTlS:  ,  were  parted.  Maimonidcs  says  this  term  was  applied  to  the  Japhethites  because  of  their  far
roving,  which  parted  them  from  each  other  in  separate  isles  and  coasts  ;  whereas  it  is  not  said  of  Ham's  descendants,
because  they  were  near  to  each  other,  forming  dense  and  contiguous  populations.—  T.  L.]

[4  Vcr.  G.—  c"i-  2TT3  .    This  dual  naipc  has  been  supposed  to  denote  the  political  division  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt.

It  would  seem  more  likely  to  have  a  geographical  significance  :  The  JVomws-the  two  narrows,  or  the  double  narroivs-

tho  straits.     A\  hat  con  d  be  more  descriptive  of  this  long  and  very  narrow  strip  of  territory,  lying  on  both  sides  of  the

££VK  X  fml  °S  m  10nftb'  !^<l  r,vc™Kin"  only  a  dozen  or  so  in  bread!  h.     It  is  strange'  that  RosenniUer  should

Kt  I  ™  n"    '         l,    iU  u;iccrtain  whether  it  is  Hebrew  or  Egyptian.     It  is  purely  Hebrew  and  no  other  proper  name

Zffiiia?*S^l£?£^*$S^mM',-  TA1S  aPP^"""*  of  extreme  narrowness,  with  mountains  or  deserts  on

of  1  am   «  1  ,  t   ?\,H  ?f  r      ',     ^at,t?1C  T-Vr*  dat0'  Thcroil3.  tuo  other  idea  must  have  had  a  later  origin.     The  son

flL]!;!m'tfll°  ^l^ttl  •    SF^^ib  hlS  ehlldrcn'  must  havo  bc«iat  once  struck  with  this  territorial  peculiarity,  so

™  ?nr  n;m,;nl>-tbl.n-  m,  the  Northern  or  Eastern  regions,  whence  he  came.     The  name  which  he  gave  to  it  afterwards

k  to  himas  ite  settler  and  proprietor.     There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  Mitzraim  was  not  his  oarli^t  name.    It

^ttlor     "a  tern  orial  designation,  afterwards  genealogically  and  historically  adopted.     The  original  name  of  this  first

may  have  been  Gu.pl,  Copt,  or  Cupht,  from  which  came  the  other  popular  designation,  Ai-yvTrr-os,  Eg.ypt.-T.  L.]

I*  Ver.  9.-"  JUiyhty  hunter  (whether  of  men  or  beasts)  Cllm  lj£b  before  the  Lord,"  to  express  his  notoriety  for
boldness  and  wickedness,  as  something  ever  before  the  divine  presence';  'so  bad,  that  God  could  not  take  his  eyes  from  it.
Compare  with  it  Gen.  vi.  10,  the  whole  earth  corrupt,  D^il'^X  ijsb  .—  T.  L.]

[6  Ver.  -!l.-ir;t:X  S^^  .  In  support  of  the  view  that  ^t;X  here  denotes  the  place  ivhithcr,  instead  of  being  the
«u5^c«  of  the  verb  SS^.Maimonides  refers  to  Numb,  xxxiv.  4,  5,  njbS?  "1  2  SI  1;iX  *\*r\:  NS^I  ,  "and  it  went  out
(to)  Hazar-addar,  and  passed  over  (to)  Azmonah  ;»  also  to  Numb.  xxi.  33,  >1S'V1ix  {lUSil  "^  ilj'  ^^11  ,  "  And  Og

'     (t!0)  ?'vrCi  ;  "i  JP  ncithori.of  wni*  cases  is  therea  prcpositionr.  'lie'''  refers  also'  to  Micah  v.  5,
land  of  A  imrod  "  arc  mentioned  together.—  T.  L.]


GENERAL    REMARKS    ON    THE    ETHNOLOGICAL
THE  NATION™    GEXEALOGICAL    1'EEE    OF

1.  TJic  Literature. — See  Matthew,  p.  19  ;  the
wesent  work,  p.  119;  KURTZ:  "History  of  the  Old
-estamcnt,"  p.  88  ;  KNOBEL,  p.  107 ;  KEIL,  p.  108 ;
;  full  and  well-arranged  survey  see  in  DELITZSCII,


p.  287 ;  also  the  notes  in  DEUTZSCIT,  p.  f>29.  See
also  the  articles,  Babel,  Babylon,  Nineveh,  and  Meso
potamia,  in  HEUZOG'S  Real-Encyclopedia.  LAYARD'S
account  of  "Excavations  at  Nineveh,"  together
with  the  "Description  of  a  Visit  to  the  Chaldsean
Christians  in  Kurdistan,  and  to  the  Jezidi  or  Wor
shippers  of  Satan."  German  of  Meissucr,  Leipsic,


346


GENESIS,  OR  TEE   FIRST   BOOK   OF.  MOSES.


1852.  Hero  belong  also  the  "  Ethnographical
Works,  or  the  National  Characteristics,"  etc :  Laza
rus  and  Steinthal.  "  Journal  of  Popular  Psycho
logy."  Berlin:  Dumler,  18.V.L  Berghaus,  Friedrich
von  Raumer,  Vorlander,  and  other.-*.

2.  The  basis  of  the  genealogical  table.  Accord
ing  tollavernik  and  Keil,  this  document  was  ground
ed  on  very  old  tradition,  aud  had  its  origin  in  the
time  of  Abraham.  According  to  Knobel,  the  knowl
edge  of  the  iu!':<>;is  that  is  represented  in  it,  had  its
origin,  in  great  p  irt,  in  the  connection  of  the  lie-
brews  with  the  Ph'enician  Canaanit.cs.  Pelit/sch
assigns  it-  composition  to  the  days  of  Joshua.  The
signs  of  a  i.i:li  an'.iquity  for  this  table  present  them
selves  unmi.-takahly  in  its  ground  features.  There
belong  lure:  I.  The  small  development  of  the  Ja-
phethan  line;  on  which  it  maybe  remarked,  that
they  were  the  people  with  whom  the  Phoenicians
maintained  the  most  special  intercourse  ;  2.  the  posi
tion  of  the  vKthio]  ians  at  the  head  of  the  Ilamites,
the  hi.-tui  ie.d  noiiees  of  Nimroil,  as  also  the  supposi
tion  that  Sodom  and  (iomorrah  were  then  existing;
:;.  the  di.M'.iminuance  of  the  Jeuish  line  with  Pi  leg,
as  well  as  the  accurate  familiarity  with  the  branch
ing  of  the  Arabian  Joktanites,  who  have  an  much
led  to  them  alone  as  to  a'l  the  Japhcth-
iies,  when  for  the  commercial  Pho  nicians  they  would
be  of  least  significance.  The  table  indicates  various
circles  of  tiadition — more  universal  and  inc. re  spe
cial.  The  .lapheihan  groups  appear  least  developed.
Besides  the  seven  suns,  the  grandchildren  of  Jupheth
are  given  only  in  the  descendants  of  (Joiner  and  Ja-
van,  in  the  people  of  ai;t(  rior  Asia,  and  in  the  inhab
itants  of  the  coasts  and  islands  of  the  Mediterranean
Sea.  Ma^oi:,  .Madai,  Thubal,  Meshech,  and  Tiras  arc
curried  no  farthi-r.  'I'he  table  certifies  a  very  copious
tradition  of  the  llamiles.  First,  there  are  mentioned
tin1  lour  ,-tms  of  Ham,  then  five  sons  of  his  firstborn,
dish,  then  the  two  sons  of  llaamah,  the  fourth  son  of
di.-h.  These  two  are,  therefore,  great-grandchildren
of  ilam.  Niuirod  is  next  presented  as  a  specially
prominent  sou  of  dish.  Then  follows  the  second  son
iri'Ilam,  Mi/.i aim,  with  six  sons.  The  sixth,  Caslu-
him,  is  again  prcsente  1  in  the  mention  of  the  Philis-
tim  and  Caphtorim,  who  are,  therefore,  also  great
grandchildren  of  Ham.  Phut,  the  fourth  son  of  Ham,
is  the  only  one  who  is  carried  no  farther.  The  fifth,
Canaan,  appears  with  eleven  sons  ;  namely,  Sidon,
the  ancestor  of  the  Phoenicians,  and  the  heads  of  the
other  ('anaanitish  tribes.  Shcm,  finally,  has  five
sons,  of  whom,  again,  Elam,  Asahur,  and  Lud,  arc
no  farther  developid.  The  line  of  his  son,  Aram,
appears  in  four  sons,  grandchildren  of  Shcm.  Of  the
sons  of  Shorn,  Arphaxad  is  treated  as  most  important.
The  line  goes  from  Shcm  through  Arphaxad  and  Sa-
lah,  even  to  the  great-grandchild,  Eber.  Ebcr  forms
the  most  important  point  of  connection  in  the  Shemi-
tic  line.  'With  his  son  Peleg  the  earth  is  divided  ;  that
is,  theiv  is  formed  the  strong  monotheistic,  Abra-
hamic  line,  in  contrast  with  the  line  of  his  brother
Joktan  and  the  Arabian  Joktanites.  Joktan  is  devel
oped  in  thirteen  sons,  great-grandchildren  of  Shcm.

From  this  survey  it  appears  :  1.  That  the  table
has  a  clear  and  full  view  of  the  three  ground-types
or  points  of  departure  of  the  Noachian  humanity —
Shcm,  Ham,  Japheth.  It  however,  inverts  the  order
of  the  names,  because  Shcm,  as  the  ancestor  of  the
people  of  the  promise,  is  the  peculiar  point  of  aim
in  the  representation.  Japheth,  however,  comes
first,  because,  since  the  history  of  Israel  stands  in
nearest  reciprocal  connection  with  that  of  the  Ilam


ites,  the  Japhcthitcs  in  this  respect  take  the  back
ground.  2.  The  table  has,  in  like  manner,  a  cleai
view  of  the  nearest  descendants  of  the  three  som
of  Noah,  of  the  seven  sons  of  Japheth,  of  the  foui
sons  of  Ham,  and  the  five  sons  of  Shen.  It  pre
sents  us,  therefore,  the  sixteen  ground-forms  of  com
mencing  national  formations.  3.  In  the  case  of  five
sons  of  Japheth,  one  son  of  Ilam,  anil  three  sons  of
Shem,  the  genealogy  is  not  carried  beyond  the  grand
children.  4.  In  respect  to  the  Japhethites,  it  does
not,  generally,  go  beyond  the  grandchildren  ;  among
the  Ilamites  it  passes  through  the  grandchild,
Raamah,  to  the  great-grandchildren  ;  so,  likewise,
through  the  grandchildren,  the  Casluhim  ;  among
the  Shemitcs,  through  Arphaxad,  it  proceeds  to  the
great-great-grandchildren,  and  these,  through  the
great-great-grandchild,  Joktan,  arc  carried  one  step
farther.  5.  The  table  occupies  itself  least  with  the
Japhethans ;  beyond  the  Mede.«,  the  people-  of  Mid
dle  Asia  and  the  eastern  nations  generally  come  no
farther  into  the  account.  It  appears,  however,  to
have  little  familiarity  with  the  PluiMiicians  proper,
since  it  only  makes  mention  of  Sidon,  whilst  it  ex
hibits  a  full  acquaintance  with  the  Egyptians,  with  the
inhabitants  of  Canaan,  and  with  the  Arabian  tribes.
In  this  peculiar  form  of  the  table  lies  the  nvirk  of  its
very  high  antiquity.  (5.  It  contains  three  fundamen
tal  geographical  outlines,  one  political,  and  besides
this,  an  important  theocratic-ethnographic  notice.
Geographical:  1.  The  mention  of  the  spreading  of
the  Javanites  (lonians)  over  the  ides  and  coasts  of
the  Mediterranean;  'J.  the  spreading  of  the  Canaan-
ites  in  Canaan  ;  "•.-  the  extension  of  the  Joktanites  in
Arabia.  r<i'i!/ritf :  The  fn>t  founding  of  cities  (or
states)  by  Nimrod.  Tlicix-rnt'ic  :  The  division  of  the
world  in  the  time  of  Peleg,  the  anec-tor  of  Abraham.
Kurt/  recommends  the  following  as  fundamental
positions  in  deciding  on  the  names  in  the  ethnologi
cal  table :  1.  The  names  denote,  for  the  mo-t  part,
groups  of  people,  whose  name  is  carried  back  to  the
ancestor;  the  race,  together  with  the  ancestor,  form
ing  one  united  conception.  2.  Moreover,  the  one
designation  for  a  land  and  its  inluibitants,  must  not
be  misapprehended  ;  for  example,  the  names  Ca
naan,  Aram,  etc.*  pass  over  from  the  land  to  the
people,  and  then  from  the  people  to  the  ancestor.
3.  In  general,  the  table  proceeds  from  the  status  in
quo  of  the  present,  solving  the  problem  of  national
origin  formally  in  the  way  of  evolution  (unity  for
multiplicity),  but  materially  in  the  way  of  reduction,
in  that  it  carries  back  to  unity  the  nations  that  lie
within  the  horizon  of  the  conceiving  beholder.  The
last  position,  however,  hardly  holds  of  the  sons  of
Noah  himself;  just  as  little  can  it  be  applied  to  the
genealogies  of  the  Shemitic  branching.  In  regard,
then,  to  the  sources  of  the  table,  Kurtz  also  remarks :
"together  with  Hengstenberg  and  Dclitxseh,  we  re
gard  the  sources  of  this  ethnological  table  to  have
been  the  patriarchal  traditions,  enriched  by  the
knowledge  of  the  nations  that  had  reached  the  Isra
elites  through  the  Egyptians.  Hengstenberg  had
already  begun  to  make  available,  in  proof  of  tins
origin,  the  knowledge  of  the  peoples  that  was  ex
pressed  on  the  Egyptian  monuments.  In  assigning
its  composition  (us  a  constituent  clement  of  Genesis)
to  about  the  year  1000  n.  c.,  Knobel  must  naturally
regard  the  ethnological  knowledge  of  the  Phoenicians
as  its  true  source."  On  the  significance  of  the  table,
the  same  writer  (Kurtz)  remarks:  "Now  that  the
sacred  history  is  about  to  leave  the  nations  to  go
their  own  way,  the  preservation  of  their  names


CHAP.   X.    1-32.


J47


indicates,  that  notwithstanding  this,  they  arc  not
wholly  lost  to  it,  and  that  they  are  not  forgotten  in
the  counsel  of  everlasting  love.  Its  interest  for
the  Old  Testament  history  consists  particularly  in
this,  that  it  presents  so  completely  the  genealogi
cal  position  which  Israel  holds  among  the  nations  of
the  earth.  It  is,  moreover,  like  the  primitive  history
everywhere,  in  direct  contrast  with  the  philosophemes
and  myths  of  the  heathen."  In  relation  to  the  idea,
that  henceforth  the  nations  are  to  be  suffered  to  go
their  own  way,  Keil  reminds  us  of  Acts  xiv.  16  ;  in
relation  to  the  prospect  of  their  restoration,  he  de
scribes  the  ethnological  table  as  a  preparation  for
the  promise  of  the  blessing  which  is  to  go  forth  from
the  promised  race  over  all  the  races  of  the  earth  (ch.
xii.  23).  For  the  historicalness  of  the  ethnological
table,  Keil  presents  the  following  arguments :  1.  That
there  is  no  trace  of  any  superiority  claimed  for  the
Shemites ;  "2.  no  trace  of  any  design  to  fill  up  any
historical  gaps  by  conjecture  or  poetic  invention.
This  is  seen  in  the  great  differences  in  the  narration
as  respects  the  individual  sons  of  JSToah  ;  in  one  case,
there  is  mention  made  only  to  the  second ;  then
again  to  the  third  and  fourth  member ;  of  many  the
ancestors  are  particularly  mentioned  ;  whilst  in  other
cases  the  national  distinctions  alone  are  specified;
so  that  in  respect  to  many  names  we  are  unable  to
decide  whether  it  is  the  people  or  the  ancestor  that
is  meant  to  be  denoted  ;  and  this  is  especially  so  be
cause,  by  reason  generally  of  the  scantiness  and  un
reliability  of  ancient  accounts  that  have  come  down
to  us  from  other  sources  concerning  the  origin  and
commencements  of  the  nations,  many  names  cannot
be  satisfactorily  determined  as  to  what  people  they
really  belong.

Against  the  certainty  of  this  ethnological  table,
there  have  been  made  to  bear  the  facts  of  linguistic
affinity.  The  Phoenicians  and  the  Canaanites  are  as
signed  to  Ham,  but  their  language  is  Shemitic.  Tuch
ascribes  this  position  of  the  people  aforesaid  among
the  Handles  to  the  Jewish  national  hatred,  and  would
regard  it  as  false.  But  on  the  contrary,  it  must  be
remembered  that  the  Jews,  notwithstanding  their
national  hatred,  never  denied  their  kinsmanship  with
the  Edo'nites  and  others.  Knobel  solves  the  philo
logical  problem  by  the  supposition  that  the  Canaan
ites  who  migrated  to  that  country  might  have  re
ceived  the  Shemitic  language  from  Shemites  who
jad  previously  settled  there.  Add  to  this  that  the
affinity  of  the  Phoenicians  and  Canaanites  with  the
Samitic  nations  of  the  south  seems  to  be  establish
ed  (KURTZ,  p.  90 ;  KAULEN,  p.  235).  As  to  what
concerns  the  Elamites  on  the  Persian  Gulf,  we  must
distinguish  them  from  the  eastern  Japhcthic  Per
sians.  Besides  these  philological  difficulties,  there
has  been  set  in  opposition  to  the  ethnological  table
the  hypothesis  of  autochthonic  human  races.  We
have  already  spoken  of  this.  And  again,  say  some,
how,  in  the  space  of  four  hundred  years,  from  Noah
till  the  Patriarchal  time,  could  such  a  formation  of
races  have  been  completed  ?  On  that  we  would  re
mark,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  American  and  Ma-
layon  rac.'S  have  only  been  known  since  the  time  of
modern  voyages  of  discovery.  The  Mongolian  race,
too,  does  not  come  into  the  account  in  the  patriarchal
age.  There  is,  therefore,  only  the  contrast  between
the  Caucasian  and  the  jEthiopic.  For  the  clearing
up  of  this  difficulty,  it  is  sufficient  to  note  :  1.  The
extraordinary  difference,  which,  in  the  history  of
Noah,  immediately  ensued  between  Shern  and  Ja-
pheth  on  the  one  side,  and  Ham  on  the  other ;  2.  the


progressive  specializing  of  the  Ilamitic  type  in  con
nection  with  the  Hamitic  spiritual  tendency  towards
its  passional  and  the  sensual ;  3.  the  change  that  took
place  in  the  Hamitic  type  in  its  original  yielding  con
fortuity  to  the  effect  of  a  southern  climate.  The
Ilamitic  type  had,  moreover,  its  universal  sphere  as
the  Jithiopic  race ;  this  constituted  its  developed
ground-form,  whilst  single  branches,  on  the  other
hand,  through  a  progress  of  ennobling,  might  make
an  approach  to  the  Caucasian  cultivation.*  That
Shem  and  Japheth,  however,  in  their  nobler  tenden
cy,  should  unite  in  one  Caucasian  form,  is  not  to  be
wondered  at.  The  great  difference  between  the
Shemitic  type  and  the  Japhethan,  as  existing  within
the  Caucasian,  is,  notwithstanding,  fully  acknowl
edged.  Since,  however,  the  Shemitic  type  in  its  no
bler  branches,  may  make  transitions  to  the  Cauca
sian  ;  so  also  may  separations  from  the  Japhethic
and  Shemitic  form,  perhaps,  the  Mongolian  and  the
American  races,  in  consequence  of  a  common  ten
dency  (see  KURTZ,  p.  80.  "  The  Direction  of  the
Noachidae.")

There  have  also  been  objected  to  the  table
chronological  difficulties  ;  in  so  far  as  it  forms  a  mid
dle  point  for  the  assumption  of  Jewish  and  Christian
chronology.  According  to  Bunscn,  the  time  before


*  [Caucasian  Cultivation.  Caucasus,  or  C:\ucnsia,  do-
notes,  geographically,  the  region  between  the  Black  and
Caspian  Seas.  Ethnologically,  no  term  is  more  indefinite.
If  we  take  it  of  the  territory  above  indicated,  it  may  be  truly
said,  that  its  inhabitants  were,  at  this  curly  time,  and  long
afterwards,  the  lowest  in  the  human  scale.  Where  it  was
not  a/3aTos  epij/j.Ca,fis  described  by  ylischylus,  it  was  occupied
by  tribes  proverbial  for  their  barbarism.  "  The  savage  Cau
casus  "  (diTa.vOpiaTro<;,  arepTrr;?)  becomes  a  name  for  all  that  was
most  rude  and  ferocious.  See  the  account  given  by  Herodo
tus  of  the  wretched  hordes  that  then  lived  the  lowest  no
madic  life  between  these  two  seas,  aw  vArjs  aypujs  &OVTO,
deriving  their  sustenance  from  the  wild  products  of  the  for
est,  painting  themselves  with  the  figures  of  animals,  nnd
living  like  them,  in  ways  so  gross,  that  llawiinson  and  others
omit  the  passage  in  their  translations, — ^ii-iv  re  TOVTOIV  TO>I>
avdpiamav  flvai  efj.<jjavfa  KO.Ta.Trep  rolai  irpotJuTOicri.  llEItOD.
i.  203.  To  say  that  the  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians,  or
the  Ilamitcs  in  general,  or  any  single  branches  of  them,
"  through  an  ennobling  (durch  Verctlduitg)  might  make  an
approach  to  the  Caucasian  culture,"  that  is,  be  raided  higher
in  the  scale  of  civilization,  would  be  very  much  like  ascrib
ing  a  similar  elevating  influence  to  the  i'inns  and  the  Lap
landers,  as  exercised  upon  the  French  and  English.  The
savage,  as  we  now  understand  the  term,  was  nut  the  primi
tive  condition  of  mankind  ;  but  the  earliest  appearance  of
it  as  a  degeneracy,  as  a  loss  of  the  humane-ness,  of  spiritual
superiority,  and  a  tendency  to  the  wilder  animal  state,  pre
sented  its'elf  in  this  very  region.  The  inhabitants  have
shown  the  same  ever  since.  No  part  of  the  earth,  geograph
ically  known,  has  had  less  of  a  history,  or  been  less  connect
ed  w'ith  history  (if  that  is  a  criterion  of  ethnological  rank)
than  this  boasted  Caucasia,  or  Circassia.  The  Kalmuc,  and
other  Tartar  tribes  that  even  now  roam  its  wilds,  though
perhaps  possessing  a  more  comely  personal  appearance,  like
the  wild  horses  of  the  same  region,  are  inferior  in  civiliza
tion,  and  in  some  kinds  of  literary  culture,  to  the  inhabitants
ofBornouand  other  kingdoms  of  Central  Africa,  in  which
the  old  Egyptian  and  Ethiopian  humane-ness  has  not  wholly
gone  out,  or  has  been  kept  alive  through  Arabian  influence.
The  sons  of  Japheth,  who  went  north,  were  the  earliest  of
the  human  race  to  become  wholly  savage,  and  the  longest
to  continue  such,  until  mrt,  at  a  much  later  day,  by  the
Southern  and  Mediterranean  streams  of  civilization  carry
ing  with  it  the  Christian  cullus.  Even  the  Javanites,  the
Greeks — not  the  earliest  Pelasgi,  merely,  but  the  later  Hel
lenes  and  Dorians — were,  for  a  long  time,  the  Barbarians,
as  compared  with  the  Egyptians  and  the  Phoenicians.  Seo
how  Homer  everywhere  speaks  of  these  older  and  more  civ
ilized  peoples,  as  compared  with  his  own  countrymen.  The
ancient  stream  of  light  has  since  turned  northward,  as  it
may  again  be  deflected  to  the  south ;  but  all  the  boasting
about  Caucasian  supremacy  is  in  the  face  of  history.  It  is  a
carrying  of  the  most  modern  ideas,  and  the  most  irrational
of  modern  prejudices,  into  our  estimate  of  the  ancient  world,
or  of  the  human  race,  during  much  the  greater  part  of  it4
existence.— T.  L.]


3-13


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


Christ  must  be  reckoned  at  20,000  years, — namely,
to  the  Hood,  10,000,  and  from  the  flood  to  Abraham,
7,000  (see,  on  the  contrary,  I>KI.ITZS<;H,  p.  '291).
Taking  these  20,000  years,  the  ante-Christian  human
ity  loses  itself  in  a  Thnhn  VnlmJiii  running  through
many  thousand  years  of  an  unhistorical,  beastly  ex
istence,  wherein  'the  human  spirit  fails  to  find  any
recognition  of  its  nobility.

Delitzsch,  in  his  admirable  section  on  the  ethno
logical  table,  remarks,  p.  28(5:  "The  line  of  the
promise  with  its  chosen  race,  must  be  distinguished
from  the  cmifusion  of  the  Gentiles;  such  is  the  aim
of  this  great  genealogical  chart,  and  in  accordance
with  wlnea  it  is  constructed.  It  is  a  fundamental
character!-'. ic  of  Israel,  that  it  is  to  embrace  all  na
tions  as  partakers  of  a  like  salvation  in  a  participa
tion  of  hope  and  love, — an  idea  unheard  of  in  all
antiquity  beside.*  The  whole  ancient  world  has
nothing  to  show  of  like  universality  with  this  table.
The  earth-describing  sections  of  the  F.pic  poems  of
the  Hiirl'ios,  and  some  of  the  I'uranas,  go  greatly
astrav,  even  in  respect  to  India,  whilst  the  nearest
lands  are  lost  in  the  wild  and  monstrous  account  that
is  triven  of  them.  Their  system  of  the  seven  world
islands  (ili-ijinx)  that  lay  around  the  Mcru,  seems  oc
cupied  with  the  worlds  of  gods  and  genii  rather  than
with  the  world  of  man.  (!,ASSKN,  in  the  "Journal  of
Oriental  Knowledge,"  i.  p.  341 ;  WILSON,  The  Vixhiut
J''triinfi).  Nowhere  is  there  to  be  found  so  unique
a  derivation  of  the  national  masses,  or  so  universal
a  survey  of  the  national  connections.  A  tinge  of
hopeful  green  winds  through  the  arid  desert  of  this
t'lhnologieal  register.  It  presents  in  perspective  the
prospect  that  those  far-sundered  ways  of  the  nations
shall,  at  the  last,  come  together  at  the  goal  which
Jehovah  has  marked.  Therefore  does  Baumgarten
complete  the  saying  of  Johannes  von  Miiller,  "that
history  has  its  beginning  in  this  ethnological  table,"
with  a  second  equally  true,  ''that  in  it  also,  as
its  cluing  limit,  shall  history  find  its  end."  We
may  undervalue  this  table,  if  we  overlook  the  fact
that,  in  its  actual  hi-torical  and  ethnological  ground-
features  it  presents,  symbolically,  a  universal  image
of  the  one  humanity  in  its  genealogical  divisions.
We  may  overvalue  it,  or  rather,  set  a  false  value
upon  it,  when  we  attempt  to  trace  back  to  it,  with
full  coiilidence,  all  the  known  nations  now  upon  the
earth.  Even  the  number  TO,  as  the  universal  sym
bol  of  national  existences,  can  only  be  deduced  from
it  by  an  artificial  method;  as,  for  example,  in  DK-
I.IT/SCII,  p.  28!).  It  is  only  in  the  symbolical  sense
that  the  catalogue  may  be  regarded  as  amounting  to
this  number.

Neither  can  we  derive  this  subdividing  the  na
tions  to  such  a  multiplicity  of  national  life,  from  the
confusion  of  languages  at  Babel.  The  natural  sub
division  of  the  people  has  something  of  an  ideal
aspect ;  the  increased  impulse  given  to  it  at  Babel
had  its  origin  in  sin.  We  regard  it,  therefore,  as  a


*  [The  most  secluded  people  in  ancient  times,  the  only
ic  possessing,  and  carrying;  with  them  in  tl    '
world-idea,  and  this  dating  from  the  vcrv  c;


one  possessing,  ami  carrying  with  thorn  in  their  history,  a
world-idea,  and  this  dating  from  the  very  earliest  period !
See  Gen.  xxviii.  14,  and  still  earlier,  Gen.  iii.  15  :  "  In  thec


and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed."
This  certainly  presents  the  Jewish  nation  in  a  most  remark
able  light,  demanding  the  attention  of  all  who  talk  about
the  philosophy  of  history,  and  especially  of  those  who  are
fond  of  describing  the  Old  Testament  as  presenting  an  out
ward,  narrsw,  ai.d  exclusive  economy.  How  universal  the
influence  of  Grecian  culture  and  Roman  conquest,  yet  nei
ther  of  them  had  what  may  be  called  a  world-idea,"  or  any
thing  like  the  Messianic  conception.— X.  L.]


strong  proof  of  the  canonical  intuition  that  this
ethnological  table  precedes  instead  of  following  tho
history  of  the  tower-building.  Kurtz  treats  the  his
tory  of  Babel  as  earlier  than  that  of  the  register ;  and
Keil,  too,  would  seem  inclined  to  identify  the  diversity
of  the  nations  with  the  confusion  of  tongues  (p.  107).
After  these  general  remarks,  we  will  confine  our
selves  to  the  most  necessary  particulars.


KXEGETICAL  AND  C1UTICAL.

1.  Vers.  2-fi. — The  Japlicthitcs. — Gomer. — The
Cimbri,  as  well  as  the  Cuniri/  or  Ci/inry  in  Wales,
and  in  Brctagne,  are  to  be  regarded  as  in  relation
with  the  Cimmerians.  They  represent  the  north
western  portion  of  the  Japhethan  territory. — Magog
appears  to  represent  the  whole  northeast,  as  the
Scythians,  in  the  most  general  way,  denote  the  cycle
of  the  northeastern  nations.  "The  Sarmatians,  for
the  most  part,  lie  to  the  west.  The  chief  people  in
the  army  of  (Jog,  E/ek.  xxxviii.  2,  !5 ;  xxxix.  1,  is
'JX1,  that  is  the  Rossi,  or  Russians."  Knobel.
— Madai;  the  Modes,  who  inhabit  the  south  and
Southwest. — Javan,  belonging  to  the  south,  the
Graco-Italian  family  of  nations. — Thubal  and  Me-
shech  as  well  as  Thogarma,  inhabiting  the  middle
tracts:  Iberians,  or  Georgians,  Armenians,  Pontus,
the  districts  of  Asia  Minor  generally. — Gomer's
Sons:  Ashkenaz  is  referred  to  the  Germans,  by
others  to  Asia  Minor,  the  Asiones.  Aslikcnaz  is  ex
plained  by  Knobel  as  denoting  the  nice  of  Asen.
The  oldest  son  of  the  Germanic  Mannus  was  called
Iskus,  equivalent  to  Ask,  Aseanios. — Riphat  is  re
ferred  by  Knobel  to  the  Celts,  by  Josephus  to  the
Paphlagonians ;  in  which  there  is  no  contradiction,
since  the  Celts  also  (the  Gauls)  had  a  home  in  A<ia
(Galatia). — Thogarma. — The  Armenians  to  this  day
call  themselves  the  House  of  Thorgom  or  Tborko-
matsi. — Sons  of  Javan  :  Elisa  is  referred  to  Elis
and  to  the  civilians,  Tarshish  to  Tartessus,  and  also
to  the  Etruscans,  whom,  nevertheless,  Delitxsch  holds
to  have  been  Shemites  ;  Kittim  is  referred  to  the
Cyprians  and  the  Carians ;  Dodanim.  to  the  Darda-
nians.

o.  Vers.  0-20.— The  ITaunitex.  The  three  first
SIITK  of  Ham  settled  in  Northern  Africa.  ].  The
^Ethiopians  of  the  upper  Nile;  2.  the  Egyptians  of
the  lower  Nile;  3.  the  Libyans,  west  of  the  Egyp
tians,  in  the  cast  of  Northern  Africa.  The  Cushites
appear  to  have  removed  from  the  high  northeast
(Cossae),  passing  over  India,  Babylonia,  and  Arabia,
in  their  course  towards  the  south  ;  for  "  in  these
lands  the  ancients  recognized  a  dark-colored  people,
who  were  designated  by  them  as  ./Ethiopians,  and
who  have  since,  in  part,  perished,  whilst  a  few  have
kept  their  place  to  this  day."  Knobcl. — Mizraim.
— The  name  denotes  narrowing,  enclosing  ;  its  dual
form  denotes  the  double  Egypt  (upper  and  lower
Egypt) ;  Al-yviTTos  is  probably  from  Kah-ptah,  land
ofPtah.  The  old  Egyptian  name  is  Komi,  Chemi,
(with  reference  to  Ham). — Canaan. — Between  the
Mediterranean  Sea  and  the  western  shore  of  Jordan.
— The  name  Poeni  (Puni),  allied  to  (povos,  blood,  and
$otv6s,  blood-red,  denotes  the  Phoeniciiins  in  their
original  Hamitic  color. — Sons  of  Cush.  Seba. —
MeroiJ,  which,  at  one  time,  according  to  Josephus,
was  called  Seba. — Chavila. — In  the  Septuagint,
EvlAa.  The  Macrobians  (or  long  living),  ./Ethiopians
of  the  modern  Abyssinia. — Sabta. — Sabbata,  a  capi
tal  city  in  Southern  Arabia.  "  To  this  day  there  is


CHAP.    X.    1-32.


349


in  Yemen  and  Hadramaut  a  dark  race  of  men  wh
are  distinct  from  the  light-colored  Arabians.  So  i
is  also  in  Oman  on  the  Persian  Gulf."  Knobel
— Raamah. — Septuagint :  'Peyua,  in  Southeastern
Arabia — Oman.  There,  too,  there  are  obscure  indi
cations  of  Raamah's  sons  Shcba  and  Dcdan. — Sab
techa. — Dark-colored  men  on  the  east  side  of  th
Persian  Gulf,  in  Garamania. — Aside  from  these
Nimrod  is  also  made  prominent  as  a  son  of  Gush
vers.  $-12.  Knobel  regards  this  section  as  a  Jeho
vistic  interpolation,  and  so  does  Delitzsch.  The
name  Jehovah,  however,  as  occurring  here,  is  no
proof  of  such  a  fact ;  it  comes  naturally  out  of  the
accompanying  thoughts.  The  only  thing  remarka
ble  is,  that  Ximrod  is  not  named  in  immediate  con
nection  with  the  other  sons  of  Gush,  but  that  the  two
sons  o!'  Raamah  go  before  him.  It  is,  however,  easy
enough  to  be  understood,  that  the  narrator  wished
first  to  dispose  of  this  lesser  reference.*  Interrup
tions  similar  to  it  are  of  repeated  occurrence  in  the
table,  as  is  the  case  also  in  other  genealogies  (1  Chr.
ii.  1 ;  xxiii.  4,  22). — He  was  a  mighty  hunter. —
"  The  author  presents  Ximrod  as  the  son  of  Gush,
putting  him  far  back  before  the  time  of  Abraham,
and  assigns  him  to  the  /Ethiopian  race.  In  fact,  the
classical  writers  recognize  ^Ethiopians  in  Babylonia
iiHhe  earliest  times.  They  speak,  especially,  "of  an
^Ethiopian  king,  Gepheus,  who  belongs  to  the  mythi
cal  time,  and  there  is  mention  of  a  trace  of  the  Cephc-
nians  as  existing  to  the  north  of  Babylon."  Knobel.
In  the  expression,  "he  began  to  be  a  hero,  or  a
mighty  one  upon  the  earth,"  there  is  no  occasion  for
calling  him  a  "postdiluvian  Lamech"  (Delitzsch).
He  began  the  unfolding  of  an  extraordinary  power
of  will  and  deed,  in  the  fact  mentioned,  that  he  be
came  a  mighty  hunter  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah.
The  hunting  of  ravenous  beasts  was  in  the  early

-  time  a  beneficent  act  for  the  human  race.     Powerful
:   huntsmen  appear  as  the  pioneers  of  civilization ;  a

.      fact  which  clearly  proclaims  itself  in  the  myth  of

•  Hercules.     And  so  the  expression,  "  Ximrod  was  a
mighty  hunter  before  Jehovah,"  may  mean,  that  he
was  one  who  broke  the  way  for  the  future  institu-

:  tions  of  worship  and  culture  which  Jehovah  intend
ed  in  the  midst  of  a  wild  and  uncultivated  nature.
'  There  is  another  interpretation :  he  was  so  mighty  a
(  aunter,  that_even  by  Jehovah,  to  whom,  in  other  re-
!  spects,  nothing  is  distinguished,  he  was  recognized  as
•  such  (Knobel ;    Delitzsch) ;  but  this  seems  to  us  to
.  lave  little  or  no  meaning.     Keil  holds  fast  to  the
:     .raditional  interpretation  :    in  defiance  of  Jehovah,
md,  at  the  same  time,   takes  the  literal  sense  of
i  mimal-hunting  in  connection  with  the  tropical  sense
>f  hunting  men,  so  that  he  explains  it,  with  Herder,
:.      s  meaning  an  cnsnarer  of  men  by  fraud  and  force.'
Neither  the  expression  itself,  nor  the  proverb :  "like
;t     fimrod,  a  mighty,  hunter  before  the  Lord,"  justifies
I  tiis  view.    By  such  a  proverb,  there  may  be  denoted
praiseworthy,  Herculean  pioneer  of  culture,  as  well
3  a  blameworthy  and  violent  despot.     In  truth,  the
base  of  the  animals  was,  for  Ximrod,  a  preparatory
xercise  for  the  subjugation  of  men.     "  For  him  and

•:?  [*  Maimonidcs  seems  to  give  a  better  explanation  of  this
esays :  "  rhc.se,  Helta  and  Havilah,  were  heads  of  peoples'
a  the  sons  oi  Kaamah  became  two  peoples  :  but  Nimrod
a  not  become  a  people  (genealogically),  wherefore  the
ripture  saith  .imply,  and  'Cush  begat  JN'imrod,'  and  not,
e  sons- of  Cush  were  jSimrod,  and  Seba,  and  Havilah.' "
lat  is,  Aim  rod  does  not  come  in  the  ethnoloMc'il  re"is'ter
peoples,  though  lie  is  mentioned  aftcrwaixkas  a  histori-
srson.  He  applies  the  same  principle  of  interpretation
other  similar  cases.  — T.  L.J


his  companions,  the  chase  was  a  training  for  war,  as
we  are  told  by  XENOPHON  (Kunegcte,  C.  i.),  the  olii
heroes  were  pupils  of  Ghiron,  and  so,  u.a^ra.1  KWI)-
•yeenW,  disciples  of  the  chase."  Delitzsch. — And

the   beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  Babel

KNOBEL  :  "  His  first  kingdom  in  contrast  with  his
second."     This,  however,  is  not  necessarily  involved
in    the   expression,    "  the   beginning."      It  denotes
rather  the  basis.     In  thus  playing  the  hero,  Ximred
established,  in  the  first  place,  a  kingdom  that  em
braced  Babel,  that  is,  Babylon,  Erech,  or  Orech,  in
the  southwest  of  Babylonia,  Akkad  (in  respect  to
situation  'AKKTJT??),  in  a  northern  direction,  and  in
the  Northeast,  Galnch,  in  respect  to  territory  corre
sponding  to  Ghalonitis,   or  Ktisiphon,  on  the  east
shore  of  the  Tigris.     This  establishment  of  an  em
pire  transforming  the  patriarchal  clan-governments
into  one_  monarchy  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  hap
pening  without  force.     The  hunter  becomes  a  subju
gator  of  men,  in  other  words,  a  conqueror. — Out  of
that  land  went  forth  Asshur.    [Lange  translates :
Out  of  that  land  went  he  forth  towards  Asshar.j
— The  Septuagint,  Vulgate,  and  many  interpreters
(Luther,  Calvin)  regard  Asshur  as  the  grammatical
subject,  and  give  it  the  sense :  Asshur  went  forth
from  Shinar.    On  the  contrary,  the  Targnm  of  Onke-
los,  Targum  of  Jonathan,  and  many  other  authorities,
(Baumgarten,  Delitzsch,  Knobel)  have  rightly  recog
nized  Ximrod  as  the  subject.    Still,  it  does  not  seem
clear,  when  Knobel  supposes  that  Ximrod  had  left
his  first  kingdom  for  the  sake  of  founding  a  sec
ond.     Moreover,  it  is    not  to  be  supposed   that  he
barely  extended  his  rule  over  an  uninhabited  terri
tory  for  the  purpose  of  colonizing  it.     It  was  rather
characteristic  of  Ximrod,  that  he  should  seek  still
more  strongly  to  appropriate  to  himself  the  occupied
district  of  Assyria  by   the  establishment  of  cities.
The  first  city  was  Xineveh  (at  this    day   the  ruin-
district  called  Ximrud),  above  the  place  where  the
Lycus  flows  into  the  Tigris ;  the  second  was  Reho-
both,   probably  east  of  Xineveh  ;    the  third  Galah,
northward   in   the   district   of  Kalachan,  in  which
;here  is  found  the  place  of  ruins  called  Khorsabad ;
the  fourth  was  Resen,  between  Xineveh  and  Galah.
— The  same  is  a  great  city. — The  first  suggested
sense  would  seem  to  denote  Resen  as  the  great  city,
or  as  the  greater  city  in  relation  to  tho  otheis  named
vith  it.     On  the  contrary,  remarks  Knobel:  Resen
s  nowhere  else  mentioned  as  known  to  antiquity,
xnd  could  not  possibly  have  been  so  distinguished,
as  to  be  called  in  this  short  way  the  c/rea>  city.    Rath-
3r  does  the  expression  denote  the  four  cities  taken
ogether,  as  making  Xineveh  in  the  wider  sense,  and
vhich,  both  by  Hebrews  and  Assyrians,  was  thus
Briefly  called  the  great  city."    According  to  Ktesias,
t  had  a  circumference  of  four  hundred  and  eighty
tadia  (twenty-four  leagues),  with  which  there  well
grecs  the  three  days'  journey  of  Jonah  iii.  3  ;  it  em-
Taced  the  quarter  founded  by  X'imrod,  out  of  which
t  grew  in  the  times  that  followed  Ximrod,  wru-n  the
Assyrian  kings  gradually  combined  the  four  places
nto  one  whole;  thus  the  whole  city  was  named  Xin-
veh    after  its  most    southern  part.      The  ancient
ssertions  respecting  the  circuit  of  the  city  are  con-
rmed  by  the  excavations.     "These  four  cities  cor-
cspond,  probably,  to  the  extensive  ruins  on  the  east
f  the  Tigris,  that  have  lately  been  made  known  by
jayard  and  Botta,  namely,  Xebi-Junus  and  Kujund-
chik,  opposite  Mosul,  Khorsabad,  five  leagues  north,
nd  Ximrud,  eight  leagues  north  of  Mosul."    Keil.
ee  also  the  note  (p.  112)  on  the  agreement  of  Raw-


350


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


linson,  Grotc,  Niebuhr,  and  other?,  as  opposed  by
the  conjectures  of  Ilitzig  and  Bunscn. — The  sons
of  Mizraim:  1.  Ludim.  As  distinguished  from
the  Shemitic  Ludim,  ver.  '2'2  ;  trovers  regards  it  as
the  old  Berber  race  of  Levatah  that  settled  by  the
Svrtis, — so  called  after  the  manner  of  other  collect
ive  names  of  the  Mauritania!!  races.  According  to
Knobel  it  was  the  Shemitie  Ludim,  who,  after  the
Egyptian  invasion,  were  called  Ilyksos.  This  is  in
the  face  of  the  text.  2.  Anamim.  This  is  referred
by  Knobel  to  the  Egyptian  Delta.  '•'>.  Lehabim.
/Egyptian  Libyans,  not  to  be  confounded  with  IC^.S.
the  Libyans  proper.  -1.  Naphtuhim.  According
to  Knobel,  the  people  of  Phthah,  the  god  of  Mem-
j)his,  in  Miduk  Egypt;  according  to  Bochart,  it

with  Ntt/^L'i,  that  connects  with  the  northern
coast  h  .'•'•;' Egypt.  5.  Pathrusim.  Inhabitants  of
Pathros,  Meridian  land,  equivalent  to  Upper  Egypt,
or  Tliciiais.  (I.  Casluhim.  The  Colchians,  "  who,
according  to  HEUOD.,  ii.  c.  105,  had  their  descent
iioni  the  Egyptians."'  This  may  probably  be  held
of  one  branch  of  Mi/raim;  whereas  the  origin  of  the
Cushites  tlh'jnsclves  would  seem  to  point  back  to

i  sec  (Jen.  ii.). — Out  of  whom  came  Fhilis-
tim.— The  name  is  explained  as  meaning  emigrants,
from  the  .Ethiopian  word  fnFI<tx«.  According  to
.\inn-,  ix.  7  ;  Jcr.  xlvii.  -1,  the  Philistines  went  forth
from  Cujihior.  We  may  reconcile  both  these  decla
rations,  I  >v  supposing  that  the  beginning  of  the  set-
ih  inr;;t  of  the  Phili.-tincs  on  the  coast-line  of  Canaan,
l:.ul  ln.cn  a  Ca>luliian  colony,  Init  that  this  was  after
wards  strengthened  by  an  immigration  from  Caphtor,
and  then  their  territory  enlarged  by  the  dispossession
of  the  A  vim,  Deut.  ii.  23. — And  Caphtorim. — By
old  Jewish  interp:  •  are  described  as  Cap-

padoeians;  they  are  regarded  by  Ewald  as  Cretans,
lloth  suppo.-itions  may  agree  in  denoting  the  course
of  migration  taken  by  the  Caphtorim. — The  sons
of  Canaan: — "Notwithstanding  the  Shemitie  lan
guage,  the  I'luenician  Canaanites  are  here  reckoned
among  tin-  Hamitic  nations,  and  must,  therefore,
have  had  their  origin  from  the  South.  In  fact,  an
cient  wiiters  afliini  that  they  came  from  the  Ery-
thnean  Sea,  that  is,  from  the  Persian  Gulf,  to  the
Mediterranean.  And  with  this  agrees  the  mythology
which  makes  the  Phoenician  ancestors,  Agenor  and
Plnenix,  akin,  partly  to  Belus  in  Babylonia,  and
partlvwith  Egyptus  (Danaus  the  ^Ethiopian)."  Kno-
bel.  1.  Zidcn.  Although  originally  the  name  of  a
person,  this  does  not  exclude  its  relation  to  the  fa
mous  city  so  called,  *J"2£,  primarily,  to  lay  nets;  it
appears,  however,  to  denote  fishing  as  well  as  hunt
ing  proper.  Sidon  was  the  oldest  city  of  the  Phoeni
cians.  '2.  Heth.  This  also  stands  as  the  name  of  a
person,  whereas  the  designations  of  the  Canaanites
thai  follow  have  the  form  of  national  appellations.
In  this  position  of  Ilcth,  together  with  Sidon  the
first-born,  they  would  appear  to  be  denoted  as  the
peculiar  point  of  departure  of  the  Canaanitish  life.
The  Hittites  (Hcthites)  on  the  hill-land  of  Judah,
and  especially  in  the  neighborhood  of  Hebron,  were
only  a  branch  of  the  great  original  Hittite  family
(1  Kings  x.  29;  2  Kings  vii.  6).  The  Kittim  also,
and  the  Tyrians,  arc,  according  to  Knobel,  compre
hended  in  this  name.  3.  The  Jebusites.  Distin
guished  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  old  Jebus,  Jerusa
lem.  4.  The  Amorites.  On  the  hill-land  of  Judah,
and  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  the  mightiest  family
of  the  Canaanites ;  therefore  may  their  name  em
brace  all  Canaanites  (chs.  xv.  1G  ;  xlviii.  22.)  5.  The


Girgasites.  (ch.  xv.  21 ;  Deut.  vii.  1 ;  Josh.  xxiv.
11) ;  their  relation  to  the  Gergesenes  (Matt.  viii.  26}
is  very  uncertain.  0.  Hivites  (or  Hevites)  in
Sichem  (ch.  xxxiv.  2),  at  Gibeon  (Josh.  ix.  7),  and
at  the  foot  of  Ilcnnon  (Josh.  xi.  3)!  "The  five  last
sons  of  Canaan  dwelt  northward  in  Phoenicia."  Kno
bel.  The  Arkites.  Denoted  from  the  city  Arka,
north  of  Sidon.  The  Sinites,  named  from  the  city
Sina,  mentioned  by  Ilieronymus,  still  farther  north.
More  northern  still  the  Zemarites,  named  from  the
city  Simyra  (Sumrah,  by  the  moderns).  Farthest
north  the  Arvadites  (also  on  the  island  Avadus) ;
on  the  northeast,  the  Hamathites,  name  from  the
city  Hamath,  still  existing. — And  afterwards  were
spread  abroad. — This  spreading  extends  from  the
Phoenician  district  along  the  coast.  The  Kenites,
mentioned  ch.  xv.  19-21,  the  Kenexites,  and  the
Kadmonites,  are  regarded  by  Delitzsch  as  people  of
Hamitic  descent.  So  also  the  Rephaim,  besides
whom  there  are  s'ill  farther  named  the  Perc/ites.
The  same  thing  may  probably  be  said  of  the  Geshu-
rim,  mentioned  1  Sam.  xxvii.  8.  The  Susim  and
Emim,  ch.  xiv.,  he  (Delit/sch)  holds  to  be  not  Ca
naanites,  but  a  people  of  a  later  introduction  (p.  300).
An  immigration  of  Shemites  must,  in  truth,  have
precedeil  that  of  the  llamites  into  Canaan. — The
sons  of  Shem  (vers.  21-31).  The  father  (ances
tor)  of  all  the  children  of  Eber. — This  declara
tion  calls  attention  beforehand  to  the  i'act,  that  in
the  sons  of  Eber  the  Shemitie  line  of  the  descend
ants  of  Abraham  separates  again  in  Peleg,  namely,
from  Joktan  or  his  Arabian  descendants.  1.  Elam.
Elamites,  the  most  easterly  Shemites  who  dwelt  from
the  Persian  Gulf  to  the  Caspian  Sea;  at  a  later  day
thev  are  lost,  together  with  their  language,  in  the
Persians.  2.  Asshur.  Assyrians  to  the  east  of  the
Tigris,  from  thence  extending  towards  Syria  and  Asia
Minor.  Their  mother-country  was  a  plain;  hence
the  name  (from  "t'X).  Their  Shemitie  language  also
underwent  a  change,  and  became  foreign  to  the  He
brew.  3.  Arphaxad.  Their  dwelling-place  was  in
Arrapachitis,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Tigris,  from
which  they  spread  out ;  by  Ewald  and  Knobel  it  is
interpreted  as  referring  to  the  Chalda?ans,  which
Kcil,  however,  regards  as  uncertain.  -I.  Lud.  The
Lydians  of  Asia  Minor,  related  to  the  Assyrians  (see
KEIL,  p.  11-1;  by  KNOBEL  they  are  referred  to  the
Canaanite  and  Arabian  races).  5.  Aram.  Aramae
ans,  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia. — The  sons  of
Aram  :  Uz  and  Gether,  probably  Arabians ;  Hul
and  Mash,  probably  Syrians.— The  sons  of  Ar
phaxad: — The  names  Salah  and  Eber  (sending
forth  and  passing  over)  denote  the  already  com
mencing  emigration  of  the  Abrahamic  race.  The
two  sons  of  Eber  are  called  Pelcg  (division)  and  Jok
tan  (diminished,  small).  With  them  there  is  a  divi
sion  of  the  Abrahamic  and  the  Arabian  lines.  Pcleg
is  the  ancestor  of  the  first.  This  is  the  explanation:
in  this  manner  was  it  that  "in  his  day  the  earth  was
divided."  Fabri  interprets  this  expression  of  a  catas
trophe  that  took  place  in  the  body  of  the  earth,
whose  form  was  then  violently  divided  into  the  later
continental  relations  (in  his  treatise  on  the  "  Origin
of  Heathenism,"  1859).  Delitzsch  interprets  it  as
referring,  in  general,  to  the  division  of  the  earlier
population ;  Keil  explains  it  of  the  division  that  took
place  in  consequence  of  the  building  of  the  tower  of
Babel*  Knobel  refers  the  language  of  the  separa-

*  [This  would  seem  to  be  the  interpretation  which  most
readily  commends  itself  to  the  plain  reader.  The  division
of  the  earth  is  referred  to  as  something  easily  known  from


CHAP.   X.    1-32.


351


tiori  of  tne  two  brothers,  Pcleg  and  Joktan,  in  whicl
Joktan  and  his  sons  took  their  way  to  the  south
Wo  find  here  indicated  the  germ  of  the  facts  b
which  the  earth,  that  is,  the  population  of  the  earth
became  divided  into  Judaism  and  Heathenism.  Fo
the  separation  of  Abraham  is  no  immediate  or  sud
den  event.  The  interrupted  emigration  of  Terah  ha<
been  previously  prepared  in  Salah  and  Eber ;  full
so  in  Pelcg.  Therefore  is  Peleg's  son  called  12 "i
friend  of  God.  In  contrast  with  Salah  (the  sent),
Eber  (the  passing  over),  and  Pelcg  (the  separating
division),  Serug  denotes  again  the  complicated  or  en
tangled,  Nahor,  the  panting,  possibly  the  ineffectual
striving,  and,  finally,  Terah,  the  loitering,  the  one
who  tallies  on  the  way.  Then  comes  Abram,  the
high  father,  wii.h  whom  the  race  of  the  promise  de
cidedly  begins.  We  have  no  hesitation  in  takinu
these  names  as  at  the  same  time  historical  and  syn>
bolical. — The  sons  of  Joktan:  In  their  multiplicity
they  present  a  remarkably  clear  figure  of  the  Arabian
tribes.  "  Thirteen  names,  some  of  which  can  still
be  pointed  out  in  places  and  districts  of  Arabia,
whilst  others  have  not,  as  yet,  been  discovered,  or
have  been  wholly  extinguished."  Knobel.  Concern
ing  their  strife,  and  perhaps,  too,  their  merging
the  Ilamitcs,  who  were  in  Arabia  before  them,  com
pare  KNOBEL,  p.  12,S — The  beni  Kahtan,  sons  of
Joktan,  or  Joktanida?,  form  their  leading  point  of
view  in  Northern  Yeman.  1.  Almodad.  The  name
El  Molidad  is  found  among  the  princes  of  the  Djor-
homites,  first  in  Yemen,  and  then  in  Hedjez.  2.  She-
leph,  the  same  as  Salif,  the  Salapenians  in  a  district
of  Yemen.  3.  Hazarmaveth,  the  same  as  Hadra-
maut  (court  of  death),  in  Southeastern  Arabia,  by
the  Indian  Ocean ;  so  named  because  of  the  un
healthy  climate.  4.  Jereh.  Sons  of  the  moon,  wor
shippers  of  the  moon ;  south  from  Chaulan.  5.  Ha-
dcram.  The  Adramites,  on  the  south  coast  of  Ara
bia.  ^C.  Uzal.  One  with  Sanaa,  a  city  of  Yemen.
7.  Diklah,  meaning  the  palm  ;  probably  cultivator
of  the  palm-tree ;  they  may  be  placed  conjecturally
in  the  Wady  Nadjran,  abounding  in  dates.  8.  Obal.
Placed  by  Kuobel  with  Gebal  and  the  Gebanitcs.
0.  Abimael.  Father  of  Mael;*  undetermined.
10.  Sheba.  The  Sabceans,  a  trading  people  whose
capital  city  is  Mariaba.  11.  Ophir.  Placed  by
Knobel  to  the  southwest  of  Arabia,  the  land  of  the
Himyarites.  Las'scn,  liitter,  and  Delitzsch,  remove
Ophi^to  the  mouths  of  the  Indus.  For  the  differ
ent  views,  see  Gesenius.  It  would  appear,  how
ever,  that  the  point  of  departure  for  Ophir  must  still
be  sought  in  Arabia.  12.  Havilah.  District  of
Chaulan,  in  Northern  Yemen ;  probably  also  colo
nized  in  India  (see  DELITZSCII,  p.  308).  13.  Jobab.

And  their   dwelling  was  from  Mesha Con-

what  is  contained  in  the  narrative,  or  is  soon  to  be  men
tioned.  Had  there  not  been  such  a  division  so  prominently
put  forth  in  the  xith  chapter,  there  might  be  some  room  for
speculation.  But  the  obvious  connection  seems  to  shut  out
every  other  view  :  He  was  called"  1'elcg  (division),  for  in  his
day  did  that  great  event  take  place  that  is  soon  to  be  men
tioned,  and  which  is  the  ground  of  all  these  genealogical
divisions.  SeeBocHAirr:  Phaleg.— T.  L.]

*  t''^'1^'  Abi-mael— a  kind  of  naming  similar  to
that  by  which  Ham  was  designated,  *3'33  ^3X  ,  Abi-
Canaan,  father  of  Canaan,  a  method  which  afterwards  be
comes  quite  common  among  the  Arabians.  In  this,  and  in
the  appearance  of  the  article  in  Tl^bx  ,  El-modad,  verse
M.  above,  we  have  germs  of  peculiar  forms  in  the  Arabic
Meet,  showing  that  it  was  already  deviating  from  the  Hc-
2E»0r$WT^ebpew  from  U>  whichever  may  have  been  the

J.llGSl. —  J..  JLi.  '


corning,  these  undetermined  bounding  districts  of
Mesha  and  Sephar,  compare  Keil. — And  by  these
were  the  nations  divided. — A  preparation  for
what  follows,  sec  the  next  chapter.


DOCTRIXAL  AND  ETHICAL.

See  the  Exegctical.

1.  The  religious  significance  of  the  ethnological
table  :  1.  Personal  characters  form  the  basis  of  the
human  world ;  the  relation  of  God  to  humanity  is
conditioned  by  the  personal  relation  of  God  to  per
sonal  being.  The  revelation  of  salvation,  therefore,
tends  also  to  take  upon  itself  a  genealogical  form.
The  ethnological  table  is  the  extended  ground-outline
of  the  relation  between  God  and  humanity,  and  of
those  that  men  bear  to  one  another.  The*  genealo
gies  are  trees  of  human  life  that  God  has  planted.
2.  In  the  christological  point  of  view,  the  genealogi
cal  table  is  the  prefiguration  of  the  universality  of
the_  gospel,  corresponding  to  the  universality  of  the
divine  love,  grace  and  compassion.  3.  It  gives  us  a
clear  idea  of  the  regular  gravitation  of  humanity  to
its  centre  in  Shem,  Eber,  Abraham,  Christ ;  that  is,
the  genealogy  of  Christ.  4.  As  the  branching  of  the
three  principal  races  places  them  in  contrast,  so,  in
a  special  manner,  is  this  the  case  with  the  branching
of  the  Hamitic  race  into  the  better  lines,  and  in  the
Canaanites;  and  so  also  the  branching  of  the  Shem-
ites,  or  that  of  the  sons  of  Eber  in  the  line  of  the
descendants  of  Joktan,  and  in  the  line  of  the  promise.
5.  The  signs  of  preparation  for  the  later  calling  of
Abraham  are  already  contained  in  the  names  of  his
ancestors  from  Salah  and  Eber  omvard.

'2.  On  the  names  Babel  and  Nineveh,  compare
the  Theological  dictionaries  ;  on  the  history  of  Babel
and  Nineveh,  sec  the  historical  works.  We  must  be
careful  here,  not  to  confound  the  beginning  of  this
very  old  city,  including  in  it  the  Babylonian  tower,
with  its  later  world-historical  development,  and  its
falling  into  ruin.  Nevertheless,  even  the  ruins  of
that  city  are  still  a  speaking  witness,  not  only  for
the  fulfilling  of  the  divine  predictions  and  threaten-
'ngs,  by  the  prophets,  but  also  of  the  historical  con
sistency  and  truthfulness  of  these  very  narrations  in
Genesis.  Concerning  the  geographical  relations,
especially  the  situation  of  Babylon  on  the  P^uphrates,
and  of  Nineveh  on  the  Tigris,  compare  the  maps  of
the  old  world  in  the  Bible-atlas  of  Welland  and  Ack-
crman ;  the  Ilistorico-Geographical  Atlas  of  the  Old
World,  by  Kiepert ;  the  Atlas  of  Kutscheit,  and  oth
ers.  Already,  in  Xenophon's  time,  Nineveh  lay  in
ruins ;  according  to  Strabo,  it  perished  with  the  As
syrian  Empire  (see  in  HKRZOG'S  "  Real-Encyclopedia"
the  article  on  the  Ruins  of  Nineveh).  Babylon  was
much  broken  by  the  Persian  kings,  especially  by
Xerxes ;  Alexander  the  Great  would  have  restored
t,  but  contributed  only  the  more  to  its  destruction  ;
,he  founding  of  Seleucia  laid  it  in  ruins.  As  Seleu-
cia  lies  opposite  to  the  ruins  of  Babylon,  so  does
Mosul  to  those  of  Nineveh.

3.  STARKE  :  In  this  chapter  we  see  the  origin  of
many  nations  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  therefore,
he  power  of  the  blessing  which  God,  after  the  flood,
lad  renewed  to  men  in  respect  to  their  multiplying
nd  propagation  ;  and  so,  finally,  we  learn  the  fathers
rom  whom  Christ  was  born  according  to  the  flesh.
Neither  Noah  nor  his  sons  begat  any  offspring  during
he  time  of  the  flood.  The  same  may  be  conjectured
o  be  true  of  the  animals  which  were  shut  up  with  him


352


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


in  a  dark  dungeon,  and  us  it  were  in  the  midst  of
death.— LANGE  :  Many  renders,  when  they  come  to
tins  tenth  chapter,  are  wont  to  regard  it  as  of  little
talue ;  some  really  think  it  to  be  superfluous,  or  of
ittle  use,  on  account  of  so  many  unknown  names.
But,  in  truth,  we  ought  to  regard  it  as  a  right  noble
gem  in  the  crown  of  Holy  Writ,  the  like  of  which
las  never  been,  or  can  be  shown,  from  any  writings
of  the  old  heathenism  that  yet  remain  to  us.* —
GERLACII:  There  is  no  account  of  antiquity  which
gives  us  so  full  and  so  general  a  survey  of  the  an
cient  nations,  as  this  ethnological  table ;  as  appears
om  the  fact,  that  the  exactness  and  truth  of  the
national  divisions  as  presented  in  the  same,  arc  ever
more  and  more  confirmed.  The  heathen  had  no
other  relations  to  people  who  were  foreign  to  them,
than  those  of  war  and  trade,  with  the  addition,  per
haps,  of  a  certain  community  of  religious  legends,
Knowledge,  and  culture;  irrespective  of  this,jiow-
ovcr,  each  nation  remained  shut  up  within  itself.
in  the  history  of  revelation,  on  the  other  hand,  be
fore  the  nan  alive  of  the  di.-persion  of  the  nations
stands  the  promise  that  Japheth  shall  find  a  home  in
the  tents  of  Shem. — HI.NSI  s  :  So  much  is  now  clear,
.hat  the  races  of  Shem  are  the  Shemites  of  philology.
Vhis  is  not  clear  at  all  ;  just  as  little,  in  fact,  as  that
the  Gallic  Franks  must  be  of  Romanic  origin.  Com
pare  in  other  places  the  learned  explanation  of  the
Mhnolouical  table  by  Hunsen.  Says  the  same  author-
.ly  (vol.  i.  part  •_',  p.  03):  "The  ethnological  table  is
the  nm.-t  learned  among  all  the  ancient  documents,
and  the  must,  ancient  among  the  learned.  For  tra
dition  predominate-!  far  above  research,  though  the
liter  is  *  d  wanting.  In  its  core  it  must  be  regard-
tlas  earlier  than  the  time  of  Abraham;  but  this
j\  no  means  excludes  the  idea  that  Moses  may
rave  made  investigations  respecting  it."  So  says
SriiU"i>i;i; ;  "  I'Yom  this  chapter  must  the  whole  uni
versal  hislorv  of  the  world  take  its  beginning."  To
the  same  ellcet  .Joh.  von  Mailer.  Citation  of  the
Historical  catalogues  of  Heathen  nations,  as  they  are
found  in  the  palace  of  Karnak,  a  ruin  of  the  old  city
Thebes,  in  liendidad,  and  on  the  monuments  of  Per-
«epolis.  Tiie.-e  have  throughout  a  national  charac
ter.  Nimrod's  chase  of  the  beasts  was  the  bridge
of  transition  to  the  hunting  of  men  (Jcr.  xvi.  10;
Lam.  iii.  52  ;  iv.  IS  ;  Matt.  iv.  10  ;  Luke  v.  10).

4.  On  the  numbering  of  the  seventy  nations,
which  the  Rabbins  make  oul  of  this  table,  as  De-
lit/sch  farther  constructs  it,  see  KEIL,  p.  110.  l)e-
lilzseh  traces  a  relation  between  the  seventy  peoples,
and  the  seventy  disciples,  Luke.  x.  1,  and  designates
the  number  as  that  of  the  divinely-ordained  multi
plicity  of  the  human.  Probably,  also,  the  name
of  the  Septuagint  has  reference  to  the  heathen  na
tions  for  whom  the  Alexandrian  translation  of  the
Old  Testament  was  designed.  Keil  objects,  that  the
numbering  can  only  come  out  clean  and  round  when
we  assign  the  name  of  nations  to  Salah  and  Eber.
BulSalaii  might  have  actually  had  more  sons.  And,
besides,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  symbolical  num-
oers  should  always  literally  correspond  to  the  histor
ical.  This  iVe<|uent  appearance  of  the  number  sev
enty  resolves  itself  into  some  early  symbolizing.
Seven  is  the  number  of  God's  work,  including  his

*  [It  is  as  essential  to  nn  undcrstandinp  of  the  Bible,
And  of  history  in  Kcnoral,  as  is  Homer's  catalogue,  in  the
second  book  of  the  Iliad,  to  a  true  knowledge  of  the  Ho-
fneric  poems  and  the  Homeric  times.  The  Biblical  student
cnn  no  more  undervalue  the  one  than  the  classical  student
the  other.  — X.  L.J


lioly  day  of  rest ;  ten  is  the  number  of  the  perfect
human  development ;  the  seventy  nations  were,
therefore,  the  entire  outspreading  of  God's  host,  un
der  his  rule.

5.  Nimrod's  despotic  power,  at  least  if  we  judge
from  the  name,  was  denoted  as  a  rebellion,  as  a  rev
olution.  It  partook  of  both  forms  of  revolution
against  the  divine  ordinance:  1.  From  above  down
wards;  2.  from  below  upwards;  of  which  the  firs!
seems,  in  truth,  to  have  been  the  oldest.


HOMILKT1CAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.

Ill  the  homiletical  treatment  of  the  ethnological
table,  we  must,  of  all  things,  avoid  giving  way  to  un
certain  and  etymological  and  historical  conjectures.
It  contains,  however,  enough  points  of  certainty  to
make  it  a  page  of  Holy  Writ  rich  in  life  and  instruc
tion.  Thereto  belongs  the  threefold  division  of  the
nations  according  to  the  names  Japheth,  Ham,  and
Shem,  the  wide,  wide,  world-wandering  of  Japheth,
in  which  the  grandchildren  and  great-great-grand
children  disappear  from  the  horixon  of  the  theocratic
consciousness;  the  early  ripe,  yet  most  ancient  de
velopment  of  the  Hamitie  culture,  with  its  corrup
tions,  in  which  the  ungodly  Cainitie  culture  once
more  mirrors  itself;  the  reciprocal  intercourse  of  the
Shemites  and  the  Handles  in  the  early  time;  finally,
the  gradual,  yet  authentically  historical  preparation
for  the  calling  of  Abraham,  and  for  the  Messianic
theocracy  in  the  line  of  Shem.  If  the  sermon  is
designed  with  reference  to  the  ethnological  table,
the  best  ground  will  be  furnished  by  taking  directly
ch.  x.  1,  or  Petit,  xxxii.  8;  «r  better  still,  some  New
Testament  text  most  appropriate  for  tlu:  purpose,  as
Matt,  xxviii.  19;  John  x.  10;  Acts  xiv.  10,  17;  xv.
18;  xvii.  20;  Rom.  xi.  ::2;  Kph.  iii.  0;  1  1'et.  iv.  0;
Rev.  xxi.  21. — The  baptism  of  the  Hood  a  forerun
ning  emblematic  baptism  of  the  whole  human  race.
As  God  knows  the  name  of  the  stars  (that  is,  their
most  interior  being,  Isaiah  xl.),  so  docs  he  likewise
know  the  name  of  all  men  and  of  all  races  (Matt,
xxii.  32).  The  theocratic,  believing  consciousness
hath  ever  proved  itself  to  be  also  a  humanitarian
consciousness,  or  one  that  embraces  all  humanity. —
The  higher  significance  of  historical  tradition.— The
commendation  of  the  world's  history  in  the  history
of  God's  kingdom. — The  relation  between  the  history
of  God's  kingdom  and  the  world-history:  1.  The
contrast ;  2.  the  connection ;  3.  the  unity  (in  its
wider  sense  is  the  whole  world's  history  a  history
of  the  kingdom  of  God).— Shem's  history,  the  last
in  the  world,  the  first  in  the  kingdom  of  God. — The
elect  and  their  appointment  to  be  salvation  for  all. —
The  distinction:  1.  Among  the  sons  of  Noah ;  2.  of
Japheth  ;  3.  of  Ham  ;  4.  of  Shem  — Nimrod's  three
fold  position:  1.  As  the  pioneer  of  civilization;  2.  as
oppressor  of  the  patriarchal  liberties;  3.  as  the  instru
ment  of  God  for  the  development  of  the  world.— Pe-
leg,  or  the  dividing  and' the  uniting  again  of  humanity.
SCHRODER:  All  these  sons,  the  white  posterity
of  Japheth,  the  yellow  and  dark  sons  of  _Ham,  how
ever  they  may  live  in  temporal  separation,  are  all
still  God's  children,  and  brothers  to  one  another.

[EXCURSUS  ON  THE  HEBREW  CHRONOLOGY — THB
STATE  OF  THE  PRIMITIVE  ME.V THE  RAPID  BEGIN
NINGS  OF  HISTORY.  The  brief  Hebrew  chronology
is  urged  as  an  objection  to  the  Scriptures.  Hence
the  tendency,  even  among  believers,  to  prefer  the


CHAP.   X.    1-82.


numbers  given  in  the  Scptuagint.     There  is  hardly
time  enough,  it  is  thought,  for  the  great  historical
commencements,  and  the  scale   on  which  they  ap
pear,  so  soon  after  the  flood.     Others,  like  Lepsius
and  Bunsen,  would  go  very  far  beyond  the  LXX.,
carrying  up  the  human  chronology,  and  that  of  the
Egyptian  monarchy  along  with  it,  twenty  thousand
years  before  the  time  of  Christ,  and  twelve  or  fifteen
thousand  years  before  the  Hood.     The  main  ground
of  this  theory  is  not  so  much  the  monuments,  though
Bunsen  has  much  to  say  about  them,  as  an  assump
tion  respecting  the  earliest  condition  and  slow  prog
ress  of  the  human  race.     With  regard  to  the  monu
ments,  on  which  so  much  reliance  is  placed,  there  is
not  space,  nor  occasion,  to  say  much  here.     Those
who  refer  to  them  with  most  confidence  have  to  ad
mit  that  there  is  great  difficulty  in  determining  their
meaning  as  well  as  their  historical  authority,  even
if  rightly  interpreted.     It  is  made  a  question,  too,
whether,  in  many  cases,  they  represent  successive
or  cotemporaneous  dynasties.     Their  barrenness  in
respect  to  almost  everything  else  but  names,  detracts
also  from  their  chronological  testimony.     Like  the
Chaldean,  Hindoo,  and  Chinese  statements,  they  are
hardly  anything  else  but  numbers.     There  is  little  or
no  filling  up  of  these  blank  statistical  spaces  with
anything   like   a   veritable   life-like   history.      Had
much  rhat  is  on  these  monuments  been  found  in  the
early  Scriptures,  it  would  have  made  them  the  scoff
of  the  infidel  and  the  rationalist.    There  is,  however,
one  concise  argument,  which,  if  rightly  considered)
ought  to  dispose  of  the  whole  matter.     Egypt  was
visited,  two  thousand  three  hundred  years  ago,  by  a
most  intelligent  Greek,  whose  valuable  history  has
come  down  to  us  entire.     In  faithful  narrative  of
what  he  saw,  as  he  saw  it,  and  of  what  he  heard,  as
he  heard  it,  Herodotus  is  excelled  by  no  writer,  an
cient  or  modern.     His  pains  and  fidelity  are  attested
by  those  immcijse  journeys,  whose  extent  would  be
deemed   a   wonder,  even"  with   all  the  facilities  of
modern  travel.     Now  this  most  credible  witness  saw
these  monuments  in  their  freshness,  and  when  they
were  as  intelligible  to  the  Egyptian  priests,  as  would
be  to  us  the  contents  of  a  modern  census.    They  de
cipher  for  him  these  hieroglyphics,  now  so  puzzling,
and  give  him,  as  deduced  therefrom,  what  they  un
derstand  to  be  the  Egyptian  history.     It  is  contained
in  his  second  book.     Can  we  ever  expect  a  better  in
terpretation  than  the  one  made  under  such  circum
stances,  and  under  the  direction  of  such  competent
guides  ?^     They  had  every  motive  to  present  their
nation  in   its   most   antique   and   imposing  aspect,
knowing,  as  they  doubtless  did,  that  the  inquirer
was  collecting  materials  for  a  history  of  the  world,
as  then  known.     If  they  erred  at  all,  it  would  most
likely  have  been  on  the  side  of  an  excessive  anti
quity.    And  yet,  the  chronology  of  Herodotus  *  may,


without  any  great  difficulty,  be  made  to  n^ici-  with
that  of  the  Bible — certainly  with  that  of  the  Septua-
gint.  In  regard  to  the  monuments,  such  a  view
should  be  deemed  conclusive.  Herodotus  is,  after
all^the  great  historical  authority  in  respect  'to  tho
antiquity  of  the  Egyptian  monarchy  ;  and  he  is  likely
to  remain  so,  since  we  have  no  reason  to  expect  any
interpretation  of  these  hieroglyphics  that  escaped  his
eager  search,  or  the  intelligence  of  his  well-informed
and  zealous  instructors.

The  other  ground,  that  is,  the  necessity  of  a  very
long  time  to   bring   about  such   results  in  the  slow
progress  of  mankind,  is  a  sheer  assumption,  that
may  at  once  be  met  by  arguments  drawn  from  the
intrinsic  aspects  of  the  case.     It  all  depends  upon
the    hypothesis   with   which   we  start  in   respect  to
the  condition  of  the  primitive  men;    r.nd  this  in
volves,  first  of  all,   an  inquiry  as  to   the  primitive
man,  or  the  primus  homo,   or  whether  there  ever
really  was  such  a  distinct  individual,  the  hcid  of  a
distinct  race,  having  a  supernatural  beginning  at  a
distinct  moment  of  time.     Some,  who  favor  the  view
of  the  low  primitive  condition  of  man,  from  which
he  struggled  slowly  up  into  language  and  a  distinct
human  consciousness,  making  his  appearance  in  his
tory  only  after  he  had  been  many  ages  upon  the
earth,  may  still  hold  to  something  fike  a  creation  of
the  species ;  but  logically  it  is  very  difficult  to  sepa
rate  such  a  doctrine  from  that  eternal-development
theory,  which,  in  opposition  to  the  axiom  <k  nihilo
nihil,  or,  what  is  equivalent  to  it,  that  m<>rc,  cannot
come  out  of  leas,  would  bring  the  highest  life  out  of
the  lowest  forms  of  matter,  and  make  God  himself
(supposing  it  to  acknowledge  something  under  that
name)  the  end  instead  of  the  beginning  of  nature.
On  the  contrary,  the  admission  of  a  creation,  in  any
intelligible  sense  of  the  word,  is  the  admission  of  a
distinct  time,  a  distinct  moment  of  time,  when  the
thing  created  began  to  be,  which  a  moment  before
was  not.     Tins,  however,  docs  not  demand  the  idea
of  an  instantaneous  coming  from  nothing,  or  even
de  novo,  of  everything  belonging  to,  or  connected
with  the  new  existence,  but  only  the  new  and  dis
tinct,  begiunning  of  that  which  especially  makes  it
whf/t  it  is,    a    new,    peculiar   entity,   separate    from
everything  else.     To  apply  this  to  man,  the  origin
of  his  physical,   his  earthly,   may  have   been  as  re
mote  as  any  geological  theory  of  "life-periods,  or  any
biblical  interpretation  supposed  to  be  in  accordance
with  it,  may  allow.     If  we  admit  tho  idea  of  growth,
or  succession  in  creation,  as  perfectly  consistent  with
supernatural  starts  regarded  as  intervening  and  ori
ginating  its  successive  processes,  then  man  may  have
been  long  coining  from  the  earth,  from  the  deepest


•  [The  Egyptian  chronology  hero  intended  is  that  which
san  be  made  out,  though  in  a  very  general  way,  from  tho
Dutlmes  of  actual  history  as  derived  by  Herodotus  from  the
numents,  and  the  priests'  interpretation  of  them,  togeth-
sr  with  other  accounts,  traditional  or  otherwise,  which  they
five  to  him.  Mcues  was  the  first  king,  who  stands  away
•ack  at  the  beginning  of  Egyptian  history.  The  next  one
11  any  historical  note  is  Mceris,  who  had  not  been  dead  900
•ear*  when  Herodotus  was  in  Egypt,  and  must  have  been,
hercfore,  about  1,350  years  before  the  time  of  Christ.  All
uat  tho  priests  had  between  these  two  was  contained  in  a
apyrus  roll,  having  the  bare  namr-s  of  330  monarchs,  whom
real,  a  thousand  years,  or  so,  would  easily  dispose  of,  on
10  supposition  of  cotemporaneous  dynasties,  or  frequent
•volutions  such  as  Egypt  must  have  had  as  well  as  other
lUons.  reducing  reigns  to  one  or  two  years,  and  many  of


them  to  months.  Lot  the  render  call  to  mind  how  rapidly
emperors  succeed  each  other  during  some  parts  of  the  later
Koman  history.  These  other  kings  the  priests  tell  him,,
were  "parsons  of  no  account,"  with  the  exception  of  Mceris
before  mentioned,  thus  showing,  that  with  all  their  parade
of  rolls  and  dynasties,  ilcnes  and  Mccri.i  were  the  only  two
conspicuous  points  in  the  Egyptian  antiquity,  until '  1,400
years  before  Christ  Such  arc  the  only  data  for  chronol
ogy,  though  tho  Egyptian  priests  pretend  to  fill  up  this
empty,  unhistorical  space,  with  341  generations,  malar  G
about  10.000  years  (see  HEROD.,  ii.  100,  142);  but  this  is
evidently  due  to  that  national  prule  which  elsewhere  led
to  tho  same  extravagant  reckoning.  They  found  little  or
nothing  of  record  or  monument  to  confirm  it,  or  they  cer
tainly  would  have  given  it  to  the  historian.  What  they
tell  him,  that  during  this  period  of  300  generations,  the  sun
had  twice  risen  where  he  now  sets,  and  twice  set  where  ho
now  rises,  is  enough  to  show  what  historical  valnc  belongs
to  the  empty  numbers  with  which  they  would  fill  up  thiM
waste  extent  of  time.  Sec  lUw  LISBON'S  Herodotus.— T.  L.J


354


(IKXKSIS,  OK   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


parts  of  the   earth,   us  is  said  1's.  exxxix.  15.     The
formation  of  the  human   physical  may  have  begun
in  the  earliest  stages  of  the  /cn'.m,  or  world-building.
The  words  ~.zy  'p,  "from  the  ./".V,"  may  denote  a
process  comparatively  quirk  or  slow.     The  essential
faith  is  satislied  either  way ;    since  it  only  demands
two  things — a  dual  derivation  of  the  completed  hu
manity,  and  an  order,  that   is,  a  succession,  whether
in  nature  or  in  time  (or  in  both),  rather  than  any
precise  duration.     Even  the  common  notion  of  an
outward  plastic  formation  of  the  body  implies  the
use  of  a  previous  nature  in  a  previous  material  or
materials— that  is,  a  use  of  them  according  to  such
natures.     There  is  essentially  the  same  idea  in  the
employment  of  previous  growths   and  proeessi  s,  a-
in  that  of  previous  material,  although  with  the  con
ception  of  such  successions  there  necessarily  comes
that   of  time,   longer  or  shorter.      How  many  steps
there  were  we  cannot  know;   but  in  thus  bringing  up
the  human  physical  through  lower  structural  forms,
there  may  have  been   outwardly  approximation-;   to
the  human,  h>ng  before  there  was  reached  that  hu
manity   proper    in    which    nature    and    spirit  unite.
With.'iut    scientific  comparison    and   deduction,  the
simplest  inspection  of  nature  is  sulHcient  to  suggest
the  thought  that  man  id  built  upon  types  from  below
him,  cv<  n  as  he  is  formed  in  the  image  of  that  which
is   above   him.     If  then   such  a  view  of  successive
evolutions   from  the   dust,  in -lead  of  an  immediate
outward  plastic  formation  of  the  human  earthly,  be
not  inconsistent  vuth   the    comprehensive   language
of  Scripture,  we  should  not  be  startl-d  at  the  thought
of  their  ha\ii:g  been  anthropoidal  forms*  of  various
degrees  of  ;.ppro\imation,  some   of  them,  perhaps,
larger  than  any  now   found   upon   earth,  and  which
may  have  perished,  like  some  of  the  larger  or  mam
moth  species  of  mammalia.      If  the    explorations  of
science  have  brought  to  light  any  such   remains,  our
faith  m-d  not  be  disturbed  by  the  question  of  their
pre-hi.-toricalness.      The   interpreter  of  Scripture  is
little  concerned,  either  in  ailirming  or  denying  such
discoveries.     Whatever  be  their  date,  we  have  not
yet  come  to  the   humanity  proper,   the  Adamic  hu
manity,    that  humanity  which   Christ    assumed  and
raises\o  a  still  higher 'sphere.     The  animal  world  is
not  yet  surpassed.     But  there  is  n  moment  when  the
human  race  now  upon  the  earth  had  its  distinct  be-
pnninir,  and  that,  too,  in  a.  primus  homo, — the  "first
Adam"— even  as  there  is  a  "new  man,"  a  new  hu
manity,  that  is  to  have  its  finish  or  completion  in  a
Kcconil  Adam,  or  last  Adam  (ejxaros  A5a,u),  as  the
apostle  calls  him.     This  beginning  of  humanity  upon
.•arih  was  not  a  physical  act  merely,  or  the  mere
completion  of  a  physical  progress.     It  took  place  in
the  spiritual  sphere.     The  true  creation  of  man  was
not  merely  A  formation,  or  an  animation,  but  an  inspi
ration,  a  direct,  divine  inspiration  (Gen.  ii.  7);  and
now  there  is  what  before  was  not,  a  r.S^"3,  a  new


*  |  There  is  so  much  of  caricature  and  groiesqucncss  in
ttic  appearance  nf  the  simia  tribe  of  animals,  that  wo  revolt
at  the  tin 'light  of  nny  connfction  with  them,  even  as  a  link
in  the  mere  physical.  Their  actions  are  so  ahsurd,  they
are  such  a  mere"  mimicry  of  reason,  ludicrous,  yet  actually
lower  than  the  sober  instinct  of  other  kinds,  that  the  out
ward  re-omblance  makes  us  the  more  disdain  the  idea  of
even  a  physical  relationship.  It  is  thus  that  the  ape-nature
places  itself  in  stronger  contrast  to  the  human  than  that  oi
other  animals  having  less  outward  likeness,  either  in  form
or  in  nction.  And  yet  such  resemblance,  in  some  degree
is  very  funeral.  There  is  something  in  the  most  commor
animal-l'ice-;  around  us,  that  would  startle  us  by  its  human
look  il'  we  had  seen  nothing  of  the  kind  before.— T.  L.]


lung  upon  earth,  not  simply  something  higher
cally  (though  even  that  would  require  a  divine  in-
ervention),  but  an  entity  distinct  as  connected  with
a  higher  or  supernatural  world.  This  Adamic  man,
,hus  divinely  raised  out  of  nature,  and  lifted  above
.he  pure  animality,  is  the  one  of  whom  the  Bible
gives  us  so  particular  an  account,  lie  was  the  one
vho  first  awoke  to  a  true  rational  human  conscious-
less.  Thus  man  "became  a  living  soul."  The  em-
)hasis  is  in  the  manner  of  the  inbreathing;  but  to
distinguish  it  wholly  from  the  animation  of  other
inds  who  are  also  called  mn  EE3 ,  the  wondrous
event  is  described  in  other  language  as  a  sealing,  a
Arming  into  a  higher  type,  pattern,  idea,  or  image,
— not  physically,  but  spiritually.  The  all-important
article  of  faith  is  the  dual  succession,  whether  re
garded  as  an  order  in  time,  or  as  an  order  of  consti
tution  without  reference  to  time  :  "  first  the  natural
iJ/i/x'K'"',  the  animal),  afterwards  that  which  is
spiritual"  (ro  iri-ei'/jLariidii').  First  that  which  comes
from  nature  (TC>  t'/c  7^5  x0''*0'"))  " fron)  "ie  Cflrthi
earthy,"  second,  that  "  which  bore  the  image  of  the
heavenly,"  "  or  of  "  the  Lord  from  heaven."

Corresponding  to  this  is  the  specific  designation
by  which  man  is  distinguished  among  the  created
orders.  The  animals  aid  plants  are  made  each
r'cb,  after  its  •p'2,  «I5os,  .vy«r/,  .•;,  f»nn,  denoting
difference  in  organic  structure,  and  therefore  some
thing  ultimately  outward  as  exhibited  in  its  last  analy
sis,  however  hidden  it  may  seem  to  the  primary  ob
nervation  of  the  sense.  It  is  not  to  be  thought  that
the  Sciiplure  writers,  in  their  simplicity,  intended  to
speak  scientifically  or  philosophically,  but  a  deeper
term  was  wanted  in  the  case  of  man,  and  we  have  it
in  a  remarkable  change  of  language.  Man  is  nowhere
said  to  be  ^n:n"b,  jn.da  i/<:n>'n  sunm,  or  xc'mJum
spccicm  xiiam,  but  when  tins  new  entity  is  to  be
brought  into  the  kosmos,  (iod  is  represented  as  say
ing  to  himself,  or  as  though  addressing  some  higher
associate  than  nature,  "Let  us  make  man  "'SSSa


*  [There  is  a  very  ;,i(Mt  <'.i;HcuHv  in  confining  thU  lan
guage  of  the  apostle,  1  for.  xv.  40,  47,  to  the  historical  in-
carnation,  or  in  the  eii'eet  of  the  coming  of  Christ  at  the
beginning  of  the  Cluistian  eni.  It  must  refer  to  something
constitutive  of  humanity  in  the  beginning,  before  the  fall,
and  in  the  very  process  of  the  becoming  mini.  Otherwise
it  would  follow,  that  before  such  historical  advent,  man  was
an  animal  merely,  wholly  earthly  and  sensuitl,  ipv^iicbs,
voixds.  If  the  irvtvua  faoxMoZv,  the  "life-giving  spirit."
in  distinction  from  the  ^VXH  £io-a,  the  soul  of  life,  or  merely
"living  soul,"  was*  not  in  our  humanity  at  its  first  consti
tution,  then  not  only  Adam,  hut  Enoch,  Xoah,  Abraham,
Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  were  only  natural  men,  animal  men,
having  nothing,  in  a  true  sense,  epiiitual  about  them.  I
we  would  avoid  this  very  strange  consequence,  the  language
referred  to  must  have  something  of  a  creative  or  constitu
tive  sense,  and  the  iri/eGjua  faoiroiow,  must  be  regarded  M
the  Aw?  4>uTi£ov  irdvTO.  avepairov,  "the  Light  that  lighteth
every  man  coming  into  the  world"  of  John  i.  9,  making,  m
the  beginning,  that  peculiar  constitution  which  we  may  call
the  completed  man,  and  which  was  never  wholly  lost  as  a
hi"h  spiritual  power,  however  much  it  may  have  been  mar
red  in  its  ethical  aspect.  Christianity  is  indeed  Kcuyrj  KTUTIS,
"a  new  creation,'  2  Cor.  v.  17,  or  the  making  of  a  "new
man,"  hut  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  idea  ot  a  resto
ration,  a  re-creation,  a  renewed  spirituality,  or  even  the
bringing  back  to  a  higher  state  than  that  from  which  man
fell.  The  second  Adam  was  not  absent  from  the  ci  eat  ion
of  the  first.  In  the  spiritual  image  of  Him  who  is  hmiselt
stvlod  the  express  image,  or  hypostatic  image,  xapaxnw
vTrooraa-eus,  Ileb.  i.  3,  was  man  spiritually  formed.  I  hrougn
it  he  became  man,  and  therefore  it  is  truly  said  of  the  incar
nate  Logos,  that  "  ho  carnc  to  his  own  ; "  and  thus  also  is
he  trulv  bar-nnsho,  son  of  man,  the  Hebrew  arid  Syriac  term
for  the  generic  homo.  In  his  eternity,  and  in  his  historical
incarnation,  he  is  "the  root  as  well  as  the  offspring  (
humanity. — T.  L.]


,


CHAP.  X.  1-32.


355


,1  our  image?  The  DVs,  therefore,  in  the  case  of
humanity,  may  be  said  to  make  the  "i"1^,  or  to  come
in  place  of  it.  Ri  other  words,  it  is  the  spiritual
Knage  here,  and  not  the  physical  organization,  that
makes  the  species ;  and  most  important  is  the  dis
tinction  in  all  our  reasonings  about  the  essential
oneness  of  humanity,  and  what  most  truly  consti
tutes  it.

From   this   primus   homo,   thus    inspired,    thus

sealed,  comes  all  of  human  kind  that  ever  has  been,

or  is  now  upon  the  earth.     To  apply  what  has  been

said  to  the  more  direct  subject  of  this  note,  there  is

here  the  decisive  answer  to  that  view  which  would

represent  man  as  commencing  in  the  savage  state

regarded  as  barely  and  imperceptibly  rising  above

the  animal.     This  inspiration  is  a  great  and  glorious

beginning.     It  is  a  new  divine  force  in  the  earth.

The  fall  does  not  at  once  destroy  it,  though  giving  a

tendency  to  spiritual  death,  and  spiritual  degeneracy,

carrying  with  it  a  physical  decline.     Even  with  this,

however,  the  primitive  divine  impulse  in  the  first

man,  and  in  the  first  men,  makes  them  something

very  different  from  what  is  now  called  the  savage

state,  and  which  is  everywhere  found  to  be  the  dregs

of  a  once  higher  condition,  the  setting  instead  of  the

rising  FU:I,  the  dying  embers  fast  going  out,  instead

of  the  kindling  and  growing  flame.     All  past  and

present   history  may  be   confidently  challenged  to

present  the  contrary  case.     Among  human  tribes,

wholly  left  to   themselves,   the   higher   man   never

comes  out  of  the  lower.     Apparent  exceptions  do

ever,  on  closer  examination,  confirm  the  universality

of  the  rule  in  regard  to  particular  peoples,  whilst  the

claim  that  is  made  for  the  world's  general  progress

can  only  be  urged  in  opposition   by  ignoring  the

supernal  aids  of  revelation  that  have   ever   shone

somewhere,  directly  or  collaterally,  on  the  human

path.

The  high  creative  impulse  manifested  itself  in
the  Antediluvian  period  in  its  resistance  to  the  death-
principle,  which,  through  the  spiritual,  the  fall  had
introduced  into  the  human  physical  organization.
It_showed  itself  in  a  rapidly  developed,  though  a
suicidal  or  self-corrupting  civilization,  in  the  line  oi
Cam,  and  in  an  extreme  longevity  in  the  holier  line

eth.     With  a  branch  of  the  latter  it  passed  the
flood,  impaired,  it  may  be,  but  unspent.     The  pre
served  race,  tending  again  to  a  sensual  gregarious-
ness,  received  a  new  divine  impulse,  which  may  al
most  be  regarded  as  resembling  a  second  subordinate
creation.    _  It  was  not  the  renewal  of  holiness,  but  of
spiritual  vigor,  making  humanity  sublime  even  in  its
wickedness.     It  was  the  spirit  of  discovery,  sendin»
men  over  the  face  of  the  before  unknown  earth.     It
was  the  pioneering  spirit,  ever  leading  them  on  to
make  new  settlements,  to  overcome  new  difficulties,
to  engage  in  great  works,  all  the  more  astounding
when  we  consider  the  little  they  possessed  of  what
may  be  called  science.     What  a  grand  conception
was  that  of  building  a  tower  that  should  reach  unto
the  skies,  and  make  them  independent  of  the  muta
tions    they  beheld   in   nature!     How   has   such   a
thought,  though  taking  far   more  scientific  forms
ever  swayed  mankind,  showing  itself  still  in  the  pre
tentious  claims  of  our  present  knowledge,  so  boast
ing,  yet  so  small  in  comparison  with  the  great  un
known,  and  so  little  able  to  relieve  the  deep-seated
evi  s  of  our  fallen  race.     "  Go  to,"  said  thev,  "  let
a  build  a  city  and  a  tower,"  as  a  defence  against
Heaven.     It  was  the  same  language  that  was  after


wards  re-echoed  in  the  Promethean  boast,*  and  that
we  still  sometimes  hear  from  a  godless  science,
vaunting  that  it  "  has  annihilated  space  and  time  "
that  it  has  disarmed  the  lightning :

Eripuit  coclo  fulmcii—

that  it  will  yet  deprive  the  ocean  of  its  terrors,  and
introduce,  at  last,  that  millennium  of  human  achieve
ment  which  will  make  man  independent  of  any  power
above  or  without  him.

It  was  but  a  short  time  after  the  flood,  when
there  appears  this  new  heroic  spirit,  this  vast  ambi
tion,  in  the  very  opening  of  the  world's  history
bcnpture  gives  113  but  few  points  in  thu  picture,  but
these  are  most  impressive:    Nimrod,   "the  mighty
hunter  before  the  Lord,"  beginning  the  kingdom  of
Babylon;   settlements   rapidly  following   it  on  the
upper  Euphrates ;   the  descendants  of  Ham  already
upon  the  Xile ;  the  sons  of  Javan  wending  their  way
by  the  islands  and  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean ;  Tyre
and  Sidon  taking  their  place  "at  the  entry  of  the
sea,"  as  though  already  looking  out  to  become  "  the
merchant  of  the  people  for  many  isles."      It  was
the  time  of  the  tower-builders,  the  pyramid-builders
the  great  city-builders,  the  empire-founders.   Alone
with  the  pioneering  and  colonizing  spirit,  there  was
also  the  associative  tendency,  so  different  from  any
thing  we  now  see  in  any  modern  savagism.     There
was,  also,  in  vigorous  exercise,  the  government  idea,
or  the  government  instinct,  if  any  prefer  thus  to
name  it,  leading  men  to  form  great  polities,  and  to
recognize  in  government  something  of  a  divine  or
supernatural  nature.     We  may  call  it  hero-worship,
but  it  was  something  very  different  from  anything
now  known  in  savage  tribes,  and  led  to  results  ut
terly  unknown  as  ever  following  from  such  a  state.
Such  were  the  primitive  men  as  the  Bible  pre
sents  them  to  us,  although  their  mere  worldly  great
ness  was  to  the  Scripture  writers  a  wholly  subordin
ate  subject.     Secular  history  confirms  the  account.
This  it  does  in  two  ways  :  1st,  by  its  silence  as  to  all
before.     If  men  had  been  so  many  ages  on  the  earth,
what  were  they  doing  all  this  time  ?     What  traces
have  they  left  of  their  existence  ?     At  the  most,  only
a  few  ambiguous  bones  here  and  there  discovered,'
after  the  keenest  search,  and  in  respect  to  whose
real  antiquity  men  of  science  arc  still  contending.
We  ask  in  vain  for  the  marks  of  progress,  or  of  any
transition  state.     A  speaking  silence,  like  that  which
seems  to  come  from  the  blank  chamber  of  the  great
pyramid,  proclaims  that  man,  the  Adamic  or  Noachic
man,  is  not  much   older   than  the  pyramids, — two
thousand  years,  perhaps,  a  little  more  or  a  little  less.
If  we  pay  no  attention  to  this  striking  fact,  of  the
almost  total  absence  of  any  human  remains,  it  mio-ht
perhaps,  be  said,  that  history  only  commences  after
the  emergence  from   the   long    savage  state,  and,
therefore,  gives  no  testimony  to  the  many  ages  of
human  existence  that  might  have  been   before  it.
This,  however,  supposes  a  sudden  emergence    such
as  would  seem  to  demand  some  new  power,  some
thing  like  a  divine  or  ah  extra  impulse,  unfelt  in  the

ages  before,  and  which  -would  not  greatly  differ at

least  in  the  marvellousness  and  apparent  supernatu-
ralness  of  it— from  what  the  Bible  tells  us  of  a  new
creation  of  humanity.  It  would  imply  something

*  Toiov  vaXaicrTrjv  vvv  irapatTKevdfeTai
"O?  6>)  Kepavvov  Kpei<rcrov  fuprja-ei  <j>\6ya,
&a\a.(raia.v  TC  yT/y  TivaKreipav  voaov
Tpiaivav,  aixMV  T'n"  UocreiSiavos  CTKeSa.

JEsciiYLUs,  Prom.  Vinct.  919.


356


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


coining  into  the  human  movement,  greatly  accelerat
ing  it.  at  least,  it'  not  wholly  originating.  It  would
be  something  undeveloped,  or  very  suddenly  and
strangely  developed,  from  what,  went  before.  And
thi-  brings  us  to  the  second  or  positive  evidence  of
history,  'if  it  testifu  s  by  its  Silence,  still  more  im-
;  icssive  is  it  when  it  lie-ins  to  speak,  and  this  is
;it  the  time  when  something  in  human  action  deemed
r.oiable,  or  worthv  of  remembrance,  demands  its
voice.  The  stroii'.1:  pelf-consciousness  which  is  the
result  of  awakened  action  immediately  seeks  its
record.  The  ob-eivation  of  passing  times,  or  chro-
nolouv,  be'.Miis  wi:h  it.  It  is  this  commencement  of
movement  that  creates  history,  whether  in  writing
of  some  kind  —  which  there  is  good  reason  to  believe
was  ainonir  'he  very  earliest  things,  and  called  out
by  this  verv  demand  for  a  recording  medium — or  in
the  ineasnied  language  of  song,  or  in  formal  tradi
tions,  which,  however  vague  and  exaggerated,  lire-
sent  an  expressive  contrast  to  an  utterly  unrecording
silence.

The  history  that  thus  begins  to  speak  has  not  the
exactness  of  modern  annals,  but,  as  compared  with
•  ight  have  been  expected  on  the  other  theory,
irs  voice  is  Imid  and  el-ar.  It  comes  not  with  mut-
tt  r.-d  tones,  inarticulate  and  unintelligible.  Its  ut
ter. nice  is  more  emphatic  in  the  very  beginning  than
i:i  some  of  the  lapsed  ages  that  follow  it.  How
i  mure  distinctly  stand  out  the  first  Tharaohs,
:•  of  sacred  or  s-ciilar  history  (see  HKKOII.,  ii.
loo,  lul),  than  the  later  shadows  upon  the  monu-
!  The  earliest  history  bursts  upon  us,  as  it
were.  It  begins  with  men  doing  great  t!  ings  raising
pyramids,  building  cities,'  founding  states.  It  opens
with  the  Egyptian  and  Babylonian  empires,  and

t,  I  i,  as  new  powers  in  fullest  vigor,  and  pre-
_••  every  appearance  of  youthful  greatness.
The  proper  names  ^iveii  to  i;~,  whether  of  men  or
I  lice.-,  have  nothing  of  the  cloudy,  mythical  aspect,
but  stand  out  with  all  the  di-;inctness  of  veritable
life.  IA'.-S  is  known  of  the  most  early  East,  of  India
and  China,  but  suflicient  to  warrant  the  belief,  that
bv  the  Cianires,  as  well  as  hv  the  Mile  and  the


*  [Four  pi-eat  cities  nre  started  in  tho  very  " beginning
.rod's  kinK<!<n:,  J'a: -el,  anil  Kroeh,  and  Aecad,  and
ia  the  l.ir.d  of  Sliinar,"  (Jen.  x.  10.     This  i.s  con
firmed   by  Herodotus.     He  speaks  of  it  as  a  remarkable
peculiarity  of  Assyria  in  his  day — the  number  and  preat-
[   its  cities."    They  must  have,   been   founded  in   ti.e
,  and  by  :i  people  who  had  a  passion  for  great
?t-ii' turos — ce   Union.,  i.   178.     Ravlinson   rcc-ards   this
l.o--v  numlier  of  important  cities  as  one  of  "  the  most  strik-
iti.res  of  the  Assyrian  greatness."    lie  shows,  too,
ii    ,  -i  1 1:1  iik.ibly  it  is  confirmed  by  the  modern  discoveries
ai!v.ii_r  the  vast    Assyrian  ruins:   "Grouped  around  Xine-
veh  wove  Calah  (Jfimrud),  Scripture  Cahich  ;  Dur  Saprina
(A7<o,..v. /,,„/);   Tarhisa  (Shcrtfkhan);   Arbol  (Arlil) ;   Kha-
•/.<  Ii    Ff.iiiiK'nii'l.-);  and  As-hur  (Kliirrful).     Lower  down,  the
banks   ef  th>'  Tigris  exhibit   an  almost   unbroken  line  of
ruins  f.-om  Tckrit  to  Baghdad,  while  Babylonia  and  Chaldea
arc  thiiiiiiihi'iit.  -tuddedwith  mounds  from  nortli  to  south,
the  rei  ore  at  capitals  of  which  we  read  in  the

inscription-!.  A":\in,  in  upper  Mesopotamia,  between  the
Tigris  and  the  Khabour,  Mr.  La  yard  found  the  whole  coun
try  covered  with  mounds,  tho  remnants  of  cities  belonging
to  the  early  Assyrian  period."  KAWLIXSOX'S  Herodotus,
vol.  i.  p.  243.  These  ?n  back  to  the  very  beginnings  of  his
tory.  They  make  history.  There  is  none  before  them,  as
there  is  no  historical  place  for  them  in  later  annals,  when
these  empires  began  to  crumble,  as  they  did  at  a  very  early
period.  So  everything  confirms  the  idea,  that  the  pyra
mids  nnd  the  great  structures  of  Thebes  and  Memphis  be
long  to  the  very  boprirminss  of  Egyptian  history.  They  are
monuments  of  the  primaeval  men".  From  thes'e  ruins'they
yet  speak  to  us  of  a  period  of  great  action,  of  a  vast  ambi
tion  suddenly  manifesting  itself,  and  before  which  silence
reigned  over  all  the  earth. — T.  L.]


Euphrates,  a  young  humanity  was  giving  evidence
of  mighty  bodily  powers  and  high  sphilual  energy;
different,  indeed,  from  the  present,  and  presenting
some  aspects  strange  to  our  modern  conceptions,  yet
very  unlike  the  savage  state,  or  a  rise  from  sncb  a
state,  had  such  a  rise  been  ever  shown  in  any  ea;ly
or  later  history  of  the  world.  In  brief — the  first  his
torical  appearances  of  men  upon  the  earth  arc  at  v.a1*
with  this  theory  of  savagism.  Such  independent
emergings  as  are  contended  for  do  not  now  take,
place,  and  never  have  taken  place  within  the  times  of
known  history.  The  savage  condition,  as  lias  been
said,  and  cannot  be  denied,  is  one  ever  sinking  lower
and  lower,  until  aid  is  brought  to  it  from  without;
and  at  the  culy  time  referred  to  there  was  no  such
aid  except  from  a  supernal  and  supernatural  source.

On  either  view,  we  are  compelled  to  admit  the
fact  of  a  great  beginning  of  humanity  on  the  earth.
The  primitive  man  was  a  splendid  being — not  scien
tific,  nor  civilized,  in  our  modern  sense  of  the  words,
but  posses-ing  great  power,  both  of  body  and  soul.
He  had  all  to  learn,  yet  learned  most  rapidly.  Re
searches  among  the  earliest  monuments  sometimes
astonish  us  by  the  suggestions  they  offer  of  a  knowl
edge  supposed  to  belong  only  to  modern  times,  or
to  which,  in  some  cases,  modern  discovery  has  nof
yet  reached.  There  is  brought  out  evidence  of  re
stdts  in  the  arts,  in  manufactures,  and  in  the  em
ployment  of  mechanical  aids,  that  we  find  it  very
dillicult  to  account  for.  Ii'  we  cannot  believe  them
to  have  come  from  processes  of  investigation  strictly
scientific,  then  must  we  ascribe  them  to  oilier  pow
ers  of  a  high  order,  and  in  which  we  fail  to  surpass
them — such  as  keen  observation  awake  to  e\  cry  out
ward  application  of  natural  forces,  most  acute  senses,
and  unrivalled  manual  skill.  II'  it  was  the  greatness
offeree  and  magnitude,  it  was  greatness  still,  such
as  was  never  attained  to  by  any  savage  people  in
historical  times.  These  early  men  had  great  aims,
they  attempted  great  things,  and  they  accomplished
them  rapidly.  \Ve  have  only  to  take  this  view,  forti
fied  as  it  is  by  Scripture  and  the  early  profane  his
tory,  to  account  for  what  seems  so  wonderful  to
some  writers,  and  which  has  drawn  them  to  their
long  chronologic-:.  As  remarked  elsewhere  (p.  o!7),
the  history  of  human  progress  has  ever  been  one  of
starts  and  impulses.  As  in  the  geological  ages,  so
also  within  historical  times,  there  are  periods  in
which  more  has  been  done  in  a  few  generations,
than,  under  other  circumstances,  has  been  accom
plished  in  many  centuries.  Thus  the  time  that  in
tervened  between  the  Scriptural  flood  and  the  first
mention  of  the  Egyptian  monarchy,  even  as  reckoned
by  the  ,-hortcr  chronology,  may  have  brought  on  the
world's  history  faster  than  ages  of  comparative  tor
por,  such  as  have  appeared  in  the  varied  annals  of
mankind.

Again,  there  is  an  intrinsic  difficulty  in  such
views  as  that  of  Bunsen,  which,  when  closely  exam
ined,  presents  a  greater  incredibility  than  anything
of  which  it  professes  to  give  the  explanation.  Ad
mitting  such  idea  of  emergence  after  ages  of  unhis-
torical  savagism,  still  the  questions  arise  :  Why  was
not  this  more  universal  after  it  had  commenced?
Why  did  it  not  appear  in  other  parts  of  the  earth  ">
Why  did  the  early  light  confine  itself  to  one  people
for  so  long  a  time,  making  Mitzraim  historically
what  it  is  geographically  and  etymologically,  the
narrows,  a  line  immense  in  length  with  the  scantiest
breadth  ?  During  these  fifteen  thousand  years,  or
more,  of  monumental  history,  all  the  rest  of  the


CHAP.   XI.   1-9.


oarth  was  in  comparative  night.  Established  insti
tutions,  a  regular  monarchy  for  ten  thousand  years,
at  least,  king  inheriting  from  king,  or  dynasty  suc
ceeding  dynasty,  a  political  state  unbroken  for  a
period  three  times  as  long  as  the  whole  series  of
Assyrian,  Babylonian,  Persian,  Roman,  Mongolian,
and  Turkish  empires — social  orders  uninterruptedly
transmitted,  records  of  all  this  preserved,  monu
ments  attesting  it !  It  is  incredible  in  itself— much
more  so  when  we  consider  the  condition  of  the  rest
of  the  earth,  even  the  nearest  parts.  In  Egypt,
ten  thousand  years  of  government,  of  civilization,  of
advanced  agriculture,  of  social  order,  and  all  this
time  Greece,  Italy,  and  even  Asia  Minor,  in  total
darkness — uninhabited,  or  in  the  lowest  unhistorical
savagism  !  It  is  very  hard  to  believe  this.  It  pre
sents  a  marvel  greater  than  anything  recorded  in
Genesis  about  the  origin  and  early  condition  of  man
kind — greater  for  the  imagination,  far  greater  for  the
reason.  Egyptian  history  would  be  like  an  Egyptian
obelisk  standing  in  the  desert,  spindling  up  to  a  vast
height,  whilst  all  around  was  desolation  in  the  view
that  height  presented.  Such  an  antiquity  in  this  one
people,  should  we  reason  from  it  a  priori,  and  con
nect  with  it  the  modern  claim  of  progress,  would
throw  out  of  proportion  all  the  other  chapters  of
history.  It  would  bring  the  Roman  empire  before
the  days  of  Abraham,  and  make  our  nineteenth  cen
tury  antedate  the  Trojan  war.

These  considerations  do  not  only  support  the
Bible  chronology  as  prolonged  in  the  LXX.,  but  fur
nish  an  argument  in  favor  of  the  still  shorter  Hebrew
reckoning.  Taking  the  primitive  men  as  the  Bible
represents  them,  and  the  latter  gives  ample  time  for
all  that  is  recorded.  Connected  with  this  there  is


another  thought.  How  came  this  Hebrew  chrono:
ogy  to  present  such  an  example  of  modesty  as  com
pared  with  the  extravagant  claims  to  antiquity  madt
by  all  other  nations  ?  The  Jews,  doubtless,  had,  as
men,  similar  national  pride,  leading  them  to  magnify
their  age  upon  the  earth,  and  run  it  up  to  thousands
and  myriads  of  years.  How  is  it,  that  the  people
whose  actual  records  go  back  the  farthest  have  the
briefest  reckoning  of  all  ?  The  only  answer  to  this
is,  that  whilst  others  were  left  to  their  unrestrained
fancies,  this  strange  nation  of  Israel  were  under  a
providential  guidance  in  the  matter.  A  divine  check
held  them  back  from  this  folly.  A  holy  reserve,
coming  from  a  constant  sense  of  the  divine  pupilage,
made  them  feel  that  "  we  are  but  of  yesterday,"
whilst  the  inspiration  that  controlled  their  historians
directly  taught  them  that  man  had  been  but  a  short
time  upon  the  earth.  They  had  the  same  motive
as  others  to  swell  out  their  national  years  ;  that  they
have  not  done  so,  is  one  of  the  strongest  evidences
of  the  divine  authority  of  their  Scriptures.  And
how  fair  is  their  representation  !  Egypt,  Babylon,
Assyria,  Tyre,  the  early  Javanic  settlements,  all
starting  about  the  same  time,  and  from  the  same
quarter  of  a  late  inhabited  earth  ;  this  is  credible,
probable,  making  harmonious  sacred  and  profane
history.  The  other  view  of  the  long  and  lonely
Egyptian  dynasties  is  monstrous,  out  of  all  propor
tion — incredible.  Had  the  Bible  given  such  a  long,
narrow,  solitary  antiquity  of  twenty  thousand,  or
even  ten  thousand,  years,  to  the  people  whose  his
tory  it  mainly  assumes  to  set  forth,  it  would,  doubt
less,  have  called  out  the  scoff  of  those  whose  sceptical
credulity  so  easily  receives  the  fabulous  chronology
of  other  nations. — T.  L.)


FOURTH    SECTION.

The  Tomer  of  Habel,  (he  Confusion  of  Languages,  and  the  Dispersion  of  (he  Naticns


CHAPTER  XL  1-0.

1   2     And  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language  [HP],  and  of  one  speech.1     And  it  came  to
pass,  as  they  journeyed2  from  the  east3,  that   they  found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar,

3  and  they  dwelt  there.     And  they  said  one  to  another,  Go  to,  let  us  make  brick,  and
burn  them  thoroughly  [literally,  to  a  burning].     And  they  had  brick  for  stone,  and  slime  had

4  they  for  mortar  [cement].     And  they  said,  Go  to,  let  its  build  us  a  city  and  a  tower,  whose
top  may  reach  unto  heaven  ;   and  let  us  make  us  a  name  [a  signal,  sign  of  renown],  lest  we  be

5  scattered  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.     And  the  Lord  came  down  to  see

6  the  city  and  the  tower  which  the  children  of  men  had   bnilded.      And  the  Lord  said,
Behold,  the  people  is  one,  and  they  have  one  language  ;   and  this  they  begin  to  do  :   and

7  now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from  them,  which  they  have  imagined  to  do.     Go  to,  lot
us  go  down,  and  there  confound  their  language  [on  the  very  spot],  that  they  may  not  under-

8  stand  one  another's  speech.     So  the  Lord  scattered  them  abroad  from  thence  upon  the

9  face  of  all  the  earth;   and  they  left  off  to  build  the  city.     Therefore  is  the  name  of  it

Called    Babel4   [for  bibs,   division  of  speech,  confusion  ;  other  explanations  :  b3   "3.   gate  of  Belus,  bz 12  ,

castloof Bcius],  because  the  Lord  did  there  confound  the   language  of  all  the  earth:  and
from  thence  did  the  Lord  scatter  them  abroad  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth.


353  GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.

p  ver  ].— 2"inx  ~"~2~:1  rnX  (IE— ,  one  lip  and  one  words,  as  near  as  cur  English  can  come  to  it.  LXX.,
vtiAot  ti  KJ'I  t'miv'ii  iJ-io-  Trial ;  Vulg.,  u!.'/u  unius  ct  scrmonwm  (orvmdcm;  the  Syiiac,  f*i  ^..^V-r  O  j-j«  j  1  A  X  ?
one-  tongue  and  one  speecli  ;  and  so  the  Targum  of  Oukelos,  in  bs'E'S'l  "H  V^r-  g°  Ul'eL'k  writers  desciibo  tho-o
who  speak  the  same  language  as  i/icyAuTToi  and  c^wrou  Kushi  interprets  Cn-.21  as  referring  to  the  thoughts  and
counsels  rather  than  to  language,  regarding  that  as  expressed  by  r.E'C  :  "They  came  to  an  understanding,"  or  "into
one  counsel,"  P.HX  ~'±"  "X2;  in  which  Vitringa  agrees  with  him.  Kaulen  makes  a  labored  distinction  beh


tween


and  Cn"C1  the  first  ofwhi  h  he  refers  to  the  subjective  clement  in  speech,  producing  the  grammatical  form,  the  other
to  the  object' ve,  <  r  the  words  as  the  mai!n-  of  language.  In  proof,  he  cites  such  passages  as  Ps.  xii.  3,  r~~~~  rZ-
lip  n  f  flatter  it  t ;  Exod.  vi.  12,  itneircitmciscrl  lif ;  I'rov.  xii.  19,  lips  of  truth,  etc. ;  Is.  xxxiii.  19,  HEw  "p.""  ,  flrr-p  »f  1,'j-
Hut  "these,  examples  <  nly  how  that,  when  '.here  is  no  contrast  intended,  HE'J  ,  Up,  may  be  taken  generally  for  hmirur.re
Hike  lini/un,  the  tongue  ;  sou  ver.  U,  below),  including  not  only  words  and  pronunciation,  but  all  of  thought  and  exprcf  -
si  vi  that  beloncrs  to  it.  To  sh'.w  that  ~^~2~  and  HE—  are  not  tautological  here,  he  quotes  Ps.  lix.  13,  "i'ErE'J  "121  ,
the  iio.rd  of  their  lips  But  this  is  needless.  It  is  clear  that  they  are  not  tautological.  They  express  two  distinct  ideas  ;
and  vet  we  nriv  doubt  whether  there  is  intended  such  a  philosophical  antithesis  as  Kaulen  would  bring  out,  though  most
true  in  its<  If,  and  most  important  to  be  considi  red  in  the  science  oflanguage.  The  first  thought  would  be  the  other  way,
namely,  that  -.21  (AoyoO  denoted  the  subjective,  ar.d  HE  -  Up,  the  outward  or  objective  in  language ;  since  the  first  ia
u-ed  of  a  tliMii  ht  thin",  subject,  that  which  j.s  expressed,  as  well  as  the  word  or  expression.  The  terms  here  are  neither
tautologi  il,  nor  antitiietical,  but  supplemental  and  iuten.-ivo.  It  is  the  unity  of  language  described  in  the  most  compre-
hcnsive  manner:  one  tip,  that  is,  one  pronunciation,  and  the  same  words  (""X  ~'~~T,  every  one  of  them  (the  ]>lural
i  distributive!}'),  that  is,  one  name  for  each  thing,  and  one  way  of  speaking  it.  "When  they  arc  put  in  direct  con
trol,  then  r.C'^' ,  in-lead  of  the  subjective  clement,  as  Kaulen  maintain-,  w;uil  1  d<  :••  >tc  mere  sound  in  distinction  from
2T>E;J  "21,  Is.  xxxvi.  i>;  2  Kings,  xviii.  20;  I'rov.  xiv.  23—  speech  of  the  lips,  that  is,  mere
ind  without  sense.— T.  L.]

'  ["  Ver.  2.     Z~'~:~,  literally,  in  their  jui'.Unij  up.     It  is  used  of  the  taking  u;>  the  stakes  cf  a  tent  (see  it  in  it-  primary
:   .   xxxviii'  12)j  and  is  thus  ] •ietorially  de.-cri;  tive  of  a  nomadic  li.'e,  like  the  Arabic  J^£»..  .     H  is  used  of  the


,1  the  wihlern.  <    ti  here  the  i.Y-i  of  an  encampment.     The  descendants  of  Noah  had  hitherto  kept

.1-  rovin.'-.  — T.  I..]

— rendi  red  from  II, c  /.'•'.-•'.     Air.n  nia,  the  supposed  landing-place  of  the  ark,  was  northwest  of  Shinar.     Thii

'..  ;  s,  ,'.,',.",,,  SUT,pose   that  the  early  human  rai  e  made  a  detour  throng}i  Persia,  and  so  were  travelling  east  when  they

innr.'    Others  have  regarded  the  nrk-mountain  aa  situated  to  the  east,  a  view  which  can  only  be  maintained

l.'vsumio  inc  the  naming  of  the  Armenian  Ararat  to  belong  to  a  later  period,  as  a  transfer  from  an  older  and  more  ca-t-

.,  (St.(,  tcxt   notc  n.  308).     The  original  8  i-ipture  docs  not,  of  itself,  determine  the  location  as  either  east  or  west;

:    Samaritan  ver.s  on,  thai  makes  ii  6  rcnclib  (in  Ceylon)  is  not  to  be  rejected,  as  in  itself  false  or  absurd,  any

:      itionin  Armenia,  or  the  Targum  and  Syriac  mountains  oi  Kardu,  or  the  Arabian  Mount  Judi^

may  have  been.     P.a.hi  K  cms  thus  to  have  retrarded  it  when  he  interprets  "~."  as  a  journeyim-   IVc.m

---  -in(mcun1  linoft  nti  medjust  above,  ch.  x.  30.    Others  would  render  CI^-2  eastward,  or  to  the  east,  rcfer-

Oen   xiii.  11-  Xumb.xxxiv.il;  Josh.  vii.  2  ;  Judg.  viiL  11,  etc.,' in  all  of  which,  except  the  first,

tl  :  teriudi  not.  'A  position  instead  of  moving  direction,  and  may,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  detci-mincd  tn,m  the  standpoint,

red  or  assumed,  of  the  narrator  or  de<criber.     Uochait  regards  E1£  as  a  name  given  to  all  the  country  b,  yoivd  the

-    .  and  Ti  rris,  indcpi  nd,  ut  of  the  position  of  some  parts  of  it  i':.  respect  to  other  parts  or  to  regions  on  the  other

is  would  seem  the  best  way,  if  we  must  render  =1^.^  from  the  east.     IVai  there  is  an  older  sense  to  the  root,

n.hil  h  ,„  ,y  u-,,;i  i  .  ,.  ,gard  •  1  as  into  ded  here.    This  primary  sense  ,  ,  or  in  front  of.     Hence  its  application  to

c.     The  ,M  country  is  afterwards  called  the  East,  an  1  so  r^-jj?  1  ccomcs  a  word  of  local  direction.

:  Lary  sense  of  anteriority  gives  the  idea  here  demanded,  which  is  not  so 'much  any  particular  direction  (the

the  thin-  chiefly  in  view),  as  it  is  the  general  idea  of  progress.     As  they  journeyed  omcard,  rlp^  ,

"rigid  al>'n<l.  i:i  their  nomadia  rovin—from  one  Lrforr  to  another,  or  from  the  place  before  them  to  ,,nc  still  farther  on-
da  nrr2  ,  or  plain  country.  Gen  xiii.  12  seems  to  be  like  this,  and  may  be  rendered  in  the  same  way :  Abra
ham  and  Lot  parted  ;  the  former  settled  (  -'£*  )  in  the  land  where  they  were  ;  or  Abraham  sim,cJ,  as  we  say  in  familiar
En  \i  !,  1  ut  Lot  journeyed  on,  =1^  rB*' .  Compare  xi.  2,  tr  ^r-.',  and  IJiry  stopped  ll.ere.  (in  Shhiar),  where
--?•  is  in  a  similar  contra  t  to  the  nom  idle  word  r5- ' .  Or  it  may  be  taken  as  a  word  of  position  :  he  pitched  his  tent
"jtward.  In  this  place  the  Targam  of  Onkclos  has  Xr^"-;-2  ,  in  the.  7>,-f,  regarding  it  a;i  denoting  posi
ilso  the  Arabic  i  -C^*JI  ^  •  The  LXX.,  the  Vulgate;  and  the  Syriac  render  it  from  the  Zast.—'f.  I,.]

.4  ycr  o-1— ~  n"*^   X"P  called  its  name  BuW,  ?b2  C'^  "3,  because  there  he  confound,  d  (baltl  =  "  albcl)  the
.   etV     ThVre  i^l'lfficu'ltV.  sometimes,  in  the  etymologies'  given  in  the  Hebrew  Bible,  but  this  seems  to  be  a  re-

•

c  i    IT   „  ;-  vi  ^t  in  snvin-  that  -X'     L_sLj      f"r  E1110)  is  confined  alone  to  the  Arabic,  of  all
and  political  procedure.    Schelling  is  ngnt  m  saying  inai  _.«j,   *-jvj  ,  .

the  Sh,  mitic  tonnes.  It  is  e.-.tircly  unknown  to  the  Hebrew,  and  if  it  is  ever  found  in  any  very  late  Syriac,  it  comes
from  the  comparatively  modern  Arabic  use.  There  is  reason,  too,  to  regard  ^2  -  notwithstanding  a  doubt  expressed  by
Kawlinson  (RVWLIXSON  :  Herod.,  i.  p.  217),  as  the  same  with  ?53  ,  the  deified  power,  or  personage,  that  appears  nil  over


In  viow  of  these  facts,  there  must  be  rejected  the  idcaof  an  early  Babylonian  monarch,  to  whom  the  name  was  cxcl.^uely
giycn.  They  seem  to  have  used  the  word  in  the  plural,  as  the  Phoenicians  did  (=^?2  ,  Eaalim),  and  this  accounts  for
the  form  it  takes,  as  expressed  in  Greek,  in  the  Persx  of  ^SCHTLVS,  657,  ft,**,  APXaioS.  Though  with  a  angular  adjective,
it  can  be  nothing  less  than  'fiyz  (Baalin),  or,  as  the  whole  would  be  cxprcesc  :  Hebrew-,  ,i.S  ,J»n  ,  ,-

To  make  this  very  ancient  and  memorable  name  ^22  (Babel)  equivalent  to  the  Arabic  J_3  t_jb  ,  52  2X2  or  -i'2  22,
ya-e  of  Bel  or  Baal,  would  be  greatly  straining  etymology  as  well  as  history.  Had  such  a  derivation  been  found


CHAP.   XI.    1-9.


35S


Bible,  it  would  doubtless  Lave  been  contemptuously  rejected,  by  some  who  go  so  far  from  tbe  Bible  to  pet  it.  Nothing
can  be  more  direct  and  consistent  than  the  etymology  given  in  Genesis.  The  verb  b^2  is  the  same,  with  the  intensive
form  b^bn  ,  ballml,  from  which  b"  is  softened  after  becoming  a  fixed  and  oft-pronounced  name.  ^2t52  ,  balbel,  is  ap
onomntope,  exactly  like  our  word  babble,  and  its  sense  of  confusion  is  probably  secondary,  coming  from  this  early  onoma-
topic  use.  The  letters  L  and  K  are  cognate  and  interchangeable,  in  the  Greek  as  well  as  in  the  Shemitic  tongues.  Hence
Lalbal  and  /Sap.Sap  are  the  same.  Barbarian  did  not,  originally,  mean  savage,  but  one  who  speaks  a  different  language,
or  who  seems  t'o  the  hearer  to  babble.  It  was  the  place  where  men  first  became  barbarians  to  each  other  (sec  1  Cor.  xiv.
11),  though  the  name,  as  an  onomatope,  would  seem  still  to  belong  to  them  all.— T.  L.]


GENERAL  PRELIMINARY   DISCUSSION.

1.  The   literature:   Bibclwcrk,   Matthew,  p.   19.
The  present  work,  p.  119,  where  the  title  of  Nic-
buhr's  work  should  be  more  correctly  given :  "  His
tory  of  Assur  and  Babel."     Berlin,  1858.     KURTZ:
"History  of  the  Old   Testament."     HACG,  on  the
"Writing  and  Language  of  the  Second  Kind  of  Cu
neiform  inscriptions."   Gottingen,  1855.    J.  BKA.XDIS,
on  the  "  Historical  Results  from  the  Deciphering  of
the  Assyrian  Inscriptions."     Berlin,  1856.     FABRI  :
"  The  Origin  of  Heathendom  and  the  Problem  of  its
Mission."  Barmen,  1859.  The  latest:  KAULEN:  "The
Confusion  of  Languages  at,  Babel."     Mainz,  1861.
Explorers  of  the  ruins  of  Babylon,  especially  Rich,
Ker-Porter,  Layard,  Rawlinson,  Oppcrt.

2.  'J7te  history  of  the  building  the  tower  at  Babel
forma,  the  liiitii  to  the  history  of  the  primitive  time.
It  may  be  regarded  as  the  genesis  of  the  history  of
the  human  striving  after  a  false  outward  unity,  of  the
doom  of  confusion  that  God  therefore  imposed  upon
it,  of  the  dispersion  of  the  nations  into  all  the  world,
and  of  the  formation  of  heathendom  as  directly  con
nected  therewith.     In  the  proper  treatment  of  this
there  comes  into  consideration :  1.  the  relation  of  the
historical  fact-consistency  of  the  representation  to  its
universal  symbolical  significance  for  the  history  of
the  world,  and  to  its  special  symbolical  significance
for  the  kingdom  of  God ;  2.  the  relation  of  the  fact
itself  to  the  common  historical  knowledge,  as  well  as
to  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  3.  the  relation
of  the  confounding,  therein  represented,  to  the  original
unity  of  the  human  race  in  its  language,  as  well  as  to
the  multiplicity  that  originally  lay  in  human  speech ;
4.  the  historical  and  archa3ological  testimonies ;  5.
the  reflection  of  the  historical  fact  in  the  mythical
stories.

3.  Kurtz  correctly  maintains  (History  of  the  Old
Testament,   p.   95)  against  II.  A.  Hahn,  that  this
place  forms  the  boundary  between  the  history  of  the
primitive  time  and  the  history  of  the  Old  Testament.
Evidently  is  the  history  of  primeval  religion  distin
guished  from  the  general  history  of  the  Old  Testa
ment  by  definite  monuments,  namely,  by  the  charac
teristic  feature  of  the  faith  in  promise,  as  presented
in  the  genealogies,  through  which  faith  Abraham,  as
the  type  of  the  patriarchal  religion,  stands  in  contrast
with  Melchidezek,  the  type  of  the  primitive  religion,
— even  as  the   morning   twilight  of  the  new  time
stands  in  contrast  with  the  evening  twilight  of  the
old.     And  so,  too,  according  to  Gal.  iii.  and  Rom.  iv.,
it  is  not  Moses  who  is  the  beginning  of  the  covenant
religion,  but  Abraham.     Moreover,  in  the  history  of
the  tower-building  there  is  brought  out  not  only  the
ground   form   for   the   historical    configuration   the
world  is  to  assume,  but  also  the  contrast  between
heathenism  and   the   beginnings  of  the  theocracy.
For  the  sake  of  this  contrast,  according  to  our  view,
the  section  may  still  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the
first  period  from  the  beginnings  of  the  Shemitic  pa-
triarchalbm  ;  although  when  regarded  in  itself  alone,
and  under  the  historical  form  of  view  of  the  Old  Tes


tament,  it  appears  as  an  introduction  to  the  history
of  Abraham.

4.  The  genesis  of  (7ie  human  striving  after  a.
false  outward  unity,  or  uniformity  and  conformity.
As  in  the  history  of  Cain,  the  first  beginnings  of  cul
ture  in  the  building  of  cities,  in  the  discoveries  and
inventions  of  the  means  of  living,  of  art,  and  of
weapons  of  defence,  were  buried  in  their  own  cor
ruption  (since  the  germs  of  culture,  however  law
ful  in  themselves,  are  overwhelmed  in  their  ungodly
worthlessness),  and  as  in  the  history  of  Nimrod  the
post-diluvian  beginnings  of  civilization,  and  of  out
ward  political  institutions,  were  darkened  by  the  in
dications  of  despotic  violence,  so  also,  in  the  history
of  the  tower-building,  must  we  distinguish  the  natu
ral  striving  of  the  human  race  after  an  essential
unity,  from  their  aberration  in  a  bold  and  violent
effort  to  obtain  an  outward  consistency,  an  outward
uniformity  (or  conformity  rather)  to  be  established
at  the  cost  of  the  inward  unity.  DKLITZSCII  says  cor
rectly  (p.  310) :  "  the  unity  which  had  hitherto  bound
together  the  human  family  was  the  community  of
one  God,  and  of  one  divine  worship.  This  unity  did
not  satisfy  them ;  inwardly  they  had  already  lost  it ;
and  therefore  it  was  that  they  strove  for  another.
There  is,  therefore,  an  ungodly  unity,  which  they
sought  to  reach  through  such  self-invented,  sensual,
outward  means,  whilst  the  very  thing  they  feared
they  predicted  as  their  punishment.  In  its  essence,
therefore,  it  was  a  Titanic  heaven-defying  undertak
ing."  *  The  inward  unity  of  faith  ought  to  have  been
the  centre  of  gravity,  the  rule  and  the  measure  of
their  outward  unity.  The  historical  form  of  their
true  unity  was  the  religion  of  Shem ;  its  concrete
middle  point  was  'Shem  himself.  It  sounds,  therefore,
like  a  derisive  allusion  to  the  despised  blessing  of
Shem,  when  they  say :  Go  to,  let  us  build  a  tower  for
us,  and  make  unto  ourselves  a  name  (a  Shem).
When,  therefore,  the  tower-building,  the  false  out
ward  idea  of  unity  is  frustrated,  then  it  is  that
Abraham  must  appear  upon  the  stage  as  the  effective
middle  point  of  humanity,  and  the  preparcr  of  the
way  for  the  unity  that  was  to  come.  Abraham  forma

*  [The  more  carefully  the  peculiar  language  of  this  Tia-
bcl  history  is  considered,  and  especially  its  heaven-defying
look,  the  more  probable  will  appear  the  view  supported  by
Bryant,  which  regards  it  as  the  origin  of  the  heathen  fabk-
of  the  war  of  the  giants  against  the  gods.  The  war  of  the
Titans  was  probably  the  same,  though  it  appears  as  a  dupli
cate  of  the  event  in  the  Greek  mythology.  The  latter,  how
ever,  being  set  fortli  as  the  more  ancient  event,  may,  with
some  reason,  be  referred  to  the  antediluvian  rebellion  de
scribed  in  Gen.  vith.  Both  of  these  myths  must  have  had
some  historical  foundation  in  actual  human  history  ;  for
nothing  can  be  more  wild  in  itself,  or  more  inconsistent  with
what  wo  know,  or  may  conceive,  of  the  earliest  thinking,
than  those  representations  of  allegorical  wars  of  which  somo
writers  are  so  fond.  In  the  first  period  of  human  life,  men
were  too  much  occupied  with  the  great  actual,  and  this  is
shown  by  the  very  exaggerations  of  the  form  which  it  as
sumed  in  history.  Myth-making  and  allegorizing  cam«  in
afterwards.  The  war  of  ideas,  of  which  some  talk,  shows
a  previous  philosophizing,  however  crude.  The  sight  of
great  physical  convulsions  may  have  suggested  some  of  thcsa
stories  ;  but  the  actual  occurrence  of  great  events  in  human
history  was  their  more  probable  source. — T.  L.]


360


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


the  theocratic  contrast  to  the  heathen  tower-building.
Since  that  time,  however,  the  striving  of  human  na
ture  has  ever  taken  the  other  direction,  namely,  to
establish  by  force  the  outward  unity  of  humanity  at
the  expense  of  the  inward,  and  in  contradiction  to  it;
this  has  appeared  as  well  in  the  history  of  the  world
monarchies  as  in  that  of  the  hierarchies.  The  his
tory  of  Babel  had  its  piv.-ig::al  in  the  city  of  Cain,
its  symbol  in  the  building  of  the  tower,  its  beginning
in  the  Babylonian  world-monarchy;  but  its  end,
according  to  Rev.  xvi.  17,  falls  in  the  "last  time."
The  contrast  to  this  hi.-tnry  of  an  outward  force-
unity  is  formed  by  Shem,  Abraham,  /ion,  Christ,  the
Church  of  believers,  the  bride  of  Christ,  according
to  Bcv.  x.\i.  -J,  ;».

5.  ?'//•  ii  arsis  "f  1h:'  confounding  t<>  u'liich  It  was
<!:,<,), n<!  I,;/  fin:/.  The  germinal  multiplicity,  as  con
tained  i.i  the  unity  of  the  human  race,  is  to  be  re
garded  as  the  na  nr.il  ba.-is  of  the  event.  We  can
not,  a-;  has  been  attempted  by  Origcii  and  other.-,
derive  a:i  organic  divi-ion  of  the  nations  in  their
manifold  c  i::!rasis  (and  just  as  little  the  varied  multi
plicity  of  life  in  the  world)  from  the  fall  merelv,  or
from  human  corruption.  To  this  effect,  it  is  \\e'l  ob
served  by  Dclitzsch,  that  '•  even  without  th.it  diune
and  miraculous  interposition,  the  one  original  lan
guage,  by  virtue  of  the  abundance  of  gifts  and  po\v(  rs
that  belong  to  humanity,  would  have  run  through  an
advancing  process  of  enrichment,  spirituali/ation,  and
diversity."  This  germinal  multiplicity  forms,  there
fore,  the  olher  >ide,  or  the  higher,  spiritual  side,  in
the  confr.-ion  of  languages  ;  but  thi.-,  too,  we  must
rlistingui.-h  in  its  genesis  and  in  its  world-luMorical
consequences.  Since  the  Babylonian  tower-building
denotes  the  genesis  of  the  national  separations  as
the  genesis  of  heathendom  (but  not  the  monstrous
development  ()f  heathendom  which  goes  on  through
the  age-),  so,  in  like  manner,  does  it  denote  the
gene-is  of  the  speech-confounding,  but  not  its  great
development  in  the  course  of  time.  This  genesis,
however,  is  to  lie  considered  in  reference  to  the  fol
lowing  points :  1.  With  the  violent  striving  after  an
outward  unity  there  is  connected  the  crushing  of  the
diversity.  U.  This  violent  suppression  calls  out,  by
way  of  reaction,  the  effort  and  intensity  of  the  diver
sifying  tendency,  or  the  conflict  of  spirits.  ".  With
this  conflict  of  spirits  there  develops  itself,  also,  the
contrast  of  varying  views  and  modes  of  expression.
-1.  The  disordered  and  broken  unity  becomes  dis
solved  into  partial  unities,  which  form  themselves
around  the  middle  points  of  tribal  affinity,  and  so
form  their  watchwords.  Thus  far  goes  on  the  pro-
ccss  of  dissolution,  in  the  sin  and  guilt  of  the  strife
after  an  outward  unity.  But  here  comes  in  the
divine  judgment  in  its  miraculous  imposition:  the
spirits,  the  modes  of  conception,  the  modes  of  ex
pression,  the  tongues  themselves,  arc  all  so  confound
ed,  that  there  becomes  a  perfect  breach  of  unity,  and
more  than  this,  a  hostile  springing  apart  of  unfet
tered  elements  that  had  been  bound  up  in  a  forced
unity.  So  did  the  divine  doom  establish  a  genesis
in  the  confusion  of  languages — a  genesis  which  after
wards,  in  the  course  of  time,  came  to  its  full  develop
ment.

(5.  The  genesis  of  the  dispersion  of  the  peoples  in
all  the  world,  and  of  the  formation  'of  heathendom
that  from  thence  bee/an.  In  opposition  to  the  cen
tripetal  force  of  humanity,  impaired  by  its  own
supcrtension  and  the  outward  alienating  tendency,
comes  now  the  reaction  of  the  morbid  centrifugal
power  set  free  by  the  sentence  of  God.  So  com


mence  the  national  emigrations  of  antiquity,  setting
away  from  the  centre  of  community,  forming  in  this
a  contrast  to  the  migrations  of  the  Christian  time,
which  maintain  their  connection  with  the  centre  of
humanity,  the  host  of  the  Christian  church.  In
greater  and  smaller  waves  of  mig:atio;i  do  the  na
tions  scatter  abroad,  and  grow  widely  diverse  in  their
separate  lands,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  views  which
they  awaken  ;  and  this  to  such  a  degree  that  every
where  they  lose  themselves  in  a  peculiarly  paganistic
autochthonic  consciousness,  or,  as  it  may  be  generally
styled,  a  servile  lite  of  nature.  The  lino  of  Shem
is  least  affected  by  the  drawing  of  this  centrifugal
power.  It  extends  itself  slowly  from  Babylon,  in  u.
small  degree  to  the  east,  and  in  great  part  to  the
southwest.  The  main  stream  of  the  llamites  takes
a  southwestern  direction  towards  Canaan  and  Africa;
another  stream  appears  to  have  turned  itself  east-
wardly  over  Persia  and  towards  India.  'The  great
stream  of  the  daphethites  goes  first  northward,  in  or
der  to  divide  it.-'lf  into  a  western  and  an  eastern
current;  a  part,  however,  in  all  probability,  taking
a  still  more  northern  direction,  until,  through  upper
Asia,  it  reaches  the  New  World.  The  most  evident
division  of  the  Shemites  is  into  three  parts,  which
still  reflect  themselves  in  the  three  main  Slumitio
languages.  The  fundamental  separation  has  gone
on  into  wider  separations;  for  example,  into  the
division  of  the  Indian  and  the  Persian  Arians.  These
divisions  are,  again,  in  a  great  degree,  effaced  by
combinations  which  proceeded  from  the  contrast
between  earlier  and  later  migrations  in  the  same  di
rection.  So,  for  example,  in  eastern  A.-ia,  the  ,Ja-
phcthitcs  appear  to  have  supervened  upon  the  II. un
ites,  in  Asia  Minor  and  Persia  upon  the  Shemites :
and  so,  in  many  ways,  have  the  earlier  .Japhethitc
features  been  overlaid  and  set  aside  by  the  later.  In
Canaan,  on  the  other  hand,  the  llamites  appear  to
have  supervened  upon  the  original  Shemitic  inhabit
ants  ;  and  then,  again,  at  a  later  date,  the  Israelites
supervened  upon  the  llamitic  Ganaanitcs.

The  most  direct  consequence  of  this  dispersion
of  the  nations  was  the  formation  of  races,  in  which
different  factors  cooperated :  1.  The  family  type  ;  2.
th'*  spiritual  direction  ;  ;;.  the  climate  in  its  strong
effect  upon  the  physical  ground-forms  which  were
yet  in  their  state  of  childlike  flexibility.  A  further
consequence  was  the  formation  of  ethnographical
contrasts  in  civilization.  In  reference  to  this  there
must  be  distinguished  :

1 )  The  contrast  between  the  savage  nations  who
had  become  utterly  unhistorical,  or  perfectly  sepa
rated  from  the  central  humanity,  and  the  historical
nations.

~2)  The  contrast  of  barbarian  nations  who  for  a
long  time  preserved  a  state  of  negative  indifference
as  compared  with  the  nations  that  were  within  the
community  of  culture.

o)  The  contrast  presented  by  the  7iations  and
tribes  of  isolated  culture,  as  compared  with  the  cen
tralized  culture,  or  that  of  the  world  monarchies  as
it  appeared  in  its  latest  form,  the  Graco-Roman-
humanitarian  sphere  of  culture.

4)  The  contrast  presented  by  the  nations  of  this
centralized  culture,  or  as  it  finally  appeared  in  the
Grteco-Roman-humanitarian  culture,  as  compared
with  the  central  theocratic  people  of  cultus  or  re
ligion.

The  last  contrasts  reveal,  as  the  second  conse
quence,  a  double  counterworking  against  the  pagan-
istic  idolization  ;  the  first  is  a  tendency  to  the  outer


CHAP.   XI.    1-9.


unity  (world-monarchy),  the  other  a  tendency  to  the
inner  unitv  (theocracy).  A  third  consequence  was
the  war  between  them.

7.   The  relation  of  the  historical  fact-consistency
of  the  Biblical  representation  to  its  symbolical  signifi
cance  for  the  universal  history  of  the  world.  ^  it  i*
difficult  to  determine  the  chronological  order  of  the
tower-building  in  the  Biblical  history  ;  it  is  still  more
difficult  to  fix  its  place  in  the  universal  secular  his
tory.     It  is,  however,  more  easy  to  do  this  when  we
assume  that  the  history  of  the  tower-building  was
that  of  a  gradually  elapsing  event,  which  is  here  all
comprehended  ill  its  germinal  transition-point  (as  the
commencing  turning-point),  conformably  to  the  rep
resentation  of  the  religious  historico-symbolical  his
toriography.     Following  the  indications  of  the  Bible
itself,  we  must   distinguish    two  periods:    first,  the
founding  of  Babel,  in   consequence  of  an  ungodly
centralization  fancy  of  the  first  human  race,  and  the
catastrophe    of   the    commencing    dissolution   that
thereby  came  in ;  secondly,  the  despotic  founding  of
the  kingdom  of  Babel  by  Nimrod,  as  connected  with
it.     Add  to  this  a  third,  which  is  in  like  manner  at
tested  by  the  Bible,  namely,  the  further  development
of  Babel  as  it  continued  on  in  spite  of  the  disper
sion,   and  to  whose  greatness  the  stories  of  Ninus
and  Semiramis,  as  well  as  the  world-historical  ruins
of  Babylon  bear  testimony.     It  is  in  perfect  accord
ance  with  the  theocratic  historiography,  that  events
which  occupy  periods  are  comprehended  in  the  ger
minal  points  of  their  peculiar  epochs.     As  this  is  the
case  with  the  tower-building,  so  does  it  also  hold  true
of  the  confusion  of  languages,  and  the  dispersion  of
the  nations.     In  regard  now  to  this  germinal  point
especially,  it  has  been  wrongly  placed  in  the  days  of
Peleg,  in  supposed  accordance  with  what  was  said,
ch.  x.  25,  concerning  the  meaning  of  the  name  Pele"-
Kcil   computes   that   Pcleg  was  born  one  hundred
years  after  the  flood,  and  draws  from  thence  the  wider
conclusion,  that  "in  the  course  of  one  hundred  and
fifty  to  one  hundred  and  eighty  years,  and  in  the
rapid  succession  of  births,  the  descendants  of  the
three  sons  of  Noah,  who  were  already  married  and
a  hundred  years  old  at  the  time  of  the  flood,  must
have  already  so  greatly  multiplied  as  to  render  cred
ible  their  proceeding  to  build  such  a  tower"  (p  IOQ)
In  respect  to  the  third  designated  period  of  the  tower-
buildmg,  Delitzsch  thus  remarks  in  relation  to  the
Biblical  interpretation  of  the  name  Babel  (for  Balbel
a  pilpel   form  in  which  the  first  Lamed  has  fallen
The  name  Babel  denotes  the  world  city  where
men  became  dispersed  into  nations,  as  the  name  Je
rusalem   denotes   the  city  of  God,  where  they  are
again  brought  together  as  one  family.     As  the  name
Jerusalem  obtains  this  sense  in  the  light  of  prophecy
the  name  given  to  Babel,  no  matter  whether
with  or  without  the  design  of  the  first  namer  a  sic-
uflcant  hiero-glyph  of  that  judgment  of  God  which
was  interwoven  in  the  very  origin  of  this  world-city
d  of  that  tendency  to  an  ungodly  unity  which  it
as  ever  manifested.     That  the°name,  in  the  sense
tf  the  world-city  itself,  may  denote  somethin-  else
9  not  opposed  to  this.     The  Etymologicum  Magnum

f  dnV  T0  T0^  ™'AO-U'  and  S0)  accoi'dinP;  to  Masu-
ii,  do  the  learned  Persians  and  Nabatteans.  It  has
cordmgly,  been  explained  as  the  gate  or  the  house
>r,  according  to  Knobel,  the  castle  of  Belus  (2  equal
Jarkthft  ^~'-  °r  "^  f°r  n'-n:?)1  Spelling's  re-
dialect,  is  without  grouuY;  it  ^t  asmuch


Aramaic  as  Arabic.  The  verb  ±S  ,  in.'rare,  like  CJS
asccndere,  is  a  very  old  derivative  from  X3  ,  inire
But  Rawlinson  and  Oppert  have  shown,  on  the  au
thority  of  the  inscriptions,  that  the  name  of  the  goc
a  not  ba,  but  bx  (the  Babylonian  Phoenician
Kronos),  and  baa  ,  therefore,  denotes  the  gate  of
El."  If  the  development  of  heathenism,  in  a  rcljfr.
lous  sense,  and,  therefore,  the  development  of  idol-
atry  is  regarded  as  a  gradual  process,  the  heathen-
ish  tendency  at  the  time  of  Nimrod  could  not  have
been  far  advanced.  Its  more  distant  beginning  ig
probably  to  be  placed  in  the  very  time  of  the  catas
trophe;  for  the  confusion  of  fundamental  reli-ious
views  may  in  general,  furnish  of  itself  an  essential
tactor  in  the  confusion  of  languages.

On  the  situation  of  the  land  of  Shinar  and  Baby-
Ion  this  side  of  the  Euphrates,  compare  the  Manuals
lor  the  _  old  geography  by  Forbiger  and  others
Concerning  the  ruins  of  the  old  Babel,  and  Babel
itself,  compare  WINER'S  "Real  Lexicon  "  the  "Dic
tionary  for  Christian  People,"  and  HERZOG'S  "  Real
Encyclopedia,"  under  the  article  "Babel"  In  lil-e
manner  DELITZSCH,  p.  212;  KXOBKL,  p!  127,  and
the  catalogue  of  literature  there  given.

8.  The  special  symbolic  significance  of  Babel  for
the  kingdom  of  God.     Here  there  are  to  be  distin
guished  the  following  stages  :  1.  The  significance  of
the  tower-building ;  2.  the  Babel  of  Nimrod,  or  the
lespotic  form  of  empire,  and  its,  tendency  to  con-
jucst ;  3.  the  significance  of  the  world-monarchy  of

Nebuchadnezzar;  4.  the  Old  Testament  symbolic
ntcrpretation  of  Babel  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  ;  Is  xiv  •  Jcr
.  ;  Dan.  ii.  37 ;  vii.  4  ;  Habakuk) ;  5.  The  New-Tes
tament  apocalyptic  Babylon  (Rev.  xiv.,  xvi.,  xvii )
Throughout  Holy  Scripture,  Babel  forms  a  world-
historical  antithesis  to  Zion.

9.  TJic  relation  of  the  confounding,  as  presented
to  the  original  unity  of  the  human  race,  as  also  to  the
original  multiplicity  as  lying  at  the  foundation  of
human  speech.     The  two  poles  by  which  the  catas
trophe  of   the  speech-confounding  are  limited    are
the  following:  In  the  first  place,  even  after  the' con
fusion  of  languages,  there  exists  a  fundamental  unity  •
there  is  the  logical  unity  of  the  ground-forms  of  lan
guage  (verb,  substantive,  etc.),  the  rhetorical  unity
of  figurative  modes  of  expression,  the  lexical  unity
of   kindred   fundamental   sounds,    the  grammatical
umty<  of  kindred    linguistic    families,  such   as   the
bnenutic,    the    Indo-Germanic,    and    the    historical
unity  in  the  blending  of  different  idioms  ;   as,  for
example,  in  the  Kotv-n,  or  common  dialect,  there  are
blended  the  most  diverse  dialects  of  the  Greek ;  so
in  the  New-Testament  Greek,  to  a  certain  extent,'the
Hebrew  and  old  Greek ;  in  the  Roman   languages
Latin,  German,  and  Celtic  dialects ;  so,  also,  in  the
English;  in  the  Lutheran  High  German,  too,  there
are  _  different  dialects  of  Germany.     Science   takea
for  its  reconciling  medium  an  ideal  unity  from  the
beginning  of  the  separations ;  faith  supposes  a  real
unity,   and  so,  finally,  Christendom  and  the  Bible.
In  the  second  place,  however,  it  must  be  acknowl
edged  that  in  the  original   manifoldness  of  human
power  and  views  there  was  already  indicated  a  mani
foldness    of   different   modes  of  expression      "In
deed,"  says  Delitzsch,  "  even  if  this  wonderful  divine"
interposition  had  not  taken  place,  the  one  primitive
speech  would  not  have  remained  in  stagnant  immo
bility.     By  reason  of  the  richness  of  the  gifts  that
are  stored  in  humanity,  it  would  have  ran  through  a
process  of  progressive  self-enrichment,  spiritualize


362


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


tion,  development,  and  manifold  diversity  ;  but  now,
when  the  linguistic  unity  of  humanity  was  lost,  to
gether  with  its  unity  in  God,  and  with  it,  also,  the
unity  of  an  all-defining  consciousness,  there  came,  in
the  place  of  this  multiplicity  in  unity,  a  breaking  up,
a  cleaving  asunder,  where  all  connection  seems  lost,
but  which,  nevertheless,  through  a  thousand  indices,
points  back  to  the  fact  of  an  original  oneness.  For,
as  Schellin^  savs,  confusion  of  language  only  origi
nates  wherever  discordant  elements  which  cannot
attain  to  unity  can  just  as  little  come  from  one  an
other.  In  every  developing  speech  the  original  unity
works  0:1,  e-.vn  as  the  allinity  partially  shows  ;  a
taking  away  oi'  all  unity  would  be  the  taking  away
of  language  itself;  and,  thereby,  of  everything  hu
man,  —  a  limit  to  which,  according  to  Schclling's  judg
ment,  the  South  American  Indians  are  approaching,
as  tribes  that  can  never  become  nations,  and  which
arc  yet  a  living  witness  of  a  complete  and  inevitable
disorganization  "  (DEUTZSCH,  \\  114,  115).  In  ac
cordance  with  the  religious  diameter  of  Holy  Scrip
ture,  we  must,  before  all  thing-,  reg;ird  the  confusion
of  languages  as  a  confusion  of  the  religious  under
standing.  Languages  expressive  mainly  of  the  sub
jective,  languages  of  the  objective,  those  of  an
ous  directness,  and  those  of  acute  or  ingfii-
io.is  accommodation,  must  very  soon  present  great
contrasts.

In  regard  to  the  original  language,  which  pre
ceded  the  confusion,  and  formed  i;s  ground,  the
learned  men  of  the  .Jewish  Synagogue,  and  after
them,  the  ehureh  fathers,  as  well  as  many  orthodox
theologian.-1,  ^among  the  moderns  with  some  limita
tion,  Pareati,  L'avernik,  Von  (ierlach,  Baumgarten),
have  expr  ••.-.  ed  the  opinion  that  the  Hebrew  was  the
language  of  the  primitive  time  and  of  Paradise,  and
that  it  was  propagated  after  the  flood  by  the  race
of  EbtT.  (hi  the  contrary,  however,  it  is  observed
that  Abraham  himself  did  not  originally  speak  He
brew,  but  Aramaic.*  ''On  this  account,"  says  De-
lit/S'.-h,  "  we  mil-!  regard  as  better  grounded  the  po
sition  of  the  Syriac,  Aramaic,  and  Persian  writers,
that  the  Syriac,  or  the  Xabat;ean,  was  the  primitive
speech,  and  that  in  the  confusion  of  tongues  it  was
still  retained  as  the  language  of  Babylon.  But,
moreover,  the  Shemitic  in  its  general  acceptation,"
he  continues,  "  cannot  lay  claim  to  that  perfection
which  must  have  belonged  to  the  primitive  speech.
We  find  nothing  to  urge  against  the  supposition  that
the  original  language,  as  such,  may  have  become  lost
in  those  that  are  historically  known"  (I>i:i.n/sm,
1>.  31o  ;  KI:IL,  p.  119).  Nevertheless,  we  do  not  be
lieve  that  this  supposition  receives  any  strength  from
what  is  a  mere  prejudice,  namely,  that  in  respect  to
its  structure  the  paradise  language  must  have  been
a  very  perfect  one.  The  speech  of  holy  innocence
has  no  need  to  prove  its  claims  through  forms  devel
oped  with  great  exactness.  As  the  Shemitic  verbal
forms  lie  in  the  middle  between  the  monosyllabic
character  of  the  Chinese  and  the  polysyllabic  char
acter  of  the  Indo-Gcrmaiiic  ;  as  they  carry  with


*  [There  conM,  at  this  time,  have  horn  no  great  differ
ence  between  Ilelirew  and  Aramaic.  Even  in  the  days  of
Jacob  and  L-iban,  they  could  not  have  diverged  much  ;
e-ince  they  appear  to  have  well  understood  each  other  in  the
very  beginning  of  Jacob's  residence.  Afterwards,  when
they  parted,  they  save  two  different  names  (1"^5  and
ttr"™!"!^.1  "i!P  ,  Gen.  xxxi.  47)  to  the  monumental  heap
of  stones  ;  but  in  so  doing,  they  probably  sought  as  much
diversity  as  the  crowing  change  in  their  respective  dialects
would  afford.—  T.  L.]


themselves,  also,  in  a  high  degree,  that  impression
of  immcdiateness,  of  the  onomatopic,  of  the  sensible
presentation  of  the  spiritual,  of  the  spiritualizing  of
the  sensible,  so,  without  doubt,  do  they  lie  specially
near  to  the  ground-form  of  different  national  tongues.
In  respect  to  the  relation  of  the  different  languages,
there  may  be  compared  the  following  writings  aa
specially  belonging  to  the  subject,  namely :  DE-
LITZSCH  :  "  Jeschurun  ;  "  Frnsi  :  "  Concordance  ;  "
"Treatises  of  Kunic,"  ERNEST  RKNAN  ;  see  DKUT/SCII,
p.  C32.  Besides  these,  KAULF.N,  p.  70  (The  Hebrew
in  its  peculiar  character  stands  nearest  to  the  con
ception  of  the  primitive  speech).

Zahn,  in  his  treatise  ("The  Kingdom  of  God,"  p.
90),  presents  a  clear  idea  of  the  similarity  of  dill'ercnt
languages.  "The  great  'Language  Atlas'  of  Balbi
is  designed  on  the  most  carefully  considered  princi
ples  (Paris,  ]S2(',).  After  a  keenly  investigated  di
vision  of  language  and  dialect,  he  designates  eight
hundred  and  sixty  languages  as  spoken  on  the  earth,
namely,  fifty-three  in  Europe,  one  hundred  and  fifty-
three  in  Asia,  one  hundred  and  fifteen  in  Africa,  four
hundred  and  twenty-two  in  America,  one  hundred
and  seventeen  in  the  fifth  portion  of  the  world;  and
yet  at  this  day  must  the  whole  sum  be  taken  at  a
greater  number,  cspcci-.dly  in  consei|tienee  of  re
searches  in  Africa."  Kaulcn.  Linguistic  investiga
tions  that  belong  here  are  connected  with  the  names
of  Herder,  Adelung,  Vater,  Klaproth,  Baljii,  Remii-
sat,  W.  Yon  Humboldt.  Sehk-icher,  Ileyse,  Bopp,
Steinthall,  Pott,  Schott,  Ewald,  Fiirst,  Bunsen,  Max
Miillcr,  Jones,  Oppert,  Hang,  and  others,  lu  favor
of  the  original  unity  of  languages,  as  against  Pott
and  others  who  call  it  in  question,  see  KAI:LEN,  p.
'2G  ;  "  Treatises  on  the.  Origin  of  Languages,"  by  the
same  author,  p.  l<>i>.

in.  The  historical  n,i<l  archccological  testimonies
for  the.  fact  of  tltc  conftixi;>t  of  !<tnr/n"yx.  BI:.V<KN  :
"Comparative  Philology  would  have  been  compelled
to  set  forth  as  a  postulate  the  supposition  of  some
such  division  of  languages  in  Asia,  especially  on  the
ground  of  the  relation  of  the  Egyptian  language  to
the  Shemitie,  even  if  the  Bible  had  not  assured  us
of  the  truth  of  this  great  historical  event.  It  is
truly  wonderful,  it  is  matter  of  astonishment,  [it  is
more  than  a  mere  astounding  fact,]  that  something
so  purely  historical  [and  yet  divinely  fixed],  something
so  conformable  to  reason,  [and  yet  not  to  be  con
ceived  of  as  a  mere  natural  development],  is  here
related  to  us  out  of  the  oldest  primeval  period,  and
which  now,  for  the  first  time,  through  the  new  sci
ence  of  philology,  has  become  capable  of  being  his
torically  and  philosophically  explained."  Between
this  history  and  the  previous  chapter  must  lie  the
primitive  history  of  the  eastern  Asiatics,  namely,
the  time  of  the  formation  of  the  Chinese  language,
that  primitive  speech  that  has  no  formative  words,
that  is,  no  inflecting  forms.  The  Chinese  can  hardly
take  rank  as  a  radical  language,  but  only  as  a  very
ancient  and  strikingly  one-sided  ramification.  To
the  linguistic  testimonies  there  maybe  added  the  fact
that  Babylon  became  the  oldest  world-monarchy;
there  is  also  its  very  ancient  fame,  and  the  fact  that
the  influence  which  went  out  from  Babylon  has  in
the  most  varied  forms  pervaded  the  whole  history
of  the  world,  to  say  nothing  of  its  giant  ruins  and
the  desolation  which  has  so  loiig  rested  as  a  judg
ment  upon  them."

11.  The  mirroring  of  the  confusion  of  language*
as  found  in  the  mythical  stories.  See  DELITZSCH,  p.
813;  LUCKEN,  p. '278;  EUSEBIUS,  Prceparalio,  ix.


CHAP.   XI.    1-9.


303


14.  AUYDENUS:  "  Some  say  that  the  men  who  first
came  forth  from  the  earth,  being  confident  in  their
greatness  and  strength,  and  despising  the  gods  in
their  fancied  estimation  of  their  own  powers,  under
took  to  build  a  high  tower  in  the  place  where  Baby
lon  now  is.  They  would  already  have  made  a  near
approach  to  the  Heavens,  had  not  the  winds  come  to
the  help  of  the  gods  and  overturned  their  tower.
Its  ruins  have  received  the  name  of  Babylon.  Men
had  hitherto  spoken  but  one  language,  but  now,  in
the  purpose  of  the  gods,  their  speech  became  di
verse;  to  this  belongs  the  war  that  broke  out  be
tween  Kronos  and  Titau.


EXEGETICAL  AND  CKITICAL.

1.  Ver*.  1  and  2.     The  settling  in  the  land  of
Shinar. — Ths  whole  earth,  that  is,  the  whole  hu
man  race. — One  language  and  one  speech  (Lange
more  literally,  one  lip  and  one  kind  of  words).
The  form  and  the   material  of  language  were  the
same   for   all. — From  the   East  (Lange   renders,
towards  the  East.     Our  margin,  Eastward). —
Prom  the  land  of  Ararat,  southeast  (-"ip^  as  one
word :   the  land  of,  or  from  the  East). — A  plane.
— For  them,  as  they  came  from  the  highlands,  the
plane  was  the  low  country,  a  valley  plane  (Til'p'Z). —
Shinar,  the  same  as  Babylonia,  though  extending
farther  northward. — And  they  dwelt  there. — The
preference  for  the  hill  country  does  not  appear  to
have  belonged  to  the  young  humanity.     Under  the
most  obvious  points  of  view,  convenience,  fertility,
and  easier  capability  of  cultivation,  seem  to  have
given  to  these  children  of  nature  a  preference  for
the  plain.     Even  at  this  day  do  the  uncultivated  in
habitants  of  the  hills  sometimes  manifest  the  same
choice.     In  this  respect  Babylon  had  for  them  the
charm  of  extraordinary  fruitfulness.     ZAUN  ("  King
dom  of  God,"  p.  86)  gives  extracts  from  Hippocrates
and  Herodotus  in  proof  of  the  singular  productive
ness  of  this  land  of  the  palm,  where  the  grain  yields
from  two  hundred  to  three  hundred  fold.     Thence
came  luxury,  which  was  followed  by  the  cultivation
of  the  paradisaical  gardens  (Gardens  of  Semiramis)
and  a  life  of  sensuality,  together  with  a  sensual  re
ligious  worship.

2.  Vers.  3  and  4.     The  building  of  t/ie  tower.

— They  said  one  to  another,  Go  to. — Expressive

)f   an    animated,    decided    undertaking. — Let    us

make  brick. — The  plain  was   deficient  in  stones,

whereas,  on  the  contrary,  it  abounded  in  a  clayey

ioil  which  would  serve  for  making  bricks,  and  as-

}haltum,  which  was  good  for  mortar.     They  burnt

.hem  to  stone  instead  of  merely  hardening  them  in

he  sun,  which  otherwise  was  the  more  obvious  prac-

ice. — And  thsy  said  (again)  Go  to. — Their  suc-

:ess  in  preparing  bricks  for  their  dwellings  enccur-

ged  them  to  go  farther.     They  resolved  upon  the

milding  of  a  city,  and  a  tower  whose  top  may  reach,

tc.     At  the  ground  of  this  there  evidently  lies  the

upression  of  immensity  as  derived  from  the  Baby-

inian  plane,  which  actually,  in  its  great  extent,  as

ome  travellers  have  described  it,  gives  the  concep-

:  on  of  the  sublime.  The  visible  middle  point  of
i  ic  same  must  have  been  the  tower,  standing  up  as
sign  of  unity  for  the  whole  human  race.  Accord-
ig  to  the  representation,  therefore,  the  words,  "  even
)  the  heaven,"  would  mean  that  the  heaven  was
Jgarded  as  something  that  could  be  reached;  al


though  at  a  later  period  such  language  occurs  in  a
hyperbolical  sense. — And  let  us  make  us  a  name.
— The  expression  C'iJ  IP  fT£9  denotes  the  appoint
ing  or  establishing  for  one's  self  a  signal  of  renown
(Is.  Ixiii.  12,  14  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  2o).  The  sign  of  secu
rity  shall  be  for  them,  at  the  same  time,  a  sk^n  of
their  fame,  and  thus,  doubtless,  would  they  give
themselves  a  name  as  a  people. — Lest  we  be  scat
tered  abroad. — Not  only  as  a  visible  signal,  but  by
the  glory  of  its  fame  shall  the  tower  hold  them  to
gether.  This  is  the  expression  of  the  political  and
popular  feeling  of  antiquity ;  in  the  pride  of  the  na
tional  spirit  the  individual  is  lost  with  his  strength
and  his  conscience.  Such  is  the  characteristic  fea
ture  of  Babel  everywhere,  whether  upon  the  Euphra
tes,  the  Tiber,  or  the  Seine.  The  individual  with  his
convictions,  his  freedom,  his  personality,  must  be
wholly  sacrificed  to  the  name  of  uniformity,  whether
it  be  worldly  or  ecclesiastical.  What  is  said  here
relates  not  merely  to  an  ungodly,  arbitrary,  ambi
tious,  individually  titanic  undertaking,  but  to  the
first  introduction  of  that  atheistical  and  antichristian
principle  which  would  not  merely  promote  the  pros
perity  and  authority  of  the  whole  in  connection  with
the  well-being  and  the  freedom  of  the  individual  per
son,  but  also  make  the  individual  an  involuntary
sacrifice  to  a  unity,  which  becomes,  in  that  way,  a
false  unity,  as  well  as  a  false  idol  placed  on  the
throne  of  the  living  God, — and  this  whether  it  be
called  Babel,  Rome,  the  Church,  or  "  la  grande
nation."  GOETHE  :

"Bo  it  truth,  or  be  it  fable,

That  in  thousand  books  is  shov;n,
All  is  but  a  tower  of  Babel,

Unless  love  shall  make  them  or..."

Or  we  may  adopt  as  a  various  reading,

When  love  of  glory  makes  them  one.

The  question  here  relates  to  the  destruction,  in  their
very  principles,  of  the  Shemitic  call  to  religion,  and
the  Japhethic  tendency  to  civilization,  by  a  Ilamitic
confounding  of  religion  and  culture,  to  the  obstruc
tion  of  the  true  progress  of  the  world  and  of  the
state,  by  resolving  the  constitution  of  human  history
into  an  immovable  Ilamitic  naturalism.  According
to  Knobel,  the  whole  significance  of  the  fact  becomes
resolved  into  one  view.  "  This  view  (he  says)  the
author  imputes  to  them  after  the  event,  since  Baby
lon,  that  most  splendid  city,  as  the  Greeks  regarded
it  (HEROD,  i.  178),  did,  indeed,  redound  to  the  fame
of  its  builders,  but,  at  the  same  time,  would  thereby
furnish  a  proof  of  their  impious  pride."  And  yet,
even  in  Knobel,  the  world-historical  substratum  in
the  representation  very  clearly  appears,  when  he
says,  that  "  according  to  Berosus  and  Eupolemus,
there  were  stories  among  the  Chaldyoans  that  those
who  were  saved  in  the  flood,  when  they  came  to
Babylonia,  again  restored  the  place,  and  especially
built  there  a  high  tower.  For  that  purpose  there
met  together  in  Babylonia  diverse  masses  of  people,
etc."  He  proceeds  to  say,  moreover,  that  Babylon
in  later  times  became  the  central  point  of  the  na
tions,  that  it  was,  besides,  a  very  ancient  city,  that
two  thousand  years  before  Semiramis  it  was  built  1'or
the  son  of  Belus.  and  that,  by  reason  of  its  huge
magnitude,  its  temple  of  Belus,  its  high  tower,  and
its  dissolute  morals  giving  it  the  appearance  of  the
very  home  of  sin  (Cuimus,  v.  1,  86),  as  well  as  ou
account  of  its  name,  it  had  a  peculiar  fitness  for  the
Scriptural  author's  narration.  The  symbolical  sig-


3G1


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


nificanee,  however,  of  the  appearance  of  Babylon,  as
matter  of  fact,  is,  in  this  way,  wholly  effaced.

8.  YLTS.  5-8.  77(0  iiuirr.cntiuii  of  Jehovah,  his
counsel  and  Jus  ait.  'Without  the  thought  of  any
Jchoviotic  document,  it  would  be  ivadily  conceived
that  the  frustration  of  such  an  undertaking  must
proceed  from  (iod  as  Jehovah,  the  founder  and  pro
tector  of  the  divine  kingdom.  The  coining  down  *

*  [ViT.  5.  -"--  ---''  ,  A.i'l  flu,!  came  down.  The  Tar-
gumof  On!::  'l,i-  r.  •:;('.<  rs  this  '•">  "'Pi.TX",  and  Jchorah  was
manifesto/,  in-  revealed  himsc!'f.  So  most  of  the  other  Jew
ish  authoii  ics.  They  derived  the  idea,  probably,  from  such
:  i!  seav.  15,  where  the  opposite  expression  seems
to  repr  lit  G  [  nsn  'iriiii/,  and  leaving  the  world  to  itself:
"'""P-  ~X  r~!-T.L'Xl  Ti-X,  I  will  yn  and  re!  urn  ti  my
place..  '  So  in  the  seventh  verse.  Onkelos  renders  it,  ('nine,
let  !(.<  '/•(  n  n  (I  '•  '/.  The  Arabic  follows  the  Taigum,  and  has


fcxj.       Compare  also   Mieah  i.   3,  ~l!~\    "3

"•."I"  ••;•-•;•;  S'i'>  .TirP,  "For  lo,  Jehovah  goes  forth
from'his  p  '.ace,  and  e  .mes  d.'r.vn  and  walks  upon  the  hi-h
lit'  tli'.-  earth."  Th'Te  1-  a  spirituality  in  Rabbi
Schelomu's  interpretation  of  this  which  is  lacking  in  most
Christian  commentators.  "It  represents  God,"  he  says,
"as  coming  down  from  hi  s  throne  of  in  en  ie.s,  2n"m  XC-  .
to  his  throne  of  judgment,"  "P"'"1  XC-  ,  as  though  the  one
were  in  the  «erene  upper  heavens  (e<anp.  1's.  exiii.  (i),  and
tiiu  other  nearer  to  the'  sphere  of  this  uirlnileiit  earth,  —  im-
•;  l\  ,:i_-  al  o  that  the  divine  merry  i;  m  .re  ri'irn!,  less  vi.-i-
LUSC  more  general  and  ditt'u-ed,  though

Bi  ".i  by  the  eye  of  faith  as  send:nu'  rain  upon  the  just  and
the  unjust,  whilst  (iod's  judgments  in  the  world  are  inure
inuirf.'s',  i:i"i-e  extraordinary,  more  palpable  to  the  sense.
It  is  "Ida  strange  work,"  'IT-".^  ~T  ,  Is.  xxviii.  21  ;  'Tn'-"
.I"";  ,  "  his  extraordinary  doing."  'J'he  commentary  of
Abeii  ;:/:i  a  i  n  "I""1,  Cieii.  xi.  5,  is  very  noteworthy:  "This
is  thus  said,  bi  <viu--e  every  thing  t!iat  takes  place  in  the
world  bc/oio  depends  from  the  powers  that  are  all  :>•<•;  as  is
fccninwhat  is  said  (1  Sam.  ii.  3)  nb^br  WZr*  C"TSll;nT3.
from  the  Heavens  events  are  arranged  (in  our  Knglisli  Ver
sion  it  is  given  very  poorly,  act  inns  are  wci<jh<  </).  'Where
fore  (Jod  is  said  to  ride  upon,  the  ln'iir,  /i.<  (Z""2U.'n  23T™1  .
Deut.  xxxiii.  '21':)  ;  for  thus  the  Scripture  speaks  with  the
l-.uigiie  of  men."  With  this  citation  of  Alien  Kzra,  tomp.
1's.  Ixviii.  ~>,  "  I'rai.-e  liim  that  rideth  on  the  Heavens  by
his  name  .lah,"  although  many  modern  commentators  differ
from  the  Jewish  in  their  rendering  of  n~~~  .  The  riding
on  the  Heavens  is  explained,  by  the  commentator  on  Alien
l>.ra,  as  ret'  "i  i  in:,'  to  the  outer  sphere  (according  to  the  asl  ro-
lojfioal  technics),  in  which  there  are  inherent  the  higher
or  ultimate  causalities,  as  Rabbi  Tanchum  says  ni?"1?"
thould  be  rendered  in  the  verse  above  quoted,  1  Sam.  ii.  3
(see  TANCHUM:  "Comment."  Lam.  i.  12),  or  P.'^D  ,  de
flecting  or  turning  causalities,  as  it  is  explained  by  him
(see,  1  Kings  xii.  Ii).  Similar  interpretations  are  given  by
the  Jewish  commentaters  of  such  words  as  !~i~n  ,  ver.  7,
Go  to  mm;  Let  us  go  down.  They  arc  used  to  express  the
•lireet  opposition  between  the  ways  and  thoughts  of
men  and  ti.ose  of  (Jod.  Says  Rabbi  Schclomo  :  "It  is
<~t~~3  "i;:~  !~1"H  ,  measure  for  measure  (par  part).  Let
us  br.i'd  ii->.  say  they,  and  scale  the  heavens  ;  let  us  go  down,
mys  (Jrod,  and  'defeat  their  impious  thought."  Other  Rab
bins,  mid  Jewish  grammarians,  have  a  method  of  explain
ing  such  .pas-ages  by  a  very  concise  y_et  most  significant
phrase.  This  mode  of  representing  things,  more  humano,

they  call  "TH  "|*cb  ,  the  language  or  "  tongue  of  the
event,"  or  tbe  action  speaking.  Thus  Rabbi  Tanchum
characterizes  the  words  nX"i  xb  "^TX  ,  the  Lord  not,  see  it,

Lam.  iii.  30,  as  (jL^t     ..tLbwJ  j  the  tongue  or  speech  of

the  condition  (the  supposed  language  of  the  wicked  actions
just  before  described),  whether  regarded  as  actually  uttered
or  not.  Thus  he?e,  Uod  speaks  in  what  he  does,  in  most  di
rect  contrariety  to  the  ways  and  thoughts  of  men.  The
event  to  be  narrated  by  the  sacred  historian  is  the  divine
intervention  in  counteraction  of  human  wickedness  and  folly.
To  be  intelligible,  it  necessarily  includes  some  statement  of
the  divine  thoughts  or  purposes,  as  inseparable  parts  of  the


of  Jehovah  forms  a  grand  contrast  to  the  rebellious
uprising  of  the  Babylonians  with  their  tower.  The
higher  they  build,  so  much  deeper,  to  speak  anthro-
popathically,  must,  he  descend  that  he  may  rightly
look  into  the  matter.  Moreover,  the  expression  <jro
to,  i\s  used  by  (Iod,  forms  an  ironical  contrast  to  the
two-fold  go  to  C"1^  ,  come  on,  give  way  now  \  as  used
by  the  Babylonians.  The  one  uul!i!its  the  other  and


,.,

speak,  for  enojicu,  to  think  ;  and,  in  Hebrew,  of  ""HT  ,  tvord,
for  l/ioiir/hl  or  thinij,—  a  connection  of  ideas  which  is  obvious
in  the  hnglisli  Ihiiilc  and  tliimj,  as  also  in  the  Geim  m  ding
and  (/  /,/.!  n.  This  language  of  the  event,  if  it  would  be  ex
pressive,  mu-t  be  characteri-tic  and  idiomatic.  'J'he  n~


truly,


tess.  s    s  not        e  te    anguage  o    te  prophe

hears  words  spoken  i.,  vision.  In  that  case  they  are  r
though  siilijei  -live  'y  heard,  as  the  mediate  language  of  the
inspiring  power,  and  not  alone  of  the  inspired  human  me
dium.  lint  in  such  narrations  as  these,  nothing  could  better
describe  the  rhetorical  peculiarity  than  this  formula  of  the
Jewish  crit  c-.  It  is  "  the  language  of  the  occasion,"  not  as
uttered  objectively,  or  heard  subjectively,  but  still  as  virtu
ally  representing  mo-t  important  parts  of  the  event.

Those  who  are  oli'ended  at  such  a  style  cannot  consist
ently  stop  short  of  a  denial  of  all  revelation,  as  either  actual
or  possible.  \Vhcii  we  make  the  objection,  we  should  con
sider  how  far  it  goes.  jS'ot  only  is  there  shut  out  the
thought  of  any  din  it  divine  intervention  in  the  world'g
history,  but  also  every  idea  whaieverof  any  divine  action
or  personality.  Look  at  the  question  carefully,  an  I  we  are
compelled  to  say  that  Iliinkiiiy,  m  any  such  way  a-  we  think,
and  even  knt/iciiiy,  in  tin-  sense  of  any  particular  recognition
of  any  thing  finite  as  finite,  areas  truly  anthropopatliic  ex
ercises  as  remembering  and  speaking.  It  is  tinly  pitiable,
thercfpie,  when  l(os<  I'lnuller,  and  oilier  commentators  liko
him,  indulge  in  their  usual  apologizing  and  patronizing
talk  about  the  simple  belief  of  the  early  ages,  ,/,-,,s  tlrf-cndert,


riKii'em  i:nns>-a  inj/nn;  i-n'mrr.  fims  ex  nmit  fiarr.  per*
jicnsis,  dccri-,iei-i;  —  '•  that  the  gods  actually  come  down  to
see.  etc1."  How  far  have-  we  got,  in  these  respects,  beyond
these  (simple  '•  early  people  .'  "  AVliat  advantage  has  the
most  rationalizing  commentator  over  them  in  the  use  of  any
language  that  wiil  enaMe  him  to  think  of  (iod,  or  talk  ol
God,  without  denying  the  divine  personality  on  the  one
hand,  or  bringing  in  something  impliedly  and  essentially
anthropopathk  on  the  other.  This  language  is  as  much  for
one  age  as  fir  another  ;  since  here  all  ages,  and  all  human
minds,  ;lre  very  much  on  a  par.  liut  why,  it  may  be  asked.
could  tlu  re  not  have  been  used  terms  more  general,  and
which  would  not  have  suggested  such  crude  conceptions  1  It
might  have  been  simply  said,  God  intervened  to  jmrenl  the
accomplishment  of  evil  purposes,  or  lie  provide'/  means  in  thfl


DC;  ween,  and  a  prcreniion  oui  a  going  ooiore,  ana  uproiTx^
ing,  or  a  j>roridenc>-,  but  a  looking  into,  a  coming  down  to
see  what  the  children  of  men  are  doing?  We  gain  nothing
by  them.  Instead  of  helping  the  matter,  our  most  philosoph
ical  language  would  only  bo  the  substituting  of  worn-out
terms,  whose  early  primary  images  had  faded  out,  or  ceased
to  affect  us  conceptually,  lor  other  language  equally  repre
sentative  of  the  idea,  whilst  excelling  in  that  pictorial  vivid
ness  in  which  truly  dwells  that  which  we  most  need.  This
is  the  suggestive  and  emotive  power,  making  words  some
thing  more  than  arbitrary  signs  of  unknown  quantities,  like
the  x  y  z  of  the  algebraist,  where  the  things  signified  are
mere  notions,  haying  no  meaning  or  value  except  as  they
preserve  the  equilibrium  of  a  logical  equation.  We  would
have  the  Bible  talk  to  us  philosophically:  "the  infinite  in
telligence  conditions  the  lm:te  ;  the  divine  power  is  the  con
serving  principle  ever  immanent  in  nature."  liut  hear  how
much  better  the  Scripture  says  this  :  "the  God  of  old  is  thv
dwelling-place,  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms, '
cbl"  nlS'TI  ,  the  arms  of  eternity,  the  arms  that  hold  up
the  world.  The  divine  wisdom  has  adopted  this  style.  It
is  a  mode  of  diction  ever  fresh,  yet  equal  to  any  other  as  a
representative  of  that  which  is  strictly  ineffable,  that  is,  un-


turns  it  against  them. — This  they  begin  to  do,
and  now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from
them. — This  reminds  us  of  the  declaration :  Adam  is
become  like  one  of  us.  Under  the  form  of  apprehen
sion  there  lies  an  ironical  expression  of  the  conscious
certainty  of  the  divine  rule. — And  the  Lord  came
down. — Delitzsch  here  again  reminds  us  that  (ac
cording  to  Hoffman)  Jehovah,  after  the  judgment
of  the  flood,  had  transferred  his  throne  to  the
heaven.  Keil,  however,  correctly  finds,  at  least  in
this  place,  only  the  anthropopathic  expression  of  the
divine  interposition. — Behold,  the  people  is  one. —
OS,  connection,  community.  The  people,  as  a  com
munity,  physically  self-unfolding,  is  called  "'I'a  (from
JT13,  probably  in  the  sense  of  mound-like,  extending,
swelling  *) ;  the  people,  as  an  ethical  community,  a
State,  as  constituted  by  an  idea,  is  called  C3>,  from  COS1
(to  bind  together,  to  associate). — They  begin  to  do.
— An  indication  of  the  future  Babel  in  the  world's
history: — And  now  nothing  will  be  restrained
from  them. — In  truth,  if  God  interpose  not,  the
prospect  is  opened,  that  the  pride  and  confidence  of
men  will  advance  with  extreme  rapidity  towards
the  destruction  of  freedom,  of  the  personal  life,
of  the  divine  seed  and  kingdom. — Let  us  go  down
and  there  confound  their  language. —  Upon
the  descent  of  Jehovah  in  his  beholding,  there  fol
lows  his  descent  in  his  counsel. — Let  us. — And  here,
again,  according  to  Delitzsch,  does  Jehovah  include
with  himself  his  angels,  the  executors  of  his  penal
justice.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  an  inappropriate  idea. —
Let  us  confound. — Knobel  would  understand  by
bb^  to  separate,  and  accordingly  translates  Babel  as
meaning  separation.  But  thereby  is  the  conception
of  the  act  carried  into  the  unmeaning.  What  is  said
does  not  refer  properly  to  a  separation  merely  of  hu
man  speech.  The  manner  in  which  it  is  confounded
is  not  described.  According  to  Koppen,  the  miracle
must  have  consisted  wholly  in  an  inward  process,  that
is,  a  taking  away  of  the  old  associations  of  ideas  con
nected  with  words,  and  an  immediate  implanting  of
new  and  diverse  modes  of  expression. |  According
to  Lilienthal,  Hoffman  (A.  Feldhoff  and  others)  it

;  attcrahlo  in  nny  of  those  sense-forms  in  which  all  human
anguagc  must  terminate,  though  still  belonging  to  the  spir-
tual  intelligence,  and  known  by  it  as  something  that  truly
'.s.  Paul  once  heard  the  divine  ideas  expressed  in  their  own
jroper  words  (2  Cor.  xii.  4),  but  he  could  not  translate  these
JppijTa  prjutna  into  the  speech  of  the  lower  sphere.  The  lan-
piage  of  the  Bible  is  the  best  that  could  be  given  us.  It
nay  present  stumbling-blocks  to  the  careless  reader,  or  to
hose  who  wish  to  stumble,  but  still  is  it  true,  that  the  more
ve  study  the  Holy  Scriptures,  even  in  their  earliest  parts
he  more  reason  do  we  find  to  thank  God  that  they  are
mtten  just  as  they  arc.— T.  L.]

*  [The  senses  of  flowing  logzllier  wl,  ich  Gescnius  gives,  or
f  extending,  swelling,  as  here  presented,  are  not  found  in
ny  use  of  the  root  15  or  IT'S,  but  are  accommodated,  as
opposed  primary  sense*,  to  the  meaning  required.  It  is
etter,  however,  to  deduce  it  from  the  sense  of  inferiority,
iclusion  (implying,  exclusion,  seclusion,  separateness).
'mch  is  common  in  the  Chaldoean  and  Syriuc.  Thus  re-
arded.  it  would  be  the  political,  rather  than  any  physical
lea— a  nation  as  a  political  unity  by  itself,  separate  from
11  others— whilst  CS  would  denote  association.  A  com-
.uuity  within  itself  in  its  two  aspects,  of  outward  exclusion
id  inner  binding.—  T.  X,.]

t  [How  easily  this  is  done,  whether  by  a  power  purely
lysical  or  divine,  is  seen  in  the  cases  of  para'ytics,  where
e  mind  remaining  clear,  the  connection  between  it  and  the
>cal  organs  is  suddenly  changed ;  so  that  though  speech  is
>t  lost,  its  utterances  are  misplaced,  the  name  of  one  thin"-
given  to  another,  or  the  connection  between  the  usual
>ra  and  the  usual  idea  seems  almost  wholly  broken  up.


must  have  been  wholly  an  outward  process,  a  con
fusion  of  the  lips,  of  pronunciation,  of  dialects ;  whilst
Scaliger  holds  that  differing  meanings  were  connected
with  like  words  or  sounds.  The  historical  symbolical
expression,  however,  may  mean,  perhaps,  that  the
process  of  inward  alienation  and  variation,  the  ground
of  which  lay  in  the  manifoldness  of  dispositions,  and
the  reciprocity  of  spiritual  tendencies,  became  fixed
in  diverse  forms  of  speech  and  modes  of  expression,
by  reason  of  a  sudden  catastrophe  brought  upon  them
by  God.  The  heathenish  Babylonian  tendency  re
flects  itself  still  in  the  enigmatical,  capriciously  vary
ing  dialects  of  the  same  people,  which  is  sometimes
to  be  remarked  in  different  quarters  of  the  same  city,
or  in  the  different  peasantry  of  the  same  community,
but  which  must  have  especially  had  place  in  the
earlier  times,  when  isolization  became  predominant.
The  first  germ  of  the  speech  confounding  must,  ac
cordingly,  have  shown  itself  as  a  diseased  action
which  the  fall  introduced  into  the  original  innate
germ  of  speech  development.  For  a  long  time  it  re
mained  naturally  latent  in  the  family  of  Noah,  but
manifested  its  full  power  in  the  time  of  the  tower-
building  ;  and  then  the  effect  of  that  epoch  prolongs
itself  through  the  whole  history  of  the  world.  In
like  manner,  however,  was  there  a  counter  influence,
too,  from  the  days  of  Abraham  onward.  According
to  KAULEN  (p.  220),  the  miracle  consists  in  this,
"that  at  that  time,  and  in  that  region,  there  was  in
troduced  a  linguistic  change  which,  although  it  would
have  naturally  come  in  in  the  course  of  things,  would
nevertheless  have  required  for  its  full  development
other  conditions  of  space  and  time  than  those  pre
sented."  If  there  is  meant  by  this  only  a  wonderful
acceleration  of  a  natural  development,  the  view  does
not  satisfy,  llightly  says  FABRI  (p.  81):  "  A  confound
ing  of  languages  presupposes  a  confusion  of  the  con
sciousness,  a  separation  of  the  original  speech  into
many,  a  disorder  and  a  breach  in  the  original  com
mon  consciousness  in  respect  to  God  and  the  world.
— The  history  of  the  tower-building  is  the  history  of
the  origin  of  heathenism." — So  the  Lord  scattered
them  abroad. — Out  of  their  purpose  comes  its  di
rect  opposite. — And  they  left  off  to  build. — That
is,  as  a  community  of  the  human  race  with  that  dis
tinct  tendency.  Ttte  idea,  however,  is  not  excluded,
that  the  Babylonians  who  remained  behind  kept  on
building  Babel.  The  success  of  the  enterprise  was
frustrated,  but  not  analogous  and  limited  undertak
ings  of  the  same  tendency ;  it  appears,  for  example,
in  the  great  world  monarchies.  Tiiis  first  disap
pointment,  however,  was  a  type  of  all  others,  as  they
successively  become  apparent  in  the  catastrophes  of
these  world  monarchies,  and  the  last  fulfilling  will  be
found  in  the  fall  of  Babylon,  as  mentioned  in  the
Apocalypse.  "  That  the  structure  itself  was  laid  in
ruins  by  an  exercise  of  divine  power  which  after
wards  took  place,  is  told  us,  indeed,  by  the  sibyl,
but  not  by  the  Scripture."  Delitzsch.

4.  Wherefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  Babe!.
— In  deriving  the  name  from  bab,  gate,  gate  of  Bel,

The  individual  derangement  is  a  very  mysterious  thing,  as
inexplicable  now  as  in  the  earliest  ages  of  the  world.  Na
tional  and  popular  derangements  are  more  rare,  but  history
records  r.trango  movements,  that  suggest  the  thought,  as  the
truest,  if  not  the  only  possible,  explanation.  Ourknowledgo
of  man,  of  the  immeasurable  deep  within  him,  of  the  infi
nite  unknown  around  and  above  him,  is  too  small  to  war
rant  any  positive  denial  of  such  statements,  or  the  possibil
ity  of  such  events,  whether  regarded  as  supernatural,  or  aa
falling  within  those  natural  causalities  of  whinh  wo  talk  so
much,  and  yet,  comparatively,  know  so  little.— T.  L.J


3G6


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


or  El,  the  authority  of  the  religious  interpretation  is
not  excluded,  as  KEIL  supposes  in  his  second  note,  p.
119.  "  Only  we  must  distinguish  between  the  frustra
tion  of  the  tower-building  and  the  destruction  of  the
later  Babel  that  was  still  built  on,  and  which,  probably,
for  the  first  after  the  dispersion  of  the  nations,  came  to
be  the  seat  of  a  heathenish  worship."  Concerning
the  significance  and  the  building  material  of  Baby-
Ion,  the  classical  writers  agree  with  the  Old  Tcsta-
tament, — for  example :  UEKOD.  i.  ch.  178 ;  STUABO,
1C  ;  Dionoiirs,  ii.  7  ;  ARIIIAN,  Alex.  vii.  17  ;  CURT.
Alex,  f),  1,  2.~> ;  EUSTATH.  ad  DI/OHI/H.  Pa-icg.  1005.
According  to  them  the  huge  walls  of  Babylon  were
made  of  burnt  brick,  as  were  also  the  magnificent
structure  of  the  temple  of  Belus,  and  the  hanging
garde::-.  According  to  one,  the  circumference  of  the
riiy  uimiuutcd  to  -1M>  stadia,  or  60,000  paces;  ac-
conlii.g  io  others,  !Jt>5  or  otiU  stadia  (furlongs),  mak-
ing,  therefore,  a  journey  of  from  18  to  24  hours.
'fi:.'  building  of  most  importance  was  the  quad-
i:i',.;:i!lar  temple  of  Belus,  each  side  of  which  was  two
furlongs  in  length ;  out  of  this  there  arose,  by  eight
iernees,  a  strong,  massive  tower,  which,  according
to  Herodotus,  was  one  furlong  in  length  and  breadth,

:••••  enrdiiig  to  Stiubo,  one  stadium  (that  is  (100
vet)  high.  The  accounts  of  modern  travellers  amount
to  a  continuation  of  the  ancient  statements.  The  re
mains  of  the  temple  of  Belus  that  was  overthrown  by
Xerxes,  and  now  called  Birs  Nimrod,  form  a  huge
i  of  ruins,  consisting  of  burnt  and  unb'urnt
uiicks,  cvmcnted  partly  with  lime  and  partly  with

<-n.  The  whole  plain  of  Babylon  is  covered
v, -it'll  mounds  of  rubbish  from  the  same  materials  (see
Xt:i'-l'o;i-m::  "Travels,"  vol. ii. p.  IJUl ;  BUCKINGHAM  :
"Tr.ivels  in  Mesopotamia,"  p.  472 ;  LA  YARD:  "Nine
veh  am*  Dabylon,"  p.  :;74 ;  and  RITTEE'S  " Geography,"
xi.  ]>.  >7<>).  "The  ancients,  for  the  most  part,  ascribe
;iic  building  of  Babylon  toSemiramis,  but  this  can  only
be  true  of  its  extension  and  fortification.  According
!.)  (lie  ancient  inscriptions,  the  city  was  older  than
this  (Knobcl  on  the  Genealogical  Table,  p.  346),  and,
according  to  ch.  x.  10,  it  must  have  been  already  in
existence  at  the  time  of  Nimrod."  Knobel.  In  re-
;  ;>ect  to  the  city,  see.  also  HEKZOG'S  Real-EncyclopcE-
die,  article  "Babel."  On  the  ruins  of  Babylon,  see
DEUTZSCH,  p.  :;12,  with  referenc*  to  the  account  of
the  traveller,  James  Rich.  The  Arabians  regard  the
ruins  of  Birs  Nimrod  as  the  Babylonian  tower  that
was  destroyed  by  fire  from  heaven.  Dclitzsch,  who
at  first  regarded  Birs  Nimrod  as  the  temple  of  Belus
(as  Rawlinson,  too,  supposes),  remarks  now,  on  the
contrary,  that  the  temple  of  Belus  stood  in  the  mid
dle  of  the  city,  but  that  Birs  Nimrod  was  situated  in
the  suburb  Borsippa,  two  miles  south.  But  now,
according  to  Oppert's  supposition,  Borsippa  means
foiccr  of  languayes,  and,  therefore,  the  opinion  has
much  in  its  favor  that  the  Birs  Nimrod  had  been
already  in  the  very  ancient  time,  the  observatory  of
the  Chaldsean  astrologers,  with  which  the  tower  of  the
speech-confounding  stands  in  historical  connection.
It  seems  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  tower,  which
was  to  denote  the  centre  of  the  earth,  should  be
placed  at  a  mile's  distance  outside  of  the  city  which
was  distinctly  regarded  as  the  capital  of  the  earth.
Moreover,  this  tower  might,  at  a  later  day,  have  be
come  the  tower  of  Bclus.  Bunsen,  nevertheless,  de
cides  for  Birs  Nimrod  (with  reference  to  Rawlinson),
and  the  name  supports  the  conclusion  that  the  tradi
tion  speaks  for  this  place.  Of  special  importance,
besides,  is  the  inscription  of  Borsippa,  as  given  by
Oppert,  which  introduces  Nebuchadnezzar  as  speak


ing,  and  according  to  which  the  first  building  of  Birs
Nimrod  is  carried  back,  in  its  antiquity,  42  genera
tions.  See  FABRI,  p.  49.


DOCTRINAL  AND   ETHICAL.

1.  Sec   the    preliminary  discussion.     Analogous
to  this  gigantic  undertaking  of  the  young  humanity
are  the  later  monumental  buildings  of  the  Egyptians,
of  the  Indians,  of  Greece,  and  of  other  lands.     Like
the  mythological  systems  of  the  civilized  nations  of
antiquity,  they  present  an  historical  contradiction  of
a  favorite  modern  view,  according  to  which  the  v,  hole
human  race  had  only  gradually  worked  itself  out  of  an
animal  or  beastly  state.

2.  The  character  and  the  teleology  of  heathenism.
The  esser.ee  of  heathenism  is  strikingly  characterized
in  our  narration  as  a  diseased  oscillation  between  the
attraction  of  humanity  to  unity,  on  the  one  hand,
and  to  multiplicity  and  unrestrained  dismemberment
on  the  other.     From  the  Babylonish  striving  after  an
outward  unity  proceeds  the  first  dispersion  of  the
nations.     This  afterwards  takes  the  form  of  a  dis
memberment  of  the  same  in  a  peculiar  sense;  it  be
comes,  in   other   words,  a  heathenish,  national,  or
local    consciousness,    an    idolatrous,    antochthonic
consciousness,  growing  wild  with   the  notions  of
national  earth  and  a  national  heavens,  whilst,  in  its
utter  disorder,  it  sinks  down   to   the  mere  prejudice
which  regards   every  stranger  as  an  enemy  (hoslis),
and  proceeds,  at  last,  to  that  absolute  exclusivcncss
which  causes  the  inhabitant  of  the  island  to  put  to
death  any  one  from  abroad,  and  the  Bushman  to
threaten  every  new  coiner  with  his  poisoned  arrows.
In  the  same  manner,  from  a  religious  striving  after  a
pantheistic  world-view,  there   originates  the  first  de
clining  of  the  spirit  into  polytheism.     And  then,  too,
the  different  world-monarchies  furnish  a  proof  that
the  diseased  centripetal  drawing  in  the  world  ever
works  in  interchange  with  that  centrifugal  tendency.
Upon  the  downfall   of  any  such  world-monarchy,
there  follows  again,  in  various  ways,  a  dissolution
and  a  dispersion  of  elements.     Even  in  the  history
of  the  Church  do  we  find  a  shadowy  outline  of  th
same  process ;  and  yet  it  is  just  the  task  and  the
daily  work  of  the  essential  Chinch  to  mediate  more
and  more  the  true  development  and  appearance,  both
of  unity  and  variety,  among  the  nations  ;  though  ia
truth  it  docs  this  through  the  light  and  law  of  the
Gospel  as  it  goes  out  from  the  spiritual  Zion,  or  that
true  kingdom  of  God  which  has  its  organization  in
the  Church.     The  true  reciprocity  between  unity  and
division  constitutes  the  life  of  humanity.     The  false,
feverish,  exaggerated  reciprocity,  which  tends  to  the
overstraining,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  division  and
dissolution  of  both  these  influences,  is  its  diseasei
and  its  death.     The  striving  of  the  world-monarchieaj
breaks  down  against  the  power  of  the  national  indi-i
vidualities.     Again,  the  national  isolations  are  inteivj
rupted   and   broken  up   by   the  world-monarchies.
But  dispersion  has  the  special  effect  to  distribute  thei
evil,  to  dismember,  to  send  one  people  as  a  judgment!
upon  another,  until  there  is  awakened  in  all  a  f'eelingl
of  the  need  of  deliverance  and  unity.     Here  belong
the  ethnographic  and  the  mythologic  systems.    la
respect  to  the  first,  compare  LANGE'S  "  Miscellaneous!
Writings,"  i.  p.  74.     On  the  last,  see  Lange's  treatise
entitled,  Die  Gesctzlich-Catholisclie  K'trche  als  Sinn-
bild.

3.  As  the  myth  of  the  Titans  reflects  itself  in  tbfr


CHAP.   XL    1-9.


3G7


creative  periods,  so  does  it  also  in  the  Babylonish
tower-building.

4.  FABRI,  p.  44:  "  In  a  manner  more  or  less  dis
tinctly  marked,  since  the  time  of  Babel,  has  every
nation,  and  every  group  of  nations,  had  spread  over
it  its  peculiar  veil  (Is.  xxv.  7)  which  has  impregnated
and  penetrated   the   whole   national   consciousness.
Even  in  the  present  age  of  the  world  does  this  re
main,  not  yet  broken  through,  morally  and  spiritually,
by  whole  nations,  but  only  by  individuals  out  of  every
nation,  who  in  Christ  have  attained  to  the  participa
tion  of  a  new  and   divine   birth, — these,   however,
being  the  very  core  and  heart  of  such  nations,  and
forming  with  one  another  a  people  in  a  people.     For
in  Christ  alone  does  man  awake  to  a  universal  thean-
thropic   consciousness."     [True  indeed,  but  Christ,
according  to  Matt,  xiii.,  works  after  the  manner  of
leaven  ;  and  in  fact,  as  a  principle  of  new  life  for  the
whole  humanity  (Rom.  v.  12),  and  the  veils  of  the
nations   are    gradually    lifted  up    lefore   they   are
wholly  removed  or  torn  away.  ,  It  is  not  the  individ
uals  and  the  nations  that  form  the  contrast  in  the
present  course  of  the  world,  but  the  grain  (the  elect)
and  .  the  chaff  in  the  nations, — in  other  words,  the
contrast  between  the  believing  and  the  unbelieving
— between  people  and  people.]

5.  The  ironical  element  in  the  rule  of  the  divine
righteousness  (see  ch.  iii.  22)  appears  again  in  the
history  of  the  tower-building,  after  its  grandest  dis
play  in  the  primitive  time.     It  is  just  from  the  false
striving  after  the  idol  of  an  outward  national  unity,
that  GoJ  suffers  to  go  forth  the  dispersing  of  the  na
tions.     Without  doubt,  too,  is  there  an  ironical  force
in  the  words  :  "  and  now  nothing  will  be  restrained
from  them  "  (ver.  7).

_  6.  In  this  demonical  effort  of  the  Babylonians  to
build  a  tower  that  should  reach  to  heaven,  there  still
remains  an  element  of  good.  By  means  of  it,  in
later  times,  they  appeared  as  the  oldest  explorers  of
the  stars,  who  discovered  the  zodiac  and  many  other
astronomical  phenomena, — as  astronomers,  in  fact,
with  their  searching  gaze  raised  to  heaven,  although
their  science  was  covered  under  an  astrological  veil.
The  unfinished  tower  was  transformed  into  an  obser
vatory  ;  and  how  vast  the  benefit  that  from  thence
has  come  to  man  !

7.  The   heathenish   yet   Titanic   energy   of  the
Babylonian  spirit  proves  itself  in  the  fact,  that  whilst
in  the  one  direction  their  worship  went  to  the  ex
treme  of  offering  human  sacrifices,  it  became,  on
the  other,  a  service  of  revolting  licentiousness.

8.  "Lot   us  build  us   a   tower  and  make  us  a
name."     The  antithetic  relation  which  this  watch
word  of  theirs  bore  to  Shem  (the  name),  and  the  des
tination  that  God  had  given  to  him  that  he  should
be  the  potential   central   point    of   humanity,  may
also  be  indicated  by  the  name  Nimrod  (l'"IB3,  come
on,  now  let  us  rebel).    And  so,  according  to  the  view
of  Roos,  may  the  race  of  Ham  have  become  engaged
with  special  zeal  in  this  tower-building,  for  the  very
purpose   of  Aveakening   the   prophecy.     But,  then,
that  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  of  a  variance  with
the  Shemites,  and  an  overpowering  of  them,  whereas
pur  history  represents  it  as  a  universal  understand
ing.     Moreover,  in  ch.  x.  10,  Nimrod  appears,  not  as
the  builder  of  Babel,  but  as  the  founder  of  the  kin«'-
dom  of  that  name ;  whereas  ch.  xi.  relates  to  the
building  of  the  city  itself.     We  must,  therefore,  sup
pose  that  in  the  understanding  mentioned,  ch.  xi.,
the  Shemites  were  either  infatuated,  or  that  they

,  were  silenced.     The  text,  however,  supposes  an  un


derstanding  of  the  races.  We  may,  perhaps,  assume
that,  in  the  designation  of  the  tower,  Shein's  priority
was  symbolically  indicated,  and  that  on  this  account
his  race  would  be  satisfied.  There  would  result,  then,
a  distinct  consequence.  Upon  this  free  federal  co
operation  of  the  patiiarchal  races,  there  followed  the
despotic  exaltation  of  Nimrod,  which  contributed,
moreover,  to  hasten  the  Babylonic  dissolution.  We
make  more  difficult  the  view  we  take  of  the  transac
tion  when  we  measure  the  greatness  of  the  tower
before  the  dispersion  by  the  later  magnitude  of  the
tower  of  Belus,  or  of  the  Bris  Nimrod.  "Mesopo
tamia,"  says  Bunsen,  "  is  covered  from  north  to
south  with  ruins  and  localities  with  which  the  name
of  Nimrod  is  everywhere  connected ;  as  in  Babylonia
so  also  in  Nineveh,  lying  farther  off  End  eastward
from  upper  Mesopotamia ;  even  the  country  of  the
Riphaean  mountains,  at  the  source  of  the  Tigris,  and
so  the  part  of  Armenia  which  lies  north  from  Nine
veh,  and  west  of  the  lake  Van,  has  its  Mount  Nim
rod."


IIOiTILETICAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.

The  tower  of  Babel  in  its  historical  and  figurative
significance :  a  gigantic  undertaking,  an  apparent  suc
cess,  a  frustrated  purpose,  an  eternal  sign  of  warn
ing.  2.  The  repeating  of  the  same  history  in  the
political  and  ecclesiastical  spheres. — The  spiritual
history  of  Babylon  to  its  latest  fulfilling  according
to  the  Apocalypse.  The  confusion  of  languages  at
Babel,  and  the  scene  of  the  Pentecost  at  Jerusalem.
— Babel  and  Zion. — Babel,  confusion  ;  Jerusalem,
peace.  Christianity,  God's  descent  to  curth,  to
unite  again  the  discordant  languages.  Christianity,
in  what  way  it  makes  the  languages  one  :  1.  In  that
from  all  spirits  it  makes  one  spirit  of  life ;  2.  from
all  peoples  one  people  ;  3.  from  all  witnessing;?,  one
confession  of  faith,  one  doxology,  one  salutation  of
love.

STAREE  :  Supposition,  that  first  after  the  flood
men  drew  from  Armenia  towards  Persia,  then  east
ward  towards  Babylon.  HEDIXGER  :  Pride  aims  ever
at  the  highest.  Avarice  and  ambition  have  no  bounds
(Jer.  xxiii.  23  ;  Luke  i.  51).

Lisco  :  The  design  of  the  tower-building  is  three
fold  :  1.  To  gratify  the  passion  for  glory  which  would
make  itself  a  name;  2.  defiance  of  God,  reaching
even  to  the  heaven,  his  seat  of  habitation ;  3.  that
the  tower  might  be  a  point  of  union  and  of  rendez
vous  for  the  whole  human  race.  Selfishness  ever
separates ;  so  was  it  here ;  love  and  humility  alone
constitute  the  true  and  enduring  bond ;  but  this  is
found  only  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  never  in  the  king
dom  of  the  world.  As  here,  so  evermore,  is  Babel
the  name  of  pride,  of  show,  of  vain  glory,  of  na
tional  subjugation,  of  fraud  and  tyranny  upon  the
earth.  As  in  this  place,  so  is  it  always  the  emblem
of  'nsoieuce  towards  God,  of  soaring  to  heaven,  of
"  making  its  throne  among  the  stars,''  and,  at  the
same  time,  of  confusion,  of  desolation,  of  God's  de
risive  irony  in  view  of  the  giant  projects  of  men
(comp.  Is.  xiv.  ;  Rev.  xviii.). — GERLACH  :  There  are
now  formed  the  sharply  separated  families  of  the
nations,  each  confined  to  itself  alone,  and  standing
to  others  in  an  essentially  hostile  relation ;  each  must
now  use  and  develop  its  own  peculiar  power.  The
whole  heathen  world  knows  no  more  any  unity  of
the  human  race,  until  finally,  through  the  Gospel,
men  again  recognize  the  fact  that  they  are  all  of  one


368


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


blood,  that  they  have  all  one  groat  common  want,
and  have  for  their  father  one  God, — until,  in  short,
the  languages  which  the  pride  of  It  old  separated
become  again  united  in  the  love  and  humility  of
Zion.

CAMVKR  IlANDnurii :  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that
the  modern  researches  into  language  have  recognized
the  original  allinity  of  most  known  languages  to  one
common  original  speech.  The  sundering  and  part
ing  of  the  nations  is  God's  own  work.  As  labor  was
the  penalty  for  the  sin  of  paradise,  so  is  separation
the  punishment  for  this  sin  of  pride.  In  both  cases,
however,  was  the  punishment  at  the  same  time  a
blessing.

ScnuoUKU  :  It  is  the  spirit  of  Nimrod  that  in
flates  humanity  in  the  plane  of  Babylon.  The  tower,
as  historical  fact,  is  to  form  the  apotheosis  of  hu
manity.

Lrrnru  :  They  have  no  concern  that  God's  name
be  hallowed,  but  all  their  care  and  planning  turns  to
this,  that  their  own  name  may  become  great  and


celebrated  on  the  earth.  This  city  and  tower  of  men
is  fundamentally  nothing  else  than  an  outward  arti
ficial  substitute  for  the  inner  union  before  God,  and
in  God. — Roos  :  It  is  credible  that  11am  and  his  son
Canaan  should  have  been  especially  zealous  to  hinder
this  counsel  of  God,  according  to  which  a  hard  des
tiny  was  to  befall  them — that  is,  that  there  should
be  a  separation  of  the  nations,  so  that  Canaan  should
become  the  servant  of  Shem  and  Japheth. — LUTFIKR  :
God  comes  down,  that  is,  he  gives  special  heed  to
them,  he  ceases  to  be  forbearing.  His  coming  down
denotes  his  revelation  of  himself,  his  appearing  in  a
new  and  great  act,  whether  taken  in  the  sense  of
mildness  or  severity.  "()  that  thon  wouldst  rend
the  heavens  and  come  down  "(Is.  Ixiv.). — Ver.  7.
The  salvation  of  men  is  a  matter  of  deep  concern  to
our  Lord  ;  the  boundary  he  would  set  to  them  is  the
barrier  of  grace  and  compassion. — G.  I).  KKUMMA-
CHKR  :  Human  plans  are  confounded  that  the  divine
order  may  proceed  from  them.  Such  is  the  course
of  the  world's  history.


F  I  F  T II     SECTION.

77(6-  race  of  Shun.     rFlit   Coim/n  urn!  and  Interrupted  Migration  of  Tcrah  to  Canaan.      The  Genesis
of  the   Contrast  litirecii  Heathendom  and  the  germinal  Patrlirehalism.


10
i  !
12
13

14
15

IG
17
18
19
20
21
•2
23
24
25
2G


CHAPTER   XI.  10-32.

1.     Genealogy  of  Shem — to  Tcrah.

These  are  the  generations  of  Shem :  Shem  was  a  Imndml  years  old  and  begat
Arphaxad1  [Knobcl:  probably,  highland  of  Chaldoea]  two  years  after  the  flood.  And  Shem
lived  after  he  begat  Arphaxad  live  hundred  years,  and  begat,  sons  and  daughters.  And
Arphaxad  lived  live  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  Salah  [sending]:  And  Arphaxad
lived  after  he  begat  Salah  four  hundred  and  three  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.
And  Salah  lived  thirty  years  and  begat  Kber2  [one  from  the  other  side,  pilgrim,  emigrant].
And  Salah  lived  after  lie  begat  Kber  four  hundred  and  three  years,  and  begat  sons
and  daughters.  And  Ebor  lived  four  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  Feleg  [division]  :
And  Eber  lived  after  he  begat  Peleg  four  hundred  and  thirty  year?,  and  "begat  sons
and  daughters.  And  Pcleg  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Ecu  [friendship,  friend]  :
And  Peleg  lived  after  he  begat  lieu  two  hundred  and  nine  years,  and  begat  sons
and  daughters.  And  lieu  lived  two  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  Scrug3  [vine-branch]:
And  Ken  lived  after  he  begat  Serug  two  hundred  and  seven  years,  and  begat  sons
and  daughters.  And  Serug  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Nahor  [Gcscnius :  panting] :
And  Serug  lived  after  he  begat  Nahor  two  hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daugh
ters.  And  Nahor  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and  begat  Tcrah  [turning,  tarrying]  :
And  Nahor  lived  after  he  begat  Terah  a  hundred  and  nineteen  years,  and  begat  sons
and  daughters.  And  Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  Abram  [iiigh  father],  Nahor

[seevcr.  2],  and  Harail  [Gcsenius:  Montanus].


2.     Tcrah,  his  Race  and  Emigration  (vers.  2T-32).

27  Now  these  are  the  generations  of  Terah  :  Terah  bagat  Abram,  Nahor,  and  llaran;

28  and  Haran  begat  Lot  [veil,  concealed].     And  Plaran  died   before   [the  face  of]   his  father

29  Terah,  in  the  lend  of  his  nativity,  in  Ur  [light;  flame]   of  the  Chaldees  (c-nrr).     And
Abram  and  Nahor  took  them  wives:    the  name  of  Abram's  wife  was  Sarai  [princess];
and  the  name  of  Nahor's  wife,   Milcah  [Queen],  the  daughter  of  Haran,  the  father  of


I


CHAP.  XI.  10-32.


369


30  Milcah  and  the  father  of  Iscah'  [spier,  sccr^\.     But  Sarai  was  barren;  she  ],ad^lhild"

31  And  Terah  took  Abram  his  so*,  and  Lot  the  son  of  Ilaran.  his  son's  son  and  Sarai  ht
daughter-in-law,  his  sonAbram's  wife;   and  they  went  forth  wit!,  tl,«  ,  f!  c
ChaUees  to  go  „,,;„  the  land  of  C™, ,1;  Jr^J^J Hart™/ °lS  °t  ,^

f  Terah  were  two  hundred  and  five  years;  and  IVruh  died  in  Uaran

['  \er.  1.— Ti'rSTX.    Arphaxad,— pronunciation  derived  from  <i'o  T  YV     A  j   c  t

pointing,  Arpakshad!     it  is  a  compound,  evidently,  of  which  the  Sinai  j  it      -^1     '   T        B  ^  th°  ""'"^
Chuldrcuns.    It  would  appear,  on  these  accounts  to  b o  i  f  P,  JD  '  r°m  wblch  tho  latcr  ""^  ,

other  ca^.    An^n- tlJLrly  nation. i  name ^w«e  n^l^I™™,  °^.^  tran^red  to  their  ancestor,  as  in  many'
chanp-o.1  for  snmethm?  else-some  dce.l  the  man  had  done   or  ,'on  e  Vm  I  ho  hn  I™  Jfi  "j°Ucrn  *lmos-     '•">"  birth  name  was

KT^isFS

after  t,,e  tlood  Snt


.r  «.  M  „,„„,,«,  „  ,,_,„„,„-  ^ssEi-jsn;  «:  ts:r-,--rsir  r  --*

will,  Iho  Greek  i™.  a™,™  «,„,  „„.,  ,..:  „.!.  '  '•"  ""*  CTO'y  <w™i,co

vkerc


o0etnerwith  its  previous  history.     Most  distineth


24


•  *V1  jfwi*v*     IVJ   BU11IC    UwltUJ

etarding,  of  this  early  Sheniitic  movement,  ^ui,  ue-<iues  u
they  seem  to  indicate  could  only  have  been  given  long  afterwa
grounded  had  acquired  a  historical  importance!  Oesenius  would
twist).  ls*o  name-giving  could  be  more  natural  and  easy  than  tl
what  is  said  in  the  blessing  of  Joseph,  Con  xlix  2'1  Hlb  13  -!
transition,  a  vcnj  f ruilf ul  boiiffh.— T.  L.]  *  lr?  "'

her  beauty,"  for  which  he  refers  to  Gen.  xii.  M.    The  root'ftsef
branch  of  the  Shemitic,  though  it  does  not  come  in  the  Hebrew
It  is  equivalent  to  the  Hebrew  frnn ,  Prophet  or  Seer.    Abcn  Ez


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  GEXEALOGIC  \L  TA
BLE  OF  THE  SHEMITES.

This  genealogy  of  the  Shemites  is  really  an  an
pendage  to  that  of  the  Sethites,  ch.  v.,  and  in  this
way  forms  a  genealogical  series  extending  fromAdaa
to  Abraham.  It  is  continued  on  the  line  of  y  •
(ch  xxii.  i!0-24),  on  that  of  Keturah  (ch.  xxv
of  Ishmael  (ch.  xxv.  12,  etc.),  of  Esau  (ch  'xxxvi
1,  etc.),  on  the  line  of  Jacob  (ch.  xlvi  8-2^  oto'
IS  P0  f£dc:,UGe»ealogical  Register,'-  in  W
zoo  s  Aeal  Encyclopedic.)  According  to  Knobel  this
has  the  character  of  an  element  of  fundamental
bcnpture  (p.  129);  we  are  satisfied  to  designate  it
as  eiohistic  umversalistic,  since  it  embraces  Sot  only
Abraham's  race,  but  also  the  nearest  branches  of  it
tha t  at  a  later  period  became  heathen.  The  table

tHSr^^fiSMg

lie  does,  a  numberless  race  of  the


upon


nlanyJfd  (verwick-
10  advance,  or  tho
"th""^ el,l:lmty  "J  .sfch  derivations,  the  names
cis  on  which  they  are  supposed  to  be
ncs.a^ young  vine-shoot  (from  ;,- ^  ,  to  wind,

,  fruitfulness  Joseph,  son  of  fruitfulness— our


J'


of  the  theocratic  line  from  the  uiitheocratic,
m  Ecu  tae  Kvme  friendship,  in  Serug  the  tangling
or  the  restraint  ot  the  development/in  \ahorac2
juct  or  a  *tnvmg    m  Terah  a  ,e«;^  OTrf  1Vom  (he
heathen  world  which  in  his  tarrying  comes  to  a  stop.
And  so  is  the  way  prepared  for  Abraham's  departure
TV  e  cannot  maintain,  with  Knobel,  that  these  Sheml
itjc  patriarchs  must  have  been  all  of  th,  m  iirst-born
They  are,  throughout,  the  first-born  only  iu  U»e  sense
of  the  promise.     lJunseu  interprets  the  name  Kber
as  one  who  comes  over  the  Tigri,.     IJut  ja  a  wider
sense  Eocr  may  also  mean  pilgrim.     The  names  Ken
and  Serug  he  interprets  of  Odessa  and  Odi-oC'-ne     As
coming    however,  in  the  midst  of  personal  names'
these  also  must   have  been  expressed  as  personal
names,  from  which,  indeed,  the  names  of  countries
may  have  been  derived.     On  the  interpolation  o?
Oa man  in  the  Septuagmt,  and  which  is  followed  bv
Luke  (ch.  m.  3(5),  compare  Knobel,  as  also  on  the
varying  dates  of,thc  ages,  as  given  m  the  SamiiSn
text  and  in  the  fecptuagmt.     The  numbers  we  have
here  arc  GOO,  438,  433,  404,  239,  239,  230,  148  205?
and  175  years.     Here,  too,  as  in  the  case  of  the
Sethites,  we  can  get  no  symbolical  significance  from
he  respective  numbers,  although  Knobel  is  unwilling
p  recognize  then-  historical  character.     In  eonncc*

Vr ?  ^  gencral  s™dual  «S

,,  nr  hf°'i  lcro  1S  clearly  reflc^e('  the  in-
In  dual  difference;  Eber  lives  to  a  -reater  ace  than
30th  his  forefathers,  Arphaxad  andSh  Nat
he  pantmg  (the  impetuous),  dies  earliest.  According


370


GENESIS.  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


to  Knobcl,  the  genealogical  table  advances  from  the
mythical  lo  the  legendary  period ;  at  least  we  have
no  sufficient  grousds,  he  thinks,  to  deny  to  Abraham
and  his  brothers  an  historical  existence.  The  same
must  hold  true,  also,  of  his  fathers,  whose  names,
with  their  theocratic  characteristics,  must  have  be
longed,  without  doubt,  to  the  most  lusting  theocratic
reminiscences.  The  table  before  us  is  distinguished
from  the  Sethitie  by  being  less  full,  in  that  it  divides
the  life-iimc  <>f  eaeh  ancestor  into  two  parts,  by  the
date  of  the  theocratic  first-born,  whilst  it  leaves  the
summing  up  of  both  numbers  to  the  reader.  "In
ver.  '2(>  tin-  genealogy,  just  like  the  one  in  ch.  v.  32,
concludes  with  the  naming  of  three  sons  of  Terah,
since  all  these  have  a  significance  for  the  history  to
come:  namely,  A  brain  as  the  ancestor  of  the  elect
race,  Nahor  as  the  grandfather  of  Rebecca  (comp.
ver.  V.i  with  eh.  xxii.  20-2:; ),  and  Harau  as  the  father
of  Lot  i  ver.  27)."  Keil.  The  table  in  DKUT/.SCH  gives
us  a  'jinn  1  view  of  the  series  of  Shemitic  families  (p.
:;•_:  I).  According  to  Hertheau  the  Septuagint  is  right  in
its  interpolation  of  Tainan,  DKI.ITZSCH  disputes  this  ;
romp.  p.  :;_-.  "  The  Alexandrian  translators  insert
ed  this  name  because  the  Oriental  traditions  have  so
much  to  -:iv  of  him  as  the  founder  of  astronomical
science;  and,  therefore,  they  were  unwilling  to  leave
out  so  faiivr,;-;  ;i  name.  There  may  have  been  a
brother  of  Salah,  through  whom  tlie  main  line  was
not  p-.opagated."  Lisco.  Pelit/.sch  gives  a  reason
for  its  not  being  called  the  tholedo;h,  or  generations
of  Abraham,  from  the  fact  that  the  author  makes
the  history  of  Abraham  himself  a  large  and  principal
part.  That,  however,  would  not  have  pn  vented  the
setting  f'T.h  oi'  Abraham's  gen"ah>gival  history.  But
in  stieh  a  representation  there  might  have  been,  per
haps,  an  obsrur'mg  of  the  idea  that  the  si  ed  of  Abra
ham  in  the  natural  sense  goes  through  the  whole  Old
Testam;  r.t,  whilst,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  it  pervades  I
the  New  (ser  Rom.  iv.  cf.  Gen.  15).


KXF.liKTICAL  AND   CRITICAL.

1.  Ch.  xi.  10-20. — Shem  was  a  hundred  years
old. — S  •  •  the  computations  of  Knobel  and  Keil.—
Two  years  after  the  flood. — This  must  be  under
stood  of  the  beginning  of  the  flood. — And  begat
sons  and  daughters. — See  the  ethnological  table;
also,  ver.  17.     "For  the  sake  of  tracing  the  line  of
the  .Inktanides  the  author  had  already  given,  in  ch.
x.  '21-25,  the  patriarchal  series  from  Shem  to  Pcleg;
lie  repeats  it  here,  where  he  would  lay  down  fully
the  line  from  Shem  to  Abraham,  with  the  addition
of  the  ages." — Arphaxad. — Arrapachitis,  "  in  north
ern  Assyria,  the  original  scat  of  the  collective  Chal
dean  family."    Knobel.    "  It  was  the  home  of  the
Xa.xSotiu  and  KapSov^oi  mentioned  by  Xenophon  and
Strabo,  as  well  as  of  the  modern  Kurds."     The  same
writer  refers  the  names  that  follow  to  cities  or  terri
tories,   to  which  we  attach  no  special   importance,
since  in  any  case  the  districts  here  would  be  them
selves  derived  from  the  names  of  persons.

2.  Vers.  27-32.     The  family  line  of  Terali.     Ac
cording  to  Keil,  this  superscription  must  embrace
the  history  of  Abraham,  so  that  the    tholcdoth  of
Ishmael,  ch.  xxv.  12,  and  of  Isaac,  ch.  xxv.  19,  cor
respond  with  it.     But  then,  in  the  spiritual  relation,
Abraham  would  be  subordinate  to  Terah,  which  can
not  be  supposed. — And  Haran  begat. — "  Accord
ing  to  the  constant  plan  of  Genesis,  it  is  here  related
of  Haran,  the  youngest  son  of  Terah,  that  he  begat


Lot,  because  Lot  went  with  Abraham  to  Canaan  (ch.
xii.  4),  and  Haran  died  before  his  father  Terah,
whereby  the  band  which  would  have  retained  Lot  in
his  father-land  was  loosed."  Keil. — Before  his
father  Terah. — Properly,  in  his  presence,  so  that  he
must  have  seen  it  ;  it  docs  not,  therefore,  mean
simply  in  his  life-lime.  The  first  case  of  a  natural
death  of  a  son  before  the  death  of  his  father,  is  a
new  sign  of  increasing  mortality. — Ur  of  the  Chal-
dees. — This  must  either  be  sought  in  the  name  Ur,
which  Ammianus  calls  Pcrsicum  Castellum,  between
Patra  and  Nisibis,  not  far  from  Arrapachitis,  or  in
Or/id  (Armenian,  Urrhai),  the  old  name  of  Eilessa,
now  called  Urfu  (see  KIKPKRT  and  WKISSENBOUN  :
'Nineveh  and  its  Territory,'  p.  7)."  Keil.  Delitzsch,
correctly  perhaps,  decides  for  the  castle  Ur  men
tioned  by  Ammianus,  although,  doubtless,  the  Ur
in  our  text  has  a  more  general,  territorial,  and,  at
the  same  time,  symbolical  meaning.  ''  The  old  Jew
ish  and  ecclesiastical  interpretation  reads  'out  of
"ITS'  (lire\  meaning  that  Abraham,  as  an  acknowl
edger  of  the  one  God,  and  a  denier  of  the  gods  of
Nimrod,  was  cast  into  the  fire,  but  was  miraculously
preserved  by  God."  Dclit/sch.  The  same  writer
finds  therein  the  idea  that  Abraham  was  plucked  as
a  brand  from  the  fire  of  heathendom,  or  from  its
heathenish  fury.  We  would  rather  suppose,  on  the
contrary,  that  by  Ur  is  meant  a  region  in  Chaldiea,
where  the  ancient  monotheistic  symbolical  view  of
the  heavenly  lights  and  flames  had  passed  over  into
a  mythical  heathenish  worship  of  the  stars,  as  a  woi
ship  of  Light  and  Fire ;  wherefore  it  is  that  th
starry  heaven  was  shown  to  Abraham  as  a  symbc
of  his  believing  progeny  (ch.  xv.),  whilst,  for  the  lie:
then  Chaldteans,  it  was  a  region  of  divine  (or  deified)
forces.  Knobel  explains  the  word  as  meaning  Mount
of  the  Chalduaits.  Rawlinson  holds  to  I  lie  reading
-.IX  as  equivalent  to  1'"  (city).  The  interpreting
it  of  linht  and  fire  is  both  etymological!}'  and  ac
tually  the  more  correct.  "The  family  of  Terah  had
its  home  to  the  north  of  Nimrod's  kingdom  (in  north
eastern  Mesopotamia),  and  worshipped  strange  god
as  is  clear  from  Josh.  xxiv.  2."  Delitzsch. — Iskah.
— By  Joscphus,  the  Talmud,  the  Turgmn  of  Jona
than,  and  others,  this  name  is  held  to  be  one  with
Sarah.  On  the  other  hand,  Knobel  properly  remarks
that  according  to  ch.  xx.  12,  Sarah  was  the  daughter
of  Terali,  and,  according  to  ch.  xvii.  17,  only  ten
years  younger  than  Abraham  ;  she  could  not,  there
fore,  have  been  a  daughter  of  Abraham's  younger
brother.  It  is  probably  the  case  that  the  Jews,  in
deference  to  their  later  law,  sought  by  means  of  this
hypothesis  to  weaken  as  much  as  possible  Abraham's
kinsmanship  to  Sarah.  Delitzsch  assumes  the  possi
bility  that  Ilaran  was  a  much  older  half-brother  of
Abraham,  and  that  Abraham,  as  also  Nahor,  had
married  one  of  his  daughters.  According  to  a  con
jecture  of  Ewald,  Iscah  is  mentioned  because  she
became  Lot's  wife.  But  it  icay  bo  that  Iscah  was
thought  worthy  to  be  incorporated  in  the  theocratic!
tradition  because  she  was  a  woman  of  eminence,  a
seeress  like  Miriam,  according  to  the  signification
of  her  name.  Knobel  alludes  to  the  fact  that  A  bra;
ham  had  his  sister  to  wife,  without  calling  to  mind
that  she  was  a  half-sister  (ch.  xx.  12),  or  might  ever
have  been  his  adopted  sister.  So  also  he  says  tha]
Nahor  married  his  niece,  and  that  in  like  manne:
Isaac  and  Jacob  did  not  marry  strangers,  but  the!
own  kindred.  He  accounts  for  this  on  the  grouni
of  a  peculiar  family  affection  in  the  house  of  Tcral


CHAP.   XI.    10-32.


371


[ch.  xxiv.  3,  4  ;  xxvi.  35  ;   xxvii.  4f>  ;  xxviii.  1) ;  jus
as  at  the  present  day  many  Arabian  families  eve
marry  in  their  own,  and  do  not  permit  one  to  take  i
wife  from  any  other  (SKETZEN:  "  Travels,"  iii.  p.  22]
The  ground,  however,  of  such  kindred  marriage  ii
the  house   of  Terah  and  Abraham,  is  a  theocrati
one,  and  thus  far  are  the  children  of  Abraham  placei
in  a  condition  similar   to    that   of  the  children  of
Adam.     As  for  the  latter,  there  were,  in  general,  in
"  daughters  of  men,"  out  of  their  own    immcdiat
kindred,  so  for  the  sons  of  the  theocracy  there  were
no  spiritual  daughters  of  like  birth  with  themselves
that  is,  of  monotheistic  or  theocratic  faith,  out  of
the  circle  of  nearest  natural  affinity.     In  this  respect
however,  they  did  not  venture  to  tread  in  the  foot
steps  of  the  Sethites  (Gen.  vi.);  for  it  was  theirs  to
propagate  a  believing  race  through  consecrated  mar
riage. — But  Sarah  was  barren. — A  prelude  to  the
history  that  follows. — And   Terah    took  Abram
his  son. — Without  doubt  has  this  removal  a  reli
gious  theocratic  importance.     At  all  events,  this  di
vinely  accomplished  withdrawal  from  Ur  of  the  Chal-
dees  must  mean  more  than  a  mere  providential  guid
ance,  as  Keil  supposes. — And  they  went  forth
with  them. — The  word  CPiX  (rendered,  with  them)
makes  a  difficulty.     It  may  be  easiest  understood  a
meaning  with  one  another.     On  the  other  hand,  De-
litzsch  reminds  us  that  the  suffix  may  have  a  reflex
sense,  instead  of  a  reciprocal  (ch.  xxii.  3).     This  is
the_  very  question,  as  otherwise  the  sentence  would
be  indefinite ;  the  expression,  therefore,  must  mean
not  only  with  one  another,  but  Inj  themselves  ;  that
is,  they  withdrew  as  one  united,  exclusive  commu
nity.     Besides  this,  there  are  two  modes  of  taking
it,     Keil  understands  only  Lot  and  Sarah  as  the  sub
ject  of  the  verb,  and,  therefore,  refers  CfiX  to  Terah
and  Abraham.     There  are  three  things 'in  the  way
of  this  :  1.  The  withdrawing  (or  going  forth)  would
be  separated  from  the  previous  introductory  expres
sion  :   Terah  took  Abraham,  etc.,  which  will  not  do  ;
2.  it  would  be  a  withdrawing  from  that  which  leads,
and  the  accompanying  would  become  the  principal
persons  ;  3.  Abraham  would  have  to  be  regarded  as
a  co-leader,  which  is  contrary  to  what  is  said  :   Terah
took  Abraham.     Moreover,  Abraham,  regarded  as  an
independent  leader,  would  have  been  bound  in  duty
to  go  further  on  when  Terah  broke  off  from  his  pil
grimage  in  Mesopotamia.     Delitzsch,  on  the  other
hand,  together  with  Jarchi,  Rosenmuller,  and  others,
refers  the  words  they  went  forth  to  the  members  of
the  family  who  are  not  named,  namely,  they  went
forth  with  those  named ;  but  this  is  clearly  against
hhe  context.     By  the  expression  with  them,  it  would
ue  more  correct  to  understand,  with  those,  namely,
i.yith  the  first-named  (Terah,  etc.),  went  forth  those
,just   previously  mentioned,  or   named  immediately
'iftcr  them.     Later,  is  Ilaran  denoted  as  the  city  of
Nahor  (ch.  xxiv.  10  as  compared  with  ch.  xxvii.  43  ;
:^xix.  4  and  xxxi.  53).     For  other  interpretations  see

Uiobel.— And  they  came  unto  Haran Terah

Hended  to  go  from  Ur  to  Canaan,  but  he  stops  in
laran,  wherefore  he  also  retains  his  people  there.
According  to  Knobel,  the  mention  of  Canaan  is  an

nticipation  of  the  history  that  follows.— Haran

arra,  Charran,  lay  in  northwestern  Mesopotamia
adan  Aram,  xxv.  20),  ten  leagues  southeast  from
dessa,  in  a  fertile  region,  though  not  abounding  in
ater.  The  city  now  lies  in  ruins.  It  was  the  capi-
1  of  the  Gabians,  who  had  here  a  temple  of  the
oon  goddess,  which  they  referred  back  to  the  time


of  Abraham.  In  its  neighborhood  Crassus  was  slain
by  the  Parthians.  More  fully  on  the  subject,  see  in
SCHRODER,  p.  520;  also  in  Knobel  and  Delitzsch.—
And  Terah  died  in  Haran.— Terah  was  two  hun
dred  and  five  years  old.  If  Abraham,  therefore,  was
seventy-five  years  old  when  he  migrated  from  Meso
potamia,  and  Terah  was  seventy  years  old  at  hia
birth,  then  must  Abraham  have  set  forth  sixty  years
before  the  death  of  Terah.  And  this  is  very  impor
tant.  The  emigration  had  a  religious  motive  which
would  not  allow  him  to  wait  till  the  death  of  his
father.  As  Delitzsch  remarks,  the  manner  of  repre
sentation  in  Genesis  disposes  of  the  history  of  the
less  important  personages,  before  relating  the  main
history.  The  Samaritan  text  has  set  the  age  of
Terah  at  one  hundred  and  forty-five,  under  the  idea
that  Abraham  did  not  set  out  on  his  migration  until
after  the  death  of  Ilaran.  Tlie  representation  of
Stephen,  Acts  vii.  4,  connects  itself  with  the  general
course  of  the  narration.


DOCTUIXAL    AX  I)    ETHICAL.

See  above:    The  significance  of  the  genealogical
table  of  the  Shemites.

1.  The  decrease  in  the  extent  of  human  life.     In
the  manifold  weakenings  of  the  highest  life  endur
ance,  in  the  genealogy  of  Shcm,  there  are,  neverthe
less,  distinctly  observable  a  number  of  abrupt  breaks :

1 .  From  Shorn  to  Arphaxad,  or  from  600  years  to  438 ;

2.  from  Eber  to  Peleg,  or  from  4(54  years  to  239  ;   3.
from  Sertig  to  Nahor,  or  from  230  years  to  148 ;  be
yond  which  last,  again,  there  extend  the  lives  of
Terah  with  his  205,  and  of  Abraham  with  his  175
years.     Farther  on  we  have  Isaac  with  180  years,
Jacob  147,  and  Joseph   110.     So  gradually  does  the
human  term  of  life  approach  the  limit  set  by  the
Psalmist,  Ps.  xc.  10.     Moses  reached  the  age  of  120
years.     The  deadly  efficacy  goes  on  still  in  the  bodily
sphere,   although  the  counter-working  of  salvation
has  commenced  in  the  spiritual.     Keil,  with  others,
finds  the  causes  of  this  decrease  in  the  catastrophe
of  the  flood,  and  in  the  separation  of  humanity  into
various  nations.

2.  Ohalacca  and  the  Chaldceans.—$QQ  the  Theo
logical  Real  Lexicons,  especially  HKRZO«'S  Eno/clo-
padie,    The   Fragments  of   the    Chaldasan    Author,
Berosus,  as  found  in  the  Chronicon  of  Eusebius,  and
:he  Chronographia  of  Synccllus.     This  people  seem
to  have   been   early,   and,   in  an  especial   sense,   a
wandering  tribe.     The  priestly  castes  of  Chald;eans
in  Babylonia  must  have  come  out  of  Egypt,     Strabo
and  others  transfer  the  land  of  the  ClTaldaeans  to  a
region  in  lower  Babylonia,  in  the  marshy  district  of
the   Euphrates   near   the   Persian    Gulf;   the   same
author,  however,  finds  also,  as  others  have  done,  the
seat  of  the  Chaldajans  in  the  Chaldtean  Mountains
very   near   to  Armenia   and   the   Black   Sea.     The
iroper  home  of  the  Chaldaeans  was,  therefore,  at  the
icad  waters  of  the  Tigris.

3.  Lrr  in  Chaldaea.     See  above.

4.  On  the  indication  of  a  great  yet  gradual  pro-
•ision  for  the  variance  that  was  to  take  place  between
he  race  of  Eber  and  the  heathen,  see  the  Exegetical
.nd  Critical.     The  later  Biblical  accounts  of  Terah
.nd  the  forefathers  of  Abraham  appear,  in  general,
o  owe  their  form  to  the   reciprocal   influence  of
sraelitish  tradition  and  the  Israelitish  exegesis  of
he  passage  before  us.     According  to  the  language
>f  Stephen,  Acts  vii.  2,  Abraham  was  already  called


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSES.


at  Ur  in  Chaldcca.  We  must,  therefore,  regard  him
as  the  proper  author  of  the  migration  of  his  father,
Tcrah.  The  passage,  Jo^h.  xxiv.  "2,  according  to
which  Abraham's  forefathers,  an<l  Tcrah  especially,
dwelt  beyond  the  river  (the  Euphrates),  and  served
other  gods,  ha*  special  relation  to  this  fact  of
Tenth's 'suffering  himself  to  be  detained  in  Haran. —
This  tln'ii,  is  to'be  so  understood,  that  in  consequence
of  the  un'n  '  :  Hi,  idolatry  IK  gan  to  take  up

its  abode  vorv  n<  ar  to  tlie  adoration  of  the  one  God,
as  Mill  mah;laii;ed  in  'i\  rah's  family  (sec  eh.  xxix.
"•_>  '.'>'•'<  :;.">;  xxx. '2-1,  27  ;  and  to  this  belongs  what  is
said  eh.  xxxi.  Ill,  about  the  teraphim  of  Laban).
\Ve'ma\  well  suppose  that  .lo.-hua,  fioin  his  stern,
l.-'-d  stand-point,  judged  a;;d  condemned  that  ming
ling  of  uor-hips,  'or  that  image  v,  orship,  as  strongly
as'.Mo-es  did  the  setting  up  of  the  golden  e.ilf.  The
little  gmiip  uf  wanderers,  ver.  »1,  appears  to  have
originated  from  a  similarity  of  feeling  which,  after
long  conliicts  in  the  line  of 'Eber,  was  finally  to  tear
it-elf  away  from  this  eonjectural  capital  of  the-  Light
an  i  I'irewor.-hip  in  Cha!d;r-a,  and,  in  that  way,  from
lieathenism  altogether.  Their  aim  was  Canaan,  be
cause  there,  paitly  from  their  decidedly  foreign  state,
partly  by  reason  of  their  antagonism  to  the  Hamitic
race,"  they  would  he  protected  from  the  contagion.
But  Ter.iii  cannot  get  beyond  H;>ran,  and  to  this  not
only  does  Joshua  refer," but  also  th^  later  Jewish
tradition  respecting  Terah.  To  this  place,  where  lie
guttles  down,  Terah  seems  to  have  given  the  name
of  hi<  dead  son,  i;,  loving  remembrance,  and  it  may
have  been  this  name,  as  well  as  the  lair  land  and  ap-
piiv.it  security,  that  bound  him  there.  The  circum-
tha;  Abraham,  according  to  ver  ,">2,  docs  not
appear  to  liave  departed  before  the  death  of  Terah
(with  which,  however,  the  history  otherwise  does  not
;  gree),  has  been  interpreted  by  Syncellus  and  others
as  impUini:  that  Terah  was  spiritually  dead.  A  like
untenable  Jewish  hypothesis,  which  Ilieronymus  gives
us,  assumes  that  t'h.e  75  years  which  arc  ascribed  to
Abraham,  eh.  xii.  -1,  arc  not  to  be  dated  from  his  r.alu-
i.il  birth,  but  from  the  time  of  his  deliverance  from
the  fuinace  of  fir.1,  which  was  like  a  new  birth.  But
th.it  Abraham  tore  himself  away  before  his  father's
death  has.  at  all  even!-,  the  important  meaning  that,
in  the  strife  between  filial  piety  and  the  call  of  faith,
he  obeyed  the  higher  voice."  The  family  group  in
Haran. 'however,  is  thus  distinctly  denoted,  because
it  now  forms  the  provisional  earthly  homestead  of  the
w.mdeiing  patriarchs,  and  because,  also,  as  the  later
history  informs  us,  it  was  to  furnish  wives  of  like
theocratic  birth  for  their  sons.

:>.  L-.'irends  concerning  the  migration  of  Abra-
1.  m.  S.r  UAHMKR,  "  The  Hebrew  Traditions  "  (Bres-
1m,  l^r.l,  p.  2-1).  According  to  a  Hebrew  Midrash
(Ruhba  :;s,  in  Ilieronymus),  Abraham,  at  Ur,  was
into  a  furnace  of  fire,  because  he  would  not
adore  the  fire  which  the  Chaldeans  worshipped,  but
Miraculously  preserved  by  God.  His  brother
Haran,  on  the  contrary,  was  consumed,  because  he
was  unresolved  whether  to  adore  the  fire  or  not.  It
was  Nimrod  who  had  him  cast  into  the  furnace.
Here  belongs,  also,  the  Treatise  of  BEKK,  entitled
'•  The  Life  of  Abraham,  according  to  the  Jewish  tra
ditions.''  Leip.,  185'A


IIOMILETICAL    AXD    PRACTICAL.

As  Abraham's  life  of  faith  develops  itself  in  his
posterity,  so  did  it  have  its  root  in  the  life  of  his  fore


fathers. — How  the  life  of  all  great  men  of  God  rests
upon  a  previous  hidden  history. — Comparison  of  the
two  lines  of  faith,  that  of  Seth  to  Noah,  and  from
hcm  to  Abraham :  1.  outwardly,  ever  less  (at  last
reduced  to  one  point) ;  2.  inwardly,  ever  stronger
'attaining  at  last  to  the  one  who  makes  the  transition).
[Thus  Noah  passed  through  the  coiruptcd  race
and  through  the  flood;  thus  Abraham  made  the
transition  through  heathenism.] — Tcrah's  migration
to  Canaan:  1.  its  spirited  beginning;  2.  iis  failure
to  go  on. — Abraham  and  his  kinsmen:  1.  lie  wa.5
probably  the  author  of  their  movement;  2.  they,
probably,  the  cause  of  his  tarrying  in  Haran. — The
dcatli  of  children  before  the  eyes  of  their  parents
(ver.  28). — Sarah's  barrenness,  the  long  and  silent
trial  in  the  life  of  Abraham.

STAKKK:  The  Sethi  tes,  among  whom  the  true
church  is  preserved. — God's  remembrance  of  the
righteous  abides  in  his  blessing. — OSIANPKH:  A
Christian  when  he  is  called,  must,  for  the  sake  of
God,  leave  joyfully  his  fatherland;  he  must  forsake
all  that  he  loves,  all  that  is  pleasing  to  him  in  the
world ;  he  must  follow  God  obediently,  and  only
where  He  leads.

[Exruusrs  ON  TIIK  CONKTSION  OF  LANIJI'AOKS. —
That  there  was  here  a  supernatural  intervention  the
language  of  Scripture  will  not  permit  us  to  doubt.
We  need  not,  however,  trouble  ourselves  with  the
question  how  fai  each  variety  of  human  speech  is
connected  with  it,  or  regard,  as  essentially  affecting
the  argument,  the  greatness  orsmallness  of  the  lum
ber  of  languages  now  spoken  upon  the  earih.  There
is,  doubtless,  many  a  local  jargon,  the  result  of  iso
lation,  or  of  unnatural  mixtures,  that  has  but  little,
if  anything,  to  do  with  an  inquiry  in  respect  to  tins
most  ancient  and  world-historical  event.  It.  is  so
dilhVuk  to  determine  what  is  a  language  in  distinc
tion  from  a  dialect,  or  mere  local  variety  of  idiom
and  pronunciation,  that  such  lists  as  those  of  Balbi
and  others  can  have  but  little  philological  value.  For
all  essential  purposes  of  such  inquiry,  therefore,  there
is  no  need  to  extend  our  view  beyond  that  district
of  earth  in  which  languages  now  existing,  either  as
spoken  or  in  their  literature,  can  be  historically  or
philologically  traced  to  peoples  connected  with  the
earliest  ki  own  appearances  of  the  human  race.  We
<rive  this  a  very  wide  sweep  when  we  include  in  it
Southern  and  "Middle  Europe,  Western  Asia,  and
Northern  Africa.  Here  philological  science,  though
yet  very  imperfect,  has  found  great  encouragement
in  its  inquiries,  and  within  this  district  has  it  begun
to  make  out,  with  some  clearness,  what  must  have
been  the  earliest  divisions  of  language.  The  result
thus  far,  as  stated  by  some  of  the  latest  and  best
writers,  has  been  the  recognition  of  three  general
families  or  groups.  In  giving  names  to  these,  there
has  also  been  recognized,  to  some  extent,  the  ethno-
logi'-ul  division  supposed  to  lie  made  from  i  he  sons
of°Xoah;  and  hence  some  have  been  inclined  to  call
them  the  Japhethic,  Shemitic,  and  Hamitic  (Bunsen,
Khami.-m  and  Semism).  It  was  early  perceived,!
however,  that  the  ethnologic  and  linguistic  lines  do
not  exactly  correspond  even  in  the  Shemitic ;  aim
there  is  s'till  more  of  aberration  and  intersection
within  the  supposed  limits  of  the  two  others.  The
first  group  has  therefore  been  called  the  Indo-Ger-
manic,  and  of  late  the  Arian.  In  the  third  the  term!
Ilamilic  has  been  generally  dropped  for  that  of  T
ranian.  The  general  correspondence,  however,  giveti
much  countenance  to  the  first  ethnological  naming


CHAP.   XI.  10-32.


J7F


But  whatever  method  be  adopted,  it  docs  not  affect
the  main  characteristics  belonging  to  each  of  the
three.  These  may  be  thus  stated.  The  Shcmitic  is
tlie  smallest,  the  most  unique,  both  in  its  matter  and
Us  form,  the  most  enduring,  the  most  easily  rccog-
tix.cd,  and  having  the  least  diversity  in  its  several
branches.  The  group  termed  Arian,  Indo-Gcrmanic,
or  Japhcthan,  is  less  marked  in  all  these  character
istics,  though  retaining  enough  of  them  to  make  clear
the  family  relationship  in  all  the  best-known  branch
es.  The  third  is  so  different  from  both  these,  it
seems  so  utterly  broken  up,  that  Pritchard,  and  other
philologist?,  have  given  it,  as  a  whole,  the  name
Allophylian,  using  it  simply  as  a  convenience  of  no
menclature.  There  exist,  however,  marks  of  affinity
that  show  it  to  be  something  more  than  a  mere  arbi
trarily  separated  mass  (see  MAX  MULLKK  "  Languages
of  the  Seat  of  War,"  pp.  88,  90,  and  RAWLINSOX  :
"Herodotus,"  vol.  i.  524).  To  make  use  of  geo
logical  analogies,  as  Bunsen  has  done,  the  Sheiuitic
may  be  likened  to  the  primitive  rocks,  the  Arian  to
the  stratified  formations,  broken,  yet  presenting  much
clearness  of  outline  and  direction,  the  Turanian  to
confused  volcanic  masses  projected  from  some  force
unknown,  or  solitary  boulders  scattered  here  and
there  in  ways  inexplicable,  yet  showing  marks  of  the
localities  from  whence  they  came,  and  evidence  of
some  original  correspondence  in  the  very  irregulari
ties  of  their  fracture.  Or  we  may  compare  them,
the  first,  to  a  temple  still  entire  in  its  structural
form,  (hough  presenting  tokens  of  catastrophes  by
which  it  has  been  affected ;  the  second,  to  wide-spread
ruins,  where  whole  architectural  rows  and  avenues
still  show  a  clear  coherence,  whilst  even  the  broken
arches,  fallen  columns,  displaced  capitals,  give  evi
dence  by  which  we  arc  enabled  to  make  out  the
original  plan  ;  the  third,  to  scattered  mounds  of  rub
bish,  in  which  shattered  slabs,  obscurely  stamped
bricks,  and  faint  marks  of  some  joining  cement,
alone  testify  to  a  structure  having  once  a  local  unity
at  least,  though  now  exhibiting  little  of  inward  plan
and  liani:ony.  To  drop  all  such  figures,  it  may  be
said  that  the  Shcmitic  has  preserved  what  was  most
enduring  of  the  original  form,  the  Arian  what  was
most  permanent  of  the  original  matter,  whilst  in  the
Turanian  has  fallen  all  that  was  most  frangible  in
the  one,  cr  most  easily  deformed  or  defaced  in  the
other.

Now  to  account  for  such  a  condition  of  things  in
language,  especially  in  its  earliest  appearance,  is
equally  difficult,  whether  we  hypothesize  the  primi
tive  movement  as  a  tendency  to  gregariousness  and
to  a  consequent  unity  of  speech,  or  as  a  tendency  in
the  opposite  direction,  or  as  being  both  combined  in
an  attractive  and  repulsive  polarity.  The  phenomena
in  each  and  all  are  at  war  with  every  such  induction.
There  is  in  the  one  family  a  strangely  preserved
unity.  There  is  in  another  a  totally  different  pecu
liarity  of  form  stamped  upon  it  from  times  that  pre
cede  all  historical  memory ;  it  is  full  where  the  first
seems  to  be  scant,  free  where  the  other  is  tense ;
sometimes  just  the  reverse,*  having  as  a  whole  a  look

*  [Thus  the  Shcmitic  greatly  excels  in  the  number  of
That  are  called  its  conjugations,  or  ways  of  modifying  the
;>rimary  sense  of  the  verb.  Otherwise  its  form  may  be  char-
icterized  as  the  very  grandeur  of  simplicity,  suggesting  the
lomparison  of  the  majestic  palm,  whilst  the  Greek  and  S:\n-
:3rit  may  bo  likened  to  the  branching  oak.  And  so,  again,
u  some  of  its  aspects,  tho  Shemitic  presents  :\  surprising
'arcnoss.  In  the  Hebrew  and  Syriac,  for  example,  there  is
he  least  show,  or  rather,  only  the  rudimentary  appearance
I'  any  optative  or  subjunctive  modality,  that  id,  in  outward


so  exceedingly  foreign  as  never  to  be  mistaken,  yel
with  an  equally  unmistakable  familiarity,  or  family
likeness,  of  its  own,  within  which  the  many  dissimili
tudes  among  its  different  branches  never  efface  the
strong  and  seemingly  ineradicable  affinities.  There
is  a  third  HO  marked  by  an  almost  total  dissolution
that  its  very  looseness  would  seem  to  make  its  only
classifying  feature,  were  it  not  that  certain  indiced
found  in  every  branch  (such  as  the  numerals  and
some  pronominal  forms),  point  to  a  community  of
origin,  whilst  appearances  of  correspondence,  even
in  its  fractures,  suggest  a  common  disorganizing
catastrophe.  Viewing  these  three  families  in  their
relations  to  each  other,  we  find  that  there  is  not  only
separation,  and  that  of  long  standing,  but  great  di
versity  of  separation.  The  original  cleaving  dates
from  a  most  ancient  period,  before  which  nothing  is
known,  and  in  its  general  aspect  remains  unaffected
by  time.  The  Hamitic,  or  Turanian,  seems  to  have
been  confused  and  tumultuous  from  the  beginning.
Such  is  said  to  be  its  appearance  on  the  early  trilin
gual  inscriptions  maue  to  accommodate  the  incon
gruous  peoples  in  the  Assyrian  empire  who  had,  in
some  way,  been  here  and  there  wedged  between  the
Arian  and  Shemitic  portions.  See  KAWLIXSON'S
"Herodotus,"  i.  527.  Again,  the  Shemitic,  though
oftentimes  in  close  contiguity,  has  put  on  none  of  the
essential  features  of  the  Arian,  nor  the  Arian  of  the
Shemitic.  The  German  and  Arabic  are  as  distinct  in
modern  times,  as  anciently  the  Greek  and  Hebrew.
The  minor  specific  divisions  in  each  family  have  va
ried  more  or  less,  but  the  great  generic  differences
have  remained  the  same  from  age  to  age,  still  show
ing  no  signs  of  blending,  or  of  mutual  development
into  some  common  comprehending  genus,  according
to  the  process  which  Bunsen  supposes  to  have  pro
duced  such  changes  in  the  antehistorical  times.
What  has  stamped  them  with  features  so  ancient  and
so  diverse  ?  Nothing  of  any  known  natural  develop
ment,  cither  of  one  from  the  other,  or  of  all  from
a  common  antecedent  stock,  can  account  lor  it.  If
Sinism,  or  Chinesian  (the  name  given  to  this  hypo
thetical  beginning  of  human  speech),  developed
Khamism,  and  Khamism  Semism,  and  Semism  Ari-
anism,  how  is  it  that  we  find  nothing  like  it  as  actual
fact  in  historical  times,  and  no  marks  of  any  transi
tion-period  in  the  ages  before  ?  Surely,  if  Bunsen's
favorite  comparisons  be  good  for  anything,  we  ought
to  find  in  language,  as  geologists  do  in  the  rocks,  the
visible  marks  of  the  process,  or  if  we  arc  compelled
to  adopt  a  theory  of  sudden  or  eruptive  breakings  in


modal  form,  since  all  the  subjective  states  may  bo  clearly
and  effectively  expressed  by  particle.?,  or  in  some  other  way.
It  is  the  same,  even  now,  in  the  Arabic,  only  that  this  em-
bryotic  appearance  is  a  little  more  brought  out.  Three
thousand  years,  and,  within  the  last  third  of  that  time,  a
most  copious  use  (philosophic,  scientific,  and  commercial,  as
well  as  colloquial),  have  given  it  nothing,  in  this  respect,
that  can  be  called  structural  growth,  nothing  that  can  lie
regarded  as  an  approach  to  the  exuberant  forms  of  modality
to  be  found  in  the  Greek  and  Latin  even  in  their  earliest
stages.  It  has  kept  to  the  mould  in  which  it  was  lirst  run.
So  also  in  the  expression  of  time,  the  Shemitic  still  preserves
its  rigidiicss.  It  keeps  its  two  tenses  unmodified  in  form,
though  it  has  ways  of  denoting  all  varieties  of  time,  relative
or  absolute,  that  any  other  language  can  express.  Compare1
it  with  the  Greek  and  Sanscrit  copiousness  of  temporal
forms ;  how  early  born  are  they,  and  how  fruitful,  in  the  or.o
case,  how  unyielding,  how  stubbornly  barren,  we  may  say,
in  the  other  !  Surely,  one  who  carefully  considers  such  phe
nomena  as  these,  must  admit  that  there  is  in  tho  birth  and
perpetuity  of  language  some  other  power — either  as  favor
ing  or  resisting — than  that  of  mutual  development,  or  re
ciprocal  change,  however  long  tho  periods  that  may  be  as
sumed  for  it  as  a  convenience  to  certain  theories. — T.  L.  I


GENESIS,  Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


(lie  one  case  (whether  we  call  them  supernatural  or
extraordinary  matters  but  little  to  the  argument)  why
should  a  similar  idea  be  regarded  as  irrational  in  the
other.  Thus  there  are  no  linguistic  marks  in  Greek
and  Hebrew  (regarded  as  early  representatives  of  two
"Teat  families},  or  in  Svriae  and  Sanscrit,  showing
That  at  any  time  they  were  a  common  language,*  or
ftuy  beginning  of  mutual  divergency  as  traced  down
wards,  or  any  evidences  of  convcrgcncy  as  we  fol
low  them  up  "the  stieam  of  time.  In  fact,  they  stand
in  mo.st  direct  contra.-:  in  their  earliest  stages;  even
as  the  fresh  geological  rupture  must  present,  doubt
less,  a  more  distinct  breakage  than  is  shown  after
air  s  of  wear  and  abrasion.  When  history  opens,
tl'iese  languages  stand  abruptly  facing  eae'h  other.
This  maybe  said  with  some  degree  of  confidence,
fur  our  knowledge  here  is  not  scanty.  We  have  the
Shemitic  all  along  from  the  very  dawn  of  history  to
our  latest  times.  The  Arabic  of  the  present  day,
I  i  as  it  has  become  in  its  derivative  vocabulary,
is  as  ri^i'l  in  its  Shcniitic  features  as  the  oldest
known  ilebirw.  There  is  some  reason  for  regarding
it  as  retaining  even  still  more  of  the  primitive  type.
The  Greek  was  in  it-;  perfection  in  the  days  of  Ho-
,11.  r,  and  as  Homer  found  it.  It,  has  never  been  sur
passed  bince  in  all  that  makes  the  glory  of  language
as  a  spiritual  structure,  in  its  classifications f  of  out
ward  things,  in  i:s  still  higher  classification  of  ideas,

*  [Tlii-  is  said  nn 'Vi'  especially  in  v.  f  r  ;  !  to  the  form,
orwhatmay  bccallcd  thesou?  of '  I  'respectively.

Of  thr  matter,  or  vo-all/ed  material,  us  it  may  be  styled,
then- is  a  good  deal  that  is  common.  Then  are  many  roots
in  thr  Ariantliat  are  (  vHer.tly  the  same  wr.h  the  Shemitic,
whether  coining  from  a  common  origin  sounds,

01  ln>m  a  later  born. \vinu'  IVoiu  each  other.  Words  pass
fiomojie  linirna.'e  to  another,  or  original  vocal  utterances
are  liroUen  up,  in  an  iinineii  -e  variety  <>f  ways;  but  the
-•tnict'iral  t'"ini<  ;,re  ui!yieMin_'.  In  this  resides  the  char-
acterain-  principle  of  perpetuity;  so  that  it  is  no  paradox
ID  atliiiu  a  generic  iden'.i'y  in  la:  guage,  in  which  the  greater
KM;,  or  even  :ill  the  articulated  sounds  had  been  changed,
or  have  givi  n  i  lace  to  others.  When  we  consider  the  pi-eat
facility  of  mere  phonetic  changes,  through  cognate  letters
or  those  of  the  same  organ,  through  transition  letters,  by
intervention  there  is  a  passage  from  one  family  into
(mother  (as  i  and  y  make  a  transition  from  the  dentals  to
the  siuttiirals,  and  >>•  cr  '•  from  the  gutturals  to  the  labials),
or  through  nasal  combinations,  such  as  i>g,  lid,  ml,  which,
on  dissolution,  may  carry  the  syllable  in  the  new  direction
of  either  clement  with  nil  its  affinities,  thus  niaking,  as  it
were,  abridge  between  them— when  we  bear  ia  mind  how
sounds  wear  out  in  the  beginning  or  at  the  end  of  words,
entirely  disappearing,  or  easily  admitting  in  their  attenu
ated  state  the  substitution  of  others  belonging  to  a  different
orcan,  or  how,  in  the  middle  of  words,  the  compression  of
nvllables  bringing  together  harsh  combinations,  crushes  out
letters  in  some  cases  (especially  if  they  be  gutturals),  or  in
troduces  a  new  element  demanded  by  euphony— we  cease  to
wi.mh-r  at  the  great  variety  and  extent  of  vocal  changes,
ceil  how  iu  various  ways  any  one  letter  almost,  or
M •  liabie  sound,  may  pass  into  almost  any  other,  and  how  the
sauv  word,  as  traced  through  its  phonetic  changes,  presents
mi  appearance  in  one  language  that  neither  the  eye  nor  the
ear  would  recognize  in  another.  To  take  one  example  that
may  stand  for  an  illustration  of  some  of  the  most  important
of  such  chanscs,  who,  by  the  sight  or  sound  alone,  or  by
any  outward  marks,  would  recognize  the  Latin  dir.s  in  the
French  jour,  or  the  English  tear  (.teaghr,  Saxpv)  in  the  Latin
laci;  laci-ima,  or  the  Endish  head  in  the  Latin  raput  and
the  Greek  KecjxxAjj,  though  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than
their  relationship  as  traced  by  the  phonetic  laws.  The  real
wonder  is  that  the  changes  in  this  department  have  not
been  greater  than  they  are  found  to  be.  It  is  the  soul  of
language,  the  unyielding  rigidity  of  its  form,  that,  by  its
association,  prevents  the  utter  dissolution  and  mutation  of
the  material.  Its  conservatism,  in  this  respect,  is  shown  in
the  case  of  languages  that  are  merely  spoken.  It  has  its
most  complete  eifect  in  those  that  have  a  written  and  print
ed  literature. — T.  L.J

t  [The  arrangement,  in  the  mind,  of  things  to  be  named,
belongs  to  the  formation  of  language,  as  much  as  the  nam
ing  if  it  may  not  rather  be  said  to  be  the  most  important


in  its  precision  and  richness  of  epithet,  in  the  pn>
found  presentation  of  moral  and  aesthetic  distinctions,
— in  this  respect  ever  iu  advance  of  the  people  who
used  it — in  the  elements  it  contained  for  the  expres
sion  of  philosophic  thought  whenever  its  stores  should
be  required  for  that  purpose,  and,  withall,  in  the
melodiousness,  the  flexibility,  and  the  exuberance  of
its  vocal  forms.  The  Thueydidian  Greek  falls  below
it  in  all  these  respects.  Certainly  it  had  not  risen
above  it.  It  is  the  tendency  of  language,  when  left
to  itself,  to  decline  in  the  attributes  mentioned.  The
assertion  may  be  hazarded  that  the  evidence  of  this
fact  is  exhibited  in  most  modern  tongues.  More  co
pious  are  they  doubtless,  better  adapted  to  a  quick
political,  social,  or  commercial  intercourse,  or  to  cer
tain  forms  of  civilization  in  which  a  greater  commu
nity  of  action,  or  of  understood  conventional  pro
ceedings,  makes  up  for  the  want  of  pictorial  and
dialectical  clearness  as  inherent  in  the  words  them
selves — but  everywhere,  in  their  old  worn  state,  pre
senting  a  lack  of  that  vividness,  that  exquisite  shad
ing  of  ideas,  that  power  of  emotion,  which  aston
ishes  us  in  the  early  languages  just  mentioned.  The
tendency,  in  fact,  is  towards  Sinism,  or  a  language
of  loose  arbitrary  symbols,  not  away  from  it.  As
savagism  is  the  dre^s  of  a  former  higher  civilization,
so  Sinism  is  the  remains  of  language,  bearing  evi
dence  of  attrition  and  fracture;  and  this,  however
copious  it  may  be,  or  however  adapted  it  may  be  to
a  mere  worldly  civilization,  such  as  that  iu  which  the
Chinese  have  long  been  stationary,  or  slowly  falling,
and  to  which  a  godless  culture,  with  all  its  science,
is  ever  tending.  There  is  in  language  accretion,  ad
dition,  looseness,  decay;  but  we  rarely  find,  if  we
ever  find,  in  any  speech  that  has  long  been  used
what  may  be  truly  called  growth  in  the  sense  of  or
ganic  vigor,  or  inward  structural  harmony.*  That
young  and  vigorous  constitution  which  is  discovered
in  the  earliest  Arian  and  Shemitic  speech,  they  mu
have  received  in  some  way  for  which  it  is  very  dilit-
cult  to  account  on  any  natural  or  ordinary  grounds.


part  of  the  namii'g  ii.-vlf.  Things,  thus  regarded,  may  he
divided  into  three  general  classes:  1.  Outward  sen-ible
objects;  -2.  actions,  qualities,  etc.,  as  the  ground  of  their
ua'miir-',  and  themselves,  therefore,  demanding  an  antece
dent  naming;  3.  mental  acts  and  states,  thoughts,  think
ings,  emotions,  etc.,  regarded  ns  wholly  spiritual.  In  r>
spect  to  the  first,  it  may,  indeed,  be  said  that  nature  makes
the  classification,  but  the  mind  must  recognize  it,  more  or  j
less  correctly,  before  it  can  give  the  names.  The  second  lies
in  both  departments  ;  since  acts  (doiiifff,  sufferings)  must  be
the  source  whence  direct  names  are  drawn  for  the  first,  and
figures,  pictures,  or  spiritual  representatives,  for  the  third,
as  is  shown  in  that  largo  class  of  words  that  are  said  to  have
secondary  meanings,  or  abstract  ideas  denoted  by  something  I
material  or  sensible  in  the  root.  The  third  classification  W
wholly  spiritual  or  within,  though  its  namings  are  thusf
drawn  from  without.  AVe  find  all  this  work  done  for  us|
when  we  arc  horn.  The  earliest  languages  have  it  as  vivid-
ly  as  the  latest,  more  vividly,  we  may  say,  if  not  carried  to
so  wide  an  extent  in  the  classification  of  outward  objects,
more  profound,  as  analysis  would  show,  in  the  dish:  lions
of  moral  and  Ksthetical  ideas.  Whence  came  it  !  Vfo
must  ascend  to  the  very  taproot  of  humanity  to  find  an  an
swer,  if  we  are  not  to  feck  still  farther  in  some  divine  teach
ing  or  inspiration.  The  phenomena  lie  ever  before  us;.
their  commonness  should  not  diminish  our  wonder  at  the
mystery  they  present.— T.  L.]

*  [We  may  thank  God  that  some  of  the  noblest  lan
guages  (Greek,  Hebrew,  Sanscrit,  Latin)  died  lo:  g  ago,  01
in  their  comparative  youth.  They  have  ihus  been  em-'
balmed,  preserved  from  decay,  made  immortal,  ever  young
— their  expressive  words  and  forms  still  remaining  as  a  re
serve  store  for  the  highest  philosophical,  theological,  an<
even  scientific  use.  They  are  called  "  the  dead  languages ;
but  that  which  some  would  make  an  objection  to  what  ha
long  and  justly  been  deemed  their  place  in  education,  istn1
very  ground  of  their  excellence. — T.  L.]


I


CHAP.    XI.    10-32.


375


Convention  will  not  explain  it,  as  Plato  saw  long  ago
in  the  very  dawn  of  philological  inquiry  ;  onoma-
topic  theories  fail  altogether  to  account  for  the  first
words,  to  say  nothing  of  grammatical  forms  ;  devel
opment  is  found  to  be  mere  cant,  giving  no  real  in
sight  into  the  mystery.  It'  the  originating  processes
fall  wholly  within  the  sphere  of  the  human,  then
must  we  suppose  some  instinctive  logic,  some  sure
'  intelligence  working  below  consciousness,  and  some
how  belonging  to  the  race,  or  races,  rather  than  to
the  individual.  If  this  is  difficult  to  conceive,  or  to
unde -stand,  then  there  remains  for  ns  that  which
hardly  surpasses  it  in  wonder,  whilst  it  falls  short  of
it  in  mystery,  namely,  the  idea  of  some  ab  extra
supernatural  power  once  operating  on  the  human
soul  in  its  early  youth — whether  in  the  first  cre
ation,  or  in  some  subsequent  early  stages  of  re
markable  development, — and  now  comparatively
unknown.*

When  we  study  language  on  the  map,  the  diffi
culty  of  any  mere  development  theory  bringing  one
of  these  families  from  the  other,  or  from  a  common
original  stock,  is  greatly  increased.  Whilst  the  All
an  and  Sliemitic  present,  in  the  main,  certain  geo
graphical  allotments  tolerably  distinct,  this  Hamitic
or  Turanian  conglomerate  is  found  dispersed  in  the
most  irregular  manner.  It  is  everywhere  in  spots
throughout  the  regions  occupied  by  the  more  organic
families  ;  sometimes  in  sporadic  clusters,  as  in  parts
of  Western  Asia,  sometimes  driven  far  off  to  the
confines  as  is  the  case  with  the  Finnic  and  Lap  lan
guage,  or,  again,  wedged  into  corners,  like  the  Basque
language  in  Spain,  lying  between  two  branches  of  the
Arian,  the  Roman  and  the  Celtic.

Had  we  found  rocks  lying  in  such  strange  ways,
it  would  at  once  have  been  said :  no  slow  depositing,
no  long  attrition,  no  gradual  elevation  or  depression,
has  done  all  this.  They  may  have  exerted  a  modi
fying  influence  ;  but  they  are  not  alone  sufficient  to
account  for  what,  appears.  Here  has  been  some
eruptive  or  explosive  force,  some  ab  extra  power,
whether  from  above  or  beneath,  sudden  and  extraor-


*  [It  is  not  extravagant  to  suppose  something  like  this
still  lying  at  the  ground  of  that  mysterious  process  which
we  witness  without  wonder,  because  so  common, — the  rapid
acquisition  of  language  by  the  infant  mind.  It  is  not  the
mere  learning  to  speak  the  names  of  outward,  sensible,  in
dividual  things— there  is  nothing  much  more  strange  in
that  than  in  teaching  a  parrot  to  talk,— but  the  quick  seiz
ing  of  those  hidden  relations  of  things,  or  rather  of  thought
about  things  (ideas  of  the  soul's  own  with  which  it  clothes
things),  ami  which  it  afterwards  tasks  all  our  outward  logic
to  explain.  How  rapidly  does  this  infant  mind  adapt  words,
not  merely  to  chairs  and  table*,  but  to  the  relational  notions
of  number,  case,  substance,  attribute,  qualifying  degree,
subjective  modality,  time  relative  and  absolute,  time  as
past,  present,  and  future,  or  time  as  continuous  and  event
ual,  knowing  nothing  indeed  of  these  as  technical  names,
but  grasping  immediately  the  ideas,  and  seeing,  with  such
amazing  quickness,  the  adaptability  to  them  of  certain
forms  of  expression,  a  mere  termination,  perhaps,  or  the
faintest  inflection,  and  that,  too,  with  no  outward  imitative
indices  from  the  sense,  such  as  may  aid  in  the  learning  of
the  names  of  mere  sensible  objects.  This  indeed  is  wonder
ful,  however  common  it  may  be.  We  never  do  it  but  one".
All  other  acquisition  of  languages,  in  adult  years,  is  by  a
process  of  nu-mory,  comparison,  and  conscious  rcasoniii"—
motner  words,  a  strictly  scientific  process,  however  certain
abbreviations  of  it  may  be  called  the  learning  of  a  foreign
tongue  by  "  the  method  of  nature  "  and  of  infancy.  Some
thing  m  the  r.icc  analogous  to  this  process  in  the  individual
infant  soul,  may  bo,  not  irrationally,  supposed  to  have
characterized  the  earliest  human  history  of  Ian  "TWO  The
failure  of  every  system  of  artificial  language,  though  at
tempted  by  the  most  philosophical  minds,  aided  by  the
highest  culture,  shows  that  neither  convention  nor  imitation
had  anything  to  do  with  its  origin. — T.  L.]


dinary  in  its  effect,  however  generated  in  its  causal
ity,  and  however  we  may  style  that  causality,  whether
natural  or  supernatural,  simply  inexplicable,  or  di
vine.  Such  eruptive  forces  arc  not  confined  to  rocke
and  strata,  or  to  sudden  changes  in  material  organi
zation.  They  have  place  also  in  the  spiritual  world,
in  the  movements  of  history,  in  the  souls  of  men,  in
remarkable  changes  and  formations  of  language.
There  are  spiritual  phenomena,  if  the  term  may  be
used,  for  which  we  cannot  otherwise  easily  account.
The  evidence  here  of  any  such  intervening  power
may  be  less  striking,  because  less  startling  to  the
sense,  but  to  the  calm  and  reverent  reason  they  may
be  even  more  marked  than  anything  analagous  to
them  in  the  outer  world  of  matter.  Great  confusion
has  arisen  in  our  theological  reasoning  from  confin
ing  this  word  miraculous  solely  to  some  supposed
breakage  or  deflection  in  the  natural  sphere.

To  say  the  least,  therefore,  it  is  not  irrational  to
carry  this  view  into  the  history  of  man  regarded  as
under  the  influence  of  supernatural,  as  well  as  natu
ral,  agencies.  And  thus  here,  as  we  contemplate  the
remarkable  position  of  the  early  languages  of  the
world,  and  especially  of  the  three  great  families,
some  force  from  without,  sudden,  eruptive,  breaking
up  a  previous  movement,  extraordinary  to  say  the
least,  would  be  the  causal  idea  suggested,  even  if  the
Scripture  had  said  nothing  about  it.  A  primitive
formation  has  been  left  comparatively  but  little  af
fected  ;  all  around  it,  cast  and  west,  arc  linguistic
appearances  presenting  the  most  striking  contrasts
to  the  first,  and  yet  the  most  remarkable  family  like
nesses  to  each  other  ;  elsewhere,  as  a  third  class  of
elements  show,  the  eruptive  or  flooding  force  has
broken  everything  into  fragments,  and  scattered  them
far  and  wide.  Philology  cannot  account  for  it ;  but
when  we  study  the  tenth  and  eleventh  of  Genesis
in  what  they  fairly  imply  as  well  as  clearly  express,
we  have  revealed  to  us  an  ancient  causation  adequate,
alone  adequate,  we  may  say,  to  the  singular  effect
produced.  The  language  of  the  account  is  general,
as  in  other  parts  of  Scripture  where  a  mighty  change
is  to  be  described,  universal  in  its  direct  and  collat
eral  historical  effect,  without  requiring  us  to  main
tain  an  absolute  universality  in  the  incipient  move
ment.  From  some  such  general  terms  in  the  com
mencement  of  chapter  xi.  it  might  seem,  indeed,  as
though  every  man  of  the  human  race  was  in  this
plane  of  Shinar,  and  directly  engaged  in  the  impious
undertaking  described.  Taking,  however,  the  two
chapters  together — and  it  is  too  much  to  say,  as
most  commentators  do,  in  the  very  face  of  the  ar
rangement,  that  the  eleventh  chapter  is  wholly  prior
to  the  tenth — we  must  conclude  that  one  line,  at
least,  of  the  sons  of  Shcm,  that  of  Arphaxad,  the
ancestor  of  the  ChaMasans,  and  of  Eber,  the  more
direct  progenitor  of  the  Hebrews,  remained  in  the
upper  country  of  the  Euphrates.  It  is  fairly  to  be
inferred,  too,  that  the  Joktan  migration  to  Arabia
had  commenced,  carrying  with  it  the  Shemitic  ele
ment  of  speech  to  modify  or  transform  the  Cushitc,
whether  introduced  before  or  after  it.  Some  of  the
sons  of  Japheth  may  have  already  set  off,  west  and
cast,  in  their  long  wanderings  (to  Greece  and  India
perhaps),  whilst  Sidon,  a  descendant  of  Ham,  had
even  at  this  early  day,  founded  a  maritime  settle
ment,  and  ventured  upon  the  seas.  It  is  not  easy  to
understand  why  the  narration  of  the  tenth  chapter
should  have  had  its  place  before  that  of  the  eleventh,
unless  a  portion,  at  least,  of  the  movements  there
recorded,  had  been  antecedent  iii  time.  It  is  com-


GENESIS,  OK   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


monly  said  that,  the  tenth  i<  anticipatory  in  respect  I
to  what   follows,  but  this  is  not  altogether  satisfae-  i
tory.      As  I  he  storv  of  tin?  plater  scattering  comes  |
after  the  ethnological  divi.-ions   in  the  order  of  nar
ration,  it  may  be  consistently  maintained  that  it  was
subsequent  to  some   of  than,  at   lea<t,  in  the  order
of  time,  whilst  the  H'"mmg   universality  of  the  lan
guage  may  bo  ex  pi  line  1  on  the  ground   of  the   mag
nitude  of  "the  later  event,  and  its  world-wide  effect  in
the  human  history.      A  close  examination,  however,
shows  that,  even   in   the  diction,  this  universality  is
not  so  strict  as  some  interpretations  would  make  it.
After  tlicsj  i  arlicr  departures,  as  \ve  may  .-upply  from
chapter  x.,  it  pnveeds  to  say,  "  the  whole  earth  (land
country)  v,  '  and  one  speech."

It  had'  not  b  '  :i  broken  up,  though  it  may  have  be
gun  to  be  all'ccted  by  eanses  which  would  naturally
jii'odi;,' •  of  dialecr.  "  And  in  //<••//•  journey

ing,"  or  "  a.<  .'.'•//  journeyed  o.m-'ti-d  (";?*:),  '.hey
found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar."  "As  Unit
journeyed,"  that  K  ;:s  men  journeyed  oiucurJ,  or
migrated  more  and  more.  Who  or  how  many  they
were  is  not  :aid,  and  these  ir.dci'mite  pronouns  give
us  no  rijh!  to  say  that  every  man  of  the  hum:--
all  of  Noaehian  kind,  were  in  this  plain  of  Shinar.
There  is  ih"  strongest  proof  to  ih  •  contrary.  We
cannot  believe  that  Noah  was  there,  although  lie
lived  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  the  flood,
or  that  Shem  wa-  there,  who  lived  one  hundred  and
fifty  years  later,  and  even  in  the  days  of  Abraham.
The  idea  i;  abhorrent  that  one  so  highly  blessed  of
God,  ami  in  "whose  tents"  God  had  promi-"d  "to
dwell"  Sill  m  the  Nan::',  the  preserver  of  tin:  holy
speech,  and  the  dire*  t  antithesis  of  that  false  "name"
which  ihooC  bold  rebels  sou-lit  to  make  unto  thcm-
velve.- — should  have  had  any  participation,  even  by
ilia  presence,  in  so  unln  1;  a  proceeding.  As  little
can  we  believe  it  of  any  of  the  line  from  which  came
Abraham,  or  <  v<  n  of  their  not  remote  consanguinti,
the  .Joht.inite  Arabian-.  The  same  feeling  arises
when  we  think  of  the  pious  fathers  of  Melchizedek,
king  of  Salem,  king  of  righteousness,  and  who  had
consecrated  him  a  priest  to  El  Elion,  that  Most  High
God  of  the  Heavens  (see  (Jen.  xiv.  1^),  who  is  here  so
blasphemously  defied.*  Who  were  they,  then^  that
composed  this  strange  assemblage  on  the  plain  of
Shinar  ?  A  vast  multitude  doubtless  a  majority  of
Noah's  descendants  perhaps,  yet  still,  as  is  most
likely,  a  cuttuvics  gentium,  a  gathering  of  the  bad,
the  boid,  the  adventurous,  from  every  family,  but
with  the  Hamitic  character  decidedly  predominant. f
Nimrodian,  perhaps,  might  they  be  called  with  more
propriety,  if  we  take  the  constant  Jewish  tradition
that  Nimrod  was  their  leader  in  rebellion.  The  no
bler  sons  of  Ham  are  to  be  distinguished  from  these


*  [Thus  llasl.i  interpret.;  their  ~ZH  ,  "  Go  to,  now  let  us
climb  tlio  tinmment  and  make  war  upon  the  most  High."
Molehizedek  iind  his  forefathers  were,  in  all  probability,
Canaanites.    There  might  IK-  piety  and  faith  even  among
these,  as  i*  instanced,  afterward-*,  and  iu  a  time  of  still  great
er  corruption,  in  the  case  of  llahab,  who  was  a  direct  ances
tress  of  our  L.u-d  !     T.'liat   1'aul  says  (Hob.  vii.  3)  of  Mcl-
chizodek's  beiuc;  drrirwp  and  d/ij)Tiup,  "  without  father  and
without  mother,"  is  not   intended  to  deny  his  having  any
tnrthiy  lineage. — T.L.]

*  [The  opinion  that  ihe  men  iu  the  plain  of  Shinar  were
uot  the  whole  human  nice,  but  predominantly  Hamtcs,
or  followers  of  Nimrod,  is  maintained  by  Augustine,  and,
among  modern  authorities,  by  Luther  and  Calvin.     See  also
the  account  of  JOSEPHUS  ("Ant."  i.  4).  who  makes  Nini-
rod  the  great  leader  of  the  whole  rebellious  movement.—
T.  L.]


liabylonian  Ilamites.  The  founder  of  the  Egyptian
monarchy,  and,  perhaps,  the  Arabian  Cnshites,  had
i:i  all  probability  gone  to  their  respective  settlements.
The  very  name,  Nimrod,  shows  a  difference  between
them.  It  is  not  the  name  of  a  country,  or  of  a  fam
ily  of  descendants,  like  the  others  mentioned  Gen.  x.
8  ;  a  (act  of  which  Maimonides  takes  notice  (see
marg.  note,  p.  JM'.i)  when  he  calls  attention  to  the
manner  in  which  Nimrod  is  mentioned  irregularly,  as
it  were,  or  out  of  the  line,  after  the  other  sons  of
Cush  had  been  disposed  of.  He  was  r.oi,  like  them,
a  "father  of  a  people,"  a  p  Uriarch,  or  ancestor,  but
a  bold  adventurer,  a  "mighty  hunter  of  men  before
the  Lord,"  or  in  defiance  of  the  Lord,  who  gathered
together,  out  of  every  people,  those  who  were  like
himself,  not  to  settle  the  world,  but  to  prevent  its
peaceful  settlement  by  engaging  in  bold  and  reckless
enterprises  of  an  opposite  nature.  He  may  be  said
to  have  reprcs  mod  the  empire  founding,  instead  of
the  plaining  or  coloni/ing,  tendency,  lie  was  the
postdiluvian  Cain,  and  there  would  seem  to  bo  a  sig
nificance  not  to  be  disregarded  in  the  fact  that  here
there  is  given  to  this  rebellious  multitude  that  same
name,  Cixn  ":£,  "sons  of  men,"  which,  in  its  fem
inine  form,  is  used  Gen.  vi.  4  (-7^1^  rvi:2)  to  denote
the  godless  in  distinction  from  the  more  pious.  The
line  here  indicated,  between  the  sons  of  God  and  the
"sons  of  men,"  was  less  distinct,  perhaps,  than  that
which  was  drawn  between  the  Scihius  and  the  C'aiu-
ites,  yet  it  still  existed  to  some  extent,  making  a  di
vision  between  the  bettu1  branches  of  the  Shemites,
with  some  from  both  the  other  lines,  an:!  this  vasi
rabble  of  the  sensual  and  ungodly.  The  grammat
ical  form  of  the  name  Nimrod  (which  is  very  unusnai
for  such  a  purpose)  shows  that  it  had  a  popular,  in
stead  of  a  family,  origin.  It  is  the  first  person  plural
future  jussive,  TV23 ,  "  come  let  us  rchd."1  Jt  was
the  watchword  of  the  impious  leader,  afterwards
given  to  him  as  a  title  by  his  applauding  followers:
'"Let  us  break  .Jehovah's  bands,  ht  us  cast  his  cords
from  us,1'  let  us  bui'.d  a  tower  that  shall  reach  Hit;,
in  the  Heave'.i-. '

Oil  this  impious  host  of  Nimrod,  predominantly,
although  not  solely,  llamitic,  fell  especially  the  scat
tering  and  confounding  blow,  like  the  bolts  from
heaven  aimed  at  the  rebellious  Titans  ;  and  hence
this  rabble  of  tongues  culled  Hamitie  or  Turanian,
or  these  allophylic  conglomerates  which  philologists
find  so  remarkable  as  compared  with  the  enduring
unity  of  the  Shcmitie,  and  the  diversified,  yet  unmis
takable  Arian  relationship.  These  two  were,  doubtr
less,  affected  by  the  shock  ;  one  of  them  may  have
had  much  of  its  subsequent  modification,  if  not  its
origin,  from  it;  but  on  the  llamitic  host  fell  the


*  [It  was  a  thought  exceedingly  wicked,  yet  having  in
it  a  kind  of  terrific  sublimity.  Neither  could  the  idea  of
reaching  the  heavens,  or  sky,  be  called  irrational,  or  absurd,
however  unscientific.  They  reasoned  inductively,  Baconian-
ly,  we  may  Eay,  from  sense  and  observation.  Their  limited
experience  was  not  against  it.  It  showed  a  vast  ambition.
It  was  not  an  undertaking  of  savages,  but  of  men  possessed
with  the  idea  of  somehow  getting  above  nature,  and  having
much  of  that  spirit  which,  even  at  the  present  day,  charac
terizes  some  kinds  of  scientific  boasting  (see  remarks,  p.
355).  It  was  not  the  success  merely  oi  the  undertaking
(from  which  wo  arc  yet  as  far  as  ever),  but  the  impious
thought,  that  God  meant  to  confound,  and  to  strike  down,
whenever  it  arose  in  the  minds  of  men.  History  is  full  or
overthrown  Isabels  ;  and  it  is  still  to  be  tested  whether  our
excessive  modern  boasting  about  what  is  going  to  be  achiev
ed  by  science,  progress,  and  democracy,  will  form  an  excep
tive  case.— T.  L.]


CHAP.   XI.   10-32.


371


stone  that  ground  them  to  powder.  "For  there*
Jehovah  confounded  the  language  of  all  the  earth "
(land  or  countri/).  This  Nimrodian  Babel  of  tongues
wrought  more  or  less  of  confusion  everywhere,  mak
ing  the  universality  in  the  effect  rather  than  in  the
immediate  causality — a  view  perfectly  consistent  with
the  soberest  interpretation  of  the  artless  language  of
Iloly  Scripture.

The  causative  influence,  we  may  believe,  was
primarily  a  spiritual  one.  It  was  a  confounding  not
only  of  their  purposes  (nb  rnzttJnE,  Gen.  vi.  5) —
thus  introducing  confusion,  madness, f  and  discord,
into  their  camp — but  also  of  their  ordinary  thinkings
and  conceiving^,  rwv  eVdti,uT)<reaii'  «a!  evvoMv  icapS'ias,
Heb.  iv.  12,  "reaching  to  the  dividing  line  of  soul
and  spirit."  i^x'')s  T6  f<*l  wevMaror,  holding  back  the
divine  gift  of  reason,  and  thus  introducing  disorder
into  the  .srn.se  and  the  utterance  through  a  prior  con
fusion  in  the  spirit.  It  deranged  their  word-forma
tions  by  a  previous  derangement  of  their  thoughts.

The  difficulty  attending  the  mere  outer  view,
here,  arises  from  a  fundamental  error  which  may  be
found  even  in  acute  treatises  of  philology.  Words
do  not  represent  things,  as  outer  existences  merely,
according  to  the  common  notion,  but  rather  ivhat  ive
think  about  things.  They  are  in  truth  symbols  of  our
own  inner  world  as  affected  by  the  outer  world  of
things  around  us.  They  translate  to  us  our  own
thoughts  as  well  as  help  us  to  make  them  known  to
others.  The  animal  has  no  such  inner  world,  and
therefore  it  is  that  he  cannot  use  speech  to  represent
it  to  himself  or  to  other  animals.  This  would  be

*  [^'J  "3  ;  for  (here.  It  may  denote  fact  or  circum
stance  as  well  :is  flocc.  For  there— in  that  event,  or  in  that
confusion.  Compare  Ps.  cxxxiii.  3,  where  this  particle,
C^ ,  is  used  in  just  the  same  way  to  denote  the  opposite
condition  of  brotherly  love,  and  the  opposite  effect  :
FlirP  rV3  Cli  "'r,  "for  there  Jehovah  commanded  the
blessing,  even  life  forever  more  ;  "  not  in  "  Mount  ITcr-
mon,"  or  "  the  mountains  of  Zion,"  merely,  but  as  belong
ing  to  this  hgJy  atl'cction  of  brotherly  love.  Compare  1  John
iii.  14.— T.  L.]

t  [For  a  notable  example  of  this,  sec  2  Chron.  xx.  23,
where  the  hosts  of  Ammon,  of  Moab,  and  of  Alount  Scir,
who  rose  up  against  Jehoshaphat,  are  suddenly  turned
against  each  other.  Profane  history  records  such  events  as


means  simply  universal  disorder,  or  what  was  sometimes
called  "the  wrath  of  Pan"  (Havb?  opyri,  see  Eumr.  "Me
dea,"  11G9),  bringing:  madness  upon  an  individual  or  a  mul
titude  ;  it  denotes  something  inexplicable,  even  if  we  refuse


u  aiiuuc.,  CIL  mi  uvunis,  LU'  u.mon  Dciiei  in  sucn  suu-
den  madness  falling  upon  multitudes  of  men,  whatever  may
be  the  explanation  of  it :

/ai/ijoTJjpo-i  Si-  ITaAAdj  '\6ijvy
cifffie&TOv  yc'Aco  wpcre  nap<;Tr\a-y£tv  Se  vorina..

Among  the  suitors  Pallas  roused
Wild  laughter  irrepressible,  and  made
Their  mind  to  wander  far.

Even  where  there  is  nothing  startling  to  the  sense  how
many  examples  are  there— they  can  be  cited  even  from  very
modern  timos-where  the  minds  of  assemblies,  composed
sometimes  of  those  who  claim  to  be  most  shrewd  and  intel
ligent,  scorn  strangely  confounded,  and,  without  reason,  and
against  all  apparent  motive,  they  do  the  very  thing  which
is  the  destruction  of  all  their  schemes.  They  seem  seized
run  a  sudden  fatuity,  and  act  in  a  manner  which  is  after-
vard- 1  unaccountable  to  themselves.  We  may  explain  it  as
ve  will ;  but  so  strong  is  the  conviction  of  an  ab  extra
lower  somehow  operating  in  such  cases,  that  it  has  passed
nto  one  of  the  moat  common  of  proverbs,  quos  Deus  rull
'erderein-i,is<Jemental— "those  whom  God  would  destroy,
ie  nrst  makes  mad."— T.  L.]


readily  admitted  in  respect  to  words  representative
of  thought  alone ;  but  it  is  true  also  of  that  large
class  that  seem  to  stand  directly  for  outward  sensible
things  per  sc.  Here,  too,  the  word  called  the  name
represents  only  remotely  the  thing  named,  but  nearly
and  primarily,  some  thinking,  conceiving,  or  emotion,
in  our  souls,  connected  with  the  thing,  and  giving
rise  to  its  name.*  As  proper  names  are  last  of  all,

*  [The  first  thing  denoted  in  outward  language  must
have  been  something  purely  inward  ;  a  conscious  state  of
soul,  a  thought  or  an  emotion,  which  demanded  an  outward
sign  in  some  articulated  sound  representing  it,  not  arbitra
rily,  nor  accidentally,  but  by  a  conscious  fitness  for  it,  such
as  other  sounds  do  not  possess,  and  of  which  there  can  no
more  be  given  an  explanation  than  of  the  correspondence
between  a  thought,  or  an  emotion,  and  an  outward  luol:  It
is  as  real,  and,  at  the  same  time,  aa  inexplicable,  us  the  har
mony  which  is  felt  to  have  place  between  a  feeling,  or  an
idea,  and  a  musical  modulation.  From  the  primary  roots
representing  these  most  interior  states,  and  which  must  bo
comparatively  few  in  number,  comes  the  next  order  of
names,  namely,  those  of  qualities  and  actions  of  outward
things  regarded  as  affecting  us.  From  these,  in  the  third
place,  come  the  names  of  outward  things  themselves,  as
having  such  qualities  or  actions,  arid  as  denoted  by  them.
Later,  indeed,  though  still  very  early,  there  arise  meta
phorical  words,  or  words  derived  from  the  second  and  third
classes,  with  secondary  tropical  senses  intended  to  represent
mental  states  as  pictured  in  Rome  outward  thing,  scene,  or
act ;  but  these  do  not  belong  to  the  prime  elements  of  speech,
which  must  begin  with  radical  sounds  supposed  to  represent
something  inward  by  a  real  or  imagined  fitness.  That  there
is  some  such  primary  fitness  seems  to  be  assumed  by  some
of  the  best  philological  writers,  as  by  Kaulen  in  his  Xprach-
vcrwirrung,  and  William  Von  Humboldt,  in  his  work  on  the
Kawi  language,  although  they  are  unable  to  explain  it.
It  is  not  likely  that  philology  will  ever  pern  tratc  the  mys
tery.  The  great  argument,  however,  for  the  reality  of  such
a  correspondence  between  articulated  sound  and  'thought,
is,  that,  on  the  reverse  theory,  language  is  arbitrary
throughout,  which  we  cannot  believe  it  to  bo.  The  denial
brings  more  difficulty  than  the  assumption,  however  inex
plicable  the  latter  may  be.

On  this  deeper  psychology  of  language  we  have  a  hint,
it  maybe  reverently  said,  in  what  is  told  us,  1  Cor.  xiv.,
concerning  the  mysterious  "  gift  of  tongues."  It  teaches  us
an  important  fact,  though  revealing  nothing  of  its  nature
or  mode.  Although  miraculous,  it  must  be  founded  on
something  in  the  essential  human  spiritual  constitution.
There  was  a  real  language  here.  It  is  a  profane  trifling
with  a  most  sacred  matter  to  treat  it  as  a  mere  tliaumaturgio
babble,  designed  only  to  astonish  or  confound  the  unbeliev
ing  beholders.  It  was  the  true  outward  expression  of  an
elevated  inward  state.  The  words  uttered  mu-t  have  been
not  only  articulate  (that  is,  formod  of  vowels  and  conso
nants)  but  truly  representative.  They  were  none  of  them
a^wpoi  (ver.  10),  or  mere  tfiOoyyoi,  smtnds,  or  noises.  They
had  a  real  5iW;«.is  Tr)s  ^coyf/?  (ver.  11),  a  true  "  power  of
voice,"  and  this  could  be  nothing  else  than  an  inherent  fit
ness  in  the  utterance  to  represent  the  entranced  state,  not
generally,  merely,  but  in  its  diversities  of  ecstatic  idea  or
emotion.  They  were  not  understood  by  the  hearers,  be
cause,  in  their  ordinary  state,  there  was  nothing  within
them  corresponding  to  it.  Even  the  uttcrers  could  not
translate  it  into  the  common  logical  language  of  the  vovs
(ver.  14),  or  understanding.  They  were  spoken  ev  irvevfiari,
in  the  spirit,  and  only  in  the  spirit  could  they  bo  under
stood,  like  the  words  that  Paul  heard  in  his  entranced  state,
"  whether  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the  body,  he  could  not
tell."  Paul  certainly  docs  not  mean  to  deny,  or  disparage,
the  greatness  of  the  spiritual  gift  in  what  he  says,  ver.  19,
but  only  to  set  forth  the  greater  outward  usefulness  of  the
prophetic  charisma.  "  I  thank  God,"  he  says  (ver.  18)  "  I
speak  with  t<5ngucs  more  than  you  all."  He  was  often  in
the  state  that  demanded  this  language  to  express  itself  to
itself.  In  respect  to  the  connection  of  this  peculiar  case
with  tho  ecncral  argument,  the  analogy  holds  thus  far,
namely,  that  these  ecstatic  utterances  were  real  representa
tive  words.  They  represented  an  inward  spiritual  state  of
thought,  or  emotion,  or  both,  from  a  real  inherent  fitness  to
do  so.  We  may,  therefore,  rationally  conclude  that  a  simi
lar  correspondence  between  words  and  ideas  was  at  the  be
ginning  of  all  human  speech.  Had  man  remained  spiritual,
this  connection  would  have  continued  as  something  intui
tively  perceived,  and  leading  ever  to  a  right  application  of
articulate  sounds  to  the  things  or  acts  sitrnified,  as  it  seems
to  have  guided  the  first  humanity  in  the  naming  of  animals
from  some  spiritual  effect  their  appearance  produced.  This
primitive  gift  or  faculty  of  intuition  became  darkened  by


378


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


so  these  names  of  outward  objects  must  hive  come
after  words  denoting  action  or  quality,  and  from
which  their  own  naming,  unless  supposed  to  he  purely
arbitrary,  could  alone  have  been  derived.  Originally
they  must  have  been  all  descriptive,  that  is,  they  had
a  meaning  beyond  their  mere  sign  significance.  In
proportion  as  such  primary  meanings  have  faded  out
in  modern  languages,  have  words  lost  vividness  and
emotive  power,  though  still  remaining  as  a  convenient
classifying  )i/,/d/'»/i.  Thus  in  early  speech  the  names
of  animals,  for  example,  were  all  descriptive.  We
find  it  so  eve  n  now,  as  far  as  we  can  trace  them  in
the  signilii -auce  of  their  roots.  They  invariably  de
note  soim -tiling  which  the  animal  tl-n-x,  or  .SV///'T,?.  or
M,  or  is  supposed  to  do,  to  suffer,  or  to  be — thus
ever  implving  some  judgment  of  the  human  mind
respecting  ii  ;  and  this  co:Te-p"nds  to  what  is  said
in  the  Scripture  of  the  animals  being  brought  before
Adam  to  see(r*X~?  for  Adam  to  see,  judge,  decide)
what  name  should  lie  given  to  each  one.  This  name
is  ever  taken  from  something  more  general,  and  the
n.ime  of  l!..it  from  something  more  general  still,  and
so  back  from  the  concrete  to  the  more  and  more  ab
stract,  until  we  are  lost  in  the  mystery,  and  compelled
t>  admit  that  tin-re  is  something  in  ourselves,  and  in
language  which  it  is  not  easy  to  understand.  We
may  be  sure,  however,  that  in  all  these  primary  names
of  animal.-  there  was  something  descriptive,  though
in  many  it  may  have  been  long  lost,  lu  some  eases
it  still  shines  dimly  through  the  wear  of  time  and
usage,  enabling  us  to  infer  it  universally.  Thus  bird,
we  may  be  certain,  means  something  more  than  /</></,
and  </"'/  than  r/<i<r,  even  as  fmfl,  /'"</</,  ?•"</'/,  still  car
ries  with  it  some  faint  image  of  jfyhiff,  and  c/t^n,
/'•<',"/,  h-i'a-r,  cuiiix  (<•<(//(),  canorus,  !"i:~p),  suggests
the  clear,  ringing,  houndlike  sound  that  denoted  the
animal  in  the  ea:liest  Arian  speech.*  Connected
with  this  (h.  re  is  another  thought  that  has  impor
tance  here.  The  first  impression  is  that  nouns,  or
the  lianas  of  things,  must  be  older  in  language  than
verbs.  Examination,  however,  shows  just  the  con
trary  as  a  fact,  and  then  we  see  that  it  must  be  so,
if  names  are  not  arbitrary,  but  ever  imply  some  ac
tion  or  quality  of  the  thing,  ami  so  an  antecedent
naming  of  that  action  or  passion.  But  not  to  pur
sue  this  farther,  it  is  enough  to  show  that  the  spring

pin,  sensuality,  and  earthlincss  turning  the  mind  outward,
niul  thus  toiidin'-,",  more  nnd  more,  to  make  words  mere  ar
bitrary  signs..  With  all  this,  there  is  evidence  that  in  the
earliest  speech  of  men  there  was  more  of  vividness,  more
of  a  eonse  ous  living  connection  between  words  and  that
which  they  signified,  than  afterwards  existed  when  lan
guages.  1  ccamc  nmi-e  copious  and  more  mixed.  In  this  way
j-iay  \ve  suppose  that  the  early  roots,  though  comparatively
few  in  number,  had  more  of  a  self-interpreting  power,  nnd
that,  in  proportion  as  this  continued,  there  was  the  greater
security  against  the  changes  <md  diversities  which  a  lower
spiritual  st  ite  must  necessarily  bring  into  language.  A
total  loss  lit'  it  among  this  rebellious  Hamitic  hn^t  may  have
led  to  a  more  rapid  confounding  of  words  and  forms,  and,
of  consequence,  a  greater  ruin  of  language  than  ever  came
from  any  other  event  in  human  history.  There  arc  exam
ples  enough  to  show  how  soon  the  best "language  becomes  a
jargon  in  a  community  of  very  bad  men,  such  as  thieves
and  evil  adventurers.  Hero  was  a  similar  case,  as  we  may
conceive  it,  only  on  a  vastly  larger  scale. — T.  L.]

*  [The  name  eivcn  to  an  animal  could  never,  of  course,
be  a  full  description.  It  is  the  selection  of  some  predomi
nant  trait,  action,  or  habit,  as  the  distinguishing  or  naming
feature.  This  may  vary  am  on?  different  people.  In  one
tongue  the  same  animal  may  be  denoted  by  his  color,  if  it
has  something  peculiar,  in  another  by  his  manner  of  move
ment,  in  another  by  a  burrowing  property,  or  by  his  method
of  seizing  his  prey.  These  different  conceivings  may  give
rise  to  different  names ;  and  yet  if  the  actions  so  repre
sented  by  these  names  have  the  same  or  similar  verbal  roots
they  may  be  indicative  of  a  remoter  unity.— T.  L.]


of  language  is  in  the  thought,  the  conceiving,  the
affection,  as  the  source  of  names  for  things,  and  for
the  relations  of  things.  Confusion  here  is  confusion
throughout,  and  this  would  be  much  more  operative
in  a  multitude  thus  affected  than  in  an  individual.
Break  up  the  community  of  thought  and  the  com
munity  of  language  is  broken  up,  or  begins  to  break
up  along  with  it.  It  affects  not  only  the  matter  but
the  form,  the  soul,  the  grammatical  structure.*  (Jo-
ing  still  deeper,  it  changes  the  mode  of  lexical  deri
vation,  or  the  process  through  which  seeondarv  senses
(as  they  exist  in  almost  all  abstract  words)  come  from
the  primary — the  inward  etymologies,  as  they  may
be  called,  which  are  of  more  importance  in  determin
ing  the  affinities  of  languages  th:;n  the  outward  pho
netic  etymologies  on  which  some  philologists  almost
exclusively  insist,  and  which  arc  so  easily  lost — all
the  more  easily  and  rapidly  when  the  more  spiritual
bonds  arc  loosed.  So,  on  the  other  hand,  the  main
taining  secure  against  mutation  the  higher  ideas  that
dwell  in  a  language,  especially  its  religious  ideas,  is
most  conservative  both  of  its  matter  anil  form.  Thus
may  we  account,  in  some  degree,  for  the  way  in
which  the  Shemitic  endured  the  shock  that  left  all
around  it  those  masses  of  fragments  which  philolo
gists  call  the,  llamiiie  or  Turanian.  The-  great  name
of  (iodwas  in  it  in  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  Those
other  remarkable  appellations  of  Deitv,  El,  Allah,
Eloah,  Elohim,  Adonai,  El  Shaddai,  El  Elion,  El
Olam,  TravTOKparui',  uij/«rTor,  cutt'i/ws,  have  been  to  it
like  a  rock  (if  aires,  giving  security  to  its  other  re
ligious  ideas,  whilst  these  again  have  entered  exten-

*  [If  our  modes  of  conceiving  individual  seiHMe  objects
have  sucli  an  "tl'ect  upon  hne^iiaue,  mil'1!]  m  ire  important,  in
this  respect,  are  thenioreah.-tract  conceptions,  ni'1!:  as.  those
of  time,  relative  or  absolute.  The  conserving  power  thu*
arising  may  receive  an  illustration  from  the  scanty,  yet  most
tenacious,  Shemitic  lenses,  as  compared  with  the -Greek.
In  the  Hebrew,  time  is  conceived  of  art  reckoned  from' a
moving  present,  making  all  that  conies  after  it,  future,  al
though  it  may  be  past  to  the  absolute  present  of  the  narra
tor  or  describe!',  nnd  all  before  it,  past.  It  need  not  lie  said
how  much  more  of  a  subjective  character  this  imparts  to
the  language,  especially  in  its  poetry.  It  has%ad,  besides,
the  effect  of  irivinir  a  peculiar  form  to  the  two. tenses,  and
of  making  thc.se,  deficient  us  they  may  seem  in  number,  de
note  all  the  varieties  of  time  that  are  expressed  in  other
languages,  but  in  a  more  graphic  manner.  Whilst  dispens
ing  with  an  absolute  present  form,  which  would  make  it
fixed  and  liind,  it  has  a  flowing  prc.se.nce,  which  may  become
absolute  -whenever  the  narration  or  description  demands  it.
In  the  Indo-Gcrmanic  tongues,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is
a  fixed  present  and  a  fixed  form  for  it,  which  will  not  allow
a  departure  from  the  absolute  time,  except  as  sometimes
implied  in  the  assumption  of  a  poetical  style.  Hence  a
much  greater  number  of  tense  forms  arc  demanded,  not
only  for  the  past,  present,  and  future,  pimply,  but  for  a  past
and  future  to  the  past  and  future  respectively,  besides  an
indefinite  or  aorist  form.  Thus  there  is  a  wide  machinery
performing  these  offices— accurately,  indeed,  though  with
little  more  precision  than  is  found  in  the  Shemitic— whilst
there  is  a  loss  of  pictorial  and  dramatic  power.  There  is  no
time,  relative  or  absolute,  denoted  by  the  Greek  tense  forms,
that  may  not,  in  some  way,  be  expressed  in  the  Arabic;
whilst  the  manner  in  which  the  latter  shifts  its  present,  aa
we  may  say,  by  hanging  it  on  a  particle,  or  making  it  de
pend  upon  its  place  before  or  after,  gives  a  greater  vividness
of  narration.  It  is  astonishing  how  such  scantiness  of  mode
and  tense  escapes  confusion  and  ambiguity  ;  and  yet  there
is  a  comparative  test  of  this  which  is  conclusive.  The
Arabic  is  written  and  read  without  anything  like  capital
letters  or  italics,  without  any  grammatical  or  logical  punc
tuation,  of  any  kind,  making  any  division  of  paragraphs,
sentences,  or  clauses.  From  the  beginning  of  a  book  to  the
end,  there  are  none  of  these  helps  to  relieve  deficiencies  of
expression,  whether  the  result  of  carelessness,  or  coming
from  unavoidable  looseness  in  the  language.  In  English
this  could  not  be  done.  Without  such  outward  helps,  the
most  a-  curate  writer,  take  he  ever  so  much  pains,  would  be  |
full  of  grammatical  constructions  that  might  be  taken  in
different  ways,  and  not  a  few  unsolvablc  logical  ambigui
ties.— T.  L.]


CHAP.   XI.    10-32.


37G


Eively  into  its  proper  names,  its  common  nouns  and
verbs,  conserving  it  against  the  corruption  and  dc-
pencracy  of  those  who  spoke  it,  and  giving  even  to
its  Arabic  and  Syriac  branches  a  holy  and  religious
aspect  beyond  anything  presented  in-  any  ancient  or
modern  tongue.  Well  and  worthily  have  the  Jewish
Rabbis  called  it  £T,pn  -,',rb  ,  the  holy  tongue.
Truly  it  is  so,  whether  we  regard  it  as  the  original
Noachian  speech,  or  something  later  preserved  entire
from  the  wreck  of  the  Babel  confusion.*

How  this  extraordinary  breaking  up  of  language
took  place  we  may  not  easily  know,  though  main
taining  its  possibility,  and  its  strong  probability,  as  a
fact,  aside  from  the  express  Scriptural  declaration.
There  is  no  department  of  human  inquiry  in  which
we  so  soon  come  to  the  mysterious  and  inexplicable
as  in  that  of  language.  Some  have  maintained  its
onomatopic  origin,  as  has  been  lately  done  in  a  very
clear  and  able  treatise  by  Prof.  Whitney.  If  this,
however,  is  confined  to  vocal  resemblances  in  the
names  of  sounds  themselves,  it  accounts  for  only  an
exceedingly  small  number  of  words ;  if  carried  far
ther,  to  supposed  analogies  between  the  names  of
certain  acts,  or  efforts,  and  the  effort  of  the  organs
in  pronouncing  them,  it  takes  in  a  very  few  more;
beyond  this  it  would  be  that  idea  of  some  inherent
fitness  in  sounds  which  has  been  already  considered
in  the  note,  p.  877,  and  to  which  the  name  onoma
topic  may  be  given  in  its  widest  sense  ;  though  then,
instead  of  being  the  easiest,  it  would  be  the  least
explicable  of  all.  So  the  philologist  may  endeavor
to  find  the  beginning  of  speech,  especially  in  the
names  of  animals,  in  the  imitation  of  animal  sounds;
or  he  may  absurdly  trace  it  to  a  conventional  nam
ing,  overlooking  the  truth  that  for  the  initiation  of
such  a  proceeding  language  itself  is  required — or  he
may  deduce  it  from  accident,  or,  give  him  time  enough
— and  a  past  eternity  is  very  long — he  may  fancy  it
coming  out  of  inarticulate  or  merely  interjectional
sounds,  making  its  random  "  natural  selections,"
until,  a;'tur  ages  of  chaos,  a  light  inexplicable  begins
to  gleam,  an  intelligence  somehow  enters  into  the
process,  and  thus,  at  last,  language  comes  into  form,
as  a  vehicle  of  rational,  that  is,  of  loyical\  thought.
But  for  human  minds,  Xdyos,  speech,  and  logos,  reason,

*  [Tli's  is  on  the  supposition  that  the  Shemilic  (for  any
difference,  here  between  the  earliest  Hebrew,  Arabic,  and
Syriuc,  is  of  little  consequence)  was  the  primitive  Noachian
speech  that  came  out  of  the  ark.  The  best  argument  for  it
is  that  thore  is  no  good  argument  to  the  contrary.  If  no
other  has  any  better  claim  on  inward  philological  grounds,
the  Bible  history  greatly  favors  the  idea,  to  say  the  le^st,
that  this  language  of  the  ark  continued  the  purest  in  the
line  of  Shem.  Kaulen,  however,  in  his  Sprachverurirrung
tu  Babel,  presents  a  philological  argument  that  certainly
seems  to  h  ivo  weight,  though,  in  itself,  it  may  not  be  deemed
conclusive.  He  insists  upon  the  fact  that  throughout  this
family,  the-  most  important  modifications  of  the  verbal  idea
are  made  by  vowel  changes  in  the  root  itself,  and  not  merely
by  additions  more  or  less  loosely  made  to  a  fixed  root,  grow
ing  only  by  agglutination.  Thus  from  one  root,  k-l-l  (as
written  without  vowels),  wo  have  kulal,  kale!,  hotel,  katol,
kitul,  kitM,  kattel,  kullal,  ktal,  Id' I,  Idol,  etc.,  all  presenting
distinct  though  varying  ideas.  The  modification  of  the  idea
is  in  the  root,  not  attached  to  it,  as  in  the  Indo-Germanic
languages,  by  a  modal  or  tenso  letter  or  syllable,  taken
from  something  without.  The  author  connects  this  with  a
view  he  maintains,  that  the  vowels,  as  distinct  from  the
consonants,  represent  the  more  spiritual  element  in  lan-
g\  age.  For  the  argument  in  its  detail  the  reader  is  referred
to  the  very  able  work  above  named,  p.  73. — T.  L.]

t  [See  the  distinction  that  1'lato  makes  in  the  Dialnr/uz
de  Leyibus,  p.  893,  I),  between  the  thing,  its  spiritual  word
or  Xoyos  (which  is,  in  fact,  the  reason  of  the  thing,  or  that
which  makes  it  what  it  is  for  the  mind,  its  constituting  idea),
and  the  ovona,  the  vocal  name  representative  of  the  spirit-
Uil  word  itself.— T.  L.]


are  one  ;  and  the  scn'ous  thinker,  who  cannot  sepa
rate  them,  takes  but  a  few  steps  in  this  mysterious
search  before  he  is  forced,  either  to  acknowledge
something  superhuman,  or  to  admit  that  in  the  birth
and  growth  of  language,  the  instrument  of  all  rea
soning,  there  must  be  some  strange  generic  intelli'
gence,  if  such  a  thing  can  be  conceived,  that  we
utterly  fail  to  discover  in  the  individual  logic.  In
other  words,  men  as  a  race,  or  races,  do  what  the
individual  singly  never  does,  something  of  which  he
is  wholly  unconscious,  and  which  he  cannot  under
stand.  The  thought  of  divine  intervention  is  the
less  strange ;  it  presents  the  less  difficulty,  and  is,
therefore,  the  more  rational.  We  are  not  to  be  un
necessarily  introducing  a  divine  agency  into  the
world's  drama,  but  here,  surely,  it  is  a  nodus  vindicc
digram,  a  knot  which  a  divine  intelligence  can  alone
unbind.  There  is  not  in  all  nature  anything  like
that  spiritual  mystery  which  meets  us  on  the  very
threshold  of  an  inquiry  into  the  origin  and  develop
ment  of  human  speech.

Leaving  these  more  abstruse  regions,  and  de
scending  again  to  the  clearer  field  of  inductive  obser
vation,  there  still  meet  us  those  geographical  difficul
ties  to  which  some  attention  has  already  been  given
as  inexplicable  on  any  theory  of  gradual  or  mutual
development.  Allusion  was  before  made  to  the
appearances  presented  by  these  broken  allophylic
tongues  to  which  has  been  given  the  common  name
Turanian — showing  themselves  among  the  other
families,  sometimes  in  contiguous  beds,  and  then
again  as  lying  far  away  and  far  apart  in  space,  even
as  they  indicate  a  remote  location  in  time.  In  such
cases  everything  indicates  the  sudden  projection  of
an  early  people,  and  of  an  early  speech,  entire.  Suc
ceeding  waves  of  migration  have  pressed  upon  their
shores,  but  changed  no  feature  of  their  language.
That  seems  to  have  had  its  form  fixed  in  the  begin
ning,  and  to  defy  mutation.  Its  isolated  state,
though  surrounded  by  hostile  elements,  has  only  ren
dered  it  more  unyielding  in  this  respect.  It  will
perish  rather  than  change  into  anything  else.  There
may  be  pointed  out  another  geographical  anomaly
on  a  larger  scale,  and  only  explicable,  too,  on  the
ground  of  some  early  intervention  to  change  the
course  of  what  might  otherwise  have  been  the  ordi
nary  historical  development.  A  little  less  than  a
century  ago,  the  learned  began  to  perceive  a  striking
resemblance  between  the  Greek  and  the  ancient  lan
guage  of  India  ;  a  resemblance  both  in  matter  and
form.  They  arc  both  of  the  Arian  or  Indo-Ger
manic  family,  and  yet  we  have  no  right  to  say  that
one  has  been  derived  from  the  other.  From  a  period
transcending  all  history  they  have  been  widely  part
ed,  territorially,  from  each  other.  They  stood  in  the
days  of  Alexander  as  distinctly  separate  as  at  any
time  before  or  after.  In  all  the  antecedent  period
there  is  no  record  or  tradition  of  any  colonizing  on
either  side,  of  any  military  expedition,  of  any  com
mercial  or  literary  intercourse,  that  could  have  pro
duced  any  assimilating  effect.  All  this  time,  and
for  long  after,  there  lay  directly  between  them  a
territory  and  a  people,  or  peoples,  having  nothing,
socially  or  politically,  in  common  with  cither,  and
speaking  a  language,  of  all  others,  the  most  directly
foreign  to  both,  or  to  any  common  language  of  which
they  both  could  be  considered  as  branches.  From
Southern  Arabia  to  Northern  Syria,  or  the  he.id
waters  of  the  Euphrates  nearly,  there  was  the  con
tinuous  strip  of  the  Shemitic,  unbroken  and  unaf
fected  during  all  that  time.  This,  as  has  before  bcei


380


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


remarked,  was,  and  is,  the  most  tenacious  and  en
during  of  all  linguistic  families.  It  is  still  a  wide
living  speech,  although  Greek  and  Sanscrit  have
both' died,  and  been  embalmed  in  their  common  and
sacred  literature,  and  although  this  parting  language,
until  comparatively  modern  times  had  no  literature
except  the  scanty  and  most  secluded  Biblical  writ
ings.  A  branch  of  the  Shcmitic,  if  we  may  not
rather  call  it  the  Shemhic  itself,  continuous  and  un
changed,  is  still  living,  strong  and  copious.  Not
withstanding  the  addition  of  many  new  words,  and
many  new  senses  that  have  attached  themselves  to
the  old.  the  Ued'Uiin  still  talks  in  a  manner  that
would  have  been  recognized  as  familiar  in  the  days
of  Abraham,  ('mild  we  suppose  the  patriarch  now
listening  to  it,  he  would  hear  some  strange  words
mingled  with  the  great  body  of  its  earliest  roots,  and
pome  few  later  forms,  but  in  its  pronouns,  its  prepo
sitions  its  tenses,  its  conjugations,  its  logical  and
rhetorical  particles,  in  the  nerves  and  sinews  as  well
as  in  the  bones  of  the  language,  it  would  strike  him
as  substantially  the  same  kind  of  talk  that  had
passed  between  him  and  his  sons  Isaac  and  Ishmaeh*
This  most  enduring  ancient  speech  has  suffered  no
thing  that  could  be  called  development  from  any
thing  on  either  side  of  it;  and  there  has  been  no
development  across  it  from  one  parted  shore  to  the
other.  Such  theories  as  that  of  Jiunscn,  by  which
;  ;  Khamism  out  of  Sinism,  and  Semism  out  of
Kharnism,  and  so  on,  would  never  explain  this.  The
dilliculty  clears  up  somewhat  if  we  bring  in  the  ex
traordinary,  and  suppose  some  early  supernatural
c-ie:iviii'_'  and  transformation,  leaving  one  primitive
typo  standing  in  its  place,  another,  greatly  changed,
to  be  carried  east  and  west  by  one  people  suddenly
parted,  and  meeting  again  historically  after  ages  of
separation,  whilst  another  type,  broken  into  1'rag-


*  [Tlii*  would  especially  lip  the  cnpo  in  ivspcet  to  snb-
yHs  I'lllin*  into  the  Scriptural  or  Koranic  stylo.  In  Keck-
iTitlorf's  Hebrew  translation  of  the  Koran  (Lcip.,  If57),
Ihere  are,  si.iiietimes,  whole  verses  in  which  the  Arabic  find
Hebrew  are  almost  wholly  identical,  both  in  the  roots  and
In  the  forms.— T.  L.  J


mcnts,  is  dispersed  far  and  wide  to  remote  portions
of  the  earth.  This  may  be  called  cutting  or  break
ing  the  knot,  rather  than  untying,  but  even  if  the
Bible  had  been  silent,  it  is  better  than  any  hypothe
sis  called  natural,  yet  found  to  be  wholly  inadequate
to  explain  the  extraordinary  phenomena  to  which  it
is  applied.  It  is  true,  give  a  theorist  time  enough,
and  hypothetical  conditions  enough,  and  he  may
seem  to  develop  almost  anything  out  of  any  thin"
else.  Grant  him  enough  of  '-natural  selections,1
and  he  may  show  us  how  to  make  worlds  and  lan
guages  by  producing,  at  last,  seeming  congruities,
falling  into  place  after  infinite  incongruities.  But
then,  such  a  method  of  proceeding,  supposed  to  be
inherent  in  the  nature  of  things,  cannot  stop  (if  it
goes  right  on  without  cycles)  until  it  has  abolished
all  things  seemingly  incongruous  or  extraordinary,
and  introduced  a  perfect  level  of  congruity  every
where,  in  the  physical,  social,  and  philological
world.  Only  take  time  enough,  or  rather  suppose,
as  some  do,  a  past  eternity  of  such  working,  and  the
only  conceivable  result  is  a  perfect  sameness;  all
disorders  must  long  since  have  been  gone,  all  species
must  have  become  one,  and  that  the  highest  or  the
lowest,  all  languages  must  have  become  one,  and  that
the  best  or  the  poorest — something  rising  in  its
linguistic  architecture  far  above  the  Greek  and  San
scrit,  or  sinking  in  its  looseness  below  anything  called
Turanian  or  Sinitic.  The  extraordinary,  now  and
then,  would  be  not  only  the  easier  conception,  but
an  actual  relief  from  the  weariness  of  such  a  physi
cal  monotony.

But  we  have  a  more  sure  word  of  testimony.
The  great  Bible-fact  for  the  believer  is,  that,  in  order
to  prevent  a  very  evil  development  of  humanity,  at
a  very  early  day,  God  interfered  with  men  and  con
founded  their  language.  There  is  nothing  irrational
in  this  if  we  believe  in  a  God  at  all.  The  manner
of  doing  it  is  not  told  us.  What  is  said  in  (Jen.  xi.
may  not  wholly  explain  the  linguistic  phenomena  so
early  presented,  and  even  now  so  remarkable;  but
it  may  be  safely  affirmed  that  far  greater  difficulties
oppose  themselves  to  any  other  solution  that  haa
been,  or  may  yet  be  offered. — T.  L.]


CHAP.   XII.    1-20.  381


SECOND    PERIOD.

TOE  Genesis  of  the  patriarchal  faith  in  the  promise  and  of  the  covenant  religion ;
of  the  antagonistic  relation,  between  the  faith  in  the  promise  and  heathenism;
of  the  harmonious  oppositions  between  the  patriarchs  and  the  human  civiliza
tion  of  the  heathen  world.  Patriarchal  religion  and  patriarchal  customs. —
dr.  XII.  1. -XXXVI.  43.


A.
ABRAHAM,   THE    FRIEND    OF    GOD,    AND    HIS  ACTS   OF  FAITH.     CIT.  XII.  l.-XXV.  10.

FIRST    SECTION.

Ths  call  of  Abram.     The  emigration  to  Canaan.     The  first  promise  of  God.     His  companionship  with

Lot.     TJie  first  manifestation  of  God  in  Canaan,  and  the  first  homeless  alienage  in

the  land  of  promise.     Abram  in  Egypt  and  Pharaoh.

CHAPTER  XII.  1-20.

1  Now  the  Lord  had  said  [rather,  said]  to  Abram,  Get  thee  [for  thyself,  Tjb  ]  out  of  thy
country,  and  from  thy  kindred,  and  from  thy  father's  house,  unto  a  land  that  I  will

2  show  thee  [through  a  revelation].     And  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and  I  will  bless

3  thee,  and  make  thy  name  great;   and  tliou  shalt  be  a  blessing:   And  I  will  bless  them
that  bless  thee,  and  curse  him  that  curseth  thee :   and  in  thee  shall  all   families  of  the

4  earth    be   blessed  [not  hless  themselves,  which  is  expressed  by  the  use  of  the  Ilithpael,  ch.  xxii.  is].       So
Abram  departed  [went  forth]  as  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  him,  and  Lot  went  with  him  :

5  and  Abram  was  seventy  and  five  years  old  when  he  departed  out  of  llaran.     And
Abram  took  Sarai  his  wife,  and  Lot  his  brother's  son,  and  all  their  substance  [gains]
that  they  had  gathered,  and  the  souls  [all  the  living]  that  they  had  gotten  in  Haran ;   and
they  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan  they  came.

6  And  Abram    passed    through  the  land  unto   the  place  of  Sichem  [shoulder,  ridge  or
water-shed]  unto  the  plain  [grove]  of  Moreh  [teacher,  owner].     And  [Although]  the  Canaanite

7  was  then   [already]  in  the  land.     And  the  Lord  appeared  unto  Abram  and  said,  Unto
thy    seed  will  I  give  this  land;    and  there  builded  he  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  who

8  appeared  unto  him.     And  he  removed  from  thence  unto  a  mountain  on  the  east  of
Bethel  [house  of  God]  and  pitched  his  tent,  having  Bethel  [now  Beitin]  ou  the  west  [seawards],
and  llai  [heaps]  on  (he  east ;  and  there  he  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lord,  and  called

9  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.     And  Abram  journeyed,  going  on  still  [gradually  further  and

10  further]  toward  the    south.     And  there  Avas  a  famine  in   the  land:  and  Abram  went

11  down  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there;   for  the  famine  was  grievous  in  the  land.     And  it
came  to  pass,  when  he  was  come  near  to  enter  into  Egypt,  that  he  said  unto  Sarai  his
wife,  Behold  now  I  know  that  thou  art  a  fair  woman  to  look  upon  [or  of  fair  appearance]  :

12  Therefore  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  the  Egyptians  shall  see  thee,  that  they  shall  say,

13  This  is  his  wife  :  and  they  will  kill  me,  but  they  will  save  thee  alive.     Say,  I  pray
thee,  thou  art  my  sister,  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy  sake  ;  and  my  soul  shall
live  because  of  thee.


382


GENESIS,  OK   THE   FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES.


And  it  came  to  pus-,  that  when  Abram  was  come  into  Eeypt,  the  Egyptians
15  It-held  the  woman  that  she  was  very  fair.  The  princes  also  of  Pharaoh  saw  her,  and

commended  her  before  Pharaoh  [Pia-st,  r-is  ]  :  and  tiie  woman  was  taken  into  Pharaoh's
10  house.  And  he  entreated  Abram  well  for  her  pake:  and  he  had  slice})  [small cattle]  and

oxen,  and  he-asse?,  and  men-servants,  and  maid-servants,  and  she-asses  and  camels
17  And  the  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  and  his  house  because  of  Sarai,  Abram 's  wife!

And  Pharaoh  called   Abram   and    said,  What   is  this   that  thou  hast  done  unto  me?

19  "Why  didst  thou  not  lull  me  that  she  was  thy  wife?     Why  saidst  thou,  She  is  mv  sister?
so  I  might    have  taken  her  to  me  to  wife;   now,  therefore,  behold  thy  wife,  take  her

20  and  go  thy  way.     And  Pharaoh  commanded  his  men  concerning  him*:  and' they  sent
him  away,  and  his  wife,  and  all  that  he  had.


CI:\I:I:AL  TKKLIMIXAKY  QUESTIONS.

1.  The  ;iirc>  and  state  of  the  world  at  the  patriarch
al  ;  •  :•!«<!.  A  multitude  of  nations  who  were  to  share
in  ihe  salvation,  through  the  faith  of  Abram,  were
not  yd  hi. rn  into  the  world,  especially  the  Roman
and  Kngii.-h  people.  The  Germanic  tVilies  lay  still
in  the  bosom  of  the-  Scythian  nomadic  life.  A  thou
sand  years  must  roll  away  before  the  development  of
the  Creek  life,  and  a  iniieli  longer  period  before  the
his'orical  appearance  of  Koine.  The  foundation  of
the  patriareliul  family,  out  of  whose  fuller  develop
ment  iato  i In-  twelve  tribes  the  Jewish  people  sprang,
.-  with  Abram.  Patriarchalism  appears  still  as
th"  fundamental  form  under  which  the  popular  life
exists  and  v. orks.  But  out  of  this  con.-titution  a
multitude  of  small  kingdoms  have  grown  up  in
Canaan  and  Syria.  The  first  feeble  attempt  at
founding  a  grand  woi  Id  monarchy  was  made  by
Nitnro  i  at  ilabel  and  Xineveh.  In  Egypt  the  king
dom  of  the  Pharaohs  already  existed.  '  The  forma
tion  (,|'  i.ational  disisions  began  \\ith  the  migrations
of  the  people,  and  to  these  v,  e  may  probably  trace
theiisodf  castes.  The  nieehanieal  resemblance  of
the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  the  dynasty  Ilia  in  China
appears  to  have  been  complete  in  its  outline  and
characteristic  features,  before  the  definite  foundation
of  tin-  organic  and  living  kingdom  of  heaven  was
begun  in  Abram.

2.  The   Biblework  will   treat   more   fully   of  the
l:;nd  of  Canaan  in  the  division,  "Book  of  Joshua."
We  refer  in  passing  to    the  Bible-dictionaries,  the
geographies,  and  journals    of   travellers.     Sec    also
ZAUN  :   "The  Kingdom  of  (!od,"  i.  p.  105.     IP  this
section  we  notice  especially  Sichem,  Bethel,  Ai,  and
the  central  part  of  Palestine;   the  South,  especially
the  vicinity  of  Hebron   and  Sichem  (now  Nablous)
lying   between   Gcrizim   and  Ebal,  about   eighteen
hours  from  Jerusalem  and  sixteen  from  Nazareth,
marks  the  northern  principal  residence  of  the  patri
archs.     Hebron  (also   Kirjath-Arba,  from  the  giant
Arba,  now  El  Kalil,  i.  e.,  friend,  beloved,  in  honor
of  Abram),  southerly  about  eight  hours  from  Jeru
salem,  a  very  old  city,  the  city  of  Abram  and  David,
lying  in  a  blooming  and  beautiful  region,  was  their
principal  dwelling-place  in  the  south.      Their  cen
tral  residence  is  the  region  of  Bethel  (the  name  is
here  anticipated— originally  Luz,  ch.  xxviii.  19,  now
the  ruins  of  Beitin),  and   Ai  (the   old   Canaanitish
royal   city,  Josh.    vii.   2,  two   hours   easterly  from
Beitin,  northerly  from  Jerusalem,  now  Medineh),  an
elevated  rich  pasture-ground.

3.  The  nomadic  life  forms  the  natural  basis  of
the  patriarchal  society.     The   Greek   term   nomad
(VO/JLO.^  from  vo^6s    pasture-ground)  designates   the


herdsman  in  a  specific  sense,  as  one  who  roams  with
his  herds  over  uncultivated  tracts,  which  as  commons
are  in  one  aspect  wastes,  in  another  pasture-grounds.
The  nomads  are  thus  pastoral  tribes  and  nations
which  have  no  fixed  dwelling-place.  According  to
the  Conversations-lexicon,  "  they  stand  higher  in  the
scale  of  human  society  than  the  tribes  who  live  by
hunting  and  fishing,  and  lower  than  those  who  follow
agriculture  and  trade,  and  belong  css-entially  to  the
grade  of  barbaiians."  But  as  an  original  form  of
human  life,  and  indeed  as  the  form  of  the  most
quiet  and  retired  life,  the  nomadic  state  is  the  basis
upon  which  both  the  highest  human  culture  and  the
most  extreme  savage  wildncss  rest.  Original  thought
ful  minds  grew  up  to  be  the  spiritual  princes  of  hu
manity  in  the  quietude  of  the  nomadic  life;  mere
common  natures  grew  wild  and  savage  under  the
same  influences.  The  nomadic  state  still  covers
large  portions  of  the  race.  "  In  Europe  we  find
only  weak  nomadic  tribes  on  the  great  .-teppes  skirt
ing  the  Black  sea,  and  in  the  high  uncultivated
northern  latitudes,  there  Tartar  and  Turkish,  here
Finnish  tribes.  Asia  and  Africa  are  the  congenial
homes  of  the  nomadic  life.  Nearly  all  thjj  Finnish,
Mongolian,  and  Turkish  tribes,  and  the  mixed  tribes
which  have  sprung  from  them,  in  the  steppes  and
wastes  in  the  northern,  central,  and  border  Asia  arc
nomads;  so  also  the  Kurds  and  Bedouin  Arabs  of
bonier  Asia  and  North  Africa,  and  nearly  all  the
tribes  of  Southern  Africa,  Caffres,  Betschuanas,
Koranas,  and  the  Hottentots.  In  South  America  the
Gauehos,  and  in  many  respects  some  Indian  tribes,
are  to  be  regarded  as  nomads."  For  the  nomadic
tribes  of  the  East  see  SCIIRODKR,  p.  273,  KOIII.RAUSCH,
a  description  of  the  Caravan  March,  p.  282.  For
the  shepherd,  herdsman,  wilderness,  tents,  see  the
articles  in  WIXEK  [Kirro,  SMITH,  Bible  dictionaries.
-A.G.]

4.  The  Period  of  tkfi  Patriarchal  Religion,  and
Form  of  Religion.  u  In  the  New  Testament  the
term  •jrarpidpx'n^  is  applied  to  Abraham,  Ucb.  vii.  4,
to  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,  Acts  vii.  8  f.,  and  to  David,
Acts  ii.  29.  Generally  it  designates  the  sacred  an
cestors  of  the  early  periods  of  the  Israelites  (Tob.
vi.  21,  Vulgate)  whom  Paul,  Rom.  ix.  5,  xi.  28,  calls
ol  narepts.  Hence  it  has  become  customary  even  in
historical  language  to  call  all  the  fathers  of  the  early
human  races,  and  especially  of  the  Israelitish  people
(including  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob),  who  are  refer
red  to  and  distinguished  in  biblical  history,  Patriarchs
(German  Erzvatcr).  Its  history,  from  the  old  theo
logical  point  of  view,  is  given  by  J.  II.  HEIDKGGER,
exercilat.  select,  de  historia  sacra  patriarchar.  (Am
sterdam,  1667-8,  Zurich,  1729),  and  is,  perhaps,  more
critically  treated  by  J.  JAK.  HESS  :  "  History  of  the


CHAP.   XII.    1-20.


383


Patriarchs"  (Zurich,  1778).  Winer.  The  patriarch
is  the  beginner  or  founder  of  a  race  or  family  (the
word  is  formed  from  &px<>>  and  irarpia).  The  Hebrew
designation  fTCK  CSSO,  which  the  Septuagint  trans
lates  &p\ovrfs  TWV  trarpiLiv  (1  Chron.  ix.  9;  xxiv.
ol),  but  in  1  Chron.  xxvii.  22,  where  the  Hebrew
term  is  bx'niu1?  ''•JSIIJ  -nto ,  and  2  Chron.  xix.  8,
Trarpidpxris,  does  not  refer  to  our  patriarchs  (which
Bretschneider  labors  in  his  lexicon  to  authorize),  but
to  the  heads  of  individual  branches  of  the  tribes  of
Israel.  Even  in  the  New  Testament,  as  is  clear
from  Acts  ii.  29,  the  word  has  a  more  comprehensive
meaning.  In  Ilerzog's  Real-Encyclopedia,  article
Patriarchs,  there  is  a  threefold  distinction  drawn
between  the  biblical  and  theological,  the  Jewish
usage  as  to  the  synagogue  officers,  and  the  churchly
and  official  idea  of  the  word.  The  Jews,  e.  g.,  even
after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  call  the  presidents
of  the  two  schools  at  Tiberias  and  Babylon,  patriarchs.
In  the  Christian  Church  all  bishops  were  originally
termed  patriarchs,  but  the  council  of  Chalcedon
limited  the  name  to  those  renowned  bishops  who
had  raised  themselves  above  bishops,  and  metro
politan-.  Here  we  are  dealing  only  with  the
biblical  and  theological  meaning  of  the  term.  In  this
relation  we  must  distinguish  the  general,  the  narrow
er,  and  the  most  restricted  idea  of  the  word.  In  the
general  and  widest  sense,  all  the  theocratic  ancestors
are  included  in  the  term,  since  the  patriarchal  faith,
as  the  faith  of  salvation,  forms  the  highest  unity
running  through  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  In
the_  wider,  earlier  usual  acceptation,  the  patriarchal
period  is  viewed  as  including  the  pious  ancestors  of
biblical  history,  from  Adam  to  the  twelve  sons  of
Jacob,  or  to  the  Mosaic  era.  See  Winer,  the  article
in  question,  the  work  of  Heidegger  above  referred  to,
and  II  A  SB'S  Huttcrus  rcdivivm  (Religio  patriarchalis
antcdiltiiiana  ct  postdiluviana).  Still,  Hess,  in  his
history  of  the  patriarchs,  has  correctly  placed  the
patriarchs  before  Abram  in  an  introductory  history,
and  begins  the  history  itself  with  Abram.  The
earlier  division  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation  into
patriarchal,  Mosaic,  and  prophetic  religion  (i.  c.,  form
of  religion)  is  not  now  at  all  satisfactory.  This  divi
sion  must  be  completed  in  one  direction  through  the
period  of  the  national  Israelit-sh  piety  or  rclfgious-
ncss  (from  Malachi  to  Christ),  and  in  the  other
through  the  period  of  the  symbolic  original  mono
theism  from  Adam  to  Abram,  which  may  be  a^ain
divided  into  the  two  halves  of  the  antediluvian  and
postdiluvian  primitive  history.  The  symbolic  mono
theism  is  distinguished  from  the  patriarchal  period
both  as  to  form  and  essence.  As  to  the  form  of  the
revelation,  the  symbol  has  there  the  first  place,  the
explanatory  word  the  second  (paradise  and  the  para
disaic  word,  the  rainbow  and  the  covenant  with
Noah)  ;  but  in  the  history  of  the  patriarchs  the  word
of  revelation  holds  the  first  rank,  and  the  signs  of  the
thcophany  enter  in  a  second  line,  as  its  confirmation.
Thus  also  the  patriarchal  religion  stands  in  a
relation  of  opposition  and  coherence  with  the
Mosaic  system.  "  The  Mosaic  system  is  a  remould
ing  of  the  patriarchal  religion  so  far  as  Israel
grown  into  a  people  in  Egypt,  may  require  a  prepa-
•atory,  and  thus  a  legal  and  symbolic  instruction  as
to  the  nature  of  the  faith  cf  Abram  and  to  receive
that  faith;  it  is  a  lower  form  of  that  religion  so  far
as  the  religious  life,  which  already  in  the  patriarchs
began  to  be  viewed  as  an  inward  life,  is  here  set  be
fore  the  people,  who  are  strangers  to  it,  as  an  exter


nal  law  ;  but  is  also  a  higher  form  of  that  religion  so
far  as  the  ideas  of  the  religion  of  promise  are  unfold
ed  in  the  law,  and  in  this  explicit  form  are  introduc
ed  into  the  life  of  the  people.  The  law,  however,
is  not  the  fundamental  type  of  the  Old  Testament,
but  the  faith  of  Abram.  In  the  patriarchal  religion
the  word  of  God  is  prominent,  the  symbol  is  subor
dinate  ;  the  Mosaic  system,  as  also  the  primitive  re
ligion,  brings  the  symbol  into  prominence  (although
the  symbol  as  an  institution).  In  Abram  the  di
vine  promise  occupies  the  foreground,  the  divine
command  rests  upon  it ;  in  the  legal  period,  as  to  the
outward  appearance  the  relation  is  just  the  reverse.
Evidently  the  patriarchal  religion,  as  also  the  pro
phetic  period  succeeding  to  the  Mosaic  system,  re
garded  in  a  narrower  sense,  bears  a  marked  resem
blance  to  Protestantism,  while  the  Mosaic  system  ap
pears  as  the  primitive  type  of  the  Mediaeval  Catholic
Church."  (See  HEKZOG'S  Encyclopedia,  article  Pa
triarchs.)

As  to  its  nature,  the  faith  of  Abram  is  distin
guished  from  the  faith  of  the  pious  ancestors  in  this,
that  he  obtains  and  holds  the  promise  of  salvation,
not  only  for  himself,  but  for  his  family ;  and  from
the  Mosaic  system,  by  the  fact  that  it  expressly  holds
the  promised  blessing,  in  the  seed  of  Abram,  as  a
blessing  for  all  people.  In  reference  to  the  first,
there  were  earlier  lines  of  the  promise:  the  line  of
Seth  in  contrast  to  that  of  Cain,  the  line  of  Shorn
in  opposition  to  those  of  Japheth  and  Ham.  But
the  line  of  Seth,  through  its  corruption,  is  gradually
lost  in  the  line  of  Cain,  and  the  line  of  Shem  forms
no  well-defined  opposition  to  the  one  all-prevailing
heathenism.  It  is  gradually  infected  with  the  taint
of  heathenism,  while  on  the  other  hand  pious  be
lieving  lives  appear  in  the  descendants  of  Japheth
and  Ham.  Melchisedec,  with  his  eminent  piety,  be
longs  to  the  Canaanitish  people,  aud  thus  to  the
family  of  Ham.  During  the  whole  period  of  the
symbolic  primitive  religion,  the  theocratic  and  hea
then  elements  are  mingled  together.  The  dark
aspect  of  this  religion  is  a  mythological,  ever-grow
ing  heathenism  ;  its  light  side  the  symbolical,  ever-
waning,  primeval  monotheism.  Heathenism  irathers
gradually,  as  a  general  twilight,  through  which  glim
mer  the  men  of  God,  as  individual  stars.  Thus  Mel
chisedec  stands  in  the  surrounding  heathenism.  In
a  religious  point  of  view  he  is  a-rrdrup,  a./.i->-iTwp,  dye-
vea\6yr]Tos.  And  he  is  so  far  greater  than  Abram,
as  he  stands  as  the  last  shining  representative  in  the
Old  Testament  of  the  primitive  religion  looking
backwards  to  the  lost  paradise  (v/Liich,  however,  did
not  entirely  cease  in  the  whole  Old  Testament  pe
riod,  and  is  not  absolutely  extinguished  even  in  later
periods  of  the  world) ;  while  Abram  stands  as  the
first  representative  of  the  decided  religion  of  the
future,  who,  as  such,  has  already  the  promise,  that
in  his  seed  all  the  families  of  the  earth  should  be
blessed,  who  is  neither  dyei/eaAo'y^ros  nor  a-n-drap,
since  the  beginning  of  his  calling  appears  already  in
his  father,  Terah.  But  the  old  religion  develops
itself  more  definitely  into  the  religion  of  the  future
at  every  step,  when  the  corruption  for  tho  time  has
reached  such  a  degree,  that  faith,  looking  out  beyond
the  present  and  the  judgment  resting  upon  it,  must
fix  in  its  eye  a  new  beginning  of  salvation.  Thus  it
was  in  Noah,  thus  also  later  in  the  Mcssian'c  proph
ets.  But  while  Noah  out  of  the  flood  of  waters
saved  a  new  race  of  men,  Abram  has,  thro'.igh  the
overflowing  flood  of  heathenism,  to  found  a  new
particular  people  of  faith,  who  should  be  a  blessing


384


GENESIS,  OK   THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


for  all.  The  blessing  is  already  a  very  advanced
idea  of  the  salvation.  For  Eve  the  salvation  as
sumes  the  idea  of  victory,  for  Lamcch,  rest,  for
Noah,  the  preservation  of  the  divine  name  and  the
human  race  ;  for  Abram,  it  forms  the  opposition
to  the  curse.  For  as  the  curse  is  the  endless,  mys
terious,  progressive  destruction  of  life,  so  the  bless
ing  is  the  eiid'es-:,  mysterious,  progressive  enriching
and  cons-.Tvaii.>n  of  lit'.-.  As  the  condition,  indeed,
Abrain  must  ;:<i  out  from  the  heathen  world.  It  is
only  aj  in  o;'i>o.-iiion  to  it,  that  he  can  introduce
the  blc -:;::!.r  which  is  promised  in  his  seed.  The
pious  forefathers  had  indeed  already  taken  the  first
step  of  i;  iih  (Ilcb.  xi.).  They  have,  by  faith  in  the
creation  of  the  world,  uttered  the  denial  of  the  in-
depcndence  of  matter,  the  fundamental  dogma  of
heathenism  (Heb.  xi.  ',}).  Abel  has  taken  the  second
step  of  ftit! i ;  he  has  introduced  the  sacrifice  of  faith
into  the  v.  o:ld,  and  on  account  of  it  sacrificed  his
own  life.  Knocli  has  taken  the  third;  he  scaled  the
faith  in  the  nc\v  life  and  rewards  beyond  the  present.
Noah  carried  faith  on  to  the  salvation  of  (iod  in  the
divhi'- judgments.  Abram,  through  tlie  required  re
nunciation  of  the  world,  introduced  the  Israelitish
faith  of  the  future,  the  hope  for  the  eternal  inherit-
a!:c  >  of  (led,  ;nid  its  introduction  through  the  inher-
i lance  of  his  blessing.  It  was  the  legitimate  result
of  his  renunciation  of  the  world  that  he  sealed  it
through  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac.  The  succeeding
patriarchs  have  developed  this  faith  more  fully,  each
in  his  own  way.  Isaac  learned  to  prefer  the  first
born  of  the  spirit  before  the  first-born  of  blood;
Jacob  pointed  out  ,Ju*!ah  as  the  central  line  of  bless
ing  within  the  1  lie-sings  of  his  sons;  Joseph  proved
hi  fidelity  to  the  promise  until  his  death.  Thus  was
prepared  the  renunciation  and  the  calling  of  Moses.
(Taken  from  Lango's  article  in  ller/og's  Encyclo
pedia.)

With  the  introduction  of  the  Abrahamic  religion
(see  the  f'a-1'i.-oiiu:  section)  correspond  its  mild  na
ture  and  form,  and  its  rich  development.  As  to
the  first,  it  must  lie  observed  that  Abram,  notwith
standing  llie  deci~ive  character  of  his  separation
from  heathenism,  still  opposes  himself  to  the  hea
then  without,  any  fanaticism.  Hence  it  is  said  in-
tiecd,  "  (Jet  tliee  out !  "  but  the  second  word  follows
immediately  :  "  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing,  and  in  tliee
shall  be  blessed,  or  shall  bless  themselves,  all  the
families  of  the  earth."  Hence  the  patriarchs  stand
upon  a  friendly  tooting  with  the  princes  of  Canaan.
In  the  point  of  marriage  alone,  warned  by  the  his
tory  of  the  Sethitcs,  they  dreaded  theocratic  mis
alliances  ((Jen.  xxiv.  3  ;  xxvii.  4ti).  In  the  fourth
generation  the  first  historical  characteristic  type  of
fanaticism  appears  in  the  deed  of  Simeon  and  Levi
((icn.  xxxiv.).  The  judicial  and  solemn  disapproval
of  this  deed  by  Jacob  ((Jen.  xlix.  £>)  marks  the  true
spirit  of  the  Israelitish  religion ;  the  bold  commenda
tion  of  this  deed  in  the  book  Judith  (ch.  ix.  2)  re
veals  the  later  pharisaic  Judaism.  Even  the  mixed
marriage  is  legal  except  in  the  case  of  the  proscribed
Canaanites ;  and  to  the  questionable  and  unhappy
connections,  c.  g.  of  Esau,  there  arc  opposed  the
blessed  connections  of  Joseph  and  Moses.  The
only  matter  of  question  is  whether  there  is  such  a
certainty  of  faith  that  the  believing  party  may  raise
the  unbelieving  into  the  sphere  of  faith.  This  was
precisely  that  which  modified  the  crime  of  Thamar;
her  fanatical  attachment  to  the  house  of  Jacob,  or
the  triba  of  Judah.  Mild  as  was  this  patriarchal
spirit  of  separation  (because  it  was  actually  spirit)  it


was  just  as  strict  in  the  other  aspect.  Hence  there
are  relative  distinctions  of  the  elect  from  those  who
are  less  strictly  the  chosen,  running  down  through
the  family  of  Abram,  first  in  the  opposition  be
tween  Isaac  and  Ishmacl,  then  in  that  between  Jacob
and  Esau,  finally  in  the  sharp  distinctions  in  the
blessings  of  Jacob.  (From  the  same  article.)

As  to  the  development  of  faith  in  the  patriarchal
period,  it  proceeds  from  the  acl.t  of  faith  in  the  life
of  Abram,  through  the  endurance  (or  patience)  of
faith  in  the  life  of  Isaac,  to  the  conflicts  of  faith  in
the  life  of  Jacob  ;  but  in  the  life  of  Joseph  the
opposition  between  the  svffir'uigs  and  the  (/lory  on
account  of  faith,  comes  into  clear  and  distinct  re
lief.  The  promise  also  unfolds  itself  more  and  more
widely.  The  blessing  of  the  descendants  of  Abram,
who  should  inherit  Palestine,  divides  itself  already
in  the  bles-ing  of  Isaac  upon  Jacob,  into  a  blessing
of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,,  and  Jacob's  authority
to  rule  announces  more  definitely  the  theocratic
kingdom.  I3ut  in  the  blessing  of  Jacob  upon  Judah,
the  Shiloh  is  designated,  as  the  prince  of  war  and
peace,  to  whom  the  people  should  be  gathered  (a
further  extract  from  the  article  in  question,  p.  199).
For  the  periods  of  the  history  of  the  covenant,  see
KURTZ,  p.  13.">.  For  the  nature  of  the  patriarchal
history,  DKUTZSCH,  p.  211-1240  ;  [also  IJAUMGARTEX,
Commentary  p.  lo5-16S  ;  KK:L,  p.  123-125.
A.  G.]

[Kurtz  arranges  the  history  of  the  covenant  un
der  the  following  periods  or  stages:  the  period  of
the  family,  including  the-  triad  of  patiiarchs  with  the
twelve  sons  of  Jacob  ;  the  period  of  the  people,
having  its  starting  point  in  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,
and  running  through  the  Judges;  the  period  of  the
kingdom  ;  the  period  of  the  exile  and  restoration;
the  period  of  expectancy ;  and  the  period  of  the
fulfilment.— A.  G.]

[Delitzsch  holds,  as  we  may  abridge  and  condenso
his  views,  that  the  patriarchal  history  is  introductory
to  the  history  of  Israel,  and  is  completed  in  three
parts — the  histories  of  the  three  patriarchs.  The
personal  history  of  the  patriarchs  revolves  around
the  promise  as  to  Israel,  and  Canaan  its  inheritance.
The  characteristic  trait  of  the  patria:chs  is  faith.
This  faith  shows  itself  in  the  whole  mighty  fulness
of  its  particular  elements  in  Abram  ;  ceaselessly
struggling,  resolutely  patient  and  enduring,  over
coming  the  world.  lie  is  the  type  of  the  conflicts,
obedience,  and  victory  of  faith — irairip  TTO.VTUV  TUV
irKTrivovTuv.  His  loving  endurance  repeats  itself  in
Isaac,  his  hopeful  wrestlings  in  Jacob.  'Eir'  (\iri9t
Trap'  4\iri5a  is  their  motto.  The  promise  and  faith
are  the  two  correlated  factors  of  the  people  of  God.
Renouncing  the  present,  and  in  the  midst  of  trials,
its  life  passes  in  hope.  Hope  is  its  true  life,  impulse,
and  affection.  Desire  is  Israel's  element.

Viewing  the  patriarchal  history  from  the  central
point  of  that  history,  the  incarnation  of  God  in  the
fulness  of  time,  its  position  in  the  history  of  salva
tion  may  be  thus  defined.  There  are  seven  stages
in  this  history  :  1.  The  antediluvian  time,  both  para
disaic  and  after  paradise,  during  which  God  was  per
sonally  and  visibly  present  with  men,  closing  with
the  flood,  when  he  retires  into  the  heavens  and  frcm
thence  exercises  his  judicial  and  sovereign  provi
dence.  The  goal  of  history  is  thenceforward  the
restoration  of  this  dwelling  of  God  with  men.  The
history  has  ever  tended  towards  this  goal.  2.  The
patriarchal  time  during  which  God  manifested  him
self  personally  and  even  visibly  upon  the  earth,  but


CHAP.   XII.    1-20.


385


only  at  times  and  only  to  a  few  holy  men,  the  patri
archs,  at  important  points  in  the  history  of  salvation
and  even  these  revelations  cease  from  Jacob  to  Mo
ees.     The  revelation  of  God  in  the  name  Pl'PP,  i.  e
as  the  one  coming  down  into  history,  and  revealing
himself  in  it,  belongs  to  this  time  of  the  completes
creation,  of  the  opening  redemption  of  Israel,  His  pecu
liar  people.    3.  The  Israelitish  period  prior  to  the  ex
ile,  during  which  God  did  not  reveal  himself  personally
and  visibly  as  in  the  patriarchal  period  to  a  few,  and  to
these  only  at  times,  but  to  a  whole  people  and  perma
nently,  but  still  only  to  a  people  and  not  to  mankind.
There  are  two  distinguishable  epochs  in  this  period.
In  the   first  Israel  is  led  by  the  Angel  of  Jehovah
in  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire — the  glorious  and  gra
cious  presence  of  God,  visible  for  the  whole  people.
The  second  is  that  of  the  presence  of  God  in  the
temple  and  in  the  word ;  in  the  temple  for  Israel,
but  only  through   the  mediation  of  priests,  in  the
word,  but  only  through  the  mediation  of  prophets.
BiU  even  this  lower,  less  accessible  temple-presence
ceased  when  Israel  filled  up  the  measure  of  its  ini
quities.     The   glory  of  Jehovah  departed  from  the
temple.     As  God  at  first  withdrew  his  manifested
presence  from  the  race  and  destroyed  it  with  the
Hood,  so  now  from  the  Jewish  people,  and  abandons
Jerusalem  to  destruction.     As  the  first  stage  of  the
history  closes  with  a  judgment   from  the  ascended
God,  and  the  second   in  the  long  profound  silence
from  Jacob  to  Moses,  so  the  third  again  ends  like  the
first.     4.  The  time  succeeding  the  exile,  at  its  com
mencement  not  essentially  different  from  the  close
of  the  third  period.     God  was  present  in  the  word,
but  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  covering,  the  cher
ubim,  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  and,  more  than  all,
the  Shechinah,  the  visible  symbol  of  the  presence
of   Jehovah,    were   wanting    in   the   temple.      But
prophecy  itself  grew  speechless  with  Malachi  and
Daniel.    The  people  complain,  We  see  not  our  signs,
there  is  no  more  any  prophet  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  9).     They
named  Simon  the  brother  of  the  Maccabeean  Jona
than   the  yyovuevos  Kal  apxtepivs   tis  vltv  aliava,  but
it   was    cus    TOV  a.vaa-rrjva.1  Trpo(p7ir-r]v  •jncrrdi'.      Thus
forsaken  of  God,  and  conscious  of  its  forsaken  state,
the  true  Israel  passed  through  this  fourth  stage  of
the  history,  a  school  of  desire  for  believers  waiting
and  longing  for  the   new  unveiling   of  the   divine
countenance.     Then  at  last  the  dawn  broke,  Jeho
vah^  visited  his  people,  and  in  the  mystery  now  un
veiling  itself  i&eiy   tipavepwdrj   tv  vapid  completes  in
far-surpassing  glory  the   antitype  of  Paradise,     o.
The  time  of  the  life  of  Christ  in  the  flesh.     It  is  now
true  in  the  most  literal  and  real  sense,  ea-K-fivuia-fv  ev
ijiuv.^     But  at  first  Israel  alone  saw  him.     The  rays
of  his  glorious  grace  reach  the  heathen  only  as  an
exception.     But  his  own  received  him  not.     They
nailed  the  manifested  in  the  flesh  to  the  cross.     But
he  who  <=£  aadeveias  died,  rose,  e«-  Swdneas  &eov,
and  ascended  into  heaven.     He   withdrew  himself
from  the  people  who   had   despised   him.     But   as
Jehovah,   after   he    had   seated    himself   upon   his
heavenly  throne,  sent  down  at  the  close  of  the  first
stage  the  judgment  of  the  flood,  at  the  close  of  the
third  works  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  so   now
;he  God-man  ascended  into  heaven  abandons  Jeru
salem  to  destruction  and  Judah  to  an  exile  which
itill  endures.     For  Israel  he  will  come  again,  but  in
he  fire  of  judgment ;  and  for  believers  he  will  also
•ome  again,  but  not  visibly  nor  in  the  fire  of  judg-
aent,   but   in   the  fire  of  the  Spirit.     6.  The  still-
nduring  present,  the  time  of  the  spiritual  presence
25


of  the  incarnate  God  in  his  church.  This  presence
is  both  more  than  the  visible  presence  of  Christ  in
the  days  of  his  flesh,  and  less  than  the  visible  pres
ence  of  the  exalted  one  in  which  it  reaches  its  en
largement  and  completion.  We  must  not  forget
that  the  Spirit  sent  upon  us  from  the  glorified  Son
of  Man  i.s  so  far  the  irapa.K\riTo^  as  he  comforts  us
on  account  of  his  absence  ;  that  all  the  de/ire  of  the
Christian  is  to  be  at  home  with  Christ;  and  that-  the
hope  of  the  whole  church  is  embraced  in  the  hope
for  the  revelation  of  Christ.  Without  shaving  in  the
exaggerated  estimate  of  the  miraculous  gifts  by  the
Irviugites,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  our  time  ivsern-
bles  the  second  part  of  the  post-exile  period,  and
that  the  church  now,  as  believers  then,  desires  the
return  of  the  wonderful  intensity  and  gracious  ful
ness  of  the  spiritual  presence  in  the  primitive
church.  This  desire  will  receive  its  fulfilment  in  the
glorious  time  of  the  church  upon  the  earth.  7.  But
the  seventh  stage  of  the  history  of  salvation,  which
endures  through  the  ./Eons  of  yEons,  will  first  give
full  satisfaction  to  all  the  desires  of  all  believers,  and
bring  that  glorious,  transcendent  restoration  of  the
paradisaical  communion  with  God  in  the  incarnation,
to^its  final  perfection.  The  new  Jerusalem  (Rev.
xxi.  8)  is  the  antitype  of  Paradise.  The  communion
of  God  with  the  first  man  to  be  redeemed,  has  now
become  his  communion  with  the  finally  redeemed
humanity.  His  presence  is  no  longer  a  transitory
alternating,  now  appearing  then  vanishing,  but  en
during,  ever  the  same,  and  endless;  not  limited  to
individuals  nor  bound  to  localities,  but  to  all,  and
all-pervading ;  not  merely  divine,  but  divine  and
human ;  not  invisible,  but  visible ;  not  in  the  form
of  a  servant,  but  in  unveiled  glory.  God  ascvnds  no
more,  for  sin  is  for  ever  judged  and  the  earth  has
become  as  heaven.  He  descends  no  more,  for  the
work  of  redemption  is  complete,  the  whole  creation
keeps  its  solemn  sabbath,  God  rests  in  it,  and  it
rests  in  God ;  Jehovah  has  finished  his  work,  and
Elohim  is  now  all  in  all,  -n-avTa.  eV  iraaiv.  See  DE-
LITZSCH,  p.  239-249.— A.  G.]

5.  The  fundamental  form  of  divine  revelation,  par
ticularly  of  the  revelation  of  the  old  covenant,  and
still  more  particularly  of  the  patriarchal  period  (see  p.
48,  Introd.).  The  historically-completed  fundamen
tal  form  of  the  divine  revelation  of  salvation,  is  the
revelation  of  God  in  Christ,  the  God-man,  i.  e.  in  one
distinct,  unique  life,  wherein  the  divine  self-commu
nication  and  revelation,  and  the  human  i:ituuion  of
God,  are  perfectly  united  in  one,  while  vrt  as  cle--
ments  of  life  they  are  clearly  distinguished  from  each
other.  The  progressive  revelation  must  correspond
in  its  outline  and  characteristic  features  to  this  goal-
to  which  it  tends.  In  its  objective  aspect  it  must  be
through  thcophanies,  in  its  subjective  the  vision  of
the  revelation  of  God,  in  its  plan,  tendency,  and  de
velopment,  Christophanies ;  the  chief  points  in  the
interchange  between  God  manifesting  himself  per
sonally  and  the  receptive  human  spirits  in  the  pro-
figurations  of  the  future  advent  of  Christ.  Tho
individual  phases  in  the  development  of  this  form
of  revelation  are  these:  (1)  The  revelation  of  God
;hrough  the  symbolism  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  visibly
for  the  paradisaic  spiritual  and  natural  clear-sighted
vision ;  and  coming  out  in  particular  words  and
representations  of  God,  addressed  to  the  ear  and
iye,  promptly,  according  to  the  necessities  of  human
development,  and  according  to  the  energy  of  the
Spirit  of  God,  who  translates  the  signs  into  words.
The  form  of  the  primitive  religion."  (2)  The  self-


38G


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


revelation  of  God  in  the  form  of  an  angelic  appear
ance,  distinct  from  his  being  ;  the  pre-announcement
of  the  future  Christ,  or  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  in  re
ciprocal  relation  and  action  with  the  unconscious  see
ing,  as  in  vision,  resting  upon  the  unconscious  ecsta
sies  of  believers,  manifesting  himself  first  through  the
miraculous  report  or  voice,  then  through  miraculous
vision,  i.  e.  first  through  the  word,  then  through  the
figurative  appearance.  The  form  of  the  patriarchal
leligion.  ('.',)  The  revelation  of  God,  distinguishing
Lis  face,  i.  c.  his  gradual  incarnation,  from  his  being,
or  nature,  or  the  angel  of  his  presence  in  reciprocal
relation  and  action,  with  the  conscious  visions,  based
upon  unconscious  ecstasies.  The  Angel  of  his  face,
or  the  face.  The  fundamental  form  of  the  Mosaic  sys
tem.  (1)  The  appearance  of  Jehovah  himself  in  his
glory,  in  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  surrounded  by
angelic  forms,  iu  reciprocal  relation  with  the  con
scious  visions,  resting  upon  the  conscious  ecstasy  of
the  prophets,  or  Jehovah  appearing  in  his  divine
Archangel  and  with  his  angel-bands  over  against  the
proph  -is  overwhelmed  and  trembling,  drawing  grad
ually  nearer  to  the  incarnate  angel  of  the  covenant
(Mai.  iii.  1 ).  The  fundamental  form  of  the  prophetic
period.  (.">)  The  hidden  preparation  for  the  advent
of  the  angel  of  the  covenant,  in  the  period  of  na
tional  religiousness;  his  work  in  the  depths  of  hu
man  nature.  (/,)  Christ  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,
the  unity  of  the  divine  revelation  and  the  human
intuition'ot  Cod,  and  therefore  also  upon  the  divine
eide  the  unity  of  Cod  and  his  Angel,  and  upon  the
human  hide  the  unity  of  the  ,-piriiual  intuitions  and
the  natural  vision  of  Chri>t.

We  have  already,  in  what  we  have  thus  said,  as
indee  1  elsewhere  (  I.ifx'n  ./«•.'",  p.  4i'>;  ]><>y>i<atik,  p.
:>M;  ;  HKKX.OG,  "Encyclopedia,"  The  1'iitrinrc/ix  <>f
I/,,-  Old  Testament),  stated  our  view  of  the  Angel
of  the  Lord;  but  we  must  here  repeat  that,  in  our
convi;-iion  the  exegetical  prejudice,  ever  coming  into
greater  prominence,  that  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  is  a
creature-angel,  as  also  the  prejudice  in  reference  to
the  supposed  angels  (ch.  vi.t,  burdens,  obscures,  and
confuses  in  a  fatal  way,  Old  Testament  theology,
and  leaves  no  room  for  a  clear  psychology  of  the
faith  of  revelation,  an  intuitive  Christology,  or  an
organic  unity  of  biblical  theology.

In  recrard  to  this  point,  Kurtz  has  undertaken  with
great  zeal  the  defence  of  the  erroneous  interpreta
tion,  although  he  had  earlier  defended  the  true  one,
"  History  of  the  Old  Covenant,"  p.  144,  2d  ed.  We
introduce  here  his  reference  to  the  state  of  the  ques
tion  before  we  enter  upon  its  discussion.  ''The
views  of  interpreters,  as  to  the  nature  and  being  of
the  Angel  of  the  Lord  (nirP  T^a,  also  called
7"~::xn  TiXb  w)  who  appears  first  in  the  patriarchal
bistorv,  have  been  divided  into  two  classes.  The  one
.sees  in  him  a  representation  of  the  deity,  entering
perceptibly  the  world  of  sense,  in  a  human  form,  and
thus  is  to"  be  regarded  as  the  prenguration  of  the
.incarnation  of  God  in  Christ;  the  other  sees  in  him
an  angel,  like  other  angels,  but  who,  because  he  ap
pears  iu  name  and  mission  as  a  representative  of  Je
hovah,  is  even  introduced  and  spoken  of  as  Jehovah ;
indeed,  himself  speaks  and  acts  as  Jehovah.  The
first  view  has  already  made  a  beaten  path  for  itself
in  the  oldest  theology  of  the  synagogue,  and  in  the
theological  doctrine  of  the  Mrtatron,  of  that,  from
God  emanating,  godlike  revealer  of  the  divine  na
ture,  has  assumed  a  definite  shape  and  form,  although
embracing  foreign  elements  (comp.  HENGSTENBERG  :


1  Christology,'  iii.  2.  pp.  31-86).  It  was  adhered  to
by  most  of  the  Fathers  (HENGSTENBERG,  as  above),
and  with  these  must  be  counted  the  old  churchly
Protestant  theologians.  In  recent  times  it  has  been
defended  most  decidedly  and  fully  by  HENGSTENBERG
(i.  pp.  125-142,  2d  ed. ;  and  iii.  2.  pp.  ol-SG),  who,
with  the  Fathers  and  the  old  Protestant  theologians,
recognizes  in  the  angel  of  the  Lord  the  manifested
God,  the  loijns  of  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Trin
ity,  and  holds  this  view  to  be  so  widely  developed  in
the  history  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation,  that  it
lays  the  foundation  for  the  doctrine  of  the  logos  in
the  Gospel  by  John  (compare  his  'Commentary  on
the  book  of  Revelation,'  i.  p.  61o).  SACK  (Comment,
theol.,  Bonn,  lt<2l),  had  already  discussed  the  ques
tion,  and  reached  the  conclusion,  that  the  angel  of
the  Lord  is  identical  with  Jehovah,  but  that  the  term
does  not  designate  a  person  distinct  from  him,  but
merely  a  form  of  manifestation,  on  which  account  he
prefers  to  render  ~^'"~  '  the  commission'  rather  than
'the sent'  (comp.  his  Ap»h</etik,  2d  ed.  p.  172).  .In
the  footsteps  of  these  two  List-named  persons,  the
writer  of  this  [  Kurt/,]  sought  to  prove,  in  THO  LUCK'S
Anzeifjn;  IS  Id,  No.  11-14,  that  the  Maleach  Jeho
vah  is  Cod,  as  presented  in  the  authors  of  the  Old
Testament;  appearing,  revealed,  entering  into  the
limitations  of  space  and  time,  as  perceptible  by  the
senses,  distinguished  from  the  invisible  God,  in  his
exalted  and  therefore  imperceptible  existence,  above
the  world  of  sense,  and  removed  from  all  the  limita
tions  of  space  and  time;  still  without  bringing  it  to
a  full,  distinct  consciousness,  whether  this  distinction
was  merely  ideal  or  essential,  whether  it  was  to  be
regarded  as  supposed  for  the  moment,  or  grounded
in  the  very  nature  of  (Jod.  The  most,  important
parts  of  this  essay  were  included  in  the  lirst  edition
of  this  work.  DKI.II/.SCII  :  '  Hiblical  and  Prophetical
Theology,' p.  289;  Nrrzsen  :  'System;'  T.  BKCK:
'Christian  Science  of  Doctrine;'  KKII,  :  '  P.ook  of
Joshua,'  p.  S7  ;  HAVKKMCK:  'Old  Testament  The
ology,'  p.  7-i  ;  KiiKAiin  :  '  Christian  Dogmatics,'
vol.  i.  ;  J.  P.  LAMIK:  'Positive  Dogmatics,'  p.  086;
STIEK:  'Isaiah,  not  Pseudo  Isaiah,'  p.  758,  and
others,  all  agree  in  the  same  exhibition  of  this  theo
logical  question.

"  The  other  view  has  found  a  defender  in  Au<;cs-
•i  IN  :  lie  Tfiiiitatc,  11.3,  and  meets  the  approval  of  the
Catholic  theologians  under  the  influence  of  their  view
of  the  adoration  of  angels ;  and  of  the  Socinians,  Ar-
minians,  and  Rationalists,  from  their  opposition  to
the  ecclesiastical  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  In  more
recent  times,  however,  some  eminent  persons,  who
arc  entirely  free  from  these  interested  motives,  have
adopted  this  view,  viz.,  STEUDKL,  in  his  Pfiiiyntpro-
gramme  for  1830,  and  in  his  '  Old  Testament  Theol
ogy,'  p.  252  ff.  ;  IIoFMANN  :  Wcissagung  und  Erjull-
unq,  i.  p.  127,  and  Schriflbeioeis,  pp.  154-1 59  and
321-340;  BAUMGARTES:  'Com.' p.  195;  THOI.UCK:
'  Gospel  by  John,'  Cth  ed.  p.  52  ;  PELT  :  '  Theo
logical  Encyclopedia,'  p.  241 ;  and  still  more  recent
ly,  DELITZSCII,  renouncing  his  earlier  view,  and
adopting  that  of  Ilofmann :  '  Com.  on  Genesis,'  p.
249.  Between  Stcudel  and  Hofmann  there  is,  how
ever,  this  difference,  that  the  former  sees  in  the
Maleach  Jehovah  an  angel  especially  commissioned
by  God  for  each  particular  case — it  being  left  unde
termined  whether  it  is  one  and  the  same  or  not,
while,  in  Hofmann's  view,  it  is  one  and  the  same
angel-prince,  who  here,  as  the  Maleach  Jehovah,
later  as  the  captain  of  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  (Josh.


CHAP.   XII.    1--20.


387


p.  14),  as  the  angel  of  his  face  (Is.  Ixiii.  9),  under
the  personal  name  of  Michael  (Dan.  x.  13,  '21 ;  xii.  1),
as  tlie  representative  of  Jehovah,  controls  the  com
monwealth  and  history  of  Israel  (  Weissnc/ung  nml
Erfullung,  pp.  131,  132).  In  his  later  work,  how
ever,  Hofmann  has  modified  his  view  so  far,  that  the
angel  who  performs  this  or  that  work  is  ever  a  defi
nite  angel,  but  the  same  one  is  not  destined  for  all
time,  while  it  is  still  true  that  Israel  has  his  prince,
his  special  angel,  who  is  named  Michael  (Schriftbe-
weis,  p.  157).

"  BARTH  has  in  a  most  peculiar  way  attempted  to
unite  the  views  of  Ilcngstenberg  and  Hofmann:
'  The  Angel  of  the  Covenant.  A  Contribution  to
Christoiogy.  A  Letter  to  Schelling.'  Leipzig,  1845.
He  holds,  with  Hengstenberg,  the  divine  personality,
and  with  Hofmann,  the  angelic  created  nature  of  the
Maleach  Jehovah,  and  unites  the  two  views  through
the  assertion  of  a  past  assumption  of  the  angelic
nature  of  the  logos,  analogous  to  his  later  incarnation.
We  leave  this  view  unexamined,  as  utterly  baseless."

Kurtz  closes  his  reference  (in  the  2d  ed.)  with  the
explanation,  that  he  finds  himself  in  the  same  posi
tion  as  Dclitzsch,  constrained  by  his  conviction  to
adopt  the  view  of  Hofmann.

According  to  the  view  of  the  old  ecclesiastical
theology,  the  (First)  argument  in  favor  of  the  self-
revelation  of  God,  in  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  is  the
personal  and  real  identity  in  which  this  Angel-name
always  appears.  If  Maleach  Jehovah,  Maleach  Elo-
him,  may  designate  some  one  angel  of  the  Lord,  in  a
peculiar  appearance,  still  it  must  be  kept  in  view
here,  that  from  ch.  xvi.  onwards  this  name,  with
slight  and  easily  explained  modifications,  is  a  stand
ing,  permanent  figure.  Hofmann  replies:  Maleach
Hamelech  is  not  the  king  himself,  but  the  king's
messenger.  So  also  Maleach  Jehovah  is  not  Jehovah
himself.  Certainly !  so  also  the  king's  son  is  not
the  king  himself.  According  to  Hofmann' s  view,
therefore,  it  must  follow  that  the  Sou  of  God  is  not
God.  The  nature  of  God  in  his  self-distinction  is
exalted  i'ar  above  that  of  earthly  kings.

Secondly.  The  Angel  of  Jehovah  identifies  him
self  with  Jehovah.  He  ascribes  to  himself  divine
honors,  divine  determinations  (Gen.  xvi.  10,  11  ;
xviii.  10,  13,  14,  '20,  36;  xxii.  12,  15,  Ifi,  etc.,  etc.).
Some  one  objects :  The  prophets  also  identify  them
selves  in  a  similar  way  with  Jehovah.  This  is  sim
ply  au  incorrect  assertion.  There  is  no  authentic
passage  in  which  the  prophet,  in  the  immediate  an
nouncement  of  the  word  of  God,  does  not  in  some
way  make  a  clear  distinction  between  his  person  and
the  person  of  Jehovah.  The  examples  which  De-
litzsch  quotes,  that  ambassadors  have  identified
themselves  with  their  kings,  rest  upon  the  political
rights  and  style  of  ambassadors,  and  are  as  little
applicable  to  the  style  of  a  creature-angel  as  to  that
of  apostles  and  prophets.

Thirdly.  The  writers  of  the  history,  and  the
biblical  persons,  use  promiscuously  the  names  Angel
of  Jehovah,  and  Jehovah,  and  render  to  this  angel
divine  honor,  in  worship  and  sacrifice  (Gen.  xvi.  13 ;
xviii.  1,  2;  xxi.  17-19;  xxii.  14;  xlviii.  15,  16,  etc.).
Our  opponents  answer :  It  is  not  high  treason  when
an  officer,  in  the  name  and  commission  of  the  king,
as  the  representative  of  the  person  of  the  king,  re-
seives  the  homage  of  the  subjects.  It  is  not  his  own
oerson,  but  the  person  of  the  king,  whom  in  this  case
Je  represents,  which  comes  into  strong  relief.  With
.his  halting,  limping  comparison,  they  seek  to  justify
'he  conduct  of  the  men  of  faith  in  the  Old  Testament,


who,  in  their  view,  rendered  freely  and  without  re
proof  divine  honor  to  a  creature-angel,  and  did  this  con
stantly,  whenever  this  angel  appears,  notwithstanding
the  Old  Testament  abhors  and  condemns  the  deifying
of  the  creature,  and  that  here  the  express  diviuo
watchword  is :  "My  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another
neither  my  praise  to  graven  images"  (Is.  xlii.  8).

The  following  reasons  are  urged  in  favor  of  the
supposition  of  a  creature-angel :

a.  The  name   angel   designates,   throughout,    a
certain  class  of   spiritual  beings.     Kurtz   formerly
replied  to  this  that  the  name  angel  is  not  one  of  na
ture  but  of  office  (Mai.  ii.  7;  Hag.  i.  13).     Although
the  name  angel  now  indeed  points  in  many  cases  to
a  certain  cla^s  of  spiritual  beings,  still  the  fact  that
there  are  symbolic  angel-forms  is  a  sufficient  proof
that  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  need  not  necessarily  be
regarded  as  a  being  of  that  class  of  spirits.

b.  Hofmann  urges  that  since  the  advent  of  Christ
the  New  Testament   speaks  of  the  &yye\os  KVOLOV
(Matt.  i.  20 ;  Luke  ii.  9  ;  Acts  xii.  7).      Kurtz  has
answered  that  in  the  places  quoted  the  expression
designates  a  different  person  from  the  Maleaeh  Jeho
vah  of  the  Old  Testament,  or  even  of  the  speech  of
Stephen  (Acts  vii,  30).     He  recalls  this  reply,  how
ever,  with  the  remark  that  if  Matthew  and  Luke
had  even  had  a  suspicion  that  the  &-yye\os  Kvpiov  in
the  Old  Testament  always  designated  the  Son  of  God,
who  has  since   become  man  in  Christ,  they  would
never  have  used  this  expression  even  once  in  refer
ence  to  a  creature-angel.     With  this  conception  of
angelic    appearances   the   transition   to    Hofmann's
view  was  surely  possible  and  easy.     To  his  objection
(p.  120)  we  reply,  that  the  incarnate  Christ  at  Beth
lehem  could  just  as  well  be  made  by  God  to  assume
an  angelic  form,  near  at  hand  and  remote,  as  the
Logos  of  God  in  the  preparatory  steps  to  his  incar
nation.     To  Kurtz  this  wonderful  manifestation  of
the  "  ubiquity  "  of  Christ  is  only  a  '•  pure  idea"  or
fancy.     But  just  as  (Gen.  xviii.  19)  the  two  angels
who  went  to  Sodom  are  distinguished  from  the  An
gel  of  Jehovah  before  whom  Abraham  stood   with
his   intercessory  prayer,  and   as  Paul  (Gal.  iii.  19)
suggests  the  distinction    between  the  angel  giving
the  law  at  Sinai  and  the  Angel  of  his  face,  who  was
the    Christ  of  the  Old  Testament  (1  Cor.  x.  4),  so
we  can  distinguish  in  the  New  Testament  between
the  two  men  or  the  two  angels  at  the  grave  of  the
risen  one  (Luke  xxiv.  4;  John  xx.  12),  or  the  two
men  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives  (Acts  i.  10)  on  the
one  side,  and  the  angel  who  announces  the  birth
of  Christ  on  the  other.    Only  Matthew,  in  his  solemn
and   festive   expression,    has   embraced    these   two
angels  in  one  symbolic  form  of  the  Angel  of  the
Lord,  and  this  indeed  upon  good  grounds,  since  in
the  resurrection  or  the  second  birth  of  Christ  the
Logos  was  active,  as  in  his  birth  at  Bethlehem.

c.  Baumgarteu  urges :  Why  should  the  Angel  of
the  Lord  first  appear  to  the  Egyptian  bondwoman,
Gen.  xvi.  ?    Kurtz  and  Delitzsch  have,  in  their  earlier
works,  given  various  replies  to  this  question.     We
answer  with  another  question :  Why  should  the  risen
Christ  first  appear  to  Mary  Magdalene,  and  not  to
his  mother  or  John  ?     We  think,  according  to  the
simple  law,  that  the  Lord  reveals  himself  first  to  the
poorest,  most  distressed  and  receptive  hearts.     It  is,
besides,  a  mere  supposition  that  the  Angel  of  the
Lord  has  first  appeared  here,  where  he  is  first  named
with  this  name,  as  we  shall  see  further  below.

d.  Kurtz  urges  again :    It  lies  against  the  idea
of  a  continuous   development  of  the  knowledge  of


388


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


the  historical  salvation,  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  if
there  is  actually  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  Old-
Testament  history  w>  clear  a  consciousness  of  the
distinction  between  the  unrevealed  and  revealed
God,  and  this  consciousness  is  ever  becoming  more
obscure  in  the  progress  of  the  Old  Testament,  but
has  vanished  entirely  and  forever  in  the  New  Testa
ment.  But  this  is  .-ill  as  manifestly  a  pure  supposi
tion  as  when  Ilotmann  thinks  the  Old  Testament
cannot  speak  of  the  ^ell-distinction  of  God  because
in  that  case  i:  would  anticipate  the  doctrine  of  the
Trinity.  T!i:;t  indeed  is  the  organic  development
of  revelation  from  the  old  to  the  New  Testament,
that  the  revelation  of  the  Trinity  in  the  divine  being
was  in'n  luci  d  through  the  revelation  of  the  duality.
]iut  when  the  form  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  in
Genesis,  passes  to  the  Angel  of  his  face,  or  the  per-
Boiiiiie  i  face  of  Jehovah  himself  in  Exodus,  then  to
the  prince  over  the  armies  of  God  in  Joshua,  and
fin::!:v  to  the  Archangel,  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant
of  the  later  prophets,  the  organic  development  of
the  doctrine  in  question  is  manifest.

c.  Kurt/,  remarks  again  the  fact  that  in  the  New
Testament  die  law  is  said  to  be  ordained  by  angels
or  spoken  by  the  aniM  (Aetsvii.  r>:i ;  Gal.  iii.  1'.';
lleb.'  ii.  1M,  as  in  favor  of  the  doctrine  of  the  created
angel.  H'Te  he  plainly  refutes  himself.  For  1'aul
(('ml  iii.  I1.')  clearly  refeVs  to  this  feature  of  the  law,
tint  ;/  wax  ordatncd  l»i  1/i<- <n,</il,  in  order  to  show
that  the  law  was  subordinate  to  the  promise  -riven
to  Abram.  Hut  if  the  mediation  through  angels
is  a  mark  of  the  imperfection  of  the  law,  it  follows
dial  Abivm  could  not  have  received  the  promise
t!  i-., uuh  such  a,  mediation  of  a  created  angel.  To
till-  end  he  presses  especially  the  appeal  to  (lleb.  ii.
2)  "tin;  -rreat  superiority  of  the  promise  to  the  law
is  derived  from  this,  that  the  law  was  announced
5t'  ii.yyt\ui>  hut  the  gospel  Sta.  -rov  Kvpiov."  1' or  the
answer  sec  Horn.  iv.  where  the  promise  to  which  the
law  is  subordinated  appears  as  the  yet  undeveloped
gospel  of  the  old  covenant.

f.  lleli.  xiii.  '2  refers  to  the  three  men  who  ap-
pe;;';ed  to  Abram  in  the  plains  of  Mature  (Gen.
xviii.).  Hut  why  not  to  the  two  angels  whom  Lot
receised  (Gen.  x'ix.)?  The  words  can  refer  only  to
li  peculiar  kind  of  hospitality,  Abram  knew,  how
ever,  that  the  men  who  were  his  guests  were  of  a
hiirher  order,  while  Lot  appears  not  to  have  known
it  at  the  be;:itmin'-r.

//.  Tle>  angel-prince  Michael  (Dan.  x.  13,  21;
xii.'l)  lias  the  same  position  which  the  Malcaeh  Je
hovah  has  in  the  historical  books.  Hut  that  Michael
cannot  be  the  Logos  is  clear,  since  he  is  not  the  only
'""  ~~.  Gabriel  appears  as  a  second  archangel
(Dan.  viii.  1G  ;  ix.  21),  (Tob.  xii.  15),  adds  Raphael
and  ( 4  Ezra  iv.  1)  still  further  Uriel.  When_I  now,
from  the  identity  of  Gabriel  or  Michael  with  the
ap;  -i  .ifing  figure  in  Rev.  i.,  draw  the  conclusion, —
Gabriel  or  Michael  are  symbolical  manifested  images
of  Christ  (as  the  old  Jewish  theology  saw  in  Michael
the  manifested  image  of  Jehovah),  and  thus  the  one
symbolical  angel-form  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  or
angel-prince  'has  branched  itself  into  the  seven
archangel  forms  of  the  coming  Christ,  Kurtz  finds
in  these  forms  "  pure  ideas  "  or  fancies.  But  I  call
them  the  veiled  angelic  modes  of  the  revelation  and
energy  of  Christ,  in  the  foundation,  limits,  and  life
of  humanity  and  history.  But  Michael  had  need  of
help  (Dan.  xi.  1).  Indeed  !  that  can  in  no  case  be
eaid  of  the  Logos  (Luke  xxii.  4">).

h.  Zach.  i.  12,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  was  subor


dinated  to  Jehovah.  The  Angel  of  Jehovah  as  the
intercessor  for  Israel  prays  to  Jehovah  of  hosts
(compare  the  high-priestly  prayer  John  xvii.).

i.  Mai.  iii.  1,  the  Messiah  wus  named  the  Angel
of  the  Covenant.  "But,"  Kurtz  argues,  "  if  Ma!a-
chi  had  intended  by  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant  the
Angel  of  Jehovah,  he  would  certainly  so  have  named
him."  Then  Moses  could  not  have  meant  the  Angel
of  the  Lord  when  he  speaks  of  the  Angel  of  his
face.  Certainly  it  is  true  that  in  the  Angel  of  the
Covenant  the  union  of  the  divine  form  of  the  Angel
of  Jehovah  and  of  the  human  Son  of  David,  as  the
divine-human  founder  of  the  New  Testament,  u?
prophetically  consummated.

k.  The  Angel  of  Ins  face  (Exod.  xxiii.  20\  of
whom  Jehovah  says,  My  name  is  in  him  (Exod.
xxxii.  84;  xxxiii.  15:  Is.  Ixiii.  9),  is  according  to
Kurtz  the  same  with  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  in  Gene
sis.  But  now  (Exod.  xxxii.  ;;4)  Jehovah  appears  so
to  distinguish  this  angel  from  himself  that  we  can
not  think  of  him  as  one  with  Jehovah.  "We  can
not  indeed  freely  use  the  ingenious  answer  to  this
difficulty  by  Hengstenberg,*  which  Kurtz  contests
(seep.  ir>4).  But  the  opposition  here  is  not  this,
that  cither  a  created  angel  goes  with  Israel,  or  the
Logos-angel,  but  this,  that  he  would  not  longer  him
self  be  present  in  the  camp  of  Israel  (Exod.  xxxiii.
5),  but  beyond  it  (ver.  7),  that  thus  a  stricter  dis
tinction  and  separation  should  be  made  between  the
impure  people  and  his  sanctuary.

/.  In  the  history  of  the  three  angels  who  visit
Abram  in  the  plains  (the  oaks)  of  Mamre  (Gen.
xviii.  19),  not  only  the  one  angel  who  remains  with
Abram  er.Urs  as  Jehovah,  but  the  two  others,
so  soon  as  they  were  rccognixed  by  Lot  in  their
super-earthly  being,  were  addressed  by  him  with  the
names  of  G'od,  Adonai.  etc.  Kurtz  overlooks  here
the  change  of  persons  which  appears  in  the  narra
tive  (eh.  xix.  17-1'.»).  The  peculiar  work  of  the  two
angelscontinr.csuntilvcr.il;.  They  lead  Lot  out
of  the  city  and  set  him  without  (before)  the  city.
The  angels  now  retire  to  the  background,  and  Je
hovah  comes  into  view  and  says,  "Escape  for  thy
life."  That  Jehovah  had  gone  up  from  Abram  into
heaven,  and  here  again  stands  before  Lot,  can  only
be  a  source  of  error  to  the  literal  conception,  which
attributes  to  Jehovah  a  gross  corporeal  form,  and  in
the  same  measure  the  local  changes  in  space.  We
do  not  wonder  now  that  Lot  clings  to  the  vanishing
an-rel-forms  with  the  cry,  Adonai.  Now  the  one
unique  appearance  presents  itself  clearly  before  him
(ver.  21).  Then  (ver.  24)  Jehovah  rained  upon
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  brimstone  and  fire  from  Jehq,-
vah  out  of  heaven.  Without  a  perception  of  the
change  of  different  voices  and  visions,  and  the  cor
responding  change  of  different  revelations,  any  one
will  have  great  difficulty  in  finding  his  way  through
this  statement  of  the  struggles  of  Lot.

We  now  bring  into  v:?w  the  gradual  de-clop-
ment  of  the  specific  revelation  of  God,  which  begins
with  the  call  of  Abram.  Hofmann  asks:  Ought  we
not  to  expect  that  the  manifestations  of  God,  SO
far  as  they  form  a  preparation  for  the  coming  of
Christ,  should  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  history
of  salvation,  and  not  first  from  Abram,  be  de
scribed  as  manifestations  of  the  Maleach  Jehovah?

*  [Ilengstenberg  holds  that  after  the  tin  with  the  golden
calf,  God  threatened  the  people  that  the  Malcaeh  Jehovah,
the  uncreated  :ii:gcl,  should  no  longer  go  with  them,  but  a
lower,  subordinate,  created  angel  ;  but  that  in  answer  to
the  prayer  of  iloses  lie  again  permits  the  uncreated  ungei
to  accompany  them. — A.  G.]


CHAP.   XII.    1-20.


380


The   whole  distinction  between  the   primitive  anc
patriarchal  religion  is  thus  overlooked.     The  faitl
of  salvation  first  takes  on  the   i'orm  of  a  delink
religion  of  the  future  and  becomes  a  more  delink
preparation    for  the    incarnation    of  Christ,    in   tli
i'aith  of  Abram.     Hofmann  himself,  as  he  in  other
places  admits  that  the  Maleach   Jehovah  is  the  one
only  form  of theophany  in  the  history  of  the  old  cove
nant,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  changes  in  the
designation  of  the  revelation :    e.  g.   "  Jehovah  ap
peared,"  etc.,  deprives  the  implied  objection  in  the
above  question  of  any  force.     Indeed,  the  appearance
of  the  Maleach  Jehovah  is  announced  vrith  the  patri
archal  revelation.     It  is  recorded  (Gen.  xii.  1),  And
Jehovah  said  to  Abram.      Starke   holds,   agreeing
with  the  older  theologians,  that  the  Angel   of   the
Lord  (see  Gal.  iii.  16)  is  the  Son  of  God  himself.
But  Stephen   (Acts  vii.    2)  says  the  God  of  glory
(8o|u)  appeared  to  our  father  Abram  when  he  was  in
Mesopotamia,  before  he  dwelt  in  Haran.     The  ques
tion  meets  us  here  therefore  :  In  what  relation  doe;
the   Maleach  Jehovah   stand  to  the  5o£a  or   lir
of  Jehovah  ?    In  Luke  ii.  9  there  is  a  very  significant
parallelism — &yye\os  Kvplov  eVe<7TT)   auroTs,  KOI  5<i|a
Kv-fiiuu  TrepieAaui^fy  aiWory,  i.  e.  both  ideas  are  bound
together  in  the  closest  manner  and  by  an  inward  tie.
In  Exod.  xxiv.  10,  ch.  xl.  34,  the  5o'£a  of  Jehovah
is  in  the  same  way  intimately  connected  with  Jeho
vah.     But  in  ch.  xxxiii.  the  5o'|a  of  Jehovah,  ver.
18,  is  fully  identified  with  the  face  of  Jehovah,  ver.
20.      According  to  ver.  14  (compared  with  ver.   2
and  Is.  Ixiii.  9),  the   face  of  Jehovah  is  identical
with  the  Angel  of  his  face.     The  Angel  of  Jehovah
is  thus  the  manifested  figure  of  Jehovah,  in  the  same
way  as  his  5,,-|a.     The  glory  fills  the  holy  of  holies,
and  Jehovah  appears  in  the  holy  of  holies  (Exod.
xl.  84  and  other  passages).     According  to  Isaiah  vi.
3  the  revelation  of  the  5o|«  of  Jehovah  shall  fill  the
whole  earth  (compare  Ezek.  i.  '28 ;  iii.  12,  etc.).     In
Titus  ii.  13  Christ  who  comes  to  judgment   is  de
scribed  as  the  S(i|«  (glorious)  appearing  of  the  great
God,  and  in  Ileb.  i.  3  he  is  styled  a.Travya.rr/j.0.  T?J?
SO'ITJS  &eov.     It  is  certain  that  the  word  5o£a  has  a
manifold  signification,  and  that  when  used  to  desig
nate  the  thcophany  it  points  rather  to  the  manifested
splendor   of  the   Spirit,  than  to  the   spirit  of  this
glorious  appearance.     (Hence  it  is  closely  connected
with  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire.)     But  so  much
is   clearly   proved,    that  the    Sofa   of  Jehovah  can
properly  be  personally  united  with  Jehovah  himself,
with  Christ,  but  not  with  any  creature-angel.     It  is
now  in  accordance  with  the  course  of  development,
as  it  is  with  the  character  of  the   patriarchal  theo-
phany,   that  it  should   begin  with    the   miraculous
report  or  voice,  the  word  (Gen.  xii.  1),  and  advance
'o  the  miraculous  vision  or  manifestation  (ver.  7).    For
:he  word  of  Jehovah  is  in  the  first  place  the  primary
ibrm  of  revelation  in  the  time  of  the  patriarchs,  and
n  regard  to  the  vision,  it  is  the  more  interior  (sub
jective)  event,  which  appears  already  in  a  lower  stage
>r  grade  of  the  development  in  the  line  of  visions.
Vfter  the  separation  of  Abram  from  Lot  (ch.  xiii.  14)
ie  receives  again  the  word  of  Jehovah,  which  bless-
3  him  for  his  generous  course,  and  in  a  way  corrc-
ponding  with  it.     So  also  after  his  expedition  (ch.
j  v.  1).     The  blessings  in  both  cases  correspond  to
•,  is   well-doing:  to  his  renunciation   of  the  better
ortions  of  the  land,  the  promise  of  the  whole  land
given,  and  to  the  pious  man  of  war,  God  gives
imself  as  a  shield  and  reward.     In  the  important
•t  of  the  justification  of  Abram  (ch.  xv.),  the  mi


raculous  appearance  enters  with  the  word  of  Jeho
vah.  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him  in  vision
If  now  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  first  appears  under  this
name  in  the  history  of  Hagar  (xvi.  it),  we  have  the
reason  clearly  given.  Hagar  had  learned  faith  ir
the  house  of  Abram,  and  its  power  to  behold  as  ar_
organ  of  vision  was  developed  in  accordance  \vitr
her  necessities.  But  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  as  the
Christ  who  was  to  come  through  Isaac,  had  a  pecu
liar  reason  for  assisting  Hagar,  since  she  for  the  sake
of  the  future  Christ  is  involved  in  this  sorrow.  Be
sides,  there  is  no  increase  of  the  divine  revelation  in
this  appearance  ;  Abram  saw  Jehovah  himself  in  the
Angel  of  Jehovah,  and  Sarah  also  in  the  manifesta
tion  of  Jehovah  sees  above  all  the  Angel.

Between  Abram's    connection  with   Ilagar  and
the   next  manifestation  of  Jehovah  there  "are  full
thirteen  years.     But  then  his  faith  is  strengthened
again,  and  Jehovah  appears  to   him  (xvii.  1).     The
most  prominent  and  important  theophany  in  the  life
of  Abram  is  the  appearance  of  the  three  men(ch.
xviii.).     But  this   appearance  wears   its   prevailing
angelic  form,  because  it  is  a  collective  appearance
for  Abram  and  Lot,  and  at  the  same  time  refers  to
the  judgment  upon  Sodom.     Hence  the  two  angels
are  related  to  their  central  point  as  sun-images  to
the  sun  itself,  and  this  central  point  for  Abram  ia
Jehovah  himself  in  his  manifestation,  but  not  a  com
missioned  Angel  of  the  Lord.     Thus  also  this  Angel
visits  Sarah  (ch.  xxi.  1 ;  compare  xviii.  in).     But  the
Angel  appears  in  the  history  of  Haga:-   a   second
time  (xxi.  17),  and  this  time  as   the  Angel  of  God
(Maleach  Elohim),  not  as  the  Malcach  Jehovah,  for
the  question  is  not  now  about  a  return  to  Abram's
house,  but  about  the  independent  settlement  with
Ishmael  in  the  wilderness.     The  person  who  tempts
Abram  (ch.  xxii.  1)  is  Elohim — God  as  ho  mani
fests  himself  to  the  nations  and  their  general  ideas
or  notions,  and   the    revelation  is  effected    purely
through  the  word.     Now  also,  in  the  most  critical
moment  for  Abram,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  conies
forward,  calling   down  to  him  from   heaven   since
;hcre  was  need  of  a  prompt  message  of  relief.     In
the  rest  of  the  narrative  this  Angel  identifies   him-
elf  throughout  with  Jehovah  (vers.  12,   10).      To
[saac   also  Jehovah  appears   (ch.  xxvi.  2),  and  the
second  time  in  the  night  (ver.  24).     He  appears   to
Jacob  in  the   night  in  a  dream  (ch.  xxviii.  12,  18).
Thus  also  he  appears  to  him  as  the  Angel  of  God  in
i  dream  (ch.  xxxi.   11),  but  throughout  identified
ivith  Jehovah  (ver.  13).     Jehovah   commands   him
o  return   home   through  the   word   (ch.  xxxi.   3).
jaban  receives  the  word  of  God  in  a  dream  (xxxi.
24).     The  greatest  event   of  revelation  in  the  life
of  Jacob  is    the    grand    theophany,   in    the    night,
hrough  the  vision,  but  the  man  who  wrestles  with
n'm  calls  himself  God  and  man  (men)  at  the  same
ime.     According  to  the  theory  of  a  created  angel,
Tacob  is  not  a  wrestler  with  God  (Israel),  but  merely
i  wrestler  with  the  Angel.     It  is  a  more  purely  ex-
ernal  circumstance  which  God  uses  to  warn  Jacob
hrough  the  word  to  remove  from  Shechem  (xxxv.
).     In  the  second  peculiar  manifestation  of  God  to
facob  after  his  return  from  Mesopotamia  (xxxv.  !)),
ve  have  a  clear  and  distinct  reflection  of  the  first
xxxii.  24).     In  the  night-visions  of  Joseph,  which
.Ircady  appear  in  the  life  of  Isaac,  and  occur  more
requently  with  Jacob,  the  form  of  revelation  during
he  patriarchal  period  comes  less  distinctly  into  view.
3ut  then  it  enters  again,  and  with  new  energy,  in  the
ife  of  Moses.     The  Angel  of  Jehovah  (Ex^'in.  2)  is


300


GENESIS,  Oil   TUE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


connected  with  the  earlier  revolution,  and  here  also
is  identified  with  Jehovah  and  Elohim  (ver.  4).  But
he  assumes  a  more  definite  form  and  title,  as  the
Angel  of  his  face,  since  with  the  Mosaic  system  the
rejection  of  any  deifying  of  the  creature  comes  into
greater  prominence,  and  since  it  is  impossible  that
the  face  of  God  should  be  esteemed  a  creature.

The  reasons  which  are  urged  for  the  old  ecclesi
astical  view  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  are  recapitu
lated  by  Kurtz  in  the  following  order:  1.  The  Maleach
Jehovah  identifies  himself  with  Jehovah.  '2.  Those
to  whom  he  appears  recogni/e,  name,  and  worship
him  as  the  true  God.  y.  lie  receives  sacrifice  _  and
worship  without  any  protest.  4.  The  biblical  writers
jonstantlv  speak  of  him  as  Jehovah.  \Ve  add  the
following"  reasons:  1.  The  theory  of  our  opponent.;
opens  a  wide  door  in  the  Old  Testament  for  the  dei
fying  oi'i  he  creature,  which  the  Old  Te.-tament  every
where  condemns;  and  the  Komish  worship  of  angels
finds  in  it  a  complete  justification.  '2.  The  Socinians
also  gain  an  iiupor;ant  argument  for  their  rejection
of  the  Trinity,  if,  in.-tead  of  the  self-revelation  of
Goii,  and  of  the  self-distinction  included  in  it  in  the
Old  Tcj-tamcnt,  there  is  merely  a  pure  revelation
through  angels.  As  the  fully  developed  doctrine  of
the  Trinity  cannot  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament,  so
no  one  can  remove  from  the  Old  TeMament  the  be-
ginnings  of  that  doctrine,  the  self-distinction  of  God,
•<vitlio.il  n .moving  the  very  .-ub.-iructure  on  which  the
Nev.  Testament  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  rests,  and
without  obscuring  the  Old  Testament  theology  in  its
very  centre  and  glory.  :'..  It,  would  break  the  band
of  the  organic  unity  between  the  Old  and  New  Tes
taments,  ii'i;,  could  be.  proved  that  the  central  point
in  the  Old  Testament  revelation  is  a  creature-angel,
and  that  the  New  Testament  revelation  passes  at  one
bound  from  this  form  to  that  of  the  God-man.  The
theory  of  the  creature-angel  in  its  continuation
through  a  colossal  adoration  of  angels,  points  down
wards  to  the  Kabhinie  and  Mohammedan  doctrine
of  angels  which  has  established  itself  in  opposition  to
the  Mew  Testament  Christology,  and  is  bound  to
gether  with  that  exaggerated  doctrine  of  angels  in
more  recent  times,  which  ever  corresponds  with  a
veiled  and  obscure  Christology.  On  the  other  hand,
it,  removes  iVoni  the  New  Testament  Christology  its
Old  Tesiament  foiiiidaiion  and  preparation,  which
consists  in  this,  that  the  interchange  between  God
and  men  is  in  full  operation,  and  must  therefore  pre
figure  itself  in  the  images  of  the  future  God-man.
1.  Viie  doctrine  of  angels  itself  loses  its  very  heart,
its  justification  and  interpretation,  if  we  take  away
from  it  the  symbolic  angel-form  which  rules  it,  as  its
ro\al  ceiitie,  i.  e.  that  angelic  form  which,  as  a  real
manifestation  of  God,  as  a  typical  manifestation  of
Christ,  as  a  manifestation  of  angels,  has  the  nature
and  force  of  a  symbol.  But  with  the  obliteration  of
the  symbolic  element,  all  the  remaining  symbolic  and
angelic  images,  the  cherubim  and  seraphim,  will  dis
appear,  and  with  the  key  of  biblical  psychology  in
its  representation  of  the  development  of  the  life  of
the  soul,  to  an  organ  of  revelation,  we  shall  lose  the
key  to  the  exposition  of  the  Old  Testament  itself.
5.  Aligns  tin  was  consistent  when,  with  his  interpreta
tion  of  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  as  a  creature-angel,  he
decidedly  rejects  the  interpretation  which  regards  the
sons  of  God  (ch.  vi.)  as  angel-beings ;  for  the  assump
tion  of  angels  who,  as  such,  venture  to  identify  them
selves  with  Jehovah,  notwithstanding  they  are  in
peril,  and  abandon  themselves  to  lustful  pleasures
with  the  daughters  of  men  until  it  issues  in  apostasy


and  a  magical  transformation  of  their  nature,  com
bines  two  groundless  and  intolerable  phantoms.  We
hold,  therefore,  that  Old  Testament  theology,  in  its
very  heart  and  centre,  is  in  serious  danger  from
these  two  great  prejudices,  as  the  New  Testament
from  the  two  great  prejudices  of  a  mere  mechanical
structure  of  the  Gospels,  and  of  the  unapostolic  and
yet  more  than  apostolic  brothers  of  the  Lord.  (See
the  defence  of  the  old  ecclesiastical  view  in  the
Commentary  by  KKII,,*  also  with  a  reference  to
KAIIMS,  dc  Angela  Domini  diatribe,  1858.  The  as
sertion  of  the  opposite  view  held  by  Delitzsch  in  his
Commentary,  meets  here;  its  refutation).

0.  The  aspect  of  all  thcophanies  as  visions.  It  is
a  general  supposition,  that  divine  revelation  is  partly
through  visions,  or  through  inward  miraculo.us  sights
and  sounds.  We  must,  however,  bring  out  distinctly
the  fundamental  position,  that  every  theophany  is  at
the  same  time  vision,  and  every  vision  a  theophany;
but  that  in  the  one  ca-e  the  objective  theophany,
and  in  the  other  the  subjective  vision,  is  the  prevail
ing  feature.  The  subjective  vision  appears  in  the
most  definite  form  in  dream-visions,  of  which  Adam's
sleep,  and  Abram's  night-h«rror  (chs.  ii.  and  xv.),
arc  the  tir.-t  striking  portents.  It  develops  itself
with  great  power  in  the  lives  of  Isaac,  Jacob,  and
Joseph,  and  is  of  .-.till  greater  importance  in  the  lives
of  Samuel  and  Solomon,  as  also  in  the  night-visions
of  Zechariah.  We  find  them  in  the  New  Testament
in  the  life  of  Joseph  of  Na/.arcth  and  in  the  history
of  Paul.  It  needs  no  proof  to  show  that  the  mani
festations  of  God  or  angels  in  dreams,  are  not  out
ward  manifestations  to  the  natural  senses.  In  the
elements  of  the  subjective  dream-vision,  veils  itself,
however,  the  existing  divine  manifestation.  But
what  the  dream  introduces  in  the  night-life,  the  see
ing  in  images — that  the  ecstasy  does  in  the  day  or
ordinary  waking  life  (see  LANCK  :  "  Apostolic  Age").
The  ecstasy,  as  the  removing  of  the  mind  into  the
condition  of  unconsciousness,  or  of  a  different  con
sciousness,  is  the  potential  basis  of  the  vision,  the
vision  is  the  activity  or  effect  of  the  ecstasy.  But
since  the  visions  have  historical  permanence  and  re
sults,  it  is  evident  that  they  arc  the  intuitions  of
actual  objective  manifestations  of  God.  Merc  hallu
cinations  of  the  mind  lead  into  the  house  of  error,
spiritual  visions  build  the  historical  house  of  God.
But  in  this  aspect  we  may  distinguish  peculiar  dream-
visions,  night-visions  of  a  higher  form  and  power,
momentary  day-visions,  apocalyptic  groups  or  circles
of  visions,  linked  together  in  prophetic  contempla
tion,  and  that  habitual  clear-sightedness  as  to  visions
which  is  the  condition  of  inspiration.  But  that  theo-
phanies,  which  are  ever  at  the  same  time  Angelopha-
nies  and  Christophanies,  and  indeed  as  theophanid
of  the  voice  of  God,  or  of  the  voice  from  heaven,  of
the  simple  appearance  of  angels,  of  their  more  en
larged  and  complete  manifestations  of  the  developed
heavenly  scene— that  these  are  always  conditioned
through"  a  disposition  or  fitness  for  visions,  is  clear
from  numerous  passages  in  the  Old  and  New  Testa
ments.  (2  Kings  vi.' 17;  Dan.  x.  7;  John  xii.  28,
29;  xx.  10-12;  Acts  ix.  8;  xii.  7-12;  xxii.  9-14.

In  theology  the  psychological  aspect  of  revelation
has  been  hitherto  very  much  neglected.  All  possibl*

*  [The  statement  and  defence,  by  Keil,  of  the  ordinary
view  held  by  the  Church,  i*  admirable,  and  completely  sat
isfactory.  As  it  is  now  within  the  reach  of  tlie  EnglMl
reader,  it  is  not  necessary  to  quote  it  here.  Those  who


CHAP    XII.  1-20.


391


forma  of  revelation  have  been  placed  side  by  side
without  any  connection.  Starke  says,  the  Son  of  God
has  appeared  to  believers  under  six  forms  or  ways  :
1.  through  a  voice  and  words ;  2.  in  an  assumed
form  either  of  an  angel,  at  least  under  that  name,  or
in  the  form  of  a  man,  prefiguring  his  future  incar
nation  ;  3.  in  a  vision ;  4.  in  dreams ;  5.  in  a  pillar
of  cloud  and  fire ;  6.  especially  to  Paul,  in  a  light
from  heaven.

EXEGETICAL  AXI)  CRITICAL.

1.  Ilic  call  of  Alram,  and  Ids  migration  to  Ca
naan  until  he  reaches  Sichem  (cli.  xii.  1-7).  The
call  of  Abram  demands  from  him  a  threefold  re
nunciation,  increasing  in  intensity  from  one  to  the
other  :  1 .  Out  of  thy  country.— The  fatherland.
The  land  of  Mesopotamia  as  it  embraced  both  Ur  of
the  Chaldces  and  Ilaran. — 2.  And  from  thy  kind
red. — The  Chuldaic  descendants  of  Shcm. — 3.  From
thy  father's  house. — Terah  and  his  family  (ch.
xi.  81,  32).  With  the  threefold  demand  it  connects
a  threefold  promise  :  1.  Of  the  special  providence  of
God,  leading  him,  indeed,  to  a  new  land  (see  Ileb.
xi.) ;  2.  of  the  natural  blessing  of  a  numerous  seed
(eh.  xiii.  1(5;  xv.  5;  xvii.  2,  t>,  1C;  xviii.  18;  xxi.
13  ;  xxii.  17);  3.  of  a  spiritual  blessing  for  himself,
and  in  its  wide  extension  to  all  the  families  of  the
earth,  making  his  name  glorious,  and  constituting
about  his  person  in  its  spiritual  import  and  rclalions
the  great  contrast  between  the  subjects  of  the  bless
ing  and  the  curse. — And  will  make  thy  name
great. — That  is,  as  the  divinely  blessed  ancestor  and
father  of  a  renowned  people  (Knobel).  The  name  of
the  father  of  believers  should  shed  its  light  and
wield  its  influence  through  the  world's  history. —
Thou  shalt  be  a  blessing. — Lit :  Be  thou  a  bless
ing.  It  is  a  superficial  view  of  this  word  which  in
terprets  it,  thy  name  shall  become  a  formula  of
blessing  (Kimchi,  Knobel :  so  that  those  who  desire
the  greatest  happiness  shall  wish  themselves  as  happy
as  Abram).  It  is  through  the  union  of  men  with
him  (iu  that  they  pronounce  and  wish  him  blessed),
that  the  mercy  and  blessing  of  God  passes  over  to
them,  and  through  their  enmity  to  him,  which  only
reveals  itself  in  calumnies  and  blasphemies*  they
draw  up  an  themselves  the  curse  of  God.  The  pre
lude  to  the  blessing  and  the  curse  flowing  through
and  from  the  Church.  The  curse:  (Gen.  iii.  14  and
17:  iv.  11;  v.  29;  ix.  25;  xxvii.  29).— In  thae
shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed.f
— The  rendering  it  as  reflexive  is  arbitrary,  since  we
have  the  special  form  of  the  hithpael  to  express  this,
and  the  interpretation  all  families  shall  desire  that
their  prosperity  may  be  as  thine,  is  shallow  and  in
correct  (Jarchi,  Clcricus  and  others).  The  reflexive
rendering  is  not  necessary,  indeed,  in  ch.  xlviii.  20. —

*  t'ij^  the  reproaches — blasphemous  curses  of  men — in
distinction  from  ~,1S<  the  judicial  curse  of  God.  Keil.—
A.  G.]

t  [We  must  not  miss  here  the  fundamental  meaning  of
the  ~  •(';;,  while  we  include  its  instrumental  sense,  through .
Abram  is  not  only  the  channel  but  the  source  of  blessing  fur
nil.  Kcil.— A.  G.]  [The  families  refers  to  the  division  oi  the
one  human  family  into  a  number  of  families  or  races.  (Pee
x.  0  ;  xx.  31).  The  blessing  of  Abram  will  bind  into  unity  the
now  dissevered  parts  of  the  race,  and  transform  that  curse
which  now  rests  upon  all  the  earth  on  account  of  sin,  into  a
Messing  for  the  whole  human  race.  Keil.—  A.  G.]  [The
Old  Testament  is  as  broad  and  catholic  in  its  spirit  as  the
New  Testament.  MURPHY,  pp.  2G2,  2G3.— A.  G.]


V.  4.  The  obedience  of  A  brain.  He  left  what  he
was  required  to  leave,  and  took  with  him  what  it  wa3
in  his  power  to  take,  Lot,  although  Lot  was  a  burden
to  him  rather  than  a  source  of  strength  (see  article
Lot,  in  the  "Bible  Dictionaries").  The  emigration
was  the  more  heroic,  since  he  was  75  years  old,  and
his  father  was  still  living*  (ch.  11).  He  probably
went  by  Damascus  (see  xv.  2). — V.  5.  The  souls
that  they  had  gotten. — Strictly,  made,  descriptive
of  the  gain  in  slaves,  male  and  female.t — Sichem.
— The  first  resting-place  of  Abram,  who  came  to  the
place  Sichem,  \  and,  indeed,  to  the  oaks  of  Moreh
(Deut.  xi.  30),  the  oak-grove  of  Morch. — Moreh. —
Probably  the  name  of  the  owner.  Knobel :  the  oaks
of  instruction,  which  appear  to  be  the  same
with  the  oaks  of  divination  (Judges  ix.  37).  H
is  not  probable  that  Abram  would  have  fixed
his  abode  precisely  (as  Knobel  thinks)  in  a  grove,
which  according  to  heathen  notions  had  a  sacred
character  as  the  residence  of  divining  priests.
The  religious  significance  of  the  place  may  have
arisen  from  the  fact  that  Jacob  buried  the  images
brought  with  him  in  his  family,  under  the  oak  of
Shechem  (xxxv.  4).  The  idols,  indeed,  must  not  be
thrown  into  sacred  but  profane  places  (Isa.  ii.  20).
But,  perhaps,  Jacob  had  regard  to  the  feelings  of  his
family,  anil  prepared  for  the  images,  which,  indeed,
were  not  images  belonging  to  any  system  of  idolatry,
an  honorable  burial.  At  the  time  of  Joshua  the  place
had  a  sacred  character,  and  Joshua,  therefore,  erected
here  the  monumental  stone,  commemorating  the  sol
emn  renewal  of  the  law.  Thus  they  became  the  oaks
of  the  pillar  at  which  the  Shcchemites  made  Abimelech
king  (Judges  ix.  6). — Then  also  the  Canaanite
•was  in  the  land. — This  explains  why  in  his  migra
tions  he  must  pass  through  the  land  to  Sichem,  to
find  a  place  suitable  for  his  residence.^  It  does  not
follow  from  this  statement,  either  that  the  narrative
originated  at  a  time  -when  the  Canaanite  was  no
longer  in  the  land,  or  that  the  term  here  designates
only  a  single  tribe  of  this  name,  which  in  the  time  of
Moses  dwelt  upon  the  sea-coast,  and  in  the  valley
of  the  Jordan  (as  Knobel  thinks),  comp.  ch.  xiii.  7  ;
xxxiv.  30.  It  is  a  tradition  of  the  Jews,  that  Noah
had  assigned  Africa  as  the  home  of  the  children
of  Ham,  but  that  the  Canaanites  had  remained  in
Canaan  against  his  command,  and  that  therefore
Abram,  the  true  heir,  was  called  thither.  Ver.  7.  The
first  appearance  of  Jehovah  in  vision.  Abram's  life
of  faith  had  developed  itself  tints  far  since  he  had
entered  Canaan,  and  now  the  promise  is  given  to
him  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  as  the  possession  of  the
promised  seed.  The  second  progressive  promise  ||
comp.  ch.  xiii.  15,  17;  xv.  18;  xvii.  8;  xxvi.  3;
xxviii.  4,  13;  xxxv.  12.  Abram's  grateful  acknowl-


*  [But  according  to  Acts  vii.  4,  his  father  was  dead.
Terah  died  when  he  was  205  years  old,  and  as  Abram  left
Ilaran  when  ho  was  75  years  old,  he  must  have  been  born
when  Terah  was  130  years  old,  and  thus  have  been  the
younger  son  of  Terah. — A.  G.]

t  [Not  only  gotten  as  secular  property  but  had  made
obedient  to  the  law  of  the  true  God.  "VVordsworth. — A.  G-.]

I  rSee  JACOBUS  :  "  Notes  on  Genesis,"  vol.  i.  pp.  227,  228.

-A.  a]

§  [The  aivthor  of  Genesis  evinces  in  this  clause  a  knowl
edge  of  the  C'auaanitcs,  and  presupposes  their  character  to
bo  known  in  such  a  way  as  a  late  writer  could  not  do.
JACOBUS,  p.  228.— A.  G.]

II  [Abram  is  the  first  person  to  whom  the  Lord  is  said  to
have  appeared,  and  this  is  the  lirst  place  at  which  the  Lord
is    said    to    have    appeared   to    Abram,   and  at  this  place
Chritt,  the  Lord  of  glory,  first  revealed  himself  as  the  Mes
siah  (John  iv.  20;  to  the  Samaritan  woman  (the  type  of  the
Gentile  Church).  WOBDSWORTH,  p.  6G— A.  G.]


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


edgment :  the  erection  of  an  altar,  and  the  founding
of  an  outward  service  of  Jehovah,  which  as  to  its
first  feature  consisted  in  the  calling  upon  his  name
(cultus),  and  as  to  its  second,  in  the  profession  and
ackno\\  ledgnfent  of  his  mine.*  Thus  also  Jacob
acted  (eh.  xxxiii.  :><);  .lush.  xxiv.  1,  liil).  Bethel,
Jerusalem,  Hebron,  Ueersheha  are  places  of  the
same  character  (/'.  e.,  places  \vhie!i  were  consecrated
by  the  patriarchs,  and  not  as  Knobel  thinks,  whose
consecration  took  place  in  later  times,  and  then  was
dated  hack  to  the  period  of  the  patriarchs).  Abram's
altars  stood  in  the  oaks  of  Moreh,  and  Mamre,  in
Bethel,  and  upon  Moriah.  Abram,  and  the  patri-
archs  generally,  served  also  the  important  purpose
of  preaching  through  their  lives  repentance  to  the
(.'anaanites,  ;>,<  Noah  was  sucli  a  preacher  for  his
time.  Forded  leaves  no  race  to  peri.-li  unwarned.
Sodom  had  even  a  constant  warning  in  the  life  of  Lot.

'2.  A  'n'lin:';;  miff  rat  ion  through  Canaan  from
>'.'V/V;«  1,1  Jii/lnl  mn/  at ',11  further  southwards  \\crg.
8  and  '.().  The  want  of  pasture  for  his  herds,  the
presentiments  of  piety,  the  yielding  of  the  patriarch
!o  the  divine  guidance,  led  him  further  southwards
to  a  new  roidence  east  of  Bethel.  He  pitched  his
ten)  between  I'.ethel  and  Ai.  "In  the  time  of  the
Judges  there  was  a  sanctuary  of  Jehovah  at  Bethel
(1.  Sam.  x.  :;),  and  at  one  time  also  it  was  the  alto  !e
of  the  ;;rk  of  the  covenant  (Judges  xx.  18,  2(1).  In
later  thii.s  it  was  the  chief  seat  of  the  illegal  worship
(cultus)  established  by  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xii.  li'.t  ;
Amos  vii.  in),  and  hence  its  name  Bethel  in  the
place  of  the  old  name  Lux  (eh.  xxviii.  1<J  ;  .Josh,  xviii.
1:1;  Ju  iges  i.  -J:;).  In  den. -sis  it  bears  this  name
already  in  the  lime  of  the  patriarchs,  who  here  re-
ci  ivc  I  manifestations  of  God  and  offered  sacrifices  to
hi:u  (ch.  xiii.  !  ;  xxviii.  -21 ;  xxxv.  7)."  Thus  Kno-
bel  explains  th  •  name  as  if  there  was  an  internal
necessity  for  d  'living  the  iaet  of  the  consecration  of
Bethel  throng!)  th"  dream  and  vision  of  Jacob.  But
that  liethel  should  be  geographically  known  as  Luz
by  the  Canaaidtes,  long  after  the  patriarchs  had
made  it  theocratic-ally  Bethel,  involves  no  real  diffi
culty. f—Abram  journeyed  (broke  up  his  en
campment  and  went). — The  whole  statement
brings  to  view  and  illustrates  the  nomadic  life,
as  also  the  allusion  to  his  dwelling  in  tents. + —
Going  on  still  toward  the  South. — The  southern
part  of  Canaan  toward  the  wilderness,  a  rich  pasture-
land.  A  particular  definite  residence  in  Hebron  is
spoken  of  in  eh.  xiii.  18.

:;.  A', rain's  journey  to  J"'<j]ipt  (vers.  10-20). —
There  was  a  famine  in  the  land. — The  frequent
famines  are  a  peculiar  characteristic  of  early  times
and  of  uncivilized  lands.  Egypt  as  a  rich  and  fruitful
land  was  even  then  a  refuge  from  famine,  as  it  was
in  the  history  of  Jacob  (JosKPH.,  Antiq.  xv.  9,  2). —
Say,  I  pray  thee  (or  now,  still),  thou  art  my
sister. — The  women  at  that  time  went  unveiled,  and

*  [Ilo  thus  n'po  tool:  po.-wssion  of  the  land  in  the  name
of  his  covenant  God.  See  HUSH,  364  ;  JACOBUS,  229.— A.  G.]

t  ["Jacob  gave  h;s  name  to  the  place  twice  (Gen.  xxviii.
T9;  xxxv.  15).  As  the  name  was  not  first  given  in  the  second
instance,  so  it  may  not  have  been  in  the  first.  Accordingly
170  meet  with  it  as  nn  existing  name  in  Abram's  time,
without  being  constrained  to  account  for  it  by  supposing  the
^rcs'jnt  narrative  to  have  been  composed  "in  its  present
lonn  after  the  time  of  Jacob's  visit.  On  the  other  hand,  we
may  regard  it  as  an  interesting  trace  of  early  piety  having
been  present  in  the  land  even  before  the  arrival  of  Abram."
Murphy.— A.  <>.]

t  ["He  ha.l  left  his  housr;  at  TTaran.  and  now  dwelt  in
tenig  as  in  a  strange  country"  (Heb.  xi.  9).  Wordsworth.


this  receives  confirmation  from  the  Egyptian  monu
ments.  The  custom  was  changed  after  the  conquest
of  the  land  by  the  Persians.  Sarah  was  ten  years
younger  than  Abram  (eh.  xvii.  17),  and,  therefore,
about  65  years  of  age.  In  the  patriarchal  manner
of  life,  her  age  would  not  make  so  deep  a  mark  ;  and
there  is  no  real  ground  for  questioning  the  continu
ance  of  her  youthful  bloom  and  beauty.  It  is  more
remarkable  that  Abram  should  adopt  the  same
course  again  (ch.  2u),  and  that  Isaac  shoal-,!  once
have  imitated  his  example  (ch.  xxvi.  7).  Modern
criticism  in  this  case,  as  often  in  other  eases,  choused
rather  to  admit,  that  there  is  a  remarkable  confusion
in  the  narrative,  than  that  there  should  have  been  a
remarkable  repetition  of  the  same  act.  "It  is  held
with  good  reason,"  says  Knobel,  "that  one  and  the
same  event  lies  at  the  foundation  of  these  three  nar
ratives."  But  the  result  of  the  first  act  of  Abram
did  not  netvssaiily  n strain  him  from  the  second,
and  Isaac,  especially  in  moments  of  anxi-ty,  may
have_  easily  uehl-d  himself  to  a  slavish  imitation
of  his  hi.her's  conduct.  The  name  Abimeleeh  lays
no  real  grou:,d  for  the  identity  of  the  second  and
third  narrative,  since  this  was  a  standing  title  of  the
kings  of  Phili.-tia,  as  Pharaoh*  was  of  the  kings  of
Egypt.  According  to  (ch.  xx.  lo)  Abram  had  al
ready  in  his  migration  from  Ilaran  arranged  with
Sarah  the  expres.-ion  referred  to  for  his  protection
while  among  strangers,  and  this  explains  the  repeti
tion  of  the  act,  the  prominent  point  in  the  moral
problem  (see  below).  "  The  Hebrew  consciousness,"
says  ^Knobel,  "pleased  itself  \\iih  the  thought  tka
on  different  occasions  the  'mothers'  wen.'  objects  of
admiration  for  their  beauty,  while  they  v.'er  •  kept
from  insult,  ami  their  husbands  protect,:!  in  their
rights  by  God."  Since  the  "  Israelitish  consciousness"
has  not  concealed  by  silence  that  Leah,  the  i>, other
of  the  larger  part  of  the  Jews,  was  not  beautiful,  we
may  trust  its  account  of  the  beuuly  of  Sarah,  Ee-
bekah  and  Rachel,  and  the  more  so  since  the  beauty
of  that  type  appeal's  still  in  Jewish  women.  It  must
be  observed  also  that  by  the  side  of  the  Ilarm'ue  wo
men  in  Egypt  and  Canaan,  Semitic  women,  even
when  advanced  in  years,  \\ould  be  admired  as  beau
ties.  Abram  desired  that  Sarah  should  say  that  she
was  his  sister,  lest  he  should  be  killed.  If  she  was
regarded  as  his  wife,  an  Egyptian  could  only  obtain.
her,  when  he  had  murdered  her  husband  and  pos
sessor ;  but  if  she  was  his  sister,  then  there  was  a
hope  that  she  might  be  won  from  her  brother  by
kindly  means.  The  declaration  was  not  false  (eh.
xx.  12),  but  it  was  not  the  whole  truth.  Knobel. —
Ver.  15.  And  commended  her  before  Pharaoh.
— "  Modern  travellers  speak  in  a  similar  way  of  ori
ental  kings,  who  incorporate  into  their  harem  the
beautiful  women  of  their  land  in  a  perfectly  arbitrary
way."  Knobel.  "  The  recognition  of  Sarah's  beauty
is  more  easily  explained,  if  we  take  into  view  that
the  Egyptian  women,  although  not  of  so  dark  a  com
plexion  as  the  Nubians  or  Ethiopians,  were  yet  of  a
darker  shade  than  the  Asiatics.  The  women  of  high
rank  were  usually  represented  upon  the  monuments
in  lighter  shades  for  the  purpose  of  flattery."
Hengstcnberg.  "According  to  older  records  the


*  [;'i"iS"12  from  the  Coptic  Ouro  with  the  masculine
article  pi  or'p,  Pnuro,  king.  The  dynasty  and  residence  of
the  king  cannot  be  certainly  determined.  But  it  is  worthy
of  notice  that  there  is  no  trace  here  of  the  later  Egyptian
contempt  for  the  nomadic  life  and  occupation  ;  a.  fact  which
speaks  decidedly  for  the  antiquity  and  historical  character
of  the  narrative."  Kurtz. — A.  G.]


CHAR  XII.  1-20.


J93


Egyptian  court  consisted  of  the  sons  of  the  mos
illustrious  priests. — Into  Pharaoh's  house,  i.  c.
harem."  Sehreder. — Ver.  l(i.  Tlie  possessions  of  tin
nomadic  chief.  "According  to  Burkhardt  am
Jxobinsoii  all  the  Arabic  Bedouin  hordes  do  not  owi
horses.  Strabo  already  relates  this  as  true  of  the
NabaUcans  (p.  16)."  Knobcl.  The  horse  docs  no
appear  with  the  patriarchs,  and  as  a  costly,  prout
animal,  both  as  a  war-horse  and  in  ordinary  use,  was
generally  in  the  theocratic  view  regarded  as  a  symbo
of  worldly  splendor. — Vcr.  17.  The  Lord  plagued
Pharaoh  with  great  plagues  [blowsj. — They
were  such  plagues  of  sickness  as  to  guard  Sara"
from  injury  (ch.  xx.  4,  G). — Vcr.  18.  This  Pharaoh  i;
not  hardened  like  the  later  king  of  that  name.  He
concludes  that  he  is  punished  for  the  sake  of  Sarai
Whence  he  draws  this  conclusion  we  are  not  told.*
— V.  '20.  Now  follows  the  dismissal  of  Abram,  but
still  a  dismissal  full  of  honorable  accompaniments.
"Pharaoh's  conduct  moreover  shows  how  under  al]
that  idolatry  which  then  held  the  Egyptians  in  it
embrace,  there  was  still  existing  a  certain  faith  in
the  supreme  God,  and  a  kind  of  reverential  fear
before  him."


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  KKIL  :  "  The  history  of  the  life  of  Abram  from
his  calling  to  his  death  unfolds  itself  in  four  stages,
whose  beginnings  are  marked  by  divine  revelations
of  special  significance.    The  first  stage  (chs.  xii.-xiv.)
begins  with   his  calling  and  emigration  to  Canaan ;
the  second  (chs.  xv.  xvi.)  with  the  promise  of  an  heir
and  the  formation  of  the  covenant ;  the  third  (chs.
xvii.-xxi.)  with  the  establishment  of  the  covenant
through  the  change  of  name  and  the  introduction
"the  covenant-sign  of  circumcision ;  the  fourth  (chs.
xii.-xxv.  11)  with  the  trial  or  temptation  of  Abram
r  the  preservation  and  perfecting  of  his  faith.    All
ic  divine  revelations  to  him  proceed  from  Jehovah,
nd  the  name  Jehovah  prevails  through  the  whole
fe  of  _the  father  of  the  faithful,  the  name  Elohim
ipearing  only  where  Jehovah,  according  to  its  si"-
iicance,  v,-ould  have  been  entirely  out  of  place,  or
ss  appropriate."     Viewing  his  lii'e  with  respect  to
s  faith,  the  first  Section  (chs.  xii.-xiv.)  marks  pecu-
arly  the  catling  of  Abraham  ;  the  second  states  his
ustifiealion,  confirmed  through  his  reception  into
e  covenant  of  Jehovah — obscured,  but  not  wcak-
oed,  through  the  erroneous  workings  of  his  faith
_  his   connection  with  Hagar  (chs.  xv.  xvi.) ;   the
ird  states  his  consecration  to  be  the  father  of  the
ithful,  and  therewith  the  legal  separation  of  his
ause,  and  the  establishment  of  his  mild  and  yet
rictly  marked  relations  to  the  heathen  (ch.  xvii.-
~i) ;  the  fourth  treats  of  the  scaling  or  confirmation
his  faith.     (From  these  we  must  distinguish  as  a
th  Section  the  time  of  the  solemn  festive  rest  of  his
iith,  or  the  evening  of  life  (chs.  xxiii.-xxv.  10).
>r  the  nature  of  the  patriarchal  history,  compare
•XITSCH,  above.

_  2.  The  translation  of  Stier  (xii.  1),  the  Lord  had
'•d,  is  based  upon  an  incorrect  interpretation  of  the

*  [V.  19.  So  I  might  have  taken,  Heb.  And  I  took.
e  construction  of  the  Hebrew  does  not  require  the  sup-
ition  that  she  actually  became  his  wife.  Our  version
ugh  not  literal,  gives  no  doubt  the  correct  sen«e  If
present  narrative  admitted  of  any  doubt,  the  douU
cmoycd  by  a  reference  to  the  parallel  case,  ch.  xx  6


passage,  in  accordance  with  a  misunderstanding  of
the  words  of  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  3).  As  the  first  call
of  Abram  in  Ur  is  by  no  means  excluded  here  by
the  second  call  in  llaran,  so  in  Acts,  the  second  call
ing  in  Haran  is  not  excluded  by  the  first  in  Ur.  The
first  calling  was  plainly  to  Abram  and  his  father's
house.  In  the  call  before  us  he  was  told  to  go  out
from  kin  father's  house,  while  his  father  with  the
rest  should  remain  in  Haran.  Stark  e  also  fails  to
distinguish  these  two  callings  correctly.*

3.  The  particularism  entering  with  the  calling
of  Abram  must  be  viewed  as  the  divine  method  of
securing  universal  results.  "In  the  particular  we
see  the  general,  in  the  individual  the  whole,  in  the
small  the  great ;  Abram's  calling  is  the  seed  out  of
which  springs  the  great  tree  under  whose  shade
many  nations  rest ;  all  indeed  shall  one  day  rest."
Lisco. — There  is  no  mere  external  preference  for
Israel  in  the  Old  Testament.  God  has,  in  his  word,
threatenings  and  judgments,  dealt  as  strictly  with
Israel  as  with  any  people ;  with  peculiar  strictness,
indeed,  according  to  the  peculiar  gifts  and  graces
which  Israel  had  received.  But  the  proper  restric
tion  is  the  truest  universality.  "  In  the  example  of
the  Jewish  people  God  declares,  that  which  was  con
cealed,  the  method  and  law  of  his  wisdom,  and
authorizes  us  to  apply  it  for  direction  in  our  own
lives,  and  to  other  subjects,  people,  and  events."  A
quotation  in  Lisco. —  The  elements  of  Abram's  char
acter:  heroic  faith,  humility,  and  self-sacrifice,  en
ergy,  benevolence,  and  gentleness.  His  call  in  the
East  :  Christians,  Jews,  and  Mohammedans  trace
their  origin  back  to  him.  The  purer  elements  of
Islamism  come  from  him.

4.  The  calling  of  Abram  :  1.  In  its  requisitions ;
2.  in  its  promises  (see  the  Exegesis) ;  3.  in  its  mo
tives,  a.  The  grace  of  God.  The  election  of  Abram.
The  choice  of  God  reflects  itself  in  the  dispositions
of  men,  the  gifts  of  believers.  As  every  people  has
its  peculiar  disposition,  so  the  race  of  Abram,  and
especially  the  father  of  it,  had  the  religious  disposi
tion  in  the  highest  measure,  b.  The  great  necessity
of  the  world.  It  appeared  about  to  sink  into  hea
thenism;  the  faith  must  be  saved  in  Abram.  c.  The
destination  of  Abram.  Faith  should  proceed  from
one  believer  to  all,  just  as  salvation  should  proceed
from  one  Saviour  to  all.  The  whole  Messianic  proph
ecy  was  now  embraced  in  Abram.  f

1  ["  There  is  no  discrepancy  between  Moses  and  St.  Ste
phen.  St.  Stephen's  design  was,  when  he  pleaded  before  the
Jewish  Sanhedrim,  to  show  that  God's  revelations  were  not
united  to  Jerusalem  and  Judea,  but  that  he  had  first  spoken
:o  the  father  of  Abram  in  an  idolatrous  land,  Ur  of  the
Ohaldees."

"  But  Moses  dwells  specially  on  Abram's  call  from  Ha-
•an,  because  Abram's  obedience  to  thai  call  was  the  proof  of

his  faith."  Wordsworth.

There  is  no  improbability  in  the  supposition  that  the  call
vas  repeated.  And  this  supposition  would  not  only  recon
cile  the  words  of  Stephen  and  of  Moses,  but  may  explain  tho
ifth  verse:  "And  they  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of
Danaan,  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan  they  came."  Abram
lad  left  his  home  in  obedience  to  the  original  call  of  God,
>ut  had  not  reached  the  land  in  which  he  was  to  dwell.
STow,  upon  the  second  call,  he  not  only  sets  forth,  but  con-
inues  in  his  migrations  until  he  reaches  Canaan,  to  which
10  was  directed. — A.  G. ]

t  ["With  the  closing;  word  of  the  promse,  'in  thee  shall

all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed,'  the  final  goal  of  all
listory  is  proclaimed,  for  there  is  nothing  beyond  the  bless-
ng  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  Thus  the  whole  fulness
f  the  divine  purpose  in  reference  to  the  salvation,  is  stated
n  tho  call  of  Abram,  and  connected  with  him  in  the  closest

manner.  For  the  TJ2  does  not  designate  any  relation  what-
ver  of  Abram  to  the'  general  blessing,  but  designates  him


394


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


5.  The  calling  of  Abram  to  the  pilgrimage  of
faith  (Hob.  xi.  8).  His  migration:  1.  into  Canaan;
2.  through  Canaan  ;  3.  to  Egypt ;  4.  his  return.
His  calling  and  migrating  an  example  of  the  calling
and  pilgrimage  of 'his  race.— A  type  of  the  calling
and  pilgrimage  of  all  believers.

G.  The  character  of  the  life  of  faith  :  a.  The  ex
perience  of  faith.  Personal  revelation  of  God,  the
personal  providence  of  Cud.  b.  The  work  or  conces
sion  of  faith.  P.  rsonal  trust  and  personal  obedience.
7.  The  word  of  Cod  to  Abralum,  sealed  through
the  manife>t-ition  of  (iod  in  Canaan,  as  the  word  of
the  gospel  is  sealed  to  the  believer  through  the  saera-
ment.  KKIL:  "The  promise  was  raised  from  Jts
temporal  form  to  its  real  nature  through  Christ,
through  him  the  whole  earth  becomes  a  Canaan."

8.°Abram  and  the  companions  of  his  faith.  Sarai,
Lot.  The  blessings  and  perils  of  the  companionship
of  the  i'aiihful.  "  The  father  of  believers  and  his  suc
cessors  appear  constantly  in  th«  Bible  as  one  whole:
hence  it  is  said  so  often,  '  To  thee  will  I  give  this  land
(cli.  xv.  17,  etc.)'"  Gerlach.

!'.  The  solitude  of  the  nomadic  life  of  the  patri
archs,  a  source  c.f  the  life  of  prayer  and  illumination —
:i  pr,  reijiiiMte  for  the  higher  revelation.  The  solitude
of  Mos,.-,  the  prophets  ("by  the  rivers  of  Babylon,"
"in  the  desert,")  of  John  the  Baptist,  of  Chri-t  the
Lord,  of  the  Chiistians  in  deserts,  of  the  mystics  in
the  cloisters  of  the  middle  ages,  of  Luther  (.Jacob
Biihine,  !•'  i\,  i  tc.).  In  tranquil  retirement.  "  Abram
was  a  rich,  ind.  pendent  herdsman,  just  as  the  Be
douin  duel's  are  still  in  the  deserts  and  the  broad
pasture  -grounds  of  Syria,  Arabia,  and  Palestine."
Gerlach.  Theiv  were  already  a  variety  of  pursuits;
huntsmen,  husbandmen,  and  shepherds.  Their  sepa
ration  and  variances  (eh.  xliii.  \>'l  ;  xlvi.  :!•!)._  For
the  tents,  deserts,  pasturages  (uncultivated  regions),
see  Bible  Dictionaries.

in.  The  consecration  of  Canaan,  through  the
in;mil'<  -  i  .  -  of  Go  1,  and  the  altars  of  Abram  (as
well  as  ol  tin-  other  patriarchs).  The  heavenly  signs
of  the  Cnureli  of  Christ;  the  setting  apart  of  the  old
earth,  to  a  new.  The  chosen  land  a  type  of  the
Christian  earth  and  of  Paradise.  "  Abram  takes  his
church  with  him."  Calwcr  Handbuch.

11.  Abram's  altars,  or  his  calling  upon  the  name
of  Jehovah,  is  at   the  same   time  a  testimony  to  his
name.     The  true  worship  is  a  source  of  the  true  mis
sionary — the  cult  us  itself  a  mission.

12.  Abram's  maxim  or  rule,  to  report  that  Sarah
was  his  sister.*      It  was  determined    upon   in  the
early  period  of  his  migrations  (eh.  xx.  IS),  but  was
here  first  brought  into  use,  and   from  its  successful
issue  was  repeated  once  by  himself,  and  once  imi
tated  by  Isaac.     It  was  with   respect  to  his  faith  a
fearful  kuzurd.     Faith  is  at  the  beginning  uncertain
as  to  the  moral  questions  and  complications  of  life.
Every  broad  view  of  the  general  is  at  first  an  uncer
tain  "view   as  to  the    particular.     Thus  it  is   in  the
broad  synthetic  view  in  science;  it  is  at  first  want
ing  in  reference  to  the  critical  and  analytical  knowl
edge  as  to  the  particular.      Still  the  scientific  Syn-


as  the  organis  rn^ans  or  instrument  through  which  blessing
should  come."  Kaumgarten.— A.  ().]

["The  Apostle  Paul  expounds  the  promise  (Gal.  m.  ib),
show-in"  :  1.  that  by  its  express  terms,  it  was  made  to  ex
tend  to  the  Gentiles;  and,  2.  that  by  the  term  l  seed' is
meant  Christ  Jesus.  The  promise  looks  to  the  world-wide
benefits  of  redemption  which  should  come  through  Christ,
the  seed  of  Abrain."  JACOBCS,  p.  225.— A.  G.]

*  [Sec  llENGsTENBEEo's  Buitrdye,  iii.  p.  o^Gff.— A.  G.J


thesis  is  the  source  of  all  true  science.     And  thua
faith,  the  great  synthesis  of  heaven,  is  at  first  uncer
tain  as  to  the  moral  problems  of  the  earthly  life.    The
history  of  all  the  great  beginnings  of  faith  furnishes  the
proof.     But  still,  the  great  life  of  faith  is  the  source
of  all  pure  and  high  morality  in  the  world.    Abram's
venture  was  not  from  laxity  as  to  the  sanctity  of
marriage,  or   as  to   his  duty  to  protect  his   wife  ;  it
was  from  a  presumptuous  confidence  in  the  wonder
ful  assistance  of  God.     It  was  excused  through   the
great   necessity    of  the  time,  his  defenceless  state
among  strangers,  the  cu.-tomary  lawlessness  of  those
in  power,  and  as  to  the  relation  of  the  sexes.     There
fore  Jehovah  preserved  him  from  disgrace,  although
he  did  not  spare  him  personal  anxiety,  and  the  moral
rebuke  from  a  heat  hen.     It  is  only  in  Christ,  that  with
the  broad  view  of  faith,  the  knowledge  of  its  Amoral
human  measures  and  limitations  is  from  the  beginning
perfect.     In  the  yet  imperfect,  but  growing  faith,  the
word  is  true,  "  The  children  of  this  world  are  wiser
in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light."     As
a  mere  matter  of  prudence,  Abram  appeared  to  act
prudently.     He  told  no  untruth,  although  he  did  not
tell  the  whole  truth.     His  word  was,  at  all   events,
of  doubtful  import,  and  therefore,  through  his  anx
ious  forecast,  wa<  morally  ha/.ardoiis.     But  the  ne
cessity  of  the  ti.ne,  the  difficulty  of  his  position,  and
his  confidence  that  Cod  would  make   his  relations
clear  at  the  proper  time,  serve  to  excuse  it.     It  was
not   intended  to   effect    a  final   deception:    his   Cod
would  unloose  the  knot.     In  his  failh  Abram  was  a
blameless  type  of  believers,  but   not  in  his   applica
tion  of  his  faith  to  the  moral  problems  of  life.    Still,
even  in  this  regard,  he  unfolds  more  and   more  his
heroic  greatness.     We  must  distinguish  clearly  be
tween    a  momentary,    fanatical,    exaggerated    confi
dence  in  (iod,  and  the  tempting  of  God  with  a  selfish
purpose  (see  the  history  of  Thamar,  Hahab).     B.ium-
gartcn  is  not  correct  when  he  says:   "Abram  aban
dons  his  wife,  but  not  so  Jehovah."     The  modern
stand-point  is  too  prominent  even  in  Delitzsi-h  :   "He
thus  thinks  that  he  will  give  the   marriage-honor  of
his  wife  a  sacrifice  for  his  self-preservat  on  ;    at  all
events,  he  is   prepared   to   do   this."     Abrain  knew
from  the  first,  that  the  promise  of  blessing  from  Je
hovah  was  connected  with  his  person.     Hence  the
instinct  of  self-preservation  is  lost  in  the  higher  im
pulse  for  the  preservation  of  the  blessing.     And  if,
in  relation  to  this  impulse,  he  placed  his  marriage  in
a  subordinate  position,  this  occurred  certainly  from
his  confidence  in  the  wonderful  protection  of  Jeho
vah,  and  the  heroic  conduct  of  Sarai.     His  syllogism
was  doubtless  morally  incorrect,  but  it  rested  upon
an  exaggeration  of  his  faith,  and  not  upon  moral
cowardice.*     Upon  any  opposing  interpretation,  the
same  conduct  of  the  patriarchs  could  not  possibly
have  been  repeated  a  second  and  third  time.     Jeho
vah  himself  could  not  have  recognized  any  tempting
of  God,  nor  any  moral  baseness,  in  his  conduct;  but

*  I  We  are  not  to  be  harsh  or  censorious  in  our  judgments
upon  the  acts  of  these  eminent  saints.  Hut  ncrher  are  we
called  upon  to  defend  their  acts  ;  and  if  the  view  oi  I^Jfl
does  not  satisfy  every  one,  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  that
the  Scripture  records  these  acts  without  expressing  distinct
any  moral  judgment  upon  them.  It  impliedly  condemns.
The  Scripturc/howcvcr,  contains  clearly  the  great  princi
ples  of  moral  truth  and  duty,  and  then  oftentimes  leaves  tlie
reader  to  draw  the  inference  as  to  the  moral  quality  oIH»
acts  which  it  records.  And  its  faithfulness  in  not  conceftUBJ
what  may  be  of  questionable  morality.  "  in  tiic  lives  of  UW
greatest  saints  shows  the  honesty  and  accuracy  of  the  histo
rian."  Wordsworth  says  well :  "  the  weaknesses  ol  tee
patriarchs  strengthen  our  faith  in  the  Tentateuch.  —A.  u.


CHAP.   XII.   1-20.


indeed  concerns  himself  in  the  leading  of  Abram's
fuith  (as  in  the  life  of  Stilling),  while  he  prepares  for
the  presumptuous  and  erroneous  syllogism  of  his  faith
its  deserved  rebuke.  In  a  similar  way  Calvin  recog
nizes  the  good  end  of  Abram,  but  at  the  same  time
remarks  that  he  failed  in  the  choice  of  his  means.

1 3.  That  the  Bible  speaks  in  this  frank  and  sim
ple  way  of  the  female  beauty,  as  it  does  generally  of
beauty  in  life,  and  the  world,  shows  how  free  it  is
from  the  gloomy,  morose,  monkish  asceticism,  while,
however,  it  does  not  conceal  the  perils  of  beauty.

14.  The  Pharaoh  of  this  early  period,  and  more
simple  life,  had  already  his  courtiers,  flatterers,  and
harem.     How  soon  the  misuse  of  m'incely  power  has
been  developed  with  the  power  itself!     In  this  case,
too,  as  it  often  occurs,  the  prince  is  better  than  his
court.      Pharaoh    treats  the  patriarch  with  honor,
humanity,  and  a  magnanimity  which  must  have  put
him  to  shame.

15.  As  we  find  recorded  in  Genesis  the  begin
ning  of  polygamy,  of  despotism,  of  the  harem,  and
even  of  unnatural  sexual  crimes,  so  also  we  have  here
the  first  corporeal  punishment  of  these  sexual  sins
in  the  house  of  Pharaoh.     We  are  not  told,  indeed,
what  was  the  particular  kind  of  punishment,  but  it  is
represented  as  sent  for  these  sins  of  Pharaoh.

10.  Dciitzsch  holds,  that  the  silence  of  Abram
under  the  reproof  of  Pharaoh,  is  a  confession  of  his
guilt.  "Ashamed  and  penitent,  he  condemns  him
self."  ft  would  be  very  difficult,  on  this  interpreta
tion,  to  explain  the  twofold  repetition  of  tiiis  net  in
the  life  of  Abram  and  of  Isaac.  We  may  not  trans
fer  our  judgment  of  the  case  to  the  stage  of  the
moral  development  of  Abram.

17  The  history  of  Sarai,  in  whose  person  God
guard.-)  die  future  mother  of  Israel  from  profanation,
is  at  the  same  time  a  sign  of  the  fact,  that  God  pre
serves  the  sacred  marriage  in  the  midst  of  the  cor
ruption  of  the  world.

18.  Among  the  rich   possessions  which  fell  to
Abram  iu  Egypt,  more  through  the  protection  and
blessing  of  God,  than  his  own  prudence,  was  most
probably  the  Egyptian  maid,  Hagar,  who  afterwards
exerted  so  important  an  influence  upon  his  course  of
life.     Eliezer,  of  Damascus,  and  Hagar,  from  Egypt,
are  undesigned  testimonies  to  the  genuine  historical
character  of  the  account  of  his  migration  from  Meso
potamia  to  Canaan,  and  from  Canaan  to  Egypt.

19.  Abram's  return  from  Egypt  at  this  time,  was
already  in  some  sense  a  return  home,  and  a  type  of
the  Exodus  of  his  descendants  from  Egypt.*

20.  The   significance  of  the  wonderful  land  of
Egypt  for  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God.     Its
connection  with  Canaan,  and  its  opposition.     How
often  it  moves  down  to  Egypt  (Egypt  lay  lower  than
Canaan),  and  from  thence  moves  back  again !    There
the  Ilamitic  spirit  blooms,  here  the  Semitic  (Zieglcr) ;
there  are  enigmas,  here  mysteries ;  there  miracles  of
death,  here  of  life ;  there  the  Pharaohs,  here  spiritual
princes.

HOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs. — Jeho
vah.  I.  The  profound  significance  of  the  name;

*  ["The  same  necessity  conducts  both  him  and  his  de-
«endant8  to  Egypt.  They  both  encounter  similar  dangers
n  that  land— the  same  mighty  arm  delivers  both,  and  leads
hem  back  enriched  with  the  treasures  of  that  wealthy
ountry."  Kurtz.— A.  O.]


2.  its   eternal   value   and   importance. — Calling   of
Abram. — Three    first    proofs    of   his    faith  :    1.   Us
must  go  out  from  his  country  and  his  father's  house,
into  a  strange  land ;    2.  he  finds  in  Palestine  "  no
continuing    city,"  and   soon   suffers   from  famine  ;

3.  he  must  go  further  to  Egypt,  in  danger  of  his  life,
marriage,  and  hope.* — Abram  at  his  altars  a  preach
er  of  repentance  for  the  Canaanites. — His  pilgrimage.
— The  companions  of  his  faith. — The  providence  of
God  over  the  lives  of  believers. — The  infallible  faith
of  Abram,  and  his  errors  in  the  applications  of  his
faith,  or  of  his  life :    1.  That  infallibility  docs  not
prevent  these  errors  ;   2.  but  it  prevents  their  dan
gerous  consequences,  and  at  last  removes  them.—
The  consecration  of  Canaan. — The  blessings  of  faith.

STARKK:  Wurtemberg  Bible:  Vcr.  1.  The  call
from  the  condition  of  sin,  or  true  conversion,  springs
not  from  one's  own  strength,  etc.,  but  only  from  the
grace  of  God. — CRAMER  :  Whoever  will  be  a  follower
of  God,  must  separate  himself  from  the  world  and  its
wickedness,  must  leave  all  consolation  and  help  in
the  creature,  and  place  his  confidence  only  and  alone
in  the  Lord. — If  we  follow  the  call  of  God,  we  are
always  in  the  right  way. — The  promises  of  God  arc
yea  and  amen. — Ver.  .'i.  Whoever  wishes  and  does
good  to  the  saints,  will  receive  good  again,  but  who
ever  wishes  and  does  them  injury,  must  meet  with
calamity. — Vers.  4,  5.  The  strength  of  faith  can  do
away  with  time,  and  present  future  things  as  if  pres
ent.} — Upon  ver.  13.  Since  Abram  was  continually
dependent  upon  the  grace  of  God,  he  must  feel  his
weakness,  which  betrays  him  into  manifold  acts  of
insincerity  and  sins.  For,  1.  he  acted  from  fear,
when  he  should  still  have  looked  to  God  ;  2.  he  gave
out  that  Sarai  was  his  sister,  when  she  was  his  wife  ;
3.  he  had  great  guilt  in  the  sin  of  Pharaoh  ;  4.  lie
thought  to  secure  his  own  safety,  while  he  placed
Sarai  and  her  chastity  in  the  greatest  peril. — Even
in  the  greatest  saints,  there  are  many  and  vari
ous  defects  and  transgressions. — God  leads  his  own
out  of  temptation,  even  when  they  have  fallen. —
OSIAXDER:  God  avenges  the  injustice  and  disgrace,
which  are  inflicted  upon  his  elect.  — Lisco :  Abram
obeyed  because  he  trusted  God ;  the  two  together
constitute  his  faith.:): — Wherever  Abram  comes,  in
his  nomadic  life  and  wanderings,  he  works  for  the
honor  of  God. — Ver.  13.  The  failures  of  this  chosen
man  of  God  appear,  upon  a  closer  survey,  as  sins  of
weakness,  which,  on  the  one  hand,  do  not  destroy
his  gracious  standing  with  God,  but  on  the  other
render  necessary  in  him  a  purifying,  providential
training.  The  providence  of  God  watches  over  his
elect. — GERLACH  :  In  the  simple,  vivid  narrative  of
the  life  of  Abram,  every  step  is  full  of  importance. — •
Ver.  3  is  the  expression  of  the  more  perfect  covenant-
relationship  and  communion.  His  friends  are  the
friends  of  God,  his  enemies  the  enemies  of  God.
God  will  himself  reward  every  kindness  shown  to

*  [There  does  not  seem  to  be  sufficient  ground  for  the
conjecture  of  Murphy,  that  Abram  was  now  pursuing  his
own  course,  and  venturing  beyond  the  limits  of  the  land  of
promise,  without  waiting  patiently  for  the  divine  counsel ;
and  that  ho  went  with  a  vague  suspicion  that  lie  was  doing
wrong.  There  is  reason  to  believe,  that  all  tho  movements
of  the  patriarch  were  not  only  under  divine  control,  but  wore
a  part  of  God's  plan  for  the  testing  and  developing  of  his
faith.  It  was  a  sore  trial  to  leave  tho  land  promised  to  him,
BO  soon  after  he  had  entered  it.  See  also  paragraph  20,
above. — A.  G.]

t  [Ver.  7.  "  Wherever  ho  had  a  tent,  Gorl  had  an  altar,
and  an  altar  sanctified  by  prayer."  Henry.— A.  G.]

t  [Faith  receives  tho  promise,  and  loads  to  obc-.licrce.—
A.  G.]


390


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


him,  and  avenge  every  injury  (in  word  and  deed),
Ps.  cv.  i:j-15. — Ver.  13.  In  the  deception  which
Abram  uses,  as  in  the  later  instances  of  Jacob  and
Hoses,  we  see  a  weakness  and  impurity  of  faith
which  did  not  yet  rely  perfectly  upon  the  help  of
God  in  his  own  way  and  time,  but  selfishly  and
eageily  grasped  after  it.  It  is  not  without  re
proof.

Ualiccr  Hdii'lbucJt :  The  command  of  God  follows
the  promise  (ch.  xii.  8).  This  advances  upwards
through  six  steps,  until,  at  the  most  advanced,  the
Messiah  appears,  who  should  spring  from  the  de
scendants  of  Abrain.  I  will  make  thee  a  trreat  na
tion,  natural  ;md  spiritual — ar.d  still  his  wife  was
unfruitful — will  bless  thee — and  still  he  did  not  pos
sess  a  footbreadth  of  land — will  make  thy  name
great — ;i  ;d  yet  he  must  be  a  stranger  in  a  strange
land. — ///  t/nc  shall  be  blessed,*  etc.  This  promise
was  repeated  to  him  seven  times:  the  third  promise
of  the  Meri-iah. — The  word  of  God  never  excuses  the
imperfections  of  believers. — BTNSKX:  Abram  is  the
eternal  model  of  all  exiles,  and  the  true  father  of  the
pilgrim-fathers  of  the  seventeenth  century  (of  the
pilgrims  of  faith  of  all  times,  Heb.  xi.). — And  make
thy  name  great.  The  Arabians,  after  Isa.  xli.  8,
call  Abram  the  friend  of  God. — SCHUODKU  :  For  a
long  lime,  as  is  evident  from  example-;  in  the  family
of  Abram,  God  had  permitted  the  truth  and  its  mar
red  image  to  stand  side  by  side.  There  must  come
at  the  list  a  moment  of  perfect  separation,  a  moment
of  d>  dared  distinction  between  truth  and  falsehood.
This  moment  nlso  actually  came. — LI:TIIKR  :  It  is
cheering,  therefore,  and  full  of  consolation,  when  we
thus  consider  how  the  church  began  and  has  in
creased. — With  him  it  is  so  arranged  that  he  cannot
remove  his  foot  from  his  native  ground,  without
planting  it  upon  an  entirely  distinct  region — the  re-

*  [The  promise  receives  it?  first  fulfilment  in  Abram,
then  1:1  tLe  Jews,  more  perfi ctly  whc.i  the  Son  (.f  Uod  be
came  ineamatc,  l/ic  sefil  of  Abram,  then  further  in  the  church
and  the  preaching  of  the  Rospe',  but  finally  and  fully  when
Christ  sh:ill  complete  his  church,  and  come  to  take  her  to
himself;— A.  U.J


gion  of  faith. — KRITMMACIIER:  The  East  still  re
sounds  with  the  name  of  Abram. — Ver.  3.  Abraic
becomes  to  many  a  savor  of  death  unto  death
(2  Cor.  ii.  16),  although  he  himself  should  not  curse.
That  is  the  prerogative  of  God,  he  should  only  be  a
blessing. — Blessing  and  making  blessed  is  the  desti
nation  of  all  the  elect. — BAUMGARTEX:  Ver.  10.
Famine  in  the  land  of  promise  is  a  severe  test  for
Abr.im.  For  the  land  is  promised  to  him  as  a  good
which  should  compensate  all  his  self-denial. — Ver.
13.  In  fact,  there  are  found  in  the  oldest  histories
frequently,  here  and  there,  the  seeds  of  the  later
more  developed  boasted  cunning  and  prudence. —
PASSAVAXT  :  (Abram  and  his  children).  Abram  was
great  before  God.  How  so?  Through  faith.  Faith
does  it.  Go  out  of  t/i;/  Itnid.  The  father-land  is
dear  to  us.  But  now  it  avails,  etc. — lie  went  out
with  his  God. — SCHWKXKE  :  "  Hours  with  the  Bible.''
Does  not  the  call  come  to  thee  also :  (Jo  out  ? — And
go  in  faith?  A  lii'e  in  faith  is  a  continual  prov
ing — a  permanent  test. — HcrsKii:  (The  Leadings
of  Abram.)  Abram  in  his  pilgrimage:  1.  The  goal
for  which  he  strove;  2.  the  promises  which  secured
its  attainment;  3.  the  dangers  under  which  he  stood;
4.  the  divine  service  which  he  rendered. — TACBE:
The  calling  of  Abram,  a  type  of  our  calling  to  the
kingdom  of  God  :  1.  As  to  its  demands  ;  2.  as  to  its
gracious  promises.* — W.  HOKMANN  :  It  is  through
Abram  that  we  receive  all  the  sacred  knowledge
until  we  reach  back  to  paradise  ;  all  that  afterwards
was  preserved  for  us  by  Moses  came  through  his
mind  and  heart. — It  was  the  believing  look  to  the
past,  which  fitted  Abram  to  look  on  into  the  future.
DELITZSCH  :  The  facts  (Abram  in  Egypt)  are  related
to  us,  not  so  much  for  the  dishonor  of  Abram,  :>,s  for
the  honor  of  Jehovah. f

*  [Abram  also  is  an  illustrious  example  to  all  who  lifar
the  call  of  God.  Ills  o!>--.lienee  i;  prompt  and  submissive.
He  neither  delays  nor  questions,  but  went  out  not  knowing
whither  he  went,  Heb.  xi.  8.  -A.  (i.J

t  [Hongstcnuerg  says:  The  object  of  the  writer  is  not
Abram's  gloriiication,  but  the  glorification  of  Jehovah. —
A.  U.J


SECOND    SECTION.

Abram  as  a  witness  for  God  in   Canaan,  and  his  self-denying  separation  from  Let.     The  New
Promise  of  God.     His  altar  in  Haiti  (oaks')  Mamrc.


CHAPTER  XIII.  1-18.

1  And  Abram  went  up  out  of  Egypt,  lie  and  his  wife,  and  all   that  ho  had,  and  Lot

2  with  him,  into  the  south  [ofCanaan].     And  Abram  was  very  rich,  in  cattle   [possessions],  in

3  silver,  and  in   gold.     And  he  went  on  his  journeys  [nomadic  departures,  stations]   from  the
south,  even  to  Bethel,  unto  the  place  where  his  tent  had  been  at  the  beginning,  between

4  Bethel  and  Hai ;   Unto  the  place  of  the  altar  which  he  had  made  there  at  the  first :  and

5  there  Abram  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.     And  Lot  also,  which  went  with  Abram,

6  had  flocks  [small  cattle],  and  herds  [large  cattle],  and  tents.     And  the  land  was  not  able  to
bear  [support]  them,  that  they  might  dwell  together :   for  their  substance  was  great,  so  that

7  they  could  not  dwell  together.    And  there  was  a  strife  between  the  herdmen  of  Abram's
cattle,  and  the  herdmen  of  Lot's  cattle :  and  the  Canaanite  and  the  Perizzhe  dwelled


CHAP.   XIII.    1-18.


397


10


8  then  [as  owners,  settlers,  5':;i]  in  the  land.     And  Abram  said  unto  Lot,  Let  there  be  no
strife,  I  pray  thee,  between  me  and  Ihee,  and  between  my  herdmen  and  thy  herdmen  •

9  for  we  be  brethren  [men,  brethren].     Is  not  the  whole  land  before  thee  [open  to  thy  choice]  ?
Separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,  from  me.     If  thou  wilt  take  the  left  hand  [land],  then  I
will  go  to  the  right;   or  if  thou  depart  to  the  right  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  left.

And  Lot,  lilted  up  his  eyes,  and  beheld  all  the  plain  [literally,  circle]  of  Jordan  [the  down-
flowing,  descending- Rhcin],  that  it  was  well  watered  everywhere,  before  the  Lord  destroyed
Sodom  [burning]  and  Gomorrah  [submersion],  even  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord   [paradise,  in
Eden  with  its  stream],  like   th-j   land  of  Egypl,  as   [until]    thou  comest  to  Zoar   [smallness,  the
11   little  one].     Then  Lot,  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan;   and  Lot  journeyed  east,  [c-p*.
from  the  east,  Septuagint  and  Vulgate  incorrect]:  and  they  separated  themselves  the  one  from  the
2  other.     Abram  dwelled  in  the  land  [province]  of  Canaan,  and  Lot  dwelled  in  the  cities
13  of  the  plain  [the  circle],  and  pitched  his  tent  toward   Sodom  [until  it  stood  at  Sodom].     But
the  men  [people]  of  Sodom  were  wicked,  and  sinners  before  the  Lord  exceedingly.'

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Abram,  after  that  Lot  was  separated   from  him    Lift  up

now  thme  eyes  and  look  [out]  from  the  place  where  thou  art  northward  [to  Lebanon]   and

15  southward  [the  desert],  and  eastward  [toPerea],  and  westwards  [the  sea].     For  all  the 'land

1G  which  thou  [thus]  secst,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever  [to  eternity]     And

I  will  make  [have  determined]  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the  earth;  so  that  if  a  man  can  nmn-

17  ber  the  uust  of  the  earth,  then  shall  thy  seed  also  be  numbered.     Arise   walk  throno-h

18  the  land  in  the  length  of  it  and  in  the  breadth  of  it;   for  I  will  give  it  unto  thee     Then
Abram  removed  his  tent,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mamre  [fatness, "strength:
name  of  the  owner],  which  is  in  Hebron  [connection,  confederacy],  and  built  there  an  altar  unto
the  Lord.


EXEGETICAL  AKD  CRITICAL.

1.  TJic  Return  of  Abram  from  Egypt,  and  the
introduction  of  the  Separation  from  Lot  (vers.  1-9).
Into  the  south. — Abram  returned  with  Lot,  whose
migration  with  him  to  Egypt  is  thus  presupposed,  to
Canaan,  not  as  in  Luther's  version,  to  the  south,  but
northwards  to  the  southern  part  of  Palestine,  to  the
region  of  Hebron  and  Bethlehem,  from  which  he  had
gone  to  Egypt.     The  233  is  a  term  which  had  obvi
ously  attained  geographically  a  fixed  usage  among
the  Israelites,  and  points  out  the  southern  region  of
Palestine.     But  the   pasture-ground  in   this  °region
seems  to  have  been  insufficient  for  Lot  and  himself
i  at  the  same  time.     Besides  his  treasures  in  gold  and
I  silver  he  had  grown  rich  in  the  possession  of  herds,
i  especially  through  the  large  presents  of  Pharaoh.*
t  Hence  he  removes  further,  by  slow  and  easy  stages
I  to  the  earlier  pasture-grounds  between  Bethel  and
Hai.     Here,  where  he  had  earlier  built  an  altar  he
i  igaiu  sets  up  the  worship  of  Jehovah  with  his  fam-
I  ly.     This  worship  is  itself  also  a  preaching  of  Jeho-
|  rah  for  the  heathen.    But  even  here  the  pasture-land

Iras  not  broad  enough,   since  Lot  also  was  rich  in
icrds,  and  the  C'anaanite  and  Perizzite  then  held  the
I  ;reater  part  of  that  region  in  their  possession.    These
|  'erizzites  are  referred  to,  because  they  were  those
I  'ith  whom  Abram  and  Lot  came  mo.>t  frequently
i  ito  contact,  and  were  their  rivals.    "  The  Pcrizzites
i  ho  do  not  appear  in  the  genealogical  lists  of  the
i  anaanitish  tribes,  but  only  in  the  geographical  cnum-
i  -ation  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  (ch.  xv.  20  •
&  x.  iii.  8 ;  Dent.  vii.  1 ;  Josh.  xi.  3),  and  whom  we
id  m  different  parts  of  Canaan,  are  inhabitants  of
e  lowlands,  who  devote  themselves  to  agriculture
td  grazing  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  11;    Zech.  ii.  4 ;  Deut.

*  [Ver.  5.    To  Lot  also  there  were  flocks.    The  blessin-
on  Abram  overran  and  flowed  over  upon  Lot.    JACOBUS"

,  iO/. J\.    LJ.J


iii._5  ;  1  Sam.  vi.  18).  The  Perizzites,  as  the  author
intimates,  were  in  possession  of  the  best  pastures ;
those  only  remained  to  Lot  and  Abram,  which  they
had  despised."  Hengstenberg.  Schroder  conjectures
that  the  Canaanitcs  here  designate  the  inhabitants
of  the  cities  in  contrast  with  the  Perizzites  who  dwelt
in  the  open  country.  But  the  name  designates,  be
yond  question,  not  only  a  mode  of  life,  but  a  pecu
liar  people,  and  they  are  brought  into  notice  here,
because  they  were  thickly  crowded  in  the  region  of
Bethel,  with  Abram.  GERLACII  :  "  Perizzites,  prob
ably  dwellers  in  perazoth,  open  courts,  or  villages,
inhabitants  of  the  country,  in  distinction  from  those
who  dwelt  in  cities."  But  then  the  greater  portion
of  the  Canaanites  would  have  been  Perizzites,  from
whom  still  Gerlaeh  distinguishes  the  Canaanites.
They  appear  to  have  been  nomads.  In  Gen.  xxxiv.
30,  they  appear  in  Sichem ;  in  Josh.  xi.  3,  between
the  Jcbusites  and  Hittites,  upon  the  mountains.
Against  the  interpretation,  inhabitants  of  the  open
country,  see  KEIL,  p.  137,  who  distinguishes  the  form
"p£n  and  h?"Sri  (Deut.  iii.  5),  inhabitants  of  the
low  or  fiatlands.* — Let  there  be  no  strife  be
tween  me  and  thee. — The  strife  between  the
herdsmen,  would  soon  issue  in  a  strife  between  their
masters,  if  these  should  quietly  or  willingly  permit
the  disorder.  It  is  possible  that  Lot's  restless,  un
easy  temper,  had  already  betrayed  itself  in  the  open
strife  of  his  servants.  The  position  of  the  words  of
Abram,  between  me  and  thee,  standing  before  the  al
lusion  to  the  herdsmen,  would  seem  to  intimate
something  of  this  kind. — We  are  brethren  (brother
men).  The  law  controversies,  which,  although
sometimes  allowable  between  strangers,  are  yet  in  all
ways  to  be  avoided,  ought  not  to  have  place  betweca

*  [Keil  adds,  as  of  still  greater  force,  the  ur-e  of  the
name,  now  with  the  Canaanites,  and  now  with  the  other
iribes  of  Canaan,  who  obviously  derive  their  names  froir
heir  ancestors,  or  the  head  of  their  tribe.— A.  G.J


398


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


brethren.  Here  kindred,  piety,  and  affection,  should
make  the  utmost  concessions  easy.  In  his  humility
Abram  places  himself  on  an  equality  with  Lot,  calls
him  brother,  although  he  was  his  nephew,  and  owed
to  him  the  duty  of  a  son.  Indeed,  he  so  far  takes
the  subordinate  place,  that  he  yields  to  him  the
choice  of  the  best  portions  of  the  land. — If  thou
•wilt  take  the  left  hand. — The  word  of  Abram  has
passed  into  a  proverbial  watchword  of  the  peace-
loving  and  yielding  temper,  in  all  such  cases  when  a
distinction  and  separation  in  the  circumstances  be
comes  necessary.

•2.  J.ofx  Clioice,  and  the  Separation  (vcrs.  10-13).
The  bold,  unblushing,  self-seeking  features  in  Lot's
character  come  clearly  into  view  here,  lie  raises
his  eyes,  and  with  unrestrained  greediness  chooses
what  s  cms  to  him  the  be<t.  Tin.' circuit  of  the  Jor
dan,  f.  c.  the  region  of  the  Jordan  (named  simply
"""),  includes  the  deep  valley  of  the  Jordan  (the
Ghor),  from  the  Sea  of  Tiberias  to  the  Dead  Sea.
The  \\hole  valley,  until  we  reach  the  Red  Sea,  is  the
Ar.'hah,  which  takes  its  name  from  the  region  here
iMi'ntloned.  It  is  the  vale  of  Siddirn  (eh.  xiv.  .'!),  the
present  region  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  is  here  in
tended.  That  the  lower  valley  of  the  Jordan  was
peculiarly  well-watered,  and  a  rich  pasture-region,  is
expressed  by  a  twofold  comparison  ;  it  was  as  Para
dise,  and  as  the  land  of  Egypt.  The  lower  plain  of
t'.ie  .Ionian  was  glorious  as  the  vanished  glory  of
Par.uiise,  or  as  the  rich  plain<  of  the  Nile  in  Egypt,
which  were  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of  Lot.  For
the  Jordan  and  its  valley,  compare  the  Bible  Dic-
tionoi  ies,  geographical  works,  and  books  of  travels.*
— As  thou  comest  to  Zoar. — At  the  southeast  of
the  Dead  Sea  (lihor  el  Sxaphia). — And  they  sepa
rated  themselves,  the  one  (a  brother)  from  the
other. — The  separation  was  brotherly  in  a  good  and
evil  sense  ;  good  in  the  mind  and  thought  of  Abram,
and  as  to  its  peaceful  form,  but  evil  in  so  far  as  the
nephew  acts  as  a  privileged  brother,  and  chooses  the
b  'St  of  the  land. — And  Abram  dwelled  in  the
land  of  Canaan. — The  opposition  here  is  not,  as
Knobel  thinks,  between  Canaan  and  the  lower  val
ley  of  the  Jordan,  but  between  the  land  of  Canaan
in  which  Abram  remained,  and  the  plain  rich  in
cities — (""IS  must  be  emphasized  in  opposition  to
"*"C*  ).  This  also  forms  a  distinct  feature  in  Lot's
character.  Abram  remained  in  the  retirement  of  his
oaks,  from  which  Lot  removed  further  and  further
toward  the  cities  of  the  valley,  and  indeed  to  those
most  renowned ;  he  soon  has  his  pastures  in  the
neighborhood  of  Sodom,  and  his  dwelling  in  Sodom
iiself.  In  Sodom,  even,  we  find  him  in  the  most
frequented  place — at  the  gate.  While  there  is  no
doubt  that  he  left  Mesopotamia  in  the  characteristic
faith  of  Abram,  yet  the  prominence  of  the  worldly
thought  and  inclination  is  revealed  in  him,  through
these  facts,  although  he  on  the  whole  preserves  in
the  very  heart  of  his  disposition  and  thought,  the
essential  features  of  faith  and  reverence  for  God.
"  Sodom  must  have  lain  at  the  southwesterly  end  of
the  Dead  Sea.  The  allusion  to  the  pillar  of  salt
points  to  this  location  (ch.  xix.  26),  and  its  name  is
still  preserved  there  in  the  present  L'sdum.  The
near  vicinity  of  Zoar  (ch.  xix.  20),  which  must  be
sought  in  the  Ghor  el  Szaphia  (see  ch.  xix.  22)  and
the  general  nature  of  the  southern  part  of  the  Dead


*    [STAXLF.T:      "Sinai     and     Palestine ; "     JACOBVS  :
•Notes."— A.  O.]


Sea,  are  in  favor  of  this  location."  Knobel.  It  Is
true,  that  the  kindred  of  the  Israelitish  tribes  left
Palestine  (ch.  xxi.  14  ;  xxv.  C,  18  ;  xxxvi.  6),  but  it
by  no  means  follows,  as  Knobel  holds,  that  the  writer
brings  this  into  prominence  from  special  and  inter
ested  motives,  for  the  same  writer  records  also  the
journeyings  of  the  Israelites  into  Egypt. — But  the
men  of  Sodom. — We  shall  learn  "more  fully  the
wickedness  of  the  Sodomites  in  the  xixth  ch.  It  is
referred  to  here,  in  order  to  show  that  Lot  had
chosen  foolishly  when  he  thought  that  he  was
choosing  the  best  portion,  and  in  order  to  make  way
for  the  history  of  the  punishment  which  came  upon
Sodom,  in  which  Lot  also  must  suffer  for  his  folly.*
3.  The  Renewal  and  Enlargement  of  the  Promise
of  the  Land  of  Canaan,  with  which  Abrani's  new
act  of  self-denial  was  rewarded,  and  his  settlement,  in
the  groves  (oaks)  of  Mature,  ht  Hebron  (vers.  14-18).
— Lift  up  now  thine  eyes  and  look. — After  the
departure  of  Lot,  Jehovah  commanded  Abram  now
also  to  lift  up  his  eyes,  in  pious  faith,  as  Lot  had
raised  his  eyes  in  impious  and  shameless  self-seeking.
Since  Bethel  was  about  central  in  the  land,  and  lay
high  upon  a  mountain  (ch.  xii.  8  ;  xxxv.  1,  etc.),  this
direction  is  evidently  historical;!  probably  Abram
cotdd  look  far  and  wide  over  the  land  in  all  direc
tions  from  this  place. — Northwards  (towards  the
midnight),  etc. — The  designation  of  the  four  quarters
of  the  heavens  (com.  ch.  xxviii.  14). — And  I  will
make  thy  seed.*  As  the  land  should  be  great  for
the  people,  thy  posterity,  so  thy  people  shall  be
numerous,  or  innumerable  for  the  land.  The  seed
of  Abram  are  compared  with  the  d|ist  of  the  earth,
with  reference  to  its  being  innumerable.  At  a  later
point,  the  one  hyperbole  falls  into  two:  "as  the
stars  of  heaven,  and  as  the  sand  upon  the  sea-shore"
(ch.  xv.  5;  xxii.  17). — Arise,  etc.  "The  free  pas
sage  through  the  land,  should  serve  to  animate  his
faith,  and  be  a  sign  for  his  descendants  of  the  sym
bolic  seizure  and  posses.-ion  of  the  land.  The  com
mand  is  not  to  be  understood  as  a  literal  direction;
Abram  could  view  the  land  promised  to  him,  at  his
pleasure." — Then  Abram  removed  his  tent.§
"The  oak-grove  of  .Mamre  lay  in  Hebron,  and  ia
often  mentioned  as  the  residence  of  the  patriarchs
(ch.  xiv.  l:>,  IfS;  xxxv.  27).  It  had  its  name  from
the  Amorite  Mamre,  a  confederate  with  Abram  (ch.
xiv.  ID,  21),  as  the  valley  northerly  from  Hebron
holds  its  name,  Eschol,  from  a  brother  of  Mamre"
(Num.  xiii.  2oj.  Knobel.  According  to  Knobel,  the
later  custom  of  sacrificing  to  Jehovah  at  Hebron

*  [This  is  one  of  the  numerous  passages  which  prove  the
unity  of  Genesis. — A.  G.]

t  [Stanley  describes  the  hill  as  the  highest  of  a  succes
sion  of  eminences,  from  which  Abram  and  Lot  could  take
the  wide  survey  of  the  land  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the
left,  such  as  can  be  enjoyed  from  no  other  point  in  the
neighborhood. — A.  G.]

t  ["The  promise  of  the  land  for  a  possession  is  CP1S  *V$ ,
The  divine  promise  is  unchangeable.  As  the  seed  of  Abram
should  have  an  eternal  existence  before  God,  so  also  Canaan
is  the  eternal  possession  of  this  seed.  But  this  does  not  avail
for  the  natural  descendants  of  Abram  as  such,  or  his  seed
according  to  the  flesh,  but  for  the  true  spiritual  seed,  who
receive  the  promise  by  faith,  and  hold  it  in  belicvintr  hearts.
This  promise,  therefore,  neither  prevents  the  exclusion  oi
the  unbelieving  seed  from  the  land  of  Canaan,  nor  secures
to  the  Jews  a  return  to  the  earthly  Palestine,  alter  their
conversion.  Through  Christ  the  promise  is  rnised  f.  oni  its
temporal  form  to  itt*  real  nature;  through  him  t'ie  whole
earth  becomes  a  Canaan."  Keil. — "  Quum  terra  in  siecuiiM
promittitur,  non  simpliciter  notutur  perpetuitas  ;  s.d  qu«
finem  accepit  Christi  advcntu."  Calvin. — A  G.]

§  ["  Dwelt,  settled  down,  made  it  the  central  point  of  M
subsequent  abode  in  Canaan."  Wordsworth. — A.  G.]


CHAP.   XIII.    1-18.


JOG


(2  Sam.  xv.  7),  is  dated  back  to  the  times  in  Gene
sis.  Still,  lie  can  neither  deny  the  migrations,  1101
the  piety  of  Abram.  As  to  the  circumstance  that,
according  to  Josh.  xv.  13,  Hebron  at  an  earlier  date
was  called  Kirjath-arba,*  see  the  Introduction.  For
the  founding  ot  Hebron,  see  Numb.  xiii.  23.  BUM-
SEN  :  "  This  remarkable  narrative  bears  upon  its
face  every  evidence  of  historical  truth,  and  is  most
fitly  assigned  to  a  time  soon  after  2900  years  before
Christ."


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  In  the  history  of  Abram  we  must  distinguish
throughout  the  providence  of  God,  and  the  conduct
of  tne  patriarch.     In  the  previous  chapter  the  provi
dence  of  God  preserves  in  safety  the  promise  to
Abram,  since  it  preserves  Sarah  inviolate.     In  this
a  new  confirmation  of  the  promise  appears  in  the
separation  from  Lot.     The  conduct  of  Abram  is  in
both  cases  marked  by  a  renunciation  of  self,  grounded
in  faith.     As  the  previous  chapter  portrays  the  self-
renunciation  of  Abram  in  reference  to  his  country,
and  his  father's  house,  in  regard  to  a  fixed  settlement
in  Canaan,  and  to  his  connubial  blessedness,  so  here
we  meet  a  like  renunciation  as  to  the  relative  posi
tion  of  Lot,  and  as  to  the  best  parts  of  Palestine
itself.     For  this  new  act  of  self-denial  is  twofold.
With  the  separation  of  Lot,  leaving  out  of  view  now
the  society  and  assistance  which  Abram  might  have
had  in  him,  and  which  was  renounced,  his  former
patriarchal    dependence   upon  Abram   ceases,    and
with  the  residence  of  Lot  and  his  family  in  the  best
of  the  land,  there  might  arise  a  serious  prejudice  to
the  claims  of  the  descendants  of  Abram  to  the  land.
But  in  regard  to  this  also  he  trusts  God,  and  in  this
case,  without  any  exaggerated  or  over-hasty  confi
dence,  such  as  appeared  in  the  exposure  of  Sarah,  f

2.  Abram  returns  to  the  place  of  his  altar  in
Bethel.    In  like  manner  Christian  settlements,  towns,
and  villages,  cluster  around  their  churches.

3.  The  wealth  of  Abram  is  referred  to  by  the
parly  writers  as  an  example  that  even  rich  people
•nay  be  pious,  and  also  that  the  pious  may  be  rich.
t  \nd  indeed,  without  any  contradiction  to  the  word
bf  Christ  (Matt.  xix.  24),  for  Christ  himself  explains
I  hat   word   more   fully  in  the    26th   verse,    by  the
I  bought,  thai  through  the  grace  of  God,  one  could
I  >e  freed  from  the  influence  of  his  wealth,  and  ena-
I  >led  in  humility  to  use  it  as  a  moral  good  for  the
j  ;lory  of  God.     The  writing  of  Clemens  Alex.,  T/y  6
•  vf^uci/os  TrAoumor,  is  in  place  here.     Moreover,  the
1  anger  of  riches  appears  prominently  here,  in  the
I  cry  first  case  in  which  riches,  as  such,  are  men-

oned.     His  riches  were,  in  some  measure,  a  tax  to

_  *  ["  Its  earliest  name  was  Hebron,  hut  it  was  later  called
-jath-arba  by  the  sons  of  Anak.    "When  the  Israelites


e  Old  Covenant,"  p.  169.— A.  G.]
t  ["Abram  went  up  out  of  Egypt.  In  the  history  of
jram,  the  father  of  Isaac,  the  type  and  pattern  of  the  true
raelites,  we  see  prophetic  glimpses  of  the  history  of  his
sterity.  Abram  went  out  of  Egypt  very  rich  in  catlle,


le  prengures  tne  pilgrimage  of  the  church
'  -ough  the  world  to  the  heavenly  Canaan.  Is  not  the  life
•Abram,  as  presented  in  the  Pentateuch,  so  wonderfully
i] 'adjusted  to  the  circumstances  and  necessities  of  all  the
'.ael  of  God,  a  silent  proof  of  its  genuineness  and  iiixpira-
la?"  Wordsworth.— A.  Q.]


Abram,  since  he  could  not  find  room  foi  his  herds,
and  his  possessions  threatened  to  involve  him  in  hos
tility  with  his  nephew.  It  is  here  also,  as  always^
tainted  with  a  want;  the  want  in  this  case  of  suffi
cient  pasturage,  and  the  necessity  for  the  separation
of  Abram  aod  Lot.  But  for  Lot,  indeed,  his  wealth
becomes  a  temptation,  which  he  docs  not  resist  in
any  creditable  way.

4.  The  germinal  divisions  of  masters  ofttimes  re
veal  themselves  clearly  in  the  strifes  of  their  serv
ants  and  dependents.     Even  the  wives  are  often  in
open  hostility  while  their  husbands  are  still  at  peace.
Abram  teaches  us  how  to  observe  these  symptoms  in
the  right  way.     His  proposal  to  separate  arises  from
his  love  of  peace,  not  from  any  selfish  regard  to  his
own  interests.*

5.  A  law-suit  is  always  doubtful  or  hazardous,
although  often  necessary.     Law-suits  between  breth
ren  are  to  be  avoided  with  double  care  and  earnest
ness.      How   beautiful  it   is   for  brethren  to  dwell
together  in  unity  (Ps.   cxxxiii.  1);    but  a  peaceful
separation  is  also  beautiful,  if  it  prevents  a  dwelling
together  in  strife  and  hatred.     This  holds  true  also
in  spiritual  things.     Abram  must  avoid  with  special
watchfulness  giving  an  offence  to  the  Canaanites.f

6.  "  Wilt  thou  to  the  left  hand,"  etc.     An  eter
nal  shining  example,  and  a  watchword  of  the  peace-
loving,  magnanimous,  self-denying  character  which
is  the  fruit  of  faith.:):

7.  The  character  of  Lot.     Its  light  side  must  not
be  overlooked.     He  had  left  Mesopotamia  and  his
father's  house,  cleaving  to  Abram  and  his  faith,  and
up  to  this  time  had  remained  true  to  him  in  all  his
march  through  the  land,  to  Egypt  and  back.     Still,
the  return  from  the  rich  land  of  Egypt  may  have
awakened  in  him  thoughts  similar  to  those  which
wrought  with  many  of  the  Israelites,  who  murmured
against  Moses.    At  all  events,  the  lower  valley  of  the
Jordan  appears  to  him  specially  desirable,  because  it
bears  such  a  resemblance  to  Egypt.    And  in  the  way
and  manner,  violating  both  modesty  and  piety,  in
which  he  chose  this  province,  and  regardless  of  re
ligious  prudence,  yielded  himself  to  the  attractions
of  Sodom ;   the  shaded  and  darker  features  of  his
character,  the  want  of  sincerity,  delicacy,  and  that
freedom  from  the  world  which  became  a  pilgrim,  are
clearly  seen.     He  is  still,  however,  a  man  who  can
perceive  the  angels,  and  protect  them  as  his  guests.
In  comparison  with  the  Sodomites  he  is  righteous.

8.  Lot  makes  the  worst  choice,  while  he  thinks
that  he  has  chosen  well.     For  his  worldly-minded-
ness,  the  sin  in  his  choice,  §  he  was  first  punished

*  [The  heavenly  principle  of  forbearance  evidently  holda
the  supremacy  in  Abram's  breast.  lie  walks  in  the  moral
atmosphere  of  the  Sermon,  on  the  Mount  (Matt,  vi.  28—12).
Murphy. — A.  G.]

["  The  practical  nature  of  Abram's  religion  was  most
strikingly  developed  here.  Ills  conduct  was  marked  by
humility,  condescension,  and  generosity."  Bush:  the  natu
ral  fruits  of  his  faith.— A.  G.]

t  [The  presence  of  those  powerful  tribes  is  mentioned  to
show  why  Abram  and  Lot  were  so  straitened  as  to  pastur
age,  to  signalize  the  impropriety  and  danger  of  their  quar
relling  among  themselves,  and  to  show  that  Abram  felt  that
the  eyes  of  these  idolaters  were  upon  him,  and  that  anv
misstep  on  his  part,  as  the  representative  of  Jehovah,  would
be  an  occasion  of  stumbling  to  them. — A.  G.]

t  ["Abram  could  have  claimed  the  exclusive  possession
on  the  higher  ground  of  the  Divine  promise  and  plan.  But
:his  exclusiveness  is  not  tho  spirit  of  our  holy  religion."
JACOBUS,  p.  239.— A.  G.]

§  [Murphy  suggests  that  he  was  a  single  man  when  he
inrted  from  Abram,  and  therefore  that  he  married  a  womau
of  Sodom,  and  thus  involved  himself  in  the  sin  of  the  Ante
diluvians,  Gen.  vi.  1-7. — A.  G.J


400


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


through  the  plundering  of  his  house,  and  his  captivity
in  the  war  of  the  kings,  which  followed  soon  after
his  choice,  and  then  through  his  fearl'ul  flight  from
Kodoin,  and  the  losses,  misfortunes  and  crimes  which
were  connected  with  it.  Thus,  the  want  of  regard
to  true  piety,  the  selfishness,  the  carelessness  as  to
the  snai vs  of  ihe  world,  niu.st  ever  be  punished.  And
indeed,  i;  is  just  when  one  thinks,  that  in  his  own
wilful  and  .•••hiful  ways,  he  has  attained  his  highest
wishes,  he  linds  himself  ensnared  in  the  retributions
of  divine  righteousness,  •which  rules  over  him  and
works  wiih  solemn  irony.

'.».  Yt'e  must  distinguish  clearly  tl'.e  times  of  the
revelation  and  manifestation  of  Jehovah  in  the  life
of  Abram,  from  the  times  in  which  he  conceals
liim.~-.lt'  I'rum  view,  which  maybe  regarded  as  the
times  (.;'  tiie  elevation  and  sinking  of  the  faith  of
Abram.  He  enjoys  the  first  manifestation  of  (Jod
after  the  first  proof  of  his  faith,  his  migration  to  Ca
naan.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  no  intimation  of  any
ri-veh/'.ion  of  Cod  on  his  return  iVom  Egypt.  Jim
al'Ur  Abram's  noble  act  of  faith  towards  Lot,  he
again  receives  a  new  promise  in  a  r.cw  word  of  the
Lord.  Then  again,  after  his  inarch  for  the  rescue
of  Lot  (eh.  xv.  1).  From  his  connection  with  llagar,
thirteen  years  elapse  without  any  mention  of  a  divine
revelation,  and  the  revelation  which  then  follows
(eh.  xvii.  1  ff.)  wears  the  form  of  a  renewal  of  the
covenant  (eh.  xv.).  lint  now,  after  Abram  had
obeyed  the  command  as  to  circumcision,  he  enjoys
the  fullest  manifestation  of  Cod,  vuth  the  most  ex-
pre.--s  and  definite  promise  (eh.  xviii.  1  11'.).  Thus
after  his  intercessory  prayer  for  Sodom,  he  is  re
warded  bv  the  appearance  of  the  angels  for  Lot,  and
Lot's  salvation  (eh.  xix.  -'.>).  Afier  the  events  at
(ierar,  and  his  deportment  there  (eh.  xx.),  the  quiet
and  ordinary  course  of  life  is  only  broken  by  the
birth  of  Isaac,  and  then  follows  the  great  trial  of  his
faith,  which  lie  heroically  endured,  and  r.  eeives  the
seal  of  iiis  faith.  From  this  introductory  completion
of  his  life,  it  unfolds  itself  in  the  calm  coming  and
going  of  the  evening  of  his  days.  But  the  promises
of  Cod  ab.vavs  correspond  to  the  acts  and  conduct
of  faith  which  Abram  had  shown.

1<>.  J.ifl  up  t/ii/tc  ei/en  and  look  (v.  1-1).  A  glo
rious  antithesis  t  >  the  word:  And  Lot  lifted  up  his
eye-.  The  selfish  choice  brings  disgrace  and  de
struction,  the  choice  according  to  the  counsel  and
wisdom  of  (Sod  secures  blessing  and  salvation.*

11.  "This  is  the  third  theocratic  promise,  in
cluding  both  the  first  (oh.  xii.  l-o)  and  the  second
(eh.  xii.  7)."  Knobel.  But  it  has  also,  like  the  pre
ceding,  i'.s  own  specific  character.  The  first  promis"
relates  to  the  person  of  Abram  ;  in  him  and  in  his
name  are  embraced  all  promised  blessings.  In  the
sec  .-nd  a  reed  was  more  definitely  promised  to  Abram,
and  also  the  land  of  Canaan  for  the  seed.  But  here,
in  opposition  to  the  narrow  limits  in  which  he  is  with
his  herds,  and  to  the  pro-occupation  of  the  best  parts
of  the  land  by  Lot,  there  is  promised  to  him  the
whole  land  in  its  extension  towards  the  four  quarters
of  heaven,  and  to  the  boundless  territory,  an  innu
merable  seed.  It  should  be  observed  that  the  whole
fulness  of  the  divine  promise,  is  first  unreservedly
declared  to  Abram,  after  the  separation  from  Lot.f


*  ["  Thus  lie  who  sought  this  world  lost  it ;  and  he  who
was  willing  to  give  up  anything  for  the  honor  of  God  and
religion,  found  it."  Fuller  ;  see  Busn,  p.  219. — A.  G.]

f  ["  Abram  has  now  obtained  a  permanent  resting-place
in  the  land,  but  not  a  foot-breadth  belongs  to  him.  His
household  is  smaller  in  number  than  r.t  first.  He  is  old


Lot  has  taken  beforehand  his  part  of  the  good  things.
His  choice  appears  as  a  mild  or  partial  example  of
the  choice  of  Esau  (the  choice  of  the  lentil c-pottage).

12.  The  Holy  land:  an  allegory  of  Paradise,  a
symbol  of  heaven,  a  type  (germ)  of  the  sanctified  and
glorified  earth.

1:!.  For  the  primitive,  consecrated  Hebron,  and
the  oak-grove  Mamre,  see  the  dictionaries,  geograph
ical  hand-books,  and  books  of  travels,  and  also  the
Bible-work,  liook  of  Joshua.

M.  STAIIKK  (fhr  Frtibcrrf  Bible):  "This  is  the
first  time  that  -ilver  and  gold  arc  mentioned  since
the  flood,  and  we  may  infer,  therefore,  that  mining
for  these  metais  must  have  been  practised.*'  (Re
flections  upon  Tubal-'.'ain).

15.  The  declaration  that  the  Canaanites  and
Periz/ites  were  then  in  the  land,  like  the  allusion  to
the  Canaanites,  dr.  xii.  C>,  furnishes  no  ground  for
the  inference,  according  to  Spino/.a,  that  the  passages
were  fir.-t  written  when  there  were  no  longer  any
Canaanites  and  l'e.i//.iies  in  the  land.  For  the  first
pass.ige  says  plainly,  that  it  was  on  account  of  the
Canaanites  that  Abram  felt  it  necessary  to  go  through
the  land  to  Sichem ;  and  here  again,  that  owing  to
their  presence,  lie  and  Lot  found  themselves  strait
ened  for  pasture-ground,  and  were  compelled  to
separate.


HOMILKTICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs.  The  hap
py  exodus  of  Abram  from  Egypt,  a  prophecy  or  type
of  the  glorious  Exodus  of  the  children  of  Israel. —
Abram's  return  to  the  allar  in  Bethel. — The  house
of  (iod  the  consecration  of  the  home. — Abram  and
Lot. — The  love  of  peace  charade;  istic  of  the  be
liever. — The  scandal  of  kindred  and  family  strifes. —
The  eager  watch fV.m-s  of  servants. — The  true  sepa
ration  for  the  sake  of  peace. — The  watchword  of
Abram  in  its  typical  significance.— The  blessing  of  a
spirit  of  concession. — The  character  of  Lot  in  its
lighter  and  darker  aspects. — Lot's  choice:  1.  In  its
fair  promise  ;  2.  in  its  evil  results. — -The  third  prom
ise  of  Cod  to  Abram. — The  peril  of  the  worldly  life,
and  the  blessing  of  retirement :  Lot  in  the  gate  of
Sodom,  Abram  in  the  oak-grove  of  Mamre. — How
quickly  the  paradise  of  Lot's  choice  lay  in  the  terri
ble  depths  of  the  Dead  Sea. — How  fin^  the  promise
of  the  eternal  possession  of  the  Holy  land  to  Abram's
seed:  1.  The  conditional  character  of  the  promise
with  reference  to  his  natural  descendants  (the  Ara
bians  in  Palestine  are  still  his  natural  sons) ;  2.  its
unconditional  character  for  his  believing  children
(Matt.  v.  r>).

STAT.KK  :  Abram  and  Lot  feared  God  ;  they  were
related,  and  fellow-travellers.  Poverty,  hunger,  and
toilsome  journeys  to  and  fro,  could  not  bring  about
any  strifes,  but  the  abundance  of  temporal  posses
sions  had  nearly  accomplished  it,  when  Abram  saw
and  marked  the  cunning  of  the  devil.  If  this  could
happcrr  to  holy  men  like  these,  we  may  easily  see
how  far  Satan  may  carry  those  whose  hearts  cling
to  this  world's  goods. — LANGE,  ver.  2  :  It  is  one
thing  to  be  rich,  and  quite  another  to  desire  riches,
and  bend  all  one's  energies  and  efforts  to  that  end.
It  is  not  the  former,  but  the  latter,  which  is  in  oppo-

and  childless,  and  yet  his  seed  shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the
earth.  All  around  him  is  his,  and  he  is  only  0:10  nmong  tnc
thousands— but  eir'  eATu'Si  vap  eAjri'Sa."  Delitzsch.— A.  O-J


CHAP.  XIV.  1-24.


401


sition  to  true  faith,  and  the  divine  blessing  (Sir.
xxxi.  1). — Ver.  7.  The  devil  is  wont  to  sow  tares,
misunderstandings,  and  divisions,  even  between  pious
men  and  believers  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  1). — Vers.  8,  9.  What
a  beautiful  example  of  humility  and  the  love  of  peace !
The  elder  yields  to  the  younger. — Whoever  will  be
a  son  of  Abram,  must  strive  to  win  his  neighbor  by
love,  but  never  seek,  to  prevail  by  violence. — Ver.
13.  It  is  commonly  (often)  true,  that  the  people  are
more  depraved  in  those  parts  of  the  land  which  are
more  rich  and  fruitful  (Ps.  cvi.  24-29). — A  good
laud  seldom  bears  pious  people,  and  we  cannot  en
dure  prosperous  days  with  safety  (Ezek.  xvi.  49). —
OSIANDER,  upon  ver.  18:  Religious  worship  at  the
first  and  last. — Lisco:  In  this  history,  the  principal
thing  is  the  grace  of  God  towards  the  chosen  race,
the  divine  providence,  through  which  circumstances
are  so  arranged  as  to  separate  from  this  race  one
who  was  not  a  constituent  portion  of  it.  Under  this
providence  Lot  freely  concedes  all  his  claims  to  the
land  of  promise,  to  which  the  plain  of  Jordan  no
longer  belonged  (certainly  not  the  plain  of  Sodom,
after  its  submersion).  This  interpretation  is  mani
festly  correct  from  the  account  vers.  14  and  15,  that
the  new  promise  of  the  land  of  Canaan  was  given  to
Abram  after  the  departure  of  Lot. — Ver.  16.  In
cludes  not  barely  the  natural  but  also  the  spiritual
descendants — the  children  of  Abram  by  faith  (Jer.
xxxiii.  22).* — A'cr.  17.  This  journey  should  be  a


*  [See  also  in  confirmation  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,
ch.  xi.  10,  1C,  where  the  apostle  points  to  the  true  and  high
est  sense  of  the  land  promised.  The  spiritual  seed  require  a
heavenly  inheritance,  and  the  heavenly  inheritance  implies
a  spiritual  seed.— A.  G.  ]


type  of  the  possession  which  took  place  much  later
under  Joshua. — GERLACH  upon  ver.  2.  The  outward
earthly  blessing  was,  to  this  man  of  faith,  a  pledge
of. the  spiritual  and  invisible. — PASSAVANT:  ]  John
ii.  15;  Matt.  v.  5,  9;  vi.  33. — Indeed,  if  we  only
assert  our  just  right  and  possessions,  harskl;/  and
firmly,  there  is  no  praise  nor  reward  from  God,  no
promise — no  pleasant  bow  of  peace ;  we  have  our
reward,  blessing  and  peace  therein.— Sciiii'inKu  :
From  all  these  notices  in  reference  to  Canaan,  it  is
clear  that  everything  in  this  chapter  bears  upon  the
land  of  promise. — Calvin  :  If  no  Canaanites  sur
round  us,  we  still  live  in  the  midst  of  enemies,  whiL-
we  live  in  this  world. — Luther :  To  the  service  of
God,  and  the  preaching  of  religion,  and  faith  to
wards  God  (ver.  4),  there  is  added  now  a  most  beau
tiful  and  glorious  example  of  love  to  our  neighbor,
and  of  patience. — Abram's  generous  and  magnani
mous  spirit  comes  out  all  the  more  clearly,  through
the  directly  opposite  conduct  of  Lot  (ver.  10). — Be
cause  Lot  had  in  eye  only  the  beauty  of  the  land,  he
had  no  eye  for  the  far  higher,  inward  beauty  of
Abram's  character. — SCHWE.NKE  :  In  his  faith,  Abram
had  placed  a  low  estimate  upon  the  world  and  its
good  things,  and  found  a  much  richer  blessing. —
HEUSER  :  Abram  in  his  disturbed  relation  with  Lot :
1.  The  disturbance  ;  2.  the  way  in  which  Abram  re
moved  it ;  3.  the  thought  which  gave  him  strength
for  his  work.*

*  [The  whole  chapter  remarkable,  as  it  presents  to  us  the
workings  of  faith  in  the  domestic  and  ordinary  life,  in  the
common  transactions  between  man  and  man,  and  affords  us
an  opportunity  of  observing  how  far  his  daily  life  was  in
unison  with  that  higher  character  with  which  the  iuspirea
writers  have  invested  him.  BUSH,  210,— A.  G.]


THIRD    SECTION.

Abram  m,d  his  War  with  the  Heathen  robber-bands  for  the  rescue  of  Lot.      Tlie  victorious  Champion

of  Faith  and  his  greeting  to  Melchizedcc,  the  prince  of  peace.     His  conduct  towards

the  King  of  Sodom,  and  his  associates  in  the  War.

CHAPTER  XIV.  1-24.

And  it  came  to  pass  in  tlie  days  '  of  Amraphel  [Gesenius  :  it  seems  to  bo  Sanscrit  AmrapAla,  keeper
of  the  gods;  Maurcr:  perhaps,  robbers ;  Furst :  =  Arphaxad]  king  of  Sllinar  [region  of  Babylon],  Arioch9
[Gesenius,  after  Bohlen,  Sanscrit  Arjaka,  venerated  ;  Furst :  the  Arian,  embracing  Persian,  Median,  and  Assyrian]
king  of  Ellasar,3  [Symmachus  and  Vulgate:  Pontus;  Gesenius  :  probably  the  region  between  Babylon  and
Elymais],  Chedorlaomer4  [Maurer:  band  of  the  sheaf;  Furst:  probably  from  the  ancient  Persian]  king  of
Elam  [Elymais],  and  Tidal  [Gesenius:  fear,  veneration]  king  of  nations  [Cloricus  :  Galilean  heathen]  •

That   these    made  war  with  Bera    [Gesenius  =  3n-ja]  king  of  Sodom,  and  with    Birsha
[Geseiiius  =  Sirrr-ja]    king   of   Gomorrah,   Shinab    [a'esenius :  father's  tooth]    king   of   Admak

[Furst:    fruit  region,  city  in  the  district  of  Sodom,  farm-city],    and    SllCmeber    [OeBenius:    soaring  aloft;
glory  of  the  eagle?]    king    of  Zeboiim    [Gesenius:  place  of  hyenas]  and    the    king  of  Bela  [devoured,

destroyed],  which  is  Zoar  [the  Email].     All  these  were  joined  together  in  the  vale  of  Siddim

[Aquila?  valley  of  fields;  Gesenius:  depressed  land,  Wady ;  Furst :  plain],  which   is    [now]    the   salt   sen

[sea  of  asphalt,  Dead  sea].  Twelve  years  they  served  Chedorlaomer  [as  vassals],  and  in  the
thirteenth  year  they  rebelled.  And  in  the  fourteenth  year  came  Chedorlaomer,  and  the
kings  that  were  with  him,  and  smote  the  Rephaims  [giants ;  Ewaid:  long-drawn,  tau]  in  Ashtc-
20


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES.


roth  Karnaim  [horned  Astarte;  from  Astarte-worship,  city  in  Batanrca,  Dcut.  i,  4;  Josh.  xiii.  12],  and  the
ZuzimS  [Susaer;  Gesenius:  from  the  fertility  of  the  country ;  Septuagint  and  others:  IBvy  lo-xvpo]  in  Ham
[treasures;  probably  an  Ammonite  region],  and  the  EmilllS  [terrors;  Emaer,  originally  in  the  land  of  Moab]
ill  Shavell  [plain]  Kiriathaim  [twin  cities  in  tho  tribe  of  Reuben,  Num.  xxxii.  37  ;  later  in  Moab,  Jcr.
G  xlviii.  l].  And  the  llorites  [dwellers  in  caves]  in  their  Mount  Sell'  [rugged;  Gcsei.ius:  wooded;
1'iirst:  hairy],  Ullto  Kl-  [oak,  terebinth]  Paran  [probably,  cave-region] ,  which  is  by  the  wilderness.

7  And  thev  returned,  and  came  to  En-mishpat  [well  of  Judgment],  which  is  Kadesh  [sanctuary],
and   smote  all  the  country   [fields]   of  the  Amalekites   [between  Palestine,  Idumca,  and  Egypt],
and  also  the  AmoriteS  [mountaineers?]  that  dwelt  in  HaZCZOn-tamar  [palm-pruning,  a  city  in  the

8  wildemcssofJudea;  later,  Engedi,  fountain  of  the  kid].      And   there  went   out  the   king   of  Sodom,
and  the  king  of  Gomorrah,  and  the  king  of  Admah,  and  tho  king  of  Zeboiim,  and  the
kiiiLT  of  l'»'!a  (the  same  is  Zoar;)  and  they  joined  battle  with  thorn  in  the  vale  of  Sid-

9  dim;    "\Vith  Chedorlaomer    the  king  of  Elam,  and  with  Tidal   king  of  nations,   and
Amraphel   king  of  Shinar,   and  Arioch   king  of  Kllasar;    [which]   four  kings  with  live.

10  And   the  vale   of  Siddim  was  full  of  slime-pits  [pits  upon  pits]  ;   and   the   kings  of  Sodom
and   Gomorrah   lied,  and   fell   there    [the  warriors]  ;    and   they   that   remained  iled  to  the

11  mountain.     And  th^v   [the victors]  took  all  the  goods  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  all

12  tl    :ir  victuals,  and  wont  their  way.     And  they  took  Lot,  Abram's  brother's  son,  who
[fur  he  |  dwelt  in  Sodom,  and  his  goods,  and  departed.

13  And  there  came  one  that  had  escaped    [fugitives],  and   told  Abram  the  Hebrew
[immigrant];    for    ho  [who]    dwelt   in   the    plain    [oak-grove]   of  Mamre  [richness,  strength]    the
Amoii'e,  brother  of  Eschol  [vine-branch],  and  brother  of  Aner  [i.e.  ","3,  dvijp?]  :   and  these

14  were   confederate  with  Abram.      And  when  Abram  heard   that  his  brother  was   taken
captive,    he  armed   [led  out  to  war]   his  trained  servants   [initiated,  tried  1,    born   in   his   own

15  house,  three  hundred  and  eighteen,  and  pursued  them  unto  Dan.      And  he  divided  him
self  against    them,  he  and  his  servants,   by  night,  and  smote  them,  and  pursued  (hern
unto  Hobah  [hiding-place],  which  is  Oil  the  left  hand  [northerly]  of  Damascus  [restless  activity].

10   And  h>'  brought  back   all  the   goods,  and   also  brought  again   his  brother   Lot,  and  his
goods,  and  the  women  also,  and  the  people.

17  "~         And  the  king  of  Sodom  Avent  out  to  meet  him  (after  his  return  from  the  slaughter
of  Chedorlaomer,   and  of  tho   kings  that  were  with   him   [confederates]),  at  the  valley  of

18  Shavell  [the  plain  northward  of  Jerusalem,  2  Sam.  xviiL  18],  wliicll    is  the  king's  dale.      And   [But]
Melchizedec  [king  of  righteousness]  king  of  Salem  [schalcm  =  C"i  V^  ]  brought  forth   bread   and

19  win'-:   and  he  was  the  priest  of  the  most   high  God  [of El-Eljon].      And  he  blessed  him,
and  said,  Blessed  be  Abram  of  the  most  high   God,   possessor  of  heaven  and  earth:

'JO  And  blessed  be  the  most  high  God,  which  hath  delivered  thine  enemies  into  thy  hand.
'Jl  And  he  [Septuagint:  'A/3pafi ;  compare  Heh.  vii.  4]  gave  him  tithes  of  all.  And  the  king  of

Sodom  said  unto  Abram,  Give  me  the  persons  [souls],  and  take  [retain]  the  goods  to
22  thyself.  And  Abram  said  to  the  king  of  Sodom,  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  unto  the
•J!!  Lord,  the  most  high  God,  the  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth,  That  I  [the  form  of  an  oath:  ifi]

will  not  take  from  a  thread  even  to  a  shoe-latchet  [the least],  and  that  1  will  not  take
•J-i  anything  that  is  thine,  lest  thou  shouldest  say,  1  have  made  Abram  rich:  Save  only

that  which  the  young  men  have  eaten,  and  the  portion  of  the  men  which  went  with  mo,

Aner,  Eschol,  and  Mamre:  let  them  take  their  portion.

1  [Ver.  1.— Lange  renders  this  first  clause  as  independent.  "And  it  came  to  pass  after  days,  or,  in  the  lapse  oi
days."— A.  (..]

'•'  [ViT.  1. — Wordsworth  and  Murphy,  lionme,  or  lion-like. — A.  G.I

a  [Ver.  L— "  Some  identify  it  with  Telassar  ;  others  more  probably  regard  it  as  Larsa,  now  Simkarah,  about  fifteen
miles  Kimthfast  of  Warka.  Rawlinson.  WORDSWORTH,  p.  69.—  A.  G.]

4  [  v,  r.  i_u  Rawlinson  compares  it  with  Kudur-Mapula,  or  Ufalul.;  whose  name  is  found  on  the  bricks  of  Chaldea,
and  whoie  title  is  Apda  Alartu,  Ravager  of  the  West."—  iluKi-ny,  p.  278.— A.  G.]


GENERAL  REMARKS.

1.  Tlie.  Modern  Criticism. — KNOBEL  (p.  143)  as
signs  the  Section  (with  cli.  xv.)  to  the  Jehovistic
enlargement,  since  the  Elohistic  author  narrates  the
founding  of  the  theocratic  covenant  elsewhere  (ch.
xvii).  We  must  carefully  distinguish,  in  a  theologi
cal  point  of  view,  between  the  permanent  covenant


of  faith  (ch.  xv.),  and  the  special  and  temporary  cov
enant  of  circumcision  *  (ch.  xvii.),  which  rests  upon
it  (see  Rom.  iv.).  The  idea  that  the  character  of
Abram  and  the  narrative  of  Melchizcdcc  are  drawn


*  [Temporary,  however,  only  as  to  its  external  form,  and
the  eign  or  seal  of  the  covenant.  The  covenant  itself  is  one
and  permanent. — A.  G.]


CHAP.  XIV.  1-2-1,


traditionally  from  interested  motives  of  the  Hebrews,
is  without  foundation.*

2.  For  special  literature  upon  ch.  xiv.  see  KNOBEL,
p.  131.

3.  The     War-makhtrj    Powers.  —  According   to
Knobel,  who  here  agrees  with  JOSEPH.,  Antiq.  i.  9,
the  Assyrian  must  be  viewed  as  the  ruling  power,
which   leads  all  the  individual  attacking  kings,  as
subject  princes  or  monarclis ;  for  there  is  no  trace
of  evidence  in  history,  that  the  elsewhere  unimport
ant  Elymais  (Susiane)  has  ever  exercised  a  sort  of
world-dominion.      Josephus   calls  the  Assyrian  the
leading  power,  Syncellus  the  Syrian,  which  in  this
case  is  just  equivalent ;  but  according  to  Ktesias  and
others,  the  Assyrians  were  the  first  to  establish  a
world-dominion  (see  p.  142,  it).     Keil,  on  the  other
hand,  holds  that  the  kingdom  of  Amraphel  of  Shi-
nar  which  Nimrod  founded,  had  now  sunken  to  a
mere  dominion  over  Shinar,  and  that  Elarn  now  ex
ercised  the  hegemony  in  inner  Asia.     The  beginnin
of  the  Assyrian  power  falls  in  a  later  period,  and
Berosus  speaks  of  an  earlier  Median  dominion  in
Babylon,  which  reached  down  to  the  times  of  the
patriarchs.      (He  refers  to  NIEBCHR'S  "History  of
Assyria,"  p.  271).     There  is  clearly  a  middle  view.
At  the  date,  ver.  1,  Amraphel,  king  of  Shinar,  stands
at  the  head  of  the  alliance  of  Eastern  princes ;  but
the  war  was  waged  especially  in    the   interest  of
Chedorlaomer  of  Elam.     Amraphel  appears  as  the
nominal  leader ;  Chedorlaomer  the  victorious  cham
pion  of  an  Eastern  kingdom,  involved  to  some  extent
in  decay.     The  Palestinian  kings,  or  kings  of  Sid-
dim,  opposed   to  them,  arc  described  as  previously
vassals  of  Chcdorlaorner,  because  the  narrative  here
treats  of  the  history  of  Siddim,  pre-eminently  of  the
history  of  Sodom  and  Lot ;  but  this  does  not  exclude
the  supposition,  that  the  princes  or  tribes  named  in
vers.  5  and  G,  were  also  at  least  partly  dependents
of  Chedorlaomer.     For  in  order  to  subject  the  lower
Jordan  valley,  he  must  have  somewhere  forced  a
passage  for  himself  into  the  land.     KEIL  :  "  It  seems
significant  that  at  that  time  the  Asiatic  world-power
had  advanced  to  Canaan,  and  brought  the  valley  of
the  Jordan  into  subjection,  with  the  purpose,  doubt
less,  to  hold,  with  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  the  way  to
Egypt.     We  have,  in  this  history,  an  example  of 'the
later  pressure  of  the  world-power  against  the  king
dom  of  God  established  in  Canaan;  and  the  signifi
cance  of  these  events  with  reference  to  the  historical
salvation,  lies  in  the  fact,  that  the  kings  of  the  Jor
dan  valley  and  surrounding  region  are  subject  to  the
world-power.      Abram,  on   the   contrary,  with   his
horne-born  servants,  slays  the  victor  and  takes  away
his  spoil — a  prophetic  sign,  that  in  its  contests  with
the  world-power,  the  seed  of  Abram  shall  not  only
not  be  brought  into  subjection,  but  be  able  to  res
cue  those  seeking  its  help.

4.  Ancient  Damascus,  also,  first  appears  here  in
the  dim  distance.


EXEGETICAL  AND   CRITICAL.

1.  The   Kings    at  War.—  (Vers.    1-3).      "  The
kings  named  here  never  appear  again."    Kcil.f —

*  [The  connection  of  this  chapter  with  what  precedes  and
follows  is  close  and  natural.  It  shows  that  Lot's  choice,
while  apparently  wise,  was  attended  with  bitter  fruits  ;  it
lays  the  ground,  in  Abram's  conduct,  for  the  promise  and
transactions  of  the  xvth  chapter.  There  would  be  a  serious
Teak  in  the  history  were  this  wanting.— A.  G.]

t  i  Chedorlaomer.     Upon  the  bricks  recently  found  in


Shinar  and  Elam  (see  ch.  10).  Ella?ar,  probably
Artemita,  which  is  called  also  Chalasar,  lying  in
j  Southern  Assyria.  (Goiim  *)  Nations  is  here°  of
|  special  significance  (see  translation  of  the  text,  also
I  upon  ver.  2 ;  compare  Josh.  x.  3,  5,  23). — All
these;  namely,  the  last-named  five  kings. — In  the
vale  of  Siddim f  (see  the  text).  "The  five  named
cities  described  (Wis.  x.  6)  as  a  Trein-oTroAiy,  ap
pear  to  have  formed  a  confederacy.  The  'four
first  (connected  together;  also  ch.  x.  19)  perished
afterwards  (Deut.  xxix.  22  ;  comp.  Hos.  xi.  8).
On  the  contrary,  Bela,  i.  e.,  Zoar,  was  not  over
taken  in  the  ruin.  The  most  important  are  Sodom
and  Gomorrah,  which  are  elsewhere  exclusively
named,  even  here,  vers.  10  and  11."  Knobel.  There
is  no  ground  for  his  conjecture  that  they  were
not  Canaanites,  drawn  from  a  misunderstanding  of
ch.  xii.  12,  that  this  region  did  not  belong  to°the
land  of  Canaan.  Keil  :  "  That  there  were  five
kings  of  the  five  cities,  is  in  accordance  with  the
custom  of  the  Canaanites,  among  whom,  still  later,
every  city  had  its  king."|

2.  The  War  (vers.  4-12).  a.  Us  cause  (ver.  4).
b.  The  course  of  the  Eastern  Kings  in  their  March. —
"  They  came,  doubtless,  in  the  usual  way,  through  the
region  of  the  Euphrates  to  Syria  (Strabo,  xvi.) ;  from
here,_  as  they  afterwards  directed  their  return  march
to  this  region,  advancing  southwards,  they  attacked
those  who  had  revolted ;  at  first,  namely,  the  Re-
phaim  in  Bashan,  i.  c.  the  northerly  part  of  tho
country,  east  of  the  Jordan  (Numb,  xxxii.  39),  then
the  Zuzims,  dwelling  farther  to  the  south,  and  after-
wards  the  still  more  southern  Emims."  Knobel. —
The  Rephaim.— "  A  tribe  of  giants  of  great  stat
ure,  spread  throughout  1'eraca ;  also  found  westward
from  Jerusalem,  upon  Mount  Ephraim,  and  in  Phi-
listia.  They  were  gradually  exterminated  through
the  Amorites,  Ammonites,  Moabites,  and  Israelites."
Kcil  holds  that  they  were  of  Semitic  origin  (p.  140).
Ashteroth  Karnaim,  or  simply  Ashteroth,  a  chief
city  of  Bashan,  the  residence  of  Og,  the  king  (Deut.
i.  4).  The  details  may  be  found  in  Keil  and  Knobel. §
— Zuzims  (an  Ammonitish  province),  probably  the
same  with  Zamsummims  (Deut.  ii.  20.)  —  Ham.
Identified  (Deut.  iii.  11)  with  Kabbah  of  the  Ammon
ites  (ruins  of  Ammon). — Emims,  terrors.  The
older  inhabitants  of  the  country  of  Moab,  like  the
Zuzims,  included  with  the  llephaim. — Kirjathaim.
Incorrectly  located  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  ;  the
ruins  el  Teym,  or  el  Tucme.— The  Horites.  The
original  inhabitants  of  the  country  of  the  Edomites.
They  drove  the  Horites  to  Elath,  upon  the  east  side
of  the  wilderness  of  Faran.  The  mount  Seir  be-


Chaldea  there  occurs  the  nnmc  of  a  kincz—Kudurmapula —
which  Rawlinson  thinks  may  be  the  same,  especially  since
tie  is  further  distinguished  as  the  Ravagcr  of  the  West.
JACOBUS,  p.  247.— A.  G.]

*  [Delitzseh  suggests  perhaps  an  earlier  name  foi
Galilee  of  the  Gentiles."  Comp.  Josh.  xii.  23;  Judg.
iv.  2  ;  and  Isa.  viii.  23.— A.  G.]

t  [Which  is  the  Salt  sea,  i.  e.,  into  which  this  valley  was
changed  in  the  overthrow  of  the  cities  (xix.  24)  KEIL,  p
139.— A.  G.  ]

t  [The  five  kings  belonged  probably  to  the  family  of
Ham,  which  had  pushed  its  way  northward,  but  had  been
rierc  chocked  and  held  under  the  sway  of  the  Shemitic  king
for  twelve  years,  but  had  now  revolted.  WORDSWORTH,  p.
69.— A.  G.]

§  [Hitter  finds  it  in  the  Tell  Ashareh.  J.  G.  Wetstein
identifies  it  with  Bosra,  for  which  he  urges  the  central  posi
tion  of  this  city  in  Peroea,  and  the  similarity  of  the  namea
Bostra  and  rniTi'Sa  .  "  Porter  suggests  'Afineh,  eight
miles  from  Bosra,  as  the  Samaritan  version,  hag  'Aohinet
for  'Ashturoth."— A.  G.]


404


GENESIS,  OH   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


tween  the  Red  and  Dead  seas.* — Ver.  8.  They  now
turned  from  the  south  to  the  north  (see  KEIL,  p.  1-11).
The  victory  of  the  Amalekites  was  gained  in  what
was  later  the  southern  tonitory  of  the  Hebrews.
Keil  and  Hengstenbcrg  h<>!d  that  it  is  not  the  Ama
lekites  themselves,  )>m  the  inhabitants  of  the  land
which  later  belonged  to  the  Amalekites.  It  says,
indeed,  the  country  of  tin-  Amalekites,  f  and  (Gen.
xxxvi.  12,  111)  Amalek  descended  from  E<au.  But
then  we  Mmuld  expect  some  account  of  that  original
people.  Air!  the  Am;:lekitish  descendants  of  Esau
may  have  mingled  \\i.h  the  earlier  constituent  por
tions  o!'  tiii'  people,  a<  the  Ishmaelitcs  with  the  ear
lier  inhabitants  of  Arabia.  Lastly,  even  the  Ainor-
ites,  upon  i  he  west  side  of  the  Dead  Sea,  were
involved  in  the  slaughter.  Knobel  denies  that
Hazc/on-tamar  can  be  identified  with  Er.gedi,  for
which,  h.iwever,  2  Chron.  xx.  "2,  bears  its  testimony.
A  rapid  march  made  it  possible  that  these  tribes
should  be  attacked  and  overcome  one  by  one.  It  is
not  said  that  they  had  all  been  tributary.  Mean
while,  however,  the  five  kings  in  the  vale  of  Siddim
h:id  lime  to  arm  themselves,  c.  J'/tc  Ii,itth-  in  the
pal,  "f  ^i, Ill/in.  The  live  feeble  kings  of  the  penta-
polis  could  not  resist  the  four  mightier  kings. — And
they  fell  there.  The  valley,  we  are  told,  was  full
of  pits  of  bitumen,  or  asphalt.  This  account  is  con
firmed  by  the  ina-s  of  asphalt  in  the  Dead  Sea.  For
these1  ma.-ses  of  asphalt,  see  the  condensed  notices  in
KNOUKI.,  p.  Kit').  \  This  remark,  however,  does  not
explain  uhy  the  five  kings  were  defeated,  but  why
they  found  the  flight  through  that  region  so  destruc
tive.  They  fell  here,  partly  hindered  by  the  pits,
partly  plunging  into  them;  only  a  few  escaped  into
the  mountains  of  Moah.  The  obvious  sense  appears
to  be,  that  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were
themselves  slain.  Knobel  thinks  the  troops  or  forces
are  intended,  and  holds  it  as  certain  that  the  king
of  Sodom  escaped  (ver.  17).  But  it  may  be  his  suc
cessor  in  the  government  who  is  here  mentioned.
Whatever  of  spoil,  in  goods  or  men,  was  found  by
the  coni|uerors  in  the  ciiv,  was  taken  away;  and,
what  is  the  main  thing  in  the  narrative,  Lot  with
them.  It  is  most  significant  :  for  he  dwelt  in
Sodom,  j?

:;.  AiifHin'x  Mnri'h  ami  Victory  (ver?.  1 .3-1(1). —
One  that  had  escaped.  The  article  marks  the
race  or  lineage.  A  fugitive  who  sought  Abram  in
Hebron,  must  doubtless  have  stood  in  close  relations
with  Lot. — Abram  the  Hebrew,  the  immigrant.  ||
Abram,  as  Lot  also,  was  viewed  by  the  escaped,  who
was  born  in  the  hind,  as  an  immigrant,  and  because
Lot  the  Hebrew  was  a  captive,  he  sought  Abram  the
Hebrew.  The  Amorite  Mamre,  and  his  two  brothers,
were:  named  as  confederates  with  Abram,  because

*  [  V:  I'linxm,  terebinth,  or  rather  wood  of  Farrm,  is  with
out  tinibt  the  later  Elath,  at  tlie  head  of  the  Ailam'tic  gulf;
e>i«-  inw.-nl  Aknl.ii.  KKH,,  p.  141.— A.  G.]

t  [Kadcsh,  probably  at  Ain-cl  Waiheh ;  though  Kril
nnd  Wordsworth  favor  the  location  at  Ain  Kadcs,  in  the
»>ast  of  thy  highest  part  of  Jebel  Halal,  about  five  hours
E.S.E.  from  Morlakhi.— A.  G.]

I  [Also  UOBIXSON'S  "Researches,"  vol.  ii.  pp.  228-230.—

A.  '  '•  I

$s  [The  passage  is  so  constructed  in  the  Hebrew  as  to
bring  out  this  significance.  And  they  took  Lot,  and  his
goods,  AbramV  brother's  son,  and  departed ;  and  (for)  he
\vas  dwelling  in  Sodom. — A.  O.]

I!  [The  one  from  tho  other  side,  who  has  come  across  the
river.  But  Murphy  urges  in  favor  of  taking  Hebrew  as  a
patronymic;  "that  every  other  tribe  in  the  country  had
originally  migrated  across  the  Euphrates,  and  that  the  word
here  distinguishes  Abraiu  as  the  1 1  ebrew,  just  as  his  confed
erate,  Mamrc.  is  distinguished  as  the  Amorite." — A.  G,]


they  assisted  him  now  in  the  war  (ver.  2-4).  Their
confederation  shows  his  overwhelming  influence. —
Abram  heard  that  his  brother  was  a  captive.  The
expression  is  significant.  Instantly  he  arms  his
trained,*  i.  c.,  his  hired  servants,  and  practised  in
the  use  of  arms ;  especially  those  born  in  his  own
house.  "That  the  patriarchs  carried  weapons  is
clear  from  chs.  xxxiv.  25;  xlix.  5."  Knobel. — Unto
Dan.  Keil  shows  that  the  Dan  alluded  to  cannot  be
the  (Laish)  Dan  (Judg.  xviii.  29)  situated  in  the
midst  of  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,  since  it  does  not
lie  upon  either  of  the  ways  leading  from  the  valley
of  the  Jordan  to  Damascus  ;  but  Dan  in  Gilead  (Dent.
xxxiv.  1  ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  (J).  In  Dan,  Abram  divides
his  little  army  into  bands,  and  falls  upon  the  enemy
from  different  quarters  by  night,  and  pursues  him
unto  Hobah,  "  probably  preserved  in  the  village
Hoba,  which  Troilo  found  a  quarter  of  a  mile
northerly  from  Damascus."  Keil.  The  Hebrews  de
fined  the  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  their  faces
to  the  East ;  hence  the  left  hand  is  northward.
Victorious,  he  brought  hack  the  whole  spoil  of  the
enemy,  both  in  men  and  goods. — And  also  Lot  his
brother.

4.  Abrani's  Triumphant  Jiitxrtt  (vers.  17-24).
The  kings  who  welcome  him. — At  the  valley  of
Shaveh,  i.  e.  the  (later)  king's  dale.  The  valley
probably  takes  its  name  from  this  event.  Absalom
erected  his  pillar  here,  2  Sam.  xviii.  18  (afterwards
remodelled  in  the  Greek  style).  According  to  Jo-
SEPHUS,  Antiq.  vii.  In,  ;•>,  it  lay  about  two  stadia
from  Jerusalem.  Melchixedec  went  northwards  to
meet  him,  thus  in  the  upper  valley  of  the  Kidron
(see  Dictionaries).  Melehixedec  appears  to  have
anticipated  the  king  of  Sodom  ;  at  all  events  he  has
the  precedence.  I'nder  his  royal  city,  Salem,  we
must  understand  Jerusalem  (Ps.  lxx\i.  :>),  and  not
the  di>tant  Salim  in  whose  vicinity  John  baptized
(John  iii.  2:-!).  Comp.  KKIL,  p.  143.  In  favor  of
Jerusalem  (1~?  =  "''n?,  founding,  or  Or.?,  posses
sion;  the  name  cbc'"i?  is  cither  the  founding  or
the  possession  of  peace ;  the  first  is  preferable,)  are
JOSKFIIUS  :  Antitj.  i.  10,  2 ;  the  Targums,  Aben
E/.ra,  Kimchi,  etc.,  Knobel,  Delitxsch,  and  Keil;
Krahmer,  Kwald  :  "  History  of  Israel,  ii.  p.  410,"  are
in  favor  of  the  Salim  of  Jerome.  That  at  the  time
of  Jerome,  the  palace  of  Melehixedec  was  usually
pointed  out  in  the  ruins  of  Salumias,  lying  about
eight  Roman  miles  from  Scythopolis,  of  which  llob-
inson  and  Smith  found  no  trace,  proves  nothing.
Salumias  lay  too  far  to  the  north,  for  the  statement
in  the  narrative.  Melchizedec  (king  of  righteous
ness — the  language  of  the  Canaanites  was  Hebraic)
is  described  as  a  priest  of  El  Eljon.  According  to
Sanchuniaton  (EUSKBILS:  Pra-p.i.  10),  the  Phuuni.
cians  called  God  'EAio^,  and  Ilanno  the  Carthaginian,
in  Plautus  J'ccnulus,  7iames  the  gods  and  goddesses
Elonim  or  Elonoth  ;  but  the  teim  here  used  is  differ
ent,  and  its  signification  is  monotheistic,  "not  God
as  the  highest  among  many,  but  in  a  monotheistic
sense,  the  one  most  high  God."  (Dclitzsch).  He
brings  from  his  city  bread  and  wine  to  refresh  Abram
and  his  followers.  "  The  papists  explain  it  with  ref
erence  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  but  the  reference
is  fatal  to  their  own  case,  since  Melchizedec  gave


*  [These  tried,  proved,  thus  trained  servants,  were  born,
in  his  house,  Prov.  xxii.  6.  "  Abram  had  trained  them  in
spiritual  things  in  the  service  of  God,  as  well  as  in  fidelity
to  himself;  sec  chap,  xviii.  19,  and  xxiv.  12-19."  WOKDS-
WOKIH,  p.  71.— A.  G.]


CHAP.  XIV.  1-24.


405


the  wine  also.     He  brought  forth,  not  he  brough
before  God."    Schroder.      Melchizedec's  prayer  Ib
prosperity  and  blessing  is  translated  by  Delitzsch
rhythmically  as  a,  double  blessing.*     The  term  n:p
denotes  the  ruler,  but  may  also  be  used  to  denol
the   creator  and   possessor. — And   he   gave  him
tithes.     As  Melchizedec  was  a  priest  of  the  tru
God,  the  gift  of  the  tithe  of  the  spoil  was  a  sanctifi
caiion  of  the  war  and  victory,  as  in  the  later  history
of  Israel  the  tithe  belonged  to  the  priest  (Lev.  xxvii
30),  and  the  payment  of  the  gift  of  consecration,  out
of  the  spoils  of  war,  to  the  priestly  tribe,  was  se
cured  by  law  (Xumb.  xxxi.  28  ff.  ;  2  Sam.  viii.   11
1  Chron.  xxvi.  27).    Compare  Heb.  vii.  4. — The  kin
of  Sodom  does  not  speak  in  a  formal,  solemn  wa
but  with  obvious  prudence,  encouraged  by  the  gene
rosity  of  Abram,  to  whom,  by  the  laws  of  war,  the
captives   belonged  as  slaves. — Give  me  the  per
sons  (souls).     Then  follows  the  noble  declaration  ol
Abram,  which  is  both  a  recognition  of  the  God  oi
Melchizedec,  or  of  the  community  of  faith,  between
Abram  and  Melchizedec,  since  it  joins  together  the
names  Jehovah  and  El  Eljon,  and  at  the  same  time
a  noble  expression  of  his  unselfishness.     He  would
not  retain  anything  from  a  thread  to  a  shoe-latchet,
i.  e.,  not  the  least  thing,  so  that  the  king  of  Sodom
could  never  say,  I  have  made  Abram  rich.     As  he
declares  his  intimate  communion  with  Melchizedec
and  introduces  it  into  the  very  forms  of  expression
of  his  religion,  so  he  utterly  refuses  any  community
of  goods  with  the  king  of  Sodom.     He  reserves  only
what  his  servants  had  already  consumed  in  the  neces
sities  of  war,  and  that  part  of  the  spoil  which  fell  to
his   three  confederates,  Aner,  Eschol,   and    Mamre
(Numb.  xxxi.  26  ;  1  Sam.  xxx.  26).


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  The  first  well-defined  appearance  of  war  in
its  different  aspects.  A  war  of  the  world  against
the  world— the  kings — the  alliances— the  conquests
— the  rulers  and  their  revolted  vassals — the  promi
nent  leader  (Chedorlaomer)— the  attack— the  victory
and  defeat — the  plunder,  and  service  of  captives —
of  the  hard  destiny  of  those  who  dwelt  quietly  in
the  land  (Lot)— of  the  wide-spread  terror,  and 'the
rebuke  of  that  terror,  before  the  true  heroism  with
which  the  true  hero  of  faith  opposes  a  defensive
and  necessary  war,  to  the  attacks  of  the  confident
and  haughty  prince.  The  children  of  God  find
themselves  unexpectedly  involved  in  the  wars  of  the
world,  as  the  history  of  Abram,  Lot,  and  Melchizedec
proves.  The  destructive  nature  of  war,  so  far  as  it  is
the  fruit  of  human  passions,  and  the  providential
overruling  of  it  unto  salvation.

t  2.  The  fearful  overthrow  of  the  Sodomite  pcntap-
olis  in  the  vale  of  Siddim,  and  the  wonderful  rescue
by  Abrtim  the  man  of  faith,  wrought  no  repentance
m  the  people  of  that  valley,  although  they  were  al
ready  weakened  and  enervated  by  "their  luxury,  nor
even  any  gratitude  towards  Lot,  for  whose  sake  thev
were  rescued  (ch.  xix.  9).  Hence  the  lost  battle,  and

*  "  Gebenedcit  sei  Abram  Gott,  dom  Allerhabencn
Dom  ErschafFcr  Himmels  und  dor  Erde
TJnd  gebcnedeit  sci  Gott,  der  Allcrhabone
Der  gehefert  dcine  Drtinger  in  dcine  Hand."

— '  alS°  rofers  to  thc  P°ctical  forms  ~"1


the  terrors  of  war  in  the  vale  of  Siddim,  became  a
portent  and  sign  of  their  later  overthrow.

3.  In  thc-  misfortunes  which  came  upon  him,  Lot
must  suffer  the  retribution  for  his  misdeeds  towards
Abram.     But  Abram  rewards  his  ingratitude  with
self-sacrificing  magnanimity.

4.  The  terrors  of  war  in  its  desolating  and  para
lyzing  power.     How  it  may  be  interrupted,  and  is
usually  checked  and  brought  to  an  cud,  through  the
heroic  faith  and  courage  of  some  single  hero,  or  it
may  be,  band  of  heroes.

5.  Abram,  the   man  of  peace   of  the  previous
chapter,    the  yielding   child  of  peace,   is  instantly
changed  into  a  lion  when  the  report  comes  to  him,
that  Lot,  his  brother,  is  a  captive.     One  citizen  of
the  kingdom  of  God  is  of  so  great  importance  in  his
esteem,  that  he  will  attack  a  whole  victorious  army
with  his  little  band,  and  venture  his  own  life,  and
the  lives  of  his  servants  upon  the  issue.     Thus  enter
in  opposition  to  the  gloomy  heroism  of  the  earth  in
Chedorlaomer  and  his  followers,  the  light  and  cheer
ful  heroism  of  heaven,  to  the  war  for  oppression  and
bondage  in  its  dark  form,  the  light  form  and  aspect
of  the  war  of  salvation  and  liberty,  to  the  power  of
godlessness,  inhumanity,  and  desperation,   in  union
with  demoniac  powers,  the  power  of  faith,  and  love,
and  hope,  in  covenant  with  Jehovah.

6.  It  did  not  enter  the  thought  of  Abram,  that
the  princes  against  whom  he  went  out  to  war  were
for  the  most  part  descendants  of  Shem,  and  indeed
the  people  of  his  former  home,  and  that  those  whom
he  rescued,  and  with  whom  he  connects  himself,  are
the  descendants  of  Ham.     The  motive  for  the  war
was  to  save  Lot,*  and  the  alliance  for  the  right,
against  the  alliance  for  wrong,  was  decisive  for  him.
The   love  to  his  brother,  the  Hebrew,  has  special
power.     Brotherly  love.     Every  Hebrew,  in  the  best
and  highest  sense,  must  help  others  as  his  brethren.
But  in  "  the  Hebrew  "  here  the  important  thing  is,
that  he  "  comes  from  across  the  river,"  not  as  De-
litzsch  holds,  that  he  is  descended  from  Heber.

7.  Abram  has  not  only,  in  his  faith,  a  heroism
and  self-sacrifice  which  overcomes  the  world,  he  has
also   the  heroic  strength  and  spirit.     His  servants
ire  men  trained  to  arms.     He  knew  that,  in  an  evil
world,  one  needs  defence  and  weapons,  and  must  be
armed.     In  his  war  with  the  world,  he  does  not  de
spise  an  honorable  alliance  with  those  who,  in  a  reli
gious   point  of  view,   may  have   different  ways  of

hinking  from  himself.     Indeed,  he  acts  throughout

n  the  true  hero-spirit.  The  rapid,  instantaneous
onset,  the  well-ordered  and  irresistible  charge,  the
outmarching  and  flanking  of  the  enemy,  the  falling
upon  him  by  night,  the  fierce  pursuit  to  the  very
utmost,  to  the  completed  result,  these  are  the  orig-

nal,  fundamental   laws   of  all   intelligent    warfare.

ind  it  does   not  admit  of  question,  that  Cromwell

["But  his  inarch  and  victory  have  another  and  a
ligher  reference  in  thc  object  of  the  history.  Even  hero
;  is  not  to  glorify  Abram,  but  rather  the  wonderful  prov-
dence  of  God  over  his  chosen,  through  which  all  here
nters  in  immediate  connection  with  the  divine  plan.
\_brain  is  thc  designated  possessor  of  the  land  ;  it  is  his
onccrn,  therefore,  to  guard  thc  land  from  all  assaults,  and
o  avenge  its  injuries  ;  it  is  the  part  of  God,  who  has  dcsis-
ritcd  him  to  this  end,  to  give  him  the  victory."  KURTZ:
History  of  the  Old  Covenant,"  p.  171. — A.  G.]

[His  title  to  the  land  involves  him  in  the  war.  Tie  must
cfc-nd  that  which  has  been  given  to  him.  "  He  is  no  sooner
onfirmcd  in  his  title,  than  the  land  is  invaded  by  aconfed-
raey  of  hostile  kings.  Thus  the  kingdom  of  God  is  no
ooiier  set  up  anywhere,  than  there  is  a  rallving  of  the
world  kingdoms  against  it."  JACOBUS,  p.  247.— A  G  J


400


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


'earned  these  fundamental  principles  of  warfare
from  Abrain  and  other  Old  Testament  heroes,  and
.{  /v  probable  Hint  Napoleon,  in  these,  as  in  inanji
other  points,  H'IIS  an  imitator  of  Cromwell  ;  as  it  is
certain  that  (ineiseiiau  and  liliichcr  liavu  learned
from  the  method  of  Napoleon.  In  the  spirit  of
prayer  Cromwell,  the  invincible,  was  greatly  in  ad
vance  of  him  (Napoleon;;  the  heroes  of  the  times
when  freedom  triumphs  place  victoriously  the  joyful
longing  for  deliverance  of  the  people  over  against
the  demoniac  lust  of  conquest  of  the  murderers  of
the  people.

8.  Abram  is  a.-sureil  of  the  good-will  and  help
of. Jehovah  through  the  Spirit  of  (Jod  inspiring  him
with  believing  ami  sacrificing  courage ;  and  therefore
joins  hi>  might,  in  the  feeling  of  his  individual  weak
ness,  with  omnipotence,  and  make*  himself  and  his
forces,  to  whom  he  communicates  his  own  spirit,
invincible  against  the  host-;  of  the  enemy,  whose
pottei,  as  demoniac  and  magical,  cannot  stand  before
the  terrors  of  (MM!,  but  parses  at  once  from  haughty
eoniideiiee  to  trembling  and  despair.  The  germ-like
oriental  world-power  surges  and  breaks  itself  upon
the  heroic  heart  of  the  lather  of  the  faithful,  as  all
the  sncccedinir  forms  of  the  world-power,  must  break
into  pieces  upon  the  believing  power  of  the  kingdom
01  doil  ;  and  for  this  reason,  because,  in  the  very
centre  of  the  world's  history,  all  the  powers  of  the
world  and  of  hell  broke  and  went  to  pieces  against
the  divine  stability  of  the  heart  of  Christ.

'.'.  In  warfare,  as  in  all  the  forms  of  civilization
and  life,  in  political  government,  in  poetry,  the
Hebrew  principle  is  il;n«unii;  living,  while  the  prin
ciple  of  the  world,  especially  of  the  (ireek  and
liomish  civilization,  is  lifeless,  formal,  or  tn-/,ni<-aL
II'Te  the  living  fountain  of  original,  direct  divine  in
spiration  is  prominent,  while  the  ordinary  cosniieal
forming'  principles  are  throughout  kept  in  the  back
ground.  l!ut  the  dynamic  principle  is  also  the  prin
ciple  of  regeneration  for  the  technical  and  artistic
system — even  for  science  itself.  Thus,  in  our  his
tory  also,  the  technical  H  sufficiently  apparent.*-  "  It
is  remarkable,  moreover,  that  corresponding  to  this
original  mode  of  warfare,  the  almost  exclusive  order
of  battle  in  later  times,  is  the  division  of  the  army
into  three  parts,  that  the' enemy  may  be  attacked  in  the
centre  and  upon  both  (I/inks  at  the  same  time  (Judo1.
v'.i.  Hi;  1  Sam.  xi.  11  ;  1  .Mace.  v.  :;:;)"  Schroder.
In.  Melchizedec  as  priest  and  king  in  one  per
son,  without  genealogy  in  his  priesthood,  which  he
executed  for  his  people  by  virtue  of  a  sovereign  in
dividual  call,  is  a  type  of  the  Messiah,  and  is  repre
sented  as  such,  1's.  ex.  4,  but  especially  in  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews  (eh.  v.  6;  eh.  vii.  17).  From  the
circumstance  that  Melehizedec  was  not  a  worshipper
of  the  Canaanitish  Hani,  but  was  a  monotheist,  or  as
Knobel  thinks,  a  worshipper  of  the  Semitic  principal
deity,  El,  Knobel  concludes  that  he  belonged  to  the
Semitic  tribe,  Lud,  to  which  also  the  tribes  at  war
belonged.  The  supposition  of  a  Semitic  chief  deity
is  in  an  erroneous  manner  transferred  from  the  re
lations  of  a  later  time,  to  the  times  of  the  primitive
religion.  It  is  the  characteristic  of  the  primitive  re
ligion,  that  in  it  throughout  Heathenism  and  Mono-

*  ["The  things  of  chief  importance  here  arc  Abram's
faith  and  the  help  of  God  ;  but  wo  should  not  overlook,  that
his  force  may  have  reached  a  thousand  men,  including  his
confederates,  and  further,  the  effect  of  the  security  of  the
hostile  forces,  the  sudden  terror,  the  darkness  of  the  nisrht,
their  confusion  among  themselves,  and  the  strategic  skill
of  Abrain."  KURTZ,  p.  17U. — A.  G.]


theism  cleave  together  and  go  asunder.  Mclchize-
'  dec  might,  therefore,  well  belong  to  the  Hamitic
I  race.*  He  is  not  a  Christ  of  the  heavenly  world,  as
perhaps  the  Gnostics  would  make  him,  nor  Shorn,  nor
Enoch,  as  the  Rabbins  and  the  Church  fathers  have
thought;  he  is  a  type  of  Christ,  because  he  is  king
|  and  priest  at  the  same  time,  because  his  priesthood
rests  upon  his  individual  personality  (airaru>t>,  etc.,
Heb.  vii.  ;i),  and  because  Abram,  the  ancestor  of  the
Levitical  priesthood,  gave  tithes  to  him.  lie  is  not
''  perhaps  the  last  witness  and  confessor  of  the  prim
itive  revelation  out  of  the  night  of  heathenism,"  for
that  is  the  splendor  of  an  evening  sky  which  rcaehea
through  all  time;  but  he  is  the  last  representative
of  the  pi'i-loil  of  the  primitive  religion,  and  therefore
he  blesses  Abrain  in  a  similar  sense  to  that  in  which
the  Baptist  must  baptize  Christ  the  Lord,  in  Jordan.
He,  in  his  way,  stands  as  the  last  of  the  first  world-
period ;  Abram  is  one  who  belongs  to  the  future, f
and  therefore  he  blisses  Abram,  and  Abrain  does
him  homage.  That  lie  is  Melchizedec,  is  in  the  first
place  significant  ("it  maybe  concluded  from  Josh.
x.  1,  :>,  where  a  later  king  of  Jerusalem,  Adoni-
Zcdck,  i.  e.,  lord  of  righteousness,  is  mentioned,  that
this  was  a  standing  name  of  the  old  kings  of  Sa
lem."  Keii) ;  then,  the  name  of  his  residence,  Salem  ;
further,  tli.it  he  is  priest  and  king  at  the  same
time  ("in  the  old  Phoenician  custom."  J)e!it/sch)  ;
finally,  that  he  represents  no  legal  and  genealogical
priesthood,  but  .-liines  singly  and  alone  as  a  clear,
bright  star,  in  the  night  of  Canaan  :  all  these  consti
tute  him  a  mysterious,  renowned  type  of  Christ  (see
PKUT/SCH,  p.  ">('>•'•;  KKIL,  p.  Ill;  At  I;KI:I.KN  upon
"Melchizedec,"  in  the  Studien  «//</  l\>-ilik<-n,  I.so7,
p.  loo).  \  As  he  is  the  priest  of  El  Eljon,  that  can
only  mean,  that  he  intercedes  for  his  people  before
the  most  \\\:r\\  <iod  with  prayer  and  sacrifice,  that
he  sought  cither  to  lead  back  the  Jebiisites  at  Sa
lem  to  a  living  monotheism,  or  to  preserve  them  in  it.


*  (The  name,  however,  is  Semitic.  It  is  prohal,'
he  was  a  Semiti'1  chieftain,  having  his  royal  seat  at  .Jerci-n-
lem.  The  locality,  as  everything  dr-e  in  connection  \vith
this  person,  so  l.rietly  r<  i'crred  to  here,  and  then  dismissed,
is  impoitant.  Thi.-,  is  clear  from  the  Use  which  is  made  of
this  history  in  the  Kpistle  to  the  Hebrews,  lie  was  a  per
sonal  type  of  Chri4  :  1.  As  he  was  both  priest  and  king;
•2.  as  Icing  of  righteousness  and  peace;  U.  as  he  was  ton-
sJruethvly,  so  fur  as  the  history  goes,  without  father  and
without  mother  ;  4.  as  hi1  held  his  priesthood  probably  by  a
special  divine  warrant.  He  acts  as  a  priest :  1.  In  bringing
the  bread  and  wine,  here  probably  connected  with  asacrilico
and  sacramental,  refreshing  this  wearied  warrior  of  the  faith,
and  welcoming  him  to  the  communion  of  saints  ;  2.  in  bless
ing  Abram— which  is  here  the  solemn,  priestly  benediction ;
;;.  in  receiving  tithes  from  Abrain— through  which  Abram
recognizes  his  typical  superiority— and  in  which  the  whole
Lev.tical  priesthood,  yet  in  the  loins  of  Abram,  recognizes
the  superiority  of  that  Priesthood  of  which  he  was  the  type.
It  thus  becomes  evident,  as  the  Apostle  shows,  that  the  Le
vitical  priesthood,  and  the  whole  Mosaic  institution,  were
intermediate  and  temporary,  and  pointed  to  the  higher
Priest  to  come — who  is  both  Priest  and  King,  and  who
holds  his  priesthood  not  by  descent,  but  by  the  express  ap
pointment  and  oath  of  God. — A.  G.]  •

t  German,  Ein  Wcrdnitlrr.

I  [See  also  KVRTZ  :  "  History  of  the  Old  Covenant,"  pp.
173-176,  whose  remarks  here  arc  very  suggestive,  and  JA
COBUS  :  "  Notes,"  pp.  2JG-2GO.— A.  G.]

["  ilclchizedec  brought  foith  bread  and  wine  as  the  priest
nf  the  most  high  God.  There  seems  to  be  an  intimation
that  this  was  a  priestly  net,  and  accordingly  the  crowning
part  of  a  sacred  feast.  It  was  probably  connected  with  the
ottering  of  a  sacrifice.  This  view  of  his  acts  is  confirmed  by
the  blessing  which  he  pronounces  as  the  priest  of  the  most
high  God."  MCHPHY,  p.  288,  289.— A.  G.]

[Melchizedec  stands  as  the  personal  type  of  Christ,  acd
at  the  svmo  time  in  his  acts  and  relations  here,  seems  to
tvpify  what  Christ,  as  our  Priest,  is  ever  doing  for  his  peo-
ple.-A.  G.]


CHAP.    XIV.   1-24.


407


11.  It  is  in  the  highest  degree  significant  that
Abram   honors   Melehizedec  with  the   tithes,*  and
that  he  introduces  El  Eljon,  in  the  oath,  or  the  reli
gious  expression  of  it,  while  he  will  not  take  from
the  king  of  Sodom  anything  from  a  thread  to  a  shoe-
latchet.    (KNOUEL:  "Abraham  is  perhaps  sensitive,"
etc.)     This  i.s  the  position  of  the  religion  of  faith  to
the  world  both  in  its  godly  and  ungodly  aspects,  the
whole  connection  and  concern  of  faith  in  the  forms
of  its  higher  culture,  the  entire  strength  of  its  repel
ling  attitude  and  tendency  towards  its  ungodly  nature.

12.  "  If  it  is  certain  that  the  repetition  by  Mel
ehizedec  of  the  familiar  title  of  God  which  he  uses
was  intended,  then  the  name  Jehovah,  which  Abram
adds  to  this  title,  and  which,  indeed,  he  places  in  the
greatest  prominence,  is  not  without  a  purpose.     It
must  serve  the  purpose  to  announce  that  Abram,  in
the  common  foundation  on  which  they  stand,  has  still
more  than  Melchizedcc.      Melehizedec,  in  the  most
high  God,  recognizes  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,
but    not    Jehovah."     Hengstcnberg.      This    agrees
with  the  idea  that  Jehovah  is  the  God  of  the  cove
nant.     In  the  measure  of  this  faith,  a  new  period
of  religion  begins  with  Abram.      God,  as  the  Most
High, f  does  not  designate  the  Highest  in  distinction
from  lower  gods,  but  in  his  exultation  above  all  the
symbols  of  his  being,  which  the  heathen  began  to
reverence  as  gods ;  thus  it  stands  in  opposition  to
polytheism,  and  also  to  pantheism  and  dualism,  the
true  expression  of  the  primitive  religion.     Hofmann
finds  here  again  an  intimation  of  the  ascension  of
God  from  the  earth  before  the  flood.     We  have  al
luded  to  this  in  the  previous  part  of  this  work.

13.  The  oath  of  Abram  is  the  first  example  of  an
oatli  with  the  uplifted  hand,  in  solemn  appeal  to  God.
But  Abram  swears  in  his  own  method,  and  at  the
same  time  in  the  devout,  customary  mode  of  Mel
ehizedec.     For  other  examples,  see  chaps,  xxi.  23 ;
xxvi.  28,  etc.

14.  In  the   elevated   character  of  Abram,  it  is
worthy  of  particular  notice  and  praise,  that  with  his
entire  renunciation  of  any  advantage  to  himself,  he
preserves  the  rights  of  his  confederates,  Mamre,  etc.,
according  to  both  usage  and  equity.

15.  It  is  remarkable,  that  this  one  chapter  shows
us  how  the  father  of  believers  enters  into  these  va-

'  The  bringing  of  the  tithes  was  an  actual  recognition


SymMiki.  p.  379.— A.  (i.

["Abrain,  the  blessed  of  Jehovah,  and  the  mediator  of
blessings  for  all  the  people,  allows  himself  to  be  blessed  by
this  royal  priest,  who  stands  beyond  the  line  and  circle  of
the  promise.  Abram,  the  ancestor  of  Israel,  of  Aaron,  and
Lovi,  of  the  people  and  the  priesthood  of  the  law,  allows
himself  to  be  blessed  by  this  royal  priest,  who  shows  no  title
through  descent  or  tlie  law.  And  not  only  so  ;  Abram,  in
whom  was  the  priestly  race  which  should  receive  the  tithes,
gave  t>  thi.-i  royal  priest  the  tithes  of  all  the  spoil.  There
is,  therefore,  an  extra-legal,  royal  priesthood,  and  priestly
kingdom,  which  this  history  typically  prophesies,  to  whom
even  Abram  and  his  seed  should  bow,  to  whom  even  the
Levitical  priesthood  should  render  homiige  ;  for,  just  where
Abram  stands  in  incomparably  the  most  striking  typical
character,  there  Melehizedec  enters  and  towers  above  him.
Melehizedec  is  the  setting  sun  of  the  primitive  revelation,
which  sheds  its  last  rays  upon  the  patriarchs,  from  whom
the  true  light  of  the  world  is  to  arise.  The  sun  sets,  that
when  the  preparatory  time  of  the  patriarchs,  the  prepara
tory  time  of  Israel,  have  passed  aw;iy,  it  may  ri~e  again  in
Jesus  Christ,  the  antitype."  Dclitzsch. — A.  G.]

t  ["  There  is  here  no  indistinct  allusion  to  the  creation
of  'hen veti  and  earth'  mentioned  in  the  opening  of  the
book  of  God.  This  is  a  manifest  identification  of  the  God
•f  Melehizedec  with  the  one  creator  and  upholder  of  all
things."  MURPHY,  p.  2S9.—  A.  G.J


ricd  forms  of  life,  of  war,  of  union  with  those  who
differed  from  himself  in  their  modes  of  thought,  of
tithes,  and  of  the  oath,  as  his  intercourse  with  the
world  demanded.  He  uses  the  oath  with  the  king
of  Sodom,  a  man  of  the  world,  who  appears  to  have
doubted  his  unselfishness  and  magnanimity.

1 C.  We  have  here,  also,  the  first  stratagem,  tho
first  celebration  of  victory,  and  the  first  priest.

17.  The  first  conflict  of  the  hosts  of  faith  with
the  first  appearance  of  the  world-power.  The  his
torical  example  of  the  Maccabees,  Waldenses,  etc.


IIOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  portions. — Texts
for  sermons  on  war,  victory,  deliverances,  public
calls,  and  demands  to  duty,  and  upon  the  oath,  etc.
War  in  a  threefold  form  :  1.  War  of  violence  ;  2.  war
of  a  faint-hearted  defence;  3.  the  rescuing  war  of
divine  inspiration. — Alliances  in  a  threefold  form :
1.  Alliance  for  robbery;  2.  the  faint-hearted  alli
ance  for  defence ;  3.  alliance  for  life  and  death. —
Abram  as  a  warlike  prince. — Love  of  our  brother  as
a  motive  in  war. — Abrara's  war  and  victory. — Cele
bration  of  Abram's  victory. — Melehizedec  as  a  type
of  Christ. — Christ  also  does  not  enter  into  worldly
wars,  but  he  refreshes  pious  heroes  with  bread  and
wine. — Bread  and  wine  the  refreshment  of  the  king
of  peace,  for  those  who  contend  for  God. — To  every
one  his  own,  particularly  to  faithful  confederates.

STARKE  :  This  the  first  war  which  the  Scripture
commemorates,  and  its  cause  was  the  lust  of  domin
ion.  (Let  it  be  granted  that  Chedorlaomcr  had  sub
jugated  the  cities  mentioned  in  ver.  2,  in  an  unright
eous  way,  still  they  were  in  the  wrong,  since  they
began  to  rebel,  and  in  this  way  would  regain  their
freedom,*  etc. — How  can  Abram  help  these  rebels?)
— God  used  the  four  kings  as  rods  to  punish  others.
Wurtemb.  Bible :  War  and  rebellion  arc  evils  above
all  other  evils ;  indeed,  a  condensed  epitome,  as  it
were,  of  all  calamities  and  sorrows. — OSIANDER:  If
the  saints  dwell  with  the  godless,  they  must  often  be
brought  down  and  punished  with  them. — (Query:
Whether  Abrain,  with  a  good  conscience,  could
enter  into  a  covenant  with  the  Canaanites  ?  He
might  make  different  excuses  ;  e.  g.,  it  is  not  proven
that  they  were  heathen ;  finally,  he  could  say  cor
rectly,  one  must  discern  and  distinguish  the  times. —
Citation  of  Jewish  fables :  "  In  Abram's  contest,  all
the  dust  (every  staff"?)  became  swords,  and  every
straw  an  arrow.")  Vcr.  lo.  An  instance  of  strata
gem,  Josh.  viii.  2  ;  Judg.  xx.  29 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  5. —
CRAMER  :  God  remembers  even  the  poor  captive.
— Covenants,  even  with  persons  not  of  our  reli
gion  and  faith,  if  made  in  a  correct  way,  and  with
a  right  purpose,  are  not  wrong ;  still,  we  must  not
rely  upon  them  (Dent.  xx.  1). — Legitimate  war. —
Against  rash  undertakings. — OSIANDKR  :  No  external
power,  but  faith  in  God,  gives  the  victory. — Vcr.  18.
Here,  for  the  first  time,  a  priest  is  spoken  of. —
CRAMER:  Honor  is  the  reward  of  virtue. — The  tithes
of  Abram. — O.SIANDER  :  A  Christian  must  even  make
his  possessions  of  service  to  the  officers  of  the  Church.
— Kings  and  princes,  if  God  grants  them  victory
over  their  enemies,  must  not  only  give  him  public

*  [It  is  not  said  in  the  narrative  that  they  were  wrong ;
and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  they  were.  Hcbcllion  may
be  right.  It  is  so,  if  the  government  is  unjust  and  oppres
sive,  and  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  success  will  at
tend  their  efforts  to  shake  oil  the  yoke  of  bondage. — A.  G.J


408


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


thanks,  but  present  to  him  of  the  spoil  they  have
taken. — Teachers  and  princes  must  profl'cr  assistance
10  each  other,  and  exchange  temporal  goods  for
spiritual  (1  Cor.  ix.  11. — Finally,  upon  the  legitimate
oath;  renunciation  of  his  own  rights,  the  compe
tency,  (kc  eyuiiable  >r«i/tx  or  /•<  i-'-urd$  of  war.

Lisro:  Abram's  magnanimity  overlooks  all  the
unbecoming  deportment  of  Lot  towards  him;  he
ventures  his  life  for  him. — The  central  point  in  this
rarrative  is  the  grace  of  God  towards  his  chosen,
through  which  he  places  him  in  a  condition  to  wage
victorious  war  with  kings,  and  after  the  assured  vic
tory,  the  same  grace  brings  kings  to  meet  him,  the
one  ill  a  thoughtful  recognition,  the  other  fawns  in
Mibjection  and  begs. — .A  brain's  freedom  from  sel-
lishne.-s. — C.u.\vi-;i:,  Handbuch:  The  humble  man  of
faith,  a  victorious  warrior  and  hero. — The  strength
of  the  Lord  is  mighty  in  the  weak. — SCIIKODKK  :  No
erecting  of  blessing,  no  word  of  God  falls  from  the
lips  of  this  king  of  Sodom;  he  is  only  thinking  of
the  eanhly. — (CALVIN):  It  is  worthy  of  praise,  that
lie  is  thankful  to  men  if  he  is  not  ungrateful  to  God.
It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  this  poor  man,  stript
of  his  goods,  through  a  servile,  hypocritical  pretence
of  mode-ty,  might  obtain  from  Abram,  at  least,  the
captives  and  the  free  city  for  himself.  (Calvin  saw,
eoiTectly,  that  Abram,  as  possessor  of  the  people  of
Sodom,  and  the  conqueror  of  the  rulers  of  Sodom,
won  for  hin, sell'  essentially  a  legitimate  dominion
ever  Sodom,  over  which  the  king  of  Sodom  would
pa.-s  as  lightly  as  possible). — Abram  bows  himself
before  Melehizedec,  but  before  the  king  of  Sodom
he  lifts  his  hand. — Thus  Abram  recognizes  and  ac


knowledges  Melehizedec,  while  he  penetrates  to  its
depth  the  nature  of  the  king  of  Sodom.  As  he  is
clearly  conscious  of  his  own  high  position,  he  con
descends  to  the  lower  standpoint  of  the  Sodomites
(out  of  which  condescension  the  oath  which  he
swears  proceeds),  in  order  thereby  to  reeogni/.e  and
own  the  higher  religious  standpoint  of  Melchixedec.
The  oath  an  act  of  worship.  He  testifies,  the'.eby,
that  he  had  not  undertaken  the  war  from  anv  lust  of
gain,  and  cuts  oil'  the  roots  of  all  the  solicitation  to
covetousness  (even  all  suspicion  of  the  same)  through
the  name  of  God. — I'ASSAVANT:  Fs.  xei. ;  liom.  viii.
31. — Covenants  for  mutual  defence  against  such  ex
peditions  for  plunder  and  life  were  necessary,  and
God  permitted  his  servants  among  the  Canaan  ites,  to
use  such  means  of  help  and  defence. — There  is  some
thing  greater  than  bread  and  wine,  mightier  than
victory  and  the  power  of  the  victor,  stronger  than
death,  and  it  overcomes,  ',nd<fd,  it  inherits  tltc  world.
What  is  it  'i  Every  child  of  Abram  can  tell. — TAUBE:
We  see  in  Abram's  victory  and  blessing,  the  victory
and  blessing  of  every  one  who  is  a  soldier  for  God. —
The  sacred  history  transplants  us  at  once  into  the
midst  of  the  turmoil  of  worldly  affairs  ;  from  the
quiet,  peaceful  tents  of  Abram,  we  are  transferred  to
the  tumults  of  war  of  heathen  nations. — HKTSKR:
The  meeting  of  Melchixedec,  the  royal  priest,  with
Abram:  a.  The  historical  event  itself;  /-.  the  typical
elements  in  it ;  c.  their  realization;  d.  the  importance
of  these  truths.

[This  history  must  be  placed  in  its  New  Testa
ment  light  (lleb.  vii.)  if  \\e  would  see  its  meaning
arid  importance. — A.  G.]


FOURTH    SECTION.

Abram  the  approved  Warrior  of  Faith,  and  God  hi?  Shield  <;nd  ///.s-  Rnrard.      IKs  longing  for  an

Jlcir,  and  his  thought  of  Adoption  anticipating  any  exigency  in  the  caxc.     The,  great  Promise

of  God.     Abranis  Faith  under  the  Starry  Heavens.     Tlic  Symbol  of  the  Starry  Heavens.

The  righteousness  of  Faith.     The  Covenant  of  Faith,  and  the  repeated  Promise.


CIIAPTKII   XV.    1-21.

1  After  these  things  [events  of  the  war]  the  word  of  the  Lord  came   [renewed  itself]  unto
A  brain  in  vision,  saying,  Fear  not,  Abram:  I  am  thy  shield   [in wnr even],  and  thy  ex-

2  cecding  great  reward  [reward  of  tho  champion].     And  Abram  said,  Lord  God,  what  wilt  thou
give  me,  seeing  I  go  [continually]  childless,  and  the  steward  [the  future  possessor]  of  my  house

3  is  this  Eliezer  [the  help  of  God,  God  is  my  help]  of  Damascus  ?     And  Abram  said,  Behold  to
mo  thou  hast  given  no  seed  [bodily  heir]  :    and,  lo,  one  born  in  my  house  is  mine  heir

4  [on  the  way  to  become  my  heir].     And,  behold,  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him,  saying,
This  shall  not  be  thine  heir;  but  he  that  shall  corne  forth  out  of  thine  own  bowels

5  [thine  own  nature]   shall  be  thine  heir.     And  he  brought  him  forth  abroad   [open  air],  and
said,  Look  now  toward  heaven,  and  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  number  them.    And

G  he  said  unlo  him,  So  shall  thy  seed  be.     And  he  believed  in  the  Lord  ;  and  he  counted

7  it  to  him  for  righteousness.     And  he  said  unto  him,  I  am  the  "Lord  that  brought  thee

8  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  to  give  thee  this  land  to  inherit  it.     And  he  said,  Lord  God,

9  whereby  [by  what  sign]  shall  I  know  that  I  shall  inherit  it?    And  he  said  unto  him,  Take
me  [bring  =  sacrifice  to  me]  a  heifer  of  three  years  old,  and  a  she-goat  of  three  years  old,  and  a

10  ram  of  three  years  old,  and  a  turtle-dove,  and  a  young  pigeon.     And  he  took  unto  him
[sacrificed]  all  these,  and  divided  them  [the  animal  sacrifice]  in  the  midst,  and  laid  each  piece


ciur.  xv.  1-21.


409


11  one  against  another:    but  tlie  birds  divided  lie  not.     And  when  the  fowls  came  down

12  upon  the  carcasses  [not  carrion],  Abram  drove  them  away.     And  when  the  sunwasgoinf
down,  a  deep  sleep  [n^--ip,  chap,  ii.21;  jobiv.  is]   fell  upon  Abram  ;   and,  lo,  a  horror  of

13  great  darkness  fell  upon  him.    And  he  said  unto  Abram,  Know  of  a  surety  that  thy  seed
shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  that  is  not  theirs  [thy  descendants j;  and  shall  serve  them";   and

14  they  shall  adlict  them  four  hundred  years  ;   And  also  that  nation,  whom  they  shall  serve,

15  will  I  judge;   and  afterward  shall  they  come  out  with  great  substance.     And  thou  shalt
1G  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace;   thou  shalt  be  buried  in  a  good  old  age.      But  in  the  fourth

generation  they  shall  come  hither  again  ;    for  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet

17  full  [to  the  measure  of  judgment].     And  it  came  to  pass,  that,  when  the  sun  went  down,  and
it  was  dark,   behold  a  smoking  furnace,  and  a  burning  lamp   [flamooffire]  that  passed

18  between  those  pieces  [of  the  sacrifice] .     In  that  same  day  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with
Abram,  saying,  Unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  [now  m  covenant]  this  land,  from  the  river

19  of  Kgypt  [wady  el  Arisch]  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates  :  The  [land  of]  Kenites

[workers  in  iron,  Judg.  iv.  11,  1?],  and  the  KcilizzitCS  [huntsmen],  and  the  KadmoniteS  [of  the  East],

20  And  the  Hittites  [fear,  terror,  in  Hebron],  and  the  Perizzites  [rustics],  and  the  Rephaim  [giants],

21  And  the  Amorites  [mountaineers,  uplanders],  and  the  Canaanites,  [lowianders],  and  the  Gir-

gashites  [dwellers  upon  the  clayey  soil],  and  the  JebusitCS    [OC?,  a  place  trodden  as  a  threshing-floor].


GEXERAL  PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

1.  The  connection  of  this  Section  with  the  pre
ceding  events  must  be  carefully  observed.     The  two
chapters  form  essentially  one  history.     Abram  had
in  faith  waged  war  against  a  fearful  and   superior
power  ;  hence  the  announcement  to  him :  /  (Jehovah)
am  th;i  shield.     He  had  renounced  all  claims  upon
the  spoil  of  war  ;  therefore  he  has  the  promise :  I  am
thy  exceeding  great  reward,  i.  e.,  reward  to  the  war
rior,     lie  had,  through  the  fresh,  living,  healthy  in
terchange  between  his  faith  and  the  world,  which  was
wanting  in  the  hermit-like  Melchizedec,  kept  himself
as  a  man  of  faith,  to  whom  it  belongs,  to  beget  a
race  of  believers,  who  should  stand  in  the  midst  of
the  world,  against  the  world  and  for  the  world.

2.  The  form  of  the   present  revelation  of  God
to^  Abram  gives   trouble   to  interpreters.      Knobel
thinks  tl.at  the  communication,  vers.  12-16,  belongs
to  a  night-vision ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  next  suc
ceeding  utterances  to  the  waking  moments.    Accord
ing  to  Keil,  the  word  of  Jehovah  comes  to  him  in
visible  forms,  neither  through   internal,  immediate
converse,   nor  through  dreams,  but   in  an  ecstacy
through  an  inward,  spiritual  beholding,  and  indeed,
in  the  day,  and  not  in  a  night-vision,  as  ch.  xlvi.  2.
"The   nmsa,  ver.   1,  rules   the  whole  chapter."
Against  the  first,  it  may  be  said,  that  the  narrative
speaks  of  a  vision  from  the  very  beginning  ;  against
the  hist,  that  Abram  is  led  out  to  number  the  stars ;
against  both,  that  they  do  not  involve  and  bring  out
any  recognition  of  the  psychological  form  of  the  past
revelation.     To  us,  it  appears  entirely  in  accordance
with  the  course  of  development  of  preceding  revela
tions,  that   Abram  should  first  have   received  the
word  of  Jehovah,  and  then  should  have  seen  a  mani
festation  of  Jehovah,  and  that  it  is  now  said,  the
word  of  Jehovah  comes  to  him  in  vision.     Abram,
truly,  at  this  time,  could  not  have  received  the  reve
lation  from  God  without  a  disposition  for  visions;
but  in  the  case  before  us,  which  treats  of  a  revela
tion  of  Jehovah   by  night,  the  visionary  fitness  of
Abram  comes  into  special  prominence.     This  dispo-
-ition  for  the  vision,  and  the  prominence  in  which  it
appears,  does  not  exclude  the  reality  of  the  following
lets,  which,  also,  Keil  regards  as  only  inward  occur
rences.    But  as  to  the  phrase  :  "  He  spake  to  him  in


visions ; "  he  accompanies  the  word  in  question  with
the  corresponding  image :  Abram  saw  the  divine
shield  and  the  divine  treasures  (KEIL,  p.  145).

EXEGETICAL  AXD   CRITICAL.

1.  The  promise  of  Jehovah,  the  starry  heavens
and  the  righteousness  of  faith  (vers.  1-6).* — Fear
not.  The  coward  fears  before  the  danger,  heroic
spirits  after.  Abram  had  now  an  experience  of  the
world  in  its  wicked  violence,  as  he  had  victoriously
resisted  its  defiant  challenge,  and  the  beaten  kings
might  easily  visit  him  with  vengeance  Therefore
he  receives  the  consoling  promise,  that  Jehovah  him
self  would  be  his  shield,  his  defence  in  all  conflicts
(Ps.  iii.  3 ;  xviii.  2). — Thy  exceeding  great  re-
ward.f  Not,  perhaps,  for  thy  general  piety,  but
the  reward  for  thy  heroic  conflict. — Abram  received
the  promise  of  God  with  the  same  feeling  of  weari
ness  of  his  natural  life,  with  which  Moses  at  eighty
years  received  the  divine  call  to  go  to  Egypt  and  free
the  people.  He  wished  to  establish  his  family.  Is
Jehovah  his  exceeding  great  reward,  then  there
naturally  follows  some  one  application  of  the  prom
ise  to  his  personal  relations ;  but  he  sees  no  other
application,  than  that  God  himself  would  be  his  ex
clusive  reward,  that  thus,  as  to  this  world,  this  Elie-
zer  of  Damascus,!  his  steward  (ch.  xxiv.  2),  must  be
his  heir.  The  thought  is  painful  to  him,  but  he
acquiesces  in  the  purpose  of  God,  and  desires  only
light  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  promise,  whether  it  is
to  be  understood  only  of  an  heir  by  adoption,  in

*  [  Tlie  ward  of  the  Lord  came  or  was.  "  This  is  the  first
place  in  the  Bible  where  this  phrase  occurs,  and  it  intro
duces  a  prophetic  vision  and  promise  of  Abram's  posterity
in  Christ— the  incarnate  wont"  Wordsworth..— A.  G.]

[The  1D2X  is  emphatic.— A.  G.]

t  [The  rendering  "thy  reward  is  exceeding  great,"  al
though  consistent  with  the  original,  and  yielding  a  good
sense,  fails  to  bring  out  clearly  the  prominent  thought  iu
the  promise.  It  is  not  the  great  things  which  Jehovafc
would  give,  but  Jehovah  himself,  to  which  the  mind  of
Abram  is  turned  as  his  reward.— A.  G.]

t  [There  i*  an  obvious  paranomasia  here — btn-meshek —
Dammcsck.  Wordsworth,  after  Lightfoot  and  others,  calls
attention  to  the  f:ict,  that  the  name  Eliezcr  is  the  same  as
Lazarus  in  our  Lord's  parable  (Luke  xvi.  20),  and  to  the
analogy  between  that  parable  and  this  history.  These
"silent  analogies  between  the  Old  and  New  Testaments'"
are  striking  and  important.— A.  G.]


410


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES.


which  case  this  Eliezer  appears  to  him  the  most
worthy.  He  desires  most  of  all  a.  decisive  sentence,
therefore  his  proposition  of  the  thing  by  anticipation.
Upon  this  allusion  depends  the  marvellous  tradition
that  Abram  had  been  king  of  Damascus  (JosKPii.,
Antiq.  i.  7,  2;  JCSTIN.,  xxxvi.  2). — To  me  thou
hast  given  no  seed.  The  pious  complaint  of  hu
man  weakness  liforc  (!od  must  lie  distinguished
from  the  i:npious  murmurs  n;:uinKt  Hod  (Kxod.  v.
22;  xxxiii.  12-15;  Numb.  xi.  11,  21;  Josh.  vii.
7;  Job;  the  prophets). — One  born  in  my  house
(son  of  my  house).*  It  is  not  synonymous  with  house-
born.  It  has  a  deeper  meaning;  it  designates  the
most  esteemed  servant  of  his  house. — Eliezer,  lie
Bays,  is  already  upon  the  way  to  become  my  heir.
It  is  a  complaining  thought,  which  forms  itself  into
a  resigned  proposition,  but  a  proposition  which  veils
a  question.  I'pon  this  follows  the  divine  deci>ion
(ver.  '!).  Jch'/vah  leads  him  out  of  his  tent,  under
the  heavens  as  seen  by  night.  His  disposition,  pre
paredness  lor  the  vision,  does  not  exclude  the  reality
of  these  events. f  lie  had  promised  him  at  first  one
natural  heir.  Hut  now  the  countless  stars  which  he
sees,  should  both  represent  the  innumerable  se-d
which  should  spring  from  this  one  heir,  and  at  the
.'-:-i;.'  time  be  the  warrant  lor  his  faith.  Jehovah
shows  him  tin-  image  of  his  descendants,  in  the  stars
of  heaven.  We  recognize  here  the  orientalist  from
i'r  of  the  Chaldees,  for  whom  the  lights  of  heaven
have  a  religious  significance,  but  at  the  same  time
the  free  monotlieist,  who  no  longer  seeks  in  the  stars
his  gods,  but  the  image  of  his  children.  That  God
who  spe:tks  to  him,  can  give  to  him  a  seed,  count
less  as  the  stars  in  heaven,  is  truly  presupposed  ;
the  representation  of  the  countlessncss  of  his  de
scendants  is  the  main  thought,  to  which  cleave  the
thoughts  of  their  shining  glory  and  their  heavenly
character  (sec  chap.  xxii.  17;  xxvi.  4  ;  Exod.  xxxii.
i:>). — And  ha  believed  in  the  Lord.  This  can
not,  l)e  either  an  element  of  a  dream,  or  the  frame  of
mind  prepared  peculiarly  for  visions,  for  it  is  an  act
of  faith  on  the  part  of  Abram,  which  was  counted  to
him  for  righteousness  by  Jehovah.  Knobel  re
marks:  "  Abram  did  not  laugh,  incredulously,  as  in
the  Elohistie  section,  xvii.  17,"  as  if  a  believer,  in
the  long  delay  of  the  promise,  could  never  fall  into
doubt,  (although  there  is  no  mention  of  any  incredu
lity  in  the  passage  referred  to).  Keil  asks:  "How
did  Moses  know  that  Abram  believed  ?  and  that  Je
hovah  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness?"  He
answers:  "He  proves  his  faith,  because,  according
t  >  the  following  directions,  he  brought  the  sacrifices,
and  because  what  Jehovah  did  with  the  animals  was
a  real  declaration  on  his  part,  that  he  counted  to
Abram  his  faith  for  righteousness."  We  must  dis
tinguish,  however,  the  inward  events  from  these
Facramental  signs,  in  which  they  are  visibly  mani
fested  and  scaled.  The  faith  of  Abram  in  the  prom
ise  of  a  bod'dii  heir  was  the  central  point  in  the  de
velopment  of  his  faith ;  with  this  faith  he  enjoyed
the  consciousness  that  Jehovah  counted  it  to  him  for
righteousness.  Justification  by  faith,  as  an  experi
ence  of  the  inner  life,  manifests  itself  in  the  peace

*  [Baumgarfcn  suggests  that  Eliezer  was  bom  at  Damas
cus  ;  then  the  T"3  "p  is  not  Eliezer,  but  his  son,  p.  185.
—A.  G.]

[Heb.  Son  of  my  Jinuse  is  inheriting  me ;  so  also  in  the
4th  verso,  there  ultall  not  inherit  tliee  this  one.  — A..  G.]

t  [There  is  no  impassable  cleft  or  abyss  between  the
spheres  of  vision  and  of  sense,  or  between  the  supersensi
ble  and  the  sensible. — A.  G.]


of  God  ;  and  Abram  could  have  given  testimony  ag
to  this  to  his  children,  if  nothing  had  occurred  as  to
the  sacrificial  animals  and  their  consumption  by  fire.
The  explanation  of  Knobel,  "a  right  disposition  of
heart  is  of  just  as  much  avail  to  liim  as  integrity  in
acts,"  is  both  tame  and  shallow.

[This  is  confessedly  an  important  passage.  Wo
have  here,  and  in  the  promise  (ver.  1),  the  "germ  of
the  great  doctrine  of  the  Lord  our  righteousness.
We  may  not  attach  to  the  words  here  used  the  ideas
in  all  their  definitcness,  which  have  been  derived
frorn  the  use  which  the  Apostle  makes  of  them
in  his  discussion  of  the  question,  how  a  sinner  can
be  justified  (Rom.  iv.  4,  5,  10,  18-25) ;  but  neither
may  we  overlook  his  inspired  exposition,  and  strive
to  interpret  the  words,  as  if  they  stood  entirely  by
themselves.  Leaving  this  out  of  view,  however,  it
is  clear  "that  Abram  had  no  righteousness  of  his
own,  that  i  ighteou-n-ss  was  imputed  to  him,  that  it
was  faith  in  Jehovah  in  him  which  was  counted  for
righteousness  ;  "  and  further,  that  this  faith  is  viewed
here,  not  merely  as  the  root  of  all  true  obedience  to
the  will  of  Cod,  and  thus  the  sum  of  righteousness
or  personal  holiness,  but  as  embracing  and  stead
fastly  resting  upon  (as  the  word  rendered  believed,
here  means)  God.  as  the  God  of  grace  and  salvation.
It  is  the  act  by  which  he  goes  out.  from  himself,  and
relics  upon  God,  for  righteou.  ness  and  grace.  The
history  clearly  shows  tiiat  there  was  this  entire  re
moval  from  the  natural  ground  upon  which  he  had
stood,  and  this  entire,  hearty,  steadfast  resting  upon
Jehovah,  "  who  is  ju>t  and  Laving  salvation'/  The
promise  which  Abram's  faith  embraced  was  the
promise  of  salvation  through  the  covenant  peed,  and
he  so  regarded  it.  His  faith,  therefore,  was  essen
tially  the  same  with  that  specific  faith  in  Christ
which  is  said  to  ju-tify  (see  Rom.  iv.  l;i).  The  Notes
of  Kurtz,  Ilaumgarten,  .Murphy,  are  suggestive  and
valuable;  and  the  exposition  of  Calvin  is  admirable, —
I'i'n ,  to  think,  desire,  purpose  ;  then  to  esteem,  reck
on,  impute,  set  to  one's  account,  2  Sam.  xix.  II1 ;  ]\s.
xxxii.  2;  Lev.  vii.  IS;  xvii.  2;  Num.  xviii.27.— A.G.]

2.  The  C'or<  an  nt  S:/-;-;jf,r  /a, /I  the.  Covenant  in
reference  to  C«na<in  (vers.  7-17).  Jehovah  gave  to
Abram  the  starry  heavens  as  a  sign  of  the  promise
of  an  heir.  Now  he  promises  to  Abram  the  land  of
Canaan  for  his  possession  (ver.  7).  Abram  a.-ks  a
sign  for  this.*  Jehovah  appoints  the  covenant  which
he  would  conclude  with  him  over  his  sacrifices,  for  a
sign.  He  determines,  also,  nt  first,  the  sacrifice
which  Abram  should  bring.  The  animals  named
here,  are  the  sacrificial  animals  of  the  Levitical
cultus.  The  future  possession  of  Canaan  was  repre
sented  beforehand  in  the  sacrifices  of  Canaan. f  The
sacrificial  animals  were  all  divided  (hence  rn"iz  IVO ,
to  hew,  cut  a  covenant),  except  the  birds,  and  the
dissevered  parts  laid  over  against  each  other.

"  The  ceremonial  of  the  covenant  of  old  consisted
in  the  contracting  parties  passing  between  the  dead
animals,  with  the  imprecation,  that  in  case  of  a
breach  in  the  covenant,  it  might  be  done  to  them  as
to  these  animals."  Against  which  Keil  (who,  how-

*  [Xot,  however,  as  expressing  any  doubt,  but  as  the
natural  working  and  fruit  of  his  faith. — A.  G.]

[Ver.  7.— I  nm  the  Lord  that  brought  thce,  etc.  Seethe
"  Preface  to  the  Ten  Commandments,"  JACOBUS,  p.  268.—
A.  G.]

t  I  Baumsarten  says  that  as  this  sacrifice  was  a  covenant
.sacrifice,  and  lay  at  the  foundation  of  all  the  sacrifices  of  the
covenant,  all  the  animals  used  in  those  sacrifices  were  here
required. — A.  G.]


CHAP.   XV.    1-21.


41]


ever,  without  sufficient  ground,  denies  that  this  ac
had  the   peculiar  nature  of  a  sacrifice),   remarks
"  This  interpretation  of  ancient  usage  is  not  support
cd  by  Jer.  xxxiv.  18."     "The  interpretation  whicl
the  prophet  here  gives  to  the  symbolic  usage,  car
only  be  a  fuller  explanation,  which  does  not  exclude
another  original  idea  of  the  symbol.     The  division
of  the  sacrificial  animals  probably  only  typified  the
twofold  character  of  the  covenant;  and  the  passa_
of  the  two  contracting  parties  between  the  parts  oJ
the  one  sacrifice,  typified  their  reconciliation  to  a
unity."     This  would  be  in  accordance  with  the  anal
ogy  of  the  symbol  of  the  ancients,  the  tessera  hoxpi-
ta'.is,  which  was  also  divided  into  two  parts  in  order
to  represent  the  alliance  or  union  of  the  two  posses
sors  of  the  divided  little  table.      Jehovah  himself
does  not,  indeed,  appear  as  sharing  in  the  offerin^
of  the  sacrifice,  but  as  a  sharer  in  the  sacrificial  feast,
which  was  signalized  in  the  later  thank-offering,  in
the  show-bread,  and  essentially  in  all  sacrifices.     It
the  man  who  presents  the   sacrifice  gives  himself
away  to  God,  so  Jehovah  gives  himself  into  commu
nion   with  that  man;    forms  a  covenant   with  him.
The  individual  specimens  of  the  collective  sacrificial
animals,  designate,  in  Calvin's  view,  all  Israel  in  all
its  pails,  as  one  sacrifice.     In  the  three  years  age,
Theodoret  finds  an  intimation  of  the  three  genera
tions  of  bondage  in  Egypt ;   which  Keil  approves,
with  a  reference  to  Judg.  vi.  25  (seven  years'  bond
age,  a  seven  year  old  bullock).     The  further  intima
tions  of  numbers  in  the  passage,  to  wir,  a  number
seven,  five,  and  eight,  Keil  rejects. — And  when  the
fowls  came  down.     The  pieces  lay  for  some  time,
unconsumcd  by  the  fire,  and  attracted  the  birds  of
prey,  which  would  have  polluted  and  preyed  upon
them,  had   not  Abram  driven  them  away.      These
are  the  heathen,  the  enemies  of  Israel,  who  would
corrupt  and  destroy  it,  like  the  birds  of  prey  (the
sacrifice),  which  were  held  as  unclean  by  the  Jews.
The  hawk  was  sacred  to  the  Egyptians,  but  the  later
Jews  represented  the  opposition  between  Jews  and
heathen,  through  the  dove  and  sparrow-hawk  (see
Knobel).     But  Abram,  in  his  faith,   remained  the
guardian-spiiit  of  Israel,  who  secured  its  sacred  des
tination  (1's.   cv.  42).— Ver.  12.    And  when  the
sun  was  going  down.*     From  this  reference  to
the  tin;?,  we  may  judge  what  was  the  marvellous
attention  and  watchfulness  of  Abram.     The  great
scene  of  the  revelation  began  on  the  previous  night;
he  had  stood  under  the  starry  heavens  as  holdin"-  a
solemnity ;    the  victims  were  slain,  and  the  pieces
distributed,  and  then  the  watch  over  them  was  held
until  the  setting  of  the  sun.     His  physical  strength
sinks  with  it,  a  deep  sleep  (rTSTnn)  overcomes  him.
But  the  disposition  for  visions  preserves  itself  in  the
sleep,  and  HO  much  the  more,  since  it  is  even  the
deep,  prophetic   sleep.      Abram  sees  himself  over
taken  by  a  great  horror  of  darkness,  which  the  word
of  Jehovah  explains  to  him.     It  was  the  anticipation
of  the  terror  of  darkness,  which,  with  the  Egyptian
bondage,  should  rest  upon  the  people.     This"  bond
age  itself  is  pointed  out  to  him,  under  three  or  four
circumstances  :  1.  They  would  be  oppressed  and  tor
mented  in  this  service ;  2.  it  would  endure  four  hun
dred   yc.irs ;    3.    the   oppressing  people   should  be
judged;    1.  they  should  come  out  of  the  bondage
with  great  substance.     It  is  to  be  distinctly  observed,
that  the  name  of  this  people,  and  the  land  of  this
servitude,  is  concealed.     Moreover,  there  arc  further

*  [lleb.,  was  about  to  go  down.— A.  G.  ]


disclosures  which  concern  the  relation  of  the  patri.
arch  to  this  sorrow  of  his  descendants.  lie  himxelj
should  go  to  his  fathers  in  peace  in  a  good,  that  is
great  age.  But  his  people  should  reach  Canaan  in
the  fourth  generation  after  its  oppression,  from  which
we  may  infer  that  a  hundred  years  are  reckoned  as  a
generation.*— For  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites
is  not  yet  full.  The  Amorites,  as  the  most  power
ful  tribe  of  the  Canaanites,  stand  here  for  the  whole
people  (Josh.  xxiv.  15).  Israel's  inheritance  of  Ca
naan  is  limited  by  the  judgment  upon  the  Canaanites;
but  tli is  judgment  itself  is  limited  and  conditioned
by  righteousness,  according  to  which  the  measure
of  iniquity  must  first  be  full. — Ver.  17.  Behold  a
smoking  furnace.  This  new  manifestation  must
not  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  dream  vision,
but  as  the  intuition  of  the  waking  consciousness,
under  the  form  of  a  vision.  For  the  divine  accept
ance  of  the  sacrifice  cannot  be  fulfilled  in  a  dream,
any  more  than  the  faith  of  Abram,  than  his  sacrifice,
or  the  making  of  the  covenant  itself. — The  smoking
furnace  is  analogous  to  the  burning  bush,  and  pillar
of  fire  of  Hoses.  That  it  here  designates  the  anger
of  God  (Keil)  is  not  supported  by  Ps.  xviii.  9.f  The
fire-symbols  are  not  always  symbols  of  the  consuming
anger  of  God  (as  perhaps  the  seraphim),  but  also
signs  of  purifying  and  saving  judgments,  as  the  pillar
of  fire,  and  pre-eminently  the  fire  upon  the  altar  of
burnt-offering.  And  beyond  doubt,  in  the  sense  of
this  passage,  Jehovah  goes  with  the  sacrificial  fire
between  the  pieces  of  the  animals.  That  the  pieces
were  not  laid  upon  the  altar,  arises  from  the  mode
of  forming  a  covenant,  according  to  which  the  con
tracting  parties  must  pass  between  them.  Abram
had  gone  between  them  long  before  the  evening
NoAV^Jehovah  goes  through  in  the  sacrificial  flame.
The  image  of  the  sacrifice  signifies  that  the  sacrificial
fire  should  never  be  extinguished  in  Israel ;  this  is
visibly  represented,  moreover,  under  the  fl.ime  of  the
altar.  We  must  recognize  clearly,  that  it  is  incredi
ble  that  the  flame  should  pass  between  the  pieces  of
the  sacrifice  without  consuming  them.  But  the  flame
cannot  designate  the  judgments  of  God  upon  the
oppressors  of  Israel  (Keil),  since  the  pieces  indeed
designate  Israel.  But  neither  the  judgments  upon
Israel,  since  the  pieces  which  signify  Israel  were
already  divided,  i.  e.,  offered  and  dedicated  to  God.
The  sacrificial  fire,  as  an  efficient  clement  of  change,
changes  the  flesh  into  a  sweet  savor  for  Jehovah,  and
the  judgment  of  an  earthly  dissolution  into  an  act  of
deliverance,  into  a  new,  heavenly  existence.

3.  Tlic  founding  of  the  Covenant  and  its  signifi
cance  (vers.  17-21). — Unto  thy  seed  have  I  given
this  land.  The  covenant  which  Jehovah  makes
with  Abram  relates  especially  to  the  grant  of  the
and  of  Canaan  to  his  descendants.  Hence,  also,  it
is  sealed  with  the  offering  of  the  sacrificial  animals
usual  in  the  land. — From  the  river  of  Egypt,
veil  holds  that  it  is  the  Nile,  because  it  is  Ira ,  not
ri3  (Numb,  xxxiv.  5).  Knobel,  on  the  other  hand,
emarks  correctly :  "  The  Nile  cannot  be  intended,
since  the  Euphrates  would  not  have  been  described
as  the  great  river  in  opposition  to  it."  It  is  thus


412


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


the  Wady  cl  Arisen,  brook  of  Egypt,  otherwise  called
Rhinocolura,  lying  at  the  southern  limits  of  Israel
(Numb,  xxxiv.  5;  Josh.  xv.  4  ;  Is.  xxvii.  12);  not
the  Nile,  because  an  oratorical  hyperbole  would  not
agree  with  the  exact  bounding  of  the  land.

[Hi-:.M.STi-:xnF.;{G,  JJtifrayc,  vol.  iii.  p.  265,  urges
in  favor  of  the  Nile  not  only  the  terra  which  is  used,
"in:,  and  which  is  not  interchangeable  with  the  term
for  a  small  stream  or  brook,  bra.  but  also  that  the
passage  is  rhetorical,  as  is  clear  from  the  fact  that
the  tribes  which  the  Israelites  were  to  dispossess
were  purely  Canaauitish,  and  no  more  extended  to
the  Euphrates  than  to  the  Nile.  Kurtz  adds,  that
these  two  streams  are  here  used  as  representative
of  the  two  great  world-powers  between  which  Israel
should  dud!.  It  is  thus  a  prediction  that  the  de
scendants  of  Abram  should  have  an  independent  ex
istence  by  (lie  side  of  these  two  great  empires,  and
that  no  nation  should  have  any  permanent  sway  be
tween  them  and  these  two  empires.  So  that  their
dominion  may  lie  said  to  reach  from  the  Euphrates
to  the  Nile. — These  two  rivers  are,  moreover,  con
stantly  referred  to  in  the  later  Scriptures,  as  the  ex
treme  boundaries  of  Israel.  See  Is.  xxvii.  12;  Jer.
ii.  ]>•'.  In  its  best  days  too,  the  Israelitish  dominion
rcache:!,  to  all  intents,  to  Egypt,  since  all,  or  nearly
all  the  intervening  powers  were  subject  to  David  and
Solomon.  "Wilkinson  holds  that  the  word  "IX1 .
liver,  a  form  of  which  is  here  used,  is  the  Hebrew
form  of  the  Egyptian  word  Jaro,  river,  applied  to
the  Nile;  see  III  sn.  Notes,  p.  255. — A.  G.  ]

The  Israelitish  dominion  should  reach  to  the  Eu
phrates,  and  did  actually  "in  its  best  days"  reach  to
it,  but  there  is  no  record  of  its  extension  to  the  Nile.
We  are  not  dealing  here  with  a  prophetic  and  spiritual
word,  but  with  the  definite  bounds  of  the  land,  for
the  race  of  Abram,  as  is  clear  also  from  the  follow
ing  enumeration.  "  Ten  tribes  arc  enumerated  going
from  the  southern  border  to  the  north,  in  order  to  fix
and  deepen  the  impression  of  universality  and  com
pleteness,  of  which  the  number  ten  is  the  symbol —
no  tribes  are  exccpted  or  spared  (Delitzsch).  In
other  passages,  sometimes  seven  (Deut.  vii.  1 ;  Josh,
iii.  KM,  six  (Kx.  iii.  8,  17;  xxiii.  23;  Deut  xx.  17),
live  (Ex.  xiii.  5),  or  even  two  (Gen.  xiii.  7),  are
named  ;  or  finally,  all  are  embraced  under  the  com-
inon  name,  Cauaanites."  Keil.  The  number  ten  is
not,  however,  the  number  of  completeness  (that  is
twelve),  but  the  number  of  a  completed  develop
ment  ;  here  of  the  completed  development  of  the
Canaanitcs  for  judgment.  The  Hivites  (ch.  x.  17)
arc  here  omitted.  The  Ilivites  at  Hermon,  in  the
region  of  Lebanon,  were  afterwards  driven  out,  but
the  Ilivites  at  Gibeon  were  graciously  spared  (Judg.
iii.  :> ;  Josh.  xi.  19).  "  The  Kenites  were  an  Ama-
lekitish — originally  Arabian  tribe,  southerly  from
Canaan  (Numb.  xxiv.  21  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  6;  xxvii.  10;
xxx.  29),  of  whom  a  part  afterwards  removed  to  Ca
naan  (Judg.  i.  10;  iv.  11,  17)."  Knobel. — The
Kenizzites.  There  is  a  reference  to  Kenaz,  an
Edomite  (chap,  xxxvi.  15,  42),  with  which  Knobel
joins  the  passage  before  us,  but  Keil  objects,  be
cause  he  correctly  assumes  that  Kenaz  must  have
descended  from  Edom,  without  bringing  into  account
the  mingling  of  the  Edomites  with  the  original  in
habitants  of  the  land.  The  Kadmonites,  also,  are
never  anywhere  more  clearly  determined.*

*  [They  seem  to  have  been  the  more  eastern,  and  to
have  held  the  other  extreme  boundary  of  the  promised  land,
towards  the  Euphrates.  MUBPHY.  p.  300.— A.  G.]


DOCTRINAL   AND    ETHICAL.

1.  For  the  vision,  see  the   Excgctical  remarks.
The  vision  of  a  shield  and  of  a  vast  treasure,  brings
to  remembrance  the  numerous  revelations  of  God
through  images  in  the  prophets,  especially  in  Jere
miah  and  Zcchariah.     We  must  distinguish  here  the
threefold  form  of  the  one  revelation  made  through
visions:   1.  Revelation  through  images;    2.  through
the  word;  3.  through  the  vision  in  deep  sleep,  upon
which  there  follows  still  a  revelation  to  the  waking
consciousness   through   the   word.      The   prophetic
frame  of  mind  on  the  part  of  Abram  is  very  extra
ordinary,  since  it  continued  through  a  whole  night
and  day,  and  into  the  following  night.

2.  The   stages  of  the  promise  which  Abram  re
ceived,  viewed,  as  to  its  genealogical  sequence,  may
be  regarded  in  this  order :    1 .  Thou  shaft  be  a  man
of  blessing,  and  shalt  become  a  great  people  (ch.  xii.
1);    2.  to  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land  (ch.  xii.  7);

3.  to  thy  seed  the  land,  to  thy  land  thy  seed  (ch.  xiii.
14).     Here  (ch.  xv.  18),  tltc  promise  of  f/ic  sad  and
the  land  was  sealed   in    the  form   of    a   covenant.

4.  The  promise  of  a  seed  advances  in  the  form  of  a,
covenant  to  the  assurance  that  God  would  be  the
God  of  his  seed  (eh.    xvii.  7).     5.  The  promise  is
more  definite,  that  not  Ishmael  but  the  son  of  Sarah
should  be  his  heir(ch.  xvii.  15  ff'.).     f>.  The  heir  was
promised  in  the  next  year  (ch.   xviii.    10).     7.  The
whole  promise  in  its  richest  fulness  was  sealed  by  the
oath  of  Jchorah  (eh.  xxii.).

3.  The  grand  thought :  God  is  our  shield,  or  de
fence  against  all  evil ;  God  himself  is  our  greatest
reward  or  highest  good ;    is  the  introductory  com
pletion  of  all  religious  desires  and  hopes.     But  man
can  remain  upon  this  high  standpoint  only  with  the
greatest  difficulty.     This  is  manifest  from  the  appli
cation  to  practical    uses    and    gains    which    Abram
makes  :  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  give  me  ?     Although
this  application  to  his  own  advantage,  carried  out  in
a  childlike  spirit,  is  perfectly  consistent  with  his  faith.

4.  Abram    under    the    starry    heavens,   and    hia
righteousness  of  faith.     The  peculiar  determination
of  the  character  of  the  patriarchal  religion.     Here
first,  the  full   importance  of  faith  comes  into  view.
Here  also,  first,  the  reckoning  of  righteousness  cor
responding  therewith.    From  this  point  onward,  both
fundamental    thoughts  run  through  the  holy  scrip
ture  (see  Rom.  iv;  James  ii.).*     The  future  of  the
Evangelical  church  was  prepared  on  that  night.     It
was  the  one  peculiar  blooming  hour  of  all  salvation
by  faith.     But  we  must  not,  therefore,  so  weaken
and  lower  the  idea  of  righteousness,  that  we  should
explain  it  as  equivalent  with  integrity,  or  in  similar
ways.     Righteousness  is   the   guiltless   position   or
standing  in  the  forum  of  right,  of  justice.f     The

*  [Righteousness  must  be  hail,  or  there  is  no  salvation.
Hen  have  lost  righteousness,  and  the  power  to  prain  it.
How  can  it  be  secured?  It  is  by  faith.  It  is  counted  to
believers ;  sec  for  illustration  Lev.  vii.  18 ;  xvii.  4  ;  2  Sam.
xix.  19,  and  Rom.  4.— A.  G.I

[J/>coBus,  Notes,  p.  267.  1.  Abram  had  no  righteousness
for  justification.  2.  Faith  is  not  imputed  to  him  as  a  work,
as  a  meritorious  ground  of  justification,  but  only  as  in.-tru-
mental,  laying  hold  on  a  perfect  righteousness.  3.  The
law  could  not  claim  any  other  than  a  perfect  righteousness —
his  own  or  another's  imputed  to  him— set  to  his  account.
And  this  is  the  gospel  plan  of  salvation— to  reckon  the  per
fect  righteousness  received  by  faith,  as  our  lighteousnesa
for  justification.— A.  G.]

f  [KURTZ  :  He  is  righteous  who,  through  the  freedom
of  his  will,  conforms  to  the  divine  idea  and  end  of  his  being.
WOEDSWORTH  is  better  :  Righteousness,  is  that  state  in  which


CHAP.    XV.    1-21.


413


forum  in  which  Abrara  stands  here,  is  the  forum  o1
the  inward  life  before  God.  In  this  he  was,  on  th
ground  of  his  faith,  declared  righteous,  through  tlu
word  and  the  Spirit  of  God.  Hence  we  read  here
also,  first  of  his  peace,  ver.  15.

5.  The  difference  between  the  four  hundred  years
ver.  13,  and  Acts  vii.  6,  and  the  four  hundred  anc
thirty  years,  Ex.  xii.  40,  is  explained,  not  only  bj
the  use  of  round,  prophetic  numbers  here,  but  "also
from  the  fact,  that  we  must  distinguish  between  the
time  when  the  Israelites  generally  dwelt  in  Egypt
and  the  period  when  they  became  enslaved  ant
oppressed.  Paul  counts  (Gal.  iii.  17)  the  time  be
twecn  the  promise  and  the  law,  as  four  hundred  and
thirty  years,  in  the  thought  that  the  closing  date  of
the  time  of  the  promise  was  the  death  of  Jacob  (Gen
xlix.).  See  the  Introduction ;  and  for  the  difference
in  question,  DKLITZSCH,  p.  371.

[NOTE  UPON  THE  FOUR  HUNDRED  TEARS  AFFLIC
TION  AND  SERVITUDE  OF  ISRAEL. — It  is  confessedly
a  matter  of  dispute  how  these  four  hundred  years
are  to  be  computed.  Some  fix  the  birth  of  Isaac  as
the  starting-point,  others  the  entrance  of  Jacob  into
Egypt,  The  difficulty  does  not  lie  in  reconciling  the
different  statements  of  the  Scripture,  but  in  bringing
any  conclusion  formed  upon  these  statements,  into
harmony  with  a  general  system  of  Chronology.
Baumgarten  says  :  The  principal  thing  in  the  threat
ening,^  the  first  word  in  the  description  of  the  sor
row,  is  an  announcement  of  their  condition  as
strangers,  T^t  ."rrn  15.  The  description,  there
fore,  in  his  view,  covers  the  period  of  their  sojourn
in  Canaan,  during  which  they  were  strangers.  He
urges,  in  favor  of  this,  the  words  of  the  Apostle  (Gal.
in.  17),  and  the  fact  that  the  Israelites  were  to  come
out  in  the  fourth  generation;  a  generation  obviously
falling  far  short  of  a  hundred  years.  They  were  to  be
there,  but  three  generations.  The  genealogical  table,
Exod.  vi.  16  ff.  favors  a  much  shorter  residence  than
four  hundred  years  ;  since  the  combined  ages  of  the
persons  there  mentioned,  Levi,  Kohath,  Amram,  in
cluding  the  years  of  Moses  at  the  time  of  the  exo
dus,  amount  to  only  four  hundred  and  eighty-four
years,  from  which  we  must  take,  of  course,  the  a^e
of  Levi,  at  the  entrance  of  Jacob  into  Egypt,  and
the  ages  of  the  different  fathers  at  the  birth  of  their
sons.  It  is  better,  therefore,  with  Wordsworth
Murphy,  Jacobus,  and  many  of  the  earlier  commenta
tors,  to  make  the  four  hundred  years  begin  with  the
birth  of  Isaac,  and  the  four  hundred  and  thirty  of
the  apostle"  to  date  from  the  call  of  Abram. A.  G.I

6.  The  demand  for  a  sign  relates  to  the  promise
of  the  land,  not  the  promise  of  a  seed.     The  starry
heavens  was  the  sign  of  the  latter  promise  to  him
Compare  the  similar  demand  of  Gideon  (Judf.  vi.
17),  and  of  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xx.   8).     The  pious
and  believing  desire  for  a  sign  points  to  a  divine
assurance,  the  impious  to  an  unsanctined  knowledge
or,  indeed,  a  doubt.     The  constant  form  of  the  pious
desire  for  a  sign,  is  the  believing  enjoyment  of  the
sacraments.

7.  The  sacrificial  animals.     See  Leviticus.

8.  The  birds  of  prey.     Compare  Matthew  xiii.
18,  19.

9.  The   profound   sleep.     Compare   ch    ii     »l  •
Biblework,  p.  209.      Thou  *halt  go  to  thy  fathers  in
peace.     Vi  ith  faith  in  the  grace  of  God,  the  future  is

man's  will  is  conformed  to  God's  will-that  state  in  which
Adam  was  created,  but  from  which  he  fell  by  sin' p    74  _


not  only  made  clear  and  glorified  (John  viii.  56),  but
the  present  also  is  illuminated.

10.  The  iniquities   of  the   Amoritos.      See   Ex.
xxxiv.  11,  14  ;  Lev.  xviii.  24  ;  xx.  23  ;  Numb,  xxxiii.
52,  5"i-;    Josh,    xxiii.  12. — Xo   people   is  destroyed
whose  iniquity  is  not  full.*

11.  Both  DELITZSCII  (p.  373)  and  KKIL  (p.  151),
assert  that  there  is  no  account  here  of  a  peculiar
sacrifice  of  a  covenant,  nor  of  a  peculiar  covenant.
Against  the  sacrifice  of  the  covenant,  it  is  said  that
Abram  did  not  pass  between  the  pieces  of  the  sacri
fice  ;  but  this  is  a  pure  supposition.    Against  the  idea
of  a  covenant,  that  there  is  no  account  of  a  pactio,  but
simply  of  a  sponsio,  a  solemn  promise  of  God  to  men.
Let  it  be  observed,  however,  that  upon  this  interpre
tation  the  moral  force  in  the  doctrine  of  flic  covenant
relation  of  _  God  to  the  believer  is  fatally  ignored,
and  that  this  interpretation  also  threatens' to  change
the  covenant  blessing  of  the  Christian  sacraments
from  a  moral  to  a  magical  blessing.     The  subject  of
the  promise,  Delitzsch  remarks,  excludes  the  idea
of    reciprocity.      "In    the    covenant,"   says    Keil,
"  which  God  concludes  with  man,  the  man  docs  not
stand  as  upon  mutual  and  equal  terms  with  God,  but
God  grounds  the  relation  of  communion,  through  liia
promise,  and  his  gracious   condescension,  to  man,
whereby  he  is  first  prepared  to  receive,  and  then,
through  the  reception  of  the  gifts  of  grace,  is  pre
pared  to   discharge   the   duties  flowing  out  of  the
covenant,    and   thus   made   obligatory   upon   him."
Although  the  covenant  of  God  with   believing  hu
manity,  is  not  a  contract  between  equals,  but  God
founds   the  covenant,  it  docs  not   follow,  that   his
founding  it  is  a  simple   promise,  although,  even  a
simple  promise,  without  some  moral  motive  giving
rise  to  it,  would  be  absurd.     But  now,  according  to
Rom.  iv.   the   foundation  of  the  gracious  covenant
of  God  with  Abram,  was  not  laid  in  the  covenant  of
circumcision   (Gen.  xvii.),   but  in  the  covenant  of
faith  (ch.  xv.j.f     Hence  the  Jewish  Targums,  and
after  them,  Christian  theologians,  have  found  in  this
chapter  the  forming  of  a  covenant  according  to  the
explicit  declaration,  ver.  17.    DELITZSCII  himself,  upon
ch.  xvii.,  says  first :  "  God  sealed  his  covenant  with
Abram,"  but  then  further,  "  God  founded  his  cove
nant  with  Abram."     But   KEJL,  p.   155,    remarks:
"  Long  before,  at  least,  long  years  before,  God  had
established  his  covenant  with  Abram."     We  make
;he   following  distinction :   in  ch.  xv.,   the  eternal,
valid  covenant  of  faith  was  concluded ;   in  ch.  xvii.
;he  specific,  old  covenant  of  circumcision,  the  pro
visional  sealing  of  the  covenant  of  faith,  of  which,
mdcr  the  Xew  Testament,  baptism  and  the  Lord's
Supper  are  the  seals.     If  we  recall,  that  the  relation
>etween  the  Lord   and  his    church  is  that  of  the
jridegroom  and  the  bride,  we  shall  truly  dismiss  the

assumption  of  a  magical  working  and  efficacv  of  the
covenant,  and  return  to  the  high  estimate  of  moral
relations  in  the  kingdom  of  personal  life,  in  which
ilso  the  passive  position,  which  the  Formula  Cone.
ecognizes  and  holds  in  conversion  is  to  be  conceived
as  a  moral  state— in  which  the  soul  is  held  in  the


*  [The  Lord  administers  the  affairs  of  nations  on  the
jrinciple  of  moral  rectitude.  MURPHY,  p.  29!).  WORDS-
VOUTII  calls  attention  to  this  sentence  in  its  relation  to  the
estruetion  of  the  C.inaanites  by  Israel,  p.  "6. A.  G.I

t  [Kurtz  holds  that  Abram  did  not  now  'pass'  between
he  pieces;  that  this  is  but  one  side  of  the  covenant,  ir>
•Inch  Hod,  but  not  Abram,  brings  himself  under  covcnan*
bliganon ;  and  that  the  covenant  is  completed  nn<l  ratified
f  Abram  in  the  transactions.  Ch.  xvii.  p.  179.— A.  G.]


414


GEXESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


attitude  of  waiting,  and  docs  not  grasp  beforehand —
produced  in  the  strength  of  the  r/ratia  prcevcniens,
and  not  as  a  pure  creaturely  and  unconcerned  yield
ing  of  one's  self  to  the  pleasure  of  another.


HOMILETICAL    AXD    PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs. — The
^rcat  thought:  God  himself  is  our  God:  1.  Our
shield;  2.  our  great  reward  (comp.  Rom.  viii.). — It
is  allowed  the  taints,  to  ask:  Lord,  Lord,  what  wilt
them  give  me? — We  learn  from  Abram  to  consult
with  God — as  to  our  affairs; — to  deliberate  with
Jehovah  as  to  our  future. — Ver.  4.  If  the  lesser  is
denied  us  that  itself  intimates  a  grant  of  the  higher.
— In  .submission  we  are  near  the  highest  promises  and
gifts. — Ahram,  the  childless,  shall  become  the  father
of  nations. — Abram  in  the  starry  night. — The  word
of  God  in  the  starry  night. — The  faith  of  Abram:
1.  Abram  n  believer;  2.  a  father  of  believers  (Rom.
iv.) ;  3.  a  father  of  all  believers,  especially  of  be
ll,  vcrs  fVom  the  circumcision. — Abram's  righteous
ness  of  faith. — The  key-note  of  his  righteousness  of
faith  :  1.  The  blessing  has  overcome  the  curse  in  his
heart  and  life;  "2.  he  will  overcome  it  in  the  world
through  hiss«'cd;  his  children  shall  be  as  the  siars,
of  heaven. — The  high  antiquity  of  Evangelical  faith.
— The  covenant  of  God  with  Abram. — Abram's  pro
phetic  sleep. — The  holy  land  :  1.  In  the  literal  sense;
_!.  as  a  type  of  the  promised  fatherland  of  believers.
—The  certainty  of  the  promises  of  God. — The  first
mention  of  the  grave  cheerful  and  friendly. — The
grave  already  illuminated  and  glorified  with  the
glimpse  of  the  life  beyond.

S;-.\I:KK:  LANGK:  Fear  and  discouragement  may
sometimes  assail  the  strongest  heroes  of  faith;  it  is
v.  ell,  however,  when  they  are  not  allowed  to  reign
(Ps.  Ixxxiv.  12;  Rom.  viii.  17;  Fs.  Ixxiii.  25,26;
c:ilii.  d) — [When  some  astronomers  have  attempted
to  specify  the  number  of  stars,  and  one  asserts  that
then;  are  1392,  another  1709,  and  still  another,
7000,  these  are  pure  conjectures,  upon  which  they
cannot  agree  among  themselves.  Then,  too,  there
are  the  thousands  of  stars,  so  remote  in  space,  that
they  arc  not  visible  through  the  best  telescopes.  It
would  have  been  a  small  consolation  to  Abram,  if
his  seed  should  only  equal  the  small  number  of  stars
specified.] — Rom.  iv.  3  ;  Gal.  iii.  6  ;  James  ii.  23. —
Ver.  3.  What  a  great  thing,  is  it  not,  to  be  near
a  prudent  householder  ! — CRAMER  :  If  we  will  be
counsellors  of  God,  we  will  do  it  to  our  injury. —
(iod  places  before  the  reason,  incomprehensible  (and
incredible)  things ;  for,  what  we  can  comprehend,
there  is  no  necessity  that  we  should  believe.* — God
foreknows  all  things. — Ver.  15.  This  is  a  pleasant
description  of  death. — In  what  a  good  age  consists.
— The  burial  of  the  dead  is  a  primitive  custom,  of
which  this  is  the  first  notice.  We  never  find,  in  the
Holy  Scriptures,  any  mention  of  the  burning  of  the
dead,  customary  among  the  heathen  ;  or  of  any  other
way  than  of  burial  (Judg.  ii.  9). — God  exercises  a
constant  foresight,  even  over  the  seed  of  believers,
Lisco  :  The  war  with  the  kings,  although  victo
riously  ended,  might  provoke  retaliation  afterwards
thus  the  present  state  of  Abram's  mind  is  connectec
with  his  previous  state.  Ver.  2.  God  is  here  for  the

*  [This  obviously  needs  modification.— A.  O.]


irst  time  called  Adonai. — Ver.  G.  Abram  is  under
lie  trial  or  test. — Although  Abram  possessed  8C
many  beautiful  and  noble  qualities  of  heart,  and  in
lis  walk  manifests  so  many  virtues,  yet  he  is  not,
hrough  all  these,  righteous  before  God,  not  in  the
possession  of  the  divine  favor,  for  there  is  also  sin
n  him,  etc.  This  defect  his  faith,  his  living  confi
dence  in  God  (more  precisely,  the  word  of  God  which
ic  grasps  in  his  faith),  supplies. — The  justification
of  the  sinner  by  faith,  is  the  only  way  of  righteous
ness,  before,  during  or  after  the  giving  of  the  law. —
Ver.  15.  Go  to  thy  fathers.  They  must  then  still  live
upon  the  other  side  of  death,  in  another  state  and
life  ;  the  continued  existence  after  death  is  here  evi
dent,  and,  indeed,  as  the  word  in  peace,  intimates,  a
blessed  existence  for  the  pious. — Ver.  16.  All  na
tions  hold  their  land,  likewise,  in  fee  from  God,  and
will  be  deprived  of  it  when  their  rebellion  against
the  Lord  their  God  has  reached  its  full  height.  Thus
the  Amorites,  and  thus  the  Israelites  at  the  exile,
and  the  second  destruction  of  Jerusalem. — Ver.  17.
The  flame  of  fire  is  the  sign  of  the  gracious  presence
of  God,  and  of  his  pleasure  in  the  sacrifice  (Lev.  ix.
24). — GERLACII  :  Abram  confesses  his  pain  and  grief.
— Without  the  least  apparent  human  probability,  he
trusts  unconditionally  upon  the  divine  and  gracious
promise.  The  word  "believed"  is  here  exact,  or
precise;  he  cleaves  to  the  Lord  (precisely:  he  stays,
supports,  rests  himself  upon  the  Lord). — The  three
years  old  animals,  because  fully  grown  ;  faultless
animals  must  be  chosen  for  sacrifice. — Ver.  15.  To
go  to  his  fathers(ch.  xxv.  S  ;  xxxv.  20;  xlix.  29,
33;  Duit.  xxxii.  5u  ;  2  Kings  xxii.  20).  The  beauti
ful  expression  for  the  life  after  death,  testifies  that
even  in  the  highest  antiquity,  the  outlook  into  the  life
on  the  other  side  of  the  grave,  was  neither  dark  nor
gloomy. — (Ver.  17.  Description  of  the  oriental  fur
nace;  a  great,  cylindrical-shaped  lire-pot). — CALWKK,
Handbuch:  Abram's  doubt,  and  newly  strengthened
faith.  He  believed  without  the  sight.— Bi:xsi-:x  :  [a
marvellous  translation  :  The  Son  of  Mesek,  posses
sion,  is  my  house,  Elicxer  a  Damascene]. — SCHRODER  :
The  present  and  future  of  Abram — God  anticipates,
prevents  (with  the  Elie/cr).  Ch.  xvi.  states  another
project,  springing  out  of  the  weakness  of  his  faith.
Abram  sees  -not,  he  bd'icrcs. — Here  appears  for  the
first  time  the  word,  whose  nature  and  strength  we
have  recognized  from  the  first  promise  onward,  and
especially  in  the  previous  history  of  Abram. — HESS:
Ver.  13.  To  prevent  Egypt's  becoming  hateful  to
him,  the  land  was  not  named  (this  concealment  is
rather  a  trait  which  attests  and  authenticates  the  gen
uine  prophecy). — The  flame  of  fire  is  typical  of  the
divine  presence  and  majesty. — SCIIWENKF,  :  Ver.  6.
We  agree  with  Luther,  this  is  the  great  word  in  this
book. — TAUBE:  The  temptation  of  the  believer:
1.  What  is  the  highest  necessity?  2.  the  highest
consolation  ?  3.  How  can  one  pass  out  from  the  high
est  necessity  into  the  greatest  consolation  ? — Ilor-
MAXX  :  It  was  the  review  of  faith  which  fitted  Abram
to  look  out  into  the  future.  He  looked  onward  to
the  blessed  rest  of  the  people  of  God,  but  he  could
not  do  this,  except  as  he  recognized  in  God,  the  re
storer  of  that  life  of  man — his  own  life,  the  life  of
his  seed,  and  of  the  race — perverted  and  fallen  by
sin,  and  burdened  with  the  curse.  Dark  and  troubled
it  may  well  be,  were  the  thoughts  of  the  father  of
the  faithful,  but  the  experience  of  his  heart  and  life
were  sure.


CHAP.  XVI.  1-16.


415


FIFTH    SECTION.

Abranfs  Concession  to  Sarai1  s  Impatience.     Abram  and  Hayar.     Ifagar's  Flight.     TJic  Anycl  of  the
Lord.     Hayar's  Return,  and  IshmacVs  Birth.


CHAPTER  XVI.  1-10.


1  Now  Sarai,  Abram's  wife  [in  the  face  of  the  previous  promise],  bare  him  no  children  :  and

2  she  had  an  handmaid,  an  Egyptian,  whose  name  Avas  Hagar  [flight,  fugitive].     And  Sarai
said  unto  Abram,  Behold  now,  the  Lord  hath  restrained  me  from  bearing;  I  pray  thee,
go  in  unto  my  maid;  it  may  be  that  I  may  obtain  [bebuiidcd]  children  by  her.     And

3  Abram  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Sarai.     And  Sarai,  Abram's  wife,  took  Ha«-ar  her
maid  the  Egyptian,  after  Abram  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  gave
her  to  her  husband  Abram  to  be  his  wife.

4  And  he  went  in  unto  Hagar,  and  she  conceived  :  and  when  she  saw  that  she  had

5  conceived,  her  mistress  was  despised  in  her  eyes.     And  Sarai  said  unto  Abram,  My
wrong  be  upon  thee  :  I  have  given  my  maid  into  thy  bosom ;   and  when  she  saw  that
she  had  conceived,  I  was  despised  in  her  eyes:  the  Lord  judge  between  me  and  thee.

6  But  Abram  said  unto  Sarai,  Behold  thy  maid  is  in  thy  hand  ;   do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth
thee  [is  good  in  thine  eyes].     And  when  Sarai  dealt  hardly  with  her,  she  fled  from  her  face.

7  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  found  her  by  a  fountain  of  water  in  the  wilderness,  by

the    fountain    in   the   way   to    Shur    [rocky.   Josephus:  Pclusium.    Gesenius:   Suez.    Keil:  Dschifar].

8  And  he  said,  Hagar,  Sarai's  maid,  whence  earnest  thou?    and  whither  wilt  thou  go?

9  And  she  said,  I  flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress,  Sarai.     And  the  angel  of  the  Lord

10  said  unto  her.  Return  to  thy  mistress,  and  submit  [bow]  thyself  under  her  hands.     And
the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  her,  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  exceedingly,  that  it  shall

11  not  be  [cannot  be]  numbered  for  multitude.     And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  her,
Behold,  thou  art  with  child,  and  shalt  bear  a  son,   and  shalt  call  his  name  Ishrnael

12  [God  will  hear] ;  because  the  Lord  hath  heard  thy  affliction  [distress].     And  lie  will  be  a
wild  man  ;  his  hand  will  be  against  every  man.  and  every  man's  hand  against  him  ;  and

13  he  shall  dwell  in  the  presence  of  all  his  brethren — [far  and  wide  in  a  free  country].     And  she
called  the  name  of  the  Lord  that  spake  unto  her,  Thou  God  seest  me  [of  true  seeing]  :  for

14  she  said,  Have  I  also  here  looked  after  him  that   [peculiarly]   seeth  me?     Wherefore
the  well  was  called,  Beer-lahai-roi   [well  of  the  life  of  seeing,  or  vision]  ;  behold,  it  is  between

[consecrated]  and  Bered  [hail,  gravel-like  hai!?] .

And  Hagar  bare  Abram  a  son:  and  Abram  called  his  son's  name,  which  Ilagar


15

16  bare,  Ishmael.
to  Abram.


And  Abram  was  fourscore  and  six  years  old,  when  Hagar  bare  Ishmael


PRELIMINARY    REMARK.

For  the  difficulties  growing  out  of  the  sexual
relations  in  the  history  of  the  Patriarchs,  see  the
Introduction,  p.  80.


EXEGETICAL    AND    CRITICAL.

1.  According  to  Knobel,  this  section  is  a  Jeho-
vistic    enlargement    of   a    brief    Elohistic    original
narrative.      But  the  narrative  bears  upon  its  face
a  complete  and  living  unity.

2.  Sarai's    Fanatical    Self-denial    (vers.    1-4).
Bare  him  no  children.    Not  even  yet,  although
he  had  already  received  (ch.  15)  the  solemn  assur
ance  of  the  great  promise.     She  was  barren  in  ch.
xi.  30,  and  remained  so  after  ch.  xv.  2.     The  child


less  state  of  Abram's  house  was  its  great  sorrow,  and
the  more  so,  since  it  was  in  perpetual  opposition  to
the  calling,  destination,  and  faith  of  Abram,  and  was
a  constant  trial  of  his  faith.  Sarai  herself,  more
over,  the  consort  of  Abram,  came  gradually  more
and  more  to  appear  as  a  hindrance  to  the  fulfilment
of  the  divine  promise,  and  as  Abram,  according  to
ch.  xv.,  had  fixed  his  eye  upon  his  head  servant,
Eliezer  of  Damascus,  so  now,  Sarai  fixes  her  eye
upon  her  head  maiden*  Hagar  the  Egyptian.  Ha
gar  was  probably  added  to  the  household  of  Abram
during  his  residence  in  Egypt  (ch.  xii.  10).  She
manifestly  possessed  a  prominent  place  in  his  house
hold,  and  appears  to  have  brought  to  that  position,
not  only  mental  gifts,  but  also  an  inward  participa
tion  in  the  faith  of  the  household. — The  Lord  hath

*  [Here,  of  course,  her  slave,  bond-woman.— A.  t3.1


410


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


restrained  me  from  bearing.*     (The  mother  s
womb    closed— a  figurative    description  of  the  ap
pointed  barrenness).     The  barrenness,  also,  is  traced
back   to  the  highest  causality,   the  purpose  of    Je
hovah  (eh.   xxix.   31;    xxx.  H2 ;    Ps    cxxvn    3;  Is.
Ixvi    i>)      The  sexual  relations,  and  the  declarations
in  regard  to  them,  are  sanctified  by  their  ultimate
end  their  spiritual  reference.    The  dejection,  at  least,
the  Borrow,  breaks  out  in  the  words  of  Sarai,  also,
as  thev  had  in  the  utterance  of  Abram,  ch.  xv.  6.—
Go  in  unto.    Euphemistic  explanation  of  the  sexual
connection.— It  may  be  that  I  may  obtain  (be
buildcdt  by  her.     As  to  the  connection  between
n32,  ".  r".   see  the  lexicons.     To  be  built,  is  to
become  ;i  house  ;   to  become  a  house,  is  to  obtain
children,    a   family.      linear    should    enlarge  Sarai:
H'vnr'-  cMM  should  be  her  child  (see  ch.   xxx.   3).
The  concubine,  viewed  in  the  light  of  this  reason,  for
which  she  is  chosen,  is  not  so  much  the  concubine
of  the  husband,  as  *i<ppl,-)nent<mj  concubine  of  the
,/.;/;•      Ti:.>   moral  idea  of  monogamy  shines  clearly
throu-h  this  obscurity  in  its  manifestation,  and  so
far  thT-   '-possession  of  concubines"  (as  Knobel  ex
presses'  it)    must    be   distinguished    from    the    later
polv-amy,  which   appeared  among  the  .lews.      >:-.rai
practises  an  act  of  heroic  self-denial,  but  still,  in  her
womanly    and   fanatical  excitement,   anticipates  her
(le<tiny'as  Eve  had  done,  and  carries  even  the  patri
arch  away  with  her  alluring  hope.     The  writer  inti
mates  how  nobly  generous    she  was    in  her    error.
This   "Tratncss   clouded    even  the   clear-sightedness
of   ibram  \     The  narrator  brings  ;,No  into  promi
nence    the    extenuating,    fact,    that    they    had    been
already  ten  years  in  Canaan,  waiting  in  vain  for  the
heir  of  Canaan.— When  she  saw  that  she  had
conceived.     "  The  unfruitful  Hannah  received  the
like  treatment  with  Sarai,  from  the  second  wife  of
her  husband  (1  Sam.  i.  0).     It  is  still  thus,  to-day,  m
eastern  lands  (see  LANK:    'Manners  and  Customs,
i.  p.   198).     The    Hebrew    regards  barrenness  as  a
great  evil  and  a  divine   punishment    (ch.   xix.    31;
xxx    1    "M  •  Lev.  xx.  -JO),  and  fruitfulness  as  a  great
good  a'nd  a  divine  blessing   (eh.  xxi.  6 ;    xxiv.  GO;
Ex    xxiii.  -20  ;  Dent.  vii.  14).     The  orientals  regard
these  things  in  the   same  light  still  (see  VOLNEY  :
'  Travels,'  ii.  p.  "M  ;  MALCOLM'S  '  History  of  Persia ;
and  WINER:  Real-worterbuch,  art.  Kinder).'"    Knobel.
Ha^ar    however,  had   not  the  position  of  a  second
wife   and  erred,  when  in  her  disposition  she  assumed
this 'position,  instead  of  recognizing  her  subordina
tion  to  her  mistress.     This    subordination    was   as
sumed  by  Abram,  and  therefore  he  does  not  seem
to  have  noticed  her  haughtiness  and  pride.;

15.  Sarai's  Displeasure  and  Edgar's  f  light  (vers.
5  and  fi).—  My  wrong  be  upon  thee.  Precisely,
wron"  in  an  objective  sense,  wrong  which  1
Sarai,  in  her  indignation  against  the  pride  and  inso
lence  of  Ilagar,  believed  that  Abram  looked  with
approbation  upon  it,  and  therefore  expresses  herself
as  if  offended.g  The  ovcrbcnt  bow  flies  back  with
violence.  This  is  the  back-stroke  of  her  own  eager,


*  (Hob.,  shut  me  up. — A.  G.]

t  [Abram  yields  to  the  suasion  of  Sarai  without  opw-
Htion,  because,  as  the  prophet  Malaehi  says,  11.  1»,  &<
sought  the  seed  promised  by  God.  KEII-,  p.  152.—  A.  JJ-J

f  r  \nd  it  was  this  apparent  indifference  which  probably
was  the  «ource  of  Sarai' B  sense  of  injury.  She  was  led  from
it  to  suspect  that  the  affections  of  her  husband  were  trans-

^T'rShe  'felt  that  Abram  oujtht  to  have  redressed  her
wror.;;— ousht  to  have  Poea  and  rebuked  the  insolence  (
the  bond- woman. — A.  G.]


overstrained  course.     Still,   her  words  are  against
Abram  ;  the  consequences  of  her  wrong  should  fall
upon  him ;  she  would  leave  his  conduct  to  the  judg
ment  of  Jehovah,  more  as  an    appeal  to  his    con
science,  than  as  a  decided  condemnation.* — Behold
thy  maid  is  in  thy  hand.     Abiam  adheres  firmly
to  the  original  standpoint.     lie  regards  Ilagar  still
as  the  servant,  and  the  one  who  fulfils  the  part  of
Sarai,  and  so  far  justifies  himself  against  Sarai.     liut
this  justification  is  turned  now  into  the  severe  cen
sure 'and  affliction  of  Ilagar,  and  this  is  the  result  of
the  wromr  position  into  which  he  has  allowed  him
self  to  be  drawn. — Sarai  dealt,  hardly  with  her.
How,  precisely,  we  arc  not  told.     Doubtless,  through
the  harsh  thrusting  her  back  into  the  mere  position  and
service  of  a  slave.    Hagar  believed  that  she  had  grown
above  such  a  position,  and  fiecs.     The  proud,  unyield
ing  passion  of  the  Ishmaelitc  for  freedom,  shows  its
characteristic  feature  in  their  ancestress.    Some  have
ventured  so  far,  as  to  suppose  that  Abram  must  have
hastened  after  her,  and  brought  her  back,  full  of  honor.
4.    The  iiit<ri'i->il'i<:)>  on  the.  part  of  the  Angel  <>J
Jehovah,    and  Jlarinr's  return  (vers.    7-1-1).— The
Angel  of  Jehovah.     See  the  preliminary  remarks
to  ch.   xii.      [The  expres.-ion    rrirP  T,S^   appears
here  for  the  first  time.     While  the'  Angel  of  Jeho
vah  is  Jehovah  himself,  it  is  remarkable,  that  in  the
very  meaning  of  the  name,  as  messenger,  or  one  who
is  sent,  there  is  implied  a  distinction  of  persons  in
the  Godhead.     There  must  be  one  who  sends,  whose
message  he  bears.— A.  G.]f  That  this  Angel  is  iden
tical  with  Jehovah,  is  placed  beyond  question  in  vers.
13  and  14.     The  disposition  of  Ilagar,  helpless,  for
saken,  with  all  her  pride,  still  believing  in  God,  warned
by  her  own  conscience,  makes  it  altogether  fitting  that
the  Angel  of  Jehovah  should  appear  to  her,  ?.  r.,  Jeho
vah  himself,  in  his  condescension— manifesting  him
self  as  the  Angel.— She  had  found  rest,  by  a  fountain
in  the  wilderness  ;  and  here,  in  her  helplessness,
«clf-refleetion,  and  repentance,  she  gains  the  disposi
tion  or  fitness  for  the  vision.     It  was  by  the  fount
ain  in  the  way  to  Shur.     "  Shur,  now  Pscluiar,
is  the  northwestern  part  of  the  desert  of  Arabia,  bor
dering  upon  Egypt  (comp.  Ex.  xv.  22;  and  Ircn:
in  rlcr  deufsclien  morgenland.  Zeitschnft,  i.  p.  1 75).
Keil.     (Ch.  xxv.   18;    1  Sam.  xv.  7 ;    xxvu.  8).     A
waste  stretch  of  land,  of  five  or  six  days'  journey,
lying  between  Palestine  and  Egypt  (see  KNOBEL,  p.
158?.     Her  location  was  thus  upon  the  old,  worn
path,  leading  from  Hebron  by  Beersheba  to  Egypt.
The  respect  which  she  enjoyed  agrees  with  her  per
sonal   inward  worth,  as  to  her  character  and  faith
but  at  the  same  time  tends  to  the  proper  estimate  of
I<hmacl    who,  as  the  child   of   Abram,  could   not
be  left  undistinguishablc  among  the  heathen.     I  he
An"cl  of  the   incarnation,  even,  could  not  permit
that   Ha^ar,    in   an   erroneous   zeal  to  become  hn
future  mother,  should  go  on  his  own  account  into
helpless  sorrow.      His  first   address  sounds  as  1
voice  of  her  own   awakened   conscience:    Hagar,
Sarai's  maid,  whence  earnest  thou  ?    Truly,  out
of  a  wilfully  sundered  relation  of  duty  and  piety,  and
out  of  the  house  of  blessing.     [The  angel  brings  her
to  a  sense  of  her  true  relation :   Sarai's  maid,  not


*  [The  appeal  is  hasty  and  passionate-springing;  from  a
mind  Bmarflng  under  the  sense  of  injury— and  not  calm

^^TptosTofo^'ladicates  to  us  a  certain  inherent
pluralitv  within  the  essence  of  the  one. only  Go     <>f  wUft
we  have  had  previous  indications,  ch.  i.  1,  &  ,  i".  —
COITUS,  p.  277.]


CHAP.  XVI.  1-16.


417


Abram's  wife. — A.  G.] — And  whither  goest  thou
indeed,  wilfully  into  guilt,  disgrace,  and  sorrow.    lit
answer  testifies  to  the  oppression  •which  she  had  ex
pericnced,  but  also  to  the  voice  of  her  own  eoi
science. — From  the  face  of  my  mistress,  Sarai
— Return  to  thy  mistress,  and  submit  thysel:
[Submit,  humble  thyself ;  the  same  word  as  that  b
which   Sarai's   harsh-dealing   is  described. — A.  (\.
The  command  to  return  to  duty  comes  first,  then  th
promise.     It  carries  the  joyous  sound  of  an  innumet
able  progeny — the  tribes  of  Ishmael. — Ishmael,  be
cause  the  Lord  hath  heard.     Misery  sighs  ;  th
Highs  ascend  to  God ;  hence  misery  itself,  if  not  sen
as  a  curse,  is  a  voiceless  prayer  to  God.     But  this  i
true   especially  of  the  misery  of  Hagar,  who  hai
learned  to  pray  in  the  house  of  Abram.    "  According
to  the   later  writers,  it  was   the  custom   that    th
mother   should  name  the  child  (eh.  iv.  1,  25;    xix
37  if.  ;    xxix.   32  ff ;  xxx.  6  if. ;    xxxviii.  3  if.) ;    bu
the  Elohist  allows  the  child  to  be  named  only  by  tl.,
father  (ch.  v.  3;  xvi.   15;    xvii.  19;    xxi.  3;  comp
ch.  xv.  18)."   Knobel.     This  distinction  is  obviously
far-fetched.     It  is  only  on  special  occasions  that  th
mother   is  referred   to  as   giving  the   name  to   th<
child.     In  ch.  xxxviii.  3.  4,  the  father  and  mothe
are  alternately  concerned  in  giving  the  name.    Abran
himself  afterwards  appropriates  "the  maternal  nam
ing  of  Ishmael. — And  he  will  be  a  wild  man
(wild-ass  man).     The  limitation  of  the  promise  is
connected  with  the  promise  itself.     Hagar  must  be
cured  of  the  proud  delusion,  that  she  is  destined  to
become  the  mother  of  the  believing  people  of  Abram
and  that  therefore  the  hope  of  Abram  depends  upor
her  personal  self-destination;    a  supposition  which
doubtless  had  taken  firm  possession  of  her  mind,
through    the  presupposition  of  Sarai  herself.     The
image  of  the  wild  ass  is  not  chosen  in  a  contemptu
ous  sense.     "  The  figure  of  the  X"IS ,  onager,  in  the
desert,    free,    wild-roving    and    untamable    animal,
poetically  described  in  Job  xxxix.  5-8,  designates
in  a  striking  manner,  the  Bedouin  Arabs  with  their
unrestrained  love  of  freedom,  as  upon  camel  (Delul)
or  horse,  with  spear  in  hand,   they  ride   over  the
desert,  noisy,  hardy,  frugal,  delighting  in  the  varied
beauties  of  nature,  and  despising  life  in  towns  and
cities  : "  and  the  words,  his  hand  will  be  against
every  man,  and   every  man's   hand  against
him,  describe  the  ceaseless  feuds  among  themselves
and  with  their  neighbors,  in  which  the  Ishmaelites
Keil.      Compare  the  characteristics  of  Esau,
ch.  xxvii.  40.    Tor  the  description  of  the  Arabs  in  the
books  of  travels,  see   KNOBEL,    p.  158.*      Knobel
thinks  that  here  also  the  prophetic  image  is  drawn
after  the  descendants  (the  free  sons  of  the  desert)
and  finds  besides  that  the  promises  (ch.  xvii.  20  •
xxi.  20,)  "  have  a  more  favorable  sound."     If  this
were  true,  it  would  be  only  the  other  side  of  the
eame  figure.      Hagar  must  know,  above  all  other
things,  that  Ishmael  could  not  appropriate  to  him
self  the  inheritance  of  blessing.     This  is  intimated
m  the  words,  In  the  presence  of  all  his  brethren.
He  will  thus  have  brethren,  but  shall  dwell  in  the
presence   of  all,    a  free   man.     Keil  remarks,  that
"'.?*?"->?  signifies  primarily,  eastward,    according  to
ch.  xxv.   9,  but  that  there   is   more  in   the  terms
tnan  a  mere  geographical  notice,  to  wit,  that  Ri-
mael  shall  dwell  independently,  in  the  presence  of
the  descendants   of  Abram.      But  history   has

H«*«,[Al-nbc  .miodcrn  travellers  speak  of  thcso  same  quali
ties  as  still  existing  among  the  Arabs.— A.  G.]

27


abundantly  confirmed  this  promise.     "Until  to-day
the  Ishmaelites  are  in  unimpaired,  free  possession
of  the  great  peninsula  lying  between  the  Euphrates
the  isthmus  of  Suez,  and  the  Red  Sea,  from  whence
they  have  spread  over  wide  districts  in  North  Africa
and  Southern  Asia"  (comp.  UKLiTzsrn,  p.  :>,77  ff)*
— And  she  called  the  name  of  the  Lord  ( Jeho
vah).     The  naming  of  God  by  Hagar  (ixn-bx)  has
been    variously    interpreted.      Hengstcnberg,"  with
Tuch,  finds  the  explanation  in  the    farther  named
well,  "well  of  the  life  of  seeing,"  or  "  vision,"  i.  e.
where  a  person  has  seen  the  face  of  God,  and   re
mains  alive.     Delitzsch  holds  this  to  be  a  verbal  im
possibility.     We  add,  that  the  supposition  as  to  the
reality  in   this  explanation,   which  appears   also  in
Keil,  is  incorrect.     We  must  distinguish  between  the
patriarchal  and  legal  periods.     Of  the  legal  period  it
is  said :  thou  canst  not  see  my  face,  for  no  man  shall
see  me  and  live  (Ex.  xxxiii.  20);  that  was  true  of
Moses,  so  fur  as  he  was  the  mediator  of  his  sinful
people  (see  Ex.  xxxiii.  13).     The  prejudice  in  Israel,
that  no  one  could  see  the  revelation  of  God  and  live
(Judg.  xiii.  22),  took  its  origin  from  these  words.
But  the  sense  of  the  words  was,  that  the  manifesta
tion  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the  sinful  people  of
Israel,  and   even  for  Moses,  so  far  as  he  was  the
representative  of  the  people,  would  be  fatal.    Hence
the   regulation    requiring   darkness   in  the  holy  of
holies.     But  of  Moses,  viewed  in  and  for  liimse'lf,  it
is  said:  The  Lord  spake  with  him  face  to  face  (Ex.
xxxiii.  11).     Moses,  in  and  for  himself,  stood  upon
the  patriarchal  ground,  but  as  the  mediator  of  'the
people,  he  stood  upon  the  ground  of  the  hw,  and
must  first,   through  the  sight  of  the  <rrace  of  the
Lord,_  be  prepared  for  the'  sight  of  his  glory  (Ex.
xxxiii.  19).     It  is  an  error  to  confuse  the  two  econ
omies,  patriarchal   and  legal.     Here  the  Angel  of
the  Lord  reveals  himself,  there  the  law  is  ordained
through  the  Angel.     Here,  those  wearied  of  life,  go
in  peace  to  their  fathers,  there  death  is  the  wa<res
of  sin.     Here  one  sees  God  in  the  reality  of  true
vision,  there  God  retires  into  the  darkness  of  the
Holy  of  Holies.      It   is   still   a   question,  however,
whether  ^Nn  should  mean,  the  one  seeing  r,i>j  person
(the  participle  from  fiXl  with  the  suffix  of  the  first
person)  as  Hofmnnn,  Baumgarten,  and  Pelitzsch  ex
plain  after  the  Chaldee:  "thou  art  a  God  of  sight,
whose  all-seeing  eye  will  not  overlook  the  helpless
and  forsaken,  even  in  the  most  remote  comer  of  the
desert."     The  meaning  of  the  name  Moriah  (ch.  xxii.
2,  8,  14)  appears  to  be  in  favor  of  this  reference  of
he  seeing,  to  God.     But  here,  also,  the  seeing  of  Je-
lovah,  was  perceived  from  the  appearance,  of  Jeho-
rah,  i.  e.   from  his  becoming  seen  (or  visible).     Keil
quotes  against  the  interpretation  of  Hofmann  the
expression  Wx'n  (Is.  xxix.  15)  and  ^xH  (Is.   xlvii.
10),  as  a  designation  of  the  one  seeing — who  sees
ne.     Thus:  ixn  in  pause  "xH  is  a  substantive,  and
designates  the  sight,  the  vision.    Gesenius,  Keil,  and

1  [Kaliseh  remarks  in  substance:  "Every  addition  to
ur  knowledge  of  Arabia  and  its  inhabitants,  coi  firms  moro
trongly  tho  biblical  statements.  While  they  have  car-
icd  their  arms  beyond  their  native  tracts,  and  ascended
-ore  than  a  hundred  thrones,  they  wen-  never  subjected  to
LC  Persian  Empire.  The  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  kin"*
ad  only  transitory  power  over  small  portions  of  their
nbes.  Here  the  ambition  of  Alexander  the  Great  and  his
uccessors  received  an  insuperable  cheek,  and  a  Roman
xpedition,  in  tho  time  of  Augustus,  totally  fai'ed.  Th«
Sedouina  have  remained  essentially  unaltered  iinca  tiie
me  of  the  Hebrews  and  the  Greeks."— A  G.I


418


GENESIS.  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


others:  "Cod  has  manifested  himself  to  her  as  a
God  of  vision,  who  can  be  seen  of  the  actual,  most
perfect  sight,  in  his  angel.1' — For  she  said,  Have
I  also  looked  after  him.  Do  1  see  him  still.  This
is  not  said  in  the  sense  of  the  popular  judgment  of
the  legal  period :  Am  I  actually  still  seeing,  i.  e.  in
the  land  of  the  living,  after  I  have  seen  Jehovah?
(Kiel,  Knobel,  etc.) ;  but,  what  I  now  see  in  this
wretched  desert,  is  that  still  to  be  regarded  as  seeing,
after  I  have  seen  the  Angel  of  the  Lord?  (=  the
glory  of  the  Lord?)*  This  is  a  true,  and  in  the
highest  degree,  real  characterizing  of  the  glorious
seeing  in  the  condition  of  the  vision  ("I  have  seen
thy  throne,  O  Lord,  from  afar").  It  is  at  the  same
time,  in  the  highest  degree  natural,  as  Hagar  express
es  the  contrast  between  the  two  conditions,  that  of
the  ordinary  seeing  and  that  of  the  highest  seeing
(vision). — Wherefore  the  well  was  called.  Thus
not  the  well  of  t/<f  life  of  xcrhtfl  or  life  of  vision
(Hengstenberg,  Keil),  but  where  the  life  =  the  life-
giver— quiekeiier,  manifests  himself,  who  grants  the
vision. — Between  Kadesh  and  Bered.  "Al
though  IScred  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere,  Rowland
has  still,  witli  great  probability,  pointed  out  the  well
of  Hagar,  mentioned  again  (eh.  xxiv.  (52;  '25,  11),
in  the  fountain  A  in  Kadesh,  lying  in  the  camping-
ground  of  the  caravans  moving  from  Syria  to  Sinai
southward  from  Ileersheba,  Movie,  or  Moilchi,  Mu-
weileh  (UoniNso.N  :  Palestine),  which  the  Arabians
call  Moilahhi  (or  Mai-lahhi)  Iladjar;  who  show  there
also  a  rocky  dwelling,  Beit-IIudjar  (.-ee  HOWI.AMI,  in
RITTKK'S  Krdk>uidt',  xiv.  p.  lUMJ).  I'.ered  must  lie
to  the  west  of  this.''  Keil.

5.  //"//'O-'.v  Ji<fnr»  (vers.  1  .">,  l(i).  There  are  two
points  which  must  still  he  noticed  here.  First,  that
Abram  receives  the  name  Ishmael,  with  which,  of
course,  the  re-reception  of  llagar  is  expressed;  and
secondly,  the  age  of  Abram,  which  is  of  importance
in  view  of  the  next  recurring  revelation  of  Jehovah,
as  showing  the  lapse  of  time  between  them.


DOCTRINAL,   AND   ETHICAL.

See  the  Excgetical  paragraphs.

1.  Surai's  character  :  noble  generosity,  pclf-
denial,  the  female  friend  still  more  than  the  si.^ter
or  wife  of  Abram,  but  woman-like,  and  in  a  fanatical
way  anticipating  the  patience  of  faith  (see  1  1'et.
Hi.  (5).

'_'.  The  moral  motive  or  impulse  of  seeking  the
heir  of  blessing,  made  availing  to  an  erroneous  and
selfish  degree,  is  here  torn  away  from  its  connection
with  the  love  impulse  or  motive,  and  exalted  above
it  in  importance  (see  the  Introduction,  p.  81).

*  [Amidst  the  variety  of  versions  of  these  phrases,  the
u'ciH'v;il  sense  is  obvious.  There  is  a  recognition  of  the  gra-
rious  :i!id  quickening  presence  of  God  revealed  to  her,  and
a  drvuut  wonder  that  she  should  have  been  favored  with
filch  ii  visi.  n.  If  we  render  the  name  which  llagar  gives
to  Jehovah,  as  the  Hebrew  seems  to  demand,  "Tho,u  art  a
God  ot  vision,  or  visibility,"  i.  e.  who  hast  revealed  thyself,
thc-n  the  reason  for  this  name  is  given  in  the  fact,  that  she
had  enjoyed  this  vision.  This  would  be  true,  whether  the
surprise  she  expresses  was  because  she  survived  the  sight
(vision),  or  because  she  here  enjoyed  such  a  vision  at  all.
This  fact  also  gives  the  name  to  the  well — not  the  well  of
the  living  one  seeing  me,  but  of  the  living— and  of  course,
life-giving,  who  here  revealed  himself.— It  is  true,  that  the
Hob.  ''X"!  takes  a  different  pointing  in  the  14th  verse,  from
that  which  it  be:irs  in  the  phrase  rendered,  "  Thou  God
seest  me  ;"  but  the  sense  given  above  seems,  on  the  whole,
most  consistent,  and  is  one  which  the  words  will  bear. —


3.  This  substitution  of  the  maid  for  the  mistress
must,  however,  be  distinguished  from  polygamy  in
its  peculiar  sense.     Hagar,  on  the  contrary,  regards
herself — in  the  sense  of  polygamy,  as  standing  with
Sarai,  and  as  the  favored,  fruitful  wife,  exalts  herself
above  her.     The  shadow  of  polygamy  resting  u|jon
patriarchal  monogamy.     Isaac's  marriage  free  from
this.     It  has  the  purest  New  Testament  form.     Re
becca  appears,  indeed,  to  have  exercised  a  certain
predominant  influence,  as  the  wife    often  docs  this
in  the  Christian  marriage  of  modern  times.

4.  Abram's  wrong  position  between  Sarai  and
llagar — the  result  of  his  yielding  to  the  fanaticism
of  Sarai.*

K.  The  Angel  of  the  Lord  (ch.  xii).  The  voice
of  the  Angel  and  the  voice  of  the  awakened  con
science  one,  and  yet  distinct.

C.  The  words  of  the  Angel  leading  to  conver
sion  :  1.  Clear  description:  Hagar,  Sarai's  maid;
2.  Whence  earnest  thou?  3.  Whither  wilt  thou  go?
The  beginning  of  conversion  itself:  simple,  pure,
clear  knowledge.

7.  Obligation  and  promises  are  not  to  be  sepa
rated  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  it  is  throughout  a
moral  region.    But  the  form  changes  according  to  the
circumstances — now  the  higher  (evangelical)  prom
ises   and  obligations,   now   the   lower  (preparatory)
obligations  and   promises. — Ver.  10.    GERLACH:  A
blessing  in  its  external   form  greater  even  than  that
promised  to  Abram,    ch.   xv.  ;">.     Still,  even  in  the
feebler  splendor,    we    should    recogni/e   the    great
promised  blessing  of  the  father  of  believers.     "  Ara
bia,  whose  population  consists  to  a  large  extent  of
Ishmaelites,    is    a    living    fountain    of    men    whose
streams  for  thousands  of  years  have  poured  them
selves  far  and  wide  to  the  east  and  west.      Before
Mohammed,  its  tribes  were  found  in  all  border-Asia,
in  the  East  Indies  as  early  as  the  middle  ages  ;  and
in  all  Northern  Africa  it  is  the  cradle  of  all  the  wan
dering    hordes.      Along    the    whole    Indian    Ocean,
down  to  Molucca,  they  had  their  settlements  in  the
middle  ages  ;   they  spread  along  the  coast  to  Mozam
bique;  their  caravans  crossed  India  to  China;  and
in  Europe  they  peopled  Southern  Spain,  and  ruled  it
for  seven  hundred  years."    Ritter.

8.  Ilagar's  satisfaction  with  the  future  of  her  son,
a  sign  of  her  humiliation. -j-     The  picture  of  Ishmael
here  the  image  of  a  scion  of  Abram  and  the  maid
(Goethe:   "From  my  father  comes  the  bodily  stat
ure,  the  bearing  of  the  higher  life  ;  from  my  mother
the  joyful  disposition  and  love  of  pleasure."     See
LANGE:    Vermischte  Schriftcn,  i.  p.  15(1.)     The  re
lation  between  ancestors  and  their  descendants.    The
law  of  life  which  lies  at  the  ground  of  the  contrast
between  the  son  of  the  maid  and  the  son  of  the  free
(John  i.  13).     The  discord  in  the  offspring  of  misal
liances.    ED.  POPPING  :   "  Travels  in  Chili,  Peru,  etc."
p.  139.     On  the  color.     These  mixed  progenies  re
ward   the   dark  mother  with   contempt,  the  white
father,  with  aversion.     "A  large  part  of  the  Bedouins
still  lead  a  robber-life.     They  justify  themselves  in
it,  upon  the  ground  of  the  hard  treatment  of  Ishmael,
their  father,  who,  driven  out  of  his  paternal  inherit-


*  [A  thousand  volumes  written  against  polygamy,  would
not  lead  to  a  clearer,  fuller  conviction,  of  the  evils  of  that
practice,  than  the  story  under  review,  BUKH,  Notes,  p.  269.
—A.  G.]

t  [This  appears,  too,  in  the  answer  which  she  makes  to
the  question  of  the  angel :  Hagar,  Sarai's  maid,  whence
earnest  thou  ?  And  she  said,  I  flee  from  the  lace  of  my
mistress,  Sarai.— A.  G.]


CHAP.    XVI.    1-16.


41 9


ance,  received  the  desert  for  his  possession,  witf
the  permission  to  take  wherever  he  could  find.'
Gerlach.  "  The  Arabian's  land,  according  to  thei
issumed  right,  reaches  as  far  as  they  are  free  to
go."  Hitter.

9.  The  importance   of  the   Arabs   in    history
Ishmacl.     God  hears.     The  strong,  world-historica
"  wild-ass,"  springs  out  of  the  mercy  of  God  towards
the  misery  of  Hagar.     His  hand  against  every  man
this  is  true  of  the  spiritual  Ishmacl,  Mohammedan
ism,  in  its  relation  to  other  religions.     It  stands  in  i
fanatical  polemic  relation. — The  Arabians  have  never
been  overcome  by  any  of  the  great  world-conquer
ors,  while  they  have  made  great  and  world-wide  con
quests.

1 0.  Hagar's  expression  in  regard  to  her  vision.
The  divine   vision  a  look   into  the   eternal  world.
Actual  sight  in  the  world  of  sense  is  no  more  sight,
when  compared  with  this.

11.  The  living  God  is  a  God  of  human  vision,  be
cause  he  is  a  God  of  divine  revelation.

12.  Tiic  well  of  the  living  God,   in  which   he
makes  men  to  see  (the  true  seeing)  a  symbol  of  the
gospel  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  of  the  Church  in  the
desert  of  the  world.

13.  Hagar's  return  laid  the  foundation  for  the
world-historical  dignity  and  honor  of  her  son  Ish-
mael. — Ishmael,  also,  must  return  to  Abram's  house


IIOMILKTICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

Vcrs.  1-4.  The  fanatical  anticipation  of  men,
grasping  after  their  destination,  and  its  results,  a
judgment  in  favor  of  the  more  patient  waiting  and
expectation:  1.  In  the  history  of  Sarai ;  2.  the  his
tory  of  Eve;  3.  in  the  history  of  the  Church  (the
mediaeval  anticipation  of  the  kingdom  of  glory). —
The  perils  of  the  husband  in  his  relations  to  the  wife:
1.  Her  fanaticism  (Sarai) ;  2.  her  sensuality  (Hagar).
— Sarai's  indignation  :  the  reaction  from"  fanatical,
over-strained  zeal.— Vcr.  4.  Hagar's  pride :  the  ex
altation  which  we  experience,  is  easily  destroyed  if
we  are  so  disposed,  through  self-glorying. — The
wrong  position  of  Abram  the  result  of  his  conduct
not  originating  in  himself. — Vcr.  7.  The  Angel  of
the  Lord  ;  or  the  most  wretched  in  the  kingdom  of
God,  enjoy  the  highest  revelations  of  his  mercy. —
The  Angel  of  the  Lord  as  an  angel  of  conversion :
1.  His  address ;  2.  his  question,  Whence ;  3.  his
question,  Whither ;  4.  his  instruction ;  5.  his  prom
ises  ;  6.  the  extent  and  order  in  his  promises. — Ha
gar's  experience,  that  sight,  is  no  more  sight  after  the
vision.— Man  beholds  by  faith,  because  God  looks
upon  him  in  grace. — At  the  wells,  in  the  desert. —
Hagar's  return. — The  perpetuation  of  the  experience
of  Hagar,  in  the  name  Ishmael. — Abram  eighty-six
years  old. — Age  110  security  against  folly. — God
turns  the  follies  of  believers  to  their  good.— Ish-
mael's  importance  in  history  (field  for  missions  in
the  East).

STARKE  :  Ver.  2.  That  was  an  abuse  of  the  rul
ing  power  over  her  maid,  and  of  the  power  of  mar
riage  which  Sarai  had  over  the  body  of  her  husband
(1  Cor.  vii.  3).  Sarai,  as  well  as  Abram,  was  con
cerned  in  the  sin,  hence  the  defenders  of  concubin
age  and  polygamy  have  no  ground  upon  which  to
stand  here.— (Foreign,  and  especially  unbelieving
servants  of  strange  religions,  may  often  work  great
injury  to  a  master  or  a  government). — We  must  not
do  evil  that  good  may  come  (Rom.  iii.  8). — Although


a  man  may  counsel  with   his  wife,   and  follow  her
counsel,  it  must  not  be   done   to  go   into   evil. —
LANGE:    See,  fellow-christian,  what  one's  own  will
and  choice  will  do  for  a  man !     It  enjoins  often  a
greater  denial  than  God  requires  of  him. — CRAMER  :
Ver.  4.     It  is  a  common  fault,  that  the  morals  of
many  are  changed  by  their  elevation  to  honor,  ami
that  prosperity   brings  pride  (Prov.  xxx.   21-23). —
Kindness  is  quite  generally  rewarded  by  ingratitude.
Ver.  7.  A  proof  that  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  was  the
Son  of  God. — Vcr.  5.    It  is  a  common  course  with
men  to  roll  their  guilt  upon  others. — LANOE  :  Noth
ing  is  more  injurious  to  the  quiet  comfort  of  mar
riage,  and  of  the  whole  household,  and  to  the  training
of  children,  than  polygamy :  it  is  impossible,  there
fore,  that  it  should  be  in  accordance  with  the  law
of  nature. — THE  SAME  :  Ishmael  is  the  first  of  those,
to  whom  God  has  assigned  their  name  before  their
birth.     After  him  there  arc  five  others :  Isaac  (ch.
xvii.  19),  Solomon  (1  Chron.  xxii.  9),  Josiah  (1  Kings
xiii.  2),  Cyrus  (Is.  xlv.  1)?  and  John  (Luke  i.  13).
Lastly,  Jesus,  the  Saviour,  is  the  seventh  (Matt,  i.  21).
— LUTHER  :  The  positions  in  life  are  very  unlike.
Therefore  we  should  remember  and  hold  to  this  con
solation,  which  the  Angel  shows :  lo,  thou  art  a  ser
vant,  a  maid,  poor,  etc.     Let  this  be  for  thy  com
fort,  that  thy  God  looks  alike  upon  masters   and
servants,  rich  and  poor,  sinners  and  saints. — CRA
MER  :  It  is  according  to  the  ordinance  of  God,  that
one  should  be  lord,  another  servant,  etc.  (1  Cor.  vii.
10). — Bill.  Tub. :  Thou  hast  sinned,  humble  thyself,
take  cheerfully  the  chastisement;   nothing  is  more
wholesome  than  that  which  will  bow  our  proud  spir
its  into  humility  (2  Sam.  xxiv.   10,  14). — Ver.  14.
He  who  not  only  holds  Ilagar  in  life,  but  is  also  the
life  itself  (John  xi.  25;  Deut.  xxxii.  46),  the  living
God  (Deut.  v.  26;  Ps.  xlii.  :3,  etc.).— In  this  God  we
shall  find  the  true  living  springs  of  all  good  and
mercy  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9;  Jcr.  ii.  13  ;  xvii.  13;  Is.  Iv.  1).
LiSCO:   Sinful  helping  of  ourselves. — Man  must
not  only  leave  the  end  to  God,  but  also  the  means
(Rom.  xi.  36).— Ver.  7.  The  (not  one]  Angel  of  the
Lord,  the  uncreated  Angel  of  the   Covenant  (Mai.
iii.  1). — Ver.  13.  These  words  designate  the  reality
of  that  revelation  made  to  her  and  for  her  good. —
The  breach  of  the  divine  ordinance  soon  avenges
tself,  for  the  unnatural  relation  in  which  the  slave
lad  been  placed  by  her  mistress  herself,  prepared
ibr  the  mistress  the  most  vexatious  grief. — GEKLACH  :
The  Angel  of  the  Lord,  is  the  divine  revealer  of  God,
the  leader  of  the  patriarchs  (ch.  xlviii.  16) ;  the  one
who  calls  and  animates  Moses  (Ex.  iii.  2) ;  the  leader
of  the  people  through  the  wilderness  (Ex.  xiv.  19,
tc. ;  Is.  Ixiii.  9) ;  the  champion  of  the  Israelites  in
anaan  (Josh.  v.  13);  and  still  farther,  the  leader
and  ruler  of  the  covenant-people  (Judg.  ii.   1  ff. ;
vi.  11 ;  xiii.  13);  then  he  who  in  Isaiah  is  the  Angel
of  his  face  or   presence  (ch.  Ixiii.  9) ;    in  Daniel,
Hichael   (and  by    whom   Gabriel  was   sent   to   the
)rophet,  Dan.  x.  13?)  in  Zechariah,  measures  the
icw  building  of  Jerusalem  (ch.  ii.  1) ;  and  in  Mala-
jhi  is  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant  (ch.  iii.  1). — CAL
MER,  Handbuch:   Mohammed  is  a  son  of  Ishmael,
md  Abram  is  thus,  according  to  the  flesh,  the  ances-
or  of  Islam. — The  Arabian,  even  now,  grounds  upon
his  passage,  in  his  pride  and  delusion,  a  claim  that
he  rights  of  primogeniture  belong  to  Ishmacl  in
tead  of  Isaac,  and  asserts  his  own  right  to  lands  and
goods,    so   far  as  it  pleases   him. — Vengeance   for
>lood  rules  in  him,  and  in  many  cases,  also,  the  work
if  the  robber  is  seen  all  along  his  path. — Ver.  12.


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


In  tli,-.  j,rcxCJicc  of  all  /tin  brdh /•</<:  the  Israelites,
.Mi.lianites,  Kdomites,  ami  tin:  Moabitcs  and  Ammon
ites,  who  were  descended  from  Lot. — SrnuoDKu:
Ver.  7.  The  Angel  of  the  Lord  finds  Ilagar;  that
p-.vsupposfs  lie  had  sou-lit  her  (Dent,  xxxii.  10).—
liod  meets  thee  in  thy  desert;  he  comes  to  thee  in
thy  conscience;  he  kindles  in  thee  the  sparks  into  a
llame,  and  eonus  to  :hy  help  in  his  grace  (Berleb,
/<;j,../).— Islainism  occupies  incontestably  the  place
of  a  middle  link  beiwcen  revelation  and  heathenism  ;
as  even  ilic  Koran  calls  the  Ishmaclites,  an  interme
diate  nation  (/IKI.I.KK  :  it  names  it  thus  in  another
j-cii.-e.  however). — <iod  tries  us  in  Mich  changes:
comfort  follows  sorrow  ;  hope  succeeds  to  despond
ency ;  and  life  to  death.  (Portraiture  of  the  Ara-
biaii,  of  t'nc  wild-ass.  The,  Arabian  =  son  of  the
morning — ludg.  vi.  3,  ">:\  ;  viii.  In). — Ver.  lli.  Mo-
se.>  rccoid.-  the  age  of  Abrani,  that  we  might  know
how  long  he  had  to  wait  for  Isaac  the  promised  son,
whom  S;>rai  should  bear  (Calvin). — PASSAVANT:  Im-
patience.— Vers.  1-ti.  Ah,  should  God  grant  u.<  our
own  way,  \ ermit  us  to  order  our  present,  to  arrange
our  future,  to  adorn  our  houses,  without  consulting


with  him,  it  would  be  no  good  and  joyful  thing  to
us.  Whoever  has,  as  to  his  way,  separated  himself
from  him,  and  sought  afar  from  him,  without  his
wisdom,  happiness,  salvation,  life,  acts  unwisely
wickedly,  llis  light  is  obscure,  his  sfep  uncertain,
the  ground  trembles  beneath  him,  and  his  lights
(lamps)  are  soon  extinguished  in  darkness. — The
woman  has  learned,  in  Abram's  house,  to  recognize
the  God  over  all  gods. — SCHWEXKE  :  Ver.  7.  She  be
lieves  that  her  departure  from  the  house  of  A  brain
would  determine  him  to  hasten  after  her  and  bring
her  back,  etc.  She  sits  down  by  the  fountain,
vainly  waiting,  until  A  brain  should  come  to  lead  her
home.  Her  pride  is  broken. — The  call  of  the  Angel.
— That  was  the  call  of  the  good  shepherd,  who
would  bring  back  the  wandering  sheep.  Thus  even
now  the  two  peoples  who  received  the  promise,  the
descendants  of  Islnnael  and  Israel,  stand  as  the
monument  of  the  divine  veracity,  as  peculiar  and
even  singular  instances  ;  guarding  with  the  greatest
care  their  nationality,  practising  their  old  customs
and  usages,  and  preserving,  in  their  exclusivcness,
their  spiritual  strength  (destination  '?)


SIXTH     SECTION.

Abram  and  the  rycattd  l^om'tse  of  God.      The  name  Air  am  chunked  to  Abraham.     The  personal

Covenant  <>f  /-'nil/I,  -now  a  Covenant  List  tint  ion  for  him,  hix  Household  and  his  Seed.

( "ii-cumcMon.     The  name  Sarai  chanr/ed  to  Sarah.     TJic  new  Name*.

Tlie  promised  one  not  Ishmael,  but  Isaac.


9

9

10

11

12


CH.  XVII.  1-27.

And  when  [after  the  lapso  of  a  long  period]  Abram  was  nineiy  years  old  and  nine,  the
Lord  appeared  to  Abrum,  and  .-aid  unto  him.  I  am  the  Almighty  God  [EI  Shaddai]  ;
walk  before  mo,  and  be  thon  perfect.  And  1  will  make  my  covenant  between  me  and
thee,  and  will  multiply  thee  exceedingly.  And  Abram  fell  on  his  face:  and  God
lr.u-.ilim]  talked  with  him,  saying,  As  for  me  [in  the  covenant  promise],  behold,  my  covenant
is  with  thee,  and  tliou  shalt  be  a  father  of  many  [multitude  of]  nations.  Neither  shall  thy
name  anv  more  be  called  Abram  [high  father],  but  thy  name  shall  be  Abraham  [father  of  a
multitude  of  nations;  of  a  people  of  peoples]  ;  fur  a  father  of  many  nations  [a  people  of  peoples]  have
I  made  thee.  And  I  will  make  thee  exceeding  fruitful,  and  1  will  make  nations  of
thee  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thee.  And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  between  me
and  thee,  and°thy  seed  after  thee,  in  their  generations,  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  to
be  a  God  [Elohim]  nnto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee.  '  And  I  will  give  unto  thee,
and  to  thy  seed  after  thee,  the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger  [thou  hast  settled],  all  the
land  of  Canaan,  for  an  everlasting  possession;  and  I  will  be  their  God  [Elohim].

And  God  [God  Elohim,  as  Eiohim]  said  to  Abraham  [first  after  his  new  name],  Thou  shall,
keep  my  covenant  therefore,  thou,  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  generations.  This
is  my  covenant,  which  ye  shall  keep,  between  me  and  you  and  thy  seed  after  thee  ;  Every
man  child  among  you  shall  be  circumcised.  And  ye  shall  circumcise  the  flesh  of  your
foreskin ;  and  it  shall  be  a  token  [sign]  of  the  covenant  betwixt  me  and  you.  And  he
that  is  eight  days  old  shall  be  circumcised  among  you,  every  man  child  in  your  gene
rations,  he  that  is  born  in  the  house,  or  bought  with  money  of  any  stranger,  which  is
not  of  thy  seed.  He  that  is  born  in  thy  house,  and  he  that  is  bought  with  thy  money,
must  needs  be  circumcised  [bis:  fcifiri] :  and  my  covenant  shall  be  in  your  flesh  for  an
everlastino-  covenant.  And  the  uncircumcised  man  child,  whose  flesh  of  his  foreskin


CEAP.    XVII.    1-27.


15

1C

17

.18
19


20
21

22
23


24

25
2G
27


is   not   circumcised  [who  will ^not  suffer  himself  to  be  circumcised,  or  avoids  circumcision]     that    [same]
soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people;   he  hath  broken  my  covenant.

And  God  [Elohim]  said  unto  Abraham,  As  for  Sarai  thy  wife,  tliou  shalfc  not  call
her  name  Sarai  [heroine],  but  Sarah  [princess]  shall  her  name  be.  And  I  will  ble^s  her
and  give  thee  a  son  also  of  her  :  ye;,,  I  will  bless  her,  and  she  shall  be  a  mother  of
nations;  kings  of  people  [c^s]  shall  be  of  her.  Thou  Abraham  fell  upon  his  face
and  laughed,  and  said  iu  his  heart,  Shall  a  child  be  born  unto  him  that  is  one  hundred
years  old?  and  shall  Sarah,  that  is  ninety  years  old,  bear?  And  Abraham  said  unto
God,  O  that  Ishmael  might  [even yet]  live  before  thee.  And  God  said,  Sarah  thv  wife
shall  bear  thee  a  son  indeed;  and  tliou  shalt  call  his  name  Isaac  [he  or  one  will  laugh]  :  and
I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  him  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  with  liiV  seed
after  him.  And  as  for  Ishmael  [coj  hours],  I  have  heard  thee  :  Behold,  I  have  blessed
him,  and  will  make  him  fruitful,  and  will  multiply  him  exceedingly  [evermore]  •  twelve
princes  shall  lie  beget,  and  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation.  But  my  covenant  will  I
establish  with  Isaac,  which  Sarah  shall  bear  unto  thee  at  this  set  time  in  the  next  vear
And  he  left  off  talking  with  him,  and  God  [Elohim]  went  up  from  Abraham.

And  Abraham  took  Ishmael  his  son,  and  all  that  were  born  in  his  house  and  all
that  were  bought  with  his  money,  every  male  among  the  men  of  Abraham's- house  •
and  circumcised  the  flesh  of  their  foreskin  in  the  selfsame  dav,  as  God  [Elohim]  had  said
unto  him.  And  Abraham  was  ninety  years  old  and  nine,  when  he  was  circumcised  in
the  flesh  Oi  his  foreskin.  And  Ishmael  his  son  was  thirteen  years  old  when  he  wa«
circumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin.  In  the  selfsame  day  was  Abraham  circumcised
and  Ishmael  his  son;  And  all  the  men  of  his  house,  born  in  his  house,  and  bought  with
money  of  the  stranger,  were  circumcised  with  him.


GENERAL  REMARKS.

1.  This  Section  is  described  by  the  pseudo-
critical  exegesis  as  Elohistic  (KNOBEL,  p.  161).  But
here,  also,  the  internal  reasons  for  the  use  of  the  name
Elohim,  are  obvious.  The  sealing  or  ratifying  of  the
covenant  of  God  with  Abram,  whose  foundation  (not
something  holding  a  mere  connection  with  it,  its  side-
piece)  ^ve  recognize  in  ch.  xv.,  embraces  not  only  the
immediate  bearer  and  mediator  of  the  covenant,  in
the  narrower  sense,  Isaac  and  his  seed,  but  all  those
who,  in  a  wider  sense,  are  sharers  in  the  covenant,
Ishmael  and  his  descendants.  If  we  do  not  distin
guish  these  two  concepticms  of  the  covenant  in  this
chapter,  we  shall  not  thread  oar  way  through  the
apparent  confusion,  to  a  correct  understanding  of  it.
It  is  CMtirely  incorrect  when  KEIL  (p.  157),  says,'
Ishmae!  was  excluded  from  the  salvation  of  the  cov
enant,  ihe  grace  of  the  covenant  was  promised  only
to  Isaac.  Upon  this  supposition  what  does  the  cir
cumcision  of  Ishmael  mean?  We  must  distinguish
the  relations  of  the  different  parties  to  the  covenant
as  stated  above ;  and  since  here  the  covenant  em
braces  all  who  share  in  it,  God  appears  and  acts  as
Elohim,  although  under  a  new  title  :  EL  Shaddai.

2.  That  thirteen  years  should  have  rolled  away
between  the  birth  of  Ishmael  and  this  new  revela
tion,  appears  to  us  very  important.  Abram  had  an
ticipated  the  purpose  of  God  in  his  connection  with
Hagar,  and  must  now,  therefore,  pass  through  a  Ion"
time  of  discipline,  of  expectation,  and  of  temptation.
["That  which  could  not  be  reached  by  nature  was
to  be  secured  by  promise,  in  the  miraculous  seed
thus  pointing  forward  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  There
fore  the  time  has  come  when,  after  having  first  al
lowed  the  unbelieving  spirit  to  make  proof  of  human
expedients  (1  Cor.  i.  20),  God  will  show  Himself
again,  and  place  the  fulfilment  on  the  basis  of  the
promise  alone  (Gal.  iii.  18).  The  covenant,  there


fore,  must  now  be  solemnly  and  formal! v  waled."
JACOBUS:  "Notes,"  vol.  i.  p.  281.— A.  (','.]  Thus,
indeed,  Moses  must  wait  fifty  long  years  after  his
premature  attempt  to  reach  his  destination.  The  di
vine  decree  over  Adam  and  Eve  mirrors  itself  in  these
facts.  They  anticipated  their  destination,  to  be  as
God  ;  and  therefore  a  waiting  time  of  thousands  of
years  was  decreed  for  the  people,  until  the  Messiah,
the  image  of  God,  should  appear.

3.   The  new  Names.     The  ground  upon  which  the.
new  name*  arc  given  to  Abram  and  Sarai,  lies  in  the
fact,  that  God  reveals  himself  to  Abram  under  anew
name,  El  Shaddai.     For  lie  is  El.  Shaddai  as  the
omnipotent  God,  i.  c.,  God  of  power  to  do  wonders,
to  create  new  things  in  the  old  world,  and  the  very
centre  of  his  wondrous  deeds  is  the  now  birth,  in
which  man  receives  a  new  name,  and  of  which  cir
cumcision  is  here  set  apart  to  be  the  typical  sign.
The  titles,  El  Shaddai,  Abraham,  Sarah,  and  circum
cision,  are  connected  by  the  closest  inward  tie ;  they
lie  upon  one  line  of  thought.     The  name  El  Shaddai
may  have  been  known  to  Abram  before,  as  the  name
Jehovah,  and  even  circumcision  ;  but  now  it  became
to  him  the  specific  name  of  the  Covenant  God,  for
the   patriarchal   history,  as  circumcision  was   now
consecrated  to  be  the  sacred  sign  of  the  covenant,
and  as  later  in  the  hLstory,  Jehovah  was  made  the
specific  designation  of  the  God  of  covenant  truth,
(Ex.  vi.  3).     The  names  Elohim  and  El  Eljon  (Gen!
xiv.  18)  have  not  lost  their  meaning  and  value  un
der  the  new  economy  of  El  Shaddai,  and  thus  also
the  name  El  Shaddai  preserves  its  meaning  and  value
under  the  economy  of  Jehovah,  which  is  modified
in  the  prophetic  times  into  the  economy  of  Jehovah-
Zebaoth.     The  wonders  of  El  Shaddai"  run  through
the  whole  kingdom  of  grace  ;  but  the  great  wonder
lying  at  the  foundation  of  all  that  follow,  is  the  birth
of  Isaac,  in  the  near  future  from  his  dead  parents
(dead  in  this  respect,  Rom.  iv.  18-21 :  Heb.  xi.  11-


422


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


19),  in  connection  with  the  marvellous  faith  corre
sponding  with  it,  and  with  circumcision  the  seal  of
the  covenant,  the  type  of  the  great,  eternal,  central
miracle  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  the  new  birth  of
Christ  from  heaven,  and  that  new  birth  of  Christians
which  is  grounded  and  coiilirmed  in  his.


EXEGETICAL    AM)    CRITICAL.

A.  The  Covenant  of  God  with  Abram  in  the
.vidcr  sense.  The  shunrs  in  t?t<:  Covenant  (vers.
1-14).

1.  The  Covenant  in  the  wider  sense  on  the  part
of  God  (vers  1-S).  When  Abram  was  ninety
years  old  and  nine.  [I-it.,  a  son  of  ninety  and
nine  years. — A.  G.]  The  long  interval  between  this
age  and  that  given  eh.  xvi.  1C),  must  be  closely  ob
served.  It  marks  a  great,  delay  of  the  promise,  a
tarrying  on  the  part  of  God,  but  which  indeed  cor
responds  wiih  the  over-haste  of  Abram  (see  2  I'et.
iii.  it). — \  am  God  the  Almighty  [HI  Shaddai ;  eh.
xxviii.  :;  ;  x\\v.  11;  xliii.  14;  xlviii.  ">  ;  Kxod.
vi.  :;].  "•-£  t'ormcd  from  TTJ ,  to  be  strong,  to
practise  violence,  with  the  nominal  termination  i  —
•is  "jn  festive,  -1'^"1'^"1  the  old,  "^p  thorn-covered,
and  other  nouns  are  formed.'1  Keil.  The  idea  of
omnipotence  is  inwoven  through  the  whole  Scripture,
with  the  idea  of  his  miraculous  works,  the  creation
of  the  ne\v,  or  the  new  creation  ( IV.  xxxiii.  '.) ;  Horn,
iv.  IT;  Numb.  xvi.  3u  ;  Is.  xlii.  !>  ;  Ixii.  (i;  Jer.xxxi.
22;  the  new  covenant;  the  new  man;  the  new
vhiid :  Rev.  xxi.  1,  •">).  I>elit/sch  has  raised  this
id"a  to  a  supposition  of  violence  done  to  nature,
which  corresponds  well  with  the  idea  of  a  miracle
held  in  the  seventeenth  century  ("that  which  is  con
trary  to  nature.")  "  Klohiin  is  the  God  who  makes
nature,  causes  it  to  be,  and  preserves  it — causes  it  to
endure  ;  El  Shaddai  the  God  icho  ronii'riiiiix  unlitr, ,
m>  th, it  i!  does  i'-/i"t  ix  ii'ju'iHst  itself,  and  subdues  it,
MI  t/int  it  boics  awl  n'tclilx  it  x<  If  to  the  service  of  grace.
('' It  designates  Jehovah  the  Covenant  God,  as  one
who  has  the  power  to  fulfil  his  promises  although
the  order  of  nature  may  appear  against  them.  It  is
a  pledge  to  Abram  that  notwithstanding  '  his  own
body  already  dead,  and  the  deadness  of  Sarah's
womb'  (Rom.  iv.  1'J),  the  numerous  seed  promised
could  and  would  be  given  to  him."  Keil. — A.  G.]
.Jehovah  is  the  God  who,  in  the  midst  of  nature,  causes
grace  to  penetrate  and  break  through  the  forces  of
nature,  and  at  last,  in  the  place  of  nature,  establishes
an  entirely  new  creation  of  grace"  (p.  381).  A  sad
dualistic  conception  of  nature  and  grace  lies  at  the
bottom  of  this  supposition.  The  creature  is  against
its  will  subject  to  vanity  (Rom.  viii.  20) ;  on  the  con
trary,  it  sighs  after  the  liberty  of  the  children  of
God.  We  can  only  speak  of  an  element  of  opposi
tion  to  nature,  in  the  miracle,  so  far  as  the  lower
nature  is  penetrated  by  the  higher,  and  must  of
course  give  way  to  it.  The  play  upon  the  letter  n
by  Delitzsch  (p.  382),  appears  to  us  cabalistic,  and
the  more  so,  since  the  names  Abraham  and  Sarah,
into  which  the  tn  enters,  are  not  grounded  in  the
uame  Jehovah  with  its  n ,  but  upon  El  Shaddai. —
Walk  before  me  (sec  ch.  v.  22  ;  xxiv.  40;  xlviii.
15  ;  Is.  xxxviii.  3).  The  great  elements  of  Abram's
faith  must  be  permanent ;  he  must  walk  continually
before  the  eye  of  the  Almighty,  in  the  consciousness
of  his  presence  who  is  mighty  to  work  miracles.  He


was  still  wanting  in  the  development  of  this  wonder-
working  faith,  and  therefore,  also,  was  not  blameless.
— And  be  thou  perfect* — free  from  blame  or
guiltless.  This  is  not,  indeed,  a  new  command,  but
the  result  of  the  command :  walk  before  me.  He
will  be  guiltless,  free  from  blame,  it'  he  remains  in
the  presence  of  the  God  who  works  wonders ;  that,
indeed,  will  make  him  guiltless,  free,  purify  his  con
sciousness. — And  I  will  make  my  covenant. — •
The  rvn2  "jr:  must  be  understood  here  after  the
analogy  of  eh.  ix.  12,  where  the  previously  formed
covenant  (eh.  vi.  IS)  with  Noah,  was  presupposed,
as  here  the  covenant  with  Abram  (ch.  xv.)  is  pre
supposed.  "  It  does  not  signify  to  conclude  a  cove
nant  (=  SP'jS),  but  to  give,  settle,  arrange,"  etc.
Keil.  ["At  the  former  period  (Gen.  xv.)  God  form
ally  entered  into  covenant  with  Abram,  here  he  takes
the  first  step  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant,  seals
it  with  a  token  and  a  perpetual  ordinance."  MUR
PHY,  p.  :-!<>7. — A.  (i.J  It  thus  denotes  the  establish
ing  of  the  covenant,  or  the  giving  it  a  traditional
force  for  his  seed,  the  arrangement  of  a  permanent
order  or  institution  of  the  covenant  (eomp.  Numb.
xxv.  12). — And  Abram  fell  on  his  face.  An  ex
pression  of  deep  humility  and  trustful  confidence,
and  indeed  also  of  the  joy  which  overpowered  him;f
hence  he  repeats  (ver.  17)  the  same  act  in  the  most
emphatic  way. — And  God  talked  with  Mm. —
We  must  notice  here  the  expression  E^ihlm,  and  the
"C"J .  God,  as  the  God  of  the  universe,  begins  a
conversation  with  Abram,  when  he  should  Invoice
Abraham  the  lather  of  a  multitude  of  nations.— As
for  me.  I  for  my  part.  The  ^S  evidently  empha
sizes  the  opposition  of  the  two  parties  in  the  cove
nant  (what  concerns;  me  or  my  part).  It  answers  to
npSI  of  vcr.  y.  Just  as  in  the  ninth  chapter  the
i:5n  "^JO  of  vcr.  9  stands  in  opposition  to  the
~N  ~N?  of  verses  4  and  5  (eomp.  Exod.  xix.  ;  ch.
xxiv). — And  thou  shalt  be  a  father.  The  1  an
nounces  the  subjects  of  the  covenant.  For  it  is  not
simply  the  individual  covenant  of  faith  of  Abram,
but  the  entire  general  covenant  of  blessing  in  him
which  is  here  spoken  of.  Knobel  thinks  that  the
name  Abraham  was  first  formed  after  Abraham  had
become  the  father  of  many  nations.  This  is  the
well-known  denial  of  the  prophetic  clement.  Uis
own  quotation,  however,  refutes  him.  "  The  He
brews  connected  the  giving  of  names  with  circumci
sion  (ch.  xxi.  3  ff. ;  Luke  i.  5'J ;  ii.  21).  The  Per
sians  likewise,  according  toTAVERMER:  '  Travels,'  i.
p.  270,  and  CIIARTJIN  :  'Voyages,'  x.  p.  7(3."  The
connection  of  the  giving  of  names,  and  circumcision,
effects  a  mutual  explanation.  The  name  announces
a  definite  human  character,  the  new  name  a  new
character  (the  new  name,  Rev.  ii.  17,  the  perfect
stamp  of  individual  character),  circumcision,  a  new
or  renewed,  and  more  noble  nature.^  "Moreover,"
Knobel  remarks:  "we  hear  only  in  the  Elohist  the
promise  of  a  multitude  of  nations  (vers.  10,  20;  ch.
xxxv.  11 ;  xlviii.  4);  the  Jchovist  uses  only  the  sin-

*  ["A'ot  sincere  merely,  unless  in  the  primitive  ^pnse
of  duty,  but  complete,  upright,  holy  ;  not  only  in  walk,  lut
in  heart."  MURPHY,  p.  308. — A.  G.]

t  [Calvin  and  Keil  recognize  in  this  prostration  of  the
patriarch  his  appropriation  and  reception  of  the  promise,
and  his  recognition  of  the  command. — A.  G.]

}  ["For  the  significance  of  names,  and  the  change  cf
names,  see  HENGSTENBEBQ'S  Beitruge  ii.  p.  270  n°. ; "  KURTZ,
—A.  U.]


CHAP.  XVII.  1-27.


423


gular  (cli.  xii.  2;  xriii.  18;  xlvi.  3).  So  likewise
the  promise  of  kings  and  princes  among  the  succes
sors  of  the  patriarch  is  peculiar  to  the  Elohist  (ver.
20;  ch.  xxv.  16;  xxxv.  11;  xxxvi.  31)."  This  dis
tinction  corresponds  entirely  with  the  fact,  that  Jc-
liovah,  out  of  the  (Goim)  nations,  which  he  rules  as
Elohim,  forms  one  peculiar  people  (G2)  of  faith,  as
he  at  first  changed  the  natural  Israel  to  a  spiritual.
As  to  this  promise  of  blessing  from  God,  the  name
Abraham,  father  of  a  mass,  noise,  tumult  of  nations,
embraces  the  whole  promise  in  its  widest  circum
ference.  1.  People  and  kings  ["  Kings.  David,
Solomon,  Christ,  whose  royal  genealogy  is  given
Matt.  i.  1-16."  WORDSWORTH,  p.  79.  Especially  in
Christ  and  the  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham,  who  are
kings  and  priests  unto  God,  Rev.  i.  6.  JACOBUS:
"  Notes." — A.  G.]  ;  even  rich  kings  should  come
from  him ;  2.  the  covenant  of  blessing  from  God
with  him  and  his  seed  should  be  eternal;  3.  the
whole  land  of  Canaan  should  belong  to  his  seed  for
an  eternal  possession.  It  should  be  observed  here,
that  Canaan  has  fallen  in  the  very  same  measure  to
the  Arabians  as  descendants  of  Abraham  (Gal.  iv.
23),  in  which  it  has  actually  been  rent  from  the  peo
ple  of  Israel  for  indefinitely  long  periods  of  time  ;  it
has  thus  remained  permanently  in  the  possession  of
the  descendants  of  Abraham  in  the  wider  sense;
4.  Jehovah  will  remain  (be)  the  God  (Elohim)  of  the
seed  of  Abraham.  This  promise,  also,  notwithstand
ing  all  the  transient  obscurations,  has  been  fulfilled  in
the  patriarchal  monotheism  in  Palestine  and  Arabia.
The  stipulated,  imprescriptible,  peculiar  right  of  the
people  of  Israel  to  Canaan  is  included  in  this  general
promise.  [Literally  to  the  lineal  seed  and  the  earthly
Canaan,  but  the  everlasting  covenant  and  the  everlast
ing  possession,  show  that  the  covenant  and  the  prom
ised  inheritance  included  the  spiritual  seed,  and  the
heavenly  Canaan. — A.  G.]  "  In  this  new  name,  God
gave  to  him  a  real  pledge  for  the  establishment  of
his  covenant,  since  the  name  which  God  gave  to  him,
could  not  be,  or  remain  an  empty  sound,  but  must
be  viewed  as  the  expression  of  the  reality  it  con
veys."  Keil.  "A  numerous  posterity  was  regarded
by  the  Hebrews  as  a  divine  blessing,  which  was  the
portion  of  those  well-pleasing  to  him  (ch.  xxiv.  60 ;
xlviii.  16,  19;  Ps.  cxxviii;  Ecc.  vi.  3)."  Knobel.

2.  The  covenant  of  Abraham  (on  his  part)  with
God,  in  the  wider  sense  (vers.  9-14).  And  God
(Elohim)  said  unto  Abraham.  The  covenant  of
circumcision  in  the  wider  sense  is  a  covenant  of
Slohim.  In  his  new  destination  Abraham  was  called
to  introduce  this  sign  of  the  covenant  for  himself  and
his  seed.  He  came  under  obligation  at  the  first  for
himself  with  his  seed  to  keep  the  covenant  with  Elo
him.  But  circumcision  is  the  characteristic  sign  and
seal  of  this  covenant,  as  a  statute  and  a  type,  i.  e.,  with
the  included  idea  of  its  spiritual  import.  In  this  sense
it  is  said :  This  is  my  covenant,  .  .  .  shall  be
circumcised.  Upon  circumcision  compare  WINER  :
Reed -Worter buck,  and  similar  works.  1.  The  act
of  circumcision:  the  removal  of  the  foreskin ;  2.  the
destination  :  the  sign  of  the  covenant ;  3.  the  time  :
eight  days  after  the  birth  (see  ch.  xxi.  4 ;  Lev.
xii.  3 ;  Luke  i.  59 ;  ii.  21 ;  John  vii.  22  ;  Phil.  iii.  5  ;
JOSEPH.:  "Autiq."  i.  12,  2);  4.  the  extent  of  its
efficacy :  not  only  the  children,  but  slaves  bom  in
the  house  [and  those  also  bought  with  his  money. —
A.  G.]  were  to  be  circumcised ;  5.  its  inviolability :
those  who  were  not  circumcised  should  be  cut  off,
uprooted. — Circumcision,  as  a  sign  of  the  patriarchal
covenant,  appears  to  presuppose  its  earlier  existence


as  a  religious  rite.    According  to  Herodotus,  circum
cision  was  practised  among  the  Colchi,   Egyptians
[It  has  been  urged,  however,  against  the  idea  that
the  Egyptians  practised  this  rite  gcnerallv;  1.  That
Abraham  circumcised  all  his  male  servants — among
them  probably  those  who  were  presented  by  Pha
raoh  ;  2.  that  Pharaoh's  daughter  knew  that  Mosea
was  a  Hebrew  child — (Heb.,  and  behold  a  male-child) ;
— 3.  Ezek.  xxxi.  18;  see  BUSH:  "Notes,"  p.  273. —
A.  G.]  and  Ethiopians ;  and  the  Syrians  of  Palestine
and   Phoenicians  might  have    learned   it  from   the
Egyptians.     In  Ewald's  view,  its  original  home  was
the  valley  of  the  Nile ;  and  it  still  exists  as  a  national
usage  among  the  Ethiopian  Christians,  and  among
the  Congos.     With  regard  to  the  circumcision  of  the
Egyytians,  we   remark,  that  while  Herodotus   and
Philo  regard  it  as  a  general  custom,  Origen  ascribes  it
simply  to  the  priests.     [WORDSWORTH,  p.  81,  urges
in  favor  of  this  view,  that  circumcision  was  not  prac
tised  by  the  other  sons  of  Ham ;  that  Ishmacl,  the
son  of  an  Egyptian   mother,  was   not  circumcised
until  after  this  institution  of  the  covenant;  and  that
Joshua  is  said  to  have  rolled  away  the  reproach  of
Egypt  when  he  circumcised  the  Israelites  at  Gilgal. —
A.  G.]     According  to  Ezek.  xxxi.  18;  xxxii.  19,  the
Egyptians  seem  to  be  included  among  the  uncircum-
cised.     We  need   not,  however,  insist  too   strictly
upon  a  prophetic  word,  which  may  possibly  have  a
higher  symbolical  sense  (comp.  Horn.  ii.  28).     And
Origen  informs  us  of  a  later   time,   in   which  the
Coptic  element  was  mingled  with  Hellenic  elements
in  Egypt.     Some  have  viewed  Egyptian  circumcision
as  an  idolizing  of  the  generative  power.    The  bloody
act  points  rather  to  purification.    Delitzsch  remarks :
that  circumcision,  as  some  think,  has  been  found  in
America,  upon  the  South  Sea  Islands,  e.  g.  in  a  mode
resembling  that  in  use  among  the  Jews,  in  the  Fecgee
Islands,  and  among  the  southeastern  Negro  tribes,
e.  g.  among  the  Damaras  in  tropical  South  Africa.
And   here  we  cannot  assume  any  connection  with
the  Abrahamic,  nor  with  the  Egyptian  circumcision.
But  the  customs  prevailing  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile,
might  spread  themselves  widely  over  Africa,  as  those
of  the  PhoDnicians  over  the  ocean.     The  Epistle  of
Barnabas,  in  a  passage  which  has  not  been  suffi
ciently  regarded  (ch.  ix.),  brings  into  prominence
the  idea,  that  we  must  distinguish  circumcision,  as
an  original   custom  of  different  nations,   from  that
which  receives  the  patriarchal  and  theocratic  sanc
tion.     "  The  heathen  circumcision,"  as  Delitzsch  re
marks,  "  leaving  out  of  view  the  Ishmaelites,  Arabians,
and  the  tribes  connected  with  them  both  by  blood
and  in  history,  is  thus  very  analogous  to  the  heathen
sacrifice.     As  the  sacrifice  sprang  from  the  feeling
of  the  necessity  for  an  atonement,  so  circumcision
from  the  consciousness  of  the  impurity  of  human  na
ture."     But  that  the  spread  of  circumcision  among
the  ancient  nations  is  analogous  to  the  general  prev
alence  of  sacrifice,  has  not  yet  been  proved.     It  re
mains  to  be  investigated,  whether  the  national  origin
of  circumcision   stands  rather  in  some  relation  to
religious  sacrifice ;  whether  it  may  possibly  form  an
opposition  to  the  custom  of  human  sacrifices  (for  it  is
just  as  absurd  to  view  it  with  some,  as  a  remnant  of
human  sacrifice,  as  to  regard  it  with  others,  as  a
modification  of  eunuchism) ;  whether  it  may  have
prevailed  from  sanitary  motives,  the  obligation  of
bodily  purity  and  soundness,  (see  WINER,  i.  p.  159);
or  whether  it  has  not  rather  from  the  first  had  itii
_ round  and  source  in  the  idea  of  the  consecration
of  the  generative  nature,  and  of  the  propagation  of


424


GENESIS,  OR   TILK   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


the  race  (DKLITZSCH,  p.  38.')).  At  all  events,  circum
cision  diii  not  conic  to  Abraham  :is  a  custom  of  his
ancestors;  lie  was  circumcised  when  ninety-nine
years  of  icre.  This  bears  with  derisive  weight  against
the  generalizing  of  ihe  custom  by  Delitzsch.  As  to
the  destination  of  circumcision  to  be  the  sign  of  the
covenant,  its  patriarchal  origin  is  beyond  n'.iestion.
[As  the  rainbow  w,;s  chosen  to  be  the  .~igu  of  the
covenant  with  Xoah,  so  the  prior  existence  of  cir
cumcision  does  nut  render  it  le-s  lit  to  be  the  sign
of  the  covenant  v.-Iih  Abraham,  nor  less  significant.
"It  was  the  lit  symbol  of  that  removal  of  the  old
man,  and  that  renewal  of  nature  which  qualified
Abraham  to  be  the  parent  of  the  holy  seed."  Mur
phy.  See  also  Kurtz  and  Baumgarten. — A.  <;.]  (See
John  vii.  22).  S'iH  it  was  placed  up-m  a  new  legal
basis  by  Moses  (Exod.  iv.  24,  25;  Lev.  xii.  :ji,  and
was  brought  into  regular  observance  by  .Joshua
(Josh.  v.  li).  That  it  should  be  the  symbol  of  the
new  b'rlh,  i.  i'.,  of  the  sanctitieation  of  human  v
from  its  very  --ource  and  origin,  is  shown  both  by  the
passages  which  speak  of  the  circumcision  of  the
heart  (Lev.  xxvi.  -11  ;  Dent.  x.  16;  xxx.  0;  Jer.  iv.
',  ;  ix.  25  ;  K/ek.  xliv.  7),  and  from  the  manner  of
speech  in  u~e  among  the  Israelites,  in  which  Jewish
proselytes  were  docribed  as  new-born.  As  to  the
terminus  of  eight  days,  which  was  so  strictly  ob
served,  that  even  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  was  held
subordinate  to  the  law  of  Circumci-ion,  Deht/.seh  ex
plains  the  prescription  of  this  period,  from  the  fact
that  the  child  was  not  separated  and  purified  from
the  sustenance  of  its  embryonic  state  until  this
period.  It  is  better  to  regard  the  week  of  birth  as  a
terminus  for  the  close  of  the  first  throes  and  labor,
and  at  the  same  time,  as  the  term  fixed  for  the  out
ward  pin-ideation.  Keil  explains:  "  because  this  day
was  viewed  as  the  beginning  of  the  independent  life,
as  we  mav  infer  from  the  analogous  prescription  as
to  the  a  ire  of  the  young  animals  us.'d  in  sacrifice
i  I,"v.  x\ii.  27;  Kxod.  xxii.  ;i<>).:*  lie  remarks  also,
"that  the  Arabians  circumcise  at  a  late  period,
usually  between  five  and  thirteen  years,  often  during
the  thirteenth  year,  because  Ishmael  was  thirteen
years  old  when  he  was  circumcised."  For  more  de
tailed  observations,  sec  K.\om<:t,,  p.  lol. — The
threatening  that  the  uncircumcised  should  be  cut
olf — uprooted,  can  refer  only  to  the  conscious,  wick-
e  1  contempt  of  the  command,  as  the  same  thrcaten-
!!!•_'  mu-t  be  understood  in  regard  to  other  offences.
Clericus  and  others  explain  the  "  cutting-off "  as  a
removal  from  the  people  and  its  privileges.  Rut  the
theocratic  death-penalty  (which  was  indeed  the  form
of  a  final,  complete  excommunication  from  th"  peo
ple")  can  alone  be  understood  here,  as  it  naturally
could  alone  meet  the  case  of  the  despiscr  of  the
covenant-sign,  and  of  the  covenant  itself.  [But  it  is
the  covenant  between  Jehovah  and  the  seed  of  Abra
ham  which  is  here  before  us,  and  exclusion  from  the
people  of  the  covenant  would  be,  as  Batrmgarten
urges,  exclusion  from  all  blessings  and  salvation.
That  this  was  connected  with  the  death-penalty  in
other  passages  (as  Exod.  xxxi.  11),  would  seem  to
show  that  the  phrase  itself  did  not  necessarily  imply
such  a  penalty. — A.  G.]  (see  KNOBEL,  p.  163).  The
reference  by  Delitzsch,  to  an  immediate  divine  judg-

*  [A  son  nf  rigid  ilmja.  It  was  after  a  week's  round,
Tvvien  a  Tic-\v  period  was  besuii,  and  thus  it  was  indicative
of  starting  anew  upon  a  new  li'e.  The  seventh  day  was  a
ji/icrod  d:\y.  And  this  period  of  RCYCII  days  was  a  sacred
period,  so  that  with  the  eighth  day  a  new  cycle  was  com
menced  JACOBUS,  p.  287. — A.  G.]  "


ment,  or  to  the  premature,  childless  death  of  the  un
circumcised,  who  had  reached  full  age,  implies  an
extraordinary  introduction  or  enlargement  of  the
theocratic  regulation,  which  belongs  to  the  Israel-
itish  tradition.  Keil  strives  to  unite  both  views
(p.  15ii).  J!i;t  here  also  we  must  disiingui.sh  the
legal  and  typical  elements,  lu  (he  topical  sense,
the  "cutting-oil1"  denotes  the  endless  destruction,
the  total  ruin  of  the  man  who  despise-  the  covenant
of  God.  |  And  it  is  worthy  of  observation,  that  to
despise  and  nject  the  :-ign,  \\as  to  despise  and  reject
the  covenant  itself.  lie  who  neglects  er  refuses  the
sign,  Jt'tth  In-oLi  it.  nt?/  covenant. — A.  G.]


I". — ".  The  establishment  of  the  covenant  in  a  nar
rower  sense  with  Isaac — the  more  direct  bearer  and
mediator  of  the  covenant  (ver.  l.",-22).  And  God
(Elohim)  said,  (iod  isiablishes  the  covenant  in
this  form  also  as  Klohim,  not  as  .Jehovah,  since  not
only  Israel,  but  Edom,  should  spring  from  Isaac,  the
son  of  Sarah. — Sarah  Ihy  wife.  "As  the  ances
tress  of  nations  and  kings,  she  should  be  called  !~ni!)
(princess),  not  "l~:^'  (heroine)."  Knobel.  I>elitzsch
explains  ~*~'-  the  princely,  but  this  does  not  distin
guish  sufficiently  the  old  name  from  the  new.  (Je
rome  distinguishes:  my  princess,  my  dominion  and
princess  generally).  Even  in  this  case  the  name  de
clares  the  subject  of  the  following  promise,  and  its
security.  Now  it  was  definitely  promise,!  to  Abra
ham,  that  he  should  have  a  son  from  Sarah  ;  and  it
was  also  intimated  that  the  descendants  from  this
son  should  branch  themselves  into  (Goiin)  nations. —
Then  Abraham  fell  upon  his  face,  and  laughed.
The  explanation  of  Knobel  is  absurd  :  "  Abraham
doubted  the  possibility,  since  he  was  an  hundred,
and  Sarah  was  ninety  years  old,  and  laughs,  there
fore,  hut  falls  upon  his  face,  lest  (iod  should  notice
it"  (  !  ).  "In  the  other  writer,  the  patriarch,  as  the
man  of  God,  believes  (eh.  xv.  G),  and  only  the  less
eminent  wife,  doubts  and  laughs  (eh.  xviii.  12).  But
here  as  there,  the  laughter,  in  the  name  of  the  prom
ised  seed  (  prijC"1),  passes  into  the  history  of  Abra
ham."  That  the  interpreter,  from  this  standpoint,
knows  nothing  of  a  laugh  of  astonishment,  in  connec-
tii>;i  v,i;h  full  faith,  indeed,  in  the  immediate  experi
ence  of  the  promise  (Ps.  cxxvi.  1,  2),  is  evident.
DKi.msrn  :  The  promise  was  so  very  great,  that  he
sank  reverently  upon  the  ground,  and  so  very  para
doxical,  that  he  involuntarily  laughs  (see  also  the
quotation  from  Calvin,  by  Keil,  p.  lol).  ["The
laughter  of  Abraham  was  the  exultation  of  joy,  not
the  smile  of  unbelief."  Art;. :  do  Oh'.  Dei.  xvi.  20.
Wordsworth,  who  also  urges  that  this  interpretation
is  sustained  by  our  Lord,  John  viii.  SO. — A.  G.]
We  may  confidently  infer  from  the  different  judg
ments  of  Abraham's  laughter  here,  and  that  of  Sa
rah,  which  is  recorded  afterward,  that  there  was  an
important  distinction  in  the  states  of  mind  from
which  they  sprang.  The  characteristic  feature  in  the
narration  here  is,  that  Abraham  fell  upon  his  face,
as  at  first,  after  the  promise,  ver.  2. — Shall  there
be  born  unto  him  that  is  an  hundred  years
old?*  The  apparent  impossibility  is  twofold  (see

*  ["These  questions  arc  not  addressed  to  God;  they
merely  agitate  the  breast  of  the  astonished  patriarch.*'
MURPHY,  p.  311.  "Can  this  be ?  This  that  was  only  too
pood  to  Le  thought  of.  and  too  blessed  a  consummation  of  all
his  ancient  hopes,  to  be  now,  at  this  late  day,  so  distinctly
assured  to  him  by  God  himself."  JACOBUS,  p.  289.— A.  G.]


CHAP.  XVII.  1-27.


425


the  quotations,  Rom.  iv.  and  Hob.  xi.). — O   that
Ishmael  might  (still)  live.     The   sense   of  the
prayer   is    ambiguous.       "Abraham,"  says   Knobi-1,
"  turns  aside,  and  only  wishes  that  the  son  he  al
ready  had  should  live  and  prosper."     Calvin,  and
others,  also  interpret  the  prayer  in  the  sense,  that
Abraham  would  be  contented  if  Ishmael  should  pros
per.     Keil,  on  (he  contrary,  regards  the  prayer  of
Abraham  as  arising  out  of  his  anxiety,  lest  Ishmael
should  not  have  any  part  in  the  blessings  of  the  cov
enant.     The  fact,  that  the  answer  of  God  contains
no  denial  of  the  prayer  of  Abraham,  is  in  favor  of
this  interpretation.     But  in  the  prayer,  Abraham  ex
presses  his  anticipation  of  an  indefinite  neglect  of
Ishmael,  which  was  painful  to  his  parental  heart.
He  asks  for  him,  therefore,  a  life  from  God  in  the
highest  sense.    Since  Abraham,  according  to  ch.  xvi.,
actually  fell  inio  the  erroneous  expectation,  that  the
promi.-e  of  God  to  him  would  be  fulfilled  in  Ishmael,
and  since  there  is  no  record  of  any  divine  correction
of  his  error  in  the  mean  time,  the  new  revelation
from  God  could  only  so  be  introduced  when  he  be
gins  to  be  in  trouble  about  Ishmael  (see  ch.  xxi.  9),
and  to  doubt,   as  to  the  truth  and  certainty  of  his
self-formed  expectation,  both  because  Jehovah  had
left  him  for  a  long  time  without  a  new  revelation,
and  because  Ilagar  had  communicated  to  him  the
revelation  granted  to  her,  as  to  the  character  of  her
son— a  prophecy  which  did  not  agree  with  the  heir
of  the  promise.     In  this  state  of  uncertainty  and
doubt  [Calvin,  however,  holds,  that  Abraham  was,
all  this  time,  contented  with  the  supposition,  that
Ishmael  was  the  child  of  promise,  and  that  the  new
revelation  startled  him  from  his  error. — A.  G.]  the
promise  of  the  heir  of  blessing  was  renewed  to  him.
But  then  he  receives  the  new  revelation  from  God,
that  Sarah  shall  bear  to  him  the  true  heir.     It  puts
an  end  to  the  old,  sad  doubt,  in  regard  to  Ishmael
since  it  starts  a  new  and  transient  doubt  in  reference
to  the  promise  of  Isaac  ;  therefore  there  is  mingling
with  his  faith,  not  yet  perfect  on  account  of  the  joy
(Luke  xxiv.  41),  a  beautiful  paternal  feeling  for  the
still  beloved  Ishmael,  and  his  future  of  faith.    Hence
the  intercession  for  Ishmael,  the  characteristic  feat
ure  of  which  is,  a  question  of  love,  whether  the  son
of  the  long-delayed  hope,  should  also  hold  his  share
of  the  bussing.     b^X  may,  indeed,  include  so  far  the
granting  of  the  prayer  of  Abram ;  it  may  mean,  still,
nevertheless.     [Better,   as  Jacobus,  indeed,   as   ad
dressed  to  the  transient  doubt  as  to  Isaac,  which
may  lie  in  Abraham's  prayer  for  Ishmael.     Indeed,
on  the  contrary,  Sarah  is  bearing  thee  a  son. — A.  G.]'
But  the  nineteenth  verse  distinctly  declares  that  the
son  of  Sarah  should  be  the  chief  heir,  the  peculiar
bearer  of  the  covenant.     Closer  and  more  definite
distinctions  are  drawn  invcr.  20. — Twelve  princes
shall  he  beget  (see  ch.  xxv.  12-16).— At  this  set
time.     The  promise  is  now  clearly  revealed  even  in
regard  to  time ;  and  with  this  the  revelation  of  God
for  this  time  ceases.


DOCTEIXAL    AND    ETHICAL.


4.  The  compliance  with  the  prescribed  rite  of
circumcision  (vers.  23-27).  The  prompt  obedience
of  Abraham  [This  prompt  obedience  of  Abraham  re
veals  his  faith  in  the  promise,  and  that  this  laughter
was  joyful  and  not  unbelieving. — A.  G.]  is  seen  in
his  circumcising  himself  and  his  household,  i.  e.  the
male  members  of  his  household,  as  he  was  com
rnanded,  in  the  same  day.  According  to  the  expres
sion  of  the  text,  Abraham  appears  to  have  performed
the  rite  upon  himself  with  his  own  hands.


1.  Sec   the   General  Remarks,   and   the  Critical
Notes  upon  the  double  circle  of  the  covenant  and
circumcision.

2.  El   Shaddai.      We  do    not  comprehend  the
whole  of  this  name,  if  we  identify  it  with  Klohim.
We  make  it  too  comprehensive  if  "we  represent  it  aa
including  the  idea  of  all  the  divine  attributes,  or  as
an  expression  of  the  majesty  of  God.     It  is  the  name
of  the  Almighty,  and  stands  here  at  the  verv  be
ginning  of  the  announcement  of  theocratic  miracles,
for  the  same  reason,  that  in  the  Apostles'  Creed  it
designates  the  nature  of  God  the  Father,   for   the
Christian  faith.     The  Almighty  God  (mrroxpATup)
is  the  God  of  the  Theocracy,  and  of  all  the  miracles.
He  makes  the  highest  revelation  of  his  miraculous
power  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  (Eph.  i.  19  ft'.).

3.  Before  my  face.     The  anthropomorphisms  of
the  Scripture.     The  soul,  head,   eyes,  arm  of  God
are  mentioned  in  the  Bible.     The  Concordances  give
all  the  information  any  one  needs.     It  is  not  difficult
to  ascertain  the  meaning  of  the  particular  descrip-

His  face  is  his  presence  in  the  definiteness  and
certainty  of  the  personal  consciousness  (Ps.  cxxxix.).

4.  Keil  brings  the  narrower  circle  of  the  cove
nant  into  conflict  with  the  wider,  as  was  above  re
marked.     [Keil   puts    his   argument   in  this  form:
Since  the  grace  of  the  covenant  was  promised  alono
to  Isaac,  and  Abraham  was  to  become  the  father  of
amass  of  nations  by  Sarah  (ver.  16),  we  cannot  in
clude  the  Ishmaclites  nor  the  sons  of  Keturah  in  this
mass  of  nations.     Since,  further,  Esau  had  no  part
m  the  promise  of  the  covenant,   the  promised  de
scciidants  must  come  alone  through  Jacob.     But  the
sons  of  Jacob  formed  only  one  people  or  nation ;
Abraham  is  thus  only  the  father  of  one  people.     It
follows,  necessarily,  that  the  mass  of  nations  must
embrace  the  spiritual  descendants  of  Abraham,  all
who  are  en  niffrews  'Appad/u  (comp.  Rom.  iv.  11,  16).
He  urges  also,  in  favor  of  this  view,  the  fact,  that
the  seal  of  the  covenant  was  applied  to  those  who
were  not  natural  descendants  of  Abraham,  to  those
born  in  his  house  and  bought  with  his  money.     lie
holds,  also,  that  the  promise  of  the  land  of  Canaan
to  this  seed  for  a  possession  is  not  exhausted  by  the
fact,  that  this  land  was  given  to  the  literal  Israel,
but  that  as   the  'Icrpa',i\   Kara,  a-dpita  are    enlarged
to  the  "lo-pcujA.  KO.TO.  Trvev/uta,  so  the  idea  and  limits
of  the  earthly  Canaan  must  be  enlarged  to  the  limits
of  the  spiritual  Canaan,  that  in  truth,  Abraham  has
received  the  promise  K\rjpoi>^ov  uvrbit  e^vat  K6a/j.ov
Rom.    iv.    13,  p.   138.— A.  G.]      Under    the   seed
promised  to  Abraham  of  a  "  multitude  of  nations,"
the  descendants  of  Esau  should  not  be  understood  ;
on  the  contrary,  the  spiritual  descendants  of  Abra
ham  must  have  been  intended,  and  reckoned  with
the  people  of  Israel,  which  constitutes,  indeed,  but
one  nation.     But  still,  we  must  always  clearly  dis
tinguish   between   the   promise,   "  in  "thee  sb.i'll  bo
blessed  all  the  families  of  the  earth,"  and  the  prom
ise,  "from  thee   shall  spring  a  mass  of  nations,"
through  Ishmael  and  Isaac,  and  these  shall  all  be
embraced  in  the  covenant  of  circumcision,  the  one
as  bearer  of  the  covenant,  the  others  as  associates
and  sharers  in   the   covenant.      Otherwise,  indeed,
even  the  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham  mifct  be  circum
cised.     But  as  circumcision  is  the  type  of  the  new
birth,  so  the  mass  of  nations  which  should  spring
from  Abraham,  is  the  type  of  his  spiritual  descend-


42G


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


ants,  and  in  the  typical  sense,  truly,  lie  is  here  the
father  of  all  believers.  In  the  typical  sense,  also,
the  promise  of  Canaan,  and  the  promise  of  the  eter
nity  of  the  covenant,  have  a  higher  meaning  and
importance.  The  remarks  of  Keil,  as  to  the  estima
tion  of  this  spiritual  significance  of  the  Abrahamie
promise,  against  Auberleti  and  others,  who  sink  the
reference  of  the  promise  to  the  spiritual  Israel  to  a
"mere  application,''  arc  well  founded  [and  are  most
important  and  suggestive. — A.  G.]

5.  Circumcision  (as  also  baptism  still  more  effect
ually,  KOMI,  vi.),  as  the  type  of  the  renewing  through
natural  suiferin.:,  evidently  forms  an  opposition  be
tween  the  old  and  sinful  human  nature,  and  the  new
life.  It  is  therefore  a  testimony  to  human  corrup
tion  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the  calling  of  men
through  divine  grace  to  a  new  life,  on  the  other.
[The  ground  of  the  choice  of  circumcision  as  the
sign  ami  seal  of  the  covenant  may  be  thus  stated.
It  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  blessing  promised,  i.  e.  a
seed  of  blessing.  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is
flesh,  but  the  promised  seed  were  to  be  holy,  and
thus  channels  of  ble.-sing.  The  seed  of  Abraham
were  thus  to  be  distinguished  from  other  races.  As
corruption  descended  by  ordinary  generation,  the
seed  of  grace  were  to  be  marked  and  symbolically
purified  from  that  corruption.  It  thus  denoted  the
purifying  of  that  by  which  the  promise  was  to  be  se
cured. — A.  G.  ]  Hut  as  a  sign  placed  upon  the  fore
skin,  it  designates  still  more  definitely  on  the  one
side,  that  the  corruption  is  one  which  has  especially
fallen  upon  or  centres  in  the  propagation  of  the  race,
and  has  an  essential  source  of  support  in  it,  as  on
the  other  side,  it  is  a  sign  and  seal,  that  man  is  called
to  a  new  life,  and  also,  that  for  this  new  life  the  con
ception  and  procreation  should  be  consecrated  and
sanctified  (see  John  i.  Hi,  14).  The  male  portion
of  the  people  only,  were  subjected  to  this  ordinance.
This  rests  first  of  all  upon  natural  causes.  Luther
finds  a  compensation  in  the  birth-throes  and  expos
ure  to  death  on  the  part  of  the  females.  The  pains
of  birth  were  truly  translated  to  the  male  sex  through
circumcision.  But  then  this  one-si dcdness  of  the
sacrament  of  circumcision  declares  the  complete  de
pendence  of  the  wife  upon  her  husband  under  the
old  covenant.  [KURTZ  :  The  dependent  position  of
the  woman,  by  virtue  of  which,  not  without  the  man,
but  in  and  with  the  man,  not  as  woman,  but  as  the
bride,  and  mother,  she  has  her  importance  in  the
people  and  life  of  the  covenant,  does  not  allow  her
to  come  into  the  same  prominence  here  as  the  man,
p.  188.  JACOBCS  says:  "Under  the  Old  Covenant,
as  everything  pointed  forward  to  Christ  the  God-
Man — Son  of  Man — so  every  offering  was  to  be  a
malt,  and  every  covenant  rite  was  properly  enough
confined  to  the  males.  The  females  were  regarded
as  acting  in  them,  and  represented  by  them.  Under
the  New  Testament  this  distinction  is  not  appropri
ate.  It  is  not  male  and  female,  Gal.  iii.  28 ;  Col.
iii.  11.  That  the  rite  was  applied  so  expressly  to
those  born  in  the  house,  and  those  bought  with  his
money — the  son  of  the  stranger — was  intended  to
point  to  the  universal  aspect  of  the  covenant,  the  ex
tension  of  its  blessings  to  all  nations.— A.  G.]  But
it  was  enlarged,  or  completed,  in  fact,  through  the
law  of  purification,  to  which  the  mother  was  sub
jected.  Its  spiritual  significance  is  finally,  that  it  is
not  birth  itself,  but  the  sexual  generation,  as  such,
which  is  the  tradux  peccati.  In  the  New  Covenant,
the  wife  has  an  equally  direct  share  in  baptism  as
the  husband.  And  this  was  typified  in  the  Old  Cov


enant  through  the  giving  of  the  name.     Sarah  pos
sesses  a  new  name  as  well  as  Abraham.

6.  It  scarcely  follows  from  Exod.  iv.  25,  as  Pc-
litzsch  thinks,   that  circumcision  proclaimed  to  the
circumcised  man,  that  he  had  Jehovah  i'or  a  bride
groom ;    although  Jews,   Ishmaclites,  and  Moslems
generally  name  the  day  of  circumcision  the  wedding-
feast  of  circumcision.     The  Scripture  constitutes  a
bridal  relation  between  Christ  and  his  Church,  viewed
in  its  totality.

7.  If  Delitzsch  in  this,  as  in  other  passages,  givea
to  circumcision  too  great  an  importance,  he  does  not
esteem  sufficiently  its  importance  when  he  remarks,
that  it  is  no  peculiar  rite  of  initiation,  like  baptism.
"It  is  not  circumcision  which  makes  the  Israelites
what  they  arc  as  such,  i.  c.,  members  of  the  Israel-
itish  church.      It  is  through  its  birth  [While  it  is
true  that  the  Israelite  by  his  birth  was  so  far  a  mem
ber  of  the  congregation  or  church,  that  he  had  a  title
to  its  rites  and  ordinances,  it  is  true  that  circumci
sion  was  the  recognition  of  that  membership,  and
that  if  he  neglected  it,  he  was  exscinded  from  the
people. — A.  G.  ] ;  for  people  and  church  are  cotermi
nous  in  the  Old  Te<tament."     This  is  totally  incor
rect,  just  as  incorrect  as  if  one  should  say,  Christen
dom  and  the  Church  are  coterminous.     [It  lies,  too,
in  the  face  of  the   whole  New   Testament,    which
places  circumcision  and  baptism  in  the  closest  rela
tions  to  each   other,  and  makes  the  one  to  come  in
the  place  of  the  other.    The  differences  between  them
upon  which  Delit/sch  dwells  are  just  those  which  we
should   expect   under   the   two   economies. — A  G.]
As  one  must  distinguish  between  Jacob  and  Israel,
so  one  must  distinguish  between  Israel  as  the  natur
ally  increased  ("i;)  and  Israel  as  the  called  people
of  God  (C?).     Israel  is,  in  a  qualified  sense,  the  peo
ple  of  God  ;  viz.,  as  it,  through  circumcision,  purifi
cation,  and  sacrifice,  was  consecrated  a  congregation
of  God  ('!~lp).     And  thus  we  must  distinguish  cir
cumcision  as  to  its  old  national,  its  patriarchal,  and  its
theocratic  and  legal  power  and  efficacy.     In  the  last
meaning  alone,  it  belonged  to  the  people  of  Israel  as
the  Church  of  God,  and  was  so  far  an  initiatory  rite,
that  by  means  of  it  an  Edomite  or  Moabite  could
be  incorporated  into  the  people  of  God,  while  genu
ine  Jews,  even  the  sons  of  Aaron,  might  be  exscind
ed,  if  it  were  neglected.     The  Old  Testament  people
of  God,  has  thus  definitely  the  characteristic  traits
of  the  spiritual  New  Testament  Israel,  a  people  of
God,  gathered  from  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.     It
was  precisely  the  fault  of  the  Edomite  Jews,  that
they  failed  to  distinguish   between   circumcision  in
this  higher  sense,  as  it  passed  over  into  baptism,  and
circumcision  as  a  national  custom.     And  this  is  the
fallacy  of  the  Baptists,  through  which  they,  to  this
day,  commonly  attempt  to  rend  away  from  the  de
fenders  of  infant  baptism  the  argument  which  they
draw  from  circumcision.     They  say,  "  circumcision
was  no  sacrament  of  the  Jews ;  it  was  a  mere  na
tional  custom."     But  it  was  just  as  truly  a  sacra
ment  of  the  Jews,  as  the  passover,  from  which  we
must   distinguish  likewise,  the  eating  of  a  roasted
lamb  in  the  feasts  of  the  ancients.     We  refer  again
to  the  well-known  distinction  in  the  Epistle  of  Bar
nabas  (ch.  ix.).

8.  The  moral  nature  of  the  divine  covenant  ap
pears  in  this  chapter,  as  in  the  earlier  formation  of
the  covenant ;  and  here  still  more  definitely  through
the  opposition :  I  on  my  part  (ver.  4),  but  thou  on
thy  part  (ver.  9).     Circumcision,  according  to  this


CHAR    XVII.  1-27.


427


antithesis,  must  be  regarded  by  Abraham  especially
as  a  duty,  which  declares  comprehensively  all  his
duties  in  the  rendering  of  obedience,  in  the  self-
denying,  subduing,  and  sanctifying  of  his  nature;
while  the  giving  of  the  name  is  the  act  of  God,  which
is  comprehensive  of  all  his  promises.  There  is  no
conflict  between  this  first  and  nearest  significance  of
circumcision,  and  the  fact,  that  it  is  a  gift,  a  sign
and  seal,  and  type  of  the  truth  of  the  covenant  of
God.  The  application  to  the  passover-meal,  and  in
deed  to  the  Christian  sacraments,  will  be  obvious.
["  As  a  sign,  circumcision  was  intended  to  set  forth
such  truths  as  these:  of  repentance  and  flesh-
mortifying,  and  ganctification  and  devotement  to
God;  and  also  the  higher  truth  of  the  seed  of  prom
ise  which  Israel  was  to  become,  and  the  miraculous
seed,  which  was  Christ.  As  a  seal,  it  was  to  authen
ticate  God's  signature,  and  confirm  his  word  and
covenant  promise,  and  execute  the  covenant  on
God's  part,  making  a  conveyance  of  the  blessings  to
those  who  set  their  hand  to  this  seal  by  faith.  Un
der  the  New  Testament  economy  of  the  same  cove
nant  of  grace,  after  "the  seed"  had  come,  the  seal
is  adapted  to  the  more  spiritual  dispensation,  though
it  is  of  the  same  general  import.  JACOBUS,  "  Notes,"
vol.  i.  p.  286.— A.  G.]

9.  The  first  laughter  mentioned  in  the  Bible  is
that  of  Abraham,  ver.   17.     A  proof  that   there  is
nothing  evil  in  the  laugh  itself.     The  first  weeping
which  is  mentioned  is  the  weeping  of  Ilagar  in  the
desert  (eh.  xxi.  1G).     Both  expressions  of  human
feeling  thus  appear  at  first,  in  a  consecrated  and
pious  form.

10.  The  Jews  declare  that  the  law  of  circumci
sion  is  as  great  as  the  whole  law.     The  idea  is,  that
circumcision  is  the  kernel,  and  therefore,  also,  that
which  comprehends  the  whole  law :  a.  as  a  separa
tion  from  an  impure  world;  b.  as  a  consecration  to
God.     When  they  say,  it  is  only  on  account  of  cir
cumcision  that  God  hears  prayer,  and  no  circumcised
man  can  sink  to  hell,  it  is  just  as  true,  and  just  as
false,  as  the  extra  ecdesiam  nulla  salus,  according  as
it  is  inwardly  or  outwardly  understood.

11.  We  have  here  the  first  allusion  to  slaves  who
were  bought  with  money  (ver.  27).     STARKE  :  "Thus
it  seems,  alas !  true,  that  at  this  time  slavery  pre
vailed,  which,  indeed,  to  all  appearance,  must  have
begun  from  the  Nimrodic  dominion.     For  when  men
have  begun  to  treat  their  fellow-men  as  wild  beasts,
after  the  manner  of  hunters,  they  will  easily  enslave
those  who  are  thus   overcome  ;    and    this   custom,
though  against  the  rights  of  nature,  soon  became
general.    When,  now,  Abraham  found  this  custom  in
existence  before  his  time,  he  used  the  same  for  the
good  of  many  of  these  wretched  people  ;  he  bought
them,  but  brought    them  to  the  knowledge  of  the
true  God,  etc.     To  buy  and  sell  men  for  evil  is  sin,
and  opposed  both  to  the  natural  and  divine  law  (Ex.
xxi.  2);   but  to  buy  in  order  to  bring  them  to  the
knowledge  of  the  true  God  is  permitted  (Lev.  xxv.
44,45)." — To  buy  them  in  order  to  give  them  bodily
and  spiritual  freedom  is  Christ-like.

12.  STAUKE  :  "The  question  arises  here,  whether
a  foreign  servant  could  be  constrained  to  be  circum
cised.     Some  (Clericus,  e.  g.)  favor,  and  others  op
pose  this  opinion.      The  Rabbins  pay :  If  any  one
•should  buy  a  grown  servant  of  the  Cuthites,  and  he
refused  to  be  circumcised,  he  should  sell  him  again."
Waiinonides.

13.  As  in  the  ark  of  Noah,  so  in  the  fact  that
Abraham  should  circumcise  all  the  male  members


of  his  household,  the  full  biblical  significance  and
importance  of  the  household  appears  in  a  striking
way ;  of  the  household  in  its  spiritual  unity,  which
the  theory  of  the  Baptists  in  its  abstract  individual
ity,  dissolves.

14.  The  promise  of  blessing  which  Abraham  re
ceives,  repeats  itself  relatively  to  every  believer.    His
life  will  be  rich  in  fruits  of  blessing,  reaching  on
into  eternity.     In  the  abstract  sense  this  avails  only
of  Christ  (Isa.  liii.  10),  but  therefore  in  some  meas
ure  of  every  believer  (Mark  x.  30).

15.  The  word  ver.  14  in  a  typical  expression
contains  a  fearful  and  solemn  warning  against  the
contempt  of  the  sacraments.     The  signs  and  seals
of  communion  with  the  Lord  and  his  people  arc  not
exposed  to  the  arbitrary  treatment  of  individuals.
With  the  proud  contempt  of  the  signs  of  communion,
the  heart  and  life  are  separated  from  the  communion
itself,  and  its  blessings  and  salvation.

16.  The  New  Testament  fulfilment  of  circumci
sion  (Rom.  ii.  29).    If  circumcision  is  the  type  of  the
new  birth,  its  essential  fulfilment  lies  in  the  birth  of
Christ.     The  sanctification  of  birth  has  reached  its
personal  goal  in  his  birth,  which  is  a  new  birth.   But
Christ  must  be  appropriated  by  humanity  through
his  sufferings.     Therefore  he  was  made  subject  to
the  legal  circumcision  (Gal.  iv.  4),  and  the  perfect
result  of  this  communion  with  his  brethren,  was  his
death  upon  the  cross  (Rom.  vi.  6;  Col.  ii.  11,  12).
In  the  communion  with  this  death,  into  which  Chris
tians  enter  with  baptism,  they  become  the  people
of  the  real  circumcision,  over  against  which  bodily
circumcision,  in  a  religious  sense,  becomes  a  cruel
mangling  of  the  body  (Phil.  iii.  3).

17.  We  must  distinguish  the  typical  significance
of  our  chapter  from  its  historical  basis,  and  bind
both  sides  together  without  confounding  them.   This
avails  of  the  twofold  circle  of  the  covenant ;  of  the
name  Abraham ;  of  the  blessing  for  his  seed  ;  of  the
eternity  of  the  covenant;  of  his  sojourn  in  Canaan,
and  the  gift  of  the  laud  to  him  for  an  eternal  pos
session  ;    of  circumcision,  and  of  the  threatening  of
excision.     In  all  these  points  we  distinguish  the  his
torical  greatness  and  spiritual  glory  of  the  covenant
of  promise.


HOHILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  paragraphs. — The  visitation  of
Abraham  after  his  long  trial  and  waiting. — God's  de
lay  no  actual  delay  (2  Pet.  ii.  9). — The  establish
ment  of  the  covenant  between  God  and  Abraham :
1.  The  precondition  of  the  establishment  of  the  cov
enant  (see  ch.  xv.-ch.  xvii.  1) ;  2.  the  contents  of
the  covenant  of  promise :  the  name  Abraham ;  a.  in
the  natural  sense ;  b.  in  the  typical  sense ;  3.  the
covenant  in  the  wider  and  narrower  sense :  4.  the
covenant-sign. — The  new  covenant  of  God  in  his
name  (El-Shaddai,  God  of  wonders),  the  basis  of  the
new  name  of  believers. — Faith  in  the  miracle  is  faith
in  that  which  is  divinely  new. — The  renewed  call  of
Abraham:  1.  As  a  confirmation  of  his  calling;  2.  as
the  enlargement  and  strengthening  of  it. — The  con
tents  of  the  call :  Walk  before  me  and  be  perfect,
i.  e.,  walk  before  me  (in  the  faith  and  vision  of  my
presence,  in  grace  and  miraculous  power),  1.  so  art
thou  blameless  (pious,  righteous,  perfect) ;  2.  so  wilt
thou  be  blameless  ;  3.  so  prove  it  through  thy  pious
conduct. — The  particular  promises  of  God,  which
arc  contained  in  the  name  Abraham :  1.  According


428


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


to  its  natural  greatness  ;  2.  according  to  its  typical
glory. — The  promises  of  Cod  conditioned  through
the  covenant  of  God. — The  two  sides  in  the  covenant
Of  God. — In  the  covenant  of  circumcision. — Circum
cision  as  a  typo  :  1.  Of  the  new  birth  ;  2.  of  baptism  ;
15.  of  infant  baptism.— Abraham's  laughter.— Abra
ham's  intercession  for  Islnnael. — For  missions  among
the  Mohammedans.— #e  r-i/l  laugh.— Isaac's  name
henceforth  a  name  of  premise. — The  significance  of
this  name  for  the  children  of  God  (1's.  cxxvi.  2;
Luke  vi.  21). — Abraham's  obedience  the  spiritual
side  of  circumcision.

STAHKK:  [derivations  of  El-Slmddai.     More  par
ticularly    upon    the    biblical    anthropomorphisms].
The  change  of   names.     There    is    here    a  glorious
proof  that  even  the    heathen  shall  come  to  Christ,
and  become  ihe  children  of  Abraham. — Upon  ver.  6.
But  above  all,  the  King  of  kings,  Christ,  is  to  de
scend   from   him  (Luke  i.   o2  ;    Horn.    ix.    5). — Upon
vcr.  7.       As   to   the  earthly  prosperity  which   (iod
promised  to  the  natural  seed  of  Abraham,  namely,
tin-  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  word  E'<  r-
nal  is  here  used  to  denote  a  very  long  time,  which,
however,   has  still   an  end  (vers.  8,   13,  ID;    Exod.
xxi.  d  ;  Dcut.  xv.  17  ;  Jer.  xviii.  Hi).     But  as  to  the
spiritual   good    which  he  promised   to  the  spiritual
seed  of  Abraham,  to  all   true  believers,  namely,  the
grace  of  God,    forgiveness    of  sins,   protection  and
bles.-ing  in  this  life,  and  heavenly  glory  in  the  life
to  come,  it  i-  surely  an  eternal,  perpetual  covenant.
[Thus    al-o  Wordsworth,  essentially,   and   Murphy:
"The  phrase,  perpetual  possession,  has  here  two  ele
ments  of  meaning — first,  that  the  possession  in  its
coming  i'oiin  of  a  certain  land,  shall  last  as  long  as
the  coexisting   relations   of  things    are   continued;
and  secondly,  that  the  said  possosion  in  all  the  va-
rietvofits  ever  grander  phases,  will  last  absolutely
forever,  p.  JI'i'.i.1'— A.  (i.]. — CKAMKK :   The   covenant
of  grace  (  f  Cod  is  eternal,  and  one  with  the  new  cov
enant  in  Christ(  Jer.  xxxi.  ",:\ ;   Isa.  liv.  Id). — OSIAS-
PKU:  Even  the  children  of  Christian  parents,  born
dead,  or  taken  away  before  the  reception  of  baptism,
are  not  to  be  esteemed  lost,  but  blessed. — lie  intro
duces,   a   sacrament  which,    viewed  in    itself  alone,
might  be  regarded  as  involving   disgrace.     But   on
this  very  account  it  typifies,  1.  the  deep  depravity  of
men,  in  which  they  are  involved  from  the  corruption
of  original  sin,  since  not  only  some  of  the  members,
but   the  whole  man,   is   poisoned,  and  the  member
here  affected  in  particular  as  the  chief  instrument  in
the  propagation  of  the  human  race.      2.    For  the
same  reason,  it  confirms  the  promise  of  the  increase
of  the  race  of  Abraham.     3.  Through  this  sign  God
intends  to  distinguish  the  people  of  his  possession
from  all  other  nations.     4.  He  represents  in  it,  the
spiritual  circumcision  of  the  heart — the  new  birth. —
Upon  ver.  14.   CRAMKU  :  Whoever  despises  the  word
of  (iod  and  the  sacraments,  will  not  be  left  unpun
ished  by  (iod  (Isa.  vii.  12  ;  Luke  vii.  30  ;  1  Cor.  xi.
30. — MUSCTLUS:    Sarah,  although  appointed  to  be
the  royal  mother  of  nations  and  kings,  does  not  bear
them  to  herself,  but  to  Abraham,  her  own  husband  ;
thus  the  Church  of  Christ,  espoused  to  Christ,  al
though  the  true  royal  mother  of  nations  and  kings,
i.  e.,  of  all  believers,  bears  them  not  to  herself,  but
to  Christ. — CRAMER:    Although  women  in  the  Old
Testament  had  no  sacrament  of  circumcision,  they
share  in  its   virtue,  through  the   reception  of  the
names,  by  which  they  voluntarily  subscribe  to  the
covenant  of  God  (Isa.  xliv.  5). — God  is  an  Almighty
God,  who  is  not  bound  to  nature. — Ver.  23.  As  to


,he  readiness  with  which  all  the  servants  of  Abraham
;uffer  themselves  to  be  circumcised,  we  sec  at  once
hat  they  must  have  had  already,  through  the  in-
jtruction  of  Abraham,  some  correct  knowledge  of
jod,  since  otherwise  they  could  not  have  understood
an  act  which,  to  mere  reason,  appears  so  preposter
ous,  foolish,  and  disgraceful. — OSIAXDKR:  Believing
leaseholders,  who  yield  themselves  in  obedience  to
the  divine  will,  shall  have  also,  through  the  divine
jlessing,  yielding  and  docile  domestics. — CKAMKR
As  circumcision  was  applied  to  all  the  members  of
Abraham's  household,  so  all,  great  and  small,  should
36  baptized  (Mark  x.  14  ;  John  iii.  5,  6 ;  Acts  xvi.
15;  xviii.  8  ;  1  Cor.  i.  10. — As  Abraham  used  no
delay  in  the  sacrament  of  circumcision,  even  so  we
also  should  not  long  defer  the  baptism  of  infants.

Lisco  :  The  essential  element  of  the  covenant  on
the  part  of  (iod  is  grace;  on  man's  part,  faith  (still,
the  grace  here  receives  a  concrete  expression  in  a
definite,  gracious  promise,  and  faith  likewise  in  obe
dience,  and  in  a  definite,  significant  rendering  of  obe
dience). — GKKI.ACII  :  ver.  ID.  Isaac  ("he  laughs,"
or  "one  laughs"),  the  child  of  joyful  surprise  is  now
announced  as  soon  to  appear. — Ver.  8.  The  eternal
possession  stands  in  striking  contrast  to  the  tran
sient,  ever-changing  place  of  sojourn,  which  Canaan
was,  at  that  time,  for  Abraham.  This  land,  how
ever,  which  God  promises  to  Abraham  and  his  seed
for  an  inheritance,  is  still  at  the  same  time  a  visible
pledge,  the  enclosing  shell  of  the  still  delicate  seed
or  kernel,  therefore  the  prophetic  type  of  the  new-
world,  which  belongs  to  the  Church  of  the  Lord ;
therefore  it  is  pre-eminently  an  eternal  possession.
This  is  true,  also,  of  all  divine  ordinances,  as  circum
cision,  the  passover,  the  priesthood,  etc.,  which,
established  in  the  Old  Testament  as  eternal,  are,  as
to  the  literal  sense,  abolished  in  the  New  Testament,
but  arc  in  the  truest  sense  spiritually  fulfilled. —
CALWKR  (Handbuch)  upon  ver.  1  :  Wtilk  before  r//ic,
etc.  The  law  and  the  gospel,  faith  and  works,  are
brought  together  in  this  one  brief  word  or  sentence.
Ver.  7.  Etcninl  corf  mint.  Truly,  in  so  far  as  the  spir
itual  seed  of  Abraham  take  the  place  of  the  natu
ral  Israel,  and  the  earthly  Canaan  is  the  type  of  the
heavenly,  which  remains  the  eternal  possession  of
all  believers. — The  female  sex,  without  any  external
sign  of  the  covenant,  were  yet  included  in  the  cove
nant,  and  shared  its  grace,  so  far  as  through  descent
or  marriage  they  belonged  to  the  covenant  people
(eh.  xxxiv.  14  ff. ;  Exod.  xii.  3;  Joel  ii.  15,  1C,).—
Scii!i''>i)KR:  Vcr.  1.  This  manifestation  was  given
to  Abraham,  when  he  had  now  grown  old  and  gray
in  faith,  for  the  hope  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  divine-
promise.  How  he  rebukes  and  shames  us  who  are
so  easily  stumbled  and  offended,  if  we  do  not  sec  at
once  the  fulfilment  of  the  divine  promises!  (Rain-
bach). — Upon  the  name  Elohim.  The  same  epoch
which  (ch.  xvii.)  introduces  the  particular  view  of
that  economy  (Rom.  iv.  11,  12),  opens  also  its  uni
versal  tendencies  and  features.  What  profound  di
vine  wisdom  and  counsel  shine  in  these  paradoxes !
(The  foundation,  however,  of  this  opposition  is  laid
already  in  ch.  xii.  1,  and  first  appears  in  its  decisive,
complete  form  in  the  Mosaic  institution  of  the  law).
— Ver.  1.  We  need  to  mark  more  carefully  the
"I  am"  of  vcr  1,  because,  so  many  false  gods  pre
sent  themselves  to  our  hearts,  and  steal  away  GUI  '
love  (Berlfb.  JBibel). — Before  Abraham  was  command
ed  to  circumcise  himself,  the  righteousness  of  faith
was  counted  to  him,  through  which  he  was  already
righteous  (Luther).— Although  he  utters  no  word,


CHAPS.  XVIII,    XIX.


429


his  silence  speaks  louder  than  if  he  had  cried  in  the
clearest  and  loudest  tones,  that  he  would  surely  obey
Ihc  word  of  God  (Calvin). — The  significance  and  im
portance  of  names,  among  the  Hebrews,  especially
in  Genesis. — Ver.  5.  Abraham  is  not  called  the  father
of  many  nations,  because  his  seed  should  be  sepa
rated  into  different  nations,  but  rather  because  the  dif
ferent  nations  should  be  united  in  him  (Rom.  iv. ;  Cal
vin). — Ver.  8.  The  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger.
The  foreigner  shall  become  the  possessor. — Upon
Ver.  14.  The  connection  shows  that  the  reference  is
to  the  conscious  contempt  of  the  sacraments,  not  to
those  children  who,  through  the  guilt  of  their  parents,
were  not  circumcised  upon  the  eighth  day  (Exod.  iv.
24,  ft'.) — Ver.  17.  Abraham  laughed.  In  the  region
of  unbelief  the  doubt  is  of  no  moment.  It  has  its
importance  in  the  life  of  believers,  where  it  pre-
eupposes  faith,  and  leads  as  a  transition  step  to  a


firmer  faith.  (There  is,  however,  a  twofold  kind  of
doubt,  without  considering  what  is  still  a  question,
whether  there  is  any  reference  to  doubt  in  the  text).
Luther  thinks  that  Christ  points  to  this  text,  (in  John
viii.  5(5).  Then  the  laughing  also  is  an  intimation
of  the  overflowing  joy  which  filled  his  heart,  and  be
longs  to  his  spiritual  experiences. — Ver.  11).  Isaac.
The  name  teaches  that  those  who  tread  in  the  loot-
steps  of  Abraham's  faith,  will  at  times  find  cause  for
laughter  in  the  unexpected,  sudden,  and  great  bless
ings  they  receive.  There  is  reason  in  God,  both  for
weeping  and  laughter  (Roos). — Ver.  '23.  We  see
how  well  his  house  was  ordered,  since  even  those
who  were  bought  with  money  cheerfully  submitted
to  circumcision  (Calvin).— PASSAVANT  :  (Abraham).
The  Almighty  God,  the  God  who  can  do  all,  sees
all,  knows  all,  he  was,  is,  and  will  be  all,  to  his
servants.


SEVENTH    SECTION.

Abraham  in  the  Oak-Grove  of  Mamre,  and  the  three  Heavenly  Men.  Hospitality  of  Abraham.  The
definite  announcement  of  the  birth  of  a  Son.  Sarah's  Doubt.  The  announcement  of  the  judgment
upon  Sodom  connected  with  the  Promise  of  the  Heir  of  Messina.  TJie  Angel  of  the  Lord,  or  the
Friend  of  Abraham  and  the  two  angels  of  deliverance  for  Sodom.  Abraham's  intercession  for
Sodom.  The  destruction  of  Sodom.  Lots  rescue.  Lot  and  his  Daughters.  Moab  and  Ammon.


11


CHS.  XVIII.  AND  XIX.

1  And  the   Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  the  plains  of  Mamre;   and  lie  sat  in  the  tent-

2  door  in  the  heat  of  the  day ;    And  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and,  lo,  three  men
stood  by  him :   and  when  he  saw  them,  he  ran   to  meet  them  from  the  tent-door,   and

3  bowed  himself  toward  the  ground,  And  said,  My  Lord  [^pX  not  l?^.],1  if  now  I  have

4  found  favor  in  thy  sight,  pass  not  away,  I  pray  thee,   from  thy  servant :   Let  a  little
water,  I  pray  you,  be  fetched,  and  wash  your  feet,  and  rest  yourselves  under  the  tree

5  [enjoy  the  noonday  rest]  :    And    I  will    fetch    a    morsel    of  bread,  and    Comfort    [stay,  strengthen]

ye  your  hearts  ;  after   that  ye  shall  pass  on :    for  therefore  are  ye   [even]  come  to  your

6  servant.     And  they  said,  So  do,  as  thou  hast  said.     And  Abraham  hastened  into  the
tent  unto  Sarah,   and  said,  Make  ready   [hasten]   quickly  three  measures  of  fine  meal,

7  knead  it,  and  make  cakes   upon  the   hearth.     And  Abraham  ran  unto  the  herd,   and
fetched  a  calf  tender  and  good,  and  gave  it  unto  a  young  man  [a  servant]  ;   and  lie  hasted
to  dress  it.     And  he2  took  butter,  and  milk,  and  the  calf  which  he  had  dressed  [caused  to
be  dressed],  and  set  it  before  them  ;  and  he  stood3  by  them  under  the  tree,  and  they  did  eat,

And  they  said  unto  him,  Where  is  Sarah  thy  wife  ?     And  he  said,  Behold,  in  the
tent.     And  he  said,  I  will  certainly  return  unto  thee  according  lo  the  time  of  life"

[return  when  this  time  of  the  next  year  shall  bo  reached]  ;  and  lo,  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  [then]  have  a
son.  And  Sarah  heard  [was  hearing]  it  in  [behind]  the  tent-door,  which  [door]  was  behind
him  [Jehovah].  Now  Abraham  and  Sarah  were  old  and  well  stricken  in  age  ;  and  it

12  ceased  to  be  with  Sarah  after  the  manner  of  women.     Therefore  Sarah  laughed  within
herself,  saying,  After  I  am  waxed  old  shall  I  have  pleasure,  my  lord  being  old  [gray]

13  also  ?     And  the  Lord  said  unto  Abraham,  Wherefore  did  Sarah  laugh  saying,  Shall  J

14  of  a  surety  bear  a  child,  which  am   [and  I  am]  old?     Is  any  thing  too  hard6  [an  exception]
for  the  Lord  ?     At  the  time  appointed  I  will  return  unto  thee,  according  to  the  time  of

15  life  [this  time  in  the  next  year],  and  Sarah  shall  have  a  son.     Then  Sarah  denied,  saying,  I
laughed  not ;   for  she  was  afraid.     And  he  said,  Nay  ;  but  thou  didst  laugh.


430  GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


1C         And  the  men  rose  up  from  thence,  and  looked  toward  Sodom  :  and  Abraham  went

17  with  them  to  bring  them  on  the  way.     And  the  Lord6  said,  Shall  I  hide  from  Abra-

18  ham  that  thing  which  I  do  [wiUdo]  ;7  Seeing  that  Abraham  shall  surely  become  a  great

19  and  mighty  nation,  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed  in  him?     For  I
know  [have  cho^n]  him,  that  he  will  [shall]  command  his  children  and  his  household  after
him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  to  do  justice  and  judgment  ;   that  the

20  Lord  may  bring  upon  Abraham  that  which  he  hath  spoken  of  him.     And  the  Lord  said,
Because 'the  cry  [of  the  sins,  ch.  iv.  10]  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  great,  and  because  their

21  sin  is  vcrv  irrievous,  1  will  iro  down  now,  and  see  whether  they  have  done  [until  a  decision]
altogether'  according  to  the  cry  of  it,  which  is  come  unto  me;   and  if  not,  I  will  know.

22  And  the  men  turned  their  faces  from  thence,  and  went  toward  Sodom:  but  Abraham
stood  yet  before  the  Lord.

23  And  Abraham  drew  near  [bowing,  praying],  and  said,  Wilt  thou  also  destroy  the  right-

24  eons  with  the  wicked?    Peradventure  there  be  fifty  righteous  within  the  city  [concealed in
the  mass]  :   wilt  thou  also  destroy,  and  not  spare  the  place  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  are

25  therein?      That  be  far  from   thee9  to  do  after  this  manner,  to   slay  the  righteous  with
the  wicked:   and  that  the  righteous  should  be  as  the.  wicked  [that  it  is  all  one  both  to  the  right-
c.,u.s!mdthewic%d],  that  be  far  from  thee:   Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth   do  right?

26  And  the  Lord  said,  If  I  find  in  Sodom  fifty  righteous  within  the  city,  then  I  will  spare

27  all  the  place  for  their  sakes.      And  Abraham  answered  and   said,  Behold  now  [once]  I
have   taken   upon   me  to  speak  [to  say]  unto  the  Lord,  which    am  lilt  dust  and   ashes.

2S    Peradventure   there  shall  lack  five  of  the  fifty  righteous:  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  city
for  lack  of  five?      And  he  said,  if  I  find  there  forty  and  five,  I  will  not  destroy  it.

29  And  he   .-pake  unto  him   yet  again,  and  said,  Peradventurc  there   shall  be   forty  found
there  [if  one  should  search  for  them].      And  he  said,  I  will  not  do  (will  leave  off  to  do]  it  for  forty's

30  sake.      And  he  said   unto  Itim,  Oh  let  not  the  Lord   be   angry,  and  1  will  speak;    Per
adventure   there  shall   tliirtv   be   found  there.      And  he   said,  I  will  not  doit  if  I   find

31  thirty  there.     And  he  said",    Behold   now  I  have   taken  upon   me  to  speak  unto   the
Lord  :   Peradventure  there  shall  be  twenty  found  there.     And  he  said,  1  will  not  destroy

32  it  for  twenty's  sake.      And  he  said,  Oh  let  not  the  Lord  be  angry,  and  I  will  speak  yet
but  this  once:  Peradventure  there  shall  be  ten  found  there.     And  he  said,  I  will  not

33  destroy  it  for  ten's  sake.      And  the  Lord  went  his  way,  as  soon  as  he  had  left  commun
ing  with  Abraham  :   and  Abraham  returned  unto  his  place.

CH.  XIX.      1    And  there  came  two1  angels  to  Sodom  at  even  ;   and  Lot  sat   [was  sitting]  in
the  irate  of  Sodom  :  and  Lot  seeing  them,  rose  up  to  meet  them ;  and  he  bowed  himself

2  with  his  face  toward  the  ground;  "And  he  said,   Behold  now,  my  lords,2  turn  in,  1  pray
you,  into  your  servant's  house,  and  tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet,  and  ye  shall
rise  up  early,  and  go  on  your  ways.     And  they  said,  Nay;  but  we  will  abide  in  the

3  street  all  night.     And  he  pressed"  upon  them  greatly ;  and  they  turned  in  unto  him,
and  entered  into  his  house;   and  lie  made  them  a  feast  [literally,  a  banquet],  and  did  bake
unleavened  bread,  and  they  did  eat.

4  But  before  they  lay  down,  the  men  of  the  city,  even  the  men  of  Sodom,  compassed
the  house  round,  both  old  and  young,  all  the  people,  from  every  quarter  [all  collected] :

5  And  they  called  unto  Lot,  and  said  unto  him,  Where  arc  the  men  which  came  in  to

6  thee  this  night?  bring  them  out  unto  us,  that  we  may  know  them.     And  Lot  went  out

7  at  the  door  unto  them,  and  shut  the  door  after  him,  And  said,  I  pray  you,  brethren,  do
S  not  so  wickedly.     Behold  now,  I  have  two  daughters  which  have  not  known  man ;

let  me,  I  pray  you,  bring  them  out  unto  you,  and  do  ye  to  them  as  is  good  in  your  eyes :
only  unto  these  men  do  nothing;  for  therefore  came  they  under  the  shadow  [and protection]
9  of  my  roof  [the  cross-beams  or  rafters  of  the  house].  And  they  said,  Stand  back  And  they
said  again,  This  one  fellow  came  in  to  sojourn,  and  he  will  needs  be  a  judge  : 3  now
will  we  deal  worse  with  thee,  than  with  them.  And  they  pressed  sore  upon  the  man,

10  even  Lot,  and  came  near  to  break  the  door.     But  the  men  put  forth  their  hand,  and

11  pulled  Lot  into  the  house  to  them,  and  shut  to  the  door.     And  they  smote  the  men  that
were  at  the  door  of  the  house  with  blindness  [dazzling blindnesses],  both  small  and  great;  so
that  they  wearied  themselves  to  find  the  door.

12  And  the  men  said  unto  Lot,  Hast  thou  here  [in  the  city]  any  besides?    son-in-law
and  thy  sons,  and  thy  daughters,  and  whatsoever  thou  hast  in  the  city,  bring  them  out


CHAPS.  XVIII.,   XIX.  431


13  of  this  place:  For  we  will  destroy4  tins  place,  because  the  cry  of  them  [the  outcry  of  theii
sins]  is  waxen  great  before  the  face  of  the  Lord  ;  and  the  Lord  hath  sent  us  to  destroy  it.

14  And  Lot  went  out  and  spake  unto  his  sons-in-law,  which  married  his  daughters,6  and
said,  Up,  get  you  out  of  this  place;   for  the  Lord  will  destroy  [as  a  destroyer]   this  city
But  he  seemed  as  one  that  mocked  °  unto  his  sons-in-law  [Luther:  he  was  ridiculous  in  their  eyes].

15  And  when  the  morning  arose,  then  the  angels  hastened  Lot,  sayinjr,  Arise,  take
thy  wife,  and  thy  two  daughters,  which  are  here  [are  found  and  rescued]  ;   lest  thou  be  cor>

16  sinned  in   the  iniquity  [the  visitation  for  the  iniquity]  of  the  city.     And  while  he  linp-ered,7
the  men  laid  hold  upon  his  hand,  and  upon  the  hand  of  his  wife,  and  upon  the  hand  of
his  two  daughters ;  the  Lord  being  merciful  unto  him  :    and  they  brougl.it  him  forth,
and  set  him  without  the  city.

17  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  they  had  brought  them  forth  abroad  [into  the  open  country],
that  he  said,  Escape  for  thy  life  [thy soul];    look  not  behind  thee,  neither  stay  thou  in

18  all  the  plain  [valley-region]  ;  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou  be  consumed.     And  Lot

said  unto    them    [the  two  passing  from  him;  between  whom  Jehovah  had  revealed  himself],    Oh    not   SO

19  my  Lord!8     Behold  now,  thy  servant   hath  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  and  thou  hast
magnified  thy  mercy,  which  thou  hast  showed  unto  me,  in  saving  my  life;  and  I  cannot

20  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  some  [the]  evil  take  me,  and  I  die :  Behold  now  this  city
is  near  to  flee  unto,  and  it  is  a  little  one :   Oh  let  me  escape  thither !  (is  it  not  a  little

21  one?)   and  my  soul  [through  its  exemption]  shall  live.     And  he  said  unto  him,  See,  I  have
accepted9  thee  concerning  this  thing  also,  that  I  will  not  overthrow  this  city,  for  the

22  which  thou  hast  spoken.     Haste  thee,  escape  thither;    for  I  cannot  do  anything  till
thou  be  come  thither;   therefore  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  Zoar  [smallness],

23,  24  The  sun  was  risen  upon  the  earth  when  Lot  entered  10  into  Zoar.  Then  the  Lord
rained  upon  Sodom  and  upon  Gomorrah  brimstone  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven ;

25  And  he  overthrew  those  cities,  and  all  the  plain,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities,
and  that  which  grew  upon  the  ground.

2G          But  his  wife  looked  back  from  behind  him,  and  she  became  a  pillar  of  salt.

27  And  Abraham  gat  up  early  in  the  morning  to  the  place  where  he  stood  before  the

28  Lord:  And  he  looked  toward  (r)jH>?)  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  toward  all  the  land
of  the  plain,  and  beheld,  and,  lo,  the  smoke  of  the  country  went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a
furnace  [lime-kilns  or  metal-furnaces.    The  earth  itself  burned  as  an  oven].

29  And  it  came  to  pass  when  God  [Elohim]  destroyed  the  cities  of  the  plain,  that  God
remembered  Abraham,  and  sent  Lot  out  of  the  midst  of  the  overthrow,  when  he  over
threw  the  cities  in  the  which  Lot  dwelt.

30  And  Lot  went  up  out  of  Zoar,  and  dwelt  in  the  mountain,  and  his  two  daughters
with  him;    for  he  feared  to  dwell  in  Zoar:  and  he  dwelt  in  a  cave,  he  and  his  two

31  daughters.     And  the  firstborn  said  unto  the  younger  [smaller],  Our  father  is  old,  and
there  is  not  a  man  [besides]  in  the  earth  to  come  in  unto  us,  after  the  manner  of  all  the

32  earth :  Come,  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine,  and  we  will  lie  with  him,  that  we  may

33  preserve  seed  of  our  father.     And  they  made  their  father  drink  wine  that  night :  and
the  firstborn  went  in  and  lay  with  her  father;  and  he  perceived  not  [was  not  in  a  conscious

34  state]  when  she  lay  down,  nor  when  she  arose.     And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,
that  the  firstborn  said  unto  the  younger,  Behold,  I  lay  yesternight  [nights]  with  my
father  :  let  us  make  him  drink  wine  this  night  also ;  and  go  thou  in,  and  lie  with  him,

35  that  we  may  preserve  seed  of  our  father.     And  they  made  their  father  drink  wine  that
night  also :  and  the  younger  arose  and  lay  with  him  ;  and  he  perceived  not  when  she

36  lay  down,  nor  when  she  arose.     Thus  were  both  the  daughters  of  Lot  with  child  by

37  their  father.     And  the  firstborn  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Moab  [from  the  father ;  or

seed  of  the  father ;  son  of  my  father  ;  brother  and  sou]  :    the  same  is  the  father  of  the  MoabitCS  Unto

38  this  day.     And  the  younger,  she  also  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Ben-ammi  [son  of

my  people,  eon  and  brother]  :    the  same  is  the  father  of  the  children  of  Ammon  [=  Ben-ammon]

unto  this  day.

[*  Ch.  XVIII.  vcr.  3.— The  versions  vary,  some  reading  one  form  and  some  the  other.  The  Septuagint  has  Kv'pte,
Vulg.  Domine..  So  also  the  Syriac  and  Onkelos.  The  Masoretic  text,  therefore,  is  preferable  to  that  used  in  our  vcr-
non. — A.  G.I

[a  Ver.  8.— He,  i.  e.  Abraham.— A.  G.]

!'  Ver.  8. — wi's  standing. — A.  G.]
*  Ver.  10.— Ilcb.,  according  to  the  living  time. — A.  G.]


432


GENESIS,   OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


r»  Vcr   M.
[«  Vcr.'n.
f  Vcr.  18.
[8  Vor.  21.—
[8  Vor.  23.
[>  Ch.  XIX
[2  Vcr.  2.—
[3  Vcr.  9.—
I*  Vcr.  13.
[5  Vcr.  11
[•  Vor.  1  1.
[7  Vor.  l(i.
[«  Vcr.  18.
r9  v,.r.  21.
[10  Vcr.  23


TIcl).,  difficult,  wonderful,  Sept.  ^5)  aSwarricret.  nupa  TV  0cw  pij^a?  sec  Luke  i.  37.  —  A.  G.I
Jehovah.—  A.  G.]

Lit.,  I  am  doin?,  am  about  to  do.—  A.  IJ.J

Ilch.  whether  they  have  made  completeness,  or  to  n.  consummation.—  A.  G.J
nbbn  ,  alomu'aHc.  —  A.  G.]
vcr.'ll—  tvo  r.f  l',e  ang<  Is.  —A.  G.]

:TX  •     Xot  the  same  f<<nn  which  Abraham  uses.—  A.  G.]
-"S  w    wE-"1)  will  ho  always  be  judging.—  A.  G.J
L\t.'  are.  deslroi/ing.—  A.  G.|
Lit.,  '/'/«'  takers  of  his  daughters.—  A.  G.J
os  a  jester.—  A.  G.]
llcb.  delayed  himself.—  A.  G.]
-i:~X  .     O  Lord.—  A.  G.]
',-'7  1"  //flVrf  j/p  thy  fucr.—  \.  G.]
llcb.',  and  Lot  came  unto.—  A.  Q.]


GLXEHAL   I'KHLIMIXAllY  KEMA11K*.

1.  It  is  i  \Hent  that  these  two  chapters  form  but
one  section  :  tin;  first  verse  of  the  sixth  chapter  forms
the  direct  continuation  of  the  previous  narrative.
[The  connection  of  this  chapter  with  the  preceding
is  twofold,  and  very  close.  This  forms  the  more
complete  unfolding  of  the  promise,  ch.  xvii.  21,  :ind
the  friendly  intercourse  which  Jehovah  here  holds
with  the  patriarch  is  the  direct  fruit  of  the  symboli
cal  purilication  of  himself  and  his  house  through  the
rite  of  circumcision,  ch.  xvii.  2:5-27.  Thus  purified,
the  way  w.is  open  for  this  friendly  appearance  and
fellowship. — A.  G.]  The  modern  criticism  attributes
this  section  r>  the  Jehovistie  enlargement,  and  finds
it  necessary,  therefore,  to  regard  xix.  2'.>,  as  an  Elo-
histic  interpolation,  which,  in  the  original  writing
must  have  immediately  followed  ch.  xvii.  (IvNor.n,,  p.
1C,G).  Hut  there  are  the  same  strong  internal  rea
sons  why  the  name  Kloliim  should  appear  in  ch.
xix.  2'.i,  as  there  are  that  ch.  xvii.  1,  should  speak  of
Jehovah,  and  aiierwanls  of  Elohim.  In  this  section,
however,  Jel.ovah  appears  in  all  other  passages.  The
complete  thenphany  of  (Sod  corresponds  to  the  com
pleted  promise  of  Isaac,  the  bearer  of  the  covenant;
and  in  this  completed  form  of  revelation  he  is  Jeho
vah.  I!ut  tli"  announcement  of  the  judgment  upon
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  essentially  connected  with
the  promise  of  the  heir  of  blessing.  The  judgment
itself,  also,  is  a  judgment  of  Jehovah ;  for,  1.  The
overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  through  a  fiery
judgment,  is  an  end  of  the  world  upon  a  small  scale,
with  which  the  necessity,  for  that  constant  revelation
of  salvation,  for  the  rescue  of  the  world,  whose  founda
tion  was  now  being  laid,  is  clearly  apparent.  2.  With
the  iirm  confirmation  of  the  father  of  the  faithful  in
the  future  of  his  believing  race,  his  relations  to  the
world  mu.-t  also  be  actually  and  clearly  defined,  5.  e.,
Abraham  must  prove  his  faith  in  his  love,  mercy,
and  his  intercessions  for  Sodom  also.  '3.  In  the
founding  of  this  believing  race,  the  overthrow  of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  as  a  judgment  of  Jehovah,
stands  as  a  solemn  warning  for  Abraham  and  his
children,  and  through  them  for  the  world  in  all  ages.
The  !)  ,]  sea  could"  not  remain  without  significance
for  the  dwellers  in  Canaan.  4.  Even  the  issue  of  the
history  of  Lot  belongs  to  the  history  of  the  com
pleted  promise ;  not  only  the  position  of  Lot,  inter
mediate  between  Abraham  and  Sodom,  nor  even  his
exemption  and  safety,  which  he  owes  to  Abraham's
intercession,  and  his  once  better  conduct,  nor,  on  the
other  hand,  the  danger,  terrors,  losses,  want,  and
moral  disgrace  into  which  he  was  betrayed  through
his  worldly  mind  and  his  unbelief;  but  the  issue  of
the  history  of  Lot,  his  full  separation  from  the  theo
cratic  obligations  and  privileges,  and  the  descent


from  him  of  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites,  who  were
related  to  the  Jews,  and  yet  alien  to  there,  belong
also  to  the  full  presentation  of  the  antithesis  between
the  house  of  Abraham  and  the  people  of  Sodom.
5.  The  abominations  of  Sodom,  moreover,  not  only
find  a  bright  contrast  in  the  consecrated  marriage
of  Abraham  and  Sarah,  but  even  a  contrast  in  the
incest  with  which  the  household  of  Lot  was  stained
(see  Introduction). — Knobel  finds  contradictions  here
which  have  r.o  existence;  e.  g.,  between  ch.  xviii.
12  and  xvii.  17  ;  between  the  recapitulation,  ch.  xix.
29,  and  the  whole  narrative  of  the  overthrow  of
Sodom.  He  remarks  upon  the  narrative,  that  the
destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  not,  in  his
view,  a  natural  event,  but  a  divine  judgment,  like
the  flood.  He  explains  the  narrative  of  the  impure
origin  of  the  .Moabites  and  Ammonites  by  a  reference
to  the  odious  Jewish  motives.  In  answer  to  this
Keil  refers  to  Dent.  ii.  t),  19,  according  to  which
Israel  should  not  possess  the  land  of  these  two  na
tions  on  the  ground  of  their  descent  from  Lot,  and
remarks,  they  were  first  excluded  from  a  position
among  the  Lord's  people,  on  account  of  their  un-
brothcrly  conduct  towards  Israel  (Deut.  xxiii,  4  11'.).
Knobel  "here  fails  to  recollect,  that  so  far  as  the  race
of  the  chosen  .Judah  is  concerned,  it  was  derived  from
an  impure  connection  of  Judah  with  his  daughter-in-
law,  Thamar,  just  as  in  the  remark,  that  the  Jews
gloried  in  the  beauty  of  their  ancestress,  he  failed
to  remember  that  Leah  is  especially  described  as  not
beautiful.  He  holds,  that  this  narrative  has  an  his
torical  support,  in  the  terrible  fate  of  the  vale  of
Siddim  ;  but  as  to  the  rest,  it  is  a  pure  mythical
statement.  [Aside  from  the  fact  that  this  supposi
tion  of  the  mythological  character  of  the  narrative
overlooks  the  opposition  referred  to  in  the  following
sentence,  it  overlooks,  also,  the  histoiical  basis  for
this  narrative  in  ch.  xiii.  13,  the  close  connection
with  the  subsequent  history,  and  the  whole  moral
bearing  and  use  of  this  history  in  both  the  Old  and
New  Testaments.— A.  G.J  Of  the  two  sides  or
aspects  of  the  history,  the  prominent  side,  viz.,  the
opposition  between  the  manifestation  of  God  to
Abraham,  and  the  judgment  upon  Sodom,  is  thus
not  properly  estimated.

2.  This  Section  may  be  divided  into  the  follow
ing  parts:  1.  The  appearance  of  Jehovah  in  the
oak-grove  of  Mamre,  and  the  promise  of  the  birth
of  Isaac  (ch.  xviii.  1-15);  2.  the  revelation  of  the
approaching  judgment  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
to  Abraham,  and  Abraham's  intercessory  prajet
(vers.  16-33);  3.  the  entrance  of  the  two  angels  into
Sodom,  and  the  complete  manifestation  of  the  cor
ruption  of  the  Sodomites,  in  opposition  to  the  better
conduct  of  Lot  (ch.  xix.  1-11);  4.  the  comparative
unfitncss  of  Lot  for  salvation,  his  salvation  with  diffi


CHAP.   XVIII.    1.— XIX.  38.


433


culty,  and  the  entrance  of  the  judgment  (vcrs.  12-
29);  o.  the  departure  of  Lot,  and  his  descendants
(ver.  30-38).


EXEGETICAL  AND   CRITICAL.

1.  The.  completed  manifestation  and  promise  of
-G-ofl  in  Ike  oak-grove  of  Mninrc  (ch.  xviii.  1-15)
— The  Lori  appeared  unto  him.* — Both  the
reality  of  the  manifestation,  on  the  one  hand,  am
the  seeing  in  vision  on  the  other,  appear  in  the  clear
est  and  most  distinct  form  in  the  history.  The  ele
ments  which  belong  to  the  vision  appear  first  at  the
very  beginning :  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  anc
looked;  then,  further,  in  the  departure  of  Jehoval
from  Abraham  (ch.  xviii.  33);  and  in  his  reappear
ance  to  Lot(ch.  xix.  17).  The  objective  element  is
seen  especially  in  the  threefold  character  of  the
manifestation,  in  the  transaction  between  Jehovah
and  Sarah,  and  in  the  history  of  the  two  angels  in
Sodom  ;  especially  in  the  assaults  of  the  Sodomites
upon  them.  But  the  peculiarities  serving  to  in
troduce  these  wonderful  objective  facts,  lie  partly
in  the  peculiar  character  of  the  history,  as  the  narra
tive  of  a  vision,  partly  in  its  symbolic  statements,
and  partly  in  its  peculiar  ghostly  form.  The  de
struction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  near;  for  them
the  evciuntj  of  the  world  has  come.  It  is  a  prelude
of  the  last  day,  in  which  the  angelic  appearance  is
entirely  natural,  and  is  introduced  through  an  inner
and  spiritual  anticipation  of  the  judgment  itself,  in
those  who  seek  to  resist  its  influence,  by  indulgence
in  wicked,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Sodomites,  in
abominable,  courses.  Delitzsch  thinks  that  Abra
ham  recognized  the  unity  of  the  God  of  revelation,
in  the  appearance  of  the  three  men.  As  to  this,  see
the  remarks  upon  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  ch.  xii.
He  adds :  "  One  should  compare  the  imitations  of
this  original  history  among  the  heathen.  Jupiter,
Mercury,  and  Neptune,  visit  an  old  man,  by  name
Hyricus,  in  the  Boeotian  city  Tanagra  ;  he  prepares
them  a  feast,  and,  though  childless  hitherto,  receives
a  son  in  answer  to  his  prayer  (Ovid's  '  Fast.,'  v.  494,
etc.)."  And  then,  further,  the  heathen  accompani
ment  to  ch.  xix. :  "  Jupiter  and  Mercury  are  jour
neying  as  men  ;  only  Philemon  and  Baucis,  an  aged,
childless  wedded  pair,  receive  them,  and  these'
therefore,  the  gods  rescue,  bearing  them  away  witli
themselve?,  while  they  turn  the  inhospitable  region
lying  around  the  hospitable  hut  into  a  pool  of  water
and  the  hut  itself  into  a  temple  (Ovid's  Metam.,  viii!
611  ff.)."  But  the  essential  distinction  between  our
ideal  facts  and  these  myths,  lies  in  this,  that  while
the  first  lie  in  the  centre  of  history  as  causal  facts  or
forces,  having  the  most  sacred  and  real  historical  re
sults,  these  latter  lie  simply  on  the  border  ground  of
mythology.  [How  completely  and  thoroughly  these
words  dispose  of  the  whole  mythical  supposition  in
this  as  in  other  case?.— A.  G.j— In  the  heat  of  the
day.— "The  dinner  hour,  when  they  took  their
principal  meal  (ch.  xliii.  16,  25  ;  1  Kings,  xx.  16)  and
their  accustomed  rest  (2  Sam.  iv/5).  VOLNKY
(Tr-vcls,  I.  p.  314)  says  the  Arab,  when  he  takes  his
meal,  sits  at  the  door  of  his  tent,  in  order  to  observe
rand  invite  those  who  are  passing ;  and  BUKKIIARDT

*  [The  Lord  appeared,  but  the  appearance  was  in  the
mrm  of  throe  men  or  angels.  There  may  be,  as  Words
worth  suggests,  hero  a  declaration  of  the  divine  unity,  and

toKA  SfliSSS of  persons ;  pcrhaps  of  tho

28


(Arabian   Proverbs,    p.   331  f.),  it   is   a   custom   in
the  East  to  eat  before  the  door  and  to  invite  to  a
share  in  the  meal  every  passing  stranger  of  respect
able  appearance."     Knobel. — And  bowed  himself
to    the    ground. — Abraham    instanrlv    recognizes
among  the  three,  the  one  whom  he  addresses  as  the
Lord  in  a  religious  sense,  who  afterwards  appears  as
Jehovah,  and  was  clearly  distinguish"'.!  from  the  twp
accompanying  angels,  ch.  xix.  1.     [The  original  ll'(--
brcw  word  is  used  to  denote  both  civil  and  religions
homage.     The  word   itself,  therefore,  cannot  deter
mine  whether  Abraham  intended   by  his   bowing  to
express  religious  homage,  though  it' is  probable  that
he  did.— A.  G.  |     "They  are  three,"  iJeiirzsch  says,
"  because  of  the  threefold  object  of  their  mission,
which  had  not  only  a  promising,  but  also  a  punitive,
and  saving  character."     Against  this  interpretation,
however,  there   is    the   fact  that  Jehovah   not  only
speaks   the   promise,  but  sends  the  judgment  also
upon  Sodom,  and  that  not  one,  but  both  angels  con
ducted  the  rescue  of  Lot.     "  It'  there  lies,"  says  De-
litzsch,  further,  "  in  the  fact,  that  God  appears  in  the
three  angels,  a  trinitarian  reference,  which  the  old
painters  were  accustomed  to  express,  by  giving  to
each  of  the  three  the  glory  which  is  the  characteris
tic  sign  ^of  the  divine  nature,  still  the  idea  that  the
Trinity  is  represented  in  the  three  is  in  every  point
of  view  untenable."     The  germ  of  the  doctrine  of
the  Trinity  lies,  indeed,  not  in  the  three  forms,  but
truly  in  the  opposition  between  the  heavenly  nature
of  Jehovah  and  his  form  of  manifestation  upon  the
earth  in  the  midst  of  the  two  angels,  i.  e.,  in  this
well-defined,    clearly-appearing   duality. — If  now  I
have  found  favor. — Knobel  and  Delitzsch  differ  in
the  explanation  of  the  NJ"~S  ,  etc.    (Knobel:  "  If  I
have  still  found  favor,"  i.  e.,  may  it  still  be  the  case.)
We  agree  with  the  supposition   that  Abraham  uses
the  expression  in  his  prayer,  out  of  the  consciousness
that  he  had  already  found  favor,  ?'.  c.,  that  his  ex
pression   presupposes  a    covenant-relation   between
himself  and  Jehovah.     The  cordial   invitation  is  in
this  case  far  more  than  oriental  hospitality,  but  still
Abraham  uses  the  human  greeting,  as  the  heavenly
forms  wear  the  appearance  of  human  travellers. —
And  wash  your  feet.— This  is  tho  lir.-t  concern
of  the  pilgrim  in  the  East,  when  he  enters  the  house
after  treading  the  sandy,  dusty  ways,  with  nothing
but  sandals.     They  were  to  rest  themselves  under
the  tree,  leaning  upon  the  hand  in  the  oriental  man
ner.* — A  morsel  of  bread. — A  modest  description
of  the  sumptuous  meal  which  he  had  prepared  for
them.      His   humble   and    pressing    invitation,   his
modest  description  of  the  meal,  his  zeal  in  its  prepa
ration,  his  standing  by  to  serve  those  who  were  eat
ing,  are  picturesque  traits  of  the  life  of  faith  as  it
here    reveals    itself,    in   an    exemplary   hospitality.
"  According  to  the  custom  still  in  use  among  the
Bedouin   sheiks  (comp.  LANE,  "  Manners   and   Cus
toms,"  II.  p.  Hi;),  Abraham  prepared,  as  soon  as
possible,  from  the  cakes  made  by  his  wife  from  three
seahs  [About  three  pecks.     A  scah  was  about  tho
third  part  of  an  cphah  ;  the  ephah  was  equal  to  ten
omcrs,  and  the  omcr  about  five  pints.     Murpln. —
A.  G.]  of  fine   meal,   and  baked  under   the   ai'hes
(rriSS,  unleavened  cakes,  baked  upon   hot,  round.

*  ["For  therefore  r.ro  yo  come— to  trfvo  me  occasion  to
offer  you  my  hospitality."  KKIL,  p.  ICG.— A.-  U.j

["Their  coming  was  of  God.  lie  recojiniz.  •(!  in  it  a  di-
•ine  call  upon  his  hospitality."  JACOBUS,  "  Notes,"  vol.  L
i.9. — A.  G.]


434


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


stones),  and  a  tender  calf,*  with  butter  and  milk,  or
curdled  milk  (KxoBEL  :  Cream),  a  very  rich  and
pleasant-tasting  meal."  Keil.— And  he  stood  by
them.— [Wordsworth  here  calls  attention  to  the
points  of  resemblance  between  this  history  and  that
of  Zacchcus,  Luke,  xix.  -1,  t>,  >S  !»,  and  then  says
with  great  beauty  :  "  This  seems  to  be  one

of  the  countless  "instances  where,  in  the  tissue  of  the
Holy  Seriptu:.  %  the  golden  threads  of  the  Old  Tes
tament  are  '.  with  those  of  tin-  New,  and
foi-m,  as  it  were,  one  whole,     p.  St. — A.  G.J     "This
ia  the                             .    :he   Eastern   countries.     The
Arab   sheik,    if    he    has    re-pectul   guest*,   does    not
sit,  in  .  .  but  stands  in  order  to
\vuiti;                       (Sii AW,  "Travels,"  p.  208  ;  HITK-
rxGHAM,  "M                ia,"  p.  23 ;  and  SEETZES,  |l  Trav
els,"  i                       )     Knoble. — And  they  did  eat,
— In  Judires  xiii.  1C.  the  Angel   of  Jehovah  refuses
to  c;..t.     K.                     Is  ii  as  a  mark  of  distinction
to  Abraham,   that  these  heavenly  messengers  should
eat.     Since  the  two  angels  were  entertained  by  Lot
in  Sodom,  it  wo  ill  appear  that  the  peculiar  reception
of  the  meal  .-hould   be  ascribed  in  a  special  sense  to
them.     Thi:,  liov                    not  remove  the  difficulty,
in  the  fact,  that  those  coming   from   heaven   should
cat  earthly  fo  >  1.     The  opposition  of  Neumann,  that
it   is   all    a  dream   up    to   ver.  Ill,   is   refuted    by  the
whole  tenor  of  the   narrative,  but    .    pecially  by  the
history  of  the   i '.iteriainment   of  (lie   two  .ing-'ls  by
Lot.     JOSEPH!  s,  "Antiq.,"  i.  11,  '_',  Philo,  the  Tar-
gums,  ar.d  the  Tallinn],  explain  the  eating  as  a  mere
app'-ara:ie".     T:.KITI.I.IAN,   on  the  contrary  ("  Adv.
Mare.,"  i:i.    0),  holds    to    a    temporary    meat-nation.
Delitzsch  a:rl  Keil  I  So  also  .lac-bus,  after  Kurtz,  re
ferring  to  John  i.  11;   1'iiil.  ii.  7;   Luke,   xxiv.  44.—
A.  ('•.]  agree  with  I  >  the  eating
of  the                   viour    witli    \:\^    di-e;;>les.     But    the
idea  of  a  tc        •:•  -ry  in.annt:   :.    in  a  /    ••"''•;r  sense,
is    an    extremely    anthropomorphic,    ai.d    not    well-
groui   '                     :'.'m  ;  an  1  the  bndily  nature  of  the
glorifi  d   Christ,  of  whom  Augustin  says:  "that   lie
ate  i-   a   f:ui;    of  hi-   power,  not   of  his  necessity,''
,/!/„./  ,          '           '.  pot(  --f'tlis  f'i'it  von  er/esfalis,  is  not
ifi.  d  with  the   form  of  the  manifestation
of   th                 .       Hut   Delitzsch   gives  still    another
explanation.     "The  human  form  in  which  they  ap
peared,  was  a  representation  of  their  invisible  nature,
and  thus  they  ate,  as  we  say  of  the  fire,  it  consumes
(or  eats)  all"  (Jrsii.v,  Dial,   cum  Tryph.,  ch.  •>!)."
Theiv  may  be  here  an  intimation  of  the  mysterious
fact,  that  "the  spiritual  world  is   mighty  in  its  mani
festation?,  and  overcomes  the  material,  according  to
the  figurative  expression   of  Augustin :  The  thirst
ing  earth  absorbs  the  water  in  one  way,  the  burning
rays  of  the  sun  in  another  ;  that  from  want,  this  by
pow,  r.      |  "  Aliter  absorbet  terra  aquam  siliens,  aliter
soli.*  r>-i>1<us  fandens:  ilia  indiffeniia,  isle  potential
Thus  n.u-MOAHTEx:  That  the  angels  could  eat  lies
in  their   pneumatic  nature,  for  the  spirit  has  power
over  matter  ;  that  they  did  cat  here  is  the  very  high
est  act  of  this  divine  sojourn  or  rest  in  the  home  of
Abraham,   p.  '206. — A.  G.]— Which  was   behind
him.— The  Angel  of  the  Lord  was  placed  with  his
back  towar  Is  the  door  of  the  tent.     But  it  greatly
strengthens  the  real  objective  character  of  the  mani
festation,  that  Sarah  also   hears,  and  indeed  hears
doubting,  the  promise  of  the  Angel. — According


*  rl-l.^h-mr-at  .was  not  ordinary  faro.     See  Pict.  Bible,
and  Brsn,  Notes,  vol.  i.  p.  286.— A.  G.]


to  the  time  of  life.* — "The  time  of  returning  to
life,"  is  the  return  of  the  same  time  in  the  next  year.
Time  returns  to  life  again  apparently  in  the  similar
appearances  of  nature.  Thus  one  form  of  time  in
nature  expires  after  another,  and  becomes  living
again  in  the  next  year. — Wherefore  did  Sarah
laugh. — Although  S'arah  only  laughed  within  herself,
and  behind  Jehovah  and  the  tent  door,  yet  Jehovah
observed  it.  Her  later  denial  (although,  indeed,  she
had  not  laughed  aloud)  and  her  fear,  prove  that  her
laugh  proceeded  from  a  bitter  and  doubting  heart.
Keil,  however,  is  too  severe  when  he  says  "  that  her
laugh  must  be  viewed  as  the  laugh  of  unbfli'f"  and
Delitzsch,  when  he  describes  it  as  the  scotf  of  doubt.
It  is  sufficient  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  her
laughing  and  that  of  Abraham.  The  Scripture  says
(Heb.  xi.  11)  that  she  was  a  believer  in  the  promise,
and  the  fact  of  her  conception  is  the  evidence  of  her
faith.  [It  thus  becomes  evident  that  one  object  in
this  man'if'-station,  the  drawing  out  and  completing
the  faith  of  Sar.h,  has  been  accomplished.  The
question.  Is  any  tiling  too  hard  for  the  Lord?  is  the
same  which  the  angel  Gabriel  used  when  announcing
to  Mary  the  birth  of  Jesus.  Mary  bowed  in  faith,
while  Saiv.h  laughs  in  doubt.  But  the  words  here
used,  with  the  reproof  administer,  1  to  ]:•  r  laugh,
seem  to  have  called  out  and  strengthened  her  faith.
See  "Wor.i'swor.Tii,  p.  84;  I!.\rM<;.\r.-;-KX,  p.  '207. —
A.  G.]  [Dclitzsch  closes  his  expositi»n  of  this  pas
sage  with  the  suggestive  words:  "This  eoii'Mential
fellowship  of  Jehovah  with  the-  patriarch  corresponds
to  that  of  the  ris.-n  Lord  with  his  disciples.  The
patriarchal  tirn"  is  moie  evangelic  than  the  time  of
the  law.  As  the  time  b<  fore-  the  law,  it  is  the  type
of  the  time  after  the  law,"  p.  2^5. — A.  <i.  ]

2.  The  announcement  of  the  jiffi/mnit  VJIOH
Sodom  and  Gomorrah^  ami  Alf< ••'.  v.vsorv

prnner  (vers.  \<'<-'.',-i}. — And  the  men  rose  up
from  thence.f — The  travellers  dej  art  i
in  the  direction  of  Sodom,  i.  e.,  over  the  mount
the  valley  of  the  Jordan.  Abraham  accompanies
them.  Ther"  is  a  w  >.:derful  union  of  the  state  of
visions  and  of  the  actual  outward  life.  We  do  not
force  t  that  this  condition  was  habitual  in  the  life  of
our  Lord,  and  that  it  is  reflected  in  the  history  of
Peter  (Acts,  xii.  11,  12j  as  it  is  also  in  that  of  Paul.
:inir  to  tradition,  Abraham  accompanied  them
as  far  as  "  the  place  Caphar-Barueha,  from  whence
Paula  looked  through  a  deep  ravine  to  the  Dead
Sea,"  l>  the  solitude  and  lands  of  Sodom."  Robin
son' thinks  this  is  probably  the  present  village  Bni
Na'im,  about  one  and  a  half  hours  easterly  from
Hebron  ["Bib.  Researches,"  vol.  ii.  p.  180.—  A.  G.]
(Vox  RAUMER,  "Palestine,"  p.  183).— Shall  I  hide
from  Abraham. — The  reason  why  God  would  an
nounce  to  Abraham,  beforehand,  the  judgment  upon
Sodom,  is  given  in  the  following  words.  There  is  at
first  great  regard  to  the  excellence  of  Abraham,  but
connected  with  this,  however,  a  reference  to  his
destination  as  the  father  of  the  people  of  promise ;
he  must  understand  the  judgments  of  God  in  the

*  [Literally,  livine  time.  JlritpHY  :  ':  Scominply  the
time  of  birth  when  the  child  comes  to  manifest  life,"  p.
316.— A.  G.]

t  [Jacobus  has  a.  striking  note  here  upon  the  connection
of  what  follows  with  what  precedes.  "  These  are  only  the
right  and  left  hand  movements.  The  records  are  in  their
proper  antithesis,  as  setting  forth  the  divine  character  and
counsel.  The  right  and  left  hand  of  the  Judge  are  for  the
opposite  parties.  Life  eternal  is  for  the  one,  and  everlast
ing  punishment  for  the  other.  "  Matt.  xxv.  46.  All  history
is  full  of  this  antithesis.— A.  G.]


CHAP.    XVIII.   1— XIX.   38.


world,  because  he  must  understand  the  redemption
[All  the  principles  of  the  divine  providence  in  it
i-elations  to  the  sins  of  men  appear  here ;  his  for
bearance    and    patience,    his    constant   notice,    the
deciding  test,  and  the  strictness  and  righteousnes
of  the  judgment,  and  hence  Abraham  is  told  here
that  these  same  principles  might  operate  upon  th
minds  of  the  people  of   God  in  all  ages. — A.  G.
For  the  judgment  cannot  be  understood' without  th<
redemption,  nor  the  redemption  without  the  judg
rnent.      The  "  natural  event "  of  Knobel  thus   be
comes  to  Abraham  and  his  children,  a  divinely-com
preher.ded  event,  and  cannot  remain  a  dark  mystery
it  presupposes   its  spiritual  and  moral  significance
But  on  this  account  especially,  the  event,  as  a  judg
ment,  is  of  peculiar  importance,  in  order  that,  like
every  following  judgment,  it  may  prove  a  monitory
example  to  the  house  of  Abraham — the  people  of
God. — For  I  have  known  him. — Luther,  follow
ing  the  Vulgate,   /  know  that  he,   etc.     Thus   the
good  behavior  of  Abraham  is  (in  an  Arminian  way}
made  the  cause  of  the  divine  knowledge.     But  the
•(""sb  is  opposed  to  this.     The  knowledge  of  Jeho
vah  is  fore-determined,  like  TrpuyivutrKeiv,  Bom.  viii.
29,    and    thus    one  with  the    (K\fye<r$ai,  Ep.    i.   4.
KEIL:  "In   preventing   love   he    sees  (>"!"),  as   in
Amos,  iii.  2;  Hosea,  xiii.  5,"  which,  however,   can
not   be  included  in  the  mere  acknowledgment   of
Abraham.     [The  word  includes  knowledge  and  love.
See  Ps.  i.  G ;  xxxi.  8  ;  1  Cor.  viii.  3  ;  xiii.  12.    BAUJI-
GARTKN,  p.  208.— A.  G.]     Kurtz  explains  this  pas
sage  strangely.     God  has  given  the  possession  of  the
land  to  Abraham,  therefore  he  would  be  sure  of  his
consent  in  this  arrangement  as  to  a  part  of  the  land.
Kim,:   '' The  destruction  of  Sodom  and  the  neigh
boring  cities  should  serve  as  an  enduring  monument
of  the  divine  punitive  righteousness,  in  which  Israel
should  have  constantly  before  its  eyes  the  destruc
tion  of  the  godless.     Finally,   Jehovah  unveils   to
Abraham,  in  the  clearest  manner,  the  cause  of  this
destruction,  that  he  might  not  only  have  a  clear  and
perfect  conviction  of  the  justice  of  the  divine  pro
cedure,  but  also  the  clear  view  that  when  the  meas
ure  of  iniquity  was  full,  no  intercession  could  avert
the  judgment.     It  is  both    for  the  instruction  and
warning  of  his  descendants."     But  still  more  cer
tainly,  also,  at  first,  to  give  occasion  to  the  prayer
of  Abraham,  and  thus   show  to  his  children  what
position  they  must  take  in  regard  to  all  the  threaten
ing  judgments  of  God  upon  the  world. — The   cry
of  Sodom. — It  is  right  to  refer  to  ch.  iv.  10  for  the
explanation  of  these  words,  and  hence  the  cry  which
is  meant  is  the  cry  of  sins  for  vengeance  or  punish
ment.     Outbreaking  offences  against  the  moral  na
ture,  as  murder  and  lusts,  especially  unnatural  lusts,
abuse  and  pain  nature,  and  so  to  speak,  force  from'
it  a  cry  of  necessity,  which  sounds  throughout  the
world   and   ascends   to   heaven.*      The  infamy   of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  world,  is  not  excluded
from  this  tendency  and  result,  but  forms  only  the
reflex,  or  one  element  of  the  cry.     The  *3  gives  the
strongest  emphasis  to  the  utterance.     [Baumgarten
and  Keil  render  it  indeed.     The  cry  of  Sodo°m,  in
deed  it  is  great — their  sin,  indeed  it  is  very  grievous.
But  the  usual  force  of  the  13 ,  for,  because,  gives  a
good  sense.     It  is  for  or  because  the  cry  is  such
that  the  Lord  comes  down  to  test  and  punish.— A.  G.]


— I  will  go  down  now. — The   anthropomorphic
expression  includes  also  a  divine  thought  or  purpose.
Jehovah  could  not  be  uncertain  whether  the  cry  of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  contained   the  truth,  but  it
was  still  a  question  whether  Sodom,  by  its  conduct
against  the  last  deciding  visitation  of  God,  would
show  that  its  corruption  placed  it  beyond  any  help
or  salvation.     The  translation  of  Luther,  "whether
it  has  done  according  to  the  cry,"  does  not  meet  the
demands   of   the   text.      It  must   become    evident
through   its   last  trial,  whether  it  has  reached  the
limit  of  the  long-suffering  patience  of  God.     Thus  it
is  not  specially  to  convince  himself,  but  to  introduce
the  final  decision.     According  to  Delitzsch  and  Keil,
the  Jl?3  must  be  taken  as  a  noun,  as  in  Isa.  x.  23,
not  as  an  adverb,  as  Exod.  xi.   1,  "  nbs  !T~S ,  to
bring  to  an  end,  here  to  denote  the  most  extreme
corruption,  in  other  passages  used  to  express  the
utmost   severity  of  punishment  (Xah.  i.  8  f . ;  Jer.
iv.  27  ;  v.  10)."  Keil.— I  will  know.— A  sublime,
fearful  expression  of  the  fact,  that  Jehovah  will  at
last  introduce  for  the  godless  a  decisive  test,  which
according  to   their   situation   is  a   temptation,    the
judgment  which  in  their  case  hardens,  and  the  judg
ment  for  the  hardening.     It  will  issue  at  the  last,  as
they  themselves  have  decided.     Patience   and  antrer
both  have  definite,  sharp  limits. — And  the  men7—
The  two  angels  who  accompanied  Jehovah   in  the
form  of  men.     It  is  observable  that  here  it  is  the
men  simply,  and  then  in  ch.  xix.  1  it  is  the  two  an
gels.     This  order  presupposes  a  very  clear  conscious
ness  as  to  the  distinction  between   the   one   chief
icrson  and  his  two  companions  ;  a  distinction  which
Delitzsch  misses,  according  to  his  view  of  the  Angel
of  the  Lord.     Here,  also  (vcr.  22),  the  two  angels
disappear,  as  they  go  farther,  while  Ji-hovah  remains
at  the  place,  in  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  ;  in  (ch.  xix.
17)  on  the  contrary,  the  two  angel-  receive  an  in
crease    through    an    undefined,   but    evident,    new
appearance  of  Jehovah.     It  is  with  reference  to  the
ater  assault  of  the  Sodomites,  that  the  angels  are
icre  described  as  men.     Their  departure  to  Sodom
s  in  fulfilment  of  the  word  of  Jehovah  :  I  will  know.
They  depart  to  introduce  the  final  decision.     They
depart,  but  Abraham  remains  standing  before  Jeho-
-ah,  upon  that   height  whence  the  vale  of  Sodom
?ould  be  seen  (ch.  xix.  17),  and  addresses   himself
o   prayer.     The   Jewish   conjecture,   that   Jehovah
emains   standing   before  Abraham,  is   a   wretched
vay  of  bettering  the  connection,  which  presupposes
he  distinction  between  the  one  Jehovah  and  the  two
.ugels   before    Jehovah. — And    Abraham    drew
near. — The  £35^  designates  especially  the  nearness
o  Jehovah,  and  more  especially   the  venturesome
Rather  the  bold.     Ileb.  iv.  Iti  ;  x.  22. — A.  G.],  me-
iating  nearness  in  the  priestly  and  believing  dispo-
ition  which  the  prayer  implies  and  contains  (Jer.
xx.    21).     That  Abraham    in    his    prayer   thought
specially  of  Lot,  is  evident,  but  that  he  interceded
or  Lot  only,  is  an   assumption  which  wrongs  not
nly  the  divine  thought  of  this  prayer  but  the  text
self.     Abraham  would  not  then  have  ceased  with
he  number  ten,  and  his  prayer   also  would  have
aken   the   form   of  an   ambiguous   circumlocution,
teil  is  correct  in  his  remark  against  Kurtz,  Abra
am  appeals  in  his  prayer,  not  to  the  grace  of  the
covenant,  but  to  the  righteousness  of  Jehovah.    But
he  is  incorrect  when  he  rejects  the  position  of  Cal
vin  :  "Common  mercy  towards  the   five   nations"
impels  Abraham  to  his  prayer,  and  on  the  contrary


43G


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSES.


brings    into    prominence    the    love    springing   from
faith°;  for  the  one  of  these   does   not   exclude  the
Other.     Luther  admirably  explains  his  heartfelt  de
sire :   "He  asks  six  times,  and  with  so  great  ardor
and  affection,  so  urgently,  that  in  the  very  great  and
breathless    interest    with    which    he    pleads   for  the
miserable  cities,  he  seems  as  if  ^-peaking  foolishly."
In  the  transactions  of  Abraham  with  God,  the  press-
in  tf  larncxtrifxx   on    the    part  of  Abraham,   and    the
forbearance  on    the    I  art   of  Jehovah,   stand  out  in
clear  reiief.      Abraham    goes  on    from   step  to  step,
Jehovah  grant-  him  step  by  step,  without  once  going
before  his  requests.      He  thus  draws  out  from   Abra
ham  the  measure  and  intensity  of  his  priestly  spirit,
while  Abraham,   on    his    side,    ever    wins   a    clearer
insight  as  to  the  judgment  of  God  upon  Sodom,  and
as  to  the  condition  of  Sodom  itself.—  Thejirxl  prnii<r
,,r/,  til  ion.      Foolish,  apparently  presuming  in  form,
sacred  as  to  its  matter!     God,  as  he  has  known  him
as  the  riirhteous  one,  must  remain   the  same  in    his
ri^hteou.-m-ss,  and    cannot,   in    any  exercise  of   his
punitive    providence,    separate    his    almighty   power
from  his  righteousness.      The  prayer  is  a  pious  syllo
gism.      Major    /,,-opofi'f/on  :  Jehovah    cannot  sweep
awas  the  righteous  with  the  wicked.     (The  emphasis
lies    upon    the    xii-cepinri   awnt/.     The    prayer    itself
prov<  s  that  the  righteous  suffer  through  the  wicked,
indeed,  with  him  and  for  him.)      Tin'  HI<H<»-  premise:
theie   might   be  fifty  righteous  ones  in  Sodom,  i.  f.,
righteous,  guiltless   in    reference,  to  this   destructive
jiidirm.'::!.      Innocent  children  are  indeed  not  intend
ed  here,  but  guiltless  adults,  who  might   form  some
propoi  tionate  counterpoise  to  the  rest.      The  conclu
sion  :   If  it   should   lie   thus,  the  judge  of  the  world
could  /"..'  destroy   the   cities,  for  righteousne-s   is  not
the  lion   I'li/x  ii.'/rit  of  strength,  but  power  conditions
and  limits  itself  through  right.      Fitly  righteous,  five
j  twice  live'/ 1  in  each  city  (the  singular  is  used  here
because  Sodom  represents   all  the  five  cities,  or  the
peniapolis  appears  a<  one  city,  whose  character  and
destiny  i-  decided  in  the  conduct  (-f  Sodom)  of  the
pentapolis,  would  be  sufficient  salt  to  save  the  city.
Five  i.-  the   number  of  freedom,  of  moral  develop-
In,  h  .—Second  j»ti!',i>,i.     The  lowly,  humble  foim  ol
the   second   prayer,  corresponds  with  the  bold  form
of  the  first,  for  Abraham  has  now  heard  that  Jeho
vah    will    spare  it    for  the  sake  of  fifty. — I   have
taken  upon  me  (ventured)  to  speak  unto  the
Lord. — This  is  not  merely  to  pray  unto  the  Lord,
lie  has  ventured  the  undertaking,  to  exert  a  definite
influence  upon  Jehovah,  i.e.,  on  the  supposition  of  a
moral  and  free  relation,  boldly  he  has  ventured  to
speak  to  him,  although  uncalled.— Which  am  but
dust  and  ashes. — DKLITZSCH:  "In  his  origin  dust
and  ashes  at  the  cud."     Notwithstanding   this  crea
ture  nature,  he  has  still  ventured  to  place  himself  it
his  p-rson.dity  over  against  the  personality  of  Jeho
vah.     He    has    taken  the  step   of  faith   across  tin
Kii! >icon,    from   the    blind,   creaturely   subjection  t(
Jehovah,  into  the  free  kingdom  of  his  love. — Per
adventure  there  shall  lack  five.— He  does  no
say:  IVi-adventurc  there  are  five  and  forty  righteous
but  clings  to  the  divine  concession.     If  it  is  as  thoi
hast  said,  then  the  want  of  five   cannot   be  decisive
The  forty-live  will  compensate  for  the  want  of  five
— Third  petition.     Since  he  knew  now  that  Jehova'
would  not  insist  upon  the  five,  he  descends  at  one
to  the  forty,  and  urges  still   that  the  righteous  ver
gcance   shot.ld    be  restrained  for  their  sakes   unt
perhaps  they  might  be  found.     Still  from  this  poii
on  he  ventures  only  to  mukc  the  supposition,  pe


Iventure  there  are  so  many  righteous  there,  with-
ut  expressly  joining  to  it  the  inference:  wilt  thou
ot  spare,  etc.  ? — Fourth  petition.  Hut  now,  after
10  number  forty  is  allowed,  Abraham  feels  that  he
an  take  a  bolder  step,  before  which,  however,  ho
rays  that  Jehovah  would  not  be  angry.  Jehovah
ad  twice  yielded  the  five;  he  now  comes  to  thirty,
ud  prays  that  he  would  at  once  yield  the  ten. —
'iftk  petition.  The  compliance  of  JelumJi  with
is  requests  emboldens  him.  Thus  he  excuses  his
oldness  this  time  by  the  mere  consistency  of  his
ords,  as  he  comes  down  to  twenty. — Sixth  petition.
[e  would  venture  only  one  more  request,  and  ihafr
Ot  without  the  deprecatory  prayer:  Oh,  let  not
he  Lord  be  angry. — He  ceases  with  the  ten,  s'.nce
ess  than  two  men  to  each  city  could  not  avail  to
urn  away  the  destructive  judgment.  But  great  as
tie  interceding  Abraham  appears  in  his  bold,  per-
istent  progress  in  his  petitions,  he  appears  equally
"reat  in  ceasing  when  he  did,  although  the  human
notive  to  bring  into  the  account  Lot,  his  wife,  his
wo  daughters,  and  his  sons-in-law,  and  thus  to  go
>n  to  the  number  five,  was  obvious  and  strong.
\.nd  thus  there  is  still  a  distinction  between  the  mere
eejejinrj,  which  knows  no  limit,  and  the  prui/tr  which
s  conscious  that  it  is  limited  through  the  moral
ature  or  spirit,  and,  indeed,  by  the  Holy  Spirit.
When  IMi ty.sch  says  "  that,  apparent  commercial
•and  of  entreaty  is  the  essence  of  true  prayer — is
he  sacred  avaiStia  of  which  our  Lord  speaks,  Luke
xi.  8,  the  importunity  (shamelessness)  of  faith,  etc.,"
ve  would  underscore  and  emphasize  the  a/iji'it-i  //./,
ind  appeal  rather  to  the  repmlnl  it»lcin<t  tlu'.n  to  the.

rgaining  nature,  and  recollect  that  the  importu-
litv,  Luke  xi.  S,  has  its  full  authorization  only  in
the  fiLrure,  but  cannot  be  identified  without  explana-
,ion,  with  what  is  analogous  to  it,  the  full  joyailness
)f  prayer.— And  the  Lord  went  his  way :  not
to  avoid  (as  Delit/.sch  conjectures)  further  entreaties
on  the  pait  of  Abraham,  for  Jehovah's  remaining
where  he  was,  and  the  joyfulness  of  Abraham's
irayer,  stand  in  a  harmonious  relation.  ''  The  judg-
nent,  which  now  follows,  upon  the  live  cities,  shows
that  not  ten  r""'1"^  ,  i.  c.,  not  sinless,  holy  persons,
but  upright,  who,  through  the  fear  of  God  and  the
power  of  conscience,  had  kept  themselves  free  from
the  prevailing  sins  and  crimes  of  those  cities,  could
be  found  in  Sodom."  Keil.  DELITZSCH  :  "  His
prayer,  however,  has  not  fallen  to  the  ground."  He
refers  to  the  rescuing  of  Lot  and  his  family.

3.  Tltc  entrance  and  sojourn  of  the  two  angels  in
Sodom,  and  the  completed  manifestation  of  its  cor
ruption  in  opposition  to  the  better  conduct  of  Lot  (ch.
xix.  1-11). — And  there  came  two  angels. —
STIER:  CTX^Ta  without  the  article;  the  peculiar
personal  angels  who  here  first  appear  definitely  in
the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  although  the
idea  of  the  angel,  in  its  wider  sense,  had  been  in
existence  since  ch.  iii.  They  arrive  at  Sodom  at
evening,  having  left  Hebron  after  midday.  The  idea
of  an  actual  human  journey  from  place  to  place  is
thus  complete  ;  but  the  inmost  central  points  of  the
narrative  are  the  two  great  manifestations,  of  which
the  first  was  given  to  Abraham  about  midday,  and
now  Lot  shares  the  second  at  evening.  But  here
the  objective  character  of  the  manifestation  is  far
more  prominent  than  the  possession  and  extent  of
the  power  to  perceive  the  vision,  for  Lot  did  not

recounize  them  at  first  as  angels,  and  they  appear  to
have"  been  seen  by  the  Sodomites,  unless  we  preffl


CHAP.   XVIII.    1— XIX.    88.


437


the   supposition    that  they  had   learned  from  Lot'
household  of  the  two  shining  youthful  forms  whi
had  turned  in  there  for  the  night.     [The  term  whicl
Lot  uses  in  his  address,  "^"IX  ,  shows  that  he  regard
cd  them  as  men. — A.  G.] — And   Lot  sat  in  the
gate  of  Sodom. — Knobcl  well  says  :  "  Jehovah,  as
the  most  holy,  will  not  cuter  the  unholy  city,"  while
Dclitzsch  asserts  li  that  Jehovah  came  in   them  to
Sodom."     That  Lot  sat  in  the  gate  of  SoJom,   i<
mentioned  rather  to  his  reproaeh  than  to  praise  hu
hospitality.     [It  is  a  reproach  to  him  that  he  is  in
Sodom  at  all,  but  his  sitting  in  the  gate  is  not  men
tioned  here  as  his  reproach. — A.  G.]     He  sits  at  the
gate  in  order  to  invite  approaching  travellers  to  a
lodging  for  the  night,  and  is  thus  hospitable  like  his
uncle.     Knobel   remarks,  ch.  xix.   1  :  "  This   polite
hospitality  is  still   practised  among  the  Arabians  ;
they  count  it  an  honor  to  entertain  the  approaching
stranger,  and  often  contend  with   each   other  who
shall  have  the  honor.     TAVERNIER,  '  Travels,'  i.  p.
125;  BUKCKHARDT,    '  Bedouins,'  p.  280,  and  '  Trav
els  in  Syria,'  p.  641  ff.  ;  BUCKINGHAM,  'Syria,'  5.  p.
285  ;  SEETZEN,  '  Travels,'  i.  p.  400."     "  The  gate  in
the  East  is  usually  an  arched  entrance,  with  deep
recesses  upon  both   sides,  which  furnish  an  undis
turbed  seat  for  the  observer ;  here  below  and  at  the
gate  they  gather,  to  transact  business,  as  there  are
usually  also    stands    for  merchandise    in   these  re
cesses,  and  to  address  narrower  or  wider  circles  upon
the  affairs  of  the  city  (ch.  xxxiv.  20 ;  Deut.  xxi.  19)."
Delkzsch.- — Behold   now,  my  lords  ("^ix). — He
does   not  recognize    them    immediately  as    angels,
which  is  the  less  remarkable  since  the  doctrine  of
angels   must   first    make   its  way    into    the   world
through  such  experiences,  and  which  is  not  excluded
by   the    disposition    or   fitness   to    perceive    visions
(comp.  Ilcb.  xiii.  2).— Nay,  but  we  will  abide  in
the  street  [i.  c.,  the  open,  wide  place  in  the  gate. —
A.  G.]  (comp.  Luke  xxiv.  29).— It  appears  to  have
been  the  object  of  the  angels  to  ascertain  the  state
of  the   city  from  the  street;  but  Lot's   hospitable
conduct  seems,  on  the  other  hand,  to  them  a  favor
able  sign  for  the  city,  which  they  will  follow.— But
before  they  lay  down.— The  wickedness  of  the
city  immediately  develops  itself  in  all  its  greatness.
That  the  old  and  young  should  come;    that  they
should  come  from  every  quarter  of  the  city  [literal
ly  the  end;  sec  Jer.  li.  31.     KEIL:   "As  we  say,  to
the  very  last  man."— A.  G.] ;  that  they  assault"  the
house,  notwithstanding  the  sacred  rights  of  guests ;
that  they  so  shamelessly  avow  their  pedcrastic  pur
pose  ;  that  they  will  not  even  be  appeased  by  Lot,
to  whom  they  once  owed  their  salvation  (ch.  xiv.),
and   (as    one    may   say,    preferred    their   demonic'
raging,  unnatural  lusts,  to  natural  oflences)  that  they
did  not  cease  to  grope  for  the  door,  after  they  were
stricken  with  blindness;  this  is  the  complete  por
traiture  of  a  people  ripe  for  the  fiery  judgment.

That  we  may  know  them. — A  well-known  eu
phemism,  but,  therefore,  here  an  expression  of  shame
less  effrontery.  It  is  the  mark  of  their  depravity
that  they  seek  pleasure  in  the  violation  of  nature,
and  have  their  vile  passions  excited  by  the  look  or
thought  of  heavenly  beauty  (see  GOTIIE'S  "  Faust  "
ii.  division,  at  the  close).  "The  lustful  abomina
tion,  according  to  Horn.  i.  27  the  curse  of  heathen
ism,  according  to  Judg.  vii.  a  copy  of  demonic  er
ror,  according  to  the  Mosaic  law  (Lev.  xviii.  22  ;  xx.
13)  an  abomination  punishable  with  death,  'here
aad  no  mask,  not  even  the  aesthetic  glory  with  which


it  was  surrounded  in  Greece."     Delitzsch.     The  vice
of  pederasty  was  reckoned  among  the  abominations
of  Canaan,  and  even  the  Israelites  were  sometimes
stained  with  it  (Judg.  xix.  22).— Behold  now,  I
have    two    daughters. — "  The    Arab    holds    his
guest  who  lodges  with  him  as  sacred  and  inviolable,
and  if  necessary  defends  him  with  his  life  (see  Kus-
KKL,  '  Natural  History  of  Aleppo,'  i.  p.  834,  etc.)."
Knobel.     "  He  commits  sin,  seeking  to  prevent  sis
through  sin."     Delitzsch.     Kcil  remarks,  "  his  duty
as  a  father  should  have  been  held  more  sacred.'
But  it  may  be  questioned  whether  there  is  not  to  be
brought  into  account  in  Lot  an  element  of  cunning
— a  kind  of  irony — since  he  could  reckon  with  cer
tainty   upon    the   taste    for   unnatural    lust   in  the
Sodomites  (he  so  speaks  because  he  knew  his  peo
ple)  ;  or  whether,  rather,  the  important  thing  is  not
found  in  the  supposition  that  he  acted  in  the  confu
sion     of    the    greatest    amazement     and     anxiety.
[Which  would  naturally  be  increased  if  he  had  dis
covered  by  this  time  that  they  were  heavenly  visitors.
—A.  G.]    We  must  take  into  account,  in  this  whole
history,  that  a  premonitory  feeling  of  the  destruction
of  Sodom  rested   upon  their  minds,  which  had  re
leased  in  Lot  the  spiritually  awakened  disposition  or
preparedness  for  desperate  acts  of  virtue,  as  it  had
in  the  Sodomites  the  demonic  rage  in  wickedness ;
as  the  same  influence  has  elsewhere  appeared  during
earthquakes  and  similar  events.     In  any  case  Lot
could  not  have  miscalculated  in  the  thought  of  a
stratagem  in  which  he  relied  not  only  upon  the  op
position  of  his  sons-in-law,  but  much  more  upon  the
unnatural  lusts  of  the  Sodomites.* — He  will  needs
be  a  Judge  (Judge  and  Judge). — See  the  orig
inal  text.     "  We  may  thus  see  that  there  is  a  sting
in  the  words  of  Lot,  because  he  would  now  reprove
their  unnatural  passions,  as  he  had  indeed  done  before
(see  2  Pet.  ii.  7).f — We   will  deal  worse   with
thee  than  with  them. — "  They  would  smite  and
kill  him,  but   abuse  his  guests."     Knobel.     In  the
words,  they  pressed  sore  upon  the  man,  the  narrator
intimates  more  than  lies  upon  the  face  of  the  words.
They  at  the  same  time  attempt  to  break  through  the
door.     The   angels   interfered,  and    the    Sodomites
were    stricken  with    blindness.       It  is    not   natural
Blindness  which  is  meant,  but  the  blinding  in  which
the   spiritual   power  of   the  angels  works  together
with  the  demonic  fury  of  the  Sodomites.     [='1~i"?O  .
a  blindness   produced   by  dazzling   light,  probably
combining  total  privation  of  sight  and  a  confusion
or  wandering  of  mind. — A.  G.]     It  marks  the  excess
of  their  wickedness,  the  continuance  of  their  abom-
nation  until  the  very  midst  of  the  judgment,  that
hey  do  not,  even  in  this  condition,  cease  from  seek-
ng  the  door.

4.  Lot's  comparative  unjitncss  for  salvation,  Ms
alvation  with  difficult;/,  and  the  entrance  of  the
udgment  (vcrs.  12-29). — And  the  men  said  unto
jot. — They  reveal  themselves  now  as  heavenly
messengers  ;  and  no  less  distinctly  their  callin"  to
lestroy  the  city  and  their  mission  to  save  him  and
Liis  household  (any  one  related  by  marriage — son-in-

*  [Only  to  these  men  do  nothing.  Tlie  form  of  the  pro-
lOuti  used,  ?N!"1 ,  is  archaic,  and  is  used  also  in  ver.  25 ,

h.  xxvi.  3,  4  ;  Lev.  xviii.  27  ;  Deut.  iv.  42  ;  vii.  22  ;  xix.  11.
•VEIL,  p.  103.  Tlu'reforo  came  (hey  under  iny  roof;  vie,,  for

tie  purpose  of  security. — A.  G.J

t  [Baumgartcn  urges  that  ."INbn  lyj  should  be  rendered
come  hither,"  instead  of  "  stand  back,''  on  the  ground  that
his  is  the  usual  meaning  of  the  verb,  and  that  it  givus  an
cvually  good  Ecnse.  p.  211— A.  G.]


438


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


iaw).  We  regard  the  usual  construction,  hast  thou
here  any  besides  9  son-in-law  and  thy  sons,
and  thy  daughters,  and  whatsoever  thou  hast,
etc.,  as  incorrect.  1.  Because  then  son-in-law  would
precede  the  son*  and  daughters,  and  is  used  in  the
singular.  '2.  Beeause  in  the  words  "whatsoever
thou  hast,"  sons-in-law,  as  wrll  as  sons  and  daugh
ters  arc  include  1.  [The  [Tollable  reference  is  to
those  in  the  eitv  and  not  in  the  house — any  one  re
lated  to  him.— A.  <i.  |— And  the  Lord  hath  sent
us. — Thf,  Angel  of  the  Lord  never  speaks  in  lid-;
way. — And  Lot  went  out  and  spake,  etc. — There
are  two  explanations:  1.  Those  tnfcint/  ///.s  <A/ ;///// -
•Vr.s',  i.e.,  who  had  taken  '.'.is  daughters  to  wife.  Tims
the  Septuagint,  the  Targunis,  Jonathan,  Jewish  ii;-
terpreters,  Schumann,  Knobel,  Dclit/sch.  Accord
ing  to  this  explanation,  Lot  had,  besides  his  married
daughters  in  the  city,  two  unmarried  daughters.  2.
C^np'3,  those  about  to  accept  or  take,  bridegrooms.
Thin'  Josephus,  the  Yulga'e,  Clericus,  Ewald,  Keil,
and  others.  Knobel  quotes  (PNU^rn)  vcr.  15  in
•  .f  'he  iii-st  explanation;  but  Keil  remarks
that  this  does  not  designate  an  opposition  between
••marriel  and  man  led  daughters,  but  between
tliese  and  t!.e  -ons-in-law  who  remained  behind.
V,  .  may  add,  moreover,  that  there  is  no  intimation
.  Lot  had  warned  married  daughters  to  rise  up.
—The  angels  hastened  Lot.* — Siive  they  were
.  .'X. 'elite  the  destruction,  there  does  not  seem
any  occasion  for  the  haste,  as  if  it  proceeded  i'lom
aome  fate — iVom  an  agency  beyond  themselves.
!5nt  there  is  a  threefold  reason  for  their  lia.-!e  :  1.
The  x.enl  of  the  right rousn<  ;  of  God,  since  the
measure  of  the  iniquity  of  So  loin  was  full;  '2.  their
own  holy  all'ectii.n  ;  '•>.  the  connection  of  their  mis
sion  with  the  preparation  of  the  judgment  in  the
natural  relations  of  Sodom. — And  while  he  lin
gered.— It  is  clear  in  every  way  that  Lot,  from  his
spiritless,  hali'-heaited  nature,  which  made  it  diflicult
to  part  1'r.ini  his  location  and  possessions,  was  res
cued  with  the  greatest  dilliculty.  [The  Lord  being
merciful  to  him,  literally,  by  the  mercy  of  Jehovah
upon  him,  /.  r.,  which  was  exercised  towards  him. —
A.  <;.] — And  set  him  down. — This  completes  the
work  of  the  two  angels  in  saving  Lot,  and  their  work
of  destruction  now  begins.— That  he  said  (see  the
remarks  upon  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  eh.  xii.) — It
is  "Jehovah  speaking  through  the  angel,"  says  De-
litzsch.  But  why  then  does  this  form  occur  first
here?  Before,  the  angels  had  said,  Jehovah  has
sent  us.  Because  the  approach  of  Jehovah  is  not
expressly  mentioned,  Keil  also  admits  here  "  that
the  angel  speaking,  speaks,  as  the  messenger  of  Je
hovah,  in  the  name  of  Cod."  Upon  the  ground  of
the  miraculous  help  given  to  him,  Jehovah  calls  him
now  to  personal  activity  in  his  own  salvation.  But
Lot,  on  the  contrary,  clings  to  the  receding  forms  of
the  two  angels,  and  it  cannot  surprise  us,  that  in  his
agitation  he  should  confound  their  appearance  and
the  voice  of  Jehovah — For  thy  life. — Life  and
soul  are  here  one,  not  merely  according  to  the  verbal
expression,  but  in  the  very  idea  of  the  situation  ;  it
includes  the  thought :  "  Save  thy  soul." — Look  not
behind  thee. — The  cause  is  given  in  Lot's  wife.
It  is  the  religious  expression  for  the  desire  to  return,
the  hesitation,  the  lingering,  as  if  one  could  easily
hasten  from  the  divine  judgment  (sec  Luke  ix.  62).
Knobel  draws  analogies  from  the  sphere  of  heathen


a'


*  [At  the.  morning.    Tho  dawn,  since  the  sun  rose  as  Lot
:ered  Zoar.    JACOBVS  :  "  Notes,"  vol.  ii.  p.  23.— A.  G.I


religions.  "  In  order  not  to  see,  the  divine  provi
dence,  or  working,  which  is  not  permitted  the  eye
of  mortals.  For  similar  reasons  the  ancients  in
completing  certain  religious  usages  did  not  look
around  them  (p.  173J."  Certainly  the  Lord  might
take  into  account  the  holy  horror  in  Lot  at  the
spectacle  of  the  liery  judgment.  Still  the  first  word
is  explained  by  the  second  :  Neither  stay  th^u  in
all  the  plain;  and  the  second  by  the  third:  Es
cape  to  the  mountain. — It  is  the  mountains  of
Moab,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  arc
intended. — And  Lot  said  unto  them:  Oh,  not
so,  my  Lord. — He  could  not  distinguish  the  mi
raculous  vi:-ion  of  the  appearance  of  the  angels  and
the  miraculous  report  of  the  voice  of  Jehovah
which  now  came  to  him.  lie  pleads  in  excuse  for
his  want  of  energy  that  fear  presses  heavily  upon
him ;  and  fear  weighs  upon  him  because,  while  he
was  free  from  the  abominations  of  Sodom,  he  was
not  free  from  its  worldly  mind.  [The,  evil,  i.  c.,  the
destruction  which  was  to  come  upon  Sodom,  lie
feared  that  he  could  not  reach  the  mountain. — A.  G.]
Lot  also  now  becomes,  in  his  own  interest,  an  inter
cessor  for  others.  He  points  to  the  little  Bela,  the
smallest  of  the  cities  of  the  pcntapolis,  and  thinks
it  is  a  small  matter  for  the  Lord  to  grant  him  this  as
a  place  of  refuge,  because  it  is  so  small,  and  there
fore  exempt  it  from  destruction.  The  name  Zoar
was  derived  from  these  events,  "/oar  is  not  to  be
sought  in  the  (ihor  el  Me/.raah,  /.  c.,  upon  the  penin
sula  which  here  stretches  into  the  Dead  Sea  (see  Is.
xv.  5),  but  rather  in  the  Ghor  el  S/aphia,  at  the
south-eastern  end  of  the  Sea,  in  the  outlet  of  the
Wady  el  Ahhsa.  This  locality  is  well  watered  and
covered  with  shrubs  and  trees  at  the  present  time,
but  is  unhealthy.  It  is  inhabited  and  well  cultivated
by  the  Bedouins,  who  have  here  a  permanent  settle
ment;  and  in  the  winter  it  is  the  gathering  place  for
more  than  ten  tribes.  Thus  Seet/en,  Burckhanit,
Kobinson."  Knobel.  For  further  references  to
Zoar,  see  in  K.NOIU.I.,  p.  171  ;  Km.,  p.  It'/,");  and  the
Bible-Dictionaries.  [UOICNSOX,  "Researches,1'  ii.  p.
•iso,  c,is,  tliil. — A.  <;.] — The  sun  was  risen  upon
the  earth. — According  to  Keil,  Lot  was  now  just  on
the  way,  but  the  text  says  expressly,  that  lie  had
entered"  Zoar.  For  the  distances  in  the  vale  of  Sid-
dim  see  K.NOHKI,,  p.  175.— Then  the  Lord  rained
|  Heb.  caused  it  to  rain.— A.  G.J  fire  from  the  Lord.
— The  antithesis  which  lies  in  this  expression,  be
tween  the  manifestation  of  Jehovah  upon  the  earth,
and  the  being  and  providence  of  Jehovah  in  heaven,
is  opposed  by  Keil.  The  !T.irP  rx?3  is  according
to  Calvin  an  emphatic  repetition.  This  does  not  agree
with  Keil's  explanation  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord.
Pelitzseh  remarks  here  :  There  is  certainly  in  ail
such  passages  a  distinction  between  the  historically
revealed,  and  the  concealed,  or  unrevealed  Cod
(comp.  IIos.  i.  1),  and  thus  a  support  to  the  position
of  the  Council  of  Sirmium  :  "  the  Son  of  God  rains
it  down  from  God  the  Father."  The  decisive  execu
tion  of  the  judgment  proceeds  from  the  manifesta
tion  of  Jehovah  upon  the  earth,  in  company  with
the  two  angels;  but  the  source  of  the  decree  of
judgment  lies  in  Jehovah  in  heaven.  The  moral
stages  of  the  development  of  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth,  correspond  with  the  providence  of
the  Almighty  in  the  heavens,  and  from  the  heavens
reaching  down  into  the  depths  of  cosmical  nature. —
Brimstone  and  fire. — Keil,  in  the  interest  of  the
literal  interpretation,  misses  here  the  religions  and
1  symbolical  expression.  "  The  rain  of  brimstone


CHAP,  xviii.  i.— xix.


439


and  fire  was  no  mere  thunder-storm,  which  kindled
into  afire  the  ground  already  saturated  with  naphtha.
[Whatever  may  be  the  explanation  of  this  catastro
phe,  whether  we  suppose,  as  seems  most  probable,
that  God  used  natural  agencies,  or  make  more  prom
inent  and  exclusive  the  storm  from  heaven,  it  is  clear
on  either  supposition  that  the  event  was  miraculous,
the  result  of  the  direct  interposition  of  God.     Upon
the  Dead  Sea,  the  '  Notes  '  of  Bush  and  Jacobus  ;
the  '  Dictionaries  '  of   Smith  and  Kitto ;  ROBINSON*  :
'Researches';    STANLEY  on    'Palestine';    and    the
numerous  books  of  travels  may  be  consulted. — A.  G.]
For  it  cannot  be  proved  from  such  passages  as  Ps.
xi.  6  and  Ezek.   xxxviii.  22  that  lightning  is  ever
called  in  the  Scriptures  brimstone   and   fire,  since
these  passages  evidently  refer  to  the  event  narrated
here.     The  words  must  be  understood  in  an  entirely
peculiar  sense,  that  brimstone   with   fire,  i.  e.,  the
burning   brimstone,    fell    from   heaven,    etc."     But
the  words  are  not  thus  peculiarly  understood,  brim
stone  with  fire,  i.  e.,  burning  brimstone,  but  brim
stone  and  fin?.     Brimstone  cannot  mix  with  fire,  in
the  air,  without  becoming  fire.     We  might,  indeed,
think  of  burning  meteors,  which  stood  in  reciprocal
relations   and   efficiency  with  the  burning   ground.
Knobel  adopts  the  explanation  of  JOSKPIIUS  :  "An-
tiq.;>  i.  11,  4;   "Bell  Jud."  iv.  8,  4;  and  TACIT.:
"  History,"  v.   7.     i'iro  and  brimstone   appear    also
elsewhere  as  the  instruments  of  divine  punishment
(Ps.  xi.  (5 ;  Ezek.  xxxviii.  22).     The  author  does  not
point  out  more  fully  what  was  the  concern  of  the
two  angels   in   the   destruction.     But  in  analogous
cases,  when  God  was  about  to  scud  evil  diseases  or
pestilences,  he  used  the  angels  as  his  instruments  (2
Sam.  xxiv.  16;  Is.  xxxvii.  30).     DELITZSCH:    "Xot
only  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  but,  with  the  exception
of  Zoar,  the  other  cities  of  the  pentapolis  (ch.  xiv.
2),_as  is  stated  Deut,  xxix.  23  (comp.  Hos.  xi.  8),  or
as  it  is  here,  the  whole  circle,  all  the  plain,  was  sub
merged  in  lire  and  brimstone ;  a  catastrophe  which
also  Strabo,   Tacitus,  and  Solinus  Polyhistor,  fully
attest,   and  which  is  constantly  referred   to  in  the
later  literature,  c.  g.,  Ps.  xi.  6  (see  Ilupfield  upon
this  passage),  even  down  to  the  Revelation."— But

his  wife    looked  back  from  behind  him.*

Some  conclude  from  this  expression,  that  she  went
behind  Lot,  and  thus  looked  back.  But  the  looking
back  is  plainly  not  more  to  be  understood  in  a  strict
literal  souse  than  the  account  that  she  became  a
pillar  of  suit.  Female  curiosity,  and  the  longing  for
her  homo  at  Sodom,  led  her  to"  remain  behind  l^ot,
and  delay,  so  that  she  was  overtaken  in  the  destruc
tion  (see  Luke  xvii.  31,  32).  Keil  even  departs
from  the  literal  interpretation  in  the  term,  pillar  of
salt,  when  he  explains :  she  was  encrusted  with  salt ;
resembled  a  pillar  of  salt,  just  as  now  objects  in  the
neighborhood  of  the  Dead  Sea,  are  soon  encrusted
from  its  salty  evaporations.  This  salt-pillar  is  men
tioned  as  still  existing  in  the  "Book  of  Wisdom,"  xi.
7,  and  in  CLEMENS  of  Rome  to  the  "Cor."  11 ;  Jo-
SEPHUS  :  "  Antiq."  i.  1],  4,  as  that  which  they  had
Been.  The  biblical  tradition  has  here  passed  into  a
mere  legend,  which  points  out  a  pillar-like  salt-cone,
about  forty  feet  high,  at  the  lower  end  of  the  Dead


*  [The  word  here  used  for  look  implies  a  deliberate  con
templation,  steady  regard,  consideration,  and  desire  ;  see
is.  Ixm.  j.  ihe  Sept,  has  en-eySAe^ei',  looked  wistfully.
WORDSWORTH,  p.  39.  She.  became,  lit.,  she  was  a  pillar  of
'ihe  dashing  spray  of  the  salt,  sulphureous  rain,
jeems  to  have  suffocated  her,  and  then  encrusted  her  whole
oody."  Murphy.— A.  G.]


Sea,  as  this  pillar  of  salt  (see  KXOBEL,  p.  176,
SEKTZEN:  "Travels,"  ii.  p.  240;  LYNCH:  "Report,"
p.  183  ft'.).  This  salt-cone  is  connected  with  tin
salt-mountain  of  Usdum  (Sodom).  ROBINSON  :  "  Re
searches,"  ii.  p.  481-485.  [Also  Grove's  article  on
the  "Salt  Sea,"  in  Smith's  Dictionary. — A.  G.] —
And  Abraham  gat  up  early  in  the  morning.
[That  is,  the  morning  of  the  destruction.— A.  G.]—
The  catastrophe  of  the  judgment  was  soon  com
pleted.  The  destruction,  viewed  from  its  universal
aspect  and  relations,  is  ascribed  to  Elohim.  But  it
is  God,  as  Elohim  also,  who  saves  Lot,  for  Abra
ham's  sake  (see  the  remarks  upon  his  intercession).

— Out  of  the  midst  of  the  destruction A  vivid

description  of  the  salvation  of  Lot  from  the  ex-
tremest  peril,  in  a  place  which  itself  lay  in  the  skirts
of  the  overthrow, — a  statement  which  Knobel,  with
out  the  least- ground,  attempts  to  prove  diiiers  from
the  earlier  account.

The  destination  of  this  judgment,  whose  precon
ditions  lay  in  the  terrestrial  volcanic  character  of  the
vale  of  Siddim  (see  ch.  xiv.  10),  for  an  eternal  warn
ing  to  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  i.  e.,  all  the  mem
bers  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  appears  clearly  in  the
constant  quotation  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Sodom
is  alone  named,  as  the  most  important  city  (Is.  iii.  9  ;
Lam.  iv.  6  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  48  ;  Matt.  xi.  23),  Sodom  and
Gomorrah  as  the  two  greatest  (Is.  i.  9,  13,  19,  and
in  other  passages),  Admah  and  Zeboim  (Hos.  xi.  8),
and  in  the  "  Book  of  Wisdom  "  the  five  cities  are
named  in  a  vague  and  general  way.

The  catastrophe,  conditioned  through  the  nature
of  the  ground,  corresponds  with  the  divine  decree
of  judgment.  The  fundamental  idea  is  the  burning
of  the  earth,  through  the  fire  from  heaven  ;  but  that
an  earthquake,  which  are  frequent  in  Palestine,  may
have  been  in  action,  and  that  volcanic  eruptions
might  have  wrought  together  with  this,  is  intimated
in  the  expression :  All  the  plain.  II>>:IH  overthrown.
The  Dead  Sea  was  formed  through  the  flowing  in
of  the  Jordan,  in  connection  with  the  sinking  of"  the
ground.

But  there  are  two  views  concerning  the  Dead
Sea.  According  to  one  (Leake,  Hoff,  and  others),
the  Jordan  before  this  flowed  through  the  vale  of
Siddim  to  the  Ailanitic  gulf  of  the  Red  Sea.  In  the
other  view  (Robinson  and  others),  there  was  an  in
land  sea,  before  the  catastrophe  of  Sodom,  which
forms  part  of  the  Dead  Sea.  For  the  reasons  in
favor  of  the  latter  view,  sec  KXOBEL,  p.  177.  A
principal  reason  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  northern
part  of  the  Dead  Sea  has  a  depth  throughout  of
nearly  1300  feet,  while  the  southern  is  only  15  feet
deep,  is  rich  in  asphaltum,  has  hot  places,  and  is  hot
at  the  bottom.  BUNSEN:  "  That  northern  basin,  ac
cording  to  Hitter's  statement  (xv.  7G7,  778),  is  due
to  the  falling  in  of  the  ground ;  the  local  elevation
of  the  southern  part,  to  the  peculiar  character  of  the
ground."  Upon  the  Dead  .Sea,  see  KNOBEL,  p.  177;
KEIL,  p.  165  ;  DELITZSCH,  p.  398 ;  and  the  Diction
aries,  especially  the  article  "Salt  Sea,"  in  the  "Bible
Dictionary  for  Christian  People."  ["  The  earlier  view
is  now  abandoned,  and  it  has  no  decisive  ground  in
the  sacred  history."  DELITZSCH,  p.  289.  See  also
GROVE,  in  S.  D.  p.  1339.— A.  G.]

5.  Lofs  departure,  and  Ids  descendants  (vers.  80-
38).— And  Lot  went  out  of  Zoar ["Lot's  res
cue  is  ascribed  to  Elohim,  as  the  judge  of  the  whole
earth,  not  to  the  covenant  God,  Jehovah,  because
Lot  in  his  separation  from  Abraham  was  removed
from  the  special  leading  and  providence  of  Jeho-


140


GENESIS,  OK  THE   llUST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


vsh."     Kicn   p.  106.—  A.G.]     After  he  had  recov-
*ed  from  the  paraly/.ing  terrors  which  fettered    urn
in/0-ir    a  calculating  fear  took  possession  of    him
ami  drove  him  from  Zoar  further  into  the  mountains
of  Moah  in  the  east.     It  was  an  unbelieving  tear,
for  the  Lord  hail  granted  /oar  to  him  as  an  asylum;
he  could  not  trust  that  divine  promise  further       1  he
result  is,  that,  poor  and  lonely,  he   must   dwell  with
ins  two  daughters  in  a  rave  i-.i  those  cavernous  chalk
mountain..       Lot    is   thus    now  a    poor    troglodyte
"There  arc  in   that   region  now  those  who  dwell  in
caves  and  !  ™ttoi-s  (Buckingham  and  Lynch).''    Kxo-
BFI     ,,    17,-;  --And    the  first-born   said  to   the
yotinger.-iour  father  is  old      This  confirms  the
assertion  of  St.  Stephen,  in  whieh  it  is  implied  that
Abraham  was  not   the  oldest  son  of  Terah  ;  lor  Lot
was  now    old,   and   he  was  the  son  ot    llaran,  and
Huriin  wns  Abraham's  brother.     Tims   one  part    o
Scripture  confirms  another,  when   perhaps  we  least
expeetit.     WORDSWORTH,   p.  89.—  A.  G.]      I  he  do-
;  led  her  to  the  iniquitous  thought
of  incest,  which  she  believed  excusable  because  there
is  not   a  man   in   the  earth,  etc.     According  to  Keil
and  Knobel,  ihey  did  not  think  that  the  human  race
had  perished,  but   only  that   there  was  no  man  who
would  unite   himself  with    them,   the  remnant    <  f  a
region  stricken  with  the   curse.     Their  idea  oi  t.
world,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  narrative,  ap
pears  to  have  been    sad   and  gloomy.       \
they  know  of  the  world,  in  their  mountain  ^solitude
This  deed   was  worthy  of  Sodom,
there  is  a  distinction  and  a  wide  differ,  nee  between
incest   and    pederasty   (see    introduction).
think-   that  they  were  represented  by  the  wr
moulded  by  the  mother,  who  was  probably  a  Sodom
ite  •  and,  o"ii  the  other  hand,  that  Lot,  as  the  nephew
of    Abraham,   was  more   favorably   (i.   e.,   partially)
represented.     Everyone  of  these  points  is  fiction!
Tli.-    narrative,    Knobel   remarks,  lacks    probabil
li  assumes  that  Lot  was  so  intoxicated  both  times
iliat  h<-  shcuM  know  nothing  of  what  took   p.ace,
:i;id  still,  an  old  man  should,  with  all  this,  be  capa
of  be-etting  seed.     Keil,  on  the  contrary,_  Fays


Ammonites,  (Specially  in  reference  to  their  origin,
see  KXOBKI,,  p.  178,  who,  however,  in  his  usual
method,  draws  the  inference  as  above  remarked,  that
this  narrative  has  its  origin  in  Jewish  animosity.
Besides  the  reply  of  Keil  [See  Dent.  ii.  It,  1!>,  and
xxiii.  4.  Lot  lure  disappears  from  th;1  history,
and,  as  Kurt/,  remark?,  it  is  the  design  of  this  narra
tive  to  give  a  support  for  the  later  records  of  the
relation  of  these  tiibcswilh  the  Israelites. — A.G.I
Delitzsch  also  may  be  consulted  (p.  401).  Knobel
himself  rccognizes'the  fact  of  the  descent  of  both  of
these  peoples  fiom  Lot.  The  nomadic  hordes  of
Lot  gradually  extended  themselves  east  and  north-
2a-t,  and  partly  subdued  and  destroyed,  and  partly
ncorporated  amo-.vj;  themselves,  the  original  tribes
of  the  Einini  and  Susim.


.  ,  _

it  does  not  follow  from  the  text  that  Lot  was   in  an
imconscious  state  during  the  whole  interval,  as  the
'labbins  have,  according  to  Jerome,  described  tli
.;  ••;!  incredible  thing,  taken  in  connection  witn
issue  of  the  event.     Indeed,  the  narrative  says  only
that  Lot  was  in  an  unconscious  state,  both  when
daughters  lay  down,  and  when  they  rose  up;  m  ti
evening  perhaps  through  intoxication,  in  the  morn-
hi"  through  profound,  heavy  sleep.     In  any  view,  a
certain  measure  of  voluntariness  must  be  assumed,
according  to  the  degree  in  whieh  he  was  conscious
and  therefore  his  intoxication  can  only  be  urged  as
an  excuse,  and  this  a  wretched  excuse,  since  the  in
toxication   was,   like   the   deed   itself,   immediatili
repeated.     Psychologically,  the  reaction  from  grea
mental  effort  and  tension  is  to  be  taken  into  account
hi    pronouncing   upon  the  pleasures  of    rest  in  an
indolent  and  sensual   nature.—  Moab.—  There   are
two  derivations  :  ZX'S  ,//o//i  tl>  c  father,  or  IE  ,  water
(as   the   semen   virile   is  euphemistically   called    in
Arabic),  for  semen  and  TX.     Keil  decides  in  favor
of  the  first  derivation,  from  a  reference  to  the  ex
planatory  expressions  (vers.  32,  34,  36).     [And  also
•  the  analogy  of  the  ^""z  .—  A.  G.]—  Aminon.—
•VES~!3,son  of  my  people.     According  to  Delitzscb,
the  form  "pas  designates  simply  the  descendants  of
the  people.     For  the  character  cf  the  Moabites  and


I'OCTUIXAT,  AM)

See  the  pieliminary  and  Exegctical  remarks.

1.  I'pon  the  manifestation  in  the  oak  grove  of
Mamre  compare  eh.  xii.     We  observe,  however,  that
the  manifestation  \\hich  was  given  to  Abraham,  was
complex,  because  it  had  reference  in  part  to  him  and
the  birth  of  Isaac,  and  in  part  to  Lot   and  Sodom.
[Icnce  it  resolves  itself,  in  the  course  of  the  history,
into  two  manifestations.

2.  The  connection  of  the  promise  of  redemption
and  the  announcement  of  judgment,  whieh  is  peculiar
to   this   section,   runs    throughout   the   whole   sacred

Icripture.

3.  The  oriental  virtue  of  hospitality  appear*  here
in  the  light  of  the  theocratic  faith,  and  so  likewise  its
blessiiiff,  whieh  is  proclaimed  through' ml    the  whole
Scripture,  down  even  to  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews
(lleb.  xiii.  2.)     It  is  a  contradiction  in  the   natural
custom  of  the  Arabs,  that  they  will  rob  the  pilgrim
in  the  desert  before  he  enters  their  tents,  but  receive
him  with  the  grcatc  1  hospitality,  as  it  is  generally  true
that  the  natural  virtues  of  people  are  tainted  by  con
tradictions.     Hospitality,  however,  is  the  specific  vir
tu.-   of   the   Ara'o,   his  "inheritance   from    his_  father
Abraham.     I>ut  in   Abraham  himself  this  virtue  is
consecrated  to  be  the  spiritual  fruit  of  faith.

•1.  The  feast  of  Cod  with  Abraham.  [How  true
it  is  that  Abraham  has  now  become  the  friend  of
God,  ,1, imes  ii.  2:).  And  what  light  this  history  casts
upon  the  meaning  of  that  term. — A.  G.]  A  New
Testament  and  heavenly  sign,  whose  later  reflection
is  the  table  of  show-bread  in  the  temple,  the  Lord's
Supper  in  the  New  Covenant,  and  the  Marriage  Sup
per  of  the  Lamb  in  tho  new  world.

5.  The  distinction  between  the  laughing  of  Abra
ham   and   Sarah  (see  above).     In  ch.  xxvi.  6  there
appears  still  another,  a  third  laugh,  in  order  to  deter
mine  the  name  Isaac  (comp.  v.  <>).     The  laughter
of  a  joyful  faith,  the  laughter  of  a  doubting  little
faith,  and  the  laughter  of  astonishment  or  even  of
the  animosity  of  the  world,  appear  and  participate  in
the  name  of  "the  son  of  promise,  as  indeed  at  that  of
every  child  of  the  promise.

6.  The  initiation  of  Abraham  into  the  purposes
of  God.     In  ch.  xviii.  17,  "  the  Scripture  has  the  ad
dition  of  rou  TrcuSo's   nov  (n"l~")  to  euro  'Afipaan,  for
which  Thilo  reads  TOV  $i\uv  pav  (corn p.  James,  ii.
23).     There  is  scarcely  any  passage  in  which  this
•n-?  or  -CH X  (If a.  xli.  8  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  7),  would  be
more  fitting 'than  in  this.     Abraham  is  the  friend  of
Jehovah  (among  the  Moslems  it  has  become  a  sur
name  ;  chalil  Allah,  or  merely  el-chalil,  from  which


CHAP.   XVIII— XIX.    1-38.


441


Hebron  is  also  called  Bcit-cl-clialil,  or  simply  El-
chalil),  and  we  have  no  secrets  from  a  friend."  De-
litzsch  (comp.  John  xv.  15  ft').  The  first  reason  is,
that  God  has  chosen  Abraham,  and  that  he,  as  the
chosen,  has  the  destination  to  found  in  his  race  for
all  time,  a  tradition  and  school  of  the  revelation  of
God,  of  righteousness  and  judgment.  The  doctrine
of  the  election  first  appears  here  in  its  more  definite
form.  [God  says,  I  know  him,  but  also  that  he  will
command,  &c.  We  ought  not  to  overlook  how  early
family  relations,  instructions  and  discipline,  assume
an  important  place  in  the  progress  of  the  kingdom
of  God ;  and  what  a  blessing  descends  upon  those
who  are  faithful  as  parents.  "Family  religion  is
God's  method  for  propagating  his  church.  This
would  lead  him  to  exercise  a  careful  parental  au
thority  for  controlling  his  house  in  the  name  of  God."
Jacobus. — A.  G.]

7.  A  further  and  more  peculiar  reason,  why  God
reveals  to  Abraham  the  impending  judgment  upon
Sodom,  lies  in  this,  that  not  only  the  history  of  So
dom,  but  also  the  Dead  Sea,  should  be  for  all  time  a
constituent  part  of  the  sacred  history,  a  solemn  warn
ing  for  ihc  people  of  God,  and  for  all  the  world.     At
the  same  time  this  history  should  make  illustrious
the  justice  of  God,  according  to  which  a  people  are
ripe  for  judgment,  when  a  cry  of  its  iniquity  ascends
to  heaven.

8.  Abraham's  intercession,  in  its  strength  and  in
its  self-limitation,  is  an  eternal  example  of  the  true
position  of  the   believer  to  the   corruption  of  the
world.     Upon  the  self-limitation  of  intercession  see
1  John  v.   10.     Intercession   even  falls   away  from
faith  and  becomes  mere  fanaticism  or  frenzy,  when  it
oversteps  the  limits  of  truth.     Abraham's  excuses  in
his  intercession,  his  prudent  progress  in  his  petitions,
his  final  silence,  prove  that  even  the  boldest  inter
course  is  morally  conditioned.     On  the  other  hand,  the
whole  power  of  intercession  and  the  full  certainty  that
prayer  will  be  answered,  appear   here  most  clearly.
[See  the  29th  verse,  which  makes  it  clear  that  Ara-

•ham's  intercession  was  not  fruitless. — A.  G.]

9.  It  is  evident  from  the  intercession  of  Abraham,
that  the  father  of  the  faithful  had  a  very  different
idea  of  righteousness  from  that  which  regards  it  as
consisting  only  in  the  non  plus  ultra  of  punishment.
See  upon  the  idea  of  SIKCUOS,  Matt.  i.  19.     Moreover,
in  the  reflection,  the  prudence,  and  the  constancy  of
the  intercession,  the  Abrahamic  or  even  the  Isracl-
itish  character  appears  here  in  its  true  worth  and  in
its  sanctified  form,  as  it  enters  afterward  in  the  life
of  Jacob  at  first  less  sanctified,  but  at  the  same  fitted
for  sanctification.     But  in  regard  to  the  thought  of
Abraham's  intercession,  we  would  make  the  follow
ing  remarks :     1.  His  intercession  takes  more  and
more  the  form  of  a  question.     2.  He  does  not  pray
that  the  godless  should  be  freed  from  punishment,
but  for  the  sparing  of  the  righteous,  and  the  turning
away  of  the  destructive  judgment  from  all,  in  case
there  should  be  found  a  sufficient  salt  of  the  right
eous  among  them.     3.  His  prayer  includes  the  thought
that  God  would  not  destroy  any  single  righteous  one
with  the  wicked,  although  the  number  of  the  right
eous  should  be  too  small  to  preserve  the  whole.  [The
righteous,  of  course,  are  not  destroyed,  although  they
are  often  involved  in  the  punishment  of  the  wicked.
—A.  G.]

10.  This  history  makes  the  truth  conspicuous  for
all  time,  that  the  whole  depraved  world  is  preserved
through  a  seed  of  believing  and  pious  men,  and  that
indeed,  not  according  to  a  numerical,  but  according


to  their  dynamic  majority.  Ten  righteous  would
have  saved  Sodom.  But  when  even  the  salt  of  th«
earth  (Matt.  v.  13)  does  not  avail  to  save  a  people  or
a  community,  then  still  God  cares  for  the  salvation
of  his  chosen,  as  is  seen  in  the  history  of  Noah,  the
history  of  Lot,  and  the  history  of  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem.  But  the  relative  mediators  who  are
given  to  the  world  in  the  "  salt  of  the  earth,"  point
to  the  absolute  mediator,  Christ,  who  is  the  central
saving  pivot  in  the  history  of  the  world.  [We  stand
here  on  the  verge  of  a  most  striking  type  of  the  judg
ment.  We  know  that  the  storm  is  gathering  and
ready  to  burst,  but  in  the  awful  silence  which  pre
cedes  it  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  intercessor.  Thus
while  the  final  judgment  is  preparing,  the  voice  of
the  true  intercessor  is  heard. — A.  G.]

11.  The  Angels  in  Sodom.     In  all   such   cases
there  must  come  a  last  final  decision.     See  above.

12.  The  manifestation  which  was  given  to  Lot,
corresponds  with  that  which  was  given  to  Abraham,  in
a  way  similar  to  that  in  which  the  vision  of  the  cen
turion,  Cornelius,  at  Csesarea,  corresponds  to  the  vision
of  Peter,  at  Joppa  (Acts  x.).     The  precondition  for
this  connection  of  the  revelations  was,  doubtless,  in
both  cases,  the  mysterious  bond  of  a  common  premo
nition  or  presentiment  of  great  events.

13.  The  sin  of  Sodom  runs,  as  a  general  charac
teristic,  through  the  heathen  world  (see  Rom.  i.  24) ;
still,  in  this  aspect  some  nations  are  far  more  inno
cent  or  guilty  than  others.     Church  history  also,  14
this  connection,  preserves  sad  remembrances.    Among
the  causes  of  the  ruin  of  the  Osmanic  kingdom,  this
sin   stands   prominent  whose   analogue  is  found  in
the  sin  of  Onan  (ch.  xxxviii.  8.).

14.  The  description  of  the  night  scene  in  Sodom
is  a  night  piece  of  terrible  aspect  and  impressiveness.
It  is  plain  (from  the  little  prospect  of  the  mass  for
the  gratification  of  personal  lusts,  and  from  the  prob
ability  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  only  knew
indirectly  of  Lot's  mysterious  guests),  that  the  uproar
of  the  Sodomites  was  more  than  half  an  uprising
against  the  judgment  of  Lot  which  they  had  already
experienced,   and  a  tumultuous   manifestation   that
their  abominable  immorality  must  be  held  as  a  public
custom,  of  which  we  have  a  purely  analogous  event
in  the  uproar  of  the  heathen  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xix.
28  ff').     All  the  spirits  of  villainy,  wantonness,  and
scoffing  unbelief  are  to  be  regarded  as  unfettered.
The  ripeness  of  the  city  for  destruction,  however,  is
not  to  be  viewed  directly  as  a  ripeness  of  the  Sodom
ites  for  damnation  (see  Matt.  xi.  23).

15.  The  demonic  and  bestial  nature  of  sin  ap
pears  in  this  history  in  frightful,  full  life,  or  rather
death  size.  [So,  also,  its  corrupting  power.     Lot  felt
its  influence,  even  though  he  resisted  and  condemned
their  vile  practices.     The  offer  which  he  makes  to
save  his  guests,  although  made  under  great  confusion,
anxiety  and  terror,  shows  its  influence. — A.  G.]

10.  Lot's  salvation  is  an  image  of  salvation  with
the  utmost  difficulty.  But  the  delay  of  his  faint
heartedness  is  raised  to  its  highest  power  of  double
heartedness  in  the  history  of  his  wife.  She  is  the
example  of  a  worldly  mind,  which  turns  back  from
the  way  of  salvation,  and  through  its  seeking  jfter
the  world  falls  into  the  fire  of  judgment.*  In  this
sense  the  Lord  has  set  Lot's  wife  as  a  warning  example

*  [The  looking  back  shows,  on  the  one  hand,  her  doubt
and  unbelief  of  the  divine  warning,  and  on  the  other,  that
her  heart  was  still  clinging  to  the  lusts  of  Sodom,  and  that
she  was  an  unwilling  follower  of  the  rescuing  angels.
KURTZ,  p.  195.— A,  G.]


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


(Luke  xvii.  32).  We  may  perceive  that  even  Lot  was
sensibly  depressed  as  to  the  earnestness  of  his  faith,
through  the  ridicule  of  his  sons-in-law,  who  regarded
him  as  a  jester.

IT.  The  Dead  Sea  serves  to  complete  the  sym
bolic  meaning  which  is  peculiar  to  the  whole  land  of
Canaan.  The  whole  land  is  an  illustration  of  the
divine  word,  and  of  sacred  history,  and  thus  the  Dead
Sea  in  particular,  i~  the  glass  of  the  divine  judgment.
As  a  monument  of  the  miraculous  judgment  it  stands
opposed  to  the  lied  Sea,  which  is  the  monument  of
the  miraculous  deliverance.  So,  likewise,  as  the  sea
of  the  old  covenant,  it  stands  opposed  to  Genessaret,
the  sea  of  the  new  covenant.  In  the  description  of
the  Dead  Sea,  however,  we  must  guard  against  those
ancient  assumptions,  of  the  apples  of  Sodom,  etc.,  al
though  some  onesided  apologies  for  these  traditions
of  the  Dead  Sea  have  appeared  again  in  recent  times.
[It  is  interesting  to  note  how  often  this  event  is
referred  to  in  the  New  Testament,  not  only  directly
but  incidentally.  The  phrases  (lee  from  the  wrath  to
iint(Ucnchable  lire,  the  description  of  the  sud-
denncs-:  and  completeness  of  the  judgment,  and  its
eternal  duration  in  the  smoke  of  their  torment,  which
aseendcth  for  ever  and  ever.  All  have  a  more  or
le-s  direr!  :<  Terence  to  this  event. — A.  G.]

is.  The  early  rising  of  Abraham,  his  hastening  to
the  place  where  he  stood  before  Jehovah,  and  his  silent
look  to  the  smoking  vale  of  Sidilim,  is  a  sublime  and
impressive  picture.  There  stands  the  mourning  priest,
lonely  and  silent  in  the  morning  light,  as  Jeremiah
rat  upon  (he  ruins  of  Jerusalem.  Now  lie  saw  that
there  were  not  ten  righteous  in  Sodom,  but  knew
from  the  re.-eiie  of  Noah  from  the  Hood,  and  felt  con
fident  indeed  that  his  intercession  had  not  been  in


1'.).  I;i  th-'  (lest ruction  of  Sodom  ami  Gomorrah,  as
in  the  primitive  miracles  in  Egypt,  and  in  the  biblical
miracles  generaliv,  the  correspondence  between  the
miraculous  divine  providence  and  the  intellectual  and
natural  conditions  upon  the  earth  must  not  be  mis
taken.

20.  Lot  and  his  daughters.     It  is  a  psychological
fact  that,  in  human  nature,  especially  in  beginners  in
the  age  of  faith  or  those  who^e  sensuous  nature  is
strong,  after  a  great  tension  of  the  life  of  faith,  of
spiritual  elevation,  great  and  dangerous  reactions  oc
cur,  during  which  temptation  may  easily  prove  cor
rupting  to  the  man.

21.  Moab  and  Amman.     Sec  the  Bible  Dictiona
ries.     "  De  Wette,  Tueh,  Knobel,  explain  the  narra
tive  as  a  fiction  of  Israelitish  national  animosity,  A:e.
(See  above.)     When,  however,  later  debauchery  (Num.
ii.  25)  and  impiety  (c.  g.  2  Kings  iii.  26  if)  appear  as
fundamental  traits  in  the  character  and  cultus  of  both
people,  we  can  at  least  hold  with  equal  justice,  that
these  inherited  sins  came  with  them  from  their  origin,
as  that  the  tradition  of  their  origin  has  moulded  their
character."

22.  LoCa   disappearance.     The   chastising   hand
of  God  is  seen  in  the  gravest  form,  in  the  fact  that
Lot  is  lost  in  the  darkness  of  the  mountains  of  Moab,
as  a  dweller  in  the  caves.     But  it  may  be  questioned
whether  one  is  justified  by  this,  in  saying  that  he  came
to  a  bad  end,  as  DF.LITZSCII  does  in  a  detailed  descrip
tion,  after  a  characteristic  outline  by  F.  0.  V.  MOSERS
(p.  400,  comp.    KIEL,   p.    167).     His  not  returning
poor  and  shipwrecked  can  be  explained  upon  better
grounds.     In  any  case  the  testimony  for  him,  2  Pet.
ii.  Y,  8,  must  not  be  overlooked.     There  remains  one
light  point  iu  his  life,  since  he  sustained  the  assaults


of  all  Sodom  upon  his  house,  in  the  most  cxtrcmo
danger  of  his  life.  [It  may  be  said,  moreover,  that  his
leaving  home  and  property  at  the  divine  warning,
and  when  there  were  yet  no  visible  signs  of  the  judg
ment,  and  his  flight  without  looking  back,  indicate
the  reality  and  genuineness  of  his  faith. — A.  G.]
His  two-fold  intoxication  certainly  has  greater  guilt
than  the  one  intoxication  of  Noah.  His  two-fold  sin
with  his  daughters  may  involve  greater  difficulty  than
the  act  of  Judah.  Both  analogies  show,  however,
that  in  judging  so  ancient  a  character  we  may  cnsily
place  them  too  strictly  in  modern  points  of  view.
True,  he  appears,  in  comparison  with  Abraham,  with
whom  he  once  entered  upon  the  path  of  the  faith  of
the  promise,  in  a  light  similar  to  that  in  which  Esau
appears  in  relation  to  Jacob.  He  might  have  suffi
cient  piety  to  save  his  soul,  but  he  was  no  man  of  the
future,  who  could  found  a  line  of  blessing;  he  was
too  much  like  the  mass,  too  much  under  the  senses,
and  too  much  involved  in  respect  to  worldly  things
for  such  a  calling.  "With  the  history  of  Lot,"  DF.
LITZSCII  remarks,  "the  side  line  from  llaran  is  com-
plcted,  and  the  origin  of  two  people  who  are  inter
woven  in  the  history  of  Israel  is  related."

23.  The  destruction  of  Sodom  an  example  of  the
later  destruction  of  the  Canaaniies.

24.  The  prudence  which,  in  the  life  of  Abraham,  ap
pears  as  a  sinful  prudence,  and  yet  susceptible  of  being
sanctified,  appears  in  the  lives  of  his  kindred  as  a  family
trait  of  the  children  of  Therah,  in  Lot  and  his  daugh
ters,  as  well  as  in   Laban.     But  it  takes  on  in  them
the  expression  of  refined  cunning,  and  thus  becomes
manifoldly  and  positively  ungodly.    Thus  Lot  himself
chose  the  region  of  Sodom;  thus  he  flatteringly  ail-
dressed   the  Sodomites  as  brethren;   thus   he  offers
them  his  daughters  as  a  substitute,  probably  from  an
ironical  expression  of  a  prudent  foresight  that  they,
controlled    by   their    demonic    and    unnatural    lusts,
would   reject  his   proposal :    but  his   daughters  use
criminal    cunning  to  obtain   offspring.     This  ince-t,
however,  appears  in  a  milder  light  when  set  in  con
trast  with  the  sin  of  Sodom.

25.  I'ASSAVANT.      These   cities   arc   represented
throughout  the  old  covenant  as  types  of  the  most
severe  judgments  of  God  (Jer.  xli.    11;    1.  40,  etc.)
And  there  is  again  another  word  in  the  old  cove
nant,  a  wonderful,  mysterious  promise,  spoken  con
cerning  these  places,   which,  at  the  very  least,  alle
viates  the  eternity  of   the    pain,   and    for  the  sake
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  redeemer  of  all  mankind,
abbreviates  the  endurance  of  the  heavy  judgments
of  the  poor  heathen  (see  Ezek.  xxxix.  25  ;  Jer.  xxix.
14;   xlviii.  47;  Ezek.  xvi.).     [The  passages  quoted
by  no   means  sustain  the    inference  which  is    here
drawn   from   them  ;    and  the  inference  lies  in  the
face  of  the  general  and  constant  testimony  of  the
Scriptures.     The  words  of  our  Lord,  Matt.  xi.  24,
place  the  destiny  of  these  places  and  of  the  heathen
in  its  true  light. — A.   G.]     That  farther  prophetic
vision  of  the  s'eer  appears  to  cast  new  light  upon  the
farther  fate  of  Sodom,  when  he  says:   This  water
flows  out  towards  the  east  and  down  into  the  plain,
and  goes  into  the  sea  (salt  sea),  and  when  it  comes
into  the  sea  its  waters  shall  become  healthful  (cb.
xlvii.  8  ff. ;    1  Pet.  iii.  19  f . ;    iv.  G).  [The  following
learned  and  impressive  note  on  the  destruction  of
Sodom,  kindly  furnished  me  by  its  author,  will   be
read  with  the  deepest  interest. — A.  G.]

NOTE  ON  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  SODOM — ITS  SUD
DENNESS—THE  DEEP  IMPRESSION  IT  MADE  ON  TUE  AN«


CHAP.   XVIII.— XIX.    1-38.


CIENT  MIND — ITS  FREQUENT  MENTION  IN  THE  SCRIP
TURES — TACITUS — THE  ARABIAN  TRADITION.  —  "As
the  subversion  by  God  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah."
Such  is  the  constant  style  of  reference  in  the  Bible.
See  Dcut.  xxix.  22;  Is.  xiii.  19;  Jer.  xlix.  18  ;  Jer.  1.
40 ;  Lam.  iv.  6  ;  Amos  iv.  11.  Its  ever  occurring  in
the  same  form  of  words,  shows  that  it  was  a  prover
bial  or  traditional  saying ;  and  this  reveals  to  us  how
vividly  the  awful  event  had  stamped  itself  upon  the
human  memory.  It  is  always  described  in  language
of  its  own.  The  peculiar  Hebrew  word  is  used  iu
the  same  way  of  no  other  catastrophe.  The  word
n^an^a  denotes  utter  subversion  or  reversal, — the
bringing  of  a  thing,  and  all  that  belongs  to  it,  in  the
direct  opposite  of  its  former  condition.  Land  has
become  water,  fertility  barrenness  and  salt,  beauty
deformity,  fragrance  and  freshness  a  vile  and  loath
some  putridity.  It  is  not  simply  decay  and  ruin,
but  an  overthrow  total  and  remediless.

These  cities  arc  thus  referred  to  as  a  standing  warn
ing — a  judgment  of  God  visible  from  generation  to
generation.  It  is  a  region  cursed  by  the  Almighty, —
doomed  ever  to  bear  the  marks  of  its  dreadful  visita
tion,  to  which  Peter  refers,  2  Pet.  ii.  6,  ical  Tr6\fts  2o5o-
fjiu>t>  KO.L  Yofj.opfa.';  Tftpptiaas  KATA2TPO4>H  KareKpi-
vev,  inoSeiyfj.0.  Tedfiicvs:  "the  cities  of  Sodom  and
Gomorrah  he  condemned  with  an  overthrow,  when  he
reduced  them  to  ashes  and  set  them  forth  as  an  ex
ample."  The  Greek  word  kalastrophe  is  the  exact
counterpart  of  the  Hebrew  nzsnE,  having  the  same
peculiar  intensity  of  meaning  as  used  in  this  connec
tion.  In  Judo  7.  the  language  is  still  stronger —
TrpoKewTai  Sfly/j.0.  nvpbs  ctiW/ov :  "  they  are  set  forth
as  an  example,  undergoing  (uTre'xoixrai)  the  sentence
of  eternal  fire."  This  eternal  fire  does  not  mean  the
punishment  of  the  inhabitants  in  another  world  (though
;he  event  itself  may  be  regarded  as  the  first  type  of
Hell,  the  first  suggestive  glimpse  to  the  human  mind
of  that  awful  doctrine),  but  has  primary  reference  to
their  long  earthly  desolation.  The  language  most
graphically  expresses  the  condition  of  those  doomed
plains,  ns  showing  the  signs  of  their  fearful  burning,
age  after  age,  air'  ciluvos  tis  alSiva.

These  regions  were  very  near  to  Jerusalem,  al
most  if  not  quite  visible  from  the  highest  places  ;  and
this  accounts  for  the  prophet's  frequent  appeal  to
them,  fh  S^y/^a,  et  in  tcrrorcm.  How  fearful  is  the
allusion  to  it  made  by  Ezekiel,  xvi.  46 ;  where  the
adulterous  Judah  is  told  to  remember  the  startling
proximity  of  this  her  younger  or  smaller  sister,  so  early
auricd  in  volcanic  fires :  "  Thine  elder  sister,  Samaria,
that  dwclleth  on  thy  left  (the  N.  W.),  and  thy  smaller*
sister,  Sodom,  and  her  daughters  (the  other  cities  of
the  plain),  that  lie  upon  thy  right."  How  awful  the
reminiscence  of  this  lost  sister  Sodom  lying  for  so
many  ages  under  the  sulphurous  waters  of  the  Dead
Sea,  with  all  the  burnt  district  a  short  distance  to  the
right  of  Jerusalem,  and  ever  presenting  that  terrific
warning,  the  SeT-y^a  wvpbs  aluviov,  to  the  oft  rebel
lious  city.

We  find  elsewhere  evidence  of  the  deep  impression
this  early  divine  judgment  made  upon  the  ancient
•nind.  The  language  of  Tacitus,  Hist.  v.  7,  could
only  have  come  from  some  vivid  tradition  prevailing
in  the  East  and  brought  thence  to  Rome:  Haudpro-
cul  inde  campi,  quos  ferunt  olim  ubcrcs,  maynis  quo

*  n:a~n  "mnx.  The  term  generally  denotes
juniority,  and  it  mny  be  so  literally  taken  hero,  since  the
origin  of  Jerusalem  may  have  been  historically  older  than
that  of  Sodom.— T.  L.  J


urbibus  habitatos,  FULMIXUM  JACTU  arsisse,  ct  mancrt
vestigia  terramquc  ipsam  specie  torridam  vim  frvyi-
feram  perdidisse  ;  nam  cuncta  atra  ct  mania  nelut  in
CINKREM  vanescunt.  Ego,  sicut  inclitas  quondam  itrbes
IGNE  CCELESTI  flagrassc  conccsserim,  etc.  There  is
something  in  the  language  strikingly  resembling  that
of  Peter  and  Jude.  Compare  T&citua1  fulminumjactu
arsisse — ignc  ccelesti  flagrasse — manere  vestigia,  with
the  St^yua  irupus  almviou,  and  in  chicrem  with  T«{ip&*
eras.  They  appear  to  be  the  set  terms  in  all  descrip
tions.  Nothing  but  an  early,  most  vivid  impression
could  have  produced  such  fixedness  and  vividness  in
the  language  of  the  tradition.

The  same  feature  of  constancy  in  terms  for  which
no  others  could  be  an  adequate  substitute,  appears
remarkably  in  the  notices  of  the  Koran,  which  strong
internal  evidence  shows  must  have  come  from  tradi
tion  independent  of  the  0.  T.  scriptures.  It  mani
fests  itself  especially  in  one  word  ever  found  in  con
nection.  It  is  the  Arabic  c^jUCflJ'...*.,'! ,  which  is,

etymologically,  the  same  with  the  Hebrew  ri3'5i"i53,
and  used  in  a  similar  manner  as  a  participial  noun.
The  peculiarity,  however,  is,  that  in  the  Arabic  the
primary  sense  which  belongs  to  it  in  this  connection
had  long  ceased,  so  that  no  traces  of  it  arc  anywhere
else  found,  even  in  the  remains  which  \ve  have  of
ante-Mohammedan  writing.  Both  the  form  and  the
peculiar  sense  have  become  obsolete  in  all  other  ap
plications  of  the  root.  In  this  recurring  phrase,  as
used  of  these  ancient  cities,  it  has  aciiuhvd  something
like  the  force  of  a  proper  name  as  a  well  known  ap
pellative,  taking  its  place  along  with  Midlan,  Egypt,
Hud,  Thamud,  and  other  names  of  places  that  tra
dition  gives  as  having  been  specially  visited  with  the
divine  vengeance.  Thus  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  are
ever  called  Al-mow-ta-fe-kat,  "the  overturned."  Aa
in  Koran  Surat,  liii.  51-55,  where  it  occurs  with
others  given  as  proper  names:  "Ami  that  he  de
stroyed  Ad,  and  Thamud,  and  left  no  remainder;
and  also  the  people  of  Noah  before  them,  and  the
Mow-ta-fe-kat  (the  overturned)  he  cast  down,  and
that  which  covered  them  covered  them."  The  last
clause  of  this  passage  is  meant  to  be  intense  in  its
repetition  :  that  is,  there  is  no  conceiving  the  horrors
under  which  they  lay  ;  "  that  which  covered  them
covered  them," — no  tongue  can  tell  it.  So,  also,
Koran  Ixix.  9 :  "  thus  went  on  Pharoah  and  those
who  were  before  him,  the  Mow-ta-fe-kat  (the  over
turned),  in  their  sin."  Thamud  and  Ad,  as  usual,  had
been  mentioned  just  before.  The  constant  introduc
ing  of  the  Mow-ta-fe-kat  along  with  these,  which  are
peculiar  Arabic  traditions,  shows  that  the  story  of  the
"  overturned  "  cities  had  a  common  origin  with  them,
and  was  not  derived  from  the  Hebrew  scriptures.

The  usage  appears  still  more  clearly,  Koran  ix.
71,  where  the  term  in  question  occurs  in  connection
with  the  people  of  Ad,  and  the  wicked  in  the  daya
of  Abraham,  who  is  the  peculiar  Mohammedan  patri
arch  :  "  L)id  there  not  come  to  them  the  story  of
those  who  were  before  them — the  people  of  Noah
and  of  Ad,  and  of  the  people  of  Abraham,  and  of
the  inhabitants  of  Midiau,  and  of  'the  Overturned'
(the  Mow-ta-fe-kat\  whose  messengers  came  unto
them  with  their  prophecies  ? "  Now  what  makes
this  the  more  striking  is  the  fact  (as  before  indicated)
that  although  the  Arabic  root,  t&Si\ ,  or  y*5oiiO,
is,  in  all  other  cases  (and  these  are  quite  frequent),
used  solely  in  its  secondary  meaning  of  falsehood
(coming  from  the  primary  sense  of  subversion,


441


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


ing  upx'uk  down,  through  the  intermediate  ideas  of
contrariness  or  opposition,  nb  invcrtendo,  pervcrten-
do),  in  those  special  usages  from  the  Koran,  and
others  like,  them,  the  word  ever  goes  baek  to  its
primitive  Hebrew  sense,  being  taken  precisely  as
TH  and  r.zsn^  in  the  Uible.  If  the  Hebrew  verb
had  had  a  hoth-pa-hel  form,  its  participle,  -Enr.tt  .
moth-hap-pel:  =  iwlofck,  would  be  almost  identical
with  the  Arable  word  so  constantly  used  for  this
purpose  (•!!  this  sense)  and  for  no  other.  Evidently
it  was  an  archaism  in  the  days  of  Mohammed,  and
this  accounts  for  its  being  used  as  a  proper  name,  in
which  form  it  had  become  iixed  against  change  and
substit;;t>:i.  The-  root  is  used  in  the  same  manner
throuirhout  the  Syriac  version,  but  in  this  branch  of
the  Shemitic  it  "had,  in  all  its  applications,  kept
nearer  to  its  old  primary  sense  preserved  in  the
Hebrew.

What  shows  that  it  was  an  antique  phrase  in
Arabic,  or  that  yjjot  (or  "EH)  had  lost  the  sense
of  subversion  in  all  other  applications,  and  that  its
emplovment  as  a  proper  name  in  this  particular  con
nection  came  from  traditional  preservation,  is  the  fact
that  even  in  translating  the  Old  Testament,  the  Jew
ish  Arabic  interpreters  never  use  it,—  not  even  in
those  places  where  the  Hebrew  ^EH  and  PCSriE
would  have  immediately  suggested  it  as  the  more
liitin-i  word;  and  this,  too,  notwithstanding  that
they  frequently  irive  to  an  Arabic  term  a  rarer  He
brew  sense.  thus  Kabbi  Saad  does  not  employ  it
in  this  very  passage,  Isaiah  xiii.  l'.',but  uses,  instead,
the  more  common  Arabic  verb,  ^J^s  ,  to  express
the  sense  of  overturning  which  is  given  by  rcEno  :
JJ  US'.  Now  in  the


Arabic  verb  cJot  ,  the  letter  n  (or  $D)  of  the  He
brew  has  been  .-ol'tened  into  X,  but  there  can  be  no
doubt  of  the  two  words  being  ctymologically  identi
cal.  So,  too,  in  the  Koran,  sometimes,  the  Hebrew


sense  of  the  antique  Arabic  Rxcjj^Jt,  is  clearly
given  in  different  and  more  common  Arabic  words.
As  in  Surat  xv.  7:1,  7-1,  where,  speaking  again  of
this  very  judgment,  and  the  manner  of  it,  it  says  :
"And  a  'sudden  storm  took  them  at  sunrise,  and
we  wide  Ike  highest  parts  of  it  to  be  the  lowest,
L&lsLu  L^-JU  UJjtS?  (that  is,  we  turned  it
upside  down),  "and  we  rained  upon  them  stones  of
burning  marl"—  a  volcanic  earthquake  and  a  lava
shower.

This  standing  epithet  occurs,  Lam.  iv.  6,  in  the
same  connection  and  in  the  same  way  ;  that  is,  in
the  nature  of  a  proper  name,  though  there  it  has
the  form  of  the  participle  perfect  of  "EH.  It  i;
nr^Enn  ^3,  "Sodom  the  overturned."  Our
English  "translation  of  the  whole  passage  is  far  from
being  clear  :  "  Greater  than  the  punishment  of  the
sin  of  Sodom  which  was  overthrown  as  in  a  moment,
and  no  hands  stayed  on  her"  :  C"l^  "2  SDH  SO  .
In  this  passage  there  is  an  uncertainty  as  to  the  ety
mology  and  meaning  of  the  word  *lbn,  but  that
interpretation  is  to  be  preferred  which  is  most  ^  in
keeping  with  the  ideas  of  suddenness,  or  quick
alarm,  that  make  so  graphic  a  feature  in  all  allusions
to  the  event,  whether  Hebrew  or  Arabic.  Geseniu
makes  *bn  from  Vn  (torquere),  and  gives  it  th
lense  :  non  immissce  sunt  manus,  "  no  hands  wer


cnt  upon,  or  against  her  "—meaning,  hands  of  the
3iiemy.  Rabbi  Tanchum's  Arabic  commentary  is  to
he  same  effect :  "  Of  Sodom  it  is  said  here,  that
here  did  not  come  upon  her  the  hand  of  man,  but
he  was  overt  it  rued,  at  one  UMP,  by  the  divine  com
mand  ;  the  word  being  the  same  as  that  in  Jer.  xxiii.
19,  '  on  the  head  of  the  wicked  shall  rush  (~"rP)
i  rushing  tempest,  bbinns  ISO  (a  whirlwind  xlnng
or  hurled},  and  also  as  found  Ecclcs.  v.  12,  15-
*lb"in  nS"i  ti"1,  there  is  a  sore  evil  (an  iiiipcnd-
ng  or  threatening  evil)  that  I  have  seen  under  the
iun."

It  may  be  a  question  here,  however,  whether
D'1"!'1  refers  to  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  or  to  the
hands  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  doomed  city.  If  we
place  the  accent  on  the  ultimate,  ibn  may  be  from
~lbn,  and  this  would  give  us  the  rendering,  "  when
no  hands  were  weak  in  her" — that  is,  suddenly,
when  they  were  in  their  full  strength  and  security.
Or  the  same  general  idea  may  be  obtained  from
bin ,  if  we  advert  to  its  primary  sense,  which  we
find  very  clearly  in  the  Arabic  JLs»  •  It  is  a  curv
ing  motion  combined  with  the  spiral  or  oblique,
Hence  the  sense  of  pain  as  expressed  by  twisting,
wringing  (torquere).  It  is  used  to  denote  the  most
intense  anguish,  the  wringing  of  the  hmuh  in  de
spair;  which  is  the  language  employed  by  the
Pesehito  Syriac  version  to  render  airopia  (distress  or
perplexity),  Luke  xxi.  2.").  No  hands  were  wrung
in  her.  So  sudden  was  the  storm  that  there  was  no
time  for  lamenting  over  their  doom.

All  this,  too,  is   expressed   by  the  way  in  which

the  frequent  Koranic  word,  &-^VA^O  >  i-s  urtc(l  w'hcn
sudden  judgments  arc  described,  and  especially  this
particular  event.  It  is  rendered  sometimes,  punish
ment,  or  pain.  It  is  also  used  of  the  crash  of  the
thunder,  frag  or  tonitru  ;  but  in  its  most  literal
sense  it  denotes  one  sharp  cry  or  shriek.  Or  it  may
be  rendered,  a  shock.  Thus  in  the  passage  before
quoted,  Surat  xv.  7-'i :  "  a  sudden  storm  or  shock
took  them  at  sunrise  "  (comp.  Gen.  xix.  2::).  The
same,  verse  88  of  the  same  Surat,  "took  them  early
in  the  morning."  Though  literally  denoting  one
sudden  scream  of  terror,  it  is  taken  for  the  came,
the  thunderstorm  or  earthquake  that  produces  it.
Thus  is  it  most  impressively  employed  to  represent  the
suddenness  and  surprise  of  the  judgment  that  came
upon  those  people  of  Lot,  as  the  Sodomites  arc  styled,

,;Ls  ,j.x>  LgJ  to  iitX^j  JLsxx^o    ill  Lo,

"  only  one  shock ;  there  was  in  it  no  waiting,"  no
recovery.  Or  it  may  be  rendered,  "  only  one  cry,
and  all  was  over."  The  remcdilessncss,  as  well  as
the  suddenness,  is  still  more  graphically  set  forth  in
the  use  of  similar  language,  Surat  xxxvi.  25  :  "  Lo,
one  cry,  and  they  are  all  still  "—literally,  burnt  out,

JocLss-,  extinguished,  dead.  So,  again,  Surat
liv.  31  :  "  Lo,  we  sent  upon  them  one  shock  (one
shriek)  and  they  are  all  burnt  stubble."  In  the  same
manner  is  it  used  of  the  day  of  judgment,  xxxvi.
53 :  "  One  shock,  or  one  cry,  and  they  (the  risen
dead)  are  all  before  us."  For  other  similar  passages
with  similar  applications,  see  Koran,  xi.  70,  97 ;
xxiii.  43  ;  xxix.  39;  1.  41  ;  xv.  73,  83  ;  Ixiii.  3.

In  the  most  express  terms  do  the  Scriptures
assign  this  catastrophe  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  to
the  judicial  action  of  God,  the  Lord  of  nature.  No


CHAP.    XVIII.— XIX.   1-38.


445


language  can  be  clearer:  "Jehovah  rained  upon
them  lire  from  Jehovah  out  of  heaven,"  Gen.  xix.  24.
And  yet,  in  perfect  consistency  with  this,  may  we
regard  it  us  brought  about  by  natural  causes,  though
belonging  to  those  great  movements  in  nature  which
marked  the  primitive  period  of  our  present  earth,
or  before  its  constitution  became  settled  in  that
comparative  calm  which  leads  the  scoffer  to  say  that
"  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  begin
ning.''  This  fearful  fizsfiTa  ,  or  overthrow,  has  im
pressed  indelible  "vestigia"  (to  use  the  language
of  Tacitus)  on  the  region  in  which  it  took  place  ;  but
no  less  sharp  and  incisive  are  the  marks  it  has  left
in  the  Oriental  traditions,  and  the  peculiar  language
to  which  it  has  given  rise  in  them  all.  It  sent  one
sharp  cry  through  the  ancient  Eastern  world,  and
that  cry  has  echoed  down  to  us  through  other  chan
nels  than  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  On  this  account
has  the  peculiar  language  employed  been  so  minutely
traced,  as  furnishing  evidence  of  the  riinute  credi
bility  of  an  event  so  ancient,  and  of  the  strong
impression  it  must  have  made  at  the  time.  It  was  a
divine  judgment,  a  divine  revelation  in  the  earth,
too  awful  and  too  unmistakable  to  allow  much
diversity  of  language  in  describing  it,  and  it  is  this
constant  manner  of  telling  the  fearful  story  which
separates  it  widely  from  the  shadowy  and  changing
mythical,  with  which  some  would  compare  it. —
T.  L.]

irOHILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs.
The  xviiith  ch.  Abraham,  the  sixth  Lot.     Promi
nent  points  in  Abraham's  life:  1.  the  great  vision;
2.  the  feast  of  the  angels ;  3.  the  faith  in  the  promise ;
4.  the  intercession  for  Sodom.     Prominent  points  in
the  life  of  Lot :   1.  the  entertaining  of  the  angels ;  2.
the  moral  resistance  of  the  assault  of  the  whole  city
of  Sodom ;  3.  his  faith,  and  his  mission  to  his  two
sons-in-law ;  4.  his  emigration  with  his  family  in  dis
tress,  before  the  judgment.     The  revelation  of  grace
and  of  wrath. — The  connection  of  the  announcement
of  salvation  with  the  announcement  of  judgment. —
The  oak  grove  of  Mamrc,  and  the  burning  Sodom. —
As  Abrahi.m  saved  Lot  the  first  time  through  war,
BO  the  second  time  through  his  intercessory  prayer. —
Abraham  and  Lot  in  their  different  positions. — In
their  last  position  with  respect  to  each  other  (Abra
ham  the  friend  of  God,  Lot  the  fugitive  from  Sodom,
[etc.). — The  connection  of  the  manifestation  to  Abra
ham  and  Lot. — The  great  manifestation  of  God,  in  the
.ife  of  Abraham,  in  its  great  significance  :  1.  A  reve-
,tion  of  the  incarnation  of  God,  of  the  future  Christ,
ad  at  the  same  time  of  the  angelic  world ;  2.  a  reve-
ition  of  the  great  sign  of  the  coming  redemption,
id  of  the  corning  judgment.

1.  Section.  The  appearance  of  Jehovah  in  the
\k  grove  of  Jfamre,  and  the  promise  of  the  birth  of
Isaac _(ch.  xyiii.  1-15).  The  great  manifestation  of
id,  in  the  life  of  Abraham,  is  the  most  striking  sign
n  the  old  covenant  of  the  incarnation  of  God. — The
east  in  the  oak  grove  of  Mamre;  a  sign  of  the  incar-
lation  of  God. — Abraham  in  the  oak  grove  of  Mamre;
sat  in  his  power  of  intuition,  and  great  in  his  activ-
ty— Herein,  also,  a  type  of  Christ.— As  in  all  great
•haracters,  the  contrasts  of  nature  are  here  reconciled
nd  removed. — Abraham's  hospitality  as  to  its  pecu-
ar  traits. — The  real  method  and  spirit  of  hospitality
"lists  alone  in  this,  that  in  or  with  the  stranger  we


receive  the  Lord  himself. — How  well  love  and  hu
mility  qualify  Abraham  to  be  the  giver  of  the  feast,
the  one  who  makes  ready  the  meal  and  then  stands
and  serves. — Sarah  as  the  housewife. — Sarah's  doubt
ing  laughter,  and  believing  astonishment. — Ver.  lo.
The  promise  of  Isaac:  1.  a  promise;  2.  an  endless  ful
ness  and  succession  of  promises. — Sacred  oak  grove:
sign  of  the  sacred  temples,  especially  of  the  Gothic
Cathedral, — the  sacred  feast,  sign  of  the  most  sacred
meals. — Abraham's  friendship  with  God  as  hospitai-
ity :  1.  God  as  the  guest  of  Abraham  in  this  world  ;  2.
Abraham  as  the  guest  of  God  in  the  other  world  (to  sit
down  with  Abraham,  Abraham's  bosom). — STAEKK:
Ver.  1  (The  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God,  at  first,
is  not  through  a  natural  nor  even  through  a  personal
union,  but  through  a  voluntary  and  casual  union,
since  he  took  from  his  free  love  a  body,  or  rather  the
form  of  a  body,  for  a  time). — To  this  person  are
ascribed  divine  works,  omnipotence  (vers.  10,  14),
omnipresence  (vcr.  13),  the  power  to  execute  judg
ment  (ver.  25). — The  virtue  of  hospitality  is  becoming
to  Christians,  and  should  be  practised  especially  by
believers  and  the  pious  (Heb.  xiii.  2  ;  Is.  Iviii.  7 ;  1
Pet.  iv.  9  ;  Job  xxxi.  32  ;  Rom.  xii.  13  ;  Gal.  vi.  10);
but  still  they  must  use  circumspection  here  also. — We
should  not  permit  strangers  to  rest  in  the  streets,  but
receive  them  and  show  them  kindness  and  help  (Rom.
xii.  13),  to  which  now  innkeepers  are  in  a  peculiar
sense  obliged  (Luke  x.  34,  35). — Vcr.  15.  From  the
fact  that  Sarah  makes  no  further  reply,  but  receives
her  rebuke  patiently,  we  may  see  that  she  recognizes
her  fault,  and  that  God  had  rebuked  it,  hence  she
also  is  graciously  preserved,  that  she  should  be  at
the  same  time  the  type  of  the  free  New  Testament
Church  (Gal.  iv.  22,  27,  31)  and  the  mother  of  believers
(1  Pet.  iii.  6).  How  severely,  on  the  other  hand,  Zach-
arias  was  chastised  for  his  unbelief  (see  Luke  i.  20.) —
A  Christian  must  never  measure  the  promise-'  of  God
by  what  seems  good  to  him,  but  give  to  the  power
of  God  the  preference  over  his  reason  (/ech.  viii.  6  ;
Luke  i.  37  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  C). — GERLACII  :  In  regard  to
Sarah.  Even  her  unbelief  which  lay  concealed  within
her,  must  be  brought  out  into  the  light,  since  it  was
now  designed  to  confirm  her  confidence  in  the  prom
ise,  which  should  not  be  fulfilled  without  her  faith. —
SCHRODER,  (LUTHER)  :  Now  there  is  hospitality  in  all
places  where  the  church  is.  She  has  always  a  com
mon  purse  and  storehouse,  according  to  Matt.  v.  42,
and  we  should  all  so  serve  her,  and  furnish  her,  not
only  with  doctrine  but  also  with  kindness,  and  that
the  spirit  and  the  flesh  may  here  at  the  same  time  find
refreshment  and  consolation  (Matt.  xxv.  35,  40). —
RAMBACH:  Ver.  8.  As  Abraham's  tent  is  here  the
house  in  which  the  Son  of  God  and  his  angels  are
entertained,  so  is  his  bosom  the  common  place  of
rest  for  the  blessed  in  the  other  world  (Luke  xvi.  22).
— The  power  and  susceptibility  for  intuition,  and
the  absorbing  and  even  careful  attention  to  busi
ness,  which  were  separated  in  Mary  and  Martha  (Luke
x.  39),  are  here  seen  united  in  the  same  person. —
That  they  must  necessarily  cat,  would  be  in  opposition
to  their  spiritual  nature,  but  the  power  to  eat  was  given
with  the  human  form. — Ver.  9.  Now  follows,  as
LUTHER  says,  the  table  talk,  that  nothing  might  bo
wanting  in  this  description,  and  that  the  whole  world
might  know  that  this  feast  was  not  so  passed  as
among  the  monks,  who  must  keep  silence  at  tho
table.

2.  Section.  The  revelation  of  God  concerning
Sodom,  and  Abraham's  intercessory  prayer  (vcrs.  16-
33). — 1.  The  communing  of  God  with  liimself  before


440


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


the  revelation  (ver.  IS),  or  the  revelation  of  God
throughout  the  i'ruit  of  the  highest  divine  purpose,  as
the  creation  of  man ;  2.  the  reason  for  this  revela
tion  (ver.  19);  3.  its  contents  (vers.  20,  21);  4.  its
results  :  a.  the  departure  of  the  men  to  the  judgment
(ver.  22) ;  b.  the  intercession  of  Abraham  (vers.  23-
30).  — Abraham  the  friend  of  God  (child  of  God,  ser
vant  of  God,  the  intimate  confidant  of  God). — The  cry
of  the  sin  of  Sodom. — The  intercession  of  Abraham  for
Sodom  as  the  first  long  prayer  and  intercession  com
municated  to  us:  1.  awakened  or  animated  by  the
consciousness  of  salvation  which  was  given  to  him;
2.  as  a  pattern  for  all  intercessory  prayers. — The
great  importance  of  intercession. — Its  features:  1.
The  boldness  of  faith ;  2.  caution  in  the  fear  of  God  ;  3.
truthfulness  of  love. — Even  the  apparently  unavailing
intercessions  are  not  in  vain. — STARKE:  Ver.  2u.
They  (the  Sodomite*)  went  so  far  that  the  greatness
of  their  sin  had  become  a  proverb  (Is.  i.  '.)  ft'.),  and
therel'oiv  they  were  destroyed  4"0  years  earlier  than
the  Canaanites. — The  sins  crying  to  heaven  are  espe
cially,  in  the  Holy  Scriptures:  1.  the  shedding  of
innoce:it  b'ood  (ch.  iv.  10;  Job  xvi.  18);  2.  the
sin  of  Sodom;  15.  the  oppression  of  the  people  of
God  (KK.  iii.  7),  especially  of  widows  and  orphans.
(H\.  xx.  2'2,  27;  Sirach.  xxxv.  I'.i);  4.  the  withhold
ing  of  the  hire  of  the  laborer  (James  v.  4). — Therc-
i'oiv  lie  could  not  understand  by  the  righteous  little-
children  ;  for,  although  they  are  not  righteous  in
their  natural  state,  they  could  not  have  committed
.-ins  crying  to  the  heavens. — They  were,  however,
included  with  those  destroyed,  without,  it  may  lie
hoped,  any  injury  to  their  bli>.~>edness,  or  (so  will  it
be  added  by  some  in  an  uncertain  way)  because  God
saw  that  they  would  tread  in  the  footpaths  of  their
fathers.  [Hut  the  Scriptures  never  allude  to  this
knowle(l'_ri'  of  God  as  the  ground  of  his  act-,  either
saving  or  destructive. — The  same  event  bears  a  very
dill'eivnt  aspect  and  meaning  as  sent  to  the  wicked
and  the  good,  e.  g.,  death.  So  with  these  judgments.
—  A.  <!.]  The  nearer  Abraham  comes  to  God  in
his  prayers  and  intercession,  the  more  clearly  he
reeo^iii/.es,  his  nothingness  and  entire  unworthi-
ness.  A  glorious  fruit  of  faith. — The  people  of  So
dom,  indeed,  could  not  think  what  was  determined
in  the  purpose  of  the  watchers  concerning  them,  and
how  Abraham  stood  in  the  breach. — Ver.  :>2.  This
I  will  is  here  repeated  six  times,  to  intimate  the  truth
of  God,  his  earnest  will,  that  he  does  not  will  the
death  of  the  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should  turn
unto  him  and  live  (Ezek.  xviii.  11,  32). — Bin.  TUB.:
Intercession  for  a  brother  believer,  even  for  the  god
less,  a  Christian  duty. — Mark  this,  ye  godless,  that  ye
and  the  world  stand  only  for  the  sake  of  the  righteous.
— We  must  come  before  God  with  the  greatest  rever
ence,  and  in  the  deepest  humility  of  heart  bow  our
selves  before  his  sacred  majesty. — The  righteous  are
highly  esteemed  in  the  sight  of  God. — GEIU.ACH  :
Ver.  19.  Abraham,  I  have  known  him,  i.  e.,  chosen
in  my  love.  As  Amos  iii.  2  ;  John  xvii.  3.  Ver.  23.
The  righteous  who  dwell  together  with  the  godless
in  any  place,  restrain  the  judgments  of  God. — Zix-
ZENDOII.K  :  I  cannot  tell  in  terms  strong  enough  the
blessed  privilege  of  speaking  with  our  Lord. — CAL-
•WER  HANDBUCII  :  But  in  this  prayer  lie  concealed
deep  mysteries,  which  render  conspicuous  to  us  the
worth  and  importance,  in  the  sight  of  God,  of  the
righteous  in  the  world,  and  on  the  other  hand  helps
to  explain  the  wonderful  patience  and  long  suffering
of  God  towards  the  evil,  and  even  towards  heaven
crying  sinners. — SCHRODER:  CALVIN:  If,  therefore,


oftentimes  temptations  contend  in  our  hearts,  and
things  meet  us,  in  the  providence  of  God,  which  seem
to  involve  a  contradiction,  let  the  conviction  of  his
righteousness  still  be  unshaken  in  us.  We  must
pour  into  his  bosom  the  cares  which  give  us  pain
and  anxiety,  that  he  may  solve  for  us  the  difficulties
which  we  cannot  solve. — I'AS.SAVANT  :  When  I  other
wise  can  do  nothing,  when  I  am  without  any  influ
ence,  and  free  access,  without  any  means  or  any
power,  then  still  I  may  do  something  through  tLe  in
tercessory  prayer.

3.  £<.-<-!ti>n.  j'7iC  entrance  and  mjourn  of  the
angels  in  SoJoin,  and  t/tc  find  manifestation  of  its
depravity,  in  contrast  with  the  belter  conduct  of  Lot
(ch.  xix.  1-11).  There  arc  parts  of  this  section
which  do  ttot  seem  fitted  for  public  reading  and
homiletical  treatment.  But  the  examination  of  the
whole  history  may  be  joined,  by  practical  and  homi
letical  wisdom,  to  the  section,  vers.  1-3. — How  sin
is  radically  a  beginning  of  the  most  extreme  corrup
tion  :  1.  it  is  against  nature,  and  tends  to  the  most
unnatural  abominations  ;  2.  a  delusion,  which  tends
to  fury  and  madness  ;  3.  an  act  of  disobedience,
which  issues  in  rebellion  against  God;  4.  an  impu
dence  and  falsehood,  tending  even  to  blasphemy. —
Hellish  night-scenes  in  the  earliest  antiquity. — The
blinding  of  the  godless  that  they  could  not  find  what
they  sought. — SI'AKKK:  (It  i-  incredible  that  Lot,  as
the  Rabbins  think,  sat,  in  the  gate  to  judge  (I)eut.
xvi.  18)  and  had  been  a  judge  in  Sodom.) — A  Chris
tian  must  behave  towards  every  one,  especially
towards  the  pious,  with  humility  and  reverence
(Horn.  xii.  in). — The  holy  angels  dwell  cheerfully
with  the  pious. — Ver.  5.  (Lev.  xviii.  22,  24;  xx.  13.)
Has  not  experience  shown,  that  if  here  and  there
songs  and  prayers  have  been  offered  in  a  home  at
evening  by  devout  persons,  there  have  been  those
who  have  run  together  before  the  windows  and
made  them  the  matter  of  sport  and  ridicule,  while
on  the  other  hand,  in  other  homes  every  kind  of
night  revel  has  been  endured  and  approved. — Ver.
8.  The  oiler  of  Lot  did  not  spring  from  evil,  but
from  the  greatest  confusion  and  alarm  ;  still  he  did
wrong  (Rom.  iii.  8  ft1.).  We  see  from  this:  1.  that
Lot  is  not  to  be  praised  as  some  have  thought  (Am
brose,  Chrysostom) ;  2.  that  he  was  not  guilty  of  a
sin  which  removes  him  beyond  the  grace  of  God. —
Ver.  it.  An  unreasonable  reproach.  Had  there
been  now  ten  such  strangers  in  Sodom,  they  would
not  yet  have  been  destroyed. — -The  gracious  requital.
Lot  ventured  all  to  preserve  his  guests ;  now  he  ex
periences  how  he  is  saved  by  them.*  It  belongs  to
no  man  to  prevent  a  greater  sin  by  a  lesser. —
Whoever  will  judge  and  punish  the  rough  world,
must  be  a  disturber  and  excite  an  uproar. — Godless
people  are  only  hardened  the  more,  through  kind  and
gracious  warnings. — Woe  to  him  whom  God  strikes
with  spiritual  blindness,  f — GERLACH  :  The  very  na
ture  of  the  trial  which  God  adopts  consists  in  this,
that  he  honors  to  the  very  last  the  liberty  lent  by
him  to  the  creature,  and  does  not  punish  to  destruc
tion  until  the  most  extreme  abuse  of  freedom  has
been  made  evident. — CALWER  HANDBCCH  :  Sins  and
shameful  vices  appear  in  their  fullest  disgraccfulness
in  the  night. — Lot  appears,  also,  to  have  before
rebuked  their  sinful  movements,  wherefore  they
reproach  him,  the  stranger,  with  a  lust  of  power  —

*  [God's  people  are  safe  when  angels  stand  sentries  at
the  doors.  Bush.— A.  G.]

t  [It  is  the  use  of  God,  to  blind  and  besot  those  whom  he
means  to  destroy.  Dp.  Hall ;  Bush. — A.  G.]


CHAP.    XVIII.— XIX.    1-S8.


447


The  nearer  the  judgments  of  God,  the  greater  the
security  of  sinners.  [The  scriptural  signs  that  the
judgment  is  near  are :  1.  that  God  abandons  men  or
communities  to  out-breaking  and  presumptuous
sins ;  2.  that  warnings  and  chastisements  fail  to
produce  their  effect,  and  especially  when  the  person
grows  harder  under  them  ;  3.  that  God  removes  the
good  from  any  community — so  before  the  flood,  so
before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem ;  and,  4.  the
deep,  undisturbed  security  of  those  over  whom  it  is
suspended. — A,  G.]

4.  Sec/ion.  LoCs  salvation.  Sodom's  destruction
(vers.  12-29).  Lot's  rescue  from  Sodom:  1.  his
obedience.  The  first  message  of  deliverance  (vers.
12-11).  2.  Then,  even,  scarcely  saved,  on  account
of  his  delay  and  fears  (vers.  15-22).— The  test  of
Lot  in  the  judgment  of  Sodom :  1.  Saved,  indeed,
but,  2.  scarcely  saved,  and  that  with  difficulty.
Urged,  importuned  by  the  angels.  Paralyzed  by
his  terror  in  the  way.  His  wife  lost.  [Almost  saved,
and  yet  lost. — A.  G.]  His  daughters. — In  the  his
tory  of  Lot,  also,  the  unity  of  the  family  is  again
illustrated :  1.  In  its  great  importance;  2.  in  its  final
extent. — Vcr.  15.  The  danger  in  delaying  the  flight
out  of  Sodom,  i.  e.,  of  conversion,  or  also  of  separa
tion  from  the  society  of  the  wicked. — STARKE:  (Ver.
12.  It  may  be  what  belongs  to  t/tee,  and  could  there
fore  relate  to  his  possessions,  especially  his  herds.
Still,  some  doubt,  and  think  that  he  bore  away  as  a
gain  or  spoil  only  his  own  life  and  the  lives  of  his
family,  while  he  must  have  left  the  herds  behind  in
his  haste.) — Ver.  14.  Acts  xvii.  18. — Sodom  a  type
of  the  spiritual  Babylon  (Rev.  xi.  8).— Whoever  will
not  be  borne  away  and  crushed  with  the  godless,  he
must  early  and  cheerfully  separate  himself  from
them,  while  he  has  time  and  leisure  *  (Rev.  xviii.  4).
— Ver.  16.  God  shows  his  goodness  not  only  to  the
pious,  but  to  those  who  belong  to  them. — Upon  ver.
21.  How  God  excuses  the  weakness  of  the  believer,
if  he  walks  with  God  in  uprightness.! — As  Zoar  was
spared  id  the  intercession  of  Lot,  so  afterwards  the
house  of  Laban  was  blessed  for  Jacob's  sake,  and
Potiphar  for  the  sake  of  Joseph,  the  widow's  meal-
chest  and  cruse  of  oil  for  the  sake  of  Elijah. — That
Zoar  was  made  better  by  the  recollection  of  the  ter
rible  overthrow  of  the  cities  may  be  inferred  from  the
fact  that  it  was  still  standing  at  the  time  of  Isaiah  (Is.
xv.  5). — (A  comparison  between  Sodom  and  Rome  in
eight  particulars :  beautiful  region ;  security ;  iniqui
ties  ;  crying  to  the  heavens ;  the  true  faith  persecuted ;
announcement  of  its  judgment  (Rev.) ;  the  rescuing
of  the  pious  ;  punishment  by  fire;  the  rising  of  the
sun  ;  the  enlightening  of  the  Jews,  etc.  H.  C.  Ram-
bach.) — (The  Dead  Sea:  Troilo  and  others  say:  I
could  compare  it  only  with  the  jaws  of  hell.) — The
fearful  judgment  upon  Lot's  wife:  1.  She  died  imme
diately  ;  2.  in  her  sins  ;  3.  an  unusual  death ;  4.
remained  unburied,  an  example  of  the  vengeance
of  God.— Luke  vii.  32,  33 ;  ix.  G2. — Vcr.  28.  It  is
calm,  pleasant  weather  with  the  children  of  God,
when  it  storms  with  the  godless  (Exod.  x.  22,  23 ;
Ps.  xxxii.  10). — GERLACII:  A  living  type  of  those
whom  the  messenger  of  the  Lord  warns  before  the
future  punishment  (Luke  xvii.  28,  29). — The  word  :
haste  and  escape  for  thy  life  ;  this  is  the  deep  under-

*  ["  The  man  who  will  not  consult  for  his  own  safety,  and
who,  oven  being  warned  to  beware,  yet  exposes  himself  by
nis  sloth  to  ruin,  deserves  to  perish."  Calvin.— A.  G  ]

t  [It  is  no  new  thing  for  the  Lord  to  grant  sometimes,
as  an  indulgence,  what  he  does  not  approve.  Calvin.  See
Jacobus.— A.  G.]


tone  which  must  be  heard  through  all  preaching  of
the  gospel.— CALW.  HAND.  :  The  mercy  of  the  Lord
saves  Lot  and  his  family,  as  a  brand  plucked  from
the  burning.  Until  Lot  is  saved  the  Lord  himself
restrains  his  hand. — SCHWENKE:  Ver.  15.  The  deep
impression  which  the  declaration  of  the  near  judg
ment  made  upon  him  was  greatly  weakened  by  the
mocking  words  of  his  sons-in-law  ;  he  delays,  waits,
puts  off.  Flesh  and  blood,  and  the  clinging  to  the
beautiful  city,  struggle  with  obedience  to  the  revela
tion  from  God. — SCHRODER  :  The  entrance  of  Lot
into  the  vale  of  Siddim  corresponds  to  his  exodus
(Baumgarten).* — How  the  first  universal  judgment
of  the  flood,  like  the  partial  judgment  upon  Sodom
and  Gomorrah,  serves  in  the  Scriptures  as  an  exam
ple  and  type  of  all  the  divine  judgments,  and  espe
cially  of  the  last  judgment  (Luke  xvii.  28  if. ;  2  Pet.
ii.  6,  etc.).— HEUSER:  Destruction  of  Sodom:  1.  A
judgment  from  heaven ;  2.  a  sign  for  the  earth. —
TAUBE  :  The  eternal  righteousness  of  God  in  the
judgment  upon  Sodom  and  Lot's  wife.  The  free
mercy  of  God  in  saving  Lot  and  his  family.

5.  Section.  LoCs  disappearance  and  his  descend
ants  (vers.  30-38).  The  30th  verse  is  alone  fitted
for  public  use.  But  from  this  a  faint  light  may  be
thrown  upon  the  whole  night-scene.  Lot's  disap
pearance  as  a  dweller  in  caves. — Lot's  history  illus
trates  the  truth,  that  whoever  will  build  a  house,
must  count  the  cost :  1.  His  inspired  exodus  from
Haran  with  Abraham,  and  journey  through  Canaan
to  Egypt,  with  ever-increasing  wealth  ;  2.  his  settle
ment  in  the  valley  of  Sodom  ;  3.  his  asylum  in
Zoar;  4.  his  disappearance  from  the  scene  in  the
caves  of  the  mountains. — How  should  tho  pious  fear
temptations  when  the  mind  is  unbent  alter  extreme
spiritual  tension. — Man  falls  easily  into  the  sins  of
the  flesh  when  the  ideals  of  his  intellectual  life  arc
dissolved  and  lose  their  power. \ — Ruth  a  Moabitess.
— STARKE  :  Lot's  daughters.  The  reason  which
moved  them  was  rather  a  groundless  prejudice  than
wantonness  of  the  flesh.  (Anxiety  lest  the  human  race
should  perish.  It  may  be,  also,  that  they  were  only
Lot's  step-daughters,  if  he  had  married  in  Sodom  a
widow  who  was  the  mother  of  two  daughters). —
CRAMER  :  Loneliness  in  retired  places  allures  not
only  to  good,  but  also,  and  much  more,  to  great  sins
(Eccles.  iv.  10). — Whoever  will  avoid  sin  must  avoid
the  occasions  which  lead  to  it. — [Strong  drink  the
fruitful  source  of  untold  degradation  and  sins. — A.
G.] — GREGORY  I. :  There  was  a  moral  sense  in  Lot,
but  it  was  confused  and  disturbed.  Intoxication  de
ceived  Lot,  who  was  not  deceived  in  Sodom  ;  the
flames  of  lust  burn  him,  whom  the  flames  of  sulphur
did  not  burn. — LUTHER  :  Some  think  that  Lot  died
soon  after,  from  distress  and  sorrow,  before  his
daughters  were  delivered,  because  otherwise  he
would  not  have  consented  that  names  should  be  given
them  which  should  constantly  remind  him  of  his  in
cest. — He  who  was  not  deceived  in  Sodom,  drunken
ness  deceived ;  who  in  Sodom,  the  very  school  of
unchastity,  had  lived  chastely,  in  the  cave  was  guilty
of  incest ;  suffered  shipwreck  in  the  harbor. — Ruth
a  Moabitess.  We  may  infer  from  Is.  xi.  14  ;  Jer.
xMii.  47  ;  Dan.  xi.  41,  that  there  will  be,  besides,

*  [The  beauty  and  fruitfulness  of  nature  attracted  him,
and  ho  chose  it  without  thinking  whether  it  would  work
injury  to  his  soul.  Tho  same  power  now  prevents  him  from
earnestly  heeding  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  BAUMGARTEN,
p.  213.— A.  G.]

t  ["Those  who  have  been  wondrously  preserved  from
temporal  destruction,  may  shamefully  fall  into  sin."  Ja
cobus.— A.  a.i


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES.


some  conversions  from  the  Moabitcs  to  Christ. — The
children  of  Ammon  were  characterized  by  similar
sins  with  those  of  their  brother  Moab,  and  therefore
have  a  similar  future. — Drunkenness  is  the  way  to
all  bestial  lusts  and  ncis. — (Holy  descendants  from
polluted  beds.  Judg.  xi.  1  ;  Ileb.  xi.  32.)— SCHRODER  :
The  thought  that  they  should  remain  alone  in  case
of  their  father's  early  death  was  one  to  them  very
hard  to  bear.  Then,  indeed,  they  would  be  entirely
helpless  and  without  protection  in  the  wide  woi Id.
If  no  husband  was  granted  to  them,  they  would  at
least  have  children,  sons,  who  could  give  protection
and  hcl;>. — (AV.  Intnl.:  The  following  riddle  has
been  constructed  from  the  history:  My  father,  thy


father,  our  children's  grandfather ;  my  husband,  thy
husband,  the  husband  of  our  mother,  and  yet
one  and  the  same  man.) — BAUMGAKTKN:  This  is  tho
crime  of  Lot's  daughters,  that  to  secure  descend
ants,  and  those  of  pure  blood,  they  thought  incest  a
small  offence. — HERBERGER:  For  one  evil  hour,  one
must  bear  the  sword  at  his  side  a  whole  year. —
THE  SAME:  Still  even  such  children  (illegitimate  and
springing  from  incest)  should  not  despair.  *!od  can
do  great  things  even  through  the  illegitimate  Jephtha
(Judg.  xi.  1  11'.).  True  repentance  makes  all  well.
[But  true,  repentance  is  never  separated  from  true
faith.  Faith  in  Christ  and  repentance  make  all  well.
-A.  (l.J


EIGHTH    SECTION.

Abraham  an!  Al'iin'ich  of  Gerar.     Ills  and   Sarah's  renewed  exposure   through  his  human,  calcu
lating  prudence,  ax  formerly  in  J'-ijypt  before  Pharaoh.     The  JJidne  preservation.
Abraham's  intercession  for  Abimelech.

CIIAPTKK   XX.    1-18.


1  Ami  Abraham  journeyed  from   thence  toward  the  south1  country  [the mid-day],  and
dwelled  between  Kadesh  and  Shur,  and  sojourned  [as  a  stranger  even]  ill  Gerar  [lodging-place,

2  pi'lirrim'src-st].      And  Abraham  said  of  Sarah  his  wile,   She  is  my  sister;   and  Abimelech

3  [father  of  the  king,  or  father-king]  king  of  Gerar  sent  and  took  Sarah.     But  (!od  [r.iohimj  came
to  Abimclech  in  a  dream  by  night,  and   said  to  him,  Behold,  thoii  art  ltd  a  dead  man
[thou  diosi,  art  <Vrui],    for  the  Voman  which   tliou   hast,  takon;     for  she    is  a  man's    wife

4  [is married].      Bui  Abimelech  liad  not  come  near  her:   and  lie  said,  Lord,  wilt  thou  slay

5  also  a  righteous  nation?      Said  he  not  unto  me,   She  /•*  my  sister?   and  she,  even  she
herself  said,  He  -is  my  brother:   in  the  integrity  of  my  heart,  and  the  innoeency  of  my

G  hands  have  I  dune  this.  And  God  said  unto  him  in  a  dream,  Yea,  I  know  that  thou  didst
this  in  the  integrity  of  thy  heart;  for  I  also  withheld  thee  from  sinning  against  me:

7  therefore  sud'ered  I  theo  not  to  touch  her.  Now  therefore  restore  the  man  his  wife  ;
for  he  is  a  prophet,''  and  he  shall  pray  for  thee,  and  thou  shall  live:  and  if  thou  restore

S  her  not,  know  thou  that  thou  shall  surely  die,  thou  and  all  that  are  thine.  Therefore
Abimelech  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and  called  all  his  servants,  and  told  all  these

It  things  in  their  cars  :  and  the  men  were  sore  afraid.  Then  Abimelech  called  Abraham,
and 'said  unto  him,  What  hast  thou  done  unto  us?  and  what  have  I  offended  thee,  that
thou  hast  brought  on  me  and  on  my  kingdom  a  great  sin?  thou  hast  done  deeds  unto

10  me  that  ouirht  not  lobe  done.     And  Abimelech  said  unlo  Abraham,  "Whal  sawest  thou

11  [evil],  that  thou  hast  done  this  thing?     And  Abraham  said,  Because  I  thought  [said],
Surely  the  fear  of  God  [Elohim]  is  not  in  this  place;   and  they  will  slay  me  for  my  wife  a

12  sake.     And  yet  indeed  she  is  my  sister;   she  is  the  daughter  of  my  father,  but  not  the

13  daughter  of  my  mother;  and  she  became  my  wife.     And  it  came  to  pass  when  God

[Kloldm]  caused  me  to  wander  [to  go  on  pilgrimages;  a  striking  plural.3  The  manifestations  of  God  here  and
there,  caused  me  to  go  here  and  there,  pilgrimages]  from  my  father's  house,  that  I  said  unto  her,
This  is  thy  kindness  which  thou  shall  show  unto  me;  at  every  place  whither  we  shall

14  come,  say  of  me,  He  is  my  brother.     And  Abimelech  took  sheep  and  oxen  [small  an*
large  cattle],  and  mcnservants,  and  womenservants,  and  gave  them  to  Abraham,  and  re-

15  stored  him  Sarah  his  wife.      And  Abimelech   said,  Behold,  my  land  is  before  the*

16  [stands  open  to  thco]  :  dwell  where  it  pleaselh  thee  [is  good  in  thine  eyes].     And  unto  Sarah  M
said,  Behold,  I  have  given  thy  brother  a  thousand  pieces  of  silver:  behold  he  is  to  thee


\i


CHAP.    XX.    1-18.


449


[for]  a  covering  of  the  eyes  unto  all  that  are  with  thee,  and  with  all  other :  thus  she

Was  reproved  4  [sot  right,  proved  to  bo  a  wife,  not  unmarried].

_    So  Abraham  prayed  unto  God  [Eiohim]  :  and  God  [Elohim]  healed  A birnclr-i,   and
13   his  wife,  and  his  maidservants:   and  they  bare  children.     For  the  Lord6  had  fast  closed
up  all  the  wombs  of  the  house  of  Abimelech,  because  of  Sarah,  Abraham's  wile.

['  Vcr.  l.-CJiH  .     The  region  south  cf  what  was  afterwards  called  Jiulah.— A.  G.]

I"  Vcr.  7.-X-V23  ,  from  ^3  ,  to  cause  to  buLUe  up  as  a  fountain.     Kcil,  Dclitzsch,  and  olhors  derive  it  from  a  root
K3  and  XB,  to  breathy  and  thus  make  uali  to  mean  one  inspircd-who  speaks  that  which  is  inbreathed  of  God  -A   G  1
-,,  t ;  n  is  Plural  in  punctuation,  agreeing  grammatically  with  C^'ix  .     Vav,  however,  may  be  regarded
as  the  third  radical,  and  the  verb  may  then  really  be  singular.     MfitriiY,  p.  323.— A.'G.]

[i  Vcr.  LB.-nnsb  ,  1  pcrs.  fern.  sing.     Kiphal,  an  unusual  form.     Sec  the  Exegctical  note  -A   C  1
|5  Vcr.  18.— Jchuvah.— A.  G.]


GENERAL  rilELrillXAKY   REMARKS.

1.  The  present  chapter  and  the  following  ap
pear  to  favor  strongly  the  documentary  hypothesis.
The  cases  in  which  the  name  Jehovah  appears  (chap.
xx.  IS  and  xxi.  1),  have,  according  to  Delitzsch,  all
the  traits  of  explanatory  additions  of  the  completes
But  Knobel  accepts,  aside  from  the  text  of  the  original
writing  (chap.  xxi.  2-5),  a  twofold  enlargement,
which  should  be  ascribed  to  the  Jehovistic  writer,
but  which  he  must  have  derived  in  great  part  from
Elohistic  records  designed  to  complete  the  original
record,  and  only  in  part  from  a  completing  Jeho
vistic  record  (p.  180,  181).  We  leave  the  hypothesis
of  different  records  to  rest  upon  its  own  basis,  but
shall  enquire  how  far  the  choice  in  the  names  of  God
may  be  explained  from  the  text  itself,  and  this  with
out  regard  to  the  hypothesis  iti  question.

_2.  The  repetition  of  the  fact  that  Abraham  pro
claims  his  wife  to  be  his  sister  has  been   noticed
already.    In  Knobel's  view,  the  Jehovistic  writer  has
recorded  the  occurrence  with  Sarah  already  (ch.  xii.
11-20),  because  he  could  then  do  it  independently,
which  could  not  be  the  case  here.     "  This  conjecture,"
remarks   Delitzsch,    "is   certainly  plausible   if  one
ascribes  the  Elohistic  portions  to  a  peculiar  source
but  it  is  equally  probable  that  the  same  event  mi°-ht
occur  twice  in  the  life  of  Abraham."     Keil,  on  the
other  hand,  justly  brings  into  prominence  the
distinction  between  the  two  histories.     The  first  dif-
Iculty,  viz.  that  Abraham,  after  having  experienced  in
Egypt  the  reproach  of  this  deed,  should  here  repeat
t  once  more,  cannot  be  removed,  if,  as  Delitzsch
iolds,  Abraham  in  Egypt  had  condemned  himself  to
emtence  after  the  reproof  of  Fharoah;  if  even  he
valked  under  a  general  sense  that  he  had  done  wron~
is  Delitzsch  and  Baumgarten  state  the  case,     [It  is
-,  is;o  iot  insupposible,  surely,  in  the  light  of  experience
p-t  (Von  hat  even  such  a  believer  as  Abraham  should  have

f  ill  n  again  iuto  tbc  samc  sin :  that  he  should  have
,:  Lw  j  epeatcd  the  act  even  when  he  was  walkin«-  under  the
jvffite  ense  of  his  wrong-doing  in  the  first  instance.— A  G  1
jot  till  'ur  history  gives  us  the  key  (v.  13)  why  this  act' was
,E  Q,,  Jpeatcd.  Abraham  could  not  make  an  explanation
•Pharoah,  concerning  the  determination  to  pro-
iim  his  wife  his  sister  while  among  strangers,  but
bimelcch  has  instilled  the  necessary  confidence  in
m,  ior  this  confidential  explanation.  But  if  the
tfing  was  then  founded  and  chosen,  the  event  mi  "lit
ider  possible  circumstances,  have  often  occurred
iless  Jehovah  had  interfered  to  prevent  this  ven-
re  of  an  unfounded  and  exaggerated  confidence-
picn  we  have  already  above  distinguished  from  a
J3re  exposure  of  Sarah.  It  must  be  taken  into


t

u,

'

>L

S


account,  moreover,  that  Abraham  had  recently  re
ceived  fearful  impressions  of  the  godless  beings  in
the  world,  which  naturally  filled  him  with  suspicion
The  second  difficulty  consists  in  this  :  that  Abimelech
should  have  found  delight  in  taking  Sarah  who  was
ninety  years_  old,  into  his  harem.  According  to
Kurtz,  her  still  blooming  or  now  rejuvenated  beauty
was  not  the  motive  ;  according  to  Delitzsch,  he  would
relate  himself  by  marriage  with  the  rich  nomadic
prince,  Abraham.  Beauty  and  the  consideration  of
rank  do  not  exclude  each  other;  spiritual  excellence
and  greatness  have  often  an  almost  magical  effect.
But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  here  it  is  not  said  that
the  beauty  of  Sarah  was  reported  to  Abimilech.  He
knew  only,  it  may  be,  that  there  was  a  sister  of
Abraham  in  his  tent,  and  brought  her  to  himself.

3.   We  are  here  told  again  that  Abraham  broke
up  his  tent,  and  journeyed  thence  towards  the  south—
the  land  towards  the  mid-Jay   (ch.  xii.  9  ;  xiii.    1)
According  to  eh.  xiii.  18,  he  had  a  permanent  abode
at  Hebron  ;  but  here  he  removes  from  Hebron  to  the
south.     This  is  to  be  explained  upon  the  ground  that,
for  the  northern  parts  of  Canaan,  the  south  designates
preeminently  the  land  of  Judah ;  but  for  the  land  of
Judah,  thus  for  Hebron  itself,  it  denotes  the  parts
towards  Arabia  Petrea,  Egypt,  and  the  western  shore
upon  the    Mediterranean.     The  southern  section  of
Canaan  (which  was  assigned  to  the  tribes  of  Judah,
Simeon,  and  Benjamin)  falls  into  four  distinct  parts,
through  the  character  of  the  country.    The  mountains
(inn)    or  highlands   form   the  central  part,  upon
whose   westerly   slopes   lies   a   hilly  country  which
gradually  sinks  to  the  plain  (nbsr),  while  towards
the  east  the  descent  (127?)  falls  oil'  into  the  valley
of  the  Jordan  and  the'  Dead  Sea,  but  towards  the
south,  the  mid-day  land  (353.,  Josh.  xv.  21  ;    com
pare  above  ch.  xii.  9 ;  xiii.  1)  forms,  in  several  distinctly
marked  terraces,  a  kind  of  first  step  to  the  mountains,
from  the  Petrcan  peninsula.     (See  GROSS,  in  Stud
undKrit.  1843,  p.  ]080.)   Here  Abraham  descends  to
the  stretch  of  country  between  Kadesh  and  Shur,
and  remained  a  long  time  about  Gerar.  whose  ruins
have  been  recently  discovered  by  Rowland,  under  the
name    Khirbct-el-Gcrar,    about   three    hours   south
easterly  from  Gaza,  in  the  neighborhood  of  a  deep
and  broad  wady,  which  takes  the  name  Dschurf-el-
Gerar."    Delitzsch.     Robinson  sought  Gerar  in  vain
see  SCHRODER,  p.  332.    "  Eusebius  and  Jerome  locate
the  place  about  twenty-five  Roman  miles  south  from
Eleutheropolis,  and  Sozomen  relates  that  there  stood
very  near  here,  in  a  winier  stream,  a  great  and  re
nowned  convent.     The  name  of  Marcian,  bishop  of
Gerar  (perhaps  in  the  convent),  appears  among  the


450


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


subscribers  iii  the  Council  of  Chalccilon  in  the  year
451."  "Gerar,  upon  the  way  from  Gaza  to  Elusa,
removed  about  three  hours  from  the  first-named
place."  Bunsen.  The  most  southerly  of  the  live
cities  of  the  Philistines  was  not  far  from  Beershcba.
The  king  of  Gerar,  Abimolech,  had  this  territory  in
the  lauds  of  the  Philistines,  according  to  ch.  xxi.  33.
In  ch.  xxvi.  1,  he  is  named  directly  as  a  king  of  the
Philistines.  According  to  Bcrtheau,  the  reference  to
the  Philistines  is  an  anticipation,  and  Delitzsch  also
finds  in  ch.  xxvi.  truces  of  a  later  hand,  though  not
recognizing  therein  an  actual  anticipation.  If  H'tibe
denotes  the  land  of  wandcrersflpr  of  strangers  (Ge-
senius),  the  name  denotes  those  who  came  from  the
coasts  into  the  interior,  in  distinction  from  the  earlier
Canaaniti  s,  and  the  inquiry  whether  the  later  Philis
tines,  of  the  times  of  the  Judges  and  Kings,  are  here
meant,  is  a  matter  by  itself;  in  any  case,  the  text
here  intimates  that  the  later  confederate  cities  of  the
Philistines  did  not  yet  exist.  Hitzig  and  Ewald  also
concede  Philistine  emigrations  into  Canaan,  or  tradi
tions  of  them,  before  Moses.  Knobel's  view,  that
Abraham  may  have  left  Hebron  from  a  similar
anxiety  with  that  which  led  Lot  (to  leave  Zoar),  is
arbitrary  in  the  highest  degree,  since  Abraham  was
in  covenant  with  the  mightier  men  in  Hebron.  Ac-
eordini:  to  Keil,  he  went  probably  to  find  better
pastures.  Ill  any  ease  the  pasture-ground  must  be
changed  from  time  to  time,  but  this  could  be  done
through  a  wider  range,  as  we  learn  from  the  history
of  Joseph  and  Mo.-es.  The  neighborhood  of  the
scene  of  the  terrible  judgment  upon  Sodom,  in  con
nection  with  other  unknown  motives,  may  have
determined  him  to  change  his  ivMdeiiee.  The  birth
of  Isaac  (ch.  xxi.)  and  the  offering  of  Isaac  (ch.  xxii.)
occur  during  his  iv.-idence  in  the  further  south:  but
then  he  dwelt  (ch.  xxiii.  1)  again  in  Hebron,  although
his  return  thither  from  Beersheba,  where  he  had  last
dwelt  (ch.  xxi.  '•'>'•>>),  is  not  recorded.

4.  Since,  from  the  promise  which  was  given  to
Abraham  in  the  oak-grove  of  Mamre,  to  the  birth  of
Isaac,  we  mu<t  reckon,  according  to  ch.  xviii.,  about
a  year,  Abraham  must  have  drawn  southwards  very
soon  after  the  overthrow  of  Sodom,  and  the  meeting
with  Abimelech  must  also  have  taken  place  at  an
early  date.  But  if  vers.  17,  18  seem  to  point  to  a
longer  time,  this  creates  no  real  difficulty,  since  the
sickness  of  the  house  of  Abimelech  may  have
lasted  a  long  time  after  Sarah  was  restored.  More
over,  our  history  illustrates,  in  two  respects,  what
may  introduce  the  further  history  of  the  birth
of  Isaac.  First,  we  see  that  Sarah  was  not  faded  in
her  appearance,  although  according  to  the  usual  sup
position  her  body  was  dead.  Then  we  see  how  her
usual  relation  to  Abraham  could  be  animated  and
strengthened  by  a  new  affection  resulting  directly
through  the  exposure  and  disturbance  to  which  it
had  been  subjected.


I:XEGETICAL  AND  CRITICAL.

1.  Abraham's  settlement  in  the  South,  especially
in  Gerar.  AbimelecKs  error,  and  the  admonition
of  God  (vers.  1-7). — Between  Kadesh  and  Shur.
— Kadesh,  see  ch.  xiv.  7 ;  Shur,  ch.  xvi.  7.  We
must  distinguish  between  this  dwelling-place  and  the
peculiar  sojourn  in  Gerar.  SCHRODER:  "Leaving his
herds  and  servants  behind  him  in  this  region,  he
himself  repairs  to  Gerar."  —  Abimelech  (Father


Cing,  or  my  Father  King).  A  standing  title  for  the
dugs  of  Gerar,  as  Pharoah  was  in  Egypt  and  Mcl-
chizedec,  or  Adonizedcc,  in  Salem  (see  Ps.  xxxiv.  1);
he  king  the  father  of  the  land. — God  (Elohim)
Dame  to  Abimelech. — It  is  presupposed  that  Abiine-
ech  had  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God ;  he  could  not
lave  known  him  as  Jehovah. — In  a  dream  by
night. — Knobel  finds  in  this  feature,  as  in  similar
cases,  that  these  communications  are  not  in  accord
ance  with  the  Elohistic  writer.  But  the  supposition
s  entirely  arbitrary.  The  prophetic  dream  of  the
night  is  generally  closely  connected  with  the  moral
reflections  and  longings  of  the  day.  It  is  in  full
agreement  with  tlu'  nature  of  dreams,  that  the  com
munication  should  be  made  in  several,  not  in  one
single  act  (see  (Jen.  xxxvii.  and  xli. ;  Matt.  ii). —
She  is  a  man's  wife  (married). — Literally,  ruled
jy  a  ruler,  or  her  lord.  His  sin  was  thus  marked  as
an  infringement  of  the  married  rights  of  a  stranger.
The  anxious  dream  appears  to  have  been  introduced
through  the  sickness  impending  over  him  (see  v.  17).*
— Wilt  thou  slay  also  a  righteous  nation? —
Dclitzsch  refers  the  C5  directly  to  the  adjective  right
eous.  A  nation  however  righteous,  i.e.,  although  it
is  righteous.  But  why  then  does  lie  use  the  term
people  or  nation  ?  Knobel  thinks  that  the  fate  of  the
Sodomites  was  floating  in  his  mind.  In  this  way  this
chapter  is,  through  a  delicate  psychological  feature,
connected  with  the  preceding.  Abimelech  is  conscious
of  innocence  as  to  his  subjective  state.  He  assumes
the  right  to  possess  a  harem  or  to  live  in  polygamy,
and  the  right  of  princes  to  bring  into  their  harem
any  unmarried  persons  of  their  territory.  He  is  con
scious  of  a  pure  heart,  and  asserts  that  his  hands  are
pure,  since  Abraham  and  Sarah,  through  their  own
declarations,  had  rendered  it  impossible  that  he  should
have  any  intention  to  interfere  with  the  rights  of
another.  She  is  my  sister.  [These  incidents  show
the  truth  and  the  itad  of  Scripture; — its  truth,  be
cause  it  docs  not  represent  the  patriarchs  as  exempt
from  human  infirmities ;  the  need  of  it,  because  the
best  of  men  were  not  able  to  make  for  themselves
even  a  correct  standard  of  moral  duty  (and  how
much  less  of  faith)  without  Scripture.  WOI-.DSWOKTH,
p.  yi. — A.  G.] — And  God  said  unto  him  in  a
dream. — The  transaction  continues  in  a  new  and
more  quiet  dream.  God  recognizes  the  apology  as
essentially  valid,  and  reveals  to  him  how  and  why  he
had  kept  him  from  touching  the  wife  of  a  prophet.
With  this  he  points  out  to  him  the  cause  of  his  sick
ness.  The  command  to  restore  the  woman  was  en
forced  by  a  threatening.  Although  he  was  guiltless
as  to  his  subjective  state,  it  is  a  reproach  to  him  that
he  acted  blindly,  and  betrayed  himself  into  the  danger,
cither  of  depriving  a  prophet  of  his  wife,  or  rather
of  being  punished  by  God  with  death.  [That  Abim
elech  thought  himself  innocent,  did  this,  as  he  says,
in  the  "b'CH  integrity  of  his  heart,  may  be  ex
plained  from  his  moral  and  religious  standpoint.
But  that  God  recognizes  his  deed  as  such,  and  still
says  to  him  that  he  can  only  live  through  the  inter
cession  of  Abraham,  thus  that  his  sin  was  one  worthy
of  death,  proves  that  God  regards  him  as  one  who
was  fitted  to  have,  and  ought  to  have,  deeper  moral
views  and  piety.  This  is  intimated  in  the  change  of
the  names  of  God  in  the  narrative,  and  noticed  in  the


*  [The  term,  however,  may  mean,  dead  as  to  progeny.
•which  is  rendered  probable  by  ver.  17.  God  healed  Abime
lech.  Jacobus.— A.  G.]


CHAP.    XX.    1-18.


451


text.     KEIL,  p.   168. — A.G.]     That  is   to  say,   th,
spirit  of  a  higher  moral  standpoint  comes  to  him  ii
his  dream,  and  opens  to  him  not  only  the  cause  o
his  sickness,  but  also  that  divine  preservation  seeuret
by  the  sickness,  as  well  as  his  duty  and  the  dange
ol'  death  in  which  he  was  still  moving.     With  this  he
receives  an  enlargement  of  his  religious  knowledge
"  At  first  C^nbx  (without  the  article)  the  Godhead  ir
a  general  sense  appears  to  him  (vcr.  3) :  but  Abiine-
lech  recognizes  in  the  appearance  the  Lord  ">jnx
upon  which    the    narrator  introduces  trn'Kxn  tlic
personal  and  true  God,  as  speaking  to  him  (vcr.  (5.)
-For  he  in  a  prophet.— The  spirit  of  prophecy
had  been  present  from  the  beginning  in  the  Scripture,
but  here  the  name  prophet  occurs  for  the  first  time!
How  could  this  aggravate  the  error  of  Abimelech,
that  Abraham,  whose  rights  he  ignorantly  had  vio
lated,  was  a  prophet  ?     Knobel  explains  that  the  sin
of  violating  the  rights  of  the  chosen  of  God,  which
he  had  in  idea  committed,  was  a  sin  against  God
himself.    Since  every  sin  is  a  sin  against  God  himself,
it  must  still  be  asked,  how  far  this  shows  the  danger
of  greater  guilt  ?  for  the  text  cannot  be  explained
under  the  idea  of  a  partiality  of  God  for  Abraham.
But  Abimelech  held  Abraham  and  Sarah  as  the  ordi
nary  nomads  of  his  time,  and  thought  therefore  that
he  could  blindly  lay  his  hands  upon  them :  he  thus
resisted  the  dim  impression,  which  they  must  have
made  upon  him,  of  a  higher  calling  and  aim.     A
prophet  should  be  received  in  the  name  of  a  prophet ;
the_sin  against  the  divine  in  the  prophet  was  a  sin
against  the  divine  in  his  own  conscience,  and  thus  in
a  special  sense  a  sin  against  God. — And  he  shall
pray  for  th.ee. — Abraham  had  already  appeared  as
a  royal  warlike  hero,  in  his  conflict  with  the  Eastern
igs.    We  have  learned  to  recognize  him  as  a  priest,
especially  in  his   intercessory   prayer    for    Sodom:
e   appears   preeminently  as  a  prophet.     But
here  intercession  appears  as  the  most  obvious  func
tion  ot  the  prophet.*     The  attributes  of  the  prophet
and  the  priest  are  thus  still  inwardly  united  in  one
as  this  mdeed  is  evident  from  the  altars  he  erected!
'2.   IILC  atonement  of  Abimelech  (vcrs.  8-10)  —
And   called   all  his   servants  (courtiers)  —  It
marks  the  frank,  open  character  of  this  God-feurin"
king,  that  he  humbles  himself  by  communicating  the
events  of  the   night,  before   his   courtiers.     ItV.s
humbling  m  the  first  place  to  confess  that,  in  spirit
ual  blindness,  he  had  made  a  dangerous   mistake
and  secondly  that  he  must  restore  to  the  stranger  his
wife.     It  speaks  well  also  for  his  household  and  his
court,  that  the  effect  of  his  reverence  communicates
itself  to  his  servants.— Then  Abimelech  called
Abraham.— He  addresses  him  before  his  people  for
Abraham  had  not  only  brought  him  into  danger  but
also  his  household  and  kingdom.     He  had  reason  to
complain  of  the  conduct  of  Abraham,  as  Pharaoh
be  ore  him  (ch.  xii.).     He  i,  thus  also  evidently  a
hold,  heroic  character,  who  does  not  shrink  from
declaring  against  Abraham  his  injured  sense  of  truth
aud  justice,    although  he  must  have  regarded  him
is  under  the  special  protection  of  God.     He    does
not  belong  to  the  kings  who  oppose  the  priests  in
skvvish  bigotry  -What  hast  thou  done  to  us  ?^
JJone  to  us.     Thus  he  values  the  unity  in  which  he
fees  that  he  is  bound  with  his  household  and  people"
e  reproaches  him  especially  with  this:  that  he
tmd  brought  lum  into  danger  of  bringing  sin  both


*  [Sec  Jer.  xxvii.  18,  referred  to  by  Bush.— A.  G.]


upon  himself  and  his  people.     This,  he  says,  is  im
moral.     But  since  he  takes   up  again   the  'words
What  have  I  offended  thee  ?  and  asks,  What
hast   thou  seen?  he   utters   in  a   discreet   form,
which  concedes  the  possibility  that  he  might  have
ignorantly  occasioned  the  wrong  of  Abraham,  his
consciousness  that  he  had  himself  indeed  given  no
occasion  for  this  deceitful  course.     Keil  and  Knobel
explain  the  words  what  hast  thou  seen?   what
hast  thou  in  thy  eye,  what  purpose  V     DKLITZSCH
(with  a  reference  to  Ps.  xxxvii.  '61  :  Ixvi.  IS) :   •'  It
is  preferable  to  take  the  word  in  its  usual  sense
through  all  time :  what  evil   hast  thou  seen  in  me
or  in  us,  that  thou  believest  us  capable  of  greater
evil  ?"— Abraham  said,  because  I  thought  (said).
-He  assumes  the  antecedent ;  I  acted  thus,  becauae
he  is  ashamed.     The  two  grounds  of  apology  follow.
The  first  runs  :  Because  I  spake  (thought  or  con
sidered  it  with  myself  and  with  Sarah).    [This  use  of
the  word  imax  is  fully  illustrated  by  Bush,  who
refers  to  Ex.  ii.  14 ;  1  Kings  v.  5  ;  Ps.  xiv.  1.—  \  G  ]
—Surely  the  fear  of  God  is  not  in  this  place.—
llns  special  motive  has  its  explanation  in  the  fact
that   he   had   so   recently  seen    the   destruction   of
Sodom.    The  fear  of  men  which  had  determined  him
so  to  act  in  Egypt,  was  awakened  afresh  by  this  de
struction.    But  he  palliates  the  offence  of  this  declara
tion  by  his  second  excuse.     He  explains  at  first  that
what  he  had  said  was  not  untrue,  since  Sarah   as  his
half-sister,  was  his  sister ;  and  then  why,  in  his  mi
gration  from  Haran,  he  had  arranged  with  Sarah  that
ihe  should  journey  with  him  from  place  to  place  under
.he  name  of  his  sister.     [Some  suppose  that  Sarah  is
;he  same  with  Iscah,  xi.  2',).     Bush  holds  that  Terah
lad  two  wives:  the  one  the  mother  of  Haran    the
Father  of  Sarah  and  Lot;  the  other  the  mother  of
Abraham.— A.  G.]  The  suppressed  feeling  of  an  end-
ess,  difficult   pilgrimage,  and  of  a  very  dangerous
situation,  reveals  itself  clearly  in  the  expressions  of
vers.  13,  14.     He  cannot  yet  speak  to  Abimelech  of
Jehovah,  his  covenant  God.     Still  less  was  it  neces-
ary  that  he  should  reveal  to  him  that  Jehovah  had
promised  Canaan  to  him.      Thus  he  says:    at  the
Command  of  God  I  entered  upon  my  wanderings
ie  speaks  of  his  theocratic  journeys  as  wanderings'
says  Elohim  instead  of  Haelohim,  uses  this  noun
with  the  plural  of  the  verbs,  that  he  may  make  him
self  understood  by  Abimelech.     "  This  use  of  the
substantive  with  the  plural  verbs  is  found  (in  the
Pentateuch  only  in  this  author,  ch.  xxxv.  7  ;  Ex  xxii
8  ;  xxx.  4,  8  ;  Josh.  xxiv.  19.     GKSEXIUS,  §  146    2  •
EWALD,  §  318  a.)"    Knobel.     Keil  finds  in  the  words
of  Abraham,  especially  in  the  plural  of  the  verb  a
certain  accommodation  to  the  polytheistic  standpoint
of  the  Philistine  king.    Delitzsch,  on  the  other  hand
remarks,  that  the  plural   connection  of  Elohim  is
found  in  passages  which  exclude  any  idea  of  accommo
dation,  or  of  any  polytheistic  reference ;  by  which
he  refutes  at  the  same  time  the  explanation  of  Schel-
Img,  that  the  Gods  of  the  house  of  Tcrah  are  to
be  understood  by  Elohim.     Under  the  expression
Wrrt  DTOiJ     [The   verb   here   is  not  necessarily
plural.     But  if  it  be,  it  is  only  an  instance  of  the
literal  meaning  of  Elohim,  the  eternal,  supernatural

powers,  coming  into  view.   MURPHY  p  3^8 A  G  1

we  understand  the  fact,  expressed  'with  some  reser
vation,  that  Haelohim,  through  a  plurality  of  special
manifestations  of  God,  which  he  received  here  and
there,  had  caused  him  to  move  from  place  to  place,
and  thus,  although  in  the  cxtremest  danger  which  his


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


wanderings  could  occasion,  extended  his  providence
over  him  still.     When,  ou  the  contrary,  Abimclech
(eh.  xxvi.  l^S)  calls  God  Jehovah,  Delitzsch  supposes
(p.  lO-'i),  but  without  certainty,  that  it  id  the  same
person,  and  besides  overlooks' the  difference  of  time,
in   which  a  longer   i;:;ercourse  may  have   made  the
Philistines  familiar  with  the  Abrahumie  ideas. — And
Abimelech  took  sV.eep  and  oxen.— He  is  satis-
tied,  and  acts  a'.K\!<,".:(>u.-ly  to  the  conduct  of  Pharaoh,
(eh.  xii.),  in  that    he  makes  Abraham  rich   presents
of  the  ancient   nomadic   goods.      The  departure   of
Abraham  from  Kgvpt   also    Sd  nis   to   iind   its    echo
here,     lie  appears  io  utter  a  mode-t  wish  that  Abra
ham  would  leave  (uTar.     [This  seems  a  forced  inter
pretation  of  the  words. — A.G.]     Still  he  may  dwell
in  his  territory  wliere  it  pleases  him. — And  to  Sarah
he  said. — "The  tliousan  1  pieces  of  .-ihcr,  i.  e.,  the
thousand  shekels  of  silver,  are  not  a  peculiar  present
::iadc  to  Sarah,  but  the  estimated  worth  of  the  pres
ent  (ver.   1  !  ),  and  de.-ignate  it  us  something  impor
tant.''  Knol.il.    So  also  Keil.    Delitzsch,  with  others,
distingui  lies  ..   special   p re:  ent  in   money,   "a  truly
royal  pre: ;  ut,  since  thirty  .-hekels  was  the  price  of  a
slave  (KA.  xxi.  ;!2)."     (A  thousand  shekels  of  silver
after  the  *heki  1  of  the  sanctuary  would  be  about  550
dollar;   according  to  the  ordinary  shekel,   less.     It
i-   imt  e  nain   which    is   intended    here.)     The   first
inlcrpreta'.ioii   is  preferable,  as  otherwise  the  second
present   must  have  In  en  made,  to  Sarah. — Behold,
he  is  to  thee  (or  that  shall  be  to  thee)  a  cover
ing  of  the    eyes. — This  diflicult    place  admits  of
d;f;'eivnt  explanations.   VIII:IM;A:  "If  the  words  are
referred  to  Abraham,  the  idea  seems  to  be  :  Abraham,
if  he  profe.-scs  to  be  the  hi:. -band  of  Sarah,  would  be  in
stead  of  a  veil  to  those  who,  looking  upon  Sarah  more
intensely,  may  be  inflamed  with  love  for  her.     (Thus
E\va!d;  sj  UKI.ITZSI  n,  p.-lol.)    Vv'c  picfer,  houever,
to  rel'er  the  words  to  the  money  icccived  by  Abra
ham.     As  if  he  says,   let  this  money,  paid  as  a  fine
to   Abraham,    prevent   any   from   desiring  thee  as  I
have  done.      lie  alludes  to  the  veil  usually  worn  by
women.     See   eh.    xxiv.    Ci.V     GKSKNUIS:  "This  is
:.n  expiatory  present  to  thee,  for  all  that  has  happened
to  thee,  and  to  Abram,  and  she  was   convinced  (of
her  fault)."     Knobel  similarly,  but  still  with  less  fit
ness,  and  at  the  conclusion,  "  thou  art  adjudged,  i.  e.,
justice  is  done  to  thee."    DKMT/SCII  and  KEIL  :  "  This
is  to  thee  an  atoning  present,  for  all  who  are  with
thee  (since  the  whole  family  is  di-graced  in  the  mis-
tie.--,  etc.)"     "It  is  to  be  explained,"  says  Knobcl,
"after  ""D    "E3  to  cover  one's  face,  so  that  he  ma)
forget  the  wrong  done  (ch.  xxxii.  21),  CnI35ia  T|3  H23
to  cover  the  face  of  the  judge,  so  that  he  shall  not
see  the  right."     Michaelis,  Baumgarten,  and  others,
explain  the  words  to  mean  a  present  for  the  purchase
of   a    veil    which    she    should  wear    in    the   future
[MuKi'iiv  urges  against  this  that  the  proper  word  for
veil  is  r^rri.     "  The  covering  of  the  eyes  is  a  figura
tive  phrase  for  a  recompense  or  pacificatory  offering
in  consideration  of  which  an  offence  is  overlooked.'
And  so  also  Jacobus. — A.  G.]    Since  Sarah  wore  no
veil  in  Egypt,  but  the  custom  of  veiling  the  faci
quickly  with  the  mantle  soon  after  appears  in  tin
history  of  Rebekah  (ch.  xxiv.  05),  this  thought  seem
quite  probable.    But  one  would  then  expect  a  specia
present  to  Sarah,  besides  the  one  to  Abraham.     De
litzsch  remarks,  "  this  would  be  bitter  irony."     13 u
the  irony  in  the  expression,  I  have  given  thy  brother
•  cannot,    however,    be    denied.      The    V3~PN"     als<
agrees  well  with  this  thought.     Besides,  it  must  b


onsidercd  that  Abimelech  had  to  relieve  himself  of
lis  displeasure  as  well  against  Sarah  as  agaiust
Abraham.  And  what  then  could  this  mean,  "thai
hall  be  to  thee  an  atoning  present,  and  for  all  with
hee,"  leaving  out  of  view  that  here  the  conjunctive

is  wanting  ?  As  a  covering  of  the  eyes,  designed
o  make  good  his  error  in  her  eyes,  the  great  present
vould  excite  rather  only  contempt.  The  atonement
vould  thus  be  to  the  violated  rights  of  the  husband;
Sarah,  who  had  constantly  declared  that  he  was  her
rother,  even  when  prudent  calculation  became  impru-
lent  temerity,  had  well  deserved  that  she  also  should
.ifl'er  a  reproof.  Still  Abimclech  appears  to  define
t  as  a  covering  of  the  eyes  only  in  a  figurative  sense :
n  the  sense  of  the  Vulgate :  hoc  c-r'it  tibi  in  mlamc.i
'culorum  ad  omncs  qui  tccum  sint,  ct  quocunrjue  pcrp-
txcris ;  nn iiuiifoijuc  te  dfprchcnsam*  Since  Surah
vore  no  veil,  which  designated  her  as  the  wife  of  a
msband  (see  ch.  xxiv.  G  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  10),  so  the  pres
ent  of  Abimelech,  wherewith  he  expiates  his  fault,
las  the  effect  of  such  a  veil ;  it  should  for  all,  and
everywhere,  be  a  testimony  that  she  is  a  married
woman.  As  Mich  should  she  now  be  held  every
where,  in  consequence  of  his  present.  "With  Clericus,
therefore,  we  find  here  a  designed  double  sense  or
meaning  ;  a  curei-'mij  <>f  the  eyes  us  tm  utuit/'iiiciU,
which  should,  <it  Hie  an  UK'  /<//",  hare  the  effect  of  a

eil.  "  nn^lji  can  only  be  the  second  person
feminine  perf.  Niph.,  although  the  daghesh  lene  is
wanting  in  T.  (GKSKMUS,  $  1>8,  4,  and  £  C>5,  ti),  for  to
liold  this  form  for  a  participle  is  scarcely  pos.-ible,"
etc.  I  KKII.  :  Since  this  word  may  be  rendered  ad
udged  as  well  as  justified,  we  take  it  in  a.  middle  sense,
and  as  designedly  having  a  twofold  meaning:  con
vinced,  placed  right.  This  hist  word  does  not  belong
to  the  writer,  but  to  Abimclech  himsilf.  'iVlth  the
pride  of  injured  magnanimity,  he  declares  that  he,
through  his  atoning  present,  would  provide  her  with
a  veil,  and  designate  her  as  a  married  woman.  For
the  veil,  see  Winer.

:;.  A1irah<ini\*  iii/'TC-'xalon  (vers.  17,  IB).  "After
this  compensation  Abraham  intercedes  (ver.  17),  and
God  removes  the  sickness  from  Abimelech  and  his
women.  The  author  does  not  define  the  sickness
more  closely  (as  in  ch.  xii.  17) ;  according  to  ver.  G  it
was  such  a  sickness  as  indisposed  to  sleep.  Compare
the  plague  of  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  v.  (>-!i  ;  xii.  6,  4,
etc.)'1  Kuobeh— And  God  healed  Abimelech,
and  his  wife,  and  his  maidservants. — Thus
Abimelech  was  not  only  afflicted  with  some  sexual
disease,  but  indirectly,  through  his  inability,  his  wife
also,  i.  e.,  his  wife  in  a  peculiar  sense,  the  queen ;  and
his  maid-servants,  that  is,  his  concubines  (see  Keil).
[They  bare  means  that  they  were  again  capable  of
procreating  children.  The  verb  is  masculine,  because
both  males  and  females  were  involved  in  this  judicial
malady.  MURPHY,  p.  329.— A.  G.]  [This  is  clear  also,
since  the  malady  was  sent  to  preserve  the  purity  of
Sarah.  Abimelech  was  not  suffered  to  touch  her,
see  ver.  (i. — A.  G.]  Ver.  18  contains  the  explana
tion—For  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  had  fast  closed
up.— [It  is  Jehovah  who  delivers  Abraham,  and  prc-

*  [Wordsworth  sucrgchts  all  throe  souses — that  of  a.  pro
pitiation  ;  of  a  provision  for  the  purchase  of  a  veil ;  und  of
an  allusion  to  the  usage  of  covering  a  bride  with  a  veil,  p.

92. -A.  a.]

t  [If,  with  Baumgnvtcn,  and  according  to  the  accents,  w«
connect  the  VSTIJO  with  the  last  word,  the  sense  can  only
be:  and  nil  this  has  been  done  or  given  that  thou.  ma  vest
be  lighted  or  redressed,  p.  220.  So  also  Murphy.— A.  Cr.J


CHAP.   XX.    1-18.


453


serves  the  purity  of  Sarah,  the  mother  of  Isaac  th
promised  seed.  WouDSwoirnr,  p.  93,  Who  urge
also  the  use  of  the  names  of  God  in  the  chapter
against  the  fragmentary  hypothesis,  with  great  force
— A.  G.]  Here  the  providence  of  Elohiin  is  traced  t<
the  motives  of  Jehovah,  the  Covenant  God  of  Abra
ham,  who  would  protect  his  chosen.  They  wer
closed  up;  i.  e.,  not  as  Knobel  thinks,  they  coul
could  not  bring  to  the  birth,  but  the  whole  house
hold  of  Abimclech  was  unfruitful  in  consequence  oi
his  sickness.  [The  term  here  used  for  maid-servants
ni'HOX,  denotes  those  held  as  concubines,  and  is  t<
be  distinguished  from  r.inE'13,  servants.  See  1  Sam
xxv.  41.  KEIL,  p.  170.— A/G.]  This  fearful  fact  foi
an  ancient  household  was  remarkable  here,  because
the  state  remained  after  the  free  return  of  Sarah,  unti
Abraham  enters  with  his  intercession.  But  this  in
troduces  the  circumstance  that  he  had  interceded  for
Sarah  also.


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  See   the   preliminary   remarks   and   the    exi-
getieal   paragraphs.    The   preceding   history  is  the
history  of  sins  "crying  to  heaven."     The  history
of  Abraham  in  Gcrar  is  a  history  of  unconscious  sins,
concealed  faults  in  the  life  of  most  excellent  men,  of
the  father  of  the  faithful,  and  of  a  noble  heathen  king.

2.  The  first  meeting  between  the  house  of  Abra
ham  and  the  Philistines.     It  serves  to  illustrate  the
fact,  that  the  knowledge  of  God  among  the  Philis
tine.-;  has  sunken  lower  and  lower  in  the  lapse  of  time,
while  it  has  been  more  and  more  completely  developed
among  the  theocratic  people.

3.  Abraham  in  Gcrar,  in  a  certain  measure,  a
counterpart  to  Lot  in  the  caves.    Lot  fears  the  pres
ence  of  men ;  Abraham  appears  to  have  sought  a
wider  intercourse.     Both  fall  into  folly  and  sin,  after
the  experience  of  the  great  judgment  upon  Sodom.
The  reaction  from  a  state  of  great  spiritual  excite
ment  reveals  itself  even  in  Abraham.

4.  The  repetition  of  the  old  saying  of  Abraham,
is  a  proof  that  he,  in  his  faith,  thought  himself  justi
fied  in  using  it.     We  must  take  into  account  also,
that  Sarah  also  was  his  sister  in  the  faith,  and  that
she  had  accustomed  herself,  in  her  painful  sense  of
her  unfruitfulness,  to  style  themselves  brother  and
sister.

_  5.  Abimelcch's  dream.  In  the  night  sleep,  the
spirit  of  revelation  comes  nearer  to  the  heathen,' as  is
shown  also  in  the  dreams  of  Pharaoh  and  Nebuchad
nezzar.  It  is  a  medium  of  revelation  also  for  children
(Joseph,  in  the  old  covenant),  and  for  laborers  with
the  hand  (Joseph,  in  the  new  covenant);  and  tfcc
prophetic  disposition,  enduring  into  the  night  or
extending  itself  through  its  'hours  (Isaac,  Jacob,
Paul).  Moreover,  Pharaoh's  butler  and  baker  (ch!
si.  8);  the  Midianites  (Judges  vii.  13-15);  the  wife
of  Pilate  (Matt,  xxvii.  19,  compare  Wisdom  xviii.  17
-19),  had  significant  dreams.

6.  Abimelech's  innocence  and  guilt.     The  moral
standpoint  of  tradition,  in  its  relation  to  the  higher
standpoint.    Traditional  morality  and  the  morality  of
conscience.  The  religious  susceptibility  of  Abimelecli

7.  Abraham  a  prophet.    There  are  different  views
as  to  the  derivation  of  this  word.    A  derivation  from
the  Arabic,  analogous  form,  explains  the  word  to
bean  the  bring  w  of  knowledge,  the  foreteller  or  pre
dictor  (.see  DELITZSCII,  p.  f,34 ;  a  communication  of


Fleischer).  The  derivation  from  the  Hebrew  N333
cbullire,  appears  to  us  nearer  at  hand,  and  corre
sponds  better  with  the  idea  of  the  prophet.  In  the
reference  of  the  word  to  the  Niph.,  Redslob  explains
it  in  a  passive  sense,  what  is  poured  forth  ;  W.Xew-
mann  and  Holemann,  actively  pouring  forth,  speaking.
If  we  regard  the  Niph.  as  both  passive  and  reflexive,
then  the  prophet  is  a  man  who,  because  he  has  received
communications  poured  into  himself,  pours  forth.
One  who  is  a  fountain.  But  the  pouring  forth  desig
nates  more  than  the  simple  speaking.  It  is  the
utterance  of  that  which  is  new,  in  the  inspired,  out
pouring  form  ;  analogous  to  the  out-pouring  of  a
fountain,  which  is  ever  pouring  out  new,  fresh  water.
The  prophet  pours  forth  that  which  is  new,  both  in
words  and  deeds  ;  the  miraculous  words  of  prophecy,
and  the  miraculous  deeds  of  typical  import.  The  de
rivation  which  Dclitzsch  proposes  from  N2  =  ns  ,  HS
to  breathe,  the  inspired,  appears  to  be  sought  from
dogmatic  motives.  Abraham  was  a  prophet  in  the
most  general  sense  ;  the  organ  of  the  divine  revela
tion,  seer  of  the  future.  He  was  a  prophet,  priest,
and  king  in  one  person,  but  preeminently  a  prophet.
And  here  God  brings  out  distinctly  his  prophetic
dignity,  because  he  is  in  this  especially  commended
as  the  friend  of  God,  the  object  of  his  protecting  care,
with  whose  injury  Abimelech's  sickness  was  connected,
and  by  whose  intercession  he  could  be  healed.  The
peculiar  order  of  the  prophets,  introduced  through
the  prophetic  schools  of  Samuel,  was  formed  after
the  order  of  priests,  and  then  the  order  of  kings  were
severed  from  the  general  class  or  order  of  prophets.

8.  Abimelech's    character    and   his    atonement.
Through   his   noble  and   pious  conduct  he  wins  a
friend  in  Abraham  (ch.  xxi.  22  ff.)

9.  Abraham's  intercession,  a  claim  of  his  faith  in
;hc  promise.     His   intercession  for  Abimelecli  and
Gerar,  a  counterpart  to  his  intercession  for  Sodom.
The   intercession    of  Abraham   for  Abimclcch,   his
house,  and  kingdom,  in  comparison  with  his  inter
cession  for  Sodom.

10.  Abraham  has,  through  his  fear,  and  the  pru
dential  means  which  his  fear  bade  him  to  use,  twice
directly  brought  about  the  very  thing  which  he  feared,
-he  taking  away  of  his  wife,  and  perhaps  would  have
ncurred  his  death,  either  the  first  or  second  time,
f  God  had  not  interfered.    How  fear  first  truly  makes
-hat  actual  which  it  seeks  to  hinder  in  ungodly  ways,
,he  history  of  Joseph's  brethren,  who  sold  him  that
ic  might  not  rise  above  them ;  the  conduct  of  Pha-
-aoh  towards  Israel,  which  brings  him  and  his  hosts
o  destruction  in  the  Red  Sea;  Saul's  determination
igainst  David ;    but  above   all,   the  history  of  the
•rucifixioii  of  Christ  on  the  part  of  the  Jewish  San-
ledrim  prove  still  more  perfectly.     How  this  same
act  appears  in  proverbs,  under  various  forms,  e.  g.,
n  the  saying  of  (Edipus,  is  well  known.

11.  The  Philistines  (see  the  Bible  Dictionaries),
'heir   first    appearance  in  sacred  history  makes   a
avourable  impression ;  Abimelcch  knows,  or  learns
o  know,  the  only  true  God.     Later,  the  Philistines
ppear  sunken  in  idolatry.


IIOillLETICAL  AND  PEACTICA.L.

Any  homiletic  use  of  this  chapter  presupposes
omiletic  wisdom.  Themes  :  Abraham  in  the  repe-
tion  of  his  fall.— Abraham  and  Abimelech.— -Abra-
am's  character :  reverent  humility,  moral  pride. —


454


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


Abraham,  the  believer,  in  his  weakness,  exalted
.ibovo  the  man  of  the  world,  in  his  strength.  [The
exaltation,  however,  a  matter  of  pure  grace. — A.G.]

First  Section. — Abraham's  and  Abimelech's  error
(vers.  1-7)  Abraham's  reaction  after  his  high  spiritual
experiences. — The  repetition  of  his  old  fault.  1.
Causes  :  Recent  experience  of  the  corruption  of  the
world,  false  prudence,  exaggerated  confidence,  the
brotherly  relation  to  Sarah,  the  tolerable  issue  of  the
case  in  Egypt.  '-!.  Natural  results:  Anxiety  and
danger,  shame  before  a  heathen's  princely  court.
3.  Gracious  issue  through  the  interference  of  God.* —
How  self-will  rushes  into  the  danger  which,  with  many
plans,  it  seeks  to  avoid. — How  the  believer  cndangeis
the  promise  of  God,  and  how  it  is  wonderfully  guard
ed  through  the  grace  of  God. — Abimelech's  integrity
the  point  of  union  for  the  gracious  providence  of  God.
— The  author  of  sacred  marriage  is  also  its  protector.
— The  care  of  God  for  Sarah  a  care  for  the  world.

STAKKK:  Now  God,  in  his  providence,  rescues
Abraham  again  from  his  human  weakness. — (Ver.  -1.
The  Holy  Spirit  marks  this  doubtless,  lest  anyone
should  say  that  Isaac  was  the  son  of  Abimelech.)
(Although  God  is  a  lover  of  life,  yet  still,  aeeording
to  his  punitive  righteousness,  there  may  be  ascribed
to  him,  as  here,  a  destruction,  consumption,  etc.) —
God  Millers  his  sainls  to  fall  into  lolly  and  sin,  that
it  mav  be  clear  how  little  they  are  able  to  do  right
by  themselves. — CKAMKU:  God  preserves  the  sacred
marriage  state. — OSIANDKII  :  Subjects  are  often  pun
ished  on  account  of  the  transgressions  of  their  rulers.
— Ver.  (I.  A  simple  and  not  evilly  intended  plan,  even
in  a  bad  cause,  if  it  proceeds  from  inconsideration,
Or  from  ignorant  x.eal,  is  described  by  this  word —
simplicity,  in  Holy  Scripture  ('2  Sam.  xv.  11,  etc.) —
Ver.  0.  God  hinders  men  from  committing  sin  in
many  ways. — God  searches  the  heart,  and  knows
what  is  done  in  integrity  and  what  in  pretence. —
CAI.WI  u,  H,:,,<lliirl,  :  Ver.  2.  As  there  (in  Egypt)
so  here,  Abraham  readies  the  directly  opposite
point  from  that  which  lie  intended.  Sarah  was
taken  away,  just  because  he  said,  she  is  my  sister. —
SCIIKOPKK:  (V.  UERBEIIGER.)  Ver.  1.  Abraham  will
avoid  the  cross,  (V)  but  he  passes  from  the  smoke
into  the  flame,  from  the  mud  into  the  mire.  There
are  in  foreign  lands  misfortunes  and  adversities  as
well  as  where  he  has  lived  hitherto.  Ah  !  Lord,  help
us,  that  we  may  sit  quietly  in  our  little  space  ;  the
dear  cross  dwells  yet  nowhere,  as  everywhere,  i.  e.,
wherever  we  are.  —  His  sin  appears  greater  here
than  at  the  first  offence;  he  stands  no  longer  as  then
(in  Egypt),  at  the  beginning  of  the  divine  leadings.
After  so  many  and  such  great  experiences  of  God's
faithfulness,  still  such  unfaithfulness  to  him.  (?) —
(Calvin.)  All  those  who  will  not,  as  is  becoming,
trn.it  themselves  to  the  providence  of  God,  shall  win
like  fruits  of  unbelief. — Ver.  2.  It  is  to  be  considered
that  an  extraordinary  beauty  is  ascribed  to  Sarah;
then  also,  that  notwithstanding  her  ninety  years,  she
is  in  the  first  half  of  human  life  at  that  period  of  the
world. — LrniKR:  Ver.  3.  It  is  impossible  that  a
man  who  believes  in  the  promises  of  God,  should  be
forsaken.  —  God  would  suffer  the  heavens  to  fall,
rather  than  forsake  his  believing  people. — Thus  God
shows  how  displeasing  adultery  is  to  him. — Ver.  6.
Abimelech  has  sinned  nevertheless,  therefore  God
by  no  means  concedes  to  him  "  purity  of  hands,"  as
the  "  integrity  of  heart." — PASSAVANT  :  An  old  oak
which  loses  a  bough  or  twig,  has  not,  therefore,

*  [How  thankful  for  the  interference  of  God, — A.  G.]


lost  its  crown. — Pharaoh  and  Abimelech.  Ver.  4.
Many  a  king  who  is  called  Christian,  has  done  what
these  two  kings  did,  and  even  worse,  and  his  people
have  necessarily  suffered  for  it  in  various  ways  before
his  crumbling  throne ;  in  a  thousand  offences,  sins,
sorrows,  etc.  Kings  may  learn  what  the  sins  of
princes  are  before  God,  and  the  people  also  may  learn
to  hate  and  deplore  the  evil  which  descends  from  the
upper  ranks. — The  prosperity  of  the  family  depends
upon  the  marriage  state,  and  the  welfare  of  society
upon  that  of  the  family,  and  upon  the  society  turns
the  good  of  the  state. — Ver.  fi.  It  is  a  great  grace
when  God  guards  any  one  from  sinning,  cither  againsi
their  fellows  or  against  God. — Thou  knowest  not  how
often  God  has  kept  thee  and  me  (Ps.  cv.  1-1,  15-
Zach.  ii.  8). — SCIIWKNKE:  The  Scriptures  do  not  de
scribe  a  saint  in  Abraham,  but  a  man,  who,  although
so  good,  is  yet  a  sinner  like  ourselves,  but  who  through
faith  was  justified  before  God,  and  what  he  did  as  he
went  from  step  to  step  in  the  narrow  path  of  faith
stands  recorded,  that  we  with  him  might  enter  the
school  of  faith.

Second  Sec! io?t. — Abraham's  confusion  and  shame,
and  Abimcli'ch's  atonement. — (Vers.  8-1(1).  The
castigatory  speech  of  the  heathen  to  the  father  of
the  faithful. — Ver.  11.  The  judgment  of  faith  con
cerning  the  world  ought  not  to  be  a  prejudice. — The
danger  of  life  in  Abraham's  pilgrimage  an  apology
for  his  Fwerving  to  his  own  way. — Ver.  8.  The  zeal
of  Abimelech  in  the  removing  and  expiating  of  his
fault. — His  noble  and  pious  integrity:  1.  In  the  ex
pression  of  his  fear  of  God;  '2.  of  his  injured  moral
feeling  ;  3.  his  readiness  to  make  his  error  good. —
Ver.  9.  Abimelech  knew  that  his  royal  sins  fell  upon
his  household  and  kingdom,  as  a  burden  and  as  guilt.

STAUKE  :  ver.  V.  It  is  to  the  praise  of  this  heathen
king,  who,  however,  was  not  without  some  fear  and
knowledge  of  God,  that  he  held  a  breach  of  the  mar
riage  law  to  be  so  great  a  sin  that  the  whole  land
could  be  punished. — Ver.  10.  OSIAXDKR  :  A  pious
ruler  and  a  pious  father  of  the  household  agree  well,
since  they  warn  and  keen  their  own  in  the  fear  of
God.  —  The  praise  of  mildness  and  gentleness. —
LUTIIKR:  The  saints  were  gently  punished  and  for
their  good. — /)/'//.  'I'i'ili.  Ver.  '.'.  We  should  amend
our  past  faults  without  delay. — SCIIUODKR  :  (LUTHER)
lie  who  was  before  a  king  (Abimelech)  is  now  a
bishop  who  spreads  among  his  subjects  the  fear  and
knowledge  of  God,  so  that  they  also  should  learn  to
I' Mr  God  and  honor  his  word.  Here  indeed  the
Sodomites,  and  those  who  dwelt  in  Gerar,  are  held
in  broad  contrast. — Ver.  12.  (Musculus:  Concerning
Sarah  as  the  sister  of  Abraham:  recogni/e  hero  the
type  of  Christ  and  the  Church.  The  Church  is  the
sister  and  the  bride  of  Christ ;  sister  through  God
the  Father,  bride  through  the  mystery  of  the  incar
nation,  and  the  truth  of  his  espousal,  etc.) — Ver.  15.
While  the  Egyptian  invites  Abraham  in  a  compliment
ary  way  out  of  his  laud,  the  Philistine  says,  Behold
my  land  is  before  thee. — (CALVIN):  This  distinction  is
due  to  the  fact  that  the  severely  punished  Pharoah
experienced  only  fear,  so  that  the  presence  of  Abra
ham  was  intolerable.  Abimelech,  on  the  other  hand,
was,  with  the  terror,  at  the  same  time  comforted. —
PASSAVANT:  Ver.  11.  Chi istians' excuses  arc  often
times  worse  than  their  faults. — But  Abraham  is  the
father  of  the  faithful ;  God  sees  in  him  Isaac,  the  son
of  promise,  conceived,  born,  reared  in  faith,  etc.  ;  he
sees  in  him  Jacob  his  servant,  etc.,  Moses,  Aaron,
Joshua,  but  above  all  that  one  of  the  seed  of  David,
Gal.  iii.  16.— The  forefather  bore  already  in  himself.


CHAP.    XXI.    1-34.


451;


that  seed  of  faith  upon  the  Son  of  God  from  which
should  bloom  the  new  hosts  of  saints  and  righteous
of  the  old  and  new  covenant,  as  the  dew  drops  from
the  womb  of  the  morning  (Ps.  ex.).— SCIIWENKE  :
Thus  the  Lord  knows  how  to  make  good  what  has
been  complicated,  and  endangered  through  human
prudence.

Third  Section.  —  Abraham's  intercession,  the
healing  of  Abimclcch  and  his  household.  (Vers.  17,
18).  Abraham  believes  still  in  the  efficacy  of  inter
cession,  although  Sodom  was  destroyed  notwith
standing  his  intercessory  prayer. — The  connection
of  intercession,  with  the  receptivity  of  those  to  whom
it  relates. — Abraham  as  an  intercessor  for  Sodom  and
for  Gerar. — The  healing  of  Abimelech  an  illustration
of  salvation,  and  leading  to  it. — STARKE:  A  beautiful
exchange  between  the  worldly  and  spiritual  state.


That  bestows  gold  and  possessions,  this  recompenses
with  the  knowledge  of  God  and  prayer. — OSIANDER  :
If  God  punishes  this  king  with  such  serious  earnest
ness  and  severity,  who  ignorantly  had  taken  another
man's  wife,  how  will  they  escape  who  knowingly  and
deliberately  defame  and  dishonor  other  men's  wives
and  daughters? — SCHRODER:  (CALVIN.)  Abraham
arms  and  disarms  the  hand  of  God  at  the  same  time.
— (Roos) :  Thus  God  does  not  forsake  his  own  in
their  need,  although  there  are  not  wanting  faults  on
their  side. — (VAL.  HEBBERGER  :  We  know  how  to
make  what  is  good  evil,  since  we  are  masters  there,
but  how  to  make  good  again  what  is  evil,  that  is  the
work  of  God.) — Because  Abraham  and  Sarah  should
laugh,  they  must  first  weep  sound  repentance.  The
martyr-week  ever  precedes  the  Easter-week  with
Christians.


NINTH    SECTION.

TJie  birth  of  Isaac.     Ishmaefs  expulsion.     Tlic  Covenant  of  peace  with  Abimclcch  at  Beer-sheba.

CHAPTER  XXI.   1-34.


1  And  the  Lord  visited  Sarah  as  lie  had  said,  and  the  Lord  did  unto  Saruli  as  he

2  had  spoken.     For  Sarah  conceived,  and  bare  Abraham  a  son  in  his  old  age,  at  the  set

3  time  of  which  God  [Elohim]  had  spoken  to  him.     And  Abraham  called  the  name  of  his
son  that  was  born  unto  hirn,  whom  Sarah  bare  to  him,  Isaac  [Jitzhak;  he  or  one  will  laugh].

4  And  Abraham  circumcised  his  son  Isaac,  being  eight  days  old  [at  the  eighth  day],  as  God

5  [  Elohim]  had  commanded  him.     And  Abraham  was  an  hundred  years  old  when  his  son
Isaac  was  born  unto  him.

G          And  Sarah  said,  God  [Elohim]  hath  made  me  to  laugh,  so  that  all  that  hear  will  laugh

7  with  me.     And  she  said,  Who  would  have  said  unto  Abraham,  that  Sarah  should  have

8  given  children  suck?  for  I  have  borne  him  a  son  in  his  old  age.     And  the  child  grew
and  was  weaned  :  and  Abraham  made  a  great  feast  the  same  day  that  Isaac  was  weaned.

9  And  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar  the  Egyptian,  which  she  had  borne  unto  Abraham,

10  mocking.     Wherefore  she  said  unto  Abraham,  Cast  out  this  bondwoman  and  her  son:

1 1  for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  son,  even  with  Isaac.     And
the  thing  was  very  grievous  in  Abraham's  sight,  because  of  his  son.

12  And  God  said  unto  Abraham,  Let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thy  sight,  because  of  the
Ir.d,  and  because  of  thy  bondwoman  ;  in  all  that  Sarah  hath  said  unto  thee,   hearken

13  unto  her  voice;  for  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  [thy descendants]  be  called.1     And  also  of  the

14  son  of  the   bondwoman  will  I  make  a  nation,  because  he  is  thy  seed.     And  Abraham
rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  took  bread,  and  a  bottle  of  water,  and  gave  it  unto
Hagar,  putting  it  on  her  shoulder,  and  [took  with  her]  the  child,  and  sent  her  away :  and
she  departed,  and  wandered  in  the  wilderness  of  Beer-sheba  [seven  wells;  well  of  the  oath].

15  And  the  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle,  and  she  cast  the  child  under  one  of  the  shrubs.
10  And  she  went,  and  sat  her  down  over  against  him  a  good  way  off,  as  it  were  a  bow
shot  [as  archers]  :  for  she  said,  Let  me  not  see  the  death  of  the  child.     And  she  sat  over

17  against  him,  and  lifted  up  her  voice  and  wept.     And  God  [Elohim]  heard  the  voice  of
the  lad;  and  the  angel  of  God2  [Elohim]  called  to  Hagar  out  of  heaven,  and  said  unto
her,  What  aileth  thee,  Hagar?  fear  not;  for  God  [Elohim]  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the

18  lad  where  he  is.     Arise,  lift  up  the  lad,  and  hold  him  in  thine  hand;   for  I  will  make

19  him  a  great  nation.     And  God  opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well  of  water;   and  she

20  went,  and  filled  the  bottle  with  water,  and  gave  the  lad  drink.     And  God  was  with  the

21  lad;    and  he  grew,  and  dwelt  in  the  wilderness,  and  became  an  [mighty]  archer.    And


450


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST    COOK   OF  MOSES.


25

26
27

2  3


And  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  Abimelech  and  "Pinch  ol  [mouth  of  all
mantling  all]  the  chief  captain  of  his  host  [^m-ral]  spake  unto  Abraham  savi
[Elohiml  t.i  with  thee  in  ail  that  thou  doest :  Xow  therefore  swear  unto  me  hen


[Elohim]  that    thou  wilt    not  deal    falselv


[  injure  deceitfully!
•  to  the   kindne


me,  nor  with  un
truth    that  I  have  d


i.  c.,  com-

iir,  God
by  God
on,  nor
;ie  unto

. .  1

r.  And  Abraham  reproved  Abimelech  [brought  a  charge  against  hii:i]  .  v-
canse  [in  the  case]  of  a  well  of  water,  which  Abimelech's  servants  had  violenllv  taken
away.  And  Abimclech  said.  1  wot  not  [have  not  lmo\vn]  who  hath  done  this  thine- •
neither  did  '  thou  tell  me,  neither  yet  heard  I  of  it  but  to-day.  And  Abraham  took
sheep  and  oxen,  and  gave  them  unto  Abimelech  ;  and  both  of  them  made  a  covenant.
'2'.)  And  Abraham  set  [still]  seven  ewe-lambs  of  the  ik'ck  by  themselves.  And  Abune-
leeii  said  unto  Abraham,  \Vhai  mean  these  seven  ewe-lambs,  which  thou  hast  set  by
themselves?  And  he  said,  Fi>r  these  seven  ewe-lambs  shalt  thou  take  of  my  hand',
thai  they  may  lie  a  witness  unto  me  that  1  have  digged  this  well.  AVhero'fore  he
i  that  place  Beer-shcba ;  because  there'  they  sware  both  of  them.  Thus  thevmnde
a  covenant  at  Ueer-slieba  :  then  Abimclech  rose  up,  and  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his
host,  and  they  returned  into  the  hind  of  the  Philistines.

And  Abn'
name  of  th
land  manv  da  vs.


['  Yer.  I?.   -Tii  Tsaac  shall  Pfcd  lie  call  oil  to  thcc.  —  A.  O.]
La  Vcr.  17.     Xot  r,T;i   -.N^"  ,  .is  in  ch.  xvi.  7.-A.  G.]


<;J-:M-:I:AL  PRELIMINABY  I;I:MARKS.

1.  Dclit/sch  holds  ("  not  led  astray  by  cli.  xxi.  1  ")
that  eh.  xxi.  l-'2l,  forms  the  fourth  Elohistic
p:irt  of  Ih"  third  section  of  the  life  of  Abraham.
Tlic  first  par!  (vers.  1-S,  of  oh.  xxi.)  goes  back  to ch.
xvii.,  unfolds  it.-;  If  \\ith  a  clear  reference  to  it,  and
forms  one  \vliole  with  it.  The  second  verse  here  refers
to  eh.  xvii.  '21.  According  to  Knoliel  on  the  contra ry,
oaly  <Ji.  xxi.  '2-5,  belong  to  the  original  writing  ;  the
rest  co;iM>ts  of  Jchovistic  enlargements,  out  of  records
v.hieh,  at  the  most,  may  possibly  be  Elohistic.  Since
De!itx.-ch  describes  eh.  xx.  also  as  Elohistic,  it  i<
plain  that  he  must  assume  different  Elohistic  sources.
Hut  out  of  this  assumption  the  whole  arbitrary
and  artificial  hypothesis  may  be  developed.  There
musl  certainly  be  some  internal  reason  for  the  ehi"i:.'-e
of  the  names  in  the  first  and  second  verses.  That
the  ivime  Elohim  should  be  used  in  the  1'istorv  of
the  expul-ion  of  Ishmael,  and  of  the  covenant  of
Abraham  with  Abimclech  requires  no  explanation  :
Aliimelcch  does  not  know  Jehovah  ;  Islnnael  walks
under  the  general  providence  of  God.  The  reason
lies  in  the  fact  that  in  vcr.  2  there  is  a  reference
to  ch.  xvii.  21,  while  vcr.  1  refers  to  ch.  xviii.
14.^  So  likewise  it  is  with  the  circumcision  of  Isaac,
which  Elohim  commanded  (vcr.  4);  it  embraces
in  Isaac  both  Esau  and  Jacob.  Sarah  also  (ver.  6),
refers  the  name  of  Isaac  to  the  arrangement  of
Elohim  ;  since  every  one  in  the  world  (existing  under
Elohim),  would  recognize  Isaac  as  a  miraculously
given  child — awakening  laughter  and  joy.*

*  ["  The  birth  of  Isaac  is  the  first  result  of  the  covenant,
and  the  first  stop  toward  its  goal.    As  it  is  the  germ  of  the


shall  be  accomplished."  Jacobus. — A.  G.]


2.  It  is  qucstionoble  whether  we  should  refer  ver.
8  to  what  precedes,  or  what  follows.  IMit/sch  fa
vors  the  first  connection,  Knobel  and  Keil  the  last.
They  suppose  that  the  feasl  at  the  wenniai:  of  Isaac
gave  occasion  for  the  expulsion  of  Ishmael.  liut
this  is  not  certain,  and  were  it  oven  certain,  ver.  f<
could,  notwithstanding,  belong  to  the  cor.elu-ion  of
the  history  of  the  childhood  of  Isaac.


1.  /sxrtA'  !j! /•<'//,  drcnincix'mn,  ami  tJic  f«n-t  at  fit's
vc.t)<;>ir/.—(\\'i-*.  1-S).— And  the  Lord  (Jehovah)
visited  ["The  Sept.  has  tirta-Ke^aro,  a  word
adopted  by  St.  Luke  in  two  places  in  liie  song  of
Zacharias  (Luke  i.  CH-7M),  who  thus  intimates  the
connection  between  the  bir;h  of  Isaac  and  the  birth
of  the  promised  seed."  WOIIDSWOKTH  p.  1>3.  He
refers  also  to  the  connection  of  the  song  of  the  bles
sed  virgin  with  these  exultant  and  thankful  woids  of
Sarah.  See  also  Gen.  xvii.  17-19  ;  Luke  ii,  21;  John
viii.  50  ;  and  Luke  i.  4 1-17.—  A.  G.]  Sarah.—  ^3
to  come  to,  to  visit,  to  visit  with  the  purpose  of  aiding'
of  saving,  or  with  the  design  to  punish,  marking  the
great  transitions  in  the  providence  of  God  ;  an  idea
running  throughout  the  Scriptures  (ch.  1.  24  ;  Ex.  iii.
1G),  to  express  which,  according  to  Knobel,  the
Elohist  uses  "SJ  (ch.  viii.  1;  xix.  29;  xxx.  20);
where,  however,  in  the  two  first  cases,  the  ideas  are
widely  different.  The  pregnancy  of  Sarah  is  traced
back  to  Jehovah,  since  the  conception  of  Isaac  is  a
fruit  of  faith,  i.  c.,  of  that  connection  of  the  sexes,
on  the  part  of  both  parents,  animated  and  sanctified
through  faith. — As  he  had  said  (ch.  xviii.  14). — AB
God  had  said  to  him  (ch.  xvii.  21).— [These  ex
pressions  have  an  exegetical  value,  not  only  as


CHAP.  XXI.  1-34.


457


showing  the  divine   faithfulness,    and   the   develop
mcnt   of  his   plan,    but   as  showing   also   how   th
different  parts  of  this  book  are  inwoven  together
atid  thus  prove  its  unity. — A.  G.] — As  God  ha<
commanded  him  (oh.  xvii.    12). — It  is  assumec
alluding  to   what   had   been   done   before   on   tin
occasion,  that  the  son  should  bear  the  name  Isaac
God  had  given  him   this  name  already,  before  hi
birth  (eh.  xvii.  19  ;  comp.  xix.  11).  The  special  eaus
of  this  name  lies  iu  the  laughing  of  Abraham  (eh
xvii.)  whose  darker  echo  is  heard  in   the  laugh  o
Sarah  (ch.  xviii.),  and  the  laughter  of  the  people  a
this  singular  birth,  of  which  Sarah  speaks  furthe
here.     The  one  thread   running   through  all   these
various  laughs  is  the  apparently  incredible  nature
of  the  event.     Knobel,  therefore,  holds,  without  suf
ficicnt  ground,  that  these  are  "  different  attempts  to
explain   the  origin   of  the   name." — An   hundrec
years  old   (see  ch.  xvii.  24).— And  Sarah  said
God  hath  made  me  to  laugh. — Delitzsch  signal
izes  the  poetical  force  of  the  two  sentences  of  Sarah
"  They  are  joyful  cries,  the  first  a  distich,  the  seconc
in  three  lines.     Hence  also  the  term  b^E  instead  of
"iSX    Sarah,  without  doubt,  goes  back  to  the  divine
giving  of  the  name,  which  the  laughing  of  Abraham
had  occasioned.     But  then  also,  she  glances  at  her
own  laughing,  which  is  now  followed  by  another  and
better  laugh,  even  the  joyful  cry  of  a  thankful  faith.
That  laugh  arose  from  her  unbelief,  this  Jehovah  has
given  to  her  as  the  fruit  of  her  faith.     But  she  must
explain  still  further,  and  that  not  without  a  certain
feeling  of  shame."     (Delitzsch,  comp.  ch.  xviii.  12. ]
— All  that  hear  will  laugh  with  me. — [IB  with
the  perfect  has  the  sense  of  the  conjunctive.     KEIL,
p.  172. — A. G.] — i.e.,  with  astonishment  at  the  mi
raculously  given  child.— A   great   feast.— STARKE  :
"The  Hebrews,  and  other  eastern  nations,  named
their  feasts  from  the  drinks  (firvra),  as  if  more
regard  was  paid  to  the  drinks  than  to  the  food."
But  as  the  joy  over  Isaac,  in  respect  to  the  promise
given  in  him,  was  directed  more  to  the  spiritual  than
the    bodily,    so    also  without  doubt  this  feast  was
arranged  with  reference  to  the  same  thing. — And
the  child  grew.— Knobel  and  Keil  refer  the  eighth
verse  to  the   following  section.     "Ishmacl,"   KEIL
remarks,  "  mocked  at  the  feast  held  at  the  weaning
of  Isaac.'"      KNOBEL:  he  had  made  sport.     But  it
is  hardly  probable  that  Ishmael  had  thus  made  sport
or  mocked  on  one  occasion  only.     "  The  wcaniii"-  of
the  child  was  often  delayed,  sometimes  after  three
(2  Macc.vii.  27;  MDXGO  PARK'S  "  Travels,"  p.  237),  and
even  after  four  years,  (RUSSEL  :  "Natural  History  of
Aleppo,"  I.  p.  427).  ["  The  weaning  from  the  mother's
breast  was  the  first  step  to  the  independent  existence
of  the  child"  (Baumgarten),  and  hence  gave  occasion
for  the  profane  wit  and  mocking  of  Ishmacl,  in  which
there  was,   as   Keil   remarks,    unbelief,    envy,   and
pride.— A.  G.]     It  was  observed  by    Abraham,  as
also  to  day  in  the  lands  of  the  east,  as  a  family  feast.
ScniioDE'.i :    ''  The  Koran  fixes  two   years,  at  least
as  the  period  of  nursing  children. "

2.  The  expulsion  of  hhmacl  (vers.  9-21), — And
Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar.— It  is  not  said  that
this  happened  at  the  feast  upon  the  weaning  of  Isaac.
The  different  explanations  of  pn^O  .  The  first  ex
planation  :  The  word  describes  one  making  sport,  as

*  'Kurtz  says  that  Ishmael  laughed  at  the  contrast  be
tween  the  promises  and  corresponding  hopes  centring  in
Isaac,  and  the  weak  nursling,  p.  201.— A  G  ]


ch.  xix.  14;  Ishmael  appears  as  a  playful  lad,  leap,
ing  and  dancing  around,  who  thus  excited  the  envy
of   Sarah.     Thus  Knobel,   after  Aben  Ezra,  Ilgen,
Gesenius,  Tuch.     The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate  intro
duce  so  much  into  the  text :  "playing  idth  Isaac."
Since  Ishmacl  was  fourteen  years  of  age  at  the  birth
of  Isaac,  and  now  about  sixteen  to  seventeen,  Sarah
must   certainly  have  seen  him  playing  with   Isaac
much  earlier,  with  jealousy,  if  his  playfulness  gener
ally  could  indeed  have  excited  her  jealousy.     But  if
Ishmael,  at  the  feast-day  of  Isaac,  was  extravagantly
joyful,  he  thus  gave  an  assurance  of  his  good-will
towards  her  son,  the  heir  of  the  house.     Hence  the
second  explanation  :  The  word  describes  the  act  of
scoffing,  mockery.     Keil  and  others,  after  Kimchi,
Vatabl,   Piscat,  Grot,  against  which  Knobel  objects
that  the  word  in  question  was  never  used  of  mock
ing.     "  Still  less,"  he  adds,  "  are  we  to  think  of  a
persecution   of   Isaac  (Gal.  iv.  29  ;  Rosenm. ;  Del),
or  of  a  controversy  about  the  inheritance  (the  old
Jewish  interpret.),  or  of  an  idolatrous  service  (Jona
than,  Jarchi)."     DELITZSCH  explains  :  "  Ishmacl,  at
the  feast  of  the  weaning  of  the  child,  made  sport  of
the  son  of  his  father  instead  of  sharing  the  joy  of
the  household."     But  the  text  certainly  says  only
that  Sarah  made  the  observation  that  he  was  a  jest
ing,  mocking  youth.     But  since  the  pn^E  follows  so
directly  upon  priS^  ,  so  we  may  certainly  conjecture
that  the  word  is  here  used  to  denote  that  he  mim
icked  Isaac,  jeered  at  him,  or   he  ridiculed  Isaac.
[He  does  not  laugh,  but  makes  himself   sportive,
derides.     This  little  feeble  Isaac  a  father  of  nations  !
HENGSTENBEBG  :  Beitrage,  ii.  p.  276.     Kurtz   urges
well  in  favor  of  the  stronger  meaning  of  the  word,
the  force  of  the  Pihel  and  the  fact  that  the  conduct
of  Ishmael  so  described  was  made  the  reason  by
Sarah  for  her  demand  that  the  son  of  the  bondwoman
should  be  driven  out,  p.  202.— A.  G.]     Leaving  this
out  of  view,  the  observation  of  Sarah  was  certainly
the  observation  of  a  development  of  character.    Ish
mael  developed  a  characteristic  trait  of  jealousy,  and
such  persons  pass  easily,  even  without  any  inclina
tion,  to  mockery.     It  is  probable  that  this  reviling
conduct  appeared  in  some  striking  way  at  the  feast
of  the  weaning  of  Isaac,  although  this  cannot  be  in-
crrcd  with  certainty  from  the  text.     "  The  Rabbins
"eign  here  a  controversy  between  the  children,  about
he  descent  of  Isaac  from  Abimelech,  about  the  iuher-
tance,  and  the  like."  Schroder.  Sarah  docs  not  regard
lim  directly  as  a  pretender,  claiming  the  rights  of
irimogeniturc,  but  as  one  unworthy  to  be  heir  with
ler  son.     Even  later,  the  moral  earnestness  and  the
ense  and  love  of  truth  in  the  heir  of  the  promise,
re  wanting  in  the  talking  and  fiction-loving  Arab.
Jut  tradition  has  added  to  this  feature,  his  hand  is
gainst  every  man,  and  thus  has  found  the  explana-
ion,  that  lie  persecuted  Isaac  with  his  jests  and
coffs,  a  tradition  which  Paul  could  use  in  his  alle-
orical  explanation.     [The   apostle   docs  far  more
lan  merely  use  a  Jewish  tradition.     He  appears  to
llude  to  the  use  made  of  this  history  by  the  prophet
saiah  (ch.  liv.),  and  in  his  explanation  of  the  alle-
ory  states  that  the   conduct  of  Ishmael   towards
saac  was  a  type  of  the  conduct  of  the  self-righteous
ews  towards  those  who  were  trusting  in  Christ  alone
or  righteousness,    or   who    were    believers.      This
locking,  therefore,  was  the  persecution  of  him  who
as^born  Kara  o-dpxa  against  him  who  was  born  Kara
veu/j.x.  ^  In  this  view,  the  word  can  only  mean  the
nbelieviug,  envious  sport  and  derision  of  this  youth,


458


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSF.3.


proud  of  his  mere  fleshly  preeminence,  as  Keil  and
Ilengstcnbcrg   hold.     He   was   thus,   obviously,   in
heart  separated  from  the  household  ot  taith.— A.  G .J
The  pa^a^es,  however,  which  Delitzsch  quotes  (ch.
xxxix.  14  and  Ezek.  xxiii.  :J2)  for  the  meaning  of
prr.i  ,  to  scoff,  must  not  be  overlooked.     In  her  es
timate  of  character,  Sarah  was  far  superior  to  Abra
ham,  as  Rebekali  was  also  superior  to  Isaac  m  judg
ment  in  reference  to  her  two  sons.-
bondwoman  and  her  son.— Knobel  thinks  that
accordin"  to  cli.  xxv.  «  the  Elohist  has  not  admitted
into  the  record  any  such  expulsion.     The  unmerciful
severity  towards  his  own  son  and  his  mother,  docs
not  a^rcc  well  with  the   character  of  Abraham,  and
it  is  doubtful,  therefore,  whether  we  are  dealing  here
with  a  literal  fact.     But  this  is  a  mere  human  arbi
trariness,  in   which  the  lofty,  pure  motive,  remains
unappreciated.     [There   is  underlying   all  these  ob
jections  of  Knobel  and  others  who  sympathize  with
him,  a  false  hermeneutical   principle,    viz.,  that    we
must  interpret  and  explain  the  word  by  what  we
conceive  to  have  been  the  moral   state   and   feelings
of  these   historical  personages.— A.  G.]     The  word
of  Sarah   was  displeasing  to   Abraham  also.     It  is
net  the  Ani^el  of  the  Lord,  but  Cod  as  Elohim,  who
confirms  the  judgment  of  Sarah.     For  the  exclusion
of  Ishmael  was  requisite  not  only  to  the  prosperity
of  Isaac  and  the  line  of  the  promise,  but  to  the  wel
fare  of  Ishmarl  himself.— For  in  Isaac  shall  thy
seed  be  called  (see  ch.  xvii.  in).— There  are  three
explanations  of  these  words:   1.  Afur  Isaac  shall  thy
seed  be  named  (llofmann).     But   Delitzsch  reminds
us  that  the  people  of  the  promise  are  only  once  called
Isaac  (Amos  vii.  '.<)•     2.  In   Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be
called  into  existence  (Drechsler) ;  better,  5.  In  Isaac
shall  the   people  which  is,  and   is   called  (Is.  xh.  8)
the  peculiar  seed  of  Abraham,  have  its  point  of  de
parture  (Bleek,  Delitzsch).— And  also  of  the  son
of  the  bondwoman  (coin;),  ch.  xvii.  20;  xvi.  12).
—And  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning.
—He  did  not  yield  to  the  will  of  Sarah,  but  indeed
to  the  command  of  Cod  which,  as  it  seems,  came  to
him  in  a  revelation  by  night.     This  decided,  perfect,
prompt   cheerfulness,  proves  that   he  would,  at  the
command  of  God,  sacrifice  Isaac  also  (ch.  xxii.  ,'!). —
And  took  bread  and  a  bottle  of  water.— The
narrative   passes  over  the  provision  of_  llagar  will
the  simple  requisites  for  her  journey  ;  with  the  breat
it   may  be   thought  (ch.  xxv.  0)  that  there  was   in
eluded   a  provision  with  money  for  a  longer  time
He  had  doubtless  made  known  to  his  household  the
revelation  of  the  night,  so  that  Sarah  might  not  be
elated   nor   Hagar   depressed.— And  the   child. —
[He  was  now  about  sixteen  or  seventeen— a  youth
"Boys  were  often  married  at  this  age."     Ishmae
was  soon  after  married.    This  must  be  borne  in  mint
in  our  estimate  of  the  command  given  to  Abraham
— A.  G.]     According  to  the  Septuagint,  Tuch,  and
others,  the  author  places  the  burden  upon  the  boj
also  ;  [The  i  conjunctive  makes  it  necessary  that  tin
lb«n  nx'  should  be  connected  with  the  principa
verb'np-     KKIL,  p.  17-'.— A.  G.]  but  this  does  no
follow  from  the  text.     Knobel  correctly  recalls  t
view  that  Ishmael  was  at  this  time  at  least  sixteen
years  old.     Delitzsch,  on  the  contrary,  understand
the  passage  in  the  first  instance  thus :    Abraham

*  [Bush  suggests  that  it  is  some  legal  divorce  which
intended.  The  Heb.  word  has  th:it  meaning,  see  Lev.  x:
7,  11;  xxii.  13  ;  Is.  Ivii.  20.— A.  G.]


laced  Isaac  [Ishmael  ? — A.  G.]  also  upon  the  back
f  Hagar  ;  and  speaks  of  inconsistencies  and  contra-
ictions  in  the  context ;  but  then,  he  himself  destroys
lis  interpretation  in  a  casual    side  remark.     The
Vulgate  also  here  corrects  the  Septuagint. — She  de-
jarted  and  wandered. — In  the  first  c:isc  she  found
ic  way  easily,  for  her  flight  was  voluntary,  but  in
lis  case  she  is  quickly  lost,  no  doubt  because  of  the
xtreme  agitation  of  her  mind  on  account  of  her
uddcn    dismissal.     Luther    has    admirably    shown
hese  inward  causes  for  her  wandering. — In  the  wil
derness  of  Beersheba. — Southerly  from  Beersheba
see  ver.  3M),  bordering  upon  the  desert  El  Tih. —
And  the  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle. — This
was  the  special  necessary  of  life  for  those  passing
lirough  the  desert.     The  boy   began  to  faint  from
hirst. — And  she  cast  the  child. — The  words  here
lave  certainly  the  appearance  as  if  spoken  of  a  little
shild.     But   a  wearied  boy  of  sixteen  years,  unac-
maintcd  with  the  straits  of  the  desert,  would  natu
rally  be  to   the  anxious  mother  like  a  little  child.
The  expression,  she  cast  him,  is  an  expression  that,
vith  a  feeling   of   despair,  or  of   renunciation,   she
suddenly  laid  down  the  wearied  one,  whom  she  had
supported   and   drawn  along  with  her,  as  if  she  had
)rayed  that   he   might  die,  and  then  hastened  away
with  the   feeling   that   she  had  sacrificed  her  child.
A  whole  group  of  the  beautiful  traits  of  a  mother's
ove  appear  here  ;  she  lays  her  child  under  the  pro-
acting   shadow  of  a  bush;  she  hastens  away;  she
seats  herself  over  against   him  at  the  distance  of  a
bowshot,  because  she  will   not   see  him  die,  and  yet
cannot  leave  him,  and  there  weeps  aloud.     Thus  also
Ishmael  must  be  oll'ered  up,  as  Isaac  was  somewhat
later.     But  through    this    necessity    he    was   conse
crated,  with  his  future  race,  to  be  the  son  and  king
of  the  desert.     And  now  llagar   must,   discover  the
oasis,  which   is  also   a  condition  of  life  for  the  sons
of  the  desert— As  it  were  a  bowshot. — Just  as
the    stone's    throw    in  Luke  xxi.    41.— And    God
heard  the  voice  of  the  lad.— The  weeping  of  the
mother  and  the   child  forms  one  voice,   which  the
narrative  assumes.      It,  is  a  groundless  particularism
when  it  is   said   Ishmael  was  heard  because  he  was
the  sou  of  Abraham.— And  the  Angel  of  God.*—
As  Jehovah   himself  is   Elohim  for  Ishmael,  so  the
Anirel   of    the   Lord  (Jehovah)  also  is  for  him  the
Angel  of  God.     There  is  no  word  here  of  a  peculiar
angelic  appearance,  for  Uagar  only  hears  the  call  of
the  Angel  from  Jicnren.     But  the  call  of  the  Angel
was   so  far  completed  by  the  work  of  God  that  he
opened  her  eyes.     Since   she  suffers  on  account  of
the  people  of  "revelation,  the  angel  of  revelation  hero
also,  as  in  her  flight,  ch.  xvi.,  protects  and  rescues
her.— What  aileth  thee,  Hagar  ?    Fear  not.—
Her  heart  grows  firm  and  strong  again  under  the
revelation  from  above.— And  hold  him  i:i  thine
hand.— Jerome  infers  admirably  from  this  expres
sion  as  to  the  sense  of  the  former  passage,  l>  from
which  it  is  manifest  that  he  who  is  held  could  not
have  been  a  burden  upon  his  mother,  but  her  com
panion."— For  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation.
— A  repetition  of  the  earlier  promise  in  ch.  xvi.     He
therefore  cannot  die.— I  will  make  him.— It  is
only  the  Angel  of  Elohim,  who  is  Elohim,  who  can
thus  speak. — And  she  saw  a  well  of  water. — A

*  [The  angel  of  Elohim,  not  Jehovah,  because  Ishmael,
since  the  divinely  ord:iincd  removal  from  the  liousc  of  Abra
ham,  passes  from  under  the  protection  of  the  covenant  uod,
to  that  of  the  leading  and  providence  of  God,  the  ruler  of  all
nations.  KEIL,  p.  173.— A.  G.]


CHAP.   XXI.    1-34.


459


living  fountain,  not  merely  a  cistern.  The  cisterns
were  covered,  and  only  discoverable  by  signs  which
were  known  only  to  those  who  were  entrusted  with
the  secret.  Some  have  conjectured  that  Hagar  now
discovered  these  marks  of  a  cistern.  But  it  is  a
well  in  the  peculiar  sense  which  is  here  spoken  of. —
And  gave  the  lad  drink. — Ishmael  is  saved,  and
now  grows  up  as  the  consecrated  son  of  the  desert.
— And  became  an  archer. — The  bow  was  the
means  of  his  livelihood  in  the  desert.  "  Some  of  th
Islimaelitish  tribes,  e.  g.,  the  Kedarenes  and  Itureans
(ch.  xxv.  13-15),  distinguish  themselves  through  this
weapon."  Knobel.  For  the  twofold  signification
firn,  see  DELITZSCH,  p.  410.* — And  he  dwelt  in
the  wilderness  of  Paran. — Ishmael  is  already  in
the  way  from  Palestine  to  Arabia.  The  wilderness
of  Paran  is  the  present  great  desert  El  Tih.  It  runs
from  the  southern  border  of  Palestine,  especially
from  the  desert  of  Beershcba,  beginning  with  the
desert  of  Sin,  between  Palestine  and  Egypt,  south
easterly  down  to  the  northern  part  of  the  Sinaitic
peninsula,  where  it  is  limited  by  the  mountains  of
Paran  [Robinson  and  Coleman  think  it  embraces  the
whole  great  desert,  and  this  supposition  best  meets
the  various  notices  of  this  desert  in  the  Scriptures. —
A.  G.]  (See  the  article  in  the  "Bible  Dictionary  for
Christian  People.") — A  wife  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt. — Hagar  takes  a  wife  for  her  son  from  her
own  home.  Thus  the  heathen  element  at  once  re
ceives  additional  strength.  The  Ishmaelite  Arabs
are  thus,  as  to  their  natural  origin,  sprung  from  a
twofold  mingling  of  Hebrew  and  Egyptian  blood ;  of
an  ideal  and  contented  disposition,  inwoven  with  a
recluse,  dream-like,  and  gloomy  view  of  the  world.

3.  Hie  covenant  between  Abraham  and  Abimelech
(vers.  22-34). — And  Abimelech  spake  unto  Abra
ham. — Abimelech,  i.  e.,  father  of  the  king,  or  father-
king,  the  king  my  father,  the  title  of  the  kings  at
Genir;  Phichol,  i.  e.,  the  mouth  of  all,  probably
also  a  title  of  the  highest  officer  of  the  kings  at
Gcrar.  The  proposition  of  Abimelech  to  Abraham
to  make  a  covenant  with  him  rests  upon  a  deep  feel
ing  of  the  blessing  which  Abraham  had  in  commun
ion  with  God,  and  upon  a  strong  presentiment  that
in  the  future  he  would  be  a  dangerous  power  to  the
inhabitants  of  Canaan.  It  is  to  this  man's  praise
that  he  does  not  seek  in  a  criminal  way  to  free  him
self  from  his  anxiety,  as  Pharaoh  in  his  hostility  to
the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  or  as  Saul  in  his  hostility  to
David,  but  in  the  direct,  frank,  honest  way  of  a  cove
nant.  Abimelech  has  indeed  no  presentiment  how
far  the  hopes  of  Abraham  for  the  future  go  beyond
his  anxieties.  The  willingness,  however,  of  Abra
ham  to  enter  into  the  covenant,  is  a  proof  that  he
had  no  hopes  for  the  personal  possession  of  Canaan.
As  a  prudent  prince,  Abimelech  meets  him  in  the
company  of  his  chief  captain,  who  might  make  an
impression  of  his  power  upon  Abraham,  although  he
addresses  his  appeal  chiefly  to  his  generosity  and
gratitude.  He  appeals  to  the  faithfulness  which  he
had  shown  him,  and  desires  only  that  he  should  not
be  injured  by  Abraham  either  in  his  person  or  in  his
descendants.  But  Abraham  distinguishes  clearly
between  political  and  private  rights,  and  now  it  is  for
him  to  administer  rcbukes.f — And  he  reproved

*  [Baumgarten  renders  a  hero  an  archer  ;  and  refers  for
»n  analogy  to  the  phrase  flbsinS  m53  ,  p.  223.— A.  G.]

t  tMurphy  renders  Kin  'and 'Kith  to  represent  the  He
brew  itJD3  1315  ,  p.  334.— A.  G.]


Abimelech  because  of  a  well  of  water  (sec  cK
xiii.  7  ;  xxvi.  15  ;  the  great  value  of  wells  in  Canaan).
— But  the  ingenuous  prince  in  part  throws  back  the
reproach  upon  him  :  Abraham  had  not  spoken  of  the
matter  until  to-day,  and  he  had  known  nothing  of  it,
He  is  ready,  therefore,  to  make  restitution,  and  now
follows   the   making  of  the  covenant. — Sheep  and
oxen. — The   usual  covenant   presents  (Ls.  xxx.  6 ;
xxxix.  1  ;  1  Kings  xv.  19). — Seven  ewe  lambs  of
the  flock. — Although  the  well  belonged  to  him,  he
secures  again  in  the  most  solemn  way  its  possession,
through  the  execution  of  the  covenant,  since  a  gift
which  one  of  the  contracting  parties  receives  from
the  other  binds  him  more  strictly  to  its  stipulations
(EWALD:  "Antiquities,"  p.  18). — Beersheba.— It  is
a  question,  in  the  first  place,  how  the  name  is  to  be
explained,  and  then,  what  relation  this  well,  in  its
derivation,  sustains  to  the  wells  of  Beersheba  (ch.
xxvi.  3'2).     Knobel  asserts  that  the  author  explains
Beersheba  through  oath  of  the  wells,  since  he  takes
S3B  for  ns>C';J ,  oatli ;  but  literally  the  word  can
only  signify  seven  wells.     Keil,  on  the  other  hand,
asserts  that  the  sense  of  the  passage  is  this  :  that  the
wells  take  their  name  from  the  seven  lambs  with
whose  gift  Abraham  sealed  his  possession.     When
we  recollect  that  in  the  name  of  Isaac  differently
related  titles  were  united,  we  shall  not  press  the  an
tithesis  between  the  seven  wells  and  the  wells  of  the
oath.     The  form  designates  it  as  the  seven  wells,  but
the  seven  really  marks  it  as  the  well  of  tho  oath.
';  !>'2ttJ3 ,  they  swarc,   literally   they    confirmed    by
seven,  not  because  three,  the  number  of  the  deity,
is  united  in  the  oath  with  four,  the  number  of  the
world  (Leopold  Schmidt,  and  this  exposition  is  un
deniably  suggestive),  but  on  account  of  the  sacred-
ness  of  the  number  seven,  which  has  its  ground  and
origin  in  the  number  seven  of  the  creation  (which,
however,  may  be  divided   into  the  three    and   the
four) ;  they  chose  seven  things  for  the  confirmation
of  the  oath,  as  Herodotus,  among  others,  testifies  of
the  Arabians  (ch.  iii.  8)."    Keil.     According  to  Kno
bel,  the  narrative  of  the  name  Beersheba  (ch.  xxvi.
30)  is  only  another  tradition  concerning  the  origin  of
the  same  name.     "But  Robinson,"  Delitzsch  replies,
"  after  a  long  time  the  first  explorer  of  the  southern
region  of  Palestine,  found  upon  the  borders  of  the
desert  two  deep  wells,  with  clear,  excellent  water."*
These  wells  arc  called  Eir  es  Stba,  seven  wells ;  after
the  erroneous  explanation  of  the  Bedouins,  the  well
of  the   lions.     According    to   Robinson,  Beersheba
lay  in  the  bed  of  a  wide  watercourse  running  here
towards  the  coast,  called  Wady  es  Seba  (Rou.  u  Pal."
i.  p.  300). — And  he  planted  a  grove  (tamarisk).
— "  Probably  the    Tamarix  Africana,  common   in
Egypt,  Petrea,  and  Palestine  ;  not  a  collection  (com
pare  with  this  tamarisk  of  Abraham,  that  in  Gibeah,
1  Sam.  xxii.  6,  and  that  in  Jabesh,  1  Sam.  xxxi.  13)."
Delitzsch.     "  They   were  accustomed  to   pla:;t   the
tamarisks  as  garden  trees,  which  grew  to  a  remark
able  height  and  furnished  a  wide  shade."     [Calvin
remarks  that  the  planting  of  the  trees  indicates  that
Abraham  enjoyed  more  of  quiet  and  rest  after  the
covenant  was  made  than  he  had  done  before. — A.  G.]
Michaelis.     The  tamarisk,  with  its  lasting  wood  and
evergreen  foliage,  was  an  emblem  of  the  eternity  of
God,  whom  he  declared,  or  as  Keil  expresses  it,  of

*  [There  are  thus,  in  fact,  two  wells,  from  which  the  city
mipiit  have  been  named,  and  from  which  it  was  named,  ac
cording  to  the  two  accounts  or  testimonies  in  Genesis.  DE
LITZSCH,  p.  296. — A.  G.]


4GO


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


the  eternally  enduring  grace  of  the  true  God  of  the
Cove-mint.  "But  it  is  questionable  whether  Abraham,
the  great  antagonist  of  all  that  is  traditional  in
mythology,  overthrowing  the  symbolism  of  nature,
would  make  such  an  exception  here.  We  must  then
also  suppose  that  his  preaching  of  Jehovah,  the  eter
nal  God,  both  preceded  and  followed  the  planting  of
the  tamarisk.  Knohcl  thinks  it  is  dear  that  a  remark
able  tamarisk  stood  there,  which  one  then  traced  back
to  Abraham.  As  a  planter  of  the  tamarisk,  Abraham
appears  a  prophet  of  civilization,  as  in  his  proclaim
ing  of  the  eternal  God  (the  X~£  with  bith  is  always
more  definite  than  simply  to  call  iipoii  ;  it  designates
also  the  act  of  proclaiming)  he  is  the  prophet  of  the
faith  (the  cult  us). — The  name  =b'~  bx  appears  to  be
us<xl  here  as  a  peculiar  explanation  of  nirP,  and
thus  to  justify  the  translation  of  this  name  by  the
words,  tin'  cti  mat.  But  Abraham  had  earlier  (ch.
xiv.  2j)  designated  Jehovah  as  El  Eljon,  then  recog
nized  him  (eh.  xvii.  ] )  as  El  Shaddai.  It  follows
from  this  that  Jehovah  revealed  himself  to  him  under
various  aspects,  whose  definitions  form  a  parallel  to
the  universal  name  Elohim.  The  God  of  the  highest
majesty  who  gave  him  victory  over  the  kings  of  the
East,  the  God  of  miraculous  power  who  bestows
upon  him  his  son  Isaac,  now  reveals  himself  in  his
<iiviuo  covenant-truth,  over  against  his  temporary
covenant  with  Abimclech,  as  the  eternal  God.  And
(he  tamarisk  might  well  signify  this  also,  that  the
hope  of  his  seed  should  remain  fresh  and  green  until
the  most  distant  future,  uninjured  by  his  temporary
covenant  with  Abimelei'h,  which  he  Will  hold  sacred.
— Abraham  sojourned  in  the  land  of  the  Phil
istines. — Abraham  evidently  remained  a  longer  time
at  Beersheba,  and  this,  together  with  his  residence  at
Gerar,  is  described  as  a  sojourn  in  the  land  of  the
Philistines.  But  how  then  could  it  be  said  before,
that  Abimvlech  and  his  chief  captain  turned  back
from  Beer.-heba  to  the  land  of  the  Philistines?  Keil
solves  the  apparent  difficulty  with  the  remark,  the
Kind  of  the  Philistines  had  at  that  time  no  fixed
bounds  towards  the  wilderness;  Bccrsheba  did  not
belong  to  Gerar,  the  kingdom  of  Abimelech  in  the
narrower  sense. — Many  days. — These  many  days
during  which  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of  the  Philis
tines,  form  a  contrast  to  the  name  of  the  eternal
God,  who  had  promised  Canaan  to  him.


DOCTRINAL  AXD  ETHICAL.

1.  Sarah's  visitation  a  type  of  the  visitation  of
Mary,  notwithstanding  the  great  distinction  between
them.  The  visitation  lies  in  the  extraordinary  and
wonderful  personal  grace,  to  which  an  immeasurable
general  human  salvation  is  closely  joined.  But  with
Sarah  this  visitation  occurs  very  late  in  life,  and  after
long  waiting  ;  with  Alary  it  was  entirely  unexpected.
Sarah's  body  is  dead ;  Mary  had  not  known  a  hus
band.  The  son  of  Sarah  is  himself  only  a  type  of
the  son  of  Mary.  But  with  both  women  the  richest
promise  of  heaven  is  limited  through  one  particular
woman  on  the  earth,  a  conception  in  faith,  an  ap
parently  impossible,  but  yet  actual  human  birth ;
both  are  illustrious  instances  of  the  destination  of
the  female  race,  of  the  importance  of  the  wife,  the
mother,  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  Both  become  il
lustrious  since  they  freely  subjected  themselves  to
this  destination,  since  they  yielded  their  sons  in  the
future,  the  sons  of  promise,  or  in  the  son  of  prom


ise  ;  for  Isaac  has  all  his  importance  as  a  type  of
Christ,  and  Christ  the  son  of  Mary  is  the  manifesta
tion  of  the  eternal  Son. — The  visitation  of  Sarah  waa
that  which  Jehovah  had  promised  a  year  before,  lie
visits  the  believer  with  the  word  of  promise,  and
visits  him  again  with  the  word  of  fulfilment.  Abra
ham  must  have  waited  five  and  twenty  years  for  the
promise,  Sarah  only  one  year.

2.  Isaac:  he  will  laugh,  or  one  will  laugh  (see
ch.  xvii.  19).     The  believer  laughs  at  the  last.

3.  The  sons  of  old  age  and  miraculously-given
children  :  the  sons  of  Noah,  Isaac,  Joseph  (ch.  xxxvii.
3),  Benjamin  (ch.  xliv.  20).  Samuel,  John   the  Bap
tist,  and  Chris!.

4.  The  little   song   of    Sarah,   the  sacred  joyful
word  of  the   mother    over  Isaac.     The  first   cradle
hymn.

5.  The   feast  of  the  weaning  of   Isaac.     "The
announcement,  the  birth,  the  weaning  of  the  child. —
All  this  furnishes  matter  for  manifold  joy  and  laugh
ter;  pns',  i.  e.,  the  laughter,  the  fulness  of  joy  in
his  name.     Our  Lord  reveals  the  profoundest  source
of  this  joy  when   he  says  (John  viii.  50),  Abraham
your  father  rejoiced  to  see  my  day,  and  he  saw  it,
and  was  glad.     Since  Sarah,  the  wife  of  one,  became
the  mother  of  Isaac,  she   became  the  mother  of  Is
rael   (Is.   li.    2;  Mai.   ii.    15;  E/.ek.  xx\iii.  24),  and
since  she  is  the  mother  of  Israel,  the  ancestress,  and,
in  some   sense,  the  mother  of  Jesus  Clnist,  who  de
rives  his  flesh  and  blood   from   Isaac,  out  of  Israel,
and  in  whom  Abraham   is  a  bles.--.ing  to  all  the  na
tions,  the  birthday  of  Isaac,  spiritually  viewed,  thus
becomes  the  door  or  entrance  of  the  day  of  Christ,
and  the  day  of  Christ  the   background  of  the  birth
day  of  Isaac."     Delit/seh.     Calvin  dwells  especially
upon  the  circumstance  that  Sarah  nursed  her  child.
"Whom  he  counts  worthy  of  the  honor  of   being
a  mother  he  at  the  same  time   makes  nurse;    and
those  who   feel  themselves    burdened    through     the
nursing  of  their  children,  rer.d,  as  far  as  in  them  lies,
the  sacred  bonds  of   nature,    unless    weakness,    or
some  infirmities,  form  their  excuse."     It  is  remark
able  that  a  century  after  the   Genevan  Calvin,  the
Genevan  Rousseau  should  again   hold  up  the  sacred-
ness  of  this  law  of  nature,  that  mothers  should  nurse
their  own  children,  against  the  unnatural  custom  at
his   time   of  using  wet-nurses,  although,  indeed,  he
himself  had  fundamentally  no  right  to  plead  it.

f>.  The  whole  context  confirms  the  Hebrew  tradi
tion,  which  finds  in  the  jests  of  Ishmael  the  kindred
idea  of  mockery,  and  upon  this  rests  the  confirma
tion  of  the  allegorical  explanation  of  Paul  (Gal.  iv. ;
comp.  "Biblework  "  on  Gal.  iv.  22-30).  [The  apos
tle,  however,  does  not  say  that  the  history  was  designed
to  be  typical,  but  had  been  used  and  may  be  used  to
illustrate  the  truth  he  was  discussing. — A.  G.]  [Ish-
mael  mocked  the  child  of  promise,  the  faith  of  his
parents,  and  therefore  the  word  and  purpose  of  God.
His  mocking  was  the  outward  expression  of  his  un
belief,  as  the  joy  of  his  parents,  which  gave  rise  to
the  feast,  was  of  their  faith.  It  thus  reveals  his
character  as  unworthy  and  incapable  of  sharing  in
the  blessing,  which  then,  as  now,  was  secured  only
by  faith.  Hence,  like  Esau,  Saul,  the  carnal  Juda-
izers  of  the  apostle's  day,  all  who  trust  in  them
selves  rather  than  in  the  promise,  he  was  cast  out. —
A.  G.]

7.  Female  tact  and  accuracy  in  the  estimate  of
youthful  character.  Sarah.  Rebekah.  Sarah's  in
terference  with  the  order  of  Abraham's  household


CHAP.   XXI.    1-34.


461


cannot  be  without  sin,  but  in  this  case  she  meets  and
responds  to  the  theocratic  thought.  This  fact  is  re
peated  in  a  stronger  form  in  the  position  of  Rebckah
over  against  that  of  Isaac,  since  she  secures  to  Jacob
the  right  of  the  first-born.  Both  fathers  must  have
their  prejudices  in  favor  of  the  rights  of  the  natural
first-born  corrected  by  the  presaging,  far-seeing
mothers.

8.  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  espe
cially  when  a  command  of  the  Lord  is  to  be  fulfilled
or  a  sacrifice  is  to  be  brought  (eh.  xxii).

!).  The  expulsion  of  Hagar.  Since  Ishmael  had
grown  to  nearly  sixteen  years  of  age  in  the  house
of  Sarah,  her  proposal  cannot  be  explained  upon
motives  of  human  jealousy.  The  text  shows  how
painful  the  measure  was  to  Abraham.  But  the  man
of  faith  who  should  later  offer  up  Isaac,  must  now
be  able  to  offer  Ishmael  also.  He  dismisses  him,
however,  in  the  light  of  the  promise,  that  his  expul
sion  confirmed  his  promotion  to  be  the  head  of  a
great  nation,  and  because  the  purpose  of  God  in
reference  to  Isaac  could  only  become  actual  through
this  separation.  The  separation  of  Lot  from  Abra
ham,  of  Ishmael  from  Isaac,  of  Esau  from  Jacob,
proceeds  later  in  the  separation  of  the  ten  tribes
from  Judah,  and  finally  in  the  excision  of  the  unbe
lieving  Jewish  population  from  the  election  (Rom.
x. ;  Gal.  iv.).  These  separations  are  continued  even
in  the  Christian  Church.  In  the  New-Covenant,
moreover,  the  Jews  for  the  most  part  have  been  ex
cluded  as  Ishmael,  while  many  Ishmaelites  on  the
contrary  have  been  made  heirs  of  the  faith  of  Abra
ham.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  perhaps  adheres  more
faithfully  to  wisdom  than  Solomon.

10.  The  moral  beauty  of  Ifagar  in  the  desert,  in
her  mother-love  and  in  her  confidence  in  God.     Ha
gar  in   the  desert  an  imperishable  pattern  of  true
maternal  love.

11.  The  straits  of  the  desert  the  consecration  of
the  sons  of  the  desert.     The  terrible  desert,  through
the  wonderful  help  of  God,  the  wells,  and  oases  of
God,   became  a  dear   home  to   him.     There  is  no
doubt,  also,  that  after  he  had  learned  thoroughly  by
experience  that  he  was  not  a  fellow-heir  with  Isaac
he  was  richly  endowed  by  Abraham  (ch.  xxv.   6),'
and  also  remained  in  friendly  relations  with  Isaac
(ch.  xxv.  9).

12.  Abimclech's  presentiment  of  Abraham's  fu
ture^  greatness,  and  his  prudent  care  for  the  security
of  his  kingdom  in  his  own  person  and  in  his  descend"-
ants.     The  children  of  Israel  did  not  attack  the  land
of  the  Philistines  until  the  Philistines  had  destroyed
every  recollection  of  the   old    covenant    relations.
Abimclech  ever  prudent,   honest,  and  noble.     The
significance  of  the  covenant  of  peace  between  the
father  of  the  faithful  and  a  heathen  prince  (comp
"Covenant  of  Abraham,"  ch.  xiv.).

_  13.  Abraham  gives  to  Abimelcch  upon  his  de
sire  the  oath  of  the  covenant,  as  he  had  earlhr
eworn  to  the  king  of  Sodom.  "  I  will  swear,"  the
sign  of  the  condescension  of  the  believer,  in  the  re
lations  and  necessities  of  human  society.  Bcariii"-
upon  the  doctrine  of  the  oath.

14.  Abraham  learns  the  character  of  Jehovah  in

i  living  experience  of  faith,  according  to  his  varied
revelations,  and  with  this  experience  the  knowledge
ol  the  attributes  of  God  rises  into  prominence.  As
Klohtm  proves  himself  to  be  Jehovah  to  him  so  Je
hovah  again  proves  himself  to  be  Elohim  in  a  higher
sense  God  the  Exalted  is  the  Covenant  God^for
nim;  God  the  Almifhty  performs  wonders  for  him  •


God  the  Eternal  busies  himself  for  him  in  the  eternal
truth  of  the  Covenant.

15.  Abraham  calls  upon  and  proclaims  the  name
of  the  Lord.  The  one  is  in  truth  not  to  be  sepa
rated  from  the  other.  The  living  prayer  must  yield
its  fruit  in  the  declaration,  the  living  declaration  must
have  its  root  in  prayer.  The  faith  of  Abraham  in
Jehovah  develops  itself  into  a  faith  in  the  eternal
truth  of  his  covenant,  and  in  the  ever  green  and
vigorous  life  of  the  promise.  ["  He  calls  upon  the
name  of  the  Lord  with  the  significant  surname  of  the
God  of  perpetuity,  the  eternal,  unchangeable  God!
This  marks  him  as  the  sure  and  able  performer  of
his  promise,  as  the  everlasting  vindicator  of  the  faith
of  treaties,  and  as  the  infallible  source  of  the  believ
er's  rest  and  peace."  Murphy.— A.  G.]  For  the
tamarisk  (see  Dictionaries  of  the  Bible)  and  for  the
meaning  of  the  desert  of  Becrshcba  and  the  city  of
tbe  same  name  (see  Concordances).

16.  Abraham,  Samson,  and  David,  in  the  land  of
the  Philistines.     Alternate  friendships  and  hostilities.
Abraham  at  first  gains  in  South-Canaan  a  welJ,  then
a  grave  (ch.  xxiii.).     Both  were  signs  of  his  inherit
ing  the  land  at  some  future  time.

17.  Bcersheba,  honored  and  sanctified   through
the  long  residence  of  Abraham  and  Isaac.     This  city
marking   the  southern  limits  of  Israel  in  contrast
with  the  city  of  Dan  as  a  northern  limit  was,  later,
also  profaned  through  an  idolatrous  service  (Amos
v.  5  ;  viii.  14).

18.  Passavant  dwells  upon  the  glory  of  the  Ara
bians  in  Spain  for  seven  centuries.     "  Indeed,  they
still,  to-day,  from  the  wide  and  broad  desert,  ever
weep  over  the  forsaken,  crushed  clods  of-  that  heroic
land."     But  what  has  Roman  fanaticism  made  of  the
land  of  Spain?     He  says  again:  "Arabia  has  also
its  treasures,  its  spices,  and  ointments,  herds  of  noble
animals,  sweet,  noble  fruits,  but  it  h-,  not  a  Canaan,
and  its  sons,  coursing,  racing,  plundering,  find  in  its
wild  freedom  an  uncertain  inheritance."    "  Gal.  iv.  29
is  fulfilled  especially  in  the  history  of  Mohammed."

19.  Upon  the  covenant  of  Abraham  and  Abime-
lech,  Passavant  quotes  the  words,  Blessed  are  the
peace-makers.     Schwenke  represents  Abimelcch  as
a  self-righteous  person,  but  without  sufficient  reason.


PRACTICAL.


See  the  doctrinal  paragraphs. — The  connection
between  Isaac's  birth  and  Ishmael's  expulsion. — The
joyful  feast  in  Abraham's  house. — Hagar's  necessity ;
Hagar's  purification  and  glorification. — Abraham's
second  meeting  with  Abimelcch.— Abraham  at  Becr-
sbeba,  _or  the  connection  between  civilization  and  the
cultus  in  Abraham's  life.  An  example  for  Christian
missions.

1.  Isaac's  birth  (ver.  1-8).  Vcr.  1.  In  the  prov
idence  of  God  we  first  experience  that  he  himself
visits  us,  that  he  gives  us  himself;  then  that  he
visits  us  with  his  deeds  of  salvation.  "  Noble  natures
regard  what  they  are  as  one  with  what  they  do."  It
is  true  of  God  above  all  others,  that  we  come  to
know  him  in  his  gifts,  and  his  gifts  hi  his  visitation.
— The  section  affords  appropriate  texts  for  baptismal
discourses.  STARKE:  the  repetition  (as  he  had  spoken,
of  which  he  had  spoken)  has  the  utmost  emphasis.
The  promises  of  God  must  at  last  pass  into  fulfil
ment,  even  when  all  hope  has  been  lost  by  men.  His
promises  are  yea  and  amen.  —  LUTHER:  "Moses
abounds  m  words,  and  repeats  his  words  twice,  io


462


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


order  to  bring  before  our  minds  the  unutterable  joy
of  the  patriarch.  This  joy  would  be  increased  also
(if  it  is  true,  as  some  say,  that  the  Son  of  God  in
human  form  appeared  to  Sarah  in  the  sixth  week,
and  wished  her  joy  of  her  young  son,  ch.  xviii.  10).
— II.  0.  RAMIUCH  :  Isaac's  birth  in  many  respects
resembles  greatly  the  birth  of  Christ :  1.  Both  births
were  announced  long  before ;  2.  both  occur  at  the
time  fixed  by  God;  :>.  both  persons  were  named
before  they  were  born  ;  -1.  both  were  supernaturally
(miraculously)  conceived  ;  5.  both  births  occasioned
great  joy  :  t>.  the  law  of  circumcision  begins  (as  to
its  principle)  with  Isaac,  and  ceases  in  (through)
Christ.  Ver.  7.  In  her  joy  Sarah  speaks  of  many
(several)  children,  when  she  had  borne  only  one  son,
who,  however,  was  better  to  her  than  ten  sons. — She
will  say :  Not  only  has  my  dead  body  received
strength  from  God,  to  bring  a  child  into  the  world,
but  1  am  conscious  of  such  strength  that  1  can
supply  its  food  which  sometimes  fails  much  younger
and  more  vigorous  mothers. — Sarah  did  this  (nursed
IKT  child)  although  she  was  a  princess  (ch.  xxiii.  6)
and  of  noble  blood,  for  the  law  of  nature  itself
requires  this  from  all,  since,  with  this  very  end  in
view,  God  has  given  breasts  to  all  and  filled  them
with  milk.  The  Scriptures  united  these  two  functions,
the  bearing  of  children  and  nursing  them,  as  belong
ing  to  the  mother  (Luke  xi.  27:  xxiii.  2'.l  :  1's.  xxii.
In).  Thus  these  two  things  were  reckoned  among
the  bles.Miigsand  kindness  of  the  Great  God  (ch.  xlix.
'.:."•).  while  an  unfruitful  body  and  dry  breasts  are  a
punishment  from  him  (Ilosca  ix.  11-1-1). — Ver.  8.
(Whether,  as  the  Jews  say,  Shorn,  Melchizedec  and
Selah  were  present  at  this  feast,  cannot  be  said  with
certainty.) — Abraham  doubtless  had  his  servants  to
share  in  the  feast,  ami  held  instructive  conversation
with  them,  exhorting  them  to  confidence  in  God,  to
flic  pral.-e  of  his  name.  Jt  is  a  peculiarly  spiritual,
joyful,  and  thankful  feast. — An  enumeration  of  bib
lical  feasts  (-2  Cor.  i.  2i>). — The  blessing  of  children.
Ingratitude,  in  regarding  many  such  gifts  (children)  as
a  punishment. — Feasts  afier  baptism  are  not  opposed
to  the  will  of  God,  but  they  should  still  be  observed
to  his  honor,  with  pious  people,  without  luxury,  and
other  poor  women  in  childbed  should  not  be  for
gotten. — SCHRODER:  Ver.  1.  lie  is  faithful  (Xum.
xxiii.  I'.i). — Since  every  birth  tlows  from  (is  a  gift  from)
God  (I's.  cxxvii.  8),  so  we  may  rightly  say,  that  the
Lord  visits  those  to  whom  he  sends  children. — Ver.
:>.  Isaac  was  the  son  of  the  free-woman,  born  through
the  promise  of  God  (Gal.  iv.  22,  23),  consequently  a
type  of  every  child  of  God,  who  through  the  strength
of  the  promise,  or  of  the  gospel,  is  born  to  freedom
and  of  a  free-woman.  (Roos.)— What  strange  dis
appointments  !  The  son,  who  receives  from  God
who  hears  the  cries  and  wishes  of  men,  his  name
Ishmael  (God  hears)  is  not  the  promised  one,  but
the  promise  was  fulfilled  in  the  other,  Isaac,  who  was
named  according  to  a  more  common  human  custom  !
[The  laughing  of  Abraham  (ch.  xvii.  17)  has  how
ever  a  greater  spiritual  worth  than  the  cry  of  Hagar
for  help  (ch.  xvi.  11).] — PASSAVANT:  Behold,  two
children  of  one  father  and  in  the  same  house,  reared  un
der  one  discipline,  consecrated  before  the  same  altar,  of
like  hearts,  borne  before  God  upon  the  same  prayer
and  thus  offered  to  him,  and  still  so  unlike  in  their
minds  and  ways,  in  their  conduct  and  aims,  etc. ;  the
dark  mysteries  of  nature  and  grace. — TACBE  :  The
birth  of  Isaac  and  expulsion  of  Ishmael  an  example
of  what  occurred  at  the  Reformation,  and  of  what
must  take  place  in  us  all.


2.  IshmaePs  removal  (ver.  9-21).  jTJic  theocratic,
separations  in  their  import :  a.  Judgment  in  respect
to  ihcjitiicsx  for  theocratic  purpose*,  but  not,  b.  in
respect  to  a  destination  to  blessedness. — [So  Henry.
We  are  not  sure  that  it  was  his  eternal  ruin ;  it  ia
presumption  to  say  that  all  those  who  arc  left  out  of
the  external  dispensation  of  God's  covenant,  are
therefore  excluded  from  all  his  mercies. — A.  G.] —
The  providence  of  God  over  Ishmael. — The  Arabians.
— The  Mohammedan  world. — Mission  Sermons. — The
external  separation  presupposes  an  inward  estrange
ment.

STARKE  :  Ver.  0.  A  laughing,  jesting,  gay,  and
playful  youth.  It  may  be  that  Ishmael  had  reviled
Isaac  because  of  his  name  which  he  had  received
from  a  laugh,  and  had  treated  him  with  scorn. —
LANGE  :  Ver.  1<>.  Sarah  could  not  have  been  without
human  weakness  in  this  harsh  demand ;  but  the
hand  of  God  was  in  it. — CRAMER  :  The  faults  and
defects  of  parents  usually  cleave  to  their  children,
hence  parents,  especially  mothers  during  pregnancy,
should  guard  themselves  lest  they  stain  themselves
with  a  grave  fault  which  shall  cleave  to  their  children
during  their  lives. — Sill.  Till).  :  The  mocking  spirit
is  the  sign  of  an  evil,  proud,  jealous,  envious  heart ;
take  heed  that  thou  dost  not  sit  with  the  scorncr  (Ps.
i.  1) — Jiibl.  M'irf.  :  Cases  often  occur  in  a  family  in
which  the  wife  is  much  wiser  than  her  husband,
hence  their  advice  and  counsel  ought  not  to  be
refused  (1  Sam.  xxv.  :>,  17).  Polygamy  produces
great  unhappincss. — CKAMKU  :  There  will  arise  some
times  disputes  between  married  persons,  even  be
tween  those  who  arc  usually  peaceful  and  friendly.
Still  one  should  not  give  loose  reins  to  his  passion,
or  allow  the  difference  to  go  too  far. — Ver.  12.
LJXGK:  Here  we  see  that  the  seed  of  the  bond
woman  shall  be  distinguished  from  Isaac.  —  The
general  rule  is,  that  the  wife  shall  be  subject  to  her
husband,  and  in  all  reasonable  things  obey  him,  but
here  God  makes  an  exception. — Since  Abraham  in
the  former  case  had  followed  his  wife  without  consult
ing  God,  when  she  gave  him  Hagar  to  wife,  so  he
must  now  also  fulfil  her  will. — The  comparison  of
Ishmael  with  the  unbelieving  Jews  at  the  time  of  the
New  Testament :  the  haughty,  perverse,  scoffing
spirit  of  persecution;  the  sympathy  of  Abraham
with  Ishmail,  the  compassion  of  Jesus  towards  the
Jews ;  the  expulsion  and  wandering  in  the  wilder
ness,  but  still  under  the  Divine  providence  ;  the  hope
that  they  shall  finally  attain  favor  and  grace. —
CRAMKR  :  The  recollection  of  his  former  sins  should
be  a  cross  to  the  Christian. — One  misfortune  seldom
comes  alone. — Blbl.  Wirt. :  There  is  nothing  which
makes  a  man  so  tender  and  humble  as  the  cross,
affliction,  and  distress. — GERLACH  :  The  great  truth
that  natural  claims  avail  nothing  before  God,  reveals
itself  clearly  in  this  history. — Isaac  receives  his  name
from  a  holy  laughing ;  Ishmael  was  also  a  laugher,
but  at  the  same  time  a  profane  scoffer. — CALWER,
Ramlbuch :  What  we  often  receive  as  a  reproach,
and  listen  to  with  reluctance,  may  contain  under  the
rough,  hard  shell  a  noble  kernel  of  truth,  which  in
deed  agrees  with  the  will  of  God.  —  SCHRODER  :
(Luther  supposes  Abraham  to  invite  to  the  feast  all
the  patriarchs  then  living ;  with  Melchizedec  and  the
King  of  the  Philistines.) — Isaac,  the  subject  of  the
holy  laugh,  serves  also  as  a  laughing-stock  of  profane
wit. — Ishmael  is  the  representative  of  that  world  in
the  church  yet  scoffing  at  the  church.  (In  the  letter  to
the  Galatians  of  the  bond-church,  in  opposition  to  the
free. — Both,  if  I  may  say  so,  are  the  sons  of  laughter


CHAP.  XXII.   1-19.


463


but  in  how  different  a  sense.  Sarah  does  not  call
Ishmael  by  his  name  (a  clear  sign  of  her  indignation),
and  shows  her  contempt  by  calling  him  the  son  of
this  bond-woman.  (LUTHER  :  ch.  iii.  24  ;  Prov.  xxii.
10;  John  viii.  35.) — Ver.  13.  Ishmael  remained  his
pen,  and  indeed  his  first-born,  whom  he  had  long
held  for  the  heir  of  the  blessing.  It  is  never  easy
to  rend  from  our  hearts  the  objects  of  our  dear  affec
tions.  But  he  who  must  soon  offer  Isaac  also  is  here
put  into  the  school  for  preparation.  Michaelis  sees
in  this  removal  the  evidence  that  God  was  displeased
with  polygamy. — Ver.  14.  In  many  points  surely  the
men  of  God  seem  somewhat  cold  and  hard-hearted  (Ex.
xxxii.  27;  Deut.  xiii.  6  ff. ;  xxxiii.  9 ;  Matt.  x.  37 ;  Luke
xiv.  26).  After  this  distinction  was  clearly  made,  Ish
mael  himself  might  draw  near  again  (ch.  xxv.  9)  and
indeed  share  in  the  possessions  of  his  rich  father.
Baumgarten.  —  The  expulsion  of  Ishmael  was  a
warning  for  Israel,  so  far  as  it  constantly  relied  upon
its  natural  sonship  from  Abraham. — Thus  the  Papists
to-day,  when  they  parade  their  long  succession,
pay  nothing  mon;  than  if  they  also  called  Ishmael  the
first-born. — Ver  17.  We  see  moreover  here  that  if
father  and  mother  forsake  us,  then  the  Lord  himself
willtakeusup.  CALVIN. — THE  SAME:  Ver.  19.  If  God
withdraw  from  us  the  grace  of  his  providence  we  are
as  surely  deprived  of  all  means  of  help,  even  of  those
which  lie  near  at  hand,  as  if  they  were  far  removed
from  us.  We  pray  him,  therefore,  not  only  that  he
would  supply  us  with  what  we  need,  but  give  us  pru
dence  to  make  a  right  use  of  it ;  otherwise  it  will
happen  that,  with  closed  eyes,  we  shall  lie  in  the
midst  of  our  supplies  and  perish.*  —  PASSAVANT  :
Hagar's  marriage  was  Sarah's  own  deed,  not  the
work  of  God,  and  this  also  made  her  fearful.  Men
easily  become  anxious  about  their  own,  self-chosen
ways. — Abraham  obeys. — The  obedience  of  the  pious

*  [So  we  do  not  see  the  fountain  opened  for  sinners  in
this  v  orld's  wilderness  until  God  opens  our  eyes.  Jacobus.
—A.  O.]


blessed  in  its  results  in  all  cases. — God  knows  hofl
to  find  us,  even  in  the  wilderness.

3.  Abraham's  covenant  with  Abimelcch  (vers.
22-34). — Traces  of  noble  minds  in  the  heathen
world. — The  Hebrews  and  the  Philistines. — Why
they  attract  and  why  repel. — STARKK  :  B'M.  Tub. .
Even  the  world  wonders  at  the  blessedness  of  the
pious. — B'M.  Wlrt.  It  is  allowed  the  Christian  truly
to  cuter  into  covenant  with  strange,  foreign,  and",
to  a  certain  extent,  with  unbelieving  people. — A
pious  man  ought  to  complain  to  the  rulers  of  the
reproach  and  injustice  he  suffers. — Rulers  should
themselves  guard  the  care  of  the  land,  since  cour
tiers  often  do  what  they  wish. — The  Rabbins  (ver.
33)  think  that  Abraham  planted  a  garden  of  fruit-
trees,  in  which  he  received  and  entertained  the  stran
gers,  from  which  he  did  not  suffer  them  to  depart
until  they  became  proselytes. — It  is  probable  that
Abraham  had  pitched  near  a  grove  or  wood,  from
which  he  might  have  wood  for  his  sacrifices,  and  in
which  he  might  perhaps  hold  his  worship,  and  also
that  he  might  have  more  shade  in  this  hot  Eastern
land. — I  am  also  a  stranger  here  upon  the  earth. —
GKRLACH  :  Ver.  22.  The  blessing  of  God  which  rest
ed  upon  Abraham  awakened  reverence  even  in  these
heathen,  who  served  still  the  true  God ;  a  type  of  the
blessing  which,  even  in  Old-Testament  times,  passed
over  from  the  covenant  people  upon  the  heathen. —
SCHRODER  :  A  consolation  follows  upon  the  great
sorrow  (Calvin). — The  oath  was  an  act  of  condescen
sion  to  the  evident  mistrust  of  the  Princes ;  in  the
other  aspect  an  act  of  worship. — The  Holy  Scrip
tures  regard  the  oath  as  if  a  peculiar  sacrament ;
there  is  the  name  of  God,  and  the  hearts  of  the  peo
ple  are  reconciled,  and  mistrust  and  strifes  destroyed.
(Luther). — Nature  fixes  itself  firmly  when  all  goes
well.  But  faith  knows  here  no  continuing  city  (13er-
lenburgcr  Bibcl). — Moses  reports  three  sacred  works
of  Abraham :  1.  He  labored;  2.  he  preached,  3.
he  bore  patiently  his  long  sojourn  in  a  strange  lanr'


TENTH    SECTION.

Tlie  sacrifice  of  Isaac.     TJie  sealing  of  the  faith  of  Abraham.     The  completion  and  sealing  of  the

Divine  Promise.


CHAPTEK  XXII.  1-19.

And  it  came  to   pass  after  these    things  [preparatory  thereto],  that  God  [Elohim]  did

2  tempt1  Abraham,  and  said  unto  him,  Abraham :  and  he  said,  Behold,  here  I  am.     And
he  said,  Take  now  thy  son,  thine  only  son  Isaac,  whom  thou  lovest,  and  get  thee  into
the  land  of  Moriah  [shown  or  provided  of  Jehovah]  ; 2  and  offer,  him  there  for  a  burnt  offering3
upon  one  of  the  mountains  which  I  will  tell  thee  of.

3  And  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  saddled  his  ass,  and  took  two  of
his  young  men  [servants]  with  him,  and  Isaac  his  son,  and  clave  the  wood  for  the  burnt

4  offering,  and  rose  up,  and  went  unto  the  place  of  which  God  had  told  him.     Then  on

5  the  third  day  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  saw  the  place  afar  off.     And  Abraham
eaid  unto  his  young  men,  Abide  ye  here  with  the  ass  ;  and  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder

6  and  worship,  and  come  [may  come]  again  to  you  (fi^s).     And  Abraham  took  the  wood
of  the  burnt  offering,  and  laid  it  upon  Isaac  his  son ;  and  he  took  the  fire  in  his  hand,


464


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES.


7  and  a  knife  :  and  they  went  both  of  them  together.     And  Isaac  spake  unto  Abraham
his   father,   and  said,  Mv  father  :    and  he  said,  Here   ami  [ihcar],   my  son.      And  he

8  said,  Behold  the  fire  and  the  wood,  but  where  is  the  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering  ?     And
Abraham  said,  Mv  son,  God  will  provide4  himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering:  so  they

9  went  [further]  both  of  thorn  together.      And  they  came  to  the  place  which  God  had  told
him  of;   and  Abraham   built  an  altar  there,  and  laid  [upon  it]   the  wood  in  order;    and

10  bound  I-aac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the  altar  upon  the  wood.     And  Abraham  stretched

11  forili  his  hand,  and  took  the  knife  to  slay  his  son.      And   the  angel  of  the  Lord   called

12  unto  him  out  of  heaven,  and  said,  Abraham,  Abraham:   and  he  said,  Here  am  I.      And
lie   said,  Lav  not    ihino   hand  upon   the  lad,  neither  do  thou  anything  unto  him:    for
now   1     kllOW    [i  havernwiviU]    that    thou    fearcst    God    [literally :  a  God-fearer  art  thou],    seeing

13  thou  hast   not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son  from  me.      And  Abraham  lifted  up  hid
eves,  and  looked   [spied,  descried],  and  behold,  behind  /////<  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket  by
Ins  horns:   and  Abraham  went  and  took  the  ram,  and  offered  him   for  a  burnt  offering

14  jn  (he   stead  of  his  son.      And  Abraham   called  the  name  of  that  place  Jehovah-jireh6
[j^:.iv:ili  w:il  sec]  :   as  ii  is  said  to  this  day,  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen.

If)          And  the  angel  of  the   Lord  called   unto  Abraham   out  of  heaven   the  second   time,

1C,    And  siiid,    15 v  myself  have   1  sworn,   saith  the   Lord,   for  because   thou   hast  done   this

17   tiling,  and  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  , ion  :  That  in  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,

and  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thy  sivd  as  the  stars  of  the  heaven,  and  as  the   sand

15  which  i.-i  upon  the  sea  shore  ;   and  thy  seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  enemies.      And
in    thv   seed    shall    all    the    nations  of  the   earth  be    blessed    [shall  bless  themselves ;  Ilithpael]  ;

1!)  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice.  So  Abraham  returned  unto  his  young  men;  and
they  rose  up,  and  went  together  to  Beer-sheba ;  and  Abraham  dwelt  [still longer]  at,
Beer-slieba.

[i  vl>r.  1.  — ris:  ,  to  try,  to  i  rove,  to  \  v.;  lot  ]:'•(•    1.   AT:.!,  r-hice  men  are  tested  <-:;!y  ;n  t;;  'V  arc  ;  laced  i::  circumstance?

of  tempt  :it  inn.  t>  ti'tnp*.  —  A.  (>.]

("  Ver.  2.— Or  when-  Jehovah  is  seen,  appears,  is  manifested. — A.  G.]
|;;  Ver.  .'.— il.'li.,  Male.  In' m  ascend  I'm- u  hiintt  offering.— &..  G.]
[4  Vcr.  8.—  IIV,7  st  "J'»r  him*  'fa  tomb.-    A.  (J.1

the


GKXKKAL   r'lKLl.MlXAllY    Iir.MA;:KS.

1.  Tlic  documentary  hypothesis  [which  implies
not  only  that  historical  documents  may  have  come
down  to  Mo-es,  ami  were  used  by  him,  but  also
that  the  book  is  compacted  from  distinct  and  still
distinguishable  compositions. — A.  G]  meets  in  this
section  a  very  significant  rebuke,  whose  import  has
not  been  sufficiently  estimated  either  by  Knobel  or
Delit/.sch.  '-Leaving  out  of  view  the  tersa  Elohim,
nothing  reaiinds  us,"  says  Knobel,  "  of  the  Elohistic,
but  ratlicr,  everything  is  in  favor  of  the  Jchovistic
author,  e.  g.,  in  the  main  point,  its  whole  tendency
as  thus  stated  (the  knowledge  of  the  unlawfulness
of  human  sacrifices  in  Israel),  the  human  way  in
which  God  is  spoken  of,  etc.  We  must,  therefore,
hold  that  the  Jehovist  uses  Elohim  here,  so  long  as
he  treats  of  human  sacrifice-^,  and  then  first,  after
this  sacrifice,  so  foreign  to  the  religion  of  Jehovah
ver.  1),  lias  been  rebuked,  uses  Jehovah."  The  real
distinction  of  the  names  of  God  is  thus  recognized
without  considering  its  consequences.  Delitzsch
says,  "the  cnlarger  generally  uses  the  name  rv.fP
less  exclusively  than  the  author  of  the  original  writing
the  CV!3x(n).  This  change  of  the  names  of  God
is,  at  all  events,  significant,  as  is  every  change  of  the
names  of  God  in  the  original  dependence  and  con
nection  of  one  of  the  two  narrators."  This  conces
sion  does  not  agree  •with  his  introduction,  when  he
gays,  "  a  comprehensible  distinction  between  the  two


names  of  God,  Eiohim  and  Jehovah,  is  not  always
to  be  received;  the  author  has  often  merely  found  a
pleasure  in  ornamenting  his  work  with  tiic  alternation
of  these  two  names  "  (p.  ;*2,  :^J).  The  change  in
the  names  in  this  section  is  explained  by  the  fact,
that  the  revelation  of  God,  which  the  patriarch  re
ceived  at  the  beginning  of  the  history,  mingled  itself
in  his  consciousness  with  traditional  Elohistio  ideas
or  prejudices,  while  in  the  sequel,  the  second  revela
tion  of  Jehovah  makes  a  clear  and  lasting  distinction
between  the  pure  word  of  Jehovah,  and  the  tradi
tion:'!  Eluhistie,  or  general  religious  apprehension
of  it.

'J.  We  have  already  discussed,  in  the  introduc
tion  (p.  Ixxiv.  if.),  the  peculiar  idea  in  the  history  of
the  sacrifice  of  Isaac,  which  th-c  traditional  theologi
cal  misunderstanding  has  transformed  into  a  dark
enigma,  which  lies  as  a  grave  difficulty  or  stumbling
block  in  the  history.  In  his  "  History  of  the  Old
Covenant  "(2d  ed.  p.  205),  KUHT;:  rcsr.mcs  with  great
zeal  the  discussion,  with  reference  to  HEXGSTENBKKO'S
Bcitrayt.  iii.  p.  145;  LANCE:  Lelcn  Jcsu,  i.  p.  120;
"Positive  Dogmatics,"  p.  818,  and  oilier  works,  and
asserts  directly  that  God  demanded  from  Abraham
the  actual  slaying  of  Isaac.  It  is  no  difficulty,  in  his
view,  that  God,  the  true  one,  who  is  truth,  commands
at  the  beginning  of  the  narrative,  what  he  forbids
at  the  close,  as  it  was  not  difficult  to  him  to  hold  that
the  assumed  angels  (eh.  vi.)  were  created  sexless,  but
had  in  some  magical  way  themselves  created  for  them
selves  the  sexual  power.  [This  is  the  difficulty  which


CHAP.   XXII.    1-19.


465


Kurtz  overlooks.    It  is  not  the  difficulty  in  reconciling
this  command  with  the  prohibition  of  human  sacrifices
in  the  Mosaic  law,  but  in  reconciling  the  command
with  the  prohibition  in  this  history,  if  the  killing  of
Isaac  is  referred  to  in  both.    Hengstenborg  and  those
who  argue  with  him,  urge  in  favor  of  their  view:   1.
That  the  command  relates  only  to  the  spiritual  sacri
fice  of  Isaac,  here  termed  a  burnt-offering  because
of  the  entire  renunciation  of  Isaac  as  a  son  by  na
ture,  which  he  was  to  make,  so  that  Isaac  was  to  be
dead  to  him,  and  then  received  back  again  from  the
dead,  no  longer  in  any  sense  a  son  of  the  flesh,  but
the  son  of  promise  and  of  grace ;  and  then,'  2.  the
numerous  places  in  the  Scripture  in  which  these  sac
rificial  terms  are  used  in  a  spiritual  sense  (e.  g.,  IIos.
xij-  p  ;  IV  xl.  7-9  ;  where  the  same  term,  burnt-
;    offering,  is  used,  and  the  Psalmist  describes  the  en
tire  yielding  of  his  personality  as  the  sacrifice  which
God    required;  Ps.  li.    19;  cxix.  loS ;  Koin.  xii.  1  ;
Phil.  iv.  18  ;  Ileb.  xiii.  15,  etc.     See  also  the  passage
1  Sam.  i.  2-1,  25) ;  and  finally  3.  the  force  and  usage  of
the  word  here  rendered  to  tempt.     But  on  the  other
hand  it  is  urged  with  great  force  :  1.  That  the  terms
here  used  are  such  as  to  justify,  if  not  require,  the
interpretation  which  Abraham   put  upon  the  com
mand,  i.  e.,  that  he  was  required  literally  to  slay  his
son  as  a  sacrifice ;  2.  that  it  is  only  as'thus  under
stood  that  we  see  the  force  of  the   temptation  to
which  Abraham  was  subjected.     It  is  obviously  the
design  of  the  writer  to  present  this  temptation  as  the
most  severe  and  conclusive   test.     He  was  tried  in
the  command  to  leave  his  home,  in  his  long  waitin"-
for  the  promised  seed,  in  the  command  to  expel  Isl°
mael.     In  all  these  his  faith  and  obedience  stood  the
test.     It  remained  to  be  seen  whether  it  would  yield
the  son  of  promise  also.     This  test,  therefore,  was
applied.     The  temptation  was  not  merely  to    part
with  his  son,  the  only  son  of  his  love,  but  it  was  in
the  command  to  put  him  to  death,  of  whom  it  was
said,  "  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called.1'     The  com
mand  and  the  promise  were  apparently  in  direct  con
flict.     If  he  obeys  the  command  he  would  seem  to
frustrate  the  promise ;  if  he  held  fast  to  the  promise
and  saved  lua  son  he  would  disobey  the  command.
That  this  interpretation  best  explains  the  whole
transaction,  as  it  related  to  Isaac  as  the  channel  of
blessing  to  the  world,  and  the  type  of  Christ,  who
was  the  true  human   sacrifice— the   man   for  men.
4.  Thai   there  is  no  real  moral  difficulty,  since  God'
who  is  the  giver  of  life,  has  a  right  to  require  it,  and
iis  command  clearly  expressed,  both  justified
Abraham  in  this  painful  deed  and  made  it  bindino-
upon  him.     5.  That  this  seems  to  be  required  by  the
words  of  the  apostle,  Heb.  xi.  19,  "accounting  that
bod  was  able  to  raise  him  from  the  dead."     The
weight  of  authority  is  greatly  in  favor  of  the  latter
interpretation,  even    among    recent   commentators
and  it  is  clearly  to  be  preferred.     In  regard  to  the
difficulty    which    Ilengstenberg   and  Lango  ur«-c    it
may  be  said  that  the  command  of  God  is  not  always
a  revelation  of  his  secret  will.     He  did  not  intend
that  Abraham  should  actually  slay  his  son,  and  there
is  therefore  no  change  in  his  purpose  or  will      He
did  intend  that  Abraham  should  understand  that  he
was  to  do  this.     It  was  his  purpose  now  to  anply  the
final  test  of  his  faith  (a  test  needful  to  the  patriarch
himself,  and  to  all  believers),  which  could  only  be
the  surrender  to  the  will  of  God  of  that  which  he
lield   most  dear ;   in  this  case  his  son,  the  son  of
promise,  in  whom  his  seed  should  be  called.     To  ap
ply  the  teat,  he  commands  the  patriarch,  as  he  had  a


30


perfect  right  to  do,  to  go  and  offer  his  son  a  burnt-
offering.     When  the  act  was  performed  i:i  heart,  and
was  about  to   be  actually  completed,  the  test   was
clear,  the  obedience  of  faith  was  manifest,  the  whole
condition   of   things    was    changed,   and    there    was
therefore  a  corresponding  change  in  the  formal  com
mand,  though  no   change  in  the   divine  purpose. —
A.  G.  |       The    actual    divine    restraint,    which    even
restrained    the   sacrifice   of    Isaac    in  the    very   act
(p.    207),    forms    the    reconciling    m\dV<:-term    be
tween    the    command    to    Abraham    and    the    pro
hibition    to   Abraham's    descendants.      We   cannot
truly   yield   our  assent   to  such  reconciling  middle-
terms  between   the   commands  and   prohibitions  of
God.     The  question,  how  could  the  assumed  posi
tive  command,  "Thou  shalt  shy  Isaac,"  become  a
ground  of  the  certain  faith  of  Abraham  ?  which  is
the  main^lilliculty  in  the  ordinary  view  of  the  pas
sage,  Dclitzsch  dismisses  with  the  remark  (3d  ed.  p.
418),  "  the  ^subjective  criterion  of  a  fact  of  revela
tion  is  not  its  agreement  with  the  utterances  of  the
so-called   pious    consciousness  which   exalts    itself
above  the  Scripture,  etc.,  but  it  is  the  experience  of
the  new-birth."     This  accords  entirely  with  the  ex
planation  of  the  Tridentine  theologians.     The   sub
jective  criterion  of  a  fact  of  revelation  is  rather  that
clear,  i.  c.,  calm,  because  free  from  doubt,  firm  cer
tainty  of  faith  produced  directly  by  the  fact  of  reve
lation  itself.     And  this  is  truly  a  consciousness  of  the
pious,  which  does  not  indeed  set  itself  above   the
Scripture,  but  with  which,   also,   the  different  acts,
words,  and  commands  of  Jehovah,  who  ever  remains
the  same  in  his  truth  and  veracity,  cannot  be  in  con
flict.     The  agreement  between  the  declarations  of
the  eternal  revelation,  and  the  eternal  declarations
of  the  religious  consciousness,  is  so  far  wanting  here,
that   Delitzsch   says:  "Israel  knew  that  God   had
once   required  from  Abraham  (the  human   sacrifice)
in  order  to  fix  for  it  a  prohibition  for  all  time.     The
law  therefore  recognizes  the  human  sacrifice  only  as
an  abomination  of  the  Moloch-worship  (Lev.  xviiL
21  ;  xx.  1-5),  and  the  case  of  Jephthah  belongs  to  a
time  when  the  Israelitish   and  Camianitish   popular
spirit  and  views  were  peculiarly  intermingled."    Then
the  abomination  of  the  Moloch-service  in  Israel  rests
purely  upon  the  positive  ground  of  the  example  in
this  history,  an  example  which  with  the  same  extreme
positiveness,  might  be  understood  to  have  just  the
contrary   force,   if   it  signifies,    perhaps ;    we   may
omit  the  human  sacrifice  in  all  such  cases,  when  Je
hovah  makes  the  same  wonderful   prohibition.     As
to  the  sacrifice  of  Jephthah,  Delitzsch  regards  it  as  a
sort  of  reconciling  middle-term  between  the  Moloch-
worship  of  the  Canaanites  and  the  prohibition  of  a
Moloch-worship  in  Israel,  that  a  hero  of  the  time  of
the  Judges  should  have  acted  in  a  heathen  (even
Canaanitish !)  rather  than  in  an  Israelitish  mannci.
Jephthah,  who  with  the  most  definite  and  triumphant
consciousness  distinguishes  between  the   Moabitish
and  Ammonite  God,  Chcmoah,  to  whom,  pmbablv,
human  sacrifices  were  offered  (2  Kings  iii.  27),  and
the  God  of  Israel,  Jehovah  (Judg.  xi.  24) ;  Jephthah
who  made   his  vow  of  a  sacrifice  to  Jehovah,  after
the  spirit  of  Jehovah  came  upon  him  (vcr.  29),  a  vow
which  was  connected  with  a  prayer  for  victory  over
a  Moloch-serving  people  ;  Jephthah,  who  was  clearly
conscious  that  he  had  made  his  vow  to  Jehovah  that
through  him  he  might  overcome  the  children  of  Am-
mon  under  their  God  Chemosh  ;  offered  indeed  an
abomination  to  Jehovah ;  and  it  is  obvious  what  is
meant  when  it  is  said,  the  daughters  upon  the  moim


466


GENESIS,   OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


tains  bewailed  her  virginity  (not  the  lost,  but  the
illegally  fixed)  and  not  her  life,  although  the  matter
concerned  her  life  ;  but  it  is  not  so  evident  when  it
is  said  that  she  never  knew  a  man,  after  her  father
had  put  her  to  death  (ver.  o'.'),  and  it  must  not  sur
prise  us,  truly,  that  it  became  a  custom  for  the  daugh
ters  of  Israel  to  spend  four  d;iys  yearly  to  commemo
rate  and  praise  a  virgin  who  was  entirely  in  accord
ance  with  her  father  in  tin.1  most  hurtful  and  godless
misunderstanding,  and  in  the  most  abominable  sacri
fice.*'  We  have  to  observe  three  oppositions  in  this
history:  first,  that  between  TEX*!  ns:  and  X~£"
iS^'viJn— j~  ^  second,  that  between  CTVbxfi  and
PV'rP,  and  third,  that  between  Ctbm  of  verse  second
and  i:~r  of  verse  tenth. — The  key  to  the  explana
tion  of  the  whole  history  lies  in  the  expression  ,~I53 .
It  denotes  not  simply  to  prove,  or  to  put  to  the  test
(Knubi •!,  Delitzsch),  but  to  prove  under  circumstances
which  have  originated  from  sin,  and  which  increase
the  severity  of  the  proof,  and  make  it  a  temptation.
And  in  .-o  far  as  the  union  of  the  elements  of  the
testing  and  of  the  tempting,  i.  e.,  the  soliciting  to
evil,  is  under  the  providence  of  Jehovah,  it  denotes,
//>  tcmptx,  in  much  the  same  sense  that  lie  also  pun
ishes  :-in  with  sin.  It  is  defined  more  closely  thus:
he  leads  or  can  lead  into  temptation  (to  do  wrong)
(Matt.  vi.  1:;).  IJut,  the  dose-t  analy.-is  is  this:  the
proving  is  from  God,  the  temptation  is  from  sin
(.lames  i.  1:;).  Thus  the  promise  at  Marah  (Kxod.
xv.  i>5,  '21',)  was  in  so  far  a  temptation  of  the  people
as  it  had  the  inclination  to  misinterpret  the  same  in
.1  fleshly  M'iise;  the  giving  of  the  manna  was  a  temp
tation  so  far  as  it  was  connected  with  the  ordinance
that  the  manna  should  not  be  gathered  upon  the
Sabbath  (Kxod.  xvi.  -I);  the  terrible  revelation  of
(iod  from  Sinai  (Exod.  x.x.  iM)  was  a  temptation  of
the  people,  since  it  could  be  the  occasion  for  their
falling  into  slavish  fear,  ami  flight  from  the  presence
of  (iod  (Kxod.  xx.  ]'.>);  com] i.  l>eiil.  viii.  '2  ;  ver.  1(1  ;
especially  eh.  xiii.  1  ;  .ludg.  ii.  ii±  The  demand  of
God  from  Abraham  that  he  should  w.-fifice  his  son,
became,  through  the  remaining  and  overwhelming
prejudice-  of  the  heathen,  to  whom  to  sacrifice  was
identical  with  to  slay,  a  temptation  to  Abraham  ac
tually  '•  to  lay  hi.s  hands  upon  the  lad."  The  com
mand  of  (Iod  stands  sure,  but  he  did  not  understand
its  import  fully,  viz.,  that  he  should,  in  and  under  the
completion  of  an  animal  sacrifice,  consecrate  and  in
wardly  yield  his  son  to  Jehovah,  and  thus  purify  his
heart  from  all  new  fleshly  and  slavish  attachment  to
him.  IJut  it  was  the  ordination  of  God,  that  in  his
conflict  with  the  elements  of  the  temptation,  he
should  come  to  the  point,  when  he  could  reveal  to
him  the  pure  and  full  sense  of  his  command.  Hence
«lso  the  first  revelation  was  darker  than  the  second.
This  fact  is  distorted  when  Schelling  finds  here  in
the  Klohim  the  ungodly  principle,  which  appears  in
opposition  to  the  Maleach  Jehovah  as  the  true  God
(DKJ.IT/.SCII,  p.  417).  Even  the  distinction  between
a  night  and  dream-voice,  and  a  clear  and  loud  tone
at  the  perfect  day  (Ewald),  decides  nothing,  although
generally  the  dream-vision  is  the  more  imperfect  form.

•»  TTo  congratulate  ourselves  upon  securing  Dr.  Pauins
Casscl  to  prepare  the  Bibelwerk  upon  the  hook  of  Judges,
who  has  shown  in  his  condensed  article,  "Jephthah,"  in
HEKZOG'S  Jtcat  Encyclopedia,  that  he  will  not  t-uffer  himself
to  he  imposed  upon  by  the  massive  traditional  misinterpre
tation  »f  this  passage  (for  whone  exegotical  restitution
llengstenherg  has  rendered  important  service;,  to  the  injury
wf  a  free  and  living  interpretation  of  it.


But  the  distinction  between  an  imperfect,  vague,  and
general,  and  the  perfect,  definite  revelation,  is  here
truly  of  decisive  importance.  The  history  of  the
prophets  (as  of  Jonah)  and  of  the  apostles  (as  of
Peter)  confirms  abundantly  that  a  true  divine  reve
lation  can  be  obscured  through  an  erroneous  under
standing  of  the  revelation  (as  indeed  the  unerring
voice  of  conscience  may  be  obscured  through  an  er-
roneous  judgment  of  the  conscience).  This  same
fact  appears  and  continues  in  the  development  of
faith.  "The  flame  purifies  itself  from  the  smoke."
We  thus  hold  here,  as  earlier,  with  Hengstcnberg
and  Beftheau,  that  the  divine  command  to  Abraham
was  subject  to  a  misunderstanding  in  him,  through
the  inner  Asiatic  sinful  tradition  of  human  sacrifice,
but  a  misunderstanding  providentially  appointed  to
be  finally  salutary  to  Abraham.  With  this  contrast
between  the  imperfect  and  perfect  revelation  now
referred  to,  corresponds  fully  the  contrast  between
hffilohim,  Klohim  on  the  one  side,  and  Maleach-Jeho
vah,  and  Jehovah  on  the  other  side.  God,  as  the  God
of  all  Gods,  whose  name  breaks  through  all  the  im
pure  conceptions  of  him,  gave  the  first  command,
which  Abraham,  in  his  traditional  and  Elohistie  ideas,
with  an  admixture  of  some  misconception,  has  yet
correctly  but  vaguely  understood,  but  the  God  of
revelation  corrects  his  misunderstanding,  when  hf
seals  and  confirms  his  understanding,  that  he  should
sacrifice  his  son  to  God  in  his  heart.  But  the  third
opposition,  between  the  expression  to  sacrifice  and  to
slay  (nbm  and  13 nr),  is  very  important,  It  is  a
fact  that  the  Israelitish  consciousness  from  the  begin
ning  has  distinguished  between  the  spiritual  yielding,
consecration  (especially  of  the  first-born),  and  the
external  symbolical  slaying  of  a  sacrificial  animal  for
the  representation  and  confirmation  of  that  inward
consecration;  and  thus  also  between  the  sacrifice
and  the  killing  in  a  literal  sense.  This  fact  was  also
divinely  grounded,  through  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac.
It  served,  through  the  divine  providence,  for  the
rejection  of  all  heathenish  abominations,  and  for  the
founding  of  the  consecrated  typical  nature  of  the
sacrifices  of  the  Israelites.

;;.  According  to  Ue  Wette,  Schumann,  von  Boh-
len  and  others,  this  narrative  is  a  pure  myth.  Kno-
bel  is  doubtful  whether  there  is  not  a  fact  lying  at
its  basis,  but  which  he  explains  in  a  rationalistic
manner  (p.  ISO).  He  gives  correctly  the  ideas  of  the
history,  the  removing  of  human  sacrifice,  and  the
sanctifying  of  a  place  for  sacrifice  at  Jerusalem.
But  the  main  idea,  the  spiritual  sacrifice  of  the  son,
as  well  as  the  unity  of  the  idea  and  the  historical
fact  escapes  him.  For  the  untenablcuess  of  myth
ical  interpretations  in  the  Old  Testament,  see  the  In
troduction.


EXEGETICAL   AXD    C1UTICAL.

1.  TJie  command  of  God  to  Abraham,  and  Ids
jour  net/  to  Morlah  (vers.  1-3). — God  did  tempt
Abraham. — For  the  meaning  of  the  word  see  above.
It  is  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  the  form  of
the  revelation  was  a  dream-vision  of  the  night,  as
this  was  the  form  of  the  revealed  command  to  re
move  Ishmael. — Abraham!  Behold,  here  ami.
— Similarly :  J/y  father  !  Here  am  /,  my  son
'ver.  7).  Abraham,  Abraham !  Here  am  I  (ver.
11).  These  brief  introductions  of  the  conversation
express  the  great  tension  and  application  of  the
human  mind  in  those  moments,  in  a  striking  way,


CHAP.   XXII.    1-19.


467


and  serve  at  the  same  tune  to  prepare  us  for  the  im
portance  of  the  conversation.  The  call :  Abraham  !
the  announcement  of  a  revelation,  of  a  command.
Here  am  1 1  the  expression  of  hearing  and  obedience.
—Take  now  thy  son.— x;-n^5.  The  X3  modifies
the  command;  it  seems  to  express  that  Elohim
wished  to  receive  the  sacrifice  from  him  as  a  free
will  offering. — Thine  only. — [Reminding  us,  as  wu?
intended,  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father.
A.  G.]  The  Sept.  has  ayawijT^j  the  Vul.  unigenitum.
The  "P1~P  is  more  significant ;  it  renders  emphatic
the  incomparableness ;  this  term  and  the  two  follow
ing  express  the  greatness  of  the  sacrifice,  but  also
the  thought  that  God  knew  well  what  he  demanded
from  him. — Get  thee  into  the  land  of  Moriah.
— i.  e.,  into  the  region  of  the  mountain  of  Moriah,  or
of  Jerusalem.  The  name  Moriah  was  anticipated  ;
according  to  ver.  14,  it  was  occasioned  through  the
events  here  recorded.*  Michaelis,  Bleek  and  Tuch
understand  the  word  to  refer  not  to  Jerusalem,  but  to
Moreh  in  Sichem.  See  the  counter-reasons  in  Kuo-
bel.  One  main  reason  among  others,  is  that  the  way
from  Beer-sheba,  where  Abraham  still  dwelt,  by
Hebron  and  Jerusalem  to  Sichem,  according  to
Robinson,  required  about  35  hours,  a  distance  which
the  old  man  Abraham  and  the  youth  Isaac  could  not
well  have  accomplished  in  three  days  (ver.  4).  The
distance  from  Beer-sheba  to  Jerusalem  is,  according
to  Robinson,  20^  hours.  For  the  meaning  of  Moriah
see  below.  [HKNGSTENBERG  (Beit.  ii.  p.  2ti3)  derives
the  name  from  !1JO,  to  see.  It  is  the  Hoph.  part,
with  the  abbreviated  name  of  Jehovah,  or  f"P,  and
signifies  the  shown  or  pointed  out.  of  Jehovah.  The
i"!X~3,  2  Chron.  iii.  1,  has  no  decisive  weight  against
this  since  it  may  be  rendered  :  "  which  was  pointed
out,  shown  to  David,"  as  well  as  "  where  Jehovah
appeared  to  David." — A.  G.]  The  Samaritans  hold
Gerizim  to  have  been  the  place  of  the  sacrifice,  but
have  not  altered  the  text. — And  offer  him  there. —
For  a  burnt  offering  may  mean  as  a  burnt  offering,
or,  also,  with  a  burnt  oilering,  in  and  under  the  sym
bolical  presenting  of  it. — Upon  one  of  the  moun
tains. — A  clear  intimation  of  the  region  of  Jeru
salem. — Which  I  will  tell  thee  of.— It  is  not  said
when  this  more  distinct  designation  of  the  place  of
the  sacrifice  should  be  given.  The  designation  is,
however,  already,  by  anticipation,  contained  in
Moriah. — And  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the
morning.  (See  Chap.  xxi.  24.)  —  And  saddled
his  ass. — Girded,  not  saddled  him.  The  ass  was
destined  to  bear  the  wood  upon  his  covering.  Abra
ham  sets  out  with  the  bleeding  heart  of  the  father,
and  the  three  days'  journey  are,  no  doubt,  designed
to  give  him  time  for  the  great  conflict  within  him,
and  for  the  religious  process  of  development  (see
Acts  ix.  9).  [As  far  as  the  matter  of  obedience  was
concerned,  the  conflict  was  over.  His  purpose  was
fixed.  He  did  not  consult  with  flesh  and  blood,
but  instantly  obeyed. — A.  G.]

2.  Tk'i  mountain  and  place  of  the  sacrifice.
(Vers.  4-10.)— Then  on  the  third  day.— He  had
now  entire  certainty  as  to  the  place.  It  is  barely
intimated  how  significant,  sacred  and  fearful  the
place  of  sacrifice  was  to  him. — Abide  ye  here
With  the  ass. — The  yonng  men  or  servants,  or
young  slaves,  destined  to  this  service,  must  not  go

*  [Comp.  with  this  history  the  revelation  of  God  in  the
mount,  recorded  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  25;  2  Oliron.  vii.  1-3  and
Luke  ii.  22-28.— A.  G.]


with  him  to  the  sacred  mountain,  nor  be  present  at
the  fearful  sacrifice. — And  I  and  the  lad. — They
could  easily  see  from  the  wood  of  the  burnt-offering,
and  the  fire,  and  the  knife,  that  he  went  not  merely
to  worship,  but  to  sacrifice ;  but  to  him  the  sacrifice
was  the  main  thing. — And  will  worship,  and
come  again  to  you.— Knobel  remarks :  "  The
author  appears  not  to  have  believed  that  Abraham
would  be  presented  in  a  bad  light,  through  such  false-
utterances  (comp.  ch.  xii.  13;  xx.  12)."  We  have
already  seen  what  are  the  elements  of  truth,  in  the
places  referred  to,  here  the  sense  of  the  word  of
Abraham  is  determined  through  the  utterance  of  the
wish  in  2i'£3,  which,  according  to  the  form  ri2"  w31,
might  be  translated  :  and  may  we  return  again —
would  that  we  might.  It  is  the  design  of  the  am
biguous  term  to  assure  them  as  to  his  intention  or
purpose.  [It  is  rather  the  utterance  of  his  faith
that  God  was  able  to  raise  him  from  the  dead.  See
Heb.  xi.  19.— A.  G.]  —And  laid  it  upon  Isaac. —
From  the  three  days'  journey  of  Isaac,  and  the  service
which  he  here  performs,  we  may  conclude  that  he
had  grown  to  a  strong  youth,  like  Ishmael,  perhaps,
at  the  time  of  his  expulsion  (the  age  at  which  wo
confirm). — The  fire. — "A  glimmering  ember  or  tin
der  wood."  Knobel. — But  where  is  the  lamb  ?  *
— Isaac  knew  that  a  sacrificial  animal  belonged  to
the  sacrifice.  The  evasive  answer  of  the  father,
trembling  anew  at  the  question  of  his  beloved  child,
appears  to  intimate  that  he  held  the  entrance  of  a
new  revelation  at  the  decisive  moment  to  be  possible.
Until  this  occurs  he  must  truly  obey  according  to  his
previous  view  and  purpose. — The  terms  of  the  ad
dress  :  My  father !  my  son  ! — The  few  weighty
and  richly  significant  words  mark  the  difficulty  of  the
whole  course  for  Abraham,  and  present  in  so  much
clearer  a  light,  the  unwavering  steadfastness  of  his
readiness  to  make  the  offering. — And  took  the
knife. — The  very  highest  expression  of  his  readi
ness,  f  Xothing  is  said  of  any  agitation,  of  any  re
sistance,  or  complaint  on  the  part  of  Isaac.  It  is
clear  thaj;  he  is  thus  described  as  the  willing  sacri
ficial  Iamb4

3.  The  frst  call  from  heaven  (ver?.  11-14). —
Abraham,  Abraham ! — As  the  call  of  the  Angel  of
Jehovah  stands  in  contrast  with  that  of  Elohim,  so,
also,  the  repetition  of  the  name  here,  to  its  single
use  (ver.  1).  A  clearer,  wider,  more  definite,  and
further  leading  revelation  is  thus  described.  The
repeated  call :  Abraham  !  designates  also  the  ur
gency  of  the  interruption,  the  decided  rejection  of
the  human  sacrifice.  For  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  sec
ch.  xii. — Now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God. —
Abraham  has  stood  the  test.  The  knowledge  of  God
reflects  itself  as  a  new  experimental  knowledge  in
the  consciousness  of  Abraham.  [I  know,  in  the
sense  of  use,  declare  my  knowledge — have  made  it
manifest  by  evident  proof.  WORDSWORTH,  p.  100.
"An  eventual  knowing,  a  discovering  by  actual  ex
periment."  MURPHY,  p.  341. — A.  G.] — Behind
him  a  ram. —  ^ns  for  ^Tinx  behind,  backwards.
is  not  used  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament,  and
from  this  has  arisen  the  conjectural  reading  "inx,
and  also  numerous  constructions  (see  KNOBEL,  p.  175).

*  f  God  trill  provide  himself.  "Another  prophetic  speech ;"
and  liow  significant ! — A.  G.]

t  [All  the  commentators  dwell  upon  the  tenderness  and
icauty  of  the  scene  here  described.  But  no  words  can  make
t  more  impressive. — A.  G.]

I  [How  it  brings  before  us  the  Lamb  i-Jio  was  led  to  the
slaughter. — A.  G.]


403


GENESIS,  OR   THE    FIRST    ROOK   OF    MOSES.


Gesenius  explains  the  word  iu  the  background;
but  we  should  observe  well  that  it  is  said  that  Abra
ham  looked  around  him,  and  thus  perceived  the  same
behind  his  back.  Unseen,  (iod  mysteriously  pre
pares  his  gifts  for  his  own.  He  does  not  receive  a
po.-itive  command  to  sacrifice  the  ram  instead  of  his
son,  although  he  recogni/.es  in  the  fact  that  the  ram
with  his  long,  crooked  horns  was  caught  in  the  thick
et,  the  divit.e  suggestion.  KNOI;I;I.:  "In  alike
wav,  through  ;;  divine  providence,  a  goat  is  presented
as  ii  sacrificial  animal  for  Jphigenia,  whom  her  father,
Agame;;.u»:i.  would  sacrifice  to  Venus  at  Aulis
(Ei:iur.  liihi'j.  .!"''/.  l.v.'l  if.)."— In  the  stead  of
his  son.*— Tl  is  expression  is  of  deciding  impoit-
ance  for  th."  whole  theory  of  sacrifice.  The  sacri-
f.,.;;.!  uni:  ;sl  ''••-:  /nates  the  symbolical  representation
of  the  per-on  who  presents  the  sacrifice;  but  this,
representation  in  the  later  ritual  of  the  sacrifices,
must  be  interpreted  differently,  according  to  the  dif-
.a,.riiic"s.—  And  Abraham  called  the  name
of  that  place. —  I><lit/-ch  and  Keil  explain  the  word
r.X"',  Jehovah  observes,  or  takes  care,  but  reject
th  .  \planation  of  the  Niphal,  >"!X~"  etc.,  upon  the
mount  of  the  Lord  it  .-hall  be  seen,  chosen,  i.  e.,  be
piovided,  or  cared  for.  They  lay  asid'1  this  signifi
cation  of  the  Niphal,  and  Delit/.seh  translates:  he
appears  upon  the  mount  of  Jehovah.  But  the
Viphal  must  here  certainly  correspond  with  the  Kal,
although  we  couM  point  to  no  other  proof  for  it.
The  explanation  also,  upon  the  mount  where  Jehovah
appears,  is  far  too  general,  since  Jehovah  dots  not
appear  only  upon  Moriah.  The  expression:  "it
will  be  cho-eii,  provided,"  does  not  mean  he  will
caie  for,  but,  he  will  himself  choose,  and  hence  the
Niphal  also  mu>:  be  :  77"  )//  >i';it  «f  JI-/I-H'  ill.  in  t/ic
tnouittd'n  when  //•  himself  selects  <m  I  ]>,•<, rnhx  /i>x
'c  .  Moriahis,  therefore,  indeed,  not  the  mount
of  t'he  becoming  visible,  of  the  revelation  of  God
(Delit/.seh).  but 'the  mount  of  being  seen,  the  mount
of  selection,  the  mount  of  the  choice  of  the  sacrifice
of  do  1 — inclu-ive  of  the  sacrifices  of  (iod.  [And
thus  of  //"'  mcriftc  . —  A.  (i.  j  For  Moriah  and  /ion,
compare  the  Bible  Dictioiiaih  s  and  the  topography
of  Jerusalem.

4.  'I'!,*'  second  <;<U  fr<>i:i  ltcnr<n  (vers.  15-19).
The  subjecl  of  the  fir.-t  call  was  preeminently  nega
tive,  a  prohibition  of  the  human  sacrifice,  connected
with  a  recognition  of  the  spiritual  sacrifice,  .ascer
tained,  and  confirmed  through  this  suggestion  of  the
tvpical  nature  of  the  sacrifice.  The  second  call  of
til.'  Maleach  Jehovah  is  throughout  positive. — By
myself  have  I  sworn.— The  oath  of  Jehovah  t
.ch.  xxiv.  7;  xxvi.  3;  1.  '24  ;  Ex.  xiii.  5;  xi.  33)
is  described  here  as  a  swearing  by  himself,  also,
Ex.  xxxii.  i:'.;  1-a.  xlv.  23;  Hcb.  vi.  13  ft'.
The  swearing  of  God  by  himself,  is  an  anthro
pomorphic  expression,  for  the  irrevocable,  cer
tain  promise  of  Jehovah,  for  which  he,  so  to  speak,
pledge-  ."..c  c-i..-ciou.sne.-n  of  his  own  personality,
the  prom's;-  as  it  imprints  itself  in  the  perfect  seal
ing  of  the  assurance  of  the  faith  of  the  believing
patriarchs.  Abraham  can  only  be  certain  of  the
oath  of  God,  through  its  eternal  echo  in  his  own
heart.  Hence  this  oath  is  supposed  also  where  the
perfection  of  the  assurance  of  the  faith  is  supposed.

*  [Abraham  offers  tho  rnm  as  a  substitute  for  Isaac.  lie
wi'liliolds  not  his  only  son  in  intent,  and  yet  in  fact  he  offers
si  substitute  for  his  son.  MURPHY,  p.  341.— A.  G.]

t  [This  is  tho  only  in«t;\nc!'  of  God's  swcarinor  by  himself
in  his  intfivoursv  with  tho  patriarchs—a  proof  of  the  unique
importance  of  this  event.  Yv'oitDswoinn,  p.  101.— A.  G.]


Hence,  also,  Jehovah  declares   that  he   had   sworn
unto  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  it   is  not  alto
gether  correct,  although  Keil  yields  his  assent,  when
Luther  says  with  reference  to  Ps.  Ixxxix.  3(i ;  ex.  4,
and   cxxxii.   11,   "As   the    promise    of    the  seed  of
Abraham  descends  in  the  seed  of  David,  so    the  sa
cred  scriptures  transfer  the  oath  given  to  Abraham,
to    the    person  of    David."       Although    ''tlu-ro    is
nothing  said  in  the  promise,  2  Sam.  vii.,  and  1  Chron.
xvii.    upon  which  these  psalms  rest,  of  an  oath  of
(!od."     Knobcl.       The   oath    of   (iod  revcds   ifsolt
even  in  the  sealing  of   the  faith,  leaving  out  of  view
the  fact  that  the  promise  given  to   David  was  much
more  particular  and  definite  than  that  which  Abra
ham  received. — Saith  the  Lord   (the  saying  of
Jehovah). — [Compare  the  rendering  of  the  Sept.,
thouhast  not  within  Id  thii  m»i,  with  the  terms  of  the
apostle,  Rom.  viii.  3'J.     The  resemblance  is  striking,
and  is  one  of  the  cuti-h-wonh  of  which  Wordsworth
speaks. — A.  (!."]     A  solemn  statement  of  the  prom
ise,  pointing  down   to    the    time  of    the    prophets.
iTirP   CX:,  address  of  the  Lord,  occurs  elsewhere  in
the    Pentateuch    only  (Num.   xiv.  2$),  and    without
Jehovah  in  the  words  of  Balaam  (Num.  xxiv.  3-15).
In  addition  to  the  comparison  of  the  number  of  th"
stars  of  heaven  (eh.  xv.  5),  we  have  that  of  the  sand
upon  the  sea-shore,  the  strong  figure  for  an  innumer
able  mass   (ch.  xxxii,  13;  Josh.  xi.  1). — Shall  pos
sess  the  gate  of  his  enemies. — The  most  obvious
sense  is  this  :    Israel    should  overcome  his  enemies,
and  capture  their  cities,  since    he  should  sei/e  and
occupy  their  irates.     But   the   (tii'c  here  points  to  a
deeper  meaning.     The  hostile    world  has  a  gate  or
gates  in  its  susceptibilities,  through  which   the  be-
lieving  Israel  should  enter  it  (Ps.  xxiv.  7-0).     The
following  words  prove   that   this    is   th''  sen-e  of  the
words  here. — And  shall  te  blessed  (shall  bless
themselves). — The  blessing  of  tho  nations  (ch.  xii.)
in  which  they  appear  still  in  a  passive  attitude,  be
comes,  in  its  rcMilt,  the  cause  of  their  freely  blessing
themselves   in   the  seed  of   Abraham,   i.  e.,  wishing
blessedness,    and    calling  themselves    blessed. — Be
cause  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice  (comp.  ver.
K5). — The   great  promise  of  Jehovah  is    no  blind,
arbitrary  form,  but  stands  iu   relation  to  the  tried
and    believing  obedi.nee    of   Abraham  (see    James
ii.  23).     [The   closing    remarks  of  Keil  on  this  pas
sage,    are   as  follows :     This   glorious    issue   of  the
temptation  so  triumphantly  endured    by    Abraham,
not    only  authenticates    the    historical  character   of
this  event,  but  shows,    in   the  clearest  manner,  that
the  temptation    was  necessary  to    the  faith  of   the
patriarch,    and  of  fundamental    importance    to   hid
position  in  the  history  of  salvation.     The  doubt  wheth
er  the  true  God  could    demand  a  human  sacrifice,  is
removed  by  the   fact  that  (iod  himself  prevents  the
completion     of     the     sacrifice,     and     the    opinion
that  Cod,    at  least  apparently,  comes  into  conflict
with  himself,  wlion  he  demands  a  sacrifice,  and  then
actually  forbids  and  prevents   its   completion,  is  met
by  the  very  significant  chai-.ge  in  the  names  of  God,
since  God  who  commands  Abraham  to    oiler  Isaac,
is  called  C'n'Vsn,  but  the  actual  completion  of  the
sacrifice  is  prevented  by  r."-"1,  who  is  identical  with
the    (Tin?  ~ykv.     Neither  mm,  the  God  of  sal
vation,'  or  the   God  of  tho  covenant,    who  gavc_  to
Abraham  the  only  son  as  the  heir  of  the  promise,
demands  the  sacrifice  of    the  promised   and  given
heir,  nor   nVibx,  God  the  creator,  who  has  the  pow-


CHAP.   XXII.    1-19.


•409


er  to  give  and  take  away  life,  but  C^nbsn,  the  tru
God,  whom  Abraham  knew  and  worshipped  as  li
personal  God,  with  whom  he  had  entered  into  a  pei
sonal  relation.     The  command  (coming from  the  tru
God,  whom  Abraham  served)  to   yield    up  his  onl
and    beloved  son,  could  have  no  other  object  tha
to  purify  and  sanctify  the  state  of  the  heart  of  th
patriarch  towards    his  son,  and  towards    his    God
an  object  corresponding  to  the  very  goal  of  his  cal
ing.     It  was  to  purify  his  love  to   the   son  of  hi
body  from  all  the  dross  of  fleshly  self-love,  and  nat
i:r,il  self-seeking   which  still    clave  to    it,  and  so  tc
glorify  it  through  love  to  God,  who  had  given  hirr
'his  son,  that  he  should  no  more  love  his  beloved  soi
as  his  flesh  and  blood,  but  solely  and  only  as  tin
gracious  gift  and  possession  of  God,  as  a  good  en
trusted  to  him  by  God,  and  which  he  was  to  be  read}
to  render  back  to  him  at  any  and  every  moment
As  Abraham  had  left  his  country,  kindred,  father's
house,  at  the  call  of  God,  so  he  must,  in  his  wall
before  God,  willingly  bring  his  only  son,  the  goal  o
his  desires,  the  hope  of  his  life,  the  joy  of  his  O!L
age,  an   offering.     And  more  than    this  even.     He
had  not  only  loved  Isaac  as  the  heir  of  his  posses
sions  (xv.  2,)  but  upon  Isaac  rested  all  the  promises
of  God,  in  Isaac  should  his  seed  be  called  (xxi.   12).
The  command  to  offer  to  God  this  only  son  of  his
wife  Sarah,  in  whom  his  seed  should  become  a  mul
titude  of  nations  (xvii.  4,  6,  16),  appeared  to  destroy
the  divine  promise  itself;    to  frustrate  not  only  the
wish  of  his  heart,  but  even  the  repeated  promises  of
his  God.     At  this  command  should  his  faitli  perfect
itself  to  unconditional  confidence  upon  God,  to  the
firm  assurance  that  God  could  reawaken  him.  from
the  dead.     But  this  temptation  has  not  only  the  im
port  for  Abraham,  that  he  should,  through  the  over
coming  of  flesh  and  blood,  be  fitted  to  be  the  father  of
believers,  the  ancestor  of  the  Christ  of  God ;  through
it,  also,  Isaac  must  be  prepared  and  consecrated  for
his  ca'ling  in  the  history  of   salvation.     As  he  suf
fered  himself,  without  resistance,  to  be  bound  and
laid  upon  the  altar,  lie  gave  his  natural  life  to  death,
that  he  might,  through  the  grace  of  God,  rise  to
newness  of  life.     Upon  the  altar  he  was  sanctified
to  God,  consecrated  to  be  the  beginner  of  the  holy
Church  of  God,  and  thus  "the  later  legal  consecra
tion  of  the  first-born  was  completed  in  him  "  (Dc-
litzsch).     As  the  divine  command,  therefore,  shows
in  all    its  weight  and   earnestness  the  claim  of  God
upon  his  own,  to  sacrifice  all  to  him,  even  the  most
dear  (comp.  Matt.  x.  37,  and  Luke  xiv.  20),   pene
trating  even  to  the  very  heart,  so  the  issue  of  the
temptation  teaches  that   the  true  God  does  not  de
mand  from  liis  worshippers  a  bodily  human  sacrifice
but  the  spiritual  sacrifice,  the  unconditional  yielding
up   of   the    natural  life,  even  unto    death.       Since
through  the  divine   providence  Abraham  offered  a
ram  for  a  burnt-offering,  instead  of  his  son,  the  ani
mal  sacrifice  was  not  only  offered  as  a  substitute  for
ihe  human  sacrifice,  and  sanctioned  as  a  symbol  of
the  spiritual   sacrifice  of   the  person  himself,  well
pleasing  to  God,  but  the  offering  of  human  sacrifices
by  the  heathen,  is  marked  as  an  ungodly  &f\o$p->i<T-
Ktia,    judged  and  condemned.     And  this  comes  to
pass  through  Jehovah,  the  God  of  salvation,  who
restrains  the    completion  of  the   external  sacrifice.
Hence,  this  event,  viewed  with  respect  to  the  divine
preparation  of  salvation,  wins  for  the  church  of  the
Lord  prophetic   significance,   which  is  pointed   out
mth  peculiar  distinctness  in  the  place  of  this  sacri


fice,  the  mount  Moriah,  upon  which,  under  the  le^al
economy,  all  the  typical  sacrifices  were  brought  to
Jehovah,  upon  which,  also,  in  the  fulness  of  time
God  the  Father,  gave  his  only-begotten  Son  an
atoning  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  in  order
through  this  one  true  sacrifice,  to  raise  the  shadow
ing  image  of  the  typical  animal  sacrifice  to  its  trutii
and  real  nature.  If,  therefore,  the  destination  of
Moriah,  ns  the  place  for  the  offering  of  Isaac,  with
the  actual  offering  of  the  ram  in  his  stead,  should  be
only  at  first  typical,  with  reference  to  the  signifi
cance  and  object  of  the  Old  Testament  sacrifice,
still  this  type  already,  also,  points  down  to  that  in
the  future  appearing  antitype,  when  the  eternal  love
of  the  Heavenly  Father,  itself,  did  what  ir,  demanded
here  from  Abraham,  namely,  spared  not  his  only-be
gotten  son,  but  gave  him,  for  us  all,  up  to  that  death  ac
tually,  which  Isaac  only  endured  in  spirit,  that  we
might  die  with  Christ  spiritually,  and  wjth  him  rise
to  eternal  life  (Rom.  viii.  32 :  v'i.  5,  etc.)  pp  177-
179.— A.  G.]

DOCTRINAL  AXD   ETHICAL.

1.  The  ruling  thought  in  this  whole  narrative,  is
the  perfection  of  the  obedience  of  faith  of  Abraham,
not  rnerely,  however,  in  the  sacrifice  of  his  son,  but
also  in  his  readiness  to  perceive  the   revelation  of
Jehovah,  which  forbids  the  killing  of  his  son,  and
causes  the  symbolic  killing  of  the  sacrifice  provided
as  the  seal  and  confirmation  of  the  spiritual  sacrifice.
Faith  must  prove  itself  in  the  inward  hearty  conces
sion  of  the  dearest  objects  of  life,  even  of  all  our
own  thoughts,  as  to  the  realization  of  salvation,  pres-
nt  and  future,  to  the  providence  of  the  grace  of
Jod.^    But  it  cannot  complete  itself  with  reference
:o  this  salvation,  without  purifying  itself,  or  allowing
itself    to  be  purified  from  nil"  traditional,  fanatical
ideas,  or  misconceptions  of  faith.     In  the  completion
of  faith,    the  highest    divinity  coincides   with   the
rarest  humanity.     The  sacrifice  of  Isaac  is,  therefore,
-he  real  separation  of  the  sacred  Israeli tish  sacrifice
from  the  abominations  of  human  sacrifices.     "These
sacrifices,   especially  of    children,    were    customary
among  the  pro-Hebraic  nations  of  Palestine   (2  Kin.
xvi.  3  ;  Ps.  cvi.  38),  among  the  kindred    Phoenicians
PORPHTR.   de  abalin.   ii.   66  ;    FUSEB.   Propar.   e.v.
.  10,  and    L.vrnD.    Const,  xiii.  4),  among  their  de-
cendants,  the  Carthaginians  (Dion.  xx.  1 1,  PLUTARCH,
:tc.),  among  the  Egyptians  (Dion.  i.  8S,  etc.),  among
he  tribes  related  with  Israel,  the  Moabites  and  Am"
nonites  (2  Kin.   iii.   27)  who  honored  Moloch  with
hem  (Lev.  xviii.  21  ;  xx.  2),  appear  also  in  the  Ar
amaic  and  Arabian  tribes  (2  Kings  vii.  31  ff ),  as  well
s  in  Ahaz  among  the  Israelites  (2  Kings  xvi.  3  ff.),
>ut  were  forbidden  by  the  law   (Deut.  xii.  31),  and'
pposed   by  the  prophets   (Jer.    vii.   31  ff.).     They
/ere  thus  generally  spread  through  the  cidtus  of  the
lations  in  contact  with  Israel,  but  were   entirely  for-
ign   to    its    legally  established  religion."    Knobel.
According  to  HENGSTEHBERG,    the   human  sacrifice
ocs  not  belong  to  heathenism  in  general,  but  to  the
arkest  aspect  of  heathenism  (Bcitragc  iii.   p.  144).
YUIITZ  believes  that  he  gives  the  correction  (p.  210).
flic    fact  that  the    spirit  of   humanity  among    the
Treeks  and  Romans  opposed  the  human    sacrifice
•see  LAXGE:  Positive  Dogmatik,  p.  862),  loses  its  force
-ith  him,  since  he  ascribes  this  opposition  to  the  re-
gious  and  rationalistic  superficially  of  their  times  ;
ic  human  sacrifices  are,  indeed,  a'fearful  madness,
ut  a  madness  of  doubt  as  to  the  true  sacrifice,  of


470


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


hopelessness  as  to  finding  the  true  atonement.  But
the  true  atonement  is  even  in  the  death  of  Christ,
the  obedient  concession  of  Christ  to  the  judgment  of
God  ;  and  the  analogy  of  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  in
the  Moloch-sacrifice,  must  be  distinguished  from  it
both  on  the  side  of  Judaism  and  of  the  world.  The
entire  perversion  of  the  fact  that  the  religion  of
Jehovah  abhors  and  rejects  the  human  sacrifice,  as  it
has  been  introduce!  by  Vaike  and  Von  Bohlen  (the
religion  of  Jehovah  stood  originally  upon  the  same
plane  with  the  Moloch  service),  and  has  been  com
pleted  by  Daumer,  Kurtz  has  examined  and  exposed
in  a  most  satisfactory  way  (p.  '2(>4  11'.).  [The  arbi
trariness  and  blasphemy  of  Daumer,  and  the  boldness
with  which  lie  makes  his  assertions  in  the  face  of
all  historv,  render  his  work  unworthy  of  any  serious
refutation.  And  Kurtz  justly  treats  it  with  ridicule.
A.  <;.]  GIIIU.AXY'S  essay:  "  The  Human  Sacri
fice  of  the  Old  Hebrews,"  may  be,  also,  consulted
here,  l>ut  is' essentially  one  with  Daumer.

•_>.  Th''  sacrifice  of  Isaac  has  an  inward  connection
with  the  expulsion  of  Islnnael,  which  will  appear
•  •learly  if  we  recollect  that  the  age  of  both  at
the  time  of  these  events  must  have  been  nearly  the
same.  Thus  must  Abraham  repent  in  the  history  of
Isaac,  the  human  guilt  which  lay  in  his  relation  to
Ishmael.  lint  as  he  had  surely  doubted  a  long  time
:is  to  the  choice  of  Ishmael,  so  also  a  doubt  intrudes
itself  as  to  the  literal  external  sense  of  the  divine
command  in  regard  to  Isaac;  a  doubt  which  can  no
more  prejudice  or  limit  the  divine  revelation  than
perhaps  the  doubting  thought  of  Paul  upon  the  way
to  Damascus,  but  rather  serves  to  introduce  the  new
revelation.  [The  narrative  of  Paul's  conversion  will
not  bear  out  this  comparison.  He  does  not,  seem  to
have  been  in  any  doubt,  but  was,  as  h  .•  himself  says,
conscientious.  lie  verily  thought  that  he  ought  to
persecute  the  Church  of  God. — A.  G.]

:{.  The  distinction  between  the  divine  revealed
command  and  Abraham's  misconception  of  it,  is
similar  to  the  distinction  between  the  infallible  con
science "'  and  the  fallible  judgment  in  regard  to
conscience,  which  has  not  been  sufficiently  noticed
in  theology.  Thus  also  Peter,  on  his  way  from
Joppa  to  Caesarea,  with  the  divine  commission
to  convert  Cornelius,  might  have  connected  with  it
the  misconception  that  be  must  first  circumcise  him,
but  the  further  revelation  tears  away  the  misconcep
tion.  The  stripping  away  of  the  erroneous  and
unessential  ideas  of  the  time,  belongs  also  to  a  sound
development  of  faith.

•1.  The  burnt-offering  of  Abraham  appears  here
is  the  foundation  and  central  point  of  all  the  typical
sacrifices  in  Israel.  Its  fundamental  thought  is  the
spiritual  yielding  of  the  life,  not  the  taking  of  the
bodily  life.  It  receives  its  wider  form  in  the  Passovei
lan:K  in  which  the  division  of  the  offerings  is  already
intimated,  vi/.,  the  thank  or  peace-offering  and  the
consecrated  killing  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  sin-
and  guilt-  (trespass)  offering  and  the  imprecatory
offering  on  the  other,  The  peculiar  atonement  offer
ing  is  a  higher  centralization  and  completion,  in  which
the  whole  system  of  offerings  points  to  that  which  is
beyond  and  above  itself.

5.  The  mountain  of  Jerusalem  receives,  through
the  offering  of  Abraham,  its  preconsccration  to  its


*  [This  assumes  what,  to  say  the  least,  is  a  matter  o
doubt,  and  is  against  the  general  faith  of  the  Church,  tha
the  conscience  itself  has  not  suffered  in  the  ruins  of  the  fall
There  is  ground  for  the  distinction,  but  we  cannot  hold  tha
the  conscience  is  infallible. — A.  (j  ]


uture  destination  as  the  later  mount  Moriah  upon
vhich  the  temple  stood,  the  prcconsecration  of  the
listorical  faith  in  God,  which  transcends  the  un-
listorical  faiih  in  God  of  Melchizedec.

6.  The  Angel  of  the  Lord  gives  the  more  accu
rate  and   particular  definition  of  that  which  Elohim
las  pointed  out  in  the  more  general  way.

7.  The  obedience  of  faith  which  Abraham  ren-
lers  in  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac,  marks  the  historical
)erfection  of  his  faith,  in  a  decisive  test.  It  marks  the
«tagc  of  the  New  Testament  5o/ci^,  or  sealing  (see-

he  Biblni-ork  upon  James).

8.  The    typical    significance  of  the  sacrifice  of
'saac  is  so  comprehensive  that  we  may  view  it,  in  some
neasure,  as  embracing  all  Old  Testament  types,  just
is  the  sacrifice  of  Abraham  itself  maybe  regarded  as

ncluding  the  whole  Mosaic  system  of  sacrifices.    The
sacrifice  itself  is  the  type  of  the  sacrificial  death  of
Jurist,  and  indeed,  ju.-t  as  truly,  in  reference  to  the
nterest  of  God,  as  to  the  interest  of  the  world  in  this
"act.     The  self-denial  of  Abraham  is  a  copy,  a  sym-
jol  (not  perhaps  a  type)  of  the  love  of  God,    who
ave  his  only-begotten  Son  for  the  salvation  of  the
world  (John  in.  16:  Rom.  viii.  32).     The  sacritici.il
act  of  Abraham,  as  also  the  enduring  silence  of  Isaac,
is  typical  in  referenc  '  to  the  two  sides  of  the  suffering
obedience  of  Christ,  as  In-  is  priest  and  sacrifice;  at  the
same  time.    Isaac  received  again  from  the  altar  is  now,
in  reference  to  Abraham,  a  God-given,  consecrated
child  of  the   Spirit  and  of  promise:  in  reference  to
Christ,   a  type    of  the  resurrection,  and    therefore,
also  a  tvpc  of  the  new  resurrection  life  of  believers.
9.  Since  Abraham  must  have  reconciled  the  prom
ise,    earlier    connected    with    the    person  of    Isaac,
with  the  command  to  offer  Isaac  as  he  understood
the  command,  he  was  necessarily  driven  to  the  hope
of  a  new  awakening,  as  this  is  admirably  expressed
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (xi.  10).     Luther  re
marked  upon  the  obedience  of  faith  :   "  Faith  recon
ciles  things  which  arc  contrary."      [Abraham's  faith
rested  not  upon  the  conclusions  of  his  understanding,
but  upon  the  word  of  God.    The  nature  and  strength
of  his  faith  appear  in  that  he  held  to  the  promise
while  he  went  promptly  to  do  what,  to  human  view,
seemed  to  prevent  its  fulfilment.     He  set  to  his  seal
that  God  was  true.    He  believed  that  God  would  ful
fil  all  that  he  had  promised.     How  he  did  not  stay
to  question.    This  is  true  faith.    It  takes  the  word  of
God  as  it  is,  in  the  face  of  all  difficulties,  and  acts
upon  it  — A.  G.]     But  this  reconciliation  of  appar
ent  contradictions  docs  not  happen  in  this  method,
that  faith  in  blind  passivity  receives  and  holds  the
contradictions,  or    rather,    suffers    them    to    remain
(as,   e.  g.,  universal  grace  and  particular  election),
but  that  faith  itself  is  brought,  through  the  spirit  of
revelation,   to    a    higher  standpoint.      [But    is  not
this  standpoint  just  that  from  which  faith  receives
truths  apparently  contradictory,  upon  their  own  evi
dence  in  the  word  of  God,  and  holds  them,  though  it
is  not  seen  how  they  can  be  reconciled? — A.G.J — In
the  anticipating  activity  of  his  faith,  Abraham  gained
the  idea  of  the  resurrection,  but  in  the  actual  issue
of  the  history  of  the  sacrifice  he  gained  the  idea  of
the  true  sacrifice  (Ps.  li.  18,  10:   Hcb.  x.  19  ff),  as
also  the  fundamental  form    of  the    Old    Testament
sacrifice.     [In  (fie  stead  of  1m  son.    "  The  wonderful
substitution  in  which  God  set  forth,  as  in  a  figure,
the  plan  of  the  Mosaic  economy,  for  the  offering  of
animal  victims  instead  of  human  sacrifices — pointing
forward  to  the  only  acceptable  substitute  whom  they
foreshadowed,  who  is  God's  Lamb  and  not  man's —


CHAP.    XXII.   1-19.


47«


the  Lamb  of  God's  providing  and  from  his  own
bosom.  His  only-begotten  and  well-beloved  Son,
the  man — the  God-man."  Jacobus.  And  this  great
doctrine,  running  through  the  whole  system  of  sac
rifice,  culminates  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ — the
innocent  in  the  stead  of  the  guilty. — A.  G.]

10.  DELITZSCII  :  "  The  concession  unto  death  at
the  threshold  of  the  preliminary  history  of  the  new-
humanity  is  not  completed,  but  merely  a  prefiguration,
for  Isaac's  death  would  have  been  useless,  but  the
concession  unto  death  at  the  threshold  of  the  history
itself  i.-:  completed,  because  the  fulfilling  and  per
fection  of  the   death  of  Christ  is  the  passing  of
himself,  and  with  him  of  humanity,  into  life.  Judaism
believes  differently.     It  sees  in  the  sacrifice  or  bind-
iog   of   Isaac   an   act  serviceable  for  all  time,  and
bringing  Israel  into  favour  with  God.     Where   the
Church  prays  for  the  sake  of  the  suffering  and  death
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Synagogue  prays  for  the  sake
of  the  binding  of  Isaac  "  (p.  418).

11.  The  oath  of  Jehovah.     It  is  not  merely  the
basis  for  the  oaths  of  men,  but :  1.  The  expression
of   the    absolute    self-determination,   consciousness,
and  faithfulness  of  the  personal  God  ;*  2.  The  ex
pression  of  a  corresponding  unshaken  certainty  of
faith  in  the  hearts  of  believers;  3.  The  expression
of  the  indissoluble  union  between  the  divine  promise
and  the  human  assurance.

12.  The  name  Morinhf   points  out  that  as  God
himself  perceives  (selects)  his  sacrifice  in  the  readi
ness  ot  an  obedient  heart  to  make  the  sacrifice,  man
should  wait  in  expectation,  and  not  make  an  arbitrary
and  abominable  sacrifice.

13.  W.  HOFFMANN  :   "  Until  now  we  hear  only  of
the  bruiser  of  the  serpent,  of  a  conqueror,  of  a  bless
ing  of  the  nations,  of  a  dominion  ;  in  short  only  the
image  of  a  great  king  and  dominion,  could  present
itself  to  human  thought  as  the  form  in  which  the
divine  salvation  should  reach  perfection.     But  now
sorrow,   concession,    death,    the   rendering  of   self
as  a  sacrifice,  enter  into  the  circle  of  the  hope  of
salvation,  and  indeed  so  enter  that  the  hope  of  sal
vation  and  the  sacrifice    belong    together  and    are
inseparable."

14.  The  completion   of   the  promixe.\     As   the
whole  history  of  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac  is  typical,  so
also  is  the  expression  of  the  completed  promise.     It
refers  beyond  Israel,  to  the  innumerable  children  of
Abraham  by  faith,  and  the  conquest  of  the  world,
promised  to  them,  appears  both  in  the  aspect  of  a
contest,  as  in  that  of  the  solemn  feasts  of  victory
and  blessing.

15.  We  cannot  say  directly  that  Abraham  sacri
ficed  Isaac  as  a  natural  son,  that  he  might  receive
him   again  sanctified  and  as  a  spiritual   son.     For
Isaac  was  given  to  him  as  the  son  of  the  promise
from  his  birth.     But  he  sacrificed  him  in  his  present
corporeal  nature,  that  he  might  receive  him  again  as
the  type  of  a  second,  new,  and  higher  life.     Thus
Israel  must  sacrifice  its  ideas  of  the  present  kingdom
of  God  in  order  to  gain  the  true  kingdom  of  God


*  [An  oath  with  God  is  a  solemn  pledfrfng  of  himself  in
all  the  iinchaiureablcncss  of  his  faithfulness  and  truth  to
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  MURPHY,  p.  341.— A.  G.]

t  [The  Mount  of  the  Lord  here  means  tha  very  height
of  the  trial  into  which  he  brings  his  saints.  There  he
will  certainly  appear  in  due  time  for  their  deliverance.
MURPHY,  p.  341.— A.  G.)

I  [In  this  transcendent  blessing,  repeated  on  this  mo
mentous  occasion,  Abraham  truly  saw  the  day  of  the  seed
of  the  woman,  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the  Son  of  man.
MrBpHY,  p.  312.— A.  G.]


which  is  not  of  this  world.  The  want  of  this  idea
of  sacrifice  betrays  the  most  of  them  into  unbelief
through  Chiliastic  dreams.  It  happens  similarly  to
all  who,  in  the  sacrificial  hour  appointed  by  God,
will  not  sacrifice  their  inherited  ideas  that  they  may
gain  a  glorified  form  of  faith.  On  the  other" hand,
every  arbitrary  external  sacrifice  is  regarded  and
judged  as  a  self-chosen  service  of  God.

16.  The  meaning  of  the  ram  in  the  sacrifice  of
Abraham  is  not  to  be  lightly  estimated.  It  desig
nates  figuratively  the  fact,  that  Christ  also,  in  his
sacrificial  death,  has  not  lost  his  own  peculiar  life,
but,  as  the  leading  shepherd  of  his  flock,  has  only
sacrificed  his  old  temporal  form  of  a  servant,  in  order
that  through  his  death  he  might  redeem  them  from
death,  the  fear  of  death,  the  bondage  of  sin  and
Satan,  and  introduce  them  into  a  higher,  deathless  life.

[In  the  person  of  Abraham  is  unfolded  that
spiritual  process  by  which  the  soul  is  drawn  to  God.
He  hears  the  call  of  God,  and  comes  to  the  decisive
act  of  trusting  in  the  revealed  God  of  mercy  and
truth,  on  the  ground  of  which  act  he  is  accounted  as
righteous.  He  then  rises  to  the  successive  acts  of
walking  with  God,  covenanting  with  him,  communing
and  interceding  with  him,  and  at  length  withholding
nothing  that  he  has  or  holds  dear  from  him.  In  all
this  we  discern  certain  primary  and  essential  charac
teristics  of  the  man  who  is  saved  through  acceptance
of  the  mercy  of  God  proclaimed  to  him  in  a  prime
val  gospel.  Faith  in  God  (ch.  xv.),  repentance
towards  him  (ch.  xvi.),  and  fellowship  with  him  (ch.
xviii.),  are  the  three  great  turning-points  of  the
soul's  returning  life.  They  are  built  upon  the  effec
tual  call  of  God  (ch.  xii.),  and  culminate  in  unre
served  resignation  to  him  (ch.  xxii.).  With  wonder
ful  facility  has  the  sacred  record  descended  in  this
pattern  of  spiritual  biography,  from  the  rational  and
accountable  race  to  the  individual  and  immortal  soul,
and  traced  the  footsteps  of  its  path  to  God.  MUR
PHY  p.  342. — A.  G.]


I1OMILETICAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.

Through  the  traditional  exegctical  interpretation,
the  sacrifice  of  Isaac  has  often  been  used  homileti-
cally  without  due  caution.  What  Kurtz  in  his  work
asserts  with  confidence  we  often  hear  also  from  the
pulpit — God  commanded  Abraham  to  kill  his  son
Isaac.  Thus  a  gross  sensuous  interpretation  in  fact
transforms  a  history  which  is  the  key  to  the  nature
of  the  whole  Old-Testament  sacrificial  system,  which
presents  in  a  striking  light  the  humane  aspect  of  the
theocracy  in  contrast  with  heathenism,  into  an  of
fence  to  the  human  and  Christian  feeling,  i.  e.,  an
offence  which  is  burdensome  and  injurious  to  a  lim
ited  and  contracted  theology,  but  must  be  carefully
distinguished  from  the  ollenccs  or  difficulties  of  un
belief.  We  make  this  remark  notwithstanding  Kurtz
thinks  that  he  must  administer  to  us  a  rebuke  for
similar  utterances  (p.  20C).  Luther  also  has  already
spoken  of  the  difficulty  in  treating  this  passage  cor
rectly. — Ver.  1.  The  testing  or  trying  of  Abraham,
as  full  of  temptation  :  1.  As  a  temptation  ;  2.  as  a
testing.  Or :  1.  The  sacrifice  of  God  ;  2.  Abraham's
obedience  of  faith. — Ver.  2.  Abraham's  sacrifice:  1.
The  command  of  God;  2.  the  leading  of  God;  S.
the  decision  of  God  ;  4.  the  judgment  of  God. — Ver.
3.  Abraham's  obedience  of  faith:  1.  Faith  as  the
soul  of  obedience ;  2.  obedience  as  the  full  preser
vation  of  faith. — Abraham's  scaling. — Ver.  16.  The


472


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


oath  of  God:  1.  What  it  means;  2.  as  it  perpctu
ates  and  generalizes  itself  in  the  sacraments ;  3.  t(
whose  advantage  it  will  be. — The  silence  of  Isaac. —
Ver.  -1.  Abraham's  journey  to  Moriah  an  image  of
the  way  to  all  true  sacrifice:  1.  The  journey  thither;
2.  the  journey  home. — Moriah,  or  the  meeting  of
God  with  the  sacrificing  believer:  1.  God  sees;  2.
he  is  seen,  appears  ;  Ji.  he  cares  Cor,  provides, ;  4.
he  himself  selects  his  sacrifice  ;  5.  he  gives  to  man
in  an  eternal  form  what  lie  has  taken  from  him  in  a
temporal  form.

STAUKK:  (Mo-'  s  does  not  relate  Ihe  peculiar  time
of  tl:is  severe  test  »!'  Abraham's  laith.  Some  place
it  in  the  thirteenth,  others  in  the  fifteenth,  and  still
others  in  the  thirty-fifth  or  thirty-seventh  year  of
Isaac.  Because  in  this  \\hole  transaction  Isaac  was
a  type  of  Chri.-t,  and  he  finished  the  work  of  redemp
tion,  through  his  death,  in  the  thirty-third,  or  accord
ing  to  otheis  t'l"  thirty-fourth,  year  of  his  age,  it  may
well  be  thought  that  in  this  year  also  Isaac  was  led
out  as  a  sacrific.'. — The  exi-ting  incorrect  use  of  the
typology  still  runs  through  the  misconceptions  of
I'jssuvant  and  Schwenke.  He  is  three  and  thirty
years  old,  :-ays  Schwenke;  and  1'assavant  savs  he
was  grown  up  to  be  a  mature  man.) — Some  red. on
ten  temptations  u herein  Abraham's  faith  was  put  to
the  test,  among  which  this  was  the  last  and  most  se
vere:  1.  When  he  must  leave  his  fatherland  at  the
call  of  (Jod  (ch.  xii.  1),  etc. — Ver.  "2.  ((>[f-r  him
th<  re,  put  him  to  death  with  thine  own  hand,  then
burn  the  dead  body  to  ashes,  thus  make  him  a  burnt-
oll'ering. — Luther  and  others  think  that  Adam,  Cain
and  Abul,  Noah  al.-o  when  he  came  from  the  ark,
held  their  worship  of  God  and  sacrificed  upon  this
mountain.  Hence  the  Arabic  and  both  the  Chaldaic
interpreters  name  it  the  land  of  the  worship  and
service  of  God. — -Various  ancient  utterances  as  to
the  mountain  of  Moriah  and  its  meaning  follow.) —
Ver. -1.  God  icveals  the  place  where  our  Saviour
should  sillier  and  die,  earlier  than  the  city  in  which
he  should  be  born  (we  must  distinguish,  however,
between  verbal  and  typical  prophecy). — The  two  ser
vants  of  Abraham.  It  is  scarcely,  at  least  not  seri
ously,  to  be  conjectured  even,  as  the  Chaldaic  inter
preters  suppose,  that  they  were  Ishmacl  and  Eliezer.
— Neither  Sarah  nor  Isaac  knew  at  the  time  the
special  object  of  the  journey.  Undoubtedly  the
mother  would  have  placed  many  hindrances  in  the
way,  and  would  have  sought  to  dissuade  Abraham
for  entering  it. — When  it  is  said  (Heb.  xi.  I'.i)  that
ho  had  received  him  as  a  figure,  we  discern  what
Abraham  knew  through  the  illumination  of  the  Holy-
Spirit.*  (At  all  events  Abraham  knew  that  the  sac
rifice  of  the  first-born  should  henceforth  be  an  ordi
nance  of  God,  and  that  this  should  culminate  in  a
closing  sacrifice  bringing  salvation). — The  three  days
of  the  journey. — Abraham  must  in  his  heart  hold  his
son  as  dead,  as  long  as  Christ  should  lie  in  the
grave. — But  one  must  above  all  else  guard  against  a
self-chosen  service  of  God. — Upon  ver.  8.  lie  stood
at  the  time  in  the  midst  of  the  controversy  between
natural  love  and  faith. — (The  altar  upon  Moriah.
The  Jews  think  that  it  was  the  altar  which  Xoah  had
built  upon  this  mountain  after  the  flood,  which  time
had  thrown  into  ruins,  but  was  again  rebuilt  by-
Abraham.  )— Upon  ver.  13.  The  LXX  render,  in  the
thicket,  Sabck.  They  regarded  it  as  a  proper  name,
which  shows  the  ignorance  of  the  Hebrew  language

*  [Isaac's  deliverance  was  a  parable  or  figure,  viz.,  of
Christ's  resurrection.   WORDSWORTH,  p.  101. — A.  G.]


in  the  Greek  commentators,  after  the  Babylonian
captivity.  Starke  records  the  fact,  that  some  "  Pa
pists"  refer  the  expression  of  Christ  upon  the  cross,
lama  sabaclhmn,  to  this  bush  Sabek,  and  th:;t  Atha-
nasius  says,  Planta  Said;  cst  rcncrand  tTit.r..—  Com
parison  of  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac  with  the  death  and

resurrection    of   Jesus   (1    Cor.    x.  13>. Ver.    10.

LANGK  :  God  Knows  the  right  hour,  indeed,  the  right
moment,  to  give  his  help. — Bibl.  Wirf,  :  If  our  o7je-
dicncc  shall  please  (Jod,  it  must  be  not  n.e.e'y  ac
cording  to  examples  without  comman  1,  but  in  accord
ance  with  the  express  word  of  God. — HilJ.  Tub.:
Ver.  11.  Wlun  we  cannot  see  en  any  side  a  way  of
escape,  then  God  comes  and  often  shows  us  a  won
derful  deliverance. — HAM,:  The  true  Christian  motto,
through  the  whole  of  life  is:  The  Lord  sees  me. —
Ver.  15.  The  Ia-t  manifestation  of  God  with  which
Abraham  was  directly  honored,  which  appears  in  the
Holy  Scriptnre>. — The  oath  of  God  :  just  as  if  he
had  sworn  by  i.is  name,  or  by  his  life.  In  place  of
this  form  of  speech  Christ  uses  very  often  the
Verily. — Tolm  xvi.  2n. — What  one  gives  for  (Jod,
and  to  him,  is  never  lost.  [Xot  only  not  lost,  but
received  back  again  in  its  higher  form  and  use.  Even
so  every  child  of  Abraham  must  held  all  that  is  most
precious  to  him  as  the  gift  of  God's  grace;  must
first  yield  to  God  the  bics-iiigs  which  seem  to  come
to  him  as  to  o'hers,  as  mere  natural  blessings,  and
then  receive  them  back  as  coming  purely  from  his
grace. — A.  G.  |

Ltsco:  What  could  better  teach  the  Jews  the
true  idea  and  aim  of  the  whole  sacrificial  service  (the
perfect  yielding  to  God)  than  the  history  of  Abra
ham  ?  Ver.  ('..  Thus  Jesus  bare  his  cross.  Ver.  IS.
The  great  blessing  is  Chri-t  who  brings  blessinirs  to
all  nations  (Acts  iii.  25;  Gal.  iii.  8). — When  (Jod
brings  a  dear  child  near  to  death,  or  indeed  calls  it
away,  he  thus  proves  us  in  a  like  way. — GKKI.ACH  :
The  name  Moriah  signifies,  shown,  pointed  out,  by
Jehovah,  and  refers  especially  to  the  wonderful
pointing  to  the  ram,  through  which  Isaac  was  saved,
since  this  was  for  Abraham  the  turning-point  of  t he-
history,  through  which  (Jod  confirmed  his  promis"
and  crowned  the  faith  of  Abraham. — Ver.  12.  God
knows:  he  knows  from  experience,  from  the  testing,
that  the  man  remains  faithful  to  him,  since  without
the  test  his  faithfulness  is  uncertain.  lie  foreknew
it,  in  so  far  as  he  foreknew  the  result  of  the  trial. —
C.u.w.  Jlaml.:  (Jod  naturally  lays  such  severe  trials
not  upon  ch'tkJroi,  but  upon  men. — Abraham  kept
Ids  faith  in  God,  an  Jehovah,  through  his  act ;  now
ilso  (Jod  will  approve  himself  to  Abraham,  as  Jeho
vah. — This  same  promise  appears  here  for  the  third
time  (ch.  xii.  3  ;  xviii.  18)  as  a  reward  for  Abraham's
obedience  and  triumph  of  faith. — Each  new  well-
endured  trial  of  fnith  leads  to  greater  strength  of
iaith  ;  the  f mil  of  faith  yields  nourishment  again  to
"aith  itself. — The  act  of  faith  on  the  part  of  Abra-
am  here  described,  is  held,  not  only  by  Jews  and
Christians,  but  even  by  Mohammedans,  as  the  very
acme  of  all  his  testing,  and  as  the  most  complete
obedience  of  his  faith. — SCIIKO'DKR:  Ver.  1.  He  is
constantly  leading  us  into  situations  in  which  what
ies  concealed  in  the  heart  must  be  revealed. — The
devil  tempts  that  he  may  destroy  ;  God  tempts  that
ic  may  crown  (Ambrose). — The  temptation  has  as  a
)rcsupposition,  that  God  has  not  yet  been  perfectly
brmed  in  us  (Hengstenbcrg). — The  idea  of  the  sac
rifice  (1  Sam.  i.  25).  And  they  slew  the  bullock  and
>rought  the  child  to  Eli  (comp.  Hos.  xiv.  2 ;  Micah
i.  7  ;  Ps.  xL  7-9  ;  li.  19). — For  this  whole  history,  see


CHAP.   XXII.   1-19.


473


the  similar  history  (Judg.  xi.).     That  Abraham  hirr
sell'  is  the  priest,  and  his  own  heart,  his  own  dccpcs
love,  and  all  his  blessing,  is  the  sacrifiee,  this  consti
tutes  the  severity  of  the  test  (Krummacher).* — Ver
5.    We  cannot  regard  these  words  as  mere  cmph
words  ;  it  is  rather  the  word  of  hope  which  had  no"
forsaken   Abraham  (Baumgarten;  also   Gcrlach).—
According  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  an  intiraa
tion  of  the  hope  of  the  reawakening  of  Isaac.    "  Bu
then,  indeed,  some  one  objects,  the  very  severe  am
weighty  thing  in  the  sacrifice  is  taken  away."    Strauss
replies  to  this  by  an  allusion  to  the  paiufulncss  of
the   death-beds   of   children   to  their  parents,  even
when  they  are  assured  of  their  resurrection. — It  is  a
more  wonderful  faith  which  supports  itself  even  to
the   issue  which   he   did  not  see,  as  if  he  saw  it
(Strauss).— Ver.  9.  The  son  is  silent  before  the  father,
as  the  father  before  God,  and  the  child   obeys  the
parents  a^  the  parents  obey  the  Lord  (Strauss). — A
sacred    contention    finds  place  here.     One  elevates
himself  above  human  nature  ;  to  the  other  to  resist
the  father  seams  more  terrible  than  death  (Gregory
Nyssa).     Ver.  12.  The  apostle  (Rom.  viii.  32)  takes
up  again  the  last  words  of  the  Angel,  and  thus  indi
cates  the  typical  relations  of  the  event. — Ver.  13.
The  entire  Lcvitical  system  of  sacrifices  is  only  an
extension  of  this  sacrifice  of  the  ram  (Richter). — It
is  remarkable  that  the  ram  is  destined  among  the
Greeks  and  Romans  as  the  substitutionary  sacrifice
in  the  gravest  cases  (Baumgarten).     It  happens  at
first_  according  to  the  ordinance,  that  God  by  virtue
of  his  concealed  providence  places  and  controls  what
may  serve  us,  but  it  follows  upon  this  that  he  stretches
out  his  hand  to  us,  and  reveals  himself  in  an  actual
experience  (Calvin).— Ver.  18.  The  blessing  given  to
the  nations  in  the  seed  of  Abraham,  they  shall  them
selves  come  to  desire  and  wish  (Baumgarten).    Abra
ham's  obedience  is  named  here  as  a  reason  of  the
promise.     This  is,  too,  a  new  reason  (Baumgarten).
— (Abraham's  obedience  is,  however,  not  so  much  a
reason  of  the  promise  as  of  the  sealing  of  the  prom
ise  through  an  oath.)— The  promise  is  the  promise
of  the  covenant.     On  the  one  hand  it  rests  funda
mentally  upon  the  grace  of  God,  on  the  other  it  is
introduced  for  Abraham  through  the  obedience  of
faith. — Abraham  receives  the  name  of  the  father  of
believers  through  this  completion  of  his  faith  (Baum
garten).     (Certainly  also  through  the  whole  develop
ment  of  hid  faith.)— Ver.  16.  There  is  a  constant  ref
erence  to  this  passage,  as  to  the  solemn,  great,  and
final   explanation.     Thus  in  ch.  xxiv.  7 ;  xxvi.  3  •
Exod.  xxxiii.  1  ;  Xumb.  xxxii.  11 ;  Deut.  'xxix.  13-
xxx.  20  ;  xxxiv.  4  ;  Luke  i.  73  ;  Acts  vii.  17  ;  neb!

*  [Wljnt  God  required  of  Abraham  was  not  the  sacrifice
f  Isaac,  but  the  sacrifice  of  himself.    WCKDSWOKTH,  p.  37.
^"•


vi.  13  (Drcchsler).— It  claims  our  notice  still,  that
the  Jews  hold  the  binding  of  Isaac  (vor.  9)  as  a  sat
isfaction,  and  use  in  prayer  the  words,  Consider  tha
binding  of  thine  only  one  (see  above).  "Indeed,
one  hundred  and  sixty  millions  of  Mohammedans
also  read  in  their  Koran  to-day.  This  truly  was  a
manifest  testing  "(Zahn). — Robinson's  description  of
Beersheba.— SCHWENKE  :  The  Lord  knows  how  to
reward  his  own. — PASSAVANT  :  Abraham  journeys
the  first,  the  second,  the  third  day  in  silence.— Pre
cious  school  of  faith,  the  highest,  the  most  sacred

school,  how  art  thou  now  so  greatly  deserted  ?

Abraham  has  become  the  father  of  Christians. — Vcr.
14.  God  sees,  he  will  see,  choose. — Reflection  upon
the  children  of  Abraham. — The  future  of  Israel,  of
believers,  etc.— (Passavant  closes  his  work  with  these
reflections.)— W.  HOFFMANN:    The   consecration  of
the  promise  through  sacrifice  :  1.  The  concession  of
the  promised  son  ;  2.  the  new  reception  of  the  prom
ised   son. — According  to  this  history  God  tempted
Abraham.     There  the  key  is  placed  in  your  hand.
It  was  said  indeed  before,  that  the  purpose  of  God
was  not  to  secure  an  external  offering,  but  an  inward
sacrifice,  etc.     In  this  inbeing  of  the  internal  and
external,  hi  this  interworking  of  the  divine  and  hu
man,  of  the  eternal  and  the  earthly,  there  lay  a  severe
temptation,  a  constant  inducement,  to  the  believers
of  the  Old  Testament,  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  mere
external,  the  mere  shell,  the  sweet  kernel,  the  fruit
of  life  itself  being  forfeited,  to  go  on  in  security,
indeed  oftentimes  to  grow  proud  of  their  possession.
— Ver.  1.  In  how  many  ways  he  enters  the  family  and
calls  to  the  father  Abraham  !  and  when  you  know  the
voice  of  the  Lord,  thus  answer :  Here  am  I. — Upon
'saac.     Almost  entirely  a  feeble  repetition  of  what
las  appeared  in  the  life  of  Abraham.     Vcr.  9.  But
le  lay  upon  the  altar  in  full  consciousness  and  in  si-
ence.     There  he  lay  himself,  as  a  dumb  sacrificial
amb,  at  the  feet  of  God.     This  is  sufficient  for  a
ifetime  of  more  than  a  century,  and  imparts  to  it,  con-
ents,  and  a  character,  which  admit  of  no  exchange
or  the  better. — He  gives  Isaac  to  him  in  another
way  than  that  in  which  he  had  called  him  his  own
at  first.     The  whole  glory  of  a  wonderful  future  sur-
ounds  the  head  of  Isaac. — TAUBK  :  The  obedience
f  faith,  or  how  first  in  the  yielding  of  that  which  is
nost  precious  faith  is  tested :  1.  God  brings  us  to
his  proof  at  the  right  time  ;  place  yourselves  there-
ore  in  his  hands,  as  Abraham ;  2.  these  tests  are
"cry  severe,  and  will  ever  grow  more  severe  in  their
rogress,  for  they  demand  the  death  of  self ;  3.  these
ests  have  a  blessed  end  for  the  tried  and  approved
eliever ;  therefore    let  us  follow  the  footsteps  of
Abraham.— HEUSER  :  The  way  of  Abraham  to  the
acrifice. — The  offering  up  of  Isaac :  1.  In  its  his-
orical  detail ;  2.  in  its  inward  typical  meaning.


474  GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


ELEVENTH     SECTION.

The  sorrows  and  joys  of  Abraham's  domestic  life.     The  account  and  genealogy  of  those  at  home,

Sarah's  death.     Her  burial-place  at  ILbron  ;  the  seed  of  the  future  inheritance  of  Canaan.

Tlie  theocratic  foundation  of  the  consecrated  burial.

CHAPTKB   XXII.  20— XXIII.  20.

20  And  it  came  to  pass  after  these  tilings  that  it  was  told  Abraham,  saying  [what  follows],

21  Behold,  Milcah,  she  hath  also  borne  children  unto  thy  brother  Nahor  ;   lluz  [sccch.x.23;

a  light  sandy  land,  ia  northern  Arabia]  his    first-born,    and    Buz   [a  people  and  region  in  western  Arabia]

22  his   brother,  and    Kenmel    [the  congregation  of  God]    the    father    of    Aram.     And  Chesed

I  Die  name  of  a  Chalilaic  tribe]  ,111(1  IlaZO  fan  Aramaic  and  Chaldaic  tribe;  Ocsenius  :  perhaps  for  HIT  PI  ,  vision]
and  Tildasll  [Furst:  'ix  1-5,  flame  of  fire],  and  Jidlaph  [Gcsenius:  tearful;  Fiirst:  melting  away,

23  pining],  and   BetllUel  [Oesenius:  man  of  God.     Furst :  dwelling-place  or  people  of  God].       And  Bctlllicl
betjat    Rebekah    [llibkah,  captivating,  ensnaring;  Furst:  through  beauty]  :    these    eight    Milcah    did

24  bear  to   Nahor,  Abraham's   brother.     And   his   concubine,  whose   name  was   Keumah

[Gcsemus:  raised,  elevated;  Fiirst:  pearl  or  coral],  she  bare  also  Tebah  [Fiirst:  extension,  breadth  ;  a
locality  in  Mesopotamia],  and  Gaham  [Gcsenius:  having  flaming  eyes;  Fiirst:  the  blacl; ;  an  Aramaic,  dark-
colored  tribe],  and  Thahasll  ( the  name  of  an  unknown  animal  :  badger,  marten,  seal?],  and  Maachah
[low-binds  ;  a  locality  at  the  foot  of  Ilermon  ;  used  besides  as  a  female  name  |.

CH.  XXIII.        1.  And  Sarah  was  an  hundred  and  twenty  and  seven  years  old  :  these  were

2  the  years  of  the  life  of  Sarah.     And  Sarah  died  in  Kirjath-arba  [city  of  Aria]  ;  the  same
is  Hebron  in  the  land  of  Canaan  :  and  Abraham  came  to  mourn  for  Sarah,  and  to  weep-
for  her.

3  And   Abraham  stood  up  from  before  his  dead,  and  spake  unto  the  sons  of  Heth,

4  saying,  I  am  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner  [not  a  citizen]  with  you:  give  me  a  possession  of

5  a  burying-place  with  you,  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight.     And  the  children
G  of  Ileth   answered  Abraham,  saying  unto  him,   Hear  us,  my  lord :  thou  art  a  mighty

prince  [a  prince  of  God]  among  us:  in  the  choice  [most  excellent]  of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy
dead  :  none  of  us  shall  withhold  from  thee  his  sepulchre,  but  that  thou  mayest  bury

7  thy  dead.     And  Abraham  stood  up,  and  bowed  himself  to  the  people  of  the  land,  even

8  to  the  children  of  Ileth.     And  he  communed   with   them,  saying,  If  it  be  your  mind
[soul,  soul-desire]  that  I  should  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight,  hear  me,  and  entreat  for

9  me    to    Ephron  [Fttrst:  more  powerful,  stronger]    the    Son    of    Zohai1    [splendor,  noble].       That    he

may  give  me  the  cave  of  Machpelah  [Gcsenius:  doubling;  Furst:  winding,  serpentine],  which  he
hath,  which  is  in  the  end  of  his  field  ;  for  as  much  money  as  it  is  worth  [full  money]  he

10  shall  give  it  me  fora  possession  of  a  burying-place  [hereditary  sepulchre]  among  you.     And
Kphron  dwelt  [sat]  among  the  children  of  Ileth.     And  Ephron  the  Hittite  answered
Abraham  in  the  audience  [ears]  of  the  children  of  Ileth,  even  of  all  that  went  in  at  the

11  gate  of  his  city,  saying,   Nay,  my  lord,  hear  me  :  the  field  give  I  thec,  and  the  cave
that  is  therein,  I  give  it  thee;  in  the  presence  of  the  sons  of  my  people  give  I  it  thee:

12  bury  thv  dead.     And  Abraham  bowed  down   himself  before  the   people  of  the  land.

13  And  he'spake  unto  Ephron  in  the  audience  of  the  people  of  the  land,  saying,  But  if
thou  wilt  give  it,  I  pray  thee,  hear  me  [give  me  hearing]  :   I  will  give   thee  money  for  the

14  field ;  take  it  from  me,  and  I  will  bury  my  dead  there.     And  Ephron  answered  Abra-

15  ham,   saving  unto  him,  My  lord,   hearken  unto  me  :    the  land   is  worth  four  hundred
^6  shekels  of  silver;  what  is  that  betwixt  me  and  thee?  bury  therefore  thy  dead.     And

Abraham  hearkened  [followed]  unto  Ephron;  and  Abraham  weighed  to  Ephron  the
silver  which  he  had  named  in  the  audience  of  the  sons  of  Heth,  four  hundred  shekels  of
silver,  current  money  with  the  merchant.

17  And  the  field  of  Ephron,  which  was  in  Machpelah,  which  was  before  Mamre,  the
field,  and  the  cave  which  was  therein,  and  all  the  trees  which  were  in  the  field,  that  were

18  in  all  the  borders  round  about,  were  made  sure  [stood]  Unto  Abraham  for  a  possession


CHAP.   XXII.  20— XXIII.  20.


475


in  the  presence  of  the  children  of  Heth,  before  all  that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  citv.

19  And   after  tin's  Abraham  buried  Sarah  his  wife  in  the  cave  of  the  field  of  Machpelah

20  before  Mamre :  the  same  is  Hebron  in  the   land  of  Canaan.     And  the  field,  and  the
cave  that  is  therein,  were  made  sure  unto  Abraham  for  a  possession  of  a  burying-place
by  the  sons  of  Heth.


EXEOETICAL  AXD  CRITICAL.

1.  Survey.  The  two  sections  which  we  have  here
placed  together,  with  the  following  and  the  last  sec
tions  of  the  life  of  Abraham,  form  a  contrast  with  his
previous  history.  The  revelations  from  God,  the
wonderful  events  of  his  life,  cease,  for  Abraham's
life  of  faith  is  completed  with  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac.
To  the  wonderful  completion  of  the  faith  of  Abraham
there  is  now  added  the  purely  natural  and  human  per
fection  of  Abraham.  Its  history  is  certainly  much
shorter,  but  it  is  at  the  same  time  a  proof  that  the
miraculous  in  the  Old  Testament  does  not  stand  in
any  exclusive  relation  to  the  material  and  human.  A
mythology  seeking  to  produce  effect,  would  have
closed  the  life  of  the  father  of  the  faithful  with
some  splendid  supernatural  or  heroic  events.  It  is,
on  the  other  hand,  a  trait  of  the  true  historical  charac
ter  of  the  tradition  here,  that  it  closes  the  life  of
Abraham  in  the  way  already  stated.  But  at  the
same  time  the  true  christological  character  of  the
Old  Testament  history,  wherein  it  forms  the  intro
duction  to  the  New  Testament  manifestation  of  the
God-man,  discovers  itself  therein,  that  the  history
of  the  life  of  Abraham  does  not  close  abruptly  with
his  greatest  act  of  faith,  but  that  from  and  out  of
this  act  of  faith  there  proceeds  a  natural  and  human
progress  of  a  consecrated  and  sanctified  life,  a  course
of  life  into  which  even  the  second  marriage  of  Abra
ham  does  not  enter  as  a  disturbing  element.  A  ter
mination  of  this  kind  has  already  appeared  in  the  life
of  Noah,  appears  later  in  the  life  of  Jacob ;  and  has
its  New  Testament  counterpart  in  the  history  of  the
forty  days  of  the  risen  Christ.  But  as  in  the  life  of
•  Jesus,  so  in  the  life  of  Abraham,  the  events  after  the
great  contests  of  faith  are  not  without  importance.
The  t\vo  sections  which  we  have  combined  under
this  point  of  view,  the  family  sorrows  and  family  joys
of  Abraham  point  downwards  to  the  history  of  Isaac
and  Israel.  From  the  son  of  Abraham  there  must
now  be  a  family  of  Abraham,  and  to  this  the  family
genealogy  of  the  house  of  Nahor  serves  as  an  intro
duction.  This  genealogical  register  first  names  Rc-
bekah,  and  then  lays  the  ground  for  the  mission  and
the  wooing  of  the  bride  by  Eliezer  (ch.  xxiv.),  a
history  in  which  also  the  wooing  of.  his  bride  by
Jacob  is  introduced  through  the  mention  of  Laban.
But  as  the  history  of  the  family  of  Abraham  is  intro
duced  through  the  record  of  the  house  of  Nahor,  so
also  is  the  first  possession  of  Abraham  and  his
descendants  in  Canaan  introduced  by  the  narrative
of  the  death  of  Sarah.  The  burial-place  in  the  cave
and  field  of  Machpelah,  are  made  a  point  of  union  for
the  later  appropriation  of  Canaan  by  the  people  of
God,  just  as  in  the  new  covenant,  the  grave  of  Christ
has  introduced  for  Christians  the  future  possession
of  the  earth  ;  a  method  of  conquest  which  unfolds
itself  through  the  graves  of  the  martyrs  and  the
crypts  of  Christian  churches  throughout  the  whole
world.  "The  testing  of  the  faith  of  Abraham  is
completed  with  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac,  the  end  of  his
divine  calling  is  fulfilled,  and  henceforward  the  his
tory  of  his  life  hastens  to  its  conclusion.  It  is  alto


gether  fitting  that  there  should  follow  now,  after  this
event,  a  communication  to  him  concerning  the  family
of  his  brother  Nahor  (ch.  xi.  27  ff.),  which  is  joined
with  so  much  appropriateness  to  the  sacrifice  of
Isaac,  since  it  leads  on  to  the  history  of  the  marriage
of  the  heir  of  the  promise.  The  NT!  C3  (comp.
ch.  ii.  29)  also  points  to  this  actual  connection.  As
Sarah  had  borne  a  son  to  Abraham,  Milcah  also  bare
sons  to  Nahor.  NT!  c.">  of  ver.  24  refers  back  to
ver.  20."  Keil.— SCHRODER :  "This  paragraph  is
merely  a  continuation  of  ch.  xi.  27  ff.  As  ch.  xix.
37,  38,  brought  the  side  line  of  Ilaran  to  its  goal  and
end,  so  here  the  side  line  of  Nahor  is  continued  still
further,  a  testimony,  moreover,  that  Moses  never
loses  the  genealogical  thread  of  the  history."

2.  Ch.  xxii.  20-24.     Knobel  holds  the  number
twelve  of  the  sons  of  Nahor,  as  also  of  the  sons  of
Ishmael   (ch.  xxv.   13  ff.)  for  an   imitation  of  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel.     It  is  unjustifiable  to  infer
from  such  accidental,  or  even  important  resemblances,
without  further  grounds,  that  the  record  is  fiction.
It  is  certainly  true  also,  that  of  the  sons  of  Nahor,  as
also  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  four  are  the  sons  of  a  con
cubine.     Still,  as  Keil  observes  in  the  history  of  the
sons  of  Jacob,  there  are  two  mothers  as  also  two  con
cubines.     Keil  also  opposes,  upon  valid  grounds,  the
view  of  Knobel,  that  the  twelve  sons  of  Nahor  must
signify  twelve  tribes  of  his  descendants  ;  thus,  e.  g.,
Bethuel  does  not  appear  as  the  founder  of  a  tribe.
"  It  is  probably  true  only  of  some  of  the  names,  that
those  who  bore  them  were  ancestors  of  tribes  of  the
same  name."     Keil.  —  Huz   his   first-born.  —  He
must  be  distinguished  from  the  son  of  Aram  (ch.  x.
23),  and  from  the  Edomite  (ch.  xxx.  28).     Knobel
holds  that  he  must  be  sought  in  the  neighborhood
of  the  Edomites. — Buz.— "Also,  since  this  tribe  is
mentioned  (Jer.  xxv.  23)  in  connection  with  Dedan,
and  Thema,  aud  since  Elihu,  the  fourth  opponent  of
Job,    belonged   to  it   (Job  xxxii.   2)."      Knobel. —
Kemuel — "  Is  not  the  ancestor  or  founder  of  the
Aramaic  people,  but  an  ancestor  of  the   family  of
Ram,  to  which  the  Buzitc,    Elihu,    also   belonged,
since  C"1X  stands  for  CT  ."     Keil.— Chesed. — The
chief  tribe  of  the  Chaldees  appears  to  have  been  older
than  Chesed,  but  he  seems  to  have  been  the  founder
of  a  younger  branch  of  the  Chaldees  who  plundered
Job  (Job  i.  17). — Bethuel,  the  father  of  Rebekah
(see  ch.  xxv.  20). — Maacha. — Deut.  iii.  14 ;  Josh.  xii.
5,  allude  to  the  Maachathites.    At  the  time  of  David
the  land  Maacha  was  a  small  Aramaic  kingdom  (2  Sam.
x.  6  -8 ;  1  Chron.  xix.  6).  "  The  others  never  appear
again."    Keil.    For  conjectures  in  regard  to  them,  see
Knobel,  p.  194.     For  the  difference  in  the  names
Aram,  Uz,  Chasdim,  see  DELITZSCH,  p.  42  ~>.

3.  GERLACII:  "The  German  word  l  Jff^siceib^  sig
nifies  a  woman  taken  out  of  the  condition  of  service,  or
bondage,  and  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  term.
Besides  one  or  more  legal  wives,  a  man  might  take,
according  to  the  custom  of  the  ancients,  one  from
the  rank  of  slaves,  whose  children,  not  by  Abraham,
but  by  Jacob,  were  mude  sharers  alike  with  the  le
gally  born  (naturally,  since,   they  were  held  for  the


476


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


adopted  children  of  Rachel  and  Leah).  It  was  a
kind  of  lower  marriage,  as  with  us  the  marriage  'on
the  left,'  *•  for  the  concubine  was  bound  to  remain
faithful  (Judg.  xix.  2  ;  2  Sam.  iii.  7),  and  any  other
man  who  went  in  unto  her,  must,  bring  his  trespass
offering  (Lev.  xix.  2<>);  the  lather  must  treat  the
concubine  of  his  son  as  his  child,  and  the  son
also,  alter  the  contraction  of  a  marriage  with  one  of
equal  rank,  must  still  treat  her  as  his  concubine  (Ex.
aii.  9-10)."

4  Cli.  23.  Siirah'1  s  death  and  burial  in  tht  cave
of  Mfic///i<l'i//,  purchased  with  tlir  adjo'ining  Held,  by
Abraham,  /'/<,///  the  ,-//i/ilroi  of  Jhtk  as  a  ]><>xxtxx!im
of  a  b'iriiiiig-place.  Knobel  and  Delitxsch  find  in
the  antique  and  detailed  method  of  statement,  and
similar  tr:ti!s.  the  stamp  of  the  characteristics  of  the
fundamental  Klohistie  writing.  The  more  truly  the
human  side  of  the  theocratic  history  comes  into  re
lief,  this  peculiar,  pleasant,  picturesque  tone  of  the
narrative  appears,  as,  e.  g.,  in  the  next  so-called  Je-
liovistic  chapter.  The  division  of  this  section  into
two  parts,  the  one  of  which  should  embrace  only  the
two  first  verses,  Sarah's  deatli  (Delitzsch)  is  not  in
•;ceordai:ce  with  the  unique,  pervading  method  of
statement  throughout  the  whole.  Sarah's  grave  was
Ihc  cradle  of  the  Ahruhamic  kingdom  in  Canaan.
The  scene  of  the  narration  i.s  in  Hebron  (now  El
I'halil).  When  Isaac  was  born,  and  also  at  the  time
of  his  saciifice,  Abraham  dwelt  at  Beersheba  (eh.
xxii.  !!•).  At  Isaac's  birth  Sarah  was  ninety  years
old  (eh.  xvii.  17),  now  she  has  reached  127  years,
and  Isaac  is  thus  in  his  ,"7th  year  (see  ch.  xxv.  2i>).
"Between  the  journey  to  Moriah, and  Sarah's  death,
there  is  thus  an  interval  of  at  least  20  years."  De
litxseh.  During  this  interval  Abraham  must  have
changed  his  dwelling  place  to  Hebron  again.  The
mention  <>f  this  change  of  residence  may  have  ap
peared,  therefore,  superfluous  to  the  writer,  and  fur
ther,  it  may  be  that  even  during  his  abode  at  IJecr-
sheba,  Hebron  was  his  principal  residence,  as  Knobel
conjectures. — The  years  of  the  life  of  Sarah. —
The  age  of  Sarah  was  impressed  on  the  memory  of
the  Israelites  through  this  repetition,  as  a  number
which  should  not  be  forgotten.  KKII,  :  "Sarah  is
the  only  woman  whose  age  is  recorded  in  the  Bible,
because,  as  the  mother  of  the  seed  of  promise,  she
became  the  mother  of  all  believers  (1  1'et.  iii.  G)."
— Kirjath-Arba,  the  same  is  Hebron  (sec  ch.  xiii.
18). — The  name  Kirjath-Arba,  i.  e.,  city  of  Arba,  is
marked  by  Kcil  after  Ilengstenberg  as  the  later
r.ame  (coming  after  Hebron),  since  the  Anakim  had
not  dwelt  there  at  the  time  of  the  patriarchs,  but
Pelitxsch,  on  the  contrary,  according  to  Josh.  xiv.
15,  and  Judg.  i.  10,  views  it  as  the  earlier  name.
Since,  however,  Num.  xiii.  22,  the  city  at  the  very
blooming  period  of  the  Anakim,  was  called  Hebron,
and,  indeed,  with  reference  to  its  being  founded
seven  years  before  Zoan  (Tanis)  in  Egypt,  it  seems
clear  that  while  the  time  mentioned  in  the  books  of
Joshua  and  Judges,  was  an  earlier  time,  it  was  not
the  carli;  st,  and  the  succession  in  the  names  is  this  :
Hebron,  Kirjath-Arba,  Hebron,  El  Chalil  (the  friend
of  God,  viz.,  Abraham).  It  is  still,  however,  a  ques
tion  whether  Hebron  may  not  designate  specially  a

*  [The  allusion  is  to  a  German  law  or  custom,  in  regard
to  mnrringe  between  persons  of  unequal  rank,  and  the  off
spring  of  stich  a  marriage. — A.  G.]

[The  concubine  was  a  secondary  or  half-wife,  and  among
the  Hebrews  her  position  was  well  defined,  and  was  not  re
garded  as  illegitimate.  Her  position  was  not  that  of  a  mis
tress,  as  we  use  the  term  concubine. — A.  G.]


valley  city  of  this  locality,  which  belonged  to  the
Hittites  (see  ch.  xxxvii.  14,  where  Hebron  is  described
as  a  valley),  the  name  Kirjath-Arba,  on  the  contrary,
the  mountain  and  mountain  city,  belonging  to  the
Anakim.  The  locality  seems  to  favor  the  supposi
tion  of  two  neighboring  cities,  of  which  or.e  could
now  use  the  valley  city  as  the  abode  of  Abraham  for
the  whole  locality,  and  now  the  mountain  city.  We
have  confessedly  to  accept  such  a  relation  be  ween
Sichem  and  the  neighboring  town  Sichar,  in  order  to
meet  the  difliculty  in  John  iv.  5.  Delitxseh  explains
the  change  of  names  through  a  change  of  owners.
Even  now  Hebron  is  a  celebrated  city,  at  the  same
time  a  hill  and  valley  city,  although  no  longer,  great
and  populous,  situated  upon  the  way  from  Becr-
shcba  to  Jerusalem,  and  about  midway  between  them
(7-8  hours  from  Jerusalem),  surrounded  by  beautiful
vineyards,  olive  trees  and  orchards  ;  comp.  the  arti
cles  in  Wixi:i:'s  "Dictionary,''  VON  UAUMKU,  and
the  various  descriptions  of  travellers.  [ROBINSON'S
description  (ii.  431—162)  is  full  and  accurate,  and
leaves  little  to  be  desired. — A.  G.] — In  the  land
of  Canaan. — This  circumstance  appears  here  con
spicuously  in  honor  of  Sarah,  and  from  the  import
ance  of  her  burial-place. — And  Abraham  came. —
The  shepherd  prince  was  busy  in  his  calling  in  the
field,  or  in  the  environs.  It  is  not  said  that  he  was
absent  at  the  deatli  of  Sarah,  but  only  that  he  now
sat  down  by  the  corpse  at  Hebron,  to  complete  the
usages  of  mourning  (to  mourn  for  Sarah,  and  to  weep
for  her),  and  to  provide  for  her  burial. — Prcm  be
fore  his  dead  (corpse). —  Fr<»n  lifm-r  his  dead.  *
He  had  mourned  in  the  presence  of  the  dea.l;  now
he  goes  to  the  gate  of  the  city,  where  the  people
assembled,  where  the  business  was  transacted,  and
where  he  could  thus  purchase  a  grave. — To  the
sons  of  Heth. — The  name,  according  to  Knobel,
appears  only  in  the  Elohistic  writings.  [This  at
tempt  to  define  and  characterize  particular  points  of
the  book  by  the  use  of  special  names,  breaks  down
so  often  that  it  may  be  regarded  as  no  longer  of  any
serious  importance — A.  G.] — A  possession  of  a.
burying-place  with  you.— It  is,  us  ]•'.  C.  V.  Moscr
remarks,  a  beautiful  scene  of  politeness,  simplicity,
kindness,  frankness,  humility,  modesty,  not  un-
minglcd  with  some  shades  of  avarice,  and  of  a  kind
of  expectation  when  one  in  effecting  a  sale,  throws
himself  upon  the  generosity  of  the  purchaser."  De
litxseh.  The  delicate  alfair  is  introduced  by  the
modest  request  of  Abraham.  As  a  stranger  and  a
sojourner  f  he  had  no  possession,  thus  even  no  bury-
ing-placc  among  them.  He  therefore  asks  that  they
would  sell  him  a  piece  of  ground  for  the  purpose  of
a  burial-place.— Thou  art  a  mighty  prince  (a
prince  of  God). — That  is,  a  man  to  whom  God  has
given  a  princely  aspect,  in  consequence  of  com
munion  with  him.  [A  man  whom  God  has  favored
and  made  great. — A.  G.]  They  offer  him  a  sepul
chre,  among  the  most  select  of  their  sepulchres  (upon
the  exchange  of  1?  for  "b  see  Knobel  and  the  op
posing  remarks  by  Keil).  [~53xb  is  generally  used
absolutely,  but  the  peculiarity  here  is  not  without
analogy  (see  Lev.  xi.  Ij,  and  does  not  justify  the
change  to  "ib  nor  that  adopted  by  the  Sept.  fctb. —


*  [Rarah,  though  dead,  was  still  his.  Wordsworth.— A. G.]
t  [Wordsworth  here  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  tho
Apostle  Peter  (t  Tot.  ii.  11)  quotes  these  words  ns  found  in
the  Septuagint,  when  he  addresses  believers  as  "strangers
and  pilgrims."  They  were,  like  Abraham,  the  father  of  the
faithful.— A.  G.I


CHAP.    XXII.   20— XXIII.    20.


477


A.  G.]     But  Abraham  cannot  consent  thus  to  mingle
himself   with    them.      He  lias  a  separate  burving-
place  in  his  eye.  —  And  Abraham  stood  up.  —  The
reverential  bowing  is  an  expression  of  his  gratitude
and  of  his  declining  the  offer.     In  the  oriental  bow
ing  the   person  touches   the  earth  with   his   brow.
Luther  often  translates  the  word  in  question  by  "  to
worship,"  in  relation  to  men,  where  it  is  obviously
unsuited  to  the  sense.  —  If  it  be  your  mind.  —  Abra
ham  introduces,  in  a  very  courtly  and  prudent  way,
his  purpose  to  secure  the  cave  of  Ephron.     It  marl-;
Ephron  as  a  man  of  prominence  and  rank,  that  he
avails  himself  of  their  intercession  ;  Keil  infers  from
the  words  /;/,•?  cifi/  (ver.  10),  that  he  was  then  lord  of
the  city.     This  is  doubtful.  —  The  cave  of  Mach-
pelah.  —  "  The  name  is  rendered  in  the  Septuagint  :
rl  (TTrrjAaiov  rb  Snr\ovv,  according  to  the  meaning  of
fiber':.     But  it  is  a  proper  name,  which  is  also  true
of'tlie  field  (eh.  xlix.   30;  1.  13),  although  it  was
originally  derived  from  the  form  of  the  cave."  Keil.
Caves  were  often  used  for  sepulchres  in  Palestine
(see  Winer,  sepulchres).  —  And  Ephron,  the  Hit-
tite,  answered.  —  "  When  now  Ephron  offered  to
give  the  cave  to  Abraham  —  this  is  a  mode  of  expres
sion  still  in  use  in  the  East,  by  which,  so  far  as  it  is
seriously  intended,  leaving  out  of  view  any  regard  to
a   counterpresent,  richly  compensating  the  value  of
the  present,  for  the  most  part  it  is  designed  to  pre
vent    any  abatement  from   the  price  desired.    [Sec
'  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  by  THOMPSON,  ii.   381-
388.  —  A.  G.]     (Comp.  DIETERIOI  and  descriptions  of
the  Eastern  lands,  ii.  p.  168  f.)."     Keil.     It  is  not
certain  that  we  should  identify  so  directly  the  orig
inal  utterance  of  true  generosity  with  the  like  sound
ing  form  of  a  later  custom.     It  must   be  observed,
still,  that  Abraham  modestly  desired  only  to  gain  the
cave,  a  place  which  was  at  the  end  of  the  field,  and
to  this  no  one  objected  ;    on   the  contrary,  Ephron
offered  him  at  the  same  time,  the  adjoining  field.
And  this  is  in  favor  of  the  good  intention  of  Ephron,
since  he  could  have  sold  to  him  the  cave  alone  at  a  cost
ly  price.  —  And  Abraham  bowed  down  himself
(again).  —  An   expression,  again,  of  esteem,  thank
fulness,  and  at  the  same  time,  of  a  dcclinature,  but,
also,  an  introduction  to  what  follows.     He   presses,
repeatedly,  for  a  definite  purchase.     The  answer  of
Ephron:  "The  field,  four  hundred  shekels,"   etc.,
announces  again  the  price  in  courtly  terms.     Knobel
explains  :  "A  piece  of  land  of  so  little  value  could
not  be   the  matter  of  a  large  transaction  between
two  rich  men."     But  it  is  the  more  distinct  echo  of
the  offer  of  the  present,  and  with  this  utters  an  ex
cuse  or  apology  for  the  demand,  because  he  (Abra
ham)  would  insist  upon  having  it  thus.  —  And  Abra
ham  weighed.  —  "At  that  time  none  of  the  states
had  stamped  coins  which  could  be   reckoned,  but
pieces  of  the  metals  were  introduced  in  the  course  of
trade,  and  these  pieces  were  of  definite  weight,  and,
indeed,  also  marked  with  designations  of  the  weight,
but  it  was  necessary  to  weigh  these  pieces  in  order
to  guard  against  fraud  "  (see  WINER,  article  Munzcn).
Knobel.      The   use  of    coins  for   the  greater  con
venience  of  original   barter,  has  been  regarded  as
the  invention  of  the  Phoenicians,  as  also  the  inven
tion   of    letters   is    ascribed   to   them.  —  Current
money  with  the  merchant  —  The  Hebrew  term  is


r>,  passing  over,  transitive;  i.  e.,  current,
fitted  for  exchange  in  merchandise.  The  idea  of  the
distinction  between  light  pieces,  and  those  of  full
weight,  existed  already.  KEIL  :  '  The  ehekel  of  sil


ver  used  in  trade  was  about  274  Parisian  grains,  and
the  price  of  the  land,  therefore,  about  250  dollars,  a
very  considerable  sum  for  the  time."     The   Rabbins
ascribe  the  high  price  to  the  covetousncss  of  Ephron.
Delitzsch,  however,  reminds  us,  that  Jacob  purchased
a  piece  of  ground  for  100  MB^bp  (Gen.  xxxiii.  19),
and  the  ground  and  limits  upon  which  Samaria  was
built,  cost  two  talents,  i.  e.,  6,000  heavy  shekels  of
silver  (1  Kings  xvi.  24).  For  the  shekel  see  DELITZPCH,
p.  4'26.     [Also  article  in  KITTO  on  "  Weights  and
Measures,"  and  in  SMITH'S    "Dictionary." — A.  G.]
It  must  be  observed,  too,  that  we  cannot  judge  of
the  relation  between  the  price  and  the  field,  since
we  do  not  know  its  bounds. — Machpelah,  which
was  before  Mamre. — For   these   local    relations
compare  DKLITZSCII  and  KEIL,  and  also  v.  RAUMER,
p.  202.     [Compare   also   ROIUNSON  :    "  Researches,"
vol.  ii.  pp.  431-162  ;  STANLEY  :  "  History  of  the  Jew.
Church."     This    cave,   so  jealously  guarded  by  the
Mohammedans,  has   recently   been   entered   by  the
Prince  of  Wales  with  his  suite.     Dean  Stanley,  who
was  permitted  to  enter  the  cave,  says  that  the  shrines
"  are  what  the  Biblical  narrative  would  lead  us  to
expect,    and    there   is   evidence  that   the    Moham
medans  have  carefully  guarded  these  sacred  spots,
and  they  stand  as  the  confirmation  of  our  Christian
faith." — A.  G.]     The  cave  lay  'TTEb  (ver.  17;  comp.
ver.  19)  before  Harare,  i.   e.,  over  against  the  oak
grove  of  Mamre  ;  Keil  and  Knobel   think   eastward,
Delitzsch  southerly.     But  the  expression   here  does
not  appear  to  refer  to  any  quarter  of  the  heavens.
The  valley  of  Hebron  runs  from  north  to  south,  in
a  southeasterly  direction.      Mamre  and  Machpelah
must  have  been  situated  over  against  each  other  in
the  two  sides,  or  the  two  ends,  of  this  valley.     Since
the  structure  JIaram,  which  the  Mohammedan  tradi
tion  (without  doubt,  a  continuation  of  the  earlier
Christian  tradition,)  designates  as  the  cave  of  Macli-
pclah,  or  as  Abraham's  grave,  and  which  the  Moham
medan  power  jealously  guards  against  the  entrance
of  Jews  or  Christians,  lies  upon  the  mountain-slope
towards  the  cast,  it  is  clear  that    Mamre  must  be
sought  upon  the  end   of    the   valley,  or  mountain-
slope  toward   the    west  (which   forms    its    eastern
side).     Here  lies  the  height  Numeidi,  which  Rosen-
miiller  says  is  the  land  of  Mamre.    We  must  then  hold
that  the  grove  of  Manire  descended  into  the  valley,
and  that  Abraham  dwelt  here  in  the  valley  at  the
edge  of  the  grove.     Still  the  opposition  in  locality
(the  vis-d-vis)  may  be  defined  from  the  high  ground
which  lies    northerly  from    Hebron,  and  is   called
Nimre  or  Xcmreh  (=Mamre?),  but  even  then  also
Abraham  must  have  dwelt  at  the  foot  of  this  emi
nence.      However,   according  to  the  old    Christian
tradition  (Schubert,  Robinson,  Seetzcn,  Ritter  and
others),  this  Hebron  of  Abraham  (Wady  el  Rame  or
Ramet  el  Chalil,   with    its  ruins  of  old  walls  and
foundations)  lay  about  an  hour  northward  from  the
present  city.     This  view  is  abandoned  by  the  most
recent  commentators,  since  this  would   require  too
reat  a  distance  between  Mamre  and  Hebron.     So
much  seems  at  least  to  be  established,  viz.,  that  the
tradition  in  regard  to  Machpelah  is  confirmed,  then
that  the  tradition  concerning  Mamre  and  the  loca
tion  of  Mamre,  must  be  determined  by  the  situation
of    Machpelah.      [In  regard    to  the   words  of   St.
Stephen,    Acts.    vii.    16,    Wordsworth    holds    that
Abraham  purchased  two  burial-places,  the  first,  the
ave  of  Machpelah,  the  second  at  Sichar  or  Sliechem  ;
and  that  it  is  bv  design  that  the  one  should  be  com-


478


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


municated  to  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  speaking  by
Moses,  the  Hebrew  legislator,  and  the  other  by  the
Hellenist  Stephen,  when  he  pleaded  before  the  Jew
ish  Sanhedrim  the  cause  of  the  faithfulness  of  all
nations,  p.  103.  See  also  ALKXAXDEU  "  on  the  Acts."

A.  G.] — And  the  field  of  Ephron  was  made

sure. — The  record  of  the  transaction  is  very  minute  ;
first,  in  regard  to  the  purchase  price  and  the  -wit
nesses  (ver.  1C),  then  in  regard  to  the  piece  of  ground
(the  cave,  the  field  and  all  the  trees)  (ver.  17),  finally,
in  reference  to  the  right  of  possession  (again  with
the  mention  of  witnesses)  (vcr.  18);  as  if  a  legal
contract  was  made  and  executed.  Even  the  burial
of  Sarah  belongs  to  the  confirmation  of  the  posses
sion,  as  is  apparent  from  the  forms  of  ver.  19,  and
from  the  ("inclusion  of  the  account  in  vcr.  20.


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.
(Upon  ch.  xxii.  20-2i.)

1.  See  the  Exegetical  and  Critical  rcrrmrks.

•2.  Joy  follows  upon  sorrow,  comfort  succeeds
die  conflict.  The  message  which  Abraham  received
was  verv  providential,  and  comes  at  the  right  mo
ment.  Isaac  was  saved.  Soon  Abraham  must  think
of  his  marriage,  and  of  the  establishment  of  his
family  through  him.  The  opportune  account  from
Mesopotamia  of  the  children  of  his  brother  Nahor
laid  the  foundation  for  the  hope  in  him,  that  he
miirht  find  in  his  family  a  suitable  bride  for  Isaac.
Rebekah  also  is  mentioned  in  the  report,  Rebekah  ap-
p.v.rs  us  the  youngest  branch  of  the  children  of  Nahor,
his  grandchild  through  JJctlmcl.  She  is  in  so  far  a
late-birth,  as  Isaac  was.  Her  brother  Laban,  who,
in  some  respects,  forms  a  parallel  to  Ishmael,  the
brother  of  Isaac,  first  appears  later  in  the  history.

:;.  It  avails  not  for  the  race  to  be  hasty,  the  race
is  not  always  to  the  swift,  Nahor  precedes  Abraham
with  his  twelve  sons,  as  Ishmael  does  Isaac.  In  the
line  of  Abraham,  the  twelve  sons  appear  first  in  the
third  generation.

4.  The  message  from  Nahor's  house,  the  sign  of
a  relationship  and  love,  sanctified  through  a  reference
to  higher  ends.

5.  Love  excites  the  thoughts  of  the  loved  ones
in  the  distance,  forms  the  greeting,  and  devises  also
the    messages    in    primitive    times.      Between   the
earliest   messengers,  the   angels   of  God,    and   the
latest  form  of  human  communication,  the  telegraph,
there  is  every  possible  form  of  communication  and
kind  of  messengers  ;  but  they  all  ought  to  serve,  and
all   shall,  in  accordance  with  their  idea,  serve  the
purposes  of  love   and   the  kingdom   of  God. — The
importance   of  the  newspaper. — A  pious    man  re
marks  :  I  have  only  two  moulding  books,  the  one  is
the  Bible,  the  other  the  newspaper. — We  should  view
all  the  events  of  the  times  in  the  light  of  God.

6.  Nahor,  the  brother  of  Abraham,  stands  still
in  a  spiritual  relationship  with  him  ;  both  his  mes
sage,  and  the  piety  and  nobleness  of  his  grandchild
Rebekah,  prove  this.     But  he  is  clearly  less  refined
than  Abraham.     Abraham  suffers  the  espousal  of
Hagar  to  be  pressed  upon  him,  because  he  had  no
children ;  but  Nahor,  who  had  already  eight  children
by   Milcah,   took   in   addition  to  her  a  concubine,
Reumah. — Contrasts  of  this  kind  teach  us  to  esti
mate  the  higher  direction  of  the  partriarchal  life,
•is  e.  g.  also  the  history  of  Lot,  will  be  estimated  in
the  mirror  of  the  history  of  Sodom.


(Upon  ch.  xxiii.)

1.  See  the  Exegetical  and  Critical  remarks.

2.  Sarah.     "  It  was  in  the  land  of  promise  that
Sarah,    the   ancestress   of    Israel,   died.      The   Old
Testament    relates   the  end  of  no  woman's  life  so
particularly  as  the  end  of  the  life  of  Sarah — for  she
is  historically  the  most  important  woman  of  the  old
covenant.    She  is  the  mother  of  the  seed  of  promise,
and  in  him  of  all  believers  (1  Pet.  iii.  6).     She  is  the
Mary  of  the  old  Testament     In  her  unshaken  faith
Mary  rises  still  higher  than  Sarah,  but  the  Scriptures
neither  record  the  length  of  her  life,  nor  her  death.
This  occurs  because  the  son  whom  Sarah  bare  was
not  greater  than  herself,  but  Mary  bore  a  son  before
whose  glory  all  her  own  personality  fades  and  van
ishes  away,"  etc.     Delitxscli.

3.  Abraham,  the  father  of  believers,  also  a  model
of  the  customary  courtliness,  and  a  proof  how  this
courtliness  is,  at  the  same  time,  an  expression  of  re
gard,  of  human  love  and  gratitude,  a  polished  form
of  human  friendship,  and  a  protection  of  personality
and  truth.    [Religion  docs  not  consist  entirely  in  acts
of  worship,   in   great  self-denials  or  heroic  virtues,
but  in  all  the  daily  concerns  and  acts  of  our  lives.
It  moulds  and  regulates  our  joys   and  sorrows;  it
affects    our    relations  ;    it    enters  into  our  business.
Thus  we  have  the  faith  and  piety  of  Abraham,  pre
sented  in  the  ordinary  changes,  the  joys,  the  sorrows,
and  the  business  transactions  of  his  life. — A.  G.]

4.  Our  history  is  a  living  portraiture  of  the  court
liness  and  urbanity  general  in  the  remote  antiquity
and  in  the  East

5.  The  traffic  and  purchase  of  Abraham,  through
out,  a  testimony  of  Israelitish   prudence   and  fore
sight,  but  free  from  all  Jewish  meanness  and  covet-
ousness.

t'i.  The  gradual  development  of  money,  or  of  the
measures  in  value  of  earthly  things,  proceeding  from
the  rating  of  the  nobler  metals,  especially  of  silver,
according  to  its  weight.  The  importance  of  the
Phoenicians  in  this  respect.

7.  A  precious  gain,  the  gain  of  a  burial  posses
sion  for  her  descendants,  is  connected  with  the  death
of  Sarah.  "  The  first  real-estate  property  of  the
patriarchs  was  a  grave.  This  is  the  only  good  which
they  buy  from  the  world,  the  only  enduring  thing
they  find  here  below,  etc.  In  that  sepulchre  Abra
ham  and  Sarah,  Isaac  and  Rebekah,  were  laid,  there
Jacob  laid  Leah,  and  there  Jacob  himself  would  rest
after  his  death,  even  in  death  itself  a  confessor  of  his
faith  in  the  promise.  This  place  of  the  dead  becomes
the  punclum  saliens  of  the  possession  of  the  promised
land.  It  was  designedly  thus  minutely  described,  as
the  glorious  acquisition  of  the  ancestors  of  Israel.  It
was  indeed  the  bond  which  ever  bound  the  descend
ants  of  Abraham  in  Egypt  to  the  land  of  promise,
drew  with  magnetic  power  their  desires  thither,  and,
collected  in  Canaan,  they  should  know  where  the
ashes  of  their  fathers  rested,  and  that  they  are  called
to  inherit  the  promise,  for  which  their  fathers  were
here  laid  in  the  grave."  Delitzsch.— The  cave  Mach-
pelah  became  for  the  Israelites  the  sacred  grave  of
the  old  covenant,  which  they  won  again  with  the
conquest  of  Canaan,  just  as  the  Christians  in  the  cru
sades  reconquered  the  sacred  grave  of  the  new  cove
nant,  and  with  it  Palestine.  And  the  Christians  also,
like  the  Jews,  have  lost  again  their  sacred  grave  and
their  holy  land,  because  they  have  not  inwardly
adhered  sufficiently  to  the  faith  of  the  fathers,  who
beyond  the  sacred  grave  looked  for  the  eternal  city


CHAP.   XXII.   20— XXIII.   1-20.


479


of  God  :  because  they  have  sought  too  much  "  the
living  among  the  dead."  Even  now  the  last  desire
of  the  orthodox  Jews  is  for  a  grave  at  Jerusalem,  in
Canaan.  [The  transaction  in  securing  this  burial-
jJacc  was,  not  as  some  have  thought,  to  secure  a
title  to  the  land  of  promise,  that  was  perfect  and
secure  in  the  sovereign  promise  of  God  :  but  it
was:  1.  A  declaration  of  the  faith  of  Abraham  in
the  promise ;  2.  a  pledge  and  memorial  to  his  de
scendants,  when  in  captivity,  of  their  interest  in  the
land.— A.  G.]

8.  Notwithstanding  the  ancients  did  not  easily
receive  a  stranger  into   their  families  (among  the
Greeks  and  Romans  usage  forbade  it),  the  Ilittites
are  ready  to  receive  Sarah  into  their   best   family
sepulchres,  as  Joseph  of  Arimathea  took  the  body
of  our  Lord  into  his  own  tomb.     This  is  a  strong
testimony  to  the  impression  which  Abraham,  and
Sarah  also,  had  made  upon  them,  to  their  reverence
and  attachment  for  the  patriarchal  couple.    They  ap
pear  also,  like  Abimelcch  at  Gerar,  to  have  had  their
original  monotheism  awakened  and  strengthened  by
their  intercourse  with  Abraham,  whom  they  honor  as
a  "  Prince  of  God."

9.  Hebron,  the  first  royal  city  of  David,  is  situated
five  hours  southerly  from  Bethlehem,  his  native  city.
How  deeply  the  present  spiritual  relations  of  Hebron
lie  under  the  splendor  of  the  royal  city  of  David !
Its  inhabitants  cultivate  the  vine,  cotton,  have  glass
works,  and  live  "  in  constant  feuds  with  the  Bethle-
hcmites."     V.  Raumer.

10.  The  custom  of  burial  and  the  sanctification
of  the  grave,  after  the  intimation,  ch.  xv.  15,  appears
here  in  a  striking  and  impressive  manner.

11.  In  order  to   preserve  his  hope  for  Canaan
pure,  Abraham  could  not  entangle  himself  with  the
Caananites,  thus :  1.  He  could  not  use,  in  common
with  the  heathen,  their  sepulchre ;   2.  he  could  not
receive  as  a  present  a  possession  in  the  land.     [This
chapter  is  interesting  as  containing  the  first  record
of  mourning  for  the  dead,  of  burial,  of  property  in
land,  of  purchase  of  land,  of  silver  as  a  medium  of
purchase,  and  of  a  standard  of  weight.     MURPHY,  p
347.— A.  G.]


HOMILETICAX,  AND  PRACTICAL.
(Upon  cli.  xxii.  20-24.)

Human  consolation  follows  the  great  conflict  and
victory  of  faith. — The  joyful  message  which  Abraham
received :  a.  From  his  home ;  b.  from  his  blood  rela
tions  ;  c.  from  his  spiritual  kindred. — The  destination
and  the  blessing  of  the  ties  of  relationship,  in  the
widest  sense. — The  end  and  the  blessing  of  all  com
munication  in  the  world. — All  human  messengers
should  be  messengers  of  love,  in  joy  and  sorrow. —
Salutations,  messages,  letters,  journals,  are  all  also
under  the  conduct  of  divine  providence.  Human
missions  are  accompanied  by  divine  missions. — A
people  spring  from  children,  or  how  significantly
Rebekah  here  comes  forward  from  her  conceal
ment. — The  joy  of  a  loving  participation  in  the
happiness  of  companions — neighbors.  STARKE  :  (A
picture  of  Syria  and  Babylon.)  Ps.  cxii.  2  ;  cxxvii.  3.
— OSIANDER  :  God  usually  refreshes  and  quickens
his  people  again,  after  temptation. — CALWER,  Hand-
buch:  When  Isaac  was  about  to  be  offered,  God
allows  him  to  hear  that  bis  future  wife  was  born  and
educated.


(Upon  ch.  xxiii.)

The  richly  blessed  end  of  Sarah  as  it  appears  :  1.
In  the  quenchless  memory  of  her  age  by  Israel ;  2.
in  the  mourning  of  Abraham  ;  3.  in  his  care  for  her
grave ;  4.  in  the  esteem  of  the  Hittites  (every  one
is  ready  to  admit  her  into  his  sepulchre) ;  5.  in  the
opportunity  for  the  securing  of  the  sepulchre  as  a
possession  by  Abraham. — The  whole  chapter  instruc
tive  on  the  grave,  as  is  chapter  fifth  on  death,  the
eleventh  chapter  of  John  on  the  resurrection  from
the  grave  :  1.  Of  death  ;*  2.  of  mourning  ;  3.  of  the
acquisition  of  sepulchres  ;  4.  of  the  burial  itself;  5.
of  hope  over  the  grave. — The  true  mourning  a  sanc
tified  feeling  of  death  :  1.  A  fellow-feeling  of  death,
with  the  dead ;  2.  an  anticipation  of  death,  or  a  liv
ing  preparation  for  one's  own  death  ;  3.  a  believing
sense  of  the  end  or  destination  of  daath,  to  be  made
useful  to  the  life. — Sarah's  grave  a  sign  of  life  :  1.  A
monument  of  faith,  a  token  of  hope ;  2.  an  image
of  the  state  of  rest  for  the  patriarchs  ;  3.  a  sign  of  the
home  and  of  the  longing  of  Israel ;  4.  a  sign  or
prognostic  of  the  New-Testament  graves. — The  sol
emn  burial  of  the  corpse:  1.  An  expression  of  the
esteem  of  personality  even  in  its  dead  image ;  2.  an
expression  of  the  hope  of  a  new  lile.f — The  sancti
fication  of  the  grave  for  a  family  sepulchre,  fore
shadowing  the  sanctification  of  the  church-yards  or
God's-acres. — Abraham  the  father  of  believers,  also
the  founder  of  a  believing  consecration  of  the  grave
— offers  themes  for  funeral  discourses,  dedication
of  church-yards,  and  at  mourning  solemnities. — The
first  possession  which  Abraham  bought  was  a  grave
for  Sarah,  for  his  household,  for  himself  even. —
The  choice  of  the  grave:  1.  Significantly  situated  (a
double  cave) ;  2.  still  more  suitably  (at  the  end  of
the  field). — Israel's  first  possession  of  the  soil :  the
grave  of  Sarah  ;  the  first  earthly  house  of  the  Chris
tian  ;  the  grave  of  Christ  and  the  graves  of  the
martyrs. — Vcr.  2.  The  mourning  of  Abraham:  1.
Its  sincerity  (as  he  left  his  pursuits  and  sat  or  lay
before  the  corpse) ;  2.  its  limit,  and  the  preservation
of  his  piety  (as  he  rose  up  from  before  the  corpse,
and  purchased  the  grave). — -Abraham  himself  must
have  had  his  own  mortality  brought  to  his  mind  by
the  death  of  Sarah,  since  he  cared  for  a  common
grave. — Vers.  9,  13.  Abraham's  traffic;  1.  In  his
transparency  ;  2.  his  purity  ;  3.  his  carefulness  and
security. — Abraham  and  the  Hittites  a  lively  imnge
of  the  Eastern  courtliness  in  the  early  times. — The
true  politeness  of  spirit  as  a  cultivation  of  hearty
luman  friendliness,  in  its  meaning :  ] .  Upon  what
it  rests  (respect  for  our  fellows  and  self-respect) ;  2.
what  it  effects  (the  true  position  toward  our  neigh
bors,  as  an  olive-branch  of  peace  and  a  protection
of  personal  honor). — The  mysterious  sepulchre  at
Hebron. — The  Mohammedans  as  the  intelligent  pro
tectors  of  the  graves  of  the  East  until  the  time  of  its
restitution. — STARKE  :  (There  is  no  ground  for  the
saying  of  the  Rabbins,  that  Sarah  died  from  sorrow
when  she  learned  of  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac). — The
'ear  of  God  makes  no  one  insensible  to  feeling,  as
the  Stoics  have  asserted  (Job  xiv.  5  ;  1  Thcss.  iv.
13  ;  Ps.  xxxix.  5,  6). — Ver.  13.  There  is  a  reference

"•  [The  patriarch  had  encountered  other  trials,  but  he
had  hitherto  been  spared  this  of  death.  But  now  death  en-
ers.  No  health,  relations,  affections,  can  resist  the  march
ind  power  of  death.  Abraham  has  in  heart  parted  with  his
.•hildren,  now  he  must  part  actually  from  her  who  had
shared  all  his  trials  and  hopes. — A.  G.]

t  [In  that  grave  was  implied  the  hope  of  Resurrection.
WORDSWORTH,  p.  104. — A.  G.]


480


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


here  to  the  first  money  transaction,  for  the  land  was
not  to  be  received  as  a  present,  or  be  held  without
price,  by  Abraham,  but  by  his  successors,  hence  he
must  pay  for  what  he  obtains  (Acts  vii.  5).  This
was,  however,  plainly  the  ordering  of  God,  that
Abraham,  through  a  purchase  of  a  burial-place  with
money,  should  have  a  foothold,  and  some  possession
of  property,  as  a  pledge  of  the  future  possession.—
God  also  shows  that  he  takes  the  dead  into  his  care
and  protect  ion,  and  he  would  never  do  this  had  he
not  a  purpose  to  reawaken  the  dead. — CRAMER:  AN  c
should  proceed  witli  gentleness  and  modesty  in  our
dealings  with  any  one.  —  Jlihl.  Tub. :  Purchases
should" be  made  with  prudence,  that  we  may  not  give
cause  for  controversy  (1  Cor.  vi.  7).— We  should  veil
in  a  seemlv  way  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  and  bear
them  reverently  to  the  grave.— L'sco  :  Tims  Abra
ham  gained  the -first  possession  in  the  land  of  prom
ise ;  here  he  would  bury  Sarah,  here  he  himself


would  be  buried ;  thus  he  testifies  to  his  faith  in  the
certainty  of  the  divine  promise  made  to  him,  as  in  a
later  case  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  just  before  the  exile,
testified  his  faith  in  the  return  of  Israel  from  its  ban
ishment,  by  the  purchase  of  the  field  of  llanamcel
at  Anathoth  (Jer.  xxxii.).  —  CALWKU,  Handbuch  :
The  possession  of  a  burying-place  as  his  own,  satis
fied  the  pious  pilgrim,  and  is  for  him  a  pledge  of  the
full  possession  of  the  land  by  his  successors. — Hcuno-
DKR:  Yer.  1.  Then  also  the  believer  may  recollect
how  God  has  written  all  his  days  in  his  bonk.  1's.
cxxxix.  10  (Pxdcii.  J)iU.}.—  Ver.  2.  The  tear  of  sor-
sow  has  its  right  in  the  heart,  because  it  is  a  human
heact :  but  there  is  a  despair  concerning  death,  as
concerning  sin. — It  is  thoughtfully  tender  to  lay  the
children  of  the  mother  earth  again  in  her  bosom  ^Sir.
xl_  i). — The  money  with  which  he  secures  the  cave
is  the  blessing  of  God  ;  thus  God  procures  for  him
peculiarly  a  possession  in  the  land  of  promise.


TWELFTH    SECTION.

Abraham'*  care  for  Isaac's  marrlajc.     Elites  wooiny  of  the  bride  for  Isaac.     TIic  theocratic  found
ing  of  a  pious  bride -wooing.     Isaac  s  marriage.


CHAPTER  XXIV.  1-C7.

1  \nd    Vhraham  was  old,  and  well  stricken  [come  in  days]  in  age  :  and  the  Lord  had

2  blessed  Abraham  in  all  things.     And  Abraham  said  unto  his  eldest,  servant1  of  his  house

3  that  ruled  over  all  that  he  had,  Put,  1  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my  thigh  :  And  .
will  make  thee  -wear  by  the  Lord,  the  God  of  heaven,  and  the  God  of  the  earth,  that
thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  unto  my  son,  of  the   daughters   of  the  Canaamtes,  among

4  whom  I  dwell :  But  thou  shalt  go  unto  my  country,  and  to  my  kindred,  and  take  a

5  wife  unto  my  son  Isaac.     And  the  servant  said  unto  him,  Peradventnrc,  the  woman
will  not,  be  willing  to  follow  me  into  this  land  ;  must  I  needs  bring  thy  son  again  into

G  the  land  from  whence  thou  earnest?     And  Abraham   said  unto  him,  Beware  that  tl
bring  not  mv  son  thither  again.

The  Lord  God  of  heaven,  which  took  me  from  my  father's  house,  and  from  the  land
of  my  kindred,  and  which  spake  unto  me,  and  that  sware  unto  me,  saying  Unto  thy
.red  will  1  <nve  this  land,  he  shall  send  his  angel  before  thee,  and  thou  shalt  take  a

8  wif-  unto  my  son  from  thence.     And  if  the  woman  will  not  be  willing  to  follow  thee,
then  thou  shalt  be   clear  from  this  thine  oath  :   only  bring  not  my  son  thither  again.

9  And  the  servant  put  his   hand  under  the  thigh  of  Abraham  his  master,  and  sware  to
him  concerning  that  matter.

10  And  the  servant  took  ten  camels  of  the  camels  of  his  master,  and  departed ;  i<
all  the  rroods  of  his  master  [with  every  kind  of  costly  goods]  were  in  his  hand:  and  he  arose

11  and  went  to  Mesopotamia,  unto  the  city  of  Nahor.     And  he  made  his  camel,  to  kneel
down  without  the  city  by  a  well  of  water,  at  the  time  of  the  evening,  even  at  the  time

12  that  women  go  out  to  draw  water.     And  he  said,  0  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham,
I  pray  thee  send  me  good  speed8  this  day,  and  show  kindness  unto  my  master  Abra,

13  ham.     Behold  I  stand  here  by  the  well  of  water  ;  and  the  daughters  of  the  men  of  the

14  city  come  out  to  draw  water:  And  let  it  come  to  pass  that  the  damsel  to  whom  I  shall
say,  Let  down  thy  pitcher,  I  pray  thee,  that  I  may  drink  ;  and  she   shall  say,   -Urink
and  I  will  give  thy  camels  drink  also  ;   let  the  same  be  she  that  thou  hast  appointed  tor
thy  servant  Isaac ;  and  thereby  shall  I  know  that  thou  hast  showed  kindness  my
master.


CHAP.   XXIV.    1-C7.


1*          And  it  came  to  pass,  before  he  had  done  speaking,  that  behold,  Rebekah  came  out
who  was  born  to  Be  hue    son  of  Milcah,  the  wife  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother   w,th
1C  her  pitcher  upon  her  shoulder.     And  the  damsel  was  very  fair  to  look  upon   a  vi  Jin
neither  had  any  man  known  her;  and  she  went  down  to  the  well  and  filled  her  p  tcher
7  and  came  up      And  the  servant  ran  to  meet  her,  and  said,  Let  me,  I  prny  thee   drink
J  a  little  water  from  thy  pitcher.     And  she  said,  Drink,  my  lord;  and  she  hasted   :',n    Te

19  down  her  pitcher  upon  her  hand,  and  gave  him  drink.     And  when  she  had  done  riving
hnu  drink  she  said   I  will  draw  water  for  thy  camels  also,  until  they  have  clone  S

20  mg      And  she  hasted,  and  emptied  her  pitcher  into  the  trough,  and  ran  a^uin  unto    he

2 1  veil  to  draw  water,  and  drew  for  all  his  camels.     And  the  man   wonde    ng§  at  her  held

^    i  7GT    wfillSt0lrwJ'  t0  -Vvhcthcr  the  LOTd  had  ™**  his  journey  prosperous  or
3t      And_  t  came  to  pass  as  the  camels  had  done  drinking,  that  the  man  took  a  -olden

of™1  n    A   f  a  - f  wt        f  ht'  fnd  tw°  bracclets  for  her  hands>  of  tcl1  *'«&&
ight  of  gold,  And  saul,  Whose  daughter  art   thou?  tell  me,  I  pray  thee  •  is  there

24  room  in  thy   father's  house  for  us  to  lodge  in?     And  she  said  unto  1m   T  "       £!

25  daughter  of  Bethnel   the  son  of  Milcah,  wLh  she  bare  uno  Nahor      S  h?*aid   mot

ver  unto  him  We  have  both  straw  and  provender  enough,  and  room  to  lodge  in'.    And

e     ovl  rTnf  ?    *  Ali'  T11  WorshiPPcd  the  Lord-     And  he  said,  Blessed  be

Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham,  who  hath  not   left  destitute  my  master  of  his
nercy    and     ns    truth:    T  leing   in  the   way,  the    Lord   led  me  to   tj  house    of  my
8     'aS!C        brethren'     And   ^e  damsel  ran  and  told  them  of  her  mother's  house  thSe


And  Rebekah  had  a  brother,  and  his  name  was  Laban  Fthe  white!  •   and  Labai

30  out  unto  the  man,  unto  the  well.     And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  saw   he  ear    n     1  rin  *
and   bracelets   upon  his  sister's  hands,  and  when  he  heard  the  words  of  Retkal   fe
siste^  saying  Thus  spake  the  man  unto  me;  that  he  came  unto  the  man,       d'       old

31  he  stood  by  the  came  s  at  the  well.     And  he  said,  Come  in,  thou  blessed  of    he  Lord  '
wherefor,    standest  thou  without?  for  I  have  prepared  the  house,  and  room  for  "he*

•  And  the  man  came  into  the  house  :  and  he  [Laban]  ungirdcd  his  camels   and

'


tfvi-.  1  T        f  -~—j    uj-i^nv,  ma    uaiiieis    aiHl     "T'VC

rovcnuer  for  his  camels,  and  water  to  wash  his  feet,  and  the  men's  feet  that
e     ith  him.     And  there  was  set  [„  the  imperf.  Hoph.  of  ESP]  meat  before  him  to  eat :  but

34    35         d  h        -]0T0a    "'A  ''       m'G  t0ld  mine  "rrand-     Aml  he  t^H  Said>  sP™k  ™.
'         And  he  said,  I  am  Abraham's  servant.     And   the   Lord   hath   blessed   in

greatly,  ana  he  is  become  ."•rent,-   nml   l>o  Imti,    «.;,,.„„   i,;,,,  a^^,_         i  i       i       ^


liath  Sivcn  him  flod^'  ™*  herds,  and  silver


op  ~   j       n         n  ll  givun  nun  UUCKS,  ami  nerus,  and  silver

36  and  gold,  and  men-servants,  and  maid-servants,  and  camels,  and  asses.     And  Sarah   my

i7  alft       3hTwtl    r6Aa  T  t0  mj  maSter  Avhen  She  Was  °Id  :  and  unto  him  hath  he  given

>/  an  di.it  ne  JuftJi.     And  my  master  made  me  swonr    QniM,,rv   TI,^,,  «i,«u  ,  I  -i..


•1  I  A  °     :  an    uno      m    at      e  gven

i  v  I  n  nf  tl'     1        !  f7  mAter^ade  me  SW6ar'  ^ft  Th°U  «halt  not  take  a^wife
9          ,  ,to      v  f  S    'T          °f  ,th°  Canaanites'  in  ^ose  land  I  dwell.     But  thou  shalt  3

9  go   unto  my  father's  house   and  to  my  kindred,  and  take  a  wife  unto  my  son.     And  I

not  f°llow  mc'     A»d  he  »id  unto


mo   Th  col  T  mc'         »       e  »      unto

me  The  Lord,  beforo  whom  I  walk,  will  send  his  angel  with  thee,  and  will  prosper  thy

41   Tl  eri  Zu  th°U    r  '    ake/  Wlf?  f°r  mj  SOU  °f  m^  kindred  aild  of  ™y  ^thcr's1  house!


n  7  .     J  J  *-*"V      1-t*'l.-ilUL    G      IlUUbU.

,  -  ^^  ^^5    mine    Oath  I  the  oath  given  by  mcl  wllGll    tllOU    COmest    to

landred ;  and  if  they  give  not  thee  one,  thou  shalt  be  clear  from  my  oath.     And  I

came  this   day  unto  the  well,  and  said,  0  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham   if  now

43  thou  do  prosper  my  way  which  I  go  :  Behold,  I  stand  by  the  well  of  water '  an™

shall  come  to  pass   when  the  virgin  cometh  forth  to  draw  water,  and  I  say  unto  her

f  '•?  ^X^       f'  aALl;J°1Waler  °f  %  Pitc]ier  [1=,  bucket;  a  jug  similar  to  a  pail  or  bucket',.


M   ,  _*-         ^       >  /  J-    ^^     U11j     pitL/iici     I     '-^  >  uu.uii.ei  ,   ajug

of  wide  mouth]  to  drink:  And  she  say  to  me,  Both  drink  thou,  and  I  will  also  drnw  for

T1X7-    r>Qm/ila  .      1^4.     4-1,  _  7          .1  cuou    <aict\>      1UJ.


j.1  i  j  v         iiv/>  -"-"^i-         aiiv  i.nuu,  anu  _L  win  ai^o  ciraw  lor

45  mastTr'-e=  /       A    ?  ^T  &T  v^  nVOman  whom   thc  L°rd  liath  aPPointed  out  for  mv
masters  son.     And  before  I  had  done  speaking  in  my  heart  [in myself],  behold  Rebekah

46  drew  ^         A"  ^  °U  her  sll°ulder  '  Vd  sie  Went  do"™  ™to  the  well  anl

1 1>  \V     tt-  CIC/G/     .      fillCt      _L      S'lKl      IlTltO      llPl*      Tof      Tii  nrlv*n1"T  »  -^1  A          11  T

and  let  down  her  pitcher  from  her  shoulder,  and  said,  Drink,  and  I  will  eive  thv  cameh
17  ^^J..8?,1  d™t,  and_she  made  tho  camel,  drink  ako.     And  IalThe',LdSS


Ar  — •      ^^^  o,,o  ou,lu,  j-jiu   uau^jiLur  of   Bethuel,   Nahor's   son,

'are  unto  him:  and  I  put  the  ear  [nose]  ring  upon  her  face,  and  the
31


482


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


48
49

50

51
52
53

54


01
(32

13


GO
G7


bracelets  upon  her  hands.  And  I  bowed  down  my  head  and  worshipped  the  Lord,
and  blessed  the  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham,  which  had  led  me  in  the  right  way
to  take  my  master's  brother's  daughter  unto  his  son.  And  now  if  ye  will  [arc  ready  to]
deal  kindly  and  truly  with  my  master,  tell  me  :  and  if  not,  tell  me  :  that  I  may  turn  to
the  riflit  hand  or  to  tin'  left.  "  Then  Luban  and  Bethuel  answered  and  said,  The  thing
proceeded!  from  the  Lord;  we  cannot  speak  [in  our  own  choice]  unto  thee  bud  or  good.
Behold  Rebekah  is  before  thee,  take  her,  and  go,  and  let  her  be  thy  master's  son's  wife,
as  the  Lord  hath  spoken.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that,  when  Abraham's  servant  heard
their  words,  he  worshipped  the  Lord,  lowing  himself  to  the  earth.  And  the  servant
brought  forth  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  and  raiment,  and  g.-ive  them  to
Kebeknh  :  he  irave  also  to  her  brother  and  to  her  mother  precious  things.  And  they
did  cat'  and  drink,  lie  and  the  men  that  u-cre  with  him,  and  tarried  all  night  ;  and  they
rose  j,p  in  the  morning,  and  he  paid,  Send  me  away  unto  my  master.  And  her  brother
•uid  her  mother  said.  L<-t  the  damsel  abide  with  us  a  few  days  [a  circle  of  days],  at  the  least
ten  |-i.i.-c"i«K'|  •  after  that  she  shall  2:0.  And  he  said  unto  them,  Hinder  me  not,  seeing
,],,,  Lord  hath  prospered  my  way;  send  me  away,  that  1  may  go  to  my  master.  And
they  said,  AVe  will  call  the  damsel,  and  inquire  fit  her  mouth.  And  they  called
Rebekah  '  and  said  unto  her,  Wilt  thou  go  with  this  man?  And  she  said,  I
will  L'o  '  \nd  they  sent  away  Rebekah  their  sister,  and  her  nurse,  and  Abrahams
servant  and  his  men.  And  they  blessed  Rebekah.  and  said  unto  her,  Thou  art  our
sistcr;  'be  thou  the  mother  of  thousands  of  millions,  and  let  thy  seed  possess  the  gate

(!  which  hate   them  (m.mics].

\  ;  Rebekah  arose,  and  her  damsels,  and  they  rode  upon  the  camels,  and  iollowec
the  'man:  and  the  servant  took  Rebekah,  and  went  his  way.  And  Isaac  came  from
the  way  of  IvUtto]  the  well  Lahai-roi  [of  the  living-animating,  quickening-vision]  ;  for  he  dwelt
[had  his  station  j  iii  the  south  country.  And  Isaac  went  out  [now  northwards]  to  meditate  in
the  field  [the  northern  field-region]  at  the  eventide:  and  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw,  and,
behold  the  camels  were  coming.  And  Rebekah  lifted  up  her  eyes;  and  when  she  saw
Isaac  she  li-hted  off  the  camel.  For  she  had  said  4  unto  the  servant,  AY  hat  man  is
this  that  walketh  in  the  field  to  meet  us?  And  the  servant  had  said,  It  is  my  master:
therefore  she  took  a  veil  and  covered  herself.  And  the  servant  told  Isaac  a  1  things
th-d  he  had  done.  And  Isaac  brought  her  into  his  mother  Sarah  s  tent,  and  took  Re
bekah,  and  she  became  his  wife  ;  and  he  loved  her  :  and  Isaac  was  comforted  utter  his
mother's


('  Vor.  2.—  Ilob.  Ins  servant,  lite  ddtr  of  his  house.—  A.  G.
[•  VIT.  12.—  Hob.  cause  ilia  occur.—  A.  O.]
[3  V.  r.  38.-  Xb    ~X  ,  if  thou  fhatt  not.—  A..  G.]
*  Vcr.  Go.  —Hub.  and  said.—  A.  G.]


GENERAL  REMARKS.

To  the  chapter  upon  the  sepulchre  and  the  burial
of  the  dead,  there  follows  now  a  chapter  upon  the
wooing  of  the  bride.  The  former  has  greater
strength  of  expression,  grounded  in  the  last  need,
death  and  the  care  for  the  dead;  the  latter  has
greater  richness  and  life,  and  glows  in  all  the  fresh
ness  and  fulness  of  a  sacred,  biblical  idyll,  the  first
pearl  in  that  string  of  pearls,  in  the  religious  glorifi
cation  of  the  human  bridal  state  which  runs  down
through  the  wooing  of  Rachel  by  Jacob,  the  little
book  of  Ruth,  to  its  culmination  in  the  Song  of
Songs.  Abraham  was  warned  by  the  death  of  Sarah,
to  set  the  concerns  of  his  house  in  order,  to  seek  a
bride  for  Isaac,  and  thus  to  provide  for  his  descend
ants.  The  narrative  joins  one  beautiful  trait  to
another,  until  the  circle  is  complete  ;  the  spirit  of  his
master  Abraham,  who  had  instructed  him,  is  clearly
reflected  in  the  faithful  and  prudent  bridal  journey  of
ais  servant,  and  Rebekah  appears  from  the  beginning
as  the  glorious,  lovely  and  boldly-determined  maiden,


peculiarly  fitted  for  the  quiet,  patient  Isaac.  "  Hu
manly  speaking,  the  following  history  belongs  to  the
most  attractive' portions  of  the  first  book  of  Moses;
we  are  tempted  to  call  it  a  biblical  idyll.  Everything
in  these  verses,  down  to  the  most  minute  part,  id
finished  and  elaborated  with  inimitable  beauty."
Schroder  Delitzsch  refers  to  the  excellent  treat
ment  of  this  narrative  by  F.  C.  V.  Movers.  The
fundamental  thought  in  the  narrative  is  the  provi
dence  of  God  in  Isaac's  marriage.  It  appears  in
Abraham's  believing  foresight  and  care  for  Isaac,  in
the  faithfulness  and  prudence  of  his  servant,  in  the
happy  meeting  of  Rebekah  and  the  servant,  in  the
forming  of  the  life  and  character  of  Rebekah,  in  the
hospitality  and  the  pious  spirit  of  her  house,  even
in  the  self-interested  conduct  of  Laban,  in  the  meet
ing  of  Isaac  and  Rebekah,  in  the  movement  of  her
heart,  and  in  his  love.  "  It  is  thus  through  the  provi
dence  of  God  that  Rebekah  became  the  wife  of_  Isaac,
and  an  ancestress  of  the  people  of  Israel."  Knobel.
The  documentary  hypothesis  falls  into  perplexity
here,  since,  according  to  cb.  xxiii.  and  ch.  xxv.  19,  the


CHAP.   XXIV.    1-67.


488


fundamental  writing  must  have  related  this  marriage
It  relieves  itself  with  the  conjecture  that  the  brief
Elohistic  narration  has  been  displaced  by  this  longer
Jehovistic  narrative.  Knobel  finds  in  the  fact  thai
the  mission  proceeds  from  Abraham,  and  the  repori
is  made  to  Isaac,  although  he  has  no  real  ground  for
the  conjecture,  as  also  in  similar  cases,  the  traces
that  the  narrative  is  not  genuine.  [Which  is  mucl
the  same  as  if  he  had  said,  since  the  narrative  is  not
constructed  as  I  think  it  should  have  been,  it  cannot
be  genuine. — A.  G.]  It  may  be  divided  into  the  fol
lowing  particular  portions :  1.  The  arrangement  o1
the  theocratic  journey  for  the  bride,  the  spiritual
image  and  character  of  the  bride  (vers.  1-9);
2.  the  journey  for  the  bride,  and  the  choice  of  the
bride  (vers.  10-21);  3.  the  entrance  into  the  house
of  the  bride  (vers.  22-33) ;  4.  the  wooing  of  the
bride  (vers.  3-1-49) ;  5.  the  rewards  for  the  bride
(vers.  50-54) ;  G.  the  bridal  journey  (vers.  54-61);
7.  the  meeting  of  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride
(vers.  62-67).


EXEGETICAL  AXD  CRITICAL.

1.  rllic  arrangement  of  the  tJieocratic  journey  for
the  bride  (vers.  1-9). — And  Abraham. — The  mo
tives  for  his  arrangement :  1.  After  Sarah's  death
his  age  warned  him  to  provide  for  Isaac's  marriage.
2.  the  blessing  of  Jehovah  warns  him,  he  must  now
through  the  marriage  of  his  son,  do  his  own  part,
that  the  blessing  might  be  preserved.  His  faith  and
his  acts  of  faith  must  correspond  to  the  promise  of
blessing  of  Jehovah.  Isaac  could  not  marry  a
Canaan itess,  but  only  a  Shemitess,  one  who  was  of
equal  birth  in  a  theocratic  point  of  view.  It  might
possibly  be  from  his  own  ancestral  home,  and  the
account  which  he  had  received  of  the  home  of
Nahor,  favored  his  hope.  He  could  not  think  of
Lot's  daughters. — Unto  his  eldest  *  servant. — It
is  usually  inferred  from  ch.  xv.  2,  that  Eliezer  of
Damascus  is  here  meant,  Gerlach  says  it  is  not
probable,  because  he  is  not  named.  For  the  same
reason  the  CALAVEU  Ilandbuch  concludes  that  he  is
intended,  because  otherwise  the  servant  would  be
named  iu  so  important  a  mission,  and  this  inference
is  just.  Eleazcr  was  peculiarly  fitted  for  this  mis
sion,  as  an  old  man  in  the  school  of  Abraham
(more  than  GO  years  had  elapsed  since  ch.  xv.  2).
Eleazcr  thus  stands  for  all  time  as  the  type  of  all
pious  and  prudent  bride-wooers.  He  is  a  steward  or
ruler  of  the  whole  house,  thus  a  trusted  servant.
[The  word  servant  like  the  word  elder,  is  an  official
title.  Bush  refers  to  Gen.  xl.  SO ;  Ex.  xii.  30 ;  Dent,
xxxiv.  5  ;  Heb.  iii.  5 ;  and  for  elder  to  Gen.  1.  7 ;
Ruthiv.  2;  Tim.  v.  17.— A.  G.]  Still  the  present
mission  of  Abraham  is  so  important,  that  he  lays
him  under  the  obligations  of  an  oath. — Put  thy
Hand  under  my  thigh. — This  usage  in  the  oath  is
referred  to  only  in  one  other  place  (ch.  xlvii.  29).
The  person  who  took  the  oath,  was  to  place  his
hand  under  the  thigh  of  him  to  whom  it  was  given.
Some  refer  this  rite  to  a  heathen  idea  or  imagina
tion.  "It  points  to  the  generating  member,  which,
as  the  organ  of  the  generative  strength  of  nature.


*  [Here  the  term  elder  approaches  its  official  significa
tion.  MURPHY,  p.  353.— A.  G.]

["  The  drier  was  not  a  title  of  age,  but  of  office.  It  passed
into  the  Church,  coming  down  to  us  from  the  Jewish
Church."  Jacobus. — A.  G.]


had  a  kind  of  sacrcdness  among  the  ancients,  and  in
the  Phallus  (or  Bacchus)  worship,  had  a  kind  of  re
ligious  honor  (ARNon.  advcrs.  Gent.  5),  e.  g. :  among
the   Egyptians  (HEROD.,  ii.  48  ;    PLUTARCH;    THEO-
DORET),  among   the   Syrians  (Lucian),  at  times   even
among  the  Hebrews  (1  Kings  xv.  13  V).     It  is  record
ed  of  the  Egyptian  Bedouin   in   modern  times,  that
in  a  solemn  asseveration  or  oath  he  places  his  hand
upon    the    generative   organ   (SONNDI.  :    '  Travels,'
ii.  p.  474)."  Knobel.     According  to  the  Jewish  idea
(which  the  Targums,  Jonathan,  Jarchi,  Tuch,  etc.,
follow),  the  rite  relates  to  the   generative  member  in
its  relations  to  God,  by  virtue  of  circumcision.     Von
Bohlen,  Gesenius,  Knobel,  bring  together   these  two
ideas  or  explanations.     The   explanation  of  the  an
cients,  that  Abraham,  with  reference  to  the  promise
of  the  covenant,  "  had  in  his  mind  the  promised  seed
of  the  covenant,  the  future  Christ,"  is  a  mystical  and
Christian  idea,  not  improperly  adduced  here,  remarks
Delitzsch,  although  the  thought  is  "usually  regarded
as  belonging  to  the   New  Testament   (see  STRIPPEL-
MANN  :  '  The  Christian  Oath,'  p.  22).     It  is  doubtful
whether  op/cos  and  o'p/a?,  testari  and  testiculus,  stand
in  a  relation  referring  back  to  this   custom."     Since
the  hand  in  the  oath  has  always  the  signification  of
pledging  oneself,  we  must  inquire  first  of  all,  what
rite-forms  of  the  hand   in  the  person  who  takes  the
oath,  usually  appear.     But   now  Abraham,  when  he
takes  the  oath  (ch.  xiv.  22),  raises  his  hand  to  heaven,
before  those  around  him,  when  he   worshipped  the
El  Eljon,  the  heavenly  exalted  God  (comp.  Rev.  x.
5-6).     According  to  Exek.  xx.  5,  the  object  of  the
hand  is  generally  to  mark  the  subject   in   respect  to
which  the   obligation  is   taken.       In  this   idea  the
Christian  oath  is  taken  upon  the  gospel,  or  even  upon
a  chest  of  relics.       When,  therefore,   Eleazer   and
Joseph  give  the  oath,  in  that  they  place  their  hands
upon  the  thigh  of  the  one  swearing  them,  the  act
had  a  special  meaning.     The  thigh  is  the  symbol  of
posterity ;  in  Israel  the  symbol  of  the  promised  pos
terity,  with  the  included  idea  of  the  promise,   Gen.
xlvi.  26  ;  Ex.  i.  5.     Eleazer  and  Joseph  thus    must
swear  by  the  posterity,  the  promise  and  the  hope  of
Abraham    and    Israel.*       This  promise   should  be
changed  into  a  curse  for  them  if  they  did  not  regard
the  oath.     This  oath  was  required  in  Eleazer  because
he  did  not  belong  to  the  house  of  Abraham,  in  Jo
seph,  because,  as  a  prince  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  he
might  be  tempted  to   be  false  to  the  faith  "of  the
promise.     It  is  sufficient  to  regard  the  thigh  as  the
symbol  of  the  whole  posterity,  the  generative  organ
as  symbolical  of  the  immediately  succeeding  genera-
:ion. — By  Jehovah  [It  is  not  an  ordinary  marriage
which  is  here  about  to  be  made,  which  would  fall
under  the  providence  of  Elohim ;    but  a  marriage
which  concerns  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  therefore
Ichovah  appears  in  the  whole  narrative.     KEIL,  p.
183. — A.  G.],  the  God  of  heaven. — Eleazer  knows
;he  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  faith  of  the  promise.
Je  should  swear  by  the  God  of  the   promises    the
God  of  Abraham,  and  with  this  the  rite  of  layin"
the  hand  upon  the  thigh    corresponds. — That  thou
shalt  not  take  a  wife. — Eleazer  does  not  appear
as  the  guardian  of  Isaac,  now  forty  years  old,  after
,he  death  of  Abraham  (Kuobel),  but  the  negation  in


>f  the  promise.   BAUMQAKTEN,  p.  241.
high  as  the  scat  of  strength  and  firmn


484


GENESIS,  OR   TI1K  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


liis  oa'h  designates  only  the  negative  side  of  his  mis-  '
eion.  Since  Abraham  had  appointed  him  to  gain  a
bride  for  Isaac,  he  might  easily,  as  an  old  man,  have
given  free  play  to  his  own  opinion,  and  viewed  a
brilliant  match" in  Canaan  as  advantageous  for  Isaac's
future.  Abraham  himself  e-rtrunly  exercises  a
patriarchal  and  guardian-like  care  over  the  patient
and  yielding  Isaac,  who,  although  forty  years  of  age,
appears  not  to  have  thought  of  marriage,  but
mourned  his  moth  rin  earnest,  devout  contemplation.
It  involves  also  the  decisive  patriarchal  and  theo
cratic  union  under  tin.-  providence  of  Jehovah. —
Feradventure  the  woman  will  not  be  willing.

The  servant  hn    n  >i  an  equal  measure  of  faith  with

Abraham.     Since  the  journey  to  .Mesopotamia  for  a
Shcmitic  bride  ;s  thus  strongly  enjoined,  and  Isaac
must  i;<>t  marry  a  Canaanitess,  it  appears  to  him  that
it  may  easily  happen  that  lie  must  take  Isaac  back  to
Mesopotamia,  if  he  should  indeed  be  married. — Be
ware  thov..— Abraham  opposes  him.      As  the  father
of  faith  upon  the  promise,  of  the  people  of  the  fu
ture,   he   had    the   watch-word,    "never    backward."
To   the  ?yl!oL'ism   of   the  rHlectinu'   and  calculating
servant,    he    oppose-    the     syllogism    of    faith.       Its
premise:    .Khovah    had   brought    him   out  of
I. i- '  I'a'hc: •'.::'. d   into   a   strange  land  ;    its   minor:    he
h  d   promised    to  his  seed  the  land  of    Canaan;    its
conclusion:   therefore  he  will  crown   the  mission  of
Klea/.er.  through  the  leading  of  his  angel,  with  a  suc-
tvs>ful  is.-ue.      In    this  assurance  he  can  easily  quiet.
the  -  v,ini  servant  wish  the  explanation,  if  the  othcr-
roper  wife  will  not   follow  him  fiom   Mc.-opo-
.  he  fhould  be  clear  from  his  oath.
•2.    ']'/!'•  j'»irii<  ;i  !<><•  the  bride,  and  tl/r  choice  of  the
6nV<?  (ver.  10-21).— And  the  servant  took. — The
mels,  and  the  accompanying  train  of  servant.-,
i  n  the  one  hand,  bear  the  presents  and  repre
sent  the  rich"s  of  his  ma-tor  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,
are  already  carefully  prepared,  and  destined  for  the
caravan  of  the  bride  and  her  maidens.     He  provides
himself,  in  case  of  success,  with  every  kind  of  jewels
from   the  treasuies  of  his  master,  which  came  later
into  Ic-itimate   use.     lie  could  take  of  every  kind
which  he  wished,  they  were  all  at  his  disposal ;   Abra
ham  risVmt:  all  upon  the  issue  of  this  journey.— To
Mesopotamia   (Aram,*   of  the  two   rivers.)—
Mesopotamia,   between    the    Euphrates    and    Tigris,
Fadan-Ar;v.i)  (eh.  xxv.  20),  according  to  Knobel,  an
Elohi-tic    expression  ;    upon    Egyptian    monuments,
Neherin  =  Naharaina. — To  the  city  of  Nahor —
i,  e.,  to  liaran  (see  ch.  xi.  ".1  ;  xii.  -1 ). — By  a  well
of  water  at  the  time  of  the  evening.— As  the
arrangement  of  the  stately  caravan,  so  also  the  en
campment    here    reveals  "the    master-servant.      The
lions  find  the  ga/.clles  by  the  springs  of  water.    Elea-
y.er  would  here,  in  a  peaceful  way,  find  the  bride  of
Isaac.     The   camels   lie  down  at  the  well  of  water
without  the  city,  at  evening,  not  to  rest  for  the  night,
but   to   ivs.t    temporarily,    and    during    the   delay.
(When   the   camels  kneel   down  they  are  unloaded,
since   their  burden  lies  upon  the  ground.) — Even
the  time  that  women  go  out  to  draw  water. —
The  maidens  and  women  in  the  East  still  bring  the
water  they  need   from   the   well   at   evening   (VoN
SnivBKUT,  ii.  p.  401;  ROBINSON,  "  Palestine,"  ii.  p
3;')l).f     They  held  their  female  conversations  at  the
wells,  as  the  men  did  in  the  gate.— O  Lord  God  of
my  mas':er. — lie  had  done  his  part,  but  knew  tha

*  [Ar.v.n  included  more  than  Mea>potainia. — A.  G.]
t  [Pictorial  Bible;.— A.  G.]


tie  result  depended  upon  the  blessing  of  Cod.  In
mmility  he  calls  upon  Jehovah,  the.  God  of  his  mas-
er  Abraham,  for  whose  sake  he  would  hear  him. —
end  me  good  speed  (grant  that  it  may  come  to
meet,  anticipate  me),  i.  e.,  what  he  wished,  Kcil  adds.
me  usual  explanation,  however,  seems  more  signifi-
ant,  the  success  appointed  by  God  cannot  he.  secured
>y  force  ;  Jehovah  causes  that  it  shall  meet  the  pioirs.
Ye  emphasize,  the  conthiy  t,o  t/iet'f.  Now  lie  detei-
nines  the  sign  for  the  discovery  of  (he  br'.de  destined
>y  God  for  l-:>ac.  The  sign  consists  in  this,  that
he  should  go  far  beyond  his  request,  in  her  frienil-
iness  and  readiness  to  serve  him.  His  request
nercly  express  -s  the  desire  that  tie  might  «/'/>  <i  little
oater  from  her  pitcher ;  her  trial  consists  in  this,
hat  she  should  give  him  to  drink  fully,  and  in
iddition,  with  voluntary  friendliness,  give  to  his
camels  also.  Tins  proof  of  love  wa«,  on  the  one
land,  certainly  not  usual,  but  on  the  other,  it  waj
lot  unheard  of,  nor  prohibited  by  any  custom.
NIEBUHH  ("  Travels,"  ii.  p.  -lid)  has  still  cxpeiienccd
:hesameor  similar  volunteered  service  (crmip.  ROI;IN-
-^ON,  "  1'ale-iine,'1  ii.  ]).  :;.'>R  lint  we  should  recol-
,ect  that  many  things  of  the  kind  to-day,  are  imita
tions  of  the  partriarchal  tradition,  as  e.  g.  also,  the
previously  mentioned  oath  of  the  lledouin,  with  the
mud  upon  the  thigh. — Before  he  had  dene  speak,
ing. — She  came  already,  to  the  surprise,  of  the
narrator  himself.— Behold  Rebekah. — She  is  no
ithcr  than  Rebekah,  the  grandchild  of  Na'nor,  the
legitimate  daughter  born  to  ilethuel.  son  of  Milcah.
She  had  thus  the  quality  of  theocratic  descent  in  an
eminent  degree.  [On  both  sides,  maternal  as  well  as
paternal. — A.  G.']  Then  she  was  very  beautiful,  as
Sarah  before,  and  Rachel  alter  her,  a  tender  maiden,
pure  from  contact  with  any  man.  And  how  politely
(  "my  lord,"  ),  how  graciously  (  "  :-he  hasled  and  let
down'"),  with  what  animation  (''she  hasted,  ran"),
and  how  cheerfully  she  fulfilled  all  the  conditions  of
the  sign  chosen  anil  determined.— The  Kad  upon  her
shoulder  is  rather  a  bucket,  or  wide-mouthed  jar,
than  a  pitcher,  otherwise  it  would  not  be  fitted  to
give  the  camels  drink.  [This  jar  was  sometimes
borne  on  the  head,  and  sometimes  strapped  upon  the
shoulder.  The  "ID  is  the  same  term  used  for  the
vessels  borne  by  the  men  of  Gideon,  and  which  were
broken  with  a  blow,  Judg.  vii.  20:  and  differs  from
the  n-n,  the  term  for  bottle  in  the  narrative  of

Hagar. V.  G.|

:;.  The  sojourn  at  ilic  home  of  the  bride  (vers.
21-".:;).  —  Wondering  at  her,  held  his  peace
(waiting).— Knotx-l  prefers  the  explanation  of  nXCJ
by  Gesenius :  attentive  look,  view,  following  the
Septuagint  and  Yulgate.  Delitzsch  and  Keil  prefer
the  explanation,  wondered,  wan  astonished.  The  fol
lowing  phrase,  held  his  peace  in  order  to  know,  is  in
favor  of  the  latter  explanation.*  The  attentive,  in
quiring  look  was  not  limited  through  the  silence,  but
through  the  astonishment.  lie  restrained  himself  in
his  astonishment.  She  had  indeed  fulfilled  the  sign,
and  as  to  his  prayer  all  was  clear,  but  as  to  his
reflection  the  question  now  first  arose,  was  she  a
Shemitcss  ?  was  she  single  ?  would  she  be  willing  to
go  with  him? — The  man  took  a  golden  ear-(nose)
ring. — The  present  which  he  now  makes  her  could
not  have  been  a  bridal  present,  hut  simply  a  friendly
recognition  and  reward  of  her  friendly  service  (at

*  fKcil  urtros  also,  that  the  Hithp.  form  of  the  verb  to
look,  would  be  to  look  round  here  and  there  restlessly,
which  would  not  suit  the  sense  here. — A.  G.]


CHAP.   XXIV.    1-67.


485


though  "the  nose-ring  is  now  the  usual  engagement
present  among  the  Bedouins.")  Delitzsch.  The  con
viction  that  the  right  person  was  found  here  truly
finds  expression,  otherwise  he  would  have  been  re
garding  her  at  too  lavish  an  expense.  At  this  moment
Robekah  had  even  somewhat  disconcerted  the  aged
Eliezer.  The  ring  was  a  golden  nose-ring,  worn  from
the  central  wall  of  the  nose,  of  about  a  half  shekel
in  weight.  The  two  bracelets  of  gold,  worn  upon  the
wrist,  were  each  of  about  five  shekels  weight  (see
WINKE,  art.  Sckmuck,  Isa.  Hi.  18  ft'.).  Eliezer's  heart
kr,ew  well  what  would  rejoice  the  the  heart  of  even  a
pious  maiden,  and  with  this  present,  the  choice  of
which  expresses  his  assurance,  introduces  his  ques
tion  as  to  her  family.  The  question  as  to  entertain
ment  in  her  house  is  an  utterance  of  the  full  assurance
of  his  hope.  It  reveals  the  working  of  his  mind,  in
so  far  as  he  asks  the  second  question,  without  waiting
for  the  answer  to  the  first.  Rebekah's  answer  accords
entirely  with  his  wish.  She  answers  also  his  second
question,  but  as  the  prudent  Rebekah,  with  the  reser
vation  which  became  her,  for  it  did  not  belong  to  her
expressly  to  invite  the  strange  man  in.  But  Eliezer
knew  enough,  as  is  evident  from  his  profound
bowing  before  Jehovah,  and  his  praise  and  thanks
giving.  ["'CH  is  the  free  grace,  with  which  Je
hovah  had  given  the  promise  to  Abraham,  ITEX  the
faithfulness  and  truth  with  which  he  fulfils  the
promise.  The  two  words  often  occur  in  the  Scrip
tures.  Baumgarten,  p.  243. — A.  G.]  For  Rebekah
the  prayer  is  a  mysterious,  joyful  announcement
from  the  home  of  Abraham,  and  beautiful  is  the
contrast  that  she  thereupon  hastens  away,  while  the
servant  completes  his  prayer.  Of  her  mother's
house.  —  Bethuel  was  living,  and  therefore  the
maiden-like  presentiment  of  a  love-suit  reveals  itself
as  she  hastens  to  her  mother's  confidence. — And
Laban  ran. — As  the  first  mention  of  Rebekah  (eh.
xxii.  23)  prepares  the  way  for  this  narrative,  so  here
we  make  beforehand  the  acquaintance  of  Laban,  who
later  exerts  so  important  an  influence  upon  the  history
of  Jacob.  Still  the  narrator  has  motives  also  for  this
allusion  in  the  present  history.  His  invitation  of  his
own  accord  to  Eliezer,  to  come  into  the  house  of  his
father,  and  the  prominence  which  he  has  in  the  en
gagement  of  Rebekah,  with  and  before  his  father,
prove  the  great  influence  which  he  had  in  his  parental
home.  His  sister  Rebekah  appears  also  with  similar
energy  in  comparison  with  Isaac.  There  was,  doubt
less  iu  the  very  arrangement  of  the  patriarchal  home,
special  room  for  the  dynamic  efficiency  of  a  strong
personality,  in  contrast  with  the  retiring  nature  of
the  more  receptive  character.  Laban  appears  always
to  have  led  his  father  Bethuel,  as  Abraham  led  his
son  Isaac :  and  Rebekah  exercises  a  stronger  influence
upon  the  history  of  her  house  than  Sarah  or  Rachel
upon  theirs.  The  sacred  writer  now  appears  to  go
back  and  bring  up  the  narrative. — And  it  came  to
pass,  when  he  saw — but  purposely,  to  bring  into
prominence  this  motive  with  Laban,  since  he  places
the  gold  ornaments  in  the  first  rank,  and  the  words
of  Eliezer,  which  Rebekah  reports,  in  the  second.
We  have  here  evidently  a  trait  of  that  covetousness
which  appears  so  prominently  in  the  later  history  of
Laban.  There  may  be  also  a  characteristic  of  the
courtly  accommodation  and  exaggeration  in  the  re
ligious  expression  he  uses,  when  he  invites  Eliezer,  as
'•  the  blessed  of  Jehovah ,"  i,  e.,  in  a  name  of  God
which  was  not  usual  with  him,  and  which  he  probably
learned  from  the  form  of  expression  which  the  servant


had  used  (although  this  cannot  be  asserted  with  cer
tainty,  since  the  calling  upon  Jehovah  had  already
its  beginnings  in  the  house  of  Therah).  But  there  is
no  more  necessity,  on  account  of  these  features,  of  mis
understanding  the  real  central  thing  in  Laban's  state
of  mind,  than,  on  account  of  similar  traits,  of  misun
derstanding  the  character  of  Lot  *  (see  ch.  xxxi.  24).
His  words  of  invitation  have  been  made  the  founda
tion  of  an  Advent  song :  Wherefore  wilt  thou  stand
without,  etc. — And  the  men's  feet. — The  servants
who  accompanied  Eliezer  are  here  mentioned  for  the
first  time.  That  Laban  took  care  for  them  also  com
pletes  the  expression  of  his  polite  hospitality. — I
will  not  eat.— "  No  one  had  asked  him  as  to  the
object  of  his  journey,  for  that  would  have  been  a
violation  of  the  Eastern  usages  of  hospitality,  which
places  these  and  similar  questions  after  the  meal.
But  the  servant  of  Abraham  unburdens  himself."
Uelitzsch.  A  new  mark  of  his  faithful  service,  of
his  prudence  and  full  assurance  of  hope.

4.  The  suit  for  the  bride  (vers.  34-49).  The
speech  of  Eliezer.  The  first  speech  in  the  Bible.  A
simple  historical  account  of  his  journey,  and  still  at
the  same  time  an  example  of  a  wise  speech,  which
weaves  skilfully  the  motives  he  would  present  with
the  account  he  gives.  The  motives  from  kindred
are  first  urged:  the  mission  is  from  Abraham.  He
is  proud  of  being  Abraham's  servant.  Then  the  hu
man  interests.  Abraham  has  grown  very  rich  and
great,  and  has  one  only  legitimate  son  and  heir.  But
even  the  human  motive  is  religiously  sanctified.  His
wealth  and  his  son  are  peculiar  blessings  of  God.
Now  follows  tie  religious  motive.  Especially  the
oath  to  take  no  Ganaanitess,  but  a  Shemitess  of  his
own  race.  This  concern  must  have  awakened  in
Nahor's  and  Bethuel's  house  not  only  kindred  feel
ings,  but  also  laid  its  claims  upon  the  conscience.
That  arrested  migration  of  Therah  rested  as  a  silent
reproach  upon  the  conscience  of  the  family  ;  the
house  of  Bethuel  might  now  enter  again  into  direct
and  blessed  fellowship,  through  the  granting  of  Re
bekah.  This  religious  motive  was  strengthened
through  the  statement  of  the  trustful  hope  of  Abra
ham,  for  a  successful  issue  of  the  mission.  Then,
again,  in  the  highest  measure,  through  the  recital
of  his  prayer,  and  how  the  sign  determined  upon
had  been  fulfilled.  And  here,"  as  a  result  of  this
recital,  the  human  motive  is  urged  again — the  indirect
praise  of  Rebekah ;  she  had  proved  herself  uncon
sciously  a  moral  ideal  of  a  maiden  worthy  of  love.
But  finally,  with  the  pride  of  a  free,  God-entrusted
suitor,  he  presses  his  suit  upon  them  and  demands
an  instant  decision.  He  urges  his  opinion,  that  they
would  be  refusing  kindness  and  truth  (PrSI  ~!0n)
towards  his  master,  if  they  should  give  him  a  denial,
because,  indeed,  they  were  not  only  his  blood-rela
tions,  but  also  his  theocratic  spiritual  kindred,  never
theless  he  would  not  beg  of  them  a  bride  for  the  son
of  Abraham.  If  they  would  not  deal  thus  kindly
and  truly,  he  would  go  into  the  same  city,  into  the
same  laud,  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  especially  to
the  other  sons  of  Xahor,  as  he  had  already  intimated
in  his  previous  words  that  he  should  be  freed  from
his  oath  when  he  had  used  all  possible  efforts. — My
master's  brother's  daughter,  i.  e.,  in  the  wider
sense.  His  granddaughter,  or  the  daughter  of  the
son  of  his  brother.


486


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


5.  The  betrothal  of  the  bride  (vers.  50-54).  La-
ban  and  BcthueL  Tie  decision.  "  Eebekah's  brother
joins  in  the  decision.  The  custom,  according  to
which  the  brother  must  interest  himself  for  the  sister
(ch.  xxxiv.  5;  xi.  25  ;  Judg.  xxi.  22;  1  Sam.  xiii.
22),  justified  him  in  so  doing."  Knobel.  Keil,  with
Others,  remarks,  this  usage  grows  out  of  polygamy,
through  which  the  fatlur  might  easily  come  to  have
less  concern  for  tin-  children  (daughters)  of  the  less
beloved  wife.  They  recognize  in  the  whole  affair
the  will  of  Jehovah  ;  they  have  neither  good  nor  evil,
i.  e  ,  indeed,  nothing  to  speak  (Numb.  xxiv.  13,  etc.).
The  consent  of  Rebekah  was  not  sought  in  the  be
trothal  itself,  but  in  the  far  less  important  point  of
the  immediate  departure.  From  this  it  follows  that,
they  wen-  sure  of  h'T  consent  to  the  union,  although
the'  authoritative  powers  of  the  house  must  decide
Up0n  i,. — Worshipped  the  Lord,  bowing  down
to  the  earth. — A  mute  attestation  of  thankfulness,
i  si|rn  of  a  mind  moved  with  astonishment  and  joy.
Hut  notice  hiTe  also  the  haste  ;  his  official  zeal  cuts
Miort  his  prayer.  [Baumgartcn  calls  attention  to
this  prayer  of  the  servant,  in  his  present  circum-
a:id  surrounded  by  those  who  did  not  honor
,le!:i'va!i,  as  a  proof  how  well  Abraham  had  instruct-
:  trained  his  household. — A.  <;.]  At  first  the
In',  lal-presents  for  tlie  bride  must  lie  produced,  then
the  betrothal-presents  for  the  family,  especially  for
!,a!.;;n  and  his  mother.  With  respect  to  the  last-
i  presents,  they  are  an  honorable  form  of  the
later,  at  least,  usual  purchase  of  the  bride  (see  WIM:R  :
"  Marriage").  The  first  were  given  to  the  bride,  in
the  name  <>f  the  bridegroom,  after  the  existing  cus
tom,  according  to  which  the  bridegroom  sent  to  the
bride  presents,  before  the  marriage,  which  should
have  the  ell'ect  to  cement  the  union — a  cu.-tom  still
prevalent  in  the  East  (see  KNOHKT,,  p.  2ot*).  A
f-hephcrd  prince  in  Canaan  might  purchase  the  ne
cessary  articles  of  this  kind  from  Phoenician  and  Ata-
maic  caravans. — And  they  did  eat  and  drink. —
Now  first  they  could  enjoy  their  food  and  drink,
which  would  naturally  constitute  an  evening  fea.-t.

0.  Tin'  /</•<'./.</  joui-Ht'ii  (vers.  51-i;i). — Send  me
away,  that  I  may  go  to  my  master. — If  it  was
bold  in  Eliezer  to  insist  upon  an  immediate  decision,
llie  successful  issue  makes  him  now,  in  his  oilicial
•/eal,  still  bolder.  His  earnestness  assumes  the  ap
pearance  of  harshness,  and  it  can  be  excused  only  by
his  LTcat  jov,  an'.!  his  great  anxiety  to  bring  the  affair
to  a  happy  issue,  before  anything  should  occur  to
make  a  disturbance.  A  few  days,  or  a  tenth  of  days,
:.  e.,  not  as  Keil  thinks,  a  few  or  much  more  (en  days,
but  (//  /"(.-•/  *>'».  <l«;/.i.  An  indefinite  number  of  days
is  an  indefinite  period,  which  might  easily  be  pro
tracted  into  a  long  period.  But  since  Eliezer  will  not
consent  to  ten  days,  Rebekah  must  decide,  and  her
dec',,;  vat  ion  is  characteristic  again  of  her  vigorous,
determined,  bold  mind.  She  is  equally  ready  for  a
departure.  She  says  with  modest  but  decided
brevity,  ~"~S.  The  sudden  departure  could  hardly
have  occurred  on  the  next  day;  it  is  sufficient  that  it
was  immediately  prepared. — Rebekah  their  sister.
— This  is  literally  tt  ue  only  of  Laban.  Rebekah
truly  became  also  through  her  betrothal,  the  equal
of  her  parents. — And  her  nurse. — Deborah  (ch.
xxxv.  8).  The  nurse  in  noble  families  usually  re
mained  (2  Kings  xi.  2)  a  permanent  and  valued  com
panion  of  her  foster-child. — And  they  blessed
Rebekah. — The  words  of  blessing  form  a  little

*  [Also  Pictorial  Bible,  and  the  boobs  of  travel?.— A.  G.]


song.  They  emphasize  it  that  Rebekah  is  their  sister,
Tor  they  are  proud  of  her  dim  but  great  hopes. — Be
thou  the  mother  of  (grow  to)  thousands  of  mil
lions. — This  wish  of  a  countless  host  of  descendants
not  of  children  alone,  that  would  be  senseless)  is  so
far  not  hyperbolical,  as  in  the  origin  and  growth  of
the  people  of  Israel,  saying  nothing  of  the  church
of  believers,  it  has  been  richly  fulfilled.  The  bless
ing  of  children  was  the  highest  happiness  of  the
Hebrew  woman.  "  It  is  still  thus  in  the  East  (Voi-
NKT:  "Travels,"  ii.  p.  359)."  Knobel.— Let  thy
seed  possess  (see  ch.  xxii.  17).  The  house  of  Na-
hor  itself  formed  a  certain  opposition  to  the  heathen,
and  well  knew  also  that  Abraham  and  the  children
of  Abraham  should  complete  the  opposition.  These
intuitions  were  doubtless  refreshed  through  the  com
munication  of  the  servant.  We  ought  not,  however,
to  be  surprised  that  the  two  clauses  of  this  verso
represent  Abraham's  hope,  rather  in  respect  to  the
number  than  the  character  of  his  seed. — And  her
damsels. — The  stately  company  of  damsels  corres
ponded  not  only  to  the  stately  equipage  and  approach
of  the  suitor,  but  was  an  actual  necessity,  s-ince  she
was  going  into  a  strange  land,  under  the  leading  of
strange  men.  "Laban  gave,  however,  only  one  maid
en  to  each  of  his  daughters  at  her  marriage  (eh.
xxix.  24,  21>)."  Knobel.

7.  The  meeting  ft f  the  bridegroom  find  tie,  Irl'lc
(vers.  62-117). — And  Isaac  came. — The  apparently
confused  narrative  here  is  found  to  be  a  clear  one,
upon  the  supposition  of  a  clear  view  of  the  land.
The  wells  of  Hagar  alluded  to,  lay  still  southerly
from  Becr-sheba.  If  Kliczer  journeyed  home  from
Mesopotamia,  or  the  northeast,  he  must  have  come
to  Hebron  to  Abraham,  before  he  could  have  been
visible  to  Isaac,  in  the  vay  to  these  wells,  or  gen
erally  in  his  stations  in  the  farther  south.  But  if
he  was  earlier  visible  to  the  young  bridegroom,  it
follows,  that  he  must  now  have  gone  from  Ilebioa
northwards  into  the  field.  The  allusion  to  the  wells
as  to  his  residence  in  the  south  region,  is  made  with
the  purpose  of  bringing  into  prominence  again,  how
it  occurred,  through  a  happy  providence,  that  he
went  so  far  to  meet  the  bride.*  lie  had  returned  in
a  happier  frame  from  his  visit  to  these  wells,  which
were  of  gi  eater  importance  to  him,  since  he  usually
had  his  outposts  in  the  south.  But  now  lie  went  out
from  Hebron  (for  Sarah's  tent  was  certainly  still  at
Hebron,  ver.  07)  into  the  peculiar  field,  or  cultivated
reirion,  without  any  intimation  that  Rebekah  would
meet  him  from  that  side,  on  the  way  down  from
Bethlehem.  DKLITZSCII  :  "  He  came  from  his  arrival
at  the  wells,  not  as  Hupfeld  and  Ewald  explain;  he
had  even  reached  the  wells."  Dclitzsch,  however,
thinks  the  meeting  took  place  in  the  region  of  the
wells  of  Hagar,  and  that  Isaac  had  for  the  sake  of
meditation  removed  his  residence  from  Hebron  into
the  south.  The  oak-grove  of  Mamrc  must  certainly
have  been  large  enough  to  give  opportunity  for  medi
tation.  Isaac  doubtless  went  into  the  south  region,
not  to  lead  any  technically  hermit  life,  but  to  over
see  the  flocks  of  his  father.  Delitzsch  also  conjec
tures  that  he  was  laying  the  affair  of  his  marriage
before  the  Lord,  at  "these  wells.  But  the  author
rather  points  to  the  fact,  that  he  was  still  clinging  to
his  grief  over  his  mother  Sarah.  [If,  however,
Abraham  was  now  residing  at  Beer-sheba,  then  Isaac

*  [The  "  South  Country."  The  "SI  includes  more  than
the  country  south  of  Palestine.  The'  south  country  may
have  embraced  He'i.ron.  Comp.  ch.  xiii.  3. — A.  G.]


CHAP.   XXIV.    1-67.


4S?


may  have  met  the  caravan  to  the  northward  of  tin
place.  Sarah's  tent  would  of  course  be  taken  with
Abraham  in  his  removals. — A.  G.] — At  the  even
tide. — "As  the  evening  turned  itself  hither — drew
on."  Delitzsch. — Went  out  to  mourn  (meditate).
— niijjb .  Explanations :  1 .  For  the  purpose  of  think
ing.  Septuagiiit,  Vulgate,  Baumgarten,  Delitzsch,
2.  In  order  to  pra;/.  Targums,  Arabic  version,  Lu-
'  ther,  and  others.  3.  For  deliberation.  Aquila  and
others.  4.  For  the  purpose  of  walking,  exercise.
Syriac,  Aben  Ezra,  Kinchi.  5.  To  briny  the  trav
eler  (  / )  Bottcher.  0.  for  lamentation.  Knobel.
In  order  to  give  himself  alone,  and  undisturbed,
to  mourning  the  death  of  his  mother.  [The  first
three  explanations  may  well  be  thrown  together,
since  thought,  prayer,  and  deliberation,  or  medita
tion,  arc  seldom  separated  in  the  experience  of  the
pious. — A.  (!.]  Knobel  correctly  quotes,  in  favor  of
this,  the  frequent  signification  of  PPhJ  and  ver.  07.
One  might  almost  think  it  was  in  the  field  of  Ephron,
but  then  \ve  should  have  to  seek  the  cave  of  Mach-
pelah  northerly  from  Hebron.  But  the  remark  of
Knobel ''  that  Isaac  first  after  the  death  of  Abraham,
according  to  the  Elohist  (ch.  xxv.  11),  removed  into
the  southern  country,"  is  of  no  moment,  since  we
muse  distinguish  between  the  mere  resting-place  of  a
subordinate,  and  the  chief  abode  of  a  shepherd-
prince. — She  lighted  off  the  camel. — Another  in
stance  of  the  rapid,  energetic  Rebekah.  "  Fell  from
the  camel,  i.  c.,  threw  herself  off  from  the  animal
she  rode,  sprang  quickly  down,  and  indeed  as  a  mark
of  her  reverence  for  Isaac,  for  she  recognized  him
as  a  man  of  rank.  This  custom  is  frequently  men
tioned  in  the  Old  Testament  (1  Sam.  xxv.  23  ;  2
Kings  v.  21),  even  by  this  same  writer  (Josh.  xv.  18);
it  appears  also,  elsewhere  among  the  ancients,  e.  g.,
among  the  Romans  (Liv.  xxiv.  44).  In  the  East,  to
day,  the  rider  descends  from  the  animal  he  rides
when  lie  meets  a  distiguished  person  (XIEBUIIR  :
'Arabia,' p.  50,  and  the  'Description  of  his  Trav
els,'  i.  p.  239 ;  JOLIFFE  :  '  Travels,'  p.  274),  and  it
is  required  of  Jews  and  Christians  when  they  meet
a  Mohammedan  of  rank  (Xiebuhr,  etc.)."  Knobel.
—What  man  is  this.— She  thus  assumes  that  Elie-
zer  knew  him.  A  womanly  presentiment. — There
fore  she  took  a  veil — KEIL  :  "The  mantle-like
Arabian  veil  for  the  head."  "  The  bride  appears
before  the  biidegroom  veiled,  hence  the  nubere  viro.
PUN.  II.  X.,  21,  22.  When  the  two  came  together
the  veil  was  removed.  The  custom  still  exists  in  the
East  (Russcl,  etc.)."  Knobel.— All  things  that  he
had  done. — Meeting  his  young  master,  the  self-im
portance  of  the  old  servant  appears  more  freely  in
his  words.— Into  his  mother  Sarah's  tent.— The
tent  of  Sarah  was  occupied  by  the  new  mistress,  al
though  Abraham  was  again  married.  It  lay  in  He
bron,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  the  inference  of
Knobel,  from  ver.  62,  that  it  must  be  sought  in  Beer-
sheba  (eomp.  ch.  xxxi.  G3).  The  wives  also  of  the  Be
douin  chiefs  have  their  own  tents. — And  he  loved
her. — She  became  the  object  of  his  peculiar  bridal

love.— And  Isaac  was    comforted [The  word

death  is  not  in  the  original.  It  seems  as  if  the  Holy
Spirit  would  not  conclude  this  beautiful  and  joyful
narrrative  with  a  word  of  sorrow — death. — WORDS
WORTH,  p.  109.— A.  G.]  Until  this  occurred  he  had
mourned  the  death  of  his  mother,  from  three  to  four
years.  Since  the  great  mournings  lasted  from  thirty
to  seventy  days  (ch.  1.  3  ;  Numb.  xx.  29 ;  Deut,  xxxiv.
8),  Knobel  caunot  find  anything  here  of  the  three  or


four  years'  mourning  of  Isaac.  But  there  is  a  plait
distinction  between  the  customary  mournings  and
the  weight  of  sadness  in  the  life  "of  a  retiring  and
elegiac  nature.  Isaac  appears  to  have  clung  to  hia
mother  Sarah,  much  as  Jacob  did  afterwards  to  hia
mother  Rebekah.


DOCTUIXAL    AXD    ETHICAL.

1.  See  the  Critical  and  Excgetical  remarks.  This
chapter  evidently  presents  a  picture  for  all  time,  of
a  sacred  bride-wooing.  Abraham  designates  as  tho
chief  requisite  of  a  blessed  theocratic  marriage,
spiritual  kindred  and  equality  of  birth.  The  Shern-
ites  of  his  father's  house  did  not  indeed  stand  upon
the  same  line  of  theocratic  hopes  with  himself,  but
they  were  still  acquainted  with  his  hopes  and  recog
nized  them  ;  they  were  free  from  the  tendency  of  the
grosser  heathenism,  and  the  result  shows  that  Re
bekah,  the  daughter  from  the  home  of  Nahor,  had  a
clearer  insight  into  theocratic  things  than  Isaac  him
self.  And  although,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Canaan-
ites,  at  the  time  of  Abraham,  were  not  so  sunken  in
corruption  as  the  Canaanitish  generations  at  the  time
of  Joshua;  although  there  were  a  Melchizedec,  an
Abimelech,  and  similar  characters,  and  around  them
circles  who  feared  God,  among  the  people ;  still  all
this  was  a  waning  blessing,  which  the  curse  gradu
ally  overwhelms,  as  the  history  of  Sodom  shows,
and  Abraham,  who  knew  the  end  of  the  Canaanites
because  Canaan  was  promised  to  him,  could  not
mingle  the  future  of  his  race  with  the  race  of  the
Canaanites.  The  TiKrfiv  ei>  ry  KO.KU  is  according  to
PLATO'S  Symposion,  or  the  instruction  of  Diotima,  a
peculiar  spiritual  impulse  of  Eros,  after  the  Greek
ideal ;  but  Abraham  in  the  theocratic  history  has
realized  this  fundamental  principle  in  a  far  higher
sense  (see  John  i.  13).

2.  The  oath  upon  the  loins   of  Abraham   (see
the  exegetical  notes  under  the  first  paragraph).     It
should  be    observed    that  Abraham    himself  here
ca-uses  the  oath  to  be  taken.

3.  The,  Angel  of  the  Lord,  who,  as  the  Angel  of
the  covenant,  promised  Isaac  the  heir  of  the  cove
nant  to  Abraham,  will,  according  to  the  assurance  of
Abraham,  mediate  and  secure  a  marriage  suited  to
the  covenant.

4.  The  journey  and  position  of  Eliezer   at  the
well  in  Haran,  his  aim  and  his  prayer,  prove  that  two
things  belong  to  a  happy  marriage  :  human  foresight
and  wisdom,  and  the  blessing  of  Jehovah  ;  i.  e.,  not
merely  the  general  blessing  of  God,  but  the  blessing
of  the  God  of  the  covenant.

5.  The  mark  which  Eliezer  fixed  upon  as  the  sign
by  which  he  should  recognize  the  bride  selected  by
Jehovah  for  Isaac,  shows  what  an  important  estimate
was  placed  upon  genuine  good  works  in  the  house  of
the  father  of   the   faithful,  especially  upon  human
friendliness,  hospitality,    kindness  to    animals    and
men.     The  cheerful  service  which  Rebekah  gives  to
the  aged  Eliezer,  shows  a  love  of  men  free  from  any

icnsual  interest.  But  that  on  his  side,  Eliezer  places
a  high  estimate  upon  her  beauty,  and  in  his  conduct
treats  her  in  a  youthful  and  complimentary  way,
shows  the  glorious  power  and  effect  of  her  beauty.

(i.  The  scripture  has  throughout  a  free  estimate
of  the  importance  of  beauty.  It  places  the  beau-
:iful  with  the  good,  in  the  praise  of  the  creation,  as
;he  Greeks  place  the  good  with  the  beautiful.  But
in  the  beauty  of  the  ancestresses  of  Israel  (Sarah,


488


GENESIS,  OR   THE    FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


Rebekah,  Rachel,)  it  sees  the  symbolical  manifesta
tion  of  a  consecrated,  beautiful  life  of  the  soul.  We
must  distinguish  clearly  in  reference  to  the  estimate
of  the  beautiful,  the  "purely  Christian  standpoint,
from  the  ecclesiastical  and  monkish.  This  last  has
drawn  from  the  words,  "he  was  without  form  or
comeliness"  (Is.  liii.  -!),  the  inference,  that,  the  most
beautiful  among  the  children  of  men  (Ps.  xlv.  3)
was  of  an  extraordinarily  disagreeable  appearance.
The  moral  idea,  and  tin1  moral  estimate  of  the  lux
ury,  in  the  presents  of  Elic/.er.

7.  The  expres.-ion  r^Xl  "~,  which  runs  through
the  whole  Old  Testament  as  a  description  of  the  di
vine  grace  and  truth  (see  Mieah  vii.  -j'n,  and  even  in
the  New  Testament  (John  i.   17),  appears  here  in  a
remarkable  manner  for  the  first  time,  in  reference  to
the  conduct  of  man  with   man.      "  Thu-  also,"   j-ays
l)eli;:--;'h,  •'mutual  proofs  of  love  between   men   are
"isn,  and  the  mutual  truly  intended,  faithful  acts  be
tween  men   are   r.!£N."     We  must,   however,    hold,
iiid  .  ,1,  t'nai  the.-e  ideas  even  in  reference   to  the  re
lations  of  man  toman,  have  a  theocratic  definiteness
and  peculiarity.      The  house  of  Nahor   must   prove,
through  iis  love  to  Abraham,  that  it   went  with    him
iu  spirit,  and  through  its  truth   preserves   its  connec
tion  with  him.      Under   these  circumstances,  the   re
fusal  of  their  daughter  would  have  been  theocratic
felony.

8.  The  importance  of  piuus  mother?  for  the  king-
dom  of  God.

','.   The   elevated   distinction   of    the  wife,  ill    the
history,  and  for  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

in.  Eiic/.er's  bride-wooing,  the  first  >pceeh  in  the
Bible,  a  fit  beginning  for  the  whole  circle  of  biblical
speeches.

11.  Klie/.er,  the  earthly  messenger  of  Abraham,
in  the  convoy  of  the  heavenly  messengers.  A  pious
diplomat,  accompanied  by  the  Angel  of  the  Lord.
The  diplomats  of  this  world  are  olten  accompanied
by  demons.

l"2.  The  propensity  of  Isaac  for  retirement  and
mourning,  agrees  with  his  pa>sive  individuality,
and  with  his  fearful  and  alfectin::  experiences  in  his
childhood  upon  Moriah.  If,  in  after  times,  he  does
not  seem  fully  to  understand  the  great  consequence
of  his  father,  and  clings  to  and  pines  for  his  mother,
this  is  explained  by  his  history  ;  but  we  see  also  how
very  greatly  the  hopes  of  Abraham  were  endan
through  thus  retiring  and  melancholy  propensity,
•raham  saw  the  right  way  to  relief.  Kebekah
was  a  consoling  providential  gift  from  Jehovah  for
Isaac,  and  lie  was  rescued  from  the  lonely  way  of  the
recluse,  since  he  now  entered  fully  upon  the  way  of
the  future  of  Israel.


HOMILKTICAL    AX1J    PliACTICAL.

Abraham's  marriage-suit  for  his  son  Isaac. — The
sanctilication  of  the  bride-wooing. — The  qualifica
tions  of  a  blessed  bride. — The  life  pictures  in  tin's
history :  Abraham,  Eliezer,  Rebekah,  Laban,  Isaac.
— The  mother  in  history,  the  foundation  of  the  king
dom  of  God. — The  two  remarkable  meetings  (that  of
Eliezer  and  Rebekah,  and  that  of  Rebekah  and
Isaac),  a  testimony  for  the  old  proverb  that  "mar
riages  are  made  in  heaven." — How  this  proverb  has
its  significance :  a.  lu  the  narrower  sense,  in  the
marriage  of  the  pious ;  b.  in  the  wider  sense,  in  the
marriage  of  the  ungodly  (the  providence  of  judg


ment)  ;  c.  in  the  sense  of  a  divine  discipline  and  in
struction,  leading  from  the  way  of  evil  to  the  way  of
virtue  and  salvation. — Rebekah  as  a  maiden,  virgin,
bride,  wife,  mother. — (The  heroine  at  last  acted  too
purely  as  a  heroine.  She  must  repent.  She  saw  her
Jacob  no  more  after  their  separation). — The  coopera
tion  of  parents  in  the  marriage  of  their  children  :
a.  Its  justice  or  propriety  ;  b.  its  limits.  —  Eliezer  in
his  faithfulness,  prudence  and  piety. — E!ie/.or,  an  ex
ample  of  the  way  in  which  the  blessing  of  the  Lord,
and  the  faithfulness  of  men,  meet  together  in  one. —
Eliezer's  petition  and  thanksgiving. — The  import  of
beauty  in  the  kingdom  of  God. — Rebekah's  charming
Service,  the  peculiar,  fundamental  trait  of  a  noble,
pious  womanliness. — The  blessing  of  an  unfeigned
human  friemiiine-s. — Especially  in  the  female  sex. —
Eliezer's  speech  the  iii:-t  in  the  Bible:  a.  As  the
speech  of  a  servant;  b.  of  a  master;  c.  which  turns
the  heart  to  the  master. — The  love  and  truth  of  God,
as  a  foundation  for  love  and  truth  among  men. — The
bridal  feast  at  Ilaran. — !>•  'ain  mi  nut,  or  the  unre
strained  eagerness  to  reach  the  goal. — The  caravan
of  Rebekah,  or  the  king  lorn  of  God  under  the
figure  of  a  journeying  pilgrim  and  wanderer.* —
Isaac's  and  Rebekah's  meeting. — Isaac's  transforma
tion.— The  blcs-ing  of  pious  love. —  Rebckah  in  the
tent  of  Sarah,  or  the  joining  of  a  new  blessing  to
the  old.

1.  Vcrs.  1-0.  STAHXI:  :  Certainly  it  was  no  small
thing,  since  Abraham  is  represented  as  a  prince,
that  Eliezer,  next  to  his  master,  should  have  supreme
command  in  all  the  house.  The  word  ''servant,1'
therefore.,  is  not  a  term  of  contempt  heiv,  but  a
truly  marked  name  of  honor,  as  the  word  ~iZ"
is  elsewhere  used  also  (Ex.  v.  tM,  etc.).  .1  iseph  was
such  a  servant  afterward  in  the  hou-c  of  IVaraoh
the  king  (eh.  xxxix.  -1 1. — LrniKii :  It  is  truly  in  the
arrangement  of  a  household  a  great,  valuable  gift,  !o
have  a  faithful  servant  or  maider.,  sine/  the  dishon
est  v  and  wickedness  of  servants  is  a  common  com
plaint  the  world  over. — CUAMKK:  The  blessing  of
Cod  makes  rich  without  toil  (Prov.  x.  2'2  ;  Ps.
cxxviii.  4).  Whi-n  one  has  something  important  be
fore  him,  let  him  attend  to  it,  with  prudence  and  un
der  good  advice.  (There  follow  here  M-VI  nil  remarks
upon  the  true  marriage,  and  upon  the  duties  of
parents  and  cluldirn  in  contracting  marriage.)  (Jcr.
xxix.  G;  1  Kings  xi.  -1.)  LANOK:  Ver.  5.  Whoever
allows  himself  to  beu.-ed  in  important  concerns,  does
well  to  seek  beforehand  full  instructions. — The  Angel
(lleh.  i.  14:  Ps.  xxxiv.  8). — CKAMKU:  Homes  and
goods  are  inherited  from  parents,  but  a  prudent  wife
-  from  the  Lord  (Prov.  xix.  14). — SCHRODKB:
The  hoary  head  should  impel  us  to  set  our  household
in  order  (Calvin). — The  last  labor  of  each  of  the
patriarchs,  is  to  attend  to  the  necessary  dispositions
and  arrangements  with  respect  to  their  successors
(Dreehslcr). — What,  Abraham  in  his  faith  here  avoids,
was  expressly  forbidden  to  the  people  of  Abraham
in  the  law  (ch.  xviii.  19;  Ex.  xxxiv.  16;  Bent.  vii.
1-3).  Natural  prudence  would  have  led  Abraham  to
contract  an  alliance  with  one  of  the  Canaanitish  fam
ilies  through  the  marriage  of  Isaac,  to  have  thus  se
cured  for  himself  support  and  protection,  and  indeed,
thus  to  have  taken  the  first  step  toward  the  posses
sion  of  the  land  of  Canaan ;  but  he  had  learned

*  [Those  who  would  seethe  resemblance  here  alluded  to,
elevated  into  a  typo,  and  drawn  out  at  length,  may  consult
WORDSWORTH,  p.  107,  who  is  rich  in  these— at  time.-;  fancies.-
and  at  times  very  striking  suggestions. — A.  G.J


CHAP.    XXIV.   1-67.


489


already  that  God  directed  his  way,  etc.  (Roos). — It
occurs  even  to-day,  in  the  East,  that  the  marriage  ol
children  is  arranged  by  the  parents,  before  the  young
persons  have  seen  each  other.  Similar  occurrence,
oh.  xxi.  21. — The  doctrine  we  draw  from  this  pas
sage,  is  this,  (hat  parents  should  take  care  for  their
sons  and  daughter.-',  that  they  may  be  advanced  to
an  honorable  marriage  state,  although  parents  at
times  misuse  their  power  ami  right,  and  constrain
children  to  take  those  in  marriage  whom  they  have
not  loved.  Such  parents  should  be  punished,  for
they  have  no  parental  heart  or  disposition,  but  arc  as
blocks  or  stones,  etc.  (Luther). — Here  the  angels  are
the  servants  of  the  bride  or  marriage  (LuiiiKR
against  "  The  Romish  Celibacy  ").  [Parents  in  dis
posing  of  their  children,  should  carefully  consult  the
welfare  of  their  souls,  and  their  furtherance  in  the
way  to  heaven.  Henry. — A.  G.]

2.  Vers.  10-21.  STARKE:  (All  the  goods  of  his
master  were  in  his  hand.  The  Jews  infer  from  this
that  Elie/er  had  taken  an  inventory  of  his  master's
goods  with  him  to  Ilaran,  that  he  might  persuade
more  readily  the  bride  of  Isaac  to  go  with  him  !)
Ver.  14.  Upon  the  desire  of  Eliezer  to  recognize
the  bi  ide  through  a  sign.  We  see  that  God  himself
was  not  displeased  with  it.  But  it  does  not  follow,
therefore,  that  we  should  follow  this  example,  since
that  would  be  to  tempt  God.  (But  the  general  truth
that  the  cheerful  readiness  to  render  service  to  the
aged  and  helpless,  and  an  affable  demeanor,  arc  to
be  viewed  as  qualities  in  maidens  which  render  them
worthy  of  love,  and  desirable  in  marriage,  is,  how
ever,  truly  contained  in  this  example.) — CRAMER  :
Yer.  11.  A  reminding  us  of  our  duty,  to  relieve  the
animals  from  their  toil,  and  to  feed  and  water  them
at  the  proper  time.— Vcr.  17.  A  Christian  must  be
gin  his  bride-wooing  with  prayer. — Museums  :  To
be  a  creature  of  God,  is  common  to  all ;  to  be  beau
tiful  is  the  mark  of  special  favor. — (Upon  ver.  19.
This  was  a  great  offer  surely,  since  it  is  well  known
that  when  camels  have  had  nothing  j;o  drink  for  sev
eral  days,  they  drink  for  a  long  time  after  one
another  before  they  are  satisfied). — Christian  parents
should  train  their  children,  especially  their  daughters,
not  to  idleness  and  pride,  but  to  household  duties  and
work. — Ver.  21.  A  man  often  does  something  in  the
simplicity  of  his  heart,  and  knows  not  what  end  God
will  make  it  serve. — We  may  serve  our  neighbors  in
a  greater  measure  than  they  desire. — Lisco :  The
ring.  Either  a  semicircular  ring,  as  a  diadem  for
the  brow,  pendent  above  the  nose,  or  the  customary
nose-ring  of  the  East  (Isa.  iii.  21  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  12  ;
Prov.  xi.  22). — CALWER  IlandbucJi :  A  remarkable
hearing  of  prayer. — SCHRODER  :  The  Arabians  still
call  Mesopotamia  El  Dschesireh,  i.  e.,  the  island. —
At  one  sign  from  the  camel's  driver  the  camel  kneels
down ;  at  another  he  rises  up. — The  Arabian  ge
ographers  still  recognize  the  fountains  without  the
city,  which  provide  the  needy  inhabitants  with  water.
— VALERIUS  HEHBERGEB:  A  young  person,  also,
should  not,  as  dazzled  and  blinded,  cling  to  one  only,
and  think  that  if  he  could  not  obtain  that  one,  he
must  go  out  from  the  world,  but  should  ever  look  to
the  Lord,  and  see  whither  he  will  lead  him.  What
God  gives  prospers  well,  but  what  men  and  the  lust
of  the  oye  gives,  that  becomes  a  pure  purgatory.
(But  although  the  understanding,  and,  indeed,  the
spiritual  understanding,  should  direct  the  affair,  still
the  choice  itself  remains  a  matter  of  the  heart).
[We  hero  learn  to  be  particular  in  commending  our
iffairs  to  the  conduct  and  care  of  divine  providence.


It  is  our  wisdom  to  follow  providence,  but   folly  tc
force  it.    Henry. — A.  G.]

3.  Vers.  22-33.  STARKE  :  (Upon  ver.  22.  Is
not  in  opposition  with  1  Tim.  ii.  <),  10  ;  2  Tim.  iii
4,5,  to  put  on  these  ornaments;'  We  answer:
1.  Rebekah  had  no  conceit  of  herself  in  connection
with  them  ;  2.  as  Sarah  was  a  princess,  so  Rebekah
became  the  daughter  of  a  prince,  an:l  we  cannot  re
fuse  to  distinguished  persons  a  certain  preeminence
in  clothing  and  ornaments  ;  3.  the  great  abundancq
of  gold,  precious  stones  and  jewels  in  the  Levitical
cultus,  was  not  to  contribute  to  pride.) — CRAMER;
Ver.  27.  If  God  has  heard  us,  we  should  thank  him.
—Ver.  31.  Blessed  of  the  Lord.  An  honorable
title  of  the  believer  in  the  Old  Testament  (Ps.  xxxvii.
22,  etc.). — To  be  obliging,  mild,  hospitable,  is  a
Christian  virtue. — CALWER  Handbuch:  (The  brace
lets  were  42  ducats,  the  ring  2  ducats).* — SCHRODER:
One  may  hold  this  before  the  sour  hypocrites,  who
hold  it  a  part  of  spirituality  and  peculiar  sanctity
not  to  wear  gold  or  silver.  God  permits  the  pomp,
splendor  and  ornaments  at  a  marriage  feast.  Even
the  dance  cannot  be  condemned,  if  it  is  carried  on
in  a  chaste,  moral  and  honorable  way.  Luther.
[The  hypothetical  "if"  shows  the  doubtfulness  of
this  announcement  even  in  Luther's  mind,  and  in
the  circumstances  by  which  he  was  surrounded.
— A.  G.] — Ver.  31.  Upon  Laban's  sonorous  words.
As  soon  as  a  living  consciousness  of  God  springs  up
in  any  one,  there  enters,  as  its  consequence,  a  sacred
horror  of  going  beyond  one's  own  stand-point  (Ileng-
stcnberg).  (But  although  Laban  speaks  here  beyond
his  own  proper  measure,  still  we  arc  not  justified  in
denying  his  piety).

4.  Vers.  34-49.  STARKE  :  Upon  ver.  85.  Herein
Eliezer  shows  his  prudence.  He  knew  well  that  a
mother  would  never  give  her  daughter  to  a  man  who
lived  more  than  a  hundred  miles  away,  in  scanty,
perhaps  needy  circumstances.  lie  thus  also,  when
he  says,  "  The  Lord  hath  blessed  my  master,"  turns
away  from  his  master  every  suspicion  that  he  had
gained  such  great  wealth  in  any  wrong  way. — Upon
ver.  37.  Hence  they  could  not  entertain  the  thought,
if  Abraham  is  so  rich  why  so  great  and  expensive  a
journey?  (he  could  indeed  have  easily  taken  a  Ca-
naanitess). — Upon  ver.  47.  In  verses  22,  2'!,  it  is' said,
the  servant  had  given  her  the  presents  before  he  had
asked  after  her  relationship,  here  the  reverse  seems
to  be  true  ;  but  the  two  are  easily  reconciled  upon
the  supposition  that  he  brought  out  the  presents  be
fore  the  question,  but  after  it,  laid  them  upon  her.j-
^They  are  rather  reconciled  upon  the  theory,  that  ho
here  gives  the  order  of  things  as  he  would  have  acted,
while  he  himself  above,  in  the  joy  of  his  heart,  a  little
too  hastily,  or  in  the  strong  assurance  of  a  prosperous
issue,  had  actually  done  both  things  at  the  same  time,
leaving,  out  of  view,  that  by  the  presupposition  and
statement  of  the  question  here,  he  declares  the  friend-
.iness  of  the  family  of  Bethuel. ) — To  the  right  hand
or  to  the  left.  Nahor  left  several  sons,  and  Eliezer
was  not  therefore  confined  to  one  line  of  Xahor's
descendants. — The  Christian  suitor  must  not  seek  to
constrain  by  power  the  consent  of  the  bride,  of  her
Barents  and  friends,  but  leave  all  to  the  providence
of  God. — SCHRODER  :  The  fulness  and  particularity
with  which  the  servant  makes  his  narrative,  agrees

f  [The  bracelets  were  from  four  to  five  ounces  in  weight
— their  value  would  depend  upon  the  precious  stones  con-
lected  with  them.  BUSH,  ii.  p.  43. — A.  G.]

t  [This  is  clearly  the  proper  way  of  reconciling  the  two
tatcments.— A.  G.]


490


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSES.


perfectly  with  the  character  of  the  affectionate,  in
telligent,  and  aged  parents.  lie  knows  how  to  put
every  lever  into  play  ;  he  uses  every  possible  means.
— While  in  verse  14  he  had  used  the  common  term
maiden,  he  uses  here  with  great  diligence,  in  his  cir
cumstantial  speech,  the  more  elevated  term  virgin.
[The  distinction  referred  to  is  that  between  Bcthidah
and  Ahna/i.  The  latter  appears  in  Is.  vii.  14.  Sec
Wordsworth. — A.  (i.J — The  nose-ring,  the  golden
ring,  which  penetrated  the  middle  wall  of  the  nose,
hung  down  over  the  mouth,  was  a  female  ornament
of  the  ancient  I'a.-t  (K/.ek.  xvi.  1*2),  and  remains  so
still,  according  to  Niebuhr  and  Arvicux.  About  the
size  of  a  <!  >'l,;r,  it  frequently  surrounded  the  whole
mouth,  li  is  at  present  also  used  among  the  Ara
bians  as  an  engagement  present.

5.  Vers.  .Mi- 5  I.  STAUKE:  Upon  ver.  50.  The
received  conjecture  that  liethuel  stands  in  the  back
ground  because  he  was  old  or  sick.  Otherwise  it
appears  as  if  the  brother  had  somewhat  to  say  in  the
marriage  of  his  Mster. — Upon  ver.  52.  Klie/.er  must
have  K  en  a  most  devout  worshipper  (vers.  12,  !>(>,
'27). — Cluistian  (|>iou<)  marriages  are  not  by  chance,
hut  made  by  God. — /I//,'.  \\'irf.:  When  pa'rcnN  see
tliat  (iod  (leak  \\itli  their  children  in  a  favorable  way,
tin  \  should  not  have  too  much  unseasonable  consid
eration  or  he.-itancy. — SmuoDKi;  :  Of  a  so-called
purchase-price  (for  the  wife)  (eh.  xxix. ;  Exod.  xxii.
1C>,  17),  which  \\as  usually  analogous  to  the  price  of
a  slave,— a<  the  Arab  of  to-day  purchases  his  bride
perhaps  for  from  three  to  live  camels — and  of  our
word  marriage,*  from  to  buy,  or  to  hire,  there  is
nothing  said  here,  since  the  suitor  divided  richly  his
jewels  between  I/iban  and  the  mother.

('».  Vers.  54-G1.  STAHKK:  Upon  ver.  55.  Be
cause  she  must  go  with  him  to  about  121,  or,  accord
ing  to  another  reckoning,  128  miles.  The  Jews  have
received  it  as  a  rule  that  there  should  be  at  least  ten
months  between  the  engagement  and  the  home-
bringing  of  the  bride.  (The  Jews  understand  C^S"1
to  mean  a  year,  and  under  the  tenth,  ten  months.) —
LANGE :  Although  Eliezer  would  not  be  detained  seve
ral  days,  it  is  not  necessary  to  conclude  that  the  de
parture  took  place  on  the  very  next  day.  (He  reminds

'[German  :  heirathcn  fromftcircn,  i.  c.,  mielhenkaufm.]


us,  with  good  reason,  that  Rebekah  had  her  things  to
arrange  and  pack  for  the  departure,  e!c.  It  is  cer
tain  that  they  hasted,  and  did  not  remain  more  than
ten  days).  Upon  ver.  fit!.  A  Christian  must  guard
the  times  carefully. — Pious  parents  should  not  con
strain  their  children  to  a  marriage  to  which  they
have  no  inclination.— 0  ye  maidens,  see  that  the
pious  Rebekah  has  found  her  bridegroom,  not  as  she
gave  way  to  idleness,  or  entered  the  unseemly  dances,
but  as  she  discharged  her  duty.  Follow  her  example,
fear  God  and  labor  diligently,  God  will  bring  you  to
the  one  for  whom  he  has  assigned  you. — OSIAXDER:
The  desire  of  pious  people  for  a  blessing  upon  others
are  mighty  prayers  before  Gofl,  and  therefore  are
never  in  vain.

7.  Vers.  G2-I57.  STAKKK:  Nothing  is  said  here  of
Abraham,  but  he  will  doubtless  receive  his  dauirhter-
in-law  in  the  most  friendly  manner  and  with  many  ben
edictions,  and  the  account  given  hereof  by  Elie/crmust
have  afforded  much  satisfaction,  and  furnished  mat
ter  for  praise  to  God.  (An  allegorical  explanation
of  the  marriage  of  Isaac,  in  reference  to  the  marriage
of  Christ  with  his  Church,  is  here  introduced). — Upon
ver.  62.  Whoever  will  be  free  must  know  how  he
is  to  support.  ;md  ca-o  for  his  wife. — (OSIANDKI:  :
Married  men  nnnt  love,  not  hate  or  strike  their
wives.) — A  happy  and  well-sustained  marriage,  miti
gates  greatly  the  adversities  of  this  life.  (Sir.  xxxvi.
24.)— SCHUODKU  :  The  twilight  resting  upon  the  field
is,  in  nature,  what  the  vesper-bell  is  in  the  Church.
— Rebekah  throws  herself  from  the  animal  she  rode,
immediately,  in  an  impulsive,  hasty  manner. — The
Arabian  woman  still  comes  down  from  her  camel
when  she  meets  a  man  of  the  same  or  higher  rank
than  herself.  Niebuhr  was  a  witness  of  such  a  meet-
ig  (1  Sam.  xxv.  '2:5;  Ts.  xlv.  12). — The  bride  was
constantly  led  veiled  to  the  bridegroom.  After  Un
completed  marriage,  he  could  first  see  her  with  her
face  unveiled. — In  ver.  1C  above,  as  also  Rachel,  eh.
xxix.  9,  Rebekah  was  engaged  in  her  duties,  and
therefore,  as  was  customary,  without  the  veil. — (The
above-quoted  allegory  of  Rarabach  :  As  that  (mar
riage  of  Isaac)  happened  according  to  the  appoint
ment  of  his  lather  Abraham,  so  this  (espousal  of
Christ)  is  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  the
Father,  etc.)


THIRTEENTH    SECTION.

Abraham's  second  Marriage.     Kdurah  and  her  Sons.     Abraham's  death  and  his  burial.


CHAPTER   XXV.    1-10.
Thou  ngnin  Abraham  took  a  wife,  and  her  name  was  Keturah  [incense,  vapor,  fragrance].

2  And  she    bare  him   Zimran    [=  Simon.    Celebrated  in  song,  renowned],  and  Jokslian  [fowler],  and
Mcdail   [strife],  and  Midian  '   [contention],  and  Isllbak  [leaving,  forsaking],   and  Sllliah  [bowed,  sad

3  —pit,  grave] .       And    Jokshan    begat    Sheba    [man ;  the  Sabaeans],  and    Dedan  [Furst:  low  country,
lowlands].       And  the  Sons  of  Dedan  Were  Asshurim  [plural  of  Asshur.    Fiirst:  hero,  strength],  and

4  Letushim  [hammered,  sharpened],  and  Leummim  [people].     And  the  sons  of  Midian  ;   Ephah

[darkness,  gloomy],  and  Epher  [=opher;  a  young  animal,  calf],  and  Hanoch  [initiated],  and  Abidah


CHAP.  XXV.  1-10.


49)


[father  of  wisdom,  the  wise],  aild  Eldaall  [Goscnius  :  whom  God  has  called] .       All  these  WCTG  tllO    chil
dren  of  Keturah.

5    6       And  Abraham  gave  all  that  lie  had  unto  Isaac.     But  unto  the  sons  of  the  concu
bines   which  Abraham  had,  Abraham  gave  gifts,  and  [separating]  sent  them  away  from

7  Isaac  his  son,  while  he  yet  lived,   eastward,   unto  the  east  country.     And  these  art
the  days  of  the  years  of  Abraham's  life  which  he  lived,  an  hundred  threescore  and

8  fifteen  years.      Then  Abraham  gave  up  the  ghost,2  and  died  in  a  good  old  age,  an  old
man,  and  full  [satisfied  with  life ;  see  ch.  xxxv.  20]  of  years ;  and   was  gathered  to  his  people.

9  And  his  sons  Isaac  and  Ishmael  buried  him  in  the  cave  of  Machpelah,  in  the  field  of
10  Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar  the  Hittite,  which  is  before   [easterly  from]   Mature;   The  field

which  Abraham  purchased  of  the  sons  of  Heth  :  there  was  Abraham  buried,  and  Sarah
his  wife.

[!  Vcr.  2.— Medan,  Jutlg<-,  and  Midian,  one  who  measures.  Murphy.— A.  G.]
[a  Vcr.  8.— Lit.,  Breathed  out.— A.  G.]


'GENERAL  REMARKS.

The  present  section  is  closely  connected  with  the
following  (vers.  1'2-lS)  which  treats  of  Ishmael,  and
with  the  whole  history  of  Isaac,  under  the  common
idea  of  the  descendants  of  Abraham.  It  introduces
first  these  descendants  in  the  widest  idea  of  the
word :  the  sons  of  Keturah.  Then  those  in  a
narrower  sense :  the  family  of  Ishmael.  And  upon
these,  those  in  the  most  restricted  sense  :  Isaac  and
his  sons.  The  writer  adheres  to  the  same  method
here  which  he  has  followed  in  the  presentation  of  the
tabular  view  of  the  nations.  lie  begins  in  his  descrip
tion  with  those  most  remote,  then  proceeds  to  those
nearer,  and  finally  comes  to  those  standing  nearest
the  centre.  We  cannot,  however,  make  the  Tholadoth
(generations)  here  the  place  of  a  division  in  the
history,  since  the  end  of  the  life  of  Abraham  marks
distinctly  a  section  which  is  closed  at  the  beginning
of  the  history  of  Isaac ;  and  thus,  as  the  genealogy
of  Keturah  is  interwoven  with  the  history  of  Abra
ham,  so  the  genealogy  of  Ishmael  is  connected  with
the  history  of  Isaac.  Knobel  holds  that  the  section
ver.  1-18  belongs  to  the  original  writing.  But  it  is
not  Elohistic  merely  because  it  contains  genealogies,
but  because  of  the  universal  relation  of  the  tribes
here  referred  to.  Knobel  remarks  upon  the  two
genealogies  of  Keturah  and  Hagar,  that  the  tribes
dwelt  in  western  Arabia  and  Arabia  Petrea,  and  also
in  the  northern  half  of  Arabia  Felix,  while  the
descendants  of  Joktan  (ch.  x.  26  ff.)  belonged  to
southern  Arabia,  at  least  in  the  earliest  time.  "  From
the  Abrahamic  horde  (?)  there  were  thus  divisions
who  went  to  the  east,  south-cast,  and  south,  where,
however,  they  found  original  Arabian  inhabitants,
with  whom  they  mingled  and  formed  new  tribes.
We  are  not,  therefore,  to  understand  that  the  tribes
here  mentioned  in  each  case  were  descended  entirely
from  Abraham.  It  is  not  intended,  even,  that  these
tribes  alone  peopled  the  regions  described  ;  rather  they
were  inhabited  by  other  tribes  also,  c.  g.,  Amalekites,
Horites,  Edomites,  and  others.  The  Arabs,  who  are
truly  so  very  dependent  upon  the  Hebrew  traditions,
agree  essentially  with  the  Hebrew  accounts.  They
distinguish  :  1.  Original  Arabs  in  dilferent  parts  of
Arabia ;  2.  Katanites  in  Yemen  and  Hhadramant,
and  3.  Abrahamites  in  Iledjaz,  Nejd,  etc.,  but  trace
back  the  last-named  to  Ishmael,  who  turned  his  course
to  Mecca,  and  joined  the  tribe  Djorhomitcs,  with  whom
Hagar  herself  was  buried.  (See  IBN  COTEIBA,  ed.  by
Wiistenfeld,  pp.  18,  30  ft'.  ABULFEDA  :  Hist.  Anteisl.,


ed.  by  Fleischer,  p.  190  ff.)"   Knobel.     [Also  article
"Arabia,"  in  Kitto  and  in  Smith. — A.  G.]


EXEGETICAL  A1ST«  CRITICAL.

1.  Yers.  1-4.  Abraham  and  Ktdurah. — Then
again  Abraham  took  a  wife. — The  sense  of  this
statement  evidently  is  :  1.  That  Abraham  took
Keturah  first  after  the  death  of  Sarah,  and  had  six
sons  by  her,  thus  at  an  age  of  13*7  years  and  upward
(Abraham  was  ten  years  older  than  Sarah,  who  died
aged  127  years);  2.  that  Keturah,  although  united
with  Abraham  according  to  the  nature  o!'  monogamy,
enjoyed  only  the  rights  of  a  concubine  (see  ver.  G,
comp.  1  Chron.  i.  32).  The  first  point  is  opposed
by  KEIL  :  "  It  is  generally  held  that  the  marriage
of  Abraham  with  Keturah  was  concluded  after  the
death  of  Sarah,  and  that  the  power  of  Abraham  at
so  great  an  age,  to  beget  still  six  sons,  is  explained
upon  the  ground  that  the  Almighty  God  had  endowed
his  body,  already  dead,  with  new  life  and  generative
strength,  for  the  generating  of  the  son  of  promise.
This  idea  has,  however,  no  sure  ground  upon  which
it  rests,  since  it  is  not  said  that  Abraham  took
Keturah  to  wife  first  after  the  death  of  Sarah,  etc.
This  supposition  is  precarious,  and  does  not  agree
well  with  the  declaration  that  Abraham  had  sent
away  the  sons  of  his  concubines  with  presents  during
his  own  lifetime,"  etc.  Kcil  appears  desirous  to  save
the  literal  expression,  that  Abraham's  body  was  dead
when  he  was  a  hundred  years  old  (Rom.  iv.  19)  but
in  the  effort  comes  into  direct  conflict  with  the  moral
picture  of  the  life  of  Abraham,  who  even  in  his
younger  years  had  only  taken  Hagar  at  the  sugges
tion  of  Sarah,  in  impatience  as  to  the  faith  of  the
promise,  and  thus  certainly  would  not  in  later  years,
and  when  there  was  no  such  motive,  have  violated
the  marriage  rights  of  Sarah  by  taking  another  wife.*
He  might  also  send  the  sous  of  Keturah  away  from
his  house  before  they  were  from  thirty  to  forty  years
of  age,  as  he  had  before  sent  Ishmael  away.  The
expression  as  to  the  dead  body  evidently  cannot  bo
understood  in  an  absolute  sense,  otherwise  the  cou-

*  [It  is  not  unusual  for  the  author  to  go  back  and  l>rinc;
up  the  narrative,  especially  at  the  close  of' one  sec'.ion,  or  at
tho  beginning  of  another ;  but  it  is  not  probable  that  this
is  the  case  here.  We  may  hold  to  tho  literal  sense  of  the
words,  that  Abraham's  body  was  dead,  i.  e.,  dead  as  to  off
spring,  and  yet  hold  that  the  energy  miruculou-ily  given  to
it  for  the  conception  of  Isaac  was  continued  alter  Sarah'i
death.— A.  G.]


492


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


ception  of  Isaac  even  could  not  bo  spoken  of.  But
if,  however,  there  is  a  miracle  in  the  conception
of  Isaac,  it  follows  only  that  the  facts  of  our
history  ai'e  to  be  viewed  as  extraordinary,  not  as
something  incredible. — And  she  bare  him  (see
1  Chron.  i.  32). —  1.  Kciitrnh'x  sonx:  Zimram.
Zo,u.Bpuv  or  ZfufyZv,  etc.  in  the  Septnagint.  Knobel
compares  it  with  Z^/3,)a/u,  the  royal  city  of  Kii/aiSoxoA.-
Tm-ai,  westwards  from  Mecca,  upon  the  Red  Sea,
spoken  of  in  Pmi.KM.K'js,  r,,  7,  5,  etc.  Still  he  is  in
doubt.  According  to  Delitzsch  they  lie  nearer  the
Zcmareni  (Pt.ix.  vi.  32). — Jokshan.  —  KXOHKL  :
"Probablv  the  KaTaavirai  (in  PTOI.KM.  vi.,7,  (>)  U]ion
the  Red  SL •  i."  Keil  suggests  the  Himjaric  tribe  of
Jakisch,  in  southern  Arabia. — Medan  and  Midian.
— KXOII;-:L  :  "  \Vithout  doubt  Mo5<aj>a,  upon  the  east
ern  coasl  of  the  Ailanitie  gulf,  and  Ma5ia.ua,  a  tract
to  the  n  Kin-cast  of  this,  in  J'TOI.KM.  vi.  7;  ii.  27.
The  two  tribes  appear  to  have  been  united.  The
Aiablan  <:  igraphers  regard  a  place,  Madjain,  as  the
residence  of  the  father-in-law  of  Moses." — Ishbak.
KXOIIKI.  :  "  Perhaps  the  name  is  still  preserved  in
^choheck,  a  place  in  the  land  of  the  Edomites."—
Shuah. — KXOHKL:  "  It  must  be  sought  in  or  near
the  Kd'i;:iiies,  since  a  friend  of  the  Edomite,  .Job,
belonged  to  this  tril>e  (Job  ii.  11)."  Other  explana
tions  may  lie  seen  in  Delitzsch  and  Keil. — 2.  Jok-
,v.'(i(//.'.<  HUH*  :  Sheba. — Probalily  the  Sabreans  mcn-
fioiiel  iii  connection  with  Tema  (Job.  vi.  19).  The
plunderers  of  the  oxen  and  asses  of  Job  (Job  i.  15).
— Dedan. — Named  in  Jer.  xxv.  23,  in  connection
witli  Tema  and  Buz,  as  a  commercial  people. — 3.
Tin-  XHIIX  of  lldliui :  Ashurim,  compare  with  the
tribe  Asyr;  Letushim,  with  the  Jitniu  I.cits  ;  Le-
unimirn,  with  the  //</// v  Linn. — 1.  The  s»ns  of
M'nl' fin  :  Epha. — Named  in  Isa.  Ix.  (',,  in  connection
with  Mid'an,  a  people  trading  in  gold  and  incense. —
Epher.— The  Jlunn  G'h'/far  in  lledjax. ;  Hanoch,
compare  with  the  place  Ilanakyc,  three  days  journey
northerly  from  Medina:  Abidah  and  Eldaah.
"Compare  with  the  tribes  Abida  and  Wadaah,  in
the  vicinity  of  Asyr."  Keil.  For  the  more  particular
and  detailed  combination  of  these  names  with  Arabic
tribe:-,  see  KXOUKL,  p.  188-190.  [The  attempt  to
identify  the-e  tribes,  and  fix  their  locality,  has  not
been  very  successful.  The  more  full  and  accurate
explorations  of  Arabia  may  shed  more  light  upon
what  is  now  very  obscure — although  it  is  prob.ible
that  in  their  eternal  wars  and  tumults,  their  fixed
limits,  and  probably  the  tribes  themselves,  have  been

lost.— A.  <;.]

'2.  Veis.  5,  0.  Abraham's  bequests. — All  that
he  had, — i.  e.,  The  herds  and  essential  parts  of  his
-ions.  Isaac  was  the  chief  heir  of  his  legit
imate  marriage.  This  final  distinction  was  previous
ly  a  subject  of  divine  appointment,  and  had  been
also  confirmed  by  Abraham  (ch.  xxiv.  36),  and  finds
expression  in  the  arrangements  for  Isaac's  marriage.
— The  sons  of  the  concubines. — In  comparison
with  Sarah,  the  mistress,  even  Keturah  was  a  wife
of  a  secondary  rank.  This  relation  of  degrees  is  not
identical  with  concubinage,  nor  with  a  morganitic
marriage.  It  is  connected,  beyond  doubt,  with  the
diversity  in  the  right  of  inheritance  on  the  part  of
the  children. — Gave  gifts. — lie  doubtless  established
them  as  youthful  nomads,  with  small  herds  and  flocks,
and  the  servants  belonging  with  them. — Unto  the
east  country. — To  Arabia.  [In  the  widest  sense,  east
erly,  east,  and  south-cast. — A.  G.]  This  separation
was  not  occasioned  merely  by  the  necessities  of
nomadic  chiefs,  but  also  for  the  free  possession  of


the  inheritance  by  Isaac  (see  ch.  xiii.  1 1  ;  xxxvi.  C).
Dclitzsch  thinks  that  he  had  already,  during  his  life
time,  passed  over  his  possessions  to  Isaac.  Under
patriarchal  relations,  there  is  no  true  sense  in  which
that  could  be  done.  But  when  the  necessities  of  the
other  sons  were  satisfied,  the  inheritance  was  thereby
secured  exclusively  to  Isaac.  "  The  Mosaic,  and  in
deed  patriarchal  usage  recognized  only  a  so-called
intestate  inheritance,  i.  e.,  one  independent  oi'  :hc  final
arrangement  of  the  testator,  determined  according  to
law,  by  a  lineal  and  graded  succession.  If,  therefore,
Abraham  would  not  leave  the  sons  of  his  concubines
to  go  unprovided  for,  he  must  in  his  own  lifetime
endow  them  with  gifts."  Dclitzsch.

3.  Vcrs.  7-10.  AinthanSx  aye,  death,  lurnd,  and
f/rai'e. — And  these  are  the  da}rs. — The  import
ance  of  the  length  of  Abraham's  life  is  here  also
brought  into  strong  relief  through  the  expression
which  is  fitly  chosen.  One  hundred  and  seventy-five
//cars. — An  old  man  and  fall  of  years. — [Of  years
is  not  in  the  original.  Abraham  was  full,  stitixficd.
A.  G.]  According  to  the  promise  ch.  xiii.  15,  comp.
ch.  xxxv.  29. — And  was  gathered. — The  expression
is  similar  to  that:  come  to  his  fathers  (ch.  xv.  15),
or  shall  be  gathered  to  his  fathers  (Judg.  ii.  10),  and
presupposes  continued  personal  existence,  since  it
designates  especially  the  being  gathered  into  f^hcol,
with  those  who  have  gone  before,  but  also  points
without  doubt,  to  a  communion  in  a  deeper  sense.
with  the  pious  fathers  on  the  other  side  <.f  death.  In
later  days  Abraham's  bosom  became  the  peculiar  aim
and  goal  of  the  dying  saints  (Luke  xvi.  22). — And
they  buried  him. — Ishmael*  takes  his  part  in  the
burial,  not  as  Knobel  thinks,  because  he  was  first
removed  after  this ;  but  because  he  was  not  so  far
removed  but  that  the  sad  and  heavy  tidings  could
reach  him,  and  because  he  was.  still  a  renowned  son
of  Abraham,  favored  with  a  special  blessing  (ch.  xvii.
10. — In  the  cave  of  Machpelah. — It  should  be
observed  with  what  definitcness  even  the  bin  ial  oi'
Abraham  in  his  hereditary  sepulchre  is  here  recorded.


1KKTIUXAL  AX3>   ETHICAL.

1.  DKLITZSCH  :  "Keturah  was  not,  like  Hagar,  a
concubine  during  the  lifetime  of  the  bride :  so  far
AUGUSTIN:  J)e  civ.  del,  xvi.  34,  correctly  rests  upon
this  fact   in  his   controversy  with   the  opponents  of
Mcnitdecnupticc.  But  still  she  is,  ver.  C,  (comp  1  Chron.
i.  32),  UJpb^E ;  she  docs  not  stand  upon  the  level
with  Sarah,  the  peculiar,  only  one,  the  mother  of  the
son  of  promise.    There  is  no  stain,  moreover,  cleaving
to  this  second  marriage.     Even  the  relation  to  Ketu
rah  promotes,  La  its  measure,  the  divine  scheme  of
blessing,  for  the  new  life  which  (ch.  xvii.)  came  upon
the  old,  exhausted  nature  and  strength  of  Abraham,
and  the  word  of  promise,  which  destined  him  to  be
the  father  of  a  mass  of  nations,  authenticates  itself
in  this  second  marriage."

2.  The  second  marriage  of  Abraham  has  also  its
special  reason  in  the  social  necessities  and  habits  of
the  aged  and  lonely  nomad.     The  word  (Gen.  ii.  24)
holds  true  of  Isaac.


*  [Ishmael,  although  not  the  promised  seed,  was  yet  tlio
subject  of  :i  special  blessing.  The  sons  of  Kcturah  had  no
particular  blessing.  Ishmael  is,  therefore,  properly  asso
ciated  with  Isaac,  in  paying  the  last  offices  to  their  deceased
father.  MURPHY,  p.  SCO.— A.  O.]


CHAP.   XXV.   1-10.


3.  Physiology  speaks  of  a  partial  appearance  of
a  certain  regeneration   of  life  in  those  who  have
reached  a  great  age ;  new  teeth,  etc.     These  physio
logical   phenomena   appear  to  have  reached  a  lull
development  in  the  life  of  Abraham.     We   should
perhaps  hold — that  these  epochs  of  regeneration  in
the  course  of  life  appear   more   frequently  in    the
patriarchs,  living  nearer  to  the  paradisiac  time  and
state.     [We  must   not,  however,  overlook  the  fact,
that  the  regeneration  in  Abraham's  case  was  super
natural. — A.  G.]

4.  The  Abrahamites  in  the  wider  sense,  who  par
tially  peopled  Arabia,  must  form  the  broad  basis  for
the   theocratic   faith    of  Abraham,    and    become   a
bridge  between  Judaism  and  Christianity  on  the  one
hand,  and  heathenism  on  the  other. — GERLACII  :  "All
these  are  heads  of  Arabian  tribes,  but  they  are  in
great  part  unknown.    Those  who  arc  best  known  are
the  (ver.  2)  Midianites,  on  the  east  of  the  Ailanitic
gulf.     A    mercantile   people   (ch.  xxxvii.  28)   often
afterwards    at   war    with    Israel    (especially   Judg.
viii.)  who  in  the  time  of  the  kings,  have  already
disappeared   from    the   history."      BUXSEN  :     "  The
Arabians  arc  still  Saracens,  i.  e.,  east-landers  (comp.
ch.  xxix.  1)."

5.  The  days  of  the  years.     The  life-time  is  spent
in  the  days  of  the  years,  and  at  its  end  the  years  ap
pear  as  days.     [Abraham  is  now  in  all  respects  com
plete  as  to  his  life ;    he  has  rendered  the  highest
obedience  (ch.  xxii.),  he  has  secured  a  grave  in  the
land  of  promise  (ch.  xxiii.),  he  has  cared  for   the
marriage  of  the  son  of  promise  (ch.  xxiv.),  he  has
dismissed  the  sons  of  nature  merely  (vers.  5,  6),  and
finally  he  has  come  to  a  good  age  and  is  satisfied
with  life.     Then  Abraham   dies.     BAUMGARTEX,  p.
240.— A.  G.]

6.  (lathered  to  his  people.     The   choice  of  the
expression  here  rests  upon  a  good  ground  ;  Abraham
has  become  a  father  in  an  eminent  and  peculiar  sense.
Essentially,  moreover,  the   expression    is   the  same
with  that  (ch.  xv.  15),  come  to  his  fathers,  lie  with
the   fathers  (Dent.  xxxi.  16),  be  gathered  with   the
fathers  (Judg.  ii.  10).     "  These  expressions  do  not
mean  merely  to  die,  for  21  a  and  n?ra  are  constantly
joined  together  (vers.  8,  17  ;  ch.  xxxv.  29,  etc.),  nor
to  be  buried  in  a  family  burial-place  with  relatives,
because  the  burial  is  expressed  still  by  "Cp  (vers.  9  ;
ch.  xv.  15,  etc.),  and  because  they  are  used  of  those
who  were  not  buried  with  their  fathers,  but  in  other
places,  e.  g.,  Moses,  David,  etc.,  as  well  as  of  those
in  whose  tombs  the  first  one  of  the  fathers  was  laid,
e.  g.,  Solomon  and  Ahab  (1  Kings  xi.  43  ;  xxii.  40)."
Knobel.     But  there  is  no  ground  for  his  assertion,
that  these   expressions,  however,  are  derived  from
burials  in  common  public  grounds,  and  then  trans
ferred  to  the  admission  into  Shcol.     We  should  not
confound  with  this  harsh  assumption  the  fact,  that
a  more  or  less  common  burial  represented  perhaps
the  reunion  on  the  other  side  of  the  grave.     But  the
peculiar  church-yards  or  large  public  burial-places
were  unknown  to  the  patriarchal  nomads.     Jacob
did  not  bring  the  body  of  his  Rachel  to  Hebron.
There  must  have  been  developed  already  with  Enoch
a  definite  consciousness  of  the  faith  of  immortality
(Ileb.  xi.  5).     DKLITZSCII:  "As  the  weariness  with
life  on  the  part  of  the  patriarchs  was  not  only  a
turning  away  from  the  miseries  of  the  present  state,
but  a  turning  to  that  state  beyond  the  present,  free
from  these  miseries,  so  the  union  with  the  fathers  is
not  one  of  the  corpse  only,  but  of  the  persons.    That


death  did  not,  as  it  might  have  appeared  from  Gen.
iii.  19,  put  an  end  to  the  individual  continued  exist
ence  of  the  man,  was  an  idea  widely  spread  through
the  after-paradisiac  humanity,  which  has  its  ulti
mate  (?)  source  and  vindication  in  that  grace  of  God
testified  to  man  at  the  same  time  with  his  anger,"
etc.  The  consciousness  of  immortality  no  more
takes  its  origin  after  the  fall,  than  the  conscience
(Rom.  ii.  14,  15).  The  hope  of  life  in  the  patriarchs
was  surely  something  more  (Heb.  xi.  13)  than  a  mere
consciousness  of  immortality.  But  death  and  the
state  beyond  it  has  evidently,  in  the  view  of  the  pa
triarchs,  a  foreshadowing  and  gleam  of  that  New-
Testament  peace,  which  was  somewhat  obscured
during  the  Mosaic  period,  under  the  light  of  the  law.
and  the  more  developed  feeling  of  guilt  and  death!
To  the  very  rich  literature  upon  this  subject  belong  :
BOTTCIIER  :  ch  Infcris,  etc. ;  (EHLER  :  Vcleris  Testa-
menti  sententia  de  rchus  post  mortem  futnris  ilhis-
trata ;  the  writings  of  Gideon  Brecher,  Engolbert,
Schumann;  "The  presupposition  of  the  Christian
doctrine  of  Immortality  stated,"  II.  SCHULTX.  Upon
Sheol  consult  the  Bible  Dictionaries.*

7.  Was  (lathered  to  his  people,  or  those  of  his
race,  to  his  fathers — to  cjo  home  to  them,  thus  to  go
home — lie  or  rest  with  them ;  a  symbolical,  rich,  glo
rious   declaration  of  a    personal   life   in    the  other
world,  and  of  a  union   with  those  of  like  mind  or
character.

8.  The  connection  of  Ishmael  with  Isaac  in  the
burial  of  Abraham  presents  the  former  in  a  favor
able  aspect,  as  Esau  appears  in  a  favorable  light  in
his  conduct  towards  Jacob  at  his  return  to  Canaan.


HOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs. — How
God  fulfils  to  Abraham  all  his  promises:  1.  The
promise  of  a  rich  life  (father  of  a  mass  of  nations,
of  a  great  age) ;  2.  the  promise  of  a  peaceful  death
(satisfied  with  life,  full  of  days,  an  honorable  burial).
— The  Abrahamites,  or  children  of  Abraham:  1.
Common  characteristic  religiousness,  spirituality,
wide-spread,  ruling  the  world ;  2.  distinctions  (Ara
bian  and  Jew,  Mohammed  and  Christ,  Mohammedan
ism  and  the  Christian  world). — Abraham's  bequests,
a  modification  of  the  strictness  of  the  right  of  in
heritance. — Days  of  Abraham,  or  this  full  age  even,
at  last  only  a  circle  of  days. — Abraham  died  in  faith
(Heb.  xi.  13) — The  present  and  future  in  the  burial
of  Abraham:  1.  On  this  side,  the  present,  his  two
sons  alone  in  the  cave  of  Machpelah  with  the  corpse;
2.  on  that  side,  the  future,  a  community  of  people,  the
companions  of  Abraham,  to  whose  society  he  joins
himself. — Abraham  died  on  the  way  to  perfection :
1.  How  far  perfected  ?  2.  how  far  still  not  perfect?

STARKE  :  (Upon  the  division  of  Arabia  in  the
wider  sense.) — CRAMER  :  The  second  or  third  mar
riage  is  not  prohibited  to  widowers  or  widows  ;  still
all  prudence  and  care  ought  to  be  exercised  (Rom.
vii.  8  ;  1  (.'or.  vii.  39  ;  Tob.  iii.  S).—Elbl.  Wirt.  :
Pious  and  prudent  householders  act  well  when  for
the  sake  of  good  order  they  make  their  bequests
among  their  children  and  heirs  (Is.  xxxviii.  1). —
(Since  Isaac  was  born  in  the  hundredth  year  of  A  bra-

»  [Also  an  Excursus  of  Prof.  TAYLFK  LEWIS  on  Gen.
xxxvn.  35,  below,  and  tlio  wide  literature  hero  open  to  the
English  reader  ;  embracing  the  doctrine  of  "  the  intoniodi-
ato  state,"  and  the  controversies  upon  the  intermediate
place.— A.  G.I


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


ham,  and  Jacob  and  Esau  in  the  sixtieth  year  of
Isaac,  and  in  the  twentieth  year  of  his  married  state,
so  Jacob  must  have  been  fifteen  years  old  at  the
death  of  Abraham.)  (Sir.  xiv.  li>,  17.) — The  pious
even  are  subject  to  death,  still  their  death  is  held
precious  by  the  Lord. — What  God  promises  his  chil
dren,  that  he  certainly  keeps  for  them  (ch.  xv.  15  ;
Ps.  xxxiii.  4). — To  die  at  a  tranquil  age  and  in  a  tran
quil  time,  is  an  act  of  God's  kindness  and  love. —
CRAMER  :  The  cross  and  adversity  make  one  yielding
and  willing  to  die. — The  souls  of  the  dead  have  then
certain  places;  they  are  in  the  hand  of  God,  :uid  no
evil  befalls  them  (Wis.  iii.  ]  ;  2  Cor.  v.  8).— Lisro  :
Faith  in  immortality  is  indeed  never  (jrjirtsx/y  an.tr/-f-
cd  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  (see  however  Matt.  xxii.
'•'>'!},  but  i.-.  ( .-<  ri,'/r/,' ,-c  (Hisi!inc</,  for  without  this  faith
the  whole  revelation  of  God  would  be  vain  and  nu
gatory  ;  the  Scripture  doctrine  of  the  resurrection
of  the  body  includes  the  doctrine  of  immortality  ;  is
impossible  indeed  without  this.  This  truth  is  set  in
its  i'tilh'.-t  and  clearest  light  by  Christ  ('2.  Tim.  i.  10).
— C.U.WK.K  //< iit'lliich:  We  see,  moreover,  from
these  verses,  how  the  Bible  relates  only  the  true  his-
'  »ry.  Had  it  been  a  myth  or  poem  it  would  have
left  Abraham  at  the  highest  step  of  the  glory  of  his
faith,  and  passed  over  in  silence  this  union  with
Kcturah  at  the  age  of  a  hundred  and  forty  years.
Abraham  is  presented  to  us  as  an  instance  and  type
(  i'  faish,  but  not  as  one  artistically  drawn  and  beau-
(ilied,  but  as  one  taken  from  actual  life,  not  even  as
a  (superhuman)  perfect  believer,  but  as  one  such,


who  leaves  us  to  find  the  first  perfect  one  in  hig
great  descendant,  and  points  us  to  him.

SCHRODER  :  The  satisfaction  with  life  well  agrees
with  a  heavenly-minded  man  (Roos). — To  his  people.
The  words  sound  as  if  Abraham  went  from  one  peo
ple  to  another,  and  from  one  city  to  another.  An
illustrious  and  remarkable  testimony  to  the  resurrec
tion  and  the  future  life  (Luther). — Since  Abraham
himself  was  laid  there  (in  the  cave  of  Machpelah)  to
rest,  he  takes  possession  in  his  own  person  of  this
promised  land  (Drechslcr).  [And  while  his  body
was  laid  there  as  if  to  take  possession  of  the  prom
ised  land,  his  soul  has  gone  to  his  people  to  take
possession  of  that  which  the  promised  land  typified,
or  Jieavcn. — A.  G.] — For  the  character  of  Abraham
see  SciiRi'ipKi:,  p.  4  (•_',  where,  however,  the  image
and  form  of  Sarah  is  thrown  too  much  in  the  shade.
[In  the  section  now  completed  the  sacred  writer
descends  from  the  general  to  the  special,  from  the
distant  to  the  near,  from  the  class  to  the  individual.
lie  dissects  the  soul  of  man,  and  discloses  to  our
view  the  whole  process  of  the  spiritual  life,  from  the
new-born  babe  to  the  perfect  man.  The  Lord  calls,
and  his  obedience  to  the  call  is  the  moment  of  his
new  birth.  The  second  stage  of  his  spiritual  life
presents  itself  to  our  view  when  Abraham  believed
the  promise,  and  the  Lord  counted  it  to  him  for
righteousness,  and  he  enters  into  covenant  with  God.
The  last  great  act  of  his  spiritual  life  is  the  surren
der  of  his  only  son  to  the  will  of  God.  MUIIPHY,  p.
3C2.— A.  G.]


B.
ISAAC,  AND  HIS  FAITII-EXDUKANCE.     Cn.  XXV.  12— XXVIII.  9.

FIRST    SECTION.

Isaac  and  Ishmact.


12


CUAPTKU  XXV.   11-18.
11          And  it  came  to  pass  after  the  death  of  Abraham,  that  God  blessed  his  son  Isaac;

and  [but]  Isaac  dwelt  by  the  Well    Laliai-roi   [wells  of  the  quickcner  of  vision].

Now  [and]    these  arc   the  generations    [genealogies,  Toledoth]    of  Ishmael,   Abraham's

13  son,  whom  llagar  the  Egyptian.  Sarah's   handmaid,  bare   unto  Abraham.     And   these
arc  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Ishmael,  by  their  names  according  to  their  generations :

the    first-born    of  Ishmael,    Ncbajoth  [heights  ;  Kabathei,  a  tribe  of  Xorthcrn  Arabia]  j    and  Kedar

14  [dark  skin.    An  Arabian  tribe],  and    Adbcel    [miracle  of  God],    and    Mibsam   [sweet  odor].       And
Mishma  [hearing,  report,  what  is  heard],  and  Dtimah  [silence,  solitude],  and  Massah  [bearing,  burden,

15  uttering  what  is  said],    Hadar    [inner  apartment,  tent],  and    Tema    [desert,  uncultivated  region],  Jetur

16  [Seven?  a  nomadic  village],    Napllish   [recreation],  and  Kedemah  [eastward];    These  arc  the    S0n3

of  Ishmael,  and  these  are  their  names,  by  their  towns  [fixed  abodes],  and  by  their  castles  ;
-7  twelve  princes  according  to  their  nations.  And  these  are  the  years  of  the  life  of  Ish-

mael :  an  hundred  and  thirty  and  seven  years ;  and  he  gave  up  the  ghost  and  died ;
18  and  was  gathered  unto  his  people.  And  they  dwelt  from  Havilah  [a  region  of  Arabia  inhab

ited  by  the  descendants  of  Joctan,  upon  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  Ishmaelites]  Unto  Shur  [a  place  east  of
Egypt,  in  the  borders  of  the  desert],  that  is  before  Egypt,  as  tllOU  gOCSt  toward  [in  the  direction  of]

Assyria  :  and  he  died  1  in  the  presence  of  all  his  brethren  [he  settled  eastward  of  all  his  brethren].

[>  Ver.  18.— Lit.,  he  fell  down,  or  it  fell  to  him.— A.  G.]


CHAP.    XXV.    11-18.


495


GENERAL    REMARKS.
See  the  remarks  upon  the  previous  section.

EXEGETICAL  AND   CRITICAL.

1.  Ver.  11.  Isaac  after  the  death  of  AbraJiam. —
God  blessed   Isaac. — The    blessing  of  Abraham
continues  in  the  blessing  of  Isaac ;  this  is  manifest
ed  in  his  welfare  and  prosperity,  or  rather  in  a  grate
ful  consciousness   which   refers   his  welfare  to  the
kindness  of  God.     We  read:  Elolmn  blessed  Isaac  ;
for  Isaac,  as  future  ancestor  of  Edom  and  Jacob,
sustained  now  a  universal  relation.     In  earthly  re
spects  Edom  is  Isaac's  heir  as  well  as  Jacob,  or  even
by  preference. — By  the  well  Lahai.roi. — By  the
well  of  Ilagar.     According  to  ch.  xxxv.  27,  Jacob
met  his  aged  father  Isaac  at  Hebron.    Doubtless  this
city  bore  the  same  relation  from  the  time  of  Abra
ham  onwards ;  Hebron  was  the  principal  residence,
Beer-sheba  the  principal  station  for  overseeing  their
flocks.     At  this   station   Isaac,  as   steward    of  his
father,  had  already  taken  up  his  abode,  and  in  con
sequence  of  his  love  of  solitude  and  seclusion  he
became  so  fond  of  it  that  now  he  dwelt  here  regu
larly,  without  yielding  up  the  principal  residence  at
Hebron  ;  he  even  moved  his  tent  from  Beer-sheba
farther  into  the  deep  solitude  of  Hagar's  well.

2.  Vers.    12-16.     The    Tolcdotk    of   Ishmael
[Upon  the  documentary  hypothesis,  each  of  these
phrases  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  document.
But  if  we  are  to  regard  each  of  these  documents  as
the  work  of  a  separate  author,  then  this  author  con
tributes  only  seven  verses  to  the  narrative.     This  is
obviously  running  the  theory  into  the  ground,  and
shows  how  unreasonable  it  is  to  regard  these  phrases
as  indicating  any  change  of  author.     They  open  new
themes  or  sections  of  the  history. — A.   G.]     Here
also  it  is  obvious  that  the  Toledoth  of  Genesis  does
not  begin  the  separate  section  of  the  history,  but
frequently  concludes  them.     In  ch.  iv.  and  v.  the
first   human   race,   together    with   the   Toledoth   of
Adam,  is  dismissed  from  history.     So  is  it  also  in
ch.  x.,  in  respect  to  the  heathen  nations,  descendants
of  Japheth,  Ham,  and  Shorn.     Ch.  xi.  dismisses  the
more  theocratic  Shemites,  together  with  their  Tole
doth.     In  ch.  xxii.  20,  the  Nahorites,  the  last  of  the
Shemites  and  nearest  to  Abraham,  retire  from  the
history,  just  as  the  Haranites,  or  Lot  and  his  descend
ants  in  ch.  xix.  36  ;   and  as  the  Abrahamites  de
scending  from  Keturah,  in  ch.    xxv. ;    and  in   our
section  the  Ishmaelites.     After  the  close  of  the  his
tory  of  Isaac  the  Edomites,  ch.  xxxvi.  1,  etc.,  ap
pear.     The  theocracy  permits  no  branch  of  the  human
race  to  vanish  out  of  its  circle  of  vision  without  fixing
it  in  its^  consciousness.     In  ch.  xxxvii.  2  Jacob  also
retires  into  the  background  as  compared  with  the
history  of  his  sons.     With  the  Toledoth  of  Ishmael
comp.   1  Chron.  i.  28-31.  — Whom    Hagar    the
Egyptian.— Besides  the  names  of  the  twelve  sons
of  Ishmael  that  here  present  themselves,  there  oc
curs  also  (1  Chron.  v.  10)  the  name  of  the  Hagar-
ites,  Ishmaelites  called  after  the  mother,  whose  name
is  no  doubt  assumed  in  one  or  more  of  the  names
before  us.     In  respect  to  the  frequent  occurrence  of
the  name  Hagar  in  Arabic  authors,  see  KNOBEL  p.
211.— Nebajoth    and  Kedar.— DEHTZSCII  :  "The
names  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Ishmael  are  in  part
well  known.     Nebajoth   and    Kedar   are   not   only
mentioned  together  in  Is.  Ix.  7,  but  also  by  PLIN  •
Hisi.  Nat.,  C,  7  (Nabatcei  et  Cedrci ;   Kaidbar  and


Nabat  (Nabt)  are  also  known  to  Arabian  historians
as  descendants  of  Ishmael.  In  respect  to  the  mean
ing  of  the  word  Nabatsans,  both  in  a  stricter  and  a
more  comprehensive  sense,  as  also  in  regard  to  their
abodes  in  Arabia  Petrea  and  beyond,  see  Knobel,
Delitzsch,  Keil. — The  Kadarenes,  described  Is.  xxi.
17  as  good  bowmen,  lived  in  the  desert  between
Arabia  Petrea  and  Babylonia  (Is.  xlii.  1 1  ;  Ps.  cxx.
5).  "  The  Rabbins  use  their  name  to  denote  the  Ara
bians  in  general."  Knobel. — Adbeel  and  Mibsam.
— In  respect  to  these  names,  as  well  us  to  that  of
Kedma,  we  can  only  reach  conjectures  (see  Knobel).
— Mishma  (Septuagint  and  Vulgate  :  Masma). —
Connected  by  Kuobel  with  yiaiffafj-avets  of  PTOL.,  vi.
7,  21.  In  Arabic  authors  we  have  beni  Misrnah. —
Duma.— Probably  Dumath  al  Djendel,  on  the  bor-
dor  between  Syria  and  Babylonia. — Massa. — Ap
parently  the  same  as  Matravoi,  on  the  northeast  side
of  Duma  according  to  PTOL.,  v.  19,  2. — Hadar  (a
more  correct  reading,  1  Chron.  i.  30,  is  Tin  ,  as
compared  with  the  maritime  country  Chathth,  famous
among  the  ancient  Arabians  on  account  of  its  lances),
between  Omam  and  Bahrein.  For  further  informa
tion  see  Knobel,  etc. — Hadar  is  taken  together  with
Thema,  which  Knobel  connects  with  0e^oi  of  Ptol
emy,  on  the  Persian  Gulf,  or  with  the  Arabic  banu
Teim,  a  celebrated  tribe  in  Hamasa,  probably  differ
ent  from  the  Tema,  Is.  xxi.  14 ;  Jer.  xxv.  23  ;  Job
vi.  19. — Jetur,  Naphisch  (see  1  Chron.  v.  18). —
"  Neighbors  to  the  Israelites  on  the  east  side  of  Jor
dan.  Knobel  refers  Jetur  to  the  Itimeans.  The
present  Druses  are  probably  their  descendants." —
Kedma. — "  As  a  separate  Arabic  tribe  we  can  only
refer  it,  in  its  narrower  sense,  to  C"ip>  133 ,  who  in
Judg.  vi.  3,  33  ;  vii.  12,  are  distinguished  from  other
Arabians,  and  must  have  dwelt  in  the  vicinity  of  the
country  east  of  Jordan.  Perhaps  they  arc  the  same
with  those  enumerated  with  the  Moabites  and  Am
monites  in  Is.  xi.  14  and  Ezek.  xxv.  4,  10."  Kno
bel.  The  sons  of  the  East  in  a  more  comprehensive
sense  denotes  the  Arabians  generally,  the  Saracens.
— By  their  towns,  and  by  their  castles,  i.  e.,
their  movable  and  fixed  habitat  ions.  —  Twelve
princes  according  to  their  nations  (Lange  ren
ders  "  to  their  nations  "). — The  translation,  accord
ing  to  tluir  nations,  can  only  mean,  as  moulded,
determined  by  their  nations."  We  hold,  therefore,
the  expression  to  mean  :  twelve  princes  chosen  for
governing  and  representing  their  twelve  tribes.

3.  Vers.  17,  18.  The  death  of  Ishmael  and  tJie
expansion  of  the  Ishmaelites. — The  years  of  the
life  of  Ishmael. — This  hale  man  attained  only  an
age  of  a  hundred  and  thirty-seven  years,  while  on  the
contrary,  the  more  delicate  appearing  Isaac  reaches
the  age  of  a  hundred  and  eighty  years.  Possibly
the  natural  passions  of  the  one  consumed  life  sooner ;
no  doubt  also  the  quiet,  peaceful,  believing  disposi
tion  of  the  other,  exercised  a  life-prolonging  influ
ence.  Ishmael  dies,  the  Ishmaelites  spread  them
selves  abroad. — From  Havilah  unto  Shur. — •
Havilah,  see  ch.  x.  29.  KNOBEL:  "From  Chaulan
in  the  south  to  the  eastern  boundary  of  Egypt."
Schur.  From  Egypt  to  the  east  in  the  direction  of
Assyria.  According  to  JOSEPHUS:  "  Antiq."  i.  12,  4,
the  Ishmaelites  dwelt  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Red
Sea. — In  the  presence  of  all  his  brethren,  i.  e.,
Hebrews,  Edomites,  and  the  children  of  Keturah.
If  we  understand  by  Havilah  the  Chaulotrcans  on  the
boundary  of  Arabia  Petrea  (Keil),  we  must  assign  a
different  meaning  to  these  words.  KEIL  :  "  From


496


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


southeast  to  southwest."  KNOBEL:  "From  south-
cast  to  northwest."  DELITZSCH  :  "  The  capital  of
the  Ishmaelitie  tribes  was  Hezaz,  situated  south  of
Yemen.  From  this  they  spread  themselves  to  the
west  side  of  the  Siniaitic  peninsula,  and  still  further
in  a  northerly  and  northeasterly  direction  beyond
Arabia  Petrea  and  Dcscrtu  to  the  countries  under
Assyrian  sway/'  [lie  died.  He  had  fallen  into  the
lot  of  his  inheritance.  The  Ilcb.  word  includes  the
idea  of  a  deiiherait-  se:tlement,  and  an  assertion  by
force  of  his  rights  and  possessions.  Tims  the  prom
ise  uttered  1)  :  i  his  Ihth  was  now  fulfilled. — A.  G.]


D'TTKIXAL    AX1)    KTIIICAL.

1.  Ishiiiael  in  his  development  precedes  Isaac,  as
Esau  precedes  Jacob,  as  the  world  gets  the  start  of
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  looks  well  for  the  devel
opment  of  Ishmael  that  he  buiies  his  lather  in  com
pany  with  his  brother  Isaac,  though  the  latter  had
been  prefenvd  to  him.

"2.  The  t \velve  princes  of  Ishmael  are  also  men
tioned  as  v,it:i''SM'sthatGod  has  faithfully  fulfilled  his
promise  e<;nee; 'iiing  their  ancestor  (ch.  xvi.  lu,  17,
"20).  The  Arabs,  too,  count  twelve  sons  of  Ishmael.

;>.  The  Ishmaehtes,  the  germ  of  the  Arabic  peo
ple  in  its  historic  significance.  The  country  of  Ara
bia.  Its  history.  Mohammed.  The  mission  of  the
Mohammedans.  The  mission  among  the  Moham
medans.  Since  Ishmael  did  not  subject  himself  to
Israel,  he  has  become  subject  to  the  Turk.

4.  Ishmael's  genealogy  seems  to  have  been  pre
served  in  the  'house  of  Isaac,  just  as  Therah's  in  the
house  of  Abraham,  or  as  the  genealogy  of  the  na
tions  in  house  of  Shem.     The   father's   house   does
not  lose  the  memory  or  the  trace  of  the  lost  son.

5.  How  the  blessing  of  Abraham   descends  upon
Isaac.     The   ln'ivditary  blessing  in   the  descendants
of  Abraham,  an  antithesis  to  the  hereditary  curse  in
the  descendants  of  Adam  generally.     The  inclination
to  solitude  in   the  life  of  Isaac.     The  nature,  rights,
and  limit  of  contemplation.     Contemplative  charac
ters.     History  of  a  contemplative  life.


HOMILTCTICAT,  AND  FKACTICAL.

Sec  Doctrinal  and  Ethical. — Isaac  the  blessed  son
of  a  blessed  father.  The  great  divine  miracle,  that
the  blessing  of  a  saving  faith  was  preserved  in  one
line  (in  spite  of  all  partial  obscurations)  from  Adam
to  Christ. — Isaac's  inclination  to  solitary  contempla
tion. — Perhaps  he  believed  already  that  a  special
blessing  was  confined  to  that  particular  place,  the
well  of  vision. — That  Isaac  selected  Hagar's  well  as  a
favorite  spot,  testifies  to  the  nobility  of  his  soul  (for
Hagar  was  the  rival  of  his  mother,  and  Ishmael  was
her  son). — Ishmael's  death ;  or  the  robust  often  die
before  the  feeble. — From  Ishmael,  a  child  once  lan
guishing  and  perishing  from  thirst  in  the  wilderness,
God's  providence  made  a  great  (world-conquering)
nation. — We  may  in  fact  best  comprehend  the  patri
archal  triad  by  regarding  Abraham  as  constituting
especially  an  example  of  faith,  Isaac  an  example  of
love,  Jacob  an  example  of  hope.  We  have  promi
nently  presented  to  us  the  still  more  predominating
features  :  the  man  of  the  deeds  of  faith,  the  man  of  the
sufferings  of  faith,  the  man  of  the  struggles  of  faith.

STAKKK  :  The  temporal  blessing  (of  Isaac)  a  pre
lude  :  a.  As  an  earnest  for  the  whole  land  of  Ca


naan  ;  b.  as  a  type  and  pledge  of  the  eternal  and
spiritual  blessing  of  salvation  in  Christ. — Misma,
Duma,  Masa.  From  these  three  names,  meaning:
hearing,  silence,  patience,  the  Hebrews  formed  the
proverb:  We  must  hear  many  things,  keep  secret
many  things,  and  suffer  many  things. — (The  Ishmael
ites  called  Hagarites  after  Ilagar.  In  Liter  times
they  preferred  to  be  called  Saracens,  after  Sarah,  as
if  dwelling  in  the  tents  of  Sarah.) — Ver.  17-  Some
cite  this  to  prove  the  happy  death  of  Ishmael,  sorna
to  prove  the  contrary.  Luther  does  not  wish  to  de
cide,  but  leaves  it  with  God — Vcr.  18.  (Ps.  cxii.  2.)
— Wh.it  God  promises  he  will  surely  perform.  Let
us  only  have  faith  in  his  promises  (Gen.  xvii.  20;
xxi.  13). — Jlili'.  Wirf. :  People  of  no  note  maybe-
come  eminent  and  distinguished  persons  if  it  is  God's
will  (Gen.  xli.  40-1:1,).

Lisco :  Ishmael  becomes  the  ancestor  of  the
Bedouins  of  Arabia  ;  these,  therefore,  and  the  Edom-
itcs  descending  from  Esau,  are  the  nations  nearest
related  to  the  Hebrews, — CALWER  Handbuch  :  The
father's  blessing  descends  upon  the  children. — After
Abraham,  that  hero  of  faith,  had  gone  to  his  rest,
Isaac  appears  in  the  foreground  of  the  history.  In
his  character  love  appears  predominant,  the  less
powerful  and  independent  love,  or  love  itself  with
its  weaknesses.  lie  appeals  as  a  gentle,  pliable  link
between  Abraham  and  Jacob,  possessing  neither  the
manly  strength  of  the  father  nor  of  the  son.  Never
theless,  he  wears  an  amiable  aspect,  which,  when
closely  viewed,  immediately  wins  our  affections.  He
does  not  make  his  appearance  as  a  fictitious  and  an
artfully  embellished  personage,  bnt  as  a  historical
character ;  so  much  so,  that  his  faults  appear  in  the
foreground,  whilst  his  good  qualities  fall  into  the
background  and  lie  concealed  to  the  superficial  ob
server.  Isaac  is  of  a  predominantly  kind  nature,
and  therefore  appears  reserved,  outwardly,  but  in
wardly  and  really,  frank. — SCIIKOI>KU :  As  to  the  char
acter  "of  Abraham  and  Isaac,  see  pp.  4-1 2  and  4i:>.
With  Abraham,  -vho,  sis  father  of  the  faithful,  was  to
begin  the  long  line  of  believing  souls,  and  in  whose
peculiar  form  of  life  their  life  was  to  have  its  way
prepared,  everything  is  vigorous  and  peculiarly  inde
pendent.  With  Isaac,  on  the  contrary,  who  only
continues  this  line,  everything  appeared  perfectly
arranged,  just  as  it  is  with  Joshua  in  relation  to
Moses,  etc. — (HENGSTEXBKRG :  However,  we  must
not  mistake  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  Isaac,
Joshua,  Elisha.) — It  seems  to  me,  one  might  know
that  he  is  the  son  of  a  dead  body,  but  on  this  very-
account  is  he  eminently  a  gift  of  God  (Ziegler). —
Could  the  memory  of  the  knife  drawn  over  him  by
the  hand  of  the  father  ever  become  extinguished  in
the  mind  of  the  son  ?  Perhaps  this  affords  us  a  par
tial  solution  of  his  life  and  character  (Krumm.). —
Let  us  not  overlook  the  fact  that  he  was  the  only
monogamist  among  the  patriarchs,  remaining  satis
fied  with  his  Rcbckah.  Abraham's  piety  descends
as  an  heritage  to  Isaac,  therefore  the  grace  of  God
also  descends  upon  Isaac  (Val.  Herberger). — The
dwelling  of  Isaac  at  a  place  so  important  in  the  life
of  Ishmael  (Hagar's  well),  attests  his  friendly  relation
to  his  step-brother. —  Gathered  unto  his  people.  A
beautiful  and  charming  description  of  immortality.
We  are  now  living  among  the  gross  people  of  this
world,  who  seek  but  little  after  God,  yea,  in  the  very
kingdom  of  the  devil.  But  when  we  depart  from  this
wretched  life,  we  shall  die  peacefully,  and  be  gath
ered  unto  our  people,  and  there  will  be  no  distress,
no  misery,  no  tribulation,  but  peace  and  rest.  (Luther),


CHAP.    XXV.    19-34.


497


SECOND    SECTION.

Jacob  ami  Esau.


(19
20


24
25
26

27
28


29
30

31,

33

34


CHAPTER  XXV.   19-34.

And  these  are  the  generations1  [genealogies]  of  Isaac,  Abraham's  son:  Abraham
begat  Isaac:  And  Isaac  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took  Kebekah  to  wile,  the
daughter  of  Bctlmel  the  Syrian  of  Padan-Aram  [from  Mesopotamia],  the  sister  to  Laban
the  Syrian.  And  Isaac  entreated  the  Lord  [ Jehovah]  for  his  wife,  because  she  ivas
barren:  and  the  Lord  was  entreated  of  him,  and  Kebekah  his  wife  conceived.  And
the  children  struggled  together  [thrust,  jostled  each  other]  within  her;  and  she  said.  If  it  be
so,  why  am  I  thus?'  And  she  went  to  inquire  of  the  Lord.  And  the  Lord  said  unto
her,  T\vo  nations  are  in  thy  womb,  and  two  manner  of  people3  shall  be  separated
from  thy  bowels;  and  the  one  people  shall  be  stronger  than  the  other  people;  and  the

elder  shall  serve  the  younger  [the  greater  shall  serve  the  less].

And  when  her  days  to  be  delivered  were  fulfilled,  behold,  there  were  twins  in  her
womb.  And  the  first  came  out  red,  all  over  like  an  hairy  garment;4  and  they  called
his  name  Esau  [covered  with  hah-].  And  after  that  came  his  brother  out,  and  Ins  hand
took  hold  on  Esau's  heel;  and  his  name  was  called  Jacob  [heel-catcher];  and  Isaac  was
threescore  years  old  when  she  bare  them.  And  the  boys  grew  :  and  Esau  was  a  cun
ning  hunter  [a  man  knowing  the  hunt],  a  man  of  the  field  [a  wild  rover,  not  an  husbandman]  •  and

Jacob  was  a  plain6  [discreet,  sedate]  man,  dwelling  in  tents.  And  Isaac  loved  Esau,  be
cause  he  did  eat  of  Aw  venison  [game  was  in  Ms  mouth  his  favorite  food]  :  but  Rebekah  loved
Jacob.

And  Jacob  [once]  sod  pottage ;  and  Esau  came  from  the  field,  and  he  was  faint.
And  Esau  said  to  Jacob,  Feed  me,  I  pray  thee  [let  me  devour  greedily],  with  that  same  red
pottage  [from  the  rcd-this  red,  here]  ;  for  I  am  faint:  therefore  was  his  name  called  Edom
32  [Red].  And  Jacob  said,  Sell  me  this  day  [first]  thy  birthright.  And  Esau  said
Behold,  I  am  at  the  point  to  die  [going  to  die]  :  and  what  profit  shall  this  birthright  do  to
me?  And  Jacob  said,  Swear  to  me  this  day;  and  he  sware  unto  him:  and  lie  sold
his  birthright  unto  Jacob.  Then  Jacob  gave  Esau  bread  and  pottage  of  lentiles-  and
he  did  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up,  and  went  his  way  :  thus  Esau  despised  Jus  birthright


Ver  19.—  The  nln  is  more  than  genealogies.    Sec  note  on  ver.  4,  ch.  ii.—  A.  G.]
Ver.  22.—  Lit.,  If  so,  for  what  this  am  I.—  A.  G.]

xb  are  hero  used  as  synonymous,  although  there  is  ground  for  the  distinction  which


Ver.  23.-C->^  and


GEXERAL  PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

1.  According  to  Knobel  we  have,  in  the  present
narration,  as  in  ch.  26,  a  mixture  of  different  records
upon  an  Elohistic  basis  by  means  of  the  Jehovistic
supplement.  It  is  enough  to  say,  that  in  our  section
the  theocratic  element  is  predominant.  [Keil  remarks
that  if  the  name  of  God  occurs  less  frequently  here,
it  is  due  partly  to  the  historic  material,  which  gives
less  occasion  to  use  this  name,  since  Jehovah  ap
peared  more  frequently  to  Abraham  than  to  Isaac
and  Jacob  ;  and  partly  to  the  fact  that  the  previous
revelations  of  God  formed  titles  or  designations  for
the  God  of  the  Covenant,  as  "  God  of  Abraham,"
"  God  of  my  father,"  which  are  equivalent  in  signifi
cance  with  Jehovah.— A.  G.]  It  introduces  the
election  of  Jacob  in  opposition  to  Esau.  The  order
of  the  Toledoth  Knobel  explains  thus  :  "  The  author
usually  arranges  them,  in  the  first  place,  according  to
32


the  individual  patriarchs,  after  he  has  recorded  the
death  of  the  father.  Next  begins  the  proper  history,
of  the  patriarchs,  e.  g.,  ch.  x.  1  ;  xi.  27  :  xxv.  13;-
xxxvi.  1  ;  xxxvii.  2.  We  have  already  made  the  re
mark  that  the  Toledoth  frequently  dispose  of  a  more
general  sequence  of  history,  in  order  to  pass  over  to
a  more  special  one.  Delitzsch  finds  three  "tran
sitions  "  in  the  history  of  Jacob.  The  fir;":  reaching
to  the  departure  of  Jacob,  ch.  xxv.  19-xxviii.  9  ;  the
second  to  Jacob's  departure  from  Laban,  ch.  xxxii.  1
(a  section,  however,  in  which  nothing  in  regard  to
Isaac  occurs) ;  the  third,  from  Jacob's  return  to  the
death  of  Isaac,  ch.  xxxv.  29.  But  this  section,  too,
is  merely  a  history  of  Jacob,  except  the  three  verses
in  ch.  xxxv.  27-29.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  pre
eminently  the  history  of  Joseph  and  of  the  rest  of
the  sons  of  Jacob,  which  begins  at  ch.  xxxvii.  2,
where,  according  to  Knobel,  the  history  of  Jacob
should  first  begin.  In  the  separate  biographies  wo


498


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


arc  to  distinguish  the  theocratic  stages  of  the  life  of
the  patriarchs,  from  the  periods  of  their  human
decrepitude  and  decease,  in  which  the  new  theocratic
generation  already  becomes  prominent.  This  history
has  four  sections  :  Rebekah's  barrenness  and  Isaac's
intercession;  Rebekah's  pregnancy  and  the  divine
disclosure  of  her  condition;  the  antithesis  in  the
nature  of  the  sons  reflecting  itself  in  the  divided  love
of  the  parents;  and  Esau's  prodigality  of  his  birth
right,  parting  with  it,  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  In  the
second  section  we  have  the  prophetic  preface,  in  the
third  and  fourth  the  typical  prelude  to  the  entire  fu
ture  history  of  the  antithesis  between  Jacob  and
Esau,  Israel  and  Edom.

'2.  Tlic  points  of  light  in  the  life  of  Isaac  lie  in
part  back  of  tliis  narrative.  These  are  his  child-like
incMiiri;-.-  and  his  patient  silence  upon  Moriah(ch.xxii.);
his  love  to  I;rbi.kah  (eh.  xxiv.);  Ids  brotherly  commu
nion  with  Ishmael  at  the  burial  of  Abraham,  and  his
residing  at  the  well  Lahai-Roi  (eh.  xxv.).  Here  we
nor,-  read  first  of  his  earnest  interees.-ion  on  account
i  I'  the  barrenness  of  Rebekah;  then,  moreover,  of
his  preference  of  E-au  because  he  was  fond  of  game.
Somewhat  later  Jehovah  appeared  unto  him  at  (ierar,
preventing  him  from  imitating  his  father  Abraham
in  going  to  Egypt  during  the  famine,  although  he
imitates  him  in  passing  off  Rcbekah  for  his  sister.
In  this,  too,  he  differs  from  Abraham,  that  he  began
to  devote  himself  to  agriculture  (eh.  xxvi.  1:2).  lie
suffers  himself,  however,  to  be  supplanted  by  the
Philistine  ,  and  o::e  well  after  another  is  taken  away
from  him,  until  he  at  last  retains  only  one,  and  finds
rest  at,  I!;  cr-sheha.  In  the  second  appearance  too
(eh.  xxvi  -  1 >,  his  <l<rp  /iiiini/!/>/\*  reflected  in  this,  that
he  presents  the  promise  of  the  blessing,  receiving  it
as  he  docffor  thesakt  of  his  father  Abraham,  lie
now  take-  courage,  and,  as  Abraham  did,  proclaims
the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  ventures  to  reprove  the
conduct  of  Abim-'lech.  His  digging  of  wells,  as  well
as  his  tilling  the  soil,  seenn  to  indicate  a  progress
beyond  Abraham.  Then,  too,  he  is  willing  to  trans
mit  to  Esau  the  theocratic  blessing  of  the  birthright,
though  E-au  had  shortly  before  sorely  grieved  him
bv  the  marriage  of  two  of  the  daughters  of  the
Hittitos.  The  marked  antithesis  between  Isaac's
vision  power,  his  contemplative  prominence,  and  his
short-sightedness  in  respect  to  the  present  life,  as
well  as  the  weakness  of  his  senses,  appears  most
strikingly  in  ch.  xxvii.  Rebekah  proceeds  now  with
more  energy,  and  Isaac  dismisses  Jacob  with  his
blessing,  who  returns  after  many  years  to  bury  his
father.  When  Isaac  blessed  his  sons  his  eyes  had
already  become  dim,  yet  many  years  passed  before
he  died  (from  his  one  hundred  and  thirtieth  to  his
one  hundred  and  eightieth  year).  Delitzsch  exagger
ates  Isaac's  weakness  as  making  him  in  everything  a
men-  copy  of  Abraham.  "Even  the  wells  he  digs
arc  those  of  Abraham,  destroyed  by  the  Philistines,
and  the  names  he  gives  to  them  are  merely  the  old
ones  renewed.  He  is  the  most  pa  sive  of  the  three
patriarchs.  His  life  flows  away  in  a  passive  quiet
ness,  and  almost  the  entire  second  half  in  senile  tor
pidity  (!).  So  passive,  so  secondary,  or,  so  to  speak,
so  sunken  or  retired  is  the  middle  period  in  the  pa
triarchal  history."  We  have  referred  to  the  points
in  which  he  does  not  imitate  Abraham,  but  is  himself.
He  does  not  go  to  Egypt  during  the  famine,  as  Abra
ham  did  ;  he  begins  the  transition  from  a  nomadic  to
and  agricultural  life,  he  digs  new  wells  in  addition
to  the  old  ones,  he  lives  in  exclusive  monogamous
wedlock,  and  even  in  his  preference  of  Esau,  the


game,  surely,  is  not  the  only  motive.  If  the  external
right  of  the  firstborn  impressed  so  deeply  his  passive
character  (especially  in  connection  with  the  robust,
striking  appearance  of  Esau,  seeming  to  fit  him  par
ticularly  to  be  heir  of  Canaan) ;  there  can  be  no
doubt,  also,  that  he  was  repelled  by  traits  in  the  early
life  of  Jacob.  But  most  especially  does  he  appear
to  have  had  a  feeling  for  those  sufferings  of  the  first
born  Ishmael,  which  he  endured  on  his  account.
And  hence  he  appeared  willing  to  make  amends  to
Esau,  his  own  firstborn,  a  fact  to  which,  at  least,  his
dwelling  at  Hagar's  well,  and  his  brotherly  union
with  Ishmael,  may  point.  It  is  evident  that  the  ar
dent  Rebekah,  by  her  animated,  energetic  declara
tions  (ch.  xxiv. "  18,  10,  '25,  '28,  58,  C.4,  05;  ch.
xxv.  2!2),  formed  a  very  significant  complement  to
Isaac,  confiding  more  in  the  divine  declarations  as  to
her  boys  than  Isaac  did,  and  therefore  better  able  to
appreciate  the  deeper  nature  of  Jacob.  But  when
Isaac,  through  his  pa.-^ivencss,  fails  in  the  perform
ance  of  his  duty,  the  courageous  woman  forgets  her
vocation,  and  with  artifice  counsels  Jacob  to  steal
the  blessing  from  Isaac — a  transgression  for  which
she  had  to  atone  in  not  seeing  again  her  favorite  son
after  his  migration.  And  even  if  Isaac  was  short
sighted  respecting  his  personal  relations  in  this  world,
yet  the  words  of  the  bles.-ing  attest  that  his  spiritual
sight  of  the  divine  promises  had  not  diminished  with
his  blinded  eyes.  It  had  its  ground,  moreover,  in
the  very  laws  of  the  psychical  antithesis  that  Isaac,  so
feeble  in  will  and  character,  was  attracted  bv  the
wild  and  powerful  Esau ;  while  the  brave,  energetic
Rebekah  found  greater  satisfaction  in  union  with  the
gentle  Jacob.  In  the  assumed  zeal  of  her  faith  for
the  preservation  of  a  pure  theocracy  among  the  patri
archs,  she  too  excels  Isaac.  We  should  bear  in  mind
that  they  were  Jews  who  relate  so  impartially  the
Xahoritie  Rebekah's  superiority  over  the  Abrahamic
Isaac.  ["Consenting  to  be  laid  on  the  altar  as  a
sacrifice  to  God,  Isaac  had  the  stamp  of  submission
early  and  deeply  impressed  on  his  soul.  Hence,  in
the  spiritual  aspect  of  his  character,  he  was  the  man
of  patience,  of  acquiescence,  of  susceptibility,  of
of.cdieiice.  His  (nudities  were  those  of  the  son,  as
Abraham's  were  those  of  the  father.  He  carried  out,
but  did  not  initiate  ;  he  followed,  but  did  not  lead;
he  continued,  but  he  did  not  commence.  Accord
ingly  the  docile  and  patient  side  of  the  saintly  charac
ter  is  now  to  be  presented  to  our  view."  MURPHY,
p.  307.— A.  G.]

KXEGETICAL    AXD    CllITICAL.

1.  Ycrs.  19 -'21.  RebekaKa  barrenness,  and
Isaac's  intercession. — Padan-Aram. — Level,  plain
of  Aram:  Hosea  xii.  12,  it  reads,  field  of  Aram.
Ch.  xlviii.  7.  Padan,  Mesopotamia.  Keil  limits
the  name  to  the  large  plain  of  the  city  of  Haran,
surrounded  by  mountains,  following  the  conjectures
of  Knobcl,  who,  however,  regards  Padan-Aram
as  a  specific  Elohistic  expression.  According  to
others,  Mesopotamia  is  divided  into  two  parts,  and
here  the  level  country  is  distinguished  from  the  moun
tainous  region.  But  this  does  not  apply  to  Haran.
To  one  travelling  from  Palestine  to  Mesopotamia
across  the  mountains,  Mesopotamia  is  an  extensive
plain.  According  to  ver.  26,  Isaac  waited  twenty
years  for  offspring.  This  was  a  new  trial  to  him,
though  not  to  Abraham,  who  still  lived.  Since
the  line  of  the  blessing  was  to  pass  through  Isaac,  his
intercession  was  based  upon  a  divine  foundation  in


CHAP.   XXV.  19-34.


499


Jehovah's  promise.  [For  his  wife,  with  reference  to,
literally  before  ;  which  Luther  says  is  to  be  explained
spiritually,  indicating  the  intensity  of  his  prayer,
the  single  object  before  his  mind. — "  Entreated  the
Lord.  The  seed  of  promise  must  be  sought  from
Jehovah,  so  that  it  should  be  regarded,  not  as  the
fruit  of  nature,  but  as  the  gift  of  divine  grace."  KEIL
p.  191.— A.  G.]

2.  Vers.  22,  23.    Rebekah's  pregnancy,  and  the
divine  explanation  of  her  condition.  — The  Hebrew
expression    IS^nrP    denotes    a  severe    struggling
with  each  other.     Knobcl    will    have   it   that    this
feature  was  derived    from    the   later   enmities    be
tween    the    Israelites    and    Edomites,    and   quotes
ch.  iv.  14-;  xvi.  12;  xix.  30.     "In  like  manner,  ac
cording  to  APOLLOD.,  2,  2, 1,  Acrisius  and  Proetus,  two
brothers,  had  already  quarrelled  with  each  other  in  the
womb  of  their  mother  about  the  dominion."     That
such  intimations  and  omens  can  have  no  real  existence
is  regarded  as  a  settled  matter  in  the  prejudices  of
this  kind   of  criticism. — Why  am  I  thus  ? — We
see  again  the  character  of  Rebckah  in  this  very  ex
pression.     According  to  Dclitzsch,  she  was  of  a  san
guine   temperament:    rash    in   her   actions,  and  as
easily  discouraged.     We  would   rather  regard  her
words  as  an  ill-humored  expression  of  a  sanguine-
choleric  temperament.    It  does  not  mean:  why  am  I
yet  living?    (Delitzsch,   referring  to  ch.  xxvii.   46,
Knobel,  Keil),  but  why  am  1  so?  i.  e.,  in  this  condi
tion.    [Why  this  sore  and  strange  struggle  within  me  ?
— A.  G.] — To  inquire  of  the  Lord.— According  to
a^  certain  Jewish   Midrash,    she  went  to  Salem  (so
Knobel).     According  to  Delitzsch,  she  went  rather
to  Hagar's  well ;  at  all  events,  to  a  place  sacred  on
account  of  revelations  and  the  worship  of  Jehovah.
Luther  thinks  she  went  to  Shem,  others  to  Abraham
or  Melchizedek,  just  as  men  inquired  of  the  prophets
in  the  time  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  ix.  9).     The  prophet
nearest  to  her,  if  she  had  wanted  one,  would  have
been   Isaac.     The  phrase  "she  went"  no   doubt
means  she  retired  to  some  quiet  place,  and  there  re
ceived  for  herself  the  divine  revelation.     For  in  the
patriarchal  history  sacred  visions  determined  as  yet
sacred  places,  nor  is  it  different  at  present.     [Still
the  plmise  seems  to  imply  that  there  was  some  place
and  mode  of  inquiring  of  the  Lord.     Perhaps    as
Theodoret  suggests,  at  the  family  altar. — A.G.]    Ac
cording  to  Knobel,  she  received  the  experience  indi
cated  as.  in  general,  a  sign  of  ill  omen.     Delitzsch
thinks  she  saw  in  it  the  anger  of  Jehovah.    However
we  must  not  too  sharply  interpret  her  ill  humor,  on
account  of  the  mysterious,  painful,  and  uneasy  con
dition,  and  the  alarming  presentiment  she  may  have
had  of  the  contentions  of  her  posterity.     That  she
was  to  be  a  mother  of  twins  she  did  not  know"  at
this  time.— Two  nations. — The  divine  answer  is  a
rhythmical  oracle.     (See  Delitzsch.)


[Two  nations  are  in  thy  womb  ;
And  two  people  from  thy  bowels  shall  be  separated  •
And  pe«ple  shall  be  stronger  than  people ;
And  the  elder  shall  serve  the  younger.

Wordsworth. — A.  G.]

With  the  prophetic  elevation  the  poetic  form  appears
also.  It  appears  very  distinctly  from  this  oracle
that  they  would  differ  from  the  very  womb  of  the
mother.  Since  Esau's  liberation  is  not  predicted  here,
Knobel  regards  this  as  a  sign  that  the  author  lived  at
atime  before  Edom  threw  off  the  yoke  of  Judah.
We  know,  however,  how  the  theocratic  prophecies


gradually  enlarge.  The  meaning  of  this  obscure
revelation,  clothed  as  it  was  in  the  genuine  form  of
prophecy,  and  which  so  greatly  calmed  her,  she  saw
in  a  certain  measure  explained  in  the  relations  that
had  existed  between  Isaac  and  Ishmael.

3.  Vers.  24-28.     The  birth  of  the  twins.      Tfic.
antithesis  of  their  nature,  and  the  divided  partiality
of  the  parents  towards   their   children.  —  Behold,
there  were  twins.— The  fulfilment  of  the  oracle  in
its    personal,   fundamental    form. — And   the   first
came  out  red.— Of  a  reddish  flesh  color.    His  body,
like  a  garment  of  skins,  covered  with  hair.    (Luxuri
ance  of  the  growth  of  the  hair.)    In  the  word  13T3XX
there   is   an   allusion  to    CT1X }  in   the   word  11'b
there  is  an  allusion  to  "PS  to .    "  Arab  authors  derive
also  the  red-haired  occidentals  from  Esau."    Knobel.
Both  marks  characterize  his  sensual,  hard  nature. —
And  his  hand  took  hold  on  Esau's  heel.— DE
LITZSCH  :  "  It  is  not  said  that  he  held  it  already  in
the  womb  of  his  mother  (a  position  of  twins  not
considered  possible  by  those  who  practise   obstet
rics),  but  that  he  followed  his  brother  with  such  a
movement  of  his  hand."     Knobel  contends  against
the  probability  of  this  statement,  since,  according  to
a  work  on  obstetrics  by  Busch,   the  birth  of  °the
second  child  generally  occurs  an  hour  after  that  of
the  first  one,  frequently  later.     The  very  least  that
the  expression  can  convey  is,  that  Jacob  followed
Esau  sooner  than  is  generally  the  case;  upon  his
heels,  and,  as  it  were,  to  take  hold  of  his  heel.    Since
the  fact,  considered  symbolically,  does  not  speak  in
his  favor  ;  since  it  points  out  the  crafty  combatant
who  seizes  his  opponent  unawares  by  the  heel,  and
thus  causes  him  to  fall,  there  is  the  less  ground  for
imagining  any  forgery  here.     The  signification  of  the
name  "  Jacob  "  is  essentially  the  same  with  "  suc
cessor,"  as    Knobel   conjectures.      Jacob's  cunning
seems  to  have  been  stripped  from  him  in  his  life's
career,  deceived  as  he  had  been  by  Laban,  and  even
by  his  own  sons,  whilst  there  remains  his  holy  pru
dence,  his  deeper  knowledge,  and  his  incessant  look
ing  to  the  divine  promise. — A  cunning  hunter

Esau  developed  himself  according   to  the  omen. —
Because  he  did  eat  of  his  venison.— Literally,
"was  in  his  mouth."— And  Jacob  was  a  plain
man — sn  UTX.     LUTHER:    a  pious  man.      KNO
BEL  ;  a  blameless  man,  i.  e.,  as  a  shepherd.     "  Hunt
ing,  pursued,  not  for  the  sake  of  self-defence  or  of
necessity,  but  for  mere  pleasure,  as  with  Esau,  the
author  regards  as  something  harsh  and  cruel,  espe
cially  when    compared  with    the   shepherd-life    so
highly  esteemed  by  the   Hebrews."     Isaac's  fond
ness  for  venison,  however,  cannot  be  fully  explained
by  this.     Gesenius  emphasizes  the  antithesis  of  gentle
and  wild.     Delitzsch  explains  fin,  "with  his  whole
heart"  devoted  to   God  and  the  good,  etc.     Keil,
more  happily,  as  "  a  disposition  inclined  to  a  domes
tic,  quiet  life."     The  most  obvious  explanation  of
the  word  in  this  place  points  out  a  man,  modest,
correct,  and  sedate,  in  contrast  with  the  wild,  un
steady,  roving,  and   proud  manner  of  Esau's  'life.
Jacob  was  modest,  because  he  adhered  to  the  costume
of  his  father,  and  stayed  near  the  tents. — Vecause
he  did  eat  of  7iis  venison,  lit.,  was  in  his  mouth.    This
weakness  of  the  patriarch  was  not  his  only  motive
in  his  preference  of  Esau,  but  it  is  particularly  men
tioned  here  on  account  of  the  following  narrative.
In  like  manner,  Haman  was  a  melancholy,  indolent
man,  fond  of  good  living.


500


GENESIS,  Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


4.  Vcrs.  29-34.   The  tyjiical  prelude  of  the  histor
ic!  antithesis  between  Jacol  and  EMU.— Jacob  sod
pottage.— A  dish  of  lentil.-.*,  see  ver.  34.— Feed
me.— Lit.,  "let  me  swallow,"  an  expression  for  cat-
•ng  greedily,  'Jrb.     According  to  Knobel,  Esau,  by
reason  of  his  greediness,  was  not  able  to  think  of
the   name,  "  lentilcs,"  but   points  them  out  by  the
words    "that    Red!"      At    the    most,  "that  Red
might  express  hi*  strong  appetite,  excited  by  the  m-
viting  color.     The  addition  H-TH  CTXH   is  generally
interpreted  :  "  from  that  same  Red."     The  repetition
in   the  original    (-hows  that  his  appetite  was  greatly
excited:   "Let   me    swallow,  I  pray   thee,   some  ol
that  Red.  that  lied  there!"     AVe  question,  however,
whether  he  did  not  say  rather:    Feed  ir',H,  ihnt  7.W.
•»„:  tin    It'd  one.     Thus  by  a  rude,  witty  play  upon
words,    !)'•    would    have   introduced    the   fact  of   his
afterward  having  been  called  "  the  red  one."     At  all
events   his   name  is  not  to  be  deduced  from  the  red
potta-e.      ''In    the   words   "3 -.ITS    and   122   above
there  is  in  licatcd  a   different   relation   of  the   names
-•-X  (red-brown)  and  ""'i  (hairy),  Init  the  one  re-
feiT'uW  to   -'">>,    that   red,   i.  e.,  brown-yellow   pot-
tacre  of  lentilcs,   QuinKiStov,  is   there   predominant.
Moreover,    thou-ands   of    names,   e.   g.,    amonu'    the
Arabs  (comp.    ABUI.FEDA'S   ll'mt.   Ante/si.),   have   a
li!;e  fortuitous  origin.      P.ut  if  any  one  should  regard
i:  as  accidental  that  the  history  of  nations  tbrse\eral
thousand   years  should  have  been  connected  with   a
p,)tta'.:e  of  1-nti'e-s,  lie  will  not  look  in  vain  for  simi
lar  occurrences   in    perusing  the  pages  of   Oriental
hi.-'orv.      [The-.el'ore    was   his    name    called    Edom.
There  is  no  discrepancy  in  ascribing  the  name  both
to  his  complexion  and  the  color  of  the  lentile  broth.
The  proprietv  of  a   name   may  surely  be  marked  by
different  circumstances.     Nor  is  it  unnatural  to  sup
pose  that  such  occasions  should  occur  in  the  course
of  life.     Jacob,  too,  IMS  the  name  given  to  him  from
the  circumstances  of  his   birth,  here   confirmed.—
A.  <;  [      It    is  scarcely  necessary   to  say  here,  that.
Icntiles  (adas)  are  still  a  favorite  dish  in  Egypt  and
Syria."     Deli; /.sch.— Sell   me  this   day.— Knobel,
as  his   manner  is,  regards  this    fact  as  improbable.
lie  thinks  the   object  of  the  narrative  is  to  imswer
the    question,   how    the  birthright  descended    iVoni
E.:au  to  -ha oil,  and    thus   erroneously  supposes  that,
according  to  the  Jewish   view,  the  people  of  Cod,
from   Adam  down   to  Isaac,  had   always   descended
from  the  line  of  the  first-born.     The  text,  however,
presents  to  our  view   the  contrast  between  ^EsauV
carnal  thinking  and  Jacob's  believing  sensibility,  ir
the  measure  of  fanatical  exaggeration,  and  according
to  its  conllict   so   decisive  and  typical  for  all  time
The    right    of   the  first-born   has  its  external  anc
internaf  aspects.     The  external  preference  consiste<
in   the   headship  over  the  brothers  or  the  tribe  (eh
xxvii.  i!!M.  ;.nd   later  also  in  a  double  portion  of  tin
inheritance  of  the  lather.     The   internal  preference
was  the  right  of  priesthood,  and  in   the  house  of
Abraham,  according  to  the  supposition  thus  far  as
sumcd,  a  share  in  the  blessing  of  the  promise  (eh
xxvii.  4,   27-2'.i).     [Which  included  the  possession
of  Canaan   and   the  covenant  fellowship  with  Jehp
vah,  and  still  more,  the  progenitor-ship  of  him  in
whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed
— A.  G.]    To  acquire  a   rightful  claim  to  this,  wa
undoubtedly  the  principal  aim  in  the  bargain,   as  i
seen  immediately  from  the  answer  of  Esau:  "I  am
at  the  point  to  die ; "  and  also  from  the  fact  tha


Esau  appears  not  to  have  been  limited  in  his  cx-
crnal  inheritance.  It  is  to  the  praise  of  Jacob  that
appreciated  so  highly  a  promise  extending  into
:ie  far  future  and  referring  to  the  invisible ;  the
ealixation  of  which,  moreover,  though  he  was  un-
onscious  of  it,  was  already  prepared  in  his  very
icing  (either  in  his  natural  disposition  or  in  his  elec-
ion).  The  acuteness,  too,  with  which  he  discerned
sau's  gross  bondage  to  appetite,  deserves  no  cen-
ure.  The  selfishness  of  his  nature  by  which  he  so
oon  estimates  his  profits  and  takes  advantage  of  his
irother, — this  impure  motive,  as  well  as  a  fanatical
elf-will  arising  from  his  excitement  in  respect  to  the
)irthright,  through  which  he  anticipates  God's  provi-
lence,  is  all  the  more  obvious  in  his  cunningly  avail-
ng  himself  of  the  present  opportunity.  [Yet  it
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  he  laid  no  necessity
upon  Esau.  He  leaves  him  to  accept  or  reject  the.
proposal.  And  Esau  knew  well,  though  he  did  not
•alue  it,  what  the  birthright  included.  His  own
vords,  '•  what  profit  shall  it  do  to  me,  seeing  I  am
\bout  to  die'?  "  show  clearly  that  he  knew  that  it  hi-
cluded  invisible  and  future  things,  as  well  as  the  visi
ble  and  present.  It  was  because  he  thus  consciously
sold  his  birthright,  and  for  such  a  consideration,  that
the  Apostle,  Ileb.  xii.  1 1>,  calls  him  a  profane  person.

A.  G.]     In   Esau   of  course  he  was  not  mistaken.

—Behold  I  am  at  the  point  to  die.— Esau,  in
lis  carnal  dispo.-ition,  seems  to  regard  only  the  pres
ent  and  the  things  of  this  life,  and  of  the  things  of
this  life,  the  visible  and  the  sensual  only.  He  yields
the  entire  higher  import  of  the  birthright,  the  specific
blessing  of  Abraham,  the  inheritance  of  his  posterity,
the  right  and  land  of  the  covenant,  for  the  satisfac
tion  of  a  moment — and  that,  too,  near  his  paternal
hearth,  where  he  would  soon  have  obtained  a  meal.
He  is  therefore  designated  (Hcb.  xii.  10)  as  £f£7)Aoj,
or  profane. — Swear  to  me  this  day. — Jacob's  de
mand  of  an  oath  in  this  transaction  evinces  a  very
ungenerous  suspicion,  just  as  the  taking  of  the  oath
on  the  part  of  Esau  shows  a  low  sense  of  honor. —
And  rose  up  and  went  his  way.— As  if  nothing
happened.  Repentance  followed  later.

DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  Rebekah's  barrenness   during    twenty    years.
The  sons  of  Isaac,  too,  were  to  be  asked  for;  they
were  to  be  children  of  faith,  especially  Jacob.     Sa
rah's  example  appears  to  occur  again.     Similar  ex
amples :    Rachel,    Hannah,    Elizabeth.     Even   when
not  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  Abrahamic  promise
of  the  blessing,  barrenness  was  regarded  in  the  an
cient  Orient  as  a  trial  of  special  severity  ;  how  much
more  so  in  this  case.     STAIIKK  :  "  Barrenness  among
the  patriarchs  (Hebrews)  was  a  painful   occurrence.
It  was  sometimes  the  fruitful  source  of  strife  (Gen.
xxx.  2);  tears  were  shed  (1  Sam.  i.  7);  it  was  con
sidered  a  reproach  (Luke  i.  25) ;  it  was  even  held  for
a  curse."     Here,  however,  Abraham   could  from  his
own  experience  comfort  them;  he  lived  fifteen  years
after  the  birth  of  the  children.

2.  Isaac's  intercession.     It  could  be  based  upon
God's  promise  and  Abraham's  experience.     Jehovah
heard  him.     He  granted  more  than  asked.     Instead
of  one  child  he   received  two.     Undoubtedly   Re-
bekah  sustained  his  intercession  by  her  prayers.  _

3.  Rebekah's  pregnancy,   her  painful  sensation,
her  ill-humor  and  alarming  presentiments.     The  gen
tle  story  of  the  hopeful  maternal  temperament  ia


CHAP.   XXV.    19-34.


501


often  of  the  greatest  significance  in  history.  Isaac,
in  accordance  with  his  disposition,  prays  to  Jehovah  ;
Rcbckah,  after  her  manner  of  feeling,  goes  and  asks
Jehovah.  Undoubtedly  she  herself  is  the  prophetess
to  whom  God  reveals  the  manner  and  future  of  her
delivery.  Jehovah  speaks  to  her.  The  word  of
revelation,  though  dark,  infuses  into  her  an  earnest
yet  hopeful  feeling  of  joy,  instead  of  maternal  sad
ness  and  despondency.  Two  brothers,  as  two  na
tions — two  nations,  to  contend  and  fight  with  each
other  from  the  very  womb  of  the  mother.  The
larger,  or  elder,  and  externally  more  powerful,  gov
erned  by  the  smaller,  the  younger,  and  apparently
the  more  feeble.  In  these  three  points  the  antithesis
between  Ishmael  and  Isaac  is  reflected  again.  [The
Apostle,  Kom.  ix.  12,  dwells  upon  this  passage  as
affording  a  striking  illustration  and  proof  of  the
doctrine  he  was  then  teaching.  Isaac  was  chosen
over  Ishmael,  but  further  still,  Jacob  was  chosen
over  Esau,  though  they  were  of  the  "same  covenant
mother,  and  prior  to  their  birth.  The  choice,  elec
tion,  was  of  grace. — A.  G.]

4.  Brothers  unlike,  hostile;   twins  even  at  en
mity,    whose    physiological    unconscious    antipathy
shows  itself  already  in  the  womb  of  the  mother —
dark  forebodings  of  life  not   yet  existing,  bearing
witness,  however,  that  the  life  of  man  already,  in  its
coming  into  being,  is  a  germinating  seed  of  a  future
individuality.     This  cannot  be  meant  to  express  a
mutual  hatred  of  the  embryos.     Antipathies,   how
ever,   as  well  as  sympathies,  may  be  manifested  in
the  germinating  life  of  man  as  in  the  animal  and
vegetable  kingdom.

5.  The  relation  of  prophecy  and  poetry  appears  in
the  rhythmical  form  of  the  divine  declaration  as  it  is
laid  before  us.    Common  to  both  is  the  elevated  lyrical
temperament  manifesting  itself  in  articulate  rhythm.

6.  The  individuality  of  the  twins  is  manifested
immediately  by  corresponding  signs.     Esau  comes
into  this  world  with  a  kind  of  hunter's  dress  cover
ing  his  rough-red  skin ;  he  is,  and  remains,  Esau  or
Edoru.     Jacob  seems  to  be  a  combatant  immediate
ly  ;  an    artful  champion,  who  unawares  seizes   his
opponent  by  the  heel,  causing  him  to  fall.     But  un
der  Jehovah's  direction  and  training,  Jacob,  the  heel-
holding  straggler,  becomes  farad,  the  wrestler  with
God.     In  the  name  "  Jacob  "  there  is  then  intimated,
not  only  his  inherited  imperfection,  but  at  the  same
time  his  continual  struggle,  5.  e.,  there  exists  a  germ
of  Israd  in  Jacob.     Esau,  in  his  wild  rambles,  be
comes  an  after-play  of  Nimrod.     Jacob  is  so  domes
tic  and  economical  that  he  cooks  the  lentile  broth
himself.     Esau  appears  to  have  inherited  from  Re-
bekah  the  rash,  sanguine  temperament,  but  without
her  nobility  of  soul;  from  Isaac  ho  derives  a  certain
fondness  of  good  living — at  least  of  game.     Jacob
inherited  from  Isaac  the  quiet,  contemplative  man
ner,  from  Rebekah,  however,  a  disposition  for  rapid,
prudent,  cunning    invention.     Outwardly   regarded]
Jacob  on  the  whole  resembled  more  the  father, —
Esau  the  mother.     This,  however,  seems  to  be  the
very  reason  why  Isaac  preferred  Esau,  and  Rcbekah
Jacob.     The  gentle  Isaac,  who  was  to  transmit  to
one  of  his  children  the  great  promise  of  the  future,
even  the  hope   of  Canaan,  might  have  considered
Esau,  not  only  in  his  character  of  first-born,  but  also
in  tint  of  a  courageous  and  strong   hunter,  more
suitable   to  hold  and  defend  Abraham's  prospects
among  the  heathen,  than  Jacob,  who  was  so  similar
to  himself  in  respect  to  domestic  life.     He  might,
therefore,  understand  the  oracle  given  to  Rebekah


in  a  sense  different  from  that  received  by  her ;  or  he
might  doubt,  perhaps,  its  objective  validity,  opposed
as  it  was  to  the  customary  right  of  succession.  That
Esau's  venison  exercised  an  influence  as  to  his  posi
tion  towards  Esau,  is  proved  from  the  text.  It  might
be  to  him  a  delusive  foretaste  of  the  future  conquests
of  Canaan.  Esau's  frank  nobility  of  soul  is  seen
also  in  his  promptly  and  zealously  complying  with
the  request.  Rebekah  confided  in  her  oracle  and
understood  her  Jacob  better.  But  even  hero  there
cooperated  that  mutual  power  of  attraction  which
lay  in  the  two  antithetical  temperaments.  Without
doubt,  Esau,  the  stately  hunter,  moved  about  in  his
paternal  home  as  a  youthful  lord  ;  in  which  fact
Isaac  thought  that  he  saw  a  sign  of  future  power.

_  7.  Isaac's  taste  and  Esau's  greediness — the  two
prime  features  of  a  likerish  deportment.  The  weak
ness  of  the  father  soon  increases  to  the  greediness
of  the  son.  Isaac's  contemplation  and  weakness  as
to  his  senses  reminds  us  of  similar  contrasts.

8.  And  Jacob  sod  potturfe.     Every  human  weak
ness  has  its  hour  of  temptation,  and  if  we  do  not
watch  and  pray,  it  will  come  upon  us  like  a  thief.

9.  To  sell  one's  birthright  for  a  pottage  of  len-
tiles :  this  expression  has  become  the  established  ex
pression  for   every  exchange  of  eternal  treasures,
honors,  and  hopes,  for  earthly,  visible,  and  moment
ary  pleasures.     No  doubt  the  motto  :  Let  us  eat  and
drink,  etc.,  is  an  echo  of  Esau's  expression.     Yet
we  are  not  at  liberty  to  regard  this  moment  of  aban
donment  to  appetite  as  an  instance  of   a  frame  of
mind   continual,  fixed;  nor  can  we  refer  the  divine
reprobation,  beginning  with    this   moment,   to    his
future  happiness.     He  was  rejected  relatively  to  the
prerogatives  of  the  Abrahamic  birthright.     Notwith
standing  his  manliness  and  placability,  he  was  not
a  man  who  had  longings  for  the  future,  and  therefore
could  not  be  a  patriarch  among  the  people  of  the
future  (Mai.  i.   3;  Ileb.  xii.  17).     Jacob,   however,
was  different ;  he  knew  how  to  prize  the  promises,
in  spite  of  those  faults  of  weakness  and  craft,  from
which  God's  training  purified  him.

10.  Thus  it  stood  with  both  children  even  before
their    birth.      The    antithesis    of    their    lives    was

rounded  in  the  depths  of  their  individuality,  that
is,  in  the  religious  inclination  of  the  one,  and  the
spiritual  superficiality  of  the  other.  But  their  very
foundations  had  their  ground  in  the  divine  election
(Rom.  ix.  11).  The  fundamental  relations  become
apparent,  with  respect  to  both,  in  a  sinful  manner.
They  become  apparent  through  the  sins  of  both,  but
they  would  have  appeared,  too,  without  their  sinful
actions,  by  God's  providence.  The  question  is  about
a  destination,  who  was  to  be  the  proper  bearer  of
the  covenant,  not  about  happiness  and  perdition.

11.  In   their  next  conflict    Jacob's    ungenerous
negotiation  increases  to  fraud.     Thence  his  subse
quent  great  sufferings  and  atonement.     By  the  de
ception  of  Laban,  too,  as  well  as  by  that  of  his  sons,
must  expiation  be  made.     The  bloody  coat  of  many
colors,   sent  to  him  by  his  sons,  reminded  him  of
Esau's  coat,  in  which  he  approached  his  father.     For
Jacob's  opinion  concerning  the  sufferings  of  his  life,
see  Gen.  xlvii.  9.     FTARKE:  Paul^  in  quoting  these
words,  Rom.  ix.  12,  does  not  speak  of  an  absolute
decree  to  eternal  life  or  eternal  damnation.     Because

od  was  to  establish  his  church  among  the  posterity
of  Jacob,  and  the  Messiah  was  to  come  through
;hera,  Esau's  posterity,  if  desirous  of  salvation,  must
;urn  to  the  worship  of  Jacob  (John  iv.  22).  Upon
the  idea  of  election,  see  LANGK'S  Positive  Dogmatic,


502


GENESIS,  OK   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


article  Of  do  Salulis.  [Also  Tliolnck,  Meyer,  Hodge
on  the  passage  Horn.  ix.  11.  It  seems  well-nigh  im
possible  to  escape  the  conviction  that  the  Apostle
here  teaches  the  sovereign  choice  of  persons,  not
merely  to  the  external  blessings,  but  the  internal
and  spiritual  blessings  of  his  kingdom,  i.  e.,  to  salva
tion.— A.  G.]

12.  The  present  prophecy  respecting  Jacob  and
Esau  is  farther  developed  in  the  blessings  of  Isaac
(eh.  xxvii.l  Tims  everything  was  historically  ful
filled.  For  Edom  ami  ldum;ea,  sec  the  Bible  Diction
aries  ;  also  respecting  the  prophetic  declarations  con
cerning  Edom.  Tin;  prophet  Obadiah  represents
Edom  as  a  type  of  the  anti-theocratic  (anti-Christian)
conduct  of  ialse  and  envious  brothers.  This  typical
interpretation  no  more  excludes  the  preaching  of  the
Gospel  iu  Muin;ea  than  similar  and  more  definite
representations  of  Babel  exclude  the  preaching  of
Peter  at  liabylon.

]:;.  The  llebr&ie,  i.  e.,  the  profoundest  concep
tion  of  history,  here  comes  into  view  again.  Ail  his
tory  develop.-)  itself'  from  personal  beginnings.  The
.d  is  predominant  in  hi.-tory.

i  1.  The  mystery  of  births;  of  the  like  relation
b..tweei:  male  ami  female  being;  of  the  unlike  but
natural  relations  between  the  more  and  less  gifted,
between  noble  and  common;  and  of  the  different
degrees  of  natural  dispositions — a  reservation  of  God,
in  his  decrees  of  providence.


IIOMILETICAL  AM)  rilACTK  'A  I,.

See  the  De.ctrinal  and  Ethical.  The  house  of  a
patriarch  in  its  light  and  dark  aspects:  a.  The  di
vine  blessing  and  human  piety ;  b.  human  weaKnr.-s
and  sin. — Different  directions  of  the  parents.  Con
trasts  of  the  children. — The  trials  in  the  life  of
Isaa'1. — Children  a  blessing,  an  heritage  of  the  Lord.
— The  intercession  and  its  answer. — Isaac's  prayers,
Kebekah's  inquiries.— Hoping  mothers  are  to  inquire
of  the  Lord. — Twin  brothers  not  always  twin  spirits.
— Jacob  and  Esau. — The  sale  of  the  birthright  fora
pottage  of  lenliles. — Edom's  character  in  respect  to
good  and  evil.  (Saying  of  Lessing  :  Nothing  in  a  man
is  condemned  as  execrable  if  he  only  has  the  reputa
tion  of  honor  and  integrity.) — Jacob's  sin,  to  human
eyes,  indissolubly  connected  with  his  higher  strivings.
— It  is  reserved  to  the  chemistry  of  God  to  separate
the  dross  of  sin  from  the  pure  metal  of  a  pious
striving  (Mai.  iii.  ">). — The  experience-  of  the  pious,  a
succession  of  divine  purifications. — Hereditary  faults.
— Jacob's  haste  and  eager  grasping,  the  sign  of  the
severe  expiatory  penitential  sorrows  of  his  li'.'e. —
lie  wished  to  acquire  externally,  what  God's  grace
had  put  into  his  heart. — The  first  fault  of  Jacob  a
harbinger  of  the  second.— Hereditary  virtues  and
hereditary  vices. — Divine  election:  1.  A  predestina
tion  of  Jacob's  and  Esau's  theocratic  position;  2.
no  decree  as  to  their  deportment. — Esau  and  Jacob;
or  a  frank,  noble  disposition  without  subjectivcncss,
without  a  desire,  and  even  without  a  true  sense  of  di
vine  things  ;  opposed  to  an  enthusiastic  feeling  for  the
eternal,  yet  tainted  with  self-deceit  and  dishonesty. —
Jacob,  a  man  of  the  higher  longing  and  hope.  Esau,
a  man  of  sensual  pleasure,  regardless  of  the  future.

STARKE,  CKAMKR  :  The  true  church  is  never  re
spected  by  the  world  as  much  as  the  great  mass  of
the  children  of  the  flesh ;  we  must  not,  therefore,
place  the  bushel  by  the  largest  heap. — Bibl.  Tub.  :
Children  are  an  heritage  of  the  Lord  (Ps.  cxxvii.  3).


— HALL  :  Isaac  asks  for  one  son  and  he  receives  two.
— LANGK  :  Married  people  are  under  obligations  to
unite  in  prayer,  especially  on  important  occasions. —
Notwithstanding  natural  causes,  God,  as  creator,  re
serves  to  himself  the  closing  and  opening  of  the
womb  of  mothers.  This  shows  his  sovereignty  over
the  human  race  (Jer.  xxxi.  20). — Rebckah,  in  her
impatience,  may  be  a  type  of  those  who,  having
been  aroused  by  God,  so  that  a  struggle,  necessarily
painful,  takes  place  between  spirit  and  flesh,  soon
become  impatient. — In  an  unfruitful  conjugal  life  we
are  to  take  comfort  in  this  :  1.  That  God  visited  with
barrenness  holy  people  in  former  times— Sarah,
Rachel,  Hannah,  Elisabeth  ;  2.  God  best  knows  our
wants  ;  o.  we  are  not  to  render  an  account  for  chil
dren,  etc.  ;  4.  to  die  without  children  takes  away,  in  a
certain  degree,  the  bitterness  of  denth  ;  5.  the  times
are  calamitous  (Matt.  xxiv.  I'.')-  In  times  of  need
we  are  not  to  consult  soothsayers,  but  God  and  his
word. — (The  struggle  of  the  flesh  with  the  spirit  in
the  new  life  of  the  new-born  ;  Rom.  vii.  22,  2:>). —
Ver.  2o.  (Jen.  iii.  Itl. — CRAMKK:  Within  the  pale  of
the  Christian  Church  we  have  different  classes  of  peo
ple  :  Jews  and  heathen  (John  x.  1(5),  true  believers
and  hypocrites,  good  and  evil  (Matt.  xiii.  -17).  God
does  not  judge  after  the  ad  vantages  of  the  flesh,  of  age,
of  size  and  other  things  which  concern  the  appear
ance. — J>/'if.  )('/'/•/.  :  Two  churches  are  prefigured
here:  one  believing  the  promises  of  Christ;  the
other  depending  on  a  carnal  advantage  of  antiquity
and  extent.  These  two  bodies  will  never  come  to  an
agreement,  until  finally  the  true  church,  as  the  small
er,  will  overcome  the  false  by  the  victory  of  her
faith,  and  triumph  over  her  in  eternal  blessedness
(1  John  v.  -1). — (),  children,  remember  what  anxiety
you  have  cost  your  mothers. — Ver.  28.  LAN;;K.  :  The
preference  of  parents  for  one  or  another  of  their
children  may  have  its  natural  cause,  and  be  sanctified,
but  seldom  does  it  keep  within  proper  limits.  Proba
bly  Esau  was  more  attached  to  his  father,  and  Jacob
to  his  mother.  (Isaac,  probably,  prefers  venison,  not
as  a  delicacy,  but  to  make  better  and  economical  use
of  his  cattle  ;  and  because  wild  animals  are  of  no  use
to  the  husbandman,  but  only  cause  destruction  to
him.) — Ver.  2:*.  The  simplicity  of  early  time.  Jacob
sitting  by  th.'  hearth  and  cooking,  which  is  usually
the  duty  of  the  females. — Ver.  IU.  The  apology  for
Jacob  (Luther  and  Calvin,  indeed,  approve  of  his
transaction  on  the  ground  of  his  right  to  the  privilege
of  the  first-born  by  the  divine  promise).  Though  the
first-born  was  highly  esteemed  among  the  patriarchs,
Christ  would  not  descend  from  one  of  the  first-born
(indicating  that  he  was  the  true  first-born,  who  was  to
procure  for  us  the  right  of  the  first-born  from  God).
[See,  also,  Rom.  viii.  29;  Col.  i.  18;  Rev.  1.  5;  Ileb.
xii.23. — A.  G.J  He  claims  to  descend,  not  from  Cain,
but  from  Shem  ;  not  from  Nahor,  or  Haran,  but  from
Abraham ;  not  from  Ishmael,  but  from  Isaac  ;  not
from  Esau,  but  from  Jacob;  not  from  the  s^ven
elder  sons  of  Jesse,  but  from  David,  and  from  Solo
mon,  who  was  one  of  David's  younger  sons. — (Ver.
27.  The  permission  of  hunting  on  certain  conditions :
First,  that  the  regular  vocation  be  not  neglected ;
second,  that  our  neighbor  be  not  injured.) — CRAMER  :
In  educating  children  we  arc  to  pay  particular  at
tention  to  their  dispositions,  observing  in  what  di
rection  each  one  inclines,  for  not  every  one  is  qual
ified  for  all  things  (Prov.  xx.  11  ;  xxii.  6).— Godless
men,  who,  for  the  sake  of  temporary  things,  despise
and  hazard  the  eternal  (Phil.  iii.  19).

GERLACH  :    The  birth  of  many  celebrated  men  of


CUAP.   XXVI.  1-22.


503


God,  preceded  by  a  long  season  of  barrenness. —
Thereby  the  new-born  babe  is  to  become  not  only
more  endeared  to  the  parents,  who  turn  their  whole
attention  to  it,  but  is  especially  to  be  regarded  by
them  as  a  supernatural  gift  of  God,  and  thus  become
a  type  of  the  Saviour's  birth  from  a  virgin. —  The  di
vine  prophecy :  The  patriarchs  come  into  view  only
(?)  in  reference  to  their  descendants,  with  whom
'they  are  considered  as  constituting  a  unity.  For
prophecy  has  not  been  fulfilled  in  respect  to  the
brothers  as  individuals. — Lisco  :  A  frivolous  con
tempt  of  an  advantage  bestowed  on  him  by  God. —
So,  also,  an  inconsiderate  oath  (Heb.  xii.  16). — An
immoderate  longing  after  enjoyment  sacrifices  the
greatest  for  the  least,  the  eternal  for  the  temporal. —
CALWF.R  Jfandlntch :  Abraham  too  rejoiced  in  the
birth  of  those  boys  ;  he  lived  yet  15  years  after  their
birth,  and  the  narrative  of  his  death  and  burial  has
been,  for  historical  purposes,  considered  first.  When
the  inherited  blessing  of  the  promise  is  the  subject
treated  of,  the  mere  course  of  nature  cannot  decide
the  issues,  in  order  that  all  praise  may  be  to  God,  and
not  to  men. — SCIUIODKR  :  (The  Kabbins  explain
Isaac's  faithfulness  to  Kcbekah  from  the  fact  of  his
having  been  offered  in  sacrifice  to  God  (I  Tim.  iii.  2).
Isaac,  to  whom  the  very  promise  was  given,  is  placed
after  Is'imaol,  and  Ishmacl,  possessing  a  temporal
promise  only,  is  put  far  before  him.  He  is  lord  over
other  lords,  counts  12  princes  in  his  line,  while
Isaac  lived  alone  and  without  any  children,  like  a
lifeless  clod  (Luther). — All  the  works  of  God  begin
painfully,  but  they  issue  excellently  and  gloriously.
Earthly  undertakings  progress  rapidly,  and  blaze  up
like  a  fire  made  of  paper,  but  sudden  leaps  seldom
prosper  (Val.  Herb.).  —  Every  mother  conceals  a  fu
ture  ;  every  maternal  heart  is  full  of  presagings.
Her  bodily  pains,  she  interprets  as  spiritual  throes
that  await  her. — The  case  of  Rebekah  presents  con
solation  to  a  woman  with  child  (Val.  Herb.). — CALVIN  :
Rebekah  probably  inquired  of  God  in  prayer. — Her
example  should  teach  us  not  to  give  way  too  much
to  sadness  in  distress.  We  are  to  restrain,  and
struggle  with,  ourselves. — Prophecy  (even  the  hea
then  oracles)  always  assumes  a  solemn  and  metrical
style,  etc.  The  prophet  is  a  poet,  as  frequently  the
poet  is  a  prophet. — Her  alarming  presentiment  did
not  deceive  Uebekah.  The  struggle  within  her  indi
cated  the  external  and  internal  conflicts  not  only  of
her  children,  but  even  of  the  nations  which  were  to


descend  from  them. — This  ver.  23  embraces  all
times  ;  it  is  the  history  of  the  world,  of  the  church,
and  of  individual  hearts,  enigmatically  expressed.
(Coats  made  of  red  camel's  hair  were  worn  by  poor
people,  also  by  prophets  (Zach.  xiii.  4  ;  2  Kings  i.
8).) — The  Hebrew  Admoni  is  also  connected  with
Adam  ;  Esau  is  a  son  of  Adam,  predominantly  in
clined  to  the  earth  and  earthly  thing?. — (Isaac's  bod
ily  nature  appears  feeble  everywhere ;  ch.  xxvii.
1,  19).  Such  persons  are  fond  of  choice  and  finer
viands.  Wherever  Abraham  has  calves'  flesh,  butter
and  milk,  on  special  festive  occasions,  Isaac  delights
in  venison  and  wine  (ch.  xxvii.  3,  4,  25). — In  the
Logos,  as  the  first-born  of  all  creatures,  the  signifi
cation  of  the  first-born,  both  animal  and  human,  has
its  true,  its  ultimate,  and  divine  foundation  (Zicgler).
The  father  is  pleased,  that  Esau,  like  Ishmael,  ch.
xxi.  20,  is  a  good  hunter,  and  he  regards  it  as  an
ornament  to  the  first-born,  who  is  to  have  the  gov
ernment  (Luther).  Esau  becomes  Edom,  and  there
fore,  still  the  more  remains  Esau  merely ;  Jacob,  on
the  other  hand,  becomes  Israel  (ch.  xxxii.  28). — Ja
cob  is  the  man  of  hope.  The  possession  that  ho
greatly  desires  is  of  a  higher  order  :  hopes  depend
ing  on  the  birthright.  He  never  strives  after  the
lower  birthright  privileges.  (It  is  doubtful,  also,
whether  these  were  as  fully  developed  at  the  time  of
Abraham  as  at  the  time  of  Moses). — I  am  at  the
point  to  die.  Sooner  or  later  I  will  have  to  succumb
to  the  perils  to  which  my  vocation  exposes  me.  A
thought  expressed  more  than  once  by  Arabic  heroes
(Tuch). — Esau's  insight  into  the  future  extended  to
his  death  only. — Jacob's  request  that  Esau  should
swear.  He  is  as  eager  for  the  future  as  Esau  is  for
the  present. — (Lentiles,  to  this  day,  are  a  very  fa
vorite  dish  among  the  Arabs,  being  mostly  eaten  in
Palestine  as  a  pottage.  Robinson  found  them  very
savory,  etc.). — Want  of  faithful  confidence  in  him
who  had  given  him  such  a  promise,  it  was  this  that
made  Jacob  wish  to  assist  God  with  carnal  subtilty,
as  Abraham  once  with  carnal  wisdom. — Thou  shall
not  take  advantage  of  thy  brother.  For  the  present,
no  doubt,  Jacob  obscured  the  confidence  of  his
hopes,  just  as  Abraham,  by  anticipation,  obscured
his  prospects. — As  Ishmacl  had  no  claim  for  the  bless
ings  of  the  birthright,  because  begotten  Kara,  crap/fa,
so  Esau  forfeits  the  blessings  of  his  birthright,  not
because  begotten  Kara  ffapxa,  but  because  inclined
KO.TO,  ffdpKa  (Delitzsch).


THIRD     SECTION.

Isaac  'in  the  region  of  Abimclcch  at  Gcrar.     The  manifestation  of  God,  and  confirmed  promise.     Hi*

imitation  of  the  maxim  of  his  father.     The  exposure  of  Rebekah.      The  living  figure  of  a

richly  blessed,  patient  endurance.


CHAPTKH  XXVI.  1-22,


And  there  was  [again]  a  famine  in  the  land,   besides  the  first  [previous]  famine  that
was  in  the  days  of  Abraham.     And  Isaac  went  unto  Abimelech  king  of  the  Philistines

2  unto  Gerar.     And  the  Lord  [Jehovah]  appeared  unto  him,  and  said,  Go  not  down  into

3  Egypt;  dwell  in  the  land,  which  I  shall  tell  thee  of:  Sojourn  [as  a  stranger]  in  this  laud,


504


GENESIS,   OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


and  1  v\ill  be  with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee;  for  unto  thee,  and  unto  tliv  seed,  1  will
•rive  all  these  countries,  and  I  will  perform  [cause  to  stand]  the  oath  which  I  sware  unto
Abraham  thy  father;  And  1  will  make  thy  seed  to  multiply  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and
will  give  to  thy  seed  all  these  countries;  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the
earth  be  blessed  [bless themselves]  ;  Because  that  Abraham  obeyed  my  voice,  and  kept  my
charge,  mv  commandment?,  mv  statutes,  and  my  laws.


8
9

10
11

12
13

:  :
15

1C

17

-


19

L'O


up

And  i;  came  to  pas?,  when  In-  had  been  there  a  long  time,1  that  Abimeleeh  kinir  ol'  the
Philistines  looked  out  at  a  window,  and  sa\v,  and  behold,  Isaac  was  sporting  with
Pi  bekah  l.i-  wife.  And  Abimclech  called  Isaac,  and  said,  Behold,  of  a  surety  [oirtuinly]
sh"  i's-  thy  wife:  and  ho\v  said-'  thon,  She  is  my  sister?  And  Isaac  said  unto  him
Because  I  said  [i  thought],  Lest  ]  die  for  her.  And  Abimelech  said,  What,  •  •<*•  this  that
lhou  hast  done  unto  us?  one  of  the  people  might  lightly"  have  lien  with  thy  Avife,  and
tliou  shouldest  have  brought  guiltiness  upon  us.  And  Ahimelech  charged  all  his  people,
saying,  lie  that  touchcth  [injures]  this  man  or  his  wile  shall  surely  be  put,  to  death.
Then  Isaac  sowed  in  that  land,  and  received  [found.  A.  c.J  in  the  same  year  an  hundred
fold  :  and  [thus]  the  Lord  blessed  him:  And  the  man  waxed  great,  and  went  forward,
and  grew  until  he  became  very  great  :  For  he  had  possession  of  Hocks,  and  possession
of  herds,  and  great  store  of  servants :  and  the  Philistines  envied  him.  For  all  (he  wells
which  his  father's  servants  had  digged  in  the  days  of  Abraham  his  father,  the  Philistines
had  s!  >pped  them,  and  filled  them  with  earth.  And  Abimelech  said  unto  Isaac,  Go
fro:n  us;  for  lhou  art  much  mightier  than  we.

And  Esaac  departed  thence,  and  pitched  his  lent  in  (he  valley  [dTook)  valley— w.-i.iy.  A.c.j
of  (  ierar,  and  dwelt  there.  And  Isaac  digged  again  the  wells  of  water,  which  thev  had
diggi'd  in  the  days  of  Abraham  his  father;  for  the  Philistines,  had  stopped  them  after
the  death  of  Abraham  :  and  he  called  their  names  after  [lite]  the  names  bv  which  his
falh'T  had  called  them.  And  Isaac's  servants  digged  in  the  valley  [at  the  hot;.',™  j.  and
found  there  a  well  of  springing  [living]  water.  And  the  herdmeu  of  (ierar  did  strive
with  Isaac's  herdmen,  saying,  The  water  ts  ours  :  and  lie  called  the  name  of  the  well
F/.el<  [contention];  because  they  strove  with  him.  And  they  digged  another  well,  and
strove  for  that  also  :  and  he  called  the  name  of  it  Sitnah  [enmity— adversary,  Satiui  wells].
And  he  removed  [brakcup]  from  thence,  and  digged  another  well;  and  for  that  they
strove  not  :  ami  he  called  the  name  of  il  Rehoboth  [wideroom];  and  he  said,  For  now
the  Lord  hath  made  room  for  us,  and  we  shall  bo  fruitful  in  the  land.


<;I:NI:KAL  PRELIMINARY  IU:MAI;KS.

1.  Tlie  present  chapter  (xxvi.)  is  the  rnly  MIC
devoted  exclusively  to  traditions  concerning  Is:iae.
The  former  narratives  were,  on  the  one  hand,  inter
woven  with  Abraham's  history,  and,  on  the  other,
eotit;:ined  the  beginnings  of  the  history  of  Esau  ami
Jacob.  The  section  in  the  following  chapter,  lint
more  fully  given  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  xxviii.,
forms  a  conclusion,  in  which  the  history  of  Isaac  and
that  of  his  sons  are  considered  as  one.  This  is  fol
lowed  by  cii.  xxxv.  27,  like  a  melancholy  echo  ex
tending  over  Isaac's  king  and  isolated  life,  during
which  Rcbckah  disappears  from  the  scene,  deeply
grieved  on  account  of  her  sons.  "VVc  have  here  a
vivid  life-picture,  taken  from  the  midst  of  Isaac's
pilgrimage,  and  representing  clearly  the  fact  that
Isaac  s  composedness  and  tranquillity  draw  after
tficm  pnre  blessings.  This  thought,  however,  per
vades  his  whole  history.  lie  submits  to  suffer  upon
Moriah,  and  thus  receives  a  mvsterious  theocratic


consecration  as  a  type  of  Chiist.  lie  waited  'for  his
bride  until  Abraham's  and  Eliczcr's  care  procured
one  for  him  without  his  co-operation,  and  in  this  he
fared  well.  During  Rebekah's  long  barrenness  he
seeks  no  remedy  such  as  Abraham  did  in  connection
with  Ilagar,  but  finally  resorts  to  prayer,  and  is
richly  compensated  in  the  bestowal  of  twins.  During
the  famine  he  does  not  go  to  Egypt,  but,  according  to
Jehovah's  instruction,  remains  in  Canaan,  and  here,
in  the  country  of  the  Philistines,  is  most  abundantly
blessed.  lie  receives  in  silence  the  censure  of
Abimelech  for  his  deceptive  statement  respecting
Rebekah.  He  is  exiled,  and  departs  from  Gerar.
He  yields  one  well  after  another  to  the  shepherds  of
the  Philistines,  ever  receding,  further  and  further ;
and  yet  the  king  of  the  Philistines  applies  to  him
for  an  alliance,  as  to  a  mighty  prince.  Finally  Isaac
knows  how  to  reconcile  himself  to  the  strong  decep
tion  prepared  for  him  by  Rebekah  and  Jacob,  and
even  this  pliancy  of  temper  is  blessed  to  him,  in  that
he  is  thereby  kept  in  the  right  theocratic  direction.


CHAP.   XXVI.   1-22.


505


His  passive  conduct,  too,  at  the  marriage  of  bis  sons
renders  the  difference  between  the  true  Esau  and  the
theocratic  Jacob  more  distinct.  His  composure  and
endurance  seem  infirmities ;  these,  however,  with  all
*veakness  of  temperament,  are  evidently  supported
by  a  power  of  the  spirit  and  of  faith.  The  moral
power  in  it  is  the  self-restraint  whereby,  in  opposi
tion  to  his  own  wishes,  he  gives  up  his  hasty  purpose
to  bless  Esau.  Isaac  learned  experimentally  upon
Moriah,  that  quietness,  tranquillity,  and  confidence  in
the  Lord  have  a  glorious  issue.  This  experience  is
stamped  upon  his  whole  career.  If  we  judge  him
from  the  declarations  concerning  Rcbckah  at  Gcrar,
he  appears  to  be  the  timid  imitator  of  his  father ;
though  tho  assuming  of  his  father's  maxim  in  this
respect  m \y  be  explained  from  his  modest,  suscep
tible  nature.  Cut  that  he  does  not  imitate  his  father
slavishly,  is  seen  especially  from  the  fact  of  his  quiet
suffering  without  any  resistance.  This  is  made  evi
dent,  too,  by  the  fact  that  he  does  not,  like  Abraham,
go  to  Egypt  during  the  famine.  Moreover,  he  does
not  take  a  concubine,  as  Abraham  did;  nor  like  him
does  he  look  to  divine  revelation  for  the  decision  re
specting  the  lawful  heir,  but  holds  himself  sure  of  it
by  reason  of  the  transmitted  right  of  the  first-born.
New  and  original  traits  appear  in  his  transition  to
agriculture,  as  well  as  in  his  zealous  digging  of  wells.
The  naming  of  the  wells,  taken  away  from  him,  has
something  of  humor,  such  as  is  peculiar  to  tranquil
minds.  His  pleasant  disposition  reveals  itself  not
only  in  his  preference  of  venison,  but  by  his  peculiar
manner  of  preparing,  for  Abimelech  of  Gerar,  and
his  friends,  a  feast,  even  after  the  gentle  reproof,  and
before  he  made  a  covenant  with  him  on  the  follow
ing  day.  In  his  vocation,  however,  as  patriarch,  he
shows  himself  a  man  of  spirit  by  building  an  altar
unto  the  Lord,  and  calling  upon  his  name  (ver.  25).
And  while  there  are  but  two  visions  mentioned  defi
nitely  during  his  life  (vcr.  3,  ver.  24),  still  there  fol
lows  a  higher  spiritual  life,  and,  at  the  same  time,
a  further  development  of  the  Abrahamic  promise
through  the  disposition  he  manifests  in  the  blessing
of  his  sons.  Our  section  may  be  divided  as  follows  :
1.  Isaac's  sojourn  in  the  country  during  the  famine
in  consequence  of  an  injunction  of  Jehovah.  Re
newed  promise  (vers.  1-6) ;  2.  Isaac's  assertion  that
Rcbekah  was  his  sister  (vers.  7-11) ;  3.  Isaac's  pros
perity  ;  his  exile  from  the  city  of  Gerar,  and  his  set
tlement  in  the  valley  of  Gerar  (vers.  12-17);  4.
Isaac's  patience  in  what  he  endured  from  the  Philis
tines,  and  its  blessing  (vers.  18-22).  Knobel  regards
the  present  chapter  as  a  Jehovistic  supplement,
mingled  with  Elohistic  elements.  [In  regard  to  the
numerous  points  of  resemblance  between  Isaac  and
Abraham,  Kurtz  has  shown  (Gesch.,  p.  226)  that
these  resemblances  are  not  slavish  imitations,  but
are  marked  by  distinct  peculiarities,  and  moreover,
that  these  similar  experiences  are  not  accidental,  but
on  the  one  hand,  as  the  result  of  the  divine  provi
dence,  they  How  from  the  same  purpose  and  disci
pline  with  the  father  and  the  son,  and  on  the  other
hand,  as  far  as  they  are  the  result  of  human  choices,
they  arise  from  an  actual  resemblance  in  their  condi
tion  and  hopes.  Thus  all  believers  in  their  expe
riences  are  alike  and  yet  unlike. — A.  G.]


EXEGETICAL    AND    CKITICAL.

1.  Vers.  1-6.  Isaac's   abode  in  the  country. — A
famine. — It  is  distinguished  from  the  famine  'in  the


history  of  Abraham.  Isaac,  following  the  cxampk
of  his  father,  was  on  the  point  of  going  to  Egypt,
but  is  arrested  by  divine  interposition.  "  Isaac's
history  commences  with  the  same  trial  as  the  history
of  Abraham  "  (Delitzsch).  This  frequent  calamity
of  antiquity  occurs  once  more  in  the  history  of  Ja
cob. — Isaac  went  unto  Abimelech. — Not  the  one
mentioned  ch.  xx.  21  (Kimchi,  Schum,  etc.,  Del.),
but  his  successor  (Knobel).  The  sam'e  may  be  said
of  Phichol  (ch.  xxi.  22).  There  is  here,  very  proba
bly,  a  diiferent  Abimelech,  and  with  him  another
Phichol.  The  former  is  expressly  called  king.  Upon
this  name  Abimelech,  as  a  standing  title  of  the  kings,
compare  the  title  to  the  xxxivth  Ps.  with  1  Sam.  xxi.
11. — Gerar. — "The  ruins  of  which,  under  the  name
of  Kirbet-el-Gcrar,  have  been  again  discovered  by
Rowland,  three  leagues  in  a  southeasterly  direction
from  Gaza."  Del.  Isaac  intends  to  go  to  Egypt,
but  according  to  God's  instruction,  he  is  to  remain
in  Palestine  as  a  stranger. — Go  not  down. — It  is
characteristic  that  Abraham  received  the  first  divine
instruction  to  depart,  Isaac  to  remain.  God  leads
every  one  according  to  his  peculiar  necessities.  Even
in  Canaan  nothing  shall  be  wanting  to  him. — All
these  countries. — Extending  the  promise  beyond
Canaan  [or  rather  all  the  laiids  of  the  different  Ca-
naanitish  tribes. — A.  G.] — I  •will  be  with  thee. —
A  promise  of  help,  blessing,  and  protection,  especial
ly  needed  by  Isaac. — I  Will  perform  the  oath. —
As  for  God,  the  divine  oath  was  absolutely  firm,
though,  on  the  part  of  Abraham,  it  might  have  been
obscured.  But  shtce  Abraham,  on  his  part,  remained
true  to  the  covenant,  it  is  renewed  to  the  son  by
virtue  of  an  oath,  whilst  in  regard  to  the  contents  of
the  promise,  it  is  even  enlarged.  The  one  land  of
Canaan  is  changed  into  many  countries,  the  seed
multiplied  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  as  the  sand
which  is  upon  the  sea-shore,  becomes  stars  only  ;  and
the  blessing  of  the  nations  (ch.  xxii.  18)  becomes  in
his  seed  a  voluntary  blessing  of  the  .nations  among
themselves. — Because  that  Abraham. — Literally,
for  that.  Abraham's  obedience  is  brought  out  conspic
uously  through  the  use  of  the  richest  deuteronomic
terms.  To  the  commendation  of  obedience  in  general,
follows  in  strict  derivation:  1.  the  charge;  2.  the
commandments ;  3.  the  institutions  ;  4.  the  germ  of
the  Thorah  in  the  plural,  mm.  [He  kept  the
charge  of  God,  the  special  commission  he  had  given
him ;  his  commandments,  his  express  or  occasional
ordei's ;  his  statutes,  his  stated  prescriptions  graven
on  stone ;  his  law,  the  great  doctrine  of  moral  obli
gations.  MURPHY,  p.  874.  His  obedience  was  not
perfect,  as  we  know,  but  it  was  unreserved,  and
as  it  flows  from  a  living  faith,  is  thus  honored  of
God. — A.  G.]  The  motive  of  the  promise  empha
sizes  the  humility  and  low  position  of  Isaac.  He
must  also,  however,  render  the  obedience  of  faith,
if  Jehovah's  blessing  is  to  rest  upon  him,  and,  in
deed,  first  of  all,  by  remaining  in  the  country.
Abraham  had  to  go  to  Egypt,  Jacob  must  go  to
Egypt  to  die  there,  Isaac,  the  second  patriarch,  is
not  to  go  to  Egypt  at  all.  Notwithstanding  the  re
semblance  to  the  promise,  ch.  xxii.,  the  new  here  is
unmistakable.

2.  Vers.  7-11.  Isaac's  assertion  rcsprcti.nr/  Re-
bekah.  In  the  declaration  of  Isaac,  the  event  here
resembles  Abraham's  experience,  both  in  Egypt  and
at  Gerar,  but  as  to  all  else,  it  differs  entirely.  With
regard  to  the  declaration  itself,  it  is  true  that  Re-
bekah  was  also  related  to  Isaac,  but  more  distantly
than  Sarah  to  Abraham.  It  is  evident  from  the  nar-


506


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


rative  itself  that  Isaac  is  not  so  seriously  threatened
as  Abraham,  although  the  inquiries  of  the  people  at
Gerar  min'ht  have  alarmed  him.  It  is  not  by  a
punishment  inflicted  upon  a  heathen  prince,  who
perhaps  might  have  abducted  the  wife,  but  through
the  intercourse  of  Isaac  with  Rebekah  that  the  true
relation  became  known.  That  the  Abimelcch  men
tioned  in  this  narrative  is  the  same  person  who,
eighty  years  before,  received  Sarah  into  his  harem,
appears  plausible  to  Kurtz  and  Delitzsch,  since  it
may  be  take:i  for  granted  that  as  a  man  gray  with
a^e  he  did  not  send  for  Rebekah  and  take  her  into
hTs  harem.  We  reject  these  as  superficial  grounds.
The  main  point  is,  that  Isaac  appears  in  this  narra
tive  i\f  a  very  cautious  man,  while  the  severe  edict
of  Abiimlecii  seems  to  suppose  a  solemn  remem
brance  in  ilf  king's  house  of  the  former  experience
with  Abrali.iin.  The  oath  that  follows  seems  al-o  to
show  that  the  new  Abimelech  avails  himself  of  the
policy  of  his  father,  as  well  as  I.-aac.  The  windows
in  old  times  were  latticed  openings  for  the  light  to
enter,  as  found  in  the  East  at  the  pres.-nt  day.

3.    Vers.    12-17.    JX<KI.<'X  proxperi';/   an  I  fjri.lc. —
Then  Isaac  sowed.— Besides  planting  trees,  Abia-
ham  wa<  yet  a  mere  nomad.      Isaac  begins  to  pursue
agriculture   along  with   his  nomadic  lite ;  and  Jacob
seems  to   have  continued  it  in  a  larger  measure  (eh.
xxxvii.  7).   "  Many  nomads  of  Arabia  connect  agricul
ture  with   a  nomadic   life  (see    BURKIIARI.T  :  >///•/,/»,
p.  4  on,  etc.)."      Knobel.      This  account  agrees  well
with  the  locality  at  Gerar.      The  soil  of  (ia/a  is  very
rich,  and   in    Nuttar   Abu  Sumar,  a  tract  northwest
of    Elysa,  the    Arabs  possess    now   storehouses    for
their  grain  (see  ROIIINSON,  i.  p.  2'.'1,  2'.»2).     Even  at
the  present   time,  in  those  countries  (e.  g.,  Hauran),
the   soil   yields   a   very   rich    produce   (BuRKHARDT :
"Syria,"  p.  4o:i).     Knobel.     [The   hundred-fold   is
a  large  and  very  rare  product,  and  yet  Babylonia  is
said  "to  have   \h-lded  two  hundred   and  even  three
hundred  fold.    ,llKiu>i>.,  i.  p.  l'.»3;  MTUI-HY,  p.  37").
— A.  G.J     "  The    exigency    of   the   famine   induced
Isaac  to  undertake  agriculture,  and  in  the  very  first
year  his  crops  yielded  a  hundred-fold  (C^? '«-)•
agriculture  of  Isaac  indicates  already  a  more  perma
nent  settlement  in  Palestine;  but  agriculture  and  the
occupation  of  the  nomadic  life  were  first  engaged  in
equally  by  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  and   it  was  not
until  their  return  from  Egypt  that  agriculture  became
the    predominant    employment."     Delitzsch. — And
the  Philistines    envied    him.— Hostilities  begar
in  their  filling  with    earth  the  wells   that  Abrahan
dug  at  Gerar,  and  which  therefore  belonged  to  Isaac
This  very  act  is  already  an  indirect  expulsion,  for
without  wells  it  i-  not  possible  that  Isaac  should  live
a  nomadic  life  at  Gerar.     [The  digging  of  wells  was
regarded  as  a  sort  of    occupancy  of  the  land,  and
as  conferring  a  kind  of  title  to  it;  and  hence  per
haps  the  envy   of   the  Philistines. — A.G.]    _"Th
conduct  was  customary  during  wars  (2  Kings  Hi.  25
Is.  xv.  0).  and   the  Arabs  fill  with  earth  the  well
along  the  r..ute  of  the  pilgrims  if  they  do  not  re
ceivc  the  toll  asked  by  them  (TROILO  :   Orientalisch
Reisebeschrrlb.,  p.  682;  NIELSUIIR  :  'Arab.'  p.  362).'
Knobel.— Go   from  us.— Abimelech   openly  vent
his  displeasure  against  Isaac.     He  banishes  him  from
his  city,  Gerar,  and  from  his  country  in  the  narrowe-
sensc._In  the  valley  of  Gerar.— The  undulatin
country  Gurf-el-Gerar,  through  which  flows  a  wad
(RITTKK:  Erdk.  xiv.  p.  804).     Constantine  erected
monument  in  this  valley  (SozoM.  6,  32).

4.  Vers.   18-22.  Isaac's  patient  behavior  under


'ie  violation  of  his  riyliis  bij  the  I'liiUstw-s.     ITit
ells. — Digged  again  the  wells. — Behind  his  back
oo,  the  Philistines  filled  the  wells  which  Abraham
ug.     Knobel  infers  from  verse  21)  that  the  hostile
onduct  of  the  Philistines  was  not  mentioned  in  the
more  ancient  record  !     The  discoveries  of  the  wells
vers.  19,  21),  too,  must  be  regarded  as  identical  with
ie  digging  again,  ver.  18  ! — The  quarrels  about  the
veils  seem  to  be  connected  with  views  respecting
tie  boundaries    of   Isaac's  place   of  exile.       lie   is
:riven   further  and    further    by    them.     "  Quarrels
bout  watering-] 'laces     and    pastures    are   common
mong   the    Bedouins   (sec   xiii.  7;    Exod.  ii.   17;
BURKHAUDT  :  '  Syria,'  p.  628,  and  '  Bedouins,'  p.  118).
Vmong  the  ancient  Arabs,  also,  severe  contests  arose
bout   watering-places  (HAMASA,   i.  p.    122  f.  287).
n  many  regions  the  scarcity  of  water  is  such  that
he  Bedouins  rather  offer  milk  than  water  as  a  bev-
rage  (SiCKTZKN,  iii.  p.  21)."     Knobel.     Isaac  yields
vithout  any  resistance;  still  he  erects  a  monument
o  the  injustice  he  suffered.     The  name  of  the  second
veil,  n:-:J,  from  the  verb  "-b ,  brings  to   view  an
enmity  malignant  and  satanic. — A  well  of  springing
water. — Running  water  (Lev.  xiv.  5,  etc.). — Reho-
both (ample  room). — The  third  well  was  probably  situ
ated  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Gerar  ;  for  it  is  previous-
y  said  that  he  had  removed  from  thence,  i.  e.,  from  the
valley  of  Gerar.     The  name  Rehoboth  indicates  that
now  by  the  guidance  of  Jehovah  lit;  had  come  to  a
wide,  open  region.     Ruhaibeh,   a   wady,    southwest
Tom  Elusa.  and  discovered  by  Robinson  (i.  2'Jl^ff.),
together  with  the   extended  ruins  of  the  city  of  the
sanie  name,  situated   upon   the   top  of  a  mountain,
remind  us  of  this  third   well  (SruAUSs:   'Sinai  and
Goh'otha,'  p.  14',))."     Delitzsch.     Robin-on  also  dis
covered  further  north,  in   a  wady,  what  was  perhaps
the    Sitnah    of    Isaac.     Ruhaibeh  is   situated  about
three  hours  in  a  southerly  direction  from  Elusa  and
about  eight  and  a  half  from  Beer-sheba,  where  the
main  roads  leading  to   Gaza  and  Hebron    separate
from  each  other.


DOCTRINAL  AXD  KTHK'AL.

1.  Dr.i.nv.scii :  "This  chapter (xxvi.)  is  composed
of  these  seven  short,  special,  and  peculiarly  colored
narratives,  which  the  Jehovist  arranged.     One  pur
pose  runs  through  all:   to  show,  by  a  special  narra
tion    of   examples    running   through   the  first  forty
years  of  Isaac's  independent  history,  how  even  the
patriarch  himself,  though  less  distinguished  in  deeds
and  sufferings,  yet  under  Jehovah's  blessing  and  pro
tection  comes  forth  out  of  all  his  fearful  embarrass
ments  and  ascends  to  still  greater  riches  and  honor."
His  life,  however,  is  not  "the  echo  of  the  life  of
\braham;"  but  Isaac's    meekness    and   gentleness
indicate  rather  a  decisive  progress,  which,  like  his
pure  monogamy,  was  a  type  of  New  Testament  rela
tions.

2.  The   events   related    in    the   present   section
belon"-  undoubtedly  to  a  time  when  Esau  had  not
reached  the  development  of  all  his  powers,  for  other
wise  this  stately  and  powerful  hunter  would  scarcely
have   submitted  so  quietly  to  the  infringements  of
his  rights  by  the  Philistines.

3.  The  two  visions  which  mark  the  hie  ot  Isaac
are  entirely  in  accordance  with  his  character  and  his
point  of  view.     In  the  first,  Jehovah  addresses  him :
Go  not  down  Into  Egypt ;  in  the  second :  Fear  not.
The  promises,  however,  which  he  receives,  are  fur-


CHAP.  XXVI.   1-22.


507


thcr  developments  of  the  Abrahamic  promise.  For
Isaac,  moreover,  Jehovah's  promises  become  a  divine
oath,  i.  e.,  a  confidence  of  faith  in  him  built  upon  a
rock.

4.  The  three  famines  occurring  in  the  history  of
the  three  patriarchs  constitute  the  fixed  manifesta
tions  of  one  of  the  great  national  calamities  of  an
tiquity,  from  which  the  pious  have  to  suffer  together
with  the  ungodly;  but  in  which  the  pious  always
experience   the  special  care  of  the  Lord,  assuring
them  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them
that  love  God.

5.  Isaac's  imitation  of  his  father  in  passing  his
wife  for  his  sister,  incurs  the  more  severe  censure  of
history  than  the  same  actions  of  Abraham,  and  it
has  this  time  for  its  result  the  gradual  expulsion  from
Gerar.     This  ignominy,  too,  must  have  the  more  in
clined  him  to  yield  patiently  to  the  infringements
of  his  rights  by  the  Philistines;  and  thus  he  is  again
blessed  with  the  freedom  of  a  new  region,  so  that
the  word  is  fulfilled  in  him  :  Blessed  are  the  meek ;
for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth.

C.  Isaac  and  Abimelech,  sons  of  their  respective
fathers,  and  yet  having  each  a  peculiar  character
according  to  their  individual  and  finer  traits.

7.  Isaac,  and  the  signs  that  appear  of  a  willingness
to  struggle  bravely  for  the  faith,  though  still  subject
to  his  natural  infirmities  and  obscured  by  them.

8.  Isaac's  energy  in  his  agricultural  undertak
ings  and  in  the  diligent  digging  of  wells.

9.  The  filling  of  the  wells  with  earth,  as  taken  in
a  spiritual  sense,  indicates  an  old  hatred  of  the  Phil
istines  towards  the  children  of  God.

10.  And  thou  shouldst  have  brought  guiltiness
upon  us.  The  idea  of  guilt  is  the  extension  of  cul
pability  over  the  future  of  the  sinner  ;  and  frequently
(as  e.  g.  in  public  offences)  more  or  less  even  to  those
around  us.  Participation  of  sin  is  participation  in  its
corrupting  and  ruinous  results.


IIOMILETICAL   AKD    PRACTICAL.

To  the  whole  chapter.  How  the  promises  of
Abraham  descend  upon  Isaac:  1.  As  the  same
promises  ;  2.  as  newly  shaped  in  their  development,
and  confirmation. — Incidents  of  a  life  of  faithful
suffering  and  rich  with  blessings,  as  presented  in  the
history  of  Isaac  :  Isaac  during  the  famine  ;  in  dan
ger  at  Gerar  ;  as  exposed  to  the  jealousy  of  the
Philistines  ;  during  the  exile  ;  in  the  strife  about  the
wells;  in  the  visit  of  Abimelech;  in  the  marriage
of  Esau. — How  Isaac  gradually  comes  out  of  his  dif
ficulty:  1.  From  Gerar  to  the  valley  of  Gerar;  2.
from  the  valley  of  Gerar  to  Rehoboth  ;  3.  from  Re-
hoboth  to  15ecr-sheba. — Isaac  as  a  digger  of  wells,  a
type  also  of  spiritual  conduct:  1.  In  digging  again
the  wells  of  the  father  that  are  filled  with  earth  ;  2.
in  digging  new  wells. — Isaac  and  Abimelech,  or  the
sons  in  relation  to  their  fathers :  1.  Resemblance;
2.  difference. — The  blessing  of  Isaac  in  his  crops  (at
the  harvest-festival). — Malignant  joy,  a  joy  most  de
structive  to  the  malignant  man  himself.  [Words
worth,  who  finds  types  everywhere,  says:  "Here
also  we  have  a  type  of  what  Christ,  the  pure  Isaac,  is
doing  in  the  church.  The  wells  of  ancient  truth  had


been  choked  up  by  error,  but  Christ  reopened  them
and  restored  them  to  their  primitive  state  and  called
them  by  their  old  names,"  etc.,  p.  1 1 5. — A.  G.]

STARKE  :  (What  Moses  narrates  in  this  chaptef
appears  to  have  happened  before  Esau  and  Jacob
were  born  (see  ver.  7).  [More  probably  when  they
were  about  fifteen  years  old,  after  Abraham's  death.
— A.  G.]  Regarding  the  Philistines  and  Philistia,
see  Dictionaries.)  The  reason  why  God  did  not  per
mit  Isaac  to  go  to  Egypt  is  not  given,  yet  it  may
have  been  that  Isaac  might  experience  the  wonderful
providence  and  paternal  care  of  God  toward  him.
Some  (Calvin)  assign  the  reason,  that  Isaac,  because
not  as  far  advanced  in  faith  as  his  father  Abraham,
might  have  been  easily  led  astray  by  the  idolatrous
Egyptians  (the  result  shows,  however,  that  it  was
unnecessary  this  time). — /  will  give  all  these  coun
tries.  Thy  descendants  through  Esau  shall  receive
a  great  part  of  the  southern  countries,  lying  between
Canaan  and  Egypt. — Ver.  5.  It  does  not  follow  from
these  four  terms,  which  were  frequently  used  after
the  law  was  given  upon  lit.  Sinai,  that  Abraham  al
ready  possessed  the  law  of  Moses,  as  the  Jews  as
sert.  Had  this  been  the  case,  no  doubt  he  would
have  transmitted  it  to  his  children.  Moses,  how
ever,  chooses  these  expressions,  which  were  in  use
in  his  time,  in  order  to  point  out  clearly  to  the  peo
ple  of  Israel  how  Abraham  had  submitted  himself
entirely  to  the  divine  will  and  command,  and  ear
nestly  abstained  from  everything  to  the  contrary  in
his  walk  before  God.  To  these  four  terms  there  arc
sometimes  added  two  more,  viz.,  rules  and  testimo
nies. — OSIANDER  :  There  are  no  calamities  in  the
world  from  which  even  the  pious  do  not  sometimes
suffer.  The  best  of  it,  however,  is  that  God  is  their
protection  and  comfort  (Ps.  xci.  1). — We  are  to  re
member  the  divine  promises,  though  ancient  and
general,  and  apply  them  to  ourselves. — CKAMER  :  We
are  to  abide  by  God's  command,  for  his  word  is  a
light  unto  our  path  (Ps.  cxix.  105).— Thus  God
sometimes  permits  his  people  to  stumble,  that  his
care  over  them  may  become  known. — To  ver.  10.
From  this  we  see  that  the  inhabitants  of  Gerar,  not
withstanding  their  idolatry,  were  still  so  conscien
tious  that  they  considered  adultery  a  crime  so  great
as  to  involve  the  whole  land  in  its  punishment. —
CRAMER  :  Comely  persons  should  be  much  more
watchful  of  themselves  than  others. — The  woods
have  ears  and  the  fields  eyes,  therefore  let  no  one
do  anything  thinking  that  no  one  sees  and  hears  him.
— Strangers  are  to  be  protected.  (Since  Isaac  pos
sessed  no  property,  perhaps  he  cultivated  with  the
king's  permission  an  unfruitful  tract  of  laud,  or  hired
a  piece  of  ground.)— It  is  the  worst  kind  of  jealousy
if  we  repine  at  another's  prosperity  without  any
prospect  of  our  own  advantage.

B'M.  Tub. :  God  blesses  his  people  extraordinari
ly  in  famine. — CRAMER:  Success  creates  jealousy;
but  let  us  not  be  surprised  at  this  ;  it  is  the  course
of  the  world. — Ver.  17.  To  suffer  wrong,  and  therein
to  exercise  patience,  is  always  better  than  to  revenge
oneself  and  do  wrong. — Christian,  the  Holy  Scrip
tures  are  also  a  well  of  living  water  ;  draw  there
from  incessantly.  —  Bibl.  Tub.:  The  jealousy  and
artifice  of  enemies  cannot  prevent  or  restrain  tha
blessing  which  the  Lord  designs  for  the  pious.


508


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


FOURTH    SECTION.

Isaac  in  Hccr-shcba.     Treaty  of  Fca?c  uit/i  Alimclcch.


CHAPTER  XXVI.  23-33.

23    24  Ami  he  went  up  from  tlioncc  to  Becr-?hcba.     And  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  the

'  same  [fu-tl  ni"ht,  and  said,  I1  am  the  God  of  Abraham  lliy  father;   fear  not,  for  I  am

with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee,  and  multiply  thy  seed  for  my  servant  Abraham's  sake

25  And  lie  builded  an  altar  there,  and  called  upon  [witnessed  to]  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and
pitched  his  tent2  there:   and  there  Isaac's  servants  digged  a  well.

26  Then   [and]  Abimelech  went  to  him  from  Gerar,   and   Ahuzzath  [possession^  occupant]
one  of  his  friends,  and  I'hichol   the  chief  captain   [sec  ch.  xxi.  22,  commander]  of  his  army.

27  •\nd  Isaac  said  unto  them,  Wherefore  come  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hate  me  [have  treated  mo

28  with  hatred],  and  have  sent  me  away  from  you?     And  they  said,  We  saw  certainly  "  that
the  Lord  was  with  thee  :  and  we  said,  Let  there  be  now  an  oath  betwixt  us  [on  both  sides],

29  even  betwixt  us  and  thee,  and  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  thee;   That4  thou  wilt  do
us  no  hurt,  as  we  have  not  touched   thee,  and  as  we  have  done   unto  thee  nothing  but
good    and  have  sent  thee  away  in  peace:    thou  art  [thus  art  then]  now  the  blessed  of  the

30,  '?;!    Lord.      And  he  rnad^i  them  a  feast,  and  they  did  eat  and  drink.      And  they  rose  up
'  betimes  in  the  morninc.  and  sware  one  to  another  :   and  Isaac  sent  them  away,  and  they

32  departed  from  him  in  peace.      And  it  came  to  pass  the  same   day,  that  Isaac  s  servants
came  and  told  him  concerning  the  well  which  they  had  digged,  and  said  unto  him,  We

33  have  found  water.      And  he  called  it  Shebah  [seven ;  here  in  its  (signification :  oath]  :   therefore
the  name  of  the  city  is  Beer-sheba  unto  this  day.

[i  Ver.  21.— ^rix  .    The  pronoun  is  emphatic— I  the  God,  etc.— A.  G.I

[»  Ver.  25.-  -J"  \    Not  the  usual  word  for  the  pitching  a  tent,  see  ver.  17.     The  Icim  may  be  chosen  with  reference
to  DIP  pr™:""1"'1'1  of  his  abode,  or  the  increase  of  his  family  and  retinue. -A.  O.)

r:l  Vei    28.— Lit.,  Seeing  we  have  seen.— A.  G.1  .

[«  Ver.  2!).-- Lit.!  If  thou  shalt.     The  usual  Hebrew  form  of  an  imprecation  or  oath.-A.  G.]


EXI-XIETICAL  AXD  CRITICAL.

To  Beer-sheba.— The  former  residence  of  Abra
ham  (ch.  xxi.  a:;),  and  Isaac's  former  station  for  his
flocks. —  The  ajyiearance  of  Jehovah. — A  night  vis
ion  ;  a  form  which  now  enters  more  definitely  into
the  history  of  the  patriarchs.— The  God  of  Abra
ham,  thy  father.— In  this  way  Jehovah  reminds
him  of  the  consistency  of  his  covenant  faithfulness,
but  especially  of  his  covenant  with  Abraham.—
Fear  not.— this  encouraging  exhortation  no  doubt
refers  to  the  disposition  of  Isaac.  Abraham  needed
Filch  an  encouragement,  after  having  exposed  himself
to  the  revenge  of  the  Eastern  kings  on  account  of
his  victory  over  them.  Isaac  needs  it  because  of  his
modest,  timid  disposition,  and  on  account  of  the  en
mity  of  the  Philistines,  by  whom  he  was  driven  from
place  to  place.  Perhaps  his  heart  foreboded  that
Abimelech  would  yet  follow  him.  He  consecrates
his  prolonged  sojourn  at  Beer-sheba  by  the  erection
of  an  altar,  the  establishment  of  a  regulated  worship,
and  by  a  fixed  settlement. — Then  Abimelech
went  to  him.— By  comparing  this  covenant  act
with  that  between  Abraham  and  Abimelech  of  Gerar,
the  difference  appears  more  strikingly.  Abimelech,
in  the  present  chapter,  is  accompanied  not  only  by
the  chief  captain  of  his  army,  but  also  by  his  friend,
i.  e.,  Ahuzzath,  his  private  counsellor.  Isaac  ani
madverts  on  his  hatred,  but  not  like  Abraham,  on


the  wells  that  had  been  taken  away  from  him  (see
ch.  xxi.  25).  Even  in  the  boasting  assertion  of
Abinukch  respecting  his  conduct  toward  I.-aac —
which  the  facts  will  not  sustain— we  recognize,  ap
parently,  another  Abimelech,  less  noble  than  the
former."  This  appears  also  in  his  demand  of  the  in.-
precatory  oath  (Jlbx).  It  is  also  peculiar  to  Isaac
that  he  permits  a  banquet,  a  feast  of  peace  as  it
were,  to  precede  the  making  of  the  covenant.  The
same  day,  after  the  departure  of  Abimelech,  the  ser
vants,  who  had  commenced  some  time  before  to  dig
a  new  well,  found  water.  Their  message  seems  to
lie  a  new  reward  of  blessing,  immediately  following
the  peaceable  conduct  of  Isaac.  Isaac  names  this
well  as  Abraham  had  done  the  one  before  (ch.  xxi.
31);  thus  the  name  Beer-sheba  is  given  to  it  also.
[It  is  not  said  that  this  name  was  here  given  for  the
first  time ;  but  as  the  covenant  concluded  was  the
renewal  and  confirmation  of  the  covenant  of  Abra
ham  with  the  previous  Abimelech,  so  the  name  is  the
renewal  and  confirmation  of  that  given  by  Abraham.
The  same  name  is  appropriate  to  both  occasions.—
A.  G.]  The  existence  of  both  these  wells  bears  wit
ness  to  the  credibility  of  this  fact.  Keil.  Knobel,
of  course,  regards  this  as  an  entirely  different  tradi
tion.  But  Delitzsch  remarks:  To  all  appearance,
Isaac,  in  the  naming  of  this  well,  followed  the  exam
ple  of  his  father  in  naming  the  well  situated  near  it ;
since  in  other  cases  he  renewed  the  old  names  of  the


CHAP.   XXVI.    23-33.


509


wells. — BCXSEN  :  To  swear,  to  the  Hebrew,  signifies,
"  to  take  sevenfold,"  or,  "  to  bind  oneself  to  seven
holy  things,  referring  to  the  Aramaic  idea  of  God  as
Lord  of  Seven ;  i.  e.,  of  the  seven  planets  (Sun,
Moon,  Venus,  Mercury,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn)."
The  remembrance  of  the  seven  sacrifices  or  pledges
of  the  covenant,  is  far  more  probable,  unless  the  ex
pression  is  to  be  regarded  as  signifying  a  seven-fold
degree  of  ordinary  certainty.


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  Isaac's   holy  elevation  of  soul  at  his  return
from  the  country  of  the  Philistines  to  his  old  home,
Beer-sheba,  crowned  by  a  promise  and  a  glorious  ap
pearance  of  God.

2.  The  divine  promise  renewed ;  see  above.

3.  Isaac  at  Beer-shcba.     He  builds  an  altar  to  the
Lord  before  a  tent  for  himself.     In  the  establishment
of  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  in  this  testimony  to  him,
as  he  calls  upon  his  name,  and  in  his  preaching,  he
is  a  worthy  heir  of  his  father.

4.  Human  covenants  are  well  established,  if  a
divine  covenant  precedes  and  constitutes  their  basis.

5.  Isaac  in  his  yielding,  his  patient  endurance
and  concessions,  a  terror  to  the  king.

C.  Isaac's  feast  of  peace  with  Abimelech,  a  sign
of  his  great  inofTensiveness.

7.  The  solemnity  of  the  well,  and  on  the  same
day  with  the  feast  of  peace,  or,  the  blessing  of  noble
conduct.

8.  Abraham  prefers  to  dwell  in  the  plains  (Moreh,
Mature),  and  he  planted  trees.     Isaac  prefers  to  re
side  at  wells,  and  he  is  fond  of  digging  wells.


HOiriLETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

Sec  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs.  The
rich  contents  of  the  term  :  God  of  Abraham.  It  de
clares  :  1.  That  the  eternal  God  has  made  a  covenant
with  us  imperishable  beings  (Luke  xx.  37,  38);.  2.
the  continuity,  the  unity,  the  unchangeablcness,  of
the  revelation  of  Jehovah  through  all  times  and  de
velopments  ;  3.  the  transmission  of  the  hereditary
blessing  from  the  believing  father  to  the  believing
children. — How  the  expression,  in  the  history  of  the
patriarchs,  fear  not  (ch.  xv.  1  ;  xxvi.  24  ;  xxviii.  15),
goes  through  the  whole  scriptures  until  it  reaches  its
full  development  in  the  angelic  message  of  the  birth
of  Christ  (Luke  ii.  10),  and  at  the  morning  of  his
resurrection.

STAHKE  :  CRAMER:  God  always  supports  his
church,  and  builds  it  everywhere  (Isa.  li.  G).  What
ever  a  Christian  undertakes,  he  ought  to  undertake
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  (Col.  iii.  17).  When  a


man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he  inakcth  even  his  ene
mies  to  be  at  peace  with  him  (Prov.  xvi.  7  ;  Gen.  xxxiii.
4). — Lawful  alliances  and  oaths  are  permitted  (Dcut.
vi.  13). — GEULACH  :  At  this  place,  remarkable,  al
ready,  during  the  life  of  Abraham,  the  Lord  renews
the  assurance  of  his  grace,  as  afterwards  to  Jacob
(ch.  xlvi.  1) ;  whilst,  in  the  consecration  of  individual
places,  he  connected  himself  with  the  child-like  faith
of  the  patriarchs,  and  satisfied  the  want  to  which  it
gave  rise.

SCHRODKR  :  The  least  thing  we  sacrifice  for  the
sake  of  God,  he  repays,  by  giving  us  himself  (Berl.
Bib.).  Whenever  Jehovah  calls  himself  God  of
Ahraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  he  shows,  thereby,  in
each  day's  revelation  of  himself  to  Israel,  the  ground
and  occasion  of  the  same  in  the  revelation  that
is  past — thus  connecting  the  new  with  the  old,
while  presenting  the  grace  shown  to  the  poster
ity,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  that  which  he
had  covenanted  to  their  fathers'  fathers.  True  re
ligion  is  essentially  historical ;  history  (not  fanciful
myths)  is  its  foundation  and  limits.  God  is  our  God,
because  he  has  made  himself  our  God  by  repeated
acts  in  history.  In  the  kingdom  of  God  everything
develops  and  progresses  ;  there  is  no  past  without
a  future,  nor  a  future  without  a  past. — Abraham  re
ceived  the  promise  respecting  the  Messiah  in  the
name  of  all  the  faithful ;  if,  now,  Isaac  and  every
believer  be  blessed  for  the  sake  of  Abraham,  he  is
blessed  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  promise  that  was
given  to  Abraham,  and,  therefore,  for  the  sake  of
Christ  (Roos). — Isaac  is  mindful  of  his  sacerdotal
office,  as  soon  as  he  takes  up  his  abode  (Berl.  Bib.).
— The  Abimelech  mentioned  here  is  more  cunning
than  his  father,  for  he  pretends  to  know  nothing
about  the  taking  away  of  Isaac's  wells  by  his  ser
vants  (Luther). — Such  is  the  course  of  the  world.
Now  insolent,  then  mean.  He  who  wishes  to  live  in
peace  with  it  (which  is  true  of  all  believers)  must  be
able  to  bear  and  suffer  (Roos). — The  Abimelech  of
ch.  xxi.  uses  Elohim,  a  word  proper  to  hi:n  ;  the  one
in  the  present  chapter,  not  caring  much  about  the
affair,  says  Jehovah,  because  he  constantly  heard
Isaac  make  use  of  this  divine  name.  He  accommo
dates  himself  to  the  feast  of  Isaac,  as  Laban  in  ch.
xxiv.  (Rom.  xii.  20 ;  Jos.  ix.  14 ;  2  Sam.  iii.  20 ;
Isa.  xxv.  6  ;  Luke  xiv.  17.) — The  divine  blessing  of
this  conciliatory  and  humble  love,  did  not  exhaust
itself  in  temporal  things.  Isaac  contended  and  suf
fered  for  the  sake  of  wells  ;  as  to  the  wells  which  he
digged  soon  after  his  arrival  at  Beer-sheba,  it  hap
pened  on  the  very  day  he  made  the  covenant  and
swore,  etc. — The  relation,  of  which  the  name  Beer-
sheba  was  the  memorial,  had  ceased  to  exist.  But
by  the  repetition  of  the  fact,  the  name  regained  i(3
significance  and  power,  and  was  the  same  as  if  now
given  for  the  first  time  (Hengstenberg).


510


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES.


FIFTH    SECTION.

Isaac's  sorrow  over  Esau's  marriage  with  the  daughters  of  Canaan.
CHAPTER    XXVI.    34,    35.


34  And  Esnti  was  forty  years  old  when  lie  took  to  wife  Judith  [celebrated?]  the  daughter

of  Breri  '   [heroic  son!  I'ontanus  ?]  the  Hittite.  and  Baslicmatll    [lovely,  Era ,  fragrance,  spicy]  the

35  dauirhtfr  of  Klon   [oak-grove,  strength]  the  Hittite:   Which  were  a  grief  of  mind2  [a  heart*
sorrow]  unto  Isaac  and  Rebekah.


['  Vcr.  I! ».— Becri,  of  a  will.— A.  O.I

[?  Vcr.  3i.— Tho  margin,  lit.,  bitterness  of  spirit.— A.  G.]


EXKGETICAL  AXD    CRITICAL.

Esau  was  forty  years  old. — Isaac,  therefore,
according  to  ch.  xxv.  'JO,  was  about  100  years. — Ac
cording  to  ch.  xxviii.  9,  he  took  Mahal ath  as  his
third  wife,  together  with  the  two  mentioned  here.
These  names  are  mostly  different,  as  to  form,  from
those  of  ch.  xxxvi.  2,  etc.  The  points  of  resemblance
are,  first,  the  number  three  ;  secondly,  the  name  of
Ilasheniath  ;  third,  the  designation  of  one  of  them  as
the  daughter  of  Elon,  the  other  as  a  daughter  of
Ishmacl.  In  respect  to  the  dissimilarities  and  their
solution,  pee  KXOBEL,  p.  278,  on  ch.  xxxvi.;  DE-
LITZSCII,  5»5  ;  KKIL,  'J2'.».— Which  were  a  grief
of  mind. — Lit. :  "  a  bitterness  of  spirit."  Their
Canaanittsh  descent,  which,  in  itself,  was  mortifying
to  Esau's  parents,  corresponds  with  the  Canaanitish
conduct.  It  is  characteristic  of  Esau,  however,  that,
without  the  counsel  and  consent  of  his  parents,  he
took  to  himself  two  wives  at  once,  and  these,  too,
from  the  Canaanites.  liashemath,  Ahuzzath,  Maha-
lath  (ch.  xxviii.  (t)  are  Arabic  forms.


DOCTRINAL  AND    ETHICAL.

1.  Esau's  ill-assorted  marriage  a  continuance  of
the  prodigality  in  the  disposal  of  his  birthright.

2.  The  threefold  offence:    1.  Polygamy  without
any  necessary  inducement ;  2.  women  of  Canaanitish


origin  ;  3.  without  the  advice,  and  to  the  displeasure
of  his  parents.

3.  The  heart-sorrow  of  the  parents  over  the  mis
alliance  of  the  son. — How  it  produced  an  effect  in
the  mind  of  Rebekah,  different  from  that  produced
in  the  mind  of  Isaac.

nOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs.

STARKK  :  LANCJE  :  Children  ought  not  to  marry
without  the  advice  and  consent  of  their  parents. —
CRAMER:  Next  to  the  perception  of  God's  wrath,
there  is  no  greater  grief  on  earth  than  that  caused
by  children  to  their  parents. — GERLACH  :  Esau  may
be  regarded  as  a  heathen,  already  and  before  his  ex
pulsion  from  the  line  of  blessing. — CALWKR  Handb.:
Took  two  wives.  Opposed  to  the  beautiful  example
of  his  father. — In  addition  to  the  trials  undergone  up
to  this  time,  domestic  troubles  are  now  added.  It
is  very  possible  that  this  act  of  disobedience  toward
God  and  his  parents,  of  which  Esau  became  guilty
by  his  marriage,  matured  the  resolution  of  Rebekah,
to  act  as  related  in  ch.  xxvii. — SCHRODER  :  The  no
tice  respecting  Esau,  serves,  preeminently,  to  prepare
for  that  which  follows  (Esau's  action).  A  self-attest
ation  of  his  lawful  expulsion  from  the  chosen  gen
eration,  and,  at  the  same  time,  an  actual  warning  to
Jacob. — Lamentation  and  grief  of  mind  appeared
when  he  was  old,  and  had  hoped  that  his  trials  were
at  an  end  (Luther).


SIXTH    SECTION.

Isaac's  preference  for  the  natural  first-born,  and  Esau.  Rebekah  and  Jacob  steal  from  him  the
theocratic  llessing.  Esau's  blessing.  Esau's  hostility  to  Jacob.  RcbckaVs  preparation  for  the
flight  of  Jacob,  and  his  journey  with  reference  to  a  theocratic  marriage.  Isaac's  directions  for  the
journey  of  Jacob,  tlie  counterpart  to  the  dismissal  of  Ishmael.  Esau's  pretended  correction  of  hit
ill-assorted  marriages.

CHAPTERS  XXVII.— XXVIII.  1-9.

1  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  Isaac  was  old,  and  his  eyes  were  dim,  so  that  he
could  not  see,1  he  called  Esau  his  eldest  son,  and  said  unto  him,  My  son:  And  he  said

2  unto  him,  Behold,  here  am  I.     And  he  said,  Behold,  now  I  am  old,  I  know  not  the  day


CHAPS.   XXVII.— XXVIII.    1-9.  51  j


3  of  my  death.      Now  therefore    take,  I  pray  thee,  thy  weapons  [hunting  weapons],  thy

4  quiver,  and  thy  bow,  and  go  out  to  the  field,  and  take  me  some  venison ;  And  make  me

Savory   meat    [tasty ;  favorite ;  festive  dish.    De  Wette  :  dainty  dish],   such   as   I   love,   and   brino-   it

5  to  me,  that  I  may  eat;  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  I  die.     And  Rebekah  heard
when  Isaac  spake  to  Esau  his  son.     And  Esau  went  to  the  field  to  hunt  fur  venison,
and  to  bring  it.

G         And  Rebekah  spake  unto  Jacob  her  son,  saying,  Behold,  I  heard  thy  father  speak

7  unto  Esau  thy  brother,  saying,  Bring  me  venison,  and  make  me  savory  meat,  that  I  may

8  eat,  and   bless  thee  before  the  Lord  before  my  death.     Now  therefore,  my  son,  obey

9  my    voice   [strictly],  according  to  that  which  I  command  thee.     Go  now  to  the   ilock
[small cattle],  and  fetch  me  from  thence  two  good  kids  of  the  goats;    and  I  will  make

10  them  savory  meat  for  thy  father,  such  as  he  loveth :    And  thou  shalt  bring  it  to  thy

1 1  father,  that  he  may  eat,  and  that  he  may  bless  thee  before  his  death.     And  Jacob  said
to  Rebekah  his  mother,  Behold,  Esau  my  brother  is  a  hairy  man,  and  I  am  a  smooth

2  man:    My  father  peradventure  will  feel  me,  and  I  shall  seem  to  him  as  a  deceiver;

13  and  I  shall  bring  a  curse  upon  me,  and  not  a  blessing.     And  his  mother  said  unto  him,

14  Upon  me  le  thy  curse,  my  son  :  only  obey  my  voice,  and  go  fetch  me  them.     And  he
went,  and  fetched,  and  brought  them  to  his  mother :  and  his  mother  made  savory  meat

15  [dainty  dish],  such  as  his  father  loved.     And  Rebekah  took  goodly  [costly]  raiment  of  her
eldest  son  Esau,  which  were  with  her  in  the  house,   and   put  them  upon  Jacob  her

16  younger  son  :  And  she  put  the  skins  of  the  kids  of  the  goats  upon  his  hands,  and  upon

17  the  smooth  [part]  of  his  neck;  And  she  gave  the  savory  meat  and  the  bread,  which  she
had  prepared,  into  the  hand  of  her  son  Jacob.

And  he  came  unto  his  father,  and  said,  My  father:  And  he  said,  Here  am  I;  Avho

19  art  thou,  my  son.      And  Jacob  said  unto  his  father,  I  am  Esau  thy  firstborn  ;   I  have
done  according  as  thou  badest  me :  arise,  I  pray  thee,  sit  and  eat  of  my  venison,  that

20  thy  soul^may  bless  me.     And  Isaac  said  unto  his  son,  How  is  it  that  thou  hast  found
it  so  quickly,   my  son?     And  he  said,  Because  the  Lord  thy  God   brought  it  to  me.

21  And  Isaac  said  unto  Jacob,   Come  near,   I  pray  thee,  that  I  may  feel  thee,  my  son,

22  whether  thou  be  my  very  son  Esau,  or  not.     And  Jacob  went  near  unto  Isaac  his
father;  and  he  felt  him,  and  said,   The  voice  is  Jacob's  voice,  but  the  hands  are  the

23  hands  of  Esau.     And  he    discerned  him    not,   because  his  hands  were    hairy,   as  his

24  brother  Esau's  hands:   so  he  blessed  him.     And  he  said,  Art  thou  [thou  there]  "my  very

25  son  Esau?     And  he  said,  I  am.     And  he  said,  Bring  it  near  to  me,  and  I  will  eat  of
my  son's  venison,  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee.     And  he  brought  it  near  to  him1,  and

26  he  did  eat:  and  he  brought  him  wine,  and  he  drank.     And  his  father  Isaac  said  unto

27  him,  Come  near  now,  and  kiss  me,  my  son.     And  he  came  near,  and  kissed  him:   and
he  smelled  the  smell  of  his  raiment,  and  blessed  him,  and  said,  See,  the  smell  of  my  son

28  is  as  the  smell  of  a  field  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed:  Therefore  [thus]  God  give  thee
of  the  dew  of  heaven,  and  the  fatness  of  the  earth  and  plenty  [the  fulness]  of  corn  and

29  wine  :  Let  people  serve  thee,  and  nations  bow  down  to  thee  :  be  lord  over  thy  brethren,
and  let  thy  mother's  sons  bow  doAvn  to  thee  [thy  mother's  sons  shall  bow]  :  cursed  be  every
one  that  curseth  thee,  and  blessed  be  he  that  blesseth  thee.

And  it  came  to  pass,  as  soon  as  Isaac  had  made  an  end  of  blessing  Jacob,  and  Jacob
was  yet  scarce  gone  out  from  the  presence  of  Isaac  his  father,  that  Esau  his  brother

31  came  in  from  his  hunting.     And  he  also  had  made  savory  meat,  and  brought  it  unto  his
father,  and  said  unto  his  father,  Let  my  father  arise,  and  eat  of  his  son's  venison,  that

32  thy  soul  may  bless  me.     And  [then]  Isaac  his  father  said  unto  him,   Who  art  thou?

33  And  he  said,  I  am  thy  son,  thy  firstborn  Esau.     And  Isaac  trembled  very  exceedingly

[shuddered  in  great  terror  above  measure],  and   Said,    Who  ?    where   is   he    [who  then  was  he]  ?   that

hath  taken  [hunted]  venison,  and  brought  it  me,  and  I  have  eaten  of  all  before  thou

34  earnest,  and  have  blessed  him  ?  yea,  and  he  shall  be  blessed.     And  when  Esau  heard
the  words  of  his  father,  he  cried  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry,    and  said  unto

35  his  father,  Bless  me,  even  me  also,  O  my  father.     And  he  said,  Thy  brother  came  with

36  subtilty,  and  hath  taken  away  thy  blessing.     And  he  said,  Is  he  not  rightly  named
[hed-hoider,  suppianter]  Jacob  ?  for  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  two  times :  he  took  away
my  birthright  [right  of  the  firstborn]  ;  and,   behold,  now  he  hath  taken  away  my  blessing.

37  And  he  said,  Hast  thou  not  reserved  a  blessing  for  me  ?     And  Isaac  answered  and  said


512  GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.

unto  Esau,  Behold,  I  have  made  him  thy  lord,  and  all  his  brethren  have  I  given  to  him
for  servants-    and  with  corn  and  wine  have  I  sustained  him   [have  I  endowed  him]  :  and

38  what  shall  I  do  now  unto  thee,  my  son?     And  Esau  said  unto  his  father,  Hast  thou  but
one  blessing,  mv  father?  bless  me,  even  me  also,  O  my  father.     And  Esau  lifted  up  his

39  voice  and  wept.     And  [then]  Isaac  his  father  answered,  and  said  unto  him,  Behold,  thy
dwelling  shall  he   the   fatness   of  the   earth,  and  of  the   dew   of  heaven    from   above;

40  And  by  thy  sword  shalt  thou  live,  and  shalt,  serve  thy  brother:   and  [but,]  it  shall  come-
to  pass"  when    thou  shalt,   have  the    dominion    [in  the  course  of  thy  wanderings],  that    thou   shalt
break  his  yoke  from  oil' thy  neck.

41  And  Esau  hated  Jacob,  because  of  the  blessing  wherewith  his  father  blessed  him:
and  K-au  said  in  his  heart  [formed  the  design],  The  days  of  mourning  for  my  [dead]  father

42  are  at  hand,  then  will  I  slay  my  brother  Jacob.     And  these  words  of  E-au  her  elder
son  were   told  to   Kebekah  :   and  she   sent  and   called  Jacob  her  younger  son,  and   said
unto  him,  Behold,  thy  brother  Esau,  as  touching  thce,  doth  comfort  himself,  purposing

43  to  kill    thee    [goesabout  with  revenge  to  kill  thce]. a      Now  therefore,   my   son,    obey    my  voice;

44  and  arise,  flee  thou  to   Laban  my  brother,  to  Haran :  And  tarry  with  him  a  few  days

45  |  sometime],   until   thy  brother's  fury  turn  away;   Until  thy   brother's  auger  turn  away
from  thee,  and  he  i'or-et  tJ,nt  which  thou  hast  done  to  him:  then  1  will  send,  and  fetch

4G  thee  from'  thence:  why  should  I  be  deprived  also  of  you  both  in  one  day?  Ami
Kebekah  said  to  Isaac,"  I  am  weary  of  my  life,  because  of  the  daughters  of  Il'eth:  if
Jacob  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  llcth,  such  as  these  vliich  are  of  the  daughters
of  the  land,  what  good  shall  my  life  do  me  [what  is  life  to  me]  ?

CH.  XXV  II  I.        1.  And  Isaac  called  Jacob,  and  blessed  him,  and  charged  him,  and  said  unto

2  'him,  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan.      Arise,  go  to  radan-aram

[Mesopotamia],  to  the  house  of  IJothuel,  thy  mother's  father;   and  take  thee  a  wife  from

3  thence   of  the  daughters  of  Laban,   thy  mother's  brother.     And  Cod   [the]  Almighty
bless  thee,  and   make   thce   fruitful,   and  multiply  thee,  that  thou  mayest  bo  [become]  a

4  multitude"  of  people  ;   Ami  give  th.-c  the  blessing  of  Abraham,  to  thee   and  to  thy  seed
with  thee  ;   that  thou  mayest  inherit  the  laud  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger  [of  thy  pilgrimage],

5  which  Cod  gave  unto  Abraham.     And  Isaac  sent  away  Jacob  :   and  he  went,  to  Parian-
aram    unto  'Laban,  son  of  Bethuel  the  Syrian,  the   brother  of  Kebekah,   Jacob's  and
Esau's  mother.

G          When  Esau  saw  that  Isaac  had  blessed   Jacob,  and  sent  him  away  to  1  adan-aram,
to   take   him  a  wife   from  thence;   and  that,  as  lie  blessed  him,  he  gave  him  a  charge,

7  pfvinir  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan;  And  that  Jacob  obey.nl

8  his  father  and  his  mother,  and   was  gone  to   radan-aram;  And   Esau  seeing  that  the

9  daughters  of  Canaan  pleased  not  Isaac  his  father;    Then  went  Esau  unto  Ishmael,  and
took    unto  the   wives   which   he   had    Mahalath    [from  root  r&n ,  Cccinit.    Delitzsch  derives  it  from
i^n ,  to  be  sweet]  the  daughter  of  Ishmael,  Abraham's  son,  the  sister  of  Nebajoth  [heights,

nabathtra].   to  be  his  wife.

P  OH   XXVII.    Ver.  1.— Lanpe  renders  "when  Isaac  v,-ns  old,  then  his  eves  were  dim,  so  that  he  could  not  see,"
as  an  independent  sentence,  laying  the  basis  for  the  following  narrative.— A.  O.]

I"  Ver.  42.— Comfortcth,  or  avcngeth.    The  thought  of  vengeance  was  his  consolation.— A.  O.I
[3  CH.  XXVIII.    Ver.  3.— bn^  ,  congregation.— A.  G.I


OEXEKAL  PRELIMINARY    REMARKS.

1.  Knobd,  without  regard  to  verse  46,  and  not
withstanding   the   word   Eloliini,  verse    28,    regards
our  section  as  a  Jeliovistic  narrative.     We  have  only
to  refer  to  the  prevailing  Jeliovistic  reference.     Re-
spccting  the  origin  of  our  narrative  Knobel  has  given
his  opinion  in  u  remarkable  manner,  e.  g.,  he  cannot
conceive  how  an  old  man  may  hear  well,  smell  well,
and  yet  be  unable  to  see  ! !

2.  The  time.     "  Isaac  at  that  time  was  a  hundred
and  thirty-seven  years  old,  the  age  at  which  Ishmael,


though  he  did  not  die  until  forty-three  years  after
wards.  The  correct  determination  of  his  age,  given
already  by  Luther,  is  based  upon  the  following  cal
culation:  Joseph,  when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh,
was  thirty  years  old  (eh.  xli.  40),  and  at  the  migra
tion  of  Jaco'b  to  Egypt  he  had  reached  already  the
age  of  thirty-nine; "for  seven  years  of  plenty  and
two  years  of  famine  had  passed  already  at  that  time  ;
cine* years  had  elapsed  since  the  elevation  of  Joseph
(ch.  xlv.  6).  But  Jacob,  at  that  time,  was  a  hundred
and  thirty  years  old  (ch.  xlvii.  9) ;  Joseph,  therefore,
was  born  "when  Jacob  was  nicety-one  years ;  and


anu  tiiiriv-seveu  years  oiu,  uie  age  ai  wuiuu  IBUUUH<IJ     *  —    ........  »~.~~        —  —          r  ii,

his  half-brother,  died,  about  fourteen  years  before;    since  Joseph's  birth  occurred  m  the  lour

a  fact  which,  in  consequence  of  the  weakness  of  old  '  of  Jacob's  sojourn  in  Mesopotamia  (comp.  ch.  xxx

a*e    may  have   seriously  reminded  him   of   death,  '  25  with  ch.  xxix.  18,  21,  and  27),  Jacobs  flight  tc


CHAPS.   XXVII.— XXVIIl.    1-9.


513


Laban  happened  in  his  seventy-seventh  year,  and
in  the  hundred  and  thirty-seventh  year  of  Isaac.
Comp.  HENGSTENBKRG  :  Eclir.  iii.  p.  348,  etc."  Keil.
3S  The  present  section  contains  the  history  of  the
distinction  and  separation  of  Esau  and  Jacob  ;  first
introduced  by  enmity  after  the  manner  of  man,  then
confirmed  by  the  divine  judgment  upon  human  sins,
and  established  by  the  conduct  of  the  sons.  This
narrative  conducts  us  from  the  history  of  Isaac  to
that  of  Jacob.  The  separate  members  of  this  sec
tion  arc  the  following :  1.  Isaac's  project;  3.  Kebc-
kah's  counter-project;  8.  Jacob's  deed  and  blessing  ;
4.  Esau's  complaint  and  Esau's  blessing ;  5.  Esau's
scheme  of  revenge,  and  Kebckah's  counter-scheme  ;
6.  Jacob  and  Esau  in  the  antithesis  of  their  mar
riage,  or  the  divine  decree.


EXEGETICAL    AXD    CRITICAL.

1.  Vcrs.    1-4. — And   his    eyes  •were   dim.
— We  construe  with  the  Sept.,  since  we  arc  of  the
opinion  that  this  circumstance  is  noticed  as  an  ex
planation  of  the  succeeding  narrative. — Thy  quiver.
— The  aira!  Aey.,  ibt-l  (lit.  hanging),  has  by  some
been  explained  incorrectly  as  meaning  sword  (Onke-
los   and   others). — Savory  meat. — -^2"'^3  ,  deli
cious  food.     But  it  is  rather  to  be  taken  in  the  sense
of  a  feast  than  of  a  dainty  dish.     It  is  praiseworthy
in  Isaac  to  be  mindful  of  his  death  so  long  before
hand.     That   he   anticipates   his  last  hours  in  this
manner  indicates  not  only  a  strong  self-will,  but  also
a  doubt  and  a  certain  apprehension,  whence  he  makes
the  special  pretence,  in  order  to  conceal  the  blessing
from  Jacob    and    Rebekah.     [Notwithstanding  the
divine  utterance  before  the  children  were  born,  un
doubtedly  known  to  him,  and  the  careless  and  almost
contemptuous  disposal  of  his  birthright  by  Esau,  and
Esau's  ungodly  connection  with  the  Canaanitish  wo
men,  Isaac  still  gives  way  to  his  preference  to  Esau,
and  determines  to  bestow  upon  him  the  blessin"-. —
A.  G.]

2.  Vcrs.  5-17.  RcbckalCs  counter-project. — Unto
Jacob  her  son. — Her  favorite. — Two  '  good  kids
of  the  goats. — The  meat  was  to  be  amply  provided,
so  as  to  represent  venison. — As  a  deceiver  (lit.,  as
a  scoffer). — "  He  is  afraid  to  be  treated  as  a  scoffer
merely,  but  not  as  an  impostor,  since  he  would  have
confessed  only  a  mere  sportive  intention."     Knobel.
It   may  be  assumed,  however,  that   his  conscience
really  troubled  him.     But  from  respect  for  his  moth
er  he  does  not  point  to  the  wrong  itself,  but  to  its
hazardous  consequences. — Upon  me  be  thy  curse.
— Rebekah's  boldness  assumes  here  the  appearance
of  the  greatest  rashness.     This,  however,  vanishes
for  the  most  part,  if  we  consider  that  she  is  positive
ly  sure  of  the  divine  promise,  with  which,  it  is  true,
she    wrongfully    identifies    her    project. — Goodly
raiment. — Even  in  regard  to  dress,  Esau  seems  to

4have  taken  already  a  higher  place  in  the  household.
His  goodly  raiment  reminds  us  of  the  coat  of  Joseph.
— Upon  his  hands.— According  to  Tuch,  the  skins
of  the  Eastern  camel-goat  (angora-goat)  are  here
referred  to.  The  black,  silk-like  hair  of  these  ani
mals,  was  also  used  by  the  Romans  as  a  substitute
for  human  hair  (MARTIAL.,  xii.  46)."  Keil.

3.  Vcrs.  18-29.  Jacob's  act  and  Jacob's  blcsshiy.
—Who  art    thou,  my  son. — The    secrecy   with
which  Isaac  arranged  the  preparation  for  the  blcss-
«g  must  have  made  him  suspicious  at  the  very  be-

O'J


ginning.     The  presence  of  Jacob,  under  any  circum
stances,   would    have    been    to    him,  at  present,   an
unpleasant  interruption.     But  now  he  thinks  that  he
hears  Jacob's  voice.     That  he  does  not  give  effect  to
this  impression  is  shown  by  the  perfect  success  of  the
deception.     But   perhaps    an    infirmity  of    hearing
corresponds    with   his   blindness. — Arise,    I   pray
thee,  sit  and  eat. — They  ate  not  only  in  a  sitting
posture,  but  also  while  lying  down  ;  but   the  lying
posture  at  a  meal  differed  from  that  taken   upon  a
bed   or   couch.     It  is  the  solemn  act  of  blessing,
moreover,  which  is  here  in  question. — How  is  it
that  thou  hast  found  it  so  quickly. — It  is  not
only  Jacob's  voice,  but  also  the  quick  execution  of
his  demand,  which  awakens  his  suspicion. — And  he
blessed  him.— Ver.  23.     This  is  merely  the  greet
ing.     Even  after  having  felt  his  son,  he  is  not  fully
satisfied,  but  once  more  demands  the  explanation
that  he  is   indeed   Esau. — Come  near  now,  and
kiss  me. — After  his  partaking  of  the  meat,  Isaac
wants  still  another  assurance  and  encouragement  by
the  kiss  of  his  son. — And  he  smelled  the  smell
of  his  raiment. — The  garments  of  Esau  were  im
pregnated  with    the   fragrance   of  the   fields,    over
which  he  roamed  as  a  hunter.     "  The  scent  of  Leba
non  was  distinguished  (Hos.  xiv.  7  ;  Song  of  Sol.  iv.
11)."     Knobel.     The  directness  of  the  form  of  his
blessing  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  the  fundamental
thought  is  connected  with  the  smell  of  Esau's  rai
ment.     The  fragrance  of  the  fields  of  Canaan,  rich
in  herbs  and  flowers,  which  were  promised  to  the
theocratic  heir,  perfumed  the  garments  of  Esau,  and
this  circumstance  confirmed  the  patriarch's  prejudice.
— And  blessed  him,  and  said. — The  words  of  his
blessing  are  prophecies  (ch.  ix.  27  ;  eh.  xlix.) — utter
ances  of  an  inspired  state  looking  into  the  future,
and  therefore  poetic  in  form  and  expression.     The
same  may  be  said  respecting  the  later  blessing  upon
Esau. — Of  a  field  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed.
— Palestine,  the  land  of  Jehovah's  blessing,  a  copy
of  the  old,  and  a  prototype  of  the  new,  paradise. —
Because  the  country  is  blessed  of  Jehovah,  he  as
sumes   that  the  son  whose  garments  smell  of  the
fragrance  of  the  land  is  also  blessed.— Therefore
God  give  thee. — Tla-dohim.     The  choice  of  the
expression  intimates  a  remaining  doubt  whether  Esau
was  the  chosen  one  of  Jehovah ;  but  it  is  explained
also  by  the  universality  of  the  succeeding  blessing.
[He  views  Ila-elohim,  the  personal  God,  but  not  Je
hovah,  the  God  of  the  Covenant,  as  the  source  and
giver  of  the   blessing. — A.  G.] — Of  the  dew  of
heaven. — The  dew  in  Palestine  is  of  the  greatest
importance  in  respect  to  the  fruitfulncss  of  the  year
during  the  dry  season  (ch.  xlix.  25  ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  13,
28;  Hosca  xiv.  6  ;  Sach.  viii.  12).— And  the  fat
ness  of  the  earth. — KNOBEL  :  "  Of  the  fat  parts
of  the  earth,  singly  and  severally."     Since  the  land
promised  to  the  sons  was  to  be  divided  between  Esau
and  Jacob,  the  sense  no  doubt  is :  may  he  give  to
thee  the  fat  part  of  the  promised  land,  i.  e.,  Canaan.
Canaan  was  the  chosen  part  of  the  lands  of  the  earth
belonging  to  the  first-born,  which  were  blessed  with
the  dew  of  heaven  and  the  fatness  of  the  earth.    As
to  the  fruitfulness  of  Canaan,  see  Exod.  iii.  8.     Com
pare   also   the  Bible   Dictionaries ;   WINER  :  article;
Palestine."     The  antithesis  of  this  grant  to  that
of  the  Edomitic  country  appears  distinctly,  ver.  o9.
A  two-fold  contrast  is  "therefore  to  be  noticed:  1.
To  Edom  ;  2.   to  the  earth  in  general ;  and  so  we
have  'O .     But  to  a  blessed  land  belong  also  blessed
seasons,  therefore  plenty  of  corn  and  wine: — Let


514


GEXESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


people  serve  thee. — To  the  grant  of  the  theocratic
country  is  added  the  grant  of  a  theocratic,  i.  e.,  spir
itual  and  political  condition  of  the  world. — And
nations. — Tribes  of  nation.*.  Not  only  nations  but
tribes  of  nations,  groups  of  nations,  are  to  bow  down
to  him,  i.  e.,  to  do  homage  to  him  submissively.
This  promise  was  fulfilled  typically  in  the  time  of
David  and  Solomon,  ultimately  and  completely  in  the
world-sovereignty  of  the  promise  of  faith. — Be  Lord
over  thy  brethren. — This  blessing  was  fulfilled  in
the  subjection  of  Edom  (2  Sam.  viii.  14  ;  1  Kings  xi.
15  ;  Ps.  Ix.  8,  (.i). — Thy  mother's  sons. — His  preju
dice  still  shows  itself  in  the  choice  of  this  expression,
according  to  which  he  thought  to  subject  Jacob,  the
"mother'.-"  son,  to  Esau. — Cursed  be  every  one
that  curseth  thee. — Thus  Isaac  bound  himself.
He  is  not  able  to  take  back  the  blessing  he  pro-
nounced  on  Jacob.  In  this  sealing  of  the  blessing
ho  afterwards  recognizes  also  a  divine  sentence  (vcr.
8M).  His  prophetic  spirit  has  by  far  surpassed  his
hum:ui  prejudice.  [This  blessing  includes  the  two
elements  of  the  blessing  of  Abraham,  the  possession
of  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  a  numerous  offspring,
but  not  distinctly  the  third,  that  all  nations  should
be  blessed  in  him  and  his  seed.  This  may  be  in
cluded  in  the  general  phrase,  let  him  that  curseth
thee  lie  cursed,  and  him  that  blesseth  thee  be  blessed.
Hut  it  is  onlv  when  the  conviction  that  he  had  against
his  will  served  the  purpose  of  (iod  in  blessing  Jacob,
that  the  consciousness  of  his  patriarchal  calling  is
awakened  within  him,  and  he  has  .-trength  to  give
the  blessing  of  Abraham  to  the  son  whom  he  hud
rejected  hut  God  had  chosen  (eh.  xxviii.  :>,  4).  See
Kcil.— A.  <:.]

4.  Yers.  30^40.  /•.'.•.••'/;'*  liiii'i-itintio,!  <u,il  Esdu's
filffxinff. — And  Isaac  trembled. — If  Isaac  himself
had  not  intended  to  deceive  in  the  matter  in  which
he  was  deceived,  or  had  he  been  filled  with  divine
confidence  in  respect  to  the  election  of  Esau,  he
would  have  been  startled  only  at  the  deception  of
Jacob.  J!nt  it  is  evident  that  he  was  surprised  most
at  the  divine  decision,  which  thereby  revealed  itself,
and  convinces  him  of  the  error  and  sin  of  his  at
tempt  to  forestall  that  decision,  otherwise  we  should
hear  of  deep  indignation  rather  than  of  an  cxtraor-
dinarv  terror.  What  follows,  too,  confirms  this  in
terpretation.  He  bows  not  so  much  to  the  deception
practised  upon  him  as  to  the  fact  and  to  the  pro
phetic  spirit  which  has  found  utterance  through  him.
An; I/STINK:  -De  Civitatc  Dri,  Hi,  ','>!:  "  Quix  non  hie
malfitietioncm  potius  expectaret  irati,  si  luce  non
an/>i  run  hmjiiratione  sed  terreno  more  generentur"
— Who  ?  -where  is  he  ? — Yet  before  he  has  named
Jacob,  he  pronounces  the  divine  sentence  :  the  bless
ing  of  the  Lord  remains  with  that  man  who  received
it. — He  cried  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bit
ter  cry. — Heb.  xii.  17. — Bless  me,  even  me  also.
— Ksa-.i,  it  is  true,  had  a  vague  feeling  that  the  ques
tion  here  was  about  important  grants,  but  he  did  not
understand  their  significance.  He,  therefore,  thought
the  theocratic  blessing  admitted  of  division,  and  was
as  dependent  upon  his  lamentations  and  prayers  as
up  on  the  caprice  of  his  father. — Thy  brother  came
with  subtilty. — With  deception.  Isaac  now  indi
cates  also  the  human  error  and  sin,  after  having
declared  the  divine  judgment.  But  at  the  same  time
he  declares  that  the  question  is  only  about  one  bless
ing,  and  that  no  stranger  has  been  the  recipient  of
this  blessing,  but  Esau's  brother. — Is  not  he  rightly
named  ("n)7 — Shall  he  get  the  advantage  of  me


because  he  was  thus  inadvertently  named  (Jacobs
heel-catcher,  supplanter),  and  because  he  then  acted
thus  treacherously  (with  cunning  or  fraud)  shall  I
acquiesce  in  a  blessing  that  was  surreptitiously  ob
tained  ? — He  took  away  my  birthright. — Instead
of  reproaching  himself  with  his  own  act,  his  eye  is
filled  with  the  wrong  Jacob  has  done  him. — Hast
thou  not  a  blessing  reserved  for  me  ? — Esau  is
perplexed  in  the  mysterious  aspect  of  this  matter.
He  speaks  as  if  Isaac  had  pronounced  a  gratuitous
blessing.  Isaac's  answer  is  according  to  the  truth.
He  informs  him  very  distinctly  of  his  future  theo
cratic  relation  to  Jacob.  As  compared  with  the
blessing  of  Jacob  he  had  no  more  a  blessing  for
Esau,  for  it  is  fundamentally  the  greatest  blessing
for  him  to  serve  Jacob. — Hast  thou  but  one  bless
ing? — Esau  proceeds  upon  the  assumption  that  the
father  could  pronounce  blessings  at  will.  His  tears,
however,  move  the  father's  heart,  and  he  feels  that
his  favorite  son  can  be  appeased  by  a  sentence  hav
ing  the  semblance  of  a  blessing,  and  which  in  fact
contains  every  desire  of  his  heart.  That  is,  he  now
understands  him — The  fatness  of  the  earth. —
The  question  arises  whether  '^  is  used  here  in  a
partitive  sense  (according  to  Luther's  translation  and
the  Vulgate),  as  in  the  blessing  upon  Jacob,  vcr.  28,
or  in  a  privative  sense  (according  to  Tuch,  Knobel,
Kurtz,  etc.).  Delitzsch  favors  the  last  view :  1.  The
mountains  in  the  northeastern  part  of  Idumrea  (now
Gebalene),  were  undoubtedly  fertile,  and  therefore
'called  1'alcestlni  Kalntaris  in  the  middle  ages  (VoN
RAUMKR,  in  his  J'<i!<t.-i!hic!,  p.  210,  considers  the
prophecy,  therefore,  according  to  Luther's  transla
tion,  as  fulfilled).  But  the  mountains  in  the  western
part  of  Idumrea  are  beyond  comparison  the  most
dreary  and  sterile  deserts  in  the  world,  as  Seetzen
expresses  himself.  2.  It  is  not  probable  that  Esau's
and  Jacob's  blessing  would  begin  alike.  .'!.  It  is  in
contradiction  with  ver.  ,'57,  etc.  (p.  455);  Mai.  i.  3.
This  last  citation  is  quoted  by  Keil  as  proof  of  the
preceding  statement.  [The  "^  is  the  same  in  both
cases,  but  in  the  blessing  of  Jacob,  "after  a  verb  of
giving,  it  had  a  partitive  sense;  here,  after  a  noun
of  place,  it  denotes  distance,  or  separation,  e.  g.,
Prov.  xx.  ">."  Murphy.  The  context  seems  to  de
mand  this  interpretation,  and  it  is  confirmed  by  the
prediction,  by  thy  sword,  etc.  Esau's  dwelling-place
was  the  very  opposite  of  the  richly-blessed  land  of
Canaan. — A.  G.]  But  notwithstanding  all  this,  the
question  arises,  whether  the  ambiguity  of  the  ex
pression  is  accidental,  or  whether  it  is  chosen  in
relation  to  the  excitement  and  weakness  of  Esau.
As  to  the  country  of  Edoin,  see  DELITZSCH,  p.  455  ;
KNOHKL,  p.  299  ;  KEIL,  p.  198;  also  the  Dictionaries,
and  journals  of  travellers. — And  by  thy  sword.
— This  confirms  the  former  explanation,  but  at  the
same  time  this  expression  corresponds  with  Esau's
character  and  the  future  of  his  descendants.  War,
pillage,  and  robbery,  are  to  support  him  in  a  barren
country.  "Similar  to  Ishmael,  ch.  xvi.  12,  and  the
different  tribes  still  living  to-day  in  the  old  Edomitic
country  (see  BURKHARDT:  '  Syria,' p.  826  ;  RITTER  :
Erdkund",  xiv.  p.  960,  etc.)."  Knobel.  See  Obadiah,
ver.  3  ;  Jcr.  xlix.  16.  "  The  land  of  Edom,  there
fore,  according  to  Isaac's  prophecy,  will  constitute  a
striking  antithesis  to  the  land  of  Jacob."  Keil. —
And  shalt  serve  thy  brother. — See  above.—
And  it  shall  come  to  pass. — As  a  consequence  of
the  roaming  about  of  Edom  in  the  temper  and  pur
pose  of  a  freebooter,  he  will  ultimately  shake  off  the


CHAPS.   XXVII— XXVIII.    1-9.


515


yoke  of  Jacob  from  his  neck.  This  seems  to  be  a
promise  of  greater  import,  but  the  self-liberation  of
Edora  from  Israel  was  not  of  long  continuance,  nor
did  it  prove  to  him  a  true  blessing.  Edom  was  at
first  strong  and  independent  as  compared  to  Israel,
slower  in  its  development  (Numb,  xx.  14,  etc.).  Saul
first  fought  against  it  victoriously  (1  Sam.  xiv.  47) ;
David  conquered  it  (2  Sam.  viii.  14).  Then  followed
a  conspiracy  under  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi.  14),  whilst
there  was  an  actual  defection  under  Joram.  On  the
other  hand,  the  Edomites  were  again  subjected  by
Amaziah  (2  Kings  xiv.  7;  2  Chron.  xxv.  11)  and
remained  dependent  under  Uzziah  and  Jotham  (2
Kings  xiv.  22  ;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  2).  But  under  Ahaz
they  liberated  themselves  entirely  from  Judah  (2
Kings  xvi.  6;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  17).  "  Finally,  however,
John  Hyrcanus  subdued  them  completely,  forced
them  to  adopt  circumcision,  and  incorporated  them
into  the  Jewish  state  and  people  (JosEpnus :  "Antiq."
xiii.  9,  1;  xv.  7,  9),  whilst  the  Jews  themselves,  how
ever,  after  Antipater,  became  subject  to  the  dominion  of
an  Idunifcau  dynasty,  until  the  downfall  of  their  state.

5.  Esau's   scheme    of    revenge,    and   Rebel-all's
counter-scheme  (vers.  41-46). — And  Esau  said  in
his  heart. — Esau's  good-nature  still  expresses  itself
in  his  exasperation  toward  Jacob  and  in  the  scheme
of  revenge  to  kill  him.     For  he  does  not  maliciously
execute  the  thought  immediately,  but  betrays  it  in
uttered  threats,  and  postpones  it  until  the  death  of
his  father. — The  days  of  mourning  .  .  .  are  at
hand. — Not  for  my  father,  but  on  account  of  my
father ;  i.  e.,  my  father,  weak  and   trembling  with
age,  is  soon  to  die. — Then,  and  not  before,  he  will
execute  his  revenge.     He  does  not  intend  to  grieve
the  father,  but  if  his  mother,  his  brother's  protec
tress,  is  grieved  by  the  murder,  that  is  all  right,  in
his  view. — These  words  were  told.— On  aecount
of  his  frank  and  open  disposition,  Esau's  thoughts
were  soon  revealed ;  what  he  thought  in  his  heart  he
soon  uttered  in  words.— And  called  Jacob. — From
the  herds.— Flee  thou  to  Laban.— Rebekah  en
courages  him  to  this  flight  by  saying  that  it  will  last
but  few  days,  i.  e.,  a  short  time.     But  she  looked
further.     She  took  occasion  from  the  present  danger
to  carry  on  the  thoughts  of  Abraham,  and  to  unite
Jacob    honorably  in   a   theocratic    marriage.     For,
notwithstanding  all  his  grief  of  mind  arising  from
Esau's  marriages,  Isaac  had  not  thought  of  this.    But
still  she  lets  Isaac  first  express  this  thought.     Nor  is
Isaac  to  be  burdened  with  Esau's  scheme  of  revenue
and  Jacob's  danger,  and  therefore  she  leads  him  to
her  mode  of  reasoning  by  a  lamentation  concerning
the  daughters  of  Heth  (ver.  46). — Deprived  also
of  you  both.— BUNSEN  :  «  Of  thy  father  and  thy
self."     Others:    "Of  thyself  and    Esau,  who  is  to
die  by  the  hand  of  an  avenger."     But  as  soon  as
Esau  should  become  the  murderer  of  his   brother
he  would  be  already  lost  to  Ecbekab.    Knobel,  again',
thinks  that  in  verse  46  the  connection  with  the  pre
ceding  is  here  broken  and  lost,  but  on  the  contrary
connects  the  passage  with  ch.  xxvi.  34  and  ch.  xxviii.
1,  as  found  in  the  original  text.     The  connection  is'
however,  obvious.     If  Knobel  thinks  that  the  char
acter  of  Esau  appears  different  in  ch.  xxviii.  6  etc
than  in  ch.  xxvii.  41,  that  proves  only  that  he  does
not  understand  properly  the  prevailing  characteristics
of  Esau  as  given  in  Genesis.

6.  Jacob  and  Esau  in  the  antithesis  of  their  mar
riage,  or  the  divine  decree  (ch.  xxviii    1-9)  —And
Isaac  called  Jacob  and  blessed  him.— The  whole
dismissal  of  Jacob  shows  that  now  he  regards  him


voluntarily  as  the  real  heir  of  the  Abrahamic  bless
ing.  Knobel  treats  ch.  xxviii. -ch.  xxxiii.  as  one
section  (the  earlier  history  of  Jacob),  whose  funda
mental  utterances  form  the  original  text,  enlarged
and  completed  by  Jehovistic  supplements.  There  are
several  places  in  which  he  says  contradictions  to  the
original  text  are  apparent.  One  such  contradiction
he  artfully  frames  by  supposing  that,  according  to
the  original  text,  Jacob  was  already  sent  to  Mesopo
tamia  immediately  after  Esau's  marriage,  for  the
purpose  of  marrying  among  his  kindred— a  supposi
tion  based  on  mere  fiction.  As  to  other  contradic
tions,  see  p.  233,  etc.— Of  the  daughters  of  Ca
naan. — Now  it  is  clear  to  him  that  this  was  a  theo
cratic  condition  for  the  theocratic  heir. — Of  the
daughters  of  Laban. — These  are  first  mentioned
here.— And  God  Almighty. — By  this  appellation
Jehovah  called  himself  when  he  announced  himself
to  Abraham  as  the  God  of  miracles,  who  would  grant
to  him  a  son  (ch.  xvii.  1).  By  this  apellation  of
Jehovah,  therefore,  Isaac  also  wishes  for  Jacob  a
fruitful  posterity.  Theocratic  children  are  to  be
children  of  blessing  and  of  miracles,  a  multitude  of
people  (bnp),  a  very  significant  development  of  the
Abrahamic  blessing.  [The  word  used  to  denote  the
congregation  or  assembly  of  God's  people,  and  to
which  the  Greek  eccfesia  answers.  It  denotes  the
people  of  God  as  called  out  and  called  together. —
A.  G.] — The  blessing  of  Abraham. — He  thug
seals  the  fact  that  he  now  recognizes  Jacob  as  the
chosen  heir — And  Isaac  sent  away  Jacob  (see
Hos.  xii.  13). — When  Esau  saw  that  Isaac. — Esau
now  first  discovers  that  his  parents  regard  their  son's
connection  with  Canaanitish  women  as  an  injudicious
and  improper  marriage.  He  had  not  observed  their
earlier  sorrow.  Powerful  impressions  alone  can
bring  him  to  understand  this  matter.  But  even  this
understanding  becomes  directly  a  misunderstanding.
He  seeks  once  more  to  gain  the  advantage  of  Jacob,
by  taking  a  third  wife,  indeed  a  daughter  of  Ishmael.
One  can  almost  think  that  he  perceives  an  air  of
irony  pervading  this  dry  record.  The  irony,  how
ever,  lies  in  the  very  efforts  of  a  low  and  earthly
mind,  after  the  glimpses  of  high  ideals,  which  he
himself  does  not  comprehend. — To  Ishmael. — Ish
mael  had  been  already  dead  more  than  twelve  years ;
it  is  therefore  the  house  of  Ishmael  which  is  meant
here. — Mahalath. — Ch.  xxxvi.  2  called  Bashemath.
— The  sister  of  Nebajoth. — As  the  first-born  of  the
brothers  he  is  named  instead  of  all  the  others ;  just
as  Miriam  is  always  called  the  sister  of  Aaron.  The
decree  of  God  respecting  the  future  of  the  two  sons,
which  again  runs  through  the  whole  chapter,  receives
its  complete  development  in  this,  that  Jacob  emi
grates  in  obedience  of  faith  accompanied  with  the
theocratic  blessing,  to  seek  after  the  chosen  bride,
whilst  Esau,  with  the  intention  of  making  amends
for  his  neglect,  betrays  again  his  unfitness.  The  de
crees  of  God,  however,  develop  themselves  in  and
through  human  plans.


DOCTRINAL  AND    ETHICAL.

1.  The  present  section  connects  a  profound  tragic
family  history  from  the  midst  of  the  patriarchal  life,
with  a  grand  and  sublime  history  of  salvation.  In
respect  to  the  former,  it  is  the  principal  chapter  in
the  Old  Testament,  showing  the  vanity  of  mere  hu
man  plans  and  efforts ;  in  respect  to  the  latter,  it
holds  the  corresponding  place  in  reference  to  the  cer-


510


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


tainty  of  the  divine  election  and  calling,  holding  its
calm  and  certain  progress  through  all  disturbances
of  human  infatuation,  folly,  and  sin.

'_'.  It  is  quite  common,  in  reviewing  the  present
narrative,  to  place  Rebekah  and  Jacob  too  much
under  the  shadows  of  sin,  in  comparison  with  Isaac.
Isaac's  sin  does  not  e.:nsi.-t  alone  in  his  arbitrary  de
termination  to  piv.«-nt  Esau  with  the  blessing  of  the
theocratic  birthright,  although  Rebekah  received
that  divine  sentence  respecting  her  children,  before
their  birth,  and  which,  no  doubt,  she  had  mentioned
to  him  ;  and  ahhor.gh  Esau  had  manifested  already,
by  his  marriage  with  the  daughters  of  Ileth,  his
want  of  the  theocratic  faith,  and  by  his  bartering
with  .lac  il>,  l.is  carnal  disposition,  and  his  contempt
of  the  biriliriirht — thus  viewed,  indeed,  his  sin  ad
mits  of  palliation  through  several  excuses.  The
clear  right  of  the  first-horn  seemed  to  oppose  itself
to  the  dark  oracle  of  God,  Jacob's  prudence  to  Esau's
frank  arid  generous  disposition,  the  quiet  shcpherd-
iii'1  of  Jacob  to  Ksau's  .-tateliness  and  power,  and
on  the  ether  hand,  Esau's  misalliances  to  Jacob's
continued  celibacy.  And  although  Isaac  may  have
In  .en  too  weak  to  enjoy  the  venison  obtained  for  him
by  Erau.  yet  the  true-hearted  care  of  the  son  for  his
failiei's  h.firmity  and  age,  is  also  of  some  import
ance.  Hut  the  manner  in  which  Isaac  intends  to
bless  Esau,  p'aci  s  his  offence  in  a  clearer  light.  He
intends  to  bless  him  solemnly  in  unbecoming  secrecy,
without  the  knowledge  of  Rebekah  and  Jacob,  or
(.!'  his  house.  The  preparation  of  the  venison  is
scarcely  to  be  regarded  as  if  he  was  to  be  inspired
for  the  blessing  by  the  eating  of  this  "dainty  dish,"
or  nf  tlii-  token  of  filial  affection.  This  preparation,
at  least,  in  its  main  point  of  view,  is  an  excuse  to
L'ain  time  and  place  for  the  secret  act.  In  this  point
(,f  vii'w,  the  act  of  Rebekah  appears  in  a  different
light.  It  is  a  woman's  shrewdness  that  crosses  the
shrewdly  calculated  project  of  Isaac.  He  is  caught
in  the  net  of  his  own  sinful  prudence.  A  want  of
divine  confidence  may  be  roco'.rni/.od  through  all  his
actions.  It  is  no  real  presentiment  of  death  that
urges  him  now  to  bless  Esau.  Hut  he  now  antici-
•jititiK  his  closing  hours  and  Jehovah's  decision,  be-
he  v  idles  to  put  an  end  to  his  inward  uncer
tainty  which  annoyed  him.  Just  as  Abraham  antici
pated  the  divine  decision  in  his  connection*  with
Hagar,  so  Isaac,  in  his  eager  and  hearty  performance
of  an  act  belonging  to  his  last  days,  while  he  lived
yet  many  years.  With  this,  therefore,  is  also  con
nected  the  improper  combination  of  the  act  of  bless
ing  with  the  meal,  as  well  as  the  uneasy  apprehension
lest  he  should  be  interrupted  in  his  plan  (secver.  18),
and  a  suspicious  and  strained  expectation  which  was
not  at  first  caused  by  the  voice  of  Jacob.  Rebekah,
however,  has  so  far  the  advantage  of  him  that  she,
in  her  deception,  has  the  divine  assurance  that  Jacob
wa<  the  heir,  while  Isaac,  in  his  preceding  secrecy,
has,  on  liis  side,  only  human  descent  and  his  human
reason  without  any  inward,  spiritual  certainty.  Hut
Rebekah'a  sin  consists  in  thinking  that  she  must  save
the  divine  election  of  Jacob  by  means  of  human  de
ception  and  a  so-called  white-lie.  Isaac,  at  that  crit
ical  moment,  would  have  been  far  less  able  to  pro
nounce  the  blessing  of  Abraham  upon  Esau,  than
afterward  Balaam,  standing  far  below  him,  could
have  cursed  the  people  of  Israel  at  the  critical  mo
ment  of  its  history.  For  the  words  of  the  spirit  and
of  the  promise  are  never  left  to  human  caprice.
Rebekah,  therefore,  sinned  against  Isaac  through  a
want  of  candor,  just  as  Isaac  before  had  sinned


against  Rebekah  through  a  like  defect.  The  divine
decree  would  also  have  been  fulfilled  without  her  as
sistance,  if  she  had  had  the  necessary  measure  of
faith.  Of  course,  when  compared  with  Isaac's  fata*
error,  Rebekah  was  right.  Though  she  deceived
him  greatly,  misled  her  favorite  son,  and  alienated
Esau  from  her,  there  was  yet  something  saving  in  her
action  according  to  her  intentions,  even  for  Isaac
himself  and  for  both  her  sons.  Fur  to  Esau  the
most  comprehensive  bl  ssing  might  have  become
only  a  curse.  He  was  not  fitted  for  it.  Just  as  EC-
bekah  thinks  to  oppose  cunning  to  cunning  in  order
to  save  the  divine  blessing  through  Isaac,  «nd  thus
secure  a  heavenly  right,  so  also  Jacob  secures  a  hu
man  right  in  buying  of  Esau  the  right  of  the  first
born.  But  now  the  tragic  consequences  of  the  first
officious  anticipation,  which  Isaac  incurred,  as  well  as
that  of  the  second,  of  which  Rebekah  becomes  guil
ty,  were  soon  to  appear.

3.  The  tragic  consequences  of  the  hasty  conduct
and    the  mutual  deceptions  in  the  family  of  Isaac.
Esau  threatens  to  become  a  fratricide,  and  this  threat
repeats  itself  in  the  conduct  of  Joseph's  brothers,
who  also  believed  that  they  saw  in  Joseph  a  brother
unjustly  preferred,   and  came  very  near  killing  him.
Jacob  must  become  a  fugitive  for  many  a  long  year,
and  perhaps  yield  up  to  Esau  the  external  inheritance
for  the  most  part  or  entirely.     The   patriarchal  dig
nity  of  Isaac  is  obscured,  Rebekah  is  obliged  to  send
her  favorite  son  abroad,  and  perhaps  never  see  him
again.     The    bold    expression  :   "  Upon    me    be    thy
curse,"  may  be  regarded  as  having  a   bright   side  ;
for  she,  as  a  protectress  of  Jacob'-   bl.  .-sinir,  always
enjoys  a  share    in  his  blessing.     But  the  sinful  ele
ment  in  it  was  the  wrong  application   of  her  assur
ance  of  faith  to  the  act  of  deception,  which  she  her
self  undertook,  and  to  which  she  persuaded  Jacob  ;
and  for  which  she  must  atone,  perhaps,  by  manv  a
long  year  of  melancholy  solitude  and  through  the
joylessness  which  immediately  spread  itself  over  the
family  affairs  of  the  household.

4.  With  all  this,  however,  Isaac  was  kept  from  n,
grave  offence,  and  the  true  relation  of  things  secured
by  the    protended    necessity  for    her   prevarication.
Through  this   catastrophe  Isaac  came  to  a  full  under
standing  of  the  divine  decree,  Esau  attained  the  full
est  development  of  his  peculiar  characteristics,  and
Jacob  was  directed  to  his  journey  of  faith,  and  to
his  marriage,  without  which  the  promise  could  not
even  be  fulfilled  in  him.    '

5.  Isaac's  blindness.     That  the  eyes   of  this  rc-
cluse   and  contemplative  man  were    obscured    and
closed  at  an  early  age,  is  a  fact  which  occurs  in  many
a  similar  character  since  the  time  of  "  blind  Homer  "
and  blind   Tiresias.     Isaac  had  not  exercised  his  eye
in  hunting  as  Esau.     The  weakness  of  his  age  first
settles  in  that  organ  which  he  so  constantly  neglected.
With    this  was    connected    his  weakness  in  judg
ing  individual  and  personal  relations.     lie  was  con
scious  of  an  honest  wish  and  will  in  his  conduct  with
Esau,  and  his  secrecy  in  the  case,  as  well  as  the  pre
caution  at  Gcrar,  was  connected  with  his  retiring,
peace-loving  disposition.     Leaving  this  out  of  view,
he  was  an  honest,  well-meaning  person  (see  ver.  37,
and  ch.  xxvi.  27).     His  developed  faith  in  the  prom
ise,  however,  reveals  itself  in  his  power  or  fitness
for  the  vision,  and  his  words  of  blessing.

6.  Rebekah  obviously  disappears  from  the  stage
as  a  grand  or  conspicuous  character  ;    grand  in  her
prudence,  magnanimity,  and  her  theocratic  zeal  of
faith.     Her  zeal  of  faith  had  a  mixture  of  fanatic


CHAPS.   XXVII.— XXVIII.    1-9.


517


exaggeration,  and   in  this  view   she  is   the  grand
mother  of  Simeon  and  Levi  (ch.  xxxviii.).

7.  It  must  be  especially  noticed  that  Jacob  re
mained  single  far  beyond  the  age  of  Isaac.  He
seems  to  have  expected  a  hint  from  Isaac,  just  as
Isaac  was  married  through  the  care  of  Abraham.
The  fact  bears  witness  to  a  deep,  quiet  disposition,
which  was  only  developed  to  a  full  power  by  extraor
dinary  circumstances.  lie  proves,  again,  by  his  ac
tions,  that  he  is  a  Jacob,  i.  e.,  heel-catcher,  sup-
planter.  He  does  not  refuse  to  comply  with  the  plan
tf  the  mother  from  any  conscientious  scruples,  but
V)m  motives  of  fear  and  prudence.  And  how  ably
Jnd  firmly  he  carries  through  his  task,  though  his
false  confidence  seems  at  last  to  die  upon  his  lips
with  die  brief  ^X,  ver.  24 !  But  however  greatly
he  erred,  he  held  a  proper  estimate  of  the  blessing,
for  the  security  of  which  he  thought  he  had  a  right
to  make  use  of  prevarication  ;  and  this  blessing  did
not  consist  in  earthly  glory,  a  fact  which  is  decisive
as  to  his  theocratic  character.  Esau,  on  the  other
hand,  scarcely  seems  to  have  any  conception  of  the
real  contents  of  the  Abrahamic  blessing.  The  pro
found  agitation  of  those  who  surrounded  him,  gives
him  the  impression  that  this  must  be  a  thing  of  in
estimable  worth.  Every  one  of  his  utterances  proves  a
misunderstanding.  Esau's  misunderstandings,  how
ever,  arc  of  a  constant  significance,  showing  in  what
light  mere  men  of  the  world  regard  the  thingsof  the
kingdom  of  God.  Even  his  exertion  to  mend  his  im
proper  marriage  relations  eventuates  in  another  error.

8.  Isaac's  blessing.  In  the  solemn  form  of  the  bless
ing,  the  dew  of  heaven  is  connected  with  the  fatness
of  the  earth  in  a  symbolic  sense,  and  the  idea  of  the
theocratic  kingdom,  the  dominion  of  the   seed   of
blessing  first  appears  here.     In  the  parting  blessing
upon  .Jacob,  the  term  bnp  indicates  a  great  develop
ment  of  the  Abrahamic  blessing. — RAXKE  :  Abraham,
no  doubt,  saw,  in  the  light  of  Jehovah's  promises,  on
to  the  goal  of  his  own  election  and  that  of  his  seed,
but  with  regard   to  the  chosen  people,  however,  his
prophetic  vision  extended  only  to  the  exodus  from
Egypt,and  to  the  possession  of  Canaan.  Isaac's  prophe
cy  already  extends  farther  into  Israel's  history,  reach
ing  down  to  the  subjugation  and  restoration'of  Esau.

9.  The  blessing  pronounced  upon  Esau  seems  to
be  a  prophecy  of  his  future,  clothed  in  the  form  of  a
blessing,  in  which  his  character  is  clearly  announced.
It  contains  a  recognition  of  bravery,  of  a  passion  for
liberty,  and  the  courage  of  a  hunter — The  Idumecans
were  a  warlike  people.

10.  When,  therefore,  Isaac  speaks  in  the  spirit,
about  his  sons,  he  well  knew  their  characters  (Ileb.
xi.  20).     The  prophetic   blessing  will  surely  be  ac
complished  ;  but  not  by  the  force  of  a  magical  effi
cacy  ;  as  Knobel  says  :  "  A  divine  word  uttered,  is  a
power    which    infallibly  and   unchangeably   secures
what  the   word  indicates.     The  word  of  "God  can
never  be  ineffectual  (comp.   ch.  ix.  18;  Xumb.  xxii.
6  ;  2  Kings  ii.  24 ;  Is.  ix.  7)."— The  word  of  a  pro
phetic  spirit  rests  upon  the  insight  of  the  spirit  into
the  profound  fundamental  principles  of  the  present,
in  which  the  future,  according  to  its  main  features,
reflects  itself,  or  exhibits  itself,  beforehand.

11.  The   high-souled  Esau  acted   dishonestly    in
this,,  that  he  was  not  mindful  of  the  oath  by  which
ne  had  sold  to  Jacob  the  birthright ;  and  just  as  Re-
bekah  might  excuse  her  cunning  by  that  of  Isaac,
BO  Jacob   might  excuse   his   dishonest   conduct  by
pleading  Esau's  dishonesty.


12.  The  application  of  the   proverb,  "The  end
justifies  the   means,"  to  Jacob's  conduct,  is  appar
ently  not  allowable.     The  possible  mental  reserva
tion  in  Jacob's  lie,  may  assume  the  following  form :
1.  I  am  Esau,  i.  e.,  the  (real)  hairy  one,  and  thy
(lawful)  first-born.     But  even  in  this  case  the  mental
reservation  of  Jacob  is  as  different  from  that  of  the
Jesuits,  as  heaven  from  earth.     2.  Thy  God  brought
the  venison  to  me ;  i.  e.,  the  God  who  ha.-;  led  thee
wills  that  I  should  be  blessed.

13.  However  plausible  may  be  the  deceit,  through
the  divine    truth    some    circumstance   will  remain
unnoticed,  and  become  a  traitor.      Jacob  had  cot
considered  that  his  voice  was  not  that  of  Esau.     It
nearly  betrayed  him.     The  expression  :   "The  vci^e
is  Jacob's  voice,  but  the  hands  arc  the  hands  of  Esau,"
has  become  a  proverb   in  cases  where  words  and
deeds  do  not  correspond.

14.  The  first  appearance  of  the  kiss  in  this  nar
rative  presents  this  symbol  of  ancient  love  to  our  view
in  both  its  aspects.     The   kiss  of  Christian  brother
hood  and  the  kiss  of  Judas  are  here  enclosed  in  one.

15.  Just  as  the  starry  heavens   constituted  the
symbol  of  the  divine  promise  for  Abraham,  so  the
blooming,  fragrant,  and  fruitful  fields  are  the  symbol
to  Isaac.     In  this  also  may  be  seen  and  employed
the  antithesis  between  the  first,  who  dwelt  under  the
rustling  oaks,  and  of  the  other,  who  sat  by  the  side
of  springing  fountains.     The  symbol  of  promise  de
scends  from  heaven  to  earth.


HOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs.  Upon
the  whole  the  present  narrative  is  both  a  patriarchal
family  picture  and  a  religious  picture  of  history.
— Domestic  life  and  domestic  sorrow  in  Isaac's  house.
— In  the  homes  of  the  patriarchs,  Abraham,  Isaac,
and  Jacob. — The  blind  Isaac:  1.  Blind  in  two  re
spects  ;  and  2.  yet  a  clear-sighted  prophet. — How
Isaac  blesses  his  sons :  1.  How  he  intends  to  bless
them  ;  2.  how  he  is  constrained  to  bless  them. — Hu
man  guilt  and  divine  grace  in  Isaac's  house:  1.  The
uilt  ;  Isaac  and  Rcbekah  anticipate  divine  provi
dence.  They  deceive  each  other.  Esau  is  led  to
forget  his  bargain  with  Jacob  ;  Jacob  is  induced  to
deceive  his  father.  Yet  the  guilt  of  all  is  diminished
because  they  thought  that  they  must  help  the  right
with  falsehood.  Esau  obeys  the  father,  Jacob  obeys
the  mother.  Isaac  rests  upon  the  birthright,  Re-
bekah  upon  the  divine  oracle.  2.  God's  grace  turns
everything  to  the  best,  in  conformity  to  divine  truth,
but  with  the  condition  that  all  must  repent  of  their
sins. — The  image  of  the  hereditary  curse  in  the  light
of  the  hereditary  blessing,  which  Isaac  ministers  :  1.
How  the  curse  obscures  the  blessing ;  2.  how  the
blessing  overcomes  the  curse. — The  characteristics
mentioned  in  our  narrative  viewed  in  their  contrasts  :
1.  Isaac  and  Rcbekah  ;  2.  Jacob  and  Esau  ;  3.  Isaac
and  Jacob ;  4.  Isaac  and  Esau ;  5.  Rebekah  and
Esau ;  6.  Rcbekah  and  Jacob. — The  cunning  of  a
theocratic  disposition  purified  and  raised  to  the  pru
dence  of  the  ecclesiastical  spirit. — God's  election  is
sure:  1.  In  the  heights  of  heaven  ;  2.  in  the  depths
of  human  hearts;  3.  in  the  providence  of  grace;
4.  in  the  course  of  history. — The  clear  stream  of  the
divine  government  runs  through  all  human  errors,
and  that:  1.  For  salvation  to  believers  ;  2.  for  judg
ment  to  unbelievers.

To  Section  First,  vers.  1-4.     Isaac's  infirmity  of


518


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


age,  and  his  faith:  1.  In  what  manner  the  infirmity
of  age  obscured  his  faith;  2.  how  faith  breaks
through  the  infirmities  of  age. — Isaac's  blindness.
— The  sufferings  of  old  age. — The  thought  of  death :
1.  Though  beneficial  in  itself ;  2.  may  yet  be  prema
ture. — The  hasty  making  of  wills.— We  must  not
anticipate  God. — Not  act  in  uncertainty  of  heart. —
The  preference  of  the  parents  for  the  children  dif
ferent  in  character  from  themselves. — The  connection
of  hunting  and  the  enjoyment  of  its  fruits,  with  the
divine  blessing  of  promise :  1.  Incomprehensible  as
a  union  of  the  most  diverse  things;  2.  comprehen
sible  as  a  device  of  human  prudence  ;  !3.  made  fruit
less  by  the  intiTference  of  another  spirit. — Isaac's
secrecy  thwarted  by  Rebekah's  cunning  device. —
Human  right  and  divine  law  in  conflict  with  each
Other. — Isaac's  right  and  wrong  vi«w,  and  conduct.

STAKKK  :  It  is  a  great  blessing  of  God,  if  ho  pre
serves  our  sight  not  only  in  youth,  but  also  in  old
a  ire  (Dent,  xxxiv.  7). — CUAMKU:  A  blind  man,  a  poor
man  (Tob.  v.  fill — Old  age  itself  is  a  sickness  (2
Sain.  xix.  I!-")). — If  you  are  deprived  of  the  eyes  of'
your  body,  see  that  you  do  not  lose  the  eye  of  faith
(I's.  xxxix.  ."j,  I')). — A  Christian  ought  to  do  nothing
from  pa-'sion,  but  t.)  judge  only  by  the  word  of
(io.!. — liHil.  Tub. :  Parents  are  to  bless  their  children
before  they  die;  but  the  blessing  must  lie  conformed
to  th''  div'me  will  (ch.  xlviii.  5).  Doubtless  Jacob,
taught  bv  isaae's  error,  learned  to  bless  his  children
better;  i.  e.,  in  a  less  restricted  manner. — (The  Rab
bins  assert  that  Jacob  desired  venison  before  his  pro
nouncing  the  blessing,  because  it  was  customary  that
the  son  about  to  receive  the  blessing  should  perform
sum-  :-pccial  act  of  love  to  his  father.) — (>SIAM>I:U:
It  is  probable  that  Isaac  demanded  something  belter
than  ordinary,  because  this  was  to  be  also  a  peculiar
day.  To  ail  appearance  it  was  a  divine  providence
throuirh  which  Jacob  gains  time  to  obtain  and  bear
away  the  blessing  before  him. — SrnuoiiKR:  Contem
plative  men  like  Isaac  easily  undermine  their
health  (?).  — Experience  teaches  us  that  natures  like
that  of  Isaac  are  more  exposed  to  blindness  than
others.  Shut  in  entirely  from  the  external  world,
their  eyes  are  soon  entirely  closed  to  it. — The  son,  by
some  embodiment  of  his  filial  love,  shows  himself  as
son,  in  order  that  the  father  on  his  part  also,  may,
through  the  act  of  blessing,  show  himself  to  be  a
father. — Love  looks  for  love. — Thus  the  blessing  may
be  considered  not  so  much  as  belonging  to  the  priv
ilege  of  the  first-born,  but  rather  as  constituting  a
rightful  claim  to  these  privileges.

/v  ,-/;„,!  ,S. -cotul,  vers.  15-17.  Rebekah's  counter-
scheme  opposed  to  Isaac's  scheme. — Rebekah's
right  and  wrong  thought  and  conduct. — Rebckah
protectress  of  the  right  of  Jacob's  election  opposed
to  Isaac  the  elect. — Jacob's  persuasion :  1.  The
mother's  faith  and  her  wrong  view  of  it. — The  faith
of  the  son  and  his  erroneous  view. — Jacob's  doubt
and  Rebekah's  confidence. — The  defect  in  his  hesita
tion  (it  was  not  a  fear  of  sin,  but  a  fear  of  the  evil
consequences). — The  defect  in  the  confidence  (not  in
the  certainly  itself,  but  its  application). — The  cun
ning  mother  and  the  cunning  son. — Both  too  cun
ning  in  this  case. — Their  sufferings  for  it  — God's
commandment  is  of  more  weight  than  the  parental
authority,  than  all  human  commands  generally.

STARKK  :  Some  commentators  are  very  severe  upon
Hebekah  (SACUIX,  Discount  XXVIII ;  others  on  the
contrary  (Calvin  and  others),  praise  her  faith,  her
cunning,  her  righteousness  (because  Esau  as  a  bold
scoffer^  had  sold  hid  birthright),  her  fear  of  God


(abhorrence  of  the  Canaanitish  nature).  (We  must
add,  however,  that  Calvin  also  marks  the  means
which  Rebekah  uses  as  evil.) — Rebekah,  truly,  had
acted  in  a  human  way,  striving  by  unlawful  means
to  attain  a  good  end. — Bibl.  Wirt :  If  the  Word  ol
God  is  on  our  side  we  must  not  indeed  depart  from
it,  but  neither  must  we  undertake  to  bring  about
what  it  holds  before  us  by  unlawful  means,  but  look
to  God,  who  knows  what  means  to  use,  and  how
and  when  to  fulfil  his  word. — Bill.  Tub:  God  makes
even  the  errors  of  the  pious  to  work  good,  if  theit
heart  is  sincere  and  upright ;  yet  we  are  not  to  imi
tate  their  errors.

GERLACII  :  Though  staining  greatly,  as  she  did
the  divine  promise  by  her  deception,  yet  at  the  sam
time  her  excellent  faith  shines  out  through  the  hi*
tory.  She  did  not  fear  to  arouse  the  brother's
deadly  hatred  against  Jacob,  to  bring  her  favorite  son
into  danger  of  his  life  and  to  excite  her  husband
against  her,  because  the  inheritance  promised  by
God  stood  before  her,  and  she  knew  God  had
promised  it  to  Jacob.  (Calvin). — SCIIKODKK  :  (Mi-
CHAELIS:  The  kids  of  the  goats  can  be  prepared  in
such  a  way  as  to  taste  like  \  eni.-on.)  Isaac  now  abides
by  the  rule,  but  Rebekah  insists  upon  an  exception
(Luther). — The  premature  grasping  bargain  of  Jacob
(ch.  xxv.  2'.),  etc.,)  is  the  reason  that  God  is  here
anticipated  again  by  Rebekah,  and  Jacob's  sinful
cunning,  so  that  the  bargain  again  turns  out  badly. —
Luther,  holding  that  the  law  is  annulled  by  God
himself,  concludes  :  Where  there  is  no  law,  there  is
no  transgression,  therefore,  she  has  not  sinned  (!  ?) —
Both  (sons)  were  already  77  years  old.  The  fact,
that  Jacob,  at  such  an  age,  was  si  ill  under  maternal
control,  was  grounded  deeply  in  his  individuality
(ch.  xxv.  27),  as  well  as  in  the  congeniality  which
existed  between  Jacob  and  his  mother.  Esau,  sure
ly,  was  passed  from  under  Rebekah's  control  already
at  the  age  of  ten  years.

Section  T/t In/,  vers.  18-29.  Isaac's  blessing
upon  Jacob:  1.  In  its  human  aspect;  2.  in  its  di
vine  aspect. — The  divine  providence  controlling
Isaac's  plan  :  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Esau. — Jacob,  in
Esau's  garments,  betrayed  by  his  voice  :  1.  Almost
betrayed  immediately;  2.  afterwards  clearly  betray
ed. — Isaac's  ,-olichude,  or  all  care  in  the  service  of
sin  and  error  gains  nothing. — Jacob's  examination.
— The  voice  is  Jacob's  voice,  the  hands  are  Esau's
hands. — Isaac's  blessing  :  1.  According  to  its  exter
nal  and  its  typical  significance  ;  2.  in  its  relation  to
Abraham's  promise  and  the  blessing  of  Jacob. — Its
new  thoughts :  the  holy  sovereignty,  the  gathering
of  a  holy  people,  the  germ  of  the  announcement  of  a
holy  kingdom.  Isaae's  inheritance  :  a  kingdom  of  na
tions,  a  church  of  nations. — The  fulfilment  of  the  bles
sing  :  1.  In  an  external  or  typical  sense  :  David's  king
dom  ;  2.  in  a  spiritual  sense :  the  kingdom  of  Christ.

STARKE  :  Jacob,  perhaps,  thought  with  a  contrite
heart  of  the  abuse  of  strange  raiment,  when  the
bloody  coat  of  Joseph  was  shown  to  him.  To  say
nothing  of  the  cross  caused  by  children,  which,  no
doubt,  is  the  most  severe  cross  to  pious  parents  i:i
this  world,  and  with  which  the  pious  Jacob  often
met  (Dinah's  rape,  Benjamin's  difficult  birth,  Sim
eon's  and  Levi's  bloody  weapons,  Reuben's  incest,
Joseph's  history,  Judah's  history,  ch.  xxxviii.,  etc.).
For  Jacob  sinned:  1.  In  speaking  contrary  to  the
truth,  and  twice  passing  himself  for  Esau;  2.  in
really  practising  fraud  by  means  of  strange  raiment
and  false  pretences ;  8.  in  his  abuse  of  the  name  oi
God  (ver.  20) ;  4.  in  taking  advantage  of  his  father's


CHAPS.   XXVII.— XXVIII.  1-9.


519


weakness. — Yet  God  bore  with  his  errors,  like
Isaac,  etc.

Ver.  26  :  a  collection  of  different  places  in  which
we  read  of  a  kiss  or  kisses  (see  Concordance).— That
this  uttered  blessing  is  to  be  received  not  only  ac
cording  to  the  letter,  but  also  in  a  deeper,  secret
sense,  °is  apparent  from  Hcbr.  xi.  20,  where  Paul
says :  that  by  faith  Isaac  blessed  his  son,  of  which
faith  the  Messiah  was  the  theme.

GERLACII  :  The  goal  and  central  point  of  this
blessing  is  the  word:  be  lord  over  thy  brethren.
For  this  implies  that  he  was  to  be  the  bearer  of  the
blessing,  while  the  others  should  only  have  a
share  in  his  enjoyment. — Lisco :  Earthly  blessing
(Dent,  xxxiii.  28). — Cursed  be,  etc.  He  who
loves  the  friends  of  God,  loves  God  himself;  he  who
hates  them,  hates  him ;  they  are  the  apple  of  his
eye. — CALWER  Handbuch :  The  more  pleasant  the
fragrance  of  the  flowers  and  herbs  of  the  field,  the
richer  is  the  blessing.  Earthly  blessings  arc  a  sym
bol  and  pledge  to  the  father  of  divine  grace. — Power
and  sway :  The  people  blessed  of  the  Lord  must
stand  at  the  head  of  nations,  in  order  to  impart  a
bhrsing  to  all. — Isaac,  much  against  his  will,  blesses
him  whom  Jehovah  designs  to  bless. — SCHRODER:
Ah,  the  voice,  the  voice  (of  Jacob) !  I  should  have
dropped  the  dish  and  run  away  (Luther).— Thus  also
the  servants  of  God  sow  the  seed  of  redemption
among  men,  not  knowing  where  and  how  it  is  to
bring"  fruits.  God  docs  not  limit  the  authority
granted  to  them  by  other  knowledge  and  wisdom.
The  virtue  and  efficacy  of  the  sacraments  by  no
means  depend,  as  the  Papists  think,  upon  the  inten
tion  of  the  person  who  administers  them  (CALVIN). —
(Esau's  goodly  raiment :  Jewish  tradition  holds  these
to  be  the  same  made  by  God  himself  for  the  first
parents  (eh.  iii.  21),  and  it  attributes  to  the  person
wearing  them  the  power  even  of  taming  wild  beasts.
— The  inhabitants  of  South  Asia  are  accustomed
to  scent  their  garments  in  different  ways.  15y
means  of  fragrant  oils  extracted  from  spices,  etc.
(Michaelis). — timell  of  a  field.  Herodotus  says,  All
Arabia  exhales  fragrant  odors.) — Thus  he  wished
that  the  land  of  Canaan  should  be  to  them  a  pattern
and  pledge  of  the  heavenly  inheritance  (Calvin). —
Dew,  corn,  wine,  are  symbols  of  the  blessings  of
the  kingdom  of  grace  and  glory  (Ramb.). —  That
curseth  Hue.  Here  it  is  made  known,  that  the  true
church  is  to  exist  among  the  descendants  of  Jacob.
The  three  different  members  of  the  blessing  contain
the  three  prerogatives  of  the  first-born :  1.  The
double  inheritance.  Canaan  was  twice  as  large  and
fruitful  as  the  country  of  the  Edomites ;  2.  the  do
minion  over  his  brethren  ;  3.  the  priesthood  which
walks  with  blessings,  and  finally  passes  over  to
Christ,  the  source  of  all  blessing  (Rambach). —
Luther  calls  the  first  part  of  the  blessing  :  the  food
of  the  body,  the  daily  bread  ;  the  second  part :  the
secular  government ;  the  third  part :  the  spiritual
priesthood,  and  places  in  this  last  part  the  dear  and
sacred  cross,  and  at  the  same  time  also,  the  victory
in  and  with  the  cross.  In  Christ,  the  true  Israel  of
all  times,  rules  the  people  and  nations.

To  Section  Fourth,  vcrs.  30—10.  Esau  comes  too
late :  1.  Because  he  wished  to  obtain  the  divine
blessing  of  promise  by  hunting  (by  running  and
striving,  etc.)  (Rom.  ix.  16);  2.  he  wished  to  gain  it,
after  he  had  sold  it;  3.  he  wished  to  acquire  it,
without  comprehending  its  significance ;  and,  4.
without  its  being  intended  for  him  by  the  divine
decree,  and  any  fitness  of  mind  for  it. — Isaac's  trem


bling  and  terror  are  an  indication  that  his  eyes  are
opened,  because  he  sees  the  finger  of  God  and  not
the  hand  of  man. — Esau's  lamentation  opposed  to  hia
father's  firmness:  1.  A  passion  instead  of  godly
sorrow ;  2.  connected  with  the  illusion  that  holy
things  may  be  treated  arbitrarily  ;  3.  referring  to  the
external  detriment  but  not  to  the  internal  loss. —
Esau's  misunderstanding  a  type  of  the  misunder
standing  of  the  worldly-minded  in  regard  to  divine
things  :  1.  That  the  plan  of  divine  salvation  was  the
work  of  man ;  2.  the  blessing  of  salvation  was  a
matter  of  human  caprice ;  3.  that  the  kingdom  of
God  was  an  external  affair. — Esau's  blessing  the
type:  1.  Of  his  character;  2.  of  his  choice:  3.  of
his  apparent  satisfaction. — Here  Isaac  and  Esau  are
now  for  the  first  time  opposed  to  each  other  in  their
complete  antithesis  :  Isaac  in  his  prophetic  greatness
and  clearness  opposed  to  Esau  in  his  sad  and  carnal
indiscretion  and  passionate  conduct.

STARKE  :  Ver.  30.  Divine  providence  is  here  at
work. — Ver.  33.  This  exceedingly  great  amazement
came  from  God. — CRAMER:  God  rules  and  determines
the  time ;  the  clockwork  is  in  his  hands,  he  can  pro
long  it,  and  he  can  shorten  it,  according  to  his  plea
sure,  and  if  he  governs  anything,  he  knows  how  to
arrange  time  and  circumstances,  and  the  men  who
live  in  that  time,  in  such  a  way  that  they  do  not  ap
pear  before  or  after  he  wishes  them  to  come.  Chris
tian,  commend  to  him,  therefore,  thy  affairs  (Ps.
xxxi.  17  ;  Gal.  iv,  4). — HALL:  God  knows  both  time
and  means  to  call  back  his  people,  to  obviate  their
sins,  and  to  correct  their  errors  (Heb.  xii.  17). —
LANGE  :  Isaac  did  not  approve  of  the  manner  and
means,  but  the  event  itself  he  considers  as  irrev
ocable,  as  soon  as  he  recognizes  that  God,  on
account  of  the  unfitness  of  Esau,  has  so  arranged  it.
While,  therefore,  we  do  not  ascribe  to  God  any  active
working  of  evil,  we  concede  that,  by  his  wisdom,  he
knows  how  to  control  the  errors  of  men,  especially
of  believers,  to  a  good  purpose. — Ver.  36.  Thus  in
solent  sinners  roll  the  blame  upon  others. — Ver.  37.
The  word  "  Lord  "  is  rendered  remarkably  prominent,
since  it  appears  only  here  and  ver.  29.  Just  as  if,
out  of  Jacob's  loins  alone  would  come  the  mightiest
and  most  powerful  lords,  princes,  and  kings,  espe
cially  the  strong  and  mighty  Messiah. — HALL  :  Tears
flowing  from  revenge,  jealousy,  carnal  appetites^  and
worldly  cares,  cause  death  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).  God's
word  remains  forever,  and  never  falls  to  the  ground.
—CALWER  Handbuch :  Ver,  36.  And  still  Esau  had
sold  it. — He  lamented  the  misfortune  only,  not  his
carelessness ;  he  regretted  only  the  earthly  in  the
blessing,  but  not  the  grace.

SCHRODER  :  Then  cried  he  a  great  cry,  great  and
Utter  exceedingly.  This  is  the  perfectly  (?)  natural,
unrestrained  outbreaking  of  a  natural  man,  to  whom,
because  he  lives  only  for  the  present,  every  ground
gives  way  beneath  his  feet  when  the  present  is  lost.

To  Isaac's  explanation  that  the  blessing  was  gone.
Here  also  a  heroic  cast  is  given  to  the  quiet,  retiring,
and  often  unobserved  love. — The  aged,  feeble,  and
infirm  Isaac  celebrates  upon  his  couch  a  similar
triumph  of  love,  just  as  the  faith  of  his  father  tri
umphed  upon  Mt.  Moriah,  etc.  (i.  e.,  he  sacrifices  to
the  Lord  his  preference  for  Esau). — The  world  to
day  still  preserves  the  same  mode  of  thinking;  it
sells  the  blessing  of  the  new  birth,  etc.,  and  still
claims  to  inherit  this  blessing  (Roos). — Esau,  and
perhaps  Isaac  also,  thought  probably  by  the  blessing
to  invalidate  the  fatal  bargain  as  to  the  birthright. —
He  only  bewails  the  consequences  of  his  sin  but  he


5-20


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


has  no  tears  for  the  sin  itself. — The  question  here
tvas  properly  not  about  salvation  and  condemnation.
Salvation  was  not  refused  to  Esau,  but  he  serves  as  a
warning  to  us  all,  by  his  cries  full  of  anguish,  not  to
neglect  the  grace  of  God  (Roos). — J-Jsau'x  blessing.
Esau  appealed  to  the  paternal  heart,  and  with  the
true  objective  character  of  the  God  of  the  patriarch,
Isaac  neither  could  nor  should  drop  his  own  paternal
character. — Now  he  has  no  birthright  to  give  away,
and  therefore  no  solemn  :  and  he  blessed  him,  occurs
here. — (Descriptions  of  the  Idunuean  country  and
people  follow).

ti«-t  i.<»i.  l''ii':h.  Vers.  41— 10.  Esau's  hatred  of  Ja
cob:  1.  In  its  moral  aspect ;  ~2.  in  its  typical  signifi
cance. —  \\'ant  of  self-knowledge  a  ran-,'  of  Esau's
enmity. — Esau  inclined  to  fratricide :  1.  Incited  by
envy,  animosity,  and  revenge;  2.  checked  by  piety
toward  the  father;  o.  prevented  by  his  frankness
and  outspoken  chnraeter,  as  well  as  by  Rebekah's
sagacity.— Rebekah's  repentance  changed  into  an
atonement  by  the  heroic  valor  of  her  faith. — Rebe-
kah's  sacrifice. — How  this  sagacious  and  heroic-
minded  woman  makes  a  virtue  (Jacob's  theocratic
wooing  for  a  bride)  of  necessity  (the  peril  of  Jacob's
life).

SIAI:KK  :  Ver.  -14.  These  few  days  became  twenty
years. — Ver.  •!.">.  That  Rebekah  did  this,  is  not  men
tioned  in  any  place.  1'robably  she  died  soon  after,
and  therefore  did  not  live  to  see  Jacob's  return  (eh.
xlix.  :;i  ;  Matt.  v.  22;  1  John  iii.  15  ;  Prov.  xxvii.  -1).
— CUAMKK:  Whatever  serves  to  increase  contention
and  strife,  we  are  to  conceal,  to  trample  upon,  and
to  turn  everything  to  the  be.>t  (Matt.  v.  '.»).— GKK-
I.ACII  :  Ver.  -11.  This  trait  represents  to  us  Esau  most
truthfully;  the  worst  thing  in  his  conduct,  however,
is  not  the  savage  desire  of  revenge,  but  the  entire
unbelief  in  God  and  the  reluctance  to  subject  him
self  to  him.  Whilst  Isaac  submitted  unconditionally
as  soon  as  God  decided,  Esau 'did  not  care  at  all  for
the  divine  decision. — CAI.WKR  Uand'mcJi  :  He  did
noi  think  of  the  divine  hand  in  the  matter,  nor  of
his  own  guilt,  sell-knowledge,  or  repentance. —
SCHHODKR:  God  never  punishes  his  people  without
corn  cling  grace  is  made  also  purifying  grace  at  the
same  time(Koos). — As  Esau  had  only  cries  and  tears
at  first,  he  now  has  only  auger  and  indignation. —
Ver.  41.  "  Repentance  and  its  fruits  correspond  "
(Luther). — All  revenge  is  self-consolation.  True


1  consolation  under  injustice  comes  from  God  (Rom.
xii.  19). — And  lie  forgets  what  thou  hast  done  to  him.
With  this  she  both  acknowledges  Jacob's  guilt  and
betrays  a  precise  knowledge  of  Esau's  character.—
Let  us  not  despair  too  soon  of  men.  Are  there  not
twelve  hours  during  the  clay  V  The  great  fury  and
fiery  indignation  pass  away  with  time  (Luther). —
How  sagacious  this  pious  woman:  she  conceals  to  her
husband  the  great  misfortune  and  aflliciion  existing
in  the  house  so  as  not  to  bring  sorrow  upon  Isaac  in
his  old  age  (Luther).

Section  tit. <-!/t,  eh.  xxviii.  1-8.  Jacob's  mission  to
Mesopotamia  compared  with  that  of  Eliezer :  1.  Its
agreement;  2.  its  dill'ereiice. — Isaac  now  voluntarily
blesses  Jacob. — The  necessity  of  this  pious  house
becomes  the  i-ource  of  new  blessings:  1.  The  feeble
Isaac  becomes  a  hero  ;  2.  the  plain  and  quiet  Jacob
becomes  a  courageous  pilgrim  and  soldier;  '3.  the
strong-minded  Rebekah  becomes  a  person  that  sac
rifices  her  most  dearly  loved. — How  late  the  full
self-development  of  both  Jacob's  and  Esau's  charac
ter  appears. — Jacob's  prompt  obedience  and  Esau's
foolish  correction  of  his  errors. — The  church  is  a
community  of  nations,  typified  already  by  the  theo
cracy.

STARKK  :  Concerning  the  duties  of  parents  and
children  as  to  the  marriage  of  their  children. — The
dangers  of  injudicious  marriages. — Parents  can  give
to  their  children  no  better  provision  on  their  way
than  a  Chris  ian  blcs.-ing  (Toll.  v.  21). — Jlil,l.  Tu: .  :
The  blessing  of  ancestors,  resting  upon  the  descend
ants  is  a  great  treasure,  and  to  be  preserved  as  the
true  and  the  best  dowry. — CALWKK  Jlaudbuch:  lie
goes  out  of  spite  (or  at  least  in  his  folly  and  self-
will)  to  the  daughters  of  Ishmael,  and  takes  a  third
wife  as  near  of  kin  to  his  father  as  the  one  Jacob
takes  was  to  his  mother.  (Rut  the  distinction  was
that  Ishmael  was  separated  from  the  theocratic  line,
while  the  house  in  Mesopotamia  belonged  to  ihe  old
stock.) — SriiKoDKii  :  Rebekah,  who  in  her  want  of
faith  could  not  wait  for  divine  guidance,  has  now  to
exercise  her  faith  for  long  years,  and  learn  to  wait.
— Isaac  appears  fully  reconciled  to  Jacob. — In  the
eyes  of  Isaac  his  fa'/icr.  He  does  not  care  about
the  mother. — Thus  natural  men  never  find  the  right
way  to  please  God  and  their  fellow-men  whom  they
have  offended,  nor  the  true,  way  of  reconciliation
with  them  (Burl.  JliM.).


c.

JACOB.-ISRAEL,  THE   WRESTLER   WITH    GOD,   AND   HIS   WANDERINGS.
FIRST      S  E  C  T I O  X .

Jacob's  journey  to  Mesopotamia,  and  lite  heavenly  Ladder  at  Bethel.


CHAPTER   XXVIII.    10-22.


10,  11  And  Jacob  went  out  from  Becr-sheba,  and  went  toward  Haran.  And  lie  lighted
upon  a  certain  place,  and  tarried  there  all  night,  because  the  sun  was  set ;  and  he  took
of  the  stones  [one  of  the  stones]  of  that  place,  and  put  them  [it]  fur  his  pillows,  and  lay

12  down  in  that  place  to  sleep.     And  [then]  he  dreamed,  and  behold  a  ladder  set  up  on  the


CHAP.    XXVIII.   10-22.


521


earth,  and  the  top  of  it  readied  [was  reaching]  to  heaven :  and  behold,  the  angels  of  God

13  [were]  ascending  and  descending  on  it.     And  behold,  the  Lord  stood  [was  standing]  above
it  :  and  said,  I  am  the  Lord  God  [ Jehovah,  the  God]  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the  God

14  of  Isaac:   the  land  whereon  tliou  licst,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed;   And  thy
seed  t^hall  bo  as  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  tliou  sjialt  spread  abroad  to  the  west  [evening],
and  to  the  east  [morning],  and  to  the  north  [midnight],  and  to  the  south  [midday]  •  arid  in
thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed.     And  behold,  I  am
with  thee,  and  will  keep  thee  in  all  places  [everywhere]  whither  thou  gocst,  and  will  bring
thee  again  into  this  land;   for  I  will  not  leave  thee,  until  I  have  done  that  which  I  have

Spoken  to  thee  of  [promised  thee].

16  And  Jacob  awaked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he  said,  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  tin's  place,

17  and   I  knew  it  not.     And  he  was  afraid,  and  said,  How  dreadful   [awful]  is  this  place!

18  this  is  none  other  but  the  house  of  God,  and  this   [hem]  is  the  gate  of  heaven.     And
Jacob  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  took  the  stone  that  lie  had  put  for  his  pillows,

19  and  set  it  up  for  a  pillar,  and  poured  oil  upon  the  top  of  it.     And  he  called  the  name
of  that  place  Bethel  [house  of  God]  ;   but  the  name  of  that  city  was  catted  [earlier]  Lnz  at

20  the  first.      And  Jacob  vowed  a  vow,  saying,  If  God  [Elohim]  will  be  with  me,  and  will
keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  and  will  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on,

21  So  that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house  in  peace  [in  prosperity]  ;  then  shall  the  Lord

22  [Jehovah]  be  my  God  :    And  this  stone,  which  I  have  set  for  a  pillar,  shall  be  God'a
house  :  and  of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me,  I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto  thee.


15


PliELIiilXARY    REilAKK.

Jacob's  divine  election,  as  well  as  the  spirit  of
his  inward  life  and  the  working  of  his  faith,  first  ap
pear  in  a  bright  light  in  his  emigration,  his  dream,
and  his  vow.


EXEGETICAL  AXD    CIUT1CAL.

1.  Jacob's  emigration,  7; is  night-quarters,  and
dream  (vers.  10-1 5). — Went  out  from  Beer-sheba.
— The  journey  from  Beer-sheba  to  Haran  leads  the
pilgrim  through  a  great  part  of  Canaan,  in  a  direc
tion  from  south  to  north,  then  crossing  the  Jordan,
and  passing  through  Gilead,  Bashan,  and  Damascus,
he  con.es  to  Mesopotamia.  It  was  the  same  journey
that  Abraham,  and  afterwards  Eliezer,  had  already
made,  well  known  to  the  patriarchal  family. — And
he  lighted  upon  a  certain  place. — Not  after  the
first  day's  journey,  but  after  several  days'  journey
(see  ch.  xxii.  4).  Bethel  (sec  vcr.  19),  or  originally
Luz,  Aoufl-a,  was  situated  in  the  mountain  of  Ephraim,
on  the  way  from  Jerusalem  to  Shechem,  probably
the  present  Beitin  ;  more  than  three  hours  north  of
Jerusalem  (see  Dictionaries,  especially  Winer,  and
books  of  travels,  particularly  ROBINSON,  ii.  pp.  125-
130). — He  lighted  upon.— By  this  expression  the
place  in  which  he  took  up  his  night-quarters,  in  the
open  air,  is  distinguished  from  the  city  already  exist
ing.— And  tarried  there  all  night.— After  the  sun
went  down,  indicating  an  active  journey.  Even  at
the  present  date  it  frequently  occurs  that  pilgrims  in
those  countries,  wrapped  in  their  cloaks,  spend  the
night  in  the  open  air,  during  the  more  favorable
icasons  of  the  year. — He  took  of  the  stones. —
"  One  of  the  stones."  A  stone  becomes  his  pillow.
Thus  he  rests  upon  the  solitary  mountain,  with  no
revering  but  the  sky.— And  he  dreamed.— In  his
dream  a  strange  night-vision  comes  to  him,  and  it
Belongs  to  his  peculiar  character  that  hi  this  condi


tion  he  is  susceptible  of  this  dream.  "Here  he
sleeps  upon  a  hard  pillow,  exiled  from  his  father's
house,  with  deep  anxiety  approaching  an  uncertain
future,  and  intentionally  avoiding  intercourse  with
his  fellow-men  ;  a  stranger,  in  solitude  and  without
shelter."  Delitzsch.  The  dream-vision  is  so  glori
ous,  that  the  narrator  represents  it  by  a  threefold
n:ti .  The  participles,  too,  serve  to  give  a  more
vivid  representation.  The  connection  between
heaven  and  earth,  and  now  especially  between
heaven  and  the  place  where  the  poor  fugitive  sleeps,
is  represented  in  three  different  forms,  increasing  in
fulness  and  strength  ;  the  ladder,  not  too  short,  but
resting  firmly  on  the  earth  below  and  extending  up  to
heaven  ;  the  angels  of  God,  appearing  in  great  num
bers,  passing  up  and  down  the  ladder  as  the  messen
gers  of  God ;  ascending  as  the  invisible  companions
of  the  wanderer,  to  report  about  him,  and  as  medi
ators  of  his  prayers ;  descending  as  heavenly  guar
dians  and  mediators  of  the  blessing;  finally,  Jehovah
himself  stamliriff  above  the  ladder,  henceforth  the
covenant  God  of  Jacob,  just  as  he  had  hitherto  been
the  covenant  God  of  Abraham  and  Isaac.  [It  is  a
beautiful  and  striking  image  of  the  reconciliation  and
mediation  effected  by  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant.
See  John  i.  51. — A.  G.]— Jehovah,  the  God  of
Abraham. — 'According  to  Kuobel,  this  is  an  addi
tion  of  the  Jehovistic  enlargement,  which  does  not
fit  the  connection  here,  where  the  question  is  simply
about  Jacob's  protection  and  guidance.  Just  as  if
this  could  be  detached  from  his  theocratic  position
and  importance  !  First  of  all,  Jacob  must  now
know  that  Jehovah  is  with  him  as  his  God  ;  that  the
God  of  Abraham — his  ancestor  in  faith — and  the
God  of  Isaac,  will  henceforth  also  prove  himself  to
be  the  God  of  Jacob. — The  land  whereon  thou
liest. — The  ground  on  which  he  sleeps  as  a  fugitive,
is  to  be  his  possession,  to  its  widest  limits.  Canaan,
from  the  heights  of  Bethel,  extends  in  all  lirections
far  and  wide.  His  couch  upon  the  bare  ground  is
changed  into  an  ideal  possession  of  the  country. — •
As  the  dust  of  the  earth  (see  ch.  xxii.  17 ;  xxvi.


522


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


4). — To  one  sleeping  upon  the  bare  ground,  this  new
symbol  of  the  old  promise  was  peculiarly  striking. —
Thou  shalt  spread  abroad. — The  wide,  indefinite
extension  to  all  quarters  of  the  heavens,  introduces
the  thought,  that  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  arc  to
be  blessed  in  him.  [That  which  is  here  promised
transcends  the  destiny  of  the  natural  seed  of  Abra
ham.  McRi'iiY,  p.  :>Sii. — A.  G.]  In  the  light  of
this  promise,  the  personal  protection  and  guidance
here  promised  to  him  has  its  full  significance  and
certainty.  Jehovah  guarantees  the  security  of  his
journey,  of  the  end  sought,  of  his  return,  and  finally,
of  the  divine  promises  given  to  him.  But  the  secu
rity  again.-t  E~au  L>  not  yet  clearly  given  to  him ;
st'll  the  expression:  /  will  not  leave  fit,,-,  until —
docs  nut  mean,  that  he  would  at  one  time  forsake
him,  but  indicates  the  infallible  fulfilment  of  all  the
promises.  [The  dream-vision  is  a  comprehensive
summary  of  the  history  of  the  Old  Covenant.  As
Jacob  is  now  at  the  starting-point  of  his  independent
development,  Jehovah  now  standing  above  the  lad
der,  appears  in  the  beginning  of  his  descent,  and
since  the  end  of  the  ladder  is  by  Jacob,  it  is  clear
that  Jehovah  descends  to  him,  the  ancestor  and  rep
resentative  of  the  chosen  people,  lint  the  whole
History  of  the  Old  Covenant  is  not  him.'  else  than,  on
one  Mile,  the  history  of  the  successive  descending
of  God,  to  the  incarnation  in  the  seed  of  Jacob,  and,
on  the  other,  the.  succes.-ive  -teps  of  progress  in
Jacob  and  h:-  seed  towards  the  preparation  to  receive
the  personal  fulness  of  the  divine  nature  into  itself.
The  vision  reaches  its  fulfilment  and  goal  in  the
sinking  of  the  personal  fulness  of  God  into  the  help
less  and  weak  human  nature  in  the  incarnation  of
Christ.  Kurtz.— A.  G.]

2.  Jtt,;.!,'s  inr,ikh<i/,  fi/x  )H<->);iuifj  s»lannihi,  find
row  (vers.  1  il-'Jii).— Surely  the  Lord.— The 'belief
in  the  omnipresence  of  Cod  was  a  part  of  the  faith
of  Abraham's  house.  And  that  Cod  was  even  pres
ent  here,  he  did  not  first  learn  on  this  occasion  (as
Km, be]  seems  to  think),  but  it  is  new  to  him  that
Jehovah,  as  the  covenant  God,  revealed  himself  not
only  at  the  eon-'eerated  altars  of  his  fathers,  but  even
here.  Jacob  (who  was  not  to  take,  and  did  not
desire  to  take,  any  of  the  Canaanitish  women),  prob
ably  from  religious  zeal,  avoided  taking  up  his  abode
for  the  night  in  the  heathen  city,  Luz.  Generally,
indeed,  he  would  feel  ill  at  ease  in  a  profane  and
heathenish  country.  The  greater,  therefore,  is  his
surpii-e,  that  Elohim  here  reveals  himself  to  him,
and  that  as  Jehovah. — How  dreadful  (see  Exod.
iii.  5) — House  of  God. — The  dreadfuluess  of  the
place  results  from  the  awe-inspiring  presence  of  the
God  of  revelation.  The  place,  therefore,  is  to  him  a
house  of  God,  a  Bethel,  and  the  Bethel  is  to  him  at
the  same  time  the  door  of  heaven.  He  feels  as  a
pinner  rebuked  and  punished  at  this  sacred  place  ;
he  trembles  and  is  filled  with  holy  awe,  but  not  dis
heartened,  lie  did  not  tremble  before  men  nor  wild
beasts,  but  now  he  trembles  before  Jehovah  in  his
sanctuary,  but  it  is  the  trembling  of  a  pious  confi
dence.— And  he  set  it  up  for  a  pillar.— CALVIN  :
"A  striking  monument  of  the  vision."  We  must
here  distinguish  between  the  stone  for  a  pillar,  as  a
memorial  of  divine  help,  as  Joshua  and  Samuel
erected  pillars  (eh.  xxxi.  45;  xxxv.  14;  Josh.  ir.  9,
20;  xxiv.  20;  1  Sam.  vii.  12);  and  the  anointing
of  the  stone  with  oil,  which  consecrated  it  to  Jeho
vah's  sanctuary  (Exod.  xx.  30).  In  the  same  manner,
we  must  distinguish,  on  the  one  hand,  between  the
consecrated  stone  of  Jacob,  which  marked  the  place


as  an  ideal  house  of  God  and  a  future  place  for  sac-
rifice  (see  ch.  xxxv.  15  ;  comp.  ch.  xxxv.  7),  and  in
an  unknown-typical  prophecy  the  place  of  the  future
tabernacle,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  anointed
stones  worshipped  with  religious  veneration  (whence
the  expression  :  "Oelgcitze,"  idols  of  oil),  and  espe
cially  the  stones  supposed  in  the  heathen  world  to
have  fallen  from  heaven,  by  whose  names  we  are
reminded  of  Bethel,  but  whose  worship,  however,
is  not  to  be  derived  from  Jacob's  conduct  at  Bethel
(see  KEIL,  p.  802;  KNOBKL,  p.  239 ;  DELIT/SCII  p
460;  WINER,  "  Stones  ").— Called  the  name.—
KNOBEL  :  "  According  to  the  Elohist,  lie  assigns  the
name  at  his  return  (xxxv.  15)."  The  naming  at  the
last-quoted  place,  however,  clearly  expresses  the
execution  of  his  purpose  to  sacrifice  upon  the  stone,
and  thus  to  change  it  from  an  ideal  to  an  actual
Bethel,  a  place  for  the  worship  of  God.  It  is  evident
that  this  naming  of  Lu/,  or  the  place  near  by,  was^
of  importance  only  to  Jacob  and  his  house,  and  that
the  Canaanites  called  the  city  Luz  now  as  before,
until  it  became  a  Hebrew  city.  According  to  Keil,
Jacob  himself  called  the  city  Lu/  by  the  name  of
Bethel,  but  not  the  place  where  the  pillar  was  erect
ed.  This  would  be  very  strange,  and  it  is  not  proved
by  ch.  xlviii.  :;,  where  Jacob  in  Egvpt  characterizes
iu  general  the  region  of  this  divine  revelation.  From
Josh.  xvi.  2  ;  xviii.  ]:>,  too,  we  receive  the  impression
that  Luz  and  Bethel,  stiictly  taken,  were  two  sepa
rate  places  ;  for  Jacob  had  not  passed  the  night  in
the  city  of  Luz,  but  in  the  fields  or  upon  the  moun
tain,  in  the  open  air.  Generally,  the  whole  region
was  called  Luz,  in  the  time  of  the  Canaanites,  but
Bethel  at  the  time  of  the  Israelites. — Vowed  a
VOW.— The  vow  seems  to  unite  the  faith  in  Jehovah
with  external  and  personal  interests.  But  the  fol
lowing  points  should  be  considered:  First,  the  vow
is  only  an  explanation  and  appropriation  of  the
promise  immediately  preceding;  second,  it  is  a  very
modest  appropriation  of  it  (meat  and  drink  and  rai
ment) ;  thirdly,  Jacob  emphasizes  especially  that
point  which  the  promise  had  left  dark  for  his  further
trial  (ch.  xxxii.  7),  viz.,  the  desire  to  return  to  his
paternal  home  in  peace,  i.  e.,  especially,  free  from
Esau's  avenging  threats. — The  vow  too: "Then  shall
the  Lord  be  my  God,  is  emphatical,  and  explains
itself  by  the  following  promises.  Jacob  fulfilled  the
first  after  his  return  (ch.  xxxv.  7  ;  ver.  Iti),  and  Israel
fulfilled  it  more  completely.  The  tithes,  that  first
appear  in  Abraham's  history  (ch.  xiv.  2u),  were  no
doubt  employed  by  Jacob,  at  his  return,  for  burnt-
offerings  and  thank-offerings  and  charitable  gifts  (see
below)  (ch.  xxxi.  51  ;  xlvi.  1).  [Murphy  says,  the
vow  of  Jacob  is  a  step  in  advance  of  his  predeces
sors.  It  is  the  spirit  of  adoption  working  in  him.
It  is  the  grand  and  solemn  expression  of  the  soul's
free,  full,  and  perpetual  acceptance  of  the  Lord  to
be  its  own  God.  The  words,  If  God  will  be  with
me,  do  not  express  the  condition  on  which  Jacob
will  accept  God,  but  are  the  echo  and  thankful  ac
knowledgment  of  the  divine  assurance,  I  am  with
thee.  The  stone  shall  be  God's  house,  a  monument
of  the  presence  and  dwelling  of  God  with  his  people.
Here  it  signalizes  the  grateful  and  loving  welcome
which  God  receives  from  his  saints.  The  tenth  is
the  share  of  all  given  to  God,  as  representing  the  full
share,  the  whole  which  belongs  to  him.  Thus  Jacob
opens  his  heart,  his  home,  and  his  treasure,  to  God.
As  the  Father  is  prominently  manifested  in  Abra
ham,  and  the  Son  in  Isaac,  so  also  the  Spirit  in
Jacob. — A.  G.]


CHAP.    XXVIII.    10-22.


523


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  Jacob's  pilgrimage.     The  patriarchs  pilgrims
of  God  (Heb.  xi.).

2.  From  Isaac  onward  the  night  dream-vision  is
the  fundamental  form  of  revelation  in  the  history  of
the  patriarchs. — Consecrated  night-life :   1.  As  to  the
occasion :  In  the  most  helpless  situation,  the  most
solemn  and  glorious  dream.     2.  As  to  the  form  :  A
divine  revelation  in  the  dream-vision  :  a.  miracles  of
sight,  symbols  of  salvation;  b.  miracles  of  the  ear,
promise  of   salvation.     3.  As  to  its  contents  :  The
images  of  the  vision :    a.  the  ladder ;  b.  angels,  as
cending  and  descending;  c.  Jehovah  standing  above
the  ladder  and  speaking. — The  words  of  the  vision,
or  the  centre  of  the  whole  vision  (CALOV.  :    Vcrbum
del  quasi  atiima  vhionin).     General  promise;  indi
vidual  promise.

3.  The  rainbow  in  the  brightness  of  its  colors,
though  soon  vanishing  away,  proclaims  the  mercy  of
God.  descending  from  heaven,  and  ruling  over  the
earth  ;  but  Jacob's  ladder  expresses  more  definitely
the  connecting  and  living  intercourse  between  heaven
and  earth.     The  ladder  reaching  down  from  heaven
to  earth,  designates  the  revelations,  the  words,  and
promises  of  God ;  the  ladder  reaching  upwards  from
earth  to  heaven,  indicates  faith,  sighs,   confession,
and  prayer.     The  angels  ascending  and  descending,
are  messengers  and  the  symbols  of  the    reality  of
a   personal   intercourse   between   Jehovah   and  his
people.

4.  The  angelic  world  develops   itself  gradually.
Here  they  appear  in  great  numbers,  after  having  been
preceded  by  the  symbolic  cherubim  and  the  two  an
gels,  in  company  with  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  :   1.
These  hosts,  however,  appear  in  the  vision  of  a  dream  ;
2.  they  ascend  and  descend  on  the  ladder ;    it  does
not  appear,  therefore,  that  they  flew.     They  do  not
speak,  but  Jehovah  speaks  above  them.     Neverthe
less,  they  indicate  the   living   communion  between
heaven  and  earth,  the  longing  for  another   world,
well  known  to  the  Lord  in  the  heavens;  the  help
and   salvation  which  comes   from   above,  and  with
which  believing  hearts  are  well  acquainted,  and  the
ascending  and  descending  signifies  that  personal  life
is  only  mediated  and  introduced  through  personal
life.     They  carry  on  this  mediation,  bearing  upwards
from  earth  reports  and  prayers,  and  from  heaven  to
earth  protection  and  blessings.

5.  In   this   vision   and   guidance  of  Jacob  the
Angel  of  the  Lord  unfolds  and  reveals  his  peculiar
nature  in  a  marked  antithesis.     Jehovah  is  the  one
peculiar  personality  who,  exalted  above  the  multi
tude  of  angels,  begins  to  speak,  receives  and  gives
the  word.

C.  Christ  brings  out  the  complete  fulfilment  of
Jacob's  vision,  John  i.  52.  From  this  exegesis  of  the
Lord  it  follows  that  Jacob,  now  already  as  Israel
(see  John  i.  47  ;  ver.  49),  not  only  beheld  a  constant
intercourse  between  heaven  and  earth,  but  foresaw
also,  in  ;m  unconscious,  typical  representation,  the
gradual  incarnation  of  God.  BAUMGARTEX:  "The
old  fathers,  and  even  Luther  and  Calvin,  are  too  rash
in  regarding  the  ladder,  directly  and  by  itself,  as  the
symbol  of  the  mystery  of  the  incarnation.  The  lad
der  itself  cannot  be  compared  with  Christ,  but  Jacob,
who  beholds  the  ladder,"  etc.  No  doubt,  Jacob,  ip
his  vision,  is  a  type  of  Christ,  and  -Baumgarten  cor
rectly  says  :  "  As  far  as  a  dream  (it  is,  the  night-
vision  of  a  believer)  stands  below  the  reality,  and


things  that  happen  but  once  below  those  that  con
tinually  occur,  so  far  Jacob  stands  below  Christ.'
Yet  the  mutual  relation  and  intercourse  between  God
and  the  elect,  of  which  the  advent  of  Christ  is  the
result  and  consummation,  was  doubtless  typified  by
this  ladder.

7.  From  Jacob's  ladder  we  receive  the  first  defi
nite  intimation  that  beyond  Sheol,  heaven  is  the  home
of  man.

8.  Just  as  Jacob  established  his   Bethel  at  his
lonely  lodging-place,  so  Christians  have  founded  their
churches  upon  Golgothas,  over  the  tombs  of  martyrs,
and  over  crypts;  and  this  all  in  a  symbolic  sense.
The  church,  as  well  as  Christians,  has  come  out  of
great  tribulations. — But  every  true  house  of  God  is
also,  as  such,  a  gate  of  heaven.

9.  The  application  of  oil  also,  which  afterwards,
in  a  religious  sense,  as  a  a  symbol  of  the  spirit,  runs
through  the  entire  Scriptures,  we  find  here  iirst  men
tioned.

10.  Jacob's  vow  is  to  be  understood  from  the
preceding  promise  of  the  Lord.     It  was  to  bo  uttered,
according  to  the  human  nature,  in  his  waking  state,
and  is  the  answer  to  the  divine  promise.

11.  As  to  the  tithes  and  vows,  see  Dictionaries.
GERLACH  :  "  The  number  '  ten  '  being  the  one  that
concludes  the  prime  numbers,  expresses  the  idea  of
completion,  of  some  whole   thing.     Almost  all  na
tions,  in  paying  tithes  of  all  their  income,  and  fre
quently,  indeed,  as  a  sacred  revenue,  thus  wished  to
testify  that  their  whole  property  belonged  to  God,
and  thus  to  have  a  sanctified  use  and  enjoyment  of
what  was  left.

12.  The  idea  of  Jacob's  ladder,  of  the  protecting
hosts  of  angels,  of  the  house  of  God  and  its  sublime
terrors,  of    the  gate   of  heaven,  of  the  symbolical
significance  of  the  oil,  of  the  vow,  and  of  the  tithes
— all  these  constitute  a  blessing  of  this  consecrated
night  of  Jacob's  life.

13.  Jacob  does  not  think  that  Jehovah's  revela
tion  to  him  was  confined  to  this  place  of  Bethel.    He
does  not  interpret  the  sacredness  of  the  place  in  a
heathen  way,  as  an  external  thing,  but  theocratically
and    symbolically.      Through  Jehovah's   revelation,
this  place,  which  is  viewed  as  a  heathen  waste,  be
comes  to  him  a  house  of  God,  and  therefore  he  con
secrates  it  to  a  permanent  sanctuary.

14.  Vers.  20,  21.     Briefly:  If  God  is  to  me  Je
hovah,  then  Jehovah  shall  be  to  me  God.     If  the
Lord  of  the  angels  and  the  world  proves  himself  to
me  a  covenant  God,  then  I  will  glorify  in  my  cove
nant  God,  the  Lord  of  the  whole  world.     [There  is
clear  evidence  that  Jacob  was  now  a  child  of  God.
He  takes  God  to  be  his  God  in  covenant,  with  whom
he  will  live.     He  goes  out  in  reliance  upon  the  divine
promise,  and   yields  himself  to  the  divine  control,
rendering  to  God  the  homage  of  a  loving  and  grate
ful  heart.     But  what  a  progress  there   is  between
Bethel  and  Peniel.    Grace  reigns  within  him,  but  not
without  a  conflict.     The  powers  and  tendencies  of
evil  are  still  at  work.     He  yields  too  readily  to  their
urgent  solicitations.     Still  grace  and  the  principles
of  the  renewed  man,   gain  a  stronger  hold,  and  be
come  more  and  more  controlling.     Under  the  loving
but  faithful  discipline  of  God,  he  is  gaining  in  his
faith,  until,  in  the  great  crisis  of  his  life,  Mahanaim
and  Peniel,  and  the  new  revelations  then  given  to
him,  it  receives  a  large  and  sudden  increase.     He
is  thenceforward  trusting,  serene,  and    established,
strengthened  and  settled,  and  passes  into  the  quiet
life  of  the  triumphant  believer. — A.  G.]


524


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSES.


IIOMILETICAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.

Sec  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs. — Jacob,
the  third  patriarch.  How  he  inherited  from  his
grandfather:  1.  The  active  deeds  of  faith,  and  from
liis  lather ;  2.  the  endurance  of  faith,  and  therefore
even  he  appears;  3.  as  the  wrestler  of  faith. — Or  the
patriarch  of  hope  in  a  special  sense. — Jacob's  pilgrim
age. — His  couch  upon  the  stony  pillow  becomes  his
Bethel. — The  night-vision  of  .J.u-nb  at  Bethel  becomes
more  and  more  glorious  :  1.  The  ladder ;  2.  the  angels
ascending  and  descending;  8.  Jehovah  and  his  prom
ise. — The  ladder:  a.  From  heaven  to  earth  :  the  word
of  God  ;  b.  from  earth  to  heaven  :  prayer  (cries  and
tears,  prayer,  intercession,  thanks,  praise). — The  An
gel  of  Coil  over  our  life. — Jehovah  speaking  above
the  silent  angel?,  or  the  peculiar  glory  of  the  word
of  God,  especially  of  the  gospel. — Jacob's  noble
fearlessness,  and  liis  holy  fear. — Bethel,  or  the  sacred
places  and  names  upon  this  earth. — Jacob's  vow,  the
answer  to  Jehovah's  promise. — How  the  (iod  of
Abraham  and  Isaac  becomes  also  the  (!od  of  Jacob,
or,  Jehovah  always  the  same  in  the  kingdom  of
Cod:  1.  The  living  results  ;  2.  the  living  nature  of
the  results.

s,ri',,,)i  Firs',  vers.  10-15.  STARKE  :  Jacob  left
his  home  secretly  and  alone,  with  all  possible  speed,
before  his  brother  Esau  was  aware  of  it.  He  took
nothing  with  him  but  his  staff  (ch.  xxxii.  10). — (Jo-
SEPiirs:  Unfavorable  opinion  of  the  people-  at  Luz.)
— Jacob,  in  this  wretched  condition  upon  his  journey,
a  symbol  of  the  Messiah.  (Explained  allegoiically
by  It  AMHACII  :  1.  Wooing  a  wife  in  a  strange  coun
try ;  2.  the  true  heir  appearing  in  poverty;  8.  the
sojourn  at  Bethel.  Christ  had  not  \\here  to  lay  his
Jio'ad.) — This  ladder,  a  symbol  of  God's  paternal  care,
by  which,  as  by  a  heavenly  ladder,  heaven  and  earth
are  connected.— But  that  thia  ladder  was  to  ^typify
something  far  higher,  we  learn  from  Christ  himself.
The  mystery  of  Christ's  incarnation,  and  of  his  me
diatorial  oilice,  was  typified  by  tiAs.—Freiberyer
Ji',1,,1:  In  this  ladder  we  see  the  steps  and  degrees:
1.  Of  the  state  of  Christ's  humiliation  ;  2.  of  the
state  of  his  exaltation. — CIIRYSO.STOM  :  "  Faith  is  the
ladder  of  Jacob  reaching  from  earth  to  heaven. —
BERMF.  :  The  ladder  of  Jacob  is  the  church,  as  yet
partly  militant  upon  the  earth,  and  partly  triumphant
in  heaven. — The  Lord  (Jehovah).  Chaldec:  The
glory  of  the  Lord.  Arab. :  The  righU)f  the  Lord.
— (Frcibcrger  Bibd:  Grotius  and  Clericus  are  wrong
in  not  being  willing  to  give  the  name,  the  Angel  of
the  Lord,  to  Christ,  but  to  one  of  the  highest  angels,
to  whom  they  attribute  the  name  of  Jehovah,  con
trary  to  the  sense  and  usage  of  the  Holy  Spirit. ) —
Ver.  15.  God,  in  comforting  him,  proceeds  gradually:
1.  He  himself  is  with  him,  not  a  mere  angel ;  2.  he
will  bring  him  back  again  ;  3.  he  will  never  leave
him  (Rom.  viii.  28). — Parents  ought  not  to  bring  up
their  children  too  delicately,  for  they  never  know  in
what  circumstances  they  may  be  placed. — HALL  :
God  is  generally  nearest  to  us  when  we  are  the  most
humble. — Bibl.  Tub. :  Even  in  his  sleep  Jacob  had
intercourse  with  the  Lord;  in  a  like  manner  our
sleep  should  be  consecrated  to  the  Lord. — Christ,
the  true  Jacob's  ladder  (Ps.  xci.  2  ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  2).

GERLACH  :  That  the  angels  here  neither  hover  nor
fly,  is  owing  to  the  representation  and  typical  signifi
cance  of  the  vision.  By  this  very  fact  Jacob  was  as
sured  that  the  place  where  his  head  lies,  is  the  point
to  which  God  sends  his  angels,  in  order  to  execute
his  commands  concerning  him,  and  to  receive  com


munications  from  him ;  a  symbol  of  the  loving  and
uninterrupted  care  for  his  servants,  extending  to  in
dividuals  and  minute  events. — l)i-e<ulful.  The  old
church  called  the  Lord's  supper  a  dreadful  mystery
(xacramentum  tremendwri). —  Lisco  :  Now  Jacob,
like  Abraham  and  Isaac,  stands  as  the  elect  of  Jeho
vah.  This  is  of  greater  importance,  since  Jacob  ia
the  ancestor  of  the  Israelites  only.  The  promises
of  Jehovah,  therefore,  that  were  given  to  him,  must
have  appeared  as  the  dearest  treasure  to  his  descend
ants. — SCHRODER  :  Ver.  10.  Became  the  sun  t'-as  set.
A  symbol  corresponding  with  his  inward  feeling.
The  paternal  home  wiiu  the  revelations  and  the  wor
ship  of  the  only  true  (iod,  is  far  behind  him,  a
strange  solitude  around  him,  and  a  position  full  of
temptation  before  him. — The  living  stone,  the  rock
of  salvation,  is  the  antitype  of  that  typical  stone  in
the  wilderness  ;  do  with  it  what  the  patriarch  did
with  his  (F.  AY.  Krummacher),  Ileb.  i.  14. — In  the
symbol  of  the  ladder  lies  the  prediction  of  the  special
providence  of  God. — Earth  is  a  court  of  paradise  ;
life,  here  below,  is  a  short  pilgrimage;  our  home  is
above,  and  the  light  of  a  blessed  eternity  illuminates
our  path  (F.  AAr.  Krummacher).

Section  Second,  vers.  16-22.  STAHKK  :  purely
the  Lord.  Chald. :  The  glory  of  the  Lord. — A'er.
1  7.  His  feeble  nature  trembled  before  this  heavenly
manifestation,  because  he  was  well  aware  of  his  nil-
worthiness,  and  the  sublimity  of  God's  majesty  con
sidered  in  the  light  of  the  Spirit. — AYliere  God's  word
is  found,  there  is  a  house  of  (iod.  There  heaven
stands  open. — (The  ancients  believed  that  the  divin
ity,  after  having  forsaken  the  greater  part  of  the  earth
(as  to  his  gracious  presence),  could  be  found  at  that
place,  whither  they  would  be  called  after  their  depart
ure  from  Chaldsea  (Cyrill  Alex.)— Yer.  IS.  As  Jacob
was  not  induced  to  set  up  this  stone  and  worship  at
it  by  any  superstition  or  idolatry,  so  the  pap:.-ts  gain
nothing"  in  deriving  their  image-worship  from  this
act ;  although  we  read  in  Lev.  xxvi.  1  ;  Dent.  vii.  5  ;
xii.  3.  that  God  has  expressly  prohibited  these  tilings.

(The  Orientals,  in  their  journeys,  use  oil  for  food,

for  anointing,  and  for  healing.) — CUAMKU:  Although
the  Lord  God  is  everywhere  present  (Jer.  xxiii.  24),
he  is  yet  especially  near  to  his  church  with  his  grace,
his  spirit,  and  his  blessing  (John  xiv.  18;  Matt,  xviii.
ou) — ]>il,i_  \\';rt.:  AYhcrever  the  Lord  God  shows
himself  in  his  word,  or  by  deeds  of  his  grace,  there
is  his  house,  and  the  gate  of  heaven,  there  heaven
with  its  treasures  is  open. — A  Christian  walks  with
great  reverence  and  i'ear  before  God,  and  bows  in
humble  submission  before  his  most  sacred  majesty.
— (Christ,  the  corner-stone,  anointed  with  the  oil  of
gladness.) — Freibcrger  Bibd:  A  church,  though
built  of  wood  and  stones,  nevertheless  bears  this
beautiful  title,  and  is  called  God's  house,  or  house
of  the  Lord.  So  frequently  were  named  :  a.  the
tabernacle  (Exod.  xxiii.  19;  xxxiv.  26);  b.  the  first
and  second  temple  at  Jerusalem,  etc.— Arers.  20,  21.
Vows  must  be  regarded  as  holy.— The  duty  of  grat
itude. — AVhatever  a  Christian  gives  to  the  establish
ment  of  divine  service,  and  to  the  support  of  pious
teachers,  he  gives  to  God.— Lisco  :  How  Go  1  reveals
himself  through  facts  and  the  experiences  of  life,  by
means  of  which  he  enlarges  the  store  of  our  knowl
edge  (still,  not  here  the  knowledge  of  his  omnipres
ence). — GERLACH  :  The  vow,  which  Jacob  here  took,
was  based  entirely  upon  the  promise  givcn_  to  him,
and  served  as  an  encouragement  to  gratitude,  to
faith,  and  to  obedience,  just  as  afterwards,  in  the
law,  in  a  similar  way,  sacrifices  were  vowed  and  of-


CHAP.   XXIX.  1— XXX.   24.


525


fercd.  It  belonged  to  the  time  of  childhood  under
tutors  and  governors  (Gal.  iv.  1). — The  stone  is  to
become  a  place  of  sacrifice. — CALWEE  Handbuch  :
Perhaps  Jacob  accomplished  the  vow  concerning  the
tithes  in  a  similar  sense,  as  at  the  feast  of  tithes  and
sacrifices  (Deut.  xiv.  28,  29),  which  afterwards  oc
curred  every  three  years,  and  at  which  the  Levites,
the  stranger,  widows,  and  orphans  should  be  invited,
and  at  which  they  should  eat  and  be  satisfied.  This
feast  may,  perhaps,  have  existed  voluntarily,  before  it
became  legal  and  was  introduced  as  a  fixed  usage. —
SCHRODER:  Generally,  the  outward  connection  with
the  chosen  generation,  the  residence  at  a  place  point
ed  out  to  them  by  God,  constituted  the  condition  of
a  participation  in  Jehovah.  Ishmael,  leaving  the
paternal  home  and  Canaan,  immediately  passed  over
to  Eloliim's  dominion.  By  this  manifestation  the
fear  (?)  that  he,  like  Ishmael,  might  be  cut  off  as  a
branch  from  its  vine,  which  soon  withereth,  is  taken
away  from  Jacob,  and  the  blessing  spoken  over  him
by  Isaac  at  his  departure,  receives  its  sanction


(Hengstenberg).  (The  circumstances  were  more
personal  and  intense ;  holy  persons  constituted  sa
cred  places,  not  vice  versa ;  nor  did  the  promise
lie  in  Isaac's  individuality,  but  in  the  house  of  Isaac
and  Rebekah,  and  Jacob  was  conscious  that  he  was
the  heir  of  blessing.  The  place  of  God's  special
care,  the  ideal  church  of  Jehovah  now,  is  also  trans
ferred  in  a  certain  sense,  from  Beer-sheba  to  Ilavan.)
— Here  God  himself  erected  a  pulpit,  and  preached,
that  his  church  shall  stand  forever  and  ever.  But
Jacob  and  the  angels  of  heaven  are  his  hearers.
But  you  must  not  run  to  St.  Jacob,  etc.,  but  in  faith
look  at  the  place  where  the  word  and  the  sacraments
are,  for  there  is  the  house  of  God,  and  the  gate  of
heaven  (Luther).— The  oil,  which,  from  without,  pen
etrates  objects  gently  but  deeply,  symbolizes  holiness
which  is  to  be  imparted  to  common  things  and  per
sons  as  a  permanent  character  (Baumgarten). — As
God  has  become  ours  by  faith,  so  we  must  cheerfully
yield  ourselves  to  our  neighbor  by  love  (Bcrleb.
Bibcl).


SECOND    SECTION.

Jacob's  wives  and  children.  Jacob  and  Rachel,  Laban's  youngest  daughter.  First  and  second  treaty  with
Laban.  His  involuntary  consummation  of  marriage  with  Leah.  T/ie  double  marriage.  Leah's  sons.
Rachel's  dissatisfaction.  The  strife  of  the  two  women.  The  concubines.  Jacob's  blcssina  of

7  •  1  7  if         J

children.


CHAPTER    XXIX.   1— XXX.  24.


Then   Jacob  went    on   his  journey  [lifted  up  his  feet]  and  came  [fled]   into  the  land  of

2  the   people    [children]   of   the  cast     [morning].     And  he  looked,  and  behold  a  well  in  the
field,   and,  lo,  there  were  three  flocks   of  sheep  lying  by  it   [before  him]  ;  for  out  of  that

3  well  they  watered  the  flocks:  and  a  great   stone  was" upon  the  well's   month.     And
thither  were  all  the  flocks  gathered:  and    [then]    they  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's
mouth,  and  watered  the  sheep,  and   put  the  stone  again  upon   the  well's   mouth  in  his

4  place.     And  Jacob  said  unto  them,  My  brethren,  whence   le  ye  ?     And  they   said,  Of

5  Haran  are  we.     And  lie  said  unto  them,  Know  ye   Laban  the   son    of  Nahor?     And

6  they  said,  We  know  him.     And  he  said  unto  them,  Is  he  well?     And  they  said,  lie  is

7  well  :   and  behold,  Rachel  [iamb,  ewe-lamb]   his  daughter   cometh  with   the  sheep.     And
[But]  he  said,  Lo,  it  is  yet  high  day,  neither  is  it  time  that  the  cattle  should  be  gathered

8  together  :  water  ye  the  sheep,  and  go  and  feed  them.     And   they  said,  We  cannot,  un
til  all  the  flocks  be  gathered  together,  and  till  [then]  they  roll  the   stone   from  the  well's
mouth ;   then  [and]  we  water  the  sheep.

And  while  he  yet  spake  with  them,  Rachel  came  with   her  father's  sheep  :  for  she
10  kept  them.     And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jacob  saw  Rachel  the  daughter  of  Laban  his
mother's  brother,  and  the  sheep  of  Laban  his  mother's  brother,  that'  Jacob  went  near,
and  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth,  and  watered  the  flock  of  Laban  his  mother's
,  12  brother.     And  Jacob  kissed  Rachel,  and  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept.     And  Jacob
told  Rachel  that  he  was  her   father's   brother  [nephew].     And  that  he  was   Rcbckah's

13  son  ;   and  she  ran  and  told  her  father.     And  it  came   to   pass,  when  Laban  heard  the
tidings  of  Jacob  his  sister's  son,  that  he  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  him  and  kissed

14  him,  and  brought  him  to  his  house.     And  [Then]  lie  told  Laban  all  these  things.     And
Laban  said  to  him,  Surely  thou  art  my  bone  and  my  flesh.     And  he   abode  with   him
the  space  of  a  month.


i :


526  GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


15          And  Laban  said  unto  Jacob,  Because  thou  art  my  brother  [relative],  shouldest  them

1G  therefore  serve  me  for  nought?  tell  me,  what  shall  thy   wages   be.     And  Laban  had

two  daughters:  the  name  of  the  elder  was  Leah  [scarcely,  the  wearied ;  still  less,  the  dull,  stupid,

17  as  Ffirst,  rather :  the  pining,  yearning,  desiring],  and  the  name  of  the  younger  was  Rachel.     Leah
was  tender  eyed;  but  Rachel  was  beautiful  [as  to  form]  and  well  favored  [as  to  countenance].

18  And   Jacob  loved   Rachel:   and  said,   I  will  serve  thee  seven  years  for  Rachel  thy

19  younger  daughter.     And  Laban  said,  It  is  better  that  I   give  her  to   thee   than  that  I

20  should  trive  her  to  another  man  :  abide  with  me.     And  [thus]  Jacob  served  seven  years
for  Rachel;   and  they  seemed  unto  him  [were  in  his  eyes]  but  a   few  days,  for  the  love  he
had  to  her.

21  And  Jacob  said  unto  Laban,  Give  me  my  wife,  for  my  days  are  fulfilled,  that  I  may

22  20  in  unto  her.      And  Laban  gathered  together  all  the  men   of  the   place,  and  made   a

23  feasl  [wedding feast].     And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  evening,  that  he  took  Leah  his  daugh-

24  ter,  and  brought  her  to  him ;   and   he  went  in  unto  her.     And   Laban  gave  unto   his

(lailirnter  Leah,  Zilpah  [.Maurer  :  the  dewy— from  the  trickling,  dropping;  ITirst :  myrrh-juice]  his  maid,

2f>  for  an  handmaid.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  in  the  morning,  behold,  it  was  Leah  :  and
lie  said  to  Laban,  What  is  this  thou  hast  done  unto  me?  did  [have]  not  I  serve  with

2G  thee  for  Rachel?  wherefore  then  hast  thou  beguiled  me?  And  Laban  said,  It  must
nol  be  so  done  [it  is  not  the  custom]  in  our  country,  to  give  the  younger  before  the  firstborn.

27    .Fulfil    her    [wedding]  week  [the  week  of  this  one— fulfil,  etc.— is  too  strong],  and    we    will   give  thee

25  this  also,  for  tin-  service  which  thou  shalt  serve  with  me  yel  seven  other  years.  And  Jacob
did  so,  and  fulfilled  her  week  :  and  [then]  he  gave  him  Rachel  his  daughter  to  wife  also.

2!)    And   Laban    irave    to    Rarhi'l    his    daughter   Bilhah    [Maurer,  Furst :  tender.    Gesenius :  bashful,
30   modest]  his  handmaid  to  be  her  maid.      And  he  went  in  also  unto  Rachel,  and   he    loved

also  Rachel  more  than  Leah,  and  served  with  him  yet  seven  other  years.
;;i  And  when  the  Lord  saw  that  Leah   was  hated  [displeasing]    he  opened   her  womb  :

32  but  Rachel  was  barren.      And    Leah   conceived,    and    bare   a    son;   and    she   called   his
name  Reuben  [see  there,  a  son]  :   for  she  said,  Surely  the  Lord  hath  looked  upon  my  afflic-

33  lion;  now  therefore  my  husband  will  love  me.     And  she  conceived   again,  and  bare  a
son  ;   and  said,  Because  the  Lord  hath  heard  that  I  was  hated,  he    hath  therefore  given

34  me  this  son  also  :  and  she  called  his  name  Simeon  [schimeon,  hearing].      And  she  conceived
ao-ain,  and  bare  a  son;   and  said,  Now  this  time  [at  last]  will  my  husband   be  joined  unto
me,    because    I    have    borne    him    three  sons  :    therefore  was    his  name   called   Levi

35  [joining,  cleaving].      And  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  son;  and  she  said,  Now  will  I
praise    the    Lord:   therefore   she   called   his  name  Judah  [praise  of  God,  literally,  praised,  viz.,  be
Jehovah]  ;   and  left  bearing.

CH.  XXX.        1.  And  when  Rachel  saw  that  she  bare  Jacob  no  children,  Rachel  envied

2  her  sister;  and  said  unto  Jacob,  Give  me  children,  or  else  I  die.     And   Jacob's   anger
was  kindled  against  Rachel  ;  and  he  said,  Am  I  [then]  in  God's  stead,  who   hath  with-

3  held  from  thee? the  fruit  of  the  womb?     And  she  said,  Behold   my  maid  Bilhah,  go   in
unto  her,  and  she  shall  bear  upon  my  knees,  that  I  may  [and  I  shall]    also   have  children

4  [be built]  by  her.     And  she  gave  him  Bilhah.  her  handmaid  to  wife.     And   Jacob  went
5,  G  in    unto  her.     And  Bilhah    conceived,   and  bare  Jacob  a  son.     And  Rachel  said,

'  God    hath    judged    me    [decreed  me  my  right],    and     hath    also    heard     my  voice,    and
hath    given     me     a    son:      therefore    called    she     his     name     Dan     [Judge;  vindicator].

7  And   Bilhah,   Rachel's  maid,   conceived   again,  and   bare  Jacob  a  second  son.     And

8  Rachel  said,   With  great  wrestlings  [wrestlings  of  God,  Elohim]  have  I  wrestled  with  my
sister,   and  I  have   prevailed :   and  she  called  his  name  Naphtali  [my  conflict  or  wrestler],

9  [And]'  When  Leah  saw  that  she  had  left  bearing,  she  took  Zilpah,  her  maid,  and  gave
10,  11  her  Jacob  to  wife.    And  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid,  bare  Jacob  a  son.    And  Leah  said,  A

12  troop  cometh  ['with  felicity,  good  fortune]  :  and  she  called  his  name  Gad  [fortune].     And  Zil-

13  pah,  Leah's  maid,  bare  Jacob  a  second  son.  And  Leah  said,  Happy  ami  [for  my  happiness],
for  the  daughters  will  call  me  blessed:    and  she  called  his  name  Asher  [blessedness].

14  And  Reuben  went  in  the  days  of  wheat  harvest,  and  found  mandrakes  [love-apples]
in  the  field,  and  brought  them  unto  his  mother  Leah.     Then  Rachel  said  to  Leah,  Give

15  me,  I  pray  thee,  of  thy  son's  mandrakes.     And  she  said  unto  her,  Is  it  a  small  matter
that  thou  hast  taken  my  husband  ?  and  wouldest  thou  take   away  my  son's  mandrakes
also  ?     And  Rachel  said,  Therefore  he  shall  lie  with  thee  to-night  for  thy  son's  man-


CHAP.   XXIX.   1— XXX.    24.


527


1G  drakes^    And  [as]  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  evening,  and  Leah  went  out  to
meet  him,  and  said,  Thou  must  come  in  unto  me;  for  surely  I  have  hired  thee  wi'.h  my

17  son's  mandrakes.     And  he  lay  with  her  that  night.     And  God  [Eiohim]   hearkensd  un-

18  to  Leah,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob  the  fifth  son.     And   Leah   said,  God  hath
given  me  my  hire  [wages,  reward],  because  I  have  given  my  maiden  to  my  husband  :  and

19  she  called  his  name  Issachar  [Yisaehcar,2  it  is  the  reward].     And   Leah  conceived  a  fain    and

20  bare  Jacob  the  sixth  son.     And  Leah  said,  God  hath  endued  me  with  a  goo°d  dowry
[presented  me  with  a  beautiful  present];  now  will  my  husband   dwell  with  me,   because  I  have

21  borne  him  six  sons:   and   she   called   his   name  Zebulun  [dwelling,  dwelling  together].     And
afterwards  she  bare  a  daughter,  and  called  her  name  Dinah  [judged,  justified,  judgment].

And  God  remembered  Rachel,  and  God  hearkened  to  her,  and  opened  her  womb.
And  she  conceived,  and  bare   a  son  ;  and  said,  God  hath   taken   away  my  reproach  •
24  And  she  called  his  name  Joseph  [may  he  add];  and   said,  The   Lord  shall  add  to  me
another  [a  second]  son.

>  J'  ,Cn:  XXX;  T,or'  11-  Ijit-  with  a  tro°P  or  baud.—  Lange  follows  the  Sept.,  Vuls?.,  and  the  most  of  the  carlv  versions
But  whether  we  follow  the  Ken,  or  the  Chethib,  as  in  our  version,  it  is  better  to  adhere  to  thfll^ti^  I  te±  £
band.  For  while  Leah  uses  hereafter  the  name  DTpX  instead  of  MlPP  indicating  the  lower  religious  state  into  whicn


(-  Vcr.  13.    Hcb.  -Cb  Ch,  there  is  a  reward—  or


&?,  he  brings  reward.    A.  G.]


GENERAL  PRELIMINARY   REMARKS.

1.  The  first  half  of  the  history  of  Jacob's  sojourn
in  Mesopotamia  is  a  history  of  his  love,  his  marriages,
and  his  children.  Bridal  love,  in  its  peculiar  splendor
of  heart  and  emotion,  never  appeared  so  definitely  in
Genesis,  after  Adam's  salutation  to  Eve,  as  in  the
present  case.  With  respect  to  the  moral  motives,
by  means  of  which  Jacob  became  involved  in  poly
gamy,  notwithstanding  his  exclusive  bridal  love,  com
pare  the  preface  p.  Ixxvi.  We  may  divide  the  his
tory  into  the  following  stages  :  1.  Jacob's  arrival  at
the  shepherds'  well  in  Haran  (vers.  1-8) ;  2.  Jacob's
salutation  to  Rachel  and  his  reception  into  Laban's
house  (vers.  9-14) ;  8.  Jacob's  covenant  and  service
for  Rachel  and  the  deception  befalling  him  (vers.
15-25).  How  Jacob,  under  the  divine  providence,
through  the  deception  practised  upon  him,  became
very  rich,  both  in  sons  and  with  respect  to  the  future.
(Gu'TiiE  :  It  has  always  been  proved  true,  That  ho
whom  God  deceives,  is  deceived  to  his  advantage.)

4.  His    renewed   service  for  Rachel  (vers.  26-30)  ;

5.  The  first-born  sons  of  Leah  (vers.  31-35)  ;  6.  Ra
chel's  d(  jection  and  the  concubinage  of  Bilhah,  her
handmaid  (xxx.  vers.  1-8) ;    7.    Leah's    emulation,
and  her  handmaid  Zilpah  (vers.  9-13  ;  8.  Leah's  last
children  (vers.  14-21) ;    9.  Rachel,  Joseph's  mother
(vers.  22-24).

2.  Knobel  finds  here  a  mixture  of  Jehovistic  re
presentation  with  the  original  text.  He  knows  so
little  what  to  make  of  the  ancient  mode  of  writing
narratives  that  he  remarks  upon  vers.  16  and  17:
"  Moreover  the  same  writer  who  has  spoken  of  Ra
chel  already  (vers.  9-12),  could  not  properly  intro
duce  the  two  daughters  of  Laban,  as  is  done  in  the
present  instance."


EXEGETICAL  AND   CRITICAL.

1.  Yers.  1-8.  Jacob's  arrival  at  the  shepherd's
mdl  in  Haran. — Then  Jacob  went  on  his  jour
ney.— This  consoling  and  refreshing  manifestation
reanimated  him,  so  that  he  goes  cheerfully  on  his  jour


ney.     Of  course,  he  must  use  his  feet,  his  bridal  tour
differs  from  that  of  P^liezer,  although  he  himself  is  the
wooer. — Into  the  land  of  the  people  of  the  East.
— The  choice  of  this  expression,  no  doubt,  indicates
that  from  Bethel  he  gradually  turned  eastward,  and
crossing  the  Jordan  and  passing  through  the  north
ern  part  of  Arabia  Deserta,  he  came  to  Mesopotamia,
which  is  also  included  here. — He  looked,  and  be
hold. — He  looks  around  to  find  out  where  he  is.
Wells,  however,  are  not  only  waymarks  in  nomadic
districts,  but  also  places  of  gathering  for  the  shep
herds. — It  was  not  a  well  of  living  water, — at  least
not  Eliezcr's  well  near  Haran, — but  a  cistern,  as  is
proved  from  the  stone  covering  it.    It  seems  to  have
been  in  the  midst  of  the  plain  of  Haran,  and  the  city  it
self  was  not  yet  in  sight. — There  were  three  flocks
of  sheep  lying  by  it. — Scenes  of  this  description
were  frequently  seen  in  the  ancient  Orient,  (ch.  xxiv.
11,  etc.;  Ex.  ii.  1(>,  etc.,)  and  may  still  be  seen  to
day  (ROBINSON  :  "  Researches,"  ii.  pp.  180,  357,  371 ;
iii.  27,  250j.     Watering  troughs  of  stone  are  placed
around  the  well,  and  the  rule  is,  that  he  who  comes
first, waters  his  nocks  first  (V.  SCHUBERT  :  "  Travels,"
ii.  p.453  ;  BURKIIARDT  :  "  Syria,"p.  128,etc.).   Among
the  Arabian  Bedouins  the  wells  belong  to  separate
tribes  and  families,  and  strangers  are  not  permitted
to  use  them  without  presents,  i.  e.  pay  (BURKIIARDT  :
"Bedouins,"  p.   185;    ROBINSON,  iii.  p.   7;   comp.
Numb.   xx.   17,  19 ;  xxi.   22).      They  are,  therefore,
often  the  cause  of  strifes  (ch.  xxvi.  19,  etc.).     The
Arabians  cover  them  very  skilfully,  so  that  they  re
main  concealed  from  strangers  (Dion.  Sic.,  ii.  48,
19,  94).     Even  now  they  are  covered  with  a  large
stone  (see  ROBINSON,  ii.  p.  1 80).    KNOBEL.   ROBINSON  :
"  Most  of  the  cisterns  are  covered  with  a  large,  thick
flat  stone,  in  the  centre  of  which  a  round  hole  is  cut,
which  forms  the  mouth  of  the  cistern.     This  hole,
in  many  instances,  we  found  covered  with  a  heavy
stone,  to  the  removal  of  which  two  or  three  men
were  requisite."     As  to  the  cisterns  (see  also  Keil,
?.  203).— And  a  great  stone.— This  does  not  mean
;hat  all  the  shepherds  were  to  come  together,  that
by  their  united  strength  they  might  roll  it  away.    The
shepherds  of  these  three  herds  must  wait  for  the


528


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


rest  of  the  shepherds  with  their  herds,  because  the
waterin"  of  the  herds  was  common  and  must  take
place  indue  order.  The  remark,  no  doubt,  indicates,
however  that  the  stone  was  too  heavy  to  be  removed
by  one  of  the  shepherds.  The  shepherds  also  appear
to  have  made  the  removal  of  the  stone  as  easy  as
possible  to  them.— My  Brethren.— A  friendly
salutation  between  the  shepherds.— Of  Haran.—
[Il-u-xn  lav  about  fbur  hundred  and  fifty  miles  north-
cast  Iron.'  Beer-sheba,  It  would,  therefore,  be  a
journev  of  fifteen  days,  if  Jacob  walked  at  the  rate
of  thirty  miles  a  day.  Murphy.— A.  G.]  iron,  this
it  does  not  follow  certainly  that  the  city  was  jar  oft,
still  L;'ha:i  mHit  have  had  tents  on  the  plains  for
his  shepherds.— Laban,  the  son  of  Nahor.— Nahor
was  his  .Tandfathcr.  Betlmcl,  his  father,  here  retires
into  the  background,  just  as  in  Rebckah's  history.—
It  is  yet  liigh  day.— According  to  Starke,  Jacob,
as  a  shepherd,  wished  to  remind  these  shepherds  ot
their  duly.  It  is  obviously  the  prudent  Jacob  who
act- here".  He  wishes  to  remove  the  shepherds,  in
order  to  meet  his  cousin  Rachel,  who  is  approaching,
alone  (see  KKII.).  He  thus  assumes  that  they  could
water  their  Hocks  separately,  and  afterwards  drive
again  to  the  pasture.

•2.    Yers.    S-M. — /«<'«>/.«    ?.t'ttli/ti<>n     to    RacJifl,
awl  '/,i.t  r,-r<i>tion    'into    Laban  x  /i<m.-r.— For  she
kept  them.— It   is  customary  among  the  Arabians
of  .Sinai,  that,  the  virgin  daughters  drive  the  herds  to
the  pasture  (see  BuRKHARDT  :    "  Bedouins,"  p.   283).
KNOHKL,  Ex.  ii.  10.— And  roUed  the  stone.— The
struii-  imp;vs.-ion   that   the  beautiful   Rachel  made
upon°her  cousin  Jacob   is   manifested  in   two  ways.
He  thinks  himself  powerful  enough  to  roll  the  stone
from  the  mouth  of  the  cistern  out  of  love  to  her,  and
disregards  the  possibility  that  the  trial  might  fail.  At
the  same  time,  too,  he  boldly  disregards  the  common
rule  of  the  .-hepherds  present.     Rachel's  appearance
made  him  ea-er,  as   formerly  Rebekah's  appearance
even  the  old  Eliczcr,  when  he  took  out  the  bracelets
before  he  knew  her.     The   power  of  beauty  is  also
recognized  here  upon  sacred  ground.     Tuch  thinks
that'the  united  exertion  of  the  shepherds  would  have
been  necessary,  and  the  narrative,  therefore,  boasts
of  a  Samson-like   strength  in  Jacob.       But   there  is
a  difference  between   Samson-like  strength  and   the
heroic  power  of  inspired  love.     [Perhaps,  however,
there  was  mingling  with  this  feeling  the  joy  which
naturally  springs   from    finding  himself  among  his
kindred   after  the  long,  lonely  and  dangerous  jour
ney   through  the   desert— A.  G.]— Jacob  kissed
Rachel.— "The three-fold  ",EX  TiX  shows  that  he
acted  thus  as  cousin  (rolling  the  stone  from  the  well's
mouth,  etc.).     As  such  he  was  allowed  to  kiss  Rachel
openly',  as  a  brother  his  sister  (Song  of  Sol.  viii.  1)."
KNOHKL. — Yet  his  excitement  betrays  him  even  here,
since  he  did  not  make  known  his  relationship  with
her  until  afterwards.— And  wept.— Tears  of  joy,  of
reanimation  after  a  long  oppression  and  sorrow  (cfa.
xlv.  15;  xlvi.   29).      He  wept  aloud,  with  uplifted
voice.     Brother  here  equivalent  to  nephew  (ch.  xiv.
1  ti :  xxiv.4-8).— When  Laban  heard  the  tidings.—
That  Jacob  made  the  whole  journey  on  foot  might
have  caused  suspicion  in  the  mind  of  Laban.     But
he  is  susceptible  of  nobler  feelings,  as  is  seen  from
the  subsequent  narration  (ch.  xxxi.  2-1),  although  he
is  f  enerally  governed  by  selfish  motives. — And  he
told  Laban. — Surely,  the  whole  cause  of  his  jour
ney,  by  which  he  also  explained  his  poor  appearance
as  the'son  of  the  rich  Isaac.     lu  the  view  of  Keil,


he  relates  only  the  circumstances  mentioned  from
ver.  2-12. — Surely  thou  art  my  flesh  and  my
bone. — He  recognizes  him  fully  from  his  appearance
and  his  communication,  as  his  near  nlativc. — The
space  of  a  month. — Literally,  during  some,  an  in
definite  number  of  days.  It  was  yet  uncertain,  from
day  to  day,  how  they  would  arrange  matters.

3.  Yers.    15-25.     Jacob's  suit    awl  x<.ri'ice  for
JRaeJ/d,     and    the    drccpt'on    practiced    vjioti    him.
—Tell  me  what  shall  thy  wages  bs. — This  ex
pression  is  regarded  by  Kcil  already  as   a  mark   of
Laban's  selfishness,  but  there  is  no  ground  for  this
view.     It  is  rather  to  be  supposed  that  Laban  wish
ed  to  open  the  way  for  his   love  suit,  which,  on  ac
count  of  his  poor  condition  he  had  not  yet  ventured
to  press.     We  see  afterwards,   indeed,   that  Laban
willingly  gives    both    his    daughters  to    him.      We
do  not,"  however,  wish  to  exclude  the  thought,  that
in  the  meantime  he  may  have  recognized  a  skilful
and  useful   shepherd   in   Jacob,   and   besides  acted
from  regard  to  his  own  interest,  especially  since  he
knew  that   Jacob  possessed   a  great  inheritance  at
home.— The  name  of  the  elder  was  Leah.— It  is
remarkable,  that  in  the  explanation  of  this  name  we
are  mostly  inclined   to  follow   derived  significations
of  the  word  nxb  (see  Fiirst  upon  this   ver))).— The
word  r(n  used  to  describe  the  eyes  of  Leah,  means
simply: "weak   or  dull,  whence  the   Arabians  have
made,"  moist  or  II  ar-eyed.     Leah's  eyes  were  not  in
keeping  with  the   Oriental   idea   of  beauty,   though
otherwise    she  might  he  a  woman  greatly  blessed.
"Eyes  which  are  not  clear    and    lustrous.     To  the
Oriental,  but  especially  to  the  Arabian,  black   eyes,
full  of  life  and  fire,  clear  and  expressive,  dark  eyes,
are  considered  the  principal  part  of  female   beauty.
Such  eyes  he  loves  to  compare  with  those  of  the
Gazelle,  (!!AMASA,  i.  p.  557,  etc."     Knobel.— Rachel,
the  third  renowned  beauty  in  the  patriarchal  family.
If  authentic  history  was  not  in  the  way,  Leah,  as  the
mother  of  Judah,  and  of  the  Davidie  Messianic  line,
otifht  to  have  carried  off  the   prize   of  beauty  alter
Sarah  and  Rcbekah.— And  well  favored.—"  Beau
tiful  as  to  her  form   and  beautiful  as  to  her  counte
nance."      Beside    the    more    general    designation:
beautiful    as    to    her    form,    the    second:     beautiful
HX-i1!?  must  surely  have  a  more  definite  significa-
tion'-~  beautiful  as  to  her  countenance,  and,  indeed,
with  a  reference  to  her  beautiful  eyes,  which  were
wantin-  to  Leah.     Thus  the  passage  indirectly  says
that  Leah's  form  was  beautiful.— Serve  thee  seven
vears  for  Rachel.— Instead   of  wages  he  desires
the  dau-hter,  and  instead  of  a  service  of  an  indefinite
number  of  davs  he  promises  a  service  of  seven  years.
"  Jacob's  service  represents  the  price  which,  among
the  Orientals,  was  usually  paid  for  the  wile  which
was  to  be  won  (see  WINER,  Rcalw.,  under  marriage).
The  custom  still  exists.     In  Kerek,  a  man  without
means,  renders  service  for  five  or  six  years  (RITTEP
Erdkunde,   xv.  p.  674),  and  in  Haurar,   Burl-hardt
("  Syria  "  p.  404),  met  a  young  man  who  had  served
ei-ht  years  for  his  bare  support,  and  then  received
for  a  wife  the  daughter  of  his  master,  but  must  ren-
der  service  still."  KNODKL.    On  the  contrary,  Keil  difr
putcs  the  certainty  of  the  assumption  that  the  .
torn  of  selling  their  daughters  to  men  was  general
at  that  time.     And  we  should  certainly  be  nearer  the
truth  in  explaining  many  usages  of  the  present  bor
der  Asia  from  patriarchal  relations,  than  to  invert
even-thing  according  to  Knobel's  view.     Kc.l  holds
that  Jacob's  seven  years  of  service  takes  the  place


CHAP.    XXIX.— XXX.    1-2-1


529


of  the  customary  dowry  and  the  presents  given  t
the  relatives ;   but  he  overlooks  the  fact  that  th
ideas  of  buying  and  presenting  (and  barter)  are  no
as  far  apart  in  the  East  as  with  us.     Nor  can  we  d
rectly  infer  the  covetousncss  of  Laban  from  Jacob's  at
ccptance  of  the  offer,  although  his  ignoble,  selfish,  nar
row-minded  conduct,  as  it  is  seen  afterwards,  throw
some  light  also  on  these  Eastern  transactions. — It  i
better  that  I  give    her  to  thee.— "Among  a
Bedouin  Arabians  the  cousin  has  the  preference  t
strangers  (BCRKHARPT,  "Bedouin,"  p.  219),  and  th
Druses  in  Syria  always  prefer   a  relative    to  a  ric
stranger  (VOLNKY,  '•  travels,"  ii.  p.  62).     It  is  gene
rally  customary  throughout  the  East,  that   a  ma:
marries  his  next  cousin ;  he  is  not  compelled  to  d
it,  but  the  right  belongs    to    him    exclusively,  an<
she  is  not  allowed  to  marry  any  other  without  hi
consent.     Both  relatives,  even  after  their  marriage
call  each  other  cousin  (BURKHARDT,  "  Bedouins,"  p
91,  and  u  Arabian  Proverbs,"  p.  274,  etc. ;  LAYARD
"Nineveh  and  Babylon,"  p.   222;  LANE,  "Manner
and  Customs," i.  p.  167).     KNOISEL. — They  seemed
unto  him  but  a  few  days.— So  far,  namely,   a
that  his  great  love  for  Rachel  made  his  long  servici
a  delight  to  him;  but,  on  the  other  hand,"it  is  no
said  that  he  did  not  long  for  the  end  of  these  sever
years.      Yet  he  was  cheerful  and  joyful  in  hope
which   is   in   perfect   keeping  with  Jacob's   charac
ter. — A  Feast. — Probably  Laban  intended,  at  the
great  nuptial  feast  which  he  prepared,  to  facilitati
Jacob's  deception  by  the   great  bustle  and  noise
but  then  also  to  arrange  things  so,  that  after  sever
days  the  wedding  might  be  considered  a  double  wed
ding      For  it  is  evident  that  he  wishes  to  bind  Jacob
as  firmly  and  as  long  as  possible  to  himself  (see  ch
xxx.   27). — Leah,  his  daughter.— The   deception
was  possible,  through  the  custom,  that  the  bride  was
led  veiled  to  the  bridegroom  and  the  bridal  chamber.
Laban  probably  believed,  as  to  the  base  deception,
that  he  would  be  excused,  because  he  had  already  iu
view  the  concession  of  the  second  daughter  to  Jacob.
— And  Laban  gave  unto  her  Zilpah We  can
not  certainly  infer  that  he  was  parsimonious,  because
he  gave  but  one  handmaid  to  Leah,  since  he  un
doubtedly  thought  already  of  the  dowry  of  Rachel
with  a  second  handmaid.     The  number  of  Rebekah's
handmaids  is  not  mentioned  (ch.  xxiv.  61). — Behold,
it  was  Leah.— ["  This  is  the  first  retribution  Jacob
experiences  for  the  deceitful  practises  of  his  former
days."     He  had,  through  fraud  and  cunning,  secured
the  place  and   blessing  of  Esau,— he,  the  younger,
in  the  place  of  the  elder ;  now,  by  the  same  deceit',
the  elder  is  put  upon  him  in  the  place  of  the  younger!
What  a  man  sows  that  shall  he  also  reap.     Sin  is
often  punished  with  sin.— A.  G.]     See  Doctrinal  and
Ethical  paragraphs.

4.  Vers.  26-30.  His  renewed  service  for  Rachel.
—It  must  not  be  so  done.—"  The  same  custom
exists  among  the  East  Indians  (see  MANU.  :  "  Stat
utes,"  iii.  160;  ROSENM.,  A.  u.  "Mod.  Orient,"  and
VON  BOHLEN,  upon  this  place).  Even  in  the  Egypt
of  to-day,  the  father  sometimes  refuses  also  to  give
in  marriage  a  younger  daughter  before  an  older  one
(LANK  :  "Customs  and  Manners,"  i.  p.  169)."  Kno-
bel.  Dclitzsch  adds  the  custom  in  old  imperial
Germany.  This  excuse  does  not  justify  in  the  least
Laban's  deception,  but  there  was,  however,  a  stin"
for  Jacob  in  this  reply,  viz.,  in  the  emphasis  of  the
right  of  the  first-born.  But  Laban's  offer  that  fol
lowed,  and  in  which  now  truly  his  ignoble  selfishness
B  manifest,  calmed  Jacob's  mind —Fulfil  her
34


week. — Lit.,  make  full  the  week  with  this  one,  i.  e.,
the  first  week  after  the  marriage,  which  is  due  to  her'
since  the  wedding  generally  lasted  one  week  (Judg!
xiv.  12  ;  Tob.  xi.  19).  [Her  week— the  week  of
Leah,  to  confirm  the  marriage  with  her  by  keeping
the  usual  wedding-feast  of  seven  days.  But  if  Leah
was  put  upon  him  at  the  close  of  the  feast  of  seven
days,  then  it  is  Rachel's  week,  the  second  feast  of
seven  days  which  is  meant.  The  marriage  with
Rachel  was  only  a  week  after  that  with  Leah.  The
seven  years'  service  for  her  was  rendered  afterwards.
— A.  G.]— And  we  will.— Ch.  xxxi.  1;  ver.  23 ;
probably  Laban  and  his  sons.  Laban  also,  as  Rebe
kah's  brother,  took  part  in  her  marriage  arrange
ments.— Rachel  his  daughter.— Within  eight  days
Jacob  therefore  held  a  second  wedding,  but  he  ful
filled  the  service  for  her  afterwards.  Laban,  there
fore,  not  only  deceived  Jacob  by  Leah's  interposition,
as  Jacob  _  tells  him  to  his  face,  but  he  overreached
him  also  in  charging  him  with  seven  years  of  service
for  Leah.  Thus  Jacob  becomes  entangled  in  polyg
amy,  in  the  theocratic  house  which  he  had  sought
in  order  to  close  a  theocratic  marriage,  first  by  the
father  and  afterwards  by  the  daughters.

5.  Vers.  81-35.    The  first  four  sons  of  Leah. —
When  the  Lord  saw.— The  birth  of  Leah's  first
four  sons  is  specifically  referred  to  Jehovah's  grace  ;
first,    because    Jehovah    works    above    all    human
thoughts,  and  regards  that  which  is  despised  and
of  little  account  (Leah  was  the  despised  one,  the  one
loved  less,  comparatively  the  hated  one,  Deut.  xxi.
15) ;  secondly,  because  among   her   first  four  sons
were  found  the  natural  first-born  (Reuben),  the  legal
first-born  (Levi),  and  the  Messianic  first-born  (Judah) ;
even  Simeon,  like  the  others,  is  given  by  Jehovah
in  answer  to  prayer.     Jacob's  other  sons  are  referred
to  Elohim  not  only  by  Jacob   and    Rachel  (ch.  xxx.
2,  6,  8),  but  also  by  Leah  (vers.  18,  20),  and  by  the
narrator  himself  (ver.  17),  for  Jacob's  sons  in  "their
totality   sustain  not  only  a  theocratic   but    also   a
universal  destination. — He  opened  her  womb. —
Ele  made  her  fruitful  in  children,  which  should  attach
icr  husband  to  her.     But  theocratic  husbands  did
not  esteem  their  wives  only  according  to  their  fruit-
\ilness  (see  1  Sam.  i.)     It  is  a  one-sided  view  Keil
takes  when  _  he  says :  "  Jacob's  sinful  weakness  ap
pears  also  in  his  marriage  state,  because  he  loved
iachel  more  than   Leah,   and   the   divine   reproof
appears,    because  the  hated  one  was  blessed  with
children  but  Rachel  remained    barren  for   a    long
ime."     All  we  can  say  is,  it  was  God's  pleasure  to
>how  in  this  way  the  movements  of  his  providence'
>ver  the  thoughts  of  men,  and  to  equalize  the  incon-
;ruity  between  these  women. — Reuben. — Lit.,  Reu-
Bcn :  Behold,  a  son.     Joyful   surprise  at  Jehovah's
ompassion.     From  the  inference  she  makes :  now,
herefore,  my  husband  will  love  me,  her  deep,
trong  love  for  Jacob,  becomes  apparent,  which  had
10  doubt,  also,  induced  her  to  consent  to  Laban'a
deception.— Simeon,  her   second  sou,  received  his
ame  from  her  faith  in  God  as  a  prayer-answerin^
od. — Levi.— The  names  of  the  sons  are  an  exprcs^
ion  of  her  enduring  powerful  experience,  as  well  as
f  her  gradual  resignation.     After  the  birth  of  the
rst  one,  she  hopes  to  win,  through  her  son,  Jacob's
ove  in  the  strictest  sense.     After  the  birth  of  the
econd  she  hoped  to  be  put  on  a  footing  of  equality
pith  Rachel,  and  to  be  delivered  from  her  disregard.
After  the  birth  of  the  third  one  she  hoped   at  least
or  a  constant  affection.     At  the  birth  of  the  fourth
he  looks  entirely  away  from  herself  to  Jehovah.—


530


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


Judah. — Praise;!.  A  verbal  noun  of  the  future
Ilophal  from  !~|-P  .  The  literal  meaning  of  the  name,
therefore,  is:  "shall  be  praised"  and  may  thus  be
referred  to  Judah  as  the  one  "  that  is  to  be  praised,"
but  it  may  also  mean  that  Jehovah  is  to  be  praised
on  account  of  him  (see  DKLITZSCU,  p.  4C5).  [See
Rom.  ii.  29.  He  is  a  Jew  inwardly,  Wto.se  praise  is
of  God.  Wordsworth  refers  here  to  the  analogies
between  the  patriarchs  and  apostles. — A.  G.] — She
left  bearing. — Not  altogether  (see  ch.  xxx.  10,  etc.),
but  for  a  time.

6.  liac/u-rs  d<jr<-t!"ii,  and  the  connection  vith
fiiUtah,  her  maid  (^\\.  xxx.  1-S).— And  when  Ra
chel  saw. — We  have  no  right  to  conclude,  with
Kcil,  from  Rachel's  assertion,  that  she  and  Jacob
were  wanting  in  prayer  for  children,  and  thus  had
not  followed  Isaac's  example.  Even  in  prayer,  pa
tience  may  be  finally  shaken  in  the  human  sinful
heart,  if  God  intends  to  humble  it.  —  Give  me
children  or  else  I  die,  i.  e.,  from  dejection ;  not :
my  remembrance  will  be  extinguished  (Tremell);
much  less  does  it  mean  :  1  shall  commit  suicide
(Chi  vsost.).  Her  vivid  language  sounds  not  only
irrational  but  even  impious,  and  therefore  she  rouses
al-o  the  anger  of  Jacob. — Am  I  in  God's  stead. —
Lit.,  instead  of  God.  God  alone  is  the  lord  over
life  and  death  (Deut.  xxxii.  I!'.' ;  1  Sain.  ii.  (',).  Ra
chel's  sad  utteranci',  accompanied  by  the  threat :  or
else  I  die,  serves  for  an  introduction  as  well  as  an
excuse  of  her  desperate  proposition. — My  maid,
Bilhah. — The  bad  example  of  Ilagar  continues  to
operate  here,  leading  into  error.  The  <|iiesii.>n  here
was  not  about  an  heir  of  Jacob,  but  the  proud  Ra
chel  desired  children  as  her  own,  at  any  cost,  lest  she
should  stand  beside  her  sister  childless.  Her  jealous
love  for  Jacob  is  to  some  extent  overbalanced  by  her
jealous  pride  or  envy  of  her  sister,  so  that  she  gives
to  Jacob  her  maid. — Upon  my  knees.— Ancient
interpreters  have  explained  this  in  an  absurdly  literal
way.  From  the  fact  that  children  were  taken  upon
the  knees,  they  were  rccogni/.ed  either  as  adopted
children  (1.  "2'.',},  or  as  the  fruit  of  their  own  bodies
(Job  iii.  12).— That  I  may  also  have  children
by  her. — See  ch.  xvi.  2. — Dan  (judge,  one  decree
ing  justice,  vindex). — She  considered  the  disgrace
of  her  barrenness  by  the  side  of  Leah  an  injustice.
— Naphtali. — According  to  Knobel :  wrestler  ;  ac
cording  to  others  :  my  wrestling,  or  even,  the  one  for
<."h'n>t  I  trrcxfltd.  DELITZSCH  :  the  one  obtained  by
wrestling.  The  LXX  place  it  in  the  plural :  Naph-
talim,  wrestlings.  Fiirst  regards  it  as  the  abbrevi
ated  form  of  Naphtalijah,  the  wrestling  of  Jehovah.
Against  the  two  last  explanations  may  be  urged  the
deviation  from  the  form  Naphtalim,  wrestlings ;  and
according  to  the  analogy  of  Dan,  vindicator,  the  most
p»t*'able  explanation  is,  my  wrestler.  As  laying  the
foundation  for  the  name,  Rachel  says :  With  great
wrestlings  have  I  wrestled  with  my  sister. —
The  wrestlings  of  God  could  only  be  in  the  wrest
lings  of  prayer,  as  we  afterwards  see  from  Jacob's
wrestlings,  through  which  he  becomes  Israel.  Dc-
litzsch,  too,  explains:  These  are  the  wrestlings  of
prayer,  in  the  assaults  and  temptations  of  faith.
HKNGSTKNBKRG:  Struggles  whose  issue  bears  the
character  of  a  divine  judgment,  but  through  which
the  struggle  itself  is  not  clearly  understood.  KNO-
i!Ki, :  ''She  was  not  willing  to  leave  the  founding  of
a  people  of  God  to  her  sister  only,  but  wished  also  to
Income  an  ancestress,  as  well  as  Leah."  But  how
can  Rachel  speak  of  a  victory  over  her  sister  rich  in
children  ?  Leah  has  left  bearing,  while  Bilhah,  her


maid,  begins  to  bear ;  at  the  same  time,  Rachel  in
cludes  as  much  as  possible  in  her  words  in  order
to  overpcrsuade  herself.  [She  believes  that  she  has
overcome. — A.  G.]  Hence,  still,  at  Joseph's  birth
she  could  say :  Now  (not  before)  God  has  taken
away  my  reproach.

7.  Vers.  9-13.  Leah's  emulation,  and  Zilpak,  her
maid. — Took  Zilpah,  her  maid. — Leah  is  still  less
excusable  than  Rachel,  since  she  could  oppose  her
own  four  sons  to  the  two  adopted  sons  of  Rachel
But  the  proud  and  challenging  assertions  of  Rachel,
however,  seem  to  have  determined  her  to  a  renewed
emulation  ;  and  Jacob  thought  that  it  was  due  to  the
equal  rights  of  both  to  consent  to  the  fourth  mar
riage.     That  Leah  now  acts  no  longer  as  before,  in  a
pious  and  humble  disposition,  the  names  by  which
she  calls  her  adopted  sons  clearly  prove. — A  troop
cometh. — Good    fortune.     An  unnecessary  conjec
ture  of  the  Masorites  renders  it  "15   X3 ,   '-fortune,
victory  cometh." — Asher. — The  happy  one,  or  the
blessed  one.

8.  Vers.    14-21.    I.ealS*   last  births.— Call  me
blessed. — An  ancient  mode  of  expression  used  by
happy  women  from  Leah  to  Mary  (Luke  i.  4s!).    The
preterite  expresses  the  certain  future. — And  Reuben
went. — Reuben,  when  a  little  boy  (according  to  De-
litzsch  five  years  old  ;  according  to  Kcil  only  four),
brought  unto  his  mother  a  plant  found  in  the  fields,
and  called  C^Sp"?!,  a  name  which  has  been  rendered
in  various  ways.     "The   LXX  correctly  translates,
n^XTn— jUTJAo  navfyayopuv;   n"""l  (and  the  kindred
•'bib)    is   the    Mandragora     rcnalis    (high-German:
alruna,   alrun,  mandrake;    GUIMM.,  '  Mythol.' ii.  p.
1153,  edit,  iii.),  out  of  whose  small,  white  and-grcen
flowers,   which,  according  to   the  Song   vii.    14,  are
harbingers  of  Spring,  there   grows  in  May,  or  what,
is  equivalent,  at  the  time   of  the  wheat-harvest,  yel
low,  strong,  but  sweet-smelling  apples,  of  the  size  of
a  nutmeg  (Arab,  tujj'ali  ex  Saitdx,  i.  c.,  pommn,  Ka-
tan(c),  which  in  antiquity  as  well  as  during  the  middle
ages  (see   (IP.AKSSK  :  '  Contributions  to  the  literature*
and  traditions  of  the  Middle  Ages,'  1850)  were  thought
to  promote  fruitfulness  and  were  generally  viewed  as
Aphrodisiacum."     Delitzsch.     Hence  the  fruit  was
called  Dudaim  amatoria,  Love-apple.     Theophrastus
tells  us    that    love-potions    were  prepared  from  its
roots.      It  was  held  in  such  high  esteem  by  them
that  the  goddess  of  love  was  called  Mandragoritis.
All  the  different  travellers  to  Palestine  speak  about
it  (see  KNOBEL,  p.  224 ;  DELITZSCH,  p.  4(>7  ;  KEIL,  p.
207  ;  WINER  :  Alraun,  Mandrake). — Give  me  cf
those  mandrakes. — Love-apples.     In  the  transac
tion  between  Rachel  and  Leah  concerning  the  man
drakes,  her  excited  emulation  culminated,  not,  how
ever,  as  Keil  says,  as  a  mutual  jealousy  as  to  the
affection  of  their  husband,  but  a  jealousy  as  to  the
births,  otherwise  Rachel  would  not  have  been  obliged
to  yield,  and  actually  have  yielded  to  Leah  the  right
in  question. — And  God  hearkened   unto  Leah.
— Knobel  thiuks  that  the  Jehovistic  and  Elohistic
views  are  here  mingled  in  confusion.     The  Elohist
records  of  Leah  after  the  ninth  verse,  that  she  prayed,
and  considers  her  pregnancy  an  answer  to  her  prayer ;
the  Jehovist,  on  the  contrary,  ascribes  it  to  the  effect
produced  by  the  mandrakes,  of  which  Leah  retained
a  part.     Here,  therefore,  the  critical  assumption  of
a  biblical  book-making  culminates.     It  is  obviously
the  design  to  bring  out  into  prominence  the  fact  that
Leah  became  pregnant  again  without  mandrakes,  and
that  they  were  of  no  avail  to  Rachel,  a  fact  which


CHAP.   XXIX,— XXX.   1-24.


531


Kcil  renders  prominent.     Moreover,  it  could  not  be
the  intention  of  Rachel  to  prepare  from  these  man
drakes  a  so-called  love-potion  for  Jacob,  but  only  to
attain  fruitfulncss  by  their  effects  upon  herself.     Just
as  now,  for   the    same  purpose  perhaps,  unfruitful
women  visit  or  are  sent  to  certain  watering-places.
From  this  standpoint,  truly,  the  assumed  remedy  of
nature  may  appear  as  a  premature,  eager  self-help.
—Issachar. — According  to  the  Chethib,  "CO  mi ,
there  is  reward;  according  to  Keil,   "IS  to  2O"1 ,  it
brings  reward,  which  is   less    fitting   here.      Leah,
according  to  ver.  18,  looked  upon  Issachar  as  a  re
ward  for  her  self-denial  in  allowing  her  maid  to  take
her  place.     By  this  act,  also,  her  strong  affection  for
Jacob  seems   to  betray  itself  again.     But  no  such
struggle  is  mentioned  of  Rachel  in  the  interposition
of   her   nuiid.— Zebulun.— That  the  children  here
are  altogether  named  by  the  mothers,  is  Jehovistic,
as  Knobel  thinks :  "The  Elohist  assigns  the  names
to  the  children  through  the  father,  and  is  not  fond
of  etymologies  !  "     It  is  just  as  great  violence  to  the
words :  God   hath  endued   me,  etc.,  to   say  the
name  signifies  a  present,   while,  according   to   the
words  following,  it  signifies  dweller.     The  name  of
Zebulun  is  first  formed  after  the   inference   which
Leah  drew  from  the  divine  gift  or  present.     b~T  ,  to
dwell,  alludes  to  the  preceding  iriT ,  to  make  a  pres
ent  ;  both  verbs  are  awa^  \ey.— Dinah,  is  mentioned
on  account  of  the  history,  ch.  xxxiv.     Ch.  xxxvii.  35
and  ch.  xxxvi.  7  seem  to  intimate  that  he  had  other
daughters,   but    they   are    not   mentioned    further.
Dinah  is  the  female  Dan.     Leah  retains  her  supe
riority.     Hence  there  is  no   fuller   explanation    of
the  name  after  the  deed  of  Dinah's  brothers,  ch.
xxxiv.

n.  Vers.  22-24.  Rachel  (he  mother  of  Joseph.—
And  God  remembered  Rachel — The  expression:
he  remembered,  here  also  denotes  a  turning-point
after  a  long  trial,  as  usually,  e.  g.,  ch.  viii/1.  In
relation  to  the  removing  of  unfruitfulness,  see  1  Sam.
i.  1(.».— And  God  hearkened  to  her.— She  there
fore  obtained  fruitfulness  by  prayer  also.— Joseph.
—This  name,  in  the  earlier  document,  as  Knobel
expresses  himself,  is  called  ?D5O,  one  that  takes
array,  i.  e.,  takes  away  the  reproach,  from  C]OX ;  and
then,  in  the  second  document,  he  shall  add,  from  ^&\
Delitzsch  also  explains :  one  that  takes  away.  Keil
adopts  both  derivations.  The  text  only  allows  the
latter  derivation :  he  may  add.  To  take  away  and
to  add  are  too  strongly  opposed  to  be  traced  back
to  one  etymological  source.  Rachel,  it  is  true,  mi«-ht
have  revealed  the  sentiments  of  her  heart  by  the
expression  :  God  hath  taken  away  my  reproach  •  but
she  was  not  able  to  give  to  her  own  sons  names' that
would  have  neutralized  the  significance  and  force
of  the  names  of  her  adopted  sons  Dan  and  Xaphtali.
That  she  is  indebted  to  God's  kindness  for  Joseph
while  at  the  same  time  she  asks  Jehovah  for  another
son,  and  thereupon  names  Joseph,  does  not  furnish
any  sufficient  occasion  for  the  admission  of  an  addi
tion  to  the  sources  of  scripture,  as  Delitzsch  assumes
The  number  of  Jacob's  sons,  who  began  with  Jeho
vah,  was  also  closed  by  Jehovah.  For,  according  to
the  number  of  twelve  tribes,  Israel  is  Jehovah's
covenant  people.

In  regard  to  the  fact,  however,  that  Jacob's
children  were  not  born  chronologically  in  the  pre
ceding  order,  compare  Delitzsch  with  reference  to
BOSEBIUS:  Praparatio  Evany.,  ix.  21,  and  ASTRUC.  :


"Conjectures,"  p.  390,   and    Keil.     The  first-born,
Reuben,  was  born  probably  during  the  first  year  of
the  second  seven  years,  and  Simeon  at  the  close  of
the  same.     All  the  sons,  therefore,  were  born  during
the  second  heptade.     Dinah's  birth,  no  doubt,  occurs
also  during  this  period,  though  Keil  supposes,  from
the  expression   ^HX,  that  she  may  have  been  born
later.     But  if  we  now  adept  the  chronological  suc
cession,  Leah  would  have  given  birth  to  seven  chil
dren  in  seven  years,  and  even  then  there  was  a  pause
for  some  time  between  two  of  them.     The  imperfect,
with  the  1  consecutive,  however,  does  not    express
always  a  succession  of  time,  but  sometimes  also  it
expresses  a   train   of  thought.     We   may  suppose,
therefore,  that  Leah  gave  birth  to  the  first  four  sons
during  the  first  four  years.     In  the  meanwhile,  how
ever  (not  after  the  expiration   of  the  four  years),
Rachel  effected  the  birth  of  Dan  and  Xaphtali  by
Jacob's  connection  with  Bilhali.     This  probably  in
duced  Leah,  perhaps  in  the  fifth  year,  to  emulate  her
example  by  means  of  her  handmaid,  who  in  a  quick
succession  gave  birth  to  two  sons  in  the  course  of
the  fifth  and  sixth  years.     During  the  sixth  and  sev
enth  years  Leah  again  became  a  mother,  and  a  short
time  after  Zebulun,  Joseph  was  born  also.     Accord
ing  to  Delitzsch,  Joseph's  birth  would  occur  between
that  of  Issachar  and  Zebulun.     But  then  the  expres
sion  ver.  25  would  not  be  exact,  and  the  naming  of
Zebulun  by  his  mother  would  be  without  foundation.
The  last  remark  also  bears  against  Keil's  view,  that
Joseph  probably  was  born  at  the  same  time  with
Zebulun,  though  he  also  considers  it  probable  that
he  may  have  been  born  later.


DOCTRIXAL  AND  ETHICAL.


1.  The  divine  revelation,  its  consolations   and
its  promises,  revive  the  believer,  so  that  he  can  pro
ceed  on  his  pilgrimage  with  renewed  vigor.     An  ex
perience  similar  to  that  at  Bethel  Jacob  afterwards
met  with  at  Peniel  (ch.  xxxii.  30).

2.  Eliezer,  acting  for   Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Moses
found  their  future  brides  by  the  side  of  wells.    These
charming  descriptions    of    the   East  resemble  each
other,  and  yet  greatly  differ  in  their  details.     On  ac
count  of  their   significance  and  beauty,  they  were
applied  to  spiritual  relations  by  the  fathers.     [See
also  Wordsworth,  who  goes  fully  into  all  the  details
of  these  analogies. — A.  G.]

3.  Jacob  experienced  the  gracious  providence  of
Jehovah   here   at  the  well,  through   oiie   act   after
another :  Shepherds  from  Ilaran ;  acquaintances  of
Laban  ;  Rachel's  appearance ;  the  occasion  and  call
to  assist  her  at  the  moment.

4.  Is  he  well  ?  ib  Glb^ri.     Happiness  and  wel
fare,  according  to  the  oriental,  but  particularly  accord
ing  to  the  biblical,  view,  consists  especially  in  peace
inviolability,  both  as  to  outward  and  inward  life.

5.  The    characters.     Laban's    character.     That
Laban  was  really  a  sharer  in  the  theocratic  faith,  and
susceptible  of  noble  and  generous  sentiment,  is  evi
dent  not  only  from  the  manner  in  which  he  receives
Jacob,  but  also  from  the  way  in  which  he  dismisses
him  (cLxxxi.  24  ;  54  ff.).    But  we  also  see,  how,  un
der  the  influence  surrounding  him  at  home  (eh.  xxxi.
1),  the  selfishness  in  him  gradually  increased,  until  it
culminated  in  the  base  use  which  he  made  of  hia
nephew's  necessity  and  love,  and  thus,  at  last,  pro
ceeds  to  practise  the  grossest  deception.     Even  in


532


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


this  deception,  however,  we  must  not  overlook  the
fact  that,  with  a  friendly  interest   in  Jacob,  he  con
sidered  it  as  a  pious  fraud.     He  was  willing   to  give
both  his  daughters  to  Jacob  ;  perhaps,  too,  he  had  in
his  eve  Leah's  quiet  but  vehement  affection  for  Jacob.
Ho  so  far  restrained  his  selii.-hness,  also,  that  he  per
mits  Jacob  to  return  home  with  the  large  possessions
that  be  had  acquired  while  with  him.     Moreover,  he
had  to  overcome  the  excited  spirit  of  his  sons  and
b-eth-ren.     The  IOW.T  standpoint  which  he  occupies
is  evident  from    the  fact   that  he  himself  leads  his
nephew  into  a  theocratic  double-marriage,  but  per
haps  al<o  with  the  intention  of  securing  to  his  house,
with  .Mvatcr  certainty,  a  full  share  in  the  mysterious
blessin"  expected  by  Abraham,  and  because  he  qui-
,.tlv  consented  that  the  strife  of  his  daughters  should
involve  Jacob  still  farther  in  polygamy.— As  to  Leah,
the  narrator  has  no  fault    to  find,  except  that  her
eves  were  not  as  beautiful  as  those  of  her  sister,  but
were  tender.     The  vehement,  though  quiet  love  for
Jacob,  as  seen  on  every  occasion,  no  doubt  made  her
•ii-o  willing  to  enter  into  the   deception  of  Jacob  by
Laban.     Besides,    she   regaided  herself  certainly  as
excusable  upon  higher  grounds  and  motives,  jnst  as
Thamar,  who   fanatically  married  into   the  house  of
promise   and  that  by  a  miilty  course  (eh.    xxxvm).
Her  increasing  humility  (see   Exegesis)  causes  her  to
be  an  object  of  Jehovah's  peculiar  regard,  or  rather,
bv  this  humility,  her  especial   election  as  ancestress
,,f  David  and  the  Messiah  becomes  evident,  and  even
h,  her  over-zealous  strife  with   her  sister,  in   which
the  question  is  about   the  increase  of  the  patriarchal
f  imilv,  her  -elf-denial  is  proven  by  the  struggle  with
which  she  gives  her  maid  to  Jacob,  and  the  kindness
wi'h   which  she  gave   the  mandrakes  to   her    sister.
llachel,  on  the  other  hand,  possessed  not  only  bright
eves    but   also  ardent   affections.     In   the  fiery  and
Rowing  nature  of  her  affection  (eh.  xxx.  1),  as  well
as  in  her  cunning  (eh.  xxxi.  3-1,  H5)  Rachel  is  the
im;i"e  of  Hebekah,  but   with    these  features  of  char
acter  more  strongly  marked.     So  also  at  the  end   in
the  tragical  issue   of  her   life.     For  as  Rebekah  did
rot  reach   the    -oal  and    see  Jacob  again,  so  Rachel
did  not  attain  her  aim  in  sharing  with  him  peacefully
and   honorably  his   paternal    heritage.     In  Rachel  s
-infill  impatience  too,  there  was  not  wanting  also  a
moral  element,  for  "the  pure  desire  of  parents  for
offspring   is    the  hi-hest  degree  of  virtuous  matn-
monv."    Delitzsch   (see  p.  405,  and   the  words  of
Luther  there  quoted).     Keil,   without   any  sufficient
reason,  places  Kachcl  (p.  200),  in  religions  respects,
below  Leah.     Distinctions  of  election  are  not  always
contrasts  of  liirht  and  darkness.     Finally,  Jacob  here
appears    dearly  as    the    man  of   the  wrestlings    of
faith,  and  as  the   patriarch  of  hope.     However  pru
dent    it  happens  to  him  as  to  the  (Edipus  in  the  Greek

tra ly.     (Edipus  solved  the  riddle  of  the  sphinx,

yet  is' blind,  and  remains  blind  in  relation  to  the
riddle  of  his  own  life.  Laban  cheated  him,  as  his
sons  did  afterwards,  and  he  is  punished  through  the
same  transgression  of  which  he  himself  was  guilty
Jacob  is  to  struggle  for  everything— for  his  birth
right,  his  Rachel,  his  herds,  the  security  of  his  life
the  rest  of  his  old  age,  and  for  his  grave.  But  in
these  struggles  he  does  not  come  off  without  many
tinnsgressions,  from  which,  however,  as  God's  elect
he  is  liberated  by  severe  discipline.  He,  therefore
is  stamped  as  a" man  of  hope  by  the  divine  provi
deuce.  As  a  fugitive  he  goes  to  Haran,  as  a  fugitiv
he  returns  home"  Seven  years  he  hopes  for  Rachel
twenty  years  he  hopes  for  a  return  home ;  to  th


very  evening  of  his  life  he  is  hoping  for  the  recov
ery'  of  Joseph,  his  lost  son  in  Sheol ;  even  whilst  he
is  "dyins  upon  Egyptian  soil,  he  hopes  for  a  grave  in
his  'native  country.  His  Messianic  hope,  however,
in  its  full  development,  rises  above  all  these  instan
ces,  as  is  evident  in  the  three  chiof  stages  in  his  life
of  faith :  Bethel,  Peniel,  and  the  blessing  of  his  sons
upon  his  death-bed.  His  life  differs  from  that  of  his
father  Isaac  in  this  :  that  with  Isaac  the  quickening
experiences  fall  more  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  life,
but  with  Jacob  they  occur  in  the  latter  half;  and
that  Isaac's  life  passes  on  quietly,  whilst  storms  and
trials  overshadow,  in  a  great  measure,  the  pilgrimage
of  Jacob.  The  Messianic  suffering,  in  its  typical
features,  is  already  seen  more  plainly  in  him  than  in
Isaac  and  Abraham  ;  but  the  glorious  exaltation
corresponds  also  to  the  deeper  humiliation.

(•>.  Jacob's  service  for  Rachel  presents  us  a  pic
ture  of  bridal  love  equalled  only  in  the  same  devel
opment  and  its  poetic  beauty  in  the  Song  of  Solo
mon.  It  is  particularly  to  be  noticed  that  Jacob,
however,  was  not  indifferent  to  Rachel's  infirmities
(ch.  xxx!  2),  and  even  treated  Leah  with  patience  and
indulgence,  though  having  suffered  from  her  the
most  mortifying  deception.

7.  The  deception  practised  by  Laban  upon  Jacob
was  perfectly  fitted,  viewed   as  a  divine   punishment
throii'di  human  sin,  to  bring   his  own  sin  before  his
eyes.°  As  he  introduced  himself  as  the  first-born,  by
the  instigation  of  his  mother,  so  Leah,  the  first-born,
is  introduced  to  him  by  his  mother's  brother,  under
the  pretence  of  the  appearance  of  his  own    Rachel.
And  this  deception  La'. an  ever,  excuses  in  a  sarcastic
way.   with    the  custom  as  to  the  birthright   of   the
auditers  at  Haran.     Thus  Jacob  atones  for  his  cun-
n'ng,  and  Laban  truly  must  atone  for  his  deception.
*8.  Leah's    election   is  founded    upon   Jehovah's
ce.     Without  any  doubt,  however,  she  was  fitted
°o  become  the  ancestress  of  the   Messianic  line,  not
mlv  by  her  apparent  humility,  but  also  by  her   m-
late  powers  of  blessing,  as  well  as  by  her  quiet  and
rue  love  for   Jacob.     The   fulness   of   her  life  be
comes  apparen-t  in  the  number  and  the  power  of  her
children  ;  and  with  these,  therefore,  a  greater  strength
>f  the  mere   natural  life  predominates.     Joseph,  on
the  contrary,  the  favorite  son  of  the  wife  loved  with
i  bridal  love,  is   distinguished  from  his  brethren,  as
the  separated  (ch.  xlix.)  among  them,  as  a  child  of  a
nobler  spirit,  whilst  the  import  of  his  life  is  not  as
rich  for  the  future  as  that  of  Judah.

9  If  we  would  regard  the  deception  and  impo
sition  practised  upon  Jacob  as  at  all  endurable,  we
must  assume,  on  the  one  hand,  Leah's  fanatic  and
vehement  love  ;  on  the  other,  his  own  perfect  illu-
MOII  This  unconscious  error  and  confusion  of  na
ture'  seems  almost  to  have  been  transmitted  to  Reu
ben,'  the  first-born  (ch.  xxxv.  22  ;  xlix.  21) ;  and
therefore,  in  consequence  of  his  offence,  he  also  lost
the  birthrHit.  We  cannot,  however,  entirely  con
cur  in  Luther's  view,  which  Delitzsch  approves,  that
while  there  was  nothing  adulterous  in  the  connection
of  Jacob  and  Leah,  it  was  still  extra-natural,  and  in
that  sense  monstrous.  There  was  undoubtedly  an
impure  and  unnatural  element  in  it.  But  we  must
bear  in  mind,  as  was  remarked  above,  not  only
Leah's  love,  but  also  Jacob's  self-oblivion,  in  which
the  free  choice  is  generally  limited  and  restrained  by
the  blind  forces  of  the  night-life,  through  and  in
which  God  works  with  creative  energy.  It  \s  the
moment  in  which  the  man  falls  back  into  the  hand
of  God  as  the  creator.


CHAP.    XXIX.    1— XXX.   24.


533


10.  The  difference  between  the  house  at  Haran
and  Isaac's  house  at  Beer-sheba,  appears  from  this,
that  Laban  entangled  Jacob  in  polygamy.  And
even  in  this  case  the  evil  consequences  of  polygamy
appear  :  envy,  jealousy,  contention,  and  an  increased
sensuality.  Nevertheless  Jacob's  case  is  not  to  be
judged  according  to  the  later  Mosaic  law,  which
prohibited  the  marrying  of  two  sisters  at  the  same
time  (Lev.  xviii.  18).  Calvin,  iu  his  decision,  makes
no  distinction  between  the  times  and  the  economies,
a  fact  which  Keil  justly  appeals  to,  and  insists  upon
as  bearing  against  his  harsh  judgment  (that  it  was  a
case  of  incest)  (p.  205).

11.  In  our  narrative  we  first  read  of  a  great  and
splendid  wedding-feast,  lasting  for  seven  days.     It  is
therefore  not  by  chance  that  this  splendid  wedding-
feast  was  followed  by  a  painful  illusion.     And,  leav
ing  out  of  view  grosser  deceptions,  how  often  may
Rachel's  imago  have  been  changed  afterwards  into
Leah's  form.

12.  While  the  sisterly  emulation  to  surpass  each
other  in  obtaining  children  is  tainted  with  sin,  there
is  yet  at  the  bottom  a  holy  motive  for  it,  faith  in  the
Abrahamic    promise   consisting  in  the  blessing  of
theocratic  births.     Thus  also  we  can  explain  how  the
fulness   of  the   twelve    tribes  proceeded  from  this
emulation.

13.  Isaac's  prejudice,  that  Esau  was  the  chosen
one,  seems  to    renew  itself  somewhat    in   Jacob's
prejudice  that  he  must  gain  by  Rachel   the   lawful
heir.     The  more  reverent  he  appears  therefore,  in
being  led  by  the  spirit  of  God,  who  taught  him,  not
withstanding  all  his  preference  for  Joseph,  to  recog
nize  in  Judah  the  real  line  of  the  promise.

14.  That  the  respective  mothers  themselves  here
issign  the  names,  is  determined  by  the  circumstances.
The  entire  history  of  the  birth  of  these  sons,  too,  is
reflected  in  their  names.     Of  similar  signification  are
the   names:  Gad   and  Ashcr;    Levi  and  Zebulun ;
Simeon  and  Naphtali ;  Judah  and  Joseph  ;  Reuben
and  Benjamin  born  afterwards :  Issachar    Dan  and
Dinah.

15.  The  progress  of  life  equalizes  and  adjusts,
to  a  great   extent,  the  opposition  between  Jacob's
love  for  Rachel  and  his  disregard  toward  Leah   espe
cially  by  means  of  the  children.     At  the  same  time
in  which  he  recognizes  Leah's  resignation,  Rachel's
passionate  ill-humor  incites  him  to  anger.

10.  He  shall  add;  he  shall  f/ive  to  me  another
son.  This  wish  was  fulfilled,  and  was  the  cause  of
her  death.  She  died  at  Benjamin's  birth.  How
dangerous,  destructive,  and  fatal,  the  fulfilment  of
a  man's  wishes  may  be  to  him,  is  illustrated  by  fre
quent  examples  in  the  Scriptures.  Sarah  wished  for
a  son  from  Hagar,  a  source  of  great  grief  to  her.
The  desire  of  Judas  to  be  received  among  the  dis
ciples  of  Jesus  was  granted,  but  just  in  this  position
he  fell  into  the  deepest  corruption.  Peter  wished
to  be  as  near  as  possible  to  the  Lord  in  the  house  of
the  high  priest,  but  hence  his  fall.  The  sons  of
Zebedee  wished  for  places  at  the  right  and  left  hand
of  Jesus,— had  their  wish  been  fulfilled  they  would
have  filled  the  places  of  the  malefactors  on  the  cross
at  the  right  and  left  of  the  Crucified.  Rachel's  wish'
is  true,  was  not  the  only  cause  of  her  death  but
with  a  certain  triumph  the  once  barren  one  died  in
childbirth,  just  as  she  was  completing  the  number
twelve  of  Israel's  sons.

17.  How  important  Joseph's  birth  was  to  Jacob
is  seen  from  this :  that  henceforth  he  thinks  of  his
journey  home,  although  the  report  looked  for  from


Rcbekah  tarried  long.     He  was  urged  to  venture  a
jtmrney  home.

18.  This  history  of  Jacob's  and  Leah's  union
sheds  a  softening  light  upon  even  the  less  happy
marriages,  which  may  reconcile  us  to  them,  for  thig
unpleasant  marriage  was  the  cause  of  his  bccomin«
the  father  of  a  numerous  posterity ;  from  it,  indeecf
proceeded  the  Messianic  line;  leaving  out  of  View  the
fact  that  Leah's  love  and  humility  could  not  remain
without  a  blessing  upon  Jacob.  The  fundamental
condition  of  a  normal  marriage  is  doubtless  brid,i
love.  We  notice  in  our  narrative,  however,  how
wonderfully  divine  grace  may  change  misfortune
even  m  such  instances,  into  real  good.  God  is  espe
cially  interested  in  marriage  connections,  because  he
is  thus  interested  in  the  coming  generations.


HCmiLETICAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.


See  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs.  Jacob's
wrestlings  of  faith.— The  patriarch  of  hope.— Jacob's
double  flight,  from  Esau  and  from  Laban.— Rich  in
fortune  and  rich  in  misfortune,  in  both  respects  rich
in  blessing.— Jacob  and  Rachel,  or  the  consecration
ot  bridal  love.— The  shepherd  and  the  shepherdess :
the  same  condition.— Jacob's  service  for  his  bride  a
type  of  the  same  service  of  Christ  for  the  church,
his  bride. — Rachel  and  Leah,  or  God  makes  a  creat
difference  between  his  children,  and  yet  esteems  them
alike  according  to  his  justice.— The  three  marriage
connections  at  wells :  that  of  Isaac,  of  Jacob,  and
of  Moses.— The  names  of  Jacob's  sons,  a  type  of
human  weakness  and  divine  salvation  in  his  house.
(Texts  for  marriage  occasions.)

To  Section  First, vers.  1-8.  STARKK:  CRAMER:  If
God's  command  and  promise  are  before  us,  we  can
proceed  in  our  undertakings  with  joy  and  confidence.
—Places  where  wells  are  mentioned  (see  Concord
ances).— (Jesus,  the  well  of  life.  The  stone,  the
impotence  of  human  nature,  to  be  removed  by  faith.
Since,  according  to  ch.  xxxi.  47,  the  Chaldeans  spoke
a  different  language  from  that  of  the  inhabitants  of
Canaan,  Jacob  probably  made  himself  understood  to
the  people  of  Haran,  because  he  had  learned  the
Chaldce  from  his  mother  (Clericus).— The  changing
of  the  language  of  the  patriarchs  into  the  laterlle"
brew  of  the  Jews.)  [There  is  every  reason  to  believe
that  these  dialects  were  then  so"  nearly  alike  that
there  was  no  difficulty  in  passing  from  one  to  the
other. — A.  G.] — Because  the  word  peace  embraces
both  spiritual  and  natural  well-being,  the  Hebrews
used  it  as  a  common  salutation.

Section  Second,  vers.  <J-1-1.  Divine  providence
was  here  at  work. — (Allegory  of  the  well.  How
Christ  has  removed  the  heavy  stone  of  sin  and  death.
The  three  herds  referred  to  the  three  days  in  which
Christ  was  in  the  grave!  etc.  Burmann.) — Ver.  13.
This  was  necessary  in  order  to  remove  all  suspicion
from  the  mind  of  Laban,  since  he  still  remembered
what  a  numerous  retinue  had  accompanied  Eliezer.
—As  three  distinguished  patriarchs  found  their
brides  at  wells  (Moses  and  his  Zipporah),  just  so  the
Lord  Christ  presents  to  himself  the  church,  his  spir
itual  bride,  through  holy  baptism,  as  the  laver  in  the
word. — SCHRODER  :  Their  first  meeting  a  prophecy
of  their  whole  future  united  life.— Ver.  11  (Calvin).
In  a  chaste  and  modest  life  greater  liberties  were
allowed. — (If  any  one  turn  to  the  true  source  of  wis
dom,  to  the  word  of  God,  and  to  the  Saviour  revealea


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


therein,  lie  will  receive  celestial  wisdom  for  his  bride.
Berl.  Libel.}

Section  Third,  vers.  15-25.  Tor.  20.  As  a  regular
servant.  A  typical  intimation  of  the  Messiah,  who
in.  the  form  of  a  servant,  with  great  and  severe  toil,
obtained  his  bride. — (Reward  of  Jacob's  patient
waiting,  of  his  faith  and  his  chastity.— Ver.  18.  Vir
tuous  maidens  do  not  attend  large,  exciting  assem
blies,  to  get  a  husband,  but  remain  at  their  vocation,
and  trust  in  God,  who  is  able  to  give  to  them  a  pious,
honorable,  and  upright  husband. — LAM.K:  IMhe
whole  difficult  service  became  easy  to  Jacob  from
the  love  he  had  to  Rachel,  why  should  it  not  be  said
of  God's  childivn,  that  it  is  from  love  to  God  that
we  keep  his  commandments,  etc.  (1  John  v.  3). —
1','ihl.  Wn-t.  :  A  ch;i-te  love  is  a  beautiful  thing,  by
whieh  conjugal  love  is  afterwards  more  and  more
strengthened  and  c'ulirmed. — Ver.  2."..  Here  Jacob
inhrht  have  understood  how  it  grieved  E.-au  when,  for
the  sake  of  his  birthright,  he  had  practised  upon  him
such  cu.ming  and  deceit.  As  he  had  done  unto  oth
ers.  Girl  permiit'  d  that  he  should  receive  from  others.
— The  crafty  Laban  wears  the  image  of  the  world ;
whoever  serves  it  never  receives  what  he  expects  ;
he  h,,,ks  for  Rachel,  and  behold  it  is  Leah  (Olear).

CKUI..U-II  :  From  this  instance  onward  (especially)
God  .-peaks   to  Jacob  by  every  occurrence.      Laban
deceives    him,  because   he  thinks  that    Laban's  (.la-
cob's ':>)  service  \\ill  be  profitable   to  him,  and  thus
he  (Labun;  lo.- es  not  only  a  great  part  (?)nf  his  herds,
but  is  al-o  obliged  to   part   from   his  children. — The
misery  of  bigamy:   it  was  therefore  expressly  forbid
den   i'i    t'ie  hw  (Lev.  xviii.  l^j  lhat   any  one  should
marry  two  sisters  at  the  same  time,  or  to   favor  one
wife  "before  the  other  (I)eitt.   xxi.    17).      The   seven
years    of    M  rvice   reminds  us   perhaps   of   the  later
statute  among  the  Israelites,  according  to  which  ser
vants  were  to  obtain  their  freedom    during  the  sev
enth  year    (Exod.   xxi.    2);    Jacob,    therefore,   as  a
compensation  for  the  daughters,  took  upon  himself
a  seven  years'  service  (-hivery). —  (The    danger    of
exciting  Esau  prevented  him  from  bringing  the  price
from  his  horn.-,  even   had  he  entrusted  his  affair  to
God.)— SeiiKdnKu:  Space  is  no  obstacle  to  faith,  nor
time  to  hope. — Au  engagement  of  long  standing,  i!
decreed  by  God,  may  become  a  salutary  and  bene
ficial  school  for  a  Christian  marriage. — Comparisons
between    the    deception   practised    by    Laban    upoi
Jacob,  and  that  which  Jacob  practised  upon    K>au
1.  One  brother  upon  another.    2.  There  the  youngei
instead  of  the  older;  here  the  older,  etc.     '<',.  (Roos
lie  did  r.ot  know  Leah  when  he  was  married  to  her
just  as  his  father  knew  him  not  when  he  blessci
him.    4.  Leah  at  the  instigation  of  her  father,  Jaeol
at  the  instigation  of  his  mother. — But  he  received
notwithstanding  his  ignorance  as  to  Leah,  the  wif
designed   for  him   by  God,  who  was  to  become  th
mother  of  the  Messiah,  just  as  Isaac  blessed  bin
unwittingly  as  the  rightful  heir  of  the  promise.    Al
in  how  niany  errors  and  follies  of  men,  here  an
everywhere,  do  we  find  God's  inevitable  grace  an
faithfulness  intertwined  (Roos).

Section  Fourth,  vers.  26-30.  STAKKK  :  Ver.  27
It  is  remarkable  that  the  ancient  Jews,  at  births
marriages,  and  deaths,  observed  the  seventh  day  a
an  holy  day  (Gen.  xxi.  4  ;  Luke  ii.  21 ;  Gen.  1.  10
Sir.  xxii.  13).  From  this  fact  we  may  conclude  tha
the  ancient  Hebrews  already  considered  the  day  o
birth  and  circumcision,  the  day  of  marriage,  and  th
day  of  death,  as  the  three  most  important  ones  i
life. — (Ver.  28.  Jacob  might  have  asked  for  a  d


orce.) — Jacob's  polygamy  not  caused  by  sensuality ;
ut  did  not  remain  unpunished. — (BUUMANN:  Corn-
arison  between  the  two  wives  and  the  Old  and  New
estament,  the  two  churches  to  whom  the  Lord  is
etrothed.  The  Old  Testament  Leah,  the  wearied,
ic  tender  eyed.)  —  HALL:  God  often  aftliets  us
irough  our  own  friendship  (relatives).  He  often
unishes  our  own  sins  by  the  sins  of  others,  before
e  are  aware  of  it  (2  Sam.  xvi.  22). — OSIANDKU  :  Oh,
•hat  is  avarice  not  capable  of? — HALL  :  God's  ehil-
ren  do  not  easily  obtain  what  they  wish  for,  but
lust  toil  hard  lor  it;  (German)  work  for  it,  tooth
nd  nail. — SCIIUODKK:  Jacob's  history,  in  its  turning-
oints,  meets  with  personages  who  serve  to  bring
ut  his  character  more  clearly  in  contrast  with
icirs;  their  thoughts  bound  in  the  present, — his
ookiug  on  into  the  future.  Thus  Esau  and  Laban.

Section  Fi ftli,  vers.  31-35.  STAUKK:  O.SIAXHKI::
t  is  still  customary  with  God  to  take  care  of  the
istressed. — CKAMKU:  God  distributes  his  gifts  by
>arts.  Do  not  despise  anyone. —  HALL:  God  knows
low  to  weigh  to  us  in  similar  ways  both  our  gifts  of
;race  and  our  crosses. — mil.  \Yirt.  :  There  is  nothing
'o  bad  or  so  complicated  but  that  God  can  bring  good
nit  of  it. — (Signification  of  the  word  from  which
'Judah"  is  derived:  1.  To  thank  ;  2.  to  commend  ;
i.  to  praise;  •!.  to  confess.)  From  this  Judah  all
Tews  received  their  beautiful  name.  —  GKUI.ACII:
Reuben:  see  a  son;  in  allusion  to  Raah-Be-Onyi,
.  c.,  he  (Jehovah)  hath  looked  upon  my  uillietion. —
SCHRODKR:  The  mother  gives  the  names,  as  she  does
also  in  Homer.

Section  Sirtli,  eh.  xxx.  1-8.  STAUKE:  J!U,I. 117/Y.  .-
impatience  is  the  mother  of  many  sins. — Even  to  the
nous  in  their  married  life  the  sun  of  peace  and  har-
nony  does  not  always  shine  ;  at  times  dark  clouds  of
dissension  and  strife  arise.  But  we  must  guard  in
time  against  such  clouds  and  storms. — We  must  not
try  to  obtain  the  divine  blessing  by  unrighteous
means. — SCIIKODKU  :  Children  are  God's  gift.  All
parents  should  consider  this,  and  take  such  care  of
•hcse  divine  gifts  that  when  God  calls  those  whom
tie  has  entrusted  to  them,  they  may  render  a  good
account  (Valer.  Herb.). — In  Rachel  we  meet  with
envy  and  jealousy,  while  in  Jehovah  there  is  com
passion  and  grace.

Section  Seventh,  vers.  0-13.  SCHRODER:  For  all
times  Israel  is  warned  by  the  patriarch's  culpable
weakness  and  pliancy  in  relation  to  his  wives,  as  well
as  by  the  frightful  picture  of  his  polygamy.^  (Israel,
it  is 'true,  should  even  in  this  way  learn  to  distinguish
the  times,  to  recognize  the  workings  of  divine  grace
in  and  over  the  errors  of  men,  and  to  rejoice  at  the
progress  in  his  law.)

Section  Eighth,  vers.  14-21.  STAKKK:  (Do  you
ask  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Dudaim  ?  some  think  they
arc  lilies,  others  that  they  arc  berries,  but  no  one
knows  what  they  are.  Some  call  them  "winter
cherries."  Luther.) — The  rivalry  of  the  sisters.
Thus  God  punished  him  because  he  had  taken  two
wives,  even  two  sisters.  Even  the  holy  women  were
not  purely  and  entirely  spiritual. — SCIIUUDER:  lu
reference  to  the  maid's  children,  God's  name  is  nei
ther  mentioned  by  Leah  nor  by  the  narrator.  They
were  in  the  strictest  sense  begotten  in  a  natural  way
(Hengstenberg).  (This  is  wrong,  for  in  the  first
place  Jacob  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  maids  in  the
natural  way  of  mere  lust ;  2.  in  that  case  they
would  not  have  been  numbered  among  the  blessed
seed  of  Israel.  The  principal  tribes,  indeed,  did  not
spring  from  them.)


CHAP.    XXX.  25— XXXI.    1-3.  535


Section  Ninth,  vcrs.  22-2 1.  STARKE  :  Why  bar
renness  was  considered  by  Abraham's  descendants
as  a  sign  of  the  divine  curse:  1.  It  appeared  as  if
they  were  excluded  from  the  promise  of  the  enlarge
ment  of  Abraham's  seed ;  2.  They  were  without  the
hope  of  giving  birth  to  the  Messiah ;  3.  They  had


and  multiply. — OSIANDKR:  Our  prayers  are  not  to  b«
considered  as  in  vain,  if  we  receive  no  answer  im
mediately.  If  we  are  humbled  sufficiently  below  the
cross,  then  we  will  be  exalted. — SCHRODER  :  Luther
says  respecting  Jacob's  wives  that  they  were  not
moved  by  mere  carnal  desire,  but  looked  at  the  bless-


no  share  in  God's  universal  command:  be  fruitful  '  ing  of  children  with  reference  to  the  promised  seed.


THIRD     SECTION.

Jacob's  thought  of  returning  home.     New  treaty  with  Laban.     His  closely  calculated  proposition
(Prelude  to  the  method  of  acquiring  possession  of  the  Egyptian  vessels).     Laban's  dis
pleasure.     God's  command  to  return.

CHAPTER    XXX.    25— XXXI.   1-3.

25  And  it  came  to  pass,  \vlicn  Rachel  had  borne  Joseph,  that  Jacob  said  unto  Laban,
Send  me  away  [let  mo  go],   that  I  may  go  unto  mine  own  place,  and  to  mv  country.

26  Give  me  my  wives  and  my  children,  for  whom  I  have  served  thee,  and  let  me  go:   for

27  thou  knowest  my  service  which  I  have   done  thee.     And  Laban  said  unto  him,  I  pray
thee,  if  1  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes,  tarry;  for  I  have  learned  by  experience1

28  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  for  thy  sake.     And  he  said,  [farther],  Appoint  me  thy

29  wages,  and  I  will  give  it.     And  [But]   he   said  unto  him,  Thou  knowest  how  I  have

30  served  thee,  and  how  thy  cattle  was  with  me  [what  thy  herds  have  become  under  me].    For  it  10 as
Hi  tie  which  thou  hadst  before  I  came,  and  it  is  now  increased  unto  a  multitude ;  and  the
Lord  hath  blessed  thee,  since  my  coming2  [after me]:  and  now  when  shall  I  provide

31  for  mine  own  house  also?     And  he  said,  What  shall  I  give  thee?     And  Jacob  said,
Thou  shalt  not  give  me  anything  [anything peculiar],  If  thou  wilt  do  this  thing  for  me,  I

32  will  again  feed  and  keep  thy  flock  [small cattle]  :  I  will  pass  through  all  thy  flock  to-day,
removing  from  thence  all  the  speckled  and  spotted  [dappled]  cattle  [iambs],  and  all  the
brown  [dark-colored]  cattle  among  the  sheep,  and  the  spotted  and  speckled  among  the

33  goats:  and  of  such  shall  be  my  hire.     So  shall  my  righteousness  [rectitude]  answer  for
me  in  time  to  come,3  when  it  shall  come  for  my  hire ;  before  thy  face :  every  one  that
is  not  speckled  and  spotted  among  the  goats,  and  brown  among  the  sheep,  that  shall  be

34  counted  stolen  with  me.     And  Laban  said,  Behold,  I  would  it  might  be  according  to

35  thy  word.     And  he  removed  that  day  the  he-goats  that  were  ringstreaked  [striped]  and
spotted,  and  all  the  she-goats  that  were  speckled  and  spotted,  and  every  one  that  had
some  while  in  it,  and  all  the  brown  among  the  sheep,  and  gave  them  into  the  hands

3G  of  his  sons.  And  he  set  three  days'  journey  betwixt  himself  [the  shepherds  and  flocks  of  Laban]
and  Jacob  [the  flocks  of  Jacob  under  his  sons]  :  and  Jacob  fed  the  rest  [the  sifted]  of  Laban's
flocks.

37  And  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  green  poplar,  [gum]  and  of  the  hazel  [almond]  and  chest
nut-tree  [maple]  ' ;  and  pilled  white  streaks  in  them,  and  made  the  white  appear  which

38  was  in  the  rods.     And  he  laid  the  rods  which  he  had  [striped]  pilled  before  the  flocks
in  the  gutters  in  the  watering-troughs6  when  the  flocks  came  [to  which  the  flocks  must  come]

39  to  drink,  that  they  should  conceive  when  they  came  to  drink.     And  the  flocks  con
ceived  before  the  rods,  and  brought  forth  [threw,  cast]  ringstreaked,  speckled  and  spotted.

40  And  Jacob  did  separate  the  lambs,  and  set  the  faces  of  the  flocks   toward  the  ring-
straked,  aiid   all  the  brown  in  the  flock  of  Laban ;  and  he  put  his  own  flocks  by  them-

41  selves,  and  put  them  not  unto  Laban's  cattle.     And  it  came  to  pass,  whensoever  the
stronger  cattle  did  conceive,  that  Jacob  laid  the  rods  before  the  eyes  of  the  cattle  in  the

42  gutters,  that  they  might  conceive  among  the  rods.     But  when  the  cattle  were  feeble,

43  he  put  them  not  in:  so  the  feebler  were  Laban's,  and  the  stronger  Jacob's.     And  the


530


GENESIS,  OU   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


man  increased  exceedingly,  and  had  much  [small]  cattle,  and  maid-servants,  and  men-
servants,  and  camels  and  asses.

CH.  XXXI.          1   And  he   heard  the  words  of  Laban's   sons,  saying,  Jacob  hath  taken
a\vav  all  that  tea*  our  father's;   and  of  tit  at  which   was   our  father's  hath   he   gotten  all

2  this""-h.rv   [riches].1'      And  Jacob   beheld  the  countenance  of  Laban,  and,  behold,  it  teas

3  not  toward   him   as   before  7  [formerly].     And  [Then]  the   Lord   said  unto  Jacob,  Return
unto  the  land  of  thy  fathers,  and  to  thy  kindred  [thy  home];   and  1  will  be  with  thee.

[i  Vcr.27.-  Lit.,  1  have  augured,  T"rn:;  Sept.,  oiumiV"" ;  not  that  Laban  was  a  serpent-worshipper,  but  that  he
used  divination  as  the  heathen  ;  and  thus  drew  his  inferences  and  uuguries.-A.  (',.]

K  Ver'.  ::r  :':•'.'  •'.'  3Sy /o-«nr^'u>-the  future- at  all  times,  when,  etc.  Laivre  renders  "  when  thou  bhalt  cv.me  upon
jr  to  my  \vivires  ;  i.  e.',  to  examine.— A.  (i.  1

[i  Yer.  37.-    He!..,  "t~r  ,  flane-tree;  so  Sent.,  Vu'p.  and  Syriae.— A.G.]

t5   r'"T"' ,  ail  unusual  archaic  form  for  r"~rjfl"  •    Kcil.— A.  G.]

i«  fii  :XXXI.     Ver.  '2.  -  Lit.,  weight— A.  ( :'. ]

[»   Ver.  -•  -Lit.,  as.  yesterday,  trie  day  before.-  -A.  G.]


GENERAL


l:KMAUKS.


1.  The   thrill   bb^l,  vcr.   27   (comp.  ch.  xii.  13),
t-hows  Unit  this  section,  according  to  Knobel,    is  Jc-
hovistic.

2.  In  consequence  of  Lillian's  deception,  Jacob
must  serve  1'uurteeii  years  for  his  Haehel.    According
lo    ch.   xx.\i.   -11    he   served   him    MX   years    longer,
airreeablv  to  the  terms  of  the   contract   that  lie  had
just  now  concluded  with  him.

:;.   The  doubtful  way  in  which  he  now  secured  his
reward  leads  us  to  conjecture   that  he  was  conscious
that  he  had  been  defrauded  by  Laban,  and   that  he
was  dealing  with  a  Sellish  man,  who-c  .-eliishness  and
power,  he   thought,  could  only  lie  countervailed  by
cunning.      Nor    is    it     to    be    denied    that   wisdom's
weapon   is    given   to    the  feeble  to  protect   himself
against  the   harsh   and   cruel    power  of  the   strong.
Our  narrative   comes  tinder  the  same  category  with
the   surreptitious   obtaining   of    the  blessing  of   the
tirst-boru  by  .laeob,  and  the  acquisition  of  the  gold
and  silver  vessels  of  the  Egyptians  by  the  Israelites.
The  prudence  manifested  in  these  cases  is  the  same;
but  still  there  was  a  real  deception  in  the  first  case
(one   deception,  however,  against   another);  in    the
present  case  it  was  simply  an  overreaching,  while  in
the  third  they  were  only  availing  themselves  of  the
situation  of   the  Egyptians,  i.  e.,  their  disposition.
In  all  three  cases,  however,   the  artful,  or   at  least
•,\  :.vi\  -calculated,  project,  was  provoked  by  a  great
and  liross  wrong.     Esau  proposes  to  take  back  the
birthright    which    he  had    sold    to    Jacob.     Laban
caused  him  to  perform   a  service  of  fourteen  years,
and  intends  to  make  him   still  further  a  prey  to  his
avarice.     The  Egyptians  have  indeed  consumed  the
very  strength  of  Israel  by  their  bondage.     And  if
the  scale  here  turns  against  Jacob  because  lie  thus
cunningly    overreached   his  father-in-law,  it  is   bal
anced  by  Laban's  pressing  him   again  into  his  ser
vice,   that  he  might   misuse  him  anew;  nor^is  the
marvellous  charm  to  be  left  out  of  view,  which  laj
in  his  ancient  nomadic  science  and   art.     Superior
minds  were  never  inclined  to  let  their  arts  and  sciences
lie  dormant.

EXEGETICAL  AXD  CRITICAL.

1.  Vers.  25-34.  The  new  contract.  —  When  Ra
chel.  —  At  Joseph's  birth  [which  therefore  could  no
have  occurred  until  the  fifteenth  year  of  his  residenc*


vith   Laban. — A.  ('-.]  a  strong  feeling   comes    over
acob,  which   leads  him  to  believe  that  he  is  to  re-
urn    home   without    having    received    a    call    from
hence  or  a  divine  command  hese.     It  is  apparent
rom  what   follows  that   he  first  of  all  wished  to  be-
inc  independent  of  Laban,  in  order  to  provide  for
,.s  own.      He   is,    therefore,    soon  hampered   again,
ince  a  fair  prospect  opened  to  him   now  and  here.
Cuban's  character  now  comes    into    \iew   in    every
itterancc. — May  I  still  grace,  etc.,  lit.,  //'  /  hare
found  furor,  etc.     If  this  expression  may  be  called
in  apo'siopesis,  we  must,  still  bear  in  mind  that  this
vas  a  standing  form  of  expression  even  in  the  oath.
Ceil  supplies  "  *,'«//  //</."     The  optative  form  already
expresses  all  that  is  pos.-ible.     If  "rrn:   is,  accord-
to   Delit/seh,    a    heathen   expression,    then    the
phraseology  in  Laban's  mouth  appears  more  striking
'-till,  through  the  connection  of  this  expression  with
Jehovah's   name. —  Appoint  me. —  He    not    only
recognizes,  almost  i'awningly,  Jacob's   worth   to   his
:iouse,  but  is  even  willing  to  yield  unconditionally  to
us  determination — a  proof  that  he  did   not  expect
of  Jacob  too  great  a  demand.     But  Jacob  is  not  in
clined  to   trust   himself  to  his  generosity,  and  hence
his   cunningly  calculated  though   seemingly   trilling
demand.     Laban's  consent  to  his  demand,  however,
breathes  in  the  very  expression  the  joy  of  selfishness  ;
and  it  is  scarcely  sufficient   to   translate :  Behold,  I
would    it   might    be  according    to  thy    word.      But
Jacob's  proposition  seems  to  point  to  a  very  trifling
reward,    since   the  sheep   in  the  East  are  nearly  all
white,  while  the  goats  are  generally  of  a  dark  color
or  speckled.     For  he  only  demands  of  Laban's  herds
those  sheep  that  have  dark  spots  or  specks,  or  that
are  entirely  black,  and  those  only  of  the  goats  that
were  white-spotted  or  striped.     But  he  does  not  only
demand  the  speckled  lambs  brought  forth  hereafter,
after  the  present  number  of  such  are  set  aside  for
Laban  (Tuch,  Baumg.,  Kurt/.),  but  the  present  in
spection  is  to  form  the  first  stock  of  his  herds  (Kno-
bel,  B-elitzsch).     [The  words,  "thou  shalt  not  give
me  anything,"  seem  to  indicate  that  Jacob  had  no
stock  from  Laban  to  begin  with,  and  did  not  intend
to  be  dependent  upon  him  for  any  part  of  his  posses
sions.     Those  of  this  description  which  should  ap
pear  among  the  flocks  should  be  his  hire.    He  would
depend  upon  the  divine  providence  and  his  own  skill.
He  would  be  no  more  indebted  to  Laban  than  Abra
ham   to   the  king  of  Sodom. — A.  G.]     Afterwards,
also,  the  speckled  ones  brought  forth  among  Laban'a


CHAP,  xxx.  25— xxxi.  1-3.


537


herds  are  to  be  added  to  his,  as  is  evident  from  his
following  arts.  Michaclis  and  Bohlen  miss  the  pur
port,  but  it  lies  in  verse  33.  For  when  he  invites
Laban  to  muster  his  herds  in  time  to  con-o,  "inE  CT3,
it  surely  does  not  mean  literally  the  next  day,  as
Delitzsch  supposes,  but  in  time  to  come  (sec  Geseiiius,
"in  13).  As  often  as  Laban  came  to  Jacob's  herds  in
the  future  he  must  regard  all  the  increase  in  speckled
and  lingstreaked  lambs  as  Jacob's  property,  but  if
he  found  a  purely  white  sheep  or  an  entirely  black
goat,  then,  and  only  then,  he  might  regard  it  as
stolon.  (As  to  the  sheep  and  goats  of  the  East,  see
Bible  Dictionaries,  the  Natural  History  of  the  Bible,
and  KNOBKL,  p.  246.)  Moreover,  this  transaction
is  not  conducted  wholly  "  in  the  conventional  forms
of  oriental  politeness,  as  in  ch.  xxiii.,  between  Abra
ham  and  the  Hittitcs  "  (Del.).  Laban's  language  is
submissive,  while  that  of  Jacob  is  very  frank  and
bold,  as  became  his  invigorated  courage  and  the
sense  of  the  injustice  which  he  had  suffered.

2.  Vers.  35,  3(5.    TJie  separation  of  the  herds. —
And   he  removed. — It  surely  is   not   correct,    as
Roseniniillcr,  Maurer,  Del.  and   Keil  suppose,  that
Laban  is  here  referred  to ;  that  Laban,  "  to  be  more
certain,"  had  removed  the  speckled  ones  himself  and
put  them  under  the  care  of  his  own  sons.     In  this
view  everything  becomes  confused,  and  Bohlen  justly
remarks:  "The  reference  here  is  to  Jacob,  because
he  intended  to  separate  the  animals  (ver.  32),  as  cer
tainly  it  was  proper  for  the  head  servant  to  do,  and  be
cause  there  is  no  mention  of  Laban's  sons  until  ch.
xxxi.  1,  while  Jacob's  older  children  were  certainly
able  to  take  care  of  the  sheep."    Reuben,  at  the  close
of  this  new  term  of  six  years,  had  probably  reached  his
urteenth  year,  Simeon  his  eleventh.    But  even  if  they
had  not  reached  these  years,  the  expression  he  gave
them,  "Pas—pa ,  could  mean :  he  formed  a  new  family
state,  or  herds,  as  a  possession  of  his  sons,  although
they  were  assisted  in  the  management  by  the  mothers
mauls,  and  servants,  since  he  himself  had  anew  become
Laban's  servant.     Hence  it  is  also  possible  (ver  36)
for  him  to  make  a  distinction  between  himself  as  La-
s  servant,  and  Jacob  as  an  independent  owner  now
represented  by  his  sons.     It  is  altogether  improbable
that  Jacob  would  entrust  his  herds  to  Laban's  sons
But  it  is  entirely  incomprehensible  that  Jacob,  with
his  herds,  could  have  taken  flight  without  Laban's
knowledge,  and  gained  three  days  the  start,  unless
bis  herds  were  under  the  care  of  his  own  sons.    [This
is  of  course  well  put  and  unanswerable  on  the  suppo
sition  that  the  sheep  and  goats  which  were  removed
from  the  flocks  were  Jacob's  stock  to  begin  with
but  it  has  no  force  if  we  regard  these  as  Laban's'
and  put  therefore  under  the  care  of  his  own  sons'
while   Jacob  was  left  to  manage    the   flocks   from
which  the  separated  were    taken.— A.  G  ]— Three
days'  journey  betwixt.— Lit.,  "a  space  of  three
days  between."     Certainly  days'  journeys   here  are
lose  of  the  herds  and  are  not  to  be  estimated  ac
cording  to  the  journeys  of  men.     Again,  Jacob  is
ahead  of  Laban  three  days,  and  yet  Laban  can  over
take  him.     \\  e  may  conceive,  therefore,  of  a  dis
tance  of  about  twelve  hours,  or  perhaps   eighteen
By  moans  of  this  separation  Jacob  not  only
gamed  Laban's  confidence  but  also  his  property.

3.  \  ers.  37-43.  Jacob's  management  of  Laban <s
herds -Took  bam  rods._DE  WETTK  :  Storax,  al
mond-tree,  maple.  BUNSEX  :  "  Gum-tree.  The  Alex
andrians  here  translate,  styrax-tree,  but  Hos  iv  13
poplars.  If  we  look  at  the  Arabic,  in  which  our


Hebrew  word  has  been  preserved,  the  explanation
of  styrax-tree  is  to  be  preferred.  It  is  similar  to  the
quince,  grows  in  Syria,  Arabia,  and  Asia  Minor,
reaches  the  height  of  about  twelve  feet,  and  fur
nishes,  if  incisions  are  made  in  the  bark,  a  sweet
fragrant-smelling,  and  transparent  gum,  of  a  light-
red .color,  called  styrax.  Almond-tree.  This  si^nifi-
cation  is  uncertain,  since  the  hazelnut-tree  may  also
be  referred  to.  Plane-tree.  A  splendid  tree,  fre
quent  even  in  South  Europe,  having  large  boughs,
extending  to  a  great  distance  (hence  the  Greek  name'
Platane),  and  bearing  some  resemblance  to  the  maple
tree."  Jacob  of  course  must  select  rods  from  such
trees,  whose  dark  external  bark  produced  the  great
est  contrast  with  the  white  one  below  it.  In  this
respect  gum-tree  might  be  better  adapted  than  white
poplars,  almond-tree  or  chestnut  better  than  hazel-
nut,  and  maple  better  than  plane-tree.  KEIL  :  Storax,
chestnut,  and  maple  trees,  which  all  have  below  their
bark  a  white,  dazzling  wood.  Thus  he  procured  roda

of  different  kinds  and  pilled  white  streaks  in  them.

And  he  set  the  rods — Knobel  thinks,  he  placed  the
staffs  on  the  watering-troughs,  but  did  not  put  them  in
the  gutters.  But  this  does  not  agree  with  the  choice
of  the  verb,  nor  the  fact  itself:  the  animals,  by  looking
into  the  water  for  some  time,  were  to  receive,  as  it
were,  into  themselves,  the  appearance  of  the  rods  lyin«
near.  They,  in  a  technical  sense,  "  were  frightened"
at  them.  The  wells  were  surrounded  with  water
ing-troughs,  used  for  the  watering  of  the  cattle.

And  they  conceived.— For   the   change  of   the
forms  here,  see  KEIL,  p.  210.— And  brought  forth
cattle. — "This    crafty  trick    was    based   upon   the
common  experience  of  the  so-called  fright  of  ani
mals,  especially  of  sheep,  namely,  that  the  represen
tations   of  the   senses  during  coition  are   stamped
upon  the  form  of  the  foetus  (sec  Bocn.,  fficroz.,  i.
618,  and  FRIEDREICH  upon  the   Bible,  i.  37,  etc.)."
Keil.     For  details  see  KNOBEL,  p.  247,  and  DELITZSCH,
p.  472.— And  set  the  faces  of  the  flock.— Jacob's
second  artifice.     The   speckled   animals,  it  is  true,
were  removed,  from  time  to  time,  from  Laban's  herds,
and  added  to  Jacob's  flock,  but  in   the   meantime
Jacob  put  the  speckled  animals  in  front  of  the  others,
so  that  Laban's  herds  had  always  these  spotted  or
variegated  animals  before  them,  and  in  this  manner
another  impression  was  produced  upon  the  she-goats
and^  sheep.     Bohlen   opposes    this    second  artifice,
against  Rosenmiiller,  Maurer,  and  others.    The  clause
n  question  should  be  :  he  sent  them  to  the  speckled
ones  that  already  belonged  to  him  (133  in  the  sense
of  w»«,s).     But  the  general  term  •jXStt  is  against
this.     The   separation  of  the  new-born  lambs   and
goats  from  the  old  herds  could  only  be  gradual.—
The  stronger  cattle.— The  third  artifice.     He  so
arranged  the  thing  that  the  stronger  cattle  fell  to
him,  the  feebler  to  Laban.     His  first  artifice    there
fore,  produced  fully  the  desired  effect.     It  was  owin-r
partly,  perhaps,  to  his  sense  of  equity  toward  Laban,
and  partly  to  his  prudence,  that  he  set  these  limits
to  his  gain ;  but  he  still,  however,  takes  the  advan
tage,  since  he  seeks  to  gain  the  stronger  cattle  for
himself.     BOHLEN  :  "  Literally,  the  bound  ones,  firmly
set,  i.  e.,  the  strong,  just  as  the  covered  ones,  i.  c    the
feeble,  languid,  faint ;  for  the  transition  is  easy  from
the  idea  of  binding,  firmness,  to  that  of  strength,
and  from  that  of  covering,  to  languishing,  or  faint-
ness.     Some  of  the  old  translators  refer  them  to  ver.
nal  and  autumnal  lambs  (comp.  PLIN.  8,  47,  COLU-
MELLA,  De  re  rust.,  8,  3),  because  the  sheep  in  Pales-


538


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


tine  and  similar  climates  bear  twice  in  a  year  (Anis-
TOT.,  Hint.  Aniin.,  G,  18,  19;  'Problem?,'  10,  46;
Boon. MIT,  Hicroe.,  i.  p.  512),  and  because  those  con
ceived  in  the  Spring  or  Summer  and  born  in  the
Autumn  are  stronger  than  those  conceived  in  Au
tumn  ami  born  in  Spring.  But  the  text  does  not
draw  this  precise  distinction."  The  Septuagint  only
distinguishes  between  eVaiTjua  and  &O-TJUO.  Luther
renders  '•  late"  and  "  early  born." — And  the  man
increased. — With  the  rich  increase  in  cattle,  care
was  taken  at  the  same  time  to  secure  an  increase  in
men-servauts  and  maid-servants,  as  well  as  camels
and  asses.  Knobel  iinds  a  contradiction  in  the  fact
that  this  rich  increase  is  here  ascribed  to  Jacob's
artifice,  whilst  it  is  attributed  to  the  divine  blessing
in  ch.  xxxi.  !>.  But  so  much  only  is  evident,  that
Jacob  did  not  act  against  his  conscience,  but  thought
that  he  might  anticipate  and  assist  by  human  means
the  fiiliilment  of  those  visions  in  which  the  rewards
of  this  kind  were  promised  to  him. — And  he  heard.
T!i'  compute-  success  that  Jacob  met  with  excited
the  envy  and  jealousy  of  Laban's  sons,  whose  exist-
:-  indicated  first  in  the  plural  (ch.  xxix.  27),
'  ;:!  \vho-c  definite  appearance  here  shows  that  the
selfish  deposition  peculiar  to  this  family  was  more
fuMy  develop^  1  in  them  than  in  Laban  himself'. —
The  words  of  Laban's  sons. — According  to  Dc-
lit/sch,  they  were  quite  small,  not  yet  fourteen  years
•;ion,  however,  which  has  no  suffi
cient  gp'und.

•1.  Ch.  xxxi.  1-3.  Jui-nb'x  rfx'ilittitin  to  return
ho)iH'. — All  that  was  our  father's. — They  evident
ly  exaggerate  in  their  hatred,  and  even  accuse  him
of  dish. .in  sty  by  the  use  of  the  expression  :  of  that
wluclt  iffii  o'tr  f(i!lnr\t.  But  Lalian  shares  in  the
threatening  disposition  ;  his  countenance  had  changed
remarkably  toward  Jacob,  a  fact  all  the  more
striking,  sine.'  lie  had  formerly  been  extraordinarily
friendly.  Trouble  and  dangers  similar  to  those  at
home  now  develop  themselves  here;  then  comes,  at
the  critical  juncture,  Jehovah's  command  :  Return.


DOCTRINAL    AND    KTHICAL.

1.  Jacob's  resolution  to  return  home  at  his  own
risk,  is  to  be  explained  from   his  excessive  joy  at
Joseph's   birth,  and  from  his  longing  for  home  and
for  deliverance  from  the  oppression  of  Laban.    More
over,  he  seems  to  have  considered  Rachel's  son  as
the    principal    Messianic   heir,    and    therefore   must
hasten  to  conduct  him  to  the  promised  land,  even  at
the  peril  of  his  life.     Besides,  he  now  feels  that  he
must  provide  for  his  own  house,  and  with  Laban's
selfishness  there  is  very  little  prospect  of  his  attain
ing  this  in  Laban's  house.    These  two  circumstances
show  clearly  why  he  allows  himself  to  be  retained
by  Laban  (for  he  has  no  assurance  of  faith  that  he  is
now  to  return),  and  in  the  second  place,  the  manner
and  means  by  which  he  turns  the  contract  to  his  own
advantage.

2.  We  here  learn  that  Laban's  prosperity  was
not  very  great  before  Jacob's  arrival.     The  blessing
first  returns  to  the  house  with  Jacob's  entrance.    But
this  blessing  seemed  to  become  to  Laban  no  blessing
of  faith,     llis  conduct  toward  the  son  of  his  sister
and  his  son-in-law,  becomes  more   and  more   base.
He  seix.es  eagerly,  therefore,  the  terms  offered  to  him
by  Jacob,  because  they  appear  to  him  most  favor
able,  since  the  sheep  in  the  East  are  generally  white,
while- the  goats  are  black.     His  intention,  therefore,


is  to  defraud  Jacob,  while  he  is  actually  overreached
by  him.  Besides,  this  avails  only  of  the  mere  form ;
as  to  the  thing  itself,  Jacob  really  had  claims  to  a
fair  compensation.

3.  Just   as   Jacob's  conduct  at  the  surreptitious
obtaining  the    birthright  was    preceded   by   Isaac's
intended  cunning,  and  the  injustice  of  Esau,  so  also,
in  many  respects,  here  Laban's  injustice  and  artifice
precedes  Jacob's  project  (ch.  xxxi.).     In   this   light
Jacob's  conduct  is  to  be  judged.     Hence  he   after
wards  views  his  real   gain  as  a  divine  blessing,  al
though  he  had  to  alone  again  for  his  selfishness  and
cunning,  in  the  form  of  the  gain,  at  least,  by  fears
and   danger.     Moreover,    we   must    still    bring  into
view,  as  to  Jacob's  and  Laban's  bargain,  the  follow
ing  points:   1.  Jacob  asks  for  his  wages  very  mod
estly  and  frankly  ;  he  a-ks  for  his  wives  and  children,
as    the  fruit  of   his  wives,   and   for    his   discharge.
While  Laban  wishes  to  keep  him  for  his  own  advan
tage.     2.  Jacob  t-peaks   frankly,  Laban  flatters  and
fawns.     3.  Jacob  might  now  expect  a  paternal  treat
ment  and  dowry  on  the  part  of  Laban.     Laban,  on
the  contrary,  prolongs  his  servile  relation,  and  asks
him  to  determine  his    reward,  because   he  expected
from   Jacob's    mode-ty   the    announcement  of  very
small  wages.     -!.   In  the  proposition  made  by  Jacob,
he  thought  he  had  caught  him.

4.  The  establishment  of  his  own  household,  after
being  married  fourteen   years,  shows  that  Jacob,  in
this  respect,  as  well  as  in  the  conclusion  of  his  mar
riage,  awaited  his  time.

5.  The  so-called  impressions   of   she   gouts    and
sheep,  a  very  old  observation,  which  the  cooperation
of  subtle  impressions,  images,  and  even  imaginations
at  the  formation  of  the  feet  us,  and,  indeed,  the  foetus
itself    among    animals    confirms. — The    attainment,
of   varieties  and  new   species   among    animals    and
plants  is  very  ancient,  and   stands  closely  connected
with  civilization  and  the  kingdom  of  God.

6.  Jacob's  sagacity,  his  weapon  against  the  strong.
But  as  he  stands  over  against  God,  he  employed  dif
ferent  means,  especially  prayer.

7.  The  want  of    candor  in  Laban's   household,
corresponds  with  the  selfishness  of  the  household.

8.  In  the  following  chapter  we  find  still  further
details  respecting  Jacob's  bargain.     In  the  first  place,
the  selfish  Laban  broke,  in   different  ways,  the  firm
bargain  made  with  Jacob,  in   order  to  change  it  to
his  advantage  (ch.  xxxi.  7).     Secondly,  Jacob's  mor
bid  sense  of  justice  had  been  so  excited  that  he  re
ceived  explanation  of  the  state  of  things  in  his  herds
even  in  his  nicrht-visions.


UOMILETICAL    AND    PEACTICAL.

See  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical  paragraphs.  The
present  section  is,  for  the  most  part,  fitted  for  re
ligious,  biographical,  and  psychological  contempla
tions.  It  is  to  be  treated  carefully  both  with  respect
to  Jacob's  censure  as  well  as  his  praise. — Jacob's
resolutions  to  return  home:  1.  The  first:  why  so
vividly  formed,  but  not  accomplished  ;  2.  the  second :
the  cause  of  his  assurance  (the  divine  command).
Moreover,  perils  equal  to  those  threatening  at  home,
were  now  surrounding  him. — His  longing  for  home
during  his  service  abroad. — The  hardships  of  a  se
vere  servitude  in  Jacob's  life,  as  well  as  in  the  history
of  his  descendants :  when  blessed  ? — Laban's  selfish
ness  and  Jacob's  sense  of  right  at  war  with  each
other. — Prudence  as  a  weapon  in  life's  batttle  :  1.


CHAP.   XXXI.   4— XXXII.   2.


The  authority  to  use  this  weapon  when  opposed  to
a  harsh  superiority  or  subtlety ;  2.  the  mighty  effi
cacy  of  this  weapon  ;  3.  the  danger  of  this  weapon.
— Jacob's  prudence  in  its  right  and  wrong  aspects
in  our  history :  1.  The  right  lies  in  his  just  claims;
2.  the  wrong,  in  his  want  of  candor,  his  dissimula
tion  and  his  self-help. — Ilis  natural  science,  or  knowl
edge  of  nature,  combined  with  prudence,  a  great
power  in  life. — The  difficulties  in  the  establishment
of  an  household:  1.  Their  general  causes;  2.  how
they  arc  to  be  overcome. — Jacob's  prosperity  abroad.
— Jacob  struggling  with  difficulties  all  his  life  long.
Section  First,  vcrs.  25-34.  STARKE  :  (As  to  the
different  meanings  of  U.T!3,  ver.  27.  Some  com
mentators  hold  that  Laban  had  supcrstitiously  con
sulted  his  tcraphim,  or  idols.) — Bibl.  Wirt. :  It  is
customary  with  covetous  people  to  deal  selfishly  with
their  neighbors. — Ver.  30.  By  means  of  my  foot.
LUTIIKU  :  i.  e.,  I  had  to  hunt  and  run  through  thick  and
thin  in  order  that  you  might  be  rich. — Ver.  34.  If
Laban  had  been  hone?t,  he  could  have  represented  to
Jacob,  that  he  would  be  a  great  loser  by  this  bargain.
God  even  blesses  impious  masters  on  account  of  their
pious  servants  (1  Tim.  v.  8). — CALVVER  Handbuch  :
Jacob  91  years  old. — Thus  Laban's  covetousness  and
avarice  is  punished  by  the  very  bargain  which  he
purposed  to  make  for  his  own  advantage. — We  are
not  to  apply  the  criterion  of  Christianity  to  Jacob's
conduct. — SCHRODER  :  Acts  and  course  of  life
among  strangers.  As  to  Laban.  Courtesy  to
gether  with  religion  are  made  serviceable  to  the  at
tainment  of  his  ends. — Thus,  also,  in  the  future,
there  is  only  a  more  definite  agreement  of  master


and  servant  between  Jacob  and  his  father-in-law. —
(The  period  of  pregnancy  with  sheep  lasts  five
months  ;  they  may  therefore  lamb  twice  during  the
year.  Herds  were  the  liveliest  and  strongest  in  au
tumn,  after  having  enjoyed  the  good  pasture  during
the  summer,  etc.  On  the  contrary,  herds  are  feeble
after  having  just  passed  the  winter.)

Section  Second,  vers.  35,  36.  STARKE  :  A  Christian
is  to  look  for  pious  men-servants  and  maid-servants.

Section  Third,  vers.  37-43.  STARKE  :  Christian,
be  warned  not  to  misuse  this  example  to  encourage
the  practice  of  cunning  and  deceit  with  your  neigh
bor. — CRAMER  :  Wages  that  are  earned,  but  kept
back,  cry  to  heaven ;  hence  nature  here  serves  Ja
cob  (James  v.  4). — HALL  :  God's  children,  even  iu
external  things,  have  evident  proofs  that  his  grace
over  them  is  greater  than  over  the  godless. — SCHRO
DER:  Luther  and  Calvin  arc  inclined  to  excuse  Jacob
(ch.  xx xi.  12).

Section  Fourth.  Ch.  xx.xi.  1-3.  STARKE  :  It  is
a  very  great  reproach  if  acquaintances  and  relatives
slander  each  other. — HALL:  As  the  godless  enjoy  no
peace  with  God,  so  also  the  pious  enjoy  no  peace
with  godless  men. — CRAMER  :  Sin  in  man  is  so  poi
sonous  that  it  glitters  in  the  eye,  and  is  sweet  to  the
taste,  and  pleasant  to  all  the  members. — SCHRODER  :
Thus  the  Lord  often  serves  his  people  more  through
the  jealousy  of  the  godless,  than  if  he  suffered  them
to  grow  feeble  in  prosperity. — Ver.  3.  LUTHER  :  It
probably  was  an  answer  to  Jacob's  prayer. — The  di
vine  command  and  promise  compensates  Jacob  for  the
promised  message  of  the  mother.  Thus  his  return  re
ceives  the  character  of  an  act  of  faith  (Baumgartcn).


FOURTH     SECTION.

JacoVs  flight.     Laban's  persecution.  The  covenant  between  the  two  on  the  mountain  of  Gilcad.

Departure.

CHAPTER  XXXI.  4— XXXII.  2.

4,  5       And  Jacob  sent  and  called  Eaclicl  and  Leak  to  the  field  unto  his  flock.     And  said
unto  them,  I  see  [am  seeing]  your  father's  countenance,  that  it  is  not  toward  me  as  be-

6  fore  :  but  the  God  [Elohim]  of  my  father  hath  been  with  me.     And  ye1  know  that  with

7  all  my  power  I  have   served  your  father.     And  your  father  hath  deceived 3  me,  and

8  changed  my  wages  ten  times:  but  God  suffered  him  not  to  hurt  me.     If  he  said  thus,
The  speckled  shall  be  thy  wages;  then  all  the  cattle  bare  speckled:   and  if  he  said  thu?,
The  [symm. :  white-footed]   ring-streaked  shall  be  thy  hire;  then  bare  all  the  cattle  ring-

9  streaked.     Thus  God  hath  taken  away  the  [acquisitions]  cattle  of  your  father,  and  given
them  to  me.     And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  time  that  the  cattle  conceived,  that  I  lifted  up
mine  eyes,  and  saw  in  a  dream,  and  behold  [isaw],  the  rams  which  leaped  upon  the

11  cattle  were  ring-streaked,  speckled,  and  grizzled.3     And  the  angel  of  God  spake  unto  rno

12  in  a  dream,  saying,  Jacob  :  And  I  said,  Here  am  I.     And  he  said,  Lift  up  now  thine
eyes  and  see,  all  the  rams  which  leap  upon  the  cattle  arc  ring-streaked,  speckled,  and

13  grizzled:  for  I  have  seen  all  that  Laban   [is  doing]   doeth  unto  thcc.      I  am  the  God  of
Beth-el,  where  thou  anointedst  the  pillar,  and  where  them  vowcdst  a  vow  unto  me :
now  arise,  get  thee  out  from  this  land,  and  return  unto  the  land  of  thy  kindred  [birth].

14  And  Rachel  and  Leah  answered,  and  said  unto  him,  Is  there  yet  any  portion  or  inheri-


LO


GENESIS,   OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


15  tance  for  us  in  our  father's  house?     Are  we  not  counted  of  him  strangers?  for  he  hath

16  sold  us,  and  hath  quite  devoured4  also  our  money.     For  all  the  riches  which  God  hath
taken  from  our  father,  that  is  ours,  and  our  children's:   now  then,  whatsoever  God  hath
said  unto  thee,  do.

17  18   Then  Jacob  rose   up,  and  pet   his   sons   and  wives  upon  camels;     And  he.  carried
away  all  his  cattle,   and  all  his  goods  [his movable  property,  gain]  which  he  had  gotten,  the
cattfe  of  his  rretlintr,  which  he  had  gotten  in  Padan-aram ;   for  to  go  to  Isaac  his  father

19  in  the  land  of  Canaan.      And  Laban  went  to  shear  his  [to  the  feast  of  sheep-shearing]  sheep:

20  and  Rachel  had  stolen  the  images8  [Tcraphim,  household  gods]   that  were  her  father's.      And
Jacob  stole  awav  unwares   [the  heart  of  ]   to   Laban  the   Syrian,  in  that  he  told  him  not

21  that  lie  iled.      So  he   lied  with   all  that  he  had;   and  he    rose   Tip,  and  passed  over  the

22  river  [Kuphratcs],  and  set  his  face  [journey]   toward  the   mount   Gilead.      And  it  was  told

23  Laban  on  the  third  day,  that  Jacob  was  iled.      And   [Then]   he  took  his  brethren  with
him,  and  pursued  after  him  seven  days' journey  :  and  they  overtook  him   in  the  mount

24  Gilead.      And  God  came  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  a  dream  by  night,  and  said  unto  him,
Take  heed  that,  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob  either  good  or  bad.

25  Then  Laban  overtook  Jacob.      Now  Jacob  had  pitched  his  tent  in  the  mount:   and
2G   Laban  with  his  brethren  [tented]  pitched   in  the  mount  of  Gilead.      And   Laban  said  to

Jacob,  AYhat  hast  thou  done,  that  thou  hast  stolen  away  unwares  to  me,  and  carried

27  awav  mv  daughters    as  captives  taken  with  the  sword    [the  spoils  of  var]  ?     Wherefore
didst  thou  flee'  away  seeretlv,  and   steal  away  from   me,  and   didst   not   tell  me,  that  I
iniirht  have  sent  thee   away  [given  thee  a  convoy]  with  mirth,  and  with   songs,  with  tabret,

28  and  with  harp  ?     And  hast  not  suffered  me  to  kiss  my  sons  [grandsons],  and  my  daughters?
•10   Ihou  hast,  now  clone    foolishly  in  so  doing.      It  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand"  to  do  you

hurt:   but  the  God  of  your  father  spake  unto  me  yesternight,  saying,  Take  thou  heed

30  that  thuii  speak   not.   to  Jacob  either  good    or   bad.      And   now,  though   thou  wouldest
needs  be  "-one.  because  limit   sore   longe.H  after  thy  father's  house;   yd  wherefore  hast

31  tl,0  i     tolcn  my  irods  ?      And  Jacob  an.-wered  and  said  to  Laban,  Because  1  was  afraid:
for  1  said  [said to  myself],    1  Vrad vent ure    thou  wouldest   take   by  force  thy  daughters  from

32  me.      With  whomsoever  thou  tindest  thy  gods,  let  him   not  live:   before   our   brethren
discern   Ihou  what  ?',->    thine   with   me,  and  take   it   to    thee:   for   Jacob    knew   not   that

33  Rachel  had  stolen  them.      And  Laban  went  into  Jacob's  tent,  and  into  Leah's  tent,  and
into  the  two  maid-servants'  tents;    but  he  found  tit'  in  not.      Then  went  he  out  of  Leah's

31  tent,  and  enten  d  into  Rachel's  tent.  Now  Rachel  had  taken  the  images  [household  p.r.sj,
and  put  them  in  the  camel's  furniture,  and  sat  upon  them.  And  Laban  searched  all

35  the  tent,  but  found  thnn  not.  And  she  said  to  her  father,  Let  it.  not  displease  my  lord
that  1  eann.it  rise  up  before  thee;  for  the  custom  of  women  [female period]  ix  upon  me.
And  he  searched  [all],  but  found  not  the  images.

30  And  Jacob  was  wroth,  and  chodc  with  Laban  :  and  Jacob  answered,  and  said  to  La-
ban,  AVhat  ?'>'  my  trespass?  what  is  my  sin,  that  thou  hast  so  hotly  pursued  [burned]  after

37  me  ?     AVhcreas  thou  hast  searched  all'my  stuff,  what  hast  thou  found  of  all  thy  household-
stuff?  set  it  here  before  my  brethren,  and  thy  brethren,  that  they   may  judge   betwixt

38  us  both.     This  twenty  years  have  I  Iccn  with  thee;   thy  ewes  and  thy  she-goats  have

39  not  cast  their  young/ and  the  rams  of  thy  flock  have   I   not  eaten.     That  which  was
torn  of  leasts,  I  brought  not  unto  thee;  I  bare  the  loss  of  it  [must  make  satisfaction  for  it]  ;

40  of  my  hand  didst  thou  require  it,  whether  stolen  by  day,  or  stolen  by  night.      Thus  I
was  fin  the  day  the  drought   consumed  me,   and  the  frost  by  night;   and  my  sleep

41  departed  from  mine  eyes.     Thus  have  I  been  twenty  years  in  thy  house  :  I  served  thee
fourteen  years  for  thy  two  daughters,   and  six  years   for  thy  cattle:  and  thou   hast

42  changed  my  wages  ten  times.     Except  the  God  of  my  father,  the  God  of  Abraham,  and
the  fear  of  Isaac  had  been  with  me,  surely  thou  hadst  sent  me   away  now  empty.
God  hath  seen  mine  affliction,  and  the  labor  [wearisome  labor]  of  my  hands,  and  rebuked
[judged]  thee  yesternight.

43  And  Laban  answered,  and  said  unto  Jacob,  These  daughters  are  my  daughters,  and
these  children  are  my  children,  and  these  cattle  are  my  cattle   [herds],  and  all  that  thou
seest  is  mine ;  and  what  can   I  do  this  day  unto  these  my  daughters,  or  unto  their

44  children  which  they  have  borne  ?     Now  therefore  come  thou,  let  us  make  a  covenant

45  [a  covenant  of  peace],  I  and  thou  ;  and  let  it  be  for  a  witness  between  me  and  thee.     And


CHAP.    XXXI   4— XXXII.  2.


541


46  Jacob  took  a  stone,  and  set  it  up"  for  a  pillar.     And  Jacob   said  unto  his  brethren,
Gather  stones ;  and  they  took  stones,  and  made  an  heap :  and  they  did  eat  there  upon

47  the  heap.     And  Laban  called  it  Jegar-sahadutha  [syriac:  heap  of  witness]  :  but  Jacob  called

48  it  Galeed  [the  same  in  Hebrew]  :  And  Laban  said,  This  heap  is  a  witness  between  me  and

49  thee  this  day.     Therefore  was  the  name  of  it  called  Galeed  :  And  Mizpah  [watch-tower]  ;
for  he  said,  The  LORD  watch  between  me  and  thee,  when  we  are  absent  one  from

50  another.     If  thou  shalt  afflict  my  daughters,  or  if  thou  shalt  take  other  wives  besides

51  my  daughters,   no  man  is  with  us;   see,  God,  ^witness  betwixt  me  and  thee.     And
Laban  said  to  Jacob,  Behold  this  heap  [stone  heap],  and  behold  this  pillar,  which  I  have

52  cast  [erected]  betwixt  me  and  thee  ;  This  heap  be  witness,  and  this  pillar  be  Avitricss,  that  I
will  not  pass  over  this  heap  to  thee,  and  that  thou  shalt  not  pass  over  this  heap  and  this

53  pillar  unto  me.  for  harm.     The  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Nahor,  the  God  of
their  father,  judge  [plural]  betwixt  us.     And  [But]  Jacob  sware  by  the  fear  of  his  father

54  Isaac.      Then  Jacob  offered  sacrifice  upon  the  mount,  and  called  his  brethren  to  eat

55  bread  :   and  they  did  eat  bread,  and  tarried  all  night  in  the  mount.     And  early  in  the
morning  Laban  rose  up,  and  kissed  his  sons  and  his  daughters,  and  blessed  them:  and
Laban  departed,  and  returned  unto  his  place.

CH.  XXXII.        1.  And  Jacob  went  on  his  way,  and  the  angels  of  God  met  him.     And
2  when  Jacob  saw  them,  he  said,  This  is  God's  host:  and  he  called  the  name  of  that

place  Mahanaim  [two  camps:  double  camp].

[:  Ch.  xxxi.  ver.  G.— The  full  form  of  the  pronoun,  see  GREEN'S  Grammar,  71,  (2.)— A.  G.]
[2  Ver.  7.— ?rjn  ,  Hiphil  from  bbfl  ;  see  GREEN'S  Grammar,  142,  (3.)— A.  G.]

[3  Ver.  10.— Ilcb".,  Beruddim,  spotted  with  hail.  Our  word,  grizzled,  is  from  the  French,  grele,  hail,  and  thus  a  literal
translation  of  the  Hebrew. — A.  G.]

[*  Ver.  15.— The  Hebrew  form,  the  absolute  infinitive  after  the  finite  verb,  denotes  continuance  of  the  action  —He
has  constantly  devoured. — A.  G.]

[5  Ver.  19.— O^B^fl .    The  word  occurs  fifteen  times  in  the  Old  Testament ;  three  times  in  this  chapter,  and  nowhere


-rphy.— A.  G.]
[6  Ver.  29.—  Ilcb.,  There  is  to  God  my  hand.— A.  G.]


GEXERAL  PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

1.  Dclitzsch    regards    the    present    section    as
throughout  Elohistic  ;  but  according  to  Knobel,  Je-
hovistic  portions   arc  inwrought  into  it,  and  hence
the  narrative  is  here  and  there  broken  and  discon
nected.

2.  The  present  journey  of  Jacob  is  evidently  in
contrast  with  his  previous  journey  to  Mesopotamia  ;
Mahanaim  and  Peniel  form  the  contrast  with  Bethel.

3.  We  make  the  following  division:  1.  Jacob's
onfcrence  with  his  wives,  vers.  4-16  ;  2.  the  flight,

.ers.  17-21;  3.  Laban's  pursuit,  vers.  22-25 ^  4.
Laban's  reproof,  vers.  26-30  ;  5.  Laban's  search  in
,he  tents  of  Jacob,  ver.  31-35  ;  6.  Jacob's  reproof,
rers.  36-42  ;  7.  the  covenant  of  peace  between  the
wo,  vers.  43,  53  ;  8.  the  covenant  meal  aud  the  de-
mrture,  ver.  54-ch.  xxxii.  2.


EXEGETICAL  AXD   CRITICAL.

1.  Vers.  4-16.  Jacob's  conference  iv'ith  his
nves. — Unto  his  flock. — Under  some  pretext  Jacob
lad  left  the  flocks  of  Laban,  although  it  was  then
he  feast  of  sheep-shearing,  and  gone  to  his  own
ocks  (a  three  days'  journey,  and  probably  in  a  di-
lection  favoring  his  flight).  Hither,  to  the  field,  he
alls  his  wives,  and  Rachel,  as  the  favorite,  is  called
rst. — Changed  my  wages  ten  times. — The
xpression  ten  times  is  used  for  frequently,  in  Xumb.
iv.  22,  and  in  other  passages.  [Keil  holds  that  the


ten,  as  the  number  of  completeness,  here  denotes  as  of
ten  as  he  could,  or  as  he  had  opportunity.    It  is  proba
bly  the  definite  for  an  indefinite. — A.  G.] — If  he  said
thus,  The  ring-streaked.— As  Laban  deceived  Ja
cob  in  the  matter  of  Rachel,  so  now  in  the  arrange
ment  for  the  last  six  years,  he  had   in  various  ways
dealt    selfishly    and    unjustly,    partly    in    dividing
equally  the   spotted   lambs,    according  to   his  own
terms,    and   partly  in   always   assigning    to   Jacob
that    particular     kind     of    spotted     lambs     which
had  previously   been  the   least   fruitful. — And  the
Angel  of  God. — Jacob  here  evidently  joins  togeth
er  a  circle  of  night-visions,  which  he  traces  up  to  the
Angel  of  the  Lord,  as  the   angel   of  Eloliim,    and
which  run  through  the  whole  six  years  to  their  close.
If  Laban  imposed  a  new  and  unfavorable  condition,
he  saw  in  a  dream  that  now  the  flocks  should  bring
forth  lambs  of  that  particular  color  agreed   upon,
now  ring-streaked,  now  speckled,  and  now  spotted.
But  the  vision  was  given  to  comfort  him,  and  indeed,
under  the  image  of  the  variegated  rams  which  served
the  flocks.      This  angel  of  Elohim  declares  himself
to  be  identical  with  the  God  of  Bethel,  i.  e.,  with  Je
hovah,  who  reveals  himself  at  Bethel  as  exalted  abovf
the  angels.     It  is  thus  his  covenant  God  who   has
guarded  his  rights  against  the  injustice  of  Laban,  and
prepares   this  wonderful  blessing  for   him ;    a    fact
which  does  not  militate  against  his  use  of  skill  and
craft,  but  places  those  in  a  modified  and  milder  light.
The  conclusion  of  these  visions  is,  that  Jacob  must
return.     [The  difference  between  this  narrative  and
that  given  in  ch.  xxx.,  is  a   difference   having   its


5i2


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


ground  and  explanation  in  the  ficts  of  the  case.
For  obvious  reasons  Jacob  chose  here  to  pass  over
lii.s  own  strategy  and  craft  in  silence,  and  brings  out
into  prominence  the  divine  providence  and  aid  to
which  his  prosperity  was  due.  That  Jacob  resorted
to  the  means  he  did,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  ob
jective  reality  of  the  dream-vision,  but  rather  con-
linns  it.  If  lie  regarded  the  vision  as  prophetic  of
the  issue,  as  he  must  have  done,  the  means  which  he
r.scd,  the  arts  and  cunning,  are  characteristic  of  the
man,' who  wa-  net  yet  weaned  from  confidence  in
himself,  was  not  entirely  the.  man  of  fnith.  If  we
regard  this  vi-vm  as  occurring  fit  the  beginning  of
the  six  years'  service,  it  is  entirely  natural  that  Jacob
should  now  c  mm  ct  if  so  elo-ely  with  the  voice  of
the  same  an;c<l  commanding  him  to  return  to  the
1-ii'd  of  his  birth.— A.  G.]— Are  we  not  counted
of  him  strangers  ?—  Laban  takes  the  same  posi
tion  towards  his  daughters  as  towards  Jacob  hiiiiM'lf.
I!,  i  <•:•  they  have  nothing  more  to  hope  for  from  him.
He  h;:d  sold  them  as  strangers,  i.  e.,  really,  as  slav<  3,
for  the  service  of  Jacob.  But  this  very  j>rifr,  i.  e.,
ti:<1  ],i,.s<i;ig  resulting  from  Jacob's  service,  he  had
entirely  consumed,  i.  e.,  the  daughters  had  received
n:>  share  of  it.  Ilene-  it  is  evident  that  they  speak
with  an  inward  alienation  from  him,  although  not
railing  him  bv  name,  and  that  they  desired  the
(light.

•_.  v, .-...-.  17--21.  Tin*  Fii'jli!. — The  circumstance
<'•  al  Jacob,  with  hi-  v.ives,  was  already  at  the  station
of  his  herds,  while  I.aban  remained  at  his  own  sta-
tion,  three  (lavs'  journev  distant, keeping  the  feast  of
sheep-shearing,  favored  the  flight.  Either  Laban
had  not  invited  Jae<.b  to  this  least,  which  is  scarce
ly  probable,  since  he  was  usually  at  this  station,  or
Jacob  took  the  opportunity  of  leaving,  in  order  to
visit  hi-  oun  flocks.  As  the  i-heep-s'nearing  lasted
several  days(l  Ham.  xxv.)  the  opportunity  was  a  very
f.'voral.le  due. — And  Rachel  had  stolen. — This
!'.•:' ture.  however,  as  also  the  following,  when  she  de
nied  the  theft  to  her  father,  reveals  a  cunning
which  is  far  more  befitting  the  daughter  of  Laban,
than  the  wife  of  the  prudent  Jacob. — The  images. —
Literally  Tcraphim  (see  Di:i.iT7.srn,  p.  410,  Note  7:i),
Penates",  small  figures,  probably  resembling  the
human  'form,  which  were  honored  as  guardians  of
the  household  prosperity,  and  as  oracles,  liut  as
we  must  distinguish  the  symbolic  adoration  of  re
ligious  images  (statuettes)  among  ancients,  from  the
true  and  proper  mythological  worship,  so  we  must
distinguish  between  a  gentler  and  severe  censure  of
the  use  of  such  images  upon  Shemitie  ground.
Doubtless  the  symbolic  usage  prevailed  in  the  house
of  Laban  and  Nahor.  It  is  hardly  probable  that
Rachel  intended,  by  a  pious  and  fanatical  theft,  to
free  her  father  from  idolatry  (Greg.  Naz.,  Basil),  for
then  she  would  have  thrown  the  images  away.  She
appears  to  have  stolen  them  with  the  superstitious
idea  that  she  would  prevent  her  father  from  consult
ing  them  as  oracles,  and  under  their  guidance,  as  the
pursuer  of  Jacob,  from  overtaking  and  destroying
him  (Aben  Ezra).  The  supposition  of  a  condition
of  war,  with  its  necessity  and  strategy,  enters  here
with  apologetic  force.  This,  however,  does  not  ex
clude  the  idea,  that  she  attributed  to  the  images  a
certain  magical,  though  not  religious,  power  (perhaps,
as  oracles.  Chrysostom).  The  very  lowest  and  most
degrading  supposition,  is  that  she  took  the  images,
often  overlaid  with  silver,  or  precious  metals,  from
mercenary  motives  (Peirerius).  Jacob  himself  had
at  first  a  lax  rather  than  a  strict  conscience  in  regard


to  these  images  (see  ch.  xxxv.  2),  but  the  strictci
view  prevails  since  the  time  of  Moses  (Ex.  xx.;  Josh
xxiv.  2, 14  f.)  [The  derivation  of  the  Heb.  word
teraphirrif  always  used  in  the  plural,  is  doubtful.
Some  derive  it  from  tarapfi,  to  rejoice— thus  dispen
sers  of  good  ;  others  from  a  like  root,  to  inquire —
thus  they  are  oracles ;  and  others,  as  Kurtz  and
Hofmann,  make  it  another  form  of  Seraphim.  They
were  regarded  and  used  as  oracles  (Judg.  xvii.  5-6;
Ezck,  xxi.  21  ;  Zech.  x.  2).  They  were  not  idols  in
the  worst  sense  of  the  word ;  and  were  sometimes
used  by  those  who  professed  the  worship  of  the  true
God  (1  Sam.  xix.  13).  The  tendency  was  always
hurtful,  and  they  were  ultimately  rooted  out  from  Is
rael.  Laban  had  lapsed  into  a  more  corrupt  form  of
religion,  and  his  daughters  had  not  escaped  the  in
fection.  We  may  modify  our  views  of  Rachel's
sin,  but  it  cannot  he  excused  or  justified  (see  KEIL,
"Arch.," p.  '.'0 ;  WOKHSWOUTH, p.  i:'>2 ;  HENGSTENBERG,
"Ghristology ;  "  HAVERiCK's"Ezek."xiii.  47). — A.G.]
— And  Jacob  stole  away  unawares  to  Laban. —
The  explanation  K\eTrrfii>  i/<Win  the  sense  of  "to  de
ceive"  (Del.,  Keil),  appears  to  us  incorrect.  The  ex
pression  indeed  does  not  bear  the  sense  which  we
moderns  associate  with  the  words  "  steal  the  heart,"
and  ver.  2t>  seems  to  indicate  that  the  heart  of  Laban
is  the  love  which  this  hard-hearted  father  bears
towards  his  daughters.  Rachel,  however,  seems  to
have  been  his  favorite.  He  regarded  and  treated
her  not  only  as  a  wise  but  cunning  child,  and,
hence,  while  he  searched  carefully  everything  in  all
the  tents,  he  did  not  venture  to  compel  her  to
arise.  The  last  clause  of  ver.  'JO,  further  cannot
possibly  mean  "  in  that  he  told  him  not  that  he  fled."
For  who  would  betray  his  own  flight?  We  interpret
"I'SH  impersonally,  it  was  not  told  him. — The
Syrian. — "Moses  gives  this  title  to  Laban  because
the  Syrians  were  more  crafty  than  other  nations."
Jacob",  however,  surpassed  him  (Cleric.).  Over  the
river. — The  Euphrates. — Toward  the  mount
Gilead. — For  the  mountains  of  Gilead  see  Geogra
phies  of  Pale?  tine,  I  Sible  Dictionaries,  Books  of  Travels,
etc.  "  Knobel  understands  1?ba  "H  to  be  the
mountain  range  now  known  as  Gebel  Gilad,  or  Gebcl
es-Ssalt,  and  combines  HSU'S  with  the  present  Ssalt.
But  this  assumption  leads  to  the  improbable  results
that  Mahanaim,  south  of  Jubbok  and  Succoth  (prob
ably  the  one  on  the  other  side),  lay  north  from  Jab-
bok,  and  thus  Jacob's  line  of  march  would  be  back
wards  in  a  north-westerly  direction."  DELITZSCII.
Delitzsch  understands  correctly,  that  it  is  the  north
ern  side  of  the  mountains  of  Gilead,  above  the  Jab-
bok,  which  lay  nearest  to  those  coming  from  Meso
potamia.

3.  Vers.  22-25.  Labon's  pursuit. — On  the
third  day. — This  is  partially  explained  by  the
long  distance  between  the  two  stations. — His
brethren  with  him. — Of  the  same  tribe,  kinsmen.

Seven  days'  journey. — As  Jacob, with  his  herds,

moved  slower  than  Laban,  he  lost  his  start  of  three
days  in  the  course  of  seven  days. — And  God  came
to'Laban. — A  proof  that  he  had  still  some  nobler
traits  of  character.— Either  good  or  bad.— The
translation  neither  good  nor  bad  is  not  fitting  here.
Literally  from  good  to  bad  (Knobel).  It  presupposes
that  he  was  inclined  to  pass  from  a  hasty  greeting
of  his  daughters  and  their  children,  to  reproaches
and  invectives. — Now  Jacob  had  pitched  his
tent. — As  soon  as  he  reached  the  heights  of  the
mountain  range,  the  mount  Gilead,  he  pitched  his


CHAP.   XXXI.   4— XXXII.  2.


543


tent,  but  here  Laban  with  his  retinue  overtook  him
and  tented  near  by  him.  The  text  assumes  :  1.  Tha
a  certain  mountain,  north  of  Jabbok,  gave  its
name  to  the  whole  range  of  mountains  (just  a;
Galilee,  originally  designating  a  small  mountain  re
gion,  gradually  extended  its  significance).  2.  Thai
thus  we  must  distinguish  between  this  first  moun
tain  in  the  range  of  Gilead,  and  the  principa
mountain  mentioned  later.

4.  Vers.  2G-30.  The  words  of  Laban  arc  charac
teristic,  passionate,  idiomatic,  exaggerated  even  to
falsehood  and  hypocrisy,  and  still  at  the  end  there
is  a  word  which  betrays  the  man — shows  his  hu
man  nature  and  kindness.  He  calls  his  daughters
liis  heart;  their  voluntary  flight  (although  he  had
sold  them)  an  abduction,  as  if  they  were  captives.
He  asserts  that  he  had  not  given  any  occasion  to
Jacob  to  flee,  on  the  contrary,  that  he  would  have
sent  him  away  with  music  and  mirth.  He
had  not,  however,  even  suffered  him  to  take  leave
of  his  daughters  and  grandsons.  These  tender  ut
terances  are  followed  at  once  by  haughty  threats
(vcr.  '29).  From  his  own  point  of  view  it  seems  im
prudent  to  relate  the  night  warning,  but  his  pride
and  animosity  lead  him  to  do  it.  Jacob  should  not
think  that  he  willingly  let  him  go  unpunished,  but
"the  Cod  of  your  father,"  he  says,  with  a  bitter
heart,  has  forbidden  me.  lie  finally  (vcr.  SO)  ac
knowledges  in  a  sarcastic  way  that  Jacob  might  go,
but  only  to  crush  him  with  the  burden  of  his  ac
cusation,  in  which,  however,  there  was  a  two-fold
exaggeration  ;  first,  in  calling  the  leraphim  his
gods,  and  then,  second,  in  making  Jacob  the  thief.
The  true  sentiment  for  his  children,  the  fear  of
God,  and,  finally,  a  real  indignation  at  the  secrecy  of
Jacob's  departure,  form  the  core  of  the  speech,  which
assumes  at  last  the  shape  of  a  pointed  accusation.
There  is  no  trace  of  self-knowledge  or  humility. —
With  mirth.— (See  1  Sam.  xviii.  6  ;  2  Sam.  vL  5.)
The  word  nnsia  is  indeed  a  collective  for  all  that
follows,  and  Delitzsch  thinks  it  probably  means  dance.
— With  tabret — See  WINER:  "Musical  Instru
ments."  [Also  KITTO  and  SMITH. — A.  G.]. — Thou
hast  done  foolishly.— Thou  who  art  usually  so  pru
dent  hast  here  acted  foolishly.  The  reproach  of  folly
carries  with  it  that  of  immorality.— It  is  in  the
power  cf  my  hand.— Knobel  and  Keil  [and  Jaco
bus.— A.G.]  translate  "There  is  to  God  my  hand,"  with
reference  to  Job,  xii.  6  ;  Hab.  i.  11.  Others  translate
bx  power  (so  Ilosen.,  Gesen.),  [Wordsworth,  Bush,
A.  G.]  and  this  seems  here  to  be  preferable,  notwith
standing  Knobel's  objection,  since  Laban  immediately
says  it  is  Elohim  who  restrains  his  hand.

5.  Vers.  31-35.     Laban's  search. — Laban's  rash
accusation  gives  Jacob,  who  knew  nothing  of  the
theft  of  the  teraphim,  great  boldness. — Let  him  not
live. — We  must  emphasize  the  finding,  otherwise
Jacob  condemned  Rachel  to  death.     "  the  cunnin^
of  Rachel  was  well  planned,  for  even  if  Laban  had
not  regarded  it  as  impure  and  wrong  to  touch  the
seat  of  a  woman  in  this  state  (see  Lev.  xv.  22),  how
could  he  have  thought  it  possible  that  one  in  this
state  would  sit  upon  his  God." — DKLITZSCFI.     But
Keil  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  view  upon
which  the  law  (Lev.  xv.)  was  based,  is  much  older
than  that  statute,  and  exists  among  other  people.
[See  also  KURTZ  :  Gesch.tvo\.  i.  p.  252 ;  BAKIIR'S  "  Sym.'
of  the  Mosaic  Cultus,"  vol.  ii.  p.  466.— A.  G.]     For
the  camel's  furniture  or  saddle,  see  Knobel,  p.  251.

6.  Vers.  36-42.     Jacob's  reproof.     He  connects


it  with  Laban's  furious  pursuit  and  scarce.  Then
he  reminds  him  generally  of  his  harsh  treatment,  as
opposed  to  his  own  faithful  and  self-sacrificing  shep
herd  service  for  more  than  twenty  years.  "  Tho
strong  feeling  and  the  lofty  self-consciousuess  which
utter  themselves  in  his  speech,  impart  to  it  a  rhyth
mical  movement  and  poetic  forms  ("nrix  pb'n  to
pursue  ardently;  elsewhere  only  1  Sam.  xvii.  5*:;.")
DEUTZSCII. — And  the  frost  by  night.— The  cold
of  the  nights  corresponds  with  the  heat  of  the  day  in
the  East  (Jer.  xxxvi.  30 ;  Psalms,  cxxi.  6). — My
sleep. — Which  I  needed  and  which  belonged  to  me.
He  had  faithfully  guarded  the  flocks  by  night,  Not
withstanding  all  this  Laban  had  left  him  unrewarded,
but  the  God  of  his  fathers  had  been  with  him  and
secured  his  rights.  Both  the  name  of  his  God,  and
of  his  venerable  father,  must  touch  the  conscience  of
Laban. — The  fear  of  Isaac.— [Heb:  he  whom
Isaac  feared.]  The  object  of  his  religious  fear,  and
veneration ;  of  his  religion,  <r«F>8a?,  a^aa^a. — Re.
buked  thee  yesternight. — This  circumstance,
which  is  only  incidentally  alluded  to  in  the  course  of
Laban's  speech,  forms  the  emphatic  close  to  that  of
Jacob.  Jacob  understands  the  dream-revelation  of
Laban  better  than  Laban  himself.

7.  The  covenant  of  peace  between  the  two.  Laban
is  overcome.  He  alludes  boastfully  indeed  once
more  to  his  superior  power,  but  acknowledges  that
any  injury  inflicted  upon  Jacob,  the  husband  and
father,  would  be  visited  upon  his  own  daughters  and
their  children.— What  can  I  do  unto  thee.— i.  c.,
in  a  bad  sense.  The  fact  that  his  daughters  and
,  randsons  were  henceforth  dependent  upon  Jacob,
fills  his  selfish  and  ignoble  mind  with  care  and  solici
tude  about  them  ;  indeed,  reminded  of  the  promises
to_  Abraham  and  Isaac,  he  is  apprehensive  that  Jacob
might  some  time  return  from  Canaan  to  Harau  as  a
mighty  prince  and  avenge  his  wrong.  In  this  view,
anticipating  some  such  event,  he  proposes  a  covenant
of  peace,  Avhich  would  have  required  merely  a  feast  of
reconciliation.  But  the  covenant  of  peace  involved
not  only  a  well-cemented  peace,  but  a  theocratic  sepa
ration. — Let  us  make  a  covenant. — Laban  makes
the  proposal,  Jacob  assents  by  entering  at  once  upon
its  execution.  The  pillar  which  Jacob  erected,  marks
the  settlement,  the  peaceful  separation;  the  stones
heaped  together  by  his  brethren  (Laban  and  his  reti
nue,  his  kindred)  designate  the  friendly  communion,
the  covenant  table.  The  preliminary  eating  (vcr.  46)
appears  to  be  distinct  from  the  covenant  meal  (ver,
54),  for  this  common  meal  continued  throughout  the
day.  The  Aramaic  designation  of  the  stone  heap
used  by  Laban,  and  the  Hebraic  by  Jacob,  are  ex
plainable  on  the  supposition  "that  in  the  fatherland
of  the  patriarchs,  Mesopotamia,  the  Aramaic  or  Chal-
dee  was  used,  but  in  the  fatherland  of  Jacob,  Canaan,
-he  Hebrew  was  spoken,  whence  it  may  be  inferred
liatthe  family  of  Abraham  had  acquired  the  Hebrew

ongue  from  the  Canaanites  (Phoenicians)." KEIL.

But  this  is  a  slender  foundation  upon  which  to  base-
such  a  theory.  The  whole  history  implies  that  the
two  families  of  Abraham  and  Nahor  down  to  this  time
and  even  later  found  no  difficulty  in  holding  inter
course.  They  both  used  the  same  language, 'though
with  some  growing  dialectic  differences.  It  is  just
as  easy  to  prove  that  Laban  deviated  from  the
mother  tongue  as  that  Jacob  did. — A.  G.]  Knobel
regards  it  an  error  to  derive  the  name  Gilead,  which
means  hard,  firm,  stony,  from  the  Gal-Ed  here  used.
3ut  proper  names  are  constantly  modified  as  to  their
ignificance  in  popular  use,  from  the  original  or  more


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


remote,  to  that  which  is  proximate. — And  Mizpah,
for  he  said. — Kcil  concedes  that  vers.  49  and  50
have  the  appearance  of  an  interpolation,  but  not
such  as  to  justify  any  resort  to  the  theory  of  combina
tion  from  different  sources.  But  since  Laban's  prin
cipal  concern  was  for  the  future  of  his  daughters,  we
might  at  least  regard  the  words,  And  Mizpah,  for  he
said,  as  a  later  explanatory  interpolation.  But  there
is  not  sufficient  ground  even  for  this,  since  Galeed  and
Mizpah  are  here  identical  in  fact,  both  referring  to
the  stone  heap  as  well  as  to  the  pillar.  Laban  prays
specifically  to  Jehovah,  to  watch  that  Jacob  should
not  afllict  'his  daughters  ;  especially  that  he  should  not
deprive  them  of  their  acquired  rights,  of  being  the  an
cestress  of  Jehovah's  covenant  people.  From  this
hour  Jehovah,  according  to  his  prayer,  looks  down
from  the  heights  of  Gilead,  as  the  representative  of
his  rights,  and  watches  that  Jacob  should  keep  his
word  to  his  daughters,  even  when  across  the  Jordan.
But  ii'i\v,  as  the  name  Gilead  has  its  origin  in  some
old  sacred  tradition,  so  has  the  name  Mizpah,  also.
It  is  not  to  lie  identified  with  the  later  cities  bearing
that  name,  with  the  Mi/pah  of  Jephthah  (Judg.  xi.
11,  34),  or  the  Mizpah  of  Gilead  (Judg.  xi.  29),  or
Ramoth- Mizpah  (Josh.  xiii.  2ti),  but  must  be  viewed
as  the  family  name  which  has  spread  itself  through
many  daughters  all  over  Canaan  (Knn.,  IMC). — No
man  is  with  us. — i.  e.,  no  one  but  God  only  can  be
judge  and  witness  between  us,  since  we  are  to  be
BO  widely  separated. — Which  I  have  cast. — He
views  himself  as  the  originator,  and  of  the  highest
authority  in  this  covenant. — That  I  will  not  pass
Over. —  Here  this  covenant  thought  is  purely  nega
tive,  <_TO\\  in  IT  out  of  a  suspicious  nature,  and  securing
a.  safeguard  against  mutual  injuries;  properly  a
theocratic  separation. — The  God  of  Abraham  and
the  God  of  Nahor. — The  monotheism  of  Laban
seems  gliding  into  dualism ;  they  may  judge,  or
"judge."  lie  corrects  himself  by  adding  the  name
of  the  <;<>d  of  their  common  father,  i.  e.,  Terah.
From  his  alien  and  wavering  point  of  view  he  seeks
for  sacredne^s  in  the  abundance  of  words.  But
Jacob  swears  simply  and  distinctly  by  the  God  whom
Isaac  feared,  and  whom  even  his  father-in-law,  Laban,
should  reverence  and  fear.  Laban,  indeed,  also  ad
heres  to  the  communion  with  Jacob  in  his  monothe
ism,  and  intimates  that  the  God  of  Abraham  and  the
God  of  Nahor  designate  two  different  religious  direc
tions  from  a  common  source  or  ground.

8.  Ver.  54-ch.  xxxii.  2.  The  covenant  viral,  and
the  departure. — Then  Jacob  offered  sacrifice. —
As  Isaac  prepared  a  meal  for  the  envious  and  ill-
disposed  Abimelcch,  so  Jacob  for  Laban,  whom  even
this  generosity  should  now  have  led  to  shame  and  re
pentance.  The  following  morning  they  separate  from
each  other.  The  genial  blood-tenderness  of  Laban,
which  leads  him  to  kiss  both  at  meeting  and  parting
should  not  pass  unnoticed  (see  ver.  28;  ch.  xxix.  13,
and  the  I'iel  forms).  It  is  a  pleasant  thing  that  as  a
grandfather  he  first  kissed  his  grandsons.  Blessing,
he  takes  his  departure. — Met  him. — Lit.,  came,  drew
near  to  him,  not  precisely  that  they  came  from  an  op
posite  direction.  This  vision  docs  7iot  relate  primarily
to  the  approaching  meeting  with  Esau  (Pcniel  relates
to  this),  but  to  the  dangerous  meeting  with  Laban.
As  the  Angel  of  God  had  disclosed  to  him  in  vision
the  divine  assistance  against  his  unjust  sufferings  in
Mesopotamia,  so  now  he  enjoys  a  revelation  of  the
protection  which  God  had  prepared  for  him  upon
Mount  Gilcad,  through  his  angels  (conip.  2.  Kings  vi.
17).  In  this  sense  he  well  calls  the  angels,  "  God's


host,"  and  the  place  in  which  they  met  him,  doublt
camp.  By  the  side  of  the  visible  camp,  which  he.
with  Labau  and  his  retainers,  had  made,  God  had
prepared  another,  invisible  camp,  for  his  protection.
It  served  also  to  encourage  him,  in  a  general  way
for  the  approaching  meeting  with  Fsau.— Maha-
naim. — Later  a  city  on  the  north  of  Jabbok  (see  V
RAUMEU'S  "Palestine,"  p.  253;  ROBINSON  :  "Re
searches,"  vol.  iii.  '2  app.  166),  probably  the  one  now
called  Mahneh.  [For  the  more  distinct  reference  of
this  vision  to  the  meeting  with  Esau,  sec  KURTZ-
Geschickte,  p.  25-1,  who  draws  an  instructive  and
beautiful  parallel  between  this  vision  and  that  at
Bethel.— A.  G.J


DOCTRINAL    AXI)    KTIIICAL.

1.  Jacob  a  fugitive  even  in  his  journey  home.
But  the  God  of  Bethel  protects  him  now  as  the  God
of  Mahanaim ;  and  the  angels  who,  as  heavenly  mes
sengers,  moved  up  and  down  the  ladder  at  Bethel,
now  appear,  as  became  the  situation,  a  warlike  host,
or  the  army  of  God.  Keil  holds  that  he  saw  the
angels  in  a  waking  state,  "not  inwardly,  but  with
out  and  above  himself;  but  whether  with  the  eye
of  the  body  or  of  the  spirit  (2  Kings  vi.  17)  cnnnot
be  decided."  At  all  events,  in  the  first  place  he  saw
an  objective  revelation  of  God,  with  which  was  con
nected,  in  the  second  place,  the  vision-power  [i.  e.,
einc  visionare  $iiiiiiinin<i,  a  power  or  disposition  cor
responding  to  the  vi.-ion  and  enabling  him  to  perceive
it.— A.  G.J.

'2.  The  want  of  candor  between  Laban  and  Ja
cob  at  Haran  leads  finally  to  the  violent  and  passion
ate  outbreak  on  Mount  Gilead.  But  such  outbreaks
have  ever  been  the  punishment  for  the  want  of
franknc.-s  and  candor.  The  fearful  public  terrors
of  war,  correspond  to  the  secrecies  and  blandish
ments  of  diplomacy. — The  blessing  of  a  genuine
and  thorough  frankness.  Moral  storms,  their  dan
ger,  and  their  salutary  results.

3.  The  vi-ions   in  which  Jacob  saw  how  God  se
cured  his  rights  against  Luban's  injustice,  prove  that
from  his  own  point  of  view  he  saw  nothing  wrong  in
the    transaction   with    the    parti-colored    rods.     But
those  rods  are  thus  seen  to  be  merely  a  subordinate
means.     There  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  the  conjec
ture  of  Keil,  that  it  may  be   suspected    that   the
dream-vision  of  Jacob  (of  the  spotted  rams)  was  a
mere  natural  dream  (see  p.  212).     It  is  evident  that
the  vision-disposition  pervades  the  night-life  of  Ja
cob,  growing  out  of  his  oppressed  condition  and  his
unjust  sufferings. — SCHRODER:  "But  Jacob's  crafty
course  (ch.  xxx.  37)  is  not  therefore  commended  by
God,  as  Luther  and  Calvin  have  taught.     Jacob  was
still  striving  to  bring  about  the  fulfilment  of  the  di
vine  promise  by  his  own  efforts."

4.  The  alienation  of  the  daughters  of  Laban  from
their  father  is  not  commendable,  but  is  explained  by
his  severity.     On  the  other  hand,  they  are  bound  to
their  husband  in  a  close  and  lovely  union.     For  the
theft  of  the  teraphim,  see  the  Exegctical  notes.

5.  It  is  not  a  chance  that  we  meet  here  in  the
idols  of  Laban  the  earliest  traces  of  idolatry  in  the
Old  World,  although  they  had  doubtless  existed  else
where  much  earlier  and  in  a  grosser  form.     We  can
thus  see  how  Polytheism  gradually  developed  itself
out  of  the  symbolic  image-worship  of  Monotheism
(Rom.  i.  23).     Moreover,  the  teraphim  arc  estimated
entirely   from   a  theocratic    point   of  view.     They


CHAP.   XXXI.  4— XXXII.   2.


545


could  be  stolen  as  other  household  furniture  (have
eyes  but  see  not).  They  could  be  hidden  under  a
camel's  saddle.  They  are  a  contemptible  nonentity,
which  can  render  no  assistance. — Ver.  23.  The  zeal
for  gods  and  idols  is  always  fanatical.

<).  The  speech  of  Laban,  and  Jacob's  answer,  give
vis  a  representation  of  the  original  art  of  speak
among  men,  just  as  the  speech  of  Eliezer  did.    Tl
xform  at  the  same  time  an  antithesis  between  a  p
sionate  and  exaggerated  rhetoric  and  phraseology
tiie  one  hand,  and  an   earnest,   grave,  religious,  ant
moral  oratory  on  the  other  hand,  exemplified  in  h
tory  in  the  antithesis  of  the  heathen  (not  stric
classic)  to  the  theocratic  and  religious  oratory.     T
contrast  between  the  speeches  of  Tertullus  and  Pa
Acts  xxiv.  2)  is  noticeable  here.     Laban's  cloquen
agrees  with   his  sanguine  temperament.     It  is  pa
sionate,  exaggerated  in  its  terms,  untrue  in  its  exa
geration,  and  yet  not  without  a  germ  of  true  at
affectionate    sentiment.      Analysis    of    diffuse    an
wordy  speeches  a  difficult  but  necessary  task  of  t
Christian  spirit.

7.  Prov.  xx.  22,  Rom.  xii.  17,  come  to  us  in  th
place  of  the  example  of  Jacob  ;  still  we  are  not  ju
tified  in  judging  the  conduct  of  Jacob  by  those  i
terances  of  a  more  developed  economy  (as  Keil  does'
[This  is  true  in  a  qualified  sense  only.  The  rH
which  men  have  is  of  course  an  important  clemei
in  our  judgment  of  the  character  of  their  acts.  Eu
Jacob  had,  or  might  have  had,  light  sufficient  t
know  that  his  conduct  was  wrong.  He  might  ha\
known  certainly  that  it  was  his  duty,  as  the°  heir  o
faith,  to  commit  his  cause  unto  the" Lord. — A.  G.I

8.  The  establishment  of  peace  between    Laba
and  Jacob  has  evidently,  on  the  part  of  Laban,  th
significance  and  force,  that  he  breaks  off  the  t'heo
cratic  communion  between  the  descendants  of  Xaho
and  Abraham,  just  as  the  line  of  Ilaran,  earlier  wa
separated  in  Lot.

9.  At  all  events,  the  covenant-meal  forms  a  thoi
ough  and  final  conciliation.     Laban's  reverence  fo
the  God  of  his  fathers,  and  his  love  for  his  daughter
and  grandsons,  present  him  once  more  in  tlie°mos
favorable  aspect  of  his  character,  and  thus  we  talc
our  leave  of  him.     We  must  notice,  however   tha
before  the  entrance  of  Jacob  he   had  made   little
progress    in   his    business.      Close,   narrow- hearted
views,  arc  as  really  the  cause  of  the  curse  as  it
fruits.

_10.  The  elevated  state  and  feeling  of  Jacob,  after
this  departure  of  Laban,  reveals  itself  in  the  Vision
of  the  hos.s  of  God.  Heaven  is  not  merely  con
nected  with  the  saint  on  the  earth  (through  the  lad-
1er) ;  its  hosts  are  warlike  hosts,  who  invisibly  guard
'he  saints  and  defend  them,  even  while  upon  the
:arth.  Here  is  the  very  germ  and  source  of  the
lesignation  of  God  as  the  God  of  hosts  (Zebaoth).

11.  There  are  still,  as  it  appears  to  us,  two  strik-
ng  relations  between  this  narrative  and  that  which
ollows.  Jacob  here  (ver.  32)  pronounces  judgment
)f  death  upon  any  one  of  his  family  who  had  stolen
he  images.  But  now  his  own  Rachel,  over  whom
le  had  unconsciously  pronounced  this  sentence  dies
oon  after  the  images  were  buried  in  the  earth  (see
:xxv  4,  18).  But  when  we  read  afterwards,  that
pseph,  the  wise  son  of  the  wise  Rachel,  describes
.is  cup  as  his  oracle  (although  only  as  a  pretext)  the
onjecture  is  easy,  that  the  mother  also  valued  the
nages  as  a  means  of  securing  her  desires  and  lon--
igs.  She  even  ascribes  marvellous  results  to  the
landrakcs.

35


12.  The  Mount  of  Gilead  a  monument  and  wit
ness  of  the  former  connection  between  Mesopotamia
and  Canaan.


HOMILETICAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.

Contrasts:  Jacob's  emigration  and  return,  or  the
two-fold  flight,  under  the  protection  of  the  God  of
Bethel,  and  of  Mahanaim.— Laban  the  persecutor  •
a.  of  Ins  own  ;  b.  of  the  heir  of  the  promise.— The
persecutor  :  1.  His  malicious  companions  ;  2  those
who  floe  from  him;  3.  his  motives.— The  word  of
God  to  Laban:  "  Take  heed,"  etc.,  in  its  typical  and
lasting  significance.— The  punishments  of  the  want
ot  candor:  strife  and  war.— The  two  speeches  and
speakers.— The  peaceful  departure:  1.  Its  light  side
reconciliation  ;  2.  its  dark  aspect,  separation.

Mrst  Section,  vers.  4-16.  STARKK  :  CRAMER-  The
husband  should  not  always  take  his  own  way  but
sometimes  consult  with  his  wife  (Sir.  iv.  35).— It  is  a
grievous  thing  when  children  complain  before  God
ot  the  injustice  of  their  parents.— Children  should
conceal,  as  far  as  possible,  the  faults  of  their  parents.
-Lisco  :  The  human  means  which  he  used  are  not
commanded  by  God,  but  are  his  own.— GEKLACH-
Jacob's  conduct,  the  impatient  weakness  of  faith  •
still  a  case  of  self-defence,  not  of  injustice.—  SCHRO
DER  :  A  contrast:  the  face  of  your  father,  the  God
of  my  father.

_  Second  Section,  vers.  17-21.  STARKE  :  Although
Jacob  actually  begins  his  journey  to  the  land  of  Ca
naan,  some  suppose  that  ten  years  elapse  before  he
comes  to  Isaac,  since  ho  remained  some  time  at
mccoth,  Sichem,  and  Bethel  (conip.  ch.  xxxiii.  17;
xxxv.  6).— The  shearing  of  the  sheep  was  in  the  East
a  true  feast  for  the  shepherds— an  occasion  of  <rreat
oy  (?ec  ch.  xxxviii.  12;  1  Sam.  xxv.  2,  8,  36)

Section  Third,  vers.  22-25.  STARKK:  Josophus.
he  intervention  of  the  night,  and  the  warning  by
'Od  in  his  sleep,  kept  him  from  injuring  Jacob.—
Ml.  Tuf>.  :  God  sometimes  so  influences  and  directs
ie  hearts  of  enemies  that  they  shall  be  favorably
iclined  towards  the  saints,  although  they  are  really
mbittcred  against  them.— HALL  :  God  makes  fool-
h  the  enemies  of  his  church,  etc.— Whoever  is  in
ovcnaut  with  God  need  have  no  fear  of  men.—
CIIROMK  :  Jacob  moves  under  the  instant  and
Dressing  danger  of  being  plundered,  or  slain,  or  of
eing  made  a  slave  with  his  family  and  taken  to  Meso-
otamia.  Still  the  promisor  (ch.  xxviii.  1  5)  fulfils  the
•omise  to  him.  Thus,  whatever  may  oppress  us  for
time,  must  at  last  turn  to  our  salvation  (Calvin).

Section  Fourth,  vers.  20-30.    STARKK:  (It  is  the'
ay  of  hypocrites  when  their  acts  do  not  prosper,  to
Deak  in  other  tones.)— Vers.  2<>.  He  docs  not  say
lat  he  has  the  right  and  authority,  but  that  he  hat
;he  power  (comp.  John  xix.  10).  "  In  this,  however
refutes  himself.     For  if  he  possessed  the  power'
iy  does  he  suffer  himself  to  bo  terrified  and  dc-
rred  by  the  warning  of  God  in  the  dream  ?— CAL-

•:R  Handbuch :  He  cannot  cease  to  threaten. He

uld  have  injured  him  but  dared  not.—  SCHRODER
he  images  are  his  highest  happiness,  since  to  him
e  presence  of  the  Deity  is  bound  and  confined  to
symbol.

Section  Fifth,  vers.  31-35.  STARKE:  CRAMER:
Ver.  31  A  Christian  should  not  be  rash  and  pas
sionate  in  his  answer.  Ver.  35.  The  woman's  cun
ning  is  preeminent  (Sir.  xxv.  17;  Judg.  xiv.  Id).—
CALWJSH  Handbuch:  Ver.  38.  The  ewes  and  the


546


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


Koats  in  their  state  were  the  objects  of  his  special
care.— Falsehood  follows  theft.— Man's  cunning  is
ready;  woman's  inexhaustible  and  endless  (Val.
IIcrl)crfrcr)

Section ' Sixth,  vers.  36-1 2.  STA IIKE  :  What  is  in
cluded  in  a  shepherd's  faithfulness  (ver.  SS).—£ibl.
Wirt  :  When  one  can  show  that  he  has  been  faith
ful,  upright,  and  diligent,  in  his  oflice,  he  can  stand
up  with  a  clear  conscience,  and  assert  his  innocence.
CRAMER  :  A  pood  conscience  and  a  gracious  God  give
one  boldness  and  consolation.— SCHRODER  :  The  per
secution  of  Jacob  by  Laban  ends  at  last  in  peace,
love  and  blessing.— Thus  the  brother  line  in  Meso
potamia  is  excluded  after  it  has  reached  its  dcstina-

'tifction  Seventh,  vers.  4:W>3.  STAHKK  :  (Differ
ent  conjectures  as  to  what  Laban  understood  by  the
God  of  Xahor,  whether  the  true  God  or  idols).—
CIIAVKII:  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he
maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him
(1'rov.  xvi.  7). — CALWKR  Jltindbuch:  Laban  now
turns  atrain  and -rives  way  to  the  natural  affections  of
a  t'atlier.  The  circumstances  which  tended  to  calm
his  mind:  1.  The  seven  days' journey :  "1.  the  divine
warning;  3.  the  mortification  resulting  from  his
fruitless 'search;  4.  Jacob's  self-defence  and  the
truth  of  his  reproaches. — His  courage  and  anger
gradually  give  way  to  fear  and  anxiety. — SCIIRODKU  :
In  the  Hebrew,  the  word  "  if"  occurs  twice,  pointing,


as  we  may  suppose,  to  the  idea,  may  God  so  punish
thcc. — (LUTHER:  How  can  this  fellow  (Laban)  so
name  the  thing  ?)

Eighth  Section,  ver.  55-ch.  xxxii.  2.  STARKE  :
Jacob  has  just  escaped  the  persecutions  of  his  unjust
father-in-law,  when  he  began  to  fear  that  he  should
meet  a  fiercer  enemy  in  his  brother  Esau.  Hence
God  confirms  him  'in  his  faith,  opens  his  eyes,
etc.— It  is  the  oflice  of  the  angels  to  guard  the  saints.
(Two  conjectures  as  to  the  double  camp :  one  that
some  of  the  angels  went  before  Jacob,  others  fol
lowed  him  ;  the  other  that  it  is  the  angel  camp  and
the  encampment  of  Jacob.)— (Why  the  angels  arc
called  hosts:  1.  From  their  multitude;  2.  their  or
der;  3.  their  power  for  the  protection  of  the  saints,
and'the  resistance  and  punishment  of  the  wicked;
4.  from  their  rendering  a  cheerful  obedience  as  be
came  a  warlike  host.— CALWEB  Handbuch:  The
same  as  eh.  xxviii.  Probably  here  as  there  an
inward  vision  (1's.  xxxiv.  7).— SCHRODER  :  Jacob's
hard  service,  his  departure  with  wealth,  and  the  per
secution  of  Laban,  prefigure  the  future  of  Israel  in
E.rypt.— (Val.  Herberger.)  Whosoever  walks  in  hia
wav,  diligent  in  his  pursuits,  may  at  all  times  say
with  St.  Paul :  "  He  shall  never  be  forsaken."— The
invisible  world  was  disclosed  to  him,  because  anxiety
and  fear  iill  the  visible  world.— LUTHER:  The  angels.
In  heaven  their  ollicc  is  to  sing  Glory  to  God  in  the
HHicst;  on  the  earth,  to  watch,  to  guide,  to  war.


FIFTH     SECTION.

Jacob*,  return.     IT»  fear  of  Jfent      7/i.  night  wrestling  mth  God.     Pcnid.     The  name  Israel
Meeting  and  reconciliation  with  Esau.


CIIAPTKB  XXXII.  C— XXXIII.  1-1 G.

3  And  Jacob  sent  messengers  before  him  to  Esau  his  brother,  unto  the  land  of  Seir

4  the  country  of  Kdom.     And  he  commanded  them,  saying,  Tims  shall  ye  speak  unto
my  lord  Esau;  Thy  servant  Jacob  saith  thus,  I  have  sojourned  [have ,con a Btraugcr]  w  th

5  I    ban,  and  stayed  there  until  now:     And  I  have  oxen,  and  asses,  flocks,  and  men-
servants   and  women-servants  :  and  I  have  sent  [and  now  I  mn^  send,  the  n  paxagogic]  to

0  my  S  Mb,  saying,  We  came  to  thy  brother  Esau,  and

?  also  he  cometh  to  meet  thee,  and  four  hundred  men  with  Inm      ^J^™^

afraid,  and  distressed  :  and  he  divided  the  people  that  was  with  him,  and  the  £  >cks,  a
3  herds  and  the  camels  into  two  bands:  And  sat  d  [thought]   If  Esau  come  to  the  one

company,  and  smite  it,  then  the  other  company  which  is  left  shall  escape
9         And  Jacob    said,  0  God  of  my  father  Abraham,  and  God  of  my  fathei  Isaac  ti

Lord  which  saidst  [art  saving]  unto  me,  Return  unto  thy  country,  and  to  thy  kmc  red    b,rfh-

10  place],  and  I  will  deal  well  with  thee  :  I  am  not  worthy  [too  little  for]  of  the  lea     of  all ^the
mercies,  and  of  all  the  truth,  which  thou  hast  shewed  unto  thy  servant :  for  ™*  »7™

1 1  [alone]  I  passed  over  this  Jordan,  and  now  I  am  become  two  bands  [camps]      ^ liver  me  i
pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of  my  brother,  from  the  hand  of  Esau:  for  I  fear  ^  Jest  he

12  will  come  and  smite  me,  and  the  mother  with   [upon,  over]  the  children.     And


CHAP.    XXXII.    3— XXXIII.   1-16.


saidst,  I  will  surely  do  thcc  good,  and  make  [establish]  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  thf»  sea

which  cannot  be  numbered  for  multitude.

And  he  lodged  there  that  same  night,1  and  took  of  that  which  came  to  his  hand  a
U  present  for  Esau  his  brother;  Two  hundred  she-goats  and  twenty  he-goats,  two  hundred
lo  ewes  and  twenty  ram,,  Thirty  milch  camels  with  their  colts,  forty  line  and  ton  bulls

16  twenty  shfi,isscs  and  ten  foals.     And  he  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  his  servants
every  drove  by  themselves  ;  and  said  unto  his  servants,  Pass  over  before  me,  and  puj

17  a  space  betwixt  drove  and  drove.     And  he  commanded  the  foremost,  saying   When

18  ?<Tt  Z,  ™    7  7G         tlT  '"'I1  a/ket\thee'  *^  Whose  art  thou?  ancfwhithe?

st  thou?  and  whose  are  these  before  thee  [what  he  drives  before  hun].     Then  thou  shalt
,.i}     They  fc  thy  servant  Jacob's:  it  i,  a  present  sent  unto  my  lord  Esau:  and  behold,

f  ,11m      nil"      US<  d  n    Tmanded   llG   the  SCCOnd'  and  the   thH  and  all  tha

followed  the  droves,  saying,  On  this  manner  shall  ye  speak  unto  Esau,  when  ye  find

0  him.     And  say  ye  moreover,  Behold,  thy  servant  Jacob  «  behind  us.     For  he  Sd
[thoueit]   Iwill  appease'  him  with  the  present  that  goeth  before  me,  and  afterward  I

3  las  face;  peradventure  he  will  accept  [make  cheerful  my  face]  of  me.     So  went  the

1  present  over  before  him  ;  and  himself  lodged  that  night  in  the  company.     And  he  rose
up  that  night,  and  took  his  two  wives,  and  his  two  women-servants,  and  his  eleven  son?

2o  and  passea  over  the  ford  Jabbok.     And  he  took  them,  and  sent    hem  over  the  brook
and  [the:,]  sent  over  that  he  had  [his  herds].

•^  of  tltUlJvC°VVlS  1(f  al(T;  andlthe™  wresfled-  a  man  with  him,  until  the  breaking
*


olW  o  V  ,  s        m>     e    o^e     t

holloa  of  his  thigh  [hip-joint  or  socket]:  and  the  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh  was  out  of  joint

26  as  he  wrested  with  him.     And  he  said,  Let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh  :  and  he  sa  d

27  I  will  not  let  thee  go   except  thou  bless  me.     And  he   said  unto  him,  What  I  thy

sLl  £      Tl  '  JaCOb'  •  Al;d  V^'  T1^  namC  sha11  be  ™lled  ™  ^ore  Jaco?
srael  u


lsl  •  aco

i         srael  u  israoij  :  for  as  a  prince  hast  thou  power  [thou  hast  contested]  with  God  and  with

^  men,  and  hast  prevailed      And  Jacob  asked  Am,  and  said,  Tell  L,  I  pray  thee  Thy
name:  and  he  said    Wherefore  *  it  to  thou  dost  ask  after  my  name?      And  he

;  0  blessed  him  there.     And  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel  [face  of'  Godl     fo    I

%  PeIueTerP      il   fre  t0          '  ^  ?7  life  hl]   "  Preserved"     Alld  as  he  P^ed  over
-  1   nuel  [Peniei],  the  sun  rose  upon  him,  and  he  halted  [woaian*]  upon  his  thigh.     There-

ore   the  ch,  dren  o    Israel  eat  not  of  the   sinew  [sciatic  ^  which  shrank,  which   ii

to  thia  da^  becausc  hc  toiidicd  ihe


.

1.  And  Jacob  lifted   up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold,  Esau  came
and  with  him  four  hundred  men.     And  he  divided  the  children  unto  Leah   and  unto

°  hd8      And  he  PUt  thc  handmaids  and  ^eir  children


f™tT     !        n  ;  as  an        er  cren

foremost  and  Leah  and  her  children  after,  and  Rachel  and  Joseph  hindermost  [at  the  last]

1  he  passed  over  before  them,  and  bowed  himself  to  the  ground  seven  times   unt  1

5  on  his^T      IV       1  '  ^     ^  ^  ™  t0  mCCt  h™'  ^d  Gmbraced  him'  ^  fe
on  las  neck,  and  kissed  him  :  and  they  wept.     And  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  [now!

the  women  and  the  children   and  said,  Who  are  those  with  thee*  [win/hast  thou  thL]  v

6  And  he  said,  The  children  which  God  hath  graciously  given  thy  servant.     Then    he

7  handmaidens  came  near,  they  and  their  children,  and  they  bowed  themselves      And

,eah  also  w,  h  her  children  came  near,  and  bowed  themselves;  and  after  came  Joseph

8  near  and  Rachel,  and  they  bowed  themselves.     And  he  said,  What  meanest  thou  by
all  this  drove  [camp]  which  I  met  ?  '     And  he  said,  These  are  to  find  grace  in  the  si  "U

10  tllf    1    lATnd  f'^'  I  ThaVG  en°USb'  "^  br°ther'  keeP  tha?  thou  ha     S
hyself.     And  Jacob  said,  Nay,  I  pray  thee,  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  si^ht

'"1    eCe  FeSCnt  at  m>'hand=   f^  therefore  [now]  I  have  seen  thy  Le    as


n  T,  now  seen  ty

11     hough  I  had  seen  the  face  of  God,  and  thou  wast  pleased  with  me      Take   I  pr,y
thee   my  blessing  that  is  brought  to  thee;  because  God  hath  dealt  graciously  with  me
2  and  because  I  have  enough  :  and  he  urged  him,  and  he  took  it.     And  he  slid   Let  us

13  take  our  journey  and  let  us  go,  and  I  will  go  before  thee.     And  [But]  he  said  unto  him

14  wilhmo      7f  Uiat  th*tMl'eU  ^  ^^  ^  the  fl°cks  a"d  ^erds  with  yom  g  °7re

lo  1   ?    '       ^     ^  S  h°Uld  °Jei>drive  them  °ne  day'  al1  the  llock  wil1  die-     Let  my
>rd,  I  pray  thee,  pass  over  before  his  servant  :  and  I  will  lead  on  softly,  according'  as


548


GEXESIS,  Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


the  cattle  that,  goetli  before  me   and   the  children  be  able  to  endure;;   until  1  come  unlo
15   my  lord  unto  Seir.      And  Ksau  said,  Let  me  now  leave  with  thee  fume  of  the  folk  that

arc  with  me:  And  he  said,  What  needeth  it?     Let  me  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my

lord.
1G          So  Esau  relumed  that  day  on  his  way  unto  Seir.

[i  Ch.  xxxii.  v<>r.  1  '.    The  iviRhl  auvrlho  return  of  the  messengers,  and  his  arrangement  of  his  company.-  -\   G  1
L-  ^  or.  -20.     lie   ..   -ovi-i  in s  luce  ;  and  so,  in  the  lust  clause  :  ho  will  Hit  up  my  face.— A.  G.]
C-  Ver.  :M.--rN-  ,  an  anti.iue  form,  only  used  here  ami  v.  25,  2(i,  from  p2X ,  to  struggle  with,  or  the  kind:
~Zi~I ,  to  I:;nit.  enclose,  as  <>nr  manlier  tlio  other.     KEII,,  p.  219.— A.  G.]
[<  Oh.  xxxiii   vcr.  .'.—Lit.,  Who  these  to  theo.— A.  G  ]
['-  Ver.  S.— What  to  tlico  all  thin  train. -A.  (i.]
[i  Vcr.  1  •;.—  !!,.;..,  which  nn-  niilki:i;r.— A.  G.]
I7   Vt  r.  1  i.      A        rdi!i_r  t..  tin-  tout,  or  pace.— A.  G.]


1  UKUMIXAllY  KEMAKKS.

Knnbel  .-upposes  lii-re  an  artificial  mingling  of
heterogt  in -on.-  anil  even  contradictory  parts,  taken
from  different  i-ources,  a  supposition  resting,  us  is
often  tiie  ca.-e,  upon  a  want  of  insight  as  to  the  con
nection,  which  U  the  great  law  in  that  kind  of  crit-
ieism.  Tlie sending  of  messengers  by  .laeolito  Esau,
i.-  ivganicd  as  a  proof  that  lie  was  not  al'r.-.itl  of  his
brother,  \vliiletlie.lehovist  represents  him  as  being
in  terror  of  him,  etc.  (p.  L!.~o).  All  parts  of  this
section  turn  upon  Jacob's  relation  to  Esau  :  1.  The
sending  of  m^.-engers  (vers.  :>-(;);  L'.  the  fear  of
Jacob,  and  his  preliminary  divi.-ion  of  the  train
into  two  hind-  (vers.  7,  N);  :',.  Jacob's  prayer  (v,  rs.
'J-lL'j;  •!.  the  delegation  of  new  mc.-sciigcrs  with
his  presents  (vers.  1M-^1);  5.  the  night  passage  of
the  tiain  ovt  r  Jabbok,  and  Jacob's  wrestling  ;  Peuiel
(veis.  '^l-:;j);  0.  Esau's  approaeli,  the  new  arrange
ments  of  tlie  train,  ami  the  greetings  (eh.  xxxiii.
1-11);  7.  Esau's  offer  and  return  (veis.  1U--1G).


EXEGET1CAL    AM)    CRITICAL.

1.  Tin-  f<.i«r,,iij  <>f  tic  t,«-sM »iffr.<  (vers.  S-C). —
Sent  messengers  before  him.— The  measure  was
precautionary,  to  inspect  what  the  danger  was,  and
to  conciliate  his  brother. — Unto  the  land  of  Seir.
— The  natural  ta.-te  for  hunting  and  the  thirst  for
power,  must  have  led  Esau,  even  during  the  lifetime
of  Isaac,  to  think  of  a  location  more  suitable  to  him,
since  the  thickly  settled  region  of  Hebron  was  not
favorable  either  for  hunting  or  for  the  establishment
of  a  strong  power.  The  region  of  Seir,  or  the  moun-
tians  of  Edom  (see  Bible  Dictionaries  and  geogra
phies,  and  books  of  travels)  seemed  more  favorable
in  both  respects.  We  thus  see  that  Esau  had  already
made  a  decided  progress  in  his  occupation  of  the
new  land,  without  having  completely  transferred  his
residence  from  Llebroii  to  Seir,  which  followed  after
wards  (see  eh.  xxxvi.  G).  The  same  distinction  be
tween  the  chief  residence,  and  an  out-station  or
colony,  meets  us  in  the  life  of  Isaac.  Keil  says  he
severed  the  relations  which  bound  him  to  his  father's
house  and  possessions,  "  because  he  was  more  and
more  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  blessing  pro
nounced  _  by  his  father  upon  Jacob,  and  which  ex
cluded  him  from  the  inheritance  of  the  promise,  the
future  possession  of  Canaan,  could  not  be  changed."
But  this  would  ascribe  too  much  to  Jacob's  obedience
of  faith  to  Esau.  The  fact  takes  place,  doubtless,
upon  natural  grounds.  Esau's  power  did  not  lie  in
his  faith,  but  in  I. Is  strong  hand.  This  man  of  might


had  gathered  his  sons,  servants,  and  confederates,
and  already  partially  completed  the  conquest  of  the
Ilorites.  He  deems  the  momentary  possession  of
power  of  greater  value  than  the  promise  of  a  relig
ious  dominion,  the  actual  posses.-ion  of  which  lay  in
the  dim  future.  He  entertains,  no  doubt,  therefore,
that  he  has  already  surpassed  his  brother,  and  this
may,  first  of  all,  have  predisposed  him  to  peaceful
thoughts  towards  him,  especially  after  Jacob's  hum
ble  message,  whose  prominent  thought  ^as  that  he
now  cheerfully  conceded  to  him  the  external  honors
of  the  first-born.  In  his  present  state  of  mind  Esau
is  satisfied  to  leave  his  brother  to  struggle  a  little
longer  with  his  fear,  and  to  harass  and  distress  him
with  a  pompous  show  of  his  forces.  The  messen-
geis  return  without  bringing  back  any  friendly
counter-greeting.  He  comes  as  a  princely  sheik  of
the  desert,  with  his  retainers.  This  is  the  prelim
inary  answer.  The  text  here  presupposes  that,  Jacob
had  received  some  notice  of  Esau's  operations  at
Seir.  [There  is  no  contradiction  between  this  text
and  eh.  xxxvi.  (>.  It  is  not  said  here  that  Esau  had
any  fixed  abode  or  dwelling  in  Stir.  The  fact  that
he  appears  with  his  armed  band  shows  that  lie  was
out  upon  a  warlike  expedition,  and  probably  with  the
design  of  driving  the  Ilorites  from  Seir.  It  was  not
his  home.  His  family  and  possessions  were  still  in
Canaan,  and  were  first  removed  to  Seir  (eh.  xxxvi.  G)
when  it  had  been  freed  from  his  enemies,  and  thus
made  a  safe  abode  for  his  wives  and  children. —
A.G.]

2.  TliR  fair  of  Jacob ,  and  his  preliminary  di-
risnm  of   the   train  into  two    band*   (vers.    7,  8). —
Was  greatly  afraid.— Jacob's  fear  was  not  ground
less.     Kebekah  had  not  called  him  back.     Esau  has
not    intimated   that  ho  was  reconciled  or  would  be
easily  appeased.     The  messengers  had  not   brought
back  any  counter-greeting.     Esau  was   coming  with
his  four  hundred  men.    The  promise  at  Bethel,  too,  re
lates  definitely  only  to  the  journey  and  the  return,  and
the  vision  at  Mahanaim  was  a  disclosure  as  to  his  de
liverance  from  the  hand  of  Laban,  but  not  accompa
nied  with  new  promises.     The  main  thing,  however,
was  this,  he  is  ill  at  ease  in  his  conscience,  with  regard
to  his  offence  against  Esau.     His  fear,  therefore,  as
well  as  his  prudence,  appears  hi  the  division  of  his
train  into  two  bands.      This  measure  precedes  his
prayer,  as  the  last  act  of  his  overhasty  and  impatient
cunning,  which  does  not  appear  to  have  been  exer
cised  after  his  prayer  and  struggle.     The  measure
itself  has  little  to  do  with  the  name  Mahanaim,  to
which  Knobel  refers  it.     It  may  serve  to  explain  the
fact  that  the  Bedouins  usually  march  in  divisions.

3.  The  prayer  of  Jacob  (vers.  9-12).     Jacob  is


CHAP.   XXXII.   3— XXXIII.   1-16.


conscious  now  that  all  his  cunning  cannot  give  his
heart  rest. — Which  saidst  unto  me. — Here  begins
the  third  link  in  the  chain ;  God  of  Abraham  and  God
of  Isaac.  He  appeals  to  the  repeated  promise  of  the
covenant  God  of  his  fathers,  given  to  him  in  the  di
vine  intimation  and  warning  to  return. — I  will  deal
well  with  thee. — He  strives  to  draw  from  this
vague  expression  a  promise  of  protection  against
Esau.  On  the  other  hand,  he  cannot  appeal  with
any  confidence  to  the  blessing  of  his  father  Isaac,
which  he  had  stolen. — I  am  not  worthy  of  the
least — Literally,  am  less  than.  Humiliation  and
gratitude  underlie  the  joyful  confidence  in  asking
for  deliverance. — This  Jordan. — We  must  conceive
of  the  ford  of  Jabbok,  as  lying  in  the  neighborhood
of  the  Jordan. — The  mother  with  the  children.
— Literally,  upon  the  children,  since  she  protects  the
children  against  the  raging  foe.  Used  proverbially
(see  Dcut.  xxii.  6  ;  Hosea  x.  14).  Knobel,  Keil,
Delitzsch,  reject  the  rendering,  upon  the  children. —
As  the  sand  of  the  Sea. — This  is  the  import  of
the  promise  ch.  xxviii.  14,  as  the  dust  of  the  earth  ;
and  thus  he  increases  the  imagery  of  the  Abrahamic
promise,  ch.  xxii.  17.  Such  a  destructive  attack  as
now  threatens  him,  would  oppose  and  defeat  the  di
vine  promise.  Faith  clings  to  the  promise,  and  is
thus  developed.  [The  objection  that  it  is  unbecom
ing  in  Jacob  to  remind  God  of  his  promise,  shows
an  utter  misconception  of  true  prayer,  which  pre
supposes  the  promise  of  God  just  as  truly  as  it  im
plies  the  consciousness  of  wants.  Faith,  which  is
the  life  of  praver,  clings  to  the  divine  promises  and
pleads  them.— A.  G.]

4.  The  delegation  of  new  messengers  with  Jus
presents  (vers.  13-21).— And  took  of  that,  etc.—
His  prayer  led  him  to  better  means  of  help  than  the
division  of  his  train  in  fear,  and  for  a  flight  near  at
hand.^  lie  passes  from  the  defensive  to  the  offensive.
He  will  not  flee  from  Esau,  but  go  to  meet  him,  and
overcome  him  with  deeds  of  love.  Delitzsch  thinks
lie  did  not  select  the  present  until  the  next  morning.
Keil,  however,  says,  correctly,  that  the  prayer,  the
delegation  with  the  present,  the  transfer  across  the
Jabbok,  and  Jacob's  struggle,  all  took  place  on  the
same  night  (ver.  14).  Delitzsch,  indeed,  admits  that
the  crossing  of  the  Jabbok,  and  Jacob's  struggle,
occur  in  the  same  night.  The  present  which  Jacob
chose  for  an  immediate  departure  during  the  night,
was  a  great  propitiatory  sacrifice  to  the  injured
brother,  and  an  humble  homage  to  the  mighty  prince
of  the  desert,  consisting  of  live  hundred  and  fifty
head  of  cattle.  And  thus,  while  making  an  atone
ment  to  Esau,  he  actually  atones  also  for  his  cunning
course  towards  Laban.  The  selections  corresponded
with  the  possession  of  the  Nomadic  chiefs,  as  to  the
kinds  of  animals  (comp.  Job  i.  3  ;  xlii.  12),  and  as
to  the  proportion  between  the  males  and  females  to
the  rule  of  Varro,  De  re  rustica.  Keil.  The  present
is  broken  up  into  divisions  with  intervening  spaces
[lit.,  breathing  places. — A.  G.],  and  thus  approaches
Esau,  that  by  the  regular  appearance  of  these  differ
ent  droves,  he  might,  by  one  degree  after  another,
soften  the  fierce  disposition  of  his  brother.  Observe  :

1.  The  climax;    goats,  sheep,   camels,  cattle,  asses.

2.  The  spaces  between  the  droves.     Each  impression
must  be  made,  and  its  force  felt  by  Esau,  before  the
next  comes  on.     3.  The  ever  repeated  form  of  hom
age:    Thy   servant,    Jacob.     A   present.     My   lord
Esau.     4.  The   final  aim:    friendly  treatment:  Thy
servant.,  Jacob  himself,  is  behind   us.     Knobel  sup
poses  that  he  finds  here  even,  a  difference  between


the  interpretation  of  the  Jehovist,  and  the  design  of
his  predecessor  to  describe  the  procession  according
to  oriental  custom  (p.  230). — For  he  said. — We
meet  here,  for  the  first  time,  the  later  important  ~B3
(comp.  xx.  16).  Esau's  face  is  to  be  covered  by
atoning  presents,  so  that  he  should  not  see,  any  more,
the  offence  which  Jacob  had  committed  against  him.
Jacob  had,  in  an  ideal  sense,  deprived  him  of  prince
ly  honor ;  he  now  recognizes,  in  a  true  and  real
sense  (and  one  entirely  suited  to  Esau's  thought  and
disposition),  his  princely  honor,  and  thus  atones,  in
fact,  for  his  fault,  since  Esau  cared  nothing  for  the
ideal  clement  in  and  by  itself.  IBS  here,  at  its  first
occurrence,  refers  to  the  reconciling  of  one  who  is
angry,  and  to  the  atonement  for  guilt.  Since  the  of
fence  is  covered  for  Esau's  face,  so  even  Esau's  face
is  covered  as  to  the  offence.  It  is  very  remarkable,
moreover,  that  the  word  "face''  here  occurs  three
times.  Esau's  face  is  covered  towards  Jacob's  obliga
tion  and  guilt.  Then  Jacob  beholds  the  face  of  Esau,
and  is  comforted,  and  Esau  lifts  up  Jacob's  face,  i.  e.,
cheers,  enlightens  it,  since  he  receives  him  kindly.

5.  TIic  night-crossing  of  the  train  over  Jabbok,
and  Jacob's  wrestling  (vers,  21-32). — And  he  rose
up  that  night. — the  confidence  of  Jacob,  rising
out  of  his  prayer  and  the  sending  of  his  present,  is
so  strong  that  he  does  not  defer  the  crossing  of  his
train  over  the  ford  of  Jabbok  until  the  morning.
Jabbok  is  now  called  the  Zerka,  i.  e.,  the  blue,  from
its  deep-blue  mountain  water.  "  It  rises  near  the  car
avan  route  at  Castell  Zcrka  ;  its  deep  mountain  valley
then  forms  the  boundary  between  Moered  on  the
north  and  Bclka  on  the  south.  It  empties  into  the
Jordan  about  midway  between  the  Sea  of  Tiberias
and  the  Dead  Sea,  and  about  an  hour  and  a  half
from  the  point  at  which  it  breaks  through  the  moun
tain."  Vox  R.U-MER  :  "Palestine,"  p.  74.  The
Jabbok  comes  from  the  cast  nearly  opposite  to  Si-
chcm.  It  was  at  one  time  the  boundary  between  the
tribes  of  Gad  and  Manasseh.  For  further  details,
see  the  Bible  Dictionaries. — Although  it  is  quite  cus
tomary  in  the  East  to  travel  during  the  night  (see
KNOBKL,  p.  258),  yet  still  the  crossing  of  his  train
over  a  rapid  mountain  stream  would  be  difficult.
The  ford  which  Jacob  used  was  not  that  upon  its
upper  course,  near  the  route  of  the  Syrian  caravans,
at  Kula't  Zerka,  "  but  the  one  farther  to  the  west,
through  which  Buckingham,  liurkhardt  ('  Syria,'  p.
597),  and  Seetzeu  ('  Travels,'  i.  p.  302)  passed,  be
tween  Jebel  Adschluii  and  Jebcl  Jclaad,  and  at  which
are  still  to  be  seen  traces  of  walls,  buildings,  and  the
signs  of  an  older  civilization  (RITTEK,  ed.  xv.  p.
1040)."  Keil.— And  he  was  left  alone.— It  is
generally  supposed  that  Jacob  remained  on  the  north
side  of  the  Jabbok.  KKIL,  p.  218;  DEUTZSCII,  p.
334.  [JACOBUS;  WORDSWOETH,  p.  136. — A.  G.]  Ro-
senmuller  and  Knobel  reject  the  idea  that  Jacob  re-
crossed  tho  stream,  although  nothing  there  claimed
his  attention,  the  latter  indeed,  on  the  incorrect  as
sumption  that  Jacob  crossed  the  Jabbok  going  from
the  south,  northwards.  In  ver.  23  it  is,  he  passed
over,  i.  c.,  he  himself,  without  mentioning  that  he
rook  his  family,  which  is  specially  related  elsewhere.
"It  seems  probable  that  he  first  went  over  himself,
md  then,  finding  the  crossing  safe,  he  returned  and
sent  over  his  herds  and  his  family.  — A.  (i.]  Then,
too,  it  is  not  necessary  that  "IP 'Pi  should  be  under
stood  in  a  local  sense  (see  Ges.  under  HP."1).  More
over,  we  find  him  (ver.  32),  when  leaving  the  place
of  his  wrestling,  Peniel,  ready  to  proceed  on  his


550


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


journey.  Lastly,  it  would  scorn  an  net  of  cowardice
_f  Jacob  had  sent  his  wives  and  children  across  the
brook,  which  was  a  protection  against  the  danger,
while  he  himself  remained  behind.  [Still,  the  narra
tive  plainly  implies  that  Jacob  remained  on  the  north
of  the  Jabbok.  And  whatever  courage  may  have
prompted  to  do,  as  to  protect  his  own  with  his  life,
Jacob  was  dimly  conscious  that  the  crisis  of  his  life
was  now  upon  him,  and  that  h-e  must  be  alone  with
God.  It  was  not  the  want  of  courage,  but  the  sense
that  help  must  come  from  God,  and  the  working  of
his  faith  which  led  him  to  cling  to  the  arm  of  God,
which  kept  him  here  for  the  prayer  and  struggle  and
victory. — A.  G.| — And  there  wrestled  a  man
with  him. — Now,  when  he-  supposed  everything  ar
ranged,  the  greatest  dilliciilty  meets  him.  The  un-
meaMired  homage,  with  which  he  thought  to  recon
cile  Esau,  touches  the  violation  or  at  least  puts  in
peril  the  promise  which  was  given  to  him.  More
over,  he  has  not  only  injured  Ksau,  but  offended  (led
(Kloliim),  who  is  the  God  of  Ksau,  and  will  not  suffer
him  to  lie  injured  with  impunity. — There  wrestled
a  man. — This  archaic  form  occurs  only  here  and  in
vers.  '_'.")  and  'J»>.  Dietrich  traces  it  to  the  idea  of
'•  struggling  or  freeing  oneself  from;"  Delit/.sch  to
~r.r, ,  ID  limit,  to  touch  each  other  closely,  member  to
member.  \Ye  prefer  the  reference  to  the  kindred  form,
PSTX,  to  ho'd  fast,  to  adhere  firmly,  etc.  Ilithpael,
to  hold  to  oneself.  There  seems  to  be  an  alln.-ion  in
the  word  to  the  name  Jabbok  (Knobcl),  or  rather,
the  brook  derives  its  name  from  this  .struggle,  p~^
inMead  of  pSX1?  (Keil).  An  older  derivation  traces
the  word,  ''to  dust,"  to  raise  dust  in  the  struggle.
The  question  arises  whether  the,  sense  of  the  word
here  is,  that  the  nameless  man  came  upon  Jacob,  as
if  lie  had  been  his  enemy,  or  that  Jacob  sei/.ed  the
man,  as  he  appeared  to  him,  and  held  him  fast,
while  lie  strive.-,  to  free  himself  from  the  grasp.  Ac
cording  to  ver.  27,  the  last  sense  is  the  true  one.
If  we  take  the  other  supposition,  we  must  conceive
that  Jacob,  during  the  night-wrestling,  recognized  as
a  friend  the  man  who  came  upon  him  as  an  enemy.
Still  there  is  no  intimation  of  a  hostile  attack.  The
passage  in  Ilos>a  xii.  -4,  also  supports  the  idea  that
Jacob  held  fast  the  mysterious  man,  and  not  vice
vend.  ''  lie  took  his  brother  by  the  heel  in  the
womb — and  by  his  strength  he  had  power  with  God
— he  had  power  over  the  angel  and  prevailed — he
wept  and  made  supplication  unto  him — he  found
him  in  Bethel." — And  when  he  saw  that  he  pre
vailed  not  against  him. — That  is,  ver.  27,  he
could  not  compel  him  to  let  him  go. — For  the  day
breaketh. — In  regard  to  this,  and  to  the  circum
stance  that  Jacob  remained  alone,  Knobcl  remarks,
"  that  the  acts  of  God  are  not  spectacles  for  the  eyes
of  impious  mortals  (see  ch.  xix.  17  ;  xxii.  13;  Exod.
xii.  2',tj."  There  is,  however,  a  broad  distinction
between  the  heathen  and  theocratic  interpretation
of  this  event.  There  is  no  reference  here  to  any
fear  or  diead  of  the  day-light  on  the  part  of  spirits.
—The  hollow  of  his  thigh. — Lit.,  the  socket  of
the  hip.  It  is  not  said  that  he  struck  it  a  blow
(Knobel);  the  finger  of  God  (for  it  is  God  who  is
spoken  of ) needs  but  to  touch  iis  object,  and  the  full
result  is  secured.— And  the  hollow  of  Jacob's
thigh  was  out  of  joint. — This  is  explained  more
fully  in  the  thirty-fourth  verse.  The  sinews  of  his
thigh  (ncri'iis  ischiudicus)  were  paralyzed  through
the  extreme  tension  and  distortion.  But  this  bodily
paralysis  docs  not  paralyze  the  persevering  Jacob. —


I  will  not  let  thee  go. — Now  the  blessing  which
he  obtained  from  his  father  by  cunning  and  deceit,
must  be  sought  with  tears  from  this  mysterious  di
vine  man.  And  then  he  blesses  him  when  he  gives
him  the  name  Israel,  i.  e.,  the  God-wrestler  or  tight
er  (from  m;J  and  bx).  [The  captain  and  prince
of  God,  from  stir  ah,  to  marshal  in  battle,  to  /cad,  to
command,  to  frjht,  and  hast  prevailed,  r"nb,  as  a
prince.  WORDSWORTH,  p.  138. — A.  G.]  Instead  of
a  supplantcr,  he  has  now  become  the  holy  wrestler
with  God,  hence  his  name  is  no  longer  Jacob,  but
Israel.  There  is  no  trace  in  his  after-history  of  the
application  of  his  wisdom  to  mere  selfish  and  cun
ning  purposes.  But  the  new  name  confirms  to  him
in  a  word  the  theocratic  promise,  as  the  name  Abra
ham  confirmed  it  to  Abram.  For  the  connection  of
this  passage  with  eh.  xxxviii.  10,  see  the  Excgctical
note  upon  that  pas-age. — And  hast  prevailed. —
Has  he  overcome  in  his  wrestling  with  God,  lie  need
have  no  further  fears  as  to  his  meeting  with  Esau. —
Wherefore  is  it,  that  thou  dost  ask  after  my
name? — The  asking  after  his  name  in  this  particu
lar  way,  not  th  -  general  inquiry,  is  the  point  which
occasions  thi-  answer.  The  believer  is  not  to  learn
all  the  names  of  the  Lord  in  this  theoretic  manner,
but  through  the  experience  of  faith  ;  thus  even  tin?
name  Immanuel.  Indeed,  he  had  already  learned
his  name  substantially.  —  Thou  hast  wrestled
with  God  and  men. — It  does  not  rest  upon  "  the
view  which  the  Jews  have  when  they  regard  the
name  Jehovah  as  ari^i-or,"  as  Knobel  asserts. —
And  he  blessed  him. — The  blessing  contained  al
ready  in  the  name  Israel,  is  now  definitely  completed.
— Peniel,  or  Penuel  with  the  1  conj.,  face  of  Go  I.
The  locality  of  this  place  has  not  been  definitely
fixed  (V.  RAUMKK,  p.  2.~>5),  hut  if  it  could  be  identi
fied  it  would  be  idle  to  look  for  it  upon  the  north
of  the  Jabbok.  Knobel  refers  for  an  analogy  to  the
Phoenician  promontory  ®iov  -npixjuTrov.  [Keil  thinks
Peniel  was  upon  the  north  of  the  Jabbok,  though
he  docs  not  regard  it  as  certain.  Kiepcrt  locates  it
on  the  Jabbok.  It  was  certainly  east  of  Succoth
(see  Judg.  viii.  8,  (,i),  and  was  most  probably  on  the
north  of  the  Jabbok. — A.  G.]— Face  to  face. — With
his  face  he  had  seen  the  face  of  God  (Exod.  xxxiii.  ;
Deut.  xxxiv.  10).  Exod.  xxxiii.  20  is  not  in  contra
diction  to  this,  since  that  passage  speaks  of  the  sec-
ing  of  God  beyond  and  above  the  form  of  his  reve
lation  in  its  legal  development. — And  my  life  is
preserved. — Luther's  translation  and  m>j  xoul  is
htakd,  saved,  is  equally  beautiful  and  correct.  For
it  is  impossible  that  the  idea  here  is  that  of  the  later
popular  notion :  he  rejoices  that  he  had  seen  the  face
of  God  and  did  not  die. — The  sun  rose  upon  him.
— The  sun  not  only  rose,  but  rose  especially  upon
him  ;  and  with  a  joyful  mind  he  begins  with  the  sun
rise  his  journey  to  meet  Esau. — And  he  halted
upon  his  thigh. — lie  appears  not  to  have  noticed
this  before.  In  the  effort  of  the  wrestling  it  had  es
caped  him,  just  as  the  wounded  soldier  oftentimes
first  becomes  aware  that  he  is  wounded  by  the  blood
and  gash,  long  after  the  wound  was  received.—
Therefore  the  children  of  Israel  eat  not. —
"The  author  explains  the  custom  of  the  Israelite?,
in  not  eating  of  the  sinew  of  the  thigh,  by  a  refer
ence  to  this  touch  of  the  hip  of  their  ancestor  by
God.  Through  this  divine  touch,  this  sinew,  like
the  blood  (ch.  ix.  4)  was  consecrated  and  sanctified
to  God.  This  custom  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere  in
the  Old  Testament ;  the  Talmudists,  however  (Tract


CHAP.   XXXII.    3.— XXXIII.    1-10.


551


Cholin,  Misehna,  7),  regard  it  as  a  law,  whose  trans
gression  was  to  be  punished  with  several  stripes."
Kuobel.  Delitzsch  adds  :  "  This  exemption  exists  still,
but  since  the  ancients  did  not  distinguish  clearly  in
•P3  ( nirsn  T>;,  the  large,  strong  cord  of  the  sinew
of  the  thigh),  between  muscle,  vein,  and  nerve,  the
sinew  is  now  generally  understood,  i.  e.,  the  interior

.  cord  and  nerve  of  the  so-called  hind-quarter,  includ
ing  tl:e  exterior  also,  and  the  ramifications  of  both."
G.  Esaus  approach,  the  new  arranr/emcnt  of  the
train,  and  the  greeting  (eh.  xxxiii.  1-11).— And  Ja
cob  lifted  up 'his  eyes. — In  contrast  to  his  previous
inward  contemplation,  and  in  confident  expectation.

And  he  divided  the    children.— We  read  no

more  of  the  two  bands  or  trains.  He  now  separates
his  family  into  three  divisions.  He  himself,  as  the
head  of  the  family,  as  its  protector  and  representa
tive,  lakes  the  lead  ;  then  follow  the  handmaids  with
their  children;  then  Leah  with  hers;  and  at  last,
Rachel  with  Joseph.  This  inverted  order,  by  which
the  most  loved  came  last,  is  not  merely  chosen  from
a  careful  and  wise  prudence,  but  at  the  same  time
the  free  expression  of  the  place  which  they  occupied
in  his  affections.—  To  the  ground  seven  times.—
Not  that  he  east  himself  seven  times  to  the  ground,
which  would  have  been  expressed  by  HIIiX  C^X,
but  he  bowed  himself  seven  times  with  the  low  in
clination  of  the  head  [the  low  oriental  bow,  in  which
one  bends  the  head  nearly  to  the  ground  without
touching  it.  Keil. — A.  G.}.  But  even  this  courtesy
far  excels  the  usual  degree  in  oriental  greetings,  and
finds  its  explanation  in  the  number  seven.  The  bow
ing  itself  expresses  the  recognition  of  an  external
princely  prerogative,  from  which  Esau' believed  that
he  had  robbed  him  ;  the  seven-fold  utterance  of  this
recognition  stamps  it  with  the  mimic  (Ger.,  mimische)
seal  of  the  certainty  which  belongs  to  the  covenant.
Thus  Jacob  atones  for  his  offence  against  Esau.
The  manifestation  of  this  courtesy  is  at  the  same
time,  however,  a  barrier  which  in  the  most  favorable
issue  protects  him,  before  mingling  with  the  spirit
and  temper  of  the  Edomitic  army. — And  Esau  ran
to  meet  him. — He  is  overcome;  his  anger  and
threats  are  forgotten;  the  brother's  heart  speaks.
Jacob's  heart,  too,  now  released  from  fear,  is  filled
with  like  affection,  and  in  their  common  weeping
these  gray-headed  men  are  twins  once  more.  "  The
unusual  pointing  of  ^^^^  probably  indicates  a
doubt  as  to  the  sincerity  of  this  kiss.  But  the  doubt
is  groundless.  The  Scriptures  never  authorize  us  to
regard  Esau  as  inhuman.  He  is  susceptible  of  noble
desires  and  feelings.  The  grace  of  God  which  ruled
in  his  paternal  home  has  not  left  him  without  its  in
fluence."  Delitzsch.  The  assertion  of  Knobel,  "  that
the  author  of  ch.  xxvii.  1  tf.  and  xxxii.  8  ff.  could
not  thus  write  if  he  wrote  proprio  inarte"  is  critically
on  the  same  level  with  the  remark  of  Tuch  upon
Jacob's  prayer,  ch.  xxxii.  'J — "  it  is  unseemly  in  the
narrator  that  he  allows  Jacob  to  remind  God  of  his
promises."  The  old  Jewish  exegesis  has  indeed
outbid  this  modern  zeal  in  effacing  this  great  and
beautiful  moral  feature  in  the  narrative.  "  The
Breschith  Rabba  and  Kimchi  inform  us  that  some  in
the  earlier  time  held  that  "Plp'i"1  meant  here  that  he
bit  him.  The  Targum  of  Jonath.  says  that  Jacob's
weeping  sprung  from  a  pain  in  his  neck,  and  Esau's
from  a  toothache."  Knobel. — The  children  •which
God. — The  name  Elohim,  out  of  regard  to  Esau's
point  of  view  [and,  as  Delitzsch  and  Keil  suggest,  in


order  not  to  remind  Esau  of  the  blessing  of  Jehovah
of  which  he  was  now  deprived. — A.  G.] — Joseph
and  Rachel. — It  is  a  fine  trait  in  the  picture  tha*
the  order  is  here  reversed,  so  that  Joseph  comes  bo-
fore  his  mother.  The  six-year-old  lad  seems  to  break
through  all  the  cumbrous  ceremonial,  and  to  rush
confidently  into  the  arms  of  his  uncle. — By  all  this
drove  (camp  or  train). — Kuobel  thinks  that  he  hero
discovers  a  third  explanation  of  the  name  Mahanaim,
and  finds  in  the  answer  of  Jacob,  these  are  to  find
grace,  etc.,  an  offensive  fawning,  or  cringing  humil
ity.  But  in  fact,  it  is  not  a  mere  present  which  is
here  in  question,  but  a  voluntary  atonement — an  in
direct  confession  that  he  needed  forgiveness.  We
find  this  same  thought  also  in  Esau's  refusal. — I
have  enough. — Esau  had  a  two-fold  reason  for  his
refusal,  for  he  doubtless  possessed  a  large  share  of
the  paternal  estate,  while  Jacob  had  earned  all  that
he  had  by  the  labor  of  his  hands.  It  is  nevertheless
a  noble  strife,  when  Esau  says,  keep  that  thou
hast,  /  have  enough,  and  Jacob  overcomes  him,
take,  I  pray  thee,  my  blessing,  /  have  enough  of
all,  or  Iriffly  all. — For  therefore  I  have  seen.
— This  cannot  mean,  I  have  gained  the  friendly  as
pect  of  thy  face  by  my  present,  but  therefore,  for
this  purpose,  is  it.  As  things  now  stand,  the  present
is  an  offering  of  gratitude. — As  though  I  had  seen
the  face  of  God. — The  words  sound  like  flattery,
but  they  bear  a  good  sense,  since  in  the  fiiendly  face
of  his  brother  he  sees  again  in  full  manifestation  the
friendliness  of  God  watching  over  his  life's  path
(Job  xxxiii.  26  ;  Ps.  xi.  7).  [He  refers  either  to  his
wrestling  with  the  angel,  in  which  he  had  "  learned
that  his  real  enemy  was  God  and  not  Esau,  or  in  the
fact  that  the  friendly  face  of  his  brother  was  the
pledge  to  him  that  God  was  reconciled.  "In  the
surprising,  unexpected  change  in  his  brother's  dispo
sition,  he  recognizes  the  work  of  God,  and  in  his
brother's  friendliness,  the  reflection  of  the  divine."
Delitzsch.— A.  G.]  The  words,  take,  I  pray  thee,
my  blessing,  are  just  as  select  and  forcible.  It  is  as
if,  in  allusion  to  the  blessing  he  had  taken  away,  he
would  say,  in  so  far  as  that  blessing  embraced  pres
ent  and  earthly  things,  and  is  of  value  to  you,  I  give
it  back.  Knobel  explains  the  choice  of  the  expres
sion  from  the  benedictions  which  accompanied  the
present.  "  The  presents  to  the  clergy  in  the  middle
ages  were  called  benedictions."  But  the  idea  of
homage  lies  nearer  here.  In  the  reception  of  his
present  he  has  the  assurance  that  Esau  is  completely
reconciled  to  him.  The  friendliness  in  Esau's  coun
tenance  is  a  confirmation  to  him  of  the  friendliness
of  the  divine  countenance,  a  seal  of  the  grace  of
God,  which  he  saw  in  his  face  at  Peniel.

7.  Esau's  offer  and  return  (vers.  12-16). — I  will
go  before  thee. — The  kindness  of  Esau  assumes  a
confidential  and  officious  character.  He  will  take
the  lead  in  the  way,  go  before  as  the  protector  of  his
caravan.  But  that  could  have  happened  only  at  the
expense  of  Jacob's  freedom.  Besides  this,  the  car
avan,  with  tender  children,  and  sucklings  among  the
cattle,  could  not  keep  pace  with  a  train  of  Bedouin.
Jacob  urges  this  strenuously,  in  order  to  effect  a  sep
aration.  It  is  no  pretence  on  his  part,  but  it  is  the
only  reason  he  ventures  to  offer  to  the  powerful  Esau,
whose  superficial  nature  unfitted  him  to  appreciate
the  other  reasons.  He  reveals  to  him  also,  in  a
striking  way,  his  purpose  to  come  to  him  at  Scir.  Is
this  the  new  Israel  or  the  old  Jacob  who  speaks  ?
The  words  are  ambiguous,  even  if  he  actually  visited
him  in  after  years  at  Seir,  as  some  have  urged  as  an


552


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


excuse.  There  is,  indeed,  a  peculiar  emphasis  upon
the  word  "'2X5,  in  connection  with  the  verb,  which
excludes  anv  obligation  to  hasten  there.  He  declines,
also,  the.  oiler  of  a  protecting  hand. — What  need-
eth  it? — lie  is  conscious  of  a  higher  protector.  He
desires  nothing  from  Esau  hut  a  peaci  ful  and  friend-
Iv  deportment.  [Jacob's  promise  of  a  visit  was
honestly  made.  His  course  led  him  to  Canaan.  prob-
ibly  to  Hebron,  and  from  thence  he  contemplated  a
visit  to  Ksan  at  Seir.  Whether  it  was  ever  made,  or
not,  we  do  not  know.  The  narrative-  does  not  record
u!I  the  eve:;'  b's  life,  and  this  may  well  liave

been  OIK;  of  tho-e  U-ss  important,  which  it  passes
over  in  Mlenc".  There  is  no  ground,  in  any  ca-e,  to
(]ties!ion  his  sine  lily,  or  to  think  that  it  is  the  old
Jacob  who  speaks.  —  A.  G.J


,  UIXAL   AM)   LTJIU'AL.

1.  This  section  belongs  to  the  more  important
parts  of  Genesis,  especially  of  the  patriarchal  his
tory,  holding  in  the1  life  of  Jacob  u  position  like  ch.
xv.,  xvii.,  xviii.,  and  xxii.,  in  the  life  of  Abraham,
eh.  xxvii.  in  the  life  of  Jsaac,  and  ch.  xli.  and  xlv.
in  the  life  of  Joseph.  We  have  here,  indeed,  the
full  development  of  patriarchalism,  the  bud  which
;'hall  open  into  its  most  perfect  flower,  and  which
unfolds  itself  completely  in  the  blessing  of  Jacob.
As  the  institution  of  a  sacred  sacrifice  reached  its
lull  development  in  the  offering  of  Abraham  (ch.
xxii.),  and  the  mysterious  fact  of  election  comes  into
prominence  in  the  blessing  of  Isaac  (ch.  xxvii.),  so
tiiis  narrative  brings  out  ia  a  clear,  distinct  form  :  1.
The  prayer  of  faith,  based  upon  the  promise  and  the
clear  coasciou-ncss  of  the  contrast  between  human
unworthiness  and  divine  grace  ;  2.  the  actual  occur
rence  of  a  bi-lieung  wrestling  with  God,  and  its  re-
••ult,  the  pivlu  ie  to  the  theauthropic  life;  3.  the  con
trast,  bjtween  the  old  and  new  man,  between  Jacob
and  Israel,  the  token  of  the  new  birth  growing  out
of  the  circumcision  of  the  heart  ;  hence,  also,  4.
the  dawn  of  the  love  of  one's  enemies,  and  of  the
triumph  of  that  afl'ection  over  the  hatred  of  our  en-
• 'laics,  through  confidence  in  God  and  the  proofs  of
his  reconciliation  ;  and  f>.  lastly,  that  divine  law,
according  to  which  believers  inwardly  and  truly  over
come  the  world,  by  their  outward  subjection  to  the
demands  of  its  power.  In  the  struggle  with  Jacob,
moreover,  the  form  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  passes
already  into  the  form  of  the  angel  of  his  face,  which
aiterwards,  in  the  book  of  Exodus,  develops  itself
more  completely.  Thus,  also,  we  find  here  already
clearly  intimated  the  germ  of  the  distinction  between
the  external  aspect  of  the  kingdom  of  God  (the
blessing  of  Isaac),  and  its  inward  essence,  a  distinc
tion  which  was  not  fully  comprehended  by  Israel  at
the  time  of  Christ,  and  over  which,  even  in  our  own
day,  many  toil  and  labor  without  clear  conceptions.
This  section  contains  also  a  representation  of  the
uightly  and  sacred  birth  hour  of  Israel,  and  in  a
formal  point  of  view  is  well  fitted  to  introduce  a
true  insight  into  the  fundamental  form  of  revelation.

'1.  The  intellectual  movement  and  progress  in  the
tin  ran,  o,  correspond  to  the  most  subtle  laws  of  the
S'l.iritual  and  intellectual  life  of  the  soul.  After  Ja
cob  had  seen  the  divine  messengers,  the  angels,  in  his
journey,  he  takes  heart,  and  scuds  a  human  embassy
to  greet  Esau.  The  contents  of  their  message  is  de
termined  by  his  prudence.  He  greets  his  lord  Esau,


|  as  Jacob  his  servant.  The  unpleasant  and  dangerous
recollections  of  the  events  which  had  occasioned  his
|  long  absence,  are  passed  over ;  on  the  contrary,  he
.  speaks  of  his  rich  possessions  in  herds  and  flocks,
which  he  had  acquired  while  with  Laban,  lest  Esau
should  think  that  he  was  now  returning,  longing  for
,  the  paternal  goods,  lie  wishes  only  to  tind  favor  in
i  the  eyes  of  Esau.  In  thus  rendering  homage  to  him,
j  he  recognizes  the  earthly  and  temporal  prerogatives
of  the  first-horn,  and  at,  the  same  time  makes  indi
rectly  a  co:i!es.--ion  of  his  guilt.  When  the  messen
gers  return  without  any  counter-greeting,  and  an-
i  nouncing  that  Es.iu  was  drawing  near,  the  mere
human  prudence  of  Jacob  again  suggests  his  course.
]  As  he  apprehends  a  hostile  attack  from  Esau,  so  he
I  thinks  of  re.-.isting  force  with  force,  but  with  the
I  prospect  of  being  vanquished.  Hence  the  division
of  his  caravan  into  two  bands.  Hut  this  measure
gives  him  no  rest.  His  pressing  wants  drove  him  to
,  faith  and  prayer,  a  prayer  which  murks  already  a
:  great  development  of  the  patriarchal  life  and  faith.
His  soul  was  thus  so  sustained  and  comforted,  that  he
can  no  more  rest  or  sleep  during  the  night.  He  now
boldly  crosses  the  Jabbok  (his  Kubicon,  or  better,
his  Kedron)  with  his  whole  train.  And  then,  in  the
loneliness  and  solitude,  he  meets  with  the  decisive
struggle  of  his  life.  After  the  victory  of  his  faith
in  this  struggle,  he  is,  as  Jacob,  lame  in  his  thigh;
he  no  longer  expects  salvation  from  his  natural
struggles  with  Esau,  but  has  found,  in  the  grace  of
Jehovah,  the  source  of  his  world  subduing  humility
and  love.  He  thinks  no  longer  of  the  two  bands  for
mutual  self-defence  or  flight,  but  on  the  contrary,  he
sends  his  five  bands  to  the  attack,  live  different  acts
of  homage  embodied  in  presents,  which,  as  a  contin
uous  train,  has  the  most  impressive  aspect,  and  gives
the  highest  satisfaction  to  Esau  in  the  presence  of
his  four  hundred  men.  The  closing  word  of  the
messengers  was  that  Jacob  was  coming  after  them  ;
he  himself,  and  thus  the  strongest  expression  of  his
confidence  toward  his  brother.  Upon  the  five  droves
which  designate  the  completed  act  of  homage,  as  an
actual  on!n-<tr<l  i/ci'iirrc/tcc  (since  five  is  the  number
of  free  choice),  there  follows  now  the  seven-fold
bowing  of  Jacob  himself,  as  a  sacred  assurance  of
his  intellectual,  i;  al  homage,  as  to  the  prerogatives
of  the  first-born  which  belonged  to  Esau.  Hence
his  family  also,  in  three  intervals  and  acts,  which
follow  the  salutation,  must  render  the  same  homage.
Jacob,  in  offering  so  large  a  portion  of  his  herds,
had  made  a  great  sacrifice  ;  so  that  probably  it  may
be  literally  true  that  his  children,  who  at  first  rode
ui)on  camels,  now  that  so  few  of  the  camels  were
left,  were  obliged  to  walk.  Hut  it  was  both  noble
and  wise  not  to  take  advantage  of  Esau's  magnani
mous  feelings,  as  he  had  formerly  done  of  his  nat
ural  and  sensual  infirmity  in  the  matter  of  the  lentilc
pottage.  And  now  he  has  completely  overcome  him,
and  even  more  than  this.  As  he  had  at  first  to  guard
against  his  former  threats,  and  his  alarming  appear
ance,  so  now  against  his  amiable  importunity,  which
might  have  led  him  into  the  danger  of  mingling  and
developing  his  cause  and  future  history  with  those
of  Esau.  Esau  actually  yields  to  his  request,  and
returns.  He  overcomes  him  in  this,  too,  but  not  as
Jacob  the  supplantcr,  but  as  Israel  the  warrior  of
God  [the  prince  with  God. — A.  G.].

3.  Jacob's  prayer.  The  great  development  of
faith  which  marked  this  prayer  :  1.  The  resting  of
the  prayer  upon  the  divine  promise?,  and  the  more
definite  development  of  prayer  in  its  general  idea;


CFTAr.   XXXII.   3.— XXXIII.    1-16.


553


2.  the  contrast :  I  am  not  worthy,  etc.  [literally,  I
am  too  little  for,  less  than. — A.  G.],  an  ancient  denial
of  any  righteousness  of  works,  a  watchword  of  hu
mility  for  all  time ;  3.  the  connection  of  the  divine
goodness  and  grace  (here  in  the  plural)  and  truth,  or
faithfulness,  which  henceforth  runs  through  the
sacred  scriptures  ;  4.  the  beautiful  description  of
the  divine  blessing,  for  with  my  staff  I  passed  over
this  Jordan,  etc.  [Jacob's  faith  appears  in  the  very
terms  by  which  he  addresses  God,  in  his  confidence
in  the  divine  promise  and  command,  the  two  pillars
of  his  hope,  iu  his  expectation  of  deliverance,  not
withstanding  his  deep  sense  of  his  personal  unwor-
thiness,  and  in  the  clear,  sharp  contrast  which  he
makes  between  the  destruction  he  feared  and  the
divine  promise.  How  could  the  promise :  I  will
make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  be  saved,  if
the  mother  was  to  be  slain  with  the  children  ?  As
Luther  has  said,  this  is  a  beautiful  specimen  of  all
hearty  prayer,  and  has  all  the  attributes  of  real  pray
er.— A.  G.]

4.  The  prayer  of  Jacob  precedes  his  choice  of
his  presents  for  Esau.     We  must  first  deal  with  God,
be  reconciled  with  him,  then  with  men.     First  faith,
then  works.

5.  Jacob's  present.     A  great  sacrifice  of  peni
tence  and  restitution,  of  large  value  in  itself,  but  far
more  glorious  in  its  spiritual  form  and  import.

6.  Jacob's  wrestling.     We  must  distinguish:  1
The  motive  of  the  struggle;  2.  its  elements;  3.  its
greatness  ;  4.  die  fruits  of  victory.     Its  motive  can
not  lie  in  Jacob's  fear  of  Esau,  although  he  was  not
yet  free  from  all  fear.     For  as  to  the  main  thin?,  his
fears  have  been  removed  by  the   foregoing  prayer
and  the  sending  of  the  present,  with  which,  indeed,
is  connected  also  the  announcement  that  Jacob  him
self  was  coming  to  meet  Esau.     The  motive  arises
from  the  fact,  that  a  new,  and  indeed  the  final  and
greatest  necessity,  sprang  from  this  act  of  homage
which  Jacob  had  just  performed.     He  had  restored
to  Esau  in  spirit  as  well  as  in  his  outward  arran^e-
ments  the  honor  of  the  first-born,  as  to  its  earthly
aspects.     But  had  he  not  thus  resigned  also  his  theo-

birthright,  the  Abrahamic  blessing?  This
question  rested  upon  his  mind  with  great  weight
since  the  external  aspect  of  the  blessing  was  appar
ently  inseparably  connected  with  the  inward.  To
how  many  of  his  descendants  has  the  external  theo
cracy  occupied  the  place  of  the  inward  and  real  kin«--
dom  of  God!  Abraham  must  distinguish  the  pres
ent  from  the  future,  Isaac  between  patient  endurance
and  dominion,  but  Jacob  must  now  learn  to  distin
guish  between  the  external  attributes  and  the  internal
and  real  possession  of  the  birthright  and  the  bless
ing.  And  since  these  things  have  hitherto  been  in
separably  blended  in  his  mind,  there,  must  now  be
as  it  were,  a  rent  in  his  very  soul ;  it  is  only  through
the  sorest  birth-throes  that  he  can  attain  a  faith  In
the  blessing,  stripped  of  its  outward  and  temporal
glory.  If  he  will  retain  the  real  blessing,  then  ap
parently  he  must  recall  the  messengers  who  have
gone  to  render  homage  to  Esau.  If  he  suffers  these
to  go  on,  then  all  his  hopes  for  the  future  seem  to
vanish.  And  still  this  is  impossible,  since  his  hope
is  inscribed,  as  a  destination,  in  his  innermost  bein^
his  election.  Like  Abraham  upon  Moriah,  he  must
also,  through  his  readiness  to  make  the  sacrifice
attain  the  full  assurance  in  its  great  gain,  the  new
life  sprmgmg  out  from  this  sacrifice.  Hence  his
wrestling  According  to  Hosea,  it  consisted  csscn-
lally  and  fundamentally  in  weeping  and  tears;  a


weeping  and  tears  that  he  might  secure  the  assuranc«
of  the  blessing  in  his  very  sacrifice  of  the  blessing.
His  sacrifice  must  be  completed  in  his  heart,  for  it  Ta
the  genuineness  of  his  repentance,  but  he  must  also
have  the  certainty  of  his  blessing,  for  it  is  the  genu
ineness  and  certainty  of  his  faith.     And  all  that  he
can  present  to  the  God  of  revelation,  for  redemption
and  deliverance  from  this  fearful  appearance  of  op-
position  in  his  inward  life,  is  his  sighs  and  tears.
There  his    prayer   becomes    a  vision  of    the   most
intensive  form  and  nature.     Jehovah  appears  to  him
in  his_  Angel,  the  Angel  appears  to  him  in  human
form,  in  the  form,  indeed,  of  some  individual  man.
The  man  in  a  certain  measure  is  his  alter  ego  in  an
objective  form,  in  so  far  as  he  is  the  image  of  Ida
innermost  individuality  in  its  communion  with  Jeho
vah,  or  the  type  of  the  Son  of  Man,  the  God-man.
But  the  man  meets  him  as  a  stranger.     He  must  in
him  become  certain  of  his  own  inward  election,  as
Moses  was  made  certain  of  the  law  in  his  own  heart,
in  the  law  of  the  two  tables  of  stone.     At  first  he
meets  him  as  a  mighty  wrestler,  who  will  cast  him
to  the  ground,  and  then  proceed  on  his  way.     That
is,  the  Angel  of  his  election  will  cast  him  down  and
then  leave  him  lying  in  his  repentance  in  bitter  an
guish  over  his  life  lost  through  his  sin  and  guilt.
But  Jacob  wrestles  with  him,  although  unable,  and
even  not  choosing,  to  make  use  of  his  strivings  as
Jacob,  of  his  supplanting  and  crafty  efforts.  °  His
human  prudence   discerns  no  way  of  escape  from
this   fearful   inward   sorrow,  nor  does  it  seek  any.
But  what  was  the  very  core  and  centre  of  his  nature
as  Jacob,  his  adherence  to  his  faith  in  the  future,
that  is  preserved,  even  now ;  he  does  not  yield  in
his  wrestling.     The  day  dawns  upon  the    struggle,
and  now  the  strange  man  seems  to  get  the  iipper
hand;    he  puts  Jacob's  thigh   out    of  joint.     The
human  strength  and  elasticity  of  the  patriarch  were
gone.     And  now  the  trial  culminates,  when  the  man
says :  Let  me  go.     But  now  also  the  precise  thought
of  Jacob,  and  the  purpose  of  his  heart,  comes  out
in  the  words:  I  will  not  let  thce  go  except  thou  bless
me.     lie  struggles  no  more,  but  throws   his  arms
around  the  neck  of  the  divine  man  and  clings  to
him.     This  is  the  full  renunciation,  and  (lie  full  and
determined  embracing  of  faith,  both  in  one  act,  and
there  lies  his  victory.     The  mysterious  stranger  asks
after  his  name  and  his  name  is  now  as  an  acknowl
edgment,  a  confession,  Jacob.     Ilis  new  name,  Ixracl,
which  is  now  given  to  him,  on  the  other  hand,  im
ports  not  only  his  absolution,  but  also  his  restitution,
indeed,  his   exaltation   above   his  previous    blessed
condition.     From  this  time  onwards  he  is  the  war
rior  of  God.     He  not  only  overcomes  Esau,  but  God
suffers  him  to  prevail  over  him  in  that  specific  way
of  wrestling  which  he  has  just  learned,     Jacob  now
asks  after  his  name.     He  must  not  seek  this  name,
however,  prematurely,  but  learn  it  in  his  actual  ex
perience.     The  names  Peniel,  Shiloh,  Immanucl,  are
for  him  to  be  developed  from  the  name  Israel.     But
when  the  parting  one  gives  him  a  special  blessing,
that  is  the  assurance,  that  in  bringing  the  offering  of
the  external  qualities  of  the  blessing  to  Esau,  he'lias
perfectly  and  fully  gained  the  essential  blessing  of
Abraham.     As  in  the  very  beginning  of   his   new
birth  he  had  learned  to  distinguish  between  the  old
and  new  life,  between  Jacob  and  Israel,  between  the
wrestlings  of  Jacob  and  the  strength  of  Israel,  so
also  he  has  now  been  taught  to  distinguish  between
the  rights  of  the  natural  human  birth,  and  the  rights
of  the  new  divine  birth.     [There  is  another  view  of


554


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


this  wrestling,  which  bases  it  upon  the  character  and
previous  history  of  Jacob.  Ho  was  not,  indeed,  des
titute  of  faith  and  reliance  upon  God,  but  the  promi
nent  feature  of  his  character  was  a  strong  reliance
upon  his  own  resources  and  strength.  He  had  thus
fallen  into  doubtful  and  censurable  courses.  In  this
confidence  lie  had  wrestled  with  Esau  for  the  birth
right,  and  with  Laban  for  the  reward  of  his  wages
and  liis  present  possessions.  God  had  dealt  with
him  by  chastisement-.  He  had  been  involved  in
difficulties  and  trials  which  he  could  not  well  have
failed  to  connect  with  his  sins.  Still  his  fault  was
not  corrected.  And  now,  on  his  return  to  the  land
of  promise,  and  his  paternal  home,  to  inherit  the
blessing  lie  had  so  striven  to  secure,  he  is  met  by
Esau  with  his  four  hundred  men.  Conscious  of  his
weakness,  and  reminded  of  his  sins,  feeling  as  he
double--  did  that  Esau's  anger  was  not  unprovoked,
he  (lies  to  God  for  help  (vers.  !()-]:>).  His  prayer
gives  him  relief  from  his  fears.  Hut  it  does  not
necessarily  wt  an  him  from  his  self-reliance.  He
must  1 1".  I  thai  his  crimes  against,  men  are  at  the  same
time  sins  against  God.  And  to  teach  him  this,  and
at  the  same  time  bring  him  to  i;i::vser\vd  reliance
upon  God,  is  the  purpose  with  which  God  meets  him
here.  Tiie  progress  of  the  struggle  and  its  issue
show  this.  He  struggles  with  this  new  combatant
to  the  very  end,  or  as  long  as  he  had  any  strength,
but  when  his  thigh  was  thrown  out  of  joint,  then  he
-aw  how  vain  the  struggle  in  this  form  was.  In  his
disabled  state  he  merely  hangs  upon  the  conqueror,
and  thus  overcomes  him.  He  is  no  longer  strong  in
himself,  but  i.i  the  Lord.  It  is  his  faith,  the  divine
principl  •  planted  in  him,  in  one  ,-ense  "  the  divine
energy''  working  in  him,  which  secures  the  victory.
The  lesson  which  .Jacob  here  learned  reveals  its
power  in  his  v.hole  after-life.  He  is  no  longer  the
supplante;-.  His  life  is  not  marked  by  his  own  striv
ings,  hut  by  his  reliance  upon  God.  And  this  is  in
;u:cord;ir.ce  with  the  prophet  Hosca  (xii.  4  IT.),  who
not  only  teaches  that  the  sighs  and  tears  were  promi
nent  features  in  the  struggle,  but  that  in  his  wrest
ling  with  God  in  f/tis  wait,  Jacob  has  completely
secured  what  he  had  been  striving  for  from  his  birth,
the  inheritance  of  the  first-born,  the  promise  and
blessing  of  the  covenant;  secured  it,  however,  not
by  his'  own  strength,  but  by  casting  himself  upon
God.— A.  G.]

7.  With  regard  to  the  form  of  the  struggle,  it
cannot  on  the  one  hand  be  a  dream-vision  which  is
spoken  of  (Rosenm.  and  others),  nor  on  the  other
hand  an  external  event  (KURTZ:  "History  of  the
Old  Covenant,"  i.  p.  260  ;  AUBKULEX,  in  the  article
"Jacob,"  in  HKKZOG'S  Encyclopedic.')  [JACOBUS:
"  Note-,"  ii.  p.  134  ;  MURPHY,  p.  414 ;  WORDSWORTH,
p.  1S7. — A.  G.]  ;  for  the  mythical  explanation  may
be  entirely  left  out  of  view.  For  moral  struggles
and  decisions  are  not  wrought  in  dreams  or  in  dream-
visions.  Against  an  external  bodily  wrestling,
Hcngstcnborg  reminds  us  forcibly  that  an  outward
wrestling  does  not  occur  in  the  form  of  weeping  and
supplica'ion.  Kurtz  attempts  to  evade  this  difficulty
by  assuming  two  acts  in  the  struggle,  in  which  the
external  bodily  wrestling  precedes  the  spiritual  wrest
ling  with  tears  and  prayers.  He  thus  seeks  to  ex
clude  the  vision  and  the  ecstasy  (conditions  which
in  our  view  are  only  two  aspects  of  one  and  the
same  state).  Keil  rejects  the  idea  of  a  natural  cor
poreal  wrestling,  but  thinks  that  an  ecstasy,  of  a
like  or  related  condition  of  the  body  and  soul,  must
be  received.  We  have  often  seen  already  that  the


condition  of  vision  or  ecstasy  does  not  exclude  the
objective  manifestation.  We  now  sec,  also,  that  the
soul-struggles  in  vision,  might  present  themselves
under  the  form  of  bodily  labor,  and  wrestlings  of  the
soul,  since  in  the  vision  the  whole  spiritual  process
is  represented  in  pictures  ;  and  further,  that  such  a
struggle  may  even  produce  bodily  effects,  as  here  the
lameness  of  Jacob's  thigh.  Kurt/  replies,  on  the
contrary,  that  such  effects  of  the  inward  life  upon
the  body  are  not  certainly  ascertained  ;  that,  indeed,
the  reverse  is  for  the  most  part  true  in  such  cases,
the  gcrminant  bodily  complaint  giving  its  peculiar
form  to  the  dream.  But  how  can  one  confound
these  mere  natural  dreams  with  the  very  highest  re
ligious  events  in  the  world  of  mind  ?  Should  we
suppose  that  the  whole  history  of  the  despised  one
rested  upon  a  mere  illusion,  still  the  history  of  Geth-
scmane  would  not  stand  there  in  vain  with  reference
to  the  event  here  before  us.  It  has  been  denied  that
such  a  lameness  as  that  described  here,  could  result
from  any  corporeal  wrestling.  [It  may  be  said,  how
ever,  that  there  is  no  necessity  here  for  departing
from  the  obvious  and  literal  sense  of  the  passage.
The  idea  of  close  personal  corporeal  conflict  seems
to  be  suggest,  d  in  the  very  terms  which  the  sacred
writer  has  oho-vn  to  describe  this  wrestling.  It.  is
certainly  implied  in  the  crippling  of  the  thigh.  An  !
if  God  walked  in  the  garden  with  Adam,  and  partook
of  the  feast  which  Abraham  prepared,  there  is  no
reason  why  he  should  not  enter  into  bodily  conflict
with  Jacob.  The  other  events  in  the  narrative,  the
crossing  of  the  Jabbok,  the  rising  of  the  sun,  seem
also  to  require  that  we  should  understand  this  wres
tling  as  real,  objective,  corporeal,  without  any  at
tempt,  however,  to  define  too  closely  its  precise
mode. — A.  G.]

8.  The  man  who  wrestled  with  Jacob.     "Some
have  absurdly  held  that   he  was  an  assassin  sent  by
Esau.     OKIGEN  :  The  night-wrestler  was  an  evil  spirit
(Eph.  vi.  12).    Other  fathers  held  that  he  was  a  good
aivel.     The  correct  view  is  that  lie  was  the  constant
revealer  of  God,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord."     Schroder.
Delitzsch  holds  "  that  it  was  a  manifestation  of  _God,
who  through  the  angel  was  represented   and  visible
as  a  man."     The  well-known  refuge  from  the  recep
tion  of  the  Angel  of  the  Incarnation  !     In  his  view,
earlier  explained  and  refuted,  Jacob  could  not   be
called  the  captain,   prince  of  God,  but  merely  the
captain,  prince  of  the  Angel.     "  No  other  writer  in
the  Pentateuch,"  Knobcl   says,  "  so  represents   God
under  the  human  form  of  things  as  this  one."     Jacob
surely,  with  his  prayers  and  tears,  has  brought  God,
or  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  more  completely  into  the
human  form  and  likeness  than  had  ever  occurred  be
fore.     The  man  with  whom  he  wrestles  is  obviously
not  only  the  angel,  but  the  type  also  of  the  future
incarnation  of  God.     As  the  angel  of  his  face,  how
ever    he  marks  a  development  of  the  form  of  the
angel  of  revelation  which  is  taken  up  and  carried  on
in  Exodus.

9.  The  angel  and  type  of  the  incarnation,  is  at
the  same  time  an   angel  and   type   of   atonement.
When  KURTZ  (p.  257)  says  "that  God  here  meets
Jacob  as  an  enemy,  that  he  makes  an  hostile  at
tack,"  the  expressions  are  too  strong.     There  is  an
obvious  distinction  between  a  wrestler  _and  one  who
attacks  as  an  enemy,  leaving  out  of  view  the  fact,
that  there  is  nothing  said  here  as  to  which  party-
makes  the  assault.     After  the  revelations  which  Ja
cob   received  at  Bethel,    Haran,  and  Malianaim,   a
peculiar  hostile  relation  to  God  is  out  of  the  ques-


CHAP.   XXXII.— 3.— XXXIII.    1-16.


tion.  So  much,  certainly,  is  true,  that  Jacob,  to
whom  no  mortal  sins  are  imputed  for  which  he
must  overcome  the  wrath  of  God  (Kcivrz,  p.  258,
the  divine  wrath  is  not  overcome  but  atoned),  must
now  be  brought  to  feel  that  in  all  his  sins  against
men  he  has  striven  and  sinned  against  God,  and  that
he  must  first  of  all  be  reconciled  to  him,  for  all  the
hitherto  unrecognized  sins  of  his  life.

10.  The  wrestling  of  Jacob  has  many  points  of
resemblance  to  the  restoration  of  Peter  (John  xxi.).
As  this  history  of  Peter  does  not  treat  of  the  recon
stituting  of  his  general  relation  to  Jesus,  but  rather
of  the  perfecting  of  that  relation,  and  with  this  of
the  restitution  of  his  apostolic  calling  and  office,  so
here  the  struggle  of  Jacob  does  not  concern  so  much
the  question  of  his  fundamental  reconciliation  with
Jehovah,  but   the  completion  of  that  reconciliation
and  the  assurance  of    his  faith  in  his   patriarchal
calling.     And  if  Christ  then  spake  to  Peter,  when
thou  wast  young  thou  girdedst  thyself,  etc.,  in  order
that  he  might  know  that  henceforth  an  entire  reli
ance  upon  the  leading  and  protection  of  God  must
take   the  place  of    his  sinful  feeling    of  his    own
strength  and  his   attachment  to  his   own  way,    so,
doubtless,   the  lameness  of  Jacob's  thigh  has  the
same  significance,  with  this  difference,  that  as  Peter
must  be  cured  of  the  self-will  of  his  rash,  fiery  tem
perament,  so  Jacob  from  his  selfish  prudence,  tend
ing  to  mere  cunning.

11.  A  like  relation  holds  between  their  old  and
new  names.     The  name  Simon,  in  the  narrative  of
Peter'y  restoration,  points  to  his  old  nature,  just  as
here  the  name  Jacob  to  the  old  nature  of  Israel.
Simon's  nature,   however,  was  not  purely   evil,  but
tainted  with  evil.     This  is  true  also  of  Jacob.     He
must  be  purified  and  freed  from  his  sinful  cunning,
but  not  from  his  prudence  and  constant  perseverance.
Into  these  latter  features  of  his  character  he  was
consecrated  as  Israel.     The  name  Abram  passes  over
into  the  name  Abraham,  and  is  still  ever  included  in
it ;  the  name  Isaac  has  in  itself  a  two-fold  signifi
cance,  which  intimates  the  laughter  of  doubt,  and
that  of  a  joyful  faith ;  but   the  name  Jacob   goes
along  with  that  of  Israel,  not  merely  because  the
latter  was  preeminently  the  name  of  the  people,  nor
because  in  the  new-birth  the  old  life  continues  side
by  side,  and  only  gradually  disappears,  but  also  be
cause  it  designates  an  element  of  lasting  worth,  and
still  further,  because  Israel  must  be  continually  re
minded  of  the  contrast  between  its  merely  natural
and  its  sacred  destination.

12.  The  sacred  and  honored  name  of  the  Israelit-
ish  people,  descends   from  this  night-wrestling   of
Israel,  just  as  the  name  Christian  comes  from  the
birth  and  name  of  Christ.     The  peculiar  destination
of  the  Old-Testament   children  of  the  covenant  is
that  they  should   be  warriors,  princes  of  God,  men
of  prayer,  who  carry  on  the  conflicts  of  faith  to  vic
tory.     Hence  the  name  Israelites  attains  complete
ness  in  that  of  Christians,  those  who  are  divinely
blessed,  the  anointed  of  God.     The  name  Jews,  in
its  derivation  from  Judah,  and  in  its  Messianic  im
port,  forms  the  transition  between  these  names,  since
it  designates  those  who  are  praised,  who  are  a  praise
and  glory  to  God.     But  the  contrast  between  the
cunning,   running  into   deceit,    which  characterized
the  old  nature  of  Jacob,  and  the  persevering  struggle
of  faith  aud  prayer  of  Israel,  pervades  the  whole
history  of  the  Jewish  people,  and  hence  Hosea,  ch.
xii.  1  if.,  applies  it  to  the  Jewish  people  (see  KURTZ,


p.  259,  with  reference  to  the  "Practical  Com. '  of
UMBKKIT,  iv.  p.  82).  The  force  of  this  contrast
lies  in  this,  that  in  the  true  Israelite  there  is  no  guile,
since  he  is  purified  from  guile  (John  i.  47),  and  that
Christ,  the  king  of  Israel  (ver.  41),  is  without  guile,
while  the  deceit  of  the  Jacob  nature  reaches  its
most  terrible  and  atrocious  perfection  in  the  kiss  of
Judas.

13.  The  natural  night,  through  which  Jacob  car
ried  on  his  long  wrestling,  not  only  figures  symboli
cally  the  inner  night  which  brooded   over  his  soul,
but  also  the  mystery  of  his  new-birth,  determined  of
course  by  its  Old-Testament  limits.     Hence  the  dawn
and  sunrise  indicate  not  only  the  blessed  state  of
faith  which  he  had  now  gained,  but  also  the  fact  that
he,  as  the  halting  and  lame,  now  appeared  as  a  new
man  in  the  light  of  the  breaking  day.

14.  When  it  is  said  of  Israel  that  he  had  prevailed
with  God,  we  must  not  forget  that  he  prevailed  with
him  because  God  permitted  him  to  do  so.     The  idea
that  God  permits  himself  to  be  overcome,  assumes
a  gross  and  dangerous  form  if  we  should  apply  it
to  our  selfish  prayers  according  to  our  own  selfish
thoughts.     In  the  entire  concession  to  the  grace  of
God,  the  believer  first  reaches  that  turning-point  iu
his  life  where  the  will  of  God  becomes  even  his  own
will,  where  God  can  yield  and  confide  himself  to  the
will  of  his  faith.

15.  In  the  apparent  rejection  of  Jacob's  question,
Tell  me,  I  pray  thcc,  thy  name  ?  the  angel  proceeds
in  the  same  way  with  Christ  in  his  public  ministra
tions.     He  does  not  immediately  call  himself  Christ.
Believers  must  attain  the  true  idea  of  his  name  from
the  experience  of  its  effects.

16.  The  growth  in  Jacob's  life  of  faith  is  marked
by  the  names  Bethel,  Mahanaim,  Peniel.     But  it  is
surely  an  entirely   unallowable  explanation  of   the
words  "I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my  life  is
preserved,"  when  they  are  explained  upon  the  preva
lent  Jewish  notion,  that  whoever  has  seen  Jehovah
must  die.     Leaving  out  of  view  the  essential  germ
of  that  notion,  that  the  sight  of  the  glory  of  God
terrifies  sinful  men  and  mortifies  sin  within  them,
which  takes  place  in  this  case  also,  it  might  be  held
more  plausibly  that  this  ver.y-  notion  grew  out  of  a
misunderstanding  of  these  words  (comp.  the  similar
expression  of  Ilagar,  ch.  xvi.  13).   DKLITZSCH  :  "The
sun  which  rose  upon  Jacob  at  Peniel  has  its  antitype
in  the  sun  of  the  resurrection  morning."

17.  The  glorious  reconciliation  between  Jacob  and
Esau  is  based  upon  the  perfect  reconciliation  of  Jacob
with  God.     For  the  old  way  in  which  he  hoped  to
overcome  Esau,  he  now  makes  amends  in  the  new
method  by  which  he  actually  overcomes  him.     We
shall  do  injustice  to  the  history  if  we  do  not  distin
guish   here  the  elements  of  humility,   satisfaction,
reconciling  love,  and  confidence.     Jacob's  humilia
tion  before  Esau  implies  his  humiliation  before  God  ;
his  satisfaction  to  Esau,  his  reconciliation  with  God ;
and  the  strength  of  his  love  and  confidence  by  which
he  overcomes  Esau,  comes  from  Jehovah's  grace  and
truth.

18.  The  fact  that  Jacob  after  his  reconciliation
with  Esau,  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  by  any  con
sideration  whatever,  either  of  fear  or  favor,  to  mingla
with  him,  is  the  clearest  proof  of  the  strength  of  his
patriarchal  consciousness.

19.  For  the  mythical  traditions  which  resemble
this  wrestling    of  Jacob  with  God,   see    Delitzsch,
Bunsen,  Schroder,  upon  the  passage.


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


HOM1LKTIOAL    AX1)    PRACTICAL.

f-ce  the  Doctrinal  paragraph?. — Jacob  between
Laban  :i::d  Esau  OH  his  homeward  journey. — Jacob's
progress  from  struggle  to  struggle. —  His  conflict  with
Lal>an  compared  with  that  with  Esau. — His  struggle
v.v.h  1110:1,  i:i  comparison  with  that  with  God. — How
;::s  of'  yoiitli  aiv  punished  alter  a  long  period  of
Years.  How  Jacob,  through  his  prayer,  passes  from
the  plan  ol'  iii^l.i  from  E-au,  suggested  by  his  human
fears,  to  the  method  of  attacking  him  with  the
weapons  of  humility  and  love;  from  a  mere  human
defensive,  to  a  divine  offensive.— The.  praver  of  Ja
cob. — The  distinction  between  his  prayer  and  his
wrestling. — Jacob's  act  of  faith  in  cros.-ing  the  Jab-
bok.— Jacob's  struggle  and  victory,  or  how  from
Jacob  lie  became  Israel. — The  features  of  (lie  devel
opment  of  revealed  faith  in  Jacob's  wrestling:  1.
The  germ  of  the  incarnation  (Godhead  and  humanity
wir.-tling  with  each  other-,  the  Godhead  in  the  form
of  a  man)  ;  2.  the  germ  of  the  atonement  (sacrifice
of  the  human  will);  '.',.  the  germ  of  justification  by
faith  (I  will  not  let  thee  go,  etc.);  4.  the  germ  of  the
new-birth  (Jacob,  Israel);  5.  the  germ  of  the  prin
ciple  of  love  to  one's  enemies  (the  reconciliation
with  God,  reconciliation  with  the  world). — Jacob's
night  and  Jacob's  dawn. — The  sacrifice  of  human
prudence  upon  the  altar  of  God,  one  of  the  most
dil'iicult  sacrifices  (more  so  than  that  of  human
-trength). —  lie'hel,  Mahanaim,  Peiiiel,  divine  stations
i'l  the  journey  of  the  pilgrim  of  faith. — The  shep
herd  train  of  Jacob,  and  the  warlike  procession  of
Esau. — Civility  a  barrier  against  injury,  and  a  source
'>i'.-'e  urity  'Pid  protection. — In  their  tears  Jacob  and
E.-au  are  twins  once  more. — Thus  the  nobler  life  of
the  world  and  the  life  of  faith  have  twin  elements
and  moments. — The  permanent  friendship  1  ctween
Jacob  and  Esau  (persons  so  in  antipathy  with  each
other,  the  children  of  God  and  men  of  the  world,  the
'i  and  the  state),  under  proper  conditions  and
at  proper  distance-'. — The  triumph  of  departing  Esau,
find  Ja-ob  (the  future  Bedouin  sheik  and  the  ances
tor  of  Israel). — Jacob  between  the  Jahbok  and  the
Jordan. — The  return  of  the  banished  to  his  father
land.  — The  native  coniitry. — The  bloom  of  patri-
archalism.

First  /Section,  vers.  4-7.  STARKE  :  Christians
must  be  open  to  reconciliation  with  their  enemies
(Kom.  xii.  1*). — SCHRODER:  If  his  mother  had  sent
l:im  the  message,  as  was  agreed  upon  :  Thy  brother
has  now  laid  aside  his  anger,  then  Jacob  would  have
had  an  easier  journey  than  now,  when  he  returns
leaning  upon  the  hand  of  the  invisible  God  (Baum-
gartcn). — The  little  ship  nears  the  haven,  all  depends
on  this  last  moment. — Esau  as  prince  in  Mount  Seir.
— Thus  he  chooses  with  perfect  freedom  what  God
has  from  the  beginning  determined  (Baum.  and
Calvin).

Second  Section,  vers.  8,  9.  SCHRODER:  We  must
not  overlook  the  name  of  Jehovah  in  his  prayer.  The
danger  is  so  great  that  a  mere  general  belief  in  a  gen
eral  providence  will  not  sustaih  him  (Hengstenberg).
Third  Section,  vers.  10-13.  STARKE  :  Nothing  is
more  humbling  than  the  grace  of  God. — CRAMER:
There  is  no  better  way  to  avoid  danger  than  by  be
lieving  prayer  (Ps.  xxvii.  8).— SCHRODER  :  His  humil
ity  does  not  blush  at  the  recollection :  for  with  my
staff,  etc. — The  mother  with  the  children.  The  words
describe  the  most  relentless  cruelty. — The  death  of
a  mother,  over  and  with  her  children,  is  the  most
cruel  way  of  taking  life  imaginable  (Baumgarten). —


God  saved  his  promise  in  saving  Jacob. — TAUBE
The  school  of  the  cross  is  the  most  glorious  school,
for:   1.  It  reveals   his   God  to  the  Christian;   2.  it
reveals  also  the  Christian  heait  before  (iod  and  the
world.

Fourth  Section,  vers.  14-22.  STARKK.  :  If  we  may
infer  from  his  presents,  as  to  the  size  of  his  flocks
of  different  kinds,  we  shall  easily  see  how  abundantly
God  has  !>K  ssed  Jacob,  end  fulfilled  to  him  his  prom
ise  of  prosperity.— SCHRODER  :  He  chooses  milch-
camels  because  they  are  more  valuable  for  their  milk,
which  is  u-ed  by  the  Arabians  as  a  drink.  The
camel's  milk  becomes  intoxicating  when  it  has  stood
a  few  hours,  but  when  fresh  has'  no  such  property
(Michaelis).

Fifth  Section,  vers.  2:5-33.  STAIIKK  :  CRAMER:
When  a  Christian  has  prayed,  he  is  not  to  sit  down
in  idleness  and  security,  but  should  consider  well
how  he  may  best  accomplish  his  end. — There  is  no
better  way  to  win  the  heart  of  an  cnemv  than  by
good  deeds  (1  Sam.  xxv.  lK).—n>l>l.  Tul>. :  There  is
no  conflict  more  blessed  and  glorious  than  when  we
wrestle  with  God  in  faith  and  prayer,  and  thus  take
heaven  by  violence. — OSIANDER  :  God  is  often  accus
tomed  thus  to  try  his  saints,  1Uid  prove  their  faith;
he  sends  upon  them  many  afflictions  at  the  same
time,  but  still  sustains  his  saints  so  that  they  shall
not  sink  (Exod.  iv.  21  ;  Ps.  xxxviii.  G  ff.).— \\'"e  bear
about  with  us  the  marks  of  our  sin,  our  miserv,  and
our  mortality,  that  we  may  not  become  proud  (2  Cor.
xii.  7). — (Ver.  26.  The  Jews,  who  hold  this  man  to
have  been  an  angel,  suppose  that  in  thus  addressing
Jacob  he  wished  to  remind  him  that  it,  was  time  for
him  to  sing  his  morning  song.  For  the  Jews  be
lieved  that  at  the  dawn  the  angels  raised  their
hymns  of  praise  to  God. — Ver.  28  (no  more  ;  No,
here,  is  equivalent  witli  not  alone). — LUTHKU:  Here
the  temptation  to  despair  often  enters,  a  temptation
by  which  the  greatest  saints  are  wont  to  be  tried.
Whoever  stands  the  test,  he  comes  to  the  perfect
knowledge  of  the  will  of  God,  so  that  he  can  say,  I
have  seen  God  face  to  face. — HALL  :  When  the  angel
of  the  covenant  has  once  blessed,  no  trial  can  make
us  miserable  (John  x.  28). — (Ver.  32.  The  Jewa
think  that  Jacob  was  healed  at  Sichem,  and  hence
the  city  was  called  Shalern.) — Compare  the  conflict
of  Jacob  after  he  had  crossed  the  Jabbok,  with  the
conflict  of  Jesus  in  Gcthsemane,  after  he  had  crossed
the  Kedron.  [Wordsworth  also  has  a  long  and  sug
gestive  note,  in  which  Jacob  is  held  up  as  a  type  of
Christ,  and  this  comparison  is  carried  out  into  vari
ous  minute  points. — A.  G.J — Jacob  a  type  of  the
New-Testament  church.  —  Bihl.  Tuft. :  They  are
blessed  who  see  the  face  of  God  in  faith,  for  thus
their  souls  are  healed. — CUAMER  :  To  see  God  is  the
best  food  for  souls,  their  strength  and  courage  (1
Cor.  xiii.  12). — GERLACH,  upon  the  28th  verse :  In
the  words,  with  men,  God  reminds  him  of  the  more
consolatory  aspect  of  the  events  of  his  former  life,
of  the  opposition  which  first  Esau,  then  Isaac,  etc.
We  must  remember,  however,  that  in  the  previous
struggles  he  was  victorious  as  Jacob  merely.) — CALW.
Hand.:  Although  all  human  power  is  weakness  com
pared  with  God,  yet  he  sutlers  himself  to  be  over
come  by  faith  and  prayer. — His  name  truly  was  a
onfession  of  his  sin. — SCHRODER  :  Quotations  from
r.  D.  KRCMMACHEK'S  "  Contest  and  Victory  of  Ja-
ob." — The  thigh  is  the  very  basis  of  the  body  ;  when
t  is  put  out  of  joint  the  body  falls  (KRUMMACHKK  :
Jacob,  however,  did  not  fall). — There  was  nothing
.eft  for  him  but  to  hang  upon  his  neck  if  he  would


CHAP.   XXXIII.    17— XXXV.    1-15.


557


not  full.— Hope  miiketh  not  ashamed  —The  wrestler
first  for  himself  and  with  men,  then  with  God  and
with  men,  lastly  for  God  and  for  men. — The  name  of

Christian  is  the  completion  of  the  name  Israel.

TAUISK  :  Jacob's  conflict  and  victory:  1.  The  con
test  ;  2.  the  victory.

Sixth  Section,  eh.  xxxiii.  1-11.  STAUKE:  In  this
manner  we  ^Christians  are  in  the  eyes  of  the  world
the  most  miserable,  subject  to  every  one,  but  in  truth

we  are  and  remain  the  heirs  of  heaven  and  earth.

Ver.  7.  The  wives  of  Jacob.  Now  when  they  thought
to  reach  his  father's  house  and  their  kindred  they
are  in  fear  of  death.  This  was  certainly  a  severe
est, — Mow  beautiful  when  contending  parties  come
together  ;  but  then  previous  difficulties  must  not  be
called  up  (Rom.  xii.  10).— In  the  world,  among  all
outward  means  there  are  none  more  effectual  than
presents  and  gifts  (Prov.  xvii.  8).— GERLACH  :  An
atoning  present  is  indeed  blessing  (1  Sam.  xxv.  27).
— Lisco :  His  victory  of  faith  is  typical  for  all  the
children  of  God.


Seventh  Section,  ver.  12-1(5.  STARKE  :  (Ver.  14.
Some  are  offended  at  Jacob  and  have  charged  him
with  deceit  (Calvin).  But  it  rather  seems  that  at
the  first  he  was  willing  to  go  thither.  Perhaps  God
had  warned  him,  as  he  did  the  wise  men  (Matt.  ii.
12).— Ver.  15.  OsiANDER:  All  official  persons  in
ecclesiastical  or  worldly  positions  should  use  wise
precaution,  that  they  may  direct  affairs  according  to
the  power  of  those  who  are  entrusted  to  them,  'lest
they  should  be  rather  injured  than  helped.— SCHRO
DER  :  LUTHER  :  Note,  the  justified  and  those  rcstin^
in  their  good  works  cannot  walk  together.— CALW.
Hand. :  Persons  so  widely  different  as  Esau  and  Ja
cob  are  the  best  friends  when  they  do  not  come  into
too  close  relations.— SCHRODER  :  The  sacred  Scrip,
tures  are  indeed  sacred.  As  the  dark  side  of  the  elect
is  revealed  without  any  attempt  at  concealment,  so
they  do  not  pass  without  notice  the  brighter  features
of  those  who  are  without.  We  find  traces  of  the
divine  image  in  every  one,  and  it  is  too  frequently
true  that  the  world  teaches  morality  to  the  believer.


SIXTH    SECTION.

•  JatoVs  settlement  in  Canaan.    At  Succoth.    At  Shechem.    Dinah.    Simeon  and  Lad.     The  first  mani-
fcstation  of  Jewish  fanaticism.     Jacotfs  rebuke,  and  removal  to  Bethel

CHAPTER  XXXIII.  17— XXXV.  1-15.

for  his  cattle :  therefore  the  namTof  thTpTace^s  called  SuccoTh  ^^  ***  ^^  ^^
Pan          w£!       5am8  *?  Sha]T  '  [in  PCaC°]'  a  C'ty  °f  Sheci*m,  which  »  in  the  land  of

19  %    ^    he  bouTf  ^f^'^^^a^];  and  pitched  his  tent  before  the
u  Liuy.     Ji.u(t  ne  Douelit  a    the     naropl   of  i   fif>lrl    -nrlm,-^  1,^11  -11-

l.ni,  1  nf  ti,«     i  -M  r  IT  J  ]  '  wjiei(3  lje  had  spread  his  tent,  at  the

Hand  or  the  children   of  llamor  Pass-  wiwtni -h^       r     ,,-  ,     ,     -\    a\      i       >

20  in  ImTidroil  nir    o- "      f  Lass.  Peaceful  bearer  of  public  bui-dons],    Shcchem's    falher,   for

^i/  an    Lunuiou  pieces    ot  money.     And  he  '~  ""  y1  ''


f

[held  m,  or  to  himself]  until  they  were  come)
6         And   Hamor  the   father  of  Shechem  went  out  unto  Jacob  to  commune  with  him

£  ev  ed\nd  V  "^  ™\  °(^  ^  "heU  ^  heard  it:  ^  ^  ™      '

gneved,  and  they  were  very  wroth,  because  he  had  wrought  folly  in  Israel   in

8  with  Jacob's  daughter;  which  thing  ought  not  to  be  done  [and  rLain]      1  nd
communed  with  them   saying,  The  soul  5  my  son  Shechem  longeth  f7r  youtdauer

9  I  pray  you  glve  her  h,m  to  wife.     And  make  ye  marriages  with  us  Ind  ^  you

tiEtesu  Td  takc  °T  da1usht1ers  unt°  y°u-  And  >'°  shai1  d-n  wit?;:  :}^

11    n      A  d  ShP  rl?P          "l  J°?;  i  and  trade  Je  thCrcln'  aud  S0t  y™  Possessions  there-

2  your  eye,   and  wlT      T  i  ^  father'  and  Unt°  ^  brethren»  Let  ™   find  6«ce  in

and  4ft    Li   of  th   J^        i8?7  ",?to.me'  X  Wil1  give'     Ask  me  never  so  mucb  dowry
id  gift  [prio    3f  the  bndo],  and  I  will  give  according  as  ye  shall  say  unto  me  :  but  give


558  GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.

13   mo  the  damsel  to  wife.     And  the  sons  of  Jacob  answered   Shechcm    and  Ilamor   his
father  deceitfully  [under  mere  pretence],  and  said,  Because  he  had  defiled  Dinah  their  sister:
t  And  they  said  unto  them,  We  cannot  do  this  tiling,  to  give  our  sister  to  one  that  is
15   uncircumcised  :  for  that  were  a  reproach  unto  us  :  But  in  this  [condition]  will  we  consent
1G  unto  you:  If  ye  will  he  as  we  be,  that  every  male  of  you   be   circumcised  ;  Then  will
we  give  our  daughters  unto  you,  and  we  will   take   your  daughters  to  us,  and  we  will
17   dwell  with  you,  and  we  will  become  one  people.      But  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  us,
3  to  be  circumcised;   then  will  we  take  our  daughter,  and  we  will  be  gone.     And  their
19  words  pleased  Ilamor,  and  Shechem,  Hamor's  son.     And  the  young  man  deferred  not
to  do  the  thing,  because  he  had  delight  in  Jacob's  daughter:  and   he  teas  more  honor
able  than  all  the  house  of  his  father.

And  Ilamor  and  Shechem  his  son  came  uirto  the  gate  of  their  city,  and  communed

1   Wlt!>  1}JC  ll"  n  °r  t'1111'1'  city,  saying,   These  men  arc  peaceable  with  us,  therefore  let  them

dwell  in  the  land,  and  trade  therein  :   for  the   land,  behold,  it  is  large  enough  for  them:

t  us  take  their  daughters  to  us  for  wives,  and  let  us  give   them   our  daughters.      Only

herein  [on tliis  condition]  will   the   men   consent    unto   us  for  to  dwell  with  UP,   to  be  one

::   people,  if  every  male  among  us  be  circumcised,  as  tlicv  are  circumcised.      Shall  not  their

cattle,  and  their  substance,  and  every  beast  of  theirs  be  ours?  only  let  us  consent  unto

1M    them,  and   they  will  dwell  with  us.      And    unto   Hamor,    and    unto    Sliechem    his   son,

hearkened  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate  of  his  city  :  and  everv  male  was  circumcised!

all  that  went  out  of  the  gate  of  his  city.

And  it  came   lo   pass   on  the  third   day,  when  they  were  sore,  that    two  of  the  sons

of  Jacob,  Simeon  and  Levi,  Dinah's  brethren,  took  each  man  Iris  sword,  and  came  upon

'JG   the  city  boldly,  and  slew  all  the  males.      And  they  slew  Ilamor  and   Shechem   his  son

with   the   edge   of  the   sword,  and    took  Dinah  out  of  Shechem's  house,  and  went  out.

-7    The    sons   of    Jacob    came    [n..w]    upon    the   slain  and   spoiled   the   city;    because  they

s    [its inhabitants]  had  defiled  their  sister.      They  took  their  sheep,  and  their  oxen,  and  their

'J9   asses,  and   that  which  was  in  the  city,  and"  that  which  icas  in  the  field.      And  all  their

wealth  and  all  their  little  ones,  and  their  wives  took  they  captive,  and  spoiled  even  all

:iO   that  was  in  tin;   house.      And   Jacob   said  to  Simeon  and   Levi,  Ye   have   troubled   me

[so  greatly]  to  make  me  to  stink   among   the   inhabitants  of  the  land,  among  the  Canaan-

ites,  and  the  Perizzites :   and  I  Icing  few  in  number  [of  a  small  household ;  easily  numbered],

they  shall  gather   themselves   together  against  me,   and   slay  me,   and   I   shall   be    de-

31   stroyed,  I  and  my  house.      And  they  said,  Should  he  deal  with  our  sister  as  Avith  an

harlot?

GJI.  XXX  V.      1.   And  God  said  unto  Jacob,  Arise,  go  up  to  Bethel,  and  dwell  there:  and
make  there  an  altar  unto  God  [EI]  that  appeared  unto  thec  Avhen  thou  fleddest  from  the

2  face  of  Esau  thy  brother.     Then  Jacob  said   unto   his  household   and  to  all  that  were
with  him,  Put  away  the  strange  gods  that  arc  among  you,  and  be  clean,  and  change

3  your  garments:  And  let  us  arise,  and  go  up  to  Bethel;   and  I  will  make  there  an  altar
unto  God,  who  answered  me  in  the  day  [at  the  time]  of  my  distress,  and  was  with  me  in

4  the  way  which  I  went.     And  they  gave  unto  Jacob  all  the  strange  gods  which  were  in
their  hand  [possession],  and  all  their  ear-rings  which  were  in  their  ears  ;  and  Jacob  hid

5  them  under  the  oak  [terebinth]  which  was  by  Shechem.     And  they  journeyed  :  and  the
terror  of  God  was  upon  the  cities  that  icere  round  about  them,  and  they  did  not  pursue
after  the  sons  of  Jacob.

So  Jacob  came  to  Luz,  which  ts  in  the  land  of  Canaan  (that  is  Bethel),  he  and  all

7  the  people  that  iccrc  with  him.     And  he  built  there  an  altar,  and  called  the  place  El-
beth-el  ;  because   there  God  appeared  unto  him,  when   he   fled   from   the  face   of  his

8  brother.     But  Deborah  [bee],  Rebekah's  nurse,  died,  and  she  was  buried  beneath  Beth
el,  under  an  oak :  and  the  name  of  it  was  called  Allon-bachuth.

And  God  appeared  unto  Jacob  again,  when  he  came  out  of  Padan-aram  [Mesopotamia]  ;

10  and  blessed  him.     And  God  said  unto  him,  Thy  name  ts  Jacob :  thy  name  shall  not
be  called  any  more  Jacob,  but  Israel  shall  be  thy  name  :  and  he  called  his  name  Israel.

11  And  God  said  unto  him,  I  am  God  Almighty:  be  fruitful  and  multiply;  a  nation  and
a  company  [--"ip]  of  nations  shall  be  of  thee,  and  kings    shall   come  out  of  thy  loins.

I  And  the  land  which  I  gave  Abraham  and  Isaac,  to  thee  I  will  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed
13  after  thee  will  I  give  the  land.     And  God  went  up   from  him,  in  the  place  where  he


CHAP.   XXXIII.    17.— XXXV.  1-15.


550


14  talked  with  him.     And  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  in  the  place  where  he  talked  with  him,
even  a  pillar  of  stone :  and  he  poured  a  drink-offering  thereon,  and  he  poured  oil  there-

15  on.     And  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  where  God  spake  with  him,  Bethel.

['  Vcr.  13. — Slialem  is  not  a  proper  noun,  but  must  be  rendered  in  place,  as  in  Jacob's  vow  (xxviii.  21),  to  which  it
evidently  refers. — A.  G.]

['•*  Vcr.  19. —  Qucsitah— weighed  or  measured.  Sept.,  Vul.,  Onk.,  have  lamb,  as  if  stamped  upon  the  coin  ;  but  coined
money  was  not  in  use  among  the  patriarchs. — A.  G.]

['•>  Ch.  xxxiv.  3. — Lit.,  spake  to  her  heart. — A.  G.]


PRELIMINARY     REMARKS.

The  section  now  before  us,  whose  unity  consists
in  the  remarkable  sojourn  of  Jacob  at  the  different
stations,  on  his  homeward  journey  to  Hebron,  may
be  divided  as  follows  :  1.  The  settlement  at  Succoth  ;
2.  the  settlement  at  Shechem;  ?j.  Dinah:  a.  The
rape  of  Dinah;  b.  Shechcm's  offer  of  marriage;  c.
the  fanatical  revenge  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  or  the
bloody  wedding ;  the  plot,  the  massacre,  the  sacking
of  the  city,  the  judgment  of  Jacob  upon  the  crime  ;
4.  the  departure  for  Bethel ;  5.  the  sealing  of  the
covenant  between  God  and  the  patriarch  at  Bethel.
Knobcl,  as  usual,  finds  here  a  commingling  of  Jeho-
vistic  and  Elohistic  elements,  since  the  internal  rela
tions  are  brought  into  view  as  little  as  possible,
while  names  and  words  are  emphasized.


EXEGKTICAL    AND    CRITICAL.

1.  Ver.  17. — To  Succoth. — The  name  Succoth,
booths,  tents,  might  have  been  of  frequent  occur
rence  in  Palestine,  but  the  locality  here  spoken  of
is  generally  regarded  as  the  same  with  the  later  well-
known  city  of  Succoth,  which  lies  east  of  the  Jor
dan.  It  was  situated  within  the  limits  of  the  tribe
of  Gad  (Jos.  xiii.  27  ;  Judg.  viii.  5-14  ;  Ps.  Ix.  C).
Josephus  speaks  of  it  under  its  Greek  name  S/c^at,
and  Jerome  Succoth  is  at  this  day  a  city  across  the
Jordan,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Scythopolis.  Rob
inson  (later  "  Resear.,"  pp.  310-31'2)  identifies  Suc
coth  with  Sakut,  lying  west  of  the  Jordan,  and
southerly  from  Beisan.  The  fact  that  the  traditional
Succoth  lies  too  far  to  the  north,  and  that  it  is  not
easy  to  see  how  Jacob,  after  crossing  the  Jabbok,
should  come  hither  again,  is  in  favor  of  this  sug
gestion.  Xor  is  it  probable  that,  having  so  nearly
reached  the  Jordan,  he  would  have  settled  in  the
east-Jordan  region  (comp.  ch.  xxxii.  10).  Knobcl
thinks  that  the  writer  wished  to  show  that  the  patri
arch  had  now  fixed  his  abode  in  the  trans-Jordan  re
gion.  That  Succoth  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Gad,
does  not  disprove  Robinson's  conjectures,  since  there
may  have  been  more  than  one  Succoth.  Compare,
further,  as  to  the  traditional  Succoth,  VON  RAUMER
p.  256  ;  KNOBEL,  p.  204  [also  Keil,  Murphy,  Words
worth,  Jacobus,  SMITH'S  "Bib.  Die.,"  all  of  whom
decide  against  Robinson. — A.  G.] — And  he  built. —
lie  prepares  here  for  a  longer  residence,  since  he
builds  himself  a  house  instead  of  tents,  and  booths
for  his  flocks,  i.  e.,  inclosures  made  of  shrubs  or
stakes  wattled  together.  Knobcl  thinks  "  that  this
is  very  improbable,  since  Jacob  would  naturally  wish
to  go  to  Canaan  and  Isaac "  (ch.  xxxi.  8).  But  if
we  bear  in  mind  that  Jacob,  exhausted  by  a  twenty-
years'  servitude  and  oppression,  and  a  flight  of  more
than  seven  days,  shattered  by  his  spiritual  conflicts,
and  lame  bodily,  now,  first,  after  he  had  crossed  the
Jordan,  and  upon  the  spiritual  and  home  land,  came


to  the  full  sense  of  his  need  of  repose  and  quiet,
we  shall  then  understand  why  he  here  pauses  and
rests.  As  the  hunted  hart  at  last  sinks  to  the  ground,
so  he  settles  down  and  rests  here  for  a  time.  He
seems  to  have  hoped,  too,  that  he  would  be  healed  at
Succoth,  and  it  is  probably  with  a  special  reference
to  this  that  it  is  said,  ver.  18,  that  Jacob  came  "  in
peace  or  in  health  "  to  Shechem.  Jacob,  too,  after
his  experience  of  his  brother  Esau's  importunity,  had
good  reason  for  inquiring  into  the  condition  of  things
at  Hebron,  before  he  brought  his  family  thither.
[The  fact  that  he  built  a  house  for  himself,  and
permanent  booths  for  his  flock,  indicates  his  contin
ued  residence  at  Succoth  for  some  years;  and  the
age  of  Dinah  at  his  flight  from  Labaii  makes  it  ne
cessary  to  suppose  either  that  he  dwelt  here  or  at
Shechem  six  or  more  years  before  the  sad  events  nar
rated  in  the  following  chapter. — A.  G.]  And  it  ap
pears,  indeed,  that,  either  from  Succoth  or  Shechem,
he  made  a  visit  to  his  father  Isaac  at  Hebron,  and
brought  from  thence  his  mother's  nurse,  Deborah,
since  Rebekah  was  dead,  and  since  she,  as  the  confi
dential  friend  of  his  mother,  could  relate  to  him  the
history  of  her  life  and  sufferings,  and  since,  more
over,  she  stood  in  closer  relation  to  him  than  any  one
else.  Xor  could  Jacob,  as  Keil  justly  remarks,  now
an  independent  patriarch,  any  longer  subordinate
his  household  to  that  of  Isaac.

2.  The  sojourn  at  Shechem  (vcrs.  18-20). —
And  Jacob  came  (to  Shalem)  in  good  health. —
The  word  cV:3  is  taken  by  the  Sept.,  Vul.,  and
Luther  [and  by  the  translators  of  the  Eng.  Bib. —
A.  G.],  as  a  proper  noun,  to  Shalem,  which  some
have  regarded  as  another  name  for  Shechem,  and
others  as  designating  an  entirely  different  place,  and
the  more  so,  since  the  village  of  Salim  is  still  found
in  the  neighborhood  of  Shechem  (ROBINSON:  "Re
searches,"  vol.  iii.  p.  114  ff.).  But  it  is  never  men
tioned  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  abtlj
as  an  adjective,  refers  to  the  Clb '£2,  ch.  xxviii.  21.
Jehovah  has  fulfilled  his  promise.— A  city  of  She
chem. — Or,  to  the  city.  Lit.,  of  Shechem.  The
city  was  not  in  existence  when  Abraham  sojourned
in  this  region  (ch.  xii.  6).  The  Hivite  prince  Ha-
mor  had  built  it  and  called  it  after  the  name  of  his
son.  For  the  old  name  Marnortha  of  Pliny,  see
KKIL,  p.  224  [who  holds  that  it  may  be  a  corruption
from  Hamor ;  but  see  also  ROBINSON,  vol.  iii.  p.  119.
— A.  G.]. — In  the  land  of  Canaan. — Keil  infers
from  these  words  that  Succoth  could  not  have  been
in  the  land  of  Canaan,  i.  e.,  on  the  west  of  the  Jor
dan.  But  the  words  here,  indeed,  refer  to  the  im
mediately  following  Hebraic  acquisition  of  a  piece
of  ground,  just  as  in  the  purchase  of  the  cave  at
Hebron  by  Abraham  it  is  added,  "  in  the  land  of
Canaan"  (ch.  xxiii.  19). — Padan-aram  (see  ch.
xxv.  20) — before  the  city. — [See  the  Bible  Diction
aries,  especially  upon  the  situation  of  Jacob's  well,
and  ROBINSON,  vol.  iii.  pp.  113-136. — A.  G.].  Even


560


GENESIS.  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


after  his  return  to  Hebron  Jacob  kept  a  pasture  sta
tion  at  SliLvlK-m  (eh.  xxxvii.  12). — A  parcel  of  a
field  (Josh,  xxiv.  32). — Abraham  purchased  for
himself  a  possession  for  a  burial  place  at  Hebron.
Jacob  go"s  further,  and  buys  a  possession  for  him
self  during  life.  "  This  purchase  shows  that  Jacob,
in  his  faith  in  the  divine  promise,  viewed  Canaan  as
his  own  home,  and  the  home  of  his  see  1.  Tradition
fixis  this  pared  of  land,  which,  at  the  coii'mest  of
Canaan,  fell  as  an  heritage  to  the  sons  of  Joseph,
a;;d  in  which  Jo~i;.h's  bones  were  buried  (Josh,
xxiv.  ,'J-Ji,  a-  rin-  plain  lying  at  the  southeast  opening
of  the  vallev  of  Shechem,  where,  even  now,  Jacob's
well  (John  iv.  ti)  is  shown,  ami  about  two  hundred  or
three  liundn-il  paces  north  of  it  a  Mohammedan
wcly,  as  the  grave  of  Joseph  (Romxsox:  "  Rc-
searclus,"  v.il.  iii.  pp.  113-13t>,  and  tlie  map  of
Xaldons,  in  '.lie  "German  Or'untal  Journal,"  xvi.  p.
ti:;ii."  Kril.  For  the  relation  of  this  passage  with
ch.  xlviii.  22,  see  tin-  notes  upon  that  passage. — An
hundrod  pieces  of  money. — Onk.,  Sept.,Vul.,  and
the  o!d'T  commciitators,  regard  the  Qucsita  as  a
piece  of  silver  of  the  value  of  a  Limb,  or  stamped
with  a  lai-.ib,  and  which  some  have  held  as  a  proph
ecy  pointing  to  the  Lamb  of  God.  Meyer  (Ileb.
Diet.)  csiiiiiates  the  (Jne.-ita  asexual  to  a  drachm,  or
an  Egyptian  double-drachm.  Dclit/sch  says  it  wa-
a  piece  of  metal  of  an  indeterminable  value,  but  of
greater  value  than  a  shekel  (see  Job  xlii.  11). — An
altar,  and  named  it. — That  is,  he  undoubtedly
named  it  with  this  name,  or  he  dedicated  it  to  KJ-
Elohe-Israel.  Delit/.sch  views  this  title  as  a  kin  1  of
superscription,  lint  Jacob's  consecration  imans
more  than  that  his  God  is  not  a  mere  imaginary  deity  ;
it  means,  further,  that  he  has  proved  himself  actually
to  be  (iod  (<iod  is  the  God  of  I.-rael);  God  in  the
clear,  definite  form  of  El,  the  M'tyh!;i,h  //<.  •  dad  of
/.</•«'/,  ///••  wrcstlt  r  i'-'tt]i  (,'n/J.  Israel  liad  experienced
both,  in  the  almighty  protection  which  his  God  had
shown  him  from  licthel  throughout  his  journeyings,
and  in  the  wrestlings  with  him,  and  learned  his
might.  In  the  Mosaic  period  the  expression,  Jeho
vah,  the  God  of  I.-rael,  takes  its  place  (Ex.  xxxiv.
2)!).  ''  The  chosen  name  of  God,  in  the  book  of
Joshua."  Ddit/.sch.  [The  name  of  the  altar  em
braces,  and  stamps  upon  the  memory  of  the  world,
the  result  of  the  past  of  Jacob's  life,  and  the  expe
riences  through  which  Jacob  had  become  Israel. —
A.  G.]

3.  Dinah  (ch.  xxxiv.  1-31). — Dinah  the  daugh
ter  of  Leah. — a.  The  ra/>c  of  Dinah  (vers.  1-4).
Dinah  was  born  about  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  year
of  Jacob's  residence  in  Ilaran.  She  was  thus  about
six  years  old  at  the  settlement  at  Succoth.  The
sojourn  at  Succoth  appears  to  have  lasted  for  about
two  years.  Jacob  must  have  spent  already  several
years  at  Shechem,  since  there  are  prominent  and
definite  signs  of  a  more  confidential  intercourse  with
the  Shechemites.  We  may  infer,  therefore,  that
Dinah  was  now  from  twelve  to  sixteen  years  of  age.
Joseph  was  seventeen  years  old  when  he  was  sold  by
his  brethren  (eh.  xxxvii.  2),  and  at  that  time  Jacob
had  returned  to  Hebron.  There  must  have  passed,
therefore,  about  eleven  years  since  the  return  from
Haran,  at  which  time  Joseph  was  six  years  of  age.
If  now  we  regard  the  residence  of  Jacob  at  Bethel
and  the  region  of  Ephrata  as  of  brief  duration,  and
bear  in  miucl  that  the  residence  at  Shechem  ceased
with  the  rape  of  Dinah,  it  follows  that  Dinah  must
have  been  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  of  age
when  she  was  deflowered.  In  the  East,  too,  females


reach  the  age  of  puberty  at  twelve,  and  sometimes
still  earlier  (Delitzsch).  From  the  same  circum
stances  it  is  clear  that  Simeon  and  Levi  must  have
been  above  twenty. — Went  out  to  see. — Scarcely,
however,  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  native  inhabit
ants  for  the  first  time,  nor  to  a  fair  or  popular  festi
val  (Josephus).  Her  going  indicates  a  friendly  visit
to  the  daughters  of  the  land,  a  circumstance  which
made  her  abduction  possible,  for  she  was  taken  bv
Shechem  to  his  hor.se  (ver.  2i'>). — His  soul  clave
unto  Dinah. — Tin's  harsh  act  of  princely  insolence
and  power  is  not  an  act  of  pure,  simple  "lust,  which
usually  regards  it<  ,-ubject  v.ith  hatred  (see  the  hi: -
tory  of  Tamar,  2  Sam.  xiii.  15). — Spake  kindly  to
her. — Probably  makes  her  the  promise  of  an  honor
able  marriage. b.  Xh<rhfi/is  offer  of  tnarriaije

(vers.  5-12). — And  Jacob  hoard  it. — In  a  large
nomadic  family  the  several  members  are  doubtless
often  widely  dispersed.  Besides,  Dinah  did  not  re
turn  home. — Held  his  peace  until  they  were
come. — The  brothers  of  the  daughter  had  a  voice
in  all  important  concerns  which  related  to  her  (xxiv.
50  ft'.).  Moreover,  Jacob  had  to  deal  with  the  proud
and  insolent  favorite  son  of  the  prince,  i.  e.,  prince
of  that  region,  and  a  painful  experience  had  made
him  more  cautions  than  he  had  been  before. — And
Hamor  the  father  of  Shechem. — As  if  he  wished
to  anticipate  the  indignation  of  Jacob's  youthful
s.nis. — Because  he  had  •wrought  folly. — Keil
speaks  of  "  seduction,"  but  this  is  an  inadequate  ex
pression.  Some  niea.-ure  of  consent  on  the  part  of
Dinah  is  altogether  probable.  In  this  case  the  dis
honor  (^"-^)  had  a  double  impurity,  since  an  uncir-
cumcised  person  had  dishonored  her. — And  the
men  were  grieved. — Manly  indignation  rises  in
these  young  men  in  all  its  strength,  but  as  the  wise
sons  of  Jacob,  they  know  how  to  control  themselves.
[It  was  more  than  indignation.  They  were  enraged  ;
they  burned  with  anger  ;  it  v:m  kindled  to  tin  m. — •
A.  G.]— He  had  wrought  folly. — nbri  rfrr  ,
a  standing  expression  for  crimes  which  are  irrecon
cilable  with  the  dignity  and  destination  of  Israel  as
the  people  of  God,  but  especially  for  gross  sins  of
the  flesh  (Dent.  xxii.  21 ;  Judg.  xx.  10  ;  2  Sam.  xiii.
12),  but  also  of  other  great  crimes  (Josh.  vii.  15). —
Which  thing  ought  not  to  be  done. — A  new
and  stricter  morality  in  this  respect  also,  enters  with
the  name  Israel. — My  son  Shechem. — The  hesi
tating  proposal  of  the  father  gives  the  impression  of
embarrassment.  The  old  man  offers  Jacob  and  his
sons  the  full  rights  of  citizens  in  his  little  country,
and  the  son  engages  to  fulfil  any  demand  of  the
brothers  as  to  the  bridal  price  and  bridal  gifts.  Keil
confuses  these  ordinary  determinations.  [He  holds
only  with  most  that  they  were  strictly  presents  (and
not  the  price  for  the  bride)  made  to  the  bride  and  to
her  mother  and  brothers. — A.  G.] — c.  Thcfanat'cal
revcnye  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  (vers.  13-29). — De
ceitfully. — Jacob  had  scarcely  become  Isrnel  when
the  arts  and  cunning  of  Jacob  appear  in  his  sons,
and,  indeed,  in  a  worse  form,  since  they  glory  in
being  Israel. — And  said  (iSn),  we  cannot  do  this
thing. — Keil  thinks  the  refusal  of  the  proposition
lies  fundamentally  in  the  proposal  itself,  because  if
they  had  not  refused  they  would  have  denied  the
historical  and  saving  vocation  of  Israel  and  his  seed.
The  father,  Israel,  appears,  however,  to  have  been
of  a  different  opinion.  For  he  doubtless  knew  the
proposal  of  his  sons  in  reply.  He  does  not  condemn
their  proposition,  however,  but  the  fanatical  way  in


CHAP.   XXXIII.    17— XXXV,    1-15.


561


which  they  availed  themselves  of  its  consequences.
Dinah  could  not  come  into  her  proper  relations  again
but  by  Shechem's  passing  over  to  Judaism.     This
way  of  passing  over  to  Israel  was  always  allowable,
and  those  who  took  the  steps  were  welcomed.     We
must  therefore  reject  only  :   1.  The  extension  of  the
proposal,  according  to  which   the  Israelites  were  to
blend  themselves  with  the  Shcchemites ;  2.  the  mo
tives,  which  were  external  advantages.     It  was,  on
the  contrary,  a  harsh  and  unsparing  course  in  refer
ence  to  Dinah,  if  the  sous  of  Leah  wished  her  back
again  ;  or,  indeed,  would  even  gratify  their  revenge
and  Israelitish  pride.     But  their  resort  to  subtle  and
fanatical  conduct  merits  only  a  hearty  condemnation.
— The  young  man  deferred  not.— We  lose  the
force  of  the  narrative  if  we  say,  with  Keil,  that  this
is  noticed  here  by  way  of  anticipation  ;  the  thing  is
as  good  as  done,  since  Shechem  is  not  only  ready5  to
do  it,  but  will  make  his  people  ready  also.     The  pur
pose,  indeed,   could  only  be   executed    afterwards,
since  Shechem  could  not  have  gone  to  the  gate  of
the  city  after  his  circumcision. — And  communed
with  the  men  of  the  city.— They  appeal  in  the
-strongest  way  to  the  self-interest  of  the  Shechcm-
ites.     Jacob's  house  was  wealthy,  and  the  Shcuhcm-
itcs,  therefore,  could  only  gain  by  the  connection. —
IT2n2  .     Beasts  of  burden,  camels,  and  asses.    "Ac
cording  to  Herodotus,  circumcision  was  practised  by
the  Phronicians,  and  probably  also  among  the  Ca-
naanitcs,  who  were  of  the  same  race  and  are  never
referred  to  in  the  Old  Testament  as  uncircumcised,
as  e.  g.,  it  speaks  of  the  uncircumcised  Philistines.
It  is  remarkable  that  the  Hivites,  Hamor  and  She
chem,  are  spoken  of  as  not  circumcised.     Perhaps,
however,  circumcision  was  not  in  general  use  among
the  Phoenician  and  Canaanitish  tribes,  as  indeed  it
was  not  among  the  other  people  who  practised  the
rite,  e.  g.,  the  Ishmaelitcs,  Edomites,  and  Egyptians,
among  whom  it  was  strictly  observed  only  by  those
of  certain  conditions  or  rank.     Or  we  may  suppose
that  the  Hivites  were  originally  a  different  tribe  from
the  Canaanitcs,  who  had  partly  conformed  to  the

customs  of  the  land,  and  partly  not."     Knobel. On

the  third  day.— After  the  inflammation  set  in.
This  was  the  critical  day  (see  DELITZSCH,  p.  340).
[He  says  it  is  well  known  that  the  operation  in  case
of  adults  was  painful  and  dangerous.  Its  subjects
were  confined  to  the  bed  from  two  to  three  weeks,
and  the  operation  was  attended  by  a  violent  inflam
mation.— A.  G.]  "  Adults  were  to  keep  quiet  for
three  days,  and  were  often  suffering  from  thirty-five
to  forty  days." — Simeon  and  Levi. — Reuben  and
Judah  were  also  brothers  of  Dinah,  but  the  first  was
probably  of  too  feeble  a  character,  and  Judah  was
too  frank  and  noble  for  such  a  deed.  "  Simeon  and
Levi  come  after  Reuben,  who,  as  the  first-born,  had
a  special  responsibility  towards  his  father  (ch.  xxxvii.
21  ff. ;  xlii.  22),  and  appears,  therefore,  to  have
withdrawn  himself,  and  as  the  brothers  of  Dinah
next  in  order  undertake  to  revenge  the  dishonor  of
their  sister.  For  the  same  reason  Ammon  was  killed
by  Absalom  (2  Sam.  xiii.  28).  Seduction  is  punished
with  death  among  the  Arabians,  and  the  brothers  of
the  seduced  are  generally  active  in  inflicting  it  (XiE-
BDIIP.  :  Anibien,  p.  39  ;  BUHKIIARDT'S  'Syria,'  p
361,  and  'Bedouins,' p.  89)."  Knobel.  Keil  says
that  the  servants  of  Simeon  and  Levi  undoubtedly
took  part  in  the  attack,  but  it  may  be  a  question
whether  each  son  had  servants  belonging  to  himself.
The  city  lay  in  security,  as  is  evident  from  the  n'J25

36


— Sons  of  Jacob. — Without  the  1  conjunctive.  The
abrupt  form  of  the  narrative  does  not  merely  indi
cate  "  the  excitement  over  the  shocking  crime."  For
it  is  not  definitely  stated  that  all  the  sons  of  Jacob
took  part  in  sacking  the  city  (Keil),  although  the
slaughter  of  the  men  by  Simeon  and  Levi  may  have
kindled  fanaticism  in  the  others,  and  have  led  them
to  view  the  wealth  of  the  city  as  the  spoils  of  war,
or  as  property  without  an  owner.  Much  less  can  it
be  said  that  Simeon  and  Levi  were  excluded  from
these  sons  (as  Delitzsch  supposes).  On  the  contrary,
they  arc  charged  (xlix.  6)  with  hamstringing  the
oxen  [Eng.  ver.,  digged  through  a  wall.— A.  G.],
i._c.,  with  crippling  the  cattle  they  could  not  take
with  them.  Nor  are  we  here  to  bring  into  promi-
nence  that  the  Jacob  nature  breaks  out  again  in  this
act,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  deed  of  the  sons
of  Jacob  is  entirely  unworthy.  [Kurtz  urges  as  an
extenuation  of  their  crime:  1.  The  fact  that  they
viewed  the  rape  as  peculiarly  worthy  of  punishment
because  they  were  Israel,  the  chosen  people  of  God,
the  bearers  of  the  promise,  etc, ;  2.  their  natural
character,  and  the  strength  of  their  passions;  3.
their  youthful  ardor ;  4.  the  absence  of  counsel  with
their  depressed  and  suffering  father.  But  with  every
palliation,  their  treachery  and  bloodthirstiness,  their
use  of  the  covenant  sign  of  circumcision  as  a  means
to  cloak  their  purpose,  their  extension  of  their  re
venge  to  the  whole  city,  and  the  pillage  of  the  slain,

must    shock    every   one's    moral    sense. A.  G.]—

d.  TJie  judrjmcnt  of  Jnc,>h  upon  their  crime  (vers.
30,  31).— Ye  have  troubled  me — If  we  look  at
the  places  in  which  the  word  "ir?  occurs  (Josh.  vi.
18;  vii.  15),  we  shall  see  plainly  that  Jacob  is  not
speaking  here  of  mere  simple  grief.     The  idea  pro
ceeds  from  the  shaking  of  water,  to  the  utmost  con
fusion  and   consternation  of  spirit,  or  changes  and
loss  of  life.     The  expression  made  to  stink,  signi
fies  not  merely  to  become  odious,  olfensive,  but  to
make  infamous,  literally,  to  make  one  an  abomina
tion.     When    Knolx'l    concludes  from    the    words:
And  I  being  few  in  number,  that  Jacob  did  not
censure  the  act  as  immoral,  but  only  as  inconsiderate,
and  one  which  might  thus  cause  liis  ruin,  the  infer
ence  is  manifestly  false   and    groundless.     He  ex
presses  his  censure  of  the  act  as  immoral  in  the
words   trouble  me,  put  him   to  shame,  made    him
blameworthy,   while    they   thought  that  they  were
glorifying    him.— Should    he    deal.— Should    one
then,  not  should  he  then  (Knobel),  for  ho  is  dead ;
nor  even  should  they  then.     The  idea  is,  that  if  they
had  suffered  this  patiently  they  would  thereby  have
consented  that  their   sister  should   generally  have
been  treated  in  this  way  with  impunity.     They  thus
insist  upon  the  guilt  of  Shechem,  but  pass  over  his
offer  of  an  atonement  for  his  crime,  and  their  own
fearful  guilt.     "  They  have  the  last  word  (Delitzsch),
but  Jacob  utters  the  very  last  word  upon  his  death
bed."     [And  there,  too,  he  makes  clear  and  explicit
his  abhorrence  of  their  crime,  as  not  merely  dan
gerous,  but  as  immoral,  and  this  in  the  most  solemn
and  emphatic  way.— A.  G.]     Indirectly,  indeed,  he
even  here  utters  the  last  word,  in  his  warning  call  to
rise  up  and  purify  themselves  by  repentance.     They
must  now  flee  from  their  house  and  home,  i.  e.,  from
the  land  which  they  have  so  lately  purchased.  '

4.  The  departure  to  Bdhd.     Ch.   xxxv.   1-8.

And  God  said  to  Jacob.— The  warning  to  depart
comes  from  Elohim,  and  hence  Knobel  aiid  Delitzsch
regard  the  section  in  ch.  xxxv.  as  Elohistic,  though


562


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


Knobel  thinks  the  Jehovist  lias  made  additions.
\Vithout  regard  to  this,  we  can  easily  see,  that  God,
who  is  to  hold  the  Canaanites  under  his  fear,  so  that
they  shall  not  take  revenge  on  the  house  of  Jacob,
must  be  called  Elohim.  Although  Jacob  had  suffer
ed  nearly  ten  years  to  elapse  since  his  return  from
Mesopotamia,  without  fulfilling  the  vow  he  had  made
(eh.  xxviii.  2u)  at  Bethel,  when  he  fled  from  Esau
(Kcil),  we  are  not,  therefore,  to  infer  that  he  had
been  regardless  of  his  duty  during  these  ten  years.
For  a  perfect  security  against  E.-au  was  a  part  of
that  which  was  to  complete  his  happy  return ;  but
there  arose  a  necessity  between  Pcniel  and  Succoth,
that  he  must  not  only  have  security  for  himself  and
his  family,  against  the  persecutions  of  Esau  ;  but
against  hi's  ollieious  importunity,  before  he  could  go
beyond  Shechem  with  his  whole  train.  Hence  his
sojourn  at  Succoth  and  Shechem.  But  when  he  is  |
now  reminded  of  a  duty,  too  slowly  fulfilled,  the  mo
tive  is  i'ouud  not  merely  in  the  vow  which  he  has  to
fulfil,  but  in  the  circumstances  occasioned  by  his
sons,  w  hich  make  his  longer  stay  at  Shechem  unsafe,
to  which  we  must,  doubtless,  add,  that  in  the  mean
while  ihe  relations  and  distinctions  between  his  house
and  that  of  E-au,were  more  securely  and  permanent
ly  established.  Have  not  the  sons,  who  formerly
were  ea.-ilv  infatuated  to  render  homage  to  their
Stately  uncle,  now  manifc.-.ted  in  an  extreme  way  their
Israeiitish  consciousness?  The  recollection  (ch.xxxi.
:-;IM  proves  that  Jacob  cherished  the  consciousness  of
his  duty.  He  seems,  indeed,  to  have  gone  too  far  in
his  precautionary  tardiness.  In  seeking  to  entirely
avoid  E.-au,  he  is  entangled  with  the  Shechemites.
The  call  and  warning  also— Make  an  altar  at
Bethel— informs  him  that  the  time  for  his  complete
return  hnmc  has  now  come. — Up  to  Bethel.—
Bethel  lay  in  the  mountain  region. — Put  away  the
strange 'gods. — The  shock  that  Jacob  had  expe
rienced  by  the  rape  of  Dinah,  the  crime  of  his  sons,
the  imperilled  existence  uf  his  family,  and  the  divine
warning  immediately  following,  strengthens  his  sense
of  the  holiness  of  God,  and  of  the  sinfulness  in  him
self  and  his  household,  and  he  enjoins,  therefore,  an
act  of  repentance,  before  he  can  enter  upon  the  act
of  thanksgiving.  He  has,  moreover,  to  confess,  in
reference  to  his  house,  the  sins  of  a  refined  idolatry,
the  sins  of  his  sons  at  Shechem,  and  his  own  sins  of
omission.  His  love  for  Rachel  had,  doubtless,  led
him  weakly  to  tolerate  her  teraphim  until  no\v._  But
now  he  has  grown  strong  and  decided  even  in  re
spect  to  Rachel.  The  fanatical  Israeiitish  zeal  of  his
sons  had  also  a  better  element,  which  may  have
qi'.ickencd  his  monotheistic  feeling.  Since  the  ma
jority  of  Jacob's  servants  came  from  the  circle  and
influence  of  the  Nahorites,  whose  image-worship  was
viewed  by  the  stricter  Israeiitish  thought  as  idola
try  (Kx.  xx.;  Josh.  xxiv.  2),  there  were  probably
to  be  found  in  Jacob's  house  other  things,  besides  the
teraphim  of  Rachel,  which  were  regarded  as  the  ob
jects  of  religious  veneration.  But  the  purification
was  necessary,  not  merely  because  they  were  now  to
remove  to  Bethel,  the  place  of  the  outward  revela
tion  of  Jehovah  (Knobel),  but  because  the  spirit  of
Jehovah  utters  stronger  demands  in  the  conscience
of  Jacob,  and  because  the  approaching  thanksgiving
must  be  sanctified  by  a  foregoing  repentance.  [There,
is  good  ground  for  the  conjecture  that  there  was  a
special  reason  for  the  charge  now,  since  in  the  spoil
•  of  tin'  citv  there  would  be  images  of  gold  and  silver.
—  A. I!.]— And  be  clean. — The  acts  take  place  in  the
following  order  :  1.  The  putting  away  of  the  strange


gods ;  2.  A  symbolical  purification,  completed,  with
out  any  doubt,  through  religious  washings  (Ex.  xxix.
4  ;  and  similar  passages) ;  and  3.  The  change  of  gar
ments.  In  some  cases  (Ex.  xix.  20)  a  mere  washing
of  the  garments  was  held  to  be  sufficient,  here  the
injunction  is  more  strict,  since  the  pollution  has  been
of  longer  duration.  In  Knobcl's  view  they  were  to
put  on  their  best  garments,  but  they  would  scarcely  go
on  their  mountain  journey  in  such  array.  The  chang
ed  garments  express  the  state  of  complete  purification,
even  externally. — Unto  God  who  answered  me.
— He  will  thus  fulfil  his  vow,  and  hold  a  thanksgiving
feast  with  them. — And  all  their  ear-rings. — They
followed  the  injunction  of  Jacob  so  strictly,  that  they
not  only  gave  up  the  religious  images,  but  also  their
amulets  (chains),  for  the  ear-rings  were  especially  so
used  (see  WINKK  :  Jicnl  \Vorh-rl>uch,  Anwh't*). — And
Jacob  hid  them. — As  stripped  and  dead  human
images  they  are  buried  as  the  dead  (Isa.  ii.  2o). —
Under  the  oak  (Terebinth). — Kxonia :  "In  the
Terebinth  grove  at  Shechem,  i.  c.,  under  one  of  its
trees  (eomp.  eh.  xii.  6;  Judg.  vi.  11).  According
to  eh.  xii.  7,  and  other  passages,  it  was  a  grove.  Wo
must,  therefore,  read  here  n|xn,  as  in  Joshua,  xxiv.
2i'>,  by  the  same  author,  to  whom  belongs  also  Ex.
xxxii.  2,  or  assume  that  there  were  both  kinds  of
trees  in  the  grove.'' — And  the  terror  of  God  was
upon. — The  genuine  repentance  in  the  house  of  Ja
cob  was  followed  by  the  blessing  of  divine  protec
tion  against  the  bloody  revenge  wiili  which  he  was
threatened  from  those  who  dwelled  near  Shechem.
God  himself,  as  the  protecting  God  of  Jacob,  laid
this  terror  upon  them,  which  may  have  been  intro
duced  on  the  one  hand,  through  the  outrage  of  She
chem  (Knobel) ;  and  on  the  other,  through  the  fear
ful  power  of  Jacob's  sons,  their  holy  zeal,  and  that
of  their  God. — Luz,  which  is  in  the  land  of  Ca
naan. — The  words  appear  to  be  added,  in  order  to
fix  the  fact,  that  Jacob  had  now  accomplished  his  pros
perous  return.  [The  name  Lux,  almond  ti\<\  still  re
curs,  as  the  almond  tree  is  still  flourishing.  Muurnv.
— \m  G.] — And  all  the  people. — The  number
of  Jacob's  servants,  both  in  women  and  children,
may  have  been  considerably  increased  through  the
sudden  overthrow  of  Shechem.  Although  Jacob
would  have  restored  all,  as  some  have  conjectured,
the  heads  of  the  families  to  whom  this  restitution
could  be  made  were  wanting. — That  is  Bethel. —
There  is  no  contradiction,  as  Kuobcl  thinks,  between
this  passage  and  ch.  xxviii.  19,  which  is  to  be  ex
plained  upon  the  assumption  of  an  Elohistic  account,
but  as  (vers.  1 5)  a  confirmation  of  the  new  name  which
Jacob  gave  the  city.  Luz  is  so  called  by  the  Canaan
ites  now,  as  it  was  before,  although  a  solitary  wander
er  had  named  the  place,  where  he  spent  the  night,
more  than  twenty  years  before,  Bethel. — El-Bethel.
He  names  the  altar  itself,  as  he  had  also  the  altar  at
Shechem  (ch.  xxxiii.  20),  and  still  further  the  place
surrounding  the  altar,  and  thus  declared  its  conse
cration  as  a  sanctuary.  El,  too,  is  here  in  the  geni
tive,  and  to  be  read  of  God ;  the  place  is  not  called
God  of  Bethel,  but  of  the  God  of  Bethel.  He  thus
evidently  connects  this  consecration  with  the  earlier
revelation  of  God  received  at  Bethel.* — Then  Deb
orah  died. — The  nurse  of  Rebekah  had  gone  with
her  to  Hebron,  but  how  came  she  here  'i  Delitzsch
conjectures  that  Rebekah  had  sent  her,  according
to  the  promise  (ch.  xxvii.  45),  or  to  her  daughter-

*  [The  verb  S|V3S ,  appeared,  is  here  plural— one  of  tix«
few  cases  in  which  Elohira  takes  the  plural  verb.— A.  O.]


CHAP.   XXXIII.    17— XXX\r.    1-15.


563


in-law  and  grandchildren,  for    their    care  ;    but  w
have  ventured  the  suggestion  that  Jacob  took  he
with  him  upon  his  return  from  a  visit  to  Hebroi
She  found  her  peculiar  home  in  Jacob's  house,  an
.vith  his  children  after  the  death  of  Rebekah.     Fo
other  views  see  Knobel,  who    naturally  prefers   t
find   a    difficulty  even    here.     It    is    a    well-know
method    of    exaggerating   all    the    blanks    in    th
Bible  into  diversities    and   contradictions. — Allon
bachuth. — Oak  of  weeping.     Delitzsch  conjecture
that  perhaps  Jiulg.  iv.   5  ;   1  Sam.  xvi.  3,   refer  t<
the  same  tree  as  a  monument,  a  conjecture  which
however,  the  locality  itself  refutes. — And  God  ap
peared    unto    Jacob.— The    distinction    betwcei
God  spake  and  God  appeared  \$  analogous  to  the  dis
tinction  in  the  mode  of  revelation  (ch.  xii.  vers.  1
and  7).     "  lie  now  appears  to  him,"  Keil  says,  "  bj
day ^  in  visible  form  :  for  the  darkness  of  that  form
er  time  of  anguish  has  now  given  way  to  the  clea;
light  of  salvation.     The  representation  is  incorrect
and    is  based  upon  the  assumption,  that  the  nigh
revelations  are  confined  to  times  of  trouble. — Again
— >v  ow,  at  his  return  when  the  vow  has  been  paid
as  before  in  his  migration,  when  the  vow  was  oc
casioned  and  made.     But  now  Jehovah  appears  to
him  as  his    God,  according  to   his  vow,  then  shall
the  Lord  be  my  God.     [  When  he  came  outofPadan-
aratn. — This  explains  the  clause  (ver.  6),  which  is
in  the  land  of  Canaan.     Bethel  was  the  last  point
in  the  land  of  Canaan  that  was  noticed  in  his  flight
from  Esau.     His  arrival  at  this  point  indicates  that
he  has  now  returned  to  the  land  of  Canaan.  MURPHY,
P-  427. — A.  G.]—  And  blessed  him. — So  also  Abra
ham  was  blessed  repeatedly. — Thy  name  is  Jacob  ?
— \Ve  read  the  phrase  according  to  its  connection
with  ch.  xxxii.  27,  as  a  question.     Then  Jacob  an
swered  to  the  question  "  what  is  thy  name  ?     Jacob.
Here^God  resumes  the  thread  again,  thou  art  Jacob  ?
But  if  any  one  is  not  willing  to  read  the  words  as  a
question,  it  still  marks  a  progress.     The  name  Israel
was  given  to  him  at  Peniel,  here  it  is  sealed  to  him.
Hence  it  is  here  connected  with  the  Messianic  prom-
.     [Murphy  suggests  also  that  the  repetition  of
the  name  here  implies  a  decline  in  his  spiritual  life
between    Peniel   and  Bethel. — A.  G.]— I  am  God
Almighty.— This  self-applied  title  of  God  has  the
same  significance  here  as  it  had  in  the  revelation  of
God  for  Abraham  (xvii.  1);  there  he  revealed  him
self  as  the  miracle-working  God,  because   he  had
promised  Abraham  a  son ;  here,  however,  because  he
promises  to  make  from  Jacob's  family  a  community
[assembly.— A.  G.]  of  nations.     [The  kahal  is  sig
nificant  as  it  refers  to  the  ultimate  complete  fulfil
ment  of  the  promise  in   the   true   spiritual  Israel.
—A.  G.]  *      Knobel   sees   here   only  an  Elohistic
statement  of  the  fact  which  has  already  appeared
of  the   new  naming  of  Jacob,  which,  too,  he  re
gards  as  a  mere  poetic  fiction.     According  to  this
supposition,  Israel  here  cannot  lie  warrior'  of  God,
but,    perhaps,    prince  with    God.      Even   Delitzsch
wavers  between  the  assumption  of  an  Elohistic  redac
tion  or  revision,  and  the  apprehension  and  recognition
of  new  elements,  which,  of  course,  favor  the  idea  of  a

*  pliirphv  says,  from  this  time  the  multiplication  of
Israi'l  is  rapid.  In  twenty-five  years  after  this  time  he  goes
down  into  Egypt  with  seventy  soul«,  and  two  hundred  and
ten  years  after  that  Israel  poes  out  of  E-rypt  numbering-
about-,  one  million  eight  hundred  thousand.  A  nation  and
a  conffreffatwn  of  nations,  such  as  were  then  known  in  the
world,  had  at  the  last  date  come  of  Lim,  and  "  lun-s"  were
to  follow  in  due  time.— A.  G.]


new  fact.  To  these  new  elements  belong  the  libation,
the  drink-offering  (probably  of  wine),  poured  upon  the
stone  anointed  with  oil,  Jacob's  own  reference  to  thia
revelation  of  God  at  Bethel  (ch.  xlviii.  3),  and  the
circumstance  that  Hos.  xii.  5,  can  only  refer  to  this
revelation.  Under  a  closer  observation  of  the  devel
opment  of  Jacob's  faith,  there  cannot  be  any  question
as  to  the  confounding  the  theophany  at  Peniel  with  a
second  theophany  at  Bethel.  It  must  be  observed,
too,  that  henceforth  the  patriarch  is  sometimes  called
Jacob,  and  sometimes  Israel.  [This  is  the  first  men
tion  of  the  drink-offering  in  the  Bible. — A.  G.]


DOCT1UXAL  AXD  ETHICAL.

1.  We  view  Jacob's  settlement  at  Succoth :  a.  In
the  light  of  a  building  of  booths  and  houses  for  re
freshment,  after  a  twenty  years'  servitude,  and  the
toils  and  soul-conflicts  connected  with  his  journey-
ings  (comp.  the  station  Elim,  Ex.  xv.  27,  where  Is
rael  first  rested) ;  b.  As  a  station  where  he  might
regain  his  health,  so  that  he  could  come  to  Shecliem
well  and  in  peace;  c.  As  a,  station  where  he  could
tarry  for  a  time  on  account  of  Esau's  importunity
(comp.  Exegetical  notes).

2.  Jacob's  places  of  abode  in   Canaan,  in  their
principal   stations,  are  the  same  with  those  of  his
grandfather  Abraham.     lie  settles  down  in  the  vicin
ity  of  Shechem,  as  formerly  Abraham  had  done  in
the  oak  groves  of  Moreh  (ch.  xii.  6).     Then  he  re
moved  to  Bethel,  just  as  Abraham  had  gone  into  the
same  vicinity  (ch.  xii.  8),  and  after  his  wandering  to
Egypt  returned  here  again  to  Bethel.     At  last  he
comes  to  Hebron,  which  had  been  consecrated  by
Abraham,  as  the  seat  of  the  patriachal  residence.

3.  For  the  history  of  Shechem  in  the  history  of
the  kingdom  of  God  (see  Bible  Diet.)     It  Is:  a.  A
capital  of  the  Ilivites,  and  as  such  the  scene  of  the
brutal  heathenish  iniquity,  in  relation  to  the  religious
and  moral  dignity  of  Israel ;  b.  The  birth-place  of
Jewish  fanaticism  in  the  sons  of  Jacob  ;  c.   A  chief
city  of  Ephraim,  and  an  Israelitish  priestly  city;
1  The  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  for  some  time  ;
c.  The  principal  seat  of  the  Samaritan  nationality
ind  cultus.     The  acquisition  of  a  parcel  of  land  at
Shechem  by  Jacob,  forms  a  counterpart  to   the  pur
chase  of  Abraham  at  Hebron.     But  there  is  an  evi-
lent  progress  here,  since  he  made  the  purchase  for
lis  own  settlement  during  life,  while  Abraham  barely

gained  a  burial  place.  "The  memory  of  Canaan  by
Tsrael  and  the  later  conquest  (comp.  xlviii.  22),  is
;losely  connected  with  this  possession.  In  Jacob's
ife,  too,  the  desire  to  exchange  the  wandering  no-
nadic  life  for  a  more  fixed  abode,  becomes  more  appa-
ent  than  in  the  life  of  Isaac.  [RORINSOX'S  "  History
}f  Shechem  "  is  full  and  accurate.  Wordsworth's  re-
nark  here,  after  enumerating  the  important  events
lustering  around  this  place  from  Abraham  to  Christ
s  suggestive.  Thus  the  history  of  Shechem,  combin-
ng  so  many  associations,  shows  the  uniformity  of
he  divine  plan,  extending  through  many  centuries,
or  the  salvatian  of  the  world  by  the  promised  seed
f  Abraham,  in  whom  all  nations  are  blessed ;  and  for
he  outpouring  of  the  spirit  on  the  Israel  'of  God,
dio  are  descended  from  the  true  Jacob;  and  for
leir  union  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Christian  church  ;
nd  for  the  union  of  all  nations  in  one  household  in
"hrist,  Luke,  i.  68. — A.  G.]

4.  Dinah's  history,  a    warning   history   for    the
aughters  of  Israel,  and  a  foundation  of  the  Old


b64


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


Testament  limitation  of  the  freedom  <>f  the  female

sex.

5.  The  collision  between  the  sons  of  Jacob  and
Sheehem,  the  son  of  Ilamor,  is  a  vivid  picture  of  the
collisions  between  the  youthful  forms  of  political
despotism  and  hierarchal  pride.  Shcchem  acts  as
an  insulent  worldly  prince,  .laeob's  sons  as  young
fanatical  priests,  hiring  him  to  destruction.

C..  Atn-r  Jacob  became  Israel,  the  just  conscious
ness  of  his  theocratic  dignity  appears  manifestly  in
bis  sons,  under  the  deformity  of  fanatical  xeal.     'tt  e
luay  view  this  narrative  as  the  history  of  the  origin,
and    first    original    form    of   Jewish    and    Clnistian
fanatici-m.      \v>'  notice  fir.-t  that  fanaticism  does  not
originate  in  and  for  it.-elf,  but  dings  to  religious  and
moral  idea-  as  a  monstrous  and  misshapen  outgrowth,
since  i:  changes   the   spiritual    into  a  carnal   motive.
The   sons  of  Jacob  were   right   in  feeling  that  they
were  deeply  injured   in   the  religious  and  moral  idea
and  di^nitv  of  Israel,  by  Shechem's  deed.     But  still
they   are   already    wrong  in  their  judgment  of  She
chem's  act  ;  since  there  is  surely  a  difference  between
the  brutal   lust   of  Ammon,  who   after  his  sin  pours
hi<  hatred  upon  her  whom   he   had   dishonored,  and
Sheehem,  who   passionately   loves    and  would   marry
the  dishonored  maiden,  and  is  ready  to  pay  any  sum
as  an  atonement;  a  distinction   which    the  sons  ot
Jacob  mi-took,  just  as  those  of  the  clergy  do  at  tins
day  who  throw  all  branches  of  the  seventh  command
ment  into  one  common  category  and  as  of  the  same
heinous    dye.      Then  we  observe   that  Jacob's  sons
justly    shun   a   mixture   with    the    Shechcmitcs,   al-
thoiHi   in  this   case  they  were  willing  to  be  circum
cised  lor  worldly  and  selfish   ends.     But   there  is  a
clear  distinction"    between   Mich    a    wholesale,    mass
conversion,    from    improper    motives,    which   would
have  corrupted  and   oppressed   the  house    of  Israel,
an  i  the  transition  of  Shechem   to  the  sons  of   Israel,
or  the  establishment    of   some   neutral   position  for
Dinah.     But  leaving   this  out  of  view,  if  we  should
prefer    to  maintain   (what  Jacob   certainly  did    not
maim;, in)  that  an  example  of  revenge  must  be  made,
to   intimidate  the  heathen,  and  to   warn  the  future
Israel  against  the  Canaanites,  .-till  the  fanatical  zeal
ia  the  conduct  of  Jacob's  sons   passed  over  into  fa
naticism   strictly  so  calle-d,   which   developed    itscl
from  the  root,  of  spiritual  pride,  according  to  its  three
world-historical   characteristics.     The  first  was  cun
ning,  the  lie,  and  enticing  deception.     Thus  the  IIu
guenots  were   enticed  into  Paris  on  the  night  of  St.
Bartholomew.     The  second  was  the  murderous  at
tack  and  carnage.     How  often  has  this  form  shown
itself  in  the  history  of  fanaticism  !     This  pretended
sacred  murder  and  carnage  draws   the   third  charac
teristic  si"-n  in  its  train:  rapine  and  pillage.     The
possessions  of  the  heretics,  according  to  the  laws  ot
the  middle  ages,  fell  to  the  executioner  of  the  pre
tended   justice;    and    the   history  of   the   crusades
against  the  heretics  testifies  to  similar  horrors  and
devastation.     Jacob,  therefore,  justly    declares   his
condemnation  of  the  iniquity  of  the  brothers,  Simeon
and  Lcvi,  not  only  at  once,  but  upon  his  death-bed
(ch.  xlix.),  and  it  marks  the  assurance  of  the  apocry
phal  standpoint,  when  the  book  Judith,  for  the  pur
pose  of  palliating  the  crime  of  Judith,   glorifies  in
a  poetical  strain  the  like  fanatical  act  of  Simeon  (ch.
ix.).     Judith,  indeed,  in  the  trait  of  cunning,  appears
RS  the  daughter  in  spirit  of  her  ancestor  Simeon.
\Ve  must  not  fail  to  distinguish  here  in  our  history,
in  this   lir.-t   vivid  picture   of  fanaticism,  the  nobler
point  of  departure,  the  theocratic   motive,  from  the


terrible  counterfeit  and  deformity.  In  this  relation
there 'seems  to  have  been  a  difference  between  the
brothers,  Simeon  and  Levi.  While  the  former  ap
pears  to  have  played  a  chief  part  in  the  history  of
Joseph  also  (eh.  xlii.  24,  and  my  article,  ''  Simeon,"
in  HKRZOG'S  "Real  Encyclopedia"),  ami  in  the  divi
sion  of  Canaan  was  dispersed  among  his  brethren,
the  purified  Lcvi  came  afterwards  to  be  the  repre
sentative  of  pure  zeal  in  Israel  (Exod.  xxxii.  28  ;
Dent,  xxxiii.  S)  and  the  administrator  of  the  priest
hood,  i.  e.,  the  theocratic  priestly  first-born,  by  the
side  of  Judah  the  theocratic  political  first-born.  A
living  faith  and  a  faithful  zeal  rarely  develop  them
selves  as  a  matter  of  fact  without  a  mixture  of  fa
naticism  ;  "  the  llame  gradually  purifies  itself  from
the  smoke."  In  all  actual  individual  cases,  it  is  a
question  whether  the  flame  overcomes  the  smoke,  or
the  smoke  the  llame.  In  the  life  of  Christ,  the  Old-
Testament  covenant  faithfulness  and  truth  burns
pure  and  bright,  entirely  free  from  smoke;  in  the
history  of  the  old  Judaism,  on  the  contrary,  a  dan
gerous  mixture  of  tire  and  smoke  steams  over  the
land.  And  so  in  the  development  of  individual  be
lievers  we  see  how  some  purify  themselves  to  the
purest  Christian  humanity,  while  others,  ever  sinking
more  and  more  into  the  pride,  cunning,  uncharitable-
ness  and  injustice  of  fanaticism,  are  completely
ruined.  DKLIT/SCH  :  "The  greatest  aggravation  of
their  sin  was  that  they  degraded  the  sacred  sign  of
the  covenant  into  the  common  means  of  their  mal
ice.  And  yet  it  was  a  noble  germ  which  exploded  so
wickedly."

7.  This  Shechemite  carnage  of  blind  and  Jev.isa
fanaticism,  is  reflected  in  a  most  remarkable  way,  as
to  all  its  several  parts,  in  the  most  infamous  crime
of  Christian  fanaticism,  the  Parisian  St.  Bartholo
mew.  [The  narrative  of  these  events  at  Sheehem
shows  how  impartial  the  sacred  writer  i;s,  bringing
out  into  prominence  whatever  traits  of  excellence
there  were  in  the  characters  of  Sheehem  and  Ilamor,
while  he  does  not  conceal  the  cunning,  falsehood,
and  cruelty  of  the  sons  of  Jacob.  Nor  should  we
fail  to  observe  the  connection  of  this  narrative  with
the  later  exclusion  of  Simeon  and  Levi  from  the
rights  of  the  first-born,  to  which  they  would  natu
rally  have  acceded  after  the  exclusion  of  Reuben  ;
and"  with  their  future  location  in  the  land  of  Canaan.
The  history  furnishes  one  of  the  clearest  proofs  of
the  genuineness  and  unity  of  Genesis.— A.  G.  |

8.  Jacob  felt  that,  as  the  Israel  of  God,  he  was
made  offensive  even  to  the  moral  sense  of  the  sur
rounding  heathen,  through  the  pretended  holy  deed
of  his  sons  ;  so  far  so  that  they  had  endangered  the
very  foundation  of  the  theocracy,  the  kingdom  of
God,  the  old-covenant  church.  Fanaticism  always
produces  the  same  results  ;  either  to  discredit  Chris
tianity  in  the  moral  estimate  of  the  world,  and  im
peril  its  very  existence  by  its  unreasonable  zeal,  or
to  expose  it'to  the  most  severe  persecutions.

y  The  direction  of  Jacob  to  Bethel,  by  the  com
mand  of  God,  is  a  proof  that  in  divine  providence
the  true  community  of  believers  must  separate  itself
from  the  condition  into  which  fanaticism  has  placed
it.  By  this  emigration  Israel  hazards  the  possession
at  Sheehem  which  he  had  just  acquired.

10  Divine  providence  knows  perfectly  how  to
unite  in  one  very  different  aims,  as  this  narrative
verv  clearly  shows.  They  arc  then,  indeed,  subordi
nated  to  the  one  chief  end.  The  chief  end  hero
which  the  providence  of  God  has  in  view  in  the  jour
ney  of  Jacob  from  Shcchem  to  Bethel,  is  the  duty


CHAP.  XXXIII.    17— XXXV.   1-15.


5G5


)f  Jacob  to  fulfil  the  vow  he  had  made  at  Bethel.
But  with  this  the  object  of  his  removing  from  She-
ehcm  and  of  his  concealed  flight  is  closely  connect
ed.  So  also  the  purpose  of  purifying  his  house  from
the  guilt  of  fanaticism,  and  the  idolatrous  image-
worship.  At  the  same  time  it  is  thus  intimated  that
both  these  objects  would  have  been  secured  already,
if  Jacob  had  been  more  in  earnest  in  the  fulfilment
of  his  vow.

1 1.  As  Jacob  intends  holding  a  feast  of  prajsc  and
thanksgiving  at  Bethel,  he  enjoins  upon  his  house
hold  first  a  feast  of  purification,  i.  c.,  a  fast-day.
This  preparation  rests  upon  a  fundamental  law  of  the
inner  spiritual  life.  We  must  first  humble  ourselves
for  our  own  deeds,  and  renounce  all  known  evil
practices,  if  we  would  celebrate  with  joyful  praise
and  thanksgiving,  with  pure  eyes  and  lips,  the  gra
cious  deeds  of  God.  The  approach  of  such  a  feast
is  a  foretaste  of  blessedness,  and  hence  the  con
science  of  the  pious,  warned  by  its  approach,  is
quickened  and  made  more  tender,  and  they  feel
more  deeply  the  necessity  for  a  previous  purification
by  repentance.  In  the  Mosaic  law,  therefore,  the
purification  precedes  the  sacrifices ;  the  solemnities
of  the  great  day  of  atonement  went  before  the  joy
ful  feast  of  tabernacles.  Hence  the  Christian  pre
pares  himself  for  the  holy  Supper  through  a  confes
sion  of  his  sins,  and  of  his  faith,  and  a  vow  of  re
formation.  The  grandest  form  in  which  this  order
presents  itself  is  in  the  connection  between  Good-
Friday  and  Easter,  both  in  reference  to  the  facts
commemorated  (the  atonement  and  the  new  life  in
Christ)  and  in  reference  to  the  import  of  the  solemni
ties.  The  Advent-season  affords  a  similar  time  for
preparation  for  the  Christmas  festival  (comp.  Matt.
v.  2;;).

12.  Viewed  in  its  outward  aspect,  the  purification
of  Jacob's  house  was  a  rigid  purification  from  relig
ious  image-worship,  and  the  means  of  superstition,
which  the  now  awakened  and  enlightened  conscience
of  Jacob  saw  to  be  nothing  but  idolatry.     But  these
works  cf  superstition  and  idolatry  are  closely  con
nected  with  the  fanaticism  for  which  Jacob's  house
must  aLo  repent.     The  common  band  or  tic  of  idol
atry  and  fanaticism  is  the   mingling  of  the  religious
state  and  disposition  with  mere  carnal  thoughts  or
sentiments.     There  is,  indeed,  a  fanaticism  of  icono-
clasm,  but  then  it  is  the  same  carnal  thought,  which
regards  the  external  aspect  of  religion  as  religion
itself,  and  through  this  extreme  view  falls  into  an
idolatrous  fear  of  images,  as  if  they  were  actual  hos
tile  powers.     The  marks  of  a  sound  and  healthy
treatment  of  images  idolatrously  venerated,  are  clear
ly  seen  in  this  history :  1.  A  cheerful  putting  away
of  the  images  at  the  warning  word  of  God  ;  but  no
threats  or  violence  against  the  possessors  of  the  im
ages  ;  2.  a  seemly  removal,  as  in  the  burial  of  the
dead  body.     Whatever  has  been  the  object  of  wor
ship  should  be  buried  tenderly,  unless  it  was  used
directly  for  evil  and  cruel    purposes.     The   sacred
washings  follow  the  removal  of  the  images,  the  pre
lude  to  the  religious  washings  of  the  Jews,  and  the
first  preliminary  token  of   baptism.     The  washing
was  a  symbol  of  the  purifying  from  sin  and  guilt  by
repentance ;    and  as  such  was   connected  with  the
change  of  garments,  the  new  garments  symbolizing
the  new  disposition,  as  with  the  baptismal  robes.

13.  The  religious  earnestness  with  which  Israel
departed  from  Shechem  set  the  deed  of  the  sons  of
Jacob  in  a  different  light  before  the  surrounding  Ca-
uaanitcs.     They  saw  in  the  march  of  Israel  a  host


with  whom  the  holiness  and  power  of  God  was  is
covenant,  and  were  restrained  from  pursuing  them
by  a  holy  terror  of  God.  The  terror  of  God  here
indicates  the  fact,  that  the  small  surrounding  nations
received  an  impression  from  the  religious  and  moral
earnestness  of  the  sons  of  Israel,  far  deeper  and
more  controlling  than  the  thirst  for  revenge.  A  like
religious  and  moral  working  of  fear  went  afterwards
before  the  nation  of  Israel  when  it  entered  Canaan,
and  we  may  even  view  the  present  march  of  Jacob
as  foreshadowing  that  later  march  and  conquest.
But  the  same  terror  of  God  has  at  various  times
protected  and  saved  the  people  of  God,  both  during
the  old  and  new  covenants.

14.  The  fulfilment  of  a  pious  vow  in  the  life  of  the
believer,   corresponds,  as  the  human  well-doing,  to
the  fulfilment  of  the  divine  promise.     It  stands  in
the  same  relation  as  the  human  prayer  and  amen  to
the  word  of  God.     The  vow  of  baptism  and  con
firmation  *  is    fulfilled   in  the  pious  Christian  life,
upon  the  ground  of  the  grace  and  truth  with  which
God  fulfils  his  promises.     Jacob's  vow  refers  to  a
special  promise  of  God,  at  his  entrance  upon  a  diffi
cult  and  dangerous  journey,  and  hence  the  fulfilment
of  the  vow  was  the  glorification  of  the  gracious  lead
ing  of  God,  and  of  the  truth  and  faithfulness  of  God
to  his  word.     It  was  a  high  point  in  the  life  of  Israel,
from  which,  while  holding  the  feast,  he  looked  back
over  his  whole  past  history,  but  more  especially  ovei
his  long  journey  and  wanderings.     But  for  this  very
reason  the  feast  was  consecrated  also  to  an  outlook
into  the  future.     For  the  further  history  of  Bethel,
see  Bible  Dictionaries.

15.  The  solemn,  reverent  burial  of  Deborah,  and
the  oak  of  weeping  dedicated  to  her  memory,  are  a
proof  that  old  and  faithful  servants  were  esteemed
in  the  house  of  Jacob,  as  they  were  in  Abraham's
household.     As  they  had  taken  a  deep  interest  and
part  in  the  family  spirit  and  concerns,  so  they  were
treated  in  life  and  death  as  members  of  the  family.
The  aged  Deborah  is  the  counterpart  to  the  aged
Eliezcr.     The  fact  that  we  find  her  here  dying  in  the
family  of  Jacob,  opens  to  us  a  glance  into  the  warm,
faithful  attachment  of  this  friend  of  Rebekah,  and
at  the  same  time  enables  us  to  conclude  with  the
highest  certainty  that  Rebekah  was  now  dead.    Debo
rah  would  not  have  parted  from  Rebekah  while  she
was  living.     DELITZSCH  :  "  We  may  regard  the  hea
then  traditions,  that  the  nurse  of  Dionysius  (n"2,
Ba/cxos)  lies  buried  in  Scythopolis  (I'hix.  //.  N,  eh.
v.  15),  and  that  the  grave  of  Silenos  is  found  in  the
land  of  the    Hebrews  (PAUSAN.  JilHaca,    cap.  24),
with  which  F.  I).  Michaelis  connects  the  passage,  as
the  mere  distorted  echoes  of  this  narrative."

1 6.  We  may  regard  the  new  and  closing  revelation
and  promise  which  Jacob  received  at  Bethel  after  his
thanksgiving  feast,  as  the  confirmation  and  sealing
of  his  faith,  and  thus  it  forms  a  parallel  to  the  con
firmation  and  sealing  of  the  faith  of  Abraham  upon
Moriah  (ch.  xxii.  15).     But  it  is  to  be  observed  here
that  Jacob  is  first  sealed  after  having  purified  his
faith  from  any  share  in  the  guilt  of  fanaticism.    And
the  same  thing  precisely  may  be  said  of  the  sealing
of  Abraham,   after  he  had  freed  himself  from  the
fanatical  prejudice  that  Jehovah  could  in  a  religious


*  [Among  the  continental  churches  confirmation  is  re
garded  in  much  the  same  light  as  we  regard  the  open  recep
tion  of  the  baptized  members  of  the  church,  to  their  first
communion  ;  when  they  are  said  to  assume  for  theinselvea
the  vows  which  were  made  far  them  in  their  baptism. —A.  G.j


566


GENESIS,  Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


sense  literally  demand  the  sacrifice  of  a  human  life,
i.  e.,  the  literal  killing,  he  became  certain  of  his  lite
of  faith,  of  the  promise  of  Cod,  and  of  his  future.
Thus  here  the  flame  of  Israel  is  completely  purified
from  the  smoke.  But  heir,  again,  it  lies  in  the  very
law  of  the  inward  lite,  that  God  cannot  seal  the
faith  from  which  the  impure  elements  have  not  been
purged.  Otherwise  fanaticism,  too,  would  be  con
firmed  and  sanctioned.  Hence  the  assurance  of  faith
will  always  waver  and  fluctuate,  even  to  its  disap
pearance 'in  any  one,  in  the  measure  in  which  he
combines  impure  and  carnal  elements  with  his  faith,
and  then  holds  it  more  and  more  as  a  confidence  of
a-  higher  grade.  Enthusiastic  moments,  mighty  hu
man  acts  of  holiness,  party  earnestness  and  temerity,
will  not  compensate  for  the  profound,  heavenly  as
surance  of  faith,  an  established  life  of  faith,  which
is  the  -iff  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  True  it  is,  that  the
precondition  of  sealing'is  justification,  the  heart  ex
perience  of  the  peace  of  Cod,  of  reconciliation  by
faith  ;  but  this  gift  of  <iod  the  Christian  must  keep
pure  bv  steadfastness  in  the  Lord,  even  in  the  mid-t
'ntation,  which  is  often  a  temptation  to  fanati
cism  (see  the  Epistle  of  James),  and  then  he  is  con
firmed.  In  our  e.-timate  of  the  stages  of  confirma
tion,  it  is  not  at  all  Grange  that  Jacob  should  have
the  name  of  Israel,  first  given  to  him  at  1'eniel,  here
confirmed  to  him.  Henceforth  he  is  more  frequently
called  Israel,  f(,r  the  new  life  in  him  has  become  a
new  nature,  the  prominent  and  inling  feature  of  his
being.

17.  The  icnewed  Messianic  promise   assured  to
Jacob  (eh.  xxxv.  1  1  ).

1<.  From  the  fact  that  Jacob  erected  a  stone  pil
lar  at  Bethel,  on  which  he  poured  a  drink-offering,
and  then  oil,  Knobel  conjectures,  without  the  least
ground,  that  the  Elohist  here  introduces  the  sacrifice
in  this  form,  and  knows  nothing  of  an  altar  and  of
animal  sacrifices  (p.  '271).  But  it  is  evident  that
i\i\<  pillar  was  taken  from  the  altar  before  mentioned
(ver.  7),  and  that  this  drink-offering  must  therefore
lie  distinguished  from  the  sacrifice  upon  that  altar.
As  in  the  wrestling  of  Jacob,  the  distinction  between
the  outward  and  inward  aspects  of  the  right  of  the
first-born,  and  thus  also  of  the  priesthood,  first  conies
into  view,  so  here,  also,  we  have  the  distinction  be
tween  the  peculiar  sacrifice  in  the  strict  sense  and
the  thank-offering.  The  stone  designates  (ch.  xxviii.
20)  the  ideal  house  of  God,  and  in  this  significance
must  be  distinguished  from  the  altar.  Through  the
thank-offering  Jacob  consecrates  the  enjoyment  of
his  prosperity  to  the  Lord  ;  through  the  oil  he  raises
the  stone,  as"  well  as  his  thanksgiving,  to  a  lasting,
sacred  remembrance.  [Krniz  remarks  here  :_  "  The
thirty  years'  journey  from  Bethel  to  Bethel  is  now
completed.  The  former  residence  at  Bethel  stands
to  the  present  somewhat  as  the  beginning  to  the  end,
the  prophecy  to  the  fulfilment ;  for,  the  unfolding  of
the  purpose  of  salvation,  so  far  as  that  could  be
done  in  the  life  of  Jacob,  has  now  reached  its  acme
and  relative  completion.  There  the  Lord  appeared
to  him  in  a  dream,  here  in  his  waking  state,  and  the
dream  is  the  prophetic  type  of  the  waking  reality.
There  God  promised  to  protect  and  bless  him,  and
bring  hijn  back  to  this  land — a  promise  now  fulfilled.
There  Jacob  made  his  vow,  here  he  pays  it.  There
God  consecrates  him  to  be  the  bearer  of  salvation,
and  makes  the  threefold  promise  of  the  blessing  of
salvation.  So  far  as  the  promise  could  be  fulfilled
in  Jacob,  it  is  now  fulfilled;  the  land  of  promise  is
open  before  him,  he  has  already  obtained  possession


in  part,  and  the  promised  seed  reaches  its  first  stage
of  completeness  in  the  last  son  of  Rachel,  giving  the
significant  number  twelve,  and  the  idea  of  salvation
attains  its  development,  since  Jacob  has  become  Is
rael.  But  this  fulfilment  is  only  preliminary  and
relative,  and  in  its  turn  becomes  a  prophecy  of  the
still  future  fulfilment.  Hence  God  renews  the  bless
ing,  showing  that  the  fulfilment  lies  in  the  future
Still;  hence  God  renews  his  new  name  Israel,  which
defines  his  peculiar  position  to  salvation  and  his  re
lation  to  God,  showing  that  Jacob  has  not  yet  fully
become  Israel  ;  the  promise  and  the  name  are  cor
relates — the  one  will  be  realixed  when  the  other  is
fulfilled.  Hence,  too,  Jacob  renews  the  name  Beth
el,  in  which  the  peculiarity  of  the  relation  of  (iod
to  Jacob  is  indicated,  /c'.s  di/\-f/hir/  in  and  among  ike
seed  of  Jacob,  and  the  renewing  of  this  name  pro
claims  his  consciousness  that  Cod  would  still  become
in  a  far  higher  measure,  El-beth-el." — A.  G.]


IIOMIM'.TK'AL  AXD  PltACTICAL.

See  the  Dodiinal  and  Ethical  remarks.  Jacob's
settlement  at  Shechem :  1.  The  departure  thither
from  Succoth  ;  L'.  the  settlement  itself:  :i.  the  new
departure  to  Bethel. — The  settlement  itself:  1.  How
promising!  happy  return.  IVosperous  acquisition
of  the  parcel  of  land.  Peaceful  relations  with  the
Shechemites.  Religious  toleration.  '1.  How  seri
ously  endangered  (through  Jacob's  carelessness,  lie
does  not  return  early  enough  to  Kcthel  to  fulfil  his
vow.  Probably  he  even  considers  the  altar  at  Hie-
chem  a  substitute.  His  love  for  Rachel  makes  him
tolerant  to  her  teraphim,  and  consequently  to  the
teraphim  of  his  house  generally.  His  polygamy^  is
perhaps  the  occasion  of  his  treating  the.  children  with
special  indulgence).  :;.  How  fearfully  disturbed  !
Dinah's  levity  and  dishonor.  Importunity  of  the
Shechemites; 'the  carnage  of  his  sons.  The  exist
ence  of  his  house  endangered.  4.  The  happy  con
clusion  caused  by  Jacob's  repentance  and  God's  pro
tection.— The  first  great  sorrow  prepared  for  the
patriarch  by  his  children. — Dinah's  conduct, — The
dangerous  proposals  of  friendship  by  the  Shechem
ites!— The  brothers,  Simeon  and  Levi.  Their  right.
Their  wrong. — Fanaticism  in  its  first  biblical  form,
and  its  historic  manifestations. — Its  contagious  pow
er.  All,  or  at  least  the  majority,  of  Jacob's  sons,
are  swept  along  by  its  influence.— Jacob's  repentance,
or  the  feast  of  purification  of  his  house. — How  the
union  of  repentance  and  faith  is  reflected  in  the
sacred  institutions.  In  both  sacraments,  in  the  cele
bration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  the  connection  of
sacred  festivals,  especially  in  the  connection  between
Good-Friday  and  Easter.— The  thanksgiving  at  Beth
el.— Here,  too,  the  feast  of  joy  is  followed  by  deep
mourning  and  funeral  obsequies. — Deborah:  ].  AVe
know  very  little  of  her ;  and  yet,  i>.  we  know  very
much  of  her. — The  greatness  of  true  and  unselfish
love  in  the  kingdom  of  God.— The  nobility  of  free

service. Jacob's  confirmation — confirmed  as  Israel.

— The  renewed  promise.

First  Section.  The  settlement  at  Succoth.  Ch.
xxxiii.  17.  STAKKE  :  He,  no  doubt,  visited  his  father
during  this  interval. — GKUL.VCII  :  (On  some  accounts
we  believe  that  Succoth  was  situated  on  the  right
side  of  Jordan,  in  the  valley  of  Succoth,  in  which  lay
the  city  of  Beth-Shean.  Succoth  are  literally  huts
made  of  boughs,  here  folds  made  of  boughs  of  trees
and  bushes.)


CHAP.    XXXIII.   17— XXXV.    1-15.


507


Second  Section.  The  settlement  at  Shechem.  Ch.
xxxiii.  18- '20.  STARKK  :  (Shcchem,  Quesita.  The
Septuugint  transl.,  lambs  ;  Chald.,  pearls.  Others  un
derstand  money.  J'J/>i.ph.,  de  pond,  et  mom.,  asserts
that  Abraham  introduced  the  art  of  coining  money
in  Canaan).  SCHRODER:  Von  Raumer  considers
Shalem  as  the  more  ancient  name  of  Shechem.  Robin-
son  regards  it  as  a  proper  name,  and  finds  it  now  in  the
village  of  Shalem,  some  distance  east  from  Shcchcm.
Third  Section.  Dinah.  Ch.  xxxiv.  1-31.
STARKE  :  Dinah's  walk :  without  doubt,  taken  from
motives  of  curiosity. — Contrary  to  all  his  expecta
tions  (for  a  peaceful,  quiet  time  of  worship,  etc.),
Jacob's  heart  is  most  keenly  mortified  by  Dinah's
disgrace,  and  the  carnage  committed  by  Simeon  and
Levi. — He  who  wishes  to  shun  sin,  must  avoid  also
occasions  of  sin. — Curiosity  is  a  great  fault  in  the
female  sex,  and  has  caused  many  a  one  to  fall.

SCHRODER:  (Val.  Herb.)  A' gadding  girl,  and  a
lad  who  has  never  gone  beyond  the  precincts  of  home,
are  both  good  for  nothing  (Tit.  ii.  5).  a.  Tin'  rape.
STAKKI::  (-2  Sam.  xiii.  12)  By  force  (2  Sam.  xiii.  12-
1-1).  (Judging  from  Dinah's  levity,  it  was  not  with
out  her  consent.) — CKAMER  :  Rape  a  sin  against  the
sixth  and  seventh  commandments. — What  a  disgrace,
that  great  and  mighty  lords,  instead  of  being  an  ex
ample  to  their  subjects  in  chastity  and  honor,  should
surpass  them  in  a  dissolute  and  godless  deportment.
— GERLACII  :  Ver.  7.  Fool  and  folly  are  terms  used
frequently-  in  the  Old  Testament  to  denote  the  perpe
tration  of  the  greatest  crimes.  The  connection  of
the  thought  is  this,  that  godlessness  and  vice  are
the  greatest  folly,  etc. — SCHRODER  :  Josephus  says,
Dinah  went  to  a  fair  or  festival  at  Shechem.  The
person  that  committed  the  rape  was  the  most  distin
guished  (ver.  19)  son  (the  crown-prince,  so  to  speak)
of  the  ruling  sovereign. — The  sons  of  Jacob,  for  the
first  time,  transfer  the  spiritual  name  of  their  father
to  the  house  of  Jacob,  etc.  They  are  conscious,
therefore,  of  the  sacredness  of  their  families.  The
sharp  antithesis  between  Israel  and  Canaan  enters  in
to  their  consciousness  (Baumgarten).  b.  T7ic propo
sed  of  marria/jc.  STARKE:  Although  it  is  just  and
proper  to  strive  to  restore  fallen  virgins  to  honor  by
asking  their  parents  or  friends  to  give  them  in  mar
riage,  and  thus  secure  their  legal  position  and  rights,
yet  it  is  putting  the  cart  before  the  horse. — Little
children  bring  light  cares,  grown  children  heavy
cares.  (God  afterwards  prohibited  (Deut.  vii.  3)  them
to  enter  into  any  friendly  relations  with  the  heathen
nations.)  c.  The  fanatical  revenge  of  Jacob's  sons.
STARKE  :  Take  care  that  you  do  not  indulge  in  wrath
and  feelings  of  revenge. — HALL  :  Smiling  malace  is
generally  fatal. — Even  the  most  bloody  machinations
are  frequently  gilded  with  religion. — FbeibergerJBibel :
Ilamor,  the  ruling  prince,  is  a  sad  example  of  an
unfaithful  and  interested  magistracy,  who,  under  the
pretence  of  the  common  welfare,  pursues  his  own  ad
vantage  and  interests,  while  he  tries  to  deceive  his
subjects. — The  Shechemites,  therefore,  did  not  adopt
the  Jewish  religion  from  motives  of  pure  love  or  a
proper  regard  for  it,  but  from  self-interest  and  love
of  gain.— CRAMER  :  It  is  no  child's  play,  to  treat  re
ligion  in  a  thoughtless  and  careless"  way,  and  to
change  from  one  form  to  another. — One  violent  son
may  bring  destruction  upon  a  whole  city  and  country.
— HALL  :  The  aspect  of  external  things  constrains
many  more  to  a  profession  of  religion,  than  con
science  (John  vi.  20).  But  how  will  it  be  with  those
who  do  not  use  the  sacraments  from  proper  motives  ?
— Strictures  upon  the  apology  for  this  deed  in  the


book  of  Judith,  and  by  others. — CRAMER  :  God  some<
times  punishes  one  folly  by  another. — HALL  :  Tc
make  the  punishment  more  severe  than  the  sin,  is  no
less  unjust  than  to  injure. — What  Shechem  perpe
trated  alone,  is  charged  upon  all  the  citizens  in  com-
mon,  because  it  seems  that  they  were  pleased  with  it.
— LANGE  :  This  was  a  preliminary  judgment  of  God
upon  the  Shechemites,  thus  to  testify  what  the  Ca-
naanites  in  future  had  to  expect  from  Jacob's  de
scendants. — OSIANDER  :  AVhen  magistrates  sin,  their
subjects  are  generally  punished  with  them.  They
evidently  do  not  present  circumcision  as  an  entire
ly  new^divine  service,  as  an  initiation  into  the  cove
nant  with  the  God  of  Israel,  but  only  as  an  external
custom. — It  is  remarkable  here,  how  adroitly  Hamor
and  Shechem  represent  to  the  people  as  pertaining
to  the  common  advantage,  what  was  only  for  their
personal  interest.— We  here  meet  the  wild  Eastern
vindictivencss  in  all  its  force.  Moreover,  the  carnal
heathen  view,  that  all  the  people  share  in  the  act  of
the  prince. — SCHRODER  :  We  have  here  the  same  sad
mixture  of  flesh  and  spirit  which  we  have  seen  at
the  beginning,  in  Jacob. — TAUBE  :  Sins  of  the  world
and  sins  of  the  saints  in  their  connection,  d.  Jacob's
judgment  upon  this  crime.  STARKE  :  (Jacob,  no
doubt,  sent  back  all  the  captives  with  their  cattle.) —
(It  seems  that,  while  not  altogether  like  Eli,  he  did
not  have  his  sons  under  a  strict  discipline,  since  his
family  was  so  large.) — For  the  wrath  of  man  work-
cth  not  the  righteousness  of  God  (James  i.  20). —
GERLACII  :  How  miraculously  God  protected  this
poor,  despised  (?)  company  from  mingling  with  the
heathen  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  persecution  on
the  other. — SCHRODER  :  Judging  from  this  test,
what  would  have  become  of  Jacob's  descendants,  if
divine  grace  had  left  them  to  themselves  in  such  a  way
(Calvin)  ?  It  was  not  due  to  themselves,  certainly,  that
they  were  not  entirely  estranged  from  the  kingdom
of  God,  etc.

Fourth  Section.  The  departure  to  Bethel.  Ch.
xxxv.  1-8.  STARKE  :  Because  the  true  church  was
in  Jacob's  house,  God  would  not  permit  it  to  be
wholly  destroyed,  as  Jacob,  perhaps,  conjectured. —
Change  your  garments. — Which  are  yet  sprinkled
with  the  blood  of  the  Shechemites. — OSIANDER  :  Le
gitimate  vows,  when  it  is  in  our  power  to  keep  them,
must  be  fulfilled  (Deut.  xxiii.  21). — CRAMER:  The
Christian  Church  may  err,  and  easily  be  led  to  super
stition  ;  pious  bishops,  however,  are  to  recognize
these  errors,  and  to  do  away  with  them.  They  are
to  purify  churches,  houses,  and  servants,  and  point
them  to  the  word  of  God.  Repentance  and  conver
sion  of  the  soul  is  the  proper  purification  of  sins. —
Bibl.  Tub. :  Is  our  worship  to  please  God,  then  our
hearts  must  be  cleansed,  and  the  strange  gods,  our
wicked  lusts,  must  be  eradicated. — The  proper  refor
mation  of  a  church  consists,  not  only  in  the  extirpa
tion  of  idolatry  and  false  doctrines,  but  also  in  the
reformation  of  the  wrong  courses  of  life  (Neh.  x.  29).
— Ver.  8.  All  faithful  servants,  both  males  and  fe
males,  are  to  be  well  cared  for  when  they  become
sick  or  feeble,  and  to  be  decently  buried  after  their
death. — CRAMER:  Christ  is  the  pillar  set  up,  both  in
the  Old  and  New  Testament ;  he  is  anointed  with
the  oil  of  gladness,  and  with  him  only  we  find  the
true  Bethel,  where  God  speaks  with  us. — GERLACH  :
Ver.  1.  His  worship  of  God  connects  itself  with  this
critical  point  in  his  history.  As  in  the  Old  Test.,
"  The  God  of  peace  and  of  comfort,"  etc.,  is  frequent-
y  mentioned,  so  also  the  faith  of  the  patriarch  clings
to  God  in  his  peculiar  personal  revelations.  It  is


508


GENESIS,  Oil   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


the  God  who  revealed  himself  at  Bethel.  (Still  the
name.  El- Bethel,  given  with  the  first  revelation  at
Bethel,  includes  the  whole  journey  of Jacob  until  his
return  to  Bethel.) — SCHKUUKK  :  Jehovah  has  accom
plished  wliat  he  has  said. — \Vceanonlyapproach  the
house  of  (iod  in  i'aith,  when  we  have  fust  pcnitential-
ly  put  away  from  cur  houses  all  strange  gods.  (Mi-
CIIAKUS  iinds  here  the  first  and  oldest  traee  of  the
baptism  of  proselytes. )  1  consider  that  Deborah,  a
wise  and  ]>i(,i:s  mairon,  was  esteemed,  so  to  speak,  by
the  servants  as  a  grandmother,  who  served  and  con
soled  Jacob  (Luther). — TATDI:  :  The  house  of  the
patriarch  Jac'-b  as  a  mirror  of  Christian  family  life.

Fifih  Section.  The  scaling  of  Uie  covenant  /n/trim
God  and  the  pn.'i-i'trch  at  Bethel.  Ch.  xxxv.  9-1  T>.
STAKKE:  As  God  appears  to  Abraham  ten  times,  so


he  appears  to  Jacob  six  times  (eh.  xxviii.  12  ;  xxxi.
11,  lo  ;  xxxii.  1-2  ;  xxxii.  2-1;  xxxv.  1  ;  the  present
passage;  and  oh.  xlvi.  il). — SCIUIODKK  :  Now  that
Jacob  has  become  Israel  in  its  fullest  sense,  the  re
newal  of  the  promise  connected  with  the  conferring
of  the  name  lias  a  far  greater  signification  than  be
fore  (Hengstcnbcrg). — Ver.  1!>.  God  descends  into
us,  whenever  he  gives  us  a  token  of  his  presence.
Here,  therefore,  we  have  a  designation  ofthe  end  of
the  vision  (Calvin). — For  the  symbolical  fignilieation
of  oil,  see  B  dir. — -As  Israel,  as  patriarchal  ances
tor,  the  foundation-.-tono  ofthe  spiritual  temple,  he
lays  the  first  (': }  stone  !•>  th.e  building  which  his  de
scendants  are  to  complete.  (Dr.KCiisi.Kii:  So  much
is  certain,  that  the  ih>t  idea  of  a  definite  house  of
(iod  is  connected  with  the  Bethel  ot'Jaeob.)


S  E  V  E  X  T  II     S  E  C  T I  O  X .

Departure  from  Bdhcl.     Benjamin's  birth.     Rachel's  death.


i    XXXV.    10-20.

16  And   they  journeyed    from   Bethel;    :md   tlierc  was  but  a  litllo1  way  to   come  to

17  Kphrath  |  fruit,  the  fruitful]  :   and  Kachel  travailed,  and  she  had   hard  labor.      And  it  came
to  pass,  when  she  was  in   hard   labor,  that  the  midwife  said  unto  her,  Fear  not;   them

18  shall  have   this  son   also.2     And   it  came   to  pass  as  her  sold  was  in  departing,  (jbr  she
died,)  that  she  called  his  name  Ben-oni  f  my  son  of  pain  or  sorrow]  :  but  his  father  called  him

19  Benjamin  |.-..M  of  thcrkht  hand].     And  Rachel  died,  and  was  buried  in  the  way  to  Kphrath,

20  which  i*  Beth-lrhcm  |  hou*.- ofi.n-ad].     And  Jacob  set  a  pillar  [monument]  upon  her  grave:
that  i-i  the  pillar  of  Rachel's  grave  unto  this  day.


rrnd


['  V^XtlTi'1-2  ,  a  space  or  strrtrh  of  ground.     How  Ion?  i?  unknown  ;  see  cli.  ::'viii.  7
iors  ii  Unions  ;  the  Sept.,  "  somowhat  lonp-cr  distance."— A.  G.]
Lit.,  for  this  U  also  to  thoe  a  ton.— A.  G.]


7  ;  2  Kings  v.  19.    Josephus


KXKGETICAL  AND    Cl'JTICAL.

And  they  journeyed. — The  residence  at  Beth
el,  enjoined  upon  him,  had  reached  its  end  with  the
founding  of  the  altar,  and  the  completed  thanksgiv
ing. — And  there  was  but  a  little  way.— An  un
known  distance.  The  Rabbinical  explanation,  "  as
far  as  one  could  plough  in  a  day,"  is  senseless,  for  in
one  direction  they  could  plough  miles,  but  in  plough
ing  a  field,  the  breadth  ploughed  depends  upon  the
length  of  the  field,  but  in  any  ease  is  too  small  to
be  the  measure  of  distances.  The  Sept.,  misunder
standing  the  passage,  makes  it  the  name  of  a  place.
[In  the  19th  verse,  however,  the  Sept.  has  hippo
drome. — A.  G.]  Delitzsch  conjectures  a  distance
equal  to  a  Persian  parasang. — And  Rachel  travail
ed. — The  wish  she  had  uttered  at  Joseph's  birth,  that
God  would  give  her  another  son,  now,  after  a  long
period,  perhaps  sixteen  or  seventeen  years,  is  about
to  be  fulfilled,  but  it  caused  her  death.  Jacob  was
now  old,  and  Rachel  certainly  was  no  longer  young;
moreover,  she  had  not  borne  children  for  many
years.  Pelit/.sch  reckons  Jacob's  age  at  one  hun
dred  and  six,  and  Rachel's  at  about  fifty  years. —


!  When  she  wars  in  hard  labor.— The  /"ir/an.l  II >-
\  phi',  forms  of  n'Jp  denote  r.ot  merely  heavy  birth-
!  pains,  but  the  very  birth-throes  and   anguish. — The
midwife,  i.  c.,  a  maid-servant  skilful  and  trusted  in
:  this  matter. — Thou  shalt  have  a  son. — The  last
!  consolation  for  Rachel.     She   dies  during   the  final
|  fulfilment  of  the  strongest  wish  of  her  life.     [As  her
soul  was  departing,  denotes  not  the  annihilation  of
the  soul,  but  the  change  of  state  and  place.     It  pre
supposes,  of  course,  its  perpetual  existence;  at  least,
its  existence  after  death.— A.  G.]     In  this  sense  we
must  explain  the  giving  of  the  name.     The  empha
sis  in  the  son  of  my  pain,  must  be  laid  upon  son.
From  her  very  death-anguish,  a  son   is  born  to  her.
Knobel  explains  the  name  to  mean  son  of  my  vanity,
"IX ,  because  his   birth  caused  her  "  annihilation,"
i.  e.,  death.     In  this  explanation,  the  child  becomes
the  father,  i.  e.,  originator  of  her  "  annihilation,"  but
is  not  the  .ton.     The  son  of  her  pain,  on  the  con
trary,  denotes  the  great  gain    of  her   sorrow ;    she
dies',  as  it  were,  sacrificing  herself;  and,  indeed,  the
once  childless,  now  in  childbed. — But  his  father
called  him. — Against  the  interpretation  of  Bcnja-


CHAP.  XXXV.    16-20.


569


min,  as  tlic  son  of  prosperity,  may  be  urged  the
"pE"  in  the  Hebrew,  which  cannot  with  any  certainty
bo  said  to  mean  prosperity;  and  further,  that  tin
would  have  been  in  harsh  contrast  with  the  dyin;
word  of  the  mother.  Delitzsch,  therefore,  holds  that
the  son  of  the  right  hand,  may  mean  the  son  of  the
south,  since  the  other  sons  were  born  in  the  north.
Some  derive  the  name  son  of  prosperity  from  the  fact
that  Jacob  had  now  reached  a  happy  independence,  or
from  the  fact  that  Benjamin  filled  up  the  prosperous
number  twelve  (see  Delitzsch).  But  Benjamin  might
be  regarded  as  the  son  of  the  strong  right  hand,  since
he  fills  up  the  quiver  of  the  twelve  mighty  sons  (Ps.
cxxvii.  5).  We  may  bring  into  view,  further,  the  re
lation  of  the  name  to  the  state  of  rest  which  Jacob
now  bciieved  that  he  had  attained.  The  tired  wan
derer  now  prepares  himself  as  a  patriarch  to  rest,  and
his  youngest  favorite  must  take  the  place  at  his  right
hand.  But  he  is  not  thereby  designated  as  his  suc
cessor.  Jacob  seems,  in  some  erroneous  way,  for  a
long  lime  to  have  had  Joseph  in  his  eye  for  this
position  ;  still,  not  with  the  same  self-will  with  which
Isaac  had  chosen  Esau.  The  Samaritan  explanation,
son  of  days,  D"1^,  i.  c.,  of  his  old  days  or  age,  we
pass  with  a  mere  allusion.  Some  suggest,  also,  that
Jacob  called  him  Benjamin,  so  that  he  might  not  be
constantly  reminded  of  his  loss  by  the  name  Bcn-oni.
This  lays  the  ground  for  the  change  of  the  name,  but
not  for  the  choice  of  Benjamin. — In  the  way  to
Ephrath. — Ephrath  (from  rns  )  is  the  fruitful,  a
name  which  corresponds  with  the  added  name  Beth
lehem  (house  of  bread).  The  distance  from  Jerusa
lem  to  Bethlehem  is  about  two  hours,  in  a  southerly
direction,  on  the  road  to  Hebron.  About  a  half-hour
on  this  side  of  Bethlehem,  some  three  hundred  steps
to  the  right  of  the  road,  there  lies,  in  a  small  recess,
the  traditional  grave  of  Rachel.  This  "  Kubbet-Ra-
lul  (Rachel's  grave),  is  merely  a  Moslem  wely,  or
the  grave  of  some  saint,  a  small,  square  stone  struc
ture,  w  itli  a  dome,  and  within  a  grave  of  the  ordinary
Mohammedan  form  (ROBINSON  :  "Res."  vol.  i.  p.  322),
which  has  been  recently  enlarged  by  the  addition  of
a  square  court  on  the  east  side,  with  high  walls  and
arches  (later  "  Res."  p.  373)."  Keil.  We  must  dis
tinguish  between  the  old  tradition  as  to  the  locality,
and. the  present  structure.  Knobel  infers,  from  Micah
iv.  8,  that  Jacob's  next  station,  the  tower  of  the  flock,
was  in  the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem.  In  that  case  Ra
chel's  grave,  and  even  Ephrath,  must  be  sought  north
of  Jerusalem,  according  to  1  Sam.  x.  2,  and  the  ad
dition — which  is  Bethlehem — must  be  viewed  as
a  later  interpretation.  In  Micah,  however,  in  the
passage  which  speaks  of  the  tower  of  the  flock,  or
the  stronghold  of  the  congregation,  the  words  seem
to  be  used  in  a  symbolical  sense.  But  the  passage,
1  Sam.  x.  2,  is  of  greater  importance.  If  Rama,  the
home  of  Samuel,  lay  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem,  then
Rachel's  grave  must  have  been  in  that  region,  and
the  more  so,  since  it  is  said  to  have  been  within  the
limits  of  Benjamin,  whose  boundaries  did  not  run
below  Jerusalem.  We  refer  for  further  discussions
to  Knobol,  p.  275,  and  Delitzsch  [and  Mr.  Grove,
in  Smith's  Bible  Diet. — A.  G.]  We  are  inclined  to
regard  it  as  probable  that  the  Benjamites,  at  the
time  of  the  conquest  of  the  country,  brought  the
bones  of  Rachel  from  Ephrath,  into  their  own  re
gion,  and  that  since  then,  there  have  been  two
monuments  of  Rachel,  one  marking  the  place  of  her
death,  and  her  first  burial ;  the  other,  the  place  where
they  laid  her  bones,  in  the  home  of  her  Bcu-oni.


Similar  transportations  of  the  remains  of  the  blessed
occur  in  the  history  of  Israel.  In  this  view  we
may  explain  more  clearly  how  Rachel  (Jer.  xl.  11
bewailed  her  children  at  Rama,  than  it  is  by  the
usual  remark,  that  the  exiled  were  gathered  at  Rama.
— Unto  this  day. — From  this  notice  Delitzsch  in
fers  that  Genesis  was  not  completed  until  after  the
arrival  of  the  Israelites  in  Canaan.  Keil  says  thia
remark  would  have  been  in  place  within  ten  or
twenty  years  after  the  erection  of  the  pillar.  Still,
he  appears  to  have  felt  that  a  term  of  from  ten  to
twenty  years  could  make  no  distinction  between  old
er  and  more  recent  times,  and  hence  adds  in  a  note,
if  this  pillar  was  actually  preserved  until  the  time
of  the  conquest,  i.  e.,  over  four  hundred  and  fifty
years,  this  remark  may  be  viewed  as  an  interpo
lation  of  a  later  writer.  It  belongs,  doubtless,  to
the  last  redaction  or  revision  of  Genesis.  Still
there  are  possible  ways  in  which  the  Israelites  even
in  the  desert  could  have  received  information  as  to
the  existence  of  this  monument,  although  this  is  less
probable.  [Kurtz  defends  the  genuineness  of  the
passage,  but  locates  the  grave  of  Rachel  in  the  vi
cinity  of  Rama,  on  the  grounds  that  the  announce
ment  here  of  a  stretch  of  land  is  indefinite,  and  fur
ther,  that  the  designation  of  the  place  by  the  distant
Bethlehem,  arose  from  the  fact  that  the  tower  of  the
flock  in  Bethlehem  was  the  next  station  of  Jacob,
and  his  residence  for  a  considerable  period ;  and  lastly,
that  Jer.  xxxi.  15  clearly  points  to  the  vicinity  of
Rama.  Keil  urges  in  favor  of  his  own  view,  that
the  existence  of  a  monument  of  this  kind,  in  a
strange  land,  whose  inhabitants  could  have  had  no
interest  in  preserving  it,  even  for  the  space  of  ten  or
twenty  years,  might  well  have  appeared  worthy  of
notice. — A.  G.]


DOCTKINAI,  AXD  ETHICAL.

1.  Rachel's  wish  ;  Rachel's  death  ;  but  her  death
at  the  same  time  her  last  gain  in  this  life.

2.  Rachel's  confinement  at  Bethlehem,  viewed  in
its  sad  and  bright  aspects  :    1.  The  sad  aspect :  A
confinement  upon  a  journey ;  a  death  in  the  presence
of  the  goal  of  the  journey  so  long  desired  ;  a  part-

j  by  death  from  the  desired  child.  2.  The  joyful
aspect :  A  son  in  whom  her  old  wish  is  now  fulfilled
(see  ch.  xxx.  21 ;  also  the  passionate  word,  "  Give
me  children,  or  else  I  die,"  xxx.  1);  a  new  enrich
ing  of  Jacob,  and  indeed,  to  the  completion  of  the
number  twelve ;  the  triumph  that  she  dies  as  the
mother  of  a  child.

3.  Rachel's  death  and  grave.     A  preliminary  con
secration  of  the  region  of  Bethlehem.     Through  her
tragic  end  she  becomes  the  ancestress  of  the  suifer-

j  children  of  Israel  generally,  even  of  the  chil
dren  of  Leah  (Jer.  xxxi.  15;  Matt.  ii.  17).  Her
grave  probably  at  Ephrath  and  Rama  at  the  same
time.  Rachel  as  the  first  example  mentioned  in  the
Scriptures  of  a  mother  dying  in  travail,  and  a  com
forter  to  mothers  dying  in  similar  circumstance?.
The  solemn  aspect  of  such  a  death  (Gen.  iii.  1C).
Its  beauty  and  transfiguration  (1  Tim.  ii.  15).

4.  The  heroic  struggles,  and  struggling  places  of
travailing  women.     Through  these  painful  struggles
they  form  the  beautiful  complement  to  the  manly
struggles  in  sacred  wars.     While  the  latter  are  in
stitutes  of  death,  the  former  are  the  institutes  of
life.

5.  The  first  midwife  who  appears  in  the  region  of


570


GENESIS,  OR    THE    FIRST    BOOK


sacred  history,  is  a  worthy  counterpart  to  the  first
nurse,  Deborah.  She  shows  the  vocation  of  a  mid
wife,  to  support  the  laboring  with  sympathy,  to  en
courage  her,  and  to  strengthen  her  by  announcing
the  birth  of  a  child,  especially  of  a  son,  or  the  an
nouncement  of  the  beginning  of  the  new  life.

t'..  The  name  Benoni,  on  Rachel's  lips,  was  not  an
utterance  of  despair,  but  of  a  deeply  painful  feeling  of
victory.  The  desired  fruit  of  her  womb  came  out
of  these  death-struggles.  Jacob's  naming  connects
itself  with  this  also  :  the  son  of  my  right  hand,  com
panionship  of  my  rest,  support,  joy  of  my  old  age.
It  is  true,  indeed,  even  in  the  sense  of  the  usually
received  antithesis,  that  every  new-born  child  is  a
Benoni,  and  a  Benjamin;  Benoni  in  Adam,  Benja
min  in  Christ.

7.  The  youngest  children  of  a  family,  Benjamin's
companions;  and  frequently  described  as  ]}•  -njamins,
they  .-land  tinder  the  hie—ing  of  a  ripe  old  age.  un
der  the  proieetion  of  older  and  stronger  brothers  and
sisters;  br,t  on  the  other  hand,  the  danger  that  the
paternal  discipline  sho'  Id  give  way  to  grandfather-
like  indulgence,  great  as  it  may  be  in  particular  ca<es,
i-  scarcely  brought  into  view  here.  They  embrace,
a-  it  were,  in  themselves,  the  whole  pa-t  of  the  fam
ily  and  the  most  distant  future.

S.  B'thlehem  here  enters,  clouded  by  Jacob's
inonniiiig;  afterwards  enlightened  by  David,  the  old-
Te-tnment  hero  out  of  Judah,  and  finally  glorified  by
the  fulfilment  of  Israel's  hope.

'.'.  The  following  verse  .-hows  how  Jacob,  as  the
Israel  of  God,  rises  from  his  giief  over  Rachel's
death.

10.  ^-la  Jtrr  a,)nl  jras  '/</.>  /rt'nuj.  \<  Starke  sng-
gests,  we  have  thus  an  indication  that  we  are  to  re
gard  death  as  the  separation  of  the  soul  and  body.
For  if,  indeed,  EEI,  the  soul,  is  life  also,  so,  and
much  more,  is  the  human  life,  soul.


IIOMILKTIC'AL  AX1)  PRACTICAL.

Pee  the  Doctrinal   and   Ethical  remarks.     It  re
quires  no  special  notice  that  this  section  is  peculiarly


adapted  for  texts  at  the  burial  of  women  dyiri"-  ir
confinement,  at  the  transactions  over  consecrated
graves,  and  similar  occasions. — Rachel's  death  upon
the  journey. — Rachel's  journey  home  in  a  two-fold
sense. — Our  life  a  pilgrimage. — As  we  are  all  born
during  the  pilgrimage,  so  we  must  all  die  upon  our
pilgrimage. — We  reach  a  fixed,  permanent  goal  only
upon  the  other  side.  Benoni  and  Benjamin  :  1.
The  similarity  of  the  names  ;  2.  the  difference  be
tween  them. — Jacob  at  Rachel's  grave. — His  silent
grief. — His  uttered  faith.

STAKKK:  An  enunciation  of  Jacob's  sorrows.  It
is  connected  with  the  names  :  Simeon,  Levi,  Dinah,
Rachel,  Reuben,  and  Bilhah.  Then  follows  Isaac's
death,  and  afterwards  Joseph's  disappearance  ;  the
famine,  etc.  Hence  he  says:  '•  Few  and  evil  have
the  days  of  the  years  of  my  life  been  "  (ch.  xlvii.  !t).
(An  allegorical  comparison  of  Rachel,  at  this  birth,
with  the  Jewish  Church.  As  Rachel  died  at  the
birth  of  Benjamin,  so  the  Jewish  Church  at  the  birth
of  Christ.) — CKA>.;KI;  :  The  birth-throes  are  a  cross
and  a  reminder  of  our  sins  ((ien.  iii.  ]r>).  (iod
recognizes  this,  and  gives  his  aid  (John  \vi.  21). —
But  if  the  divinely-blessed  mother,  or  her  fruit,  should
die,  their  happiness  is  not  put  in  peril  (1  Tim.  ii.  1.")}.
— Christian  midwives  should  encourage  women  in
this  fearful  crisis. — Women  in  this  .-late  should  dili
gently  prepare  themselves  for  death. — O.-IANDKI:  :
The  dead  bodies  of  the  pious  are  not  to  be  treated
as  those  of  irrational  animals,  but  must  be  decently
buried,  that  we  may  thus  testify  our  hope  in  the
resurrection  from  the  dead  (Prov.  x.  7). — Scnr.oDKu:
Bethlehem  is  called  now  B<  it-Lahm  ;  i.  e.,  meat-
house.  Benjamin  a  type  of  the  Jlessiah,  who,  in
his  humiliation,  was  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  in  l.is  ex
altation  a  son  of  the  right  hand  of  (iod  (I)rechsler).
[Wordsworth  here  brings  out  several  striking  analo
gies  between  Benjamin  and  St.  I'aul,  basing  them
upon  the  word  ticrpuna,  which  the  apostle  applies  to
himself  "as  one  born  out  of  due  time,"  properly,
"the  child  whose  1,'irlh  is  the  cause  of  his  mother's
dcafh."  1'aul  speaks  of  himself  as  one  thus  born,
and  thus  seems  to  invite  us  to  compare  him  with
Benjamin.  1'.  115. — A.  G.]


EIGHTH     SECTIOX.

Tlic  station  at  the  tower  of  Rlar.     lioilcns   crime.     Jacob's   sonr,.     His  return  to  Isaac  and  Hebron
(Rcbckah  no  longer  living).     Isaac's  death.     His  burial  by  Esau  and  Jacob.


CHAPTER  XXXV.  21-29.

21  And    Israel   journeyed,    and    spread    his    tent  beyond   the   tower  of   Edar    [flock],

22  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Israel  dwelt  in  that  land,  that  Reuben  went  and  lay  witli
Bilhah   his  father's  concubine  :    and  Israel  heard  it.1     Now  the  sons  of  Jacob  were

23  twelve  :  The  sons  of  Leah  ;    Reuben,  Jacob's  first-born,  and  Simeon,  and  Levi,  and

24  Judah,    and    Issachar,    and  Zebulun :    The  sons  of  Rachel ;    Joseph,   and   Benjamin  :
25,  26   And  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  Rachel's  handmaid;   Dan,  and  Naphtali :    And  the  sons

of  Zilpah,   Leah's  handmaid ;    Gad,  and  Asher.     These  arc  the  sons  of  Jacob,  which
were  born  to  him  in  Padan-aram  [Mesopotamia].


CHAP.    XXXY.   21-29  57]

2V          And  Jacob  came  unto  Isaac  his  father,  unto  Mamre,  unto  the  city  of  Arbah  (which

28  -is  Hebron)  where  Abraham  and   Isaac  sojourned.     And  the  days  of  Isaac  were   a:i

29  hundred  and  fourscore  years.     And  Isaac  gave  up  the  ghost  and  died,  and  was  gathered
unto  his  people,  Iciny  old  and  full  of  days;   and  his  sons  Esau  and  Jacob  buried  him.

['  Ver.  22. — The  break  in  the  MS.  here,  and  the  Masoretie  note,  "that  there  is  a  hiatus  in  the  middle  of  the  verse,"
suits  the  sense  better  than  the  division  into  verses.  It  may  have  been,  ns  Wordsworth  suggests,  designed  to  express  ths
unutterable  feelings  of  Jacob  when  he  heard  of  this  horrible  act  of  his  eldest  son.— A.  G.]


EXEGETICAL  AXD  CRITICAL.

Vers.  21-2K. — Beyond  the  tower  of  Edar. —
Had  Rachel's  original  burial  taken  place  at  Rama,  we
could  not  well  have  supposed  that  Jacob,  who  here,  as
Israel,  rises  above  his  grief  for  his  loved  wife,  should
have  made  his  next  station  at  Jerusalem.  Moreover,
the  region  immediately  around  Jerusalem  was  proba
bly  not  suitable  for  a  nomadic  station.  We  adhere,
however,  to  the  tradition  which  fixes  Rachel's  death
north  of  Bethlehem,  and  the  next  station  of  Jacob,
below  Bethlehem,  at  the  tower  of  Edar.  The  tower
of  the  flock  i.s  a  tower  built  for  the  protection  of  the
floclcs,  and  as  their  gathering  place,  in  a  region  pecu
liarly  fitted  for  pasturage  (2-  Kings  xviii.  8  ;  2  Chron.
xxvi.  K>;  xxvii.  4  f.).  Jerome  and  the  common  tradi
tion  locate  it  south  of  Bethel,  and  not  far  from  that
place.  From  this  tower  Jacob  could  have  easily  and
frequently  visited  his  father  Isaac,  without  prema
turely  mingling  his  household  and  possessions  with
the  household  economy  at  Hebron,  which  it  is  possi
ble  may  yet  have  stood  in  strict  relations  with  Esau.
Such  an  absence  might  have  favored  Reuben's  crim
inal  purpose  and  act. — Reuben  went. — Bilhah  was
Rachel's  handmaid,  not  Leah's ;  nevertheless,  Reuben
was  guilty  of  incest;  of  a  lustful  deed  of  impiety,  which
occasioned  his  loss  of  the  birthright  (ch.  xlix.  4).
The  characteristic  weakness  of  Reuben,  which  ap
pears  in  its  praiseworthy  aspect  in  other  cases  (see
history  of  Joseph),  here  exposes  him  to  the  force  of
temptation. — And  Israel  heard  it. — As  if  he  was
absent.  Was  he  at  Hebron,  and  does  Reuben,  as
the  temporary  head  of  the  household,  assume  special
privileges  to  himself  ?  Israel  heard  it,  that  he
might  reprove  it  in  a  suitable  way,  in  his  spiritual
maturity,  quiet,  and  dignity. — Now  the  sons  of
Jacob  were  twelve. — Jacob's  sons  must  also
become  sons  of  Israel  through  a  divine  discipline
and  training.  They  are,  however,  the  rich  blessing
of  the  promise,  with  which  he  returns  to  his  father,
and  are  here  enumerated  by  name  after  their  seve
ral  mothers,  as  if  in  presenting  them  to  their  grand
father.  As  a  whole,  they  are  said  to  have  been
born  in  Padan-aram  ;  although  this  was  not  strictly
true  of  Benjamin.  We  are  thus  prepared  already,
and  introduced  to  Isaac's  point  of  view,  for  whom,  it
is  true,  Jacob  brings  all  his  sons  from  a  strange  land.
Thus  the  exile  Jacob  returns  home  to  his  father
Isaac,  laden  with  the  richest  blessing  of  the  promise.
The  dark  days  of  this  patriarch  are  followed  by  this
joyful  reappearance  of  the  exile.

Yers.  27-2(J. — Unto  Mamre  (see  history  of
Abraham,  above). — Isaac  has  thus  changed  his
residence  to  Hebron  during  the  absence  of  Jacob.
— An  hundred  and  fourscore  years. — With
the  conclusion  of  the  life  of  Isaac,  the  narrative
hastens  to  the  immediately  following  events  (ch.
xxxvii.).  Jacob  was  born  in  the  sixtieth  year  of
Isaac's  life  (ch.  xxv.  26),  and  was  thus  one  hundred
and  twenty  years  old  when  Isaac  died.  But  when  he


was  presented  to  Pharaoh  in  Egypt,  he  was  one
hundred  and  thirty  years  old  (ch.  xlvii.  9).  Of  this
time  there  were  seven  fruitful  and  two  unfruitful
years  since  Joseph's  exaltation  in  Egypt  (ch.  xlv.  6),
and  thirteen  years  between  the  selling  of  Joseph  and
his  exaltation,  for  he  was  sold  when  seventeen  (eh.
xxxvii.  2),  and  was  thirty  when  he  was  raised  to
honor  and  power.  Hence  we  must  take  twenty-
three  years  from  the  one  hundred  and  thirty  years
of  Jacob,  to  determine  his  age  at  the  time  Joseph
was  sold ;  which  is  thus  one  hundred  and  seven.
"  Isaac,  therefore,  shared  the  grief  of  Jacob  over
the  loss  of  his  son  for  thirteen  years."  In  a  similar
way,  Abraham  had  witnessed  and  sympathized  with
the  long  unfruitful  marriage  of  Isaac.  But  Isaac
could  see  in  these  sorrows  of  Jacob  the  hand  of  God,
who  will  not  allow  that  any  one  should  anticipate
him  in  a  self-willed  preference  of  a  favorite  son. — -
Old  and  full  of  days. — He  recognized  the  close  of
his  life-experiences  and  trials,  and,  like  Abraham,
departed  in  peace. — >And  Esau  and  Jacob  buried
him. — It  is  a  beautiful,  genuine  historic  feature,
that  Esau  here  precedes  Jacob,  while  Isaac  is  men
tioned  before  Ishmacl  at  the  burial  of  Abraham.
Could  we  draw  any  inference  from  this,  as  to  the
external  inheritance,  the  assertion  of  Keil,  that  Ja
cob  heired  the  earthly  goods  of  Isaac,  is  far  too  strong
and  confident.  It  is  certain,  indeed,  that  Esau  re
ceived  a  considerable  portion,  and  in  external  affairs
merely  he  took  a  prominent  part,  to  which  the  hom
age  Jacob  rendered  him  had  given  him  an  indirect
claim.  A  certain  degree  of  separation  had  already
been  made  between  the  spiritual  and  eartUy  birthright.
Isaac  was  buried  in  the  cave  of  Machpclah  (ch.  xlix.  31 ).


DOCTEIXAL  AXD    ETHICAL.

1.  Jacob's  last  station  at  the  tower  of  Edar  is
also  marked  by  a  new  heart-sorrow.

2.  Reuben's  crime  probably  occasioned   by  his
authority  over  the  household  during  his  father's  ab
sence  with  Isaac  at  Hebron.     The  cause  of  his  for
feiture  of  the  right  of  the  first-born  (ch.  xlix).

3.  The  number,  twelve,  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  in
its  typical  significance.     Twelve,  the  number  of  a  life
completed,  or  expanded  to  its  full  limits  and  devel
opment.     Thus  in  the  house  of  Ishmael  and  of  Esau,
but  in  a  higher  sense  in  the  house  of  Israel.    Hence
the  twelve  sons  are  the  types  of  the   twelve  tribes
(ch.  xlix. ;  Deut.  xxxiii.),  and  the   twelve  tribes  of
the  theocracy  types  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  Christ,
and  these,  again,  types  of  the  twelve  fundamental
forms  of  the  New  Testament  Church  (Rev.  xxi.  12  f.).
That  the  number  four  is  a  factor  of  the  number
twelve,  is  here  intimated  by  the  four  mothers  ;  four  ia
the  number  of  the  world,  three  the  number  of  the  sanc
tuary  and  of  the  spirit ;  and  thus  twelve  is  the  num
ber  of  a  fulness  or  completeness,  consecrated  to  God.

4.  Jacob's  return  to  Isaac  with  his  sons,  the  last


572


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


ray  of  sui.li-ht.  fur  the  aged  and  blinded  patriarch.
This  belonged  to  the  complete  satisfaction  of  the  old
man's  life,  after  which  he  could  fro  to  his  people
"full  of  I'.HVS,"  or  satisfied.  T!:us  .Jacob's  soul  was
':•  .'vivt-d,  w'mn  he  saw  (lie  wagons  sent  by

Joseph.

5.  The  brotherly  union  of  Jacob  and  Esau  at  the
burial  of  Isaac,  a  beautiful  token  of  peace  and  re
conciliation  at  bis  end.  ["  E-au  and  .Jacob  having
shaken  hands  over  the  corpse  of  their  father,  thrir
paths  diverge  to  meet  no  more."  Pdiusch. — A.  (l.J


i;   .MII.KTK'AL   AXI)   I'KACTIOAL.

See  IVctrinal  paragraphs.  Isaac's  long  and  pa
tient  waiting  for  Jacob's  return  home,  during  the
night  of  his  blindness.— Light  at  the  evening-time.—
Isaac  and  Simeon  (Luke  ii.).—  Esau  and  Jacob,  or
the  reconciling,  peace-making  efficacy  of  death  and


the  grave. — STAP.KE  :  Ver.  22.  (The  Jewish  Rabbis
make  this  a  small  crime,  and  say  Reuben  overthrew
the  bed,  when  he  saw  that,  after  Rachel's  death,  it
was  not  borne  into  his  mother  Leah's  tent,  but  intr
that  of  Bilhah ;  because  he  inferred  that  Jacob
loved  Uilhah  more  than  Leah). — OSIAM>KK:  In  the
true  Church  also  there  arise  at  times  great  scandals. —
GERLACH:  Comp.  2  Sam.  xvi.  22.  CAI.WKU  1  land-
buck:  Isaac  reached  the  greatest  age  among  the
three  patriarchs. — Sciir.oDKK  :  Bilhah  proved  unfaith
ful  ;  Reuben  committed  incest. — Jacob's  painful  si
lence. — When  he  departed,  nothing;  when  he  re
turned,  all  (Drechsler).— Details  as  to  the  number
twelve,  also  in  regard  to  Jacob. — [WORDSWORTH  :
The  record  of  these  sins  in  the  history  is  an  evidence
of  the  veracity  of  the  historian.  If  it  had  been  a
human  composition,  designed  to  do  honor  to  the  He
brew  nation,  assuredly  it  would  have  said  little  of
these  flagrant  iniquities  of  Simeon,  Levi,  Dinah,  and
Reuben. — A.  G.J


NIX  Til    SECTION.

Esau's  Famibi  Record  and  the  Horites.


CHAPTER  XXXVI.    1-43.

1    2          Now  these  arc  the  generations  of  Esau  [hah-y,  rough],  who  is  Edom  [rod].     Ks-au
'  Look  his  wives  of  (lie  daughters  of  Canaan ;  Adah  [ornament,  grace]  the  daughter  of  Elon
[oak-grove,  oak,  strength]    the    llittife,  and  Aholibamah    [tent  of  the  sacred  height]    the    dai
Of  AViah   [answering]   the  daughter  Of  Zibeon  [Gcsmius:  colored;  Fiir.t  .wild,  robber     the   H.VltC  ;

3  And  Bashemath  [pleasant  fragrance]  Ishmael's    daughter    sister    of  Nebajoth   [lofty  place]

4  And  Adah  bare  to  Esau,  Eliphaz  [etrength  of  God] ;  and  Bashemath  bare  Reuc

5  Godl-    And  Aholibamah   bare  Jeush  [or  Jehus,  gatherer],  find  Jaalaln  [Furst:  monntain-climber],
and  Korah1  [smooth]:  these  arc  the  sons  of  Esau,   which  were  born  unto  him  m     he

G  land  of  Canaan.  And  Esau  took  his  wives,  and  his  sons,  and  his  daughters,  and  al  the
persons  of  his  house,  and  his  cattle,  and  all  his  beasts,  and  all  Ins  substance  which  he
had  got  in  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  and  went  into  the  country  from  the  face  of  h.s  brother

7  Jacob.     For  their  riches  were  more  than  that  they  might  dwell  together  :  and  the    and

8  wherein  they  were  strangers  could  not  bear  them,  because  of  their  cattle.

K  nu  in  mount  Seir  [rough,  wild  mountain-region]  :  Esau  is  Edom.  _

9  And  these  arc  the  generations  of  Esau  the  father  of  the  Edomitos,  in  mount  Seir  :

10  These  are  the  names  of  Esau's   sons;    Eliphaz  the   son  of  Adah  the  wife  of  Esau;

11  Reuel  the  son  of  Bashemath  the  wife  of  Esau.     And  the  sons  of  Eliphaz  were   Teman

[right  ride,  southlanderl     Omar     [Gcsenius:  eloqncnt ;  Furst :  mountain-dwcllerj     Zepl.O     [watch J,    ail<

12  Gatam  [Gesenius  :  puny,  thin ;  Furst:  burnt,  dry  valley]  and  Kenaz  [hunting].     And  linina  [-taunt]

was  concubine  to  Eliphaz,  Esau's  son:  and  she  bare  to  Eliphaz  Amalek:  these  were

13  the  sons  of  Adah,'  Esau's  wife.     And  these  arc  the  sons  of  Reuel ;   Nahath   [going  down,
evening],     and    Zerah     [rising,  morning],     Shammah     [wasting;  Furst:  report,  call]     and    Mi:

[Gesenin,-.  fear;  rorst :  perhaps  joy,  rejoicing]  :  these  were  the  sons  of  Bashemath,  Esau  s  wife
U          And  these  were  the  sons  of  Aholibamah,  the  daughter  of  Anah    the  daughter  ot

Zibeon,  Esau's  wife  :  and  she  bare  to  Esau,  Jeush,  and  Jaalam    and  Korah.
15         These  were  dukes  [princes,  heads  of  families,  chiefs]  of  the  sons  of  Esau  :    the  sons  ot  Mi-

phaz   the  first-born  son  of  Esau;    duke  Teman,  duke  Omar,  duke  Zepho,  duke  Kenaz,


CHAP.   XXXVI.   1-43.  573


1C  Duke  Korali,   duke  Gatam,  and  duke   Ainalck  :    these  are  the   dukes   that   came  of
Eliphaz,  in  the  land  of  Edom  :  these  were  the  sons  [grandsons]  of  Adah.

17  And  these  are  the  sons  of  Kcuel,   Esau's  son  ;    duke  Nahath,   duke  Zerah,   duko
Shammah,  duke  Mizzah  :  these  arc  the  dukos  that  came  of  Reuel,  in  the  land  of  Edom  :
these  arc  the  sons  [grandsons]  of  Bashemath,  Esau's  wife.

18  And  these  are  the  sons  of  Aholibamah,  Esau's  wife  ;  duke  Jeush,  duke  Jaalam,  duke
Korah :    these  were  the  dukes  that  came  of  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  Anah,  Esau's

19  wife1.     These  are  the  sons  of  Esau  (who  is  [prince  of]   Edom)  and  these  are  their  dukes.

20  These  are  the  sons  of  Seir  the   Jlorito   [cave-dweller,  troglodyte],  who  inhabited  [primitive!
dwllcr?]   the  land;    Lotan   [=  covering,  vetted],  and  Shobal   [traveller,  wanderer],  and  Zibeon,

21  and  Anah,  And  Dishon  [gazelle],  and  Ezer  [Gesenius :  store;  Furst:  connection],  and   Dishan4
[same  as  Dishon]  :  these  are  the  dukes  of  the  Horitcs,  the  children  of  Seir  in  the  land  of

22  Edom.     And  the  children  of  Lotan  were  Hori  [troglodytes],  and  Heman  [Gesenius:  dcstruc-

23  tiou;  Fiirst:  commotion]  :  and  Lotan's  sister  was  Timna,     And  the  children  of  Shobal  were

these;      Alvan     [Gesenius:  unjust ;  Fiirst:  lofty],    and    Manahath    [rest],    and    Ebal     [Furst:  bald

24  mountain],  Shepho  [bare,  desert],  and  Onam  [strong,  robust].     And  these  are  the  children  of
Zibeon  ;  both  Ajah  [screamer,  hawk],  and  Anah  [singer,  answerer]  :  this  was  that  Anah  that
found  the  mules  [hot  springs]  in  the  wilderness,  as  he  fed  the  asses  of  Zibeon  his  father.

25  And  the  children  of  Anah  were  these  :  Dishon,  and  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  Anah.

26  And  these  are  the  children  of  Dishon;  Hemdan  [pleasant],  and  Eshban  [Gesenius:  insight;

Fiirst :  thoughtful  hero],    and    Itliran    [superior  r:  Jothro  and  Jithron],    and    Cheran    [Gesenius  :  harp  ;

27  Fiirst:  companion].       The    children    of    Ezer    are    these;     Bilhan    [— Bilhah ;   Gesenius:  modest;

28  Furst :  tender],  and  Zaavan  [Furst :  unquiet,  troubled],  and  Akan   [twisting].     The   children   of

29  Dishan    are    these;     Uz    [sandman,  or  woodman],    and    Aran    [Gesenius:  mightier].        These    arc

the  dukes  that  came  of  the  Horites  ;   duke  Lotan,  duke  Shobal,  duke  Zibeon,  duke  Anah,

30  Duke  Dishon,  duke  Ezer,  duke  Dishan:  these  are  the  dukes  that  came  of  Ilori,  among
their  dukes5  in  the  land  of  Seir.

31  And  these  are  the  kings  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom,  before  there  reigned  any

32  king  over  the  children  of  Israel.     And  Bcla  [comp. ch. xiv. 2]  the  son  of  Bcor  [Gesenius:
torch,  lamp ;  Furst :  shepherd]  reigned  in  Edom  :    and  the  name  of  his  city  was  Dinhabah

33  [Gesenius,  Furst:  place  of  plunder  (?Fehmgericht)«].       And  Bcla  died,  and  Jobab    [shout,  howl,  i.  e.,

34  der-crt]  the  son  of  Zerah  of  Bozrah  [fold,  fort]  reigned  in  his  stead.     And  Jobab  died,  and

35  Ilusham  [=:iiushai ;  rapid,  haste]  of  the  land  of  Tcmani  reigned  in  his  stead.     And  Husham

died,  and  liadad    [prince ;  strong,  violent]    the   son    of   Bedad    [separate,  the  lonely],   (who    smote

Midian  in  the  field  of  Moab),  reigned  in  his  stead:  and  the  name  of  his  city  XL- as  Avith
3G   [Gesenius:  ruins;  Fiirst:  tent- village].     And  Hadad  died,  and  Samlah  [covering]  of  Musrekah

37  [a  vineyard]  reigned  in  his  stead.     And  Samlah  died,  and  Saul  [asked,  wished]  of  Rehoboth

38  [wide,  room]  by  the  river  reigned  in  his  stead.     And   Saul   died,  and  Baal-hana.ii  [gracious

39  lord]  the  son  of  Achbor  [=  Achbar,  mouse]  reigned  in  his  stead.     And  Baal-hanan  the  son
of  Achbor  died,  and  Hadar  [grace,  honor]  reigned  in  his  stead  :  and  the  name  of  his  city
was    Pau    [Gesenius :  bleating ;  Furst:  yawning  deep]  ;     and    his    wife's    name    was    Mchctabcl

[God-benefiting],  the  daughter  of  Hatred  [pushing],  the  daughter  of  Mezahab  [water  of  gold].

40  And  these  are  the  names  of  the  dukes  that  came  of  Esau,  according  to  their  families,
after  their  places,   by  their  names;    duke  Timnah,  duke  Alvah  [Gesenius :  unrighteousness ;

41  Fiirst :  height,  exaltation],   duke    Jetheth    [Gesenius  :  nail ;  Furst :  subjugation] .       Duke  Aholibamah,
duke  Elah   [Furst:  oak  strong,  and  hard],  duke   PinOll    [=  Punon  ;  Gesenius:  darkness;  Fiirst:  a  mine].

42,  43   Duke  Kenaz,  duke  Tcman,  duke  Mibzar  [fortress,  strong  city].     Duke  Magdiel  [Furst:

glory  of  God ;  Gesenius  :  prince  of  God],    duke    Irani    [citizen,  city  region]  :     these    be   the    duk'CS    of

Edom,  according  to  their  habitations,  in  the  land  of  their  possession  :  he  is  Esau,7  the
father  of  the  Edomites.

['  Vor.  5.— Murphy  gives  these  names  the  signification  of  haste,  hiding,  ice.— A.  G.I

[2  Vcr.  7.— Of  their  sojoumings.— A.  G.]

[3  Vcr.  12.— From  pbft  C2  ,  a  nation  of  head-breakers,  spoilers?  Langc.  Laboring,  licking  up;  Murphy:  which
seeucs  the  better  derivation.— A.  G.]

[*  Vcr.  21.— Murphy  :  threshing.— A.  G.]

[^  Ver.  30.— Which  were  to  them  for  tribe-princes  (and  tribe  names).— A.  G.]

[6  Ver.  32.— The  FehmgcricJit  was  the  secret  criminal  court  iu  Westphalia,  somewhat  akin  to  our  vicilancc  com
mittees.— A.  G.]

[T  Ver.  43.— Lit.,  This  is  Esau  =  the  father  of  Edom,  the  founder  of  the  Edomites,  with  their  kings  and  princes.
This  closes  this  Section,  and  at  the  same  time  prepares  us  for  what  follows.— A.  G.]


574


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

A.  It  is  in  full  accordance  with  the  mode  of
statement  used  in  Genesis,  that  at  this  point,  at
which  Esau  passes  out  from  connection  with  the
theocratic  history,  the  history  of  his  family,  as  be
longing  to  the  genealogical  tree,  should  be  preserved
in  the  memory  of  the  people  of  God  (see  p.  405).
15.  The  toledoth  of  the  Edomites  is  recorded  in  a
series  of  special  genealogies:  1.  The  point  of  depar
ture:  Esau's  wives  and  children,  and  his  settlement
upon  the  mountains  of  Seir  (vers.  1-8);  2.  Esau's
sons  and  grai;<!.-ons  viewed  as  tribe-lathers  (vers.  9-
14);  :•!.  the  tr.''e-chiefs  or  princes  of  the  house  of
Es.ui  (vers.  15-l(i);  4.  the  genealogy  of  the  abori
gines  of  the  land,  the  Ilorites,  with  whom  the  Edom
ites,  as  conquerors,  are  mingled  (vers.  20-3' >);  5.
the  kings  of  the  land  of  Edom  (vers.  31-30);  f>.  the
rulinir  princes,  i.  e.,  the  heads  of  provinces,  or  rather
the  seats  cif  chieftains,  enduring  throughout  the
reigns  of  the  kings  of  Edom  (vers.  40-43). — C.  It  is
clear  that  these  tallies  do  not  form  any  one  peculiar
chronological  sueces.-ion.  The  tables,  number  three  of
the  Edomitic  princes,  and  four,  of  the  llorite  princes,
form  a  parallel  ;  in  point  of  time,  indeed,  the  line
of  llorite  princes  must  be  regarded  as  the  older  line.
So,  nls->,  table  number  five  of  the  kings  of  Edom,  is
parallel  with  number  six  of  the  provincial  princes
or  councillors  of  Edom.  There  are,  therefore,  but
'hree  fundamental  divi.-ions  :  1.  The  sons  and  grand
sons  of  Edom  ;  2.  the  old  and  new  princes  of  Edom  ;
3.  the  kingdom  of  Edom  viewed  as  to  its  kings  and
as  to  its  provincial  rulers  (or  dukedoms). — In  Dent,
ii.  12,  22,  the  Edomites  appear  to  have  de.-t  roved  the
Horites,  as  the  aboriginal  dwellers  in  Seir.  But  this
must  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  a  warlike  subju
gation,  which  re-'dtcd  partly  in  their  absorption,
partly  and  mainly  in  placing  the  original  dwellers  in
the  land  in  a  state  of  bondage,  and  that  wretched
condition  in  which  they  are  probably  described  in
the  book  of  .lob  (Job  xvi.  11  ;  xvii.  t'>  ;  xxiv.  7;
xxx.  1  ;  see  KNOHKL,  p.  -!77).  Knolvl  refers  these
tables,  as  generally  all  the  completed  genealogical
tables  in  Genesis,  to  the  Elohist.  But  this  only  is
established,  that  the  genealogical  tables  are,  in  their
very  nature,  in  great  part  Elohistie.


EXEGET1CAL    AXD    CRITICAL.

Efi'i't's  wives  and  children,  and  his  settlement  upon
flu:  1/ioiinfains  of  Seir  (vers.  1-8). — Of  Esau,  that
is  Edom  (eh.  xxv.  30). — In  eh.  xxvi.  34  the  two
first  wives  of  Esau  are  called  Judith,  the  daughter
of  Beeri  the  Hittite,  and  Bashemath,  the  daughter
of  Elon  the  Hittite.  In  ch.  xxviii.  9  the  third  wife
bears  the  name  of  Mahalath,  the  daughter  of  Ish-
rnael.  Here  the  daughter  of  Elon  the  Hittite  is
called  Adah,  and  in  the  place  of  Judith,  the  daugh
ter  of  Beeri  the  Hittite,  we  have  Aholibamah,  the
daughter  of  Anah,  the  granddaughter  of  Zibeon  the
Ilivite.  But  while  the  daughter  of  Elon  is  named
Bashemath  above,  here  the  daughter  of  Ishmacl
bears  that  name.  It  is  perfectly  arbitrary  when
Knobel  and  others  identify  the  Zibeon  of  ver.  2  with
the  Zibeon  of  vcr.  21,  and  then,  instead  of  the  addi
tion,  the  Hivite,  read  the  llorite.  But  Knobel  re
marks  correctly :  "  The  different  accounts  (all  of
which  he  ascribes  to  the  Elohist)  agree  in  this :  a.
That  Esau  had  three  wives ;  b.  that  one  of  them  is


called  Bashemath  ;  c.  that  the  third  was  a  daughter
of  Ishmael  and  sister  to  Xcbajoth."  Kcil  explains
the  differences  upon  the  assumption  that  Moses  used
genealogical  records  of  Esau's  family  and  descend
ants,  and  left  them  unaltered.  The  statement,  how
ever,  presents  no  irreconcilable  contradiction,  but  is
explained  by  the  custom  of  the  ancient  orientals,
which  is  still  in  use  among  the  Arabians,  by  which
men  often  received  surnames  from  some  important
or  remarkable  event  of  life  (as,  e.  g.  Esau  the  sur
name  Edom,  eh.  xxv.  30),  which  gradually  became
proper  names,  and  by  which  women  at  their  marriage
generally  assumed  new  first  names  (comp.  HENCSTKX-
IIKKG'S  Seitrcic/e,  iii.  pp.  273-302).  We  remark  only
that  Judith  takes  the  name  Aholibamah,  her  father
Beeri  (for  the  conjecture  of  Ilengstenberg,  which  will
scarcely  stand  the  test,  in  our  judgment,  see  Ki;ir.,  p.
232)  the  name  Anah,  while  the  general  popular  name
IIittites=Canaanites  becomes  specific  in  the  name
Ilivite.  But  now  the  names  Aholibamah  and  Anah
appear  to  be  symbolic  and  religious  names.  Bashe
math,  the  daughter  of  Elon,  now  bears  the  name
Adah,  while,  on  the  contrary,  Mahalath,  the  daughter
of  Ishmael,  is  now  called  Bashemath.  This  may  be
explained  upon  the  supposition  that  Esau,  whose
garments  were  fragrant  with  sweet  odors,  distin
guished  Judith  [Mahalath  V — A.  (!.],  whom  he  mar
ried  twenty  years  Inter  than  his  other  wives,  as  his
favorite  wife  by  the  name  Bashemath,  the  fragrant,
while  as  a  compensation  he  called  his  former  Bashe
math,  Adah,  or  ornament.  If  Beeri  was  a  priest,
the  name  Anah  (hearing,  answering),  would  be  ap-
propiiate  to  him,  as  also  Aholibamah,  tent  of  height,
holy  tabernacle,  would  be  to  his  daughter.  For  the
different  attempts  at  reconciling  these  differences,
see  KXOIIKL,  p.  278.  The  impossibility  of  solving
these  difficulties  is  emphasized  and  supported  by  a
collection  of  examples,  which  certainly  shows  that
there  were  different  traditions  according  to  different
points  of  view,  in  full  accord  with  the  living  nature
and  character  of  biblical  relations.  [These  tables
carry  the  genealogy  of  the  descendants  of  Esau
down  to  the  period  at  which  the  Pentateuch  closes,
since  the  last  of  the  eight  kings,  whose  united  reigns
would  probably  cover  this  length  of  time,  of  whom
it  is  not  said  that  lie  died,  was  probably  still  upon
the  throne  at  the  time  of  Moses,  and  was  the  king
of  Edom  to  whom  Moses  applied  for  leave  to  pass
through  the  land.  The  statement,  though  very
brief,  is  arranged  with  the  utmost  precision.  We
have  first  the  introductory  statement  in  regard  to
Esau  and  his  wives,  and  his  settlement  at  Seir ;  then
the  genealogy  of  his  sons  and  grandsons  'born  in
Seir,  in  distinction  from  those  born  in  Canaan  ;  then
of  the  tribe-princes  of  Edom  ;  then  by  an  easy  and
natural  transition  the  genealogy  of  the  Horitc  princes
and  tribes  who  were  absorbed  by  the  Edomitic  tribes ;
then  of  the  kings  of  Edom ;  and  lastly  of  the  places
or  chief  seats  of  these  tribal  princes,  after  their
families,  by  their  names.  It  is  not  surprising  that
there  should  be  inquiries  suggested  here,  which  can
not  be  answered,  or  that  there  should  be  missing
links  in  the  historical  statement.  The  apparent  dis
crepancies,  however,  involve  no  contradiction.  As
to  the  wives  of  Esau,  the  different  accounts  may  be
reconciled  in  either  of  two  ways.  We  may  suppose
with  some  (Murphy,  Jacobus)  that  Judith,  during  the
long  period  between  her  marriage  and  the  removal
of  Esau  to  Seir,  had  died,  without  leaving  male  issue,
and  that  Aholibamah  here  recorded  is  the  fourth
wife  of  Esau  in  the  order  of  time,  although  in  this


CHAP.    XXXVI.    1-43.


i)/ j


table  classed  with  the  daughter  of  Elon,  because  she
was  a  Canaanitess  also.  The  mere  change  of  names
iu  the  females  occasions  little  difficulty,  since  it  is  so
common  for  persons  to  have  two  names,  and  since
the  first  name  of  the  female  was  so  frequently
changed  at  marriage.  This  seems  a  natural  supposi
tion,  and  will  meet  the  necessities  of  the  case.  We
may,  however,  suppose,  as  Hengstenberg  suggests
(.~ee  also  Kurtz,  Keil,  Baumgarten),  that  the  names
Been  and  Anah  designate  the  same  person.  In  the
24th  verse  we  meet  with  an  Anah  who  is  thus  de
scribed  :  "  This  was  that  Anah  that  found  the  warm
springs  (E.  V.  mules)  iu  the  wilderness,  as  he  fed  the
asses  of  Zibcon  his  father."  The  identity  in  the
name  of  the  father,  Zibeon,  leads  to  the  identifying
of  Auah  and  Beeri.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  signifi
cance  of  the  name  Beeri,  man  of  the  wells,  which
would  seem  to  refer  to  some  such  remarkable  event
iu  the  desert,  lie  would  probably  be  known  by  this
name,  Beeri,  among  his  associates,  but  iu  the  gene
alogy  he  appears  with  his  own  proper  name,  Anah.
That  he  is  in  one  place  called  a  Ilittite,  in  another  a
Hivite,  in  another  still  a  Ilorite,  may  be  easily  ex
plained  on  the  theory  that  the  Ilittite  defines  the  race,
the  llivitc  the  specific  tribe,  and  the  Ilorite  describes
him  with  reference  to  his  abode.  The  theory  of
lleiigsfenberg  is  certainly  ingenious,  meets  essentially
the  difficulties  in  the  case,  and  may  well  be  held
until  a  belter  is  suggested.  See  HENGSTENBERG'S
BcU)\iff<\  vol.  iii.  pp.  273-802  ;  Keil,  Kurtz,  Baum
garten,  in  loc. — A.  G.]— And  Adah  bare. — See  the
names  of  the  sons  of  Esau,  1  Chron.  i.  33.  [The
difference  between  the  catalogue  there  and  here  is
due  to  the  change  in  the  Hebrew  from  one  weak  let
ter  to  another. — A.  G.] — Into  the  country,  from
the  face  of  his  brother. — The  conjecture  that  the
word  Seir  has  been  left  out  after  the  word  land  or
country,  is  superfluous  [and  hence  unjustifiable. —
A.  G.],  if  we  understand  the  words  "  away  from  his
brother  "as  a  qualifying  adjective  or  phrase.  He
sought  a  country  in  which  he  should  not  meet  with
his  brother.  The  final  emigration  of  Esau  to  Seir
after  the  death  of  his  father  docs  not  exclude  the
preliminary  migration  thither  (xxxii.  3) ;  neither  does
the  motive  for  the  earlier  removal,  the  securing  of  a
wide  domain  for  hunting,  and  over  which  he  might
rule,  exclude  the  motive  for  the  later,  in  the  fact
that  the  flocks  of  the  two  brothers  had  grown  so
large  that  they  could  not  dwell  together.  We  may
well  conclude,  however,  from  the  last  statement,  that
Esau  had  at  least  inherited  a  large  part  of  the  herds
of  Isaac,  although  Keil  assumes  the  contrary.

Second  Section.  Esau's  sons  and  grandsons  as
'.he  ancestors  of  tribes  (vers.  9-14;  comp.  1  Chron.  i.
•J6,  37).—  To  Mount  Seir — The  mountain-range
between  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Ailanitic  Gulf.  The
northern  part  was  called  Gcbalene,  and  the  southern
Es  Slierah  (see  KEIL,  p.  233 ;  WINER'S  Real  Wurter-
buch  [Kitto,  new  edition,  Smith,  Murphy. — A.  G.],
and  the  Geographies  of  the  Bible).  "  While  the  sons
of  Aholibamah  became  directly  heads  of  tribes,  it
was  only  the  grandsons  of  the  other  two  wives,  each
of  whom  bare  only  one  son,  who  attained  this  dis
tinction.  There  were  thus  thirteen  heads  of  tribes,
or,  if  we  exclude  Amalek,  who  was  born  of  the  con
cubine  Timnah,  twelve,  as  with  the  Nahoritcs,  Ish-
maelitcs,  and  Israelites."  Knobel.  [It  is  probable,
as  Hengstenberg  has  shown,  that  this  Amalek  was
the  ancestor  of  the  Amalekites  who  opposed  the
Israelites  in  their  march  through  the  desert;  and
that  this  is  what  Balaam  alludes  to  when  he  says  that


Amalek  was  the  first  of  the  nations,  not  the  oldest,
but  the  first  who  made  war  with  the  Israelites  after
they  became  the  covenant  people  of  God.  The  ref
erence  to  the  field  of  the  Amalekites,  eh.  xiv.  7,  is
not  in  opposition  to  this,  since  it  is  not  said  in  thai
passage  that  the  Amalekites  were  slain,  but  that  they
were  slain  who  occupied  the  country  which  after
wards  belonged  to  this  tribe.  It  is  not  probable  that
a  people  who  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  his
tory  of  Israel  (see  Numb.  xiii.  29  ;  xiv.  1 3  ;  Judg.
vi.  3;  vii.  12;  xii.  15;  1  Sam.  xiv.  4S  ;  xv.  2  ffT;
xxvii.  8  ;  2  Sam.  viii.  12)  should  have  been  without
their  genealogy  in  the  book  of  Genesis.  Amalek
probably  separated  himself  early  from  his  brethren,
perhaps  from  the  fact  of  his  birth  not  being  strictly
legitimate,  and  grew  into  an  independent  people,  who
seem  to  have  had  their  main  position  at  Kadesh,  in
the  mountains  south  of  Judah,  but  spread  themselves
throughout  the  desert  and  even  into  Canaan.  See
HEXGSTENBERG  :  Bdtragc,  vol.  iii.  p.  30:>  ff. — A.  G.]
There  were  three  divisions  from  the  three  wives. —
The  sons  of  Eliphaz. — For  the  ethnographic  im
portance  of  these  names,  compare  Knobel  and  the
Bible  Dictionaries.  Amalek,  see  above. — These
are  the  sons  of  Adah. — Since  Timnah  was  a  con
cubine,  it  is  assumed  that  Adah  had  adopted  her.

Tided  Section.  The  Edomitic  tribe-princes  (vers.
15-19).  "  niES&X,  probably  from  C|bx  or  =  i£bx  =
ninBlBa,  families,  heads  of  families,  is  the  peculiar
title  of  Edomitic  and  Horitic  phylarchs,  only  once,
Zech.  ix.  7,  xii.  5,  applied  to  Jewish  princes  or  gov
ernors.  Knobel  is  entirely  wrong  when  he  explains
these  names  geographically."  Keil.  But  they  may
have  established  themselves  geographically  within
more  or  less  fixed  limits,  e.  g.  T email  (Edom  from
Teman  to  Dedan,  Ezek.  xxv.  is).

Fourth  Section.  Genealogy  of  the  lloritcs  (vers.
20-30;  comp.  1  Chron.  i.  38-42).— Of  Seir.— The
name  of  the  ancestor  of  the  early  inhabitants  of
Seir  is  identical  with  the  name  of  the  land,  as  is  true
also  with  the  names  Asshur,  Aram,  Mi/.raim,  Canaan,
in  the  genealogical  table. — The  Horites. — i~n  ,
from  ",-n,  hole,  cave,  cave-man,  troglodyte. — Who
Inhabited  the  land — i.  e.,  the  earlier  inhabitants
in  contrast  with  the  Edomites.  The  hind  of  the
Edomites  is  full  of  caves  (Romxsox,  "Researches,"
vol.  ii.  p.  551  ff.).  "The  inhabitants  of  Idumtea
use  them  for  dwellings.  Jerome,  upon  Obadiah,  says
they  had  dwellings  and  sheepfolds  in  caves.  This  was
peculiarly  true  of  the  aboriginal  Horites,  who  (Job
xxx.  6)  are  described  by  this  peculiarity.  It  is  re
markable  that  the  description  of  the  wretched  man
ner  of  living  and  evil  courses  of  the  Ilorites,  givei:
in  the  book  of  Job,  are  still  accurately  true  to-daj
of  the  dwellers  in  the  old  Edomitic  land."  Knobel.
The  Ilorite  table  first  enumerates  seven  princes,  then
their  sons,  among  whom  the  name  Anah  occupies  a
prominent  place  (ver.  24),  who  is  said  in  Luther's
version  [also  in  the  English. — A.  G.],  following  the
error  of  the  Talmud,  "  to  have  found  the  mules  in
the  wilderness."  He  discovered  rather  in  the  desert
Gir'ri ,  warm  springs  (Vulgate),  which  may  refer
:o  the  warm  sulphur  springs  of  Calirrhoe,  in  Wady
Zerka  Maein,  or  to  those  in  Wady  El  Ahsa,  south
east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  or  to  those  in  Wady  Hamad
Between  Kerek  and  the  Dead  Sea.  For  further  de
tails  sec  Knobel  and  Keil,  the  latter  of  whom  re
marks  that  the  notice  of  his  feeding  the  asses  may
indicate  that  these  animals  led  to  the  discovery  of
the  springs,  p.  225,  note.  Besides  the  sons,  there


576


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSKS.


arc  two  daughters  named  in  this  genealogical  table,
Tldmnah  and  Aholibamah.  "  Thimnah  may  per
haps  be  the  same  person  with  the  concubine  of  Eli-
pha/.,  ver.  12.  Aholibamah  i>,  however,  not  the
same  with  the  wife  of  Esau."  Kc-il.  There  may
have  been,  also,  more  than  one  person  of  the  name
of  Thimnah.  For  the  differences  between  this  cata
logue  and  tint  in  1  Chron.,  comp.  KEIL,  p.  234.
[These  diversities  are  mainly  those  which  arise  from
the  substituting  ore  weak  letter  for  another. — A.  G.]
The  princes  are  .-till  named  once  more,  as  they  gave
their  names  to  tribes  or  districts.  Knobel  attempts
to  explain  these  names  as  it'  they  were;  geographical
and  not  pers'iiul,  which  Keil  should  not  so  strongly
have  opposed.  [Keil  shows,  however,  how  vain  and
groundless  this  attempt  is,  by  the  fact  that  the  son
ofZibcon  discovered  the  warm  springs,  which  proves
>(  course  that  this  is  a  table  of  the  names  of  per
sons,  a:;d  not  of  tribes  or  their  localities. — A.  G.]

J-'ifS'i.  S,i-!l<»i.  The  khigx  of  llic  /dud  of  Edom
(vcrs.':;i -:;•!;  romp.  1  Chron.  i.  43-50).  Out  of  the
original  discordant  or  opposing  Edomitc  and  llorite
princes  there  sprang  one  united  kingdom,  thcEdom-
itie  element  being  undoubtedly  the  predominant.
From  tin*  statement  here  made,  it  is  plain  that  the
Kings  were  not  hereditary  kings;  in  no  case  does  the
son  succeed  to  the  father's  throne.  Still  less  are  we
to  suppose,  \\ith  Keil,  Ilcngstenbevg  [also  Murphy,
Jacobus,  and  others. — A.  G.],  that  it  was  a  well-
ordered  elective  monarchy,  with  chosen  kings,  since
in  that  case,  at  leas:,  some  of  the  sons  would  have
succeeded  their  fathers.  (Knobel  wavers  between
the  assumption  of  i  lections  and  usurpations.)  It  is
rather  in  accordance  with  the  Edomitid  character
(see  the  blessing  of  Isaac\  that  a  circle  of  usurpa
tions  should  arise  out  of  the  turbulent  transition
state;  dark  counterparts  of  the  way  and  manner  in
which  the  judges  in  Isuuel  wrought  together  or  fol
lowed  one  another  at  the  calling  of  God.  ThusBcla,
of  Dinhaba,  city  of  plunder,  a<  devourer(as  despotic
Balaam),  might  well  begin  the  series.  And  the  name
of  Joba'n,  one  who  with  the  howling  of  the  desert
breaks  forth  from  his  fastness,  confirms  the  mode  of
the  kingdom  as  already  intimated.  Ilusham  seems
to  have  gained  his  power  and  position  by  surprise,
Iladad  by  violence,  and  Samlah  by  political  arts  and
fraud.  With  Saul,  therefore,  we  first  meet  with  one
who  was  desired  and  chosen,  and  the  remark  that  he
was  succeeded  by  Baal-hanan,  gracious  lord,  and  he
by  Iladar,  rich  in  power,  whose  wife  bears  a  truly
pious  name,  justifies  the  conjecture  that  the  savage,
uncultivated  forms  of  violence  and  cunning  gradually
gave  place  to  the  more  noble  forms.  Of  this  eighth
king  of  the  Edomitcs,  it  is  not  said  here  that  he  died.
The  table  closes,  therefore,  with  the  time  of  Hadar.
Keil  justly  assumes  that  the  tribe-princes  or  phylarchs
(who,  indeed,  as  persons,  did  not  follow  each  other,
but  were  cotemporary,  and  as  hereditary  dignities
located  and  fixed  themselves  geographically)  existed
as  cotemporaries  with  the  kings  (with  regard  to  Ex.
xv.  15,  comp.  Numb.  xx.  14  fif.).  "While  Moses
treats  with  the  king  of  Edom  with  reference  to  a
passage  through  his  land,  in  the  song  of  Moses  it  is
lie  tribe-princes  who  are  filled  with  fear  at  the
niraculous  passage  of  the  Israelites  through  the  Red
Sea  (comp.  Exek.  xxxii.  29).  We  may  urge  further
that  the  account  of  the  seats  of  these  phylarchs,
vcrs.  40-43,  follows  after  the  catalogue  of  the
Icings."  Keil. — Before  there  reigned  any  king
over  the  children  of  Israel — It  has  been  inferred
from  this  statement,  that  Genesis,  or  the  part  of


Genesis  lying  before  us  here,  was  not  composed  until
the  time  of  the  kings  in  Israel.  Delitzsch  replies  tc
this,  that  the  narrator  might  have  inserted  this  clause
from  the  stand-point  of  the  promise  spoken,  c.  g.  ch.
xvii.  1  and  ch.  xxxv.  11.  Then,  indeed,  \ve  should
have  expected  another  mode  of  expression.  But
how  obvious  it  is  to  suppose  that  this  phrase  is  an
interpolation  by  a  later  writer  !  ["The  phrase  does
not  imply  that  monarchy  began  in  Israel  immediately
after  those  kings;  nor  does  it  imply  that  monarchy
had  begun  in  Isiael  at  the  time  of  the  writer  ;  as
Isaac's  saying  'that  my  soul  may  bless  thec  before  I
die,'  does  not  imply  that  he  was  dead  at  the  time  of
his  saying  so.  It  simply  implies  that  Israel  was  ex
pected  to  have  kings,  as  Isaac  was  expected  to  die."
Murphy.  The  sentence  is  in  its  place,  and  the  sup
position  of  any  interpolation  is  needless  ami  there
fore  unwarrantable. — A.  G.]  But,  carefully  consid
ered,  this  table  points  back  to  a  very  remote  time  of
the  Edomitie  kingdom.  Leaving  out  of  view  the
fact,  that  usurpations  follow  each  other  far  more
rapidly  than  hereditary  sovereigns,  we  must  ob
serve  that  no  one  of  these  kings  ever  appears  else
where,  or  is  in  any  way  involved  in  the  Israelitish
history.  Some  have,  indeed,  supposed  that  Iladad,
the  son  of  Bedad,  ver.  35,  is  identical  with  the  Edom-
ite  king  who  rebelled  against  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi.
M),  yet  the  various  distinctions  of  the  two  differ
altogether  (sec  Kr.n,,  p.  •2">C>).  1  Icngstenberg,  with
much  stronger  force,  concludes,  from  the  fact  that  he
is  said  to  have  smitten  .Midi. in  in  the  field  of  Moab,
that  he  must  have  been  ne.nly  a  contemporary  with
Moses,  since  at  the  time  of  Gideon  the  Midianitcs
disappear  from  the  history. — Eela  the  r;on  of  Beor.
— It  is  merely  an  accidental  coincidence,  that  Balaam
also,  whose  name  is  related  to  1'ela,  is  a  son  of  Bcor,
although  even  Jewish  expositors  have  here  thought
of  Balaam  (see  KNODKL,  p.  280).— Of  Bozrah. — An
important  city  of  the  Edomiteg  (Is.  xxxiv.  C  and
other  passages).  Knobel  thinks  that  the  name  has
been  preserved  in  the  village  Busairch  [see  ROBIN
SON  :  "Researches,"  vol.  ii.  p.  511  II'. — A.  G.].  For
Masrekah  and  llehoboth,  see  Knobel.  [Keil  holds
that  the  allusion  to  the  river  determines  the  locality
to  be  on  the  Euphrates  ;  probably  it  is  the  Errachabi
or  Rachabeh  on  the  Euphrates  near  the  mouth  of  the
Chaboras. — A.  G.]  We  prefer,  however,  to  seek  it
at  some  small  nahar,  river,  in  Edom. — Hadar,  1
Chron.  i.  50,  erroneously  Iladad. — Mezahab. — -
Regarded  by  Knobel  as  masculine,  by  Keil  as  femi
nine,  but  the  former  is  more  probable.  [Keil  makes
Matred  the  mother  of  his  wife,  and  Mezahab  her
mother.  Murphy  regards  both  as  masculine  nouns.
There  is  no  general  rule,  other  than  u^age,  to  deter
mine  the  gender  of  many  Hebrew  names,  and  the
usage  is  not  uniform.  Sec  GREEN'S  "  Grammar,"
§  197. — A.  G.]  Keil  supposes  that  the  last-named
king,  Iladar,  is  the  same  one  with  whom  Moses
treated  for  a  passage  through  his  land.  The  theory
that  the  Pentateuch  must  be  entirely  referred  to  Mo
ses,  probably  lies  at  the  basis  of  this  supposition.
The  critical  history  of  the  Bible,  however,  cannot
depend  upon  such  conjectures.  If  we  take  into  ac
count  the  strong  desire  in  the  Edomitie  race  for  do
minion,  we  may  well  conjecture  that  the  first  usurpa
tion  began  soon  after  the  death  of  Esau's  grandsons
"If  now,"  Keil  remarks,  "we  place  their  death
about  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  before  the  exodus
of  Israel  from  Egypt,  there  would  be  a  period  of
two  hundred  and  ninety  years  before  the  arrival  o'
Israel  at  the  borders  of  Edom  (Numb.  xx.  14) ;  a


CHAP.    XXXYI.    1-43.


577


period  long  enough  for  the  reigns  of  the  eight  kings,
even  if  the  kingdom  arose  first  after  the  death  of
the  phylarchs  mentioned  in  vers.  15-18."  We  may
add,  further,  that  the  tables  may  possibly  close  with
the  beginning  of  Hadar's  reign,  and  hence,  perhaps,
we  have  a  more  detailed  account  of  his  family.  We
should  thus  only  have  to  divide  the  two  hundred  and
ninety  years  between  the  seven  kings.  An  average
,of  forty  years  is  certainly,  however,  a  very  long  pe
riod  to"assi_:n  to  a  circle  of  such  despotic  sovereigns.
[If,  however,  the  kings  co-existed  with  the  dukes,
and  were  elective,  chosen  probably  by  these  dukes
or  phylarchs,  and  began  soon  after  the  death  of  Esau,
we  should  have  a  longer  average.  The  length  of
human  life  at  that  period  would  justify  the  assump
tion  of  these  longer  reigns;  if  there  is  good  reason
to  believe,  as  there  seems  to  be,  that  their  reigns
were  peaceful,  and  not  violent  usurpations.  All
these  calculations,  however,  depend  upon  the  length
of  the  period  of  the  bondage. — A.  G.]

Sixth  Section.  The  permanent  tribe-princes,  or
the  seats  of  their  power,  in  Edom  (vcrs.  40-4 3  ;  comp.
1  Chron.  i.  51-54).  It  is  plain  that  we  have  here
the  geographical  position  of  the  original  personal
tribe-princes,  recorded  under  the  political  provincial
tribe-names,  i.  e.,  we  have  the  ethnographic  and
geographical  divisions  of  the  kingdom  of  Edom  ;  and
Keil  justly  rejects  the  assertion  of  Bertheau,  that
there  follows  here  a  second  catalogue  of  the  Edomitic
princes,  who  perhaps,  after  the  death  of  Hadar,
"  restored  the  old  tribal  institution  and  the  heredi
tary  aristocracy." — After  their  places,  according
to  their  families,  by  their  names. — After  the
names,  i.  e.,  which  their  families  and  places  had
formed  for  themselves.  Hence  many,  perhaps  the
most,  of  the  old  names  of  princes  have  passed  over
into  new  names  of  tribes  and  localities. — 1.  Thim-
nah=Amalek  (see  vers.  12,  16,  and  22).— 2.  Al
e/ah. — Here  the  Horitic  name  Alwan,  ver.  23,  ap
pears  to  have  forced  its  way  through  the  Edomite
dominion.  —  3.  Jetheth. — 4.  Aholibamah. — Per
haps  the  district  of  the  sons  of  Aholibamah,  ver.  2.
Keil  is  inclined  to  refer  it  to  the  Horite  Aholibamah,
ver.  25. — 5.  Elah. — Reminds  us  of  Elon,  ver.  2,
and  of  Eliphaz  his  grandson  and  Esau's  son,  whose
sous,  Omar,  Zepho,  and  Gatam  (ver.  11),  may  per
haps  have  gone  up  into  the  district  of  Kcnaz. — 6.
Pinon. — 7.  Kenaz. — Points  back  to  Kenaz,  the  son
of  Eliphaz,  ver.  11. — 8.  Theman. — This  was  the
name  of  the  first  son  of  Eliphaz,  ver.  11. — 9.  Mib-
zar. — Goes  back,  perhaps  through  Bozra,  to  a  tribe-
prince.  The  signification  of  Zepho,  ver.  11,  is  analo
gous, — 10.  Magdiel. — Is  perhaps  connected  with
Manahath,  ver.  23. — 11.  Iram. — "  nbtf  is  the  sea-
point  Aila.  "i'rQ  is  the  same  with  Phunon,  a  camp
ing  place  of  the  Israelites  (Numb,  xxxiii.  43  f.),
celebrated  for  its  mines,  to  which  many  Christians
were  sent  by  Diocletian,  situated  between  Petra
and  Zoar,  northeasterly  from  Wady  Musa  (HITTER,
xiv.  p.  125  ft0.).  V^n,  the  capital,  "'S^nn  "fix  ,
ver.  34."  Keil.  Mibzar  might  be  referred  to  Petra,
Knobel  thinks,  since  it  is  a  stronghold,  but  that  place
is  usually  called  Sclah. — He  is  Esau. — The  conclu
sion  of  the  narrative  is  entirely  in  accordance  with
the  Hebrew  conception  of  the  personal  character
and  relations  of  history.  Esau  is  actually  "  the
father"  and  not  merely  the  founder  of  Edom,  as
he  lives  on  in  his  toledoth.  This  close  of  the
toledoth  of  Esau  points  forward  to  the  toledoth  of
Jacob.

37


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  The  sacred  history  hangs  up  in  the  treasure-
house  of  the  Old  Testament  the  tables  of  the  tole
doth  of  Esau,  not  merely  because  he  too  received  a
blessing  from  God,  and  had  the  promise  of  a  blessing
(Keil),  but  more  especially  because  lie  now  breaks
the  band  of  the  theocracy,  and  passes  out  of  view,
just  as  it  had  done  with  the  tables  of  the  nations,  and  all
the  succeeding  genealogical  tables.     God,  indeed,  per
mits  the  heathen  to  go  their  own  way  (Acts  xiv.  16  ;
Ps.  Ixxxi.  13),  but  is  mindful  of  all  his  children  (Acts
xv.  14  f.  ;  xvii.  26),  even  those  who  are  hi  the  king
dom  of  the  dead   [but  in  a  different  sense,  surely.
— A.  G.]    (Luke  xx.  38  ;  1  Peter  iv.  6),   and  hence
the  people  of  God,  too,   preserve  their  memory  in
hope.

2.  We  may  suppose  that  Edom  at  first  preserved
the  patriarchal  religion,  although  in  a  more  external
form.     Its  vicinity  to  the  tribe  of  Judah,  if  it  made
any  proper  use  of  it,  was  a  permanent  blessing.     The
idolatry  of  Edom  is  not  referred  to  frequently  even  in
later  history.     The  only  allusions  are  1  Kings  xi.  1  ;
ix.  8  ;  2  Chron.  xxv.  14.     From  these  intimations  we
may  infer  that  Edom  declined,  to  a  certain  extent,
into  heathen,  religious  darkness,  but  much  more  in
to  moral  depravity  (sec  Ex.  xv.  15,  and  other  pas
sages).     The  people  of  Israel  are  frequently  remind
ed,  however,  in  the  earlier  history,  to  spare  Esau's
people,  and  treat  them  as  brethren  (Deut.  ii.  4,  5 ;  xxiii.
7,  8).     It  may  be  remarked,  by  the  way,  that  these
passages  show  the  early  age  of  Deuteronomy,  since
Edom  stands  in  other  relations  at  a  later  period.    The
refined  theocratic  recollection  in  Edom,  avails  so  far
as  to  even  awaken  and  cherish  its  jealousy  of  Israel.
And  in  this  respect  Edom  stands  in  the  relation  of
an  envious,  malicious,  and  false  brother  of  Israel,
and  becomes  a  type  of  Antichrist  (Obadiah).     This,
however,  does  not  exclude  the  promise  of  salvation
for   the  historic   Edom,   in   its  individual  members
(Isai.  xi.  14  ;  Jer.  xlix.  17  ff.).     We  do  not  read  of
any  special  conversion  of  Edom  to  Christianity,  per
haps  (see,  however,  Mark  iii.  8),  because  the  violent
conversion  of  Edom  to  the  Jewish  faith,  under  John
Hyrcanus,  had  first  occurred,  by  which  Edom  was  par
tially  merged  into  the  Jews,  and  panially  amalga
mated  with  the  Bedouin  Arabs.     To  return  back  to
Jacob,  or  to  fall  away  to  Ishmael,  was  the  only  alter
native  open  to  Edom.

3.  In  the  Herodian  slaughter  of  the  children  at
Bethlehem,  however,  the  old  thought  of  Esau,  to  kill
his  brother  Jacob,  becomes  actual  in  the  assault  upon
the  life  of  Jesus.

4.  The  history  of  the  Edomitcs  falls  at  last  into
the  history  of  the  Ilerods.     For  this  history,  as  for
that  of  Edom,  we  may  refer  to  the  Bible  Dictionaries,
the   sources    of    religious   history    (Joscphus,    and
others),   and   books    of   travels.    [ROBINSON,  "  Re
searches,"  vol.  ii.  p.  551  ff. — A.  G.]

5.  The  table  here  is  composed  of  several  tables
which  portray,  vividly  and   naturally,  the  origin  of
a  kingdom:    1.  The  period  of  the  tribe-chiefs ;    2.
the  period  of  the  peculiar  permanent  tribe-princes  ;
3.  the  period  of  the    formation  of  the  kingdom,  and
its  continued  existence  upon  the  basis  of  permanent
tribe  principalities  or  dukedoms.

C.  The  subjugation  of  the  lloritcs  (whom  we  are
not  to  regard  as  savages,  merely  because  they  dwelt
in  caves)  by  the  Edomites,  and  the  fusion  of  both
people  under  an  Edomitic  kingdom,  represent  a -to  us


578


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


vividly  the  process  of  the  formation  of  a  people,  as
in  a  precisely  similar  way  it  has  occurred  a  hundred
times  in  the  history  of  the  world.  In  sacred  history
we  may  refer  here  especially  to  the  rise  of  the  Sa
maritans,  and  in  later  history,  to  the  formation  of
the  Uoman  people.  The  Franks  overcame  the  Gauls
as  theEdomites  the  Horitcs,  although  under  different
moulding  relation?.  This  great  forming  process  is  now
taking  place  under  our  very  eyes  in  North  America.
'But  these  historical  growths  of  a  people  are  the  sub
ject  of  a  special  divine  providence  (Acts  xvii.  "26).

7.  We  are  hi're  reminded  again  of  the  prominent
personal  view  of  all  the  relations  of  life  in  the  sacred
Scriptures.     At  the  close  of  the  whole  evolution  of  a
people  it  is  said  again  :  This  is  Esau.     He  lives  still,
as  the  father,  in  the  entire  people  ;   stamps  even  the
lloritic  element  with  his  own  image.

8.  The  discovery  of  the  warm   springs  by  Anah,
is  an  example  of  human  discoveries  in  their  accidental
and  providential  bearings  and  significance.     [Words
worth  says  :  There  is  an  important   moral  in  these
generations  of  Esau.    They  show  that  the  families  of
the    cart/ill  race   of  this   world   develop  themselves
more  rnjiiiU'i  than  the  promised  seed.     Ishmael  and
Esau  conic  sooner  to  their  possession  than  Isaac  and
Jacob.     The  promised  seed  is  of  slow  growth.     It  is
like  the  grain  of  mustard-seed  (Matt.  xiii.  31).     The
fulfilments  of  all  God's  promises,  of  great  blessings
to  his  people,  are  always  lon^  in  coming.     But   the
kingdoms  of  this  world  would  soon  fade,  while  the
kingdom  of  heaven  will  endure  for  ever  (p.  147,  H<s).
—A.  G.]


ILOMILKTICAL   AX1)   1'UACTICAL.

Meditations  upon  this  chapter  must  be  connected
with  the  general  declarations  as  to  Esau,  e.  g.,  with
Isaac's  blessing  upon  him,  with  the  prophetic  pas
sages  relating  to  Esau,  with  the  history  of  the  Herods,
with  Aets  xvii.  2(>,  or  with  other  N'ew  Testament
passives. — The  fulfilling  of  the  blessing  upon  Esau.
— Esau's  development. — The  ancient  and  modern
Edom. — How  Israel  even  in  later  days  regarded  the
fraternal  relation  of  Edom  as  sacred.

STAKKK  :  This  narrative  of  Esau  has,  doubtless,  its
important  uses,  partly  as  it  shows  how  richly  God
fulfils  his  promises  (ch.  xxv.  23  ;  xxvii.  39,  40),  partly
as  it  sets  before  the  descendants  of  Jacob,  how  far
the  boundaries  of  Esau's  descendants  reach,  and
partly  as  thence  the  Israelites  are  earnestly  forbidden
to  encroach  upon  them  (Dcut.  ii.  4,  5),  except  in  rela
tion  to  the  Amalekites  (Ex.  xvii.  14).  Moreover,
there  were  many  pious  men  among  the  descendants
of  Esau,  who  were  in  covenant  with  God.  Observe
how  the  patriarchal  sacrificial  service  continued  for
a  long  time  among  the  Edomites,  until,  after  the
exodus  of  the  Israelites  from  Egypt,  the  church  of
the  Edomites  gradually  declined,  etc.  (Taken  in  part
from  RAMBACH'S  "Ecclesiastical  History.")  Ver.  3.
Tlie.se  names  lead  one  to  think  of  Job's  friends.  (He
then  remarks,  that  some  suppose  that  Job's  friend
Eliphaz  descended  from  this  one,  while  others  regard
the  Eliphaz  of  Job  as  still  older.)  View  of  the  Edo-
:  mites  and  of  the  Amalekites. — (Ver.  24.  Mules,  ac


cording  to  Luther.     The  Hebrew  word  occurs  but
once  in  the  sacred  Scriptures,  and  is,  therefore,  more
difficult  to  explain.     The  Sept.  has  formed  from  it  a
man's  name;  the  Chaldee  renders  it  "giants  ;  "  the
Samar.  Emim,  a  race  of  giants  ;  in  the  Arabic  some
understand  a  kind  of  warm  bath ;  others,  a  kind  of
healing  drug.) — Ver.  33.  This  Jobab  is  held  by  some,
though  without  any  good  reason,  as  the  same  with  Job.
— OSIANDER  :  The  kingdom  of  Christ  alone  endures
and  is  eternal ;   the  other  kingdoms  and  sovereign
ties,  which    are    of   this  world,  are  subject  to  fre
quent  changes,   and,  indeed,  decay  and  perish  (Ps.
Ixxxix.   3,  4).       Whatever    rises    rapidly  disappears
rapidly  also  (Ps.  xxxvii.  35  f.).     LAXGE  :  Jacob,  not
less  than  Abraham  and  Isaac,  was  a  type  of  Christ :
1.  According   to   the    promise,    the   lord    over    all
Canaan,  but  he  had  nothing  of  his  own  there  but
the  parcel  of  the  field  which  he  bought  at  Shechem.
Thus,  Christ  also  is  the  Lord  of  the  whole  world,
etc. ;    2.  Jacob  a  great  shepherd,   Christ  the  chief
shepherd ;  3.  Jacob's  long  service    for  Rachel  and
Leah,  Christ  in  the  form  of  a  servant  and  his  ser
vice;    4.  Jacob  gained  two  herds,  Christ  the  Jews
and  Gentiles  ;  5.  Jacob  a  prophet,  priest,  and  king,
the    three    offices    of  Christ ;    6.  Jacob's  wrestling,
and    Christ's   agony  and  struggle;    7.  Jacob  lame
in  his  thigh,  Christ  and  the  prints  of  the  nails  and
spear;   8.  Jacob  left  behind  him  twelve  patriarchs,
Christ  the  twelve  apostles.     (iKur.ACii :  Calvin's  re
marks.     We  must  here  remember,  that  those  sep
arated  from    God's   covenant    rise  quickly  and  de
cay  rapidly,  like    the    grass    upon   the    house-tops,
which    springs    up    quickly    and    soon  withers    be
cause  it  has  no  depth  of  earth    and    roots.     Both
of    Isaac's    sons    have    the    glorious    promise    that
kings  shall  come  from  them  ;  now  they  appear  first
among  the    Edomites,  and  Israel    seems    to  be  set
aside.     But  the  course    of  the    history  shows  how
much  better  it  is  first   to  strike  the  roots  deep  in
to  the  earth,  than  to    receive    immediately  a  tran
sitory    glory  which    vanishes   away    in    a    moment.
The  believer,  therefore,  while    he    toils  slowly  on
wards,  must  not    envy  the    rapid   and  joyful    pro
gress  of  others,  for  the  permanent  prosperity  and
blessedness  promised    to    him    by  the    Lord  is  of
far  greater  value. — SCIIKODKU  :    (Rankc:)     The  Is
raelites  also  were   to    be  encouraged  in  their  con
test,  through    the    conspicuous   victory   which   the
Edomites    in  earlier  times  had  obtained    over    the
numerous  tribes  of  Seir.    (Baumgarten :)    This  exter
nal  glory  in  the  very  beginning  of  Esau's  history,
stands  in  striking    contrast  to  the  simple  relations
in  the  family  of  Jacob,  but   corresponds   perfectly
with    the  whole  previous    course    of  our   history,
which,  from  the  beginning,  assigns  worldly  power
and  riches  to  the  line  which  lies  beyond  the  cove
nant  and  union  with  God,  while  it   sets  forth  the
humility  and  retiring  nature  in  the  race  chosen  by
God. — In   later   history,  the    kingdom   among  the
Edomites  appears  to  have  been  hereditary  (1  Kings
xi.  14). — Ver.  43.      (Baumgarten  :)      We   may  ex
plain  the  fact  that  only  eleven   names    are    found
here,  while   there    are   fourteen    above,    upon   the
supposition  that  some    of  the    seats  of  power  em
braced  more  than  one  princely  family.


CHAP.   XXXVII.  1-36.


THIRD    PERIOD.

THE  Genesis  of  the  People  of  Israel  in  Egypt  from  the  Twelve  Branches  of  Israel,
or  the  History  of  Joseph  and  his  Brethren.  Joseph  the  Patriarch  of  the  Faith-
dispensation  through  Humiliation  and  Exaltation. — Cn.  XXXVII.  1 — L.


FIRST     SECTION.

s  incomidcrate  fondness  for  Joseph.     Joseph's  dreams.     His  brothers'1  envy.     Joseph  sold

into  Egypt.

CHAPTER  XXXVII.    1-3G.

1  And   Jacob   dwelt  in  the  land  wherein  his   father  was  a  stranger,  in  the  land  of

2  Canaan.     These  are  the  generations  of  Jacob.     Joseph  being  seventeen  years  old,  was
feeding  the  flock  with  his  brethren ;  and  the  lad  was  with  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  and  with
the  sons  of  Zilpah,  his  father's  wives :  and  Joseph  brought  unto  his  father  their  evil

3  report.1     Xow  Israel  loved  Joseph  more  than  all  his  children,  because  he  was  the  son
of  his  old  age2;    and  he  made  him  a  coat  of  many  colors3  [a  beautiful  robe,  ch.  xxvii.  is].

4  And  when  his  brethren  saw  that  their  father  loved  him  more  than  all  his  brethren,  they

5  hated  him,  and  could  not  speak  peaceably  unto  him.     And  Joseph  dreamed  a  dream,
G  and  he  told  it  to  his  brethren :  and  they  hated  him  yet  the  more.     And  he  said  unto

7  them,   Hear,  I  pray  you,   this  dream  which  I  have   dreamed:  For,   behold,  we  were
binding  sheaves  in  the  field,  and,   lo,   my  sheaf  arose,  and  also  stood  upright ;    and,

8  behold,  your  sheaves  stood  round  about,  and  made  obeisance  to  my  sheaf.     And  his
brethren  said  unto  him,  Shalt  thou  indeed  reign   over  us?  or  shalt  thou  indeed  have
dominion  over  us  ?  and  they  hated  him  yet  the  more  for  his  dreams,  and  for  his  words.

9  And  lie  dreamed  yet  another  dream,  and  told  it  to  his  brethren,  and  said,  Behold,  I  have
dreamed  a  dream  more ;  and,  behold,  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  eleven  stars  made

10  obeisance  unto  me.     And  he  told  it  to  his  father,  and  to  his  brethren;  and  his  father
rebuked  him,  and  said  unto  him,  What  is  this  dream  that  thou  hast  dreamed  ?     Shall  I
and  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  indeed  come  to  bow  down  ourselves  to  thee  to  the

1 1  earth  ?     And  his  brethren  envied  him ;  but  his  father  observed  [kept,  preserved]  the  say-
12,  13  ing.    And  his  brethren  went  to  feed  their  father's  flock  in  Shechem.    And  Israel  said

unto  Joseph,  Do  not  thy  brethren  feed  the  flock  in  Shechem?  come,  and  I  will  send  thee

14  unto  them.     And  he   said  to  him,  Here  am  I.     And  he  said  to  him,  Go,  I  pray  thee,
see  whether  it  be  well  with  thy  brethren,  and  well  with  the  flocks;  and  bring  me  word

15  again.     So  he  sent  him  out  of  the  vale  of  Hebron,  and  he  came  to  Shechem.     And  a
certain  man  found  him,  and,  behold,  he  was  wandering  in  the  field :  and  the  man  asked

1G  him,  saying,  What  seekest  thou?     And  he  said,  I  seek  my  brethren:  tell  me,  I  pray

17  thee,  where  they  feed  their  flocks.     And  the  man  said,  They  are  departed  hence;   for  I
heard  them  say,   Let  us  go  to  Dothan    [the  two  wells].     And   Joseph   went   after  his

18  brethren,  and  found  them  in  Dothan.     And  when  they  saw  him  afar  off,  even  before

19  he  came  near  unto  them,  they  conspired  against  him  to  slay  him.     And  they  said  one

20  to  another,  Behold,  this  dreamer  [man  of  dreams]  cometh.     Come  now,  therefore,  and  let
us  slay  him,  and  cast  him  into  some  pit ;  and  we  will  say,  Some  evil  beast  hath  de-

21  voured  him  :  and  we  will  see  what  will  become  of  his  dreams.     And  Reuben  heard  it,


580


GENESIS,  Oil    THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


anil  lie  delivered  him  [sought  to  deliver]  out  of  their  hands  ;   and  he  said,  Let  us  not  kill  him.
And  Reuben  said   unto   them,  Shed   no    blood,  litt  cast  him    into  this  pit  that   it  in  the
•wild. -mess   and  lav  no  hand  upon  him;  that  he   might  rid   him  out  of  their  hands,  to
deliver  him  to  his  faiher  again.      And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Joseph  was  come  unto  his
brei'nren,  that   thev  stripped  Joseph  out   of  his   coat,  Jtis  coat  of   many  colors   that  ?';«.*
im.      And  thev  took  him,  and  cast  him  into  a  pit  :   and  the  pit.  vas  empty,  tin  rv  was
no  water  in  it.      And    they  sat   down  to  eat   bread:  and  they  lifted   up  their  eyes   and
.  a  company  of  Ishmaelites  [acaravan]  came  from   Gilead,  with   their

camels  bearing  spices  [tragakanth-gum],  and   balm,  and   myrrh,  going  to  carry  it    down  to
]v_rvpi.      And  Judah   >aid   unto   his  brethren,  AVhat    profit  is  it  if  we  slay  our   broiher,
•al    his   blood  ';      (.'nine,  and  let  us    sell  him  to  the    Islimaeht.es,  and  let  not  our
:.  him;    for  he  zs  our  brother,  «/«/  our  ilesh.     And  his  brethren  were  content.
.-..-  passed  by   Midianites,  merchantmen;   and  they  dre\v  and  lifted  up  Joseph
pit,  and  sold  Joseph  to  the   Ishmaelites    for  twenty  j,,'<  a  .t  of  silver  :   and  they
it  Joseph  unto  Ki_rvpt.     And  Reuben  returned  unto  the  pit  :   and,  behold,  Joseph
\vas  not  in  the  pit  ;   and  in-  rent    his  clothes.      And  he  returned   unto   his   brethren,  an  i
i  child    is  not;   and  ],  whither   shall  I  go?      And  they  took  Joseph's   coat,  and
,VJ    killed  a  kid  of  the  gnats,  and  dipped  (he  coat  in  the  blood.      And  they  sent  the  coat  of
marnj  colors    and    they  brought  it  to  their   lather;  and  said,  This  have  we  found;   know
;;;;    now  whether  it  lc  thy  son's  coat  or  no.      And  he  knew  it,  ami  said,   It  i*  my  son's  coat
34   an  evil  beast  hath  devoured   him;   Joseph  is  without  doubl   rent  in  pieces.     And  Jacob
;  ud  put  sackcloth  upun  his  loins,  and  mourned  for  his  son   many  days.

;;;,   Ami  all  his  sons,  and   all  his   daughters,  rose  up    to  comfort  him;   but   he  refused  to  be

comforted;   and  he  said,  .For  1  will  go  down  into  (he  grave  [shcol]  '  unto  my  son  mourn-

i          his   father  wept    (in-  him.      And  the    Midianites  .-old    him    into  Egypt,  unto

LViiphar  [Septuagint!  nereis,  belonging  to  the  sun],  all    ollicer    of    Tharaoh's    [king ;  Lcpsius :  sun],

and  captain  of  the  guard.

1 1  Vi •:•.  J.— PI""  ~r~Z.~  .  LXX.,  \f/uyov  Trorrjpoi' ;  Vulgate,  more  strongly,  ncnifni-i/ fi -it It;  .,•  sums  cipud  ;>n!rr»i  crimint
fi.-ssinui.  l-'i'  r.i  ""I ,  ail  onomatopc  (dabab— dab  — dabble),  denoting  a  light,  oft-repeated  snund  (lap-lap),  or  mo/ion,  liko

the  Arabi'-  ^J  leniter  inccssit,  i-ip'«i-H.  In  cither  way  the  noun  H"  would  come  to  mean  a  rumor  whifju'red,  or
,  rei  ping  round.  It  does  n.'t  mean  that  Joseph  made  accusations  against  them,  as  the  Vulgate  has  it,  but  that,  in  boyish
simplicity,  he  repealed  what  lie  had  heard  a!. -nt  them.  The  root  3-T  occurs  only  Cant.  vii.  in,  where  (ic.-enius  gives  it
tie-  icnse  nt  l,'i/h':i/  tl<,wimi,  which  hardly  seems  consistent  with  tlic  radical  idea  of  repetition.  The  light  motion  of  the
lip-,  like  one  miit'teiiii--,  or  faintly  attempting  to  speak  in  sleep,  as  our  translators  have  given  it,  is  more  in  accordance
with  the  i  ature  of  the  root.— T.  J..1

[-  V.  r.  V  ~~:p7  "  .  Keiniercd,  f>:  of  Itis  old  aye,  TrjAvyeTos.  I!ut;  aH  Maimonidcs  well  remarks,  this  could  not
h-ivc  been  the  r^e  with  Jo-'eph  in  a  degree  much  exceeding  the  relation  to  the  father  of  Issachar  and  Zcbulon.  1!"
thinks  therefore,  that  lie  was  so  called,  not  because  he  was  late  born,  hut  because  he  stayed  at  home,  and  thus  became  his
father's  print  ipal  stay  and  support—"  as  is  the  custom  of  old  men  to  retain  one  son,  ill  this  manner,  whether  the  youngest
or  init--'""TTb  r~-n  ""-?-  that  is,  be  to  him  yijpoTpo^os  or  y7)pO|3oa-/co;,  as  tlic  Greeks  called  it."  In  this  view  the
plural  fi.rm  would  be  intensive,  denoting  extreme  old  age1,  to  which  the  other  places  where  the  form  occurs  would  well
agree,  (ien.  xxi.  '2,  ~  ;  xliv.  20.  After  Joseph,  Benjamin  performed  this  duty.  The  Targum  of  Onkclos  seems  to  have  had
something  .d'this  kind  in  vi-w,  when  it  renders  it  fib  E^n  "C,  Jiti  wi.«:  son— Ji!:- careful  sen,  who  provided  for  him.— T.  L.]

l^i  YIT  ;;___  -155  r:i~~,  c"(7/  of  many  colors,— rather,  coat  of  pieces.  The  context  shows  that  it  was  something
beautiful  and  luxurious  ;'  the  other  passage  where  it  occurs,  2  Sam.  xiii.  18,  shows  that  it  may  denote  a  garment  for
cither  sex,  and  the  plural  form  indicates  variety  of  construction  or  material.  The  primary  sense  of  the  root,  CD2  .
is  diminution,  not  diffusion,  as  (iesenius  says  (see  ,152).  This  is  inferred  from  the  use  of  C£S  for  something  small,  as
t  he  end  or  extremity  of  anything,  and  the  parallelism  of  the  verb,  1's.  xii.  2,— a  garment  distinguished  for  small  spots,
x<  <•,']>:  SL  Hi- fringes—  T.  L.]

[«   Ver.  33.— On  the  etymology  of  3'iXC  sec  Excursus,  p.  585  sqq.— T.  L.]


(JEXERAL  PRELIMINARY   REMARKS.

1.  It  is  to  be  noted  here,  in  the  first  place,  that  the
history  of  Joseph  is  amplified  beyond  that  of  any
of  the  patriarchs  hitherto.  This  is  explained  by  the
contact  which  Joseph's  transportation  gives  rise  to
between  the  Hebrew  spirit  and  the  Egyptian  culture
and  literature.  A  traae  of  this  may  be  found  in
the  history  of  Abraham  ;  for  after  Abraham  had  been
in  Euypt.  his  history  becomes  more  full.  With  the
memorabilia  of  Joseph  conned s  itself  the  account


of  Moses,  who  was  educated  in  all  the  different
branches  of  Egyptian  learning,  whilst  this  again
points  to  Samuel" and  the  schools  of  the  prophets.

'>..  Knobel  regards  Joseph's  history  as  having  grown
out  of  the  original  Elohistie  text  connected  with  a
later  revision  (p.  288).  lie  supposes,  however,  in
this  case,  two  halves,  which,  taken  separately,  have
no  significance.  That  Joseph  was  sold  into  Egypt,  ac
cording  to  the  supposed  original  text,  can  only  be
explained  from  the  fact  mentioned  in  the  supposed
additions,  that  he  had  incurred  the  hatred  of  his


CHAP.    XXXVII.    1-30.


58


brethren  by  reason  of  his  aspiring  dreams.  Reu
ben's  proposition  to  cast  Joseph  into  the  pit,  and
which  aimed  at  his  preservation,  wag  not  added  until
afterwards,  it  is  said.  Even  Joseph's  later  declara
tion  :  I  was  stolen  from  the  country  of  the  Hebrews,
is  regarded  as  making  a  difference.  Delitzsch,  too,
adopts  a  combination  of  different  elements,  without,
however,  recognizing  the  contradictions  raised  by
Knobel  (p.  517).  He  presents,  also,  as  a  problem
difficult  of  solution,  the  usage  of  the  divine  names  in
this  last  period  of  Genesis.  In  ch.  xxxvii.  no  name
of  God  occurs,  but  in  ch.  xxxviii.  it  is  Jehovah  that
slays  Judah's  sons,  as  also,  in  ch.  xxxix.,  it  is  Jeho
vah  that  blesses  Joseph  in  Potiphar's  house,  and  in
person  ;  as  recognized  by  Potiphar  himself.  Only
in  vcr.  9  we  find  Elohim, — the  name  Jehovah  not
being  here  admissible.  From  ch.  xl.  onward,  the
name  Jehovah  disappears.  It  occurs  but  once  be
tween  ch.  xl.  and  1.,  as  in  ch.  xlix.  18,  when  Jacob
uses  it :  "I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  Jehovah."
For  different  interpretations  of  this  by  Keil,  Drechs-
ler,  Ilengstenberg,  Baumgarten,  and  Delitzsch,  see
DELIT/SCII,  p.  515.  The  three  last  agree  in  this,  that
the  author  of  Genesis,  in  the  oft-repeated  Elohim,
wished  here  to  mark  more  emphatically,  by  way  of
contrast,  the  later  appearance  of  the  Jehovah-
period,  Exocl.  iii.  6.  This  would,  indeed,  be  a  very
artificial  way  of  writing  books.  The  riddle  must
find  its  solution  in  actual  relations.  The  simple  ex
planation  is,  that  in  the  history  of  a  Joseph,  which
stands  entirely  upon  an  Elohistic  foundation,  this
name  Elohim  predominantly  occurs.  Joseph  is  the
Solomon  of  the  patriarchal  times.

:;.  The  generations  of  Jacob  connect  themselves
with  those  of  Esau.  Delitzsch  justly  remarks,  p.
511,  that  the  representation  which  follows  (ch.
xxxvii.  to  ch.  1.),  was  intended  to  be,  not  a  mere  his
tory  of  Joseph,  but  a  history  of  Jacob  in  his  sons.
Otherwise  Judah's  history,  ch.  xxxviii.,  would  appear
as  an  interpolation.  The  twelve  sons  of  Jacob  con
stitute  Israel's  new  seed.  The  latter  fact,  of  course,
has  the  stronger  emphasis.  The  generations  of
Jacob  are  the  history  and  successions  of  his  poster
ity — that  is,  his  living  on  in  his  posterity,  just  as
Adam's  tholedoth,  Gen.  v.  1,  represent  the  history  of
Adam,  not  personally,  but  historically,  in  his  descend
ants.

4.  Joseph's  history  is  considered  in  a  triple  rela
tion  :  as  the  history  of  the  genesis  of  the  Israclitish
people  in  Egypt ;  as  an  example  of  a  special  provi
dence,  such  as  often  brings  good  out  of  evil,  as  ex-
empliiied  in  the  book  of  Job  ;  and  as  a  type  of  the
fundamental  law  of  God  in  guiding  the  elect  from
suffering  to  joy,  from  humiliation  to  exaltation — a
law  already  indicated  in  the  life  of  Xoah,  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  but  which,  henceforth,  develops  it
self  more  and  more  (especially  in  the  history  of
David),  to  terminate,  at  last,  in  the  life  of  Jesus,  as
presenting  the  very  sublimity  of  the  antithesis.  Hence
the  appearance,  in  our  history,  of  individual  types
representing  the  New-Testament  history  of  Jesus,
such  as  the  jealousy  and  hatred  of  Joseph's  brethren,
the  fact  of  his  being  sold,  the  fulfilment  of  Joseph's
prophetic  dreams  in  the  very  efforts  intended  to  pre
vent  his  exaltation,  the  turning  of  his  brothers'  wick
ed  plot  to  the  salvation  of  many,  even  of  themselves,
and  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  the  spiritual  sentence
pronounced  on  the  treachery  of  the  brethren,  the
victory  of  pardoning  love,  Judah's  suretyship  for
Benjamin,  his  emulating  Joseph  in  a  spirit  of  re-
ieeming  resignation,  Jacob's  joyful  reviving  on  hear-


;  of  the  life  and  glory  of  his  favorite  son,  whom
he  had  believed  to  be  dead.

Concerning  Israel's  genesis  in  Egypt,  Delitzsch
remarks  :  "  According  to  a  law  of  divine  providences,
to  be  found  not  only  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  also
in  the  New  (?),  not  the  land  of  the  promise,  but  a
foreign  country,  is  the  place  where  the  Church  is
born,  and  comes  to  maturity.  This  foreign  country,
to  the  Old-Testament  Church,  is  the  land  of  Egypt.
To  go  before  his  people,  to  prepare  a  place  for  them,
is  Joseph's  high  vocation.  Sold  into  Egypt,  lie  opens
the  way  thither  to  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  the  same
country  where  he  matures  to  manhood,  where  he  suf
fers  in  prison,  and  attains  to  glory,  becomes,  to  his
family,  the  land  where  it  comes  to  the  maturity  of  a
nation, — the  land  of  its  servitude,  and  of  its  re
demption.  Thus  far  Joseph's  history  is  the  overture
of  Jacob's  history — a  type  of  the  way  of  the  Church  ;
not  of  Jehovah  only,  but  of  Christ  in  his  progress
from  humiliation  to  exaltation,  from  subjection  to
freedom,  from  sufferings  to  glory/'  See  Matt.  ii.  15  ;
Hosea  xi.  1.  Israel's  riches  of  election  and  endow
ment  are  to  be  developed  by  contact  with  different
heathen  nations,  and  especially  with  Egypt.  Just  as
Christianity,  the  completed  revelation  of  the  new
covenant,  developed  itself  formally  for  the  world,  by
its  reciprocal  intercourse  with  a  GrEeco-Romanic
culture,  thus  was  it  also  with  the  faith  of  the  old
covenant  in  its  reciprocal  intercourse  with  the  old
Egyptian  world-culture,  as  shown  especially  in  the
history  of  Joseph,  Moses,  and  Solomon  who  became
the  son-in-law  of  one  of  the  Pharaohs.  More  prom
inently  does  this  appear,  again,  in  the  history  of  Alex
andrian  Judaism  ;  in  which,  however,  the  interchange
of  influence  with  Egypt  becomes,  at  the  same  time,
one  with  that  of  the  whole  Orient,  and  of  Greece.

The  key  of  Joseph's  history,  as  a  history  of  prov
idence,  is  clearly  found  in  the  declaration  made  by
him  ch.  xlv.  5-8,  and  ch.  1.  20.  The  full  explanation,
however,  of  its  significance,  is  found  in  the  history
of  Christ  as  furnishing  its  perfect  fulfilment.  Per
mission  of  evil,  counteraction  and  modification
of  evil,  frustration  of  its  tendency,  its  conver
sion  into  good,  victory  over  evil,  destruction  of  evil,-
and  reconciliation  of  the  evil  themselves, — these  are
the  forces  of  a  movement  here  represented  in  its
most  concrete  and  most  powerful  relations.  The
evil  is  conspiracy,  treachery,  and  a  murderous  plot
against  their  innocent  brother.  The  conversion  of
it  is  of  the  noblest  kind.  The  plot  to  destroy  Jo
seph  is  the  occasion  of  his  greatest  glorification.
But  as  God's  sentence  against  the  trembling  con
scious  sinner  is  changed  into  grace,  so  also  the  tri
umph  of  pardoning  love  overcoming  hatred  becomes
conspicuous  as  a  glorious  omen  in  Joseph's  life.

"  Inasmuch,"  says  Delitzsch,  "  as  Israel's  history
is  a  typical  history  of  Christ,  and  Christ's  history  the
typical  history  of  the  Church,  so  is  Joseph  a  type  of
Christ  himself.  What  he  suffered  from  his  brethren,
and  which  God's  decree  turned  to  his  own  and  his
nation's  salvation,  is  a  type  of  Christ's  sufferings,
caused  by  his  people,  but  which  God's  decree  turned
to  the  salvation  of  the  world,  including,  finally,  the
salvation  of  Israel  itself."  Says  PASCAL  (Pensccs,  ii.
',),  2) :  "  Jesus  Christ  is  typified  in  Joseph,  the  be
loved  of  his  father,  sent  by  his  father  to  his  brethren,
the  innocent  one  sold  by  his  brethren  for  twenty  pie
ces  of  silver,  and  then  becoming  their  Lord,  their
Saviour,  the  saviour  of  those  who  were  aliens  to
Israel,  the  saviour  of  the  world, — all  which  would
not  have  been  if  they  had  not  cherished  the  design


GENESIS,  OR   TILE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


of  destroying  him— if  they  had  not  sold  andrejecte
him.  Joseph,  the  innocent  one,  in  prison  with  tw
malefactors — Jesus  on  the  cross  between  two  thieves
Joseph  predicts  favorably  to  the  one,  but  death  t
the  other ;  Jesus  saves  the  one,  whilst  he  leaves  th
other  in  condemnation.  Thus  has  the  Church  eve
regarded  Joseph's  lii.-tory."  Already  is  this  inti
mated  in  the  Gospels.  What  Pascal  here  says,  an,
as  is  also  held  by  the  lathers,  c.  g.,  Prosper  Aqui
tanus,  de  Promissionibiis  <t  Pra>, !'«•!'„, i,il>nx  Dei,  i
but  a  brief  statement  of  the  pious  thoughts  of'al
believers,  in  the  contemplation  of  the  history.  It  i
this  which  impart.- to  the  wonderful  typical  light  her
presented  its  irresistible  charm.

When,   however,  Joseph   is   made  the  exelusi\\
centre   of  our    history,   and  the  patriarchal   tvpe  of
Christ  (KIKTX,  "  History  of  the  Old  Testament,"!
p.  •"!:;),  Keil  pre-ents,  in   o])posiiioii,  some  most  im
portant  c  msiderations.     It  is,  indeed,  no  ground  of
differed.  .•  (as  presented  by  him),  that  Joseph  b.raim
formally  naturalized    in  Egypt;  for  Christ,  too,  was
delivered  to  the  heathen,  and  died  out   of  the  cam])
N'or  d,H-'  it  make  any  important  difference   that  Jo-
KCph   received    no  speeial  revelations  of  God  at  the
rpurt   of   Pharaoh,   as    Daniel    did   at   the   court    of
Nebuchadnezzar;   the  gift  of  interpreting  dreams  IK
also,  like  Daniel,  referred  back   to  God.  "  Of  grcatoi
'ance  is  (lie  remark  that  Joseph  is  nowhere,  in
the   Scriptures   tliemselvcs,  presented  as   a  type   of
Christ;     yet   we   must    distinguish    between"  verbal
refercnc  >s  ;;nd  real  relations,  such  as   mi-lit  be  indi-
cated  inZach.  xi.  12,  and  in  Christ's  declaration  that
1  ne    of  Ilia    diseiples  should   beti-ay  him.     These  is,
however,   a  verbal   reference    in    Stephen's   speech,
Acts  vii.  '.i.      Tliere  is  no  mist. iking  the  fact  that   the
ianic    traces   in  our  narrative  are   shared  both
by  Joseph  ami  Jtulah.     Judah  appears  great  and  no
ble  throughout  the  history  of  Joseph;  the  instance,
however,  in  which  he  is  willing  to  sacrilicv  himself
to  an  unlimited  servitude   for  Benjamin,  makes  him
coequal  dignity  with  Joseph.     So  in  Abraham's  sac-
nfjce,  the   Messianic   typical   is  distributed  between
him  ami  Isaac.     Joseph's  glory  is  preeminently  of  a
prophetic  kind;   the  weight  of  a  priestly  voluntary
self-sacrifice   inclines  more    to   the    side  "of  Judah.
Benjamin,  too,  has  his  Messianic  ray  ;  for  it  is  espe
cially  on  his  account  that  (lie  brethren   may  appear
before  Joseph  in  a  reconciling  light.     On  HILLER'S
"  Typological  Contemplation  of  Joseph,"  see  KEIL,
p.  212.     MEINERTZHAGEN,  in  his   "Lectures  on  the
Christology  of  the  Old  Testament"  (p.  204),  treats
of  the  typical  significance  of  Joseph  with  great  ful-
ness.     It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  ever  afterwards
Benjamin  appears  theocratically  and  geographically

•t'tcd  with  Judah.

5.  The  disposition  of  Joseph's  history,  and  the
settlement  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  as  well  as  its
relation  to  the  Ilyksos  of  whom"  Josmirs  speaks
(contra  Apion,  i.  14),  in  an  extract  from  Manetho's
history,  presents  a  question  of  great  historical  inter
est  (see  DELITZSCH,  p.  518).  The  extract  concerning
the  Ilyksos  has  a  mythical  look.  Still  darker  are
other  things  which  Josephus  gives  us  from  Manctho
and  Chaeremon  (contra  Ap.,  i.  26,  32).  Different
views:  1)  The  Ilyksos  and  the  Israelites  are  iden
tical  ;  so  Manctho,  Josephus,  Hugo  Grotius,  Ilof-
mann,  Knobel  (p.  301),  and,  in  a  modified  form,
Seyffarth,  Uhlemann.  2)  The  Hyksos  are  distinct
from  the  Israelites;  they  were  another  Shemitic
tribe— Arabians,  or  Phoenicians ;  so  Cunaeus,  Scal-
iger,  etc.  This  view,  says  Delitzsch,  is  now  the  pre


vailing  one.     So  also   Ewald,  Lcpsius,    Saalschiitz,
but  with  different  combinations.     On  thc=e  see  DE
LITZSCH,  p.  521.     3)  The  Ilyksos  were   Scythians;
so  Champolliou,  Rosscllini.     The  first  view  is   op
posed  by  the   fact    that    the  Israelites  founded  no
dynasties  in  Egypt,  as  did  the  Ilyksos ;  nor  did  they
exist  there  under  shepherd-kings,  as  the  name  Ilyksos
has  been  interpreted.     Against  the  second  view  De
litzsch  insists  that  the  people  of  Egypt,  into  whose
servitude  Israel  fell,  appear  as  a  people  foreign  to
them,  and  by  no  means  as  one  connected  with  them.
The  Shemitic  idea,   however,  is    so   extended,  that
we  cannot  always  suppose  a  theocratic  clement  along
with  it.     The  most  we  can  say  is,  that  the  Ilyksos^
who,  no  doubt,  were  a   roving"  band  of  conquerors,
came  from  Syria,  or  the  countries  lying  north  and
ea>t    beyond  Palestine.     In  the  Egyptian   tradition,
their  memory  seems  to   have   been  "so   mingled  with
that  of  the  Israelites,  tint  it  would  seem  almost  im
possible  to  separate  the  historical  element  from  such
a  mixture.     Since,   however,  the   Israelitish  history
seems  more  obscured  by  that  of  the  Ilyksos  than
contradicted,  it  may  be  regarded  as  more  probable
that  the   latter  came    latest.     The    pressure  of  the
Israelites  upon  the  Canaanites,   from   the  east,   may
have  driven   them   in    part  to   the  s-uth  ;    and    the
weakening  of  Egypt  by  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh
and  his  army,  forty  years  before,  might  have  favored
a  conquest.     The  chronological  adjustment,  however,
must  be  left  to    itself.     For  a  fuller  treatment  of
this  subject,  see  E.  BOHMKH,  "  The  First  Book  of  the
Thora"  (Halle,  18r,2);  appendix,  p.  205,  etc.    Accord
ing   to   Lepsius,  the  appearance  of    the    Ilvksos  in
Egypt  preceded  the  history  of  Joseph.     At  :il'l  events
this  dim  tradition  bears  testimony  to  the  Isra.'lhi.-h
history  in  many  particulars  (e.  g.'  that  they  founded
Jerusalem   in  Judca).      On  the  full  confirmation  of
Toscph's  history  by  Greek  historians  and  by  Egvp-
:ian  monuments,  compare  DELITZSCH,  p.  521,  e'c. ;
HEXGSTENBERG,  "The  Pentateuch  and  Egypt,"  Ber-
in,  LS-11.

6.  The  history  of  Israel's  settlement  in  Egypt  ex-
:ends  through  the  sections  that  follow :  ] )  The  corrup-
,ion  in  Jacob's  house,  the  dispersion  of  his  sons,  the
oss  of  Joseph  (ch.  xxxviii.-xxxix.).  2)  Joseph's
elevation,  and  the  reconciliation  and  gathering  of  his
jrethrcn  (ch.  xl.-l.).  3)  Israel's  transplantation  to
Egypt  (ch.  xlvi.-xlvii.  2(5).  4)  The  keeping  of  the
livine  promise,  and  the  longing  of  Israel  to  return
lome  to  Canaan  (ch.  xlvii.  27-cli.  1.).


EXEGETICAL  AXI)  CRITICAL.

Contents:  The  conspiracy  of  Jacob's  sons  against
heir  brother  Joseph,  considered  in  its  awful  dark-
icss,  or  the  deep  commotion  and  apparent  destnic-
ion  of  Jacob's  house:  1.  The  occasion  (vets.  1-11);
J.  the  opportunity,  and  the  plot  of  murder  (vers.
2-20) ;  3.  Reuben's  attempt  to  rescue  ;  4.  Judah's
ffort  to  save,  unknowingly  crossing  that  of  Reuben
vers.  25-27) ;  5.  the  crime,  the  beginning  of  mourn-
!ig,  the  hiding  of  guilt  (vers.  28-32);  C.  Jacob's
eep  grief,  and  Joseph  apparently  lost  (vers.  33-30).

1.  The  occasion  (vers.  1-11). — In  the  land  of
/anaan. — It  seems  to  have  been  made  already  his
ermanent  home,  but  soon  to  assume  a  different  ap-
earance.— The  generations  (see  above).— Joseph
eing  seventeen  years  old. — A  statement  very
mportant  in  respect  both  to  the  present  occurrence
nd  the  future  history.  In  ch.  xli.  46,  he  is  men-


CHAP.   XXXVII.   1-36.


583


Honed  as  thirty  years  old.     His  sufferings,  therefore,
lasted  about  thirteen  years.     At  this  age  of  seventeen
he  became   a  shepherd  with    his   brethren.     Jacob
did  not  send  his  favorite  son  too  early  to  the  herds  ;
vet  though  the  favorite,  he  was  to  begin  to  serve  be
low  the  rest,  as  a  shepherd-boy.     At  this  age,  how
ever  Joseph  had  great  na'iveness  and  simplicity,    lie
therefore  imprudently  tells  his  dreams,  like  an  inno-
'  cent  child.     On  the  other  hand,   however,  he  was
very  sedate ;  he  was  not  enticed,  therefore,  by  the
evil  example  of  some  of  his  brethren,  but  considered
it  his  duty  to  inform  his  father.— And  the  lad  was
with  the  sons  of  Bilhah.— For  the  sons  of  Bilhah
Rachel's  servant  stood  nearer  to  him,  while  those  ot
Leah  were  most  opposed.     He  brought  to  his  father
n?i  cm  rx,  translated  by  Keil,  evil  reports  con-
cernhv  them.     A  direct  statement  of  their  offences
would" doubtless    have   been  'differently  expressed.
They  were  an  offence  to  those  living  in  the  vicinity.
This  determined  him  to  inform  his  father,  but  it  docs
not  exclude  a  conviction  of  his  own.     It  is  inadmis
sible  to  refer  this  to  deinite  sins   (as,  c.  g.,  some
have  thought  of  unnatural  sins).     That  the  sons  of
the  concubines  surpassed  the  others  in  rude  conduct,
is  easily  understood.     Joseph's  moral  earnestness  is,
doubtless,  the  first  stumbling-block  to  his  brethren,
whilst  it  strengthens  his  father  in  his  good  opinion.
The  beautiful   robe  was  the   second  offence.     It  is
called  c^SB    r:r3,  "an   outer  garment  of  ends,"
which  extends,  like  a  gown,  to  the  hands  and  the
ancles.     The  Septuagiut,  which  Luther's  translation
follows,  renders  it  "  a  coat  of  many  colors."     Comp.
2  Sam.  xiii.  IS.     The  common  tunic  extended  only
to  the  knees,  and  was  without  arms.     Already  this
preference,  which  seemed  to  indicate  that  Jacob  in
tended  to  give  him  the  right  of  the  first-born,  aroused
the  hatred 'of  his  brethren.     One  who  hates  cannot
greet  heartily  the  one  who  is  hated,  nor   talk  with
him  frankly  and  peaceably.     In  addition  to  this,  Jo
seph,  by  his  dreams  and  presages  (though  not  yet  a
prudent  interpreter),  was  pouring  oil  upon  the  flames.
At  all  events,  the  n;n  (lo),  as  repeated  in  his  narra
tion,  shows  that  he  ha.d  a  presentiment  of  something
trreat.     Both  dreams  are  expressive  of  his  future  ele
vation.     In  Egypt  he  becomes  the  fortunate  sheaf-
binder  whose  sheaf  "  stood  up  "  du/ing  the  famine.
The  second  dream  confirms  the  first,  whilst  present
ing  the  further  thought :  even  the  sun  and  moon-
that  is,  according  to  Jacob's  interpretation,  _cven  his
father  and  his  mother — were  to  bow  before  him.     Ra
chel  died  some  time  before  this.     On  this  account
the  word  mother  has  been  referred  to  Bilhah,  or  to
Benjamin  as  representing  Rachel,  or  else  to  Leah.
The  brethren  now  hated  him  the  more,  not  merely
as  recognizing  in  his  dreams  the  suggestions  of  am
bition,  but  with  a  mingled  feeling,  in  which  there  was
not  wanting  a  presentiment  of  his  possible  exalta
tion — as  their  declaration,  ver.  20,  betrays.     In  Ja
cob's    rebuke   we    perceive   also   mingled  feelings.
There  is  dissent  from  Joseph's  apparently  pretentious
prospects,  a  fatherly  regard   toward  the   mortified
brethren,  yet,  withal,    a  deeper   presentiment,  that
caused  him  to  keep  these  words  of  Joseph  in  his
heart,  as  Mary  did  those  of  the  shepherds.     As  the
naivete   of    the  shepherd-boy  was  evidence  of  _the
truthfulness  of  these  dreams,  so  the  result  testifies
to  the  higher  origin  of  a  divine  communication,  con-
ditioned,  indeed,  by  the  hopefully  presageful  life  of
Joseph.     These  dreams  were  probably  intended  to
sustain  Joseph  during  his  thirteen  years  of  wretch


edness,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  prepare  him  to  txj
an  interpreter.  The  Zodiac,  as  here  brought  in  by
Knobel,  has  no  significance,  nor  the  custom  of  placing
a  number  of  sheaves  together.

2.  The  opportunity  and  the  plot  of  murder  (vers
12-20).— In  Shechem. — There  is  no  ground  foi
supposing  another  Shechem,  as  some  have  done,  on
account  of  what  had  formerly  occurred  there.  It  is
more  likely  that  Jacob's  sons  courageously  returned
to  the  occupation  of  the  parcel  of  land  formerly  ac
quired  by  them.  This  very  circumstance,  however,
may  have  so  excited  the  anxiety  of  the  cautious
parent  that  he  sent  Joseph  after  them.  That  Joseph
could  have  lost  his  way  at  Shechem  is  easily  ex
plained,  since  he  was  so  young  when  his  father  lived
there. — In  Dothan.— The  Septuagint  has  Awducfci
Judith  iv.  G  ;  vii.  3  ;  viii.  3  ;  Aw&o'f/tt.  2  Kings  vi.  13,
Dothan.  It  was  a  place  above  Samaria,  towards  the
plain  of  Jezreel,  according  to  Josephus  and  Hierony-
mus.  "  Thus  it  was  found  by  Robinson  and  Smith
in  their  journey  of  1852,  and  also  by  Van  do  Vclde,
in  the  southeast  part  of  the  plain  of  Jabud,  west  of
Genin.  It  is  a  beautiful  green  dell,  always  called
Dothan,  at  whose  south  foot  a  fountain  rises."  De-
litzsch.  Through  the  plain  of  Tell-Dothan  a  high
way  passes  from  the  northwest  to  Ramleh  and  Egypt.

They  conspired  against  him. — That   Reuben

and  Judah  were  not  concerned  in  this,  is  plain  from
what  follows.— This  dreamer  cometh.— Spoken
contemptuously  — master  of  dreams,  dream-man.
The  word  FVT^]  does  not  express  contempt  of  itself,
as  is  seen  from'ch.  xxiv.  Go,  the  only  other  place  in
which  it  occurs.  It  denotes  something  unexpected
and  remarkable. — Into  some  pit.— Cisterns  (see
Winer:  wells). —  And  we  shall  see.  —  They
thought  by  their  fratricide  surely  to  frustrate  his  ex
altation—a  proof  that  his  dreams  alarmed  them  ;  hut
by  this  very  deed,  as  controlled  by  God's  providence,
they  bring  it  about.

3.  Reuben's  artful  attempt  at  saving  (vers.  2
24).  The  text  states  directly  that  Reuben  made  his
proposition  in  order  to  save  Joseph.  Knobel,  by  a
frivolous  criticism,  would  foist  a  contradiction  upon
the  text,  namely,  that  Reuben  made  the  proposition
in  order  to  let  him  perish  in  the  pit ;  since  a  blood
less  destruction  of  life  seems  to  have  been  regarded
as  less  criminal  than  a  direct  killing.  But,  then,  the
Reviser  must  have  imparted  to  Reuben's  proposition
a  different  interpretation,  by  means  of  an  addition.
Reuben,  it  is  true,  had  to  express  himself  in  such  a
way  that  the  brothers  might  infer  his  intention  to  let
him  perish  in  the  pit ;  but  this  was  the  only  way  to
"ain  their  consent. — They  stripped  Joseph  out
of  his  coat.— The  object  of  their  jealousy  and  their
wrath.— And  the  pit  was  empty.— So  that  he  did
not  perish.  His  cries  for  mercy  they  remembered
many  years  afterwards  (eh.  xli.  21).

4.  JudaKs  bold  attempt  to  save  him  (vers.  25-27).
—And  they  sat  down.— Through  this  apparent
insensibility  their  inward  agony  is  betrayed;  it  ap
pears  in  their  agitated  looking  out,  so  that  they  espy,
the  Ishmaelites  already  at  a  great  distance. — And
behold,  a  company  of  Ishmaelites.— A  caravan,
nn-.S  (Job  vi.  19).  "This  caravan  (as  Robinson's
description  shows)  had  crossed  the  Jordan  at  Beisan,
and  followed  the  highway  that  led  from  Beisan  and
Zerin  to  Ramleh  and  Egypt,  entering  the  plain  of
Dothan  west  of  Genin."  Delitzsch.  In  vers.  25,
27,  and  28,  the  merchants  are  called  Ishmaelites,
whilst  in  the  first  part  of  ver.  28  they  are  styled


584


GENESIS,   OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


Midianites,  and  in  vcr.    ?,C,  Medanites.     Knobel,  of
course,  regards   tlieni  as  different  traditions  (p.  293).
Ver.  28,  however,  would  seem  to  tell  us  that  the  Ish-
maelites  were  the  proprietors   of  the  caravan,  which
was  made  tip,  for  the  most  part,  of  Midianitish  peo
ple.     In   a   similar  manner,  probal.lv,  as  Esau  made
a  number  of  the  Horites  subject  to 'him,  so  had  the
Ishmaelites  also  brought   under  them  a    number  of
the   Midianites.     One   hundred   and   fifty  years,  the
time  that  had  elapsed  since  Ishmael's  departure  from
Abraham,  would   give  a  Miflicicnt   increase   for  this
(see  KKII,,  p.  iM  I  |.      As  merchants,  they  were  trans
porting   costly   products   of  their   eoun'trv  to  E^vpt.
Gum-tragacanth    i-   found    in    Syria;    tli'e    balm'  of
(Jilead    was    especially   renowned",   and   was    sold   to
Phoenicia  and    Eirypt  ;  ladanum  (myrrh),  or  the  fra
grant  rose  of  the  cistus,  is  f..und  in  Arabia  and  Syria,
as  well  as  in  Palestine  (see  SCHUBERT,  iii.  p.  114'and
17-1).      Concerning   the   cisterns,   or   the    artificially
prepar.  d    reservoirs  of   rain-water,  see  the    Die'iuu-
aries   and   geographical   works.     Tlu-v  miirht  be  full
>t  waN-r,  or  have  mire  at  the  bottom,  or  be  entirely
dry.     They  were  frequently  used  as  prisons  (see  Jer.
xxxviii.   0;    xl.    ]5).      SCHRODKI::   "On   his  way  to
Damascus,  Robinson  found  Khan  Jubb  Jusuf  (a  kind
of   inn),  the  khan    of  Joseph's  pit,  so   called   after  -i
well  connected  with  it,  and  which   for  a    Ion-  time
both  among  Christians  and   Mohammedans,  was  re
garded  as  the  cistern  into  which  Joseph  was  thrown  "
— AndJudah  said.— "Then  Jndah  began  to    use
the  language  of  a  hypocritical  self-interest,"  says  IV-
itzsch.     This,  however,  seems  to  be  not  at  all  justified
by  Judah's  after-history.     It   must  be  presupposed
that  Jndah  was  unacquainted  with   Reuben's  inten
tion.     Tli,>  brethren  were  so  much  excited  that  Ju-
alone   could   not  have  hoped   to  rescue  Joseph
from  their  hand.     The  ferocity,  especially,  of  Simeon
and  Lcvi,  is  known  to  us  from  former  history.     Ju-
ah,  therefore,  could  think    no   «.therwise   than   that
Joseph  must  die  from  hunger  in  the  pit.     As  in  op-
!><>-. non  to  this,  therefore,  and  no:  as  a  counteraction
i    Keubens   attempt   at  deliverance,  is  his  proposal
"'  judged.      He  lived  still,  though  a  slave.    There  i
s  a  possibility  of  his   becoming  free.     He  might!

cape  by  the  caravan  routes  that  passed
south  through  his  home.     Reuben,  in  his  tenderness
I   '»ade  a  subtle   attempt  to  save  him.     In  the
''Older  policy  of  Judah  we  see  that  subtle  attempt
ossed  by  one  more  daring.     Xo  doubt  both    had
some  ill-feeling  towards  Joseph,  and  were,  therefore
no;  capable  of  a  mutual   and  open  understanding!
I  hat  both,  however,  preserved  a  better  conscience
than  the  rest,  is  evident  from  the  later  historv      The
unity  of  our  story  is  not  disturbed  by  Knobel's  re
mark,  '   that    a    further  tradition   is  "given    ECSEB
1  r»'j>.  Evany.,  ix.  2.3,  to  the  effect  that",  in   order  to
escape  the  snares  of  his   brethren,  Joseph  besought
Arabians,  who  were  near,  to  take  him  alon"  with
hem  to  Egypt;  which   they  did;  so  that    in  this
way     are    the   patriarchs    still    more    exculpated."
U  hat  Joseph  says   of  himself  afterwards,  that    he
was  stolen  out  of  the  land  of  the  Hebrews  (ch   xl
15),  c.oes  not  contradict  our  narration.     Was  he  to
ell  ^to  the  Egyptians  the  crime  of  his  brethren  ?

5.   \  ers.   28-32.     The    crime,  the  beqlnninq    of

ia<».r,n>,,7,     and    the    concealment    of  "the    quilt.—

Twenty  pieces   of    silver.-Comp.  eh.    xx.    16

I  wenty  shekels  of  silver  was  the  compensation  that

es  appointed  for  a  boy  from  five  to  twentv  years

old  (Lev.  xxvii.   5),  whilst  the   average  price 'of  a

was    thirty    shekels   (Exod.  xxi.   32) —And


Reuben    returned   unto    the  pit.-His  absence
may  easily  be  accounted  for:  it  was  impossible  for
him  to  eat  with  his   brethren  in   his  then   state  of
|  mind;  and  he  probably  resorted  to  solitude  to  think
!  ^ji    Plan    ot     deliverance—And    he    rent    ^
clothes.— The  later  custom  (Matt.  xxvi.  c,5)  orHn-
ally  sprung    from  vivid    emotions    of    sorrow, -the
rending  as  an  expression  of  inward  distraction       \f-
terwards  came  this  rending    of  garments  upon  the
others  (ch   xliv.  i:!)._And  I,  whither  shall  I  go?
--Nut  only  as  the  first-born  was  he  especially  re
sponsible  for  the    younger  brother,  bnt  his  tender
•ohngs  lor  him   and  for  the  unhappy  father,  made
him  the  bearer  of  the  agony  of  the  guilty  confede-
TV,"n  i  tbiVVlldl   adepree  that  he' knew  not
what  to  do.-And  they  took  Joseph's  coat.—
One  transgression  gives  birth  to  another      With  the
consciousness  that  tried  to  conceal  their  guilt   there
mingles  the  old  grudge  concerning  the  coat  of  many
colors,  which  here  turns  itself  even   against  the  fa-
:hcr.     Doubtless,  i,,  some  degree,  they  tlmu-ht  them
selves  justified  n.  the  thought  that"  the  father  had
-riven  them  cause  of  irritation  by  providing  such  a
coat  lor  Joseph.     Reuben  and  Judah  are,  moreover
burdened  by  the  ban  of  silence
,    l>'£c°V*de<Pffrief,  and  Joseph's  apparent  loss
33-36).-It  is  my  son's  coat—Their  decep-
on  succeeded.     In  his  agony  he  does  not  discover
he  fraud;    he  sight  of  the   blood-dyed  garment  led
him  to  conclude:  Surely  an  evil  beast  hath  torn  Jo
seph  and  devoured  him.— Sackcloth.— The  si-n  of
the   deepest    mourning    (see    Winer:   Traucr-sack )
—And  mourned  for  his  son.— Ret:,;,;!,,.,  also  his
rme.it    of    mourning.— And    all  his  sons.— The
criminals  as  comforters  !-And  all  his  daughters.
— I-rom  this  there  arises  the  probability  that  Jacob
had  other  daughters  than  Dinah,  though'  the  d'uHi
n-lawmay  be  so  called.— For  I  will  go  down.
-The  -2  is  elliptical,  implying,  nothing  can  comfort
me,  for,  etc.— Mourning  unto  my  son.— There  is
doubtless,  something  more   hen;  than  grief  merely
for  the  loss;  there  is   also  self-reproach  for  havin-
exposed  the  child  to  such  danger.-Into  the  grave
(Bheol).— In  this  mournful  mood  of  Jacob  does  this
word  xhrol  first  occur.     It  was  not  the  world  beyond
the  grave  considered  as  the  gathering  to  the  fathers
it  the  dark  night  of  death  and  mourniii"      There
are  various  derivations  of  this  word.     One  that  easily
suggests  itself  is  that  which  marks  it  from  bxt;,  to
demand— that  place  which  inexorably  demands'  all
men  back  (Prov.  xxx.    15;   Is.   v.   14;  Heb.  ii.  5).

Excursus  below,  especially  p.   586  sq. T.  L.l

A'er.  30.  The  word  G^nD ,  according  to  its  original
significance,  denotes  an  eunuch ;  its  later  and  more
general  interpretation  is  courtier.— Captain  of  the
guard.— Literally  a  slayer,  that  is,  an  executioner
(see  2  Kings  xxv.  8;  Jer.  xxxix.  9).     For  particulars
see  DELITZSCH,  p.  531.     On  the  chronology  as  con
nected  with  the  remark  that  Joseph  was  sold  when
he  was  seventeen  years  old,  see  also  DKLITZSCII  p
532      Joseph's  history  here  suffers  an  interruption
by  the  insertion  of  an  incident  in  the  life  of  Judah
Ch.  xxxviii.     Delitzsch  ascribes  this  to  literary  art
on  the  part  of  the  author,  but  of  that  we  may  doubt
It  is,  of  itself,  just  the  time  that  we  should  expect  to
learn  something  more  about  Judah.


[NOTE  ON  GENESIS  xxxvn.  .35.  THE  PRIMITIVE
CONCEPTION  OF  SHEOL.— This  is  the  first  place  in
which  the  word  occurs,  and  it  is  very  important  to


CHAP.   XXXVII.   1-36.


585


trace,  as  far  as  we  can,  the  earliest  conception,  or
rather  emotion,  out   of  which  it  arose.     "I  will  go
down  to  my  son  mourning  to  Sheol,"— towards  Sheol
or,  on  the  way  to  Sheol,— the  reference  being  to  the
decline  of  life  terminating  in  that  unknown  state
place,  or  condition  of  being,  so  called.     One  thin"
is  clear :  it  was  not  a  state  of  not-being,  if  we  may
use  so  paradoxical  an  expression.     Jacob  was  going
to  his  son  ;  he  was  still  his  son ;  there  is  yet  "a  tie
between  him  and  his  father ;  he  is  still  spoken  of
as_a  personality;  he  is   still  regarded  as  having  a
being  somehow,  and   somewhere.     Compare  2  Sam.
xii.  23,  libs  -bh   ^x,  "/  am  going  to  him,  but
Ae  shall  not  return  to  me."     The  him  and  the  me  in
this  case,  like  the  7  and  the  my  son  in  Genesis,  are
alike  personal.     In  the  earliest  language,  where  all
:s  hearty,  such  use  of  the  pronoun  could  have  been
no  unmeaning  figure.     The  being  of  the  one  who
as  disappeared  is  no  less  real  than  that  of  the  one
who  remains  still  seen,  still  found*  to  use  theShem-
jtic  term  for  existence,  or  out-being,  as  a  known  and


visible  state  (see  note,  p.  273).     The  LXX  have  ren
dered  it  here  th'Atov,  into  Hades  ;  the  Vulgate,  ad
Jiltiim  me  urn  in  infernum.     It  was  not  to  his  son  in
3  grave,  for  Joseph  had  no  grave.     His  body  was
supposed  to  be  lying  somewhere  in  the  desert   or
torn  in  pieces,  or  carried  off,  by  the  wild  beasts  (see
ver.  33).     To  resolve  it  all  into  figurative  expressions
lor  the  grave  would  be  simply  carrying  our  meanne
ss  modern  rhetoric  into  ancient  forms  of  speech
employed,  in  their  first  use,  not  for  the  reflex  paint-
:ng,  but  for  the  very  utterance  of  emotional  conccp-
i  However  indefinite  they  may  be,  they  are  too
mournfully  real  to  admit  of  any  such  explanations,
ookmg  at  it  steadily  from  this  primitive  standpoint
we  are  compelled  to  say,  that  an  undoubting  convic-
lon  of  personal  extinction  at  death,  leavin^  nothino-
but  a  dismembered,  decomposing  body,  now  belong"
mg  to  no  one,  would  never  have  given  rise  to  such
The  mere  conception  of  the  grave,  as  a
ce  of  burial,  is  too  narrow  for  it.     It,  alone,  would
itroyed  the  idea  in  its  germ,  rather  than  have
given  origin  and  expansion  to  it.     The  fact,  too,  that
hey  had  a  well-known  word  for  the  grave,  as  a  con
fined  place  of  deposit  for  the  body  (nsp  rvrnx    a
possession,  or  property,  of  a  grave,  see  Gen.  xii'ii/9),
shows  that  this  other  name,  and  this  other  concep
tion  were  not  dependent  upon  it,  nor  derived  from  it.


which  comes  this  most  ancient  word,  so  full  of  some
most  solemn  significance.     There  is  a  reference,  also
to   the  German  Mile,  or  the  general  term  of   the
northern  nations  (Gothic,  Scandinavian   Saxon)   de
noting  7«,fc,  or  cavity;  though  this  is  the  very  ques
tion,  whether  the  northern  conception  is  not  a  sec
ondary  one,  connected  with  that  later  thought" of
penal  confinement  which  was  never  separable  from
toe  teaxon  hell,— a.  sense-liniitation,    in  fact,  of  the
more  indefinite  and  more  spiritual  notion  primarily
presented  by  the  Greek  Hades,  and  which  furnishes
the  true  parallel  to  the  early  Hebrew  Sheol.     Fiirst
has  the  same  view  as  Gesenius.     To  make  bixCJ  and
SiSIB  equivalents,  etymologically,  there  is  supposed
to  be  an  interchange  of  X  and  S,  a  thing  quite  com
mon  in  the  later  Syriac,  but  rare  in  the  Hebrew
especially  the  earlier  writings,  and  which  would  be
ued  as  a  mark  rccentioris  Heoraismi,  if  the  ration
alistic  argument,  at  any  time,  required  it.     The  2>
has  ever   kept    its    place   most    tenaciously  in   the
Arabic,  as  shown  by  Robinson  in    the    numerous
LTO?!r.?a™S.of  Place*  iQ  *toh   ^    remains   un-


mi         i         i  juvuu  irom  it.

The  older  lexicographers  and  commentators  gcn-
Jrally  derived  the  word  Mxd  (Sheol)  from  bxiS
Sha-al),  to  auk,  inquire,  etc.  '  This  is  a  very  easy
ienvation,  so  far  as  form  is  concerned;  and  why  is
t  not  correct  ?  In  any  way  the  sense  deduced  will
ieem  near,  or  far-fetched,  according  to  our  precon-
septions  in  respect  to  that  earliest  view  of  extinct  or
sontmued  being  Gesenius  rejects  it,  maintainin


«     -  *  --j  v/vi     ;       4>, j        J-U.aj.li  lilllj  HI  ir

X'iJ  is  for  bird  ,  and  means  cavity  ;  hence  a
ubterranean  region,  etc.     He  refers  to  bsui ,  hollow
f  the  hand,  or  fist,  Is.  xl.  12  ;  1  Kings  xx.'lo';  Ezek
10  ;  and  bs^lS,  the  name  for  fox  or  jackal   who
s  holes  in  the  earth,— this  being  all  that  can  be
1  of  any  other  use  of  the  supposed  root  from

*  [Compare  the  Hebrew  X2*  J  ,  as  used  Ts.  xlvi.  1,  from

ton  eTthut'wh!;0;11-011*  ral1'bin'ica1'  «se  of  the  term  for  ex-
s  that  which  is  somehow- pmeMi    Comp.  also  the
rab.  L>«.^>.  and


ings  to  be  found.—  T.  L.]


numerous

--    t — ^^^  +i±   .riii^u   u,    remains   un-
changed  to  this  day.     So  it  was,  doubtless,  in  the
most  early  Shemitic,  though  in  the  Syriac  it  became
afterwards  much  weakened  through  the  antipathetic
Greek  and  Roman  influence  upon  that  language  and
so,  frequently  passed  into  the  more  easily  pronounced
N.     It  is  improbable  that  this  should  have  taken
place  in  the  most  ancient  stage  of  the  larm,ao-e  or
at  the  time  of  the  first  occurrence  of  this  wo°rd  in
the  biblical  writings.     Gesenius  would  give  to  ijj'iS
too  the  supposititious  primary  sense  of  dtqqma   t
make  it  the  ground  of  the  secondary  idea  of  search
or  inquiry  ;  but  this  is  not  the  primary  or  predomi
nant  conception  of  iiXIS  ;  it  is  always  that  of  inter
rogation,  like  the  Greek  ^ra'*,  or  of  demand,  like
a,™*   ever  implying  speech,  instead  of  the  positive
t  search,  such  as  is   denoted  by  the  Hebrew
1 ,  to  explore.      Subsequent    lexicographers  and
commentators  have  generally  followed  Gesenius  who
seems   to  pride  himself  upon    this  discovery  (see
ROBINSON:  "Lex.  N.  Test."  on  the  word   Hades).
>1  the  older  mode  of  derivation  he  says :  "Prior  de
etymo  conjcctura  viz  memoratu  digna  cut."     15y  some
it  would  be  regarded  as  betraying  a  deficiency  in
Hebrew  learning  to  think  of  supporting  an  etymology
so  contemptuously  rejected.     And  yet  it  has  claims
that  should  not  be  lightly  given  up,  especially  as  they
are  so  intimately  connected  with  the  important  in
quiry  in  respect  to  the  first  conception  of  those  who
nrst  used  the  word.     Was  this,  primarily,  a  thought
locality,  however  wide  or  narrow  it  may  have
been,    or  did  the  space-notion,  which  undoubtedly
prevailed  afterwards,  come  from  an  earlier  thought
or  state  of  soul  rather,  more  closely  allied  to  feefina
than  to  any  positive  idea  ?     This  conception  of  lo
cality  in  the  earth  came  in  very  early ;  it  grew  natu
rally  from  something  before  it ;  but  was'it  fir«t  of
all  ?     Lowth,  Herder,  etc.,  are,  doubtless,  correct  in
the  representations  they  give  of  the  Hebrew  Sheol
as  an  imagined  subterranean  residence  of  the  dead'
and  this  is  confirmed  by  later  expressions  we  find  in
thelsalms  and  elsewhere,  such  as  "goin«-  down  to
the  pit"  (compare  -112  11-31-  and  similar  language
Ps.  xxviii.   ];    xxx.  4;    Ixxxviii.    5-    Is.  xiv.   19-
xxxvm.  10,  etc.) ;  yet  still  there  is  the  best  of  rea
sons  for  believing   that  what  may   be    called    tho
emotional  or  ejaculatory  conception  was  earlier  than


58G


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF   MOSKS.


this  and  that  the  local  was  the/ora  it  took  when  it
passed  from  an  emotion  to  a  speculative  thought.
From  what  source,  then,  in  this  earlier  stage,  could
the  name  more  naturally  have  come  than  from  the
primitive  significance  of  that  word  bxU,  which,  m

the  Arabic  jL ,  and  everywhere  in  the  Shcmitic
f-xmilv  has  this  one  old  sense  of  appealing  intcrro
Son-first,  simple  inquiry,  secondly,  the  idea  of
demand?  The  error  of  the  older  etymologists,  then,
consisted,  not  in  making  it  from  bsr,  but  in  con-
ncc'in"  it  wi.h  this  secondary  idea,  and  so  referring
it  to  Sheol  itself  as  demanding,  instead  of  the
mournin-  .ighin-  survivors  asking  after  the  dead.
They  supposed  it  was  called  Sheol  from  it,  rapacity,
or  unsatiablcness,  ever  clahning  its  victims,— a
thought,  indeed,  common  in  the  earli  language  ot
mourning  but  having  too  much  of  tropical  artifice
to  be  the  very  earliest  It  belongs  to  that  later  stage
in  which  liuiL'iiairc  is  employed,  retroactively,  to
awaken  or  intensify  emotion,  instead  ct  being  Us
gushing,  irrepressible  utterance.  In  support  ot  this
view  the  text  constantly  cited,  as  the  standard  one,

,vas  Prov.  xxx.  16,  yin  rrrx  xb  nrri  XP  -  -  Msttj,
Sheol  if"'/  is  never  satisfied,  that  never  says,  enough
See  the  old  commentary  of  Martin  (icier  on  the  book
,,f  Proverbs  Corresponding  to  this  is  the  manner
i-,  which  Homer  speaks  of  Hades,  and  its  vast  popu-
lution:

So  the  dramatic  poets  represent  it  as  rapacious,
cari-yin"  oil  its  victims  like  a  ferocious  animal  (see
the  "Medea"  of  ECBIPIDES,  ll<>s),  inexorable,


p


,
ever   demanding,   but   hearing   no


prayer  in  return.     Hence  it  had  settled  into  the  clas
sical  phrase  rapax  Orcus  (see  CATCLLUS,  n.  28,  20).
But  this,  whatever   form  migb.t  be  given  to  it,  was
not  the  first  thought  that  would  arise  in  the  mind
re-pectin-    the  state  of   the  departed.     Instead  of
such  an  objective  attribute  of  Hades,  or  Sheol,  as  a
place  demanding  to  be  filled,  it  was  rather  the  sub
jective  feeling  of  inquiring  wonder  at  the  phenome
non  of  death,  at  the  thought  of  the  one  who  had
disappeared,  and  of  that  inexplicable  state  into  which
even  the  imagination  failed  to  follow  him.     Shadowy
a^  all  such  language  is,  it  is  only  the  stronger  evi
dence  of  that  feeling  of  continued  being  which  holds
on  so  firmlv  through  it  all,  as  though  in  spite  ot  the
positive  appearances  of  sense  testifying  to  the  de
parture,  or  the  negative  testimony  arising  from  the
failure  of  the  eve  to  pierce  the  darkness  (whence  the
Greek  Hades,  the  unseen),  or  of  the  ear  to   gather
any  report  from  the  silence  into  which  the  dead  had
gone      Sec  remarks  in  the  note  before  referred  to
p  273   on  the  idea  of  death  as  a  state,  a  state _ot
kino,  the  antithesis,  not  of  being,  but  of  the  active
life  "  beneath  the  sun."     Now  the  idea  of  extinction
of  absolute  not-beinir,  of  a  total  loss  of  individual
personality,  would  have  excluded  all  questioning ;  it
would  never  have  made   such  words  as  Hades,  or
Shcol,  according  to  either  conception,  whether
inquiry  or  of  locality,  whether  as  denoting  a  state  or
a  place,  whether  as  demanding  or  as  interrogated,
whether  as  addressed  to  the  unseen,  or  to  the  yoic(
less  and  unheard.     The  man  was  gone,  but  where  i
\ccording  to  a  most  ancient  and  touching  custom,
they  thrice  most  solemnly  invoked  his  name,  but  no
answer  came  back.     Their  belief  in  his  continued
bcino-  was  shown  by  the  voice  that  went  after  him,
though  no  responding  voice  was  returned  to  the  livu


car.  b"iXttJ  (the  infinitive  used  as  a  noun),  to  ask,
to  inquire  anxiously ;  he  had  gone  to  the  land  thus
denoted,  that  "undiscovered  country  from  whow
bourne  no  traveller  returned."  The  key-text  here  is
Job  xiv.  10  :  "Man  dies,  and  wastes  away;  he  givett
up  the  ghost  (rnsn  ?W,yiffhwah  ha-adam,  man
si^hs,  or  gasps  for  breath),  and  where  is  he  ?  "  V»JO,
ueayyo,  0,  where  is  he?  See  Zach.  i.  5  :  Tlic  fa'hcrs!
nrrrvx,  where  «re  then?  Compare  also  Job  yn.
2l"  and"  other  places  of  a  similar  kind,  all  showing
how  natural  is  the  connection  between  the  wailing,
questioning  wayyo,  and  the  word  Sheol  so  nnme.n
atelv  suggested  by  it.

The  disappearance  of  Enoch  from  the  earth  was
stranger  than  that  of  the  ordinary  death,  but  gave
rise  to  the  same  feeling  of  inquiry,  only  in  a  more
intensive  degree.  "  He  was  not  found,"  ovX  tvpiffKero,
says  the  LXX,  and  this  gives  the  real  meaning  of
the  Hebrew  « :~X  ,  not  denoting  non-existence,  for
that  would  be  directly  contrary  to  what  follows,  but.
that  he  was  nowhere  to  be  found  on  earth.

Thus  regarded,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  the  idea  ot
some  locality  would  soon  attach  itself  to  the  primi
tive  emotional  conception,   and  in  time  become  so
predominant  that  the   older  germ  ot  thought,  that
was  in  the  etymology,  would  almost  wholly  disap
pear      Still  the  spirit  of  the  word,  its  //,  /*/  or  ghost,
to  use  the  more  emphatic  Cerman  or  Saxon,  long
haunts  it  after  the   conception  has  changed  so  as  to
receive  into    it    more    of    the    local    and   definite.
Trench  has  shown  how  tenacious  is  tins  root-sense
of  old  words,  preserving  them,  like  some  guardian
crcnius  from  misusage  and  misapplication,  ages  alter
ft  has' ceased  to  be   directly  conceptual,  ,.r  to  be
known  at  all,  except  to  the  antiquarian  philologis
Thus   although  the  cavernous  or  subterranean   idea
had  become  prominent  in  the  Psalms  and  elsewhere
this  old  spirit  of  the  vord  still  hovers  about  it  in  all
such   passages;  we   still  seem  to  hear  the  sighing
weayyo  ;  there  yet  lingers  in  the  ear  the  plaintive
sheol'ah,  denoting  the  intense  looking  into  the  world
unknown,  the  anxious  listening  to  which  no  answer
ing  voice  is  returned.

That  Sheol,  in  its  primary  sense,  did  not  mean
the  -rave  and  in  fact  had  no  etymological  associa-
tionWit,  is  shown  by  the  fact,  already ^cnt.one,
that  there  was  a  distinct  word  for  the  latter,  of  stil
earlier  occurrence  in  the  Scriptures  common  in  all
the  Shemitic  languages,  and  presenting  the  definite
primary  conception  of  digging,  or  excavation  pip,

Ibr,  krb,  =-=,  =r.a,  ffrb,  9>^  9™^     ^  ™*

no  room  here  for  expansion  into  the  greater  thought
The  Egyptian  embalming,  too,  to  one  who  attentively
considers  it,  will  appear  still  less  favorable.     It  was
a  «in  and  rigid  memorial  of  death,  far  less  suggcs  ive  ,
of  continued  being,  somehow  and  somewhere  than
the  flowing  of  the  body  into  nature    hrough  deeo  n-
position  \n  the  grave,  or  its  dispersion  by  fire     to
the  prime  elements  of  its  organization.     In  the  sup-
posed  case,  however,  of  Joseph's  torn  and  dismem-
bered  corpse,  there  was  nothing  from  any  of    hcj.
sources  to  aid  the  conception.   \  ct  Jacob  held  on  to
it-  I  will  go  mourning  to  my  son,  *:$   -N,  not  55,
or  VX  for  V? ,  on  account  of  my  son,  as  some  wou
take 'it  *    Had  Joseph  been  lying  by  the  side  of  hu


[In  proof  that  ^X  may  have  the  sense  of  bs  ,  ]:«.scn-


CHAP.    XXXVII.    1-36.


5S7


mother  in  the  field  near  Bethlehem  Ephratah,  o
with  Abraham  and  Sarah,  and  Isaac  and  Rebek'ah
in  the  cave  of  Machpclah,  or  in  some  Egyptian  sar
cophagus,  embalmed  with  costliest  spices  and
wrapped  in  aromatic  linen,  the  idea  of  his  uubrokei
personality  would  have  been  no  more  vivid,  Josepl
himself  (his  very  ipsc)  would  have  been  no  nearer
or  more  real,  to  the  mourning  father,  than  as  he
thought  of  his  body  lying  mangled  in  the  wilderness
or  borne  by  rapacious  birds  to  the  supposed  four
corners  of  the  earth.  I  will  go  to  my  son  mournin
shcolah  (nbxttJ ,  with  n  of  direction),  Sheol-ward,—
on  the  way  to  the  unknown  land.

This  view  of  Sheol  is  strongly  corroborated  by
the  parallel  etymology,  and  the  parallel  connection
of  ideas  we  find  in  the  origin  and  use  of  the  Greek
Hades.     Some  would  seek  its  primary  meaning  else
where,  but  it  is  clearly  Greek,  and  no  derivation  is
more  obvious  than  the  one  given  long  ago,  and  which
would  make  this  word  "AiSrjs  (Homeric  'AiSrjs,  with
the  mild  aspirate)  from  a  privative  and  JSefi/  to  see.
We  have  the  very  word  as  an  adjective,  with  this
meaning  of  invisible  or  unseen,  HESIOD  :  "  Shield  of
Hercules,"  477.     It  denotes,  then,  the  unseen  world
carrying  the  idea  of  disappearance,  and  yet  of  con
tinued  being  in  some  state  unknown.     The  analogy
between  it  and  the  Hebrew  word  is  perfect.     Sols
the  parallelism,  all  the  more  striking,  we  may  say
from  the  fact  that  in  the  two  languages  the  appeal  is
to  two  different  senses.     In  the  one,  it  is  the  eye
peering  into  the  dark ;  in  the  other,  it  is  the  ear  in
tently  listening  to  the  silence.     Both  give  rise  to  the
same  question  :  Where  is  he  ?  whither  has  he  "one  ?
and  both  seem  to  imply  with  equal  emphasis  that
the  one  unseen  and  unheard  yet  really  is.     Some
times  a  derivative  from  the  same  root,  and  of  the
same  combination,  is  joined  with  Hades  to  make  the
meaning  intensive,  as  in  the  "Ajax"  of  SOPHOCLES,

TOC  an-drpoTroi'  a.iSri\ot>  "A.iSav —


The  awful,  unseen  Hades.

From  this  use  has  come  the  adjective  ids  LOS,  rendered
eternal,  but  having  this  meaning  from  the  association
as  (the  Iladean,  the  everlasting),  since  it  is  no
etymologically  connected  with  aluv  (see  Jude  6
Seo-juo??  aiSiots,  where  the  two  conceptions  seem  to
unite).  In  truth,  there  is  a  close  connection  between
these  two  sets  of  words  ('AfSns  and  aifo.  Dbis  anc


*r),  one  ever  suggesting  the  other,—"  the  things
hat  arc  seen  are  temporal  (belong  to  time),  the  things
hat  are  uxseen  are  eternal."  Hence  we  have  in
Lrreek  the  same  idiom,  in  respect  to  Hades,  that  we
lave  in  Hebrew  in  relation  to  Olam  (oblS)  the
counterpart  of  aMr.  Thus,  in  the  former  lan-'uao-e
ire  have  the  expressions,  oW'AiSov— S^os "AiSo°,
tc.,  corresponding  exactly  to  the  Hebrew  cM?  r,ia'
he  home  of  eternity,  poorly  rendered  his  long  home
-ccles.  xn.  5.  Compare  the  oltdav  alAviov  the


ense  of  direction,  so  clear  everywhere  else  in  the  hundreds
f  cases  where  this  preposition  5N  occurs,  is  not  lost  even


"house  eternal,"  2  Cor.  v.  1.  Compare  also  A*«0.
riio.N  s  Aaesilaus,  at  the  close,  where  it  is  said  of  tl<«
Spartan  king,  rV  tfStuv  o1*r,<rlv  Karr,ydy,ro,  "he
was  brought  back,  like  one  who  had  been  away  to
his  eternal  home."  Sec,  too,  a  very  remarkable
passage  Diommrs  SICCLCS,  lib.  i.  ch.  51,  respecting
the  _  belief  of  the  most  ancient  Egyptians  •  "  The
habitations  of  the  living  they  call  inns,  or  Iod<nn<*-
places  KaraAiW,  r,  since  we  dwell  in  them  so  short
a  time,  but  those  of  the  dead  they  style  oW?  tisiovt
everlasting  abodes,  as  residing  in  them  forever  T>J
a™pov  wfiwc."  See  also  PAREAU  :  J)e  JoU  Notitiir.
etc.,  on  the  early  Arabian  belief,  p  27

Why  should  not  Jacob  have  had  the  idea  as  well
5  these  most  ancient  Egyptians  ?     That  his  thought
was  more  indefinite,  that  it  had  less  of  circumstance
and  locality,  less  imagery  every  way,  than  the  Greek
and  Egyptian  fancy  gave  it,  only  proves  its  higher
purity  as  a  divine  hope,  a  sublime  act  of  faith,  rather
than  a  poetical  picturing,  or  a  speculative  do-ma
ine  less  it  assumed  to  know,  or  even  to  imagine
showed  its  stronger  trust  in  the  unseen  world  a!  an
assured  reality,  but  dependent  solely  for  its  clearer
revelation  on  the  unseen  God.     The  faith  was  all  the
stronger,  the  less  the  aid  it  received  from  the  sense
or  the  imagination.     It  was  grounded  on  the  surer
rock  of  the  "everlasting  covenant "  made  with  the
athers,  though  in  it  not  a  word  was  said  directly  of
a  future  life.     «  The  days  of  the  years  of  mv'pil
gnmage,"  says  Jacob.     He  was  "a  sojourner  upon
earth  as  Ins  fathers  before  him."     The  lan-nan-e  has
no  meaning  except  as  pointing  to  a  homefan^S/ov
iK-nviv   an  eternal  habitation ;  whether  in  Sheol   or
nrough  Sheol,  was  not  known.     It  was  enough  that
t  was  a  return  unto  God,  "his  people's  direUinff-
place  (tob  Visa,  see  Ps.  xc.  1)  in  all  generations."
t  was,  m  some  way,  a  "  living  unto  him,"  however
they  might  disappear  from  earth  and  time  ;  for  "he
is  not  the  God  of  the  dead."     His  covenant  was  an
assurance  of  the  continued  being  of  those  with  whom
it  was  made.     "Because  he  lived  they  should  live
also          Art  thou  not  from    everlasting,  Jehovah,
my  God,  my  Holy  One?  we  shall  not  (wholly)  die."
Ihou  wilt  lay  us  up  in  Sheol ;  thou  wilt  call  and
we  will  answer;  thou  wilt  have  regard  to  the  work
of  thy  hands."     The  pure  doctrine   of  a  personal
<jQd,  and  a  belief  in  human  extinction,  have  never
since  been  found  conjoined.     Can  we  believe  it  of
the  lofty  theism  of  the  patriarchal  ages  ?

Hades,  like  Sheol,  had  its  two  conceptual  stages
tot  of  state,  and  afterwards  of  locality.  To  the
Greek  word,  however,  there  was  added  a  third  idea
It  came  to  denote,  also,  a  power;  and  so  was  used
for  the^  supposed  king  of  the  dead,  'At3r,s,  'Au
A«S«V€«k,— «„«£  Mpuv  (mad,  xx.  61);  and  this
personification  appears  again  in  the  later  Scripture
1  Lor.  xv.  55,  0  Hades,  where  is  thy  victory?  and
'"  R-  -  S,  xx.  13,  14,  where  Hades  becomes  lim-


DOCTRIXAL    AND    ETHICAL.

1.  Jacob's  fondness  for  the  younger  son  forms  the
•her     extreme     to     Isaac's    predilection    for    the
first-born.     He  had,  ,t  is  true,  better  reasons  than
boao ;  for  Joseph  is  not  only  the  son  of  his  beloved
Rachel,  but  also  the  Nazarite  (the  consecrated  or  sen-
irate  one)  among  Ins  brethren,-a  fact  to  which  he
tines  upon  his  death-bed  (see  Gen.  xlix.  22)     But


588


GENESIS,  OK   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


ah   surpassed
T.,oS,'™gSlc

tSl  £

yl  his

'    1(  ^

lie  ventures


between  his  predilection  and  hi
pears  in  more  than  one   install
ter  service  as   a   shepherd's  b
lather  provides  for  him  a  show:
him  at  home  longer   than  the  others.
his  favorite  upon  a   distant  and  dangerous  mission
and  this  is  a  reason  why  he  refuses  to  be  comforte<
it  his  los-s        He  rebukes  hit-    ---
presumptuous  dream,  but  feels  compelled  to  keep  tin
presa^ini:  omens  in  his  vaticinating  heart.

20Thc  Scriptures  make  no  palliation  of  the'  sins


cnce  of  one  son  to  another.    And,  in  this  respect,  ha
v  atoned  for  a  sin  which  had   been   already

.cob's  mourning  shows  how  deeply  his  peace
was  shaken.  The  self-examination  occasioned  in
pious  souls,  in  consequence  of  the  loss  or  sullenngs
of  dear  ones,  especially  of  children,  becomes  a  griev
ous  self-condemnation.  From  this  then;  arises  a
longingafter  death.  But  here,  too,  there  must  lie  an
unconditional  surrender  to  God's  grace.  We  see
here  also  how  a  the  congregation  of  the  fathers
beyond  the  grave  becomes  a  Sbeol  to  the  pre-Oiris-
consciousness  through  the  feeling  it  gives  of


^^^^^^^^^^^^~

the  ground-law,  late  me  ^  J^  .^     They  muhul  us  of  t he   caravan   of   Mo-

that  there  is  a  signifi-     luimmcd.tlmt  mo,;. .  rvnu  wued  of  al   Ishmaeh ,sh  mer


T,,o  rinpllci.,  »m,  ,-..i,.,  Joseph  .relates  to
.,  re  .......  1-  -  of  'S^'  °

"  '"   "       '


c,  ,»ade  bb.


to  animosity,  animosity  to  fi«    hatred,  and  hatre

sas


ee  CL  haractcr      rresa,n,ful  Of  the  future,


,,,  •:!„,.,.  of  the  hated  one,  «hose  glory  they  aime

T^ncer  .....  g  the  «,y  in  .bW.  the.e  ,„,;,»  of
Kcuoen  ami  Judah  croa,  each  other,  see  the  Eseget-    Jctan  *


t,i.mi,1jcjand  ,,ro;,d  anticipatio


a3  „  Kl,,t.

,»„       ta  «:  ^


anpcasc  his  father  for  the  wrong  done  in  the  case  of     sense.
Ijilhah.     T  lie  weakness,  which,  according  to  ch.  xlix.


ab  malieiously  frustrated  Reuben's  good  ,nter


former  aniraocity  towards  Joseph,  they  could  only
weakly  oppose  their  angry  brethren.

8.  The  "  coat  of  many  colors  "  dipped  in
reminds  us  of  the  deception  that  Jacob,  in
raiment,  practised  upon  his  father.  Yet  it  must  not
be  overlooked,  that  Jacob  became  reconciled  at
Peniel.  Had  he  been  sanctified,  indeed,  as  well  as
reconciled,  he  would  not,  after  such  bitter  experience,
have  repeated  his  father's  error  of  an  arbitrary  prefer-


Reuben's


Sect  on  Pa  st
Jacob  had  his

ye  *  he  dld  °c
noticed.


Although
-

™-ltCobQCom*
s?it  AMBROSK  -.


CHAP   XXXVII.    1-36.


589


June/at   libcros   equal  is  gratia  quos  junxit  cequalis
naiura.   Envy  is  a  diabolical  vice  (Wisd.  Sol.  ii.  24).*
—HALL  :  Suffering  is  the  road  to  honor. — THE  SAME  :
When  we  arc  loved  by  our  Heavenly  Father,  and
weep  over  our  sins,  we  will  bo  hated  by  our  brethren
in  the  flesh  (1  Peter  iv.  4).—£ibl.  Tub. :  Do  not  un
necessarily  tell  your  enemy  what  may  be  for  your  ad
vantage. — CALWER  Handbuch:    Ver.  2.     No   mali
cious  information  was  it,  but  coming  from  an  inno
cent  free-heartedness   and  a  dutiful   abhorrence  of
cvi}-— Lisoo,  on  the  contrary:  A  child-like  and  in
dicious  tale-telling.— GEELACH  :  As  a  spoiled  chi'
he  accuses  his  brethren  to  his  father.   [The  bounda
between  the  malicious  and  the  dutiful  here  may
drawn  with  difficulty  ;  yet  it  is  to  be  observcd,"tl
Joseph  told  the  father  what  was  already  spoken  of
the  people,  that  is,  when  it  had  already  become  an  \
fame.]— SCHRODER  :  Luther  says, that  Joseph  narra
cd  his  dreams  "  like  a  child,"  not  from  malice,  b
in   simplicity  and  innocence. — RICHTER:    Mark   i
young  Joseph  saw  in  his  dreams  only  his  exaltatio
not  the  humiliation  that  preceded  it.— HEIM  ("  Bib
Studies  ") :  The  difference  between  the  two  dream


a»a709  ecne.'   es  TOV    KOCTUO

through  au-i/  of  the  devil  death  entered  into  the  world     The

is  something  very  peculiar  about  this  sin  of  envy,  fully  jus

ifying  the  epithet  diabolical.    In  the  first  place,  it  "is  V

eminently  spiritual.     It  is  a  pure  soul-sin,   bavins  lea

connection  with  the  material  or  animal  nature,  and  f

which  there  is  the  least  palliation  in  appetite,  or  in  anv  ex

trinsic  temptation.    Its  seat  and  origin  is  wholly  superca

nal,  except  as  the  term  carnal  is  taken,  as  it  sometimes  is  b

he  Apostle,  for  all  that  1S  evil  in  humanity.    A  man  ma

be  most  intellectual,  most  free  from  every  vulgar  appeti

of  the  flesh ;  he  may  be  a  philosopher,  he  may  dwell  spec;

latively  m  the  region  of  the  abstract  and  the  ideal,  and  vc

his  sou    be  full  of  this  corroding  malice,  which  the  autho

[  the  book  ot  Proverbs,  describing  it  in  its  effect  rathe

than  Us  origin,  calls  "rottenness  in  the  bones"  (1'rov.  xh

SO),  Presenting  it  as  the  opposite  of  that   "sound  hear

which  is  the  life  of  the  flesh."     In  the  second  place,  it  is  th

S,?wlT lYfTL  .^lmo«t   every  other  passion,  even  ac

know  ledgcd  to  be  smiul,  has  m  it  somewhat  of  good,  or  ap

pearance  of  good.     Revenge  assumes  to  have,  at  its  founda

tion ,  some  sense  of  wrong,  that  allies  it  to  justice     Kern,  -i

c  aims  relationship  to  Themis.     Anger  makes  a  similar  plea

and,  with  some  show  of  reason,  lays  part,  at  least,  of   h

blame  upon  the  nervous  irritability.     These,  and  other  hu

man  passions,  trace  a  connection,  in  their  spiritual  geneal

ogy,  between  themselves  and  pure  affections  that  mi-  1

have  belonged  to  man's  psychical  or  sensitive  nature  befor

the  fall.     I  ut  envy,  or  hatred  of  a  man  for  the  good  that  i

in  him.  or  m  anv  w.-iv  Tim-t.iina  <•„  v^™         ,.„.-,  ____,,:


•' -.-;-  ••  """X  '"  """"-ujmip  m  JIansoul  before  i
revolted  from  king  Shaddai.  Neither  can  it  be  laid,  where
we  are  so  fond  of  charging  our  sins,  upon  the  poor  bodv  It
would  seem  to  have  no  natural  growth  from  MansonlV nW
tonal  corporation,  ruined  as  it  is.  It  is  the  breath  of  the
old  serpent.  It  is  pure  devil,  as  it  is,  also,  purely  spiritual
It  needs  no  body,  no  concupiscent  organization,  no  appe
tites  or  fleshly  motions,  no  nerves  even,  for  the  exercise  of
its  devibsh  energies.  It  is  a  soul-poison,  vet  acHn-  fear
fully  upon  the  body  itself,  bringing  more  death  into  ft  tha  '
seemingly  stronger  and  more  tumultuous  passions  that  have
their  nearer  seat  m  the  fleshly  nature.  "It  is  rottenn,  s  n
the  bones."  A\  o  may  compare  this  proverb  of
with  a  terrific  description  of  envy  by  ^SCHYLCS

Ooj  '*


fVTvxovvra  crvv
'


TOIJ  T    OUTOS  O.VT

KO.I  TOV  Vvpaiov


Envy  at  others'  good  is  evermore
Malignant  POISOX  sitting  on  the  soul  •
A  double  woe  to  him  infected  with  it.
Of  inward  _pain  the  heavy  load  he  bears,
At  sight  of  joy  without,  he  ever  mourns.


lainful,  but  envy  has


do^cription


In  the  first  there  could  be  only  ten  sheaves  besides
Joseph's,  since  Benjamin  was  not  present,  and  Joseph
said  to  his  brethren,  Your  sheaves.  In  the  second,
however,  he  beholds  definitely  eleven  stars  there
fore  himself  as  the  twelfth  included.

Section  Second.     (Vers.  12-20.)     ST.UIKE  :  Ver.
15.  Joseph  enters  upon  his  journey  in  the  simplicity
of  his  heart,  expecting  no  evil;  and  thus  God  let's
him  run  into  the  net  against  which  he  could  have
easily  warned   him.     God's  ways,  however,  are  se
cret.     Whom  he  wishes  to  exalt  he  first  tries,  puri
fies,  tempts,  and  humbles.   [The  Rabbins  and  one  of
the  Targums  tell  us  that  this  man,  who  directed  Jo
seph  in  the  field,  was  the  angel  Gabriel  in  the  form
•     ,a,cman-J— HALL  :    God's    decree   precedes    and
:   fulfilled,    whilst  we  have   no   thought  about  it
yea,   even  fight   against   it.      Though"  a   Christian
does    not    always    prosper,  though   difficulties   be
set    his   way,    he    must    not    be    confounded,    but
ever  continue  firm  and  steadfast  in  his  calling.    Ver.
18.     Here  Moses  shows  what  kind  of  ancestors  the
Jews  had  (eomp.  Acts  vii.  9,  etc.).      Thus  they  fell
from  one  sin  into  another.     Perhaps  Simeon  was  the
ringleader;     since     he    afterwards   was    bound    as
hostage  for  his  brethren.— SCHRODER  :  Joseph  «-oes
m  search  of  his  brethren,  and  finds  sworn  enemies
bloodthirsty  murderers.— HEIM  ("Bible  Studies"):
Shechem  is  about  twenty-five  leagues  from  Hebron.
Joseph's  mission  to  this  remote  and  dangerous  coun
try  is  a  proof,  at  the  same  time,  that  Jacob  did  not
treat  him  with  too  much  indulgence,  and  that  he  did
not  keep  him  home  from  any  feelings  of  tenderness.
Joseph  s  willing  obedience,  too,  and  his  going  alone
in  inexperienced  youth,  upon  such  a  danircrous  jour-
ley,  is  a  proof  that  he  was  accustomed  toobcy  cheer-
ully — a  habit  not  acquired  in  an  effeminate  brin«in"-
ip.

Section  Third  (vers.  21-24).  STARKK:  So  goes
he  world.  Pious  people  ponder  the  welfare  of  the
godless,  whilst  the  latter  are  conspiring  for  their  de
traction  (1  Sam.  xix.  5).  God  can  raise  up,  even
mong  enemies,  helpers  of  the  persecuted.  "  Woe  to
hose  who  draw  iniquity  with  cords  of  vanity  and
in,  as  it  were  with  a  cart-rope  "  (Isa.  v.  18).

Section  Fourth  (vers.  25-27).     STARKK  :  LUTIIEH:
They  take  then-  seats  as  though  they  had  well  done
icir  work.     Conscience  is  secure;  sin  is  asleep  ;  yet
sees  all.— SCHRODER  :    [Unfavorable  judgment
f  Judah.l    LUTHER  :    0,  Judah,   thou  art  not  yet
unfied.     In  CALWER  Handbuch  Judah  is  even  com
pared  to  Judas,  who  sold  the  Lord.     But  it  is  alle-
jorising  merely,  when  we  are  determined  in  our  jud«--
ent  by  mere  outward  resemblances.     See  the  Exe-
?etical  and  Critical.     Judah's  proposition  arose  from
10  alternative :    He  must  either  starve  to  death  in
ie  pit,  or  he  must  be  sold  as  a  slave.

Section  Fifth  (vers.  28-32).  STARKE  :  Xo  matter
hat  hindrances  Joseph's  brethren  might  put  in  the
ay  of  the  dreams'  fulfilment,  against  their  will  were
icy  made  to  promote  it  (Ps.  Iv.  10).— _Bib/.  Tub.  :
lus,  there  is  yet  a  spark  of  good  in  nature.  If
ily  man  would  not  suppress  this  small  light  he
ould  be  preserved  from  the  greatest  sin^°—  TJIF
ME:  Joseph  is  a  type  of  Christ  in  his  exaltation,
his  humiliation,  and  especially  in  his  being  sold
r  thirty  [twenty]  pieces  of  silver.  Ver.  29.  Jose-
us  thinks  that  Keuben  came  by  night  so  as  not  to
detected.  [One  of  the  Targums  adds,  that  Reu-
)en,  on  account  of  the  incest  committed,  had  been
sting  among  the  mountains,  and,  in  order  to  find
ace  before  his  father,  had  intended  to  briu<*  Joseph


590


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


again  to  him.]     Ycr.   32.     Thus  Joseph's  brothers
add  sin  to  sin.

Section  Sixth  (vers.  33-36).  STARKE  :  This  was
a  punishment  of  God.  Jacob  had  deceived  his  fa
ther  Isaac  by  putting  around  his  neck  and  hands  the
skin  of  a  kid;  he  is  himself  now  deceived  by  Jo
seph's  coat  dipped  in  the  blood  of  a  kid. — HALL  :
One  sin  is  made  to  cover  another;  godless  men,  it  is
true,  ever  try  to  conceal  their  malignity,  but  it  comes
to  light  at  last,  and  is  punished. — OSIANDKR  :  Seldom
does  misfortune  come  alone.  It  is  but  a  short  time
-ince  .Jacob  was  deprived  of  Rachel;  now  he  has  lost
Joseph.  In  such  a  concealment  of  guilt  they  pass
twenty-iwo  years.  And  his  father  wept  for  him.
[LriHKK  :  This  was  Isaac,  Joseph's  grandfather,  who
lived  still  twelve  years  after  this  event.]  He  himself
(Jacob)  had  several  tilings  to  reproach  him  in  his


conscience :  Why  did  he  let  the  boy  go  alone  on
such  a  journey  ?  Why  did  he  send  him  into  a  coun
try  abounding  in  wild  beasts? — Bibl.  Wirt.:  In
grief  we  are  inclined  to  overdo. — OSIANDKR  :  Pious
parents  often  blame  themselves  when  things  go  bad
ly  with  their  children,  even  when  there  is  the  least
ground  for  it. — CALWER  Handbuch :  After  the  crime
comes  the  lie ;  after  the  lie,  a  hypocritical  comforting
of  the  father. — SCHRODER  :  LUTHKR  :  During  all  this
time,  the  brethren  were  unable  to  pray  to  God  with
a  good  conscience. — Observe,  each  one  of  the  three
patriarchs  was  to  sacrifice  his  dearest  son.

To  the  whole  c/iaj/ler.  TAUDE  :  The  selling  of
Joseph  by  his  brethren  :  1.  From  what  sources  this
horrible  deed  arose ;  2.  how  the  divine  mouth  re
mains  silent,  whilst  the  divine  hand  so  much  the
more  strongly  holds  ;  3.  the  types  that  lie  concealed.


SECOND     SECTION.

JudaJt's  temporary  separation  (probably  in  sadness  on  account  of  the  (/«</).     Jfis  sons.     T/iamar.


CHAITKR    XXXVIII.    1-30.

1  And  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  Jiulali  went  clown  from  his  brethren,  and
'1  turned  in  to  a  certain  Adullamite,  whose  name  icus  Hirah  [noble, free].  And  Judah

saw  there  the  daughter  of  a  certain  Canaanite,  whose  name  v.-us  Shuah  [cry  for  help] ;  and
;i  he  took  her,  and  went  in  unto  her.  And  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son;  and  ho  called
•t  his  name  Er  [n?,  watcher].  And  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  son;  and  she  called  his
f>  name  Onan  [f-treugth,  strong  one].  And  she  yet  again  conceived,  and  bare  a  son;  and

called  his  name  Shelah  [peace,  quietness,  Sluioh?]  ;  and  he  was  at  Chezib  [delusion],  when  .she
G  bare  him.  And  Judah  took  a  wife  for  Er  his  first-born,  whose  name  was  Thamar  [palm].

7  A  nd  Er,  Judah's  first-born,  was  wicked  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  ;   and  the  Lord  slew  him.

8  And  Judah  said  unto  Onan,  Go  in  unto  thy  brother's  wife,  and  marry  her,  and  raise  up

9  seed  to  thy  brother.     And  Onan  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be  his  [of  his  own  name]  :
and  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  he  went  in  unto  his  brother's  wife,  that  he  spilled  it  on

10  the  ground,  lest  that  he  should  give  seed  to  his  brother.     And  the  thing  which  he  did

1 1  displeased  the  Lord  ;  wherefore  he  slew  him  also.     Then  said  Judah  to  Thamar  his  daugh
ter-in-law.  Remain  a  widow  in  thy  father's  house,  till  Shelah  my  son  be  grown ;   (for  he
said,  Lest  peradvcnture  he  die  also,  as  his  brethren  did] ;  And  Thamar  went  and  dwelt

1 2  in  her  father's  house.     And  in  process  of  time  the  daughter  of  Shuah,  Judah's  wife,  died  ;
and  Judah  was  comforted,  and  went  up  to  his  sheep-shearers .  to  Timnath  [possession],

13  he  and  his  friend  Hirah  the  Adullamite.     And  it  was  told  Thamar,  saying,  Behold,  thy

14  father-in-law  goeth  up  to  Timnath,  to  shear  his  sheep.     And  she  put  her  widow's  gar
ments  off  from  her,  and  covered  her  with  a  veil,  and  wrapped  herself,  and  sat  in  an  open
place  [literally,  gate  of  two  eyes]  '  which  is  by  the  way  to  Timnath:  for  she  saw  that  Shelah

15  was  grown,  and  she  was  not  given  unto  him  to  wife.     When  Judah  saw  her,  he  thought

16  her  to  le  an  harlot;  because  she  had  covered  her  face.     And  he  turned  unto  her  by  the
way,  and  said,  Go  to,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  come  in  unto  thee ;  (for  he  knew  not  that  she
was  his  daughter-in-law)  ;  and  she  said,  "What  wilt  thou  give  me,  that  thou  maycst  come

1  7  in  unto  me  ?     And  he  said,  I  will  send  thee  a  kid  from  the  flock ;  and  she  said,  Wilt  thou

18  give  me  a  pledge,  till  thou  send  it?     And  he  said,  What  pledge  shall  I  give  thee?
And  she  said,  Thy  signet,  and  thy  bracelets,  and  thy  staff  that  is  in  thy  hand.    And  he

19  gave  it  her,  and  came  in  unto  her;  and  she  conceived  by  him.     And  she  arose,  and
went  away,  and  laid  by  her  vail  from  her,  and  put  on  the  garments  of  her  widowhood,


CUAP.   XXXVIII.    1-30.


591


20  And  Juclah  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his  friend  the  Adullamite,  to  receive  his  pledge

21  from  the  woman's  hand  :  but  he  found  her  not.     Then  he  asked  the  men  of  that  place,
saying,  Where  is  the  harlot  that  was  openly  by  the  way-side?     And  they  said,  There
was  no  harlot  in  this  place.     And  lie  returned  to  Judah,  and  said,  I  cannot  find  her  :
and  also  other  men  of  the  place   said,  that  there  was  no  harlot  in  this  place,.     And
Judah   said,  Let  her  take  it  to  her,  lest  we  be  shamed ;  behold,  I  sent  this   kid,  and
ihou  hast  not  found  her.     And  it  came  to  pass  about  three  months  after,  that  it  was
told  to  Judah,  saying,   Thamar  thy  daughter-in-law  hath  played  the  harlot;  and  also,
behold,  she  is  with  child  by  whoredom.     And  Judah  said,  Bring  her  forth,  and  let  her
be  burut.     When  she  was  brought  forth,  she  sent  to  her  father-in-law,  saying,  By  the
man  whose  these  are,  am  I  with  child ;  and  she  said,  Discern,  I  pray  thee,  whose  are,

26  these,  the  signet,  and  bracelets,  and  staff.  And  Judah  acknowledged  them,  and  said,
She  hath  been  more  righteous  than  I  •  because  that  I  gave  her  not  to  Shelah  my  son ;
and  he  knew  her  again  no  more.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  time  of  her  travail,  that

28  behold  twins  were  in  her  womb.     And  it  came  to  pass  when  she  travailed,  that  the  one
put  out  his  hand ;  and  the  midwife  took  and  bound  upon  his  hand  a  scarlet  thread,  say-

29  ing,  This  came  out  first.     And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  drew  back  his  hand,  that,  behold,
his  brother  came  out;  and  she  said,  How  hast  thou  broken  forth?  this  breach  be  upon

30  thee;  therefore  his  name  Avas  called  Pharez   [breach].     And  afterward  came  out  his
brother,  that  had   the  scarlet  thread  upon  his   hand;   and  his  name  was  called  Zarah

[going  forth,  sun-rising] .


p  Vcr.  1-1.—^;"?  nrE3  .  Rendered,  in  our  translation,  an  openjjlace;  margin,  door  of  eyes,  more  literally,  with
reference  to  Prov.  vii.  12.  Tho'LXX.  have  taken  it  as  a  proper  name,  rats  wuAat?  Aivdv,  which  has  led  Borne  to  regard
it  as  the  same  with  E:iam  mentioned  Joshua  xv.  31,  and  referred  to  by  Hieronymus  as  situated  in  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and
called,  in  hi«  day,  Bcth-enim.  See  Kosenmiiller.  The  dual  form  here  is  expressive  of  something  peculiar  in  the  place.  It
means  two  eyes,  or  two  fountains,  probably  the  former,  denoting  two  openings,  that  is,  two  ways,  a  place  where  she  was

certain  to  be  seen.  This  corresponds  to  the  Vulgate  rendering,  in  bivio  itineris.  So  the  Syriac,  ]£u»?o)  A.A.^0" -'
Arabs  Erpenianus  the  same,  IQ.J  JaJt  <J.Ag..g*0  .  The  idea  of  there  being  a  city  there,  at  that  time,  or  of  her  taking

her  place  by  the  gate  of  a  city,  is  absurd.  Abcn  Ezra  says  it  was  a  place  so  called  because  there  were  two  fountains  there.
This  was  an  early  use  of  the  Hebrew  "p? ,  the  eye,  arising  from  the  beautiful  conception  that  springs,  or  fountains,  were
eyes  to  the  earth,  as  the  herbs,  in  sonic  places,  are  called  fllTlX  ,  lights  coming  from  the  earth.  — T.  L.]


GENERAL.  PRELEMINABY  HEMAIIXS.

The  story  here  narrated  is  not,  as  Knobel  sup
poses,  an  insertion  in  Joseph's  history,  but  a  par
allel  to  il,  considered  from  the  one  common  point
of  view  as  the  story  of  the  sons  of  Israel.  Accord
ing  to  the  previous  chapter,  Joseph  (that  i?,  Ephraim)
appeared  to  be  lost;  here  Judah,  afterwards  the
head  tribe,  appears  also  to  be  lost.  But  as  in  the
history  of  the  apparently  lost  Joseph  there  lay  con
cealed  the  marks  of  a  future  greatness,  so  must  we
look  for  similar  signs  in  the  history  of  Judah's  ap
parent  ruin.  Parallel  to  Joseph's  spiritual  ingen
uousness,  patience,  hopeful  trust  in  the  future,
appears  Judah's  strong  and  daring  self-dependence,
fulness  of  life,  sensuality  combined  with  strong  ab
stinence,  besides  the  sense  of  justice  which  leads
;  him  to  acknowledge  his  guilt.  Examine  it  more
closely,  and  we  cannot  fail  to  trace  a  strong  feature
,  of  theocratic  faith.  It  is  a  groundless  conjecture  of
i  Knobel,  that  the  object  of  this  narrative  was  to  show
the  origin  of  the  levirate  law  among  the  Jews,  that
required  the  brother  of  a  husband  who  died  without
[issue  to  take  the  widow  to  wife,  and  that  the  first-
Iborn  of  this  connection  should  stand  in  the  toledoth,
1 3r  genealogical  lists,  in  the  name  of  the  deceased,
IDeut.  xxv.  5;  Matt.  xxii.  23;  Ruth  iv.  See  WINER
lin  "  Levirate  Marriage."  The  law  in  question  is
lof  a  later  date,  and  needed  no  such  illustration,
i  The  custom  here  mentioned,  however,  might  have
hxisted  before  this  time  (see  DELITZSCH,  p.  534).


But  why  cculd  not  the  idea  have  originated  even  in
Judah's  mind  ?  Besides  this,  Knobel  presents  chro
nological  difficulties.  They  consist  in  this,  namely,
that  in  the  period  from  Joseph's  abduction  to  Jacob's
migration  into  Egypt — about  twenty-three  years —
Judah  had  become  not  only  a  father,  but  a  grand
father  by  his  son  Pharez  (according  to  ch.  xlvi.  16).
Now  Judah  was  about  three  years  older  than  Joseph,
and,  consequently,  not  much  above  twenty  at  his  mar
riage,  provided  he  had  intended  it  at  the  time  when
Joseph  was  carried  off.  On  account  of  this  difficulty,
and  of  one  that  follows,  Augustine  supposes  that
Judah's  removal  from  the  parental  home  occurred
several  years  previous.  But  this  is  contradicted
by  the  fact  of  his  presence  at  the  sale  of  Joseph
(see  KEIL,  p.  240) ;  whilst  the  remark  of  Delitzsch,
that  "  such  early  marriages  were  not  customary  in
the  patriarchal  family,"  is  of  no  importance  at  all,
besides  its  leaving  us  in  doubt  whether  it  was  made
in  respect  to  Judah's  own  marriage,  or  the  early
marriage  of  his  nephews.  "  Jacob,"  he  says,  "  had
already  attained  to  the  age  of  seventy-seven  years,"
etc.  In  reply  to  this,  it  may  be  said,  that  early  mar
riages  are  evidently  ascribed  to  other  sons  of  Jacob
(ch.  xlvi),  though  these  children,  it  is  probable,  were
for  the  most  part  born  in  Egypt.  Between  the  pa
triarchs  and  the  sons  of  Israel  there  comes  a  decisive
turning-point :  earlier  marriages — earlier  deaths
(see  ch.  1.  20).  Nevertheless,  the  twenty-three  years
here  are  not  sufficient  to  allow  of  Pharez  having
two  sons  already  at  their  close.  Even  the  possibility


GENESIS,  OH   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


that  Pliarez  and  Zarah  were  born  before  the  migra
tion  to  1-Vvpt    is  obtained  only  from  the  supposition
thatJudah  must  have  married  his  sons  very  early.
Supposing  that  they  were  seventeen  or  eighteen  years
„],!    the  'reason  for  so   early   a  marriage  may  have
been  Judith's   knowlcd-c  of    Kr's    disposition,     lie
mav  have  intended  to  prevent   evil  by  his   marriage,
but  he  did  not  attain  his  object.     The  marnagc  ot
Onan   thai  resulted  from  this  was  but  a  consequence
of  the  first  •   and,  in    fact,  Onan's  sin  seems  to  indi
cate  a  youthful  baseness.     Judah,   however    might
have  made  b<,ih  journeys  to  Egypt  whilst  his  own
1-imilv  wa-  still  existing.     With  respect   to  Judah  s
grandchildren,  il  is  an  assumption  of  Hengstenberg
(Authfnlit     p-   ;;r''),  tll;a  they  were  born  in  Egypt,
and  that  the}  are  considered  to  have  come  to  Egypt,
as  in  their  fathers,  together  with  Jacob  (DELITZSCH,
,,   538)       \.-cording  to  Keil,  the  aim  of  our  narrative
is'  to  show  the  three  prineipal  tribes  of  the   tnture
dynasties   in   Israi-l,  and   the  danger  there  was  that
the  sons  of  Jacob,  through   Canaanitish  marriages,
n.H.t  forget  the  historic  rail  <'f  their  nation  as  the
nie.linm  of  redemption,  and  so  perish  in  the  Bins  ol
Canaan    had  not  (iod   kept  them  from  it  by  leadm
them  into   Kirvpt.     It  must  be  remarked,  however,
that    in    this  period,  it  was  with  difficulty  that  such
marriages  with  Canaanitish  women  could  be  avoided,
since  the  connection  with  their  relations  in  Mesopota
mia    had  ceased.     I'ndoubtedly    the    beginning    of
corruption   in  Judah's  family,  was  caused   by  a  <  a-
naanitish  mode  of  life,  and   thereby   the  race  was
threatened  with  death  in  its  first  development ;  but
wesee,  also,  how  a  vigorous  life  Struggles  with,  and
Struggles  out  of,  a  deadly  peril.


KXEGETICAL  AND   CUITH'AI..


1    ,/»/,/,//,'.<  separation,  his  marriage,  m;<l  his  sons
(ver-    I-:-)— And  Judah  went  down.— He  parted
from  his  brethren  at  the  time  they  sold  Joseph.  _  It
wa«  not    a<in  the  case  of  Esau,  the  unbndled  im
pulse  of  a  rude  and  robust  nature  that  prompted  him
prematurely  to  leave  his   paternal  home   though  he
showed  thereby  his  strong  self-reliance.     On  account
of  hi*  frank  disposition,  Judah  could  not  long  par
ticipate  in  offering  as  his  brethren   did,  false  conso
lations  to  his  aged  father  (ch.  xxxvii.  35).     It  weighs
upon  him  that 'he  cannot  tell  the  true  nature  ot  the
case  without  betrayins  his  brethren;    and  it  is  this
that  drives  him  off;  just  as  his  grudge  against  those
who  had  involved  him  in  their  guilt  separates  him
from  their  company.     Besides,  a  bitter  sadness  may
have  come  upon  him  on  account  of  his  own  purpose,
thou-h  meant  for  good.     Thus  he  tries  to  find  peace
in  solitude    just  as  a  noble-minded  eremite  or  separa-
ti-t   leaves  a  church  that  has  fallen  into  corruption.
Like  his  antitype,  the  New-Testament  Judas  but  in
a  nobler  spirit,  does  he  try  to  find  peace,  as  he  did,
after  havin"    sold  his   Lord.     In  a  similar  manner
did  the  tribe  of  Judah  afterwards  keep  its  ground
against  the  ten  tribes  in  their  decline  and  rum.     In
question  now  arises,  whether  Judah  went  down  from
the  Hebron  heights  in  a  westerly  direction  towards
the  Mediterranean  Sea,  to  the  plain  of  Sarepta,  as
Delit/seh  and  Knobel  suppose,  or  eastward  toward  tlie
Dead  Sea,  where,  according  to  tradition,  the  cave  o
Adullam  lay  (1  Sam.  xxii.   1),  in  which  David  con
cealed  himself  from  Saul.     Chezib  (ver.  5)  was  sit
uated  east  from  Hebron,  if  it  be  identical  with  Ziph
of  the  desert  of  Ziph.    Timnath,  according  to  Jose-


phus,  xv.  57,  was  situated  upon  the  heights  of  Judah
and  could  be  visited  as  well  from  the  low  country  in
the  east,  as  from  that  of  the  north.     If,  according  to
Eusebius  and   Hieronymus,  Adullam  lay  ten  Roman
miles,  or  four  leagues,  east  of  Eleutheropolis  (Beit-
dscttibrin),    this    statement   again  takes    us    to   the
mountains    of    Judea.     It    is,    therefore,    doubtful.
Still  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  David,  like  his  ances
tor,  once  sought  refuge  in  the  solitude  of  Adullam.
—And  turned  in  to,  etc.— "  13*'  »n<l  It  j>//<-hf(J,
namely,  ibns,  his  tent,   ch.  xxvi.  25,  close    !>y  ("")
a    man,   belonging   to   the  small   kingdom  of  Adul
lam      (Josh.     xii.     15)     in      the     plain     of     Judah
(Josh.    xv.    35)."   IMit/.seh.      This    settlement  indi
cates  friendly  relations  with  Hindi.     No  wonder  that
Hindi  gradually  yields  himself,  as   a  servant,  to  the
wiser    Judah.  "  Here    Judah    marries    a    Canaanite
woman.     This  should  be  noted  in  respect  to  Judah,
who  became  afterwards  the  principal  tribe,  as  also  in
respect  to  Simeon  (ch.  xlvi.  1<»),  because  it  would  bo
least  expected  of  him,  zealous  as  he  was  for   the  I--
ra.-litish   purity  in  the  murder  of  the   Shechemites.
Without  takinir  into  view   the   unrestrained  position
of  Jacob's  sons,   this  step   in    Judah  might    be   ex
plained  from  a  transient  lit  of  despair  respecting  Is
rael's  future.      In   the  names  of  his  three  sons,  how
ever,  there    is  an  intimation   of    return    to   a   more
hopeful  state  of  mind.— Er,  Onan,  Shelah  (see  1
Chron.  ii.  8).— The  place  of  Shelah's  birth  is  mentioned,
because  there  remained  of  him  descendants  who  would
have  an  interest  in  knowing  their  native  district.

2.  The  marriiif/e  of  t/i<-  ton*  <'•'>•/<•  Tlnnmir.  It
may,  at  least,  be  said  of  Thamar,  that  she  is  not  ex
pressly  called  Canaanitish.  If  we  could  suppose  a
westerly  Adullam,  she  might  have  been  of  Philistine
descent.  By  the  early  marriage  of  his  sons,  Judah
seems  to  have  intended  to  prevent  in  them  a  germ-
inatiiiL'  corruption.  That,  he  finds  Thamar  qualified
Tor  such  a  state,  that,  beside  her  Er  appears  _as  a
criminal,  whose  sudden  death  is  regarded  as  a  divine
judgment  (then  Onan  likewise),  and  all  this,  taken
in  connection  with  the  fact  that,  after  the  death  of
both  sons,  she  hoped  for  the  growing-up  of  the  third,
Shelah  seems  to  point  her  out  as  a  woman  of  ex
traordinary  character.— Till  Shelah  m  son  be


traordmary  cnaracier. —  j.m  out  ^y  =  "  ••'  r
grown.— According  to  Knobel  (Delitzsch  and  Red),  I  :.--
Judah  regarded  Thamar  as  an  unlucky  wife  (comp.  I
Tobit  iii.  7),  and  was,  therefore,  unwilling  to  give
to  her  the  third  son,  but  kept  putting  her  oil'  by
promises,  thus  causing  her  to  remain  a  widow.  This,
however  is  inconsistent  with  Judah's  character,  and
is  not  sustained  by  the  text.  It  is  plainly  stated  that
Judah  postponed  Shelah's  marriage  to  Thamar  be-
cau«ed  he  feared  that  he  might  die  also.  It  was  not
superstition,  then,  according  to  the  analogy  of  later
times  but  an  anxiety  founded  on  the  belief  that  the
misfortune  of  both  his  sons  might  have  been  con-
nccted  with  the  fact  of  their  too  early  marriage,
that  made  the  reason  for  the  postponement  ot  his
promise.— In  her  father's  house.— Thither  widow!
withdrew  (Lev.  xxii.  13).

3.  Judah's  crime  mill  Tliamar  (vers.  12-16).—
And  (when)  Judah  was  comforted.— After  the
expiration  of  the  time  of  mourning,  he  went  to  the  fes
tival  of  sheep-shearing  at  Timnath  upon  the  moun
tains,  in  company  with  Hirah.— And  it  was  told
Thamar.— The  bold  thought  which  now  flashed


across  the  mind  of  Thamar  is  so  monstrously  em
matical,  that  it  takes  itself  out  of  the  range  of  i
ordinary  criticism.  Mere  lust  would  not  manifa


CHAP.   XXXVIII.    1-30.


593


itself  in  such  a  way.     It  might  have  been  a  griev
feeling  of  right.     She  seemed  to  herself,  by  Judah
command  and  her  own  submission  to  it,  condemnet
to  eternal  barrenness  and  mourning  widowhood.     1
break  these   barriers  was  her  intention.     A  thirs
however,  for  right  and  life,  was  not  her  only  motiv
for  assuming  the  appearance  of  a  harlot,  the  reproae
of  legal  incest  (for  the  intimation  of  Er's  basenes
^and  of  Onan's  conduct  leaves  it  a  question  whethe
it  was  so  in  reality),  and  the   danger  of  destruction
Like  the  harlot  Rahab,  she  seems  to  have  had  a  know
edge  of  the  promises  made  to  Israel.     She  even  ap
pears  to  cling,  with  a  kind  of  fanatical  enthusiasm,  t
the  prospect  of  becoming  a  female  ancestor  in  Isra'e
See   the    Introduction,    p.    81.     AMBKOSIUS:  "No
tewporalcm  ttsum  libidinis  requisivit,  sed  succcssionei
gralias  co-ncupivit."     According  to  Keil,  Judah  cam
to  her  on  his  return.     Since  the  sheep-shearing  festi
vals  were  of  a  jovial  kind,  this  assumption  migh
serve  for  an  explanation  and  palliation  of  Judah'
sin  ;  still  it  cannot  be  definitely  determined  from  th
text.— And  sat  in  an  open  place.— Lange  trans
lates :  And  sat  in  the  gate  of  Ennayim  (Enain,  in  the
low  country  of  Judah,  Josh."  xv.  34)'.— Which  is  by
the  way  to  Timnath.— "  She  puts  off  from  her  the
common  garments  of  a  widow,  which  were  destitute
of  all  ornaments  (Judith  x.  ',',  ;  xvi.  8),  covers  hersel
with  a  veil,  so  as  not  to  be  recognized  (comp.  Job
xxiv.  15),  and  wraps  herself  in  the  manner  customary
with  harlots."  Knobel.     "Thamar,"  says  the  same
•  wishes  to  appear  as  a  kedescha  "  (a  priestess  of
Astarte,  the  goddess  of  love).     This,  however,  could
hardly  have    been  her  intention,  as  appearing  before
Judah.     The  proper  distinction  may  be  thus  made  •
According  to  ver.  15,  he  thought  her  to  be  a  zona
(njl'T),  but  in  vcr.  21  the  question  is  asked,  accord
ing  to  the  custom  of  the  country  :  Where    is   the
kedescha?  (mn-rn).     As  a  son  of  Jacob  he  might
have  erred  with  a  zona,  but  could  not  have  had  In
tercourse  -vith  a  kedescha,  as  a  devotee  of  the  god
dess  of  love.     Still  the  offence  is  great ;  though  there
s  to  be  considered,  on  the  one  side,  the  custom  of
the  times,  together  with  Judah's  individual  tempera
ment  and  the  excitement  caused  by  the  sheep-shear
ing,  whilst,  on  the  other,  there  is  to  be  kept  in  mind  the
gmatical   appearance   of  the  transaction,   behind
which  moral  forces,  and  a  veiled  destiny,  are  at  work
?mng  of  the  seal-ring,  the  cord,  and  the  staff
shows  that  Judah  has  fallen  within  the  circle  of  a
magical  influence,  and  that  it  i?  not  fleshly  lust  alone
-hat  draws  him.     These  pledges  were  the  badges  of
us  dignity.     "Every  Babylonian,   says   Herodotus
carries  a  seal-ring,  and  a  staff,  on  the  top  of  which
there  is  some  carved  work,  like  an  apple  or  a  rose
ihe  same  custom  prevailed  in  Canaan,  as  we  see
aere  in  the  case  of  Judah."  Delitzsch.     To  this  day
io  the  town  Arabians  wear  a  seal-ring  fastened  bv  a
30rd  around  the    neck  (ROBINSON  :  "Palestine,"  i.
\  58).     "  The  he-goat  appears  also  as  a  present  from
man  to  his  wife  (Judg.  xv.  1)."  Knobel.— Lest
we  be   shamed — These  words   characterize  the
noral  state  of  the  country  and  the  times.     In  his
ager  search  for  the  woman  and  the  pledges  (which
jrobably  were  of  far  more  value  than  the  kid)   Ju-
lah  shows  himself  by  no  means  so  much  afraid  of
Qoral  condemnation,  as  of  mocking  ridicule.

4  Thamar  and  her  sons  (vers.  27-30)  —And
et  her  be  burnt.— By  this  sentence  the  energetic
udah  remmus  us  again  of  David,  the  great  herC  of
.is  family.  U  ith  a  rash  and  angry  sense  of  justice
38


he  passes  sentence  without  any  thought  that  he  is
condemning  himself,  just  as  David  did   when  con
fronted  by  Xathan,  2  Sam.  xii.  5.     There  are  ever  in
this  line  two  strong  natures  contending  with   each
other.     "  In  his  patriarchal  authority,  he  commanded
her  to  be  brought  forth  to  be  burned.     Thamar  was
regarded    as   betrothed,  and  was,    therefore,  to  b*
punished  as  a  bride  convicted  of  unchastity.     But
m  this  case  the  Mosaic  law  imposes  only  the'penalty
of  being  stoned  to  death  (Deut.    xxii."  20),    whilst
burning  to  death  was  inflicted  only  upon  the  daugh
ter  of  a  priest,  and  upon  carnal  intercourse  both  with
mother  and  daughter  (Lev.  xxi.  19;  xx.  14 ).    Judah's
sentence,  therefore,  is  more  severe  than  that  of  the
future  law."  Keil.     The  severity  of  the  decision  ap
pears  tolerable  only  upon  the  supposition  that  he
really  intended  to  give  to  Thamar  his  sonShelah;
besides,  it  testifies  to   an  arbitrary  power  exercised
in   a  strange  country,  and  which  can  only  be  ex
plained  from  his  confidence  in  his  own  strength  and
standing.     How  fairly,  however,  does  Thamar  brin"
him  to  his  senses  by  sending  him  his  pledges.     The
delicate  yet  decisive  message  elicits  :m  open  confes
sion      But  his  sense  of  justice  is  expressed  not  only
n  the  immediate  annulling  of  the  decision,  but  also
n  his  future  conduct  towards   Thamar.     The  twin-
rirth  of  Rebecca  is   once  more   reflected.     We  see
how  important  the  question  of  the  first-born  still  re
mains  to  the  Israelitish  mother  and  midwife.     In  the
case  of  twins  there    appears   more   manifestly  the
narks  of  a  striving  for  the  birth-right.     Pharezjiow-
vcr,  did  not  obtain  the  birth-right,  as  Jacob  sought
t,  by  holding  on  the  heel,  but  by  a  violent  breach,
n  this  he  was  to  represent  Judah's  lion-like  manner
within  the  milder  nature  of  Jacob.     According  to
tnobel,  the   midwife  is   supposed  to   have  said  to
.  harez :  A  breach  upon  thee,  i.  e.,  a  breach  happen
o  thee ;  and  this  is  said  to  have  been  fulfilled  when
he  Israelitish  tribes  tore  themselves  away  from  the
ouse   of  David,  as  a  punishment,  because  the  Da-
idian  family  of  the  Pliarezites  had  violently  got  the
upremacy  over  its  brethren.


DOCTHIXAL  AND    ETHICAL.

1.  Judah's  beginnings  as  compared  with  those  of
oseph.— A  strong  sensual  nature ;  great  advances
reat  offences— strong  passions,  great  self-condemna-
on,  denials,  struggles,  and  breaches.

2.  Judah  as  Eremite,  or  Separatist,  in  the  noblest
nse  ;  the  dangers  of  an  isolated  position.

3.  Hirah,  from  a  valuable  comrade,  becoming  an
officious  assistant,— a  witness  to  Judah's  superiority

4.  The  sons  of  Judah.     The  failure  of  his  well-
intended  experiment  to  marry  his  sons  early.

5.  Onan's  sin,  a  deadly  wickedness,  an   example
to  be  held  in  abhorrence,  as  condemnatory  not  onlv
of  secret  sins  of  self-pollution,  but  also  of  all  similar
offences  in  sexual  relations,  and  even  in  marriage  '"-
self.     Unchastity  in  general  is  a  homicidal  waste  of
the  generative  powers,  a  demonic  bestiality,  an  out-
rage  to  ancestors,  to  posterity,  and  to  one's  own  life
It  is  a  crime  against  the  image  of  God,  and  a  dc"-ra-
dation  below  the  animal.     Ouan's  offence,  moreover
as  committed   in   marriage,  was  a   most  unnatural
wickedness,  and  a  grievous  wrong.     The  sin  named

tter  him  is  destructive  as  a  pestilence  that  walketh
darkness,  destroying  directly  the  body  and  soul  of
the  young.     But  common  fornication  is"  likewise  an
unnatural  violation  of  the  person,  a  murder  of  two


594


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


Bouls  and  a  desecration  of  the  body  as  the  temple  of
God  '    There  are  those  in  our  Christian  communities
who  are  exceedingly  gross  in  this  respect ;  a  proof
of  the  most  defective  development  of  what  may  be
called,  the  consciousness  of  personality,  and  of  perso
nal  dignity.  it-,
«     6    The  Levirate   law.     Its  meaning  and  object.
The  theocratic  moral  idea  of  the   levirate  law  is  as
cribed  in  the  Calwcr  Handbuch  to  the  desire  of  imper-
ishableness.     GERLACH  remarks :  '' An   endeavor  to
preserve  families,  even  in  their  separate  lines,  and  to
retain  the  thereby  inherited  property,  pervades  the
laws  of  the  Israelites,— a  feeling  that  doubtless  came
down  from  the  patriarchs.     The  father  still  lived  on
in  the  sun  ;  the  whole  family  descending  from  him
was,  in  a  certain  sense,  himself;  and,  through  this,
the 'place  n'"ll»:-r  lla'  People  was  to    be  preserved.
From  the  remotest  antiquity,  so  much  depended  upon
the  preservation  of  tradition,  upon  the   inheritance
of  religion,  education,  and  custom,  that  these  things
were  never  regarded  as  the  business  of  individuals,
but  of  families    and  nations.     When  afterward   the
house  of  Jacob  became  a  people,  this  duty  of  the  le
virate  law  necessarily  made  trouble,  and  the  brother-
in-law  was  no  longer  forced  to  it;  but  even  then  he
was  publicly  contemned  for  his  refusal  (Deut.  xxv.  5  ;
Ruth   iv.  7;  comp.  Matt.   xxii.  23)."     The  first  _  mo
tive  for  the  patriarchal  custom,  or  for  Judah's  idea,
comes,  doubtless,  from  a  struggle  of  faith  in  the  pro
mise  with  death.     As  the  promise  is  to  the  seed  of
Abraham,  so   death  seems  to  mar  the  promise  when
he  carries  away  some  of  Jacob's  sons,  especially  the
iirst-born,  before  they  have  had  offspring.     Life  thus
enters  into   strife  with  death,  whilst  the  remaining
brothers  fill  up  the  blank.     The  second  motive,  how
ever,  is  connected  with  the  fact,  that  the  life  of  the
deceased  is  to  be  reflected  in  the  future  existence  of
their  names  in  this  world.     Israel's  sons  are  a  church
of  the  undying.     There  is  a  third  motive;  it  is  to  in
troduce  thi'  idea  of  spiritual  descent.      The  son  of
the  surviving  In-other  answers  for  the  legitimate  son
of  the  dead,  and  thus   the  way  is  prepared   for  the
great  extension  of  the  adoptive  relationship,  accord
ing  to  which  Jesus  is  called  the  son  of  Joseph,  and
mention   is  made    of  the    brothers  of  Jesus.      Ihe
institution,  however,  being  typical,    it  could  not  be
carried   through  consistently   in   opposition  to   the
right  of  personality.     A  particular  coercive  marriage
would  have  been  at  war  with  the  idea  of  the  law  itselt.

7.  Thamar's  sin,  and  Thamar's  faith.

8.  The  Hierodulai.    Female  servants  of  Astarte,
Aschera,  or  Mylytta  (see  DELITZSCII,  p.  530).     The
he-goat  sacred  to  Astarte.

9    Judah's  self-condemnation  and  confession.
10.  Judah's  (Thamar's)  twins ;  Isaac's  (Rebecca's)
twins.


HOMILETICALASD  PRACTICAL.


Sec  Theological  and  Ethical.  It  is  only  with  great
caution,  and  in  a  wise  and  devout  spirit,  that  this  nar
rative  should  be  made  the  ground  of  homiletical  dis
courses.— Judah's  solitude.— The  apparent  extinction
of  the  tribe.— God's  judgments  on  the  sins  of  unchas-
•  jty. — The  danger  arising  from  feasts  (such  as  that  of
the  sheep-shearing. — The  keeping  of  promises.— Self-
condemnation.— The  fall  and  the  recovery  in  our  nar
rative. — Apparent  extinction,  and  yet  a  new  life,
tla-ough  God's  grace,  in  Judah's  uprightness  and  sin
cerity.


Section  First.  Vers.  1-5.  STARKE:  HALL:  God's
election  is  only  by  grace,  for  otherwise  Judah  never
would  have  been  chosen  as  an  ancestor  of  Christ,—
E'M.  Wirt. :  Pious  parents  can  experience  no  great
er  cross  than  to  have  vile  and  godless  children  (Sirach
xvi.  1).— GERLACII  :  This  marriage  of  Judah  is  not
censured,  since  it  was  impossible  that  all  the  sons  of
Jacob  should  take  wives  from  their  kindred  in  Meso
potamia.— SCHRODER  :  Yer.  5.  Chezib ;  meaning  DE
LUSION,  on  account  of  the  delusions  connected  with
this  place.— The  false  hope  of  Judah— afterwards  oi
Thamar.—  Then  again  of  Judah.

Section    Second.      Vers.   0-11.      STARKE:    llns
Thamar,    very   generally  regarded  as  a  Canaanite,
though  by  some  of  the  Jews  very  improbably  called
a  daughter  of  Melchizedek,  bas  received  a  place  in
the  Toledoth  of  Christ  (Matt.  i.  3),  to  show  that  he  is
also  the  hope  of  the  heathen.     [The  Jews  might   in
two  wavs,  have  suggested  to  them  this  strange  hy
pothesis  of  Thamar's  being  the  daughter  oi  Melchize
dek  •   1    Throu. -h  ancestral  pride  ;  2.  From   conclu
sions  derived  from  the  law.  -They  reasoned  thus :
Judah  intended  to  burn  Thamar,  she  must  have  been
the  daughter  of  a  priest.  If  she  was  the  daughter  of
a  priest  then  probably  the  daughter  of  Melchizedek.]
— HAI.L  :  Remarkably  wicked  sinners  God  reserves  to
himself  for  his  own  vengeance.—  Ver.  11.  Judah  spake
deceitfully  to  his  daughter-in-law.     Judah  may  also
have  thought  that  his  sons'  carlv  marriages  hastens
their  death,   especially  if  they  were  only  fourteen
vears  of  age  (?) ;  and  it  may  be  that  on  tins  account
he  did  not  wish  his  son  Shelah  to  marry  so  young.—
II  VLL  :  Fulfilment  of  promises  is  the  duty  of  every  up-
ri"ht  man  nor  can  either  fear  or  loss  absolve  him.—
SCHRODER:  The  seed  has  the  promise  of  salvation—
the  promise  on  which  the  fathers  grew.    The  levirate
law  was  but  a  peculiar  aspect,  as  it  were,   of  that
universal  care  for  offspring  which  formed  the  (1
Testament  response  to  God's  covenant  faithfulness.
Onan's  sin  a  murder.     It  is  as  if  the  curse  of  Canaan
descended  upon  these  sons  from  a  Canaamtisn  wo
man  — SCHWKXKK  :   The  sin  of  Onan,  unnatural,  de
structive  of  God's  holy  ordinance,  is  even  yet  so  dis
pleasing  to  the  Lord  that  it  gives  birth  to  bodily  and
Spiritual  death.— UEIM  ("Bible  Studies"):  1  Cor.  vi.
11      Why  is  it  that  the  Holy  Ghost  mentions  first  in
this  chapter  the  sin  of  Onan,  and  then  points  us  so
carefully  to  the  Saviour  of  the  world  as  descending
from  the  incest-stained  Judah  and  Thamar?     Here
only  may  we  find  salvation,  forgiveness,  the  taking
away  of  all  guilt,  and  the  curse  that  rests  upon  it.

Section  nird.  Vers.  12-16.  HALL  :  Immodesty
in  dress  and  conduct  betrays  evil  desires.— CRAM  KB  :
Widower  and  widow  are  to  live  lives  of  chastity.
That  Thamar  desired  Shelah  to  be  given  to  her  was
not  unreasonable  ;  but  her  course  in  thus  avenging
herself  is  by  no  means  approved,  though  some  of
the  Christian  fathers  (Chrysostom,  Ambrose,  Ihco-
doret)  praise  her  on  this  very  account,  and  ascribe
her  design  to  a  peculiar  desire  to  become  the  mother
of  the  M°cssiah.-Ver.  24.  It  is  not  agreed  whether
he  spoke  these  words  as  judge  or  accuser  lie  was
here1  among  a  strange  people  ;  but  as  he  has  never
subjected  himself  to  them,  he  would  be  judge  m  his
own  affairs.-CAi.vix :  Severe  as  Judah  had  been
acrainst  Thamar,  he  judges  now  indulgently  in  his  own
c°sc  — Lisco  has  a  remarkable  view,  namely,  that
Judah  himself,  after  the  death  of  his  wife,  was  undei

...  i  .     •  c  \ „.«  n   vM-i  f-    \»"i    I  mrr  TO


JUUtlH    iUUlDCJUj    U,ILV,I     vu

obligation  to  marry  Thamar,  if  he  was  not  willing  tl
eive°hcr  to  his  son.  The  same  view  is  entertained
by  Gerlach,  undoubtedly  from  a  tnis understanding  of


CHAP.    XXXIX.    1-23.


the  later  levirate  law. — SCHRODER  :  Harlots  only,  in
•Contrast  with  virtuous  and  domestic  women,  frequent
the  streets  and  markets,  lurking  at  every  corner
stone  (Prov.  vii.  12;  Jer.  iii.  2;  Isaiah  xvi.  25-31  •
Jos.  ii.  15).

Section  Fourth.  Vers.  27-30.  STARKE  :  Vcr  30.
In  Christ's  birth-register,  too,  great  sinners  are  found.
— [OSIANDER:  These  two  children  signified  two
people,  namely,  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles.  For  the
Jews,  though  seeming  to  be  the  first  to  enter  eternal
life,  have  become  the  last ;  whilst  those  of  the  Gen
tiles  who  heard  the  gospel  of  Christ  have  gone  before


them  and  become  the  first  (according  to  Val.  Her
berger.)]— SCHRODER  :  Zarah,  according  to  some,
means  brightness,  as  a  name  given  to  him  on  account
of  the  scarlet  color  of  the  thread  upon  his  hand.  Ac
cording  to  others,  it  means  the  sun-rism?,  as  indica
tive  of  his  appearing  first.— LUTHER  :  Why  did  God
and  the  Holy  Ghost  permit  these  shameful  things  to  be
written  ?  Answer  :  that  no  one  should  be  proud  of
his  own  righteousness  and  wisdom,— and,  again,  that
no  one  should  despair  on  account  of  his  sins,  etc.  It
may  be  to  reriiind  us  that  by  natural  right,  Gentiles,
too,  are  the  mother,  brothers,  sisters  of  our  Lord.


THIRD   SECTION.

Joseph  in  Potiphars  house  and  in  prison.      His  sufferings  on  account  of  his  virtue,  and  hx

apparent  destruction.


CHAPTER  XXXIX.   1-23.


1


And  Joseph  was  brought  down  to  Egypt;   and  Potiphar,  an   officer  of  Pharaoh
captain  ol  the  guard  [life-guordsmen,  executioners],  an  Egyptian,  bought  him  of  the  hands
2  oi  the  Ishmaelites,  which  had  brought  him  clown  thither.     And  the  Lord  was  with
Joseph,  and  he  was  a  prosperous   man;  and  he  was  in  the  house  of  his  master  the
^gyptian.     And  his  master  saw  that  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  that  the  Lord  made
4  all  that  he  did  to  prosper  in  his  hand.     And  Joseph  found  grace  in  his  sight,  and  he
served  him ;  and  he  made  him  overseer  over  his  house,  and  all  that  lie  had  he  put  into
s  hand.     And  it  came  to  pass  from   the  time  that  he  had  made  him  overseer  in  his
house,  and  over  all  that  he  had,  that  the  Lord  blessed  the  Egyptian's  house  for  Joseph's
_  sake;  and  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  was  upon  all  that  he  had  in  the  house  and  in  the
G  neld      And  he  left  all  that  he  had  in  Joseph's  hand;  and  he  knew  not  aught  he  had
^  save  the  bread  which  he  did  eat.     And  Joseph  was  a  goodly  person,  and  well-favored
3  ch.  xxix.  ir].     And  it  came  to  pass,  after  these  things,  that  his  master's  wife  cast  her
upon  Joseph;   and  she  said,  Lie  with   me.     But  he  refused,  and  said  unto  his
masters  wife   Behold,  my  master  wotteth  not  what  is  with  me  in  the  house,  and  he
i  hath  committed  all  that  he  hath  to  my  hand;    There  is  none  greater  in  this  house  than
I;  neither  hath  he  kept  back  anything  from  me  but  thee,  because  thou  art  his  wife  •
how  then  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin  against  God?     And  it  came  to  pass
as  she  spake  to  Joseph,  day  by  day,  that  he  hearkened  not  unto  her,  to  lie  by  her,  or
3  be  with  her.     And  it  came  to  pass  about  this  time,  that  Joseph  went  into  the  house
3  his  business  ;  and  there  was  none  of  the  men  of  the  house  there  within.     And  she
caught  him  by  Ins  garment,  saying,  Lie  with  me  :  and  he  left  his  garment  in  her  hand
13  and  led,  and  got  him  out  [of  the  house].     And  it  came  to  pass,  when  she  saw  that  he  had
t  Ins  garment  in  her  hand,  and  was  fled  forth,  That  she  called  unto  the  men  of  her
house,  and  spake  unto  them,  saying,  See,  he  hath  brought  in  an  Hebrew  unto  us  to
la  mock  us;  he  came  in  unto  me  to  lie  with  me,  and  I  cried  with  a  loud   voice-  And  it
came  to  pass,  when  he  heard  that  I  lifted  up  my  voice  and  cried,  that  he  left  his  gar-

16  xnent  with  me  and  fled   and  got  him  out.     And  she  laid  up  his  garment  by  her,  until

17  Ins  lord  came  home.     And  she  spake  unto  him  according  to  these  words  savin-  The

18  Hebrew  servant,  which  thou  hast  brought  unto  us,  came  in  unto  me  to  mock  me  f  And
it  came  to  pass  as  I  lifted  up  my  voice,  and  cried,  that  he  left  his  garment  with  me,

id  out.     And  it  came  to  pass,  when  his  master  heard  the  words  of  his  wife  which

i    e  spake  unto  him   saying  After  this  manner  did  thy  servant  to  me;  that  his  wrath

2J  was  kindled.     And  Joseph's  master  took  him,  and  put  him  into  the  prison  [stronghold!  '

e  where  the  king's  prisoners  [state-prisoners]  were  bound :  and  lie  was  there  in  the

But  the  Lord  was  with  Joseph,  and  shewed  him  mercy,  and  gave  him  favor


10


I!


596


GENESIS,  OR   T1IE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


22  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper  of  the  prison.     And  the  keeper  of  the  prison  commit
Joseph's°hand  all  the  prisoners  that  were  in  the  prison;  and  whatsoever  they  did  there,  ho

23  was  the  doer  of  it.     The  keeper  of  the  prison  looked  not  to  anything  thai  wus  under  li
hand  because  the  Lord  WHS  with  him,  and  that  which  he  did,  the  Lord  made  it  to  prosper.


ri  Vt,r  A,,  _.-,•--(  r,~  _  Literally,  tho  nmii'l  Jxnis",  so  called  from  its  shape,  which  was  different  from  the  common
E-vptian  architecture-thusVo.  structed,  perhaps,  as  giving  greater  strength.  Abcn  Ezra  expresses  the  opinion  that  tho
K-ord  i<  Egyptian  ;  but  it  occurs  in  Hebrew,  as  in  Cant.  vii.  3  (nHO),  where  it  evidently  has  tho  sense  of  nundnea,  and
is  <o  rendered  in  the  nil,  ieut  versions.  Tl.is  is  confirmed  by  its  near  relationship  to  the  more  common  ^flO  ,  to  Oo  n
from  which  the  Syriac  bus  its  word  \^r^  for  tower  or  castle.  Although  Joseph,  for  policy,  used  an  interpreter  when
=peaking  with  his  brethren,  yet  there  must  have  been,  at  this  time,  a  great  affinity  between  the  Phcmitic  ami  tbe  old
Egyptian  toi.-ue.  Very  many  uf  the  words  must  have  been  the  same  in  both  language*.  The  LXX.  have  rendered  it,


uon.  in  the  ftromjltM  ,  Vulg.,  simply  in  a'lrercm.— T.


.  .  RAL   rilKI.IMlNAKV  KKMAllKS.

1.  Tin'    three   chapters,   xxxix.-xlii.,  form  a  dis
tinct  section    by  themselves.     .Joseph  in   Egypt— in
his  uii.-ery  ancTin  his  exaltation;  first,  himself  ap
parently  hi-t.  afterwards  a  saviour  of  the  world.     Ch.
xl.  pres'ents  the  transition  from  his  humiliation  to  his
cxaltati

2.  In  the  .-eetion  from  ch.  xxxix.-xlii.,  Knobel  re
cognizes  the  elements  of  the   original   text,  minded
with  the  additions  of  the  Jehovist.     It  is  a  matter  of
fart,  that  the  elohi-tic  relations   predominate,  but  in
decisive  ]••  iuta  Jehovah  appears  as  the  ruler  of  Jo
seph's  destiny.

3.  If  the  preceding  chapter  might  lie  regarded  as
a  counterpart  to  eh.  xxxvii.,  then    the  present  chap
ter  forms  airain  a  counterpart  to  the   one  before  it.

.  hapters  airree  in  referring  especially  to  sexual
relations.  In  the  former,  Onan's  sin,  whoredom,  and
incest,  an-  spoken  of:  in  the  one  before  us,  it  is  the
temptation  to  adultery.  In  the  former,  however,
Judah.  on  account  of  sexual  sins,  seems  greatly  in
volved  in  truili,  thou-h  it  is  to  he  considered  that  he
intended  to  restrain  the  unchastity  of  his  sons,  that
ho  upholds  the  levirate  law,  that  he  judges  severely
of  the  supposed  adultery  of  one  betrothed,  and  that  he
purposely  and  decidedly  shuns  incest,  Nevertheless,
he  hims.df  does  not  re.Mst  the  allurement  to  unchas
tity,  whil.-t  Joseph  per.sistcntrY  resists  the  temptation
to  "adultery,  ami  shines  brilliantly  as  an  ancient  ex
ample  of  chastity.  His  first  trial,  when  he  was  sold,
was  his  suffering  innocently  in  respect  to  crime,  and
yet  not  without  some  fault  arising  from  his  inconsid-
erateness.  His  second  and  more  grievous  trial  was
his  suffering  on  account  of  his  virtue  and  fear  of
God,  and,  therefore,  especially  typical  was  it  in  the
history  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

4.  Our  narrative  may  be  divided  into  three  parts  :
1)  Joseph's  good  conduct  and  prosperity  in  Potiphar's
house  (vers.l-G);  2)  Joseph's  temptation,  constancy,
and  sufferings  (vers.  6-20) ;  3)  Joseph's  well-being  in
prison  (vers.  21-l?o).

EXEGETICAL  AXD   CRITICAL.

1.  Joseph's  pood  behavior  and  prosperity  in
Poiiphar'x  house  (vers.  1-0). —And  Potiphar
bought  him  ^see  ch.  xxxvii.  3t>). — As  captain  of  the
"  executioners,"  he  commanded  the  guard  of  the
palace,  or  Pharaoh's  body-guard,  who  were  to  exe
cute  his  death-sentences,  and  was  named  accordingly
Concerning  this  office  among  other  ancient  nations
see  KNOBEL,  p.  30;i.  The  name  eunuch  also  denotes


a  courtier  in  general  ;  but  Knobel,  without  any
ground,  would  regard  Potiphar  as  really  such  ;  though
these  were  frequently  married. — And  the  Lord
was  with  Joseph!— Here  the  name  Jehovah
certainly  corresponds  with  the  facts.  Joseph  was
not  only  saved,  hut  it  is  Jehovah  who  saves  him  lot-
he  purposes  of  his  kingdom.  His  master  soon
eeogni7.es  in  him  the  talent  with  which  he  under-
akes  and  executes  everything  entrusted  to  him.  As
iv  Jacob's  entrance  into  Lahan's  house,  so  by  Jo
seph's  entrance  into  Potiphar's,  there  comes  a  new
prosperity,  which  strikes  Potiphar  as  something  re-
narkable.  lie  ascribes  it  to  Joseph  as  a  blessing
ipon  his  piety,  and  to  his  Cod  Jehovah,  and  raises
Joseph  to  the  position  of  his  overseer.  In  this  office
be  had,  doubtless,  the  management  of  an  extensive
and-cconomy ;  for  in  this  respect  there  was,  for  the
military  order,  a  rich  provision.  It  was  a  good
training  for  the  management  of  the  trust  he  after
wards  received  in  respect  to  all  Egypt.  Upon  this
new  influence  of  Joseph  there  follows  a  greater  pros
perity,  and  therefore  Potiphar  commits  to  him  his
whole  house.— Save  the  bread  which  he  did
eat. — SeiiKonKi:  :  "  There  appears  here  that  charac
teristic  oriental  indolence,  on  account  of  which  a
slave  who  has  command  of  himself  may  easily  attain
to  an  honorable  post  of  influence."  Save  the  bread,
etc.  "  This,"  according  to  Bohlen,  "  is  an  expression
of  the  highest  confidence ;  but  the  ceremonial  Egyp
tian  does  not  easily  commit  to  a  stranger  anything
that  pertains  to  his  food."  Besides,  the  Egyptians
had  their  own  laws  concerning  food,  and  did  not  eat
with  Hebrews.

2.  Joseph's  temptations,  consolations,  and  suffer
ings  (vers.  0-20).— And  Joseph  was  a  goodly
man.— His  beauty  occasioned  his  temptations.— His
master's  wife  cast  her  eyes  upon  him.— His
temptations  are  long  continued,  beginning  with  lust
ful  persuasions,  and  ending  in  a  bold  attack.  Jo
seph,  on  the  other  hand,  tries  to  awaken  her  con
science  ;  he  places  the  proposed  sin  in  every  possi
ble  light ;  it  would  be  a  disgraceful  abuse  of  the  con-
fidence  reposed  in  him  by  his  master ;  it  would  be
an  outrage  upon  his  rights  as  a  husband  ;  it  would
be  adultery,  a  great  crime  in  the  sight  of  God.
A  "-am,  he  s'huns  every  opportunity  the  woman  would
give  him,  and  finally  takes  to  flight  on  a  pressing
occasion  which  she  "employs,  notwithstanding  he  is
now  to  expect  her  deadly  revenge.  KNOBEL  :  "  The
ancients  describe  Egypt  as  the  home  of  imchastity
(MARTIAL,  iv.  42,  4  :  ncquitias  tellus  scit  dare  nulla
maqis).  and  speak  of  the  great  prevalence  of  mar-
riage  infidelity  (HEROD,  ii.  Ill;  DIOD.  Sic.  i.  59),
as  "well  as  of  their,  great  sensuality  generally.  For


CHAP.   XXXIX.    1-23.


597


example,  the  history  of  Cleopatra,  Dion.  ch.  51    15  "
For  similar  statements  respecting  the  later  and 'mod
ern  Egypt,  see  KKIL,  p.  251,  note.— To  lie  by  her
-An   euphemistic  expression.— That   she   called
unto  the  men.— Lust  changes  into  hatred      She
intends  to  revenge  herself  for  his  refusal.    Beside*  it
IB  for  her  own  safety;  for  though  Joseph  himself
Jght  not  betray  her,  she  might  be  betrayed  by  his
garment  that  he  had  left  behind.     Her  lying  story  is
Characteristic  in  every  feature.     Scornfully  she  calls
her  husband  he  ("  he  hath  brought  in,1'  etc  )    and
ihereby  betrays  her  hatred.     Joseph  she  designates
an  Hebrew,"  i.  e.,   one  of  the  nomadic  people
who  was  unclean  according  to  Egyptian  views  (ch.'
XJH.  o2;  xlvi.  34).     Both    expressions    show    her
She  reproaches  her  husband  with  havino-  im
pended  her  virtue,  but  makes  a  show  of  it  by°call-
mg  the  pretended  seductions  of  Joseph  a  Wanton
mockery    as  though  by  her  outcry  she  would  put
herself  forth  as  the  guardian  of  the  virtue  of  the

females  of  her  house.— Unto  me  to  mock  me

Her  extreme  cunning  and  impudence  are  proved  by
the  fact  that  she  makes  use  of  Joseph's  garment  as
the  corpus  delicti,  and  that  in  pretty  plain  terms  she
almost  reproaches  Potiphar  with  having  purposely
endangered  her   chastity.— That  his   wrath   was
Mndled.— It  is  to  be  noticed  that  it  is  not  exactly
said,  against  Joseph.     He  puts  him  into  the  tower
the  state-prison,  surrounded  by  a  wall,  and  in  which
the  prisoners  of  the  king,  or  the  state  criminals,  were
kept.     V  er.  10.     Delitzsch  and  Keil  regard  this  pun
ishment  as  mild ;  since,  according  to  DIOD.  Sic.  i.
-b,  the  Lgyptian  laws  of  marriage  were  severe      It
must  be  remembered,  however,  that  Potiphar  decreed
is  penalty  without  any  trial  of  the  accused,  and
t  his  confinement  seems  to  have  been  unlimited
At  the  same  time,  there  is  something  in  the  opinion
expressed  by  many,  that  he  himself  did  not  fully
jeheve  las  wife's  assertion,  and  intended  a-ain  in
time,  to  reinstate  Joseph.     It  may,  therefore,  have
seemed  TO  him  most  proper  to  pursue  this  course  in
>rder  to  avoid   the  disgrace  of  his  house,  without
sacrificing  entirely  this  hitherto  faithful  servant    The
prosperous  position  that  Joseph  soon  held  in    the
prison  seems  to  intimate  that  Potiphar  was  punishin
mm  gently  for  appearance  sake.

3.  Joseph's  well-bciny  in  the  prison  (vers   21-^3
-Favor  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper—This  was
a  subordinate  officer  of  Potiphar;  and  "thus  van
ishes  the  difficulty  presented  by  Tuch  and  Knobel
that  Joseph  is  said  to  have  had  two  masters,  and  that
mention  is  made  of  two  captains  of  the  body-guard."
Dehtzsch.     The  overseer  of  the  prison  also  recognizes
Joseph  s  worth,  and  makes  him  a  sort  of  sub-officer  •
igh  he  does  not,  by  that,  cease  to  be  a  prisoner


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  GERLACH  :  The  important  step  in  the  develop
ment  of  the  divine  plan  is  now  to  be  made:   the
louse  of  Jacob  was  to  remove  from  the  land  of  the
promise  into  a  foreign  country,  as  had   been    an
nounced  to  Abraham  many  years  before  (ch.  xv  13)
Jacob  s  numerous  family  could   no    longer   remain'
among   the  Canaanites,  without  dispersion,  loss    of
unity  and  independence,  and  troublesome  conflicts
ith  the  inhabitants  of  the  country.     "Further  on
1 :  They  were  to  become  a  people  in  the  most
tivated  country  then  known,  and  yet  most  distinct
ly  separated  from  the  inhabitants."

2.  Jehovah  was  with  Joseph.     The  covenant  God


victoriously  carries  forward  his  decrees  throiMi  a
the  need,  sufferings,  and  ignominy  of  his  people'
Joseph,  so  to  say,  is  now  the  support  of  the  future
development  of  the  Old-Testament  theocracy  •  and
on  the  thread  of  his  severely  threatened  life  as  one
above  whose  head  hangs  the  sword  of  the  heathen
executioner,  there  is  suspended,  as  far  as  the  human
eye  can  see,  the  destiny  both  of  Israel  and  the  world
1  s  omnipotence  may,  and  can,  make  its  purposes
dependent  from  such  threads  as  Joseph  in  prison
Moses  m  the  ark,  David  in  the  cave  of  Adullam!
Irpvidence  is  sure  of  the  accomplishment  of  its
object.

3.  Joseph  suffering  innocently,  yet  confidin"  in
bod  :  a    a  s  aye,  yet  still  a  freeman  ;  b.  unfortunate,
yet  still  a  child  of  fortune  :  c.  abandoned  yet  still
standing  firm  in  the  severest  temptations ;  d  forlorn
yet  still  in  the  presence  of  God ;  c.  an  object  of  im
pending  wrath,  yet  still  preserved  alive ;  /.  a  state-
prisoner,  and  yet  himself  a  prison-keeper  ;  q    every
way  subdued,  yet  ever  again  superior  to  his  condi
tion      In  this^  phase  of  his  life,  Joseph  is  akin  to
Paul  (2  Cor.  vi.),  with  whom  he  has  this  in  common
that,  through  the  persecutions  of  his  brethren,  he  is
forced  to  carry  the  light  of  God's  kingdom  into  the
heathen  world,— a  fact,  it  is  true,  that 'first  appca-s
in  the  life  of  Joseph,  in  a  typical  form.
_      4.  Joseph,  as  an  example  of  chastity,  stands  here
in  the  brightest  light   when  compared  'with  the  con
duct  of  Judah  in  the  previous  chapter.     From  this
we  see  that  the  divine  election  of  the  Messianic  tribe
was  not  dependent  upon  the  virtues  of  the  Israelitish
patriarchs.      We  should  be  mistaken,  however    in
concluding  from  this  a  groundless  arbitrariness  in
the  divine  government.     In  the  strong  fulness  of
Judah  s  nature  there  lies  more  that  is  undeveloped
tor  the  future,  than  in  the  immature  spirituality  and
self-reliance  of  Joseph.     It  is  a  seal  of  the  truth  of
Holy  Scripture  that  it  admits  such  seeming  paradoxes
as  no  mythology  could  have  invented,  as  well  as  a
sea  of  its  grandeur  that  it  could  so  boldly  present
such  a  patriarchal  parallel  to  a  people  proud  of  its
ancestry,  whose  principal   tribe  was  Judah.  and  in
winch  Judah  and  Ephraim  were  filled  with  jealousy
toward  each  other.

_  5.  Joseph's  victory  shows  how  a  man,  and  espe
cially  a  young  man,  is  to  overcome  temptation  The
first  requirement  is :  walk  as  in  the  all-seeino-  pres
ence  of  God ;  the  second :  fight  witli  the  weapons
of  the  word  in  the  light  of  duty  (taking  the  offen
sive,  which  the  spirit  of  conversion  assumes  accord
ing  to  the  measure  of  its  strength) ;  the  third  :  avoid
the  occasions  of  sin  ;  the  fourth :  firmness  before  all
things,  and,  if  it  must  be,  flight  with  the  loss  of  the
dress,  of  the  good  name,  and  even  of  life  itself.

6.  The  curse  of  adultery  and  its  actual  sentence
in  Joseph's  speech  and  conduct.

7.  The  accusation  of  the  woman  a  picture  of
cabal,   reflecting  itself  in  all  times,  even  the   most
modern.     The  first  example  of  gross  calumniation
m  the  Sacred  Scripture,  coming  from  an  adulterous
woman    presenting  a  picture,  the  very  opposite  of
Joseph  s  virtue,  as  exhibiting  the  most  impudent  and
revengeful   traits   of  vindictive   lyin«-      Thu<    also
was  Christ  calumniated,  in  a  way  that  might  be'called
the  consummation  of  all  calumny,  the  master-piece
of  the  pmce  of  accusers.

8.  Potiphar's  wrath  and  mildness  are  indications

that  he  had  a  presentiment  of  what  the  truth  really

was      It  is  also  an  example  showing  how  the  pride

the  great  easily  inclines  them  to  sacrifice  to  th«


598


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


honor  of  their  house  the  right  and  happiness  of  their
dependants.

IIOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.  Joseph's  destiny  ac
cording  to  the  divine  providence:  1.  His  misfortune
in  his  fortune.  As  formerly  the  preference  of  his
father,  his  variegated  coat,  and  the  splendid  dreams,
prepared  for  him  im.-fortunes,  so  now  his  important
function  in  I'otiphar's  house,  and  his  goodly  person.
2.  His  fortune  in  his  misfortune.  He  was  to  go  to
Egypt,  as.-ume  the  condition  of  a  slave,  enter  prison,
and  all  this  in  order  to  become  a  prophetic  man,  an
interpreter  of  dreams,  an  overseer  of  estates,  lord
of  Egypt,  a  deliverer  of  many  from  hunger,  a  cause
of  repentance  to  his  brethren,  and  of  salvation  to
the  hou.-e  of  Jacob. — TAVIIK:  The  promise  of  suf
fering,  and  the  blessing  of  godliness :  1.  Its  use:
"godiine-s  is  profitable  unto  all  things  ;  "  '2.  its  snf-
feiii.gs:  "all  that  will  live  godly  shall  suffer  persecu
tion  ,  "  •').  iis  hle-s'mg  in  iis  exercise:  "  exercise  thy-
S'-lf  nn;o  godlir.i  ss."

Section  First.  (Vers.  1-f.).  STARK K:  There  is  no
butter  companion  on  a  journey  than  (lod.  Blessed
.:  •  they  who  never  forget  to  take  this  society  with
tli-  ni  wherever  thev  go. — L'.li'.  Tub.  :  God's  blessing
and  grace  are  with  the  pious  everywhere,  even  in
their  severest  trials. — CKAMKU:  Where  (Jod  is  present
with  his  grace,  there  he  will  be  soon  known  through
his  word,  and  other  tokens  of  his  presence. — OSIAN-
DK!, :  Pious  servants  should  lie  made  happy  in  their
service;  they  should  be  loved  as  children,  and  ele
vated  to  higher  employments. —  LAM;K  :  A  beautiful
bodily  form,  and  a  disposition  fundamentally  enriched,
both  by  grace  and  nature  !  how  fitly  do  they  corres
pond. — SCHRODER:  In  Egypt  Jacob's  family  had  a
rich  support  during  the  famine  ;  there  could  it  grow
up  to  a  great  and  united  people  ;  there  it  found  the
best  school  of  human  culture;  there  was  the  scat
of  the  greatest  worldly  power,  and,  therefore,  the
best  occasion  in  which  to  introduce  those  severe  suf-
f 1. 1  ings  that  were  to  awaken  in  Israel  a  longing  after
redemption,  and  a  spirit  of  voluntary  consecration  to
God  (Ilengstcnberg). — God's  being  with  Joseph,  how
ever,  is  not  a  presence  of  :-pecial  revelations,  as  with
the  patriarchs,  but  a  presence  of  blessing  and  suc
cess  in  all  things  (Baumgarten). — Joseph  happy,
though  a  servant. — Among  the  implements  of  agri
culture  delineated  on  the  Egyptian  tombs,  there  is
often  to  be  seen  an  overseer  keeping  the  accounts
of  the  harvest.  In  a  tomb  at  Kum  el  Ahmar  there
is  to  be  seen  the  office  of  a  household  steward,  with
all  its  appui  tenances.

'•tin  Second.  (Vers.  7-20).  STARKE  :  LCTHER :
Thus  far  Satan  had  tempted  Joseph  on  his  left  side,
i.  e.,  by  manifold  and  severe  adversities ;  now  he
tempts  him  on  the  right,  by  sensuality.  This  temp
tation  is  most  severe  and  dangerous,  especially  to  a
young  man  For  Joseph  lived  now  among  the  hea
then,  where  such  sins  were  frequent,  and  could,
therefore,  more  easily  excite  a  disposition  in  any  way
inclined  to  sensual  pleasure.  The  more  healthy  one
is  in  body,  the  more  violent  is  this  sickness  of  the
soul  (Sir.  xiv.  14).  The  more  dangerous  temptations
are,  or  the  more  difficult  to  be  overcome,  so  much
the  more  plausible  and  agreeable  are  they.  Nothing
is  more  alluring  than  the  eyes.  "  And  if  thine  eye
offend  thee,  pluck  it  out." — Ver.  9.  MUSCULUS:  In
all  cases  he  who  sins,  sins  against  God, — even  then


•when  he  is  wronging  his  fellow-men.  I>ut  he  most
especially  sins  against  God  who  injures  the  forsaken,
the  miserable,  the  ''  little  ones,"  and  those  who  are
deficient  in  understanding.  For  God  will  protect
them,  since  they  cannot  be  wronged  without  the
grossest  wickedness. — AUGUSTINE:  Iinitcntar  ado
lescentes  Joseph  sanctum,  pu/ckrum  corporc,  jiulchri-
or  em  mcnlc. — LAXGE  :  Since  by  nature  shame  is  im
planted  in  women  to  a  higher  degree  than  in  men
(in  addition  to  the  fact,  that  in  consenting  and  trans
gression  she  is  exposed  to  more  danger  and  shame),
so  much  the  more  disgraceful  is  it  when  she  so  de
generates  as  not  only  to  lay  snares  secretly  for  the
other  sex,  but  also  impudently  to  importune  them. —
Tin:  SAME:  The  fear  of  God  is  the  best  means  of
grace  for  avoiding  sin  and  shame.— HALL:  A  pious
heart  would  rather  remain  humbled  in  the  dust  than
rise  by  sinful  means. — Ver.  12.  He  preferred  to
leave  lire  garment  behind  him,  rather  than  a  good
conscience. — LAM;:;:  In  a  temptation  to  adultery
and  fornication,  flight  becomes  the  most  pressing  ne
cessity. — Ver.  IS.  CRAMER:  The  devil  will  be  true
to  his  nature  ;  for  as  he  is  an  unclean  spirit,  so  also
is  he  a  liar. — HAI.L:  Wickedness  is  ever  artful  in
getting  up  false  charges  against  the  virtues  and  good
works  of  others  (Acts  xvi.  -Jo).  We  must  be  patient
toward  the  diabolical  slanders  of  the  impious  ;  for
(iod  finally  comes  and  judges  them. — lioware  of  the
act  itself;  against  the  lie  there  may  be  found  a
remedy. — Vers.  Ill,  %2n.  He  who  believes  easily  is
easily  deceived.  Magistrates  should  neither  be  par
tial,  hasty,  nor  too  passionate.

SCHRODER :  "Joseph  was  a  goodly  person."  With
literal  reference  to  eh.  .xxix.  17,  Joseph  was  the  re
flected  image  of  his  mother.  They  in  whose  hearts
the  Holy  Spirit  dwells,  are  wont  to  have  a  counte
nance  frank,  upright,  and  joyful  (Luther). — The  love
of  I'otiphar's  wife  was  far  more  dangerous  to  Joseph
than  the  hatred  of  his  brothers  (Rambach). — Now  a
far  worse  servitude  threatens  him,  namely,  that  of  .-in
(Krummaeher). — Joseph  had  a  chaste  heart,  and,
therefore,  a  modest  tongue  (Val.  Herbcrger).  Un
chaste  expressions  a  mark  of  unchaste  thoughts.  On
the  monuments  may  be  seen  Egyptian  women  who
are  so  drunk  with  wine  that  they  cannot  stand.  Of
a  restriction  of  wives,  as  customary  afterwards  in  the
East,  and  even  in  Greece,  we  find  no  trace. — Joseph
lets  his  mantle  go,  but  holds  on  to  a  good  conscience.
Joseph  is  again  stripped  of  his  garment,  and  again
does  it  serve  for  the  deception  of  others.  — Sensual
love  changes  suddenly  into  hatred  (2  Sam.  xiii.  15).
— CALWER  Handbuch  :  Such  flight  is  more  honorable
than  the  most  heroic  deeds.

S«'tion  Third.  (Vers.  21-23).  STAP.KE  :  OSIAN-
DER  :  To  a  pious  man  there  cannot  happen  a  severer
misfortune  than  the  reputation  of  guilt,  and  of  de
served  punishment  therefor,  when  he  is  innocent
(Rom.  viii.  28). — CRAMER:  God  sympathises  with
those  who  sutler  innocently  (James  i.  3).  God
bringeth  his  elect  down  to  the  grave,  but  bringeth
them  up  again  (1  Sam.  ii.  6).  Whom  God  would  re
vive,  can  no  one  stifle.  Whom  God  favors,  no  mis
fortune  can  harm.

SCHRODER  :  Those  who  believe  in  God  must
suffer  on  account  of  virtue,  truth,  and  goodness;
not  on  account  of  sin  and  shame  (Luther).  Exalt
ation  in  humiliation,  a  sceptre  in  a  prison,  servant
and  Lord — even  as  Christ. — God's  eyes  behold
the  prison,  the  fetters,  and  the  most  shameful  death,
as  he  beholds  the  fair  and  shining  sun.  In  Joseph's
condition  nothing  is  to  be  seen  but  death,  the  losa


CHAP.   XL.    1-23.  59S


of  his  fair  fame,  and  of  all  his  virtues.  Now  comes
Christ  with  his  eyes  of  grace,  and  throws  light  into
the  grave.  Joseph  is  to  become  a  Lord,  though  he
had  seemingly  entered  into  the  prison  of  hell  (Luther).
Joseph's  way  is  now  for  a  time  in  the  darkness,  but
this  is  the  very  way  through  which  God  often  leads
his  people.  Thus  Moses,  David,  Paul,  Luther ;  so


lived  the  Son  of  God  to  his  thirtieth  year  in  Nazareth.
Nothing  is  more  opposed  to  God  than  that  impa
tience  of  the  power  of  nature  which  would  violently
usurp  his  holy  government. — STOLBERG  justly  com
mends  "the  inimitable  simplicity  of  Joseph's  history
narrated  in  the  most  vivid  manner,  and  bearing  OK
its  face  the  most  unmistakable  seal  of  truth."


FOURTH     SECTION.

Joseph  as  interpreter  of  the  dreams  of  Ms  fellow-prisoners.

CHAPTER  XL.   1-23.

1  And  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things  that  tlie  butler  of  the  king  of  Egypt,  and  his

2  baker,  had  offended  their  lord  the  king  of  Egypt.     And  Pharaoh  was  wroth  against
two   of  his  officers,    against   the  chief  of  the   butlers,    and   against   the   chief  of    the

3  bakers.     And  he  put  them  in  ward  in  the  house   of  the   captain  of  the,  guard,  into

4  the    prison,   the    place  where  Joseph   was    bound.       And    the    captain  of   the  guard
charged    Joseph    with  them ;    and    he    served    them ;    and    they    continued  a  season

5  in  ward.     And  they  dreamed  a  dream,  each  man  his  dream   in  one  night,  each  man
according  to  the  interpretation  of  his  dream,  the  butler  and  the  baker  of  the  king  of

6  Egypt,  which  were,  bound  in  prison.     And  Joseph  came  in  unto  them  in  the  morning,

7  and  looked  upon  them,  and,  behold,  they  were  sad.     And  lie  asked  Pharaoh's  officers
'  that  were  with  him  in  the  ward  of  his  lord's  house,  saying,  Wherefore  look  ye  so  sadly

8  to  day  ?     And  they  said  unto  him,  "We  have  dreamed  a  dream,  and  there  is  no  inter
preter  of  it.     And  "Joseph  said  unto  them,  Do  not  interpretations  belong  to  God?  tell

9  rue  them,  I  pray  you.     And  the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to  Joseph,  and  said  to  him,

10  In  my  dream,  behold,  a  vine  was  before  me.     And  in  the  vine  were  three  branches  :
and  it  was  as  though  it  budded,  and  her  blossoms  shot  forth;   and  the  clusters  thereof

11  brought  forth  ripe  grapes  :  And  Pharaoh's  cup  was  in  my  hand  :  and  I  took  the  grapes,

12  and  pressed  *  them  into  Pharaoh's  cup,  and  I  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand.     And
Joseph  said  unto  him,  This  is  the  interpretation  of  it:   The   three   branches  are  three

13  days:  Yet  within  three  days  shall  Pharaoh  lift  up  thine   head,  and  restore  thee  unto
thy  place  ;   and  thou  shalt  deliver  Pharaoh's  cup  into  his  hand,  after  the  former  manner

14  when  thou  wast  his  butler.     But  think  on  me  when   it  shall  be  well  with  thee,  and
shew  kindness,  I  pray  thee,  unto  me;  and  make  mention  of  me  unto  Pharaoh,  and  bring

15  me  out  of  this  house  :  Eor  indeed  I  was  stolen  away  out  of  the  land  of  the  Hebrews:
1G  and  here  also  have  I  done  nothing  that  they  should  put  me  into  the  dungeon.      When

the  chief  baker  saw  that  the  interpretation  was  good,  he  said  unto  Joseph,  I  also  was

17  in  my  dream,  and  behold,  I  had  three  white  baskets  on  my  head  ;  And  in  the  uppermost
basket  there  was  of  all  manner  of  bakemeats  for  Pharaoh ;   and  the  birds  did  eat  them

18  out  of  the  basket  upon  my  head.     And  Joseph  answered  and  said,  This  is  the  inter-

19  pretation  thereof:   The   three  baskets  are  three   days:  Yet  within    three   days  shall
Pharaoh  lift  up  thy  head  from  off  thee,  and  shall  hang  thee  on  a  tree ;   and  the  birds

20  shall  eat  thy  flesh   from   off  thee.     And  it  came   to   pass   the   third  day,  which  was
Pharaoh's  birthday,  that  he  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  servants  ;   and  he  lifted  up   the

21  head  of  the  chief 'butler,  and  of  the  chief  baker  among  his  servants.     And  he  restored
the  chief  butler  unto  his  butlership  again ;  and  he  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand ;

22,  23  But  he  hanged2  the  chief  baker;  as  Joseph  had  interpreted  to  them.     Yet  did  not
the  chief  butler  remember  Joseph,  but  forgat  him.

[i  Ver.  11.—  -tTZ)  SO  .  Iprcfsrd.  The  word  occurs  only  here,  yet  its  meaning  is  sufficiently  obvious  from  the  context,
and  from  the  cognate'chaldaic  DHO  .  It  is  onomatopic,  representing  the  emission  of  the  juice.  It  is  allied  to  nnU
with  its  sense  of  waste  and  destruction.  LXX.,  ef  e'0Au>a  ;  Vulg.,  ezpressi.— T.  L.]

[a  Ver.  22. — Flb?l.  It  does  not  here  denote  suspension  from,  like  hanging  from  a  gallows.  The  preposition  ?3
IB  opposed  to  that,  and  fhovrs  that  it  denotes  crucifixion. — T.  L.]


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


PRELIMINARY  RKMAltKS.

The  contents  of  this  chapter  may  bo  denoted,
the  silent  preparation  for  the  great  turning  m  Jo
seph's  destiny.  In  itself  considered,  however,  our
narrative  shows  us  how  the  religious  capacity  oi  suf-
lorin.'  for  the  Lord's  sake  develops  itself,  like  a
.'oriiK  in  the  people  of  God.  Joseph's  spiritual  life
shines  resplendent  in  his  prison.  There  may  be  clis-
thrmished  the  following  sections  :  1.  '1  he  imprison
ment  of  the  two  court-officers,  and  Joseph's  charge
over  them  (vers.  1-4);  '2.  their  dejectedness  and
Joseph's  sympathy  (vers.  5-8) ;  3.  the  dream  of  the
chief  builer,  and  its  interpretation  (vers.  9-15);  4.
the  dreani  of  the  chief  baker,  and  its  interpretation
(vcr<  IG-11>);  •"'•  the  fulfilment  of  both  dreams.


HXr.iiKTICAL   AM)   CRITICAL.


1.  Vers.  1-4.  lit?  imprisonment  of  the  two
court-officers,  and  Joseph's  charge  over  thcm.--The
chief 'of  the  butlers  and  the  chief  of  the  ba-

kers.— According  to  ver.  2  they  are  the  chiefs  in
their  respective  departments  of  service.  The  ori
ental  kings,  a-  those  of  the  Persians  (XESOPH.,  Ilel-
lenica  vui  i.  38),  had  a  multitude  of  butlers,  bakers,
and  cooks  The  otlice  of  chief  butler  was  very  hon-
orablc  with  the  kings  of  Persia  (llKiio...,  in.  "I;
XKNOPII.,  Cyroped.  i.  3,8).  It  was  ..nee  filled  by
Nehemlah  (Neli.  i.  11  ;  ii.  1).— In  the  house  of  the
captain  of  the  guard— i.  c.,  in  the  house  of  1  oti-
phar  The  house  of  the  captain  of  the  guard  was
connected  \vi;h  the  state-prison,  and  denotes  here  the
prison  itself.— Charged  Joseph  with  them.—
lb  re  I'otiphar  nirain  minifies  himself  with  Joseph  3
fortune  (and  that  byway  of  mitigating  it)  in  the
recognition  of  hN  talents.  By  this  distinguished
charge,  he  shows  favor,  at  the  same  time,  to  Joseph
:uid  to  his  fallen  colleagues.

2.   Vers.  5-8.     Thar   dejectedness   and  Josephs
~tl ,//,,,.— According  to  "the  interpretation.—
Both  had  dreamed— each  one  a  different  dream-
each  one  a  siirniiicant  dream,  according  to  the  autiei
pated  occurrence  upon  which  it  was   founded,  and
•d<o  according  to   its  interpretation.     Josephs  con
versation  with  the  sad  and  dejected  prisoners,  proves
his  -a"aeity  as  well    as    his  kindly   sympathy,
shows,    too,   how  misfortune    equalizes    rank,    and
makes  the  great  dependent  on  the  sympathy  ot  those
who  are  lower  in  position.— And   there  is  no   in
terpreter     of    it.— An    expression    showing    that
the  interpretation  of   dreams  was   much  in  vogue,
and  that  it  was  one  of  the  wants  of  persons  of  rank
to  have  their  dreams  interpreted.— Do    not   inter
pretations  belong  to  God  ?— He  admits  that  there
are  sbniiieant  dreams,  and   that  God  could  bestow
on  men  the  <nft  of  interpretation  when  they  are  re
ferred  back  to  him.     He  rejects,  indirectly,  the  hea
then  art  of  interpreting  dreams,  whilst,  at  the  same
time,  giving  them  to  understand  that  it  was,  perhaps,
imparted  to  himself.     First,  however,  he  is  to  hear
their  dreams.     Knobcl  is  inexact  when  he  speaks_  in
-cncral    terms    of   "the    ancient   view    concerning
dreams  "     Doubtless  the  field  of  revelation   admits
dreams  as  sent  by  God,    but   these   coincide  with
dreams  in  general  just  as  little  as  the  prophetic  mode
of  interpreting  them  coincided  with  that  of  the  hea
then   though,  according  to  Egyptian  views,  all  pro


phetic   art    comes  from  the  gods  (I!i:uoi>.   ii.    83)
Knobel.

3.  Vers.  9-15.     TJic  dream  of  the.  chief  butler
and  its  interpretation.— In  my  dream,  behold  a

vine. A  lively  description  of  a  lively  dream.     The

iirst  picture  is  the  vine,  and  the  rapid   development
of  its  branches   to  the  maturity  of  the  grapes.     On
the  vine  in  K::ypt,  see  KNOHKL,  p.  :;i>7.     In  the-  sec
ond  picture,  tlie  chief  butler  beholds  himself  in  the
service  of  Pharaoh,  preparing  and  presenting  to  him
the  juice  of  the  grapes.     "  The  vine  was^n  fern  .1  to
Osiris,  and  was  already  well   known  in    Egypt.     See
Ps.  Ixxviii.  47;  cv.    33;    Numb.  xx.  i>.     The   state
ment,  HKHOD.,  ii.  77,  is,  therefore,  to  be  taken  with
limitations.      Nor  is  i;  true  that  in  the  time  of  Psam-
meiicus  fresh  must  only  was  drank,  while  fermented
wine  was  prohibited.     Knobcl  has  shown  that    PLU
TARCH,  D,  /s/V, ,  vi.  ('.,   says  just   the  contrary.     The
people  drank  wine  unrestrained ;  the  kings,  because
they  were  priests,  only  so  much   as  was  allowed  by
the" sacred  books;   hut  from   the  time  of  Psammcti-
cus    even  this  restriction  was    abolished.     The    old
monuments    show     great    variety    of    wine-utensils,
wine-presses  at  work,  topers  tired  of  drinking,  even
intoxicated  women."   Delit/.seh.     "Wine   had   been
prohibited  before  the   time  of  Mohammed  (SHARAS-
TASI,  ii.  p.  8-JC,).     The  grapes  he  allowed  (Koran,  xvi.
11    Ci'.i)-     They  evaded   his  prohibition   by   pivssmg
the    -rapes  and  drinking   the   juice  of    the   berries
(Sciiui.TZ,    Leitiwii,  v.    p.   280).      Such    juice  ot
grapes  the  Egyptian   king   drank    also    in   Joseph  s
Time      He  was'  a  ruler  of  the  Hyksos  (?),  who  were
an  Arabian  tribe."   Knobel.     THE  SAME:  Thcdreara-
interprcter  Artemidorus  classes  the  vine  with  plants
that  "row  rapidly,  and  regards  dreams  concerning  it
H  having  a  quick   fulfilment.     Joseph's  interpreta
ion  —Three  branches,  three  days.— Since  1  ha-
Moh's   birth-day  was  at  hand,  and  was  known,  per-
nps   as  a  day  of  pardon,  this  presentiment    may,  to
some  dc'Tce,"  have    been  affected    by    it.— Lift  up
thine  head.— T<»   replace,  again,  in  prosperity  and
,onor,  especially  to    bring  out   of   prison   (2   Kings
xxv  <>7)_And   show  kindness,   I   pray   thee,
unto  me.— Joseph  is  so  sure  of  his  interpretation
that  he  employs  the  opportunity  to  plead  tor  Ins  own
and  liberty  .-I  was  stolen.- An  oppression
o    innocence.     They  took  him  away  from  his  father,
but  how  it  was  done,  his  feelings  do  not  allow  him  to
relate-   enou-h  that  he  came  to   Egypt  neither  as  :
criminal,  nor  a<  a  slave,  rightly  sold.     With  the  same
caution  he  speaks   about  his    imprisonment  withou
exposing  the  house  of  Potiphar.

4  Vers  16-19.  The  dream  of  the.  chief  of  the
bakers,  and  its  interpretation.  The  striking  resem
blance  of  his  dream  to  the  one  previously  interpreted,
caused  the  baker  to  overlook  its  ominous  difference ;
he  therefore,  hopes  also  lor  a  favorable  interpreta
tion.  The  interpreter,  however,  shows  his  discern
ment  in  recognizing  the  birds  that  did  not  cat  the
bakemcats  out  of  the  basket  upon  Ins  head,  as  the
main  point.  He  diners  also  from  the  heathen  inter-
nreters  in  announcing  the  unfavorable  meaning  plain
ly  and  distinctly.  KNOBKL:  "In  Egypt  men  were
accustomed  to  carry  on  their  heads,  women  upon
their  shoulders.  In  modern  Egypt  women  bear  bur
dens  upon  their  heads."  "  Even  at  this  day  in  Egypt
kites  and  hawks  seize  upon  articles  of  food  earned
upon  the  head."  The  criminal  to  be  put  to  death
was  fastened  to  a  stake,  to  increase  thereby  the  H
verity  of  the  punishment  (Dent.  xxi.  22;  Josh.  x.
26  ;  2  Sam.  i  v.  1  -i ).  This  custom  was  also  prevalent


CHAP.   XL.    1-23.


601


among  other   nations,  especially  the   Persians  an
Carthaginians.

5.  Vers.  20-23.  TJie  fulfilment  of  loth  the,
dreams.  The  kings  of  antiquity  were  accustomed  t
celebrate  their  birth-days.  "According  to  II  erode
tus,  this  was  the  only  day  on  which  the  kings  of  th
Persians  anointed  themselves,  and  gave  presents  t
their  subjects.  In  like  manner  the  Hebrew  kings
on  joyous  occasions,  exercised  mercy  (1  Sam.  x
13)."  Knobel.  Joseph  is  forgotten  'by  the  butler
apparently  for  ever ;  God,  however,  has  provided  fo
his  exaltation,  not  only  through  the  destiny  denote'
in  the  dreams,  but  also  by  the  clearing  up  of  th
truthfulness  of  the  interpreter.


DOCTEJXAL  AND  ETIIICAL.

1 .  The  manner  in  which  the  divine  providence  qui
etly  and  secretly  makes  the  most  insignificant  things
apparently,  the  occasion  and  the  cause  of  wonderfu
changes,  appears  very  visible  in  our  narrative.  Ii
would  appear  simply  fortuitous  that  Pharaoh  shoulc
have  thrown  into  prison  his  two  officers  on  account
perhaps,  of  some  very  trifling  offence ;  still  more  ac
cidental  would  it  appear  that  Joseph  should  have
had  charge  of  them,  and  that  both  should  have  had
alarming  dreams,  and  finally,  how  extraordinarily
fortuitous  that  Joseph,  on  entering,  should  have  ob
served  their  depression  in  their  countenances  !  But
all  this  apparent  chance  was  made  a  prerequisite,  in
the  course  of  God's  providence,  for  Joseph's  exalta
tion,  and  Israel's  redemption.  "  The  Lord  finds  a
thousand  ways  where  reason  sees  not  even  one."

2.  The  occurrences  of  the  heathen   world,  the
affairs  of  courts,  their  crimes,  cabals,  intrigues,  are
all  under  the  divine  control.     A  country  in  which  the
wisdom  of  the  world  seems  to  have  emancipated  it
self  from  all  regard  to  the  government  of  a  divine
providence,  is  just   the   one  whose    administration
shows  the  most  failure,  and  most  frequently   expe
riences  an  ironical  disappointment  of  its  plans.

3.  Prisons,  too,  with  their  dark  chambers,  dun
geons,  sorrows,  secrets,  are  under  the  control  of  God.
At  all  dmes  have  they  enclosed  not  only  criminals,
but   the   innocent, — oftentimes   the  best  and  most
pious  of  men.     Christ  says  :  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye
came  unto  me  ;  and  he  speaks  thus,  not  of  faithful
martyrs  only ;  even  among  the  guilty  there  is  a  spark
of  Christ's  kinsmanship, — i.  e.,  belonging  to  him.

4.  How  mightily  misfortune  takes  away  the  distinc
tion  of  rank.     Joseph  has  not  only  the  heart's  gift
of  sympathy  for  the  unhappy,  but  also  that  open-
hearted  self-consciousness  that  fits  him  to  associate
with  the  great.     Even  when  a  child  did  he  run  be
fore  his  mother  in  meeting  Esau.

5.  The  night-life  with  its  wakcfulness,  as  with  its
dreams,  enters  into  the  web  of  the  divine  providence
(see  Book  of  Esther,  Daniel,  Matt.  ii.  xxvii.  19  ;  Acts
xvi.  9  ;  Ps.  cxxxii.  4).     Dreams  are  generally  so  un
meaning  that  they  should  never  cause  men  to  err  in
obedience  to  the  faith,  in  duty,  or  in  the  exercise  of
a  judicious  understanding.     Their  most  general  sig
nificance,  however,  consists  in  their  being  a  reflection
of  the  feelings,  remembrances,  and  anticipations  of
the  day  life,  as  also  in  the  fact,  that  all  perceptions
of  the  body  give  themselves  back  in  the  mirror  of
the  nightly  consciousness,  as  imaged  speech  or  pic
ture.      The  spirit   of  God  may,  therefore,  employ
dreams  as  a  medium  of  revelation.     He  can  send
dreams  and  bestow  the  gift  of  interpretation.     But,


in  themselves,  the  most  significant  dreams  of  reve
lation  never  form  ethical  decisions,  though  they  may
be  signs  and  monitors  of  the  same.  Their  higher
significance,  however,  is  sealed  by  their  great  =and
world-historic  consequences  for  the  kingdom  of  God.
6.  Joseph  very  definitely  distinguished  between
his  own  and  the  heathen  mode  of  interpretin"
dreams  ;  and  this  he  owes  to  his  Isruelitish  coi>
sciousness  as  opposed  to  the  heathen.  The  divine
certainty  of  his  interpretation  is  seen  in  the  fact,  that,
notwithstanding  the  greatest  -  similarity  in  both
dreams,  he  immediately  recognizes  the  point  of  dis
similarity,  and  dares  to  make  the  fearful  announce
ment  in  the  assurance  that  the  issue  of  the  affair
would  be  in  correspondence.  The  apparent  severity
of  such  frankness  could  not  make  him  falter  in  the
feeling  of  what  was  due  to  truth.  To  narrate  how  he
may  have  sought  to  mitigate  it,  by  expressions  of
sympathy,  lay  not  within  the  scope  of  this  narration.

7.  The  joyous  feasts  of  the  great  are  sources  both
of  life  and  death.

8.  A  man  in  prosperity  soon  forgets  the  com-
panions  of  his  former  misery,  just  as  the  chief  butler
forgot  Joseph.     God's  memory  never  fails,  and  it  is,
at  the  same  time,  the  chief  quickener  of  the  memories
of  men.     God  keeps  his  own  time.     The  ray  of  hope
that  shone  for  the  prisoner  at  the  release  of  the  chief
butler  went  out  again  for  two  years.     When  all  hope
seemed  to  have  vanished,  then  divine  help  comes  in
wonderfully.


nOHILETICAL  AOT>  PBACTICAL.

See  Doct.  and  Eth.     Joseph's  disciplinary  trials.

lis  preparation  for  his  great  calling  of  saviour  and
ruler:  a.  by  sufferings;  b.  by  works  of  his  vocation.
— Traces  of  God  in  the  prison:  1.  Divine  light;  2.

loly  love ;  3.  divine  monitions  ;  4.  hope  of  deliver
ance. — God's  government  in  its  great  issues:  1.  Of

he  smallest  things  ;  2.  of  the  proudest  events  ;  3.
of  the  most  fallible  judgments  of  men ;  4.  of  the
darkest  prisons ;  5.  of  the  nightly  life  ;  6.  of  hopes
and  fears  in  human  need.

First  Section.  Vers.  1-4.  STARICE  :  Ver.  1.  In
what  the  offence  consisted  is  not  announced.  The
Rabbins,  who  pretend  to  know  all  things  about  which

he  Scriptures  are  silent,  say  that  the  butler  had  per-
nitted  a  fly  to  drop  into  the  king's  cup,  and  that  a
^rain  of  sand  was  found  in  the  bread  of  the  baker.

'he  conjecture  of  Rabbi  Jonathan  has  more  proba
bility  ;  he  thinks  that  both  had  conspired  to  poison
he  king.  Joseph  was  thirteen  years  in  a  state  of

umiliation,    and    the    last   three   (?)   in  a   prison.

CHRODKR  :  Information  concerning  the  Egyptian
vine  culture  and  representations  of  it  upon  the  inonu-
nents  (according  to  Champollion  and  others,  p.  57G),
— also  concerning  the  modes  of  baking,  which  wa3

uite  an  advanced  art  among  the  Egyptians.  The
Igyptians  had  for  their  banquets  many  different

inds  of  pastry.— The    offices  of  chief  butler  and

hief  baker  were  in  high  honor,  and  sometimes  that

f  field-marshal  was  connected  with  them. — In  the

ast  the  prisons  are  not  public  buildings  erected  for

lis  sole  purpose,  but  a  part  of  the  house  in  which
prison  officer  resided.
Second  Section.     Vers.  5-8.     STARKE  :  CRAMER  ;

here  are  different  kinds  of  dreams :  divine  drcamg
.   xxviii.    12;  xli.   17;  Daniel  ii.  28);  diabolical

eams  (Deut.  xiii.  2  ;  Jeremiah  xxiii.  16  ;  xxvii.  9)  ;
atural  dreams  (Eccles.  v.  2).  We  must,  therefore.


G02


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


distinguish  between  dream?,  and  not  regard  them  all
alike  (Sirach  xxxiv.  7).  The  godless  and  the  pious
may  get  into  the  same  troubles,  and  have  similar  suf
ferings  ;  yet  they  cannot  look  upon  them  with  the
like  'dispositions  and  emotions.  SCHRODER  :  They
may  have  been  dreams  suggested  by  their  official  po
sition.  Both  of  them  may  have  gone  to  sleep  with
the  number  three  upon  their  minds  because  of  the
thought  that  Pharaoh  was  to  celebrate  his  birth-day
within  three  days.  No  wonder  that  their  imagination
overflowed  from  the  abundance  of  their  hearts  ;  and
who  can  tell  how  much  their  consciences  were  con
cerned  in  these  dreams.  The  culture  and  the  char
acter  of  the  Egyptians  was  every  way  mystical,  or
rather  symbolical ;  the  less  they  arc  able  to  account
for  an  occurrence  the  more  divine  it  seemed.  Night
they  considered  as  source  of  all  things,  and  as  a
being  to  which  they  paid  divine  honors.  The  whole
ancicr.t  history  of  this  wonderful  people  has  a  noc
turnal  aspect  about  it.  One  might  call  it  the  land
of  dreams  of  presentiments,  enigmas.  Joseph's  des
tiny  in  respect  to  this  country  begins  in  dreams,  and
is  c'impl.'t.'d  by  them  (Krummacher).  It  is  not  every
one  that  can  read  the  writing  of  the  human  counte
nance  ;  this  power  is  given  to  love  only  (Baumgarten).
He  preached  in  prison  as  Christ  did  <  Uichtcr).

Thi,-<l  *><•/;<»!.  Vers.  0-15.  STAKKK:  Ver.  14.
The  Jews  charge  that  Joseph  in  this  request  demand-
.  -I  pay  for  his  interpretation,  and  allege  that,  on  this
account,  he  had  to  remain  in  prison  two  years  longer.
There  is,  however,  no  ground  for  such  an  imputation  ;
but  thou-'n  !)>•  had  the  assurance  of  the  divine  pres
ence,  and  that  God  would  deliver  him  from  the
prison,  he  had,  nevertheless,  a  natural  longing  for
liberty.  Be.-ides,  he  did  not  ask  anything  unfair  of
the  butler  (1  Cor.  vii.  21).— CRAMER:  Ordinary
means  are  from  God,  and  he  who  despises  them
tempts  (lod. — THKSAMK:  We  may  assert  our  inno-
cency,  and  seek  deliverance,  yet  still  we  must  not,
on  that  account,  speak  ill  of  those  who  have  injured
ns  (  Malt.  v.  -14).

SCHRODER:  The  dream  of  the  chief  butler,  no
doubt,  leans  upon  the  business  of  his  life  and  ^  office,
but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  also  has  the  imaginative
impression  of  "  the  poet  concealed  within  every
man,"  as  Schubert  calls  it.— CAI.WKR  Handbuch:
Ver.  15.  A  mild  judgment  upon  the  act  of  his  breth
ren,  whom  he  would  not  unnecessarily  reproach.

Fourth  Section.  Vcrs.  16-10.  STARKE  :  Bill
Wirt. :  Whenever  the  word  of  God  is  to  be  expound
ed,  it  should  be  done  in  the  way  the  Holy  Spirit  pre-
K-nts  it,  and  according  to  the  word  itself,  no  matter


whether  the  hearers  are  disturbed,  alarmed,  or  com
forted. — SCHRODER  :  (Calvin  :)  Many  desire  the  word
of  God  because  they  promise  themselves  simply  en
joyment  in  the  hearing  of  it. — CAIAVKR  Haiidbuch :
In  Hebrew,  "  to  lift  up  the  head,"  is  a  play  upon
words.  It  means  to  restore  to  honor  and  dignity,  or
to  hang  upon  the  gallows,  or  decapitation  (taking
off  the  head),  or  crucifixion  (lifting  up  upon  tho
cross).

Fifth    Section.     Ters.    20-23.      STAUKK  :     Bill.
Wirt:  Godless  men  in  adversity,  when  they  receive
help  from  the  pious,  make  the  fairest   of  promises,
but  when  prosperity   returns  they  forget  them   all.
Be   not,    therefore, '  too    confiding.       High    station
changes  the  manners,  and  usually  makes  men  arro
gant. — LAXGK  :  How  easily  is  a  favor  forgotten,  and
how  seductive  the  courtier  life  !— KCHUODKR :  These
are  times  when  men,  through  the  prestige   of  birth,
or  by  money,  or  human  favor,  may  reach  the  summit
of  honor  and  wealth,  without  any  previous  schooling
of  adversity ;  still   such    men    are   not   truly  great,
whatever  may  be  the  greatness  of  their  title  and  their
revenues.     They  are  not   the   instruments   that  God
employs  in  the  accomplishment  of  his  great  purposes.
Thus  to  Joseph,  who  was  to  become  Lord  of  Egypt,
the  house  and  prison  of  Potiphar,  in  both  of  which
he  bore  rule  on  a  lesser  scale,  were  to  be  ids  prepara
tory  school.  The  wisdom  he  was  to  exercise  in  great
er  things   begins  here  10   show   itself  in   miniature.
Such  a  heart-purifying  discipline   is  needed  by  all
who  would  see  God,  and  who  would  be   clothed  with
authority   for   the   world's   benefit.       Without    this
there  is  no  truly  righteous  administration.     It  never
comes  from  passsionate  ovcrhastiness,  sensual    sloth,
needless  fear,  selfish  purposes,  or  unreasoning  obsti
nacy.       On  the   contrary,  Joseph   was   purified,   in
prison,  by  the  word  of  God  ;  so  was  Moses  in  Midian,
David  in  exile,  Daniel  in   Babylon.     Thus  became
they  fit  instruments  in  the   hand   of  God   (Koos).
Therefore  is  it  that  the  pious   Joseph  was  crucified,
dead,  and  buried,  and  descended  into  hell.     Now
comes  the  Lord  to  deliver  him,  honor  him,  make  him
great  (Luther).— HKIM  (Bible   Studies):  It  was  Jo
seph's  single  ray  of  hope  in  the  prison— that  which
lighted  him   to"  freedom — that   he   could   commend
himself  to  the  intercession  of  the  chief  butler.  When
this  went  out,   according  to   every  probable  view,
there  seemed  nothing  else  for  him  than  to  pine  away
his  whole  life  in  prison  ;  and  yet  the  fulfilment  of  the
dreams  of  the  court  officers  might  have  strengthened
him  in  the  hope  of  the  fulfilment  of  his  own  dreams
in  his  native  home.


FIFTH    SECTION.

Joseph  the  interpreter  of  Pharaoh's  dreams.


CHAPTER  XLI.    1-57.

1  \nd  it  came  to  pass,  at  the  end  of  two  full  years  [lit.,  days],  that  Pharaoh  dreamed  ;

2  ami,  behold,  he  stood  by  the  river.     And,  behold,  there  came  up  out  of  the  river  seven
well-favoured  kine,  and  fat-fleshed;   and  they  fed  in  a  meadow1  [bushes  the  grass  on  the

3  bank  of  tho  river].     And,  behold,  seven  other  kine  came  up  after  them  out  of  the  river  ill-

4  favoured  and  lean-fleshed,  and  stood  by  the  other  kine  upon  the  brink  of  the  river.     Anc


CHAP.   XLT.    1-57.


fiOS


the  ill-favoured  and  lean-flcshcd  kine  did  eat  up  the  seven  well-favoured  and  fat  kinc.     Ro

5  Pharaoh  awoke.     And  he  slept  and  dreamed  the  second  time ;  and,  behold,  seven  ears
G  of  corn  came  up  upon  one  stalk,  rank   and  good.     And,  behold,  seven  thin  ears,  and

7  blasted  with  the  cast  wind,  sprung  up  [in  single  stacks]  after  them.     And  the  seven  thin
ears  devoured  the  seven  rank  and  full  ears.     And  Pharaoh  awoke,  and,  behold,  it  was

8  a  dream.     And  it  came  to  pass  in  the   morning,  that  his  spirit  was   troubled  ;  'and  he
sent  and  called  for  all  the  magicians "  [scribes :  skilled  in  hieroglyphics]  of  Egypt,  and  all  the
wise  men  [magicians]  thereof;  and  Pharaoh  told  them  his  dreams;  but  there  teas  none

3  that  could  interpret  them  unto  Pharaoh.     Then  spake  the  chief  butler  unto  Pharaoh

saying,  I  do  remember  my  faults  this  day.     Pharaoh  was  wroth  with  his  servants  and
1  put  me  in  ward  in  the  captain  of  the  guard's  house,  both  me  and  the  chief  baker;  'And

we  dreamed  a  dream  in  one  night,  I  and  he;  we  dreamed  each  man  according 'to  the
!  interpretation  of  his  dream.     And  there  was  there  with  us  a  young  man,  an  Hebrew

servant  to  the  captain  of  the  guard ;  and  we  told  him,  and   he  interpreted  to  us  our
3  dreams ;   to  each  man  according  to  his  dream  he  did  interpret.     And  it  came  to  pass   as

he  interpreted  to  us,  so  it  was ;  me  he  restored  unto  mine  office,  and  him  he  hanged
t  Then  Pharaoh  sent  and  called  Joseph,  and  they  brought  him  hastily  o.it  of  the  dun  "eon

bit]  ;  and  he  shaved  himself,   and  changed  his  raiment,  and  came  in  unto  Pharaoh
15  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  I  have  dreamed  a  dream,  and  there  is  none  that  cnii

interpret  it;  and  I  have  heard  say  of  thee,  that  thou  canst  understand  a  dream  to' inter-

6  pret  it.     And  Joseph  answered  Pharaoh,   saying,  It  is  not  in  me:3  God  shall  give
17  Pharaoh  an  answer  of  pence.     And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  In  my  dream   behold

I  stood  upon  the  bank  of  the  river;  And,  behold,  there  came  up  out  of  the  river  -even

i  kme,  fat-fleshed,  and  well-favoured;  and  they   fed  in  a  meadow;  And,  behold    «cven

other  kme  came  up  after  them,  poor,  and  very  ill-favoured  and  lean-fleshed   such  as  I

20  never  saw  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  badness;  And  the  lean  and  the  ill-favoured  kine

d  cat  up  the  first  seven  fat  kine ;  And  when  they  had  eaten  them  up,  it  could  not  he

known  that  they  had  eaten  them;  but  they  were  still  ill-favoured,  as  at  the  beo-inning

bo  I  awoke.    And  I  saw  in  my  dream,  and,  behold,  seven  ears  came  up  in  one  stalk  full

3  and  good;  And,  behold,   seven  ears,  withered,   thin,  and  blasted  with  the  east  wind

24  sprung  up  after  them  ;  And  the  thin  cars  devoured  the  seven  good  ears.    And  I  told  this

2o  unto  the  magicians ;  but  there  was  none  that  could  declare  it  to  me.     And  Joseph  said

unto  Pharaoh,  The  dream  of  Pharaoh  is  one  ;   God  hath  shewed  Pharaoh  what  he  is

t  to  do.      The  seven  good  kme  are  seven  years ;  and  the  seven  good  cars  arc  seven

-7  years ;   the  dream  is  one.     And  the  seven  thin  and  ill-favoured  kine,  that  came  up  after

lem,  are  seven  years ;  and  the  seven  empty  ears,  blasted  with  the  east  wind  shall  be

seven  years  of  famine.     This  is  the   thing  which  I  have  spoken  unto  Pharaoh;  what

God  is  about  to  do,  he  sheweth  unto  Pharaoh.     Behold,  there  come  seven  years  of

30  great  plenty  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt ;  And  there  shall  arise  after  them  seven

i-s  of  famine;   and   all  the  plenty  shall  be  forgotten  in  the  land  of  E-vpt;  and  the

famine  shall  consume  the  land;  And   the  plenty  shall  not  be  known  in  the  land,  by

o2  reason  of  that  famine  following;  for  it  shall  be  very  grievous.     And  for  that  the  dream

oo   n    ,    °\,     i    ^0  pharaoh  twice;  it  is  because  the  thing  is  established  by  God,  and

shortly  bring  it  to  pass.     Now,  therefore,  let  Pharaoh  look  out  a  man  discreet

t  and  wise,  and   set  him  over  the  land  of  Egypt.     Let  Pharaoh  do  this,  and  let  him

3o  appoint  officers  over  the  land,  and  take  up  the  fifth  part  of  the  land  of  Eo-vpt  in  the

seven  plenteous  years.     And  let  them  gather   [.ay  in  store]  all  the  food  of  those  good

that  come   and  lay  up  corn  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh,  and  let  them  keep  food

06  in  the  cities.     And  that  food  shall  be  for  store  to  the  land  against  the  seven  years  of

famine,  which  shall  be  in  the  land  of  Egypt;  that   the  land  perish  not  through  the

(  famine      And  the  thing  was  good  in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and  in  the  eyes  of  all  his

ervants.     And  Pharaoh  said  unto  his  servants,  Can  we  find  such  a  one  as   this  H   a

i  man  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  is?     And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  Forasmuch  as

»th  shewed  thee  all  this,  there  is  none  so  discreet  and  wise  as  thou  art  :    Thou

shalt  be  over  my  house,  and  according  unto  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  be  ruled ;

1  only  in  the  throne  will  I  be  greater  than  thou.     And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  See,  I

42  have  set  thee  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt.     And  Pharaoh  took  off  his  ring  from   his

land,  and  put  it  upon  Joseph's  hand,  and  arrayed  him  in  vestures  of  fine  linen,  and  put


604


GENESIS,  OR  THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


43  a  gold  cluun  upon  Ins  neck;   And  lie  made  him  to  ride  in  the  second  chariot  which  lie

had;   and  they  cried  before  him,  Bow  the  knee;4  and  he  made  him  ruler  over  all  the

:  land  of  Egypt.     And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  I  am  Pharaoh,  and  without  thee  -shall

4y  no  man  lift  up  his  hand  or  foot  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt.     And  Pharaoh  called  Joseph's

name    /aphnatll-paaneah  '  [gave  him  the  title  of  Savior  of  the  world  ;  preserver  of  life,  &c.]  ;    and    he

gave  him  to  wife  Asenath  [consecrated  to  Neith  (the  Egyptian  Minerva)],  the  daughter'  of  Poti-
pherah    [same  as  Totiphar  ;  near  to  the  sun],    priest   of  Oil    [light  :  8un  ;  Heliopolisj.      And    Joseph
4G  went  out  over  all  ihe  land  of  Egypt.     And  Joseph  was  thirty  years  old  when  he  stood
Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt.      And  Joseph  went  out  from  the  presence  of  Pharaoh

47  and  went  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt.     And  in   the   seven  plenteous  years'  the

48  earth  brought  forth  by  handfuls  [armful  upon  armful].     And   he  gathered  up  all  the   food

even  years  which  were  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  laid  up  the  food  in  the  cities;

the  held  which  way  round  about  every  city,  laid  he  up  in  the  same      And

Joseph  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  very  much,  until  he  left  numbering   for

',s  without  number.     And  unto  Joseph  were  born  two  sons  before   the   years  of

famine  came;   which  Asenath,  the  daughter  of  Poti-pherah,  priest  of  On,  bare  unto  him.

51  And   Joseph   called   the   name   of  the   first-born   Manassoh    [the  one  that  causes  to  forget  ;  viz.,
Jehovah];   For  God,  said  Jtc,  hath  made  me  forget  all  my  toil,  and  all  my  father's  house.

52  And  the  name  of  the  second  called  he  Ephraim  [Furst":  fruits  ;  Pehtzsch  :  double  fmi  tfuiness  ];
r>l]   For  God  hath  caused   me  to  be  fruitful  in  the  land  of  my  affliction.     And  the  seven
:>l    Jcars  (li'  plenteousness  that  was  iu  the  land  of  Egypt  wcrJ  ended  [npbztr].     And  the

seven  years  of  dearth  began  [nrlbnrn]  to  come,  according  as  Joseph  'hail  said  ;  and  the
55  dearth  was  in  all  lands;  but  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  there  was  bread.  And  when  [„!«>]

all  the  land  of  Egypt  was  famished,  the  people  cried  to  Pharaoh  for  bread;   and  Pharaoh

said  unto  all  the  Egyptians,  Go  unto  Joseph;  what  he  saith  to  yon,  do.  And  the
50  famine  was  over  all  the  face  of  the  earth;  And  Joseph  opened  all  the  store-houses,  and
57  sold  unto  the  Egyptians;  and  the  famine  waxed  sore  in  the  land  ef  Egypt.  And  all

countries  came  into  Egypt  to  Joseph  for  to  buy  com;  because  that  the  famine  was  so

sore  in  all  lands.


I  '  \  iv.  -2.—  rP!X  .  A  pure  Egyptian  word,  say  most  of  the  commentators  ami  lexicographers  ;  and  yet  no  reason  can
be  ghvn  uhy  it  is  not,  at  the  same  time,  Shemitic.  Its  occurrence,  Job  viii.  11,  is  as  good  proof  of  the  latter  supposition,
us  (leu.  xh.  2  !-<  <if  the  former.  The  thin},'  signified,  a  r  ml  >j  pasture,  was  more  common  in  Egypt  than  in  Judea  or  Arabia,
and,  theivf'.nv,  it  became  letter  known  in  the  early  Egyptian  tongue.  The  same  may  be  said  of  ISO  .—  T.  L.]

i2  Vcr-  "•—  "''r^H  •  Ilcrf'  >3  a  word  used  of  a  thing  most  peculiarly  Egyptian,  and  yet  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt
of  its  root  being  Shemitic.  It  is  from  a"lPI  ,  stylus,  a  writing  or  graving  instrument.  They  were  the  sacred  scribes.  See
Gi:sKNirs,  and  HHCIIART,  Hicroz.  ii.  p.  463^  Comp.  VIP!  .—  T.  L.]

L3  \  er.  lii.--^'1><52  :  Beside  me,  or  some  one  else  than  me.  The  LXX  have  rendered  it,  avev  TOV  0eo5  OVK  aTro/cpiflrJcreTai
TO  o-urjpiov  'I-apoii,  "  as  though  they  had  read  ilJS^  xb  ,"  says  Rosonmiillcr.  Hut  there  i.s  no  need  of  this  to  explain  the
interpretation.  The  LXX  have  given  the  general  sense  correctly,  since;  there  is  a  negative  or  excluding  force  in  "Hr  ?3  .
Not  me—  no  one  but  God  can  answer  to  Pharaoh's  satisfaction.  The  famous  Ilebraico-Samaritan  Codex  has  the  negative
partidr,  and  there  could  not  be  a  better  proof  of  its  having  followed  the  LXX  ;  keeping  its  apparent  error  without  its
general  correctness  in  this  passage.  —  T.  L.]

[4  '\  er.  43.—  Tj"}^X  •     It  is  not  easy  to  sec  why  there  should  have  been  so  much  pains  to  make  out  this  to  be  a  pure

'iryptian  word,  or  to  'deny  its  Shemitic  origin.     Some  make  it  from  OYBE  PEX,  inclinate  centra.    See  Jablonsky  as  cited

>•  Itoscnmuller.     Others  would  make  it  equivalent  to  A—  HPE—  XEK,  a  rege  cinctus.    The  word  is  almost  identical  with

~"?"^  '  tllc  Hipl'il  imperative  of  "13  ,  and  its  Hebrew  sense,  6010  Hie  knee  or  kneel  (  just  as  we  make  the  verb  from  the

noun)  would  seem  the  meaning,  of  all  others,  best  adapted  to  the  context.    The  slight  variation  confirms  this.    Had  it

been  simply  dressing  up  a  pure  Egyptian  word  in  a  Hebrew  form,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  writer  should  not  have

employed  the  proper  Hebrew  Iliphil.    The  word  at  this  time,  doubtless,  belonged  to  both  languages,  but  its  solemn  and

public  pronunciation  in  the  shouting  procession  made  the  narrator  prefer  to  keep  the  broader  Egyptian  sound  of  X

for  PI  .-T.  L.]

[5  Ver.  4.').—  ri:~Q  PIES  ,  Zophnath-raeneah.  This  word  is  doubtless  Egyptian,  as  there  can  nothing  be  made  of  it
in  Hebrew.  LXX,  ^oveo^avijx-  The  latter  part  of  the  compound  is,  doubtless,  a  Coptic  word,  equivalent  to  the  Greek
owii^and  the  whole  is  rendered  caput  seculi  of  mundi.  Vulg.,  salvalorem  mundi.  It  is  worthy  of  note  as  showing,  that
nt  this  early  day,  and  in  this  early  language,  a  time-  word  (age,  period,  cycle,  etc.)  was  used  for  world,  like  the  later  use
of  the  Hebrew  C3"r  ,  and  of  aluv,  for  mundus  in  the  New  Testament.—  T.  L.]


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

Contents  of  this  section  :  The  dreams  of  Pha
raoh  (vers.  1-7);  2.  The  Egyptian  interpreters  of
dreams  and  Joseph  (vers.  8-16);  3.  The  narration


of  the  dreams  and  their  interpretation  (vers.  1 7-32) :
4.  Joseph's  counsel  in  the  employment  of  his  inter
pretation  ;  5.  Pharaoh's  consent  and  appointment
of  Joseph  as  overseer  (vers.  37^5);  6.  Joseph's
management  during  the  seven  years  of  plenty,  and


CHAP.   XLI.    1-57.


God's  blessing  him  with  children  (vcrs.  46-53);
The  seven  years  of  dearth,  the  famine,  and  the  buj
ing  of  the  corn  in  Egypt  (vers.  54-57).


EXEGETICAL    AJfD    CRITICAL.

1.  Vcrs.  1-7.    27ic  dreams  of  Pharaoh. —  At  th
end  of  two  years  (=•<£'•').— This  shows  Joseph'
long  imprisonment. — By  the  river  (Lange   trans
lates  :  By  the  Nile).— The  Nile,  as  is  well  known
is  the  condition   on   which   Egypt's    fruitfulness  de
pends.     Its  overflowing  fertilizes  the  soil,  and  whei
it  docs   not   occur,   the   crops  fail. — Seven  well
favored  kine. — On  the  one  hand  was  the  male  kine
a  symbol  of  the  N#e  (DiOD.  Sic.  i.  51),  and  especial
ly  sacred  to  their  god  Osiris,  who  invented  agricul
ture  (Dion.  i.  21).     The  bullock  was  a  symbol  of
Osiris,  whose  name  was  also  given  by  the  Egyptiai
priests  to  the  Nile  (PLUTARCH  :  De  hide,  33,  39,  43)
On  the  other  hand,  the  female  kine,  in  the  Egyptian
symbolical  language,  was  the  symbol  of  the  "earth
of  agriculture,  and  of  the  sustenance  derived  from
it  (CLEMENS    ALEX.   Strom,  v.  p.  567).     This  agrees
with  the  representation  of  Isis,  who  was  worshippec
as  the  goddess  of  the  all-nourishing  earth  (MACROB.
"  Saturn,"  i.  20),   or  of  the  earth  fertilized  by  the
Nile  (PLUTARCH  :  De  liide,  38).     The  cow  was  spe
cially  sacred  to  her,  and  she  was  pictured  with  horns
(HEROD,  ii.  41).     Her  symbol  was  the  kine.     "Isis
was,  at  the  same  time,  goddess  of  the  moon  which
determined  the  year.     In  hieroglyphic  writing,  her
picture  denoted  the  year."     Knobel.     Seven    well-
favored  kine  rising  out  of  the  Nile  were,  therefore,
pictures  of  a  seven-fold  appearance  of  the  soil  made
fruitful  by  the  Nile.— Seven  other  kine  came  up,
ill-favored.— Lit.,  thin  (ver.  19),  lank,  lean-fleshed.
They  follow  these  well-favored  ones,  and  appear  right
by  their  side — a  typical  expression  of  the  fact  that
the  years  of  famine   are   to  follow  close  upon   the
years  of  plenty. — And  dreamed  the  second  time.
— "  According  to  the  ancient  art  of  dream-interpre
tation,  dreams  that  are  repeated  within  a  short  time
have  the  same  meaning ;  the  repetition  was  to  awake
attention    and     secure    confidence    (ARTEMIDORUS  :
Oneirocrit.  4,  27).     Knobel. — Seven  ears  of  corn
came  up  upon  one  stalk — According  to  Knobel,
the  coming  up  upon  one  stalk  is  to  denote  the  imme
diate  connection   of  the  respective  heptades.     But
then  the  same  thing  would  have  been  mentioned  in
respect  to  the  seven  thin  ears.     The  plentiful  branch
ing  of  the  principal  stalk  into  separate  spears  and
ears,  is,  however,  an  immediate  appearance  of  fer
tility,  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  the  thin  crop  does  not
spread,  but  comes  up  in  separate  and  slender  stalks.
— Blasted  with  the  east  wind. — With  the  south
east  wind  coming  from  the  desert — the  wind  called
chamsin. — It   was    a   dream. — It  was  obvious  to
Pharaoh  from  both  dreams  that  there  was  in  them
something  very  important ;  but  the  imagery  had  been
BO  vivid  that  he  awakes  with  conscious  surprise  at
finding  it  a  dream.     KNOBEL:    "A  beautiful  series
of  symbols :  the  Nile  the  source  of  fertility,  cows  as
representing  fertility  itself,  and  ears  of  corn  as  the
result."

2.  "Vcrs.  8-16.  The  Egyptian  interpreters  of
dreams,  and  Joseph. — That  his  spirit  was  troubled
(Comp.  Dan.  ii.  2).  There  was  something  painful  in
the  thought  that  though  there  was  some  evident  mo
nition  to  him  as  a  sovereign,  the  interpretation  was
wanting;  and  the  pictures  were  the  more  painful


since  their  termination  was  apparently  so  terrible. —
And  called  all  the  magicians. — The  fC2-in
from  B"in ,  a  writing  stile,  were  the  lfpoypafj.fj.aras,
belonging  to  the  order  of  the  priests,  and  occupied
with   the   sacred    sciences,    such   as   hicroglyphical
writing,  astrology,  dream-interpretation,  fortune-tell
ing,  magic,   and   sorcery.     They  were  regarded  as
possessors  of  the  secret  arts  (Exod.  vii.  11),  or,  in
other  words,  the   philosophers,  or  wise  men   of  the
nation.     Keil.     More  particularly  concerning   their
magic  art,  see  KNOBEL,  p.  311.     As  interpreters  of
dreams  the  Egyptian  priests  are  also  mentioned  by
TACITUS:  "  Hist."  iv.  83.     See  DELITZSCH,   p.  544,
and  Hengstenberg. — But  there  was  no  one  that
could  interpret  them. — "  Though  the  roots  of  the
dream,  and  of  its  interpretation,  were  given  in  the
religious  symbolical  science  of  Egypt,"  as  Keil  re
marks,  they  failed  to  find  its  meaning  ;  but  then  he
calls  to  mind  what   BAUMGARTEN    says :  "  It  is  the
doom  of  this  world's  wisdom  to  be  dumb  where  its
knowledge  might  avail,  or  dependence  is  placed  upon
it  (Job  xii.  20)."     This  incapacity,  however,  must
naturally  be  increased  in  cases  where  the  interpreta
tion  to  be  brought  out  is  evidently  of  a   fearful  na
ture  ;  for  the  heathen  court-prophets  were  doubtless
flatterers,  too,  just  as  afterwards  the  false  prophets
in  the  courts  of  the  Jewish  kings. — I  do  remember
my  fault. — The  chief  butler,  too,  is  called  to  the
council ;  for  together  with  the  magicians  the  wise
men  generally  were  summoned  to  attend.     The  dec
laration  of  the  chief   butler  is  referred,  by  Knobel
and  Keil,  to  his  offence  against  the  king  (ch.  xl.  Ij,
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  his  forgetfulness  of  Joseph
(ch.  xl.  43).     At  all  events,  the  unpleasant  recollec
tion   of  his  former   punishment  was  the    principal
cause. — And  they  brought  him  hastily. — A  vivid
representation  of  the  turning  of  his  fortune,  caused
by  the  rising  court  favor. — And  he  shaved  hiai-
self. — Joseph  met  the  excitement  of  his  liberators
with  grace  and  dignity.     "He  changed  his  garments,
as  is  done  by  one  who  is  to  participate  in  some  sa
cred  act  (see  ch.  xxxv.  2).     The  Egyptians  let  the
jeard  and  hair  grow,  in  mourning  (HEROD,  ii.  36).
So  Joseph  had  done  in  the  mournful  time  of  his  im
prisonment.     He    observes    the    Egyptian   custom.
The  Hebrews,  on  the  other  hand,  cut  off  their  hair
and  beard  on  such  occasions."     Knobel.     According
o  Wilkinson,  the  Egyptian  painters  represented  with
a  beard  any  one  whom  they  would   designate  as  a
man  of  low  caste,  or  life. — To  interpret  it. — Pha
raoh  draws  bold  inferences  from  the  statement  of
he  chief  butler,  but  in  a  manner  perfectly  consistent
with  that  of  a  despot  who  is  impatient  to  have  his
expectations  realized.     Not  even,  however,  the  flat-
ering  words  of  the  king,  can   discompose   Joseph,
le  gives  God  the  glory  (as  in  ch.  xl.  8).     But  he  also
lopes  for  divine  light,  and  courteously  invites  the
iing  to  narrate  his  dream.

3.  Vers.  17-32.  Tlic  narration  of  i/ie  dreams,
nd  their  interpretation.  The  narration  agrees  per-
ectly  with  the  first  statement,  and  it  only  brings  out
aore  distinctly  the  subjective  truthfulness  of  the
ccount,  that  the  king,  in  the  description  of  the  ill-
avored  kine,  mingles  something  of  his  own  reflec
ions. — What  God  is  about  to  do  he  showeth
unto  Pharaoh. — Joseph  puts  in  the  front  the  re-
gious  bearing  of  the  dream,  and  in  this  most  sue-
essfully  attains  his  aim.  Whilst  unhesitatingly  pro
essing  his  belief  that  these  dreams  came  from  God,
e  at  the  same  tune  keeps  in  view  the  practical  as-


600


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


pcct.  God  would  inform  Fharaoh,  through  Joseph's
interpretation,  what  he  intends  to  do,  in  order  that
the  king  may  take  measures  accordingly.  The  cer
tainty  and  clearness  of  the  interpretation  are  to  be
so  prominently  manifested  as  to  remove  it  far  from
comparison  with  any  heathen  oracles.  Kuobel  will
have  it  that  the  Elohist  and  the  Jehovist  assume
here  different  positions  in  respect  to  dream-revela
tions.

4.  Vers.  33-3G.  Joseph's  counsel  in  respect  to  the
practical  me  of  t/f  i/<<<  rpretntion.    The  candid  advice
of  Joseph  shows  that  his  high  gift  did  not  intoxicate
him;  but  rather,  that  he  himself  was  greatly  struck
by  tlie  providence   revealed   in  the  dreams.     It  is  a
great  delivery  from  a  great  and  threatening  destruc
tion.      The  first   demand  is  1'or   a  skilful  overseer,
with  his    subordinate.-;.     Then  there   is  wanted  the
enactment  of  a  law  that  the  laud  shall  be  divided
into  live  parts  during  the  seven  plenteous  years  ;  so
that  they  were   to  give  the  fifth  instead  of  the  tithe
(or  tenth),  as  may    have  been  customary  ;  and  that
the  royal  storehouses  should  be  built  in  the  cities  of
the  land,  in  order  to  be  filled  with  corn.     We  have
no  right  to  say  that  Joseph   meant  in  this  to  recom
mend  himself.     It  would  seem  rather  that  he   is  so
.-rruck.  with  the  foresight  of  the  great  coming  famine,
that  he  cannot  think  of  himself.     Besides,  the  oflice
which   his  counsel  sketches  is  much  less  important
than  liiat  which  Pharaoh  afterwards  confers  on  him.
There  is  still  a  great  difference  between  a  chief  of
the  taxiratherers  and  a  national  piime  mini.-tef.

5.  Vers.  37-45.   Pharaoh's  con-ai  lit  and  Joseph's
":,/;<,'< i, tnicut. — And   the   thing   was   good. — The
correctness  of  the  interpretation  and   the  certainty
ni'  it-  1'ultilinent  are  both  here  presupposed.     By  the
rule-  of  Egyptian  symbolism  their  correctness  could
;i';t  be  questioned  ;  their  certainty,  however,  lay  in
the  belief  that  the  dreams  of  Fharaoh  were  sent  by
(iod.     The  stress,  therefore,  lies  upon  the  approba
tion  with  which  Joseph's  advice  was  received.     And
this  was  so  conformable   to  the  object  in  view,  that
even  had  the  fulfilment  been  doubtful,  it  would  have
been  a  wi.-e  measure  of  political  economy.     But  Pha
raoh  goes  farther;  from  the  divine  illumination  that
appears  in  Joseph  he  concludes  that  he  is  just  the
man  to  carry  out  the  plan. — Thou  shalt  be  over
my    house. — What    follows  is   the    direct    conse
quence  :  And  according  to  thy  word. — Knobel
explains   the  Hebraism  in   this   language  (^pS  3?1
"I52!>  ^3  p^"1 ,  lit.,  upon  thy  mouth  every  one  of  my
people  shall  kiss),  according  to  1  Sam.  x.  1  and  Ps.
ii.  ]'2,  as  referring  to  the  custom  of  expressing  hom
age  by  a  kiss,  or  throwing  the  kiss  with  the  hand.
Kcil  disputes  this  on  verbal  grounds  ;  but  even  if  the
language  admits  it  idiomatically,  such  an  act  would
not  be  appropriate  in  homage  paid  to  princes.     It
would  be  better  to  give  p'113  here  its  primary  signifi
cance  :  to  attach,   to  unite   onc*c?f.     So  Joseph    is
nominated  as  Pharaoh's  Grand  Vizier.     Knobel  in
fers  from  this  that  it  is  a  Jehovistic  insertion,  and
that,  according  to  the  Elohist,  Joseph  was  made  a
state  officer,  and  not  a  royal  minister.     Does  he  de
rive  this  from  an    acquaintance  with  the  Egyptian
state-calendar   of  those   days  ?     Before    Pharaoh's
explanation  (ver.  41),  Knobcl's  twofold  distinction
of  the  highest  dignities  falls  to  the  ground. — His
ring  from  his  hand. — After  the  concession  of  the
dignity,  he  confers  on  him  its  insignia.     The  first  is
the  seal-ring,  "  which  the  grand  vizier  or  prime  min
ister  held,  in  order  to  affix  it  to  the  royal  decrees


(Esth.  iii.  10  ;  viii.  2)."  Kcil.  So  also  was  it  among
the  Turks  (KNOBEL,  p.  314).  The  second  is  the
white  byssns-robe  (made  out  of  fine  linen  or  cotton),
worn  by  the  priests,  and  by  which  he  was  elevated
to  a  rank  corresponding  to  the  dignity  of  his  office.
The  third  mark  of  honor  was  a  gold  chain  about  his
neck,  to  denote  distinction,  and  as  a  special  mark  of
the  royal  favor.  "  According  to  jElian  and  Diodo-
rus,  it  was  the  usual  mark  of  distinction  in  the  per
sonal  appearance  of  the  judges,  like  the  golden  col
lar,  as  seen  pictured  upon  the  monuments."  Dc-
litzsch.  In  this  dignity  Joseph  is  now  to  be  present
ed  to  the  people ;  the  king,  therefore,  makes  him
ride  in  procession  through  the  city,  in  his  second
chariot,  i.  c.,  in  the  one  that  came  immediately  after
the  royal  chariot,  and  caused  the  customary  an
nouncement  of  the  dignity  c  inferred  to  be  made  by
a  herald.  "The  exclamation:  TpSX  >  i.  c.,  (>om
down,  is  an  Egyptian  word  formed  from  ~i~  by
means  of  Masoretic  vowels  which  make  the  Hiphil
and  Aphel  conjugation.''  Keil.  GKHLACII:  Out  of
the  Coptic  word  '•  low  the  head,"  a  Hebrew  is  made,
low  the  knee. — I  am  Pharaoh. — He  again  repeat
the  reservation  of  his  royal  dignity,  but  with  the
same  definitcness  he  appoints  him  overseer  of  the
whole  land,  with  the  consciousness  that  he  was  com
mitting  the  salvation  of  his  people  to  the  favorite  of
Deity.  Therefore  he  says:  And  without  thee
shall  no  man,  etc. — Yet  for  the  Egyptians'  Mike  he
must  be  naturalized.  Fharaoh,  therefore,  first  gives
him  an  Egyptian  name  (the  Sept.:  tyov&onfyavr,x',
for  the  various  interpretations  of  which,  see  KEIL,
p.  25G ;  KNOBEL,  p.  ;U4).  Bunseii  interprets  it,
crca'or  of  life.  In  its  Hebrew  transformation  the
word  has  been  rendered  revealer  of  secrets  ;  LUTHER:
secret  counsel.  In  its  stateliness  the  name  is  in  ac
cordance  with  the  oriental  feeling, — especially  the
Egyptian, — yet  it  simply  expresses  Pharaoh's  feeling
acknowledgment  that  Joseph  was  a  man  sent  by
God,  and  bringing  salvation.  In  him,  first  of  all,
was  fulfilled  the  word  of  that  prophecy  :  In  thy  seed
shall  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blest.  Xext,  the
king  gives  to  him  an  Egyptian  wife,  Asenath,  the
daughter  of  Fotipheres  (LXX,  irfj/re^pv;,  ille  qui
so/is  cat),  priest  at  On,  which  was  the  vernacular
name  for  Ileliopolis  (LXX,  'HAiotWoAu,  city  of  the
sun).  "This  city  of  On("X,  changed  by  EzekieL,
xxx.  17,  derisively  into  "X)  was  a  chief  city,  devoted
to  the  worship  of  Ra,  the  sun-god.''  Delitzsch.  "Ac
cording  to  BRUGSCH  ('  Travels,'  etc.),  its  name  upon
the  monuments  was  Ta-Ra,  or  Pa-Ra,  house  of  the
sun.  Here,  from  the  oldest  times,  has  been  a  cele
brated  temple  of  the  sun,  with  a  company  of  learned
priests,  who  took  the  first  stand  in  the  Egyptian
colleges  of  priests  (comp.  HEROD,  ii.  3  ;  HK.NGSTEN-
BERG,  p.  30)."  Kcil.  The  same  remarks :  "  Such
an  extraordinary  promotion  of  a  slave-prisoner  is  to
be  explained  from  the  high  importance  which  an
tiquity,  and  especially  Egyptian  antiquity,  ascribed
to  the  interpretation  of  dreams,  and  to  the  occult
sciences,  as  also  from  the  despotic  form  of  oriental
governments."  As  a  parallel  case,  he  refers  to
HEROD,  ii.  121,  where  Rhampsinkus  is  represented
as  promoting  the  son  of  a  mason  to  be  his  son-in-
law,  because,  as  <l  the  Egyptians  excelled  all  men,  so
this  one  excelled  all  the  Egyptians  themselves,  in
wisdom."  The  priest  rank  was  esteemed  the  highest
in  Egypt,  as  it  was  the  caste  to  which  the  king  him
self  belonged.  KNOBEL  (p.  315)  attempts  to  do
away  the  difficulty  winch  this  temple  of  On  makes


CHAP.  XLI.   1-57.


607


to  the  assumption  that  the  Israelites  were  the  same
as  the  Ilyksos,  who  are  said  to  have  destroyed  the
Egyptian  temples.  This  ancient  On  was  situated
lower  Egypt,  about  two  leagues  northeast  from  the
present  city  of  Cairo.  The  situation  of  Heliopoli&
is  marked  by  mounds  of  earth,  now  enclosing  a  fla1
piece  of  land,  in  the  centre  of  which  stands  a  soli
tary  obelisk.  In  the  vicinity  is  the  city  of  Matarieh
with  the  well  of  the  sun,  and  a  sycamore-tree,  undei
which,  according  to  the  tradition,  the  holy  family  ii
said  to  have  rested.

6.  A  ers.  46—53.  Joseph's  management  of  ill
harvest  during  the  seven  years  of  plenty,  and  his  bless
ing  oj  children. — And  Joseph  was  thirty  years
eld. — The  summary  account,  ver.  45,  and  Joseph
went  out,  is  here  given  more  specifically.  Knobc'
does  not  seem  to  know  what  to  make  of  this  mode
of  Biblical  representation,  in  which  it  resumes
former  assertion  for  the  purpose  of  making  specifi
cations.  He  calls  upon  the  reader  to  note  "  that  this
had  been  already  said,  ver.  45."  As  the  dreams  are
fulfilled,  so  Joseph  fulfils  his  calling.  His1  mode  of
proceeding  is  clearly  stated.  In  the  cities  of  the
different  districts  storehouses  are  built,  in  which  is
to  be  laid  up  the  fifth  part  of  the  harvest. — Manas-
seh. — In  this  name  is  expressed  the  negative  effect
of  his  exaltation  :  God  has  freed  him  from  the  pain
ful  remembrance  of  his  sufferings,  and  from  all  an
gry  recollections  of  his  father's  house.  The  name
Ephraim  expresses,  on  the  contrary,  the  positive
consequence.  It  is  a  double  happiness  on  a  dark
foil,  as  though  he  had  said  :  In  the  land  of  my
wretchedness  there  is  first,  deliverance,  second,  a
raising  to  honor.

7.  The  seven  years  of  dearth,  (he  famine,  and  the
selling  of  the  grain.  On  the  frequent  occurrence
of  famines  in  Egypt  and  the  adjacent  northern  coun
tries,  see  KEIL,  p.  258.  For  particulars  see  Hengsten-
berg,  and  extracts  by  Schroder,  p.  590. — And  all
countries. — The  countries  adjacent  to  Egypt,  and
especially  Palestine.  Aside  from  the  fact  that  Egypt,
in  early  times,  was  a  granary  for  the  neighboring
countries,  and  that  they,  therefore,  suffered  also  from
every  famine  that  came  upon  it,  it  is  a  thing  to  be
noticed  that  the  rain-season  of  these  lands,  as  well
as  the  rising  of  the  Nile,  was  conditioned  on  north
ern  rainy  winds.


DOCTRINAL   AXD    ETHICAL.

1.  Joseph's  exaltation:  1)  Considered  in  itself.
Grounded  in  his  destiny.     Accomplished   by  his  in
nocent  sufferings  and  his  good  conduct  (rhil.  ii.  6).
Carried  out  by  God's  grace  and  wisdom  as  a  divine
miracle  in  his  providentia  specialissirna.     Its  princi
pal  object  the  preservation  of  Israel  and  of  many  na
tions.     Its  further  object,  Israel's  education  in  Egypt.
Its  imperishable  aim  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  edifi
cation  of  the  people  of  God  by  means  of  the  funda
mental  principle  :  through  humiliation  to  exaltation.
2)    This  exaltation,  in  its  typical  significance:  the
seal  of  Israel's  guidance  in  Egypt,  of  the  guidance
of  all  the  faithful,  of  the  guidance  of  Christ  as  the
model  of  our  divine  instruction.

2.  Joseph's  sufferings  from  his  brethren  so  turned
by  God's  grace  that  they  become  sufferings  for  their
own  good.     Thus  Joseph's  sufferings  become  a  turn
ing-point  between  Abel's  blood  crying  for  vengeance,
and  the  death  of  Christ  reconciling  the  world.     The
contrast  here  is   no    contradiction.     The   blood  of


Abel  was  crying  for  vengeance  in  no  absolute  or
condemning  sense,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  Christ's
reconciliation  is  connected  with  an  inward  and  spir-
itual  judgment.  And  thus,  also,  Joseph's  brethren
were  to  be  led  through  a  hell  of  self-knowledge  to
peace  of  conscience,  just  as  Joseph  individually  at
tained,  by  degrees,  to  a  complete  victory  over  him
self.

3.  Pharaoh's  dreams,  like  Nebuchadnezzar's,  be
came,  through  the  divine  providence,  factors  in  the
web  of  the  world's  history.     The  king's  heart  is  in
the  hand  of  the  Lord  ;  as  the  rivers  of  water  he  turn-
ethit(Prov.  xxi.  1).     As  the  high  priests  (John  xi.
51)  were  to  utter  words  of  significance  unconsciouslv,
and  unwillingly,  so  kings  are  made  to  serve  God  in
acts  having  a  significance  beyond  immediate  inten
tions.     Its  roots,  however,  extended  down  into  the
dream  of  life.     Gcrlach  calls  attention  to   Nestor's
words  concerning  Agamemnon's  dream  (Iliad,  ii.  80).
HEIM  ("Bible  Hours")  is  full  on  the  same  thought,

4.  The  memory  of  the  chief  butler.     Forgetful-
ness  of  the  small — a  sharp  remembrance  in  the  ser
vice  of  the  great.     The  memory  as  exercised  in  the
service  of   God :    forgetting  all  (that  hinders)— re
membering  all  (that  promotes).     The  change  from
darkness  to  light,  from  night  to  day,  in  the  landscape
of  history.

5.  Joseph  as  opposed  to  the  Egyptian  interpreters
of  dreams,  Moses  as  opposed  to  the  Egyptian  sor
cerers,  Christ  as  opposed  to  the  Scribes  and  Phari
sees,  Paul  as  opposed  to  heresies,  etc.  ;  or,  in  other
words,  the  contrast  between  divine  wisdom  and  the
wisdom  of  this  woi'ld — a  contrast  that  pervades  all
history.

0.  God  conducts  every  nation  by  its  special  char
acteristic,  by  its  religious  forms,  according  to  the
measure  of  piety  that  is  in  them.  Tims  he  ruled  the
Egyptians  through  the  night-life  and  the  world  of
dreams.

7.  The  Egyptian  symbolism  in  the  dreams  of
Pharaoh.  "  These  and"  similar  thoughts,  no  doubt,
occurred  also  to  the  Egyptian  scribes,  but  Joseph's
divinely-sealed  glance  was  necessary  in  assuming  the
responsibility  of  the  fourteen  years,  as  well  as  in  the
interpretation  of  the  dreams,  which  afterwards  ap
pear  very  simple  and  obvious."  Delitzsch.  The
ethical  point,  that  divine  courage  is  necessary  for
prophecy,  is  not  to  be  overlooked.  It  was  a  perilous
undertaking  to  announce  to  the  Egyptian  despot  a
famine  of  seven  years.  It  is  not  correct,  as  Knobel
states,  that  among  the  Hebrews,  false  prophets  alone
referred  to  dreams;  and  still 'more  groundless  his
allegation  of  a  difference  between  the  "  Elohist "  and
the  "  Jehovist"  in  this  respect.  Roos  speaks  of  the
gift  of  interpreting  dreams  which  Joseph  possessed,
as  a  gift  of  prophecy,  inferior,  however,  to  that
manifested  by  Israel  and  Jacob  when  they  blessed
their  sons.  For  the  dream  interpreter  has  a  handle
given  to  him  by  the  dream  ;  whilst  in  the  case  of
Isaac,  Jacob,  and  other  prophets,  everything  is  de
pendent  on  direct  divine  inspiration.  But  the
prophets  mentioned,  even  those  that  prophesied  im
mediately,  had  historic  points  of  departure  and  con
nection.  We  can  only  say,  therefore,  that  there  arc
different  forms  for  the  manifestation  of  the  pro-
Dhetic  spirit.  Divine  certainty  is  the  common  mark
of  all.

8.  The  universalistic  aspect  of  the  Old  Testament
ippears  also  from  the  fact  that  our  narrative,  without
my  reserve,  informs  us  how  pious  Joseph  becomes
ncorporated  in  the  caste  of  Egyptian  priests.  "  Je-


COS


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


hovah's  religion,"  says  Delitzsch,  "  enters  into  Egyp
tian  forms,  in  order  to  rule,  without  becoming  lost
in  it.  Strictly  speaking,  it  was  the  assuming  of
Egyptian  customs  by  one  devoted  to  the  religion  of
Jehovah.  Compare  the  indulgence  shown  by  Elisha
to  Naaman  the  Syrian  (2  Kings  v.  17-19).

9.   DKLITZSCH:   "How,  then,   asks   Luther — how
s  it  Christian  in  him  to  glory  iu  having  forgotten  his
father  and  his  mother  V  "     This,  however,  is  not  the
case  ;  lor  when  Joseph  speaks  of  having  forgotten
his  father's  house,  he   has   surely  some  memory  of
the  injuries  of  his  brethren,  and  the  name  Mauasseh
,s  to  remind  him    constantly  of  this  noble  resolution
.0  forget  hi-  wrongs.     Luther  thus  answers  his  own
question:   lie  intended  to  say,    I   now  see   that  God
meant  to  take  away  from  me  the  confidence  which  I
..•ad  in  my  lather;' for  he  is   a  jealous   God,  and  is
not  willing  that   the  heart    should  have  any  other
ground   of  ivst   than  himself.     "It  is  remarkable,"
says  KNOHKI.  (p.  -j8M,  "that  Joseph  gives  no  timely
information  of  his  existence,  and  of  his   exaltation,
to  a  lather  who  so  loved  him,  and  whom  he  so  loved
n  turn,  but    permitted  a  series  of  years  to  pass,  ami
even  thru  was  led  to  it  by  the  coming  of  his  breth
ren."      The   proper  solution   of  this  scruple,  already
entertained   by  Theodoret,  we   find  in    Kaumgarten.
"With  steadfast  faith  he  renounced  all  self-acting  in
respect  to  God's  decree,  which  pointed  to  a  further
and  more  glorious  aim.      The  first  consequence  to  be
traced  was  the   verification  of  his  prophecy,  that  his
power  might  be  placed  on  a  stable  foundation."     To
this  there  must  be  added   the  consideration  that  Jo
seph  could   not   make   himself  hastily   known  to  his
father  without  leading  to  the  discovery  of  the  guilt
which    weighed  upon    his    brethren.     A   precipitate
disclosure  of  this  dark  secret   might,   perhaps,   ruin
Jaeob's   house   irrecoverably.      And,  finally,  it   must
be  considered  that  Joseph,  especially  during  the  first
years,  had  a  call  to  active  duties  of  the   most  strin
gent  and  pressing  nature.— SCHRODER  :  Since  Jos -ph
tirst   mentions  his    adversity  (in   the  declaration  re
specting  the  name  Manasseh),  he  must  have  referred
to  his  father'*  house  only  in  its  mournful  reminiscence
as  the  scene  of  his  misery.     In  view  of  the  present
as  something  evidently  controlled  by  God,  his  whole
past  vanishes  away,  as  comparatively  of  no  conse
quence.     It  is  the  confidence  of  rest  in  God's  provi
dence.     Calvin,  it  is  true,  imputes  it  to  him  as  a  sin  ;
whilst  Luther  calls  it  a  wonderful  declaration.     Af
terwards,  at  Ephraim's  birth,  as  Schroder  remarks,
Joseph  held   in,  so  to  speak,  his  former  exuberance
of  joy.     The    words,    in   the  land  of  my    sorrows
(meaning   Egypt),   reveal   a   mournful   longing   for
Canaan.


HOMILETICAI,  AND  TUACTICAL.


Sec  the  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.  Pharaoh's  char
acter.  A  good  king  a  blessing  to  his  country.  Pha-
raoh's  dream  a  mark  of  his  care  for  his  people,
therefore,  also  of  God's  care  for  him.  Fruitful^  and
unfruitful  years;  great  means  in  the  hand  of  God's
providence.  Joseph's  deliverance  beyond  expecta
tion:  1.  Late  beyond  expectation;  2.  early  beyond
expectation  ;  3.  great  beyond  expectation  ;  4.  en
tirely  different  from  what  "he  thought  in  his  longing
for  home.  Joseph's  deliverance  and  exaltation  a
typical  order  in  God's  kingdom  :  1.  Every  true  ex
altation  presupposes  a  deliverance  ;  2.  every  true  de
liverance  is  followed  by  exaltation. — Joseph  and  the


other  personages  in  our  narrative.  Joseph  the  He
brew  slave  standing  in  royal  dignity  before  the  throne
of  Pharaoh  :  a.  In  his  quiet  preparation  for  audi
ence;  b.  in  his  humility  and  his  faithful  confidence  ;
c.  in  his  fearless  interpretation  of  the  dreams  ac
cording  to  their  truth  ;  d.  in  his  wise  counsel.  Jo
seph,  like  Moses,  an  Egyptian  prince,  and  yet  a  prince
in  the  kingdom  of  God. — Joseph's  political  economy.
— His  economy  on  a  grand  scale  the  type  of  all  lesser
economies.  Joseph  and  his  sons. — The  years  of
blessing. — (Sod's  care  for  men  through  the  commer
cial  intercourse  of  different  lands. — How  sure  the
divine  decrees  !  (the  brethren  of  Joseph  must  come).
TAUUK  :  Through  humiliation  to  exaltation. — The
history  of  Joseph's  exaltation:  1.  When  in  the
deep,  how  confidently  may  we  suffer  God  to  guide
us  ;  2.  when  on  the  mount,  how  surely  from  the  deep
does  the  Hessing  draw  its  verification.

/•Y/vi'  Section  (v.-rs.  1-7).  STARKE:  (PuJ>.  :
"Hist."  v.  !)).  "There  is  famine  in  Egypt  when  the
Nile  rises  only  twelve  ells;  there  is  still  suffering  if
it  dues  not  exceed  thirteen;  if  it  rises  to  fourteen,
there  is  great  rejoicing." — CIIAMKII  :  "Whom  God
means  to  raise  to  honor,  he  suffers  to  remain,  for  a
time,  under  the  cross.— ScniionF.u  :  At  the  expiration
of  two  years  of  days.— LVTIIKR  :  Joseph,  oppressed
with  cares,  counted  on  his  fingers  all  the  hours,
days,  months,  whilst  deeply  sighing  for  deliverance.
For  the  anticipation  of  the  future  the  soul  of  man
shares  with  that  of  the  animal,  except  that  in  the
former,  by  its  connection  with  spirit,  or  that  higher
principle  which  constitutes  humanity,  such  a  faculty
becomes  perceptible  in  dreams,  whilst  in  the  animal
it  is  confined  to  the  waking  state  (Schubert).  _  The
number  seven  represents  the  religious  clement  in  the
case.  The  thin  ears  are  said  to  be  blasted  with  the
cast-wind,  which,  when  directly  east,  occurs  in  Egypt
as  seldom  as  the  directly  west.  The  .-outheast  wind,
however,  is  frequent  (Hengstenberg).

Second  H-rt-ion  (vers.  8-1 1'.)-  STAP.KK:  The  wis
dom  that  God  reveals  excels  that  of  the  world;
therefore  the  latter  is  to  be  confounded  by  the  for
mer  (Rom.  viii.  28). — CRAMKK:  A  Christian  is  not  to
judge  the  gifts  according  to  the  person,  but  the  per
sons  according  to  the  gifts,  and  must  not  he  ashamed
to  learn  even  from  the  lowest  A  Christian  should
study  decorum  towards  all,  especially  towards  those
of  h'iirh  rank.  Serving  and  suffering  are  the  best
tutors  for  those  maturing  for  the  ruler's  station  (Ps.
cxiii.  7,  8). — HALL:  How  are  God's  children  reward
ed  for' their  patience!  How  prosperous  are  their
issues !  A  true  Christian  docs  not  boast  of  the  tal
ents  confided  to  him,  but  ascribes  everything  to  God.
Third  Section  (vers.  17-32).  STARKE  :  B'M.
Wlri. :  Even  to  the  heathen  and  to  infidels,  God
sometimes,  reveals  great  and  secret  things,  _  to  the
end  that  it  may  become  known  how  his  divine  care
and  providence  may  be  traced  everywhere  within
and  without  the  Church.— CRAMEU  :  When  God  re
peats  the  same  things  to  us,  the  repetition  is  not  to
be  regarded  as  superfluous,  but  as  an  assurance^that
it  wiliecertainly  come  to  pass.  SCHRODER:  In  prison,
and  upon  the  throne,  the  same  humility,  the  same
joyous  courage  in  God. — Joseph  marks  his  God-
consciousness  more  distinctly  before  Pharaoh,  by
saying  Ha-Elohim,  thus  making  Elohim  concrete  by
means  of  the  article.

Fourth  Section  (vers.  33-36).  STARKK  :  Men
generally  make  a  bad  use  of  abundance.  The  peo
ple,  doubtless,  imitated  Joseph's  example,  and  pro
vided  for  the  future.  Careful  in  earthly  things—


CHAP.    XLII.    1-28.


609


much  more  so  in  heavenly  tilings.  SCHRODER:
God's  true  prophets  did  not  merely  predict  the  fu
ture;  they  also  announced  means  of  relief  against
the  approaching  evil  (Calvin).— He  who  takes  coun
sel  is  the  one  to  be  helped  (the  same).

Fifth  Section  (vers.  37-45).  STARKK:  CRAMKR  :
''  lie  that  handles  a  matter  wisely  shall  find  good  "
(Prpv.  xvi.  20).— [The  Egyptian  linen,  on  account
oi  its  snowy  whiteness,  and  its  great  excellence,  was
BO  costly  that  it  was  thought  equal  to  its  weight  in
gold.]  ?— SCHRODER  :  The  king's  conclusion  "shows
how  greatly  Egypt  esteemed  the  higher  knowledge  ;
since  it  confirms  the  opinion  which  made  this  nation
so  renowned  for  wisdom  among  the  ancients. Lib
eration  was  not  Joseph's  only  want  when  in  prison ;
afterward,  however,  he  received  what  he  did  not  at
first,  understand  (Luther).

Kixth    Section    (vers.    46-53).     STAIIKE:    Wise


rulers  fill  their  granaries  in  time  of  famine,  and  thus
teach  prudence  to  the  poor.  The  saving  hand  is
lull  and  beneficent;  the  squandering  hand  is  not  only
empty,  but  unjust.— SCHRODER  :  Information  from
Hengstenberg  on  the  monuments  and  tombs,  serving
to  elucidate  our  narrative.— SCHRODER  :  Xo\v  is  the
time  of  exaltation,  when  he  is  to  become  the  in
strument  of  God's  great  purposes  (Krummacher)

Seventh,  Section  (vers.  54-57).  STAKKG  :  CRA
MER  :  It  is  in  accordance  with  Christian  charity  that
the  surplus  of  the  one  shall  relieve  the  deficiency  of
the  other.  How  gloriously  does  God  compensate
Joseph  for  his  former  uuhappiness.  (The  hate  of  his
brothers;  the  favor  of  the  king ;  abuse  aud  derision
reverence;  imprisonment  in  a  foreign  laud  exalta
tion;  the  work  of  a  slave,  the  seal  of  the  kin"  •
stripped  of  his  coat  of  many  colors,  clothed  in  white
vesture;  iron  bands,  a  golden  chain.)


SIXTH    SECTION.

Retributive  Discipline      Tkc  Famine  and  the  First  Journey  to  Egypt.     JoscpVs  stales  with
himself.     The  repentance  of  the  Brethren.     Joseph  and  Simeon.

CHAPTER  XLII.   1-38.

1  Now  when  Jacob  saw  there  was  corn  in  Egypt,  Jacob  said  unto  hi,  sons   Why  do

2  yelook  one  upon  another?     And  he  said,  Behold,  I  haye  heard  that  there  is  com  in
Egypt;  get  you  down  thither,  and  buy  for  us  from  thence;  that  we  may  Hye   and  n

3)4  dl°-  ^^tir^^^v^^  ^^orAinEgy^;^:;;^!1101


land   and  he  ^t  was  that  sold  to  all  the  people  of  the  land  ;  and  Josep'brethren


19  Joseph  said  unto  them  the  third  day,  This  do,  and  !ive  ;  for  I  fear  God     If  ye  be  True
men  let  one  of  your  brethren  be  bound  in  the  house  of  your  prison  •  go'  ye   carry  corn

w±  b^ifildCd^l  ''  ,BUt  ^  v  S  7T  r^  ^^  Unt°  ™  '  ~  S  £  *
oe  venned,  and  ye  shall  not  die.     And  they  did   so.     And  they  said  one  to

ano  her   We  are  yenly  guilty  concerning  our  brotherf  in  that  wefaw  t      L"lh  of  ]  is
soul,  when  he  besought  us,  and  we  would  not  hear;  therefore  is  this  dltressCe  upon

Ot/


G10  GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.

22  us      And  Reuben  answered  them,  saying,  Spake  I  not  unto  you,  saying,  Do  not  sin
against  the  child;   and  ye  would  not  hear?  therefore,  behold,  also  his  blood  is  required.

23  And  they  knew  not  that  Joseph  understood  them;  for  he  spake  unto  them  by  an  inter-

24  preter.     And  he  turned  himself  about  from  them,  and  wept;  and  returned  to   them
a  fain,  and  communed  with  them,  and  took  from  them  Simeon,  and  bound  him  before

25  their  'eyes.       Then   Joseph   commanded  to   fill  their  sacks  with  corn,  and  to  restore
every  mail's  money  into  his  sack,  and  to  give  them  provision  for  the  way ;   and  thus

26  did  he  unto  them.     And   they  laded   their  asses  Avith  the  corn,  and  departed  thence.
•>7  And  as  one  of  them  opened  his  sack  to  give  his  ass  provender  in  the  inn,  he  espied  hi-;
~>S  money   for,  behold,  it  was  in  his  sack's  mouth.     And  he  said  unto  his  brethren,  My

money 'is  restored,  and,  lo,  it  is  even  in  my  sack;  and  their  heart  failed  them,2  and  they
•'9  were  afraid,  saying  one  to  another,  AYhat  is  this  that  God  hath  done  unto  us?  And

thev  came  unto  Jacob  their  father  unto  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  told  him  all  that  befell
CO  unto  them,  saying,  The  man,  who  is  the  Lord  of  the  land,  spake  roughly  to  us,  and
21  took  us  for  spies  of  the  country.  And  we  said  unto  him,  We  are  true  men;  we  are
•52  no  spies-  \Ve  be  twelve  brethren,  sons  of  our  father;  one  is  not,  and  the  youngest  is

33  this  day 'with  our  father  in  the  land  of  Canaan.      And  the  man,  the  lord  of  the  country,
-aid  unto  us,  Hereby  shall  I  know  that  ye  are  true   men;  leave  one  of  your  brethren

34  here  with  me,  and  take   food   for   the  famine  of  your  households,  and   be   gone;  And
brin-  vour  youngest  brother  unto  me;   then  shall  i  know  thai  ye  are  no  spies,  but  that
yc  are  true  men;  so  will  I  deliver  you  your  brother,  and  ye   shall  traffic  in  the   and.

•;5  And  i;  came  to  pass,  as  they  emptied  their  sacks,  that,  behold,  every  mans  bundle  oi
money  was  in  his  saek;  and"  when  l»th  they  and  their  father  saw  the  bundles  of  money,

;jG  thev  were  afraid.  And  Jacob  their  father  said  unlo  them,  Me  have  ye  bereaved  o/  my
childr*  n  '  Joseph  i*  not,  and  Simeon  ^  not,  and  ye  will  take  Benjamin  aicay  ;  all  these

37  thin-  are  against  me.      And   Reuben  spake  unto  his  father,  saying.  Slay  my  two  sons,
if  I  brin- him  not  to  thee;   deliver   him   into  my  hand,  and  I   will  bring   him   to   thee

38  -I"-. in      '  \nd  he  said,  My  son  shall  not  go  down  with  you;  for  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he
i.rieft  alone  ;    if  mischief  befall  him  by  the  way  in  the  which  ye  go,  then  shall  ye  bring
down  mv  gray  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.

[>  Vcr.  •!.- -V'CX  -  A  ran:  lUhrew  word,  occurring  only  here,  in  vc-r.  38,  and  in  Exod.  xxi.  22,  23.  Goscniiifl  would
connect  the  root  with  the  Arabic  ^j| ,  others  ^vith  the  Arabic  U  and  the  Syriac  fcf ,  which  means  to  heal.  Thu
ttrnt  comes  nearer  to  it  in  sense,  but  a  much  closer  agreement,  both  in  form  and  significance,  exists  between  it  and  the

r  4-  f'

Arabic  ^J  ,  to  be  in  yricf  or  pain,  and  its  noun  (ff*,\  ,  pain,  offiic'ion.     It  occurs  in   the:  Koran,  v.   2!>,  72;  viL  1.1  ;

h-ii   °3   in  the  very  sense  here  demanded  by  the  context.  -  T.  L.l

'.;  Vcr  -,s  _---,  as*--  ,  ami  their  heart  went  out.  LXX,  efcVrr,  i,  ««PSia  ai™.  Hence  the  Greek  ««rraa«,  ecstasy.
It  may  denote  ra^urc,  a^nithwnt,  overwhelming  sorrow-any  condition  of  ,,,ul  in  which  the  thoughts  and  affect^
"cm  to  pass  beyond  the  control  of  the  will.  The  heart  goes  forth,  the  mind  wndar,,  the  soul  toes  command  of  itsclt
It  the  same  imagery,  and  nearly  tic  same  terms,  in  many  languages.  Corresponding  to  lt  are  the  expressions  for  tl
oppo  ite  tate  Compare  the  Latin  e*ire  <ie  mente,  ration*,  etc.,  lo  le  or  go  cut  of  one's  mind,  and  the  opposite .co.gere  se
,  „,:,  courage,  to  recover  one's  self.  So  the  English,  to  le  collected,  or  exposed.  There  is  a  s.m.lar  iisago  of  the  Greek
^ay7P°°L  and  i*poK«*«,  to  collect,  gather  back  the  soul.  See  the  Phccdo,  G7  c.  Vulgate,  obsl^facU  sunt.-T.  I,]

l-RELIMIXAKY     REMARKS.  rather  that  book-mangling  criticism,  now  so  nmch  in


1.  It  nnpears  uncertain  toKnobel  which  narrator
(the  KK.hiit  or  the  Jehovist)  tells  the^  story  here.
Many  expressions,  says  he,  favor  the  original  Scrip
ture,"  but  s:>me  seem  to  testify  for  the  Jehovist,  e.g.,
land  of  Goshen  (eh.  xlv.  10),  thy  servant  instead  of/
(ch.  xiii.  lo).  Very  singular  examples  truly  !  Yet
the  langua-e,  it  is  then  said,  is  rich  in  peculiarities.
This  part  the  Jehovist  is  said  to  have  made  up  from
his  first  record.  A  very  peculiar  presentation  this,
of  the  awa^  \ryo/j.fva  of  different  authors,  as  ohtaiued
by  such  a  combination.  The  aira|  \fyi>/j.tva  (words
or  expressions  occurring  but  once)  are  always  forth
coming  from  behind  the  scene.  Such  is  the  dead
representation  of  that  spiritless  book-making,  or


-  ,

vogue  with  those  who  make  synopses  of  the  New-
Testament.

2.  The  history  of  Joseph's  reconciliation  to  his
brethren  extends  through  four  chapters,  from  ch.
xli.-xlv.  It  contains:  1)  The  history  of  the  _  chas
tisement  of  the  brother?)  which,  at  the  same  time  is
a  history  of  Joseph's  struggles  ;  2)  of  the  repentance
of  his  brothers,  marked  by  the  antithesis  Joseph  and
Simeon  (ch.  xlii.);  3)  the  trial  of  the  brothers,  in
which  appears  their  repentance  and  Joseph's  recon
ciliation,  marked  by  the  antithesis  of  Joseph  and
Benjamin  (ch.  xliii.  1  ;  xliv.  17);  4)  the  story  of  the
reconciliation  and  recognition,  under  the  antithesis
of  Judah  and  Joseph  (ch.  xliv.  18  ;  xlv.  16) ;  P)  the
account  of  the  glad  tidings  to  Jacob  (vers.  7-28).


CHAP.   XLII.   1-38.


1.  The  contents  of  the  present  section:  ])  The
journey  to  Egypt  (vers.  1-6) ;  2)  the  rough  reception
(vers.  7-17);  3  the  tasks  imposed  and  the  amuse
ments  made  by  Joseph  (vers.  ]  8-3 1 ) ;  4)  The  volun
tary  release,  the  return  home,  the  report,  the  dark
omen  (vers.  25-35);  5)  Jacob's  lament  (vers.  30-38)


EXEGETICAL   AM)    CRITICAL.


3.  Vers.    1-0.       The  first  journey   of  Joseph's
brethren  to  Egypt.—  When.  Jacob  saw  __  It  is  al
ready  presupposed   that  the  famine  was  raging  in
Canaan.     Jacob's  observation   was   probably3  based
upon  the  preparations  of  others  for  buying  corn  in
Egypt,     The  word  "irj  is  translated  corn,  but  more
properly    means     a     supply    of    corn     (frumenti
cumulus,   Gesen.,    Thesaur.),    or  vendible  or    mar
ket    corn.—  Why     do      ye     look      one     upon
another  9—  Their  helpless   and  suspicious  lookin^
to  each  other  seems  to  be  connected  with  their  guilt
The  journey  to  Egypt,  and  the  very  thought  of  Egypt
haunts  them   on    account  of  Joseph's   sale.—  And
Joseph's  ten  brethren.—  They  thus  undertake  the
journey  together,  because  they  received  corn  in  pro
portion  to  their  number.     For  though  Joseph  was
humanely  selling  corn  to  foreigners,  yet  preference
>r  Ins  own  countrymen,  and  a  regard  to  economy
demanded  a  limitation  of  the   quantity  sold  to  indi
viduals.—  But  Benjamin.—  Jacob  had  transferred  to
Lenjamm  Ins  preference  of  Joseph  as  the  son  of
Rachel,   and   of  his   old   age   (ch.  xxxvii.  3).     He
guarded  him,  therefore,  all  the  more  carefully  on  ac
count  of  the  self-reproach  he  suffered  from  bavin*
once  let  Joseph  take  a  dangerous  journey  all  alone!
sides,  Benjamin  had  not  yet  arrived  at  full  man
hood.     Finally,  although  the  facts  were  not  clearlv
known  to  him,  yet  there  must  be  taken  into  the  ac
count  the  deep  suspicion  he  must  have  felt  when
he  called  to  mind  the  strange  disappearance  of  Joseph
their  envy  of  him,  and  all  this  the  stronger  because
Benjamin     too,    was    his    favorite—  Rachel's     son,
Jose      3  brother—  Among   those    that  came.—
I  ne  picture  of  a  caravan.     Jacob's  sons  seem  willin-
se  themselves  in  the  multitudes,  as  if  troubled
'  an  alarming  presentiment,     Knobel  thinks  the
ci.y  to  which  they  journeyed  was  Memphis.  Accord-
;  to  others  it  was  probably  Zoar  or  Tanais  (see
Numb.   xiii.   20)       By  the  double  Mn  the  writer
denotes  tl  e  inevitable-ness  of  their  appearing  before
Joseph     Having  the  general  oversight  of  the  sale
he  specially  observed  the  selling  to  foreigners   and
it  appears  to  have  been  the  rule  that  they  were  to
present  themselves  before  him.     Such  a  direction
though  a  proper  caution  in  itself,  might  have  been
connected  in  the  mind  of  Joseph  with  a  presentiment
of  their  coming.     He  himself  was  the  a^jj       The
circumstance  that  this  word  appears  otherwise  only
later  writers  may  be  partly  explained  from  the
peculiarity  of  the  idea  itself.     See  Dan.  v.  29     Here
Darnel  is  represented  as  the  third  aiba  (shalit)  of
e  kingdom      "it  seems  to  have  been  the  standing
by  which  the  Shemites  designated  Joseph    as
e  having  despotic  power  in  Egvpt,  and  from  which

i  sTnvNoTia;  i;ie  w?rd  ^BT"-  the  nam°  °f

1  rst  Hyl  sos  king  (gee  JOSEPHUS:    Contra  Apion.
14)  .  —  keil.—  And  bowed  themselves.—  Thus

Joseph's  dreams  were  fulfilled,  as  there  had  been  al
•eady  fulf.lle  1  the  dreams  of  Pharaoh


2.  Vers.  7-17.  The  harsh  reception.  Joseph
recognized  them  immediately,  because,  at  the  time
of  his  abduction,  they  were  already  grown  up  men,
who  had  not  changed  as  much  as  he,  and  because'
moreover,  their  being  all  together  brought  out  dis
tinctly  their  individual  characteristics.  He  was  be-
sides,  familiar  with  their  language  and  its  idioms
ihey,  on  the  contrary,  did  not  recognize  him  because

he  had  attained  his  manhood  since  in  Egypt,—  because

he  appeared  before  them  clad  in  foreign   attire,  and
introduced  himself,  moreover,  as  an  Egyptian  'who
spoke  to  them  through  an  interpreter.    "Add  to  this
that  he  had  probable  reasons  for  expecting  his  breth
ren,  whilst  they  could  have  had  no  thought  of  meeting
Joseph  in  the  character  of  the  shalit.—  But  made
himself  strange  unto  them.—  By  speaking  roii"h-
ly  unto  them.     It  is  a  false  ascription  to  Joseph  of
a  superhuman  perfection  and  holiness,  when,  with
Luther,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  and  others  (see  KEIL,  p  259)
we  suppose  that  Joseph,  with  settled  calmness,  only
intended  to  become  acquainted  with  the  disposition
of  their  hearts,  so  as  to  lead  them  to  a  perception  of
their  guilt,  and  to  find  out  how  they  were  disposed
towards  his  hoary  sire,  and  their  youngest  brother.
Kurtz  is  more  correct  in  supposing  it  a  struggle  be
tween  anger  and  gentleness.     Their  conduct  to  him
self  may  have  even  made  it  a  sign  of  suspicion  to
mm  that  Benjamin  did  not  accompany  them.     True
it  is,  that  a  feeling  of  love  predominates  ;  since  the
humiliation  foretold  in  his  dreams  was  already    for
the  most  part,  fulfilled,  and  he  might,  therefore'  ex
pert  the  arrival  of  his  father,  and  of  his  brother  Ben
jamin,  who  would,  at  the  same  time,  represent  his
mother.    His  future  position  towards  them,  however
must  be  governed  by  circumstances.     The  principal
aim,  therefore,   of  his  harsh  address,  is   to   sound
them  in  respect  to  their  inner  and  outer  relations
According  as  things  should  appear  were  they  to  ex
pect  punishment  or  forbearance.      Finding  them  well
disposed,  self-renunciation   becomes  easier  to  him  •
whilst  his  harsh  conduct  is  to  them  only  a  wholesome
discipline.—  Ye  are  spies.—  That  such  a  danger  was
common,  in  those  ancient  days  of  emigration  and  con
quest,  is  clear  from  various  instances  (Numb  xxi  3?  •
Josh.  n.  1,  etc.).     See  also  KNOBKL,  p.  321.     More^
over,  Egypt  was  exposed  to  invasion  from  the  North
Supposing,  too,  that  Joseph  had  already  a  presenti
ment  of  how  the  affair  would  turn  out,  he  might  term
them  spies,  with  something  of  an  ironical  feelin-  be
cause  their  coming  was  undoubtedly  a  preliminary  to
their  settlement  in  Egypt,—  The  nakedness  of  the
land—  its  unfortified  cities,  unprotected  boundaries
etc.       Afterwards     Joseph    himself     becomes     to
them   the   gate   through  which    they   enter  E>vnt
—Nay    my  Lord.—  Their   answer  shows  a  fed-
dignified      displeasure.—  We      are      all
ane    man's     sons,    we     are     true     men.—  Yet
their  mortified  pride  is  restrained  by  fear  and  respect
Joseph  repeats  his  charge,  and  so  gets  from  them  the
further  information,  that  his  father  is  still  alive   and
that  Benjamin  was  well  at  home.-And  one  is  'not
-From  this  expression  Keil  concludes  that  they  did
not  yet  feel  much  sorrow  for  their  deed.     But  ire

*


r     ee.        ut  ire

they  to  confess  to  the  Egyptian  shalit  y  I  ;  fa*™
their  distress  alone  had  afterwards  drawn  from  them
sudden  repentance,    it   could  hardlv   have   been
genume.-That  is  it  that  I  spake  with  you._
Josephs  great  excitement  shows  itself  in  his  waver-
ig  determinations  quickly  succeeding  and  correct-
s  each  other.      They  gravitate  from  severity  to


612


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


mildness.  In  vcr.  It,  wo  have  his  positive  decision
that  they  are  spies,  and  are,  therefore,  to  expect
death.  In  ver.  15,  il  is  made  conditional.  Asatest
of  their  truth  they  are  to  be  retained  until  the  ar
rival  of  their  brother. — By  the  life  of  Pharaoh.* —
The  Kgyptians,  as  the  Ik-brews  afterwards,  swore  by
the  life"  of  their  kings  (see  KNOBKL,  li'2'2).  Joseph
tlius  swears  as  an  L_:\p:ian.  His  main  solicitude,
however,  appears  here  already  :  he  must  know  how
Benjamin  does,  and  their  disposition  towards  him.
In  ver.  lo',  he  expresses  himself  more  definitely :  one
of  them  is  t<>  •,*>  and  bring  the  hroiher,  the  others
are  to  remain  in  confinement.  A  change  follows  in
ver.  17,  they  ;nv  confined  for  three  d;iys,  probably
on  aeeoim;  nf  the  expression  of  their  unwillingness  to
feteh  l!e!ijan;in.  1'it  for  pit  (sec  eh.  xxxvii.  '24)!
These  three  'lavs,  however,  were  to  Joseph  a  time
for  retleeiion,  and  for  the  brothers  a  time  of  visitation.
Tlu'V  all  Deemed  now  to  have  fallen  into  slavery  in
Kuypt,  even  it'  they  had  not  incurred  the  death  of
criminals.  How  this  must  have  made  them  remembei
Joseph's  sale  !  One  ray  of  hope  has  lie  left  them  :  on
Benjamin'.-  appearance  they  could  be  released.

[*  XI. II.  i:>.  riV"  "H.  Literally,  by  tin-  lii'cs  of
1'iiuraoh;  but  tin.1  primitive  conception,  whatever  it  may
note,  ]>.  li>">,  -il.  column),  that  irave  rise  to
the  plural  form  of  tins  word,  had  probably  become  dim  or
lost,  and  there  is  intended  hen1  only  the  OIK;  ireneral  sense
Lhere  i-,  however,  a  n  mark  of  Maimoni  les  on
this  phrase,  in  this  place,  that  is  worthy  of  note.  His  criti
cal,  as  well  a-  most  philosophii  al.  e;,  r  observe.-*  a  ditt'i  rer.ee
in  t!,is  little  word  "!"!,  an.!  the  vowel  pointing  it  has  in  the
S'TiptUivs  ace  rdini:  as  i!  is  used  of  God  or  man.  'J'hus  in
tin  !l  '•!•( -.-  ..ath,  ~r-;]  TV  "•-•  Tj  (comp.  1  S.im.  xx.
,; ;  xxv.  -ii  :  _'  Kin.-s'ii.  :',  1,'d;  i\-.':;i);  ami  other  places),
whi"h  is  veil  icre  1,  (if  I  In-  l,"n!  Hreth,  nuil  an  thy  snul  livetli,
he  notices  waat  has  i  scaped  most  uitics,  vi/..,  the  change,  of
vowel  in  t!i  •  word  "i"!  :  s  >  that  the  rendermi;  should  lie,  us
t',.  Tsirrf  lirelh,  or  /.//  Ihc  Urin:i  .l.-hom/i,  mill  In/  the.lif<-  nf
Hi, I  soul.  Tho  reasons  of  this  ho  thus  .--tales  in  the  >/,/,,;•
•  .  /;  i/.-  -  •  ,\  towl<  '"  .  ;'  iir  t  ]  art  of  the  frreat
v.-ork  entitle. 1  Yi'/l  line/in ~n'c«li.  ch.  ii.  s<"-.  1  1  :  "  In  Gen.
xlii.  1"),  it  N  said,  ni'~5  "PI  ,  l>j  tin'  ,'//'•'  (I ires)  of  Pharaoh ;
*  i  in  1  Sam.  i.  -C>,  7j'i'E3  ^fl,  by  !!,'  ///•  "f  thy  foil',  ns  a'.so
iu  m  my  i  ther  plan's.  15ut  in  the  Minn:  connection  it  is  not
said  ~*~~  Ti  '.chei),  but  mrP  Ti  (<  hai),  in  the  absolute
form  instead  of  tin:  construct  or  genitive,  because  the
Creator,  blessed  lie  he.  and  his  life  are  one,  not  separate,  ag
the  lives  of  creature*  <>r  of  angels.  Therefore,  lie  does  not
l,:io\v  ricaum^  by  means  of  the  creatures,  as  we  know  them,

b'.it  hy  himself  ("T£I£?  r.~rP2),  because  all  life  leans  up  on
him.  and  by  his  knowing  himself  he  knnweth  all  things— since
he  and  his  knowledge  also,  an  well  as  he,  ami  his.  life,  arc  one.
This  is  a  matter  which  the  tongue  has  not  the  power  of  ut-
t'Tiiej;,  n-iv  the  ear  of  hearing,  nor  can  the  mind  comprehend
it  ;  but  such  is  the  reason  of  the  change,  and  of  its  being
said  ~"~I  TI,  lii/  the  life  of  Pharaoh,  in  the  construct
-'  ite,  •  i  ce  Pharaoh  and  his  life  are  two."  A^ain,  sec.  xi.
andxii.:  ••  All  things  beside  the  Creator,  blessed  he  he,
eM-d  thvo'iu'h  his  truth  (o:%  truthfulness)  and  because  he
Knows  him-elf,  he  knows  everything.  And  he  does  not
!<:•  ,v  by  a  knowledge  which  is  without  (or  outside,  V"n
"I'-'C;,  t  .  lomse'ii,  us  we  know,  because  we  and  our  knowl
edge  are  not  one;  but  as  for  the  Creator,  blessed  be  he,
both  his  knowledge  and  his  life  are  one  with  himself  in
every  mode  of  unity.  Hence  wo  may  say  that  he  is,  at  the
panic  time,  tin-  knoioer,  the  known,  and  the  knuiolcdgf  itself,
all  iu  one."  Or,  as  ho  tells  us  in  the  bfjrinninir  of  this  pro
found  t  realise,  di.  i.  see.  1  :  "God's  truth  is  not  like  the
truth  of  the  creatures,  and  thus  the  prophet  says  (Jerem.  x.
1  .),  Jelwah  God  is  truth,  and  God  is  life,  (plural  C^Tt
/•>••.<  ;  c  '-mr-are  jra-njp  rwv  ^WTWV,  James  i.  17),  heislhe  "i^
Z~~".  /'<•'  /.-iH/7  of  eternity,  Hie  l-imj  of  the  world."  That  is,
he  is,  a1  tiie  same,  time,  the  truth,  the  life,  the  everlasting
Zi/w.  Co:r,parc,  als •>,  MAIJIONIDKS,  1'orta  ilosid,  Pococke
edition,  p.  256.— T.  L.]


3.  Yers.  18-'24.  The  hard  terms  imposed;  Jo-
h's  arrangement  and  the  repentance  of  the  brothers ;
Joseph's  struggle  ;  Simeon  in  prison.— This  do  and
live. — Joseph  now  presents  the  charge  in  its  condi
tional  aspect.  The  motive  assigned :  For  I  fear
God. — This  language  is  the  first  definite  sign  of
peace — the  first  fair  self-betrayal  of  his  heavt  Agi
tated  feelings  lie  concealed  tinder  these  words.  It  i.-i
as  much  as  to  say:  I  am  near  to  you,  and  to  your
faith.  For  them,  it  is  true,  the  expression  meant
that  he  was  a  religious  and  conscientious  man,  who
would  never  condemn  on  mere  suspicion.  It  is  r.n
assertion,  too,  on  which  they  are  more  to  rely  than
on  the  earlier  asseveration  made  :  by  the  life  of  1'l.a-
rnoli. — Let  one  of  your  brethren  be  bound. —
Before,  it  was  said  :  one  shall  go,  but  the  others  re
main  ;  now  the  reverse,  and  more  mildly  :  one  shall
remain,  but  the  others  may  go.  This  guarantees  the
return  with  Benjamin,  and  leaves  them  under  the
impression  that  they  are  not  yet  free  from  suspicion.
Joseph  sees  the  necessity  of  the  others  going,  for  his
father's  house  must  be  supplied  with  bread. — And
they  did  so. — A  summary  expression  of  what  fol
lows,  but  anticipatory  of  their  readiness  to  comply
with  Joseph's  request. — We  are  verily  guilty. —
Not :  '•  we  atone  lor  our  brother's  death  "  (  Uelitzseh);
for  thus  there  would  he  eli'aeed  the  thmight  that  the
guilt  was  still  resting  upon  them.  The  expiation  is
expressed  in  what  follows. — Therefore  in  this  dis
tress  come  upon  us. — Knobel  translates  it  nfouixg,
and  makes  the  trivial  remark  :  "All  misfortune,  ac
cording  to  the  Hebrew  notion,  is  a  punishment  for
sin."  Joseph's  case  itself  directly  contradicts  him.
— When  he  besought  us. — Thus  vividly  paints  the
evil  conscience.  The  narrator  had  not  mentioned
this  beseeching.  Tims  are  they  compelled  to  make
confession  in  Joseph's  hearing,  without  the  thought
that,  he  understands  .them.  But,  their  open  confes
sion,  made,  as  it  was,  before  the  interpreter,  betrays
the  pressure  of  their  sense  of  guilt. — And  Reuben
answered. — A  picture  of  the  thoughts  that  "accuse
or  excuse  one  another"  (Rom.  ii.  15).  Ketibcii,  too,
is  not  wholly  innocent ;  but,  as  against  them,  he
thought  to  act  the  censurer,  and  what  he  did  to  save
Joseph  he  represents  in  the  strongest  light.  We
may,  indeed,  conclude  that  his  counsel  to  cast  him
into  the  pit  was  preceded  by  unheeded  entreaties  for
his  entire  freedom. — For  he  spake  with  them
by  an  interpreter. — Knobel  here  has  to  encounter
the  difficulty  that  Joseph,  "  as  an  oiliccr  of  the
Ilyksos  "  (to  use  his  own  language),  assumes  the  ap
pearance  of  not  being  able  to  speak  Hebrew. — And
he  turned  himself  about  from  them. — Overcome
by  his  emotion,  he  has  to  turn  away  and  weep.
This  is  repeated  more  powerfully  at  the  meeting  with
Benjamin  (eh.  xliii.  30),  and  finally,  in  a  most  touch
ing  manner,  after  Judah's  appeal  (ch.  xliv.  18,  etc.).
The  cause  of  this  emotion,  thrice  repeated,  and  each
time  with  increasing  power,  is,  in  every  instance,
some  propitiating  appeal.  In  the  first  case,  it  is  the
palliating  thought  that  Reuben,  the  first-born,  in
tended  to  save  him,  and  yet  takes  to  himself  the  feel
ing  of  the  guilt  that  weighed  upon  them.  In  the
second  case  it  is  the  appearance  of  the  young  and
innocent  Benjamin,  his  beloved  brother,  as  though
standing  before  the  guilty  brethren.  In  the  third
instance,  it  is  Judah's  self-sacrifice  in  behalf  of  Ben
jamin  and  his  father's  house.  The  key-note  of  Jo
seph's  emotion,  therefore,  is  this  perception  of  aton
ing  love,  purifying  the  bitter  recollection  of  injustice
suffered.  A  presentiment  and  a  sentiment  of  recon-


CHAP.   XLII.   1-38.


015


eiliution  melt  thp  heart  which  the  mere  sense  of  right
might  harden,  UK!  becomes  even  a  feeling,  at  the
same  time,  of  divine  and  human  reconciliation.
Only  as  viewed  from  this  definite  perception  can  we
estimate  the  more  general  feelings  that  flow  from  it:
"painful  recollection  of  the  past,  and  thankfulness
to  God  for  his  gracious  guidance." — And  returned
to  them  again. — Joseph's  first  emotion  may  have
removed  his  harsh  decisiveness.  His  feeling  of  jus
tice,  however,  is  not  yet  satisfied  ;  still  less  is  there
restored  his  confidence  in  his  brethren,  especially  in
reference  to  the  future  of  Benjamin.  Hut  before
adopting  any  severer  measures,  he  communed  with
them,  doubtless  in  a  conciliatory  manner.  Then  he
takes  Simeon,  binds  him,  or  orders  him  to  be  bound,
that  he  might  remain  as  a  hostage  for  their  return.
That  he  does  not  order  Reuben,  the  first-born,  to  be
bound,  explains  itself  from  the  discovery  of  his
guiltlessness.  Thus  Simeon,  as  standing  next,  is  the
first-born  of  the  guilty  ones.  He  did  not  adopt
Reuben's  plan  of  deliverance,  though  he  did  not  es
pecially  distinguish  himself  in  Joseph's  persecution,
as  might  have  been  expected  of  him  from  his  zealous
disposition  shown  in  the  affair  of  Shechem, — a  fact
the  more  easily  credited  since  neither  did  Judah,  the
next  after  him,  agree  with  the  majority.

4.  Vcrs.  25-35.  The  voluntary  release ;  the  re
turn  ;  the  report;  the  dark  omen. — To  fill  their
sacks. — -H"1-3^  ,  receptacles  or  vessels,  in  the  most
general  sense. — To  restore  every  man's  money
with  his  sack. — Joseph  would  not  receive  pay
from  his  father,  and  yet  he  could  not  openly  return
the  money  without  betraying  a  particular  relation  to
them.  Therefore  the  secret  measure,  one  object  of
which,  doubtless,  was  to  keep  up  the  fear  and  excite
ment,  as  it  also  served  to  give  them  reasons  for  ex
pecting  something  extraordinary. — Provisions  for
the  way. — To  prevent  the  decrease  of  their  store,
and  to  make  unnecessary  the  premature  opening  of
their  sacks. — One  of  them  opened  his  sack. — At
the  place  of  their  night-quarters.  It  could  not  have
been  what  we  now  call  an  inn.  Delitzsch  supposes
that,  at  that  time,  already,  there  were  shed-like
buildings,  caravanseras,  existing  along  the  route
through  the  desert  (Exod.  iv.  24).  Keil  doubts  this.
The  fact,  of  the  separate  opening  of  his  sack  by  one
of  them,  demands  no  explanation.  He  might  have
made  a  mistake  in  the  sack,  or  the  money  might  have
been  pui:  in  a  wrong  one ;  but  even  this  circumstance
is  so  arranged  as  to  increase  the  fear  of  their  awak
ened  consciences. — What  is  this  that  God  hath
done  unto  us  ? — They  are  conscious  of  no  decep
tion  on  their  part,  and  they  cannot  understand  how
the  Egyptians  could  have  done  it.  Whether  it  were
an  oversight  on  their  side,  or  a  cunning  trick  of  the
Egyptians  to  arrest  them  afterwards  for  theft — at  all
events,  their  aroused  consciences  tell  them  that  they
have  now  to  contend  with  God.  They  see  a  dark
and  threatening  sign  in  it,  now  that  a  sense  of  God's
judgments  is  awakened  in  them. — And  they  came
unto  Jacob. — The  story  of  their  strange  intercourse
with  the  terrible  man  in  Egypt,  is  confirmed  by  the
fearful  discovery  made  when  all  the  sacks  arc  opened.
Joseph's  intimation,  which  they  report,  that  they
might  traffic  again  in  Egypt,  provided  they  fulfilled  the
imposed  condition,  is  a  ray  of  light,  which,  in  their
present  mood,  they  hardly  knew  how  to  appreciate.

~).  Vers.  3G-38.  JacoUs  lamentation. — Me  have
ye  bereaved  of  my  children.— The  pain  of
Simeon's  apparent  loss,  grief  for  Joseph  here  re


newed  again,  and  the  anguish  concerning  Benjamin,
move  Jacob  greatly,  and  cause  him  to  express  him
self,  hyperbolically  indeed,  but  still  truthfully,  ac
cording  to  his  conception,  as  a  man  overwhelmed
with  misfortune,  and  losing  his  children,  one  after
the  other.  So  little  thought  the  wise  and  pious  Ja
cob  how  near  was  the  joyful  turning-point  in  the
destiny  of  his  house.  Ilis  reproach  :  inc  hw<e  i/e  be
reaved  of  mi/  c7///(/jvH,  as  addressed  to  those  who
might  have  formally  contradicted  it,  is  more  forcible
in  its  application  than  lie  could  have  thought.  Or
had  he  a  presentiment  of  something  he  knew  not  ?
In  regard  to  Joseph  he  could  only  knowingly  charge
that  he  had  once  sent  him  to  them,  and  they  had
not  brought  him  back.  In  respect  to  Simeon  lie
could  only  reproach  them  with  having  told  too  much
to  the  governor  of  Egypt  respecting  their  family
affairs  (see  eh.  xliii.).  Respecting  Benjamin  he  could
only  complain  that  they  should  ask  to  take  him
along.  The  aroused  consciences  of  his  sons,  how
ever,  told  them  that  truly  all  the  threatening  losses
of  Jacob  were  connected  with  their  removal  of  Jo
seph;  for  they  themselves  considered  the  present
catastrophe  as  a  visitation  on  account  of  it. — And
Reuben  spake. — AVith  a  clearer  conscience,  he  has
also  more  courage ;  but  his  oiler  to  leave  his  sons  as
hostages,  so  that  Jacob  might  slay  them  if  he  did
not  return  with  Benjamin,  is  more  expressive  of  a
rude  heroism  than  of  true  understanding ;  for  how
could  it  be  a  satisfaction  to  a  grandfather  to  slay
both  his  grandchildren  !  It  can  only  be  understood  as
a  tender  of  a  double  blood-vengeance,  or  as  a  strong
expression  of  assurance  that  his  return  without  Ben
jamin  was  not  to  be  thought  of.  Knobel  thinks  it
strange  that  Reuben  speaks  of  two  sons,  since  at  the
time  of  the  emigration  to  Egypt,  according  to  ch.
xlvi.,  he  had  four  sons.  And  yet  he  was  quite  ad
vanced  in  years,  according  to  the  Elohistic  account !
— With  sorrow  to  the  grave  (see  ch.  xxxvii.  35  ;
1  Kings  ii.  6,  9).


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.

1.  A  chapter  showing  the  unfailing  fulfilment  of
the  divine  decrees,  the  power  of  a  guilty  conscience,
the  righteous   punishment  of    guilty  concealers   as
visited   by  suspicion  on  all  sides,  the  certainty  of
final  retribution,  the  greatness  of  moral  struggles,
the  imaginations  of  an  evil  conscience,  the  presenti
ments  of  misfortune  as  felt  by  a  gray-haired  sire  in
a   guilty  house,  and,  with  it  all,  the  change  from
judgment  to  reconciliation  and  salvation  in  the  life
of  the  now  docile  sons  of  the  promise.

2.  They  came  at  last  ;   late  indeed,   but  come
they  must,  even  if  it  had  been  from  the  remotest
bounds  of   the   earth.     Joseph's   brethren   were  to
come  and  bow  themselves  down  before  him.     God's
decrees  must  stand.     It  is  not  because  Joseph  saw
it  in  a  dream,  but  because  in  the  dreams  there  was
represented  the  realization  of  God's  decrees  as  al
ready  interweaving  themselves  with  the  future  of  the
sons  in  the  innermost  movements  of  their  most  iu-
terior  life.     So  sure  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  divine
counsels, — so  unfailingly  grow  the  germs  of  destiny
in  the  deepest  life  of  man.

3.  AVhy  do  the  sons  of  Jacob  look  so  helplessly
one  upon  the  other  ?     AVhy  does  it  not  come  into
their  minds  that  corn  is  for  sale  in  Egypt,  and  that  a
caravan  of  travellers  is  making  preparation  in  their
vicinity?     To   their  guilty    conscience,  Egypt  is   a


G14


GENESIS,  OK   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


foreboding  name,  threatening  calamity.  If  they
must  go,  however,  they  would  rather  go  all  together,
that,  in  the  multitude,  they  may  find  mutual  encour
agement.  They  have  to  explain  why  they  come  ten
strong,  and  are  thus  driven  to  speak  about  Joseph  ;
but  with  what  embarrassment  do  they  pass  hastilv
over  one  who  is  no  more  !  And  now,  terrified  by
the  prospect  of  imprisonment,  and  threatened  with
death,  they  are  unable,  •  -veil  in  .Joseph's  presence,
and  within  the  hearing  of  the  interpreter,  to  suppress
their  self-accusation  :  "  \\'e  are  verily  guilty  concern
ing  our  brother."  And  now,  ag:'in,  how  vividlv
COMIC  to  their  minds  the  prayers,  of  that  brother,  in
vain  besecchiir.:  them  tor  mercy.  So  truthful  is  the
memory  of  conscience.  The  money,  too,  found
again  in  the  sack  of  one  of  them,  becomes  another
fearful  sign  that  the  divine  judgments  are  at  last  to
descend  upon  them.  The  last  discovery  of  it  in  the
sac!,-  of  all  of  them,  fill.-,  up  the  measure  of  their
fears.  All  favoraM"  signs  ;!rc  gone:  the  twofold
mitigation  of  .Joseph's  purpose;  his  assurance:  1
tear  *MM!;  his  explanation  that  Benjamin's  appear-
anc"  would  satisfy  him;  the  voluntarv  release  ;  the
finding  a^ain  o!'  their  money,  Reuben,  too,  Ihongli
having  a  belter  conscience,  shares  in  their  feeliii'/-  :
li'-  sees  coming  down  upon  them  the  full  visitation
".r  lilood-guih'iness  ;  evt  n  the  pious  father  has
a  for'-bodmg,  In-coming  even  more  distinct,  that
somehov.,  tliri. u-li  the  crime  of  hi-  sons,  a  dark
doom  is  impending  over  his  house.  Therefore  U  he
not  willing  to  tru.-t  hi-  Benjamin,  for  so  Ion','  a  jour
ney,  Io  the-"  sons,  \\lio  seem,  for  some  re.i<.-iM,  to

have  a  uuiltv  conscience, — it,  may  lie  in  relation  to
.Jo.-  :  h.

1.  )V  <m  *i,'i,.-s.  Though  Jo.-eph's  suspicion  wa?
unfiiunded,  i;  expresses  a  righteous  judgmeiit  :  that
guilty  men  who  conceal  a  dim:-  demanding  an  open
atonement,  must  ever  encounter  suspicion  as  the  re
flex  of  their  evil  secret.  Even  when  trusted  thev
•  bel:i  vc  ii.  because  not  yet  true  to  themselves.
To  .Jos  ph  it  must  have  appeared  strangely  suspicious
that  they  came  without  Benjamin.

.">.  My  regarding  Jo--<-ph  as  a  saintly  man,  who,
from  the  very  firs',  :md  with  a  freely  reconciled
spiiir,  was  only  imposing  a  divine  trial  upon  his
brothers,  and  leading  them  to  repentance  through  a
soul-enlightening  discipline,  we  raise  him  above  the
t  >1  '.-  Testament  stand-point;  to  say  nothing  of  the
fact  that  .Joseph  could  not  at  first  have  known
wh.i  ther  the-e,  his  half-brothers,  were  not  also  the
persecutors  of  Benjamin,  and  with  as  deadly  a  had  e  1,
perhaps,  as  they  had  shown  to  him.  Neither  had  he
any  means  of  knowing  whether  or  not  he  could  ever
be  on  friendly  teims  with  them.  But  that  he  is  to
pass  through  a  great  religious  and  moral  struggle
with  himself,  is  evident  from  his  wavering  decisions,
from  the  time  he  takes  for  consideration,  and  espe
cially,  from  the  fact  that  he  postpones  the  trial  even
after  they  had  brought  Benjamin  to  him.  He  adopts
a  course  in  which  both  his  aged  father  and  his  be
loved  Benjamin  are  exposed,  temporarily,  to  the
greatest  distress.  Decidedly,  from  the  very  begin
ning,  does  he  take  a  noble  position,  but  by  severe
struggles  is  he  to  attain  to  that  holy  stand-point  of
complete  forgiveness :  and  for  this  purpose  his
brothers'  confession  of  their  guilt,  and  especially  the
appearance  of  Reuben,  Benjamin,  and  Judah,  are
blessed  to  him,  just  as  his  own  conduct  assisted  the
brothers  in  bringing  on  their  struggles  of  repentance
and  self-sacrifice  by  faith.

6.  The  turning  of  judgment  into  reconciliation.


A  principal  point  in  this  is  the  involuntary  confes
sion  of  the  brethren  in  Joseph's  hearing,  the  discov
ery  of  Reuben's  attempt  to  save  him,  the  atonement
made  by  the  proud-hearted  Simeon,  the  melting  of
the  brothers'  obduracy,  and,  through  it,  of  Joseph's
exasperation.  Above  all,  the  recognition  tluit  God's
searching  providence  is  present  throughout  the  whole
development.  "  Whatsoever  maketh  manifest  is
light  "  (Eph.  v.  10).  Thus  under  the  light  of  Christ's
cross  the  entire  darkness  of  the  world's  guilt  was
uncovered,  and  only  in  such  an  uncovering  could  it
become  reconciled.

7.  Even  now  there  already  (lawns  upon  Joseph
the  wonderful    fact    that   his  exaltation   was   owing
mediately  to   the   enmity  of  his  brethren,  and  that
they  were  together  both  conscious   and  unconscious
instruments   of  God's  inercy  and  of  his  providential
de.-iirn  to  save  much  people  idive  (ch.  xlv.  and  1.).

8.  Jacob  feels   the   burden  of  his  house,  and  his
alarming    presentiments    of    evil    become    manifest
more  and  more.     We  must  imagine  this  to  ourselves,
if  we  would  clearly  understand  his  depression.     He
is  not  strengthened  by   the  spirit  in  his   household,
but   put   under   restrain!    and   weariness,      lie    feels
that  there  is  something  rotten  in  the  foundation  of
his  house.

I*.  Here,  too,  death  is  not  denoted  as  a  descend
ing  into  Sheol,  but  as  the  dying  fm,M  the  heart's  sor
row  of  an  uncompleted  life.  Opposed  to  it  is  the
going  home  to  the  fathers  when  the  soul  is  satisfied
with  the  life  on  earth,  and  its  enigmas  are  all  solved.


nOMILETICAL    AND    I'KAf  TICAL.

Sec  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.  The  brethren  appear
ing  before  Joseph.  Thus  the  world  before  Christ,
the  oppressors  in  the  forum  of  the  oppressed,  the
wicked  at  the  judgment-seat  of  the  pious. — Joseph
and  his  brethren  as  they  stand  confronting  each
other:  1.  He  recognizes  them,  but  they  do  not  rec
ognize  him  ;  2.  the  positions  of  the  parties  are
changed,  but  Joseph  exercises  mercy;  3.  the  judg
ment  must  precede  the  reconciliation  ;  4.  human
and  divine  reconciliation  go  together.  We  arc  rcrih;
yiiiltt/  concerning  onr  brotlx-r.  1.  This  language
considered  in  their  sense  ;  2.  according  to  Joseph's
understanding;  ',',.  in  the  sense  of  the  spirit.  The
guilty  conscience  terrified,  at  first,  by  signs  that  were
really  favorable.  Jacob's  lamentation  as  the  seem
ing  curse  of  his  house  becomes  gradually  known.
At  the  extremcst  need  help  is  near.  Benjamin's
daik  prospects  (his  mother  dead,  his  brother  lost,
himself  threatened  with  misfortune),  and  thcil  favor
able  issue.

T.U'HE:  The  hours  of  repentance  that  come  to
Joseph's  brethren  :  1.  How  the  sinner  is  led  to  re
pentance  ;  2.  how  repentance  manifests  itself ;  ;i.
the  relation  of  the  Lord  to  the,  penitent  sinner.

First  Section  (vcrs.  1-0).  STAUKK:  The  utility
of  commerce.  The  different  products  which  God
has  given  to  different  countries,  demand  mutual  in
tercourse  for  their  attainment.  A  believer  must  em
ploy  ordinary  means,  and  not  tempt  God  by  their
refusal.  Nothing  can  hinder  God's  decrees  in  behalf
of  the  pious. — SCHRODER  :  The  guilt  of  Benjamin's
brothers  in  respect  to  Joseph  seems  to  weigh  upon
the  father's  heart  as  a  kind  of  presentiment. — CAL-
WER  ffandbuch :  Joseph's  brethren  are  they  called,
because  Joseph  stands  here  in  the  foreground  of  his
tory,  and  the  destiny  of  the  family  is  connected  with


CHAP.   XLIII.    1— XLIV.    17.


615


him.  The  very  ten  by  whom  he  was  sold  must  bow
themselves  before  him,  and  receive  the  righteous  and
higher  requital. — HEIM  :  The  expression  sons  of  Is
rael,  instead  of  sons  of  Jacob,  points  to  Israel  the
man  of  faith,  whose  children  they  were,  who  accom
panied  them  with  his  prayers,  and  for  whose  sake,
although  he  knew  it  not,  this  journey  to  Egypt,  so
dark  in  its  commencement,  became  a  blessing  to  them
all.

Second  Section  (vcrs.  7-17).  STARKE  :  Formerly
they  regarded  him  as  a  spy — now  are  they  treated  as
spies  in  turn. — Ver.  15.  This  expression  is  not  an
oath,  but  only  a  general  asseveration.  The  first
Christians,  though  making  everything  a  matter  of
conscience,  did  not  hesitate  thus  to  aflirm  by  the  life
of  the  Emperors,  but  they  were  unwilling  to  swear
by  their  divinity.  Jurmnus  sicut  non  per  gemos
C'&sanun,  ita  per  saJutcm  corum  quce  cst  aur/ustior
omnibus  ffcniis.  Tert.  Apol. — HALL  :  The  disposi
tion  of  a  Christian  is  not  always  to  be  judged  by  his
outward  acts. — GERLACII  :  Ver.  9.  Nothing  is  more
common  than  this  reproach  upon  travellers  in  the
East,  especially  when  they  would  sketch  any  parts
of  the  country. — SCHRODER  :  lie  who  was  hungry
when  they  were  eating,  now  holds  the  food  for  which
they  hunger.  To  him  (Joseph)  there  was  committed,  for
some  time,  the  government  of  a  most  important  part
of  the  world.  Ho  was  not  only  to  bless,  but  also  to
punish  and  to  judge;  i.e.,  become  forgetful  of  all
human  relations  and  act  divinely.  [KUUMMACIIER  :
Still  Joseph  felt  as  man,  not  as  though  he  were  Provi
dence.]  Joseph  plays  a  wonderful  part  with  his
brethren,  but  one  which  humbles  and  exercises  him
greatly.  A  similar  position  God  assumes  towards
believers  when  in  tribulation  ;  let  us,  therefore,  hold
assuredly  that  all  our  misfortunes,  trials,  and  la
mentations,  even  death  itself,  are  nothing  but  a
hearty  and  fair  display  of  the  divine  goodness
towards  us  (Luther).  Joseph's  suspicion,  though
feigned  in  expression,  has,  nevertheless,  a  ground
of  fact  in  the  former  conduct  of  his  brothers  towards
him.

Third  Section  (vcrs  18-24).  STARKE:  God
knows  how  to  keep  awake  the  conscience. — Ver.  18.
The  test  of  a  true  Christian  in  all  his  doings,  is  the


fear  of  the  Lord. — Bibl.  Tub. :  How  noble  is  religion
in  a  judge  ! — LANGE  :  Chastisements  as  a  means  of
self-examination.  There  may  be  times  when  sins,
long  since  committed,  may  present  themselves  so
vividly  before  the  eyes  as  to  seem  but  of  yesterday.
— THE  SAME  :  God's  wise  providence  so  brings  it
about,  that  though  a  guilty  man  may  escape  the  de
served  punishment  for  a  time,  the  visitation  will
surely  come,  even  though  it  be  by  God's  permitting
misfortunes  to  fall  upon  him  through  the  guilt  of
others,  when  he  himself  is  innocent.

Fourth  Section  (vers.  25-35).  STARKE  :  Simeon
may  now  let  his  thoughts  wander  back,  in  repentance
for  his  murderous  deeds  at  Shechem,  in  weeping  for
the  grief  he  had  caused  to  Joseph,  and  in  imploring
God's  forgiveness.  God  does  not  bestow  the  bless
ing  of  the  gospel  on  the  sinner  in  any  other  way
than  in  the  order  of  the  law,  or  in  the  knowledge  of
his  sins.  A  frightened  conscience  always  expects  the
worst  (Wisd.  of  Sol.  xvii.  11). — SCHRODER:  Simeon
is  bound ;  probably  because  the  leader  at  Shechem
was  also  the  prime  mover  against  Joseph  (Baum-
garten.

Fifth  Section  (vcrs.  35-38).  STARKE:  He  "who
wrestled  with  God  (and  man)  and  prevailed,  shows
here  great  weakness  of  faith.  Yet  he  recovers,  and
again  struggles  in  faith,  like  Abraham  his  grand
father. — CRAMER:  When  burdened  with  trials  and
temptations,  we  interpret  everything  in  the  worst
way,  even  though  it  may  be  for  our  peace. — GERLACII  :
Jacob's  declarations  betray  a  feeling  that  the  broth
ers  were  not  guiltless  respecting  Joseph's  disappear
ance.  He  knew  their  jealousy,  and  he  had  expe
rienced  the  violent  disposition  of  Simeon  and  Lcvi.
— SCHRODER  :  There  is  nothing  so  restless  or  so  great
a  foe  to  peace  as  a  frightened  heart,  that  turns  pale
at  a  glance,  or  at  the  rustle  of  a  leaf  (Luther).  He
had  long  suspected  them  in  regard  to  Joseph  (see
ver.  4) ;  the  old  wound  is  now  opened  again.  Reu
ben  is  once  more  the  tender-hearted  one.  lie  offers
everything  (ver.  37)  that  he  may  prevail  with  hia
father.  "  But  it  is  out  of  reason  what  he  offers."
Luther. — HEIM  :  Jacob's  painful  language.  There
breaks  forth  now  the  hard  suspicion  which  he  had
long  carried  shut  up  in  the  depths  of  his  own  heart.


SEVENTH    SECTION.

Tlie  second  journey.     Benjamin  accompany  ing.     Joseph  maketh  himself  known  to  his  brethren.

Their  return.     Jacob's  joy.


CHAPTER   XLIII— XLV.
:    A.  The  trial  of  the  brethren.     Their  repentance  and  Joseph's  reconcilablcncss.     Joseph  and  Benjamin.

CHAPTER   XLIII.    1— XLIV.    17.

1,  2  And  the  famine  was  sore  in  the  land.     And  it  came  to  pass,  when  they  had  eaten

up  the  corn  which  they  had.  brought   out  of  Egypt,  their  father   said   unto   them,  Go

3  again,  buy  u?  a  little  food.      And  Judah  spake  unto  him,  saying,  The  man  did  solemnly


»J1C  GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


4  protest  unto  us,  saying,  Ye  shall  not  see  my  face,  except  your  brother  be  with  you.     If

5  tliou  wilt  send  our  brother  with   us,  we  will  go  down  and  buy  thee  food;   But  if  thou
will  not  send  him,  we  will  not  go  down  ;   for  the  man  said  unto  us,  Yc  shall  not  sec  my

G   face  [n:rain],  except  your  brother  le  with  you.      And  Israel  said,  Wherefore  dealt  ye  so

7  ill  with  me,  as  to  tell  the  man  whether   ye   had  yet   a   brother?      And  thev  said,  The
man  asked  us  straitly  of  our  state,  and  of  our  kindred,  saving,  Is  vour  father  vet  alive?
have  ye  another  brother?  and  we  told  him,  according  to  the  tenor  of  these  words:  could

8  we  certainly  know  that    he  would   say,  Bring   your    brother    down?     And  Judah   said
unto  .Israel  Ins  father,  Send  the  lad  with   me,  and  we  will   arise   and   go;    that  we   may

9  live,  and  not  die.  both  we,  and  thou,  and  also  our  little  ones.      I  will  be  surety  for  him;
of  mv  hand  shall  thou  require  him;   if  I    bring  him   not   unto   thee,  and  set  him  before

10  thee,  then  let  me  bear  the  blame  for  ever;   For  except  we  had  lingered,  surely  now  we

11  had  returned  this  second  time.      And  their  father  Israel   said  unto  them,  If  it  must  le  so
now,  do  this;  take  of  the  best  fruits   in   the   land   in   your  vessels,  and  carry  down  the
man  a  present,  a  little  balm,  and  a  little  honey,  spices,  and   myrrh,  nuts,  and  almonds;

12  And  take  double  money  in  your  hand;   and  the  monev  that  Avas  brought  again  in  the
mouth  of  your  sacks,  carry  it  again  in  your  hand  ;   peradvenlure  it   wns  an  oversight;

13,  11  Take  also  your  brother,  and  arise,  go  again  unto  the  man  ;  .And  God  Almighty  give
yon  mercy  In-fore  the  man,  that  he  may  send  away  your  other  brother,  and  Benjamin.

!,">  If  I  be  bereaved  of  my  chil'lrtn,  I  am  bereaved.  And  the  men  took  that  present,  and
thev  took  double  money  in  their  hand,  and  Benjamin,  and  rose  up,  and  went  down  to

1(5  Egypt,  and  stood  before  Joseph.  And  when  Joseph  saw  Benjamin  with  them,  he  said
to  the  ruler  of  his  house,  Bring  these  men  home,  and  slav,  and  make  readv  ;  for  these

17  men  shall  dine  with  me  at  noon.     And    the   man  did    as   Joseph    bade;    and    the    man

18  brought  the  men  into  Joseph's  house.      And   the    men  were    afraid,  because  they  were
brought  into  Joseph's  house  ;   and   they  said,  Because  of  the   money  that  was  returned
in  our  sacks  at  the  first  time   are  we  brought  in;   that  he   may  seek  occasion  against  us,

19  and  fall  upon  us,  and  take  us  for  bondmen,  and  our  asse.-s.      And  they  came  near  to  the
steward  of  Joseph's   house,  and    they  communed  with  him   at   the  door  of  the  house.

20,  21  And  said,  ()  sir,  we  came  indeed  down  at  the  first  time  to  buy  food  ;  And  it  came
to  pass,  when  we  came  to  the  inn,  that  we  opened  our  sacks,  and,  behold,  every  man's
money  vas  in  the  mouth  of  his  sack,  our  money  in  full  weight;  and  we  have  brought
it  again  in  our  hand.  And  other  money  have  we  brought  down  in  our  hands  to  buv
food;  we  cannot  tell  who  put  our  money  in  our  sacks.  And  he  said,  Peace  le  to  you,
fear  not;  your  God,  and  the  God  of  your  father,  hath  given  yon  treasure  in  your  sacks;

24  1  had  vour  money.  And  he  brought  Simeon  out  unto  them.  And  the  man  brought
the  men  into  Joseph's  house,  and  gave  tin  m  water,  and  ihev  washed  their  feet;  and  he

2.")  gave  their  asses  provender.     And  they  made  readv  the  present  against  Joseph  came  at

20  noon;    for  they  heard   that   they   should   eat   bread    there.      And   when   Joseph    came
home,  they  brought  him  the  present  which  v'<is  m  their  hand  into  the  house,  and  bowed

27  themselves  to  him  to  the  earth.      And  he  asked  them  of  their  welfare,  and  said,  Is  your

28  fa i her  well,  the  old  man  of  whom   ye   spake?      Is  he  yet  alive?     And  they  answered,
Thv  servant  our  father  is  in  good  health,  he  is  yet  alive.     And  they  bowed  down  their

29  heads,  and  made  obeisance.      And  he   lift  up   his  eyes,  and  saw  his  brother  Benjamin,
his  mother's  son,  and  said,  Js  this  your  younger  brother,  of  whom  ye  spake  unto  me?
And   he   said    farther    [without  waiting  for  an  answer]    God   be   gracious   unto   thee,   my   son.

30  And  Joseph  made  haste ;   for  his  bowels   did   yearn   upon  his  brother;   and  he   sought

31  u-lu.re  to  weep ;  and  he  entered  into  his  chamber  and  wept  there.     And  he  washed  his
'.VI  face,  and  went  out. and  refrained  himself,  and  said,  Set  on  bread.     And  they  set  en  for

him  by  himself,  and  for  them  by  themselves,  and  for  the  Egyptians,  which  did  eat  with
him,  by  themselves ;  because  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat  bread  with  the  Hebrews:

33  for  that  is  an  abomination  unto  the  Egyptians.     And  they  sat  before  him,  the  first  born
according  to  his  birthright,  and  the  youngest   according   to   his  youth ;   and  the  men

34  marvelled  one  at  another.     And  he  took  and  sent  messes  unto  them  from  before  him  ;
but  Benjamin's  mess  was  five  times  so  much  as  any  of  their's.     And  they  drank,  and
were  merry  with  him.

Cu.  XL1V.  1.  And  Joseph  commanded  the  steward  of  his  house,  saying,  Fill  the
men's  sacks  with  food,  as  much  as  they  can  carry,  and  put  every  man's  money  in  hia


CHAP.   XLIV.    18— XLV.  28.


•J  sacks  mouth.     And  put  my  cup,  the  silver  cup,  m  the  sack's  mouth  of  the  youngest

3  and  his  corn-money.     And  he  did  according  to  the  word  that  Joseph  had  spoken   °As

4  soon  as  the  morning  was  light,  the  men  were  sent  away,  they  and  their  asses      And
when  they  were  gone  out  of  the  city,  and  not  yet  far  off,  Joseph  said  unto  his  steward
Up,  follow  alter  the  men;  and  when  thou  dost  overtake  them,  say  unto  thorn   Where
fore   have  ye  rewarded  evil  for  good?     Is  not  this  it  in  which  my  lord  drinketh    and

6  whereby  indeed  he  divineth  ?  Ye  have  done  evil  in  so  doing.     And  he  overtook  them

7  and  he  spake  unto  them  these  same  words.     And  they  said  unto  him,  Wherefore  *aith
my  lord  these  words?     God  forbid  that  thy  servants  should  do  according  to  this  thin-

8  Behold    the  money  which  we  found  in  our  sacks'  mouths,  we  brought  again  unto  thee
Ou1t1°0t  tlleT7!.a!ld  of  Canaan  J  how  then  should  we  steal  out  of  thy  lord's  house  silver  or

9  go  d?     With  whomsoever  of  thy  servants  it  be  found,  both  let  him  die,  and  we  also
will  be  my  lord  s  bondmen.     And  he  said,  Now  also  let  it  be  according  unto  your  words  •

11  he  with  whom  it  is  found  shall  be  my  servant;  and  ye  shall  be  blameless.  Then  tliev
dily  took  down  every  man  his  sack  to  the  ground,  and  opened  every  man  his  sack

And  he  searched,  and  began  at  the  eldest,  and  left  at  the  youngest;  and  the  cup  was

13  found  in  Benjamins  sack.     Then  they  rent  their  clothes,  and  laded  every  man  his  as.

4  and  returned  to  the  city.     And  Judah  and  his  brethren  came  to  Joseph's  house  -  for

15  he  wM ryet  there;  and  they  fell  .before  him  on  the  ground.     And   Joseph  said  unto

them.  What  deed  «  this  that  ye  have  done?  Wot  ye  not  that  such  a  man  as  I  can
1G  certainly  divine  ?  And  Judah  said,  What  shall  we  say  unto  my  lord?  what  shall  we

speak?  or  how  shall  we  clear   ourselves?     God  hath  found   out  the  iniquity  of  thy

servants;  behold,  we  are  my  lord's  servants,  both  we,  and  he  also  with  whom  the  cup  is
lv  found  And  he  said  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so  ;  but  the  man  in  whose  hand  the

She?  my  Sei'Vant;  and  as  for  y°u>  Sefc  7°u  UP  in  Peace  unto  your

B.  The  narrative  of  the  reconciliation  and  the  recognition.     Judah  and  Joseph.
CHAP.  XLIV.  18— XLV.  28.

18  Then  Judah  came  near  unto  him,  and  said,  0  my  lord,  let  thy  servant,  I  pray  thee
speak  a  word  m  my  lord's  ears,  and  let  not  thine  anger  burn  against  thy  servant;  for

19  thou  art  even  as  Pharaoh.     My  lord  asked  his  servants,  saying,  Have  ye  a  father/or  a
brother?     And  we  said  unto  my  lord,  We  have  a  father,  an  old  man,  and  a  child  of  his
old  age   a  little  one ;  and  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he  alone  is  left  of  his  mother,  and  his

21  father  loveth  him.     And  thou  saidst  unto  thy  servants,  Bring  him  down  unto  me,  that

22  I  may  set  mine  eyes  upon  him.     And  we  said  unto  my  lord,  The  lad  can  not  leave  his

tort/ he  should  leave  his  father,  his  father  would  die.     And  thou  saidst  unto
ervants  Except  your  youngest  brother  come  down  with  you,  ye  shall  sec  my  face
24  no  more.     And  it  came  to  pass  when  we  came  up  unto  thy  servant  my  father,  we  told
-o  him  the  words  of  my  lord.     And  our  father  said,  Go  again,  and  buy  us  a  little  food

26  And  we  said,  We  can  not  go  down ;  if  our  youngest  brother^  be  with  us,  then  will  we
go  (  own;   for  we  may  not  see  the  man's   face,  except  our  youngest  brother  be  with  us.

27  Anc  thy  servant  my  father  said  unto  us,  Ye  know  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  sons  •
And  the  one  went  out  from  me  [and  did  not  reten],  and  I  said,  Surely  he  is  torn  in  pieces-

29  and  I  saw  him  not  since ;  And  if  ye  take  this  also  from  me,  and  mischief  befall  him   ye

shall  bring  down  my  gray  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave   fsheoil.     Now  therefore

when  1  come  to  thy  servant  my  father,  and  the  lad  be  not  with  us,  seein-  that  his  life

is  bound  up  m  the   lad's  life;   It  shall  come  to  pass,  when  he  seeth  that  the  lad  is  not

i         us  that  he  will  die;  and   thy  servants  shall  bring  down  the  gray  hairs  of  thy

our  lather  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.     For  thy  servant  became  surety  for  the

L  d  unto  my  father,  saying,  If  I  bring  him  not  unto  thee,  then  I  shall  bear  the  blame  to

her  for  ever.     Now,  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  let  thy  servant  abide  instead  of  the

ad,  a  bondman  to  my  lord ;  and  let  the  lad  go  up  with  his  brethren.     For  how  shall  I

go  up  to  my  father  and  the  lad  be  not  with  me?  lest  peradventure  I  see  the  evil  that


618  GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.

Cn.  XL\r.          1   Then  Joseph  could  not  refrain  himself  before  all  them  that  stood  by  him
ami  he  cried,  Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me.     And  there  stood  no  man  with  him,

2  while  Joseph  made  himself  known  unto  his  brethren.     And  he  wept  aloud;   and  the

3  Egyptians  and  the  house  of  Pharaoh  heard.     And  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  I  am
Joseph;  doth  my  father  yet  live?  And  his  brethren  could  not  answer  him  ;    for  they
were  troubled  at  his  presence.      And  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  Come  near  to  me,
]  pray  y<»i.     And  they  came  near.     And  he  said,  I  am  Joseph  your  brother,  whom  ye

'>   sold  into  Egypt.     Now,  therefore,  be  not  grieved,  nor  angry  with  yourselves,  that  ye

G   sold  me  (hither;   for  God  did  send  me  before  you  to  preserve  life.      For  these  two  years

hath  the  famine  Icen  in  the  land;   and   yet  there  are  five  years  in  the  which   there  shah

7  neither  be  earing  nor  harvest.     And  God  sent  me  before  you  to  preserve  you  a  posterity

8  in  the  earth,  and  to  save  your  lives  by  a  great  deliverance.      So  now  it  ivas  not  you
th</l  sen!  me  hither,  but  God;  and  he  hath  made  me  a  father  to  Pharaoh,  and  lord  of

0  all  his  house,  and  a  ruler  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt.     Haste  ye,  and  go  up  to
my  father,  and  say  unto  him,  Thus  saith  thy  son  Joseph,  God  hath  made  me  lord  of  all

10  Egypt  ;    come  down  unto  me,  tarry  not;   And  thou  slialt  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen
[East  district  of  Egypt ;  the  name  is  of  Koptic  origin.    Uncertain :  district  of  Hercules],  and    thou   shalt   be,
near   unto   me,  thou,  and   thy  children,  and  thy  children's   children,  and  thy  flocks,  and

11  thy  herds,  and  all  that  thou  hast;   And  there  will  I  nourish  thee  ;   for  yet  'there  arc  five
years  of  famine;  lesl  thou,  and  thy  household,  and  all  that    thou  hast,  come  to  povcrtv.
And,  behold,  your  eyes  s<  e,  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother  Benjamin,  that  it  is  mv  month

:>   that  speaketli  unto  you.      And  ye  shall  tell  my  father  of  all  my  glory  in  E'jypt,  and  of

1  I    all  thai  ye  have  seen;   and.   ye  shall  haste   ami  bring  down  my  father  hither.     'And  he

fell  upon  his   brother  Benjamin's  neck,  and  wept;   and   Benjamin  wept  upon   his  neck.

J5  Moreover  he  kissed  all   his  brethren,  and  wept  upon  them  ;  and  after  that  his  brethren

4  . .  1 1 .    .  .1     .      *  .  1 .     1    '


('.  The  glad  tidings  to  Jacob,  vcrs.  10-28.

And  the  fame  thereof  was  heard  in  Pharaoh's  house,  saying,  Joseph's  brethren  are

1  7   come;   and  it  pleased  Pharaoh  well,  and  his  servants.      And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,

Say  unto  thy  brethren,  This  do  ye;  lade  your  beasts,  and  go,  get  you  unto  the  land  of

8  Canaan;   And  take  your  father,  and  your  households,  and  come  unto  me;   and  I  will

19  give  you  the  good  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  ye  shall  cat  the  fat  of  the  land.     Now
thou  art  commanded,  this  do  ye;  take  you  wagons  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  for  your

20  little  ones,  and  for  your  wives,  and  bring  your  father,  and  come.     Also  regard  not  your

21  stuff;   for  the  good  of  all  the  land  of  Egypt  is  yours.     And  the  children  of  Israel  did
so;  and  Joseph  gave  them  wagon?,  according  to  the  commandment  of  Pharaoh,  and

2  gave  them  provision  for  the  way.     To  all  of  them  he  gave  each  man  changes  of  rai-

23  ment;   but  to  Benjamin  he  gave   three   hundred  pieces  of  silver,  and   five  changes  of
raiment.     And  to  his  father  he  sent  after  this  manner  ;  ten  asses  laden  Avith  the  good

24  things  of  Egypt,  a*d  ten  she-asses  laden  with  corn,  and  bread,  and  meat  for  his  father
by  the  way.     So  he  sent  his  brethren  away,  and  they  departed;  and  he  said  unto  them,

2.~>   See  that  ye  fall  not  out  by  the  way.     And  they  went  up  out  of  Egypt,  and  came  into
20  the  land  of  Canaan  unto  Jacob  their  father.     And  told  him,  saying,  Joseph  is  yet  alive,

27  and  he  is  governor  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt.     And  Jacob's  heart  fainted,  for  he  be
lieved  them  not.     And  they  told  him  all  the  words  of  Joseph,  which  he  had  said  unto
them  ;  and  when  he  saw  the  wagons  which  Joseph  had  sent  to  carry  him,  the  spirit  of

28  Jacob  their  father  revived.     And  Israel  said,  It  is  enough;   Joseph  my  son  is  yet  alive-
I  will  go  and  see  him  before  I  die.


['  Ch.  xliii.  1  1.—  "P?2'^  ift  5  3^  1CNI3  "'iS  1  .  Rendered  :  "  If  I  am  bereaved  of  my  children,  I  am  bereaved.
Our  translators,  by  putting  in  children,  -would  seem  to  have  regarded  it  as  emphatic,  thus  :  If  I  am  bereaved  of  my  ehil
drcn,  I  am  bereaved  of  all.  It  may  be  taken,  however,  as  a  declaration  of  submission  to  what  appears  inevitable,  as  in
!.sth.  iv.  1(>,  "'Frt^S  "^rn^X  "iCX3  .  Or  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  passionate  exaggeration  in  view  of  Joseph's  sup
posed  death,  Simeon's  confinement,  'and  the  demand  for  Banjamin  :  I  am  bereaved  of  all  my  children,  one  after  the
other.—  T.  L.]


CHAP.    XLIII.   1— XLV.   28.


(51 «


I'  Ver.  18.— rtjl?.-'! .  The  b  here  is  servile.  Compare  Malachi  ii.  13  and  Gen.  xxviii.  C.  In  Gen.  xxx.  15,  we  hav*
both  forms  of  the  infinitive  (Hn^b  and  P.^jT)  in  immediate  connection.  See  it  explained  in  the  Se.pher  Ilarikmo,  o:
Hebrew  Grammar,  of  BEN  GANNACH,  p.  30,  lino  30.  Ho  regards  both  alike  as  infinitives.— T.  I,.]

I3  Ver.  20.— ijnx.  ">3  .  Gescnius  regards  ^3  in  this  and  some  similar  cases  (see  Josh.  vii.  S),  as  a  contraction  for
1T3  ,  from  the  root  n?3  ,  a  very  rare  word  in  Hebrew,  though  very  common  in  the  Chaklaic  and  Syriac.  In  the  sense
of  entreaty,  n»3  occurs  only  Is.  xxi.  12,  and  of  inquiry,  Obad.  6.  Abbreviations  are  made  only  of  words  that  aro
much  used,  and  we  cannot,  therefore,  regard  it  as  a  forma  precalionis  C*53  ,  my  prayer),  having  such  nn  origin.  The
Targum  of  Onkelos  interprets  it  in  this  way,  but  this  is  owing  to  its  being  written  in  the  Chaklaic  language.  "  A  much
bettor  view  is  that  of  Aben  Ezra,  who  regards  it  as  the  preposition  and  pronoun,  with  an  ellipsis  of  the  word  'pS  ,  as  in
Sam.  xxv.  24,  ipX  ^3  '|l>ri,  on  me  my  Lord  be  the  guilt.  Or  it  may  be  a  sort  of  ejaculatory  phrase,  with  an
ellipsis  of  the  precatory  verb,— as  would  seem  to  be  confirmed  by  Judges  vi.  13,  S|:j2?  m'ni  C"11!  I'TX  13  .  cmne  tell
me,  my  lord,  if  Jehovah  is  with  us,  why,  etc.  See  BEX  GANNACII,  ficpher  IIarikma*&,  31.  the"view  of  Gesenius  was
suggested,  probably,  by  the  Syriac  rendering  of  this  passage,  Judg.  vi.  13,  v^j.io  v^l^a  jj]  \2*~ .  In  Josh.  vii.  S
where  the  same  phrase  occurs,  the  Syriac  has  left  it  out  entirely.— T.  L.]


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

Contents:  a.  The  trial  of  tho  brethren.  Their
repentance  and  Joseph's  forgiveness.  Joseph  anc
Benjamin.  Ch.  xliii.  1-xliv.  17 :  1.  Judah  as  surety
for  Benjamin  unto  his  father,  vers.  1-14  ;  2.  Joseph
and  Benjamin,  vers.  15-30  ;  3.  the  feast  in  honor  oi
Benjamin,  vers.  31-34  ;  4.  the  proving  of  the  breth
ren  in  respect  to  their  disposition  towards  Benjamin,
especially  after  the  great  distinction  shown  to  him,
ch.  xliv.  1-17.  b.  The  story  of  the  reconciliation,
and  of  the  recognition,  as  presented  under  the  an
tithesis  of  Judah  and  Joseph,  ch.  xliv.  18,  xlv.  13.
1.  Judah  as  surety  and  substitute  fur  Benjamin,  ch.
xliv.  18-34;  2.  Joseph's  reconciliation  and  making
himself  known  to  them,  ch.  xlv.  1-5  ;  3.  Joseph's
divine  peace  and  divine  mission,  vers.  5-13;  4.  the
solemnity  of  the  salutation,  vers.  14,  15.  c.  The
glad  tidings  to  Jacob,  vers.  16-28.  1.  Pharaoh's
message  to  Jacob,  vers.  10-20;  2.  Joseph's  presents
to  Jacob,  vers.  21-24;  3.  the  return  of  Joseph's
brethren  ;  Pharaoh's  wagons  and  Jacob's  revivifica
tion,  vers.  25-23.


EXEGETICAL  AND   CRITICAL.

a.  77ie proving  of  the  brothers.  Their  repentance
and  Jowp/Ss  forgiveness.  Joseph  and  Benjamin,
ch.  xliii.  1 ;  xliv.  17.  1.  vers.  1-14 ;  Judah  as  sure
ty  for  Benjamin  unto  the  father. — Buy  us  a  little
bread. — In  death  and  famine  a  rich  supply  is  but
little ;  .so  it  was  especially  in  Jacob's  numerous  fam
ily,  in  regard  to  what  they  had  brought  the  first  time.
— And  Judah  spake. — Judah  now  stands  forth  as
a  principal  personage,  appearing  more  and  more
glorious  in  his  dignity,  his  firmness,  his  noble  dispo
sition,  mid  his  unselfish  heroism.  He,  like  Reuben,
could  speak  to  his  lather,  and  with  even  more  free
dom,  because  he  had  a  freer  conscience  than  the
rest,  and  regarded  the  danger,  therefore,  in  a  milder
light.  Judah  does  not  act  rashly,  but  as  one  who
has  a  grand  and  significant  purpose.  His  explana
tion  to  the  wounded  father  is  as  forbearing  as  it  is
firm.  If  they  did  not  bring  Benjamin,  Simeon  was
lost,  and  they  themselves,  according  to  Joseph's
threatening,  would  have  no  admittance  to  him— yea,
they  might  even  incur  death,  because  they  had  not
removed  from  themselves  the  suspicion  of  their  being
spies.— Wherefore  dealt  ye  so  ill  with  me  ?—
KNOBEL:  "His  grief  and  affliction  urge  him  on  to
reproacli  them  without  reason."  Unreasonable,
however,  as  it  appears,  it  becomes  significant  on  the
supposition  that  he  begins  to  read  their  guilty  con


sciences,   and,  especially,  when,  with   the  one   pre
ceding,  we  connect  the  expression  that  follows :  Me
have  ye  bereaved  of  my  children.— The  mac
asked  us  straitly.— [Lange  translates  the  Hebrew
H'"lNrt  i>Xttj  bixta  literally,  or  nearly  so:  cr  fragte
und  fragte  mis  ans ;  or,  as  it  might  be  rendered
still  closer  to  the  letter,  he  asked  to  ask  ;  or,  if  wo
take  the  infinitive  in  such  cases  as  an  adverb,  he  asked
inquisitively,  and  then  proceeds  to  remark]  :    This
expressive  connection  of  the  infinitive  with  the  in
dicative  in  Hebrew  must  not  be  effaced  by  grammat
ical  rules;  we  hold  fast  to  its  literalness  here.     They
did  not  speak  forwardly  of  their  family  relations,
but  only  after  the  closest  questioning.     By  this   pas
sage  and  Judah's  speech  (ch.  xliv.),  the  account  in  the
preceding  chapter  (ver.  32)  is  to  be   supplemented.
They  owed  him  an  answer,  since  the  question  was  to
remove  his  suspicion ;  and,  moreover,  they  had  no
presentiment  of  what  he  wanted. — Send  'the  lad
with  me.— ins  (with  me}  says  the  brave  Judah.
lie  presents  himself  as  surety  ;  he  will  take  the  guilt
and  bear  the  blame  forever.     The  strong  man  prom
ises  all  he  can.     To  offer  to  the  grandfather  his  own
grandchildren,  as  Reuben  offered  his  sons,  that  he
might  put  them  to  death,  was  too  unreal  and  hyper
bolical  to   occur  to   him.     We  become  acquainted
with  him  here  as  a  man  full  of  feeling,  and  of  most
energetic  speech,  as  ver.  3,  and  ch.  xxxiii.  had  be
fore  exemplified.     He  eloquently   shows   how   they
are  all  threatened  with  starvation.     The  expression,
too  :  Surely  now  we  had  returned  the  second
time,  promises  a  happy  issue.— If  it  must  be  so
now. — Jacob  had  once  experienced,  in  the  case  of
Esau,  that  presents  had  an  appeasing  effect  on  hos
tile  dispositions.     From  this  universal  human  expe
rience  there   is    explained   the  ancient  custom,  es
pecially  in  the  East,  of  rendering  rulers  favorably
disposed   by  gifts  (see  1  Kings  x.  25;  Matt.  ii.  11 ;
Prov.  xviii.  16  ;  xix.  6).— Of  the  first  fruits  of  the
land. — (Lange   translates:    Of  that  which  is  most
praiseworthy.)     Literally,  of   the  song;    i.  e.,  that
which  was  celebrated  in  song.     The  noblest  products
of  nature  are,  for  the  most  part,  celebrated  and  sym
bolized  in  poetry.     In  presents  to  distinguished  per
sons,  however,  the  simple  money-value  of  the  things
avails  but  little;  it  is  the  peculiar  quality,  or  some
poetic  fragrance  attached  to  them,  that  makes  them
effective.     Delitzsch    doubts    this    explanation,  but
without  sufficient    reason.     They   are  especially  tc
:ake  balm,  the  pride  of  Canaan,  but  in  particular  of
Gilead.     Then  honey.     Knobel  and   Delitzsch  sup-
Jose   it  to  be  the   honey  of    grapes,    Arab.,    dibs.
'  Grape  syrup  ;  i.  c.,  must  boilod  down  to  one  third,


620


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


an  article,  of  which,  even  at  the  present  day,  there
are  sent  yearly  three  hundred  camel-loads  from  He
bron's  vicinity  to  Egypt."  Delitzseh.  But  this  very
abundance  of  the  syrup  of  grapes  would  lead  us  to
decide  rather  for  the  honey  of  bees,  were  it  not  for
the  consideration,  that  in  the  Egypt  of  to-day  great
attention  is  given  to  the  raising  of  bees,  and  that  it
is  no  wine  country,  although  not  wholly  without  the
culture  of  the  vine  (ch.  xl.  10). — Spices. — (Langc,
trar/acaiil/i.-ffitm.)  A  kind  of  white  resinous  medica
ment  (see  AViner,  7V<';;<«'"><//0- — Myrrh. — Frank
incense,  salve  medicament  (see  Winer,  Ladanum),
— Nuts. — The  Hebrew  word  ~"^2  occurs  here
only,  but  by  the  Samaritan  translation  it  is  interpret
ed  of  the  fruit  of  the  J'ixtnrin  /rr<i,  "a  tree  similar
to  the  terebinth — oblong  and  angular  nuts  of  the
size  of  a  hazel-nut,  containing  an  oily  but  very  pal
atable  kernel,  which  do  not,  however,  grow  anymore
in  Palestine  (as  is  stated  in  SnirnKiir's  '  Travels  in
the  East,'  ii.  p.  478;  iii.  Ill),  but  arc  obtained  from
Aleppo  (romp.  ROSKN.,  iii  the  '  (ierman  Orient.  Mag
azine,'  xii.  ]).  5<>2)."  Keil. — Almonds. — (See  Winer,
Ahutnid-ti-cf.)  On  the  productions  of  Palestine  in
general,  see  CALWKU  Bill.  "  Natural  History,"  etc. —
And  take  double  money. — ( Lit.  second  money.
They  are  not  to  take  advantage  of  the  mistake,  even
though  no  unfavorable  construction  should  be  put
upon  it,  or  it  should  occasion  them  no  harm. — And
God  Almighty. —  Here,  when  some  strong  miracu
lous  help  is  needed,  he  is  again  most  properly  desig
nated  by  the  name  El  8h«dai. — If  I  be  bereaved
of  my  children. — Be  it  so.  An  expression  of
resignation  (Ksth.  iv.  10).  As  his  blessing  here  is
not  a  prayer  full  of  confidence,  so  the  resignation
lias  no!,  the  full  expression  of  sacrifice  ;  lor  .Jacob's
soul  is  unconsciously  restrained  by  a  sense  of  the
ban  resting  upon  his  sons.  He  is  bowed  down  by
(lie  spiritual  burden  of  his  house.

2.  Vers.  15-30.  Joxrpli  and  J>f»j<i>irin. — And
stood  before  Joseph. — Knobel  justly  states  that
the  audience  they  had  with  Joseph  did  not  take
place  until  afterwards.  The  meaning  here  is  that
they  took  their  place  in  front  of  Joseph's  house,  to
gether  with  Benjamin  and  the  presents,  and  so  an
nounced  to  him  their  arrival. — Bring  these  men
home. — With  joy  had  Joseph  observed  Benjamin
with  them,  and  concludes  from  thence  that  they  had
practised  no  treachery  upon  him,  through  hatred  to
the  children  of  Rachel,  the  darlings  of  their  father.
r.enjamin's  appearance  sheds  a  reconciling  light  upon
the  whole  group.  He  intends,  therefore,  to  re
ceive  them  in  a  friendly  and  hospitable  manner.
His  staying  away,  however,  until  noon,  characterizes
not  only  the  great  and  industrious  statesman,  hut
also  the  man  of  sage  discretion,  who  takes  time  to
consult  with  himself  about  his  future  proceeding. —
And  stay. — Bohlen's  assertion  that  the  higher
castes  in  Egypt  ate  no  meat  at  all,  is  refuted  by  Kxo-
BEL,  p.  '.',-i(\. — At  noon. — The  time  when  they  par
took  of  their  principal  meal  (ch.  xviii.  1). — And
the  men  were  afraid. — Judging  from  their  for
mer  treatment  they  know  not  what  to  make  of  their
being  thus  led  into  his  house.  If  a  distinction,  it  is
an  incomprehensibly  great  one  ;  they,  therefore,  ap
prehended  a  plan  for  their  destruction.  Some  mon
strous  intrigue  they,  perhaps,  anticipate,  having  its
introduction  in  the  reappearance  of  the  money  in
their  sacks,  whilst  the  fearful  imagination  of  an  evil
conscience  begins  to  paint  the  consequences  (secver.
18).  "A  thief,  if  unable  to  make  restitution,  was


sold  as  a  slave  (Exod.  xxii,  3)."  Therefore  they  are
not  willing  to  enter  until  they  have  justified  them
selves  about  the  money  returned  in  their  sacks.
They  address  themselves,  on  this  account,  to  Joseph's
steward,  with  an  explanatory  vindication. — When
we  came  to  the  inn. — In  a  summary  wav  they
here  state  both  facts  (ch.  xlii.  27;  and  xlii.  :;r>)  to
gether.  For  afterwards  they  might  have  concluded
that  the  money  found  in  the  sack  of  one  of  them
was  a  sign  that  that  money  had  been  returned  in  all
the  sacks. — In  full  weight. — There  was,  as  yet,  no
coined  money,  only  rings  or  pkccs  of  metal,"  which
were  reckoned  by  weight. — Peace  be  to  you. — It
can  hardly  be  supposed  that  the  steward  was  let  into
Joseph's  plan.  He  knew,  however,  that  Joseph  him
self  had  ordered  the  return  of  the  money,  and  might
have  supposed  that  Joseph's  course  toward  them,  as
h;s  countrymen,  had  in  view  a  happy  issue.  In  this
sense  it  is  that  he  encourages  them. — Your  God
and  the  God  of  your  father. — The  shrewd  stew
ard  is  acquainted  \\ith  Joseph's  religiousness,  and,
perhaps,  has  adopted  it  himself,  lie  undoubtedly
regards  them  as  confessors  of  the  same  faith  with
Joseph.  KNOBEL:  '•  His  own  good  fortune  each  man
deduces  from  the  Cod  he  worships  (Hos.  ii.  7)." —
Has  given  you  treasure. — Tims  intimating  some
secret  means  by  which  (Hod  had  given  it  to  them ;
but  for  all  this  they  >till  remain  uneasy,  though  suf
ficiently  calmed  by  his  verbal  acknowledgment  of
receipt:  I  had  your  money,  but  more  so  by  the
releasing  of  Simeon.  It  is  not  until  now  that  they
enter  the  house  which  they  had  before  regarded  as  a
snare.  Now  follow  the  hospitable  reception,  the
disposition  of  the  presents,  Joseph's  greeting,  and
their  obeisance. — And  he  asked  them  of  their
welfare. — This  was  his  greeting.  See  the  contrast,
ch.  xxxvii.  4.  For  the  inquiry  after  their  lather's
welfare  they  thank  him  by  the  most  respectful  obei
sance,  an  expression  of  their  courtesy  ami  of  their
filial  piety.  They  represent  their  father,  just  as  Ben
jamin  represents  the  mother,  and  so  it  is  ;hat  his
dream  of  the  sun  and  moon  fulfils  itself  (ch.  xxxvii.
U).  If  we  suppose  Benjamin  born  about  a  year  be
fore  Joseph's  sale,  he  would  be  now  twenty-three
years  of  age.  Knobel  does  not  know  how  to  under
stand  the  repeated  expressions  of  his  youth  ("55,
etc.).  But  they  are  explained  from  the  tender  care
exercised  towards  him,  and  from  the  great  difference
between  his  age  and  that  of  his  brothers. — And  he
said. — It  is  very  significant  that  Joseph  does  not
wait  for  an  answer.  He  recognizes  him  immediately,
and  his  heart  yearns. — My  son. — An  expression  of
inner  tenderness,  and  an  indication,  at  the  same  time,
of  near  relationship. — And  Joseph  made  haste. —
His  overwhelming  emotion,  the  moment  he  saw  his
brethren,  like  Jacob's  love  of  Rachel,  has  a  gleam
of  the  New-Testament  life.*  It  is  not,  however,  to

*  [A  glimpse  of  the  New- Testament  life.  It  is  very  com
mon  to  represent  the  Old  Testament  as  containing  the
harsher  dispensation,  and  as  presenting  the  sterner  attri
butes  both  of  God  and  man.  This  is  often  done  without
much  thought,  or  discrimination  of  the  respects  in  winch  it
may  be  false  or  true.  The  Old  Testament  is,  indeed,  a  less
full  revelation  of  mercy  as  a  doctrine,  or  a  scheme  of  salva
tion,  but  the  mercy  itself  is  there  in  overflowing  measure,
and  expressed  in  the  most  pathetic  language.  It  is  peculiar
ly  the  emotional  part  of  Holy  Scripture,  presenting  every
thing  in  the  strongest  manner,  and  in  strongest  contrast,
•whether  it  be  wrath  or  tenderness,  indignation  against
apostasy  or  love  for  the  oft-times  apostate  and  rebellious
people.  It  may  even  be  maintained  that  the  New  Testa
ment,  though  more  didactic,  is  less  tender  in  its  language,
less  abounding  in  pictures  of  melting  compassion  an  the


CHAP.   XLI1I.    1— XLV.    28.


621


be  regarded  as  a  simple  feeling ;  it  is  also  an  emotion
of  joy  at  the  prospect  of  that  reconciliation  which
he  had,  for  some  time,  feared  their  hatred  towards
Rachel's  children  might  prevent,  and  so  bring  ruin
upon  Benjamin,  upon  Jacob's  house,  and  upon  them
selves.  No  emotions  are  stronger  than  those  arising
from  the  dissolution  of  a  ban,  with  which  there  is,
at  Ihe  same  time,  taken  away  the  danger  of  a  dark
impending  doom,  and  the  old  hardening  of  impaired
affection.


part  of  God,  and  of  devoted  affection  of  one  human  heart
to  another.  What  moro  moving,  in  this  respect,  than  the
language  of  the  prophets  (compare  Isaiah  xlix.  15  ;  liv.
8-10;  Mi.  15,  10;  Ps.  ciii.  13-15;  Gen.  viii.  21;  Dent,  x.
12;  x.  19;  xxiv.  14-22;  Ezck.  xvi.  GU-G3  ;  IIos.  xi.  8,9;
Mic.  vi.  8  ;  vii.  18,  19),  so  full  of  God's  pathetic  yearning,
we  might  style  it,  towards  humanity  !  On  the  other  hand,
what  more  exquisite  pictures  can  there  be  found  of  human
tenderness,  than  those  of  David  and  Jonathan,  Kuth  and
Naomi,  the  pathetic  meeting  of  Joseph  and  his  brethren  as
here  described,  David's  forgiving  tenderness  towards  Saul,
and  even  Esau's  reception  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxiii.  4-15)  after
all  the  wrong  he  had  apparently,  or  in  reality,  received  from
him.  In  this  latter  case,  we  may  regard  Esau  as  one  who
had  but  little  if  any  grace,  and  yet  the  feeling  here,  viewed
as  growing  out  of  the  patriarchal  life  and  religious  ideas,  may
well  be  compared  with  any  general  influence  of  our  nom
inal  Christianity  in  arousing  men  to  deeds  of  tenderness  and
heroism.  Tins  false  view  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  ig
norance  of  the  Bible  is  causing  more  and  more  to  prevail,  is
a  great  wrong  to  the  whole  cause  and  doctrine  of  revelation.
Even  the  most  tender  dialect  of  the  Xew  Testament,  is
drawn  from  the  Old.  Its  Hebraisms  are  its  most  pathetic
parts.  Of  this  there  is  a  good  example  in  the  very  style  of
language  here  employed.  The  expression  TEni  ^115323,
rendered,  his  bowels  did  yearn  (rather,  warmed),  has  been
naturalized  in  the  Xew-Testameut  Greek,  where  air\dyx.va.
is  used  for  C"1  32  fin.  It  may  be  said,  however,  that  both
the  Hebrew  and  the  Greek  are  marred  for  the  English  read
er  by  the  rendering  'bowels,  especially  if  taken  in  the  sense
of  intestina,  instead  of  the  larger  meaning  that  belongs  to
the  Latin  viscera.  It  may  be  doubted  whether


does  ever,  of  itself,  denote  any  part  of  the  body,  either
more  or  less  interior.  When  the  singular  is  used  for  the
womb,  it  is  rather  to  bo  regarded  as  a  metaphorical  use  of
its  primary  sense  of  cherishing,  or  as  that  which  loves  and
cherishes.  The  Greek  counterpart,  a-n\dyx''a.,  denotes  the
most  vital  parts,  such  as  the  heart,  the  lungs,  and  the  liver,
the  parts  which,  in  the  case  of  animals  slain,  were  regarded
as  the  choicest  eating,  and  were  given  as  an  honorary  por
tion  to  the  guest.  See  Homer  everywhere.  They  included
the  KapSia,  with  the  4>peve<;,  or  prxcordia,  and  the  ^nap,  or
liver.  Another  word  was  ^rop,  which  was  used  exactly  as
C^JCn"}  is  used  here,  and  with  a  similar  verb  signifying  to
bo  wariii,  or  burn  ;  as  Odyss.  i.  48  :

dAAd  fj-oi  <x/i<£  ,  'O&vcr^'i  Satypovt.  AAI'ETAI  rjrop.


wX    T"~P,  the  fire  is  burning;  also  Luke  xxiv.  32,  ov^l  rj

KapSia  rj/iwj'  Kaio/xtVr)  'iv  iv  yii.lv,  "  was  not  our  heart  burn
ing  within  us  ?  ''  Instead  of  bowels,  it  would  be  more  in  ac
cordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  Hebrew  word  to  render  it
here,  his  heart  yearned,  or  warmed.  Kosenmii'ler,  on  this
passage,  makes  one  of  his  wise  remarks  about  "  the  ancient
men"  (prisci  hominen),  and  their  great  simplicity  in  regard
ing  these  parts  of  the  body  as  the  scat  of  the  affections".  It
has,  however,  always  been  so,  more  or  less,  in  all  languages.
In  the  ancient  tongues  even  intellect  is  generally  assigned
to  these  middle  regions,  and  but  rarely,  or  comparatively  so,
to  the  head.  With  us  it  seems  almost  a  matter  of  conscious
ness  that  wo  think  with  our  heads,  but  this  is  an  effect  rath
er  than  a  cause  of  the  change  of  language.  In  the  Latin,
coc^is  used  for  ivisdom,  prudence,  and  cordatus  is  equivalent
to  e/j.<t>pu>v,  a  wise  and  prudent  man.  The  Greek  popular
language  placed  thought  in  the  <£peVe9,  not  in  the  e-y/ce'^oAo;,
or  brain,  although  the  latter  is  sometimes  referred  to  in  this
light,  especially  by  Aristotle.  Demosthenes  once  makes  a
popular  allusion  to  some  such  notion  in  the  oration  Do  Ila-
loneso  ;  bat  the  poetical  language,  the  best  representative
of  the  popular  feeling,  is  all  the  other  way.  So  in  the  He-


3.  Vers.  31-34.  The  banquet  in  honor  of  Benja
min. — And  he  washed  his  face. — A  proof  of  the
depth  of  his  emotion.  It  was  still  hard  for  him  to
maintain  a  calm  and  composed  countenance. — And
they  set  on  for  him  by  himself. — Three  tables,
from  two  different  causes.  Joseph's  caste  as  priest,
and  in  which  he  stood  next  to  the  king,  did  not  allow
him  to  eat  with  laymen.  And,  moreover,  neither
Joseph's  domestics,  nor  his  guests,  could,  as  Egyp
tians,  eat  with  Hebrews.  Concerning  the  rigidness
of  the  Egyptian  seclusion,  see  KNOBEL,  p.  328.  .Be
sides,  the  Hebrews  were  nomads  (ch.  xlvi.  84).  On
the  Egyptian  castes,  see  VON  RAUMER,  Vorlcsungeri
uber  die  altc  Gcsch,  i.  p.  133. — And  they  set. —
They  were  surprised  to  see  themselves  arranged  ac
cording  to  their  age.  But  the  enigma  becomes  more
and  more  transparent ;  whilst  strange  presentiments
are  more  and  more  excited.  The  transaction  betrays
the  fact  that  they  are  known  to  the  spirit  of  the
house,  and  that  it  can  distinguish  between  their
ages.  The  Egyptians  sat  at  table,  instead  of  reclin
ing;  as  appears  from  their  pictures. — And  he  took
and  sent  messes. — They  were  thus  distinguished
by  having  portions  sent  to  them ;  whilst,  as  yet,  they
were  hindered  by  no  laws  from  eating  of  Joseph's
meat. — But  Benjamin's  mess. — This  is  a  point
not  to  be  overlooked  in  the  proving  of  the  brethren  ;
it  is  an  imitation,  so  to  say,  of  the  coat  of  many
colors.  It  would  determine  whether  Benjamin  was
to  become  an  object  of  their  jealousy,  just  as  his
father's  present  had  before  been  to  him  the  cause  of
their  hatred  (so  also  KEIL,  p.  264).  His  mess  is
five  times  larger  than  the  rest.  "  Such  abundance
was  an  especial  proof  of  respect.  To  the  guest  who
was  to  be  distinguished  there  were  given,  at  a  meal,
the  largest  and  best  pieces  (1  Sam.  ix.  23  ;  HOM.  11.
vii.  321,  etc.).  Among  the  Spartans  the  king  re
ceived  a  double  portion  (HEROD,  vi.  57,  etc.) ;  among
the  Cretans  the  Archon  received  four  times  as  much
(fferaelid.  Polit.  S).  Five  was  a  favorite  number
among  the  Egyptians  (ch.  xli.  34 ;  xlv.  22 ;  xlvii.  2,
24  ;  Is.  xix.  18).  It  may  be  explained,  perhaps,
from  the  supposed  five  planets. — And  they  drank
and  were  merry  with  him. — Intoxication  is  not
meant  here  (see  Hagg.  i.  6),  but  a  state  of  exhilara
tion,  in  which  they  first  lose  their  fear  of  the  Egyp
tian  ruler.  Benjamin  was  sitting  as  a  guardian
angel  between  them,  and  it  was  already  a  favorable
sign,  that  the  distinction  showed  to  him  did  not  em
bitter  their  joy.  Nevertheless,  whether  Joseph  had
reached  the  zenith  of  an  inexpressible  rapture,  as
Delitzsch  says,  may  be  questioned.  In  all  this  happy
anticipation,  we  may  suppose  him  still  a  careful  ob
server  of  his  brethren,  according  to  the  proverb
in  vino  verita*:  At  all  events,  the  effect  of  the  pres
ent  to  Benjamin  was  to  be  tested,  and  their  disposi
tion  towards  him  was  to  undergo  a  severe  probing.

brew,  the  scat  of  thought,  is  in  the  reins,  n'pbs,  Latin
renes,  Greek  (with  digamma)  $peVe<s :  "  try  the  hearts  and
the  reins,"  Ps.  vii.  10;  "ire  the  night  season  my  reins  in
struct  me,"  Ps.  xvi.  7.  Only  once  in  the  Bible  is  the  head  so
referred  to  ;  and  that  is  in  the  Chaldaic  of  Daniel,  iv.  7,
where  Nebuchadnezzar  says  :  "  the  visions  of  my  head  upon
my  bed,"  ''CX'l  "•ITH.  Everywhere  else  it  is  the  heart,
3^,  or  the  reins  ITPSS,  or  the  inward  part  "JT,  or  some
times  expressions  denoting  something  still  more  interior,  aa

mniO  and  crO.  rendered  the  hidden  part,  Ps.  li.  8  :  li Ir,

\  's  T

the  hidden  part  make  me  to  know  wisdom."    The  practice  of

divination,  by  the  inspection  of  these  parts  in  sacrifice
shows  the  same  mode  of  thinking,  and  a  similar  verbal  eon<
sciousncss.— T.  L.J


022


GEXESIS,  OR    THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOfeES.


•1.  Ch.  xliv.  1-17.  TJie  trial  of  the  brothers'  dis
position  towards  Benjamin,  especial/ '//  after  his  great
distinction. — And  he  commanded  the  steward

of  his  house. — The  return  of  money  does  not  be
long  to  this  trial,  but  only  the  cup  in  Benjamin's
sack.  Knobel  is  incorrect  in  calling  this  also  a  chas
tisement.  So  also  is  Delitzsch,  in  holding  that  a
surrender  of  Benjamin  by  his  brethren  loses  all  au
thentic  support,  in  the  fact  that  in  all  the  sacks
something  was  found  that  did  not  belong  to  tin  in.
Rather  is  Benjamin  the  only  one  who  must  appear  as
guilty,  and  as  having  incurred  the  doom  of  slavery
(ver.  17). — Up.  follow  after  the  men. — The  haste
i-s  in  order  that  they  may  not  anticipate  him  in  the
discovery,  and  so  defeat  die  accusation  by  their  vol
untary  return.  Tin;  steward  is  to  inquire  only  for
the  silver  r;i|>. — And  whereby  indeed  he  divin-
eth.— "In  Egypt,  the  country  of  oracles  (I>.  xix.  8),
hydromancy  also  was  practised,  i.  e.,  to  predict
events  from  appearances  presented  by  the  liquid
content-  of  a  cup,  either  as  standing  or  as  thrown.
/fhis  mode  (if  divination  is  still  practised.*  It  was
called  w'n: ,  lit.,  whispering  (in  magic  formulas  or
oracles  |,  divinarc."  Delitxsch.  Compare  also  Kxo-
EKL,  p.  -VJ'.'.  The  indicating  sign<  were  cither  the
refraction  of  the  rays  of  light,  or  the  formation  of
circles  on  the  water,  or  of  ligun  s,  <-r  of  small  bub
bles,  whenever  something  was  thrown  in.  Aecord-
-  Himseii,  however,  the  aim  was,  by  fixing  the
. •;.< •-  of  the  diviner  upon  a  particular  point  in  the
cup,  to  put  him  into  a  dream-like  or  clairvoyant
state.  Concerning  this  kulikomancy,  or  cup-divina
tion,  see  Schroder.  The  cup  is,  therefore,  marked,
not  <>n'\  as  a  festive,  but  also  as  a  most  sacred,  uten-
.-!!  <>f  .lo--eph  :  and,  on  this  account,  to  take  it  away
was  considered  as  a  heinous  crime.  Knobel,  in  his
peculiar  way,  lure  tries  to  start  a  contradiction.
"  According  to  the  Elchist  (he  «ays),  Joseph  gets  his
knowledge  of  the  future  from  God  (ch.  xl.  8)  ;  whilst
here  he  derives  it  from  hydronvi;:cy,  as  practised  by
one  received  into  the  caste  of  the  priests."  So,  too",
did  he  -wear,  in  all  earnestness,  by  the  life  of  Pha
raoh  ;  and  the  older  exegctes  would  relieve  us  from
the  apprehension  that  in  so  doing  he  might  have
taken  a  false  oath  !  In  a  vigorous  denial,  and  with
eloquent  speech,  do  the  accused  repel  the  charges  of
the  steward  and  give  strong  expression  to  the  con
sciousness  of  their  innocence. — With  whomso
ever  it  be  found,  let  him  die. — Whilst  consent
ing  to  their  proposal,  the  steward  moderates  it  in  ac
cordance  with  the  aim  of  the  prosecution.  The  pos-
sessor  of  the  cup  alone  is  demanded,  and  he,  not  to
die,  but  to  become  Joseph's  slave.  He  presents  this
forthwith,  so  that  the  discovery  again  of  the  money
may  not  be  taken  into  consideration,  and  that  tem"-
porary  fear  of  death  may  not  harm  Benjamin.  Ben
jamin  only  is  to  appear  as  the  culprit,  and  this  is  in
order  to  find  out  whether  or  not  his  brethren  would
abandon  him.  For  these  reasons  the  money  found
in  the  sacks  is  not  noticed  at  all. — And  began  at
the  eldest. — This  was  in  order  to  mask  the  decep
tion. — They  rent  their  clothes. — This  was  al
ready  a  favorable  sign  ;  another,  that  they  would  not
let  Benjamin  go  alone,  but  returned  with  him  to  the

*  [See  in  the  t«xt  notes,  p.  323  (5,  Ocn.  is.  6),  another
interpretation  of  this  by  that  acute  Jewish  grammarian,
Ben  Gannach.  The  2  iu  T1""""  he  renders  concerning
if,  instead  of  by  if,— that  i<,  :is  a  means  of  divination.
;'  Could  not  such  a  man  find  out  by  divination  who  had  his
rap  7  "-X.  L.]


city  ;  third,  that  they  put  themselves  under  the  direc
tion  of  Judah,  who  had  become  surety  for  Benja
min  ;  and  fourth,  that  they,  together  with  Benjamin,
prostrated  themselves  as  penitents  before  Joseph.—
Wot  ye  not  ? — Joseph's  reproach  was  not  so  much
for  the  vilencss,  as  for  the  imprudence,  of  the  act ;
since  he  intends  to  conduct  the  severe  trial  as  spar
ingly  as  possible.  The  Hebrew  irn: ,  etc.,  denotes
here  a  divinely-derived  or  supernatural  knowledge,
to  which  Joseph  lays  claim,  not  only  as  a  member
of  the  caste  of  pric.-t-,  but  as  the  well-known  inter
preter  of  the  dreams,  owing  his  reception  into  this
caste  to  his  remarkable  clear-sightedness. — That
such  a  man  as  I. — He  puts  on  the  appearance  of
boasting,  not  to  represent  them  as  mean  persons,  but
only  as  inferior  to  himself  in  a  contest  of  craftiness.
Thus  he  meets  the  supposed  improbability  that  he
could  still  divine  although  the  cup  was  taken  from
him. — And  Judah  said,  What  shall  we  say? —
Judah  considers  Benjamin  as  lo.-t,  and  without  in
quiring  how  the  cup  came  into  his  sack,  he  recog
nizes  in  this  dark  transaction  the  judgment  of  God
upon  their  former  guilt.  This  appears  from  his
declaration:  We  are  my  lord's  servants. — Ben
jamin,  it  is  true,  had  no  part  in  that  old  guilt ;  nei
ther  had  Reuben  and  Judah  directly,  but  concerning
this  no  explanation  could  be  given  in  the  court  of
the  Egyptian  ruler.  In  a  masterly  manner,  there
fore,  he  so  shapes  his  speech  ambiguously  that  the
brethren  are  reminded  of  their  old  guilr,  and  ad
monished  to  resign  themselves  to  the  divine  judg
ment,  whilst  Joseph  can  understand  it  only  that  they
are  all  interested  in  the  taking  of  the  cup,  and  he
especially,  as  the  one  confessing  for  them.  I,  above
all,  am  guilt}",  says  the  innocent  one,  in  order  that
he  might  share  the  doom  of  slavery  with  the  appar
ent  criminal.  In  this  disguised  speech  the  rcxcr ratio
inctditUs  appears  in  its  most  favorable  aspect.  Foi
his  brethren  he  utters  a  truth:  Jacob's  sons  have
incurred  the  divine  judgment.  For  Joseph  his
words  are  a  seeming  subterfuge,  and  yet  a  most
magnanimous  one.  Thus  the  two  noble  sons  of  Ja
cob  wrestle  with  each  other  in  the  emulation  of
generosity,  one  in  the  false  appearance  of  a  despot
and  boaster,  the  other  forced  to  a  falsity  of  self-accu
sation  that  seems  bordering  on  despair. — And  he
said,  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so. — Here  is
the  culmination  of  the  trial.  Benjamin  is  to  be  a
slave;  the  others  may  return  home  without  him.
ill  they  not  be  really  glad  to  have  got  rid  of  the
preferred  and  favorite  child  of  Rachel,  in  such  an
easy  way  ?  But  now  is  the  time  when  it  comes  true :
"  Judah,  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise  "
'see  xlix.  8).

b.  History  of  tJtc  reconciliation,  of  the  recogni
tion,  and  of  their  meeting  each  other  again  under  the
antithesis  of  Judah  and  Joseph,  ch.  xliv.  18-xlv.
15. — 1.  Vera.  18-34.  Judak  as  surety  and  substitute
fur  Benjamin  before  Joseph.  Judah's  speech  is  not
only  one  of  the  grandest  and  fairest  to  be  found  in
the  Old  Testament  (connecting  itself,  as  it  does,  with
an  increased  significance,  to  those  of  Eliezer  and
Jacob),  but,  at  the  same  time,  one  of  the  most  lofty
examples  of  self-sacrifice  contained  therein. — Then
Judah  came  near  unto  him  and  said. — Peclus
facit  disertum,  the  heart  makes  eloquent.  Necessity,
and  the  spirit  of  self-sacrifice,  give  the  inspiring  con
fidence  (Tra^pritria). —  In  my  lord's  ears.  —  He
presses  towards  him,  that  he  may  speak  the  more
impressively  to  his  ear  and  to  his  heart  (ch.  1.  4  ;  1


CHAP.  XLIII.    1— XLV.    28.


623


Sam.  xviii.  23).  And  yet,  with  all  his  boldness,  he
neglects  not  the  courteous  and  prudent  attitude. —
For  thou  art  as  Pharaoh. — In  this  Judah  intends
to  recognize  the  sovereignty  which  could  not  be  af
fronted  with  impunity.  For  Joseph,  however,  there
must  li.ive  been  in  it  the  stinging  reminder  that  the
acme  of  severity  was  now  reached.  The  vivid,  pas
sionate  style  of  narration,  as  the  ground  of  treat
ment  in  the  cases  presented,  is  ever  the  basis  of  all
Bible  speeches. — And  his  brother  is  dead. — Jo
seph  has  here  a  new  unfolding  of  the  destiny  to
which  God  had  appointed  him ;  especially  does  he
begin  to  perceive  its  meaning  in  relation  to  his  father
Jacob  (ver.  28).  This  language  strengthens  what  is
said  about  Benjamin,  as  the  one  favorite  child  of  an
aged  father — doubly  dear  because  his  brother  is
dead. — And  we  said  unto  my  lord,  The  lad
cannot  leave  his  father. — From  this  it  appears
why  Joseph  confined  them  three  days  in  prison.
They  had  refused  to  bring  Benjamin.  It  appears,
too,  that  they  had  consented  to  bring  him  only  be
cause  Joseph  had  especially  desired  it,  and  had  inti
mated  a  favorable  reception  ("  that  I  may  set  mine
eyes  upon  him,"  see  Jer.  xxxix.  12).  Judah  gently
calls  his  attention  to  this  as  though  it  were  a  prom
ise.  And,  finally,  they  are  brought  to  this  determi
nation  on  account  of  the  pressure  of  the  famine.  It
had  cost  them,  too,  a  hard  struggle  with  the  father.
The  quotation  of  Jacob's  words  (vers.  27-29)  shows
how  easily  they  now  reconcile  themselves  to  the  pre
ference  of  Rachel  and  her  sons  in  the  heart  of  Jacob.
— That  my  "wife. — Rachel  was  his  wife  in  the
dearest  sense  of  the  word,  the  chosen  of  his  heart.
Therefore,  also,  are  her  two  sons  near  to  him. — And
the  one  went  out  from  me. — Here  Joseph  learns
his  father's  distress  on  his  own  account.  His  mourn-
in  "•  and  longing  for  him  shows  how  dear  Benjamin
must  be,  now  the  only  child  of  his  old  age. — When
he  seeth  that  the  lad  is  not  v.  ith  us. — With  the
utmost  tenderness  Benjamin  is  sometimes  called  the
youngest  child,  sometimes  the  lad.  Out  of  this  a
frigid  criticism,  that  has  no  heart  to  feel  or  under
stand  it,  would  make  contradictions.  If  Joseph  has
his  way,  Jacob  will  die  of  sorrow.  And  now  Judah
speaks  the  decisive  word, — one  which  the  mere
thread  of  the  narration  would  not  have  led  us  to
anticipate,  but  which  springs  eloquently  from  the
rhetoric  of  the  heart. — For  thy  servant  became
surety  for  the  lad  unto  my  father. — Therefore
the  passionate  entreaty  that  Joseph  would  receive
him  as  a  substitute  of  the  one  who  had  incurred  the
sentence  of  slavery.  In  all  this  he  makes  no  parade
of  his  self-sacrifice.  He  cannot,  and  will  not,  return
home  without  Benjamin.  He  would  even,  regard  ic
as  a  favor  that  he  should  be  received  in  his  place.
He  would  rather  die  as  a  slave  in  Egypt,  than  that
his  eyes  should  behold  the  sorrows  of  his  father.  So
stands  he  before  us  in  his  self-humiliation,  in  his  self-
sacrifice,  equal  in  both  with  Joseph,  and  of  as  true
nobility  of  soul.

2.  Vers.  1-5.  JoscpJis  reconciliation  and  mak
ing  himself  known. — Then  Joseph  could  not  re
frain. — The  brethren  had  not  merely  stood  the  trial ;
Judah's  eloquence  had  overpowered  him.  Reconcilia
tion  never  measures  itself  by  mere  right ;  it  is  not
only  full  but  running  over.  Thus  is  it  said  of  Israel :
"  he  wrestled  with  God  and  prevailed."  We  must
distinguish,  therefore,  between  two  elements  in  Jo
seph's  emotion :  first,  his  satisfied  reconciliation,  and,
secondly,  his  inability  to  restrain  any  longer,  though
in  presence  of  all  the  beholders,  the  strong  agitation


of  his  swelling  heart.  See  a  full  representation  of
this  as  given  by  DKLIT/SCII  (p.  558).  When,  however,
he  says,  that  Benjamin's  brothers,  do  not  press  him
(Benjamin)  with  reproaches,  notwithstanding  they
had  reason  to  regard  him  as  guilty,  and  as  having,
by  his  theft,  plunged  them  into  misfortunes,  there
must  be  borne  in  mind  their  earlier  suspicions  as  ex
pressed  ch.  xliii.  18.  Doubtless  they  now  conjec
tured  that  they  were  the  victims  of  some  Egyptian
intrigue  ;  still  they  recognized  it  as  a  divine  judg
ment,  and  this  was  the  means  of  their  salvation.  In
their  resignation  to  suffering  for  Benjamin's  sake,  in
their  sorrow  for  their  father's  distress,  Joseph  saw
fruits  for  repentance  that  satisfied  him.  He  beheld
in  them  the  transition  from  the  terror  of  judgment  to
a  cheerful  courage  of  self-sacrifice,  in  which  Judah
offers  himself  as  a  victim  for  him,  inasmuch  as  he
does  it  for  his  image.  This  draws  him  as  with  an
irresistible  power  to  sympathize  with  their  distress,
and  so  the  common  lot  becomes  the  common  recon
ciliation. — Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me.
— He  wished  to  be  alone  with  his  brethren  at  the^
moment  when  he  made  himself  known  to  them.  Tho
Egyptians  must  not  see  the  emotion  of  their  exalted
lord,  the  deep  abasement  of  the  brethren,  and  the
act  of  holy  reconciliation  which  they  could  not  un
derstand.  Neither  was  the  theocratic  conception  of
the  famine,  and  of  his  own  mission,  for  Egyptian
ears. — And  he  wept  aloud. — With  loud  cryings
he  began  to  address  them ;  so  that  his  weeping  was
heard  by  all  who  were  without,  and  even  by  the
people  in  the  house  of  Pharaoh.  It  follows  that  Jo
seph's  dwelling  must  have  been  near  the  palace  ;
"his  residence  was  at  Memphis."  (Kuobcl.) — I  am
Joseph. — This  agitating  announcement,  for  which,
however,  their  despair  may  have  prepared  them,  he
knows  not  better  how  to  mitigate  than  by  the  ques
tion  :  Doth  my  father  yet  live  ? — He  had  already
heard  this  several  times,  yet  he  must  ask  again,  not
because  he  doubted,  but  that,  in  the  assurance  of  this
most  joyful  news  he  may  show  them  his  true  Israelii-
ish  heart,  and  inspire  them  with  courage.  Xor  are
we  to  forget  that  Judah's  words  had  vividly  pictured
to  him  the  danger  that  the  old  man  might  die  on  ac
count  of  Benjamin's  absence,  and  that  it  now  began
painfully  to  suggest  itself  to  him,  how  much  he  might
have  imperilled  his  father's  life  by  the  trial  of  his
brethren. — For  they  were  troubled.— -In  their
terror  they  seem  to  draw  back. — Come  near  to
me,  I  pray  you. — I  am  Joseph  your  brother
whom  ye  sold  into  Egypt. — It  seems  as  if  he  had
to  confess  for  them  the  thing  they  most  dreaded. —
Now  therefore  be  not  grieved.  — Seeing  their
sorrow  and  repentance,  he  would  now  raise  them  to
faith.  The  one  portion  of  them,  namely,  those  who
were  conscious  of  the  greater  guilt,  must  not  mar
this  favorable  state  of  soul,  and  render  faith  more
difficult  by  their  excessive  mourning,  nor  should  the
guiltless  (Reuben,  Judah,  Benjamin)  produce  the
same  effect  by  angry  recriminations. — To  preserve
life. — To  this  they  are  now  to  direct  their  atten
tion.

3.  Vers.  5-13.  Josephs  divine  peace,  and  div inc
mission. — To  preserve  life  did  God  send  me. —
What  they  had  done  for  evil  God  had  turned  to  good.
And  now,  having  repented  and  been  forgiven,  as  God
had  shown  to  them  in  his  dealings,  they  are  now  in
a  state  to  understand  his  gracious  purposes.  A
closer  explanation  of  these  words,  which  would  re
quire  the  giving  of  his  whole  history,  he,  for  the
present,  discreetly  waives. — And  yet  there  are


624


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


five  years. — This  shows  already  the  point  towards
which  hi?  mind  is  aiming — to  draw  them  down  to  Egypt.
— Neither  earing  nor  harvest. — A  vivid  represen
tation  of  the  years  of  famine. — Before  you  to  pre
serve  you. — The  preservation  of  Jacob's  house
seems  now  (if  more  importance  than  that  of  the
Egyptians,  and  the  surrounding  peoples. — By  a
great  deliverance. — The  question  was  not  one  of
assistance  merely,  however  great,  but  of  deliverance
from  death  and  famine.  It  may,  however,  be  so
called  in  reference  to  the  great  future,  and  as  con
taining  in  it  the  final  deliverance  of  the  world. — So
now  it  was  not  you, — but  God.— Here  he  makes
a  pointed  contrast :  m>t  von  ;  in  this  is  contained:
first,  his  forgiveness  ;  secondly,  his  declaration  of
the  nulF.ty  of'  their  project,  and  its  disappearance  be
fore  the  great  decree  of  God.  Thrice  does  he  make
these  ("in,;1. >i ling  declarations.  lint  in  what  rcuj/rclx
WHX  it  (''<>'/.'  He  made  him,  first,  a  father  unto
Pharaoh,  that  i<,  a  paternal  counsellor  (2  Chron.  ii.
1-  ;  iv.  li>).  ''  It  was  an  honorary  distinction  of  the
.first  minister,  and  which  also  existed  among  the  Per
sian--  (. \ppendix  to  Esther  ii.  0;  vi.  10),  and  the
Syrians  (1  Maccab.  xi.  .'52)."  Knobel.  These  words
also  refer  to  the  interpretation  of  Pharaoh's  dreams,
and  the  advice  connected  with  it.  The  consequence
was,  that  he  obtained  this  high  position  which  he
can  now  use  for  the  preservation  (if  his  father's  house.
— Come  down  unto  me. — The  immediate  invita
tion  given  without  any  conference  with  Pharaoh
shows  his  firm  position;  but  it  was,  nevertheless,  a
hazardous  undertaking  of  his  agitated,  yet  confident
heart.— In  the  land  of  Goshen. — (Vh."  xlvii.  1 1).—
Raamses. — A  district  of  Lower  Egypt,  north  »f  the
Nile,  ami  very  fruitful  (eh.  xlvii.  d,  1  1),  especially  in
gra-s  (eh.  xlvi.  "  1).  "  Even  at  this  day  the  province
of  Seharkijah  is  considered  the  h-st  part  of  Eirypt
(ROBINSON:  '  I'ahest.,'  i.  <tr>)."  Knobel.  See  f ME
SAME,  p.  :;.":!,  and  the  Biblical  Dictionaries.  See  also
Bunsen. — And  there  will  I  nourish  thee. — The
expression  -"""P.  "2  may  mean,  tJmt  tlt<,n  i/tai/est  not
become  «  /"''-^ xn'im,  that  is,  fall  into  slavery  through
poverty,  and  thus  Knobel  interprets  it  with  reference
to  ch.  xlvii.  lit,  etc. ;  but  it  may  also  mean,  (hat  than
t»<t>/tt;f  nut  //,•  dipr'aal  off/i//  JKISS/ union.*,  SO  as  to  Suf
fer  want, — an  interpretation  which  is  to  be  preferred.
— And  behold  your  eyes. — If  their  father  in  his
distrust  (see  ver.  25)  should  not  credit  their  testimony,
he  will  undoubtedly  believe  the  eyes  of  Benjamin. —
All  my  glory. — He  perceives  that  his  aged  father,
oppressed  by  sorrows,  can  only  be  revived  again
through  vivid  representations  (see  vcr.  27).

•i.  Vers.  14-15.  Ilie  solemnity  of  the  salutation.
— And  he  fell  upon  his  brother  Benjamin's
neck. — Benjamin  is  the  central  point  whence  leads
out  the  way  to  reconciliation. — Kissed  all  his
brethren. — The  seal  of  recognition,  of  reconciliation,
and  of  salutation. — And  wept  upon  them. — DE-
LITZSCII  :  •'  While  he  embraced  them."  But  of  Ben
jamin  it  is  said,  he  wept  upon  his  neck.  Benjamin
would  seem  to  remain  standing  whilst  the  brothers
bow  themselves ;  so  that  Joseph,  as  he  embraced,
wept  upon  them. — And  after  that  his  brethren
talked  with  him. — Not  until  now  can  they  speak
with  him, — now  that  they  have  been  called,  and
been  forgiven,  in  so  solemn  and  brotherly  a  manner.
The  joy  is  gradually  brought  out  by  an  assurance,
thrice  repeated,  that  he  did  not  impute  their  deed
to  them,  but  recognized  in  it  the  decree  and  hand
of  God.

c.   Tlie  joyful  message  to  Jacob.     Vers.   16-28.


— Pharaoh's  commission  to  Jacob. — And  the  fame
thereof  was  heard. — At  the  recognition  Joseph
was  alone  with  his  brethren ;  now  that  he  has
made  known  their  arrival,  he  avows  himself  as  be
longing  to  them. — And  it  pleased  Pharaoh  well.
— Recognitions  of  separated  members  of  the  same
family  have  an  extraordinary  power  to  move  the
human  heart,  and  we  already  know  that  Pharaoh  was
a  prince  of  sound  discernment,  and  of  a  benevolent
disposition.  But  what  was  pleasing  to  Pharaoh  was
also  pleasing  to  his  courtiers,  and  his  servants.  Be
sides,  Joseph  had  rendered  great  service,  and  had,
therefore,  a  claim  to  Egyptian  sympathy.  Thus  far
a  dark  shadow  had  rested  on  his  descent;  for  lie
had  come  to  Egypt  as  a  slave.  Now  he  appears
as  a  member  of  a  free  and  noble  nomadic  family.
—And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph. — First,  he  ex
tends  an  invitation  to  the  brethren  agreeing  with
Joseph's  previous  invitation.  Then  follows  a  com
mission  to  Joseph,  the  terms  of  which  bear  evidence
of  the  most  delicate  courtliness. — The  good  of  the
land. — This  is  generally  taken  as  meaning  the  best
part  of  the  land,  that  is,  Goshen  (Raschi,  Gcsenius,
and  others).  Knobel,  according  to  vers.  20,  23,  in
terprets  it,  of  the  good  things  of  Egypt:  whatever
good  it  possesses  shall  be  theirs.  The  connection
wilh  the  following:  the  fat  of  the  land,  would  seem
to  point  to  a  leasing  of  possession,  but,  of  course,  not
in  the  sense  of  territorial  dominion.  It  is  not  an
argument  against  this  that  the  leasing  of  places  is
afterwards  asked  for  (eh.  xlvi.  :M  ;  xlvii.  4).  On  the
contrary,  the  petition  there  made  rather  rests  on  a
previous  general  promise. — Now  thou  art  com
manded. — Pharaoh  had  refrained  from  using  the
form  of  command  towards  Joseph,  but  now  in  adopt
ing  it,  in  a  case  of  his  own  personal  interest,  it  must
be  regarded  as,  in  fact,  a  refined  courtesy.  It  is  the
very  strongest  language  of  authorization. — This  do
ye. — He  regards  the  cause  of  Joseph,  and  his  breth
ren,  as  one  and  inseparable.  The  sense,  therefore,  is
not :  cause  thy  brethren  so  to  do  (Knobel) ;  for  they,
of  themselves,  could  not  take  wagons  from  Egypt. —
For  your  little  ones. — "  Egypt  was  rich  in  wagons
and  horses  ;  they  are  not  mentioned  among  the  no
madic  Hebrews."  The  small  two-wheeled  wagons  of
the  Egyptians  "could  be  also  used  on  the  roadless
wastes  of  the  desert.''  Keil. — Also  regard  not  your
stuff. — They  should  not  grieve  over  the  articles  of  fur
niture  they  would  have  to  leave  behind  ;  since  they
would  have  everything  abundantly  in  Egypt. — The
children  of  Israel. — A  decisive  step  for  the  house
of  Israel. — Joseph  gave  them  wagons — and  pro
vision  for  the  -way. — Changes  of  raiment. —
LANGE:  Lit.,  festival  habits  (holiday  clothing)  as  a
change  for  the  usual  dress. — But  to  Benjamin  he
gave  three  hundred  pieces  of  silver,  and  five
changes  of  raiment. — He  makes  amends  to  this
guiltless  brother  after  the  well-meant  alarm  which  he
had  given  him. — And  to  his  father. — In  these
presents  love  seems  to  surpass  the  measure  of  its  aim,
since  Jacob  had  been  invited  to  come  speedily  to
Egypt ;  but  there  might  possibly  be  hindrances  to
the  journey.  Besides  the  ten  asses  were  for  the  com
mon  transportation,  and  the  occasion  of  their  dismis
sion  is  employed  to  send  along  with  them  costly
things  of  various  kinds  from  the  land. — See  that  ye
fall  not  out  by  the  way. — The  old  explanation :  do
not  quarrel  by  the  way,  is  held  by  Knobel,  Delitzsch
and  Keil,  in  opposition  to  Michaelis,  Gcsenius,  and
others,  who  make  it  an  admonition :  fear  not.  But
the  language,  and  the  situation,  both  favor  the  first


CHAP.   XLIII.    1— XLV.   28.


625


interpretation.*     The  less  guilty  ones  among  them
might  easily  be  tempted  to  reproach  the  others,  as

Reuben  had  done  already. — Joseph  is  yet  alive.

In  this  message  his  heart  lost  its  warmth  f  and  joy.
He  had  not  full  trust  in  them.  It  was  by  no  means
the  incredulity  of  joy  (Luke  xxiv.  44),  because  the
news  seemed  too  strangely  good  to  be  true ;  rather
dad  his  suspicion,  in  its  reciprocal  working  with  their
long  consciousness  of  guilt,  made  him  fundamentally
[Distrustful.  And  now  that  dreadful  shalit  of  Egypt
turns  out  to  be  his  son  Joseph  !  Even  Uonjamin's
witness  fails  to  clear  up  his  amazement. — And  -when
le  saw  the  wagons. — Xot  until  they  had  told  him
ill  the  words  of  Joseph,  and  added,  perhaps,  their
own  confession — how  they  had  sold  him,  how  Joseph
lad  forgiven  them,  how  he  had  referred  them  to  the
iivine  guidance — is  Jacob  able  to  believe  fully  their
eport ;  and,  now,  in  connection  with  all  this,  there
:ome  the  Egyptian  wagons,  as  a  seal  of  the  story's
ruth,  as  a  symbol  of  Joseph's  glory,  a  sign,  in  fact,
roiii  God,  that  the  dark  enigma  of  his  old  years  is
bout  to  be  solved  in  the  light  of  a  "  golden  sunset."
-It  is  enor.gh. — Ilis  longing  is  appeased,  he  has  as
ood  as  reached  the  goal. — I  will  go. — The  old  man
s  again  young  in  spirit.  He  is  for  going  immediate-
he  could  leap,  yes,  fly.


"  Now  purified  at  last,  with  hope  revived,
i-'.n-  liiu's  new  goal  he  starts."

See  the  close  of  the  (Ed: pus  Coloneur,.}  DKLITZSCH  :
Thus  Jacob's  spirit  lives  again. — And  Israel  said. —
;  is  Isi-ttd  now  that  speaks.  How  significant  this
iiangc  of  name.''


DOCTRINAL  AND  ETHICAL.


*  [The  old  rendering  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the  pri-
lary  scm  j  of  TJ"!  is  not  fear,  but  excitement  of  mind  in  any
iy,  like  Greek  ipyq,  6py^o/x<u,  by  which  the  LXX  translate
Is.  iy.. >  (see,  also,  Eph.  iv.  20,  Da  ye  angry,  yet  sin  nut),
d  which  is  one  ol  the  places  referred  to  by  Itosenmiiller
-  the  sense  of  fear.  In  the  other  places  cited  by  him  the
n.-e  of  align;  or  excitement,  suits  the  context  best  •  as
xod.  xv.  14  ;  Deut.  ii.  25.  In  all  other  places  the  sense  of
ge  or  anger  (opyTJ)  is  beyond  doubt.  There  is  no  iutima-
n  of  anything  on  the  way  which  should  cause  fear  (in  the
nso  of  terror,  commotion)  any  more  than  in  any  of  their
evious  goin  :-,  and  comings.  The  fear  of  apprehension,  or
xiety,  such  is  might  be  felt  on  account  of  the  mishap  of
e  money  found  in  the  sacks,  would  be  expressed  by  a  very
Ferent  word.  Whereas  everything  in  the  context  renders
s  advico  of  Joseph,  that  they  .should  got  into  no  disputes
th  one  another, very  probable.  LXX,  juij  6pyi'fecr0e,  Syriac,

]-^>    <^  y—    H  ;  do  not  quarrel  on  the  road.    So  the
rgum. — T.  1,].

t  [Hebrew,  !)2b  JC^  and  his  heart  grew  chill.  It  is  the
ao  idea  as  the  GreeY  Tr^y,  Tray,  nrjyw/ja,  an  onomatopic
rd  ol  the  second  class,  denoting  some  resemblance  between
^  sound  and  the  effect  produced— hardness,  solidness,  com-
ctness;  hence  sol idity,  coldness.  The  heart  stopping  in
11  and  amazement.  It  is  interesting,  too,  to  note  how
nmon  in  language  is  this  metaphor,  or  secondary  sense,
Dressing  hope  and  joy  by  warmth,  distrust  and  despair  by
hill.  As  in  the  Odyssey,  i  167—

,  ouSe  re?  rjH-tv

0a\iru>pri,  e'nrep  TIS  einxQovLtav  avdpuTTiav
<t>T)<TLV  eAeu<reo-0at  •  TOU  S'  tuAero  voa-Ti^ov  ^/xap.

"  No  warmth  to  us,— that  is,  no  warming  hope,  should
T  one  on  cartn  declare  that  he  would  come  again,— for-
r  gone,  the  day  of  his  return."  This  is  very  much  as
Jacob  felt.  Compare,  also,  the  Iliad,  vi.  412,  where
rupr,,  warmth,  in  this  sense,  is  opposed  to  chilling  grief.
ios,  cold,  is  used  in  the  opposite  way.— T.  L  ]

40


need ;  3.  its  apparent  end  (the  banquet) ;  4.  its  acme  \
5.  its  glorious  issue.

1.  The  pressure  of  want,  and  its  power  in  the
hand  of  providence:  1)  How  inexorable  in   its  de
mands.     Jacob  is  to  deliver  up  Benjamin.     2)  How
full  of  grace  in  its  designs.     By  it  alone  can  Jacob's
house  be  delivered  from  the  burden  of  deadly  guilt.

2.  Judah's  confidence.     "A  lion's   whelp "(ch.
xlix.  9).     This  confidence  lie  would  not  have  had,  if
he  had  not  formerly  proposed  to  sell  Joseph  in  order
to  save  him,  or  had   he  not  been  willing  to  sacrifice
himself  for  Benjamin's  safe  return.     The  spirit  of
self-sacrifice  is  the  great  source  of  courage.

3.  It  is  in  the  name  of  Israel  that  Jacob  treats
with  his  sons  in  the  giving  up  of  Benjamin.     His
reproach,  too  (ver.  6),  is  in  the  name  of  Israel.     It
seems  to  come,  indeed,  from  Jacob's  weakness,  and
to  be,  therefore,  wrongly  used ;  but  behind  the  mere
sound  there  lies  the  hidden  announcement  of  a  suspi
cion   that  they  were  dealing  unfairly  with  the  sons
of   Rachel.     We  now  recognize  Israel's  character,
especially  in  the  following  traits  :   1)  Not  to  his  other
sons  does  he  entrust  Benjamin,  not  even  to  Reuben,
whose  weakness  he  knows,  but  only  to  Judah,  whose
frankness,  honesty,  and  strength  seem  to  inspire  him
with  confidence.     2)  He  again  employs  the  old  weap
on,  the  giving   of  presents  to  a  threatening  antago
nist;  yet  well  knowing  that  the  Egyptian  would  not,
like  Esau,  look  to  the  quantity  so  much  as  the  qual
ity  of  the  things  offered,  and  so  he  sends  him  the
most  highly  prized  or  celebrated   products  of   the
land.     3)  With  a  severe  uprightness  does  he  require
his  sons  to  return  the  money  found  in  their  sacks,
and  thus  disarm  the  suspicion  of  the  Egyptian.     4)
He  entrusts  to  them  Benjamin  as  lliclr  brother.     5)
He  commits  himself  to  the  protection  of  Almighty
God,  i.  e.,  the  delivering  and  protecting  God  of* the
patriarchs,  who  wrought   miracles  on  "their  behalf.
(>)  He  resigns  himself  to  God's  providence,  even  at
the  risk  of  becoming  entirely  childless.

4.  ^  The.  prized  fruits  of  the  land  of  Canaan.     In
Jacob's  words  there  appears  an  objective  poetry,  or
the  poetry  of  the  lands,  as  it  may  be  called.     First
of  all,  it  consists  in  their  iiobles"t  products,  not  as
they  serve  the  common  wants  of  life,  but  rather  its
healing,  adornment,  and  festivity.     When  he  selected
them,  however,  Jacob   could  "have    had   but   littlo
thought  how  mighty  the  influence   these  noble  gifts
of  Canaan's  soil  would  have  upon  the  great  Egyptian
ruler, — how  they  would  impress  him  as  the  wonders
of  his  youth,  the  glories  of  his  native  land.

5.  Joseph's  state  of  sonl  at  the  appearance  of
Benjamin:   1)  His  joy;  2)  his  deep  emotion;  3)  his
doubt,  and  the  modes  of  testing  it:  a.  the  feast;  b.
the  cup ;  c.  the  claim  to  Benjamin.     If  at  the  first
meeting  with  his  brethren  Joseph  had  to  struggle
with  his  ill-humor,  he  now  has  to  contend  with  the
emotions  of  fraternal  love.

6.  The  agitating  changes  in  the  trial  of  Joseph's
brethren  :  1)  From  fear  to  joy:  2)  from  joy  to  sor
row  ;  3)  and  again  from  sorrow  to  joy.

7.  Their  negotiation  with  the  steward,  or  the  de
lusions  of  fear.     They  are  innocent  (respecting  the
money),  and  yet  guilty  (in  respect  to  their  old  crime).
Having  once  murdered  confidence,  there  lies  upon
them   the  penalty  of  mistrust,  compelling  them  to
regard  even  Joseph's  house  as  a  place  of  treachery.
They  could  have  no  trust  whUst- remaining  unrecon
ciled.

8.  The  steward.     Joseph's  spirit  had  been  im
parted  to  his  subordinates.


026


GENESIS,  OR  THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


9.  Good  fortune  abounding  (the  money  given  to
them ;    Simeon  set  free  ;    the  honorable  reception ;
the  banquet;    the    messes);    and   yet  they  had   no
peace,  because  the  pure  foundation  for  it  was  not  yet
laid.

10.  Joseph's  deep  emotion,  a  sign  of  reconcilia
tion.

11.  The  banquet,  and  Egyptian  division  of  castes.
(The   distinction   of  caste  is  here  recognized  as  cus
tom  interpenetrated   by  dogma,  and   this   gives   the
method  of  the  struggle.     Joseph  sends  messes  from
his  table.     The   true   tendency  of  the  caste  doctrine
is  to  absorb  everything  into  that  of  the  priesthood.)
Egyptian  forms  (honorary  dishes;   the  number  live).
An"  Israelitish   meal.      As    the    banquet    of  Josephs
joy,  of  his  hope,  of  his   trying  natch.     As  the  feast
of"  reviving   hope   in  Jo^'ph's  brethren;  their  par
ticipation  without  envy  in  the  honoring  of  Benjamin.
As  an  introduction  to  the  last  trial,  and  a  prepara
tion  for  i:.

11'.  The  successful  issue  in  the  fearful  proving
of  1-rael's  MHIS.

(Ch.  xliv.  IS— xlv.  10.     Joseph  and  Ju'lah.)

1.  Judah's  speech.  DKMT/SCII  :  "  Judah  is  the
doqu.'iit  one  among  his  brethren.  His  eloquence
had  carried  the  measure  of  .Joseph's  sale;  it  had
prevailed  on  .lacob  to  send  Benjamin  with  them  ;
and  here,  finally,  it  makes  .Joseph  unable  to  endure
the  restraint  which  he  \\i.-hed  to  put  upon  himself."
The  end,  however,  is  attained,  not  more  by  his
touching  eloquence  than  by  his  heroic  deed,  when
he  oilers  himself  as  surety  for  Benjamin,  and  is
willing  to  sacrifice  himself  by  taking  his  place.

•j.  Ami  I  a,ir/.  This  citing  of  Jacob's  langua
in  Judah's  speech,  mu-t  Lave  had  something  espe-
ciallv  agitating  lor  Jo<-'ph,  — all  the  more  so  because
the  speaker  is  not  aware  of  the  deep  impression  it
must  have  made  upon  him.  In  this  citation  of  Ja
cob'.-  last  words  in  respect  to  that  old  event,  there  is
reflected,  as  Schroder  lightly  remarks,  Jacob's
doubt.  1  x'tl'I,  that  is,  I  thought  at  that  time.

;;.  The  moral  requisites  of  reconciliation,  whether
human  or  divine,  are  quite  obvious  in  our  narrative
Reuben  represents  the  better  element  in  the  mnra
struggle,  Benjamin  the  innocent  paity,  Judah  thi
surety,  who  takes  upon  himself  the  real  guilt  of  hi.
brethren  and  the  factitious  guilt  of  Benjamin.  Re
pentance,  faith,  and  the  spirit  of  sacrifice,  several!)
appear  in  these  representatives.  Through  _  three
stages  do  these  elements  prepare  the  reconciliation
to  Joseph's  heart  and  to  the  brethren  as  opposed  tc
him.  It  has  for  its  foundation  a  religious  ground
though  only  in  an  Old-Testament  measure.  The
thrice-repeated  declaration  of  Joseph:  Ye  have  no
sent  me,  but  God  has  done  it,  is  the  strongest  expres
sion  of  restored  peace  and  forgiveness.  As  Benja
m'm.  so  to  speak,  had  taken  his  place,  the  conchisioi
avails :  Whatever  ye  have  done  to  him,  ye  have  don
it  even  unto  me.

•1.  It  is  an  especial  New-Testament  trait  in  Jo
F.eph's  mode  of  thinking,  that  he  so  fully  recognize
how  the  sin  of  his  brethren,  after  having  been  atone
for,  is  entirely  taken  away ;  the  divine  providenc
having  turned  it  to  good.  This  truth,  which  he  s
promptly  read  in  his  mission,  many  Christians,  an
even  many  theologians,  arc  yet  spelling  out  in  th
letter.  Joseph,  however,  recognizes,  as  the  centra
point  of  the  divine  guidance,  his  mission  to  sav
Israel's  house  from  starvation,  and  to  preserve  it  fc


great  deliverance.  In  this  thought  there  lies  en-
osed  the  anticipation  of  a  future  and  an  endless
ilvation.  For  this  end  the  treachery  of  the  breth-
en  is  first  turned  away,  as  guilt  expiated,  and  then,
nder  the  divine  guidance,  turned  to  good.  Thus
oscph's  mission  becomes  a  type  of  the  cross  of
hrist ;  though  the  expiating  points,  which  are  found
eparated  in  Joseph's  history,  are  wholly  concentra-
•d  in  the  person  of  Jesus.  Here  they  appear  in
ivcrs  persons  :  It  is  Reuben  the  admonisher,  Benja-
lin  the  innocent,  Judah  the  surety,  Joseph  the
etraycd  and  the  forgiving,  Jacob  the  lather  of  a
amily  pressed  down  by  the  guilt  of  his  house.

5."  Joseph's  kiss  of  peace  reminds  us  of  Christ's
reetin-r  to  his  disciples  and  to  the  world.

(5.  Benjamin,  by  the  way,  became  in  after  times,
wild  and  haughty  tribe,  then  deeply  humbled  (in
he  days  of  the  Judges),  then  Judah's  rival,  in  the
ppo-ition  of  Saul  and  David,  then  Judah's  faithful
onfederate  and  _///•'//<//«'(•  ;  in  the  New-Testament
hue,  Paul  airain,  its  great  descendant,  connects  him-
elf  in  faithful  devotion,  with  "the  lion  of  the  tribe
•I'  Judah."

7.  The  recognitions  of  relatives,  friends,  lovers,
ong  lost  to  each  other,  are  among  the   most  impor-
ant  occurrences   in   human   life,    especially  as  they
ppear  in   their  reality,   and   in  the   poetry   of    an-
iquity  *  (see    LAN-UK'S   ''History    of   the  Apostolic
1'inies,"  L  P- •!-)•      In  the  most  conspicuous   points,
mwever,  of  outward  recognitions,  are   reflected  the

spiritual  (Luke  xv.  1M),  and,  in  both,  those  of  the
world  to  come.

8.  The  ambiguous  forms  that  present  themselves
m  the  history  ol  Jo.-eph,  and  in  which,  at  last,  Judah

uid  Joseph  stand  opposed  to  each  other,  lose  them
selves  entirely  in  the  service  of  truth,  righteousness,
md  love.  At  the  same  time  they  appear  as  imper
fections  of  the  Old-Testament  life  in  comparison  with
the  joy  of  confession  that  appears  in  the  New  Testa
ment."  What  they  represent,  of  the  tilings  that  last
forever,  is  the  caution  and  the  prudence  of  the  New-
Testament  wisdom.  "Be  ye  wise  as  serpents  and
harmless  as  doves.''

(Ch.  xlv.  18-27.    Joseph  and  Jacob.)

1.  The  joyful  news:  1)  The  announcers:  Joseph,
Pharaoh,  Egyptians,  the  sons  of  Jacob.  2)  Their
contents:  Joseph  lives;  his  glory  in  Egypt;  come
down.  3)  Jacob's  incredulity;  the  chill  of  his  heart
at  the  words  of  his  sons,  whom  he  does  not  credit.
4)  The  evidences  and  the  tokens :  Joseph's  words,
Pharaoh's  wagons.  5.  Jacob  becomes  again  Israel
in  the  anticipation  of  the  serene  clearing  up  of  his
dark  destiny,  in  the  discharging  his  house  of  an  old
ban.  Joseph's  life  restores  to  him  the  hope  of  a
happy  death.

•1.  UKUTZSCH  :  "  In  Joseph's  history  the  sacred
record  maintains  all  its  greatness  ;  here,  in  this  scene


if  story  of  Joseph,  had  it  been


Vn  SoDhocles     Thi    story  of  Joseph,     a  een    nown

UmTwould  have  furnished  the  ^eat  critic  with  the  best
^lustration  of  what  he  calls  the  pathetic,  £  «Mot,  ™  £*
chief  element  of  power  in  the  dramatic  exhibition.-  i.  L.J


CHAP.    XLIII.    1— XLY.  28.


021


•  >t'  recognition,  it  celebrates  one  of  its  triumph
It  is  all  nature,  all  spirit,  all  art.  These  three  hci
become  one ;  each  word  is  bathed  in  tears  of  syn
pathy,  in  the  blood  of  love,  in  the  wine  of  happ
ness.  The  foil,  however,  of  this  history,  so  beaut
ful  in  itself,  is  the  5<^a,  the  glory,  of  Jesus  Chris
which,  iu  all  directions,  pours  its  heavenly  light  upo
it.  For  as  Judah  (?)  delivered  up  Joseph,  so  th
Jewish  people  delivered  Jesus  into  the  hands  of  th
heathen,  and  so,  also,  does  the  antitypal  history  o
this  betrayal  lose  itself  in  an  adorable  depth  of  wif
dorn  and  divine  knowledge."  THE  SAME  :  This  Jt
cob,  over  whom  comes  again  the  spirit  of  his  youth
is  Israel.  It  is  the  name  of  the  twelvc-tribcd  peo
pie,  whose  migration  to  Egypt,  and  new-birth  out  ol
it,  is  decided  by  the  f!~5X,  /  w'll  go,  of  the  hoar)
patriarch.


IIOMILETICAL  AXD  PRACTICAL.

See  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.  Forms  of  character
Forms  of  reconciliation.  The  types  in  our  history
TAUHE  :  Joseph's  revelation  to  his  brethren — a  typi
of  Him  who  rose  to  his  disciples.

(Ch.  xliii.  1— xliv.  17.)

STAKKK:  Ch.  xliii.  10.  Bill  Tub.:  A  less  evi
should  justly  be  preferred  to  a  greater. — THE  SAME
A  Christian  must  bear  with  resignation  the  troubles
that  God  ordains. — At  the  door  of  the.  house.  Per
haps  that  they  might  leave  in  time.  The  guilty  con
science  interprets  everything  in  the  worst  way
(Luther).  [Sitting  at  a  meal  is  more  ancient  than
lying  jExod.  xxxii.  (i) ;  the  latter  mode  came  much
later  into  use,  among  the  delicate  and  effeminate  Per
sians.] — OSIAXDKR  :  Let  every  land  keep  its  own  cus
toms,  unless  they  are  in  themselves  indecent  and
godless.  [Ch.  xliv.  1 5  ;  Joseph  is  said  to  have
learned  magic  in  Egypt ;  but  this  is  hardly  credible.]
— [\rer.  9  ;  that  was  said  very  rashly  (?).]—  Ch.  xliv.
1C..  CRAMER:  God  knows  how  to  reveal  secret  sins
in  a  wonderful  manner  (Ps.  1.  21).— CALWER  Hand-
bvc/i :  In  suffering  for  Benjamin,  they  were  to  atone
for  their  sins  toward  Joseph. — SCHRODER  :  Conscience
is  greater  than  heaven  and  earth.  If  this  did  not
exist  hell  would  have  no  fire  and  no  torment.

(Ch.  xliv.  IS— xlv.  16.)

STARKE:  When  God  has  sufficiently  humbled
his  faithful  children,  he  makes  a  way  for  their  es
cape  (1  Cor.  x.  13).— Ch.  xlv.  5.  LUTHER:  A  poor
weak  conscience,  in  the  acknowledgment  of  its  guilt
is  filled  with  anguish.  We  must  hold  up  and  coun
sel,  open  heaven,  shut  hell,  whoever  can,  in  order
that  the  poor  soul  may  not  sink  into  despair.  When
a  Christian  has  been  exalted  by  God  to  high  worldly
state,  he  must  not  be  ashamed  of  his  poor  parents
brothers,  sisters,  and  other  relations,  nor  despise
them  (Rom.  viii.  28).— THE  SAME  :  I  wonder  how-
Joseph  must  have  felt  when  he  came  to  kiss  Simeon,
the  ringleader  in  the  crimes  committed  against  him  ;


and  yet  he  must  have  kissed  him,  too.— Comparisor
of  Christ  and  Joseph,  according  to  Luther  and  Ram-
bach.— Matt.  v.  24.  CAI.WER  Handlmch  :  That  is  the
most  rational  view  in  all  cases,  especially  in  the  dark
dispensations  of  human  life,  not  to  halt  at  human
causes,  or  stay  there,  but  to  look  at  God's  ways,  as
Joseph  does  here  ;  and  to  trace  his  leading,  like  a
golden  thread  drawn  through  all  the  follies  and
errors  of  men. — SCHRODER  :  Here  (at  the  close  of
Judah's  speech)  is  the  time  that  the  cord  breaks
(Luther).— The  thoughts  and  feelings  of  Jacob's
sons  are  all  directed  intently  to  this  one  thing :  Ben
jamin  must  not  be  abandoned ;  everything  else
ceases  to  trouble  them.— Judah  is  bold  "because  he

speaks  from   the  strong   impulse    of    his   heart,

LUTHER,  on  Judah's  speech :  Would  to  God  that  I
might  call  upon  God  with  equal  ardor.— Judah  shows
that  he  is  the  right  one  to  be  surety  (Richter).— Ju
dah  may  have  closed  with  tears,  and  now  Joseph  be
gins  with  them  (Richter).— Joseph  shows  himself  a
most  affectionate  brother,  while,  as  a  genuine  child  of
God,  he  points  to  him,  away  from  himself  and  his
people. — In  God  all  discords  are  resolved.  Grace
not  only  makes  the  sin  as  though  it  had  never  been,
but  throws  it  into  the  sea  (Micah  vii.  19);  without
abolishing  sin  as  sin,  that  is,  as  unexpiatcd,  it  makes

the   scarlet   dyed   as  white  as  snow   (Isa.  i.  18)

HKIM:  Jerem.  Risler,  in  section  xl.  of  his  historical
extracts  from  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  pre
sents  not  less  than  twenty-two  points  of  resemblance
between  Joseph  and  Jesus.  Such  a  gathering,  how
ever,  of  separate  resemblances  may  easily  divert  us
from  the  main  features.  Each  essential  homogeneity
is  always  reflected  in  many  resemblances.  Yet  Ris-
ler's  parallel  is  quite  full  of  meaning  (see  HEIM,  p.
540).  As  yet  we  have  had  before  us  the  fulfilment
of  the  type  in  the  course  of  history ;  the  fulfilment
of  the  other  half  still  lies  in  the  future  (namely,
:hat  Jesus  makes  himself  known  to  the  Jews,  the
brethren  who  rejected  him),  Zach.  xii.  10;  Matt,
xxiii.  38,  39 ;  Rom.  xi.  25,  26.

(Ch.  xlv.  17-28.)

STARKE  :    Egypt's   great  honor   and   glory ;    iu
showing  hospitality  to  the  whole  Church,  that  is,  the
louse    of    Jacob.     After   dark  and  long-continued
.torms,  God  makes  again  to  shine  upon  his  people
he  sun  of  gladness.     The  joy  of  pious  parents  and
ihildren  at  seeing   each  other  again  in  the  life  to
:ome. — SCHRODER  :  (Three  hundred  pieces  of  silver,
qual  to  two  hundred  dollars.)     He  not  only  wished
o  show  his  love  to  his  brethren,  but  also,  to  induce
he  absent  members  of  the  family  to  undertake  the
ourney  (Calvin).     On  the  journey  to  eternity  we
uust  not  become  angry,  either  with  our  companions,
r  with  God  (Berl.  Bib.].     Christians,    as  brethren,
light  not  to  quarrel  with  each  other  on  the  way  of
fe. — HEIM  :   The  first  impression  that  the  joyful
ews  made  upon  the  aged  and  bowed-down  Jacob,
ras  to  dull  his  heart.     Cases  are  not  unfrequent  of
poplexy  and  sudden  death  arising  from  the  recep-
on  of  glad  tidings.     It  was  somewhat  Ske  the  joy
f  Simeon  (Lukeii.  29,  30).


G28  GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


EIGHTH     SECTION.

brad's  emigration  with  //,'*  family  to  Egypt.     TJic  settlement  in  Ike  land  of  Gosht-n.     Jacob
<iit<J  Pharaoh.     Jomph's  political  Economi,.      Jacob's  charge  concerning  his  burial  at

Canaan.

CHAPTERS  XLVI.   and  XLYII.

1  •   took   his  journey  with   all   that  he  hail,  and  came  to   Bcer-sheba,  and

'.into  the  God  of  his  father  Isaac.     And  Cod  spake  unto  Israel  in  the

3   visions  uf  the  night,  and   said  Jacob,  Jacob.      And  he  said,  lien:  I. urn.     And  he  said,

I  om  Cod.  (he  God  of  thy  father:   fear   not    to   go   down    into    Kgypt ;   for  I  will  there

:e  of  thee   a   givat  nation:   I   will  go  down  with   thee   into   Egypt;    and  I   will  also

•"'   surely  bring  thee  up  again;  and  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  eves.      And  Jacob

up  from  Becr-sheba;   ami   the   sons  of  Israel  carried   Jacob  their 'father,  and   th":r

G  litl  iul  their  wives,  in  the  wagons  which  Pharaoh  had  sent  to  carry  him.      And

they  took  their  cattle,  and   their  goods,  which   they  had   gotten  in   the   la  ml  of  Canaan,

7   and  came  into  Egypt,  Jacob,  and   all   his  s 1  with   him:    His  sons,  and   his   sons'  sons

S    with  him,  his  daughters,  and   his   sons'  daughters,  and   all   his  seed  brought  he  with  him

into  Egypt.     And  these  are  tin;  names  of  the  children  of  Israel,  which  came  into  Ku-vpi,

!'  Jacob  and    his  sons:    Lieuben,  Jacob's   first-born.     And  the  sons  of  lieubcn  ;   Ilanoch

[initiated  <n   initiating,  teacher],   and   I'halhl  [distinguished],  and    Ue/rou  [l'iirst :  blooming  one,  beauti-

10  fill  one],  and  CV.rmi  [Furst :  noble  one,  Gescn. :  vine-dresscrj.      And  the  sons  of   Simeon;    Jemuel
(da;,  -..I],  and  Jamiu    [the  right  hand,  luck],  and  Ohad  [Gescn. :  gentleness ;  Kiirst  :  strong],
and  Jachin  [  founder], and  /ohar  [lightening  one,  bright-shining  one],  and  Shaul  [tlie  one  aslo.-a  f.>r]  the

11  son  of  a  Canaanitish  woman.      And  the  sons  of  Levi ;    Cershon  [expulsion  of  the  profane?],
Ivoha'  h     [  ei.iiLU-i'g.itiim  of  the  consecrated?],   and   Merai'l     [harsh  one,  severe  one,  i>ra<-ti.-i-i-  of  di~  i]  line  :'  I.

1 'J    And  the  sons  of  Judah  ;   Er   [see  chap,  xxxviii.  s],  and  Onan,  and  Shelah,  and  Pharc/,  and
/arah  :   but   Er  and  Onan  died  in  the  land  of  Canaan.     And  the  sons  of  Pharex  were

13  Jle/.i-oii    [seev.9],  and     llamul    [sparer?  gentle  one,  delicate  one].       And    the    sons   of  Issachar  ;
.1  (C|hi    |  wi  n;i,  i .,.  us-wonn,  one  dressed  in  crimson  cloth,  war-dress  ],   and  Plllivah   [=Phuah,  utterance,  speech,

th  |.  and  .lob  [  ~  -'-'*,  sea  Xunili.  xxvi.  29;  1  C'hron.  vii.  1,  returner],  and  Shimron  [keeping,  guard-

14  ini-|.      And  tin.1    sons  of  Zehuhin;    Sered  [escaped,  salvation],  and    Elon    [oak,  strong  one],  and
\~j  Jah.ev'i  [waiting  upon  God].      These   be  the  sons  of  Leah,  which  she  bare  unto  Jacob  in

Padan -aram,  with  his  daughter  Dinah:   all  the  souls  of  his   sons  and  his  daughters  were

1C    thirtv    and    three.       And    the   sons   of  Gad;    Ziphion    [beholder,  watchman,  the  seeing  one],  and

liar,  i  I  (  hay.-ai,  the  f. -stive  one],  SllUIll  [the  resting  oncj.  and  Ezbon  [Oesen.  :  devoted  ;  ITirst :  listener],

17   Eri   [watchman],  and    Arodi    [descendants],  and   Areli   [heroic].     And    tin;   sons   of  Asher ;

Jimnah  [fortune],  and  Ishuah  [like],  and    Isui  [alike,  one  to  another ?  twins ?],  and    Beriah  [gift],

and  Serah  [abundance],  their  sister;  and  the  sons  of  Beriah;  lleber  [company,  associate],
I -^  and  Malchiel  [my  king  is  God].  These  are  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  Avhom  Laban  gave  to  Leah
i!)  his  daughter,  and  these  she  bare  unto  Jacob,  even  sixteen  souls.  The  sons  of  Ilachel
-0  Jacol/s  wife  ;  Joseph  and  Benjamin.  And  unto  Joseph  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  were

born  Manasseh  and  Ephraim '  [see  chap.  1.,  etc.],  which  Asenath,  the  daughter  of  Poli-
'_'  1  pherah  priest  of  On,  bare  unto  him.  And  the  sons  of  Benjamin  were  Belah  [sec  chap.  xiv.  2,

dev.miw],  and  Becher  [^-oun^  camel ?  youth],   and  Ashbel  [sprout],  Gera  [=m;,  fighter?],  and

Xiiamail  [loveliness,  graceful],  Elli  [brotherly],  and  PtOsh   [head],  Muppim   [adorned  one,  from  HE"1],

22  and  lluppim  [protected],  and  Ard  [ruler?  from  TT1].     These  arc  the  sons  of  Rachel,  which

23  were  born   to  Jacob:  all   the   souls  were    fourteen.     And   the   sons   [the  son]    of  Dan  ;

24  Hushim    [the  hast encr].     And   the    sons   of  Naphtaii ;   Jahzeel    [allotedby  God],    and    Guni

25  [hedged  around,  protected  135],  and    Jezer    [image,  my  image],    and    Shillem    [avenger].      These   are
the  sons  of  Bilhah,  which    Laban  gave  unto   Ilachel  his  daughter,  and  slie  bare  these

2(5  unfo  Jacob;   all  the  sotds  were  seven.     All  the  souls  that  came  with  Jacob  into  Egypt,

which  came  out  of  his  loins,  besides  Jacob's  sons'  wives,  all  the  souls  were  threescore

27   and  six:   And  the  sons  of  Joseph,  which  were  born  him  in  Egypt,  were  two  souls;   all


CHAPTER   XLVL,   XL VII.


the  souls  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  which   came   into   Egypt,  were  threescore  and  ten.

28  And  he  sent  Judah  before  him  unto  Joseph,  to  direct  his  face2  unto  Goshcn;   and  they

29  came  into  the  land  of  Goshen.     And  Joseph  made  ready  his  chariot,  and  went  up  to
meet  Israel  his  father,  to  Goshcn,  and  presented  himself  unto  him  ;   and  he  fell  on  his

oO  neck,  and  wept  on  his  neck  a  good  while.     And  Israel  said  unto  Joseph,  Now  let  me
,'il    die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  face,  because  thou  art  yet  alive.     And  Joseph  said  unto  his

brethren,  and  unto  his  father's   house,  I  will  go  up,  and  show  Pharaoh,  and  say  unto

him,  My  brethren,  and  my  father's  house,  which  were  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  are  come

32  unto  me  :  And  the  men  are  shepherds,  for  their  trade  hath  been  to   feed  entile;   ant".

?>   they  have  brought  their  flocks,  and  their  herds,  and  all  that  they  have.     And  it' shall

come  to  pass,  when  Pharaoh  shall  call  you,  and  shall  say,  What  is  your  occupation?
34   That,  ye  shall  say,  Thy  servants'  trade   hath  been  about  cattle  from   our  youth,  even

until  now,  both  we  and  also  our  fathers:   that  ye  may  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen;   for

every  shepherd  is  an  abomination  unto  the  Egyptians.
Git.  XLVTI.          1   Then  Joseph  came  and   told  PHaraoh,  and   said,   My  father   and  my

brethren,  and  their  flocks  and  their  herds,  and  all  that  they  have,  arc  come  out  of  the
!  land  of  Canaan ;   and,  behold,  they  are  in  the  land  of  Goshen.     And  he  took  some  of

3  his  brethren,  even  five  men,  and  presented  them  unto  Pharaoh.     And  Pharaoh  said
unto  his  brethren,    What  is  your  occupation?     And   they  said  unto  Pharaoh,    Thy

4  servants  are  shepherds,   both  we,   and  also  our   fathers.    "They  said,   moreover,  unto
Pharaoh,  Eor^to  sojourn  in  the  land    arc  we  come ;  for  thy  servants  have  no  pasture  for
their  ilocks:  for  the  famine  is  sore  in  the  land  of  Canaan  :  now  therefore,  we  pray  thec,

5  lei;  thy  servants  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen.     And  Pharaoh  spake  unto  Joseph,  saying,

6  Thy  father  and  thy  brethren  are  come  unto  tlice  :   The  land  of  Egypt  is  before  theiT;
in   the   best   of    the    land  make  thy    father  and    brethren   to   dwell;   in   the   land   of
Goshen  let  them  dwell:  arid  if  thou   knowest   any  men  of  activity  among  them,  then

7  make  them  rulers  over  my  cattle.     And  Joseph  brought,  in  Jacob  his   father,  and  set
i   him  before  Pharaoh  :  and  Jacob  blessed  Pharaoh.     And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Jacob,  Plow

9  old  art  thou?  And  Jacob  said  unto  Pharaoh,  The  days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage
arc  an  hundred  and  thirty  years  :  few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the  years  of°my  life
been,  and  have  not  attained  unto  the  days  of  the  years  of  the  life  of  my  fathers  in  the

10  days  of  their  pilgrimage.     And   Jacob   blessed   Pharaoh,   and   went  out  from    before

11  Pharaoh.     And  Joseph  placed  his  father  and  his  brethren,  and  gave  them  a  possession
in  die  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  best  of  the  land,  in  the  land  of  Barneses  [Ramses,  son  of  the  sun.

12  The  name  of  several  Egyptian  kings],  as  Pharaoh  had  commanded.     And  Joseph  nourished  his
father,  and  his  brethren,  and  all  his  father's  household  with  bread,  according  to  their

13  families3    [Bunsen:  "To  each  one  according  to  the  number  of  his  children"].      And  there  was  no  bread
in  all  the  land;  for  the  famine  was  very  sore,  so  that   the   land   of  Egypt,  and  all   the

14  land  of  Canaan,  fainted 4  by  reason  of  the  famine.     And  Joseph   gathered  up   all   the
money  that  was  found  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  for  the  corn

15  which  they  bought;  and  Joseph  brought  the  money  into  Pharaoh's  house.     And  when
money  failed  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  all  the  Egyptians  came
unlo  Joseph,  and  said,  Give  us  bread  :   for  why  should  we  die  in  thy  presence?  for  the

1G  money  faileth.     And  Joseph  said,  Give  your  cattle ;  and  I  will  give  you  for  your  cattle,

17  if  money  fail.     And  they  brought  their  cattle  unto  Joseph;   and  Joseph  gave  them

bread  in  exchange  for  horses,  and  for  their  flocks,  and  for  the  cattle  of  the  herds,  and  for

13  the  asses;  and  he  fed  them  with  bread   for  all  their  cattle  for  that  year.     When  that

year  was  ended,  they  came  unto  him  the  second  year,  and  said  unto  him,  We  will  not

hide  it  from  my  lord,  how  that  our  money  is  spent ;   my  lord  also  hath  our  herds  of

cattle;  there  is  not  aught  left  in  the  sight  of  my  lord,  but  our  bodies,  and  our  lands:

19  "Wherefore  shall  we  die  before  thine   eyes,  both  we  and  our  land?     Buy  us  and   our
land  for  bread,  and  we  and  our  land  will  be  servants  unto  Pharaoh ;  and  give  us  seed,

20  that  we  may  live,  and  not  die,  that  tlie  land  be  not  desolate.     And  Joseph  bought  ail
the  land  of  Egypt  for  Pharaoh;   for   the  Egyptians   sold  every  man  his  field,  because
the  famine  prevailed  over  them  :  so  the  land  became  Pharaoh's.     And  as  for  the  people,
ho  removed  them  to  cities  5  from  one  end  of  the  borders  of  Eirypt  even  to  the  other  end

22  thereof.     Only  the  land  of  the   priests  bought  he  not;   for  "the  priests  had  a  portion
assigned  them  of  Pharaoh,  and  did  eat  their  portion  which  Pharaoh  cave  them:  where


630  GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   COOK   OF   MOSES.

23  fore  they  sold  not  their  lands.     Then  Joseph  said  unto  the  people,  Behold,  I  have  bought
you  tiiis  day,  and  your  land,  for  Pharaoh  ;   lo,  Jtcrc  is  seed  for  you,  and  ye  shall  sow  the

24  land.      And  it  shall  come  to  puss,  in   the  increase,  that  ye  shall  give   the  iifth  part  unto
Pharaoh,  and  four  parts  shall  be  your  own,  for  seed  of  the  iield,  and  for  your  (bud,  and

25  for  them  of  your  households,  and  for  food  for  your  little  ones.     And  they  said,  Thou  hast
saved  our  lives:  L-t  us  iind  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord,  and  we  will  be  PharauVij  sor-

26  vants.      And  Joseph  made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  Kgvpt  unto  this  day,  thai  Pharaoh
should  have  the  iifth  j<urt  ;  except  the  land  of  tin;  prirsts  only,  which  became  not    I'!;;.-

27  raoh's.      And  Jsrael  dwelled  in  the  land  of  Kgypt,  in  the  country  of  Goshen;   and  they
2s  had  possessions  °  therein,  and  grew,  and  multiplied  exceedingly.     And  Jacob  lived  m

the  land  of  Egypt  seventeen  years  ;   so  the.  whole  age  of  Jacob  was  an  humin  d   forty

29  and   seven   years.      And  the  time  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must  die;   and  he  called  his  son
Joseph,  and  said  unto  him,  Jf  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thv  sight,  put,  I  prav  ther,  thy
hand  undiT  my  thigh,  and  deal  kindly  and  truly  with  me;    bury  me  no:,  1  pray  thee,  in

30  Kgypt  :    J!ut  I  will  lie  with  my  fathers,  and  them  shait  carrv  me  out  of  K^vpt,  and  bury
,'il    me  in  their  bury  ing-place.   And  he  said,  I  will  do  as  tlumha.M  said.     And  he  said,  Swear

unto  me.      And  he  sware  unto  him.      And  Israel  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's  head.

[  '-  (  h.  xlvi.  in._  The  7.  XX  have  added,  after  Manassch  and  .Kphraim,  averse  si  •ciniiigly  from  1  C'hr.m.  vii.  ~]  1,  hut
iii!l.Tiii:r  so  much,  loth  fr  m  th<'  H-brew  of  that  place,  and  from  the  LXX  itself,  tli.it  it  c.iu  hardly  be  reeogniucd.  Xo
•ii  h  is  it.  It  is  nut  in  the  Samaritan,  which,  in  most  cases  oi'  v.irlam  c,  has  in  en  made  to  conform  t  j
tin  I,  XX.  If  it  wa.;  in  some.  old  Hebrew  copies,  it  had  clearly  been  put  in  to  carry  out  the  lino  of  Joseph  ;  andt.
us  how  cxiilanatory  scholia,  referring  to  later  things,  may  have  got  a  place-,  a:id  some  of  them  ::u  al'idhiw  place,  in  the.
ti  x;  of  (leu,  -i-.-T.  L.]

|-   Ver.  2S.     r  "••-::  ,  !«  show  the  way—//;/.  Hiphil  of  fl""1  .     This  makes  a  very  L-  .....  1  sense  here,  but  there  is  somi
fur  d.inhtin  _;•  it,  :'in  :e  the  LXX  render  avva.i>-r,aa.i,  as  though   they  had   re;ul   rX^~b  here,  us  well  as   \\i-\  below.


LXX,  as  usual,  the  Samaritan  is  conformed,  and  gives  nx"lp3  twice.     The  Syrac  has  C.j'L^Z'.iiilii  ,   (•>

unto,  or  /„•  SPOJ,  which  shows  that  the  translator  read  rX~'n':3  (>r  rXTlb),  Muphal  infinitive  of  the  verb  nX~  ,
or  rcirarded  r~T!~  a-  be  jig  the  same  defectively  written.  Thin  has  some  t'.ippurt  from  what  immediately  follows  i;i
Vcr.  .!>,  "-N  X~""  (Xii'hal  of  PIX"),  ni\(\  ftp):rarf(!,  or  "  pre.sen(e.il  Jtimsrlf"  to  him.  The  Tar^um  of  Onkelo.s  renders
i!  t  .  meet  i,:'m  :  which  shows  also  the  reading  HXTpb,  like  that  of  the  LXX.—  'I'.  I,.]

|  :    Ch.  xlvii.  li.—  ~'-~   ~Z~  •     This  is  sometimes  a  plira-e  of  comparl-i-n,   ui-    proportion,  as  a  Is.)  ~fZ  (•  :C   Lev.  XXV.
"-'  ;  Xnmh.  vi.  lit  ;  T'.xud.  xii.-l,  ete.),  yet  here  it   is  inure  expressive  taken  literally,  /•>  t/i>:  munUi   of  the'/;7//>'  ones,  \  r.  •-

i'  ]>r"]'(>rtion.  yc-t  sliowin^',  at  the  same  time,  Joseph  V  pathetic  care  --seeing  to  the  wants  aud  j.iv.-.  .
appropriate  fo  nl  even  fur  the  yonmrest  in  the  preat  company.  —  T.  1..1

['  Vwv.  1  ",.  "|*"Sn  HSrij.  The  Textu.-i  Samaritanui  has  X5H1  (xbn'  ),  whieh  llosi  nmiil'er  condemns  as  a  neve
It  M  i  ins,  however,  to  be  the  same  word,  only  with  a  different  orthogiuphy,  X  for  ~  ;  and  so  all  the  old  interpre
ters  regarded  it  -either  reading  X^ni  ,  or  regarding  nbr.1  as  equivalent  to  it;  I.  XX  Jf^Airrf,  fdHcil,  fain!,  <1  ;  .^vriai;
L.—  'fj*,  iri7.  -t  ihmhitc.  hiteially,  if  we  read  HX5,  die  lund  was  weary,  fond.  So  the  Greeks  use  the  verb  KUIUW  of
lands  and  cities  as  \\ell  as  of  persons.  Such  a  poetic,  transfer  has  great  pathos.  So  a'so,  in  Hebrew,  is  the  verb
rZ—  ,  to  ;-I.M',  tran.-ferred  to  the  land.  Conip.  Lev.  xxvi.  ;;i,  IJ.J.  As  also  other  verbs  by  the  same  or  au  opposite  figure  ;
Is.  xxiv.  1,  "P.  ~;^:  !~.";;'CX  ""Nn  "b^J  nblX,  wnunii»ij,  I'.-illicring,  i.i  the  land,  languid  and  wasting  the  world.
Thi  re  is  no  need  of  supjK>siir_r  a  different  root,  as  Gcseiiius  does,  or  of  comparing  it  with  n!~O  ,  which  is  quite  a  different
wi  rd.  See  in  the  O^ii  juts  Tyrannus  of  SOPIIOCI.KS,  20,  the  description  of  a  land  waiting  with  famine  and  pestilence  :

<fi0ii'0vcra  /uti'  KaAvfiv  cyfcaprois  \Soi'Ci'S.


[•''  Vcr.  21.—  3  '^?b  "irX  ".""ri.tnniff/.md  it  (.'In  j.rr  t,       .  .  .

w'..i.  h  is  good  llebrew,  notwithstanding  what  Roscnmuller  i-ays  about  it,  and  render  accordingly,  KaTeSovAwaaro  av-a
tit  raKas,  made  them  scrrc  him  as  servants,  whieh  would  not,  however,  be  slavery,  in  the  sense  of  man-ownership,  ac-
ii;  to  the  most  modern  notion,  but,  rather,  an  increase  of  their  civil  subjection.  The  Samaritan  has  the  Hebrew
onding  to  this  ;  but  the  whole  argument  of  Gcscnius  on  that  codex  goes  to  show  that  it  is  everywhere  a  conform


eonespo


e  oynuc,  oniy  wuu  more  Clearness,  nay  ing,  msieau  01  me  smgjo  wura  _  •  ,.»  ,  u  repetition,
«V.y  to  ci'/y,  or  rather,  y>om  farm  to  farm.  Easchi  says  he  did  this  to  break  up  their  title  by
destroying  the  residence  as  a  memorial  of  ownership,  and  so  preventing  seditions,  as  Grotius  also  remarks  upon  the  jlacc.
The  common  reading  is  confirmed  by  JOSKPHUS,  Anliq.  Jud.  ii.  7,  7.— T.  L.]

[6  Ver.  27. — rt2  ""~^.*"  •  1'he  Kiphal  form,  with  its  passive,  reflexive,  or  deponent  sense,  makes  the  expression
here  correspond  exactly  to  the  technical  language  of  the  English  common  law  in  regard  to  the  holding  of  la-nil— they  iven
seized  of  it— the  passive  of  the  habendum  el  tenendum  in  the  language  of  a  grant.  Compare  Josh.  xxii.  9,  CP-TriX  V ~X
~^  "TnXD  "I'wX  ,  "the  land  of  their  holding"  of  which  they  were  seized,  as  tenants  in  fee,  having  had  "livery  of'  seizin  "
given  to  them,  rVwlQ  T","  by  the  hand  of  Moses."  Compare  also  Xurnb.  xxxii.  30,  E-ZITS  Itfl  XJT  ,  "  and  they


CHAP.    XLVI.,    XLVII.


G31


were  seised  (that  is,  they  had  possession  given  them)  in  the  midst  of  you."  In  the  verse  before  (Gen.  xlvii.  26),  Joseph
is  saiil  to  have  given  them  possession  (acting  doubtless  as  agent  or  attorney  to  the  king,  the  chief  lord,  or  holder  in  capitr),
that  is,  livery  o/  seisin,  in  some  such  manner,  or  with  some  such  ceremonies  as  are  described  in  our  old  common-law  books.
jrnb  "OT"1  PnX  C',!"''! ,  "and  Joseph  put  it  for  a  decree"— a  memorial  of  the  grant,  Cl'*n  "I?  ,  unto  this  day,  that
is,  "'in  foe  "—in  perpetuum.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  how  strikingly  similar  have  been  the  law-language  and  ceremo
nies  of  different  ages.  Compare  the  prophetical,  or  spiritual,  grant,  Ps.  ii.  8,  where  !"!"nNI  has  the  same  emphasis,  "the
nations  for  an  inheritance,  the  ends  of  the  earth  for  a  holding  forever."— T.  L.]


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.

1.  The  transplantation  of  the  house  of  Israel  to
Egypt  under  the  divine  sanction  in  the  genesis  of  the
people  of  Israel,  and  under  the  protection   afforded
by  the  opposition  to  each  other  of  Egyptian  preju
dice  and  Jewish  custom ;  this  being  with  the  definite
reservation,  confirmed  by  an  oath,  of  the  return  to  Ca
naan.    Such  is  the  fundamental  idea  of  both  chapters.

2.  Knobel  finds  a  manifold  difference  in  the  his
tory  contained    in   chapters   xlvi.-xlviii.,  ''  between
the  ground  scripture  as  it  is  accepted  by  him,  and  the
amplification  of  the  later  editor."     According  to  the
Elohist  (lie  says),  Manasseh  and  Ephraim  are  said  to
have  been  youths  already,  whilst  here,  that  is,  in  the
"  amplification,"  etc.,  they  appear  as  boys  (ch.  xlviii.
8-12).      In  the  narrative  of  the  Elohist,  Jacob's  re
quest  respecting  his  burial  is  directed  to  all  his  chil
dren,  whilst   here   it   is   made  to  Joseph   only  (ch.
xlvii.  SI).     And  this   is  held  up  as  a  discrepancy  !
See  another  specimen  of  this  critical  dust-raising,  p.
336.     Here  again  Knobel  knows  not  how  to  take
the    significancy  of  his  UTTK|   \ey!>u.tva.     Even  "rt,
ver.  2:;,  must  answer  as  proof  of  a  second  Jehovistic
document.

:;.  Oh.  xlvii.  and  xlviii.  are  taken  by  Delitzsch  as
belonging  to  the  superscription,  as  containing  Jacob's
testamentary  arrangements.

4.  The  contents :  1)  Jacob's  departure,  ch.  xlvi.
1-7;  '2)  Jacob's  family,  ver.  8-2 T  ;  3)  the  reunion
and  mutual  salutation  in  the  land  of  Goshen,  ver.
28-34  ;  4)  introduction  of  Joseph's  brethren  and
his  father  Jacob  to  Pharaoh ;  grant  of  the  Goshen
territory  ;  the  induction  and  settlement  of  the  house
of  Israel,  ch.  xlvii.  1-12;  5)  Joseph's  administration
in  Egypt,  ver.  13-2C;  G)  Israel  in  Egypt  and  the
proviso  he  makes  for  his  return  to  Canaan,  even  in
death,  vers.  27-31.


EXEGETICAL  AXD    CRITICAL.

1.  Jacob's  departure  (ch.  xlvi.  1-7). — And  Is
rael  took  his  journey. — Even  as  Israel  he  had  a
human  confidence  that  he  might  follow  Joseph's  call
to  Egypt.  But  as  a  patriarch  he  must  have  the  di
vine  sanction.  Until  this  time  he  might  have  doubts.
When  he  halted  at  Beer-sheba  ("  the  place  of  Abra
ham's  tamarisk  tree,  and  of  Isaac's  altar  ")  he  offered
sacrifice  to  the  God  of  his  fathers — a  peace  offering,
which,  in  this  case,  may  also  be  regarded  as  a  thank-
offering,  an  offering  of  inquiry,  or  in  fulfilment  of  a
vow.  It  must  be  remembered  that  Isaac  once  had
it  in  view  to  journey  to  Egypt,  had  not  God  forbid
den  him.  And  so,  in  the  last  revelation  that  Jacob
received,  in  the  night-vision,  there  comes  to  him  a
voice,  saying,  Jacob,  Jacob;  just  as  Abraham  had  to
be  prepared  by  a  decisive  prohibition  in  the  repeated
call,  Abraham,  Abraham,  ch.  xxii.  11,  so,  in  a  similar
way,  must  Jacob  here  be  prepared  for  going  onward
to  Egypt.  The  revelation  which  Abraham  had,  ch.
xv.,  might  seem  dark  to  him.  Its  import  neither


held  him  back  nor  urged  him  forward  on  the  jour
ney.  The  transplantation  of  his  house  to  Egypt  wai
a  bold  undertaking.  On  this  account  the  God  of  his
fathers,  the  Providence  of  his  fathers,  reveals  himself
to  him  as  God  El,  the  powerful  one,*  with  whom  he
may  safely  undertake  the  journey,  notwithstanding
the  apparent  inconsistency  that  he  is  leaving  the
land  of  promise.  The  main  thing  in  the  divine
promise  now  is,  that  he  is  not  only  to  become  a
mighty  people  in  Egypt,  but  that  he  shall  return  to
Canaan.  The  latter  part  might  be  fulfilled  in  the  re
turn  of  his  dead  body,  but  this  would  be  as  symbolic
pro-representation  of  the  fact  that  Israel's  return  to
Canaan  should  be  the  return  of  his  people.  The
firmness  of  the  departure  appears  in  the  fact  that
Israel,  with  wives  and  children,  allows  himself  to  be
placed  on  Egyptian  wagons,  and  that  they  took  with
them  all  the  movable  property  that  they  possessed
in  Canaan.  The  picture  of  such  a  migration  scene
upon  the  monument  of  Beni  Hassan  is  described  by
Hengstenberg,  "  Moses  and  Egypt,"  p.  37,  etc.
"Jacob  is  now  to  die  in  Egypt ;  this  death,  however,
in  a  foreign  land,  is  to  have  the  alleviation  that  Jo
seph  shall  put  his  hand  upon  his  eyes.  This  last,
service  of  love  was  also  customary  among  other  an
cient  nations  (comp.  Horn.  II.  xi.  453,  ctc.f )."  Kno
bel.  Concerning  the  wagons,  see  DELITZSCH,  p.  562.
2.  Jacob's  house  (vers.  8-27).  Three  things  are
here  to  be  considered:  1)  The  number  7";  2)  the
enumeration  of  the  children  and  grandchildren  who
may  have  been  born  in  Egypt ;  3)  the  relation  of  the
present  list  to  the  one  given  Numb,  xxvi.,  and  1
Chron.  ii.  The  numbering  of  the  souls  in  Jacob's
household  evidently  points  to  the  important  symbolic
number  70.  This  appears  in  its  significance  through
out  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  re
flected  in  the  ethnological  table,  in  the  70  elders  of
Moses,  in  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin,  in  the  Alexandrian
version  of  the  LXX,  in  the  70  disciples  of  our  Lord,
in  the  Jewish  reduction  of  the  heathen  world  to  70
nations.  Ten  is  the  number  of  the  completed  hu
man  development,  seven  the  number  of  perfection
in  God's  work ;  seventy,  therefore,  is  the  develop
ment  of  perfection  and  holiness  in  God's  people.
But  between  the  complete  development  and  the  germ
there  must  be  a  correspondence  ;  and  this  is  the
family  of  the  patriarch,  consisting  of  seventy  souls.
"The  number  seventy  is  the  mark  by  which  the
small  band  of  emigrants  is  sealed  and  stamped  as
the  holy  seed  of  the  people  of  God."  Delitzsch.  On
the  manner  in  which  the  number  70  is  formed  out
of  the  four  columns,  Leah,  Zilpah,  Rachel,  Billiah,
sec  DELITZSCH,  p.  563  ;  KEIL,  p.  270.  It  is  to  be

*  [Our  English  translation,  I  am  God,  fails  here  in  not
giving  the  article  (bs!"!),  or  any  emphasis  of  expression
equivalent  to  it.  The  best  way  would  have  been  to  pivo  tho
name  itself—  I  am  El — as  elsewhere  there  is  given  the  name
El  Shaddai,  or  else  the  meaning  of  the  name  as  I/angc  ren
ders  it— I  am  the  Mighty  One,  the  God  of  thy  fathers.—
T.L.]

t  [See  also  the  Odyssey  xi.  426 ;  xxiv.  29G,  and  a  very
touching  passage  to  the" same  effect  in  the  Electro,  of  Sopho
cles,  1138.— T.  L.]


(.EXKSIS,  OR    THE    FIRST   JjOOK    Or'   AlOSES.


observed   tliat  Dinah,  as  an  unmarried  heiress,  con-
stitutcs  an  independent  niember  of  the  house,  just  as
>Serali,  daughter  of  Asher  (ver.  IT);   whilst  it   may
be  supposed,  i:i  respect  to  the  other  daughters  and
granddaughters,  that  by  marriage  they  became  incor
porated  wiih  t'ne  families    and  tribes  tliat  are  men
tioned.     The  fact  that  a  .-on  of  Simeon  is  specially
mentioned  a-  the  son  of  a  Canaanuish  woman,  show"
that  it   vras  the  rule  in  Jacob's  house-  to  avoid  (';
imnitish  marriages,  though    the  "  Ishmaelitish,  KL
nirian,  and  Edomitie  relationshiji   still  stood  open  t
tnem."  Keil.     The  ancient  connection,  however,  wit
Mesopotamia,    Laban    had    impaircil,  if  not  entirel
interrupted.     .\    similar  enumeration,    K\od.    i.    .-,
Deut.  x.  22;  whilsl  the  LXX,  and,  after  ir.  Acts  vii
14,  lire-cms   the  number  T"),  by  counting  in  the   livi
sons  of  Ephraimand  Manasseh  according  to  I  Chron
viii;  j  ''.v  KEIL,  p.  -271),  an  enumeration  b\

which   the   persons    named  are   still  lucre  distinct!"
M-t  ;i[>  as   heads  of  families.

As  to  what  farther  relates  to  the  sons  of  Phare?
the  SOL-  of  Benjamin,  etc.,  it  is  clear  that  when  it  is  said
of  Jacob,  tliat  he  brought  all  these  souls  to  E;_r\pt,  it
have  the  same  meaning   as  when    it   is   said'ol
his  tw.-lve  sons,  that  he  brought  them   out   of  Meso
potamia,   though  Benjamin   was  born  afienvards  in
his  home.     The  foundation  of  the  Palestinian  family
"late  was   laid    on    the  return   of  Jacob   to  Canaan',
whilst  the  formation  of  the   K-yptian   family  state'
j'lid  of  its  full  patriarchal  development,  was  laid  when'
ho  came  to  Kgypt.     The  idea  goes  ahead  of  the  date.
umgarteii   urges    the   literal    conception;  but    the
light  view  of  the  matter  is  given   by  llenirstenberu'.
For  a  closer  discussion  of  the  question  see  KEIL,  p.
271,  and  DKUTZSCH,  p.  :,C,l  •  especially  in  relation'  to
liculticsof  KNOBEL.P.  340.     KKIL:  "It  is  clear
that  our  list  contains  not  only  Jacob's  sons  and  irrand-
M>ns  already  born  at  the  time  of  the  emigration,  but
lesidesthis,  all  the  sons  that  formed  the  ground  of  the
twelve-ttibed   nation,— or,  in    general,  all  the  grand-
and  great-grandchildren    that    became  founders    of
nischpa-hoth,   or  independent,   self-governing    fami
lies.     Thus    only  can    the    fact    be    explained,    the
tacl    otherwise  inexplicable,    that,    in    the   days  of
-loses,  with   the  exception  of  the   double   tribe  of
•Ios«?l>li,  there  were,  in  none   of  the  tribes,  dcscend-
:uits  from  any  grandson,  or  great-grandsons,  of  Jacob
that  are  not  mentioned  in  this  list.     The  deviations
in  the  names,  as  given  in  Xumb.  xxvi.,  and  in  Chroni-
!e.s,  are  lobe  considered  in  their  respective  places."
'*\  e  ;.  ley  here  to  KKII,,  ]).  HT2;   DKI.ITZSCH,  p.  565.

::.    11, in-  rf-unlon  and  greetings  In  th<    l,i,,<!  <•/'
'i'osltm.      Ver.    28-34.— And  he   sent  Judah.—
Judah  has  so  nobly  approved  himself  true  and  faith
ful,    wise    and    eloquent,   in    Joseph's    history    that
Jacob  mav,  with  all  confidence,  send  him  before  to
prepare    the   way.     Judah's    mission    is    to    icucive
Joseph's  directions,  in  order  that  he  himself  may  be
a  guide  to  Israel,  ami   lead  him   unto  the   land   of
'Os.ieii.     Joseph,  however,  hastens  forward  to  meet
';•  in  Goshen,  and  to  ?reet  him  and  his  breth-
ie  presented  himself  to  him.— KKIL  :
'•  riX-3  otherwise  generally  thus  used  in  spcakin"-  of
an  appearance  of  (Jod,  is  hero  chosen  to  express  the
[TKiry  m  which  Joseph  went  to  meet  his  father."  *


But  surc.y  it  was  less  the  external  splendor,  in  itself
considered,  than  the  appearance  of  one  beloved  Ion"
supposed  to  be  dead,  but  nowlivin-  in  Morions  pTOs-
pcnty.— Now  let  me  die.— This  joyful  view  of
(.cath  is  not  to  be  overlooked  ;  it  is  opposed  to  the
common  notion  respecting  the  Jewish  view  of  the
hie  beyond  the  grave.  jSm-h  language  shows  that

English  veraon,  as  in  that  of  Luther,  it  is  left  anibi-ruons

iif'h  both  convey  the  impression  that  it  was  Jo.-.ei  !i    The

Jewish  commc]  IT.     Uashi  makes  it  Joyciih   '-ml

raises  the  query,  why  Jacob  did  not  fall  upon  his  son'sneck

ami  kiss  him  ;  lor  which  i,,-  gives  reasons  from  the  llabbins,

at   are  hardly   intelligible.     Maimor.idcs,    on   the   other

land,  makes  Jacob  the  grammatical  subject.     It  would  not

iiavc  been  according  to  tlie  ancient  notions  of  revcivne"  for

the  son  to  have  fir.-t  fallen  on  his  father's  luvi;  and  kissc


kissed  hie  h.

brace.     Joseph,  he   intimates,  appeared  to  him  in 'alTbis
piory.  .\!  nrsthedid  not  r«v<  gnize  him,  but  as  soon  as  he  saw
'  '^  («cn-,  :>  :  •  '  ;    '     -t   i    passively,  ari,,,,rr,l,  bream,-
i'<*.&  ,  unto  him)  he  tell,  etc.     AVe  may  ihink  Maimonides'
other  reason  to  be  ineorielusive  in  this  case,  but  the  -i-m-
•aloneis  ei, titled  t-..  mueh  attrition.     The  easy  and
natural  ru.e  is  that  where  there  fire  a  number  of  verb-  cou-
nected,  the  subject  of  the  first  belongs  to  them  all  unless
is  a  change  direct,  or  implied  in  seine  way,  in  the
number,  gender,   or   idiom.     Had  "3  X~^  hecn'like  the
rest  of  the  verbs,  there  would   have   becn"no  mound   for
upjiosition.     It  is,  however,  passive  or  deponent -he
appeared  unto  him  (badly  rendered,  presented  liiinsrlf)  or
no  visible  or  known  to  him.     The  Targum  ..f  Oiikelos
ranslates  '3    S^l  by  ^b  ^barx  ,  was  r  i-cah  I  to   him
In  Mich  ease  the  grammat'ical  r'fcjvrf  of  the  verl
may  become  the  real  subject  of  the  one  that  follows  ;  and  it
•  I  for  here  in  the  pronoun  (•;)  which   rejire-
ikes  a  change  as  though  it  1  :!,]  been
•:i  actively,  and  ht  (Jacob)  recognized  him,  ml  fell  on  his
•k,  etc.     The  verb  S-H  is  .\j},h:..l,  ,  ,  {o  tl-.e


l-  wl:i,-!i  is  used  for  itheiv,  an-1  is  .  -

£  denote  n  subjective  a;.]^earanoc.     Tim-;,  in  the  r,
•  errfon  of  the  >,"ew  'I'e^tament,  it  eorrcs;  on, Is  to  the  (ir.  ek
'vOri,  .and  is  even   used   for  d«;3Ae^e   ('/„:  rfcorcrecl  fiyl,!),
ruten  in  this  passive  or  pubiectivo  aspect.     As  in   Murk   x
2  ;  John  ix.  15,  where,  in  the  Syria,-,  Jesus  is  the  subject
i  the  verb,  and  the  blind  man's  seeing,  or  seeing  npiin,  is
•ikingly  exi)ressed  by  sayinp,  he  became  visible  unto
im—tniit  is,  Jesus  stan<Iiug  before  him,  as  the  first  object
n  which  the  new  eye  fell.     Coiii].an',  also,  in  the  Greek,
-ul;e  xxii. -13,  "and  an  an:  ,  !  appeared   (c5</,^)  unto  him.
\dtie  prayed,  '  etc.     The  subjccl  of  irpooTju'xeTO  is  different,
71  tins  account,  from  the  Grammatical  sul.j.-et  of  ^Or,,  ami
derived  Irom  the  precedm-  a-JTw,  although  no  other  direct
-«  m  s.     In  the  s;  irit  of  this  the  late

Arabic  \  ersion  of  Drs.  Sm;!h  and  Vim  l>yck  ha>  well  ren
dered  it  !"'  a;vmrcd  itnlo  him,   in  had  of


vhe.n  /„


[*  The  right  view  of  13  Xl'1  (appeared  unto  him)  is  ne-

'•essary  to  determine  the  mcaiiins  of  what  follows:  mid  he

II  iyw»  In*  neck,  etc.     Who  fell  !  It  is  not  so  clear  that  the

f  the  verb  b3*1  is  Joseph,  although  it  is  so  taken

by  the  T.XX,  the  Vulgate,  and  most  of  the  translators    In  our


tioii  following  the  Vulgate.  Of  course,  fho  rule  slated  and
the  apparent  exception,  become  unimportant,  andaie  both
disregarded,  wlen  the  context,  of  itself,  prevents  nil  am
biguity.  The  more  carefully,  however,  the  language  is
examined  here,  the  inore  reason  will  there  appear  for  re
garding  the  father  as  the  subject  of  the  verb  b'g'sl ;  as  in  the
parallel  passage,  Luke  xv.  20,  where  it  in  the  fafhcr  who
sees  thereon,  and  who  falls  upon  his  neck,  dSev  O.VTOV  o
Trarrjp  KOL  entirco-tv  eiri  TOV  rpax^ov  aiirou.  It  would  have
been  the  same  had  the  construction  been,  and  he  appeared
unto  him.

But  whatever  view  is  taken,  there  is  great  pathos  in  the
particle  "11?,  commonly  rendered  orjain,  and  here,  very
tamely,  in  our  English  Version,  a  good  wlrilr.  In  this  pas
sage  it  must  have  its  primary  sense  of  repetition,  reiteration,
as  it  appears  in  the  Arabic  t>Lc.  ^'hich  the  translator,
Arabs  Erpenianus,  actually  uses  for  it.  So  Ilashiand  Abcn
Ezra.  They  refer  to  Job  xxxiv.  23,  111'  C^C"1  JO  "for
not  repeatedly  (or  continually)  does  God  lay  upon  man  "
A  better  reference  would  be  to  Ts.  cxxxix.  IS,  when  I  awake,
lam  still  with  ihw,  r(S?  "T"?.  again  and  again  with  thee  ;
or  I's.  Ixxxiv.  5,  "  Ricked  arc  they  wlio  dwell  in  thy  house,


CHAP.   XLVI.,   XLVII.


G33


J;icob  recognizes,  in  Joseph's  reappearance,  the  last
miraculous  token  of  the  divine  favor  as  shown  to  him
in  this  world.— I  will  go  up  to  Pharaoh.— Knobcl
explains  the  expression  from  the  fact,  that  the  city
of  Memphis,  being  the  royal  residence,  was  situated
higher  than  the  district  of  Goshen.     Kcil  explains  it
ideally  as  a  going  up  to  court.     This  view   becomes
necessary  if  we  regard  Tanais  as  the  capital,  which  is,
however,  rendered  somewhat  doubtful  by  the  expres
sion  itself,  if  it  is  to  be  taken  literally. — That  ye  shall
say,  thy  servants'  trade  hath  been  about  cattle.
— This   instruction    shows  Joseph's   ingenuousness,
combined  with  prudent  calculation.  His  brethren  are
frankly  to  confess  their  occupation  ;    Joseph  even
sets  them  the  example  before  Pharaoh,  although,  ac
cording  to  his  own  explanation,  shepherds  were  an
abomination  to  the  Egyptians,  that  is,  an  impure
caste.     I5y  this  frankness,  however,  they  are  to  gain
the  worldly  advantage  of  having  given  to  them  this
pastoral  district  of  Goshcn,  and  at  the  same  time,  the
theocratic  spiritual  benefit  of  dwelling  in  Egypt,  se
cured,  by  this   distinction  of  castes,  from  all  impure
mingling  with  the  Egyptians   themselves.     Knobel
lays  stress  upon  the  word  1X2Z,  in  distinction  from
*ip2,   because  sheep  and  goats  were  not  generally
nscd  for  sacrifice  by  the  Egyptians,  because  their
meat  did  not  belong  to  the  priestly  royal  dish,  and
because  wool  was  considered  by  the  priests  to  be  un
clean,  ;ind  was,  therefore,  never  used  for  the  wrap
ping  of  the  dead.     But  the  conclusion  drawn  from
this,   that  keepers  of  sheep  and  goats  had  been  es
pecially  rcinn  (a  thing  tabooed),  cannot  be  estab
lished.  _  This,  in  a  very  high  degree,  was  the  case
only  with  herdsmen  of  swine  (HEROD,  ii.  47),  who,
nevertheless,  together  with  the  herdsmen  of  cattle,'
were  numbered  in  the  seven  castes  (HEROD,  ii.  164),
and   both   together  called  the  caste  of  shepherds,
(Dion.  i.  74).     The  name  Povic6\ot  is  only  a  naming
a  potiori  (from  the  better  part)."     Delitzsch.     Ac
cording  to  GRANT  ("Travels,"  ii.  17),  the  herdsmen
are  represented  on  the  monuments,   as  long,  lean
distorted,  sickly  forms — a  proof  of  the  contempt  that
rested  upon  them.     Joseph's  theocratic  faithfulness
preferred  for  his  people  contempt  to  splendor,  pro
vided  that  under  the  cover  of  this  contempt,  they
might  remain  secluded  and  unmixed  (see  Heb.  xi.  26).
For  the  cause  of  this  dis-esteem,  see  KEIL,  p.  274  •
K.SOBKL,  p.  oil.

4.  The  presentation  of  Joseph's  brothers,  and  of
Us  father,  to  Pharaoh.     The  y rant  of  the  land  of


-   •'.*•'  -»  •  't>j  *•*•  '••'"-i~'*".u«-,o  -u L*.  L i  nj i  j  tuct  rtvtc  nuit

out  it  means  more  than  this ;  he  fell  upon  his  neck  and  wept
repeated:;/,— over  and  over  again,— unahlo  to  satisfy  the
ilJ.epov—K\av9fj.olo,  as  Homer  styles  the  luxury  of  arief  even
for  remembered  sorrows,  much  loss  the  joy  of  tears  at  such
a  recognition.  Affecting  is  it  in  either  view,  but  most  of -ill
when  wo  regard  it  as  the  long  sobbings  and  long  embracing
01  the  aged  lather.  The  old  eyes  weeping  !  There  is  not  in
our  human  life  a  more  touching  scene,  even  when  it  comes
from  senile  weakness,  and  not,  as  in  this  case,  from  reco<*-
nitions  that  might  draw  tears  from  the  stoutest  manhood
and  from  the  recollection  of  events  whoso  pathetic  interest
the  utmost  invention  of  the  novelist  or  the  dramatist  fiils
to  imitate.  With  this  passage  in  Genesis  there  may  be  com
pared  (lie  interview  of  David  and  Jonathan,  1  Sam.  xx  41  •
"  And  they  kissed  one  another,  and  wept,  one  with  another^
until  David  exceeded,  ir^an  TH  15  .»  David  aulem  am-
plius;  his  emotion  went  beyond  all  ordinary  bounds  The
expression  seems  to  have  much  of  the  force  of  the  particle  in

he  passage  before  us.  It  is  another  example  of  the  rhetori-


Goshcn.  The  induction  and  settlement.  Ch.  xhii.  1-12,
—Some  of  Ms  brethren.— (nspa)   This  has  been
interpreted  as  meaning  some  of  the  oldest,  and  some
of  the  youngest,  or,  in  some  such  manner  ;  but  there
is  no  certainty  about  it ;  since  the  expression  may
mean  any  part  as  taken  (cut  off)  from  a  whole.     As
Joseph  could  not  present  all  his  brethren  to  Pharaoh,
he  chooses  five,  a  number  of  much  significance  to
the  Egyptians  (see  ch.  xliii.    34).     Pharaoh  again
shows  himself,  in  this  case,  a  man  of  tact  and  deli
cacy.     Of  the  young  men  he  asks  the  nature  of  their
occupation  ;  of  old  Jacob  he  inquires  his  age.     Es
pecially  well   docs  he  manage  in  not  immediately
granting    to    Joseph's    brethren    their    petition   to
be  allowed  to  settle   in    Goshen,   but   leaves   it  to
Joseph,  so  that  he  appears  before  his  brethren  in
all  his  powers,  and  their  thanks  are  to  be  rendered
unto  him  instead  of  Pharaoh.     Joseph,  at  the  same
time,  receives   full    power  to  appoint   proper   men
from    among     them    as    superintending   herdsmen
(magistros  pccoris).—  See  KNOBEL,  who  thinks  "  that
this  petition  was  more  suitable  for  the  chief  of  the
horde  (sic)."       Yet  he  quiets  himself  by  the  fact
that  in  other  places  the  narrator  brings  forward  the
sons  of  the  aged  father ;    as  though  this  were  not
an  obviously  proper  proceeding.     Still  he  will  have  it
that  the  ground  Scripture,  as  he  calls  it,  reports  but
one  introduction  of  Jacob.— And  Jacob  "blessed
Pharaoh.— When  he  came  into  his  presence  and
when  he  left  him.     There  is  something  more  here
than  a  mere  conventional  greeting.     Jacob  had  every
inducement  to  add  his  blessing   to   his  thanks  for
Joseph's  treatment,  for  the  stately  invitation,  and  for
the  kind  reception.     Besides,  an  honorable  old  age  is
a  sort  of  priesthood  in  the  world.— Of  my  pilgrim
age.— Jacob's  consciousness  of  the  patriarchal  life,
as  a  pilgrimage  in  a  foreign  land,  must  have  devel
oped  itself  especially  in  his  personal  experience  (seo
Heb.  xi.  13,  etc.).— Few  and  evil.— That  is,  full  of
sorrow.     Jacob  speaks  of  his  life  as  of  something
already  past.     This  is  explained  from  his  elevated
state  of  soul.     lie  is  ready  to  die.     In  such  presenti
ment  of  death,  however,  he  is  mistaken  by  almost
seventeen  years  ;  for  he  died  at  the  age  of  one  hun
dred  and  forty-seven.      His  father,  Isaac,  also  had
thought  to  make  his  testament  much  earlier  (seech,
xxvii.  1,  etc.).     In  fact,  the  age  of  Jacob  fell  much
short  of  that  of  Abraham  (one  hundred  and  seventy-
five),  and  that  of  Isaac  (one  hundred  and  eighty).—
In   the   land  cf  Rameses.— (Heroon-polis.)     Ch.
xlv.  10,  it  is  called  Goshen.     It  is  here  named  after  a
like-named  place  in  Goshen  (Exod.  i.  11);  and  thus
we  are  already  prepared  for  the  departure  afterwards,
which  started  from  Rameses  (Exod.  xii.  37  ;  Numb,
xxxiii.  35).     Concerning  the  country  of  Goshcn,  see
KEIL,  p.  276  ;  DELITZSCH,  p.  572.

5.  Joseph's  administration  of  the  affairs  of  Egypt
(Ver.  13-26).  _Tliis  proceeding  of  Joseph,  reducing
the  Egyptians,  in  their  great  necessity,  to  a  state  of
entire  dependence  on  Pharaoh,  has  been  made  the
ground  of  severe  reproach ;  and,  indeed,  it  docs
look  strange  at  first.  The  promotion  of  earthly  wel
fare,  and  of  a  comfortable  existence,  cannot  excuse
a  theocratic  personage  in  bringing  a  free  people  into
the  condition  of  servants.  But  the  question  here  is
whether  Joseph  really  acted  in  an  arbitrary  manner.
He  was  not  a  sovereign  lord  of  the  storehouses,  but
only  Pharaoh's  servant.  As  such,  ho  could  not  de
mand  of  Pharaoh  views  that  in  their  aspect  of  liber
ality  lay  beyond  his  horizon  ;  besides  it  is  to  be  con
sidered  that  the  people  themselves  desired  to  save


634


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   HOSES.


their  lives    at    the  price    of   their    freedom.       The
point  we  are  mainly  to  look  at  is  that  Joseph  was
riot  at    liberty  to  give  the  com  away,  and,  to  saj
nothing  of  Pharaoh's   right,  he  might  thereby  have
opened  so  wide  the  door  of  a  wasteful  squandering,
to  have  produced  a  universal  famine.     We  are   also
to  suppose  that  Joseph  was  urged,  step  by   step,  to
these  measures,  by  the  pressing  consequences  of  the
situation;  but,  that  he  tried  to  mitigate,  as  much  as
posiole,  the  d  pendenec  that  ncces.-aiily  followed,  by
an    assessment  of  the  iifth  part,   leaving  four-fifths
to  them.     The  principal  aim  of  the  narrative  is  to
show,  in  the  lirst  place,  the  advantages  of  the  Israel
ites  in  comparison  with  the  Egyptians  ;  how  splen
didly  the  foimer  were  provided   for.      Again,  Joseph
might   have  yielded  to  the  mgeiiev  of  the  circum
stances,  all  the  more  freely  from  the  consideration,
that  the  future   of  Israel  would    be   more  secure  by
thus  having  a  favorable  position  among  a  ilepri  sscd,
rather  than  a  haughty  and  oppressive  people.     IJut,
at  all  events,  even  in  this  relation,  divine  retribution
surpasses,  in  its  severity,  tin1  inei.Mire  of  human  un-
derstanding.      When  afterwards    the    Israelites  were
held  ill  bondage  by  the  Egyptians,  it  may  remind  us
<•!'   the    fa. -I,    that,    through    Josrph,    the    Egyptians
'Ivcs  had  been  made  servants  to  Pharaoh,  how
ever  pure   may  have   been  his  motive. — Herds  of
cattle. — The   expression  r~i"r;~n  r:p"  shows   that
the  lair  value  of  the  cattle  is  here  kept  prominently
in   view;  since  n:p~  denotes  property   acquired. —
And  as  for  the  people  they  demanded. — Con
cerning    the   'iili'iTeiit    readings,    ver.    21,   where   the
I. XX  and  the  Samaritan,  and  other.-, with  Knobel,  read
"•^-"n   ih.-i.'.id  of-r^^n.  see  note,  KKII,,  p.  277.
We    ir.ust    not,    however,    sup]>ose,   with    Delit/.sch,
a  translocation  of  the  people  from  one  place  in  Egypt
i<>  another  in  its  remotest   ]>art,  but   the   distributing
of  the  present  crown  ])easants  into  the  different  towns
of  their   iv.-peetive    districts   throughout   the   whole
laud.      The  ground  of  this  was  that,  for  the  present,
tliev  must  get  their  sustenance  from   their  granaries
in  the  cities,  and  that,  afterwards,  these  became  the
places  in  which  they  were  to  deliver  the  fifth  part. —
Had   a  portion  assigned  them. — We  understand
this  of  the  land  of  the  priests  not  of  their  portion  of
the  provision  which   is  mentioned  afterwards. — Ye
shall  give  the  fifth  part. — This  was  no  heavy  tax  ;
and  there  was  a  benefit  in  it,  that  it  tended  to  pro
duce  an  habitual  carefulness  in  respect  to  the  unfruit
ful  years.     That  a  provision,  in  such  cases,  had  here
tofore    been  wanting  in   Egypt,  is  evident  from  the
destitution  of  the  people.     Joseph  may,  therefore,  be
•ookcd  upon,  in  all  this,  as  a  wise  man  striving  with
the  necessities  of  famine,  so  sore  an  evil  in  ancient
times.*


[*  Ail  tliis  difficulty,  about  Joseph's  proceedings  vanishes
when  ('in:  studiously  considers  what  the  Egyptians  would
have  do]..',  or  Low  fatal  their  free,  improvidence  might  have
proved,  without  hi*  sagacious  political  economy.  There
would  have  been  no  cattle  to  he  sold  ;  the  hinds  would  have
been  barren  lor  the  want  of  hands  to  till  them.  Each  one
for  himself,  without  a  common  weal,  and  a  wise  ruler  taking
care  of  it,  and  taxing  them  for  such  care,  there  would  not
have  been,  in  their  future  prospects,  any  stimulus  to  frugal
ity,  or  industry.  It  is  yet  an  unsettled  question,  whether
unregulated  individual  cultivation  of  laud,  in  small  por
tions,  or  a  judicious  system  of  landlordism,  for  which,  of
course,  there  must  he  rent  or  tax,  is  the  tetter  method  for
the  universal  good.  The  twenty  per  cent,  which  Joseph
exacted  for  the  governmental  care,  was  not  a  system  of
slavery  ;  and  it  may  have  been  far  better  than  a  much  creat
or  percentage,  perhaps,  to  capitalists  and  usurers. — T.  L.]


The  accounts  which  Ilr.r.onoTrs  (ii.  100),  and
DIODORUS  (i.  73),  have  given  concerning  the  national
economy  of  ancient  Egypt,  seem  to  refer  to  disposi
tions  of  a  later  date,  at  whose  basis,  nevertheless,
may  have  lain  these  measures  of  Joseph,  even  as  the
latter  may  have  been  grounded  on  still  elder  rela
tions  and  peculiarities.  The  main  view  to  be  taken
in  respect  to  this  economy  is,  that  the  kin;:,  in
connection  with  the  priest  and  warrior  castes, "pos
sessed  the  land  il>iod.  Sic.),  whilst  the  peasants  and
tradesmen  had  land  subject  to  rent.  >"ow  if  Joseph
changed  the  feudal  system,  formerly  existing,  into
one  of  servitude,  it,  is  to  be  remembered  that  the
former  was  not  so  favorable,  nor  the  latter  so  un
favorable,  as  that  which  existed  in  still  later  times.
The  feudal  peasant  was  already  under  an  absolute
authority,  and  was  obliged,  e.g.,  at  the  beginning  of
the  seven  years  of  plenty,  to  give  the  iiith  part  ;
whilst  the  servants,  as  they  are  afterw-.mla  called,
were  only  persons  put  under  a  more  definite  direc
tion  in  the  management  of  their  economic  relations.
For  more  on  this,  sec  KKII,,  p.  278,  on  the  tax  rela
tions  of  the  East,  ami  al-o  Knobel,  p.  340.  C.erlach
maintains  that  the  Egyptians  did  not  h'.>C";r,e  1  •
men  in  this  transaction,  but  were  only  brought  inlo
a  feudal  relation  to  Pharaoh.  It  is  said,  however,
expressly,  that  Joseph  bought  not  only  their  land,
but  themselves,  their  bodies.  It  is  true,  a  di.-tiacl.ion.
may  be  made  betwec  ;i  this,  and  an  entire  bodily  sub
jection  ;  and,  therefore,  may  it  be  called  servitude
or  dependence.

6.  Israd  in  Egypt.  Hi*  /•/•<>.",'.',>.  7//.t  nlurn  in,
duith  to  (J<uK'(t,i.  Ver.  27-31. — And  they  had
possession  therein. — Personal  appropriation  and
outward  extension. — And  Jacob  lived. — The  nar
rative  prepares  us  very  circun.slaiiiialiy  for  Jacob's
death,  as  an  event  of  great  moment  to  his  people. —
Put  thy  hand  under  my  thigh. — See  ch.  x.xiii.
Joseph  is  to  confirm  by  an  oath  his  promise  to  bring
his  remains  home  to  Canaan.  Because  Jacob  exacts
this  of  all  his  sons  collectively  (see  ch.  xlix.),  Knobel,
as  usual,  discovers  a  discrepancy.  It  is,  however,
the  same,  determination,  only  more  fully  developed
in  the  latter  passage.  After  Joseph's  promise,  Jacob
prays  upon  his  bed.  The  fulfilment  of  his  last  \vi.-h
lias  been  secured. — And  Israel  bowed  himself. —
We  must  think  of  him  as  sitting  up  in  his  couch  ;  it
is,  therefore,  incorrect  when  Keil  says,  he  turned  to
wards  the  head  of  the  bed,  in  order  to  worship,  u-hile
It/ing  with  the  face  turned  towi'ti-dx  (lie  bed.  The  Vul
gate  which  Keil  quotes,  says  the  reverse:  wlorav'd
JJcimi  c,i>i  i'1-r.'ii'x  ad  Irctuli  cap/it.  The  idea  is,  that,
kneeling,  he  bows  himself  in  the  bed,  with  his  face
turned  towards  the  head.  The  LXX  seems  to  have  read
~£>]  for  M^ri  (ham-mat-teh  for  Jtam-mit-talt)
caused  by  a  mistake  of  the  vowels  to  the  unpointed
consonants,  and  the  consideration  that  Jacob  is  not
represented  as  sick  and  confined  to  his  bed  until  the
next  chapter.  By  this  LXX  interpretation  :  -npocrtKv-
t}<TfV  'lrrpai)\  tirl  rb  6.Kpov  TTJS  [)d,8dav  aurov  (which
we  also  find  in  the  Syriae,  the  Italian,  and  Ileb.  xi.
21),  there  is  suggested  the  rich  and  beautiful  thought,
that  Jacob  celebrates  the  completion  of  his  pilgrim
age  (ch.  xlvii.  9)  in  prayer  and  thanksgiving.  If  we
take  it  in  the  other  sense,  having  no  greater  evi
dence,  and  less  significance,  the  turning  to  the  bed'a
lead  in  a  kneeling  posture  is  the  one  natural  to  the
jody,  if  we  imagine  the  bed's  head  to  be  the  higher
:>art.  At  the  same  time,  it  seems  here  expressed  that
Jacob,  in  praying,  turns  away  from  the  world,  and


CIIAr.   XLVL,   XLVII.


605


from  men  to  God,  as  the  facing  and  turning  of  tli
priest  at  the  altar  expresses  the  same  idea  symbol!
cally.  Yon  Bolilen  maintains  that  the  question  ha
nothing  to  do  with  praying.  It  means,  he  says,  tha
Jacob  was  sinking  back  upon  his  pillow,  as  David
1  Kings  i.  47,  whilst  Joseph  put  his  hand  under  hi
thigh.  For  such  an  occasion,  however,  the  wor
sinn'l1*]  (generally  denoting  adoration)  would  seen
unhappily  chosen,  and  is  easily  misunderstood.  DK
LiTz&en  takes  the  two  representations  together  (a
denoting  in  one  the  act  of  prayer  and  the  oath  cere
monial).


DOCTEINAL  AXD    ETHICAL.

1.  Jacob's  halt  at  Beer-sheba  furnishes  a  proof
again  of  the  distinction  between  human  certainty
and  that  derived  from  the  divine  assurance.     Thus
John  the  Baptist  knew  already  of  the  Messianic  mis
sion,  before  his  baptism,  but  it  was  not  until  the
revelation  made  at  the  baptism  that  he  received  the
divine  assurance  which  he  needed  as  the  forerunnei
of  Christ.     In  our  day,  too,  this  distinction  is  of
special  importance  for  the  minister  of  the  gospel.
Words  of  divine  assurance  are  the  proper  messages
from  the  pulpit.

2.  The  God  of  Israel  is  also  the  mighty  God  of
Jacob — the  same  God  who  commanded  the  one  to
stay,  the  other  to  go.

3.  Not  until  Jacob  had    again  made  sure   and
sealed  his  patriarchal  covenant-relation  with  God,  is
he  able  to  set  forth,  witli  joy  and  confidence,  on  a
journey,  with  his  whole  family,  into  a  strange  and
dangerous  world.

4.  Exegesis,  as  in  other  places,  hastens  too  rap
idly  over  the  significance  of  these  Biblical  names.
Though  some  are  quite  doubtful,  others  have  an  un
mistakable   importance,   opening,   by  their   connec
tions,  a  view  revealing  the  spirit  of  the  respective
fiimilie?,  and  of  their  fathers.     Thus  the  names  of
Reuben's  sons  express  a  sanguine  hope  (initiated,
distinguished,   etc.).     In  the  names  of  Levi's  sons,
we  may  recognize  the  three  leading  traits  of  hierar
chical  rule.     And  so  in  many  other  cases.

5.  Dinah   had  to  atone  for  her  former  freedom,
and  the  fanatical  severity  of  her  brothers,  by  a  joy
less  single  life.     But  she  has  the  honor,  along  with
Serah,  <,f  being  reckoned  among  the  founders  of  the
house  of  Israel  in  Egypt.     Together  with  the  devel
opment    of  the    theocracy,  there   is    unfolded   the
gradual  elevation  of  woman.     The  idea  of  female
inheritance  here  presents  itself.

G.  Judali,  the  father's  minister  to  Joseph.  By
his  faithfulness,  strength,  and  wisdom,  he  has  risen
in  the  opinion  of  his  father,  and  thus  it  is  that  Ja
cob's  divine  illumination  shows  itself  especially  in
respect  to  the  tribe  of  Judah, — becoming  a  revela
tion  full  and  clear  in  the  blessing  pronounced  ch.  xlix.

1.  Jacob's  and  Joseph's  reunion,  full  of  unspeak
able  emotion  expressed  in  tears  and  in  embraces.
To  Jacob,  Joseph  appears  as  one  who  had  come
from  the  realm  of  the  de.id.

8.  Jacob's  declaration :  now  let  me  die,  presents
another  aspect  in  the  contemplation  of  death  and
Hades,  different  from  that  which  is  usually  raised
through  tho  more  common  speech  respecting  it  in
Old-Testament  times.  The  men  of  the  Old '"Testa
ment  describe  Sheol  as  a  gloomy  region ;  but  this
somes  from  their  fear  of  descending  into  it  before
Lhey  have  seen  the  full  tokens  of  grace,  or  have  re


ceived  that  peace  of  the  Lord  which  givctli  rest
When  they  have  had  a  sight  of  these,  they  die  wil.
lingly;  it  is  then  a  lying  down  to  sleep, — a  going
home  to  the  fathers.  In  general,  however,  it  is  true
that  this  terrified  legal  consciousness  of  death  pre
dominates  over  the  Old-Testament  evangelical  con
sciousness  of  unconditional  resignation  in  hope.

9.  The  instructions  that  Joseph  gives  his  breth
ren  show  us  that  this  ancient  statesman  clearly  com
prehended  the  truth,  that  the  highest  ingenuousness,
and  the  purest  frankness,  is,  at  the  same  time,  the
highest  wisdom  (see  the  instructions  of  Christ  to  the
apostles,  Matt.  x.).     This  wisdom  of  Joseph,   it  is
true,  was  not  the  wisdom  of  this  world.     It  was  a
divine  wisdom,  that  he  thus  placed  the  house   of
Israel   in   Egypt  under  the  protection  of  Egyptian
contempt.     By  thus  giving  them  a  lowly  posit  ion,  he
secured  their  worldly  welfare,  whilst  promoting  their
theocratic  prosperity.

10.  Pilgrim  in  youth,  pilgrim  in  age,  always  a
wrestler,— Jacob  just  touches  upon  his  sufferings,
as  far  as  it  is  meet  for  Pharaoh  to  hear.    The  feeling
of  his  wonderful  deliverances  shows  itself  movingly
in  Iris  blessing  upon  Joseph's  sons.     The  idea  of  the
spiritual  pilgrimage  of  believers  upon  earth  appears
very  distinctly  in  this  picture  of  Jacob's  life,  which
he  sketches  before  Pharaoh.

11.  The   last   thought    of    Jacob,    eistwhile    in
Mesopotamia,  and  now  in  Egypt,  is  that  of  going
home.     There  he  wishes  to  return,  even  in  death
itself.     And  yet  Canaan  was  not  his  true  and  proper
home ;  though  it  was  for  him  the  type  and  pledge
of  the  everlasting  rest  (see  Heb.  xi.).

12.  The  transplantation  of  Israel  had  for  its  aim
the  negative  and  positive  advancement  of  the  people
of  God.     Negatively  :  It  must  be  transplanted  from
Canaan  if  it  would  escape  being  ruined  spiritually
by  mingling  with  the  people  of  the  land,  or  bodily,
through  premature  wars  with  them.     Positively :  In

ypt  they  were  parted  from  heathenism  by  a  double
barrier,  namely,  their  foreign  race,  and  their  reputa
tion  as  a  caste  impure  ;  but  here  they  found  suste
nance  _and  room  for  their  enlargement  as  a  people
upon  its  fertile  soil ;  at  the  same  time,  they  were
drawn  out,  through  the  Egyptian  culture,  to  develop-
nent  of  their  mental  powers.  In  Egypt  were  they
orcpared  for  their  transition  from  the  nomadic  to  the
agricultural  state.


IIOMILETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

See  Doctrinal  and  Ethical.  Jacob's  last  pilgrim
age. — Jacob's  house. — Jacob  and  Joseph's  reunion.
— Jacob's  joy  in  death. — Jacob  before  Pharaoh. —
Israel  in  Goshcn.— TAUBE  (ch.  xlvii.  7-10):  Jacob's

ife :  1.  As  a  mirror  of  the  miseries  of  human  life  in

;cneral ;    2.  as  a  mirror   especially  of   a  true  and

ilesscd  pilgrimage.

First  Section.  (Ch.  xlvi.  1-7.)  STARKK:  This
leparture  to  Egypt  is  often  spoken  of;  Numb.  xx.  14,

5  :  Josh.  xxiv.  4  ;  Ps.  cv.  23  ;  Is.  lii.  4  ;  Jer.  xxxi.
2;_Acts  vii.  15.— This  is  the  last  appearance  with
vhich  God  favored  Jacob. — Ver.  3.  Jacob  might  be

.fraid :  1.  On  account  of  his  personal  safety  (ad-
•anced  years) ;  2.  on  account  of  the  prohibition  to

saac  (ch.  xxvi.  2) ;  3.  on  account  of  his  descend

nts_  (Egypt  a  heathen  country);  4.  on  account  of

ervitude  threatening  them  (as  predicted  ch.  xv.  13) ;

.   on  account  of  leaving  Canaan,  the  promised  land ;

.  Abraham's  experiences,  ch.  xii.   12  (see  Jacob's


G3G


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


declaration  cli.  xlv.  2S). — A  Christian  should  enter
upon  lii-5  journeys  with  God  accompanying. — B'M.
Tali.  :  God  guides  his  people  on  their  ways. — CRA-
MKR  :  Jacob  au  example  of  the  fortune  and  pilgrim-
nge  of  believers. — SCHRODER:  The  answer  of  God
is  in  n-plv  to  his  dijtres.-ing  anxiety, — to  his  flesh
and  blood,  as  we  may  regard  it ;  therefore  does  he
call  him  by  his  more  human  name:  "Jacob!  Jacob!
Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  eyes ;  "  the  last
*<yvice  of  love  that  the  nearest  kindred  could  per
form  to  the  dying  (Tubit  xiv.  15).  See  Robinson
on  the  halting  ol  the  wagons  at  Becisheba.

Second  Section.  (Vers.  8-27.)  STAKK.E:  The
use  of  thi<  arcii:-ate  catalogue  of  the  children  of  Is
rael  ;  it  shows  the  separation  of  the  tribes,  and  marks
t!u-  tribe  of  the  Messiah.  It  gives  a  clearer  view  of
the  people's  increase,  and  thus  shows  the  fulfilling
of  the  divine  promise. — Ohad,  Numb.  xxvi.  and  1
Chron.  iv.  21,  not  counted  here;  probably  died
without  is.-ue. — (Ver.  15.  The  numbers  do  not  sum
up  to  more  than  thirty-two.  The  Rabbins  remove
the  dillieulty  by  saying,  God  must  be  counted  in,
since  he  said  that  he  would  go  down  with  them.
But  this  is  not  necessary.  It  would  be  better  to  say,
Jacob  and  hi<  children,  etc.) — Ver.  21.  On  the  diifer-
rn<-e  between  this  and  1  Chron.  viii.  6,  and  Numb.
xxvi.  38,  :.'.',  in  respect  to  Benjamin's  children,  see
the  explanation  in  the  respective  places.  The  gene-
are  important. — Jlilil.  Wni.:  The  true  church
•  >f  God  is  a  small  number,  but  let  no  one  stumble
God  takes  good  care  of  his  elect,  and
Knows  all  their  names. — SCHIIUDKR  :  The  fact  that
1'gvpt  is  the  hiding-place  for  Israel,  shows  that  the
relation  \\as  not  one-sided  only;  if  Israel  was  some
thing  lor  the  heathen,  it  is  also  clear  that  the  hea
then,  on  the  other  hand,  had  their  mission  for  I-rael
(Baumgarlc-n). — The  full  people  of  Israel  consisted
of  twelve  sous,  and  seventy  souls,  and  the  Christian
church  con.-i.-tcd  of  twelve  apostles,  and  seventy  dis
ciples  ( Ko  i.

Tin  rd  Section.  (Vers.  2S-"1.)  STAUKE:  (In  the
land  of  Gosheii ;  after  several  wce'.s  spent  on  a  jour
ney  of  forty  or  fifty  miles). — John  x\i.  2t). — Was
.Joseph's  joy  great  when  he  saw  again  his  father,  how
great  will  be  the  joy  of  God's  children  when  they
meet  each  o;her  again  in  glory! — SCHRODER:  Now
the  patriarch  is  ready  to  die,  for  in  Joseph  he  be
holds  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  promises. — Ver.  '•>:>.
To  be  sure,  is  to  win.  Right  ahead,  is  the  motto  of
the  good  lider  (Valcr.  Herb.).  The  pride  of  the  world
::  akes  small  estimate  of  what  God  regards  as  highest
'.  llaumgarten).  Thus  began  already  in  the  house  of
Jacob,  at  its  entrance  into  Egypt,  that  reproach  of
Christ  which  Moses  afterwards  esteemed  greater
liches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt  (Roos).  This  an
tipathy  of  the  Egyptians  towards  the  shepherd-
people  was  a  fence  to  them,  such  as  was  afterwards
the  law  of  Moses  (Roos).

/•'<,">-'fi  s,,-/ioii.  (Cli.  xlvii.  1-12.)  STARKE  :  Yer.
1 .  Joseph  does  not  ask  particularly  for  Goshcn,  yet
he  knows  in  what  manner  to  arrange  it,  that  Pharaoh
may  readily  perceive  how  much  he  would  be  obliged
to  him  for  the  grant  of  that  district. — (Yer.  2.
niip'C;  some  translate  it  from  the  extremes,  that  is
from  the  oldest  and  the  youngest ;  others  understand
it  as  referring  to  those  who  were  of  least  account.
Their  idea  is  that  Joseph  meant  to  prevent  Pharaoh's
employing  them  as  soldiers.) — CALVIN:  Se  quis  alitcr
pure  Deo  scrvire  non  potcst  qttam  si  mundo  sefceli-
dum  rcdJitt,  hie  omm's  faccssat  ambltio.  A  Christian
must  not  be  ashamed  of  the  humble  condition  in


which  God  may  have  placed  him. — MUSCCL.  :  Pha
raoh  does  not  inquire  after  Jacob's  piety,  religion,
and  godly  walk,  but  only  after  his  age. — Kevcntcen
years.  As  long  as  he  had  sorrowfully  cared  for  Jo
seph,  so  long  Joseph,  in  return,  cat  ed  for  him.
Earthly  benefits  God  repays  by  spiritual  blessings  ;
1  Cor.  ix.  11. — CRAMER:  God  bestows  much  on  the
man  who  has  many  children. — SCIIRODKR  :  Yery
proper  that  they  remain  in  the  border  district  until
everything  is  settled.  In  the  midst  of  the  Egyptians,
the  Israelites  are  ever  as  strangers  in  the  land. —
HI:IM:  The  patriarch  standing  before  Pharaoh.  The
patriarch  and  the  priest  of  God's  church  before  the
king  of  the  mightiot  and  most  civili/ed  state  at  that
time  in  the  word.

Fifth  Seel  ion.  (Yers.  1",-2G.)  STARKV::  Yer.  1".
A  divine  punishment  of  the  Egyptians.  (They  would
not  otherwise  have  regarded  Joseph's  example  in  the
sparing  use  of  the  corn  ;  some,  perhaps,  would  have
scouted  his  predictions). — Ver.  10.  Joseph  said :
Fidelity  to  Pharaoh  requires  that  I  should  not  let
you  have  the  corn  for  nothing. — Freiburr/cr  Bibcl :
Slavery  is  against  the  law  of  nature. — Our  daily
bread,  a  great  proof  of  the  divine  beneficence. —
(Ver.  22.  Circumstances  sometimes  excuse.  If  Jo
seph  favored  the  heathen  priests  it  was  in  obedience
to  the  express  commands  of  Pharaoh.) — Sciiiioi>i;u  :
Concerning  Goshcn.  It  was  for  the  most  part  a
prairie  country,  adapted  to  the  gra/.ing  of  cattle,  and
yet  there  were  fertile  agricultural  portions  (lleng-
stenberg). — See  ROIH.NSON'S  account  ol'  Goshen,  or
the  province  Surkijeh,  p.  G2n. — In  the  enumeration
of  Egyptian  herds,  horses  come  first,  Exod.  ix.  3  ;
for  their  raising  was  especially  proper  for  (lie  coun
try. — Sheep,  "held  sacred  by  the  Thchans.'' — Asse-',
were  sacrificed  to  Typhon. — Thcjiftli,  a  religious
political  revenue,  whose  relation  to  tithes  (douMo
fifths)  is  obvious.  The  tax  of  a  fifth  is  small  in  a
fertile  land  like  Egypt,  where  harvests  are  from  thirty
to  a  hundred  fold.! — (Itoisixsox  compares  Joseph's
conduct  with  that  of  Mohammed  All  (p.  l>2;;),  who
made  himself  sole  owner  of  all  the  property  in
Egypt ;  but  the  great  difference  between  them  is  ob
vious.)- — The  double  tithe  in  Israel  was  probably  a
Mo-aii' imitation.  ''As  Pharaoh  provides  by  a  tifth
for  the  sustenance  of  the  ptie.-t-,  to  also  Jehovah"
(llcngstenberg).

Sixth  Section.  (Vers.  2C-31.)  STAIIKE  :  B'M.
Tub. ;  It  is  right  that  a  certain  part  of  what  the  land
produces  should  be  given  to  the  lord.* — Yer.  30.
Thus  Jacob  testifies  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,
as  one  who  awakes  from  sleep. — SCHRODER  :  Jacob
dies  as  the  last  of  the  patriarchs,  and  his  death  is
the  conclusion  of  this  historical  introduction,  or  his
tory  of  the  beginning.  He  dies,  moreover,  in  a  for
eign  land.  That  makes  it  the  more  important  and
conclusive  event.  (In  the  expression :  have  found
r/racc,  there  comes  into  consideration  :  1.  That  it  has
not  the  same  weight,  nor  the  same  subordinate  sense,
as  it  would  have  in.  occidental  speech  ;  2.  that  Ja
cob  here  asks  a  favor  of  Joseph  which  might  seem
to  him  as  coming  in  collision  with  his  Egyptian
duty.) — HEISI  :  Jacob  had  reached  a  lovely  evening
of  his  wearisome  and  troubled  life ;  but  it  might  be
said  of  him :  Forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind,
I  reach  forth  unto  the  things  that  are  before.

*  [So  says  the  European  commentator.  The  American
would  rather  say :  to  the  ijfirc.rnment  that  protects  its  pro
duce  and  the  labor  employed  in  its  cultivation, — presenting
a  similar  idea,  hut  m  a  more  rational,  as  well  as  in  a
milder  form. — T.  I/.]


CHAP.    XLV1.,   XLVII.


637


[NOTE  ON  THE  INTERVIEW  BETWEEN  JACOB
PHARAOH — THE  PATRIARCHAL  THEOLOGY — THE  IDE
OF  THE  EARTHLY  LIFE  AS  A  PILGRIMAGE. — Common
tators  have  bestowed  much  study  upon  the  gene
alogical  register  in  the  preceding  chapter,  the  mean
ing  of  its  proper  names  (in  most  cases  not  easil
determined),  and  the  question,  whether  all  the  d
scendants  of  Jacob  there  mentioned  were  born  be
fore  the  migration.     This  is  valuable,  indispcnsabL
it  may  be  said,  to  a  right  knowledge  of  the  Scrip
tures ;  but  it  has  led  many  to  pass  very  slightly  ove
those  scenes  of  touching  beauty,  and  most  exquisit
tenderness,  that  are  presented  in  Joseph's  meetii
with  his  lather  .(already  alluded  to  in  the  note,  p
633),  and  in  the  interview  between  Jacob  and  Pha
raoh,  c-li.  xlvii. :  "  And  Joseph  brought  in  Jacob  hi
father,  and  set  him  before  Pharaoh."     What  a  pic
ture  of  life  and  reality  have  we  here  !     The  feebl
patriarch,  leaning  upon  the  arm  of  his  recovered  son
is  led  into  the  presence  of  the  courteous  monarch
who  receives  him,  not  as  an  inferior,  nor  as  a  de
pendent  even,  but  with  all  the  respect  due  to  hi:
great  age,  and  with  a  reverent  feeling  that  in  thi;
very  old  man,  the  representative,  as  it  were,  of  an
other  age,  or  of  another  world,  there  was  somethin
of  a  sacred  and  prophetical  character.     "  And  Ja
cob  blessed  Pharaoh."     It  is  probable  that  Pharaoh
asked  his  blessing.    At  all  events,  there  is  something
in  the  kindliness  of  his  reception  that  induces  Jacot
to  bestow  his  patriarchal  benediction  upon  him  ;  anc
doubtless  the  king  received  it,  not  as  a  formality,  or
with  a  mere  feeling  of  courtly  condescension,  but  as
something  that  had  a  divine  value  for  himself  anc
his  kingdom.     Throughout  this  narrative  of  Joseph
there  is  a  life-likeness  in  the  character  of  Pharaoh
that  shows  him  to  us  as  one  of  the  most  veritable
objects  presented  in  history.     And  what  an  air  of
reality  in  all  these  scenes  here  so  exquisitely  por
trayed  !    What  a  power  of  invention  do  they  exhibit
(if  we  concede  to  them  no  higher  excellence) ;  what
skill  in  the  art  of  pictorial  fiction, — that  peculiar
talent  so  cultivated  in  modern  times,  and  which,  it
is  supposed,  has  only  reached  its  perfection  in  our
own  day.     It  is  this, — inconsistent  as  it  may  seem
with  all  we  know  of  the  most  early  writings, — or  it
is  the  most  natural  and  exact  drawing  from  the  very
life.     There  is  something   here  in  the  internal  evi
dence  which  the  sound  mind  intuitively  perceives,
and  on  which  it  confidently  relies.     It  is'no  invented
tale.     The  picture  stands  out  vividly  before  us;  age
has  not  dimmed  its  colors ;  remoteness  of  scene,  and
wide  diversity  of  life  and  manners,  cannot  weaken
its  effect.    It  produces  a  conviction  of  reality  stronger
than   that  which  comes,  often,  from  narratives  of
events  close  to  our  own  days,  or  even  cotemporary.
Away  over  the  chasm  of  time  we  look  directly  into
that  old   world.     We  see  the  figures  distinctly  mov
ing  on  that  far-off  ancient  shore.     It  is  brought  nigh
to  us  in  such  a  way  that  we  could  almost  as  well
doubt  our  senses,  as  think  of  calling  it  in  question.
At  all  events,  no  mythical  theory  can  explain  it.    We
are  shut  up  to  a  very  sharp  issue,  a  very  stringent
alternative :  It  is  the  very  truth,  the  very  life,  in  the
minutest   feature  of  its  close  limning,  or  it.  is  the
most  monstrous,  as  it  is  the  most  circumstantial,  and
consciously  inventive,  lying.     No  "  higher  criticism,"
as  it  is  called^  can  ever  make  satisfactory,  to  a  truly
thoughtful  mind,  the  comparison  sometimes  drawn
between  these  "Bible  stories"  and  the  cloudy  fables
that  characterize  the  early  annals  of  other  ancient
aations.     Study  well    the   striking    contrasts.     The


lives  of  the  pilgrim  patriarchs,  so  clear  in  their  life
like  portraitures,  the  wild  Scandinavian  legends,  the
wilder  Hindoo  myths,  presenting  not  simply  the
supernatural,  for  there  are  connections  in  which  that
is  most  credible — more  credible  even  than  its  ab
sence — but  the  unnatural,  the  horrible,  the  mon
strous,  the  grotesque  ;  what  affinity  between  these  ?
The  clear,  statistical  story  of  Joseph,  the  picture  of
the  veritable  Pharaoh,— the  shadows  of  Ion,  of  Dorus,
of  Cadmus,  that  flit  across  the  dim  page  of  the  ear
liest  Hcllenian  history ;  what  sane  mind  can  trace
any  parallel  here  ?  there  is  no  escaping  the  issue,
we  may  say  again.  It  is  sharp  and  decisive.  The
reasoning  is  curt  and  clear.  Absolute  fiction  in  these
Bible  stories,  with  a  skill  surpassing  that  of  Defoe,
Scott,  or  Thackeray, — absolute  forgery,  with  a  con
scious  intent  to  deceive  in  every  particular,  or  abso
lute  truth,  self-verifying,  is  the  only  alternative.  It
is  not  such  a  forgery ;  it  is  not  such  an  artful  fiction  ;
the  most  extreme  rationalist  shrinks  from  affirming
this ;  it  is,  therefore,  the  truth,  and  nothing  but  the
truth.  Wre  may  reverently  use  the  imagination  in
attempting  to  fill  up  some  parts  of  the  picture,  but
we  may  not  disturb  the  graphic  outline.  How  very
clear  it  is  in  the  passage  specially  before  us.  Im
agination  needs  no  help.  We  can  almost  see  them,
the  stately  monarch,  the  very  aged  man,  the  beloved
son  now  in  the  strength  and  glory  of  manhood, —
they  stand  out  as  vividly  as  anything  now  on  the
canvas  of  our  present  history.  We  may  as  well
doubt  of  Cfesar  and  Alexander,  yea  of  Napoleon  and
of  Washington,  as  of  Jacob,  Joseph,  and  Pharaoh.

"  And   Pharaoh  said  unto  Jacob,  How  old  art
thou  ?  '_'     The  English  translation  here,  in  departing
from  literalncss  in  the  question,  has  marred  the  ef-
?oct  of  the  answer,  the  peculiar  language  of  which
is   suggested   by  it,  or,  at  least,  strictly  connected
with   it.     The    Hebrew    is,    Tp*n  ':';;   TCI    n^2.
which  we  have  reason,  from  what  Diodbrus  says  'of
.heir  views  of  life  (lib.  i.  51),  to  regard  as  an  Egyp-
;ian  as  well  as  a  Shcmitie  idiom — "  How  many  are
he  days  of  the  years  of  thy  life"  (or,  lives)?  "it  is
i  drawing  out  of  the  phrase  to  make  it  intensive.
t  suggests  the  long  years  of  the  earthly  t,ojourning,
enhanced  by  the  thought  of  the  many  days  of  which
hey  are  composed — or  days  taken  in  that  indefinite
vay  so  common  in  the   early  languages  to   denote
imes   or  periods.     In  what  perfect  harmony  with
his  is  the  answer  ?     We  see  in  it  the  old  man's  gar-
ulousncss  (using  the  term  in  its  most  innocent  and
latural  sense),  the   feeling  of  personal  importance
vhich  the  very  old  exhibit,  and  rightly  exhibit,  in
iew  of  their  surpassing  length  of  years.     They  love
o  dwell  on  it,  and  to  state  it  minutely,  extending
heir  words  as  though  in  some  proportion  to  the  long
ime    through    whicli    memory   looks   back.     How
trongly  we  are  reminded  here  of  the  Grecian  Nestor,
xcept  that  there  is  a  holiness  and  a  moral  grandeur
bout  Jacob,  to  which  the  old  Homeric  hero,   in   his
arrulous  worldliness   and   boasting,  makes  no  ap-
roach.     They  are  alike  in  the  senile  reduplication
f  their  words.     Not,    however,   like  the   frequent
'estoric  prelude,    tW   &s   rj^oifn,  "0  that  I  were
oung  again,"  but  in  a  prolonged  strain  of  solemnity
nd  sadness  comes  the  slow  reply:  "The   days  of
ic  years  of  my  pilgrimage  are  a  hundred  and  thirty
cars ;  few  and  evil  have  been  the  days  of  the  years
f  my  life,  and  have  not  attained  unto  the  days  of
ic  years  of  the  lives  of  my  fathers,  in  the  days  of
icir  pilgrimage."     We  can  see  the  old  man  as  he
lys  this,  leaning  on  his.  staff,  and  supported  by  hid


638


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


son  ;  we  can  almost  hear  the  tones  of  his  trembling
voice,  the  pauses  of  his  slow  utterance,  the  seem
ingly  tautological  yet  most  emphatic  sound  of  his
repetitions.  "  Few  and  evil ;"  alas!  how  ancient  is
this  style  of  speech!  How  from  the  very  beginning
dates  this  wailing  language  so  full  of  the  feeling  that
some  great  evil  has  befallen  humanity,  and  that  our
earthly  life,  in  its  best  condition,  is  but  a  pilgrimage
i)!'  sorrow.  It  has  not  conic  from  the  world's  later
experience.  The  fart  her  we  go  back,  even  into  what
would  seem  to  lie  the  very  youth  of  our  race,  the
louder  and  clearer  is  the  voice.  It  is  not  confined  to
the  Scriptures.  It  meets  us  everywhere  in  the  ear
liest  heathen  writings,  but  without  the  placid  resig
nation  that  is  so  evident  in  the  n.ost  striking  Uiblical
samples.  Compare  the  (J-i'yxxr//,  xviii.  loO.


So  Pindar's  rr.',-u~s  orai)  fu'&pa-Tros,  7'i,fh.  viii.  I'1.).
Compare  Job  vii. ;  xiv. ;  Ps.  ciii.  !•">;  (Jen.  xviii. '27
("who  am  but  dust  and  ashes,");  the  same,  .Tub
•:xv.  lH;  xlii.  l>  ;  Siraeh  x.  '.»  (''why  is  dust  and  ashes
]  rond":  ;  ar.d  other  passages  too  numerous  for  quo
tation.

Among  the  most  natural  and  truthful  things  in
;!.N  narration  is  the  respect  shown  by  Pharaoh  to
Jacob.  It  might  be  accounted  for  by  that  eourteous-
II'1-:.;  and  sen>o  of  justice  which  seems  so  character
istic  of  this  monarch,  as  ulso  by  his  great  friendship
:<>r  Jo-eph.  Jim  tlierc  is  something  more  in  the  ca~e,
and  haviiiLT  a  deeper  ground.  It  is  a  lei  ling  of  rev-
which  makes  him  d'.-iiv  tlie  patriarch's  bless
ing.  Respect  for  age  was  more  felt,  and  more  lauded
as  a  virtue,  in  the  ancient  world,  than  in  the  modem,
although  it  still  holds,  and  nothing  but  a  most  disso
lute  civili/ation  can  break  it  up.  There  is,  moreover,
something  of  (ui-c  with  which  we  look  upon  a  very
(dd  man,  a  centenarian  or  upwards,  one  who  has
gone  far  beyond  the  ordinary  limit  of  human  life.
It  affects  us  as  a  strange  spectacle.  There  seems  to
be  something  unearthly  about  him,  superhuman,
almost  supernatural — as  though  he  belonged  to
another  age,  or  world.  So  to  the  young  Telemachus
appeared  the  aged  Nestor  who  had  survived  three
generations  of  men  (Odyss.  iii.  '2  !('.),

ware   ftoi  aSai'aros  iyiaAAcrat  eiaopaacrflcu,

"  like  an  immortal,  as  I  ga/e,  docs  he  stand  out  be
fore  me" — like  one  seen  in  vision,  to  give  the  full
force  of  that  peculiar  word  iVSaAAerai — or  as  some
thing  transcending  the  ordinary  humanity.  This
feeling  was  heightened  by  the  fact  that  the  Egyptians,
as  compared  with  the  nomadic  patriarchs,  were  not  a
long-lived  people.  Jacob,  although  he  had  "  not
attained  unto  the  days  of  the  years  of  the  life  of
his  fathers,"  was  to  them  a  remarkably  old  man.
Pharaoh  had,  probably,  never  before  seen  a  case  of
such  extreme  longevity.  Herodotus  (iii.  23)  learns,
from  the  Egyptians,  of  an  ./Ethiopian  people,  among
whom  some  reached  the  age  of  one  hundred  and
twenty  years,  but  the  manner  in  which  it  is  narrated
shows  that  it  was  regarded  as  remarkable  and  excep
tional,  confirming  the  idea  that  such  advanced  age
was  unknown  among  the  Egyptians  themselves.


The  matter  however,  of  deepest  interest,  and
most^  worthy  of  note  in  this  answer  of  Jacob,  is  it?
pilgrim  tone:  "  The  days  of  the  years  of  my  pil
grimage—few  and  evil  have  they  been,  and  have  not
attained  unto  the  days  of  the  years  of  the  life  of  my
fathers,  in  the  days  of  their  pilgrimage."  Who  can
deny  the  fairness  of  the  apostle's  reasoning  (Heb.  xi.
14):  "Now  they  who  say  such  things  declare  plainly
(fH'tav[£ovffii>,  make  it  very  manifest)  that  they  seek
a  country— that  they  long  (opeyovrai)  for  a  'better
country,  even  a  heavenly — confessing  themselves  to
be  strangers  and  sojonrners  upon  earth  "  (|fVoi  nu.1
iraptTrifaiuoi,  men  away  from  home).  "Where-fore
Cod  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God  (not  of
the  nonexistent,  or  the  peri-lied,  Matt.  xxii. 'tf2),  for
he  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city"— "a  city  which
hath  foundations,''  stable,  cnd'iring,  that  "passeth
not  away."  This  language  of  pilgrimage  is  not  re
solvable  into  the  unmeaning,  like  a  worn-out  modern
metaphor,  or  a  mere  poetical  sentimentality.  Such
use  of  words  would  be  wholly  inconsistent  with  the
character  of  the  patriarchs,  and  their  stern  ideas  of
reality.  It  was  not  a  pilgrimage  simply  in  respect  to
the  old  home  "  whence  tlicy  came  out ;  "  for  thither,
as  the  author  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  most
pertinently  observes  (xi.  1  I),  they  could,  at  any  time,
have  returned.  That  certainly  was  not  "  the  better
country"  they  were  seeking.  Xo  going  back  to
Mesopotamia,  the  region  of  the  fire-worshipping
idolatry;  rather  go  down  to  Egypt,  the  land  of
dreams  and  symbols,  yea,  down  to  Sheol  even — ever
pressing  on  their  pilgrim-way  with  unabated  confi
dence  in  the  covenant  God.  He  would  be  with  them
wherever  they  went.  Into  what' ver  regions  they
might  pass,  known  or  unknown,  there  would  be  the
~X-"n  ~N~~>  the  "angel  Redeemer,"  to  "deliver
them  fiom  all  evil."  It  was  no  metaphor  except  as
a  traii>fer  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  sense.  The  true
pilgrim  idea  is  inseparable  from  the  term  constantly
employed.  Xo  word  in  the  Hebrew  language  main
tains  a  more  clear  and  emphatic  sense  :  "^1.
a  sojourning,  a  (<trr;/!>iff,  a  ju/;/rhi<ir;e,  from  ".".
to  turn  aside  by  (lie  way,  to  tarry  as  a  stranger,  ever
denoting  a  temporary  instead  of  a  settled  residence.
It  is  a  staying  in  a  land  which  is  not  one's  home.
So,  to  the  patriarchs,  even  Canaan  is  called  "^"IX,
~rv~:,"  the  land  of  their  pilgrimages.  To  their  de
scendants,  or  to  the  Israelitish  nation  taken  collect
ively,  as  a  corporate  historical  entity,  it  was  a
K\77poro/u;'a,  a  settled  earthly  inheritance,  but  to  them,
individually,  it  was  not  "  the  rest  provided  for  the
people  of  God,"  and  this  language  was  ever  to  re
mind  them  of  it.  Their  only  inheritance  was  the
promise,  of  which  the  Canaanitic  K\Trjpovo/j.ia  was  the
type,  and  of  this  they  became  " heirs  through  faith"
— 5ia  TriffTfois  K\-qpovoi.'.oiivTcav  TA2  'EnArTEAl'AS,
Hcb.  vii.  12.  For  examples  of  such  use  of  "i*a.
11ST3  and  "15,  see  Gen.  xvii.  18,  xxviii.  4  ("  the  land
in  which  thou  art  a  stranger  "),  Ps.  cxix.  54  ;  xxxix.
13;  1  Chron.  xxix.  15;  Lev.  xvii.  22  ("  the  stranger
dwelling  in  the  midst  of  you  "),  Deut.  v.  14  ;  xxiv.
14,  and  many  other  places.  The  idea  is  ever  pres
ent,  that  of  a  stranger  tarrying  in  a  strange  land ;
and  this  language  of  the  patriarchs  has  been  taken
up  by  later  writers,  thus  becoming  predominant
among  the  grave  pictures  of  the  Old-Testament
saintly  life.  See  1  Chron.  xxix.  15  ;  Ps.  xxxix.  13,
"  strangers  before  thee,  and  sojourners  as  all  our
fathers  were."  The  words  are  also  used  of  lodging


CIIAr.    XLVI.,    XLYII.


G39


in  an  inn,  or  dwelling  temporarily  in  a  tent,  and  this
calls  up  the  passage  before  quoted  from  Diodorus
Sieulus  (Excursus  on  Sheol,  p.  587),  showing  that
some  such  an  idea  of  life  being  a  pilgrimage  was  not
altogether  unknown  to  Pharaoh,  and  to  the  early
Egyptians.  The  other  conception  of  life,  as  a  tran
sient  dwelling  in  a  tent,  gives  an  inexpressible  sub
limity  to  some  of  the  Old-Testament  declarations,
evidently  accommodated  to  it,  and  intended  to  denote
the  security  of  the  everlasting  rest :  "  From  the  ends
of  the  earth  do  I  cry  unto  thee  "  (from  this  distant
earth,  this  remote  and  foreign  land) ;  "  0  that  I
might  dwell  in  THY  tabernacle  of  the  eternities
(n^b-i*  'fcnXZ),  0  that  I  might  find  shelter  under
the  covert  of  thy  wings,"  in  the  "secret  place  of  thy
presence  !  "  Ps.  Ixi.

As  Canaan  was  not  "  the  rest,"  so  neither  was
Sheol,  whether  regarded  as  the  grave  merely,  or  some
strange  state  of  continued  being,  lying  beyond.  No
mere  sentimentality  about  the  sepulchre  as  a  place
of  repose  from  life's  weariness  could  answer  to  these
grave  declarations  of  grave  men,  much  less  that  mon
strosity  of  conception  which  would  connect  the  ideas
of  rest  and  utter  non-existence.  Sheol  lay  in  the
road  of  their  pilgrimage.  Through  this  unknown
region — so  very  dark  then,  so  obscure  even  yet, —
they  had  to  pass ;  but  only  as  a  part  of  their  ap
pointed  journey.  The  "  city  which  had  foundation*,"
lay  still  beyond.  But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  as  it
often  has  been  asked,  did  not  the  patriarchs,  and  the
pious  Bible  writers  who  followed  them,  say  more
about  this  better  country,  instead  of  only,  now  and
then,  giving  a  glimpse  of  it  in  some  pious  ejacula
tion  'i  It  may  be  answered,  that  perhaps  their
hearts  were  too  full  of  it  to  say  much  about  it.  They
.had  the  pilgrim's  reticence  in  the  midst  of  frivolous
;;nd  unsympathizing  strangers.  These  old  "  men  of
faith  "  had  that  precious  thing  so  pleasing  unto  God
as  the  only  root  of  any  true  human  virtue,  and  which
made  these  uncultivated  Okl-Testamcnt  heroes,  im
perfect  as  they  were  in  some  things,  fairer  in  His
sight  than  an  Epictetus,  a  Seneca,  or  an  Antonine,
with  all  their  lauded  and  refined  morality.  They  had
"  this  precious  faith,"  but  they  did  not  weave  it  into
dogmas,  or  construct  from  it  systems  of  heartless
ethical  speculation.  They  did  not  talk  of  their  spir
ituality  ;  and  yet,  even  in  the  few  things  they  said,
what  approach  is  made  to  them  by  the  modern  ra
tionalist,  or  our  flippant  litterateur,  who  calls  them
gross,  and  pronounces  their  views  so  defective  as
measured  by  the  later  progress  in  all  elevated  and
refined  thinking  ?  Who  hears,  or  expects  to  hear,
from  critics  of  this  class,  the  utterance  of  any  long
ing  desires  for  the  better  country  ?  How  strange  it
would  sound  to  hear  them  say:  "  I  have  waited  for
thy  salvation,  0  Lord,"  or  to  make,  in  earnest,  the
declaration  that  they  regarded  themselves  as  "  pil
grims  and  sojourners  "  upon  this  unsatisfying  earth  !
Again,  a  reason  of  their  silence  may  have  been
the  reserve  arising  from  the  thought  of  the  dark  and
unknown  journey  yet  to  be  made  before  their  pil
grimage  was  wholly  ended.  Their  views  of  Sheol
were  sombre,  because  Sheol  (in  its  true  sense)  was
to  them,  perhaps,  a  stronger,  a  sterner,  if  not  a  clear
er  reality,  than  it  has  become  to  us  w'.th  those  con
fident  expectations  of  an  immediately  perfect  state
that  have  placed  the  old  doctrine,  with  much  valua
ble  Scripture  connected  with  it,  almost  wholly  in  the
background  of  our  theology.  But  to  understand
their  language  we  must  go  back  to  their  standpoint,
dark  and  inadequate  as  it  may  seem  to  us.  As  death


was  not  non-existence  in  any  view  (see  note  on  tli4
earliest  ideas  of  death,  p.  27-1),  but  a  state  of  being,
however  strange, — not  the  opposite  of  being,  at  all,
but  of  active  life, — so  Sheol  was  the  continuance,  the
prolongation  of  the  judicial  death  pronounced  upon
man,  not  a  state  following  it.  Deliverance  from  one
was  deliverance  from  the  other.  Their  pilgrimage
leel  them  through  this  shadowy  place,  and  though
they  still  trusted  to  their  covenant  God,  they  knew
not  when,  nor  where,  nor  how  that  deliverance  should
be.  Sheol  was  not  their  home,  their  language  im
plies  that ;  it  was  not  the  end  of  their  journey.
They  did  not  talk  of  going  to  Heaven,  or  to  glory ;
these  ideas,  as  we  now  hold  them,  had  not  yet  come
in ;  and  yet,  if  we  may  take  many  expressions  in
the  Psalms  as  the  language  of  the  Old-Testament
religious  experience,  there  was  ever  the  thought  of
a  divine  presence,  of  a  nearness  unto  God,  of  the
support  and  guidance  of  the  redeeming  Goel,  what
ever  ideas  of  locality,  of  time,  or  of  condition,  might
be  present  or  wanting  to  the  conception.  As  their
eyes  grew  dim  in  death,  their  hope  grew  stronger,
though,  perhaps,  no  more  definite  than  before.
Hence  Jacob's  ejaculation,  coming  in  so  strangely,
and  so  suddenly,  whilst  presenting  the  visions  he
had  of  his  sons'  worldly  destiny.  To  cheer  his  dying
heart,  there  seems  to  have  mingled  among  these  far-
off  yet  earthly  pictures,  as  they  crowded  upon  the
seer's  mind,  a  ray  still  more  remote,  from  the  other
side  of  Sheol.  What  else  could  he  have  meant  in
that  remarkable  interruption  of  the  prophetic  series:
rnrP  "T^p  -rrrvr^b,  "/w  thy  salvation  have  1
waited,  Jehovah"  (Gen.  xlix.  18).  What  salvation?
nothing,  surely,  in  this  life.  It  was  no  deliverance
from  Laban,  or  Esau,  no  expectation  of  worldly  se
curity,  such  as  followed  his  vision  upon  the  stone
pillow  at  Bethel.  That  was  all  past  and  gone-.  Sheol
was  before  him,  but  Jacob  still  trusts  the  angel  of  the
covenant,  and  this  dying  ejaculation  shows  that  there
was  with  him,  then  and  there,  in  some  way,  the  pres
ence  of  the  nameless  power  that  had  met  him  at
Penicl.  What  meaning  in  it  all,  unless  that  power,
and  that  guide,  was  expected  to  go  with  him  through
the  still  darker  journey?  The  supposition  that  this
sudden  exclamation  refers  to  something  seen  in  vision
in  respect  to  Dan  and  Samson  (an  opinion  derived
from  its  place  among  the  blessings  which  it  inter
rupts),  seems  the  merest  trifling, — with  all  respect,
be  it  said,  to  the  learned  commentators  who  have
held  it.  Even  if  we  regard  the  whole  as  an  ecstatic
dream,  there  must  be  some  consistency  in  it.

The  whole  patriarchal  theology  may  be  summed
in  one  great  article,  trust  in  the  covenant  God, — a
trust  for  life,  a  trust  for  death,  for  the  present  beino;,
or  for  any  other  being.  There  was  something  ex
ceedingly  sublime  in  this  faith.  They  were  like  men
standing  on  the  border  of  an  immense  ocean,  all  un
known  as  to  its  extent,  its  other  shore,  if  it  had  any,
or  its  utter  boundlessness.  Ready  to  launch  forth
at  the  divine  command,  they  had  the  assurance  that
all  would  be  well,  whatever  might  be  their  individual
destiny,  since  this  covenant  God  was  also  the  God
of  their  fathers,  who  must,  therefore,  in  some  way,
"  live  unto  Him,"  that  is,  they  must  have  yet  a  being
that  would  make  them  the  proper  subjects  of  such  a
covenant  relationship.  Still  Sheol  had  a  gloomy  as
pect  ;  it  was  associated  with  the  idea  of  penalty ;
Death  and  Hades  went  together ;  the  one  was  but  a
form  of  the  other,  a  carrying  out  of  the  great  sen
tence.  Though  a  part  of  their  pilgrimage,  the  way
was  very  dark.  Not  with  rapture,  therefore,  but


G40


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK  OF  MOSES.


with  calm  confidence,  did  they  go  down  into  its  un
known  depths,  still  holding  fast  the  hand  of  the  "  re
deeming  angel,"  who  in  death,  a.s  well  as  in  the
active  earthly  life,  would  "deliver  them  from  al
evil."  They  knew  that  this  "  Redeemer  lived  "  (Job
xix.  '25),  ;in  I  they  felt  that  in  some  way,  they  kne\\
not  how,  his  lite  was  theirs,  lie  could  "quicken
them,  and  bring  them  up  again  from  the  "depths  of
the  earth"  (Ps.  Ixxi.  2u).  Thus  their  hope  took  the
form  of  a  ivaifi/i-/,  until  "  the  wrath  should  turn  "
(Tjrx  ~~'~  ~"  ,  Job  xiv.  l:>),  and  the  dread  penalty,
i.i  some  way,  be  satisfied.  Thus  Job  says:  "all  the
days  of  my  appointment  (there)  will  I  ;/•«//,  nutil  my
change  shall  come"  —  my  halipah,  my  revivisccnee
or  renewal  (see  how  tiie  word  is  used  1's.  xe.  5,  and
cii.  27).  So  Ps.  xvi.  1  i,  "Thou  wilt  not  leave  my
soul  in  Hade.-,"  Ps.  xiix.  <S-]t'>,  "No  man  can  redeem
his  brother";  "yet  God  will  redeem  my  soul  from
llie  hand  of  Siicol,  for  lie  will  take  me."  Let  the
rationalist  say  what  he  will  of  this  language,  the
;•',!///;/  ant  of  l!n'  hti.'nl,  and  the  ji)\ve)i!in<i,  for  a
brief  and  unimportant  time,  the  hand  from  sei/.ing,
can  iK-vcr  he  made  tj  mean  the  same  thing.  To  tl.e
same  effect  Ps.  xxxi.  ('>,  "  Into  thy  hands  do  I  tru.-t
my  .-pint,  for  thou  hast  redeemed  me  (/V.V/<M/,  r<';i-
soirii'/l  me>,  Jehovah,  God  of  //v/'/t  "  —  of  covenant-
faithfulness.  Sometimes  it  seems  to  take  the  form
of  a  hope  that  this  Goel,  this  "angel  of  the  cove
nant,"  would  lie  personally  with  them  in  Sheol.
There  is  good  rea-on  '"''  thus  interpreting  the  pas
sage  Ps.  xxiii.  -I,  as  referring  rather  to  Siicol  itself,
the  spirit-world,  or  world  of  the  dead,  instead  of  a
state  of  SOIT.AV  in  this  life,  or  a  drawing  near  unto
death,  as  is  commonly  suppo.-e  1.  For  places  in  which
r""2;^  (tzaliiiai'eth,  there  rendered  shadow  of  death)
is  put  for  death  itself,  or  the  state  of  the  dead,  see


Job  XXXviii.   17  (


:»    "'"


of  tr.<i!>nn>;.  t/t),


x.  22,  xii.  •_':',  compared  with  .lob  xxviii.  3,  and
e-pecially  Job  xxviii.  21,  2:i.  Such  a  rendering
seems  neee->-iry  to  the  climax  intended  1's.  xxiii.  4  :
''  Even  in  tin1  valley  of  tzalmaveth,"  in  the  land  of
t!ie  shades,  the  terra  umbramm,  ''I  will  i'ear  no  evil
(eomp.  Gen.  xlviii.  I'M,  for  thou  art  with  me,  thy  rod
and  thy  staff,  they  shall  comfort  me"  —  "l:^n^  .
restart  me,  revive  me,  and  hence  the  Syriac  X^r."3  ,
for  rci'lf'ixrt  /«;\  resurrection.  In  IJades  they  arc
s'.i'd  uiili  "  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  Souls."

This  patriarchal  faith,  in  its  pilgrim  aspect,  seems
a  strange  thing  to  our  modern  conceptions;  but
there  is  a  view  of  it  which  may  lead  us  to  regard  it
as  even  a  stringer,  if  not  a  better,  faith  than  our
own.  Involved  in  the  very  essence  of  all  spiritual
religion  are  two  great  truths  :  1.  The  being  of  a  God,
a  moral  governor  who  treats  man  as  something
above  the  plane  of  nature,  that  is,  enters  into  a  cove
nant  with  him  ;  and,  2.  the  existence  of  the  human
soul  in  another  life,  as  grounded,  in  its  ultimate  per


fection  at  least,  upon  such  covenant.     The  first  of
these  is  also  first  in  value  and  importance.     It  is  the
first  lesson  in  the  catechism  of  theology.     It  must
be  learned  thoroughly,  or  the  second,  by  itself,  as
the  mere  idea  of  continued  spiritual  existence,  be
comes  a  perversion,  and  may  be  a  source  even  of
dangerous  imaginative  error."    The  patriarchs  were
educated  chiefly   in    this  greater  and    more    fund  a
mental  dogma,  belief  in  (Jod,  trust   in  God,  submis
sion  to  (Jod,  whatever  might  be  the  human  destiny.
Nothing  can  be  purer  or  more  lofty  than  their  theism
when  viewed  alone ;  though,  as  has  been  before  re-
marked,  it  is  never  wholly  separate  from  some  form
of  the  other  doctrine.     The  purity  with  which  men
hold  the  second  must  depend  upon  the  thoroughness
of  their  initiation  into   this  prime  idea  of  a  God  to
be  trusted,  in  life,  in  death,  in  light,  in  darkness,  and
to  whose  sovereign  wisdom  and  goodness  there  must
be  an  implicit  resignation,  whatever  may  be  known
or  unknown  in  respect  to  his  dealings  with  the  finite
being  he  has  created.    To  this  state  Job  was  brought,
when,  at  the  close  of  the  long  drama,  he  tell  upon
his  face  before  God,  and  said  unto  Him  (*bx,  wito
rue,  not,  cmicernhiy  /,•"•)  that  "right  thing"  for  which
he  was  commended,  rather  than  for  any  superiority
in  the  previous  argument.     Hence  it  is  fiiat  this  first
truth  takes  precedence,  not  in  rank  only,  but  in  the
time  order  of  revelation,   though   the  second,  in  its
rudimentary    state,    may   ]>,:  almost   coeval   with   it.
The  one  is  fully  developed,  while  the  other  is  in  iti
erm.      As   best  expressing  the  contrast,  the  editor
would  venture  here  to  quote  from  something  he  has
elsewhere  written  ("Article  on  the  Closing  Chapters
of   the   Hook  of  Job,"  Mercersburg    Review,   Jan.
I860):   "The  patriarchs  were  first  in-! meted  in  that
first  and  greatest  chapter  in  theology.     Is  there   not
something  in  modern  experience  to  show  the  evil  of
reversing  this  order  of  ideas,  of  making  the  subordi
nate  primary,  of  coming  to  regard  the  human  sph
:ual   destiny  too  much  as  Ihe  chief  thought  in  re-
igion,  and   the   belief  in  a  (Jod  as  something  minis-
crial  or  mediate  to  it?     We   refer   not  now  to  that
naturalistic  form  of  spiritualism  which  has  lately  be
come  so  rife  among  us,  but  to  much  that  appears  in
;he  better  thinking  of  the  religions  world.      We  may
yet  learn  from  the  Old  Testament.     \Ve  may  see  a
lory  in  its  theism  thus  standing  alone  in  its  sublim-
ty.     Boast  as  we  may  of  our  progress  in  theology,
inless  this  order  of  ideas  is  preserved  in  all  its  purity,
our  belief,  our  reverence,  our   highest   thought  of
iod,  may  fall  below  that  of  the  Syrian  pilgrim,  or
)f  that  ancient  son  of  the  East  whose  sufferings  and
experience  are  recorded  in  attestation  of  this  first
and  greatest  of  truths."     We  must  guard  against  such
cndency,  or  there  is  danger  that  our  rc-Hgio, — our
iew  of  the  bond  between  the  infinite  and  the  finite
oul, — may  become  nature  instead  of  coven,intt — a
Ireamy  sentimentality  instead  of  faith. — T.  L,]


CHAP.    XLVIII.    1-22.


N  I  N  T  II     SECTION.

JacoVs  slclcnax.     Ills  llcsxing  of  7u,  yrandcldldrcn.     Joseph's  sons.

CIIAPTI:U   XLVIII.    1-22.

1  And  it  came  to  pass,  after  these  thing,,  that  one  '  told  Joseph,  Behold,  chy  father  «
sick;  and  he  took  with  him  his  two  sons  Manasseh  and  Ephraim.'  And  one  told  Jacob"
d  said,  Behold  thy  son  Joseph  cometh  unto  thee  ;  and  Israel  strengthened  himself

3  and  sat  upon  the  bed      And  Jacob  said  unto  Joseph,  God  Almighty  appeared  uiT  me

4  at  Luz  [Bethel]  m  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  blessed  me.     And  said  unto  me   I  will  make
_   thee  fruitful,  and  multiply  thee,  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  multitude  of  people-  an  d  I

5  will  give  this  land  to  thy  seed  after  thee,  /or  an  everlasting  possession.     And  now  thy

wo  sons,  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  that  were  born  unto  thee  in  the  land  of  B^pT  £
fore  I  came  unto  thee  mto  Egypt,  are  mine  ;  as  Reuben  and  Simeon,  they  shall  be  mine
<>  Am       y  issue,  which  thou  begettest  after  them,  shall  be  thine,  and  shall  be  called  after
-    the  name  of  their  brethren  in  their  inheritance.     And  as  for  me,  when  I  came  from
ladan,  Rachel  died  by     me  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  when  yet  there  was  but  a  little  way

I  ;  "       J  bUried  her  thcr°'  ln  the  Wa    °f  E"h"


S  BchH  em   r  '  e  sam

8  lehcm    [rcasonforonlarging.hodo.scc.dantsofRachcl].       And    Israel     beheld    Joseph's    sons,

and  said    Who  arc  these?     And  Joseph  said  unto  his  father,  They  are  my  sons  whom

10  I  w  11  b  \f  Z  mCN       ,7  "•     ^  he1Said'  Bri"°  them'  J  Pra^  thee'  ™to  *Z  and

10  I  w  11  bless  them      Now  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  dim  for  age,  so  that  he  could  no   see

11  And  he  brought  them  near  unto  him,  and  he  kissed  them,  and  embraced  them      And


and'  lo'  God  shewed


m     a          w  ,  ,

3  3     P  1         1      i'       1?      nG1i-  bJ°Ught  tIlGm  °'lt  fr°m       tween  his  knees  [jaoov.1

3  and  he  bowed     himself  with  Ins   face  to  the   earth.     And   Joseph  took  them   both
Lphraimin  his  right  hand  towards  Israel's  left   hand,  and   Manasseh  in  his  left     and

4  towards  Israels  right  hand,  and   brought  them   near  unto  him.     And  Israel  stretched


r  ,

1  -    in  the  midst  of  the  earth.     And  when  Joseph  saw  that  his  father  laid  his  r  i"      hand

upon  the  head  of  Ephraim,  it  displeased  him;   and  he  held  up  his  father's  hand  to  re

8  move  it  from  Lphraim's  head  unto  Manasseh's  head.     And  Joseph  said  unto  his  father

S   fSie7ro?  i     V      1       Vrtie  firSt:b0rn;  Put%  right  handP  upon  l"s  head      And

ither  refused,  and  said,  I  know  ,«,   my  son,  I   know  it;  he  also  shall   becomes

people  and  he  also  shaU  be  great;  but  truly  his  younger  brother  shall  be  greater  San

i  he   and  his  seed  shall  become  a  multitude  of  nations.0   And  he  blessed  tl^m  that  day

21  3  I5     1     'C  1  !  7d  b^fS'  Sayin&  G°d  make  thce  as  EPhr^,  and  as  Manasself-

22  b  ?T    I"   1  Kraimf,before   Manassch.     And  Israel   said  unto   Joseph,  Behold,  I  die'
22  but  God  shall  be  with  you,  and  bring  you  again  unto  the  land  of  your  fathers      More

over   I  have  given  to  thee  one  portion  e  above  thy  brethren,  which  I  took  out  of  die
hand  of  the  Amorite  with  my  sword  and  with  my  bow.


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   ROOK   OF   MOSES.


phatic  Ui:m  the  fienl.'ive  would  have  boon.  Very  near  to  it,  would  be  Luther's  rendering,  slurb  mir  Rachel.  The  LXX
and  the  Yulirate  both  oir.it  it,  but  the  LXX  adds,  Rachel  tlnj  mother,  which  has  much,  internally,  in  its  favor;  since  it
would  -  >•  that  Jacob,  in  speaking  to  Joseph,  her  son,  should  call  her  Rachel  merely,  just  as  he  would  speak  of

I.eah.  r~"  .  rendered  a  link  if'j'.  lla=hi  makes  it  a  thousand  cubits,  or  the  same  as  the  r~—  C"nn  ,  the  limit  of  2
tabbath  day's  journey.— T.  L.]

[:l  Yer.  1-.— "Pin— "*"  .  An-!  lie  Iwcil.  Tlic  LXX  render  it  in  the  plural,  Kai  Trpoo-eKvvr)<ja.i>  avrw,  and  lh'->j  bowed,
or  kii<  olrd  d'iWii  before  him.  t;:.it  is,  Muna<seh  and  Lphraim  ;  as  if  they  had  read  ITIT  '£"**  ,  which  is  ;.;ivt  u  i:i  the
Samaritan  Codex.  The  reading  i~  also  followed  by  the  .Syriac,  ai.d  has  much  internal  probability  on  its  side. — T.  i ,.  1

I1  Ver.  11.  -"'"P  r,X  ~~— .  Literally,  tie  made  his  liantls  intelligent,  thai  is,  did  not  fro  by  /, -,  linrj  only,  in  aid  of
hi ;  dim  eyes.  Tin-  I. XX  :v::di-iin:r,  e'raAAaf  ra5  \eipas,  '"'*  hamtj  crosswise,  and  the  Yu^ate,  cnminitfi.'ns  rtin;,ii.-;  ismei'olv
•:nfere:.tial,  and  requires  no  chaimr  in  the  Hebrew  text.  See  GI.ASSII  Phil.  Kitcra,  1(129.— T.  L.]

[3  Yer.  V">.   -TX    H"'""    CT'rX"  -///-•  6W  u-hnf<.<!  inf..     It  is  the  pastoral  ima-.-.     The  God  n-Jio  w
—  or,  in  a  ni'uo  ecneral  •/•,   guide,  or  guardian  ruler.     Compare  the  frequent  Homeric  Troi^jjv,  iroi/xau'ei,  to

express  tin   kindy  relation.—'!'.  L.]

)•'•  Yi  :-.  -^.-"T.X  -I'^'-  .Se  v.  hat  is  s-. id  oil  this  in  the  r.x.e:ietical  and  C'rilii  :il.  S'ri  also  the  vny  same  plirrue
Xeph.  iii.  U  (  vi'h  one  shoulder,  that  is,  with  one  consult,  or  shoulder  to  shoulder),  Ihinifrh  its  usa^e  there  does  not  shed
much  light  on  this  ]  -  ;  Issirs(/Vn7.  /S  tcra,  p.  1!b.">)  ::ivcs  it  as  an  example  id"  the  IVhiieal  inijnna.  The  C:  inject  uru

of  (n  jcniuri  ecems  vcrj  j  rol  able.     He  regards,  it  as  the  common  word  for  shculdiT,  taVvii  1111  taphorically  for  a  tiact  o*'

S>  the  Kir.:'. i.-h  word  y.V/.v, ':'<•;•  is  i


i  Ki.l.IMlXAKY   REMARKS.

1.  To  the  distinction  of  Jndah,  in  (lie  history  of
Israel,  correspond.-!  the  di^tiiH'tio'.i  of  Josi'jili,  ivune-
ly,  that  lie  i-  represented  liy  t\vo  trilics.  Tliis  hi;-
torieal  faet  is  lieiv  referred  l>aek  to  the  patri:;relial
theoerulie  sanetion.  ]n  this  .laeoh  authenticates  the
distiiictioii  (>!'  Raelii'l  no  !••.--  than  of  .Ii'-ejih.  The
iirrai'.ii'einent  is  of  iniportanee  ;is  ex]iressin^  the  fact
that  tin-  tiilie  uf  hi<  favorile  MIII  should  be  neither
that,  of  tie'  priesthood  (Lcvi),  nor  the  central  tribe
of  the  M""ia!i  (.ludali).  <  )n!y  throtiirh  divine  illunii-
nation,  and  a  divine  self-renouncement  of  hi>  o\vn
wisdom,  could  he  have  coin,'  In  Mich  a  decision.  It
was  however,  in  accordance  with  his  di  cp  love  ol
.Joseph,  that  he  richly  indemnified  him  in  ways  corre-
spoii'iin^,  at  the  same  time,  to  th<'  dispositions  of  the
sons  and  to  the  divine  determination  ;  and  that,  in
this  preliminary  Jjlessinp,  he  prepared  him  for  the  dis-
linpiMiin-r  b!es-'m:r  of  .Judah.  If  we  regard  the  rifrht
of  the  lir.-tborn  in  a.  three-fold  way:  as  priesthood,
prineehood,  and  double  inheritance  (1  Chron.  v.  -),
then  Jacob  uives  to  Joseph,  by  way  of  devi-e,  the
third  part,  at  least,  namely,  the  double  inheritance.
Thus  this  chapter  forms  the  natural  introduction  to
the  bit  s.-ini:  of  Jacob  inch.  xlix.  Neither  of  them
van  be  rightly  understood  without  the  other.

"2.  Contents:  1)  The  distintruishing  blessiii!;  of
Joseph,  especially  the  adoption  of  his  sons,  Manas-
eeh  and  Ephraim,  vers.  1-7;  '-)  the  blessing  of
Ephraim  and  Manasseli,  vers.  8-1  fi ;  ">)  the  prece
dence  of  Ephraim,  vers.  17-19;  4)  The  preference
of  Joseph,  vers.  2n-ti'2.


EXEGETICAL  AX1)   CKITICAL.

-  1'::  adaption  of  Joseph's  sons,  Manassfh  and
EpJiraiir;  (vers.  1-7).  DKMTZSCH  :  "  We  must  call
it  an  act  of  adoption,  although,  in  the  sense  of  the
civil  law,  adoption,  strictly,  is  unknown  to  Jewish
antiquity ;  it  is  an  adoption  which  may  be  compared
to  the  adoptlo  jilcna  of  the  Justinian  code  (adoption
on  the  side  of  the  ascendants,  or  kinsmen  reckoned
upwards)."  The  theocratic  adoption,  however,  has,
before  all  things,  a  religious  ethical  character,  though
including,  at  the  same  time,  a  legal  importance. —


After  these  things. — Jacob's  history  is  now  spir.
itually  closed  ;  he  lives  only  for  his  sons,  as  testator
and  prophet. — And  he  took  with  him.— Th.
of  Joseph  must  now  have  been  about  twenty  year.-i
old.  They  were  alnadyboru  when  Jacob  came  to
Ku'ypt,  and  he  lived  then-  seventeen  years. — And
Israel  strengthened  himself. — Jlri.n/scii :  "It
is  Jacob  that  lies  down  in  sickness  ;  it  is  Israel  that
gathers  up  his  strength  (compare  a  similar  significant
change  of  these  names  eh.  xlv.  '11  :  Jae'  b  reco\  '.-
from  his  fainting  ;  it  is  Israel  that  is  for  going  straight
to  Egypt).1' — God  Almighty  appeared  unto  me.
— Jacob  makes  mention  first  of  that  glorious  revela
tion  which  had  shed  its  light  upon  the  v.  hole  of  his
troubled  life.  He  makes  prominent,  however,  th'-
promise  of  a  numerous  posterity,  as  an  introduction
to  the  adoption. — They  shall  be  mine.— They
shall  not  tie  two  branches,  merely,  of  one  liibe,  but
two  fully-recognized  tribes  of  Jacob  and  Israel,  equal
in  this  respect  to  the  firstborn  Reuben  and  Simeon.
— Shall  be  thine. — The  sons  afterwards  bom  shall
belong  to  Joseph,  not  forming  a  third  tribe,  but  in
cluded  in  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  ;  for  Joseph  is
represented  in  a  two-fold  way  through  these.  Alter
this  provision,  the  names  of  the  other  sons  of  Jo
seph  are  not  mentioned  ;  it  was  necessary,  however,
that  they  should  be  contained  in  the  genealogical
registers,  Numb.  xxvi.  28-37;  1  Chron.  vii.  M-1'J
(Josh.  xvi.  17). — As  for  me,  when  I  came  from
Padan. — The  "Nl  here  makes  a  contrast  to  Joseph.
The  calling  to  mind  of  Rachel  here  would  seem,  at
first  glance,  to  be  an  emotional  interruption  of  the
train  of  thought.  In  presence  of  Joseph,  the  re
membrance  of  the  never-to-be-forgotten  one  causes
a  sudden  spasm  of  feeling  (Delitzsch).  Rut  the  very
course  of  the  thought'would  lead  him  to  Rachel.  Site
died  by  him  on  the  way  to  Ephrath  ("OS  would  mean,
literally,  for  him  ;  she  died  for  him,  since,  while
living,  she  shared  with  him,  and  for  him,  the  toils
of  his  pilgrimage  life,  and  through  this,  perhaps,
brought  on  her  deadly  travail.  She  died  on  the  way
to  Ephratah,  that  is,  Bethlehem,  after  she  had  only
two  sons.  And  so  must  he  make  this  satisfaction  to
his  heart's  longing  for  that  one  to  whom  he  espe
cially  gives  the  name  of  wife  (see  xliv.  27),  his  first
love,  that  there  should  be  three  full  tribes  from


CHAP.    XLVIII.    1-22.


04?


these  two  brandies  of  Rachel.  And  thus,  througl
(heir  enlargement,  is  there,  a  sacred  memorial,  no
only  of  Joseph,  but  also  of  the  loves  and  hopes  of
Ixaehel  and  Jacob.  Knobel  rightly  remarks  that  the
descendants  of  Joseph  became  very  numerous,  mfe
i-ior  only  to  those  of  Judah  (Xumb.  i.  33,  35),  ant
;wTc»  surpassing  them,  according  to  another  reckon
ing  Numb.  xxvi.  34,  37) ;  so  that,  as  two  tribes,  they
were  to  have  two  inheritances  (Xumb.  i.  10),  a  fact
which  Ezekiel  also  keeps  in  view  for  the  Messianic
times  (E/ek.  xlvii.  13;  xlviii.  4);  although  (Dent,
xxxiii.  13)  they  are  put  together  as  one  house  of  Jo-
Keph.  Knobel,  however,  will  have  it  that  it  is  the
narrator  here  who  must  be  supposed  to  make  this
explanation  instead  of  allowing  that  the  patriarch
himself  might  have  foreseen  it.— Padan. — Put  here
for  Padan-aram.— Bethlehem.— An  addition  of  the
narrator.

'2.   rJ7ic  blessing  of  the  sons,  Ephraim  aud  Manas-
trh   (vers.  8-16).— Who  are    these? — "The  old,
dim-eyed  patriarch  interrupts  himself.     He  now  per
ceives,  for  the   first  time,  that  he  is  not  alone  with
Joseph,  and  asks,  JTTio  are  these  here?     Here  again
Knobel  puts  us  in   mind,  in   his  presumptive  way,
that  the  narrative  follows  the  old  view,  that  the  ut
tered  blessings  of  godly  men  have  power  and  effica
cy  "  (a  view  which  has  not  wholly  died  out),  and  re
marks  that  these  young  persons  ought  to  have  been
well  known  to  Jacob.     In  the  Elohistic  time-reckon
ing,  therefore,  the  question  was  an  improbable  one
(he  would  say).     Then,  too,  ought  the   old,  and  al
most  blind  Isaac  to  have  been  able  to  distinguish  his
two   sons,   Jacob   and  Esau  ! — And   he    brought
them  near — The  emotion  of  the  grandfather  grows
stronger  as  he  calls  to  mind,  how  God  had  given  him
joy  beyond  his  prayers  and  anticipations.     lie  had
not  even  expected  to  sec  Joseph  again,  and  now  he
beholds  not  only  him,  but  his    two'  children. — And
Joseph  brought  them  out.— Jacob,  in  his  embrace,
had   drawn    them    between   the   knees,   and   to  his
bosom;   for  we  must  think  of  him  as  sitting.     This
would  suggest  the  idea  of  boys,  or  of  children  in  the
arms,  a  thing  which    Knobel   has    not    overlooked  ;
and  yet  it  is  self-evident  that  even  as  grown-up  chil
dren,  they  might  stand  between  the  knees  of  Jacob.
The  blessing  was  a  religious  act,  and  in  receiving  it,
they  n  ust  take  another  and  more  solemn  attitude.
Therefore  does  Joseph  draw  them  back,  and  kneels
down  himself,  to  prepare  the  sons,  and  himself  with
them,    for   the  patriarchal  blessing.     Hereupon    he
brings  them  in  the  right  positions  'before  Jacob.     If
Jacob  would  lay  his  right  hand  upon  Manasseh,  Jo
seph  must  present  him  with  his  left,  and,  with  like
cure,  must  Ephraim  be  placed  before  the  left  hand
of  Jacob.     Among  the  Hebrews  the  right  hand  was
the  place  of  precedence  (1  Kings  ii.  19).     But  Jacob
crosses  his  expectation. — Guiding  his  hands  wit
tingly.—  Delitzsch  and  Knobel  are  in  favor  of  the
LXX  interpretation,  with  which  agrees  the  Vulgate
and    the     Syriac,    he    changed,    crossed  his   hands ;
Keil   disputes  it.      The  expression   denotes  a  con
scious  and  well-understood   act.     This  is   the   first
mention,  in  the  Scriptures,  of  the  imposition  of  the
hands    in  blessing  (Xumb.  xxvii.  18,23). — And  he
blessed  Joseph. — In  his  blessing  of  Manasseh  and
Ephraim,  "  who  are  also  comprehended  as  Joseph  in
the  blessing  of  Jacob  (ch.  xlix.)  and  Moses."    Kno-
l»el. — God  before  whom.— The  l^isb  here  is  not
to  be  disregarded  (see  ver.  1(5).     It  is  the  God  who
reveals  himself  to  the  fathers  through  His  Presence


the  angel  of  His  Presence,  '"IS  "N^S,  Isn.    Ixiii
9). — Who  fed  me. — Led   me,  guided   me,  as  my
shepherd,  Ps.    xxiii. — The    angel. — Compare    Is  a'.
Ixiii.  9.     The  word  Tj^S?>"!  has  no  Wau  convershv.
Delitzsch  explains  this  as  showing  "  that  the  sepa
rate  self-existence  of  the  God-sent  angel  mentioned
Xumb.  xx.  1C,  is  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  his
being  a  medium  and   mediator  of  the  divine   self-
witnessing."     This  is  evidently  a  mingling  of  the  di
vine  and  the  creaturely  which    the   Old  Testament
docs  not  recognize.     A  creaturely  angel  cannot  stand
in  connection  with  God  as  a  fountain  of  blessing  (but
see  KEIL,  p.  281).     It  is  inconsistent  when  Delitzsch
would  here,  too,  regard  the   Logos  as  represented  by
this  angel.     It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  along  with
this  threefold  naming  of  God  (which  would  seem  to
sound  like  an  anticipation  of  the  trinity;  see  KEIL,
p.  281),  there  is,  at  the  same  time,  clearly  presented
the  conception  of  God's  presence,  of  his  care  as  a
shepherd,  and  of  his  faithfulness  as  Redeemer— all,
too,  in  connection  with  the  laying  on  of  hands.     We
have,  therefore,  in  this  passage,  a  point  in  which  the
revelation  makes  a  significant  advance. — From  all
evil. — Jacob  could  tell   of    many  seasons  of  sore
pressure,  in  which  the  prospect  of  deliverance  had
almost   vanished.     They    are    connected    with   the
names  Esau,  Labau,  Shechem,  Joseph,  and  the  fam
ine.     The    most   grievous  calamity  was  the  ban  of
unrevealed  guilt,  that,  for  so  many  years,  lay  as  a
burthen  upon  his  house,  and  which"  threatened   to
carry  him  away  into  a  death-night  of  anguish ;  for
ierc,  along  with  evil  there  is  also  wickedness,  and  so
the  first  ground  laid  for  that  last  prayer  "  Our  Father
'deliver  us  from  evil)/'— Bless  the  lads.—"  There
s  expressed  here,  in  the  singular,  the  threefold  dc-
lotation  of  God  in  the  unity  of  the  divine  being."
Ceil.     And  so  also  in  the  unity  of  the  divine  gov-
irnment. — And  let  my  name  be  named  on  them.
—The  blessing  divides  itself  into  a  spiritual  ijnd  an
^arthly  aspect.     Here,  the   first    rightly  precedes;
or  the  words  are  not  at  all  nvt<i  aduptionls  (Culvin),
n  which  case  not  only  would  the  name  of  the  fathers
je  unsuitable,  but  the  extinction  of  Joseph's  name
vould  be  altogether  out  of  place  ;  much  rather  are
hey  to  be  acknowledged  as  ycmiiite  children  of  the
wtriarchs,  and  so  prove  themselves  to  be,  notwith-
tanding  their  mother  was  the  daughter  of  an  Egyptian
n-icst.    The  remembrances  and  the  promises  of  salva-
ion  are  to  be  sustained  by  them  and  through  them.
The  name  of  the  fathers  is  the  expression  of  the  life  of
the  fathers,  and  the  thus  becoming  named  denotes  the
realization  of  that  which  is  verified  in  these  names,
that  is,  the  faith  of  the  fathers,  as  well  as  the  recog
nition,  which,  by  virtue  of  them,  becomes  their  por
tion.     To  the  predominant  spiritual  blessing  there  is
added    the  predominant  earthly,  or,  rather,  the  hu
man,  with  like  force. — And  let  them   grow  into
a  multitude.— The  verb  n:,T  is  from  y\  with  rela
tion  to  the  extraordinary  increase  of  the  fishes.     And
truly   shall   they   so    multiply   themselves    in   the
midst,  that  is,  in  the  very  core  of  the  land.

3.  The  precedence  of  Ephraim  (vcrs.  17-19). —
When  Joseph  saw.— Joseph  looks  to  the  natural
right  of  the  first-born.  He  supposes  that  his  father
has  made  a  mistake,  and  this,  all  the  more,  from  the
pains  he  had  taken  in  the  proper  presentation  of  the
sons. — I  know  it,  my  son,  I  know  it.— Joseph,
with  his  merely  natural  judgment,  stands  here  in
contrast  with  the  clear-seeing  and  divinely  imparted
wisdom  of  the  prophet,  who  knows  right  well  that


G44


GENESIS,  OK   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


by  his  crossed  hands,  lie  is  giving  the  precedence  of
the  birthright  to  the  younger  son.  From  his  inter
position  he  takes  occasion  to  announce  to  the  father
the  future  relations  of  the  two.  True  it  is  that  a
rk-h  blcs.-ini:  is  bestowed  upon  Manasseh,  but  Ephraim
shall  be  'the  greater.— "  This  blessing  begins  to
f'uliil  itself  i'roni  the  days  of  the  .ludges  onwards  ;  _as
the  tribe  of  Epluaim  in  power  and  compass  so  in
creased  that  it  became  the  head  of  the  northern  ten
tribes,  and  its  name  became  of  like  Mgnificanee  with
that  ot  [sracl ;  although,  in  the  time  of  Moses,
Manas.-eh  still  outnumbered  Ephraim  by  twenty
thousand  (Xumb.  \\vi.  :;!  and  37)."  Keil.

4.  Th-  /.,-./•  .•••  of  Joseph  (vcrs.  20-22).—
In  thee  Fjliall  Israel  bless.— This  rich  expression
of  beiiediciion  .-hall,  in  its  fuliilmcnt,  brconu-  pro-
vul.ial  in  I-'.. nl—  And  he  set  Ephraim  before
Manassch.-  These  words  close  the'  preceding  nar-
nuivi,  bill  they  belong  here,  as  denoting  that
E))hrai;n  is  preferred  only  in  the  sense  that  Manas
seh,  tun.  was  to  be  a  -Teat  people.  It  was,  moreover,
ii  single  tribe  lhat  again  branched  into  two  great  dis-
triets,  having  separate  inheritances  on  each  side  of
Jordan.— And  God  shall  bring  you  again.—
Tin-  was,  for  Joseph  and  his  children,  a  great
promise  u':d  di.-pei.sation:  Notwithstanding  their
E.vptian  ielatiot:s  they  art"  not  to  complete  their
hi.-'toi  \  in  Egypt. — Moreover,  I  have  given  unto
thce  'one  portion. — losli.  xvii.  -I  I.  We  may  well
.-uppo.-e  that  ~~".  is  a  ]'lay  of  words  upon  Slu-chem,
which  lay  in  the'th'-tricl  of  Joseph  (Josh.  xxi.  11),
and  \\here,  at  a  later  day,  the  bones  of  Jo-eph  him
self  were  inlet-red  in  the  lieid  purchased  by  Jacob
(i-h.  xxxiii.  I1.').  This  is  to  be  inferred  from  the
great  importance  that  Sheehem  alt. lined  in  the  later
lii.-iory  of  Israel;  but  not  at  all,  as  Yon  liohlcn  and
others  s'tppo-c,  that  there  is  reference  here  to  an
actual  occupation  of  Sheehem,  on  the  ground  that
Jaeob.had  afterwards  appropriated  to  himself  the
act  of  his  sons.  The  perfect,  Tr.-b,  is  used  in  a
prophetic  sense.  KKII.  :  "The  words  cannot  be  re
ferred  to  the  purchase  at  Sheehem  (eh.  xxxiii.  1!)),
for  a  forcible  taking  by  sword  and  bow  cannot  be
called  a  purcha-e;  •  much  less  can  they  relate  to  the
wicked  robbery  perpetrated  by  Jacob's  sons  (eh.
xxxiv.  4J."i);  for  Jacob  could  not  possibly  take  to
himself,  as  his  own  act,  this  evil  deed  for  which  he
lays  a  curse  upon  Simeon  and  Lev!  (eh.  xlix.  I1.) — to
say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  the  robbery  had,  for  its
consequence,  not  the  occupation  of  this  city,  but
the  withdrawal  of  Jacob  from  the  country.  More
over,  the  conquest,  of  that  district  would  have  been
in  entire  contrariety  to  the  character  of  the  patri
archal  history,  which  consists  in  renunciation  of
sell-willed  human  works,  and  in  resigned  believing
hope  in  the  Cod  of  the  promise  (  Dclitzsch)."  Nev-
erthelc-'-,  this  connection  of  Jacob's  prediction  with
the  time  then  present,  is  not  without  significance.
There  Appears  here,  in  an  isolated  form,  the  first
indication  that  the  Israelites,  in  their  return  out  of
Egypt  (when  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  shall  have
become  full,  eh.  xv.  It'.),  should  acquire  lands  by
conquest  with  sword  and  bow.  This  foresight  of  Ja
cob,  however,  may  have  had  its  suggestive  origin  in

*  [  It  is,  however,  PO  called  in  the.  lunpuape  of  the  English
iV'iHiii.m  law.  According  to  Littleton  arid  Blackstone,  pur-
dnif  (t<i  v.'hieh  the  Hebrew  n:p  and  !~i;p"3  well  cor-
ri'-p-.!i<!)  i-  any  mode  of  gdli'iiy,  or  oc'ftiiriiig,  lands,  or  other
property,  except  by  do-cent.  Sur-h  also  is  tho  wide  sense
af  the-  Greek  tcrricris,  KTri/^a. — T.  L.|


the  thought,  how  two  of  his  sons,  in  a  religious  yet
unholy  zeal,  had  once  conquered  the  entire  city  of
Sheehem.  In  the  germinal  fanaticism  of  such  ''  sons
of  thunder,"  the  prophetic  eye  discerns  the  seed  of
a  future  purer  heroism.  Thus  regarded,  the  private
acquisitions  of  the  patriarchs  in  Hebron,  and  espe
cially  in  Sheehem,  are  a  kind  of  symbolical  occupa
tion  of  the  land,  in  which  the  promise  of  God  is
typically  realized.  P.eyond  all,  in  this  respect,  is
tiie  designation  of  Canaan  as  the-  home  of  Israel,
and  the  strengthening  of  its  home-feeling,  as  that
by  which,  at  a  later  day,  the  march  of  Israel,  after
the  migration  from  Egypt,  is  directed.  And  so,  too,
the  prediction  ol  •Jacob  becomes  th"  lirst  established
point  for  the  future  partition  of  Canaan,  causing
that  Joseph's  children,  especially  the  Ephraimites,
would,  at  all  events,  !><•  jiohifcrf  by  a  well-understood
indication,  to  th"  land  of  Sheehem.  On  this  account,
too,  might  it  have  been  said,  in  later  times  (John  iv.
;">),  that  Jacob  had  given  his  field  at  Sheehem  to  his
son  Joseph.  That  pointing,  however,  must  have
exerted  an  influence  in  the  whole  partition  of  tin.'
land  of  Canaan  among  the  twelve  tribes.— The
Amorite. — A  poetical  name  for  Canaanitcs generally.


DOCTRINAL   AND    ITJIICAL.

1.  In  the  decline  of  life,  the  believer  look-  cltcer-
fully  back  upon  his  entire  experiences  of  the  grace
of  God,  that  he  may  thereby  quicken  his  hopes  and
prospects  for  the  futuie,  and  lor  eternity.

'2.  The  adoption  had  for  its  aim  not  only  to  in
corporate  into  the  people  of  Israel  the  SOUS  of  Jo
seph  who  had  been  born  in  Egyptian  relations — not
only  to  honor  and  glorify  Itacliel  in  her  children —
not' only  to  assign  to  Joseph  the  double  inheritance
as  the  third  part  of  the  biilhiight — but  also  to  ke"p
full  the  tribes  to  the  number  twehe.  P.y  the  adop
tion  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  there  is  al-o,  already,
introduced  the  spiritual  distribution  of  the  tribe  of
I.cvi  among  all  the  tribes;  although  this  turn  of
things  can  only  indicate  such  a  dispersion  (eh.  xlix:.).
The  historical  compensation  between  the  line  of  Leah
and  that  of  Rachel,  is  indicated  in  this  blessing,  as:
in  later  times  there  appears  the  contrast  between
Ephraim  and  Judah.  The  Messiah,  indeed,  id  to
come  fiom  the  tribe  of  Judah  ;  but  the  first  elements
of  his  Church,  to  >ay  the  least,  came  out  of  Galilee,
the  district  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  1'aul  was  from  the
tribe  of  Benjamin.

3.  The  cros.-\ri<e  position  of  Jacob's  hands  has
been  interpreted  allegorically  of  the  cross  of  Christ.
On  this  account  has  the  occasional  appearing  of  the
cross  figure,  been  regarded  as  momentous;  and  yet,
without    reason,    unless    there    is  kept  in  view  the
general    idea,  namely,  that  one  direction,  or  deter
mination,  has  been  thwarted  by  an  opposing  one  ;  as
here  the  natural  expectation  of  Joseph  in  respect  to
Manasseh.     In  the  symbolical  sense,  the  form  of  the
blessing  here  carries"  with  it  no  theocratic  destiny  of
sorrow.

4.  Here  first  appears  the  imposition  of  hands  in
its  great  significance  for  the  kingdom  of  God.     The
evident  effect,  outwardly,  is  that  Jacob  makes  a  dif
ference  in  the  value  of  the  blessing  for  both  sons.
It  is,  in  the  first  feature,  a  symbolic  of  the  blessing,
through  the  symbol  of  the  hand,  especially  the  right.
Then  there  is  a  theocratic  inauguration  and  investiture.
The  grandchildren  of  Jacob  are  raised  to  the  condi
tion  of  sons.     Thus,  afterwards,  does  the  imposition


CHAP.    XLVIII.    1-22.


Df  hands  denote  a  legal  consecration,  Xumb.  xxvii
18-23;  Dent,  xxxiv.  I).  The  impartation  thereby
of  an  actual  power  of  blessing,  appears  already  in
the  Old  Testament,  in  its  typical  beginnings;  but  in
the  New  Testament  it  comes  forth  in  its  full  signifi
cance,  Matt.  xix.  13;  Acts  vi.  6.  The  idea  in  com
mon  of  the  different  applications  of  the  imposition
of  hands,  is  the  transfer,  or  traduction,  of  the  com
munity  of  life  through  the  hand.  Through  this,
the  animal  offerings  became  symbolical  resignations
of  human  life,  and  so,  inversely,  the  sick  were  re
stored  to  health.  See  the  article  "Imposition  of
Hands,"  HERZOG'S  lical-Encycloj>cdia ;  also  KKIL,
p.  281.  On  the  significance' of  the  hand  sec  also
the  citations  from  Passavant  by  Schroder.

5.  On  the  great  place  of  Ephraim  in  the  life  and
history  of  Israel,  compare  the  History  of  the  Old
Testament.

G.  The  blessing  of  Joseph's  sons  is  throughout
denoted  as  a  blessing  of  Joseph  himself  in  his  sons.
We  cannot  say  that  this  was  because  Joseph  had  be
come  an  Egyptian.  Such  service  had  no  more  taken
away  his  theocratic  investiture,  than  the  foreign  po
sition  of  Nehemiah  and  Daniel  had  done  in  their
cases.  Even  Joseph's  bones  still  belonged  to  Israel.

7.  It  is  incorrect  to  regard  the  effect  of  Jacob's
benediction  as  a   representation  merely  of  Hebrew
antiquity ;  and  so  is  it  also  when  we  regard  the  pro
phetic  significance  and   power   of    the   benediction
alone,  as  a  positive  addition  to  the  authority  of  the
divine   promise.     The  divine  promise  reveals  itself
even  in  the  human  life  germs.     Ephraim's  future  lay
in  the^core  of  Ephraim's   life,  as  laid  there  by  God.

8.  The  elevated   glow  of   Jacob's    spirit,    as    it
lights  up  on  the  hearth  of  his   dead  natural  life,  his
eagle-like  clairvoyance  with  his  darkened  eye-sight,
reminds  us  of  the  similar  example  in  the  blessing  of
Isaac.     The  fact    of    a  state  of  being   raised   high
above  the  conditions  of  old  age,  meets  us  here  in
even  a  still  stronger  degree.     The  possibility  and  in
ner  truth  of  such  a  contrast,  wherein  the  future  life
already  seems  to  present  itself,  is  confirmed  by  man
ifold  facts  in   the  life  of  old  men   when  pious  and
spiritually  quickened.

<J.  In  the  threefold  designation  of  God  in  the
blessing  of  Jacob,  Keil,  without  reason,  finds  an  an
ticipation  of  the  trinity  (p.  281).  But,  in  fact,  this
is  the  first  place  in  which  the  previous  duality  of
Jehovah  ami  his  angel  begins  to  assume  something
of  a  trinitarian  form.  That,  however,  which  is  to
be  regarded,  in  its  general  aspect,  is  the  unfolding
of  the  revelation  consciousness  in  the  blessings  be
fore  us,  especially  the  appearance  of  that  conception
of  deliverance  from  all  evil.

10.  The  prophetic  bestowment  of  territory  on
Joseph,  at  the  close  of  the  blessing,  is  the  first  Indi
cation  that  Israel  shall  conquer  Canaan  by  the  sword
and  the  bow.  The  allusion  to  Shechem  can  only  be
regarded  as  the  crystallization-point  for  the  whole
Israelitish  acquisition.  If  Shechem  is  to  be  a  por
tion  for  Ephraim,  Judah  must  be  transferred  to  the
south,  and  find  its  point  of  holding  (its  habendum  ct
tenendum)  in  the  grave  of  Abraham.  These  deter
minations  have  others  for  their  necessary  conse
quences.


HOillLETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.

The  benedictions  of  Jacob. — Jacob  almost  blind,
yet  with  an  eagle  glance  in  the  light  of  God.— Jo


seph  left  out  in  the  numbering  of  the  brethren,  yel
obtains  his  blessing  before  them. — Joseph's  doubU
inheritance. — The  settlement  of  the  birthright  in
Israel:  1.  In  correspondence  with  the  facts,  or  the
diverse  gifts  of  God ;  2.  as  a  prevention  of  envy  on
the  one  side,  or  of  pride  on  the  other;  3.  an  indica
tion  of  the  divine  source  of  the  true,  or  spiritual,
birthright ;  4.  a  preparation  for  the  universal  priest
hood  of  the  people  of  God.— The  blessing  of  Jacob
as  given  to  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  :  1.  The  names  ;
2.  the  fulness  ;  3.  the  certainty.

1.  The   adoption    of  Joseph's   sons   (vers.    1-7)
STARKE  :  Here,  for  the  first  time,  is  Ephraim  preferred
to  Manasseh. — Herewith,  therefore,  is  the  first  priv
ilege  of  the   birthright,  namely,  the  double  inherit
ance,  taken  from  Reuben  and  given  to  the  two  sons
of  Joseph,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  princehood,
and  the  magisterial  power,  is  given  to  the  tribe  of
Judah,  and  the  priesthood  to  Levi. — The  duty  of
visiting  the  sick,  of  ordering   one's   own  household,
of  remembering  kindred  and  fiiends  when  dead. —
CALWER  Handbuch:  Observe  how  the  names  of  Is
rael  and  Jacob  arc  changed. — When  the  spirit  is  ele
vated  a,nd  strong,  the  sick  body  gets  a  new  power
of  life,   especially  for  the  transaction   of   high    and
holy  duties. — Ver.  '.',.  Canaan  ;  ever  Canaan.     Egypt
was  only  his  transition-point,  and  so  it   must  be'for
Joseph. — SCHRODER  :  They  who  arc  blessed  of  God
can  bless  in  turn.

2.  The  blessing  of  the  sons,  Ephraim  and  Manas-
seh  (vers.   8-16).     STARKE:  The  laying  on  of  hands
in  the  various  applications.     Among  others,  in  the
condemnation  of  a  malefactor  (Lev.  xxiv.   14;  Hist.
Susanna,  ver.  34.)     [As  far  as  concerns  this  kind  of
hand-imposition,  it  expresses   merely  that  the  wit
nesses  feel  themselves  stained  with   the  guilt  of  the
accused,  and  this  guilt,  with  its  stain,  they  would  lay
upon  his  head  (see  Lev.  v.  1).     A  still  deeper  com
prehension  of  this  act  of  laying  on  the  hands,  makes
it  an  acknowledgment  of  human  community  in  the
guilt,  and  a  symbolical  carrying  over  of  a  penitent

uilt-consciousness  to  the  guilty,  as  that  which  can
alone  impart  to  punishment  a  reconciling  character.
On  the  meaning  of  Goel  (bxi's),  sec  the  Dictionaries.]
— Christians  are  called  that  they  may  inherit  the
blessing. — CAI.WKR  Handbncli  :  Though  born  in  a
foreign  land,  they  arc  engrafted  into  the  patriarchal
stem. — SCHRODER  :  Ha-Elohhn,  who  fed  me,  or  was
my  shepherd ;  a  form  of  speech  dear  to  all  the  pa
triarchs,  and,  in  the  deepest  sense,  to  Jacob  on  ac-
unt  of  his  shepherd  life  with  Labau  (Ps.  cxix.
170). — II KIM  :  He  is  my  redeemer  (or,  who  redeemed
me),  my  goel.  It  is  the  word  that  Job  uses  (Job.
xix.  25),  when  he  says,  "I  know  that  my  redeemer
liveth."

3.  The,  precedence   of  Ephraim   (vers.    17-10).
STAKKK:  How  God  sometimes  prefers  the  younger  to
the  elder,  we  may  see  in  the  case  of  Shem  who  was
preferred  to  Japhcth,  in  the  case  of  Isaac  who  was

•referred  to  Ishmael,  of  Jacob  who  was  preferred  to
feau,  of  Judah  and  Joseph  who  were  preferred  to
Reuben,  of  Moses  who  was  preferred  to  Aaron,  ami
inally,  of  David,  who  was  preferred  to  all  his  breth
ren.  God  set  tiicc  :  a  form  of  speech  to  this  day  in
ise  among  the  Jews.  As  they  greet  with  it  men  and
heir  young  companions,  so  it  is  also  said  to  wives
ind  young  women  :  God  make  tliee  as  Sarah  and
.vebecca. — CRAMER:  Human  wisdom  cannot,  in  ui-
vine  things,  accommodate  itself  to  the  foreknowledge,
'he  election,  and  the  calling  of  God;  but  must  ever


r.40


GENESIS,  OK    THE   FIRST    BOOK   OF   MOSES.


mingle  with  them  it.,  own  works,  character,  and
merit.  —  Ver.  in.  CKAMKK:  When  God  speaks,  the
deed  must  follow.  —  SCIIRODKR  :  He  fancies  that  the
dimness  of  his  father's  eyes  may  deceive  him,  even
as  lie  once  deceived  his  father  Isaac.

4.  The  preference  of  Joseph  (vcrs,.  20-2:2').  God
distributes  his  gifts  as  lie  wills  ;  in  so  doing  he
wrongs  no  man.  —  Ver.  22.  Citation  of  various  inter
pretations  (<ome  hold  that  sword  and  bow  mean
merely  the  impressions  on  the  coin  with  which  he
bought  the  field  at  Shrehi-m.  Rashi  explains  the
bow  as  meaning  prayer.  There  is  also  an  interpre
tation  of  it  as  prophetic).  —  My  Hod,  let  me  set  my
house  in  order  in  due  season,  I's.  xc.  12.  —  Srmii>m:r.  :
Which.  I  innk  out  at'  ilir  hitn<l  nf  the  Ani»ri/>:  With
prophetic  boldness,  he  uses  the  past  for  the  future.
The  prophetic  impulse,  as  it  appears  in  this  laiK'ua^e,
prepares  u<  for  that  which  immediately  foLows.

[IXTKKl'RKTATTON     <>t-~     Till:    Wo;:DS     GoKr.,    M.M.AK

HAI;<;OI:I.,     KKDKKMKK,     AMUI.     KI.HKFMKI:.       (li-:x..
xr.vni.  Id.  —  In   tin'   Uomiletical    and    Practical,   just
',  Hi"  re  nier  N  referred   to  the   Hictionai  i
eaning    of   tlicse   word-.      Their    irreat    impor-
both  in  ihe   patriarchal  and  the  Christian  the-


t.M

,  make's    proper  a    mou
n.      The  primary  sen-e  of  the  root  bxl  is  that
•'  •, ',  or  be  i  »ff  xfttninl,   with    blood.      Thru  it
i.-  applied,  metaphorically,  t
brother's  or   kinsman'-;    bloi


th


to


one  who  .-ull'ers  a
go  unavenged,  on
the  ground  that  he  himself  i-  stained  with  it, — pol
luted  by  it,  as  the  idea  is  afterwards  applied  to  the
land,  or  civil  community,  that  take-;  the  place  of  the
individual  l;li'!ra<-lu'i-  in  the  ancient  law.  Then  it  is
given  to  him  ottieially,  and  he  is  called  from  it  bxJ~.
or  the  one  wdio  removes  the  stain  bv  t  ikin^  ven
geance.  Hence  it  becomes  a  name  for  the  next  of
kin  himself,  and,  later  still,  it  is  applied  to  him  as
one  \\iio  redeems  the  lo-t  inheritance, — -beim:  a
transfer,  as  we  may  say,  from  the  criminal  to  the
civil  side  of  jurisprudence.  See  Lev.  xxv.  2."i ;  Ruth
iv.  •!,  ti  :  iii.  12  ;  Numb.  v.  S.  This  civil  sense  could
not  have  been  the  primary,  as  it  could  only  c  >me  in
after  the  establishment  of  property  and  civil  institu
tions.  Gescnius,  in  making  it  lirst,  is  illogical  as
well  as  unphilological.  His  referring  it  to  the  later
Hebrew,  Jlcbraisino  .v<  yv/o/7,  has  no  force.  The
word  is  found,  in  this  sense  of  ;W/*/,W,  in  Isaiah,
and  in  the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah.  There  having
been  a  few  occasions  for  such  use  in  Malachi  and
Nehemiah,  decides  nothing  as  to  the  earlier  scr.si  -
of  the  word.  The  land-redeeming  idea,  at  all  evi  n's,
must  be  secondary.  It  i.s  not  difficult  to  explain,
too,  how  the.  primary  sense  might  come  out  in  the
vivid  language  of  the  prophets,  whilst  the  secondary
meets  us  oftcner  in  the  less  impassioned  historical
portions  of  Scripture.  Both  transitions  arc  clear.
The  next  of  kin  who  avenges,  and  the  next  of  kin
who  m/<.v,«.v  (buys  back)  the  lost  inheritance,  is  the
same  person.  It  is  redemption  in  both  legal  aspects,
the  criminal  and  the  civil,  as  said  before.  And  so
the  shadow  of  the  word,  and  of  the  idea,  is  pre
served  in  the  legal  nomenclature  of  later  times.
Thus  in  the  Greek  judicial  proceedings,  whether  in  a
criminal  or  a  civil  action,  the  plaintiff  was  called
Sia-ifwi',  the  pursuer,  the  defendant  <ptvyuv,  the  fleeer.
\Ve  lind  it  still  in  our  most  modern  law  language.
The  words  prosecutor  and  pursuer  (the  latter  used
iu  the  Scotch  law)  are  remnants  of  the  old  idea,
though  redeemer  has  no  counterpart.


The  term  Gocl  is  applied  to  God,  or  to  an  angel
representing  God,  and  this  makes  the  derivation  from
blood-staining,  as  above  given,  seem  harsh  and  un.
suitable.  It  has  led  Olshauscn,  and  others,  to  njeet
it  when  given  in  the  interpretation  of  Job  xix.  25,
where  Job  says'1"  ^NJ,  "1  know  that  my  God,
my  redeemer,  liveth."  It  is  an  appeal  there  to  some
one  as  an  avenger  of  his  cause,  of  his  blood,  we  mav
say,  as  against  a  cruel  adversary.  Com  p.  Job  xvi.
IS,  "O  earth,  cover  not  thou  my  blood,"  an  1  th;-
appeal,  in  the  next  verse,  to  "the  witness  on  high"
(Cn£li5£2  •np1:.;.  the  same  etymoloicall  with  the


on   the  day  of  judgment,   Koran   xi.   21).      Whom

could  Job  have  had  in  mind  but  that  great  one  who

was    believed   on   from    the   earliest   times,  and  who

was  to  deliver  man  from  the  power  of  evil.     He  was

the  antagonist  of  the  oydpcoTro/fTc-Vor,  or  "man-slayer

from  the  beginning"  (John  viii.  41),  who  plays  such

an  important  part  in  the  introduction  to  this  ancient

or  Joheid,  as  we  may  call  it.     It  is  this  Deliv

erer   that    meets   us,    in    some    form,   in  all   the    ohl

mythologies.     He  is  the  great  combatant   by  whom

is  waged   the  M^X7?   a^tu-aToy,  the.  "immortal  strife"

between    the    powers    of  good    and    evil,  —  "war   in

Heaven,  Michael   and   his  angels  lighting  with  Sat;i;i

and   his  angels."     He  was  to  be  of  kin  t  >  us.     The

theanthropic   idea   can  be  traced  in  most  of  the  old

religions,  and   especially  was   it  an  Oriental  dogma.

All    this   points    to  that  ancient  hope  that  wa.-  bora

of  the   protevangel,    (Jen.  iii.   15,  whatever   f  >rm   it

may  have   taken    according  to  the  varied  culture  or

culms  of  mankind,  —  whether  that  of  warrior,  legis

lator,  benefactor,  or  of  the  more  sphnual  .Messiah  a.;

d  pieted    in    the   Hebrew  Scriptures.      This  Delive;  ••;•

of  humanity  was   to   be  CTX  -,2  ,  Sou  of  Man,  and,

at.  the  same   time,  one  of  the  lent:  /:'>'<,  /i/,n,  Sons,  of

God,  or  chief,  or  lirst  born,  among  them.     The  patri

archs  knew  him  as   ?N.'n  "xbsri  ,  the  avenging  cr

"redeeming   angvl.''     Th?   lirst,  cr   rfftfithiy  aspect,

however,   is    c-ailiest   and   most   predominant.     The

other,  or   the   redeeming   id  -a,  in  the  more  forensic

sense,  came  in  later,     hi  modern  times  it  has  become

almost    exclusive.      In    the   patristic  theology,   how

ever,  the  avenging,  or  rather,  ri-.-n-i.^irf  aspect  of  the

Redeemer's  work,  had  a  conspicuous  place.     He  ap

pears  more  as  a  militant  hero  who  fights  a  great  bat

tle  for  us,  who  delivers  us  from  a  powerful  foe,  when

we   "had  become  the  prey    of    the  mighty."      L'e-

demption  consisted   in   something  done   for   us,  not

forensically  merely,  but   in   actual   contest,  in  som-

mysterious  way,  with  the   great  Tower  of  evil,  who

seemed  to  have  a  claim,  or  who  asserted  a  claim,  to

our  allegiance,  and  whom  the  Redeemer  overcomes

before  the  forensic  work   can  have  its  accomplish

ment.

From  the  two  ideas  huve  come  two  sets  of  fig
ures,  the  forensic  and  the  warlike,  as  we  may  call
them,  both  clearly  presented  in  the  Bible,  but  iha
former  now  chiefly  regarded.  Hence  the  ideas  of
debt,  of  satisfaction,  of  inheritance  lost  and  recov
ered.  These  are  most  true  and  Scriptural,  b'lt  thej
should  not  have  been  allowed  t:>  cast  the  others  into
the  shade.  Much  less  should  they  have  led  ::ny,  as
has  been  lately  done,  to  speak  of  the  patristic  view,
in  which  these  figures  of  rescue  arc  most  prominent,
as  "  the  devil  theory  of  the  atonement."  The  re
demption  is  explained  by  both  :  it  is  the  ransoming


CHAP.    XLIX.    1-33.


047


of  the  captive  taken  in  war;  it  is  the  paying  of  the
bankrupt's  heavy  debt.  We  owed  ten  thousand  tal
ents  without  a  farthing  to  pay ;  but  we  were,  none
the  less,  prisoners  to  a  "  strong  one  "  who  had  to  be
bound  and  despoiled  of  his  prey,— or  who  had  shed
our  blood,  and  who  was,  therefore,  to  be  pursued
and  slain.  The  forensic  language  undoubtedly
abounds  in  the  Xcw  Testament,  but  there  is  there,
'  as  well  as  in  the  Old,  much  of  the  other  imagery.
Thus  Col.  i.  13,  "Who  hath  rescued  us  from  the
power  of  darkness" — the  strong  Homeric  word
fppviTa.ro,  so  often  used  of  deliverance  on  the  field
of  battle.  Compare  also  Col.  ii.  15,  "  Having  spoiled
(stripped  of  their  armor)  principalities  and  powers,"
— evil  spirits  (see  Eph.  vi.  12;  John  xii.  31).  The
Redeemer  did  a  work  in  Hades.  It  is  clearly  inti
mated  as  a  fact,  1  Peter  iii.  ID,  though  the  nature
of  it  is  veiled  from  us.  He  made  proclamation
(etcripv£f)  in  Shcol,  not  a  didactic  sermon,  but  an  an
nouncement  of  deliverance.  "Thou  wilt  call"  says
Job,  "and  I  will  answer"  (Job.  xiv.  15).  The  pa
triarchs  waited  there  for  the  coming  and  the  victory


of  the  bxhn


the   angel   Redeemer.     In   1


John  iii.  8  it  is  said  that  the  Son  of  God  came,  "iva.
Avr/Ty.  that  he  might  unbind  the  works  of  the  devil,
that  is,  free  his  captives.  In  Horn.  xi.  20,  he  is
called  'O  PTOMENO2  ;  "  there  shall  come  forth  from
Zion  the  Deliverer."  Ic  is  the  LXX  rendering  of
2X"5 ,  Is.  lix.  '20,  as  in  Is.  xlviii.  20,  and  other  places.
The  petition  in  the  Lord's  prayer  is  pva-ziTjuasairb
roi)  Troi'ijpoi),  "  rescue  us  from  the  evil  one."  The
rendering  deliver  would  be  well  enough  if  the  old
sense  of  the  word  were  kept,  but  probably  to  most
minds  it  suggests  rather  the  idea  of  prevention,  of
keeping  safe  from,  than  that  of  rescue  from  a  mighty
power  by  which  we  are  carried  captive  ;  and  thus
the  weaker  sense  given  to  pvvai  obscures  the  person
ality  that  there  is  in  rov  Trovypov,  the  evil  one.

These  ideas  are  as  much  grounded  on  the  Scrip
ture  as  the  others,  and  it  will  not  do  to  treat  them
lightly,  as  "  specimens  of  patristic  exegesis,"  to  use


a  phrase  that  has  been  snceringly  employed.  John
Uunyan  may  have  known  little  of  patristic  interpre
tations,  but  he  was  deeply  read  in  the  Scripture,  and
impressed  with  the  significance  of  its  figures.  This
militant  view  of  the  Redeemer's  work  is,  therefore,
the  ground  conception  of  his  greatest  book,  the
"  Holy  War,  or  the  Battle  for  the  Town  of  Mansoul,
between  Iminanuel  and  Satan."  Such  a  view,  too,  is
necessary  to  give  meaning  to  some  of  the  Messianic
titles  in  the  Old  Testament,  besides  that  of  the  Goel
or  Redeemer.  Especially  is  it  suggested  by  the  El
Gibbor  ("1123  bs)  the  hero  God,  or  divine  hero,  of
Is.  ix.  5,  who  "  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death,  and
divided  the  spoil  with  the  strong,"  Is.  liii.  12.  It
may  be  said,  too,  that  this  militant  idea  is  predomi
nant  in  Christian  feeling  and  experience,  although
the  forensic  is  more  adapted  to  formal  articles  of
faith.  Hence,  while  we  find  the  one  prominent  iii
creeds,  as  it  ought  to  be,  the  other  especially  appears
in  the  hymns  and  liturgies  of  the  church,  both  an
cient  and  modern.

For  striking  examples  of  bXa  (Redeemer,  in  the
sense  of  rescuer  or  avenger\  see  such  passages  as
Is.  xlix.  2 15,  "  Thy  Redeemer,  the  mighty  one  of
Jacob  ;  "  Is.  xliii.  1,  "Fear  not,  for  I  have  redeemed
thee;"  Exod.  xv.  13,  "thy  people  whom  thou  hast
redeemed ;  "  Exod.  vi.  G,  "  Redeemed  you  with  a
strctchcd-out  arm;"  Ps.  xix.  15,  "My  rock  and  my
Redeemer ;  "  Ps.  Ixxviii.  35,  "  the  Most  High  their
Redeemer;"  Ps.  Ixxvii.  16;  Ps.  ciii.  4,  "who  re-
decmeth  thy  life  from  corruption;"  Ps.  cxix.  154,
"  contend  for  me  in  my  conflict  and  redeem  me  ; "
Jer,  1.  34,  pTH  fibsa,  "their  Redeemer  is  strong,
Jehovah  of  Hosts  is  his  name; "  so  Prov.  xxiii.  11,
"  come  not  nigh  to  the  field  of  the  orphans,  for  their
Goel  is  strong."  Compare  also  Hosea  xiii.  14,  "  I
will  ransom  them  from  Sheol,  cbx.'.x  r"E2 ,  from
Death  will  I  redeem  them ;  I  will  be  thy  destruction,
0  Sheol ; "  Is.  xxxv.  9,  "  the  redeemed  shall  walk
there;"  Job  xix.  25  ;  Is.  xliv.  22;  and  many  other
similar  passages. — T.  L.]


TENTH      SECTION.

Jacob's  llc.mng  of  his  sons.     Judah  and  his  brethren.     Jacob's  last  arrangements.     His  burial

in   Canaan.     His  death.


CHAPTKH    XLIX.    1-33.

And  Jacob  called  unto  his  sons,  and  said,  Gather  yourselves  together,  that  I  may

2  tell  you  that  which  shall  befall  you  in  the  last  days.     Gather  yourselves  together,  and

3  hear,  ye  sons  of  Jacob;  and  hearken  unto  Israel  your  father.      Reuben,  thou  art  my
first-born,  my  might,  and  the  beginning  of  my  strength,  the  excellency  of  dignity,  and

4  the  excellency  of  power :  Unstable  as  Avatcr,  thou  shalt  not  excel ;  because  thou  Aventest

5  up  to  thy  father's  bed;  then  defiledst  thou  it:  he  went  up  to  my  couch.     Simeon  and

6  Levi  arc,  brethren ;  instruments  of  cruelty  are  in  their  habitations.     O,  my  soul,  come
not  thou  into  their  secret;  unto  their  assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not  thou  united;  for  in

7  their  anger  they  slew  a  man,  and  in  their  self-will  they  digged  down  a  wall.      Cursed
le  their  anger,  for  it  ivas  fierce;   and  their  wrath,  for  it  was  cruel;   I  will  divide  them  iu


048


GENESIS,  OR    THE   FIIIST   HOOK   OF   MOSES.


13

11
15
1G

17

18,

20


Jacob,  and  scatter  them  in  Israel.  Judah,  them  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise  •
thv  hand  shall  be  on  the  neck  of  thine  enemies;  thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down
before  thce.  Jndah  is  a  lion's  whelp;  from  the  prey,  my  son,  thou  art  gone  up-  he
=toi  [>ed  down,  he  couched  as  a  lion,  and  as  an  old  lion;  who  shall  rouse  him  up?  The
sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet  until  Shilol
•me;  and  unto  him  si  the  gathering  of  the  people  be.  Binding  his  fo;d  mito  the
vinr.  :ilul  llis  ass'd  co11  llll!o  tlic  choice  vine;  he  washed  his  garments  in  wine  and  liis
clothes  in  the  blood  of  the  grapes.  His  eves  xhall  Ic  red  with  wine,  and  his  teeth  white
with  milk.  Zc-bulun  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the  sea.  and  lie  shall  be  for  an  haven
of  ships:  and  his  border  shall  Ic  unto  Zidon.  [ssachar  is  a  strong  ass,  couchin-  down

Between    two   burdens.     And   he   saw  that   rest   was    g I,  and    the    land   thut'"\Y  »•«.«

houhler  to   bear,  and  became   a   servant    unto  tribute      Dan


an  :ili'l;'r  '"  l!i'-  Path,  that  biteth    the   horse  heels,  so   thai  his   rider  shah   tall   backward!
I'J   i  have  wailed  for  thy  salvation.  ()   Lord!      Gad,  a    troop   shall   overcome  him-   but
1    overcome   at   the   last.      Out    of    Asher   his  bread  shall  In-  fat,    and    he  shall
ro}'a!    dainties.       Napbtali    is    a    hind    let:     loose;     he    givefh    '"-oodlv    word?
oseph  is  a  fruitful  bough,  even   a  fruitful    bough   by    a  well,  whose  branches 'run  over
the  wall.     The   archers   have  sorely  grieved  him,  "and   shot  at  hi,,),  and    hated   him'-
But  his  bow  abode  in  strength,  and   the  arms  of  his   hands  were    made  stron"-  by  the
hands  of  the  mighty  GW  of  Jacob:   (from  thence  w  the  shepherd,  the  stone  oFlsrael :)
/;''r»  \y  the  God  of  thy  father,  who  shall   help  thce;   and   by  the  Almighty,  who  shall
bee  with  blessings  of  heaven  above,  blessings  of  the  dee.,  that  lieUi  under   bless-
ol  the  breasts  and  of  the  womb:   The  blessings  of  thy  father  have  prevailed' above
the  blessings  of   my  progenitors,  unto  the  utmost  bound  of  the   everlasting  hills:  they
slia11  !li;  o»  illf'  head  of  Joseph,  and  on  the  crown  of  the  head  of  him  that'waa  separate
from  his  brethren.     Benjamin  shall  raven  as  a  wolf;  in  the  morning  he  shall  devour  the
prey,  an  ,  al  nigh!  he  shall  divide  the  spoil.     All  these  arc  the  twelve  tribes  of  Fsracl  :
I's  it  that  their  father  spake  unto  them,  and  blessed  them  ;   every  one  accordin-
sing  he  blessed  them.     And  he  charged  them,  and  said  unto  them,  1  am  to  be
gathered  unto  my  people;   bury  me  with  my  fathers  in  the  cave  that  in  in  the  field  of
hphronthe  Hittite ;   In   the  cave  that   is   in   the   field  of  Machpelah,  which    is  before
lamrc,  in   the  land   of  Canaan,  which  Abraham   bought  with   the   field  of  Kphron  the
Ililtite  for  a  possession  of  a  burying-place.     There  they  buried  Abraham  and  Sarah  hn
•e  they  buried  Isaac   and   Kebekah  his  wife;   and  there   1    buried  Leah.      The
•e  of  the  field  and  of  the  cave  that   i*  therein   was   from   the   children  of  lleth
And  when  Jacob  had  made  an   end   of  commanding   his   sons,  he  gathered  up  his  feet
jnto  the  bed,  and  yielded  up  the  ghost,  and  was  gathered  unto  his  people.


I'KKLIJUXAUY  IlKMAltKS.

Tn  (liis  most  important  and  most  solemn  closing
prophecy  of  (iciicsis,  tin-re  come  into  consideration  :
1.  'Jlii1  p:  ophetie  development  generally;  "2.  the
character  of  its  contents:  3.  its  poetic  il  form;  4.
itj  origin;  ~>.  the  analogies:  ti.  the  literature;  7.
the  points  of  particular  interest.

1.  The  ]>r«!>lict]<-  development.  The  blessing  of
Jacob  forms  the  close,  the  last  full  bloom  of  the
patriarchal  prophecy,  or  of  the  theocratic  promise  of
the  patriarchal  time.  The  seed  of  the  protevangel
passes,  in  its  unfolding,  through  the  blessing  of
Noah,  through  the  promises  given  to  Abraham  (es
pecially  the  closing  one  of  ch.  xxii.),  and,  finally,
through  the  blessing  of  Isaac,  and  the  promises  made
to  Jacob,  to  become,  at  last,  the  prophetic  form  of
life,  as  ir  is  manifested  in  the  future  of  the  twelve


tribes.     Thenceforth,  in  respect  to  its  tenor,  is  the
|  Messianic  germ  more  distinctly  unfolded  than  in  the
I  promises  hitherto  ;  whilst  the  poetic  form,  which  is
j  so  peculiar  a   feature   of  the  Messianic    predictions,
attains  in   them  to  the  full  measure  of  its  bloom!
1  "We  shall  mistake  the  meaning  of  this  Messing,  un
less  we  estimate  it  according  to  the  theocratic  degree
,  of  its   development,  or,  if  we  do  not  bear  in  mind
j  that  it  stands  midway  between  the  blessing  of  Isaac
I  and  the  Mosaic  promises.

In  respect  to  the  fundamental  ideas  contained  in
these  benedictions,  it  may  be  said  that  the  blessing
of  Judah  forms  evidently" its  central  point,  to  which
that  of  Joseph  makes  a  corresponding  contrast.
The  spirit  of  Israel  finds  its  corresponding  expression
in  the  one,  the  heart  of  Jacob  in  the  other.  The
others  group  themselves  around  these,  not  as  isolated
atoms,  but  in  significant  relations.  The  declarations


CHAP.   XLIX.   1-33.


G49


made  in  respect  to  Reuben,  Simeon,  Levi,  link  them
selves  together,  and  have  a  direct  view  to  the   dis
tinction  of  Judali.     In  those  of  Zcbulun  and  Issachai
who,  as  sons  of  Leah,  arc  placed  before  the-  sons  o
the  handmaids,  there  is  a  reversal   of  the  nature
order  of  succession,  since  Zebulun,  the  younger,  pre
cedes.     There  seems  to  have  been  a  motive  her
similar  to  that  which  led  to  the  preference  of  Ephraii
to  Manasseh.     Zebulun's  preference  seems  to  consi*
in  this,  that  he  has  place  between  two  seas,  extent
ing  from  t'ae  Galilean  sea  to  the  Mediterranean,  a
indication  of  a  richer  worldly  position.     Dan  close
the  group  which,  like  a  constellation  of  seven  stars
forms  itself  around  Judah.     Then   follows  the  ejac
ulation  (vcr.  18),  in  which  there  seems  to  be  again
sound  of  Judah's   destiny.     In   the   natural  order
Naphtali  would  have  come  next ;  but  the  blessin
includes  both  the  two  sons  of  Leah's  handmaid,  Ga^
and  Asher,  between  the  sons  of  Rachel's  handmaic
Dan  and  Napthali.     It  is  not  easy  to  see  the  reasot
of  this,  unless  it  was  somehow  to  reinforce  the  lin
of  Rachel  through  Naphtali;   or  we  may  suppos
that  the  position  of  the  three  named  before  Josepl
led  to  Joseph  and  Benjamin.     Gad  is  like  Joseph  ai
invincible  hero  in  defensive  war.     Asher  makes  th<
prelude    to  the  rich  blessing  of  Joseph  in  natura
things.     >;  aphtali  ranks  with  Benjamin  in  impetuous
ness  and  decision  of  character.    It  is  strictly  iu  accord
ancc  with  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  that  the  picture  hen
given  of  the  future  of  Israel's  tribes  should  have  it;
light  and  shade,  its  broad  features,  and  its  mere  points
of  gleaming,  and  that  it  should  be  just  as  indeterminate
in  its  chronology.     In  respect  to  the  nature  of  its  con
tents,  Knobel  maintains  that  this  portion  of  Scripture
is  incon  ectly  called  the  blessing  of  Jacob.     The  bless
ing  of  Moses,  Dent,  xxxiii.,  is  rightly  so  designated,
because  it  contains  only  good  for  the  tribes ;  whilst
this,  on  the  contrary,  has  much  that  is  to  their  dis
advantage.     "  Judah  and  Joseph,  as  the  most  im
portant,  are  treated  in  the  most  favorable  manner  ;
Naphtali,  also,  is  spoken  of  favorably  in  respect  to
deeds  of  heroism,  and  poetic  art,  as  Asher  for  his
productive  territory.     To  a  tolerable  degree  the  same
may  be  said  of  Gad,  who,  indeed,  is  overcome,  but
overcomes  at  last ;  whilst  it  is  not  saying  much  for
Zebulun  that  he  shall  dwell  by  the  seas.     What  is
declared  of  Issachar,  that  he  yields  himself  to  labor
like  an  ass,  or  concerning  Dan,  that  like  a  serpent
he  lurks  in  the  path,  or  of  Benjamin,  that  he  shall
be  like  a  ravening  wolf,  contains,  at  least,  a  mingling
of  disapprobation,"  etc.     This   shows   but   a   poor
comprehension  of  the  prophetic  forms  of  speech.
If,  in  a  good  sense,  Judah  is  a  lion  rampant,  why,
in  the  same  sense,  may  not  Benjamin  be  a  wolf,  es
pecially  a  victorious  one,  that  "  in  the  evening  di
vides  the  spoil ';  "     And  why  should  not  Dan,  who  is
judge  in    Israel,  be  compared  with  the  serpent  in
view  of  his  strategical  cunning?     Along  with  Xaph
tali,  the  swift-footed  deer  may  also  be  named,  in  no
unfavorable  way,  the  strong-boned  ass  Issachar,  who,
in  his  comfortable  love  of  peace,  devotes  himself  to
peasant  service,  and  to  the  transport  of  burdens  be
tween  the  Galilean  sea   and  the  southern  regions.
Next  to  these  animal  figures,  whose  characteristics
are  to  be  regarded  according  to  the  oriental  usage,
and  not  moralized  upon  in  our  occidental  way,  comes
the  figure  of  the  plant :  Joseph  the  fruitful  vine,  sup
plemented  by  the  human  figure  :  Joseph,  the  archer,
or  mark  for  the  archer's  arrows.     Less  developed  is
the  figure  of  Asher,  the  royal  purveyor,  or  of  Zebulun
the  shipper,  or  that  of  Reuben  drawn  from  the  insta


bility  of  water.     Is  it  an  evil  doom  pronounced  upon
Reuben,  pointing,  as  it  does,  to  his  sin,  that  he  should
be  deposed  from  the  birthright?     Rather,  according
to  the  Scripture,  is  it  a  misfortune  when  a  man  em
braces  a  calling  to  which  he   is  unequal,  as,  for  ex
ample,  Saul  and  Judas.     The  prince  of  the  twelv«
tribes  must  be  something  more  than  an  unstable  va
por.     It    was,   however,  by   this  determination  that
Reuben  was  guarded  from  his  own  destruction.     lie
remains  the  first  below  the  first-born,  and,  from  this
state  of  forbearance  and  protection  he  may  still  de
velop    the    more     moderate    blessing    pronounced
Deut.   xxxiii.   6.     Simeon  and  Levi  have   not,  like
Reuben,  so  repented  of  their  old  guilt,  that  it  may
not  be  again  charged  upon  them,  with  a  malediction
of  the  deed  that  may  yet  become  a  blessing,  if  it  is
the  occasion   of   chastising,  warning  and  purifying
them.     How  their  dispersion  in  Israel,  which  is  \m-
posed  upon  them  as  a  penalty,  may  be  transformed
into  a  distinction,  is  shown  in  the  position  of  Levi
and  in  the    blessing  later   pronounced   upon   him
Deut.   xxxiii.  8.     Through  this  dispersion,  Simeon,'
indeed,  disappears  as  a  tribe,  but  he  becomes  incor
porated  with  Judah,  the  best  of  the  twelve  (Judg.  i.
3).     Benjamin,    "  the  ravening  wolf,"  becomes^  in
the  blessing  of  Moses,  a  protector  of  the  beloved  of
Jehovah.     Zebulun  is  praised  for  his  maritime  posi
tion  ;  Issachar,  the  broad-limbed  peasant,  rejoices  in
his  tents.     Gad,  the  fighter  in  Genesis,  becomes,  in
the  blessing  of  Moses,  a  lion  like  Judah;  and  so  Dan
is  a  young  lion,  ready  to  spring,   as  before  he  was
compared,  in  a  similar  manner,  to  a  darting  serpent.
Naphtali  is  still  described  as  full  of  grace,  though  in
more  expressive  language.     Asher,  who,  in  Genesis,
is  full  of  bread,  is  changed,  in  the  Mosaic  blessing,
to  the  "abounding  in  oil."     We  need  not  wonder'
therefore,  that  Joseph,  who  is  ever  praised,  is  com
pared,  in  the  blessing  of  Moses,  to  the  ox  and  the
buffalo.     In  the  later  benediction,  the  blessing  of
Judah  becomes  more  mysterious,  more   individual,
more  spirituous,  whilst  yet  there  is  a  falling  back  of
the  rich  development  presented  in  Genesis.     This
designation,  therefore:  the  blessing  of  Jacob,  is  well
grounded,  besides  being  expressly  confirmed  in  ver.
28.     In  regard  to  the  relations,  or  the  perspective
of  this  prophecy,  it  is  incorrect  to  say,  as  Baumgar-
:en  and  Kurtz  do,  that  the  seer  here  looks  at  the
imc  of  the  Judges  as  giving  the  fulness  of  his  pic-
•ure.     Thus  to  limit  the  prophecy  in  the  olden  time,
s  to  divest  it  of  its  character  as  true  prediction,  and
make  it  a  mere  presaging.     Each  prophecy,  indeed,
las  its  own  provisional  points  of  aim  and  rest,  be-
onging  to  the  time  in  whose   forms  and  colors  it
:lothes  itself,  yet  still,  in  its  last  aim,  ever  points  to
he  perfection  of  the  kingdom  of  God.     This,  more-
iver,  is  here  expressed  in  the  very  letter,  "  n^nx"
^aTl,  literally,  at  the  end  of  the  days,  that  is,  in
he  last  time,  eV  tVxarcoi/  TUV  ypepZii  (LXX) — not
he  future  in  general,  but  the  closing  future,  in  fact,
he  Messianic  time  of  the  completion,"  etc.  (KEIL,
).  284).     True  it  is,  that  the  period  from  the  time  of
tie  Judges  to  that  of  David  appears  as  the  deter
minate  foreground  view  of  the  seer,  but  this  is,  itself,
symbolic  configuration,  in  which  he  looks  through,
nd  beholds  the  whole  Messianic  future,  even  to  its
lose,  though  not  in  its  perfectly  developed  features,
ust  so  does  the  protevangel  point  already  to  the
nd,  but  only  in  its  most  general  outlines  as  the  sal-
ation  of  the  future.

2.  Ilie  blessing,  in  the  character  of  its  contents.


G50


GENESIS,    Oil   THE    FIRST    BOOK   OF    MOSES.


In  each  prophecy  we  must  distinguish  three  capital
points:  1)  Its  basis  in  the  present,  or  its  point  of
departure;  '2)  its  nearest  form  of  the  future ;  ">)  the
symbolical  significance  of  the  panic  for  the  wider
fulfilling  of  the  redemption  history.  And  so  here
Israel  '•  -ndpoint  of  promise  as  hitherto  un

folded;  in  tii -•  prophetic  clearness  of  its  illumination,
in-  sees  the  characters  of  his  sons,  ami  the  real  pro-
c  as  it  lies  in  their  individuality.  V.'hat  is  more
clear  than  that  Judah  already  reveals  the  lion  nature,
Joseph  that  of  the  fruitful  tree,  or  that  Heubcii,
Simeon,  and  I.evi  do  alrtady  show  clear  points  of
distinction  in  their  lives,  lint  in  the  character  of  the
eons  he  sees,  too,  the  iivst  unfolding  of  the  tribes  in
Canaan,  even  .-is  it  reveals,  itself  IV, >m  tlie  time  of  tl'.e
.Indies  to  that  of  David.  Then  Reuben  is  no  more
the  fir-  still  well  provided  for  in  array

c-onvs [•••:.  li  t  >  his  impnt'it  nt  nature.  Tin.1  di.-pcr-
;-ion  of  Sin'.,  on  and  Levi  has  already  begun.  The
tribe  of Judah  advances  more  and  more  towards  the
royal  diirniiy.  /chulun  has  his  petition,  so  favorable
for  worldly  intereou's •>,  lietwccn.the  Galilean  ami
the  Mediterranean  seas.  I-.stc'  ar  has  drawn  his  lot
i:i  tli''  lich  regions  of  the  p'ai.i  of  Je/reel,  etc.
lint  now  on  •  v.-  aid  g<>  entirely  (iiit  of  the  p;  oph'  tie
sphere,  if  he  should  mistake  tlie  theocratic  redemp
tion  idea,  as  it  shines  thro'iirh  these  outlines  and
color?,  or  their  symbolical  character.  This  charac
ter  comes  cl'-arcst  into  vii  w  in  Jirlali.

"..  'J'l:--  poetic  f',rii>.  Vt'rh  the  sacred  appear
ance  el'  the  people  (.f  <!ed,  t!i"  people  of  (lie  new
world,  comes  the  speech  of  the  new  wo;ld:  that  i-
its  poetry,]  erfectly  developed.  There  is  already  the
rhythmie;',]  son  ft,  tlie  beautiful  ]iar.dleli.-m,  the  exu
berance  <>f  figures,  the  pluy  upon  names  (vers.  *,
i.'i,  li'i,  1'.',  'jo,  :i:i;  according  to  Knobel  also  15  and
'2l\  tin1  play  upon  words  (vers.  S,  l'.i),the  peculiar
forms  of  e\i>re-.Mon,  the  elevation  of  spirit,  the
heart,  feclhi;  <;  and  all  these  form  a  ]>oetry  coi-
rcsponding  to  th  of  the  objects  as  well

as  to  the  chaiaetcr  of  the  speaker,  who  shows
SO  ma:)\  traits  of  the  human  heart  hi  his  deep  emo
tion,  and  in  the  grandeur  of  his  faith  in  Cod.

•1.  Tlie  la.-t  remark  takes  us  to  the  subject  of
origin.  The  reckless  inclination  of  our  times  to
di.-conneet  the  choicest  productions  of  genius  from
the  names  with  which  they  are  associated,  and  to
as.cribe  them,  in  any  and  every  way,  to  some  un
known  author,  finds  a  special  occasion  for  its  lawless
criticism  in  the  passage  of  Scripture  now  before  us.
Nevertheless,  the  reference  of  it  to  Jacob,  and  in  the
;:i  which  it  stands,  still  finds  its  many  and
able  supporters.  Those  who  now  best  represent  this
view  an-  Deh't/.sch,  Baumgarten,  Diestel,  Hcngsten-
berg,  Kcil,  and  others.  On  the  other  hand,  the  as
cription  to  Jacob  is  wholly  rejected  by  DcWette,
.Schumann,  Bleek,  Knobel,  and  others.  This  is  due,
in  part,  to  the  spirit  of  rationalism,  a  fundamental
assumption  of  which  is  that  prophecies  must  have
arisen  after  the  events  they  are  supposed  to  predict.
Governed  by  thn,  Knobel  transfers  the  origin  of  the
passage  to  the  time  of  J)avid,  and  is  inclined,  with
Bohlen  and  others,  to  ascribe  it  to  the  prophet  Na
than.  Knobel  deems  it  a  weighty  objection,  that  a
"  simple  nomade  "  could  never  have  produced  any
thing  of  the  kind,  especially  an  enfeebled  and  aged
one.  This  may  be  carried  farther,  so  as  to  deny
generally  that  the  patriarchal  nomadcs  could  have
carried  with  them  anything  of  the  spirit  of  the  Mes
sianic  future  ;  which  would  show  that  this  confident
assumption  of  the  critic  runs  clear  into  absurdity.


In  respect  to  the  last  ground  see  the  Analogies.  Aa
far  as  concerns  the  objection  of  Ileinrieh  and  others,
namely,  if  the  patriarch  could  foretell  tin  future  at
all,  why  did  he  not  go  beyond  the  Davidian  period,  it
may  be  said  that  it  is  too  narrow,  too  limited  in  its
scope,  to  demand  attention.  On  the  question,  wheth
er  the  poem  i;5  to  be  ascribed  to  the  E!uhisf,  or  tr.
the  Jehovist,  see  KxonKr,,  p.  335.  As  it  will  not  ex
actly  suit  either  tlie  Elohist  or  the  Jehovist,  Knob-I
has  to  betake  l.i:e.selt"  to  his  documentary  store-
hon-e  that  lie  keeps  ever  lying  behind  the  scenes.
As  to  what  concerns  tlie  age  and  authority  of  our
document,  a  writer  who  lived  at  the  time  of  the  first
formation  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood,  would  have
hardly  ventured  to  place  the  tribe  of  Levi  in  so
unfavorable  a  light  as  that  in  which  it  here  appeal's.
And  so,  too,  the  tribes  ot  Reuben  and  Simeon  would
never  have  allowed  any  Hebrew  song-writer  to  make
such  a  representation  of  their  ancestors.  In  respect
to  its  character,  the  po,  m  claims  for  itself  not  only
a  patriarchal  age,  but  also  a  patriarchal  sanction.
Nevertheless,  a  distinction  may  be  safely  made  be
tween  the  patriarchal  memorabilia  (wlios'  pale-keep
ing  was  doubtless  attended  to  by  Joseph)  and  a  ca
nonical  recension  which  'li  1  i  et  venture  to  change
anything  essential.

,">.  The  analogies.  The  dying  Isaac  (Vli.  xxvii.\
the  dying  Mose-<  (Dent,  xxxii.),  the  dying  Joshua
(Josh,  xxiv.i,  tli"  dung  Samm  1  ( 1  Sam.  xii.),  the
dying  David  (li  S. 'in.  xxiii.),  in  tl.e  Old  Testament,
the  dying  Simeon,  the  dung  I'aul,  and  the  dying
Peter,  in  the  New,  prove  fur  us  the  fact,  that  the
spirit  of  devoted  men  of  God,  in  anlicipati  .n  ot'
death,  soars  loan  elevated  con-vhuisiiess,  and  either
in  priestly  admonition*,  or  prophetic  foresceinga,  al-
te-ts  it s  divine  nature,  its  elevation  above  the  common
life,  and  its  anticipation  of  a  new  and  gloiious  exist
ence.  The  testimony  of  antiquity  is  harmonious  in
respect  to  such  facts, — even  heathen  anii<juiiv.  So
declared  the  dying  Socrates,  that  lie  regarded  him
self  as  in  that  stage  of  being  when  men  had  m<vi  of
the  foreseeing  power  (PLATO  :  Apologia  Socratis).
Pythagoras  taught  that  the  soul  sees  the  future,
when  it  is  departing  fiom  the  body.  In  Cicero,  and
other  writers,  we  find  similar  declarations.  (See
KNOISKL,  p.  -I'.i.)  Knobel,  however,  presents  it,  as  a
grave  question,  whether  the  narrator  means  to  assert
a  direct  gift  of  prophetic  vision  in  the  dying  Jacob,
or  whether  there  is  not  rather  intended  an  immediate
derivation  of  knowledge  from  God.  This  is  just  the
wav  in  which  orthodox  interpreters  oftentimes  place
the  divine  inspiration  in  contrast  with,  and  in  contra
diction  to,  their  human  prcconditionings  ;  whereas  a
rational  comprehension  of  life  sees  here  a  union  of
natural  human  states  (consequently  a  more  fully  devel
oped  power  of  anticipation  in  the  dying)  with  the  illu
minating  spirit  of  revelation  that  shines  through  them.

G.  The  literature  .of  the  passage,  see  the  Introduc
tion,  p.  120.  The  Catalogue,  by  KXOUKL,  p.  356.
Note  in  KEIL,  p.  28G.  See  Marg.  Xote,  p.  6(51.

7.  The  division  :  1)  The  introduction  (vers.  1-2);
2)  the  group  of  Judah,  or  the  theocratic  number
seven,  under  the  leading  of  the  Messianic  first-born
(vers.  8-18) :  a.  The  declarations  that  are  intro
ductory  to  Judah,  Eeuben,  Simeon,  Levi  (vers.
3-7) ;  b.  Judah  the  praised,  the  prince  ai  long
his  brethren  (ver.  8-12);  c.  the  brothers  associated
with  Judah,  as  types  of  the  Jewish  universalism,  of
the  Jewish  ministry,  and  of  the  Jewish  public  de
fence :  Zebulun,  Issachar,  Dan  (vers.  13-18);  3)  the
group  of  Joseph,  or  the  universalistic  (Egyptian)


CHAP.    XLIX.    1-S3.


051


number  five,  under  the  leading  of  the  eirthly  first
bom  (ver.  19-27) :  a.  the  tribes  that  arc  introduc
tory  tu  Joseph's  position,  the  culture  tribes  :  Gat'
Asher,  Naphtali  (vers.  H)-21);  b.  Joseph,  the  de
voted,  as  the  Xazarite  (or  the  one  separated)  of  hi
brethren  (vers.  2'2-2(J) ;  c.  Benjamin,  the  dispense
and  the  propagator  of  the  universal  blessing  of  Israe
(ver.  2V);  4)  the  closing  word,  and  connected  wit!
it,  Jacob's  testamentary  provision  for  his  buna
(vers.  28-33).

[KXCUKSUS. — JACOB'S  DYING  VISION  OF  THE  TRIBES
AND  TIII-:   MESSIAH. — There  is  but  one  part  of  th
Scripture  to  which  this  blessing  of  Jacob  can  be  as
signed,  without  making  it  a  sheer  forgery,  and  that
too,  a  most  absurd  and  inconsistent  one.     It  is  the
very  place  in  which  it  appears.  Here  it  fits  perfectly
It  is  in  harmony  with  all  its  surroundings;  whils
its  subjective  truthfulness — to  say  nothing  now  of  its
inspiration,   or   its  veritable  prophetic  character —
gives  it  the  strongest  claim  to  our  credence  as  a  fac
in  the  spiritual  history  of  the  world,  or  of  human
experience.     There  is  pictured  to  us  a  very  a;
patriarch  surrounded  by  his  sons.     He  has  lived  an
eventful  life.     He  has  had  much  care  and  sorrow
though    claiming   to   have    seen  visions  of  the  Al
mighty,  and  to  have  conversed  with  angels.  Ilis  sons
have  given  him  trouble.     Their  conduct  has  led  him
to  study  closely  their  individual  characteristics.     He
lives  in  an  age  when  great  importance  is  attached  to
the  idea  of  posterity,  and  of  their  fortunes,  as  the
sources  of  peoples  and  races.     This  is  more  thought
of  than  their  immediate  personal  destiny.     It  is,  of
all  ages,  the  farthest  removed  from  that  sheer  indi
vidualism,  which,  whether  true  or  false,  is  now  be
coming  so  rife  in  the  world.    Men  lived  in  their  chil
dren,  for  the  future,  as  they  looked  back  "  to  be
gathered  to  their  fathers,"  in  the  past.     The  idea  of
a  continued  identity  of  life  in  families,  tribes,  and
nations,  making  them  the  same  historical  entities  age
after  ago,  is  in  no  book  so  clearly  recognized  as  in
the  Bible,  and  in  no  part  of  the  Bible  is  it  more
striking  than  it  is  in  Genesis,  though  we  are  present
ed    there  with    the  very  roots    of   history.     Along
with  this  were  the  ideas  of  covenant  and"  promise,
which,  whether  real  or  visionary,  were  most  peculiar
to  that  time,  and  to  this  particular  family.     In  such
a  subjective  world,  the  patriarch  lives.     At  the  ap
proaching  close  of  his  long  pilgrimage  of  one  hun
dred  and  forty-seven  years,  he  gathers  around  him
his  sons,  and  his  sons'  sons,  to  give  them  his  bless
ing,  or  his  prophetic  sentences,  as  they  were  regard
ed  in  his  day.     This  is,  in  itself,  another  evidence  of
inward  truthfulness.    He  had  derived  from  his  fathers
the  belief  that,  at  such  a  time,  the  parental  benedic
tion,  or  rhe  contrary,  carried  with  it  a  great  spiritual
importance.       It  was  not  confined   to  this  family ;
such   a   belief  was   very   prevalent   in   the    ancient
world.  It  was  a  partial  aspect  of  a  still  more  general
opinion,  that  the  declarations  of  the  dying  were  pro-
•  photic.    How  much  of  this  do  we  find  in  Homer.    It
is  still  in  the  world.     The  most  sceptical  would  be
cheered  by  the  blessing,  and  made  uneasy  by  the
malediction  of  a  departing  acquaintance,  much  more,
of  a  dying  father.     Besides  this,  Jacob  had  specially
inherited  the  notion,  and  the  feeling,  from  his  grand
father  Abraham  and  his  father  Isaac.     Thus  affected,
he  would  no  more  die  without  such  a  benedictory
close,  than  a  loving  and  prudent  father,  at  the  pres
ent  day,  could  leave  the  earth  without  making  his
testament.    Keep  all  this  in  vew,  and  think  how  much


more  impressive  is  the  scene  from  its  being  in  a  it»
eign  land,  whither  they  had  been  driven  byfamine,  and
from  which,  as  the  firmly-believed  promise  assured
them,  they  were  eventually  to  go  forth  a  great  people.
Having  thus  placed  before  us  the  accessories  of
the  vision,  we  may  ask  the  question,  was  it  real '?
that  is,  subjectively  real,  if  the  term  is  not  deemed  a
paradox.     Were  these  utterances  merely  formal  sen
tences?     Was  it  all  a  ceremony  with  the  dying  old
man, — a  solemn  one,  indeed,  but  requiring  only  cer
tain  usual  benedictory  formulas.  Or  did  he  KCC  some
thing?  that  is,  was  there  corresponding  to  each  of
these  utterances  an  actual  state  of  soul,  visionary,
ecstatic,  clairvoyant — call  it  what  you  will,— the  pro
duct  of  an  excitcl  imagination,  the  movement  of  a
weak  or  shattered  brain,  a  delirious  dream,  or  a  true
psychological  insight,  dim  indeed,  irregular,  flitting,
fragmentary,  yet  real  as  an  action  of  the  soul  coming
in  close  view  of  the  supernatural  world,  and  by  the
aid  of  it,  seeing  something,  however  shadowly,  of  the
successions  and  dependencies  in  the  natural  and  his
torical  ?     Think  of  it  as  we  may,  all  that  need  be
contended  for  here,  as  most  important  in  the  letter
interpretation,  is  thu  inner  truthfulness  of  such  a
vision  state,  and  its  harmonious  connection  with  the
whole  subjective  life  that  had  preceded  it.      This
granted,    or   established,   the  outward    truth   these
visions  represent,  or  arc  supposed  to  represent,  may
be   safely   trusted   to  the   credence   of  the   serious
thinker.     Such  a  vision,  with  such  antecedents,  and
such  surroundings,  compels  a  belief  in  higher  reali
ties  connected  with  them;  though  still  the  vision  it
self,  if  we  may  so  call  it,  is  to  be  interpreted  pri
marily  in  its  subjective  aspect,  leaving  the  inferences
from  it  to  another  department  of  hermeneuiies  as  be
longing  to  theology  in  general,  the  analogies  of  Scrip
ture,  and  what  may  be  called  its  dogmatic,  in  distinc
tion  from  its  purely  exegctical  interpretation   (sec
Excursus  on  the  Flood,  p.  315  and  marginal  note).
It  may  be  conceded  that  commentators  have  been
too  minute  in  their  endeavors  to  trace  in  this  imagery
a  connection  with  particular  events  in  subsequent
history ;    as  though  Jacob  had  before  him  the  his
torical  event  itself,  just  as  it  took  place,  and  invented
the  imagery  as  a  mode  of  setting  it  forth.     Better  to
liavc  left  it  as  it  was,  with  no  attempt  to  go  beyond
what  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  actually  seen  by
the  dying  man — flitting  images  of  his  sons,  as  indi
vidual  persons  in  some  future  aspects  of  their  genca-
ogical  history, — these  images  reflected  from  his  own
spiritual  experience  of  their  characteristics, — truly
irophetic,  but  not  getting  far  out  of  their  individual
:raits,  as  so  well  known  to  him  by  their  conduct.
Though  all  the  pictures  are  thus  more  or  less  pro-
ihetic,  they  arc  still  subordinate  to  one  that  stands
out  in  strongest  light — the  vision  of  one  coming  from
afar,  the  Sliiloh   prophecy,  wherein,  is  unfolded  the
Messianic  idea  inherited  from  his  father, — a  sight  he
:atches  of  the  Promised  Seed,   the  one  "in  whom
11  nations  should  be  blessed,"  the  "one  to  whom  the
;athering  of  the  peoples  (s^rj .  in  the  plural,  the
Jcntiles)  should  be."     This    is  the  central  vision,
oming  from  the  central  feeling,  and  around  it  all
he  rest  are  gathered.     They  are  to  it  as  the  histori-
jal  frame  to  the  picture.  All  their  importance  comes
"rom  it.     Judah  is  more  closely  connected  with  this
icntral  vision  than  all  the  rest.     Joseph  we  would
lave  thought  of,  though  Judah's  late  noble  conduct
tad  done  much  to  draw  the  father's  heart  towards
dm ;  but  here  comes  in  the  thought  of  something
ontrolling    the    merely    natural    subjective    state


G52


GENESIS,  OR   THE  FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


The  main  tiling,  however,  is  the  Messianic  idea  re
garded  by  itself,  and  for  this  the  history  of  Jacob
and  his  lather,  the  feelings  and  belief  in  which  he
h:ul  lived,  that  ever-vivid  idea  of  a  covenant  God,
that  other  conception  of  a  (Joel,  or  "Redeeming
angel"  delivering  from  till  evil,— the  very  name  sug
gesting  the  idea  of  some  human  kinsmanship — afford
an  ample  ground.  lie  calls  this  one  who  is  to  come
by  the  mysterious  name  of  Shiloh.  Commentators
have  given  themselves  unnecessary  trouble  about
the  exact  objective  point  indicated  by  the  word.  It
may  refer  to  the  great  Deliverer,  or  to  the  great  de
liverance  that  would  characterize  his  coming.  Tin-
closest  examination  of  this  anomalous  form  shows
that,  in  some  way,  there  enter-  into  every  aspect  of
it,  whether  as  proper  name,  or  as  epithet,  the  idea
or  peace,  stillness,  gentleness,  and  Vet  of  mighty
power.  It  is  perfectly  described,  Isaiah  xlii.  U  :  "  He
shall  not  cry,  nor  lift  up  his  voice,  nor  cause  it  to  be
heard  in  the  streets;  a  bruised  reed  shall  he  not
break,  and  the  smoking  wick  lie  shall  not  quench;
but  l.e  shall  bring  forth  righteousness  victoriously."
Why  does  the  dying  man  speak  this  unusual  word
Shili.h  V  Unusual  then, — perhaps  before  nnuttcrcd,
— unusual  since  in  the  form  it  takes,  although  the
verbal  root  is  nioic  common.  A  reason  can  hardly
be  given  for  it.  It  was,  most  likely,  a  strange,  if
rot  wholly  unknown,  name  to  those  who  then  heard
it  uttered.  We  can  trace  it  to  no  antecedents.  It
was  a  wondrous,  a  mysterious  name.  A  startling
dream-like  character  pervades  the  whole  chapter,
with  its  sudden  transitions,  its  rapt  outpourings,  its
quick  changi  s  of  scene,  defying  all  the  canons  of
any  mere  rhetorical  or  poetical  criticism;  but  this
vision  a-p-'ct  appears  especially  in  the  unexpected
coming  in  of  (his  remarkable  word  Shiloh,  and  the
extraordinary  use  that  is  made  of  it.  It  suggests
the  mysterious  ''xbc  (rendered  smW)  of  Judg.  xiii.
IS,  the  li '-ml  r/ul,  N^E  of  Isaiah  ix.  >>,  and  the  m-
•'•,mni/iui',',il,I''  our,  (Jen.  xxxii.  !)»>,  who  says,  "  why
inquire-t  thou  after  my  name  ''.  "  The  patriarch  him
self,  perhaps,  could  not  have  explained,  how  or  why
he  li.- ed  it,  or  in  what  way  it  came  to  him,  whether  by
sotr.e  conscious  association,  or  as  having  its  birth  in
a  sudden  arresting  of  the  mind  by  some  new  and
wondrous  thought,  like  that  which  prom;. ted  the
strange  ejaculation  in  verse  18.  It  was  intended  to
!,'•  mysterious  (we  may  reverently  say  who  believe  in
the  prophetical  character  of  the  vision),  that  men
might  ponder  much  upon  it,  and  be  the  better  pre
pared  to  understand  its  glorious  import,  when  it
should  be  fully  realized  upon  the  earth.  The  whole
vision  is  like  other  prophecy  in  this,  that  it  is  the
remote  appearing  strangely  as  seen  from  a  present
standpoint,  and  through  intervening  historical  scenes
regarded  as  more  or  less  near.  We  cannot  reduce
the  perspective  to  chronological  order.  We  can
only  seize  the  prominent  point  of  view  in  the  picture,
and  feel  that  the  other  parts,with  their  greater  or  les
ser  degrees,  of  light  and  shade,  are  all  subordinate.

So,  too,  there  must  not  be  pressed  too  closely,  in
our  exegesis,  what  is  said  about  Judah,  and  the
sceptre,  and  the  p~rra  ,  the  ruler's  staff,  or  as  other
wise  rendered,  "  the  law-giver,  from  between  his
feet."  We  cannot  square  it  with  the  monarchy  of
Herod,  or  any  precise  historical  change  of  magis
tracy.  We  cannot  make  out,  as  indicated  by  it,  a
Jewish  royalty  to  a  certain  period,  or  a  Jewish  inde
pendence,  general  or  partial,  to  some  other  period.
But  when  we  view  it  as  expressing  chiefly  the  rela


tion  of  Judah  to  the  other  tribes,  his  surviving  as  n
tribal  name,  and  giving  .the  name  Jews  (.fud<e!)  tc
the  whole  Israelitish  people,  after  the  other  tribes
had  lost  their  historical  identity,  and  when  we  re
member  about  what  time  even  this  ceased  to  be,  and
the  Jews  (Juda-i)  became  utterly  denationalized  po
litically,  whether  as  an  independent  or  a  subject
people,  we  see  a  light  and  a  power  in  the  picture
which  is  unmistakable, — a  point  of  view  which  we
may  suppose  to  have1  flashed  upon  the  seer's  mind,
without  regarding  it  as  occupied  with  any  precise
historical  dates  or  dynasties,  contemplated  merely  in
their  political  aspects.  Unlit  here  (""3  "I")  means
unto  and  then  ceasing,  or  unf<>  and  not  after.  Judah
shall  survive  them  all,  but  he  too  shall  disappear
when  Shiloh  comes,  and  the  "gathering  of  the  peo
ple"  takes  plate.  Then  was  to  be  fulfilled  that
ancient  prayer  which  was  sung  by  the  whole  Israel
itish  nation  before  they  lo-t  the  world-idea  founded
on  the  patriarchal  pioinises,  and  the  later  narrow,
exclusive  spirit  took  full  possession  of  them:  "  That
thy  way  may  be  known  in  the  earth,  thy  saving
health  among  all  nations, — let  the  peoples  praise
thee,  0  God,  let  <iU  the  peoples  praise  thee."  See
1's.  Ixvii.  o,  4,  and  other  similar  passages.

What,  then,  was  the  historical  date  of  this  writ
ing,  and  of  the  vision  it  records,  whether  subjective
or  objective,  genuine  or  forged?  There  has  been
a  strenuous  effort  to  assign  it  to  a  later  period.  And
why?  Because  it  assumes  to  prophesy,  and  all
prophecy  must  have  been  written  after  the  events.
This  is  the  canon,  the  bare  i/ii-fum  rather,  to  which
everything  else  must  yield.  Take  it,  however,  out  of
its  place  in  Genesis,  and  the  thoughtful  mind  cannot
avoid  seeing  that  there  is  no  oth'T  which  does  not
destroy  its  subjective  character,  obliterate  all  the
marks  of  its  inward  truthfulness,  and  make  it  not
only  a  lie,  a  forgery,  but  a  most  unmeaning  one.
Had  it  been  made  up  at  any  other  time,  it  would
have  had  more  distinctness  of  historical  reference.
What  it  told  us,  whrthcr  it  had  been  more  or  less,
would  have  had  a  more  unmistakable  application.
Had  it  been  all  a  fiction,  made  after  the  supposed
events,  they  would  never  have  been  left  in  such  a
dream-like,  shadowy  state,  unless  on  the  hypothesis
of  such  a  style  being  carefully  imitated,  with  a  skil
ful  throwing  in  of  the  antique  coloring,  and  that,
for  reasons  elsewhere  given  (sec  p.  037),  would  have
been  incredible,  we  might  almost  say,  inconceivable.
There  would  have  been  no  such  irregularities  as  we
find,  no  such  shadows ;  the  dim  perspective  wotdd
have  been  filled  up ;  for  in  any  such  case  it  would
have  been  a  sheer  forgery,  a  conscious  lie  in  every
part,  with  every  word  and  figure  showing  design.  It
would  have  given  evidence  of  its  being  the  language
of  art  rather  than  of  emotion  which  uses  words
simply  as  the  vehicles  of  its  utterance,  rather  than
with  any  studied  aim  of  conveying  precise  concep
tions,  whether  true  or  false.  The  metaphors  which,
even  in  their  incongruities,  fit  so  well  into  the  pic
ture  of  the  patriarch's  dying  condition,  with  its  ante
cedents  and  surroundings,  would  have  been  made
more  suggestive  of  the  known  historical  than  of
those  individual  traits  on  which  they  are  so  evidently
grounded.  The  young  lion,  the  lioness,  the  foal
bound  to  the  vine,  the  strong  ass  between  his  two
burdens,  the  serpent  by  the  way,  the  adder  in  tho
path,  the  hind  let  loose  and  giving  goodly  words,
the  ravening  wolf,  in  the  morning  devouring  the  prey
and  at  night  dividing  the  spoil — all  these  would
either  have  been  entirely  left  out,  or  they  would  have


CHAP.    XL1X.    I-3IJ.


G5S


been  made  to  mean  more,  in  their  particular  appliea
tions,  as  well  as  in  their  general  bearing.  They  arc
far  more  truthful  in  the  supposed  vision  of  the  dying
man,  than  they  would  be  in  such  a  conscious  for
gery,  even  though  we  might  regard  the  former  as
only  ;i  dream  of  delirium.  The  picture,  too,  of  the
future  power  to  whom  "  the  gathering  of  the  peo
ples  should  be,"  would  have  been  painted  in  more
gorgeous  splendor,  instead  of  being  left  like  a  far-
off  light,  guiding  to  a  sublime  hope,  and  yet  giving
so  dim  a  view  of  the  Messianic  royalty.  Thus  to
speak  of  it  is  not  to  disparage  its  true  excellence  as
viewed  from  the  place  it  occupies  in  the  earliest
Scripture.  It  is,  indeed,  the  whole  of  it,  a  divine
vision,  with  its  central  glory,  yet  irregularly  refracted
and  reflected  to  us  from  a  broken  and  uneven  human
mirror.  This  central  light  has  grown  brighter  in  the
trance  of  Balaam  (Numb.  xxiv.  17);  how  much
clearer  still  has  it  become,  and  higher  in  the  pro
phetic  horizon,  as  it  appears  in  the  nearer  visions  of
the  evangelical  Isaiah :  "  Arise,  shine,  for  thy  light
is  come,  and  the  glorv  of  Jehovah  is  rising  upon
thee."

Again,  when  we  regard  the  record  in  question  as
the  forgery  of  a  later  date,  its  moral  aspect  wholly
changes.  It  is  strange  that  they  who  talk  of  prophe
cies  made  after  the  event  do  not  sec  what  a  moral
stigma  they  cast  upon  the  supposed  makers.  It  is
usual  for  this  "  higher  criticism  "  to  speak,  or  affect
to  speak,  with  great  respect  of  the  Hebrew  prophets
as  very  sincere  and  honest  men,  upright,  professing
a  stern  morality,  in  advance  of  their  ago,  etc. ;  but
what  are  they,  on  this  hypothesis,  but  base  liars,
conscious,  circumstantial  liars, — yea,  the  boldest  as
well  as  the  most  impious  of  blasphemers  !  It  is  no
case  of  self-deluding  prognostication,  or  of  a  fervid
zeal  creating  in  the  mind  a  picture  of  the  future,
which  the  seer  honestly  believes  as  coming  from  the
Lord.  They  know  that  the  events  are  not  future,
but  that  they  themselves  have  falsely  and  purposely
put  themselves  in  the  past.  They  have  simply  ante
dated,  or  forged  an  old  name,  turning  history  into
prediction,  and  greatly  confusing  and  exaggerating
it  to  keep  up  the  imposture.  And  then  the  daring
impiety  of  the  thing  for  men  professing  such  awe  of
Jehovah,  the  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God  of  Saba-
oth,  with  his  immutable  truth,  his  everlasting  right
eousness, — the  God  who  especially  abhors  falsehood,
"  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  'behold  evil, — that
frustrateth  the  tokens  of  the  liars,  and  makcth  the
diviners  mad,  that  turneth  wise  men  backward  and
maketh  their  knowledge  foolishness, — that  confirrn-
eth  the  word  of  his  servants,  and  performeth  the
counsel  of  his  messengers."  Take,  for  example,  the
prophecies  of  "  the  later  Isaiah,"  as  this  "  rational
school "  are  fond  of  styling  him,  and  whom  they  so
greatly  praise  for  the  loftiness  of  his  morality.  He
lives  after  the  events  he  assumes  to  predict,  he
knows  that  they  have  come  to  pass,  and  yet  with
•what  bold  blasphemy  he  throws  himself  upon  Jeho
vah's  prescience  as  the  attestation  of  his  prophetic
power,  and  challenges  the  ministers  of  false  religions
to  produce  anything  like  it  in  the  objects  of  their  wor
ship  :  "  Let  them  bring  forth  and  show  us  what  shall
happen ;  let  them  show  the  former  things,  and  things
to  come,  that  we  may  know  that  ye  are  gods ;  who
hath  declared  from  the  beginning,  that  we  may  know?
and  before  the  time,  that  we  may  say,  lie  is  true  ?
Behold  the  former  things  are  come  to  pass,  and  new
things  do  I  declare ;  before  they  spring  forth  I  tell
you  of  them ."  Bee  how  this  impostor  who  pretends


to  predict  a  captivity  that  is  past,  represents  God  as
specially  challenging  to  himself  foreknowledge,  and
proclaiming  it  to  be  the  ground  of  trust  in  his
messenger  :  "  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  like  me  ;
declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  from  an
cient  times  the  things  that  arc  not  yet  done ;  calling
from  the  East  the  man  that  executeth  my  counsel,
from  a  far  country;  yea,  I  have  spoken  it,  I  will  also
bring  it  to  pass."

The  absurdity  and  difficulty  of  such  a  hypothesis
become  still  more  striking  when  considered  in  refer
ence  to  this  patriarchal  document.  Had  it  been  a
concoction  of  later  times,  some  things  in  it  would
certainly  not  have  appeared  as  they  actually  do  in
the  vision  as  it  has  come  down  to  us.  Lange  has
well  shown  this  in  what  he  says,  p.  650,  about  the
tribes  of  Levi  and  Simeon,  and  those  condemning
utterances,  which,  neither  in  the  times  of  the  judges
nor  of  the  kings,  would  the  tribes  of  Reuben  and
Dan,  much  less  the  proud  Lcvitical  priesthood,  have
ever  borne.  Above  all  docs  such  a  view  become
incredible  when  this  pretended  ancient  prophecy  is
ascribed  to  Nathan,  as  is  done  by  Bohlcn,  Knobel  and
others.  Who  was  Xathan  ?  and  what  is  there  re
corded  of  him  that  can  be  supposed  to  have  made
him  the  fit  instrument  for  such  an  imposition.  We
have  but  little  about  him,  but  that  is  most  distinct.
See  1  Chron.  xvii.  where  he  brings  to  David  the  mes
sage  concerning  the  Lord's  house,  and  "2  Sam.  xii.
The  latter  passage,  especially,  presents  an  unmistak
able  character,  warranting  a  most  intense  admiration
of  the  man.  He  is  no  mere  theoretical  moralist.
Seneca  wrote  some  of  the  choicest  ethical  treatises,
containing  sentiments  which  some  have  represented
as  vying  with,  or  even  surpassing,  those  of  Paul;
and  yet  he  was  more  than  suspected  of  conniving  at
some  of  the  worst  crimes  of  his  imperial  master
Nero.  How  different  the  character,  and  the  attitude,
of  the  old  Hebrew  prophet !  How  sternly  practical
was  he,  as  well  as  theoretically  holy.  The"  king  had
covered  over  his  adultery  by  marriage.  Had  Seneca
been  there,  or  some  philosophical  courtier  of  his
class,  he  would  have  pronounced  it  well,  whilst  of
the  murder,  and  the  manner  of  it,  he  would  have
thought  himself,  perhaps,  not  called  to  speak;  see
ing  that  such  events  were  not  strangers  to  thrones
and  palaces,  and  a  prudential  respect  for  authority
might  justify  silence,  when  speech,  perhaps,  might
be  useless  as  well  as  dangerous.  The  Hebrew  seer
was  of  another  school.  He  appears  before  the  king,
now  in  the  height  of  his  power,  Kabbah  fallen,  arid
all  his  enemies  subdued.  He  addresses  him  in  that
parable  of  the  poor  man  and  his  lamb,  which  has
ever  challenged,  and  must  continue  to  challenge,  the
admiration  of  the  world.  Not  by  ethical  abstrac
tions,  but  by  a  direct  appeal  to  the  conscience,  lying
oft  below  the  individual's  consciousness,  yet  most
mysteriously  representing  to  him  the  voice  of  God,
lie  uncovers  the  strange  duality  of  the  human  soul,
and  brings  out  the  monarch's  sentence,  yea,  even
his  malediction,  upon  himself:  "As  Jehovah  liveth,

man  that  hath  done  this  thing  shall  surely  die."
Every  reader  of  the  Bible  is  familiar  with  the  scene.
The  prophet's  interview  with  the  self-forgetting  king
.3  unsurpassed  by  anything  in  the  world's  literature,
historic,  epic,  or  dramatic.  The  human  soul  never
appeared  purer  or  loftier  than  in  that  wise,  that
;eutle,  and,  at  the  same  time,  most  powerful,  rebuke
of  royal  unrighteousness.  This  is  what  we  have  of
Nathan.  And  now  to  think  of  such  a  man  delib
erately  sitting  down  to  fabricate  a  lie,  to  personate


051


«»;:  THE  FIKST  JJOOK  OF  MOSES.


the  character  of  old  Jacob,  the  revered  father  of  hi.-;
nation,  treating  with  contempt  tlie  old  records  or  old
traditions  of  his  day,  making  no  scruple  of  rejecting
them,  or  of  altering  them  in  any  way  to  suit  his  pur
poses,  making  them  falsely  seem  prior  to  events  al
ready  past,  and  with  all  this,  most  absurdly  as  well
as  dishonestly,  assuming  to  foist  upon  his  cotempo-
raries,  at  that  later  day,  what  they  had  i.ever  before
!;";';111  <>J'  as  connected  with  tin'-  sacred  ancestral
name.  Think  of  Mm  minutely  forging  the  scene
presented  by  the  dying  old  man,  and  the  sons-sur
rounding  his  bed,  racking  his  inveTiiUMi,  lik

urn    Chatterton   or   Defoe,    to   find    figures,  and

speeches,  and  antique  idi  ims,  to  put  i;.to  his  mouth,

conscious  all  the   time  of   lying  in  the  whole   and

every    part— such     inconsistent,    unmeaning    kin",

too— ami  then   palming  ii   off  as  an  old  prophecy!

!    We  eoidd   not    believe    it   of   the   mcsl

ig  Sadducee  of  Jacob's  lace,  how  much  less  of

the   trntliful,    incorruptible,    holy   .Nathan,    in    name

'  •"''  s  >   lik;«   the   one    whom   our  Saviour

meed    "an   Israelite   in   whom    there  wa<    no

guile."

There  is  no  need  of  going  farther  in  this  to  meet

itionalist.     The  same  mode  of  argument,  and

••orn  the  same  point  of  view,  may  be  applied  to  all

•  i'  p-vndo  Jacobs,  p-etido  I-aia!'s

vphal  Moses,  and  personated  Jeremiahs.     T,:e

they  bringdown  thN  patriarchal  document,  cs-

.'•'•  l!'"   -''••-  •'•:•  '""••:  ies  the  wildness  and  the

lity.  _  Their    theories    of    prophecy    after    the

event,  it  will   bear  t  >  be  repeated,  are  utterly  incon-

tent  with  any  moral   respect    for  tho-e  old"  Jewish

Wits,  whom  they  afi'ecl  to  admire  as  tar-seeing  men,

iotic,  most  humanitarian,  elevated  in  their

"    "''  reform,    rising   above  the    prejudices  of  a

'-'  '' •:-':''   traditi     .  ,s  beyond   the  for-

[)  and  superstitions  of  their  times,  but  not

to  In-  ivirarded  aa  veritable  si  ers  of  the  future,  or  a-

sp  dally  inspired    by  Cod   in  any  way  dillerent  from

•'  lofty-minded  nun,"  or  as  assuming  to  be  such,

except  in  a  rhetorical  or  poetieal  \\ay. "  Most    pious

ey,   most    reverent,  yet    have   they   no  scruple

about  announcing  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  events  as

•M  which    they  knew  to  be  past  at  the  time  of

the  announcement,  or  to  be  utterly  false  as  assumed

divine  messages.     Th.  re  were,  it'is  true,  some  men

of  old  who  did  this,  but   in   what   abhorrence   thev

were    held   we   learn  fiom   Jer.  xxiii.   25-82,  and    1

Kinjs  xxii.  T.i,  t>o.

There  ari-es  here  a  sharp  issue,  as  has  been  al
ready  said,  but  it  cannot  be  evaded.  There  is  no
3t  middle-ground  of  compilation  and  tradition
inixed  together.  The  Bible  statements  are  of  such
a  nature  as  not  to  allow  the  guppo.-ition.  They  are
.-•o  peculiar,  so  linked  together,  they  form  such  a  se
rial  unity,  that  we  must  believe  it'all  a  forgery,  Xa-
than,  David,  as  well  as  Jacob  and  Ids  blessing,  o'r  we
must  give  credence  to  it  as  being,  all  together,  a
c-o.ierent,  chronological,  consistent  history.  "  (See  p
'J9,  introduction,  and  marginal  note.)  It  is,  through
out,  delusion,  imposture,  forgery,  nonentity,  or  it"  is
the  most  serious  and  truthful"  chapter  iii  all  this
world's  history.  If  the  former  view  staggers  even
t  lie  most  sceptical,— if,  in  itself,  it  is  more  incredible
than  any  supernatural  events  recorded  in  such  for
geries,  then  must  we  come  back  heartily  to  the  old
belief,— the  Bible  a  most  truthful  book —all  true
dlowing  for  textual  inaccuracies) -all  subjectively
:rue,  at  all  events,  although  admitting  of  human  mis
conceptions  in  respect  to  the  science  and  mediate


causalities  of  things  narrated,  or  that  which   often
comes  to  the  same  thing,  human  imperfections  neces
sarily  entering  into  the  language  employed  as  the
medium  of  their  record.     In  other  words,  everything
is  honestly  told,  and  believed  by  the  writers  'to  be
just  as  they  have  told  it.     Whether  it  be  narrative
description,  statistical  statement,  precept,  sentiment'
thought,   devotional   feelinir,   pious  emotion   of   anv
kind,    moral    musing,  sceptical  soliloquizing   as  in
Lcclesiastes,  passionate  expostulation,  as  in  .J0|,  pro.
phetic  announcements  grounded  on  visions  or  voices
>eheved  to  come  firm  the  Lord,— all  is  given  just  as
it  was  experienced,  known,  or  believed  to  be  known
Lc.ird,  received  from  accredited  witnesses  living  in
or  near  the  very  times,  conceived,  felt,  remembered
seen  by  the  eye  of  sense,  seen  in  the  ecstatic  trance
"d   in  the  visions  of  the  ni-ht,  or  in  any  way
present  to  their  souls  as  knowledge,  thought   mem
ory,    or   conception,  most    carefully    and   truthfully
recorded.     There  is  no  fiction  here,  no  invention,  no
art,  no  "fine  writing,"  no  mere  aiming  at  rhetorical
•fleet,— no  use  of  metaphors,  imaires,  or  impassioned
language,  except   as   the  expression  of  inward  vivid
and   emotional   states    that   imperatively  demanded
them  as  the  bo.-t  n.edium  for  their  utterance.

We  must  choose  between  this  or  the  grossest
forgery.  The  more  the  issue  is  distinctly  seen,  the
certain,  for  every  thoughtful  mind",  the  only
decision  it  allows.  Thi<  human,  so  appearing,  de
mands  ^the  superhunrin  and  divine.  This  natural
subjective  truthfuluc-'s  once  admitted,  thoroughly
and  heartily  admitted,  the  supernatural  cannot"  be
excluded.  It  must  come  in  somewhere  in  both  its
forms,— whether  it  be  the  objective  supernatural
which  the  Scripture  itself  records,  or  (110  inward
spiritual  supernatural,  still  more  wonderful,  connect
ed  with  the  very  existence  of  such  a  book  in  such  a
world. — T.  L.J


AM)   CUJTICAL.


1.  "\  ers.  1,  2.     Tl.r  uifr^lm'lhii.—Tha.t  I  may
tell  you.— He  has  called   them    to  his  dying  bed;
but  it.-  highest  purpose  is  that  he  may  tell  them  how
lives  on    in  them.— That  which    shall
befall    you.— According  to    their    dispositions  and
enaraeter,  which  he  has  long  known,     lie  announces
to  them  the  destiny  which  shall  befall  them  as  a  con
sequence  of  their  characters  as  shown  in  the  events
of  their  lives,  but  this  as  seen  in  the  divine  light-
In  the  last  days,  =-£-n   r.i-nso.— The  expres
sion  is  used  in  reference  to  the  world  time  as  a  whole,
and  denotes,  especially,  the  Messianic  time  of  the
completion  (Isa.  ii.  2;  l>.ek.  xxxviii.  8,   and  other
places;  see  KEIL,    p.    284).— Ye  sons   of  Jacob,
hearken  unto  Israel  your  father.— Sons  of  Ja
cob  are  they   predominantly  ;    sons  of  Israel  must
they    evermore   become.     From    nature    and    from
grace,    from   human    disposition    and    from    divine
guidance  is  their  future  to  be  formed.

2.  Vers.  3-18.  The  group  of  Judali.  a.  The
llessings  that  are  introductory  to  Judah:  Reuben,
Simeon,  Levi. — Reuben,  thou  art  my  first-born.
—My  strength.  The  meaning  of  first-born  explained.
He  is  the  first  fruits  of  his  vigor  spiritually  as  well
as  bodily. — The  excellency  of  dignity  and  the
excellency  of  power.— A  reference  to  the  dividing
of  the  birthright  into  two  rights.  In  the  dignity
there  lie  together  the  priesthood  and  the  double  in
heritance.  The  power  is  the  germ  of  the  warlike


CHAP.  XLIX.   1-33.


chieftainship.     Further    on  Jacob    disposes   of  th
power  in  favor  of  Judah;  the  double  inheritance  h
gives   to   Joseph.     The    priesthood  does    not   her
specially  appear ;  audit  is  this  feature  that  speak
for  the   antiquity   of  the    blessing. — Unstable  as
water. — The  verb  used  here    denotes  literally  th
bubbling  and  exhalation  of  boiling  water.     Spirit
ually  it  denotes  a  rash  and  passionate  impulsiveness
LXX,  e£i>Ppia-as.     For  other  interpretations  see  Kno
bcl.     This  trait    of  character    is    immediately    ex
plained  :— Because  thou  weiitest  up  to  thy  fa
ther's  bed  (sec  ch.  xxxv.  22).— This  impulsiveness
shows  itself  likewise  in  his  offer  of  his  two  sons  a
hostages.     Later  it  shows  itself,  in  the  tribe,  in  .„„
insurrection  of  Dathan  and  Abiram,  who  desired  a
share  in  the  priesthood — a  claim  which,  doubtless
had  reference  to  the  lost  birthright  of  their  father
At  a  still  later  period,  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  and  tha
of  Gad,  desire  to    have  their  inheritance  specially
given  them  together  in  the  conquered  district,  on  the
other  side  of  Jordan,  Numb,  xxxii.  1 ;  in  which  case
their  request   was  granted  on   condition   that   they
should  help  fight  out  the  war  for  the  conquest  of
Canaan.     Through  this  Reuben  gets  an  isolated  po
sition  on  the    southwestern   border,  in  the  pasture
land  over  the  Arnon.     Again,  in  the  erection  of  the
altar  at  the  Jordan,  on  their  return  (Jos.  xxii.),  there
manifests  itself   the   same    old    impetuosity,  which
might  have  occasioned  a  civil  war,  had  they"  not  suf
ficiently  excused  it.— Thou  shalt  not  excel  (that
is,  thou  shalt  not  have  the  dignity).     See  1  Chron.  v.
1.     Joseph  has  the  double  inheritance,  and,  so  far,
the    rrba    (or   birthright);    whilst   Judah  became
prince.     To  a  certain  degree,  therefore,  as  Delitzsch
remarks,  the   first-born  of  Rachel    comes   into  the
place  of  the  first-born  of  Leah.     "  In  order  that  God's
righteous  ruling  here  may  not  be  arbitrarily  imitated
by  men,  the  law 'forbids  (Deut.  xxi.  15-17)  that  any
preference  should  be  shown  to  the  first-born  sons  of
*  beloved  wife,  over  those  born  of  one  less  favored."
Delitzsch.     The  good   will,    and    fraternal    fidelity,
which    belonged  to  Reuben's    character,   appear  in
the  history  of  the  tribes.     Points  of  interest  in  the
character  of  this  tribe :  the  victory,   in   connection
with  the  Gadites,  over  the  Amorite  king  Sihon  ;   also
over  the  Gadarenes  (1  Chron.  v.   8-10).     The  less
significant  blessing  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxxiii.  6),  sim
ply  indicating  the  danger  of  transgression.     A  re
proach  cast  upon  them  (Judg.  v.  15)  for  their  di
visions,  etc.,  in  the  nation's  peril. — He  went  up  to
my  couch.— Jacob  speaks    indirectly   (of  him)  in
the  third  person.     Was  it  because  he"  turned  away
from  him  in  displeasure  ?     We  may  rather  suppose
that  he  turns  himself  to  the  other  sons  in  order  to
fix  their  attention  upon  his  sentence. — Simeon  and
Levi.— True  brothers  in  their  disposition,  as  it  ap
peared    in    their    treatment    of   the    Shechemites.
Therefore    it   is,    that    they   arc    included    in    one
declaration.     Its  most  obvious  aim  is  to  revoke  for
them  also  their  leadership.— Instruments  of  cru-
fclty. — They  must  have  been   something  else  than
swords.     Clericus,  Knobel,  and   others,  understand
-H"1""'-^  as  denoting  malicious  and  crafty  purpose,
marriage  proposals,  etc.,  an  explanation  that  seems
ot  easy.*— Into  their  secret.— As  he  would  clear
from  their  fanaticism,  so  also,  in  respect  to

"i~~0.    There  ia  hardly  any  warrant  for  rcn-

A


pro-
He  de-


the  prophetic  destiny  would  he  clear  his  people  and

the  Church  of  God.     It  is   the  very  nature  of  a  sc

cret  plot,  or  of  a  factious  conspiracy,  to  make  itself

of  more  importance  than  the  community,  and  thus

to_  produce    disunion.*—  Unto    their    assembly.

mine  honor.—  My  life,  or  my  soul  (IV    vii.  6;  xvi

9).     The  expression  here  is  well  chosen.     The  'be

liever  cannot  trust  his  personality,  with  its  divine

dignity,  to  a  congregation  in  which  secret  conspira

cies,  and  fanaticism,  are  allowed  to  bo  the  ruling

powers.     So,  too,  is  the  expression  br:p    significant

ly  chosen,  as  also  the  verb  1PP.     There  is  no  union,

no  communion,  between  the  soul  of  Israel,  and  the

companionship  of  such  fleshly  zeal.  —  They  slew  a

man  —  Man  is  taken  collectively.  —  A  wall  (an   Ox

Lange  more  properly  renders  itf).  —  They  cut  the

sinews  of  the  hinder  foot  of  the  cattle  in"  order  to

destroy  them.     This  was  done  after  the  manner  of

war  mentioned  Josh.  xi.  6,  9  ;  2  Sam.  viii.   4,  with

relation  to  the  horses  of  the  Canaanites  and  Syrians

According  to  ch.  xxxiv.  28,  they  could  not  have  done

it  to  any  cattle  that  they  could  carry  off  with  them  ;

and  this,  therefore,  must  be  taken  as  a  supplemental

account.—  Cursed  be  their  anger,   for   it  was

fierce  (Lange,  violent).  —  They  were  not  personally

cursed,  but  only  their  excess  and  their  angry  doings  ;

neither  are  they  reproved  for  simply  being'angry?—

I  will  divide  them  —  A  prophetic  expression  'of

divine  authority.     So  speaks  the    spirit    of  Israel,

giving  command  for  the  future,  as  the  spirit  of  Paul',

though  far  absent  in  space  (1  Cor.  v.  8).     This  dis

persion  was  the  specific  remedy  against  their  insur

rectionary,  wrathful  temper.     lii  the  first  place,  they

could  not  dwell  together  with  others  as  tribes',  and,

secondly,  even  as  single  tribes  must  they  be  broken

up  and  scattered.     Thus  it  happened  to  'the  weakest

of  these  two  tribes  (Simeon,  Xumb.  xxvi.    14),  in

that  it  held  single  towns,  as  enclosed  territory,  within

the  tribe  of  Judah  (Josh.  xix.    1-9)  with  "which  it

went   to  war  in  company  (Judg.   i.   3-17),    and  in

which  it  seems  gradually  to  have  become  absorbed.

In  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  a  portion  of  them  made  an

expedition  to  Mount  Seir  (1  Chron.  iv.  42).     In  the

blessing  of  Moses  (Deut.    xxxiii.),    Simeon  is   not

named.     Levi,  too,  had   no   tribal  inheritance,  but

only  an  allotment  of  cities.     At  a  later  day,  by  rea

son  of  his  tithe  endowment,  he  is  placed  in  a  more

favorable  relation  to  the  other  tribes  ;  nevertheless,

lie  lacked  the  external  independence,  and  because  of

the  privations  they  suffered,  they  yielded  themselves

sometimes,  as  individuals,  to  the  priestly  service  of

idolatry.     The  turning,  however,  of  Levi's  dispersion

to  a  blessing,  threw  an  alleviating  light  upon  the  lot

rives  it  from  the  Arabic    -Co,  to  deceive,  pr&ctise.  strata

gems.  The  whole  phrase  would  then  denote  instruments  if
violence,  their  treacheries,  equivalent  to  instruments  of  via.
ence  and  treachery.  How  well  this  suits  the  context  is
easily  seen.  Late  Arabic  Version  of  Smith  and  Van  Dyke,
air  swords.—  T.  L.]


*  [Forverunreinigt  in  Lange,  read  veruneinitji.—'X.  L.]
t  [IIT  11  JT>?.  Our  English  version,  dinged  duwn  a
rail,  is  clearly  wrong,  as,  to  make  that  sense,  it  should  have
>ecn  'VHfi  ;  besides,  "IJSS  is  never  used  in  such  a  way.  I:
s  applied,  Josh.  xi.  9,  to  'houghing,  as  tho  old  English  wort
s,  or  to  cutting  the  hamstrings  of  cattle  to  disable  them.
I  he  parallelism  here  denotes  the  intensity  of  their  wrath  aa
t  raged  against  man  and  beast.  There  is  no  need  of  referring
(i)  "'X  to  Hamor  alone.  It  is  a  general  term—  man  they  slew,

x  they  hamstrung—  everything  fell  before  their  ferocitv.—
L.  L.J


G5G


GENESIS,  nil    T1IE    FIRST    BOOK    OF   MOSES.


cf  Simeon,  who,  together  with  Benjamin,  came  into
closest  union  with  Judnh.

b.  Jinluh  (vers.  8-12).— Judah,  thou  art  he
•whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise. — Luther  hap
pily  remarks  that  Jacob  says  this  as  one  who  hitherto
had  been  in  vain  looking  about  for  the  right  one:
Judah,  thou  art  the  man.  For  the  history  of  Judah
and  (hi.1  literature  pertaining  to  this  blessing,  see
K.NOUKI.,  p.  :;>',2. — Shall  praise. — A  play  upon  the
name  Jiiil.ih,  as  mraninir  one  who  is  celebrated.  A:
a  later  day  il.is  name  (.ludra,  Jews)  passes  over  to
the  whole  j  eople.  Originally  it  is  the  name  of  one
for  whom  thanks  are  given  to  (!od. — Thy  hand
shall  be  upon  the  neok. — The  enemies  ilee  or  how
themselves,  ::s  victor,  or  lord,  he  lays  his  hand  upon
their  neeks.  His  power  in  peace  corresponds  to  his
greatness  in  war;  a  contra.-t  which,  further  on,  ap
pears  >i;!l  more  strongly. — Shall  bow  down  be
fore  thec. — He,  the  foremost  and  strongest  against
the  foe,  shall,  therefore,  be  chief  among  his  brethren.
"  That  he  should  be  a  "!""•*,  a  prince,  among  them
(1  Chron.  v.  '1 ',  is  his  reward  for  the  part  he  took  in
that  blessed  turn  which  the  history  of  Israel  received
through  Jo>eph."  Driity.seh.— Thy  father's  chil
dren. — All  oi'  them  ;  not  merely  thy  mother's  sons,
but  all  thy  brethren. — A  lion's  whelp. — ""  is  to
In-  ili-tinguished  from  ~,^E3  as  quite  a  young  lion.
The  expre-'-ion  denotes,  therefore,  the  innate  lion-
nature  which  Judah  liad  shown  from  hi<  youth  up.
not  only  Judah  personally,  but  the  tribe  e-pecially.
His  faults  were  no  malicious  ones  ;  on  the  contrary,
he  early  \\iihstood  his  brethren  in  their  evil  de.-ign,
and,  at  a  later  peiiod,  became  their  reconciling  me
diator  IK 'fore  Joseph. — From  the  prey,  my  son,
thou  art  gone  up. — l!y  Knobel  and  others  thi-i  lan
guage  is  interpreted  of  the  lion  sei/.ing  his  prey  in
the  plain,  and  then  earning  it  np  to  his  abode  ill  the
mountain-  (Cant.  iv.  8),  which  seems  especially  ap-
I  lieab!r>  to  Judah,  as  dwelling  in  the  hill-country,
\Ve  prefer,  however,  the  interpretation  (,f  Herder,
Cie-eiiins,  and  others,  who  understand  the  word  of
glowing,  advancing  in  strength  and  si/.e,  and  espe
cially  because  it  is  said  "I:1;,  fruin  the  prey,  in  the
sen^e  of  t/t rough,  or  by  the  means  of,  the  prey;
.-•nice  it  is  trilh  the  prey  that  the  lion  goes  back  to
the  hills.  At  the  same  time,  growth,  in  warlike
deeds  of  heroism,  forms  a  contrast  to  the  quiet  yet
fearful  ambush  of  the  lion.  The  old  lion  is  stronger
than  the  young  one;  and  more  fearful  still  is  the
lioness,  e-peeially  in  deft  nee  of  her  young.  So  lies
down  the  strong-grown  Judah ;  who  shall  venture  to
attack,  or  drive  him  up  for  the  chase?  This  pro-
phetic  lion-iigure  was  especially  realized  in  the  royal
and  victorious  dominion  of  David  ;  although  even  in
the  wildeiuess,  the  tribe  of  Judah  marched  before
the  other  tribes — a  figure  of  the  young  lion. — The
sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah. — The  scep
tre  is  the  ny>r!;  of  royal  power.  The  ruler's  staff,
p£nc,  seems,  from  the  parallelism,  to  express  the
same  thing.  The  word  denotes  that  which  estab
lishes,  makes  laws ;  hence  the  ruler's  staff.  Here,
however,  is  meant  the  staff  or  mace  of  the  warrior
chief;  and  so  it  would  be  the  ducal,  or  field-marshal's
staff.  In  correspondence  with  this  the  tenn  "PsJH
(at  his  feet)  would  seem  like  an  allusion  to  the  army
that  follows  the  chieftain,  although  the  expression
would  primarily  present  the  figure  of  the  chief  sit-
i  ing  upon  his  throne,  with  his  sceptre  between  his
feet.  In  respect  to  the  sceptre,  and  representations


of  princes  with  the  sceptre  between  their  feet,  see
KXOBEL,  p.  3(34.  If  we  had  to  choose,  we  should
prefer  the  interpretation  of  Ewald  and  others,  accord
ing  to  which  vbm  here,  according  to  the  connec
tion,  must  mean  the  people  or  army.  For  other  ex
planations  see  Knobel.  Judah  is  not  merely  to  pos
sess  the  sceptre,  but  also  command  with  it,  and  rule
with  vigor.* — Until  Sliiloh  come.— [Lange  trans
lates,  until  he  (Judah)  comes  home  as  the  rest-
giver.]  The  expression  "£-~S>  does  not  denote  the
temporal  terminus  where  Judah's  lordship  ceases,
but  the  ideal  terminus  where  it,  reaches  its  glorious
perfection.  According  to  the  first  supposition,  the
place,  has  been,  in  various  ways,  interpreted  of  the
Mes.-iah.  With  the  dominion  of  Herod  did  the  scc])-
tre  depart  from  Judah,  and,  therefore,  then  must  the
Me.-siah,  or  Shiloh,  have  made  his  appearance.  The
different  interpretations  of  the  word  Shiloh  do  not
require  of  us  here  a  more  copious  exegesis  ;  we  may
simply  refer  to  the  commentaries.  There  are,  1.  The
verbal  prophetic  MesMauie  interpretations,  that
rov£  is  the  abstract,  for  the  concrete  (see  the  verb
nb'i'),  and  denotes  tic  mitlior  of  tranquillity,  the
Messiah.  This  is  the  old  Jewish,  the  old  Catholic,
and  the  old  Protestant  interpretation.  Those  who
Mill  hold  it  are  Ilengstenberg,  Schroder,  Keil  and
others,  as  also  Hofmann,  according  to  his  later  view.
Modifications:  a.  It  is  from  t"w  fi!<n*,  and",  and
so  means  hix  son  (see,  on  the  contrary,  Keil);  /;.  the
word  stands  for  lS*!  =  'b  "'i;N  ;  -until  he  coi/U'S  to
ii'ltnn  it  belongs;  namely,  the  sceptre.  This  inter
pretation  is  made  to  depend  upon  a  false  application
of  the  passage  E/.ek.  xxi.  27.  In  a  similar  way  the
EXX,  fii's&v  lAdj;  TO  aTroKtuKva.  avrcS,  or  w  anoKtiTai
(according  to  Aquila  and  others);  the  Vulgate,  qtt>
i/iit'i-jiilus  cxt,  from  the  supposition  of  another  verb
(nb«)  ;  2.  unniessianie  interpretations  :  a.  Shiloh
is  the  same  as  Shalomo,  king  Solomon  himself  (Abu-
said  and  others). — Shiloh  denotes  the  place  Silo
(Shiloh),  where  the  ark  was  :-et  up  after  the  conquest
of  Canaan  (Josh,  xviii.  ]);  and  in  the  sense  until
he  come,  that  is,  generally,  until  the:;  cai/ic  (Herder
and  Tuch) ;  1.  Knobcl's  view  :  until  lie  >•<•.-,•'  (  nb'i  )
comes,  and  to  it  shall  the  obedience  of  the  people  be;
o.  typical  interpretations  :  </.  Until  he  comes  to  rest
( I  loi'inanifs  earlier  view)  ;  b.  until  he  comes  to  Shi
loh,  but  in  the  sense  that  Shiloh  is  the  type  of  the
city  of  the  heavenly  rest,  the  type  of  that  into  which
Christ  has  entered  ;  c.  to  these  we  add  our  inter
pretation  :  until  he  himself  comes  home  (namely,
from  his  warlike  career)  as  the  Shiloh,  the  rest-
bringer,  the  establisher  of  peace.  Suggestions  in
opposition  to  the  preceding  interpretations  :  1.  That
of  the  personal  Messiah.  The  idea  was  not  fully  de
veloped  in  the  time  of  Jacob.  Moreover,  by  placing
him  along  with  Judah,  the  connection  is  interrupted.
Keil  charges  Kurtz  with  presumptuously  determining
how  far,  or  how  much,  the  patriarch  should  be  able
to  prophecy  ;  but  he  himself  seems  to  acknowledge
no  regtdar  development  in  the  prediction.  2.  Shiloh,
as  a  place.  That  would  be,  in  the  first  [dace,  a  geo-
graphical  prediction,  from  which  the  mention  of

*  [P|-!|3n  means  obedience,  mcrence,  and  not  gatlterimj,
as  the  Targums  and  Jewish  commcr.tcitors  give  it.  This  is
evident  from  Trov.  xxx.  17,  CX  rn~"  ,  where  it  cenotcs

filial  piety,  as  aJso  from  the  Arabic  root  i'«  ,  ctymologi-
cally  identical  with  it,  and  which  is  very  common.— T.  L.]


CHAP.    XLIX.    1-33.


657


Sidon  greatly  differs ;  in  the  second  place,  until  the
conquest  of  Canaan,  Joshua,  of  the  tribe  &f  Ephraim.
was  leader,  so  that  the  sceptre  did  not  belong  to  Ju-
dah.     This  explanation  would  be  more  tolerable  if
taken  in  the  typical  sense  of  Delitzsch  ;    only  we
would  have  to  regard  Shiloh  as  the  ideal  designation
cf  the  city  of  rest,  transcending  altogether  the  con
ception  of  Shiloh  as  a  place.     But  now  Keil  shows
us  that  Shiloh  can  be    no    appellative,  but  only  a
proper  name,  originally  "jl^lM.     3.  Tl:ere  is  finally
the  interpretation  "3   Ti'X,  which  is  vorbally  doing
great  violence  to  the  expression  by  taking  it  as  an
abbreviated  or  mutilated  form. — Other  interpretations
demand  from  us  no  attention.     The  y sounds  of  our
own  interpretation :  1.  That  Shiloh,  as  concrete,  may
denote  not  only  one  who  rests,  but  also  one  who
brings  or  establishes  rest  (sec  KEIL,  p.  2!'U) ;  2.  St
denotes  often  a  returning  home,  or  forms  a  contrast
to  a  former  departure  from  home;  ?>.  an  analogy  in
favor  of  our  view,  according  to  which  we  take  nb'13
as  in  apposition  with  the  subject   Judah,  mav  be
found  in  Zach.  ix.  9  :   "  Thy  king  cometh  unto  thee,
just "  (a  righteous  one),  p-HS  t,b  N"^-— that  is,  in
the  attribute  of  righteous  rule;  4.  this  explanation
alone  denotes  the  degree  of  unfoldment  which  the
prophecy  had  received  in  the  patriarchal  age.     First,
the  Messiah  is  implicitly  set  forth  in  "  the  seed  of
the   woman,"  then  with  Seth   and  Shem,  then  with
Abraham  and  his  seed,  afterward  with  Jacob  and
Israel,  and,  finally,  here  with  Judah.     What,  there
fore,  is  said  verbally  of  Judah,  relates  typically  to  the
Messiah.     He  is  here,  in  the  same  full,  theocratic
sense,  the  prince  of  peace,  as  in  other  places  Israel
is  the  son  of  God  (IIos.  ;d.  1).*— Binding  his  foal
unto  the  vine. — The  territory  of  Judah  is  distin
guished  for  vineyards    and   pasture-land,  especially
near  Hebron  and  Engedi.     On  account  of  the  abund
ance  of  vines,  "  they  are  so  little  cared  for,  that  the
traveller  ties  to  them  his  beast.     In  the  oldest  times
the  ass,  together  with  the  camel,   was  the  animal
usually  employed  in  travel ;  as  the  Hebrews  seem
not  to  have  had  horses  for  that  purpose  before  the
times  of  David    and  Solomon.     The  ass  also  suits
better  here  as  the  animal  for  riding  in  time  of  peace."
Knobcl.     THE  SAME:  He  washes  hix  garment  in  u-inc
— that  is,  wine  is   produced  in  such  abundance  that
it  can  bo  applied  to  such  a  purpose ;  a  poetical  hy
perbole,  as  in  Job  xxix.  6.     On  account  of  the  men
tion  of  blood,  the  passage  has,  in  various  ways,  been
interpreted  allegorically  of  the  bloody  garment  of
David,  or  of  the  Messiah  (Isa.  Ixiii). — His  eyes  red
vrith  wine. — (Lange  translates  it  dark  gleaming.)
He  shall  be  distinguished  for  dark  lustred  eyesf
and  for  white  teeth  ;  a  figure  of  the  richest  and  most
ornate  enjoyment ;  for  there  can  be  no  thought  here
of  debauchery — just  as  little  as  there  was  any  idea

*  [The  best  and  fullest  discussion  of  the  Shiloh  prophe
cy,  with  a  collection  and  critical  examination  of  the  author-
ties,  ancient  and  modern,  may  be  found  iu  Dr.  Samuel  H.
Turner's  excellent  commentary,  modestly  entitled,  "A  Com
panion  to  the  Book  of  Genesis,"  pp.  371-388,  especially  his
comparison  of  the  Jewish  Targnms  and  the  old  versions.—

1  [-*:*y  "ibib'^n.  The  difficulty  all  vanishes  if  wo
road,  with  the  Samaritan  codex,  ibib^n  (the  slightest  of
variation?!,  M  for  I",).  The  LXX  and  Vulgate  have  evi
dently  followed  it— xapoTTOtoi  oi  libQaXfioi—imlchricres  suni
oculi.  Compare  "Z'~<  b'b?,  Ezck.  xxviii.  12  ;  1E"1  b^DE
1's.  1.  2.-T.  L.]

4-2


of  drunkenness  when  the  brothers  of  Joseph  became
merry  at  the  banquet,  or  in  the  marriage-supper,
John  ii.

c.    The  Lrothers  associated  with  Judah  :  Zebulun,
hsachar,  Dan,     Vers.    13-18. — Zebulun,  at    the
haven  of  the  sea. — Zebulun  extends  between  two
seas,  the  Galilean  and  the    Mediterranean,  though
not  directly  touching  upon  the  latter  (Josh.  xix.  10) ;
we  do  not,  therefore,  see  why  the  word  CT£i  should
made  us  think  merely  of  the  Mediterranean.     The
mention  of  ships  denotes  that  he  had  a  call  to  com
merce  ;  especially  when  it  .is  said  that  he   extends
unto  Sidon.     This  blessing  (Deut.  xxxiii.  19 ;  Josr-
rnus:  Ant.  v.  1,  22;  Bell  Jud.  iii.  3,  1)  is  in  the
highest   sense  univcrsalistic  (as   distinguished  from
theocratic). — Issachar,    a  strong    ass. — Literally,
an  ass  of  bone.    lie  possessed  a  very  fruitful  district,
especially  the  beautiful  plain  of  Jczreel  (Josh.  xiii.
17  ;  coinp.  Judg.  v.  15).     In  the  rich  enjoyment  of
his  land,  he  willingly  bore  the  burden  of  labor  and
tribute  imposed  on  his  agriculture  and  pasturage.
The  figure  here  employed  has  nothing  mean  about
it.*     The   Oriental   ass   is   a   more    stately   animal
than  the  Western.     "  Homer  compares  Ajax  to  an
ass;  the  stout  caliph,  Merwan  II.,  was  named  the  ass
of   Mesopotamia."     Knobcl. — And    he  saw   that
rest   was  good    (Jos.  DC  Hello  Jud.  iii.  3,  2). —
We  are  not  to  think  here  cf  servitude  "  under  a
foreign  sovereignty ; "  yet  still  the  expression  tribu
tary  (":>  OE^)  is  used  of  the  Canaanitcs  and  of
prisoners  taken  in  war;  moreover,  it  may  be  said
that  the  Israclitish  disposition  towards  servitude  was
especially    prominent    in    this   tribe. — Dan    shall
judge. — As  he  is  the  first  son  of  a  handmaid  who  is
mentioned,  it  is  therefore  said  of  him,  with  empha
sis,  that  he  shall  have  a  full  inheritance,  a  declara
tion  which  avails  for  the  sous  like  him  in  this  re-
;pect.     It  may,  however,  be  well  understood  of  them
on  the  ground  that  they  were  adopted  by  the  legiti
mate  mothers   Rachel  and   Leah.     The  expression
•shall  jwljc  is  a  play  upon  the  name  Dan.     He  shall
judge  as  any  one  of  the  tribes.     By  many  this  is  re
ferred  to  his  self-government,  on  the  ground  of  the
tribe's  independency  (Herder  and  others).     Accord-
.ng  to  others  (Ephraim,  Knobcl)  the  word  relates  to
his  transitory  supremacy  among  the  tribes ;  as  in  the
days  of  Samson.     At  all  events,  in  the  life  of  the
strong  Samson  there  appears  that  craft  in  war  which
s  here    especially  ascribed  to  Dan.     Nevertheless,
:he  expression  he  shall  judge   denotes,  primarily,  a
high  measure  of  independence.     The  tribe  of  Dan
,vas  crowded  in  its  tract  between  Ephraim  and  the
Philistine.?  (sec  KXOBKL,   p.  Sol)),  and,  therefore,   a
;art  of  it  wandered  away  to  the  extreme  boundary

f  [How  the  merest  prejudice,  sometimes,  affects  our  viev
of  events,  and  destroys  the  power  of  what  mipht  otherwise;
>o  most  impressive !  There  is  hardly  any  miracle  in  the
Old  Testament  that  has  more  of  a  sip/niiicant  moral  lesser
'nan  the  rebuke  of  Balaam,  the  mad  prophet,  by  the  mouth
)f  the  beast  on  which  he  rode.  See  the  use  made  of  ii,  i
*>~'?r  ii.  1G.  As  an  example,  too,  of  the  supernatural,  then-

10  more  objection  to  1>c  made  to  it  (except  the  gcneia!
one;  than  though  an  ano-el  had  spoken  from  the  sky,  which
would  have  been  thuupht  sublime,  at  least.  And'  yet  for
low  many  minds  has  this  miserable  modern  prejudice,  tins
unfounded  contempt  for  the  animal  named,  destroyed  the
affect  of  the  miracle,  and  turned  all  (illusion  to  it  i-ito  ;.
standing  jc.-;t,  as  it  has  also  irrationally  belittled  Homer's
•eally  line  comparison.  The  ignobkj  view  of  the  animal
ias  had  the  same  effect  in  making  an  offendiculum  of  our
Saviour's  most  significant  miracle,  of  the  demons  and  the


G58


GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF  MOSES.


on  the  north,  surprised  the  Sidonian  colony  Lais,  at
tlio  foot  of  Lebanon,  and  established  there  a  new
i:ity,  named  Dan,  on  the  ruins  of  the  old  (Josh.  xix.
47;  Judg.  xviii.  7,  27). — Dan  shall  be  a  serpent
by  the  way. — The  word  Ti"  may  stand  poetically
for  rP!T>  (GESEN.  §  128,  2),  and  so  the  form  is  to  be
regarded;  out  of  which  may  arise  the  question,
whether  the  figure  that  follows  is  to  be  taken  in  a
medial  or  in  a  vicious  sense.  In  respect  to  this,  we
hold  that  the  sense  is  primaiily  medial,  but  that  there
rnay  be  a  vicious  allusion.  The  war  stratagems  of
Samson  are  not  reckoned  to  his  disadvantage  ;  and
yet  cunning  in  war  passes  ea.-ily  into  malicious  guile,
as  it  appears  in  the  figure  cf  the  adder,  and  as  it
was  actually  practised  in  the  snrpri-e  of  the  peace
ful  city  Lais.  "  The  viper  (ccrasl)*  has  in  a  special
degree  this  common  property  of  the  serpent  tribe
(eh.  iii.  ]).  It  lays  its.  If  in  holes,  and  rests  in  the
road,  and  falls  u::i  \poctedly  upon  the  traveller.  It
is,  of  the  color  of  the  earth,  and  there  is  danger
from  the  lightest  triad  (Dion.  Sic.  iii.  -!<>)."  Knobel.
The  serpent  in  the  path  is  by  the  Targumists,  and
some  church  fathers,  interpreted  of  Samson.  I!y
Ephraim,  Thcodoret,  and  others,  it  is  referred  to
Antichrist;  whereto  Lunn:n  remarks:  Pitto  diabn-

•  !  ran  fuisac  (see  I\i:ii.,  p.  298).

It  must  always  -ccni  remarkable  that  Dan  should  be
left  out  in  the  enumeration  of  the  tribes  in  the  Apoca
lypse. — I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  O
Lord. — In  the  exhaustion  of

patriarch  here  ut:.  g  intcrjaculation.     Was

it  on  account  of  a  foresight  he  In  1  of  the  future
degradation  of  the  tribe  of  Dan  into  the  practice  of
idolatry,  or  of  i's  struggle  v.  iih  the  Philistines,  or
would  lie  declare  by  ii  tha:  there  was  a  higher  salva
tion  than  any  achie\ed  by  Samson  V  In  no  MI  •  of

\MIVS  docs  the  po-i:io;i  o!'  the  ejaculation
to  be  clearly  explained,  but   only  by  the  supposition
that  he  makes  in  it  a   division   among  his   benedie-
tions,  separating  thereby  the   group  of  Judah    from
that  of  .Joseph.

0.    Vers.    1!»-21.    Tl.c   f/ron/>   of  ./o.s,y,,V— a.    Tin'
ory:   (/(C/,  J  *//<;•,  X'tjihiul't.

— Gad,  a  troop  shall  overcome  him. — We  can
.inly  make  an  attempt  to  carry  into  a  translation  the
:  d  play  upon  words  that  is  here  found.  Gad
occupied  on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan,  and  was
in  many  ways  invaded  and  oppressed  by  the  eastern
hordes,  but  victoriously  drove  them  back  (see  1
s'hrcn.  v.  IS;  xii.  8-15).  We  must  here  call  t:i


f.:r  this  to  the  Syriac  root  w£L£_&>,  to  creep,  as  Gesenius

loos.  That  would  only  give  the  generic  name  serpena.  This
•.vas  evidently  a  vcnomniis  and  most  inaliyiuuit  serpent.  It,
is  rendered  adder  in  our  version  ;  Vulgate  crmstrf.  As  the
words  DmMf.  Ain  and  Ain  Won  are  closely  allied,  especial
ly  in  their  intensive  conjugations,  this  name,  as  here  used,
may  help  in  fixing  the  meaning  of  that  difficult  word,  ?"'.!},
:is  employed  Gen.  iii.  15  (see  marginal  note  p.  235).  It  may
liavc  the  sense  of  lying  in  wail  (insidiandi),  or  of  sltnginff,
both  of_  which  well  suit  the  passage  in  Genesis  (at  least  m
one  o_f  its  applications,  to  which  the  other  seems  a  parono-
mastic  accommodation)  and  the  figure  intended  here.  It
was,  probably,  some  thought  derived  from  this  name,  as
denoting  a  very  malignant  animal,  and  a  resemblance  to  the
old  serpent,  Gen.  iii.  15,  that  led  some  of  the  old  interpre
ters  to  connect  Dan  with  Antichrist.  If  Jacob  could  be
supposed  to  have  had  a  glimpse  of  such  an  idea,  it  would
better  cxplaii:  the  sudden  ejaculation  that  follows,  than  any
other  mere  historical  reference  that  has  been  mentioned  as
suggestive  of  it.— T.  L.]


mind  the  brave  warriors  from  Mount  Gilcad,  in  the
time  of  the  Judges,  and  especially  of  Jephthah.  In
this  power  of  defence  Gad  is  akin  to  Joseph. — Out
of  Asher  his  bread  (shall  be)  fat.— Asher  had
one  of  the  most  productive  districts  by  the  Mediter
ranean,  extending  from  Carmel  to  the  Phoenician
boundary,  rich  in  wheat  and  oil ;  but  together  with
the  fertility  of  his  soil,  the  blessing  expresses  also
his  talent  for  using  and  honoring  the  gifts  of  nature
in  the  way  of  culture.  A  second  feature  that  is
found  in  Joseph.  JJut  this  is  also  especially  true  of
Xaphtali. — A  hind  let  loose. — There  are  presented
of  him  two  distinct  features  :  he  is  a  beauteous  and
active  warrior,  comparable  to  the  so  much  praised
gazelle  (2  Sam.  ii.  18,  etc.).  The  word  ntlbp  finds
its  explanation  in  Job  xxxix.  5  ;  pee  KEIL,  p.  299. —
The  second  trait :  he  givetli  goodly  -words. — The
first  lias  been  esnieially  referred  to  the  victory  under
Barak,  of  the  tribes  of  Xaphtali  and  Zebulun  over
Jabin  ;  the  second  to  the  song  of  Deborah.  At  all
events,  Naphtali  is  praised  for  his  rich  command  of
language.  As  he  himself,  like  the  gazelle,  is  poet
ical  in  his  appearance,  so  also  is  his  speech  rich  in
p-i.'try.  Not  without  its  importance  is  the  reference
to  Is.  ix.  ],  Matt.  iv.  ].",  and  the  fact  that  the  preach
ing  of  the  gospel  first  proceeded  from  these  districts.
Yet  they  did  not  strialv  IK  long  to  Xaphtali.  The
word,  by  many,  is  interpreted  of  the  terebinth,  "he
is  a  slender,  fast-growing  terebinth"  (V.  ISohlenK
There  is  but  little  pertinency  i"  this.  The  traits  of
Naphtali  prepare  us  especially  lor  Joseph.

f>.  Ji'x<]ilt.  Vers.  •^•j-'Jti.  Joseph  comes  before
v.s  :  1.  Asa  fruit-tree;  2.  as  an  unconquerable  ar
cher:  •'!.  ;N  the  darling  of  his  father;  '1.  as  the
Xazarite,  or  one  separated  from  his  brethren. — A
fruitful  bough  (literally,  son  of  a  fruit-tree). — Its
place  is  by  a  well  in  a  garden.  Its  daughters — its
twii:S — run  over  the  fa:  den  wall.  Th-'  word  r~-3
contains  an  allusion  to  Ephraim.  Other  interpreta
tions  see  in  Knobcl  (~'",S  =  ty;/«,  Oi'icuhi). — The
archers  have  sorely  grieved  him. — The  figure
does  not  present  to  us  here  the  past  enmity  of  the
brethren  (to  uhieh  many  refer  it),  but  the  enmities
which  the  tiibe  of  ilanasseh  had  (specially  to  en
counter  iVora  the  famed  Arabian  archers.*  Gideon,


*  [It  is  difficult  for  n^  to  ngroe  with  Dr.  Lancro  here.
The  view  seems  to  proceed  l'n>m  a  misconception  of  the  true
nature  of  Jacob's  Mi'r.jertivc  state.  "What  did  iic  sec  in  his  vis
ion  '.'  "Was  it,  as  is  most  like!}',  the  actual  figures,  such  as  tho
lion  going  up  to  the  hills,  the  serpent  by  the  way,  the  rider
falling  backward,  an  ass  lying  down,  a  flying  hind,  archers
shooting  at  their  object,  a  sceptre  departing,  and  a  people
gathering,  a  ravening  wolf,  etc.,  as  supposed  representatives
of  historical  events,  so  to  be  interpreted  by  himself  or  oth
ers  ;  or  did  he  sec  something  like  the  historical  events  them
selves,  and  invent  the  metaphors  for  their  expression  ?  In
the  last  case,  individual  characteristics  in  the  sons,  as  known
to  his  experience,  nrc  no  longer  the  suggestive  grounds,  but
something  entirely  separate  and  arbitrary.  Or  was  lie,
throughout,  a  mere  mechanical  utterer  of  words,  having
nothing  in  actual  conception  corresponding  to  them  1  If  we
take  the  former  view,  then  the  suggestive  ground  of  this
archer  picture  was  something  in  Joseph's  individual  hie-
to  ry,  though  it  may  well  be  regarded  as  typical,  or  pre-
figurative,  of  that  of  his  descendants,— an  idea  in  harmony
with  all  the  Biblical  representations  of  this  most  peculiar
and  typical  people.  Tho  same  remarks  apply  to  what  Dr.
Lange  and  others  have  said  in  respect  to  the  ejaculation,
vcr.  18,  as  though  it  were  prompted  by  some  actual  view  of
Dan's  idolatry,  or  of  Samson  fighting  with  the  Philistines,
seen  as  historical  events  actually  taking  place  in  vision.
Better  regard  it  as  entirely  disconnected,  a  sudden  crying
out  from  some  emotion  having  its  origin  in  view  of  some
salvation  higher  than  these,  and  for  which  he  had  been
waiting, — a  term  which  can  in  no  wny  be  referred  to  these
supposed  historical  deliverances.  Separate  from  Joseph


CHAP.    XIJX.    1-30.


G59


the  vanquisher  of  the  Midianitcs,  belongs  especially
here. — His  bow  abode  in  strength. — The  victo
rious  resistance  and  enduring  strength  of  Ephraim
and  Manasseh. — The  mighty  (God)  of  Jacob,
lie  who  wrestled  with  Jacob  at  Peniel,  the  God  El
that  strengthened  Jacob,  has  strengthened  Joseph  ;
he  who  proves  himself  the  shepherd  of  his  life,  his
rock  at  Bethel  on  whose  support  he  slept  as  he  pil
lowed  his  head  upon  the  stone.  In  a  general  way,
too,  the  stone  may  be  taken  as  denoting  his  rock-
like  firmness.  'Jacob's  wonderful  guidance  and  sup
port  reflects  itself  in  the  history  of  his  son.  The
bow  is  the  figure  of  strength,  of  defence ;  so  also
the  arm. — Who  shall  bless  thee. — The  blessings
that  are  now  pronounced. — Blessings  of  heaven
above :  dew,  rain,  sunshine. — Of  the  deep  that
lieth  under:  fountains,  fertilizing  waters.— Of  the
breasts  and  of  the  wcmb :  increase  of  children.
— The  blessings  of  my  progenitors. — Ol^'n,
Vulgate,  which  the  LXX  had  changed  into  C^n
mountains.  The  word  D'Xn  here  docs  not  mean
<hstrc,  but  limit,  from  ttJO.  The  blessings  of  Jo
seph  shall  extend  to  the  bounds  of  the  ancient  hills  ;
that  is,  they  shall  rise  higher  than  the  eternal  hills,
that  lift  themselves  above  the  earth, — an  allusion  to
the  glorious  mountains,  most  fruitful  as  well  as  beau
tiful,  in  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  in  Bashan  and  in
Gilead.  These  surpassing  blessings  beyond  those  of
his  forefathers,  can  only  be  understood  of  a  richer
outward  unfolding,  and  not  of  deeper  or  fuller
ground.— -That  was  separated  from  his  breth
ren  (Lauge  renders,  devoted  as  a  Nazarite). —
See  Deut.  xxxiii.  16.  lie  is  a  Nazarite  (a  separate
one)  in  both  relations — in  his  personal  consecration,
us  well  as  in  his  historical  dignity.

c.  Jjdijmidii.  Yu-.  27.  From  morning  until
evening  is  he  quick,  rapacious,  powerful.  An  inti
mation  of  I  ho  warlike  boldness  of  the  tribe  (Judg.
v.  M;  vx.  iG;  l  Citron,  viii.  40).  Ehud.  Saul.
JoiuiUiau.  The  dividing  of  the  spoil  points  to  his
higher,  nobler  nature.  Paul,  the  great  spoil-divider,
from  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.

•1.  "\  ers.  i2S-33.  The  closing  word. — When  he
blessed  them.— It  was  a  blessing  for  all.  The  com
mission  iu  relation  to  his  burial  is  an  enlargement
of  the  earlier  one  to  Joseph.  The  burial  of  Leah  in
Hebron  is  here  mentioned  first.  His  death  a  peace
ful  falling  to  sleep.  Though  then  dying,  at  that
moment,  in  Egypt,  he  goes  immediately  to  the  con
gregation  of  his  people.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  the
grave,  or  the  future  burying,  that  is  meant.


DOCTRINAL  AXD   LT1IICAL.

1.  The  blessing  of  Jacob.  An  intervening  stage
in  the  theocratic  revelation  between  the  blessing  of
Isaac  and  that  of  Moses.  It  is  to  be  taken  together
with  the  special  bk-ssing  upon  Joseph  in  ch.  xlviii.

personally,  there  is  nothing  in  this  figure  of  the  archers
that  would  not  about  as  well  suit  any  other  wars,  of  any
other  tribes,  as  the  conflicts  of  Mauasse'h  with  the  Arabians.
Besides,  what  is  to  be  done  with  all  the  rest  of  the  figures
that  precede  and  follow  this  in  the  blessing  of  Joseph,  and
which  can  no  more  be  referred  to  Manasseh  historically
than  to  some  other  of  the  tribes?  There  is  clearly  predict
ed  great  fruitfnlncss  and  general  prosperity  to  Joseph,  and
in  him  to  the  two  tribes  that  were  to  represent  him,  but  all
this  is  made  the  more  striking  by  being  suggestively  ground
ed  on  tiie  sorrows  and  persecutions  he  had  individually  ex
perienced.  It  is  the  remote  seen  as  compensation  of  the
near.  See  the  remarks  on  the  subjective  character  of  the
Whole  vision,  in  the  excursus  p.  G52.— T.  L  J


The  nearest  addition  is  the  song  of  Moses  and  the
prophecy  of  Balaam.

2.  The  blessing  of  Jacob  denotes  already  an  an
ticipation  of  the  victory  of  life  over  death.     As  a
prophet,  Jacob  is  lifted  over  the  foreboding  of  death.
His  death-bed  is  made  glorious  by  a  Messianic  glance.

3.  What  shall  befall  you — What  lies  in  the
innermost  experience  of  man,  that  befalls  him  from
the  extreme  borders  of  the  earth,  and  out  of  the  far
remote  in  time.     The  relation  between  the  heart  and
the  destiny.     In  the  heart  lie  the  issues  of  life  (Prov
iv.  23).

4.  On  the  geography  of  the  passage,  see  the  Book
of  Joshua,   and  the  geography  of  Palestine.     The
blessing  of  Jacob  goes  on  beyond  the  whole  interven
ing  time  of  the  Israelitish  residence  in  Egypt,  con
templating  the  blessed  people  as  they  are  spread
abroad  in  the  holy  land.     So  in  prophecy,  although
pertaining  to  all  time,  the  period  next  following  its
utterance  forms  its  peculiar  picture  of  life,  or  its
foreground,  as  it  were,  without  being  that  in  which
it  finds  its  close.

5.  On  the  prophetic  consecration  and  illumination
of  pious  souls  in  the  act  of  dying,  see  what  is  said  in
the  Exegctical  and  Critical.

6.  Since  Judah  is  denoted  as  the  prince,  and  Jo
seph  as  the  Nazarite  among  his  brethren,  so  evidently
has  the  whole  blessing  two  middle  points.  As,  more
over,  the  declaration  :  I  have  waited  (or  I  wait)  for
thy  salvation,  0  Lord,  cannot  be  regarded  as  having
its  position  arbitrarily,  there  must  be  formed  by  it
two  distinct  groups  :  one,  seven  in  number,  and  the
other,  five.     The  first  group  has  the  theocratic  Mes
sianic  character,  the  second,  the  universalistic.     All
the  single  parts  of  each  group  are  to  be  referred,  sym
bolically,  to  their  middle  point.     Both  groups,  how
ever,  arc  mutually  implicated  and  connected.  Judah's
sceptre  avails  for    all    the    tribes;    Joseph    is    the
Nazaritc  for  all  his  brethren.     The  first  group  stands
under  the  direction  of  the  name  Jehovah  ;  the  second,
in  respect  to  its  character,  falls  in  the    province    of
Elohim.  Typically,  the  first  is  predominantly  Davidic,
the  second.  Solomonic  (Joseph  the  Nazarite  among
"is  brethren) ;  the  first  has  its  consummation  in  Christ,
the  second,  in  his  church.

1.  The  crime  of  Reuben  is  actually  that  of  incest ;
its  peculiar  root,  however,  was  i/'/3pis(the  violence  of
his  temperament).  Just  as  in  the  Grecian  poetry  it
is  represented  as  a  fountain  of  gross  transgression.

s.  In  respect  to  the  fanaticism  of  the  brothers
Levi  and  Simeon,  see  what  is  said  in  the  Exegetical,
and  ch.  xxxiv.  In  the  sentence  of  Levi's  dispersion,
the  thought  of  a  special  priestly  class  evidently  ap
pears  in  the  background,  yet  so  that  Jacob  seems
to  let  it  depend  on  the  future  to  determine  whether
Judah,  or  Joseph,  is  to  be  the  priest,  or  who  else.
This  shows  the  great  antiquity  of  the  blessing.

9.  As  the  remedy  for  Reuben's  u/3pi^,  or  his  reck
less,  effervescent  temperament,  lies  in  his  disposition

weakness,  as  proceeding  naturally  from  such  a
disposition,  so  the  remedy  for  the  fanaticism  of

i  and  Simeon  lies  in  their  dispersion,  or  the  in
dividualizing  of  the  morbidly  zealous  spirits.

10.  Judah — Shiloh.  In  Isaac's  prediction  con
cerning  Jacob  there  was  denoted,  for  the  first  time,
;hc  Messianic  heir  of  Abraham  as  ruler,  and,  there-
'ore,  the  possessor  of  a  kingdom.  Here  the  domin-
on  brandies,  in  Judah,  into  the  contrast  of  a  war
like  and  peaceful  rule.  And,  truly,  this  contrast  ap-
)oars  here  in  the  greatest  clearness,  as  announced
r.  8.  The  lion  nature  of  Judah  is  developed  in  tht


coo


GENESIS,  OH   THE   FIRST   BOOK   OF   MOSES.


lion  throughout, — the  lion  rampant,  the  lion  resting
and  even  the  lioness  watching  over  the  lion's  lair!
To  the  same  wide,  extent  goes  the  warlike  leader
ship,  whoso  ruler's  staff,  then,  is  naturally  a  mar
shal's  staff,  and  is  to  re;i,ain  so  until  he  has  achieved
a  perfect  trim. ph.  Thru  he  returns  home  as  Shi-
lnn'  !l!:'l  t!-'  people  are  v,h  illy  obedient  to  hi::!.
Now  follows  the  paiiitini:  of  this  picture  of  peace.
The  contrast  of  the  warlike  and  ihe  peaceful  rule
branches  out  in  the  go\  eniments  respectively  of
i/a\id  and  Solomon.  L'ut  Chri.-l  is  the  complete
fulfilling.  He  is  the  victorious  champion,  and
;•  Prii  e  "i1  Peace,  in  the  highest  .sense;
he  is  "the  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  who  hath
overcome,"  Rev.  v.  ;,.  lie  binds  to  the  vine  the


animal
peace,
symbol
iuspira
blessed

\\idch    t

Ile\,    till]

I

(1       i.     V.


ent
nut


on    \\liich    he    rides,   as    one    employed    h.
As    the    elm.-  tree    dispenses    its  o'il  as  a
•-pirif,   so  is   the   \Ine  a   fountain   of
"  n,   dispensing    a   joy    of   the    spirit.     The
j  '.'•    ol    faith    denotes     the    turning-point,    to
war-time   brings  us,  and    \\hence    the
of  peace   begins.      On   this  account   is   the
in     its     Tnme    of    honor,    n~--j
2;    Jt-retn.   ii.    '.'I).       The  w.'Khini:  of  his
the    bh-od    of    the    grape,  is
••'     with    the    warrior's    bloody
he  returns  home.       In   the
v  ot'  ''  c  ''"•'"  salvation,   the  painful  nvolle,
»'  "I  '  time  disappear  (Isn.i.  ix.).      He  p,-
his   festival   garment;    yet    is    ornate  in    tl
:>  .   civ.  I.M.     The  tiinire  tin
•  that  later  representation    in    which   tsrai
''•']'"l<  ]'"•  '  '  v"   t;    licnlly,  Christ  really;   the  faire:

ildren   o!'  men.

1 !.    !':  X-biihin  we  see  denoted  the  nj;iversa!N!i
the   willingness    for  service    i
'          of  craft  in  a  small  worldly  powi  !•',  a
:•   toes  (be   wise   as  serpents),  all' of

ic  unfoldiii"
;>  of Jndah.

.  [--{/ta\  '  !    ••'.'•-

roll

I,   indeed  '"a"

a    salvation    from  Jehovah

)vl!ldl  •  inl  and  the  aim  of  even

1:   pe  <•!'  I

U'.   That   a  number  five  forms   itself  around  Jo-
should   not  surprise  its,  when   we  take  i:

tlic  significance  of  this  number,  and  its  pe-
!iar    universalistic    position.      In   correspondence
we  see  in  Ca  I  the  valiant.;  ,  u]turc

undary  guard  against  the  Eastern  hordes  ;
-^  Asher   the   cheri.-hcr  of  the  material  culture;   in'
•^-'i  '-'•  I'  the  guardian  of  the  spiritual;  in  all  three
traits  of  J,

:-  Joseph's    glory.     Hi-  blessings  present  the
I  r.e-1   predominantly  in    its  earthly  as
pect;    stiil,   in    i],,>  expressions^  the  ancient  i»r»n>-
ia"isi  '  }»'>'»,  there  lies  a  symbolical  sig-

Ihat  points  awav  beyond "  the  hills  of
Ephraim  and  Gilead ;  especially  when  it  is  consid
ered  t.iat  these  biesMngs  are  to  come  upon  the
head,  the  crown  of  the  Xanarite,  separated  elect
—the  personal  prince  among  his  brethren.  As  Ju-
oah  in  his  hereditary,  so  is  Joseph  in  his  personal
gure.  The  early  figs  or  bloom  of  the  patriarchal
As  Melchizedek  was  a  gleam  from  the  de-
p..rtmg  [*-imitivc  time,  so  was  Elias  a  fiery  meteor
with  which  the  lav  period,  in  its  narrower  sense
comes  to  an  end.


Ii).  Benjamin,  who  in  the  evening  divides  the
prey  A  wild,  turbulent  youth,  au  old  age  lull  of
j  blessing  of  sacrifice  for  others.  That  div'dm-
the  spoil  in  the  evening  is  a  feature  that  cvidui'i-
passes  over  into  a  spiritual  allusion.  Our  lh-r
thought  would  be  of  the  dividing  of  the-  prJy
among  the  young  ones,  but  lor  this  alone  the  ex
pression  is  too  .strong.  lie  rends  all  tor  hin^e"1
m  the  morning,  he  yields  all  in  the  evenin-  -  thi,
is  not  a  figure  of  Benjamin  only,  but  of  the  the
ocratic  Israel ;  and,  therefore,  a  most  suitable  cW
(see  Isaiah  liii.  12).


IIOMILET1CAL    AM)    J'UACTICAI,

The  dying  Jacob  as  jirophet.—  His  blcssin"  1  is
sons:    1.  The  sons  themselves;   L'.   the  districts;  3.


the  tribes.  —  The  characteristic  di\ersitie.s  of  the
tribes,  a  type  of  the  diversity  of  apostolic  gifts.—
Moreover,  the  severe  sentences  of  Jacob  become  a
blessing  (see  the  tlxegetical).—  JWaA,  /
—i  herein  lies:  L  The  typical  renown  of  Judah  ;
2.  the  archetypal  renown  of  Christ;  ;;.  the  repre-
;"'  renown  of  (  'hri>tiaiis.—  \Vaitin-  for  the
Lord's  salvation,  as  expressed  by  tiie  month  of  the
dying:  ].  A  testimony  i,,  their  future  continuance
in  being:  '2.  a  piomisc  for  their  posterity.—  The
blessing  of  Joseph;  Joseph  the  person.'l  chief
Judah  the  hereditary  ;  .  ;izeuek

and  Abraham.

1.  "\cr.s.   1-2.     The    introduction.     STAKKK:   In
this    important   chapter    Jacob    is    to  be    regarded
-  as  a  father,  but,  preeminently,  a;  a  p'rojjhet
1.  —  The  words  of  the  dj

greatest  weight.—  S<  HUODER  :  A  choral  song  .
swan.  —  The  last   one  of  the  jteriod   that
awaj  is  called  to  b!e.-s  the  bcgimang  of  the   new.—
liis  blessing  is,  at  the  same  time,  a  prophecy.—  The
word  of  God  is    iir.-i  addressed  to  individuals,  and
that,    too,    in  deepest    confidence.—  The  trusted   of
God  become  the  beams  of  his  word.  —  When  life's
il.in.e    begin.-,    to   be    extingtii.-lKd,  theie    a],  pears,  at
times,  the  mo:  ;  vigorous  health  01  the  spirit,     There
is  a  change  of  speech,  .  •  of  language,  in

this  condition  of  clairvoyance.

I'ASSATANT  :  (ili:iu»Ki:  :)  Ir  is  a  high  outlooking,  a
heroic  announcing  in  figurative  parabolic  style;  a
poetical  letter  ol'  donation  ;  the  most  ancient  pocli-
ra'  "-"P  of  Canaan.  'J'in-  poetical  mode  of  speech
not  arbitrary,  but  ti:e  self-limitation  of  excited  feei
ng  in  a  measured  form  of  diction.  —  Li.sco  :  The
spiritual  peculiaritii  -  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  form  Ihe
roundwork  of  the  prophecy,  and  these  the  father
ud  sufficient  opportunity  for  learning  during  his  long
if(\  The  main  tenor  is  their  future  life  and  action
n  Canaan,  where  he  points  out,  prophetically,  to  each
ribe,  its  place  of  residence,  and  to  which  'he  would
lireet  their  look  and  longing,  as  persons  who  were
o  regard  themselves  only  as  foreigners  in  Eu'ypt.
2.  Vers.  3-1  S.  The  group  of  Judah—  vers.  3-7

—  a.  Reuben,  Simeon,  Levi.      STAUKK  :  /,'.'/,/.  Tub.  :
'arcnts  should  punish  the  faults  of  their  children
eriously  and  zealously,  and  not,  with  untimely  fond-
ess,  cloak  them  to  their  hurt,  —  Ver.  5.  Such  cruelty
•ilHheir  children  imitate,  as  sufficiently  shows  itsclY
a^the  treatment  that  Christ  received  from  the  high     .
riests  who  were  descended  from  Lcvi.  —  Jacob  curs'es
nly  their  wrath,  not  their  persons,  much  less  their
escendants  (not  their  wrath  simply  but  its  excess).

—  Levi  had  no  territory  but  forty-eight  cities.  —  Private


CHAP.    XLIX.   1-33.


CGI


revenue  is  punishable. — GERI.ACII  :  The  pimishnici
bore  threatened,  was  fulfilled  in  respect  to  Lcvi,  IK
changed  to  a  blessing  for  himself  and  his  people.-
SciiRiiDKU  :  The  comparison  of  the  grace  with  whic
God  prevents  us,  and  of  the  punishment  which  fo
lo\ys  guilt,  is  most  painfully  humbling  (Calvin). —
Mine  hono,;  used  for  my  soul :  Because  the  soul,  i
the  image  of  God,  makes  man  higher"  than  the  natu
ral  creation. — Simeon  and  Lcvi.  They  were  sepa
rated  from  each  other  and  dispersed  among  th
tribes;  and  so  the  power  was  broken  which  woul
have  been  their  portion  in  the  settlement  of  thetriba
districts  (Zeigler).— (Luther.)  By  such  a  proceedhv
God  intends  to  obstruct  the  old  nature  and  the  cvl
example.  It  is  especially  worth  mentioning  tha
Moses  exposes  here  the  shame  of  his  own  tribe.  Thu
clearly  appears  the  historical  truthfulness  (Calvin.
(The  Kabbins  pretend  that  most  of  the  notaries  auc
schoolmasters  were  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon).

Vers.  8-12.  b.  Judah.  STARKE  :  In  his  pro
phetic  inspiration  Jacob  makes  the  announcemen
gradually  :  He  calls  Judah  :  1.  A  young  lion,  who
though  strong,  has  yet  more  growth  to  expect ;  2.  ar
old  strong  lion  ;  3.  a  lioness  who  shuns  no  danger  in
defence  of  her  young.  Christ,  the  true  Shiloh,  the
Prince  of  Peace.-*- SCHRODER  :  The  power  of  the
figure  increases  in  the  painting ;  probably  an  intima
tion  of  that  ever-growing  warlike  power  of  the  tribe,
which  has  its  perfection  in  the  all-triumphant  one,
the  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah. — G'ERLACII  :  Until  the
peace,  or  the  rest,  shall  come.  A  poetical  propei
ii'ime  of  a  great  descendant  of  Jm'Uh.  The  outward
blessing  here  directs  the  mind  to  the  inexhaustible
fountain  of  heavenly  blessing  that  shall  proceed  from
him.— TACEE:  (Vers.  10-12.)  Jacob's  blessing
Judah. — A  promise  relating  to  Christ  and  his  king
dom.  It  promises:  1.  The  victorious  hero  for  the
establishment  of  this  kingdom  ;  2.  the  Prince  of
Peace  with  his  gentle  rule  for  the  perfection  of  this
kingdom.

Ve;-s.  13-18.  c.  Zcbulun,  Issr.char,  and  Dan.
STARKE:  Zcbulun  (Isai.  ix.  1-2);  compare  Matt.  iv.
15-10.  Issachar's  land.  Josephus  :  Pinguisomnis
et  pasc;ds  plena.  Vcr.  13.  It  is  a  glorious  gift  of
God  to  dwell  by  navigable  waters.  (The  tribe  of
Dan  a  type  of  Antichrist,  although  Samson  himself
was  a  type  of  the  Lord  the  Messiah.) — Vcr.  18,  The
Chaldaic  translation :  "  Our  father  Jacob  does  not
say,  I  vait  for  the  salvation  of  Gideon,  nor  for  the
salvation  of  Samson,  but  the  salvation  of  the  Mes
siah  "  (Acts  iv.  12).— SCHRODER:  Dan.  Some  inter
pret  :  For  thy  salvation  (that  of  Dan)  do  I  wait  upon
the  Lord  (Judg.  xviii.  30  ;  1  Kings  xii.  20).  Many
church  fathers  expected  that  Antichrist  would  come
out  of  Dan.  The  salvation  of  God  is  the  opposite  of
the  serpent's  poison,  and  of  the  fall  (Roos).  The
omission,  of  Dan,  Rev.  vii.  5. — CAUVKR  IlnnJbuch  :
The  tribo  of  Dan  brought  in  the  first  idolatry  (Judg.
xviii.),  and  is  not  in  the  Revelations  among  the  one
hundred  and  forty-four  who  were  sealed. — TACIIE  :
Ch.  xlix.  18  ;  xxix.  33.— Jacob's  death-bed.— His
confession  the  confession  of  Christian  experience. —
His  end  the  end  of  the  believer,  full  of  confidence
and  hope.— HOFMANN  :  (Ver.  18.)  Jacob's  dying
ejaculation. — The  tenor  of  his  whole  pilgrimage.—
Waiting  for  the  salvation  of  God.

3.  Vers.   19-27.     The  group  of  Joseph.— Vers.


19-21.  «.  Gad,  Asher,  Naph tali.— STARKE  :  Luther
on  Gad.  Fulfilled  when  they  assembled  the  Reuben-
ites  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  as  prepared  to
occupy  the  land  of  Canaan  before  the  other  Israelites
came_  there.  Their  neighbors  were  the  Ammonites,
Arabians,  etc.  These  people  sometimes  invaded  this
tribe,  and  plundered  it ;  though  they  also  avenged
themselves. — [Comparison  of  Naphtali :  1 )  To  a  hind.
2)  to  a  tree,  according  to  one  of  two  interpretations.]
He  ffiveth  r/oodly  words.  Most  of  the  apostles  who
preached  Christ  through  the  world  were  from  thi:
tribe  (land  of  Galilee).— SCHRODER  :  (LUTHER  :)  Ful
filled  in  Deborah  and  Barak.

Vers.  22-25.  1>.  Joseph.  STARKE  :  LCTIIEU  :
The  blessing  of  Jacob  goes  through  the  kingly  his
tory  of  Israel.— SCHRODER  :  All  the  enmities' of  his
brethren,  whom  the  old  father  (who  preferred  him  to
them)  compared,  even  in  his  forgiveness,  to  a  battle
array,  had  only  made  him  stronger  (Herder).  The
strong  one  who  wrestled  with  Jacob  had  made  Jo
seph  strong.  He  who  was  his  stone  (ch.  xxviii.)  was
also  the  protector  of  his  ton  (Herder).— CALWER
Handbuch :  Joseph  has  the  natural  fulness,  Judah
the  spiritual.

c.  Benjamin.  STARKE  :  Interpretations  of  the
prediction  as  referred  to  Ehud,  Saul,  Mordccai,
Esther,  Paul.— SCHRODER  :  LUTHER,  after  Tertullian  •
This  may  bo  very  appositely  interpreted  of  the  Apos
tle  Paul,  for  he  had  devoured  the  holy  Stephen  like
a  wolf,  and  after  that  divided  the  gospel  spoils
throughout  the  world.— CAUVER  Jfcmdbuch:  This
Messing  of  Benjamin  is  fulfilled  by  Saul  corporeally,
jy  Paul  spiritually.

4.  Vers.  28-31.  The  closing  word.  STARKE:
Moses  says  that  he  blessed  each  one  of  them  without
exception  ;  but  the  blessings  of  Reuben,  Simeon,
and  Levi,  had  fear  and  shame  belonging  to  them.
They  were  not,  however,  without  the  benediction ;
he  curse  was  only  outward  ;  they  still  had  part  in  the
Messiah.  The  punishment  is  transformed  into  a
icalthy  discipline,  especially  in  the  case  of  Levi.
We  never  read  that  Joseph  wept  amidst  all  his  suf-
"erings  (?) ;  but  the  death  of  his  father  breaks  his
leart.  Burial  with  one's  fathers,  friends,  etc. ;  a
lesire  for  this  is  not  wrong;  yet  still  (lie  earth  is  all
he  Lord's. — SCHRODER  :  He  saw  death  coming,  and
ays  himself  down  to  die,  as  one  goes  to  sleep.*


*  [To  the  literature  of  this  chapter  (see  p.  650,  6)  mav  be
deled  a  tract  just  published,  by  K.  Kohler,  Berlin,  18C7,
utitled  Der  Segen  Jacob's.  It  is  valuable  as  presenting  a
ood  argument  for  the  antiquity  of  the  piece,  in  opposition
o  the  theory  of  its  being  a  later  fiction  (sec  p.  9).  It  is
cry  suggestive,  truly  learned,  especially  in  the  Jewish
lidrashin,  in  which,  however,  the  writer,  though  a  Jew,
as  little  iaith,  even  as  he  shows  still  less  of  reverence  for
le  Scriptures.  He  holds  it  to  be  a  very  ancient  song,  yet
ocs  not  hesitate  to  make  Jacob  a  mt/'h,  Jacob's  God  a  great
DEA,  and  Jacob's  sons  to  be  only  the  names  of  supposed
utelar  tribal  deities  (&/i  ulzyolllicUtn).  lie  rejects,  of  cour.-e
10  derivation  of  these  names  as  given  by  the  mothers,  but
aows  himself  a.  much  mere  extravagant  ctyuio!oDibt  th:in
achel  and  Leah.  Kcubcn,  'p'INI ,  he  turns  into  bsSIX"! .
nd  interprets  it  as  meaning  sun-pod  (Sonne.mjott,  or  Gnu
>:S  Strahls).  Jacob  himself  is  only  a  SchulzgotlJteit,  die
srscftiedenen  Stumme  gemeinsam  beschirmtnde..  The  tract
valuable  and  noteworthy  as  showing  the  extreme  pronTcss
f  this  "more  refined  exegesis."  It  may  be  regarded  as  a
-lecimeu  of  "the  higher  criticism"  evaporated,  "gone  tin
ito  Tohu"  (Job  vi.  IS),  or  of  "  rationalism "  run  mad.—
.  I/.]


0(52  GENESIS,  OR   THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF   MOSES.


ELEVENTH    SECTION.

's  mourning.     Jacob's  burial  in   Canaan.     Ttr  brother*1  dread  of  JOSlJJt.     His  word  rf
peace  and  trust  for  Hum.     Josephs  last  provision  for  Jus  own  return  home  to  Canaan
•if to-  death,  similar  to  (he  provision  rf  his  father.


J,0^1U    k'1    "Pon    his    father's    face,   and    wept   upon    him,  ami    kissed   hiln

i  commanded  Ins  servants,  the  physician?,  to   embalm '  his  father:  and  the

>'i™s  eml.ah i  I  'rael.     And  forty  days  were  fulfilled  for  him  •    for  so  are  fulfilled

1:  and  the  Egyptians  mourned  for  him  threescore

•n  days.      And  when  the  days  of  his  mourning  were   past,  Joseph  spake  unto  the

1  haraoh,  saying,  If  now  1  have  found  grace  in  vour  eyes   speak,  1  pray  you

r*  of  Pharaoh,  saying,   My  father  made  me  swear,  sayin?   Lo   T  die  -   n7m  v

•:(  ;  T  havc  for  me  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  there  shalt  tbou  bury  me

•:"'•-          *'""v>  ".";  ™  go   up,  I  pray  thee,  and  bury  my  father,  and  I  will  come

haraoh   said,  Go  up,  and   bury   thy   father,  according  as   he   made   thee   swear

.    --u,.l.lp,I,  wont  tip  to   bury  his  father:  and  with   him  wen,    up   all   the  servants  of

elders  oi  his  house,  and  all  the  elders  of  the  land  of  Egypt.     And  all  the

rants]  of  Joseph,  and  his  brethren,  and  his  father's 'house  •   o  th
'i  their   flocks,  and   their  herds,  they  left  in   the  land   of  Goshen       \nd
I'K.'i'o  jvcnl  up  with  him  both  chariots  and  horsemen;  and  it  was  a  very  (Treat  company
'"c  to  the  threshing-floor  of  Atad  [buckthorn],  which  is  beyond  Jordan   and
I'  V ''•:'"  mournotl  with  a  great  and  sore  lamentation;   and  he  made  a  mournin-  for
vs.      And  when  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  the  Canaanites   saw  the
•or  of  Atad,  they  said,  This  «  a  grievous  mourning  to  the  Iv'vplian-
•  name  of  it,  was  called  Abel-mizraim,  which  is  beyond  Jordan      And  his
according  as  he  commanded  them.      For  his  son.'  carried  him  into  t!  ,
i  buried  him  in  the  cave  of  the  field  of  Machpelah,  which   ibraham
,    '':'"'  for  '•'  Possession  of  a  burying-place,  of  Ephron  the  Hittite,  before

lamre.     And  Joseph  returned  into  Egypt,  he  and  his  brethren,  and  all  that  went  up
ith  him  to  bury  his  father,  after  he  had  buried  his  father.     And  when  Joseph's  brethren
:™  that  theb  father  was   dead,  they  said,  Joseph  will  peradventure  hate  us   and  will
ainly  requite  us  all  the  evil  we  did   unto  him.     And  they  sen!  a  messenger  unto
y  father  did  command   before  he  died,  savin-    Ho  shall  ye  say  unto
Joseph,  forgive     1  pray  thee,  now,  the  trespass  of  thy  brethren/and  their  sin-  for  they
did  unto  thee  evil  ;   and  now,  we  pray  thee,  forgive  the  trespass  of  the  servants  of  the

I  i-rul    nr  T  htr    raf  hai«  A  >-»  / 1  _i  ,1  T  -,.


T  -,   /i    i     r   ,      r    ,  .  •"•-)      -  i"«v    •    'i;  iwi^ivc  :£>puss  uj   LJIC  scrvantsoi  the

•d  of  thy  father      And  Joseph  wept  when  they  spake  unto  him.     And  his  brethren
owent  and   fell  down  before  his   face;   and  they  said,  Behold,  we  l,e  thy  servants
a:,-,  and  more  pathetically,  Behold  us>  thy  servant,].     And'  Joseph  said  unto  them,  Fear  not

;)),        m   i  hn  i^lnnr*  f\f  /~'^,1  9       l>,.j     ....    r_ .  "  ,1  i   .          ••,  '


.  eren

went  and  f.,11  down  before  his   face;   and  they  said,  Behold,  we  le  thy  servants
aiy,  and  more  pathetically,  Behold  us,  thy  servants].      And   Joseph   said   unto   them,  Fear  not
in  the  place  of  God?      Hut  as  for  you,  ye  thought  evil  against  me;   but  God
rno:         t   unto  good,  to  bring  to  pass,  as  it  is   this   day,  to  save  much  people   alive
sow  therefore  fear  ye  not:  1  will  nourish  you,  and  your  little  ones.     And  he  comforted
them,  and  spake  kindly  unto  them.3     And  Joseph  dwelt  in  Egypt,  he  and  his  father's
nous      and  Joseph  lived  a  hundred  and  ten  years.     And  Joseph  saw  Ephraim's  children
the  third  generation:  the  children  also  of  Machir  the  son  of  Manasseh  were  brought
ip  upon  Joseph  s  knees.     And  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  I  die  ;  and  God  will  «urely
it  you,  and  bring  you  out  of  this  land  unto  the  land  which  he  sware  to  Abraham
aac  and  to  Jacob.     And  Joseph  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of  Israel   saying
d  will  surely  visit  you,  and   ye  shall  carry  up   my  bones  from  hence.     So'  Joseph
7  a  hundred  and  ten  years  old  ;  and  they  embalmed  him  ;  and  he  was  put  in

a  COilill  [a  sarcophagus]  in  Effvpt.


CHAP.    L.    1-26.


GO;


Vcr.  2.— ^:n  occurs  only  here,  and  in  Cant.  ii.  13,  where  it  is  applied  to  the  ripening  of  the  %.  The  Arabic
___„ —  has  also  both  these  senses  of  ripening  and  of  embalming.  The  LXX  have  rendered  it  erra<£idcra<.,  to  bury,  putting
a  part  of  a  proceeding  for  the  whole — to  prepare  him  for  burial.  Vulgate — ul  aromatibus  condircnt.—T.  L.]

[a  Ver.  17.— Xw\  forgive;  literally,  Ufl  up.  The  figure  may  be  either  the  lifting  up  the  supposed  prostrate  face,  or
Hie  lifting  off  the  burden  of  remembered  guilt.  It  is  most  expressive  cither  way. — T.  L.  ]

[3  Ver.  21.— S23  P3J  "12^7?  •  Rendered,  and  he  spake  kindly  unto  them.  Literally,  he  spake  unio  their  heart,  and
so  the  LXX  have  rendered  it.  lie  did  not  merely  use  good  oratorical  forms  of  encouragement,  but  spoke  words  coming
from  the  heart,  and  which  the  heart  immediately  understood.  It  was  the  langiiagc  of  deep  emotion.  Compare  the  same
expression,  1  ,'-um.  i.  13,  and  Is.  xl.  2,  rendered  in  the  latter  place,  speak  ye  comfortably— literally,  sjicak  to  the  heart  of
Jerusalem.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  such  intensive  expressions  of  the  Hebrew  had  not  been  more  generally  preserved  in
our  English  version.  Some  of  them  might  have  sounded  strangely  at  first,  but  time  would  have  naturalized  them,  and
given  them  a  place  among  the  choicest  idioms  in  our  language.— T.  L.]


1.  As   the   fundamental  idea   of    the   preceding
chapter  denoted,  with  solemn  foresight,  the  future
appearance  of  Israel  in  the  promised  land,  so,  in  the
closing  chapter  before  us,  the  actual  return  of  Israel
to  Canaan  is  settled,  by  way  of  anticipation,  in  the
burial  of  Jacob  in  Canaan,  and  by  the  oath  which
Joseph  gives  to  his   brethren.     The   spirit   of   the
theocratic  home-feeling  in  its  higher  significance,  and
of  the  assurance  of   their  return,  breathes  through
this  whole  chapter.     In  this,  Genesis  points  beyond,
not  only  to  the  exodus  of  the  children  of  Israel,  but
away  beyond  this  also,  to  the  eternal  home,  as  the
goal  of  Cud's  people.

2.  According  to  Knobcl,  merely  vers.  12,  in  be
longs  to  the  ground  Scripture,  while  all  the  rest  is
an  enlargement  made  by  the  Jchovist ;  but  then  the
Jehovist  must  be  supposed  to  follow  the  first  docu
ment  (see  p.  377,  KNOBEL).     As  respects  this  criti
cism,    now,  must   tilings  themselves  be  allowed  to
speak,  especially  such  things  as  the  strong  presence
of  Joseph.,  and  other  facts  of  a  similar  kind!

3.  Contents  :  1)  The  mourning  for  Jacob's  death,
and  the  preparation  of  his  dead  body  in  Egypt,  vers.
1-0. — 2)  The  mourning  procession  to  Canaan,  vers.
7-l->. — 8)  The  breaking  out  of  an  old  wound.     The
fear  of  Joseph's  brothers,  and  his  declaration  that
their  guilt  has  been  expiated  under  the  government
of  God's  grace,  vers.  14-21.

4.  Joseph's  life  and   death.     His  provision  ex
acted  from   them   by   an    oath :  that  lie  should  be  j
carried  home  to  Canaan  at  his  death,  vers.  22-26.


J'XKGKTICAL  AXD   CRITICAL.

1.  Vers.  1-6.— And  Joseph  feU.— An  inimitably

touching  expression  of  his  soul's  deep  emotion. —
And  the  forty  days  were  fulfilled.— For  forty
days  did  the  process  of  embalming  continue.  Then
follow  thirty  days,  which  make  the  full  three-score
and  ten,  days — the  time  of  mourning  for  a  prince.
"  The  embalming  of  the  body  was  an  Egyptian  cus
tom,  practised  for  pay  by  a  special  class  of  skilled
artists  (rapixevrai),  to  whom  the  relations  gave  the
body  fof  that  purpose.  According  to  HERODOTUS,
ii.  80,  there  were  three  modes  of  proceeding,  of
which  the  most  costly  was  as  follows :  they  drew  out
the  brain  through  the  nostrils,  and  filled  the  cavity
in  the  head  with  spices;  then  they  took  out  the
viscera,  and  filled  the  space  with  all  kinds  of  aromat-
ics,  after  which  they  sewed  it  up.  The  next  step
was  to  salt  the  body  with  natron,  and  let  it  lie  sev
enty  days,  or  longer.  Then  they  washed  it  off,
wrapt  it  in  fine  linen,  and  smeared  it  with  gum.


Finally,  the  relatives  took  it  back,  enclosed  it  in  a
chest,  and  kept  it  in  a  chamber  for  the  dead.  We
derive  the  same  information  from  DIODORTJS  Sic.,  i.
91,  and,  moreover,  that  the  taricheutists  (the  embalm-
crs)  were  held  in  high  honor,  and  ranked  in  the  so
ciety  of  the  priests.  In  the  several  districts  they
had  particular  places  for  their  business  (STRABO,  xvii.
p.  795).  They  used  asphaltum  which  was  brought
from  Palestine  to  Egypt  (Dion.,  xix.  00  ;  STRAKO,
xvi.  p.  70-1).  From  thence,  too,  they  obtained  the
spices  that  were  employed  (see  ch.  xxxvii.  25  ;  xliii.
11).  The  intestines  they  put  in  a  box  and  cast  into
the  Xile  ;  doing  this  been  use  the  belly  was  regarded
as  the  seat  of  sins,  especially  those  of  gluttony  and
intemperate  drinking.  (Ponrnyn.  Altstl.t.,  \v.  10.)
See  more  on  this  subject  in  FKiKnr.Kini  (Zar.  E'J)cl,
ii.  p._  190).  See  also  WJXKR,  Ecah'^rlt-rb.,  'Em
balming.'  Jacob  was  prepared  as  a  mummy.  Jo
seph  in  the  same  manner,  ver.  2(].  This  is  related  of
no  other  Hebrew.  The  embalming  mentioned  later
among  the  Jews  was  of  a  different  kind  (John  xix.
SO)."  Knobel.  The  mourning  for  Aaron  and  Moses
was  observed  thirty  days. — Speak  in  the  ears  of
Pharaoh. — On  an  occasion  so  peculiar  lie  lets  oth
ers  speak  for  him;  moreover  it  was  unseemly  to  ap
pear  before  the  king  in  mourning. — The  grave
which  I  have  digged  for  me. — This  is  not  at  va
riance  with  the  supposition  that  Abraham  had  pre
viously  bought  the  cave.  In  this  cave  of  Machpclah
Jacob  had,  at  a  later  time,  made  a  special  prepara
tion  of  a  grave  for  himself.  It  is  a  conjecture  of
Von  Bohlen,  with  Onkel  and  others,  that  m:
here,  should  be  rendered  louyht ;  but,  there  is  no
need  of  it.

2.  Vers.  7-1".  The  great  mourning  procession
of  the  Egyptians  here  proceeded,  on  the  one  hand,
from  their  recognition  of  Joseph's  high  position,  and,
on  the  other,  from  their  love  of  funeral  festivity
(Hengstenberg). — Threshing-floor  of  Atad. — So
called  from  "J2X,  thorn,  because,  perhaps,  surround
ed  by  thorn-bushes. —  Seven  days. —  The  usual
time  of  mourning.  The  place  is  called  by  Ilierony-
mus,  Bcthagla.  Concerning  the  late  discovered
traces  of  the  place,  lying  not  far  from  the  northern
end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  see  KNOBEL,  p.  379.  It  is  this
side  of  Jordan,  though  the  account  s.ays  beycnd
Jordan.  The  expression  is  explained,' when,  with
the  older  commentators,  we  take  into  view  that  the
traditionary  mention  arising  from  the  old  position  of
the  Israelites,  had  become  fixed.  Bunsen  would  re
move  the  seeming  difficulty  by  maintaining  that
l~~l!'bj  "r"r  actually  means  this  side  of  Jordan.
Dclitzsch  and  Keil  suppose  that  the  place  denoted  is
not  identical  with  Bethagla,  but  actually  lay  on  the
other  side  of  Jordan.  There  probably  did  the  Egyp-


GG4


GENESIS,  Oil    T11E   FIRST  BOOK   OF  MOSES.


tiivn  mourning-train  remain  behind,  after  having  gone
round  the  Dead  Sea ;  whilst  the  sons  of  Jacob,  ac
cording  to  ver.  13,  actually  entered  Canaan  proper.
I'iliicult    e.ue-tion,  why  the  mourning-train    did
e  ii:  :ial  dii-ict  way  from  Egypt  to  Hebron,
is  answered  by  saying,  that  on  the  usual  route  they
:,.rd  themselves  against  encounters
;e  tribes;  and  this   is    supported   by  the
fact,  that    the  children  of  Israel,  likewise,  at  a  later
1   avoid    the  tte  oil   the  w^.-tern

•  •  •  ••  .  ",  t'i  •  :  !i  was  in  some  ivspccls
npical,  presenting  an  anticipation,  a-  it  were,  et'  the
later  journey.  I'..  time  the  C.-.naanite.s  at

tentively    v,  •   iiiourning    procession;    but

they  had  ini  ]  ri  L-ntiment  of  its  -'  '  ••  for  the
later  ti  verc  especially  quiet  as  thev  looked

0:1  during   this   "  of    the   Kgvp-

tia;-  i."

.'!.   Ver-.  11-21. — An  cl  v.Thc-:i  Joseph's  breth
ren  r;av.-.  tood  as  a  ]iowe:i'ul   ino-

'.  ;    and    now
In  tlici)  to  him

!  tiiere  is  no

groi.nd   for  v  '  •-,  that    this  was  a  mere

•    t  i   an   i  1.
'  him  for  a  slave,
Th's

:.!.       ,b

fGol'-     Can

I   by  :  ?     God  lias

it  i  a  deliverance,  and  in   thi.-

..      C  id   has

m  ;  and,  therefore,  he  himself  can  i,.)
1  1  he  ;  since  that
in  the  pi. ice  <  f  the
.  -",  give  -

g;a:id  .  -v<a,

it  is  tli  world's  his

tory.

1.  Vers.  i::!--v,.— The  thii-.l  generation.— That

The  d.  -i-d  bodies  M  ere  ,

in  chests  o!'  .••.yea:.  .  M-.  the  cham-

:'  tli  •  d  ;:  1.     So   Joseph's  body  was  kept.     In

1  .'  1  rael  't  was  ea  ;  |  Kxod.  xiii.

19),  and  laid  in  the  field  of  Jacob  at  Shechern  (Josh.

xxiv.  ,".-J).


1.  We  have  d'-nokd  ibis  chn]  ti  r  as  the  cl

<;f  the  ling.     It  H   a   trait   that    breath,  s

through  it.     Canaan    the  hoi   c-land  of  Israel— type
of  the  heavenly  1

2.  .Icscph'.;   dispo  itii  n,  ;   •  u  -.:ng,  and   tnnhful-
ness.

3.  With    wonderful   propriety  does  Joseph  unite
in  his  own   person   the   Israelitish  truthfulness  with
that  which  \  :.  value   i:;  the  Egyptian  eu.s-
toms  and  u>:

•i.  The  nioiir:;i'!g-tr;'.in  of  Jacob,  a  prcsignal  of
Isr;:ei's  return  to  C;u:p.'i;i.

r>.  As  God  makes  Genesis  glorious  in  the  begin
ning,  by  the  account  of  his  creation, — so  here,  at
the  end,  by  a  display  of  his  providence  (ver.  2u).

().   The  admonitions  of  conscience.

7.  Perfect  love  castcth  out  fear.  Joseph's  word
of  peace  for  Ids  brethren.

S.  Joseph's  provision  an  act  of  faith.  Pointin"-
to  the  exodus.


IIOMILETICAL  AM)  TACTICAL.

Consecrated  death.  — Consecrated  mourning
The  consecrated  mourning  usage.  The  pious  mourn
ing  procession.  The  divine  sighing  for  home.  Tin-
dead  Jacob  draws  beforehand  the  living  Israel  to  Ca
naan.  Ik-fore  all  is  the  dying  Christ.— The  way  of
pur  future  wonderfully  prepared :  1.  In  the  mourn
ing-train;  '2.  in  the 'exodus  of  the  spirits;  3.  in  tin-
going  forth  of  the.  heart  in  its  longing  and  sighing
for  home.

First  Section.  (Vers.  1-6.)  PTARKE:  Extract
from  llK::onoiTs  ii.  s:.,  8G,  on  the  Iv.rvpihm  iiioun--
ing  usage-,  and  ii  ing  of  the  dead.— ^/i/.

T.//I.:  The  bodies  of  the  dead  are  rightly  honored,
when  th'-y  are  buried  i:;  th,e  carih,  wiih  the  common
usages,  when  they  an>  not  superstitions;  but  they
arc  iMt  to  be  exposed  for  spiritual  icvereiiee,  or  car
ried  about  for  that  purpose,  or  have  ascribed  to  them
any  miracle-working  power.  Though  we  may  weep
''  r  the  dead,  it  mu.-t  not  be  with  u  •  as  i:  is  \\'iih  the
heath;-.),  wh.o  have  no  hone. — C.\!.WK:I  J/,u/, /')/',•//  .-
Egypt  swarmed  with  pi  !  cause  there  was

'•ially  for  each  disease.

&<-ond  Section.  (Vers.  7-1 H.)  PTARKK  :  Th;:s
was  th-.-re  almost  royal  hoTi-ir  done  to  Jacob  in  hi--

for  1:1  i  dead  !!  \;  ti  in   Icing
rn  for  Fevcnty-two  days. — SciinonKK:  l';i  tin

xlvi.  --1  :  J;-.-

col)  was  literally  brought  back  from  Kgypt  to  Ca
naan  ;  sine  •  for  his  b<  ly  did  (3  !  |  n  pare  this  pro-
phetie  journey.

(Vers.  14-21.)  STAHKK:  Attend
ance  rj..  n  t!i,-  dead  to  ti  ir  place  of  rc.-'i  is  a  Chris
tian  act.— Ver.  In.  Tit-  ••  Kent  ,/  ,  ••••  nyer,  i

It  was  probably  Benjamin  wl  cnt. li.\u.:

'I'"  one  who  m  ai.s  good,  tin-re  can  hi-  nothing  more

icion. — Tin:  SAMK  :  The  tie  of  n-

ch  stiicter    than    that    of  nature.—  Ver.

!!('.    LANT.E:  Ti:e  history  of  Joseph  and  his  brethren

an  (  sample  of  the  wonderful   providence   of  God.

./;,'/,/.   T,  !>.:  The  wic'd-d  plot  :  r-w\\  ngair.st

the  pious,  Cod  turns  to  i',.  ir  best

GKRLACII  :  The  reve'at'o::  of  the  mo4  wonder
fully  glorious  decree  of  God's  1  vc  and  alnii:;htv
power,  which  man  (aniiot  fur-trite,  yen,  even' t!:"'
transformation  of  evil  into  blessing  and  salvation  —
this  appears  to  have  been  fulfilled  throughout  tin-
entire  lii'.-  of.Io.-eph.  His  feeling,  so  gn  atlyremovi  •(
from  the  revenge  wliich  his  brothers  still  thought
him  capable  of,  goes  far  beyond  them,  lie  speak:
to  their  In-ait.  Jlis  words  drop  like  h;:bn  upon  a
wound.  It  is  a  beautiful  pieio;':ll  evprcssion  which
elsewhere  occurs. — With  an  act  of  faith  of  the  dying
Jacob,  connecting  the  first  book  of  Moses  with  the
second,  this  history  closes,  and  thereby  points  to  the
fulfilling  of  the  promise  that  now  follows.— SCHRO
DER:  -As  we  have  one  father,  they  would  say,  so  have
we  one  God,  our  lather's  God  ;  forgive  us,  therefore,
for  God's  sake,  the  God  of  our  father.  They  make
mention  of  servitude  as  their  deserved  punishment,
\\itli  reference  to  their  evil  deed  to  Joseph  (Baum-
garten).

Fo-nrth  Section.  (Vers.  22-20.)  FTAKKE  :  It  is
not  probable  that,  at  that  time,  the  brothers  were  all
living.  [In  that  case  the  meaning  would  have  refer
ence  to  the  heads  of  families. — To  the  wood  out  of
which  the  coffins  of  the  dead  were  made,  there  seems
to  have  been  ascribed  the  property  of  being  incor
ruptible  ? — Comparison  of  Joseph  with  Christ  in  a


CHAP.  L.    1-2G.


G65


pcries  of  resemblances.] — God  does  not  suffer  fidelity
to  parents,  or  love  and  kindly  deeds  to  one's  own
people,  to  go  unrewarded. — Bibl.  Wirt. :  God  is  wont,
sometimes,  even  in  this  life,  to  recompense  to  believ
ers  their  cross  and  misery.  That  is  the  best  thought
of  death,  to  remember  the  promise  of  God  and  his
gracious  redemption. — SCHRODER  :  It  all  ends  with
the  coffin,  the  mourning  for  the  dead,  the  funeral
procession,  and  the  glance  into  the  future  life.  The
age  of  promise  is  over;  there  follows  now  a  silent
chasm  of  four  hundred  years,  until  out  of  the  rushes
of  the  Nile  there  is  lifted  up  a  weeping  infant  in  a


little  reed-formed  ark.  The  age  of  law  begins,
which  endures  for  fifteen  hundred  years.  Then  in
Bcthlehcm-Ephratali  is  there  born  another  infant,
and  with  him  begins  the  happy  time,  the  day  of  light,
and  quickening  grace  (Krummacher).  —  CALWKU
Handbuch :  His  place  as  prime  minister  of  Egypt
had  not  extinguished  Joseph's  faith  in  the  divine
promise.  He  shared  in  the  faith ;  he  is  to  be  a  co
heir,  a  sharer  in  the  inheritance. — Lisco  :  And  so
speaks  Joseph  yet,  through  faith,  unto  his  people,
though  he  has  long  been  dead,  and  in  his  grave. —
HEJM  :  Joseph  closed  his  life  with  an  act  of  faith.


THE    END,


Standard  Religious  and  Theological  Works.


ic   ©Hurch.


C


CHAFF.  —  HISTORY    OF   THE    APOSTOLIC    CHURCH,

with  a  General  Introduction  to  Church  History.  By  PHILIP
SCHAFF,  D.D.  Translated  by  Edward  U.  Yeomans.  One  volume,
Svo,  cloth.  Price,  ........  $3  75

In  the  Introduction,  which  fills  134  pages,  the  learned  author  gives  the
outline  of  a  philosophy  of  Church  History  somewhat  novel,  but  which
commends  itself  to  the  enlightened  judgment.  A  thorough  German  in  his
devotion  to  study  and  in  the  patience  and  thoroughness  of  his  investiga
tions,  and  at  the  same  time  an  American  in  spirit  and  principle,  and  rooted
and  grounded  in  the  truth,  Dr.  Schaff  possesses  peculiar  qualifications  for
the  important  work  here  undertaken  ;  and  this  introductory  volume,  em
bracing  the  history  of  the  Apostolical  Church,  is  all  that  could  be  expected
of  such  a  man,  —  learned,  independent,  scientific,  exhaustive,  full  of  vigor
ous  thought,  and  a  model  of  historical  arrangement  and  style,  showing
him  to  be  master  of  the  subject.  No  work  certainly  in  the  English  lan
guage  can  compare  with  it  for  comprehensiveness,  learning,  and  literary
ability,  and  no  student  of  Church  History  can  afford  to  be  without  it.

CRITICAL  NOTICES.

"  This  is  the  first  learned  theological  work,  in  Germany,  composed  in  the  United  States,
and  undoubtedly  the  best  published  on  that  subject  in  that  country.  I  hail  the  work  in  both
respects  as  the  harbinger  of  a  great  and  glorious  future.  It  is  worthy  of  a  German  scholar,
of  a  disciple  of  Neander  (to  whom  the  work  is  dedicated),  a  citizen  of  the  United  States,  and
of  a  believing  and  free  Christian  and  Protestant  ;  it  stands  on  German  ground,  but  it  is
none  the  less  original  for  that."—  Dr.  BUNSEN'S  Hyppolytus.

"  This  book  is  one  of  the  best  compendiums  extant  of  Church  History.  Its  spirit  is
thoroughly  Christian,  its  arrangement  clear,  its  style  lively  and  attractive,  and  it  contains
notices  of  the  most  recent  German  and  other  opinions  on  every  question  as  it  rises."—
Edinburgh  Review,  for  January  1853.  (By  Dr.  A  LFORD,  the  Commentator.}

"  This  book  is  eminently  scholarlike  and  learned,  full  of  matter,  not  of  crude  materials,
crammed  together  for  the  nonce  by  labor-saving  tricks,  but  of  various  and  well-digested
knowledge,  the  result  of  systematic  training  and  long-continued  study."—  Princeton  Re
view.  (By  the  late  JOS.  A  DDISON  A  LEXA  NDER,  D.D.)

^  "  On  the  topic  of  which  it  treats,  it  is  beyond  all  question  the  most  valuable  work  in  tho
English  language.  I  am  far  from  acquiescing  in  every  view  and  statement  which  it
confabs,  but  it  is  a  book  of  the  first  order  for  scholarship,  good  taste,  and  Christian
feeling."—  Prof.  C.  E.  STOWE,  Andover,  Mass.

"  No  work  in  the  English  language,  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  covering  the  same  pe
riod,  can  be  compared  with  it  for  learning,  freshness,  and  comprehensiveness."—  Rev.
HENRY  B.  SMITH,  D.D.,  Union  Theological  Seminary,  Ne-jj  York.

"  We  regard  it  as  a  most  valuable  contribution  to  our  ecclesiastical  literature.  It  is  evi
dently  the  result  of  much  careful  study,  and  the  fruit  of  extensive  learning  ;  and  indicates  a
mind  peculiarly  fitted  for  historical  labors."—  New  York  Observer.

"  This  work  bears  upon  it  the  marks  of  true  learning,  and  independent,  vigorous  thought,
from  the  first  page  to  the  last.  It  is  a  model  of  historical  order  and  clearness."—  Biblio-
thfca  Sacra.


921012


Standard  Religious  and  Theological  Works.

(Shrisiicm    ©hurch.

C^CHAFF. — Vol.    I. — HISTORY    OF    THE     CHRISTIAN

CHURCH.     By  PHILIP   SCIIAFF,    D.D.     From   the   Birth   of

Christ  to  the  Reign  of  Constantine,  A.D.  1-311.     Svo.    .     .     $3  75

— Vols.  II.  and  III. — From  Constantine  the  Great  to  Gregory  the

Great,  A.D.  311-600.     Svo,  cloth.     Price  per  volume,      .     .     $375

These  three  volumes  complete  the  author's  history  of  Ancient  Chris
tianity,  bringing  it  down  to  the  close  of  the  sixth  century.  Thus  far  the  work
is  incomparably  the  best  compend  on  the  general  history  of  the  Christian
Church  that  has  been  given  to  the  public,  especially  for  the  use  of  the
American  student,  not  excepting  Neandcr,  Gieseler,  Kurtz,  and  other  ex
cellent  histories.  The  "  style  is  easy  and  flowing,  offering  unusual  attrac
tions  to  the  general  reader,  though  now  and  then  exhibiting  some  piquant
traces  of  his  native  German  idiom  ;  events  arc  well  grouped,  and  the  nar
rative  is  animated."  In  some  respects  it  is  a  decided  advance  upon  other
manuals.  It  is  more  comprehensive  ;  all  subjects  that  properly  belong  to
a  complete  sketch  are  treated,  including  the  history  of  Christian  art,  hym-
nology,  accounts  of  the  lives  and  chief  works  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church,
etc.  The  literature  of  the  subject  is  carefully  collated,  embracing  the
English  and  American,  which  no  Grrman  history  does.  The  great  theo
logical,  christological,  and  anthropological  contiovcrsics  of  the  period  are
duly  sketched  ;  and  in  all  the  details  of  history  the  organizing  hand  of  a
master  is  distinctly  seen,  shaping  the  mass  of  materials  into  order  and
system.  If  the  author  lives  to  complete  it,  according  to  his  purpose,  it
will  fairly  distance  all  rival  works  in  the  English  tongue,  and  remain  as  an
enduring  monument  of  his  Christian  scholarship,  painstaking  labor,  and
ardent  piety.

CRITICAL  NOTICES.

"Dr.  SchafT  has  thoroughly  and  successfully  accomplished  his  task.  The  volumes  that
lie  before  us  are  replete  with  evidences  of  a  careful  study  of  the  original  sources  and  of  an
extraordinary,  and  \ve  might  say  unsurpassed,  acquaintance  with  the  modern  literature,
German,  French,  and  English— in  (he  department  of  ecclesiastical  history.  They  are
equally  marked  by  a  fair-minded,  conscientious  spirit,  as  well  as  by  a  lucid,  animated  mode
of  presentation."— AT.  Y.  Nation.  (By  Prof.  GEORGE  /'.  FISHER,  of  Yak-  College.)

"  This  new  volume  of  Church  History  is  a  very  handsome,  well-printed  book  of  535
pages,  furnished  with  that  indispensable  appendage,  a  good  index.  Dr.  SchafiF  has  written
a  perspicuous,  animated,  often  eloquent,  and  always  trustworthy  narrative.  This  is  high
praise  when  we  look  at  the  deficiencies  of  the  best  of  the  current  works  in  this  depart
ment." — AVif  Englandtr.

"  This  volume  seems  to  us  to  have  all  the  merits  of  the  author's  previous  publications,
which  are  too  well  known  to  need  description  here,  and  which  have  placed  him  in  the  first
rank  of  contemporary  writers  on  Church  History,  not  only  in  this  country,  but  in  Germany
and  England." — Princeton  Review.


BS  1235  ,L3  SMC

Lange,  Johann  Peter

Genesis

4719420L


ypCfow

mm

m-tfa
