




A LECTURE 


BY THE 

REV. J. C. RYLE, B.A 

Rector of Helmingham, Suffolk. 


DELIVERED BEFORE THE 


CHURCH OF ENGLAND YOUNG MEN’S SOCIETY, 


IN FREEMASONS’ HALL, 


JANUARY 26 , 1852 , 


THE HON. ARTHUR KINNAIRD, 


IN THE CHAIR. 


FLEET STREET, and HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE 

MDCCCL1I. 


LECTU RES FO R 1852. 

Genesis and Geology. 

Rev. JOHN CUMMING, D.D. 

George Whitefield. 

Rev. J. C. RYLE, B.A. 

The Triumph and Corruption of Christianity in the 
Reign of Theodosius the Great. 

Rev. W. W. EWBANK. M.A. 


Upalru illmnrtal library 




(Eljursfiplfc (EnUertum 


fflfBtegatta 


iffT 


Atlanta, 


(Srnryta 


gp ^“ n * wt, > | Axvnvrury oca rcitiTi.es, 

A. O. CHARLES, J City of London Auxiliary . 

January 1852. 

*** The Office of the Society in London , is present at 
No. 10, St. Bride's Passage , Fleet Street . # 





GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


There are some men in the pages of history, whose 
greatness no person of common sense thinks of dis- 
puting. They tower above the herd of mankind, like 
the Pyramids, the Parthenon, and the Colosseum, 
among buildings. Such men were Luther and Au- 
gustine, Gustavus Adolphus and George Washington, 
Columbus and Sir Isaac Newton. He who questions 
their greatness, must be content to be thought very 
ignorant, very prejudiced, or very eccentric. Public 
opinion has come to a conclusion about them — they 
were great men. 

But there are also great men whose reputation lies 
buried under a heap of cotemporary ill-will and mis- 
representation. The world does not appreciate them, 
because the world does not know their real worth. 
Their characters have come down to us through poi- 
soned channels. Their portraits have been drawn by 
the ill-natured hand of enemies. Their faults have 
been exaggerated. Their excellences have been ma- 
liciously kept back and suppressed. Like the famous 
sculptures of Nineveh, they need the hand of some 
literary Layard to clear away the rubbish that has 
accumulated round their names, and show them to the 
world in their fair proportions. Such men were Vigi- 
lantius and WicklifFe. Such men were Oliver Crom- 
33 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


well and many of the Puritans. And such a man was 
George Whitefield, about whom T have come here to 
speak to-night. 

There are few men whose characters have suffered 
so much from ignorance and misrepresentation of the 
truth, as Whitefield’s. 

That he was a famous Methodist, and ally of John 
Wesley, in the last century : that he was much run r 
after by ignorant people for his preaching; that many 
thought him an enthusiast and fanatic, — all this is 
about as much as most Englishmen know. 

But that he was one of the principal champions of 
evangelical religion in the eighteenth century in our 
own country ; that he was one of the most powerful 
and effective preachers that ever lived ; that he was a 
man of extraordinary singleness of eye and devoted- 
ness to the interests of true religion; that he was a 


regularly ordained clergyman of the Church of Eng- 
land, and would always have worked in the Church, 
if the Church had not most unwisely shut him out; — 
all these are things of which few people seem aware. 
And yet, after calm examination of his life and writ- 
ings, I am satisfied this is the true account that ought 
to be given of George Whitefield. 

My chief desire, to-night, is to assist young men in 
forming a just estimate of Whitefield’s worth. I wish 
to lend a helping hand towards raising his name from 
the undeservedly low place which is commonly as- 
signed to it. I wish to place him before your eyes as 
a noble specimen of what the grace of God can enable 
one man to do. I want you to treasure up his name 
in your memories, as one of the brightest in that com- 
pany of departed saints, who were in their day patterns 


A 


Si 







« 


GEORGE WHITE FI ELD. 


of good works, and of whom the world was not 
worthy. 

I propose, therefore, without further preface, to 
give you a hasty sketch of Whitefield’s times , White- 
field’s life , Whitefield’s religion , Whitefield’s preaching , 
and Whitefield’s actual tcork on earth . 

1. The story of Whitefield’s times is one that 
should always be told on occasions like the present. 
Without it nobody is qualified to form an opinion 
either as to the man or his acts. Conduct that in one 
kind of times may seem rash, extravagant, and indis- 
creet, in another may be wise, prudent, and even 
absolutely necessary. In forming your opinion of the 
comparative merits of Christian men, never forget the 
old rule, 46 Distinguish between times.” Place your- 
self in each man’s position. Do not judge what was 
a right course of action in other times, by what seems 
a right course of action in your own. 

Now the times when Whitefield lived were unques- 
tionably the worst times that have ever been known 
in this country, since the Protestant Reformation. 
There never was a greater mistake, than to talk of 
64 the good old times.” The times of the 18th century, 
at any rate, were “bad old times,” unmistakeably. 
Whitefield was born in 1714. He died in 1770. It is 
not saying too much to assert, that this was precisely the 
darkest age that England has passed through in the 
last three hundred years. Anything more deplorable 
than the condition of the country as to religion, mo- 
rality, and high principle, from 1700 to about the era 
of the French Revolution, it is very difficult to con- 
ceive. 


C’* > ** a 


( 




GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

The state of religion in the Established Church 
can only be compared to that of a frozen or palsied 
carcass. There were the time-honoured formularies, 
which the wisdom of the Reformers had provided. 
There were the services and lessons from Scripture, 
just in the same order as we have them now. But as 
to preaching the Gospel in the Established Church, 
there was almost none. The distinguishing doctrines 
of Christianity — the atonement — the work and office of 
Christ and the Spirit — were comparatively lost sight of. 
The vast majority of sermons were miserable moral 
essays, utterly devoid of anything calculated to awaken, 
convert, save, or sanctify souls. The curse of black 
Bartholomew- day seemed to rest upon our Church. 
For at least a century after casting out two thousand 
of the best ministers in England, our Establishment 
never prospered. 

There were some learned and conscientious bishops 
at this era, beyond question. Such men were Seeker 
and Gibson, and Lowth, and Warburton, and Butler, 
and Horne. But even the best of them sadly mis- 
understood the requirements of the day they lived in. 
They spent their strength in writing apologies for 
Christianity, and contending against infidels. They 
could not see that without the direct preaching of the 
essential doctrines of Christ’s Gospel, their labours 
were all in vain. And as to the majority of the 
bishops, they were potent for negative evil, but im- 
potent for positive good — giants at stopping what 
they thought disorder, but infants at devising any- 
thing to promote real order — mighty to repress over- 
zealous attempts at evangelization, but weak to put 
in action any remedy for the evils of the age — eagle- 
36 


V - f w- w r 




GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


eyed at detecting any unhappy wight who trod on the 
toes of a Rubric or Canon, but blind as bats to 
the flood of indolence and false doctrine with which 
their dioceses were everywhere deluged. 

That there were many well-read, respectable, and 
honourable men among the parochial clergy at this 
period, it would be wrong to deny. But few, it is to 
be feared, out of the whole number, preached Christ 
crucified in simplicity and sincerity. Many, whose 
lives were decent and moral, were notoriously Arians, 
if not Socinians. Many were totally engrossed in 
secular pursuits ; they neither did good themselves, 
nor liked any one else to do it for them. They 
hunted ; they shot ; they drank ; they swore ; they 
fiddled; they farmed; they toasted Church and King, 
and thought little or nothing about saving souls. And 
as for the man who dared to preach the doctrine of the 
Bible, the Articles, and the Homilies, he was sure to 
be set down as an enthusiast and fanatic. 

The state of religion among the Dissenters was 
only a few degrees better than the state of the Church. 
The toleration which they enjoyed from William the 
Third’s time, was certainly productive of a very bad 
spiritual effect on them as a body. As soon as they 
ceased to be persecuted, they appear to have gone to 
sleep. The Baptist and Independent could still point to 
Gill, and Guyse, and Doddridge, and Watts, and a few 
more like-minded men. But the English Presbyterians 
were fast lapsing into Socinianism. And as to the 
great majority of Nonconformists, it is vain to deny 
that they were very different men from Baxter and 
Flavel, and Gurnall and Traill. A generation of 
preachers arose who were very orthodox, but painfully 
37 




r 

GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


cold — very conscientious, but very wanting in spiritu- 
ality — very constant in their objections to the Esta- 
blished Church, but very careless about spreading vital 
Christianity. 

Gentlemen, I deeply feel the difficulty of conveying 
to your minds a correct impression of the times when 
Whitefield lived. I dislike overstatement as much as 
any one, but I am thoroughly persuaded it is not 
easy to make an overstatement on this branch of my 
subject. 

These were the times when the highest personages 
in the realm lived openly in ways which were flatly 
contrary to the law of God, and no man rebuked them. 
No courts, I suppose, can be imagined more diametri- 
cally unlike than the courts of George I. and George 
II., and the court of Queen Victoria. 

These were the times when profligacy and irreligion 
were reputable and respectable things. Judging from 
the description we have of men and manners in those 
days, a gentleman might have been defined as a creature 
who got drunk, gambled, swore, fought duels, and 
broke the seventh commandment incessantly. And, 
for all this, no one thought the worse of him. 

These were the days when the men whom kings 
delighted to honour were Bolingbroke, Chesterfield, 
Walpole, and Newcastle. To be an infidel or a sceptic 
— to obtain power by intrigue, and to retain power by 
the grossest and most notorious bribery — were consi- 
dered no disqualifications at this era. Such was the 
utter want of religion, morality, and high principle in 
the land, that men such as these were not only tole- 
rated, but praised. 

These were the days when Hume the historian put 

38 




GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

forth his work, became famous, and got a pension. 
He was notoriously an infidel. These were the days 
when Sterne and Swift wrote their clever, but most 
indecent, productions. Both were clergymen, and high 
in the Church, but the public saw no harm. These 
were the days when Fielding and Smollett were 
the popular authors, and the literary taste of high 
and low was suited by Roderick Random, Peregrine 
Pickle, Joseph Andrews, and Tom Jones. 

These were the days when Knox says, in his history 
of Christian Philosophy — “ Some of the most learned 
men — the most voluminous writers on theological sub- 
jects — were totally ignorant of Christianity . They 

were ingenious heathen philosophers, assuming the name 
of Christians, and forcibly paganizing Christianity for 
the sake of pleasing the world.” These were the days 
when Archbishop Drummond (1760) could talk of 
“ intricate and senseless questions about the influence 
of the Spirit, the power of grace, predestination, im- 
puted righteousness, justification without works, and 
other opinions which have from the beginning perplexed 
and perverted, debased, defiled, and wounded Christi- 
anity.” These were the days when Bishop Warburton 
considered the teaching office of the Holy Ghost to be 
completed in the Holy Scriptures, and that his sancti- 
fying and comforting offices are chiefly confined to 
charity. Such were the leading ministers. What must 
the mass of teachers have been ? Such were the priests 
of Whitefield’s time ! What must have been the 
people ? 

These were the days when there was an utter dearth 
of sound theological writing. The doctrines of the 
Reformers were trampled under foot by men who sat 
39 







1 * 1 I »' 





•mm 


* 

GEORGE WHITEFIEED. 

in their chairs. The bread ot the Church was eaten 
by men who flatly contradicted her Articles. The 
appetite of religious people was satisfied with “ Tillot- 
son’s Sermons,” and the 66 Whole Duty of Man.” A 
pension of £200 a-year was actually given to Blair, of 
Edinburgh, for writing his most unchristian sermons. 

Ask any theological bookseller, and he will tell you 
that, generally speaking, no divinity is so worthless as v 
that of the eighteenth century. 

In fine, these were the days when there was no 
Society for promoting the increase of true religion, but 
the Christian Knowledge Society, and the Society for 
the Propagation of the Gospel. And even their work 
was comparatively trifling. Nothing was done for the 
Jew. Nothing was done for the heathen. Nothing, 
almost, was done for the colonies. Nothing was done 
for the destitute parts of our own country. Nothing ' 
was done for education. The Church slept. The Dis- 
senters slept. The pulpit slept. The religious press slept. 

The gates were left wide open. The walls were left un- 
guarded. Infidelity stalked in. The devil sowed tares 
broad-cast, and walked to and fro. The gentry gloried 
in their shame, and no man pointed out their wicked- 
ness. The. people sinned with a high hand, and no 
man taught them better. Ignorance, profligacy, irre- i 

ligion, and superstition, were to be seen everywhere. 

Such were the times when Whitefield was raised up. 

I know that this is a dreadful picture. I marvel 
God did not sweep away the Church altogether. But 
I believe that the picture is not one whit too highly 
coloured. It is painful to expose such a state of things. 

But for Whitefield’s sake the truth ought to be known. 

Justice has not been done to him, because the condi- 
40 






GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

tion of the times he lived in is not considered. The 
times he lived in were extraordinary times, and re- 
quired extraordinary means to be used. And whatever 
quiet men, sitting by their fireside in 1852, may say 
to the contrary, I am satisfied that Whitefield was 
just the man for his times. 

2. The story of Whitefield’s life, which forms the 
next part of this evening’s subject, is one that is soon 
told. The facts and incidents of that life are few and 
simple, and I shall not dwell upon them at any 
length. 

Whitefield was born in 1714. Like many other 
great men, he was of very humble origin. His father 
and mother kept the Bell Inn, in the city of Gloucester. 
Whether there is such an inn now I do not know. 
But, judging from Whitefield’s account of his circum- 
stances, it must formerly have been a very small 
concern. 

Whitefield’s early life se'ems to have been anything 
but religious, though he had occasional fits of devout 
feeling. He speaks of himself as having been addicted 
to lying, filthy talking, and foolish jesting. He con- 
fesses that he was a Sabbath-breaker, a theatre-goer, 
a card-player, and a romance-reader. All this went 
on till he was twelve or fifteen years old. 

At the age of twelve he was placed at a grammar 
school in Gloucester. Little is known of his progress 
there, excepting the carious fact that, even then, he 
was remarkable for his good elocution and memory, 
and was selected to make speeches before the corpora- 
tion at their annual visitations. 

At the age of fifteen he appears to have become 
41 



GEORGE WHITEF1ELD. 


tired of Latin and Greek, and to have given up all 
hopes of ever becoming more than a tradesman. He 
ceased to take lessons in anything but writing. He 
began to assist his mother in the public-house that she 
kept. At length, he says, “ I put on my blue apron, 
washed mops, cleaned rooms, and, in one word, be- 
came a professed common drawer for nigh a year and 
a half/’ 

But God, who ordereth all things in heaven and 
earth, and called David from keeping sheep to be a 
king, had provided some better thing for Whitefield 
than the office of a pot-boy. Family disagreements 
interfered with his prospects at the Bell Inn. An old 
schoolfellow stirred up again within him the desire of 
going to the University. And at length, after several 
providential circumstances had smoothed the way, he 
was launched, at the age of eighteen, at Oxford, in 
a position at that time much more humbling than it is 
now, as a servitor at Pembroke College. 

Whitefield’s Oxford career seems to have been the 
turning-point in his life. According to his own journal, 
he had not been without religious convictions for two or 
three years before he went to Oxford. From the time of 
his entering Pembroke College, these convictions rapidly 
ripened into decided Christianity. He became marked 
for his attendance on all means of grace within his 
reach. He spent his leisure time in visiting the city 
prisons and doing good. He formed an acquaintance 
with the famous John Wesley and his brother Charles, 
which gave a colour to the whole of his subsequent 
life. At one time he seems to have had a narrow 
escape of becoming a semi-papist, an ascetic, or a 
mystic. From this he seems to have been delivered, 
42 




GEORGE VVHITEFIELD. 


partly by the advice of wiser and more experienced 
Christians, and partly by reading such books as 
Scougal’s 6< Life of God in the Soul of Man,” Law’s 
“ Serious Call,” Baxter’s “ Call to the Unconverted,” 
and Alleine’s “ Alarm to Unconverted Sinners.” At 
length, in 1736, at the early age of twenty-two, he 
was ordained deacon by Bishop Benson of Glouces- 
^ ter, and began to run that ministerial race in which 

he never drew breath till he was laid in the grave. 

His first sermon was preached in St. Mary-le-Crypt, 
Gloucester. It was said to have driven fifteen persons 
mad. Bishop Benson remarked, that he only hoped 
the madness might continue. He next accepted tem- 
porary duty at the Tower Chapel, London. While 
engaged there, he preached continually in many of the 
London churches, and among others, in the parish 
churches of Islington, Bishopsgate, St. Dunstan’s, St. 
Margaret, Westminster, and Bow, Cheapside. From 
the very beginning he attained a degree of popularity 
such as no preacher, probably, before or since, has 
ever reached. To say that the churches were crowded 
when he preached, would be saying little. They were 
literally crammed to suffocation. An eye-witness said, 
“ You might have walked on the people’s heads.” 

* From London he removed for a few months to 

Dummer, a little rural parish in Hampshire, near 
Basingstoke. From Dummer he sailed for the colony 
of Georgia, in North America, after visiting Gloucester 
and Bristol, and preaching in crowded churches in 
each place. The object of his voyage was to assist the 
Wesleys in the care of an Orphan House, which they 
had established in Georgia, for the children of colonists 
who died there. The management of this Orphan 
43 


I 





i 









GEORGE WHITEFIELD- 


House ultimately devolved entirely on Whitefield, and 
entailed on him a world of responsibility and anxiety 
all his life long. Though well meant, it seems to have 
been a design of very questionable wisdom. 

Whitefield returned from Georgia after about two 
years’ absence, partly to obtain priest’s orders, which 
were conferred on him by Bishop Benson, and partly 
on business connected with the Orphan House. And 
now we reach the era in his life when he was obliged, 
by circumstances, to take up a line of conduct as a 
minister, which he probably at one time never contem- 
plated, but which was made absolutely necessary by 
the treatment he received. 

It appears that, on arriving in London after his 
first visit to Georgia, he found the countenances of 
many of the clergy no longer towards him as they were 
before. They had taken fright at some expressions in 
his published letters, and some reports of his conduct 
in America. They were scandalized at his preaching 
the doctrine of regeneration in the way that he did, 
as a thing which many of their parishioners needed. 
The pulpits of many churches were flatly refused to 
him. Churchwardens, who had no eyes for heresy and 
drunkenness, were filled with virtuous indignation 
about what they called breaches of order. Bishops 
who could tolerate Arianism and Socinianism, got 
into a state of excitement about a man who simply 
preached the Gospel, and put forth warnings against 
fanaticism and enthusiasm. In short, Whitefield’s 
field of usefulnsss within the Church was rapidly nar- 
rowed on every side. 

The step which seems to have decided Whitefield’s 
course of action at this period of his life, was his 
44 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


adoption of open-air preaching. He had gone to 
Islington, on a Sunday in April, 1739, to preach for 
the vicar, his friend, Mr. Stonehouse. In the midst of 
the prayers, the churchwarden came to him, and 
demanded his license for preaching in the London 
diocese. This Whitefield, of course, had not got any 
more than any clergyman not regularly * officiating 
* in the diocese has at this day. The upshot of the 
matter was, that being forbidden to preach in the 
pulpit, he went outside, after the service, and preached 
in the churchyard. From that day, he regularly took 
up the practice of open-air preaching. Wherever 
there were large open fields around London, wherever 
there were large bands of idle, church-despising, Sab- 
bath-breaking people gathered together — there went 
Whitefield and lifted up his voice. The Gospel so 
proclaimed was listened to, and greedily received 
by hundreds, who had never dreamed of visiting a 
place of worship. In Moor Fields, in Hackney Fields, 
in Mary-le-bone Fields, in May Fair, in Smithfield, 
on Kennington Common, on Blackheath, Sunday after 
Sunday, Whitefield preached to admiring masses. Ten 
thousand, fifteen thousand, twenty thousand, thirty 
thousand, were computed sometimes to have heard 
him at once. The cause of pure religion, beyond 
doubt, was advanced. Souls were plucked from the 
hand of Satan, as brands from the burning. But it 
was going much too fast for the church of those 
days. The clergy, with very few exceptions, would 
have nothing to do with this strange preacher. In 
short, the ministrations of Whitefield in the pulpits 
of the Establishment, with an occasional exception, 
from this time ceased. He loved the Church. He 
45 


■ 


m 


- 




GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


gloried in her Articles and Formularies. He used 
her Prayer-book with delight. But the Church did 
not love him, and so lost the use of his services. 

The plain truth is, the Church of England of that day 
was not ready for a man like Whitefield. The Church 
was too much asleep to understand him. 

From this date to the day of his death, a period 
of thirty-one years, Whitefield’s life was one uniform 
employment. From Sunday morning to Saturday 
n ight — from the 1st of January to the 31st of 
December — excepting when laid aside by illness, he 
was almost incessantly preaching. There was hardly 
a considerable town in England, Scotland, and Wales, 
that he did not visit. When churches were opened 
to him, he gladly preached in churches. When 
chapels only were offered, he cheerfully preached in , 
chapels. When church and chapel alike were closed, 
he was ready and willing to preach in the open air. 

For thirty-four years he laboured in this way, always 
proclaiming the same glorious Gospel, and always, as 
far as a man’s eye can judge, with immense effect. 

In one single Whitsuntide week, after he had been 
preaching in Moorfields, he received one thousand 
letters from people, under spiritual concern, and 
admitted to the Lord’s table three hundred and fifty 
persons. In the thirty-four years of his ministry, 
it is reckoned that he preached publicly eighteen 
thousand times. 

His journeyings were prodigious, when the roads 
and conveyances of his times are considered. Four- 
teen times did he visit Scotland. Seven times did 
he cross the Atlantic, backward and forward. Twice 
he went over to Ireland. As to England and Wales, 

46 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


he traversed every county in them, from the Isle 
of Wight to Berwick-on-Tweed, and from the Land’s 
End to the North Foreland. 

His regular ministerial work in London, when he 
was not journeying, was prodigious. His weekly 
engagements at the Tabernacle in Tottenham-court 
Road, which was built for him when the pulpits of 
the Established Church were closed, were as follows — 
Every Sunday morning he administered the Lord’s 
Supper to several hundred communicants, at half-past 
six. After this he read prayers, and preached, both 
morning and afternoon — preached again in the even- 
ing at half-past five — and concluded by addressing a 
large society of widows, married people, young men, 
and spinsters, all sitting separately in the area of 
the Tabernacle, with exhortations suitable to their 
respective stations. On Monday, Tuesday, Wednes- 
day, and Thursday mornings, he preached regularly 
at six. On Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, 
and Saturday evenings, he delivered lectures. This 
you will observe made thirteen sermons a-week. 
And all this time he was carrying on a correspond- 
ence with people in almost every part of the world. 

That any human frame could so long endure the 
labour he went through, does indeed seem wonderful. 
That his life was not shortened by violence, is no 
less wonderful. Once he was nearly stoned to death 
by a popish mob in Dublin. Once he was nearly 
murdered in bed by an angry lieutenant of the navy 
at Plymouth. Once he narrowly escaped being 
stabbed by the sword of a rakish young gentleman 
in Moorfields ; but he was immortal till his work was 
done. He died at last at Newbury Port, in North 


GEORGE "WHITEFIELD. 


America, from a fit of asthma, at the age of fifty-six. 
His last sermon was preached only twenty-four hours 
before his death. It was an open-air discourse two 
hours long. Like Bishop Jewell, he almost died preach- 
ing. He left no children. He was once married, and 
the marriage does not seem to have contributed much 
to his happiness. Bat he left a name far better than 
that of sons and daughters. Never I believe was there 
a man, of whom it could be so truly said, that he 
spent and was spent for God. 

3. The story of Whitefield' s religion is the next 
part of the subject that I proposed to take up, and 
unquestionably it is one of no little interest. 

What sort of doctrine did this wonderful man 
preach ? an inquirer may reasonably ask. What 
were the standards of faith to which he adhered under 
the Bible ? What were the peculiar .essentials of this 
religious teaching of his which was so universally 
spoken against in his day ? 

The answer to all these questions is short and 
simple. Whitefield was a real, genuine son of the 
Church of England. As such he was brought up in 
early youth. As such he was educated at Oxford. As 
such he preached as long as he was allowed to preach 
within the Establishment. As such he preached when 
he was outside. References to the Prayer-book, Arti- 
cles, and Homilies, abound in all his writings and 
sermons. His constant reply to his numerous oppo- 
nents was that he at any rate was consistent with the 
Formularies of his own church, and that they were 
not. It is not at all too much to say, that when 
practically cast out of the Establishment, Whitefield 
43 


II 


V 


V. 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

was an infinitely better churchman than ten thousand 
of the men who received the tithes of the Church of 
England, and remained comfortably behind. 

Whitefield no doubt was not a churchman of the 
stamp of Archbishop Laud and his school. He w r as not 
the man to put a Romish interpretation on our excel- 
lent Formularies, and to place Church and Sacraments 
before Christ. He was not a churchman of the stamp 
of Tillotson and the school that followed him. He 
did not lay aside justification by faith, and the need of 
grace, for semi-heathen disquisitions about morality and 
duty, virtue and vice. And he was quite right. Laud 
and his followers went infinitely beyond the doctrines 
of our Church. Tillotson and his school fell infinitely 
below. 

But if a churchman is a man who reads the Articles, 
and Liturgy, and Homilies, in the sense of the men who 
compiled them — if a churchman is a man who sym- 
pathizes with Cranmer, and Latimer, and Hooper, and 
Jewell — if a churchman is a man who honours doc- 
trines and ordinances in the order and proportion that 

the Thirtv-nine Articles honour them — if this be the 
•/ 

true definition of a churchman, then Whitefield was the 
highest style of churchman — as true a churchman as 
ever breathed. And as for Whitefield’s adversaries, they 
were little better than shams and impostors. They 
had place and power on their side, but they scarcely 
deserve to be called churchmen at all. 

Perhaps no better test of Whitefield’s religious 
opinions can be supplied, than the list of authors in 
divinity which he wrote out for the use of a college 
connected with his Orphan House in Georgia. Of 
churchmen, this list includes the names of Archbishop 
49 




i 





GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

Leighton, Bishop Hall, and Burkitt; of Puritans, Pool, 
Owen, and Bunyan ; of Dissenters, Matthew Henry 
and Doddridge ; of Scotch Presbyterians, Willison and 
Boston. All these are men whose praise is even now 
in all the churches. These, let us understand, were the 
kind of men with whom he was of one mind in 
doctrine. 

As to the substance of Whitefield’s theological 
teaching, the simplest account I can give of it is, that 
it was purely evangelical. There were four main things 
that he never lost sight of in his sermons. These 
four were — man’s complete ruin by sin, and consequent 
natural corruption of heart — man’s complete redemp- 
tion by Christ, and complete justification before God 
by faith in Christ — man’s need of regeneration by the 
Spirit, and entire renewal of heart and life — and man’s 
utter want of any title to be considered a living Chris- 
tian, unless he is dead to sin and lives a holy life. 

Whitefield had no notion of flattering men and 
speaking smooth things to them, merely because 
they were baptized and called Christians, and some- 
times came to church. He only looked at one pro- 
minent feature in the thousands he saw around him 
— and that was, the general character of their lives. 
He saw the lives of these multitudes were utterly con- 
tradictory to the Bible, and utterly at variance with 
the principles of the church to which they professed 
to belong. He waited for nothing more. He looked 
for no further evidence. He judged of trees by their 
fruits. He told these thousands at once that they 
were in danger of being lost for ever— that they were 
in the broad way that leads to destruction— that they 
were dead, and must be made alive again — that they 
50 


-- 


GEOKGE WHITEFIELD. 




were lost and must be found. He told them that if 
they loved life, they must immediately repent — they 
must become new creatures — they must be converted, 

V 

they must be born again . And I believe the apostles 
would have done just the same. 

But Whitefield was just as full and explicit in set- 
ting forth the way to heaven, as he was in setting 
forth the way to hell. When he saw that mens con- 
sciences were pricked and their fears aroused, he 
would open the treasure-house of Gospel mercy, and 
spread forth before a congregation its unsearchable 
stores. He would unfold to them the amazing love of 
God the Father to a fallen world — that love from 
which he gave his only-begotten Son, and on account 
of which, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for 
us. He would show them the amazing love of God 
the Son in taking our nature on him, and suffering for 
us, the just for the unjust. He would tell them of 
Jesus able to save to the uttermost all that would 
come to God by him — Jesus and his everlasting right- 
eousness, in which the vilest sinners might stand com- 
plete and perfect before the throne of God — Jesus and 
the blood of sprinkling, which could wash the blackest 
sins away — Jesus, the High Priest, waiting to receive 
all who would come to him, and not only mighty, but 
ready to save. And all this glorious salvation, he 
would tell men, was close to them. It was not far 
above them like heaven. It was not deep beneath 
them like hell. It was near at hand. It was within 
their reach. He would urge them at once to accept it. 
The man that felt his sins and desired deliverance had 
only to believe and be saved, to ask and receive, to 
wash and be clean. And was he not right to say 
51 


& 



J 


GEORGE WHITEFIELO. 

so ? I believe the apostles would have said much the 
same. 

But while Whitefield addressed the careless and 
ungodly masses in this style, he never failed to urge 
on those who made a high profession of religion their 
responsibility, and to stir them up to walk worthy 
of their high calling. He never tolerated men who 
talked well about religion, but lived inconsistent lives. 
Such men, no doubt, there were about him, but it is 
pretty certain they got no quarter from him. On the 
contrary, one of his biographers tells us that he was 
especially careful to impress on all the members of 
his congregation, the absolute necessity of adorning 
the doctrine of God in all the relations of life. 
Masters and servants, rich people and poor, old and 
young, married and single, each and all were plainly 
exhorted to glorify God in their respective positions. 
One day he would tell the young men of his con- 
gregation to beware of being like one he heard of, 
whose uncle described him as such a jumble of re- 
ligion and business, that he was fit for neither. 
Another day he would hold up the example of a 
widow, remarkable for her confidence in God. Another 
day he would say to them, “ God convert you more 
and more every hour of the day ; God convert you 
from lying a-bed in the morning; God convert you 
from lukewarmness ; God convert you from conformity 
to the world.” Another day he w r ould warn young 
men against leaving their religion behind them as 
they rose in the world. “ Beware,’ ’ he would say, “ of 
being golden apprentices, silver journeymen, and cop- 
per masters.” In short, there never was a greater 
mistake than to suppose there was anything Antino- 
52 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

mian or licentious in Whitefield’s teaching. It was 
discriminating unquestionably. Sinners had their por- 
tion ; but saints had their portion too. And what 
was this but walking in the very steps of the apostle 
Paul ? 

The crowning excellence of Whitefield’s teaching 
was, that he just spoke of men, things, and doctrines, 
in the way that the Bible speaks of them, and the 
place that the Bible assigns to them. God, Christ, 
and the Spirit — sin, justification, conversion, and sanc- 
tification — impenitent sinners the most miserable of 
people — believing saints the most privileged of people 
— the world a vain and empty thing — heaven the only 
rest for an immortal soul — the devil a tremendous 
and ever-watchful foe — holiness the only true hap- 
piness — hell a real and certain portion for the uncon- 
verted ; these were the kind of subjects which filled 
Whitefield’s mind, and formed the staple of his mi- 
nistry. To say that he undervalued the sacraments 
would be simply false. His weekly communions at 
the Tabernacle are an answer that speaks for itself. 
But he never put the first things in Christianity second, 
and the second first. He never put doctrine below 
sacraments, and sacraments above doctrine. And w r ho 
shall dare to blame him for this ? He only followed 
the proportion of the Bible. 

It is only fair to add, that Whitefield exemplified 
in his practice the religion that he preached. He had 
faults, unquestionably. I have not come here to make 
him out a perfect being. He often erred in judgment. 
He was often hasty, both with his tongue and with 
his pen. He had no business to say that Archbishop 
Tillotson knew no more of religion than Mahomet. 


53 





GEORGE WHITE FI ELD. 


He was wrong to set down some people as the Lord’s 
enemies, and others as the Lord’s friends, so precipi- 
tately as he sometimes did. He was to blame for 
styling many of the clergy letter-learned Pharisees, 
because they could not receive the doctrine of the new 
birth. But still, after all this has been said, there can 
be no doubt that, in the main, he was a holy, self- 
denying, and consistent man. Even his worst enemies 
can say nothing to the contrary. 

He was, to the very end, a man of eminent self- 
denial. His style of living was most simple. He 
refused money when it was pressed upon him, and 
once to the amount of £7000. He amassed no fortune. 
He founded no wealthy family. The little money he 
left behind him at his death was entirely from the 
legacies of friends. 

He was a man of remarkable disinterestedness and 
singleness of eye. He seemed to live for only two 
objects — the glory of God and the salvation of im- 
mortal souls. He raised no party of followers who 
took his name. He established no system, like Wesley, 
of which his own writings should be cardinal elements. 
A frequent expression of his is most characteristic of 
the man ; “ Let the name of George Whitefield perish, 
so long as Christ only is exalted.” 

Last, but not least, he was a man of extraordinary 
catholicity and liberality in his religion. He knew 
nothing of that narrow-minded policy which prompts a 
man to fancy that everything must be barren outside 
his own camp, and that his party has got a monopoly 
of truth and heaven. He loved all who loved the 
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. He measured all by 
the measure which the angels of God use — “ did they 
54 


j 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

possess repentance towards God, faith towards the 
Lord Jesus Christ, holiness of conversation ? ” If they 
did, they were as his brethren. His soul was with such 
men, by whatever name they were called. Minor differ- 
ences were wood, hay, and stubble to him. The marks 
of the Lord Jesus were the only marks he cared for. 
This catholicity is the more remarkable, when the 
spirit of the times he lived in is considered. Even the 
Erskines, in Scotland, wanted him to preach for no other 
denomination but their own, viz., the Secession Church. 
He asked them, why only for them ; and received 
the notable answer, that they were the Lord’s people. 
This was more than Whitefield could stand. He asked 
if there were no other Lord's people but themselves. 
He told them, if all others were the devil’s people, they 
certainly had more need to be preached to. And he 
wound up by informing them, that if the Pope himself 
would lend him his pulpit, he would gladly proclaim 
the righteousness of Christ in it. To this catholicity of 
spirit he adhered all his days. And nothing could be 
a more weighty testimony against all narrowness of 
spirit among believers, than his request shortly before 
his death, that when he did die, John Wesley might 
be asked to preach his funeral sermon. Wesley and 
he had long ceased to see eye to eye on Calvinistic 
points. But as Calvin said of Luther, so Whitefield 
was resolved to think of Wesley. He was determined 
to sink minor differences, and to know him only as a 
good servant of Jesus Christ. 

Such was George Whitefield’s religion. Comment, 
I hope, is needless upon it. Time, at any rate, forbids 
me to dwell on it a moment longer. But surely I 
think I have shown enough to justify me in expressing 
55 





GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 







a wish that we had many living ministers in the 
Church of England like George Whitefield. 


4. The next part of this evening’s subject is one 
which I feel some difficulty in handling, — I allude to 
Whitefield' s preaching. 

I find that this point is one on which much difference 
of opinion prevails. I find many are disposed to think 
that part of Whitefield’s success is attributable to the 
novelty of Gospel doctrines at the time when he 
preached, and part to the extraordinary gifts of voice 
and delivery with which he was endowed, and that 
the matter and style of his sermons were in nowise 
remarkable. From this opinion I am inclined to 
dissent altogether. After calm examination, I have 
come to the conclusion that Whitefield was one of the 
most powerful and extraordinary preachers the world 
has ever seen. My belief is, that hitherto he has 
never been too highly estimated, and that, on the con- 
trary, he does not receive the credit he deserves. 

One thing is abundantly clear and beyond dispute, 
and that is, that his sermons were wonderfully effective. 
No preacher has ever succeeded in arresting the 
attention of such enormous crowds of people, as those 
he addressed continually in the neighbourhood of 
London. No preacher has ever been so universally 
popular in every country he visited, England, Scotland, 
and America, as he was. No preacher has ever 
retained his hold on his hearers so entirely as he did 
for thirty-four years. His popularity never waned. It 
was as great at the end of his days, as it was at the 
beginning. This of itself is a great fact. To com- 
mand the ear of people for thirty-four long years, and 
56 




1 


/ 




GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

be preaching incessantly the whole time, is something 
that the novelty of the Gospel alone will not account 
for. The theory that his preaching was popular, 
because new, to my mind is utterly unsatisfactory. 

Another thing is no less indisputable about his 
preaching, and that is, that it produced a powerful effect 
on people in every rank of life. He won the suffrages 
of high as well as low, of rich as well as poor, of 
learned as well as unlearned. If his preaching had 
been popular with none but the uneducated masses, we 
might have thought it possible there was little in it 
except a striking delivery and a loud voice. But facts 
are, unfortunately, against this theory too ; and, under 
the pressure of these facts, it will be found to break 
down. 

It is a fact, that numbers of the nobility and gentry 
of Whitefield’s day were warm admirers of his preach- 
ing. The Marquis of Lothian, the Earl of Leven, the 
Earl of Buchan, Lord Rae, Lord Dartmouth, Lord 
James A. Gordon, might be named, among others, 
besides Lady Huntingdon and a host of ladies. 

It is a fact, that eminent statesmen, like Boling- 
broke and Chesterfield, were frequently his delighted 
hearers. Even the artificial Chesterfield was known 
to warm under Whitefield’s eloquence. Bolingbroke 
has placed on record his opinion, and said, “ He is the 
most extraordinary man in our times. He has the 
most commanding eloquence I ever heard in any per- 
son.” 

It is a fact, that cool-headed men, like Hume the 
historian, and Franklin the philosopher, spoke in no 
measured terms of his preaching powers. Franklin 
has written a long account of the effect his sermons 
57 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


w 


produced at Philadelphia. Hume declared that it was 
worth going twenty miles to hear him. 

Now these are facts — simple, historical, and well- 
authenticated facts. What shall we say to them ? I 
say that these facts are quite enough to prove that 
Whitefield’s effectiveness was not owing entirely to 
delivery and voice, as some men would have us believe. 
Bolingbroke and Chesterfield, and Hume and Franklin, 
were not such weak men as to allow their judgments to 
be* biassed by any mere external endowments. They 
were no mean judges of eloquence. They were, pro- 
bably, among the best qualified critics of the day. 
And I say confidently, that their opinion can only be 
explained by the fact, that Whitefield was indeed a 
most powerful and extraordinary preacher. 

But still, after all, the question remains to be 
answered, What was the secret of Whitefield’ s unpa- 
ralleled success as a preacher? How are we to 
account for his sermons producing effects which no 
sermons, before or after his time, have ever yet done ? 
These are questions you have a right to ask. But 
they are questions I find it very hard to answer. That 
his sermons were not mere voice and rant, I think we 
have pretty clearly proved. That he was a man of 
commanding intellect and grasp of mind, no one has 
ever pretended to say. How then are we to account 
for the effectiveness of his preaching ? 

The reader who turns for a solution of this question 
to the seventy-five sermons published under his name, 
will probably be much disappointed. He will not find 
in them many striking thoughts. He will not discover 
in them any new exhibitions of Gospel doctrine. The 
plain truth is, that by far the greater part of them 
58 





GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


were taken down in short-hand by reporters, without 
Whitefield’s knowledge, and published without correc- 
tion. No intelligent reader, T think, can help dis- 
covering, that these reporters were, most unhappily, 
ignorant alike of stopping and paragraphing, of gram- 
mar and of Gospel. The consequence is, that many 
passages in these sermons are what Latimer would call 
a “ mingle-mangle,” or, what we should call in this 
day, 45 a complete mess.” 

Nevertheless, I am bold to say, that with all their 
faults, Whitefield’s printed sermons will repay a candid 
perusal. Let the reader only remember what I have 
just said, that most of them are miserably reported, 
paragraphed, and stopped, and make allowance accord- 
ingly. Let him remember, also, that English for 
speaking and English for reading are two different lan- 
guages ; and that sermons which preach well, always 
read ill. Remember these two things, I say, and I do 
believe you will find very much to admire in some of 
Whitefield’s sermons. For myself, I can only say, I 
believe I have learned much from them, and, however 
great a heresy against taste it may appear, I should 
be ungrateful if I did not praise them. 

And now let me try to point out to you what seem 
to me to have been the characteristic features of White- 
field’s sermons. I may be wrong, but they appear to 
me to present just such a combination of excellences 
as is most likely to make an effective preacher. 

First and foremost you must remember, Whitefield 
preached a singularly pure Gospel .. Few men ever 
gave their hearers so much wheat and so little chaff. 
He did not get into his pulpit to talk about his party, 
his cause, his interest, or his office. He was perpe- 
59 


iWMiflHmifMRara 


m 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


tually telling you about your sins, your heart, and 
Jesus Christ, in the way that the Bible speaks of them. 
“ Oh ! the righteousness of Jesus Christ ! ! ” he would 
frequently say, “ I must be excused if I mention 
it in almost all my sermons.” This, you may be 
sure, is the corner-stone of all preaching that God 
honours. It must be pre-eminently a manifestation of 
truth . 

For another thing, Whitefield’ s preaching was sin- 
gularly lucid and simple . You might not like his doc- 
trine, perhaps. But at any rate you could not fail to 
understand what he meant. His style was easy, plain, 
and conversational. He seemed to abhor long and 
involved sentences. He always saw his mark, and 
went direct at it. He seldom or never troubled his 
hearers with long arguments and intricate reasonings. 
Simple Bible statements — pertinent anecdotes, and 
apt illustrations — were the more common weapons that 
he used. The consequence was, that his hearers always 
understood him. He never shot above their heads. 
Never did man seem to enter so thoroughly into the 
wisdom of Archbishop Usher’s saying, “to make easy 
things seem hard is easy, but to make hard things easy 
is the office of a great preacher.” 

For another thing, Whitefield was a singularly bold 
and direct preacher . He never used that indefinite 
expression, 66 we,” which seems so peculiar to Eng- 
lish pulpit oratory, and which leaves a hearer’s mind 
in a state of misty confusion as to the preacher’s 
meaning. He met men face to face, like one who 
had a message from God to them — like an ambas- 
sador with tidings from heaven ; “ I have come here 
to speak to you about your soul.” He never minced 
GO 


• i 


GEORGE AVHITEFIELD, 


matters, and beat about the bush in attacking pre- 
vailing sins. His great object seemed to be to dis- 
cover the dangers his hearers were most liable to, 
and then fire right at their hearts. The result was, 
that hundreds of his hearers used always to think 
that the sermons were specially addressed to them- 
selves. He was not content, like many, with sticking 
on a tailpiece of application at the end of a long 
discourse. A constant vein of application ran through 
all his sermons. 64 This is for you : this is for you : and 
this is for you.” His hearers were never let alone. 
Nothing, however, was more striking than his direct 
appeals to all classes of his congregation, as he drew 
towards a conclusion. With all the fault of his 
printed sermons, the conclusions of some of them 


are, to my mind, the most stirring and heart- search- 
ing addresses to souls that are to be found in the 
English language. 

Another striking feature in Whitefield’s preaching 
was his thundering earnestness. One poor, uneducated 
man, said of him that he “ preached like a lion.” Never, 
perhaps, did any preacher so thoroughly succeed in 
showing people that he, at least, believed all he 
was saying, and that his whole heart, and soul, and 
strength, were bent on making them believe it too. 
No man could say that his sermons were like the 
morning and evening gun at Portsmouth, a formal 
discharge fired off, as a matter of course, that dis- 
turbs nobody. They were all life. They were all 
fire. There was no getting away from under them. 
Sleep was next to impossible. You must listen whe- 
ther you liked it or not. There was a holy violence 
about him. Your attention was taken by storm. You 
61 

} . 

I 



GEORGE WHITE FIELD. 


were fairly carried off your legs by his energy, before 
you had time to consider what you would do. An 
American gentleman once went to hear him, for the 
first time, in consequence of the report he heard of 
his preaching powers. The day was rainy, the con- 
gregation comparatively thin, and the beginning of the 
sermon rather heavy. Our American friend began to 
say to himself : “ This man is no great wonder, after r 
all.” He looked round, and saw the congregation as 
little interested as himself. One old man, in front 
of the pulpit, had fallen asleep. But all at once 
Whitefield stopped short. His countenance changed. 

And then he suddenly broke forth in an altered tone : 

“If I had come to speak to you in my own name, 
vou might well rest your elbows on your knees, and 
your heads on your hands, and sleep ; and once in 
a while look up, and say, What is this babbler 
talking of? But I have not come to you in my 
own name. No ! I have come to you in the name 
of the Lord of Hosts” (here he brought down his 
hand and foot with a force that made the building 
ring), “ and I must, and will be heard.” The con- 
gregation started. The old man woke up at once. 

“ Ay, ay ! ” cried Whitefield, fixing his eyes on him, 

“ I have waked you up, have I ? I meant to do it. \ , 
I am not come here to preach to stocks and stones : 

I have come to you in the name of the Lord God 
of Hosts, and I must, and will, have an audience.” 

The hearers were stripped of their apathy at once. 

Every word of the sermon was attended to. And the 
American gentleman never forgot it. 

Another striking feature in WhitefieTd’s preaching 
was his singular power of description. The Arabians 
62 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


have a proverb which says, “ He is the best orator 
who can turn men’s ears into eyes.” If ever there 
was a speaker who succeeded in doing this, it was 
Whitefield. He drew such vivid pictures of the things 
he was dwelling upon, that his hearers could believe 
they actually saw them all with their own eyes, and 
heard them with their own ears. 66 On one occasion,” 
says one of his biographers, “ Lord Chesterfield was 
among his hearers. The preacher, in describing the 
miserable condition of a poor benighted sinner, illus- 
trated the subject by describing a blind beggar. The 
night was dark ; the road dangerous, and full of snares. 
The poor sightless mendicant is deserted by his dog 
near the edge of a precipice, and has nothing to 
grope his way with but his staff. But Whitefield 
so warmed with his subject, and enfolded it with 
such graphic - power, that the whole auditory was 
kept in breathless silence over the movements of the 
poor old man;” and, at length, when the beggar 
was about to take that fatal step which would have 
hurled him down the precipice to certain destruc- 
tion, Lord Chesterfield actually made a rush forward 
to save him, exclaiming aloud, “ He is gone ! he is 
gone !” The noble Lord had been so entirely carried 
away by the preacher, that he forgot the whole was 
a picture. 

One more feature in Whitefield’ s preaching deserves 
especial notice, and that is, the immense amount of 
pathos and feeling which it always contained. It was 
no uncommon thing with him to weep profusely in 
the pulpit. Cornelius Winter goes so far as to say 
that he hardly ever knew him get through a sermon 
without tears. There seems to have been nothing 
63 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

whatever of affectation in this. He felt intensely for 
the souls before him, and his feeling found a vent in 
tears. Of all the ingredients of his preaching, nothing, 
I suspect, was so powerful as this. It awakened sym- 
pathies, and touched secret springs in men, which no 
amount of intellect could have moved. It melted down 
the prejudices which many had conceived against him. 
They could not hate the man who wept so much over 
their souls. They were often so affected as to shed 
floods of tears themselves. “ I came to hear you,” 
said one man, “ intending to break your head ; but 
your sermon got the better of me, it broke my heart.” 
Once become satisfied that a man loves you, and you 
will listen gladly to anything he has got to say. 
And this was just one grand secret of Whitefield’s 
success. 

And now I will only ask you to add to this feeble 
sketch, that Whitefield’s action was perfect— so perfect 
that Garrick, the famous actor, gave it unqualified 
praise — that his voice was as wonderful as his action— 
so powerful, that he could make thirty thousand peo- 
ple hear him at once — so musical and well attuned, 
that men said he could raise tears by his pronuncia- 
tion of the word “ Mesopotamia : ” that his fluency 
and command of extemporaneous language were of 
the highest order, prompting him always to use the 
right word and to put it in the right place. Add, I say, 
these gifts to those already mentioned, and then judge 
for yourselves whether there is not sufficient, and more 
than sufficient, in our hands, to account for his power 
as a preacher. 

For my part I say, unhesitatingly, that I believe 
no living preacher ever possessed such a combination 
64 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 










of excellences as Whitefield. Some, no doubt, have 
surpassed him in some of his gifts; others, perhaps, 
have been his equals in others. But for a combina- 
tion of pure doctrine— simple and lucid style — bold- 
ness and directness — earnestness and fervour — de- 
scriptiveness and picture-drawing — pathos and feel- 
ing — united with a perfect voice, perfect delivery, 
and perfect command of words, Whitefield, I repeat, 
stands alone. No man, dead or alive, I believe, ever 
came alongside of him. And, I believe, you will always 
find, that just in proportion as preachers have ap- 
proached that curious combination of excellences 
which Whitefield possessed, just in that very pro- 
portion have they attained what Clarendon defines 
true eloquence to be, viz., “ a strange power of 
making themselves believed.’" 


! 


5. And now, gentlemen, there only remains one 
more point connected with Whitefield to which I 
wish to advert. I fear that I shall have exhausted 
your attention already. But the point is one of such 
importance, that it cannot. he passed over in silence. 
The point I mean is, the actual amount of real good 
that Whitefield did. 

You will, I hope, understand me, when I say, 
that the materials for forming an opinion on this 
point, in a history like his, must necessarily he scanty. 
He founded no denomination among whom his name 
was embalmed, and his every act recorded, as did John 
Wesley. He headed no mighty movement against a 
church which openly professed false doctrines, as 
Luther did against Rome. He wrote no hooks which 
were to he the religious classics of the million, like 
65 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


John Bunyan. He was a simple, guileless man, who 
lived for one thing only, and that was to preach 
Christ. If he succeeded in doing that effectually, 
'he cared for nothing else. He did nothing to pre- 
serve the memory of his usefulness. He left his work 
with the Lord. 

Of course, there are many people who can see in 

Whitefield nothing but a fanatic and enthusiast. 

» 

There is a generation that loathes everything like 
zeal in religion. There are never wanting men of 
a cautious, cold-blooded, Erasmus-like temper, who 
pass through the world doing no good, because they 
are so dreadfully afraid of doing harm. I do not 
expect such men to admire Whitefield, or allow he 
did any good. I fear, if they had lived eighteen 
hundred years ago, they would have had no sympathy 
with St. Paul. . 

Again, there are other people who count schism a 
far greater crime than either heresy or false doctrine. 
There is a generation of men, who, under no circum- 
stances, will worship God out of their own parish : 
and as to separation from the Church, they seem to 
think that nothing whatever can justify it. I do not, 
of course, expect such men to admire Whitefield or 
his work. His principle evidently was, that it was 
far better for men to be uncanonically saved than 
canonicallv damned. 

J 

Whether by any other line of action Whitefield 
could have remained in the Church, and retained his 
usefulness, is a question, which, at this distance of 
lime, we are very incompetent to answer. That he 
erred in temper and judgment in his dealings with 
the bishops and clergy, in many instances, I have no 
66 






GEORGE WHITEFIELD, 

doubt. That he raised up fresh bodies of separatists 
from the Church of England, and made breaches which 
probably will never be repaired, I have no doubt also. 
But still it must never be forgotten, that the state of 
the Church was bad enough to provoke a holy indig- 
nation. The old principle is most true, that “ he is the 
schismatic who causes the separation, and not he who 
separates.” If Whitefield did harm , the harm ought 
to be laid on the Church which compelled him to 
act as he did, quite as much as on him. And when 
we come to strike the balance, I believe the harm 
he may have done is outweighed by the good a 
thousand-fold. 


The truth I believe is, that the direct good White- 
field did to immortal souls was enormous. I will 
go further. I believe it is incalculable. In Scot- 
land, in England, in America, credible witnesses have 
recorded their testimony that he was the means of 
converting thousands of souls. 

Franklin, the philosopher, was a cold, calculating 
man, and not likely to speak too highly of any 
minister’s work. Yet, even he confessed that it “ was 
wonderful to see the change soon made by his preach- 
ing in the manners of the inhabitants of Philadelphia. 
From being thoughtless or indifferent about religion, it 
seemed as if all the world were growing religious.” 

Maclaurin and Willison were Scotch ministers, 
whose names are well-known to theological readers, 
and stand deservedly high. Both of them have testified 
that Whitefield did an amazing work in Scotland. 
Willison in particular says, “ that God honoured him 
with surprising success among sinners of all ranks 
and persuasions.” 


67 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


Old Venn, in our own Church, was a man of strong 
common sense, as well as great grace. His opinion 
was, that “ if the greatness, extent, success, and dis- 
interestedness of a man’s labours can give him dis- 
tinction among the children of Christ, then we are 
warranted to affirm, that scarce any one has equalled 
Mr. Whitefield.” Again, he says, “ it is a well known 
fact, that the conversion of men’s souls have been the 
fruit of a single sermon from his lips, so eminently was 
he made a fisher of men.” And again, “ Though we 
are allowed to sorrow that we shall never see or hear 
him again, we must still rejoice that millions have 
heard him so long, so often, and to such good effect ; 
and that out of this mass of people, multitudes are 
gone before him to hail his entrance into the w r orld 
of glory.” 

John Newton was a shrewd man, as well as an 
eminent minister of the Gospel. His testimony is, 
“ I am not backward to say, that I have not read or 
heard of any person, since the apostles’ days, of whom 
it may more emphatically be said, he was a burning 
and a shining light, than the late Mr. White- 
field, whether we consider the warmth of his zeal, 
the greatness of his ministerial talents, or the ex- 
tensive usefulness with which the Lord honoured 
him.” 

These are not solitary testimonies. I might add 
many more if time permitted. Romaine did not agree 
with him in many things, yet what does he say of 
him? “We have none left to succeed him; none, of 
his gifts ; none, anything like him in usefulness.” 
Toplady was a tremendously high Calvinist, and not 
disposed to over-estimate the number of saved souls. 

68 


1 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


Yet he says, Whitefield’s ministry was “ attended with 
spiritual benefit to tens of thousands;’’ and he styles 
him “ the apostle of the British empire, and the prince 
of preachers.’’ Hervey was a quiet literary man, whose 
health seldom allowed him to quit the retirement of 
Weston Favell. But he says of Whitefield, “I never 
beheld so fair a copy of our Lord, such a living 
image of the Saviour. I cannot forbear applying the 
wise man’s encomiums of an illustrious woman to 
this eminent minister of the everlasting Gospel, i many 
sons have done virtuously, but thou excellest them 
all/ ” 

But if the amount of direct good that Whitefield 
did in the world was great, who shall tell us the 
amount of good that he did indirectly ? I believe it 
never can be reckoned up. I suspect it will never 
be fully known until the last day. 

Whitefield was among the first who stirred up 
a zeal for the pure Gospel among the clergy and laity 
of our oivn Church . His constant assertion of pure 
Reformation principles — his repeated references to the 
Articles, Prayer-book, and Homilies — his never-an- 
swered challenges to his opponents to confute him 
out of the Formularies of their own communion — all 
this must have produced an effect, and set many 
thinking. I have no doubt whatever, that many a 
faithful minister, who became a shining light in those 
days within the Church of England, first lighted his 
candle at the lamp of a man outside. 

Whitefield, again, was among the first to show 
the right way to meet infidels and sceptics . He saw 
clearly that the most powerful weapon against such 
men is not metaphysical reasoning, and critical dis- 
69 


i 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


quisition ; but preaching the whole Gospel — living 
the whole Gospel — and spreading the whole Gospel.-' 
It was not the writings of Leland and the younger 
Sherlock, and Waterland, and Leslie, ,that rolled back 
the flood of infidelity one half so much as the preach- 
ing of Whitefield, and Wesley, and Fletcher, and 
Romaine, and Berridge, and Venn. Had it not been 
for them, I firmly believe we might have had a coun- 
terpart of the French Revolution in our own land. 
They were the men who were the true champions of 
Christianity. Infidels are seldom shaken by mere 
abstract reasoning. The surest arguments against them 
are Gospel truth, and Gospel life. 

To crown all, Whitefield was the very first who 
seems thoroughly to have understood what Chalmers 
has called the aggressive system . He did not wait for 
souls to come to him, but he went after souls. He did 
not sit tamely by his fireside, mourning over the wicked- 
ness of the land. He went forth to beard the devil 
in his high places. He attacked sin and wickedness 
face to face, and gave them no peace. He dived 
into holes and corners after sinners. He hunted 
up ignorance and vice, wherever it could be found. 
He showed that he thoroughly realized the nature of 
the ministerial office. Like a fisherman, he did not 
wait for the fish to come to him. Like a fisherman, he 
used every kind of means to catch souls. Men know 
a little more of this now than they did formerly. City 
Missions and District Visiting Societies are evidences 
of clearer views. But let us remember this was all 
comparatively new in Whitefield’s time, and let us 
give him the credit he deserves. , 

In short, I come to the conclusion that no man 

70 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


has ever done more good in his day and generation 
than the man who is the subject of this lecture. He 
was a true hero, and that in its highest and best sense. 
He did a work that will stand the fire, and glorify God, 
when many other works are forgotten. And for that 
work I believe that England owes a debt to his cha- 
racter which England has never yet paid. 

And now, gentlemen, I hasten to a conclusion of 
this already over-long lecture. I have set before you, to 
the best of my ability, Whitefield’s time, and life, and 
religion, and preaching, and actual work. I have not 
extenuated his faults, to the best of my knowledge. 
I have not exaggerated his good qualities, so far as I 
am aware. It only remains for me to point out to you 
two great practical lessons which the subject appears 
to me to teach. 

Learn then, I beseech you, for one lesson, the 
amazing power that one single man possesses, when he is 
determined to work for God, and has got truth on his 
side. 

Here is a man who starts in life, with everything, to 
all appearance, against him. He has neither family, 
nor place, nor money, nor high connections on his side. 
His views are flatly opposed to the customs and pre- 
judices of his time. He stands in direct opposition to 
the stream of public taste, and the religion of the vast 
bulk of ministers around him. He is as much isolated 
and alone, to all appearance, as Martin Luther opposing 
the Pope, as Athanasius resisting the Arians, as Paul 
on Mars’ Hill. And yet this man stands his ground. 
He arrests public attention. He gathers crowds around 
him who receive his teaching. He is made a blessing 
71 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

to tens of thousands. He turns the world upside 
down. How striking these facts are ! 

Here is your encouragement , young men, if you 
stand alone. You have no reason to be cast down and 
faint-hearted. You are not weak, though few, if God 
is with you. There is nothing too great to be done 
by a little company, if only they have Christ on their 
side. Away with the idea that numbers alone have 
power! Cast away the old vulgar error that majorities 
alone have strength. Get firm hold of the great truth 
that minorities always move the world. Think of the 
little flock that our Lord left behind him, and the one 
hundred and twenty names in that upper chamber in 
J erusalem, who went forth to assault the heathen world ! 
Think of George Whitefield assailing boldly the ungod- 
liness which deluged all around him, and winning vic- 
tory after victory I Think of all this. Cast fear away. 
Lay out your talents heartily and confidently for 
God. 

Here also is your example , young men, if you 
desire to do good to souls. Whether you become 
ministers, or missionaries, or teachers — never forget 
you must fight with Whitefield’s weapons, if you wish 
to have any portion of Whitefield’s success. Never 
forget what John Wesley said was Whitefield’s theology 
— 66 Give God all the glory of whatever is good in 
man: set Christ as high, and man as low as possible, 
in the business of salvation. All merit is in the 
blood of Christ, and all power is from the Spirit of 
Christ.” 

Think not for a moment that earnestness alone will 
ensure success. This is a huge delusion. It will do no- 
thing of the kind. All the earnestness in the world 
72 



GEOKGE WHITEFIELD. 



will never enable a teacher of German theology to 
show you one Tinnevelly, or a teacher of semi-Popery 
one Sierra Leone. Oh, no ! it must be the simple, 
pure, unadulterated Gospel that you must carry with 
you if you are to do good. You must sow as White- 
field sowed, or you will never reap as he reaped. 

Learn, in the last place, what abundant reasons 
we have for thankfulness in the present condition of the 


Church of England . 

We are far too apt to look at the gloomy side of 
things around us, and at that only. We are all prone 
to dwell on the faults of our condition, and to forget to 
bless God for our mercies. There are many things we 
could wish otherwise in our beloved Church, beyond 
all question. There are defects we could wish to see 
remedied, and wounds we should gladly see healed. 
But still, let us look behind us, and compare the 
Church of our day with the Church of Whitefield’ s 
times. Look on this picture, and on that, and I am 
sure, if you do so honestly and fairly, you will agree 
with me that we have reason to be thankful. 

We have bishops on the bench now, who love the 
simple truth as it is in Jesus, and are ready to help 
forward good works — bishops who are not ashamed 
to come forward in Exeter Hall, and lend their aid to 
the extension of Christ’s Gospel — bishops who would 
have welcomed a man like Whitefield, and found full 
occupation for his marvellous gifts. Let us thank God 
for this. It was not so a hundred years ago. 

We have hundreds of clergymen in our parishes 
now, who preach as full a Gospel as Whitefield did, 
though they may not do it with the same power — 
clergymen who are not ashamed of the doctrine of 
73 




f 


GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


regeneration, and do not pronounce a minister a heretic, 
because he says to ungodly people, “ Ye must be born 
again/’ Let us thank God for this. A man need not 
travel many miles now in order to find parishes where 
the Gospel is preached. When driven out of one 
parish church, he can find truth in another. It was 
not so a hundred years ago. 

We have thousands of laymen now, who are fully 
alive to the duties and responsibilities of members of a 
Protestant Church — laymen who rejoice in holding 
up the hands of Evangelical ministers, and are righte- 
ously jealous for the maintenance and extension of 
Evangelical truth. Let us thank God for this. It was 
not so a hundred years ago. 

We have societies and agencies for evangelizing 
every dark corner of the earth in connexion with our 
Church. We have wide and effectual doors of useful- 
ness for all who are willing to labour in the Lord’s 
vineyard. The difficulty now is, not so much to find 
openings for doing good, as to find men. Let us thank 
God for this. It was not so a hundred years ago. 

Young men of the Church of England, I ask you 
to gather up these facts, and treasure them in your 
memories. They are facts. They cannot be gain- 
sayed. Treasure them up, I repeat. Look back a 
century, and then look around you, and then judge for ' 
yourselves whether you ought not to be thankful. 

Beware, I beseech you, of that tribe of men who 
would fain persuade you to forsake the Church of Eng- 
land, and separate from her communion. There is a 
generation of murmurers and complainers in the pre- 
sent day, who seem to revel in picking holes — a gene- 
ration that seems to forget that fault-finding is the 
74 




GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 


easiest task in all the world — a generation that has 
no eyes to see the healthy parts in our body ecclesiastic, 
but has a wonderfully quick and morbid scent for 
detecting its sores — a generation that is mighty to 
scatter, but impotent to build — a generation that would 
persuade churchmen to strain at gnats, but finds no 
difficulty itself in swallowing camels — a generation that 
would have you pull the old house down, but cannot 
offer you so much as a tent in its place : of all such 
men, I say solemnly, and affectionately— of all such 
men— I warn you to beware. Listen not to them. 
Have no friendship w r ith them. Avoid them. Turn 
from them. Pass away. 

Let us not leave the good old ship, the Church of 
England, until we have some better reason than can 
at present be seen. What, though she be old and 
weather-beaten ! What, though in some respects, 
she may want repair ! What, though some of the crew 
be not to be depended on ! Still, with all her faults, 
the old ship is in far better trim than she was a 
century ago. Let us acknowledge her faults, and hope 
they may yet be amended. But still, with all her 
faults, let us stick by the ship ! 

When the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of 
England are repealed, and the Prayer Book and 
Homilies so altered as to be unprotestantized — when 
regeneration and justification by faith are forbidden 
to be preached in her pulpits — when the Queen, 
Lords and Commons, and laity, have assented to these 
changes — in short, when the Gospel is driven out of 
the Establishment — then, and not till then, it will be 
time for you and me to go out ; but, till then, I say, 

LET US STICK BY THE CHURCH ! 

75 



LATELY PUBLISHED. 


A Narrative of the Tinnevelly Mission. By the Lev. 

G. Pettitt. In foolscap 8vo., with Map, &c., price 7s. 

The Journal of the Bishop of Montreal: during a Visit to 
the Church Missionary Society’s North-West American Mis- 
sion. Second Edition, foolscap 8vo., with Map, &c., price 
4s. 6 d. cloth. 

Chapters on Missions in South India. By the late Rev. 

H. W. Fox, B.A., Missionary at Masulipatam. Foolscap 8vo., 
price 3s. 6d. cloth. 

Missions in Western Africa, among the Bulloms, Susoos, &c. 
Being the first undertaken by the Church Missionary Society 
for Africa and the East. By the Rev. S. A. Walker, M.A. 
8vo., price 12s. cloth. 

Sketches of Christianity in North India. By the Rev. 

M. Wilkinson. Foolscap 8vo., price 6s. cloth. 

A Brief Account of the late Conversions in Dingle. By 
Mrs. B. D. Thompson. Second Edition. Crown 8vo., with 
Plates, price 5s. 6d. cloth. 

Redemption in Israel. Narratives of the Lives of Converted 

Israelites. By M. A. Barber. Foolscap 8vo., 6s. cloth. 

Church Prayers ; analyzed and arranged for use on Social 
and Public Occasions. By a Clergyman. 18mo., price 2s. 
cloth, or 2s. 6d. roan. 

The Book of Private Devotions. A Collection of the most 

valuable early devotions in the English Church. Edited by the 
late Rev. E. Bickersteth. Third Edition. Foolscap 8vo., price 
3s. 6d. cloth. 

Also , by the same Author . 

Family Expositions of the Epistles of St. John and St. 

Jude. .Foolscap 8vo., price 3s. 6d. cloth. 

Divine Warning to the Church, at this time, of our 
Enemies, Dangers and Duties, and as to our Future Prospects. 
Fourth Edition. Foolscap 8vo., price 6s. cloth. 


A Manual of District Visiting : with Hints and Directions 
to Visitors. By the Rev. Edw. J. Nixon, B.A., Curate of 
Stapenhill. Foolscap 8vo., price 2s. 6d. cloth. 


SEELEYS, FLEET STREET AND HANOVER STREET, LONDON. 


LATELY PUBLISHED. 


Primitive Obliquities ; or, a Review of the Epistles of the 
New Testament, in Reference to the prevailing offences of the 
Church. By the Rev. R. Boys, M.A. Foolscap 8vo., price 
3s. 6d. cloth. 

Thoughts on Rationalism, and on the Divine Inspiration of 
the Holy Scriptures. By the Rev. A. McCaul, D.D., Pro- 
fessor of Divinity, King’s College, and Prebendary of St. 
Paul’s. Foolscap 8vo., price 2s. 6d. cloth. 

The Student’s Theological Manual. Containing the History 

of the Canon, Theological Evidences, Biblical Antiquities, Old 
and New Testament History, Church History, Doctrine and 
Prophecy. By George Henry Preston, of St. Begh’s College, 
Cumberland, Curate of Halstow the Lower, Kent. In One 
Volume, 8vo., price 7s. 6d. 

The Church of Christ and the Churches of Christ. By the 

Rev. Hugh McNeile, D.D., Canon of Chester, Minister of 
St. Jude’s Church, Liverpool. Second Edition. 12mo, price 
7s. cloth. 

The Evidences of Christianity. A Course of Lectures. By 
the Right Rev. C. P. Mcllvaine, D.D., Bishop of Ohio. A New 
Edition, foolscap 8vo., price 5s. cloth. 

The Holy Catholic Church. By the Bight Bev. C. P. 

Mcllvaine, D.D., Bishop of Ohio. l8mo., price Is. 6d. cloth. 

The Sinner’s Justification before God; its Nature and 
Means. A Scriptural Treatise. By the Right Rev. C. P. 
Mcllvaine, D.D., Bishop of Ohio. 16mo., price Is. 6d. cloth. 

The Way of Patience better than that of Secession. By 
Adolphe Monod. Foolscap, price 2s. cloth. 

An Appeal to the Original Text of Scripture, with Refe- 
rence to the Doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration. By Thomas 
Monck Mason, B.A. In foolscap 8vo., price 2s. 6d. 

Plain Sermons on the Liturgy of the Church of England. 
By the Rev. W. W. Champneys, M.A, Third Edition. l6mo., 
price 2s. cloth. 

Episcopacy and Presbytery. By the Bev. Archibald Boyd, 
A.M., Incumbent of Christ’s Church, Cheltenham. In 8vo., 
price 10s. 6d. cloth. 

SEELEYS, FLEET STREET AND HANOVER STREET, LONDON. 


LATELY PUBLISHED. 

A Memoir of the Rev. H. W. Fox, B.A. By the Rev. 
G. Townshend Fox, B.A., with a Preface by the Rev. H. Y. 
Elliott, M.A. Third Edition, crown octavo, price 7s. 6d. cloth. 

Selection from the Correspondence of the Rev. J. T, 
Nottidge, M.A., Rector of St. Helen’s and St. Clement’s, 
Ipswich. Edited by the Rev. C. Bridges, M.A. Post octavo, 
with a Portrait, price 8s. 6d. cloth. 

The Life, Letters, and Opinions of W. Roberts, Esq. 
Edited by his Son, A. Roberts, M.A. Post octavo, price 
7s. 6d. cloth. 

Personal Recollections. By Charlotte Elizabeth, In one 
volume, foolscap octavo, with a Portrait, price 6s. cloth. 

The Life of the Rev. Rowland Hill, M.A. By the Rev. 
Edwin Sidney, M.A. Fourth Edition, foolscap octavo, with 
a Portrait price 6s. cloth. 

The Life of Dean Milner. By his Niece. Abridged, in 
one volume, foolscap octavo, with a Portrait, price 6s. cloth. 

i 

A Memoir, Correspondence, and Remains of the Author of 
“ The Listener.” a Christ our Example,” & c. Second Edition, 
foolscap 8vo., with a Portrait after Lawrence, price 7s. cloth. 

Memoir of Mrs. John West, who died at Chettle, Dorset, 
March 23, 1839. By John West, A.M., Rector of Chettle, 

Dorset. Third Edition, foolscap 8vo. Price 4s. 6d. cloth. 

1 • • v 

Memorials of Two Sisters. By the Author of “ Aids to 
Development, &c. &c. Fourth Edition, foolscap octavo, price 
4s. 6d. cloth. 

Letters and Papers of the late Viscountess Powerscourt, 
Edited by the Rev. Robert Daly, A.M., Rector of Powerscourt. 
Fourth Edition, foolscap octavo, price 5s. cloth. 

SEELEYS, FLEET STREET, AND HANOVER STREET, LONDON. 



I 








LATELY PUBLISHED. 

Primitive Obliquities ; or, a Review of the Epistles of the 
New Testament, in Reference to the prevailing offences of the 
Church. By the Rev. R. Boys, M.A. Foolscap 8vo., price 
3s. 6d. cloth. 

Thoughts on Rationalism, and on the Divine Inspiration of 
the Holy Scriptures. By the Rev. A. McCaul, D.D., Pro- 
fessor of Divinity, King’s College, and Prebendary of St. 
Paul’s. Foolscap 8vo., price 2s. 6d. cloth. 

The Student’s Theological Manual. Containing the History 
of the Canon, Theological Evidences, Biblical Antiquities, Old 
and New Testament History, Church History, Doctrine and 
Prophecy. By George Henry Preston, of St. Begh’s College, 
Cumberland, Curate of Halstow the Lower, Kent. In One 
Volume, 8vo., price 7s. 6d. 

The Church of Christ and the Churches of Christ. By the 

Rev. Hugh McNeile, D.D., Canon of Chester, Minister of 
St. Jude’s Church, Liverpool. Second Edition. 12mo, price 
7s. cloth. 

The Evidences of Christianity. A Course of Lectures. By 
the Right Rev. C. P. Mcllvaine, D.D., Bishop of Ohio. A New 
Edition, foolscap 8vo., price 5s. cloth. 

The Holy Catholic Church. By the Right Rev. C. P. 

Mcllvaine, D.D., Bishop of Ohio. lSmo., price Is. 6d. cloth. 

The Sinner’s Justification before Cod; its Nature and 
Means. A Scriptural Treatise. By the Right Rev. C. P. 
Mcllvaine, D.D., Bishop of Ohio. l6mo., price Is. 6d. cloth. 

The Way of Patience better than that of Secession. By 

Adolphe Monod. Foolscap, price 2s. cloth. 

An Appeal to the Original Text of Scripture, with Refe- 
rence to the Doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration. By Thomas 
Monck Mason, B.A. In foolscap Svo., price 2s. 6d. 

Plain Sermons on the Liturgy of the Church of England. 
By the Rev. W. W. Champneys, M.A. Third Edition. lGmo., 
price 2s. cloth. 

Episcopacy and Presbytery. By the Rev. Archibald Boyd, 
A.M., Incumbent of Christ’s Church, Cheltenham. In Svo., 
price 10s. 6d. cloth. 

SEELEYS, FLEET STREET AND HANOVER STREET, LONDON. 






j 

I 




f 


0 


LATELY PUBLISHED, 

t . 

| 

| A Memoir of the Rev. H. W. Fox, B.A. By the Rev. 
G. Townshend Fox, B.A., with a Preface by the Rev. H. V. 
Elliott, M.A. Third Edition, crown octavo, price 7s. 6d. cloth. 

i 

| Selection from the Correspondence of the Rev. J. T. 
Nottidge, M.A., Rector of St. Helen’s and St. Clement’s, 
Ipswich. Edited by the Rev. C. Bridges, M.A. Post octavo, 
with a Portrait, price 8s. 6d. cloth. 

j 

The Lite, Letters, and Opinions of W. Roberts, Esq. 

Edited by his Son, A. Roberts, M.A. Post octavo, price 
7s. 6d. cloth. 

Personal Recollections. By Charlotte Elizabeth, In one 

volume, foolscap octavo, with a Portrait, price 6s. cloth. 

The Life of the Rev. Rowland Hill, M.A. By the Rev. 
Edwin Sidney, M.A. Fourth Edition, foolscap octavo, with 
a Portrait price 6s. cloth. 

; The Life of Dean Milner. By his Niece. Abridged, in 

one volume, foolscap octavo, with a Portrait, price 6s. cloth. 

. 

; A Memoir, Correspondence, and Remains of the Author of 
“ The Listener.” “ Christ our Example,” &c. Second Edition, 
foolscap 8vo., with a Portrait after Lawrence, price 7s. cloth. 

i 

! Memoir of Mrs. John West, who died at Chettle, Dorset, 
March 23, 1839. By John West, A.M., Rector of Chettle, 
Dorset. Third Edition, foolscap 8vo. Price 4s. 6d. cloth. 

Memorials of Two Sisters. By the Author of “Aids to 
Development, &c. &c. Fourth Edition, foolscap octavo, price 
4s. 6d. cloth. 

j . 

| Letters and Papers of the late Viscountess Powerscourt, 
Edited by the Rev. Robert Daly, A.M., Rector of Powerscourt. 
Fourth Edition, foolscap octavo, price 5s. cloth. 

SEELEYS, FLEET STREET, AND HANOVER STREET, LONDON. 







W 



* 


LATELY PUBLISHED. 



The GOSPEL of thejOLD TESTAMENT: on the plan 
of the Work of Cotton Mather. By the author of “ The 
Listener.” Second Edition, foolscap 8vo., price 5s. cloth. 

PLEADING with GOD : Extracts from various Authors, 
upon the Obligation, the Spirit, and the Success of Prayer. 
With a Preface by the late Rev. R. P. Buddicom. Fifth 

LECTURES on the PROPHET AMOS. By the Rev. 
Vincent W. Ryan, M.A., late curate of St. Mary’s, Edge Hill, 
and Vice-Principal of the Collegiate Schools, Liverpool. In 

The LAST SCENES in the Life of our Lord and Saviour ; 
or, a Practical Exposition of the last nine^Chapters of St. 
John. By the Rev. D. K. Drummond, B.A. . Second Edition, 

SCRIPTURE SYMBOLISM; or, Tabernacle Architecture. 
By the Rev. Samuel Garratt, B.A., Minister of Trinity Chapel, 
Waltham Cross. Foolscap 8vo., price 3s. 6d. cloth. 

The DAWN OF LIFE; or, Scripture Conversions. By 

a Clergyman. In one Volume, foolscap 8vo., price 3s. 6d. cloth. 

CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCE as displayed in the Life 
and Writings of St. Paul. Fifth Edition, 12mo., price 6s. cloth* 

CHRISTIAN MEDITATIONS ; or, the Believer’s Com- 

panion in Solitude. By the late T. S. B. Reade, Esq. Third 

The CHRISTIAN INDEED, Discourses on the Lord’s 
Prayer. By the Rev, W. Tait, M.A., Incumbent of Trinity 
Church, Wakefield. Foolscap 8vo., price 4s. 6d. cloth. 

COTTAGE LECTURES ; or, the Pilgrim’s Progress 
practically explained. By the Rev. Charles Overton, Vicar of 
Cottingham. In Two Volumes, foolscap 8vo., price 3s. 6d. 

A SIMPLE COMMENTARY on the NEW TESTA- 
MENT, intended for Family Reading, and for the use of 
Cottagers. By Lady Wake. Vols. I. II. Crown 8vo., price 

SEELEYS, FLEET STREET AND HANOVER STREET, LONDON. 




