COULD  LIBRARY 
EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 


God’s  Methods  With  Man 


o r AL'f  o f 

G.  Campbell  Morgan 


SECOND  EDITION 

Coefj  Methods  toith  Man 

In  Time — Past,  Present,  and  Future 
With  colored  chart.  i2mo,  paper,  50  cents; 
cloth,  $1.00 

The  fascination  of  prophetic  interpretation  are  presented 
in  sharp  and  illustrated  ouXlintJ" -^Sunday  School  Times. 

^aiherein  Ha-Ve  We 

'Robbed  God? 

Malachi’s  Message  to  the  Men  of  To-day 
i2mo,  cloth,  75  cents 

“The  exposition  is  well  done,  practical  and  helpful.*’ — 
Christian  <tAd’Vocate. 

15 he  ^rue  Estimate  o_f 

Life  and  Ho  to  to  Li-Ve 

Red  Books  Series.  i2mo,  paper,  15  cents;  cloth, 
net,  30  cents 

“In  Mr.  Morgan  there  is  a wonderful  nearness  and  un- 
usual insight  into  spiritual  truth.” — Evangelist. 

15 he  Hidden  ^ears 

at  J^azareth 

Quiet  House  Series.  i8mo,  cloth,  25  cents 

“He  seeks  by  sympathy  to  penetrate  these  years  of 
His  silence  and  obscurity.” — Sunday  School  Times. 


Fleming  H.  *Re*Oell  Company 

3 Publishers 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/godsmethodswithmOOmorg 


AGES  OF  THE 


Christ-.  Kini  & Priesh 


The  Fall  I-q 


Symbolism 
of  Color 


Blue  • 
Green 
BJack 
Red  • 
Gold 


Heavenly  C/ory. 

Earthly 

Evil, 

Sacrifice. 

Ificlory  of  Christ. 


Purple  Priesthood. 


CHART  OF  EVENTS.  PAST,  PRESENT.  AND  FUTURE. 


THE  AGES  OF  THE  AGES. 
GOD  ALL  IN  ALL. 


God’s  Methods  With  Man 


In  Time : Past,  Pres- 
ent and  Future  . . 


By  the  Rev. 

G.  CAMPBELL  MORGAN 

Author  of  Discipleshijf'’*  etc^ 


With  Colored  Chart 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


718 


Copyright,  1898 

BY 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 


THE  CAXTON  PRESS 
NEW  YORK. 


Author’s  Note 


These  addresses  were  delivered  in  substance 
at  Northfield,  and  reported  stenographically. 
They  were  then  revised  and  expanded,  and 
were  afterward  delivered  in  my  own  church. 
A flood  of  letters,  books,  and  pamphlets 
poured  in  upon  me  : some  from  enquirers;  some 
from  those  who  have  differed  from  positions 
taken  up ; and  very  many  from  those  who  have 
been  helped. 

These  letters  have  all  been  acknowledged,  ex- 
cept in  cases  where  that  was  rendered  impos- 
sible by  anonymity.  However,  I was  and  am 
determined  not  to  be  tempted  into  controversy 
of  any  kind,  either  by  letter  or  in  print,  seeing 
that  I am  far  from  claiming  that  hearers  or 
readers  are  bound  to  accept  my  convictions  as 
absolute  truth.  I simply  desire  to  enunciate 
what  I believe  to  be  the  teaching  of  the  New 
Testament.^  The  final  court  of  appeal  is  not 
any  man’s  interpretation,  but  God’s  Book ; and 
I may  have  something  yet  to  learn  upon  certain 
points. 

If  those  whom  I address  search  the  Scriptures 

* The  quotations  are  from  the  Revised  Version. 

5 


6 


Author’s  Note 


for  proof  of  my  statements,  and  do  not  come  to 
the  same  conclusions  as  myself,  we  may  yet  re- 
joice together  in  that  we  shall  thereby  know  the 
Word  of  God  more  perfectly,  and  moreover  that 
“what  we  know  not  now,  we  shall  know  here- 
after.” 

G.  Campbell  Morgan. 

New  Court  Chapel^ 

Tolling  ton  Parh^  N, 


CONTENTS 


I PAGE 

hrrEODUCTOEY 9 

II 

From  Ceeation  to  Cheist 15 

III 

The  Dispensation  of  the  Spieit 29 

IV 

The  Coming  op  Cheist 47 

V 

Daniel^s  Missing  Week 67 

VI 

The  Events  of  the  Missing  Week 81 

VII 

The  Dawn  of  a Golden  Age 97 

VIII 

The  Golden  Age 113 

IX 

Aftee  the  Thousand  Yeaes 129 

X 

The  Pueifying  Hope 145 

Appendix 161 

(7) 


Ere  God  had  built  the  mountains, 

Or  raised  the  fruitful  hills ; 

Before  He  filled  the  fountains 
That  feed  the  running  rills — 

In  Me,  from  everlasting, 

The  wonderful  I AM, 

Found  pleasures,  never  wasting ; 

And  Wisdom  is  My  name. 

When,  like  a tent  to  dwell  in, 

He  spreads  the  skies  abroad. 

And  swathed  about  the  swelling 
Of  ocean ^s  mighty  flood — 

He  wrought  by  weight  and  measure ; 

And  I was  with  Him  then : 

Myself  the  Father’s  pleasure. 

And  Mine,  the  sons  of  men. 

Thus  Wisdom’s  words  discover 
Thy  glory  and  Thy  grace, 

Thou  everlasting  Lover 
Of  our  unworthy  race. 

Thy  gracious  eye  surveyed  us, 

Ere  stars  were  seen  above ; 

In  wisdom  Thou  hast  made  us. 

And  died  for  us  in  love. 

And  couldst  Thou  be  delighted 
With  creatures  such  as  we — 

Who,  when  we  saw  Thee,  slighted 
And  nailed  Thee  to  a tree  ? 
Unfathomable  wonder. 

And  mystery  divine ! 

The  voice  that  speaks  in  thunder 
Says — “Sinner,  I am  thine!  ” 

COWPER, 


(8) 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


I 

INTRODUCTORY 

For  a correct  estimate  of  the  present  times, 
and  a true  conception  of  future  events,  we  must 
have  a clear  understanding  of  the  things  that 
are  past.  We  are  in  danger  of  living  too  much 
in  the  present,  and  of  looking  upon  the  Divine 
activities  as  if  they  were  haphazard  or  acci- 
dental, as  our  own  always  are,  save  as  we  are 
under  the  control  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  We 
seem  to  have  contracted  the  idea  that  in  the 
history  of  the  race  God  has  been  making  ex- 
periments with  men ; and  that  when  one  plan 
has  failed,  He  has  adopted  another.  Such  false 
conceptions  arise  from  the  fact  that,  mentally 
and  spiritually,  we  live  too  much  in  the  circle 
of  our  own  times,  and  are  forgetful  of  all  that 
has  gone  before.  The  corrective  is  found  in 
studying  history  from  the  Divine  standpoint. 
Nothing  yields  a more  chaotic,  uncertain,  and 
unsatisfactory  result  than  a view  merely  from 
the  human  side ; while,  on  the  contrary,  order, 
beauty,  and  progress,  are  seen  only  as  we  take 
the  Divine  outlook. 


9 


lO 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


The  Chart  which  accompanies  these  Lectures 
is  intended  as  an  aid  to  the  mind  through  the 
avenue  of  the  eye.  It  is  a comparatively  sim- 
ple delineation  of  the  events  with  which  we 
have  to  deal,  and  is  intended  to  represent  the 
whole  stream  of  time.  The  portion  of  a circle 
colored  blue  represents  the  past  eternity.  The 
beginning  of  time  is  marked  by  a small  green 
circle,  signifying  a state  of  earthly  perfection, 
the  garden  of  Eden  as  it  came  from  the  hand 
of  God.  Human  history  runs  on  in  epochs — 
from  the  Fall  of  man  to  the  Flood ; from  the 
Flood  to  the  call  of  Abraham ; from  the  call  of 
Abraham  to  Moses ; and  the  reign  of  Law  to 
the  coming  of  Christ.  From  the  point  where 
human  sin  begins,  the  red  line  marks  the  pres- 
ence of  sacrifice,  the  blood  of  “ the  Lamb  slain 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world.”  At  the  end 
of  the  period  of  Law,  the  Cross  is  uplifted; 
and  a line  ascending  indicates  the  return  of 
Jesus  to  the  heavens.  So  far  as  humanity  is 
concerned,  that  line  is  black,  announcing  the 
culmination  of  sin ; and,  in  contrast,  we  have 
the  gold  which  tells  of  heavenly  glory  accom- 
plished by  that  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ.  A cir- 
cle, showing  the  sphere  of  the  Holy  Spirit’s  dis- 
pensation, is  colored  red,  because  the  whole 
earth  to-day,  as  viewed  from  the  Divine  stand- 
point, is  under  the  blood  of  Christ’s  Cross. 
God  is  dealing  with  man,  entirely  and  every- 


Introductory 


11 


where,  under  the  shelter  and  shadow  of  that 
Cross.  A thin,  green  line  from  Eden  to  Cal- 
vary marks  the  fact  that  throughout  human  his- 
tory God  has  never  left  the  earth  without  wit- 
nesses who  have  been  loyal  to  Him.  That  line 
becomes,  in  the  period  of  the  Spirit’s  work,  a 
golden  one  ; for  the  testimony  is  now  of  a heav- 
enly, as  distinct  from  the  former  earthly,  charac- 
ter. A line  half  gold,  half  purple,  indicates  the 
priestly  work  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  heavens 
during  this  period.  The  device  of  a tongue  of 
fire  represents  the  Spirit  as  connecting  the  ex- 
alted Christ  and  the  earth  on  which  we  live. 
This  dispensation  ends  with  the  coming  of 
Christ,  and  the  ascent  of  the  Church  to  meet 
Him,  marked  by  a line,  the  black  of  which  sig- 
nifies the  mystery  of  the  rapture  to  the  unregen- 
erate, and  the  blue  and  gold,  the  glory  the 
Church  now  enters  upon  with  Christ.  Then 
sets  in  a short  period  of  tribulation  upon  the 
earth,  indicated  by  a black  section  ; at  the  end 
of  which  Christ  and  His  Church  come  to  the 
mid-heavens ; He  Himself  descends  to  the 
earth ; and  we  have  the  Millennium,  a green  cir- 
cle with  the  star  of  gold,  showing  that  while  an 
earthly  glory  is  set  up,  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven 
will  be  realized  under  the  direct  rule  of  Christ 
and  His  people.  The  red  line  of  blood  is  taken 
up  and  continued  on  our  Chart  immediately 
upon  the  end  of  this  dispensation.  At  the  end 


12 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


of  the  Millennium  there  will  be  a short  period  of 
further  trouble  upon  the  earth,  again  marked 
by  a black  section.  A golden  section  indicates 
the  fullness  of  the  times,  the  glorious  reign  of 
Christ,  and  then  the  great  eternities  set  in, 
when  God  shall  be  all  in  all. 

It  is  well  to  approach  this  subject  reverently, 
humbly,  and  apart  from  controversy.  The 
Bible  we  shall  regard  throughout  as  the  au- 
thoritative revelation  of  God  concerning  His 
dealings  with  men.  We  shall  turn  neither  to 
the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left  to  defend  the 
statements  of  the  Word  of  God. 

At  the  outset,  however,  there  are  certain  prin- 
ciples to  which  assent  must  be  given,  in  order 
to  a true  understanding  of  the  whole  scheme 
of  these  studies. 

I.  First,  the  one  abiding,  eternal,  unchange- 
able fact — God  is.  It  is  necessary  thus  to  get 
down  to  the  bed-rock  for  a sound  structure. 

II.  Then  we  must  recognize  the  truth  of 
Divine  Sovereignty.  The  God  from  Whose 
thought  all  good  things  come,  has  never  handed 
over  anything  to  other  government  than  His 
own.  It  may  be  that,  for  awhile,  the  prince  of 
the  power  of  the  air  has  seemed  to  rule ; but 
let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  God  is  upon  His 
throne,  high  and  lifted  up,  still  holding  in  His 
hands  the  reins  of  government.  Not  only  in 
His  own  heavens,  not  only  on  this  earth,  but  in 


Introductory  13 

the  deepest  abyss  itself,  God  is  absolutely  Sov- 
ereign. 

III.  The  next  point  is  that  this  rule  cannot 
be  set  aside ; it  will  continue  forever,  notwith- 
standing all  opposition. 

IV.  Lastly,  because  God  is,  and  because  He 
still  holds  the  reins  of  government,  there  must 
come  the  final  triumph  of  His  Kingdom  and  of 
His  will. 


II 

From  Creation  to  Christ 


16 


I looked  : aside  the  dust-cloud  rolled— 
The  Waster  seemed  the  Builder  too ; 
Upspringing  from  the  ruined  Old 
I saw  the  New. 

was  but  the  ruin  of  the  bad, — 

The  wasting  of  the  wrong  and  ill ; 
Whatever  of  good  the  old  time  had 
Was  living  still. 

The  outworn  rite,  the  old  abuse, 

The  pious  fraud  transparent  grown, 

The  good  held  captive  in  the  use 
Of  wrong  alone — 

These  wait  their  doom,  from  that  great  law 
Which  makes  a past  time  serve  to-day ; 
And  fresher  life  the  world  shall  draw 
From  their  decay. 

But  life  shall  on  and  upward  go ; 

Th^  eternal  step  of  Progress  beats 
To  that  great  anthem,  calm  and  slow, 
Which  God  repeats. 


God  works  in  all  things : all  obey 
His  first  propulsion  from  the  night : 

Wake  thou  and  watch  ! — the  world  is  grey 
With  morning  light ! 

J.  G.  Whittiee. 

The  Reformer.'** 


(16) 


II 


FEOM  CEBATION  TO  CHEIST 

In  thought  we  enter  the  dread  silence  of 
eternity  past;  and  as  the  voices  of  earth  are 
hushed,  we  have  in  that  silence  one  conscious- 
ness— God  is  love.  Every  movement  of  crea- 
tion began  there. 

“In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth 

The  phrase  “the  beginning”  carries  us  behind 
all  dates.  The  first  certainty  is  that  God 
created — when^  no  man  can  tell:  how  far  hack^ 
is  beyond  all  computation.  Behind  the  begin- 
ning of  material  things — God.  Those  who 
would  put  science  and  revelation  in  opposition 
say  to  us,  “ You  tell  us  that  the  world  is  six 
thousand  years  old ; but  here  is  a piece  of  rock 
which  must  be  thousands  of  years  older.”  We 
reply  that  we  do  not  count  our  six  thousand 
years  from  the  creation  of  matter,  but  from  that 
of  man.  Your  rock  may  be  as  old  as  you 
please.  Our  claim  is  that,  beyond  your  longest 
stretch  of  years,  is  God — creating.  Yet  another 
change — “ The  earth  was  waste  and  void ; dark- 
ness was  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.” 

17 


i8 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


It  may  be  well  to  tabulate  the  statements  of 
Genesis  i.  1,  2 : 

1.  ‘‘In  the  beginniDg  God/^ 

The  only  satisfactory  statement  possible  con- 
cerning the  countless  ages  of  the  past.  The 
light  of  the  New  Testament  enables  us  to  make 
a further  assertion  concerning  that  past  eternity, 
viz,  “ God  is  love.” 

2.  “ God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.” 

That  declares  the  origin  of  all  of  which  we 
know  anything  beside  God  Himself.  No  date 
is  fixed,  nor  can  be. 

3.  “The  earth  was  waste  and  void,  and  darkness  was 

upon  the  face  of  the  deep.” 

Between  this  and  the  former,  some  unchronicled 
event  has  transpired ; for  “ waste  and  void  ” are 
words  which  cannot  describe  the  first  condi- 
tions of  any  creation  of  God. 

4.  “The  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the 

waters.” 

The  chaotic  earth  was  not  God-forsaken,  but 
watched  by  the  unwearying  vigilance  of  the 
Eternal  Spirit.  How  long  this  lasted  none  can 
tell. 

We  come  now  to  a point  with  which  we  are 
more  immediately  concerned,  “And  God  sazc?.” 
Here  we  have  for  the  first  time  Divine  thought 


From  Creation  to  Christ  19 

expressed  in  speech.  The  Word  of  God,  the 
Logos.  In  John’s  Gospel  is  an  important  state- 
ment bearing  on  this  fact — John  i.  1: 

In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.” 

By  the  Logos  God  brings  order  out  of  dis- 
order, and  beauty  out  of  the  darkness.  The 
Word  of  God  sounded  over  the  chaotic  earth; 
and,  in  response  to  that  Word,  there  arose  order, 
beauty,  everything  that  we  see  to-day,  only  in 
its  perfection.  Read  in  this  connection,  Prov. 
viii.,  where  the  Word  of  God  is  spoken  of  as 
Wisdom.  Observe  the  declarations  of  that 
wonderful  passage,  that  in  all  God’s  creative 
acts,  “I  (Wisdom)  was  daily  His  delight.” 
Thus  we  have  creation  by  God,  through  Christ, 
the  Wisdom  or  the  Word  of  God;  the  earth 
thoroughly  furnished,  and  man  placed  thereon. 
So  time  begins. 

Accepting  absolutely  the  Bible  story,  which 
fits  in  with  reason,  experience,  and  hope,  we 
find  man  created  in  the  image  of  God  and 
placed  amid  perfect  environment.  He  lives  in 
the  Divine  favor,  holding  unbroken  communion 
with  God,  and  dwelling  in  the  realm  of  loyalty 
to  Him.  Some  say  that  man  was  a non-moral 
being  until  he  fell ; but  we  contend  that  the 
moment  he  stood  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  with 
its  testing  point  for  character  in  the  forbidden 


20 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


tree,  and  the  Divine  denial  of  its  fruit  upon  his 
soul,  he  knew  that  the  realms  of  right  and  of  wrong 
were  bounded  by  obedience  and  disobedience. 
He  was  a moral  being  the  moment  he  took  up  his 
position  there.  God  did  not  tempt,  but  tested, 
man — an  absolute  necessity  in  the  nature  of  the 
case,  for  man  is  a being  with  a will.  Man’s  will  is 
paralyzed,  robbed  of  its  glory  and  magnificence, 
save  as  he  has  opportunity  to  use  it. 

Tennyson  says 

‘ ‘ Our  wills  are  ours,  we  know  not  how  ; 

Our  wills  are  ours  to  make  them  Thine/’ 

But  man  chose  to  make  his  will  his  own,  in 
contradiction  to  the  Divine  will;  becoming,  by 
that  action,  immoral.  He  fell,  was  driven 
forth ; and,  from  that  moment,  the  reign  of 
conscience  set  in.  Man  took  his  place  outside 
the  garden  of  Eden,  to  face  the  future  with  its 
conflict  and  need.  His  position  was  that  of  a 
sinner ; and  the  Divine  dealing  was  no  longer 
with  one  innocent,  but  with  a law-breaker. 
Straightway  the  blood  line  was  over  the  earth, 
pointing  to  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  and  to  be  slain  in  the  fullness  of 
time.  God  brought  to  the  man  and  woman  in 
the  garden  coats  of  skins ; and  there  could  have 
been  no  such  clothing  save  as  there  had  first 
been  the  sacrifice  of  life  and  the  shedding  of 
blood.  The  sacrifices,  which  ever  pointed  on 


From  Creation  to  Christ 


21 


to  Christ’s  Cross,  began  here  with  man’s  sin. 
Man  went  out  from  the  garden,  with  his  hope 
set  on  the  future,  comforted  by  the  announce- 
ment that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise 
the  serpent’s  head.  God  sent  into  life  new 
ministries  of  sorrow  and  toil,  that  man  might, 
by  the  consciousness  of  loss,  be  drawn  back  to 
the  Divine  heart. 

The  story  of  the  earth  from  Eden  to  the 
Flood,  covering  about  1665  years,  is  known  to 
us  all.  During  that  period  two  races  of  men 
were  developed.  First,  we  have  the  line  from 
Adam  through  Cain,  tending  to  corruption  and 
degradation.  There  is  also  the  line  through 
Seth,  which  culminates  in  Enoch,  at  the  seventh 
generation,  who  “ walked  with  God,  and  was 
not,  for  God  took  him.” 

From  Enoch  the  line  of  demarcation  became 
less  and  less  distinct  until  in  the  days  of  Noah 
humanity  had  reached  an  awful  depth  of  deg- 
radation. Gen.  vi.  11,  5 : 

*^And  the  earth  was  corrupt  before  God,  and  the 
earth  was  filled  with  violence.’’  “And  the  Lord  saw 
that  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and 
that  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart 
was  only  evil  continually.” 

God  now  destroyed  the  whole  race  by  the 
Flood,  with  the  exception  of  an  elect  company, 
by  whom  the  continuity  of  the  race  was  pre- 
served, and  on  whom  a new  era  had  dawned. 


22 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


Hitherto  man’s  conscience  had  been  under 
blood.  Blood  and  sacrifice  still  held  their 
place,  but  God  imposed  upon  man  the  duty  of 
mutual  self-government.  Let  us  turn  to  one 
passage  only,  in  Gen.  ix.  5,  6 : 

“Surely  your  blood,  the  blood  of  your  lives,  will  I 
require ; at  the  hand  of  every  beast  will  I require  it : 
and  at  the  hand  of  man,  even  at  the  hand  of  every 
man’s  brother,  will  I require  the  life  of  man.  Whoso 
sheddeth  man’s  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed: 
for  in  the  image  of  God  made  He  man.” 

That  is  a new  arrangement.  Men  are  now  to 
be  governed  mutually.  Every  man  is  to  exer- 
cise care  for  his  brother : and  if  man  slay  his 
brother-man,  other  men  are  to  see  that  he  pays 
the  penalty  with  his  life.  Thus  God  safeguards 
the  life  of  each  by  making  all  responsible  for 
the  lives  of  individuals.  It  is  a new  commence- 
ment, with  corruption  and  evil  put  away  by  the 
Flood. 

Soon  after  the  Deluge,  the  tower  of  Babel 
rose.  Some  assert  that  its  object  was  security 
against  the  effects  of  any  future  flood.  Gen. 
xi.  4 shows,  however,  the  thought  in  the  minds 
of  the  builders. 

“Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a city,  and  a tower,  whose 
top  may  reach  unto  heaven,  and  let  us  make  us  a 
name ; lest  we  be  scattered  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth, 

It  was  not  that  they  hoped  to  escape  another 


From  Creation  to  Christ 


23 


judgment  which  might  be  coming  upon  them  ; 
but  they  desired  solidarity.  To-day  we  hear  a 
great  deal  about  the  “ solidarity  of  humanity  ” ; 
and  the  endeavor  to  secure  it  by  putting  God 
out  of  His  own  world  is  a very  old  piece  of  his- 
tory. Apart  from  Him,  the  only  really  co- 
hesive force  for  humanity  is  absent,  and  con- 
fusion must  be  the  result.  These  men  were 
scattered  throughout  the  whole  earth,  and  their 
tongues  were  confounded.  Some  of  our  friends 
are  seeing  very  serious  difficulties  to-day  as  re- 
gards that  confusion  of  tongues.  Personally,  I 
see  no  more  objection  to  this  record  than  to  the 
account  of  the  Pentecostal  gift  of  tongues ; and 
if  men  are  prepared  to  question  one,  why  not 
the  other  ? 

Here  there  came  into  human  history  the  ele- 
ment of  nationality.  We  talk  proudly  to-day 
about  our  patriotism.  Patriotism  is  after  all 
one  of  the  greatest  curses  the  world  has  ever 
seen,  and  is  but  another  name  for  selfishness. 
What  is  the  Divine  ideal  ? “ He  hath  made  of 

one  blood  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.’’  All 
nationality  and  patriotic  pride  have  sprung 
from  Babel,  and  the  attempt  to  do  without 
God.  Supposing  all  nationality  were  swept 
from  the  world  to-day,  what  would  follow? 
Disarmament,  and  peace.  Then  there  would 
be  real  unity ; and  until  that  is  realized, 
“brotherhood”  outside  the  Christian  Church 


24 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


is  an  anomaly  and  foolishness.  God  scattered 
these  Babel  builders  in  their  attempt  to  secure 
solidarity  without  Him. 

From  Babel  to  Abraham  there  was  a develop- 
ment of  national  pride,  self-interest,  and  con- 
sequent animosities.  In  the  call  of  Abraham, 
we  find  God  taking  one  man  upon  the  principle 
of  faith.  Faith  is  the  confidence  of  man  in  God, 
which  results  in  his  submission  and  obedience. 
The  world  had  lost  this  principle,  and,  as  we 
have  seen,  the  latest  unfolding  of  unbelief  was 
the  attempt  to  secure  unity  apart  from  the 
Divine.  As  a result  the  solidarity  of  the  race 
was  lost,  and  a company  of  nations,  with  prej- 
udices, and  pride,  began  to  conflict  with  each 
other.  God’s  purpose  in  calling  Abraham  was 
that  of  creating  a new  nation,  held  together  by 
this  unifying  principle  of  faith,  that  through 
them  the  nations  of  the  earth  might  learn  the 
blessedness  and  peace  of  the  Divine  Kingship. 

That  is  the  true  story  of  the  calling  of  Abra- 
ham and  the  creation  of  Israel  as  a nation.  I 
solemnly  protest  against  the  common  mistake 
concerning  the  calling  of  Israel  to  God’s 
service,  that  God  abandoned  the  world,  and 
took  but  a few  people  for  Himself.  God  called 
Abraham  and  said,  “I  will  bless  thee  and  make 
thee  a blessing;  and  in  thee  shall  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth  be  blessed.”  As  at  the  first  God’s 
Spirit  brooded  over  chaos  before  order  was 


From  Creation  to  Christ 


25 


evolved  therefrom,  so  His  unwearied  love 
never  ceases  toward  man.  Israel  was  created 
to  influence  other  nations  for  God,  itself  being 
within  His  kingdom.  Israel,  however,  rebelled 
against  God’s  rule ; and  ended  in  Egypt  and 
in  slavery.  Through  unbelief  and  sin,  the 
whole  nation  went  down  into  bondage. 

After  four  hundred  years,  God  wrought  de- 
liverance for  them ; and  then  the  period  of  Law 
set  in,  and  the  nation  was  brought  under  the 
direct  Kingship  of  God.  Thus  was  instituted 
the  most  marvellous  government  the  world  has 
ever  seen.  Very  wonderful  was  that  period  in 
the  wilderness,  when  a great  and  mighty  people 
were  trained  as  God’s  children,  and  were  pre- 
pared for  all  that  lay  before  them.  Their  law 
was  given  them  by  God,  and  they  lived  within 
its  sphere. 

They  came  into  the  promised  land,  and  then 
degeneracy  set  in.  They  grew  tired  of  theoc- 
racy, and  demanded  a monarchy.  We  have  a 
King,  said  they,  but  He  is  in  the  heavens; 
these  nations  have  kings  who  are  with  them  in 
courts,  robes,  and  palaces.  Give  us  such  an  one ! 
They  had  their  desire,  and  passed  through  earthly 
kingship  into  the  realm  of  corruption,  and  ulti- 
mately into  renewed  captivity.  At  last  God’s 
kingly  rule  passed  from  them  altogether ; and 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  set  in,  with  Media, 
Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome,  in  the  ascendant. 


26 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


Still  the  line  of  witnesses  for  God  ran  on,  in  a 
few  souls  true  to  Him,  such  as  Anna,  Simeon, 
the  shepherds,  and  others  who  looked  for  the 
day  of  the  Messiah. 

Now  came  the  last  message,  that  of  John, 
followed  by  the  King  Himself  with  the  same 
words,  “ The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.” 
He  declared  its  laws,  and  gave  evidences  of  its 
benefactions,  as  He  healed  men,  drove  out 
devils,  and  applied  heaven’s  solace  to  earth’s 
sorrows  and  travail  for  His  brief  ministry  of 
three  and  a half  years.  How  did  it  end  ? “ He 
came  unto  His  own,  and  they  that  were  His 
own  received  Him  not,”  but  gave  Him  the  death 
of  the  Cross. 

The  evident  lessons  of  our  study  are  two — 
first,  human  failure;  second,  Divine  progress. 
Look  where  you  will  in  human  history,  you 
find  failure.  The  Fall  and  the  Flood,  Cor- 
ruption and  the  Cross.  Every  time  humanity 
is  put  upon  a new  footing  it  fails.  Has  God 
failed?  Not  once;  everything  has  been  pre- 
paratory and  progressive.  Let  us  retrace  our 
steps.  The  Cross  and  all  that  it  means  was 
prepared  for  throughout  Judaic  history.  This 
one  nation  of  Israel  learned,  through  battle  and 
smoke,  murmuring  and  forgiveness,  captivity 
and  deliverance,  the  great  truth  that  there  is 
but  one  God.  Monotheism  is  the  lesson  which 
humanity  has  learned  through  Israelitish  his- 


From  Creation  to  Christ 


27 


tory.  From  the  time  when  Israel  came  back 
out  of  Babylon,  she  never  again  set  up  idols. 
When  that  truth  was  enshrined  for  the  world 
in  the  chosen  nation,  then  the  one  God  became 
flesh.  God  was  preparing  through  the  wonder- 
ful history  of  their  times  for  the  Incarnation. 
What  of  the  failure  that  preceded  the  Flood  ? 
Sin  worked  itself  out  to  the  utmost  head  of 
corruption.  God  allowed  it  to  have  its  own 
free  working,  and  then  He  swept  it  away,  and 
started  man  upon  the  next  stage  of  history, 
having  behind  him  that  terrific  example  of 
what  sin  is  when  it  is  left  to  its  own  course.  I 
am  bold  to  say  that  human  corruption,  so  far  as 
its  actual  effects  upon  men’s  lives  are  con- 
cerned, has  never  reached  the  awful  depths  of 
degradation  which  prevailed  before  the  flood, 
when  the  sons  of  men  were  holding  intercourse 
with  evil  spirits. 

Thus  we  have  sin  manifested  and  the  one 
God  seen ; while  the  Incarnate  Word  takes  that 
sin  upon  Himself,  that  the  world  may  ever 
know,  from  that  point  onward,  the  meaning  of 
sin  as  well  as  the  meaning  of  God  and  His 
Divine  government. 


Ill 

The  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit 


29 


When  God  of  old  came  down  from  heaven, 
In  power  and  wrath  He  came ; 

Before  His  feet  the  clouds  were  riven, 

Half  darkness  and  half  flame. 


But  when  He  came  the  second  time, 

He  came  in  power  and  love ; 

Softer  than  gale  at  morning  prime 
Hover’d  His  Holy  Dove. 

The  fires  that  rushed  on  Sinai  down 
In  sudden  torrents  dread, 

Now  gently  light,  a glorious  crown. 

On  every  sainted  head. 

Like  arrows  went  those  lightnings  forth, 
Winged  with  the  sinner’s  doom ; 

But  these,  like  tongues  o’er  all  the  earth, 
Proclaiming  life  to  come. 

And  as  on  Israel’s  awe-struck  ear 
The  voice,  exceeding  loud. 

The  trump,  that  angels  wake  to  hear. 
Thrilled  from  the  deep,  dark  cloud ; 

So,  when  the  Spirit  of  our  God 
Came  down  His  flock  to  find, 

A voice  from  heaven  was  heard  abroad, 

A rushing,  mighty  wind. 


It  fills  the  Church  of  God ; it  fills 
The  sinful  world  around ; 

Only  in  stubborn  hearts  and  wills 
No  place  for  it  is  found. 

Keble. 

^'‘Christian 


30 


Ill 


THE  DISPENSATION  OF  THE  SPIRIT 

We  now  come  to  deal  with  the  central  circle 
in  our  Chart,  marking  the  present  dispensation. 
The  thin  line  continued  across  it,  is  golden  in- 
stead of  green,  showing  that  God’s  chosen  peo- 
ple are  now  of  heavenly,  rather  than  earthly, 
character.  Above  is  a line  which  marks  the 
present  High  Priestly  work  of  Jesus  Christ  in 
the  heavens,  this  line  having  its  purple  or 
priestly  side  toward  the  earth.  The  device  of 
a divided  tongue  of  fire  shows  that  the  whole 
dispensation  is  that  of  the  Spirit. 

Let  me  remind  you  of  the  events  immedi- 
ately following  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  Christ. 
There  was  the  resurrection  from  among  the 
dead ; and  then  the  forty  days  which  He  spent 
among  His  disciples,  every  day  of  which  un- 
doubtedly had  some  very  definite  meaning.  It 
is  of  the  greatest  interest  to  trace  His  appear- 
ances during  that  period  to  various  persons, 
upon  different  occasions,  in  different  places  and 
ways.  The  ten  days  of  waiting,  between  His 
ascension  and  the  ushering  in  of  the  Spirit’s 
dispensation,  were  for  the  disciples  days  of 
weakness  and  of  foolishness.  These  men  whom 


31 


32 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


Christ  had  called  to  Himself  had  no  wisdom  to 
know  what  to  do,  even  if  they  had  possessed 
the  power  to  accomplish  anything.  God,  in  in- 
finite wisdom,  left  them  for  ten  days,  enjoining 
them  to  wait  for  “ the  promise  of  the  Father,” 
and  until  they  were  endued  with  “ power  from 
on  high.”  We  are  all  familiar  with  the  story 
of  Pentecost  and  its  effects  upon  these  men  in 
the  upper  room : the  rushing  mighty  wind,  fill- 
ing the  whole  house  where  they  were  assembled, 
and  the  appearance  of  parting  tongues  of  fire 
sitting  upon  each  of  them.  The  wondrous 
power,  that  came  upon  Christ’s  followers,  the 
new  Spirit  that  possessed  them,  and  the  marvel- 
lous deeds  of  early  apostolic  days  are  well 
known  to  every  one  of  us.  It  is  our  aim  to  get 
a general  view  of  the  whole  dispensation  thus 
inaugurated. 

By  His  coming  at  the  day  of  Pentecost  upon 
that  company  of  men  and  women  in  the  upper 
room,  the  Holy  Ghost  formed  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ.  There  had  been  no  Church  prior 
to  that  coming  of  the  Spirit.  Individual  Jew- 
ish disciples  had  gathered  around  the  Lord  dur- 
ing the  days  of  His  ministry,  and  He  prepared 
them  for  the  ushering  in  of  this  wondrous  dis- 
pensation. As  they  gathered  together  day  by 
day  in  the  upper  room,  they  were  a collection 
of  separate  individual  souls ; but  “ when  the 
day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come,”  and  the 


The  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit  33 


Spirit  fell  upon  them,  He  united  them  into  one 
whole  body,  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
Spirit  came  to  create  the  Church,  to  be  the 
bond  of  its  life ; and,  from  that  time  to  this, 
men  have  only  entered  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  through  the  new  creation  of  the  Spirit. 
Avoiding  anything  like  controversy,  we  still 
find  it  necessary  to  say  in  passing,  that  no  per- 
son was  ever  admitted  to  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  by  water  baptism,  or  by  votes  of  mem- 
bers. There  can  be  no  admission  into  spiritual 
union  by  that  which  is  purely  material.  We 
admit  persons  into  Church  fellowship,  not  in 
order  that  they  may  become  members  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  but  because  they  are  already 
such.  For  the  sake  of  a very  important  dis- 
tinction, I repeat  that  by  the  coming  of  the 
Spirit  the  Church  was  formed ; and  that  same 
Spirit  has,  from  that  day  to  this,  admitted  into 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  such  souls  as,  con- 
vinced by  Himself,  have  believed  upon  Christ 
and  have  been  therefore  born  again  of  the 
Spirit.  So  began  the  dispensation  in  which  we 
live. 

What  is  the  difference  between  the  Spirit’s 
relation  to  this  present  dispensation  and  to 
former  ones  ? This  question  is  very  important ; 
because  we  are  in  danger  of  imagining  that 
God  has,  in  some  way,  been  working  in  sections 
of  Himself  while  dealing  with  men.  This  is 


34 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


not  so:  the  Spirit  had  direct  dealings  with 
every  dispensation  that  has  passed  away.  Psalm 
xxxiii.  6 : 

“ By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made ; 

And  all  the  host  of  them  by  the  breath  of  His  mouth.  ’ 

There  can  be  very  little  doubt  that,  in  order  to 
carry  the  true  sense  of  the  word  there  to  Eng- 
lish readers,  breath  should  have  a capital  By  as 
referring  to  the  Holy  Spirit ; and,  in  that  dec- 
laration of  the  Psalmist,  we  have  the  union  of 
God  the  Father,  with  the  Word  of  God,  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  in  creation.  Gen.  vi.  3 : 

“And  the  Lord  said,  My  Spirit  shall  not  strive  with 

man  forever,  for  that  he  also  is  flesh.” 

I do  not  refer  you  to  that  verse  to  deal  with  it  in 
its  setting,  to  which  I make  only  passing  refer- 
ence. It  is  continually  being  quoted  as  appli- 
cable to  this  dispensation  and  to  individual  life 
therein.  Sermons  have  been  preached  from 
this  passage,  to  prove  that  God  now  withdraws 
His  Spirit  from  living  men.  Such  use  is  con- 
trary to  Scripture,  and  a denial  of  the  great 
lines  of  order  upon  which  God  proceeds  and 
from  which  He  never  deviates  in  His  dealings 
with  men.  In  its  setting,  it  plainly  refers,  some 
one  hundred  and  twenty  years  before  the  event, 
to  the  time  when  judgment  should  set  in  by  the 
Flood.  But  I quote  it  to  show  that  in  the  old 
di^ensation  God  dealt  with  man  by  His  Spirit 


The  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit  35 


for  special  reasons  and  on  particular  occasions. 
Num.  xi.  25 : 

“ Aud  the  Lord  came  down  in  the  cloud,  and  spake 
unto  him,  and  took  of  the  Spirit  that  was  upon  him, 
and  put  it  upon  the  seventy  elders;  and  it  came  to 
pass  that  when  the  Spirit  rested  upon  them,  they 
prophesied/^ 

The  Authorized  Version  adds,  “and  did  not 
cease  but  the  Revised  Version  makes  an  im- 
portant alteration,  “ they  did  so  no  more.” 
The  elders  only  prophesied  when  the  Spirit  was 
upon  them.  We  read  further  that  when  Eldad 
and  Medad,  who  were  not  ordained,  began 
prophesying  (verses  27-29) : 

“ There  ran  a young  man,  and  told  Moses,  and  said, 
Eldad  and  Medad  do  prophesy  in  the  camp.  And 
Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  the  minister  of  Moses,  one  of 
his  chosen  men,  answered  and  said.  My  lord  Moses,  for- 
bid them.  And  Moses  said  unto  him.  Art  thou  jealous 
for  my  sake?  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord^s  people 
were  prophets.” 

Why  did  these  men  prophesy?  Because  the 
Spirit  of  God  had  come  upon  them.  The  Spirit 
on  the  elders  made  them  prophets ; but  when 
He  was  taken  from  them,  thej^  ceased  to  proph- 
esy. Forgive  the  use  of  a word  to  which  I par- 
ticularly object,  but  I employ  it  in  its  common 
acceptation : the  Spirit  upon  the  laity  made 
them  prophets.  (It  is  high  time  that  we  drop 
the  unholy  distinction  between  clergy  or  minis- 
ters and  “ the  laity  ”).  The  Spirit  came,  of  old, 


36  God’s  Methods  with  Man 

that  men,  in  or  out  of  orders  as  God  chose, 
should  become  His  messengers  to  the  age  in 
which  they  lived. 

Another  interesting  reference  to  the  work  of 
the  Spirit  in  the  old  dispensation  occurs  in  Exo- 
dus xxxi.  1-6 : 

“And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  See,  I 
have  called  by  name  Bezalel,  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son 
of  Hur,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah : and  I have  filled  him 
with  the  Spirit  of  God.’^  What  for?  “In  wisdom, 
and  in  understanding,  and  in  knowledge,  and  in  all 
manner  of  workmanship,  to  devise  cunning  works,  to 
work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  brass,  and  in  cutting* 
of  stones  for  setting,  and  in  carving  of  wood,  to  work 
in  all  manner  of  workmanship.” 

The  anointing  of  the  Spirit  to  be  a brassworker, 
carpenter,  stonecutter,  and  everything  else ! 
Would  to  God  we  believed  it,  in  this  day,  more 
than  we  do ! In  the  old  dispensation,  men  who 
had  special  work  to  do  were  fitted  for  it,  even 
to  the  details  of  material  things,  by  the  coming 
upon  them  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Such  illus- 
trations might  be  multiplied ; and  they  form  a 
most  interesting  study. 

Under  the  old  dispensation  the  Spirit  was 
given  to  certain  men  for  specific  work  or  the 
delivery  of  special  messages ; and  when  the 
work  was  done.  He  was  withdrawn.  He  was 
then,  if  I may  use  the  phrase,  a visitor  to  men, 
coming  by  the  will  of  God,  accomplishing  the 
Divine  purpose.  But  godly  men  of  those  days 


The  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit  37 


looked  for  something  further,  even  in  connection 
with  the  Spirit  of  God.  Here  is  a prophecy 
containing  a promise  made  to  them : 

Joel  ii.  28-30  : ‘‘And  it  shall  come  to  pass  after- 

ward, that  I will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh ; 
and  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy,  your 
old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  young  men  shall  see 
visions : and  also  upon  the  servants  and  upon  the  hand- 
maids in  those  days  will  I pour  out  My  Spirit.” 

That  was  a promise  made  to  the  old  dispensa- 
tion, but  not  fulfilled  in  it ; and  it  is  a supreme 
instance,  but  not  the  only  one,  of  such  a prom- 
ise. Jer.  xxxi.,  and  the  wondrous  chapters 
toward  the  close  of  Ezekiel’s  prophecy,  show 
how  men  of  old  waited,  not  only  for  the  coming 
Messiah,  but  for  the  giving  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
as  never  before. 

From  Creation  through  the  reign  of  con- 
science, on  to  the  period  of  law,  the  Spirit 
worked  among  men  upon  occasion,  convincing 
of  sin,  revealing  the  will  of  God,  fitting  for 
specific  service  to  be  rendered  to  God;  but 
that  was  all.  Pentecost,  however,  was  a fulfill- 
ment of  the  prophecy  in  Joel.  Peter,  speaking 
to  the  assembled  crowd  concerning  the  sights 
which  they  had  seen  and  the  sounds  which  they 
had  heard,  said,  in  answer  to  a criticism  from 
some  in  that  crowd  (Acts  ii.  14-16) : 

‘‘Ye  men  of  Judaea,  and  all  ye  that  dwell  at  Jerusa- 
lem, be  this  known  unto  you,  and  give  ear  unto  my 


38  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


words.  For  these  are  not  drunken,  as  ye  suppose ; see- 
ing it  is  but  the  third  hour  of  the  day  ; but  this  is  that 
which  hath  been  spoken  by  the  prophet  Joel.’^ 

At  Pentecost  the  Holy  Spirit  came  in  His 
fullness  as  He  had  never  come  before,  to  be  for 
this  dispensation  not  a visitor  but  a resident  in 
the  Church.  That  event  was  equal  in  impor- 
tance to  the  Incarnation  itself,  was  closely  allied 
to  it,  and  was  its  direct  consequence.  Bring 
together  those  remarkable  statements : “ The 
Word  was  made  flesh”;  “ I will  pour  out  my 
Spirit  upon  all  flesh.”  Now  that  Divinity  has 
come  to  humanity,  and  humanity  in  the  person 
of  the  incarnate  Logos  is  linked  to  Divinity — 
the  Spirit  of  God  can  be  poured  out  upon  all 
flesh.  The  two  events  are  so  closely  joined  in 
essence  that  neither  can  be  correctly  understood 
apart  from  the  other.  By  the  coming  of  that 
Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  as  the  result  of 
the  finished  work  of  the  Son  of  God,  we  enter 
upon  the  Spirit’s  dispensation — that  in  which 
we  live  to-day. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  to-day  the  Revealer  and 
the  Administrator  of  the  absent  King  Whom 
the  world  still  rejects.  Never  let  it  be  forgot- 
ten that  we  are  living  in  a world  which  has  cast 
out  the  King.  We  are  the  direct  descendants 
of  the  people  who  joined  in  saying,  “We  will 
not  have  this  Man  to  reign  over  us.”  The  fact 
that  the  earth  has  cast  Him  out  abides  unto 


The  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit  39 

this  time ; but  God,  in  grace,  has  turned  the 
wrath  of  man  into  that  which  praises  Him, 
taking  hold  of  human  failure  and  transforming 
it  into  Divine  victory.  The  heavens  have  re- 
ceived the  King  for  a time ; but  while  He  is 
hidden  from  the  eyes  of  men  for  awhile,  the 
Living  One  is  being  made  real  to  all  peoples  of 
the  earth  in  this  generation.  How  ? By  the 
living  Spirit,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  the  Ad- 
ministrator of  the  King  in  His  absence.  He 
makes  Christ,  and  not  Himself,  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  believer.  His  one  work  is  to  up- 
lift, unveil,  reveal  Jesus  to  the  hearts  of  His 
people  ; to  realize  within  the  character  of  those 
who  are  born  again  all  Jesus  is,  by  bringing 
them  under  the  blessed  rule  of  the  King  Him- 
self. 

Sometimes  friends  ask  me  to  recommend  them 
a book  upon  the  Holy  Spirit.  My  reply  is, 
“ Read  John’s  Gospel,  chapters  xiv.  to  xvi. ; for 
there  you  have  weighty  statements  concerning 
the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  lips  of  the  Master 
Himself.”  Take  xiv.  16  : 

“I  -will  make  request  of  the  Father,  and  He  shall 
give  you  another  Comforter.” 

In  Scripture  there  are  untranslatable  words, 
having  in  them  infinite  depths  of  meaning, 
which  can  never  be  put  into  any  number  of 
words ; and  this  term,  “ the  Comforter,”  is  one 


40 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


of  them.  You  may  make  it  “Intercessor”  or 
“Advocate,”  if  you  will;  but  it  means  both, 
and  infinitely  more  than  the  two  together.  It 
is  the  word  which  reveals  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  life  of  the  believer.  Verses  16,  17 : 

“ And  I will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you 
another  Comforter,  that  He  may  be  with  you  forever, 
even  the  Spirit  of  truth : Whom  the  world  cannot  re- 
ceive ; for  it  beholdeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him : 
ye  know  Him  ; for  He  abideth  with  you,  and  shall  be 
in  you.” 

Verse  26. — “But  the  Comforter,  even  the  Holy 
Spirit,  Whom  the  Father  will  send  in  My  name,  He 
shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  to  your  remem- 
brance all  that  I said  unto  you,” 

So  that  the  one  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  to 
teach  things  concerning  Christ,  and  to  bring  to 
remembrance  and  understanding  the  words 
which  fell  from  His  lips.  This  proves  that 
there  is  a twofold  aspect  of  the  Spirit’s  work — 
a truth  which  I can  now  only  outline.  First, 
there  is  His  work  in  the  world  and  with  the 
people  of  the  world ; and  then  there  is  His 
work  in  the  Church  and  with  the  people  of  the 
Church.  Read  the  word  of  the  apostle  in  1. 
Tim.  iv.  10: 

“For  to  this  end  we  labor  and  strive,  because  we 
have  our  hope  set  on  the  living  God,  Who  is  the  Sav- 
iour of  all  men,  specially  of  them  that  believe.” 

We  see,  then,  that  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  has 
a twofold  aspect — He  is  the  Saviour  of  all 


1 


The  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit  41 

men,  He  is  the  Saviour  specially  of  those  who 
believe.  If  therefore  the  Spirit  of  God  comes 
to  take  up  Christ’s  work,  to  apply  it  and  make 
Him  real,  the  same  double  office  will  character- 
ize the  Spirit’s  operations.  Because  we  have 
lost  sight  of  this  truth,  some  have  fallen  away 
from  the  hope  of  the  Church — the  return  of 
our  Lord  Himself. 

First,  there  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
Church;  then  His  work  upon  all  flesh.  Re- 
ferring again  to  Acts  ii.,  the  Spirit  fell — upon 
whom  ? Upon  the  waiting  disciples,  baptizing 
them  in  His  fullness,  filling  them  as  He  came, 
equipping  them  for  life  and  for  service  by  His 
coming,  creating  by  that  inflow  the  Church. 
But  presently  the  little  company  broke  up  and 
went  from  the  upper  room,  and  as  Peter  preached 
to  the  crowd,  the  people  were  moved  and 
swayed.  How?  By  Peter’s  preaching?  As- 
suredly not.  If  Peter  had  preached  the  day 
before,  he  might  have  uttered  the  same  words, 
but  they  would  not  have  produced  that  effect. 
How,  then,  was  the  crowd  swayed  ? The  Spirit 
of  God  was  dealing  with  it ; for  Peter’s  preach- 
ing was  in  power  and  in  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit.  What  is  demonstration?  Making  plain. 
Peter  uttered  what  he  had  to  declare — his  wit- 
ness concerning  the  Master — and  the  Spirit 
made  it  plain  to  those  who  heard.  It  is  such 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  which  still  marks 


42 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


the  true  sphere  of  preaching.  How  often  some 
of  us  have  labored  to  make  the  Gospel  simple  : 
and  what  an  endless  pity  it  is  that  we  do  not 
leave  such  work  to  the  Holy  Ghost ! I some- 
times feel  that  in  our  passionate  desire  to  make 
God’s  word  plain  we  may  be  thwarting  the  Di- 
vine purpose  and  hindering  the  Divine  activity. 
When  the  Holy  Spirit  equips  a preacher,  He 
gives  him  words ; while  the  preacher  who  is 
responsive,  utters  the  word,  the  Spirit  makes  it 
plain.  That  is  what  Paul  meant  when  he  said 
that  he  had  not  come  to  the  Corinthians  with 
enticing  words  of  man’s  wisdom,  but  with  the 
story  of  the  Cross,  made  clear,  real,  and  force- 
ful, by  the  Spirit  of  God  Himself. 

For  a moment  let  us  look  more  closely  at  the 
twofold  nature  of  the  Spirit’s  sphere.  What 
He  is  doing  in  the  Church  we  have  already 
seen  in  the  reference  which  has  been  made  to 
John  xiv.  16 — He  is  the  Comforter.  If  we 
turn  to  chapter  xvi.  13,  14,  we  get  a very  im- 
portant statement. 

‘‘  Howbeit  when  He»  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  He 
shall  guide  you  into  all  the  truth : for  He  shall  not 
speak  from  Himself.’^ — What  wonderful  words  concern- 
ing the  Spirit  of  God! — “but  what  things  soever  He 
shall  hear,  these  shall  He  speak : and  He  shall  declare 
unto  you  the  things  that  are  to  come.” 

The  next  verse  declares  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  Church — 


The  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit  43 


“He  shall  glorify  Me : for  He  shall  take  of  Mine, 
and  shall  declare  it  unto  you/^ 

Beloved,  how  much  do  you  know  of  Jesus 
Christ — how  much  of  the  beauty  of  His  char- 
acter, of  the  tenderness  of  His  love,  of  the  maj- 
esty of  His  person  ? All  that  you  have  learned 
concerning  Christ,  you  know  only  by  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Spirit  of  God.  No  man  can  call 
Him  Lord  save  by  the  Spirit ; and  no  man  can 
know  Him  save  by  the  Spirit.  The  first  work 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  then,  is  to  make  Christ  to 
the  believing  heart 

“ a living,  bright  reality, 

More  dear,  more  intimately  nigh 
Than  e^en  the  svreetest  earthly  tie.“ 

That  being  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  be- 
liever, truth  becomes  to  us,  not  a commodity  to 
be  stored,  but  a great  sanctifying,  purifying 
force  in  our  lives.  When  the  Spirit  of  God 
comes  to  the  soul  and  says  “ Jesus  is  Lord,” 
the  soul  responds  “Jesus  is  Lord.”  It  is  not 
that  the  soul  has  found  out  a secret,  but  rather 
that  it  has  passed  into  a new  realm  of  life  ; and 
the  whole  of  its  being  goes  down  before  the 
Lordship  of  Jesus  thus  revealed.  So,  from 
then  until  now,  the  Spirit  has  been  revealing 
Christ  and  reproducing  Him  within  the  char- 
acters and  lives  of  the  members  of  the  Church, 
Is  tha^  all  of  His  work  ? Nay ; look  again 


44 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


at  John  xvi.  8-11.  Here  you  have  the  larger 
outlook  upon  the  Spirit’s  operations.  Jesus 
says ; 

“ And  He,  when  He  is  come,  will  convict  the  world 
in  respect  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judg- 
ment”— NOT  come.” 

If  I can  impress  that  upon  you,  it  will  be  some- 
thing done.  That  passage  is  continually  being 
misquoted,  by  the  addition  of  the  words  “ to 
come.”  The  force  of  the  statement  may  be 
gathered  from  our  Lord’s  own  explanation : 

“Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  Me;  of  right- 
eousness, because  I go  to  the  Father ; of  judgment,  be- 
cause the  prince  of  this  world  hath  been  judged” — 
NOT  shall  6e.” 

It  is  not  of  judgment  to  come,  but  of  judgment 
past,  that  the  Spirit  is  to  convict  the  world. 

The  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  world,  as  dis- 
tinct from  the  Church,  is  that  of  bringing  men 
into  direct  contact  with  Christ  in  these  three 
particulars. 

i.  Sin.  Because  He  is  the  Saviour  from  sin, 
refusal  to  believe  in  Him  is  the  specific  sin 
which  lies  at  the  root  of  all  others. 

By  belief  I do  not  mean  an  intellectual  as- 
sent to  the  historic  statements  concerning  Him, 
but  the  surrender  of  the  whole  being  to  .Him  in 
perfect  confidence.  Unbelief,  then,  is  the  atti- 
tude of  life  unsurrendered  and  disobedient. 


The  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit  45 

ii.  Righteousness,  Because  He  has  ascended 
to  the  Father,  righteousness  is  now  possible  to 
all  who  believe  in  Him.  Thus  belief  is  not 
only  for  the  putting  away  of  sin,  it  is  also  for 
the  bringing  in  of  righteousness. 

hi.  Judgment.  He  has  judged  the  prince  of 
the  world,  and  henceforth  all  who  believe  in 
Him  share  His  triumph  over  evil. 

The  great  enemy  of  the  race  has  been  bruised 
by  the  Saviour  of  men. 

The  demonstration  of  these  truths  to  men  is 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  How  did  you 
find  your  way  to  Jesus  Christ?  Using  some 
sermon,  tract,  or  other  human  instrumentality, 
the  Spirit  convicted  you  of  sin,  of  righteous- 
ness, and  of  judgment  accomplished  by  the 
Cross ; and  you,  through  Christ,  entered  freely 
into  the  region  of  purity,  power,  and  blessing. 

In  our  present  dispensation  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  doing  this  twofold  work ; He  is  selecting — I 
use  the  word  without  a moment’s  hesitation, 
but  you  may  use  the  word  “ electing  ” if  you 
please — the  members  of  the  Church  of  Christ ; 
but  He  is  doing  infinitely  more.  He  is  prepar- 
ing the  whole  earth  for  the  return  of  the 
King,  as  in  every  land  He  works  through  the 
disciples  of  Christ.  He  is  thus  undermining 
false  religions  and  preparing  the  hearts  of  men. 

Nations  are  getting  ready  for  Christ.  For 
example,  the  messengers  of  the  Cross  have  in- 


46  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


fluenced  the  great  teaching  centres  of  India, 
where  thousands  are  flinging  away  false  reli- 
gions. Alas ! that  many  such  should  be  drift- 
ing into  agnosticism  and  atheism.  We  can 
almost  hear  the  footfall  of  the  King  as  He 
comes  to  bring  in  all  the  wondrous  dispensation 
which  is  to  succeed  this  present  preparatory 
one.  Look  where  you  will,  and  you  find  tri- 
umphs of  the  Cross  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit’s 
work,  and  there  are  signs  of  readiness  on  every 
hand  for  the  dawn  of  the  day  of  God  and  the 
advent  of  the  King. 

Let  us  remember,  then,  that  the  twofold 
work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  make  Jesus  real  to  this 
age.  He  does  this  in  the  Church,  by  revealing 
Christ  increasingly,  growingly,  progressively  to 
believers,  that  they  may  be  transformed  into 
Christ’s  likeness.  He  does  it  in  the  world,  by 
preparing  everywhere  for  the  return  of  the 
King. 


IV 

The  Coming  of  Christ 


47 


I woke,  and  the  night  was  passing, 

And  over  the  hills  there  shone 

A star  all  alone  in  its  beauty 
When  the  other  stars  were  gone — 

For  a glory  was  filling  the  heavens 
That  came  before  the  day, 

And  the  gloom  and  the  stars  together 
Faded  and  passed  away. 

Only  the  star  of  the  morning 
Glowed  in  the  crimson  sky — 

It  was  like  a clear  voice  singing, 

‘‘  Kejoice ! for  the  Sun  is  nigh ! 

0 children ! a Star  is  shining 
Into  the  hearts  of  men — 

It  is  Christ  with  a voice  of  singing, 

“ Rejoice ! for  I come  again ! 

“For  the  long,  long  night  is  passing. 

And  there  cometh  the  golden  day ; 

1 come  to  My  own  who  love  Me, 

To  take  them  all  away, 

“ It  may  be  to-day  or  to-morrow. 

Soon  it  will  surely  be ; 

Then  past  are  the  tears  and  the  sorrow — 
Then  Home  forever  with  Me/’ 

Hymns  of  Ter  Steegen  and  others. 

“ The  Morning  Star,  ’ ’ 


48 


IV 


THE  COMING  OF  CHRIST 

All  Christian  people  are  looking  for  the 
Millennium.  It  is  an  integral  part  of  Chris- 
tian teaching  and  of  the  living  creed  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  that 

Jesus  shall  reign  where’er  the  sun 
Doth  his  successive  journeys  run. 

There  is  no  difference  of  opinion  among  evan- 
gelical Christians  concerning  the  certainty  of 
that  great  future  event  which  constitutes  the 
hope  of  the  world  as  well  as  of  the  Church. 
There  are  varying  views  as  to  how  the  Millen- 
nium will  be  ushered  in ; as  to  how  the  state  of 
blessedness,  foretold  by  prophets,  and  distinctly 
taught  by  the  teachers  of  the  new  dispensation, 
will  be  brought  about.  All  Christian  people 
believe  in  the  second  advent  of  Jesus  Christ, 
but  differ  concerning  the  time  of  His  coming, 
the  conditions  under  which  He  will  appear,  and 
the  purpose  of  that  advent.  Probably  the 
most  popular  view  in  current  theology  is,  that 
the  Gospel  will  be  carried  by  missionaries  of 
the  Cross  into  land  after  land,  until  not  only 
all  peoples  have  heard  the  glad  tidings,  but,  by 
the  preaching  thereof,  have  been  brought  into 
49 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


50 

subjection  to  Jesus  Christ.  Those  who  hold 
this  view  necessarily  believe  that  His  advent 
will  be  post-millennial.  Let  me  say,  in  passing, 
that  this  view  of  the  coming  of  Christ  is  only 
two  hundred  years  old,  theologically ; for,  prior 
to  the  period  indicated,  it  was  the  general  be- 
lief of  the  Church  that  the  Millennium  would 
be  ushered  in  by  His  advent. 

We  are,  however,  not  particularly  interested 
in  theological  views  as  held  then  or  now ; but 
we  are  intensely  anxious  to  know  what  is  the 
teaching  of  the  New  Testament  about  this 
most  important  subject.  In  the  first  place, 
then,  let  us  examine  Paul’s  first  Letter  to  the 
Thessalonians,  to  which  we  must  refer  more 
than  once : 

1 Thess.  i.  9,  10  : ‘‘For  they  themselves  report  con- 
cerning us  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto 
you;  and  how  ye  turned  unto  God  from  idols,  to  serve 
a living  and  true  God,  and  to  wait  for  His  Son  from 
heaven.” 

The  words  revealed  the  threefold  attitude  of 
every  believer  in  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  early 
days  of  Christianity.  There  was,  first  of  all, 
the  turning  to  God  from  idols;  next,  the  serv- 
ing of  the  living  God  ; and,  third,  the  waiting  for 
His  Son  from  heaven.  That  was  a declaration  of 
the  position  of  the  believer  with  regard  to  the 
past,  the  present,  and  the  future.  He  had  turned 
from  the  idols  of  the  past  to  God ; in  the  then 


The  Coming  of  Christ  51 

present  days  he  was  serving  God ; and  to-mor- 
row— the  coming  of  the  King ! There  was 
repentance,  turning  from  idols  to  God ; there 
was  the  consistent  Christian  walk  through  the 
days,  serving  the  living  God ; but  there  was, 
above  it  all,  shining  upon  it  in  beauty,  the  hope 
which  maketh  not  ashamed — waiting  for  the 
Son  from  heaven. 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  first  two  of  those 
three  positions,  thousands  of  God’s  people  are 
fulfilling  them,  in  the  measure  in  which  it  is 
possible  to  do  so  when  the  third  is  forgotten  or 
denied.  There  has  been  the  turning  from  idols 
to  God ; there  is  the  serving  of  the  living  God 
in  daily  walk ; and  yet,  alas  ! alas ! for  years 
the  Church  has  lost  its  hope,  and  has  not  been 
living  as  a people  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

If  that  be  the  Church’s  true  attitude,  the 
coming  of  Jesus  Christ  must  necessarily  be 
distinctly  taught  in  the  New  Testament.  I do 
not  set  any  very  particular  value  upon  the 
figures  which  follow,  but  they  are  interesting 
for  passing  notice.  In  the  New  Testament 
there  are  no  less  than  three  hundred  and  eigh- 
teen distinct  references  to  the  coming  of  Jesus 
Christ.  If  you  divide  your  New  Testament 
into  verses,  one  in  twenty-five  has  to  do  with 
that  blessed  hope  of  the  Church.  And  if  you 
take  these  two  letters  to  the  Thessalonians— 


52 


God's  Methods  with  Man 


the  part  of  the  New  Testament  which  deals 
specifically  with  this  great  subject — one  verse 
in  four  has  a direct  reference  to  the  return  of 
the  Master. 

Perhaps  one  of  the  most  remarkable  contri- 
butions, theologically,  to  the  discussion  of  this 
whole  subject  in  recent  years — remarkable  be- 
cause of  the  source  from  which  it  has  come— is 
the  book  which  Professor  Denney  has  written 
upon  the  epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,  in  the 
Expositor's  Bible  Series.  He  has  emphatically 
declared  that  the  hope  of  the  Church  in  those 
days  was  most  unmistakably  a hope  that  Jesus 
would  soon  come.  He  says,  “ It  was  this  hope 
which  more  than  anything  gave  its  color  to  the 
primitive  Christianity,  its  unworldliness,  its 
moral  intensity,  its  command  of  the  future 
even  in  this  life."  And  again,  “ That  attitude 
of  expectation  is  the  bloom,  as  it  were,  of  the 
Christian  character.  Without  it,  there  is  some- 
thing lacking;  the  Christian  who  does  not  look 
upward  and  onward  wants  one  mark  of  perfec- 
tion." 

I feel  that  something  must  here  be  said  about 
the  authority  of  the  New  Testament  in  this 
connection.  I was  speaking  a little  while  ago, 
about  this  great  subject  of  the  return  of  the 
Lord,  to  a friend  of  mine,  one  who  is  in  the 
ministry,  a man  of  undoubted  culture  and  also 
of  spiritual  devotion.  He  told  me  he  thought 


53 


The  Coming  of  Christ 

it  was  a very  beautiful  dream,  but  only  a dream. 
“Surely,”  said  I,  “you  agree  with  me  that  it  is 
taught  in  the  pages  of  the  New  Testament:  for 
instance,  in  Paul’s  letter  to  the  Thessalonians.” 
His  reply  was,  “I  fully  grant  you  that  when 
Paul  wrote  his  letters  to  the  Thessalonians  he 
believed  the  next  event  of  importance  in  the 
history  of  man  would  be  the  coming  of  Jesus 
Christ.”  I said  to  him,  “Wliat  do  you  mean 
by  saying  that  Paul  believed  it  ? ” He  replied, 
“ If  you  read  his  letter  to  the  Galatians,  written 
at  a much  later  period  of  his  life,  you  will  find 
that  he  makes  no  direct  reference  to  this  sub- 
ject, and  has  evidently  outgrown  that  early  be- 
lief.” That  was  to  me  an  appalling  position 
with  regard  to  the  inspiration  of  the  New 
Testament.  I said  to  my  friend,  “Then  you 
believe  that  Paul’s  inspiration  was  nothing 
more  than  his  own  particular  view  of  truth  at  a 
certain  period  in  his  life.”  “ That  is  exactly 
what  I believe.”  “Well,”  said  I,  “how  do 
you  know  that,  if  Paul  had  lived  ten  years 
longer,  he  would  not  have  outgrown  his  view  of 
Christian  liberty  as  declared  in  the  letter  to  the 
Galatians?  ” 

I submit  that  every  epistle  from  the  pen  of 
Paul  was  called  forth  by  the  necessities  of  local 
circumstances.  In  writing  to  Thessalonica,  he 
was  seeking  to  correct  those  who  had  wrong 
views  of  the  return  of  their  Lord ; while,  in 


54 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


his  epistle  to  Galatia,  he  dealt  with  Christian 
people  who  were  becoming  enslaved  by  Juda- 
ism. Every  epistle  had  its  specific  bearing  upon 
local  conditions;  and  I absolutely  deny  that 
there  was  any  growth,  on  the  line  of  my  friend’s 
remarks,  in  the  writings  of  the  apostle.  At 
the  very  last,  when  death  seemed  imminent, 
Paul  still  lived  in  the  belief  that  his  Master 
would  come ; and  when  he  spoke  ever  and  anon 
of  the  possibility  of  death,  it  was  by  no  means 
a denial  of  his  earlier  position  as  manifested  in 
his  writings  that  the  Church’s  hope  is  the  com- 
ing of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  subject  is  so  full  and  many-sided,  one 
hardly  knows  which  particular  point  to  take  in 
order  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  the  next  imme- 
diate event  for  which  the  Church  (and  the 
world,  moreover)  waits,  is  the  return  of  the 
Lord  Himself.  May  I ask  j^'ou  to  read  the 
seven  parables  contained  in  the  Gospel  of  Mat- 
thew, chapter,  xiii.  They  give  us  a sevenfold 
aspect  of  the  Kingdom  during  this  dispensation. 
What,  then,  is  the  general  teaching  of  these 
parables  ? Do  any  or  all  of  them  imply  that 
this  dispensation  is  to  be  one  in  which  the  whole 
world  shall  be  gathered  into  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  by  preaching?  Careful  examination  af- 
fords evidence  that  such  is  not  their  teaching, 
whether  we  take  them  singly  or  collectively. 
The  first  four  parables  which  deal  with  out- 


The  Coming  of  Christ 


55 


ward  maDifestations  in  this  dispensation  were 
spoken  to  the  multitude,  two  being  afterward 
explained  to  the  disciples ; the  last  three  view 
things  from  a Divine  standpoint,  and  can  only 
be  fully  understood  by  those  who  are  linked  in 
life  with  the  King,  and  so  were  spoken  to  the 
disciples  alone. 

Does  the  first  parable,  that  of  the  sower, 
teach  that,  at  the  end  of  the  age,  all  men  every- 
where shall  be  won  to  the  Kingdom  ? Assur- 
edly not.  There  is  mixture  of  good  and  evil — 
some  seed  falling  upon  good  ground,  some  upon 
secondary  ground,  and  some  upon  utterly  fruit- 
less soil ; so  that  there  shall  be  a harvest  reaped 
out  of  the  world,  rather  than  the  whole  world 
be  won. 

In  the  next  parable,  that  of  the  wheat  and 
the  tares,  the  truth  assumes  another  form. 
Here  are  two  sowings  going  forward — not  only 
the  sowing  of  wheat,  but  that  of  tares  by  an 
enemy ; and  when  the  servants  came  and  said 
to  the  Master,  “Shall  we  root  up  the  tares?” 
He  replied,  “No,  let  both  grow  together  till  the 
harvest.”  “ The  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  age,” 
said  Jesus  to  His  disciples  ; “and  at  that  time 
there  shall  be  separation  between  wheat  and 
tares.”  There  is  no  teaching  there  that  the 
sowing  results  in  all  wheat ; but  difference  in 
kind,  mixture,  and  final  separation,  are  clearly 
marked. 


56  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


Then  there  is  the  parable  of  the  mustard  seed 
which  became  a great  tree.  A tree,  in  Scrip- 
ture, is  always  the  figure  of  power.  Nebuchad- 
nezzar is  spoken  of  under  that  similitude,  and 
the  king  of  Assyria,  and  Pharaoh ; the  great 
dynasties  and  forces  of  the  earth  are  repre- 
sented as  trees.  Our  Lord  simply  teaches  that 
Christendom  shall  become  a great  power  and 
force — nothing  more.  I suggest,  for  your  con- 
sideration, that  the  fowls  of  the  air  are  emblems 
of  evil  and  not  of  good  ; and  that  their  lodging 
in  the  branches  of  the  tree  teaches  the  corrup- 
tion of  even  Christendom  itself. 

Much  stress  is  continually  laid  upon  the  par- 
able of  the  leaven,  as  teaching  that  Christianity 
must  gradually  win  the  whole  world  to  Christ. 
Is  it  probable  that,  when  the  Lord  has  already 
given  utterance  to  three  parables  which  dis- 
tinctly teach  mixture  of  good  and  evil.  He 
should  contradict  the  whole  scheme  of  the  first 
three  by  the  fourth  ? The  Kingdom  of  Heaven 
is  not  represented  by  leaven ; we  must  have  the 
whole  picture  if  we  would  know  what  our  Lord 
intended  to  teach.  The  woman  who  uses  the 
leaven,  the  leaven  itself,  and  the  meal  into 
which  it  is  put — all  the  parts  of  the  parable 
must  be  considered  in  order  to  a just  view  of 
its  meaning.  Leaven  here,  as  everywhere  else 
in  Scripture,  is  a type  not  of  good  but  of  evil ; 
and  if  you  will  carefully  search  your  Bible,  you 


The  Coming  of  Christ 


57 


will  find  that  in  no  single  instance  is  there  vari- 
ation from  this  principle.  The  symbolism  of 
the  Bible,  from  Genesis  to  Revelation,  is  never 
self-contradictory.  If  any  have  doubts  as  to 
the  inspiration  and  authority  of  Scripture,  they 
may  find  in  what  I have  just  said  a point  of 
profitable  intellectual  study.  The  symbolism 
of  Scripture,  with  regard  to  color,  numbers, 
figures  of  speech,  in  every  case  displays  the 
closest  harmony.  In  this  particular  case  our 
Lord  uses  leaven  as  a type  of  evil.  His  picture 
is  that  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Kingdom  as 
being  corrupted.  With  every  desire  to  avoid 
fanciful  interpretation,  my  own  view  of  the  case 
is  that  the  woman  who  mixes  the  leaven  with 
the  meal  represents  the  whole  system  of  ecclesi- 
asticism ; and  I believe  it  will  be  found  that  no 
part  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  has  escaped 
the  corrupting  and  evil  influence  of  that  leaven. 
The  master  does  not  say,  “ Until  the  whole  is 
corrupted,  but  until  the  whole  is  leavened  ” ; 
and  thus  again  you  have  the  idea  of  mixture 
apart  from  the  ultimate  triumph  of  either  good 
or  evil. 

Our  Lord  now  turns  from  the  crowd  and 
speaks  three  parables  to  the  disciples  alone. 
First,  a man  finds  treasure  hidden  in  a field, 
and  straightway  sells  all  that  he  has,  and  buys 
the  field  that  he  may  obtain  the  treasure.  We 
will  take  the  second  of  these  parables  in  con- 


58  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


junction  with  the  first;  for  it  reveals  the  same 
aspect  of  truth.  A merchantman  seeking 
goodly  pearls,  finds  one  of  great  price,  sells  all 
that  he  has,  and  buys  that  pearl.  These  men 
of  the  parable  are  commonly  regarded  as  types 
of  the  sinner  seeking  Christ.  Indeed,  one  of 
our  hymns  runs : 

I’ve  found  the  pearl  of  greatest  price  ; 

My  heart  doth  sing  for  joy. 

Such  an  interpretation  pre-supposes  that  a sin- 
ner can  buy  the  field  and  the  pearl ; but  this 
contradicts  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption  as 
made  known  in  Jesus  Christ.  He  who  finds 
the  treasure  in  the  field,  and  discovers  the  pearl 
of  great  price,  is  Christ.  How  can  I purchase 
Him,  if  He  be  the  pearl  and  I the  merchant- 
man? What  have  I to  sell  which  will  procure 
for  me  any  right  or  inheritance  in  the  Son  of 
God  ? Nothing,  verily.  He  emptied  Himself 
of  His  glory,  made  Himself  of  no  reputation, 
and  purchased  us  with  His  own  blood.  Ah  ! 
wonder  of  wonders,  mysterious  grace,  only  He 
can  understand  wherein  the  Church  is  His 
pearl  of  great  price.  I know  nothing  more 
calculated  to  humble  us  in  the  dust  than  His 
estimate  of  us ; for,  as  we  know  and  live  near  to 
Him,  we  are  increasingly  constrained  to  say 
that  we  are  nothing  worth.  He  graciously  de- 
clares, however,  that  we  are  worthy  the  pur- 


The  Coming  of  Christ 


59 


chase  of  His  precious  blood.  If  that  be  the  true 
interpretation,  again  we  have  selection  from  the 
dispensation.  The  buying  of  the  field  to  possess 
the  treasure,  and  the  purchase  of  the  pearl.  He 
has  not  only  bought  the  hidden  treasure,  but 
the  field.  The  whole  world  is  His  by  redemp- 
tion price.  His  work  is  not  ended  in  it  and 
with  it,  when  He  has  gathered  out  the  hidden 
treasure.  He  has  other  things  to  say  to  the 
earth,  other  deeds  to  do,  other  victories  to  win ; 
but  the  gathering  out  of  the  Church  is  the  special 
work  of  this  dispensation,  as  revealed  in  the 
parables  we  have  just  considered. 

The  last  parable  was  spoken  by  Christ  to 
His  workers,  who  were  to  be  like  fishermen 
flinging  a great  net  into  the  sea.  Is  the  net 
designed  to  bring  all  fish  into  a state  of  good- 
ness ? No,  it  encloses  both  good  and  bad ; then, 
at  the  end  of  the  age,  separation  is  to  be  made 
between  the  two.  My  sketch  of  these  seven 
parables  fails,  because  of  its  brevity  to  do 
justice  to  them;  and  they  will  well  repay  care- 
ful and  prayerful  consideration.  The  main 
thought,  however,  to  be  derived  from  them, 
and  which  I would  fain  impress  upon  God’s 
people,  is  that  our  age  does  not  issue  in  the 
conquest  of  the  world  for  Christ ; but  in  the 
gathering  out  of  an  elect  remnant,  leaving  for 
a succeeding  era  another  Divine  work  full  of 
significance  and  blessedness.  Bearing  in  mind 


6o 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


the  features  indicated  upon  our  Chart  as  char- 
acteristic of  the  present  dispensation,  a question 
of  supreme  interest  arises.  In  an  age  of  mix- 
ture, progressive  selection,  and  ultimate  separa- 
tion, what  is  the  next  event  for  which  we  are 
to  look  ? The  return  of  the  Lord  Himself. 

Let  us  rapidly  trace  the  character  of  the  age 
as  revealed  by  various  passages  of  Scripture. 
In  1 Cor.  xi.  28,  we  have  a phrase  that  bounds 
the  Table  of  the  Lord ; and,  as  we  sometimes 
sing, 

Thus  that  dark  betrayal  night, 

With  the  last  advent  we  unite, 

By  one  blest  chain  of  loving  rite — 

Until  He  come. 

The  conflict  of  the  Church  and  of  the  believer 
is  to  end  at  Christ’s  appearing,  or  epiphany,  a 
word  used  only  by  Paul  among  New  Testament 
writers — sometimes  (asTiere)  in  reference  to  the 
coming  of  Christ /or  His  people;  at  other  times, 
in  regard  to  His  coming  with  them.  How  long 
is  patience  to  have  its  perfect  work?  “Until 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  ” (Jas.  v.  7).  How  long 
am  I to  serve  in  the  King’s  will  in  this  age  ? 
“ Trade  ye  herewith  till  I come  ” (Luke  xix. 
13).  When  am  I to  be  crowned  ? The  apostle 
Paul  says  that  he  is  to  receive  his  crown  at 
Christ’s  appearing — again  using  the  word 
Epiphany  (2  Tim.  iv.  8).  When  shall  we  en- 
joy reunion  with  departed  loved  ones  ? When 


The  Coming  of  Christ  6i 

“ the  Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven 
with  a shout”  (1  Thess.  iv.  16,  17).  Then  it 
is  that  we  are  to  be  “ together  with  them  caught 
up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air : 
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord.”  What- 
ever you  think  of  as  characteristic  of  Christian 
life  and  service  in  this  age,  you  find  to  be 
bounded  in  the  New  Testament,  never  by  death, 
always  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Oh  that  believers  had  not  lost  their  bright  hope 
of  the  Lord’s  return,  while  they  faithlessly  and 
continually  talk  of  death  as  their  portion ! True, 
we  may  “ fall  on  sleep,”  and  no  man  knoweth 
the  hour  of  Christ’s  coming,  save  the  Father; 
but  the  one  bright  hope  of  faithful  Christian 
hearts  is  ever  this — the  Lord  Himself  shall 
come. 

In  his  first  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  Paul 
shows  that  there  is  a most  distinct  difference 
between  the  hope  of  the  Church  or  the  coming 
of  Christ  for  His  people,  and  the  day  of  the 
Lord — His  coming  ivith  them.  The  two  things 
are  clearly  seen  on  our  Chart,  where  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  is  indicated  by  His  descent 
from  the  heavens  and  the  ascent  of  His  people 
to  meet  Him  in  the  air ; but  the  apocalypse  of 
Christ,  or  “ day  of  the  Lord,”  is  marked  by  a 
second  line  which  shows  His  coming  to  earth 
with  His  people. 


62 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


1 Thess.  iv.  16,  17  : “For  the  Lord  Himself  shall 

descend  from  heaven,  with  a shout,  with  the  voice  of 
the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God  : and  the 
dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first : then  we  that  are  alive, 
that  are  left,  shall  together  with  them  be  caught  up  in 
the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air  : and  so  shall  we 
ever  be  with  the  Lord/^ 

We  need  not  pause ; no  one  can  possibly  con- 
found that  statement  with  the  thought  of  death 
— a thing  which  is  there  abolished.  It  is  not 
death  to  which  we  are  to  go,  but  to  the  Lord 
Himself.  The  next  chapter  begins : 

“But  concerning  the  times  and  the  seasons,  breth- 
ren, ye  have  no  need  that  aught  be  written  unto  you. 
For  yourselves  know  perfectly  that  the  day  of  the  Lord 
so  cometh  as  a thief  in  the  night.” 

Here  is  a very  distinct  difference  between  the 
“ coming  ” and  the  “ day  ” of  Christ.  The 
coming  of  Christ  is  His  parousia^  His  presence  ; 
His  coming  in  person  into  the  midst  of  His  peo- 
ple, that  He  may  gather  them  to  be  with  Him- 
self. “But,”  says  the  apostle,  “ while  ye  com- 
fort one  another  with  these  words,  1 need  not 
write  to  you  of  the  times  and  seasons.  For  ye 
know  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh  as  a 
thief  in  the  night.”  The  day  of  the  Lord  is,  in 
one  sense,  begun  by  His  coming;  but  it  is  a 
whole  period  which  stretches  out  beyond  that 
coming,  the  Millennium  itself  being  included  in 
the  phrase.  The  context  is  against  any  suppo- 
sition that  the  day  of  the  Lord  and  the  day  of 


The  Coming  of  Christ 


63 


Judgment  are  periods  of  twenty-four  hours. 
We  know  that  the  day  of  grace  has  extended 
over  nearly  nineteen  hundred  years ; and  the 
day  of  Judgment  will  last,  at  least,  a thousand 
years.  What  we  are  waiting  for,  however,  is — 
the  King  Himself. 

After  the  resurrection  the  disciples  asked 
Jesus,  “ Wilt  Thou  at  this  time  restore  again 
the  kingdom  to  Israel?  ” and  He  replied,  “ It  is 
not  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons.’’ 
This  expression,  “ times  and  seasons,”  is  no  hap- 
hazard one ; but  in  the  mouth  of  Jesus  and  from 
the  pen  of  the  apostle  it  refers  to  the  whole 
providential  arrangement  marked  out  by  God 
from  beginning  to  end,  and  upon  which  this 
dispensation  is  an  unmeasured  interpolation — 
certainly,  there  is  no  measurement  for  the  latter 
in  Scripture.  Continual  pushing  on  and  pull- 
ing back  of  dates  has  done  more  than  anything 
else  to  bring  this  blessed  truth  into  discredit. 
What,  then,  are  we  to  do?  Comfort  one  an- 
other with  these  words — the  Lord  Himself  shall 
come.  The  duration  of  this  age  being  known 
only  to  God,  all  His  redeemed  ones  are  to  be 
ever  living  according  to  the  Divine  will,  with 
their  eye  upon  its  consummation — the  coming 
of  the  Master. 

The  people  of  Thessalonica  misinterpreted 
Paul’s  first  epistle,  thinking  that  the  day  of 
Christ  had  come  because  they  were  in  tribula- 


64  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


tioii.  Paul  therefore  wrote  a second  letter 
wherein  he  corrected  this  error,  showing  how 
that  day  must  be  preceded  by  certain  signs, 
and  that  the  Church  waiting  for  her  Lord,  will 
not  pass  through  the  tribulation,  but  will  be 
taken  from  the  earth  before  it  comes.  In  the 
opening  verses  of  chapter  ii.  is  a further  wonder- 
fully clear  and  concise  distinction  between  the 
“ coming  ” and  the  “ day  ” of  Christ.  The 
words  themselves  are  more  important  than 
anything  which  can  be  said  about  them : 

2 Thess.  ii.  1-4:  “Now  we  beseech  you,  brethren, 

touching  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our 
gathering  together  unto  Him ; to  the  end  that  ye  be 
not  quickly  shaken  from  your  mind,  nor  yet  be  trou- 
bled, either  by  spirit,  or  by  word,  or  by  epistle  as  from 
us,  as  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  now  present ; let  no 
man  beguile  you  in  any  wise  : for  it  will  not  be,  ex- 
cept the  falling  away  come  first,  and  the  man  of  sin  be 
revealed,  the  sun  of  perdition,  he  that  opposeth  and 
exalteth  himself  against  all  that  is  called  God  or  that 
is  worshipped  ; so  that  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God, 
setting  himself  forth  as  God.” 

Before  “ that  day  ” dawns,  the  final  apostasy 
(the  definite  article  is  very  distinct)  is  to  be  in- 
augurated by  the  revealing  of  the  man  of  sin — 
not  a system,  but  an  individual.  Paul  tells  us 
that  this  “ mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already 
work ; only  there  is  one  that  restraineth  now 
until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way.”  Surely,  to 
make  Rome  that  restraining  power  would  be 


The  Coming  of  Christ  65 

setting  Satan  to  cast  out  Satan,  and  evil  to 
hinder  evil.  No ; it  is  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God 
Who  is  restraining  and  checking  the  individual- 
ization of  lawlessness.  But  when  the  Church 
shall  be  withdrawn  from  among  men,  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  depart  with  it ; for  the  Comforter,  in 
accordance  with  the  words  of  Jesus,  abides  with 
believers  forever.  Then  shall  the  unchecked 
mystery  of  iniquity  be  manifested,  and  focused 
in  one  who  will  assume  the  very  place  of 
Christ  in  God’s  temple. 

My  aim  has  been  to  set  forth  Christ’s  com- 
ing to  take  His  people  away  from  the  world, 
as  the  next  event  in  history  for  which  His 
Church  should  look.  I stay  but  a moment  to 
deal  with  a common  misrepresentation  of  this 
truth.  Some  will  say,  ‘‘  Then,  God  is  beaten, 
inasmuch  as  comparatively  few  are  being  gath- 
ered into  His  Church.”  That  is  a very  short- 
sighted view.  God  has  never  for  a moment 
been  defeated  in  the  course  of  human  history. 
Event  has  followed  event  in  God’s  progressive 
work  of  redemption  and  regeneration,  all  the 
details  of  which  have  been  necessary.  The 
Millennium  cannot  be  realized  until  the  pre- 
paratory work  of  this  dispensation  has  been 
accomplished ; and  this  embraces  not  only  the 
gathering  out  of  the  Church,  but  the  preaching 
of  the  Gospel  among  all  nations,  and  the  un- 
dermining of  all  false  institutions  and  evil  sys- 


66 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


terns  of  religion.  Men  may  not  realize  that 
their  passionate  desire  for  the  dawn  of  a golden 
age  is  excited  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel ; 
but  it  is  so  nevertheless.  All  pure  and  holy  am- 
bition, as  manifested  in  the  attempts  of 
thinkers  to  discover  the  secrets  of  true  life,  has 
sprung  from  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 
The  great  words  which  to-day  indicate  the 
higher  movements  of  the  times,  such  as  broth- 
erhood, disarmament,  socialism,  solidarity,  are 
the  children  of  the  living  Word  of  God,  the 
offspring  of  the  Logos,  Every  gleam  of  light 
that  is  falling  upon  the  darkness  of  men  is  a 
part  of  the  essential  Light. 

“They  are  but  broken  lights  of  Thee; 

And  Thou,  O Lord,  art  more  than  they.” 

All  dreams  of  a golden  age  have  their  inspira- 
tion in  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom. 

In  order  that  this  longing  of  humanity  may 
be  satisfied,  the  Church  must  be  taken  away  to 
allow  of  sin  working  out  its  full  and  most  fear- 
ful manifestation.  Then  shall  Christ  appear 
with  His  people,  to  destroy  antichrist  by  the 
brightness  of  His  coming  and  to  set  up  His 
golden  reign  upon  the  earth.  No  other  out- 
look can  be  so  full  of  roseate  views  and  of  hope 
for  the  Church  and  the  world,  as  this  triumph 
of  God’s  rule  and  the  accomplishment  of  His 
purposes  in  the  way  which  He  hath  aforetime 
declared. 


V 

Daniel’s  Missing  Week 


67 


“ Lo,  His  the  heavenly  army, 

The  Lord  of  Hosts  attending : 

^Tis  He — the  Lamb, 

The  great  I AM, 

With  all  His  saints  descending. 

To  you,  ye  kings  and  nations, 

Ye  foes  of  Christ,  assembling. 

The  host  of  light. 

Prepared  for  fight. 

Come  with  the  cup  of  trembling, 

“ Praise  to  the  Lamb  forever ! 

Bruised  for  our  sin  and  gory. 

Behold  His  brow. 

Encircled  now 

With  all  his  crowns  of  glory — 

Beneath  His  feet  reposing. 

The  whole  redeemed  creation 
Are  now  at  rest, 

Forever  blessed. 

And  sing  His  great  salvation.” 

Sir  E.  Denney. 


68 


V 


DANIEL’S  MISSING  WEEK 

Between  the  coming  of  Christ  for  His  peo- 
ple and  His  millennial  reign  there  will  be  a 
short  interval  of  seven  years,  full  of  interest 
because  of  the  events  transpiring  upon  the 
earth  and  in  the  heavens.  On  our  Chart  the 
interval  as  depicted  does  not  show  the  correct 
proportion  of  time.  The  part  with  which  we 
have  been  dealing  is,  as  far  as  dates  serve, 
drawn  to  scale ; but  this  seven  years’  interval, 
if  proportionately  marked,  would  be  hardly 
visible.  The  coming  of  Christ  for  His  people 
concludes  a dispensation,  but  it  does  not  end 
His  activities  upon  the  earth.  The  period  of 
selection  and  preparation  closes,  and  the  Day  of 
Judgment  and  national  dealing  is  ushered  in. 

In  Matt,  xii.,  from  verse  18,  we  have  a quota- 
tion of  a prophecy  concerning  the  Messiah  : 

‘ Behold,  My  Servant  whom  I liave  chosen  ; 

My  Beloved  in  whom  My  sonl  is  well  pleased  : 

I will  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him, 

And  He  shall  declare  judgment  to  the  Gentiles. 

He  shall  not  strive,  nor  cry  aloud ; 

Neither  shall  any  one  hear  His  voice  in  the  streets.’’ 

I make  a pause  there  of  set  purpose.  What 
immediately  follows  is  often  quoted  as  if  closely 
69 


70 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


connected  with  the  portion  we  have  read;  but 
it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  dispensation  in 
which  we  live.  “ A bruised  reed  shall  He  not 
break,  and  smoking  flax  shall  He  not  quench,” 
is  interpreted  as  if  it  referred  to  Christ’s  deal- 
ings now  with  men  and  women  whose  aspira- 
tions after  Him  are  weak  but  will  not  be  de- 
spised. I believe  that  to  be  an  incorrect 
interpretation  of  the  words,  and  ask  you  to 
notice  particularly  what  is  their  real  intention. 
There  should  be  no  stop  save  a comma  at  the 
word  quench.  Mark  the  construction, 

“ A bruised  reed  shall  He  not  break,  and  smoking 
flax  shall  He  not  quench,  till  He  send  forth  judgment 
unto  victory,” 

Then,  there  is  to  be  a day  when  He  will  do 
such  things ; and  in  that  verse  you  have  an- 
other aspect  of  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  re- 
vealed. In  the  present  day  He  does  not  strive 
nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets : 
neither  will  He  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor 
quench  the  smoking  flax,  till — there  is  an  em- 
phasis on  that  word  which  w^e  must  regard  if 
we  are  to  understand  the  passage — ^^till  He 
send  forth  judgment  unto  victory.” 

There  is  another  dispensation  of  Christ’s 
work  in  which  He  will  do  these  very  things. 
Some  will  say,  “ Surely  there  is  no  time  coming 
when  Christ  will  break  and  quench  in  such 


Daniel’s  Missing  Week  yi 

manner.”  No ; not  in  the  sense  in  which  we 
have  regarded  the  reed  and  the  flax.  We  have 
misunderstood  the  words,  in  supposing  that 
they  apply  to  sinners  weakly  feeling  after  Him. 
The  bruised  reed  refers  to  His  enemies;  the 
smoking  flax  to  His  opponents.  In  Isa.  xlii. 
1-4,  you  will  find  the  original  of  the  quotation: 
and  the  whole  context  there,  as  in  Matthew, 
proves  that  “bruised  reed”  and  “smoking 
flax  ” represent  Christ’s  enemies,  with  magnifi- 
cent satire  in  this  description  of  them.  Whai 
is  a reed?  Weakness.  What  is  a bruised 
reed?  Weakness  weakened.  What  is  flax? 
That  which  is  easily  destroyed.  What  is  smok- 
ing flax  ? That  which  has  within  itself  the  ele- 
ments of  its  own  destruction.  In  His  day  of 
grace  and  mercy  God  will  not  break  a bruised 
reed ; it  is  bruised,  and  will  be  broken  in  due 
time.  Neither  will  He,  at  this  time,  quench 
that  which  is  already  smouldering  unto  consum- 
ing. The  great  and  beautiful  truth  which  we 
have  so  often  endeavored  to  enforce  by  those 
words  abides ; but  we  must  be  true  to  Scripture 
as  it  stands,  and  not  attempt  to  enforce  truth 
by  misapplication  thereof.  In  the  time  yet  to 
come,  beyond  this  day  of  grace  and  mercy, 
Christ  will  break  and  quench  His  enemies ; 
and  He  will  sweep  before  the  majesty  of  His 
coming,  as  chaff  of  the  threshing  floor,  the 
evil  things  which  so  affright  us  by  their  tremen- 


72 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


dous  hold  upon  our  age.  In  that  day,  yet  to 
come,  He  will  send  forth  judgment  unto  vic- 
tory. 

The  same  truth  is  tauglit  in  Luke  iv.  18,  19. 
At  the  beginning  of  His  ministry,  in  the  Syna- 
gogue at  Nazareth,  our  Lord  read  from  the 
book  of  the  prophet  Isaiah  words  which  re- 
vealed the  scope  and  character  of  the  dispensa- 
tion that  His  first  advent  inaugurated : 

The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me, 

Because  He  anointed  Me  to  preach  good  tidings  to  the 
poor  : 

He  hath  sent  Me  to  proclaim  release  to  the  captives, 

And  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind, 

To  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised, 

To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord.’’ 

Turn  to  the  place  from  which  the  quotation 
comes,  Isaiah  Ixi.  1,  2,  and  you  find  that  the 
words,  “And  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our 
God,”  were  omitted  from  Christ’s  reading  as 
recorded  in  Luke.  Our  translators  have  con- 
fined their  punctuation  to  a comma  at  the  end 
of  the  words,  “ the  acceptable  year  of  the 
Lord,”  and  of  course  there  was  no  stop  cor- 
responding to  ours  in  the  roll  from  which  Jesus 
read ; but  at  the  point  indicated.  He  ceased 
reading  and  closed  the  book.  In  publicly  read- 
ing the  words  of  a Hebrew  prophet  who  hun- 
dreds of  years  before  had  foretold  the  coming 
of  Christ,  no  one  else  would  have  ended  there, 


Daniel’s  Missing  Week  73 

for  Messiah’s  work  includes  proclamation  of 
God’s  day  of  vengeance.  Christ’s  immediate 
purpose,  however,  was  to  indicate  the  first  as- 
pect of  His  mission,  “ the  acceptable  year  of  the 
Lord,”  as  then  beginning  in  Himself. 

With  equal  certainty  shall  the  Messiah  once 
more  take  up  that  old-time  prophecy,  and  fulfill 
it  to  the  letter  as  regards  the  day  of  vengeance 
of  our  God.”  The  scriptures  with  which  we 
have  dealt  reveal  two  aspects  of  Christ’s  work. 
“ He  shall  not  strive  noi*  cry ; neither  shall  any 
man  hear  His  voice  in  the  streets  ” — the  story  of 
His  work  to-day  : “ Till  He  send  forth  judgment 
unto  victory  ” — the  story  of  His  work  to-mor- 
row. “ The  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  ” — 
His  work  to-day;  “The  day  of  vengeance  of 
our  God” — His  work  to-morrow — beyond  His 
coming  to  gather  out  His  Church. 

In  popular  conception  the  Day  of  Judgment 
is  a period  of  twenty-four  hours,  in  which  men 
are  gathered  together  to  hear  sentence  pro- 
nounced upon  them ; but  it  is  really  as  much 
a dispensation  as  is  this  day  of  grace.  There  is 
no  reason  to  regard  the  one  “day”  as  limited 
to  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  term  any 
more  than  the  other ; indeed,  such  an  interpre- 
tation robs  the  phrase  of  its  majesty  and  beauty. 
What,  think  you,  does  the  world  wait  for  to- 
daj  ? God’s  day  of  judgment.  What  do  the 
oppressed  masses  need  most?  God’s  day  of 


74 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


judgment.  What  is  the  groaning,  sorrowing 
population  of  our  earth  asking  for  to-day? 
God’s  day  of  judgment.  We  shall  deal  more 
fully  with  the  subject  when  we  speak  of  the 
golden  age  in  which  the  King  Himself  shall 
rule.  This  is  the  day  of  grace,  and,  at  its  close, 
the  day  of  judgment  will  dawn,  and  will  be 
characterized  by  the  direct,  positive  govern- 
ment of  the  King  Himself;  but  prior  to  His  ap- 
pearing with  his  people  to  enter  upon  that  day, 
there  will  be  the  interval  of  which  we  must 
now  more  particularly  speak. 

Some  of  us  still  keep  the  book  of  Daniel  in 
our  Bibles,  esteeming  it  as  equal  in  Divine 
authority  and  profitable  teaching  with  every 
other  Scripture.  Turn  to  chapter  ix.  The  first 
two  verses  are  introductory : 

“In  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  son  of  Ahasuerus, 
of  the  seed  of  the  Medes,  which  was  made  king  over 
the  realm  of  the  Chaldeans ; in  the  first  year  of  his 
reign  I Daniel  understood  by  the  books  the  number  of 
the  years,  whereof  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jere- 
miah the  prophet,  for  the  accomplishing  of  the  desola- 
tions of  Jerusalem,  even  seventy  years. 

Verses  3 to  19  record  Daniel’s  prayer  of  contri- 
tion and  penitence  concerning  the  sin  of  his 
people.  In  verses  20  to  23  we  have  an  account 
of  the  appearance  of  the  angel  Gabriel  to 
Daniel,  bringing  words  from  God  regarding  the 
future.  Verse  24  contains  a general  statement: 


Daniel’s  Missing  Week 


75 


“ S&ventp  weeks  are  decreed  upon  thy  people  and  upon 
thy  holy  city,  to  finish  transgression,  and  to  make  an 
end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity, 
and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and  to  seal 
up  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the  Most  Holy.” 

The  Divine  programme  thus  given  to  Daniel, 
as  a representative  of  the  Jewish  nation,  has  a 
very  obvious  bearing  upon  our  subject.  We 
are  familiar  with  the  prophetic  week  ” as  a 
period  of  seven  years ; therefore  490  years  was 
the  time  assigned  for  the  accomplishment  of  the 
prophecy.  To  say  nothing  of  the  interval  be- 
tween the  delivery  of  this  message  and  the 
crucifixion  of  our  Lord,  1897  years  have  passed, 
and  yet  that  programme  is  evidently  not  com- 
pleted. But  I ask  you  to  consider  a very  re- 
markable set  of  figures  in  connection  with  this 
prophecy : 

. Verse  25. — “Know  therefore  and  discern,  that  from 
the  going  forth  of  the  commandment  to  restore  and  to 
build  Jerusalem,  unto  the  anointed  One,  the  Prince, 
shall  be  seven  weeks:  and  three-score  and  two  weeks.” 

Now,  what  really  happened?  Exactly  forty- 
nine  years  elapsed  between  the  command  to  re- 
build and  the  completion  of  the  work  by  Nehe- 
miah.  There  we  have  the  seven  “weeks.” 
From  the  time  when  Nehemiah  completed  his 
commission  to  the  death  of  Christ  was  exactly 
434  years,  or  sixty-two  weeks.  Thus  we  have, 
in  fulfillment  of  that  prophecy,  from  the  com- 


76  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


mand  for  rebuilding  Jerusalem  to  the  Cross,  ex- 
actly 483  years,  as  history  testifies.  What  is 
left,  as  compared  with  verse  24  ? One  week : 
that  is  to  say,  I have  the  account  of  sixty-nine 
“weeks”  (the  483  years  just  mentioned),  but 
the  seventieth  week  is  missing.  Where  is  it  ? 

My  purpose  is  to  show  that  the  missing  week 
comes  at  the  end  of  the  present  age,  an  age 
which  is  an  unmeasured  interpolation  upon 
God’s  times  and  seasons.  As  I have  said  be- 
fore, prophetic  truth  has  been  much  discredited 
by  presumptuous  attempts  to  fix  a date  for  our 
Lord’s  return.  Both  Christ  Himself  (Acts  i. 
7)  and  His  servant  Paul  (1  Thess.  v.  1)  have 
declared  that  it  is  not  for  us  to  know  measure- 
ments which,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  are  not  re- 
vealed. God  will,  in  His  renewed  dealings 
with  His  earthly  people,  resume  the  “times 
and  seasons  ” which  were  broken  in  upon  when 
man  rejected  Christ. 

Reverting  to  Dan.  ix.,  let  us  look  at  verse  26. 

“ After  the  three-score  and  two  weeks  ” — see  verse  25 
— “ shall  the  anointed  One  he  cut  off : ” 

The  Authorized  Version  adds  “and  not  for 
Himself,”  a mis-translation  which  is  corrected 
in  the  Revised,  all  Hebrew  scholars  agreeing 
that  it  should  read,  “ and  shall  have  nothing  ” : 
that  is,  He  shall  not  then  possess  the  kingdom 
or  be  the  acknowledged  King,  but  shall  be  cast 


Daniel’s  Missing  Week  77 

out.  At  that  point  in  the  verse  comes  a colon, 
and  then  we  read, 

“And  the  people  of  the  Prince  that  shall  come  shall 
destroy  the  city  and  the  sanctuary  ; and  his  end  shall  be 
with  a flood,  and  even  unto  the  end  shall  be  war ; des- 
olations are  determined.  And  he  shall  make  a firm 
covenant  with  many  for  one  week,^^ 

From  that  colon  to  the  first  semicolon  are 
words  prophetic  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusa- 
lem soon  after  the  death  of  Messiah,  not  by  the 
Prince,  but  by  the  people  of  the  Prince.  Then 
the  prophecy  passes  on  to  events  at  the  close  of 
this  age,  when  the  Prince  himself  shall  be 
manifested.  The  semicolon  of  Daniel  is  the 
comma  which  follows  Isaiah’s  “ acceptable  year 
of  the  Lord.”  Here  is  the  division  between 
the  dispensations ; and  at  the  close  of  the  pres- 
ent age,  when  Jesus  takes  His  Church  to  be 
with  Himself,  then  “ times  and  seasons  ” shall 
be  resumed,  Daniel’s  week  (delayed,  in  the 
eternal  counsels  of  God)  shall  run  its  course 
upon  the  earth,  God  shall  accomplish  His  an- 
cient purposes,  and  the  prophecies  spoken  to 
His  people  in  other  dispensations  shall  be  ful- 
filled to  the  letter.  Signs  of  the  times  show 
that  our  unmeasured  age  is  nearing  its  com- 
pletion by  the  coming  of  the  Master ; but  He 
teaches  us  to  name  no  date. 

Many  among  the  people  of  God  shrink  from 
any  reference  to  the  book  of  Revelation ; but 


y8  God’s  Methods  with  Man 

therein  we  shall  find  Daniel’s  interval  between 
the  coming  of  Christ  and  the  reign  of  Christ 
viewed  from  a new  standpoint.  When  this  neg- 
lected book  is  approached,  the  purpose  seems 
too  often  to  be  that  men  may  explain  it  away  by 
reading  into  it  metaphor,  figure,  and  allegory : 

Kev.  i.  3 : ‘‘  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they 

that  hear  the  words  of  the  prophecy,  and  keep  the 
things  which  are  written  therein/^ 

The  only  book  in  the  Bible  that  opens  with  a 
distinct  blessing  pronounced  upon  those  who 
read  its  pages ; and  yet  what  part  of  the  canon 
of  Scripture  is  so  neglected  ? Shall  we  not  be 
among  those  who  diligently,  prayerfully,  and 
humbly  search  what  God  would  teach  us  in 
that  last  book  of  His  Word?  There  is  a key 
which  must  be  used  before  we  can  understand 
what  seems  to  be  a labyrinth. 

Rev.  i 19 : “ Write  therefore  the  things  which  thou 

sawest,  and  the  things  which  are,  and  the  things  which 
shall  come  to  pass  hereafter  ” — 

the  commission  directly  given  to  John,  by 
Jesus  Christ. 

How  shall  the  things  mentioned  be  divided  ? 
“ The  things  which  thou  sawest  ” are  the  visions 
of  Jesus  (chapter  i.) ; and  “ the  things  which 
are  ” relate  to  visions  of  the  churches  (ii.,  iii.). 
Those  letters  of  John  were  written  to  churches 
actually  existing  at  the  time,  and  the  first  ap- 


Daniel’s  Missing  Week 


79 


plication  is  to  such  communities;  but  the  epis- 
tles reveal  a sevenfold  condition  of  Church  life 
which  is  repeated  with  varying  emphasis  at  one 
time  or  another  in  every  successive  age  of  the 
Church  until  to-day.  They  reveal  progress, 
good  or  bad,  in  Church  life  and  movement. 
We  may  find  both  Laodicean  and  Philadel- 
phian churches  now.  “ The  things  which  are  ’’ 
exist  in  the  present  dispensation ; but  from 
chapter  iv.  to  the  end  of  the  book,  we  have 
“ the  things  which  shall  come  to  pass  here- 
after.” It  is  to  me,  personally,  a matter  of  sur- 
prise that  the  revisers  have  retained  the  word 
hereafter  in  i.  19,  because  the  Greek  words  are 
“ meta  tauta.^^  The  very  first  words  of  chapter 
iv.  are  “ after  these  things,”  a phrase  which  ex- 
cites little  critical  attention  until  it  is  com- 
pared with  the  Greek  of  i.  19.  In  both  instan- 
ces the  words  are  ^^meta  tauta^^  meaning  “ after 
these  things”;  and,  as  I have  already  inti- 
mated, the  last  section  of  the  book  extends 
from  the  beginning  of  chapter  iv.,  where  the 
door  is  opened  in  heaven,  “ after  these  things.” 
What,  then,  are  “ these  things  ” ? The  dis- 
pensation of  the  Church  upon  earth,  in  its 
varied  aspects.  “ After  these  things  I saw,  and 
behold  a door  opened  in  heaven.’"'*  From  the 
beginning  of  iv.  to  the  end  of  xix.  a remarkable 
series  of  events  follows  on  the  earth.  The 
Church  of  J esus  Christ  is  then  in  the  heavens. 


8o 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


She  is  seen  ever  and  anon  in  some  place  of 
heavenly  glory ; while  upon  the  earth  vials  are 
being  poured,  trumpets  are  sounding. 

Chapter  xix.,  verses  11-15,  give  an  account 
of  the  end  of  the  interval  with  which  this  chap- 
ter deals : 

And  I saw  the  heaven  opened  j and  behold,  a white 
horse,  and  He  that  sat  thereon,  called  Faithful  and 
True;  and  in  righteousness  He  doth  judge  and  make 
war.  And  His  eyes  are  a flame  of  Are,  and  upon  His 
head  are  many  diadems  ; and  He  hath  a name  written, 
which  no  one  knoweth  but  He  Himself.  And  He  is 
arrayed  in  a garment  sprinkled  with  blood  : and  His 
name  is  called  the  Word  of  God.  And  the  armies 
which  are  in  heaven  followed  Him  upon  white  horses, 
clothed  in  flne  linen,  white  and  pure.  And  out  of 
His  mouth  proceedeth  a sharp  sword,  that  with  it  He 
should  smite  the  nations : and  He  shall  rule  them  with 
a rod  of  iron ; and  He  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the 
fierceness  of  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God.” 

He  came  to  Bethlehem’s  manger  to  preach 
“ the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  ” ; He  will 
come  with  the  armies  of  heaven,  to  proclaim 
“the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God.”  He  came 
long  years  ago,  a lonely  Man,  our  brother  man  ; 
He  did  not  cry  nor  lift  up  His  voice  in  the 
streets;  He  will  come  again  to  break  the 
bruised  reed  of  iniquity,  to  quench  the  smok- 
ing flax  of  opposition.  Another  dispensation 
in  the  great  plan  of  our  King  and  Master  will 
open  when  He  comes  to  the  earth  with  His 
gathered  people. 


VI 

The  Events  of  the  Missing  Week 


81 


True  is  it  that  no  heart  may  comprehend 
The  glory  God  prepareth  for  His  own, 

And  what  will  happen  when  this  age  shall  end ; 

But  yet  in  vision  Jesus  hath  made  known 
How  fair  and  holy  shall  His  Church  descend, 
Lit  up  with  light  of  precious  jasper  stone. 


And  He  shall  make  His  Church  all  heavenly  fair, 
With  gold  and  pearls  and  every  radiant  stone, 

And  reign  in  Holiness  and  Glory  there. 

And  shine  as  suns  and  stars  have  never  shone ; 
And  He  shall  lead  His  Bride,  His  joy  and  care, 

With  blissful  singing  to  His  Father’s  throne. 

With  eyes  undimmed  shall  she  her  God  behold. 
Behold  Him  face  to  face,  and  walk  by  sight. 

Not  trusting  only,  as  in  days  of  old, 

But  seeing  with  her  eyes  eternal  Light, 

The  great  Salvation  mystery  shall  unfold 
In  that  high  vision  of  Love  infinite. 

Hymns  of  Ter  Steegen  and  others. 

“ The  Blessed  Rope,” 


82 


VI 


THE  EVENTS  OF  THE  MISSING  WEEK 

Our  last  chapter  dealt  with  the  “ week  ” of 
years  between  the  Parousia  of  Christ  and  His 
Apocalypse.  Let  us  now  consider  the  events 
of  the  interval,  both  on  earth  and  in  heaven. 
Fear  and  wonder  will  take  possession  of  those 
who  are  left  when  our  Lord  comes  for  His 
Church.  There  will  be  on  every  hand  strange 
questionings,  producing  conviction  in  thousands 
of  souls,  turning  them,  even  during  that  terrible 
time,  with  their  faces  toward  God.  We  might 
easily  give  free  play  to  imagination  concerning 
the  effect  produced  upon  those  who  remain. 
Fathers,  mothers,  sons,  daughters,  brothers,  and 
sisters,  will  be  missing,  taken  away  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air ; and  the  consternation  ensuing 
may  be  readily  pictured.  Rev.  John  MacNeil 
of  Australia,  who  has  recently  gone  to  his  rest, 
has  a very  graphic  passage  in  one  of  his  books, 
describing  this  period  when  the  taking  away  of 
a mother  from  her  daughter  may  be  instru- 
mental in  turning  the  latter  from  frivolous 
worldiness  to  the  knowledge  of  God  and  the 
service  of  Christ. 


83 


84  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


But  we  are  more  interested  in  the  effect  pro- 
duced upon  the  character  of  the  age  by  taking 
from  the  world  those  who  are  found  waiting 
for  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  influence  of 
Christian  character  on  the  present  age  is  re- 
vealed under  the  figures  used  by  Christ  Him- 
self with  regard  to  His  people.  He  calls  them 
the  light  of  the  world  and  the  salt  of  the  earth. 
Remove  the  light,  and  darkness  ensues  ; take 
away  the  antiseptic,  and  there  will  be  unlimited 
opportunity  for  extension  of  corruption  and 
development  of  evil.  The  presence  of  godly 
men  and  women  is  to-day  affecting  the  life  of 
London  to  a larger  extent  than  we  think.  We 
all  feel  that  we  are  doing  comparatively  little 
for  God  in  our  great  city.  Doubtless  I speak 
to  many  who  have  labored  in  London  for  more 
years  than  I have  lived  ; but  the  twelve  months 
spent  here  have  burdened  me  with  a concep- 
tion of  its  need  which  by  its  vastness  almost 
discourages  effort.  Still,  the  life  of  the  great 
city  is  enormously  influenced  for  good  by  its 
godlj"  citizens. 

The  effect  of  the  Church’s  removal  must  be 
twofold — many  will  turn  to  the  Saviour ; but, 
on  the  other  hand,  many  will  throw  off  the  re- 
straint which  up  to  that  time  will  have  rested 
upon  them.  Corruption  and  evil  of  every  kind 
will  increase.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  man  of 
sin  will  be  revealed. 


Events  of  the  Missing  Week  85 

2 Thess.  ii.  7-10  : For  the  roystery  of  lawlessness 

doth  already  work;  only  there  is  one  that  restraineth 
now,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  And  then  shall 
be  revealed  the  lawless  one,  . . . whose  coming  is 

according  to  the  working  of  Satan  with  all  power  and 
signs  and  lying  wonders,  and  with  all  deceit  of  un- 
righteousness for  them  that  are  perishing.” 

There  may  have  been  historic  and  local  appli- 
cations of  these  words,  but  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit 
Who  hinders  the  full  manifestation  of  that 
mystery;  and  the  end  of  my  quotation  gives, 
in  very  solemn  terms,  the  marks  of  the  lawless 
one’s  coming  and  rule.  Coincident  with  the 
Thessalonian  prophecy  are  the  words  in  Dan. 
xi.  36 : 

“ And  the  king  shall  do  according  to  his  will ; and 
he  shall  exalt  himself,  and  magnify  himself  above 
every  god,  and  shall  speak  marvellous  things  against 
the  God  of  gods  : and  he  shall  prosper  till  the  indigna- 
tion be  accomplished.” 

Now  turn  to  1 John  ii.  18: 

‘‘Little  children,  it  is  the  last  hour:  and  as  ye 
heard  that  antichrist  cometh,  even  now  have  there 
arisen  many  antichrists ; whereby  we  know  that  it  is 
the  last  hour.” 

Verse  22. — “Who  is  the  liar  but  he  that  denieth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ?  This  is  the  antichrist,  even 
he  that  denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son.” 

Chap.  iv.  3:  “Every  spirit  which  confesseth  not 

Jesus,  is  not  of  God  : and  this  is  the  spirit  of  the  anti- 
christ, whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it  cometh  ; and  now 
it  is  in  the  world  already.” 


86 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


The  spirit  of  antichrist  is  the  mystery  of  law- 
lessness, the  essential  spirit  of  evil  and  of  oppo- 
sition to  God ; and  it  has  been  in  the  world 
from  the  moment  of  the  Fall  until  now.  The 
late  F.  W.  Robertson,  of  Brighton,  in  one  of 
his  remarkable  sermons,  traces  the  diversity  of 
manifestations  which  the  spirit  of  antichrist  has 
had  in  various  ages,  such  as  power,  idolatry,  or 
mammon ; but  it  is  ever  the  self-same  attempt 
to  underwork  good  by  evil. 

In  that  sense,  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  the 
spirit  of  lawlessness,  antichrist,  is  at  work  to- 
day ; but  when  the  Church  is  removed  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  His  dispensational  fullness  is 
consequently  taken  away  from  the  earth,  there 
will  be  nothing  to  hinder  the  working  of  that 
Satanic  power  which  will  become  concrete  and 
incarnate  in  the  person  of  one  man.  I have 
already  referred  in  these  addresses  to  a work 
which  I recommend  every  one  to  read  as 
being  a most  valuable  contribution  to  the  con- 
sideration of  this  whole  subject,  namely.  Pro- 
fessor Denney’s  book,  in  the  Expositor’s  Bible 
Series,  upon  Thessalonians.  He  emphasizes 
the  fact  that  when  Paul  wrote  to  Thessalonica, 
he  most  certainly  regarded  antichrist  as  a per- 
son to  be  manifested  at  a given  time.  (With  the 
Professor’s  explanation  of  Paul’s  intention  we 
agree  ; from  his  interpretation  of  the  fulfillment 
we  differ.)  This  will  be  in  the  interval  be- 


Events  of  the  Missing  Week  87 

tween  the  coming  of  Jesus /(9r  His  people  and 
His  appearing  with  them. 

Daniel  ix.-xi.  discovers  a great  world-power 
which  arises  during  that  period  conquering  the 
earth  and  entering  into  convenant  with  the 
Jews  gathered  into  Jerusalem,  in  their  unbe- 
lief ; and  it  is  a remarkable  sign  of  the  present 
times  that  there  are  now  more  Jews  in  Pales- 
tine, driven  thither  by  persecution,  than  in  the 
days  of  Nehemiah.  In  the  midst  of  the  seven 
years  antichrist  will  break  the  covenant,  cause 
sacrifice  and  oblation  to  cease ; and  a terrible 
period  of  suffering  will  follow — Jacob’s  day  of 
trouble  and  calamity.  Then,  Dan.  ix.  27 : 

‘‘Upon  the  wing  of  abominations  shall  come  one  that 
maketh  desolate ; and  even  unto  the  consummation, 
and  that  determined,  shall  wrath  be  poured  out  upon 
the  desolator.’^ 

Here  we  have  in  an  individual  the  most  awful 
manifestation  of  evil  the  world  has  ever  seen ; 
one  claiming  to  have  Divine  power  and  yet  di- 
rectly energized  by  Satan.  During  the  latter 
part  of  the  “ week  ” will  come  the  breaking  of 
seals,  sounding  of  trumpets,  and  pouring  out  of 
vials  described  in  Revelation. 

These  seven  years  will  see  a marvellous  gath- 
ering to  God  of  stricken,  smitten,  and  afflicted 
men.  The  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  of 
the  Jewish  nation  will  be  sealed  ; and  the  great 
multitude,  which  no  man  can  number,  out  of 


88 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


every  nation,  shall  be  brought  to  Christ.  Let 
us  read  John’s  account  of  this  multitude  in 
Rev.  vii.  13-17  : 

‘‘And  one  of  the  elders  answered,  saying  unto  me, 
These  which  are  arrayed  in  the  white  robes,  who  are 
they,  and  whence  came  they  ? And  I say  unto  him. 
My  Lord,  thou  knowest.  And  He  said  to  me.  These 
are  they  which  come  out  ” — 

and  here  the  Revised  Version  makes  an  essen- 
tial correction,  as  compared  with  the  Author- 
ized, by  using  the  definite  article : 

“Of  the  great  tribulation,  and  they  washed  their 
robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 
Therefore  are  they  before  the  throne  of  God ; and  they 
serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple  ; and  He  that 
sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  spread  His  tabernacle  over 
them.  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any 
more ; neither  shall  the  sun  strike  upon  them,  nor  any 
heat : for  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne 
shall  be  their  shepherd,  and  shall  guide  them  unto 
fountains  of  waters  of  life  : and  God  shall  wipe  away 
every  tear  from  their  eyes.  ^ ^ 

We  have  been  singing  these  words  in  our 
anthems,  and  continually  reading  them  as  if 
they  applied  to  this  dispensation  ; but  it  is  only 
true  in  a general  sense.  Undoubtedly  the 
Church  shall  have  all  tears  wiped  from  her 
eyes;  but  the  passage  refers  to  the  great  com- 
pany of  those  who  come,  not  through  trials 
such  as  yours  and  mine,  but,  by  God’s  grace, 
out  of  the  great  tribulation  which  follows  the 


Events  of  the  Missing  Week  89 


taking  away  of  the  Church  and  the  revealing 
of  the  man  of  sin. 

How  is  this  ingathering  to  be  accomplished  ? 
I give  you  my  answer  with  reserve,  because 
many  devout  students  of  prophetic  truth  differ 
from  me  here.  Personally,  I am  convinced 
that  not  all  Christian  people  will  be  taken  to 
be  with  Christ  on  His  return,  but  only  those 
who  by  the  attitude  of  their  lives  are  ready  for 
His  appearing.  They  who  remain  and  pass 
through  the  tribulation  will  be  awakened  by 
the  stupendous  events  of  their  times  to  the 
privilege  and  responsibility  of  witnessing  for 
the  truth  in  that  age.  Even  in  the  day  of 
Jewish  sorrow  God  will  dwell  with  His  ancient 
people,  who  will  then  become  heralds  of  the 
Cross ; and  under  stress  of  plague,  famine,  and 
suffering  beyond  imagination,  an  innumerable 
multitude  will  “wash  their  robes  and  make 
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.”  Those 
years  will  be  such  as  the  world  has  never  seen 
— first,  in  regard  to  the  manifestation  of  evil  in 
forms  more  awful  than  we  have  ever  known  ; 
and,  secondly,  in  the  marvellous  crowding  to 
Jesus  Christ  of  a “great  multitude  which  no 
man  can  number.” 

What  of  the  Church  during  that  time  of 
tribulation?  She  is  in  the  heavens  with  her 
Lord,  all  the  retarding  forces  and  probationary 
days  of  earth  being  ended ; and  Rev.  iv.  to  xix. 


90 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


gives  a view  to  her  position.  During  that  in- 
terval the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  will  be  set 
up ; and  it  is  most  important  to  distinguish  be- 
tween that,  the  hemay  and  the  great  white 
throne.  The  former  is  for  the  Church,  and  is 
set  up  directly  she  is  taken  from  the  earth ; 
while  the  latter,  which  is  an  entirely  different 
thing,  comes  after  the  Millennium. 

2 Cor.  V.  10,  11  : “For  we  must  all  be  made  mani- 

fest before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ; that  each  one 
may  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,  according  to 
what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  Know- 
ing therefore  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men, 
but  we  are  made  manifest  unto  God.” 

These  words  do  not  refer  to  the  general  Judg- 
ment. If  you  examine  the  beginnings  of  the 
epistles,  you  will  find  that  in  each  case  the 
writing  is  addressed  to  the  saints,  and  it  is  of 
them  the  apostle  speaks  when  he  says,  “ We 
must  all  be  made  manifest  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ.”  As  sinners,  our  judgment  was 
accomplished  at  the  Cross  of  Christ,  in  view  of 
which  the  Spirit  convinces  of  judgment,  not 
“ to  come,”  but  past.  To  the  hema  of  Christ, 
we  His  servants  must  come  ; and  all  our  serv- 
ices will  be  tested  by  His  eyes  of  fire.  This 
need  not  affright,  but  should  fill  us  with  godly 
fear  and  heart-searching  as  to  the  kind  of  work 
we  are  doing  for  God. 

“ We  must  all  be  made  manifest  ” ; for  God 


Events  of  the  Missing  Week  91 


does  not  dissociate  our  work  from  ourselves. 
Outward  effort  counts  for  nothing  unless  I am 
a Clirist-soLil ; and  then  my  life  is  my  work. 
The  question  for  each  one  should  be,  Of  what 
sort  is  my  life?  If  it  is  self-centred  and  un- 
watchful, so  also  is  my  work — ‘‘wood,  hay, 
stubble  (1  Cor.  hi.  12).  But  if  my  life  is  sur- 
rendered to  the  King,  if  I am  loyal  to  Him  and 
absolutely  under  His  control,  mine  is  King’s 
work — “gold,  silver,  precious  stones.”  I like 
to  connect  this  scene  at  the  hema  of  Christ  with 
John’s  vision  of  the  Master,  in  the  book  of 
Revelation,  where  He  is  pictured  as  with  eyes 
of  fiery  flame.  Here  is  a man  whose  whole 
Ohristian  life  of  service  has  been  “ wood,  hay, 
and  stubble  ” ; and  the  eye  of  fire  consumes  it. 
The  man  is  saved,  yet  so  as  through  fire.  There 
is  another  whose  work  has  been  “gold,  silver, 
and  precious  stones  ” ; and  the  eye  of  the  Mas- 
ter purifies  it  of  dross,  burns  out  evil,  until  the 
work  sparkles  with  beauty  even  under  the 
glance  of  the  King  Himself. 

Then  shall  Christ’s  Church,  not  only  re- 
deemed but  purified  by  the  fire  of  His  eye,  be 
presented  faultless,  without  spot,  blemish,  or 
wrinkle,  in  the  white  light  of  His  Father’s 
glory  and  holiness.  Jude  24  and  26  describes 
this  much  better  than  any  words  of  mine  can 
possibly  do. 


92 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


‘‘Now  uuto  Plim  that  is  able  to  guard  you  from 
stumbling, — not  falling — “and  to  set  you  before  the 
presence  of  His  glory  without  blemish  in  exceeding  joy, 
to  the  ouly  God  our  Saviour,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  be  glory.’’ 

Rev.  xix.  7,  8,  gives  what  I believe  to  be  the 
next  event : 

“Let  US  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,  and  let  us 
give  the  glory  unto  Him  : for  the  marriage  of  the 
Lamb  is  come,  and  His  wife  hath  made  herself  ready. 
And  it  was  given  unto  her  tliat  she  should  array  her- 
self in  fine  linen,  bright  and  pure : for  the  fine  linen  is 
the  righteous  acts  of  the  saints.” 

The  dress  of  the  Bride  in  this  remarkable  cer- 
emony of  eternal  union  with  her  Lord  will  be 
that  which  was  purified  in  the  fire  at  the  judg- 
ment-seat, To  this  succeeds  the  apocalypse  of 
Jesus,  “Behold,  He  cometh  with  His  saints.” 
Thus  we  have  traced  the  course  of  events  upon 
the  earth — the  full  manifestation  of  evil,  the 
consequent  sore  tribulation,  and  a great  gather- 
ing out  of  both  Jew  and  Gentile ; while  in  the 
heavens  the  Church  has  been  brought  to  judg- 
ment, purified,  presented  to  the  Father,  and 
eternally  united  to  Jesus  Christ.  I hope  it  has 
been  made  clear  that,  during  that  period,  the 
world  is  by  no  means  God-forsaken.  Every 
mundane  event  will  be  directly  under  Divine 
control ; and  through  all  the  awful  chaos,  which 
will  be  far  more  terrible  than  anything  hitherto 
known,  God  will  be  working  toward  the  con- 


Events  of  the  Missing  Week  93 

summation — the  coming  of  Jesus  to  set  up  His 
own  reign. 

I shall  probably  repeat  again  and  again  my 
personal  conviction  that  ours  is  an  unmeasured 
dispensation  as  far  as  man  is  concerned. 
“ Times  and  seasons,”  which  ended  for  awhile 
with  the  cutting  off  of  Messiah,  will  be  resumed 
when  He  takes  away  His  Bride  who  is  also  re- 
jected of  men.  While  that  is  so,  the  signs  of 
the  times  seem  to  indicate  in  the  most  definite 
manner  that  our  age  now  nears  its  close.  The 
general  unrest  plainly  points  to  the  coming  of 
Jesus.  Another  portend  is  the  return,  long 
and  distinctly  foretold,  of  the  Jew  to  Palestine, 
in  a state  of  unbelief.  Ritualism  in  all  its 
varied  forms  is  one  of  the  surest  signs  of  the 
end  of  this  age.  When  the  heart  and  spirit  of 
true  religion  has  gone,  men  ever  attempt  to  re- 
place it  by  outward  show.  The  revival  of 
sacerdotalism,  the  new  assumptions  of  the 
Romish  Church,  and  the  Romanizing  of  the  An- 
glican Church  to  so  large  an  extent — (mourned 
by  devout  souls  within  her  communion,  quite 
as  intensely  as  by  those  outside  it) — all  point 
to  a consummation  close  at  hand.  Another 
proof  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh 
may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  never  has  there 
been  a time  when  all  the  forces  of  evil  were  ally- 
ing themselves  as  they  are  to-day.  The  spirit 
of  lawlessness  is  more  and  more  throwing  off 


94 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


restraint,  raising  its  proud  head,  and  laughing 
at  the  testimony  of  the  living  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ.  To  take  one  example — twenty  years 
ago  those  who  were  fighting  hard  against  the 
blighting  drink  traffic  knew  where  to  plant 
their  blows ; but  it  is  no  longer  so.  The  action 
which  turned  breweries  into  limited  liability 
companies  has  permitted  the  roots  and  rami- 
fications of  this  giant  evil  to  invade  our  churches 
until  we  do  not  know  where  the  mischief  ends. 
Without  entering  into  party  politics,  we  may 
see  how  banded  iniquities  contrive  to  win  their 
own  victories  in  elections,  whichever  side  they 
may  favor. 

It  is  no  less  a sign  of  the  times,  that  never 
was  spirituality  more  marked  in  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  than  it  is  to-day;  and  to  that 
blessed  fact  I bear  testimony  with  fervent  glad- 
ness. Everywhere,  true  men  and  women  are 
hungering  and  thirsting  after  God,  as  never  be- 
fore. Let  there  be  the  spiritual  declaration  of 
the  Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  purposes 
of  God,  and  men  are  found  eager  to  hear,  learn, 
and  obey.  The  great  spiritual  movements  of  the 
last  twenty  years — Keswick,  Northfield,  South- 
port,  Star  Hall,  and  the  holiness  movement  of 
the  Salvation  Army — all  prove  that  God  is  giv- 
ing the  promised  latter  rain,  that  the  end  of  the 
age  draws  nigh,  and  that  the  King  Himself  will 
soon  appear. 


Events  of  the  Missing  Week  95 

We  stand,  as  did  the  men  of  old,  in  the  valley, 
and  ask  the  same  question  as  they:  “Watch- 
man, what  of  the  night  ? ” Men  of  God  upon 
the  heights  of  vision,  seers  of  the  present  day, 
looking  out  upon  the  great  horizon,  send  back 
to  us  the  old  answer,  “ The  morning  cometh ; 
the  night  also.”  The  signs  of  the  times  are 
such  as  reveal  the  power  of  spirituality,  side  by 
side  with  the  development  of  evil ; but,  thank 
God,  beyond  the  night  that  comes  is  the  larger 
day  and  gladder  age  for  man. 


I 


I 


.,1 


VII 

The  Dawn  of  a Golden  Age 


97 


The  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand,  at  hand ! 

Its  storms  roll  up  the  sky ; 

The  nations  sleep  starving  on  heaps  of  gold ; 

All  dreamers  toss  and  sigh ; 

The  night  is  darkest  before  the  morn ; 

When  the  pain  is  sorest  the  child  is  born — 

And  the  Day  of  the  Lord  at  hand. 

Gather  you,  gather  you,  hounds  of  Hell, 

Famine,  and  Plague,  and  War ; 

Idleness,  Bigotry,  Cant,  and  Misrule, 

Gather,  and  fall  in  the  snare  ! 

Hireling  and  Mammonite,  Bigot  and  Knave, 

Crawl  to  the  battlefield,  sneak  to  your  grave, 

In  the  Day  of  the  Lord  at  hand. 

Who  would  sit  down  and  sigh  for  a lost  age  of  gold, 
While  the  Lord  of  all  ages  is  here  ? 

True  hearts  will  leap  up  at  the  trumpet  of  God, 

And  those  who  can  suffer,  can  dare. 

Each  old  age  of  gold  was  an  iron  age,  too. 

And  the  meekest  of  saints  may  find  stern  work  to  do. 
In  the  Day  of  the  Lord  at  hand. 

C.  Kingsley. 

**  The  Day  of  the  Lord.^^ 


99 


VII 


THE  DAWN  OF  A GOLDEN  AGE 

What  will  be  the  condition  of  things  upon 
the  earth  at  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  ? The 
world  will  be  groaning  under  the  most  awful 
despotism  it  has  ever  known ; for  the  removal 
of  the  Church  will  have  issued  in  the  triumph 
of  Gentile  power  centred  in  the  antichrist,  who 
shall  exercise  unparalleled  rule  over  the  nations, 
and  who  will  then  be  at  the  zenith  of  his  fame. 
Half-way  through  Daniel’s  missing  week  of  years 
the  man  of  sin  will  break  his  covenant  with 
the  unbelieving  Jews,  gathered  in  Jerusalem, 
who  will  become  a persecuted,  oppressed,  and 
despised  people.  During  this  period,  too,  there 
is  to  be  terrible  martyrdom  of  those  who,  through 
the  stress  of  the  times,  yield  to  the  claims  of 
Christ,  as  presented  by  His  remaining  witnesses. 
All  the  latest  discoveries  of  science  and  the  de- 
velopments of  earthly  progress,  so-called,  will 
be  pressed  into  the  service  of  antichrist.  Some 
of  us  have  read  certain  books,  the  titles  of  which 
I cannot  recall  for  the  moment,  in  which  the 
authors  have  allowed  their  fancy  loose  rein  with 
regard  to  coming  wars.  I believe  that  in  a popu- 
lar periodical  a story  of  this  kind  has  been  run- 
99 


lOO 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


ning,  the  writer  working  out  in  a speculative 
way  what  is  likely  to  be  the  ultimate  issue  of 
the  present  arming  of  the  nations  and  the  en- 
deavor to  find  new  and  improved  methods  for 
the  expeditious  slaughter  of  men.  Think  of 
the  high  efficiency  attained  upon  the  great  con- 
tinent of  Europe  in  warlike  machinery  ! In  the 
writings  referred  to,  there  is,  unconsciously  it 
may  be,  an  element  of  truth.  The  lawless  one 
will  avail  himself  of  all  the  results  of  scientific 
research  and  invention,  and  Christ  shall  return 
with  His  saints  to  find  the  peoples  of  the  earth 
crushed  under  the  iron  heel  of  an  oppression 
far  more  terrible  than  all  the  previous  experi- 
ence can  furnish,  and  exceeding  the  wildest 
flights  of  imagination. 

In  this  connection  we  may  refer  again  to  the 
Scripture  quoted  in  a former  section  of  these 
studies — 2 Thess.  ii.  7,  8 : 

‘‘For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already  work; 
only  there  is  one  that  restraineth  now,  until  He  be 
taken  out  of  the  way.  And  then  shall  be  revealed  the 
lawless  one,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the 
breath  of  His  mouth,  and  bring  to  nought  by  the  mani- 
festation of  His  coming. 

That  is  to  say,  by  the  epiphany  of  His  Parousia, 
or  the  brightness  of  His  presence.  It  is  not 
that  such  destruction  comes  by  Christ’s  Pa- 
rousia, as  the  appearing  to  His  people  is  called, 
but  by  that  stage  of  His  coming  elsewhere 


The  Dawn  of  a Golden  Age 


loi 


spoken  of  as  His  Apocalypse  or  Manifestation. 
Among  the  old  prophetical  writings,  Zech.  xiv. 
1-6  exactly  foretells  the  same  event. 

Behold,  a day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  when  thy  spoil 
shall  be  divided  in  the  midst  of  thee.  For  I will  gather 
all  nations  against  Jerusalem  to  battle  ; and  the  city 
shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses  rifled,  and  the  women 
ravished ; and  half  of  the  city  shall  go  forth  into  cap- 
tivity, and  the  residue  of  the  people  shall  not  be  cut  off 
from  the  city.  Then  shall  the  Lord  go  forth,  and  fight 
against  those  nations,  as  when  He  fought  in  the  day  of 
battle.  And  His  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the 
mount  of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east, 
and  the  mount  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the  midst 
thereof  toward  the  east  and  toward  the  west,  and  there 
shall  be  a very  great  valley  ; and  half  of  the  mountain 
shall  remove  toward  the  north,  and  half  of  it  toward 
the  south.  And  ye  shall  flee  by  the  valley  of  my 
mountains ; for  the  valley  of  the  mountains  shall 
reach  unto  Azel:  yea,  ye  shall  flee,  like  as  ye  fled 
from  before  the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  king 
of  Judah : and  the  Lord  my  God  shall  come,  and  all 
the  holy  ones  with  thee.^^ 

That  is  an  Old  Testament  prophecy  of  this 
Apocalypse  of  the  Lord  with  His  holy  ones; 
and  now  we  may  turn  to  a New  Testament 
prediction,  part  of  which  has  several  times  en- 
gaged our  attention. 

Rev.  xix.  11 — XX.  4 : And  I saw  the  heaven  opened ; 

and  behold,  a white  horse,  and  He  that  sat  thereon, 
called  Faithful  and  True  ; and  in  righteousness  He 
doth  judge  and  make  war.  And  His  eyes  are  a flame 
of  fire,  and  upon  His  head  are  many  diadems ; and  He 


102 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


hath  a name  written,  which  no  one  knoweth  but  He 
Himself.  And  He  is  arrayed  in  a garment  sprinkled 
with  blood  : and  His  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God. 
And  the  armies  which  are  in  heaven  followed  Him 
upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and 
pure.  And  out  of  His  mouth  proceedeth  a sharp 
sword,  that  with  it  He  should  smite  the  nations : and 
He  shall  rule  them  with  a rod  of  iron : and  He  tread- 
eth  the  winepress  of  the  fierceness  of  the  wrath  of 
Almighty  God.  And  He  hath  on  His  garment  and  on 
His  thigh  a name  written.  King  of  kings,  and  Lord 

OF  LORDS. 

“ And  I saw  an  angel  standing  in  the  sun;  and  he 
cried  with  a loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the  birds  that  fly 
in  mid  heaven.  Come  and  be  gathered  together  unto 
the  great  supper  of  God ; that  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of 
kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains,  and  the  flesh  of  mighty 
men,  and  the  flesh  of  horses  and  of  them  that  sit 
thereon,  and  the  flesh  of  all  men,  both  free  and  bond, 
and  small  and  great, 

“And  I saw  the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth, 
and  their  armies,  gathered  together  to  make  war 
against  Him  that  sat  upon  the  horse,  and  against  His 
army.  And  the  beast  was  taken,  and  with  him  the 
false  prophet  that  wrought  the  signs  in  his  sight, 
wherewith  he  deceived  them  that  had  received  the 
mark  of  the  beast,  and  them  that  worshipped  his  im- 
age: they  twain  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire 
that  burneth  with  brimstone  : and  the  rest  were  killed 
with  the  sword  of  Him  that  sat  upon  the  horse,  even 
the  sword  which  came  forth  out  of  His  mouth  : and  all 
the  birds  were  filled  with  their  flesh. 

“And  I saw  an  angel  coming  down  out  of  heaven, 
having  the  key  of  the  abyss  and  a great  chain  in  his 
hand.  And  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  the  old  ser- 
pent, which  is  the  Devil  and  Satan  ” — the  name  is  re- 
peated  and  given  in  varied  form  that  there  may  he  no  mis- 


The  Dawn  of  a Golden  Age  103 

take — “ and  bound  him  for  a thousand  years,  and  cast 
him  into  the  abyss,  and  shut  it,  and  sealed  it  over  him, 
that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more,  until  the 
thousand  years  should  be  finished : after  this  he  must 
be  loosed  for  a little  time. 

“ And  I saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them,  and 
judgment  was  given  unto  them : and  I saw  the  souls 
of  them  that  had  been  beheaded  for  the  testimony  of 
Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of  God,  and  such  as  worshipped 
not  the  beast,  neither  his  image,  and  received  not 
the  mark  upon  their  forehead  and  upon  their  hand ; 
and  they  lived,  and  reigned  with  Christ  a thousand 
years.” 

I have  quoted  that  long  passage  of  Scripture 
because  I believe  the  Word  of  God,  if  we  will 
but  read  it  with  simplicity,  is  more  clear  and 
powerful  than  anything  that  can  be  said  about 
it.  In  the  zenith  of  the  power  of  antichrist, 
Jesus  will  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  the 
whole  company  of  His  saints,  coming  to  set  up 
His  own  blessed  reign  upon  the  earth.  His 
appearing  will  be  the  destruction  of  the  man  of 
sin,  and  the  confusion  of  the  confederacy  of  the 
nations  against  God  and  His  Christ.  He  will 
scatter  before  His  coming  the  evil  which  has 
been  brought  to  so  prominent  a head  during 
the  period  of  that  missing  “ week.” 

That  will  be  the  day  of  Christ’s  vindication 
before  all  the  earth,  when  “ every  eye  shall  see 
Him,  and  they  which  pierced  Him ; and  all  the 
tribes  of  the  earth  shall  mourn  over  Him  ” 
(Rev.  i.  7).  The  Master  has  been  hidden  now 


104  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


for  nineteen  hundred  years ; and  the  scoffing 
world  says,  “ Where  is  the  promise  of  His  com- 
ing? ” Men  are  asking  us  if  we  really  still  be- 
lieve in  Christ  as  we  used  to  do.  Alas ! that 
the  infidelity  of  the  ungodly  should  have  crept 
into  the  very  Church  itself ; so  that  there  are 
not  wanting  those  who  have  tried  to  under- 
mine our  holy  faith,  by  seeking  to  rob  it  of 
everything  that  is  supernatural  and  beyond 
explanation  by  laws  which  men  think  they  un- 
derstand. But  as  surely  as  God  is  upon  His 
throne,  Jesus,  “this  same  Jesus,”  the  Man  of 
Nazareth  and  Capernaum,  the  Man  of  the  city 
and  of  the  village,  He  Whom  crowds  heard 
speak  in  the  olden  days,  is  coming  back  to  our 
earth,  accompanied  by  His  saints.  Christ’s 
people  also  shall  be  vindicated  when  it  is  seen 
that  “ the  foolish  things,  the  weak  things,  and 
the  things  which  are  not,”  in  the  estimation  of 
earth  to-day,  will  prove  to  be  things  of  wisdom, 
things  of  strength,  and  things  that  are.  Then, 
too,  shall  the  earth  have  its  opportunity  as 
never  before. 

May  I warn  you  against  spiritualizing  this 
truth?  Christ  will  indeed  be  the  King  of 
kings  upon  this  earth.  He  will  be  as  directly 
and  positively  a Ruler  as  any  monarch  whose 
name  is  upon  our  lips  to-day ; but  His  sway 
will  be  more  absolute  and  powerful.  With  all 
my  heart  and  soul  I believe  that  the  only 


The  Dawn  of  a Golden  Age  105 


effective  rule  for  humanity  is  an  absolute  mon- 
archy ; but  the  trouble  is,  that  we  have  never 
yet  found  the  monarch.  For  a little  while  the 
heavens  have  received  Christ,  the  only  One 
worthy  of  unlimited  rule  ; but  the  King  of  men 
is  coming  back,  in  infinite  compassion  for  the 
world  which  drove  Him  out.  For  His  coming, 
not  only  the  Church,  but  the  whole  creation 
waits.  The  Revised  Version  gives  a far  wider 
meaning  and  greater  force  than  does  the  Au- 
thorized to  Paul’s  words  in  Rom.  viii.  19, 
“ The  earnest  expectation  of  the  creation  wait- 
eth  for  the  revealing  [the  Apocalypse  or  reve- 
lation] of  the  sons  of  God.”  To-day  the  sons 
of  God,  as  such,  are  unknown,  or  despised  and 
persecuted ; but  when  the  Master  comes,  they 
will  be  revealed  with  Him — and  it  is  for  this 
consummation  that  the  earth  is  waiting. 
When  He  comes  to  set  up  His  Kingdom  and  to 
judge,  not  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear  or  the 
seeing  of  the  eye,  but  with  righteous  judgment, 
then  what  solution  of  problems,  what  healing 
of  wounds,  what  blessing  for  poor,  oppressed 
humanity ! 

Following  upon  the  end  of  Gentile  power 
and  policy,  in  the  destruction  of  the  man  of  sin, 
and  the  sweeping  away  of  all  war  by  the  great 
battle  of  Armageddon,  comes  the  restoration  of 
God’s  ancient  people  of  Israel  to  their  true 
position  among  the  nations.  I do  not  say  the 


io6  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


restoration  of  the  Jew — that  is  not  comprehen- 
sive enough  ; but  of  the  whole  Israel  of  God. 
The  ten  tribes,  lost  for  centuries,  shall  be 
found  and  restored  to  their  land,  for  the  fulfill- 
ment of  God’s  purposes  for  Israel,  and  through 
Israel,  for  the  race.  I know  that  some  doubt 
this  truth,  and  say  that  Israel  as  a nation  has 
been  finally  cast  off.  Can  God  desert  those  to 
whom  He  has  made  oath?  Absolutely  impos- 
sible! Can  He  be  defeated?  Never!  God’s 
purposes  may  be  thwarted  and  hindered ; but, 
despite  all  human  failure  and  folly,  they  must 
eventually  be  realized.  The  prophecies  of  the 
Old  Testament  concerning  God’s  ancient  peo- 
ple have  never  been  wholly  fulfilled ; and  it 
cannot  be  that  the  inspired  Word  of  the  living 
God  should  prove  a failure. 

Deut.  vi.  4,  5,  has  a direct  bearing  on  this 
subject. 

“Hear,  O Israel : the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord : and 
thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might.” 

That  is  the  Divine  purpose  for  Israel.  The 
unity  of  God  is  a great  abiding  fact,  there 
coupled  with  heart  and  soul  love  for  Him  on 
the  part  of  the  nation.  Connect  with  that  pas- 
sage Isa.  xliii.  12,  13: 

“I  have  declared,  and  I have  saved,  and  I have 
showed,  and  there  was  no  strange  god  among  you: 


The  Dawn  of  a Golden  Age  107 

therefore  ye  are  My  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord,  and  I 
am  God.  Yea,  since  the  day  was  I am  He ; and  there 
is  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  My  hand  : I will  work, 
and  who  shall  let  it? 

Israel  is  God’s  chosen  nation  for  manifesting 
Him  to  the  world,  and  that  revelation  is  to  be 
made  by  their  own  loyalty  to  Him,  and  by 
their  absolute  freedom  from  the  corrupting 
practices  which  have  obtained  among  other 
people.  Such  an  ideal  has  never  yet  been  fully 
carried  into  practical  effect ; but  because  it  is 
Divine,  it  has  yet  to  be  realized. 

Before  suggesting  to  you  a few  principles  of 
interpretation  for  distinguishing  the  Bible 
prophecies  concerning  Israel  which  have  not  yet 
been  realized,  I ask,  Are  such  predictions  to  be 
fulfilled?  If  not,  we  are  driven  into  one  of 
two  positions.  Either  they  are  not  inspired, 
or,  being  inspired,  God  has  made  a mistake.  I 
decline  to  adopt  either  alternative.  I have 
given  up  reading  any  book  outside  the  Bible 
for  proof  of  its  inspiration.  This  blessed  Book 
is  gripping  my  inner  consciousness  more  and 
more,  and  is  compelling  my  obeisance  to  what 
must  indeed  be  (and  not  merely  contain)  the 
very  Word  of  God.  The  second  alternative  be- 
ing obviously  untenable,  it  follows  that  the 
prophecies  are  intended  to  be  fulfilled.  The 
distinguishing  principles  suggested,  then,  are 
as  follows : — 


lo8  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


i.  Prophecies  speaking  of  God’s  Israel  as  a 
whole,  in  fullness  of  blessing,  are  yet  future. 
All  the  glorious  predictions  concerning  the  trh 
umph  and  magnificence  of  Israel,  are  unful- 
filled. They  must  and  will  be  realized  to  the 
letter. 

ii.  References  not  merely  to  the  restoration 
of  the  nation,  but  to  its  conversion,  are  to  a 
state  of  things  not  yet  realized,  because  God’s 
ancient  people  are  not  yet  regenerate  in  heart 
and  life.  They  will  be  when  they  acknowledge 
Him  as  Saviour  and  as  King,  Whom  to-day  they 
are  rejecting. 

iii.  When  the  prophecy  speaks  of  Israel  as 
restored  to  wander  no  more,  it  refers  to  the  fu- 
ture. 

iv.  Descriptions  of  the  utter  and  final  over- 
throw of  Israel’s  enemies  are  unfulfilled. 

V.  When  the  coming  of  Messiah  is  connected 
with  national  deliverance,  the  prophecy  is  un- 
fulfilled. To  some  of  us  it  is  remarkable  that 
tlie  nation  did  not  understand  its  own  prophets. 
How  did  a devout  Jew  of  the  olden  times  read 
Isa.  liii.,  with  its  picture  of  the  suffering  One? 
Well,  he  passed  it  over  because  he  did  not  un- 
derstand it,  after  the  manner  of  many  Chris- 
tians in  our  own  day,  in  regard  to  other  matters 
in  the  Book,  touching  Israel’s  future  glory  and 
government.  Part  of  Jewish  prophecy  has 
been  fulfilled  in  the  coming  of  the  rejected 


The  Dawn  of  a Golden  Age  109 


One ; but  all  predictions  which  connect  His 
coming  with  national  deliverance  are  still  un- 
fulfilled. 

vi.  When  it  is  declared  that  Israel,  as  a 
whole,  shall  be  a channel  of  blessing  to  all  other 
nations,  the  prophecy  is  unfulfilled. 

vii.  When  the  prophecy  was  uttered  after 
the  return  from  Babylon,  it  remains  to  be  ful- 
filled. 

Take  two  instances  in  illustration.  First,  the 
beautiful  passage  in  Isa.  xlix.  18-22. 

“Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  behold:  all 
these  gather  themselves  together,  and  come  to  thee. 
As  I live,  saith  the  Lord,  thou  shalt  surely  clothe  thee 
•with  them  all  as  with  an  ornament,  and  gird  thyself 
with  them,  like  a bride.  For,  as  for  thy  waste  and  thy 
desolate  places  and  thy  land  that  hath  been  destroyed, 
surely  now  shalt  thou  be  too  strait  for  the  inhabitants, 
and  they  that  swallowed  thee  up  shall  be  far  away. 
The  children  of  thy  bereavement  \flie  lost  tribes']  shall 
yet  say  in  thine  ears.  The  place  is  too  strait  for  me : 
give  place  to  me  that  I may  dwell.  Then  shalt  thou 
say  in  thine  heart,  Who  hath  begotten  me  these,  seeing 
I have  been  bereaved  of  my  children,  and  am  solitary, 
an  exile,  and  wandering  to  and  fro?  and  who  hath 
brought  up  these?  Behold,  I was  left  alone;  these, 
where  were  they?  ” [Mark  that  question,] 

“Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I will  lift  up 
Mine  hand  to  the  nations,  and  set  up  My  ensigns  to 
the  peoples  : and  they  shall  bring  thy  sons  in  their 
bosom,  and  thy  daughters  shall  be  carried  upon  their 
shoulders.” 

While  I am  not  able  positively  to  deny  that 


1 lO 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


we,  as  a nation,  are  identical  with  the  lost  ten 
tribes,  I am  by  no  means  satisfied  of  it ; but  I 
have  no  quarrel  with  those  who  hold  that  view. 
At  all  events,  God  knows  where  they  are ; and 
back  to  the  old  land  for  which  He  has  declared 
His  love,  shall  come  the  scattered  earthly  peo- 
ple— not  the  two  tribes,  not  Judah  alone,  but 
all  the  Israel  of  God. 

The  second  example  is  Zech.  viii.  7,  8 : 

“Thus  saitb  the  Lord  of  Hosts  : Behold,  I will  save 
My  people  from  the  east  country,  and  from  the  west 
country : and  I will  bring  them,  and  they  shall  dwell 
in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem  ; and  they  shall  be  My  peo- 
ple, and  I will  be  their  God,  in  truth  and  in  righteous- 
ness.’’ 

That  is  a prophecy  never  yet  fulfilled ; and  I 
believe  one  of  the  very  first  things  after  the 
Apocalypse  of  Jesus  with  His  saints,  and  when 
the  man  of  sin  has  been  destroyed,  will  be  the 
gathering  of  God’s  ancient  people  to  their  own 
city.  The  consideration  of  God’s  purpose 
therein  must  be  reserved  for  future  study ; but 
I may  say  here  that  the  gathered  ones  will  be- 
come the  greatest  missionaries  the  world  has 
ever  had.  They  will  preach  the  everlasting 
gospel,  and  be  God’s  messengers  to  other  peo- 
ples, carrying  all  the  truth  of  the  Kingdom 
which  they  rejected  when  Christ  came  of  old. 

Rev.  XX.  2,  3,  shows  that  when  the  King 
comes  and  has  destroyed  the  very  incarnation 


The  Dawn  of  a Golden  Age  ill 


of  earthly  evil,  an  angel  from  heaven  will  lay 
hold  upon  Satan  and  bind  him  for  a thousand 
years,  so  that  his  deceiving  of  the  nations  shall 
cease  during  that  period.  Passing  by,  for  the 
present,  his  subsequent  loosing  for  a little  sea- 
son, it  is  one  of  the  most  glad  and  blessed  pros- 
pects, that  Christ  is  to  inaugurate  His  reign 
upon  the  earth,  by  locking  away  from  the  na- 
tions the  arch-enemy  of  the  human  race.  Let 
me  repeat  that  this  coming  of  its  King  is  earth’s 
greatest  hope.  I have  every  confidence  in  the 
victory  of  righteousness,  not  on  account  of  the 
organizations  of  the  present  day,  but  because 
I have  faith  in  God  and  in  the  consummation 
of  His  purposes,  by  this  coming  of  Christ  to 
set  up  His  reign  among  men. 

Surely  He  coraeth,  and  a thousand  voices 
Call  to  the  saints,  and,  to  the  deaf,  are  dumb  ; 

Surely  He  cometh,  and  the  earth  rejoices, 

Glad  in  His  coming.  Who  hath  sworn, “I  come.’’ 

This  hath  He  done,  and  shall  we  not  adore  Him  ? 

This  shall  He  do,  and  shall  we  yet  despair? 

Come,  let  us  quickly  fling  ourselves  before  Him ; 

Cast  at  His  feet  the  burden  of  our  care. 


! 

? 

i 

r 

i 

1 


VIII 

The  Golden  Age 


113 


Hail  to  the  Lord^s  anointed ; 

Great  David’s  greater  Son  ! 

Hail,  in  the  time  appointed, 

His  reign  on  earth  begun  ! 

He  comes  to  break  oppression, 

To  set  the  captive  free, 

To  take  away  transgression, 

And  rule  in  equity. 

He  comes  with  succor  speedy 
To  those  that  suffer  wrong ; 

To  help  the  poor  and  needy. 

And  bid  the  weak  be  strong ; 

To  give  them  songs  for  sighing. 

Their  darkness  turn  to  light, 

Whose  souls  condemned  and  dying 
Were  precious  in  His  sight, 

• •••••• 

Arabia’s  desert  ranger 
To  Him  shall  bow  the  knee ; 

The  Ethiopian  stranger 
His  glory  come  to  see  ; 

With  offerings  of  devotion. 

Ships  from  the  isles  shall  meet, 

To  pour  the  wealth  of  ocean 
In  tribute  at  His  feet. 

Kings  shall  fall  down  before  Him, 

And  gold  and  incense  bring ; 

All  nations  shall  adore  Him, 

His  praise  all  people  sing : 

For  He  shall  have  dominion 
O’er  river,  sea,  and  shore. 

Far  as  the  eagle’s  pinion 
Or  dove’s  light  wings  can  soar. 

J,  Montgomery. 


114 


VIII 


THE  GOLDEN  AGE 

Antichrist  destroyed,  Israel  restored,  and 
Satan  bound — the  personal  reign  of  Christ  will 
begin.  Of  that  reign  it  is  difficult  to  give  any- 
thing approaching  a full  and  direct  description. 
A study  of  Old  Testament  prophecy  may  help 
Bible  students  to  form  some  idea  of  the  glories 
of  that  time.  Let  us  look  at  a few  of  the  chief 
features  as  thus  revealed,  considering  first  the 
Millennial  order,  and  then  taking  some  glimpses 
at  the  blessings  resulting. 

Jesus  will  be  King,  in  as  direct  and  positive 
a sense  as  any  ruler  the  world  has  ever  known, 
hut  with  larger  empire  and  more  autocratic  sway. 
He  will  be  Judge  as  well  as  King,  and  the  final 
Arbitrator  in  any  disputes  that  may  arise 
among  men.  In  Luke  i.  32,  33,  we  read  : 

“He  shall  be  great,  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of 
the  Most  High : and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  Him 
the  throne  of  His  father  David  : and  He  shall  reign 
over  the  house  of  Jacob  forever ; and  of  His  kingdom 
there  shall  be  no  end.  ” 

That  announcement  made  to  Mary  concerning 
Jesus  has  never  yet  been  fulfilled,  but  will  be 
when  the  time  comes  for  His  personal  reign. 

115 


11 6 God’s  Methods  with  Man 


He  will  be  the  King  of  God’s  ancient  people 
gathered  to  Jerusalem  ; and,  through  them,  the 
Governor  of  the  whole  earth.  Psalm  Ixxii.  has 
first  application  to  King  Solomon,  but  can  only 
find  lasting  fulfillment  in  Jesus  Christ.  It 
opens  with  the  words, 

Give  the  King  Thy  judgments,  O God, 

And  Thy  righteousness  unto  the  King’s  Son,’^ 

Then,  in  verses  8,  9 we  have  this  prediction, 

“ He  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea^ 

And  from  the  Biver  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

They  that  dwell  in  the  wilderness  shall  bow  before  him ; 
And  His  enemies  shall  lick  the  dust.” 

In  Zech.  ix.  9 we  read, 

“ Rejoice  greatly,  O daughter  of  Zion  ; shout,  O 
daughter  of  Jerusalem  : behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto 
thee:  He  is  just,  and  having  salvation;  lowly,  and 

riding  upon  an  ass,  even  upon  a colt  the  foal  of  an  ass.” 

The  next  verse  contains  a quotation  from  the 
Psalm  just  mentioned  which  confirms  the  appli- 
cation of  that  Psalm  to  Christ,  because  He  has 
already  literally  fulfilled  the  foregoing  words  of 
Zechariah  which  speak  of  the  mode  of  Christ’s 
entry  into  Jerusalem. 

“ And  I will  cut  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraim,  and 
the  horse  from  Jerusalem,  and  the  battle  bow  shall  be 
cut  off ; and  He  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  nations : 
and  His  dominion  shall  he  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the 
Biver  to  the  ends  of  the  earth. 


The  Golden  Age  117 

The  remainder  of  the  prophecy  in  that  latter 
verse  will  be  fulfilled  in  the  Millennium. 

Zechariah  viii.  1-8  reveals  the  centre  of  gov- 
ernment. 

“ And  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  came  to  me, 
saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts:  I am  jealous 

for  Zion  with  great  jealousy,  and  I am  jealous  for  her 
with  great  fury.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  : I am  returned 
unto  Zion,  and  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem : 
and  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  The  city  of  truth  ; and 
the  mountain  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  The  holy  mountain. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts : There  shall  yet  old 
men  and  old  women  dwell  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem, 
every  man  with  his  staff  in  his  hand  for  very  age. 
And  the  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of  boys  and 
girls  playing  in  the  streets  thereof.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  Hosts : If  it  he  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  the 
remnant  of  this  people  in  those  days,  should  it  also  be 
marvellous  in  Mine  eyes  ? saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts : Behold,  I will  save  My 
people  from  the  east  country,  and  from  the  west  coun- 
try : and  I will  bring  them,  and  they  shall  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  Jerusalem  ; and  they  shall  be  My  people,  and 
I will  be  their  God,  in  truth  and  in  righteousness.’^ 

Palestine,  reinhabited  by  the  nation  of  Israel, 
is  to  be  redivided  ; and  each  tribe  will  return, 
not  to  the  section  of  land  previously  occupied, 
but  to  a portion  which  stretches  from  the  sea- 
board across  the  land.  Jerusalem  is  to  be  re- 
built, and  will  possess  a temple  far  larger  and 
more  magnificent  than  before,  the  size  of  which 
is  given  by  Ezekiel.  The  city  will  not  merely 
be  the  seat  of  rule  exercised  over  Israel ; but 


ll8  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


the  metropolis  of  government  for  the  whole 
earth,  and  the  centre  for  the  world-wide  wor- 
ship of  God.  In  the  past  its  sacrifices  and  ob- 
lations pointed  on  to  Christ ; but  these,  restored 
in  the  Millennium,  will  be  ofi'ered  in  memory 
of  the  work  which  Jesus  accomplished  by  His 
Cross.  In  Jerusalem  Christ’s  laws  and  deci- 
sions are  to  be  made  and  given  ; and  from  thence 
edicts  will  go  forth  affecting  the  whole  of  man- 
kind. 

All  Gentile  nations  will  come  into  a place  of 
blessing  as  a result  of  this  restored  nationality 
of  Israel.  You  will  find  promise  of  this  in 
Gen.  xxii.  18: 

‘‘And  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
be  blessed.’^ 

That  prophecy  has  never  been  realized,  except, 
to  some  extent,  in  the  first  advent  of  Christ ; 
but  it  awaits  complete  and  very  literal  fulfill- 
ment in  the  age  to  come.  The  same  truth  is 
taught  in  Isa.  Ivi.  6,  7 : 

“Also  the  strangers,  that  join  themselves  to  the 
Lord,  to  minister  unto  Him,  and  to  love  the  name  of 
the  Lord,  to  be  His  servants,  every  one  that  keepeth 
the  Sabbath  from  profaning  it,  and  holdeth  fast  by  My 
covenant ; even  them  will  I bring  to  My  holy  mountain, 
and  make  them  joyful  in  My  house  of  prayer;  their 
burnt  offerings  and  their  sacrifices  shall  be  accepted 
upon  Mine  altar : for  Mine  house  shall  be  called  an 
house  of  prayer  for  all  peoples.” 


The  Golden  Age 


119 


As  to  the  method  of  government,  all  the  na- 
tions of  the  earth  will  be  subdued  to  Christ’s 
rule  and  will  pay  tribute  to  Jerusalem  and  to 
its  King.  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that 
they  will  all  be  loyal  in  heart.  Sin  will  still  be 
upon  the  earth,  but  held  in  repression,  to  be 
dealt  with  at  the  close  of  the  Millennium. 
The  great  deceiver  of  the  nations  having  been 
bound,  and  cast  for  a thousand  years  into  the 
abyss,  Christ  will  exercise  autocratic  rule 
through  His  chosen  administrators : that  is, 
through  His  ancient  people,  and,  in  some  meas- 
ure, through  His  heavenly  people,  the  Church, 
who  will  be  associated  with  Him  in  His  reign 
over  the  earth.  “ Know  ye  not,”  says  Paul, 
*^that  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world?”  (1 
Cor.  vi.  2). 

Having  thus  briefly  considered  the  Millennial 
order,  let  us  endeavor  to  see  some  of  its  glo- 
rious advantages  by  reference  to  the  visions  of 
the  prophets.  Amid  the  groaning  of  oppressed 
men  under  the  foolish  and  iniquitous  forms  of 
government  which  have  blighted  human  life, 
how  we  long  for  a single  Authority,  just  and 
final.  That  is  exactly  what  the  earth  will  have 
for  a thousand  years,  when  the  One,  rejected  of 
old,  is  King  in  actuality. 

The  principles  which  will  regulate  govern- 
ment in  that  age  are  briefly  and  clearly  stated 
in  Isa.  xi.  1-4 : 


120 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


“ And  there  shall  come  forth  a Shoot  out  of  the 
stock  of  Jesse,  and  a Branch  out  of  his  roots  shall  hear 
fruit : and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  Him, 
the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  Spirit  of 
counsel  and  might,  the  Spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  ; and  His  delight  shall  be  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  : and  He  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of 
His  eyes,  neither  reprove  after  the  hearing  of  His  ears : 
but  with  righteousness  shall  He  judge  the  poor,  and 
reprove  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth  : and 
He  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  His  mouth, 
and  with  the  breath  of  His  lips  shall  He  slay  the 
wicked.’^ 

Then  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  man, 
righteousness  and  judgment  will  be  perfectly 
wedded.  To-day  the  law,  made  for  the  sinner,  too 
often  hits  the  saint.  Human  judgment  is  always 
given  upon  evidence  which  results  from  a 
fallible  seeing  of  the  eye  and  hearing  of  the 
ear.  But  Christ,  as  an  omniscient,  as  well  as 
omnipotent  Judge,  will  know  the  secret  inward 
motives  of  the  hearts  of  men.  When  cases  are 
brought  to  Him  by  His  administrators,  His 
decision  will,  therefore,  be  perfect  in  equity. 
“ With  righteousness  shall  He  judge  the  poor.’’ 
He  shall  pronounce  His  sentence  strictly  on 
the  basis  of  that  intimate  knowledge  which 
cannot  characterize  the  judgments  of  this  age, 
under  limited  forms  of  government.  We 
sometimes  say  oppressed  nations  need  mercy 
and  pity.  Nay,  it  is  rather  strict,  impartial 
judgment  that  is  required.  The  most  merciful 


The  Golden  Age 


121 


thing  in  the  economy  of  God  is,  that  when  His 
King  comes  to  execute  judgment  and  truth,  the 
exercise  of  these  attributes  will  be  based  upon 
His  infinite,  unmistakable  knowledge  of  the 
hearts,  thoughts,  and  intents  of  men. 

Another  phase  of  blessing  is  revealed  in 
Rom.  viii.  19-23 : 

“ For  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creation  waiteth 
for  the  revealing  of  the  sons  of  God.  For  the  creation 
Tvas  subjected  to  vanity,  not  of  its  own  will,  but  by 
reason  of  Him  who  subjected  it,  in  hope  that  the 
creation  itself  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage 
of  corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  chil- 
dren of  God.  For  we  know  that  the  whole  creation 
groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until  now. 
And  not  only  so,  but  ourselves  also,  which  have  the 
first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves  groan 
within  ourselves,  waiting  for  our  adoption,  to  wit,  the 
redemption  of  our  body. ' ^ 

Creation  is  to  be  freed  from  its  groaning  and 
travailing  in  pain  ; the  blight  upon  nature  will 
be  removed ; and  a perfect  manifestation  of  its 
beauty  will  take  the  place  of  all  it  now  suffers 
in  company  with  fallen  humanity.  Turning  to 
Old  Testament  words  on  the  subiect,  read  Isa. 
xi.  6-9 : 

“And  the  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the 
leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid  ; and  the  calf  and 
the  young  lion  and  the  fatling  together ; and  a little 
child  shall  lead  them.  And  the  cowand  the  bear  shall 
feed ; their  young  ones  shall  lie  down  together : and 
the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox.  And  the  sucking 


122 


God’s  Methods  with  Man 


child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned 
child  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  basilisk’s  den.  They 
shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  My  holy  mountain: 
for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.’* 

You  cannot  spiritualize  that  passage.  It  is  a 
plain  statement  of  the  fact  that,  under  the 
sway  of  our  Redeemer,  the  ferocity  of  wild 
beasts  shall  depart,  and  nature  itself  shall  feel 
the  blessed  influence  of  the  reigning  Prince  of 
Peace. 

I have  been  asked  whether  the  Golden  Age 
will  be  marked  by  dietetic  abstinence  from 
flesh.  While  I do  not  believe  in  vegetarianism 
for  to-day,  except  under  certain  conditions,  I 
may  express  the  belief  that  nature  itself  will 
then  be  free  from  everything  which  savors  of 
cruelty ; for,  “ they  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy 
in  all  My  holy  mountain.”  Certain  it  is  that 
the  lower  animals  will  be  vegetarians,  for, 
“The  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox.” 

I dare  not  linger  upon  these  attractive  pic- 
tures of  nature  restored,  but  must  take  them 
in  rapid  sequence. 

Isa.  XXX,  24,  25 : “The  oxen  likewise  and  the  young 
asses  that  till  the  ground  shall  eat  savory  provender, 
which  hath  been  winnowed  with  the  shovel  and  with 
the  fan.  And  there  shall  be  upon  every  lofty  moun- 
tain, and  upon  every  high  hill,  rivers  and  streams  of 
waters,  in  the  day  of  the  great  slaughter,  when  the 
towers  fall,” 


The  Golden  Age 


123 


Isa.  xli.  18-20:  “I  will  open  rivers  on  the  bare 

heights,  and  fountains  in  the  midst  of  the  valleys:  I 
will  make  the  wilderness  a pool  of  water,  and  the  dry 
land  springs  of  water.  I will  plant  in  the  wilderness 
the  cedar,  the  acacia  tree,  and  the  myrtle,  and  the  oil 
tree ; I will  set  in  the  desert  the  fir  tree,  the  pine,  and 
the  box  tree  together : that  they  may  see,  and  know, 
and  consider,  and  understand  together,  that  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  hath  done  this,  and  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  hath  created  it.” 

Isa.  Ixv.  25  : “ The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed 

together,  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox : and 
dust  shall  be  the  serpent^s  meat.  They  shall  not  hurt 
nor  destroy  in  all  My  holy  mountain,  saith  the  Lord.” 

These  passages,  taken  almost  at  haphazard 
from  among  many,  are  predictions  of  what 
shall  surely  come  to  pass.  When  man,  God’s 
crowning  work,  first  sinned,  he  dragged  down  all 
creation  in  his  fall ; but  when  Jesus  shall  come 
again,  to  reign  in  the  power  of  His  Cross,  Passion, 
and  Atonement  (for  that  is  to  be  the  strength 
of  His  rule),  then  the  whole  creation  shall  feel 
the  touch  of  His  presence,  and  shall  respond  to 
His  redemptive  work.  Ferocity  shall  be  driven 
from  the  beasts,  roses  shall  bloom  in  the  desert ; 
and  the  whole  of  nature  which  to-day  is  blighted 
and  cursed  by  sin  shall  be  perfected  in  beauty, 
because  the  King,  Who  has  redeemed  man  and 
the  earth,  shall  Himself  be  Governor. 

What  of  man  in  that  period  of  the  Millen- 
nium ? His  physical  being  is  to  share  in  the 
general  blessedness  : 


124  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


Isa.  Ixv.  20:  “ There  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  in- 

fant of  days,  nor  an  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his 
days : for  the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old,  and 
the  sinner  being  an  hundred  years  old  shall  be  ac- 
cursed.^’ 

Premature  death  shall  be  unknown,  and  phys- 
ical vitality  shall  be  strong  and  generous. 
There  are  three  verses  which  speak  of  the 
children  under  the  reign  of  Jesus. 

Psa.  Ixxii,  4 : “ He  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  people. 
He  shall  save  the  children  of  the 
needy.” 

Isa.  xi.  8:  ‘‘The  sucking  child  shall  play  on  the 
hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned  child  shall  put  his 
hand  on  the  basilisk’s  den.” 

Zech.  viii.  5 : “ And  the  streets  of  the  city  shall  be 
full  of  boys  and  girls  playing  in  the  streets  thereof.” 

What  is  the  King's  ideal  for  child-life  ? 
Play!  With  what  shall  they  play?  With 
that  from  which  to-day  we  carefully  and  neces- 
sarily guard  our  little  ones.  “ The  weaned 
child  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  basilisk’s  den  ” ; 
while  a little  dimpled  fist  shall  be  entwined  in 
the  mane  of  the  lion  to  lead  about  that  royal 
playmate ! What  a glorious  picture  of  child- 
life  in  the  daj"  of  the  Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ! 

In  Isa.  Ixv.  21,  22  we  have  a glimpse  of  mil- 
lennial social  conditions  : 

“ They  shall  build  houses  ” — xoell^  that  goes  on  now — 
“and  inhabit  them.”  The  persons  who  do  this  to-day 
are  fete  and  far  between.  ‘‘  They  shall  plant  vineyards, 


The  Golden  Age 


125 


and  eat  the  fruit  of  them.  They  shall  not  build,  and 
another  inhabit ; they  shall  not  plant,  and  another  eat : 
for  as  the  days  of  a tree  shall  be  the  days  of  My  peo- 
ple, and  My  chosen  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of  their 
hands. 

It  will  be  a great  change;  but  when  Jesus  is 
King,  profit  shall  go  to  the  toilers. 

There  will  also  be  unparalleled  commercial 
activity : 

Zech.  xiv.  20,  21 : “In  that  day  shall  there  be  upon 
the  bells  of  the  horses,  Holy  unto  the  Lord  ; and 
the  pots  in  the  Lord’s  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls  be- 
fore the  altar.  Yea,  every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in 
Judah  shall  be  holy  unto  the  Lord  of  Hosts ; and  all 
they  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  take  of  them,  and 
seethe  therein : and  in  that  day  there  shall  be  no  more 
a Canaanite  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts.” 

The  sanctuary  will  be  free  from  the  trafficker, 
and  the  trade  of  the  nation  will  be  character- 
ized by  being  “ Holy  unto  the  Lord.”  Another 
note  to  the  same  effect  is  sounded  in  Ezek. 
xxxiv.  24-26 : 

“ And  I the  Lord  will  be  their  God,  and  my  servant 
David  prince  among  them  ; I the  Lord  have  spoken  it. 
And  I will  make  with  them  a covenant  of  peace,  and 
will  cause  evil  beasts  to  cease  out  of  the  land  ” — that  w, 
men  who  prey  upon  the  people  shall  then  have  no  existence 
— “and  they  shall  dwell  securely  in  the  wilderness, 
and  sleep  in  the  woods.  And  I will  make  them  and 
the  places  round  about  My  hill  a blessing;  and  I will 
cause  the  shower  to  come  down  in  its  season ; there 
shall  be  showers  of  blessing.” 


126  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


See  the  security  of  life  under  the  government 
of  Jesus,  when  men  sleep  in  the  woods  with  no 
sense  of  dread.  A closing  glimpse  comes 
through  Amos  ix.  11,  13,  14: 

“In  that  day  will  I raise  up  the  tabernacle  of  David 
that  is  fallen,  and  close  up  the  breaches  thereof ; and 
I will  raise  up  his  ruins,  and  I will  build  it  as  in  the 
days  of  old.  . . . Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the 

Lord,  that  the  plowman  shall  overtake  the  reaper,  and 
the  treader  of  grapes  him  that  soweth  seed  ; and  the 
mountains  shall  drop  sweet  wine,  and  all  the  hills  shall 
melt.  And  I will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  My  peo- 
ple Israel,  and  they  shall  build  the  waste  cities,  and 
inhabit  them ; and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and 
drink  the  wine  thereof ; they  shall  also  make  gardens, 
and  eat  the  fruit  of  them.’^ 

A poetic  description  of  the  prosperity  that  shall 
attend  man’s  labors  in  the  coming  days  of  the 
King. 

I have  found  it  increasingly  difficult  to  con- 
fine myself  to  a comprehensive  view  of  topics, 
any  one  of  which  might  have  occupied  more 
than  a whole  chapter  of  this  book.  I have 
tried  to  give  a general  survey  of  the  years 
when  nature  shall  be  freed  from  the  curse ; 
man  realize  full  physical  strength ; profits  go  to 
the  toilers;  commerce  be  consecrated  to  God; 
men  dwell  in  security;  prosperity  bring  the 
plowman  upon  the  heels  of  the  reaper;  and, 
above  all,  when  missionary  enterprise  shall  be 
at  its  highest  and  best — when  God’s  ancient 


The  Golden  Age 


127 


people  shall  go  forth  to  all  lands  with  the  story 
of  the  Cross  for  the  healing  of  the  nations; 
when,  hearing  that  story,  men  of  distant  lands 
shall  take  hold  upon  him  that  is  a Jew,  and 
shall  say — “We  will  go  with  you,  for  we  have 
heard  that  God  is  with  you/’ 

These  glimpses  of  happy  times  to  come  re- 
quire me  to  repeat  that  sin  will  not  be  ex- 
terminated during  that  period ; but  instead  of 
being  rampant,  as  it  is  to-day,  daring  to  lift  its 
head  and  laugh  in  the  face  of  righteousness,  it 
shall  lick  the  dust  and  be  kept  in  check  by  the 
presence  of  the  Master.  Then  shall  men  know, 
as  never  before,  the  possibilities  of  humanity 
and  of  the  earth  under  the  righteous  reign  of 
God’s  own  King. 

In  conclusion,  it  is  always  of  practical  value 
to  know  God’s  ways  of  dealing  with  men.  If 
all  this  is  to  happen  under  the  reign  of  Jesus 
by  and  by,  surely  those  who  have  already 
crowned  Him  King  may,  even  to-day,  know 
something  of  the  blessedness  of  the  reign  that 
is  coming. 


■'  V-  ''  > ,i 

• .1 3 


IX 

After  the  Thousand  Years 


129 


Crown  Him  with  many  crowns, 

The  Lamb  upon  His  throne  ; 

Hark ! how  the  heavenly  anthem  drowns 
All  music  but  its  own. 

Awake,  my  soul,  and  sing 
Of  Him  who  died  for  thee. 

And  hail  Him  as  thy  chosen  King 
Through  all  eternity. 

Crown  Him,  the  Lord  of  Love ! 

Behold  His  hands  and  side ; 

Eich  wounds,  yet  visible  above 
In  beauty  glorified  : 

No  angel  in  the  sky 

Can  fully  bear  that  sight. 

But  downward  bends  his  burning  eye 
At  mysteries  so  bright. 

Crown  Him,  the  Lord  of  Peace  ! 

Whose  power  a sceptre  sways 
From  pole  to  pole — that  wars  may  cease — 
Absorbed  in  prayer  and  praise ; 

His  reign  shall  know  no  end, 

And  round  His  piercM  feet 
Fair  flowers  of  Paradise  extend 
Their  fragrance  ever  sweet. 

Crown  Him,  the  Lord  of  Heaven ! 

One  with  the  Father  known. 

And  the  blest  Spirit,  through  Him  given, 
From  yonder  glorious  throne  ! 

All  hail ! Redeemer,  hail ! 

For  Thou  hast  died  for  me ; 

Thy  praise  shall  never,  never  fail 
Throughout  eternity. 

M.  Bridges. 


130 


IX 


AFTER  THE  THOUSAND  YEARS 

A SCHOLARLY  and  lucid  exposition  of  this 
subject  is  contained  in  a book  written  by  Mr. 
George  F.  Trench;  and  from  the  name  of  that 
volume  I have  borrowed  the  title  of  the  present 
chapter. 

In  the  course  of  these  studies  we  have  dealt 
with  seven  dispensations  of  God ; and  we  have 
seen  that  in  the  last  of  them,  the  Millennium, 
men  will  have  in  fullest  measure  all  the  things 
which  have  gone  before : Conscience,  History, 
Direct  Divine  Guidance,  Law  and  Ritual,  the 
presence  of  Jesus  as  King,  and  the  Ministry  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  To  understand  the  events 
which  succeed  the  thousand  years  nothing  more 
is  needed  than  an  intelligent  reading  of  plain 
and  simple  statements  in  the  book  of  Revela- 
tion, commencing  at  xx.  7,  and  ending  at 
xxii.  7 : 

Rev.  XX.  7-10 : “And  when  the  thousand  years  are 

finished,  Satan  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison,  and 
shall  come  forth  to  deceive  the  nations  which  are  in 
the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  Gog  and  Magog,  to  gather 
them  together  to  the  war : the  number  of  whom  is  as 
the  sand  of  the  sea.  And  they  went  up  over  the 
breadth  of  the  earth,  and  compassed  the  camp  of  the 
saints  about,  and  the  beloved  city  : and  fire  came  down 
131 


132  God’s  Methods  with  Man 

out  of  heaven,  and  devoured  them.  And  the  devil 
that  deceived  them  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and 
brimstone,  where  are  also  the  beasts  and  the  false 
prophet ; and  they  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night 
unto  the  ages  of  the  ages  {margin). 

We  have  seen  that  the  Golden  Age  is  to  be 
characterized  by  the  direct  government  of 
Christ.  Sin  will  still  be  in  the  earth ; but  it 
will  be  held  in  repression  and  summarily  pun- 
ished as  soon  as  manifested.  The  nations 
which  Christ  will  rule  with  a rod  of  iron  will 
be,  to  a large  extent,  disloyal  in  heart ; so  that 
when  Satan  is  loosed  for  a little  season  he  will 
straightway  deceive  them.  True,  there  will  be 
everywhere  those  who  refuse  enlistment  under 
his  banners  ; but  the  picture  here  is  that  of  an 
enormous  apostasy,  the  most  fearful  ever  seen. 
The  armies  of  the  nations  will  gather  together 
against  Jerusalem.  Not  after  the  old  fashion 
of  patriarchal  days  will  this  warfare  be  waged ; 
but  express  trains,  ocean  liners,  and  all  the 
latest  developments  of  science  will  be  im- 
pressed for  the  service  of  the  armies  gathered 
from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  to  some  who  have  dreamed  of  the 
Millennium  as  a finality,  the  outlook  afterward 
is  disappointing  ; but  ere  the  Kingdom  of  Jesus 
Christ  in  all  its  glory  can  be  ushered  in,  the 
unbelief  and  disloj^alty  which  lurk  in  the  hearts 
of  men  must  be  brought  to  a final  head. 


After  the  Thousand  Years  133 


A study  of  the  long  list  of  apostasies — the 
Fall,  the  Flood,  Babel,  the  Crucifixion  of  Christ, 
the  Manifestation  of  antichrist,  and  this  Revolt 
of  the  Nations  under  the  personal  leadership  of 
the  devil — opens  before  us  an  awful  depth  of 
human  depravity,  and  should  lead  to  heart- 
searching in  the  sight  of  God  as  to  how  far  the 
elements  of  rebellion  and  sin  still  abide  within 
us.  A short,  swift,  burning  sentence  dismisses 
the  rebellious  host,  “Fire  came  down  out  of 
heaven  and  devoured  them.” 

The  second  stage  of  development  which  claims 
our  attention  is  found  recorded  in  Rev.  xx. 
11-15 : 

“ I saw  a great  white  throne,  and  Him  that  sat  upon 
it,  from  Whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled 
away  ; and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them.  And  I 
saw  the  dead,  the  great  and  the  small,  standing  before 
the  throne ; and  books  were  opened  : and  another  book 
was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life : and  the  dead 
were  judged  out  of  the  things  which  were  written  in 
the  books,  according  to  their  works.  And  the  sea  gave 
up  the  dead  which  were  in  it ; and  death  and  Hades 
gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  them  : and  they  were 
judged  every  man  according  to  their  works.  And 
death  and  Hades  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  Are.  This 
is  the  second  death,  even  the  lake  of  Are.  And  if  any 
was  not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life,  he  was  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire.’^ 

What  marvellous  scenes  are  these,  in  the  clos- 
ing drama  of  evil ! They  reveal  the  last  stages 
in  its  outworking  and  destruction.  First,  the 


134  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


rebel  nations  swept  away ; and  then  the  dead, 
small  and  great,  gathered  before  the  throne. 
Can  there  be  found  in  the  whole  realm  of  liter- 
ature anything  more  striking  than  the  descrip- 
tion of  that  great  Judgment  day?  A scholar, 
discussing  the  Book  of  God,  as  literature,  said 
that  while  it  is  wonderful  for  its  vivid  imagina- 
tion and  magnificent  conception,  it  is  not  equal 
in  these  respects  to  some  of  the  old  Greek 
writers.  One  present  in  the  company  where 
this  was  said,  asked  for  an  example  from  these 
writers ; and  the  words  were  quoted  from 
Homer — “Great  Jove  frowned,  and  half  the 
sky  was  black.”  As  against  that  sentence 
these  words  from  the  Apocalypse  were  given — 
“ I saw  a great  white  throne,  and  Him  that  sat 
upon  it,/rom  Whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven 
fled  away ; and  there  was  found  no  place  for 
them,"  Surely  from  the  standpoint  of  magnifi- 
cent conception  the  inspired  Word  is  far  more 
wonderful  than  Homer. 

In  this  scene  notice  that  earth  and  heaven 
have  fled  away,  and  man  is  upheld  in  front  of 
that  throne  by  the  omnipotence  of  God,  and 
has  no  rock  behind  which  to  hide  himself.  In 
that  final  judgment  of  evil  no  man  is  rewarded 
because  of  his  work.  There  are  rewards  for 
work;  but  they  will  be  distributed  elsewhere. 
The  only  escape  from  the  doom  of  that  day  is  a 
name  written  in  the  Book  of  Life ; and  those 


After  the  Thousand  Years  135 

who  possess  that  blessing  are  not  present  for 
judgment.  Mark  the  clear  distinction  between 
the  hoohs^  by  the  writing  contained  in  which 
the  dead  are  judged,  and  the  Book  of  Life. 
Names  entered  in  the  latter  are  found  there 
only  by  virtue  of  the  atoning  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Then  are  death,  Hades,  and  all  whose 
names  are  not  written  in  the  Book,  cast  into 
the  lake  of  fire.  That  is  the  end  of  evil,  and 
yet  it  is  but  the  beginning  of  the  glorious  con- 
dition of  humanity. 

In  Rev.  xxi.  1 we  have  the  third  event  after 
the  thousand  years  : 

**  I saw  a new  heaven  and  a new  earth  : for  the  first 
heaven  and  the  first  earth  are  passed  away  ; and  the 
sea  is  no  more,” 

The  former  heaven  and  earth  have  fled  away 
from  the  face  of  Him  Who  sat  upon  the  throne, 
for  purification  and  reconstruction,  not  by 
water  as  at  the  Flood,  but  by  fire.  When  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  described  by  Peter  as 
those  “wherein  dwelleth  righteousness,”  are 
seen,  the  full  purposes  of  God  for  humanity  will 
be  unfolded. 

Next,  we  read  of  “ the  holy  city,  new  Jeru- 
salem, coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God, 
made  ready  as  a bride  adorned  for  her  hus- 
band.” In  verses  10-24  we  have  a wonderful 
description  of  that  city ; and  any  attempt  to 
spiritualize  it  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  whola 


136  God’s  Methods  with  Man 

proper  prophetic  treatment  of  the  book  of  Rev- 
elation. It  is  the  city  for  which  Abraham 
looked  and  for  which  we  look  ; and  it  is  not 
spiritual  but  material,  as  far  as  spiritualized 
people  need  material  things.  We  may  no  more 
discuss  this  than  the  resurrected  body  of  Jesus, 
which  was  palpable  to  the  touch  of  Thomas, 
yet  was  spiritual  enough  to  stand  in  the  midst 
of  His  disciples  without  the  opening  of  doors. 
The  city’s  dimensions  work  out  at  fifteen  hun- 
dred miles  in  width  as  well  as  in  length,  large 
enough  to  cover  the  whole  of  Europe.  Making 
Jerusalem  the  centre,  it  would  about  cover  the 
whole  area  promised  to  Abraham.  I incline  to 
the  idea  of  a pyramidal  rather  than  a cubiform 
elevation.  Some  regard  the  promise  that  death 
shall  cease,  as  applying  to  the  Millennium ; 
whereas  the  old  prophets  tell  us  that  in  that 
period  the  sinner  shall  be  accursed  and  the 
child  shall  die.  But  in  this  City  of  God,  the 
great  ultimate  place  of  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Christ,  there  shall  be  no  death,  pain,  nor  curse, 
because  there  is  no  sin. 

“The  nations  shall  walk  amidst  the  light  thereof 
(ver.  24). 

In  that  city,  the  earthly  dwelling-place  of  a 
heavenly  people,  the  old  Jewish  idea  of  Israel 
as  betrothed  and  married  to  God,  and  the  truth 
of  the  Church  as  the  Bride  of  the  Lamb,  will 


After  the  Thousand  Years  137 


each  find  fulfillment.  Thus,  our  fifth  point 
shows  the  kings  and  the  nations  of  the  earth  in 
the  light  of  the  city,  bringing  into  it  all  their 
glory  and  honor. 

Now  comes  a verse  (27)  the  beauty  and  value 
of  which  are  too  often  obscured  by  hasty  read- 
ing. 

“There  shall  in  nowise  enter  into  it  anything  un- 
clean, or  he  that  maketh  an  abomination  and  a lie.” 

It  does  teach  that  no  unclean  person  and  no  liar 
shall  be  able  to  pass  into  the  city;  but  that  is 
the  smallest  part  of  its  meaning.  How  came 
the  mystery  of  sin  into  Eden  ? He  who  work- 
eth  abomination  made  a lie  and  tainted  the 
brightness  of  the  garden  ; and  the  stream  of 
evil  outworked  into  all  human  history.  Into 
that  fair  city,  Christ’s  all-glorious  Bride,  shall 
no  unclean  thing  come.  No  temptation  to  sin 
shall  ever  be  allowed  to  assault  the  dwellers  in 
that  home  of  the  future.  This  truth  reveals  a 
Divine  purpose  more  glorious  even  than  the 
blessedness  of  the  Millennium. 

A seventh  point  of  progression  : 

Rev.  xxii.  2:  “On  this  side  of  the  river  and  on  that 

was  the  tree  of  life,  bearing  twelve  manner  of  fruits, 
yielding  its  fruit  every  month  : and  the  leaves  of  the 
tree  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.” 

A difficulty  seems  to  arise  here  in  the  sacred 
story.  What  can  the  nations  need  of  healing 


138  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


in  the  perfect  Kingdom,  where  sin  shall  be  cast 
out?  On  the  authority  of  a Greek  scholar  of 
repute  we  may  substitute  the  word  health  for 
healing  ^ “ The  leaves  of  the  tree  were  for  the 
health  of  the  nations.”  Healing  pre  supposes 
disease,  while  health  does  not. 

Vers.  3 and  4;  ‘‘And  there  shall  be  no  curse  any 
more  : and  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be 
therein  : and  His  servants  shall  do  Him  service , and 
they  shall  see  His  face ; and  His  name  shall  be  on  their 
foreheads.” 

Remember  that  these  are  only  passing  glimpses 
of  the  glory  of  a kingdom  on  earth,  beyond  the 
Millennium,  the  great  white  throne,  and  the 
final  casting-out  of  evil.  This  is  a picture  of 
the  fullness  of  the  times,  when  all  things  shall 
be  subdued  to  the  sway  of  Jesus. 

There  are  passages  in  the  Epistles  which  can 
only  refer  to  this  period.  Heb.  ii.  6--8  contains 
a quotation  from  Psalm  viii.,  where  four  facts 
concerning  man  are  stated : 

i.  “Thou  madest  Him  a little  lower  than  the 

angels.” 

ii.  “Thou  crownedst  Him  with  glory  and  honor  ” ; 

iii.  “And  didst  set  Him  over  the  works  of  Thy 

hands.” 

iv.  “ Thou  didst  put  all  things  in  subjection  under 

His  feet.” 

1 See  “After  the  Thousand  Years.”  By  George  F. 
Trench,  B.  A.  {London : Morgan  <&  Scott,  2s.  6d.)  Foot- 
note to  p.  89. 


After  the  Thousand  Years  139 

Reading  further,  we  find  Paul  applying  the 
fourfold  statement  to  Jesus  Christ.  “ What  is 
man  ? ” asks  the  psalmist ; and,  by  inference, 
the  reply  affirms  that  there  is  no  knowledge  of 
man  until  we  see  Jesus.  “ We  behold  Him 
who  hath  been  made  a little  lower  than  the 
angels  ” ; so  that  the  first  of  the  four  prophe- 
cies has  been  fulfilled:  “ Even  Jesus,  because 

of  the  suffering  of  death,  crowned  with  glory 
and  honor  ” ; then  the  second  is  fulfilled.  “But 
now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  subjected  to 
Him.”  Therefore  the  prophecy  of  that  psalm, 
uttered  before  Christ  came  to  earth,  has  only 
partially  been  fulfilled.  In  the  Messianic  dis- 
pensation Jesus  was  made  a little  lower  than 
the  angels,  for  the  suffering  of  death.  Here 
and  now  we  see  Him  with  His  personal  crown 
of  glory  and  honor.  In  the  period  of  Millen- 
nial splendor  He  shall  be  set  over  the  works  of 
God’s  hands.  In  the  time  beyond  the  Millen- 
nium all  things  will  be  subjected  to  Him. 

There  are  three  other  passages  in  the  writ- 
ings of  Paul,  which  have  reference  to  this 
period : 

Eph.  i.  20-23:  “ . . . which  He  wrought  in  Christ, 
when  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  and  made  Him  to 
sit  at  His  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above 
all  rule,  and  authority,  and  power,  and  dominion,  and 
every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this  age,  but 
also  in  that  which  is  to  come  : and  He  put  all  things 
in  subjection  under  His  feet,  and  gave  Him  to  be  head 


140  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


over  all  things  to  the  Church,  which  is  His  body,  the 
fullness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all.’’ 

This  purpose  of  God  stands,  though  as  yet  it 
has  not  been  fully  realized,  nor  will  it  be  during 
that  Millennium  in  which  hearts  will  be  dis- 
loyal. It  remains,  therefore,  to  be  fulfilled  in 
the  glorious  Kingdom,  beyond  the  destruction 
of  evil  and  the  great  white  throne. 

In  the  same  category  is  Phil.  ii.  5-11  : 

“Have  this  mind  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ 
Jesus : Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  counted  it  not 
a prize  to  be  on  an  equality  with  God,  but  emptied 
Himself,  taking  the  form  of  a servant,  being  made  in 
the  likeness  of  men  ; and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a 
man.  He  humbled  Himself,  becoming  obedient  even 
unto  death,  yea,  the  death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore 
also  God  highly  exalted  Him,  and  gave  unto  Him  the 
name  which  is  above  every  name  ; that  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven  and 
things  on  earth  and  things  under  the  earth,  and  that 
every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord, 
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.” 

That  will  never  be  until  the  Millennium  is  past 
and  the  great  Kingdom  comes  which  lies  in  the 
fullness  of  time  beyond. 

The  last  scripture  in  this  connection  is  Cob 
i.  13-20 : 

“Who  delivered  us  out  of  the  power  of  darkness, 
and  translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  His 
love.”  The  issues  of  that  deliverance  and  translation  may 
he  traced  in  the  succeeding  verses,  “In  W"hom  we  have 
our  redemption,  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins : Who  is  the 


After  the  Thousand  Years 


141 


image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  firstborn  of  all  creation  ; 
for  in  Him  were  all  things  created,  in  the  heavens  and 
upon  the  earth,  things  visible  and  things  invisible, 
whether  thrones  or  dominions  or  principalities  or 
powers  ; all  things  have  been  created  through  Him,  and 
unto  Him  ; and  He  is  before  all  things,  and  in  Him  all 
things  consist.  And  He  is  the  Head  of  the  Body,  the 
Church : Who  is  the  beginning,  the  firstborn  from  the 
dead  ; that  in  all  things  He  might  have  the  preeminence. 
For  it  was  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  in  Him 
should  all  the  fullness  dwell ; and  through  Him  to  rec- 
oncile all  things  unto  Himself,  having  made  peace 
through  the  blood  of  His  cross ; through  Him,  I say, 
whether  things  upon  the  earth,  or  things  in  the 
heavens.’^ 

Jesus  Christ  will  never  be  defeated.  There  is 
nothing  of  God’s  creation  which  will  not  be 
subjected  to  Him  through  Christ;  no  partial 
fulfillment  of  the  words  we  have  just  read  can 
satisfy  the  Divine  heart.  Not  until  Christ  shall 
have  banished  evil,  brought  in  the  new  heavens 
and  the  new  earth,  and  given  the  City  of  God 
to  the  earth,  will  our  Lord’s  work  be  complete 
and  His  glory  at  the  highest. 

Then  shall  come  the  time  when  Christ  will 
hand  over  the  Kingdom  to  the  Father.  When? 
I do  not  know.  Mr.  Trench  expresses  his  be- 
lief that  the  period  of  the  Kingdom  will  be  far 
longer  than  the  whole  stream  of  time  past,  but 
acknowledges  that  nothing  may  be  dogmatically 
stated  on  this  point.  Probably  the  glorious 
Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  wherein  all  things  are 


142  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


reconciled  unto  the  Father  by  Him,  will  ex- 
tend through  ages  of  which  we  can  have  no  con- 
ception. But  there  is  an  end,  concerning  which 
revelation  was  made  to  the  apostle  Paul;  and 
apart  from  his  words  about  this,  we  have  no 
light  upon  the  subject,  as  far  as  I know.  He 
says, 

1 Cor.  XV.  24  : “Then  cometh  the  end,  when  He 

shall  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father  ; 
when  He  shall  have  abolished  all  rule  and  all  authority 
and  power,” 

Christ  will  abolish  these  things,  not  merely  in 
connection  with  evil,  but  absolutely.  When 
He  is  supreme  Monarch  and  there  is  no  other 
power,  friendly  or  hostile,  in  existence,  then 
shall  the  Son  also  be  subject  to  the  Father,  that 
God  may  be  all  in  all. 

Who  shall  tell  the  majesty  and  glory  of  God’s 
purpose?  Let  us  cease  to  have  circumscribed 
ideas  regarding  God  and  His  Christ.  He  to 
whom  a thousand  years  are  but  as  yesterday 
when  it  is  past  and  as  a watch  in  the  night,  is 
moving  on,  despite  our  fret  and  worry. 

‘ * For  I doubt  not  through  the  ages  one  increasing 
purpose  runs. 

And  the  thoughts  of  men  are  widened  with  the 
process  of  the  suns.” 

Who  shall  tell  what  lies  beyond  the  handing 
of  the  Kingdom  to  God?  Did  you  ever  dream 


After  the  Thousand  Years  143 

that  there  must  come  in  the  endless  and  illimi- 
table time — which  is  not  time,  but  eternity — a 
moment  of  weariness,  a sense  of  monotony  ? 
Nay,  think  also  of  endless  space.  The  sen- 
sitized film  reveals  stars  which  no  astronomer 
has  ever  examined.  Reach  the  furthest  limit 
thus  marked,  and  space  is  still  before  you. 
God  is  there,  as  here,  limitless  and  unexhausted; 
and  where  He  is,  is  love.  All  the  things  of 
which  we  have  spoken  are  but  the  passing  of 
His  breath.  While  God  and  Love  live  on, 
there  never  can  come  weariness  to  the  children 
of  His  love.  “And  every  one  that  hath  this 
hope  set  on  Him,  purifieth  himself,  as  He  is 
pure.’’ 


\ 


X 

The  Purifying  Hope 


145 


I^m  waiting  for  Thee,  Lord, 

The  beauty  to  see,  Lord ; 

I^m  waiting  for  Thee,  for  Thy  coining  again, 
Thou^rt  gone  over  there,  Lord, 

A place  to  prepare,  Lord  ; 

Thy  home  I shall  share  at  Thy  coming  again, 

’Mid  danger  and  fear.  Lord, 

I’m  oft  weary  here.  Lord, 

The  day  must  be  near  of  Thy  coming  again : 

’Tis  all  sunshine  there,  Lord, 

No  sighing  nor  care.  Lord, 

But  glory  so  fair,  at  Thy  coming  again. 

Whilst  Thou  art  away.  Lord, 

I watch  and  I pray,  Lord — 

Oh,  hasten  the  day  of  Thy  coming  again ! 

This  is  not  my  rest.  Lord, 

A pilgrim  confess’d.  Lord, 

I wait  to  be  blest,  at  Thy  coming  again. 

Our  loved  ones  before,  Lord, 

Their  troubles  are  o’er.  Lord, 

I’ll  meet  them  once  more  at  Thy  coming  again : 
The  blood  was  the  sign.  Lord, 

That  marked  them  as  Thine,  Lord, 

And  brightly  they’ll  shine  at  Thy  coming  again. 

E’en  now  let  my  ways.  Lord, 

Be  bright  with  Thy  praise.  Lord, 

For  brief  are  the  days  ere  Thy  coming  again  : 

I’m  waiting  for  Thee,  Lord, 

Thy  beauty  to  see,  Lord, 

No  triumph  for  me  like  Thy  coming  again  ! 

Anonymous, 


146 


X 


THE  PURIFYING  HOPE 

Many  persons  will  ask,  What  is  the  practical 
value  of  this  teaching?  The  answer  to  that 
question  is  found  in  1 John  ii.  28  to  iii.  3. 

‘‘And  now,  my  little  children,  abide  in  Him;  that, 
if  He  shall  be  manifested,  we  may  have  boldness,  and 
not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming.  If  ye 
know  that  He  is  righteous,  ye  know  that  every  one 
also  that  doeth  righteousness  is  begotten  of  Him.  Be- 
hold, what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed 
upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  children  of  God: 
and  such  we  are.  For  this  cause  the  world  knoweth 
us  not,  because  it  knew  Him  not.  Beloved,  now  are 
we  children  of  God,  and  it  is  not  yet  made  manifest 
what  we  shall  be.  We  know  that,  if  He  shall  be 
manifested,  we  shall  be  like  Him;  for  we  shall  see 
Him  even  as  He  is.  And  every  one  that  hath  this 
hope  set  on  Him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is 
pure.’^ 

I fear  that  the  question  to  which  I have  used 
these  verses  as  a reply  too  often  reveals  the  fact 
that  the  one  asking  has  a wrong  conception  of 
the  nature  and  value  of  truth.  It  is  not  a com- 
modity to  be  stored,  but  a purifying  and  sancti* 
fying  force,  bringing  men  into  harmony  with 
the  will  of  God.  The  man  who  seeks  mere 


147 


148  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


possession  of,  apart  from  obedience  to,  truth, 
must  fail  in  his  quest.  When  God  reveals 
Himself  to  man,  obedience  prepares  for  the  re- 
ception of  further  and  deeper  revelations.  In 
this  connection  we  call  to  mind  the  declaration 
of  our  Lord,  The  truth  shall  make  you  free  ” ; 
and  the  words  of  His  great  intercessory  prayer, 
“ Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth  : Thy  Word 
is  truth.”  It  is  not  a point  of  indifference  as 
to  whether  any  given  view  be  correct  or  not. 
It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  we  de- 
voutly, humbly,  and  yet  earnestly,  search  out 
the  will  of  God  in  the  truth  of  God.  What, 
then,  is  the  particular  value  of  the  study  of 
Bible  teaching  concerning  things  to  come? 
John,  who  had  such  clear  understanding  of  the 
affinity  between  Jesus  and  the  believer,  says 
that  the  hope  of  the  Church  is  to  be  the  reason 
for,  and  the  power  of,  purity  of  individual  life 
in  its  members. 

The  Greek  word  translated  hope  in  the  pas- 
sage referred  to  undoubtedly  has  the  same 
meaning  as  the  Anglo-Saxon  hopa.  The  word  is 
often  used  in  a light  way  which  ignores  its  true 
meaning.  Hope  is  a confident  anticipation  of 
good  things  to  come,  with  corresponding  effort 
to  reach  and  attain  them.  It  is  not  a mere  con- 
sciousness in  the  mind,  that  something  of  value 
is  to  take  place  in  the  future.  It  is  the  setting 
of  life  and  purpose  toward  that  which  the  mind 


The  Purifying  Hope 


149 


has  come  to  understand  and  appreciate.  The 
return  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  uniformly 
regarded  by  the  apostles  as  the  hope  of  the 
Church,  though  they  may  treat  of  it  under 
varied  aspects,  such  as  the  reward  of  workers, 
the  destruction  of  evil,  meeting  with  loved  ones 
gone  before,  and  the  inexpressible  delight  of 
the  Lord’s  presence.  Let  us  examine  a few  of 
such  passages : 

(i.)  Rom.  viii.  17-25:  “ heirs  of  God,  and 

joint-heirs  with  Christ;  if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with 
Him,  that  we  may  be  also  glorified  with  Him.  For  I 
reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be 
revealed  to  us-ward.  For  the  earnest  expectation  of 
the  creation  waiteth  for  the  revealing  of  the  sons  of 
God.  For  the  creation  was  subjected  to  vanity,  not  of 
its  own  will,  but  by  reason  of  Him  who  subjected  it,  in 
HOPE  that  the  creation  itself  also  shall  be  delivered 
from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the 
glory  of  the  children  of  God.  For  we  know  that  the 
whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together 
until  now.  And  not  only  so,  but  ourselves  also,  which 
have  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves 
groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  our  adoption,  to 
wit,  the  redemption  of  our  body.  For  by  hope  were 
we  saved  : but  hope  that  is  seen  is  not  hope : for  who 
hopeth  for  that  which  he  seeth?  But  if  we  hope  for 
that  which  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  patience  wait 
for  it.^^ 

Evidently,  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle,  the  com- 
pletion of  redemption — that  is,  the  redemption 
of  the  body — is  the  hope  of  the  Church. 


150  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


(ii.)  Titus  ii.  11-13:  “For  the  grace  of  God  hath 
appeared,  bringing  salvation  to  all  men,  instructing  us, 
to  the  intent  that,  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly 
lusts,  we  should  live  soberly  and  righteously  and  godly 
in  this  present  world  ; looking  for  the  blessed  hope 
and  appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.’^ 

In  this  case  the  apostle  links  the  Church’s  hope 
with  the  epiphany  of  the  glory. 

(iii.)  Heb.  X.  19-23:  “ Having  therefore,  brethren, 
boldness  to  enter  into  the  holy  place  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  by  the  way  which  He  dedicated  for  us,  a new 
and  living  way,  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say.  His 
flesh ; and  having  a great  Priest  over  the  house  of 
God  ; let  us  draw  near  with  a true  heart  in  fullness  of 
faith,  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  con- 
science, and  our  body  washed  with  pure  water  : let  us 
hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope  that  it  waver  not; 
for  He  is  faithful  that  promised.” 

The  translation  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
“Let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our/aztA,” 
is  inexplicable,  when  the  Greek  word  there 
used  is  rendered  hope  in  every  other  New  Tes- 
tament passage.  Faith  has  been  mentioned  in 
verse  22  ; and,  in  its  fullness,  we  are  to  draw 
near  into  the  holy  place.  It  is  the  confession 
of  our  hope  that  we  are  to  hold  fast;  and  the 
nature  of  that  hope  is  evident  from  verses  25 
and  35-37 : 

“ Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together, 
as  the  custom  of  some  is,  but  exhorting  one  another ; 
and  so  much  the  more,  as  ye  see  the  day  drawing  nigh. 


The  Purifying  Hope 


151 

. . . Cast  not  away  therefore  your  boldness,  which 

hath  great  recompense  of  reward.  For  ye  have  need  of 
patience,  that,  having  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  may  re- 
ceive the  promise.  For  yet  a very  little  while,  He 
that  cometh  shall  come,  and  shall  not  tarry.” 

The  coming  of  the  Blessed  One  is  the  hope 
which  we  are  to  hold  fast,  as  we  come  to  God 
in  fullness  of  faith. 

(iv.)  1 Peter  i.  3,  6;  “Blessed  be  the  God  and 

Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who  according  to  His 
great  mercy  begat  us  again  unto  a living  hope  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  unto  an  in- 
heritance incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth 
not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  you,  who  by  the 
power  of  God  are  guarded  through  faith  unto  a salva- 
tion ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time.” 

The  hope  of  the  Church  is,  in  this  aspect,  a sal- 
vation to  be  revealed  in  all  its  fullness  when 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  shall  come. 

(v.)  Reverting  to  the  verses  with  which 
we  started,  in  the  words  “ He  that  hath  this 
HOPE,”  the  apostle  of  love  refers  to  the  day 
when  we  shall  see  Christ  as  He  is,  and  be  like 
Him.  It  is  this  hope  toward  which  the  Church 
looks  with  confidence  and  takes  her  way 
through  days  of  patient  waiting. 

An  alteration,  apparently  trivial,  and  yet  of 
vital  importance  to  a right  estimate  of  this 
hope,  is  made  in  1 John  hi.  3.  Instead  of  “ this 
hope  in  him^'^  as  in  the  Authorized,  we  have 
“this  hope  set  on  Him,”  and  the  pronoun 


152  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


should  have  a capital  letter,  for  it  refers  to 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  revelation  of  the  Father. 
“Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath 
bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called 
children  of  God  ” ; and  the  argument  proceeds, 
from  the  Father  through  the  Son,  to  the  point 
of  hope’s  purifying  effect. 

Then,  this  hope  “ maketh  not  ashamed.” 
There  is  no  uncertainty  about  it,  and  it  cannot 
be  hindered.  That  which  has  become  the 
Church’s  beacon,  casting  a ray  of  glory  upon 
her  dark  night,  is  no  false  light  luring  to  de- 
struction. This  hope,  being  set  upon  God  in 
His  purpose  and  arrangement,  and  not  upon 
our  individual  life,  the  circumstances  of  a day, 
the  conditions  of  a century,  or  the  changing 
policy  of  ecclesiasticism,  is  lifted  clear  away 
from  the  strife  of  party  and  from  human  un- 
certainty. As  sure  as  God  is,  the  hidden  Man 
Christ  Jesus,  the  King  Whom  the  heavens  have 
received  for  a season,  must  come  again:  and 
the  light  and  the  glory  of  that  promise  is  the 
hope  of  the  Church. 

If  it  be  indeed  true  that  Jesus  is  coming; 
and  if,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  the  date  of  His 
return  has  been  absolutely  hidden  from  man — 
how  should  we  live  as  those  to  whom  God  has 
given  that  coming  as  the  supreme  and  only 
hope  of  our  life  ? The  question  answers  itself. 

This  is  a purifying  hope,  because  it  regulates 


The  Purifying  Hope 


the  attitude  of  the  believer’s  life  toward  Christ. 
Through  all  the  passing  years  we  are  to  wait 
for  Him,  expecting  that  at  any  moment,  above 
the  din  and  strife  of  earth,  we  may  hear  His 
call.  There  is  no  other  'purifying  hope.  I take 
it  for  granted  that  no  true  child  of  God  cher- 
ishes the  sordid  ambitions  of  worldly  men,  such 
as  the  hope  of  wealth  or  of  fame.  Yet  our 
hope  may  be  set  upon  an  opening  for  ourselves 
in  the  mission  field  or  in  the  service  of  humanity 
at  home.  As  long  as  hope  is  set  upon  service, 
it  is  not  fixed  upon  Christ,  and  He  should  hold 
full  and  absolute  possession  of  our  hearts.  Our 
lives  may  be  so  occupied  with  things  good  in 
themselves,  that  we  do  not  see  the  King.  In 
the  will  of  God,  however,  there  is  but  one  atti- 
tude for  the  believer — that  of  the  pilgrim,  with 
loins  girt  and  staff  in  hand,  waiting  for  the 
break  of  day,  the  coming  of  the  King.  Do  not 
misunderstand  me.  If  we  are  truly  waiting 
for  Jesus,  we  shall  not  be  careless  of  those  for 
whom  He  died : and  we  shall  not  dare  disobey 
His  word  which  bids  us  preach  the  gospel  to 
every  creature.  But,  as  far  as  individual  life  is 
concerned,  the  coming  One  should  fill  the 
heart’s  vision  through  all  the  days  and  mo- 
ments. 

How  will  this  affect  our  behavior  ? I would 
suggest  questions  rather  than  attempt  to  an- 
swer them  ; for  your  own  minds  and  hearts  will 


154  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


be  busy  on  this  point.  How  should  I transact 
my  business,  knowing  that  even  as  I make  an 
entry  in  my  ledger  I may  be  interrupted  by  the 
call  of  my  Master?  How  should  I take  my 
recreation  when,  at  any  moment.  He  may  sum- 
mon me  from  it  to  His  own  presence  ? The 
purifying  effect  of  such  considerations  are  evi- 
dent. We  are  to  serve  our  generation,  live  in 
our  homes,  do  our  business,  and  take  our  rec- 
reation, in  readiness  to  leave  all  at  any  moment. 
Some  one  says,  “ That  will  make  a very  strained 
sort  of  life.”  I think  not. 

Mr.  Wesley  was  once  asked  by  a lady,  “Sup- 
pose that  you  knew  you  were  to  die  at  twelve 
o’clock  to-morrow  night,  how  would  you  spend 
the  intervening  time  ? ” “ How,  madam  ? ” he 

replied;  “why,  just  as  I intend  to  spend  it 
now.  I should  preach  this  night  at  Gloucester, 
and  again  at  five  to-morrow  morning ; after  that 
I should  ride  to  Tewkesbury,  preach  in  the 
afternoon,  and  meet  the  societies  in  the  evening. 
I should  then  repair  to  friend  Martin’s  house, 
who  expects  to  entertain  me,  converse  and  pray 
with  the  family  as  usual,  retire  to  my  room  at 
ten  o’clock,  commend  myself  to  my  heavenly 
Father,  lie  down  to  rest,  and  wake  up  in 
glory.”  1 

No  man  lived  a more  strong  and  beautiful 
life  than  did  John  Wesley,  and  his  view  of  death 
‘ ‘‘Anecdotes  of  the  Wesleys.” — Wakerley. 


The  Purifying  Hope 

was  that  whenever  it  came  he  would  be  found 
at  his  duty  ; and  the  transition  from  that  duty 
to  heaven’s  service  would  be  a natural  one. 
Instead  of  death,  let  the  Lord  be  expected ; 
and  the  true  attitude  of  life  will  be  that  of 
quiet  pursuit  of  duty  and  constant  readiness  to 
greet  Him. 

But  you  say  to  me,  “Would  you  like  Jesus 
to  come  and  find  you  playing  with  your  chil- 
dren ? ” Why  not  ? I know  of  no  occupation 
that  I believe  would  be  more  pleasing  to  the 
heart  of  my  King ! It  would  be  a proof  of  my 
belief  in  the  blessedness  of  His  reign,  when  the 
children  are  to  have  a perfect  playtime. 

When  Jesus  went  from  earth,  the  clouds  at 
which  His  disciples  gazed  were  riven,  and  an 
angel  appeared,  saying : 

“Why  stand  ye  looking  into  heaven?  This  Jesus 
. . . shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  beheld  Him 
going  into  heaven  ! ” — 

that  is,  in  the  clouds,  not  merely  in  a spiritual 
sense.  Thus,  at  the  earliest  moment  in  the  “ lit- 
tle while,’’  the  attitude  of  star-gazing  was  re- 
buked ; and  His  disciples  were  sent  to  the  dis- 
charge of  duty,  to  look  for  Him  from  the  midst 
of  loyal  service.  Alas  ! that  some  who  profess 
to  believe  in  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  should 
give  up  all  the  things  which  they  were  intended 
to  sanctify.  We  are  to  be  busy  about  our  ap- 
pointed task;  to  influence  our  day  and  genera- 


156  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


tion  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  by  a reproduction  in 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  the  pure  character 
of  Jesus  Christ ; and  all  the  while  to  have  a 
listening  ear  for  the  Master’s  call,  and  the  long- 
ing to  welcome  Him  when  He  comes. 

This  hope  also  lights  up  circumstances.  Are 
you  entrusted  by  God  with  the  great  responsi- 
bility of  riches  ? Expecting  the  Lord’s  return, 
you  will  use  that  wealth  for  Him.  Are  your 
days  filled  with  stress  of  poverty  and  necessity 
for  careful  planning  in  regard  to  means?  In 
the  light  of  that  promise,  even  poverty  is  trans- 
figured. I am  not  now  discussing  the  great 
questions  of  poverty  and  wealth.  I regard 
poverty  as  a curse!  God  never  meant  any  one 
to  be  poor,  in  the  sense  of  that  pinching,  grind- 
ing want,  which  gives  a man  heart-ache  and 
brain-ache.  There  is  plenty  in  the  world  for 
every  man  to  live  in  comfort,  and  all  lack  is  the 
result  of  human  mismanagement.  The  light  of 
that  coming  upon  friendship  forbids  unholy  al- 
liances and  ennobles  sanctified  comradeship; 
and  when  it  falls  upon  the  graves  where  our  sa- 
cred dust  rests,  how  beautiful  they  become! 
We  shall  meet  in  “the  morning.” 

“ Some  from  earth,  from  glory  some  : 

Severed  only  till  He  come.” 

The  bright  rays  of  this  truth  shine  for  me 
upon  some  of  the  most  perplexing  problems  of 


The  Purifying  Hope  157 

the  Book  of  God  and  of  the  times  in  which  we 
live.  In  my  New  Testament  I find  the  free- 
will of  man  and  the  sovereignty  of  God  both 
distinctly  taught.  These  things  were  long  a 
source  of  perplexity  to  me.  The  view  which  I 
strongly  hold,  that  Christ  is  coming  for  His 
Church,  an  elect  company  out  of  the  multitude 
of  the  saved,  has  solved  for  me  a most  difficult 
problem.  I believe  that  Divine  election  has 
reference  to  membership  in  the  Church  of  the 
Firstborn,  not  to  personal  salvation  ; and  I be- 
lieve, therefore,  that  there  will  be  great  multi- 
tudes saved  by  the  finished  work  of  Christ  who 
are  not  members  of  that  sacred  body. 

Christ’s  coming  throws  light  upon  other  prob- 
lems in  the  Book,  in  current  theological  thought, 
and  in  present-day  life.  How  can  we  find  com- 
fort in  missionary  enterprise  unless  we  believe 
in  Christ’s  coming  and  the  more  blessed  dispen- 
sation which  lies  beyond  ? Let  the  societies  add 
to  their  statistics  the  facts  that  within  a year 
the  heathen  have  multiplied  in  a ratio  far  ex- 
ceeding the  number  of  converts  made  ; and  that 
the  proportion  of  Christians  to  the  mass  of  man- 
kind is  smaller  to-day  than  it  was  fifty  years 
ago.  Where  is  your  comfort,  in  view  of  these 
facts?  Along  such  a vista  of  missionary  work 
God  appears  as  being  beaten  out  of  His  own 
world!  We  believe  that  the  King  is  doing 
work  preparatory  to  His  coming.  He  is  gath- 


158  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


ering  out  His  Church,  and  in  a thousand  ways 
making  straight  His  paths  by  the  proclamation 
of  the  Gospel  in  all  lands,  so  that  when  the 
ancient  people  of  God  shall  become  His  mes- 
sengers to  all  peoples  they  will  find  a readiness 
to  receive  the  message  as  the  result.  In  this 
view  we  have  hope  for  the  nations  of  the  earth 
and  for  the  ages  which  lie  ahead. 

The  light  of  this  truth  falls  also  upon  the 
chaos  and  unrest  of  our  age — arming  of  na- 
tions, mutual  distrust,  “wars,  and  rumors  of 
wars.”  Man  is  failing  in  governmental  power ; 
and  the  hope  of  the  world  is  that  Jesus  will 
come  to  rule  within  the  lines  or  His  own  royal 
policy.  Once  take  firm  hold  of  this  great  truth 
of  the  coming  of  the  King,  and  it  affords  a 
bright  outlook  along  every  avenue  of  life  and 
brings  gladness  to  the  weary  heart. 

Our  responsibility  is  marked  in  the  passage 
to  which  I have  more  than  once  referred : 

1 John  ii.  28:  “ And  now,  my  little  children,  abide 
in  Him  ; that,  if  He  shall  be  manifested,  we  may  have 
boldness,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  com- 
ing.” 

The  if  casts  no  doubt  upon  His  appearing,  but 
is  indicative  of  a coming  at  any  time.  An  al- 
ternative possibility  is  here  suggested  as  to  the 
attitude  of  Christians  at  that  coming.  They 
may  “have  boldness”  or  “ be  ashamed.” 

With  regard  to  the  first : the  word  “ hold- 


The  Purifying  Hope 


159 


ness  ” (in  place  of  confidence,  A.  V.),  by  no 
means  conveys  the  whole  force  of  the  original. 
The  idea  is  that  we  may  have  the  freedom  of 
speech  which  comes  of  the  perfect  familiarity 
of  friendship.  We  all  know  how  the  diffidence 
and  awkwardness  which  come  of  the  sense  of 
being  out  of  place,  paralyze  speech.  This,  I 
imagine,  would  be  the  position  of  most  of  us  if 
granted  a personal  interview  with  Queen  Vic- 
toria. Not  only  should  we  be  at  a loss  in  re- 
gard to  deportment,  but  we  should  wonder 
what  to  say,  and  be  anxious  as  to  whether  we 
had  said  it  aright  or  not.  May  God  help  us  so 
to  abide  in  Christ  that  when  He  comes  we  may 
not  feel  the  awkwardness  which  arises  from 
the  constraint  of  being  strangers  to  Him,  but 
that  we  may  be  able  to  say — This  is  our  Mas- 
ter, we  have  known  him  by  faith  and  now  we 
see  Him.  We  have  poured  in  to  His  listening 
ear  the  tale  of  our  sorrows  in  the  day  of  mys- 
tery and  darkness,  and  now  we  may  talk  with 
Him  face  to  face  (see  Isa.  xxv.  9). 

Mark  the  other  possibility,  “.  . . and 

not  be  ashamed  from  Him  at  His  coming  ” (the 
preposition  is  apo,  away  from).  The  picture  is 
that  of  persons  so  conscious  of  unreadiness  that 
they  dare  not  face  Him.  The  root  meaning  of 
the  word  ashamed  is  disgraced,  so  that  it  is 
allowable  to  read,  “ and  not  be  disgraced  from 
Him  at  His  coming.”  This  is  not  addressed  to 


i6o  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


the  outside  world,  but  to  the  believer  in  Christ, 
In  that  verse  there  is  a very  clear  division 
which,  to  my  mind,  answers  the  question 
whether  believers  may  not  pass  through  the 
great  tribulation.  Some  will  be  ready  to  enjoy 
freedom  of  access  to  Christ  and  familiarity  with 
Him ; but  the  “ little  children  ” of  God  who 
have  been  living  only  in  the  elements  of  the 
world  will  be  disgraced  at  His  appearing. 

What  are  we  to  do,  as  Christian  men  and 
women,  in  the  light  of  these  two  possibilities  ? 
I give  two  passages  from  the  Epistle,  as  my 
closing  words : “ My  little  children,  abide  in 
Him  ” ; “ Every  one  that  hath  this  hope  set  on 
Him  purifieth  himself.”  Those  who  are  abiding 
in  Christ  here  on  earth,  who  purify  themselves 
as  He  is  pure,  separated  ones  cut  clean  adrift 
from  the  ungodliness  of  the  age,  loyal  of  heart 
to  the  King  in  the  days  of  waiting  for  Him — 
these  are  the  men  and  women  who  will  have 
boldness  in  the  day  of  His  coming. 

Who  shall  draw  the  line  ? I do  not.  It  is 
for  each  of  us  to  make  application  of  this  truth 
in  solitude. 


APPENDIX 


161 


“ Come,  Holy  Ghost — for  moved  by  Thee 
The  prophets  wrote  and  spoke — 
Unlock  the  truth,  Thyself  the  key : 
Unseal  the  sacred  Book/^ 

Wesley, 


162 


APPENDIX 


BEING  AN  ADDRESS  GIVEN  AT  THE  CLOSE  OF 
THE  SERIES  IN  ANSWER  TO  WRITTEN  QUES- 
TIONS SENT  IN 

The  interest  taken  in  the  important  subject 
of  God’s  dispensational  dealings  with  man  has 
been  evidenced  by  the  questions  that  have 
reached  me  in  response  to  my  invitation.  I 
am  very  glad  to  say  that,  as  far  as  one  may 
judge  from  the  tone  of  the  writers,  not  a single 
query  has  been  sent  for  the  sake  of  contro- 
versy. Some  friends  have  written  differing 
from  positions  I have  taken;  and  that  was 
only  to  be  anticipated.  God’s  truth  is  too  won- 
derful to  be  so  formulated  that  it  shall  be  in- 
telligible in  its  entirety  to  every  one.  Thank 
God,  however,  it  is  our  joyful  hope  that  when 
the  Lord  doth  bring  again  Zion,  we  shall  see 
eye  to  eye. 

The  same  question  has  come  in  varied  forms 
from  many  persons.  It  has  been  no  easy  task 
to  analyze  and  classify,  as  a necessary  prelimi- 
nary. No  attempt  has  been  made  to  deal  with 
irrelevant  questions  bearing  upon  the  wider 
field  of  prophecy,  in  topics  not  directly  related 
to  the  exact  line  of  study  we  have  taken. 

163 


164  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


I have  selected  fourteen  typical  questions 
which  call  for  answers  of  varying  length  in 
accordance  with  their  relative  importance. 

1.  Is  it  not  clear  that  half  DanieVs  missing 
week  has  already  gone  in  the  three- and-a-half 
years  of  our  Lord's  earthly  ministry? 

Many  hold  that  view ; but,  personally,  I can- 
not do  so,  because  of  the  clear  and  distinct 
division  of  the  “ weeks  ” in  Dan.  ix.  26,  27. 
“ And  after  the  three-score  and  two  weeks  shall 
the  Anointed  One  be  cut  off,  and  shall  have 
nothing.”  The  Authorized  Version  says  Mes- 
siah shall  be  “ cut  off,  but  not  for  Himself  ” — 
words  which  are  certainly  not  justified  by  the 
original.  The  sense  is  that  He  shall  be  with- 
out dominion.  “And  the  people  of  the  prince 
that  shall  come  shall  destroy  the  city  and  the 
sanctuary  ” : that  is,  the  people  who  are  guided 
by  the  same  principle  of  government  that  even- 
tually characterizes  the  rule  of  antichrist.  This 
scripture,  thus  far,  was  undoubtedly  fulfilled 
in  the  coming  of  the  Roman  legions  and  the 
destruction  which  came  upon  Jerusalem  after 
the  death  of  Christ.  “And  his  end  shall  be 
with  a flood,  and  even  unto  the  end  shall  be 
war ; desolations  are  determined.  And  he 
shall  make  a firm  covenant  with  many  for  one 
week : and  for  the  half  of  the  week  he  shall 
cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease.” 


Appendix 


165 


The  whole  “ week  lies  in  the  future.  The 
prince,  or  antichrist,  is  to  make  a covenant  for 
a week  which  he  will  break  in  the  midst  of 
that  period,  and  then  will  follow  the  half-week 
of  terrible  persecution  and  tribulation  of  which 
we  have  spoken  at  length.  I have  also  dealt 
very  fully  with  the  seventy  sevens  of  Daniel ; 
and  I therefore  only  touch  upon  them  to  say 
that  they  consist  — 

(i.)  Of  the  forty-nine  years  which  com- 
menced with  the  permission  given  to  Nehemiah 
to  rebuild  Jerusalem,  and  ended  with  the  com- 
pleting of  the  wall. 

(ii.)  Of  the  four  hundred  and  thirty-four 
years  from  thence  to  the  cutting  off  of  Messiah, 
making  four  hundred  and  eighty-three  years  in 
all.  Thus,  there  is  one  “week”  left;  and, 
according  to  the  teaching  which  I find  in  this 
scripture,  that  must  be  the  whole  “ week  ” in 
which  antichrist  sets  up  his  rule,  keeping  the 
covenant  for  the  first  half,  and  becoming  an 
oppressor  in  the  second. 

2.  Does  1 John  in,  1^  teach  that  the  vision 
of  Christ  is  to  he  the  transforming  power  ? 

Let  us  read  the  verses. 

“Behold  wliat  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  be- 
stowed upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  children 
of  God : and  such  we  are.  For  this  cause  the  world 
knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  Him  not.*^ 


l66  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


The  question  is  concerned  with  what  follows. 

“ Beloved,  now  are  we  children  of  God,  and  it  is  not 
yet  made  manifest  what  we  shall  be.  We  know  that, 
if  He  shall  be  manifested,  we  shall  be  like  Him  ; for 
we  shall  see  Him  even  as  He  is.” 

Now  read  verse  2 again,  and  substitute  be- 
cause as  the  exact  equivalent  of  for.  This  will 
enable  us  to  see  that  the  statement  may  be 
taken  in  two  ways.  It  may  mean  that  we  are 
quite  sure  we  shall  be  like  Christ,  from  the 
very  fact  that  we  are  to  see  Him ; or  it  may 
signify  that  seeing  Him  will  cause  us  to  be  like 
Him.  I do  not  dogmatize  about  these  differ- 
ing interpretations.  While  I long  held  and 
preached  that  the  vision  of  Christ  would  change 
the  believer,  it  now  seems  to  me  that  this  trans- 
formation must  first  take  place ; and  the  fact 
that  I am  to  see  Him  is  the  proof  that  I shall 
be  like  Him.  If  my  vision  of  Christ  on  the 
resurrection  morning  is  to  be  the  cause  of  my 
transformation,  the  pre-supposition  is  that  I 
shall  not  be  changed  until  I look  at  Him ; that 
though  the  time  be  immeasurably  short,  yet  my 
first  view  of  Him  will  be  in  my  unchanged  con- 
dition. This  is,  in  some  aspects,  a beautiful 
thought,  but  incorrect,  as  I think.  I believe 
we  shall  be  changed  in  a moment,  in  the  twink- 
ling of  an  eye ; and  that,  when  changed  by  the 
power  of  God,  we  shall  look  at  Christ.  John 
tells  us  that  we  shall  be  like  Christ  because 


Appendix 


167 


only  those  bearing  His  likeness  can  see  Him ; 
and  we  are  to  have  that  blessed  sight.  It  is 
the  pure  in  heart  who  see  God.  I offer  no  hard 
and  fast  dictum  on  the  point : but  I find  that 
almost  all  who  have  any  right  to  deal  with  the 
original  tongue  lean  to  this  exposition  rather 
than  to  the  other. 

3.  What  Scripture  authority  is  there  for  sup- 
posing  that  some  Christians  may  have  to  pass 
through  the  tribulation?  Are  not  all  believers 
members  of  the  body  of  Christ  ? 

That  is  the  question  which  has  come  from 
most  places — India,  Ireland,  Scotland,  Canada, 
and  the  United  States,  as  well  as  from  my  own 
immediate  neighborhood — showing  that  it  has 
been  exercising  the  minds  of  a large  number  of 
God’s  children.  On  the  other  hand,  I may 
say  before  dealing  with  it  that  I have  had  many 
letters  agreeing  with  the  view  I hold,  that  the 
Church  is  an  elect  body  which  is  to  be  taken 
out  of  the  world,  while  many  Christians  remain 
through  the  tribulation.  It  is  difficult,  briefly, 
to  sketch  the  view  which  I derive  from  the  New 
Testament.  I must  begin  at  a point  which 
seems  to  be  irrelevant,  but  I think  you  will  see 
that  it  leads  up  to  the  answer.  I only  seek  to 
lay  before  you  the  reasons  for  my  conviction  in 
this  respect. 

The  truth  concerning  the  Church  or  Body  of 


l68  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


Jesus  Christ  is  peculiar,  as  far  as  the  teaching 
of  the  New  Testament  is  concerned,  to  the 
writings  of  the  apostle  Paul.  It  is  needful  to 
remember  that  upon  the  statement  just  made  is 
raised  the  structure  which  I commend  to  your 
notice.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  preach  about  the 
Church  at  all.  He  went  everywhere  preaching 
the  Kingdom^  and  He  mentioned  the  Church 
only  twice.  Once,  when  He  uttered  a prophecy 
which  was  so  magnificent  as  to  embrace  within 
itself  all  other  prophecies  concerning  the 
Church,  and  yet  was  so  simple  that  we  can 
always  remember  it,  He  said  to  Peter,  “ Thou 
art  a stone,  and  upon  this  Rock  I will  build  my 
Church.”  We  must  never  forget  the  distinct 
difference  between  a piece  of  stone,  and 

the  solid  rock,  petra.  The  Church’s  security 
lies  in  its  being  built  on  the  Rock,  and  its  ulti- 
mate triumph  as  an  aggressive  force  is  declared 
in  the  words,  “ The  gates  of  Hades  shall  not 
prevail  against  it  ” ; “ The  last  enemy  that  shall 
be  abolished  is  death  ” — and  therefore  death  is 
not  to  prevail  against  the  Church.  The  other 
reference  is  when  Christ  speaks  of  discipline 
among  His  own  disciples.  If  your  offending 
brother  refuses  to  hear  you  alone  or  in  com- 
pany with  another,  you  are  to  bring  the  matter 
before  the  Church.  In  those  two  passages  con- 
taining all  that  ever  fell  from  Christ’s  lips  on 
this  point,  we  have  (1)  the  Church’s  security ; 


Appendix 


169 


(2)  its  victorious  conquest ; and  (3)  its  author- 
ity to  excommunicate  the  man  or  woman  who 
persists  in  sin. 

New  Testament  writers  others  than  Paul 
make  no  reference  to  the  Catholic  Church  of 
the  Firstborn,  the  great  mystic  Body  of  Christ ; 
but  only  mention  local  churches,  under  the 
Greek  word  Ecclesia^  meaning  assembly.  John 
writes  about  the  Bride,  but  never  names  the 
Church.  The  Gospel  of  the  Church  was  pe- 
culiarly and  specially  committed  to  Paul.  May 
I ask  you  to  follow  me  patiently  through  some 
of  his  statements  on  the  subject.  The  Epistle 
to  the  Romans  as  to  its  argument  ends  with 
xvi.  23.  Then  follows  the  benediction,  verse 
24,  in  the  Authorized,  omitted  from  the  Re- 
vised. The  last  three  verses  are  undoubtedly 
Paul’s  words,  but  are  an  added  doxology  con- 
taining a very  important  statement,  not  worked 
out  here,  but  in  subsequent  letters : 

“ Now  to  Him  that  is  able  to  stablish  you  according 
to  MY  GOSPEL  and  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  ac- 
cording to  the  revelation  of  the  mystery  which  hath 
been  kept  in  silence  through  times  eternal,  but  now  is 
manifested,  and  by  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets,  ac- 
cording to  the  commandment  of  the  eternal  God,  is 
made  known  unto  all  the  nations  unto  obedience  of 
faith ; to  the  only  wise  God,  through  Jesus  Christ,  to 
Whom  be  the  glory  forever.  Amen.^^ 

The  apostle  there  made  use  of  a remarkable 
phrase,  “ my  gospel/’  in  connection  with  an  ab 


lyo  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


lusion  to  a mystery  which  he  does  not  immedi* 
ately  unfold.  That  passage  gives  us  the  key- 
word “ mystery.”  Now  turn  to  1 Cor.  ii.  7-10. 

“ But  we  speak  God’s  wisdom  in  a mystery^  even  the 
wisdom  that  hath  been  hidden,  which  God  foreordained 
before  the  worlds  unto  our  glory  : which  none  of  the 
rulers  of  this  world  knoweth  : for  had  they  known  it, 
they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory : but 
as  it  is  written.  Things  which  eye  saw  not,  and  ear 
heard  not,  and  which  entered  not  into  the  heart  of 
man,  whatsoever  things  God  prepared  for  them  that 
love  Him.” 

A common  misquotation  which  I have  heard 
made  even  by  eminent  preachers  adds  “ to  con- 
ceive ” after  “ heart  of  man  ” ; but  it  is  unwar- 
rantable to  use  the  words  as  a statement  by 
Paul  that  no  one  can  have  any  idea  of  things 
to  come.  He  has  something  more  to  say,  and 
should  not  be  interrupted  ; therefore  read  on  : 

“ But  unto  us  God  revealed  them  through  the  Spirit : 
for  the  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things 
of  God.” 

Through  the  Holy  Spirit  this  hidden  mystery 
is  to  be  understood,  and  it  is  to  spiritual  men 
only  that  it  can  ever  be  revealed. 

A further  step  is  taken  in  the  epistles  to  the 
Ephesians  and  Colossians,  where  the  mystery  is 
unfolded. 

Eph.  i.  9 ; iii.  1-4,  9:  “ Having  made  known  unto 
us  the  mystery  of  His  will,  according  to  his  good  pleas- 


Appendix 


171 


ure  whicli  He  purposed  in  Him.  . . . For  this 

cause  I Paul,  the  prisoner  of  Christ  Jesus  in  behalf  of 
you  Gentiles, — if  so  be  that  ye  have  heard  of  the  dis- 
pensation of  that  grace  of  God  which  was  given  me  to 
you-ward  ; how  that  by  revelation  was  made  known 
unto  me  the  mystery^  as  I wrote  afore  in  few  words, 
whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye  can  perceive  my  under- 
standing in  the  mystery  of  Christ ; . . . and  to 

make  all  men  see  what  is  the  dispensation  of  the  wys- 
tery^^^  or^  preferably^  as  the  margin  gives  “ the  stew- 
ardship of  the  mystery  which  from  all  ages  hath  been 
hid  in  God.^» 

Thus  the  apostle  shows  that  the  mystery  hid- 
den in  past  ages  had  been  revealed  to  him ; 
that  he  was  commissioned  to  teach  it ; and  that 
his  was  the  stewardship  of  declaring  it  to  the 
Church.  In  chapter  v.,  where  he  has  been 
speaking  to  husbands  and  wives,  he  says,  con- 
cerning the  great  prototype  of  that  relation- 
ship, “ This  mystery  is  great : but  I speak  in  re- 
gard of  Christ  and  of  the  Church”  (verse  32). 
In  vi.  19,  20,  he  asks  for  prayer,  “ that  utter- 
ance may  be  given  unto  me  in  opening  my 
mouth,  to  make  known  with  boldness  the  mys- 
tery of  the  gospel,  for  which  I am  an  ambassa- 
dor in  chains.”  Then,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Co- 
lossians,  Paul  refers  to  the  mystery  and  to  its 
unfolding  in  another  aspect. 

Col.  i.  26,  27:  *‘Even  the  mystery  which  hath  been 

hid  from  all  ages  and  generations:  but  now  hath  it 
been  manifested  to  His  saints,  to  whom  God  was  pleased 
to  make  known  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this 


172  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


mystery  among  tlie  Gentiles,  which  is  Christ  in  jou,  the 
hope  of  glory.” 

ii.  2 : “That  their  hearts  may  be  comforted,  they 

being  knit  together  in  love,  and  unto  all  riches  of  the 
full  assurance  of  understanding,  that  they  may  know 
the  mystery  of  God,  even  Christ/^ 

iv.  3 : “Withal  praying  for  us  also,  that  God  may 

open  unto  us  a door  for  the  word,  to  speak  the  mystery 
of  Christ,  for  which  I am  also  in  bonds.” 

We  have  had  the  statement  laid  down  that 
to  Paul  was  committed  the  gospel  of  the  mys- 
tery of  the  Church — of  a people  to  be  gathered 
out  of  the  world  and  united,  by  the  bonds  of 
the  very  life  of  Christ,  to  Christ  Himself,  to  be 
forevermore  in  such  close  association  with  Him, 
that  the  great  apostle  can  only  describe  the 
union  by  speaking  of  Jesus  as  the  Head,  and 
of  those  gathered  to  Him  as  forming  the  Body. 
Such  is  the  mystery  that  has  come  up  from  the 
eternities : that  kings,  rulers,  and  priests  never 
saw ; that  apostles,  even  in  the  time  of  Jesus, 
did  not  understand ; and  that  God  committed 
to  this  one  man. 

After  his  conversion  Paul  was,  first  of  all, 
united  with  those  apostles  who  were  called 
directly  from  Judaism  ; and  for  a certain  period, 
in  common  with  them,  he  preached  the  Gospel 
of  the  Kingdom.  But  there  was  a point  where 
he  ceased  to  proclaim  the  Kingdom,  and  began 
to  preach  gospel^'  of  the  Church.  Careful 
reading  of  the  Acts  will  show  that  in  early  days 


Appendix 


173 


the  first  apostles  were  linked  with  Judaism; 
and  it  was  through  the  revelation  which  God 
gave  to  Paul  that  there  came  a break  between 
that  system  and  the  Church.  It  has  been  said 
that  if  Christ  takes  some  Christians  away  and 
leaves  others,  it  will  rend  His  Body  and  break 
up  the  Church.  Now,  I have  been  very  care- 
ful to  avoid  saying  that  members  of  the  inner 
sacred  Church  of  the  Firstborn,  or  Christ’s 
Body,  will  be  left  behind.  Let  me  say  em- 
phatically that  I believe  the  Body  will  not  be 
rent,  and  that  the  Church  of  the  Firstborn  can- 
not be  broken;  that  when  the  Master  comes, 
the  whole  Church  will  go  to  meet  Him.  Who, 
then,  will  be  left  ? Many  Christian  people  who 
are  not  members  of  that  Church  of  the  First- 
born. 

The  question  which  naturally  arises  is.  What 
constitutes  membership  of  that  Body  ? The  an- 
swer is  in  a word — Election.  Read  the  words 
of  the  man  to  whom  was  committed  the  Gospel 
of  the  Church : 

Eom.  viii.  28-30:  “We  know  that  to  them  that 

love  God  all  things  work  together  for  good,  even  to 
them  that  are  called  according  to  His  purpose.  For 
whom  He  foreknew,  He  also  foreordained” — predes- 
tined, as  it  is  in  the  Authorized  Version — “and  whom 
He  foreordained,  them  He  also  called : and  whom  He 
called,  them  He  also  justified:  and  whom  He  justified, 
them  He  also  glorified.” 

There  you  have  the  perfect  working  of  God: 


174  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


His  sovereign,  supreme  election,  from  the  past 
eternity  right  up  to  the  glory,  from  eternity 
unto  eternity : from  the  past  sovereignty  of  God 
in  foreknowing  and  foreordaining  and  selecting 
and  electing — we  cannot  get  away  from  these 
words,  and  must  not  be  afraid  of  them — right 
on  into  the  coming  eternity,  when  God  crowns 
His  chosen  with  glory  and  honor.  You  read 
things  like  that  in  no  writer  save  Paul : and  he 
is  referring  to  the  Church,  this  company  which 
God  is  gathering  out  into  closest  union  with 
His  Son.  In  the  Book  of  Revelation  you  have 
the  living  creatures  round  the  throne,  with 
circle  after  circle  of  inhabitants  beyond  them. 
The  living  creatures  mark  the  inner  circle  of 
the  Church  which  God  has  selected,  elected, 
chosen,  and  which  Jesus  is  coming  to  gather 
unto  Himself. 

Now  we  ask,  Whom  does  God  foreordain? 
Read  the  words  which  I momentarily  omitted 
from  that  passage  in  Romans:  Foreordained 

to  he  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  SonJ^  God’s 
election  of  certain  persons  to  constitute  His 
Church  is  not  capricious,  but  has  regard  to 
character.  He  foreordained  those  whom  He 
foreknew,  in  order  that  they  might  be  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  His  Son.  Are  there 
not  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  in  the 
world— forgive  me,  I will  not  say  in  the  world, 
but  in  our  churches — who  are  not  conformed  to 


Appendix 


175 


the  image  of  His  Son?  Assuredly  there  are. 
Are  they  not  Christians?  I think  they  are,  I 
believe  they  are  God’s  own  children : but  they 
are  not  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  and 
will  be  left  behind  when  the  Master  comes. 
He  will  gather  out  that  inner  mysterious  unity, 
His  own  Catholic  Church,  made  up  of  such  men 
and  women  as  He  has  predestined,  foreordained ; 
and  He  will  gather  them  because  they  are  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  His  Son.  We  must  not 
make  Paul’s  theology  broader  than  it  is  in  fact. 
Do  not  imagine  that  he  writes  about  all  Chris- 
tian people;  but  remember  that  his  subject  is 
the  inner  circle  of  believers  who  are  “blame- 
less and  harmless,  without  blemish  in  the  midst 
of  a crooked  and  perverse  generation,  among 
whom  ye  are  seen  as  lights  in  the  world.”  The 
whole  of  Paul’s  teaching  is  concerned  with  the 
Church ; and  the  revelation  of  the  mystery 
which  he  received  when  he  was  taken  up  into 
the  third  heaven  has  never  been  given  to  any 
other  man  save  through  his  teaching.  In  that 
conception  of  the  Church  I find,  for  my  own 
part,  a solution  of  the  apparent  diflSculty  of  the 
doctrine  of  election,  and  a very  clear  statement 
of  the  character  of  those  who  will  be  caught 
away  to  be  with  the  Lord  when  He  comes  to 
gather  His  own. 

Are  there  other  scriptures  favoring  this  view? 
I believe  all  the  teaching  of  the  Word  to  be 


iy6  God’s  Methods  with  Man 

in  harmony  therewith.  Let  us  take  two  ex- 
amples : 

Heb.  ]*x.  27,  28 : “And  inasmuch  as  it  is  appointed 

unto  men  once  to  die,  and  after  this  cometh  judgment ; 
so  Christ  also,  having  been  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins 
of  many,  shall  appear  a second  time,  apart  from  sin, 
to  them  that  wait  for  Him,  unto  salvation.’^ 

Christ  will  appear  the  second  time,  apart  from 
sin,  to  them  that  wait  for  Him.  The  force  of 
the  teaching  here  is  intensified  by  the  Revised 
Version,  in  which  is  substituted  for 

“ Are  there  not  hundreds  of  Christians 

who  are  not  waiting  for  Him,  and  who  would 
say:  ‘‘Do  not  talk  to  us  about  these  things; 
we  do  not  believe  in  them,  and  do  not  wish  to 
wait  for  Him  ? There  are  scores  of  Christian 
people  to  whom  the  certainty  of  Christ’s  coming 
to-morrow  morning  would  bring  consternation. 
If  there  is  one  thing  they  would  wish  to  post- 
pone, it  is  that  coming.  As  I have  already 
shown,  those  who  are  truly  waiting  for  Christ 
are  not  star-gazers,  but  men  and  women  con- 
formed to  His  likeness,  living  as  He  did,  doing 
His  work,  watching  for  Him  in  the  midst  of 
active  service. 

Certain  expositors  tell  us  that  of  the  virgins 
(Matt.  XXV.)  five  were  good  and  five  bad. 
Nay,  verily.  The  five  foolish  virgins  were 
separated  from  the  crowd  and  had  lamps  and 
oil.  Their  lamps  were  not  gone^  but  going^  out. 


Appendix 


177 


They  had  everything  necessary,  but  not  a suffi- 
ciency. When  the  five  wise  virgins  had  gone 
into  the  wedding  and  the  five  foolish  ones 
knocked  at  the  door,  the  Master  said,  “I  know 
you  not  ” : that  is  to  say,  He  had  shut  the  door 
upon  them  as  far  as  that  dispensation  was  con- 
cerned ; but  they  were  not  lost.  Jesus  said, 
“ The  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  unto  ten 
virgins  f not  the  Kingdom  of  heaven,  unto  five ; 
and  the  kingdom  of  earth,  unto  five.  In  the 
following  parable  of  the  talents,  a number  of 
men  are  needed  for  another  picture  of  the  King- 
dom of  heaven.  It  was  one  of  the  Lord’s  own 
servants  who  did  not  use  the  one  talent,  but 
buried  it,  and  was  consequently  turned  into 
outer  darkness.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  “ outer  darkness  ” refers  to  Gehenna, 
the  place  of  eternal  loss ; but  to  the  tribulation, 
in  contrast  to  the  light  in  the  marriage  chamber 
of  the  Lamb. 

We  cannot  dwell  upon  the  interesting  study, 
but  it  may  well  teach  us  the  importance  of 
careful  reading.  Let  us  not  imagine  that  we 
know  all  contained  in  this  Book  of  God.  For 
myself,  I find  that  a single  verse  will  often  hold 
me  in  a way  that  permits  no  escape  from  it. 
Every  time  a man  gets  on  his  knees  before  God, 
with  this  Book  in  his  hand,  he  will  make  fresh 
discoveries  of  his  own  ignorance.  We  cannot 
read  it  as  we  would  peruse  the  latest  novel: 


iy8  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


for  the  Book  of  God  will  demand  careful 
search,  patient  attention,  and  continued  labor 
with  heart  and  mind  if  we  are  to  know  it.  I 
have  dealt  at  much  length  with  this  question 
of  believers  passing  through  the  tribulation, 
because  of  its  great  importance  in  my  own 
view,  and  having  regard  to  the  wide  interest 
indicated  by  the  many  quarters  from  which  it 
has  come. 

4.  What  relation  do  little  children  hear  to  the 
truth  of  the  Lord's  coming  ? 

A beautiful  question,  to  which,  however,  no 
definite  answer  can  be  given  from  Scripture, 
save  by  deduction  and  inference.  I gather 
from  the  work  and  words  of  Jesus  that  all  chil- 
dren who  have  not  willfully  sinned  will  be 
taken  away  from  the  tribulation,  and  that  irre- 
spective of  parentage.  I believe  that  the  chil- 
dren of  the  most  ungodly  men  and  women  in 
the  world  are  Christ’s  by  virtue  of  what  He 
accomplished  upon  the  Cross.  There  is  a point 
at  which  such  children  will  need  to  be  born 
again  from  above,  and  that  is,  when  they  reach 
the  place  of  responsibility.  I have  a boy  in 
my  own  home  who  certainly  has  not  yet  reached 
that  point ; and  my  personal  conviction  of  the 
tenderness  of  the  heart  of  my  God  assures  me 
(but  I speak  without  dogmatism  even  here) 
that  if  He  should  take  me.  He  would  not  leave 


Appendix 


179 


my  child,  who  has  no  knowledge  of  right  and 
wrong,  to  pass  through  the  tribulation.  I sim- 
ply rely  upon  my  own  view  of  the  great  heart 
of  God  and  the  work  and  words  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

5.  In  view  of  prophecy^  how  near  may  the 
coming  of  Christ  he  ? 

I have  said  again  and  again  that  no  man  can 
fix  the  date  of  the  advent  of  Christ.  Accord- 
ing to  Mr.  Dimbleby,  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
end  upon  Good  Friday  in  this  present  Easter- 
tide (1898).  He  was  very  careful  to  guard  him- 
self against  any  assumption  that  the  Parousia 
would  take  place  then.  I neither  affirm  nor 
deny  his  conclusion  ; but  I do  say  that  we  have 
no  single  line  of  teaching  which  conclusively 
proves  the  place  or  time  of  Christ’s  coming. 
In  Daniel’s  image  we  have  the  head  of  gold, 
representing  the  Babylonian  empire  ; the  breast 
and  arms  of  silver,  as  the  Medo-Persian  king- 
dom ; the  belly  and  thighs  of  brass,  as  the 
Macedonian  monarchy;  and  the  legs  of  iron, 
as  the  Roman  rule.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  all  these  have  been  fulfilled  and  have 
passed  away.  The  feet  and  toes,  a mixture 
of  iron  and  of  clay,  are  in  the  times  of  the  full- 
ness of  the  Gentiles ; and  all  the  rest  of  the 
image  is  gone.  How  is  this  image  to  end  ? By 
the  Stone  cut  without  hands  out  of  the  moun- 


i8o  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


tain,  striking  the  feet  and  breaking  the  whole 
thing  into  pieces.  The  image  is  simply  sym- 
bolical of  earthly  power,  to  be  ended  by  the 
coming  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  for  but  with  His 
people.  He  will  come  and  take  His  Church 
away,  and  then  seven  years  must  pass  before 
the  Stone  will  smite  the  image  unto  its  destruc- 
tion. That  issue,  however,  does  not  fix  the 
time  of  our  Lord’s  coming  for  his  people,  which 
may  be  before  the  ten  toes  (kingdoms)  have  run 
their  course,  or  afterward.  All  we  know  is, 
that  before  the  image  of  worldly  power  can  be 
demolished,  Christ,  the  Stone  cut  without 
hands  from  the  mountain,  must  smite  that 
image.  But  no  man  knoweth  the  day  or  the 
hour  of  Christ’s  coming ; consequently,  the 
only  word  which  He  speaks  to  His  own  people 
is,  ‘'Watch:  for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  know 
not  the  Son  of  Man  cometh!  ” 

6.  Can  ive  hasten  the  coming  of  the  Lord?  If 
so^  how? 

In  2 Peter  iii.  11,  12,  we  have  words  bearing 
on  that  question. 

“ Seeing  that  these  things  are  thus  all  to  be  dissolved, 
what  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  liv- 
ing and  godliness,  looking  for  and  earnestly  desiring 
the  coming  of  the  day  of  God.” 

In  the  Authorized  Version  you  have  it  “has- 
tening unto,”  but  the  marginal  reading  of  the 


Appendix 


l8i 


Revised  Version  is,  I believe,  far  nearer  the 
original  idea  than  either  of  the  others — “ ear- 
nestly hastening  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God.’' 
Yes,  I think  it  is  possible  to  hasten  the  coming 
of  the  Master,  by  His  Bride  being  ready  for 
Him,  as  it  has  been  put  in  that  hymn  of  El 
Nathan’s : 

Let  all  that  look  for,  hasten 
The  coming  joyful  day, 

By  earnest  consecration, 

To  walk  the  narrow  way. 

The  moment  His  Bride — the  Body,  the  Church 
— is  ready.  He  will  come.  I believe  that  is  the 
true  force  of  the  word  in  the  Epistle  of  Peter 
— not  hastening  unto,  but  “hastening”  the 
coming. 

7.  When  the  present  dispensation  ends^  and 
the  Spirit  is  withdrawn^  will  His  office  and  worh^ 
as  set  forth  in  John  xiv,^  xv,^  xvi.^  he  superseded 
hy  the  personal  ministry  of  Christ?  When  the 
Spirit  is  gone^  who  will  carry  on  His  work  ? 

The  Spirit  is  withdrawn  only  in  a dispensa- 
tional  sense.  Every  successive  age  with  which 
we  have  dealt  on  the  Chart  included  within  it- 
self all  that  had  gone  before ; and  the  Millen- 
nium will  have  in  it  all  the  richness,  glory,  and 
beauty,  of  everything  that  has  preceded  it. 
The  Spirit  will  be  withdrawn  in  this  one  way 
— as  a presence  in  the  world  which  prevents 


i82  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


the  full  outworking  of  evil.  Immediately  the 
Spirit  is  withdrawn,  antichrist  will  work 
mightily  through  the  seven  years;  but  in  the 
Millennium,  itself,  it  is  by  the  same  Holy  Spirit 
that  men  will  be  brought  into  living  contact 
with  Jesus  Christ. 

8.  what  does  Enoch'' s prophecy  refers  as  re- 
corded in  J ude  ? 

To  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  set  up  His 
kingdom  upon  the  earth.  “ Behold  the  Lord 
came  with  ten  thousand  of  His  holy  ones,  to 
execute  judgment  upon  all.” 

9.  What  judgment  is  referred  to  in  Matt,  xxv. 
in  the  parable  of  the  sheep  and  the  goats  ? And 
at  what  period  in  your  Chart  does  that  judgment 
come  ? 

There  is  nothing  more  commonly  misinter- 
preted than  that  parable.  It  contains  no  single 
word  about  the  dead ; but  is  exactly  what  it 
professes  to  be — a picture  of  the  time  when 
Christ  shall  come  and  all  nations  shall  be  gath- 
ered before  Him.  It  is  the  judgment,  not  of 
individuals,  nor  of  the  Church,  but  of  the  na- 
tions of  the  earth,  when  Christ  comes  at  the 
end  of  Jacob’s  trouble.  The  basis  of  judgment 
for  the  nations  is  to  be  their  treatment  of 
Christ’s  brethren,  the  Israelitish  nation.  Of 
course,  in  all  Jewish  truth  there  is  an  under- 


Appendix 


183 

current  of  application  to  God’s  children  in 
general ; but  we  should  be  careful  how  we 
apply  the  words  “ Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  unto 
one  of  these  my  brethren,  even  these  least,  ye 
did  it  unto  Me.”  They  do  not  belong  to  this 
dispensation,  but  to  the  next;  and  there  is 
nothing  in  them  which  has  any  very  close  bear- 
ing upon  our  present  position. 

10.  Who  will  he  the  victims  of  the  final  apos- 
tasy after  the  thousand  years  ? 

It  is  distinctly  stated  in  Rev.  xx.  7,  8,  that 
when  Satan  is  loosed,  he  will  deceive  the  nations. 
During  that  period  of  the  Millennial  reign,  the 
nations  will  be  subject  to  Christ,  but  not  all  of 
them  will  be  loyal  in  heart  to  Him  ; and  when 
Satan  is  loosed,  it  will  be  to  deceive  such  dis- 
loyal nations.  That  the  obedience  to  the  gov- 
ernment of  Christ  during  the  Millennial  period 
will  be  feigned  is  clearly  taught  in  such  pas- 
sages as  Psalms  xviii.  44  and  Ixvi.  3,  where  the 
Hebrew  word  translated  “ submit  ” is  the  same 
translated  elsewhere,  “ deceive,”  “ dissemble,” 
“deal  falsely,”  “lie.”  All  the  nations  will  be 
under  the  government  of  the  “ Rod  of  iron,” 
and  will  be  compelled  to  submit  therefore.  In 
heart,  however,  the  great  mass  will  be  rebel- 
lious to  the  end,  and  will  eagerly  avail  them- 
selves of  the  opportunity  of  outwardly  throw- 
ing off  the  yoke  and  entering  upon  actual  con- 


184  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


flict,  when  it  presents  itself  in  the  unloosing  of 
Satan. 

11.  Is  there  any  possibility  of  a raptured  saint 
being  deceived  and  finally  lost? 

Absolutely  no  possibility,  because  the  rap- 
tured saints  will  have  entered  into  a state 
which  shall  fit  them  for  the  New  Jerusalem, 
into  which  nothing  that  worketh  abomination 
or  maketh  a lie  can  come — that  is,  there  will  be 
for  them  no  further  temptation  to  sin.  This,  of 
itself,  answers  the  other  part  of  the  question — 
Would  Heb.  vi.  4-7  refer  to  such  a time? 
Certainly  not. 

12.  1 Cor,  XV.  2Jp-27 ; Rev.  xx,  1^.  Do  not 
these  Scriptures^  taken  in  conjunction^  teach  that 
Christ  delivers  up  the  Kingdom  at  the  destruction 
of  deaths  before  the  new  heavens  and  the  new 
earth  ? 

I do  not  think  that  is  a necessary  sequence. 
The  ‘‘  then  ” of  Corinthians  does  not  mean  im- 
mediate action.  There  is  another  “ then  ” 
which  bears  out  my  view,  in  verse  23.  “ Each 

in  his  own  order:  Christ  the  first-fruits;  then 
they  that  are  Christ’s  at  His  coming.  Then 
Cometh  the  end.”  That  is,  as  I believe,  in  the 
period  of  which  we  have  no  measurement,  be- 
yond the  great  white  throne,  and  beyond  the 
creation  of  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth. 


Appendix 


185 


18.  Does  the  final  triumph  of  Jesus  Christ  in- 
clude the  ultimate  reconciliation  and  subjection  of 
every  soul  of  man  to  Him  so  that  not  one  shall  be 
utterly  and  eternally  lost? 

My  correspondent  uses  two  words,  “ recon- 
ciliation ” and  ‘‘subjection.”  The  final  triumph 
of  Jesus  does  include  the  “subjection  ” of  every 
soul  of  man  to  Him ; for,  God  has  exalted 
Christ  “that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee 
should  bow,  and  that  every  tongue  should  con- 
fess that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father.”  But  the  final  triumph  of 
Jesus  Christ  does  not  necessarily  include  the 
“reconciliation”  of  every  soul  to  Him.  There 
will  be  souls  unreconciled  who  will  yet  be  sub- 
ject. It  is  an  awful  topic  to  deal  with ; but  the 
possibility  is  clearly  taught  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment that  a soul  may,  by  its  own  free  will,  be 
alienated  from  Jesus  Christ;  and  that,  never- 
theless, He  may  have  out  of  that  soul  the  honor 
which  comes  from  subjection  apart  from  recon- 
ciliation. In  passing,  and  in  connection  with 
the  great  tlieme  which  we  are  only  touching 
upon,  let  me  say  to  Bible  students  that  we  must 
be  very  careful  how  we  use  the  word  “eternity.” 
We  have  fallen  into  great  error  in  our  constant 
use  of  that  word.  There  is  no  word  in  the 
whole  Book  of  God  corresponding  with  our 
“eternal,”  which,  as  commonly  used  among  us, 
means  absolutely  without  end.  The  strongest 


i86  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


Scripture  word  used  with  reference  to  the  ex- 
istence of  God,  is — “ unto  the  ages  of  the  ages,” 
which  does  not  literally  mean  eternally.  Let 
us,  however,  remember  that  the  self-same  word, 
which  is  thus  used  in  connection  with  the  ex- 
istence of  God,  is  also  applied  to  the  loss  of  the 
human  soul.  Men  have  divided  the  Church, 
separated  from  each  other,  and  persecuted  one 
another,  upon  a thought  conveyed  by  an  English 
word  which  has  no  equivalent  in  the  Bible.  But 
who  shall  grasp  “ the  ages  of  the  ages,”  or  say 
that  when  a limit  is  reached,  if  limit  there  be, 
it  is  not  that  other  ages  upon  ages  may  be  born  ? 
God  is  subject  to  no  limitation,  and  our  finite 
thought  must  utterly  fail  to  fathom  the  ages 
which  He  inhabits.  We  have  no  right  to  dog- 
matize upon  anything  beyond  what  is  written  ; 
nor  should  we  use  a human  word  to  express 
Divine  things  in  the  great  future,  concerning 
which  we  know  so  little.  I repeat,  it  is  a 
solemn  possibility  that  a soul  may,  by  its  own 
deliberate,  unchanging  choice,  pass  into  the 
ages  of  the  ages,  without  God  and  without 
hope,  and  yet  be  subject  to  Christ,  while  un- 
reconciled to  Him. 

14.  According  to  1 Cor,  xv.  26^  the  last  enemy 
that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death.  What  about  him 
that  hath  the  power  of  death  ? 

We  are  told  that  Satan  has  the  power  of 


Appendix 


187 


death — and  I take  the  inference  of  my  corre- 
spondent to  be  this:  if  death  is  the  last  thing  to 
be  abolished,  then  the  one  who  has  the  power 
of  it  must  first  be  abolished.  I venture  to 
think  that  what  is  implied  in  the  question  does 
not  follow.  In  the  passage  referred  to,  we  have 
enemies  under  Chrisfs  feet^  and  enemies  abolished. 
There  may  be  enemies  who  will  never  be  abol- 
ished, though  they  be  under  His  feet.  Christ 
must  reign  until  He  has  put  all  enemies  under 
His  feet.  Lucifer,  the  son  of  the  morning, 
must  be  put  under  His  feet.  And  so  must  the 
souls  of  men  who  deliberately  rebel  against 
Him ; but  it  is  not  said  that  He  shall  abolish 
them.  He  will  abolish  death ; and,  in  that 
case,  there  can  be  no  dying,  even  for  rebel 
souls. 

I have  endeavored  to  answer  the  whole  of 
the  questions  selected  according  to  the  light 
which  I have.  We  now,  for  the  present,  take 
leave  of  this  great  subject  of  prophecy.  Main- 
taining the  spirit  of  readiness  for  Divine  lead- 
ing in  regard  to  lines  of  teaching,  we  may,  at  a 
future  day,  return  to  the  subject  in  some  other 
aspect.  But,  in  conclusion,  let  me  say  that 
truth  should  never  make  us  proud.  We  may 
be  very  confident  that  we  hold  the  truth ; but 
the  surest  way  to  deny  its  power  is  to  be  bitter 
and  unloving  toward  those  who  differ  from  us. 


l88  God’s  Methods  with  Man 


Let  us  remember  that  Truth  is  Christ,  and 
Christ  is  Truth  ; that  Christ  is  God,  and  God  is 
Love ; therefore  Truth  is  Love,  and  Love  is 
Truth.  In  proportion  as  you  may  hold  the 
Truth,  you  will  become  loving  toward  those  who 
differ  from  you.  All  the  wrangling,  ostensibly 
for  the  sake  of  Truth,  which  has  split  and 
divided  certain  sections  of  the  Church,  until 
men  therein  scarcely  know  where  they  stand, 
is  evidence  that  Truth  has  never  been  properly 
understood  by  them.  Truth  should  not  be 
stored  as  a commodity  or  as  something  of 
which  to  boast.  While  we  feel  that  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Word  of  God  is  very  clear,  let  us  re- 
member that  we  are  only  scholars  spelling  out 
the  alphabet  in  the  school  of  Jesus  Christ.  We 
may  rest  assured  that,  in  the  day  when  we  have 
full  knowledge  granted  unto  us,  we  shall  dis- 
cover that  the  men  of  whom  we  were  the  most 
afraid,  have  held  Truth  which  we,  perchance, 
have  never  known.  Our  duty  toward  our 
brother  and  his  toward  us,  if  we  be  loyal  to 
Christ,  is — that  we  love  each  other  still,  though 
we  may  not  agree  in  our  views.  Should  noth- 
ing else  be  accomplished  by  this  series  of 
lectures,  we  may  be  profoundly  thankful  if 
they  lead  to  searching  of  the  Word  of  God. 


A Selection  from 


Fleming  H.  Revell  Company’s 


Catalogue 


New  York : 158  Fifth  Avenue 
Chicago : 63  Washington  Street 
Toronto;  154  Yonge  Street 


Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer’s  Works. 


'The  Slicplierd  Psalm#  Illustrated.  Printed  in  two 

colors.  i2mo,  cloth,  boxed  $1.25 

The  Bells  of  Is.  Echoes  from  my  early  pastorates. 
With  portrait.  lamo,  cloth 75 

Prayers  for  Heart  and  Home#  8vo,  flex,  cloth,  .75 
Old  Testament  Heroes#  lamo,  cloth,  each,,  i.oo 


The  Expository  Series#  lamo,  cloth,  each. . . i.oo 
Christ  in  Isaiah.  (Isaiah  XL-LV.) 

The  Way  Into  the  Holiest.  (Hebrews.) 

The  Life  and  Light  of  Men.  (John’s  Gospel.) 

Tried  by  Fire.  (First  Epistle  of  Peter.) 

The  Christian  Life  Series#  i8mo,  cloth,  each,  .50 
Saved  and  Kept.  (New.) 

Cheer  for  Life’s  Pilgrimage.  (N'ew,) 

Through  Fire  and  Flood. 

The  Glorious  Lord. 

Calvary  to  Pentecost. 

Key  Words  to  the  Inner  Life. 

The  Future  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

A-  The  Present  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life,. 

The  Shepherd  Psalm. 

Christian  Living. 

A Castaway,  and  Other  Addresses. 

The  Secret  of  Guidance.  Meditations. 

Light  on  Life's  Duties#  Each,  lamo,  cloth,  net,  .30 
The  Psalms#  Notes  and  Readings.  i8mo,  cloth,  .60 
Envelope  Series  of  Booklets#  Packets  Nos.  i and  2, 
Each  containing  12  Tracts,  assorted net,  .20 

Choice  Extracts#  24mo,  paper,  each,  5c.;  per  doz. 
-net,  35c.;  i6mo,  paper 15 


David. 

Joshua. 

Joseph. 


Jeremiah, 


Moses. 

Israel. 

Elijah. 


Abraham. 


By  Rev.  Andrew  Murray 

Authorised y copyright  editions, 

THE  SCHOOL  OF  PRAYER*  svols,  i2mo, 

cloth,  each  75c.  ; the  set,  boxed,  $1.50. 

The  Ministry  of  Intercession : A Plea  for  More 
Prayer. 

With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer  : Thoughts 
on  Our  Training  for  the  Ministry  of  Intercession. 

THE  WITH  CHRIST  SERIES.  6 vols.,  i6mo. 

Paper,  each  25c. 

Cloth,  each  35c. ; the  set,  boxed,  $2.00. 

A With  Christ.  Holy  in  Christ. 

Abide  in  Christ.  itThe  Spirit  of  Christ. 

Like  Christ.  ^The  Master^s  Indwelling. 

The  New  Life.  Words  of  God  for  Young  Disciples 

of  Christ.  i6mo,  cloth,  50c. 

The  Childrenfor  Christ.  i2mo,  cloth,  $1.00. 

The  True  Vine.  Meditations  for  a Month  on  John 

XV.  1-16.  Long  i6mo,  cloth,  50c. 

Waiting  on  God.  Daily  Messages  for  a Month. 

Long  i6mo,  cloth,  50c. 

The  Lord^s  Table.  Long  i6mo,  cloth,  50c. 

The  Deeper  Christian  Life.  An  Aid  to  its  Attain^ 

ment.  i6mo,  cloth,  50c. 

Jesus  Himself.  i8mo,  cloth,  25c. 

Love  Made  Perfect.  i8mo,  cloth,  25c. 

Humility.  The  Beauty  of  Holiness.  1 8mo,  cloth,  30c. 
BePerfect.  Meditations  fora  Month.  i8mo,  cloth,  30c, 
Let  Us  Draw  Nigh  I 1 8mo,  cloth,  30c. 

Why  Do  You  Not  Believe?  i8mo,  cloth,  30c. 
Money:  Thoughts  for  God’s  Stewards.  i8mo, 

cloth,  25c. 

The  Spiritual  Life.  lamo,  cloth,  50c. 

The  Holiest  of  All.  An  exposition  of  the  Epistle 

to  the  Hebrews.  8vo,  cloth,  net  $2.00. 

Envelope  Series  of  Booklets.  1 2 tracts.  Per  dozen, 
net,  20c. ; per  hundred,  net,  $1.50 


By  Rev.  A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D. 

The  Ministry  of  the  Spirit#  Introduction  by  Rev. 

F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.  i2mo,  cloth,  gilt  top $i.oo 

i8mo,  cloth,  net^  25c.;  by  post,  net 30 

How  Christ  Came  to  Church:  The  Pastor’s  Dream. 
A Spiritual  Autobiography.  With  the  life-story  and  the 
dream  as  interpreting  the  man,  by  Rev.  A.  T.  Pierson, 

D.D.  With  portrait.  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  top 75 

i8mo,  cloth,  7iet^  25c.;  by  post,  net 30 

In  Christ;  or,  the  Believer’s  Union  with  his  Lord. 

i2mo,  cloth,  gilt  top,  $1.00;  paper,  net 35 

Pocket  Edition,  long  i8mo,  cloth i.oo 

Popular  Edition,  i2mo,  cloth,  ...  .30 

Cheap  Edition,  i8mo,  cloth,  net^  25c.;  by  post,  net,  .30 

The  Holy  Spirit  in  Missions#  i2mo,  cloth,  gilt 

top,  $1.25;  paper,  net 50 

Grace  and  Glory#  Sermons  for  the  Life  that  Now  is 
and  That  which  is  to  Come,  lamo,  cloth,  gilt  top. . 1.50 
Paper,  net 50 

Ecce  Venit;  or,  Behold,  He  Cometh.  i2mo,  cloth, 

gilt  top,  $1.25;  paper,  net 50 

The  Ministry  of  Healing ; or,  Miracles  of  Cures  in 

all  ages.  i2mo,  cloth,  gilt  top,  $1.25  ; paper,  net.. . .50 

The  Two-Fold  Life;  or,  Christ’s  Work  for  Us,  and 

Christ’s  Work  in  Us.  i2mo,  cloth,  gilt  top 1.25 

Paper,  net 50 

Yet  Speaking#  Unpublished  Addresses.  i6mo, 

cloth. . . 50 

Risen  with  Christ;  or,  the  Resurrection  of  Christ 
and  of  the  Believer.  i6mo,  boards 30 

The  First  Thing  in  the  World ; or,  the  Primacy  of 

Faith.  i6mo,  decorated  boards 20 

Cheap  Edition,  net.^  loc.;  per  doz.,  net.  . i.oo 

The  Coronation  Hymnal#  400  Hymns,  with  Music. 
By  Rev.  Drs.  A.  J.  Gordon  and  A.  T.  Pierson.  4to,  half- 

oloth,  red  edges,  net,  60c.;  cloth,  red  edges,  net 75 

Two  editions : An  edition  for  general  use,  and  a Baptist 
edition  Send  for  specimen  pages. 


Adoniram  Judson  Gordon#  A Biography.  By  his 

son,  E.  B.  Gordon.  Illustrated.  8vo,  cloth...,,...  1.50 


DATE  DUE 

I 

1 

DEMCO  NO.  38-298 

£«Taw  NAZMENE  COLLEGE 

NEASE  LIBRARY  EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 

BS647  .M6  1898X  GOULD 

Morgan  G.  Campbell/God’s  methods  with  m 


3 2999  00024  8844 


f 

Gould  BS  647  M6  1898x  718 

Morgan,  George 
God’s  methods  with  man  in 
time:  past,  present,  and. . . 

DATE 

ISSUED  TO 

Gould  BS  647  M6  1898x  718 

Morgan,  George 
God’s  methods  with  man  in 
time:  past,  present,  and... 

