ad 


= | 
Pe | 
aay 


X 
is 
Paes 


AST 


h 


M 


IMM 


| 
| 


| 


1001 1338356 


il 


| 
| 


School of Theology at Claremont 





The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 








cw 
V) 


g a) Ww 
s\ : 
wy ~ 


GOD’S MASTERPIECE 


AN ANALYTICAL EXPOSITION OF 
EPHESIANS I-III 


BY 
ARNO C. GAEBELEIN 
Editor of ‘‘Our Hope” 


PUBLICATION OFFICE “OUR HOPE” 
456 FOURTH AVENUE 
NEW YORK CITY 
PICKERING & INGLIS N. W. BIBLE AND TRACT 


11 Bothwell Circus DEPOT 
GLASGOW, SCOTLAND WINNIPEG, MAN. 


~ A ie cy ia 

ely ad 2 

. eo iis LA Pha’ m 4 n wT 7 
vey) Lm, PA ee ty, Wee 
hd C : > 





Copyright, 1913, by A. C. Gaebelein 


Bl Se 
. 
“ 
Ss 
Lae id 
f 
‘ “ 
as 
0 +4 
ae ale 
4 
1 meee Bae |e te 


SO fk DISCARDED «pores 


CONTENTS 

Page 
RGEEE TIC TIONS conta te she ie eae: orale oh alate are eae seesr eae 1 
(1) NS) CR ee Pe Pa a CRY: 8 
SRPPATIRST CHAPTER fo% dite Siti ap oe Cle ante nme 16 
MEPS SCOND) CHAPTER 8, 5 fe vile ie soe) lap eio edie ime 61 
THE MYSTERY OF THE MASTERPIECE.........-- She cee | 
SPRL HIRE). (GOHAPTER (or 05 010 ooh oie ois cinfosie sialejene aietoni e's 115 


Theology Library 


N | 
Ca ! itorn la 


wey Ages 


yey 


» 





God’s Masterpiece 


INTRODUCTION. 


The Epistle to the Ephesians is one of the 
prison Epistles of the Apostle Paul. Tychicus 
and Onesimus were sent by him to Colosse. 
Epaphras, that great man of prayer, who agon- 
ized in prayer for the Colossian believers 
(Col. iv:12), had communicated to Paul the 
condition of the church in Colosae, and in- 
formed him of the threatening danger from ~ 
unsound teachers. Tychicus had received from 
Paul the letter to the Colossians, containing 
such wonderful revelations concerning the 
person and work of Christ, and the believer’s 
fulness in Him. All the Colossian errors were 
met by the Holy Spirit in this Epistle and much 
more was added. Onesimus, the runaway 
slave, who in believing the Gospel had become 
the spiritual son of the Apostle and a brother 
beloved to his master Philemon, carried that 
beautiful little epistle of recommendation and 
courtesy to Philemon. The Epistle to the 
Ephesians* was also committed to Tychicus. 
Never before and never after were such 





*Some scholars claim that the words “at Ephesus” 
should be omitted and that the Epistle was not addressed 


2 God’s Masterpiece. 


weighty and blessed documents entrusted to 
human messengers. 

In the Epistle to the Colossians Paul makes 
the statement, ‘““Whereof I am made a minister, 
according to the dispensation of God which 
is given to me for you, to fulfil the Word of 
God”’ (Col. 1:25). To fulfil the Word of God 
does not mean, as often stated, that Paul ful- 
filled his ministry and was faithful in it. It 
means rather that to him was given the revela- 
tion which makes full, or completes, the Word 
of God. The highest and most glorious revela- 
tion, which the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ has been pleased to give, He 
communicated through the Apostle Paul. The 
two prison Epistles to the Ephesians and 
Colossians embody this completion of the Word 
of God. The Ephesian Epistle holds the 
place of pre-eminence. The revelation which 
is given in this Epistle concerning believing 
sinners, whom God has redeemed by the blood 
of His Son, and exalted in Him into the highest 
possible position, is by far the greatest revela- 


to the Ephesians. The evidence for it is found in the 
fact that the Epistle does not contain any messages of 
personal greetings and in other internal evidences. We 
believe that the Epistle was first sent to the church at 
Ephesus and then passed on to other places, so that it 
was a kind of a circular letter. The Epistle mentioned 
in Col. iv:16 was undoubtedly this Epistle. 


God's Masterpiece. 3 


tion. God is revealing His own loving heart 
and tells out by His Spirit how He loved us 
and thought of us before the foundation of the 
world. He shows forth the riches of His 
Grace and now makes known the secret He 
held back in former ages. How rich it all is! 
Like God Himself, so this revelation, coming 
from His loving heart, is inexhaustible. We 
may speak of Ephesians as the rich Epistle 
of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who, rich in mercy, tells us of the exceeding 
riches of His Grace in kindness towards us 
through Christ Jesus. But even this definition 
does not tell out half of all the Glory this 
wonderful document contains. It is God’s 
highest and God’s best. Even God cannot 
say more than what He has said in this filling 
full of His Word. 

In the Psalms we read: ‘“The heavens declare 
the glory of God and the firmament showeth 
His handiwork” (Ps. xix:1). We lift up our 
eyes and behold the wonders of God’s creation, 
which He called into existence by His Son 
and for Him (Col. 1:19). Here in this Epistle 
another heaven is opened. If the heavens of 
Creation are so wonderful and their depths 
unfathomable, how much more wonderful are 
the Heavenlies into which Christ has entered, 
where He now is seated, far above all princi- 


4 God’s Masterpiece. 


pality and power and might and into which 
God’s Grace has brought us in Him! 

And this brings us to the reason for calling 
the opening chapters of this Epistle ‘‘the 
Masterpiece of God.” The first three chapters 
of Ephesians contain the great revelation 
to which we referred above. What God has 
accomplished in His Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, 
to the praise of the Glory of His Grace, how He 
makes believing sinners one with His Son, 
sharers of His fulness and His Glory, this 
is the revelation of these chapters. All was 
planned before the foundation of the world, 
while elsewhere in these chapters (ii:7), the 
eternity to come is mentioned. From eternity 
to eternity are the boundaries of these three 
chapters. 

The church, the body of Christ, the fulness of 
Him that filleth all in all, the one body in which 
believing Jews and Gentiles are united, the 
building growing unto an holy temple, the 
habitation of God by the Spirit, and the ulti- 
mate destiny of that body, are further revela- 
tions of these marvellous chapters. 

Now the central verse of these chapters is 
found in ii:10. ‘‘For we are His workmanship 
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which 
God has before ordained, that we should walk 
in them.” The word ‘‘workmanship”’ arrests 


God’s Masterpiece. yy 


our attention. It is the Greek ‘‘Pozema,”’ 
from which our word ‘“‘Poem”’ is derived. It 
is a beautiful thought in itself to think of 
those who are saved by Grace, and united to 
Christ as “the poem of God.” But the word 
“‘Poiema”’ may also be rendered ‘‘Masterpiece.”’ 

Only once more is the same word found in 
the original language of the New Testament 
Scriptures. In Romans i:20 it is used in 
connection with the physical creation. God 
has produced two great masterworks in which 
He manifests His power. He called the uni- 
verse into existence out of nothing. What He, 
as the omnipotent One can do, is seen in the 
creation of the heavens and the earth and 
in the sustenance of His creation. His eternal 
power and Godhead are revealed in creation 
(Rom. i:19-20). But the creation of the 
universe out of nothing is not the greatest 
masterpiece of God. God has done something 
greater. He has produced a work, which 
reveals Him in a far higher degree. That 
greater masterpiece is the redemption of 
sinners. God took only six days to bring order 
out of the chaos of the disturbed original 
creation and to call into existence the present. 
earth and heavens, but He spent forty days 
with Moses in directing him to build the 
tabernacle, because the work of redemption is. 


6 God’s Masterpiece. 


more glorious than the work of creation. In 
this greater work He manifests “the exceeding 
greatness of His power to us-ward who believe, 
according to the working of His mighty power, 
which He wrought in Christ, when He raised 
Him from the dead and set Him at His. own 
right hand in the heavenly places’ (i:17-20). 
God planned this great work before He 
ever created the universe, and the universe was 
called into existence in anticipation of this 
greater manifestation of God’s glorious power. 
How God planned it before the foundation of 
the world, the work of the Godhead in the 
accomplishment of it, the details of His master- 
piece and the mystery connected with it, we 
hope to follow in this exposition. 

God’s creation may be studied with the tele- 
scope and with the microscope. With the tele- 
scope we study the heavens and see the great 
constellations and millions of heavenly bodies. 
We take the microscope and examine the 
drop of water and behold there the marvels of 
creation. A telescopic sweep of this Epistle 
is insufficient. The microscopic examination 
brings out its wonders. 

“The student of the Epistle to the Ephesians 
must not expect to go over his ground too 
rapidly; must not be disappointed, if the week’s 
end finds him still on the same paragraph, or 


God’s Masterpiece. 7 


even on the same verse, weighing and judging, 
—penetrating gradually, by the power of the 
mind of the Spirit, through one outer surface 
after another, getting in his hand one and 
another ramifying thread, till at last he grasps 
the main cord whence they all diverged, and 
where they all unite—and stands rejoicing in 
his prize, deeper rooted in the faith, and with a 
firmer hold on the truth as it is in Christ. And 
as the wonderful effect of the spirit of inspira- 
tion on the mind of man is nowhere in Scrip- 
ture more evident than in this Epistle, so, to 
discern those things of the Spirit, is the spiritual 
mind here more than anywhere else required.’’* 
And the more we read and study this Epistle, 
the more we will be impressed with the greatness 
and the glory of the revelation it brings to our 
hearts. It is a theme for eternity. How 
needful the study of this Epistle is for us in 
these days! The truths revealed will keep 
us in the days of apostasy and lift us above 
the materialistic spirit of the times. Without 
earnest and continued meditation on the 
great truths made known in this Epistle, 
spiritual growth and enjoyment are impossible. 
May it please the Holy Spirit to lead the 
writer and the reader into a better and deeper 
heart knowledge of His wonderful Grace. 


*Dean Alford. Prolegomena. 





The Analysis of Ephesians 
Chapters I-III 


The Epistle to the Ephesians is composed of 
two parts. In chapter iv:1 we read, “I there- 
fore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you 
that ye walk worthy of the calling wherewith 
ye are called.” With the fourth chapter the 
second part of this Epistle begins. The pre- 
ceding chapters, the first three, then tell us of 
the calling wherewith the God and Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ has called those, who 
believe in His Son, and from the fourth chapter 
to the end of this letter we find exhortations 
to walk worthy of that calling. To walk 
worthy as a Christian it is needful to know the 
calling wherewith He has called us. In the 
first great prayer in this Epistle we read, 
“That ye may know what is the Hope of His 
calling.”” Every Christian believer must know 
the Calling above everything else. The true 
knowledge of it is to govern our lives on earth. 


Chapter I. How God planned for and 
works in the production of His 
Masterpiece. 


1. The Introduction. Verses 1-2. 
2. The Great Doxology. Verse 3. 


God’s Masterpiece. 9 


3. The Plan and Work of the Godhead. 
Verses 4-14. 


A. TheGod and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ. 


a. Chosen us in Christ before the foundation 
of the world. Verse 4. 

b. Predestinated us unto the Son-place in 
Christ. Verse 5. 

c. Made us accepted in the Beloved. Verse 6. 

“To the Praise of the Glory of His Grace.” 
Verse 6. 


B. The Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ. 


a. Redeemed us through His blood. Verse 7. 

b. The Revelation in Him of the mystery of 
His will. Verses 8-10. 

c. In Him we obtained an Inheritance. 
Verse 11. 

“To the Praise of His Glory.” Verse 12. 


C. The Holy Spirit of God. 


a. Quickened by Him in hearing and believ- 
ing the Gospel. Verse 13. 

b. Sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise. 
Verse 13. 

c. The Earnest of our Inheritance. Verse 14. 


10 God’s Masterpiece. 


“Unto the Praise of His Glory.”’ Verse 14. 

4. The parenthetical Prayer to the God 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
Glory. Verses 15-23. 


A. Thanksgiving. Verses 15-16. 


B. The Prayer for Enlightenment in the Knowl- 
edge of Him. Verses 17-18. 


a. To know the Hope of His Calling (God 
the Father). Verse 18. 

b. To know the riches of the Glory of His 
inheritance in the Saints (God the Son). Verse 
18. 

c. To know the exceeding greatness of His 
power to usward, who believe (God the Holy 
Spirit). Verse 19. 


C. The Manifestation of the Power to usward. 
Verses 20-23. 


a. Christ raised from the dead. Verse 20. 

b. Seated at God’s right hand far above all. 
Verses 20-21. 

c. All things under His feet. Verse 22. 

d. Head of the Church, His body. Verses 
22-23. 


Chapter II:1-10. The Masterpiece pro- 
duced. 


1. What Man is by Nature. Verses 1-3. 


God’s Masterpiece. 11 
A. Dead in Trespasses and Sin. Verse 1. 


B. Enemies of God under the Prince of the 
Power in the Air. Verse 2. 


C. Children of Wrath. Verse 3. 


2. What God does richin Mercy. Verses 
4-6. 


A. The foundation: His great love wherewith He 
loved us. John 11:16. Verse 4. 
B. Giving Life together with Christ. Verse 5. 
C. Hath raised us up with Him. Verse 6. 


D. Seated us in heavenly places in Christ 
Jesus. Verse 6. 
3. The Destiny of the Masterpiece. Verse 
ae 
The Ages to come. 
4. Saved by Grace through Faith. Verses 
8-10. 


A. The positive statement. Saved by Grace 
Verse 8. 


B. The negative side: Not of Works. Verse 9. 
C. The Purpose of the Masterpiece. Verse 10. 


a. His Workmanship. 
b. Created in Christ unto good works. 


12 God’s Masterpiece. 


Chapter I[:11-III:21. The Mystery of the 
Masterpiece, the Church, the house of 
God and the Body of Christ. 


1. The Conditions of the Gentiles. Ver- 
ses 11-12. 


A. Called the Uncircumcision. Verse 11. 
B.. What they were. Verse 12. 


a. Without Christ. (Aliens). 

b. Strangers to the covenants. 

c. Without Hope and without God. 

2. But Now in Christ Jesus. Verses 
13-18. 


A. Made nigh by the blood of Christ. Verse 14. 


B. What the work of Christ has accomplished. 
Verses 15-18. 


a. He is our Peace; made both One. Verse 
14. 

b. Broken down the middle wall. 

c. Abolished the law of commandments in 
ordinances. Verse 15. 

d. To make one new Man. Verse 15. 

e. In Himself. 


C. The Reconciliation. Verse 16. 


a. Both (Jews and Gentiles) reconciled unto 
God in one body. 


God’s Masterpiece. 13 


b. The enmity slain. 
c. By the Cross. 


D. The Peace and Reconciliation preached. 
Verse 17. 
a. To those afar off (Gentiles). 
b. To them that were nigh (Jews). 
E. The gracious Result. Verse 18. 


Both have access by one spirit unto the 


Father. 
3. The great Relationship of the Master- 
piece. Verses 19-22. 


A. The relationship changed. Verse 19. 


a. No more strangers and foreigners. 
b. Fellow citizens with the Saints. 
c. Of the Household of God. 


B. The church as the Spiritual House. Verse 20. 


a. The foundation of the house laid. 
b. The chief cornerstone: 


C. The Holy Temple. Verse 21. 


a. Building framed together. 
b. Growing unto an holy temple. 


D. The Church, the habitation of God through 
the Spirit. 


14 God’s Masterpiece. 


4. The ministry of the Mystery of the 
Masterpiece. Chapter III:1-13. 


A. Paul the prisoner of Jesus Christ. Verse 1. 
B. His Ministry concerning the Masterpiece. 
Verses 2-5. ‘ 


. Made known by revelation. 

. The mystery of Christ. 

Hidden in other ages. 

. Now made known by the Spirit. 


C. The Mystery revealed. Verse 6. 


. Gentiles fellowheirs. 
. Of the same body. 
c. Partakers of His promise in Christ. 


D. Paul made a Minister of it. Verse 7. 


a. According to the gifts of His Grace. 
b. According to the working of His Power. 


Aaoorp 


Oo 


E. The Proclamation of the unsearchable Riches. 
Verse 8. 
a. The Apostle’s humility. 
b. The unsearchable riches of Christ. 


F. The dispensation of the mystery and its 
purpose. Verses 9-10. . 

a. To make all see what it is. Verse 9. 

b. To show the manifold wisdom of God to 

the heavenly principalities and powers. Verse 10. 


God’s Masterpiece. 15 


c. According to the eternal purpose. Verse 
11, 

d. Access with confidence. Verse 12. 

e. The tribulations of the Minister of the 
Mystery. Verse 13. 

5. The Prayer unto the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. Verses 14-19. 


A. The Prayer unto the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Verses 14-15. 


B. The Petitions of the Prayer. Verses 16-19. 


a. To be strengthened with might by His 
Spirit in the inner Man. Verse 16. 

b. That Christ may dwell in your hearts 
by faith. Verse 17. 

c. Rooted and grounded in love. 

d. Tocomprehend with all saints. Verse 18. 

e. To know the Love of Christ. Verse 19. 

f. To be filled with the fullness of God. 

6. The Great End Doxology. Verses 20-21. 

This marvellous section of the Word of God 
begins with a great doxology (i:3) and ends 
with another great outburst of Praise. All is 
unto the Praise of the Glory of His Grace. 


The First Chapter 


How God planned for and works in the pro- 
duction of His Masterpiece. 


1. The Introduction. ‘Paul an apostle of Jesus 
Christ by the will of God, to the saints which are at 
Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus. Grace be 
to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ.”” (Verses 1-2.) 


The introductory words of this great Epistle 
are in tune with the great revelation it contains. 
It is interesting to compare the opening words 
of the different Epistles. Inspiration is as 
much manifested in the introductions and greet- 
ings, as it is in the great doctrinal unfoldings 
of these precious documents. In Romans Paul 
speaks of himself in the beginning of the 
Epistle as separated unto the Gospel of God; 
in the words of introduction all the leading 
features of that Gospel are revealed, because 
Romans unfolds the Salvation of God. In 
the Epistle to the Corinthians among whom 
the leaven of worldliness was working, the fact 
of their sanctification is put in the foreground: 
“sanctified in Christ Jesus, called Saints.” 
Galatians is characterized in the first verse as 
the Epistle in which the Holy Spirit gives the 


God’s Masterpiece. 17 


defence of the apostolic authority of Paul and 
of the Gospel he preached: “an apostle, not 
from men, nor through man.” Colossians 
too has its characteristic introduction, while 
in the Epistle to the Philippians Paul does 
not speak of himself at all as an apostle, but 
associated with Timotheus, he speaks as a 
fellow-servant and fellow-saint. 

Without showing these peculiarities in the 
opening sentences of the other Epistles we point 
out that ‘‘the will of God” is made prominent 
in the very brief introduction of our Epistle. 
Paul means “‘little.”’ It is the name Saul of 
Tarsus assumed with the conversion of Sergius 
Paulus in Paphos (Acts xiii:7-9). The name 
tells of the great humility of the Apostle, 
which is elsewhere more fully expressed in this 
Epistle (Chapter iii:8). And his apostleship is 
by “the will of God.’ It is to be noticed that 
the will of God is repeatedly mentioned in the 
first chapter. All the blessings mentioned flow 
forth from the will of God. What God hath 
done for us in Christ Jesus is “‘according to 
the good pleasure of His will” (verse 5); 
“having made known unto us the mystery of 
His will’? (verse 9); ‘“‘who worketh all things 
after the counsel of His own will’ (verse 11). 
This will of God reacheth back before the 
foundation of the world. It made the erstwhile 


18 God’s Masterpiece. 


persecutor of the church of God the Apostle 
of Jesus Christ, through whom that blessed 
will of God is now fully revealed. 

““To the Saints which are at Ephesus and 
to the faithful in Christ Jesus.’’ We stated 
before that the words “which are at Ephe- 
sus” are not found in the best manuscripts. 
It is of little or no consequence. The Epistle 
may have been sent from one assembly to 
another, and in all probability is the one 
mentioned in Colossians iv:16. There is no 
mention made of the church at Ephesus, though 
the Epistle contains the fullest revelation of the 
church we have in the Word of God. In- 
dividual believers are addressed as Saints and 
as faithful in Christ Jesus. The words ‘‘Saints 
and the faithful” do not mean, as it has been 
supposed, two classes of believers in Ephesus. 
All believers are constituted saints, “‘separated 
ones.” But a Saint may not be faithful. 
Many who are saved by Grace and called 
Saints are unfaithful in their walk and testi- 
mony. The believers addressed are such, who 
live in faithfulness in Christ Jesus, manifesting 
in practical holiness their calling as Saints. 
And to such the Holy Spirit can give the 
highest and the best; He was unhindered to 
make known unto them the blessed revelation 
this Epistle contains. This is still an important 


God’s Masterpiece. 19 


principle. This address to ‘the Saints and 
faithful in Christ Jesus’’ corresponds to the 
division of the Epistle. In the first three 
chapters we learn that God has made us His 
Saints in Christ, and in the last three chapters 
we are exhorted to walk in faithfulness. 


Then follows the salutation so full of 
blessed meaning. ‘“‘Grace be to you and peace 
from God our Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ.”” These words are often termed a 
wish, a prayer or a blessing. They are more 
than that. Grace and Peace from the Father 
and His ever blessed Son, the Lord Jesus Christ 
are bestowed upon us, and they are put at 
the beginning of this and other Epistles to 
assure the people of God, that these unfathom- 
able blessings, Grace and Peace, are on our 
side. No matter how weak and imperfect 
those may be who are saved and sheltered in 
Christ, Grace and Peace will never be with- 
holden from them. The Holy Spirit never 
mentions Himself in these salutations to the 
Saints. They are always exclusively from the 
Father and the Son. The Holy Spirit is in 
the Saints of God. 


2. The great Doxology. “Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who hath blessed us with 
every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus.” 
Verse 3. 


20 God’s Masterpiece. 


This great doxology should constantly be as 
an outburst of praise upon the lips of God’s 
redeemed people. It stands at the beginning 
of the great revelation of this Epistle, without 
doubt the greatest doxology in the entire 
Word of God. And when we reach the end of 
these three marvellous chapters we find another 
outburst of praise recorded. ‘Unto Him that 
is able to do exceeding abundantly above all we 
ask or think, according to the power that 
worketh in us, unto Him be glory in the church 
in Christ Jesus unto all generations for ever and 
ever. Amen” (iii:20-21). Between these two 
doxologies are found the unfathomable riches 
of the Grace of God towards us in Christ. 

The third verse, the beginning of the Epistle 
itself, is the key to the great revelation which 
follows in this chapter. It is the bud which the 
Holy Spirit gradually unfolds. 

The Godhead in blessing sinners is revealed 
in this doxology. First we find the God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. He is 
the author of all blessings. We are to bless 
Him for the blessing which He has bestowed 
upon us. We are to give the blessings back to 
Him in praise. 

In the second place we learn that the bless- 
ings are in Christ. In His Son, God has 
blessed us. He gave Him for us. He came, 


God’s Masterpiece. 21 


died and was raised from the dead. In Him 
we have believed and in Him, with whom we 
are one Spirit, God has blessed us. 

Then in the third place we read of the bless- 
ings, what kind of blessings they are, spiritual 
blessings; they are therefore communicated by 
the Holy Spirit. And how many such blessings 
has He given? Our authorized version states 
“with all spiritual blessings.’”’ The correct 
rendering is “with every spiritual blessing.” 
‘There is then no blessing whatever, which God 
can give, which He has kept back from those 
who are in Christ. All God, the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, can give in 
spiritual blessings, He has given. It is a most 
blessed fact! God has now come forth and 
revealed what He can do for such as we are 
and how great are the exceeding riches of His 
Grace. In Old Testament times God had His 
people Israel. To them He promised earthly 
blessings. But greater than the blessings of 
the earth are the blessings He has given to us 
in Christ. What these blessings are we shall 
discover in the verses which follow. 

The phrase “in heavenly places’’ should be 
translated ‘‘Heavenlies.”” It is peculiar to 
this Epistle. We find the Heavenlies men- 
tioned five times. Chapter i:3, 19; ii:6; iii:10 
and vi:l12. It has a twofold meaning, the 


22 God’s Masterpiece. 


nature of the blessings which are ours in a risen 
and ascended Christ, and the locality where our 
Lord, the Head of the body is. In the Heaven- 
lies where He is now, the church will be with 
Him. As we review this doxology we find the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit men- 
tioned. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ has blessed us; these blessings are in 
the Son and as spiritual blessings they are 
communicated by the Holy Spirit. 

What follows is very interesting. From the 
fourth verse to the fourteenth we find the 
blessings stated with which we are blest in 
Christ. Generally these blessings are enu- 
merated by expositors of this Epistle, and 
seven of them are pointed out. There seems 
to be a better key to unlock the verses which 
speak of these blessings. Three times in these 
verses we read of the praise of God, His Grace 
and His Glory. 

Chapter i:6, ‘““To the praise of the Glory of 
His Grace.” Verse 12, ‘“That we should be 
to the praise of His Glory.” Verse 14, “Unto 
the praise of His Glory.” 

Each of these words of praise mark the end 
of what is said about the different persons of 
the Godhead, the Father, the Son and the 
Holy Spirit. In verses 4-6 we read of what the 
Father has done; verses 7-12 reveal what 


God’s Masterpiece. 23 


we have and are in the Son, in Christ; verses 
13 and 14 reveal the work of God the Holy 
Spirit. Thus we have the work of the Godhead 
in our behalf represented in this chapter. 


3. The Plan of the Work of the Godhead. 
Verses 4-14. 


A. The God and Father of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


“According as He hath chosen us in Him before the 
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and 
without blame before Him; in love having predestinated 
us unto the Sonplace by Jesus Christ to Himself according 
to the good pleasure of His will, to the praise of the glory 
of His grace, wherein He hath made us accepted in the 
Beloved.”’ Verses 4-6. 


These three verses reveal the blessed work of 
God the Father. Three great facts are men- 
tioned of Him. He hath 

a. Chosen us in Christ before the foundation 
of the Word. 

b. Predestined us unto the Sonplace in 
Christ. 

c. Made us accepted in the Beloved. 


How wonderful these statements are! Here 
we are face to face with revelation. To deny 
this would stamp these words as the lying 
imaginations of a deceiver, absolutely unreliable 
and untrustworthy. Only a direct revelation 


24 God’s Masterpiece. 


from God can acquaint us with that which 
took place before the foundation of the world. 
In the first verse of the Bible we read of God’s 
original Creation. “In the beginning God 
created the heaven and the earth.” How 
many millions of years ago this took place is 
not revealed, nor can human science ever find 
it out.* But here revelation takes us before 
the foundation of the world. Whatever is 
in God’s eternity, that unfathomable existence 
without a beginning, is beyond man’s ability 
to know and therefore unrevealed. In the 
words before us the Spirit of God makes known 
the great truth, that God before even the 
world existed planned His Masterpiece, how 
He would make known the exceeding riches 
of His Grace. With Him in all eternity, 
resting in His own bosom was His Only Be- 
gotten Son, the Son of His Love. In Him, by 
Him and for Him all things, visible and in- 
visible were called into existence. Before even 
this creation was effected, God knew the out- 
come. Surprise is an impossibility with God. 
He knows the end from the beginning, “Known 


*The guesses of Science on the age of the earth are 
amusing. They range from 20 million years to 400 mil- 
lions. None of the eminent scientists have ever been able 
to agree on a fixed number. And if they did, it would still 
be guesswork. 


God’s Masterpiece. pas 


unto God are all His works from the beginning 
of the world” (Acts xv:18). Before He created 
the highest creature, him who was the Cherub 
that covereth (Ezek. xxviii:14), God knew that 
he would become the Devil. The whole story 
of man’s fall, dragged down by the fallen 
Lucifer (Isaiah xiv:12) into sin and death, 
was not hidden from God. He knew all what 
would come to pass. The whole human race 
as it was to come into existence was known to 
Him and every member in that race. Well 
may we exclaim with David, when the Spirit 
of God unfolded to him God’s omniscience, 
“Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it 
is high, I cannot attain to it” (Psalm cxxxix:6). 

And then God made provision. He made 
the “ages” in His Son (Hebr. i:2-3). Then He 
chose us in Him that we should be holy and 
without blame before Him. This deep and 
blessed statement refers to the Saints of God, 
who constitute the Church, the body of Christ 
and as such the Glory of Christ (Chapter 1:23). 
In Ephesians we find the fullest revelation 
concerning the church, that mystery, which was 
not made known in former ages (Chapter 
iii:5). Here on the threshold of this sublime 
revelation we are told that the church was in 
the mind of God before the foundation of the 
world. Before His blessed Son ever came to 


26 God’s Masterpiece. 


this earth for redemption, before He ever died 
on Calvary’s Cross and rose from the dead to 
return as the glorified Man into God’s presence, 
before the Holy Spirit ever came to form that 
body, God knew the members of it, all who 
would constitute the body of His Son, the 
church. And as such He has chosen them that 
they should be holy and without blame before 
Him. How men with a show of learning have 
wrestled with these statements and by their 
theories and opinions have made the words 
“election” and ‘“‘predestination’’ obscure and 
difficult! Depths are connected with the state- 
ments before us which we cannot fathom. 
And God forbid that we should ever try to 
explain the actions of God’s Sovereignty or 
judge Him by our own thoughts. We bow in 
adoration and worship in the presence of such 
a statement “chosen in Him before the foun- 
dation of the world.” Israel as the elect 
earthly people will give us a little help. In 
Old Testament times there were many nations, 
nations of culture, learning and power. Yet 
God did not take them up, but let them go 
their own way. But what does He say con- 
cerning Israel? ‘“‘Hear this Word that the 
Lord hath spoken against you, oh children 
of Israel, against the whole family which I 
brought up from the land of Egypt, saying, 


God’s Masterpiece. 7A f 


you only have I known of all the families of 
the earth” (Amos iii:1-2). Israel is His elect 
earthly people; but their election is never 
spoken of as having been before the foundation 
of the world. Israel was chosen in time. The 
Saints of the New Testament times, which 
constitute the Body of His blessed Son, He 
hath chosen before there was a world. That 
body, the church, is an outgathered company, 
in its number known to God alone, because 
He has chosen them. And this choice of God 
declares that in Christ we should be, even as 
we are (blessed be His Name) “holy and 
without blame.’ It means that we become 
thus partakers of His nature, the nature of 
God, and therefore a nature capable of com- 
munion with God, a nature to which no blame 
is attached. This God willed and this is the 
portion of every believer in the Lord Jesus 
Christ. The Grace of God bestows it upon 
us. And our destiny as we shall see, the 
destiny of the elect body of Christ, the Church, 
is not in connection with the earth, but in the 
Heavenlies, even as we are chosen before there 
was an earth. 

The words “in Love’’ with which verse 4 
ends, we believe, belong to the sentence which 
follows in the next verse, so that we read, “In 
love having predestinated us unto the Son- 


28 God’s Masterpiece. 


place through Christ Jesus by Himself accord- 
ing to the good pleasure of His will.” It was 
love which purposed all this, the love which pas- 
seth knowledge. The words before us reveal 
the position, which God has given to those 
whom He hath chosen in Him before. the 
foundation of the world. The authorized 
version speaks of ‘adoption of children.” 
This hardly expresses it correctly. Believers 
in the Lord Jesus Christ are not adopted into 
the family of God; they are born into the 
family. The Greek has only one word “‘Son- 
place.” We are placed into the position of 
Sons. Not alone hath God given to us His 
own nature, but He gives us, because we have 
that nature in and through His Son, the place 
as Sons. Think of what God might have 
done for those, who by wicked works are His 
enemies. He might have given us the place of 
unfallen angels, the wonderful ministers of 
Heaven. What mercy that would have been! 
Or He might have lifted us to the dignity of an 
Archangel, full of beauty and power. But 
even that would not have been the very best 
He could have done in the riches of His Grace 
and Love. He has made us Sons, like the 
Son, whom He raised from the dead and seated 
at His own right hand. Sons of God, like His 
Son, destined to be joint heirs with Him and 


God’s Masterpiece. 29 


forever with the Lord; this tells out the marvel- 
lous story of God’s riches in Grace. He gave 
to His Son, risen from the dead, a better 
name and a better inheritance than the angels. 
And this we share in Him according to the eter- 
nal will of God. 

And all this is “‘according to the good pleasure 
of His will.’”’ Not according to our works, 
nor according to the appreciation or apprehen- 
sion of all this, as some have stated. Our 
works and actions have absolutely nothing to 
do with this. All we do is to accept in faith 
that, into which God has brought us according 
to His will. It is all of God. How else could 
it be, if it was all done in His will before even 
a human being existed. 

Before we pass to the third statement, a 
brief word on “predestination.” This word, 
which means ‘‘marked out” is nowhere found 
in connection with the Gospel, nor does it 
say anywhere in the Word, what some have 
said, that God has predestinated human beings 
to be lost. But while we do not read that He 
ever predestinated any one to be lost we read 
““God would have all men to be saved” (1 Tim. 
ii:4). God has nothing to say to a lost world 
about predestination. His Grace, bringing 
salvation has appeared unto all men. God’s 
offer of salvation is therefore to all. 


30 God’s Masterpiece. 


“Whosoever will’ and ‘‘Whosoever be- 
lieveth” are the glorious terms of God’s good 
news to all alike. But when we believe, we 
know that we are chosen and predestinated. 
Those who have believed on Christ are predes- 
tinated and they possess the Son-place. Then 
having believed, we know that we were chosen 
in Him before the foundation of the world. 

And in all this God shows what His Grace 
can do. “To the Praise of the Glory of His 
Grace.’”’ God could not manifest the Glory 
of His Grace with angels; but with sinners 
in the bondage of sin and death, on the road 
to eternal death and punishment, He was 
enabled to show it all forth. In the gift of 
His Son He has made it known. This modern 
Gospel of “‘salvation by character’ is surely a 
wicked thing, a soul-destroying delusion. It 
robs God of the Glory of His Grace. Let us 
magnify Grace! Let us give Him the Praise 
and the Glory, and as being saved by Grace 
let us live to the Praise of the Glory of His 
Grace! 

And in the third place we read that we are 
made accepted in the Beloved. Mark, it 
does not say “in Christ”? but in the Beloved. 
This is extremely precious. Christ is the Be- 
loved of God and as chosen in Him, partakers 
of the divine nature, predestinated unto the 


God’s Masterpiece. 31 


Son-place, we are “the Beloved of God called 
Saints.”” The Love wherewith God loveth the 
Son is the Love with which we are loved. 
We are as dear to God as He is Himself, who 
was always His delight. ‘Nearer my God to 
Thee, nearer to Thee,” is often sung by those 
who do not know anything of what Grace 
has done. We cannot be nearer to God, nor 
dearer to Him, than we are in Christ, the 
Beloved. Accepted in the Beloved, means 
that we rest in Him on the bosom of the God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Oh! 
come and let us praise His Name. 


B. The Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ. 


“In whom we have redemption through His blood, the 
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His Grace, 
which He hath made to abound towards us in all wisdom 
and intelligence; having made known unto us the mystery 
of His will, according to His good pleasure which He hath 
purposed in Himself, for the administration of the fulness 
of times to head up all things in the Christ, both which are 
in heaven, and which are on earth; in Him, in whom also 
we obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according 
to the purpose of Him who worketh all things after the 
counsel of His own will, that we should be to the praise 
of His Glory, who have trusted beforehand in Christ.’ 
Verses 7-12. 


These verses put before us the Son of God, 
what He has done for us in His work, and the 
riches of God’s Grace, which abounds in Him 


32 God’s Masterpiece. 


towards all who have believed. We discover 
three things, which are stated here: 


a. Redeemed us through His blood. Verse 7. 


b. The Revelation in Him of the hi of 
His will. Verses 8-10. 


c. The inheritance we have obtained in Him. 
Verse 11. 


And all this is ‘‘ to the praise of His Glory.” 
Verse 12. 


The Beloved One, having been mentioned 
in Whom we are accepted, we read at once 
of His work. The Son of God came from the 
Father’s bosom to this earth to redeem us, 
so that God’s eternal will might be carried out. 
Redemption, the taking out of the condition 
in which we are by nature, is a necessity, 
and has been forever accomplished by the 
blood of the Son of God, which He shed on the 
cross. Three Greek words are translated by 
redemption, giving us its blessed meaning. 
Agorazo, which means, to buy in the market. 
It is used in the following passages: 1 Cor. 
vi:20; 2 Pet. ii:1; Rev. v:9; xiv:3-4. Exa- 
gorazo, to buy out of the market, used in 
Gal. iii:13 and iv:5. Lootruo, to liberate on 
the receipt of a ransom, used as a verb and 


God’s Masterpiece. ; 30 


noun in Luke xxi:24 and 28; Romans iii:24; 
viii:23; 1 Cor. i:30; Eph. i:7, 14; iv:30. It is 
this last word which is employed here. Through 
His blood the Son of God has taken us out of 
the condition in which we are. He paid the 
price and has set us free. The redemption we 
have in Him is a settled thing. We know it 
belongs to us. But it means more than the 
forgiveness of our sins. The riches of His 
Grace revealed in redemption through His 
blood includes all our needs as sinners. The 
blood has redeemed us, set us free, from all 
things in which we are by nature. All we have, 
all we are, all we shall have and shall be are 
the blessed results of redemption by blood. 
We are delivered from the wrath to come 
(1 Thess. i:10), as well as “‘out of the present 
evil age” (Gal. i:4). We are delivered from 
the power of darkness (Col. i:13), yea, “He 
gave Himself for us, that He might redeem 
us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a 
peculiar people zealous of good works” (Tit. 
ii:14). These things we have, they are ours 
in Christ while we wait down here for the 
full “‘Son-place,”’ the adoption, the redemption 
of our body (Rom. viii:25). The forgiveness 
of sins is, so to speak, the foundation, and 
upon this follow all the other precious gifts 
which God is enabled to bestow according to 


34 God’s Masterpiece. 


the riches of His Grace, because His blessed 
Son shed His blood. 

How little all this is enjoyed by those who 
have believed in Christ! How great the 
ignorance of many of God’s people concerning 
the riches of His Grace, which He hath made to 
abound towards us! So many lack the fullest 
assurance to which every believer is entitled, 
and have but little knowledge of all they have 
entered upon and they have received, when they 
trusted in Christ. And it is this knowledge of 
the riches of His Grace we are told to con- 
template, and which will be the means of draw- 
ing us close to Himself. As we know this and 
enjoy it, we walk in separation from this present 
evil age, out of which we are redeemed. It will 
not leave us barren nor unfruitful, but produce 
in our lives fruit to the Praise of the Glory of 
His Grace. 

The words which follow put before us some 
blessed and deep truths. Redeemed through 
His blood, having redemption, the forgiveness of 
sins, according to the riches of Grace, He hath 
made known unto us the mystery of His will. 
God wants His elect, His church, to know the 
secret things of His will and what He hath 
purposed in Himself. Therefore He hath made 
the riches of His Grace abound towards us in 
all wisdom and intelligence. God has been 


God’s Masterpiece. oo 


pleased to make known in Christ the mystery 
of His will. It is the revelation of the mystery, 
which was kept secret since the world began 
(Rom. xvi:25), so that we know in Christ 
and through Christ the fulness of His purpose. 
That mystery of God is Christ, in which are 
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge 
(Col. ii:3). Christ, who has redeemed us by 
His blood, was raised from the dead. God 
“set Him at His own right hand in the Heaven- 
lies’ —‘‘He hath put all things under His feet, 
and gave Him to be the head over all things 
to the church, which is His body, the fulness of 
Him that filleth all in all’? (Chapter i1:21-23). 
This is the mystery: that Christ risen from the 
dead, seated at the right hand of God, is the 
Head and those who believe on Him constitute 
the church, His body. This body is destined, 
according to the eternal purpose of God, to 
share the Glory of the Head. This purpose 
is still in the future. The administration (or 
dispensation) of the fulness of times has not 
yet come. When it comes all things will be 
headed up in the Christ, both which are in 
heaven and which are on earth. We must 
notice it speaks of ““The Christ,” which means 
Christ, the Head, and the church, His Body. 
Marvelous Grace which has reached down to 
us and makes us one with Him, who, in accor- 


36 God’s Masterpiece. 


dance with His Father’s will, shares His own 
Glory and Inheritance with those who are in 
Him, the Sons of God! ‘‘The administration 
of the fulness of times’’ will come when He, 
who occupies now the Father’s throne, comes 
again and receives His own throne. Then all 
things will be put in subjection under His feet; 
He will be supreme and the reconciliation of 
things on earth and things in heaven (not 
things or beings under the earth) will take place. 
Creation itself, disturbed and so fearfully 
marred by the fall of man, will be put back 
into its original condition. The administra- 
tion of the fulness of times is the age to come, 
when righteousness will reign as Grace reigns 
now; the kingdom age, when He has taken His 
inheritance and reigns as King over the earth. 
In that day of Glory He will bring His many 
sons unto Glory (Heb. ii:10), and, more than 
that, ‘‘He shall come to be glorified in His 
saints, and to be admired in all them that have 
believed” (2 Thess. i:10). This is the glorious 
mystery of His will made known unto us who 
are, through the riches of His Grace, the heirs 
of God and fellowheirs with Christ. 

Of this inheritance we read in the words 
which follow: ‘In Him, in whom also we ob- 
tained an inheritance, being predestinated, 
according to the purpose of Him, who worketh 


God’s Masterpiece. 37 


all things after the counsel of His own will, 
that we should be to the praise of His Glory, 
who have trusted beforehand in Christ.” 
It is all “in Him,” in this precious and deep 
portion of God’s holy Word. A brief review 
will demonstrate this. We are blessed “in 
Christ’”” with every spiritual blessing (verse 
3). We are chosen “in Him’’ before the foun- 
dation of the world (verse 4). He hath accep- 
ted us “in the Beloved.” It is “in Him’’ we 
have redemption, and “in Him” we have ob- 
tained an inheritance. Apart from Christ there 
is no blessing, no redemption, no Glory. Re- 
jecting Christ and the price He paid for our 
redemption, His blood, means eternal death, 
eternal darkness, eternal wrath. It is a solemn 
fact that apostate Christendom, that Christless 
Christianity and bloodless Gospel, rejecting 
God’s Son and God’s only Gospel, is rushing on 
towards the judgment of a holy and righteous 
God. 

The inheritance of Christ, which belongs to 
Him as the glorified Man, we have seen before; 
He will receive it when “the administration 
of the fulness of time’? comes. In Him we 
have obtained an inheritance; we are called of 
God to share the inheritance of His Son in 
the ages to come. It is equally true that we 
are as redeemed by His blood, His inheritance. 


38 God’s Masterpiece. 


How wonderful it all is! We shall see Him as 
He is and then we shall be like Him; trans- 
formed into His image that He might be the 
firstborn among many brethren. We shall 
possess with Him His inheritance, for we are 
joint heirs with Christ. We shall be with Him 
wherever He is in Glory, for the body must be 
where the Head is; forever with the Lord. 
This is the inheritance we have obtained 
in Him. But what it all means. Only eter- 
nity will disclose the unsearchable riches of our 
Glory in Him and His Glory in us. And it 
is ‘‘to the Praise of His Glory.” Before we 
heard of ‘“‘the Praise of the Glory of His 
Grace’”’ (verse 6), which speaks of what He has 
done for us in raising us from the dunghill of 
our sin, misery and shame. But “the Praise of 
His Glory” will be fully manifested in the day 
of His Glory, when He appears with His saints. 
Of this He spoke in His prayer, “‘that the world 
may know that Thou hast sent me, and hast 
loved them, as Thou hast loved Me” (John 
Xvii:23). When He appears and leads forth 
in triumphant splendor His redeemed ones, 
all reflecting His Glory, then the world will 
know and He will get ‘“‘the Praise of His 
Glory.” 

Those mentioned here who ‘“‘trusted before- 
hand in Christ,” are Jews who have entered by 


God’s Masterpiece. 39 


faith into this blessed relationship and who 
possess now something infinitely higher and 
more glorious than the nation will possess 
when the Lord Jesus comes to restore His 
earthly people. In fact the ‘‘we’ in these 
two verses refers to believing Jews, while the 
“‘ye’”’ in the verse which follows means believing 
Gentiles. Both classes constitute the church, 
the body of Christ. Into this the second chap- 
ter enters more fully. 

May it please the Holy Spirit to make these 
blessed truths concerning our place and our 
inheritance in Christ more real tous. Our walk 
depends upon our believing contemplation of 
all these riches of His Grace. A little time 
is left us here. May we enter with our hearts 
more fully in all this and manifest His Grace, 
the Grace which stooped so low and has lifted 
so high, in a separated walk and devoted life, 
till we obtain the inheritance “‘to the Praise 
of His Glory.” 


C. The Holy Spirit of God. 


“In whom ye also having heard the Word of truth, 
the gospel of your salvation; and having also believed in 
Him, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. 
Who is the earnest or our inheritance until the redemption 
of the purchased possession, unto the Praise of His Glory” 
(verses 13, 14). 


In these words the Holy Spirit reveals His 


40 God’s Masterpiece. 


own work in God’s Masterpiece. Here again 
we notice three things: 


a. Hearing and believing; the Quickening 
by the Spirit. Verse 13. 


b. The Sealing by the Holy Spirit of Promise. 
Verse 14. 

c. The Holy Spirit the Earnest of our In- 
heritance. 


These words are of great importance. The 
Son of God came to this earth to redeem us 
and because He has finished the work the 
Father gave Him to do, the Holy Spirit, the 
third person of the Godhead has come to do His 
work. 

Three words are prominent in the thirteenth 
verse, the words “heard,” ‘‘believed’’ and 
“sealed.” They go together. The Word of 
Truth, the Gospel of salvation must be heard 
and believed; the hearing and believing results 
in the sealing with the Holy Spirit of promise. 
The Holy Spirit indwelling the believer is the 
earnest of the inheritance until the redemption 
of the purchased possession takes place. 

The Word of Truth, the Gospel of Salvation 
is the medium through which the Holy Spirit 
works. In the second chapter of this Epistle 
we read of the condition in which all men are 
by nature ‘dead in trespasses and _ sins.” 


God’s Masterpiece. 4] 


The Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Life and Power 
can alone reach this condition of death. He 
quickens us in our spiritual death, but He 
does His work through the Word of Truth, the ~ 
Gospel of Salvation. ‘Faith cometh by hear- 
ing and hearing by the Word of God’ (Rom. 
x:17). The Word which is to be preached is 
“the Word of Faith’ (Rom. x:7). Through 
this Word the Spirit of God operates and 
reaches the heart of man ‘‘for the Word of 
God is living, and powerful and sharper than 
any two-edged sword, piercing even to the 
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the 
joints and marrow and judgeth the thoughts 
and reasonings of the heart’ (Heb. iv:12). 
It is evident that inasmuch as ‘‘faith cometh by 
hearing and hearing by the Word of God” 
that the hearing of the Word is the means 
through the power of the Holy Spirit to pro- 
duce faith. Hearing and believing the Word 
of Truth, the Gospel of Salvation, the Holy 
Spirit then acts and we are “born again, not 
of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by 
the Word of God, which liveth and abideth 
forever” (1 Pet. i:23). This explains the words 
of our Lord to Nicodemus ‘‘except a man be 
born of the water and of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God” (John iii:5). 

But too little of this Word of Truth and the 


42 God’s Masterpiece. 


Gospel is preached in our days. Some of the 
professional evangelists instead of preaching 
the Word and the Gospel, tell all kinds of anec- 
dotes, which make people laugh and sometimes 
blush. A number of these men employ “‘slang”’ 
words and are extremely vulgar in the language 
they use. These same men seem to be after 
the money of the people and collect thousands 
of dollars for a few weeks of so-called‘ revival 
services.” They attract large crowds and claim 
marvellous success in the conversion of thou- 
sands. But is this really the work of the Holy 
Spirit? Does the Spirit of God use silly anec- 
dotes, often mixed with falsehoods, or can He 
use vulgar language to quicken sinners dead in 
trespasses and sins? These questions we must 
answer in the negative. These “revivals” are 
often discovered to be counterfeits. The sup- 
posed conversions were attempts at refor- 
mation produced by soulical emotions, or, what 
is even worse, a “religious affiliation” without 
salvation. All these attempts to reach men 
apart from the clearcut presentation of the 
Gospel of Salvation are the most dangerous 
tactics the arch-hater of the Gospel, Satan, 
uses. The Holy Spirit uses the Word of Truth. 
We repeat it again, “‘Faith cometh by hearing 
and hearing by the Word of God.” What is 
needed is to preach the Word in fullest assur- 


God’s Masterpiece. 43 


ance and confidence that the Holy Spirit with 
His power is doing His work in His own way 
by it. No Gospel preacher need to trouble 
himself about the results of his preaching. 
The Spirit of God uses the message, though the 
results may not be seen at once. 

All who have heard and believed are sealed 
by the Holy Spirit of promise. The authorized 
version is misleading. “In whom also after 
that ye believed’’ should be rendered by “‘and 
having also believed in Him ye were sealed 
with the Holy Spirit of promise.’ Some 
teach that a person may have believed in 
Christ and not have received the sealing with 
the Spirit. The claim is made that between 
believing in Christ and the sealing with the 
Spirit years may intervene, and that the sealing 
with the Spirit must be sought in a definite 
experience. All these claims have no founda- 
tion in Scripture. The sealing with the Spirit 
is not an inward experience, which must be 
sought after conversion and which is obtained 
by self-surrender. Sealing is a figurative ex- 
pression. The seal is a mark of ownership. 
As soon as a sinner hears the Gospel, believes 
in Christ, the Holy Spirit comes to him and 
makes His abode there. In this way God seals 
His own who believe in His Son, by giving to 
them His Spirit. Every believer is therefore 


44 God’s Masterpiece. 


indwelt by the Holy Spirit, and by this, God 
marks us as belonging to Him, while the Holy 
Spirit in us is the assurance of our security, for 
He keeps all in whom He dwells. The seal is 
therefore the Holy Spirit Himself, and His 
presence in the believer denotes ownership and 
security. The sealing with the Spirit is not an 
emotional feeling or some mysterious inward 
experience. Nowhere are we told to “feel” 
that we are sealed; we know it because the 
Word of God tells us so. And the Holy Spirit 
is the Spirit of promise, because He was prom- 
ised and has come in fulfilment of the promise 
of the Father and the Son. 

But He is also the Spirit of promise in the 
believer, for His presence promises better things. 
He is the earnest of our inheritance, the pledge 
that in the future we shall come into possession 
of our full inheritance. The gift of the Holy 
Spirit is the first installment, so to speak, of 
the Glory which belongs to us. When we 
come into full possession of the inheritance He 
ceases to be the earnest, but He Himself will 
never leave us in all eternity. 

The inheritance is here also called ‘“‘the 
purchased possession.” It has been fully 
paid for and is therefore completely purchased. 
But it speaks here not only of “purchase” 
but also of the ‘‘redemption’’ of our inheritance. 


God’s Masterpiece. 45 


The purchase price was the Blood; the redemp- 
tion of the purchased possession will be by 
power. Our inheritance, the purchased pos- 
session, is in the Heavenly places. This 
heavenly sphere is still in the grasp of Satan 
“the prince of the power in the air.’”’ With 
his demons he tenants the air and the Heavenly 
places, which are part of Christ’s inheritance 
and, therefore, ours as well. That such is the 
case we find in the last chapter of this Epistle, 
where we read of our present warfare which is 
“against the wicked spirits in the heavenly 
places” (vi:12). But this purchased possession 
which belongs to Christ and to us will not 
always be left in the power of Satan and his 
angels. The power of God will fully recover 
it in the future. Revelation xii gives us the 
most interesting prophetic history of this. 
Satan and his angels will be cast out of heaven 
and the redeemed of God will take possession 
of the wonderful inheritance above. The 
redemption of the purchased possession begins 
with the rapture of the Saints, when all His 
Saints are caught up in clouds to meet Him in 
the air. This is followed by Satan cast out of 
heaven. The redemption by the power of 
God will be consummated in the personal and 
glorious Manifestation of our Lord to establish 
His Kingdom over the earth. 


46 God’s Masterpiece. 


And now before we turn to the prayer which 
concludes the first chapter of this great Epistle 
we must have a review of this great revelation 
we have found thus far, concerning the work 
of the Godhead, in the production of the 
Masterpiece of God in redemption. 

1. We found God the Father has chosen 
us in Christ before the foundation of the world. 
God the Son came down from Heaven’s 
Glory and redeemed us by His Blood. God 
the Holy Spirit quickens those who hear 
and believe. He is here because Christ finished 
His work on the Cross. 

2. God the Father has predestinated us 
unto the Son-place. God the Son reveals, 
to all who are sons with Him, the mystery of 
His will, concerning the future of the new 
creation. God the Holy Spirit because we 
are sons possesses us and keeps those whom 
He possesses. He is the Spirit of Sonship. 

3. God the Father has accepted us in the 
Beloved. God the Son has given us in 
Himself an inheritance. God the Holy Spirit 
is the earnest of that inheritance. 

Surely this is revelation from God. So 
blessedly simple, so profound that all the 
eternal ages will not suffice to sound its depths. 
No man could have ever discovered or invented 
such a plan. Let us bow before it in worship 


God’s Masterpiece. 47 


and yield our lives “‘to the Praise of the Glory 
of His Grace.” 

The second half of this chapter contains 
a prayer. It is the first prayer in the Epistle; 
the second prayer is found at the close of the 
third chapter. Let us notice that the greatest 
revelation of God given in Ephesians has 
these two prayers connected with it. The reve- 
lation is given that we might enter into the 
knowledge of it and enjoy it in our hearts, even 
“to know the love of Christ, which passeth 
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the 
fulness of God.’’ Prayer is needed for this. 
As we read these blessed truths we must 
make them our own. 

A. Thanksgiving, verses 15-16. 

“Wherefore I also, having heard of your faith in the 
Lord Jesus, and love unto all the Saints, cease not to give 
thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers.”” 

These are the words with which Paul intro- 
duces his prayer for the Ephesians. He had 
heard of their faith and. love. Faith in the 
Lord Jesus and love unto all the Saints are 
the leading and blessed essentials of true 
Christianity. Grace works these in our hearts. 
Neither faith nor love can be learned or ac- 
quired by man’s own efforts; both are the 
result of the work of the Holy Spirit. ‘No 
man can say that Jesus is Lord, but by the 


48 God’s Masterpiece. 


Holy Spirit” (1 Cor. xii:3). ‘The Love of 
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy 
Spirit, who is given unto us” (Rom. v:5). With- 
out this faith in the Lord Jesus, love unto all 
the Saints is impossible, and where there is true 
faith in the Lord Jesus, there must be love nto 
the Saints. If our hearts lay hold by faith of 
the great truths contained in the first part of 
this chapter and the Lord Jesus, and our wonder- 
ful position in Him and blessing is enjoyed by 
us, the love unto all the Saints will be manifes- 
ted. It is the fruit of faith in the Lord Jesus. 
It is by this love that we know we have passed 
out of death into life, “We know that we have 
passed out of death into life, because we love 
the brethren’ (1 John iii:14). ‘Whosoever 
loveth Him that begat, loveth him also that is 
begotten of Him” (1 John v:1). 

And let us notice the little word “all.” 
The Love of God which is shed abroad in our 
hearts includes all the Saints of God, not alone 
a little circle of such who see eye to eye with 
us in all things, not alone the Saints we know 
and are of an amiable disposition, but it takes 
in all, no matter what they are, and where they 
are, all who are born of God. He loveth 
them all and His Love in our hearts must needs 
embrace all whom He loveth. How little of 
this love unto all the Saints is in evidence in 


God’s Masterpiece. 49 


our days! May we always think whenever 
we come in touch with Saints who appear 
unlovable, who either oppose us or who do 
not share all our views, that the Lord Jesus 
loves them, loves them as much as He loves us. 
We must bear with them as He bears with us. 
This is one of the true tests of spirituality, love 
unto all the Saints. In the peculiar days in 
which we live, the last days of this age, when 
Satan tries to divide the flock of God as never 
before, may we love all His beloved people 
and reach out after the weak and stumbling 
ones of the flock. Let us remember that God 
hath chosen them with us before the foundation 
of the world, that He has accepted them as He 
has accepted us in the Beloved. May we never 
forget that the Lord Jesus died for them as He 
died for us, and that the same Holy Spirit who 
abides in us, is also in them. Then we shall 
make mention of all the Saints in our prayers. 
It is a blessed occupation, into which the 
Holy Spirit will lead us to pray for the Saints of 
God, besides giving thanks for them. Whenever 
a fellow believer has misunderstood us or the 
enemy attempts to sow the evil seed of jealousy 
between ourselves and other Saints, the best 
way, yea the only way, to overcome the evil 
is by prayer. When there is prayer for the 
Saints and the love for them is nourished by 


50 God’s Masterpiece. 


the prayer of intercession, the enemy will find 
it difficult to bring in his discord. Paul made 
mention of them in prayer and what he asked 
for all the Saints we find revealed in the verses 
which follow. But we must remember the 
mighty One, who stood behind the penman of 
these words, the Holy Spirit. It is therefore 
more than the prayer of the Apostle Paul for 
the Ephesian Christians. It is the prayer of 
the Holy Spirit for all the Saints. What 
the Holy Spirit desires for those who belong 
to Christ, to know and to enjoy, is now made 
known. ‘The Spirit who prays is the Spirit of 
power, who can and will make all good to us. 


B. The Prayer for Enlightenment in the 
Knowledge of Him, verses 17-18. 


“That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
glory, may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revela- 
tion in the knowledge of Him, the eyes of your heart being 
enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of His 
calling, and what the riches of the glory of His inheritance 
in the Saints, and what the exceeding greatness of His 
power to usward, who believe, according to the working of 
His mighty power.” 


The prayer here is addressed to “the God of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory.” 
The prayer in the third chapter is made to 
“the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.” This 
corresponds most beautifully to the blessed 


God’s Masterpiece. 51 


revelation in the first 14 verses of this chapter. 
“God and Father’ are the blessed words, 
which stand in the foreground of this Epistle. 
God is Light and God is Love. The first 
prayer is a prayer for light, that His redeemed 
people may know, be enlightened; therefore it 
is addressed to the God of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. The second prayer in the third chapter 
is for love, and therefore addressed to the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

If we look a little closer at the words “the 
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
Glory,” we shall discover their marvellous mean- 
ing. God who hath chosen us and predesti- 
nated us before the foundation of the world is 
“the God of our Lord Jesus Christ.’’ The 
whole blessed story of the Gospel is revealed 
in this sentence. Here is the fact that God 
gave Him, who is His Only Begotten. The 
Son of God came to this earth and humbled 
Himself, appearing in the form of a servant; 
this is expressed in the word ‘“‘Jesus,”” His 
Name in humiliation. The titles ‘Christ and 
Lord” tell us of His resurrection. ‘God hath 
made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, 
both Lord and Christ” (Acts ii:36). The only 
time the Lord Jesus spoke of God as His God 
was on the Cross, when he said, “My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” 


52 God’s Masterpiece. 


But after His resurrection He speaks again 
of His God and in a most blessed connection. 
He said to Mary “Go unto My brethren and 
say to them I ascend unto my Father and 
your Father, and to My God and your God” 
(John xx:17). .Thus His God, the God who 
gave Him, who delivered Him up for us, who 
raised Him from the dead, is our God. We 
are brought into the same blessed relationship 
with Him. This is the only correct and scriptural 
way how we should address God “Our God and 
our Father, the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ’; anything less than that cannot 
have the approval of the Spirit of God.* And 
what does the expression ‘‘the Father of Glory” 
signify? From Him, “the God of our Lord 
Jesus Christ,” He who raised Him from the 
dead and gave Him Glory, Glory proceeds. 
First He gave to Him, who was made sin for 
us, glory. We see Him now crowned with 
Glory and Honor at the right hand of God. 
But the Glory He has received will be by-and- 
by shared by the church, His body. Thus the 
words “the God of our Lord Jesus Christ” 
takes us in the past; the title “Father of 





*Sir Robert Anderson in a recent volume, “‘The Honor 
of His Name,” has called attention to the unscriptural use 
of the name of our ever blessed and adorable Lord, a very 
timely warning. 


God’s Masterpiece. bo 


Glory” looks forward into the future. The 
God of our Lord Jesus Christ has accomplished 
the work for us in His Son and Glory, eternal 
Glory is now before us. 

In verses 17-19 we find three petitions and 
with these, in which we see the three persons 
of the Godhead indicated, we shall now be 
occupied. First we notice, however, that the 
desire is expressed that God “may give unto 
you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in 
the knowledge of Him, the eyes of your heart 
being enlightened.” 

This does not mean that they had not yet 
received the Holy Spirit. We saw they were, 
as every true believer is, sealed by that Spirit 
of promise, which means, the gift of the Spirit. 
There is no second giving of the Spirit promised. 
It means that the Spirit might operate as the 
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation. He is in 
all believers, but in few He can manifest His 
full power as the Spirit of Wisdom and Reve- 
lation. And the Holy Spirit will impart “‘the 
knowledge of Him.” If we desire to know 
Christ more fully, the Spirit of God as the 
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation will give us 
this knowledge. He enlightens the eyes of 
our hearts.* It is the heart, the new nature 





*The authorized version has ‘‘the eyes of your under- 
standing,’”’ which is an incorrect translation. 


54 God’s Masterpiece. 


in the believer, which alone can take in the 
great truths revealed in the Masterpiece of 
God. The human intellect cannot grasp these 
truths; the Spirit of God must enlighten the 
eyes of our spiritual nature. 

And now the three petitions “‘that ye may 
know.” 

1. The first is ‘‘that ye may know what is 
the Hope of His calling.’’ This is the calling 
of the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father 
of Glory. What then is His calling? For what 
has He called us? Into what is He bringing 
those whom His Son redeemed? It is infinitely 
more than to have our sins forgiven, as some 
have explained it; or to get to heaven. We 
do not hope to have our sins put away, but we 
know they are put away. We do not hope 
to get to heaven, we know that we are there 
in Christ, through Grace. Romans _ viii:29 
gives us the Hope of God’s calling. ‘For 
whom He did foreknow, He also did predesti- 
nate to be conformed to the image of His 
Son, that he might be the firstborn among 
many brethren.’ The hope of His calling is 
to be One with Him, whom God raised from 
the dead and gave Him Glory. Every sinner 
saved by Grace will eventually bear the full 
image of the Firstborn from the dead. “We 
shall see Him as He is and shall be like Him.” 


God’s Masterpiece. , 55 


The church, the body of Christ this Master- 
piece of God, will be joined to the Head and 
they shall be One. This is God’s calling; 
this is into what He brings redeemed sinners. 
The Holy Spirit must enlighten the eyes of our 
heart, that we can get fresh glimpses of this 
high and holy calling, and He must keep this 
calling constantly before our eyes. There is 
no other way to have and to enjoy the reality 
of this. If but this knowledge of His calling, 
our glorious destiny in Christ and with Him, 
is entered in by God’s children, it would 
mould their lives and keep them in the place of 
separation. May it please the Holy Spirit to 
enlighten afresh the eyes of all His people, so 
that they may know this great calling and 
walk worthy of it. And how soon this calling 
of God for which we earnestly hope may become 
an actual fact! A little while longer and “He 
that shall come will come.” It is then that 
we shall come into possession of our inheritance. 

2. The second petition is that we may know 
“the riches of the Glory of His inheritance 
in the Saints.”” Now again we read of “riches.” 
“For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, though He was rich, yet for your 
sakes became poor, that ye by His poverty 
might be rich” (2 Cor. viii:9). The riches 
into which God, the Father of Glory, has 


56 God’s Masterpiece. 


brought us through Him, who laid His Glory 
by, is told out in this Epistle. It is the rich 
Epistle of our riches in Christ. “The Riches of 
His Grace’’ (Ep. i:7); ‘‘the Riches of the Glory 
of His Inheritance’’ (i:18); “Rich in Mercy” 
(ii:4); ‘“‘the exceeding Riches of His Grace” 
(ii:7); ‘‘the unsearchable Riches of Christ” 
(iii:8); ‘‘according to the Riches of His Glory” 
(iii:16); these are the passages in which we 
read of His Riches towards us and our Riches 
in Him. : 

And what is the meaning “‘the riches of the 
Glory of His inheritance in the Saints?” We 
have an inheritance, and He has us for His 
inheritance. He is our inheritance, and we are 
His inheritance. The Glory of Christ’s in- 
heritance are the Saints, for whom He died, the 
many sons He brings to Glory. The church is 
the fulness of Him, who filleth all in all. The 
Saints are the gift of the Father to the Son. He 
said in His high-priestly prayer, ‘I am glori- 
fied in them.’ What are the riches of the 
Glory of His inheritance in us, we cannot fully 
fathom at this time. In that blessed day, 
when He receives His inheritance from the 
Father’s hands, we shall inherit with Him, 
and He will have His inheritance in the glori- 
fied Saints. ‘“‘He will rejoice over thee with 
joy, He will rest in His love, He will joy over 


God’s Masterpiece. OL 


thee with singing” (Zeph. iii:17). Though this 
is spoken of Israel it is equally true of the 
church. Knowing this, that before us is a 
future of Glory with Him, though we cannot 
grasp the fulness of that Glory of His inherit- 
ance in the Saints, our hearts even now rejoice 
and give to Him the praise and adoration, 
which belongs to Him. Oneness of Glory with 
Him and the Father is the never ending 
destiny of the blood-bought Saints. 

3. And the third petition is that we may 
know “‘the exceeding greatness of His power to 
usward who believe.” The context shows what 
the power is, which is mentioned here and which 
is on our side. When God called His Master- 
piece, the Universe, into existence He mani- 
fested His great power. He called all into 
existence out of nothing. What great power 
it was by which He created all things! In 
His great Masterpiece in Redemption, He 
also made known His power and the exceeding 
greatness of His power is now to usward, who 
believe. It is put on our side. 

What is this power? The concluding verses 
of this chapter give the answer. Look to the 
Cross. There the ever blessed Son of God 
suffered and died. He bowed His blessed head 
after he had spoken the precious, never to be 
forgotten words, “‘It is finished.” He who knew 


58 God’s Masterpiece. 


no sin was made sin for us, and by the shedding 
of His blood paid our debt. His body was laid 
in the tomb. On the third day the mighty 
power of God, the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
opened the tomb and “He raised Him from 
the dead.” But more than that, the mighty 
power of God lifted Him up. He passed 
through the heavens, higher and higher, until 
He was carried by the mighty power of God into 
the highest heaven and seated at God’s own 
right hand, far above all principality, and 
power, and might, and dominion, and every 
name that is named. And still more than that. 
The mighty power of God put all things under 
His feet and made Him head over all to the 
church, which is His body, the fulness of Him, 
that filleth allinall. Inthe highest Glory, with 
the highest possible Glory upon Him, is the 
Man Christ Jesus. His presence there, taken 
from the tomb, through the heavens into Glory, 
tells of the fullest accomplishment of God’s 
Masterpiece. 

And now the power which raised Him from 
the dead, which seated Him at God’s own right 
hand, which put all things under His feet 
(though we do not yet see all things put under 
Him) is on our side. It is to usward who 
believe. We can count as His redeemed ones 
on this resurrection power. How is it to us- 


God’s Masterpiece. 59 


ward? When we believe and that life is im- 
parted unto us, even eternal life, that power 
is there. In our lives as His people down 
here, in the conflict, in temptations, every step 
of the way, this mighty power is on our side. 
Oh! for faith to realize this constantly, that 
we are indeed risen with Christ. The Holy 
Spirit is in us as the Spirit of power to give us 
the victory. And finally the mighty power of 
God will be to usward in “that day’”’ when the 
blessed Head, our Lord Jesus Christ, will 
give the shout from the air, when the Saints, 
who fell asleep (as to the body) will rise first, 
when we who are alive and remain will be 
changed in the twinkling of an eye, ina moment, 
and caught up together with them in clouds to 
meet the Lord in the air. The same power 
which raised Him and carried Him through 
the heavens, will bring His complete church into 
Glory. 

In the presence of the words of verse 23 one 
feels more like worshipping than trying to 
expound its meaning. Marvellous words! It 
tells out the blessed Masterpiece of God. 
Christ the Head, the church, chosen in Him 
before the foundation of the world, the body. 
The Head is in Glory; the body not yet joined 
to the Head. He waits in Glory; the Saints 
wait on earth. The Body needs the Head, but 


60 God’s Masterpiece. 


the Head also needs the Body. ‘The Christ” 
will be complete when the Body is joined to the 
Head by the mighty power of God. The church 
as His Body is His fulness; it makes Him 
complete. And when that is reached, when 
Head and Body, Christ and the church, are 
united in Glory, then will the hope of His 
calling be realized and He will have the Glory 
of His inheritance in the Saints, and we shall 
know the exceeding greatness of His power to 
usward. 

Concerning the church, as the Body, the 
Masterpiece of God, we shall hear more in the 
chapters which follow. 


The Second Chapter 
Verses 1-10 
The Masterpiece Produced. 


After the great revelation of the first chapter 
and the prayer which followed, the production 
of the Masterpiece itself is now brought more 
fully into view. We have before us a reve- 
lation concerning our state by nature and 
how God takes us up and produces out of such 
material His Masterpiece. The first ten verses 
of this chapter give us this story. These 
verses belong to the richest of the whole Word 
of God. 


1. What Man is by Nature. Verses 1-3. 


“And you, who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein 
in times past ye walked according to the course of this 
world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the 
spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience; 
among whom also we all had our conversation in times 
past in the lusts of our flesh and of the mind; and were by 
nature the children of wrath, even as others.” 


What Man, Jew or Gentile, is by nature, is 
first brought forward. The contrast between 
the Epistle to the Romans and that to the 
Ephesians is interesting. In Romans the Spirit 
of God demonstrates at length the guilt and 
unrighteousness of the whole world. Gentiles 


62 God’s Masterpiece. 


without the law and the Jews with the law 
are seen equally guilty and lost. All have 
sinned. Jews and Gentiles are all under sin. 
The divine verdict is “there is none righteous, 
no, not one.’ (Rom. iii:9-10). God stops 
every mouth and shows that the whole world 
is guilty and lost (iii:19). Upon that dark 
background God writes the story of His love 
in His blessed Son, and reveals His righteous- 
ness, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all 
and upon all that believe. He reaches down 
into the terrible pit where man is as sinner and 
discovers the way out, leading forth in the 
Epistle to the Romans, till the summit is 
reached in the eighth chapter. 

In Ephesians nothing is said of Man’s con- 
dition in the opening chapter. God speaks 
of Himself and His sovereign Grace first of 
all and leads us far higher than in the Epistle 
to the Romans. And after He has made 
known His plans and His work, after He has 
revealed the riches of His Grace and into what 
He brings those who believe on His Son, He 
tells us what material we are. Our desperate 
condition in which we are by nature is un- 
covered. 


A. Dead in Trespasses and Sins. 


The first description shows that man is by 


God’s Masterpiece. 63 


nature in the state of death. This is spiritual 
death. While in Romans the conduct of Man 
as a sinner is made prominent, here it is the 
condition in which man is. Man is dead 
spiritually, dead towards God, because man is 
conceived and born in sin. The entire Word 
of God bears witness to this condition. The 
spiritual death of man is the foundation fact of 
the Gospel. If man were not in that condition, 
he would not be in need of salvation. Our 
Lord emphasized this condition. He told the 
religious Pharisee Nicodemus, the moral and 
learned ruler of the Jews, one of the finest 
types of the natural man, that he had no life 
and “must be born again.” In His great 
discourse in the fifth chapter of the Gospel of 
John, our Lord makes the declaration that man 
is spiritually dead. “Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, he that heareth my Word, and believeth 
on Him that sent me, hath everlasting life, 
and shall not come into judgment; but is passed 
from death unto life’ (John v:24). This 
shows clearly that as long as man does not 
believe on the Son of God, he is in the state of 
death, and only Grace by faith in the Lord 
Jesus Christ can change that condition. Again 
He said, ‘Verily, verily I say unto you, The 
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead 
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and 


64 God's Masterpiece. 


they that hear shall live’ (John v:25). The 
dead in this verse are not the physically dead, 
for He speaks of those in verses 28-29 of the 
same chapter. He describes the condition of 
man spiritually and shows that He alone can 
change this condition. And His power to raise 
the physically dead was abundantly demon- 
strated when He raised Lazarus from the dead, 
after he had lain four daysin the grave. Laza- 
rus dead, in the darkness, and corruption of 
the grave, may well be used as a picture of 
man as he is in his natural state. The scholar, 
the learned, the moral man, the philanthropist, 
all, no matter what they are or have made of 
themselves, if unregenerated, are dead towards 
God; they are in the darkness and corruption of 
spiritual death. This is a hard saying for the 
twentieth century. We hear much of the 
“better self” or “the good spark” which is in 
everybody. Appeals are made to live better 
and cleaner lives, but the truth God has re- 
vealed concerning man, that he is dead in 
trespasses and sins, is but little believed. 


B. Enemies of God under the Prince of the 
Power of the Air. 


The next verse tells us of the walk in which . 
the natural man is found. It is according to 
the course of this world, according to the 


God’s Masterpiece. 65 


Prince of the Power of the Air, the spirit 
which now worketh in the children of dis- 
obedience. It fully reveals the awful place in 
which man is as dead in trespasses and sins. 
The walk is according to the nature; the lust 
of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of 
life are the governing principles of this walk. 
All are enemies of God by wicked works. 
And behind all there stands the Prince of 
the Power of the Air, Satan. He works in the 
children of disobedience, which here means the 
Jews. Of this our Lord spake when He said, 
“Ye are of your father, the devil, and the lusts 
of your father ye will do” (John viii:44). 
And again it is written, “He that committeth 
sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the 
beginning” (1 John iii:8). It isasolemn truth, 
which God has revealed concerning our con- 
dition as fallen beings, that we are in the 
grasp of the Prince of the Power of the Air; 
that man is under this mighty Being of Dark- 
ness. To what a place of degradation man 
has been brought by sin! This likewise is 
disbelieved by the great majority of professing 
Christians. A personal devil is ridiculed and 
his existence denied. But all these denials 
cannot change the true condition as made 
known by the Spirit of God. These denials 
emanate from this very Being, whose work 


66 God’s Masterpiece. 


is to blind the eyes of man so that he cannot 
see his real condition before God. As long as 
the natural man has not received that life, 
which God offers in His Son, he is dead in 
trespasses and in sins, and is forced to walk 
according to the course of this age, held in 
captivity by sin and Satan, whose slave he is. 


C. Children of Wrath. 


The ‘‘you’’ of the first verse is addressed 
to the Ephesians, who were of the Gentiles, 
and their unsaved condition is thus pictured. 
When in this verse it is stated “among whom 
also we had our conversation,” the Apostle 
shows that the Jews were in the same condition. 
And he adds, ‘“‘and were by nature the children 
of wrath, even as others.” The Spirit of 
God shows that Gentiles and Jews by nature 
are the children of wrath. The wrath of a 
holy and righteous God rests upon man in 
this awful condition. ‘He that believeth on 
the Son hath everlasting life; and he that 
believeth not the Son shall not see life; but 
the wrath of God abideth on him” (John 
11:36). No Millennial Dawnist, Restitutionist, 
or as some call themselves, “‘Reconciliationist,” 
nor any of the other errorists of the present 
day, can disprove this simple and solemn state- 
ment. They attempt an explanation, but fail 


God’s Masterpiece. 67 


in it. The truth revealed that we are “children 
of wrath” by nature and remain children of 
wrath as long as we are outside of Christ, is 
increasingly denied. What a significant fact, 
that God has revealed to us our true condition 
in which we are by nature! And man denies 
this revelation and refuses to believe what God 
saith about him. This denial is found in all 
the cults of Anti-christianity, such as the new 
Theology, Christian Science, the new religion, 
Russellism or Millennial Dawnism, Bahaism, 
Theosophy and a number of others. 

But where is there a true child of God, saved 
by Grace, enjoying the knowledge of the Gospel 
with its blessed depths and marvellous heights, 
who denies the truth of the first three verses of 
the second chapter of Ephesians? We know 
it is our true photograph. We acknowledge 
it all to be true. Such material God has to 
produce out of it His great Masterpiece. 


2. What God does, rich in Mercy. 
Verses 4-6. 


After this dark picture of death, ruin and 
wrath, we read of what God has done and does 
for all those who are in that condition, who 
believe on His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. 
We shall find how, in the riches of His Mercy, 
He reaches, in His Son, down to these conditions 


68 God’s Masterpiece. 


of death and despair and gives life in place of 
death, raises up with Christ out of the condi- 
tions of enmity and Satan’s power, and changes 
all who believe, from children of wrath, into 
children of Glory. It is a marvellous, a most 
blessed revelation given in a few sentences. 


A. The foundation. The great love where- 
with He loved us. 


“But God who is rich in mercy, for the great 
great love, wherewith He loved us” (Verse 4). 
This is the precious bridge, which leads out of 
the dark and dreary, hopeless condition. How 
beautiful are the first two words of this verse! 
How sweet they are to faith. But God: 
There are many “But God” in the Bible, and 
it is well for the reader of the Word of God to 
notice them. When human power is ended, 
when man’s help fails, when all is dark, when 
hope is gone, then “But God’! May our 
faith constantly lay hold upon it, and whenever 
difficulties arise, trials and troubles surround 
us and insurmountable obstacles, mountains, 
confront us, may we cry triumphantly, “But 
God!’’ 

And so here in our passage. Man is helpless; 
Man in himself is hopeless. What can one do 
who is dead? What can a person do who is 
the slave of a powerful being, whose chains 


God’s Masterpiece. 69 


cannot be snapt by a puny effort? What can 
one expect who has deserved only wrath? 
But God! God now comes to the front and 
makes known that towards such as we are, He 
is rich in mercy. Rich in Mercy! How often 
one hears this. Who does not talk of the mercy 
of God? Hindus, Mohammedans, Unitarians, 
Bahaists, all talk of God being merciful. But 
God who is righteous cannot be rich in mercy 
unless His righteousness is satisfied and His 
mercy rests completely upon that righteous- 
ness. And this is blessedly the case. He has 
loved us with a great love. For that great 
love with which He has loved us, He is now 
towards such as we are, “rich in Mercy” and 
can take us up and out of our condition. 
John iii:16 tells us of that great love. He gave 
His only begotten Son. He made Him who 
knew no sin to be sin for us. He put the cup 
of wrath to His blessed lips and He drank the 
last drop of it, which was our due. The Lord 
Jesus Christ met all the claims of God’s right- 
eousness, and now God is rich in Mercy, for 
the great love wherewith He loved us. 

On account of this great Love wherewith 
God has loved us, which enables Him, who is 
righteous, to be rich in mercy, God can take up 
lost sinners and lift them so high. How God 
does it is now revealed in a few words. 


70 God’s Masterpiece. 
B. Quickened us together with Christ. 


“Even when we were dead in sins hath quickened us 
together with Christ” (by Grace ye are saved). Verse 5. 


The verse and that which follows in which we 
read of the believer’s resurrection with Christ 
and being seated in Christ in the heavenlies, 
takes us back to the time when our blessed 
Saviour Lord was quickened and raised from 
the dead and seated in Glory. It is plain what 
God did for Him, who died on the Cross, He 
has done for all, who believe on His Son. 
Many Christians are ignorant of this great 
truth, while others have difficulty in grasping 
it. Yet it is quite simple. Every Christian 
believes that when the Lord Jesus suffered on 
the Cross He bore their sins in His own body 
on the tree. With the Apostle Paul every 
believer is entitled to say in looking back to 
the Cross, ‘““He loved Me, He gave Himself 
for me.” We know all our sins were paid for 
by His work; all the punishment we deserved 
fell upon Him, our gracious substitute. In 
Him we died. All this happened when we were 
not in existence at all. The sins He bore were 
not yet committed. God knew all about us 
and all about our sins and shame, the punish- 
ment we deserved, and His ever-blessed Son 
took all upon Himself. In the same sense 


God’s Masterpiece. 71 


God hath quickened us with Christ, . raised 
us up and seated us in Him, when He did 
this for His Son our Lord Jesus Christ. This 
is simple, yet so wonderful and deep, that it is 
incomprehensible. It was all done for us, 
who believe, when it was done for Him. God 
in His marvellous counsels in redemption has 
associated us with Christ. He has made all, 
who believe on Him, sharers of His life and 
nature; He brings them into the same rela- 
tionship as sons, and finally into the same 
Glory and Inheritance. Let us bear in mind 
that all this was done for us in Christ. He 
is the first One who was quickened, raised 
up and exalted in Glory, and associated with 
Him are all His members; we share it with 
Him. 

But from this high point of God’s counsels 
we must descend and speak now of our individ- 
ual quickening and how all this becomes our 
blessed and real portion by faith in Jesus Christ. 
Before we do this, we call attention to the word 
“‘together.’’ It is generally misapplied. Many 
read as if it meant we are “‘quickened together 
with Christ.’’ If this were the meaning, 
the word ‘“‘together’”’ would be superfluous; it 
would be sufficient to say ‘“quickened with 
Christ.”” The word ‘“‘together’” has reference 
to “Jews and Gentiles’; these two, as seen 


72 God’s Maslerpiece. 


elsewhere in this chapter, are made one and 
both are quickened with Christ. 

The word “quicken” is an old English word 
and means ‘“‘imparting life.’”’ We learned from 
the first verse of this chapter that man is dead 
in trespasses and sins. Our condition is that of 
spiritual death. But God in His great master- 
piece of redemption has life for us, which He 
imparts as His gift. That life is spiritual and 
eternal; it is the Life of His Son, who died and 
was raised from the dead. “Verily, verily I 
say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into 
the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it 
dies it bringeth forth much fruit”’ (John xii:24). 
He went into death and the grave, but came 
forth out of the grave. It is this life of the 
Son of God the sinner receives, when He 
believes on Him. “Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, He that heareth My Word, and be- 
lieveth on Him that sent Me, hath everlasting 
life and shall not come into judgment, but is 
passed from death unto life. Verily, verily I 
say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, 
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son 
of God; and they that hear shall live’ (John 
v:24, 25). As soon, then, as a sinner believes 
on the Son of God, casts himself as a lost sin- 
ner upon Christ, he receives life, eternal life, 
as the gift of God. 


God’s Masterpiece. 73 


How little this great, yet simple fundamental 
Gospel truth is known and enjoyed among the 
great mass of professing Christians. Some 
years ago a Y. M. C. A. Secretary showed us a 
large number of cards, which had been signed 
during an evangelistic campaign. The cards 
were in the form of a pledge. “From now 
on I promise to lead a better religious and 
Christian life.’ We asked the Secretary how 
it is possible for a person to lead a better life, 
when that person has no life at all. Before 
there can be a better life, a life lived to please 
God, there must be the communication of 
spiritual life, of which man by nature is desti- 
tute. ‘They that are in the flesh cannot please 
God,” because they that are in the flesh are 
simply natural men, without the new nature. 
The Gospel does not come to man demanding 
to do better, to stop lying or stealing, to lead a 
better life. The Gospel does not say, Do and 
act right and you shall have life. The Gospel 
offers life to man dead in trespasses and sins. 
When that life, the gift of God, is received by 
faith in Jesus Christ, the doing follows. Only 
as we receive this life can we live and walk in 
righteousness. 

There is a beautiful parable concerning Jeru- 
salem in the Book of Ezekiel, which fully illus- 
trates this (Ez. xvi:1-14), “Thy birth and thy 


74 God’s Masterpiece. 


nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy father was 
an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite’ (Ez. 
xvi:3). What a parentage! It fully illustrates 
Psalm 1i:5, “Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, 
and in sin did my mother conceive me.” And 
when that child was born, it was cast out. 
“Thou wast cast out into the open field to the 
loathing of thy person, in the day that thou 
wast born.” It pictures our condition by 
nature. Sin has put us into the “open field” 
(the world), and put us into the desperate 
condition in which this little one is seen. And 
what could this child do, laying in its own blood 
in the open field? Could it help itself, wash 
itself, save itself and lead a better life? Abso- 
lutely impossible! It needed salvation, and 
it found salvation, not by its efforts, but from 
the Lord who passed by. ‘‘And when I passed 
by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own 
blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in 
thy blood, live!’? In mercy He beheld the 
miserable, lost little one and the first thing He 
did was to speak the word of Life and by it 
communicated life to the one doomed in death. 
All this shows forth the Gospel concerning 
life. It is the first thing our Lord does, when 
He finds us, giving us life. In the same parable 
we read what else He did for the child. He 
entered into covenant with the child, ‘‘and 


God’s Masterpiece. 75 


thou becamest mine.”’ “I washed thee with 
water” ... “I anointed thee with oil.” He 
clothed the child, provided shoes, covered it 
with silk. “I decked thee also with ornaments, 
and I put bracelets upon thy hands and a 
chain on thy neck. And I put a jewel on thy 
forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a 
beautiful crown upon thy head.” What did 
the child do? Nothing whatever. From the 
word “Live” to the beautiful crown, which 
was placed upon its head, it was all His work. 
This is what Grace does for all who believe the 
Gospel. 

“By Grace are ye saved.’’ Blessed be 
God in all eternity for these precious words, 
which are given here for the first time in this 
Epistle! Salvation is by Grace, and is all 
from His side. God has accomplished the 
mighty work for us. We could have nothing to 
do with it, for it was all planned before the 
foundation of the world; it was done when we 
were not at all in existence. And as we trust 
in Christ we are saved by Grace. We do not 
hope to be saved at last. Nor do we work to 
be saved. The Grace of God has saved us, 
we have eternal life and can never perish. 


C. Raised us up together. 
“And hath raised us up together.” This 


76 God’s Masterpiece. 


leads us on in the mighty power of God in the 
production of His Masterpiece. Quickening 
and Resurrection are not one and the same 
thing. As already stated, quickening means 
the giving of life. Resurrection, however, is 
the placing of that given life into the proper 
sphere. By the resurrection of the Lord Jesus 
Christ we are justified. Nothing can now be 
laid to the charge of God’s elect, nor can 
there be any more condemnation (Romans 
vili:31-39). In Him, therefore, whom He 
raised from the dead, God has given to us a 
new and blessed position. We are taken 
from among the dead; we have received His 
life and now occupy in resurrection the blessed 
place before God, which He occupies as the 
First-begotten from the dead. We are Sons 
of God, the beloved of God, called Saints, and 
no longer as enemies of God in a guilty distance 
from Him. We are fully accepted in the 
Beloved. We are as near in Him to God as He 
is. That is what it means, “raised us up 
together.”’ 


D. Seated in Christ Jesus. 


“And made us sit together in heavenly 
places in Christ Jesus.’”’ This leads us still 
higher. Grace must do all it can do, or it 
would not be Grace. God is going to get now 


God’s Masterpiece. 77 


the highest Glory for Himself by making known 
the riches of Mercy towards those who are in 
Christ. If He had stopped short of the wonder- 
ful declaration before us, His Grace would not 
have been exhausted. It would be unfinished. 
But He has done it all. Besides giving us 
life and placing us in the blessed position as 
sons in resurrection, He has seated us in Christ 
Jesus in the heavenly places. Quite often the 
statement is quoted as “‘made us sit together 
in heavenly places with Christ Jesus.” This 
is incorrect. We are not seated with Christ, 
but in Christ. When He comes again, we 
shall be with Him and share His glory. Here 
we have the very summit of Christian position. 
We are not alone representatively, but also 
virtually, sitting in Christ in the highest 
Glory. Not alone have we life in Him, but He 
is our life. Therefore our life is hid with 
Christ in God. In Him, who is our life, we 
are seated in the heavenly places. How far 
above man’s thought and expectation all this 
is! Who would ever have dared to reach as 
high as that! And how little we can enter 
into the fullness of all this. Yet it is given to 
us to enjoy now in faith by believing what 
God hath told us, without being able to com- 
prehend its heights and depths. Oh! that 
indeed the eyes of our hearts may be enlight- 


78 God’s Masterpiece. 


ened, that we may know the hope of His 
calling. 

It is worth the while to review in a brief 
word the blessed revelations given in the first 
six verses of this chapter. 

We saw first what man is by nature. Dead 
in trespasses and sins; this stands in the fore- 
ground. Enemies of God under the Prince of 
the Power of the Air; this is the result of such a 
condition. Children of Wrath, because we are 
dead, His enemies and linked with Satan. 

And now God has come in with His mighty 
Power in the production of His Masterpiece. 
He gives life so that the dead condition is ended. 
Instead of enemies, we are constituted, by the 
resurrection of His Son, beloved sons of Him- 
self. And in Christ Jesus, He makes of us 
children of Glory, instead of children of Wrath. 
Marvellous Masterpiece of God! May we 
praise Him for it all. 

But one must ask in view of such riches of 
Grace, as revealed in the preceding verses, 
What is the purpose of all this? The verse 
which follows gives the answer. We find our- 
selves face to face with the purpose of Glory in 
the destiny of His Masterpiece. 


3. The Destiny of the Masterpiece. 


“That in the ages to come He might show the exceeding 


God’s Masterpiece. 79 


riches of His Grace in His kindness toward us in Christ 
Jesus.” Verse 7. 

In the first place let us notice that the little 
word ‘‘us’’ now refers to all, the “together” 
in verses five and six, believing Jews and 
Gentiles. The Masterpiece of God is not so 
much the salvation of the individual as it is 
the church, the body of Christ into which 
believing Jews and Gentiles are put by the 
Holy Spirit. Only once was this great truth 
mentioned at the close of the first chapter, 
when we read that Christ is the head of the 
church, ‘‘which is His body, the fulness of Him 
that filleth all in all.”’ We have refrained from 
enlarging on this fact that the church, the 
body of Christ, is God’s Masterpiece, because 
in the second half of this chapter and in the 
one which follows the truth concerning the 
church is more fully revealed. 

The verse before us revealing the destiny of 
God’s Masterpiece is one of: the richest and 
deepest of the whole Word of God. It is 
strange that some of the leading and most 
analytical expositors of Ephesians have failed 
to grasp its meaning. They apply it in a way 
which is all out of keeping with the scope of 
the first part of this chapter. “The ages 
to come” are explained by them as the present 
Christian age; of the different periods of our 


80 God’s Masterpiece. 


dispensation, they speak of “ages.” Their 
interpretation is, that God shows now in this 
dispensation, in every period of it, the exceeding 
riches of His Grace in those who are in Christ. 
Anyone can see that this view is incorrect, for 
the Word of God never speaks of a dispen- 
sation being composed of ages. 

“The ages to come” are future ages, which 
follow the present age. This verse forms a 
kind of a mountain-peak in this Epistle. We 
look into the past eternity without a beginning 
and hear what God willed before the foundation 
of the world; we look in the future and hear of 
“ages to come.”’ 

The greater part of evangelical Christendom 
holds a very hazy and decidedly unscriptural 
view concerning the ‘ages’ of time and 
eternity. The different ages of the past, the 
present age and the ages to come are something 
foreign to many Christians. The great dis- 
pensational truths of the Word of God have 
been grossly neglected. It has avenged itself 
in a fearful way. The enemy has taken advan- 
tage of this. Evil teachers like the notorious 
“Pastor Russell,” with his ‘Plan of the Ages,” 
etc., have brought out a little of the dispen- 
sational facts, but mixed with it the most 
deadly, soul destroying errors, which are a 
curse to the professing church and by which 


God’s Masterpiece. 81 


thousands have become ensnared. The prevail- 
ing idea, that the present age in which we live, 
is the last age, and that when it ends no other 
age will follow, has no foundation whatever in 
the Scriptures; it is totally unscriptural. The 
present age will end. How it ends and that 
another age will follow is fully revealed in the 
prophetic Word. The coming age is that of 
“the dispensation of the fulness of times’ 
(Chapter i:10), the Kingdom age, when the 
Kingdom will be established on this earth and 
the Lord Jesus Christ will exercise His Kingly 
rule and authority, showing forth His Kingly 
Glory. When the Kingdom age ends and 
this earth is consumed by fire (2 Peter iii:10) 
there will be a new heaven and a new earth. 
Then the eternal state—the eternal age—is 
reached. 

Of this we read here and a revelation is given 
concerning these ages to come. God is going 
to make known His Glory through and in 
His great Masterpiece. The word “show” 
means “to exhibit”—‘‘to display.’ His pur- 
pose concerning the future then is ‘that in the 
ages to come He might display the exceeding 
(surpassing) riches of His Grace in kindness 
towards us in Christ Jesus.” The age in which 
we live loves to display. Every few years 
there is an “exposition” somewhere, when all 


82 God’s Masterpiece. 


the great achievements of the age are dis- 
played. Man in his day prides himself with 
his power. But this boasting age will end in 
the predicted crash, when all high things will 
be laid low and this boasting, Christless civili- 
zation will be swept by the fires of divine dis- 
pleasure and judgment. It is then, when the 
present age closes and man’s display comes to 
a sudden end, that God will begin His display, 
His exposition. 

He opens the Heavens and brings forth Him, 
who is now unseen, the Man in Glory at His 
right hand. His Glory will cover the Heavens, 
when He shines forth in His royal Majesty 
and comes in great power and glory. What a 
day it will be when He sends Him back, the 
First begotten from the dead! And He will 
not be alone. His Saints follow Him. Each 
reflects the Glory of Himself. The Son brings 
His many sons into glory. He is then glorified 
in His Saints and admired in all them that 
believed (2 Thess. i:10). What a wonderful 
display of power and glory that will be! God 
displays His Masterpiece; the Christ, the 
Head and the Body. He shows to all the 
beings of the Universe what He has accom- 
plished, and thus displays the surpassing 
riches of His Grace. Throughout the Kingdom 
age this unspeakable display will continue. 


God’s Masterpiece. 83 


The Lord and His Church will be together in 
the Glory of the new Jerusalem and will reign 
over all. 

But this is not all. In the eternal age, from 
eternity to eternity, God is continuing in this. 
He will bring forth something new in Glory, 
new riches of Himself for those who are one 
with His well beloved Son. From eternity 
to eternity He displays the surpassing riches of 
His Grace in kindness towards us in Christ 
Jesus. How one is overwhelmed in the pres- 
ence of such a statement! And how little 
after all we can understand all those coming 
riches in Glory. What a destiny! The heart 
may well cry—nothing but Glory! What is 
the little suffering, the little while down here, 
in comparison with such never ending 
Glory! 

A word of caution here is also needed. Of 
late the teaching is being circulated that in 
eternal ages God will work towards a restitution 
of all things. These unscriptural teachers call 
themselves “‘reconciliationists.’’ According to 
them the ages to come will bring God’s grace to 
all the lost and they will be saved. But where 
does it say this? Certainly not in the Word 
of God. Their theories are obtained by a 
process of reasoning. The passage here speaks 
only of those “‘in Christ Jesus.” 


84 God’s Masterpiece. 


4. Saved by Grace through Faith. Verses 
8-10. 


A. The Positive Statement. Verse 8. 


“For by Grace are ye saved through faith; and that not 
of yourselves; it is the gift of God.” 


And now once more the Spirit of God em- 
phasizes this great fact “‘saved by Grace.” 
Salvation and all it includes is the gift of God. 
But what about faith? Is that also the gift 
of God? Assuredly. It is not of ourselves to 
be able to believe and accept God’s Word, nor 
is it an accomplishment which is to our credit; 
but it is God’s gift. Faith cometh by hearing 
and hearing by the Word of God. 

In a day when the counterfeit Gospel, the 
Gospel of works and character building, is 
almost universally preached, a Gospel, which 
is not of God, but which has the curse of God 
resting upon it (Gal. I:8), may we cling the 
closer to the solid rock, which will abide for- 
ever ‘‘saved by Grace.” 


B. The Negative Side: Not of Works. Verse9. 
“Not of works lest any man should boast.” 


The works of man have nothing to do with 
salvation. Alas! how many try to gain favor 


God’s Masterpiece. 85 


with God by doing. The religious Pharisee 
who stood in the temple and told God what he 
had not done and what he was doing as a 
religious man, has thousands of followers in 
Christendom to-day. Man has no works. We 
are by nature positively and negatively bad. 
We have never done a good thing. If right- 
eousness and with it salvation were by the law, 
then Christ would be dead in vain. And how 
strange that some say that they believe sal- 
vation is not of works, but by Grace, and then 
assert, that if they are saved and wish to re- 
main saved, they must work! 


C. His Workmanship. Verse 10. 


“For we are His workmanship created in Christ Jesus 
unto good works, which God has before ordained that 
we should walk in them.” 


This is linked closely with the foregoing 
statement. We have no works; nothing we do 
or have done can save us. But God has 
worked. We are His workmanship created in 
Christ Jesus. We are in Him, His new crea- 
tion. By giving to us the new nature, His 
life, He has called us ‘“‘unto good works.” 
Fruit to the praise of His Glory is the result 
of Grace. “This is a faithful saying and 
these things I will that thou affirm constantly, 
that they which have believed in God might be 


86 God’s Masterpiece. 


careful to maintain good works’ (Tit. iii:8). 
Fruit unto God is the blessed result of being 
in Christ and abiding in Him (Rom. vii:4 and 
John xv:5). Saved by Grace is witnessed to 
by a holy walk. The man who says, “Saved 
by Grace’”’ and walks constantly in unrighteous- 
ness and brings no fruit, shows that his profes- 
sion is spurious. 


The Mystery of the Master- 
piece—The Church 


Chapter IT:11-III:21. 


With the eleventh verse of the second chapter 
we reach a new division in this Epistle. The 
great Mystery of the Masterpiece of God, the 
church, is next revealed by the Holy Spirit. 
We saw in the first chapter of this wonderful 
Epistle how God planned His Masterpiece 
and the work of the Godhead. Then we 
learned in the first ten verses of the second 
chapter how God deals with us individually 
and fashions lost sinners, who trust in Christ, 
into His Masterpiece. And now we are led 
higher, and the fact is made known that all 
believers are united into one body. This 
truth was briefly mentioned at the close of the 
preceding chapter (1:22, 23). 


1. The Condition of the Gentiles. 
Verses 11-12. 
A. The Uncircumcision. Verse 11. 


“Wherefore remember, that ye being in time past 
Gentiles in the flesh, who are called the Uncircumcision 


88 God’s Masterpiece. 


by that which is called the Circumcision in the flesh made 
by hands.” 


The Gentiles are to remember first of all 
what they were in time past. What Gen- 
tiles were morally we have learned from 
the opening verses of this chapter. The 
same condition is also that of the Jews, “for 
there is no difference; for all have sinned, 
and come short of the glory of God” 
(Rom. iii:22-23). But while there was 
no difference between the Jews and the 
Gentiles morally (Rom. iii:9), there was 
a difference dispensationally. “What advan- 
tage, then, hath the Jew? or what profit is 
there of circumcision? Much every way; 
chiefly because that unto them were committed 
the oracles of God” (Rom. iii:1-2). God had 
revealed Himself to Israel, the seed of Abraham, 
while the Gentiles were permitted to go their 
own way. Even so the Lord reminded Israel 
of this fact: ““You only have I known of all 
the families of the earth” (Amos iii:2). Cir- 
cumcision in the flesh made by hands was the 
covenant sign and the characteristic mark of 
separation from the other nations. Gentiles 
possessed no such divinely made covenant, 
and the reproach of ‘‘Uncircumcision” rested 
upon them. 


God's Masterpiece. 89 
B. What Gentiles were. Verse 12. 


“That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens 
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from 
the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without 
God in the world.” 

Four things are given to picture the desperate 
condition of the Gentile world. 

a. Without Christ. 

b. Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel. 

c. Strangers from the covenants. 

d. Without Hope and without God. 


The picture indeed is dark; but it only brings 
out the marvellous beauty of God’s Master- 
piece, and His Grace in putting such wanderers, 
without hope and without God, as members 
into that blessed body, which is the fulness and 
glory of Christ, who filleth all in all. Dispen- 
sationally, the great Gentile world was “‘with- 
out Christ’’; they knew nothing about Christ; 
no promise had been given to them. But 
Israel possessed the promises. Prophet after 
prophet had spoken and announced to Israel 
the coming One and His work. Everything in 
their God-given institutions fore-shadowed 
Christ, and when He came in the fulness of 
time He declared “Salvation is of the Jews” 
(John iv:22). Though the Syro-Phoenician 
woman cried after Him and addressed Him as 
“Son of David,’’ He answered her not a word; 
as a Gentile she had no claim on Him. Gentiles 


90 God’s Masterpiece. 


had no part in the promised Messiah. Only 
after His own had rejected Him and delivered 
Him into the hands of wicked men, was the 
Gospel sent to the Gentiles. By their fall 
salvation came to the Gentiles (Rom. xi:11). 
They were “aliens from the commonwealth of 
Israel’ and “‘strangers from the covenants of 
promise.”’ Because they were as Gentiles so 
completely excluded from the commonwealth 
and the covenants of promises, they were 
without Christ. The Gentiles were “‘the dogs”; 
poor, wandering outcasts, far off, as we read 
later in this chapter. Yet, beautiful it is to 
see God anticipated the salvation of the 
Gentiles, and some Gentiles were received into 
the congregation of Israel. We mention but 
“Ruth,” the Moabitess, upon whom _ the 
curse of the law rested in a special manner, 
and whose name is found in the genealogy of 
our Lord. 

And the result of having no promise of Christ, 
separated from Israel and God’s covenants, as 
well as the commonwealth of Israel, the kingdom 
of priests, the result of all was—‘“‘without hope 
and without God in the world.’”’ No ray of hope 
enlightened the dark night of the Gentiles. 
The Gentiles had indeed possessed light and 
had known God, but had turned their backs 
upon God. Therefore being left alone, they 


God’s Masterpiece. 91 


had no hope. Different was Israel’s con- 
dition. Israel along with the promises and 
the covenants had hope. The hope of Israel 
is the Messiah; and though they are wanderers 
now, yet there is hope, which some day will be 
gloriously realized in the conversion of the 
remnant of Israel and the fulfillment of all 
their promises. But the Gentiles knew no 
hope. They were ‘‘without God in the world.” 
God, of course, knew the Gentiles. His deal- 
ings with them was not unrighteous, but accord- 
ing to His own sovereign will. He did not 
make Himself known to the Gentiles because 
they had turned away from the light and 
therefore He gave them up. The first chapter 
in Romans is an enlargement of the brief 
description of what Gentiles are morally and 
dispensationally. They knew God (Rom. 1:21) 
and glorified Him not. They became vain and 
were darkened. They thought themselves wise 
and became fools. After they became idola- 
trous, God gave them up in their bodies 
(Rom. i:24), in their souls (verses 26-27) and 
in their spirits (verse 28). 

Well may we remember in the dreadful days 
of apostasy, which are upon us, that Gentiles, 
who have had the Gospel preached unto them, 
are turning once more from the light, yea, 
from God’s best. Christendom in denying 


92 God’s Masterpiece. 


Christ is rapidly waning, and must eventually 
plunge into a greater darkness than the dark- 
ness of the Gentile world before the cross. 
Without Christ, without hope, and without 
God! Fearful and solemn words these are! 
When Christ is given up, His Deity and His 
Blood rejected, when men deliberately turn 
away from Him, and deny His Person and His 
Glory, they rush into the outer and eternal 
darkness ‘‘without hope and without God.” 


2. But Now in Christ Jesus. Verses 
13-18. 


A. Made nigh by the Blood of Christ. Verse 
14. 


“But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were afar 
off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.” 


Blessed are the two little words that stand 
at the beginning of this sublime verse—But! 
Now! It is the second “but” in this Epistle. 
It corresponds to the ‘‘but” in verse 4 of this 
chapter. The Holy Spirit describes, in the 
beginning of this second chapter, as we have 
seen, the desperate moral condition of Jews 
and Gentiles, showing that all are by nature 
the children of wrath. ‘Then the triumphant 
declaration comes in—‘‘But God who is rich 
in mercy, for the great love, wherewith He has 


God’s Masterpiece. 93 


loved us.’’ And here, after it is shown that 
the Gentiles were dispensationally without 
Christ, without hope and without God in the 
world, so very far off, we meet the other “‘but.”’ 
God in His mighty power, in His infinite 
grace, makes the far off Gentiles nigh. “But 
now.” This dispensation of Grace in which 
He makes known the mystery, which in other 
ages was not made known, that the Gentiles, 
once without Christ and without God, should 
be fellow-heirs and of the same body, is the 
‘‘now’’ in which the surpassing riches of 
God’s Grace are made known. Now, after 
Israel rejected the King and the Saviour, 
now, when He is upon the Father’s throne, 
now, when the Holy Spirit is on earth to do 
His appointed work, now, during the present 
age, God makes fully known what He had 
planned before the foundation of the world. 
He is producing His Masterpiece, taking the 
material from Israel, and reaching out with 
His mighty power after the Gentiles, to put 
them into one body. The poor, miserable, 
naked beggar upon the dunghill, the Gentile, 
is taken up to sit among princes and inherit 
the throne of Glory. 

“But now in Christ Jesus.” Here again we 
are obliged to halt. ‘“‘In Christ Jesus.” This 
is the place of blessing; this is the One in whom 


94 God’s Masterpiece. 


the purposes of eternity are carried out. Not 
for what they have done, or would do, but 
“fn Christ. Jesus.’ Oh! that blessed Name, 
above every other name! How prominent this 
precious Name is in these unsearchable reve- 
lations on the threshold of this rich Epistle! 
Review them once more. Five times His 
Name is given in the first three verses of Ephe- 
sians. Paul is an apostle of Jesus Christ, 
and the Saints are faithful in Christ Jesus. 
Grace and Peace is from the Lord Jesus 
Christ. In Christ we possess every spiritual 
blessing. Im Him we are chosen. By Jesus 
Christ we have the son-place. In the Beloved 
we are accepted. In Him we have redemption. 
All things are to be gathered in Christ in the 
coming dispensation. In Him we have an 
inheritance. And thus we could continue and 
cover the same blessed ground once more. It 
is Christ, and Christ only, throughout these 
marvellous revelations. 

In Him, who came from Heaven’s glory and - 
went to the cross, where He gave Himself 
and shed His blood, believing Gentiles are 
made nigh. Oh! blessed words! Made nigh 
by the Blood of Christ! What comfort this 
brings to us poor sinners of the Gentiles, once 
so far off, such outcasts in such a fearful, 
immeasurable distance from God! What a 


God’s Masterpiece. 95 


blessing that not our works, our service, our 
sacrifice, our sufferings or anything else have 
anything whatever to do with “being made 
nigh.”” Nor, blessed be God! have our works 
anything to do with keeping us nigh. The 
Blood has made us nigh; the Blood will ever 
keep each true believer nigh, and unfaith- 
fulness can never put him back into the place 
where he once was. The Blood of Christ 
has justified us; by the Blood we have forgive- 
ness of sins: it cleanses us from all sin. By the 
blood of Christ we enter the Holiest. And who 
can tell us how nigh the Blood has made be- 
lieving Gentiles? We are as near to God as 
Christ is. We are as dear to Him as He is, 
who was our substitute on the cross. Oh! for 
faith to enter into this and to enjoy it. And as 
we enjoy in faith our nearness to God in Christ, 
our blessed and eternal portion, we shall find 
that we shall indeed live and walk no longer as 
the other Gentiles do, but ‘‘unto the praise of 
the glory of His Grace.” 


B. What the work of Christ has accomplished. 
Verses 14-15. 


“For He is our peace, who hath made both one, and 
hath broken down the middle wall of partition, having 
abolished in His flesh the enmity, the law of cormmand- 


96 God’s Masterpiece. 


ments in ordinances; for to make in Himself of twain one 
new man, making peace.’’ 


Made nigh by the Blood of Christ! This 
is the blessedness of believing Gentiles, who 
were once afar off, without Christ, without 
hope and without God in the world. But 
much more has been accomplished by the 
blessed work of the Lord Jesus Christ. Three 
things are stated in these two verses. 


a. He is our peace; making both one. 

b. Broken down the middle wall and abolished the law 
of commandments. 

c. Making in Himself one new man. 


It is a most precious truth that Christ Him- 
self is our peace. Not what we have done, or 
what we do could make peace. It is wrong to 
speak, as it is so often done, of making our peace 
with God. God has done it in the blood of the 
Cross; and He who hath accomplished this for 
us, is our peace. ‘Therefore being justified 
by faith, we have peace with God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ.’’ However, this most com- 
forting fact of peace with God, through and in 
Christ, is not at all before us in the fourteenth 
verse. The parties here, which are made one, 
are not a holy God and an unholy sinner. The 
Jews and the Gentiles are the two, who are 


God’s Masterpiece. 97 


made One in Christ. Between these two there 
stood a middle wall of partition, separating 
them. This middle wall of partition is the law. 
God Himself had put up this wall, separating 
His people Israel from the Gentiles. We read 
in Isaiah about the vineyard, which is Israel, 
that He had fenced it (Isaiah v:2); and our 
Lord, speaking of the same vineyard, said: 
“He hedged it round about’? (Matt. xxi:33). 
The law of commandments in ordinances 
demanded from the Jews an entire separation 
from the Gentiles. For a Jew to eat with a 
Gentile was sin. Even Peter, when he had 
eaten with the Gentiles in Antioch, separated 
himself and withdrew; this shows how deeply 
rooted was this prejudice. The enmity and 
hatred between the Jews and Gentiles was 
great and can easily be traced in history. And 
now in the cross of Christ, God has broken down 
this middle wall of partition and made an end 
of this enmity, the law of commandments 
in ordinances. It has found its end in the cross. 
The Jews having rejected their Messiah had 
filied up the measure of their guilt as a nation 
and had become more guilty on account of it, 
than the Gentiles. The middle wall ceased 
existing. The Gentiles far off, in darkness, 
without Christ, without hope and without God, 
the Jews having rejected their promised Christ 


98 God’s Masterpiece. 


and nailed Him to a Cross, are the material, 
which God forms into His great Masterpiece. 
He comes forth with the mystery He had not 
made known in former age. Jews and Gentiles, 
believing, trusting in Christ, made nigh by 
His blood, are made both one and constitute 
one new man. This is what God has accom- 
plished, taking believing Jews and believing 
Gentiles, gathering them into one. This is 
the Masterwork of God, We does during this 
age. When the Kingdom age comes the Jews 
will receive their place of blessing and glory 
in their land, and the Gentiles will be greatly 
blessed and enjoy righteousness and peace. 
Both Jews and Gentiles will be in the Kingdom 
then, but not as one body. In the present 
age a body is forming “where there is neither 
Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumsion, 
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ 
is all and in all (Col. ii:11). This new man is 
the church, and Christ is the Head of that new 
man. Grace flowing from the cross of Christ, : 
where peace was made in the blood, takes up 
Jews and Gentiles and makes them one. When 
our Lord prayed in His high priestly prayer 
“that they may all be one as we are one,” He 
must have thought of this great truth, now 
fully revealed in this Epistle by the Spirit of 
God. 


God’s Masterpiece. 99 


C. The Reconciliation. Verse 16. 


“And that He might reconcile both unto God in one body 
by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby.” 

a. Both reconciled unto God in one body. 

b. The enmity slain by the cross. 


The two classes are still in view here and the 
“one new man” of the preceding verse is now 
called ‘“‘one body.’’ That body is the church. 
Thus gradually the Holy Spirit leads up to that 
mystery, which in former ages was not made 
known unto the sons of men. How sublime 
are the unfoldings in this greatest of all Epistles! 
Taken back into the counsels of the Godhead; 
then down to where He finds us in our sin and 
shame; then out of death and up into glory. 
And now the Spirit of God begins to show us 
the mystery of the one body. In all this 
wonderful work, the cross and the work of the 
cross, is kept in fullest view. Apart from the 
cross and the blood, which was shed by the 
holy One, there can be no such reconciliation. 
A careful comparison should be made with 
Colossians i:20-21, inasmuch as the same word is 
used for “reconcile,” which is used in this 
verse. “And having made peace through the 
blood of His cross, by Him to reconcile all 
things unto Himself; by Him, whether they 
be things in earth, or things in heaven. And 
you, that were sometimes alienated and ene- 


100 God’s Masterpiece. 


mies in your mind by wicked works, yet now 
hath He reconciled, in the body of His flesh 
through death, to present you holy and un- 
blamable and unreprovable in His sight.” 
Here we find a double reconciliation. The 
reconciliation of all things and the reconcilia- 
tion of believing sinners. These two recon- 
ciliations correspond to the two headships of 
Christ. He is the head of Creation (Col. 
i:15-17) and He is the head of the body, the 
Church (Col. i:18). The reconciliation of all 
things, that is, things in earth and things in 
heaven, is still future. When He comes again 
and takes the place over His creation and 
delivers groaning creation from its groans and 
from the curse, which rests upon it, then He 
will reconcile all things. All things in earth 
and in heaven will be brought into their right, 
their holy and glorious condition; of this the 
Old Testament prophetic Word bears abundant 
witness. The wicked dead, however, are not 
included in the ‘“‘all things.’’* 

The reconciliation of all who have belawadk 

*Compare with Phil. ii:9-11. In Philippians, where 
Christ’s exaltation is described and the fact is revealed, 
that every being must acknowledge Him as Lord (not as 
Saviour), a forced acknowledgment, as far as the lost are 
concerned, things under the earth are mentioned. 
But not so in Col. i:20. For things under the earth there 
is no reconciliation. 


God’s Masterpiece. 101 


is an accomplished facts How the 20th and 
21st verses of the first chapter of Colossians 
correspond with the second chapter of Ephe- 
sians needs no further explanation. But in 
the verse before us in Ephesians, the individual 
reconciliation is not in view. The two, believ- 
ing Jews and Gentiles, are reconciled in one 
body unto God, and Christ is the head of that 
body. And by the cross the enmity was also 
slain. This again refers to the law. It is not 
the law which is slain, but it is that which is 
so fully developed in the Epistle to the Romans. 
All who are in the one body are dead to the 
law. ‘‘Wherefore, my brethren, ye also were 
made dead to the law through the body of 
Christ; that ye should be joined to another, 
even to Him that was raised from the dead, 
that we should bring fruit unto God’’ (Romans 
vii:4). 

D. The Peace and Reconciliation Preached. 
Verse 16. 


“And He came and preached peace to you, who were afar 
off, and to them that were nigh.” 

a. To those afar off (Gentiles). 

b. To them that were nigh (Jews). 

The two classes are again mentioned. We, 
as Gentiles, are afar off and the Jews are they 
who were nigh, though, morally, as far off as 
the Gentiles. It has been argued from this 


102 God’s Masterpiece. 


verse that the Lord Jesus Christ never preached 
in person, after His resurrection, this peace 
to these two classes. Inasmuch as it says 
“He came,” it is claimed that it means His 
“spiritual coming” in which thisis accomplished. 
But He promised another comforter, who was 
to come and who came, the Holy Spirit. He 
has taken His place and through His Spirit He 
sends forth this blessed message to Gentiles 
and to Jews, “I create the fruit of the lips; 
Peace, peace to him, that is far off, and to 
him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will 
heal him. But the wicked are like the troubled 
sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up 
mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my 
God, to the wicked” (Isaiah lvii:19-21). This 
is an Old Testament anticipation of what was 
to come; a hint of what was in the mind of 
God and which is now fully revealed in this 
Epistle of the Masterpiece of God. When 
He comes again as the Prince of Peace, when 
His church, composed of all who were made 
nigh, is complete, He will speak peace to the 
nations, and they will learn war no more. 


E. The gracious Result. Verse 18. 


“For through Him we both have access by one Spirit 
unto the Father.” 


The Holy Spirit brings the message of peace 


God’s Masterpiece. 103 


and reconciliation to Gentiles and Jews. The 
believing sinner is put by the Spirit into the 
one body, and both, Gentiles and Jews, have 
by one Spirit access unto the Father. The 
Jew never knew anything whatever about 
“access unto the Father.’’ He had a taber- 
nacle and the way into the Holiest was not yet 
made known. The Gentile was “‘without God’”’ 
altogether. Something far more blessed is now 
made known. All believers are made nigh and 
born again, indwelt by the Holy Spirit, they 
belong to the family of God and cry by the one 
Spirit, given to all, ““Abba, Father.” 

Our Lord spoke of this to the woman at 
the well of Samaria. “But the hour cometh, 
and now is, when the true worshippers shall 
worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for 
the Father seeketh such to worship Him” 
(John iv:23). Made nigh by blood; worship- 
ping in the Holiest; calling upon God as Father; 
a continued access into His presence by His 
own Spirit—these are blessed realities for all, 
who are in Christ, members of His body. But 
how little we enter into the full enjoyment of 
this! 

We are led still higher. The last four verses 
form a climax. What Gentiles were without 
Christ, what Gentiles are in Christ, we have 
learned from the preceding verses. The middle 


104 God’s Masterpiece. 


wall, the law of commandments in ordinances, 
is broken down. The enmity was slain by 
the cross. Believing Gentiles are made nigh 
by the blood of Christ. Both Jews and 
Gentiles constitute in Christ one new man and 
both have access by one Spirit unto the Father. 
And now we hear more of that new man, the 
body of Christ, that is the church. 


3. The Relationship of the Masterpiece. 
A. The Changed Condition. Verse 19. 


“Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, 
but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household 
of God.” 

a. No more strangers and foreigners. 

b. Fellow-citizens with the Saints. 

c. Of the household of God. 

“Now therefore’ Gentiles are no longer that 
which they were without Christ. Then they 
were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel 
and strangers from the promises; but now, in 
Christ, they are fellow-citizens with the Saints, 
and of the household of God. A most blessed 
transformation! Fellow-citizens with the Saints 
does not mean that they have been brought 
into the commonwealth of Israel. The con- 
ception that the church, the body of Christ, is 
the commonwealth of Israel continued in a 
spiritual form, is incorrect. Grace has in- 


God’s Masterpiece. 105 


troduced both, believing Jews and believing 
Gentiles, into a higher sphere and into a far 
more precious fellowship. Their fellowship is 
with the Saints, which means fellowship with 
the whole company of the redeemed. This 
fellowship will some day find its blessed reali- 
zation and consummation in the Kingdom to 
come, which the Saints receive and which 
cannot be moved (Heb. xii:28). Abraham, the 
father of the faithful, by faith, “looked for a 
city, which hath foundations, whose builder 
and maker is God” (Heb. xi:10). And _ be- 
lieving Gentiles, once without God and without 
hope, are brought into the same fellowship 
and look for the same heavenly city. ‘For 
our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also 
we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ” 
(Phil. iii:20). But more than that, they are 
of the “household of God,’’ members of the 
family of God by the new birth. But the 
words “household of God’’ are to be connected 
with the verse which follows. Believing Gen- 
tiles constitute, with believing Jews, the house 
of God. The masterpiece of God, the church, 
is therefore now described under the figure of 
a building. 


B. The Church as the Building. Verse 20. 


“And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and 


106 God’s Masterpiece. 


prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner- 
stone.” 

a. The foundation. 

b. The chief cornerstone, 


In the first chapter of this Epistle the church 
is called ‘“‘His body.” In the second chapter 
the church is compared with a building, which 
groweth unto an holy temple and which is 
the habitation of God through the Spirit. 

In the Old Testament God had a building 
in which He manifested His presence and His 
Glory. The tabernacle in the wilderness and 
the temple of Solomon were shadows of the 
church, which God is now building. The 
foundation upon which the church as the house 
is built, we find mentioned first. And it is of 
importance that we examine this foundation 
closely. One of the common mistakes con- 
cerning the foundation upon which the church 
is built, is that, which claims that the foundation 
are the prophets of the Old Testament. Ac- 
cording to this view the Old Testament Saints . 
belonged to the church, and the church itself was 
therefore in existence throughout the previous 
dispensations. Adam, Enoch, Noah, Moses 
and all who believed the promises of God are 
therefore taken to be members of the church. 
This view is often based upon the words we 
have under consideration, that the church is 


God’s Masterpiece. 107 


built upon the foundation of the apostles and 
prophets. Now if the prophets were mentioned 
before the apostles, there might be a possibility 
that the prophets of the Old Testament are 
meant. But it says “‘apostles and prophets.” 
They are the New Testament apostles and 
prophets. Chapter iii:5 gives positive evidence 
on this whole question. The church is called 
a mystery “which in other ages was not made 
known unto the sons of men, as it is now re- 
vealed unto His holy apostles and prophets by 
the Spirit.” To this we may add the words of 
our Lord at Cesarea Philippi when He said to 
Peter ‘‘upon this rock I will build my church.” 
The church up to that time was not yet in 
existence, nor was it in process of building, 
during the days of the earthly ministry of our 
Lord, but the building of the church was still 
a matter of the future. When the Holy Spirit 
came on the day of Pentecost, the church began 
and subsequently the same Spirit revealed the 
mystery hidden in former ages. 

Another error in connection with the foun- 
dation of the church is the conception that 
the apostles are the foundation. The Romish 
“church” teaches this, closely followed by 
ritualistic protestant ‘‘churches” which speak 
of apostolic succession. These claim that they 
possess the successors of the apostles and, 


108 God’s Masterpiece. 


therefore, their “‘churches’” have a succession 
of foundations. A queer building that is! And 
other protestant sects trace their beginnings to 
some man who ‘‘founded”’ their church. All thisis 
wrong and against what God has accomplished 
in His Masterpiece. In this way the-enemy 
has marred and corrupted the Truth of God. 

But what does it mean “built upon the 
foundation of the apostles and prophets?” 
Are they themselves, in their persons, Paul, 
Peter, James and others, the foundation upon 
which the church rests as a building? Not 
at all. It is true the Apostle Paul writes to 
the Corinthians, ‘‘I have laid the foundation.” 
But that does not mean that he is the foun- 
dation. in connection with the same state- 
ment, Paul declares, ‘‘For other foundation 
can no man lay than that is laid, which is 
Jesus Christ” (1 Cor. iii:9-11). He speaks of 
Christians as ‘‘God’s building,’’ the church. 
Paul and the other apostles are the foundation 
in what they taught and still teach in their 
epistles. The Lord Jesus Christ and the doc- 
trine of Christ, this is the foundation. This 
the apostles taught. It is their doctrine, given 
by the Holy Spirit come down from heaven. 
It is not the question of being the foundation, 
but building upon that foundation, as taught 
by the apostles and prophets. 


God’s Masterpiece. 109 


When Peter had uttered his inspired con- 
fession ‘“‘Thou art the Christ, the Son of the 
living God,”’ our Lord announced, as mentioned 
above, the future building of His church. “And 
I say also unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build my church; and the gates 
of hades shall not prevail against it’’ (Matt. xvi: 
18). Satan has invented the abominable lie, that 
Peter is the rock foundation of the church. 
But the rock is not Peter, but Christ Himself. 
The apostle Peter significantly received no 
messages to the church and his epistles give no 
revelation concerning the church. Only once 
doés he touch upon the fact that believers are 
God’s building. And when he did, the Spirit 
of God guided his pen to answer the perversion 
of the truth as found in ritualistic Christendom. 
The Holy Spirit anticipated the fatal errors to 
come. Peter writes of the Lord Jesus as the 
living stone, and believers he calls “living 
stones” built up a spiritual house (1 Peter i1:4-5). 

So it is Christ, and the doctrine of Christ, 
which is the foundation. ‘The church’s one 
foundation is Jesus Christ her Lord.’’ But He 
likewise is the chief cornerstone. Of this also 
Peter testifies. ‘Wherefore also it is contained 
in the Scripture, Behold I lay in Zion a chief 
corner stone, elect, precious; and he that 
believeth on Him shall not be confounded.” 


110 God’s Masterpiece. 


It is a quotation from Isaiah xxviii:16. But 
who can tell out the preciousness of this 
blessed One, upon whom everything rests! 
Another passage to be considered in connection 
with Christ as the chief cornerstone is Psalm 
cxvili:22, “The stone which the builders 
refused is become the head stone of the corner.” 
Jewish tradition gives the story that, when 
Solomon’s temple was building, a stone was 
discovered hewn in a peculiar way. The 
builders refused that particular stone, only to 
discover later that it was fitted to be the 
cornerstone. Thismay betrue. But we know 
from the Gospels and the book of Acts, that 
the rejected stone is Christ. ‘‘Jesus saith unto 
them, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, the 
stone, which the builders rejected, the same 
is become the head of the corner: this is the 
Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?” 
(Matt. xxi:42). “‘This is the stone which was 
set at naught of you builders, which is become 
the head of the corner” (Acts iv:11). It was 
after Israel rejected Christ, that He became 
the chief cornerstone, the sure, the precious 
foundation, upon which the building rests. 

C. The Holy Temple. Verse 21. 

“In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth 
unto an holy temple in the Lord.” 


a. Fitly framed together. 
b. Growing unto an holy temple. 


God’s Masterpiece. 111 


The building of God’s Masterpiece is fitly 
framed together, which means, that God puts 
it together in His own marvellous way. Be- 
lievers are living stones. They possess the 
same life, which is in Christ, the living stone. 
Needless to say, that only those, who are born 
again, belong to that building. From the 
first chapter of this Epistle we learned that all 
those who belong to this elect body were known 
and chosen of God before the foundation of the 
world. The entire building is therefore planned 
by God and every stone has its proper place. 
This is a marvellous fact. Solomon’s temple 
gives a little illustration of this. When that 
temple was building hammer, axe and tools 
of iron were not heard. “And the house, 
when it was building, was built of stone made 
ready before it was brought thither, so that 
there was neither hammer nor axe, nor any tool 
of iron heard in the house, while it was build- 
ing.” Every stone was prepared before hand 
and fitted into the place where it belonged. 
How beautifully it illustrates the fitting to- 
gether of the house, His church! He chooses 
and prepares the material and puts each in its 
proper place.* What a contrast with man’s 





*Read in connection with this 1 Cor. xii. The same 
truth is there revealed in connection with the teaching of 
the Church as the body of Christ. 


112 God’s Masterpiece. 


methods in trying to increase ‘‘church-mem- 
bership!” The divine revelation is forgotten. 
Christendom has departed from the faith in 
these revelations concerning the one church 
and its architect. But all the confusion, the 
wrong conceptions and attending evils, cannot 
frustrate the purposes of the Lord. He is 
building His church. He takes the material 
and puts it as living stones in the place where 
it belongs. This is the work of His Spirit. 
And in the midst of all the confusion, the 
clamoring voices, the spurious revivals, the 
ecclesiastical-political hurry of world-reforma- 
tion, the work goes on quietly, but steadily. 
The church is the temple of God. Some day 
that growing temple will be complete. The last 
stone will be put in and then the building, which 
was fitly framed together on earth, will become 
the holy temple of the Lord in glory. All this 
transcends everything which was revealed by 
the Old Testament prophets. The eternal 
destiny of this holy temple no saint can fully » 
understand. 

D. The Habitation of God in the Spirit. 
Verse 22. 

“In whom ye also are being built in together an habita- 
tion of God in the Spirit.” 

This is still another climax in this rich Epistle 
of God’s greatest work. The third person of 


God’s Masterpiece. 113 


the Godhead is now mentioned. He dwells in 
the church, because He indwells every in- 
dividual believer. This is a present fact. 
We are the habitation of God. As He dwelt 
of old in the tabernacle, so He dwells in the 
church through the Spirit. He does no longer 
dwell in an earthly house. The conception of 
a church building being a “holy place” which 
we must call “the house of the Lord” or “a 
temple” is absolutely wrong. It is the Jewish 
idea. God does no longer dwell in an earthly 
house and yet He has His habitation here. 
Wherever two or three are gathered together 
in His name, there He is in the midst; that isa 
church and the habitation of God through 
the Spirit. ‘Even now in the state of imper- 
fection, by the Spirit dwelling in the hearts of 
believers, that God has His habitation in the 
church; and then when the growth and increase 
of that church shall be completed, it will be 
still in and by the Holy Spirit fully penetrating 
and possessing the whole glorified church, 
that the Father will dwell in it forever.”’* 
Alas! how this wonderful truth is not alone 
completely lost sight of, but rejected by men, 
who claim to be Christians. How great is 
the prostitution of the church! May we 
remember these great truths and individually 
*Dean Alford in Greek New Testament. 


114 God’s Masterpiece. 


walk in them, knowing that we are the habita- 
tion, the dwelling of God. Out of that con- 
sciousness flows both our blessedness and our 
responsibility. What influence this blessed 
revelation of the Masterpiece of God should 
have upon our life and conduct! Daily we 
ought to have it vividly before our hearts 
that we are the habitation of God. ‘‘What? 
know ye not that your body is the temple of 
the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom ye have of 
God, and you are not your own’ (1 Cor. vi:19). 


The Third Chapter 


The Ministry of the Mystery of the 
Masterpiece 


Chapter III: 1-13. 
A. Paul the Prisoner of Jesus Christ. Verse 1. 


“For this cause, I, Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ, for 
you Gentiles.” 

The great Apostle begins to speak of himself 
and the mystery which had been made known 
unto him. In the brief word of greeting, 
with which this epistle begins, we find his name 
mentioned as an Apostle of Jesus Christ by 
the will of God. Then followed at once that 
marvellous unfolding of the Masterpiece of 
God in all its riches and precious depths. And 
now he is to tell more fully of the mystery of 
the Masterpiece; and as it was revealed to 
Him as the Apostle to the Gentiles, he writes, 
“T,. Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ, for you 
Gentiles.” He became the prisoner of Jesus 
Christ, for the Gentiles, when on his last 
visit to Jerusalem, he related his experience, 
speaking from the stairs, which led into the 
castle, and addressing the Jews in the temple- 
court. When he told them that the Lord had 
said unto him, “Depart, for I will send thee 


116 God’s Masterpiece. 


far hence unto the Gentiles,” the Jewish mob 
would not listen any longer, but cried out, 
“‘Away with such a fellow from the earth!’ 
(Acts xxii:21-22). In this way he became the 
prisoner of the Lord for the Gentiles. From 
the prison in Rome the most blessed messages 
were sent forth by the Holy Spirit through 
Paul. 


B. His Ministry concerning the Master- 
biece. Verses 2-5. 


“If indeed ye have heard of the dispensation of the Grace 
of God which is given me toward you, how that by revela- 
tion He made known unto me the mystery (as I wrote 
before in few words, whereby when ye read, ye may under- 
stand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ), which in 
other generations was not made known unto the sons of 
men, as it is now revealed unto His holy apostles and 
prophets by the Spirit.” 


. Made known by revelation. 

. The Mystery of Christ. 

Hidden in other generations. 

. Now made known by the Spirit. 


oe oat) 


He speaks of that which they had known, 
and learned from his oral teaching, that the 
Lord had entrusted him with the dispensation* 
of the grace of God towards the Gentiles. 
The Gospel of Grace in all its marvellous riches, 


*Administration or stewardship. 


God’s Masterpiece. 117 


flowing out to the Gentiles, was given to Paul 
to proclaim. He spoke of this Gospel which he 
preached as “‘my Gospel.’ In defense of that 
Gospel, the dispensation of the grace of God, 
he wrote to the Galatians, “But though we, 
or an angel from heaven, preach any other 
Gospel unto you than that which we have 
preached unto you, let him be accursed. As 
we said before, so say I now again, if anyone 
preach any other Gospel unto you than that 
ye have received, let him be accursed.” These 
are solemn words. They have occasionally 
been termed a passionate outburst of Paul, 
when he found his authority belittled by the 
judaizing teachers, which troubled the Gala- 
tians. They are not that at all. The Holy 
Spirit bears testimony in these words to the 
fact that he had received a dispensation of the 
grace of God towards the Gentiles, and that the 
Gospel, which he so faithfully prolcaimed, was 
given to him by revelation of Jesus Christ. 
It was therefore a most serious and solemn 
thing to interfere with that Gospel, or to teach 
anything which was not in harmony with it. 
The curse of God must surely rest upon those 
who pervert or counterfeit that Gospel. How 
much this is done in the days of apostasy 
needs no further illustration. The day assur- 
edly comes, when the divine anathema will be 


118 God’s Masterpiece. 


executed upon Christendom, which has set 
aside the true Gospel and proclaims what is 
not the Gospel at all. 

The Apostle had received this double minis- 
try, the Gospel and the ministry concerning 
the church (Col. i:23, 25). Both are insepa- 
rably connected. Indeed they were revealed 
in germ at his conversion. He saw on the 
road to Damascus the Lord in His Glory. 
The Gospel he received proclaims to the sinner, 
who believes on the Son of God, a blessed iden- 
tification with the risen and glorified Lord. 
Then he heard the Lord speaking to him, 
“Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” He 
persecuted Christians and not Christ, but he 
learned then, that believers in Christ are 
one with Him. This is the germ of the truth 
concerning the church. In Ephesians the stew- 
ardship or dispensation concerns mostly the 
church. 

This mystery was made known unto him by 
revelation. The word mystery needs a brief - 
definition. It is not something mysterious, 
but it means that which was unknown, hidden 
from man, till it pleased God to make it known 
by revelation. When our Lord spoke of the 
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven in Matthew 
xill, He said: “I will utter things which have 
been kept secret from the foundation of the 


God’s Masterpiece. 119 


world.’”’ The Apostle Paul often speaks of 
the mysteries made known. See 1 Tim. 
iii:16; Col. i:26-27; Col. ii:2; Eph. v:32; 2 Thess. 
ii:7; Rom. xi:26. He reminds the readers of 
this Epistle that he had mentioned the mystery 
before in a few words. Without doubt this 
directs our attention to the first chapter of the 
Epistle. Then he had stated “the mystery 
of the Christ.”” What is it? Not merely the 
statement contained in the last verse con- 
cerning the church, as the body of Christ, but 
Christ Himself. Christ whom God raised from 
the dead, whom He set at His own right hand 
in the heavenly places, under whom God hath 
put all things and who is the Head of His 
body. This body is the church, His own 
fullness. 

This mystery of a risen Christ, who has a 
body composed of believing Jews and Gentiles, 
is the mystery, which, in other ages, was not 
made known unto the sons of men. It is 
the mystery which was kept secret since the 
world began (Rom. xvi:25). From the be- 
ginning of this Epistle we learned that the 
church was in the counsel of God before 
the foundation of the world, but He let ages 
go past till He was pleased to make it known. 
This statement settles the question once for 
all concerning the existence of the church, 


120 God’s Masterpiece. 


the body of Christ, in and during the Old 
Testament dispensations. Yet it is one of 
the most widespread views that the church 
existed from the beginning of creation and 
the words of promise contained in the Old 
Testament prophetic Word are the promises of 
the church, and its glorious future on the 
earth, in reigning over the nations. Before 
this mystery could be made known, the Son of 
God had to come into the world and go to the 
cross to make propitiation for sins. Further- 
more, He had to ascend upon high and take 
His exalted position at the right hand of God, 
and the Holy Spirit had to come down from 
heaven. On the day of Pentecost the church 
came into existence. The assembled believers 
in Jerusalem were not alone filled with the 
Spirit, but also baptized by the Spirit into one 
body. But even on that glorious day, when 
the evidence was so wonderfully given, that 
the One who had died on the cross is risen, and 
at God’s right hand, the truth concerning the _ 
church, the mystery, was not made known. 
Peter did not preach a word about the church. 
The Lord chose Saul of Tarsus, the persecutor 
of the church, as steward of this hidden mys- 
tery. It wasrevealed tohim. When he states, 
“it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and 
prophets by the Spirit,’ there is no clash 


God’s Masterpiece. 121 


whatever with the previous claim of the 
Apostle, ‘“He made known unto me the mys- 
tery.” The apostles and prophets (New Testa- 
ment prophets and teachers) received also the 
truth concerning the mystery, but as under 
him, to whom the Lord gave the revelation 
first of all. They were acquainted through 
Paul’s revelation with the mystery, and the 
Holy Spirit led them into the knowledge of it. 


C. The Mystery Stated. Verse 6. 


“That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the 
same body, and partakers of His promise in Christ by the 
- Gospel.” 

a. Gentiles—fellow-heirs. 
b. Of the same body. 
c. Partakers of His promise in Christ. 


We look at these statements separately. 
That Gentiles should be fellow-heirs* with 
Jewish believers in a distinct body is a new 
revelation. The Old Testament abounds in 
promises for the Gentile nations. These prom- 
ises speak of righteousness and peace, which 
the nations of the earth are toenjoy. But they 
all stand connected with the age which is yet 
to come. That age is introduced by the 


*Literally: Joint-heirs, joint-members and joint-par- 
takers. 


122 God’s Masterpiece. 


visible manifestation of the Lord. At that 
time the people Israel will receive the place of 
headship among the nations. The Gentiles 
will join themselves to Israel, and Israel has 
the promise that the nations will seek the 
light and glory revealed in their midst. “And 
the nations shall come to thy light, and kings 
to the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine 
eyes round about and see; all they gather 
themselves together, they come to thee. Thy 
sons shall come from far, and thy daughters 
shall be nursed at thy side. Then shalt thou 
see, and be filled with delight; and thine heart 
shall thrill, and be enlarged; because the 
abundance of the sea shall be converted unto 
thee, the forces of the nations shall come unto 
thee” (Is. 1x:3-5). Many similar passages 
could be quoted, but in not one of them is it 
even hinted at that Gentiles will be joint-heirs 
with Israel. In this mystery of the church 
there is revealed an inheritance, which is far 
superior to any inheritance promised to Israel 
and to the nations in the coming Kingdom. 
Christ, whom God has raised from the dead, 
and who is in the presence of God, is also made 
by God the heir of all things. Believers in 
Him are called ‘“‘joint-heirs with Christ’ 
because they are sons of God (Rom. viii:17). 
Both believing Jews and believing Gentiles 


God’s Masterpiece. 123 


are joint-heirs with Christ, and in the future 
day of His glory, they will rule and reign with 
Him. 

Then “of the same body’ joint-members. 
The believing Jews on the day of Pentecost 
were formed, as already stated, into one body 
by the Holy Spirit. They became then one 
spirit with the Lord, and that marvellous 
organism, the body of Christ, had its beginning. 
Gentiles are joint-members of the same body; 
they are united with all the saints in one 
body. And therefore believing Gentiles are 
joint-partakers of His promises in Christ by 
the Gospel. These promises again do not 
concern the earth, but they concern the 
glory tocome. Israel’s promises will be fulfilled, 
and they will be under Christ as King, when 
He comes to reign. But the body of Christ 
has far greater promises in Christ. The body 
will be joined to the head, share the glory of 
the head and be where the head is. The Head, 
Christ, and the Body, the Church, composed 
of believing Jews and Gentiles, joint-heirs, 
joint-members, joint partakers—this is the 
mystery. 


D. Paul, the Minister of the Masterpiece, 
Verse 7. 


““Whereof I was made a minister, according to the gift 


124 God’s Masterpiece. 


of the grace of God given unto me according to the effectual 
working of His power.”’ 


a. According to the gift of His Grace. 

b. According to the working of His Power. 

The Apostle Paul states once more the fact 
of his divinely given ministry. It was the 
gift of the Grace of God unto him; the Grace 
which called him and made him the steward 
of God’s highest revelation. And this steward- 
ship distinguished him from the other Apostles; 
for this reason Paul refers to it so often. He 
knows what was committed unto Him. The 
Grace which was given to him was linked 
with the manifestation of “His power’’; it 
was “‘according to the effectual (literal: ener- 
getic) working of His power.’’ This statement 
must be linked with Chapter i:19. One of 
the things Paul mentions in the prayer of the 
first chapter is the knowledge of the exceeding 
greatness of His power, which is to usward. 
‘“And what is the exceeding greatness of His 
power to usward who believe, according to 
the working of His mighty power.’ We 
remarked on this verse that this mighty power, 
which raised Christ from the dead and made 
Him Head over all things, is to usward in a 
three-fold way. When we are quickened with 
Christ; when we believe and receive the gift of 
God, eternal life, as a present possession, that 


God’s Masterpiece. 125 


power is manifested. It is on our side in our 
walk; in the conflict, in trials we can count on 
it. In the future this mighty power will be 
to usward, when the shout of the Lord will be 
heard from heaven, when the dead in Christ 
are raised and living believers are caught up 
in clouds to meet the Lord in the air. The 
great Apostle to whom these blessed truths 
were so fully revealed experienced in himself 
the working of this mighty power. He knew 
the exceeding greatness of His power. It 
worked in him and through him. It enabled 
him to serve and to suffer. Nor must we forget 
the remarkable experience he made, when he 
was caught up into paradise, and heard un- 
speakable words (2 Cor. xii:l-4). “As the 
chosen interpreter of God’s hidden mysteries, 
and the special expounder of the church, it was 
fitting, that he should be so initiated into the 
realities of heaven, as to become an unfaltering, 
and, as it were, familiar witness when declaring 
things unseen.” The gift of His Grace and 
the working of His Power are seen together in 
Paul as the minister of the Masterpiece. 


E. The Proclamation of the Unsearchable 
Riches. Verse 8. 

“Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is 
this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles 
the unsearchable riches of Christ.” 


126 God’s Masterpiece. 


a. The Apostle’s humility. 

b. The unsearchable riches of Christ. 

Saul of Tarsus, the young Pharisee, of the 
stock of Israel, the tribe of Benjamin, an 
Hebrew of the Hebrews, as he described him- 
self (Phil. iii:5) and exceedingly zealous of 
the traditions of his fathers (Gal. i:14), was no 
doubt filled with pride. Grace wrought a 
marvellous change in him. The name Paul 
means ‘“‘little,’’ expressing the beautiful humil- 
ity, which characterized the life of this chosen 
instrument. In the Glory-light which shone 
around him on the way to Damascus, he had 
seen his own vileness and unworthiness. He 
had seen the Lord. This vision broke him 
down completely, so that he speaks of himself 
ever after in terms of self-abasement. “For I 
am the least of the apostles, that am not meet 
to be called an apostle, because I persecuted 
the church of God’ (1 Cor. xv:9). “And I 
thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled 
me, for that he counted me faithful, putting 
me into the ministry; who was before a blas- 
phemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; but 
I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly 
in unbelief’ (1 Tim. i:12-13). He called 
himself ‘‘the chief of sinners.’”’ And here in 
the Epistle in which he unfolds through the 
Spirit of God the highest revelation concerning 


God’s Masterpiece. 127 


the Masterpiece of God, he takes the very 
lowest place. He called himself ‘‘the least of 
the Apostles’; but now he goes deeper than 
that. ‘‘Less than the least of all saints’ is 
what he thinks of himself. He might have 
made much of his superior knowledge, of the 
great revelation given to him, and he might 
have paraded a kind of an official pride as the 
Apostle to the Gentiles. But the high calling, 
the mystery made known unto him, the blessed 
ministry given to him, produced far different 
results. It humbled him into the dust before 
God. It could not be otherwise. Grace, 
such wondrous grace, as revealed through Paul, 
‘reaching down to such as we are, lifting so high 
with such an unspeakable calling and destiny, 
will ever humble us into the dust to give Him 
the glory. Grace necessitates this. The more 
we know of the blessed mystery of God’s 
Masterpiece, the less we shall think of ourselves 
and delight to take the lowest place. Truth 
learned or knowledge gained in spiritual things, 
which does not humble us and make us think 
less and less of ourselves, is a dangerous thing. 
Truth, must ever break us down and lead into 
self-judgment and self-abasement. 

And how little of this true humility, mani- 
fested by the great Apostle, is seen in our 
days! Many desire to be teachers. How 


128 God’s Masterpiece. 


often a novice, flattered by others on account 
of a little gift, becomes lifted up with pride and 
falls into the crime of the devil (1 Tim. iii:6). 
Instead of being humble, such are puffed up. 
They glory in the little knowledge and forget 
what is written: ‘““What hast thou that thou 
didst not receive? Now if thou didst receive 
it, why doest thou glory, as if thou hadst not 
received it?” (1 Cor. iv:7). Their pride of 
heart leads them to claim that they have 
received “‘new light.’”’ No one before them, 
even the most blessed teachers of bygone 
days, knew the truth in such fulness, as 
they have discovered it. They make the 
boast that they follow no man, but read 
exclusively the Bible. More than _ once 
have they been found out to be plagiarists, 
reproducing almost verbatim the works of 
others. Their attempt to be original leads 
them into error. Such men ought to be 
shunned, for they belong to that class against 
which the Holy Spirit warns. ‘“‘Also of your 
own selves, shall men arise, speaking perverse 
things, to draw away disciples after them’ 
(Acts xx:30). Treat with suspicion such who 
claim to possess more light and knowledge in 
divine things than others, and who are puffed 
up with pride. A spiritual Christian will 
soon find that the utterances and writings of 


God’s Masterpiece. 129 


such teachers, though beautifully worded, leave 
the heart empty. The power of God is not there. 

Paul speaks of what he had to preach as the 
gift of grace. This grace enabled him to preach 
among the Gentiles “the unsearchable riches of 
Christ.’ This means more than the preaching 
of salvation to the Gentiles. What riches 
these are, which God has revealed in Christ! 
They are riches of grace, riches of inheritance 
and riches of glory. Christ is the mystery 
of God, in which are hid all the treasures of 
wisdom and knowledge (Col. ii:2, 3). And 
these riches are unsearchable; we cannot 
fathom their depths. 


F. The Purpose of the Mystery. Verses 9-13. 


“And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the 
mystery, which from the beginning of the world has been 
hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ; to the 
intent that now unto the principalities and powers in 
heavenly places might be known by the church the mani- 
fold wisdom of God. According to the eternal purpose in 
Christ Jesus our Lord; in whom we have boldness and 
access by faith of him. Wherefore I desire that ye faint 
not at my tribulations for you, which is your glory.” 

a. To make all men see. Verse 9. 

b. To show to principalities and powers the wisdom of 
God. Verse 10. 

c. According to the eternal purpose. Verse 11. 

d. Access with confidence. Verse 12. 

e. The tribulations of the minister of the mystery. 
Verse 13. 


130 God’s Masterpiece. 


His ministry in the preaching of the un- 
searchable riches of Christ was also to make 
all men see the fellowship of the mystery. 
Those who are saved, and therefore belong to 
Christ, are meant. The natural man without 
a spiritual nature cannot grasp these things, 
but the believer, Jew and Gentile, is to see 
“the fellowship of the mystery.”’ The better 
rendering is “‘to enlighten all (with the knowl- 
edge) what is the administration of the mys- 
tery, hidden throughout the ages in God, who 
created all things by Jesus Christ.’”’ The 
word “‘administration’”” (economy) is the same 
as dispensation; the mystery is the one stated 
in verse 6, “that the Gentiles should be fellow- 
heirs, etc.,’’ the mystery of the one body, the 
church. Before we learned that this mystery 
was not made known in other ages. This is 
once more emphasized by the statement that 
the mystery was hidden in God from the 
beginning of the world.* How necessary 
therefore is the knowledge of this hidden 
mystery, but now made known, to the people 
of God! Alas! this great mystery of God 
has been obscured and hidden by the enemy 
of the truth. We see about us the sad results 
springing from the ignorance of this mystery. 





*See also Romans xvi:25; Col. 1:26. 


God’s Masterpiece. 131 


May all those who acknowledge still the 
authority of the Word of God, and desire 
to please the Lord by obedience, enter 
deep into this most precious revelation and 
carry out in a practical way the truth of 
what the church is. This is the way in 
which we can enjoy the unsearchable riches 
of Christ. 

The tenth verse leads us still deeper. While 
the mystery is made known to human beings, 
the principalities and powers. in heavenly 
places learn to know by the church the manifold 
wisdom of God. The principalities and powers 
are heavenly beings, the host of angels. Little 
do we know of these unfallen beings, their 
habitations in the heavenlies and their minis- 
trations. Some day, when we shall know as 
we are known, these mysteries will all be 
known to the heirs of glory. For in the day of 
His manifestation (and our manifestation with 
Him) the angels shall worship Him (Heb. 
i:6, 7) and the redeemed will know these celes- 
tial beings. They have, as the creatures of 
God who know Him and His works, an intense 
interest in the affairs of this earth, one of the 
smallest body in the vast universe. In the 
hour of creation they sang for joy (Job 
Xxxvili:7). Throughout the history of the Old 
Testament we hear them mentioned and often 


132 God’s Maslerpiece. 


they appeared on earth as the servants and 
messengers of Jehovah. Intelligently they en- 
tered into all His ways and works, as He dealt 
with the earth in mercy and in judgment. 
They beheld the wisdom of God in many 
ways. Yet what God had purposed before the 
foundation of the world, the hidden mystery, 
was not known by them. Prophets prophesied 
of things to come and searched to know the 
meaning, and angels desired to look into these 
things (1 Pet. i:11-12). 

Gabriel was sent to the virgin to announce 
the incarnation. With what wonder those 
heavenly beings must have looked on, as He, 
who is in the bosom of the Father, laid His 
glory by and took the creature’s place! They 
hovered near the place where He was born and 
broke out in their heavenly praise. Angels 
ministered unto Him after His temptation in 
the wilderness. No doubt they were with 
Him all along the path, He so patiently went 
in His humiliation. An angel appeared in 
Gethsemane to strengthen Him. With what 
awe they must have stood by when wicked 
men nailed Him to the cross, when the prince 
of glory died! The angel of the Lord descended 
from heaven and rolled back the stone from 
the tomb. They were present at His resur- 
rection. They witnessed the farewell scene 


God’s Masterpiece. 133 


on Olivet and gave the message of hope to the 
disciples. When He ascended up on high 
these principalities and powers beheld the 
glorious victor, for it is written that He was 
“seen of angels” (1 Tim. iii:16). With what 
joy they must have seen Him enter God’s 
presence far above themselves, made so much 
better than the angels! What Hallelujahs 
they must have cried in heavenly ecstasy, 
when the Man Christ Jesus took His place at 
the right hand of God! 

And now they behold the manifold wisdom 
of God by the Church. That, which no 
prophet ever saw, what no human being could 
have imagined, what no angel ever knew, what 
was known alone to God, took place. The 
church, the body of Christ, the fulness of Him 
that filleth all in all, began on earth with the 
Coming of the Holy Spirit on Pentecost. 
They see how this body is being built, fitly 
framed together, and they know the glory which 
awaits that body. Therefore now is made 
known unto them by the church the manifold 
wisdom of God. 

And because the angels possess this knowl- 
edge, they rejoice over one repenting sinner 
(Luke xv:7). They know what it means to 
the sinner, and more so to Christ, when another 
member is added to His body. Nor must we 


134 God’s Masterpiece. 


lose sight of another statement. “Are they 
not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister 
to them who shall be heirs of salvation” 
(Heb. i:14). We do not know how they 
minister to our need, but we know they do 
minister. : 

The principalities and powers in verse 10 do 
not include the evil spirits as mentioned in 
Chapter vi:12. Satan, no doubt, is forced 
likewise to see the power and wisdom of God 
by the church and his coming defeat and 
overthrow likewise. 

And all this great mystery now made known 
is “according to the eternal purpose, which 
He purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.’”” In 
Him we have boldness and access with con- 
fidence by the faith of Him. We can draw 
nigh to God and enter into His presence. 
The Greek word “parresia’’ translated by 
‘“‘boldness,’’ means really “‘free speech”— that 
is, the speaking of all. It is the blessed privi- 
lege of prayer. How sad, that we made nigh 
by blood, sharers of the unsearchable riches 
of Christ, are so slow in making use of such a _ 
wonderful privilege! 

Then Paul addressed His Gentile brethren 
personally. He desires that they faint not 
at his tribulations for them, which is their 
glory. The blessed instrument chosen to 


God’s Masterpiece. 135 


make known the mystery suffered in prison. 
Suffering belongs to the body, as the Head also 
suffered. We suffer with Him, that we may 
be also glorified with Him (Rom. viii:17). 
And Paul wrote in the Epistle to the Colossians, 
“Now, I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, 
and I fill up that which is behind of the tribu- 
lations of Christ in my flesh, for His body, which 
is the church” (Col. 1:24). 

Well may we glory in tribulations when we 
think of the glory which is ours in Christ. 


5. The Prayer unto the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. II[:14-21. 


The great unfolding of the Masterpiece of 
God has for its closing paragraph a prayer 
and a doxology. The first doxology we found 
in the opening chapter (verse 3), where also the 
first prayer is recorded. And now after all 
these riches were made known, the blessed 
truths, and the mystery of the Masterpiece, 
a second prayer, follows.. 


A. The Prayer. Verses 14-15. 


“For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in heaven and 
earth is named.” 


The first prayer is addressed to the God of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. We learned what is 
connected with that prayer. The petition is 


136 God’s Masterpiece. 


that “we might know.” The second prayer is 
addressed to the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ.* Here it is the question of love, that 
we may enjoy in our hearts the riches of His 
grace and possess Christ and His love, as a 
reality in our hearts. It is not enough that our 
minds grasp the marvellous revelations of the 
Masterpiece of God, and we receive the knowl- 
edge of the blessing wherewith He hath blessed 
us in Christ. The heart is to enter into all 
this. We must know in a practical way what 
it all means. The Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ is our Father. He is the Father of 
every family (not ‘“‘the whole family’’) in heaven 
and earth. And this does not mean that 
modern day error, the All-Fatherhood of God. 
The teaching that God is the Father of the 
entire human race and that every human being 
is a child of God, independent of faith in Christ, 
is unscriptural. But what does it mean “of 
whom every family in heaven and on earth is 
named?” Angels are here first of all viewed as 
a family over which God is Father. He is 
the Father of spirits. Israel will be the family 
of God in that blessed future day, when they 
will receive their promised blessing. Then 


*The best manuscripts omit “of our Lord Jesus Christ’’; 
but it is of little consequence; the Father is the Father 
of our Lord. 


God’s Masterpiece. 137 


Israel will be indeed God’s son on the earth and 
they will know Him as Father. The Gentiles, 
too, when they are blessed with believing Israel 
in the age to come, when righteousness reigns 
under the sceptre of the King of righteousness, 
will also be a family, and God will be known by 
them as a loving and merciful Father. But, 
while the position of angels and their rela- 
tionship to God is exalted and most blessed; 
and the position of Israel in the Millennium 
will be one of glory as a redeemed family; and 
saved Gentile nations will know the Father 
and be sharers of earthly glories—the relation- 
ship and blessing of the Masterpiece of God, 
the church, is infinitely higher than every other 
family in heaven and earth. 


B. The Petitions of the Prayer. Verses 16-19. 


“That he would grant you, according to the riches of his 
glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the 
inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; 
that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able 
to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and 
length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of 
Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled 
with all the fullness of God.” 

a. To be strengthened with might Sy. His Spirit in the 
inner Man. Verse 16. 

b. That Christ may dwell in your hearts. Verse 17. 

c. To comprehend with all saints. Verse 18. 

d. To know the love of Christ. Verse 19. 

e. To be filled unto the fullness of God. 


138 God’s Masterpiece. 


The first petition is that ‘““He would grant 
you, according to the riches of His Glory, to 
be strengthened with might by His Spirit in 
the inner man.” In the first chapter we saw 
our wonderful position in Christ ‘‘to the praise 
of the glory of His grace,’”’ and the prayer that 
we might know ‘“‘the riches of the glory of His 
inheritance in the Saints.’”” And here we have 
the standard given according to which we can 
address our petitions and claims to the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. It is according to 
the riches of His Glory. Thus we find it ex- 
pressed in another epistle. ‘But my God shall 
supply all your need according to His Riches 
in glory by Christ Jesus’? (Phil. iv:19). This 
is the treasure from which we can draw. Oh 
that we might remember it each time we bow 
our knees and address the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ! How poor and feeble our words 
are! Our petitions often sound as if they were 
addressed to a God, who is limited in His power 
or unwilling to shower His fullest blessing upon 
us. The difficulty with us is that we look too 
much to ourselves, to our failures, to our own 
struggling experience, and not enough to Him 
who is our Lord in Glory and the riches of 
glory, which are for us. How different our 
prayers would be if, before we approach Him, 
we would meditate first on Himself and the 


God’s Masterpiece. 139 


riches of glory, which are now on our side! 
Praise would burst forth from our lips and His 
Spirit would fill us. Let us reckon with these 
riches of His glory, the riches of Himself dis- 
played in Christ, in His Cross, in His presence at 
His own right hand; and may we constantly 
remember that our Father wants us to lay claim 
to them. And if we do that we shall indeed be 
strengthened with might by His Spirit in the 
inner man. The Holy Spirit dwells in our 
hearts. He is the Spirit of power. He is 
with us and in us to strengthen us. And if 
the Spirit of God is ungrieved in our hearts, He 
will constantly direct our attention to Him, 
who is altogether lovely. He reveals to our 
hearts ‘‘the Riches of His Glory” ever shining 
from the Word of God, the full display of God 
in the Person of His Son and all His Riches. 
It is then, when He does this work in us, that 
we are strengthened with might by His Spirit 
in the inner man.* 

And this leads us to the next petition, 
“That Christ may dwell in your hearts by 


*A strange delusion it is, when men and women seek by 
self-surrender, prolonged prayer and fasting, etc., to obtain 
the manifestation of the power of the Spirit of God. 
We have often found these misguided souls ignorant of 
the Glory of God as displayed in the Person and Work of 
Christ. They know nothing of God’s Masterpiece. 


140 God’s Masterpiece. 


faith.” Beautiful prayer! And what a won- 
derful thing it is! Christ is in the highest 
Glory, far above all principalities and 
powers. We beheld His Glory and His 
Future. All things are to be put under 
Him. And in Him we are. “In Christ” is 
the sweet music of this Epistle, sweet and 
precious to God and to those, who enter into 
these things in the Spirit. But here we are 
told that Christ Himself is to dwell in us. 
What a difference there is between an occasional 
guest in a home and one who really comes to 
abide. Christ is not to be a visitor in the heart 
of the believer, but He is to dwell there. 
Beautifully does this petition correspond with 
the words of our Lord. Read John xv, His 
‘parable of the Vine and the Branches. “Abide 
in Me and IJ in you,” ‘“We will come unto Him, 
and make our abode with him’ (John xiv:23). 
“T in them and Thou in Me,” thus He prayed 
before He went to the Cross. And Paul, 
through whom the Holy Spirit prayed this. 
prayer for the Saints of God, knew the blessed 
truth, for he confessed “I live, nevertheless 
not I, but Christ liveth in me’”’ (Gal. ii:20). 
And faith is to lay hold of it, while the Holy 
Spirit makes it a reality for us. And then to 
walk, to live, to act, to serve with the con- 
sciousness Christ dwells in my heart! The 


God’s Masterpiece. 141 


Christ of the Glory, the Christ of God in me 
and I in Him. As we are occupied with Him 
and His Glory, He dwells in our hearts by 
faith. We must be rooted and grounded in 
love. As we think of Christ, are occupied 
with Him and His Glory and He dwells in us, 
we shall indeed be rooted and grounded in that 
love which passeth knowledge. The roots are 
to go deeper and deeper into the love of God. 
While all aboutus is being parched spiritually, 
because the apostate masses turn their backs 
upon the Gospel and the Cross of Christ, the 
roots of our faith must take the strength and 
joy out of that never-failing source, the love of 
God. Then we shall be grounded like the 
deeply-rooted tree. And what can give stabil- 
ity in these last days but ‘“‘keeping ourselves 
in the love of God.” 

And then we come to the dimensions. We 
are to comprehend with all saints what is the 
breadth and length and depth and _ height. 
But who knows these dimensions? It will take 
eternity to comprehend it all. Look at the 
outstretched arms of the blessed One on the 
Cross! Here we behold breadth—‘‘Come unto 
Me all’ is the message as it comes from the 
cross. The length of His love is from eternity 
to eternity. The first chapter told us of the 
fact that before the foundation of the world He 


142 God’s Masterpiece. 


thought of us. He loved us before we ever 
existed. His love has no beginning and no end. 
It is an eternal love with which He loveth us. 

And the depth! How deep, oh! how deep did 
He go down! The manger? The boyhood 
days in Nazareth? The manhood where He 
had not where to lay His head? The life that 
spent and was spent? Ah! the depths are far 
deeper. Let the hours of darkness give the 
answer, when He descended into the deep, 
dark waters of judgment and God’s face was 
hidden from Him. Shall we ever know the 
depths of His love? 

The height takes us into the Heaven of 
heavens. Look into an opened heaven! See 
the Glory-light! Behold there on that throne, 
there sits, not an angel, but a man! ‘“‘We see 
Jesus who was made a little lower than the 
angels for the suffering of death, crowned 
with glory and honor.’’ And into that Glory 
He has taken us. His love could never 
stop short of that. Where He is there the 
objects of His love shall ever be with Him. 
“The Glory Thou hast given me I have given 
them.’ Oh! the breadth, the length, the 
depth, the height! 

“To know the love of Christ that passeth 
knowledge.”” We are to know something 
which passeth knowledge. It is a paradox. 


God’s Masterpiece. 143 


We know that love, and the more we know it 
the more it passeth our knowledge. Shall we 
ever know fully the love that passeth knowl- 
edge? This ever must be our blessed occupa- 
tion to know the love of Christ, which passeth 
knowledge. And what are the consequences? 
“That ye may be filled unto (not with) all the 
fullness of God.’ In the measure in which we 
know the love of Christ and comprehend the 
dimensions of this love, in the measure in which 
we have Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith 
and are rooted and grounded in love, in that 
measure shall we be filled unto all the fullness 
of God. 


6. The Great End Doxology. Verses 20-21. 


“Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly 
above all that we ask or think, according to the power that 
worketh in us, unto him be glory in the church in Christ 
Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.” 


One feels like dropping the pen and leave un- 
touched this wonderful outburst of praise 
given by the Holy Spirit. How blessed are 
these final words of the three greatest chapters 
of the Bible! And they are so fitting for the 
end of the description of God’s Masterpiece. 
He is able to do exceeding abundantly above 
all that we ask or think. Often these words 
have been misapplied. Some one prays for 


144 God’s Masterpiece. 


help in earthly things and pleads this promise. 
Accordingly the suppliant may expect a great 
deal more than he asked for. But his prayer 
for increase in temporal things remains unan- 
swered. We have a perfect right to make all 
our wants known before Him. He is interested 
in the smallest things in our life. Wecan come 
with all our earthly need to the throne of Grace 
and we shall never come in vain. The words 
in this doxology, however, have nothing to do 
with earthly needs and blessing. We are 
blessed in Christ with every spiritual blessing. 
It is for us to claim all these wonderful bless- 
ings which belong to us because we belong 
to Christ. Let us open our mouth wide! Ask 
for spiritual blessing, for the knowledge of that 
love which passeth knowledge; pray to be 
strengthened by the might of His Spirit in 
the inner man; pray for being filled unto all 
the fullness of God, yea, ask much and He 
will do exceeding abundantly above all that we 
asked. Exhaust all imagination in thinking 
on the glory of Christ and your glory in Him. 
Think of the highest, the best, the most glorious 
in connection with Christ and our union with 
Him, as well as our inheritance. And after 
we have come to the end of all our thinking and 
expectation, He will do exceeding above all 
we think. Glory to His Name! 


God’s Masterpiece. 145 


“To Him be glory in the church in Christ 
Jesus, unto all the generations of the age of 
ages. Amen.” It is and ever will be eternal 
praise, because it is eternal glory. And the 
church, His Masterpiece, is the vessel of His 
praise. Therefore He took us up and put us 
into the one body ‘“‘that in the ages to come 
He might display the surpassing riches of His 
grace in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus.” 
Could God have given a higher revelation than 
this? Could He say more than what He hath 
said in these wonderful chapters in Ephesians? 
May the prayer of His Spirit be answered 
in all who read these truths, so that His gracious 
purpose may be accomplished in us and 
through us. 


SS 


Theology Library 
SCHOOL OF THEO! CO 
AT CLAREMONT 


in 
va Le ~ 
alifornia 


AS?62 


a Lm pill ies i) 


21% 
ren AA j 





\ 
‘ 
¥ 

\ 

‘ 
' 

, 
: 
> - 











eth ta 





BS2695 .G3 
Gaebelein, Arno Clemens, 1861-1945. 
God s masterpiece : an analytical expos 





BS Gaebelein, Arno Clemens, 1861-1945. 
2695 God's masterpiece; an analytical exp 
G3 of Ephesians I-III, by Arno C. Gaebele 


New York, Publication office "Our Hope 
etc., ¢1913] 
2p. C., L45p. 20cm. 


Republished as the first part of the 
commentary on the Whole Epistle, publi 
1928 under title: Unsearchable riches. 


1. Bible. N.T. Ephesians I-I] 
Commentaries. I. Title, 




































































pen AAPA 
SSS 


SSS 


