\. 4 


oe o d y 2, Gig 7 : 
iil t é < SP Ne ae seit iH f ; Pais 4 


\ — 4 ae, 
Pe”, jf LO 


GOLD FROM OPHIR 


A NEW BOOK OF BIBLE READINGS, 


ORIGINAL AND SELECTED. 


BY 


J. E. WOLFE, ' 
a EVANCELIST, 
f WITH INTRODUCTION BY DR. JAMES H, BROOKES, 
a | 
LLL. 
{ ARCHER G. WATSON, Manacen, 
TORONTO WILLARD TRACT DEPOSITORY, 
i Cor. YONGE AND TEMPERANCE Sts., Toronto, CANADA. 


Entered according to the Act of the Parliament of Canada, in the year one thousand eight hundred and 
eight-nine, by Archer Green Watson, Manager, Toronto Willard Tract Depository (Ltd.), in the 
office of the Minister of Agriculture at Ottawa, 


ee 


]AMES MURRAY & Co., 
PRINTERS AND BOOKBINDERS, 
26 & 28 Front St, West, 
TORONTO, 


° 
the W 
were 

they s 
nized | 
dom ; 

seekes 
the fe: 
attaine 
of God 


It is a 
as ‘a y 
and ab; 
grass. 
enduret 
become 
in Scrig 
Resurre 
to souls 
among s 
pose, to 
The 
gold int 
fied, strc 
heart... 
Yea, the 
precisely 
God's we 


INTRODUCTION. 


tor? patent of nobility is a disposition to search the sacred Scriptures. It is written of 

the Bereans: ‘‘ These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received 
the Word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things 
were so,” Acts17:11, They did not merely read the Old Testament occasionally, but 
they searched it, or as the word means, they examined it closely, they sifted it, they scruti- 
nized it, they scanned it, remembering the promise tc cvery one who desires heavenly wis- 
dom: ‘If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding; if chou 
seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; then shalt thou understand 
the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God,” Prov. 2: 3-5. The honor thus 
attained outiasts all earthly distinctions, marking the high character and immortal dignity 
of God's noblemen, 


“ When gems, and monuments, and crowns, 


Are mouldered down to dust." 


It is a pleasure, therefore, to call the attention of believers to this boon »f Evangelist Wolfe, 
as ‘‘a work of faith, and labor of love,’’ undertaken to exalt ‘‘ the Word of God, whica liveth 
and abideth for ever. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of 
grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away ; but the Word of the Lord 
endureth for ever,’’ 1 Pet. 1: 23-25. It isa book that must be most helpful to all who would 
become better acquainted with ‘‘ the first priaciples of the oracles of God," for it sets forth 
in Scriptural and simple language the great facts of Ruin, Redemption, Regeneration and 
Resurrection, together with kindred truths that canno‘: fail to be stimulating and suggestive 
to souls subject to the authority of the Holy Spirit. Hence it should be hailed with joy 
among similar books, appearing in these last and evil days, and prepared with the same pur- 
pose, to glorify our risen and coming Lord, 

The title, ‘‘Gold from Ophir,” reminds us of the different words that are translated 
gold in the Bible. The first is bctser, and it signifies ‘‘ to cut off,” then ‘‘ inaccessible, forti- 
fied, strong.” « ‘‘ Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine 
heart,.... Then shalt thou lay up gold, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brook. 
Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defence,"’ Job 22: 22-25. Here the word gold in verse 24 is 
precisely the same that is rendered defence in verse 25; and so, if a man gets the gol¢ of 
God's word not only in his mind, but in his heart, he is defended against dangers. 


iv. INTRODUCTION. 


Second, zahab, ‘ brightness, shining.’ ‘- The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the 

soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the sim) le; the statutes of the Lord 3 

are right, rejoicing the heart ; the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes; E a 

the fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever; the judgments of the Lord are true and # 

righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold,” Ps, 19:7-10. Here the word si 

means ‘' to shine,"’ and he who makes the Word of God the man of his counsel, will find his se! 

way to be like the path of the just, ‘‘that shineth more and more unto the perfect day,” dir 
the 


Prov. 4: 18. 

' Third, charuts, ‘to be active, quick, sharp, decided, determined, decreed.” In the day 
of Christ’s return and Israel’s restoration it is said, ‘‘ the Lord gave the word; great was the 
company of those that published ‘t;’’ or, as Dr. J. Addison Alexander renders it, ‘‘ The 
women publishing :t are a great host;” or, as Dr, DeWitt renders it, ‘‘ The women herald- 
ing gladness are a great host; "’ or, as the Revised Version has it, ‘‘ The women that publish 
the tidings are a great host." His promise is : ‘‘ Also upon the servants and upon the hand- 
maids in those days will I pour out my Spirit,” Joel 2: 27-29; and then He will say to His 
people so long oppressed :; ‘‘ Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the 
wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold,” Ps. 68: 11-13. 
Wien the Lord gives the word, and the word is received, believers become not only active, 
but desided and determined, as the word for gold here means, not ‘‘ carried about with every 
wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness,’’ Eph. 4: 14. 

Fourth, kethem, ‘‘ to shut up, to hide,’’ ‘‘ Where shall wisdom be found? and where is 
the place of understanding ? Man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it foundinthe | 
land of the living.... It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir,” Job 22: 12-16. ‘‘ Upon i 
thy right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir,” Ps. 45:9. ‘'My beloved is whiteand ~ 
ruddy ; the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as the mos fine gold,"" Song 5:10, 11. |) 
In these passages the word for gold means ‘‘to hide,” reminding us of the confession of the 3 ft 
Psalmist, ‘‘ Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee,” Ps. 119: 11. 


| 
} 
j 


This is the best thing, hid in the best place, and he who has the Word of God in his heart arom 
has laid up for himself ‘‘ treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and on 4 
we o 


where thieves do not break through nor steal,”’ Matt. 6 : 20. q , 
Fifth, segor, ‘to shut up, to enclose,” hence “ precious gold, that is, pure, unadulter- | 
ated.” Of the wisdom of the Old Testament, which is the Christ of the New, it is said, “It [ 
cannot be gotten for gold," Job, 28:15. But wisdorn is revealed in the Word, and of this it 
is written, ‘‘ Every word of God is pure; He is a shield unto them that put their trust in : 
Him, Add thon not unto His words, lest He reprove thee, and thou be found a liar,” Prov. 
30:5,6. This is the kind of gold with which we approach God, having “ our, bodies washed 
with pure water,” Heb, 10:22; or as it is written in another place, ‘' Christ also loved the 
Church, and gave himself for her, that he might sanctify and cleanse her with the washing == 
of water by the Word,” Eph. 5:25, 26. The Word is pure and unadulterated, the truth ot § ’ 
God without the admixture of the least error. 


PP. ican esteem 


INTRODUCTION. Vv. 


——— 


8 me Sixth, paz, ‘‘ refined." Concerning the knowledge of Christ, ‘‘ the gold and the crystal 
Lord 4 cannot equal it; and the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of fine gold,” Job 28. 17. 
duet j ‘Thou settest a crown of pure gold on his head,” Ps, 21:3. ‘‘ Therefore I love thy com- 
9.600 mandments above yold, yea, above fine gold,"’ Ps. 119: 127. ‘‘ His legs as pillars of marble 
were set upon sockets of fine yold,” Song 5:15. So this paz gold is the appropriate symbol of the 
4 ies divine nature and perfect humanity of Him concerning whom the Holy Ghost testifies ; ‘‘ In 
day, the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God,” John 
1:1; ‘‘ Who knew no sin,” 2 Cor. 5:21; ‘‘ Without sin,’’ Heb. 4: 15; ‘‘ Who did no sin,” 

he day 1 Pet. 2:22; ‘‘and in Him is no sin,” 1 Jno, 3: 5. 
ae Seventh, chrusios or chrusion, used by the poets, according to Liddell and Scott, ‘‘ to 
te denote anything dear or precious.” ‘Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, 
scuba which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious 
publish stones,....he shall receive a reward,” 1 Cor. 3: 11-14. The foundation is Christ, the super- 
. agin structure must be reared in the love of Christ, and for the glory of Christ, and this alone is 
ee precivas to God, All that is of self and the world shall be burned in the day of our Lord’s 
asthe coming, and hence we are not surprised to hear Him saying to the Laodicean Church, that 
: ate fitly represents the present condition of the professing Christian body, ‘‘I counsel thee to 
Sorciehded a buy of me gold tried in the fire,” Rev. 3:8. Everywhere we see the failure of man, and the 
wimaneed a | ruin ofall that he touches ; but for this very reason our hearts respond the more eagerly to 


the Spirit’s voice, ‘‘ Unto you thevefore which believe he is precious,” 1 Pet. 2:7. 


beige acne a May He nbundantly own the pages that follow for the comfort of saints and the salva- 


nd in the 9 tion of sinners, leading the reader to see (1) that ‘‘all Scripture is given by inspiration of 
eee \ God, and is profitable for doctrine,” 2 Tim, 3:16; and (2) that all Scripture, both Old and 

nbitean a New Testament, sets forth the person and wor of Christ, Jno. 5 : 39; and (3) that ‘‘ Whatso- 
:10, Il. ay 


ft a ever things were written aforetime were written for our learning,’ Rom. 15:4; and (4) that 
e § i ‘ 
vedi % the Word is a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our path, Ps, 119: 105; and (5) that we 


oan are made clean through the Word, Jno. 15 : 3; and (6) that the Word is able to build us up, 
his heart and to give us an inheritance among all them that are sanctified, Acts 20: 32; and (7) that 
pt, and we overcome Satan by the blood of the Lumb, and by the word of our testimony, facing the 
devil with the blood, and the world with the word, Rev.12:11. To the Lamb that was slain 
nadulter- be the glory unto the ages of ages ! 
said, “It § 
hofthisit | JAMES H. BROOKES. 
ir trust in 4 
r,"’ Prov. a 
es washed § 
b loved the | 
he washing | 


he truth of & 


ro ; 
. A TESTS. 
STS 


al 


: | 
j 
} 
k 
f 
i 
{ 
f 
BE 
= 
t 
t 
© 


he 
Sug} 
Hek 
finer 


Job 


store 
no ¢ 
from 
gold. 
For 
pleas 
ings | 
regar 
reade 
and f 
assur 
mente 
Resur 
all the 
scans 
first v 
N 
hands 
T 

the wr 
merel} 


PREFACE. 


HE title of this new book of Bible Readings, Gold from Ophir, is, as the reader 
will observe, a Scriptural one. It struck me as being the most appropriate and 
suggestive one that came to my mind. Ophir, it is said, was a region from which the 
Hebrews in the time of Solomen obtained Gold. The gold was proverbial for its 
fineness, so that “ gold of Ophir” is several times mentioned as /ime gold, Ps. 45:12: 
Job 28: 16; Isa. 13: 123 1 Chron, 29: 4. 

What a golden mine of truth is the precious Word of God! What inexhaustible 
stores of wealth lie enfolded within its bosom! Blessed thought, too, that it contains 
no dross, quartz, or earth, from which it must needs be separated. The Book 
from the beginning to the ending is composed of multitudinous nuggets of the purest 
gold. And yet it requires patient, prayerful digging in ord‘r to obtain the treasure. 
For near a score of years I have been digging in this mine, and have found it a most 
pleasurable and profitable task. 

While engaged in evangelistic work it occurred to me that a book of Bible Read- 
ings could be arranged on a more practical basis than any I had yet seen, with due 
regard to “the right dividing of the word of truth.” How far I have succeeded, the 
reader must judge. Moreover, in this busy age, when there is such a “running to 
and fro,” and so little time to spend in laborious searching of the Scriptures, I felt 
assured it would be a good and helpful thing to put in proper order the four funda- 
mental and leading facts of the Bible, viz.: Ruin, Redemption, Regeneration and 
Resurrection, hoping that this etfort for God’s glory might be permitted to be a help to 
all those who feel called to labor for the salvation of the lost. Yet, let every one who 
scans its pages remember that “truth second-hand” is of no real value unless it be 
first wroug tt into the soul by the mighty power of the Holy Ghost. 

Many of the “ nuggets of gold” found in this volume have been gathered by other 
hands than mine. Due credit is therefore given. 

The “ Suggestive Thoughts and Unfoldings” have been gleaned and culled from 
the writings of the clearest and purest authors of Gospel literature. They are given 
merely to serve as a stimulus to thought. 


Sensettnassdaenanininesiinesdiiiendiaeradeanar tah uesteeiaaaenaneee aaa 


| viii, PREFACE. 
i LL LN 

The various papers and articles found scattered throughout the book are from the 
pens of skilled students and teachers of the Word. The article by Dr. West, on 
“The Resurrection of the Body,” was written exclusively for Gold from Ophir. 
Professor Morehead, Dr. Jas. H. Brookes, Messrs. Geo. C. Needham, E. P. Marvin, 
C. Russel Hurditch, John Currie, and a host of others, have contributed to make the book # 
what it is. From the pages of Ze London Christian, Footsteps of Truth, Word and a x 
Work, The Faithful Witness, Notes for Bible Study, and other periodicals, I have P 
collected much valuable matter. And right here let me tender my hearty thanks to a 
those who have so kindly contributed the excellent readings, articles, and papers that 
adorn the pages of the book. 

The Miscellancous Department, made up of readings and articles of the 
most vital and practical character, I trust may be much used of the Lord in furnishing 
the winner of souls with weapons whereby he shall be enabled to “ pull down the 

. - strongholds of the mighty.” 
| May the Spirit of the living God be upon all those who look into this volume for 

help in Christian work, and again let me repeat, may the worker in the Lord's vine- 
yard never cease to remember that truti., unbaptized with the Holy Ghost, can never 


accomp'ish permanent good. 


G 
| the 
trial 
] 

It is 
inas' 
“ Loc 
| | 3 taken 
| ) God: 
4 are v: 
| his th 
| | A pass 1 
is to 
1 The 
“The 
a purifie 
si a ds  etenautaneenie q I 
-» James 

@ for the 

= firene 

Pe 43:2. 

7 the jus 

shine,’ 

works, 

= Lam. « 

| toabor 
. : = both to 
= ofthe. 

"= break 

>) multipl 


J. E. WOLFE. 


Vinita, Inv, Tur., May 7, 1859. 


i 
We 
ia! 
be 
Be 


— * 


m the 
st, On 
phir. 
arvin, 
» book 
ra and 
I have 
nks to 
rs that 


of the 
lishing 
wn the 


ime for 
's vine- 
1 mever 


GOLD. 


OLD Takes a Prominent Place in Scripture,—It is mentioned in the 
second and last chapters of both Old and New Testaments, It is figurative of 
the child of God, Lam. 4:2; Job 23:10; of his works, 1 Cor. 3:12; and of “the 


a trial of his faith,’ 1 Peter 1:7. Our study now only refers to the believer. 


I. Gold is Found in the Earth.—“ Out of it wast thou taken,” Gen. 3 : 19, 
It is found in darkness, We are “ called out of darkness,” 1 Peter 2:9. It is found 
ina state of filth: “Filthy is man,” Job 15:16; Ps. 14:3. It is dug out of the earth: 
“Look unto ... the hole of the pit whence ye are digged,” Isa, 51:1. After being 
taken out of the earth it is washed : “ Ye are washed,” 1 Cor.6: 11. It is then crushed : 
God says to man, “ My thoughts are not as your thoughts,” Isa. 55 : 8; man’s thoughts 
are vain, 1 Cor. 3 : 20; and are crushed in the presence of God, who begs him to “ forsake 
his thoughts,” Isa. 55:7. It is now fit for the fire ; and if gold is to be refined, it must 
pass thrcugh the fire : “ Beloved, think it not strange concerning the flery trial which 
is to try you,” 1 Peter 4:12. “Yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto,” 
1 Thess. 3:3. “When He hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold,” Job 23: 10. 
“The furnace is for gold; but the Lord trieth the he trts,” Prov. 17:3. The fire 
purifies it: “ He shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them 5 gold,” etc., ‘al. 3 : 3, 


II. Gold Stands the Fire.—“ Blessed is the man that dureth temptation,” 
James 1:12. The refiner is at the expense of the fire: God had chastise his people 
for their sin, yet, “ His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel,” Judges 10:16 “Tne 
fire never injures it : “When thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burned,” Isa. 
43:2. Its value is estimated by weight: “Thou, most upright, dost weigh the path of * 
the just,” Isa. 26:7. When refined, it is bright: “ A man’s wisdom maketh His face to 
shine,” Eccles. 8:1. “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good 
works,” Matt. § : 16, 


III. ‘Gold is Precious.—“ The precious sons of Zion comparable to fine gold,” 


- Lam. 4:12. Pliable : Paul could say, “I know both how to be.abased, and I know how 


to abound ; everywhere, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, 


_ both to abound and to suffer need,” Phil. 4:12. It attracts attention: “Ye are the light 
> of the world ; a city that is set on a hill cannot be hid,” Matt. 5:14. Beating does not 
- break it, but causes it to excand: “The more they afflicted them, the more they 
- multiplied and grew,” Exodus 1:12. “I would ye should understand, brethren, that 


* 


“s ‘ b, ; 
‘ e> 
: 
eer et a eT SE A a 


fe ata (int cabana ea 


7 


- @ 
A em ENCE NEE 


2 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


the things which have happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance 
of the gospel ; so that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and to all 
others,” Phil. 1 : 12, 1.5 (margin) 


IV. Gold is Liable to Grow Dim.—How is the gold (Israel) become dim ?” 
Lam. 4:1. A gold ring constantly worn never becomes dim ; because it is continually 
rubbing against the flesh, and dai'y comes under the action of water : “Christ loved the 
Church and gave Himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, by the washing 
of water by the Word,” Eph. 5:26. ‘‘ Wherewithal shall a young man cieanse his way? 
By taking heedthe) according to Thy Word,” Ps. 119:9. A gold chain becomes 
dim because it lacks the daily washing : “ He that received seed among the thorns is 
he that heareth the Word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of tiches 
choke the Word, and it becometh uu:ruitful,” Matt. 13 : 22. 


V. Brass Resemblos Gold.—“ Satan himself is transformed into an angel of 
light,” 2 Cor. 1t:14. It only becomes hard by being mixed wit baser metals: “A 
little leaven leave.eth the whole lump,” 1 Cor. 5 : 6. 


x 


Pie 2 


herance 
1 to all 


e dim ?” 
tinually 
ved the 
washing 
lis way ? 
econies 
10rns is 
f 1iches 


ang s1 of 
Is: “A 


RUIN, 


RUIN. 


THE FIRST SIN. 
Ly James Ingiis. 


HE historical and moral truthfulness of the Bible narrative of man’s fall has been 
questioned, on the ground that the offence was so insignificant—it was only the 
eating of an apple! But this is quite an inaccurate and unfair representation. 

When a man puts another’s name to a bill, we do not aescribe it as only writing two 
words, and for these two words being tried and condemned. We call it by its right 
name—forgery. Our first parents disbelieved and disobeyed God ; this was their sin, 
and for this they died. And the first sin of the world has been so fruitful in evil 
because it contained the seeds of all sia. It was ingratitude to the God who iad 
crowned our first parents with loving-kindness and tender mercies ; it was niistrust of 
His goodness, unbelief of His word, end disobedience of an express command. 
There was an unhallowed gratification of appetite in ating forbidden fruit, and a 
determination to obtain knowledge, though at the cost of departing from God. There 
was blind faith in a false guide, whilst God was. forsaken ; and there was the essence 
of idolatry, and all the corruptions of religion, in the belief that the doing of an out- 
ward thing could impart spiritual grace. There was the communication of sin from 
) the one to the other, and the preference of the creature to the Creator. It is with the 
' greatest inconsideration that a sin like this could be spoken of lightly. Unbelief—the 
' world’s ruin—is the root of it atl, as faith in God is the world’s salvation. 

“The story of the Fall,” as Delitzsch says, “like that of the creation, has wandered 
| over the world. Heathen nations have transplanted and mixed it up with their 
geography, their history, their mythology, although it has never so completely changed 
form, and color, and spirit, that you cannot recognize it, Here, however, in the law 
(of which the Book of Genesis is a part) it preserves the character of a universal, 
human, world-wide fact ; and the groans of creation, the redemption that is in Christ 
Tesus, and the heart of every man, conspire in their testimony to the most literal truth 
of the whole narrative.” ; 

There is the well-known Greek myth of Pandora :—“ The first men passed sunny 
days in undisturbed happiness. No labor, no care weighed upon them ; their welfare 
was not interrupted by weakness or disease. But they could not longer remain in a 
state of inactivity. They felt an internal impulse to search for occupation. Then 
Prometheus (one of these men) shaped a human form out of clay; in order to animate 
it, he stole the fire from heaven. This audacity excited the severe anger of Jupiter. 
He wished to punish him, and ordered Vulcan to make the first woman out of earth, 
who should, by her charms, as well as by her faults, inflict wretchedness upon man. 
Thus Pandora was produced. All the gods and goddesses adorned her with fatal 
gifts to ensnare the hearts of men. She received a box containing all imaginable 
evils. She presented it to Epimetheus, the brother of Prometheus, who opened the 
box and the evils were scattered all over the earth.” 

In the British Museum there is a seal, brough. from Babylon, which has 
two figures sitting, one on each side of a tree, With their hands stretched out towards 
it, while at the back of one there is a serpent. 

In engravings, from gems and other ancieat remains of Western art, are similar 
representations. A fruit-laden tree, a serpent, a man and woman, a destroyer of the 
serpent, are the principal portions of the various pictures. 

The Persian tradition is, that the parents of the human race,were at first innocent, 
but they allowed themselves to be seduced by the spirits of Ahriman (the evil). They 
had been destined to happiness, on condition of their continuing humble, obedient 
and pure ; but Ahriman deceived them, and drew them away from Ormuzd (the good). 
Afterwards, Ahriman gave them fruit, of which they ate; and in consequence they 
» lost a hundred blessings, save one. Thereafter, they obtained fire, partook of flesh, 
_ and presented offerings ; they made themselves clothes of skin, and built houses. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE FALL OF MAN, 


I. The fall of man was consequent upon ; 


the disobedience of Adam, Gen. 3: 6, 11, 
12. The Holy Spirit who spake through 
Moses, in Genesis, uttered the same testi- 
mony through Paul in Rom. 5: 12, 15, 19. 
It is well to remember this, in these days 
of apostacy, when infidels inside and outside 
of religious circles are using all their in- 
tellectual gifts in the endeavor to over- 
throw the truth of the verbal and plenary 
inspiration of the Holy Scriptures. 

II. The devil was the cause of man’s 
fall, Gen. 3:1-5. For corroborative testi- 
mony, see 2 Cor. 11: 3; 1 Tim. 2: 14. 

III, Man was first made in the image of 
God, Gen. 1 : 26; but forfeited that God- 
likeness by sinning, Gen.. 5: 3, compared 
with 1 Cor. 15 : 48, 49. 

IV. We have further testimony in the 
Word of God as to the totally depraved 


condition of man, Job. 15 : 14; 
Psa. 51: 5; Isa. 48:8; John3: 6. 

V. Man, by nature, is a child of the 
Devil.—Matt. 13 : 38; John 8:44; 1John3: 
8,10. This testimony is totally at variance 
with the sentimental and unscriptural doc- 
trine of the so-called ‘‘ Fatherhood of God 
and Brotherhood of Man” theories as taught 
from many pulpits and advocated by many 
religious writers. 


VI. The natural man is also termed in the 
Scriptures a ‘child of wrath.”"—Eph. 2: 3. 


VII. Not only is he outwirdly a rebel 
against God, but he is inwardly corrupt. 
See Gen. 6:5, where the marginal reading 
emphasizes the fact of his total inward de- 
pravity. The ceclaration is, that not only 
‘the imagination, but also the purposes and 
desires"’ are corrupt. See, for proof, Jer. 
16:12; Matt. 15: 19. J. E. W.: 


25: 43 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


oe first chapter of Genesis shows us God “in the beginning” creating ; and in 

the last of Exodus we behold Him dwelling in “glory” in the midst of His people. 
Between these we see man, who was made “upright,” “in the image of God,” falling 
from his high estate, and sinking to the depths of degradation and iniquity. 


FEARFUL were the results of the fall! The man, woman, serpent, earth—all came 


under the wrath of the offended Creator. 


Labor and sorrow..came to be the portion 


of both man and woman; though one to rule, the other to serve; and from this 
sentence there is no escape till dust returns to dust. Thus it has been ever since and 
will be “until the Lord come” and “restore” all things, and finally bruise Satan 
under His feet, by consigning him to the lake of fire (Acts 3: 21; Rom. 8: 20-23; 
1 Cor. 4:5; Rev. 20: 10). 


“In the day that thou eatest thereof tho shalt surely die” (Gen. 2 : 17). 
Such were God’s words, and see how they have been fulfilled. Life forfeited means 
death, unless respitea by grace. “#y one man sin entered inte the world, and 


death by sin” (Rom. 5: 12). 


SIN has been well described as the determination of the will to other than God. 
Thus it was with Eve; she doubted, mistrusted God, and believed Satan. She 
first lusted after, then ate, what God had forbidden, as did Adam likewise, and that 
was sin ; and the result of sin was death (Jas. 1 : 15). 


25: 43 


of the 
John 3: 
variance 
tral doc- 
. of God 
is taught 
by many 


.ed in the 
zph. 2:3. 
ya rebel 
corrupt. 
11 reading 
1ward de- 
; not only 
poses and 
proof, Jer. 
_E. W.: 


lg; andin 
is people. 
d,” falling 


all came 
e portion 
from this 
since and 
hise Satan 
8: 20-233 


ct 47) 
ed means 
vorld, and 


than God. 
an. She 
p, and that 


* his earliest history: God tested him, and 


Sis evil :— 


"was seen,—that is, sin as io the will. 


II. As tried by conscience, his corruption 
was seen,—that is, sin as to the heart. 


IIl. As tried by law, his transgression 


' I. God declares man to be “blinded in 
heart,” Eph. 4:18. This is why the 
natural man cannot see God. ‘' Blessed are 
he pure in heart, for they shal! see God,” 
Matt. 5 : 8. When the new heart is 
received then ‘the eyes of the understand- 
ing are opened"’ to see God in nature, in 
Providence, and in His word, 

' II. Asa natural result of his heart blind- 
hess, it follows that he cannot but be per. 


Isa. 1:5; Rom. 3: 12-16. 


o SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


the very first thing recorded under each test 


I. As tried in innocence, his independence 


verse and corrupt in his ways, Gen. 6:12; | 


III. He is intellectually depraved, or | Job. 11:12. 


RUIN. vs 


WHAT IS THE CHARACT’SR OF MAN. 


a What is the character of manasseen from 


was seen,—that is, sin as to the command: 
ment. 

IV. As tried by Christ, his enmity was 
seen,—that is, sin as to the Persona. 

The complete character of the poison is 
no\, seen—the “flesh” wou. kill God if it 
could. Man in the flesh slaughtered the 
God-man, . Every unsaved sinner has that 
infernal essence of Satan in his bosom. 


CERTAIN BILLS OF INDICTMENT AGAINST MAN. 


corrupt in mind, Psa. 14: 2, 3; Rom. 3:11; 
1:31. 


IV. Pride of intellect leads man to reject 
the things of God, 1 Cor. 2:14; Matt. 


13:11, 12. 


V. He comes short of the glory of God, 
Rom. 3: 23. 


VI. His ccuscience is defiled, Titus 
1:15: tieb. 10: 22, 

VII. He is utterly intractable, or obsti- 
nate, and is compared to a wild ass's colt, 
J. E. W. 


—————s 


HAT is death? Death is separation—separation of soul from God, separation of 


soul from body. 


N 


. : Man before the fall was in union with God, and thus ever 
\edrawing from Him the needed power to sustain the spiritual life imparted ; but once 
e determination of the will was to other than God—as was the case when Adam and 


“Eve yielded to the tempter—that day death ensued; for sin separated them from 


“God. 


___ DEATH is the inevitable result of sin, so equally is death eternal; not God’s 
rhitrary will, but the inevitable conszquence of dying in unpardoned sin. Unless 


in this life “made nigh ty the blood of 


hrist” (Eph, 2 : 13), eternal separation frem 


sod must ensue; and ¢ternal separation from God is hell. 


__ MAN, by nature, ‘s ruined and guilty. We have left the foun<ain of living waters 
ind hewer. out for ourselves “broken cisterns, that can hold no water.” 
ffended ; and he who offendeth “in one point is guilty of all.” 

_ THE holy law, as an impartial jury, has brought in the verdict of “guilty.” And 
us we are lost .o him who create 
f his holy law. 


a 
Hy, 2 
us. 


We have 


We have brought ourselves under the curse 


8 } GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


MARKS OF MAN'S ALIENATION FROM GOD. qa 


I. Man's fear of God the first manifested 
proof of his estrangement from Him, Gen. 
3:8. 


II. He goes astray from his birth, Psa. 
58: 3; Eph. 4:18; Col.1:21. There is no 
such thing as an ‘‘innacent’’ little babe. 
Every mother is witness to the fact of inher- 
en‘ depravity, in the manifested ugliness, or 
anger, of the babe, long before it becomes a 
responsible agent, or can understand the 


V. Fallen man is also conscious of his 
guilt, Gen. 3: 7, 8, 10. But, refusing to 
acknowledge the necessity of being clothed 
in Christ's righteousness, he seeks to cover 
his nakedness with the few fig-leaves of his 
own self-righteousness. 

VI. This, by the word of the Lord, leads 
us to see, very clearly, the fallen sinner’s 
character in God’s sight, Eccles. 7 : 20; 
Rom. 3: 10. ‘ 


VII. He is so abominable that God de- 
scribes him as one that ‘‘drinks in iniquity 
like water,” Job 15:16. All men, without 
regard to culture, without regard to their 
station in society, whether educated or 
uneducated, rich or poor, are ‘‘stinking” 
(marg.) in God’s estimation. See Psa.14:3. 
Surely this is sufficient to mark man — 
out as utterly fallen, and lost io God, and 
that his only hope of salvation must come 
through Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the 
lost, Luke 19: ro. Vipin Roe Ws 


difference between right and wrong. David's 
testimony istrue: ‘‘I was shapen in iniquity, 
and in sin did my: mother conceive me," 
Psa, 51: 5. 


III. He is a slave to sin. Rom. 6:10, 
16; 7:5, 23, 24; Gal. 5: 17; ‘serving 
divers lusts and pleasures,"’ Titus 3: 3. 

IV. The natural man’s conduct is always 
at variance with God’s will, and therefore 
grievous to Him, Psa. 10:5; 2 Peter 
AS ote 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


Wat incalcuiable ruin came as a result of man’s sin? (1) Death spiritual; 7 
separation of soul from God, is equally the lot of all, for all are “sinners” by 7 
‘nature, born in sin, and then sinning in thought and deed (Ps. 51. 5 ; Rom. 3 : 10-12, 23); (7 
separated from God by sin (Isa. §9 : 2), they are dead in trespasses and sins (Eph. 2 : 1) 7 
till ‘‘quickened” by the grace of God, “born again,” made new creatures “in Christ” | 
(John 3:3; 2Cor.5:17). (2) Death temporal; separation of soul and bocy, 
which we see around us daily, when the spirit returns “unto God who gave it” and | 
the dust “to the earth as it was” (Eccles. 12:7). This has been the lot of all since ™ 
Adam sinned (Rom. § : 12); two only excepted—Enoch and Elijah. “In Adam all & 
die” (1 Cor. 15 : 22) as result of sin. ‘Death passed upon all men, for that all have} 
sinned” (Rom. § : 12); and thus it will be with all—even the Lord’s people—‘ till He 7 
come,” and finally destroy “the last enemy,” even “death. (1 Cor. 15 : 20). (3) Death © 
eternal; “everlasting” separation, or “ destruction from the presence of the Lord” | 
(2 Thess. 1 : 9), which is “the second death” (Rev. 20: 12-15), and most terrible of | 
- all; reserved for those whose names are “not written in the book of life.” : 


LA eo 


- engi 
- and 


me ©6God 
get, 
‘= afte 
BortH by nature and practice man is of no use to God. He has become utterly 32 
“unprofitable ;” the fine gold has become dim. 
WE have not only been guilty of specific breakings of God’s holy law, by which 
we are seen to be transgressors, our natures are fallen, we are depraved and corrupt, 
the imagination of the thoughts of the heart only evil continually. Self-will, self- 
seeking, and self-pleasing have taken the place of God’s will, God-seeking, and God- § 
pleasin, ; and thus while self is gratified we are lost to God. 


_ that 
i else 


RUIN. * 


9 
‘ THE CONDITION OF LOST MAN. 
us of his E I. He is dead in sin, Eph, 2:1 A Sal- | the Creator has, in His word, made the 
efusing to S vation Army officer once made the Guaint | way plain, man obstinately chooses “his own 
ng clothed a remark that ‘‘ Not only had the sheep fallen | way,” Isa. 53:6. 
3 tocover || into the pit, but they had also lost their Te Bid tows : : 
. ’ F s darkness; 
aves of his | bleat ; in other words they had lost the life John, 3: ii pe eee oe ere 
of God out of their souls, vr He te ie ti h M 

. rru ° 
Lord, leads II. His depravity is total, Gen. 6: 5; | 18 q: Nerd ape ae! 
sn alain’ ia 18,19; Rom. 3:13; 14. His heart is a 
St 90 om. 7+ 10. fountain of iniquity, pouring forth only vile- 
i III. He is devoid of the fear of God. | ness. 
“ te ss ha In this he resembles the natural brute beast, VII. He is a destroyer of souls Rom 
in iniquity Rom. 3: 18. 3:15,16. His influence tends to lead souls 
on, without IV. He is wilfuland stubborn., Although | to hell instead of heaven. J. E. W. 
ard to their 
ducated or 
“stinking” 
g Pes. 1425. | WHAT SIN HAS ENTAILED. 
mark man ~ : ; 
‘9 God, and i I. Man’s fall thrust him out of Paradise, V. Man cannot remedy his lost condi- 
past come 4 Gen, 3:24. tion, Prov. 20:9; Jer. 2:22; 13:23. 
jour of the | II. His sin doomed him to labor and | yy. The only remedy has been provided 


jEwW. sorrow, Gen. 3:16, 19; Job. 5:6, 7. by God, Gen. 3:15; John 3: 14-18; 2 Cor. 
NS III, Temporal death was another result | 5; 14-21, etc. 
; of his transgression, Gen. 3:19; Rom. 5: 12; 


1 Cor. 15: 22. 


VII. Temporal and eternal death at hand 


, 
oa 
4 for the sinner. Therefore the necessity for 


spiritual ; a IV. To all this was added the awful | immediate application of God's remedy, 
sinners” by [9 doom of eternal death, Job. 21:30; Rom. | Josh. 24:15; 2 Cor. 6: 2. 
B : 10-12, 23); ‘ 5:18, 21; 6: 23. J. E. W 
s (Eph. 2:1) @ fares ah Cotes poeceeseniee esis este EP Nene 
“in Christ” a sens 
1 age ed a SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 
fave 1 : ; 

of all since === HE unsaved sinner should write “ Lost” on the palms of his hands, on the soles of 
In Adam all | his feet; in all he does and wherever he goes he is lost. “Lost” should be 
Ihat all have - engraved on his intellect, his will, his affections ; at all times, und2r all circumstances, 
ble—“ till He © and in all his faculties, he can but say “ Lost.” 

(3) arent = How true that the holy, just, and good law of God came demanding of us love to 
bf the Lor A God, and proved that what God justly demands from man He has not got, and cannot 
jt terrible O19 et, so that, without exception, it may be said of all men who ought to have sought 

after God, “There is none that seeketh after God.” 
come utterly . * Our part is to take the place of a sinner and nothing else. Most people believe 


7% that they are sinners, but comparatively few believe that they are sinners and nothing 
w, by which #3 else but sinners. 


and corrupt, Fy CHRIST appeared tn “ put away sin ;” but it does not mean that, as to its presence 
elf-will, self- . in this world, sin has been put away. S. 1 indeed has been the ruin wrought, for, 
g, and God- #3 alas! no one can look to our streets, our jails, our asylums, our infirmaries, our news- 


“= papers, and dream of such a thought. 


fa 


10 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


GOD NO RESPECTER OF PERSONS; OR, “THERE IS 
NO DIFFERENCE.” 


Ax Address by W. P. Mackay. 


URN now to Romans, the 3rd chapter and 22nd verse, and at the last clause we 
read, “For there is no difference; for all have sinned, and come short of the 
glory of God.” This is what God has said. 

And now you who are happy and amiable, this is the one thing I wish to tell you 
from God, “There is no difference.” This is what you never could and never can 
feel; it is a thing for which you must believe God. As it is God with whom you have 
to do, I beseech you not to listen one moment to any that would take you from His 
truth. He says, “There is no difference.” He has proved that the lawless Gentile 
or heathen and the law-breaking Jew or religious person are equally guilty, and that 
not one among either the outwardly profane or the outwardly decent is found righteous 
or good before Him. Of course there are differences in heinousness or degradation of 
sins. I need not stop to speak of tais ; we all know it. I wish to tell you what you 
and I do not by nature know, namely, that there is no difference as to where we stand 
before God. The one question is, guilty or not guilty? There are no degrees as 
to the fact of guilt. “He that offends in one point is guilty of all,” and nothing less. 
He that offends in all points is guilty of all, ane nothing more. Therefore, while there 
are differences among offences, there is no difference as to guilt. Therefore, all men 
in the world (and you included) have been brought in guilty before God. 

Look at the story of the Prodigal Son in the 15th of Luke. The moment he 
crossed his father’s threshold with his pockets full of money and a respectable cress 
on, he was as really guilty, as really a sinner, as when he was among the swine in his 
rags. He was more degraded when keeping swine, but not more guilty. In fact, his 
degradation and husks were his greatest mercies, for these led him to see his guilt. A 
full pocket and a respectable appearance are the worst things a guilty sinner can 
have, as these lead him to think that he is rich and increased with goods, and has 
need of nothing, when in God’s sight he is wretched, and miserable, and poor, and 
blind, and naked. I do not ask you, Are you a sinner in the common use of that 
word? because you for whom I write are not. You mean by sinner, one who is very 
wild, profane, disobedient and lawless. This is as men speak of sinners. God, how- 
ever, says that there is no difference. The only thing I ask you is this, Have you 
offended in one point—not one point of open sin, but one point in thought or word? 
You confess at least one point. God asks no more. If you have offended in one 
point you are guilty of all. Man would never think this nor say it. But God 
says it. Suppose that your life were like a book that you have written, and there was 
only one small blot just like a pin’s point in it, whilst all the other leaves were per- 
fectly clean, and you came and presented it before God; He would put it beside all 
the blackest lives that ever lived, the blackest histories of the vilest murderers, and 
thieves, and harlots, and over all this collection would be written these words, ‘ There 
is no difference.” 

You. have offeaded in one point. It is not a question of being a great sinner—it is 
this question, Are you as perfect as the Christ oft God, the perfect man? If you had 
lived for fifty years without committing one sin, or haying one wrong wish or thought, 
and just then you had an evil thought, and afterwards lived another fifty years and 
died, aged 100, with only this one evil thought (not even a word or an action), when 
you came to stand before God in judgment, He would put you beside all the offscour- 
ings of the earth, men who for a hundred years never had a good thought, and He 
would say, “There is no difference.” 


fattX® ot oe oes ik 


Ws 


se we 
of the 


1] you 
rer can 
u have 
ym His 
Gentile 
1d that 
shteous 
ation of 
hat you 
e stand 
rees as 
ing less. 
ile there 
all men 


ment he 
ple Gress 
ne in his 
fact, his 
p ilt. 

ner can 

and has 
boor, and 
b of that 
b is very 
hod, how- 
ave you 
or word? 
d in one 
But God 
here was 
ere per- 
beside all 
rers, and 
, * There 


ner—it is 
you had 
thought, 
years and 
pn), when 
offscour- 
| and He 


a regards guilt. But God says it, and the’e the matter ends. 
ss risking your chance of escaping hell on the possibility that God has told lies, and that 


RUIN. II 


Of course you think this is very hare, but it is true. God will never ask your 
opinion whether it ought to be so or not, He has in grace told us already what He 
will do. You and I, not knowing absolu’e holiness, cannot understand or appreciate 
such a judgment. We could never feel that every one is the same in God's sight as 


If you wish to go on, 


these words are not perhaps quite true, that “there 1s no difference,” then the judg- 
ment day will declare it to you. I would rather advise you to believe God, against 
your own ideas and opinions, and simply because He has said it, to proceed as if in 
His sight, “ there is no difference” between those we call great and little sinners. 


“T cannot believe that all are so bad,” said one, after I had been saying, “ there is 
no difference.” 


“ But,” I added, “the Rible says, ‘ there is no difference.’ ” 

“ But there must be sreater sinners than others.” 

“ Oh, yes, Most certainly. Greater offenders are recognized in the Bible ; he that 
owed fifty and he that owed five hundred pence ; but as to guilt, God says, ‘ there is no 
difference.’ ” 

“ Well, I cannot see it,” still continued my friend. 

“‘ But it is in God’s word, whether you see it or not ;” and it is sufficient that God 
has said it, for His Word is truth. Let me give an illustration, Let us suppose that 
a bill had been stuck up in this town saying that recruits were wanted for Her 
Majesty's Life Guards, and that none would be enlisted but those who were tall and 
measured not under six feet in height. Let us suppose that many of the young men 
in the town were anxious to serve in this regiment, and John meets James and says 
to him, “ Well, I’ve more chance than you, for I am taller than you;” and they put 

back to back and measured themselves with one another, and indeed John is taller than 
James. And there continues to be much measuring in the town before the day that 
the recruiting-sergeant come:. 

They measure themselves by themselves, and compare themselves among them- 
selves, but they forget one thing—that not only tall men, but men not under six feet 
are wanted. One man at last says, “ Well, I’ve measured myse!f with every man in 
the town, and I’m the tallest man in it,” and it might be quite true. But will even he 
be qualified ? 
| The trial day comes. Each is measured, from the man five feet six inches, to the 
very tallest. Supposing he is five feet, eleven inches and three-quarters. Thesergeant 
cannot let him pass. He is short. He must take his place among the very shortest 
as to getting into the Life Guards. He is the tallest man in the town, but he is short 
| of the standard, and ‘‘there is no difference” from the very shortest as to his exclusion 

from the Life Guards. There is a difference in height, but not in qualification. 

Thus it is with every sinner. He may be good, or bad, in the sight of men, but 
_ “there is no difference, for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.” If 

any man could say, I have come up to God’s standard, and this is true, then there 
would be a difference ; but “come short” is written on every man’s brow, therefore 
there is no difference. 
Whether was Adam or Eve the more to blame? This might afford material for a 
_long discussion, and at the end, the heinousness of their crime would be to us a 
‘matter of opinion. I have no doubt there might be some shade of degree as to hein- 
ousness ; but one thing is sure—if their offences were not equally heinous, they were 
equally driven out. The cherubim that turned every way with the flaming sword, 
separated both equally from the tree of life ; there was no difference. 
When the rain began to fall and the waters to rise, after Noah had entered the 
-ark, the people who had their houses high up might have been pitying the poor 
people who built low down in the valley, as they heard the screams of the drowning. 
' By and by the water sweeps above the little hills, and then those on the high hills, in 
‘turn, congratulate themselves upon their high-built villas, But the water still rises ; it 


war see Bry 
> 


I2 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


a rr cr 


enters their ground floors ; they rush out of their grand mansions or hovels—for there 
was no difference-—and flee to the tops of the very highest mountains ; but only 
find respite for a few moments, for “all the high hills under the whole heaven were 
covered, and all flesh died that moved upon the earth... . and every man; all in 
whose nostrils was the breath of life of all that was in the dry land, died, ana every 
living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground.” Under that 
judgment-flood there was no difference. Lookacross the wide, level sea, and consider 
the thousands of caves and stupendous mountain chains that it hides, the plains and 
valleys, the dens of seaweed and the fortresses of rock; and the level sea rolls 
equally over all, and there is no difference. Drunkard and respectable lady, the 
hoary-haired sinner and the infant at the mother’s breast—-all were under that fearful 
flood, for there was no difference. Ifyou had been there, do you think you would 
have been made an exception of? You may be able just now to get anything that 
money can buy. Could money have saved youthen? Prince and beggar, strong men 
and weak, bad and good, were all equally swept away. There was no difference, It 
has happened already you see, and it will happen again—not with water, but with fire. 

When Jehovah rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from 
peienee out of heaven, there was no difference. All were equally destroyed : very 

ad and very good shared the same fate. This fearful, unprecedented shower falling 
out of heaven—brimstone and fire—took everyone by surprise, and <lestroyed every 
dweller there. ‘ He overthrew those cities and all the plain, and all the inhabitants 
of the cities.” There was no difference. 

When Israel was sheltered in the house of bondage from the destroying angel’s 
and, “It came to pass that at midnight Jehovah smote all the first-born in the land 
of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharaoh that sat on the throne, unto the first-born of 
the captive that was in the dungeon.” Judge and prisoner alike found themselves 
face to face with death. In the palace and in the hovel the voice of mourning was 
heard ; not one of the doomed first-born escaped. These first-born might have been 
beautiful, amiable, educated, and accomplished, or they might have been vile, 
degraded, ignorant, and hardened ; .butthere was no difference. It is with this 
God you and I have to do. 

When Jericho’s walls fell flat before the appointment, the ordinance of God, in 
righteous judgment “they (the Israelites) utterly destroyed aJ1 that was in the city, 
both men and women, young and old.” The strong man and the feeble woman, the 


‘ active young man and decrepit old man, were equally slain by the edge of the 


sword. There was no difference. 

The flaming sword of the cherubim, the flood of waters, the deluge of fire, the 
angel of death, and Joshua’s sword, all preach to you and me with calm decided voice, 
“There is no difference.” These things were written for us, that we might know what 
we may expect so that we might not leap intothe dark. Nothing will happen that has 
not been told us. 

A brother in the Lord could never get a young lady to think about eternity until 
he quoted this text, “The wicked shall be turned into he'i, and all the nations that 
forget God.” That word “forget” seemed to haunt her, May it haunt you, dear 
friend! Youdo not require to deny God’s existence, to mock at Him, to despise 
Him, to reject Him, to neglect Him; all you have to do is to forget God. Do you 
know the God who says, “ There is no difference?” Have you forgotten that He 
identifies you with all descended from Adam? Have you forgotten the God driving 
our parents out of Eden, and placing a sword crying for blood? Our brother Cain 
soon forgot ; our brother Abel remembered. Have you forgotten the God who swept 
away all in tke days of Noah? Have you forgotten that He is the Judge of the quick 
and the dead, and as there was no difference, so there is a day coming when there 
will be no difference. In the judgment ofthe quick, all the “ goats” are equally on 
the left hand—there is no difference. In the judgment of the dead, “the dead, small 
and great, stand before God” —small and great sinners, young and old, king and 


—_— 


there 
t only 

1 were 
all in 

every 
y that 
ynsider 
ns and 
a rolls 
dy, the 
fearful 
1 would 
ng that 
yng men 
nce, It 
vith fire. 
jre from 
d ° very 
ry falling 
ad every 
\abitants 


5 angel’s 
the lan 

‘t-born of 
emselves 
ning was 
ave been 
been \ ile, 
with this 


of God, in 

the city; 
man, the 
ge of the 


bf fire, the 
ded voice, 
snow what 
in that has 


rnity until 
Ations that 
you, dear 
to despise 
. Do you 
en that He 
od driving 
bther Cain 
who swept 
f the quick 
hen there 
equally on 
ead, sma 
1, king and 


RUIN, 13 


serf, peer and peasant—‘“and whosoever was not found written in the book of life 
was Cast into the lake of fire,” for there was no difference. Yourname may have been 
written on the communion roll of any or all of the churches, or it may have been 
written in the sheets of the Newgate conviction-book for murderers, but there is no 
difference. The lake of fire levels all distinctions. There may be, there are, many 
and few stripes ; there may be, there are, great and small cups full of wrath, but 
every cup, be it great or small, is full. The lake of fire—fearful thought— rolls its 
hideous sea of wrath and torment in one surging wave over all that have not been 
enrolled in the one book of life. In hell, and bn only there, for the first time, 
you will believe that there is no difference. Every one believes it there. 
Let me ask you to look at another picture. Three men are hung on three crosses. 
If you look at them, you will see that there is no difference. If you listen to what they 
are saying, you will hear one at the one side mocking Him in the centre, and the one 
at the other side saying, “Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same 
condemnation? And we indeed justly. but this man hath done nothing amiss.” 
The one in the centre is saying, “ Father, forgive them, for they know not what they 
do.” Those suffering “justly,” and He that had done “nothing amiss,” equally 
suffer, for there is no difference. Those needing forgiveness, and He praying for 
their forgiveness, are under the same doom, for there is no difference. Whoare they? 
Those on either hand are two malefactors, or thieves, who die by the condemnation of 
their law. He in the centre was proved innocent, and He is the Judge of quick and 
dead. He has taken of His own free-will the load of sin upon Him, and, under sin, 
He cannot be cleared. Spotless, pure, holy though He was, He cannot escape. God 
can by no means clear the guilty. ‘“ He hath raade Him sin for us, who knew no sin.” 
He is underx our guilt, and “there is no difference” between Him and the thief—He 
must suffer. Dear friend, does not this explain all difficulty about an innocent, 
am‘able, virtuous, accomplished lady being on the same level before God as a 
drunkard or murderer? Here is God’s perfect Son—yea, thelvery God-man—on the 
same level with malefactors, not for Himself, but for us. God became man, and gave 
Himself for our sins. This satisfaction that the innocent made for the guilty is 
offered to you, and you may ‘reely have it, for “there is no difference.” 

If ihe eye of the vilest sinner in this world should perchance rest on this—an 
outcast from all society, one who has lost all friends and all self-respect, the tottering 
drunkard coming out of his delirium tremens—I tell you as from God, this Christ is 
offered to you as God’s love-gift. You niay reckon Him yours, and proceed upon it as 
if He were yours as truly as I or any other person in this world do so. You have as 
much right to claim Him as we, for “there is no difference” in God’s sight— 

‘His blood can make the foulest clean, 
His blood avails for me.” 


Thus, my friend, for whom especially I write this, you have to take the lost sinner’s 
place, for God says, “there is no difference.” As I have said before, I could know 
this only from God’s Word. You have been as happy asa bird all your life, but you 
forget to find out what God thinks about you. I have tried to show you this from the 
Bible. I do not ask you if you feel it, for 1 am sure you never could, neither could 
any one feel all the catalogue of sins in Romans first and second chapters true against 
him individually ; but God knows us better than we know ourselves, and this is His 


' estimate of us. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


ALL HAVE SINNED. 


I. All have sinned, Rom. 3: 23. 

II. Ye have sinned against the Lord, 
Num, 32: 23. 

III. Thou,.... hast sinned against thy 
soul, Hab. 2: 10. 

IV. If we say we have not sinned, we 
make Him a liar, t John 1: ro. 


sinned against the Lord, 2 Sam. 12: 13. 
ned, Psa. 51:4; Luke 15:18. 


save sinners, 1 Tim, 1: 15, 


THREE STEPS IN THE BIBLE INTERPRETATION OF SIN. 


See Prov. 24:9, and kindred passages, 
III. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Rom. 
14! 23, 


I. The transgression of the law—lawless- 
ness, I Jno. 3:4. 
II. The thonght of foolishness is sin. 


SIN. 


25:4; Psa. 51:5; 52:2, 2; 130:3; John 
8:7; Gal. 3:22; 1 Jno. 1:8. 

IV. Sin described, Gen. 6:5; Deut. 9:7; 
Isa. 1:18; Matt. 15:19; Jno, 15:22; 
Rom, 3:20; 4:15; 14:23; 1 Jno. 3:4; 
5:17. 

V. The only remedy for sin, Luke 22: 
20; Jno. 1:29; Rom, 3: 25,26, Eph. 1:7; 
Heb. 9: 12-14, 22; 1 Pet. 2:24; 1 Jno. 1:7. 


I. Entrance of sin into the world, Gen. 
3° I-10; Rom, 5:12. . 

II. Its immediate consequences, Gen, 3: 
14-19; 4:11, 12; Num. 32:23; Job 14:1; 
Ezek, 18:4, 20; Jno, 3:19; Rom. 6:23; 
t Cor, 15:56; Gal. 5: 19-21; Jas. 1:15; 
Rev. 19: 12-14; 22:15. 

-III, All men are born in sin and commit 
sin, Gen. 5:3; 1 Kings 8: 46; Job. 15:14; 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


O lost to Géci was man that there never could have been any communication between 

the living God and dead sinners unless Jesus Christ, who was the life, had 

come into the place of death, and had been raised by the glory of the Father ; 
whereby dead ones are raised or quickened into life. 


PRIDE 1s one of the most prominent pillars in the midst of the ruins of man’s 
fallen condition. Its presence is one of the strongest evidences of his fall. 


THERE ic no difference. This truth lies at the root of all revelation from God 
to sinful men. There is no difference. St. Paul uses this expression twice : the first 
time in the third chapter of Romans, “There is no difference, for all have sinned and 
come short of the glory of God.” Man does not like this truth when it is preached ; 
it is often denounced as absurd and heretical, but it has stood since Paul’s day. Culti- 
vated men do not like to be brought down to the level of the mu.Zerer and drunkard ; 
and without doubt there is a ditference in degree, but not in the guilt of moral delin- 
quency. There is a difference as to the depth which men are down in the mud, but all 
are together in the horrible pit and miry clay. 


V. And David said unto Nathan, I have 
VI. Against Thee, Thee only, have I sin- 


VII. Christ Jesus came into the world to 


RUIN. ~ 15 


A PHOTOGRAPH OF THE NATURAL MAN. 


I, ''No good thing,’ Rom. 7: 18. V. Man is evil from childhood. Gen. 8; 21. 
II. At ‘enmity against God," Rom. 8:7. VI. The heart is deceitful ‘‘above all 
III, ‘Cannot please God,” Rom. 8: 8. things,” Jer. 17:9; also incurably wicked 


IV. Going back to the first verdict pro- (RV). 
nounced as to man’s natural state, and what VII. The only remedy is a “new heart,” 
do we find? See Gen, 6:5. Ezek, 36:26. J. E. W. 


ges. 
sin, Rom. 


1:3; John 


Deut. 9:7; 
Oo. 15:22; 
Jno. 3:4) 


Luke 22: 
Eph. 1:7; 
1 Jno. 1:7. 


bn between 
life, had 
e Father ; 


s of man’s 


from God 
le: the first 
sinned and 
preached ; 
lay. Culti- 
drunkard ; 
moral delin- 
ud, but all 


DO FOR A MAN. 


Many Bible instances 


WHAT SIN CAN 


~ I. Sin robs a man of peace, Trouble was 
' unknown to our first parents until sin came 
in to destroy their peace. Men living in sin 
' have no peace, Rom. 3:17. 

II, Sin shuts man out from God. He was 
cut off from fellowship with the Creator 
when he first sinn-d in Eden, Gen. 3: 6,7. 


others to destruction. 
of this. 

V. I: makes him a transgressor of the 
law; for ‘‘sin is lawlessness,” 1 Jno. 3:4 
(R. V). 

VI. He is helpless to deliver himself from 
the bondage of sin. ‘‘When we were yet 
without strength,” Rom. 5:6. 

VII. The wages, or fruitage of sin, is 
death. The only wages the devil pays the 
sinner is DEATH. See Rom. 6:23. 

J. E. W. 


III. Sin makes a coward of a man. 
Hence we read that ‘‘ The wicked flee when 
no man pursueth,’’ Prov, 28:1. 


IV. Sin makes manatool for Satan to lead 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


dul righteousness which is of faith is contrasted with the righteousness which is of 

the law. It is utterly useless for any one of us to attempt to secure righteous- 

ness on the ground of law-keeping, for if from this moment until we are a hundred 

_ years old we never committed one sin, it would be all up with us; we have sinned in 

the past, the line of cortinuity is broken, and we must get upon another line altogether ; 

the righteousness which is of faith comes in when the righteousness which is of the 
law is broken. 


ONE has well said: “People waste their time in mud-measuring. One says: 
‘My foot is only covered with mud, but look at that fellow, he is ankle-deep in it; the 
one who is ankle-deep in mud says, ‘Look at that man, he is up to the knees in mud ;’ 
while he, in his turn, says, ‘I am not so bad as that man, he is up to the neck in the 

>= mud.’ It is of no use to talk like that; here is a rope-ladder to help you all up from 

_the pit. ‘Oh,’ says one, ‘I am as good as my neighbor, and better than many.’ Very 
true, perhaps, but that is only the difference between being up to the knees in mud or 

_up to the neck ; if you are in the pit, you need a rope-ladder that you may get out and 

_ place your feet upon a rock, for there is no difference. One man with decent boots on, 

_and only one foot a little muddy, says, ‘I do not believe there is no difference. Do 

| you mean to say I am no better than that fellow there up to his neck in the mud?’ 
_ No, my friend ; and very likely the man up to his neck will get hold of the ladder first, 

_ for he is so shocked at the mud that he is glad to get out of it; while the respectable 

' man spends his time arguing about the depth of mud he is in. It is not mud- 

' measuring, but salvation, we have to do with, for ‘there is no difference, for all have 


e 


_ sinned and come short of the glory of God.’” 


16 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


FIVE THINGS ABOUT MAN’S PRESENT FALLEN STATE. 


The Scriptures clearly state the following 
five things as attending man’s present fallen 
State: 


1. Great darkness of understanding. 

We know nothing as we ought to know. 
Carnai men are blind, and cannot see afar 
off. ‘Io them the doctrines of the Gospel, 
and even the terms in which they are taught, 
seem strange. In their sight the most 
glorious objects possess no lustre. Even 
Jesus Christ is to them without form and 
comeliness, In Him they see no beauty, 
that they should desire Him. In heaven, 
and among the righteous, He is the centre 
of attraction. To the unrenewed, He is as 
a root out of a dry ground, 1 Cor. 2: 14; 
Eph. 4: 18, 


II. Maz in his fallen state is guilty and 
condemned. 


See Rom. 5: 12-19; Rom. 3:19. 


III, Man is vile, depraved. 

Job. 40:4; Gen. 6:5; Matt. 15:19; 
Mark 7: 21, 22. 

IV. In his fallen state man is miserable. 

Rom. 3:16,17. His misery is so great 
that the wholecreation groaneth. The sighs 
and groans and screams of earth are inferior 
only to those of the pit of woe. Men con- 
tinually gather vanity, 

V. Man is helpl.ss. 

Ke is without strength, Rom. 5:6. He 
has no might, Isa. 4o:2¢ He cannot 
come to Christ, except the Father draw him, 
Jno. 6:44. He is as weak as water. 


To such the Gospel ought to be good news. 
As we come into the world we are dead in 
trespasses and in sins. Yes, by sin we are 
dead. But in the Scriptures Christ is repre- 
sented as ‘Our Life.” This life is the 
light of men. The believing sinner is made 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


[N the Epistle to the Romans, it is not until all men in the world—good, bad, and 
indifferent—have been brought in guilty before God, that Cod opens up His secret. 


THE criminal has been found guilt 


at the bar, the judge has pronounced the 


sentence, the convict now awaits execution ; his prayers, his tears cannot save him ; he 


is condemned. 


It is in vain that he loudly calls for mercy, and promises amendment 


for the future ; the sentence has been passed ; the law is inflexible and his blood is 


demanded. 


By the fall is declared the fact that we are no princes, but slaves to those horrible 
despots, sin and corruption; our beauty is faulty and evanescent; our wisdum 
is foolishness ; our purposes are continually broken off ; our bodies date their tenden- 
cies to dissolution from the day of our birth. 


THE plan of Satan showed that God had not yet deprived him of his wisdom ; 


though, alas! it had been changed from the noble power of a 
High to the cunning of a deceitful intriguer ! 


rir-e of the Most 
He would not make his assault with 


ower and terror; for that would drive the assailed into the arms of their piotector 
instead of ont them away from Him, and their earnest cries for help would 
Ce) 


quickly call down 


t lightnings upon their daring foe. But he would present himself | \ 


in the form: of an inferior and subject animal, from which they would never suspect 
harm. For, like all his children of this world, Satan, though proud even to destruction, 


can yet degrade himself to the very dust jn order to carry out his purposes. 


a partaker of Christ's merits,‘ and of His 
Spirit. By His Spirit, we are created anew 
in Christ Jesus unto go~d works. His 
| righteousness justifies us; His Spirit sancti- 
fies us: and by His righteousness, sin is par- 


RUIN. 17 


by His amazing energies, the Spirit becomes 
the author of our pe ‘sonal holiness. Christ's 
righteousness gives us a title to heaven; 
His Spirit gives us a fitness for heaven, 
His righteousness gives us authority to be- 
come the sons of God; His Spirit gives us 
meetness for beholding the face of our 
Father who is in Heaven. Theone answers 
all demands of the penalty of the law; the 
other secures conformity to the precepts of 
the law. Christ's blood washes away our 
guilt; His Spirit washes away our defile- 
The former delivers us from the 
curse of the law; the latter removes the 
stain from our soul. The one purges our 
consciences, the other our hearts: Without 
the former, we are accursed; without the 
latter, we are polluted. 


W. S. PLUMER, D.D. 


"991; VE believed the devil ; believed this beast of the field, as she supposed him to be, 
> }e4— rather than the great Creator of'allthings. Earth, laden with her countless tombs 

sever sighing for the credulity ; Ocean, as his chasing waves roll over the bones of 
aultitudes lying amid their unheeded treasures, moans in response ; and Hades, while 
his vast realms are being daily peopled by fresh colonies of unclothed spirits, solemnly 


As a proof of man’s ruin do we not continually percsive, both in ourselves and 
thers, the workings of that feeling upon which Satan played in the case of our first 
arents? Does it not ng ay in self-will, which is the determinacion to be obeyed as 

Is it not evident in pride and conceit, whether arising from 
wirth, ability, beauty, wealth, or any other source? May it not betraced in that bound- 
ss self-confidence which puts forth its own wisdom and opinions as alone worthy of 


15: 19s doned ; by His Spirit sin is expelled. By 

His merits we become righteous in law; by 
1iserable. His Spirit we become upright in heart. By 
so great His righteousness imputed, weare accepted ; 
The sighs by His Spirit imparted, we are purified. 
re inferior His righteousness rcmoves condemnation ; 
Men con- is Spirit takes away depravity. 

Christ’s righteousness is put upon us; His | ™ent. 

Spirit is put within us. His righteousness 
3:6. He Mis reckoned to our account; His Spirit 1s 
He cannot poured upon us, His righteousness was 
draw him, Swrought out for us; His Spirit works in us. 
er. By His life of obedience and suffering, 
good news. C hrist brought in everlasting righteousness ; 
re dead in 
sin we are SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 
ist is repre- 
life is the 
ner is made 

proclaims that God is true. 

d, bad, and 
His secret. fod instead of obeying 
punced 7 
vehin;he [aay.: : : : 4 > 
Spay dment “PeRotice, and expects them to be received with gratitude and deferred to by all ? 
his blood is 


IN the fall of our first parents the prince of this world prevailed. The new crea- 


ion had been seduced to rebellion ; there was no longer any bar to the resumption of 
fis dominion. Forth from the ground he rose triumphant, and expanding his shadowy 
vings over the recovered territory, impeding the pure rays of God’s sun, and dropping 
hick the poisonous promises of sin, under which earth’s flowers faded, her fruits 
*@Pithered, her plenty was restrained, and she brought forth evil as well as good. 


_ WHEN they fell the guilty pair became suddenly conscious of the vileness of that 
esh which had been the medium of their transgression: they were bewildered with 
he painful sense of a fall from the eminence on which God had placed them, of their 
esemblance to the brutes around the a—nay, even of their unfitness to be seen. 


' THE Saviour showed Nicodemus that even if he could enter his mother’s womb a 
» gecond time, or a hundred times, or a thousand times, and be boru, it could do him no 
@good, for he would come forth with the same sinful nature, received from all his sinful 
mi@mothers back to the days of sinning Eve; and hence Jesus. said: “ Verily, verily, I 
magey unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he can not enter into 

Mie kingdom of God.” 


} 


bse horrible 
ur wisdum 
eir tenden- 


W 


is wisdom ; 
f the Most 
ssault with 
ir wxotector 
help would 
sent himself 
pver suspect 
destruction, 


GOLP FROM OPHIR. 


SIN AND SINNERSHIP. 


An Address by Pastor F. B. Meyer, B.A. 


WE are going to talk about sin and our sinnership. There is nothing more needful 7% 
just now than true proportional views regarding these. Sin and the cross are @ 
intimately joined. To make little of sin is to make little-of God’s masterpiece, the plan 7% 

of salvation, of Jesus as Redeemer, of the terrors of hell and the inexpressible glory of "7% 
heaven. In dealing with anxious ones I would not advise your appealing to them to (7a, 


trust to Christ ; that may be done simply to please you, and such ‘ust may cor : to a 
speedy end. Direct the mind of your friend to sin, itsenormity, ii heinous character. 
When the spirit of God applies this your friend will be very glaa to run to the Lord 
Jesus for salvation. Now let us try to understand for ourselves what sinis. Turn to 
Romans, to that grand argument of the apostle Paul. See how in the first chapter he 


establishes the sinnership of the Gentile race ; inthe second he deals still further with © 
it, but more especially with regard to the Jews; in the third he proves tuat none are 


righteous, and he goes through a catalogue of our poor human nature, with a terrible 


anatomical power. The throat, an open sepulchre; the tongue, an instrument of 7 
deceit ; and the lips of poison ; the mouth full of cursing and bitterness ; the feet, the | 
willing servants of sin hurrying on theiz way to the shedding of blood ; the eyes too, | 


the whole man, infected, contaminated with sin. See how the cubject is elaborated. 


Our sinnership is established in three distinc: ways: 1st. That we are all members of § 


a sinful race; 2nd, that allhave a tendency to sin; 3rd, that day by day, consciously 
or unconsciously, we are constantly yielding to sin. 


Let us consider these and see if we do not agree with the apostle, Rom. 3: 19, | 
“that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.” | 
We shall not stay long over the first of these. Turn to 1 Cor. 15:22. “In Adam all | 
die.” Death is the proof of universal sin—that we are a doomed race. This is further | 


carried out in Rom. 5:14. There we see that the penalty of death came upon all, 
showing that all are the children of Adam, identified with the sinful head of the race. 
The whole of the human family is one tree, the same in nature from the root to the 
extreme tips of the branches. And so also are all under God’s divine purpose of grace. 
The ownership of sin and shame lies at every door. So it becomes us all when we 
approach the throne of grace to bemoan before God not only individual! sin, but the sin 
of the race. And. never forget this great fact that if the stock of the first Adam is all 
wrong the stock of the second Adam is all re-created. The first birth brings doom, the 


second salvation. I charge you, oh men, who are under the doom of old Adam and his & 


race, not to close youreyes till by the second birth you pass from death to life. Now note 
our second point—our original nature. In the Bible it is called the “Flesh.” Spell it 
any way you please, it is the same forward or backward. But if you do ix backward 

ou will have to drop the “h,” and Englishmen can easily do that, and then you will 

ave self. Selfis flesh, flesh is self. It is the 1, that which says “TI will,” “I wont,” 
“me, me, me ; my, my, my,” always. - ‘Lhat’s the old nature, there is no mistake about it. 
Some people say that they have got rid of it, but I’m not so sure about it. We may 
lame old Adam, but he’s not so easily killed as some people think. This selfish life 
came by birth, see Gen, 5:3. Adam begat a.son “in his own likeness.” See how this 
compares with Gen. 1: 26. When men speak to me about our descent from inferior 
animals I turn up this text, “And God said, let us make man in our image after our 
likeness.” Man was made on the outlines of the character of God-—love, truth, purity, 
and other cognate qualities, but Gen. viii. 21 tells a different story: “The imagination 


of man’s heart is evil from his youth.” Our Lord brings this out still more clearly ing 


pone 3:6, “born ofthe flesh.” To all of us here this applies ; we all come from this 


ow evil origin ; in all of us this tendency reveals itself. Read Eph. 2:3, and you will = 


hud, tk 
YOU Cal 


meart. 
mou una 


We 


but how 
bught I 
ppiritua! 


oul. } 


read, “| 
there is 
L find t 
fnough 
after thi 


od hae 


hat. self 


re needful 7% 
cross are — 
e,the plan | 
le glory of | 


o them to 
cor :to a 


character. | 
> the Lord © 
. Turn to | 
chapter he | 
irther with | 
it none are | 


RUIN. 19 


‘. understand it better—that everybody without exception lives ir the lusts of the flesh. 


a terrible 7 
‘rrument of © 


ie feet, the | 
ie eyes too, © 


elaborated. 


nembers of § 


consciously 


Rom. 3: 19, | 
efore God.” § 
Adam all | 


s is further 
e upon all, 
bf the race. 
root to the 
e of grace. 
ll when we 
but the sin 
Adam is all 
5 doom, the 


am and his 


Now note 
” Spell it 
t backward 


ke about it. 

We may 
s selfish life 
ee how this 
om. inferior 
ge after our 

th, purity, 
magination 


e clearly ing@ 


e from this 


nd you will 


) the other all lives revolve. 
Mis the love of God, love to man. 


faong as you live here, until you enter life beyond the pearly gates. 
living according to the flesh, the “I” life, then I fear you will never know the salvation © 


reast, Christ’s life lives in you. 


but how I could increase and quicken my spir‘tual life. 
pught I to attenu a few more conferences? read a few more books? or apply to some 
bpiritual teacher to assist me?” The question was how to get the life of God into my 
soul. 


read, “If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live.” 


[ find there germs of holy living that will fructify in my heart, that is inspiration 
tnough for me. Now, see what I had to do: “ mortify the deeds of the body.” Look 
After this mortification ; that was my part of it. 
mod had to see to that. 


hat. self-love is cast out ; the Holy Spirit looks after all the rest.—Christian Leader. 


But to some of you this may apply, Eph. 4 : 22, “Ye have put off the old man.” Now, 
have I made it plain? That :here are two centres or pivots of life—and around one or 
The one is love of self, the flesh, self-seeking ; the other 
It is the manifestation of the selfish life in so many 
forms that constitutes our sinnership. When you are on your knees confess that you are 
a member of a sinful race, as well as your personal transgression. Now this selfish life 
shows itself in bias and brings us to thesecond point. You have watched the bowl 
rolling on the green. It has been turned in the lathe and one side made heavier than 
the other. See how it gets out of the straight line and bends to the bias. That is the 


Bway withus. Just as the young tiger shows its nature by licking up blood, so does our 


vil nature assert itself, and it remains in us right away when we are converted and we 
have consecrated our lives to God. Still the tendency is there ready to assert itself. 
f temptation come, it is to it the temptation appeals. You are insulted. “Oh, I will 
Bive him biow for blow! I won’tstandit! I'll give him six forhis half-dozen!” That’s 
he way we go on, the selfish life demanding satisfaction, and we fume and fret till 
rther orders. Now, look at this: there is a clear distinction in the Word of God 
earding these two positions ; being in the flesh and tl. flesh being in us. The first 
indicates our state by nature; the second the state of being saved. The first is 


spoken in Rom, 8:8, “they that are in the flesh cannot please God.” The second 


is spoken in the second verse of the same chapter, “The law of the Spirit of life in 
esus Christ hath made me free from the law of sin and death.” This is perhaps 
better brought out in Gal. 5: 16,17. This was written to Christian people, mind you, 

d the apostle must have known what he was writing about. “The flesh lusteth 
igainst the Spirit and the Spirit against the flesh.” You see the word spirit is printed 


vith a capital S. Now you may understand from this that the flesh-life is yours so 


And if you are 


bf Jesus ; but directly you are born again, new principles take up their abode in your 
The Holy Spirit will take up his abode in your breast 

ind when temptation comes cry to Him, and He will give you the victory. It is as if 
the Holy Spirit took possession of my house and thrust old Adam down to the cellar. 
Dften he will try to come up, but a stronger power casts him down, and I hear him go 
ud, thud, thud, down stairs again to his own place, glory be toGod! Ah, young men, 
you can go through the streets of the city unscathed with the Holy Spirit in your 


meart. The devil might as weil try to set the ocean on fire with sparks as to catch 
Bou unawares. 


Well, Pll tell you what passed through my «;.ind the other day. I wanted to find 


I said to myself, “ Now, 


Now, I will tell you my discovery. I turned to Romans 8: 13, and there I 


Ah, 


here is no book like the Bible to help us on our way. Ask me about inspiration! If 


The other part, the life, the living, 
‘There was His promise: “Ye shall live.” I have to watch 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


BIBLE 


Dogs—Generally wild in the East, prow- 
ling about ¢he streets, savage, and feeding on 
garbage, Psa. 59:6; Matt. 7:6; 2 Pet. 
23.22) 

Swine—Delighting in filthiness and dirt, 
2 Pet. 2: 22. 

A cage of unclean birds, Jer. 5:27; 
Rev. 18: 2. 

Defiled garments, Isa. 64:6; Rev. 3: 
4; Jude 23; like Joshua’s, Zech, 3 : 3. 


Spots and blemishes—Spots ‘‘ that God 
hates and man hides,’’ 2 Pet. 2: 13. 

Sepulchres—‘ Full of dead men’s bones, 
and of all uncleanness."”” Matt. 23 : 27. 

Under the Mosaic ritual, the defiling 
character of sin was brought out very 
prominently, as in— 

The leprosy—The special type of sin, 
Lev. 13th and 14thchapters; the melancholy 
picture of corruption, loathsomeness, and 
decay ; affecting persons, garments, houses, 
beginning insidiously, and spreading with a 
relentless progress, until complete destruction 
left nothing more to do; and besides, in- 
curable. 


ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DEFILEMENT OF’ SIN. 


The rites enjoined in the case of the leper é 
all denoted, in the most humbling manner, 7 
the mournful effects of sin; see Lev. 13 : 45 
46; the rent clothes, bare head, covered lip 
and the leper’s pitiable cry, if any one came 
near, ‘‘ Unclean, unclean!" and the separa- || 
tion from society, without the camp. Some 
of these signs are same as those appointed 
in mourning for the dead. 


Regulations abont social life.—Child- 
bearing, Lev. 12: 2-8; food, Lev. 11th chap; 
disease, Lev. 15th chap.; contact with un- 
cleanness, Lev. 5 : 2, 3; II : 24, 25; 22: 5,6. 


Regilations about death.—Touching 2 
dead body, or carcase of a beast, or a grave, 
Num, 19: 11-22; Lev. 17: 15, 16; 5: 2-13; 
even entering the tent where the dead | 
Num. 19: 14; the priests mourning for the 
dead, Lev. 21 : 1-3. 


sd 


Regulations about sacred duties.—E ver! 
taking part in thuse, in some cases, made) 


men liable to ceremonial uncleanness\ = 
Burning the sin offeriug, e. g., on the day off 
atonement, Lev. 16:28: leading the scape/ 
goat into the wilderness, Lev. 16: 26, etc. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 
ESUS declared : “Ye will not come to me, hat ye might have life” (John 5 : 4o); 


but the words would have no meaning, if we have life, whether we do or do nom 


come to Christ. 


“But God, who is rich in mercy, for His great love wherewith he loved us, evey 


when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace are y@ 
saved),” Eph.2:4,5. The Holy Spirit doc; not say that sin had introduced som§ 
disorder into the moral faculties of the soul. He does not say that they retained 
divine spark in the breast which, with the kindly influences of a proper culture, coul@® 
be kindled into a flame. He does not say that they possessed a germ which, with th 
applianc 1s of religious teaching and church nurture and good example, could } 
developed into salvation. He does not say that they had been injured by the fall, ant 
were like a man with a broken limb who needs a surgeon, or like a sick man _needin 

a physician ; but they were dead, and therefore needed God. If the inspired apost) 
used language with even an ordinary degree of intelligence and meaning, he plain 
teaches that those to whom he wrote had once been dead, actually dead, in sins ; an 
death implies three things: first, absence of life ; second, insensibil'ty ; and thir 
helplessness. 


of the leper a 
ing manner, © 


ithe separa- ” 


camp. Some) 
se appointed © 


life. —Child- 
vy, 11th chap.; 
act with u 
1,25; 22: 5,6. 


_—Touching 2 
ast, or a grave, 
5, 16; 5: 2-13, 
the dead 1 


urning for the ™ 


duties. —E ven” 

e cases, made? 
uncleanness 7 

_on the day o!f# 


ing the scape) 
. 16: 26, etc. 


(John 5: 40); 


e do or do ni 


loved us, evel 
by grace are ):@ 


troduced some 
hey retained 


culture, coul@ 


Which, with th 
le, could ! 
by the fall, am 
man needin 
ispired apost 


Ing, he plain 


H, in sins; al 


ity ; and thir 


—_—S_E_EONEHE_EC a 


RUIN 


© The red heifer was a striking illustration © 
pof the imputation of defilement, Num. 
19: 1-10. (1). The heifer itself, as bearing 


he uncleanness of the people, was to be 
arried without the camp. (2). Eleazer was 
© offer it, not Aaron, that the high priest 
might not be defiled. (3). Eleazer, the 
briest, the man who burnt the heifer, 
nd even the ‘‘clean man” that gathered 
he ashes, were all rendered ceremonially 


t nclean by the performances of these duties. 


Even the sanctuary itself might be defiled, 
ev. 20:3; Ezek. 5:11; 2 Chron, 36: 
fy Ex. 20:25; Psa. 74:7; 79:1. 


© The moral leprosy.—It would be difficult 


> describe to the full the awful extent of 
he spreading taint of sin. Trace in Con- 
ordance under the head of defiled, and see 
Ow sin is inscribed on man’s mind and con- 
ience — body — hands — feet — flesh—gar- 
hents—house —land, etc.; under filthy— 


Of filthiness of the flesh and spirit "—“ filthy 


Onimunicatious’’ — ‘filthy lucre’’ — (five 
mes)—‘‘all filthincss and superfluity of 
aughtiness'’— ‘‘even our righteousnesses 


are as filthy rags,’ and manis ‘abominable 
and filthy ''—'‘ altogether filthy.” 

Zech. 3-dchap.—The high priest Zech- 
ariah represented Israel appearing before 
the Lord—first, clothed with filthy garments; 
then clothed with change of raiment, adorned 
and crowned with personal and official 
dignity. 

Haggai 2: 11-13. 


‘How much more easily is uncleanness 
communicated than purity! One drop of 
ink will stain a glass of water, but one drop 
of water cannot purify a glassful of ink. 


Isa. 52: 11.—‘* Touch no unclean thing.” 
One of the greatest lessons the Lord would 
tcach His Church. It was the charge given 
to Israel on their entering Canaan—" Defile 
not yourselves,” see Concordance; on their 
leaving Babylon, Isa. 52:11; applied tothe 
Church of Christ in her separation from the 
world, 2 Cor. 6:14. Isa. 35:8; 52:1; 
Ezek. 44:9; Zech. 14:21}; Rev. 21: 27. 
The entire absence of all defilement in the 


Church’s future glory. 
G. S. BOWES. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


F‘HRIST spoke of the unconverted:as dead, when He said to the man who would 
4 bury his father before following the Lord, “Let the dead bury their dead” 
uke 9:60); and when he represented the prodigal’s father giving warm welcome to 

pe wanderer in the joyful cry, “This my son was dead, and is live again” ’ 


Luke 15 :24). 


THE whole current of Scripture in its bearing upon His redeemed people, who 


ave slipped down into the world, is an earnest exhortation to arise from among 
le dead, because it is a most unseemly thing for those who have life te be seen 


rovelling amid the associations of the charnal house. 
fou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light” (Eph. 


“Wherefore he saith, awake 


£14); or as Rotherham translates it, “Up! thou sleeping one, and rise from among 
ie dead, and the Christ will shine upon thee.” 


_ OF all the children of Adam, male and female, old and young, rich and poor, 
lucated and uneducated, moral and immoral, religious and irreligious, it is thus 
Ainly, positively, and repeatedly affirmed in the word of God, that apart from Christ, 
‘until Christ is received, they have no life. What evidence of utter ruin ! 


» MANY a father, yea, many a Christian father, looking with unutterable pride and 


rning upon the youn 


girl who is the joy of his home, if he coul« sr > her in the 


t of God’s word, would exclaim in deep distress, “ My daughter is even now dead” 


att. 9 +18), : 


Hl} 


Racer 
4 
t Helis 
j rit} 
a q 
i 7a he 
-iei 
} 
| ait} 
ne ; 
F i 
Hd ih 
; it} 
bith 
j Wt 
f } 
paeees | 
i } 
igi } 
} i 
} } 
i 
H t 
a) I 
i f 
| 
e Gath 
j ‘ 
H PEGG 
4 Hitit 
i. al) 
| tit} 
H Halil 
} But 
ia} 
t i 
| Hail 
! 
| | 
| Hi 
i 
| 
| | 
| 
: 
‘ay 
ei 
| 
| 
} 


pares 


22 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


Leprosy, Lev. 13th and 14th chapters.— 
Loathsome — defiling — separating— spread- 
ing — incurable. 


Physical disease.—The blind—lame— 
deaf — dumb —- palsied — withered—bowed 
down; doubtless our Lord’s miracles of 
healing such, were spiritual parables of the 
cure of sinners. 


Wounds—bruises, Isa. 1:6; 30: 26; 
Luke 4: 18. 

Poison—venom, Rom. 3:13; Jas. 3:8. 

Death, Eph. 2:1; Jas. 1:15; 5:20. 

Burden, grievous and intolerable, Matt. 
Ir: 28. 3 

Slavery, as to the worst of masters, Jno. 
8:34; Rom. 6:20; 7: 14; the drudgery, 
worse still, of many lusts and pleasures, Tit. 
3:3; 1 Kings 21: 20-25, 

Captivity, such as in ancient times was 
marked by cruelty and hardship, when cap- 
tives were bound and often blinded, Isa: 
61 : 1.—See Concordance on Bondage. 

Leaven, corrupting—spreading, Matt. 13: 
333 16:6; xr Cor. 5:6-8; Gal. 5:9. 

Debt, even to the utmost and most hope- 
less extent—the bankrupt’s debt of ten 
thousand talents, Matt. 18: 23-25. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE late Sir James Simpson, of Edinburgh, who was not less eminent as a Chris- = 
tian than he was as a physician, tells in one of his excellent tracts of a man who 


TYPES AND FIGURES OF SIN, 


Spots and stains—crimson and scarlet 
dyed, Isa. r : 18; double dyed (as the 
Hebrew word for scarlet implies), Deut. 32: 
5; 2 Pet. 2:12; jude 12-23. 

Fountain of Impurity, Jer. 6: 7. 

Floods, Psa. 18: 4; Rev. 12: x6. , 

Crooked—Perverse, Deut. 32:5; Psa. 
25:5. ° 

Cage, full of unclean birds, Jer. 5: 27. 

Uirdle, cleaving to a man, Jer. 13: 10, 11. 

Vine of Sodom, and grapes of Gomorcah, 
Deut. 32: 32. 

The old man; not called ‘old’ for 
weakness and decay (though Heb. 8:18 is 
true of the believer); but rather from anti- 
quity, because inherited from Adam, and "7g 
also because pervading the whole of man's 7} 
fallen nature. : 

The body of sin, Rom. 6:6; (‘‘ body,” @ 
as consisting of many members, and all ‘‘in- | 
struments of unrighteousness.’’)—See the @ 
catalogue: hands—lips—tongue—throat— 
feet, &c., Isa. 59: 3-7; Rom. 3: 13-17. 

The law of sin, Rom. 7: 25—the antago- | 
nistic principle to the ruling power of grace; § 
the deliberate, organized rule and system of 
evil, Psa. 94: Io. 


yale ncRNA SLA NERS ASE 


cen nen imapeemnnimanaetpteeasutniannenneiive rerecenenatetnrsne=neny 


was fatally wounded in the last duel fought near that city. A bullet struck the spine of 

the challenger, and when asked some hours afterwards how he felt—“ I feel,” he replied, | 
“exactly what I am—a man with a living head and a dead body mysteriously joined} 
together.” This is precisely what every man is by nature, excert that he has a living ime 
body and a dead spirit mysteriously joined together; so that it may be said of the 9 
whole world, “alienated from the life of God.” a : 4 i 


How appalling the results of the spiritual death of our first parents! The curse 
that followed blighted the fair face of creation, culminated in the expulsion of the 
sinner from Eden, in the shocking murder by his first-born son of a younger brother, 
in the banishment of Cain from the presence of the Lord, in the thorough worldliness 
of his posterity, in_the speedy corruption of the righteous seed, until, ““ God saw that 
ths wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually” (Gen. 6; 5). 


k 


a 


The reign of sin, Rom. 5: 21. 
The wages of sin, Rom. 6: 23. 


Words expressive of sin.—It has been 
Memarked how rich the Hebrew language is 
n such synonyms; may not the same be 
ail of most languages, our own not the 
ast? The ordinary Hebrew and Greek 
pords include the ideas of missing the mark 
- crookedness — deviating from the pre- 
Btibed pvath—lawlessness—rebellion, etc. 
Gi, the derivations similarly of our English 
mrds : amiss — abomination — err —fault— 
ty—evil or vile—ill—iniquity — trans- 
Jéssion — ungodliness — wickedness — mis- 
ef — haughtiness—corrupt—forward, etc. 


d scarlet 
i (as the 
Deut. 32: 


5. 


: 5; Psa. 


te yh 
13: 10, Il. 
Gomorcah, 


“old” for 
eb. 8:18 is 
from anti- 
Adam, and 
le of man's | 


he infatuated passicn™ of sinners after 
is similarly painted in the darkest éolcrs: 
laf where we read of them “drinking iniquity 
e water,” Job 15:16; drawing sin ‘‘as it 
e with a cart rope,” Isa. 5:18; running 
h swift haste after evil, Prov. 1:16; 6: 
revelling in lust, from which they 
nnot cease,” 2 Pet. 2:34; unabletosleep 
fhout doing mischief, Prov. 4:16; doing 
“day and night,” Micah 2:1; “with 
ih hands earnestly,” Micah 7:3; to the 
host limit of their power, Jer. 3: 5. 


6; ( body,” 
and all ‘‘in- 7 
)—See the ae 
ne—throat— 
13-17. 
the antago- 7% 
er of grace; F 
d system of 


aay 


as a Chris: 
a man who 
the spine of} 
.” he replied, 
iously joined 
has a living 
be said of the 


bidden fruit. 


Hlikeness” (Gen. 126). 


! The curse 
bulsion of the 

er brother, 
ih, worldliness 
od saw that] 


ation of the enmity is enmity still.” 


RUIN, 


@ee thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image.” 

ga;od did not consist in any physical resemblance, but it was wholly spiritue!, and 
§ spiritual resemblance having been ‘lost, Adam begat a so. in his own likeness. 
fat is to say, he transmitted his sinful nature to his posterity, according to.a law 
Strated in all departments of vegetable and animal life, and recognized even by 
del science, that “like produces like.” The nature thus transmitted from fallen 
& to fallen son is often in the sacred Scriptures significantly called “the flesh,” as in 
mn. 6:12, after the time when “ God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was 
rupt ; for all flesh had corrupted His way upon the earth.” So in Rom. 8 :6, 7, R.V. 


| THE Holy Ghost declares that the nature inherited from the first man is death, is 
lity against God, and as John Newton has well said, “an enemy may be reconciled, 


23 


The dark groups of many sins included 
in one sad list present a painful picture, 
which is often drawn. See Matt. 15: 19; 
1 Cor.6:9; Gal. 5: 19-21; 2 Tim. 3: 2-5; 
Titus 3:3; Rev. 21:8, 

Every sinner is a moral suicide, See 
Num. 16; 38; Prov. 8:36; 20:2; Jer. 
42:20 (marg.); Hab. 2:10; Hosea 13:9, 

Gal. 3 : 22.—'*The Scripture hath con- 
cluded (shut up) all undersin.” The Greek, 
“all things’—not only all mea, but all 
things in all men, as John 3 : 6, is not ‘‘he,” 
but “that which is born of the flesh is 
fle h.” 

1:John 5 : 19.—‘‘ The whole world lieth in 
wickedness '’—luiled in the fatal sleep with- 
out alarm, 

1 John 3: 4 may be translated—‘t Whoso- 
ever is a doer of sin is a doer of lawlessness, 
for sin is Jawlessness,"’ 


Ezek. 8 : 7-18.—The unfolding of what sin 
is, when clearly seen in its real deformity. 


Judges 2: 11.—*The children of Israel 
did evil in the sight of the Lord''—an ex: 
pression which occurs about fifty times asa 
terrible aggravation of the evil and danger 


of sin. 
Pastor G. S. BOWES. 


— 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


IE moment sin entered Adam’s soul he was “alienated from the life of God ;” and 
+ . . . “a: . 

‘ee the death of his body centuries later was but the comparatively trifling accident 
s@maccompaniment of the spiritual death that came upon him the very day he ate the 


| WHEN Adam was created God _ said: “Let us make man in our image, after 
But in Gen. 5 : 3, we read that “ Adam lived an hundred 


The likeness 


24 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


a TT 


THE USE OF THE MORAL LAW IN CONVINCING 
THE SINNER OF HIS SIN. 


By Dr. Wm, S. Plummer. 


6¢7T’HE law entered that the offence might abound,” Rom, § : 20; that is, that it 
might be seen by us all how many and ‘ll-deserving our sins were. Conviction © 
of sin is not confined to unregenerate men, nor to sinners in the earlier stages of 
religious impressions when a law-work is wrought on the heart. Important as this is, 
the law is not then laid aside as a means of conviction. To the close of life it continue 
to be of use to this end. It teaches us that we are not worthy to be called God’s | 
servants ; it shows that our strength to do that which is rightis nothing. Colquhoun: — 
“The children of fallen Adam are so bent upon working for life, that they will on no|~ 
account cease from it till the Holy Spirit so convince them of their sin and misery, a 
to show them that Mount Sinai is wholly on fi e around them, and that they cannot | 
with safety remain a moment longer within the limits of it.” ‘“ What things svever the — 
law saith, it saith itto them who are under the law ; that every mouth may be stopped 
and all the world become guilty before God,” Rom. 3:19. By our early convictio 
of sin, we obtain some faint impression of the necessity of salvation by grace. By ou 
subsequent convictions, we are led more and more to renounce all confidence in our-! 
selves for righteousness ; and to see more and more our need of the perfect righteousness! 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. There is no greater mistake respecting experimental 
religion than that which regayds the work of conviction entirely done when conversion! 
takes place. Itis true that sometimes there are certain horrors of conscience, certain) 
pangs of remorse. certain guilty fears and awful apprehensions of the wrath to come), 
which in an equal degree do but seldom afflict the soul after conversion. But these! 
‘horrors and fears are no necessary elements of conviction. He is truly convicted who} 
has a true sense that he is a sinner against a just and holy God ; and that he deserve™ 
ill and only ill at the hands of the Judge of all. He may not expect to be punished) 
David was an experienced child of God when he said of the commandments, “ by) 
them is thy servant warned ;” and “ who can understand his errors ?- cleanse thou 
me from secret faults,” Psa. 19 : 11, 12. 

“One may have set his hope in God through Jesus Christ; indeed, the more 
effectually he has despaired of helping himself, and the more completely he has casif 
himself on God in humble hope, the more ‘proper and deep are his convictions, This 
use of the law is much insisted on in the Scripture. Paul says, “ By the law is the 
knowledge of sin,” Rom. 3:20. And wk2n in the same epistle, he had proven the 
utter impossibility of salvation by the deeds of the law. he adds, “ What shall we sa) 
then? Is the law sin? God forbid,” Rom. 7:7. He then goes on to say how useful ii@ 
had beentohim. The spirit of his declaration is, that he never would have known wha' 
a poor, lost, undone, helpless creature he was, and that he never would have felt hi 
need of a Saviour, and never would have fled to.Him for refuge, but for the law. Hit 
words are, “I had not known sin but by the law; for I had not known lust, excepiiam 
the law had said, Thou shalt not covet,” Rom. 7 :7 as 

In ancient times, schools had teachers to superintend their instructions. Beside 
these, there were pedagogues employed to go around and gather the children anf 
conduct them to the school. It is probably to this latter office that Paul refers, whe 
he says, “The law was our schoolmaster” (literally our pedagogue) “to bring us i 
Christ,” Gal, 3:24. And as the pedagogue of old brought the child to school not on™ 
one day, but every day in the term, so the law brings us to Christ, not only when vag 
accept Him, but as often as we renew our hold on Him. “ The law is a star to lead 
one to Christ,” said T. Watson. The law shuts us up to the faith of Christ. 1t make 
Christ precious to the soul. Noman can esteem the redemption that is in Christ mon 


wert 


RUIN. 25 


highly than his sense of his own lost and ruined estate as a sinner shall rise. Tell me 
whit a man thinks of himself, and I will tell what he thinks of the Redeemer. Tell me 
what he thinks of the Redeemer, and I will tell you what he thinks of himself. Every 
» believer is ready to say, “I was alive without the law once ; but when the command- 
'ment came, sin revived, and I died. And the commandment which was ordained to 
life, I found to be unto death. For sin, taking occasion by the: commandment, 
deceived me, and by it slew me,” Rom. 7:9-11. So that “what the law could not do 
js, that it “7 in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful 
Conviction flesh, and for sin, condemned (or punished) sin in the flesh ; that the righteousness of 
x stages of _ ig might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,” 
is is ANom. 6 : 3, 4 

eveenee ) Why do the great mass of men feel so tittle interest in conversation, books and 
‘alled God's sermons which explain the way of salvation? Gbviously, the reason is, they have no 
Colquhoun . st view and sense of their deplorable condition, God’s Spirit is indeed the Author 
will on no f all true conviction of sin ; but in producing it, He leads the minds of men to under- 
‘ wiser’, asf and the nature of the law under which they live ; and to see that their lives, words, 
the aan } nd hearts are wholly destitute of conformity to its requirements. If men saw these 
y : lhings as the truth demands, and as they will one day see them, the preaching of the 
Gospel would be listened to in a manner far different, and with success far greater than 
ye have ever witnessed in the world. Then salvation by grace through a Redeemer 
vould be glad tidings of gfeat joy toall people. Listlessness would take her flight from 
worshipping assemblies. Eagerness would mould the features of every hearer ; and 
he swelling solicitude of each bosom would catch every whisper of mercy from the 
word of God as it was pronounced by the living minister. Let then all men study the 
law. Let them study it carefully, candidly, solemnly. There is a great Physician, but 
sinners will never go to Him unless they find out that they are sick. Let regenerate 
men also study the law. The more they know it, the closer will they cleave to Christ ; 
gand the more profound will be their humility ; and the better will they understand their 
indebtedness to Christ for fulfilling its precepts and enduriug its curse in their stead, 
d for their salvation. Ifa man loves God he will also love His law; and what one 
‘ched| loves he will desire and labor to know. “Christ’s promise of ease and refreshment 
be punish Bre sounds sweet after the thunderings and lightnings of Mount Sinai,” wrote Augustine. 
dents, Riot * The law gives commands, in order that, endeavouring to perform them, being wearied 
cleanse through our infiymity under the law, we may learn to pray for the assistance of grace. 
'... The utility of the law is to convince man of his own infirmity, and to compel 


righteousness | 
experimental J 
en conversion | 
ience, certain? 
rath to come,|% 
But these! 
onvicted who} 
t he deserve’ 


ee me cal him to pray for the gracious remedy provided in Christ... . . God commands what 
"ae a This : ye cannot perform, that we may know for what blessings we ought to supplicate 


Wh, cys The law was given to convict you; that being convicted you might fear, 


he law is the th at fearing you might pray frr pardon, and not presume on your own strength,” 


bd proven the 

t shall we sajj 
how useful 1 
e known whi 
h have felt hi 
the law. Hi a 
n lust, exce) = e 


ons. Beside 
children an@yy 

l refers, whey 
to bring us | 

hool not onlay: 


5 a star to leaj 
ist. 2t make 
in Christ mon 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


TWO SOLEMN FACTS ABOUT SIN. 


I. The Deceivableness and Unprofit- 
ableness of Sin: 

Like the vine of Sodom, Deut. 32: 32, 
33—fair in appearance, but bitter as gall; 
deadly ‘‘as the poison of dragons and ctuel 
venom of asps.”’ 

Like a sweet morsel, Job 20 : 12-14, 
14, which a man rolls under his tongue, and 
holds in his mouth to enjoy its sweet flavor, 
till it presently turns to the bitterness of 
gall, and he sucks the poison of asps. 

Like honeyed words of lust, that end in 
bitter wormwood, Prov, 5: 3, 4. 

Like stolen waters, that lad to death, 
Prov. 9: 17. 

Like bread of deceit, that fills the mouth 
with gravel, Prov. 20: 17. 

Like the vain toil of one who labors hard 
to earn wages, and puts it into a bag with 
holes, Haggai 1 : 6. 

Like the wild delirium of strong drink, 
that bites like a serpent and stings like an 
adder, Prov. 20:13; 23:32. 

Prov. 14:12, 16, 25.—'' There is a way,” 
etc, 


How true the following extract: ‘' Holi- 
ness is sweet in the way and in the end too; 
wickedness is sometimes sweet in the way, 
but always bitter in the end.” 


Prov. 12:26.—''The way of the wicked 
seduceth them.” 


The mirage of life.—The delusive appear- 
ance that cheats the fainting traveller with 
bright hopes of fountains and shady trees, and 
vanishes whilst he is still wasting his strength 
in the weary chase, IIl-gotten gains seldom 
last. Remember Achan and his wedge of 


gold, What profit was there in Naboth’s — 


vineyard to wretched Ahab? in the thirty 
pieces of. silver to miserable Judas? in | 


Gehazi’s talents? in the rich fool's barns || 
and the rich man’s purple? The gildedbait 7 


of sin cannot long hide the hook, Prov. 21: 
6; 2 Pet. 2:3. 


Eph. 4:22, ‘lusts of deceit;” 2 Thess. a 
2:10, ‘tall deceivableness of unrighteous- | 
ness; Heb. 3:13, ‘‘hardened through the | 


deceitfulness of sin,” 2 Tim. 3:3; Titus3:3, | ig 


“deceiving and being deceived.” 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


peer declares in Rom. 7:18, “I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwelleth 
no good thing.” He does not say that there was some little good about him, | 


a divine spark, a germ of holiness, but he declares that in the nature received tom 
fallen Adam there dwelleth no good thing. 


THE Holy Ghost asserts (Rom. 8:8) that “they that are in the flesh cannot 


please God.” This declaration is sufficient to.show man’s complete alienation from 
God. It shows that tHey may run the round of the sciences, they may explore the 
depths of philosophy, they may become familiar with the fine arts, they may be 
baptized in any or all of the modes ever practised, and by any or all of the ecclesiastical 
dignitaries on the face of the earth, but if they are in the flesh, if they have only the 
nature inherited from man, if they are not born again, if they are not made spiritually 
un oad ea please God, for “without faith it is impossible to please Him” 

» 11 36). 

IT is not enough to say that all men are doomed to death, but as the result 
of sin, and the sin of one man, death has already passed upon all men. They are not 
dead to their earthly ‘aterests and obligations and relations, but to God. : 


RUIN, 27 


II. The Progressive Character of Sin: Isaiah t : 5.—'t Ye will revolt more and 
Is like the leprosy, whether in a man's | ™vre.” 
body or in a house, characterized by a small 2 Tim, 3:13.—‘' They wax worse and 
_ beginning (Lev, 12: 36), a steady growth and | worse.” 
fearful end, 


t: 't Holi- 
send too; 


Num. 32: 14.—'tAn increase of sinful 
. the way, 


Is like a canker or gangrene, 2 Tim. 2: | men.” 
'17,a mortification in the flesh, spreading 
Over the adjacent parts, till death ensues, 
P unless stopped by a timely cure. 


Psa, 1: 1. 

The book of Psalms, at the beginning, sets 
forth the downward steps of sin, The un- 
| Is like a serpent’s bite, a little puncture, | godly (men regardless of God) soon become 
hardly visible, but large enough to admit the | sinners (the conscious and deliberate trans- 


he wicked 


jive appear- 


veller with ? ‘ 

Os ind fatal anaes gressors of God's law), and end in being 
‘aN am rengih Isa. 5: 18. ; scorners (the defiers and scoffers of all re- 
ains seldom It is a common saying among the rabbins, | ligion); thus, led by the siren lure of temp- 
's wedge of ‘Sin is, at first, like a fine silken thread, | tation, they first walk, then stand, then sit, 


a Naboth’s arcely felt; but the temptation strengthens without alarm, in the road to death. 
n the thirty 7 y habit; the fine thread grows to the thick- Isa. 57: 8.—'t Thou hast enlarged thy bed." 
Ju das? in Be ess of a cable or Cart-rope, which binds the Matt. 5:22.—Observe the growth of unre- 
fool's barns {ae hhappy victim with relentless power."’ strained anger. First felt, but silent; then 
1e gilded bait | | Jer.9:3.—''They proceed from evil to | venting itself in abuse, ‘‘Raca;” then in 
sk, Prov. 21: | il,” contempt, ‘' thou fool.” 
Es Hosea 13 : 2.—'* Now they sin more and 2 Cor. 12 : 20.—Observe the growth of 
» 9 Thess. a more.” strife from half-smothered debates and secret 
{nrighteous- : 2 Tim, 2; 16.“‘They will increase unto | envyings to open tumults and unchecked 
through the | fore ungodliness "’ quarrels. 
hs Titus3:3, | ae as a 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


A LL that proceeds from the old sinful nature must of necessity partalze of its charac- 
teristics, for like produces like, and the stream cannot rise higher than its 
: urce ; and hence the absolute necessity of the “new birth,” of a new nature from 
bove. 


gooue the flesh is a dangerous and deceitful monster, neither to be trifled with 
or trusted. 


| FRom the fall God has classed unregenerate man with unclean beasts. See Ex. 
3: 133 ly Every firsding of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb ; and if thou wilt not 
deem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the first-born of man among thy 
hildren shalt thou redeem.” A broken-necked ass, then, is the Bible symbol of the 
gesh, or of human nature, of whose dignity and grandeur we hear and read so much. 


_ Davip declared ; “Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother 
Onceive me (Psa. 51:5). This is not the extravagant statement of a gloomy fanatic 
r misanthrope, but the deliberate testimony of a man who spake as he was moved by 
ie Holy Ghost, showing that iniquity and sin are inwoven in the very warp and woof 
f our being. 

= _ BEFORE any open act of iniquity was committed, before any knowledge of good 
d evil dawned upon our infant minds, before any idea respecting God was formed, 


fore any word was uttered, before conscious thought heri 
Rigment in the soul ; any conscious thought was cherished, sin had a 


bsh) dwelleth | 
d about him, © 
eceived fom 
flesh cannot 
ienation from 
explore the 
they may be 
ecclesiastical 
ave only the 
nde spiritually 
please Him 


as the result 
They are nothy 


28 GOLD FRCM OPHIR. 
Pe RATES oA A AURORE Sie ams PR RE 


1 Tim. 5; 13.—‘‘ Not only idle, but tattlers, Babel-builders, Gen. 11:6'—"' This they 
also busybodies."’ begin to do; and now nothing will be re- 
2 Pet. 2:20.—'' The latter end is worse | strained from them.” 
with them than the beginning.” Lot.—A striking instance. He first chose 
Apostacy, after partial iliumination, brings | the neighborhood of Sodom from selfish 
the deepest darkness; as the eye is most | motives, Gen. 13: 10, 11, and pitched his 
dazzled in leaving a well-lighted room. See tent towards it; then he soon came to dwell 
Matt. 12 : 45. in Sodom, 14:12; then, worse still, after 
Jude 11.—Observe the reckless course of having been driven out, and losing all he 
sin—‘gone"—"ran greedily "—"pex shed.” had, he returned to dwell in it again; and 
this second time he seems to have settled 


Jude 16.—‘‘ Murmurers" (as it were, whis- | , 
perers of discontent in private); then “com- there, and become still more ‘intimately 
: connected with the place, even catching 


plainers,"” oponly expressing dissatisfaction ; n Pe 
rn ki at swellt f vanity. | Some of its evil spirit in acting unjustifiably 
Ys SRN iat elites Bande lath toward his own daughters, Gen. 19: 7, 8, 14. 


Matt, 24:12; Luke 18‘ 8.—As the wicked- Joseph's brethrea.—Envying « brother, 


‘ness of the world grew from the creation to ; voting : 
the flood, till the whole earth was filled with | Planning to kill him, covering their guilt by 
deceiving their father, 


‘violence and guilt, Gen. 6:5, 11, 12, 13, so 
shall it be at the end, before the second | Jstaelin the Wilderness, See Murmur- 
coming of the Lord. | he on 
. Examples: David, in his great fall, 2 Sam. rth 7 


~* Our first parents, Gen. 3rd chap.—The chapter, sloth—lust— deceit — adultery — a 
9 . — vf 
first sin was a true foreshadowing of the fatal sahlrahinok : col 
‘ progress of temptation,—listening—looking Peter’s three - 61d denial, each more vio- J 
—taking—tasting—eating—giving—excusing lent and terrible than the former, 
and defending. —Selected, 


eee ae en 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


S° deep seated and irremediable is the corruption of our nature, that even a quick- 

ened or regenerated man, looking to his own strivings for deliverance, is forced % 
to exclaim, “ Th~ good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I 
do. .... I finc then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is present with me. | 
For I delight in che law of God after the inward man ; but I see another law in my § 
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the 
law of sin which is in my members. O wretched man that 1am! whoshall deliver me 
from the body of this death?” (Rom, 7 : 19-24). 


THE tiger born to-day is like the tiger that was born outside of Eden, and the 
man who is born to-day is like the man who was born outside of Eden, in his relations 
toGod Ifatiger is caught and caged it does not cease to be a tiger, and although 
man may be conquered and curbed by law and education, his nature remains the same 
under all circumstances and in all generations, 


“THE old man is corrupt according to the deceitful iusts.” The mischief is 
within ; and so the faithful witness has said : “Ye must be born again.” : 


THE ruin is so great that you cannot im rove the “old Adam” nature, viz., the 
carnal mind or heart. It is so perverse and bad: that it can neither be eliminated 
nor improved. 


ed 


RUIN. 29 


This they 


aye | : SIN IN GOD'S SIGHT. 


trast with it the unspeakable preciousness of 


first chose | I. "Thou hast set our iniquities before 
m selfish Thee, our secret sins in the light of Thy _ the blood. 

tched his | countenance,” Psa. 90:8, The topic is | IV, In the light sin is judged, and in the 
etodwell 7 found in the text; Sin in the light of God's  Jight sin is put away,1 Jno.1:7 Christ the 
still, after | judgment. +» “light of the world,” ‘ bore our sins in His 
ing all he II. Man judges by what he feels; God own body on thetree."’ There the accursed 
again ; and judges by what he sees, Gen.6:5. It is hindrance to man's getting back to God was 
ive settled » in the “light” that the heinous character of removed out of the way. ‘'Beb~'* the 
‘intimately sin is manifested. The word isthe medium | Lamb of God that taketh away the sir of 
n catching that God uses with ‘vhich to “convince of | the world," Jno. 1 : 29. 

njustifiably in.”” See Psa, 119: 130, Jno. 3:19, 21. V. Light preced<s life. By the light we 
19: 7,8,14. © III, On the great Day of Atonement the | discover that we ‘are dead in trespasses 
a brother, whigh-priest had to go into the ‘light’ in | and sins,” and then we get life by receiving 
eir guilt by : he Most Holy Place. ‘There, in the awful | Christ, ‘*He that hath the son, hath life; 
presence of God, in the light that shone | and he that hath not the Son of God, 
beteewn the cherubim and mercy-seat, he | hath not life,” 1 Jno. 5:12. No life out of 
could, in a measure, see what a dreadful | Christ. J. F. W. 
thing sin was in God's sight, and also con- 


e Murmur- 
Sam, 11th 
-adultery — a 
3 a SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


h more vio- | 


: O we teach fables when we assert man’s ruin and wretchedness? Let sin give the 
—Selected. answer to that question—sin in all its shades of blackness, sin in its universality, 
= | Let sin fr-m the very commencement to the present day, give the answer, with all its 
tears and groans ; let sickness, and sorrow, and death give their evidence as regards 
man’s ruin. Every hospical, and prison, and grave-yard, and every coffin, and every 
shroud, tell us that this being, created in the image of God, is feeble, and fallen, 
ren a quick- degraded, and condemned, and therefore needs a Saviour. 


ce, is forced “For the love of Christ constraineth us : because we thus judge, that if one died 
i not, that I | for all, then were all dead” (2 Cor. §:14) Here again is proof positive of inan’s total 
nt with me. Overthrow by sin. The very fact of Christ’s death on the cross brings out the 

law in my [@gemecertainty of man’s complete alienation from his Maker. If man had not been utterly 
tivity. to the tdead toward God, Christ would not have died. : 


li deliver m¢ HS =56 Don’t ignore God’s verdict » it 1s, £ All have sinned and come short of the glo 

fof God” (Rom, 3:23); and again, “ By one man sin entered into the world, and death 
den, anc the by sin” (Rom. 5:12). Man says he cannot understand this ; but his own experience 
his relations proves it to be true. 


ind although - Don’r think that,all little babes are “little innocents.” They are not. They 
ins the same show “old Adam” before they have done with the cradle. 


_=2==- How complete was the fall and separation from God! God had fully blessed ; 
mischief 1s Satan suggests that God keeps back the best gift out of envy. lest man should be like 

Him. Man trusts Satan for kindness rather than God, whom He judges according to 
Satan’s lie. He believes Satan instead of God, when he tells him he should net die, 
as God said he should, and casts off the God who had blessed him, to gratify his lusts. 
Not trusting God, he uses his own will to seek happiness by, as a surer way, as men 
Fdo now, é 


ture, viz., the 
eliminated} 


e 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE MYSTERY OF DRESS. 


By A. A. Rees. 


‘‘And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed,”— 
Genesis 2: 25. i, 


6¢ A ND were not ashamed.” Wherefore this qualification? It is to imply that 

nakedness and shame were not originally snked together—that is, that God 
did not constitute their union ; and even reason tells us that artificial clothing was an 
after-thought, for if God made man perfect, as He did all the other creatures, wh 
should he, unlike them, need any supplement to his skin? No, he was not ashamed, 
because he was not self-conscious ; like the herds and the flocks, he knew not that he 
was naked, and so was no more ashamed of being as God made him than they were. 
In a word, he knew neither good nor evil within or without, and therefore could not 
make any distinction between being naked and being clothed. But sin “opened his 
eyes ”—that is, it created self-consciousness—and he knew what he did not know 
before, “that he was naked”—naked in body and in soul, But why should he be 
ashamed of this twofold nakedness? As to his body, it was unchanged; but his soul 
being how possessed by self-conscicusness, and sin being the object of that conscious- 
ness, he had a bad and guilty self-consciousness or conscience, which passed from his 
soul to kis body, made him ashamed of the nakedness of both, prompted him to hide 
his bodily shame by wearing manufactured clothing, and the shame of his soul by 
running frem the presence of God among t} 3 trees of the garden. But neither of 
these rudimentary coverings were sufficient. An apron of fig-leaves could not ccver 
the naked body, nor could a screen of trees coverthenaked soul, God’s voice speedily 
tore off these flimsy pretexts, and, after conviction and sentence, He supplied “ coats of 
skin” for their bodies, and a promise of redemption for their souls—the former being a 
type of the latter. Moreover, alas! all Adam’s sons and daughters came into the world 
with the same conscious twofold nakedness and shame, which they endeavor to hide 
by artificial clothing for the body and self-righteousness for the soul—that is, humanly- 
invented religion under one form or another. And until God’s voice pursues and 
arrests them they are complacent with their double invention, whether their clothing 
be the aprons of savages or the manufacture of Parisian milliners and tailors, and 
whether their religion be the fetishism of Africa or the pseudo-Christianity of Eu pe. 
When, however, the questions reach the covered and sleepy conscience, “Adam, 
where art thou?” “Whe told thee that thou wast iaked?” the self-righteous covering 
is torn and scattered to the winds, and the soul stands out in conscious nakedness and 
shame, while fashion is contemptuously discredited as the shameful development of 
primeval fig-leaves. "What now can cover the soul’s nakedness, not only from the eye 
of the conscience, but a!so from the eye of God? The answer is, Nothing but Christ. 
When the conscience sees Him as the perfect response to every Divine claim, all guilt 
and shame disappear, and God can be confronted not only without alarm but with 
full assurance. 

Man is not now, however, as he was in Paradise—innocentg’ norant, naked and 
shameless—but “ knowing good and evil,” selt-conscious, sinful, and yet not ashamed, 
if a Christian, because Christ is the a!l-sufficient answer in the conscience to confessed 
and repented sin, Furthermore, in proportion as conscience is cultivated and 
developed, so is the sense of moral guilt and bodily shame; hence, children and 
savages, with a rudimentary conscience, are but little sensible of the difference between 
right and wrong, and of the difference between being naked and being clothed. 
Behold, then, the vile origin of dress, and consider the monstrous preposterousness of 
being proud of it. As well might a convict be vain of his glittering and clanking 


e 
Re ee 


RUIN. p 


Ag fetters, the very badge of his crime and i 
fete : f i punishment, as me i 
. pais kasit ga psi Menger ra being the badge of their Se aida the plundered cei 
| ; » al 's of innocent creatures, and a neces il i i 
body, a partially sanctified soul, anc a de zed Oh haem dart che 
_ Self-conscisusness shall be replaced by a Bet he a ea 
bing contemplation of G 
_ new heaven and the new earth shall tika the ‘oh ., tS tliied sad dacmiins 
ace of th i i 
Creation, and when, as the result of Christ’s Gh pres ower ed Ge wre vem hoe, 
e ’ 


like His, shall leave it fs : , leem 
: glorified, “naked, and GA oppo heoess beneath the soil and step forth incorruptible, 


hamed."— 


mply that 
that God 
ng was an 
tures, wh 
ashamed, 
ot that he 
they were. 
could not 
pened his 
not know 
uld he be 
ut his soul 
conscious- 
d from his 
im to hide 
is soul by 
neither of 
not ccver 
ce speedily 
| “coats of 
ler being a 
» the world 
vor to hide 
, humanly- 
urrsues and 
ir clothing 
ailors, and 
of Eui pe. 
», “Adam, 
is covering 
edness and 
lopment of 
ym the eye 
but Christ. 
m, all guilt 
a but with 


naked and 
t ashamed, 
» confessed 
vated and 
ildren and 
ice between 
ig clothed. 
rousness of 
d clanking 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


CAIN. 


G@ Coveted the favor that his brother's offering got. 

A Angry because his brother is accepted and he rejected. 

| Inherited this evil from his parents, 

BH Neglected the sin offering that was crouching at the door. 


This was the sin of sins—that he would Bible). ‘If thou doest well, shalt thou not 
rot accept or bring the offering}that God | be accepted? and if not, a sin offering 
- required (see Gen. 4:7, margin, Newberry’s | croucheth at the door.” F, E. M. 


MAN’S RUINED CONDITION DESCRIBED BY GOD. 


I. Every imagination of the thoughts of XI. Guilty before God, Rom. 3: 19. 
a Deact wae. only evil cuatinuelly, Gen, XII, All have sinned, and come short of 
* 3 te glory of God, Rom. 3 : 23. 


II. Abominable, Job. 15 : 16. XIIT. Unens vith 
III. Ail gone aside, they are altogether eee es ee ee nee 


become filthy: there is none that doeth 4 
good, no, not one, Psa. 14: 3. XIV. Dead in trespasses and sin, Eph. 
a 


IV. Corrupt, Psa. 53: 1. ; ; ‘ai 
y Wulh ok evil: and tiadness de: their XV. Children of disobedicnce, Eph. 2: 2. 


heart, Eccles. 9: 3. XVI. Children of wrath, Eph. 2: 3. 


VI. From the sole of the foot even unto XVII. Without Christ, having no hope, 7 
the head no soundness in it, but wounds, | and without God in the world, Eph. 2: 12, 
and bruises, and putrifying sores, Isa. 1: 6, j , 

VII. The heart is deceitful above all | , pee Eee ee eee oe 
. things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17 : 9. a a 

VIII. Lost, Luke 1g : 10. XIX. Having not the Spirit, Jude rg. 

IX. Without excuse, Rom. 1 : 20. XX. Wretched, and misevable, and poor, 


X. None that seeketh after God, Rom. and blind, and naked, Re ; 


3:11. J. M. S. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


MAN must have life before he can obey, even to the slightest extent, any one of the 

precepts of the Lord. God gives not His lawto dead men, oz rather, if He does, | 
it is to show that they are legally, morally, and spiritually dead, and are utterly unable 
alg those commandments which the fact of their death proves them to have 

roken. 
ADAM, who had covered his nakedness, speaks of it when God is there as much 
ag if he had done nothing to cover it. And so it is with all our efforts to make out 
what shall hide our sin, or make out righteousness. Moreover man flies from God § 
before ever God drives him in os at peer from His presence and blessing ...... 
As representing the race, Adam had no promise; there is none to the first Adam ; all 
is in the second, the woman’s seed. 


God’s own description of him and his 
/ members. 

I. The Heart—From within, out of the 
= heart proceed :— 


RUIN. 33 


MAN. 


IV. Conscience—Seared with a hot iron 
1 Tim, 4:2. Defiled, Titus 1: 15. 

V. Feeling—Being past feeling, Eph. 4: 
19. 


; thou not I, Evil thoughts. VI. Understanding—Darkened, Eph. 4 
n Pt ag II. Adulteries. 18. 
akc , Ill. Fornications. VII. Eyes—Full of adultery that cannot 
a or cease from sin, 2 Peter 2:14; see Job24:15 
ase eR VIII, Hands—Full of blood, Isa x 15. 
. Covetousness. : es 
yD. VII. Wickedness. The act of violence is in them, Isa. 59:6. 
.y VIII. Deceit. IX. Feet—Run, make haste to evil, Isa. 
debs f IX. Lasciviousness. 57:7. ‘Swift, make haste, etc., Rom. 
ne short 0 X. An evil eye. 3:15. 
» XI. Blasphemy. X. Lips—Adders’ poison, Psa. 140: 3. 
agth, Rom. p XII. Pride. Poison of asps, Rom. 3:13. Unclean, Isa. 
XIII. Foolishness. 6:5. 
4 sin, Eph. | All these evil things come from within and XI. Throat—An open sepulchre, Kom. 
Maefile the man, Mark 7 : 20-23. 3: 13. 
3, Eph. 2: 2. a _Man’s heart is— XII. Mouth — Cursing and bitterness, 
: a 1. Deceitful above all things, 2. Desper- | Rom. 3: 14, 
233. Btely wicked, Jeremiah 17:9. 3. Foolish. XIII. Tongue —Deadly poison, deceit, 
g no hope, | . Darkened, Rom. 1: 21. 5. Blind, Eph. James 3 : 8; Kom. 3: 13 
ph. 2: 12. : 4 18, pane with covetous practices, XIV. Bon Pull of the eine of youth, 
th, 1 Tim. | | ghasaesiatag Job 20:11 
It. The Mind—Reprobate, Rom. r : 28. The whole head is sick and the whole 
cawre. ) efiled, Titus 1:15. heart faint. From the sole of the foot even 
III. The Thoughts—Of iniquity, Isaiah | unto the head there is no soundness in it, 
le, and poor, (RRR : 7. ; Isaiah 1 5, 6. S. TINSLEY. 
ius 
os SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 
'N the third chapter of Genesis we find—what, alas! has always happened, and hap- 
™ pened immediately when God has set anything up in the hands of responsible 
§4mman—disobedience and failure. The subtlety of the hidden enemy of our souls is now 
y one of the j work. The first effect is the distrust of God which he inspires ; then lust and 
if He does, isobedience ; utter dishonor done to God, whether as regards His tfuth or His love ; 
terly unable ¢ power of natural affections over man; the consciousness of being naked and 
em to have wwerless ; effort to hide from oneself; terror of God—seeking to hide from Him ; 
if-justification, which seeks to cast upon another, and even upon God, that of which 
bre as much 6 have been guilty. 
; ee God = THERE is no difficulty in understanding what is meant when it is said that a lion 


aan ; all | 


* the objects of His just displeasure. 


dy nature ferocious and blood-thirsty ; and in precisely the same sense it is affirmed 
jon the testimony of God Himself th.t by nature we are sinful, for by nature we 


34 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


artnet 


ILLUSTRATIONS FROM BOSTON’S “FOURFOLD STATE.” m7 


Sin is the natural man’s element; he is as , whence comes all the fry of actual sins and 8 
loth to part with it as the fishes are to come | abominations, 


out of the water on to dry lz.nd. ee ‘ a 
Though 5 The corrupt heart is lire an ant’s nest, on 
ough a stone thrown up into the air | which, while the stone lieth, none of them 


may abide there a little while, yet its natural | appear ; but take off the stone and stir them 
heaviness will bring it down to the earth | : 


as week asd ed up but with the point of a straw, you will 
peng osaeetnond te ik saan telioceeag return to | cee what a swarm is there and how lively 
the wallowing in the mire, because they | they be 
were not changed. ’ 


There was not one wrong pin in the | The natural man is always as a workman 
tabernacle of human nature when God set | left without light—either trifling or doing 


it up, however shattered it is now. mischief. Try to catch thy heart at any — 
time thou wilt, and thou shalt find either | 


weaving the spider's web, or hatching cocka- : 
trice-eggs, Isa. 59: 5. 


A disposition to establish our own right- 
eousness is a weed that naturally grows 
in every man’s heart, but few sweat at the 
plucking of it up—it lurks undiscovered. : ‘‘ By one man sin entered into the world, ” 

The sin of our nature is the cause of all | 4nd death by sin.” Behold the door b 
particular lusts afd actualsins, in our hearts | Which death camein! Satan wrought wit 
and lives; it is the spawn which the great | his lies till he got it open, and so death] 
leviathan has left in the souls of men, from | entered. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


» the second chapter of Genesis we have man in the order of created blessing, the) 
state in which he is; in the third, man’s fall from God, by which his intercourse 
with God on this ground is foreclosed ; ii: the fuurth, his wickedness in connection with 
grace in the evil state resulting from his fall ; what the world thereupon became, man 
being driven out from the presence of God. 


AFTER man’s fall we find he grew worse and worse, and God’s creation wa: 
utterly defiled and filled with violence, the two universal characters of active will out 
of God. As regards man, it was now brought out, when he was left to himself (for 
before the flood, save gracious testimony, he was so left), that every thought of his 
heart was only evil continually. 


SINS like deadly fruits abound on every hand ; but they are the visible outgrowth 
of the sin that like a poisonous root is implanted in every human breast. Currents 
and streams of gins that are impure in their lightest spray are flowing everywhere over 
the earth ; but they all spring from the sin that like a corrupt fountain has its source 
beyond the control of men. 


OF such a heinous character is the evil nature within us that if we had been bor 
blind and deaf and dumb, if we had been shut up in a dungeon at our first breath and 
cut off all our lifetime from any possible contact with the world, sin would still have 
reigned with imperious sway over every faculty of our being, and aroused every 
impulse of the heart in determined opposition to the will of God, whether preclaimedii@ 
‘amid the thunders of Sinai, or pleading in the tender accents of Calvary. 


al sins and x 


t's nest, on 
ne of them 
id stir them 
Nw, you will 
how lively 


a workman 
ng or doing 
eart at any 
t find either 
tching cocka- 


o the world, 


and so death 


blessing, the! 


s intercourse 


Innection with am 
became, man 


creation was 
hctive will out 


b himself (forj 


ought of his 


ble outgrowth 


st. Currents 
brywhere Over 
has its source 


ad been born 
st breath and 
buld still have 
roused every 
er proclaimed 


| The Lord put all maukind’s stock (as it 


If one lamb skip into a water, the rest 


RUIN. 35 


children of men, to whom it is very natural 
to embrace an evil way. 


We have fallen into the hands of our 
grand adversary, as Samson into the hands 
of the Philistines, and are deprived of our 
two eyes. ‘There is none that under- 
standeth.” 


The unregenerate part of mankind are 
rambling through the world like so many 
blind men, who will neither take a guide 
nor can guide themselves, and are there- 
fore falling over this and the other preci- 
pice into destruction.— Footsteps of Truth. 


were) in one ship, and, as we ourselves 
yould have done, He made one common 
her (Adam) the pilot. 


As the circumcised parent begets an 
ncircumcised child, and after the purest 
n is sown we reap corn with the chaff, 
the holiest parents beget unholy children, 
hd cannot communicate their grace to them, 
‘they do their nature. 


it are near will suddenly follow; it may 
o be observed in the disposition of the 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


TE find the sweet Psalmist of Israel saying, not in the hyperbole of poetry, nor in 
the extravagant confession of a morbid conscience, but in the inspired utterance 


a truth that applies to every child of Adam, ‘ Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and 
‘sin did my mother conceive me.” (Psa. 51:5). 


THE words of Genesis 6 : 5, “every,” “only,” “evil,” and “continually,” tell the 
palling story of the world’s utter ruin by sin without going further. 


__ THE story of man’s ruin is told out more powerfully and affectingly at the cross 
Christ, for there alone has the full enormity of sin been exhibited to the gaze of the 
tonished heavens. ‘God spared not His own Son,” because all our iniquities were 

id upon Him, although the inconceivable agony of the sinless sufferer must have 
pealed with inconceivakle urgency to the Father's sympathies, 


_ HE who is engaged in preaching the “ gospel of manhood,” or the “ gospel of 
fence,” or any other gospel than the good news of salvation for ruined man 
lely through faith in Christ, though he were an angel from heaven, let him be 
cursed. “As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other 
spel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.” (Gal. 1:9). 


® SURELY it is a solemn and suggestive fact that three times God deliberately 


) 


ssifies man with unclean beasts. This significant fact is in marked contrast with 
8 foolish, because false and fatal, exaltation of man, to which many of our most 
pular pulpits are now rendering their powerful support. These orators delight to 
yell upon the dignity and nobility of man, but according to God’s estimate of his 
ral condition by nature, his appropriate type is a broken-necked and worthless ass. 


_ THE very fact that the word of God imperatively demands that the sinner 
je born again,” furnishes proof positive that He has condemned the old nature as 


eoly and hopelessly bad, and has executed upon it the sentence of His righteous 
pleasure 


_A FAMOUS English physician, a Christian, remarks: “There are many figures 
i similes employed by God in the Holy Scriptures to represent to us our lost 
dition as sinners, such as rebels, slaves, blinded, deaf, etc. ; but to my medical 
id there is none more solemn than that which occurs twice in the second chapter of 


hesians, viz: “ in trespasses and sins.” The unregenerate, unbelieving soul 
lompared here by God to a corpse—a lifeless carcase ; it is “dead in sins.” bd 


36 GOLD FROM OPHIR.’ 


THE ROOT OF THE TREE. 


By H. F. Witherby. 


ee latter part of the fifth chapter of Romans treats of our nature, and from it we | 

take five divine proofs of man’s condition, opposite to which we place five views © 
of divine grace abounding towards man in his lost condition, “for where sin abounded /% 
grace did much more abound” (v, 20.) 


RUIN. GRACE, 
I, (v. 12). I, (end of v, 15). 
Sin, and death by sin, brought into the The grace of God brought to man: 
world : By one Man—Christ. 
By one man—Adam. hs 19); 
II, (v. 15). The free gift by grace abounding unto 
Many being dead; or having died: many: 
Through the offence of one man—Adam, By one Man—/fesus Christ. 
SINFULNESS. RIGHTEOUSNESS. 
III, (v. 18). III. (v. 18), 
The old judicial standing before God— The new judicial standing before God— 
to condemnation : justification of life : 
By the one offence of—Adam. By. the one righteousness of Christ. 
IV. (v. 19). IV. (v. 19). 
Many made sinners : Many made righteous : 
By one man's—Adam's—disobedience. By one Man’s—Christ’s—obedience. 
DEATH, LIFE, 
V. (v. 21). V.: (a2); 
The reign of sin unto death : The reign of grace unto eternal life; 
Brought in through one man—Adam. Brought in through one Man—Christ Jesus} 


We arrange these five views of God’s grace in the three divisions of Grace 
Righteousness, and Life, opposite to man’s Ruin, Sinfulness, and Death. 

First, then, there is the ruin, The ruin of God’s work when He made mai 
upright. 

I. Sin is brought into the world : 

“By one man sin entered into the world.” Innocence existed in ons man-f 
Adam. God made Adam free from evil; without the knowledge of sin. This wa 
the starting point of man’s existence upon the earth—a life in its moral characteristiogy 
totally distinct from our present life. But Adam preferring disobedience to obedienct 
and exercising his will, his nature became evil, and thereupon the character of th 
fountain of human life became changed. Innocence disappeared from the earth, an 
sin entered the world. This is the origin of our sinful nature which we receive 
through our parents, and with which we were born. We trace the river from hi 
present day tothe past generation—we follow it further and further till we reach it 
source—and we find that every age has produced a nature which is sinful. 

The nature of man is, moreover, actively evil, and the activities of our nature 27% 
» our individual responsibilities. Ifa wicked father beget a wicked son, the wickedne 
of the son is his own wickedness and his own responsibility, and not that of his pare 


® Ruin. 37 


he law of the land would not excuie a thief because his father and grandfather had 
been thieves before him, and neither does the divine law excuse us individually 
Ahecause of the sinful nature of the parent of our race. 

Had any man been born innocent, and retained his innocency, from him a fresh 
4 ream of life should have flowed ; but, “all have sinned.” This is the plain fact. It 
i from it we | mas unalterable. Neither does God Himself elect to change it ; but in contrast to the 
e five views | ark reality of sin’s entrance into the world there is grace. 


in abounded "755%. J, The grace of God is brought to man. ‘ 

One Man—Adam—by wilful transgression of God’s comman1 introduced sin and 
path into the world; by one Man—Jesus Christ—willingly, and in obedience to 
od’s word, doing God’s will, grace came to man. 

_ Man failed in his state of innocence, and brought ruin upon the whole human 
¢ ; thereupon God promised One by whom man should be blessed, and Jesus, dying 
F sinners in the activity of divine love, brought grace to the ruined race, and brought 
accomplishing redemption. God’s justifying , race flows to man from Christ, who 
dfor the ungodly. : 

God does not repair the ruin, or rebuild what man has overthrown, but God brings 
e to man in the ruin, and grace meets us just as we are, and just where we are. The 
ace of God brought to man in his present state by the one Man, Jesus Christ, is as 
tinct a reality as the ruin and the sin brought into the world in its first state by the 
i¢man—Adam. Sin entered the scene of innocence. Grace has entered the scene of 
n. 

- Not ony has sin been brought intc che world, but death also by sin, and thus : 


oe To man, as the offspring of Adam, is attached the penalty of 


4 
gone 


before God 


of Christ. om 
_ “Through the offence of one many be dead,” or have died (5:15). As a king, 


bon surrendering to the enemy, involves his kingdom by his act, and as, in his fall 

Ne kingdom also falls, so the race of man suffers the penalty of its head—the many, 
obedience. "ae multitude of mankind has fallen with Adam under death’s power. ; 
| “The wages of sin is death,” which solemn sentence Adam and myriads of men 
ive proved in their own bodies. Death is the wages of sin, but not the debt of 

‘ ture. God did not make in order to die, but by sin man forfeited his life, and now 
bternal life: | ith “death passed upon all men for that all have sinned,” and he who dies in his sins 
L—Christ Jesus ll ">e eternally banished from the presence of the Holy God. 

_ Thus, we have by Adam’s act, innocence gone, continuous life upon this earth 
st, and man sinning a few short years in a scene of suffering, and then leaving this 
@ rth altogether. No power in man to recover what is lost, no strength to lift himself 

e made ma it of his natural condition—Paradise behind, death before, and after death judgment. 


ions of Grace 


on® man-} 
sin. This w 
characteris! 
e to obedienct? 
Inaracter of th 
the earth, aq 
h we receive 
river from th} = 
ill we reach! ° 
ful. 


our nature 2% 
the wickedne 
iat of his parel 


GOLD FROM 8rum. 


CLOSING THOUGHTS ON THE SUBJECT OF RUIN. | 


LL unbelievers are, in the strong language of Scripture, dead. They are dead in 4 
the eye of Divine]ustice ; for as the condemned criminal is spoken of “asadead 
man,” when his crimes have brought on him the legal doom of death, so the unconverted ~ 


a 


cs 


man is likewise “dead,” because “the that believeth not is condemned already.” Further ~ 
he is.also spiritually dead on account of being cut off by his sins from communion with | 


the living God. For as a corpse moves not, stirs not, feels not, and cannot be roused 


so is he dead to all Jeve of God, and everything pertaining to the wondrous gospel o: 


Jesus Christ. 


THE unbelieving are carrying about, in connection with their living bodies, dead © 
souls, They remind us ofthe fearful punishment described by Virgil, as inflicted by © 


the mythical Mezentious, King of the Tyrrhenians, when he bound dead corpses to 
living men; and the living moved about with the dead, decomposing bodies tied to them, 
face to face and hands to hands! Many, very many, of those who walk our streets, 


ard some who frequent our churches, are just like Mezentious’s victims ;: only the dead, © 


corrupt, and putrefying thing is within. 
THE unregenerate are stalking charrel-houses, walking “ whited sepulchres,’ 
which outwardly “ appear beautiful,” but within are full of “rottenness ” and “ unclear. 


ness.” In God’s holy sight the soul of every unbelieving man—however moral, and | 


good, and virtuous, and excellent, and exemylary (in the estimation of the world) that | 


man may be—is dead—dead in trespasses and sins. For “all have sinned ;” “there | 
is none righteous ; no, not one.” And the dreadful eternal fate of every such unbeliever 7 
is this: “ He that believeth not the Son shall not see Life, but the wrath of God 


abideth on him.” What a terrific doom! 

AT the present day many persons have photographs of their faces taken, which | 
they present to their friends. But if it were possible to have an album of photographs | 
taken of our sinful souls, revealing and blazoning forth all the evil deeds they had each 
done, all the evil words they had ever spoken, and all the evil thoughts they had ever 
thought, how hideous and horrible would such a picture be! Would any man dare to 
give his true soul-photograph to any brother-man ? 

THE soul of the sinner is dead. And now comes the momentous question, 
How may it be rendered spiritually alive? How “born again” into new life? How 
recovered and restored from a state of death in sin, to a state oflife in righteousness: 
By nature and practice we are all sinners,—all “dead in trespasses and sins,”—all 
rebels against God. And the doom for every single sin of every sinner is eternal 
death—eternal separation and banishment from the holy presence of God. 

SIN is the blast which withers all the flowers of life. 


OH, the depravity of our nature! Some doubt whether it is total depravity. It 
deserves a worse adjective than that. 
MEN is helpless to vary the law under which he finds himself. Just.as the fish, 


which, at the approach of danger, fly above the waves, man may make efforts to belie 


free from sin, but his very efforts only demonstrate his inability to deliver himself% 
The short flights of the fish do not change them into birds, or deliver from the law o/ 
their existence, and they soon drop again into their native element ; and.man canno 
elevate himself out of himself. Nor does he, by efforts to rise above himself, escapt 
from the law under which he is born, 
Condemnation is attached to this governing principle of sin and death. Mat 

gravitates to destruction, as the apple falls to the earth. Man does not rise t0 

lory as the flame ascends upwards. Itis not in man’s being to direct his course to 

od and to heaven ; alas! it is his nature to get as far away from God as possible, ant 
to tread the broad road. 


re dead in 
“asadead 
sconverted 
» Further 
union with 
be roused, 
s gospel of 


dies, dead © 
inflicted by 
corpses to 
ied to them, 
our streets, 


ad ;” “there 
+h unbeliever % 
wrath of God |= 


taken, which | 
photographs : 
hey had each 
hey had ever} 

man dare to 


ous question, 
life? How 
ghteousness: 
a sins,’—all 
her is etern 


Hepravity. It 


ist.as the fish? 
efforts to bee 
Aliver himsellig 
om the law 
d-man cannd 
mself, escapt 


death. Mat 
s not rise t? 
his course t? 
5 possible, ati 


RUIN. 39 


THE extent of the terrible law of sin and d i i 
shy ne , eathis a : 
ye sg ae i id bial an Jesus _ not found. Eveswnee conan or Chie on 
Nir : nd wherever he ma j : an 
religious, or in those debased and profane, it cadens Pony rece denne cts gran 


In the Book of Leviticus we are 
t f 3 told that no leaven o: i 
or, hed fe the Revised Version, “ meal”) offering e eaaitad te ory 5 yp ae 
) “ceseghe sin, a no offering must have sin with it. Is not honey the pe Y hat 
Es Winds pin of human nature, which, when it comes into Jb | iegher 
it runs counter to God’s righteousness and _ holi i 
. . 1°) i 
. OM stig la ag must set aside all our natural feelings, sodutn ehat earns 
a peed e nda Nepliag concerning whatis called in the Book of Revelati wn 
- bg ele eo e oug t to bow and receive the statements, because God h a 
ce ate a ae ong propa al‘ ot us sinned in him, so that the 
U , , all. e are all dorn in iri 
¥ ' a state 
veal! Leghigiens | es ti ef thou eatest thereof thou shalt nee aie? Data aid 
agar ods zi hp : ager ar yes oh his sin ; but spiritual death cack 
om ‘ ined. Spiritual death is our herita 
brn to! pha pe Bible describes as “dead in treibasien Sate Mi 7 
iy ade A eo + fa ithe are part and parcel of this spiritual death in whi ia 
all bi oh, Mie = iy abet bee to Mt of something Woisd- cancel 
: t annihilation, but must b i . 
aed : I , b ust be a sta 
of solemn warning. This punishment is identified with the. ike oF ieruie 
9 . 


hich we read, “whosoever was no i i 
t found written in the Book of life” was cast. It 


3 


Ww ; ; 
‘ tonne pt be any pat of the Bible a clearer statement of the Gospel than i 
Aa withe a Spay which was written to set forth Christian doctri Tt at 
Beck choca ar id gc fie of sin. In chaps. 1 ad 2, and in the first h rat 
oo fis 08 ve the subject of sin explained ind opened u “Why? In 
ap 0 Prepare ou the rh which is afterwards to be piiounced. oa 4 h i 
- Setahelgaleiig at ae t in guil before God, then comes the revelation f he 
em that believe.” It is fo ee kate ye pi ink he ia upon ai 
a ure doctri in i 

* any. ‘opt ie ri agen eas fundamental truth. Riiderer ‘apenas, h weve 
ae en Lip ; ‘ Be : owever unattractive it is, the truth content he Nae 
eee os ai pots especially in these times. Amidst the man — ai 
BD econse of thas aie his pata ag oo more potent than ignorance on this pabiect 
By Gor has provided or nn re is so much ignorance as to the remedy 


| Mav, asachild of Adam, i 

5 { am, is not at the centre of the im ( 

t! ih Rabi ne without Christ, he does not know ne chntiny bes a ap a 

let, es and without end, only to lose himself more and Alege 

‘ ay the mo oe sete i and the energy of his moral faculties, do bat lac d be 

Ds to physic a age se vie aang aang hae than those hich anole 

inns} er : im tH 

fonsistent principles, which cannot be reconciled without Christ Moen er 
. ver the 


adency of man is always to i i 
Drcotie craven vets make of himself, as he is, the centre of everything ; and 


- You may galvanise a dead bod ‘ve it the 
and give it fe pe gar Such ake pode and give it the semblance of life, or rich! 

‘ 7 : ut d le i chly adorn 
is a true illustration of what the world i taorallp helore Cody br noritheeyting 
Fitaal igious lifé and outward adorning, it is a corrupt and E hotwrithistendiag 
: corpse, and only fit for burial. pt and worthless thing— 


40 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


HOLINESS implies a full knowledge of what sin is, and a complete hatred of 
sin. God only knows what sin is, and what it is to hate sin with determined, 
unchanged, and unchangeable detestation. 


RIGHTEOUSNESS is a perfect conformity to the law; if it be tried by the balance 
or the sanctuary, it is full weight ; if by the standard, it is full measure ; if judgment 
be laid to the line and righteousness to the plummet, it is quite upright. There is no 
defect in it of any kind. This is the righteousness of the law—it must be perfect and 
continual, failing in no one point: for the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of 
God. And it is an adjudged case that there is none righteous, no, not one. It is left 
upor. record that all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; therefore, by 
the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in His sight. 


IN one of Spurgeon’s sermons the following quaint but scriptural sentiments fell 
from his lips: “ T helleve in the fall. I am quite sure I must have fallen some time 
or other, for I know I am not as good as God would have made me, and as I shall be 
one day. But as I found myself in my natural estate when the Spirit of God woke 
me up to examine myself, I did not find myself to be the perfect creation of God. I 
found myself a fallen being while I was yet a boy. With godly parents and a holy 
training, yet I had abundant evidence that somewhere or other 1 had had an awful fall. 
Some people think that in the fall Adam broke his little finger ; he met with much more 
serious mischief than that. There was an awful fall for the whole race in that day 
when our great representative wilfully broke the law of his God. The Scripture tells 
us that the human heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. Perhaps 
you do not believe it ; but I know it was true of me, and I believe it may be true with 
the rest of us. When man once begins to see himself he begins to hate himself, and is 
ready to condemn himself outright. According to Scripture, there are tendencies in 
us towards evil. Do you find no such tendencies in you towards evil? Do you have to 
try and force yourself to think a wrong thought? Do you ever have to sit down and 
try to think of something evil? Evil thoughts come quickly enough of themselves, like 
ill weeds that grow apace. But when you wish todo right, and to study it, and to 
bring yourself intoan elevated frame of mind, is there not effort wanted, because 
of the oe nature which points downwards and towards evil w.chin, a3 Scripture tell us 
it does 


THE course of man commenced with disobedience, it developed with human 
progress ; till, by reason of human iniquity combined with satanic energy, God sent 
the flood, and swept the face of the earth of its sciences and its cities, of its arts and 
its wickedness. 


AFTER the flood, the re-peopled earth became, morally, like the side of the moon 
lying in the shroud of its own shadow ; even then darkness covered the earth and 
gross darkness the people. The world worshipped demons, and even Israel redeemed 
from idolatrous Egypt, carried images of demons in theircamp. The licentious acting 
of the human will led the heathen into every form of horrible self-indulgence (Rom. 
I : 23-31), till man became what beasts can never be—lower than himself. The Jews 
transgressed the law Jehovah gave them, and by transgression became more culpable 
than the Gentiles, who had but their consciences to accuse orto excuse them (Rom. 
2 i 15) and who, not having the restraint of divine authority, sinned with uncurbed 
“wills. 


“DEAD in trespasses and sins,” “Sons of disobedience,” “Children of wrath,’ 
such is the solemn record of God concerning man ! 


THE heart of man i: the filthiest place, excepting hell, that can be. 


THERE are depths in the mystery of sin which it is as impossible for us to fathom 
as it is o us to sound the depths of the mystery of godliness. Speculation is worse 
than useless. 


' creatic 
' natura 
' readin 


‘The hg 


| This ig 


trans 
give 
mere 
God’g 
And 
we ar 
Scrip 
than 
very “ 
law is 
impre 
sin, 


S 
pain, ( 
envy, 
robbe} 
is the 


readin 
cross, 


By co 
what al 
it is le 
forsake 


———— 


ed of 
Lined, 


lance 
zment 
»is no 
t and 
lom of 
is left 


re, by 


ats fell 
ie time 
hall be 
d woke 
30d. I 
a holy 
ful fall. 
sh more 
hat day 
ire tells 
Perhaps 
rue with 
f, and is 
ncies in 
1 have to 
ywn and 
Ives, like 
, and to 
because 
re tell us 


human 
od sent 
arts and 


he moon 
arth and 
edeemed 
us acting 
e (Rom. 
he Jews 
culpable 
m. (Rom. 
luncurbed 


nf wrath,” 


to fathom 
is worse 


RUIN. 41 


HistTorY and experience tell us that sin is not a mere passing defect which time 
removes. It is true that there are certain sins which disappear in certain places 
as the ages roll on; but while certain sins vanish, sin always abides. The fountain of 
evil never runs dry, though the streams that proceed from it varyin their appearance and 
their character. The sins of childhood, its peevishness, and changefulness, and disobedi- 
ence disappear as youth opens before us ; but youth biings with it a pride, a vanity, a 
recklessness of its own. As a youth passes through the golden gate of manhood, a 
sobering influence passes over him ; but strong passions, a longing to be rich at any 
cost, the love of pleasure, a determination to crush others down, and mount the ladder 
of life over their heads—such foes as these lie in wait for him; how few fully escape 
from their hands! And when old age comes upon a man, the shadows close around 
him, and the fountain of many pleasures once delighted in dries up ; then avarice often 
lays hold upon him, hardening, petrifying every tender thought and feeling, and withering 
the whole nature up. Sickness is found often to make men selfish, and prosperity to 
produce pride, riches to foster selfishness and luxurious living, poverty to produce 
discontent. Each event that happens to a man seems to have some sin corresponding 
to it, which it is apt to awaken in,his heart. Evidently the tree 1s corrupt in all 
positions and at all seasons, and it brings forthcorrupt fruit, 


WHAT is sin? In t John 3, we read that “sin is the transgression of the law,” 
or, as I think it may be more correctly defined, “Sin is nonconformity to law.” If we 
ask what that law is, we find that it 1s not the law of society, not the iaw of public 
opinion, but the law of God which is expressed either in the two great commandments 
given by Christ, or in the Ten Commandments contained in the law of Moses. These 
set forth God’s claims upon us as his creatures. If we take the law positively, as in 
the two commandments, it is perfect love—to “love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart,” and to “love thy se as thyself” These things none of us do. We - 
transgress the law, we do not conform to the law, we are sinners. What we need is to 
give up this shallow view which we naturaily have of sin, when we account sin as 
merely a breaking forth of corruption in this or that direction ; and we need to embrace 
God’s definition as something more searching, more real, and more comprehensive. 
And I ask, which one of us (at all acquainted with his own heart) does not feel that 
we are rightly brought in sinners before God? After all that we can say in presenting 
Scripture truth concerning the nature of sin, I believe that we need a teacher more 
than man to bring it home to our hearts. While the Word of God sets before us a 
very clear definition of what sin is, namely, nonconformity to law, and that “by the 
law is the knowledge of sin,” yet we need the Spirit of God who wrote that Word to 
impress it upon our hearts, and I believe that the Spirit does come and convince of 
sin. Then, and not till then, do we really understand what this fearful evil is. 


SIN is the grand cause of the misery and sorrow in the world at this very day, 
pain, disease, and death ; strifes, quarrels, and divisions ; wars, battles, and fightings ; 
envy, jealousy, and malice; deceit, fraud, and cheating ; violence, oppression, and 
robbery ; selfishness, unkindness, and ingratitude—all these are the fruits of sin. Sin 
is the parent of them all. Sin it is that has so marred and spoiled the face of God’s 
creation. More than all, sin crucified the Son of God. 


WE shall know more deeply in eternity the meaning of sin, and the evil of the 
natural heart. How are we to know it now more deeply? By looking to Jesus; by 
reading such passages as Romans 3; and by looking at the cross of Christ. By 
reading of “feet swift to shed blood,” and marking the feet of Jesus nailed to the 
cross. The throat an open sepulchre,” and the cry of the Son of God, “I thirst.” 
‘The hands ready for iniquity, and the hands of Jesus fastened in judgment to the tree. 
By counting what evil members one must have, by what Christ suffered on the tree ; 
what a cursed head mine must be, since the Son of God was crowned with thorns. 
This is learning holiness, first in learning to hate what we see God judging in His Son ; 


it is learning to shrink from that which made God’s Son say, “Why hast Thou 
forsaken Me ?” 


42 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


SIN is at once a state, a guilt and a pollution. = reason of our sin we have 
become alienated and separated from all personal fellowship with God. No man who 
does not know Jesus Christ can have any peaceable relations with God. Nor does he 
care for them. He lives and walks with his back turned upon his Creator. He is 
living in God’s world without God. God is not his Father, nor does he call upon Him 
as such, nor ever pray to Him with any assurance of being heard. He is a self- 
orphaned outcast. This is the state or condition in which sin leaves every man. 
Besides this, sin is a guilt. Every man by reason of his sin has rendered himself 
justly obnoxious to the sentence of the divine law. For sin is not an accident or 
merely a misfortune in which man without his consent or agency has become involved. 
It is a voluntary state ; and a transgression against the righteousness and holiness of 
God, for which he is brought under the just judgment and sentence of the divine law. 
Again, sin is a pollution. It has defiled man’s spiritual nature, corrupted his 
affections, thrown his whole moral nature out of harmony with God and filled him 
with all uncleanness, so that his heart becomes the fountain and source of all the evil 
with which the world is corral aigOr gp this destroys in man all fitness for 
fellowship with God or those wh® are in h y fen hip with Him, and also unfits him 
for all happy service for Him. But in.addition to all this, sin has brought us under 
the malign influence of Satan, and put us’ “ompletely in his power that, as is written, 
we “being dead in trespasses and sins, walk according to the course of this world, 
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the 
children of disobedience.” 

THERE is a striking change in the grand panorama of Genesis from the first two 
to the third chapters. Where there was rest and beauty but yesterday is chaos and 
confusion to-day. First, we see formation ; then, deformation ; and third, re-formation. 
In human history man was made in the likeness cf God ; ’‘is is formation. Man 
by his own wilful act sinned against God and fell into mor _ 10s ; this is deforma- 
tion. God appears to man with a promise of salvation throt + seed of the woman, 
and there begins out of Eden the work of man’s re-formation, shese same steps are 
seen in the history of the Church and of the Jewish race. : 


THE sin of Adam was not merely an inconsiderate act without a moral reaction 
upon his own nature, but a corroding poison penetrating the whole person, the injurious 
operations of which are transmitted upon all the descendants of the ancestor. The 
fall of man became an established condition in consequence of which we are ushered 
into existence as enemies of God and His law, infected with a perverted nature. 
“ That which is born of the flesh is flesh,” John 3:6. “The carnal mind .. enmity 
against God, for it is not subject to the law of ‘God, neither indeed can be. So then 
they that are in the flesh cannot please God,” Rom. 8:7-8. O how is the glorious 
image of God marred, how is the original temple of the Holy Ghost ruined! “ From 
the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it, but wounds, and 
bruises, and putrifying sores ; they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither 
mollified with ointment,” Is. 1:6. It is the nature of sin in the repetition of transgres- 
sion to extend in growth and increase in force until it asserts a predominating position, 
bringing the subject into captivity to the law of sin, Rom. 7:23. The sinner then, by 
reason of the carnal-mindedness of his will, is delivered up to sin, sold under sin, verse 1 4. 
“To whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are,” Rom. 6:16. 
Behold the drunkard, the angry, the voluptuous, the proud—how they “ sit in darkness 
and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron,” Ps. 107: 11. Once 
they coudd sin, now they ust, for sin has become unto them a despotic law. 


Cain had no bad companions to teach him sin; he had no evil example to 
follow, for he was the first man that was born on the earth; but the evil came /rom 
himself, from his own debased heart, and he was ready, as soon as an opportunity 
offered, to murder his brother. How long it takes us to learn the lesson that man 
cannot be improved, he “ must be born again.” 


sin 
wha 


pro 
\, ' Go 
utter 
be w 
fora 


andl 
have 

4 to “ 
f 
 estim 
' lovey 
of Hi 
_ agains 
 childr 
- on hin 
_ worm 
' agains 
the Gc 

' are no 
not D 
| wrath, 
' sinfuln 
' of the t 
: As 
Aa stained 
| trees n 
| supplie 
> him, it 
roam t 

| bird of 


; the sac 


W 
© of the fq 
sWinish 
‘to exergq 
And all 
E abjects, 


SI 
to think 
-upon m 
MA 
6:53), h 
in huma 
God—th 
Satisfy t 


ave 
who 
s he 
le is 
Him 3 
self- 


nan. ‘ 
self 
nt or 
lived. 
ss of 
law. 
| his 
| him 
e evil 
ss for 
; him 
under 
ritten, 
vorld, 
in the 


st two 
9s and 
1ation. 
Man 
orma- 
oman, 
bps are 


paction 
jurious 
The 
shered 
ature. 
enmity 
bo then 
lorious 
‘From 
as, and 
neither 
nsgres- 
osition, 
hen, by 
erse 14. 
h, 6: 16. 
larkness 
Once 


ple to 
e from 
prtunity 
at man 


of the forest ; nor in t ; 
swinish indulgence ; nor in those who, refusing to recugnize the authority of God, fail 
to exercise any authority themselves. Sin reigns, as the Apostle says most truly. 


RUIN. 43 


THE curse that from the first has followed sin, and above all the cross whereon 
sin was condemned and punished, show that words cannot tell nor mind conceive 
what sin is, and what is the wrath of the Holy One against it. There lies the need for 
propitiation, There is Divine wrath to be turned away. Whilst that wrath remains, 
God cannot receive man, and man cannot approach God. If we ask how God’s wré.n 
utters itself, we may venture to sh : In separation from the sinner. Can anythiay 
be worse than that? Can outer darkness, or any other terrible figure depict what it is 
for a soul to be left with its sins, cut-off from God ? 


Ir is among the most potent of the energies of sin that it leads astray by blinding, 
and blinds by leading astray : that the soul, like the strong champion of Israel, must 
have its eyes put out when it would be “bound with fetters of brass,” and condemned 


to “grind in the prison-house.” 


APPALLING as sin may appear to us, when viewed in the light of God’s Word, our 
estimate of it falls far short of what it is in the sight of a holy God. God is love— 


' love which passeth knowledge, love which only finds outward expression in the cross 
| of His dear Son. And yet we read: “The wrath of God is revealed from heaven 
_ against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men ;” the “ wrath of God cometh on the 
_ children of disobedience ;” “‘ he that believeth not the Son... . the wrath of God abideth 
- onhim;” “to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever ;” “where their 
- worm dieth not, and their fire is not quenched ;” “treasure up unto themselves wrath 
| against the day of wrath;” “in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that obey not 


the Gospel ;” “the wine press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God.” These 


' are not merely isolated passages, but such as occur throughout the Scriptures. It jis 
not Divine sorrow of which they speak, nor even Divine displeasure, but Divine 
' wrath, and when we put then together we have an indescribable revelation of the 
| sinfulness of sin. Many of th :o no doubt are figurative, but God’s figures are figures 
of the truth, and their truth is sustained by history. 


As a result of the fall man’s crown is rolled in the dust, his honor tarnished and 


' stained. His scvereignty is strongly disputed by the lower orders of creation. If 
| trees nourish him, it is after strenuous care, and they often disappoint. If the earth 
| supplies him with food, it is in tardy response to exhausting toil. If the beasts serve 
| him, it is because they have been laboriously tamed and trained, whilst vast numbers 
roam the forest glades, setting him at defiance. If he catch the fish of the sea, or the 
: bird of the air, he must wait long in cunning concealment. 


So degraded has man become that he has bowed before the objects that he was 


» to command, and has prostrated his royal form in shrines dedicated to birds, and four- 

footed beasts, and creeping things. It is the fashion now-a-days to extol heathen 

philosophy, but how can we compare it for a moment with the religion of the Bible, 
pees its Pras are filled with mummies of deified animals, and its temples with 
the sacre 


bull? 


WHERE is the supreune? ofman? Not in the savage cowering before the beasts 
e civilized races that are the slaves of lust, and sensuality, and 


And all who bow their necks beneath its yoke are slaves, and menials, and c swering 


pabjects, in comparison with what God made and meant them to be. 


SIN defiles, debases, disfigures, and blasts all it touches. And we may shudder 
to think that its virus is working in our fame, as we discover the results of its ravages 


supon myriads around, 


MAN’s state by nature is that of spiritual death ; he has “no life” in him (Jno. 
6:53), he is “alienated from the life of God” (Eph. 4:18), There is no pulsation 
sin human nature which beats Godward, no craving within for God, no thirst after 
God—the source of life and light and love ; no seeking for rest in Him, who alone can 
satisfy the soul, 


44 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


an ee ns ee 


WHEN Adam fell from his innocency, not only did he become a sinner, but the 
primary instincts of his fallen nature led him to shun God, and to hide himsebf from 
His presence. Centurics have rolled on since that dark day, and men still are far 
from Gond—not indeed farther from God, as to their nature, than Adam, their pro- 
genitor, for that would be impossible ; brit, as regards the great mass of humanity, 
terribly farther off as to the knowledge of God, indeed utterly ignorant of Him, and 
living in the darkness of moral estrangement from Him. 


THE fine and noble qualities existent in man are the remains of the beauty and 
perfection of the divinely-made creature before the fall. They may be likened to 
fragments of sculpture and broken pieces of exquisite ornament which are dug out of 
ruined temples, and treasured in museums pertaining to civilized countries ; civiliza- 
ion admires the conceptions of ancient days, marvels at the skill that no longer 
exists, and seeks to imi‘ate the fragmentary marbles it has dug out of their hiding- 
places ; but at the same time lacks the mind and the hand which conceived and 
executed the works of its admiration. 


MAN has lost spiritual perception of God, and, as those creatures which, by 
reason of their dwelling in the darkness of the waters of subterranean caverns, havc 
lost the organ as well as the sense of sight, he lives and moves in the darkness of his 
nature’s distance from God, in a world, which, alas! has cast off God; and he is 
ignorant of the gloom in which he dwells. 

In the second chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, two intensely solemn 
statements are made .especting man’s state by nature. Men are there described as 
being dead in sins, and also as being the children of wrath :—‘“‘ You . . , . were dead in 
trespasses and sins . . . we... were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.” 
(Eph. 2:2, 3). The Apostle was writing to Gentiles, to people who had been 
“worshippers of the great goddess, Diana,” and of the image which, poor idolaters as 
they once were, they fancied had fallen “ down from Jupiter.” These Gentiles are the 
“vou,” and himself and other Hebrews the “we” cf the solemp statement. But 
whether Gentiles or Hebrews, “there is no difference, for all have sinned and come 
short of the glory of God.” . 


® 


Z 
“Gg k 

but the q 

ef from ‘sa 

are far 4 

eir pro- , | 

manity, : 

im,and —i 

uty and : 

ened to —ia™™ 
ig out of d 

civiliza- a 
> longer e 
- hiding- 
ved and #im 
hich, by ‘ 
ns, have = 
ss of his a 
nd he is ‘ 
> solemn 
ribed as : 
edeadin ji 
s others.” q 
ad been a 
laters as 4 R E 
s are the ag f : DEMPTION 
nt. But q . 
nd come 
; y :' Mi & vg MA ‘ ¢ 


ie | 

t 
mise: 
Chri: 
wort 
out ¢ 
mear 
reder 


word 
the 
migh 
word, 
same 
“You 
Chris 
is mé 
Eph. 
day o 
the id 
being 

z 


or poy 
word | 
3:13; 
them 

forum, 
the lai 
all furt 


spoken 


prophet 
all her | 
destruct 


REDEMPTION. 


By Dr. Jas. H. Brookes. 


[* is interesting to notice the different words employed by the Holy Ghost in 
the Bible to express the thought of our deliverance from an estate of sin and - 
misery, and our introduction into an estate of salvation bya Redeemer. All intelligent 
Christians know that the words of Scripture are inspired, and therefore they are 
worthy of devout and careful study. Never does the Spirit of God use a word with- 
out a special reason for its selection; and it may comfort our hearts to trace the 
meaning of the various terms in which He tells us of our Saviour’s glorious 
redemption. ' 

The first is /utroo, “to loose by a price, to release by a ransom.” This is the 
word where it is written, “ Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, . . . but with 
the precious blood of Christ,” 1 Pet. 1:18, 19; “who gave himself for us, that He 
might redeem us from all iniquity,” Tit.2:14. Inthe form of a noun it is the same 
word, when we read, “having obtained eternal redemption,” Heb. 9:12; and the 
same noun, with the prefixed preposition /rom, is found in the following passages : 
“Your redemption draweth nigh,” Luke 21:28; “through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus,” Rom. 3:24; “the redemption of our body,” Rom. 8:23; “who of God 
is made uato us ... redemption,” 1 Cor.1:303; “in whom we have redemption,” 
Eph. 1:73 “untii the redemption of the purchased possession,” Eph. 1:14; “unto the 
day of redemption,” Eph. 4:30; “in whom we have redemption,” Col. 1:14. Here 
the idea is release from bondage or captivity by the payment of a ransom, the ransom 
being the precious blood of Christ. 

The second word is exagorazo, “to purchase out, to buy up out of the possession 
or power of any one,” as Dr. Young renders it, “Zo acguire out of the forum.” This 
word is found in the texts, “ Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law,” Gal. 
3:133 “God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem 
them that were under the law,” Gal. 4:4, 5. The mention of the law shows that a 
forum, or court of justice, is in view ; and Christ, having paid the fine demanded by 
the law, having met the penalty of the law in behalf of His people, buys them out from 
all further claims upon them, and leads them forth into liberty. 

The third word is found in the Old Testament. It is pah-dah, meaning “to est 
free, let go,” but nearly always translated redeem. It is so rendered about fifty times, 
and occvis in such passages as these: “Israel, whom thou hast redeemed,” Deut. 
21:8; “the Lord liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,” 2 Sam. 
4:9; “What one nation in the earth is like Thy people Israel, whom God went to 
redeem?” 1 Chron. 17:21; “the Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants,” Ps. 34 : 22; 
“Zion shall be redeemed with judgment,” Isa. 1:27; “I will redeem them out of the 
hand of the terrible,” Jer. 15:21; “though I have redeemed them, yet they have 
spoken lies against me,” Hos. 7:13. He set His people free by the substitution of a 
spotless lamb, to bear the merited stroke of death in their room and stead. 

The fourth word is pah-rak, “to break off, to tear away, rescue, deliver.” In the 
sense of redeeming it occurs but once, and that place shows Christ reigning in power 
and mercy over Israel at His second advent, while the triumphant song ascends, He 
“hath redeemed us from our enemies,” Ps. 136:24. Dr. J. A. Alexander renders it, 
“snatched us from our enemies,” and adds that the “verb always denotes violent 
action.” This is in precise accord with everything that is elsewhere written in the 
prophets, concerning the way Israel shall be redeemed the second, and last, time from 
all her foes. It will be by the coming of the now rejected Messiah, appearing for the 
destruction of the nations gathered against Jerusalem to battle. 


[47] 


48 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


is 2’ d a division in Ex. 8:23; “I will put a division 
bet ie ane pecan But it will be observed from the marginal 
saad oe that Bo said to Pharaoh, “I will put a redemption between my people i 
thy a le.” It was indeed a division, mace by the sprinkled blood of the spot ess 
nhs bat it was first a redemption. The same word occurs in the following ake ‘ 
an int redemption unto his people,” Ps. 111:9; “with him is plenteous redemp- 
G dvae! me 0:7; “Is my hand shortened at all, that it can not redeem ?” Isa. 50 a 
God sane 4 dhisiok put between His redeemed people and the unbelieving world ; ' Th 
aud it must be so, if they have really felt the touch of the blood. 


founc 
i i ebrew, gah-al, meaning, not only “to redeem, ransom, forgo 
plea ee tie denen” a biage to view the eaffice of one, who at ep vba ; Ever 
Senian deliverer, redeemer, husband, and avenger. | It is ney in Na a orig | aa 
blessing. Tyee nia aN A Pind atte cat ‘Ex Bie. in Job's noble | intery 
sb: ill redeem you with a stretc ' x. 0:6; Ob zu 
seal “1 now that ay Redeemer liveth,” Job. 19 : 25 As a dlssanbhi a | op) 
“who redeemeth thy life from destruction,” Ps. 103 ‘4 5 in Isaiah’s p p Bu ae | and j 
Redeemer shall come to Zion,” Isa. 59:20; in Jehovah’s word of cheer : sae wees 4 judgm 
“1 wil! redeem them from death,” Hos. 13: 14. ee La ibe a ee oatit 
the wrongs His people have suffered for. seen six thousand year; anoth 
Bi Wis seventh ere ales tL sian dite the New Testament, and into LS aohbale Ncae | a * 
Wi cigle htaldder buy, to purchase,” or as it is in Young’s Analytical Concordance, 
wel ae we the et »P but three times in the Bible in the sense of founde 
“to acquire at the forum.” It te the bé k of Revelation. “Thou wast slain, and | away b 
Hiding Loca: gg ‘God by th ; blosd: ” Rev. 5:93. “redeemed from earth ;” Bo eeiteal 
hast secon sanene fie Rev th 3) 4. ‘Here the Lord Jesus is with His oe WN, 
fi the het aaurk of heaven, and He takes pererscin of rae oe eae den th si hice 
i i od. us a e wa ; 
Pe deradscon to. oie lenient sueacic of bliss, He is our Redeemer, to whom be } _necessa 


ms = mane eee erie maten ence mses cesses ae 3 
ee earl soeenosea - at : . oes 
PRESS “ohmic Dotty Saas aoe i 


I. T 
accordi 
with 
blessed 
foundat 
withal 4 
made si 
II, T 


praise now and ever, 


——— 


THE 
wi 
the sto 


glitter o 
death w; 


(1) 
world, 
to the b 
mercy o 
through 
who reje 
righteou 


i aon mnt ee ns ponent ein marily Nol 
A 5 emis st ae ence eae 
tw ee ik AAG RT etme = 


st RiabetiaT ina Na 


REDEMPTION, 49 


GOD'S COVENANTS FOUNDED ON THE BLOOD 
OF A VICTIM. 


By J. N. Darby. 


The necessity of the covenant being 
founded on the blood of a victim was not 
forgotten in the case of the first covenant. 
Everything was sprinkled with blood. The 
types always spoke of the necessity of death 
intervening before men could be in relation- 
ship with God. Sin had brought in death 
and judgment. We must either undergo the 
judgment ourselves, or see our sins blotted 
out through its having been undergone by 
another for us. 

Three applications of the blood are pre- 
sented in Heb. 9:12-22. ‘The covenant is 
founded on the blood. Defilement is washed 
away by its means, Guilt is removed by the 
remission obtained through the blood that 
has been shed. 

These are, in fact, the three things 
necessary ! 

I. The ways of God in bestowing blessing 
according to His promises are connected 
with His righteousness, the sins of those 
blessed being atoned for, the requisite 
foundation of the covenant, Christ having 
withal glorified God in respect of sin, when 
made sin on the cross, 

II, The purification of the sins by which 


we were defiled (by which all things, that 
could not be guilty, were nevertheless 
defiled)'is accomplished. Here there are cases 
in which water was typically used; this is 
moral and practical cleansing. It flows from 
death; the water that purifies proceeded 
from the side of the holy victim already 
dead. It is the application of the word— 
which judges all evil and reveals all good— 
to the conscience and the heart. 


III. Now as regards remission. In no 
one case can this be obtained without the 
shedding of blood. Observe that it does not 
heresay “application.” It is the accomplish- 
ment of the work of true propitiation wiich 
is here spoken of. Without shedding of 
blood there isno remission. All-important 
truth! Fora work of remission, death and 
blood-shedding must take place, 


Two consequences flow from these views 
of atonement and reconciliation to God. 


It was necessary that there should be a 
better sacrifice, a more excellent victim, than 
these which were offered under the old 
covenant; because it was the heavenly things 
themselves, and not their figures, that were 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE cross of Christ is the divine necessity of divine light and love. Jesus crucified 
will ever attract to God ; so long as the world endures will this marvel stand, that 

the story of the sufferings and death of Jesus shall draw men from the glory and the 
glitter of the world, from its fame and its shame, even to God Himself. By Christ’s 


death we understand that God is love. 


(1) THE slaying of Abel by Cain is typical of the slaying of Christ by the wicked 
world. (2) The blood of Abel that called out for vengeance upon Cain is set in contrast 
to the blood of Christ, “ which speaketh better things,” and which cries out for the 
mercy of God upon the sinner. (3) Abel is a type of the believer who accepts life 
through faith in the offering appointed by God ; while Cain is a type of the unbeliever 
who rejects that offering, and presumes to come before God with his own offering and 


righteousness. 


50 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


to be purified. For it is into the presence of 
God in heaven itself that Christ has entered. 


In the second place, Christ was not to offer 
Himself often, as the high-priest went »in 
every year with the blood of others. For 
He offered up Himself. Hence, if all that 
was available in the sacrifice was not brought 
to perfection by a single offering once made, 
He must have suffered often since the 
foundation of the world. (And He must 
have repeatedly suffered, for there must be 
reality in putting away sin). This remark 
leads to the clear and simple declaration of 
the ways of God on thi$ point—a declaration 
of priceless value. God allowed ages to pass 
(the different distinct periods in which man 
has’ in divers ways been put to the test, and 
in which he has had time to show what he 
is) without yet accomplishing His work of 
grace. ‘This trial of man has served to show 
that he is bad in nature and in will, The 
multiplication of means only made it more 
evident that he was essentially bad at heart, 
for he availed himself of none of them to 
draw near to God. On the contrary, his 
enmity against God was fully manifested. 


When God had made this plan, before the 


law, under the law, by promises, by the 
coming and presence of His Son, then the 
work of God takes the place, for our 
salvation and God's glory, of man’s responsi- 
bility, on the ground of which faith knows 
man is entirely lost. This explains the 
expression (ve ‘se 26) ‘in the consummation 
of the ages.”” 


Now this work is perfect, and perfectly 
accomplished. Sin has dishonored God, and 
sepavated man from Him. All that God had 
doae to give him the means of return only 
ended in affording him opportunity to fill up 
the measure of his sin by the rejection of 
Jesus. [But in this the eternal counsels of 
God were fulfilled, =t least the moral basis 
and that in infinite perfection, for their 
actual accomplishments in their results, All 
now in fact, as in purpose always, rested on 
the second Adam, and on what God had 
done, not on man’s responsibility, while that 
was fully met for God's glory. (Compare 
2 Tim, 1:9, 10; Titus1:1, 2.) The Christ 
whom man rejected had appeared in order 
to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself. 
Thus it was morally the consummation of 
the ages. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


ESUS crucified—the sacrifice for sin, the friend of sinners—is the mighty magnet by 
which God draws us to His heart of love ; Christ crucified is the irresistible force 
which no power of Satan nor of the world can withstand. And by that cross God is 
glorified beyond all human thought and utterance, even to the utmost of the infinite 


extent of His own nature. 


NOTE the titles of the Lord in the Gospels: Son of Man; Son of God. Son of 
Man given for man, and, on man’s account, bearing the shame and the spitting, endur- 


ing death and being forsaken on the cross. 


Son of God given from God’s heart for a 


perishing world. The light required that the Son of Man should be lifted up ; tne love 


gave the Son of God for man. 


Gop as light is seen in the cross of the Son of Men. The Lord having in grace 
become a man, having taken the place of Son of Man before God, must needs go 
through to the end with the work undertaken, That work was redemption, in order to 
effect which the sacrifice of Himself was required ; therefore the necessity imposed 
upon Him, as Son of Man, to die in order that we might live. ...... God as love 
is seen in the gift of the Son of God. From the depths of His own heart, because He 
is !ove, God gave His eternal Son for a perishing world, gave Him to become a man, 


that, being a man, He might die in order that we might live. 


banqu 
IIT, 
desires 
IV. 
to the 
Vv. 
68:6; 
Rom, 
VI. 
P.B.V 
19:4; 


— 


dea 


questid 


REDEMPTION. 


een reeeeniineoreeneaeten +t 


BROUGHT BY GOD; OR, THE GLORIES OF CHRIST 
IN THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. 


In this we find an interesting parallel to 
the history of Abraham. In Gen. 13 he is 
spoken of as ‘‘Abram the Hebrew.” The 
word signifies ‘‘one that passes over, a 
passenger, or from the other side,"’ and is 
probably derived from Eber, his ancestor, 
Gen. 11:16, 24, 26. It also refers to the 
fact of Abram’s having been taken by God 
from the other side of the River Euphrates, 
and as such is a bear+!ful picture of the 
‘illuminated '' ones to whom this letter is 
written, Hebrews 10:32, who have been 
brought to God— 

I. Out of darkness, Ys, 107:14; into His 
marvellous light, 1 Pet. 2;9; 2 Cor. 4:6. 

II. From the horrible pit into His 
banquetting house, Cant. 2:4; Ps. 11:2. 

III, From the depths of the sea to the 
desired haven, Ps, 68:22; 107: 30. 

IV. Out of the iron furnace, Deut. 4:20; 
to the King’s chambers, Cant. 1: 4. 

V. From being bound with chains, Ps. 
68:6; to the glorious liberty of God’s children, 
Rom. 8: 21. 

VI. Brought up from the grave’or hell, 
P.B.V., Ps. 30:3; near unto Himself, Ex, 
19:4; Num, 16:9. 


On the other hand, the word may be 
connected with Hebron, Gen, 13: 18, 
Abram's new home, or rather place of 
sojourning, Gen. 35:27; for he was con- 
fessedly but a ‘stranger and a sojourner” 
even in the land, because he “‘ looked for a 
city’ of God’s building, Gen. 23:4; Heb. 
11:9. Ifso, this suggestsa beautiful train 
of thought when we recollect that ‘' Ur of the 
Chaldees,’’ where he formerly dwelt, signifies 
fire, demons, or robbers; and Haran, where 
he tarried half-way to Canaan, and where 
Terah his father died, means wrath, surely 
teaching that destruction is as inevitable for 
one who tarries on the threshold of heaven, 
outside the ark, as for those who are thousands 
of milesaway. Thereis no intermediate place 
of safety. Lost or saved; dead or alive, 
In Christ, not condemned ; but out of Him . 
the wrath of God, the wrath of the Lamb, 
the wrath of the Holy Ghost, abideth on the 
unbeliever even now, and hereafter the 
vengeance of eternal fire, ‘‘ for our God is a 
consuming fire,” John 3:36; Rev. 6:16; 
Heb. 3:7, 11; 12:29; Jude,7." ‘The fire 
is not quenched,” for fire burns on and on 
until there is nothing left to feed it, Isa, 
1:31; Mal. 3:2, 33 4:1; Nahum r:g, 8, 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE all-availing efficacy of our Lord’s sacrifice is the truth, which, if truly and 
fully recognized, enables us to rejoice in the forgiveness of sins. J+ removes our 
questionings and our doubts, and opens the way for us to delight in Christ as our life. 
LIKE Israel in the wilderness, transgressing and sinning, and fallen under the 
power of the fiery serpents, we lay perishing beneath the judgment our sins had brought 
upon us. The remedy for their ruin was the death their sin had brought upon them, 


set forth before their eyes in divine hes chs Bri serpent of brass set upon a pole. 
? 


Our hope, in our more hopeless deat 


is Him “made sin for us who knew no sin,” 


2 Cor. § :21 ;” “Sin condemned in the flesh,” Rom. 8 : 3; Christ crucified. 

ALL true religion has a d’stinct beginning, and that beginning dates from the time 
when a sinner stands at Calvary, conscious of his utterly ruined condition, and realizes 
the truth that Jesus so completely satisfied God for sin, that He could a before He 

r 


gave up the ghost, “Jt zs jinished,” and that “we have redemption t 


ough HIs 


BLOOD, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of His grace. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


eae ee te _ y i 


CHRIST IN OLD TESTAMENT TYPE AND SIMILITUDE, 


I. Christ in His divine person and work 
is the great and constant theme of the Old 
Testament, 

John 5:39, 46; Luke 24:27, 44; 1 Pet. 
I:10-12; Acts 26:22, 23; John 16:14, 15; 
John 15:26; Rev. 19: 10. 

II. Important to understand types and 
similitudes of Christ which “illuminate” the 
Scriptures, 

Be cautious, but not toc cautious, 1 Cor. 
10:1; Gal, 4:24,25; 1Cor.g:9. To the 
natural man, what “ wild typology.” Much 
of the O, T. is almost meaningless without a 
knowledge of typology. 


and Noah, Rom. 5:14; 1 Cor. 15: 45-49; 
Heb, 12:24; Jude 14, 15; 1 Pet. 3:20, 21; 
2 Pet. 2:5-9; Matt. 24: 37-39. 

Isaac, Joseph and David in about a score 
ofimportant particulars each, 

The whole history of Israel from Egypt 
to Canaan, is typical, 1 Cor. 10:11, The 
Tabernacle in its various parts—furniture, 
offerings—presents a complete set of types 
of Christ and Redemption. ‘These linea- 
ments of the Redeemer and traces of 
Redemption may seem dim at first, but in 
the progress of revelation and interpretation, 
they become more and more clear and 


III. Christ and His work is foreshadowed | uminous until— 


in many persons, actions, places, things, 
divinely ordered aad recorded. 


**Earth’s sad story 
Ends in glory, 
On yon shore,” 


E.P.M. 


Adam, the fig leaves, Eve, Abel, Enoch 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


ET the sinner look straight away to Jesus on the cross. The light of divine 
righteousness requiring death frpm the transgressor by the wounds and woe of the 
spotless Saviour, reveals how vile we are—what a State is by nature ours. All the 
suffering and sorrow, all that being forsaken of His God, were necessary—our sins 
called for every grief and every pain borne by the Lord ; our sins called for every drop 
of woe wherewith His bitter cup was filled. 


LET us understand that God is not said to be angry with the world, but to love it, 
in that He gave His Son for it. God is merciful to us and loveth us, and of very love 
gave His Son unto us, that we should not perish but have everlasting life. And, as 
God giveth by love and mercy, so do we take and receive by faith and not otherwise. 
Faith only—that is, trust in the mercy and giace of God—is the very hand by which 
we take this gift. This gift is given to make us safe from death and sin, And it is 
bestowed upon the world ; and the world signifies all mankind. 


‘I MUST say,” wrote Dr. Chalmers in a letter to a friend, “that I never had so 
close and satisfactory a view of the Gospel salvation, as when I have been led to con- 
template it in the light of a simple offer on the one side, and a simple acceptance on the 
other. It is just saying to one and all of us, There is forgiveness through the blood of 
my Son.” it is not in any shape the reward of our own services; ... . it is the gift 
of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. It is not given because you are worthy to 
receive it, but because it is a gift worthy of our kind and reconciled Father to bestow. 


THE Holy Ghost did not make peace ; but Christ did : the Holy Ghost is not said 
to be our peace ; but Chyist is. God did not send, “preaching peace” by the Holy 
Ghost, but “ by Jesus Chsist.”. Comp. Acts 10:36; Eph. 2: 14,173; Col. 1:20, 


garn 
“Th 
stanc 
10:5 
the h 
is, he 
but tc 
I 

were 
mornj 
sacrifj 
a bu 
seven 
kid o 
‘sacrifi 
his ho 
of twa 
the ot 
childrs 
confes 
furthe 
morni) 
and th 
scape- 
29: 7- 
Sacrifid 
to Jew 
priest 
five h 
Atone) 
also off 
own fu 
contri 
the wh 
distinc 
In all 
freque 


REDEMPTION, 53 


THE DAY OF ATONEMENT. 
By Dr. Edersheim. 


[* briefly reviewing the Divine ordinances about this day, Lev. 16th chapter ; Num. 

29:11 (and according to the Jewish view, it was also the day on which Adam 
had sinned and repented ; that on which Abraham was circumcised ; and that on which 
Moses returned from the mount and made atonement for the sin of the golden calf,) 
we find that only on that one day in every year the high-priest was allowed to go into the 
Most Holy Place, and then arrayed in a peculiar white dress, which differed from that 
of the ordinary priests in that its girdle also was white, and not of the Temple colors, 
while “the bonnet” was of the same shape, though not the same ~ xterialas “the mitre,’ 
which the high-priest ordinarily wore. The simple white of his array, in distinction to 
the “ golden garments” which he otherwise wore, pointed to the fact that on that day 
the high-priest appeared, not as “the bridegroom of Jehovah,” but as bearing in his 
official ae emblem of that perfect purity which was sought by the expiations 
of that day. Thus in the prophecies of Zechariah the removal of Joshua’s “ filthy 
garments” and the clothing him with “change of raiment,” symbolically denoted— 
“T have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee,” Zech. 3 :3, 4. Similarly those who 
stand nearest to God are aiways described as arrayed “in white,” Ezek.9:2; Dan. 
10:5; 12:6. And because these were emphatically “the holy garments,” “ therefore” 
the high-priest had to “ wash his flesh in water, and so put them on,” Lev. 16: 4, that 
is, he was not merely to wash his hands and feet, as before ordinary ministrations, 
but to bathe his whole body. 

From Numbers 29: 7-11, it appears that the offerings on the Day of Atonement 
were really of a three-fold kind—“the continual burnt-offering,” that is, the daily 
morning and evening sacrifices, with their meat and drink-offerings; the festive 
sacrifices of the day, consisting for the high-priest and the priesthood, of “a ram for 
a burnt-offering,” Lev. 16:3; and for the people of one young bullock, one ram, and 
seven lambs of the first year with their meat-offerings for a burnt sacrifice, and one 
kid of the goats for a sin offering; and, thirdly, and chiefly, the peculiar expiatory 


‘sacrifices of the day, which were a young bullockas a sin-offering for the high-priest, 


his house, and thesons of Aaron, and another sin-offering for the people, consisting 
of two goats, one of which was to be killed and its blood sprinkled, as directed, while 
the other was to be sent away into the wilderness, bearing “all the iniquities of the 
children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins” which had been 
confessed “over him,” and laid upon him by the high-priest. Before proceeding 
further, we note the following as the order of these sacrifices—first, the ordinary 
morning sacrifice ; next the expiatory sacrifices for the high-priest, the priesthood, 
and the people (of one bullock, and one of the two goats, the other being the so-called 
scape-goat); then the festive burnt-offerings of the priests and the people, Num. 
29:7-11, and with them another sin offering; and, lastly, the ordinary evening 


sacrifice, being, as Maimonides observes, in all fifteen sacrificial animals. According 


to Jewish tradition, the whole of the services of that dav were performed by the high- 
priest himself, of course, with the assistance of others, for which purpose more than 
five hundred priests were said to have been employed. Of course, if the Day of 
Atonement fell on a Sabbath, besides all these, the ordinary Sabbath sacrifices were 
also offered. Ona principle previously explained, the high-priest purchased from his 
own funds the sacrifices brought for himself and his house, the priesthood, however, 
contributing, in order to make them sharers in the offering, while the public sacrifices for 
the whole people were paid for from the Temple treasury. Only while officiating in the 
distinctly expiatory services of the day did the high-priest wear his “linen garments ;” 
in all the others he was arrayed in his “golden vestments.” This necessitated a 
frequent change of dress, and before each ‘1c bathed his whole body. All this will be 


tiled ood 


| 
| 


ai! 
i y 
| 
} 
if 


BN | 
i 


54 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


ow . 
best unaerstood by a more detailed account of the order of service, as given in the 
Scriptures and by tradition. 

Seven days before the Day of Atonement the high-priest left his own house in 
Jerusalem, and took up his abode in his chambers in the Temple. .A substitute was 
appointed for him, in case he should die or become Levitically unfit for his duties. 
Rabbinical punctiliousness went so far as to have him twice sprinkled with the ashes 
of the red heifer—on the third and the seventh day of his week of separation—in case 
he had, unwittingly to himself, been defiled by a dead body. During the whole of that 
week, also, he had to practise the various priestly rites, such as sprinkling the blood, 
burning the incense, lighting the lamp, offering the daily sacrifice, etc. For, as 
already stated, every part or that day’s services devolved on the high-priest, and he 
must not commit any mistake. Some of the elders of the Sanhedrin were appointed to 
see to it that the high-priest fully understood, and knew the meaning of the service, 
otherwise they were to instruct him init. On the eve of the Day of Atonement the 
various sacrifices were brought before him, that there mi~ht be nothing strange about 
the services of the morrow. Finally, they bound hin oath not to change 
anything in the rites of the day. This was chiefly for tear oi \.. Sadducean notion, 
that the incense should be lighted before the high-priest actually entered the Most 
Holy Place ; while the Pharisees held that this was to be done only within the Most 
Holy Place itself. The evening meal of the high-priest before the great day was to be 
scanty. All night long he was to be hearing and expounding the Holy Scriptures, or 
otherwise kept employed, so that he might not fall asleep. (This for special Levitical 
reasons.) At midnight the lot was cast for removing the ashes and preparing the altar ; 
and to distinguish the Day of Atonement from all others, four, instead of the usual 
three, fires were arranged on the great altar of burnt-offering. 

The services of the day began with the first streak of morning light. Already 
the people had_been admitted into the sanctuary. So jealous were they of any 
innovation or alteration, that only a linen cloth excluded the high-priest from public 
view, when, each time before changing garments, he bathed—not in the ordinary 
place of the priests—Lut in one specially set apart for his use. Altogether he changed 
his raiments and washed his whole body five times on that day, and his hands and feet 
ten times. When the first dawn of morning was announced in the usual manner, the: 
high-priest put off his ordinary (layman’s) dress, bathed, put on his golden vestments, 
washed his hands and feet, and proceeded to perform all the principal parts of the 
ordinary morning service. Tradition has it that immediately after that, he offered 
certain parts of the burnt-sacrifices for the day, viz., the bullock and the seven lambs, 
reserving his own ram and that of the people, as well as the sin-offering of akid of the 
goats, Numb. 29: 8-11, till after the special expiatory sacrifices of the day had been 
brought. But the text of Lev. 16: 24 is entirely against this view, and shows that the 
whole of the burnt-offerings and the festive sin-offering were brought after the 
expiatory services. Considering the relation between these services and sacrifices, 
this might, at any rate, have been expected, since a burnt-offering could only be 
acceptable after, not before, expiation 

The morning service finished, the high-priest washed his hands and feet, put off 
his golden vestments, bathed, put on his “linen garments,” again washed his hands 
and feet, and proceeded to the peculiar part of the day’s services. The bullock of the 
sin-offering stood between the Temple-porch and the altar. It was placed towards the 
south, but the high-priest, who stood facing the east (that is, the worshippers), turned 
the head of the sacrifice towards the west (that is, to face the sanctuary). He 
then laid both his hands upon the head of the bullock, and confessed as follows :— 
“Ah, Jehovah! I have committed iniquity ; I have transgressed ; I have sinned—I 
and my house. Oh, then, Jehovah, I entreat Thee, cover over (atone for, let there 
be atonement for) the iniquities, the transgressions, and the sins which I have 
committed, transgressed, and sinned before Thee, I and my house—even as it is 
written in the law of Moses, Thy servant: ‘For on that day will He cover over 


(aton 
shall 
Jehc 
fessio 
time 
Jeho 
called 
priest 
cast t. 


close 1 
close t 
close t 
which \ 
were of 
“la-Az: 
goat” j 
been pl 
(westwe 
stitute ( 
shook t! 
laying c 
right-ha 
alike in 
that thes 
should, 
will afte 
priest tic 
the so-c 
which w 
towards 
laid on 
more ma 
Pilate a 
iniquity 4 
It that w 
borne be 
this mir; 
Wit 
and most 
more ret 
bullock, 
only as b 
formula 
seed of A 
ment, 
gave it to 
altar of b 
a handfu 
brought i 
Incense j 
the Day o 
to reverse 


2: Se oe eS ee 


at 


REDEMPTION, 55 


eS 
—_—— 


(atone) for you to make you clean ; from all your transgressions before Jehovah ye 
shall be cleansed.’” It will be noticed that in this solemn confession the ‘name 
Jehovab occurred three times, Other three times was it pronounced in the con- 
fession which the high-priest made over the same bullock for the priesthood ; a seventh 
time was it uttered when he cast lots as to which of the two goats was to be “for 
Jehovah ;” and once again he spoke it three times in the confession over the so- 
called “ scape-goat” which bore the sins of the people. All these ten times the high- 
priest pronounced the nae of Jehovah, and, as .¢ spoke it, those who stood near 
cast themselves with their faces on the ground, while the multitude responded : 
“Blessed be the Name ; the glory of His kingdom is for ever and ever.” (In support 
of this benediction, reference is made to Deut. 32 : 3.) 
The first part of the expiatory service—that for the priesthood—had taken place 
close to the Holy Place, between the porch and the altar. The next was performed 
close to the worshipping people. In the eastern part of the Court of Priests, that is, 
close to the worshippers, and on the north side of it, stood an urn, called Calpi, in 
which were two lots of the same shape, size and material ; in the second Temple they 
were of gold—the one bearing the inscription “ la-Jehovah,” for Jehovah, the other 
“Jla-Azazel,” for Azazel, leaving the expression, Lev. 16 :8, 10, 26, (rendered “ scape- 
goat” in the Authorised Version) for the present untranslated. These two goats had 
been placed with their backs to the people and their faces towards the sanctuary 
(westwards). The high-priest now faced the people, as standing between his sub- 
stitute (at his right hand) and the head of the course on ministry (on his left hand), he 
shook the urn, thrust his two hands into it, and at the same time drew the two lots, 
laying one on the head of each goat. Popularly it was deemed of good augury if the 
right-hand lot had fallen “for Jehovah.” The two goats, however, must be altogether 
alike in look, size, and value ; indeed, so earnestly was it sought to carry out the idea 
that these two formed parts of one and the same sacrifice, that it was arranged they 
should, if possible, even be purchased at the same time. The importance of this view 
will afterwards be explained. The lot having designated each of the two goats, the high- 
priest tied a tongue-shaped piece of scarlet cloth to the horn of the goat for Azazel— 
the so-called “ scape-goat”—and another round the throat of the goat for Jehovah, 
which was to be slain. The goat that was to be sent forth was now turned round 
towards the people, and stood facing them, waiting, as it were, till their sins should be 
laid on him, and he would carry them forth into “a land not inhabited.” Assuredly a 
more marked type of Christ could not be conceived, as He was brought forth by 
Pilate and stood before the people, just as He was about to be led forth, bearing the 
iniquity of the people. And, as if to add to the significance of the rite, tradition has 
it that when the sacrifice was fully accepted the scarlet mark which the scape-goat had 
borne became white, to symbolize the precious promise in Isa. 1:18; but it adds that 
this miracle did not take place for forty years before the destruction of the Temple. 
With this presentation of the scape-goat before the people commenced the third 
and most solemn part of the expiatory services of the day. The high-priest now once 
more returned towards the sanctuary, and a second time laid his two hands on the 
bullock, which still stood between the porch and the altar, to confess over him, not 
only as before, his own and his household’s sins, but also those of the b ages The 
formula used was precisely the same as before, with the addition of the words, “the 
seed of Aaron, Thy holy people,” both in the confession and in the petition for atone- 
ment. Then the high-priest killed the bullock, caught up his blood in a vessel, and 
gave it to an attendant to keep it stirring, lest it should coagulate. Advancing to the 
altar of burnt-offering, he next filled the censer with burning coals, and then ranged 
a handful of frankincense in the dish destined to hold it. Ordinarily, everything 
brought in actual ministry unto God must be carried in the right hand—hence the 
incense in the right and the censer in the left. But on this occasion, as the censer for 
the Day of Atonement was larger and heavier than usual, the high-priest was allowed 
to reverse the common order. Every eye was strained toward the sanctuary as slowly 


56 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


——— 


bearing the censer and the incense, the figure of the white-robed high-priest was seen 
to disappear within the Holy Place. After that nothing further could be seen of his 
movements. The curtain of the most Holy Place was folded back, and the high-priest 
stood alone and separate from the people in the awful gloom of Holiest of All, only 
lit up by the red glow of the coals in the high-priest’s censer, In the first Temple the 
ark of God has stood there with the “ mercy-seat” overshadowing it; above it, the 
visible presence of Jehovah in the cloud of the Shechinah, and on either side the out- 
spread wings of the cherubim ; and the high-priest had placed the censer between the 
staves of the ark. But in the temple of Herod there was neither Shechinah nor ark— 
all was empty ; and the high-priest rested his censer on a large stone, called the 
“*foundation-stone.” He now most carefully emptied the incense into his hand, and 
threw it on the coals of the censer, as far from himself as possible, and so waited till 
the smoke had filled the Most Holy Place. ‘Then, retreating backwards, he prayed 
outside the veil. .... . The high-priest was not to prolong this prayer, lest his pro- 
tracted absence might fill the people with fears for his safety. While the incense was 
offering in the Most Holy Place the people withdrew from proximity to it, and 
worshipped in silence. At last the people saw the high-priest emerging from the 
sanctuary, and they knew that the service had been habs rol Rapidly he took from 
the attendant, who had kept it stirring, the blood of the bullock. Once more he 
entered into the Most Holy Place, and sprinkled with his finger once upwards, towards 
where the mercy-seat had been, and seven times downwards, counting as he did so: 
.“ Once” (upwards), “once and once” (downwards), “once and twice,” and so on to 
“once and seven times,” always repeating the word “once,” which referred to the 
upwards sprinkling, so as to prevent any mistake. Coming out from the Most Holy 
Place, the high-priest now deposited the bowl with the blood before the veil. Then 
he killed the goat set apart for Jehovah, and, entering the Most Holy Place a third 
time, sprinkled as before, once upwards and seven times downwards, and again 
deposited the bowl with the blood of the goat on a second golden stand before the 
veil. Taking up the bowl with the bullock’s blood, he next sprinkled once upwards 
and seven times downwards towards the veil, outside the Most Holy Place, and then 
did the same with the blood of the goat. Finally, pouring the blood of the bullock, so 
as thoroughly to commingle the two, he sprinkled each of the horns of altar of incense, 
and then, making a clear place on the altar, seven times the top of the altar of incense, 
Thus he had sprinkled forty-three times with the expiatory blood, taking care that 
his own dress should never be spotted with the sin-laden blood, What was left of the 
blood the high-priest poure’ »ut on the west side of the base of tlic altar of burnt- 
offering. 

By these expiatory sprinklings the high-priest had cleansed the sanctuary in all 
its parts from the defilement of the priesthood and the worshippers. The Most Holy 
Place, the veil, the Holy Place, the altar of incense, and the altar of burnt-offering 
were now clean alike, so far as the priesthood and the people were concerned ; and 
in their: relationship to the sanctuary both priests and worshippers were atoned for. 
So far as the law could give it, there was now again free access for all; or, to put it 
otherwise, the continuance of typical sacrificial communion with God was once more 
restored and secured. Had it not been for these services, it would have become 
impossible for priests and people to offer sacrifices, and so to obtain the forgiveness of 
sins, or to have fellowship with God. But the consciences were not yet free from a 
sense of personal guilt and sin. That remained to be done through the “ scape-goat.” 
All this seems clearly implied in the distinctions made in Lev. 16:33: “And he shall 
make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement fot 
the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.” 

Most solemn as the services had hitherto been, the worshippers would chiefly 
think with awe of the high-priest going into the immediate presence of God, coming 
out thence alive, and securing for them by the blood the continuance of the Old 


a 


Test 
took 
sins 
same 
"sca 
looki 
was t 
of th 
comn 
house 
their |} 
mittec 
is wri 
covere 
ye sha 
Jehov: 


out thr 
which 
interve 
one, sp 
he shot 
who wa 
destiny 
that the 
that “h 
ments t 
wildern 
Sabbat 
was a st 
refresh 
Station. 
accompi 
a Sabba 
At last t 
while th 
a project 
edge of 
with the 
the rest 
Immedia 
minutes 
ear, that 
Wh: 
Everythi 
that “to 
sacrificed 
Was only| 
them bei 
kind exc 
dipped i 
what s 
requiring 


een 
his 
riest 
only 
the 

the 

out- 
1 the 
rk— 
the 
and 
d till 
ayed 
pro- 
» Was 

and 
n the 

from 
re he 
vards 
dso: 
on to 
o the 
Holy 
Then 
third 
again 
e the 
wards 
1 then 
bck, so 
cense, 
cense. 
e that 
of the 
burnt- 


in all 
Holy 
fering 
3; and 
ed for. 
put it 
h more 
become 
ess of 
from a 
-goat.” 
e shall 
for the 
ent fot 


chiefly 
oming 
e Old 


REDEMPTION,’ 57 


—- = ~ - - — = ae ee 


SEA Ten 


Testament privileges of sacrifices and of access unto God through them, What now 
took place concerned them, if possible, more nearly. Their own personal guilt and 
sins were now to be removed from them, and that in a symbolical rite, at one and the 
same time the most mysterious and the most significant of all. All this while the 
“scape-goat,” with the “ scarlet-tongue,” telling of the guilt it was to bear, had stood 
looking eastwards, confronting the people, and waiting fur the terrible load which it 
was to carry away “unto a land not inhabited.” Laying both his hands on the head 
of this goat, the high-priest now confessed and pleaded ; “Ah, Jehovah ! they have 
committed iniquity; they have transgressed; they have sinned—Thy people, the - 
house of Israel, Oh, then, Jehovah! cover over (atone for), I entreat Thee, upon 
their iniquities, their transgressions, and their sins, which they have wickedly com- 
mitted, transgressed, and sinned before ‘TThee—Thy people, the house of Israel. As it 
is written in the law of Moses, Thy servant, saying: ‘For on that day shall it be 
covered over (atoned) for you, to make you clean from all your sins before Jehovah 
ye shall be cleansed.’” And while the prostrate. multitude worshipped at the name of 
Jehovah, the high-priest turned his face towards them as he uttered the last words, 
“Ye shall be cleansed !” as if to declare to them the absolution and remission of 
their sins. : 

Then a strange scene could be witnessed. The priests led the sin-burdened goat 
out through “Solomon’s Porch,” and, as tradition has it, through the eastern gate, 
which opened upon the Mount of Olives. Here an arched bridge spanned the 
intervening valley, and over it they brought the goat to the Mount of Olives, where 
one, specially appointed for the purpose, took him in charge. Tradition enjoins that 
he should be a stranger, a non-Israelite, as if to make still more striking the type of Him 
who was delivered over by Israel unto the Gentiles, Scripture tells us no more of the 
destiny of the goat that bore upon him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, than 
that they shall “send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness,” and 
that “he shall let go the goat in the wilderness,” Lev. 16:22. But tradition supple- 
ments this information. ‘The distance between Jerusalem and the beginning of “the 
wilderness” is computed at ninety stadia, making precisely ten intervals, each half a 
Sabbath-day’s journey from the other. At the end of each of these intervals there 
was a station, occupied by one or more persons, detailed for the purpose, who offered 
refreshment to the man leading the goat, and then accompanied him to the next 
station. By this arrangement two results were secured; some trusted persons 
accompanied the goat all along his journey, and yet none of them walked more than 
a Sabbath-day’s journey—that is, half a journey going and the other half returning. 
At last they reached the edge of the wilderness. Here they halted, viewing afar off, 
while the man led forward the goat, tore off half the “scarlet tongue,” and struck it on 
a projecting cliff; then, leading the animal backwards, he pushed it over the projecting 
ledge of rock. There was a moment’s pause, and the man, now defiled by contact 
with the sin-bearer, retraced his steps to the last of the ten stations, where he spent 
the rest of the day and the night. But the arrival of the goat in the wilderness was 
immediately telegraphed, by the waving of flags, from station to station, till, a few 
minutes after its occurrence, it was known in the Temple, and whispered from ear to 
ear, that “the goat !:ad borne upon him all their iniquities into a land not inhabited.” 

What then was the meaning of a rite on which such momentous issue depended ? 
Everything about it seems strange and mysterious—the lot that designated it. and 
that “to Azazel ;” the fact that though the highest of all sin-offerings, if was neither 
sacrificed nor its blood sprinkled in the Temple ; and the circumstance that it really 
was only part of a sacrifice—the two goats together forming one sacrifice, one of 
them being killed, and the other “let go,” there being no other analogous case of the 
kind except at the purification of a leper, when one bird was killed and the other 
dipped in its blood, and let go free. Thus these two sacrifices—one in the removal of 
what symbolically represented indwelling sin, the other contracted guilt—agreed in 
requiring two animals, of whom one was killed, the other “let go.” This is not the 


58 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


fo nee 


place to discuss the various views entertained of the import of the scape-goat. But it 
is destructive of one and all of the received interpretations, that the sins of the people 
were confessed not on the goat which was killed, but on that which was “let go in the 
wilderness,” and that it was this goat—not the other—which “ bore upon him all the 
iniquities” of the people. So far as the conscience was concerned this goat was the 
feat and the only sin-offering “for all the iniquitiés of the children of Israel, and all 
their transgressions in all their sins,” for upon it the high-priest laid the sins of the 
people, after he had by the blood of the bullock and of the other goat “made an end 
of reconciling the Holy Place, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar,” 
Lev. 16:20. The blood sprinkled had effected this ; but it had dohe no more, and it 
could do no more, for it “could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining 
to the conscience,” Heb. 9:9. The symbolical representation of this perfecting was 
by the live goat, which, laden with the confessed sins of the people, carried them away 
into “the wilderness” to “ a land not inhabited.” The only meaning of which this 
seems really capable, is that though confessed guilt was removed from the people to the 
head of the goat, as the symbolical substitute, yet as the goat was not killed, only sent 
far away, into “a land not inhabited,” so, under the Old Covenant, sin was not really 
blotted out, only put away from the people, and put aside till Christ came, not only to 
‘ take upon Himself the burden of transgression, but to blot it out and to purge it 
away. (May there be here also a reference to the doctrine of Christ’s descent i- :o 
Hades?) ‘Thus viewed, not only the text of Leviticus, 16th chapter, but the languages 
of the 9th and roth chapters of Hebrews, which chiefly refer to the Day of Atonement, 
becomes plain. The “blood,” both of the bullock and of the goat which the high- 
priest carried “once a year” within “the sacred veil,” was “offered for himself 
(including the priesthood) and for the errors (or rather ignorances) of the people.” In 
the language of Lev. 16:20, it reconciled “the Holy Place, and the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and the altar,” that is, as already explained, it rendered on the part of 
priests and people the continuance of sacrificial worship possible. But this live scape- 
goat “let go” in the wilderness, over which, in the exhaustive language of Lev. 16:21, 
the high-priest had confessed and on which he had laid “all the iniquities of the 
children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins,” meant something quite 
different. It meant the inherent ‘“‘weakness and unprofitableness of the command- 
ment ;” it meant, that “the law made nothing perfect, but was the bringing in of a 
better hope ;” that in the covenant mercy of God guilt and sin were indeed removed 
from tb» people, that they were “covered up,” and in that sense atoned for, or rather 
that they were both “covered up” and removed, but that they were not really taken 
away and destroyed till Christ came; that they were only taken into a land not 
inhabited, till He should blot it out by His own blood; that the provision which the Ola 
Testament made was only preparatory and temporary, until “the time of the reforma- 
tion ;” and that hence real and true forgiveness of sins, and with it the spirit of 
adoption, could only be finally obtained after the death and resurrection of “the Lamb 
of God which taketh away the sin of the world.” Thus in the fullest sense it was true 
~€ the “fathers)* these all. .... . received not the promise ; God having provided 
some b<iter thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.” For “the 
law having a shadow of the good things to come,” could not “make the comers 
thereunto perfect ;” nor yet was it possible “that the blocd of bulls and of goats 
should take away sins.” The live goat “let go” was every year a remover of sins 
which yet were never really removed in the sense of being blotted out—only deposited, 
as it were, and reserved till He came “whom God hath set forth as a vropitiation 
. «++. because of the passing over of the former sins, in the forbearance of God,” 
Rom. 3:25 (Alford’s Version). “And for this cause He is the mediator of a new 
covenant, in order that, death having taken place for the propitiation of the transgres- 
sions under the first covenant, they which have been called may receive the promise of 
the eternal inheritance,” Heb. 9: 15. 


I 
the 
freq 
and 
refe! 
is to 
how 
of a 
Serij 

Vy 
2Col 


Ww 
2. Pet. 
Jesus ¢ 
siinple 
tion, sa 
1 Cor, 


ning 
was 
away : 
this 4 
othe 2m 
sent ot 
‘eally . 
ly to Me 
geit 


tr oUlC ES 


rather 
aken 
d not 
e Old 
orma- 
birit of 
Lamb 
s true 
bvided 
“the 
omers 
goats 
bf sins 
losited, 
tiation 
God,” 
a new 
sgres- 
ise of 


In taking up ‘‘Atonement" as a topic, 
the inclination of the Christian worker is 
frequently to see first what his favorite 
and learned commentator has to say with 
reference to the subject. But the best way 
is to go to the Bible first. It is remarkable 
how clear and simple the whole subject 
of atonement is opened up in the Holy 
Scriptures. 


{, Atonement is explained in Rom. 5: 8-11; 
2Cor.§: 14-21; Gal. 1:4; 1 Jno,2:2; 4:10. 


II. It was foreordained (see margin), Rom. 
3:25; 1 Pet. 1:11, 20; Rev. 13:8, 


III. It was prophesied, Isa. 53: 4-6, 8-12; 
Dan. 9: 24-27; Zec.14;1, 7; Jno. 11: 50, 51, 


REDEMPTION, 


ATONEMENT AS DEFINED BY THE BIBLE. 


IV. It was accomplished alone by the 
Lord Jesus Christ, Jno. 1:29, 36; Acts 
t Thess. 1:10; « Tim. 2:5,6; 
Heb. 2:9; 1 Pet. 2: ar. 

V. It was voluntary, Psa. 40:6-8, with 
Heb. 10: 5-9; Jno. so: 11, 25, 17, 18. 

Vi. The atonement exhibits the grace, 
mercy, and love of Gow the * and of 
His Son jesusChrist,Rom.& 32, «'h.2:4, 
5, 7; 1 Tim. 2:4; Heb. 2: Roa §:8; 
1 Jno 4:9, 10; Jno. 15:13; Gai. 2:20; 
Eph: 24, 25! Revit: 5, 

Val. The justice and mercy of God were 
reconciled in the atoning work cf Jesus 
Christ on the cross, Isa. 45:21; Rom. 3:25, 
26. J. EL W. 


SEVEN PRECIOUS FACTS CONCERNING ATONEMENT, 


I, The Scriptures declare the necessity of 
an? .onement, Isa. 59: 16; Luke 19:10; Fleb, 
Q: 22. 

II. Christ’s atonement the end of Old 
Tcsiament sacrifices, Heb. 7:27; 9: 24-28; 
10:10, 12, 14; 1 Pet. 3:18. 

Til. It was perfectly satisfactory to God, 
Eph. 5:2; Heb. 1: 1-3. 

TY. Reconciliation, perfect and complete, 
effected by the atonement, Rom. 5: 10; 2 Cor. 


oe A SAL IPEAA | ener nee aw 


oe PC AIS om ee i ers nl re 


5: 18-20; Eph, 2: 13-16; Col. t: 20-22; Heb. 
2:17; 1 Peter 3: 18. 


V. The only access to Ged was by atone- 


ment, Hab. ro; 1g, 20, 


VI. Remission of sins by way of the 


atonement, Jno. 5:29; Rom. 2:25; Eph. 
t:7; t Jno. 1:7; Rev.zis. 


VII. Eternal justification for the believing 


sinner through the bicod of atonement, Rome. 


5:9; 2 Cor. 5:21, 


J. E. w. 


Lachine sengenestncene 7 pe ete ree nn eh ree + le eh Ae rate ns ine ny 
an eae ae ae ee 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


E are said to be saved by the dnow/edge of God or of Christ ; that is, by simply 
knowing God as He has made Himself known to us, Isa. 5:3, Vig Tim, 2:43 
2 Pet. 2:20; for “this is lite eternal, that they might £#ow thee, the only true God, and 


Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent,” John 17 : 2. 


And, as if to make simplicity more 


siinple, the Apostle, in speaking of the facts of Christ’s death and burial and resurrec: 
tion, says, “ By which also ye are saved, if ye heep tn memory what I preached unto you, 


1 Cor, 15 31, 2 


60 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


USES AND APPLICATIONS OF THE BLOOD (1). 


If the believer will note the contexts of the IV. It is the purchase-morfey of the flock, 
references connected with the following | Acts 20: 28. 
quotations, it will be discovered as to the 
blood of Jesus Christ, that,— 

I. It connects the believer with a covenant, 
Matt. 26: 28, etc. 

II. The knowledge of it is eternal life, 


V. It is the propitiation provided by God, 
Rom. 3:25. 

VI. It tells of the finished justification, 
Rom, 5:9. 


VII. The centre of unionamong the saints 


Jno. 6: 32-39. 
III, It is the proof of the death of Jesus, | °7 earth, 1 Cor. to: 16. 
Jno. 19: 33. Ar. by J. E. W. 
THE BLOOD (2). 
The blood of Jesus Christ is the means V. It has secured to the sinner an approach 
God has used to procure— into the holiest, where God dwells, and 
I. Freedom from guilt, Eph. 1:7. Christ, who gives good things to come, Heb. 
II. It is the medium that procured our | 9:7-12. 
nighness—to God as sons; to Christ as VI. It isto be known assuch, Heb. g: 12-28. 
bride; to the Holy Ghost as temple, Eph. | vir Both the place to which this leads, 
shes and the blessings of the place (as well as the 


III. Through it we have sadeciption: the 
forciveneus of aie, Col, & : 14. people for wkom they are), are connected 
IV. It is the power of deliverance from elaine saps le se 
Satan’s kingdom into Christ's, Col. 1:20. | 


Ar. by J. E. W. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


T is our belief of God’s testimony, concerning His own grace and Christ’s work, that 
brings us into possession of the blessings concerning which that testimony speaks. 
Our reception of God’s testimony is confidence in God Himself, and in Christ Jesus 
His Son; for, where the testimony comes from a person, or regards a person, belief of 
the testimony and confidence in the person are things inseparable Hence it is that 
Scripture sometimes speaking oy confidence, or trust, as saving us ; see the Psalms 
everywhere, such as 13:5; 52:8; alsor Tim. 4: 10; Eph. 1:12; asif it would say to 
the sinner, “Such is the gracious character of God. that you have only to put your 
case into His hands, however bad it be—only to trust Him for eternal tife-—and He 
will assuredly not put you to shame.” 


“ THE gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.” “For God so 
foved the world that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life.” “Here,” says one of the English 
Reformers, “ God, who is infinite and unspeakable, gives after such a manner as passeth 
allthings. For that which He gives He gives not as the wages of desert, but of mere 
love. This sort of giving, which has its spring in love, makes this gift more excellent 
and precious. And the words of Christ are plain, that God loveth us. And as God, 
the giver, is exceedingly great, so is the gift that He giveth, which is His only Son.” 


II, 
heave: 


III. 
know | 


I. TI 
1:18. 


Ii. I 
word, f 


III. ] 
so sung 


sweet. sn 
devils, ir 
the effica 
that finis 
attemt 
tions, ch 
more cer 
a grief ty 


REDEMPTION. 


asta oui gcse eat niles etgieaeatate adit ali iaitiaahlpntttatnnetisl lated taisiinidiay 


THE BLOOD @). 


I. By the blood we see the taking away of IV. It is the measure of our obedience to 
sin, the setting apart of the saints of God, | God, Heb, 12: 1-4. 


and that by which they are already perfected, V. It is the testimony of good things to 
Heb. 10: 11-14. us, but judgment on the world, Heb, 12: 24. 
II, Through it comes the power for VI. It is the sanctification of an eternal 
heavenly filial service, Heb. 10: 19. covenant, Heb. 13:12, 20, 21. 
III. It is the sanctification of those that VII. The knowledge of it is proof of 
know it, Heb. 10: 27-31; 13: 12. election, 1 Pet. 1:2. Ar. by J. E. W. 


THE BLOOD (4), 


I, The blood is the saint’s ransom, 1 Pet. IV. Our redemption—so sung of in heaven, 
1:18. Rev. 5:9. 

li. It is the saint’s daily resource, by the V. The cleansing of our robes, Rev. 7: 14. 
word, for cleansing, 1 Jno, 1:7. VI. God's witnesshere on earth, 1 Jno. 5:8, 

III. It is for the cleansing of our persons— VII. It is the victory over Satan, Rev, 


so sung of on ea*th, Rev. 1:5. tats, Ar. by J. E.W. 


a 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE Bible does not say, ‘ Being satisfied about our faith, we have peace with God ;” 
it simply says, “ Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.” Not satisfaction 
with your own faith, but satisfaction with Jesus and His work—that is what God presses 
on you. You say, “Iam satisfied with Christ.” Are you? What more, then, do you 
wish? Is not satisfaction with Christ enough for you, or for any sinner? Nay, and is 
not tis the truest kind of faith?. To be satisfied with Christ, that is faith in Christ. 
To be satisfied with His blood, that is faith in His blood. What more could you have? 
Can your faith g ve you something which Christ cannot? or will Christ give you 
hing till you can produce faith of a certain kind and quality, whose excellences will 
enti'le you to blessing? Do not bewilder yourself. Do not suppose that your faith is 
ay: °, ora bribe, ora merit. Is not the very essence of real faith just your being 
satis’. d with Christ ? 


Ti © offering and the sacrifice presented on the cross, God has accepted asa 
sweet smelling savour, and the proof of its acceptance is furnished to angels, men, and 
devils, in the fact that God has 1aised Him from the dead. Nothing can be added to 
the efficacy of that atoning sacrifice nothing can be added to the completeness of 
that finished work ; nothing can be added to the value of that precious blood. Any 
attemjt to add something of our own, in the way of feelings, repentance, good resolu- 
tions, charitable deeds, or ecclesiastical ordinances, that salvation may be rendered 
more certain and secure, is an insult to God, a dishonor to the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
a griefti.vhe Holy Spirit. 


62 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


JUSTIFICATION 


(Rom. 5.) 


[The Scripture references are arranged to furnish a brief Bible reading for every day of the week.] 


I. What it means. 

The first place the word ‘justify ’’ occurs 
in the Scripture renders it ‘‘How shall we 
clear ourselves ;"' and it stands constantly 
opposed to ‘‘condemn,"’ Gen. 44:16; Deut. 
25:1; 1 Kings 8:32; Job 9:20; 13:18; 
Prov. 17:15; Isa. 50: 8,9; Rom. 8: 33, 34. 


4I. Grace is its source. 

“Being justified freely by His grace, 
through [the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus,"" Rom, 3:24; Tit. 3;5,7; Isa. 45:22, 
25; Acts15:11; Rom. 5:15-21; 11:6; 1 Cor. 
15:10; Eph. 1:6; 2:4-8; 2 Tim. 1:9; 
t Peter 5:10. 


III. The blood of Christ is the price paid 
for it, and its procuring cause. 

“Being ucw justified by His blood, we 
shall be saved from wrath through Him, 
Rom. 5:9; Lev. 17:11; Col. 1:20; Eph. 
1:37; 2:13; Heb. 9:12-14; 1 Peter 1:18, 
19; 1 John 3:7; Rev.1:5; 5:9; 12:11. 

IV. Faith receives it and is thus its instru- 
mental cause. ‘ 

“Therefore being justified by faith we 
have peace with God through our Lord 


Jesus Christ,’’ and peace is nota feeling, but 
a permanent state or condition into which 


the believer is brought towards God, Rom. 
5:1; 3: 25, 26, 28, 30: Gal. 2:16; 3:8, 24; 
Acts 13:39; Rom. 4:3, 5, 16; Phil. 3: 6-9; 
Heb, 11:6; John 6: 29. 


V. The risen Christ is the proof that His 
work has been accepted in behalf of the 
believing sinner; and hence that our justifi- 
cation stands while He continues to live. 

‘‘ Who was delivered for our offences, and 
was raised again for our justification,” Rom. 
4:25; 6:6-9; 7:4; 1 Cor.15:17; 1 Peter 
1:20, 21; Jno. 14:19; 1 John 4: 17. 


VI. Good works are the fruit of it, Paul 
and James standing back to back, viewing 
the same subject and bearing the same testi- 
mony from different points of observation. 

“Ye see then, how by works a man is 
justified, and not by faith only,” James 
2:24; Gal. 5:6; Eph’ 2:9, 10; Tit. 2:14; 
3:1, 8,14; 1 Thess. 1:2, 5; 1 Cor. 15:58. 


VII. God is the Supreme Judge who pro- 
nounces the sentence of justification, and as 
this is the court of last resort there is no 
appeal from His decision. 

“It is God that justifieth,’” Rom. 8: 33; 
Gen. 18:25; Deut. 32:4; Job.9:20; 13:18; 
Luke 18: 13, 14. 

Dr. J. H. BROOKES. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE cross is a wonderful place. 
the deepest joy. 


Here opposites meet—the deepest sorrow and 


“ CAN you tell me,” said an unhappy sceptic to a happy old saint, “just what is 


the gospel you believe, and how you believe it ?” 


She quietly replied, ‘‘ God is satisfied 


with the work of His Son—this is the gospel I believe ; and I am satisfied with it— 


this is how I believe it.” 


Said another lady to another unhappy man, “There is a 


great difference between your religion and mine ; your’s consists of two letters—D-O, 


and mine consists of four, D-O-N-E.” 


Th 


met in 
redeem 


probabl 
Elkanal 
while t 
would a 

Ty 

I. J 
bear the 


° 


delivera 


Ex. 
Fro 

kind of 

Starting 

Ex. 
Thes 
cattle wa 
midnight 

Isa. 

__ Itis 

with the 
John 

It is 
before thd 

subjects, 
of their gy 
of a grate 

Col. 
Literg 


and 


at is 
bfied 
it— 
isa 
)-O, 


REDEMPTION, . 63 


REDEMPTION AS TAUGHT AND ILLUSTRATED 
IN The BIBLE. 


IGURES: The Cherudim in Eden and in the Tabernacle (or the mercy-seat, veil, 
and curtains) many take as being emblems of the redeemed. 

Deliverance from Egypt, by price, Isa. 43:3; Ex. 15% 13, 16; and by power, Ex. 
6:7; Neh. 1: Io. 

Deliverance from © he Psa. 74:2; Isa. 52 : 3, etc. 

Shadows under the Law: The redemption of the first-born of man and of 
unclean beasts, Ex. 13:12, 13 ; Num. 18 :15-17 ; 3: 45-51. 

The mercy-seat, or propitiatory, upon the ark, of pure gold, the appointed meeting- 
place of God with His people, Ex. 25 : 17, 20, 22. 

he half-shekel atonement money, appointed equally for the souls of all, Ex. 

10 : 10-16, 
: The redemption of property from servitude, etc., Lev. 35th chapter. 

The goe/ or near kinsman. This Jewish ordinance involved the three essential 
points,—nearness of kin, ability to redeem, and willingness to redeem ; and all these 
met in Christ, the Divine Redeemer. The instituiicn was illustrated in Boaz, the 
redeemer of Ruth, Ruth 4 : 14 (marg.) 

Typical persons: JZoses, the redeemer or deliverer of Israel. Acts 7 : 35. 

Boaz, the redeemer of Ruth, (marg.) Ruth 4: 14. 

Hebrew names: /Pedaiah means redeemer of the Lord. Jgal, God will 
redeem. £/tanah, God hath purchased or redeemed. 

The first person so called was the son of Korah, of the same generation as 
Aaron’s children, born about the time of Israel’s redemption from Egypt. This was 
probably given in thankful acknowledgment of that exodus. The elder brother of 
Elkanah was called Assir, which means captive or bondman, and was probably given 
while they were groaning under Egyptian bondage. The same name (Elkanah) 
would appear to have been given to other persons, in token of some deliverance. 

Two things are to be noted in connection with redemption : 

1. The words redeem and redemption almost always, except in a few instances, 
bear the meaning of recovery, deliverance. 

2. The word is seldom used in the Old Testament in connection with spiritual 
deliverances, whilst it is hardly ever used otherwise in the New Testament. 

Ex. 12 : 2.—The change redemption makes: 

From the time of the exodus, their great deliverance, Israel was to count a new 


kind of year, which was called the sacred year ; thus redemption is, as it were, a fresh 
starting point. 


BS 10120 ' 192 7% 

These texts show the completeness of redemption. “Not a hoof” of Israel’s 
cattle was to be left behind ; not a dog to :nove his tongue, though they left Egypt at 
midnight, when dogs were wont to bark at the least sound. 

Isa. 34:83 61:23; 6334. 

It is worthy of note how three times Isaiah contrasts the day of God’s vengeance 
with the year of redempuon. Mercy rejoices over judgment. 

John 18 : 39.—Releasing one at the passover. 

It is uncertain when this custom was introduced ; whether by the Jews themselves 
hefore their subjugation by the Romans, or by the Romans to show favor to their Jewish 
subjects. The first seems more likely ; and the custom was designed to be a memorial 
of their great deliverance from Egyptian bondage. If so, it is a pleasing recognition 
of a grateful spirit. 

Col. 1 : 13.—“ Who hath delivered us.” 

Literally, snatched away forcibly, as David rescued the lamb from the lion’s paw. 


G. S. BOWES, 


64 : GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


my ee 


REDEMPTION. 


(Eph. 1:7.) 

I. Its necessity seen: Ill. THE METHOD. 

1. In Man's Guilt, Gen. 6: 9, Psa. 14 : 1-3; Death is the result of sin, Gen. 2:17 
Isa. 1:5, 6; Rom, 3:9, 19; Eph. 4:17, 19. Ezek. 18: 4, 20; Rom. 5: 12; 6: 23. ii 

2. In Man’s Helplessness, Jer. 12:23; The life is in the blood. Christ shed His 
17:9; Micah 6:5,6; Phil. 3:3-11; Rom. | blood, gave His life a ransom for the sinner, 
7: 24. Lev. 17:11; Heb. 9:22; Matt. 26: 28; 

With sin came a promise of redemption, | Rom. 3:25; 5:9; 1 Cor. 10:16; Eph. 2313, 
Gen. 3:15. Col. 1:19,20; Heb. 9:12-14; 10:19; 13:12. 


Again and again reiterated, Deut. 18:15; | 1 Peter 1: 2,18, 19; 1 Jno.1:7; Rev. 1:5; 
Pea: 94:83 5: Tea. 97364 Jer. 33.) 240255 [: 9 9 See th : 
Ezek. 34:23; Dan. 2:44; Hosea 13:14; Of redemption it may be said; 
Mal. 3:1. Which fact was kept before God's 1. It is finished, Heb, 11 : 24-28. 
ancient people almost constantly by the offer- . It is perfect, Heb, 11: 7-14. 
ings, sacrifices and worship of the Tabernacle . It is universal, Heb. 3 :9. 
and the Temple, especially. And, also, by . It is personal, Jno. 3: 16. 
the organic law by which they were governed, . It is satisfactory, Rom. to: 4. 
as indicated in the redemption of servants, . It was timely, Gal. 4: 4. a, 
Lev. 25:40, 54; lands, Lev. 25:27; name, . In its ultimate reach it is eternal, 
Deut. 25:5, 9; beasts, Ex, 12: 13, etc., etc. Eph. 4:30; 1:14; Rom. 8:23; Heb. 11:12. 
It is, with all its fullness and preciousness, 
for all who will receive it, 2 Cor, 5:14, 15; 
Matt. 20:28; Rom. 3:24; 1 Cor. 1: 30; | Jno..3: 16. 


SI OW FS W DN 


| 
| 
Ii. THE REDEEMER. 


2 Cor. 5:18, 19; Gal. 3:13; Phil. 4: 109; t Jno.2:2; 1 Tim, 2:3, 4; 2 Peter 3:9. 
Col. 1:30; 1 Tim. 2:6; Titus 3:5, Heb. Hebrews 13 : 20, 21. 
9: 24-26; 1 Peter 1:18, 19. | Dr. L..W. MUNHALL. 

8 ‘ 


——————————————————————— ee ——e—™T—T—O=—™T—eOToeeeQ«@Q SS Seeaentacie 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE work in virtue of which all sin is finally put away out of God’s sight—-abolished 
—is accomplished, the question of good and evil is come to a final issue on 
the cross, and God perfectly glorified when sin was before Him; the result will not be 
finally accomplished till the new heavens and the new earth. But our sins having 
‘been borne by Christ on the cross, He rises, atonement being made, an eternal 
testimony that they are gone forever, so that by faith we are now justified and have 
peace. We must not confound these two things, our sins being put away, and the 
perfectly glorifying God in respect of sin, when Christ was made sin, the results of 
which are not yet accomplished. As regards the sinful nature, it is still in us ; but 
Christ having died, its condemnation took place then, but, that being in death, we 
reckon ourselves dead to it, and no condemnation for us. 


WHAT a marvellous deiiverance !_ What a work for the glory of God! The moral 
import of the cross for the glory of God is a subject which, as we study it, becomes 
ever more and more magnificent—a never-ending study. It is, by its moral perfec- 
tion, a motive for the love of the Father Himself with regard to Jesus. “ Therefore 
doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again.” 


ESI 
fo 
have : 
sinful 
with ii 
desire 
away | 
east is 


« ( 
He ass 
have e 
for us 
as parc 
invitati 
will be 
word o 
all sin.’ 


T 
sins, b 
was col 
He has 
place j 
the like 
the cro4 
Himsel 
and the 
He js 
totally ( 
abolitio 
believe 
TH 
Si, rs, 


(y 


shed 


bh on 
bt be 
ving 
rnal 
ave 
the 
ts of 
but 


ny we 


oral 
mes 
brfec- 
efore 


REDEMPTION, ; 65 


THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OF JESUS. 


I. The heavenly vision of the ‘blood, | On His hand, Isa. 49: 16—Security. 

Rev. 7. IV. The peace-speaking pov'er of the 
II. The blood of deliverance from sin, | blood, Col. 1: 20.. 

Eph. 1:7. V. The great value of the blood, 1 Pet. 
III. The place of nearness by blood, Eph. | 1: 18, 19. 

2: 13. VI. The protection of the blood (the Lamb, 
How near? On His arm, Cant. 6:6— | type of Christ), Ex. 12: 13. ’ 

Love. VII. The victory of the blood, Rev. 5:9. 


On His shoulder, Deut 33: 12—Strength. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


ESUS is the only and the all-sufficient, as He is the authorized, Taker-away of sin, 
for the world at large. The whole world is p:ought in guilty before God, “ for all 
have sinned ;” and the true Gospel of God is, that when any one belonging to that 
sinful world feels his sin to be oppressive, and comes straight to “the Lamb of God” 
with it, and frankly acknowledges it, and tells out his anxiety regarding it, and his 
desire to get rid of it, he will find that Jesus has both the power and the will to take it 
away ; and on seeing it removed from him by “the blood of His cross,” “as far as the 
east is from the west,” he will be enabled to sing with a grateful heart and “ joyful lips :” 
‘‘T lay my sins on Jesus, 
The spotless Lamb of God ; 
He bears them all, and frees us 
From the accursed load.” 


“Gop has so loved us, as to give His only-begotten Son to die for sinners ; and’ 
He assures me that, if I, a perishing sinner, believe in Him, I shall not perish, but 


have everlasting life ; I believe His Word, and reckon that if He gave His Son to die 


for us when we were yet sinners, He will with Him, also, freely give all such things 
as pardon and purity, grace and glory; and if, in accordance with His own gracious 
invitation, I rest my soul upon His manifested love in Christ Jesus, | believe that it 
will be as impossible for me to perish as for God to change His nature, or cancel the 
ae of grace and truth that the ‘blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from 
all sin.’” 


THE Son of God—sent of God in love—has come, and not only has He borne our 
sins, but (He having offered Himself up freely to accomplish Hs will, whose will He 
was come to do, a spotless victim) God made Him who knew no sin to be sin for us. 
He has placed Himself, ever without sin (in Him it was grace and obedience), in the 
place in which our failure in our responsibility here below had set men, and, made in 
the likeness of men, died to glorify God in respect of sin, so that we are discharged by 
the cross from the burden on the conscience of the sin that dwells in us. He takes on 
Himself before God the whole charge of sin (but according to the power of eternal life 
and the Holy Ghost that was in Him)—offers Himselfas a vict‘m forit. Thus placed, 
He is made sin ; and in His death, which He undergoes in grace, sin in the flesh is 
totally condemned by the just judgment of God, and the condemnation itself is the 
abolition of that sin by His act of sacrifice—an act which is valid for every one that 
believes in Jesus who accomplished it. 


THE Gospel is the report of a peace purchased by the blood of Christ for poor 
si, ners, and offercd to them. 


(5) 


66 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


HOW TO PRESENT THE ATONEMENT TO INQUIRERS, 


Pastor A. |). Gérdon. 


First, we must believe in it ourselves, Ido 
not say we must understand all about it, but 
we must believe in it. I shall not attempt to 
give an exposition of the doctrine of the 
atonement; but I want to give you a single 
passage that will, I think, present the best 
idea of the kind of atonement we must offer 
to the inquirer. Now, if you wish to finda 
truth stated strongly and emphatically, go to 
one who has once disbelieved it, and has 
afterwards accepted it. I do not wish to 
speak irreverently, but, if you will study his 
life, I think you will find that Peter in his 
earlier days was not a believer in the atone- 
ment. You remember that, when our Lord 
said that He.was to go to Jerusalem and 
suffer there, and be crucified and arise the 
third day, Peter rebuked Him, and said: ‘Be 
it far from Thee, Lord; this shall not be unto 
Thee.” He was perfectly scandalized, you 
see, at the idea that Christ should die. But 
we find that, later, a great change has come 
over him; for in his first epistle he gives a 
wonderful statement of the doctrine of the 
atonement: ‘‘Who His own self bare our 
sins in His own body on‘the tree, that we, 
‘being dead to sins, should live unto righteous- 
ness: by whose stripes ye were healed.” 
I think that that passage analyzed will 
be likely to answer almost any case that 
you may meet with. One says, ‘I do not 


Ramat ooh SORES SEES STRIPES SSA IN alae De ms i ea RG 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


believe that another person can bear my 
sins—sin is such a personal and radical 
thing. I have no doubt that Christ, by 
His death, draws men away from their sins, 
but I canvot believe he can bear sin for 
another.” But mark the expression, ‘‘ Who 
His own self bare our sins.” Talk about 
emphasizing Bagster Bibles! I believe God 
has done this Himself; as though foreseeing 
that men would put secondary meanings on 
His Word, such as, e. g., that the coming of 
Jesus Christ is at death, and all that sort of 
thing. We have it written, ‘‘The Lord 
Himself shall descend from heaven:” and 
so we have in this passage: ‘‘ Who His own 
self bare our sins." ‘' Well,”’ says one, ‘I 
believe that in His spirit and in His moral 
sympathies, he took my sins on Him, so to 
speak,”’ That wasnotall, Mark the words, 
‘Who His own self bare our sins in His own 
body.’ ‘ Oh,” says one, ‘‘it is written also 
that He bare our sicknesses. And I have no 
doubt that in both body and soul he sympa- 
tkived with us.” Go one step further. 
‘ Bare our sins in His own body on the tree,”’ 
Thus we are brought to the very cross of 
Christ and to His sufferings then endured for 
our salvation. Some persons say to us that 
Jesus Christ was not punished for our sins, 
and make a distinction between chastisement 
and punishment; well, I don’t know but 


S touching sacrifices, read Leviticus 1st to 7th chapters entire, also the 16th chapter ; 


Numbers 19th chapter 


In the sacrifices of the Bible there are three parties ; 


priest, offerer, victim. Christ is all that, Heb. 9:11-15. There are also three 
principal elements or parts ; suostitution, imputation, death ; and Christ was all that 
for His people, Matt. 20:28; Rom. 6:8; note the force of the little word “for,” 
2 Cor. 5:21; 1 Tim. 2:6; Tit.2:14; 1 Pet. 2:24; Jno. 1:29; Pet. 3: 18. 

THERE is no atonement without blood. There is no standing before God without 


blood. Cain was the great father of Socinianism. 
blood, and stamped the way with his own name. 


in the way of Cain!” 


He invented a way to God without 
“Woe unto them ! they have gone 


him peace 


there, 
gressi 
the ch 
and w 
the at 
bring | 
then y 


consen 
consen 
says, I 
borne j 
consent 
friend o 
ing men 
who sai 
teen yea 
in this y 
the pers 
my grie 
said, ‘* Y¢ 
you belie 
and ans 
ment of 
you belie 
at the th 
joy as 
healed,” 
ing Chris 


L with 
sinner’s d 
for peace 
With rece 
paration, 
salvation, 
THE} 

two stateg 
Not partl 
e knew 
perfecrly g 
over you,’ 
his seal t 


ss 


there is such a difference, but here we read, 
‘ By whose stripes ye were healed.” 


Turn again to Isa. 53:5, and we read 
there, ‘‘ But He was wounded for our trans- 
gressions, He was bruised for our iniquities ; 
the chastisement of our peace was upon Him; 
and with his stripes we are healed.” It is 
the atonement—that is what we want to 
bring to a person under conviction. And 
then we want him by a personal faith to 
consent to that atonement. Faith is the 
consent of a sinner to Christ. Jesus Christ 
says, consent to save you because I have 
borne your sins; all you have to do is to 
consent to be saved on these terms. A 
friend of mine who is very successful in lead- 
ing men to the Saviour, said he met a man 
who said he had been seeking Christ for four- 
teen years. He made him read this passage 
in this way, reducing it from the general to 
the personal form: ‘‘ Surely He hath borne 
my griefs.” ‘‘Do you believe that?” He 
said, ‘‘ Yes.’’ ** And carried my sorrows.”’ ‘Do 
you believe that?’ He thought a moment 
and answered that he did. ‘The chastise- 
ment of my peace was upon Him.” “ Do 
you believe that?’’ The man was in tears 
at the third passage, and actually leaped for 
joy as he read: ‘ By His stripes I am 
healed.” Fourteen years he had been seek- 
ing Christ, but when he came to the point of 


REDEMPTION. 67 


appropriating Christ's finished work, he was 
healed instantly. Let us uige men not to 
look at their faith, but at Jesus Christ; and 
not to believe that they believe, but believe 
that Christ has borne their sins. Ifa man 
has a telescope, and his attention is all taken 
up with the barrel, and not at all with the 
heavens, he will not see the stars. So it is 
with a man who looks at his faith instead of 
looking to Christ. ‘Then remember to tell 
men to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
not tell them to pray or read their Bibles for 
salvation. When I was in Providence, a 
man was convicted of sin, in the chapel of 
the jail; he went to the chaplain and said, 

‘What shall Ido? I have been a very bad 

man ; Ishall belost. What shallIdo?’’ ‘Go 
back to your cell,’’ said the chaplain, ‘‘ and 

shut yourself in, and say: ‘ God be merciful 

to me a sinner.’’’ The man told the story 

the next Sunday in the chapel. ‘I didso,* 
he said, ‘‘ but felt no better, Every prayer 

I uttered, it seemed as a mockery to God, 

and I feltas though the ground would open 

and drop me into hell. Then I remembered 

the minister said, ‘ The blood of Jesus saves 

us from all sin.’ I believed it, and then I 

knew I wassaved.” ‘That is the foundation : 
simply to believe it on the grounds that 

Christ presents it to us. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


i? is of the last importance to be clear as w the fact ‘that it is the work of Christ 
without,and not the work of the Spirit zw7¢/z7, that must form the sole ground of the 


sinner’s deliverance from guilt, and of peace with God. He must beware of resting 
for peace on his feelings, convictions, tears, prayers, or resolutions. He must begin 
with receiving Christ ; and not make that the termination of a course of fancied pre- 
paration, Christ must be the Alpha and Omega. He must be everything in our 
salvation, or He will be nothing. 


THERE is no such thing as being partly saved and paitly lost. There are but 
two states, and we must be in either the one or the other. The Israelite in Egypt was 
not partly sheltered by the blood, and partly exposed to the sword of the destroyer. 
He knew he was safe. He did not hope so. He was not praying to be so. He was 
perfecily safe. And why? Because God hath said, “ When I see the blood 1 will pass 
over you.” He simply rested upon God’s testimony about the shed blood. He set to 
his seal that Ged was true. He believed that God meant what He said, and that gave 
him peace. He was able to take his place at the paschal-feast inconfidence andassurance, 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE SCAPEGOAT AND THE LIVE GOAT, 
Leviticus xvi. 


W* find in this chapter, as well as in other parts, two animals offered, both typifying 

the ove offering of Christ, but in different aspects. For example, see the durnt 
offering and s7z offering—two, yet one, each a type of Christ, but each in a different 
view. The burnt offering speaks to us of Jesus offering Himself to God in His own 
intrinsic merit, the sin offering as the sacrifice for our sins—He “ offered Himself 
without spot Zo God,” and He “hath given Himself for ws an offering,” etc. Again, in 
the directions concerning the cleansing of the leper, two birds were to be taken, One 
of these was to be killed—a type of the death of Christ ; the living bird was to be 
dipped in tixe blood of the bird that was killed, and then let go free—a type of the 
liberty obtained in consequence of Christ’s death, resurrection, life. 

In the chapter now before us, two goats were commanded to be brought, one for 
the Lord, the other for the scapegoat. It is a common thing with people only to think 
of sin as it concerns ¢hem_, they wish to be saved in order to escape hell, and they do 
not think of Ged in the matter at all. Now we know that God needs to be satisfied on 
account of sin before He can save a sinner; sin reached to the throne of God, and 
blood must be sprinkled there. Christ could enter into the holiest and take Eis seat 
at God’s right hand in His own merit ; but when He went in on our behalf, He must 
take blood with Him. Thus the goat that was for the Lord was offered for a sin 
éffering, and its blood was to be brought within the veil, and sprinkled upon the mercy 
seat; the other goat was to be presented alive before the Lord, and after Aaron had 
confessed over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, he was to be sent away 
into the wilderness, and bare u him all their iniquities unto a !and not inhabited, 
z.é., where no one would ever see or know anything more about him—he would be 
forgotten. This shows how entirely sin is removed from us by the blood of Christ. 
The slain goat typified the atonement for sin defore God, this goat typified the perfect 
removal of sin from us-—‘he one offering. “ As far as the east is from the west, so far 
hath He removed our transgressions from us.” 

J. M. CODE. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS 


HE great propitiation is sufficient for .he sin of the world. The Father’s co-equal 


Son stooped fer the moment to sin’s penalty, and there is now an open way to 
God, whose face, once averted from the sinner, is now towards him. The love once 
pent within Him is now set free, and with outstretched arms He entreats the Son to 
come and welcome. Christ has taken away wrath by taking it upon Himself. Prayer 
does not secure it, good works do not, repentance does not, faith does not ; but Christ 
secured it. ‘God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself.” If Christ has 
turned away wrath, can any sinner be lost? For an answer to this we have but to 
remember what salvation is. Salvation is not represented by penalty cancelled. 
That is but an open way to it. Salvation is fellowship with God. “This is eternal 
life, to know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent.” 
Propitiation does not save ; it makes salvation possible, it clears the way for us to God, 
and enables (od to throw the door wide open, to “ receive us graciously, and love us 
freely.” “Thou wast angry with me, but thine anger is turned away, and Thou 
comfortest me.” 

IN Scripture the “blood of Christ” implies for man as a sinner all the Divine 
value of it to God, and made over to us, and the abiding and eternal excellency 0! 
Christ’s finished work. God only can and does fully estimate its preciousness. 


Job 
2:20; 4 
position 
and has 


ance, 

21:20, 
Man can 
Job 36: 
Mark to 


hear of 


( IF 
es 
for sinne 
the guilt 
from sin 
the cros 
rest. 2B 
impulse d 
todie, | 
Here, be 
under His 
runs ove 
draw. T 
the powe 
by dying 
atonemen 
those for 
Power, for 


IEDEMPTION. 
EMI N 69 


REDEMPTION. 


I, The Redeemer. ‘ Holy Oneof Israel.”’ 5. From all iniquity, Titus 2: 14. 


Isa. 43: 14. 6, From death and the grave, Hosea 13: 14. 
II. How He Redeems. IV. Employment of the Redeemed. 


1. By the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1: 18, 19. 1, Speaking of the mercy of God, Psa. 
2. Clean taking unclean one’s place, Ex. | 107: 2. 


1313. 2, Walk in the highway of holiness, Isa, 
Ill, VW iat He Redeems from. 35:9 
1, Guilt of sin, Eph. 1:7. 3. Singing to the Lord, Isa. 51; 11. 
2. From the law, Gal, 4:6. | 4. Making most of every moment, Eph, 
3. From the hand of the mighty (Satan), | 5‘ 16. 

Job 6: 23. | 5. Praising the Lamb throughout eternity, 
4. From destruction, Psa. 102: 4. | Rev. 5:9, 


JESUS—OUR KINSMAN AND REDEEMER. 


Job 19:25-27; Lev. 25:25, 47-49; Ruth | Lev. 25: 48, 49; Ruth 2:20. (Margin) This, 
2:20; 4:14; Jer. 32:7,8. 1. Weare in the | Jesusis, Heb. 2:9-18. 4. As men, near of 
position of the brother who is waxen poor, | kin, Jesus has the right to redeem; as God, 
and has sold both himself and his inherit- | He has the power, Is. 47: 4° Ps. 78:35; Isa. 
ance. Rom. 3:9-24; 6:16; 7:14; 1 Kings | 44:6; Luke 1:68; Job 33: 23. 24; Isa. 49: 24, 
21:20, 25; 2 Kings 17:17; Isa. 52:3. 25; Isa. 63:1; Ps. 68:18; Eph. 1:14, Acts 


Man cannot redeem himself or his brother. | 2c:28; 1 Cor. 6:19, 20; 1 Pet. 1: 3-6; John 
Job 36:18, 19; Psa. 49:7,8; Mark 16:26; | 8:36; Heb. 2:14; 1 Pet. 2:9, 
Mark 10:26, 27. 3. The Redeemer must be Blessed Redeemer! 


near of kin to have the right to redeem, Miss E. HOWARD. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


a IF I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me,” John 12: 32. Jesus 
» Christ was lifted up on the earth; and the cross will be the centre of attraction 
for sinners down to the end of time. From Calvary comes the voice of Mercy; and 
the guilty sons of men are drawn by the charming sound. The cross draws men away 
from sin and wickedness ; and draws them to pardon, holiness, life and heaven. At 
the cross broken hearts find healing, mourners find consolation, and the weary find 
rest. [Beneath the shadow of the cross the love of sin dies ; the disheartened feel the 
impulse of a new life ; and under the impetus it gives, they go forth to do, to dare, and 
to die. Here at Thy dear cross, O wondrous Christ, we find a balm for every wound ! 
Here, beneath Life’s healing tree, we find our bliss, our heaven, our all. ‘I sat down 
under His shadow with great delight.” Joy unspeakable fills my heart, and my cup 
runs over. Jesus was lifted up out of earth. A dead Carist would be powerless to 
draw. ‘The cross isa mighty power, for Jesus lives again. He was slain to receive 
the power to draw all His people to Himself. Jesus put the sin that was upon Him away 
by dying ; His death destroyed death ; and rising from the dead His perfect accepted 
atonement becomes the heart’s true attraction. The redeemed will be saved; «ll 
those for whom Jesus died will be drawn to Him for life. His death will never lose its 
power, for He lives for evermore. 


7c GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


——— ee 


A NEW TRANSLATION OF ISAIAH 53; 


TOGETHER WITH ITS INTRODUCTION IN ISA. §2: 13-15. 
By Eph. M. Epstein, M.D. 


52. And as a root from a land of desolation, 
13. Behold my servant.shall be wise, No form is his, 
Lifted up, exalted very high. And no beauty, that we should see him, 
14. As many were astonished at thee, And nO appearance, that we should 
(For thus his looks were marred as no desire him, 
man’s, 3. Despised is he, and avoided of men ; 
And his features as no sons of Adam). A man of pains, anc acquainted with 
15. So too will he stir up many nations’ sickness ; 
Kings will open wide their mouthsat him ; And as one from whom the face is hid, 
For that which was not related to them, | Thus despised is he, and we regarded 


they saw, him not. 
And that, which they have not heard, 4. But verily, our sicknesses he bore, 
they now understood. And our pains—he suffered them ; 
53. ° Yet we, we regarded him as plagued, 


1. Who believed our report ? | Smitten and afflicted of God, 
And the arm of Jehovah, upon whom | 5. But he was wounded by our transgres- 
was it revealed ? (him, | sions, 
2. Fora suckling he would come up before | Bruised by our sins; 


onvenneenerniin ener oe 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


OME Hindoos were on a journey in India. The road was rough and long, and 
the sun burned hotly in the skies. Slowly they passed on the way, and as one day 
aiter another came to an end, many of the party grew faint and weary. There was 
one poor man who seemed a stranger to the rest ; he was old and feeble and ready to 
sink from the heat and labor of the way. At last he fell and could not rise again. 
The Hindoos looked upon him, and finding that he was likely to die, they left him to 
perish without pity or help, for these he hen are unkind to the sick ard dying. But 
there was among those travelers a missionary, on his way to a distant place to preach 
the Gospel ; he saw the old man fall and ran to aid him, while the rest passed along. 
Yet all his help could not now save his life. He knelt by the poor man’s side and 
softly said in his ear, “ Brother, what is your hope?” The dying traveler raised him- 
self to reply, and, with a great effort said; ‘ The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from 
all sin,” and then laid down his head again and died. The missionary was greatly 
astonished at the answer ; and, from the calm and thoughtful manner in which the 
words were spoken, he could not but feel that the man had died safe in Christ. “ How 
or where,” thought he, “ could this Hindoo have got his hoper” And, as he looked at 
the dead body, he saw a piece of paper grasped tightly in one of his hands. He care- 
fully took it out, and what was his surprise and delight when he saw it was a single leaf 
of the Bible, on which was the first chapter of the first Epistle of John, where these 
words are found. On that page a héathen man had met with the Gospe:. 
THE death of Christ is the only ground on which God could in faithfulness and 
justice forgive sins ; and we know He must either do it in faithfulness and justice or 
not at all. ° 


a 


9. An 


T? E 
: oO 
In the b 
door po 
on eithe 
upon th 
plague g 
the bloo| 
have ent 
hot eno 
that Ch 
His deat 
In Hims¢ 
we are ¢ 
repentan 
God did 
When yo} 
and we 
Word alo 
Characte 
thousand) 
ORD sa 
the stabil 
the destro 


hid, 
rded 


, and 
e day 
e was 
dy to 
gain. 
im to 
But 
breach 
along. 
he and 
H him- 
from 
reatly 
Hh the 
‘How 
ked at 
 care- 
Je leaf 
b these 


5S and 
ice of 


The removal of our peace was laid upon 


Anu. among his. generation, who ever 


REDEMPTION. 71 


But a rich man's among his dead ones, 


him, For no robbery did he, 
And by his wound there was healing for And no deceit with his mouth, 
Len ro, But Jehovah thus desired ; 
5. We all like sheep have wandered astray, ‘If his soul shall make a sin-sacrifice, 
Each one his own way we turned, He shall see posterity, 
But Jehovah met in him, the sin of all He shall prolong his days,” 
of us. And Jehovah's desire shall by him suc- 
. He is brought nigh, ceed, 
And he is tormented, 11. Of the toil of his soul he shall see and 
And he opened not his mouth ; be satiated; 
Like a lamb to slaughter led, Of his own mind shall my righteous 
Like a sheep before its shearers, servant make many righteous 
Dumb,—and he opened not his mouth. And their sinshe shall suffer. 
. Away from prison and court heis taken, | ,, ‘Therefore among the great will I give 


him a portion, 


thought ' And with the mighty shall he divide 
That he was cut off from the land of the spoils, 
living, 


That the plague to him from my people's 
transgression came ? 


. And among the wicked his grave was 


appointed, 


Because he exposed his soul to death, 

And with transgressors was he num. 
bered, 

Yet the sins of many he bore, 

And for transgressors he would intercede. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE Israelites, who were not a whit better than the Egyptians lying under sentence 
of death, were commanded to take a bunch of hyssop, and, having dipped it 
in the blood of the slain lamb, to strike that blood on the two side posts, and on the upper 
door post of their houses, not beneath, to be trampled under foot, but protecting them 
on either side, and overhead. Then God said, “the blood shall be to you for a token 
upon the houses where ye are; and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the 
plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I| smite the land of Egypt.” But if 
the blood had not been sprinkled as commanded, the destroyer would most certainly 
have entered the houses, and the stroke of death would have been inflicted. It was 
not enough that the lamb was slain; the blood must be sprinkled. It is not enough 
that Christ, our passover, has been sacrificed, but He must be personally received. 
His death in itself considered will not save a single accountable soul, apart from faith 
in Himself. It is absolutely essential, therefore, at the outset to ask ourselves whether 
we are trusting in the blood alone, or partly at least in our faith, our feelings, our 
repentance, our resolutions, our baptism, our union withthe church, our goods works. 
God did not say, when I see these things, but when I see ¢he d/oa7. Nor did ‘He say, 
when you see the blood, but when /see it. He was satisfied with the blood outside, 
and we must be satisfied with His word inside. The blood alone makes us safe; the 
word alone makes us sure. There was no doubt great variety in the age, moral’ 
character, past history, and deyree of confidence on the part of the hundreds of 
thousands within those blood sprinkled houses ; but they were equally safe, for the 
LorD saw the blood and passed over the door, and stood beside it to bar it, as if with 
the stability of His throne, as if with the length of eternity, against the entrance of 
the destroyer. Until He dies, not one sheltered beneath the blood can perish. 


= - teat SESH Nabe eM tania 


72 . GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


ee 


WHERE GOD PUTS SIN. 


1. Thou hast covered all their sin, Ps. 
85: 2. 

2. As far as the east is from the west, so 
far hath He removed our transgressions, Ps. 
103: 12. 

3. Thine iniquity is taken away, and thy 
sin purged, Isa. 6: 7. 

4. Thou hast cast all my sins behind Thy 
back, Isa. 38:17. 

5. Will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43:25. 

6. I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy 
iransgressions, Isa. 44: 22. 


7. The Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity 
of us all, Isa. 53 : 6. 

8. He shall bear their iniquities, Isa. 53: 11. 

9. The iniquity of Israel shall be sought 
for . . . and they shall not be found, Jer. 
1:20, ; 

10. None of his sins that he hath committed 
shall be mentioned unto him, Ezek. 33: 16. 

11. Wilt cast all their sins into the depths 
of the sea, Micah 7 : 19. 

12, Hath He . . . put away sin by the sac- 
rifice of Himself, Heb. 9: 26. J. M.S. 


. eens AA neonate 


—--~ - 


+ SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


SKING how Christ’s death could turn away the wrath of God, we are told plainly 
—it was by substitution. It is sometimes said that’ that word is not in the Bible ; 

but the thing is there. “The Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.” “He hath 
redeemed us from he curse of the law, being made a curse for us.”, “He made Him 
to be sin for us wh.) knew no sin.” He was “ once offered to bear the sins of many.” 
He “suffered for sins, the just for the unjust.” He “bore our sins in his own body on 
the tree.” It is said, however, that this is impossible, as sins cannot be transferred. 
Of course, this is so, but though sin cannot be transferred, the penalty can. The holy 
Son of God could not become a sinner, but He could take the sinner’s place, and bear 
the sinners doom, ‘That is what the Scriptures teach really took place. On Calvary 
He asserted his sinlessness in the cry, “My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” 
The doom of.sin was there. For a moment Christ was forsaken by the Father, 
Then He knew the Divine wrath, and what it was to be cut off from God. And what 
was that awful darkness, but to descend into hell? There the Divine wrath uttered 
itself, and its threatenings were fulfilled. Sin was gathered upon one sacred head. 


and judged and punished there. 


AMONG other good things therein is an altar, which is the cross of Calvary, on 
which there was offered one offering for ever—an altar the efficacy of whose sacrifice 
avails for Jew and Gentile, for the past, the present, and the future; an altar from 
which there is a new and perfect highway into the holy place, for we read in the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, that Christ, our High Priest, has “passed through the heavens.” 
As the priest of old passed from the altar of sacrifice right through the veil into the 
very presence of God, so our High Priest passed from the cross of Calvary up to the 
throne of God. We have a new and perfect altar,& new and perfect highway, a 
new veil—‘“that is to say, His flesh,” which was rent on the cross. We have also in 
this tabernacle a new mercy-seat, which is sprinkled with the blood of atonement ; 
and we have a new shrine, a new Shekinah presence, which is that of God Himself. 
This is the more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, and which can never pass 
away. Besides that, we have in Christ Himself a more perfect tabernacle. He was 
personally the temple of God. His perfect sinlessness was the altar on which His 
blood was offered. He was the sacrifice Himself, the Priest who offered the sacrifice, 
the mercy-seat, the Shekinah presence of God—“the brightness of the Father's 


glory.” 


I, 
being 
God h, 
by dyi 
of Divi 
‘“At-on 
chapte1 
the blo 
again tl 
by perfe 
only in. 

ground. 
Anc 
over the 
blood w: 
little acc. 
Christ h: 
and had 
pierced L 
The 
of the lar 
appears v 
His Son ; 
II F 
of Christ. 
by sin sol 
subject. te 
buying hi 
Just 
now are s 
Jesus. T 
ho questi¢ 
command, 


So now, al 
the stroke 
has nothin 
soul pleads 
of sin and 
SO priceles: 
belong to } 
blood of C, 
IIE 
forth Thy } 


are prisone 


inly 
ble ; 
hath 
Him 
any.” 
y on 
rred. 
holy 
bear 
hvary 
he?” 
ther, 
what 
texved 
head. 


‘ 


ys on 
rifice 
from 
n the 
ens.” 
o the 
o the 
ay, 4 
$0 in 
nent 5 
nself. 
pass 
e was 
ay His 
rifice, 
thers 


REDEMPTION. 73 


SEVEN THINGS INSEPARABLY CONNECTED WITH THE 
BLOOD. 


Collated and arranged by J. £. W. 


], Atonement or Reconciliation: See Lev. 17:11; Rom. 5:10, Man 
being a sinner against God, needs to be reconciled ; and the blood is the means which 
God has provided. He gave Jesus, His well-beloved Son, to pay the atonement price 
by dying in the stead of guilty rebels. His blood fully and forever satisfied the claims 
of Divine Holiness. Meaning of word Atonement: Our fathers used to pronounce it 
*At-one-ment.” It refers to the grea. Day of Atonement, spoken of in the 16th 
chapter of Leviticus, in which the high-priest passed into the Most Holy Place with 
the blocd of sacrifice, in order to reconcile the guilty sinnerto God; to make “at-one” 
again the Holy God and the sin-stained worshipper. Reconciliation has been made 
by perfect righteousness, That which blood of bulls and goats could never do, save 
only in measure as they pointed to Christ, has been done by Himeternally, and on the 
ground of the merits of 4is death God now beseeches sinners to be reconciled to Him. 

Another idea conveyed by atonement is that of covering over. The blood covers 
over the page of our sins, and hides them from the eye of God. This aspect of the 
blood was thoroughly realized and beautifully expressed by a half-witted lad, of whoma 
little account was once published under the title of “Happy Mute.” He said that “ Jesus 
Christ had passed His red hand over the page of sin in the book of God’s remembrance, 
and had left nothing visible there but the blood which had flowed from His palm when 
pierced by the nails of Calvary.” 

The crimson stain of our iniquities is hidden in the deeper dye of the atoning blood 
ofthe lamb. Just as when we gaze at a red object through glass of the same color, it 
appears white, so does God behold the scarlet sinner when covered wit the blood >f 
His Son as “ whiter than snow.” 

II Redemption: In1 Peter t : 19 we read, “ Redeemed with the precious blood 
of Christ.” The simple meaning of redemption is a buying back, a re-purchase. Man 
by sin sold himself to the devil, and thus became his lawful prey and captive ; became 
subject to Satan, and came under his condemnatic... But grace devised a way of 
buying him back. It is by way of “the blood of the Lamb.” 

Just as of old, Israel was delivered from Egypt by virtue of the sprinkled blood, so 
now are sinners brought out cf captivity and bondage of Satan by blood—the blood of 
Jesus. Then all were safe who took shelter beneath the blood-sprinkled lintel, It was 
no question of goodness or moval fitness, but simply one of obedience to a plain 
command,—- 

‘* Now get thy house within, 
Slay, eat, anoint thy door; 
The dread avenger comes not in 
To smite, but passeth o’er."’ 


So now, all whe come beneath the refuge God has provided, are eternally secure from 
the stroke of the Angel of Judgment.: our moral condition, our state in the eyes of men, 
has nothing to de with saivation. All depends on the application of the blood. Ifa 
soul pleads this before God as an atonement, he is at once redeemed out of the bondage 
of sin and Satan, and he becomes the property of God, bought with a price so precious, 
so priceless, that no mortal tongue can tell out its value. ‘‘He redeemed me,” “I 
belong to Him,” should henceforth be the language of all those thus ransomed by the 
blood of Cuirist. 

Ill. Deliverance from the Pit: “By the blood of Thy covenant I have sent 
forth Thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water,” Zech.9:11. By nature all 
are prisoners in a pit, and unable to get out by any effort of ourselves. The character 


74. GCLD FROM OPHIR. 


of this pit is here described as “ without water.” In Isa. 38 : 17, Hezekiah speaks of it 
as a “‘pit of corruption ;” in Psa, 40:2, David says it is “a horrible pit, ora pit of 
noise ;” and in Job 33: 30, it is alluded to as a pitof darkness. What a graphic picture 
is this, drawn by the Spirit of God, of that pit in which all mankind are caged and held 
captive !—a place lacking water—the emblem of life—a place of death, corruption, 
horrur, and darkness. Such is the condition of all sinners who are still outside the 
shelter of the blood. It is a picture of the pit of hell. 

IV. Forgiveness of Sins: “In whom we have redemption, through His blood, 
the forgiveness of sins,” Eph. 1:7. Inmany placesinthe Word of God is forgiveness 
coupled with the blood, since it is the only ground on which pardon may be proclaimed. 

The very first blessing we are called upon believing in Jesus, is to Anow that we 
are saved, pardoned,forgiven. Not tothink,not to hope, but toknowas an accomplished 
fact that all vur iniquities are blotted out as a thick cloud. 

God forrives on the ground of sin having been righteously put away by the blood, 
Satisfaction having been fully made to the demands of His holiness, He can now freely 
pardon all who cometo Him by Jesus. Salvation isa blessing to be known and enjoyed 
now, a present possession to make glad the heart, and give strength and power to live 
a godly life. 

V. Justification: “Justified by His blood,” Rom. 5:9. Not only forgiven, but 
justified by the blood. Justification is something far beyond forgiveness. Salvation 
from heli is one thing ; but meetness for the presence of God—the inheritance of the 
saints in light—is quite another. 

VI. Peace with God: “Having made peace by the blood of His cross,” Col. 
1:20, Theconscience that is set at rest about sin has peace ; the one who believes that 
Christ has mace peace by His blood enjoys peace. Peace never comes from feelings, 
or anything we do or think. Our estimate of the value of the blood does not give peace, 
but the blood itself. Our estimate is but faulty at the best; our appreciation of the 
value of Jesus very defective ; and if our peace rested upon this, it would be shaliow 
and ever liable to change. How blessed it is to know that Christ Himself is our peace ; 
that His blood on the mercy-seat ever speaks to God on our behalf. 


‘* We thank Thee for the blood, 
The blood of Christ Thy Son ; 
The blood by which our peace is made, 
Our victory is won ; 
Great victory o’er hell, and sin, and woe, 
That needs no second fight, and leaves no second foe.” 


VII. Nearness to God: “ Made nigh by the blood of Christ,” Eph. 2:13. We 
are in Christ. Weare His children, heirs, etc. All by virtue of the blood. 


Piernaionnnranganinninnanttditntnheteenen-anaene aang nnNatehinRar one gee ee 


known, 
Secon 

so far gc 
God not 
bidden t 
Third 
judgmen 
is a mit 
worketh | 
Fourth 


OW i 

and 
victim, la 
were inflj 
infringed, 
with the e 
He must 
can do thi 
human née 
suffer for ¢ 
lesson tha 
and for us 
taken our 


“THO 
when the d 
sand, whe 
from the g 
Water is cal 
we see on 
the water r 
there by itd 
sin for us,” 
IF the 
asa rebel a 
Ina deeply 
With him : 
peace with ¢ 
laying the 
the Suret 
Holy Jehov 
to all who b 
securely for 
is Jesus Chr 


ve 


ed 


yd. 
sly 
ed 
ive 


but 
ion 
the 
Sol. 
chat 
ng’s, 
ace, 
the 
low 
LCE 5 


We 


REDEMPTION. 75 


JUSTIFICATION. 


The law is a looking-glass, in the which Fifth office—constraining man to go to 
man may see himself, of what sort he is. | Jesus as our mediator, Deut. 18 : 18, 

The first office of the law—to make sin Man's inability to keep the law, Psa, 
known, Rom. 8:7. 143: 2. 

Second office—to increase sin. We were In Christ's name, Acts 4: 12. 


so far gone from God, that the command of 
God not to do increases our desire to do for- 
bidden things, James 4:17. 

Third office—to show God's wrath and 
judgment, Deut. 27:26. St. Paul: The law 
is a ministry of death, 2 Cor. 3:7, and 
worketh wrath, Rom. 4: 15. 

Fourth office—fear, Rom. 8:7. N. B. FRITTS. 


eee See ee eee 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


OW is atonement to be made? Whois able to take upon himself the sin of the world, 
and to make perfect satisfaction to God’s holy law? First, He must be a wedding 
victim, laying down His life of himself freely, for if the punishment of the smallest sin 
were inflicted on Him without or against His will the justice of heaven would be 
infringed. Second, He must be a sfoé/ess victim, for one taint or spot would do away 
with the efficacy of the sacrifice. The sinless alone can atone for the sinful. Third, 
He must be capaéd/e of offering satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and no man 
can do this. Fourth, the victim must have the power of God, to take upon Himself all 
human needs, and weaknesses, and sorrows, and sufferings, and sins, but if He is to 
suffer for sin, if He is *> stand in the place of man, and to write with His own hand the 
lesson that sin should not go unpunished, He must also be man, to suffer as one of us, 
and for us. This is the sacrifice which has been transacted. The Son of God has 
taken our place, and has done for us that which we could not do ourselves. 


“THOU hast cast all our sins into the depth of the sea”—this was understood 
when the cable was laid. The ocean is miles deep, the bottom covered with thick red 
sand, where the cable lies softly and secure. The water at the bottom is almost solid 
from the great pressure of the body of the ocean. This portion of the compressed 
water is called ¢he cushion of the sea, and it is in repose, where is no such agitation as 
we see on the surface, where the wind acts and where tempests rage. The density of 
the water renders it impossible for anything ever to rise again that may have sunk 
there by its own weight. Into such depths God has cast our sins, when ‘“‘ He was made 
sin for us,” 2 Cor. 5:21. 

IF the Holy Ghost be awakening the sinner to a true apprehension of his danger, 
as a rebel against God’s authority, a guilty, polluted, hell-deserving sinner, he must be 
in a deeply anxious state of mind, and such questions as these must be ever present 
with him: “What must I do to be saved ? What is the true ground of a sinner’s 
peace with God? What am J to believe in order to be saved?” Well, in so faras 
laying the foundation of your reconciliation is concerned, you have nothing to do; for 
the Surety of sinners said on Calvary, “ /¢ zs finished.” Jesus has done all that the 
Holy Jehovah deemed necessary to be done to insure complete pardon, and salvation 
toall who believe in His name. If the sinnertake Jesus as his Saviour, he will build 
securely for eternity. “For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which 
is Jesus Christ.” 


By believing in Him, Acts 13:39; Gal. 
2:16, and 3: 11. 

Not justified by good works, Hzb, 7: 27; 
John 12: 31, 32. 

Man delivered from the law and sin, John 
1: 29 (for) Gal. 3: 13. 


i 
j 
i 
j 

i 


70 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE ALTAR 


hy Horatius Bonar, 
‘‘We have an altar,'' Heb. 14: 10 
The cross is our altar. There the great | (od \\\t of Heaven embraces may). There 
burnt-offering was laid and burnt and a is but one meeting place for the sivwer, Man 


thinks there are many such; God tella him 
there is but one. Man's varied aystems of 
religion, his self-devised tites, his well-pre 
pared forms of religion, are his meeting 
places—substitutes for the God-appointed 
meeting place. de 


cepted forus, Py the altar we stand, find- 
ing in it everything that suits the sinner’s 
case and meets the sinner’s fears. 

I. There I see God in Christ reconciling 
the world unto Himself. The ‘altar’’ was 
the place of reconciliation for Israel; the 
cross is the place of reconciliation for us. 
There we see everything that prevented re- 
conciliation removed, and everything needed | III. There I see the forgiveness of sins 
for accomplishment there finished and ex- | for the guiltiest. The inscription on our 
hibited. ‘ Reconciliation” is the inscription | altar may be said to be, ‘‘ Forgiving iniquity, 
on the cross. transgression and sin.’ No amount of sin, 

II. There I see God meeting man in love. | and no kind of sin, is excluded from this 
At the cross Heaven touches earth, and | mighty pardon. It is a pardon worthy of 


But all in vain. Meet me 
at the cross’’ isGod’s messageof love, No 


where else is there grace or peace 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


OD hath written a law and a Gospel ; the law to humble us, and the Gospel t 
comfort us ; the law to cast us down, and the Gospel to raise us up: the law to 
convince us of our misery, and the Gospel to convince us of His mercy ; the law to 
discover sin, and the Gospel to discover grace and Christ, pointing, as it ever does, to 
the sacrificial work of Christ on the cross. 

THE testimony of the late Henry Reed, of England, is very precious. He was a 
wealthy, but devoted Christian, who had spent a long life in making known the Gospel, 
and in work of practical benevolence and charity. Finding that he was about to pass 
away, and wishing to leave on permanent record a farewell message to his friends and 
the world, before his mind began to wander amid the shadows of death, he called for 
pen, ink, and paper, and calmly and deliberately inscribed the following statement of 
his experience and full conviction :—“ After all I have said, preached, and written for 
upwards of forty-five years, I wish it to be distinctly understood that the ground of the 
hope that is within me (which hope is full of immortality and eternal glory) is not 
‘repentance toward God, although it is written, ‘Except ye repent, ye shall all like- 
wise perish.’ Nor is it faith, although it is written, ‘ withouth faith it is impossibl. to 
please God.’ Nor is it in becoming a new creature, although it is written ‘Except 
a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.’ Nor is it in holincss, 
although it is written, ‘Without holiness no man shall seethe Lord.’ They are, indeed, 
great and glorious gifts, all purchased by blood Divine, for which I adore and praise a 
triune God. Still none of them atoned for my sins. Repentance did not die for me; 
faith did not die for me; the new creature did not die for me; holiness did not die for 
me. My confidence is not in the gifts, but in the Giver—the Eternal Son of God, 
who teok my nature, and in that nature, as my substitute, atoned for my sins. On His 


finished work alone does my soul rely for pardon, hr‘~<=:- 2nd heaven ; and He only 
is made unto me wisdom, righteousness, and sane*fici:ts 5), a 


lemption.” 


consul 
so that 
absolu 
the utt 
tion iss 
V.T 
sinner, 
is iver 
soul, | 
An tru 
bHiié | 
ment or. 
gracious 
VE® 


— 
—=== 


HE d 
the 
God rem 
of God, t 
and of th 
tion of thi 
the soul ¢ 
blood,” 


I Bw: 
threshold 
must have 
peace, [| 
out at ond 
any prepa 
pardoning 
and just td 
testimony 
“the blood 
you have 7 
Prayer, aft 
Pass throy 

ness; but 
the all-per: 
the ungod 
very act of 


y to 
, to 


AS a 


pass 
and 
for 
t of 
for 
the 
not 
ike- 
Ls to 
cept 
ss, 
eed, 
sea 
me 5 
for 
+04, 
His 
mnly 


-#e 


REDEMPTION. 77 


- 


the altar; worthy of Him who has set up | that the altar represents, but life also, for the 
the altar, worthy of the divine sacrifice cross is the death of the substitute; and 
that has been presented there ‘‘ once forall.’ | therefore the meaning of the altar is LIFE; 
\V. There I see the only place of safety life out of death, life through Him who 
for the sinner Wrath is everywhere else; ‘‘ poured out His soul unto death,”’ because 
perfect security is there. The ‘consuming He was bearing the sins of many, and thus 
fire’ descends on the altar, and is there making everlasting life a free, a sure, a 
consumed—there expended and exhausted; __ righteous gift to the guiltiest of Adam’s race. 
so that all who stand around that altar are —-~VII. There I seeall things ready for the 
absolutely and forever safe. ‘Salvation to sinner’s acceptance. The ransom is there, 
the uttermost” is the world-wide proclama- | the purchase-money is there, the things 
tion issuing from the four horns of that altar. | needed by a sinner are all there; and God 
V. There I see the divine welcome forthe says ‘*Take.” They are all to behad for the 
sinner. It comes from God Himself, andit taking. Nomerit, no money, no work, all is 
is given with His whole heart and whole free. He that believeth enters on the pos- 
soul. It is no half-way welcome, butearnest , session of all. To believeis to take, ‘He 
ail true, Sons of men, Goc bids you wel- | that believeth yarn everlasting life.” Simple 
baile! He has ve pleasure in your banish- | believing puts me in immediate possession 
ment or conMemiation, ‘Drawnear" is His | of all the fullness of theChrist of God. My 
gracious messaji'| whiy stand aloof? acceptance of God's provision for the guilty 
VI. There I see life in death, Itis death | makes meanaccepted man. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE date of the feast of the Passover is of special significance. It was observed in 
the month in which God brought His people out of Egypt. Again and again does 

God remind Israel of their deliverance from Pharaoh’s bondage, and so does the Spirit 
of God, through Paul, bid the Ephe: igs and all saints remember the bondage Of atk 
and of the world, out of which all who believe a/é Hélivered by Ue #/ath and resurrec- 


tion of the Lord Jesus, Redemption’s feast begins a ni v/ on the ground of which 
the soul can sing, © U rite Him that loveth us, and washed us fiji our sins in His own 
blood.” 


I BESEECH you to settle it in your mind #7/#4 $f OV ELU Hiss af sins” Kies at the very 
threshold of the Christian life. It is a blessing neéded and Uieineble now. You 
must have forgiveness, or perish forever ; ba must have it #aw, or y: nnot have 


peace. It is surely a most delighiful thought, that you can gét fhe guilty pact blotted 


out at once and forever! God pardons freely and at once. Hé 6és not nculcate 
any preparation in order to pardon. One, who knew the blessedn2ss of enjoying His 
pardoning mercy, testifies thus €oncerning it: “If we confess our sins, He is faithful 
and just to forgive our sins, and to Cleanse us from ji unrighteousness ;” aad this 
testimony was given, on the ground of what he bad affirmed in the same letter, that 


“the blood of Jesus Christ Hig Son clearseth us from all sin. He does not say, After 
you have repented more thoroughly, after you have spent cays and weeks in agonizing 
prayer, after you become more thoroug!ily instructed divine things, and after you 


pass through years of “ trouble and sorrow,” fhe you me y ire to hope for forgive- 
hess; but you are warr:.nted, on simply confessing your sy eli that, through 
the all-perfect merits of Christ, you are pardoned that very moment ; fr God “justifieth 
the ungodly,’ and Christ “ rece’veth sinners) and says to every one f (rete, in the 
very act of receiving them, “ Be of good cheers thy sins be foretven thee. 


78 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


JESUS AS. REDEEMER AND DELI, FRER FROM SIN. 


I, But Thou hast in love to my soul de- | —_V. Christ redeemed us from the curse of 
livered it from the pit of corruption, Isa. the law, Gal. 3:13. 
38:17. VI. Might redeem us from all iniquity, 
II. I will ransom them from the power of ‘Titus 2:14. 
the grave; I will redeem them from death, VII. Redeemec with the precious blood, 
Hos. 13:14. t Pet. 1:18, 19. 
III, Who gave Himself for our sins, that VIII. Who His own self bare our sins in 
He might deliver us from this present evil His own body, 1 Pet. 2:24. 
world, Gal, 1: 4. IX, Unto Him who loved us, and loosed 
IV. Who loved me, and gave Himself for (R.V.) us from our sins, Rey, 1: 5. 


me, Gal. 2: 20. J. M.S. 


THE FINISHED WORK OF JESUS CHRIST. 


I. It was effected by Christ alone. See III. The effect of the knowledge of that 
John 1:29, 36; Acts 4:10, 12; 1 ‘“hess, finished work on the heart and life of 
1:10; r Tim. 2:5,6; Heb. 2:9; 1 Pet. | the believer, See Rom, 12:1, 2; 2 Cor. 


a eT | 6:14-18; 2Cor.7:1; Jas. 2: 14-26; 1 Pet. 
| 


II. It was voluntary. See Psa. 4o:6-8, | 
with Heb. 10: 5-9: John 10:11, 15,17, 18. | 


2124. 


J.E.w. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


DO not know a more striking illustration of salvation by the blood of Christ alone 
than that which is furnished by the sprinkling of the blood of the passover lamb on 
the homes of the Israelites, on the eve of their redemption from the bondage of Egypt. 
“ The blood on the lintel secured Israels peace.” There was nothing more required in 
order to enjoy settlec peace, in reference to the destroying angel, than the application 
of the blood of sprinkling. God did not add anything to the blood, because nothing 
more was necessary to obtain salvation from the sword of judgment. He did not say, 
“When I see the blood avd the unleavened bread or bitter herbs, I will pass over.” By 
no means, These things had their proper place,and their proper value ; but they 
never could be regarded as the ground of peace in the presence of God. 


WHEN we speak of “vicarious atonement,” what dowe mean by it? “ Vicarious” 
means something that is done on behalf of another, because he is unable to do it him- 
self. You have an obligation to fulfil, and you are unable to fulfil it, and another fulfils 
it on your behalf. “Your obligation is this ; You ought to obey the law of God perfectly, 
but you do not and cannot. You have every one of you broken the law, and you have 
done wrong against God, for every sin is a wrong against God. You owe, therefore, 
reparation to God. You deserve punishment, for your sin is a breach of the law, the 
eternal and immutable law of God which cannot be broken with impunity; and that 
the majesty of law may be held and God’s justice satisfied you must bear the penaity of 
transgression, And then, further, you need have the enmity done away with which 
exist¢ hetween you and God. You need a new heart of reconciliation which shall 


bring you into fellowship and peace with God 


a 


R*® 
b 
again i 
ship ey 
perforn 
second, 
wrong, 
in that 
secured 
Testam 
saidin t 
the dea 
to whic 
The sa 
They w 
miserab 
selves tl 
present 
selves pi 

the desc 

the Ang 
inheritar 

bodies w 

come, ev 

Avenger 

sleep in | 

changed, 


a 


6é F ar 

Sai 

know tha 
been shec 
able. I; 
nor love 
Assured] 
they have 
and thus, 
to be save 
Gry 

that it sho 
doing of j 
tion from 
with “ Hy; 
a Matter ¢ 
by His B 
spontaneo 
is right to 
Him yours 


REDEMPTION. 79 


THE GOEL-REDEEMER. 


By Prof. G. W. Morehead. 


Gace Lev. 25:25,etc. A redeemer must first of all have this qualification, he must 
be near of kin to the man on whose behalf He intervenes. It was again and 
) again insisted on that Christ had partaken of flesh and blood, hence He claimed kin- 

ship even with thera, Then this kinsman-Redeemer had a three-fold function to 


perform, first, He had to redeem the person of him who had been sold into slavery ; 

second, his property; third, if he had suffered wrong He must avenge him of the 
: wrong. The New Testament doctrine of the redemption of Christ was in germ form 
| in that action of the Redeemer. See Eph. 1:7; 1 Cor. 6:19, 20. And then He had 
, secured for them theinheritance. The whole doctrine of their inheritance in the New 


Testament was bound up with the action of this kinsman-redeemer in Ley. 25. Peter 
said in the opcaing of his first letter that we had beenquickened together with Christ from 
the dead unto an inheritance. Poor Eve lost not only herself, but the great estate i 
to which she was an heir with her husband, and the two were expelled from Paradise. 
The saddest history of the entire race began at that point, and ran on to this day. 
They were an expelled family, they were outside their proper inheritance, and the 
miserable business of patching up a lost character, and striving to restore unto them- 
selves their lost inheritance, began in that day of shame, and had gone on down to the 
present time. They were engaged in the herculean, impossible task of making them- 


at selves presentable unto the Lord God, whereas He had given them the Goel-Redeemer, 
of the descendant of Eve, of thestock of Abraham, of the tribe of Judah, the great King, 
yr. the Angel Jehovah Himself, who not only redeemed them, but restored to them their 
ot. inheritance, and by and by will be the avenger of all their wrongs, 2 Thess. 1:7. Their 
bodies were not yet redeemed, but were breaking down, and, unless the | hid should 
come, every one now living would be sleeping under the sod by andby. But the great 
Avenger was coming, and at His appearing, at His shout from above, all them that 
tae sleep in Him would be awakened, and they who were alive and remained would be 
changed, and together with them caught up to meet the Lord in the air. 
a SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 
t. i an Israelite had been asked as to his enjoyment of peace, would he have 
in said, ‘I know there is no other way of escape but by the blood of the lamb ; and I 
mn know that that is a divinely perfect way ; and, moreover, I know that that blood has 
g been shed and sprinkled on my door-post ; but, somehow, I do not feel quite comfort- 
by, able. I am not quite sure if I am safe. I fear I do not value the blood as I ought, 
By nor love the God of my fathers as I ought.’ Would such have been his answer? 
ey Assuredly not. And yet hundreds of professing Christians speak thus, when asked jf 
they have peace. They put their thoughts about the blood in place of the blood itself ; 
and thus, in result, make salvation as much dependent upon themselves as if they were 
to be saved by works.” 
ls “Give your heart to Christ” is, essentially, /aw—not Gospel. It is most proper 
iv that it should be done, for God Himself demands it ; but itis not evangelical to urge the 
ys doing of it as if zt were the Gospel. The true Gospel is, Accept the free gift of salva 
ig tion from wrath and sin, by receiving Jesus Himself, and all the benefits He purchased 
‘aM with “ H1Is OWN BLOOD,” and your heaft will be His in a moment—given Him, not as 
an a matter of Jaw, but of dove; for, if you have the love of //7s heart poured into yours 
et by His Blessed Spirit, you will feel yourself under the constraining influence of a 
8 spontaneous spiritual impulse to give Him your heart, and all you have, in return, It 
a is right to give Him your heart, but unless you first receive His, you wi!! neyer give 


Him yours. 


80 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


BLOTTING OUT. 


I. Repentance in order that sins may be | IV. The blotting out of sins and iniquities 
blotted out, Acts 3: 19. Psa. 51:1, 9. 

II. God only can blot out sins, Isa. V. God will not blot the name of the 
43:25. righteous out of His book, Rev. 3:5. 

III. God has blotted out, Isa. 44: 22. J.B. Ww. 


THE DEATH OF CHRIST. 


I. It was voluntary, Luke 12:50; juvhn | III. It was painful, Matt. 27: 29-50; Heb. 
10:11, 18; Heb. 10:7, 9. ' 2:9, 103; 1 Peter 1:11. 

II. It was substitutionary, Isa. 53; Dan. IV. It was ignominious, Heb. 12: 2, 3. 
9:27; Matt. 20:28; 1 Cor.5:7; 1 Tim. V. It was accursed, Deut. 21:23; Gal. 
2:6; Titus 2:14; Heb. 9:26-28; 1 Peter 3: 13. 

1:18, 19; Rev. 1:5. eed. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE blood of Jesus has opened a new and living way into heaven for a poor sinner. 

It hag raised a ladder from earth to heaven. The cross of Christ was set in the earth, 
and there His blood was shed ; ie merey-seat of God is set in heaven, and there His 
blood is sprinkled. By His owt blood He entered into the holy place, having obtained 
eternal redemption for ia} and boldness is given to us to enter into the holiest by the 
same precious blood. ‘Then, poor sinner, will you stay away when God says * Come?” 
Will you go to the world for happiness, when God has given His own dear Son to make 
you happy, atid to save you from everlasting misery? Will you say, *I aim too great 
a sinner,” when God says that the blood of Jesus Chrigt His Son cleanseth us from all 
sin? Will you say, “Twill wait a little longer,” whe, God says, ‘* Now is the accepted 
time, now is the day of salvation?” 

MAN needs a friend to deliver him from the curse, from death, from judgment, from 
the wrath tocome. Can he help hitiself? Can his fellow-men help him? If they 
could, they wouldnot. They would not die in his piare Ani \f they did it would be of no 
use. Willangels help him? Ifthey would thely Help would Wot avail; for sin, being an 
infinite evil, requires infinite atonement, Wit Jesus Christ zs infinite— infinite in Holi: 
ness, infinite in goodness, infinite in power and love ; and Hie beiny punished would 
atone for the infinite evilof sin. He stepsforward, " Jesus,’said Paul, “was madea 
little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, 
that He by the grace of God should taste death for every man.” He is the IWrlend ol 
sinners,a Friend in need. By nature we are naked 3 we wander about in the coli. 
Jesus Christ sees us needy—steps as it were froin heaven to earth—takes off His own 
raiment and wraps it aboutus, Wut we are not only naked; we are hungry and 
thirsty, My friends, do we feel our souls hungering and thirsting after righteousness? 
Do we feel that the things of earth are unsatisfying, vain, empty, vile? Do we feel 
that they will not do for our souls ? and are you hungering and thirsting after something 
that will satisfy—something that is far better? Christ sees our need. He steps from 
heaven ; He pours out His own blood, His life, for us todrink. He makes us what we 
once were, restoring us to our first condition, raising us from the dunghill—from the 
depths of degradation—to the throne, the heights of glory. 


“The 
and I h, 
make a1 
the bloc 
soul,’’ I 


have, tt 
I, Re 


“Tn y 
His blo 
1314, 

* Feed 
hath pu 
20: 28, 

Thou 
to God b 
and tong 
5+9. 

Ye we 
things, as 
versation 

fathers ; 


N Helo 
this w 
before all 
lilt, this 
HA eh A 
Waveily ¥ 
Sins f | 
infinite ig J 
aid what ¢ 
Sin has bre 
height of F 
who could 
Son of the 
ibhorrence 
He could n 
loathsome 4 
lt Hig love 
people who 
sinner—ent 
and sin-hea 
expression ¢ 
utfers the qd 
Son of God, 


© 


rom 
hey 
f 110 
an 
10ll- 
puld 
dea 
nor, 
1 ol 
hold. 
own 
and 
ess? 
feel 
hing 
rom 
t we 
the 


REDEMPTION. 81 


THE BLOOD OF CHRIST—A BIBLE READING. 


“The life of the flesh is in the blood ; 
and I have given it to you upon the altar, to 
make an atonement for your souls; for it is 
the blood that maketh ‘an atonement for the 
soul,” Lev. 17:11. Hence, in Christ we 
have, through faith— 


I, Redemption. 

‘In whom we have redemption through 
His blood, even forgiveness of sins,'’ Col. 
nag 

‘Feed the Church of God, which He 


hath purchased with His own blood,” Acts 
20 : 28. 


!*Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us 
to God by Thy blood out of every kindred, 
and tongue, and people, and nation,’”’ Rev. 
5:9. 

‘Ye were not redeemed with corruptible 
things, as silver and gold, from ) our vain con- 
versation ‘received by tradition from your 
fathers; but with the precious blood of 


t 


Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and 
without spot,’’ 1 Peter 1:18, 19. 

II. Forgiveness of sins. 

“In whom we have redemption through 
His blood, the forgiveness of sins,’ Eph. 1:7. 

This is My blood of the New Testament 
which is shed for many for the remission of 
sins,’ Mat. 26: 28. 

‘‘Whom God,hath set forth to be a pro- 
pitiation through faith in His blood, to declare 
His righteousness for the remission of sins 
that are past,’’ Rom. 3:25. 

‘Without shedding of blood is no re- 
mission,” Heb. 9: 22. 

III. Justification. 

‘Being now justified by His blood, we 
shall be saved from wrath through Him,” 
Rom. 5:9. : 

IV. Cleansing from sin, both as to the 
person and the consciexce. 

“The blood of Jesus Christ His Son 
cleanseth us from all sin,’ 1 John 1:7. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


N Hebrews 1sf we have 


smany glories of the Lord Jesus Christ, and we ask wnywas 
this wonderful and glorious Being, in whom all things are summed up 


na who LS 


before all things, the Fathers delight and the Father’s glory—why has this infinite 


ht, this infinite | 
HA A Th Bij 


inavenly wisdoii? ‘Va rule by His just a 


sins 2 What height of glory | what depth of abasement | 
infinite ia His self-humiliation and the fet of His love to us. 

table love 
Sin has brought Him down from heaven! Our defilement ha 
height of Hi#®glory! Oh, what an expression !—what aclimax! |! 


aid whatan awful sacrifices of unspes 


who could properly understand the true nature, depth, and guilt of sin. 
Son of the Father, He perfectly sympathised with the Father in His lo 


jower, this infinite majesty come down to our poor earth? For what 
ne? To show forth the splendor of His tajesty? 


To teach 
nig] He tame fo purge ow 

Infinite is His majesty, and 
Whata glorious Lor 
s by Himself/? 


drawn Him froii i 


“to purge our sin 


H the only org 
God of God, 
ithing and 


ibhiorrence of sin 5 but, nel WAHL to befriend us and having become one witli ts, 
ii 


He could not bear the fac’: of our being lost. 


So this loathsomeness of our iniquity, as 


loathsome to Jesus as to the Father, He willingly takes upon himself, Jesus—pericct 

ii His love to the holy and righteous Father, perfect in His love to the sinful and guilty 

people whom He came to save, with infinite Hatred af sin and with infinite love to the 

sinner—enters, alone and unassisted, into that awful wilderness where, ns our substitute 

and sin-bearer, He feels the Father's face as turned away from Him; and as the 

expression of His agony, iit whith faith and love endured all things and Hy ie 
I 


utters the ery, “My God, My God; why hast Thou forsaken Me?” Then Jest, t 
Son of God, purged by Himsvlf our sins, 


& 


82 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


as ne renee — a ——— — 


“JESUS OUR SACRIFICE.” 


Laying aside all theories and traditions of 
men, let us try to.learn just what the Bible 
itself teaches concerning the sacrificial death 
of Jesus, 

I. Jesus is a Sacrificial Lamb: John 1: 
29; Acts 8:32, 35; 1 Peter 1:19; Rev. 5: 
6,9; 7:14. The persons using the fore- 
going language were all Jews. ‘They were 
accustomed to the sacrificial ideas of the Old 
Testament, and the sacrificial scenes of the 
Temple, and io none other. They, there- 
fore, must have meant that Jesus was, as it 
were, 2 lamb to be slain for the sins of men. 

Il. jesus is a sin offering : 2 Cor. 5: 21. 
In the Greek translation of the Hebrew 
Scriptures, the ‘‘ Septuagint,’’ LXX., the ori- 
ginal word for “sin offering’ is rendered by 
the single word ‘‘sin,” it is “the sin.” From 
the Septuagint the word passed into the New 
Testament, and in this sense is used in thy 
foregoing text. See Ex, 29:14, Revision, 
Margin, and Lev. 6:25, and like places in 
the LXX. Seealso Rom. 8:3; 1 Cor. 15:3; 
t Peter 2:24; 3:18. 

He is also the sin offering foz the great 
atonement: Heb. 9:12, 25, 26, 28; 13:11, 
r2; (compare Lev. 16: 1, 28), 

He is likewise our Passover offering: 1 


Cor. 5:7; John 19: 36; (Ex. 12: 46; Numb. 
g: 12). 

And He is finally our peace offering ; Eph 
2:13, 14; Col. 1:20, 22; Rom. 5:1, 11. 
All the foregoing texts contain a distinct 
reference to the sacrifices under the law and 
their fulfilment in Jesus. 

III. His blood makes atonement ; Matt. 
20: 28, to be compared with Lev. 17: 11, 14, 
especially the last verse, ‘‘ the life (margin, 
‘soul ’) ofall flesh is the blood thereof" (R.V.), 
and this life or soul is ‘‘ given upon the altar 
to make an atonement for your souls” (v. 11). 
‘The Hebrew word for ‘‘ ransom" in Ex, 21: 
30; 30:12, isrendered by the same Greek word 
in the Septuagint that our Lord applies to 
Himself; and the Hebrew word thus trans- 
lated is precisely the same word that in Lev. 
17:11 and elsewhcre is rendered ‘ atone- 
ment.’ The plain meaning of our Lord is, 
that He came to give His life in the place of 
the lives of many as an atonement for their 
sins. See alsorTim.2:6; Tit.2:14; Heb. 
9:12; Eph. 1:7; Col. 1:14; Gal. 3:13. 

To the same effect is Matt. 26:28. Com- 
pare this with Heb. 9: 15-23; ;Ex. 24:8; Heb. 
13:20; tr John 1:7; Rev. 1: 5. 

His blood thus shed is a propitiation for 


EO _ FETE _EHETEEE~.-~_0- > 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


E should think much of the d/ood, it is our way". approach to God ; a way is now 
open every moment into the Holiest of all. The guilty heart can“hot approach 

God, it willingly sets up a fence. What removes it? The blood. Look at all the 
expenditure of His grace from first to last to bring us nigh. When the blood is rightly 
used and applied, what is the result? Nearness to God. Are you living in this near- 
ness to God? If there be a question concerning guilt, there is a remedy—the blood ; 
thus the heart gets confidence, and fear and disinclination are removed. Pople talk 
of knowing its power, but no man knows it aright who does not feel in the embrace 
of God. Whose blood is it? The blood of the Lord Jesus. He presents His own 
blood ; he takes, as it were, the death which is past, and holds it up before God. He 
is the living Mediator, presenting the blood which He shed to redeem us to God. He 
knows our hearts, our sins, our weakness, our fearfulness, and He presents the blood to 
give us confidence and assurance. ‘The blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth wu; 


from all sin,” 1 John 1:7. 


sin: R 

word * 
the coy 
the lay 
25:17, . 
atoneme 
on the ¢ 
14, LXX 
ot that 
offered, 
blood its 
I: 2; 

It shor 
that the ¢ 
lated “at 
literally r 
in money 
“covered 
set him fr 
in sacrific 

her, and gs 
his sins, d 
Rom, 4:7 
tural mea 
hot prima 
lowship wi 
of the guilt 


O, I co 
throug 
Isaac was 
the sacrifice 
God. We 
atonement, 
seat, even s 
and blessin 
the will of 


IT was 
speech was 
the power of 
what the wh 
or want of ( 
publish the t 
to that youn; 
want to see 
us than wea 


now 
oach 
i the 
htly 
near- 
od; 
b talk 
race 
own 
He 
He 
od to 
h us 


REDEMPTION. 83 


ee a - ee — - - 


sin: Rom. 3:25; 1 John2:2; 4:10, This | sacrifice, from the sight of offended Jehovah ; 
word “' propitiation " is properly the name of | and this in order to his subsequent restora- 
the cover of the ark of the covenant above | tion to the Divine favor, 
the law, the mercy seat (Heb.9:5; Ex. IV. Jesus is the priest. As such, He offers 
25:17, LXX). Upon this cover the blood of the sacrifice and mediates between God and 
atonement was sprinkled by the High Priest _ men: John 10:18; Heb. 4:14; 7°24, 27; 
on the day of the great atonement (Lev. 16; | 10:12, and 19-22; 1 Tim. 2:5, Revision: 1 
14, LXX.); amd finally, from being the mame | John 2:1. 
of that upon which the atoning blood was From all the foregoing, the only legiti- 
offered, it came to designate the sacrificial | mate conclusion must be that Jesus is a 
blood itself. See also Heb. 12:24; 1 Peter | sacrifice for the sins of men in the same 
¥a ‘nse as the sacrifices offered under the law; 
It should be observed in this connec'ion the only difference being that He has ful- 
that the Old Testament word variously trans- | filled, once for all, in His own sacrifice, the 
lated ‘‘atone,” “atonement,” and ‘‘ransom,"" | meaning and purpose of all the sacrifices 
literally means "‘ cover." The penalty paid | that were ever offered under the Old Testa- 
in money for an offece against the law | ment. The w ‘ of sacrifice He perfocted 
“covered"’ the liability of the offender and | forever when He was “lifted up from th 
set him free (Ex. 21:20). The blood offered | earth" upon the Cross of Calvary. For 
in sacrifice ‘‘covered"' the guilt of the sin- | this, the law prepared the way ; Jesus finished 
ner, and so saved him from the penalty of | the work. From the Old Testament 
his sins, death (Lev. 1:4, 5, etc.). Hence | learn the elementary principles of salvation ; 
Rom. 4:7; Ps. 32:1; Ps. 85:2, the Scrip- | in Jesus*we obtain the completed truth of 
tural meaning of the word ‘‘atonement"’ is | redemption. He ‘is made unto us wisdom, 
not primarily reconciliation, peace, and fel- | and righteousness, and sanctification and 
lowship with God; but it is the ‘‘covering’’ | redemption." 
of the guilt of the sinner by the blood of the H. W. CONGDON. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


O, 1 come to do Thy will, O God. ..... By the which will we are sanctified, 
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once forall,” Heb. 10:9,10. As 
Isaac was willing at the bidding of his father to be offered up, even so was Christ as 
the sacrifice for sin. We behold Him as the sacrifice, bearing the righteous wrath of 
God. We behold Him as the sacrificer, offering Himself. As Aaron, on the day of 
atonement, went into the holiest of all, and sprinkled the blood on and before the mercy 
seat, even so did Christ meet the claims of God by His death, bringing glory to God 
and blessing to the believer. , We behold Him as the servant wholly devoted to do 
the will of God. We behold Him as the swéduer, conquering every foe. 


IT was not exciting words, it was not eloquence, that Paul had. Why, he said his 
speech was contemptible! He did not profess to be an orator. but he preached Christ, 
the power of God and the wisdom of God-—Christ, and Him crucified. And this is 
what the whole world wants—Christ, and Him crucified. And the world will perish 
for want of Christ. Let every man and woman that loves the Lord Tesus begin to 
publish the tidings of salvation. Talk to your neighbors and friends, kun and speak 
tothat young man! Talk to him of heaven and of the love of Christ ; tell him that you 
want to see him saved ; and bear in mind this, that God is far more willing to bless 
us than we are to have Him. Let us, then. keep close to Christ. 


s> 


% 


yy my 
ser 
; 4> g 4 


\\, 


Nd °. = “s * aro 
. et 1 4 ce 


[MAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


Nee 


1d 


125 


6” 


84 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


ZS 7 ~ ee, 


“THE BLOOD.” 


By Dr. Anderson. 


*¢ TN whom we have redemption through His blood.” Redeemed with ‘the precious 
blood of Christ as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.” The allusion 
to the Passover is clear. Israel was redeemed by blood. There wasa redemption by 
power, too. With a strong hand and an out-stretched arm God brought His people out 
of Egypt. But this followed on redemption by the blood. * ; 
And this is a truth which every sinner who seeks pardon and life must learn. The 
heart craves some proofs of redemption, some sense of deliverance, before believing in 
the blood. But God will give none. It was as slaves. still groaning under Egypt’s 
bondage, that the Israelites sprinkled the paschal blood. Some, doubtless, could have 
shown the livid weals of the ganger's lash even as they feasted on the lamb within 
their blood-stained doors. They were still in the house of bondage, and the power of 
Egypt was unbroken. As judged by unbelief in the light of reason, and of plain, hard 
facts, their faith was fanaticism, and their conduct was folly. They had nothing to 
rest upon, nothing to appeal to, but the bare word of Jehovah. 

And so is it with the Gospel. It reaches thé sinner in his sins, as he is and where 
he is, and tells him of life and peace. It comes as the word of God, and claims to be 
received as such. The message to Israel was, “I will bring you out from under the 
burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you cut of their bondage, and I will redeem 
you with a stretched-out arm.” But before they could be redeemed from Egypt's 
bondage, they must needs-be delivered from Egypt’s doom. The judgment was not 
upon the Egyptians, but upon Egypt ; and none wereexcepted. ‘The destroying angel 
had no commission to inquire as fo race, or creed or character. The death-sertence 
had fallen upon the first born, and it was for him to execute that judgment, save where 
the blogd-stain testified that it was already past. They “kept the sprinkling of the 
blood, lest he that destroyed the first-born should touch tnem.” Through the blood 
the Israelite had redemption. 

There are two words for redeem in the New Testament. The one signifies to buy, 
as in a market ; the other, to effect deliverance by the payment of ransom and tie 
exertion of power. The latter is the fuller word, and this it is which is commonly used 
in the Septuagint, notably in connection with the deliverance from Egypt. Here the 
thought of purchase is utterly inadequate, save as it is included in the ransom. Satan, 
after all, is but a brigand. Pharaoh had no rightful claim upon the people whom he 
held in servitude, and Israel’s deliverance was his destruction. 

And yet redemption by blood goes deeper than this. It was by the decree of God 
Himself that the death-sentence passed pon the first-born. It was God who ordained 
the deliverance from that doom. And, mark, it was not by the dzath of the paschal 
lamb, but by the sprinkling of its blocd, that Israel was saved. Here the doctrine of 
the blood comes in. Substitution is the leading truth in our theoiogy respecting the 
Atonement, but in Scripture it is but part of a fuller and a wider truth. In the sin- 
offering Israel was identified with the victim before its death, by the laying on of hands; 
and the victim died as a substitute. But the sin-offering was for a people already 
redeemed. In the Passover, on the other hand, the dea¢h of the lamb, though the basis 
of the blessing, in itself brought no deliwerance. Zhat depended on the sprinkled 
blood, whereby the Israelite became identified with a death already accompiished. , 

And the Passover reveals to us the sacrifice of Christ in its aspect towards the 
sinner lying under judgment. That sacrifice is God’s provision for his deliverance, 
but it can Lring no blessing, it can bring nothing but a deeper doom for him who 
rejects’ it or neglects it, unless and until he becomes identified therewith. 

'f words are to be used with scriptural accuracy, redemption is not through the 
death of Christ, but through His d/ood. (See Eph. 1: 7; 1 Peter1:18, 19. The blood 


of his ¢ 
ground 
but in 1 
is prea 
sinned. 
upon H 
eing vi 
to fied 
truly, b 
imputin 
dethron 
He to 
that He 
characte 
judge : 
ina byg 
and not} 
be as u 
throne ig 
mercy,” 


REDEMPTION. 85 


includes the death, but it brings in the thought of the sinner’s identification therewith. 

The blood is a figurative expression, and the figure is derived from the types.) Or, to 

; drop the figure, the sinner must become identified with that death py faith. To use 

& the good old term of the divines, the blood represents death “appropriated” by the 

sie sinner who bélieves. If this doctrine of the blood be lost sight of, we shall inevitably 
ries i lose ourselves in the trackless waste of universalism, or else be driven to take refuge in 
; the narrow rut of ultra-Calvinism. The one ever ignores the righteousness of God, the 
by other denies His grace. In contrast with both, the Gospel of the blood reveals how 
oye ; grace can reign through righteous:iess unto eternal life. 
The __And here we must remember that the two distinctive truths of the Gospel, 
righteousness and grace, belong, not to the age of “ darkness,” but to that of “the true 4 
en light,” which shone in Christ. That faith is counted for righteousness is a truth as old | 


) 
= as the covenant with Abraham. But how God could be righteous in thus justifying the 
ie ‘ believing sinner—thisis a truth which was veiled until the new covenant revealed it. | 
thin The righteousness of God was witnessed by the law—by these very types of the Mosaic 
- : r ritual—but it was manifested and declared in the Gospel, apart from law altogether ; 
hat and antil that revelation was made it was a hidden truth, Rom. 3 :21-26. 
ig to s And so aiso with grace. The Israelive’s redemption depended not on any merits | 
: of his own, but only upon the blood. Butyet the blood was only for the Israelite. The 
a ef ground of redemption was such that the Egyptian might have shared it just as freely : 
» he but in fact he wasexcluded. No messageof mercy reached him. But now the Gospel 
Se is preached to every creature under the heaven. “There is no difference, for all have 
deem sinned.” ‘There is no difference, for the sare Lord over allis rich unto all that call 
iam upon Him.” “Sin reigned once—God was déaling with men on the ground of their 


a being what they onght to be, while by their very nature they were what they ought not 
ange tobe. God’s attitude towards the sinner therefore was adverse. There wasacovenant 
tence truly, but that only served to make the doom of the world more definite. God was 
ae imputing sin, and the normal and legitimate result to men was death. But now sin is 
f sy dethroned and grace is reigning. God is no longer imputing sin, but preaching peace. 
bloo He to whom all judgment is committed is now seated on a throne of grace. It is not 
that He has grace for the elect, and judgment for all besides, but that grace is the great 
characteristic ox His reign. Heis a Saviour and nota judge. He shall yet come to 
judge: but now the amnesty has been proclaimed, and judgment waits. It is not, as 


p buy, 
d tne 


; en ina bygone dispensation, that there is mercy for a favored class, but that there is mercy, 

hg - and nothing else, for all without distinction, The day is coming when judgment will | 
Pe tp be as unmixed as grace is now, but during all this ‘acceptable year of the Lord,’ His 
1) 


throne is a throne of grace, and the guiltiest sinner upon earth will there find only 
mercy? | 


) f ( 70d 
Hained 
aschal 
ine of 
ng the 
1e gin- 
ands; 
lready 
le basis 
inkled 
as ; 
ds the 
prance, 
m who 


hoh the 
8 stood 


86 GOLD FROM OPHIK. 


nls adnate get a eee tae eT 


a 


WITNESS TO THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST. 


‘A Witness to the sufferings of Christ,” 1 
Peter 5. I. 

A witness mnay be (a) an eye-witness, or 
(4) one who bears testimony. In both these 
senses Peter was a witness to the sufferings 
cf Christ. He beheld the cruelty to which 
hig Master was subjected, and bore him 
company in the seasons of watching and 
weeping through which He passed. But 
then there was much in relation to the suf- 
ferings of Christ of which no man could 
speak from personal observation. There was, 
for instance, the object of those sufferings 
and the blending of a Divine and human 
nature by which they were made pussible 
and by which they were made effective. If 
Peter knew anything of these solemn truths, 
it was not flesh and blood that had revealed 
them unto him: the revelation must have 
come tohim from God, He thereforespeaks 
of events which came under his own notice, 


him by the Holy Ghost. He is a witness to 
the sufferings of Christas + 


I. The Subject of Prophecr. 

See ¢ Peter 1: 11..‘' Testified beforehand.” 
Rev. 19: ro....‘* The Spirit of prophecy.” 
Acts 10; 43....All the Prophets wit- 

ness."’ 
Prophets who witness to the sufferings of 

Christ— 


Isaiah...... Com. Isaiah 53:7; with Acts 
8 : 34. 
David...... Com. Ps. 22:1; with Matt. 27:46. 


Zachariah .. Zech. 13:7. 


II, Vicarious. 
1 Peter 2: 21.. ‘For us.” 
1 Peter 3:18..‘*Forsins.”’ ‘* Forthe unjust.” 
Here it is clearly taught that Jesus suf- 
fered for others, and for the sias of others. 
Peter is supperted by the testimony of 


The Prophets ! I: 535, ‘For our trans- 
and declares truths which were revealed to ( gressions,”’ 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


HE Son of God’s taking on Him man’s nature, and offering it in sacrifice, was the 
strict condition of all the glory and reward promised to Christ and His seed, Isa, 
53:10, 11, wherein all things are freely promised, and that faith that is required for 
sealing a zaan’s interest in the covenant is promised in it, and wrought by the grace of 
it, Eph.2:8. Zhat faith at first is wrought by, and acts upon, a full and absolute 
offer of Christ, and of all His fulness; an offer that kath no condition in tt, but that 
na‘tve one to ali offers, acceptance; and in the very act of this acceptance, the accepter 
doth expressly disclaim all things in himself, but sinfulness and misery. That faith in 
Jesus Christ doth justify (although, by the way, it is to ne noted that it is never written 
in the Word that faith justifieth actively, but always passively ; that a man is justified 
by faith, and that God Justifieth men by ard through faith; yet admitting the phrase) 
only as a mere instrument, receiving that imputed righteousness of Christ for which we 
are justified ; and that this faith, in the office of justification, 7s neither condition nor 
qualification, nor our Gospel righteousness, but in its very act a renouncing of all such 
* bretences. We proclaim the market of grace to be free, Isa. 55 : 1-3. It is Christ’s 
last offer a :d lowest, Rev, 22:17. If there be any price or money spoken of, it is 70 
price, no money. 


“* HE His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree.” It is not said 
that our duties, or our prayers, or our fastings, or our convictions of sin, or our repent- 
ance, or our honest life, or our alms-deeds, or our faith, or our grace—it is not said 
that those bore our sins ; it was Jesus, Jesus Himself, Jesus alone, Jesus, and none 
but Jesus, ‘bore our sins in His own body on the tree.” Rest, then, in nothing short 
_ of peace with. God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 


Our. 


Le 
Dic 
tke li: 
Luke 
Matt. 
Matt. 
Matt. 
Matt. : 
Mark ; 


Thes 
selves, 


t Peter 
Roman: 
Hebrey 


sufficien 


“W 


Jesus C] 
perhaps j 
us to cle 
to sin’??? 
from all 
shed on 
“No, Hi 
Oh, what 
Can anyt 
more sj 
yet what 
wonderfu 
Isin, § 


s the 
, Isa. 
id for 
ce of 


solute 
that 
epter 
ith in 
ritten 
stified 

rase) 
h we 
wn nor 
such 
rist’s 
4s 20 


said 
pent: 
said 
none 
short 


REDEMPTION, 87 


John, 1 Jno. 2:2, For our 
sins.” 
lpaut, Rom. 5:3, ‘* For us." 
(We 20:28. ‘* For many." 
John 6:51. ‘ For the life of 
the word." 
john 10:11. For His sheep.” 
‘‘ He suffered for us””—" for sins.” 
Did Peter remember his own sins? See 
the list :— 


Luke 5:8. * A sinful man.”’ 

Matt. 14:31. ‘Little faith.” 

Matt. 26: 33. ‘t Presumption.” 

Matt. 26:58. ‘Afar off.” 

Matt. 26:72.  ‘''I know not the man." 
Mark 14: 72 ” Began to curse.” 


The Apostles 


Our Lord.... 


These words have an application to our- 
selves, ‘He suffered fox our sins.” 


III. Sufficient. 
t Peter 3:18. ‘*Once suffered.” 
Romans 6:10. ‘ Died unto sin once.” 
Hebrews 9:26. ‘*Once in the end of the 
world.” 


Hebrews 9:28. ‘*Qnce offered.” 
Hebrews to: 24. ** One offering.’’ 
Hebrews 10: 12. ‘One sacrifice.” 

See the significance of this repeated truth 
—Why one offering? Because one was 
sufficient. The Jewish sacrifices offered 


daily ; but no need for such a repetition of 
the sacrifice of Christ (see Heb. 7 : 27). 


IV. A Revelation of the Character of 
Chris:. 

1 Peter 2:23—‘t When He suffered He 
threatened not.” See contrast between the 
conduct of the Master and that of His dis- 
ciples, 

Jamesand John. Luke { Peter. Matt. 26: 51, 
9:55. { 52. 


Christ’s patience our { + Pider as ay. 
pattern. 


V. A Ground o/ Consolation t» His 
Suffering Followers. 

The Epistle written to sufferers (see 1 
Peter 1:1.). Consolation to be derived 
from the following considerations concerning 
Christ’s sufferings :— 


The price of redemption......1 Peter 1: 18. 


, Guarantee of His sympathy....Heb. 4: rs. 


Christ suffered on account of sin. Be- 
lievers suffer for '' righteousness.” 
They may rejoice because— 


Ch. 2:21. **Called to suffer.” 
Ch. 4:13. ‘Made partakers of Christ's 
sufferings.” 
Ch. 4:14. ‘God is glorified.” 
Ch. 2:20. ‘ Suffering is acceptable.” 
Ch. 5:10. ‘Only for a while.” 
HENRY THORNE. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


66 HAT avails the blood of Christ?” 


“Tt avails what good works, what incense of 


prayer, what streams of tears of penitence could never avail. ‘The blood of 
Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from all sin.’” ‘‘ Helps to cleanse ourselves, 
perhaps?” ‘‘No,cleanseth us.” ‘ Does it not furnish the motive and the obligation for 
us to cleanse ourselves?” ‘No, it cleansethus.” “Is it ‘cleanseth us from the desire 
tosin’?” ‘No, cleanseth us from sin.” “ Cleanseth us fro:a some ofour sins?” “No, 
from all sin.” ‘But did you say the blood does this?” “Yes, the blood of Christ 
shed on Calvary.” “The life and the holy teaching of Christ, you must mean?” 
“No, His blood.” “His example, is it not?” “No, His blood, His precious blood.” 


Oh, what hostility the world still betrays toward this essential element of Christianity ! 
Can anything be stated more plainly? Can a truth of eternal importance be declared 
more simply than this, that our redemption from sin is by the blood of Christ? And 
yet what strenuous efforts are constantly made to set aside this plain, essential, 
wonderful, and most glorious truth, that the blood of Jestis Christ cleanseth us from 
allsin. “ Without the shedding of blood is no remission.” 


a 
i 
$ 
a 
vik 
i 
4 
: 
i 
af 
a 
AS 


88 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


— a To _ - nee ——~ 


“THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OF CHRIST.” 


I. The ground of our acceptance. ‘‘It | vain conversation . . . but with the pre- 
is the blood that maketh an atonement for | cious blood of Christ,’’ 1 Pet. 1: 17-109. 
+he soul,” Lev. 17:11. ‘‘When I see the | ‘Jesus, that He might sanctify the people 
blood I will pass over you,” Ex. 12:13. | with His own blood, suffered without the 
‘Having made peace through the blood of gate. Let us go forth therefore unto Him 
His cioss, by Him to reconcile all things | without the camp, bearing His reproach,” 
unto Himself,” Col. 1:20. ‘‘ Justified by | Heb. 13:12, 13. 

His blood,” Rom. 5:9. ‘‘Thebloodisthe | V. The secret of overcoming. ‘‘ They 
life,” Deut. 12:23. ‘‘The good <hepherd overcame . . . by the blood ofthe Lamb,” 
giveth his life for the sheep,”’ John 10: 11. | Rev. 12:11. ‘Always bearing about in the 
‘He laid down His life for us," 1 John 3:16. | body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life 

II, The channel of forgiveness. ‘In also of Jesus might be made manifest in ovr 
whom we have redemption through His body,’ 2 Cor. 4:10. ‘God forbid that I 
blood, the forgiveness of sins, acccrding to should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord 
the riches of His grace," Eph. 1:7. God | Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified 
for Christ's sake hath forgiven you,” Eph. | unto me, and I unto the world,” Gal. 6: 14. 
4:32. ‘You hath He quickened together | VI, The pledzeof blessing. ‘This cup 
with Him, having forgiv.:n youalltrespasses,” is the new testament in my blood,” Luke 22: 
Col. 2: 13. ; 20, ‘‘ Heis the mediator of the new testa- 

III. The means of cleansing. ‘The ment, that by means of death, for the 
blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleansetii rs | redemption of the transgressions that were 
from allsin,”’ 1 John1:7. For if the blood | under the first testament, they which are 
of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an | called might receive the promise of eternal 
heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to | inheritance," He:.9:15. ‘‘ He that spared 
the purifying of the flesh: how much more | not His own Son, but delivered Him up for 
shall the blood of Christ . . . purge your | us all, how shall He not with Him also 
conscience from dead works to serve the | freely give us all things?'’ Rom. 8: 32 
living God?" Heb. 9:13, 14. ‘Washed | VII. Apprehension needful to spiritual 

from our sins in His own blood,” | life, ‘‘ Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of 


Rev. 1:5. ‘‘ These are they which - | man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in 
have washed their robes, and made them | you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and ‘drinketh 
white in the blood of the Lamb,” Rev. y:14. | my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise 

IV. The separating power. ‘Pass the | him up at the last day. For my flesh is 
time of your sojourning here in fear: Foras- | meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed,” 
much as ye know that ye were not redeemed | John 6:53-55. 


with corruptible things . . . from your JANET CLARK. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


6 1 EHOLD, then, O Spirit-convinced soul, the Lamb of God that taketh away the 

sin of the world! In His death upon the cross, behold the Lamb of God that 
taketh away the sin of the world! In His death upon the cross, behold the mighty 
sacrifice, the ransom for the sins of many! See there the sum of all His obedience 
and sufferings! Behold the fashed work !—a work of stupendous magnitr.de, which 
He alone could have undertaken and accomplished? Behold our sacrifice, our finished 
sacrifice, our perfected redemption, the sole foundation of our peace, and hope, and joy. 


D O 
Rom 


belies 
salva 
who ] 


life w 
cross 


It is 
Probal 
D 
know 
D 
“od tl 
“ent 1 
Calvar 
D 
cannot 
Di 
eternal 


enemy 
God ha 
found t 
and cor 
their tr; 
then, Ss 
blood re 
done by 
God, an 
faith rex 
“ F 
ever be] 
could nc 
of God 1 
There a 
of Chris 
reminds 
Christ is 
death of 


the 
hat 
hty 
Ince 


REDEMPTION, 


SUBsTITUTION—A WORD FOR EVERYBODY. 
Py Jokn Wood. 


Hee despair, for Christ has died. 
Don’t presume, for Christ will Judge. 

Don’t think He died for the good—there are none. He died for the ungodly, 
Rom. 5 : 6. 

Don’t fail to notice the importance of two words in John 3: 16—“ Whosoever 
believeth.” ‘Yhere is no declaration of universal salvation on the one hand, nor of 
salvation »ffered to a favored few on the other. The promise of eternal life is to “all 
who look,” John 3:14. 

Don’t let the crucified Saviour be foolishness to you. Heknows nothing of spirituai 
life who cannot say, with the apostle Paul, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,” Gai. 6:14. ve 

Don’t attach any importance to across. There is no virtue in cross or crucifix. 
It is “the precious blood of Christ” which God values, and the saved sinner too. 
Probably the Lord Jesus died on a ¢ve’. 

Don't grasp the shadow and miss the substance, as, alas, many do, What do you 
know of atonement, reconciliation, peace, victory ? 

Don’t think (as many do) of God the Father as separate in heart or thought from 
od the Son—they are equally concerned fox your salvation. As Abram ard Isaac 
‘ent to Moriah, “both of them:together,” Gen. 22:8, so Father and Son went to 
Calvary. The type wonderful—the contrast too. 

Don’t try to add to Christ’s finished work, it you are a seeking scul, because you 
cannot; God is satisfied with it and with every sinner who trusts it. 

Don’t trample “the Blood of the Covenant’ under foot. To do so is to be 
eternally lost. 

Don’t be too proud to be saved in God’s way. What has a poor sinner to be proud 
of ?—Footsteps cf Truth. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


(¢”THE Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost,” Luke 19: 10. 

Lost sinners were God’s property, but they had been decoyed away by Satan, the 
enemy of God and man, and their life of sin was the result of their being lost. But 
God had sent His Son to seek and save them, and when He came to this world He 
found them under the power of sin and Satan. They had sold themselves to do evil, 
and consequently they were a prey to the Evil One, who held them in bondage, while 
their transgressions of the holy law of God kept them from heaven ; yet Jesus, to save 
then:, suffered the punishment their sins had deserved, while at the same time His 
blood redeemed them from the power of Satan. So now, because of what Jesus had 
done by His death on the cross, full satisfaction had been made for the violated law of 
God, and sinremoved ; so that God can now save the guilty, whoever they be, who by 
faith receive the Saviour as God’s gift to them. 


“For God so loved the wor'd, that he gave His only begotten Son, that whoso- 
ever believeth in Him should not Zer7sh, but have everiasting life,” John 3:16, God 
could not receive us with our sin, Christ, as our Jrofitzation, has fully met the claims 
ot God for us. Christ, as our swdstitute, has borne the wrath of God ins‘ead of us. 
There are three expressions that we are apt to think synonymous, namely’ The cross 
of Christ, the blood of Christ, and the death of Christ. Now, the cross of Christ 
ceminds us what He endured, that is, the pain, persecution, and shame. The blood of 
Christ is the ransom-price He paid to procure tne blessings of the Gospel, while the 
death of Christ tells what He suffered instead of us, and our identification with Him. 


go GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


casa iititay a Cee 


HIS BLOOD CLEANSES FROM ALL SIN. 
By C. HT. Spurgeon. 


‘They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony,” 
Rev. 12:11. 


if ESE victors all fought with the same weapons. They had two weapons, and 

these two were one—the blood and the Word. The blood of the lamb: IT 
WAS THEIRS. The blood of the Lamb will not help us until it becomes our own, 
They went to Jesus by faith and received the attonement; the cleansing blood was 
sprinkled on them, it spoke peace to their consciences, and it took away their sins; 
they were washed in it ; they were made white as the driven snow. “The blood of 
Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin.” They were afar off, and “They were 
made nigh by the blood of Christ.” This blood continued to give them access to God, 
for it gave them boldness to draw near the throne of grace. In fact this blood was so 
theirs, that it was the life of their spirit; it was a generous wine for them, and 
became the highest joy of their souls. If you and I are ever to be amongst these 
victors, the blood must be our own, appropriated by faith. How is it with you? Has 
the blood cleansed thee, my brother? Does the blood dwell in thee as thy life? Has 
the blood of the Lamb given thee fellowship with God and brought thee near? If so, 
thou art on the way to overcoming by the blood. 

The blood of the Lamb, according to the verse which precedes the text, had given 
them all they needed, for it gave them salvation. They were saved, completely 
saved. Jesus Christ, when they laid hold upon Him and felt the power of His blood, 
redeemed them from all iniquity, and translated them from the kingdom of Satan, 
Then they received strength: note that word. They had been dead, but they 
obtained life ; they had been weak, and they were made strong in the Lord, for he who 
knows the power of the blood of Jesus is made strong to do great exploits. Then they 
obtained the kingdom, for the kingdom comes to us by the way of the conquering 
blood of Jesus, and He hath made us kings and priests unto God because: He was 
slain. We are told, also, that they had power, or authority. Our Lord, who has 
risen from the dead, clothed all His disciples with authority when He said, “all power 
is given unto Me in heaven and in earth; yo ye, therefore, and teach all nations.” 
Beloved, if we have participated in the blood of Jesus Christ, I hope we feel it to be 
all these four things to us,—salvation from sin, strength out of weakness, a kingdom in 
fellowship with Christ, and authority to speak in Hisname. It is the blood of the 
covenant, and it secures all thecovenant gifts of God to us. It is the life of our life, 
the allin all of all that we possess. So, then, they had the blood of the Lamb, anc 
they possessed the privileges which the blood brings with it. 

When God shall rise up amongst us men and women who live only to prove the 
power of the blood of Jesus Christ, and live for nothing else ; who tell out the Saviour’s 
nanie, 2nd sho-y in their lives what that blood has done for them, and are ready to die 
to glorify their Lord, then will come the times in which the song of victory shall be 
heard, then shall the travailing woman have her reward, and then shall the dragon be 
covered with everl..sting shame! May Ged bless you by giving you to know the power 
of the blood, for Jesus’ sake, Amen. 


precic 


God a 


stretcl 
R 
securit 
the of 
Jehovz 
task th 
and H 
Egypti 
sage 
He fou 
world, 
from tl 
themse 
the str< 
peace: 
to escay 
He del: 
the ligh 
power t 
and the 
III 
Himse) 
a peculi 
power. 
saved 


REDEMPTION. gI 


THE FOUR-FOLD REDEMPTION. 


bi date religious machinery of the times is, to all intents and purposes, bent upon 

redeeming men from their vices and sins without a new birth. Vicious persons, 

while in a fit of conviction or sorrow, have resolved to reform their ways. Some have 
purchased a Bible, others have taken pledges, and have made a start to do better, only 
in a short time to cast aside their resolve and their home-spun religion, and like the 
“sow that was washed,” to wallow in the filth and mire of sir. Converts of this kind 
have been made by the thousand. They joined the ‘‘church” and intended to live 
and do great things, but only to fail. How could it be otherwise? See Jer. 13 : 23. 
It is beyond man’s capacity to save himself, beyond his desire or will, but “Christ 1s 
able to save to the uttermost all who come unto God by Him,” Heb. 7:25. See 1 Jno. 
3:8; Luke19:10. Ifyou are not already in Christ you are lost. The reason, as one 
has said, is not that God has put anything in your wav as a barrier, but you are so 
fearfully wrecked and ruined and perverted, that He alone who made you once already, 
can re-make you. 

Now then Christ redeems people perfectly, and absolutely, and ei2rnally :— 

I. By His own precious blood: The blood of the paschal lamb insured 
Israel’s safety, and gave them peace. 

‘“*The wages ofsin is death.” Jesus took our sin and its wages, death. Sin is not 
coveredover to be faced again as inthe types, but “fxtaway,” Heb.g:26. ‘ Ye were not 
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold .. . . but with the precious blood 
of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot,” 1 Peter1:18, 19. The 
precious blood of Christ “cleanseth from allsin.” The basis of reconciliation between 
God and men is this same “blood of the cross.” Christ died for our sins, according 
to the Scriptures ; and He was buried, and rose again the third day according to the 
Scriptures,” 1 Cor. 15 : 3, 4. 

Il. By His ighty Power: Not only by His own blood, but by His out- 
stretched arm, the arm of His Almighty strength. 

Redemption by blood, however, isnot enough. Though Israel had absolute 
security and some peace under the blood, their own unwillingness to leave Egypt and 
the opposition of Pharaoh, its monarch, were to be surmounted. The Almighty 
Jehovah easily overcame both difficulties. He allowed the Egyptians to harass and 
task the Hebrews with grinding bondage till they were very glad to make their escape, 
and He overcame Pharaoh’s opposition by the ten plagues which he inflicted on the 
Egyptians, till at last he himself thrust them forth, glad to get rid ofthem. 

_® Jesus came to seek and to save that which was lost, and the condition in which 
He found man was under the power, and willingly in the service, of the god of this 
world, viz., the devil, As the Hebrews in Egypt required the blood to shield them 
from the destrvying angel, they were equally necessitous of the power to subdue both 
themselves and the mighty hosts of Pharaoh, so Jesus Christ is the “stronger than 
the strong man armed,” 2. ¢., the devil. But bad as he is, he cannot keep his 5°°2s in 
peace: Christ, the stronger than he, by His word and Spirit, makes the sinner willing 
to escape, as well as compel the devil to let him go. By the price of His own blood 
He delivers the guilty one from righteous judgment ; and that power that commanded 
the light to shine out of darkness is sufficient to dispel the sinner’s darkness ; the 
power that commanded the waves and winds into stillness, the devils into obedience, 
and the blindinto the light of day, is enough for me, for you, and for all else. 

Ill. Christ redeems from all lawlessness: See Titus2:14. “Who gave 
Himseif for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself 
a peculiar people, zealous of good work.” This for those already saved by price and 
power. rist redeems from all lawlessness (Titus 2:14) those already 
saved by price and by power. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


There is deep darkness to be dispelled, old habits to be broken off, and the word 
of God is to be taken as guide for all thinys, pride and self have to be subdued, and 
subjection to Christ as Lord must be the rule ; one’s own helplessness, untrustworthiness, 
and ungodliness have to be learned, in order to hide only in Christ and appreciate 
Him. It has to be known and really believed that a Christian’s only safety, prosperity 
and security is to go by God’s written word. Thus weare redeemed out of all lawless- 
ness into subjection to the Lord Jesus. 

IV. Our bodies have to be redeemed. Our bodiesare now bodies of humilia- 
tion. They have many things in commor with the beasts that perish, but they are the 
human bodies ; much time is now necessarily spent on them and for them, as had been 
said, In hea, they are a buraen, and in cold they are suffering, and in old age they 
are stiff and worn up, etc. They require feeding and cleaning and care. They are 
liable to all sorts of pain and suffering, and trouble ; meanwhile they, however frail 
and feeble, are fitted to our present mode of living, but unfit for the glory that awaits 
us. Therefore He will redeem our bodies. See Rom. 8:22, 23. The work of Jesus 
Christ is perfect. They then shall be incorruptible, immortal and spiritual—Se/e“d. 


A 


bea 
plan 


scen 
linge 
altar 
altar 
place 
of C 
Gard 
nakeq 
whic 
cove 
the 
same 
that s 


God t 
proof 
furnis 
sharp] 
of Sol 
Moria 
covere 
on the 
above 
Rock | 
dans t 
which 
erecte: 

W 
of Ger 
did te: 
upon t 
of His 
severe 
tender 
that E 
perish, 
A 


KEDEMPTION. 9% 


THE LAMB FOR THE BURNT OFFERING, 
Ry Thomas Newoerry. 


T one of the Advent Conferences, Mildmay, England, says the London Christian, 

the greatest interest was awakened by the exhibition of Mr. Thomas Newberry’s 

beautiful model of Solomon’s Temple, with his suggestive and deeply instructive ex- 
planations. He said: 

I feel I cannot get away from tue contemplation of the wondrous and glorious 
scene—-the sacrifice on Calvary. 1 do not think it will be unprofitable if we should 
linger a little around the Cross, I feel like the sacritice—bound with cords to the 
altar, so that I cannot get away from it just at present. Suppose, then, we look at the 
altar of burnt offering. (This altar, as represented in the model, occupies a prominent 
place in the centre of the court.) This altar is the shadow of the Cross, The Cross 
of Calvary threw its shadow back through the long ages We may trace it in the 
Garden of Eden. See that innocent victim whose skin termed a covering for the 
nakedness of our first parents. It was ove skin—for the word is in the singular—with 
which our first parents were arrayed by the hand of God in substitution for the fig -leaf 
covering which they had themselves devised. I see in that victim the first shadow of 
the Cross. The firstling of the flock that was Abel’s offering was another part of the 
same shadow of Calvary’s Cross. The altar erected by the Patriarchs formed part of 
that shadow. 

The altar erected by Abraham on Mount Moriah, one of the mountains which 
God told him of, is a wondrous shadow of the Cross of Calvary. If we wanted a 
proof of the inspiration of Scripture, that twenty-second chapter of Genesis would 
furnish it. We see there an unmistakable shadow of the Cross, clear in all its outlines, 
sharply cut, accurate and true in every detail. Let us connect this altar in the centre 
of Solomon’s court, with that erected, as pointed out by the finger of God, on Mount 
Moriah. It may be that Solomon’s altar stood on the very self-same spot of earth once 
covered by the altar that Abraham erected on Mount Moriah. At the present day, 
on the crest of that mountain, the-e is a remarkable projection of limestone half a foot 
above the surface of the surrounding platform of marble, on which the Dome of the 
Rock now stands. . That irregular limestone projection is regarded by the Mohamme 
dans to the present duy asthe sacred spov where their father Abraham built an altar on 
which to offer up his son Isaac. The Dome of the Rock is, so to speak, a monument 
erected over that sacred spot. 

What a wondrous shadow of the Cross of Calvary is this twenty-second chapter 
of Genesis, which describes the sacrifice that Abrahain offered. We are told that God 
did tempt Abraham—that is, put him to the test. Satan’s temptations are actions 
upon the evil of our nature to bring out theevil. God’s testings are rather the actions 
of His own grace to bring out that grace to the full. God tried Abraham in the most 
severe manner. He put the gold into a crucible at white heat. He tried him at the 
tenderest point. How it reminds us of that wondrous fact: ‘God so loved the world, 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life,” John 3 : 16. 
| Abraham takes the wood and lays it on his son Isaac. How that brings Isa, 53 
{to our remembrance—another wondrous shadow of Calvary’s Cross. “The Lord 
hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.” Abraham and Isaac, we read, “ went both of 
them together.” How instructive and how full of deep meaning is this expression. Itwas 
the grace of God that caused Him to give His only begotten Son; it was the grace 
‘of the Son that led Him to give Himself to the fulfilment of the Father's will—”‘ they 
went both of them together.” Isaac said, ‘‘ Behold the fire and the wood, but where is 
the lamb fora burnt offering?” ‘God will provide Himself a lamb fora burnt offering.” 
How pathetic was Abraham’s reply. Did Isaac understand it? Perhaps he did. If 


94 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


EEE a - -—— — 


there was the spirit of the father’s surrender in Abraham, there was also the spirit of 
the son’s surrender to the father’s willin Isaac. ‘‘ So they went both of them together.” 

Let us transfer the question of Isaac to the altar of burnt offering. In the centre 
of Israel's camp in the wilderness was this altar of burnt offering—nine cubits square 
and three cubits high. At the dedication of the Tabernacle, the fire of God descended 
and consumed upon the altar the sacrifice. The command of God was that the fire 
should ever be burning upon the altar; it should never go out. And so, when 
Solomon’s Temple was dedicated, the fire again descended and consumed the sacrifice 
upon the altar, that a standing ordinance might be again asserted—The fire is ever to 
be burning on my altar ; it shall never go out ; it shall never be put out. 

What is the fire that came from God that consumed the victim, and caused it to 
ascend as a sweet savour—that fire which, when the rebels presented strange fire, 
ceme forth and consumed them. What is that fire? ‘Behold the fire.” Itwasthe 
very centre of Israel’s encampment ; there was the smoke ever ascending, the fire ever 
burning. What was it the emblem of? ‘Our God is a consuming fire.” ‘The fire is 
the emblem of God’s righteousness and holiness. It was never to be put out. God 
never ceases to be the righteous and holy God, of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, 
and who cannot look upon sin. Never for one single moment or twinkling of an eye, 
in time, or for one single moment throughout eternity, will that fire cease to burn. It 
shall never go out. In the glory above, God will bs ever righteous and holy ; and in 
the bottomless pit, the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, that holiness shall con- 
tinue, That fire shall never cease to burn; it shall never go out. There the fire is 
unquenched, and there the worm dieth not. “For Tophet is ordained of old ; yea, for 
the King it is prepared ; He hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and 
much wood ; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it,” Isa. 
30: 33. All the sin of a guilty world, when the lake of fire is open to receive the 
damned, will be cast irto it as fuel for the everlasting burnings. It shall never go out. 
“ Behold the fire.” 

“Behold the wood.” It was the occupation of the Gibeonites to he hewers of wood 
for God’s altar. Daily the priests were to lay the wood upon the fire. What is the 
wood? The wood is the emblem of sin. “Thou hast set our iniquities before Thee ; 
our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.” The wood was daily set in order upon 
the fire. God is righteous: behold the fire. Man is a sinner: behold the wood. 
Lood round upon the world. Behold the wood. Oh! what heavy fagots will be 
carried down to the everlasting burnings. Their sins will follow them ; every sin that 
a man has committed, and that goes unconfessed and unpardoned, unwashed in 
Emanuel’s blood, will be a fagot for the burning. Behold the holiness and righteous- 
ness of God, who is a consuming fire. 

. “ But where is the lamb for the burnt offering?” ‘Behold the wood!” From 
all parts of the world the echo comes back: Behold the wood! From heathendom, 
Popedom, Christendom, comes the echo: Behold the wood! ‘But where is the 
lamb for the burnt offering?” Let us send up the challenge to the heavens above: 
“Where is the Lamb?” Angels, where is the Lamb? Gabriel, will you step for- 
ward? The echo.comes back: Where is the Lamb? Where? Where? Ah! 
beloved friends, that was the cry for ages and ages, till one day John the Baptist 
pointed with his finger to a man walking alone, and said: “ Behold the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world.” ‘ My son, God will prepare Himself a lamb 
for the burnt offering.” That is He. [As Mr. Newberry came to this part of his 
deeply solemn subject, his face, worn and wrinkled with the furrows of age, was lit‘up 
with a glow of rare animation ; nis eyes sparkled as with the very light.of heaven ; his 
hand was raised in dramatic and triumphant gesture. The whole scene, with the 
wonderful surroundings, was one never to be forgotten.] See the carpenter’s Son, 
despised and rejected of men, led as a lamb to the slaughter, and dumb before its 
shearers—behold the Lamb that God has provided. ‘ None other can by any means 
redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him,” Ps. 49:7. God could see 
fad 


none 
on H 
roun 
from 
Oh, b 
world 
Lamb! 
savou 

I 
People 
of Jeh 
flames 


sits upg 
infinite 


was G 
evenin; 
im the 1 
will be ' 
led as 


REDEMPTION, 95 


none amongst the ranks of the angels mighty enough, and worthy enough, to be laid 
on His altar—wood of God’s fire. But God has Himself provided a Lamb. He looked 
round upon the world ; God is holy: behold the fire. The wrath of God is revealed 
from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men: behold the wood, 
Oh, blessed thought: “ Sehold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the 
world!” ‘The fire ever burning ; the wood ever consuming ; the sweet savour of the 
Lamb, ever ascending. God always holy; man ever a transgressor ; but the sweet 
savour of the Lamb of God ever ascending from God’s altar. 

I look down now to the cave below, and I see in Tophet the fire and the wood. 
People want to know what the brimstone is; that is it—the wrath of God, the breath 
of Jehovah is a stream of brimstone, the fierceness of which adds intensity to the 
flames. I look down, and I say: Behold the fire, and behold the wood, but where is 
the lamb? And these caves of darkness utter back the sorrowful echo: WHERE? 
Where? Where? Behold, the fire; it shall never go out. Behold the wood; but no 
lamb for a burnt offering there. 

I look up to the regions of light above, and I say, Behold the fire. Yes, He who 
sits upon the throne of the universe—God the Judge of all—is a God of infinite justice, 
infinite holiness, infinite purity : behold the fire. \Vhere is the lamb? Behold in the 
midst of the throne, ‘a Lamb as it had been slain.” But where is the wood? From 
those regions of light and from the midst of the throne there comes the echo back. 
WHERE? Where? Where? There is no evil there, no wood there, no sin there. 

The lamb on the altar was God’s centre for Israel’s camp; the lamb on the altar 
was God’s centre of Israel’s kingdom under Solomon ; the lamb on the altar—not the 
evening lamb, but the morning lamb—will be God’s centre for Israel and for the earth 
in the millennial period. But God’s centre for heaven, for the universe and for eternity, 
will be the Lamb as it had been slain,” in the midst of the throne of God—no longe* 
led as a lamb to the slaughter, but reigning for ever and ever, 


96 GueLn FROM OPHIR. 


CLOSING THOUGHTS ON THE SUBJECT OF 
REDEMPTION. 


NE evening two soldiers were placed as sentries at the opposite ends of a sallyport, 
or long passage, leading from the Rock of Gibraltar to the Spanish territory. 
One or them, from the reading of the sacred Scriptures, was rejoicing in God his 
Saviour ; while the other, from the sarne cause, was in a state of deep mental anxiety, 
being under strong conviction of sin and earnestly secking deliverance from the load 
of guilt inat was pressing upon his conscience. On the evening alluded to, one of the 
officers who had been out dining was returning to the garrison at a late hour, and 
coming to the sentry on ue outside of the sal! _rt--who was the soldier recently 
converted—he asked as usual for the watchword, The man, absorbed in meditation 
on the glorious things that had recently been unfolded to him, and filled with devout 
gratitude and love, on being roused from his midnight reverie, ~eplied to the officer's 
challenge with the words, “ Zhe precious blood of Christ.” He soon, however, 
recovered his self-possession, and gave the correct watchword, But his comrade, who 
was anxiously seeking the Lord, and who was stationed at the other or inner end of 
the sallyport, a passage especially adapted fer the conveyance of sound, heard the 
words “the precious blood of Christ” mysteriously borne upon the breeze at that 
solemn hour of midnight. The woids came home to his heart as a voice fron Heaven; 
the load of guilt was removed ; and She precious blood of Christ spoke peace to the 
soul of the sin-burdened soldier. 


By “ the blood of the Lamb” we understand our Lora’s death as a substitutionary 
sacrifice. Let us be very clear here. It is not said shat they overcame the arch-enemy 
br the blood of Jesus, or the blood of Christ, but by the blood of ¢he Lamb; and the 
words are expressly chosen because, unaer the figure of a lamb, we have set before 
us a sacrifice, The blood of Jesus Christ, shed because of His courage for the tzuth, 
or out of pure philanthropy, or out of self-denial, ccnveys no special Gospel to men, 
and has no peculiar power about it. ‘Truly it is an example worthy to beget martyrs, 
but it is not the way of salvation for guilty men. {% you proclaim the death of the 
Son of God, but do sot show that tle died the just for the unjust to bring us to God, 
you have not preached the blood of the Lamb. You must make it known that “the 
chastisement of our peace was upon Him,” and that “the Lord hath laid on Him the 
iniquity of us a!l,” or you have not declared the meaning of the blood of the Lamb. 
There is no overcoming sin without a substitutionary sacrifice. The lamb under the 
old law was brought by the offender to make atonement for his offence, ani in his 
place it was slain. This was the type of Christ taking the sinner’s place, bearing tisc 
sinner’s sin, and suffering in the sinner’s stead, and thus vindicating the justice of God, 
and making it possible for Him to be just and the justifier of him that believeth. I 
understand this is to be the conquering weapon—the ceath of the Son of God set forth 
as the propitiation for sin, Sin must be punished ; it is punished in Christ’s death. 
Here is the hope of men. 


THERE was the Sin-offering, the Burnt-offering, and the Thank-offering. ‘Thus, 
if the order was inverted or altered, it would indicate the attitude which the worshipper 
took toward God. Ifhe came with a sin-offering or with a thank-offering only, he 
declared himself @ sénner or not @ sinner by that act. Such, apparently, was the 
difference between the offerings of Cain and Abel ; and by their offerings they became 
respectively the types of the various ways in which ever since men have viewed the 
Atonement. 

THE atonement of Christ was not designed to make God merciful, but to make 
way for the exercise of His mercy, without prejudice to the rights of His justice, and the 
demands of His law. 


4 
T 


regene 
Christi 
throug] 
W 
ministr 
light tu 
us wher 
in torme 
kind for 
tenderl 
Inperiliy 
tion, on 
victoriot 


THE 
Christ, tk 
The clea 
does He. 
ol away 
or ever p 

_ Gov’ 
tion of the 
God. If 
His holine 
Sin of ever 
detected b 
throug. th 
absolute a 


REDEMPTION. 97 


“Me hath redeered us from the curse of the law, being made a 
curse for us.” Yonder lies a poor man in Raymond street jail. He has been sentenced 
to imprisonment for life at hard labor.. This is the curse of th: law.of man upon the 
murderer. Who can tell what the despair of that man was, when in the youth of his 
manhood he contemplated that doom to be worked out through many years? He could 
not bear it. And so not having the fear of God before his eyes, but driven by the 
thought of escaping the dowm of the human law, he murdered himself. Alas, he fled 
from the curse of man’s law to endure for ever the curse of God’s law. Who may tell 


what the terrors of that soul are now? He cannot flee from the wrath of God’s law . 


by dying. For that death is one that never dies. The man-who murders his fellow, 
shaii under human law die the death, but the soul that sinneth shall die the second 
death, unless redeemed by the death of Christ. The death sentence upon sin is an 
everlasting death. But, blessed be God, Jesus has redeemed us from the curse of the 
law. Death ana imprisonment shall never be the portion of the believer. 


‘Free from the law; oh, happy condition, 
Jesus has died, and there is remission.” 


NOTHING can be laid for a foundation of pardon but Christ alone, His blood and 
righteousness. 


“ THE grace of God which bringeth salvation,” is not only not apart from Christ and 
through Christ—it is “za Cyhrdst.” Grace is a gift, but not a yift which may be 
accepted without the Giver. Four this reason Christ transcends ati His gifts in the 
mind and heart of the Christian. Forgivenessis most precious ; sois justification and 
regeneration, and the hope ot glory; but these are never dwelt upon by the true 
Christian except as his heart is knit to Jesus, in whom we have the “redemption 
through His blood.” 


WHEN we die, we die for ourselves, and the crisis is alleviated by all beneficent 
ministries, Bathings for the hands, bathings tor the head, bathings for the feet ; the 
light turned down low, or set in just the right place; all the orfices of affection about 
us when wecometodie. But notso with Jesus. He died not for Himself, but He died 
in torment, and He died for others. He died in torture; the good for the bad; the 
kind for the cruel ; the wise for the ignorant; the divine for the human. Oh, how 
tenderly we feel towards anyone whe has done a great kindness and perhaps at the 
imperiling ot his own ife! How we ought to feel towards Christ, the Captain of Salva- 
tion, on the white horse riding down our foes ; but in the moment He made the 
victorious charge, the laces of death struck Him ! 


** Was it for crimes that I had done, 
He groaned upon the tree ? 
Amazing pity, gtace unknown, 
And love beyond degree,” 


THE more the searching eye of God rests-on me, trusting: to the perfect work of 
Christ, the more, as it were, does He discover the perfect value of the blood of Christ. 
The clearer the ligh:, the more is it to show that not a spot cr stain ison me. What 
does He see? The efficacy of the blood of His own provided Lamb—that which has 

ut away my sin. The same light that detects the sin manifests its being utterly and 
or ever put away ; yea, has burst forth and shone in the putting it away. 


Gov’s own holiness has now come completely out. Since the death and resurrec- 
tion of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is no longer a question of coming up step by step to 
God. If man stands e God at all, he must stand ir: contact with the full light of 
His holiness. How du xnat light burst forth? In the absolute putting away of the 
sin of every believer, and that by the worst act of man’s sin. The very sin that was 
detected by the light, thet would have hindered the soul’s approach, was put away 
throug.i the blow that brcught Jesus to the death ; and now the believer stands in the 
absolute and full enjoyment of God’s love. Such is His ,oodness ! 


Rae aap at SiS 


98 GOLD FROM OPHIk. 


THE power of the prince of this world was never more clearly revealed than at the 
cross. He who entered into Judas on the night of the betrayal, raised the storm of 
prejudice and passion which spent its waves on Calvary. Wicked men led captive by 
the devil at his will, hurried the patient Sufferer to sacritice ; nevertheless, the hour of 
the adversary’s triumph was the hour of his defeat. The cross which judges man, in 
judging sin also judges the tempter oy whom sin was brought in. The head of the 
enemy is bruised even when he bruises the heel of the victor. The first man suc- 
cumbed to the tempter, and since then men have been enslaved; the second Man 
could say, “ The prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in Me ;” and on the 
cress, “ Having spoiled principatities and powers, He made a show of them openly, 
triumphing over them in it,” Col.2:15. If by man came slavery, by man also 
freedom has come. The world’s prince has lost his cause and forfeited his claim, 
He is cast out, for sentence hath gone forth against him. Now he whom the Son 
males free is free indeed. He knows the truth, and the truth makes him free. 


IN the Epistle to the Hebrews we read of a “ perfect sacrifice.” “ Neither by the 
bleod of goats and calves, but by. His own blood He entered in once into the holy 
place.” Where was the superiority of the sacrifice of Christ over the old sacrifices? 
First of all, it consisted in this, that it was final. The old sacrifices had to be offered 
morning by-morning, evening by evening, year by year. But thi3 one is offered “once 
for all.” This is the sacrifice towards which all other sacrifices pointed, and through 
which they had their efficacy. Sinless and infinite, this sacrifice was also a person. 
The animals were unconsenting victims, but Christ was a consenting offering. ‘ No 
man taketh my life from me, I lay it down of myself.” This is the offering of the very 
essence of God Himself on our behalf, as a substitute for us and for our sins. And, 
besides that, there is this superiority : under the old law there had to be various 
offerings. Ifthere was one offering whose blood was shed, there was another, the 
scapegoat, for instance, upon the head of which the hands of the priest must be laid, 
and the sins of the people confessed ; the blood of the one animal was shed, but the 
othex animal was sent alive into the wilderness. Now, these two goats represented what 
our blessed Lord had in Himself—perfect unity. Not only was our Lord the offering 
whose blood was shed ; but, as the scapegoat, He carried our sins into forgetfulness, 
and as our fore-runner He entered the holy place, the very presence of God. Besides 
all this, there is a Divinity, a Deity, in our sacrifice. The sacrifice of Jesus was tne 
sacrifice of God Himself. ‘God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself.” 
It was the Father who in Jesus was thus offering Himself; it was the Son as the 
substitute for us who offered Himself also to the Father. He Himself expresses it 
thus, “Lc I come, to do thy will, O God.” There is a perfect obediei.ce, a perfect 
sinlessness, a perfect offering, a perfect shedding of blood. We also read of Christ 
having “obtained eternal redemption for us.” Not only have we a more perfect 
tabernacle, and a more perfect sacrifice, but there is finality of redemption. It is a 
redemption for ever, offered once for all; it is for past and future, as well as present, 
for Jew and Gentile alike. Further, itredeems us wholly—body, soul, and spirit. We 
are wholly redeemed unto the Lord, and He is wholly given to each one of His 
redeemed ones. It is likewise eternal, because it has neither beginning nor ending— 
He is “the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,” 


It is God’s estimate of the blood of Christ that is the measure of my acceptance 
with Himself. It gives me peace. I have been reconciled to God in the consciousr ess 
of the perfect love that gave Christ ; but besides that i am brought into perfect favor 
with God--the favor which rest. cn Christ. It is not merely that old things are gene, 
and my sins washed away in th blood of Christ, but the perfect love of God is revealed 
in doing it. I came back to G | in unbounded confidence and infinite love. This is 
the place of the Christian. Christ being in us. teaches us, and conducts down into 
our souls this love of God; and the heart is thus reconciled in blessed peace and 
righteousness, resting in the consciousness of His perfect grace toward us. 


2s 


enoug: 


C: 
be 
gre 
iti 


ha 
We 
ree 
set 
an 
im 

It : 

' ing 
En 
con 
pow 
dar] 
face 
follc 
here 
fron 
it ne 
Eng 
be tl 
their 
cons 
send 
time 
and 
way, 
embr' 
of pit 
Hapy 
shed 


I 
and C 
as ty 
simpl 
bites 
thoug 
and CO 
sinner 
grace 
the in 
perfect 


T 
His thé 
nothing 
the ble 
but « 
on the 
Inside, 


Ae) 
ae 
+ 


rone, 
baled 
ris 1S 
into 
and 


R=DEMPTION, 


AN English traveller in Africa relates that during his journey he feund a wretched 
captive. who had been taken in war by a savage tribe and was condemned to a bar- 
barous death. The traveller was filled with pity for the rian, who had more inielli- 
gence than mest of his countrymen, and he offered many bribes for his redemption. 
“ Man of the pale face,” said Libe, the chief of the tribe, in his native tongue, “ Libe 
has ivory and gold, and oxen and slaves ; and when ke wants move he calls out his 
warriors, and rushes on the neighboring tribes, as the river horse crashes through the 
reeds, and bears off all that he will. Libe needs not thy spoils, G white face; Libe 
seeks not gold, but blood !” and at a sign from the chief, one of his followers flung 
another dart at the wretched Gurra. The traveller saw the sign, and by an instinctive 
impulse threw himself forward with uplifted arm, as if to stay that murderous weapon. 
It struck that uplifted arm, pierced through the young man’s sleeve, and hung quiver- 
ing in his flesh! An exclamation burst from the lips of Libe when he saw that the 
Englishman was struck. Not only had he in his dealings with ths natives won, by his 
conduct, their esteem, but there was a wholesome fear among the coast-tribes of the 
power of England. Libe, wno would have thought little of sweeping hundreds of his 
dark fellow-countrymen from the face of the earth, feared the vengeance of the pale 
faces. The traveller read dismay on the countenance of the savage, and instantly 
followed up his advantage. “Thou dost not seek gold, but blood,” he cried; “see, 
here it flows before thee, and for it account must be given!” He drew out the dart 
from his arm, and large drops fell on the ground. ‘Oh, son of the ocean, Libe meant 
it not; Libe’s heart is heavy,” began the chief. “Have! not bought the slave?” the 
Englishman exclaimed, pointing to poor Garra with his bleeding arm; “his life shall 
be thy fine ; give him up, and there shall yet be peace between the white men and 
their dark brothers.” ‘‘ Be it so,” answered Libe, glad to escape so easily from the 
consequences which he dreaded ; “thou hast bought him, he is thine: and Libe will 
send for the great medicine-man to see to the white man’s hurt.” It was some little 
time before Libe and his wild train could be induced to depart. When at length Libe 
and his party dashed down the bank, and began passing the river on their homeward 
way, the redeemed slave uttered a wild cry of joy, and crawling up to his deliverer, 
embraced his knees, and covered his feet with kisses! ‘‘Garra, the slave of the son 
of pity, the blood-bought, always a faithful slave!” murmured the grateful savage. 
Happily the Englishman was able to tell the poor creature of Him whose blood was 
shed for the redemption of the world, and to lead him to the Saviour. 


It is of the utmost imporiance to distinguish between the Spirit’s work 77 us, 
and Christ’s work for us. Where they are confounded, one rarely finds settled peace 
as*o the question of sin. The type of the passover illustrates the distinciion very 
simply. The Israelite’s peace was not founded upon the unleavened bread or the 
bitter herbs, but upon the blood. Nor was it, by any means, a question of what Ae 
thought about the blood, but what God thought about it. This gives immense relief 
and comfort to the heart. God has found a ransom, and He reveals that ransom to us 
sinners, in order that we might rest therein, on the authority of His word, and by the 
grace of His Spirit. And albeit our thoughts and feelings must ever fall far short of 
the infinite preciousness of that ransom, yet, inasmuch as God tells us that He is 
perfectly satisfied about our sins, we may be satisfied also, 


THE Israelite was saved by the blood a/oze,and not by his thoughts about it, 
His thoughts might be deep or they might be shallow ; but, deep or shallow, they had 
nothing to do with his safety. He was not saved by his thoughts or feelings, but by 
the blood. God did not say, “‘ When you see the blood, I will pass over you.” No: 
but “when / see.” What gave an Israelite peace was the fact that Jehovah’s eye rested 
on the blood. ‘This tranquilized his heart. The blood was outside, and the Isiaelite 
inside, so that he could not possibly see it; but God saw it, and that was quite 
enough, : 


j 


e 


i 
} 
4 
i 


100 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


ABEL knew grace in righteousness through precious blood; and, therefore, 
brought a ‘rue gift-offering. Cain, on the other hand, impiously brought his gift- 
offering as a reason why God should receive Az, and it was rejected. In dealing 
with him, God ignores the offering, and speaks of Azs Jerson: “If thou doest well, 
shalt Zhou not be accepted ? and if not, behold! a sin-offering is crouching at the 
door,” Gen. 4:7. Poor Cain! like many others in our day, he would rot believe God 
as to his sinfulness ; would not believe Him as to need of a sin-offering ; would not 
believe that Ae Aimse/f was all wrong ; and, presuming to draw near with his gift- 
Nei ig fruits of a cursed earth, and the labors of a sinful man—was utterly 
rejected. 


‘‘UntIL I saw the blood, ’twas hell my soul was fearing ; 
And dark and dreary in my eyes the future was appearing ; 
While conscience told its tale of sin, 
And caused a weight of \voe within. 


But, when I saw the blood, and looked at Him who shed it, 
My right to peace was seen at once, and I with transport read it; 
\ I found myself to God b-oaght nigh, 
And ‘‘ Victory !’’ became my cry. 


My joy was in the blood, the news of which had told me, 
b That spotless, as the Lamb of God, my Father could behold me; 
And all my boast was in His name, 
‘Through whom this great salvation came. 


And when, with golden harps, the throne of God surrounding, 

The white-robed saints around the throne their songs of joy are sounding, 
With them I'll praise that precious blood, 
Which has redeemed our souls to God. ' 


DEATH eternal is the ultimate satisfaction which the law demands of the sinner. 
It can be readily seen that the ransom which our Lord paid was in itself a sufficient 
equivalent and even more than an equivalent. For what could magnify the law of 
God more, and what could sound tlie depths of sin more than that the Eternal Son of 
God should, in the likeness of sinful flesh, be made sin for us and die in our stead? 
Let it be remembered, then, that this great ransom was made to God as the Morai 
Governor of the universe, not as a benefit or bounty to Him, but as a satisfaction 
demanded by the law of righteousness for sin. We always read of the blood which is 
the ransom being offered toGod. In Egypt thé lamb was slain and the blood sprinkled 
on the door posts and lintels of the Hebrew cottages, so that it might be under the eye 
of Jehovah. Hence we read “ When I see the blood I will pass over you,” or come 
between you and the death angel. 


ner, 
lent 
v of 
in. of 
acd P 
oral 
‘tion 
+h is 
kled 
eye 
ome 


REGENERATION. 


HOW TO OBTAIN ENTRANCE INTO THE KINGDOM. 
By Lady Dent. 
Read John 3:1-18; 1:12, 13; Jas 1:18; 1 Pet. 1: 23. 


6¢(\NE of the most important truths in the Bible, to be considered, is as to how 

entrance may be obtained “into the kingdom of God.” It is a matter which 
relates te the personal salvation of each soul, and therefore of the deepest moment to 
each, 

In Eden God reisned supreme, and the creature held communion with the 
Creator, till Satan entered, usurped God’s authority, induced man to believe him 
rather than God, and thus led to sin, and consequently death—by reason of separation 
from God, the source of life—and expulsion from the earthly paradise. 

I. God ‘‘ Drove out the Mian,” and “a flaming sword turned every way, to 
keep the way of the tree of life,” Gen. 3 : 22-24; that man might not eat thereof in 
his fallen state, and live forever in frail taternacle—‘ body of sin,’ Rom. 6 :6—with 
curse around. This was mercy, and shows that “God is love.” Love also dictated 
that revelation to fallen man, which pointed to death and resurrection of “the Seed” 
of the woman, Gen. 3:15; Heb. 2:14; 1 Cor. 15:21, wherein life could be found, 
beyond the power of death; and those who are united to the crucified, risen, and 
exalted Saviour, Acts 2 : 22-24, 32, 33, can feed on Him, ¢he “ Tree of Life.” Jesus: is 
the “Seed” that died to save, Jno. 12:24. Jesus is the “Tree of Life,” who lives to 
sustain the life of saved ones, Rev. 1:18 3 Jno. 6:57. 

But how is this union effected? The whole human race died in Adam, the 
federal head. All are born in sin, Rom. 3: 10, 12; 5:12; ‘‘ flesh,” namely, fallen, old 
Adam nature, “cannot please God ;” it is utterly corrupt, Gen. 6:5, with Psa, 53:2, 
3; 73:8; Rom. 7:18; 8:7, 8; Gal. 5: 19-21. How, then, can any such be united 
to the Holy Jesus, and “eriter the kingdom of God?” Our Lord Himself gives the 
answer— 

Il. “Ye Must be Born again,” or anew, or afresh, or “from above.” (See 
Jno. 3:3, R.V., also verse 31, where the same word is translated “from above”). No 
patching up of the old nature will do; there must be a new nature implanted. That 
which is “of the earth” remains “earthy,” that which is born of the flesh is or 
remains “ flesh,” 1 Cor. 15 :47, 48: Jno. 3:6. Nothing but the new birth will suffice. 
Twice this truth is enforced by our Lord, vs. 3, 5, and its deep importance shown by 
the repetition of the words “verily, verily.” Words of incalculable import to man, 
and of deep blessing, when by grace given to apprehend their meaning. “Verily” is 
the same word in Greek as “Amen ;” Jesus is he “ Amen,” Rev. 3:14, and “all the 
promises of God in Him are Yea, and in Him Amen,” 2 Cor. 1:20. It is, as if Jesus 
had said, I, “the God of Truth,” or “Amen,” Isa. 65 ; 16, say to vou, “ Except a man 


[103] 


cm in i 


2 ene yeni <r em 


104 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


be born again,” etc. A truth thus stated is incontrovertible ; and God alone can give 
this new nature, suited to His kingdom, and without which no man can “see,” or 
“enter” therein. 

Nicodemus went tu Jesus as a great “ Teacher,” a learned “ Rabbi,” just as many 
speak of Him in these days, but who, like Nicodemus, do not know Him as the “ Son 
of God,” yea, God Himself. Nicodemus, being a “ruler,” was ashamed to go to Jesus 
by day, as if he, a teacher, were going to be taught (changed ‘ater, see Jno. 7: 50; 
19 : 39) ; but he went under cover of night, hoping to get instruction of a superior kind, 
probably expected to hear some learned discourse, just as men now like to listen to 
clever, eloquent sermons ; and as the first words of our Lord startled Nicodemus, so 
are people startled now, when this same truth is first put before them. “How cana 
man be born when he is old?” asks Nicodemus, He thought only of the natural birth, 
the birth of the arid but of what avail a repetition of that, if it could take place? 
There would be still the old Adam, sinful nature, “the flesh,” of which it is said so 
emphatically, ‘‘ They that are in the flesh cannot please God ;” whereas our Lord spoke 


of a spiritual nature. 


III “Born of the Spirit.” This may appear incomprehensible now, as it did 
to Nicodemus then, and men may ask, as he did, ‘‘ How can these things be?” It is 
humbling also to the proud heart of man to hear that there is nothing in him that God 
can accept, for he is always proudly imagining that he cam do something whereby to 
gain heaven ; he vainly supposes he can work his way back to God, to the position 
from which Adam fell ; but this is a fatal mistake. Every good thing cometh “from 
above,” Jas. 1: 17; and therefore it is only in the zew nature, given from above, that 
aman can do anything “well-pleasing to God,” Phil. 4:17, 18 ; Heb. 13 :21—both 
addressed to believers ; for what comes from above will work its way upwards, even as 
water which finds its own level. 

But how is this birth of the Spirit effected. Read passages at the head of this 
article. These show it is through the instrumentality of “the Word”—the written 
Word, which testifies of Jesus, the embodied or living “Word.” The Word quickens, 
or gives life, Ps. 119: 50. By the preaching of the Gospel souls are begotten, 1 Cor. 
4:15. The “incorruptible” seed sown, Luke 8:11, 15: 1 Pet. 1:23, in~hearts pre- 
pared of the Lord, Acts 16:.14, and watered by the Holy Spirit, springs up into life. 
The Holy Spirit’s work zz the sinner is to reveal the Saviour’s work /or him, and the 
Father's love ¢o him, shown in the gift of His Son, Rom. 5:8; and through His con- 
straining power the sinner is led to accept His testimony—look with the eye of faith at 
Jesus “lifted up,” John 3:15, 16; 12: 32, 33, and receive Him into the heart. Thus 
is he quickened by the Spirit, John 6 :63; Jas. 1:18; 1John5:1; “born” orbegotten 
of God, becomes a child of God, partaker “of the Divine nature,” John 1:12; 2 Pet. 
I :43 and united to Christ, 1 Cor. 12 : 13 ; “a new creature” or creation—“z# Christ,” 
2 Cor. 5:17, R. V., marg.; Gal. 6:15. In Adam, the first man, we have sin, disobe- 
dience, death, inherited in natural birth. In Christ, “the second Man,” the “Lord 
from heaven,” 1 Cor. 15 : 47, life, obedience, righteousness, imparted in new or spiritual 
birth, The two not mixed, but quite separate. In Christ, two distinct natures, the 
Divine and the human. In the believer, likewise two natures, “flesh” and “spirit.” 
Jesus, as man, was on earth; as God, in heaven, John 3:13: so now, be*iever in 
body, on earth ; in spirit, with Christ “in the heavenlies,” Eph. 1:3; 2:6. Jesus 
now in heaven as man, in “the glory of God,” Acts 7:55; as God, filling all space. 
Thus God, in the Person of Christ, having descended to earth, raises manhood up to 
God, Eph. 4: 9, 10; and thus is restored to new-born soul, the fellowship destroyed 
by the fall, 1 John 1 : 1-3, and God and man meet in Christ. 

IV. Action of Spirit mysterious. It is compared to wind, John 3 : 8, and 
the same Greek word is used to express both. At Pentecost, Acts 2, the Holy Spirit 
came as “mighty rushing wind.” In Ezek. 37 :9 (though primarily referring to the 
resuscitation of the nation Israe!), the wind typifies the Holy Spirit softly breathing 
life inte dead souls ; just as ‘the Lord God breathed” into the inanimate clay when 


— ee ae ee Oe oe ee al ee ee a ee 


Yr wr ew Vee 


REGENERATION. 105 


Adam “became a living soul,” Gen. 2:7. The Lord God directs the wind to fulfil 
“His word,” Ps, 148 :8; so with the “Spirit” sent bythe Son ‘from the Father,” 
John 15:26. The cause is hidden, but the effects are seen; sometimes in gentle 
influences, like soft, refreshing breezes, infusing new life into inva).d; at others, mighty 
and powerful to uprooting Satan from heart, and “ pulling down of strongholds,” 2 Cor. 
10: 4, even as great tempest uproots gigantic trees, or throws down strong piles of 
huildings. Such results clearly show what power has been at work ; and so with one 
“born of the Spirit ”—the results must be seen, and these are, conformity to Christ, 
Rom. 8:29; hatred to sin, 1 Jno. 3:9; victory over the world, 1 Jno. 5:4, Tastes, 
dispositions, occupations, affections, desires, sanctified by indwelling Spirit, 1 Tim. 
4:4, 53 2 Tim. 2:21, and directed to new object, z. ¢., “glory of God,” 1 Cor. 10: 31. 
“All things are become new,” 2 Cor. 5:17. Senses, time, talents, all differently 
employed. Motive power hidden from view, but results visible. ‘ Not I, but Christ,” 
Gal. 2:20, His life is manifested in the believer ; the new life, in the one born anew. 


106 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


REGENERATION, 


“Ye must be born again," John 3: 3. 


I. Itis ascribed to God. ‘As many as | 


received Him, to them gave He power to 
become the sons of God, even to as many as 
believe on His name: which were born, not 
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of 
the will of man, but of God,” John 1; 12, 13. 
* Ye are all the children of God by faith in 
Christ Jesus,” Gal. 3:26. ‘For we are 
His (God's) workmanship, created in Christ 
Jesus unto good works," Eph. 2:10. ‘‘ Ac- 
cording to His merc,, He saved us, by the 
washing of regeneration and renewing of tie 
Holy Ghost,” Titus 3:5. ‘Of His own wili 
begat He us, with the Word of Truth,” 
James 1:18, ‘Blessed be the God and 
Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ, which 
according to His abundant mercy hath be- 
gotten us again unto a lively hope by the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ from thedead,”’ 
1 Peter 1: 3. 

II It is ascribed to Christ. ‘The Son 
quickeneth (maketh alive) whom He will,”’ 
John v.:21. ‘The hour is coming. and now 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God: and they that hear shall live,” 
John 5:25. ‘‘If ye know that He (Christ) 
is righteous, ye know that every one that 
doeth righteousness is born of Him, ’ 1 John 
2:29. 

III, It is ascribed to the Spirit. “ Ex- 
cept a man be born of water (é.¢. word) and 
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the king- 
dom of Heaven" (see John 3:5-8). ‘It is 
the Spirit that quickeneth,” John 6:63. 
‘The washing of regeneration and renewing 
of the Holy Ghost,” Titus 3:5. ‘The 
Spirit giveth life," 2 Cor. 3:6. 

IV. It is ascribed to the Word. 1. As 
used by the Father, James 1:18; r Peter 1: 
23. 2. Asused by Christ, John 6:63. 3. 
As used by the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3:6. 4. As 
used by man, 1 Cor. 4:15. The Father is 
the originating cause. The Son the pro- 
curing cause. The Spirit the efficient cause. 
The Word the instrumental cause. 

J. HIXON IRVING. 


Nees produces ‘nature ; like begets like. ‘That which is born of the flesh-is 
1‘ flesh.” Human nature is human nature, whether cast ina Jew ora Gentile mould, 
whether amiable or offensive, courageous or cringing. Good never will be evolved 
out of evil, nor light be born of darkness, nor pageanines issue uncreated out of chaos. 


The flesh is, and ever will be what it is; and t 


is is true of all, Let us not, like rest- 


less waves, vainly beat against the iron rocks of truth. 
NO spiritual perception of God’s kingdom exists in us in our nature state. We 


have no soul-eye to see what it is like. 


CULTIVATION does not change nature, it leaves the thorn bush and the thistle, thorn 
and thistle still. Man can develop things of earth’s kingdom which exists, he cannot 
create. Cultivation never enables a man to see more than the kingdom of men; it 
neither generates a wish nor creates a desire in him fot the kingdom of God. On the 
contrary, cultivation of the flesh usually ends in more potent pride than ever. 


THE believer is dead, because Christ died for him. The life with which the 


power of temptation, guilt, the attacks of sin, are conn«cted, exists no longer to faith. 
By death all that was connected with it has come to an end. Now that which was 
connected with the life of the old man was sin, condemnation, weakness, fear, power- 
lessness against the assaults of the enemy—all that is past. We have a life, but it is 
in Christ ; it is hidden with Him in God. 


we ar 
they 
bapti: 
tendo 
have. 
versir 
and wv 
water 
quick 
F 


water 


upon 
comet 


REGENERATION. 107 


THE SPIRIT OF LIKE. 
By Dr. Jas. H. Brookes. 


rT HAT shall we say then? Is the law sin? God torbid. Nay, I had not known 
sin, but by the law,” Rom. 7:7. “ By the law is the knowledge of sin,” Rom. 
:20. Moreover, the law entered, that the offense might abound,” Rom. 5:20. “It 
was added because of transgressions,” Gal. 3:19. The law, therefore, was never so 
much as designed to bring life or salvation to a sinner, but only to reveal to his view 
his terrible condition as spiritually dead. Hence it is called “the ministration of 
death,” and “the ministration of the condemnation,” 2 Cor. 3:7, 9, because, having 
detected the presence of death in man’s sinful nature, it can only utter the voice of a 
stern and righteous condemnation, “Cursed is every one that continueth not in all 
things which are written in the book of the law to do them,” Gal. 3: 10; and whoso- 
ever shall keep the whole law and yet offend in one point, heis guilty of all,” Jas. 2 : 20. 
Consequently unless it can be shown that a man has never failed to be conformed to 
the requirement of the law in thought, word, or deed, it is simply impossible for him 
to be saved by the law, or by any thought, word, or deed of his own. 

But what the latv could not do, God did when, sending His own Son in the like- 
ness of sinful flesh, and for sin, He condemned sin in the flesh, The work of Christ 
in our behalf did not stop with offering a sacrifice for the outward manifestations of 
evil seen in our conduct; it extended to the hidden root of evil in our depraved 
nature, making complete atonement for iniquity, both in its external and visible forms, 
and in its internal and invisible principle—out of which all actual transgressions 
proceed, The sin-hating God met His sin-bearing Son in the darkness that gathered 
around the cross, and “over all the earth,” and there entered into a full and final 
settlement of the tremendcus question of sin, condemning it, and executing the 
sentence of condemnation, as it exists even in the flesh; that the requirement of the 
law might be fulfilled in those who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 

It is not strange, therefore, that the Holy Spirit is here and elsewhere called the 
Spirit of life, for the Spirit through the Gospel imparts life to dead souls, and maintains 
it until the day of Jesus Christ, who says, “It is the Spirit that quickeneth ; the flesh 
profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are life,” 
Jno. 6:63. Again it is written, “The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life”— 
2 Cor. 3: 6—the two passages presenting the law of sin and death in contrast with the 
law of the Spirit of life. Nor must the importance which the Saviour attaches to His 
words, in connection with the Spirit and with life, be overlooked, when he says, “the 
words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are life” because they explain 
His remark to Nicodemus, “ Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he can- 
not enter into the kingdom of God.” 

There are many who think our Lord here refers to baptism as the means by which 
we are regenerated or born again, or by which we receive everlasting life ; and hence 
they are worrying themselves with childish questions about the proper mode of 
baptism, or about the particular religious body amid the wretched divisions of Chris- 
tendom that constitute the true Church, or about the succession of ecclesiastics that 
have a right to administer ordinances. It seems to be forgotten that He was con- 
versing with a ruler of the Jews, who was familiar with the Old Testament scriptures, 
and who ought at least to have known the frequent allusions in these scriptures to 
water, as an appropriate symbol of the Word of God when accompanied by the 
quickening energy of the Holy Ghost. 

For example, the Pharisee had surely read the promise of Jehovah, “I will pour 
water upon him that is thirsty, ar? “-ods upon the dry ground ; I will pour my Spirit 
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring,” Isa. 44:3; “for as the rain 
cometh down, and the snow, from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the 


Bits 


SS oo eens 


108 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread 
to the eater ; so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth,” Isa, 55: 10, 11. 
He ha: surely read the glowin fennbers that reached on to the time when the 
kingdom of God shall be established on the earth, “ ‘Then will I sprinkle clean water 
upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will 
I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within 
you ; and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an 
heart of flesh, And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my 
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them,” Ezek. 36:25-27. There are 
many similar passages, and Nicodemus should have known that to be born again is to 
be born or begotten of the word of God, applied to the conscience and heart in the 
life-giving eigyd of the Spirit. 

That the Lord Jesus did not teach the doctrine of regeneration, or the reception 
of life, by baptism, 1s contlusively shown by the following facts : 

I, He never preached about baptism, nor even alluded to it, until after His death 
and resurrection. Think of the Saviour Himself preserving a studied silence with 
regard to that without which no one can enter the kingdom of God ! 

II. It is said, “Jesus Himself baptized not,” Jno. 4:2. Think of the Saviour 
withholding His hand from the work of regeneration ! 

III. if He taught that regeneration or life is communicated by baptism, He flatly 
contradicted His own testimony, for He afterwards said to the unbaptized robber on 
the cross, ‘ To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise,” ‘Luke 23 : 43. 

IV. If baptism is regeneration, no unbaptized person is saved, for there is no 
exception to the rule laid down in the conversation with Nicodemus. “Except a 
man,” or as Dr. Young properly translates it, “ Except amy one, be born again, he can- 
not see the kingdom of God.” Then the immense number of godly Friends or 
Quakers, and all who on a dying bed have believed, like the dying thief, without 
* baptism, and the countless millions of dead unbaptized infants, must have perished, 
although Jesus declares, “It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that 
one of these little ones should perish,” Matt. 18 : 14. 

But if this is not enough to show that our Lord taught no such doctrine as 
regeneration by baptism, additional facts may be mentioned : 

I. He said to Nicodemus in the language of rebuke, “Art thou a master of 
Israel, and knowest not these things?” Jno. 3:10. The latter could not have known 
Christian baptism, for it was then instituted, although he ought to have known the 
quickening efficacy so often ascribed to the word of God in the Old Testament. 

II. Baptism is seldom mentioned after tiie Acts of the Apostles, and at that time, 
so far as the record goes, it was administered in the name of Jesus alone. The follow- 
ing passages, in few of which is baptism by water even in view, are all that contain any 
reference to the ordinance: Rom. 6: 3, 43 t Cor. 1:13-17 3 10:23 12:133 15:29; 
Gal. 3:27; Eph. 4:5; Col. 2:12; Heb. 6:2; Pet. 3:21. In fifteen of the Epistles 
‘here is not the slightest allusion to baptisryn. Could this be possible, if by it the 

‘nner obtains regeneration or eternal life? 

IIT, Paul writes to a large church, “I thank God that I baptized none of you but 
Crispus and Gaius ; lest any should say that I had baptized in mine own name. And 
I baptized also the household of Stephanas; besides, I ki:ow not whether I baptized 
any other. For Christ sent me not to baptize, |but to D i ovoeg the Gospel,” 1 Cor. 
1:14-16. Think of the Apostle exclaiming, “I thank God that I was not the means 
of regenerating any of you, for Christ sent rie not to be used for the regeneration of 
men. 

But surely it is needless to go further in the statement of objections, when we 
have the positive testimony of the Holy Ghost that it is by the word of God we are 
born or begotten again. ‘“ Of His own will begat he us with the word of truth,” Jas. 
1:18 “Seeing ye have purified your hearts in obeying the truth through the Spirit 
{this answers precisely to the water and the Spirit), unto unfeigned love of the brethren, 


who 
Chri: 
that | 
may 
tion | 
in im 
stanc 
word 
one | 
read 
exter 


REGENERATION. 109 


en — 


ee 


love one another with a pure k art fervently ; being born again, not of corruptible seed, 
but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth forever,” 1 Pet. 
1:22,23. “In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel,” 1 Cor. 4: 15. 
“ Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you,” Jno. 15: 3. 
“Christ also loved the church, and gave Himself for it; that He might sanctify and 
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word,” Eph. 5 : 25-27. 

It is perfectly clear, therefore, that we are born or begotten by the word of God, 
which the Spirit employs as the means of imparting spiritual life; and there is the 
most striking analogy between the rlation the Spirit sustains to the sinless human 
nature of Christ and the relation He sustains to the new-born soul, that is made par- 
caker of the divine nature ; 

I. Christ as a man was born of the Spirit, Luke 1 : 35. 

II. He was anointed and sealed with the Spirit, Acts 10 : 38; Jno. 6:27. 
Ill. He was led by the Spirit, Luke 4:1. 
IV. He acted in the power‘of the Spirit, Luke 4: 14-19. 
V. He was justified by the Sp‘rit, Rom. 1:4; 1 Tim, 3:16, 
VI. He offered Himself by the Spirit, Heb. 9: 14. 
VI. He was raised up by the Spirit, Rom. 8:11; 1 Pet. 3: 18. 
In like manner the new nature which is imparted to believers is : 
Il. Born of the Spirit, as already shown. 
II. Those thus born are anointed and sealed with the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1:22; 
1 Jno. 2 227. 
III. They are led by the Spirit, Rom. 8:14; Gal. ¢ : 18. 
IV. They act in the power of the Spirit, Jno. 7 : 38, 39 ; Acts 1:8. 
V. They are justified by the Spirit, 1 Cor, 6:11. 
VI. They offer themselves unto God by the Spirit, Rom. 15:16; 1 Pet. 1:2. 
VII. They are raised up by the Spirit, Rom. 8; 11. 

Well, then, may the Holy Ghost be called “the Spirit of life,” and well may those 
who want to be saved rejoice that in the same chapter He is called “the Spirit of 
Christ ;” exhibiting the very patience, kindness, tenderness, and yearning for the lost, 
that caused Jesus to be known as the “friend of publicans and sinners.” Well too 
may they be glad that they are not summoned to a wearisome and baffling investiga- 
tion “of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands,” but that the Spirit of life 
in imparting life uses the living word of the living God, so sinpie a child may under- 
stand it, so plain he that runneth may read. If they will’bow to the testimony of that 
word, apart from the control of man’s teaching, they need not continue in darkness 
one hour, nor remain in doubt of their salvation any longer time than is required to 
read that the bosom of the Father is ready to shelter them, the arms of Christ are 
extended to welcome them, and the Spirit is beseeching them to receive eternal life. 


-T10 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE NEW BIRTH. 


I. Man, fallen from-God, corrupt in his 
very being, requires a new birth, John 3: 6: 
Rom. 8:7, 8. 

II. The sinner can neither enter nor see 
Heaven without being regencrated, John 
3:3. 

III. The new birth is wrought, conicintly, 
by the Holy Trinity: (1) Wrought by God 
the Father, John 1:13; 1 Pet. 1:3; (2) 
Wrought by Christ the Son, 1 John 2: 29; 
(3) Wrought by the Holy Spirit, John 3:6; 
Titus 3:5. 


IV. It is produced through: the instru- 
mentality of the word of God, Jas. 1:18; 
1 Pet. 1;23; thrce.gh the resurrection of 
Christ, 1 Pet. 1:2; through the ministry of 
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4:15. 

V. Man is born again by the will of God, 
Jas. 1: 18. 

VI. It is all of the mercy of God, Titus 
305 
VII. It is.all for the glory of God, Isa. 43: 
7; 1 Cor. +: 21-31. 

J. &. W. 


BIBLICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE NEW BIRTH. 


I, It is called a new creation, 2Cor.5: VV. It is described as a new spirit, Ezek. 
17; Gal. 6:15; Eph. 2: 10. | 13:19; Rom. 7:6. 

II. It is termed newness of life, Kom. Vi. Further, as the inward man, Kom. 
cat 7:22; 2 Cor. 4:16 


esl id eae au cadibiion st tam VII. It is a partaking of the divine na- 
6:4-6; Eph. 2:1, 5; Col. 2:12; 3:1. lt pak s: 

IV. Ezekiel, by the Holy Spirit, calls it a | “#7 °° ** 4 
new heart, Ezek. 36: 26. | J. E. W. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGH AND UNFOLDINGS. 


OES Christ not solemnly aver, that without a mew birth from above, not one—no, not 
even a moral, learned, inquiring Nicodemus—can see or enter the kingdom of God? 
He does‘not say that he may not, but that he canno/, enter—leaving it to be inferred 
that it is worally tmpossible. And this arises from the fact of its being @ Aéagdom, as 
well as from the fact of our depravity. An anarchist has a decided dislike to consti- 
tutional and settled government; so a man, who hates the laws by which God's 
king? m is governed, cannot be a loyal subject of His holy administration. God 
would require to change //7s nature, before He admitted any of us into His kingdom 
with our za¢ure unchanged. But, as God cannot change, we must, if we would sce or 
enter His kingdom. Before we can be happy and loyal subjects of it, we must be 
“born again,” and thus get its laws written in our minds and hearts. 


As long as preachers keep by the pictorial and illustrative, and speak of the 
seasons of the year, the beautiful earth, and the ancient sea, mountains and plains, 
rivers and lakes, fields, flowers, and fraits, sun, moon, and stars, sinners comprehend 
the discourse and applaud it ; but, when the deeply spiritual and eternally important 
form the theme, they feel listless, and characterize it as dull, prosy, and uninteresting. 
But if we cannot enjoy a highly spiritual discourse, it must be because we are “ carna/,” 
and want the spiritual “sense,” which aiways accompanies the new birth ; for “the 
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God : for they are foolishness 
unto him ; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” 


ozek. 


Kom. 


P ila- 


, not 
70d? 
brred 
W2, aS 
nsti- 
;0d’s 
God 
dom 
’e or 
bt be 


f the 
ains, 
hend 
rtant 
pting. 
nal, ie 
“the 
hness 


REGENERATION, lI 


“Yi MUST BE BORN AGAIN;” OR, OUR REGENERATION, 
By W. P. Mackey. 


HOUGH you knew all the duties incumbent upon a royal Prince, this knowledge 
would not make you a rcyal Prince. You must be ina position before you can 
act under the laws of that position. This is the natural order admitted by all men in 
human things, but quite reversed when they begin to speculate on divine things. God’s 
order is this—I make you sons : walk like sons. Man says, try to walk like sons, and 
after a shorter or longer time you will be made sons. But we must be brought out of 
the kingdom of darkness before we can take the first step in the kingdom of light. 
Before we can enter this kingdom we must have a nature capable of enjoying it. A 
nature can be implanted only by birth; therefore we must be born again. This subject 
is gone fully into in John 3. 

Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews, came to Jesus, and said to Him, “ WE KNOW,” eic. 

Jesus answered him by saying, “ Except a man BE BORN AGAIN,” etc. 

There is a great difference between what we £now and what we ave, a great differ- 
ence between our attainments, education, talents, knowledge, and our standing before 
God, and our relation to God. Nicodemus was an inquiring man, who had been 
convinced of Christ’s claims by external evidences, and whose conscience was now 
seeking after something deeper and more satisfactory. He comes with this profession 
of knowledge, “ Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man 
can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him,” John 3:2. Jesus, 
because He knew all men, and all the thoughts of men, answered not the words but the 
need of Nicodemus, by showing that all his knowledge would never save him or any 
other man ; for “Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” 
Nicodemus by nature, however well-instructed, could never see God’s kingdom. 

I. Christ not a Teacher of the Old Nature. He is First a Saviour, 
then a Teacher.—In the present day, in certain quarters, we hear a good deal about 
Christ as the perfect man, the perfect example, and the perfect teacher; but here is the 
answer of Jesus Himself to allsuch compliments. Hecame not to teach the old nature 
—not to teach man as sprung from Adam, but to seek and save the lost, to give the 
new nature, and to teach saved men. The policy of all who have openly, or in thought, 
denied the divinity of Christ, is to laud His moral teaching and His God-like example. 
They bring; well known and fondly cherished truths forward, as if only they believed 
and preached these great facts ; but at the outset they forget this insurmountable bar- 
rier to all moral reclamation of the old nature of man, “ Except a man be dorz again, 
he cannot see the kingdom of God.” : 

We find others, Fowever, who know Christ not merely as a teacher, but who also 
believe in His divinity, that He is God as well as man. In fact, many in ourland know 
every fundameatal doctrine in the Bible; but a mere knowledge of doctrine, however 
true, never introduced a son of Adam into the kingdom of God. Men may have 
learned what justification, sanctification, and adoption are; they may be able to dis- 
tinguish minutely between all the creeds, isms, and heresies, they may be theoretically 
orthodox, may be able to judge preachers and sermons, may be very ready freely to 
“iticise most men they hear, and graciously pay beautiful compliments to their special 
favorites, as Nicodemus did to Jesus. They may know, moreover, about the new 
birth, its inecessity and divine origin ; but notwithstanding all this, they could not dare 
to say, as before God, “ Whereas we were blind, now we see.” The greatest amount 
of theological education never yet saved a man. Creed, or the belief in a certain 
amount of doctrine, has made Christendom, but never made a Christian. “Ye must 
be born again.” 

Others again, when their consciences have been reached, try to get this new birth 


112 , GOLD .FROM OPHIR. 


brought about, and begin most zealously to train and trim, to educate and reform their W 
old nature, quite ignorant of what is meant by “ 4077 again.” up 
The Old Nature Unchanged and Unchangeable.—Nicodemus won- 
dered how a man when old could be brought again into this world but ; if it were tell 
possible, what better would he be? He might have changed his circumstances by edu 
this new birth according to the flesh; but would he have changed kingdoms? He ‘] the 
would still be in the kingdom of the first Adam; he would still be flesh; for Jesus hell 
goes on to say, “That which is born of the flesh is flesh,” ver. 6. Water never rose pick 
above its level: that which is produced is of the same nature as that whick produces. Prie 
We find people to-day who think that if they were in other circumstances they would mur 
have a better chance of getting saved. The rich man thinks that if he were poor, he theo 
might have time to think of religion. ‘The poor man, if he could get ends to meet, and | turn 
had a little more money, would have more leisure to think of God. But the difficulty . it to 
is not so much in what is around us, as in what is w7thin us. ’ word 
Again, the-aids of religion are called in, in order that the flesh may be tmproved; awf 
but after all attempts it is found to be only religious flesh. Man may have all varieties intel 
of it ; but it never rose to seg the kingdom of God. In nature, we speak of the animal ask 
kingdom and the vegetable kingdom. If we took a rose from the latter of these king- cated 
doms, and cultivated it and trained it, and by our various arts made it produce all its . Eph. 
varieties, we never by these means could bring it into the other kingdom—into the and 
animal kingdom. Or, again, if I take a nettle from the roadside, and bring it into my you } 
garden or my hothouse, watch over, dress, water, and warm it, | may produce beautiful conv] 
nettles, and beautiful varieties of nettle, but I never could get apples from it; that which 4 God 
1s produced from the nettle is nettle. We can never gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of i writté 
thistles. Man 
Man hy nature is in the kingdom of the first Adam; no amount of reformation, [ ETER 
amelioration, cultivation, civilization, or religiousness, can bring one single man into 
the kingdom.of God. Look through Great Britain and Ireland,—what is the object of bya. 
the great bulk of the religious machinery? Is it not for cultivating the flesh, in order to act 
that, after death, it may see the kingdom of God? This is no guess. It is the sad impro 
confession of godly men in all the churches—godly bishops, godly rectors, godly pastors, And} 
elders and deacons. All unite in the same complaint, and do their best against it. The a to loo 
majority of respectable religious people, as good as Nicodemus, a master in Israel, do / man, 
not know the practical power of this truth which stands at the door of God’s kingdom. J 
They put salvation at the end of a long series of self-improving processes—God puts essent 
the salvation of the soul at the very beginning, and all duties that in their discharge can ver. 5 
honor Him, are founded upon this fact. “ Man’s chief end is (not to get the soul saved, truth, 
but) to glorify God and to enjoy Him for ever”—starting with being saved for nothing I. 
as the means to this end. 2. 
III. The Absolute Necessity of a New Nature.—Before I can enter God's 3. 
kingdom I must have a new nature, that can appreciate, see, live in, and enjoy that L 
kingdom. Ask a blind man what red is. He has no idea of it because he cannot see, I. 
because he has not the capacity. Educate him in the mixing of colors. Tell him } the ki 
that the blue and yellow mixed make green ; he may soon remember this, and sow It 
much more ; by that knowledge he never saw a color. a Mar 
The questions therefore of most importance to you are not—do y ou know doctrine? ~ man, 
do you know Christ’s teaching? do you know your Bible? do you know the evidences ; this de 
of Christianity? do you know that Christ is God, that Christ is a Saviour? that He is - §=s not_ bb 
able and willing to save? You may know all that, and be host forever. | But are you m= which 
born again? Are you a partaker of a new nature, a divine nature? Are you an heir not in 
of God? Is your standing now in Christ or in Adam? may a) 
Before I can see the kingdom of God, I must have the nature implanted that f still re 
belongs to that kingdom. This is something more than a mere thought of sin forgiven, Nature 
or righteousness obtained. It is a question of capacity, of fitness to enjoy, of lixeness decent 
of nature. What an awful thought that so many religiously educated people are lost Sc 


a 
j 


——~ 


their 


won- 
were 
s by 
He 
Jesus 
rose 
uces. 
vould 
yr, he 
and 


iculty . 


oved ; 
‘jeties 
nimal 
king- 
all its 
to the 
to my 
rutiful 
which 
figs of 


1ation, 
n into 
ject of 
order 
he sad 
stors, 
The 
hel, do 
edom. 
d puts 
be can 
Baved, 
thing 


God’s 

that 
t see, 
1 him 
know 


rine? 
ences 
He is 
e you 

heir 


that 
iven, 
eness 
lost 


REGENERATION. 113 


What a hell, where the good, decent religious sons of Adam have to be for ever shut 
up with the’profane and the drunkard, and the abominable and the unclean ! 

Reader, I entreat of you, think. Think for a moment, did Jesus speak truth or 
tell lies? If he spoke truth, those who have not deen born again, however intelligent, 
educated, moral, benevolent, or religious, can never see the kingdom of God, an4 -nust, 
therefore, be swept away for ever with the lost, for there are only two places. Whata 
hell! Frequenters of cathedrals and frequenters of gin-palaces, tract-distributors and 
pick-pockets, drawing-room-meeting religionists and the off-scourings of the streets | 
Priests who, with solemh mien, pretended to stand between the people and God, and 
murderers who have been hung for their crimes! ‘Teachers who knew everthing in 
theology, and the profane, the swearer, the blasphemer, the infidel! These things will 
turn out true, whether you believe them or noé. It was seen in the days of Noah. Is 
it to be 5 ur,bitter experience? Hell is real. Eternal punishment is real. Christ’s 
words are true, although they may be doubted, or denied by the majority of men. The 
awful fact remains. Stop, therefore, high or low, rich or poor, educated or une‘lucated, 
intelligent or ignorant, religious man or blasphemer, respectable or profane, think and 
ask yourself these questions, 4m [born again? Have-l a new life ?--a life communi- 
cated by,the Spirit of God through the truth—born not of flesh, but of water, tae word, 
Epl.. 5 : 26, and the Spirit. Have J been born twice-—once into this world of Adam, 
and again into that of God? Friend, if you have not this uew birth, it were better that 
you had never been born ; but now as you are, and where you are, whenever you are 
convinced ef the necessity of this new birth, look and live ; believe and be saved ; take 
God at His word: He says, “ Ye ust be born again ;” and in the same chapter it is 
written; “As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of 
Man be lifted up, that whosoever BELIEVETH on Him should not perish but have 
ETERNAL LIFE. What God demands, God provides. 

IV. How the New Nature is Im fanted.—-This new nature is not implanted 
by a process, but received by an act of faith. This new nature never sets aside as 
to actual fact the old, never amalgamates, never becomes incorporated with it, never 
improves it, but “lusts” against it in the believer, wars against it, is “contrary to it.” 
And howis it implanted? Reader, this is of the greatest importance to you. Are you 
to look for the new birth in your own frames or feelings, to an ordinance or an act of 
man. A mistake here is fatal—“ Ye must be born again.” How? 

Jesus answers this, and gives-us the three things that are divinely and absolutely 
essential for the new birth, John 3:7; seeing the kingdom, ver. 3 ; entering the kingdom, 


ver. 5 ; or having eternal life, ver. 15; all these being but different aspects of the same 
truth, These three essentials are ; 


1. Water, ver. 5.. 

2. The Spirit, ver. 5 and 8. 

3. The Son of Man lifted up, ver. 14. 

Let us consider each shortly : 

I, Water.—“ Except a man be born of WATER and of the 
the kingdom of God,” ver. 5. 

It cannot in any way refer to baptism by water, the application of literal water to 
a man externally, as that would only wash his body and could not touch his inner 
man. Some would rad the text, ‘‘ except a man be born of baptism,” and of course by 
this doctrine Old Testament saints could not be in the kingdom of God, as they were 
not baptized. Circumcision could not save a inan. “ Neither is that circumcision 
which is outward in the flesh. . . . Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, and 
not in the letter,” Rom. 2 : 28,29. No change on a man externally can profit. He 
may apply much nitre and wash himself with much soap, but his leopard spots of sin 
still remain. Nor will mere education, reformation, cultivation, training of the old 


Spirit, he cannot enter 


Nature, turn flesh into spirit. ‘That which is born of the flesh is-flesh ;” it may be 


decent or indecent flesh, religious or irreligious, pious or profane, but still flesh. 
Some seeing this, and understanding it, have now asked what can the “ water” 
8 


lid GOLD. FROM OPHIR. 


ne 


mean? This has been answered in several ways. Some say it is the same as the 
Spirit ; others that it is the same as the blood, but “there are three that bear witness 
in earth, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood,” so that if water was only another 
way of expressing either the working of the Spirit or the cleansing of the blood, there 
would be only two bearing testimony—the Spirit and the blood and the water standing 
for either. Wecan solve the cuestion by asking what should have come into the 
mind of Nicodemus when Curist spoke of wafer? He,a master in Israel, knew ofa 
laver where every priest had to wash before he could enter into the holy place, for no 
unwashed foot ever trod that holy place. He, a master in Israel, knew the book of 
Ezekiel, and the’ promise ‘to be fulfilled in a coming day to Israel. ‘‘Then will I 
sprinkle clean wafer upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all ycur filthiness and 
from idols will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I 
put within you... . And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in 
My statutes; and ye shall keep My judgments and do /hem,” Ezek. 36 : 25, 26, 27. 

A teacher jn Israel should have been looking for the antitype of temple and laver, 
and the true water of purification sprinkled to cleanse from defilement. He should 
have been conversant with the.119th Psalm, which definitely explains what the water is 
(ver. 9): “ Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way ?* By taking heed according 
to Thy Word.” 

The water here spoken of by Christ and typified in the Old Testament, is the 
WORD OF GOD, the embodiment, the revelation of God’s thoughts. 

Let us search the Scriptures as to this: “Being born again, not of corruptible 
seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever. 
For all flesh is as grass,” 1 Pet. 1:23. In our text “flesh” is contrasted with the 
“Spirit,” here flesh is contrasted with the “ Word.” “The seed is the Word of God,” 
Luke 8:11. “The righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise... The 
Word is nigh thee,” Rom. 10:6-8. ‘Of his own will begat He us with the Word 
of truth,” James 1518. “Ye are c/ean through the Word which | have spoken unto 
you,” John 15 :3. ; 

These all show that THE WORD is used by God in the new birth in that place 
where Christ speaks of water to Nicodemus, but we have more direct evidence in 
Eph. 5 ‘26, “That He might sanctify and cleanse it (the Church) with the washing of 
water by “he Word.” ‘Thus, from Old Testament type, from New Testament analogy, 
and from direct scriptural statement in both Old and New Testaments, the wafer in the 
new birth is proved to be the “ Word of God.” 

And most important it is tosee this. Howam I bornagainby the Word? Water 
cleanses by displacement. Uncleanness and water cannot occupy the same space at 


the same moment; the water displaces the uncleanness, and -thus cleanses. The si 
Word of God does not act by teaching “the flesh,” but by displacing all the the ights g C 
of “the flesh,” and putting in those of God. those 
The entrance of God’s word gives ight, Psalm 119 : 130. Man was lost by hear- Now 
ing Satan ; he is saved by hearing ‘ od. Man, in his natural Adam-standing, jis a dead 
chaos—nothing in him can meet or please the eye of God—he is without’ form and by th 
void, darkness brooding over him. When God, therefore, begins to re-create him (for ° Wella 
“we are “is workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,” Eph, 2 : 10), He gy 
“aye “ Let light be,” and light is; and it is by the entrance of His Word that this is tae the 
one. 
This Word of God judges everything in man ; it puts God and His requirements ay y 
before man. Human opinion is entirely set aside.. By nature we are all apt to rest flesh” 
satisfied that there are many worse than we. “If I am lost, many will have a bad ent 
chance,” is sometimes said, and quite true, for God’s Word tells us we are all guilty, He dy 
and, as we saw in a former chapter, “there is no difference,” all condemned already, T 
equally condemned. We compare ourselves with one another, or according as men then t 
are estimated, bad, good, or indifferent. God’s Word comes like water, and washes ewig 
out all our thoughts and opinions. 


the 
ness 
ther 
here 
ding 
» the 
ofa 
r no 
Ik of 
vill I 
and 
will I 
yk in 


laver, 
hould 
iter 1s 
rding 


is the 


ptible 
ever, 
th the 
God,’ 
. The 
Word 
unto 


place 
nce 0 
ing of 

logy, 
in the 


ater 
hce at 
The 
‘ights 


hear- 
jis a 
and 
(for 
»), He 
his is 


nents 
o rest 
3 bad 
uilty, 
eady, 
men 
ashes 


REGENERATION. 115 


“It’s my idea,” says one, “if one tries to livea goou life, that this is all he can do.” 


Of course, this is your idea ; but all our thoughts are evil, and unless God’s Word 


displaces our ideas we are undone. 

“It’s my opinion,” says another, “that we must just do the best we can, and trust 
in the mercy of God.” Of course this is your opinion—but the action of God’s Word 
is like water to wash out our o@inions. The first’ thing it tells me about myself and 
about all of us is that we are lost, depraved, guilty, condemned. - 

But more ; the Word of God brings in God’s mind about Himself instead of my 
own ; it lets God think for me, God speak for me, God act for me; it makes me 
passive, because I can be nothing else. 

“ Hear, and your soul s\,all live,” Isa. 55:3. Life is on its syllables—man, begins 
to speak, to pray, etc., when he wants to be saved—God says, Hear / God is praying 
tous, and should we not answer God’s prayer before we begin to pray? He does 
beseech men by us, 2 Cor. 5:20. His prayer is easily answered. He says, ‘f Will you 
have my Son ?” andthe answer is “ Yes” or “ Vo.” By thus hearing the Word of God, 
and understanding it. Matt. 13:23, we receive a new life from God in which God’s 
thoughts reside, and in which they aci. Let us now look at the Spirit’s work in 
regeneration. 

If. The Spirit.—We must be born of the SprrRiT—not the Spirit apart from the 
Word —not the Word apart from the Spirit—not two births—but the one divine new 
birth, We see Spirit and Word as the “ving water, John 7:38. “ Hethatbelieveth on 
me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this 
spake He of the Spirit, which they that’ believe on Him should receive.” This was 
seen at Pentecost, when the rivers of living water (read Peter’s sermon, a number of 
Old Testament quotations) flowed out to the salvation of thousands, the words of God 
carried home by the Spirit—hence “ving water; the Word is the water, but it is 
stagnant or dead without the Spirit—Spirit and Word make “ving water. Again, 
Jesus said, John 6 : 63, “the words that | speak unto you they are spirit and they are 
life.” Mere moral suasion, as it is called, never yet saved a man. This Word only 
operates as God’s Spirit applies it, The vehicle is the Word, but the power is the 
Spirit. 

If people are famishing in a town, and we intend to send supplies to them, we load 
the vans and wagons with bread and corn, and make upa large train. The entrance of 
these wagons will bring life to many a famished family, to marly a dying man. Why 
delay, then ? why is the train lying useless at this station where there is plenty? We 
are waiting for that powerful engine which will speed it along. Screw upthe coupling, 
make all fast ; and now not only is the feast ready, but feasts and guests are brought 
together. Christ Himself is the bread, the Word is the wagon, and the Spirit is the 
engine or power that brings Christ in the Word to us poor perishing sinners. 

God made a great feast, and bade many, Luke 14:16; none came, and “none of 
those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper,” is now what God has said. 
No merely invited guest ever came. We preach “Come, ;” we tell that all things are 
ready, that the feast .s spread, the door open, that “ yet there is room ;” but ru man 
by this mere invitation ever came ; as onc has said, “ God has to fill the chairs, as 
well as the table.” Five yoke of oxen or a piece of ground are of much more value 
to a natural man than the richest feast of God. (sod has to provide the guests as well 
as the feasts. If there were no Christ provided, there would be no feast : if there were 
no Spirit working, there would be no guests. 

Ve must be born of the Spirit. Like produces like. “That which is born of the 
flesh” is not merely like “ the flesh,” but is “ flesh,” and “ that which is born of the Spirit’ 
is not like the Spirit, nor is it the Spirit (that would be incarnation), but “is spirit,” and 
He dwells in that which He begets. 

This is something gure different from “the flesh” being pardoned, then taught, 
then toned down, pervaded, and sanctified by the Spirit. We have the man, the I, 
the existi:\g person with undivided responsibility, “ 407 again” by the thoughts of Goa 


FEA ci ions aeseaaat ake eaeo. er AI 


Traps ate aL 


116 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


acting in him in power, and the mind and nature of God communicated to him by the t] 
Spirit; and this now is the man’s life, as the “flesh” was kus life before. No ! G 
Christian can have his standing “‘in the flesh.” Alas ! that ever any of us should walk bi 
in the flesh: “we are not in the flesh ;” alas ! the flesh is in us still. h 

A boat has been sailing on the salt ocean; it has come through many a storm, er 
and, half full of the briny water, it is now sailing on the fresh water of the river. It is th 
no longer in the salt water, but the salt water is in it. The Christian has got off the or 


Adam-sea for ever. He is in the Christ-river for ever. Adam is still in him, which he 
is to nortify and to throw out, but he is not in Adam. He has now a power, and a 
position, and inclination to judge himself. He knows himself. It was at this point q Wi 


that Paul exclaimed, “ I know that in me—that is, my flesh—dwelleth no good thing.” th 
He is not two persons, but in the one person he has, and will have to his last hour an 
here, two natures diametrically opposite, and activ..." opposing each other. He now 
sees that “ the flesh” lusts against the “ Spirit,” but the Snirit also against the “flesh,” hfe 
in order that he may not walk as he used to walk; that these are contrary, and 
therefore never can be friends, and that he has in him, and will have in him, a foe that oul 
is neither to be trifled with nor trusted, but watched, warred with, and mortified. of 1 
' But his life is in his new nature. He is now a “partaker of ‘he divine nature,” als 
“born of God,” “an heir of God:;” and thus it is with every one who is born of the 
Spirit, Jew or Gentile, for God acts here in sovereignty. Connection with Avraham pre 
only gave them a fleshly standing, but a new thing is needed by the Jew as well as moi 
the Ger.tile, and is as free to the Gentile as to the Jew. : eve 
The eighth verse of John 3 is a most blessed verse. In it we poor sinners of the Spi 
Gentiles have got in: Reader, never quarrel with the royal prerogative of God’s grace ; 
read Rom. 9, and see that if we do not let God be absolute we have no chance of and 
salvation, for we are all equally “condemned already.” Praise His grace that hath His 
now appeared to every nation under heaven. 
But passing over Christ’s testimony of the Father, as given in verses nine to Cros 
phirtecn—-(hropaets had prophesied, but here is God himself )—let us now look at belie 
III. The Son of Man Lifted Up.—This, indeed, is our life. Christ said, “Ye ; I be 
MUST be born again ;” but here is another MUST that He mentions, “As Moses lifted ; it—] 
up the serpent in the wilderness, even so MUST the Son of man be lifted up: that who- puts 
ever believeth on Him should not perish but have everlasting lite.” God says, Ye test 
must, but He also says, I must. Your Adam-life is forfeited, and you are under con- a 
demnation. The Son of man lifted up is the answer to the forfeit. Satan, who has the Satis: 
power of death, and has every man in his power, for all have sinned, has been destroyed you s 
as to his power, his head having been bruised by Christ on the cross, Heb.2:14. But of th 
Christ is now risen, and can communicate His life to any one who believes in Him, He value 
having satisfied every demand of God. The new birth is the communication of a new ] 
life. Christ beyond the doom of sin is that life; Christ incarnate before His death you s 
cannot be “our life,” because the judgment against the old life can only be met in you n 
death. a liar 
The “corn of wheat” must die before the fruit can be produced. The resurrection- 9m evel 
life of Christ is therefore the new life preached to the s¢#mes, and implanted in him on not G 
his de/‘eving—a life that is perfect, impeccable, indestructible, eternal as the Christ of His S 
God is—a life that has already proved-victorious over the cross of shame, over death's is in ] 
strongest power—a life that will ere long swallow up mortality. : Cady 
The Spirit of God applies the Word that speaks about the lifted-up Christ whom | oda 
we receive and rest upon for salvation, and this is the new birth, Such a life is offered s R 
only to a stnner—what a comfort! No righteous man, no earth-wise, no rich man ever betwer 
entered the kingdom of God as such—only as justified sinners. None but redeemed i, thy 
sinners sing the song of that kingdom—none but those who, guilty, depraved, lost, have as do 
taken their place with roused consciences at the foot of the cross, and there seen the } D 
lifted-up Christ. All in tha®kingdom are “ new creatures,” clothed in “the best robe, onger 
with the “ring,” and the “shoes,”’and “the: fatted calf” slain. “What perfection 1s In to thy 


a 


yy the 
: No 
walk 


storm, 
It is 
off the 
ich he 
and a 
; point 
thing.” 
st hour 
[e now 
‘flesh,’ 
‘y, and 
foe that 
L. 
ature,” 
of the 
Draham 
well as 


s of the 
s grace } 
ance of 
rat hath 


nine to 


at 
hid, “ Ye 
bes lifted 
hat who- 
says, Ye 
der con- 
p has the 
estroyed 
14. But 
im, He 
of anew 
is death 
he met in 


rrection- 
him on 
Christ of 
r death's 


st whom 
5 offered 

an ever 
redeemed 
ost, have 
seen the 
Pst robe,” 
jon is In 


REGENERATION, 117 


eo 


the Word of God! The Word tells me that unless I am born again I cannot enter 
God’s kingdom ; but the same word tells me that if 1 am born again, though only a 
babe now, I am as sure of spending eternity with my Lord as if I were with Him, Ne 
hatred of devils, no enmity of the world, no power of the flesh, shall keep me out. We 
enter God’s kingdom by being born again. We Aave eternal life even now. We have 
the germs of heaven even here. We do not wait for that life ; but “he tnat believeth 
on the Son HATH everlasting life,” ver. 36. 

We have tried to show thus briefly what is meant by being “ born of water and of 
the Spirit.” Read 1 John 5 :6—-“ This is He that came by water and blood, not by 
water only, but by water and blood, and it is the Spirit that bezreth witness, because 
the Spirit is truth. For they that bear witness are three; the Spirit, and the water, 
and the d/ood, and the three agree in.one.” (Correct translation.) 

The d/ood is for expiation ; that is, the Son of man lifted up on the cross, and His 
hfe taken for ours. “This is He that came by water and blood,” 1 John 5 : €. 

The water is for.moral cleansing ; that is, the Word of God spaited in power 4o 
our consciences, Jesus “came not by water only,” that is to say, not merely a teacher 
of the word, “but by water and blood.” He came certainly as the great teacher} but 
also as the great sacrifice making atonement for sin. 

The Sfrret:is the witness from the throne of God to the value of that blood in the 
presence of God, and the witness to our spirits by applying the word (water) and thus 
morally cleansing. He is also the source, the framer, and the power of expression of 
every new feeling, thought, affection, or purpose in the new creation, “and it is the 
Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth.” 

These three agree in one, mest in one point, work out one thing in their testimony, 
and this is the testimony, that “God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in 
His Son. He that hath the Son, hath life,” 1 John 5§ : 11, 12. 

What any sinner, therefore, has to do in this new birth is to look to Christ on the 
cross ; and where is he to look to Him now as crucified but in ¢#e Word. He is to 
believe what God says about His Son. God says, I have given yo. Christ, John 3: 16. 
I believe it; therefore I thank God. I do not ask myself do I feel it? but God says 
it—I appropriate it as mine—I believe His word by putting in my name where God 
puts His “ whosoever.” In this Word of God we get the Spirit’s witness—that is, God’s 
testimony about His Son, God does the work; we believe the Word. 

Reader, are you orn again? You are not satisfied with yourself. Nor is God 
satisfied with you. You are not satisfied with your estimate of the work of Christ. Are 
you satisfied with God’s estimate of it? The Spirit has come to tell out to us the value 
of that blood. Faith does not consist in my valuing it, but in my accepting God’s 
value of it. God says, “When I see the blood, I will pass over you.” 

If you do not believe God’s witness, the Spirit of God in the Word, about His Son, 
you simply make God a liar. Now you must either make yourself a liar or God. Do 
you not think that it would be the better way to say, “ Let God be true and every man 
a liar”—myself the first liar? A man does not like to be called a liar, but God says, 
“every man.” Untila man calls himself a liar, he makes God one. “ He that believeth 
not God hath made Him a liar, because he believeth not the record that God gave of 
His Son. And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this hfe 
isin His Son.” As long as you look within yourself for one idea, one opinion, one 
thought, you are listening to a liar. Call your heart a liar at once and simply take 
God at His word, receive His Son as He has given Him to you. : 

Reader, art shou born again? There was a moment that every Israelite had 
between being bitten and dying ; that moment was given him to lookand LIVE That 
is thy brief moment of life, hast thou looked and lived? God can dono more than He 
has done to provide life for thee. He spared not His Son! 

Do not look to thy wcunds, to thy sins, and think thus to get peace. Try no 
longer earth’s prayers, or religions, or works of righteousness. They are but ointments 
to thy sores, that will never heal, but look away from all to the serpent on the pole. 


a re ee 


ahha 


a 


— 


118 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


The question is not, whether thou hast great faith or little faith, It did not depend 
upon the length of the look, nor the earnestness of the look, it was the fact of looking 
that cured the bitten Israelite. Look and live! thou hast only one brief yet sufficient 
moment of time. 

But how are, «1 spending this litthe moment? . In making money, in indulging 
the lust of the flesh, che lust of the eye, and the pride of life! In gathering together 
the dust of their condemned cell into heaps and calling it riches! In gathering the 
straws that lie in their prison, and making crowns, and madman-like, playing at kings 
while death is written as their doom ; and the door of escape stands still open ! 

God is standing over them with this awful word, “‘ YE MUST BE BORN AGAIN,” and 
this other wondrous word, “ THE SON OF MAN MUST BE LIFTED UP.” He delivered 
up His Son td death, What a holy God! What a just, righteous, truthful God! 
When sin was lying on the sinless Christ, He could not let it pass. Do you think He 
will let you pass now after that aw/ul day at Calvary! It is there that we read the 
deom of sin. How shall we escape from Him if we neglect His “so great salvation?” 
For it is not with God merely as a judge we have to do; for.it was His /ove that planned 
and vrought the whole redemption work. Doubly bitter will be your cup of wrath that 
you have spurned the salvation of such a God who desires to be known by you as LOVE ; 
for in order that azy poor sinner might be born again, “ God'so loved the WORLD that 
He gave His only-begotten Son, that WHOSOEVER believeth on Hii should not perish, 
but have everlasting life,” John 3 :16. 

Let us suppose that you are convinced of these important realities ; that you are 
lost; that therefore your first need isa Saviour, not a teacher; that you have not a 
nature capable of enjoying God; that the new natur@is gotten by your being born; born 
Sal of water (the Word) and the Spirit, but you cannot understand how this comes 
about. You cannot understand what is meant by locking to Christ as the bitten Israel- 
ites looked to the serpent on the pole. Let me illustrate it by a conversation [| had, 
one day, with a man who had been hearing the Gospel preached, and with whom : had 
to walk some miles. 

I began ly asking, “ Have you ever thought of the great salvation ?” 

“Oh yes,” he replied ; “I have often thought about it” 

“And are you saved?” 

“Well, I could not say that—I don’t feel as I would like.” 

“T quite believe that ; but do you think any of us could ever feel perfectly right in 
this world? But are you at peace with God?” 

“‘T never could say that I am satisfied with myself.” 

“But, my friend, | did not ask if you were. It would be a very bad sign if you 
were satisfied with yourself. But are you at peace with God?” 

“Well, I never could feel that I have peace.” 

“But I don’t ask if you feel at peace with yourself; I hope you never will. Have 
you peace with God?” 

“To tell you the truth, I am not right.” 

“ How Icng is it since you began to think of these things ?” 

“About seven or eight years ago, in the north of Ireland, I was first awakened by 
a minister preaching on ‘ Ye must be born again.” And often since that time I have 
been trying to feel God’s Spirit working in me.” 

“And you never have r” 

“‘No; I could not be sure.” 

‘ How could ever any one be sure of what was going on within him, especially as 

our enemy comes as an angel of light ?” 

“Well, what am I to do, then?” 

‘Jesus was the one, yor remember, that said, ‘Ye must be born again.’ ‘ Except 
aman be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God.’ Now, 
at the end of all this conversation, Nicodemus did not know how to be saved, but only 
enid, ‘How can these things be?’ even when Jesus Himself was the greac Teacher.” 


anc 
ap 
the 
Hit 
live 


wh: 


your 
vit 


frie 
awa 
sim 


havij 
Us SL 


you 
presg 
tie » 
burd¢ 
your 


cloth 
¢ 


6 


me fo 
/ 


in an 


doubt 
standi 
and n 
doubt: 
have t 

T 
quite 
thoug] 
Me, : 


end 
<Ing 
1ent 


sing 
ther 

the 
ings 


and 
ered 
i0d ! 
- He 
| the 
on?” 
nned 
that 
IVE; 
that 
rsh, 


u are 
not a 
born 
omes 
srael- 
had, 
; had 


ht in 


you 


lave 


REGENERATION. 119 


* Tuat’s just where I am.” 

“ Now, what did Jesus do? He took him away to the picture-book for children, 
and showed him the picture of a dying man looking away from himself to a serpent on 
a pole, and thus obtaining life ; and told him that ‘as Moses lifted up the serpent in 
‘hz wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in 
Him should not perish, but have eternal life.’ Now all you have to do is to look and 
live.” 


“ But that is just what I’ve been trying to do, and what I don’t know how to do— 
what is it to look to Christ?” 

“ Now I can understand your difficulty ; you cannot see Christ with the eyes of 
your body ; you cannot see Him in vision ; you say that you cannot feel His presence 
within you; you cannot feel that you have “faith.” 

Exactly ; what am I to do?” 

“Allow me to give you an illustration.” ln some such words I spoke with my 
friend, and gave him the substance of the following illustration, which seemed to clear 
away his difficulty ; and I trust, by God’s blessing, it may enable you to receive God’s 
simple plan, and accent God’s salvation for nothing. 

You have a rent—say £10 a-year—to pay ; having to maintain a large family, and 
having been recently in distress and out of work, you find it impossible to pay it. Let 
us suppose that I was able, knew your diffieulty, took pity on you, and said to you— 

* John, I hear you have your rent coming of, and having had very hard times, 
you will never bz able to pay it. Now I wish you to use your money for your most 
pressing wants, to get food and clothing for your wife and family, and dook fo me for 
tie rent.” You, knowing me, and hence believing me, would go away home with a 
burden off your mind and a happy heart. When you came home next Saturday with 
your wages, you would tell your wife to spend all the money in getting food and 
clothing. 

* But, John,” she would say, “ are we not to lay aside something for the rent ?” 

“Oh no,” you would answer ; “I met a man whom I know, and he said, Look fo 
me jor the rent, and I believe him.” 

And thus weeks would go on, till shortly before the rent-day a neighbor comes 
in and says— 

“John, I have only got £5 gathered for my rent, and I don’t know what I m to do. 
How much have you?” 

“None at all.” 

“What! have you nothing gathered ?” 

“ No, for a friend of mine said, Look to me jor the rent.” 

“ And are you not getting anxious about it ?” 

“ No. ” 

“Why ?” 

~ Badnase I trust him.” 

“ Why ? » 

“ Because I believe him.” 

“ Why pe? 

“* Because I know him.” 

By and by the rent-day comes, and even your wife begins to be suspicious and 
doubtful, but you have implicit trust ix what ! said—you have no difficulty in under- 
standing what /ook to me for the rent means ; and so, at the appointed hour, I walk in 
and make my word good, and am happy to find that, against all your neighbor's 
doubts, against all your wife’s fears, and even against all your own tremblings, you 
Eave trusted my word and looked to me for the rent. 

This is, of course, just an illustration, as I have no doubt you are at the present 
quite able and willing to ":y your own rent; but in the matter of our salvation, 


though we might be willing, we are totally unable ; so the Lord now ms das * Look to 
Me, and be ye saved.” 


hs 
- 
a 
nh 
uh 


120 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


Christ on the cross has satisfied God’s justice. He paid the debt for th> sinner. 
Men are doing perfectly right things ; praying, living moral lives, and giving money 
for charitable purposes ; but all for the wrong end. Ali these will never save. God 
says, “ Look to Me for salvation,” and then begin to use your time, talents, money, 
powers, for their legitimate end, to glorify God. Do not try to be holy in order to be 
saved. That would be like the man laying up for a rent which he could never pay. 
“ Look to me and be saved,’ says God, and then be holy, because you are sure of 
salvation on the authority of God. Religion will never save you—even pure religion. 
God defines pure religion in James 1:27: “ Pure religion, and undefiled, before God 
and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and ‘to 
keep himself unspotted from the world.” By the deeds of the law we cannot be 
justified ; therefore by doing all this we cannot be saved. Religion is the life of a 
saved man, not the efforts of an unsaved man to get saved. Wedo'not'try to do good 
in order to get a new nature, but we try to do good because we have’ received a new 
nature. ‘The work which God will accept from you is not ¢o the cross, it is from the 
cross to the crown. Jesus did ALL the saving-work. He brought the cross to our 
level. Get saved by looking to Him, and then live to God. Do not look to the 
feeling of being saved—look away from what is being wrought 7” you to what was 


wrought for you. We are not saved on account of the Spirit working in us, but by’ 


means of His work—we are saved on @ccount of Christ dying for us. We are not 
saved /or faith but ¢hrough faith. “Look to me and be ye saved, all the ends of the 


earth.” 
Lie down as a wounded, helpless, ungodly sinner, and look away from yourself to 


Jesus crucified for sin. 


motes 
Ma Ly 7 


L 
he wil 
if inte 
intoa 

T 
teache 
the Cr 
ever p 
creatu) 
has ay 
those - 
birth. 
of God 


REGENERATION, 121 


RESULTS OF THE NEW BIRTH. 


I. The very first thing the new birth pro- 
duces is likeness to God, Eph. 4:24; Col. 
3: 10. 

II. Similarity, in a measure, to the Lord 
Jesus Christ, Rom. 8; 29. 

III. Asa result of the new birth comes a 
just and true knowledge of God. Jer. 24:7; 
Col. 3: 10. 

iV. It produces hatred to sin, 1 John 3: 9; 
5: 18, 


V. It is the mighty motive power in con- 
quering the world; it alone can give victory, 
r John 5: 4. 


VI. It gives relish and delight in God's 
word, Rom, 7: 22. 


VII. Brotherly love is born of the new 
birth, John 13:35; 1 John 3:14-24; 4:7; 
5: 1-4. 

‘J. E. W. 


THE NEW BIRTH. 


I, Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus 
Christ is come in the flesh is of God, 1 John 


ASB. 


II, As many as received Him, to them 
gave He power to become the sons of God, 
even to them that believe on His name, 
John 1: 12. 

III. Which were born, not of blood, nor 
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of 
man, but of God, John 1: 14 

IV. Being born again, not of corruptible 
seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of 


God, which liveth and abideth forever, 1 
Pet. 1: 23. 

V. God . . . gave His only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3: 16. 

VI. This life is in His Son, 1 John’ 5: r1. 

VII. Jesus said I am the resur- 
rection and the life: he that believeth in Me, 
though he were dead, yet shall he live; and 
whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall 
neverdie. Believeth thou this? John r1: 
25, 26. 


SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS AND UNFOLDINGS. 


Rags motions of sin may really be most violent, when a new principle is brought in to 

cast it out ; and as the sun, sending its beams through the window, discovers the. 
motes in the house, and their motions, which were not seen before, so the light of grace 
may discover the risings and actings of corruption. . 


Dr. OWLN says, “If a man of acarral mind is brought into a large company, 


he will have much to do ; if into a company of Christians, he will feel little interest ; 
if into a smaller company engaged in réligious exercises, he will feel less ; but if taken 
into a closet and forced to mediate upon God and eternity, this will be insupportable.” 
THERE is no entrance into God’s kingdom in our natural state. Nature itself 
teaches the lesson. The animal does not entef into the vegetable kingdom. God, 
the Creator, maintains the bread lines which distinguish creature from creature. Who 
ever planted a forest in the ocean? The laws of nature cannot be altered by the 
creature ; the laws of the new creation are never set aside. Being born anew, a man 
has a new nature. The spiritual kingdom is the element, if we may so express it, of 
those who are born of the Spirit ; and to enter this kingdom there must be the new 
birth. “Except a man be born of water anc the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom . 
of God.” 
\ 


122 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


CLOSING THOUGHTS ON THE SUBJECT OF REGENERATION, 


Bhs new nature, derived through the Spirit implanting the word in the soul, is 

divine as its source. Born of the Spirit, men are thereby partakers of the divine 
nature, and actually possess a life which is distinct from the life they have from Adam; 
a life absolutely new. Christ is the source, the pattern, the expression of this life ; 
He is the life itself, we receive it from Him by the Spirit. 

THE Spirit of God works in human hearts through the word. Such is His way ; 
He does not act independently of the truths of the written volume. He takes that 
which He Himself has inspired, and which He is the revelation of God in Christ, and 
makes powerful in convicting, converting, and sanctifying. 

Curisr’s death has marked the state of all men: “If onc died for all, then were 
all dead,” 2 Cor. 5:14. We know what the dead state of our nature is, not only by 
the declaration of the Scriptures, but also by the fact of Christ’s death. Dead in sin 
is man’s condition, and in that condition he cannot but remain, unless God communi- 
cate to him a life outside of that conditicn. ° 


APART from the Spirit of God, the letter kills. What more could it do? for the 
word tells us that we are in our sins and require life, and shows to us that life is the 
gift of God. “The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life,” 2 Cor. 3:6. The words 
which Jesus spoke, He said were spirit and life, Jno. 6:63, but the souls of the 
hearers were rendered receptive by the Holy Ghost. To deal with the word of God 
as if a man could take it up and make it his own in his natural strength, is practically 
to assume for man a power which the truth of Co.) denies that man possesses. Whether 
religious or profane, learned or ignorant, the fiesh is flesh in itself, just as an oak is an 
oak, though there are varieties of the tree. It is written: “It is the Spirit who quick- 
eneth ; the flesh profiteth nothing,” Jno. 6 : 63. 


REMEMBER, Jesus proceeded to lay before the Jewish ruler atonement through 
Himself, lifted up as a mediator, and God’s free love to a perishing world, embodied 
in the gift and work of His Son. You want to be barn again. Well, Jesus tells you 
to look to thegSon of Man lifted up, as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, 
and you will thus be pardoned and made to live. You say you are prostrated and 
helpless—with the poison of the serpent coursing through you—sick and dying—and 
you want to live, to experience such a new life as shall prove, not only a present 
counteractive to the virus of this terrible death-poison, but also an enduring espiritual 
reality? Well, Jesus says, in this conversation with the inquring ruler, that “God so 
loved the world, that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whoscever believeth in 
Him should not perish, but have everlasting Life.” 

JESUS CHRIST, the incarnate Son of Ged, asserts the absolute necessity of 1 
generation, when He says: “ Vérily, verily, i say unto thee, Except a man be bor.’ 
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” /.nd further on, He says, as solemnly and 
decidedly, “ Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom of God.” And He gives a fact aS the reason of this necessity: “ 7hat 
which 7s vorn of the flesh ts flesh.” “Flesh,” or corrupt human nature, is unfit to enter 
God’s kingdom, and will ever continue so. No self-regeneration is to be expected. 
The total depravity of human nature renders a total spiritual change of absolute 
necessity. The whole race, and every individual “man,” is utterly depraved in heart, 
his will averse from good, his conscience is defiled, his understanding is darkened, 
his affections are alienated from God and set upen unworthy objects, his desire: are 
corrupt, his appetites ungoverned ; and unless the Holy Spirit impart a new nature, 
and work an entire change on the whole faculties of his mind by “the washing of 
water through the word,” cleansing away his filthiness of spirit, as water cleanses 
away outward defilement, he must remain an unfit subject for God’s holy kingdom. 


de 
tur 
ph 
to 
to 


dez 
of t 
God 
Spi 
old 


is O1 
roll 
time 
His 
proc 
who 


sorr 
theré 
com] 
almo 
life o 
tell o 
have 
Sften 
high 
brok 
as | 


We 
char 
Ther 
acter 
the f: 
bears 
divin 
and » 
gentl 
tende 
tions, 
divin 
simp! 
the S 
unto 
in th: 
but v 
word 


IN, 


l, is 
sine 
AM; 
ife ; 


ay : 
that 
and 


vere 
r by 

sin 
uni- 


the 
; the 
ords 

the 
God 
cally 
ather 
is an 
uick- 


ugh 
died 
you 
ess, 
and 
and 
rsent 
itual 
d so 
h in 


fox 
ors 
and 
the 
hat 
nter 
ted. 
blute 
art, 
| ed, 
are 
ure, 
of 
ses 


‘unto the day of redemption, and why He should permit others to groan for weary years 


REGENERATION. 123 


Gob forgives us our sins, cleanses us from our defilement, and justifies us from all 
things ; He also gives us a new life in His Son. This life is cntionly distinct from our 
natural life ; it is a holy life—in Goa and in Christ ure its origin, and the Holy Spit 
is its energy. 

THE absolute necessity for the quckening power of the Holy Ghost in sinners 
dead in sins is indicated by the fact that where the word “ quicken” is used in Scrip- 
ture it yenerally relates to giving life at the resurrection to the body in its state of 
physical death. God will exercise a power, by which the dust of the dead will be raised 
to life, and He now exercises a power by which man in his death of sin becomes alive 
to Himself. 

THE Holy Spirit is the gracious agent who accomplishes the new birth of men 
dead in sins. In His sovereignty He is pleased to work in us, and to give the words 
of truth, which our outward ears hear, energy within us, and so to render the word of 
God the word of life to us individually. The bare letter of God’s truth, apart from the 
Spirit’s work in us, does not give us life. The word of God does not take root in our 
old fallen nature, and teaches us the truth about ourselves. 


Now, in this age of grace, that which God promised is manifested. All eternity 
is one continuous present with God; but in His ways with men, ages and periods have 
rolled on, the dispensation of law and its testing ef men have come to a close, and the 
time has arrived for the word of God respecting eternal life to be made good. ‘This, 
His word, is unfolded through the preaching, as we read in Titus 1 ; 1-3, and by the 
proclamation of life to sinners ead in their sins, God, by His Spirit, quickens those 
whom it is His purpose to associate in life with, His own Son, 

THERE are this day, among those whom He has quickened, some in throes of 
sorrow, who have been thus for months, yes, and in some instances, for years together; 
there are others who have broken forth into peace and joy, with a suddenness to be 
compared to the spring of the arctic regions, where snows melt and winter flees away 
almost im nediately, and where myriads of blossoms within a few days burst forth into 
life out of the long dreary months of death. No two souls have the idenaticul tule to 
tell of God’s work in them, but all have the same life ; Christ is the life of all, and all 
have a “common salvation.” The remarkable manner in which strong characters are 
8ften gently overcome, and we.k ones forced into obedience of the truth, in which a 
high intellect is subdued by the most absolute simplicity, and a rough brute nature 
broken down by the most tender grace, all witness to divine wisdom, and the working 
“as He will” of the Spirit of God. 


THE ways of the Spirit of God, when working in souls, are exceedingly varied. 
We never find in the work of God in nature, or in grace, anything of a stereotyped 
character ; but we do find general characteristics marking every group of His workings. 
There are not two clouds alike, yet the classes of clouds invariably preserve their char- 
acter, whether they be that of the sweeping rain-cloud, or the mountain-like mass, or 
the far-off tracery. No two ears of wheat are exactly the same, but every ear of wheat 
bears the common stamp of a general’ character. Divine diversity in no way denies 
divine unity. The Holy Spirit bows or breaks men as He pleases; He is sovereign, 
and works as He will. He moves some souls, as the rustling corn is moved by the 
gentle summer breeze ; He breaks others, as forests are broken by the whirlwind. How 
tenderly are some hearts affected by His work, while others, by the effect of His opera- 
tions, are driven almost into despair! But all in whom He works, implanting the 
divine life, have the genera! features of the family of God; and what we have to do is 
simply to believe and to yield ourselves to the fashioning influence of the truth. Why 
the Spirit of God should bring some souls so swiftly into peace with God, and seal them 


in the spirit of bondage and fear, teaching them deep lessons as to self, we know not ; 
but we do know that there is divine wisdom in all His gracious ways, and that the 
word of truth is the means whereby the happy deliverance of every soul is produced. 


124 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE power put forth by God in giving life.to sinners dead in their sins, is after A 
» the same sort as that which He exercised in zaising from the dead the body of His 
Son, who had died for sinners. “The exceeding greatness of His power to us-ward 
who believe, according to the working of His mighty power, which he wrought in 
Christ, when He raised Him from the dead,” Eph. 1 : 18-20, Life is given to the 
spiritually dead, who are raised from their spiritual state of death, according to the 


migaty power of God, even as the Lord’s body was raised from among the physicaily 
dead. 


_ THE resurrection of our Lord evidences a life for man beyond death, a life which 
is freed from death’s dominion, Rom. 6:9, and from sin, Rom. 5 : 8; and the eternal 
life is now communicated to us who believe on the once crucified but now riser Son of 
God, in His present condition’of resurrection. ‘ Tnis is truth, new in the sense that it 
is Christian truth, not Jewish truth; and it is liberty, even as the Lord taught before 
His death, as is recorded for example in John, the 8th chapter. 


Z. 
2 
i 
O 
i) 
pe 
as 
i 
Y) 
(x) 
aa 


RESURRECTION. 


THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY. 


By Dr. Nathaniel West. 


IKE Him who was its brightest illustration, the doctrine of the Resurrection of the 
3ody has become, to many, a “stone of stumbling and a rock of offence.” It 
was denied in ancient times 

I. By the sect of the Sadducees, who belived in “neither angel, resurrection, nor 
spirit ;” e/é¢e sceptics and literal interpreters of the “lively oracles ;” discrediting the 
Prophets, yet holding to ‘‘ Moses and the Law ;” men, examples of whom we have in 
the parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, in the disputers with Jesus, and in the first 
assailants of the resurrection of Christ, Matt. 22:23-33; Mark 12:18-23; Luke 20: 
27-33; Acts 4:2; 23:6-8, 26:6-8, 24; Luke 16:19-31; Matt. 28:11-15. 

II. By Athenian Epicureans and Scoics, who, confronting Paul on Mars’ Hill, 
mocked at his doctrine; some jibing ‘ What will this babbler say?” others expounding, 
“He seemeth to be a setter forth of gods, because he preached Jesus and the Resur- 
rection,” Acts 17: 16-32. 

III. By sceptics in the Corinthian Church, who forgetting the gospel of the 
Resurrection Paul had preached, and which they professed to receive, declared boldly 
“There is no resurrection of the dead,” denying the fact because unable to explain the 
“ How,” 1 Cor. 15:1-34, 35-58. 

IV. By Hymeneus and Philetus, who interpreting a predicted, literal, objective 
fact concerning the body, in a spiritual sense concerning the soul, “gangrened” the 
church with their doctrine, and “erred concerning the truth, saying that the resvrrec- 
‘on is past already,” 2 Tim 2:17, 18, 

VY. By Gnostic sects in the primitive Church who held that the evil principle 

-- ed in matter, and, spiritualizing the prophetic words, taught that the resurrection 
. et ¢7.a moral awaking of the soul from its sleep in sin, or an educational progress 
ti... ignorance to knowledge, by means of science, philosophy, and art. These men 
the great Justin denounced as “blasphemers of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob.” 

VI. By certain Church-Fathers, who, following Origen and the Alexandrian 
school of philosophy, allegorized the prophecies concerning Israel, the Resurrection, 
the Secoud Coming of Christ, the Millennial Age, and the New Heaven and Earth, 
and were the first in history to broach the doctrine of a gradual leavening or sanctifi- 
cation and conquest of the whole world, by means of church agencies and the out- 
pouring of the Spiric of God. They held that “¢he millennium 1s now.” 

The resurrection of the body is also denied in modern times: 

I By Modern Rationalism, which regards the Old Testament prophetic word, as 
also the word of Christ and His Apostles, as the “ outward envelope” of an “ abstract 
spiritual thought,” a “general idea,” clothed in Jewish drapery or Oriental costume, 


{127} 


128 , GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


aa ~~~ ~~ es, 


not meant to be literally interpreted. It is “Poetry !” the “rough rind of a sacred 
bulb 1” “oriental phantasmagoria!” “arabesque word-ornament!” “ non-essential 
form ! 

II. By Modern Materialism, or Scientific Monism, which denies the dualism of 
matter and mind, and holds that body and soul have ceme alike from an atom, and 
are alike the result of self-organization which appears at birth and expires at death. 
This is only a revival of the ancient materialism of Epicurus and Lucretius. 

III. By Modern Philosophic Idealism and Scepticism which denies the existence 
of matter, or a real external world, resolving all outward phenomena into mere delu- 
sions of the mind. 

IV. In general, the resurrection of the body is denied by all the forms of pure 
Naturalism, viz: Atheism, Pantheism, Deism, Materialism, Idealism, Scepticism, 
Agnosticism ; on the ground that it is a miracle, and therefore (1) it is zaposszble 
because contrary to nature, (2) it is z#credtble because contrary to experience. Its wit- 
nesses, though honest, were more likely to be deceived than their testimony was likely 
to be true. The supernatural is denied in both cases. And this is the crime of much 
so-called science and philosophy in our day. 

Our Reply.—The reply of our Lord to the Sadducees is all sufficient here. “Ye 
do err, not knowing the Scriptures, neither the power of God.” The cause of the denial 
of the resurrection is zgmorance, (1) of the Scriptures as a testimony to the fact of the 
resurrection ; (2) of the ower of God as a cause adequate to produce the fact. The 
first meets the “zzcredible,” the second meets the “ zspossib/e.” Paul meets both in 
his challenge to Agrippa, ‘‘Why should it be thought (a) a thing ‘credible, (6) that 
God should raise the dead ?” Acts 26:8. He who denies or doubts the resurrection 
of the body denies or doubts, (1) God, (2) the Scriptures, (3) Christianity. The Pro- 
phets, Ajyostles, and Christ are false witnesses, the Christian faith which rests on Christ 
raised from the dead is vain, and the Christian hope which looks for His coming to 
raise the dead is vain also. We are lost forever ! 

_ Different Resurrections.—The Scriptures reveal different kinds of resurrec- 
tions : 

I. Spiritual: a resurrection of the soul from its death and corruption in sin, John 
5:24; Eph, 2: 1-6; 5:14; Col.2:13; Rom.6:1-11. This is a present resurrection, 
and elsewhere called a Quickening, Eph. 2:1; a New Birth, John 3:3; and a New 
Creation, Eph. 2: Io. 

II. Material: a resurrection of the body from its death and corruption in the 
grave, and here (a) the resurrection of the righteous, John:5 : 25 ; (4) the resurrection 
of the wicked as well as the righteous, John 5 : 28; Acts 24:15. 

III. Moral; a revival of the Christian life, under the power of the Spirit of God. 
Pentecost, Acts 2: 1-4, 17, 18, 41; Joel 2:28, 29; Isa. 44;3; Ezek. 36:27; Zech. 
12; 10. 

IV. National and Political ; the resurrection of Israel, as a nation, from its national 
and political death, after the two long days of Old Testament, and New Testament non. 
existence of Israel’s kingdom ; a resurrection on the, third, day, the day of millennial 
glory, Hos. 6:1, 23; 13:14; 14:5-8; Ezek. 37: 1-28. 

V. Diabolical: the resurrection of Aztichrist, the revived head of the ten-king- 
domed world-power of the last times ; the Beast “who had the stroke of the sword and 
did live,” Rev. 13:14, whose “‘death-stroke was healed,” Rev. 13 : 3, 12; who “ ascends 
out of the abyss,” Rev. 17:8; 11:7, that “was, is not, and shall be present,” Rev. 17: 
8; “whose coming is with all Satanic energy,” 2 Thess. 2:8. Thisis the last Gentile 
“ri and last oppressor of the people of God. This resurrection is both that of a person 
and a power. 

Resurrection of the Righteous.—The texts for this are Exod. 3 : 4-6, com- 
pare with Exod. 6:3, 4, and Acts:7: 5, with respect to God’s covenant to give the 
“land of Canaan” to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, ¢ oar, stg a promise yet 
unfulfilled, but to be fulfilled at the resurrection. This is Christ’s answer to the Saa 


wicked 
ground 
Christ, 
wicked 
resurre 
in cont 
one pas 
the ten 
kingdo 
Picture 
prove t 
rection, 
this pa: 
among 
Dut ho, 


et 


icred 
ntial 


sm of 
, and 
leath. 


tence 
delu- 


f pure 
icism, 
osstble 
ts wit- 
likely 
much 


(<4 Ye 
denial 
of the 

The 
oth in 
b) that 
‘ection 
e Pro- 
Christ 
ling to 


Burrec- 
, John 


ection, 
h New 


in the 
ection 


f God. 
Zech. 


htional 
At non. 
ennial 


-king- 
d and 
scends 
v.17: 
entile 
person 


com- 
e the 
se yet 
Sada 


RESURRECTION. 429 


ee 


ducees, out of the Law, He proves the resurrection of thebody out of “oses,” see Matt. 

22 : 23-33; Mark 12: 18-23; Luke 20: 27-33; also Deut. 32:39. The bodies of the 

righteous mu*t rise because these are part of their total personality, and because the 

“living God” is the God of the whole person, the God of “ Abraham,” of “ Isaac,” of 
“Jacob,” who, in covenant with God, are redeemed from death, and still “live unto 

God” though their bodies rest in the grave. The “living God” is the “God of the. 
living and not of the dead, for all live unto Him.” Believers never die, John 11 : 26. 

They still live. “They rest in their beds, each one walking ‘n their uprightness,” Isa. 

57:2. They are under a covenant that abolishes death and secures their resurrection. 

This is Christ’s argument with the Sadducees. “Abraham,” “Isaac,” and “Jacob” 

shall each be raised from the dead to inherit the land of promise made glorious and 

heavenly at the coming of Christ. It stopped the Sadducean mouth! : «Itis not merely 

the “Immortality~ of: the: Soul” Christ proves by this argument, but especially the 

“ Resurrection of the Body,” otherwise God’s promise to the patriarchs, Exod. 6.: 4, is 

false, and God’s covenant fails. The other passages for the resurrection of the right- 

eous are : Job 19: 23-27; Ps. 16:10; 17:15; 49:14,15; §0:4,5; Hosea 13:14; 

Isa. 26:19; Ezek. 37:12; Dan. 12: 1-3; Matt. 27:52, 53; John 5:25; 6: 39, 40, 44, 

$4; 11:1-44; Romans 8:11, 23; 1 Cor. 15:1-58; Phil. 3:11; 1 Thess. 4: 13-18; 

Hek 11:19, 35, 40; I Pet. 1: 3-9; Rev. 11:18; 20:4. 

The resurrection of the righteous is described variously as that :— 

I, Of Christ’s Body, Isa. 26: 19. 

II. Of the Blessed Sleepers, Rev. 14:14; 1 Thess. 4:14; John 11:11; Dan. 12:2. 
III. Of the Singing Dwellers in the Dust, Isa. 26 : 19. 
IV. Of the Just, Luke 14:14; Acts 24:15. 
V. Of Life, John 5 : 29. 
VI. Of the Righteous, Ps. 49: 14. 
VII. A better Resurrection, Heb. 11 : 35. 
VIII. Out from among the dead, Phil. 3 : 11. 
1X. Out from among the sleepers, Dan. 12: 2. 
X. Of the Many, not.of.all the Dead,-Matt. 27:52, 53; Dan. 12: 2, 
XI, Of They that are Cheist’s, 1 Cor. 15 : 23. 
XII. C* ‘ne Beheaded for Christ, Rev. 20: 4. 
XIII. Of the Slain for Christ, Isa. 26 : 24. 
XIV, Of the Baptized for the Dead, 1 Cor. 15:29, 
XV. Of the Two Witnesses, Rev. 11: II. 
XVI. The First Resurrection, Rev. 20: 5. 

Resurrection of the Wicked.—In all ages, Jewish and Christian, some have 
denied the doctrine of the resurrection of the wicked, (1) on the ground of a false senti- 
mentalism more gracious and less just than God; and (2) on the ground that such is 
the connection between the resurrection and the redeeming work of Christ, that the 
wicked are excluded from it, it being the peculiar privilege of the righteous. ‘These 
grounds are insufficient.and vain, sinking out of sight,as they.do, the judicial relation of 
Christ,'as the Son of Man, to all mankind, and the necessity of the resurrection of the 
wicked in order to their final judgment, John 5 :27 ; Acts 17:31. On the contrary, the 
resurrection of the wicked is taught dy zmplication, everywhere in the Old Testament, 
in connection with the doctrine of final retribution. Expressly is this the case in the 
one passage of the Old Testament which makes it plain, by deduction from the use of 
the term, “visited,” at the close of the “many days” of Israel’s glory in the millennial 
kingdom, viz., Isa. 24 : 21:22; a passage which is the Old Testament basis for John’s 
picture in Rev. 20:5, 11-15. The passage in Dan. 12:2 so often wrongly used to 
prove the resurrection of the wicked, and does not teach it, but only the “ First Resur- 
rection) as in Isa. 26:19; Rev.20:4; John §:25. King James’ wrong translation of 
this passage has led tothis error. The true rendering is: “ A/any shall awake out from 
among the sleepers in the earth-dust ; 7ese (who awake) sha// de unto life everlasting, 
but ¢hose (the slain who do not awake) shall be unto shame and contempt everlasting.” 


at agian mn Ni giana ican 


130 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


ee ee 


(See The Presbyterian Review, Jans 1854.) The contrast ts between the resurrection of 
the righteous and the destruction of the living wicked, “ at that time,” viz., Antichrist’s 
destruction, Dan. 11:45; 12:13 Isa. 66:24, and mot between the resurrection of the 
righteous and the resurrection of the wicked. So Isaiah shows us, Isa, 26:14, 19; so 
John shows us, Rev. 20:4, 5. It is that of the resurrection of the righteous, and the 
non-resurrection of the wicked. 

Nevertheless, the Old Testament does teach the resurrection of the wicked as above 
stated. The New Testament also does so in the clearest manner. Although neither 
in Matthew, Mark, Luke, nor in Peter, James or Jude, is it once mentioned, yet it is 
expressly taught by our Lord, and called a resurrection “ unto damnation,” John 5 : 29 ; 
by Paul, and called a “resurrection of the unjust,” Acts 27:15; and by John, and 
called a resurrection “of the rest of the dead,” Rev. 20: é ; “of those not written in 
the Book of Life,” v. 12 ; a resurrection unto “the second death,” v.14. And these 
are all the passages in both Testaments that mention it ; and in /wo passages alone in 
all the Bible, do we find d0¢A resurrections mamed together, John 5 : 28, 29; Acts 
27:15. Itis the historic faith of both the Jewish and the Christian Church that the 
wicked shall rise. And this resurrection shall be, aot by virtue of their union to 
Christ, as in the case of believers, but by an independent, omnipotent act of God, 
who raises the dead, and because of their relation to Christ as the Son of Man, and 
the Judge of all mankind, 2 Cor. 5:10; John 5: 27. 

The Time of the Resurrections.—I. Of the Spiritual Resurrection of the 
dead, Itis “now,” “to-day,” and continuous by the power of the Spirit, and the word 
of the gospel which is the spiritual “voice” of Christ, John 5:21, 24-25; Matt. 23: 
37; John3:8; 4:14; 7:37; Rom. 8:2; Eph.2:1; Heb.4:7. The spiritually dead 
hear the voice of Christ and live. : . 

Il. Of the Moral Resurrection, or revival, of those already raised, but endued 
afresh with power from on high, Joel 2 : 28, 29; Isa. 44:33; Acts 1:4-8; 2:1, 2, 17, 
18; Hosea 14:4-9; Zech. 12:10; Micah 2:7; Isa, 41:17, 18. This is essentially 
the same as the above. It is Now, To-day, continuous, in answer to faith and prayer, 
Isa. 41:17; Ezek. 36:37; Hab. 3:2; Acts 1:4. All the sfirztual promises of 
salvation are common to both Jewish and Christian believers. The rest are Jecu/iar 
to Israel, as such, and the Nations. 

III. Of the National and Polit. 1 Resurrection of Israel, It is at the Second 
Coming of Christ, and at Israel’s conversion, as a people, to Christ, after their return 
in measure to the Holy Land, yet future, Acts 3: 19-21; Rom. I1:25-33; Matt. 
23: 39, and parallels ; Luke 21:28. It follows the destruction of Antichrist, Deut. 
32 : 39-43, with Rev. 15:3, 4; Isa. 11:4; with 2 Thess. 2:8; Isa. 59:19, 20 with 
Rom. 11:26; Dan. 7:21-27, with Rev. 19:11-22. And it synchronizes with the 
deliverance of Israel’s faithful living, and the resurrection of Israel’s faithful dead, 
Deut. 32: 39; Hos. 13:14; Isa.26:19; Ezek. 37:12-14; Dan. 12: 1-3; Rev. 20:4; 
11: 18. 

IV. Of the Diabolical Resurrection of the Antichrist.—It is at the opening 
of the 7oth week of Daniel, and marked by the enactment of a strong covenant 
with the Jews, Dan. 9:27; Rev. 13:2, 3. It is at the time of the invasion of 
Palestine in the last days; time of the overflowing, Isa. 59:19; Dan. 9:26; time 
of the Mock-Christ’s effort after universal conquest, Rev. 6:2. It immediately 
precedes the “ Day of the Lord,” 2 Thess. 2:1-8 ; and is contemporaneous with the 
Resurrection of Israel’s Dry Bones, Ezek. 37,: 1-12; Rev. 11:1-14; 12:1-11. Like 
the Resurrection of Christ, it will be denied, disbelieved, mocked at as a fable, be 
mysterious, and unknown for a time, but still it will be a fact, soon made evident, to 
the world’s sorrow, Rev. 13:3. It is not far off from the resurrection of the righteous. 

V. Of the Bodily Resurrection of the Righteous.—And here we have several 
marks of the time. : 

(a) In general, it is “ at the Last Day,” John 6 : 39, 40, 44, 54; Luke 14:14; John 
11:24. The day that closes our present dispensation, day of recompense for the just, 


ion of 
hrist’s 
of the 
93 So 
id the 


above 
reither 
t it is 
§ +29; 
n, and 
ten in 
these 
one in 
; Acts 
iat the 
lion to 
of God, 
an, and 


t of the 
1e word 
att. 23: 
ly dead 


endued 
iy 2, 12) 
sentially 
prayer, 
ses 0 


peculiar 


Second 
r return 
; Matt. 
t, Deut. 
20 with 
ith the 
1 dead, 
. 20:43 


opening 
venant 
sion of 
; time 
diately 
ith the 
. Like 
able, be 
dent, to 
rhteous. 
several 


4; John 
he just, 


RESURRECTION. _ 131 


and of vengeance for the wicked; the ‘ Day of the Lord;” the Day of Judgment 
1 John 4:17; the “Great Day of the Wrath of God,” Rev. 6: 17 ; the “time to reward 
the dead,” Rev. 11:18; the “Great Day of God Almighty,” Rev. 16:14; a Day that 
is an Epoch of Time, closing the “ Times of the Gentiles,” the bisecting epoch between 
our own and the millennial age, Luke 21 : 24-28. 

(4) It is in “the Hour that zs coming and Now #s,” the dead shall rise, John 5 : 25. 
The “NOW IS” refers to the resurrection of Lazarus, John 11:43, 44, and to that of 
the “many bodies of the saints” that arose when the voice of Christ was heard from 
the cross, Matt. 27:50-53. The hour that “1s COMING” refers to the end of our 
present age, or “‘ Last Day,” when all “they that are Christ’s,” 1 Cor. 15 : 23, “ them 
that sleep in Jesus,” 1 Thess. 4 : 14, shall rise from the dead. The swift glance of our 
Lord sees both these “hours” and He speaks of them in one and the same breath. 
The resurrection. of believers at His first and second Advents He unites in the same 
sentence, though occurring ages apart. The passage John 5 : 25, means nothing else 
than the dodi/y resurrection of those whose sfz77/ua/ resurrection is in verse 24. It means 
nothing else in its distant scope than the “ First Resurrection,” in which the martyrs, 
who are only a part of “them that are Christ’s,” stand prominent, Rev. 20:4. The 
doctrine of the Fourth Gospel is identical with that of the Apocalypse written by the 
same author. The wicked, in vs. 28, 29, do mot rise at that time, Dan. 12:1; Isa. 
26: 14. 

(¢) It is, more definitely yet, at the Second Advent, or Parous, of the Lord, when 
“the Lord Himself shall desr-nd from heaven, with a shout, with the voice of the 
Archangel, and with the trump of God ; and the dead in Christ shall rise first,?—i.e. 
before the living are “changed,” 1 Thess. 4:16. “ They that are Christ's, at His 
coming,” 1 Cor. 15:23. 
Christ from heaven. This one fact annihilates all false theories of the resurrection, 
now so much in vogue; as the one fact that, when He does come, and “descends from 


heaven,” —“ Himself,’—in His proper personality, annihilates all false theories of His * 


Parousia. \t is at His “appearing” the righteous dead rise and are glorified, 1 John 
3:2; Heb. 9:28; Titus2: 13; 2 Pet.3:12; 2 Thess.2:8; 2 Tim. 4:1, 8; 1 Peter 
1:7; Col. 3:4. Itis at His “appearing” the righteous living are ‘‘ changed,” Phil. 
3:20,21. The “resurrection” of the righteous dead, and “change” of the righteous 
“who are alive and remain,” are both put at the same epoch of time, because put at 
the “coming,” 1 Cor. 15:51, 23; which is at the “appearing,” Phil. 3:20, 21, the 
“appearing” and “cor ing” being the same event, 1 Thess. 4:16, 17; 2 Thess. 2:8. 
When the Lord “cones” He “appears.” His coming is pope visible, and 
glorious. The resurrection of believers takes place when the Lord comes to gather 
His saints, Ps. 50:3, 5; 2 Thess.2:1; to gather His elect, Matt. 24:31; to gather 
His wheat, Mat. 13:30; Rev. 14:15; to gather the living wicked, the tares, Matt. 13: 
30; the vine ot the earth, Rev. 14:19; to gather Israel, Ps. 142:2; Isa. 11:12; Ezek. 
34:12-16, compared with Matt. 24:31, and Isaiah 27:13; 49:22; Micah4:6-8; Ezek. 
37:21; Zeph. 3:9; Isa. 66:19-21; Rev. 16:18; to gather the Nations, Joel 3:11-14; 
Isa. 34:1 3 Zeph. 3:8; Zech. 14:2, 3; Matt. 24:32, 4o; Rev. 11:18; 16:16; 15:4; to 
judge the world, Acts 17:31; to overthrow the world-power or Gentile-Colossus, Dan. 
2:31-35, 36-45; to destroy the Antichvist, Dan. 7 : 9-14, 20-27; Rev. 19: 11-22; Isa. 
11:4; 2 Thess.2:8; to bind Satan, Rev. 20:1; and to set up His glorious kingdom on 
earth, Daniel 7:18, 27; Zech. 14:9; Ps. 72:7; Rev. 20:4. It is in immediate and 
direct connection with these great events that the resurrection of the righteous takes 
place, the change of the living occurs, and the “rapture” of both “to meet the Lord 
in the air,” 1 Thess. 4:17. : : 

(d) It is yet more definitely, a Pre-millennial Resurrection. A millennium on 
earth defore the resurrection of the righteous is an ecclesiastical fiction, and not only 
without one passage of support from God’s Word, but opposed by the whole concert 
of Prophets, Apostles and Christ Himself, in both Testaments. This is the one un- 
failing test of all false millennialisrn, whether Jewish or Christian, whether carnal 


There is no resurrection of the dead before the return of , 


o 


132 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


eel 


or spiritual, whether coarse or fine, whether a millennium of culture or Christianity. 
Everywhere in God’s Word the Millennial Age /fol/ows the great events just 
described ; fo//ows the resurrection of the righteous, and, therefore, Solow the Second 
Coming of Christ. The resurrection of the righteous is Pve-millennial. A Pre- 
advent Millennium is a perversion and negation of the prophetic word in both 
Testaments. “The thousand years,” in John, Rev. 20: 1-7, are identical with the 
“many days” in Isa, 24:22, at whose end those punished and cast into the abyss at 
their deginning are let loose for fihal judgment ; 2. ¢., the resurrection of the wicked 
occurs at the ezd of the “many days.” These days are identical also with the “ many 
days” in Ezekiel 38:8, at whose end Gog is destroyed. They are identical with 
Hosea’s “third day,” which follows his “two days” of Israel’s Old and New Testa- 
ment dispersion and national death. They are identical with the Messianic days of 
glory on earth, called “ His Days,” in Psalm 72:7. Everywhere in the Old Testament 
the resurrection of the righteous co these “days,” and stands connected with the 
great events just described, which occur at the end of our present age, and at the 
beginning of the “many days.” It stands connected also with the Se//-revelation of 
Jehovah, or His coming, or His appearing, in the day of the Lord, which in the New 
Testament is called “ Zhe Apocalypse of Jesus Christ,” and is the name given to the 
closing book of the New Testament canon. It precedes the final glory of Israel, 
gathered, restored, converted to Christ, and dwelling in their fatherland; ze., it 
precedes the millennial age in both Testaments, Deut. 32:39; Ps. 49:14; Hosea 
137143 14:4-8; 5 25:8; 26:1, 19; Ezek. 37: 1-28, 40-48; Dan..12: 1-33 7:27; 
1 Cor. 15:23; Rev. 19: 11-213 20:1-73 11:15, 17,18; 12:7-10, with Dan. 12: 1-3. 
There is no millennium till a@//er the resurrection of the righteous, at the Second 
Coming and appearing of Christ. The resurrection of the righteous is at the opening, 
not at the close, of “the thousand years,”—years that deg?z only after the Second 
Advent. 

VI. Of the Bodily Resurrection HA the Wicked.—The time of this resurrection is 
put in both Testaments at the ezd of the period of converted Israel’s blessedness and 
glory in their own land ; 2.¢., at the end of the millennial age introduced by the second 
coming of the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven, Dan. 7:9-14; Rev. 1:73 19:11. 

(a) In the Old Testament, we find it so in Isa. 24:22, where, “afterthe many days’ 
that follow the judgment on Satan and his angels, and Anti-christ and his hosts, those 
who then were cast into the abyss, are released for final judgment ;* z.¢., they are 
“czsited” in a judicial sense, like confined criminals le. out for final sentence. !* 1s 
here all scholars find the Old Testament passage for the resurrection of the wicked in 
connection with the doctrine of finalretribution, That resurrection occurs “a/ter many 
days.” These days, identical with “the thousand years” in John, it follows that the 
resurrection of the wicked is /osf-millennial, in the Old Testament. It stands 
connected, also, with the final judgment, which likewise occurs “after many days,” 
following the period of restored and converted Israel’s blessedness and peace in their 
fatherland. “Afer many days thou shalt be visited,” Ezek. 38:8. The “wisited” 
here, as in Isaiah, means looked after for final retribution. What is taught is this, 
viz., that (1) the “vzsz¢zmg,” at the end of the “Many Days,” of those who in Isaiah 
23:22 were imprisoned in the abyss at-the beginning of those days, viz., Satan, his 
demons, and the wicked dead ; and (2) the “wészting” of Gog, or the living nations, 
deceived by Satan, let loose at the end of those days, occurs af the same post-millennial 
time. That is, the final resurrection and judgment of the wicked, living and dead, Is 
not simultaneous with the judgment on Antichrist, the deliverance of Israel, and the 
resurrection of the righteous at the Second Coming of Christ, but stands distantly 
from it by the whole extent of the Millennial Age, or “Many Days” in Isa, 24: 22; 
Ezek. 38:8; or “Third Day,” in Hosea 6: 2. i 

(6) In the New Testament, we find it so. With this all are familiar. John is the 
organizer and interpreter of Old Testament prophecy, concerning Israel and the 
Nations. The interval of the one thousand years, implied in 1 Cor. 15 : 23-28, is fully 


— —— 


anity. 
; just 
econd 
 Pre- 
. both 
th the 
yss at 
vicked 
}many 
1 with 
Testa- 
lays of 
tament 
ith the 
at the 
tion of 
ie New 
to the 
Israel, 
 £esy it 
Hosea 
75275 
12: I-3. 
Second 
opening, 
Second 


ection is 
ess and 
b second 
19:11. 

y days’ 
ts, those 
hey are 
e. tis 
cked in 
ler many 
hat the 
stands 
yy days,” 
in their 
visited” 
is this, 
Isaiah 
tan, his 
nations, 
i ennial 
dead, is 
and the 
Histantly 
243225 


n is the 
and the 
, is fully 


RESURRECTION. 133 


opened out by the great New Testament seer, who, at the same time, builds on Old 
Testament ground. A word here is sufficient, the case is so clear. The resurrection 
of the righteous, called the “ First Resurrection,” and in which the blood-witnesses of 
Jesus stand in the foreground, is identical in time with that in Hosea 6:2; Isa. 26: 
19; Dan. 12:2; John 5:25; 1 Cor. 15:23. It immediately follows the Second Com- 
ing of Christ, from “ Heaven opened,” Rev. 19:11, for the destruction of Antichrist 

Israel’s last oppressor. “The one thousand years,” or millennial age, immediately 
follow that advent, and that resurrection, Rev. 20:1-7.. The chronological sequence of 
chapter 20: 1-7, upon chapter 19; 11-21, ts strict and unsunderable. The resurrection 
of the “rest of the dead,” unraised at the beginning of the thousand years, /o//ows the 
letting loose of Satan, and the re-deception of the nations, at the end of the thousand 
years, and is, moreover, associated with the judgment, by fire, on Gog, Rev. 20: 7-15. 
It is the final resurrection and judgment, in which the wicked, Satan, death, and hades 

receive their final award. In other words, the thousand years in Rev. 20: 3-6, lie in 
between the First Resurrection and the Last Resurrection ; de¢ween Satan imprisoned 
and Satan let loose ; de/ween the Judgment on Antichrist and the Judgment on Gog. 

or, as Paul has it, de¢ween the assumption of the kingdom by Christ, at His Second 
Coming, and the surrender of the kingdom by Christ to the Father, at the end of the 
thousand years, 1 Cor. 15 : 23-28. He who denies this denies the perspicuity of the 
Scriptures, the harmony of both Testaments, and the unity of all prophecy. The doc- 
trine of a wazversal and simultaneous resurrection of the righteous and wicked dead is 
unknown to the word of God, as it was unknown to the primitive Church standing 
nearest the Apostles. 

(c) This view is in perfect harmony with the celebrated passage in John 5 : 21-29 
so often quoted against it. What we have here is (1) a general unlimited expresion 
covering a// kinds of resurrection, verse 21 ; (2) a more special expression, limited to a 
spiritual resurrection, verse 24 ; (3) a special expression limited to the resurrection of 
the dodies of the righteous dead, the dodies of believers, verse 25; and last ofall,a 
general unlimited expression covering the resurrection of the dodies of both rig: “ous and 
wicked, ‘ail that are in their graves,” verses 28, 29. Such the progress in discourse 
The error of interpretation consists in this, viz., (1) in assuming that the “ hour that is 
coming” in verse 25, is identical with the “hour that is coming” in verse 28, not con- 
sidering that our Lord, glancing at the wAo/e future in verse 28 as His thought advances 
in climax to comprehend the wo/e, combines éo¢h resurrections in one without regard 
to the distinction of time; the “hour” having thus a doudle reference in verse 28 
whereas it hac but a sézg/e reference, as to the future, in verse 25 ; (2) in assuming that 
because events mentioned in juxtaposition, or grouped together in general discourse 
therefore they must be s¢mu/tancous tn occurrence; ( 3) by compounding the universal 
subject of discourse, “allthat are in their graves,” in verse 28, with the Jarticular 
subject, “ A/any out from among the sleepers,” in Dan 12:23; and (4) by wrongly 
carrying over the verb, “awake,” from the first to the second clause of the verse in 
Dan. 12:2, where the subject is Jarticu/ar, because we are entitled to carry over the 
verb, “come forth,” into the second clause of verse in John 5 : 29, where the subject is 
universal, verse 28. Inthis way the “Zany out from among the sleepers,” in Dan. 12:2 
are made equal to the ““4//thatare in their graves,” in John 5:28; and thus by confusion 
worse confounded, the doctrine of a wniversal and simultaneous resurrection of the 
righteous and the wicked, at the second coming of Christ, has been given to the Church 
as the word of God. On the contrary, the representation in the fourth Gospel is in 
perfect harmony with the representation in the Apocalypse. And this is a fatal blow 
to the “Higher Critics.” The “hour that is coming” in John 5 : 25, is the hour for 
the resurrection of the righteous, called by Daniel “at that time,” Dan, 12:1, viz., the 
time of Antichrist’s overthrow, and end of Israel’s tribulation ; “that day,” 2 Tim. 4: 
8; 1:12; 1 Pet.5:43 2‘1im. 1:12. In the most express manner, the Old Testament 
prophets assure us that the wicked shall of rise “ at that time,” but only tl.2 “ upright,” 
Ps. 49 : 14-15, only “ Christ’s dead body” of believers, Jsa. 26:19; only they who are 


gp tt ng OC 


134 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


“written in the Book,” Dan, 12:1. As for the wicked, “dead ¢hey shall of live; 
deceased, ¢hey shall nof rise ; for Thou hast vzszted and destroyed them, and made all 
memory of them to perish,” Isa. 26:14. They sleep, as it were, “a perpetual sleep, and 
they wake not,” Jer. 51: 39-57. They are forgotten in the millennial age. The New 
Testament could teach us no otherwise, nor will he, who understands the law of pro- 
phetic representation, its groupings and its separations, and the progress, unity, and 
harmony of God’s word, find any contradiction in either Old or New Testament pre- 
diction. The juxtaposition in John 5: 28-29, no more implies simultaneousness of 
occurrence than it does in Acts 27:15; Isa. 61:2; Luke 4: 19-20; or in Dan, 9: 26. 
Co-existence of different events in mental conception, or in general prophetic discourse, 
does not necessarily implv co-existence in time, and what is indefinite in the earlier 
pa be interpreted by what is definite in the later revelation. This is admitted on all 
hands. 

The Manner of the Resurrection.—-The Scriptures are silent as to the 
manner of the resurrection of the wicked. TZhat is veiled? As to that of those who 
sleep in Jesus, it is solemn, imposing, and magnificent beyond our poor capacity to 
understand. 

I. It is Martial, as becomes a victory over death and the grave. It is with a 
“shout” from the descending Lord Himself, throned on the clouds, gleaming in 
glory, and flanked and followed by His covering army of holy angels. It is with the 
“voice” of the Archangel, repeating the order for assault on the empire of death, to 
the innumerable host that attend His coming. It is with “the trump of God” whose 
clangor is louder and longer than that at Sinai. “ Zhe trumpet shall sound / 1 Thess. 
4:17; 1 Cor. 15:52. Itis with an “opening of graves,” overturning the tombstones, 
and bursting the grassy hillocks, that mark and measure the length and breadth of 
the dust of God’s saints, Matt. 27 : 52 ; Ezek. 37:12. Itis witha “rapture” in clouds 
‘to meet the Lord in the air,” 1 Thess. 4:17. It is in company with living saints 
who, strangers to death, are yet “changed” into the likeness of those who are raised 
from the dead. 

II. Itis Orderly, as in an army. “Every man in his own ¢agma, or band, 
1 Cor. 15 :23. By battalion, and division, they ascend, and deploy in the sky in 
bright procession ; the martyrs first, the faithful blood witnesses of Jesus; martyrs o: 
the Law, martyrs of the Gospel, the slaughtered babes of Bethlehem, the martyrs of 
Pagan and Papal persecutions, fronted and led by their world-famed heroes ; patri- 
archs, prophets, kings, apostles, confessors, reformers, and saints of all ages, who 
fell in temperate, torrid and frozen climes, who witnessed for Christ a good confession, 
in palaces, hovels, and huts, on thrones and in dens and caves of the earth; all 
uniformed in resurrection attire, and soaring sublime to meet their Lord. 

III. It is Quéck. As the body of man rose erect at first from the dust of the ground, 
by God’s creative command, so shall the dust of the sleeping saints start into life, 
bodies full formed and complete, in response to the “Spirit” the “ Voice” and the 
“Trump.” Quick as a glance it will be. Quicker than Christianity works. Not by 

rocess of natural law, not by blind evolution, not by higher forces in nature, but 
instantaneous it will be, by God’s command. “In amoment,” “in the twinkling of an 
eye,” they shall break their fetters and rise immortal, to die no more, I Cor. 15: 52. 

IV. It is Glorious. They “shine as the sun,” Matt. 13 : 43; “as the firmament’s 
gleam,” and “as stars forever and ever,’ Dan. 12:3. Their glory, Paul tells us is 
that of the ‘‘ Sun,” the “ Moon,” and the “ Stars,” differing in glory, yet all corruscant 
with heavenly splendor. Like numberless millions of gems, sparkling in light, shall 
the “saints in light” appear in the sky, some like the twinkling gauze of Andromedas 
veil, some like the three that glitter supreme in the belt of Orion. ‘So also zs the 
Resurrection,” 1 Cor. 15:41, 42.. “As the stars, so shall thy seed be,” Gen. 15:5. The 
incandescent glow of theit immortal bodies “fashioned like unto Christ’s glorious 
body,” Phil. 3:21, will array them in “raiment so white as no fuller on earth can 


white it,” Mark-9 : 3. As they “have borne the image of the earthly, so do they bear _ 


of C 
triurd 
devi 


graves, 
Matt. < 


is not “ 
soil, is 1 
the sar 
passed | 
rection | 
or stam 
which c 
self. 
That id 
particle: 
and visi 
and the 
the tota 


RESURRECTION. 135 


TT, 


the image of the heavenly,” 1 Cor. 15:49. In glory celestial their “corruptible” has 
dazzled to “incorruption,” their “mortal has put on immortality,” 1 Cor. 15: 56. 
Freed from the limits and needs of a carnal life, their “ flesh and blood” are exchanged 
for bodies “equal to angels in heaven,” Mark 12:25; vestments of matter pervaded 
by spirit, agile and swift, the “natural spiritual” now, “dishonor” exchanged for 
“glory,” and “ weakness ” for “ power,” 1 Cor. 15 : 43, 46. 

v. It is 7ryiumphant. ‘The graves are vacated, the earth has restored her richest 
treasure, the monster is “swallowed up in victory.” “ Death, where is thy sting? 
Grave, where is thy victory?” 1 Cor. 15:55; Hos. 13:14. It is the proud challenge 
of Christ and His saints together to death’s empire and its opened graves. The 
triuraph of the righteous is complete and eternal, God beholding, angels attending, 


devils trembling, heaven resounding. It is impossible to conceive of anything more . 


erfect. With Christ, near Christ, Ze Christ, and z# Christ, their blessedness is 
infinite. And allin obedience to Hisown command. Awake! sing ! ye dwellersin the 
dust! Be bright as the glittering dew! Mount as on eagle’s wings! Come ye 
blessed! Inherit the kingdom! Wear the crown! Sit on my throne! Share my 
supper! Swell the song! Isa. 26:19; 40:31; Matt. 25:34; Rev. 3:21; 2:6;19:9; 


+13. 
‘ What is it that rises ?—This respects the ature of the resurrection body: of 
what substance and qualities it is. And— 

I. It is the same body that was laid in the grave ; that which once lived, died, and 
now lives again; that which belongs to the proper outer personality of the individual. 
So our Lord spake when appearing as the Risen One to John, “I am He that liveth 
and was dead, and behold, I am alive forever more,” Rev. 1:18. So to the Elevon, 
“Behold, it is I myself; handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye 
see me have,” Luke 24:39. So, in the case of Lazarus, “ He that was dead came forth, 
bound hand and foot with grave clothes,” John 11:44. The Scripture doctrine is 
explicit. What “comes forth,” in the resurrection, is what is laid down “2 the graves,” 
dot 5:28, 29; “this body” that is destroyed, Job 19:26; “My flesh” that rests in 

ope, Ps. 16:19; Acts 2:26; “ 7hés mortal” that puts on immortality, and “ 7hzs 
corruptible” that puts on incorruption; “/¢” that was sown; “/¢t” that is raised ; 
“ That which” is natural, 1 Cor. 15 : 35-54; “ Your natural bodies,” Rom. 8:11; “ Our 
vile body,” Phil. 3:21. Just as the “many bodies” of the Oid Testament saints that 
slept “arose” when they heard the “Voice” from the Cross, “and came out of the 
graves, after His resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared to many,” 
Matt. 27: 50-53. That “raised” is what is “planted,” even as the “corn of wheat,” 
John 12 : 24, and the “ bare grain,” 1 Cor. 15:37, thatis “not quickened except it die.” 
Otherwise, there is no force in the term “Aza-staszs,” nor in the words “sleep” and 
“wake.” 

II. It is a Different Body from what was laid in the grave. It is not “flesh and 
blood,” which “cannot inherit the Kingdom,” 1 Cor. 15 : 50, though it may be “ flesh 
and bones” as the Saviour had, Luke 24 : 39, yet glorified. What is laid in the grave 
is not “that body that shall be,” 1 Cor. 15 : 37, even as the grain of wheat, sown in the 
soil, is not the grain that is found in the harvest-ear. And yet it is the same wheat— 
the same yet different, the same in substance and form, although, if great change has 
passed upon it by any means—it is vastly different in quality. ‘So also is the resur- 
rection ;’”’ even like old and battered coin cast in a new mould, bearing a new impress, 
orstamp. There is a true material structure to the resurrection body, and an Jdentity 
which compels the recognition of the personality though differenced from its former 
self. We shall know each other in the future age, 1 Thess. 2: 19-20; Matt. 17: 3. 
That identity does not consist in a mechanical reproduction of the same material 
particles laid in the grave, but in the continuous unity, proper form and personality, 
and visible tangible corporeity, of the individual existence which death cannot destroy 
and the resurrection can only glorify. This view of identity is already proved from 
the total displacement of the material particles of the human body in regular 


EE oe ae RE ER RTD RO a RE ET TD 


G LD FROM OPHIR. 


136 


septennial pees even during life. And yet “/¢” is “ 7¢” forever; the same in sub- 
stance and in form, though different in attribute or quality, because regenerated, 
changed, recreated, transfigured ; no longer “natural” but “spiritual,” z.¢., adapted tc 
spiritual uses ; matter spiritualized, 1 Cor. 15: 45- A body, “ metaschematized,” Phil. 
3:21; “metamorphosized,” 2 Cor. 3:18, “immortal,” “incorruptible,” and, though 
material, yet raised in “ power” and “glory,” “angel-like,” and “ Christ-like,” eter- 
nally, “It bears the image of the heavenly,” 1 Cor. 15:49. There-incorporation of 
the disembodied soul in its old temple raised again, is a necessity from the words 
“ Ve must be born again,” John 3: 3, and from the words “ Your bodies are the temples 
of the Holy Ghost,” 1 Cor.6:19, From death to life is the law for the body as well as 
the soul, since the whole personality lies under the penalty and curse. A regenerate 
soul in an unregenerate body the believer is now, and “groans being burdened,” 
2 Cor. § : 4, crying out “O, wretched man !” Rom. 7 : 24, and longing for the coming 
of Christ and “the redempticn of the body,” Rom. 8 : 23, in order to his perfect free- 
dom from carnality and sin, and his perfect likeness tc his Lord. He who hath not 
learned to sigh for the day of his resurrection is yet a babe in the school of Christ. 
a | alse T'heories.— Men, not content with the word of God as to the fact, have 
devised various theories in order to account for, and explain, both the fact and the 
how of the resurrection body. And— 

I. The doctrine according to which the soul evolves, for itself, its own new body 
—even as it evolves its old one in embryo, and at birth—either (a) now in this 
present life, (4) or at death, (c) or in the intermediate state, (d) or at the time of the 
resurrection. Between the soul and the outer gross body a new tenuous vestment is 
formed by the soul, a subtle nerve-envelope, in a'ticipation of its future need, Or, if 
not this, then, after death, and by “ molecular attraction,” “ nature’s inorganic forces,” 
and the “higher chemistry,” the soul being “‘ formative and self-organizing,” it» ves 
for itself a “ glorified allotropism”’ as the vesture of its immortality. For this ed 
scientific, bioplastic, pantheistic, naturalistic speculation, there is not one of 
proofin all the Scriptures. It is the pagan doctrine of the self-extensibility of spirit, 
or that the spirit-force is the source of corporeity, externalizing itself in material form. 
It attributes to nature that “life” and “formative power” which belong alone to God. 
Each soul forms its own body! The resurrection is a process according to natural 
law, nature being the weaver of ethereal body. This egg-skin theory of the resurrec- 
tion is contradicted by the whole word of God which represents the resurrection, not 
as.a “process of nature” but as an “instant act of God,” “in a moment,” “in the 
twinkling of an eye,” and at a definite time, “the last trump;” and the resurrection 
body itself as the special “ g#/t” of God to each saint, 1 Cor. 15:38. As well seek to 
explain by natural law the miracle of the Water changed into Wine, or dead Lazarus 
raised to life again, or the Incarnation of our Lord, or His own resurrection! The 
whole theory is materialistic and against the supernatural. It stands opposed to 
miracles. The gift of life does not belong to Jaw, but to a “Power” above all law, 
acting instantly, and apart from second causes. It is God’s omnipotent volition, and 
God’s omnipotent communication. 

II. The doctrine that the resurrection body is already in us now, by reason of the 
Sacrament of the Altar, believers being gradually transubstantiated into, or consub- 
stantiated with, the Lord’s risen body now, by eating which, in the sacrament, they 
are nourished to eternal life. This mystic, sacramentarian, semi-pantheistic, Corpus- 
Christi-theory of the resurrection rests upon the dogma of the “ Real Presence” of 
Christ in the Holy Supper, and actual appropriation of His real flesh and blood in 
that ordinance, The resurrection body is generated within us, now, by ethical pro- 
cesses, and is evolved “sacramentaliter.” It is enough to reply to this, that, even 
granting the premises, the conclusion is illicit. There is nothing in the argument to 
show that the effect of eating Christ’s risen body, or His literal flesh and blood, would 
be the creation, in the believer, of an inner tenuous nerve-envelope, to serve us in the — 
middle-state, and complete itself at the last day. 


se ah eng hg i aga tanc aan anne 


excelle 
power 
mM sep: 
for its 

probat 
6:11, 

weaves 
ever to 
this bor 
of nate 
quicke1 


sub- 
ated, 
ed tc 
Phil. 
ough 
eter: 
on of 
vords 
mples 
ell as 
erate 
ned,” 
ming 
t free- 
th not 
ist. 
have 
id the 


' body 
n this 
of the 
1ent is 
Or, if 
yrces,” 
ves 

ed 

of 
spirit, 
1 form. 
lo God. 
atural 
surrec- 
bn, not 
in the 
ection 
feek to 
azarus 
The 
sed to 
Il law, 


RESURRECTION 137 


-— a a =e 


Ill. The Germ Theory of the resurrection, viz.; that there is a special germ 
residing in the present body, preserved there as a living seed which vegetates in the 
ave, and grows, at last, to the future resurrection body, as the seed-corn grows to 
its ear, or the wheat-grain to its ear This theory rests upon the straining of analogy 
beyond its properlimits, and a misconception of the illustrations by our Lord and Paul, 
jokn 12:24; 1 Cor. 1 5: 36. The whole point of our Lord’s illustration is this, that as 
“the corn or wheat” abides “alone” and unproductive, “except it fall into the 
sround and die ;” so, apart from His own death, a harvest of souls for God is 
impossible. The great point of Paul’s illustration is that, as the grain of wheat dies 
and rises again, so the body dies and rises again. In other words, death, although a 
necessity, is of itself no bar to resurrection ; rather, it is in order to resurrection. The 
“how” or mode of the vegetation and the resurrection in the Plant World has nothing 
whatever to do with the argument in either case. It is the fact that is adduced. 
Neither Christ nor Paul teach that the resurrection of the body is the result of a 
vegetative process according to natural law. All their teachings contradict this. 
What Paul does is to meet the Corinthiar scepticism, built on “ How are the dead 
raised, and with what body do they come?” by showing its self-convicted folly in this, 
viz.: that the same objection lies against the same fact of death and resurrection in 
nature, while, nevertheless, the fact is believed though none can explain the “ mystery.” 
The “ow” of the natural process is as inexplicable as the “ow” of the super- 
natural act. I: faith obtains in the one case, much more should it obtain in the other. 
The “ testimony” as to the “ fact” is the same in both cases. “ Otherwise, Christ is 
not risen,” and men are forever lost. Paul does not identify the natural process with 
the supernatural act of God. He does not te ch that the resurrection of Christ, or 
of believers, was, or will be, the result of a germinal development. He says nothing 
of a “germ” in either case. For him, the whole dody is the seed, in figure ; not a germ 
in the body. Nowhere do the Scriptures speak of a resurrection body germinally 
present in believers now, but always that the present body is, itself, the subject of the 
resurrection. A germ is not the body, and vegetation is not resurrection. Still more ; 
the germ is, by supposition, indestructible, superior to the claims of corruption and 
death, even when buried in the earth. It never dies. But the Scriptures demand 
the absolute death of the whole body as the pre-condition of its resurrection. Paul 
does not hold to the germ theory even in the vegetable world. He attributes no 
death-defying life to any seed that rises. He knows no immortal germ anywhere, 
but. speaks of the whole seed as due to death in order to quickening. “AjpAron/” 
“Senseless man! Thatwhich thou sowest is not quickened except it die, 1 Cor. 15: 36. 
In the plant world, as in the animal world, “life” is the gift of God, and “death” is 
the law of nature. So far from holding the germ theory, he rejects it, and even the 
seed theory, except to refute his adversaries, and adopting the architectural idea, in 
opposition to the germ t .eory, speaks of the resurrection body as a “‘ duclding of God,” 
2 Cor. 5. 1-4, “ fashioned” by His power, Phil. 3:21. 

IV. The theory that the human spirit developes at death, an “ zzxaterial form of 
light,” or “luminiferous ether” in which it resides till the resurrection ; a vesture of 
glory completing itself in its reunion with the resurrection body. This is held by many 
excellent men, and rests upon the double view (1) that the human spirit possesses a 
power of self-organization, and (2) that the soul preserves its individuality after death 
in separate form, uncommingled and unabsorbed with other souls, and needs an organ 
for its action, recognition and communication. One word here is enough. Whatever 
probabilities exist for a “clothing” of the soul “given,” or “put on” after death, Rev. 
6: 11, 13, and ,prior to:the resurrection, there is no Scripture proof that the spirit 
weaves it for itself, nor that, were such a vesture given of God, it has anything what- 
ever to do with the resurrection body. From first to last, the Bible doctrine is that 
this body of ours which we have from “the first man, Adam,” and which is the subject 
of natural death and burial in the grave, is the self-same subject of supernatural re- 
quickening and resurrection, and shall “come forth” in the ecuss of the glorious 


138 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


body of “the second Adam, the Lord from heaven,” 1 Cor. 15 : 45-47. And this is the 
faith of true believers. Thy 
W._v Effects the Resurrection ?—The self-same adorable Trivne God, rod 
ne 


Father, Son and Holy Ghost, who effected créaiion, effects prov:dence, and all salva- 
tion, effects also the resurrection. Within their own interior relations and operations, 
each of the Persons of the Trinity act se~arate/y. Outside those relations, in time and 
space, a// act concurrently.’ The Father ceeates, the Son creates, the Holy Spirit 
creates. The Father rules, the Son rules, the Holy Spirit rules. The Father raises 


est 
des 
Isra 


pur 


the dead, the Son raises the dead, the Holy Spirit raises the dead. All three concur. Its ¢ 
All three co-operate. One does nothing without the other, in regeneration, justifica- inst 
tion, sanctification, resurrection, or glorification.’ A Triune hand is pledged for the cou 
redemption of the believer, body and soul, from the dominion of sin, death, the grave glor 
and hell. This is the doctrine of the sacred Scriptures. Nor is there a crime greater wit 
in the universe than to doubt or disbelieve the love, and oath, and faithfulness, and eart 
power, and word, and work, of these Blessed Three, self-bound in sworn compassion reir 
to redeem us from our sins, and raise us glorified, to share their kingdom, fellowship, ret 
and joy forever. com 
The Hope of the Resurrection.—For all who have believed,on Christ to the from 
saving of their souls, the hope of the resurrection of the body, is :— apos 
I. A Comforting Hope, Job 19 : 25-27; 1 Thess. 4: 13-18; Ps. 16:10; 49:15. : Test 
II. A Satisfying Hope, Ps. 17 : 15. In st 
III. A Sustaining Hope, 2 Cor. 4:17, 14; 5: 1-3. the 
IV. A Lively Hope, 1 Pet. 1 : 3-7. ; Most 
V. A Purifying Hope, 1 John 3: 2, 3. 13:9 
VI. A Glorious Hope, Rom. 8 : 18. Ezek 
VII. A Sure Hope, John 14:19; Rev. 1:18. ' 24:2 
VIII. A Sealed Hope, Rom. 8:11; 2 Cor. 5: 5. 1: 3- 
IX. A Triumphant Hope, Hos. 13:14; 1 Cor. 15 : 55-57. . John 
X., A Jubilant Hope, Isa. 26: 19. come 
XI. A Blessed and Holy Hope, Rev. 20: 6. churc 
XII. The Believer’s Hope, John 11 : 25-27. apost 
The Resurrection and the Kingdom.-—The doctrine of the resurrection of blind 
the righteous stands everywhere, in the Bible, organically and inseparably connected antag 
with the establishment of Messiah’s kingdom of glory on earth. Apart from this it distor 
has no notice. Its “me is ever made synchronous with that of the re-erection of come 
David’s fallen tent. if, sPzv7tuad/y, this began at the First Advent, it was yet attended conve 
by the literal resurrection of the bodies of many saints that slept. Set up, outwardly, Israel 
as a visible sovereignty un earth, at the Second Advent it will be attended by the 3: 19: 
literal resurrection of all that are Chrisi’s. It is because the kingdom is to be in preset 
relation to this present earth, a visible, real, historic, external kingdom, with a loc»! weeks 
centre and seat, that the corporeity of its subjects is required, for the King Himself 1: Adver 
incarnate and risen from the dead. A resurrection of the body for the purposes of a becon 
Messianic administration in a super-terrestrial sphere has not the slightest foundation . Set up 
in the "Yard of God. A believing Jew would stare at the utterance of the thought, me Cres 
‘and a believing Gentile should. God's willis to be done “om earth” as it is now eu 
in heaven. The resurrecticn cf the body is in order to the resurrection of the kingdom, wickec 
and the coming of Christ, in visible bodily form, is in order to both. As the kingdom ; Pa, n 
is a real, proper, iiteral. material one, though spiritual, so 1s the resurrection of the oe h 
body. As the kingdom is the re-erection of the outward kingdom once begun, but es ( 
destroyed, dead and buried, through Israel’s guilt, a kingdom to be rescored, but in ae 0; 
form more glorious, and “under the whole heaven,” so the bodies of the righteous, undre 
once existent, but dead now, Uacause of sin, are to be re-erected, but in power and ‘ Idealiz 
glory as never before. + 3h 8: 
It is for this reason the wicked sus: mot and wl/ not be raised “ in that day,” and ank o 
“at that time,” when the nghteous “ awalze out from among the sleepers in the dust.’ yg 
ze: 


° f 2 : . A i 
: b - bo f 
eS ‘ aie , ’ : © ~ 


RESURRECTION. 139 


They can only be raised at the close of Messiah’s temporal kingdom of glory on 
earth, when the final judgment occurs, in which Satan, death and hell, receive their 
final award. Of what possible use could the resurrection of the wicked be for the 
establishment of the kingdom of the righteous on earth? ‘To weed out the tares, to 
destroy the ungodly, to overthrow Antichrist, to break the Gentile colossus, to redeem 
Israel, to deliver the righteous, to raise the faithful dead, is plain enough. But what 
urpose could the resurrection of the wicked serve, when, thus far, ir history, amid all 
its advancing steps, no instance of the resurrection of the wicked is found, while many 
instances of che resurrection of the rightec::s are known, and while yet a further time- 
course remains to be run, and Satan is loosed again, at the close of the kingdom of 
glory on earth? God’s wisdom is not so foolish as to mix, in history, the absolute end 
with the relative end, the close of time with the beginning of the kingdom of glory on 
earth. Precisely as the resurrection of the wicked is strfctly connected with the final 
retribution of the wicked when Messiah surrenders the kingdom, so precisely is the 
resurrection of the righteous connected with the final veward of the righteous, at the 
coming of Cnrist, when Messiah assumes the kingdom, and the wicked are swept 
from the earth. In no picture by the prophets, in none by Christ, in none by His 
apostles, is the future other'vise painted. Every time, and in every place, in both 
Testaments, the resurrection of the righteous stands, in the text and context, always 
in strictest connection with the regathering of dispersed Israel, and the setting up of 
the Messianic kingdom, at the coming of Messiah Himself in glory. It is so in 
Moses, Deut. 32: 39-43. It is so in David, Ps. 49: 11-20. It is so in Hosea, Hos. 
13:9-143 14:4-9. Itisso in Isaiah, Isa. 24:21-23; 25:6-9; 26: 1-21. It is so in 
Ezekiel, Ezek. 37: 1-28. Itissoin Daniel, Dan. 12:1-3. It is so in Christ, Matt. 
24:29-39; 25: 31-46; Luke 21: 24-28. It is so in Peter, Acts 3:19-21; 1 Peter 
1:3-7. It is so in Paul, Rom. 8:19; 11:26; Heb. 10:37; 11:26-28. It is soin 
John, Rev. 11: 15-183 15:2-43 19:11-21: 7:1-8; 14:1-5. The kingdom cannot 
come apart from the resurrection of the righteous at Messiah’s advent in glory. The 
church fiction of a kingdom of millennial glory on earth, such as the prophets and 
apostles describe, defore tne resurrection or the body, is one of the best embalmed, 
blindest, and wildest inventions of prejudice, purpose, and of false exegesis, and is 
antagonized, at every point, by the entire Word of God. It is a masterpiece of 
distortion and negation of the “ lively oracles.” The millennial glory on earth cannot 
come defore the coming of Christ to raise His saints. It cannot come éz/ore Israel’s 
conversion and delivefance. The end of Christ’s sojourn in heaven, and that of 
Israel’s present apostasy and national death, are fixed at the same point of time, Acts 
3:19-21; Rom. 11:26. The period of that sojourn is measured wy the interval of our 
present dispensation, which is the interval between the 69th and 70th of Daniel’s 70 
weeks, the last of which is eschatological, and the 69th of which expired at the First 
Advent, Dan. 9: 24-27; Luke 21:24; Rev. 11:1-13. The sojourn ended, the Risen 
becomes the Returning Lord,in the clouds of heaven, descending to wake the righteous, 
set up His kingdom, and reign on the earth. Everywhere, this is the uniform biblical 
representation. 
The doctrine of a universal and simultaneous resurrection of the righteous and 
wicked was first taught B.C. 168, in the apocryphal 2 Book Henoch, chapter 51:1, It 
was not the faith of the Maccabean mariyr mother and her seven martyr sons, whom 


* Paul has so touchingly eulogized, 2 Macc. 7:29, 14; Heb. 11: 35-38. It was not the 


faith of the Pharisees in the time of our Lord, Luke 14: 14,15. It was not the 
faith of the prophets, Christ, or His apostles, aor of the early Christian church for three 
hundred yxars, nearest the aposiies. The Allegorizers, Spiritualizers, Gnostic 
Idealizers, and Roman Hierarchizers have been they who wrecked the true doctrine, 
and gave us the ‘alse, transmitted tirough middle-age fogs, and still settled as 
dank obstruction on Protestant eyes. Ii is to God’s goodness we owe the fact of an 
emancination so wide and so great already, by means of patient study of the Word 
itself, and among so many of the noblest and ablest scholars of our times. We come 


=) cit maaan coc mae 


140 * GOLD FROM ‘OPHIR. 


back to the early faith of the church, and find that the resurrection of the righteous 
is strictly associated with the establi:’ ment of the kingdom of Christ on earth, at His 
coming, and with the hope of a bicssed reunion and fellowship of the saints of all 
times, among whom we expect to meet our loved ones gone before us ; yea, together 
to rise to meet the Lord when He comes, and share in our bodies and souls, united 
forever, and like to His own, His ineffable smile, eternal beauty and bottomless love. 
Our whole interest in the doctrine of the resurrection of the body is bound up with, 
and limited to, this one fact, even that we and ours may not only be “zz” Him, and 
“with” Him, but “ear” Him, and “/ke” Him to all eternity. Blessed the inter- 
mediate state where souls, “absent from the body,” are “present with the Lord,” 
2 Cor. 5:8. ‘Blessed the dead who die in the Lord,” Rev. 14:14. But more blessed 
are they who, victors over the grave, rise in the resurrection of the just, fashioned like 
Christ Himself, and, perfect 7m body and soul—the only perfect human beings—enter 
with Him to His kingdom, and live and love and reign with Him forever. 


whole 
II. 7 

for Ch 
III. 


one to 
hearts 1 

Thess 

VE. \ 
above, < 
not on t 
our bod 

VII. 
faith, a 
6:12, 1: 
Vili. 


RESURRECTION. 141 


“THE GLORIES OF CHRIST” IN ZECH. 6: 11-13. 


I. He is the crowned High Priest (11.) 
The crowns are made of silver and gold. 
The one speaks of redemption—His death— 
and the other of His Divine glory as—the 
Son of God. 

II. ‘*The Man whose name is The 
Branch.” This is Christ’s special name in 
relation to Israel and their future glory; see 
Isa. 11:13; Jer. 23:5, and 33:15; Zech. 3:38; 
the Stone of Israel with seven eyes—the 
only times He is thus named. 

III. His service for them and also for 
us. ‘‘Heshall branch up under Him, and 
build the temple of the Lord; even He shall 
tuild the temple of the Lord.” What He 
will yet do for Israel, and also His present 
work for His Father and for us, the Church 
of God, Eph. 2: 19-22; 1 Cor. 3:9; Heb. 
3:3; I Pet. 2:4, 5. 


1V. He is the Glory-Bearer. ‘‘And He | 


shall bear the glory.’ It is only by Him, 
and in Him, and from Him, that all God’s 
eternal blessings of His salvation come to us, 
and soon will to Israel. How glorious He 
is! ‘‘'On His head are many crowns.” 


V. He will be the reigning and ruling 
Qne. ‘He shall sit and rule on His 
throne."” We see Him nowas our enthroned 
Sin-Purger, Prophet, Priest, and Lord, and 
soon He will be known and loved as Israel’s 
Redeemer and King. His Kingly reign and 
glory, and all its Divine issues, will then be 
fulfilled, known, and delighted,in by them. . 

VI. ‘*The counsel of peace between 
them both,” which speaks of His infinite 
delight He will have inall those He has so 
divinely blessed, and also of their delight 
and peace they will have in Him. Blessed 


be God for the prospect ! 
W. Hz. 


PRACTICAL TRUTHS AS TO THE WALK OF THE CHRISTIAN 
IN CONNECTION WITH “THE COMING OF CHRIST.” 


I. Weare to hold fast till He come. The 
whole truth of God, Rev. 2: 20, 75. 

Il. Weare to be steadfast in our service 
for Christ, 1 Cor.'15 : 58. 

Ill. We are tostand fast in the Lord, Phil. 


3:20; 4:1. 
IV. Weare to rejoice in the Lord alway, 
Phil, 4:4. 


V. Weare to increase and abound in love 
one to another, that He may establish our 
hearts unblameable in holiness before God, 

Thess. 3: 12, 13. 

VI. Weare to seek those things that ave 
above, and set our affection on things above, 
not on things on the earth; and to mortify 
our bodies, Col. 3: 1-5. 

VII. We are to fight the good fight of 
faith, and lay hold on eternal life, 1 Tim. 
6:12, 13, 14. 

VIIi. We are to preach the Word; be in- 


stant in season, out of season; reprove, re- 
buke, exhort, with all long-suffering and 
doctrine, 2 Tim. 4: 2, 8. 

IX. We are to deny ungodliness and 
worldly lusts, and to livesoberly, righteously, 
and godly in this present world, Tit. 2: 12, 13. 

X. Weare to be patient and long ratient, 
and to establish our hearts, James 5:7, 8. 

XI. We are comforted in regard to our 
sleeping loved ones, who are with Christ, and 
as to our speedy reunion with them, 1 Thess. 
4:13, 16. 

XII. Weare to abide in Christ; that we 
may not be ashamed, and have confidence 
before Him at His coming, 1 John 2: 28 

XIII, We are to hoid the Word of His 
patience and the results tous, Rev. 3: 10.11 

XIV. Those who are elders are to feed the 
flock of God, and to be as examples to them, 
1 Peter 5: 2. W. AH. 


piste tar nfl cme retaken 


142 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE SECOND COMING. 


I. Jesus is coming again. 

Our God shall come, Ps. 1: 3. 

The Lord Himself shall descend from heaven, 
1 Thess. 4: 16. 

This same Jesus. .shall so come, Acts 1:11. 

The Son of Man shall come in the glory of 
His Father, Matt. 16: 27. ? 

They shall see the Son of Man coming in 
the clouds of heaven, Matt. 24: 30, 

Behold, He cometh witb cloud::, and every 
eye shall see Him, Rev. 1:7. | 

The voice of my Beloved! behold, He 
cometh, Cant. 2: 8. 


II. And that soon and unexpectedly. 

Yet a little while, and He that shall come 
will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10: 37. 

Behold, I come quickly; and My reward is 
with Me, Rev, 22: 12. . 

Surely I come quickly, Rev. 22: 20. 

Ye know not what hour your Lord doth 
come, Matt. 24: 42. 

Ye know not when the Master of the house 
cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the 
cock-crowing, or in the morning, Mark 
13: 35. 

III. To receive His own children. 

He shall gather together His own elect, 

Matt. 24 : 31. 


Ye shall be caught up....to meet the Lord 
in the air, 1 Thess. 4: 17. 

Thou shalt receive me to glory, Ps. 73: 24. 

I will come again, and receive you unto 
Myself, John 14: 3. 
IV. That they may be with Him. 

There where I am, there ye may be also, 
John 14: 3. 

Where I am, there shall also My servant be, 
John 12: 26, 

Father, I will that they also, whom Thou 
hast given Me, be with Me where I am, 


John 17: 24. 
Thou shalt be with Me in Paradise, Luke 
23:43 


With Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1 : 23. 


V. Ina place prepared for them. 

Come, ye blessed of My Father, inherit the 
kingdom prepared for you, Matt. 25 : 34. 
Eye hath not seen..the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love Him, 

I Cor. 2:9. 

Men have not heard..O God, beside Thee, 
what He hath prepared for him that 
waiteth for Him, Isa. 64: 4. 

An inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled 
reserved in heaven for you, 1 Pet. 1: 4. 

I go to prepare a place for you, John 14: 2. 

—Footsteps of Truth. 


THE JUDGMENTS. 


I. The judgment of believers as sinners is 
on the cross of Christ, Rom. 6:6-8; Heb. 
10:17; I John 4:7; John 3:18; 2 Cor, 
5:14-21; 1 Peter 2:24. 

‘II, The judgment of saints (works)—at the 
‘judgment seat of Christ’’ after the saints 
have been caught up, 1 Thess. 4:14, 17; 1 
Cor. 4: 1-5; 3:13-15; 2 Cor. 5:9, 10; Rom. 
14: 10, 12. 

III, ‘The judgment of the “quick” (‘‘liv- 
ing") nations, Acts ro: 42; 2 Tim, 4:1; 1 


Pet. 4:5; 1 Cor. 6:2; Matt. 25: 31-45; 
Acts 17:31. ‘Inhabited earth.” 
(Day of Judgment, 1,000 years.) 

IV. Thejudgment of the ‘‘dead’’—‘‘ Great 
White Throne”’ at the closeof the Millenium, 
Matt, 10:15; Ir:2z, 22; 12:41, 42; Rev. 
20:12,15: 2 Pet.2:9; 3:7; Jude6; Rom. 
2:15, 16. 

V. The judgment, of angelsy 1 Cor. 6:2: 
Jude 6; 2 Pet. 2:4; Rev. 20:10; Matt. 
25: 41. Mrs. T.C. ROUNDS 


Self-c 
Gent# 
Lover 
Loyal 
Docil 
Solid, 
Lover 

tha 

sure 


RESURRECTION. 143 


Ah ST, LL LTT eesettheseee 


THE LAST DAYS. 


By A. B. 


Mackay. 


CHARACTERISTICS ‘OF THE LAST | Holding the root of Holding a form of 


DAYS, 
According to 


Speen TSA Oe 
® 1. II. 


Some Theologians. The Word of God, 
(2 Tim. 3: 1-5, R.V.) 
KNOW THIS, 
That in the last days, 
GOOD GRIEVOUS 
TIMES SHALL COME; 
For men shall be 


Unselfish, Lovers of self, 

No lovers of money, Lovers of money, | 

Modest, Boastful, | 

Humble, Haughty, 

Kindly, Railers, 

Obedient to parents, Disobedient to pa- 
rents, - 

Grateful, Unthankful, 

Holy, Unholy, 

Affectionate, Without natural af- 
fection. 

Easily appeased, Implacable, 

True, Slanderers, 

Self-controlled, Without self-control, 

Gentfe, Fierce, | 

Lovers of good, No lovers of good, 

Loyal, Traitors, 

Docile, — Headstrong, 

Solid, Puffed up, 
Lovers of God more Lovers of pleasure, | 
than loversof plea- — rather than lovers 

sure, of God, 


godliness,and show- godliness, but de- 


ing the power there- nying the power 
of, , thereof. 
TO THESE ALSO FROM THESE ALSO 
HOLD FAST. TURN AWAY. 

I 


Which testimony do you believe? 
This on the left? or, This on the right ? 
“The Scripture cannot be broken,” John 

10 : 35. 
II. 
Which list accords best with what you 
see and hear? 
This on the left? or, This on the right ? 
‘Ye can discern the face of thesky ; but can 
ye not discern the signs of the times ?”’ 
Matt. 16: 3. 
Ill. 
Which advice will you take ? 
This on the left ? or, This on the right ? 
‘Come out from amor.g them and be ye 
separate,” 2 Cor. €: 17. 
iV. 
What place will you take 


| When jesus judges the nations for these 


things ? 
That on the left ? or, That on the right ? 
‘These shall go away into everlasting pun- 
ishment; but the righteous into life 
eternal,’ Matt. 25: 46. 


—Fuithful Witness. 


Some of God's dear people tell us that 
they see no interest or practical use in the 
doctrine of the Lord's coming; that it is in- 
volved in mystery and we can know but 
little about it; that death is the Lord’s com- 
ing to the individual, and that the doctrine 
paralyzes missionary effort. 


I will present, therefore, a Bible study, 
showing that it is connected with every 
doctrine and duty of our holy religion, and 
that it is used by Christ and the Apostles for 
every practical purpose of Christian char- 
acter and life. Christ speaks of baptism 
thirteen times and of His second comiag 


144. GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


forty times. If I were to present death as 
a ground of appeal, I could find but two or 
three passages in all the New Testament, 
and not one direct exhortation for a believer 
to watch for the uncertain event of death, 
but upon this theme I have more than three 
hundred passages from which to select. I 
will present seven groups fof careful and 
prayerful study. 

I. We are exhorted by the Lord's coming, 
to assurance, brotherly love, heavenly affec- 
tions, and boldness in confessing Christ, 
Phil. 1:6; 2 Tim. 1:12; Rev. 3:3, 11; 
Phil. 3: 18, 20; Heb. 13: 13, 14: Mark8: 38; 
Luke 22: 8, 9. 

II. We are taught and exhorted to be 
watchful, sober, patient under provocation, 
and on guard against hasty and unjust judg- 
ments, 1 Pet.4: 7; Phil.4:5; Phil. 1:10; 
1 Pet. 1:13; 1 Cor. 4:5; 1 Cor. 6: 1-13; 
Jas. 5:9. 

III. To be pure and holy in heart, sepa- 
rated and consecrated; abiding closely in 
Christ. 1 John 3: 1-3; Col, 3: 1-4; 1 Thess. 
3:72, 13; 1 John 2: 28; 1 Thess. 5: 23; 
Tit. 2: 11-15; 2 Tim. 4:8, 10. 


IV. To endure temptation, rejection, per- 
secution, and all earthly losses, with forti- 
tude and cheerfulness, 1 Pet. 4: 12, 13; 
John 14: 1-3; Heb. 10: 34-37; Luke 12: 32-36; 
Thess. 1: 6-10; 2 Cor. 4:17; Rom. 18: 19. 

V. To be comforted.in bereavements and 
afflictions by the hope of resurrection, re- 
union and glory, John 17:24; 1gThess. 
4:14-18; Rev. 20:6; Thess. 3:5; Matt. 
19:27, 28; Matt. 13: 43; John 16: 22. 

VI. To be faithful and diligent in service 
regardless of the fear or favor of men~ full 
of missionary zeal ; to arouse the consciences 
of impenitent men by appeals to ‘‘ that day ” 
See about one-half of all the parables ; 
Matt. 24: 48-51; 2 Tim.4:1,2; 1 Tim 6°°.- 
1 Thess, 5: 1-10; 1 Cor. 16:22: Jude rg, 15; 
Matt. 16: 26-27. 

VII. To regard this as the supreme and 
impending event of unfulfilled prophecy, to 


teach these things, to live under the magic . 


power of this expectancy ; and to celebrate 
the Lord’s Supper as witnesses of this 
blessed hope, Rev. 1:7; Tit. 2:15; Heb. 
10 : 35-37; 1 Thess. 1:9,10; 2 Tim. 4: 7, 8 
1 Cor. 11: 22, E. P. MARVIN. 


THE HEAVENLY HOME. 


I would set forth the ‘‘great city, the holy 
Jerusalem,” Rev. 21: 10, the blessed and 
eternal home of all who love Jesus, in the 
following way :— 

I. Ht is a great city. 

‘' That great city,” said John, gazing on it. 
Its circuit is vast—beyond Babylon or Nine- 
veh, Paris or London. That ‘ mighty city,”’ 
says John, speaking of Babylon the great, 
Rev.18:10; butthis is mightier far. There 
hasbeen nocity likeit. Itis¢he city, the one 
city, the great metropolis of the mighty uni- 
verse, the mighty city of the mighty God. 

Il. It is a well-built city. 

Its ‘builder and maker ‘s God.” Its 
foundations are eternal; its wa.ls are jasper ; 
its gates, pearls: its streets paved with gold. 


& 
It is ‘compactly built together,"’ lying four- 
square, and perfect in all its parts, without a 
break, or flaw, or weakness, or deformity. 


‘IIL. It is a well-lighted city. 

Something brighter than sun or moon is 
given to fill its heaven. The glory of Ged 
lightens it. The Lamb is its ‘‘light,”’ cr 
“lamp,” so that it needs no candle, no sun- 
light. There is no night there. 


IV. It is a well-watered city. 

A pure river of water of life flows through 
its streets, proceeding from the throne of 
God and the Lamh. What must its waters 
be? What must be the rivers of pleasure 
there? Who init can ever thirst? Its in- 
habitants shall thirst no more. 


It I 
ations 
.the sa 
man ¢ 
and g 


IX. 


It o 
as its 


1, per- 
forti- 
43} 
32-36; 
}3 19. 
ts and 
nm, re- 
Thess. 
Matt. 


service 
n~. full 
‘iences 
:day”’ 
ables ; 
Oe 
14,15; 


ne and 
ecy, to 
magic , 
lebrate 
of this 
; Heb. 
4:7,8 
IN. 


hrough 
bne of 
aters 
asure 
Its in- 


RESURRECTION. 


145 


V. It is a well-provisioned city. 

The tree of life is there, with its twelve 
manner of fruits and its health-giving leaves. 
It has more than Eden had; it is paradise 
restored—paradise and Jerusalem in one; 
Jerusalem in paradise, and paradise in 
Jerusalem. 


VI. It is a well-guarded city. 

Not only has it gates and walls and towers 
which no enemy can scale or force, but at 
the gates are twelve angels, keeping per- 
petual watch. 


VII. It is a well-governed city. 

Its king is the Son of God; the King of 
kings, Immanuel, the King eternal, whose 
sceptre is righteousness; who loveth right- 
eousness, and hateth iniquity. No misrule 
is there, no disorder, no lawlessness. 


VIII. It is a well-peopled city. 


It has gathered within its walls all gener- 
ations of the redeemed. Its populationis as 


the sands or the stars—the multitude that no 


man can number—the millions of the risen 
and glorified. 


IX. It is'a holy city. 


It origin is heavenly and it is as perfect 
as its builder. Nothing that defileth shall 


enter—no spot, or speck, or shadow of evil. 
All is perfection there, divine perfection. 


X. It is a glorious city. 

The glory that fill it and encircles it is the 
glory of God. All precious stones are there; 
no marble or granite, such as we boast of 
now. All about is gold and pearls and gems. 
Everything resplendent is there. 


XI. It is a blessed city. 


It is truly thejoyouscity. Itis the throne 
and seat of the Blessed One, and all in it is 
like Him, Its name is Jerusalem, the City 
of Peace; its king's name is Solomon, the 
Prince of Peace. There is no enemy there, 
no danger, no sickness, no curse, no death, 
nc: weeping, no pain, no sorrow, no change 
forever. They that dwell in it ‘‘shall hunger 
no more, neither thirst any more,” Rev. 
7:16, 17; for the ransomed of the Lord 
shall return, and come to it with songs; and 
sorrow and sighing shall flee away, Isa. 
35:10. Blessed city! city of peace, and 
love, and song! fit accompaniment of the 
new heavens! fit metropolis of the new 


‘earth; whereindwelteth righteousness ! How 


eagerly should we fook for it! How worthy 
of it should we live! 


Dr. H. BONAR. 


THE PROMISE OF THE LORD'S COMING. 


Acts I: 9-11. Rev. 16:15; 22:7, 
12, 20. 

Rev. 2:3-!I. Heb. 9: 28. 

John 14; 2, 3. Acts 3: 19-21. 

1. To raise the righteous dead : 

Isa. 26: 19. John 5: 28, 29. 

John 11: 25. Phil. 3: 10, 11. 

Dan. 12: 13. t Thess, 4 : 13-16. 


1 Cor, 15:20, 23, 52. Rev. 20: 4-6. 

Il. To change the living (as Enoch, 
Gen. 5:24, and Elijah, 2 Kings 2: 11.) 
Isa. 26 : 20-21. t Thess. 5: 4, 8-10. 
Luke 16: 26, 27, 34-37. Luke 12: 35-38. 


1 Thess. 4: 15-17. 1 Cor. 15: 51. 
Matt. 25 ; 6-10. Rev. 3: 10. 
Luke 21 ; 36. Rev. 12 5. 


146 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


DEATH: IS HE “THE KING OF TERRORS, OR THE PRINCE 
OF PEACE?” 


FOR a solution of this vexed question let us appeal to the testimony of God’s Word. 

Death may be defined to be the separation of the spiritual from the material part 
of man, or the soul from the body. It was pronounced as a curse by God on Adam 
and his posterity for the sin of disobedience. ‘ Dying thou shalt surely die.” Man 
was created to live: and not to die; he dies as a punishment for sin. ‘The separate 
existence either of soul or body is a violation of the law of creation, and a state of 
imperfection. 

Death is everywhere spoken of in the Bible as the great enemy of man. He is 
detested by God. Aaron was commanded not to go in to any dead body, not even 
that of his father or his mother. No smell or taint of death should defile the person 
or garments of him who came into the immediate presence of that Holy Being who 
dwelt between the cherubim. God says of His chosen Israel, “I will ransom them 
from the grave, I will redeem them from death. O death, | will be thy plagues. O 
grave, I will be thy destruction.” 

No disembodied spirit could come into God’s presence without reminding Him of 
the fact that the arch-fiend, whor: he had hurled over the battlements of Heaven, had 
despoiled the fairest work of His entire creation. Even his only and well-beloved 
incarnate Son did not dare to present Himself before His Father’s throne as a naked 
Spirit. Not until he had overcome death in His own person, snatched His body from 
its foul embrace and clothed it with the beauty and glory of immortality, thus giving 
an earnest of the completion of the mission His Father had given Him to do, did He 
ascend to His Heavenly Father. And not until He has accomplished as much for 
His chosen ones of all ages, will He take them to His blissful abode. Christ’s saved 
ones do not go straggling into the mansions of the blest, one by one, as naked disem- 
bodied souls. It is when these have been perfected by reunion with their glorified 
bodies, and the whole Church, the one body of Christ, adorned in her beautiful garments 
as the bride of the tomb, that she will be introduced to the majesty on High and enter 
into the inheritance of the Heavenly Kingdom 

Death is not a momentary event or passion. It is a condition or state of being. 
Peter in his first sermon, Acts 2 : 24, tells us that “ God raised up Christ, having loosed 
the pains of death, for it was not possible that He should be holden of it.” These 
“* pains,” whatever were their nature, cannot be predicted of the body. They could 
not have been physical suffering such as He endured in the garden or on the cross, 
for His body was lying insensible inthe tomb. They must tbhe:efore have pertained to 
His spiritual nature.. And for the space of three days, our Lord endured these “ pains 
of death.” The disquiet, the unrest, the feeling of loss, due to the separation into parts 
of what was created to remain forever one undivided whole, is probably what may be 
regarded as the “pains of death.” The great enemy of man had divided asunder 
what God had joined:together. 

We read in Rom. 6:9, thai “ Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more ; 
death hath no more aominion over Him.” But death held Him with a firm grasp, so 
long as His body remained in the grave; so we shall remain under the dominion of 
death until our resurrection. During this brief period the soul of our Lord was in 
that paradise to which He promised to take the penitent thief. This was not the 
heavenly abode of God the Father, but the place of departed spirits, where the souls 
of all who die on earth remain until the resurrection of the body. 

St. John “saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the Word of 
God,” and crying, “ How long, O Lord, noly and True, dost Thou not avenge our 
blood on Thine that dwell on the earth?” These souls were not before the throne of 
God and the Lamb, engaged in worship and ascription of praise. And they were not 


‘parate 
tate of 


He is 
ot even 
person 
ng who 
n them 
ues. O 


Him of 
en, had 
yeloved 
1 naked 
dy from 
3 giving 
did He 
uch for 
Ss saved 
it disem- 
rlorified 
Arments 
hd enter 


being. 
+ loosed 

These 
y could 
e€ cross, 
hined to 
“pains 
to parts 
ay be 
hsunder 


bp more ; 
\ ASP, s0 
inion of 
was in 
not the 
e souls 


ord of 
nge our 
rone of 
ere not 


RESURRECTION. 147 


content with their condition ; which could not, therefore, have been one of unalloyed 
bliss. Their utterance was almost a complaint at the tardiness of the Lord to avenge 
them of their adversaries, and bring them into the fulness of blessing. St. John “saw 
the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus. . . . And they 
“ived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.” The phrase “they lived,” can refer 
to nothing else than the union of their souls and bodies at the resurrection. The 
question of the angel to those who sought Jesus on the morning of the resurrection 
was, “ Why seek ye the “ving among the dead?” Christ had been dead, but was 
then “Se BBhasty from the dead. So the souls that John saw were dead until resur- 
rection, when they “ved” again. Our Lord says of Himself, “I am He that eth 
and was dead.” The sting of death will be felt, and his dominion continued tu be 
exercised until the very last, for “the /as¢ enemy that shall be destroyed is death.” 

We do not overlook the assertion of St. Paul that “to die is gain,” that he had a 
“ desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better.” The condition of the soul 
in the intermediate state is undoubtedly one of rest and peace and communion with 
Christ, as well as exemption from the toils and suffering incident to this life. But it 
is an zmperfect condition and all who are in that state are under the dominion of death. 
St. Paul nowhere holds up death as an object of hope and desire. He exhorts Chris- 
tians to long, hope, and pray for the coming of the Saviour and the accompanying 
resurrection and translation as their highest, chiefest good. His prayer for the 
Thessalonians was that their whole spirit, soul, and body, be preserved blameless (or 
entire) “unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ ;” in other words, that they might 
not taste death at all, but live to receive translation at the hand of their King. Death 
ts not the goal of the believer. 

A very pernicious effect of the modern teachings in respect to death is that it 
makes the resurrection of the body of no consequence. For if the naked soul, on its 
separation from the body, enters into the full enjoyment of heaven, and upon a career 
of never-ending expansion and glory, what need is there of a body? The resurrection 
state must be a matter of indifference to those who thus believe. Our Lord’s resur- 
rection was the crowning act of His redemptive work, without which everything else 
was valueless. It was an earnest of the final victory He will obtain over the king 


_ of terrors at the last iudgment, when Death will be forced to yield up the myriads 


over whom he has so long held dominion, and receive his eternal punishment. No, 
it is not to “the blessedness of dying,” nor the “holy joy of death,” nor to “death as 
the Prince of Peace,” that we are to look forward with eager desire as the acme of our 
hopes ; but to the coming of the Lord, the resurrection of the righteous dead, and the 
translation of the living saints.—Zimothy ; in Mid-Continent. 


148 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


- DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH IN GENESIS. 


1 Cor, 10: 11. 


First epoch—Fall to Flood, 1656 years, 
Second epoch—Ark to Abraham, 427 years. 
Third epoch—Abraham to Joseph's death, 
427 years; and to Exodus, 592 years. 


-I. Revelation of truth in beginning of each 
epoch—Adam, Gen. 3:15, 21, 24; Noah, 
Gen. 9: 4-6, 9-13; Abraham, Gen. 17:1. 

II. Increase of revealed truth through 
each epoch—Enoch, Jude 14, 15; Gen. 
4:25, 26; Shem, Gen. 9: 26, 27; 11: 10-26; 
Joseph, Gen. 49: 22-26. 

III. Increase of wickedness during each 
period—Marriage with world, Gen. 6: 1, 2, 
11, 12; Rebellion, Gen, 11° 4, 5; Slavery, 
Ex. 1:13, 14. 

IV. Crisis of each epoch demanding judg- 
ment—Deluge, Gen. 6:13, 17. Confusion 
of tongues, Gen, 11:7-9. Slaying Egyptians, 
Ex. 7:12; 14:28. 


V. Deliverance of saved in each epoch— 


Ark, Gen. 8: 15-19; 1 Peter 3:20. Selec- 


tion, Abraham, Gen. 12: 1-5. Moses, Ex. 
15; I-19. 

(1) In each epoch revealed truth increases 
from beginning to end. From epoch to 
epoch the revelation is additional to and in 
harmony with the previous revelation. The 
increase of the numbersaved £ » ave e 
is likewise evident. Thislaw \: 
Scripture running through each age, till 
Satan is chained, then all will be saved. 

(2) In each epoch sin increases, and grad- 
ually leavens the good, till the crisis is 
reached, and then judgment; the good is 
perfected and delivered. 

(3) Each age prepares for something 
better tocome. — 

(4) God overcomes sin finally by the in- 
flicted penalty. 


SECOND COMING OF JESUS. 


It isnamed in God's Word as that which 
believers should long for, 2 Tim. 4:8; Titus 
2:13; Heb. 9: 28; Rev. 22: 20. 

I. Attitude of the early church. 

t Thess. 1:10; Phil. 3:20; 2 Thess. 2:1. 

II. Practical duties taught by the doc- 
trine. 

Watcbiulness, Matt. 24:42,51; Mark 
13: 33-373 Luke 21: 28, 34-36; Rev. 3:3; 
Luke 12: 45, 46. 

Faithfulness, Matt. 25: 14-20; 24: 48-51; 
Luke 19: 13-15. 


Wakefulness, Matt.25 : 1-13; 1 Thess.1: 8. | 


Joy, Acts 1:11. Compare with Luke 
24:52; Col. 3:4; Phil. 4:4, 5; 1 Peter 
1:7,8; Rom. 5:2; 8:24. The hope is in 
Christ's coming. 

Patience, Heb. 10: 36, 37; 1 Cor. 4:5; 
James 5:7, 8. : 

In anticipation of trouble, John 14:1, 3. 
In actual trouble, 1 Thess. 4 : 13-18. 


III. Motives arising from the doctrine. 

For holiness of believers, 1 Thess. 3: 13; 
5:23; Titus 2:11-15. For abidingin Christ, 
1 John 2:28, For perseverance, Rev. 3:2, 
For ministers preaching it, 1 Peter 5: 2-4; 2 
Tim. 4: 1-4; 1 Thess. 2: 19. 

IV. Warning against apostacy. 

Luke 17 : 24-37; 2 Thess, 2: 1-12; 1 Tim. 
4:1, 2; 2 Tim. 3:1-5; 2 Peter 3: 1-4; 2 
John 7. 

V. An appeal to sinners. 

2 Thess 1 : 6-10; Acts.3: 19-21. 

VI. A personal, not a spiritual coming. 

Matt. 10:77; 13: 11-52; 24: 30; 12: 44,48; 
John 21: 19-23, Luke 19: 11-15; John 
14.1-3; Luke 12: 35-40. 

What the angels say, Acts 1:9-11. What 
Peter by the Holy Ghost says, Acts 3; 19-21. 
What Paul says by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 
1:7; 1 Thess, 4:16. What Christ said to 
John, Rev. 22; 7, 22, 20. 


PRP ae ee ee ee ae 


poch — 
Selec- 
es, Ex. 


creases 
och to 
and in 
1. The 
at re 
1 
ige, till 
ed. 
id grad- 
srisis is 


good is 
mething 


r the in- 


bctrine. 
B. 3:13; 
Christ, 
ev. 3:2, 
53 2-45 2 


| x Tim. 


Ri 1-4, 2 


RESURRECTION, 149 


ee , 


VII. Relation of the coming to Israel, 
the Church, and the World. 

Israel (the Jews) to be restored to the 
Holy Land. The land promised uncondi- 
tionally, Gen, 13: 14-17. Its boundaries not 
yet fully occupied, Gen. 15:17, 18. An 
everlasting possession, Gen, 17: 3-8; Deut. 
11:12; Lev. 25:23. An everlasting throne, 
1 Chron, 17: 4-17. Their restoration, Isa. 
1325-27, 2:2, 3; 4%: 10-13; Jer. 3:3-8; 
33: 7-16; Ezek. 37: 21-28; Jer. 3: 16-18. 
To the church, Rom. 8:23; 1 Cor. 1:7; 
Phil. 3:20; Heb. 9:28; 2 Tim. 4:8; Titus 
2:13; 1 Thess. x: 10. 

Coming of the Lord in the air for believers. 
Christ seen only by believers after the resur- 
rection, Acts 1:2, 3, 10; John 14:19; 1 
Thess. 4:16; Acts 10,41; 1 Cor. 15: 18. 

Shout, word of command. Saints only 
will understand the word of command, John 
12:28; Acts 9: 7 Compared with Acts 22:9; 
Dan. 10:7; 1 Cor. 15:51, 52. The looking 
for Christ is not death, 1 Thess. 4: 14-18; 
Phil. 3:21; 1 Cor. 15:23, 49-54. With 
Christ, John 12:26; 14:3, 193 17:24; I 
Thess. 5: 10. 

VIII. Believers and the Judgment. 

Their ‘persons ,and sins do not come into 
judgment: but their works do, Rom, 14:10; 
1 Cor, 3: 8, 13-17; 2 Cor. 5:10; Eph. 6:8; 
Rev, 22:12; James 1:12; 2 Tim. 4:7, 8; 1 
Peter 5:4; Col. 3:25. 


IX. Coming of the Lord to the earth. — 

Coming of the Lord is when He comes 
for His saints, Day of the Lord is the day 
of judgment, visitations, and the thousand 
years of His reigns 

For His saints, Matt. 24:29, 30: Mark 
14:62; 2 Thess. 1:7; Rev. 1:7; Zech. 
14:1, 4,5; Rev. 17:14. Compare with 
Rev, 19:14; Jude 14; Col. 3:4; 1 Thess, 
3:13; 4:14. 

X. The believer reigns with Christ. 

Rom. *: 17; 1 Cor. 6:2, 3; Matt. 19:28; 
Luke 12.25-37; 2 Tim. 2:12, Rev. 1:6; 


3:21; 5:9, Io. 


De es SS *: 


XI. Order of events in Christ's coming. 

1. The dead in Christ arise, and those who 
_ are alive and remain are caught up together 
“with them in the clouds, 1 Thess. 4314-18, 

A literal restoration ¢” ‘he Jews to their 
own land, Part of them return in unbelief, 
Isa, 6: 9, 13; 17: 10-14; Dan. 9: 24, 27. 
Compare with Zech. 11:14-17; Zech, 
12; 8-14; Isa. 18: 3-7; Ezek. 22: 1-9; Zech. 
13: 1-9. 

2. The temple will be rebuilt, 2 Thess. 
2:4; Rev. 11: 1-8, 

3. The Jews will enter into a covenant 
with Anti-Christ, Dan. 9:27; John 5: 43. 

4. After three and a half years, Anti-Christ 
revéals His true character, Dan. 7; 19-23; 
8: 23-25; 9:27; 11:36; 2 Thess, 2:3,9; 
Rev. 13. 

5. Hestops the sacrifice in the temple and 
sets up His own image for worship, Dan. 
9:27; 11:31; Matt. 24:15; Rev. 13: 14-17; 
Dan, 12:11. 

6. The two witnesses are killed, Rev. 
x % 

7. The devil cast out of the air into the 
earth, Rev, 12: 7-12. 

8. The Holy City (Jerusalem) trodden 
down, Dan 9:26; Rev. 11:2; Luke 21: 24, 

g. Great tribulations come upon the world, 
Jer. 30:7; Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21; Rev. 
7:14; 3:10; Luke 21: 34-36; Zech. 14: 12. 

10. Israel is saved in these tribulations by 
the personal appearance of Christ, Zech. 
14: 1-3; Rev. 19; 2 Thess. 2: 4-7. 

XII. The Resurrections. 


Difference in character of the resurrections 
of the believer and unbeliever, John 5: 28,29; 
1 Thess, 4: 13-18; 1 Cor. 15: 42, 54, 55. 

Difference in time of resurrections of 
believers and unbelievers, Rev. 20: 4-6; 
Luke 14:14; Isa. 26:6-9; 26: 12, 14,19, 21: 
Ezek. 27:1-14; Dan. 7:17-27; 12: 1-3; 
Matt. 13:38-43; Psa. 49:14, 15; Matt. 
22:30; Luke 20:35, 36; 1 Cor. 15:23; 
Phil. 3:11; Acts 24:14, 15. 


J. H. BROOKES, 


DEATH AND THE LORD'S COMING CONTRASTED. 


I, Death is the penalty of sin, but the | 
Lord's coming delivers from sin and penalty, | 
Rom. 6:23: 1 Thess. 4: 17. | 

II, Thoughts and experiences of the one, | 
painful ; of the other, delightful, John rz: 31; 
Titus 2: 13. 

III. In one event we look downward and 
weep; in the other, upward and rejoice, 
John 11: 35; Phil. 2: 16. 

IV. In one the body is sown in corruption 
and dishonor; in the other it is raised in 
incorruption and glory, t Cor. 15: 42, 43. 


V. In one event we were unclothed; inthe | 


other, clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5: 4. 

VI. In one a sad separation of friends ; in 
the other, a glad reunion, Ezek. 24:16; 
1 Thess. 4: 13, 14. 

VII. We enter into rest at death, but we 
are crowned at the Lord’s coming, 1 Thess. 
4:13; 2 Tim. 4:8. 

VIII. Death comes as our great enemy ; 
Christ as our great friend, 1 Cor. 15: 36; 
Prov. 18:24 


150 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


IX. Death is the king of terrors; Christ is 
the king of glory, Job 18:14; Ps. 24:7. 

X. Satan has the power of death; Christ 
is the Prince of Life, Heb. 2:14; Acts 3: 15. 

XI. In one event we depart to be with 
Christ ; in the other, He comes to us, Phil. 
1:23; John 14: 3. 

XII. Christ and the Apostles never com- 
manded saints to watch for death, but 
repeatedly for the Lord's coming, 1 Cor. 
15:51; Matt. 25: 13. 


We may here see that the frequently 
assumed resemblance between these two 
| events is strikingly unscriptural and false. 


We should also understand that the prac- 
tice of applying parables, instructions, and 
exhortations to death, which we know were 
expressly spoken of the Lord's coming, is a 
false and dangerous method of interpretation, 
Jer. 23:28; Rev, 22:18, 19. 


E. P. MARVIN. 


THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST AND EVENTS CONNECTED 
THEREWITH. 


A WORD FOR INQUIRERS IN:iO THE SUBJECT. 


I. Will the second coming of Christ be 
a personal one? 

Yes. The word “appear,” in Heb. 9: 28, 
answers the question conclusively. A spirit- 
ual coming, or presence, would not be a 
visible one, see also Acts 1:11; Matt. 24:30; 
John 1:51; Rev. 1:7; Zech. 14:4, 5. 

II. When will He come—before or after 
the millennium? 

Before. ‘‘ Iniquity will abound’’ up to the 
very time of His appearing, 1 Tim. 4:1, 2: 
2 Tim. 3: 1-5, 13; Jude 17, 18, 19; 2 Peter 
3:3, 4; Matt, 24: 37-39; Luke 17: 26-30; 
Luke 21 : 33-35, R. V. 

III. For what purpose will He come? 

To establish His kingdom and personal 


reign of righteousness over the earth. Pre- 
paratory to this, according to promise, He 
first descends from Heaven to receive His 
saints, both those who have died and those 
who are then alive, who are changed, and 
‘caught up to mest fim & theair.” ‘This 
is the first resurzection,” = Thess. 4:15, 18; 
John 14:3. He doubtless returns wita c4em 
for a time, to the immediate presence of the 
Father, when will take place the judgment 
of works of service as believers, according 
to 1 Cor, 3: 12-15, with a view to position 
and reward in the coming Kingdom; also, 
what is termed in Rev. 19:7, ‘ the marriage 
of the Lamb."”’ The salt of the earth being 
thus removed, moral corruption and axti- 


irist is 
7. 

Christ 
er 38 
> with 
, Phil. 


r com- 
h, but 
1 Cor. 


juently 
se two 
false. 


le prac- 
ns, and 
»w were 
ing, is a 
etation, 


VIN. 


TED 


Pre- 
hise, He 
ive His 
hd those 
ed, and 

“This 
15, 18; 
ta cacm 
e of the 
hdgment 
cording 
position 
nm; also, 
arriage 
Ih being 
d_ anti- 


Christian rebellion and apostacy develop un- 
hindered, and spread with increased rapid- 
ity, until, the cup of man’s iniquity being 
full, the Lord descends to earth with His 
saints to ‘‘execute the judgment written" 
in Ps, 110: 5,6; Isa. 63: 1-6; Dan. 2: 34, 
35, 44,45; Zech. 14: 1-5; Ezek. 39: 17-21; 
Joel 3:9-16; Mal. 4: 1-3; Jude 14, 15: Rev, 
14:17-20; 17: 13,14; and 19: 11-21; also 
Ps. 2; 2 Thess. 1: 7-9; and2:7-12. Thisis 
the ‘day of vengeance of our God," Isa. 
61:2; 62:4, and 34: 8; the day of the Lord 
of Hosts,’ Isa. 2; 12-17. 


IV. What follows? 

The binding of Satan in the bottomless pit 
for 1,000 years, Rev. 20: 1,3. The repent- 
ance and conversion of the Jews by the 
actual sight of their Messiah, Zech. 12: 10, 
14. Full restoration and establishment of 
Israel and Judah in their own land, Ezek. 
37; Zech. 8: 3-8 ; Jer. 23 : 6-8, and 31 : 31-40; 
Isa. 65: 18-23. Renewal of the earth by 
partial removal of the curse, Isa. 35; Joel 
3:18; Amos 9:13; and change also in the 
natures of the animal creation, Isa. 11 : 6-9, 
and 65:25; Rom. 8:21. Conversion of the 
Gentiles, Isa. 2:1-3, and 49:6; Micah 
4:1-4; Ps, 22:27, 28; Zech. 8: 20-22; Isa. 
11:9; Hab. 2:14; Mal. 1:11; and com- 
mencement of the millennium, or visible 
personal sign of Christ and His risen glori- 
fied saints over the regenerated earth, Matt. 
19: 28; Isa. 32: 1; Jer. 23: 5,6; Zech. 14:9; 
John 1:51; Rev. 2: 26, 27; 3:21; and 20:4. 


V. What, then, is the object and char- 
acter of the present Gospel Dispensation? 

Not the conversion of the whole world, 
but, first, to make manifest the fulfilment of 
the Divine purposes in the institution of the 
preceding one—Judaism, with its system of 
teaching by types, sacrifices, and ordinances, 
and its consequent setting aside. Also, the 
full clear revelation of God’s perfect plan of 
saving lost man by the sacrifice of His own 
beloved Son, the God-Man Christ Jesus, 
once crucified for us, but now the risen, 
victorious, glorified Saviour, Heb. 7: 10. 


RESURRECTION. 151 


This plan to be fully and faithfu‘ly pro- 
claimed by those who accept it, to ‘the 
whole world for testimony unto all the 
nations" (R.V.); the ordained result to be 
the gathering out from amongst them, both 
Jews and Gentiles, a people to his Name, to 
be His witnesses, ‘‘to serve the living and 
true God, and to wait for His Son from 
heaven,’ who shall bring in the succeeding 
age of universal righteousness. 


At the close of that glorious period, an- 
other outbreak of Satanic and human wicked- 
ness is to take place, to be, however, speedily 
and finally put down, Rev. 20 : 7-10; followed 
by the judgment of the wicked dead—the 
finally impenitent, before ‘‘the great white 
throne,"’ verses 11 to 15; the passing away of 
the present heavens and earth, and the 
creation of ‘‘new heavens and a new earth,” 
Rev. 21: 1-5, ‘‘ wherein dwelleth righteous- 
ness," and where there shall be ‘‘no more 
curse,’ 2 Peter 3:13; Rev. 22: 3. 


‘These are the true sayings of God,” 
though but a part of those things He has 
revealed in His Word as yet to come to pass. 
‘‘Hath He said, and shall He not do it? or 
hath He spoken, and shall He not make it 
good?’ ‘The great day of the Lord is 
near ; it is near and hasteth greatly,’’ Zeph. 
1:14. The ploughshares must be beaten 
into swords, and the pruning-hooks into 
spears, Joel 3; 10, ere the swords shall be 
beaten into ploughshares and the spears into 
pruning-hooks, Micah 4:3. The mighty 
men of war must be awakened for the last 
dread confiict which comes as ‘‘a destruction 
from the Almighty,’’ and terminates at 
Armageddon, Rev. 16: 13-16, of which He 
has said, ‘‘I will overturn, overturn, over- 
turn, until He come whose right it is, and I 
will give it Him,"’ Ezek. 21 ; 27, before we 
can reach the time when ‘‘ the nations shall 
learn war no more.’’ Many are crying 
‘Peace! peace! "’ and expecting to establish 
it on ea.t* apart from the coming of the 
‘Prince of Peace,” in spite of what is thus 
clearly revealed, and in spite of the warning 


152 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


a Saeed meetin * 
> 
cs en ttn ant aa tices nats OS 
— 


Pi 


trumpet of the signs of the times, now waxing 
louderand louder. But ‘thecounsel of the 
Lord, that shall stand."" He must, after long 
forbearance, do His work of judgment on re- 
bellious men, ere, asthe Sunof Righteousness, 
He can arise with healing on His wings, and 
“fill the face of the world with fruit,’’ the 
fruit of the Tree of Life. 

These t-vo contrasted periocs in the clos- 
ing years of the world’s history are rapidly 
approaching, yea, are even at the door. 


THE THREE LOOKS. 


‘Behold, the Bridegroom cometh;"' He 
shall execute the judgment, and He shall 
bear the glory, and wear his ‘'‘ many crowns” 
in the scene of his former humiliation, and 
suffering, and death, for ‘‘the Father hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son.” 
‘‘Then the moon shall be confounded, and 
the sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts 
shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, 
and before his ancients gloriously,” Isa. 
24: 23. C. A. THOMPSON. 


By Dr. Gordon, 


The eye is the index of the soul, and 
wherever it turns, there the Spirit muy be 
supposed to be for the ‘time directed; hence 
God’s constant command that we should 
look. ‘The great facts of redemption are set 
before us, And they are completed facts; 
we can add nothing to them by our faith; 
we can take nothing from them by our un- 
belief. But they must be appropriated, in 
order that they may become facts of ex- 
perience and inner life. One opening of the 
eyelid, and all the teautiful landscape which 
lay spread ovt before us instantly kecomes 
an inward expexience, imprinted first on the 
retina of the eys, and from that mysteriously 
thrown upon the camera of consciousness. 

Now, the three great facts of Christ's 
redempticn are, atorement, advocacy, and 
advent. Aud there are thrice looks corres- 
ponding to these. 


I. The backward look. 

‘* Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all the 
ends of the earth,” Isa. 45:22. The eye is 
first carried back to the cross, ar <o Christ's 
finished work thereon accomplished. Then, 
our Redeemer having satisfied the law con- 
cerning sin, bidsus accept, by our consenting 
faith, the satisfaction He has made. ‘ Hav- 
ing made peace by the blood of the cross,” 


and, therefore, ‘‘ being justified by faith, we 
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ.” 


II. The upward look, 

‘Looxing unto Jesus, the author and 
finisher of our faith; who, for the joy that 
was set before Him, endured the cross, despis- 
ing the shame, and is set down at the right 
hand of the throne of God,’ Heb. 12:2. 
There He is in the place of advocacy, who 
was before in the place of atonement. 
Better for the present that He should be 
there rather than here. The lawyer must 
be in court if he would conduct the suit of 
his client; and therefore Christ has gone 
‘‘to appear in the presence of God for us." 


III. -The onward look. 

‘Looking for that blessed hope and the 
gloricus appearing of the great God and our 
Saviour Jesus Christ,” Titus 2:13. This is 
the true expectation of the believer who 
waits for full salvation. Our Lord compares 
Himself to a nobleman going into a far 
country to receive for himself a kingdom, 
and to return. It is for us to wait that 
return, that we may share that kingdom with 
Him, ‘‘ For our conversation is in heaven ; 
from whence, also, we look for the Saviour, 


the Lord Jesus Christ." ; Tl 
- -Watchword. 


‘ecient <ctSStstt sts SY 


we gaze with cu: senting faith upon His work, 


" He 
e shall 
‘owns”’ 
yn, and 
ar hath 
Son.” 
d, and 
f Hosts 
usalem, 
oP Iga: 


SON. 


ith, we 
rd Jesus 


ior and 
joy that 
, despis- 
he right 
> Rew & tw 5 
y, who 
mement. 
ould be 
ler must 

suit of 
as gone 
or us.” 


and the 
and our 
This is 
er who 
bmpares 
op a far 
ngdom, 
nit that 
bm with 
eaven ; 
Baviour, 


RESURRECTION. 


THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST-THE TRUE KEY TO 
THE STUDY OF THE BIBLE. 


The Second Coming of Christ is spoken of 
by the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ Him- 
self in the strongest and most glowing terms, 
as being the hope of the Church, and the 
finalsalvationof Jew andGentile. 1. Christ's 
coming will be personal. 2. There will be 
no' millennium until Chr‘st comes. Let us 
look at His personal coming under the head 
of the two advents of Christ. 

I. Christ’s Second Coming wiil be per- 
gs, ual. 

“For as often as ye eat this bread, and 
drink this cup, ve do show forth the Lord's 
death till He come,” x Cor. 11: 26. 

This text, and others, enable us in part to 
see what Christ began at His first coming, 
and what He will finish at His second coming. 
Let us take a look back and see what Jesus 
suffered and did for us; and then, as we look 
forward, we will see what Christ is coming 
for. We will take four quartette looks. 

I. What He suffere” in bearing our sins. 

1. As we look back we see redemption 
begun, Matt. 20:28; Gal. 3:13. When we 
Took forward we see redemption finished, 
Luke 21:27, 28; Rom, 8:23; Phil. 1:6. 

2. He appears with our sii, Matt, 26:28; 
1 Pet. 2:24. »He appears without sin, or 
having nothing to do with sin, to them that 
look for Him, Heb. 9: 28. 

3. He appears in weakness, Ps, 22:6; 
Mark 15:4, 5. When He comes He will 
appear in power and great glory, Matt. 24: 
30; 26: 64. 

4. He is laid hold on by death, John tg: 
33. When He comes it is to conquer, and 
put an end to death forever, 1 Cor. 15 : 20-26; 
Rev. 20:14; 21:4; Heh. 2: 14, 15. 

II. What He suffered from friends and 
enemies. 

1. Friends forsake Him, Zech. 13:7; Mark 
14:50. They gather together unto Him, z 
Thess. 1:10; 2:1. 


2. Surrounded by eneraies, Ps. 22:16; 
Matt. 27:36. When He comes He will be 
surrounded with myriads of friends, Zech. 
Ig: 5; 1 Thess. 3:13; Jude 74,15. 

3. Enemies mocked and scoffed at Him, 
Ps, 22:13; Luke 23: 35-37. When Hecomes 
they will tremble with fear, Rev. 6: 14-17; 
Luke 23: 30. 

4. As we look back, Satan is bruising 
Christ, Gen. 3:74; Isa.53:5. Christ coms 
to bruise Satan, Kom. 16:20; Rev. 20: 1-3, 

Ill, What He suffered in His person, 
morally and physically. 

1. As we look back we see Him filled and 
covered with darkness, Matt. 24: 36-44; read 
Ps, 88. When He comes He will be filled 
and covered with unapproachable light, r 
Tim. 6: 14-16; Acts 26:13; Rev. 21:23. 

2. We see Him covered with shame, 
Matt. 27: 27-31. He comes covered with 
glory, Matt. 24: 30; 25:31. 

3. Inderision crowned and hailed king of 
the Jews, Matt. 27:29. He will be hailed 
when He comes, amid shouts of angels and 
saints, as King of kings, 1 Tim. 6°14, 15; 
Rey. 11:15; 3g: 76, 

4. As He hung upon the cross the world 
was veiled in darkness, Juke 23:44. When 
He comes, from east to west will be lit up 
by His glorious light, Matt. 24: 27. 

IV, What He suffered from God, man 
and Satan. 

1. At the cross God forsakes Him because 
He has to de with sin, Mark 15:34. At His 
second coming God is with Him, because He 
has nothing to do with sin, Titus 2:13; Heb. 
9:28; 1 Thess, 4: 14. ; 

a. As we look back, we see the grave is 
receiving, and still receiving our dead, Isa, 
53:9; John 19: 39-42. But waen He comes 
the grave will give up our dead forever, John 
5:28, 29; 2 Thess. 4: 15, 16. 

3. Satan’s hour and the power of darkness, 


sient tale pias Nai 


een a 


canna nn a 


154 ‘ 


Luke 22: 53. But when He comes it will be’ 
His hour, yea, His everlasting day, Dan. 7: 
13, 14, Rev. 22:4, 5. 

4. As we look back, the world is judging 
Christ, Luke 23:1-26; John 18:28-31. As 
we look forward we see Him coming to judge 
the world, Ps. 50: 3-6° Acts 17: 30. 

This is what faith sees as it looks back; 
and this is what hope expects as it looks 
forward. Faith sees a bruised, crucified, 
dead, buried and risen Christ. Hope expects 
to see a glorified Christ. 

Was His first advent literal and personal, 
as He began redemption, bare our sin, 
appeared in weakness, was laid hold on by 
death? Yousay, yes. Well, then, He will 
appeai in person as He completes redemp- 
tion, puts an end to sin, is seen in power 
when He comes to cast death into the lake 
of fire, Rev. 20: 14. 

Was this first advent literal and personal 
when friends forsook Him, when enemies 
surrounded and mocked Him, and Satan 
bruised Him? Well, then, He will appear 
personally when friends gather and surround 
Him, when foes tremble, and Satan is bruised 
and cast into the bottomless pit and lake of 
fire, to be tormented forever and ever, Rev. 
20: I-10, 

Was His first advent literal and personal 
when filled and covered with darkness, when 
shame was heaped upon Him, and He was 
mocked’ in derision as king of the Jews; 
when nature veiled her face at such treat- 
ment of her Creator ? -He surely will appear 
in person when He comes covered with light 
and glory as King of kings at His second 
coming, and then nature will be His witness, 
as it was at His first coming, Num. 14: 21: 
Ps. 72:19. 

Was His first coming personal, when God 
forsook Him, the grave received Him and 
the world judged Him? He willsurely come 
in person when God comes with Him, for 
the dead in the graves to hear Him, to judge 
the world and reign on David's throne for- 
ever, Matt. 25: 31-46; Luke 1: 32. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


II. There can be no millennium until 
Christ comes. 

We will give some plain simple scripture 
reasons for saying so. 1. The devil is at 
liberty to deceive and to destroy until Christ 
comes and binds him with the great chain, 
Rev. 20:1-3. Thisisat the beginning of the 
thousand years. Surely we must all admit 
that there can be no millennium with the 
devil going about to deceive, as an angel of 
light, preaching another Gospel, 2 Cor. 11: 13- 
15. To others as a poisonous serpent to 
leaven and corrupt pure doctrine, 2 Cor. 11; 
Rev. 12:9. And to many asa roaring lion, so 
that they are dwarfed.through fear of him, 
1 Peter 5:8; Job 1:7; Prov. 29:25; Christ 
must come and bind this great enemy before 
this fair earth will have her glorious rest, 
Isa.14:10; 14:7; and His people perfect 
love without fear, 1 John 4: 17-18. 

2. Anti-Christ is tobe reigning in full power 
when Christ comes, 2 Thess, 2:8; John 5° 
43. No one that believes that God is a 
jealous God, Exod. 20: 1-5, can believe that 
there can be a time of rest and peace, with 
this man of sin, this son of perdition, in the 
camp. We believe this man of sin—this 
son of perdition—is to be destroyed at Christ's 
coming, 2 Thess. 2:2-3. Then begins the 
millennium. 

3. Wickedness is to increase with the 
wicked, until Christ comes. Christ Himself 
says it, and tells us plainly it will be like 
Noah's day, before the flood, like Lot's day 
before Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed 
by fire, Luke 17: 26-29; Matt. 24:12, 37-39. 
Daniel 12: 8-10, givesa glimpse of the wick- 
edness, and Paul to Timothy by the Holy 
Ghost gives a fearful picture of man’s corrup- 
tion, 2 Tim. 3: 1-7. 

4. The tares and the wheat are to grow 
together until Christ comes, Matt. 13 : 24-30, 
36-43. The tares are the devil’s children. 
Can there be a millennium with those Ish- 
maelites in the house with Isaac. Read Gal. 
4: 22-31, and ask yourself the questionif you 
think you could have much of a millennium 


a 


until 


oture 
is at 
hrist 
hain, 
of the 
idmit 
h the 
sel of 
I:13- 
nt to 
r. 11; 
on, so 
him, 
Christ 
yefore 
; rest, 
erfect 


power 
hn 5° 
lis a 
e that 
, with 
n the 
—this 
rist’s 
s the 


the 
mself 
e like 
s day 
royed 
7739: 
wick- 
Holy 
brrup- 


grow 
24-30, 
dren. 
b Ish- 

Gal. 
| you 
nium 


- 


with some of those Ishmael tares that are in 
the church in the present day. You know 
they are enemies to all warm-hearted prayer 
meetings, and to all pure Gospel sermons, 
and to all spiritual work in the Church; but 
give them a raffle in the Church, or a bean 
supper, cr a theatrical performance, or a 
dance, and they are at home, like their father, 
the devil, | hn 8: 44. 

5. There are to be scoffers, and men flatter- 
ing themselves in false peace, until Christ 
comes, 1 Thess. 5:1-3. There are no doubt 
tens of thousandslistening to cultured preach- 
ing (but not the Gospel) that are saying peacc, 
peace, when there is no peace, Jer. 6:14. 
And among this class we have the scoffers 
that are saying ‘‘ Where is the promise of His 
coming?’’ Ah! poor deluded, corrupt pro- 
fessor, you will see Him some day to your 
shame and confusion; then you will have 
time to think over your cultured sermons, 
without any saving Christ, or comin ~ Christ, 
in them, 2 Peter 2: 1-3. 

6. There is to be a resurrectio~ of the 
Saints before the thousand years reign of 
Christ on earth, 1 Cor. 15: 20-23; 1 Thess. 
4:13-17; John 5 :28-29; Rev. 20: 4-6. 

Has Satan been chained yet? Has Anti- 
Christ been consumed yet? Is wickedness 
decreasing in the world everywhere—any- 
where? Have the tares een separated and 
cast into the fire? Are there no scoffers 
saying, ‘‘Where is the promise © His 
ccming?”’ Is the resurrection past already, 
and has nobody’s faith been overthrown? 
2 Tim. 2:17,18. Ever spiritually-minded 
believer says, No, no! oll, then, hear the 
Master say, ‘‘ Behold I .. .e quickly, hold 
that fast which thou hast, that no man take 
thy crown,” Rev. 3:2. 

Topical study on scores of subjects will 
lead to Christ’s Second Coming. 

You will find the following line of study 
exceeding!y interesting. \W’e here give you 
an idea, and put them in sevens, as this 
makes i¢ easier for the memoi'y ; and in it we 
have the gerfece number of suripture. 


RESURRECTION. 155 


1 God, Gen. 1:1; Ps. 50:28; Titus 2:13. 
2 Light, Gen.1:3; Ps.104:2; 1John1:5; 
1 Tim. 6: 14-16. 
3 Lord, Gen. 11:5. 
Thess. 4; 16. 
4 Judge, Gen. 18:25; Acts 17:31; 2Tim. 
rs 


The Lord descends, 1 


4:1. 

5 Man, Gen. 1:26; Acts 17:31; Matt. 
25:31. 

6 Work, Gen. 2:2; Rev. 22:12. 

7 Gathering together, Gen. 1:10; Ps. 
50:3; 2 Thess. 2:1. 


t Sons of God, Gen. 6:2; 1 John 3:2. 

2 Angels of God, Gen. 32:1; Matt. 16: 27; 
Mark §&: 38. 

3 Servants, Gen. 14:14; Luke 12:37. 
Blessed Servants. 

4 Walk, Gen. 17:1; Rev. 16:15. 

5 Kingdom, Gen. 10:10; Luke 19: 15. 

6 Come, Gen. 7:1; John 14:3; Acts 1: 11. 

7 Door Shut. Gen. 6:16; 7:16; Matt. 
25: 10. 


1 Sin, Gen. 4:7; Heb. 9; 28. 
2 Heart, Gen. 6:5; 1 Cor. 4:5. 
3 Darkness, Gen. 1:2; 15:12; 1 Thess. 


5:4. 

4 Earth, Gen. 6: 11-12; 2 Pet. 3: 10. 

5 Sinners, Gen. 13:13; Jude 14:15. 

6 Night, Gen. 1:5; 1 Thess. 5:2; 2 Pet. 


3:10. 
7 Serpent, Gen. 3:14; Rev. 20: 1-3. 


1 Blessed, Gen. 1:28; Rev. 22:7. 

2 Voice, Gen. 3:10; 1 Thess. 4: 16. 

3 Behold, Gen. 1:29; Rev. 1:7; 16:15. 

4 Nations, Gen. 10:5; Matt. 25 : 31-32. 

5 Presence ofthe Lord. Gen. 3:8; 2 Thess. 


1: 7-9. 

6 Vengeance, Gen. 4:15; 2 Thess. 1: 7-8. 

7 Fire, Gen. 15:17; (Margin) Ps. 50:3; 
2 Thess. 1: 7-8. 


1 Righteousness, Gen. 15:6; 2 Tim. 4:8. 

2 Grace, Gen. 6:8; 1 Pet. 1:13. 

3 Spirit, Gen. 6:3; 1 Thess. 5:23. 

4 Heaven, Gen. 1:15; 1 Thess. 4: 16; Acts 
rity 

5 Air, Gen. 1: 30; 1 Thess. 4: 17. 

6 Day, Gen. 1:5; Job 19:25; 2 Tim. 4:8. 
No night, Rev. 22: 5. 

7 Believed, Gen. 15:6; 1 Thess. 1: 10, 


1 Shepherd, Gen. 49:10; 1 Pet. 5: 4. 

2 Glory, Exod. 24:16; Matt. 24: 30. 

3 Crown, Exod. 25:11; 1 Thess. 2:19. 

4 Life, Gen. 6:17; Col. 3: 4. 

5 Son, Gen. 22:12; 1 Thess. 1: ro. 

6 Died, Gen. 50:26; 1 Thess. 4: 14. 

7 Changed, Gen. 41:14; 1 Cor, 15: 51-52. 


‘156 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


1 Cometh, Exod. 4:14; Matt. 25:6; Rev. 
229, 
2 Thief, Exod. 22:2; 1 Thess. 5:2; 2 Pet. 


wi. 10. 

3 Wicked, Gen. 38:7; 2 Thess, 2: 8. 

4 Dead, Gen. 23:4; 1 Thess. 4:16; 2 Tim. 
Py 


4:1. 
5 Garments, Gen. 38:14; Rev. 16:15. 
6 Virgin, Exod. 22:17; Matt. 25: 10-13. 
7 Quickly, Joshua 8:19; Rev. 22: 20. 


1 Look, Gen. 15:5; Phil. 3: 20. 

2 Escape, Gen. 19:17; 1 Thess. 5: 2, 3. 

3 Coming, Gen. 30:30; James 5:8; 2 Pet. 
112 


3:12. 
4 Salvation, Gen. 49:18; Heb. 9: 28. 
5 Delivered, Num. 21: 34; 1 Thess. 1: ro. 
6 Rest, Exod. 33:14; 2 Thess. 1:7, 8; 
Heb. 4:9. 
7 Gift, Deut. 16:19, 1 Cor. 1:7. 


t Love, Deut. 7:7; 1 Cor. 16;22. 

2 Confidence, 2 Kings 18:19; 1 John2: 28. 
3 Redemption, Lev. 25:52; Luke 21 ; 27,28. 
4 Waiting, Num. 8:25; 1 Cor. 1:7. 

5 Watching, 1 Sam. 4:13; Prov. 8: 34; 


Luke 12; 37. 

6 Watch, Exod. 14:24; Judges 7:19; 
Matt. 24: 42. 

7 Reward, Ruth 2:12; Matt. 6:27; Rev. 
22: 12. 


rt Saints, 1 Sam. 2:9; Zech. 14:5; 1 Thess. 
3:13; Jude 14.15. 

2 Blameless, Geu. 44:10; 1 Thess. 5; 23. 

3 First Fruits, Exod. 23:16; 1 Cor. 15; 23. 

4 Reapers, F.uth 2: 5-7; Matt. 13 : 41-43. 

5 At Hand, Deut. 32: 35; Phil. 4:5; 1 Pet. 
4:7. 

6 Consume, Deut. 7 : 16; 2 Thess. 2:8. 

7 Suddenly, Num. 12:4; Mal. 3:1; Mark 
8 : 34-37: 


rt Enoch, Gen. 5: 22-24; Jude 14:15. 

2 Noah, Gen. 6:13; 7:1; Matt. 24:37-39. 

3 Lot, Gen. 19:23, 24; Luke 17 : 28, 29. 

4 Saviour, Judge: 3:y; (Margin) Phil. 
- 3320; Titus 2: 13. 


5 He Cometh, Exod. 4:14; Rev. 1:7. 

6 Harvest, Gen. 8:22; Ruth 2:23; Matt. 
13 3 39; 40. 

7 No Man Knoweth, Deut. 34:6; Matt. 
24- 30-36; Mark 13: 31-37. 


1 Lightning, Job 37:3; Matt. 24:27. 
2 Glorious, Exod. 15:6; Titus 2:13. 
3 Trumpet, Exod. 19:19; 20:18; Matt. 
24:30, 313 1 Cor. 15:51, 5231 Thess. 
216 


4:16. 

4 Tarry, Judges 5:28; Heb. 10: 37. 

5 Over All, Gen. 39:5; Matt. 24 : 45-47. 

6 New Heavens and New Earth, Isa. 
65:17; 2 Pet. 3:10-13; Rev. 21:1. 

7 are, of Kings. Ezra 7: 12; Ezek. 26:6; 
2 Tim. 6: 14-16. 


We have taken upthe word of God,—Light, 
| Lord, Judge, Man, Work, Gathering Together, 
Sons of God, Angels, Servants, Walk, 
Kingdom, Come, Door Shut, Sin, Heart, 
Darkness, Earth, Sinners, Light, Serpent, 
Blessed, Voice, Behold, Nations, Presence 
of the Lord, Vengeance, Fire, Righteousness, 
Grace, Spirit, Heaven, Air, Day, Believed, 
Shepherd, Glory, Crown, Life, Son, Died, 
Changed, Cometh, Thief, Wicked, Dead, 
Garments, Virgins, Quickly, Look, Escape, 
Coming, Salvation, Delivered, Rest, Gift, 
Love, Confidence, Redemption, Waiting, 
Watching, Watch, Rewards, Saints, Blame- 
less, First Fruits, Reapers, Hand, Consume, 
Suddenly, Enoch, Noah, Lot, Saviour, He 
Cometh, Harvest, No Man Knoweth, Light- 
ning, Glorious, Trumpet, Tarry, Over all, 
New Heavens and New Earth, King of 
Kings. In all eighty-four words, which 
might be increased to hundreds, but these 
will suffice to show that Christ’s Second 
Coming may be made a profitable study, 
and that all our study may head up into His 
Second Coming. 
This is the way I have studied Christ's 
personal Coming from the Bible, to satisfy 
my own mind. May God bless it to others, 


is my prayer. 
sti TOHN CURRIE. 


[3. 
3; Matt. 
1 Thess. 


7. 
45-47. 
rth, Isa. 
Ii I. 

ek. 26:6; 


|,—Light, 
Together, 
5, Walk, 
n, Heart, 
_ Serpent, 
Presence 
teousness, 
Believed, 
on, Died, 
xd, Dead, 
:, Escape, 
test, Gift, 
Waiting, 
s, Blame- 
(Consume, 
viour, He 
th, Light- 
Over all, 
King of 
is, which 
but these 
s Second 
ble study, 
b into His 


H Christ's 
to satisfy 
to others, 


IRRIE, 


RESURRECTION. 157 


THE PROPHETIC SCRIPTURES. 


8 Reece: are at least eight reasons for those who fear the Lord giving heed to the 
prophetic Scriptures : 

I, Because they are the words of the living God. 

II. Because ALL Scripture is profitabic, . . . that the man of God may be perfect, 
throughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Tim. 3: 16, 17. 

III. Because the Holy Spirit—the glorifier of Jesus—is given to us to show us 
“things to come,” Jno. 16: 13; and can we suppose that He would have taken u 
His abode in our hearts, to guide us into a correct understanding of the mind of God, 
unless our heavenly Father intended it for our blessing and His own glory? Certainly 
not, especially when we remember that the name of this blessed Teacher is “ The 
Comforter.” 

IV. Because the testimony of the apostle Peter is that we do well to take heed 
tothe “sure word of prophecy,” as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, 2 Pet. 
I: 16-19. ; 

V. Poe aces much of the personal ministry of the Lord Himself was prophetic. 

VI. Because prophecy formed an important feature in the ministry of the apostles. 

VII. Because the last book in the sacred Scriptures is peculiarly prophetic. It 
is a letter from the Lord Jesus to His saints some years after His ascension ; it opens 
with the solemn announcement, “ Behold, He cometh with clouds ; and every eye 
shall see Him, and they also which pierced Him; and all kindreds of the earth shall 
wail because of Him; ” and concludes with, “‘ Behold, I come quickly.” The book is 
introduced with, ‘‘ Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this 
prophecy,” etc. ; and towards the end it is written “Seal not the sayings of the pro- 
phecy of this book.” 

VIII. Because most unfulfilled prophecy is connected with the personal return 
and glory of Him who is the object of the affection and desire of the Lord’s people. 
The first resurrection will take place when the Lord Himself descends from heaven, 
1 Thess. 4: 16, 17,3 the dead, small and great, being raised a thousand years after- 
ward, when He to whom all judgment is committed will sit upon the great white 
throne, Rev. 20: 5-12. When the enemies of the Lord Jesus are made His footstool, 
He will. avise from the throne on which He is now seated, to put all foes under His feet 
Heb, 10: 12, 13. When the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as 
the waters cover the sea, Jesus will be King over all the earth; in that day there 
shall be one Lord, and His name one, Zech. {4:9.—-H. A, Snell, 


PE AAS ae 


Mersichame soit land se ashes bier aghabiieineais, 


‘ 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


By Prof. Blakie. 


AS our attention is to be mainly directed to the Holy Spirit and His work, it is 
natural that we should begin by briefly considering who and what is the Holy 
Spirit? What is His relation to the other persons of the Trinity, and what is His 
relation to men, especially in connection with the great work of redemption ? 

It is a subject which from its very nature demands no ordinary reverence and sub- 
duedness of mind. We may well take the shoes from off our feet as we approach it ; 
we must address ourselves to it in a frame of holy awe. In its zwtel/ectual bearings, 
the whole subject of the Trinity belongs to a region so utterly beyond the ken of our 
faculties, that every inquiry that bears upon it ought to be conducted with profound 
reverence and godly fear. In its Jractical bearings, the doctrine of the Holy Spirit 
makes an equally strong demand upon our reverence, for it is in the person of the 
Holy Spirit that Godhead comes into closest contact with man, and no inquiry can be 
more impertant than that which concerns the manner in which, when the Holy Spirit 
thus deals with us, we should act towards Him. If there were some one member of 
the Royal Family whose function it was, when we had any business to transact, to 
come into personal contact with us, we shduld feel that without diminishing the 
respect due to those members of Royalty who kept more in the distance, we were 
under special obligations to bear ourselves suitably toward him. If it be true, as we 
shall presently see more clearly, that the Holy Spirit is that member of the Trinity 
who comes into touch with us, with the view of depositing Divine elements in our 
spirits, with the view of 5 eee sh us, and of moulding and fashioning us after the 
Divine likeness, and in all suitable ways influencing us in accordance with the Divine 
will—it becomes overwhelmingly important that we bear ourselves yghtly and 
reverently toward Him, and abstain from all that would be displeasing ir¥ His sight, 
and especially from all that is fitted to thwart Him and drive Him away. 

The special point on which this address is intended to bear is the PERSONALITY 
of the Holy Spirit. We have to consider Him not as a mere zz/fluence exerted either 
by the Father, or the Son, but as Himself, a person, equally a person with the Father 
and the Son. It is true that this is necessarily implied in the very doctrine of the 
Trinity ; the Trinity means three persons in the unity of the Godhead, and in this 
point of view it were out of the question that the first should be a person, and the 
second a person, but not the third. In point of fact, however, it is found that many 
persons have a much less distinct impression of the personality of the Holy Spirit than 
they have of the personality of the Father and the Son. If is desirable, therefore, 
that the fact of His personality, and the proofs of His personality, be set clearly before 
our minds at the outset of our Conference to-day. 

We gather from Scripture—which is really the only source of our knowledge on 


II (161] 


162 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


this profound and mysrious subject—that while the Father is the Eternal Fountain 
ot Godhead, the Son i: eternally begotten of the Father, and the Holy Spirit proceeds 
eternally from the Fat)ser and the Son. We are further taught in Scripture that no 
man having seen God at any time, it is the function of the Son to reveal God, and 
that it is the function af the Holy Spirit to communicate God, in all His communicable 
attributes, to men. In reference to the scheme of redemption, it is the office of the 
Father to devise, the oflice of the Son to execute, and the office of the Holy Spirit to 
apply that work. The performance of these various functions implies the personality 
of each of the three persons, and certainly it implies the personality of the third as 
much as of the first or the second. I do not take up your time at present with the 
Scripture proofs of these varied functions of the three persons, I suppose it will be 
admitted by those present that they are Scriptural. I trust, too, that there are many 
here who can add to that Scriptural evidence a certain confirmation from their own 
experience, 

For the doctrine of the Trinity, far beyond our natural apprehensions though it 
is, is susceptible of a certain verification from experience. ‘To the natural mind the 
doctrine appears not only unreasonable, but very unnecessary and even troublesome. 
It seems to introduce a very needless complication into the unity of God. ‘To the 
natural reason of man it appears that all it is essential for God to do might be done 
by one person as well as—nay, better than, by three. But those to whom redempti»: 
has become a reality—those who have passed through the stages of conscious guilt, 
and conscious disorder of soul—who have been driven from refuge to refuge, finding 
all insufficient until at last they have got rest in the atoning work of Jesus, the sancti- 
fying work of the Holy Spirit, and the fore-ordaining grace of the Father who has 
disposed and directed all—those who have co through all the strain of thes: 
experiences, find much complacency and satisfact:.. in that manifoldness of Divine 
operation which is implied in the doctrine of the Trinity, and in that blessed and most 
harmonious co-operation of all the three persons in our redemption, which is the 
practical outcome of the doctrine to us. The interlacing arms of the three persons 
seem to provide a specially sure and glorious refuge for the soul that has been tossed 
with a sense of sin, after it has been driven from all the refuges of lies, while the 
special relation of each of the three to some one aspect of the work of redemption 
gives us the fullest possible assurance that every department of the work will be most 
thoroughly carried out. The words of the Apostolic Benediction are far more to such 
persons than a threefold echo of a single sound. “The grace of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost,” are a threefold 
cord that cannot be broken. 

“The Lord bless thee and keep thee ; the Lord make His face shine upon thee, 
and be gracious unto thee ; the Lord lift up His countenance unto thee and give thee 
peace,” acquires a new fulness and completeness when you think of it as the blessing 
of the One in Three, the Three in One. 

The miore direct Scripture proofs of the personality of the Holy Spirit are such as 
these : 

I, The Holy Spirit is spoken of in relation to the Father and the Son in such 
terms as imply that He is a separate person. ‘Ihe formula of baptism and the words 
of benediction now referred to imply His personality. Why should we baptize in the 
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, if the Holy Ghost is not a person, 
if He is a mere Divine emanation or influence? But even more decisive are the 
terms in which He is referred to in our Lord’s farewell discourse: ‘‘‘The Comforter, 
which is the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name,” John 14:20. It 
were hardly possible for words to teach more clearly that the Holy Spirit is a separat« 
person, separate both from the Father and the Son. : 

Il. Will and choice, the most peculiar acts of personality, are ascribed to the 
Spirit. In 1 Cor. xii. 11, after an enumeration of the gifts which were common in the 
early Church, we read: “All these worketh that one and the self same Spirit, dividing 


yuntain 
‘“oceeds 
that no 
od, and 
nicable 
of the 
pirit to 
sonality 
hird as 
ith the 
will be 
e many 
eir own 


ough it 
ind the 
ylesome. 
To the 
be done 
emptio 
us guilt, 
, finding 
» sancti- 
who has 
of thes: 
f Divine 
nd most 
h is the 
persons 
n tossed 
hile the 
emption 
be most 
to such 
d Jesus 
hreefold 


on thee, 
ive thee 
blessing 


such as 


in such 
e words 
e in the 
person, 
are the 
mforter, 
: 20. It 
eparatt 


to the 
in the 
Hividing 


THE HOLy SPIRIT. 163 


- a oe 


to every mau severally as He wll.” There is no more distinct evi e i 
among men than the exercise of will and choice, such as is here ertar te the Holy 
Spirit. Of similar tenor are the passages in the Acts 16:6, 7, where it is said that 
Paul and his companions were forbidden by the Holy Ghost to preach in Asia, and 
that when they tried to go into Bjthynia the Spirit suffered them not. So also we 
read, Acts 13:2, that as certain brethren ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the 
Holy Ghost said: Separate Me Birnabas and Paul for the work whereunto I have 
called them.” — if we take suc!) passages in their natural sense they undoubtedly, and 
most distinctly, prove the personality of the Holy Spirit. 

II, The ordinary operations of the Holy Ghost, involving will and choice as they 
do, imply the Spirit’s personality, These operations will be the subject of another 
address. What I remark of them is that they are characterised by much variety, and 
by adaptation to the circumstances of each case. The Spirit does not deal with all 
alike. He has various ways of convincing and converting, of comforting, and ever, of 
sealing. His operations are adapted to the peculiar case of each. There were great 
diversities in the dealings of our Lord with individuals while He was pursuing His per- 
sonal ministry. He did not deal with Zacchzeus as He dealt with Nicodemus : He did not 
deal with Peter as He dealt witn inomas ; rie dia not deal with the Syro-Pheenician 
mother as He dealt with the woman that was a sinner. Now the Holy Spirit was 
sent to continue the work of Christ in drawing men and women to Himself. The 
work of the Holy Spirit is characterised by the same diversity as that of Christ, and 
this implies not only personality, but a busy, active, earnest mode of operation—the 
work of one intensely interested in what He is doing, and prepared to bring any or all 
the resources of his Infinite Divine Nature to bear on the great work of converting 
sanctifying, and transforming the souls of men. 

IV. One other proof of the personality of the Holy Spirit is found in what is said 
regarding Him when His work is opposed. Scripture tells us that tle Ho! Spirit 
may be resisted, grieved, vexed, quenched. It would take too much time to »> iully 
into the meaning of these several expressions, and the occasions to which they are 
applicable. They do not imply that the Holy Spirit ever fails in His blessed purpose 
in the case of any who are the subjects of God’s fore-ordaining grace. And, indeed, 
when it is said that the Spirit is grieved or vexed, this can only be the figure called 
anthropopathy—ascribing to a Divine Being the feelings of men. But undoubtedly 
the use of such words is a conclusive proof of the personality of the Spirit. It would 
be wholly unsuitable to say that an influence or an emanation was grieved or vexed. 
Grief or vexation, or whatever feeling answers to this in the Divine nature is obviously 
ap attribute of a person 

Now, in conclusion, let us ask, what is the practical application of this doctrine of 
the personality of the Holy Spirit? What difference does it make that the work of 
regeneration, sanctification, and transformation, is not carried on by an influence or 
emanation from God the Father, but by a separate Divine person? Now, I am not 
prepared to say that the difference is a difference zm Aind, for there have been good 
men who have been Christians for years and have fully recognized the Divine source 
of conversion and sanctification before they understood the doctrine of the personality. 
But if not a difference in kind, it is a most decided and important difference in degree. 
It gives us a new and vivid sense of the reality and overwhelming importance of the 
work of renewal in the soul of man, to think that it has been specially committed to 
one Divine person, that it specially occupies His Divine energies, that it is the special 
subject of His thoughts and operations. Further, it gives us a vivid sense of the 
honor which we ought to cherish for the Holy Spirit, the gratitude which we owe to 
Him, the profound cordiality with which we should welcome Him, the dread we 
should have of hindering or obstructing Him, the delight with which we should resign 
ourselves to His hands, and seek to be penetrated by His grace, and to be instruments 
for His work. Once more: this subject may well give us confidence in the compiete 
accomplishment .f the work of conversion and sanctification, seeing it has been com- 


164 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


ey, 


mitted to a Divine Being who is as much interested init and as profoundly qualified 
for it, as the Second Person was for the work undertaken by Him. Let us, then, 
honor more the Holy Spirit, realise more vividly the value and importance of His 
work, own more humbly our entire dependence on Him, look yp to Him more earnestly 
to put forth His eg power ; and very specially let us guard more carefully against 
all that would hinder Him in His mighty enterprise either in ourselves or in others, 
“ Because the palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of the city shall be left, the torts 
and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks : until the 
Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the 
fruitful field be counted for a forest.” 

One other remark I must make in conclusion, in the way of caution. The Scrip- 
tures show us, that while there is a real sense in ' “hich different portions of the work 
of redemption are specially connected with the several persons of the Trinity, that 
sense is not an exclusive sense. That is, it does not exclude the other persons from 
doing the same work. The Father sanctifies, and the Son sanctifies, along with the 
Spirit ; and, indeed, it cannot be otherwise. In the ineffable mystery of the Trinity, 
the acts of each are the acts of all, and the acts of all are the acts of each. For 
“there are three persons in the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: 
and these three are one God, the same in substance and eaual in power and glory.” 

‘— From London Christian. 


ee oe ee 


Soe ee. 


ualified 
, then, 
of His 
irnestly 
against 
others. 
he torts 
intil the 
and the 


e Scrip- 
ie work 
ity, that 
ns from 
vith the 
Trinity, 
h. For 
Ghost: 


_ glory.” 


THe Hoy Spirit. 165 


THE HOLY SPIRIT—A BIBLE READING. 


According to the Scriptures of truth the 
infinite God, maker of heaven and earth, 
exists in three distinct Persons, Father, 
Son, and Spirit; ‘‘and these three are one 
God, the same in substance, equal in power 
and glory." The Father is God, the Son is 
God, the Spirit is God. The Father is a 
Person, the Son is a Person, the Spirit is a 
Person. In the glorious work of human 
salvation the Father plans, the Son executes, 
the Spirit applies redemption t~ the believer. 
The Father sends the Son, the Son delights 
to come; the Father and the Son send the 
Spirit. It is of the Spirit thus sent forth 
upon such an errand of love and mercy, we 
are more particularly to speak. 


I. The Holy Spirit is a Person. 

The complete proof of personality is the 
possession of personal attributes or proper- 
ties and the performance of personal acts. 
“Whoever has understanding, reason, vill, 
affections, ¢.e., the attributes of an intelli- 
gent and moral agent, and puts forth 
corresponding acts, must be a_ person. 
Apart from these qualities and acts, there is, 
and can be, no proof of a personal being in 


the universe, whether man, angel, or God.'’ | 


In the fullest and most explicit manner 
every act and attribute of personality is 
ascribed in the Scriptures to the Holy 
Spirit He knows, We teaches, testifies, 
searches, leads, hears, speaks, reproves, 
glorifies, helps, intercedes, bestows super- 
natural gifts according to His will, etc., Jno. 
14:17-26; 15:26; 16:7-13; Rom. 8:16, 26; 
1 Cor, 2:13; 1 Cor. 12: 8-11. 

1. The Lord Jesus speaks of the Spirit in 
such a way as to make it evident that He 
meant we should know Him to be a person. 
The Greek word for the Spirit is pueuma— 
a neuter noun ; yet our Lord in John 16 : 12- 
14, employs a masculine pronoun to designate 
Him, saying, ‘‘Howbeit, when He, the 
Spirit of truth is come, He will guide you 


into all truth: for He shall not speak of 
Himself," etc. (e4einos). 

2. His personality is proved also from 
the formula of baptism, and the apostolic 
benediction, Matt. 28:19; 2 Cor. 13:14. 
In these instances the Spirit is associated 
with the Father and the Son; if they are 
persons, so is He. Moreover, it is incon- 
sistent with every law of language and 
reason to speak of the ‘‘ name" ofan energy, 
or an influence, and to connect an energy 
with two distinct persons. 

3. Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost 
indicates that He is a person, Matt. 12:31, 
32; Mark 3:28, 29; Luke 12:10, Properly 
speaking, blasphemy is a sin which can be 
committed only against a person. 


II. The Holy Spirit is God. 

1. He is called by Divine Names, Isa. 
6:8, 9, cf. Acts 28:25; Acts 5:3, 4; 1 Cor. 
3:16; 6:19; 2 Cor. 6:16. 

2. The perfections of God are ascribed 
to Him. (a) Omnipotence, Gen. 1:2; Job 
26:13: 33:4; Zech. 4:6; Joel 2:28, 32; 
Jno. 3:5; 1 Cor. 12:8-11. (4) Omnipre- 
sence likewise, Ps. 139:7. He abides in 
each individual believer, and in the tni- 
versal Church, 1 Cor, 6:19; Jno. 14; 16, 17, 
(c) He is omniscient ; Isa. 40:13; 1 Cor. 2:9- 
11. To dishonor and depreciate the Holy 
Spirit is a sin of special enormity, Heb. 
10 ; 29. 

III, The Gift of the Holy Spirit. 

On the day of Pentecost the Spirit was 
given in an altogether supernatural manner. 
We call it the Baptism of the Spirit, for it 
was the fulfilment of the promise of Jesus 
made to His disciples both before and after 
His res'rrection, In John 16:7, we find 
this somewhat strange and very significant 
language; ‘‘It is expedient for you that I 
go away ; for if I gonot away, the Comforter 
will not come unto you; but if I depart, I 
will send Him unto you." Here we may 


165 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


quote also the equally significant words of 
John 7 : 39—"' For the Spitit was not given ; 
because Jesus was not yet glorified.” Of 
course this language does not mean that the 
Old Testament believers did not have the 
Spirit, for we know on the authority of both 
the Old and the New Testaments that they 
did; it means that in much larger measure 
and in a different way the Spirit is given 
under the present dispensation. The gift of 
the Spirit at Pentecost was in consequence 
of Christ's finished work of redemption, and 
His ascension to the right hand of the 
Father.» Hence we read in Acts 2: 33, 
“Therefore being by the right of God 
exalted, and having received of the promise 
of the Holy Ghost, He hath shed forth this 
which ye now see and hear.” Before the 
death of Christ the Spirit undoubtedly 
wrought in the heartsof men; but it was not 
until redemption work was completed that He 
was poured forth with that copious effusion 
which is the characteristic feature of our 
dispensation. His presence now in the 
world is so peculiar and so distinct, as that 
it might well be said, He was not given until 
Jesus was glorified. 


IV. Emblems of the Spirit. 

1. Oil, 1 John 2: 20, 27; Lev 6, anointing 
of Aaron as high priest, and afterward that 
of his sons, cf. Ps. 133. ~ 

2. Seal, Eph. 1:13, 14. By the gift of the 
Spirit to His people God marks them and 
sets them apart as His own. 

3. Earnest, 2 Cor. 5:5; Eph. 1:14. The 
earnest is the pledge and security of all that 
is promised. 

4. Water, John 4:14; 7: 37-39. 

5. Wind, John3:8. 

V. Work of the Spirit. 

1. Creation, Gen. 1:2; Job 26:13; Ps. 
33:6; 104: 30. 

2. Inspiration, 2 Tim. 3:16; 1 Pet.1: 10; 
2 Pet. r: 21. 

3. Convicting the world, Jno. 16: 7-11. 

4. Regeneration, John 3:5; Titus 3: 5. 

5. He carries forward to completion the 
new lite and gracious work which He origin- 
ates, Rom. 5:5;8: 11, 14,16; 2 Thess. 2:13. 

6. Abides in believers, Jno. 14:16, 17; 
1 Cor. 3: 16. 

7. The Spirit grieved, Eph. 4:25-32; 
1 Thess, 5: 14-22. 

W.G. MOOREHEAD. 


NOTES ON THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


‘* Have ye received the Holy Ghost since 
ye believed ?”’ Acts 19: 2. 

A question of the deepest import—a ques- 
tion put to believers. It was not, ‘‘ Have ye 
received Christ?’’ but ‘‘ Have ye received 
the Holy Ghost since ye believed ?"’ 

1. The receiving of Christ as Saviour, or 
being ‘ born again,’’ of the Spirit of God, 
is nct the baptism of the Holy Ghost. The 
baptism of the Holy Ghost is subsequent to 
the reception of Christ as Saviour, It is 
promised, Joel 2:16, 17. 

The Ephesian believers were saved. They 
nad believed in Jesus. They were disciples, 


as is clearly stated in verse 1 of chapter 19; 
but they, like thousands of Christians of the 
present day, had not received the power 
from on high, the great essential qualification 
for Christian service. This brings us to our 
main argument, viz: 

1. That there is a great differetice vetween 
having the Spirit zw us testifying that we 
are the children of God, and the Spirit «fon 
us qualifying us for service: 

2. All true believers have the Spirit of the 
Lord. See J:0. 3:7, 8. But Jesus prayed 
for the coming of another Comforter, Jno. 
14:16, 17; Luke 24: 49. 


Mointing 
ard that 


ift of the 
hem and 


14. The 
f all that 


-13; Ps. 
et. 1:10; 


19-11. 
IS 3:5. 
etion the 
le origin- 
28S, 2:13. 
216, 17; 


4125-32; 
EAD. 


hpter 19; 
s of the 
e power 
ification 
s to our 


vetween 
that we 
irit won 


it of the 
5 prayed 
er, Jno. 


3. The Lord commanded them not to 
depart from Jerusalem until they were filled 
with the Holy Ghost, Acts 1: 4, 5. 

4. The Holy Spirit comesasadove. A dove 
is the gentlest of all birds. So when the 
Holy Ghost comes upon a man, he will pos- 
sess the gentleness of Jesus, Luke 3: 21, 22. 

5. The Spirit by anointing, 1 Sam. 16: 13. 
Demonstration of the Spirit, Acts 2:4, 7. 
The fruit of the Spirit, Acts 2:41. Fruits 
cf the Spirit, Gal. 5: 22, 23. 

6. This anointiag may be lost. Note case 
of Samson, Judges 16: 20. 

7. If you are filled with the Spirit you wi’! 
be misjudged, Acts 2:11, 13. 

8. There will be more power at times 
than generally, Judges 13 : 24, 25. 

9. The Holy Ghost is the mighty power of 
God. ‘Dry bones live,” Ezek. 37:9, 10; 
and is resistless, Acts 6:10, II. 

to, Men are sent by the Spirit, and this 
is the only right and tiue sending, Acts 
10: 1g, 20. 

11. His leadings are perfect, Ex. £3: 21. 
The pillar and the cloud. 

12. The Spirit is for workers and not for 
lazy disciples, Ex. 31 : 3-5. 

13. It is wonderful, 1 Sam. 10: 10-12. 

14. The Holy Spirit gives hunger for souls, 
1 Cor, 9:20; 9:22,23 Winning. 

15. It will make the timid bold, cud the 
slow of speech quick to testify, Ex. 4 : 10-16; 
Jer. 1:8, 9. 

16. Your words will be appropriate. You 
will not strain for effect, Prov. 25: 11. 

17. Yon will feel like Elihu of old, Job 
32:17, 18. 

18. The anointing will also make you care- 
ful in your speech. See Eccles. 5 : 2. 

19. If placed in sudden emergency you will 
be able to speak without pre-meditation. 
See Matt. 22:15, 21, 22. 

20. There will be times when the Spirit 
will lead you to be silent and answer not a 
word, Matt. 27 : 12-14; Luke 23:9, to. 


21. In Genesis God came down and con- | 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. 167 


founded the people so they could not under- 
stand one another, Gen. 11:6,7. In Acts 
2:1-10, God the Holy Ghost came down, 
and caused the disciples to speak so that 
men of all languages could understand them. 

22. Whenever the Holy Ghost is spoken of 
in the Bible, He is spoken of in terms cf 
gentleness and love. We often read of the 
‘wrath of Gcd"’ the Father, as Rom, 1 : 18; 
and we read of the wrath of God the Son, as 
in Psalms 2:12; but we nowhere read of the 
wrath of the Holy Ghost. 

23. Trench says that '*The fundamental] 
idea of ‘Comforter,’ according to its ety- 
mology and its early uses, is that of 
Strengthener, and not Consoler. Like an 
advocate, who being summoned to the side 
of the accused or imperilled, stands by to aid 
and encourage.” 

24. '' He divides severally to every man as 
He will," x Cor. 12: 11, 

25. The Gift of the Spirit is frequently 
described as or by words expressive of 
abundance and continuance. Thus the Holy 
Ghost is spoken of as 

(c) Coming, as a mighty and powerful 
impulse, as in the case of ~‘hniel, Jepthah, 
Samson, personally, and upon the Church- 
collectively. 

(5) Poured Out, Psa. 45:2; Isa. 44:3; 
Joel 2:28, 29: Zech. 12:10; Acts2: 17, 18, 

(c) Shed abundantly, as in Titus 3 : 6. 

(d) Clothing, Judges 6:34; 1 Chron. 
12:18 (margin); Luke 24:49; ‘‘ endued,” or 
invested with the Spirit. 

(e) Dwelling, Psa. 68:18; Jno. 14:17; 
Rom. 6:9; 1 Cor. 3:16; and also 6:19. 

(f) Supplying the wants of the Church, 
Phil. 1: 19. 

Luke’s Gospel contains the most frequent 
references to the Holy Ghost of all the 
Gospels. In the first four chapters we read 
of Zacharias, and Elizabeth, John Baptist, 
Mary, Simeon, and our Lord Himself, being 
filled with, or moved, by the Holy Ghost. 


Ar, by J. E. W. 


168 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT IN OUR SALVATION. 


How often is this great and mighty person 
—the Holy Spirit of God—thought and 
spoken of as an influence, even by those who 
profess to know Him. Thus is He dis- 
honored by those who are His own children, 
who are born of Him, John 3:7; andgrieved 
and wounded even in the house of His 
friends. In Genesis, He is nanied as the 
great cause of motion and of life. Without 
Him, the deep was in darkness. By Him, 
the rivers flow, the winds have power, the 
rain falls, the fire burns, the dew-drops 
sparkle, the lightnings flash, the thunders 
roar, tle clouds roll back, and the sun ap- 
pears. Heis the efficient cause of all life, 
natural and spiritual. He gives skill to the 
artist, knowledge to the learned, and wisdom 
to the wise. Every good and perfect gift is 
from and through Him, in whom we live and 
move and have our being. In His opera- 
tions in connection with our great salvation, 
He is called the Spirit of life, of truth, of 


grace, of adoption, of power, of comfort, and 
of holiness. 

He strives with sinners, Gen. 6: 3. 

He reproves (convicts) of sin, John 16: 3. 

He helps our infirmities, Rom. 8: 24. 

He comforts, Acts 9: 3. 
- He teaches, John 14 : 26. 

He guides, John 16:13. 

He sanctifies, Rom. 15: 16. 

He testifies of Christ, John 15 : 26. 

He glorifies Christ, John 16: 14. 

He searches all things, Rom. 11 : 33-36. 

He worketh according to His own will, 1 
Cor. 13: 4. 

He dwells in saints, John 14: 17. 

He may be grieved, Eph. 4 : 30. 

He may be vexed, Isaiah 63: Io. 

He can be resisted, Acts 7 ; 51. 

He can be tempted, Acts 5:9. 

He can be quenched, 1 Thess. 5: ro. 


Dr. WARD. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


The manifestation of the Spirit is given 
to every man. 

No one is left in the dark, 1 Cor. 12:7. 

No one can confess Christ but by the 
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12: 3. 

Weare born again by the Spirit, John 3: 5. 

Baptised of the Spirit, Acts 1 : 5. 

Filled by the Spirit, Eph. 5: 18. 

Led by the Spirit, Rom. 8: 14. 

Anointed by the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1: 20, 21. 

Sent by the Spirit, Acts 13: 4. 

Sealed by the Spirit, Eph. 1: 13. 

Access by the Spirit, Eph. 2: 18. 

Sanctified by the Spirit, Rom. 15: 16. 

Taught by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2:13. 

Strengthened by the Spirit, Eph. 3: 16. 

Comforted by the Spirit, John 14: 26. 


Gifted by the Spirit, 1 Cor, 12 : 8-11. 

Transformed by the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3 : 18. 

Habication of the Spirit, Eph. 2: 22. 

Remember by the Spirit, John 14: 26. 

Powerful by the Spirit, Zech. 4:6. 

Fruitful by the Spirit, Eph. 5:9. 

We live in the Spirit, Gal. 5:25. 

We walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5: 16. 

We pray in the Spirit, Eph, 6: 18. 

We speak in the Spirit, Matt. ro : 20. 

We sow to the Spirit, Gal. 6:8. 

We reap of the Spirit, Gal. 6:8. 

Glory revealed by the Spirit, 1 Cor 
2:9, 10. 

Grieve not the Spirit, Eph. 4: 30. 

Quench not the Spirit, 1 Thess. 5: 19. 


Miss KATIE A. CLARKE, 


THE HOLy SPIRIT. 169 


THE WORK 
OF THE HOLY SPIRIT PREVIOUS TO PENTECOST. 


W. A. Southwell. 


rt, and 


16 : 3. N the consideration of this subject, we start with the truth of the Personality—the 
. Godhead—the essential holiness of God the Spirit. 
If to the a¢her’s eternal counsel and purpose we owe the glorious f/an of salva- 
tion ; if to the Sov’s unspeakable sacrifice we owe the éaszs of salvation ; it is to the 
Holy Spirits instrumentality we are indebted for the accomplishment of all its puz- 
poses. He it is who, all down the ages, has wrestled with men in their sins, and has 
brought forth the fruits of grace. Ever has it been true that . 


‘Every virtue men possess, 
And every victory won, 
36. And every thought of holiness, 
will, 1 Are His alone.” 


The Holy Spirit !—is not the phrase at once expressive of the Divine Energy or 
Force, by which is communicated life, light, order, beauty, majesty, alike to the 
material and moral world? working sometimes “soft as the breath of even,” and 
sometimes, as at Pentecost, “the sound of a rushing mighty wind;” thus in gentle- 

e ness and strength combining the two elements which are always found in the perfec- 
; tion of both character and working. 

In carefully examining the Scripture references to our subject, we first of all find 
the Holy Spirit at work in creation. Thus “the Spirit of God moved upon the face 
of the waters,” whilst Job tells us how God “garnished the heavens by His Spirit,” 
and David sings that “all the host of them” were made by “the breath of His mouth.” 

But Genesis gives us prophecy (by type) as well as history, for we read of 
Joseph as “a man in whom the Spirit c, God is,” exalted to be ruler—a fitting type 
of Him who, having the Spirit “ without measure,” shall yet wear the “many crowns” 
of universal dominion. ; i 

Passing to Exodus, we find men filled “with the Spirit of God in w7sdom, and in 
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship to devise cunning 

works,” that they may make a place where Jehovah may dwell amongst His people. 
: 18. Again, we have the same blessed Spirit given for wisdom to dead, advise, and rule. 
as, for instance, to Moses, the Elders, Joshua, Elisha, Saul, David. 
b6 Another series of passages show His working in Othniel, Gideon, Jephthah, and 
Samson, in the form of might, valor, invincible power, whereby these men “subdued 
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, and obtained promises.” 
Continuing our examination, we find “holy men of God . . . mioved by the 
Hcly Ghost” to declare His mind and will for the warning, or guidance, or instruction 
of His people. Thus said David, “The Spirit of the Lord spake by me and His 
word was in my tongue ;” and Micah also, “I am full of power by the Spirit of 
b Jehovah . . . and of judgment and of might, to declare unto Jacob his trans- 
gression, and to Israel his sin.” Thus also on Jahaziel came, the Spirit of Jehovah, 
“and Hesaid . . . Thus saith the Lord.” Zechariah also speaks of “ Jehovah's 
words sent in His Spirit by the prophets.” : 
Further, we have instances of the display of the Spirit’s mzraculous Power in the 
translation of Elijah, “ who was taken up by a whirlwind into heaven,” reminding us 
of the events of Pentecost, and especially how “the Spirit of the Lord caught away 
b. Philip.” 
° Ie is also interesting to note the evidences of the sozreignty of the Spirit’s work- 
> ing; in His departure from Saul because of disobedience ; and in His condescending 


Cor 


170 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


to speak by the mouth of Balaam, who was otherwise a false prophet—in one case 
leaving a man because of his moral failure, and in the other, speaking by one who 
had no moral qualification whatever. 

Here we may note that it was doubtless in view of the departure of the Spirit 
from Saul—thus disqualifying him for kingly rule, and marking God’s displeasure with 
Him—that King David, conscious of /7s sin, said, “Take not Thy Holy Spirit from 
me.” The only thing approaching this n the New Testament is whi ie Paul expresses 
a holy fear lest he be disqualified or disowned as a servam/ (not as a child of God) 
by becoming unprofitable, and, in that sense, a “castaway.” 

Now, let us see what we may yather from these several references, remembering 
that the Old Testament was only a partial revelation alike of Father, Son, and Spirit, 

How did the Spirit then act, and on whom ?—On leaders, fephets, 
kings, sweet singers, and on the rank and file of the people too, men and women. 
Having first of all “moved upon the face of the waters,” or, as the margin gives it, 
“ fluttered,” as an eagle over her brood (compared with Deut. 32:11), “ He “ breathed 
into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul.” 

He then came “fon men, vested upon them, girding, clothing, enduing them with 
wisdom, skill, fearlessness, understanding, power to overcome. 

As to the vesw/ts of His working, we have to say, for the most part, “ Howbeit 


» 
+t 
' 

; 


that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural.” They were in keeping 
with the character of the dispensation, which dealt with an earthly people, and gave 
i them an earthly inheritance. But all these things happened for an ensample to us, 
I whose blessing is of “the heavenly.” Al 
i. Thus it is clear that the working of the Spirit previous to Pentecost was of a h 
i typical character. The “fluttering” over a chaotic world finds its antitype in the new if 
i birth by the Spirit, the new creation in Christ Jesus. t 
1) The abundant gift of the £pizit to Joseph foreshadowed the fulness that should M 
‘il rest on the Lord Jesus Himself; whilst Isaiah uses with reference to the Spirit of 4 ey 
if Jehovah, which should rest upon the “ Branch,” the identical words describing the a 
4 working of that Spirit in the “ wise-hearted” ones gifted by Him to construct the ye 
i Tabernacle—its “glory and beauty” being symbolic of the greater glory and beauty va 
of the inner life, which should be wrought first in the Church of God, and in the latter- ‘¢ 
day glory in Israel too. First the natural, and afterwards the spiritual ! the 
Did the Spirit in those skilled ones of old work with earthly materials, adding ie 
together with Divine cunning the gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine ‘YP 
linen, so are we by the self-same Spirit to “add to our faith, virtue, and courage, and on 
knowledge, and patience,” and all the other graces “that pertain unto life and godli- 
ness.” What “ garments for glory and beauty” are these ! ot 


Again, was there the gift of leadership and rule in those days? Do we not find 
the antitype in apostolic days, when the Lord “‘ gave some to be apostles, and some we 
prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers,” leading us to, and 
fitting us for, not an earthly inheritance, but a heavenly ? 

In like manner, the voice in the mortal prophets foreshadowed the voice in the 
unchanging and incorruptible Word of God. 

Yet again, what was the girding with physical power for combat between mortal 
foes, and for victory over all enemies of the hosts of God, but a foreshadowing of the 
power that in Gospel times should gird us for sfzrttual warfare? What do we see in 
the brave Othniel, in valiant Gideon, in Jephthah, the mighty man of Gilead, and in 
Samson—whose strength, for a time obscured by weakness, yet became so mighty in 
death—but typical workings of the Spirit of God, first in the Son of His love, who 
“death by dying’ slew ;” and then in saints of God, who, “out of weakness made 
strong,” wrestle with and overcome, not flesh and blood, but “ wicked spirits in high 
places?” Not that there was no spiritual element present with the carnal type, but 
tha. it lay in the bezkground, whilst for all, in thosé days as in these, et, 
Spirit was alone the root and power for all that was of God. 


cast 
e who 


Spirit 
é with 
4 fi Oli 
resses 


i God 


bering 
Spirit. 
sphets, 
vomen 
‘ives it, 
‘eathed 


m with 


Lowbeit 
keeping 
nd gave 
le to us, 


yas of a 
the new 


t should 
Spirit of 
bing the 
ruct the 

beauty 
he latter- 


adding 
hnd fine 
hge, and 
d godli- 


not find 
d some 
to, and 


e in the 


h mortal 
g of the 
e see in 
and in 
ighty in 
hve, who 
ks made 
in high 
pe, but 
1 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. I7. 


then, as now, He was the Spirit of Zderty (free spirit) ; the good Spirit for guid- 
ance and instruction ; and was everywhere wherever human hearts sought His grace. 
‘hen, Ue wrought for an earthly people, whose standing and relationship, and 
inheritance, with His working, might @// de Jost. 


Vow’, He neW-creates a heavenly people, whose portion is not here, but in the 
heavens, eternally secured in Christ. 

in addition, however, to the typical character of the Spirit’s work, previous to 
Pentecost there was this, chat He wrought in and upon men as the Sfirit of servant- 
y4aA, in contrast with His working now as the Spirit of somship. The solid unity of the 
Church of God as “one body” was not known ; men were of the chosen nation by 
natural birth. Believers are now baptized into “ one body by one Spirit.” 

The sonship of believers was a hidden mystery, and with it all that it carried—the 
children’s portion, the holy nearness, the co-heirship with Christ, the “ Abba, Father,” 
‘he inheritance incorruptible and fading not away. ‘Behold what manner of love 


ihe Father hath bestowed upon ws, that we should be called children of God ;” and so 
we are, or as we sometimes sing— 


‘t Abba, Father, Lord, ve call Thee, 
Hallowed name! from day to day ; 
Tis Thy ehildren’s right to know Thee, 
Note iit children, Father ! say."’ 


All this was unrevealed and unknown 


What, then, had these glorious “sons of faine,” who wrought with skill, and led 
their hosts to victory, and were themselves the history of that early dawn? This, 
that this same Holy Spirit of somshi~ to us, was the Holy Spirit of servantshrp to them. 
May we not say with the Queen of Sheba, “ Happy are these, thy servants, which 
stand continually before thee?” ‘This was not a tithe of the blessing we now have, 
yet theirs was a blessed place and portion, with its ‘dreams and visions of the night,” 
when God spake with them—with the Angel of the Covenant eating, talking, wrestling 
with them—the pillar-cloud by day, and the fiery glow by night, whilst they them 
selves were girded, enriched with al! that was needful! he Aignity and discharge of 
the responsibilities of their position as servants of the “ Most High (id ;” whilst u 
it all there fell the earliest rays df day-brenking, when their position, with | 
types and shadows, should find fulles: 
and privilege. 

We are, by unspeakable grace, sos; and to this g 
let us seek to aGa wie joy of service rendered from a standj they of old never 
knew. “For ye have not received the Spirit of servantship leadi: k to fear, iyut 


ye received the Spirit of sonship, whereby we cry Abba, Father.’—f/ rom Lohsheps of 
Truth. 


Adant 
erin the unclouded light of Gospel ; f 


vith its unfailing bliss, 


172 GOLD FROM OPHIk. 


LIVING IN THE POWER. 


2 Tim.3: 5. 


. I may profess what I like and may preach 
like an Apollos, but unless my life says 
‘Amen’ to my words they will count but 
little. Itis easy to write out cheques, but if 
a man is known to be worthless his cheques 
count for nothing. Soit is with our words 
and our profession. It is easy to profess, 
but is my word confirmed by “signs follow- 
ing’’ in my daily life? Does my manner of 
life plainly declare that— 

1. I have been redeemed ?—Eph. 1:7; 
Tit: D334, 

2. Am sealed by the Spirit ?—Eph. 1: 13. 

3. Am a child of God ?—1 John 3:2; 
Rom. 8:16, 17. 

4. Amastranger here? z.e., am one who 
has no home ?—1 Pet, 2:11. 

5. Ama pilgrim ? z.e.,am one who is go- 
ing home ?—1 Pet. 2:11. 

6. Am really one of the ‘‘ peculiar peo- 
ple? ’—1 Pet. 2:9; Tit. 2:11. 

7. Am “looking for and hasting” the 
hour when “my Lord shall come ? ""—2 Pet. 
3:12; Tit.2: 14. 

There are many of us who are making 
great professions along the line of holiness, 


but are we living ‘‘ godly in Christ Jesus?" 
—2 Tim. 3:12. The subject of the second 
coming of Christ was never more generally 
preached (as a doctrine) than it is to-day; 
but are we really ‘‘ waiting for His Son from 
heaven ?"'—1 Thess.1:10. It is very easy 
for us to talk about laying up treasure in 
heaven, but are we living as though our 
treasures were in heaven? It is alsoeasy to 
talk about ‘‘separation ;'’ but are we really 
living a life of ‘‘separation to our blessed 
Lord ? "—2 Cor. 6: 14-18. Are we separate 
from the world, its pleasures and its practices? 

If we are are not living these doctrines 
then ours is the ‘ form without the power;" 
and it is ‘‘high time for us to awake.” 

We sho ld ‘awake to righteousness,” 
1 Cor. 15:34; awake to our privileges in 
that kingdom which is ‘‘ righteousness, peace, 
and joy in the Hoiy Spirit ;’’ awake to a life 
of power and service ; awake ‘‘ for our salva- 
tion is nearer than when we first believed,’’ 
Rom. 13:11, 12. Oh, let us live as though 
there were a power in godliness, and as 
though we expected our Lord at any 
moment.’ W.S. MARTIN. 


“THE HOLY SPIRIT” IN EPHESIANS. 


I. We were sealed, on believing, with that 
“ Holy Spirit" of promise, Eph. 1 : 13. 

II. By ‘one Spirit’ we have access to 
the Father, Eph. 2:18. 

III. We are builded together for an habita- 
tion of God through ' the Spirit,” Eph. 2: 22. 

IV. The mystery of Christ (the Church) 
was revealed to Paul by the Spirit, Eph. 
3:5. 

V. We are to be strengthened with all 
might by ‘‘¢he Sprit,’ that Christ may 
dwell in our hearts by faith, Eph. 3: 16. 


VI. We are to endeavor to keep the | 


unity of the Spirit" in the bond of peace, | 
| 6: 18, W. H. 


Eph. 4: 3. 


VII. There is one body and ome Spirit, 
Eph, 4: 4. 

VIII. We are not to grieve the Holy Spirit 
of God, Eph. 4 : 30. 

IX. Weare to walk as children of light; 
for the fruit of “the Spirit” is in all good- 
ness and righteousness and truth, Eph. 
538, 9, 

X. Weare to be "' filled with the Spirit’ 
and its results, Eph. 5: 18-2r. 

XI. We are to take the ‘sword of the 
Spirit," which is the Word of God, Eph. 6: 17. 

XII. We are to pray always with all 
prayer and supplication in "the Spirit," Eph. 


sus?" 


second 
ierally 
9-day ; 
n from 
y easy 
ure in 
th our 
easy to 

really 
blessed 
sparate 
ctices? 
ctrines 
ower ;”’ 


sness,”’ 
eges in 
, peace, 
to a life 
r salva- 
ieved,”’ 
though 
and as 
nt any 
rIN. 


THE HOLy SPIRIT. 173 


TYPES OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


I. The Dove, Jesus being baptized, the 
heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost 
descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon 
Him, Luke 3° 21, 22. 

II. Fire. Our God is a consuming fire, 
Heb. 12:29: He is like a refiner’s fire, Mal. 
3:2; He shall baptize you with the Holy 
Ghost and with fire, Matt. 3:2; there ap- 
peared unto them cloven tongues like as of 
fire, and it sat upon each of them, Acts 2: 3. 

III. Wind. The wind bloweth where it 
listeth . . . sois every one that is boru of 


"the Spirit, John 3:8; there came a sound 


from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, 
Acts 2:2. 

IV. Water. I wili pour water upon him 
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry 
ground; I will pour My Spirit, upon thy 
seed, Isa. 44:3; then will I sprinkle clean 
water upon you, and ye shall be clean. . . » 
I will put My Spirit within you, Ezek. 36 ; 25- 
27; He that believeth on Me, out of his belly 


shall flow rivers of living water ; this spake 
He of the Spirit, John 7: 38-39; He saved 
us by the washing of regeneration and re- 
newing of the Holy Ghost, Titus 3: 5. 

V. Oil, The Spirit of the Lord is upon 
me, because the Lord hath anointed me, 
Isa. 61:1; God anointed Jesus of Nazareth 
with the Holy Ghost and with power, Acts 
10:38; Thou anointest my head with oil, 
Ps, 23: 5; I shall be anointed with fresh oil, 
Ps, 92:10; ye have an unction from the 
Holy One... . The anointing which ye 
have received of Him abideth in you, 1 John 
2: 20-27. 

VI. Wine, Be not drunk with wine, but 
be filled with the Spirit, Eph. 5:18; Others 
mocking said, These men are full of new 
wine. But Peter said... these are not 
drunken, as ve suppose... . But this is 
that which was spoken by the prophet Joel: 
I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh, 
Acts 2 ; 13-17. 


NAMES AND TITLES OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


I, The Comforter. I will pray the Father, 
and He shall give you another Comforter, 
John 14:16; the Comforter, which is the 
Holy Ghost, shall teach you all things, John 
14:26; when the Comforter is come, He 
shall testify of Me, John 15: 26. 

II. Spirit of Truth. The Spirit of truth, 
whom the world cannot receive, John 14:17; 

the Spirit of truth, which procedeth from 
the Father, John 15:26; the Spirit of truth 
will guide you into all truth, John 16: 13. 

lil. Spirit of Grace. I will pour upon 
the house of David the Spirit of grace, Zech, 
12:19; of how much sorer punishment shall 
he bs thought worthy who hath done despite 
unto the Spirit of grace ? Heb. ro: 2g. 

IV. Spirit of Wisdom, The Spirit of 
wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of 
counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge 


and the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11:2; speak 
unto them whom I have filled with the 
Evirit of wisdom, Ex. 28: 3; Joshua was full 
of the Spirit of wisdom, Deut. 34:9; the 
Father of glory gave unto you the Spirit of 
wisdom, Eph. 1: 17. 

V. Spirit of Glory. If ye be reproached 
for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for 
the Spirit of glory resteth upon you, 1 Vet 
454 

VI. Spirit of Judgment. The Lord shall 
wash away the filth of the daughters of Zion 
by the Spirit of judgment, Isa. 4:4; when 
He is come, Hé will reprove the world 
of judgment, because the prince of this world 
is judged, John 16: 8-11; the Lord of Hosts 
shall be for a Spirit of judgment to him that 
sitteth in judgment, Isa. 28 : 6, 

VII. Spirit of Promtise. After ye believed, 


See See ae : ie reve 
stannic perens pap TD ime yey ag mma mmm tn 
ibn ; 
sbi ented es as sane beminnnen snenieten 
ie if 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of 


promise, Eph. 1:13; the Holy Spirit is 
also called the Spirit of God, Gen. 1:2; 1 


Cor. 2:14; Rom. 8:9-14; 1 Cor. 6:11; and 
the Spirit of Christ, 1 Pet. 1:11; Rom. 
8 :9.— Footsteps of Truth. 


THE POWER OF THE HOLY SPIRIT; OR, THE TWO GREAT 
FAMILIES. 


Text: x Cor, 12: I-13. 


Those who are in Christ Jesus have anew 
power within them. Not only new life in 
Christ but a new force within—even the 
Spirit of God Himself. 

The law is no longer their ruler, but by the 
Spirit they are enabled to fulfil the law's 
xequirements, and to live to God. 

First, then, the Bible divides mankind 
into two vast families. In | oth of these 


we cannot be—in one or the other we all 
are. 

There is ne intermediate place, ‘since birth 
determines entrance into each of them. 

First, that which is natural: into this 
family we all entered when we were born 
into the world. Afterwards is that which is 
spiritual: into this family we were brought 
by grace, when we were born again. 


THR TWO GREAT FAMILIES. 


NATURAL. 
Origin. 
“That which is born of the flesh,'' John 
3:6. 
Nature. 
“Ts flesh,"’ John 3:6. 
‘After the flesh,’ Rom. 8:5. 


Standing 
“Tn the flesh,’ Rai, 8: 5. 


Inclination. 
‘Mind the things of the flesh,'’ Rom, 8: 5, 


Result. 
**Death,"’ Rom, 8:6. 


SPIRITUAL, 
. Origin. 
‘' That which is born of the Spirit,"' Jolin 
:6. 
Nature. 
‘Is Spirit,’ John 3:6. 
‘After the Spirit,’’ Rom, 8. 5. 


Standing. 
‘Tn the Spirit,’ Rom, 8:9, 
Inclination 
'' Mind the things af Apirit,’ Rom. 8:5. 


Result, 
‘ Life and peace,"’ Rom, 8: 6, 


1. '' The fleshly mind is enmity against God.” 
2. ‘' For it is not subject to law of God." 
3. '' Neither indeed can be." 
‘' So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God," Rom. 8; 9,8. 


When a man believes upon Christ, he 


' geceives everlasting life, and then he is 


I. Born of the Spirit. 

This is his birthday in divinethings. Thus 
he enters the family of God's people. He 
receives life by the Spirit. So is the Spirit 


the power for living out practically the life 
he has in Christ and from Christ. 

Towards this end the ‘flesh profiteth 
nothing,” John 6:63. It has no vigor for 
godly living; no strength for serving God, 
or for enjoying God; on the contrary, it is 
opposed to God. See Gal. 5: 17. 


pe 
are 
Spi 
beli 
His 
or t 


1; and 
Rom. 


EAT 


we all 


ce birth 
m. 

ito this 
re born 
which is 
brought 


John 


he life 


rofiteth 
gor for 
g God, 
y, it is 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. ; 175 


Il. Not only is the believer born of the 
Spirit, he is also indwelt by the Spirit. 

For iu every believer, who believes the 

Gospel of Salvation, the Holv Spirit dwells. 
See Rom, 4:25; 5:1. 
- Peace regarding the righteousness of God 
in dealing with sin, and with our sins—peace 
with God as thogreat Judge, for He, the Just 
One, justified us. Thereupon the Holy 
Spirit took up His dwelling within our hearts, 
and shed abroad in our hearts the love of 
God. 

Thus the Holy Spirit takes up His abode 
within the believer, John 14:16. And this 
being accomplished, 

lll, The Holy Spirit never leaves His 
dwelling place. See again John 14: 16, 

It is true that David prayed, ‘‘ Take not 
Thy Holy Spirit from me,’ Ps. 51:11; but 
we are not now speaking of the manifesta- 
tions of the Spirit to the believer, but of the 
Spirit personally dwelling within him. The 
Spirit was not personally sent from the 
Father and given to dwell within the believe: 
until the Lord Jesus rosé from the dead. 
See John 7:39. All our privileges are based 
upon the finished work of Jesus Christ, an 
are consequent upon ott Lord's glory. The 
Spirit of God does not thet forsake the 
believer, whose boily He has deigner to make 
His temple, Hit if the believer allow self 
or the flesh to act, then the Spirit of God is 
grieved, He is a Person within the believer, 
who is a gtieved Person, His manifesta- 
tionscease, Hiscommunications are interrup- 
tions; He witnesseth not with our Spirits 

Hut a father does fot leave the house 
because his child is wilful and disobedient ; 
but until his child be sorry his grieved heart 
finds it impossible to express its affections to 
the child. He becomes the yeprover of his 
child. His true love to his.child can act in 
no other way, and the child, instead of 


beholding the smile, sees grief written upon 
His father's countenance. 

And thus it is, too often, that the children 
of God, instead of enjoying the manifesta- 
tions of the Spirit of God within, are, 
because of their evil and disobedient ways, 
subject to the reproofs which the Spirit ad- 
dresses to them. ‘Therefore we are en- 
joined— ; 

“Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, 
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of re- 
demption,"’ Eph. 4: 30. 


IV. Again the Holy Spirit of God who 
dwells within His people, takes up His 
abode in their hearts as ‘h2 Spirit of Son- 
ship. 

See Gal. 3:26; Gal. 4:6. He is not with us 
as the Spirit of bondage, not as a Spirit 
leading us to fear, but to liberty, Note Gal. 
5:1. Weare not by the Spirit led to doubt 
our Father's love, or to question whether we 
are His children. See Gal. 4:7; Rom. 
8:15. Wecall Him Father by the Spirit, 
Rom. 8:15 

Another thing about this Spirit of Sonship 
is that it is an individual blessifig as well as 


| a family blessing. 


And we know the blessing experimentally. 
We know it— 


4 


t. Because God has revealed 
Htd ; bit we k 


it in His 


a, Because God has made the fact good 
withitiour hearts, 4 he Spirit itself beareth 
witness with our Spirit, that we are ti 
children of God,’ Rom, 8: 16 

There is a mutual witness of love within 
the hearts of earthly parent and child, but 
there is acloser witness within our hearts to 
God, for the same Spirit who is with the 
Father is alsa within our hearts, and He 
makes God oiit Father tu cur hearts what 
our Father's heart 18 [08 tit Selected. 


176 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


— papenuuuisineaniesiincsite a 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND THE BELIEVER. 


Geo. C. Needham. 


hai the Spirit was to Jesus in His human nature, that He is to the believer. He 

is given to the believer as the Spirit of Sonship, Rom. 8: 16, 17. Being, first of 
all, born of the Spirit into the divine family, He takes up His abode within us, so that 
we are the children of God, having the Spirit of adoption. The common idea of 
adoption is that of a rich man taking a beggar from the streets and treating him as a 
son. So God takes us into His family. The parallel fails in one respect; there is 
not!ing in nature between the rich man tg the beggar, but in the adoption of the 
believer, the Spirit enables him to realize a relation already existing. “The Spirit 
Himself beareth witness with our spirits.” We have a spiritual nature which gives 
this testimony, 2nd it is in the line of the Spirit’s own testimony, Rom. 8:16; Gal. 
4:6. Itis important thax we understand this relation of the Spirit to us as believers. 

The Spirit is also given as a Divine seal upon the believer. We are sealed with 
the Holy Spirit of promise, Eph. 1:13. See also 2Cor.1:22. What is this seal? 
It is not sone emotion er seme experience ; it is the Spirit of God Himself. This seal 
is first of alla mark of genuineness. All legal documents must have an official seal 
as attesting their validity. “ Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter 
into the kingdom of heaven,” Matt. 7:21. It is not a question of what our frierds 
think about us, but what God thinks about us, If any man have not the Spirit of 
Christ he is none of His, Rom. 8:9. 

The seal is also for security. My spouse is a fountain led, Cant. 4:12. The 
sand of the desert cannot enter and mar the fountain. his sealing also implies 
ownership. ‘“ The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord knoweth 
them that are His,” 2 Tim. 2:19. Itis also a mark of recognition. Sometimes we 
have a peculiar mark on our goods, so that we may distinguish them from the goods 
of others. Unless we have upon us this seal of the Spirit, God will not own us as His. 

Another thought the seal carries with it, it impresses a likeness. Whena seal is 
placed on the soft wax, an impression is produced th;.t corresponds with the die. 
So the Holy Spirit brings out in the believer His own likeness. He is the Holy Spirit 
and the Spirit of truth, therefore we are to be holy and truthful. God’s grand pur- 
pose concerning us is that we may be conformed to the image of His Son. That will 
not fully take place until our bodies are raised from the dead; but now there is a + 
moral transformation going on in the life of every believer who is walking in the Spirit. 
There is a continuous growth into the likeness of the Son , so that believers are the 
epistles of Christ that may be read and known of all men : and the image of Christ to 


A 
12 
7 
iP 
13 if 
Ms | 
et | 
, 
} \ 
i Hi 
Hig 
| 
i 
4 ] 
i 
| 
| 


be seen, Rom. 8 : 29; 2 Cor. 3 : 18. fC 

Again, the Holy Spirit is given to the believer as the holy oil for anointing. “Ye .. i 
have an unction from the Holy One,” 1 John 2:20. See also verse 27, which ihe 
speaks of an anointing specially for teaching. In the Old Testament there are many . . 
beautiful symbols that typify this anointing. We read in Psalm 45, of “ the oil of ag 
gladness.” We are to be joyful in the Lord. Then there is the oil that maketh man’s he 
face to shine, Psalm 104 : 15—-the type of moral beauty. This anointing is upon us ' agai 


that we may reflect the likeness of Jesus Christ. As He was Prophet, Priest and King, 
so we are called to enter upon the same spiritual functions, and for all these 
relationships we need the anointing of the Holy Spirit. 

We are enjoined to walkin the Spirit, Gal. 5:16. “As many as are led by the 
Spirit of God they are the Sons of God,” Rom, 8:14. Born, sealed, anointed and 
led by the Spirit, we shali not fulfil the lusts of the flesh. We are to present our 
bodies to God, and this must be done in the Spirit in order to be acceptable. We are 
to pray in the Holy Ghost. Our praises must be the outcome of the Spirit dwelling 
within us. Our money is to be given not merely as a matter of philanthropy, but 2s 


‘ver, He 
ig, first of 
ls, so that 
n idea of 
him asa 
. there is 
ion of the 
The Spirit 
lich gives 
16 ; Gal. 
believers. 
aled with 
his seal ? 
This seal 
ficial seal 
hall enter 
ur frierds 
: Spirit of 


12, The 
o implies 
knoweth 
‘times we 
1e goods 
s as His. 
ha seal is 
the die. 
oly Spirit 
and pur- 
hat will 
here is a 
e Spirit. 
are the 
hrist to 
g, “Ve 
, Which 
re many 
he oil of 
th man’s 
upon us 
d King, 
ll these 


ld by the 
ted and 
bent our 
We are 
dwelling 


7, but as 


THE HOLy SPIRIT. 177 


NS SSS es SS Sn 


an offering which shall be as a sweet savor unto God. No service, however humble, is 
wasted, that is done in the Spirit to the praise of His glory. 

As the Spirit guarded the dead body of Jesus, so we read in Romans 8 : 11, of the 
Spirit’s relations to the sleeping saints. Let us bearin mind when we take the bodies 
of our friends to the cemetery, and place them in the tomb, the Spirit guards them 
there ; and when the shout of the King is heard, He will raise them up in glory, that 
they may be fashioned like unto Christ’s glorious body. Our bodies are redeemed 
with the blood of Jesus Christ, and are precious to Him. Let us remember that our 
bodies are the present dwelling place of the Holy Spirit. It is a solemn thought, that 
He has put Himself into our keeping. How careful should we be as to our associations 
and our walk in life, avoiding all that would quench that divine light, or grieve our 
best friend. We are not our own; let us therefore glorify God in our bodies and 
spirits which are His. 


THE HCLY GHOST 


a hie Holy Spirit is a real person and is God. Peter said to Ananias, “ Why hath 

Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost ?—Thou hast not .ed unto men, 
but unto God, Acts 5:3, 4. He acted increation, Job 26:13; spake by the prophets, 
2 Peter 1 : 21; dwelt in Christ on earth, and dwells in every believer now, John 14: 17; 
as also in the Church, 1 Cor. 3:16, Reader! have you received the Holy Ghost since 
you believed ? Acts 19 : 2. > 

He has striven with men from the beginning, Gen. 6 : 3 ; and is the great agent of 

regeneration, and of all the necessary work in men's souls, such as repentance and 
faith for their salvation, Titus 3:5. He is the great inside gift of God to believers, 
as the Son is God’s great outside gift to the world, John 3:16; 7 : 38,39. Those that 
believe on God’s Son for salvation, God anoints and seals with the Holy Ghost, who 
is also the earnest, or pledge in their hearts, of their future inheritance, 2 Cor. 1 : 21, 22. 
These believers are no longer in the flesh, Christ is in them, the sentence of death is 
written upon their bodies, and the Spirit is the pledge and agent of their resurrection 
when Jesus comes again, Rom. 8:9, 11. He is also the active agent in the believer's 
soul for all practical life after he is saved, and can be grieved, Rom, 8: 13, 14, 23, 26; 
Eph. 4 : 30. 

In Old Testament times He came upon different men, such as Gideon, Samson, 
and Saul; but did not indwell them. 

He did not come as a Divine person to dwell on the earth, till after the ascension 

of Christ, consequent on the work of redemption. See John 7 : 39; 14: 16, 26 ; 15 : 26; 
16:7. Now during Christ’s sojourn at the right hand of God, He dwells ‘on earth, in 
the believer's body, 1 Cor. 6:19; and inthe Church, 1 Cor. 3:16, till Christ comes 


again for His saints; then he will be taken out of the way, 2 Thess. 2:7. He will be 


poured out on the Jews in the latter day, Joel 2 : 28. 
To say that the Spirit by which Jesus did His work was a devil, was to blaspheme 
against the Holy Ghost. For such a sin there is no forgiveness, Mark 3 : 29, 30. 
A. BEG. 


16 


14 


—_—_— 
—~ 
—__s 
———s 
— 


1.25 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


A 


hy 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 
(716) 872-4503 


Photographic 
ociences 
Corporation 


178 GOL. FROM OPHIR. 


NN 


THE HOLY SPIRIT OF GOD. 


All we can know of the Spirit is contained 
inthe Bible. As weare now more intimately 
related to the Spirit than to any other person 
of the Trinity, a correct knowledge of His 
persor. and wok is of the utmost importance 
to the believer. 

The doctrine of Scripture is that the 
Spirit is the executor of God. What God 
does is done by the Spirit. 

I. Hence at the very first we find Him 
presiding at Creation, Gen. 1:2; Job 26: 13; 
33:4; 32:8; Ps. 104: 30. 

II. This creative power is made the sym- 
bol of the new creation-—the new birth. 
Hence we find that the soul is like chaos 
until the Spirit acts—no order, no life---the 
soul is desolateness and emptiness. Compare 
John 3:5; 1 Cor. 12:3; 1 Thess. 1:5; Tit. 
3:5; illustrated by Gen. 41:38; Num. 11:17, 
25,29; I Sam, 10:6; 16:13, 14; Isa, 61:1. 


III. The field of the Spirit's work at first 
seems tc have been consigned to a few, Jcel 
2:28; Isa. 44:3. His dispensation had not 
yetarrived. He was to take Christ's place, 
John 14:16; 16:7. ‘The promise of the 
Father" was fulfilled, Acts 1 and 2. 

IV. The history in the book of Actsis the 
record of the Acts of the Holy Ghost, indi- 
cating the pazt He was to take hereafter in 
the economy of the Church, Acts 4:8, 31; 
5:32; 6:3,55 7:51.55; 8:15; 9:17, 31; 
10: 44, 47; 11:15, 16; 13:2, etc., ete.; 
19: 26. 

V. In the Epistles the doctrine is based 
on the history—the actual experience, Rom. 
15:13; 1 Cor 2:13; 6:19; 2 Cor. 13:14; 
Heb. 6:4; 2 Tim. 1: 14; Jude 20. 

VI. ‘Therefore’ grieve not the Holy 
Spirit of God, Eph. 4: 39. 

J. C. HILL. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT IN EPHESIANS. 


I. Eph.1:13. ‘In wkom ye also trusted, 
after that ye heard the word of truth, the 
gospel of your salvation: in whom also, 
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with 
that Holy Spirit of promise.” You heard, 
you trusted; and then, having believed, ye 
were sealed with the Holy Ghost—the szal 
of God upon you, saying: Tuiiis soul is mine; 
it belongs to Me. That is the first thing. 

II, Eph, 1:17. ‘'That the God cf our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may 
give unto you the spirit 0: wisdoin and 
revelation in the knowledge of Him.” 

III, Eph. 2:18, ‘Through Him we both 
(Jew and Gentile) have access by one Spirit 
unto the Father," 

TV. Eph, 2:22. ‘In whom ye also are 
builded together for an habitation of God 
through the Spirit.’’ 

V, Eph. 3:16, ‘That He would grant you, 
according to the riches of His glory, to be 
strengthened with might by His Spirit in 


| 
| 


the inner man; that Christ may dwell in 
your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted 
and grounded in love." 

VI. Eph, 4:4. We read that there ‘s one 
Spirit, and just because there is one Spirit 
there is one body, and one unity of the 
Spirit that must be kept. 

VII. Eph. 4:30. ‘‘Grieve not the Holy 
Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto 
the day of redemption.” 

VIII. Eph. 5:9. The fruit of the Spirit 
is said to be in all goodaess and righteous- 
ness and truth, 

IX, Eph. 5:18. ‘Be not drunk with wine, 
wherein is excess, but be filled with the 
Spirit.’ Strengthened by the Spirit, filled 
by the Spirit, having the fruits of the Spirit, 
taking ‘‘the sword of the Spirit, which is the 
word of God." 

X. Eph, 6:18, ‘Praying always with all 
prayer and cupplication in the Spirit." — 
Notes for Bible Study. 


I 
I 
s 
J 
t 
q 


ee 


ne 


k at first 
few, Joel 
| had not 
t's place, 
se of the 


.cts is the 
ost, indi- 
eafter in 
4:8, 31; 
y3 17,31; 
tc., etc.; 


is based 
ce, Rom. 


r. 13:14; 
he Holy 


HILL. 


dwell in 
g rooted 


ve 's one 
e Spirit 
of the 


e Holy 
led unto 


e Spirit 
ehteous- 


th wine, 
ith the 
it, filied 
e Spirit, 
h is the 


with all 
pirit.’’ — 


THE HOLy SPIRIT. | 179 


BIBLE NOTES ON THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


I. Not by might nor by power, but by My ; __ VI. Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, 
Spirit, Zech. 4: 6. 


II. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, 
Toel 2: 28, V"1. How is it tuat ye have agreed to- 


III. Be filied with the Spirit, Eph. 5:18. | gether to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Acts 
IV, My Spirit shali not always strive with | 5:9. 

man, Gen. 6: 3. Z a 
V. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, VITi. Quenci: not the Spirit, 1 Thess. 


Eph, 4: 30. 5:19. 


Acts 7: 51. 


ANOINTING OF THE SPIRIT. 


I. Oil for the light, Exod. 25 : 6. V. Oil of joy. 

‘They that were foolish took their lamps, ‘God, thy God, hath anointed thee with 
and took no oil with them: but the wise took | the oil of gladness above thy fellows,” Ps. 
oil,"’ Matt. 25:3, 4. ‘Ye are the light of | 45:7. ‘The oil of joy for mourning,” Isa. 
the world,’ Matt. 5:14. ‘Arise, shine,” | 61:3. ‘Thou anointest my head with oil; 
Isa,60:1. ‘Noi by might, nor by power, | my cup runneth over,” Ps. 23:5. ‘‘The 
but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts,” | kingdom of God is....joy in the Holy 
Zech. 4: 6. Ghost,” Rom. 14:17. ‘The frvit of th. 
Spirit is....joy,” Gal. 5:22. (6,7 

VI. Oil of separation, Lev. 21: 10-12; 10: 

Once anointed with the holy oil, the 
anointed ones could not, dared not, live as 
others. ‘‘Come out from among tliem, and 
be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not 
the unclean thing,’’ 2 Cor. 6:17. ‘' Know 
ye not that your body is the temple of the 
Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have 
of God, and ye are not your own? For ye 
are bought with a price; therefore glorify 
God in your body, and in your spirit, which 
are God’s,"’ 1 Cor. 6: 19, 20. 

VII. The land of promise was a land of 
oil-olive, Deut. 8: 8. 

The walk of faith is a walk in the Spirit. 
If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in 
the Spirit,’’ Gal. 5:25. ‘' We all, with open 
face beholding as in a glass the glory of the 

IV. Oil for heating. Lord, are changed into the same image from 

‘Pour'ng in oil and wire,"”’ Luke 10: 34. | glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the 
“The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,”’ | Lozd,” 2 Cor. 3: 18. 

John 14: 26. JANET CLARK. 


II. Oilupon the meat offering, Lev. 2:15. 
‘God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the 
Holy Ghost and with power,” Acts ro : 38. 


III. Oil for anointing: (2) Prophet. 

‘Elisha....shalt thou anoint to be pro- 
phet in thy room,”’ 1 Kings 19:16. ‘I will 
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your 
sons and your daughters shall prophesy,” 
Joel 2:28, 29. ‘‘They were all filled with 
the Holy Ghost,” Acts2:4. ‘ He will show 
you things to come,” John 16:13. ‘‘Ye 
have an unction from the Holy One, and ye 
know all things,’ : John 2:20. (6) Priest, 
“ev. 8:30. (c) King, 1 Samuel 16:13. ‘Ye 
are a royal priesthood,"’ 1 Peter 2:9. ‘He 
hath made us kings and priests unto God and 
his Father,’’ Rev. 1:6. ‘‘He which hath 
anointed us is God," 2 Cor, 1: 23, 


AT 


180 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


erences a saeesemenppamaeenentininrntnndnteeine ret = —— —— ———— 


HOW OUR NEEDS ARE MET BY THE PROMISES OF THE 
HOLY SPIRIT. 


I, When we are unloving, Rom. 5: 5. VI. When we fear others, 2 Cor. 3:17. 
II, When we cannot pray, Rom. &: 26, 27. VII. When we do not understand the 
III. When our prayers seem not to reach | Word, 1 Cor, 2:10, 11. 

the Father, Eph. 2: 18. | VIL. When we do not know what to do 
IV. When we are weak in faith, 1 Cor. | or where to go, Jno. 14:26; 16: 13. 

12:8,9. IX, When sve feel our inability, Zech, 4:6. 
V. When we are weak in purpose, Eph. X. The precious promise, Luke 11: 13, 

3:16. | F, A, HATCH, 


THE SEVEN OPERATIONS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN JOHN, 


I, Quickening, John 3: 5. | VI. Testifying against the world, see 
II. Indwelling, John 4: 14. : | John 15: 8-11; 14: 16, 17. 
III. Outflowing, John 7 : 38. | VIL. Prophasying, John 16: 13:—Of the 
IV. Comforting, |:!1n 14 : 16, 17. rapture of the saints; of the awful judgments 
V. Teaching, John 14: 26. ; to come upon the wicked. 


PERSON OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


I. The Eoly Spirit as a pexson is as- | Joel 3: 1-5; Acts 10:38; Luke 4:18; Isa. 6r: 
sociated with the Father and the Son, | 2; Mark 12:36. 


Matt. 28:19; 2 Cor. 13:14; Matt. 3:16, 17; VII. The Holy Ghost is called God, Acts 

Eph. 2:22. 5:3,43 1 Cor. 3:16.17; 2 Cor. 6:16; Eph. 
II. The Holy Spirit is represented asa | 2:22; 1 Cor, 6:19. 

distinct agent, John 14:16; John i5:26; | VIII. The Holy Spirit quickens the 

John 16:7-15; I Cor. 12:8-11; Acts 7:50! | mind, Rom, 12:6, 8; 1 Cor, 12: 27, 28; Ex. 

Acts 13:2, 4; Acts 28:25. | 32:3,6; Ex. 35:31, 35; 1 Kings 3:7-12; 1 


| Kings4:26; Jud. 3:10; Jud. €:34; 1 Sam. 
ET: 65: 1. Sadm,:163 14, * 

IX. The Holy Spirit inspires to teach 
God’s will, John 14:26; John 15:26; John 
: ; : _. | 16:13;> Luke 1:67; Acts ar:11; 2 Pet. 
ar Will pie gid is sya ‘e 1:21; 2 Sam, 23:2; 2 Chron, 20:14; Micah 

im, 2 Cor: ta; 1  giaahighel git Nona sha hia 3:8; Judges 6:34; 1 Chron. 12:18; 2Chron., 

V. He isasent Messenger and Teacher, | 24:20; Luke 24:49, 

John 14:16, 26; John 15:26; John 16:7, The Holy Spirit effects whatever is done 


III. Divine attributes are ascribed to the 
Holy Spirit, Acts 28:25; Heb, 10:15; Jer. 
31°33; Jet.10;2; 1 Cor. 2:10,11; John 
3:5; John 1:13. 


13, 15. in the soul by special divine agency to ac- 
VI. The Holy Spirit and Spirit of God | complish justification an | sanctification 


are identical in some passages, Acts 2: 17; S. H. TYNG, 


THE 


3:17. 
and the 


it to do 


ch, 4:6. 
ee 


TCH. 


OHN, 


rid, see 


—Of the 
igments 


Isa. 61: 


’ d, Acts 
Dd; Eph. 


ns the 
b8; Ex. 
“123; I 
1 Sam. 


teach 
; John 
2 Pet. 
Micah 
hron, 


s done 
to ac- 
n 

ING, 


THE HO.Ly SPIkI?1. 181 


EMBLEMS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


I. Water, John 7 : 37-39.—Cleansing—Re- | V. Rain and Dew, Deut. 32: 1-3; Mic. 
freshing—Freely Given. | 5:7.—Fertilizing—Refreshing—Abundant. 
II. Fire, Acts 2: 2-4; Matt. 3: 11.—Puri- 


fying—Warming—Illuminating. ing. . phe wore, Fake 4 ale CeO Mee 
III. Wind, John 3 : 8.—Powerful—Reviv- Pongiving: 
IV. Oil, Isa. 61;1; Luke 4: 18,—Healing VII. A Voice. 1 Kings 19: 12, 13; fsa. 30: 
—Comforting, 21.—Teaching—Guiding—Warning. 


THE POWER OF THE HOLY GHOST. 


I. In the first place the Spirit of Godis | V. Exhibited in raising Christ from the 
the Power of God, compare Matt. 12:28, | dead, 1 Peter 3:18. 
with Luke 11 : 20. VI, Exhibited in working miracles, Rom. 
II. Christ commenced His ministry in the | 15: 19. 
Power of the Holy Ghost, see Luke 4 : 14. VII. Exhibited in making the Gospel effi- 
{II. The Power of the Holy Ghost was | cacious, t Cor, 2:4; 1 Thess. 1: 5. 
exhibited in the creation, see Gen. 1: 2; Psa. VIII. Exhibited in overcoming all diffi- 
104 : 30. culties, Zech. 4 : 6, 7. 
IV. Exhibited in the conception of Christ, IX. Promised by the Father, I.uke 24: 49. 
Luke 1: 35. X. Promised by Christ, Acts 1:8..—Selected. 


THE OFFICE OF THE HOLY GHOST. 


The office of the Holy Ghost may be | brought into it by the baptism of the Spirit. 
illustrated in this way, making a distinction | ‘‘ Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost,” 
between His miraculous and ordinary influ- | Acts 1:5. ‘For by one Spirit are we all 
ences, the latter of which more immediately | baptized into one body, whether we be Jews 


concerns us to obs2rve ; or Gentiles,” 1 Cor, 12:13. 

I. Through the preaching of a crucified V. No person can say that Jesus is the 
id risen Saviour (as on the Day of Pente- | Lord but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12: 3. 
cost) the Holy Ghost will convict of sin, VI. By Him we are sealed and anointed as 

thus teaching the very murderers of Christ | His, Eph. 1:13; 1 John 2:27. 
to surrender themselves to His service and VII. By Him some are set apart te the 


be filled with the Holy Ghest. ‘And they | ministry of the Gospel. ‘The Holy Ghost 
were all filled with the Holy Ghost,” Acts | said, ‘Separate me Barnabas ard Saul for 
2:45 4:31. the work whereunto I have called them,” 

II. The Holy Ghost fell on them that | Acts 13:2. 
heard, Acts 10:44. On taem was poured 
the gift of the Holy Ghost, verse 45. 

III. The Gentiles may receive Him as well 
as the Jews. ‘' The Holy Ghost fell on them 
as on us at the first,’’ Acts 11: 15. 

IV. All that ever were in the church of 
Jesus Christ, or now are, or will be, are 


ViIt. He sends the true ministers. ‘' So 
they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, 
departed,” Acts 13: 4, 5; 2 Sam. 23:2. 

IX. He influences them what and how to 
preach, ‘* Which things also we speak, not 
in the words which man’s wisdom teacheth, 
but which the Holy Ghost teacheth,’ 1 Cor, 


TS A 


182 


2:15. Their preaching did not come in 
‘word only, but also in power, and in the 
Holy Ghost, 1 Thess. 1: 5.” 

X. Therefore the true church is a spirvé¢ual 
church or house, 1 Peter 2:5, being built 
together by the Spirit. ‘‘In whom ye also 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


are builded together for a habitation of God 
through the Spirit,’ Eph. 2:22 ‘ We are 
the circumcision, which worship God in the 
Spirit, . . and have no confidence in the 
flesh,’ Phil. 3 : 3. 

JOHN FETTERHOFF. 


THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


I, He Convicts, Converts, and Sancti- 
fies. 
1 He reproves, see John 16: 8. 
2 Convicts, Micah 3: 8. 
3 Strives, Hel. 3:7. 
4 Instructs, Neh. 9: 20. 
5 Aids the preached word, 1 Thess.1:5, 
1 Peter 1 : 12. 
6 Quickens, John 6: 63. 
7 Renews, Titus 3: 5. 
8 Imparts love to God, Rom. 5: 5. 
9 Leads, Psalms 143: 10. 
10 Upholds, Psa. 51 : 12. 
11 Prevails, Zech. 4:6. 
12 Washes and justifies, 1 Cor. 6: 11. 
13 Gives liberty, 2 Cor. 3:17. 
14 Aids in mortifying sin, Rom. 8 : 13. 
15 Resists the flesh, Gal. 5:17, 18. 
16 Changes from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 
3:18. 
17 Aids in living unto God, 1 Peter 4 : 6. 
II. The Holy Ghost the Comforter. 
t Is given by the Father, John 14: 16. 


2-Is given by Chiist, Isaiah 61 : 1-3. 

3 Isgiven through Christ's intercession, 
John 14 : 16. 

4 Is sent in the name of Christ, John 
14: 26. 

5 Is sent by Christ from the Father, 
John 15: 26. 


III. As Comforter He communicates joy 
to the Saints, Rom. 14: 17. 

1 Edifies the church, Acts 9: 31. 

2 Testifies of Christ, 1 John 4:2. 

3 Imparts the love of God, Rom. 5: 3-5. 

4 Imparts hope, Rom. 15:13. 

5 Witnesses with Saints, Rom. 8 : 16. 

6 Gives access to the Father, Eph. 2: 18. 

7 Seals believers, Eph. 1:13; 4: 30. 

8 Imparts joy, 1 Thess. 1:6. 

9 Dwells with and in Saints, John 14: 17. 
10 Abides forever with Saints, John 14: 16. 
tr Is known by Saints, John 14: 17. 

12 The world cannot receive, John 14: 17. 


—Scripture Text Book. 


THE SPIRITS WORK IN BELIEVERS. 


I. He teaches us to sanctify ourselves. 
See 2 Tim. 2:21, also verse 19; 2 Cor. 7:1. 

II. He teaches us what to follow, Heb. 
12:14. 

III. Our responsibility is to abstain from 


all that iscontrary to the Word, the Spirit’s' 


teaching, 1 Thess. 4: 3-7. 
IV. The Holy Spirit is the direct agent 


in actually conveying to us all that con- 
tributes to our sanctification. 


V. By Him we are changed, 2 Cor. 3:18; 
1 Cor.6:11; Rom: 15:16; 2 Thess. 2:13; 
t Peter 1:2. 

VI. By Him we are “ baptized intc one 
body.” See 1 Cor. 12:13, 27; also Rom. 
12:5; Eph. 4:25. 

This is the real ‘‘baptism of the Spirit.” 
which our Lord promises to His people, 
Acts 1:5, and of which all true believers are 
partakers. See how beautifully the reality 


on of God 
‘We are 
sod in the 
ce in the 


HOFF. 


I-3. 
cession, 


ist, John 


Father, 


tater joy 


ir. 3:18; 
S. 2:13; 


inte one 
30 Rom. 


Spirit.” 

people, 
vers are 
. reality 


THE HOvy Spirit. 183 


of this union is unfolded in Eph. 4 : 22-32. | Holy Spirit to effect these realities, but also 
Here the relationship of the believer to | to make us know them. He works a con- 
Christ is so closely and so marvellously | sciousness and assurance of them in the 
figured by that of a man’s flesh to the man heart that simply believes them. This is 
himself, verse 29; and believers are actually | important and should be thoughtfully con- 
spoken of in the most remarkable manner as | sidered by some who doubt the possibility of 


‘‘members of His body, of His flesh, and of | such an assyrance, or who a: all events 


His bones.” See verse 30, regard it only as the privilege of a few ad- 
VII. By Him are the various gifts dis. | vanced or mature Christians. See 1 John 
tributed. See 1 Cor. 12: 4-11. 3:24. ‘We know,” etc., 1 Jao. 4:13; Rom, 


Lastly. Not only is it the office of the | 8:15, 16; Gal. 4:6; 1 Jno. 5:10. 


CHARACTER OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


I. He is God. See Exodus 17:7, comp. IV. He is called Omnipresent, Psalms 


with Heb. 3: 7-9. 139: 7-13. 
i : V. He is calied Omniscient, 1 Cor, 2: 10. 
Pe Me teoallen Gord; Aate s+ 9:'4: VI. Fe is called Omnipotent, Luke 1: 35; 


II. He is called Eternal, Heb. g: 14. Rom. 15:19. 


*weeree (Geet? ee * wt oe) erpee? 


” _ — < 
cep ED OA TRS — =: . _. 


. 
“a 
Hf 
i 
\ 
| 
| 


184 GOLD FROM OFHIR. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND SERVICE. 


{7 know that one effort put forth in (he power of the Holy Ghost is worth a whole 

life-time of service without Him. While meditating on this subject I have been 
impressed with the need there is in these days that Christian workers should be more 
fully anointed with power from on high. Why cannot we, as the disciples of old, wait 
for ten cays before the Lord, that we may receive a baptism of the Spirit? I amsure 
we all feel that we are not filled full as we wish to be. Where is the hindrance? Is 
not the Lord willing to pour out a blessing according to His promise? I do not know 
that it would bea waste of time if our Christian merchants were to close their shops, 
and our ministers close their studies, so as to meet in some central place from day to 
day and cry for an outpouring of the Holy Ghost. Indeed, I do not know but I may 
in these remarks be occupying precious time that ought to be spent on our knees. 
But if they should lead us to our knees afterwards, the time wil! not be misspent. 

Service implies that we are already brought into relationship with the Lord. And 
if we are Servants, that invo'ves the still closer relationship of Sons. “Son, go work 
to-day in my vineyard.” God employs not hirelings, but sons. I remember going 
with my wife to visit an interesting lighthouse on the New Jersey coast. She made 
the remark tothe light-house keeper: “‘ When you hear the wind blowing and the storm 
raging, are you not filled with fear for your safety?” ‘Oh, no,” he replied, “my own 
saiety 1s secured. I bend all my energies to keeping the reflectors bright and the 
lamps filled with oil; I think about the safety of others.” So when the Christian 
knows that his own safety is secured, he will endeavor to shine out upon the dark 
waters of sin for the safety of those who are perishing in their unbelief. 

For this service we need power. In Micah 3:8, we read: “I am full of power 
by the Spirit of the Lord.” Any man who rebukes a backsliding people needs to be 
full of power. Our Lord said to His apostles, “ Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until 
ye be endued with power from on high,” Luke 24:49; Acts 1:8. So that we in 
New Testament times need the very same power that the Old Testament prophets 
had, whether our services take the form of rebuking sin, or witnessing for Jesus and 
inviting sinners to Him. 

This power of the Holy Spirit may be represented in a two-fold manner—power 
within us, and power resting “pon us. “The water that I shall give hit: shall be ¢ 
him a well of water springing up into everlasting life,’ John 4:14. This denotes the 
personal life and experience of the believer. ‘He that believeth on Me, out of him 
shall flow rivers of living water,” John 7 : 37—not a well only, but a fountain. This is 
the real secret of ministry—not receiving the Spirit once for all, but putting ourselves 
under the Divine inflow, that He may flow through us in the form of service and 
ministry for others. 

When God made choice of a man to do the work of constructing the Tabernacle, 
he must be endowed with wisdom by the same Spirit as fitted Moses for the work of 
leadership. In all the detail work of the churches we need men qualified by the 
power of the Spirit dweliing within them. 

It is said of John the Baptist that from his birth he should be filled with the Holy 
Ghost, Luke 1:15, 16. He was to be a Nazarite—one separated unto God from the 
womb, Think of his marvellous ministry, which lasted only about nine months. For 
further instances of the enduement with power in the early Church, see Acts 2: 4; 
4:313 633-5. 

But there is something beyond ; we want not only to be filled with the Spirit, but 
to overflow. “I am full of matter, the Spirit within constraineth me, I will speak that 
I may be refreshed,” Job 32:18, 20. Our testimony fom the Lord ought torefresh us 
if we are like Elihu. “ My heart is inditing a good matter”—bu) og up like those 
hot springs that burst from the earth—“I speak of the things which I have made 
touching the King,” Psalm 45:1. When a man is full of the Holy Ghost his talk will 


1 a whole 
ave been 
be more 
old, wait 
am sure 
nce? Is 
not know 
‘ir shops, 
n day to 
ut I may 
ur knees. 
ent. 

‘d. And 
go work 
er going 
1e made 
he storm 
‘my own 
t and the 
~hristian 


the dark 


of power 
sds to be 
em until 
at we in 
prophets 
Sus and 


power 
ull be 2 
otes the 
of him 
This is 
rselves 
ice and 


ernacle, 
work of 
by the 


e Holy 
liom the 
s. For 
ts 2:4; 


irit, but 
ak that 
resh us 
p those 
le made 
alk will 


i 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. 185 


not be about himself. Let us pray that there may be such a fullness of the Spirit 
within us that it must find vent: that we must talk that our hearts may be refreshed. 
The other thought is the power of the Spirit “foz us. In this aspect the Spirit is 
represented by the oil. How frequent, in the symbolic rites of the Old Testament 
priesthood, was the use of the consecrating oil! As illustrations of the power of God 
resting on his servants, see Joshua—Num. 27:18; Deut. 34:9; Gideon—Judges 
6:34; Samson—13 and 14; Elisha—2 Kings 2:9; Zechariah—-2 Chron. 24:20, 
See also, Is. 32:15; Ezek.37. As we go forth to service among the dry bones of this 
world 6f sinners, “dead in trespasses and sins,” let us claim the promise of the Holy 
Ghost upon us. If we continually feel our entire dependence on Him, He will not 
leave us. He will be ineus and upon us, clothing His own word with mighty power, 


CN. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND CHARACTER. 


Ee the sight of God we are judicially perfect in Christ, Jude 24; Col. 1:22. He is 

now presenting us by His pricstly ministrations, and in His own inherent holiness, 
as a holy people te the Father. ‘The ultimate purpose of Jesus Christ is to “ present 
unto Himself a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle,” Eph. 5:27. But we are 
still in the body, and the Holy Spirit is given that He may keep us without spot and 
blameless unto the coming of our Lord. 

There are many elements that go to make up character. First of all, there is //z. 
The third person in the Godhead is called “the Spirit of Life,” Rom. 8:2. It is essen- 
tially the work of the Spirit to produce life in the soul of man, Then He comes to 
dwell in the living soul. He loves to dwell in the scene of life, to provide for Himself 
a princely palace in thc heart of regenerate man. 


Another element of character is ¢vvth. The man who is not truthful even in the. 


world’s estimation is not a man of good character. So the Spirit is called the Spirit 
of Truth, John 14:17. In all our transactions, and in all our relations with our 
fellowmen, we must be truthful, else our Christian testimony will be of no avail. Three 
times in the three chapters, John 14-16, the Holy Ghost is termed the Spirit of Truth. 
He guides us iato all truth; presents the truth to us; and leads us to walk in the 
truth. 

He is also designated the Spirit of holiness, Rom. 1:4 There can be no real 
Christian character without practical holiness. God hath .. »sen us in Christ, that 
we should be holy, Eph. 1:4. If we bear the name of Christ we are commanded to 
be holy, 2 Tim. 2:19. Holiness primarily means separation. Practically it is moral 
excellence. Weare to follow after holiness, Heb. 12:14. As a dog scenting the 
game is intent on the pursuit of it, so the believer is to lay out all his energies in the 
pursuit ot holiness. It must be the great object of our renew<< life. ; 

Our “conversation” is to be holy ; this word covers the whole life of the believer. 
To this end the Spirit is given—to lead us in the paths of holiness, that the world may 
be convinced of the reality of our profession and our possession of that which they do 
not possess. Thus, if we should never open our lips, we may exemplify a holiness of 
character that shall win others to the feet of our Lord and King. As McCheyne said, 
“What a dreadful weapon in the hands of God is a holy man!” In proportion as we 
are holy, the power of the Spirit shall rest upon us. 

Then He is called the Spirit of wésdom, which is another element of character. 
We read of Bezaleel, wo was filled with the Spirit of God in wisdom, Ex. 31:2. A 
man may show worldly or intellectual wisdom without the Spirit, but the wise in heart 
are taught by the Spirit of God. ; Bat 

Strength is another element of character. Power was given to the early disciples 


186 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


for testimony, for witn>ss bearing, and also for endurance. So in all times of persecu 
tion and reproach, if we are to take our stand for God in testimony to those around 
us, we need the strength which will enable us to endure. 

Goodness, too, is an important element in character. “Thy Spirit is good,” Ps, 
143: 10, When in the early days of the Church they wanted men to manage their 
secular affairs, they were enjoincd to look out for those who were “ of honest report, 
fill of the Holy Ghost,” Acts 6:3. Barnabas was “a good man, and full of the Holy 
Ghost,” Acts 11; 24. Apart from public testimony, or public position, goodness must 
be seen in the personal life. In those early days the Church looked not for moneyed 
men, or mn of social influence and position, but for men of’sound judgment, and who 
were irreproachable in their personal life, upon whom the Holy Ghost was resting. 
In our own day we need officials in the Church who shall be above criticism. 

Character, in short, ir Christ formed in us through the Spirit. In all the minutize 
of domestic life, and commercial life, just as much as in public testimony, the pcwer 
and teaching of the Spirit are needed for the building up of true Christian character. 
The pagan king Pharaoh attributed the character of Joseph to the Spirit of God. By 
his patience, meekness, truthfulness, and purity of life he won from Pharaoh this 
eulogy: “Can we find such an one as this, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?” 
Gen. 41:38. So let us yield ourselves to the power of the Holy Ghost that He may 
chisel off the angles and corners, tone down the harsh lines, and bring out in us the 
image of Jesus Christ. Let our prayer be, not so much that we may be great, as that 
we may be holy, men and women. G. C. N 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND THE HEARING OF FAITH. 


Gal. 3 : 2. 


[? is the Holy Spirit that is the life of a Church and the life of a soul. © No Spirit, no 

life! It is through this Spirit that the nran awakes—opens his eye, his ear, his 
heart. This Spirit is fvs¢ with the sinner, revealing the truth to him aid enabling 
him to believe it. Not self, nor man, nor the flesh is first, but the Holy Ghost. It is 
He who moves on the face of the waters. 

But there is another side of the question which our text brings before us ; namely, 
the receiving of the Spirit after believing, as the result of “the hearing of faith.” In 
neither is there any visible iliapse, or audible voice, or perceptible touch—anything 
contrary to or out of the region of our faculties ; still both are real. Itis to the second 
that our verse refers. And the question to be solved is this: Does He come in con- 
nection with the law or the: Gospel? Is he received by working or by believing? 
Does the preaching of law, or the preaching of grace, bring Him? The Apostle 
appeals to the experience of the Galatians, when first he comes tothem preaching the 
Gospel. It was in connection with that Gospel which he preached that they received 
the Spirit: and that Gospel was not the Gospel of working, but of believing the Spirit 
came down on them, when he delivered his message of grace, and they received that 
Spirit in receiving the good news. 

The Apostle refers to one thing only here, as the result of a received Gospel—the 
Spirit. But in like manner are all the blessings of the newcovenant received. Thus is 
Christ Himself received: by “The hearing offaith.” Thus is pardon received: by “The 
hearing of faith.’ Thus is life received : by “ The hearing offaith.’”’ “So we preached 
and so ye believed.” It is not as workers of good works, or doers of God’s law, but as 
listeners to His Gospel, that we are receivers of His blessire. It is not as workers, 
but as /’steners, that we are receivers of His Spirit. ‘“ Hear, and your soul shall live ;” 
“ Hearken unto Me;” “ Listen, O ye isles ;” ‘ Blessed is the man that heareth Me ;” 


persecu 
s around 


od,” Ps, 
ge their 
it report, 
he Holy 
ess must 
noneyed 
and who 
; resting. 


minutize 
he pewer 
haracter. 
10d. By 
raoh this 
God is?” 
He may 
in us the 
t, as that 


se 


H. 


pirit, no 
s ear, his 
enabling 
st. Itis 


namely, 
th.” In 
anything 
e second 
e in con- 
blieving ? 
Apostle 
hing the 
received 
he Spirit 
ved that 


pel—the 
Thus is 
by “The 
breached 

, but as 
workers, 
Il live ;” 
h Me;” 


THE HOLty Spirit. 187 


“ He that hath an ear, let him hear ;” “ Hear ye deaf ;” “ He that heareth My words ; ” 
“ Biessed are they that hear.” 

I. The Holy Spirit is God’s specia’ gift to us. (1) He is the promise of 
the Father. (2) He is the Church’s special birthright. (3) He is in the hands of the 
risen Saviour. (4) In Him are all the gifts needed by the Church as a whole and by 
cach saint. In the Spirit all is contained that we need. The Father is most willing 
to bestow Him ; the Son ‘s most willing to shed Him down; He is most willing to 
come. Weneed Him much. As the earth without rain and sunshine turns to bar- 
renness, so it is with the Church or soul without the Spirit. But still He is “ ministered ” 
or “given” or dispensed in a particular way, God’s way— the way that will honor the 
Father and glorify Christ. 

Il. Heis not received in or by working. None of God's gifts are thus 
received ; least of all the Spirit. The Jaw does not procure us the Spirit. Works do 
not contribute to our obtaining it. We do not serve in order to obtain the Spirit, but 
we obtain the Spirit in order that we may serve. First the Spirit, then work ; not 
first work, then the Spirit. The works that we do without the Spirit, or previous to 
our receiving the Spirit, are in themselves poor and unprofitable, nor can they in any 
way secure the Spirit for us. 

lil. He is received by the hearing of faith. The expression is a peculiar 
one. It is not simply “ hearing,” nor “faith,” but the “hearing of faith,” that obtains 
for us the Spirit. What does it mean, then? Not that faith which leads to hearing, 
but that hearing which leads to faith (or believing). It is in listening to the Divine 
word that faith springs up, and then the Spirit comes in and fills us with all His gifts 
and graces. No doubt the Spirit must work in order to our hearing and believing ; 
but then He works most fully after that we have believed. It is the believing soul that 
is the vessel for receiving all His fulness. The Holy Ghost then does not come— 

(1) By works. Works cannot win, or buy or deserve. He is the free Spirit. 
Psaim 51:12, 

(2) By chance, at random. ,There is no chance work in the mission of the Holy 
Ghost. 

(3) By miracle, as at Pentecost. It is the same Spirit, but not by open miracle. 

(4) By mere sovereignty. God is sovereign; yet He gives the Spirit in an 
appointed way, and acccrding to promise. 

But 27 believing, and 4y believing, in proportion to our faith. The simpler and 
stronger our faith the more of the Spirit. 

Let us believe for the Spirit. Not simpl:: believe and hope that by-and-by the 
Spirit will come in power upon us, but believe for Him—that is, earnestly and believ- 
ingly desire Him, and desire more of Him. Our unbelief hinders Him, grieves Him. 
Let us beware. Only believe, and be filled with the Spirit. 

The age thinks it can do without the Spirit. Let the Church watch against this 
blasphemy. Let her keep hold of the Lord’s promise, the promise of the Father. Let 
her prize the gift, long for more of it. Let our cry be continually, “ More of the Holy 
Spirit ; more of His fulness ; more of His gifts and graces.” 

Not human intellect or genius, but the power and wisdom of the Holy Ghost! 
Study and culture may do much for the mind in widening and filling it, but more is 
needed. Man’s faculties, well disciplined according to the progress of the age, may 
raise him to no inconsiderable height, but only the Divine Spirit can lift a fallen being 
out of the region of darkness and evil into sympathy with the “age to come,” into 
communion with the living God.—Se/ected. 


" 


THE SCRIPTURES 


bh 


nN = 
- ’ em se % 


=< 


THE SCRIPTURES. 


GOLDEN BELLS AND POMEGRANATES; OR, WORD AND 
: LIFE. 
By J. &. Wolfe. 


“A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of 
the robe round about.""—Ex. 28 : 44. 


HE typez of the Old Testament are full of significance to the Spirit-taught child of 

God. To him they interpret in the most practical manner the spiritual truths of 

the New Testament. In other words, they carry to him God’s comment on His own 

most precious word. The personal characteristics of the Lord Jesus Christ shine forth 

most luminously in the types, and shadows, and symbols of the Old Testament 
Scriptures. 

These types, from whatever cause, have been much neglected, notwithstanding 
that our Lord furnishes the key to their interpretation in that saying of His, “ MosES 
WROTE OF ME.” Againthe Holy Spirit deciares through Paul, 1 Cor. 10:12; “Now 
all these things happened urto them (the children of Israel,) for types (see marginal 
reading) ; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world 
are come.” . 

The Person and work of God’s Beloved Son is the substance of all types, promises, 
and prophecies. The exercise of tracing out those lines of truth which centre in Him, 
with the application of their meaning to ourselves, is one of the most glorious objects 
that the devout student of the Word can possibly have before him. Such study, when 
rightly conducted, not on the basis of mere idle curiosity, but with the right motive 
and principle, will lead to blessed discoveries of “ heights and depths, and lengths and 
breadths,” of Him who is “‘ God manifest in the flesh.” 

The 28th chapter of Exodus is a volume of spiritual beauty. A life time of study 
could not fathom its depths nor exhaust its boundless stores. In this chapter we 
have a minute description given of the separation of Aaron to the priesthood ; his 
priestly garments, the breast-plate, ephod, robe broidered coat, mitre and girdle, etc., 
etc. But I will confine myself more particularly to the truth embodied in the “bells 
and pomegranates.” See verses 31 to 35 :— 


“And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod allof blue,..... and beneath, 
upc —* 2 hem of it,‘thou shall make pomegranates of blue and of purple, and of scarlet, 
ro. _ubdout the hem thereof ; and beils of gold between them round about ; a golden 


bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe 
round about. And it shall be upon Aaron to minister, and his sound shall be heard 
“dat he govth in unto the holy place before the Lord, and when he cometh out, that 
edie not.’ 
The office of the ancient High Priest was to make atonement for the sins of the 


e r 
[rot] 


192 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


people. Once every year the blood of sacrifice was taken into the Most Holy Place. 

‘And although the whole tabernacle was built as a Sanctuary for the Most High, this 
room was specially where He dwelt. None were permitted to enter, save the High 
Priest, and he only one day in each yeai, which was called the Day of Atonement. 
Then as the representative of the nation, he passed within the vail, with incense and 
blood, and God communed with man. So we see that after our Lord Jesus Christ 
had completed the work which the Father gave Him to do, in offering Himself as a 
sacrifice for the sins of the world, He arose from the dead, and, as our Great High 
Priest, He ascended into the Hravens, and passed into the Most Holy Place, and 

_then were the gifts of the Spirit manifested in the sound of TESTIMONY ; Acts 2: I-11, 
and they will be when He comes out again. The FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT, we know, 
were also in the saints, as witness the record of the Acts of the Apostles. 

One well-taught in the Word has remarked: “ Upon the hem of the robe of the 
ephod there was the desirable fruit (pomegranates) and the testimony (golden bells) 
of the Holy Ghost, which depended on the priesthood. I think that Christ in entering 
Heaven made Himself heard through the Holy Ghost in His people—hem of His 
garment (compare Psalm 133); and He will make Himself heard through His gifts 
when He comes out also. Meanwhile, He bears within also the iniquity of the holy 
things in holiness before the eternal God. (Tuais holiness is upon His very forehead). 
Not only they but their imperfect services are presented according to the divine holi- 
ness in Him... . The Heavenly Priest must Himseif be a heavenly Mau; and it is 
to this character of Christ, as here in the high priest, that the fruits and .estimony of 
the Spirit are attached. It is from Christ in His heavenly character that they flow ; 
they are attached to the hem of His garment (His people—His body) here below. 
His sound was heard when He went in and when He came out; and so it has been 
and will be.” 

MacIntosh says : “ The blue robe of the ephod is expressiv > 0: thei tirely heavenly 
character of our High Priest. He is gone into heaven; He is beyond the range of 
mortal vision ; but, by the power of the Holy Ghost, there is divine testimony to the 
truth of His being alive, in the presence of God ; and not only testimony but fruit like- 
wise. ‘A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate.’ Such is 
the beauteous order. True testimony tothe great truth that Jesus ever liveth to make 
int.~cession for us will be inseparably connected with fruitfulness in Hisservice. Oh, 
for a deeper understanding of these precious and holy mysteries! It is needless to 
remark that there is divine appropriateness as well as significance in all the figures 
presented to us inthe Word. Thus the “ pomegranate,” when opened, is found to 
consist of a number of seeds contained in a red fluid. Surely this has a voice. Let 
spirituality, not imagination, judge.” 

May not the “golden bell” also signify the joyful sound of the glorious gospel of 
the blessed God? Jesus yet speaks from heaven to the sons of men. “ My words 
they are Spirit and they are life.” The literal translation of the word “ gospel” is “the 
joyful message.” Would God that more might hear, “look, and live.” 

But have not the “bells and pomegranates” additional significance? Most 
assuredly. To the believer the “bells” speak of testimony for the Lord Jesus while 
the “ pomegranates ” tell of fruitfulness or fruit-bearing. 


I. Testimony. 1. The bells were made of pure gola. The High Priest did 


not dare put on silver, zinc, tin, iron, or any other kind of metal. So the believer's 
testimony should be the “ pure gold” of God’s Word. How much of the testimony 
given in our religious meetings falls short of this holy standard any one who has 
spiritual discer: ment can testi y. The most we hear now-a-days is something about 
“feeling,” or “ iy church,” or “ our dear pastor,” or “my opinion.” Zinc, tin, lead and 
iron, instead o. the blessed holy Word of God. 

2. It will be noticed, furth zr, that the bells and pumegranates evenly balanced on 
the hem of the High Priest’s robe. There were just as many pomegranates as bells. 
Many Christians who have the bells seem to be devoid, in a large measure, of the 


=x O 


aD P HO tog os 


w 
t 
O 


aly Place. 
Ligh, this 
the High 
onement. 
‘ense and 
us Christ 
nself as a 
reat High 
lace, and 
$2: 1-11, 
we know, 


»be of the 
den bells) 
1 entering 
m of His 

His gifts 
f the holy 
forehead). 
ivine holi- 
; and it is 
timony of 
hey flow ; 
‘re below. 
- has been 


heavenly 
e range of 
my to the 
fruit like- 
Such is 
to make 
ice. Oh, 
eedless to 
ne figures 
found to 
hice. Let 


gosnel of 
y words 
1” is “the 


? Most 
sus while 


Priest did 


believer's 
estimony 
who has 
ing about 
lead and 


anced on 
as bells. 
e, of the 


THE SCRIPTURES. 193 


pomegranates. Our Christian character should be :ounded out full. We should have 
as Many pomegranates as bells. Our lives should be in perfect harmony with our testi- 
mony. “A golden bel! and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pom: yranate, upon the 
hem of the robe round about.’ 

3. Testimony ought to have it in two things. Not only the truth, but a// the truth. 
Many in the ae and elsewhere are afraid to speak all that the Lord commands. 
Some withhold certain important truths for “policy sake.” Such are not faithful 
witnesses, 2nd God will judge them. 

4. There is a notable distinction between the testimony of the Holy Spirit and that 
of the believer. The Spirit testifies OF Christ; the believer FOR Christ. In John 
15:26 we read: “He shall testify OF Me;” but in Acts 2:14-17, we find Peter 
testifying FOR Christ. 

How simple and to the point was the testimony of the early disciples. There was 
no straining for effect; no gilt-edged oratory; no imaginative flights, causing the 
hearer to exclaim, “ What a wonderful preacher! How captivating hismanner { How 
gifted ! What a wealth of language!” In the Acts of the Apostles we have the model 
testimonies for all times, ‘Christ crucified, dead and risen again,” was their theme 
on every occasion and under every circumstance. We never read of any flattering 
things being said of them. Sometimes their testimony was rejected in the most bitter 
and vindictive style; sometimes it was received by multitudes “with gladness of 
heart.” Nothing, however, could for one moment cause them to abandon the blessed 
“old, old story.” The bells were golden and rang with no uncertain sound. What 
wondrous scenes were witnessed in those days. Thank God, even in our day when 
the Word is preached in its purity, and the Holy Ghost honored, like results follow. 
Oh! for a revival of the old-fashioned Actarian times! 

Note the testimony given by Peter in Acts 5 : 29-42. Just liberated from prison, 
whither he had been sent along with other of the Apostles, we find him in the temple 
preaching the Gospel just as fearlessly as ever. How the ecclesiastical authorities 
raged, saying, verse 28: “Did not we straightly command you, that ye should not 
teach in this name? And, behold ye have filled Jerusalem with your doct~ine, and 
intend to bring this man’s blood upon us.” : 

Then Peter and other Apostles answered and said : ‘We ought to obey God rather 
than men. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on 
atree. Him Hath God exalted with His ein ht hand to be a Prince and Saviour, for 
to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And we are His witnesses to 
these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey 
Him. When they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and took counsel to slay 
them. Then stood there up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor 
of the law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put the 
Apostles forth a little space; and said unto them, ye men of Israel, take heed to your- 
selves what ye intend to do as touching these men. For before these days rose up 
Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four 
hundred, joiaed themselves : who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed Him, were 
scattered and brought to nought... ... And now I say unto you, refrain from these 
men, and let them alone ;. for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to 
nought ; but if it be of God, 4e cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to 
fight against God. And'to him they agreed: and when they had called the Apostles, 
and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, 
and let them go. And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that 
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His name. And DAILY in the TEMPLE, 
and in EVERY HOUSE, they CEASED NOT to TEACH and PREACH JESUS CHRIST.” 

Prisons, persecutions, death, could not intimidate them nor make them change 
the nature of their testimony. Stephen had just been stoned to death for giving the 
“Golden Bell” testimony. Many were arrested and put in prison, and the persecu- 
tion waxed so hot that great numbers were forced to flee for their lives, leaving homes, 

13 


194 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


. 


kindred and all for Christ’s sake. But at! this could not or did not interrupt the steady 
witnessing of those Holy Ghost anointed ones. On they went like a mighty resistless 
river. It is to be supposed that the more bitter their persecutions the clearer and 
sweeter the ring of the “Golden Bells.” See Acts 8 ; 4-8 :— 

“Therefore they that were scattered abrvad, vent everywhere PREACHING THE 
WORD. Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached CHRIST unto 

, thera, And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip 
spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. . . . And there was great joy in 
that city.” 

In the same chapter, commencing at the 26th verse, Philip kas a call from God 
to do a little personal work for his divine Master. 

“ And the Angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saving ; Arise, and go toward the 
south, unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza which is desert. And 
he arose and went ; and behold a man of Ethiopia, an Eunuch of great authority under 
Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had 
come up to Jerusalem for to worship, was returning ; and, sitting in his chariot read 
Isaiah the prophet. The: the Spirit said unto Philip, go near and join thyself to this 
chariot. And Philip RAN thither to him, and he heard him read the prophet Isaiah, 
and said, Understandest thou what thou reacest? And he said, How can I except 
some man should guide me? And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit 
with him. The place of the Scripture which he read was this, “He was lead asa 
sheep to the slaughter ; and lik: a lamb dumb before his shearers, so opened He not 
His mouth. In His humiliation His judgment was taken away; and who shall 
declare His generation? for His life istaken fromthe earth. Andthe I‘unuchanswered 
Philip, and said, I pray thee of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself or of some 
other man? THEN PHILIP OPENED HIS MOUTH AND BEGAN AT THE SAME SCRIPTURE, 
AND PREACHED UNTO HIM JESUS.” 

As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so Philip lifted up “Jesus only,” 
and what precious results followed! There was no putting the Eunuch on a long 
mourner’s bench trial for his salvation, no legal striving for conversion ; no praying 
before receiving God’s wonderful gift of eternal life. The well-taught evangelist just 
made the way plain vy the Word of God, and the Eunuch believed straightway and 
trusted in Jesus Christ and was saved/ It isso in this our day, when the Word is 
rightly divided. Souls believe, receive Christ and live. Many Christian ministers, 
because of their ignorance of the Scriptures, cannot lead a soul out of the darkness. 
They preach the sinner into a state of conviction and then “leave the rest of the work 
to the Holy Spirit,” as they say. The secret of the matter is, that not having had 
Philip’s schooling, they are ignorant of the way to lead a soul at once to Christ. How 
true that portion of the divine word, Rom. 10: 14-17, “ How then’ shall they call on 
Him in whom they have not believed ? and how shall they believe on Him in whom 
they have not heard? and how shall they hear w:thout a preacher? and HOW SHALL 
THEY PREACH, EXCEPT THEY BESENT? As it is written, how beautiful are the feet 
of them that preach the GOSPEL OF PEACE, and®BRING GLAD TIDINGS OF GOOD THINGS ! 
But they have not all obeyed the Gospel. For FAITH COMETH BY HEARING, and 
HEARING BY THE WORD OF GOD.” Golden bells, golden bells ! 

See also Acts 10 : 34-48, where Peter gives the same old testimony in the power 
of the Spirit. The Word is stil quoted. Glorious results follow. 

Acts 13 : 38, 39 contains t 1e Gospel in a “ nut-shell.” 

In Acts 16; 25-34, Paul and Silas ring out the joyful message to the hardened 
jailor, and “in the same hour of the night” he and his family are converted. No long 
legal process here. How quick the Spirit applied the Word, under the ministration 
of those God-taught brethren. They knew kow to lead a soul to the Saviour, becaus¢ 
they had fed upon the Word, and knew how to “rightly divide it.” 

What is the great need of the day? The simple answer is, WE MUST COME 
BACK TO THE SIMPLICITY OF THE SCRIPTURES. Let our testimony have 


( 
] 
é 
I 
‘ 


pS SPU MANTRA IRE EIN ar te 


the steady 
y resistless 
learer arid 


HING THE 
[RIST unto 
hich Philip 
‘reat joy in 


from God 


toward the 
assert. And 
ority under 
s, and had 
hariot read 
self to this 
het Isaiah, 
n I except 
-up and sit 
is lead asa 
1ed He not 

who shall 
hanswered 
f or of some 
CRIPTURE, 


esus only,” 
on a long 
O praying 
gelist just 
htway and 
e Word is 
ministers, 
p darkness. 
bf the work 
aving had 
rist. How 
ey call on 
in whom 
OW SHALL 
hre the feet 
D THINGS ! 
RING, and 


the power 


b hardened 
No long 
inis tration 
r, becaus¢ 


5T COME 
ony have 


THE SCRIPTURES. 195 


a “Thus saith the Lord”’ ring to it. The cry of many of th: theologi al schools of the 
present day is, “The people must have ministers who are a breast of the times.” This 
is a fearful mistak2 and delusion. What is needed is the culture of the Bible. Those 
that are called of God have got all that they can attend toto give the world the simple 
Gospel. What has science got to do with our salvation? Where in the Word is it 
commanded that the minister of the Gospel shouid give five or seven years of his life 
to the study of metaphysics, philosophy, theology, and the sciences, in order to qualify 
himself for the v. ork of the ministry? Science, philosophy, etc., are all right in their 
place, but nowhere in the Bible is it taught that one c:lled of God to the work of the 
ministry should waste his valuable time on these secular side ic:sues. Ever. = Paul, 
with all che education received before his conversion, declares, “ And I, brethren, when 
I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you 
the testimony of God. For I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus 
Christ, and Him crucified. And I was with you in fear,and in much trembling. And 
my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man’s wisdom, but in 
demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith should not stand in the 
wisdom of men, but in the power of God.” 

II. Fruit-Bearing. 1. As remarked,the golden bells and pomegranates alternated. 
They were equal in number, and as the bells spoke of testimony, so the pomegranates 
typified fruitfulness or fruit-bearing. Inthe 5th chapter of Galatians we read of the 
“fruit of the Spirit.” In Solomon’s Song the Church is compared to an orchard of 
pomegranates. The normal condition of the believer should be that of a fruit-bearer. 
True testimony always produces genuine fruit-bearing. The soul that reverently feeds 
on God’s Word and “sounds it forth,’ will not be without precious fruit. “ Every 
branch that beareth fruit, He purgeth it that it may bring forth more fruit... . . If ye 
abide in Me, and my words abidein you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done 
unto you. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear MUCH FRUIT; so shall ye be 
my disciples,” Jno. 15:2, 7,8. The fe and words should accord. 

2. Fruitless believersare takenaway. SeeJno. 15:2. Thisis more fully brought 
out in 1, Cor. 1117-32. The Corinthian believers had not only tolerated gross sin in 
their midst, (5th chapter), but had become sectarian in spirit, 1 Cor. 3 : 1-7, and had set 
up separate tables, I Cor. 21:17, 18, 19,20 and 21, and no longer remembered the 
Lord’s death in the break:ng of bread together. Note particularly the 29th and 3oth 
verses. “For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment 
(margin) to hiriself, not discerning the Lord’s body. For THIS CAUSE MANY ARE 
WEAK and SICKLY among you, and MANY SLEEP.” Sleep, in this instance, refers to 
physicaldeath. The Lord had removed them from the earth, for had they continued 
in this bad state the name of Jesus would have been disgraced before the world. Sick- 
ness, even unto death, was sent upon them, as noter Jno. 5:15. “ If any man (Chris- 
tian man, for the epistles were written to believers for their edification and warning, 
and not for the unsaved) see his brother sin a sin whichis not unto death (that 1s 
physical death, not eternal death), he shall ask, and He shall give him life for them 
that sin not unto death. There is a SIN UNTO DEATH. Ido not say that he shall 
pray for z¢.” For corroboration of the foregoing see James § : 12-20, especially the 

ast verse, The party to be prayed for is not one of the unconverted, but a BROTHER. 
The context must be read in order to get the true meaning of this verse. So we see 
that there is a sin unto death forthe believer who will not be purged or pruned, Jno. 
15:2,6. How inexpressively solemn is all this ! 

3. Physical or bodily affliction is one of the ways in which the Lord frequently 
chastises His children. I believe that bodily weaknesses are often sent in faithful 
love. Sometimes to hinder the development of evil forseen only by the Lord Himself, 
as for example the “thorn in the flesh” sent to Paul, a preventive discipline that is 
most precious ; but often as direct chastisement for evil committed, as for instance, 
see Numbers 12: 10; 2 Chron. i6: 12; 2 Chron, 26:19; James5: 15. 

4. It has been remarked that Paul, though pre-eminently possessed of the gift of 


196 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


healing, left Trophimus sick at Miletum, as though the purpose of the Lord in sending 
the sickness had not been accomplished. . . . Timothy seems to have been con- 
stitutionally weak and subject to frequent bodily infirmities, 1 Tim. 5 : 23. This was 
doubtless needed discipline, but there is no evidence that it was chastisement for evil 
committed. 

5. Ini Cor. 1 : 30, there can be doubt that the words “many sleep” refer to death. 
The Greek word rendered “sleep” is the same that occurs in chapter 7 ; 39, and is 
translated “dead.” It occurs again in chap. 15 :6, 18, 20, 5; also in 1 Thess. 4: 13, 
14, 15; and 2 Peter 3:4, and elsewhere. A different word entirely is used in such 
passages as Matt. 8:24; 26:40; Eph. 5:14; 1 Thess. 5: 6, 7, 10. 

6. In 1 Kings 13:24, we find an instance of chastisement unto death on account 
of disobedience. Even Moses, Aaron, Miriam, and others, fell in the wilderness on 
account of disobedience, and none save Joshua and Caleb lived to enter the land of 

romise. 
7. How true it is that the fruitless branches are “taken away” from the sphere of 
fruit-bearing. But even then it is in order that they may not be “judged with the 
world. ' 

8. This leads us to see—if we have eyes to see—the great need of walking in 
constant communion with the Master. The best among us remember that at the 
judgment of stewardship, when Christ shall judge the works of the redeemed ones, 
all our negiect of duty, all our religious works that were performed for the approval or 
benefit of self, all “hay, wood, and stubble,” will be consumed in the fiery flames of 
His judgment wrath. May we have that love, that loyalty to the Beloved Lord Jesus, 
that John speaks of in his Ist epistle, 4th chapter and 17th verse: ‘“ Herein is our love 
made perfect, that we may have BOLDNESS IN THE DAY OF JUDGMENT; 
because as He is, so are we in this world.”. Thank God it is written that “when we 
big: judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be judged with the world,” 


— of Os bet best & 6s 


in sending 
been con- 
This was 
ent for evil 


er to death. 
39, and is 
less. 4: 13, 
ed in such 


on account 
derness on 
the land of 


e sphere of 
ed with the 


walking in 
that at the 
emed ones, 
approval or 
'y flames of 
Lord Jesus, 
. is our love 
\GMENT ; 
“when we 
the world,” 


THE SCRIPTURES. 197 


THY WORD. 


“The ontrance of Thy Word givethl ight; it giveth understanding unto the simple.”-—Psalm 119 : 130. 


¢ 


I. The supreme authority of the word of | Col. 1: 3-6; 1 Thess. 1:2-10; 2:13, 14; 


God. 
Deut. 4: 1-10; 12:32; Joshua 1:8; Prov. 
30:5,6; John 12, 48-50; Heb. 1: 1-3; 2: 1- 


4; Rev. 1: 1-3; 20:12; 22:18, 19. ‘‘ Take 
heed what ye hear,’’ Mark 4:24. ‘Take 
heed how ye hear,’’ Luke 8:12. ‘To the 


law and to the testimony; if they speak not 
according to this word, it is because there is 
no light in them,”’ Isaiah 8: 20. 


II. The teacher of the word. 

“The Holy Ghost, . . He shall teach you 
all things,’ John 14:26. ‘‘The Comforter, 
. . .He shall testify of Me,"’ John 15:26. 
“The Spirit of Truth, . . He will guide you 
unto all truth,” John 16:15. 


III. Blessings promised to those who 
“hearken to do” His word. 

Ex. 15:26; Lev. 26: 3-13; Deut. 6: 1-3; 
7: II-I5; II :13-15; I11:22-25, 28: 1-4; Rev. 
1:3; 12:7. 

IV. Judgment to all who despise and 
neglect it. 

Lev. 26: 14-40; Deut. 28:15-68; 2 Kings 
22:13; 2 Chron. 36: 15, 16; Prov. 1: 24-32; 
Isa. 65:12; 66:4; Rom, 2:11, 12, 16; 2 
Thess, 1:7-93 2: 10-12. 

V. Would you be happy? Read the 
word, 

Ps, 119:162, 165; Isa. 48:18; Jer. 15:16; 
John 15:11; 16:33; 17:13; Acts 13: 32, 
33, 38, 39; 1 John1: 1-4. 

VI. Would you be wise? Read the 
word. 

Ps. 19:7; 119:98,99; Prov. 1: 1-7; 9:10; 
1 Cor, 1: 22-24, 30, 31; 1 Cor. 2: 1-16; Cai. 
1:93 3:16; 2 Tim. 3: 14, 15. 

VII. Would you be fruitful? Read the 
word. 

See what the fruit is in Gal. 5:22, 23; 
Eph. 5:9; Luka 8: 11-15; Rom. 10;17; 


t Pet. 2:1, 2; Ps. 1:1-3; Isa. 54: 8-13. 


VIII. Would you be holy? Read the 
word, 

Ps. 119:9-11, 133; John 15:3; 17:17; 
2 Cor,7:13 Eph. 5: 26, 27. 

IX. Would you know God? Read the 
word. 

Job 22:21-30; Prov. 2:1-5; 8:34, 35; 
John 1:1, 14, 18; 5:38, 39; 1 John 5:20. 


X. Would you have fellowship with 
God? Read the word. 

Prov. 6:20-23; John 14: 21-23; Phil. 
3:8, 10, 11; r John 1: 1-3; Rev. 3:20; 1 
Cor. 1:9. 


XI. Would you be strong in the Lord, 
and have victory over the world, the 
flesh, and the devil? Read the word. 

Ps. 17:4, 5; Prov, 2: 1-10; 7:1-24, 27; 
Matt. 4: 3-10; Eph. 6: 10-17; 1 John 2:14. 

XII. Would you be a praying Christian, 
and have power with God? Read the 
word. 

Ex. 34:5-9; Num. 14;17-20; 2 Sam. 
7:17-27; Job 22:22-28; John 15:7; Hos. 
14:1°3. 

XIII. Would you beasuccessful servant ? 
Read the word. 

Josh. 1:7, 8; Ps. z321-3: 2 Tim. 2:25; 
3:16, 17; Heb. 4:12. ‘‘ Let the word of 
Christ dwell in you richly,’ Col. 3: 16. 
Praying always with all prayer and suppiica- 
tion in the Spirit. 


TO THE UNSAVED. 


XIV. Would you be saved, and have 
eternal life? Read the word. 

Luke 16 : 22-31; Acts 11:14; 13:26: Ps. 
197:20; Rom. 1:16; James 1:18, 21; John 
5:2. 26, 39; 1 Pet. 1:23-25; John 20: 31; 
1 John 5:13. —Faithful Witness. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


“THE TRUTH.” 


Christ is— 


1. The truth, Jno. 14: 6. 
2. Full of truth, Jno. 1: 14. 
3. Brought it to us, Jno, 1:17. 


Believers are— 
1. Begotten by the truth, Jas. x: 18. 
2. Sanctified through the truth, Jno. 17: 17. 


Believers are to— 

1. Know the truth, Jno. 8 : 32. 

2. Worship the truth, Jno. 4: 23. 
. Bear witness of the truth, Jno. 5: 33. 
. Rejoice in the truth, 1 Cor. 13 :6. 
. Endure by the truth, 2 Cor. 6: 7. 
. Speak the truth, Eph. 4:25. 
. Rightly divide the truth, 2 Tim. 2:75. 
. Girt with truth, Eph. 6: 14. 
. Obey the truth, 1 Pet. 1 #22. 


10. Walking in the truth, 2 Jno. 4. 
Our power for this— 
The Spirit of truth, Jno. 14:17. 
Unbelievers are— 
1. Destitute of the truth, 1 Tim. 6: 5. 
2. Resist the truth, 2 Tim. 3:8. 
3. Obey not the truth, Rom. 2:8. 
4. Love not the truth, 2 Thess 2: ro. 
Hypocrites — 
1. Hold the truth in unrighteousness, Rom. 
1: 18. 
2. Change the truth of God into a lie, 
Rom. 1: 25. 
Doom of the Unbeliever— 
Damned who believe not the truth, 2 
Thess. 2: 12. 
— Selected. 


THE POWER OF GOD'S WORD. 


It converts the soul, Psa. 19:7-11; Jer. 
93:5. 22; 

It makes clean, Psa. 119:9; Jno. 13: 8-10; 
Jno. 15:3; Eph. 5:26. 

It quickens, Psa. 119: 50, 93. 

It enlightens and convinces of sin, Psa. 
119:130; Prov. 6: 20-23; Hosea 6: 4-6; cf. 
Jno. 3: 19-21; and Eph. 5: 11-14. 

It gives life, Isa. 55:2, 3; Matt. 4:4; 
Jno. 5:24; Jno. 6:63; Jno. 20:31. 

It accomplishes God's purposes, Isa. 55: 11. 

It is like a fire and a hammer, Jer. 23: 29. 
* It saves the soul, Acts 11:14; 13:20; 
Rom. 1:16; 1 Tim. 4:16; 2 Tim. 3:15; 
James 1 : 21. 

It is able to build up, Acts 20:32; Rom. 
15:4; 1 Cor. 10:11; 1 Pet. 2:2. 

It produces conviction of sin, Rom. 3: 20; 
Rom. 7:9-13; James 2:9. 


It produces faith, Rom. 10:17. 

It produces joy and peace, Rom. 15 : 13. 

It is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1:17-25; 1 
Cor. 2: 4, 5. 

It is a savor of death unto death, or of life 
unto life, 2 Cor. 2:16, 17. 

It appeals to every man’s conscience, 2 
Cor. 4:2. 

It pulls down strongholds, 2 Cor. ro: 4, 5. 

Is a schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 3 : 19- 
24. 
It is the sword of the Spirit, Eph. 6: +7; 
Heb. 4: 12. 

Stops the mouths of gainsayers, Titus 
I :Q-It. 

It gives the new birth, Jas. 1:18; 1 Pet. 
1:23. 

It gives knowledge of eternal life, 1 Jno. 
5: 9-13. C. M. WHITTLESEY. 


2:10. 


sness, Rom. 


into a lie, 


e truth, 2 


—Seleced. 


. 15:13. 
317-25; 1 


h, or of life 
science, 2 


br. TO: 4, 5- 
Gal. 3: 19- 


ph. 6:.7; 
ers, Titus 


18; 1 Pet. 


ife, 1 Jno. 
ESEY. 


THE SCRIPTURES. 199 
& 


a ee On eee eee 


THE WORD OF GOD. 


By Cal. Burton. 


HE Word of God is quick and powerful and sharper than ,any two-edged sword, 
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and 
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart ; neither is there 
any creature that is not manifest in His sight, but all things are naked and opened 
unto the eyes of Him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4: 12, 13. 

2. Are you glad, reader? Ps. 13:9 and 23:24. If commentaries and helps on 
the Word of God are studied merely 10 become acquainted with the doctrine and 
literature of the Bible, they will tend rather to puff up than to build up, 1 Cor. 
8: 1-33 4: 19, 20. ‘ 

3. Satanis very bysy now-a-uays as an angel of light,2 Cor.11:14. He will allow 
souls to occupy themselves with the Bible, provided they stop short of Christ, the 
Alpha and Omega of the Bible. 

4. The Jews are said to have so reverenced the Bible that they counted its letters 
—but they crucified Christ. 

5. The second chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel furnishes a striking illustration 
of the difference between familiarity with the letter of Scripture and the drawings of 


‘the Father to the person 0’ Christ. The wise men were in true and earnest search 


for Christ, and they found Him. Doubtless they could not compare with the chief 
priests and scribes in scriptal knowledge. These could quote chapter and verse, 
but of what use was their Lnowiediee to them? It only cetidined them ready instru- 
ments for Herod, in his deadly enmity to God’s appointed. 

6. Better far be a humble worshipper at the feet of Jesus, though with slender 
knowledge, than be a learned scribe with a heart cold and distant from that blessed 
One, Phil. 3 : 8, f.c. 

Dear reader, which are you? 

7. The word of God cannot be too diligently studied, but let it be to “know Him,” 
ae 3:10, fic. “in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,” 

os) a 


A SHORT METHOD WITH INFIDELS. 


G. F. Pentecost. 


N infidel is one who denies the revelation which God has made to us of His will, 
love, and grace, in the, Bible, and especially in the person of Jesus Christ. There are 
a great variety of infidels. The learned and the ignorant ; the somewhat sincere and 
the utterly insincere ; the religious and the irreligious ; the infidel in disguise and the 
openly defiant. @rhey all agree on one point, viz., that the Bible is the work of man, 
pure and simple ; that God is not the author of it, by inspiration or otherwise ; that 
the supernatural occurrences recorded in it never occurred; that God never spoke to 
man, and that all the “thus saith the Lords” are falsehoods or vain imaginings. 
Especially, that the New Testament history of Jesus is mythical or deliberately 
fraudulent. 
We are often asked by young Christians, and sometimes by older ones, what 
answer to give to men who deny the truth of the Bible. We suggest the short answer 
of John Wesley. We have studied this answer very carefully, and do not see why it 


200 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 
% 


is not a complete answer to the infidel objection. Infidels often, and indeed usually, 
forget that their own positions are open to criticism, and that it is as incumbent upon 
them as it is GpoR Christians to make their position good. In meeting them on their 
denial of the divine origin of the Bible, we must recognize, and so must they, that the 
Bible is a fact, and that it must be accounted for, just as any other fact. Wesley’s 
short method is substantially this ; 

1. The Bible is a book, and if God is not its author, it must have been written by 
some man or men without any supernatural aid. 

2. It must have been written by good men or bad men, if it was composed by 
more than one man. 

3. If it is false in its statements it is a dad book, therefore it could not have been 
written by good men, since good men would not have written so bad a book as the 
one is, if it is a false book, nor have been the authors of so great and grave false- 

oods, : 

. 4. Bad men could not and would not have written so good a book as the Bible is 
confessed to be, even by infidels. rst, because it is not possible that men who were 
bad e1ough to have perpetrated so great a fraud, and told or written such monstrous 
lies as are contained in the Bible (if it is not true), could have constructed so sublime 
a philosophy of life, and so perfect a system of ethics, or conceived so faultless and 
perfect a character as is embodied and portrayed in the person of Jesus. Second, 
even if we could conceive of bad men being abie to invent the Bible, such men would 
have no motive in writing such a book, every line of which condemns their badness 
and consigns them to everlasting torment, while it instructs them that the only way to 
happiness is through the denial of all carnal appetites and desires, and a life of self- 
sacrifice and personal righteousness and holiness. 

5. Since, therefore, we cannot conceive of good men writing so bad a book, or 
bad men writing so good a book, we must conclude that its authorship is from another 
source, and that source is clearly stated in the Bible itself. 

This argument, which is very simple, though capable of a wide expansion, seems 
to us amply sufficient to dispose of the ordinary infidel objection to the Fiple. In this ] 
connection, the following extract from John Stuart Mill (“Three Essays on Religion”) 
is in point. The author of this paragraph was an atheist, did not of course believe in 
Jesus Christ as the Son of God, but he unhesitatingly accepted the historical 
character of Jesus, and denied that it was possible for His character and sayings to 
have been the result of invention ; 

“Tt is no use to say that Christ, as exhibited in the Gospels, is not historical, and 
that we know not how much of what is admirable, is supperadded by the tradition of 
the followers. Who, among His disciples or among their proselytes, was capable of 
inventing the sayings ascribed to Jesus, or of imagining the life ar.d character revealed 
in the Gospels? Certainly not the fishermen of Galilee; as certainly not St. Paul, 
whose character and idiosyncrasies were of a totally different sort ; still less the early 
Christian writers, in whom nothing is more evident than that the good which was in 
them was all derived from the higher source.” : s 

This dilemma as to authorship has been admitted by the ablest and most candid b 
of all infidel writers. In fact, the theory of fraud and forgery has bee.. practically ¢ 
given up by candid men. The last ditch in which intidelity makes itstaud, is one in 


SS ON EEE 


1 
| | 
ou 
| 
| 
| 
| 
} 
| 
‘ 


hae 

Be 
| 
a 


which they must reconcile the highest ethical teaching with a deliberate attempt on é 
the part of the writers of the Bible, from religious motives, to impose a falsehood upon : 
the readers. In a word, we must first persnade ourselves that sweet waters may flow " 
from a bitter fountain, or vice versa; or that it is possible to gather grapes of thorns q 
and figs of thistles. 

The Bible itself is its own best argument. Let it speak for itself and demonstrate ’ 


its divine right by its imperishable existence. According to the boasted law of the 
survival of the fittest, the Bible is the fittest book, and its survival is a demonstration ' 
of its fitness to live according to ity own claim. '  g 


sually, 
t upon 
n their 
hat the 
esley’s 


tten by 
sed by 


e been 
as the 
e false- 


Bible is 
iO were 
nstrous 
sublime 
25s and 
Second, 
1 would 
adness 

yay to 
of self- 


ook, or 
another 


, seems 
In this 
igion”) 
lieve in 
torical 
ings to 


al, and 
ition of 
hble of 
vealed 
. Paul, 
e early 
was in 


andid 
tically 
one in 
pt on 
mt upon 
hy flow 
thorns 


strate 
lof the 
ration 


THE SCRIPTURES. 201 


NOTES ON THE 


The Gospel of Matthew, Mark, and Luke 
refer to Time— 

Matthew's to the Past, 
Mark's to the Present, 
Luke's to the Future, 

John's refers to Eternity. 

_ Matthew, Mark, and Luke wrote of the 
external life of Christ ; John of the internal, 

Matthew's Gospel was written in ¥erusa- 
lem. From thence he showed Jesus as the 
Messiah, 

Mark's from Rome-—-showing him as the 
irresistible Conqueror of the world. 

Luke's from Greece—showing Him as the 
Divine Philanthropist. 

John’s from Asia Minor—showing Him as 
the Word made flesh. 

Matthew condemned the carnal view of the 
Church held by fudaism. 

Mark condemned the Cesarism of brute 
force. 

Luke condemned the corrupt philosophy of 
Hellenism, 

John condemned the humanitarianism of 
the world by showing the Divine humanity. 

Matthew represents Jesus as a King—the 
King of Israel—introduces him as Genesis 
introduces the history of Abraham. 

Mark represents Jesus as a Priest or 
Servant—the Saviour of the world—writes 
consecutive to the conclusion of Malachi 
(‘My messenger’). 

Luke represents Jesus as a Prophet—the 
Son of Man ascending to the Divine throne— 


begins in spirit and form-like 1 Samuel (the 
| receipt of custom. 


child prophet). 

John represents Jesus as the Son of God 
descending to humanity—shows the Word 
in the second (spiritual) creation, as Moses 
did in the first and material one, 

Matthew takes one course. 

Luke an entirely opposite one. 


‘Mark a middle course. 


FOUR GOSPELS. 


The synoptic Gospels treat of the kingdom 
of God. 

John's Gospel treats of eternal life, 

Matthew treats of Jesus’ functions as the 
Messiah, 

Luke treats of His work as a Saviour. 

Mark treats of His activity as an Evange- 
list. 

John treats of His person, human and 
divine. bs 

John wrote the threefold picture of the life 
of God— 

1. In the person of Jesus, in his Gospel. 

2. In the Christian, in his Epistles. 

3. In the Church, in the Apocalypse (or 
Revelation). 

Matthew shows Jesus as Ezekiel’s lion— 
royalty, 

Mark skows Jesus as a man—human 
sympathy. 

Luke shows Jesus as the calf or ox— 
sacrifice, 

John shows Jesus as the eagle—divinity. 

Matthew speaks most business-like about 
money, and his Gospel is peculiar for its full 
revelation of the fatherly character of God. 

ark is most graphic and dramatic, and 
has no reference to the law of Moses. 

Luke has the most mention of women. 

John gives Jesus’ visit to Judea and 
Jerusalem rather than to Galilee, 

There is some reason to believe that the 
four evangelists each inserted in his Gospel 
a single shy hint of his own personality :— 

Matthew is the publican called at the 


Mark is the young man who left his linen 
cloth in the hands of those who captutéd 
Jesus. 

Luke is the disciple who went with 
Cleophas to Emmaus. 

John is the beloved disciple. 

ALEX. CRAIGHEAD. 


20:3; 3 John 4. 


ocemergenenmnenNaneni ante smeneareyennan nee 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


ince ene 


TRUTH, 


I, The believer and truth. He should— 
1. In truth speak, Zech, 8:16; Eph. 4: 25. 
2. In truth walk, 1 Kings 2:4; 2 Kings 


3. In truth serve, Josh 24:14; 1 Sam. 


12: 24. 


. Intruth rejoice, 1 Cor, 13: 6. 
. In truth meditate, Phil. 4:8. 
. In truth love, 1 John 3: 18. 


: 18, 


John 4:24; Ps. 


. In truth obey, Rom, 2:18; Gal. 3:1. 


(c) Heard in truth, Ps, 69: 13. 

(d) To understand His truth, Dan. 9: 13. 

(e) That truth should not be taken out of 
his mouth, Ps. 119: 43. 

(f) That God would send out His 
truth, Ps, 43:4, 

(g) That He would prepare truth, Ps. 
61:7. 


Il. What the truth is able to do for the’ 
believer. 


re 
. To make free, John 8: 32. 


To regenerate, James 1 : 15. 


4 

5 

6 

7. In truth worship, 
5 

8 

9 


. He should esteem the truth, Prov. 
23: 23. 
10, Rightly divide, 2 Tim. 2:15. 
11, Buy the truth, Prov, 23: 23. 
12. He should pray to be— 
(a) Led in the truth, Ps. 25: 5. 
(6) Preserved in the truth, Ps. go: 11. 


. To sanctify, John 17:17. 

. To shield, Ps. gt: 4. 

To preserve, Ps, 40: 11. 

. To establish, 2 Pet. 1: 12, 

. To gird, Eph. 6: 14. 

. To purify, 1 Pet. 1: 22. 

J. HIXON IRVING. 


or Aut wW DN 


GLORIOUS THINGS IN THE GLORIOUS BOOK. 


His is a glorious gospel, 2 Cor. 4 : 4. 


God is glorious in holiness, Ex. 15: 11. 
He has a glorious name, 1 Chron. 29: 13. His is a glorious vest, Isa, 11 : 10. 

He has a glorious arm, Isa. 63 : 12. | He brings us into glorious liberty, Rom. 
He has a glorious right hand, Ex. 15:16. | 8:21. 

He has a glorious voice, Isa. 30:30. @ He will give us a glorious body; Phil. 3 : 21. 
He has glorious feet, Isa. 60: 13. His church will be a glorious church, Eph. 
His is a glorious work, Ps. rrr : 3. Ce ve _ F, E. MARSH. 


t 


WHAT THE WORD OF GOD IS TO THE GODLY. 


It is loved: because of its purity, Ps. 


It is the food by which his nature is 
nourished, 1 Pet. 2:2. 11g: 140. ‘ 
It is a preservative against sin, Ps. 119: 11, It brings peace to them, Ps. 119; 165. 
139. It is a plea for help, Ps. 119: 175, 8. 
It quickens the soul, Ps. 119: 50. It counsels them, Ps. 119: 24. 
It gives songs in the house of our pilgrim- It is their delight, Ps. 119: 16. 
age, Ps. 119: 54. It is a message they utter to others, Ps. 
It enriches the soul with what is more | 119: 13. 
precious than gold, Ps. 119: 72, 162. It is the object of desire, Ps. 119: 33, 36, 
It impartssuperior wisdom, Ps.119:98,105. | 77, 49, etc. J. A. R. DICKSON. 


n.Q: 13. 
*n out of 


ut His 
uth, Ps. 


» for the’ 


VING. 


hers, Ps. 


9: 33, 36 
SON. 


THE SCRIPTURES, 203 


ee . —— . — ooo 


HOW TO READ THE WORD. 
Geo, Miiller. 


ape the Scriptures regularly through. Read, alternately, portions from the Old 

and New Testaments. Begin at the beginning of each. Mark where you leave 
off, and begin there next time. When you have finished each Testament, begin it 
again. e 
2. Read with prayer. You cannot by your own wisdom understand the word of 
God. In all your reading of the Scriptures, seek carefully the help of the Holy Spirit. 
Ask ayy sary sake that He will enlighten you. 

3. Read with meditation, Ponder over what you read. The truth is thus applied 
to your heart. You see new and deeper meanings. it is better to ¢Aink over a little 
than merely to read a great deal. 

4. Read with reference to yourself. Never read only with a view to instructing 
others ; but for your own teaching. Receive blessing yourself first, and you will 
communicate it to others. Always ask yourself, “ How does this affect me?” 

5. Read with faith. Notas statements which you may believe or not, but as the 
revealed word of God. Receive every word as true, with simple childlike trust. Rest 
upon the promises. Read them as made /or you, 

6. Read in order to carry into practice. e must accept His Word as being the 
revelation of His will. In it He tells us what to be and what todo, He expects us 
to be “ obedient children.” ; 


MOSES THE AUTHOR OF THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


By James Inglis. 


OSES is the author of the Book of Genesis, and of the other four books which bear 
his name. We have no direct statement in Scripture that the Book of Genesis 
itself was written by him, but that what the Hebrews called THE Law, of which 
Genesis was a section, was written by Moses is asserted in numerous passages, both 
in the Old Testament and in the New. Josh. 1:7, 8; 2:34; 23:6; 1 Kings 2:3; 
2 Kings 23:25; 2 Chron. 23:18; Dan.g:11; Mal. 4:4; Matt.8:4; Matt. 19:7,8; 
Mark 12:26; Luke 16:29; 24:27; Jno. 5:45, 46; 7:19; 2 Cor. 3:7-15. “Every 
work which comes down to us as the production of a particular author is to be accepted 
as his production, unless strong grounds can be produced to the contrary.” Much 
more, when we have a succession of testimonies reaching from Joshua to Ezra, with 
the whole weight of New Testament authority. 

The authority of the Book of Genesis is confirmed in a remarkable manner by our 
Lord Himself. He authenticates most of its leading events, as will be seen from the 
yr quotations, some of which are indeed mere illusions, whilst others are very 

efinite :— 

Gen. 1:1; Mark 13: 19— The beginning of the creation which God created,” 
Matt. 24:21. 

Gen. 2: 1-3; Mark 2: 27—“ The Sabbath was made for man.” 

Gen. 2 123-25; Matt. 19: 4-6—“ Have ye not read that He which made them at 
the beginning made them male and female, and said, for this cause shall a man leave 
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife ; and they twain shall be one flesh ?” 


ye 


204. GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


Gen 3: 1-5; Jno. 8: 44—“ Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your 
father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning.” 

Gen, 4 :1-8; Matt. 23 : 35 —“ Righteous Abel.” 

Gen. 6; Gen. 7; Matt. 24 : 37-39—“ As the days of Noah were, so shall also the 
coming of the Son of Man be. For as in the days that were before the flood they 
were cating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah 
entered into the ark, and knew not until the flood came, and took them all away.” 

Gen. 15:6; Jno. 8: 56—“‘ Your father AFraham rejoiced to see my cay; and he 
saw it and was glad ;” Jno. 8: 39, §8; Luke 13: 28. 3 

Gen. 17 :9-14; Jno. 7 : 22—“ Moses therefore gave unto you" circumcision (not 

. because it is of Moses, but of the fathers).” 

Gen. 19: I-25 ; Luke 17:28, 29—“ In the days of Lot: they did eat, they drank, 
they bought, they suid, they planted, they builded ; but the same day that Lot went 
out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed tlem all.” 

Gen. 19: 26; Luke 17 ; 32—“ Remember Lot’s wife.” 

Gen, 28: 16-22; Jno. 1 : 51—“ Hereafter ye shall see heaven open; and the angels 
of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.” 

That Moses made use of a variety o1 information traditional or written in the Book of 
Genesis does not affect either the authorship or the inspiration of the book. A house 
is none theless new in plan and purpose that whilst some of its stones have been taken 
from the living quarry, others have been cut and squared from a former building. The 
Gospels were writtex by men, who, apart altogether from inspiration, had become 
acquainted with the words and acts of our Lord ; but this in no way lessens their credi- 
bility or authority. There is evidence on the face of history that it has been compiled 
from various sources, and that possibly documents in whole or in part have been 
transferred toits pages. Thus the first and second chapters appear to have a differen: 
author; the great geneaiogical chart in the tenth chapter must have been in existence 
long prior to Moses ; and the history of Abraham and Joseph are written in a differ- 
ent style. But all these varied materials are worked into one great book, having a 
definite design... ; 

The Book of Genesis is, besides, just such as an author in the age and circum- 
stances of Moses might have written. Its ctyle and language, its intimate acquaintance 
with Egypt and Canaan and the peninsula of Sinai, are all strong proofs tc the same 
effect. The investigations of scholars into the language and antiquities of Egypt have 
established this fact beyond reasonable doubt. Genesis forms, moreover, the historic 
and moral basis on which the other four books rest, and without which they could not 
be understood, plainly showing that they all come from a master mind ; and tt is inti- 
mately related to the whole volume of the inspired Scriptures - « « Genesis 
is divided into two main parts—one universal and one special. The first part, which 
contains the earliest history of man, extends from the first chapter to the eleventh 
chapter. The eleventh chapter forms a connecting link between the firstand second parts. 
The second part begins with chapter twelve, and is continued to the close of the book. 
It contains the call of Abraham and the history of his descendants to the beginning 
of their sojourn in Egypt. “The chief aim which pervades the waole is to show how 
the theocratic instituticn founded by Moses was rendered possible and necessary. 
The book, therefore, takes its starting point from the original unity of the human race, 
and their original relation to God, and proceeds thence to the interruption of that 
relation by the appearance of sin.” In the first promise to Adam, the call of Abraham 
and the subsequent training of the family of Isra*l, we have the preliminary steps of 

the great work of grace which was consummated in the coming of the Lord Jesus to be 
the Saviour of the worid, 


litfizren! 
Kistence 
4 differ- 
aving a 


circum- 
intance 
e same 
pt have 
historic 
buld not 
is inti- 
enesis 
, which 
leventh 
d parts. 
e book. 
pinning 
DW how 
essary. 
An race, 
of that 
braham 
teps of 
s to be 


THE SCRIPTURES, 205 


THE WORD. 


Twe meanings—Jesus Christ, the Living 
Word, Jno."1: 1-5, 14. The Bible, the Writ- 
ten Word, Luke 11:28; Jas. 1:22; Ps. 
I1g: 101; 25: 38. 

Christ’s name— 

The Word. 

The Son, or Word, is the only one who 
speaks or has spoken of the Trinity, Jno. 
5: 37. 

The words He speaks are :— 

Creative, Gen. 1; Ps. 33:6; Jno. 1: 3. 

Upholding, Heb. 1 : 3. 

Regenerating, Acts 11:14; 1 Pet. 1:23; 
Jas. 1:18; Ps. 19:7. 

Sanctifying, Jno. 15:3; 17:17; Eph. 
5:26, 27. 

(Question.—How’ far are we responsible 
for the regeneration of souls? Ans.—Faith- 
fully and in love to sow the Seed, the Word 
of God). 

The Written Word corresponds with the 
character of the Living Word. 

*1. Heis Truth, Jno. 14:6. 
His Word is Truth, Jno. 17;17; Ps. 
11g: ISi. 

2. He is Life, Jno. 14:6; Jno. 1:4. 

His Words are Life, Jno. 6:63; Phil. 
2:16. 


3. He is Gracious, Ex. 34:6; Jno. 1:14. 
His Words are Gracious, Luke 4:22; 
Ps, 45:2; Acts14:3. Word of His 
Grace, 
4. He is Merciful, Ex. 34:6; Jer. 3: 12. 
His Words are Merciful, Ps. 85: ro. 
5. He is Precious, 1 Pet.2:7. Highly 
valued, much esteemed. 
His Words are Precious, Ps. 19: 10, 11. 

6. He is Pure, r Jno.3:3. Free from 

mixture, without spot or blemish. 

His Word is Pure, Ps. 12:6; Ps. 
11g: 40. 

7. He is Holy, 1 Pet. 1:15, 16; Rev.4:8. 

Whole, entire, perfect, in a moral 
sense. 

His Word is Holy, Rom. 7:12. ‘‘ Holy 
Scriptures,’’ 

The Power of the Word, Heb. 4: 12. 

The Certainty of the Word, Prov. 22: 18- 
21. 

The Hope of the Word, Ps. 119: 81, 

The Eternity of the Word—Ps. 119 : 89 — 
Settled in the heavens; 1 Pet. 1:25— 
Endureth forever, 

Heaven and earth shall pass aw, but 
My words shall not pass away, Matt. 24: 35. 

*,_C, ROUNDS. 


THE WORD OF GOD. 


I. As God's Word of wisdom it makes 
wise unto salvation, 2 Tim. 3:15; John 
17:20: 20: 31; Jas. 1: 21. 

II. As the word of life, it quickens, Ps. 
119: 50-93; John 6: 63. 

III, Asa divine word it converts the soul, 
1 Pet. 1:23; Jas. 1:18; Ps, 19:7. 

IV. As the truth which is after godliness 
it sanctifies, John 17:17; 15:3, 7; Ps. 119: 9. 

V. As a nourishing word, it promotes 
growth in grace, t Pet. 2:2; Acts 20: 32. 

VI. Asa word of consolation, it comforts, 
Ps, 19:8; 119: 54, III. 


VII. ‘As amagazine of supply, it thoroughly 


furnishes us unto all good works, 2 Tim. 3: 17; 


Ps. 119: 104. 


VIII. As the divine word, it is our guide, 


Jer. 8:9; Prov. 6:23; Mark 12; 24; 2 Peter 
1:19. 


IX, As a spiritual sword, it is a mighty 


weapon in the hands of the Spirit, Acts 18 : 24, 
28; Eph. 6:17; Matt. 4: 4-10, 


X. When the books are opened, it will 


judge us at the last day, John 12:48; 5:45; 


Rom, 2 312, 


O. W. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


I. God’s word is— 


A ‘amp, verse 105, f.c. Alight, verse 105, 
lic. A counsellor, verse 24, l.c. Wonder- 
ful, verse 129. Our heritage, verse 111, f.c. 
Exceeding broad, verse 96. The Truth, 
verse 142, f.c. Better than silver, verse 72. 
Better than gold, verse 127, Sweeter than 
honey, verse 103. Good, verse 39, l.c. 
Righteous, verse 138. Settled, verse 89. 
Very pure, verse 140. Very faithful, verse 
138. Kkight on all subjects, verse 128, From 
everlasting, verse 160. Toeverlasting, verse 
152. 


II. Power of God’s word. 


It quickens, verse 25. It cleanses, verse 
9. It keeps clean, verse 1. It keeps from 
sin, verse 11. It strengthens, verse 28, It 
comforts, verse 5¢. It gives liberty, verse 
45. It gives great peace, verse 165. It 


gives rejoicing of heart, verse 111, lc, It’ 


gives understanding, verse 104, l.c. 
light, verse 130, fic. 
‘affliction, verse 92. 


III. Results. 
Blessed—ourselves, verse 2, l.c. Safe— 
ourselves, verses 114, 117. Rejoice, other 
Christians, verse 74. Fellowship with 
Christ’s people, verse 63, 


It gives 


It gives support in’ 


Enjoy God's | 
. 


GLEANINGS FROM THE 119TH PSALM. 


presence and smile, verse 135. Long for the 
salvation of sinners, verses 136, 158. 


IV. We are commanded to— 

Believe in it, verse 66, l.c. Love it, verse 
47. Love it exccedingly, verse 167, l.c, 
Search it, verse 94, lc.’ Keep it diligently, 
verse 4. Keep it continually, verse 44. 
Consider it, verse 95, l.c. Trust in it, verse 
42, lc. Hope in it, verse 43, l.c. Never 
forget it, verse 176, l.c. Walkin itsp: ‘epts, 
verse 59. Hide it in the heart, verse rr. 
Meditate on it, verse i5. Observe it with 
the whole heart, verse 34. Keep it with the 
whole heart, verse 69, l.c, Delight in it, 
verse 47. Learn it, verse 73,l.c. Talkofit, 
verse 27,1.c. Declare it to others, verse 13. 
Obey it at once, verse60. Never beashamed 
of it, verse 46. Rejoice in it, verse 14. Unto 
the end, verse 112. 

V. Time for meditation on it— 

In the morning, verse 147. In the even- 
ing, verse 148. At midnight, verse 62. All 
day, verse 97. All night, verse 55. B 

VI. God will— 

Open the eyes to read aright, verse 18. 
Teach it to us, verse 26, l.c. Make us 
understand it, verse 27, lc. Enlarge our 
hearts to keep it, verse 32. 

Miss KATIE CLARKE, 


THE MINISTERING OF THE WORD. 


I. The necessity, Titus 1:3; 1 Cor. 1:21; 
Rom. 10: 14. 

Who shall preach. 

If. The commission, Matt. 9:37, 38; 
Rom, 10:15 ; Mark 16:15, 16; Rev. 22:17; 
1 Cor. 14:1, 5, 24, 31, 39,; 2 Cor. 4:13; 1 
Pet. 2:5, 9. 

III. All have gifts and should use them, 
Ror. 12: 3-8; 1 Cor. «2th chapter; 1 Pet, 
4:10, :1, There are those who would for- 
bid, but God rebukes all such; See Num. 
x1 ; 26-29; Lukeg: 49,50. Theentire Church 
preached upon the day of Pentecost: See 


Acts 2: 1-4, 17-18. Alsoduring the Persecu- 
tion: See Acts 8:1-4. Every member in the 
early Ephesian Church preached: See Acts 
19:6. “reaching during the first two 
centuries of the Church's history, upon the 
part of the entire membership, was the rule 
and not the exception. 

IV. The subject, 1 Cor. 1: 23, 24; 2-Cor. 
4:5; Acts 13:28: Gal. 1:8. 

V. How, 1 Cor, 2:4, 5; 1:17, 18; Tim. 
4:1, 2; Jer. 23: 28. 

VI. Exhortations, 1 Cor, 14:40; 3:6, 7; 
2 Cor. 5:20, 


ig for the 


it, verse 
167, lc. 
iligently, 
verse 44. 
1 it, verse 

Never 
pr *epts, 
verse II. 
e it with 
with the 
ght in it, 
Talk of it, 
verse I3. 
ashamed 
14. Unto 


the even- 
> 62. All 
e 


verse 18. 
Make us 
large our 


ARKE, 


b Persecu- 
ber in the 
See Acts 
first two 
upon the 
8 the rule 


4; 2.Cor. 
18; Tim. 


; 3:6, 7; 


. THE SCRIPTURES. 207 


a rr tn EE A ES 


- THE PRECIOUS BIBLz. 


C. H. Spurgeon. 


Ww. are begotten by the Word of God : it is the instrumental means of regeneration. 
Theretore love your Bibles, keep close to your Bibles. 

You seeking sinners, you who are seeking the Lord, your first business is to 
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ ; by:t, while you are yet in darkness and in gloom, oh, 
love your Bibles and search them! Take them to bed with you ; and when you wake 
up in the morning, if it is too early to go down stairs and disturb the house, get half 
an hour of reading upstairs. Say, “ Lord, guide me to that text which shall bless me. 
Help me to unde:stand how I, a poor sinner, can be reconciled to Thee.” 

I recollect how, when I was seeking the Lord, I went to my Bible, and to Baxter’s 
“Call to the Unconverted,” and to Allen’s “Alarm,” and .Doddridge’s “ Rise and 
Progress ;” for I said in myself, “I am afraid that I shall be lost ; but I will know the 
reason why. I am afraid I shall never find Christ ; but it shall not be for want of 
looking for Him.” That fear used to haunt me ; but I said, ‘1 will find Him, if He is 
to be found. I will read. I will think.” 

There was never a soul that did sinc 2rely seek for Jesus in the Word, but by and 
by he stumbled on the precious truth that Christ was near at hand, and did not want 
any looking for ; that He was really *here—only they, poor blind creatures, were in 
such a maze that they could not just then see Him. Oh, cling you to Scripture! 
Scripture is not Christ ; but it is the silken clue which will lead youto Him. Follow 
its leadings faithfully, Rom. 10: 8, 9. 

When you have received regeneration and a new life, keep on reading, because it 
will comfort you. You will see more of what the Lord has done for you. You will 
learn that you are redeemed, adopted, saved, sanctified. Half the errors in the world 


spring from people not reading their Bibles. Would anybody think that the Lord. 


would leave any one of His dear children to perish, if he read such a text as this: “I 
give unto My sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck 
them out of My hand !” When I read that, I am sure of the final perseverance of the 
saints. Read, then, the Word, and it will be much for your comfort. 

It will be for your nourishment too. It is your food as well as your life. Search 
it, and you will grow strong in the Lord and in the power of His might. 

It will befor your guidance also. I am‘sure those go rightest who keep closest to 
the Book. Oftentimes, when you do not know what to do, you will see a text leaping 
up out of the Book, and saying, “ Follow Me.” I have seen a promise sometimes 
blaze out before my eyes, just as when an u.-uminated device flames forth upon a public 
building. One touch of flame, and a sentence or a design flashes out in gas. I have 
seen a text of Scripture flame forth in that way to my soul; I have known that it was 
God’s word to me. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE TRUTH. 


I, What truth is. 

That which is opposed to falsehood, Prov. 
14:37. 

That which is opposed to deceit, Rom. g: 1. 

That which is opposed to pretence, Eph. 
4:21; John 1:9. 

That which is true of itself, 1 Tim. 2:7. 

That which is true doctrine, Gal. 3: 1. 

That which is the fulfilment of the types 
and shadows of the law, John 1:17; 14:6. 


II. Some of the things with which truth 
is found connected. 
1. Grace and truth, John 1: 14, 17. 
2. Mercy and truth, 2 Sam. 15: 20. 
. Peace and truth, 2 Kings 20: 19. 
. Faithfulness and truth, Isa. 25: 1. 
. Light and truth, Ps. 43:3. 
. Righteousness and truth, Zech. 8:8. 
. Spirit and truth, John 4: 23, 24. 
III. God and truth. 
“God is a God of truth," Deut. 32:4; 
Ps, 31: 5. : 
1. His Word is truth, Dan. 10:21; John 
17:17. 
2. His judgments are truth, Ps. 96:13; 
Rom. 2:2. 
3. He desires truth, Ps. 51: 6. 
4. He regards it with favor, Jer. 5: 3. 


5. He delights in those who speak truth, 
Prov. 12: 22. 

6. He keeps truth, Ps. 96: 6. 

7. He will judge in truth, Ps. 96:13. 

8. He must be walked before in truth, 1 
Kings 2: 4. 

g. He must be served in truth, Josh. 
24:14; I Sam. 12: 24. 

IV. Christ and truth. 

1.“IT am... the Truth,” John 14:6; 
7:18, 

2. Truth came by Him, John 1:18. 

3. He spake truth, John 8: 45. 

4. He is full of truth, John 1: 14. 

5. He bore witness to the truth, John 
18: 37. 

6. He prayed His disciples might be 
sanctified by the truth, John 17: 17. 

7. His life was sought because He spake 
truth, John 8 : 40. 

V. The Spirit and truth. 

1. ‘The Spirit of Truth,” Tohn 16:13; 
t John 5:6. 

2. He guides into truth, John 16: 13. 

3. He bearswitness to thetruth, 1 John 5:6. 

4. His fruit is ‘ truth,” Gal. 5:9. 

5. The world cannot receive Him, John 
14:17. J. H.1. 


4OW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 


1, Object in study, find Christ, John 5 :39; 
Luke 24: 27, 44; Acts 28:23; 2 Tim. 3:16; 
John 6:63; Ps. 138:2; John 1:1, 14; John 
3: 1-13, 34. 

a. Life by the word, James 1: 18-21; 1 
Peter 1:23; Deut. 8:3; John 5:39; John 
6:63; Ps. 119: 130, 

3. Growth, Job 23:12; Jer. 15:16; John 
6:35; Matt. 5:6; 2 Thess. 2:13; Eph. 5: 26. 

4. Power, Isaiah 40:8; Ps, 19:89; 
John 15:7; Eph. 6:17; Heb. 4:12; Rom. 
10:17. 


5. Searching in study, John 5: 39; 2 Tim. 
2:15, 

6. Dependence on the Holy Spirit, John 
15:13; John 46:26; Jude 20: Jac. 1:5; 1 
Cor. 2:9, 10, 12, 13. 

7. With whole mind and heart, 1 Chron. 
28:9; 2 Chron,15:2; Isaiah 26: 3. 

8. Seek light from any who are taught by 
the Spirit, 2 Peter 1:20, 21; 1 Tim. 4: 13-16. 

9. After such study have clear, positive 
views, 2 Tim, 1: 8-13; Ps. 2: 12, 13. 

J. H. BROOKES. 


peak truth, 
6: 13. 
in truth, 1 


ruth, Josh. 


John 14:6; 
218, 


4. 
ruth, John 


might be 


17. 
e He spake 


shn 16:13; 


16:13. 
, 1 John 5:6. 


9. 
Him, John 
J. H.1. 


39; 2 Tim. 


Spirit, John 
fac. 1:5; 1% 


t, 1 Chron. 
23. 

e taught by 
m. 4: 13-16. 
ar, positive 


13. 
ROOKES. 


THE SCRIPTURES. 209 


eee ees 


a rer rrr re om 


THE WORD OF GOD, 


. Our prevention from sin, Ps. 119: 11. | 
. Our counsellor, Ps. 119: 24. 

. Our guide, Ps, 119: 19. 

. Our lamp, Ps. 119: 105. 

. Our sustenance, Luke 4 : 4. 

. Our quickening, Ps, 119: 50. 


Aw > WwW DN H 


STUDIES ON 


The Bible is the word of God,—'‘' The 
Mighty God, even the Lord, hath spoken,”’ 
Ps, 50:1. 

Introductory.—The Bible is of superhuman 
origin; the text declares that ‘‘God has 
spoken ;"’ this book contains what He said, 
hence His word. 


I. The Old Testament claims to he the 
word of God. 

1. That God spoke to men—Abraham, 
Gen. 12: 1-3; 22:1, 2; Isaac, Gen. 26: 2-5; 
Jacob, Gen. 28: 13-i5; Moses, Ex. 33:11; 
34 : 32-34. 

2. The Hebrews so received it—at Horeb, 
Ex. 20:19; 24:3-7; in Jerusalem, 2 Kings 
22:13; when Ezra read it, Neh. 8:1. 

3. Its power over them—reformed them, 
Dan. 9:2; sustained them, Isa. 39:8; 
builded them; they died for it, Josephus 
vs. Apion. 

4. Christ so received it; see quotations in 
the Gospels; as support, Matt. 4: 3-10; as 
authority, Matt. 22:31, 32; as being ful- 
filled, Luke 24: 44. 


7. Our comfort, Ps. 119; 50. 

8. Our sword, Eph. 6: 17. 

g. Our cleansing, Eph. 5 :26. 

10. Our sanctification, John 17: 17. 
HENRY P. DONNER. 


THE BIBLE. 


5. The Apostles so received it; see their 
quotations; their use of it, Acts 17:2; 
settling questions, Acts 2: 29, 30. 


_II. The New Testament claims to be the 
word of God. 

1. Christ's teachings are God's word—He 
claims it, Jno. 8:28; His enemies confess, 
Jno. 7:49; His friends testify, Heb. 1 : 2. 

2. Apostles’ teachings are God’s word— 
Christ promised it, Jno. 14:26; promise 
fulfilled, 1 Cor. 2:12, 13; Christians re- 
ceive it, 1 Thess. 2:13; results prove it, 
Acts 19:20. 

3. The Gospel test proves it is God's 
word—in the individual, Jno. 7:17; the 
family, society, intellectual life, in civil 
governnient, 

4. Its compass proves it is God’s word— 
height, depth, length, breadth. 

Conclusion—God’s thought of us passes 
into word; that word is light and life; it 
comes to every soul that will receive it; 
Jesus Christ the incarnate Word, our life. 

S E, WISHARD. 


210 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


BRIEF MISCELLANEOUS HINTS ON BIBLE STUDY. 


Collated by W. F. Crafts. 


| Fapee at least one verse of Scripture each day. Verses from memory will be 
wonderfully useful in your daily life and work. See Josh. 1:8; Psa. 119: 11. 

Do not be satisfied with simply reading a chapter, \ut study the meaning of at 
least one verse every day. 

Read and study the Bible soc’*//y. This is done in Teachers’ Meetings, Bible 
Classes, Bible Sociables, etc. Eac‘ one’s views are sure to be som~what corrected, 
supplemented and stimulated by the views, arguments and stggestions of others. 

Set apart at least fifteen minutes each day for studying tt, this little will be grand 
in results, and never be regretted. 

When you read your Bible, be sure you hunt for something. Read the same 
chapter over and over again, till you understand it.—D.L.M. 

Make yourself thoroughly famdliar with Pauls Epistles. They are the ey ¢o al/ 
the Holy Scriptures.—D.L.M. 

Look into the deeper meanings, as astronomers search into the depths of the skies. 
New stars may be found in the most studied chapters. 

Take the plain and simple meaning of a passage. Ingenious interpretations are 
usually dangerous. —L.A. 

Allow for yourself, your prejudices, etc. The Calvinist reads Philippians 2 : 12, 
13, with all the emphasis on verse 13, while the Arminian accents verse 12, and reads 
verse 13 very lightly.—L.A. . 

Get at dest translation. (1.) By studying it in “the original,” if possible. (2). By 
comparing the received translations with the new translations that areappearing. (3.) 
By comparison also with French and German Bibles, especially “ Luther's Bible.”— 

A. 


Study so as to ascertain the whole truth contai.:ed in a single incident or miracle ; 
when and why written, how it applies to yourself, and how to use it for others.—L.A. 

Have Cruden’s Concordance and a Bible Text-Book at hand; also in all cases 
refer to parallel passages and marginal notes. 

Study the Bible in ¢he freshness of the morning rather than the weary hours of 
evening. Open and read it in the morning before opening any other book or any 

aper. 
ae Believe in the Bible as God's revelation to you, and act accordingly. 

Study the peculiar circumstances of the writer of any passage under considera- 
tion.—L.A. 

Ask “ Who ts it that speaks in this passage?” A Universalist preacher took as 
a text to preach against future punishment, Gen. 3 : 4—‘ Thou shalt not surely die ”— 
the words of the Devil.—L.A. 

Ask what is the character of the passage? Law? Poetry? History? Philosophy? 
Why not interpret the poem in Judges 5 : 20, by the same prose laws that so many apply 
to the poem in Josh, 10:13?—L.A. 

Ask what is ‘he temperament of the writer or speaker? Rom.g: 3 is to be read 
in the light of Paul’s vehement nature, not used as a prose statement of a necessary 
principle of didactic theology. So John 6 : 53, 63, is to be read with Christ’s illustrative 
temperament in mind.—L.A. : : 

Take the Bible to the preaching service, the Sunday-school, and the week evening 
prayer-meeting.—]J.H.V. 

Study the Bible SY piaated / Take “Love,” for instance, and spend a month in 
searching wha. the Bible says about love, from Genesis to Revelation. Thus you will 


YY. 


ry will be 
Ig: Il. 
ming of at 
ings, Bible 
corrected, 
hers. 
| be grand 
1 the same 
> key to all 
f the skies. 
tations are 
yians 2:12, 
, and reads 
aring. (3.) 
s Bible.”— 
r miracle ; 
lhers.—L.A. 
in all cases 
hours of 
ook or any 


considera- 


her took as 
rely die’”— 


Philosophy ? 
many apply 


to be read 
necessary 
b illustrative 


eck evening 


a month in 
us you will 


THE SCRIPTURES. 2It 


learn to love everybody, whether they love you or noi. Inthe same way, take “ Grace,” 
‘* Faith,” ‘ Assurance,’ ‘‘ Heaven,” and so on. 

Let the conductor of a class elicit from each member a written statement (anony- 
rr.ous) of the use he makes of the Bible. This will probably in many cases bea melan- 
choly “confession,” but such “confession is good for the soul,” and may lead to 
repentance and reform.—J.H.V. 

Read the Bible through tr course,once or twice in a life-time, using 2 Tim. 3: 16, 17, 
as a personal glass through which to read each passage, asking “‘ What reproof in this 
for me?” “ What instruction ?” etc. 

Read the Bible with a view to associate it with the scenes and surroundings of our 
lives. Looking out upon Nature, ask “ What doves the Bible say of trees and shrubs ?” 
“What does the Bible say of rivers and waters?” Sv of national affairs Psa. 33 : 12- 
223; 44: 1°33 evening, Psa. 121 : 4-8; morning, Psa. 3:5; 5:3; the Sabbath, Rev. 
1 : 10-20; so of business, meals, journeys, rocks, storms, etc., etc. 

Read the Bible with déographical centres? As it is of intensest interest to read 
Revolutiorary history with Washington as the centre, so it will be found pleasant to 
read Jewish and Christian history with Moses or samuel, or Peter or Paul, as a living 
centre, grouping the scenes of which they were the most’ prominent human figures 
around their personal histories. 

Read the Bible comprehensively, getting the grand view of each book or set of 
books. This is hardly second in value to any method of Bible study, and yet is 
probably least followed of any. Bible reading is, for the most part, either “in course,” 
or with sharp analysis of single verses here and there, or in single chapters. It is of 
the highest impuriance that we should also get a comprehensive bird’s-eye view of 
each Bible epistle, each history, each biography, by reading it continuously to the end, 
or at least with as few intervals and as short as if we were reading a modern letter, 
biography or history. 

The time required to read the individual books of the Bibleis much less than is 
usually supposed. Genesis, which is the longest historical book in the Bible, can be 
read without haste in three hours—-an amount of time which almost every one 
frequently gives to a favorite author at one or two sittings. Luke is the only New 
Testament book that requires two hours for its reading. Forty-two out of the sixty-six 
books of the Bible may be read in less than an hour each, Cf cciiise, such books as 
Proverbs and Psalms, which have no continuous narrative, should not be read so 
continuously, 

‘Study to know for what, and to whom a book or chapter was written. 

Study how to use the Bible so as to “walk with God” and lead others to Christ. 

Read the Book as if it were wrztten for yourself, Always ask God to help you to 
understand it, and then EXPECT that He will. 

Carry a Bible or Testament with you. 

Read systematically with some purpose in mind. 

Read the Bible with a view of “v/ng rather than merely /earning it, coming to it 
not only perfunctorily for lessons and sermons, but also jor loving conversation, “as a 
man talketh with his friend.” 

Those who can afford but little for Bible helps can cover the various lines of F‘ble 
study quite satisfactorily by getting the following : “How to Study the Bible,” by Jas. 
H. Brookes; “Notes on the Books of the Bible,” by J. H. B.; “Jesus is Coming,” by 
W. E. B.; “Revised Scripture Text Book,” “ Young’s Concordance.” All the fore- 
gcing can be obtained through the agency of any bookstore.—J. E. W. 


212 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 


G. F. Pentecost. 


f ea we know, is a hackneyed theme. At the same time it is an important one and 

must again ana again be discussed. There are many Christians who really want 
to know how to get at the truths of God’s word, in order that they may know the will 
of God and grow in grace. They try to read the Bible and fail to do so in any 
measure satisfactory to themselves. They adopt one method after another, only 
to abandon them, and finally settle down to a mere formal reading of chapters, 
concluding (falsely) that Bible reading is a science known only to a few. 

This is all a great mistake. God’s book was not given for the few, but to and for 
the many. It is not a closed book, but an open one. It is not a difficult book, but an 
easy book; a delightful book; a most fascinating book both to read and study. 
There is no book in the world that is so full of thrilling interest as the Bible; no book 
in the world so varied in its contents ; no book in the world so straightforward and 
simple in its style. By this we do not mean that there are no deep places in the 
Bible ; no difficulties to be mastered; no mysteries to be solved. On the contrary, 
there are deeps everywhere, and difficulties on eve: 7 page; and since it is a revelation 
of the mystery of God and godliness, there must be mysteries in it to be solved. But 
we mean to say that with all this, the Bible is yet a book that every child of God 
ought to be and may be thoroughly familiar with and practically the master of, so far 
as its greatest and most blessed truths are concerned. 

It is not our intention to unfold a method of Bible reading in this article, but to 
suggest one or two fundamental principles which must be observed if we are to read 
and study the Bible with profit to ourselves. 

First, Every one coming to the Bible ought to remember that it is a book to be 
read with the aid of a Divine Interpreter. No child of God ought ever to think of 
«pening the Bible for even a moment’s reading or study without first invoking the 
presence and direct aid of the Holy Spirit. For without the Spirit of God to 
illuminate the page and enlighten the heart and mind of the reader, the Bible is an 
unlighted candle. It is a dead body in which there is no expression or response. It 
may be dissected and analyzed, but no life will be found in it. The absence of the 
Holy Spirit in Bible study is the main reason why it is to some a dull book, and to 
others a book so “mysterious” that it cannot be understood. Let us repeat this: 
that the most important factor in Bible study is the Holy Spirit, by whom the book 
itself was given to us. It was for this reason that Luther used to say if he had only 
ten minutes in which to read the Bible he would spend six of them in prayer that his 
own soul might be brought into spiritual fellowship with the Holy Spirit. Let every 
one, then, who would read the Bible with understanding and profit, first seek 
eainestly and reverently the presence and blessing of the Holy Spirit, and then read 
and study in conscious dependence upon this Divine Interpreter, and the pages of 
God’s book will giow with life and teem with the precious thoughts of God. 

Second. The Bible, to be understood and profited by, must be studied as well as 
read. We by no means under-estimate the value of regular reading, in course, from 
Genesis to Revelation ; indeed we most earnestly recommend this habit. Neverthe- 
less, there is a great difference between regular reading of the Bible and the careful 
and particular study of it. To read the Bible is one thing, to studyit is another. One 
might gain something in the way of knowledge by simply reading through a text-book 
on grammar or mathematics ; but no one would think of mastering the science of 
language or mathematics by simply reading the text-books through, chapter by 
chapter, “in course.” By study we understand a careful effort of the mind to 
comprehend and apply the things which are brought to our intelligence. As we study 


God’s Word, we ask questions. To whom was this said’ What was the occasion of 


MENTS 


t one and 
ally want 
w the will 
30 in any 
ther, only 
chapters, 


to and for 
ok, but an 
nd study. 
; no book 
‘ward and 
ces in the 
- contrary, 
revelation 
lved. But 
ild of God 
r of, so far 


cle, but to 
are to read 


book to be 
o think of 
oking the 
of God to 
Bible is an 
sponse. It 
nce of the 
bok, and to 
peat this: 
the book 
e had only 
er that his 
Let every 
first seek 
then read 
p pages of 


as well as 
burse, from 
Neverthe- 
he careful 
her. One 
text-book 


science of 


hapter by 

mind to 
B we study 
ccasion 0 


Co 


THE SCRIPTURES. 213 


the saying? What did the person or persons to whom it was said understand by it? 
What does it mean to me, if anyehind f How am I to apply this truth? Anda score 
of other questions like unto these. 
Third. The Bible is a book not simply to inform the mind, but to sanctify the life. 
A book designed first to give us a revelation of God and then bring our lives into 
reconciled relations to Him. It must therefore be studied with an honest purpose to 
apply its truths to our life. When the will of God is ascertained, z¢ must be done. It 
is not the hearer, but the doer of God’s word that is blessed. If, therefore, in the 
course of our study, some truth is discovered that has personal bearing upon our own 
relation to God—upon our own life and conduct—and we do not at once endeavor to 
apply the truth practically and experimentally, not only will we get no good from the 
knowledge gained, but we will soon lose the power ‘o gain more. If God lays 
spiritual food before us, and we do not eat it, He will cease to give us food. If God 
intrusts us as to life and conversation, and we do not walk in Zlis way, the way will be 
darkened to us. If God reveals His grace and the way of salvation and we do not 
believe, the light will be withdrawn. The Bible has no real truth for a man who does 
not ptu~pose to use the truth for salvation and sanctification. One of the chief reasons 
why we have such difficulty in understanding the Bible is that we do not do what we 
understand, 
God will not vouchsafe knowledge of Himself and His will to mere curiosity. 
These are bit three suggestions, but they are among the most important ones. 
They pertain to principles of Bible reading, rather than to any method. Whosoever 
will prayerfully seek the spirit of God, honestly endeavor to find out what was in the 
mir.d of the Spirit in the words of the Bible, with a purpose to apply the truth to 
himself, and then honestly and diligently put the discoveries of truth into practice, will 


have no difficulty in understanding the Bible, and experience no dullness either in 
reading or studying it, 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 


ieee aaa Piven obtener 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 


PRACTiCAL HINTS TO SOUL WINNERS. 
by J. E. Wolfe. 


“And they that be wise’ (margin, ‘‘teachers,'') shall shine as the brightness of the 
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever,’’ 
Daniel 12: 3. 


[* there is any one thing that a Christian worker needs above another, it is a practical 
knowledge of how to deal with souls. He who said, “I will make you fishers of 
men,” has placed within the reach of every child of God the gift of soul-winning. 

, There is one passage of Scripture in which God says, “ My people perish for lack of 
knuwledge ;” and while this may not be directly applicable to the subject under dis- 
cussion, yet in a modified sense it is. Many ministers of the Gospel come short of 
the knowledge of how to lead a soul to Christ. The word is preached, sinners are 
convicted, are brought to the birth, but are not born. So with Christian workers : 
they will converse with the unconverted and see conviction produced, but are brought 
to a stand-still at this point, not knowing how to lead them to a decision ‘or Christ. 

There is nothing, therefore, so essential as unclouded knowledge of how to rightly 
divide God’s Word, and apply it to the various cases that may be met with in what is 
known in these modern days of revival as the “inquiry room.” Many times the worker 
blames the inquirer vith dullness of mind when really the fault lies within himself. 

Mr. Moody says : “ Having studied the Bible, it is important that we know how 
to use it, and nowhere is this knowledge so essential as in our personal work for 
Christ.” 

In the first place, then, the believer should believe God’s word with all his heart, 
soul, mind, and strength. The Bible is not merely an old book with holy memories 
clustering about it, simply bringing to us good advice on important subjects ; it is 
infinitely more. It is God’s voice to us, fresh as when first uttered, and it “is given 
by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for 
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished 
unto all good works,” 2 Tim. 3: 16,17. Every Christian, then, should be a minister of 
the Gospel, and should remember that he is ordained of the Lord to tell out the Gospel 
story to others. : 

Supposing a person should be sent into a carpenter shop to doa piece of tine work, 
but who had no knowledge of how to use the tools skillfully, the job, if job at all, would 
be a bungling piece of work. Now the Lord has in His Word furnished every facility 
necessary for soul-winning. The tools are there; the skill to use them must be 
acquired by patient, prayerful study of the Word. A physician is called to see a 
patient. Ifhe be not a quack he will make a careful diagnosis of the case, and then 
Prescribe the proper remedies. How strange if he should give a h sty look at the 

|. Patient, and simply gwess as to what kind of medicine to administer! The Bible is 


f217] 


218 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


God’s medicine chest, and the worker should be so thoroughly educated in the Word, 
as to know hovw to determine the ailment of the patient and then prescribe the proper 
remedies, 

Many well-meaning Christians, when brought in contact with a convicted sinner, 
“tell their experience.” Now no two Christian experiences are alike. The process 
of awaken..., conviction and conversion are in no two cases identical. Ss ihat the 
relating of experience is likely to cause the inquirer to stumble. Satan takes advan- 
tage, and suggests that he, the inquirer, must pass through the same peculiar process 
as did his instructor The best thing to do is to use God’s word, as it is applicable to 
all cases. 

There are many helpful passages for different classes of seekers. The first class, 
I would suggest, is the backslider ; it is a very numerous one. Until backsliders are 
reclaimed the work of revival cannot progress uninterruptedly. Many of the books of 
the Old Testament are devoted to backslidden children of God. 

(The arrangement and classification of the following passages are by no means 
original, but are given in order to help the many in the Church who perhaps may 
not have come across them before. ] 

I. FOR BACKSLIDERS.—Jeremiah 2:5, 13, 19, 27, 325 3:12, 13, 14,22; Hosea 
14:1, 2,4. The references will be found to be quite numerous. A backclider must 
begin where he left off. Peter denied or ceased to confess Christ, and there was no 
restoration until confession was resumed. 

II]. FOR THOSE WHO ARE INDIFFERENT.—There are many who are but slightly 
convicted, if at all. The Word of God must be used in the most unsparing manner. 
The only remedy for such cases are the following passages of Scripture and kindred 
references: Romans 3:10, 23; 7:24; I John 1:10; Ecclesiastes 7:20; Isaiah 53:6; 
Psalms 1:43:23; Galatians 2:16; Ephesians 2:8,9; Isaiah1:5,6. Withsuchcases 
let thorough work be done. Let God’s Word be the mirror in which the sinner shall 
see nimself as God sees him. 

III. FOR THE VERY DEEPLY CONVICTED.—Such should be dealt with in great 
tenderness. Use Isaiah 1:18 3 53: 4,553 43:253 44:22; 1 Peter 2:24; Romans 
5:6; Revelation 22 :17. 

IV. THE CLASS THAT DO NOT KNOW HOW TO COME TO CHRIST.—There are 
many of this class. They have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge. _Per- 
haps they have been taught by some that they must “seek religion.” Nowhere in the 
New Testament is the sinnc= exhorted to seek religion. A seeker of religion is already 
a Christian, James 1:27. They should be taught not to receive a creed, but a Person. 
John I: It, 123 5:24; 3:16, 18, 36; 6:40, 47. They must trast, Isaiah 26: 3; 
Psolm 54:8. God offers salvation as a gift, and to be taken, Revelation 22:17; Psalm 
96:13; Romans 6: 23. 

V. THE “ Don’t FEEL” Ciass.—A false theology has made feeling a condition of 
salvation. Thousands of sinners have stumbled and are stumbling over this false 
idea. Show them that it is simple trust in God’s word that brings the joy of conscious 
salvation. Teach them to rest on the Word. Sometimes this class will trust and 
come back doubting. It is because they have not confessed Christ. Use Romans 
10:9, 10; Matthew Io: 32. ° 

VI. “1AM AFRAID I WILL NOT HOLD OoT.”—Many use this as an argument for 
not deciding for Christ. Give them: 1 Peter 4:19; Psalm 321:13; Isaiah 43:2; 
1 Corinthians 10; 133; 2 Corinthians 12:9; Tude 24; Romans 8 ; 35-39; Co’ »ssians 


3: 35 4. 
: VII. For THOSE WHO STUMBLE OVER WEAK CHRISTIANS.—Use Romans 14: 12; 
John 21 ; 21, 22; Matthew 7:1, 3; Romans 2:1; 3:4, 
VIII. For THE “I’LL Try” CLass.—Show them tiet sa!vation is not to be ob- 
tained by trying. They must quit trying and go to trusting. Use Romans 4:5, and 
kindred passages, 


he Word, 
he proper 


-d sinner, 
> process 
-inat the 
25 advan- 
r process 
ylicable to: 


first class, 
liders are 
» books of 


no means 
haps may 


2; Hosea 
ider must 
re was no 


ut slightly 
g manner. 
d kindred 
iah 53:6; 
such cases 
nner shall 


in great 
Romans 


There are 
ige. Per- 
ere in the 
is already 
a Person. 
lah 26:3; 
7; Psalm 


bndition of 
this false 
conscious 
trust and 
e Romans 


bument for 
lah 43:23 
oO »ssians 


ans 14:12; 


to be ob- 
5 435, and 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 219 


IX. “‘THERE ARE SOME THINGS I CANNOT GIVE UP.”—For this class refer to 
Mark 8: 35, 37; Phillippians 3: 7, 8. : 

X. TO WHOM IS THE INVITATION EXTENDED ?—To the /os?, to the ungodly, 
Luke 19:10; Matthew 9:12; Luke 5 : 32. 

XI. THE TIMEOF SALVATION.—See Isaiah 55:6; 2 Corinthians 6:2; Hebrews 3:7. 

XII. DELAY IS DANGEROUS.—Preverbs 1:24, 28; Warnings: Psalm 92:7; 
2 Peter 2:9. 

XIII. How TO MEET THE SKEPTIC.—John 7:17; Psalm 25:14; John 6: 4o. 

XIV. A FEw CLOSING HInTs: 


It is not best for several persons to talk one after another with the same inquirer. 

The worker should believe that Jesus is aé/e and willing to save now. 

It should be remembered that each inquirer has one chief difficulty. 

Meet all candid objections but avcid controversy. 

Let the Spirit of God pray in you while you work with them. 

Urge the seeker gently, yet earnestly, to zmmedtate decision. 

Do not ask a soul to wait until to-morrow. 

Do not tell an inquirer “I shall pray for you till you are converted.” Keep that 
to yourself. 

Do not offer the least comfort to impenitent souls. 

Be thorough. Don’t run to too many in the inquiry room, but confine yourself to 
one until some decision is reached. 

Never fail tc pray with an inquirer, if possible, in a quiet manner, standing or 
kneeling by his side. 

Above all things have fasth for immediate results. 


220 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


—— lpmetiin cetacean wast: hae: te sh 


RULES FOR EVANGELISTS. 


’ Being those given by Paul to Timothy. 


I. ‘‘ Stir up the gift that isinthee,"’ 2 Tim. 
1:6. 

II. ‘‘Be not thou ashamed of the testi- 
mony of our Lord," 1:8. 

III. ‘‘ Hold fast the form of sound words, 
which thou hast heard of me, in faith and 
love which is in Christ Jesus,’ 1:13; and 
again in the 14th verse, ‘‘That good thing 
which was committed unto thee, keep by the 
Holy Ghost which dwelleth in thee.” 

IV. You want strength; then, ‘' Be strong 
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus,” 2: 1. 

V. ‘Endure hardness as a good soldier of 
Jesus Christ,” 2: 3. 

VI. Remember that Jesus Christ, of the 
seed of David, was raised ‘from the dead, 
2:8. Evangelists, that is the doctrine for 
you. Christ raised from the dead is God's 
receipt in full for the sinner's justification. 

VII. ‘' Study to show thyself approved unto 
God, a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of 
Truth,” 2: 15. 

VIII. ‘‘ Flee also youthful lusts; but fol- 


low righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with 
them that call on the Lord out of a pure 
heart,’’ 2: 22. 

IX. ''Foolish and unlearned questions 
avoid, knowing that they do gender strife,” 
2323. 

X. ‘Continue thou in the things which 


thou hast learned,'' 3:14. Not only preach . 


to others, but live out the truth you preach. 

XI.. '' All Scripture is given by inspiration 
of God,"’ 3:16. Be persuaded of the inspira- 
tion of the Scripture. Use it, for it is the 
sword of the Spirit. 

XII. ‘'I charge thee, therefore, before God 
and the Lord Jesus Christ Preach the 
Word, beinstant in season, ou: s4 season,” 
4c Ri 

XIII. ‘Do the work ofan evangelist,” 
4:5. Do the work, don’t merely talk about 
it, or be satisfied with the title of an evange- 
list. DO the WORK—it is tough work, hard 
work, but blessed work. 


MARCUS RAINSFORD. 


BIBLE NOTES FOR STUDENTS. 


1. The first verse in the Bible speaks of | 
CreaTion. The Jast verse in the Bible | 
speaks of Grace. The middle verse of the | 
Bible speaks of JUDGMENT, Ps. 18:9, 

2. Evea Type of the Church, Gen. 2; 22. | 
‘And the rib builded He a woman.” (See. 
margin), Eph. 2:22. ‘In whom (Christ) | 
ye are builded together.’ 

3. The Day of Grace—God says: '' Look 
unto Me and be ye saved, Isa, 45:22. The 
Day of Fudgmeni, ‘'Every eye SHALL see 
Him," Rev. 1:7. Many to-day will not look _ 
for mercy, but one day they will be compelled 
to look for judgment. 

4. What Fesus Saves from—' His people 
from their sins.” 


. . condemnation of sin, | 


Rom. 8:1; . . present power of sin, Rom. 
7:6,7;.. from sinitself, with all its effer.. 
when weget to glory, Rev. 22:3,4. Frow.: 
iniquity, Titus 2:14; from this preser* < . 
agv, Gal. 1: 4; from our enemies, Luke 1: 7:. 

5. Twenty-two Signs of the Times, 2 Tim. 
3: 1-8. 

6. ‘A Good General Servint, Epaphroditus 
Phil. 2:25; brother; companion in labor; 


| fellow-soldier ; messenger; servant. 


7. ‘Put on the Whole Armour of God, 
Eph. 6:11; That we may be able to stand— 
defensive, verse 13. That ye may be able 
t9 WITHSTAND, aggressive, verse 16. Ye 


| SHALL be able to QuENcH, victory. 


F. C. SPURR. 


ee ee ee a ea 


va. 


—= “~ wf 7. ~~ &- . 


- Qo 


o 


eace, with 
of a pure 


questions 
ler strife,” 


ngs which 


nly preach - 


ou preach. 
inspiration 
the inspira- 
r it is the 


before God 
reach the 
Na yeason,”’ 


vangelist,” 
talk about 
an evange- 
work, hard 


SFORD. 


sin, Rom. 
ll its effer 
Frow.: 
reser* « 
Luke 1:71. 
mes, 2 Tim. 


aphroditus 
in labor; 
nt. 

ur of God, 
to stand— 


ay be able 
16. Ye 


BPURR. 


_cords,"" Num. 3: 36, 37. 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 221 


WHY SHOULD GOD'S PEOPLE WORK. 


I. To show the genuineness of their faith 
and love, Jas. 2:18, 26; John14:15; and 
15:10, 14. 

II. God chose and regenerated them that 
they might work, John 15.16; Eph. 2: ro. 

III. Christ died that they might work, 
Titus 2:14; 2 Cor. 5:15. 

IV. Scriptures given to qualify them for 
work, 2 Tim. 3: 16, 17. 


V. Sufficient help offered to enable them 
to work, 2 Cor. 9:8; and 12:9; Phil. 4:13. 

VI. That they may be blessed and happy, 
Jas. 1:25; John 13:17. 

VII. To glorify God and be like Him, 
Matt. 5:16; 1 Pet. 2:12; John 15:8; Titus 
3:8; Matt. 5:44, 45, 48. 

Let God’s people therefore OBEY, Heb. 
10: 24. G. T. 


, _ SERVICE. 


We are set free to serve. God said six 
times to Pharaoh, ‘‘Let my people go, that 
they may serve Me."" We, too, are redeemed 
out of the spiritual Egypt to serve God— 
‘Made free from sin, ye became the servants 
of righteousness,” Rom, 6: 18-22. ‘That 
we, being delivered out of the hands of our 
enemies, mightServe Him,” Luke 1: 74. 

I. Characteristics of God’s service. 

1. Loving service. ‘‘ Idrew them with cords 
of a man, with bands of love, Hos. 11:4. 
“TI love my master . . . I will not go out 
free . . . he shall serve him for ever,’’ Ex. 
21:5, 6. 

2. Whole-hearted service. ‘*No man can 
serve two masters,’’ Matt.6:24. ‘Present 
your bodies a living sacrifice... your 
reasonable’ service,"’ Rom, 12:1. ‘There 
shall not an hoof be left behind; for thereof 
must we take to serve the Lord our God; 
and we know not with what we must serve 


_ the Lord, until wecome thither,”’ Ex. 10: 26. 


3. All-including service. ‘‘ Whatsoever ye 
do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not 
untomen .. . foryeserve the Lord Christ,” 
Col. 3:23, 24. ‘' Whosoever shall give to 
drink unto one of these little ones a cup of 
cold water only in the name of a disciple, 
verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise 
lose his reward,"’ Matt. 10:42. ‘Under the 
charge of the sons of Merari . . . the pillars 
.» their sockets, and their pins, and their 


to look after, but it was God's work as much 
as any seemingly more important. His 
field of service is wider than our field of 
vision). 

4. Holy service. ‘‘ Be ye clean that bear 
the vessels of the Lord,” Isa. 52:11. ‘* The 
Levites were purified .. and after that went 


the Levites in to do their service, Num. 
| 8:21, 22. 


(Such little things ~ 


5. Foyous service. ‘Serve the Lord with 
gladness,” Ps. 100:2. ‘' My servants shall 
sing for joy of heart,” Isa. 65 : 14. 

6. Satisfied service. ‘'Mine éiect shall 
long enjoy the work of their hands. They 
shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for 
trouble,” Isa. 65 : 22. 

“ For only work that is for God alone 
Hath an unceasing guerdon of delight— 
A guerdon unaffected by the sight 

Of great success, nor by its loss o’erthown ; 

Allelse is vanity be::eath the sun, 

There may be joy in doing, but it palls when done.” 

7. Rewarded service. ‘‘God is not un- 
righteous to forget your work and labor of 
love,” Heb. 6:10. ‘Your work shall be 
rewarded,"* 2Chron. 15:7; Jer.31:16. “If 
any man’s work abide . . . he shall receive. 
a reward," 1 Cor. 3:14. ‘Come... in- 
herit the kingdom prepared . . . inasmuch 
as ye have done it unto one of the least of 
thee, my brethren, ye have done it unto Me,”’ 
Matt, 25: 34-40. 

II. Characteristics of God's servants. 
1. Obedience. ‘His servants ye are to 


whom ye obey,’’ Rom.6:16. ‘‘ Whatsoever 
He saith unto you, doit,” Jfohn2:5. ‘Thy 
' servants are ready to do whatsoever my lord 
the king shall appoint,” 2 Sam. 15:15. (It 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


is not enough to be working for the Master, | 


we must be working at His word). 

2. Gentleness, patience, meekness, ‘The 
servant of the Lord must not strive; but be 
gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient, in 
meekness instructing those that oppose them- 
selves,” 2 Tim, 2:24, 25. 

3. Love, ‘‘ By loveserveoneanother,” Gal. 
5:13. ‘‘Let us not love in word, neither in 
tongue; butindeedand in truth,” 1 John 3:18. 

4. Expectancy. ‘Let your loins be girded 
about, and your lights burning; and ye 
yourselves like unto men that wait for their 


Lord . . . Blessed are those servants whom | 


| 


i 


the Lord, when He cometh, shall find watch- . 


ing,” Luke 12: 35-40. 

III. Strength for service. 

“Who issufficient for these things ?'’ 2 Cor. 
2+ 16, 

‘Our sufficiency is of God,” 2 Cor. 3:5. 

1. Prayer, ‘‘Andinthemorning, rising up 
a great while before day, He went out, and 
departed into a solitary place, and there 
prayed," Mark 1:35. (In the Gospel of 
God’s Servant, herein the first chapter, we 
see how He gathered strength by prayer). 

2. Baptism of the Spirit, Acts2. ‘They 
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they 
spake the word of God with boldness,” Acts 
4:31. ‘Seven men of honest report, full of 
the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may 
‘appoint over this business . . . Stephen, a 
man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost 
... full of faith and power, did great 
wonders and miracles among the people,” 
Acts 6: 3, 5, 8. 

3. Following Fesus. ‘If any man serve 
Me, let him follow Me," John 12:26. ‘ Con- 
sider Him that endureth such contradiction 
of sinners against Himself, lest ye be wearied 
and faint in your minds,” Heb, 12:3. ‘I 
have given you an example,” John 13: 15. 

4. Looking to the Lord. ‘Behold, as the 
eyes of servants look unto the hand of their 


masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto 
the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait 
upon the Lord our God,” Ps. 123:2. 
Answered by, ‘'I will guide thee with mine 
eye,’’ Ps, 32:8. ‘The Lord looked upon him, 


| and said, Go in this thy might . . . have . 

not I sent thee? '' Judges 6: 14. a 

5. Trust. ‘*The God of heaven, He will S 

prosper us; therefore we, His servants, will rt 

arise and build,’* Neh. 2:20. ‘' We rest on st 

| Thee, and in Thy name we go agains: this n 
multitude,”’ 2 Chron. 14:11. 

6. Grace. ‘‘Let us have grace, whereby al 
we may serve God acceptably, with reverence y' 
and godly fear,” Heb, 12:28. ‘‘Hegiveth my . | 
more grace,” James 4:6. ‘God is able to y 
make all grace abound toward you; that ye, m 
always having all-sufficiency in all things, 
may abound in every good work," 2Cor.9:8. § fit 

7. Remembrance of past help. ‘David st 
said moreover, The Lord that delivered me Ash 
out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw z 
of the bear, He will deli¥er me out of the 
hand of this Philistine,” 1 Sam. 17: 37. of 
“When I sent you without purse, and scrip, ce 
and shoes, lacked ye anything? And they 
said, Nothing,” Luke 22: 35. a 

IV. The glory of service. ns 

'' Let this mind be in you, which was also a 
in Christ Jesus: who . . . made Himself of 
no reputation, and took upon Him the form ar 
ofa servant .. . andhumbled Himself, and fo 
became obedient unto death, even the death y¢ 
of the cross, Wherefore God also hath highly a] 


exalted Him," etc., Phil, 2:5-11. ‘I am 
among you as He that serveth," Luke 22 : 27. 
“Whosoever will be chief among you, let 
him be|your servant; even as the Son of 
Man came not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister, and to give His life a ransom tor 
many,"’ Matt. 20:27, 28. ‘Ye serve the 
Lord Christ,"’ Col. 3: 24. 


‘ They spent their lives for others, 
But the world knew them not; 
It had not known their Master, 
And they sought no higher lot. 
But the angels in heaven knew them, 
He knew them, who died and rose ; 
And the poet knew that the lowest place 
Was that which the Highest chose,” 


JANET CLARK. 


naiden unto 
ir eyes wait 
Ps, 123:2. 
e with mine 
sd upon him, 
t... have 


ven, He will 
ervants, will 
We rest on 
y against this 


ice, whereby 
ith reverence 
‘* He giveth 
od is able to 
rou; that ye, 
n all things, 
”* 2 Cor.g:8. 
Ip. ‘David 
delivered me 
Dut of the paw 
ie out of the 
Sam. 17: 37. 
se, and scrip, 
? And they 


hich was also 
e Himself of 
im the form 
Himself, and 
ben the death 
o hath highly 
-rr, ‘I am 
Luke 22: 27. 
ong you, let 
8 the Son of 

unto, but to 
la ransom tor 

e serve the 


t; 


, 

Dt. 
them, 

d and rose ; 

west place 

chose,’ 


cr CLARK. 


THrt WORK AND WORKERS, 223 


PLAIN WORDS ON PLAIN SPEAKING. 
By J. T. Trench. 


Y first piece of advice is in the words of the Lord to Jeremiah, 2,500 years ago :— 

“ Be not afraid of their faces.” If you are afraid of either the “ goodies” or the 

“badies,” and I am not sure which are the severest critics, you had better clear out, 

and take to scribbling, shoemaking or some other respectable business, as you are 
certainly not fit to be a King’s messenger. 

Il. Make them understand you.—A man said to me some time ago, “ The 
worst of you is that if you preach any wrong doctrine, you will destroy us, for you are 
sure to make us understand it.” Well, preach the truth if you know it, and if you do 
not you had better hold your tongues until you do. 

III. Seek not your own glory.—If you do that, you are done for; and yet of 
all temptations this is the most powerful. “Well preached,” whispers the devil in 
your ear, as you leave the pulpit. ‘‘Lord, help!” you exclaim. “ Now, devil, pass on.” 

IV. Don’t offer the Lord what costs you notbLing.—If you think you can 


‘ preach without study, you are laboring under a great delusion. I preach very little ; 


moreover, my sermons are no great things, but I never preach one that does not cost 
me from four to six hours’ study. 

V. Don’t preach beyond your experience.—If you do, your audience will 
find you out before you have been at it for ten minutes, and God will find you out earlier 
still. I once heard a man preach on “Christian Perfection,” and after the service I 
went up to him, and said, ‘‘ Excuse my asking, sir, do you experience all you have been 
urging upon me?” He replied, in a very flurried way, “ Well I am afraid I have an 
engagement now, but I will see you about. it some Other time.” And off he went. 

VI. Avoid politics in the pulpit.—You have enough to do with the passions 
of the heart, the reasonings of the intellect, the ambitions of the soul, without degrading 
celestial interests by importing partisan politics into the pulpit. 

VII. Heat the iron before you try to mould it.—Remember that you have 
a difficult work to perform, and do it with common sense, or rather with uncommon 
sense. But in the citadel which you have to storm you have always a friend, namely, 
tne man’s own conscience. That tells him that religion is right, and that he had better 
surrender. 

In conclusion. You will find that your attainment in method, and achievement, 
and also in result, will be pretty much according to your faith and your works. Go in 
for a big thing while you are about it, and at last the Saviour’s own hand will place on 
your immortal brow a crown whose glittering gems will forever reflect His smile of 
approbation. 


HINTS FOR THE INQUIRY ROOM. 


By Geo, Soltau. 
“ HEARING AND ASKING THEM QUESTIONS.” 


‘The preparations of the heart in man and the answer of the tongue, is from the 
Lord,” —Prov. 16: 1. 


ANY workers find some difficulty in knowing how to begin a conversation. Such 
\ questions as “Are you a Christian?” “Is your soul saved?” “ Have you found 
the Lord?” are somewhat abrupt, and may have the effect of repelling the inquirer. 
Just as a medical man, when he calls to see a patient, leads up to the special questions 
as to the suffering and illness, so with tender sympathy the Christian should lead up to 
the close inquiry as to the state of the soul of the anxious one. It is a good plan to 


t 


i 


icicles Sir titanic cass dcabeenncle tiie aaah sas EE 


224 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


a ee 


commence with questions suggested by the text of the address, or by the. closing 
appeal made by the speaker, or by an allusion to the closing hymn. 

Amongst the replies to pointed questions about the safety of the soul, the following 
will probably be frequent :— 

I. “‘Ihope Iamsaved. Iamdoing the best Ican. What more canIdo?” 

Instead of at once attempting to show that the hope is vain, and that nothing has 
to be done for salvation, it may be well to ask such questions as these :— 

How long have you been hoping to be saved? What first aroused your mind as 
to the necessity of being saved? When did you begin to do your best? How have 
you been getting on? Are you satisfied with yourself? How many sins have you 
overcome? Who told you to do your best? Have you any text that enjoins it? When 
will you have attained to the standard of holiness that God requires? Do you know 
what God requires? He requires a perfect likeness to Jesus, His blessed Son. Here 
is the description of Him, Heb. 7:26: “He was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners.” Are you like Him? 

Inquirer may reply, “But I am not worse than most people, and better than a 
great many.” “ But you adit you owe a certain amount to God that you cannot pay? 
a debt of sin has been contracted?” “Yes,” 

With this admission turn to Luke 7 : 41, 42, and explain the parable of the two 
debtors. Let the inquirer be the 50-pence debtor, the Christian worker the 500- 
pence debtor, and point out the meaning of the words “ nothing to pay.” Ifthe inquirer 
brings up the text Phil. 2 : 11, “‘ Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling,” 
as an argument for “doing one’s best,” turn to the passage, and read, “ For it is God 
that worketh 2 you,” and show how it is impossible to work ou¢ what God has not 
first worked zz, that He gives forgiveness of sin, and the Holy Spirit for this very pur- 
pose, thus enabling the saved sinner towork for Him,and manifest the saivation received. 

Another line of conversation may be found useful, Putthe question, “ How much 
time do you spend in religious exercises during the week? and how much in business 
or family affairs?” Suggest the desirability of reversing the order of things, and 
devoting to the interests of the soul for the next month the time hitherto spent in 
business etc., and to the affairs of ordinary life the time hitherto spent in spiritual 
things, pointing out how such a process would lead to bankruptcy and confusion. If 
the soul is of more imr~-tance than the body, how utterly vain and futile must the 
efforts be for its salvation. Do not encourage the inquirer to “keep on trying,” as is 
so often done. Note carefully Rom. 10:3. Having knocked away all the props of 
self righteousness, and convinced the soul of its need, put God’s way of dealing with 
sin before the inquirer. 

Il. “I put my trust in the Almighty, He is very merciful.” 

When you hear the expression, “the Almighty,” be very sure the person using it 
knows nothing of the character of God, or of the heinousness of sin. Inquire, “ What 
promise of God are you trusting? What do you know of His Mercy? Has‘ He forgiven 
your sins? Has He accepted you? Answers in the negative to these questions will 
enable you to point out that the inquirer is trusting in his feelings, prayers, good char- 
acter, etc., rather than in God.” 

“ But I shouldn’t like to presume to say I was saved ; none can tell that till they 
come to die!” To such an observation, reply, “ Suppose when you come to die, after 
doing your best, you find you have made some great mistake, and you are all wrong 
and there is no time to get anything put right, what will youdo? Itis presumption 
to flatly contradict what God says, tak He plainly declares that we may know we are 
saved, and have eternal life.” See John 3: 16, 363 5:24. 

III. “How am I toc know that Jesus died for me?” : 

Turning to Rom. 3:11, “They have all gone out of the way,” ask the inquirer, 
“Is this true?” “Yes.” “Then you have gone out of the way?” “Yes.” Again, 
Isa. 53 : 6, “All we like sheep have gone astray ; we have turned everyone to his own 
way.” “Isthat true?” “Yes.” “Then you have gone out of the way?” “Yes.” “And 


———— TT 


the. closing 
e following 


canIdo?” 
nothing has 


yur mind as 
How have 
is have you 
is it? When 
}o you know 
Son. Here 
ed, separate 


setter than a 
cannot pay? 


2 of the two 
ker the 500- 
f the inquirer 
d trembling,” 
For it is God 
God has not 
this very pur- 
tion received. 
“ How much 
h in business 
bf things, and 
erto spent in 
nt in spiritual 
onfusion. 
utile must the 
trying,” as 1s 
the props of 
dealing with 


erson using it 
quire, “ What 
s‘ He forgiven 
questions will 
rs, good char- 


1 that till they 
e to die, after 
hre all wrong 
5 presumption 
now we are 


the inquirer, 
es.” Again, 
bne to his own 


cs Yes.” ‘“ And 


THE WoRK AND WORKERS. 225 


-_~ 


you have turned to your own way.” “Yes.” ‘ How far have you gone from God in 
your own way? As far as you could get?” ‘“Yes.’’ Now change the words a// we 
for the word J/, and read the verse again, coucluding, “and the Lord hath laid on Him 
the iniquity of .... Whom?” “Did Jesus die for you?” “ You have no right to 
cut this verse in two, believing that the first part that condemns you is true, and that 
the last clause that would save you is not true.” 

It is important with this class of inquirers to very clearly put before them that 
the Lord knew those whose sins He was bearing on the cross—that His eye looked 
down the future as well as back on the past, and that He then was fully aware for 
whom He was suffering, John 17:20. “ Neither pray I for these alone, but for them 
also which shall believe on Me through their cee 

IV. “How can I tell whether I am one of the elect ? 

The adversary of souls skilfully uses the most precious doctrines to hinder the 
sinner coming to Christ. He uses the doctrine of God's free grace to lull the conscience, 
by persuading the soul there is plenty of time. He uses election to frighten timid 
souls, lest they press forward and accept the gift of life. To such an inquiry it may 
be well to reply, “Are you anxious to know whether you can be saved?” ‘“ Yes.” 
“Jesus said, ‘If any man thirst, let him come unto Meand drink,’” John 7: 37. “ Did 
He mean this invitation for anyone?” “Yes.” “For you?” “I don't know; how 
can anyone come unless the Holy Spirit draw him?” “Who set God’s people 
arranging these meetings? Whoinduced youtocometothem? Was it not the Holy 
Spirit? And having brought you here, and given you this desire for salvation, does 
He purpose disappointing you, and leaving you in darkness and difficulty? The Holy 
Spirit now submits to your heart the decision of the matter. The question really is, 
What do youchoose. Whatever you choose God willratify. Choose life, by accepting 
the Lord’s invitation. ‘If any man thirst, let him cometo Me,’ and God will seal that 
choice for ever.” 

It has been very wisely said that the texts containing the great invitations such as 
“ Whosoever will,” and ‘ Whosoever believeth,” etc., are the outside texts for all to 
read. Those who believe these words of mercy, and step inside the door, will find 
another set of texts for their comfort and assurance, such as Rom. 8: 29, 30; Eph. 1: 4, 
5; 1 Peter 1:2; these are the zmside texts. 

Vv. “I am afraid I have committed the unpardonable sin.” 

This difficulty haunts the minds of a certain number of persons who are naturally 
morbid, and given to introspection. If sucha remark is made by an inquirer, ask him, 
“ Does this fear haunt you? How long have you been thus troubled? What first 
gave rise to.\:?” Then ask, “Do you honestly desire salvation? Who produces thi: 
desire in your mind, Satan, or the Holy Spirit? Ifthe Holy Spirit has thus stirred 
you to earnest inquiry, it is clear you cannot have committed the unpardonable sin. 
Had you done so, He would no longer strive with you ; He would have left you for ever, 
and you would never have been troubled about these things. Take your very anxiety 
of mind as the best proof that the Lord desires your salvation, and has guided you here 
for that very purpose.” 

‘JI. “Iam afraid if I begin to-night I shall not hold on.” 

To meet this difficulty it is important to make clear the work of the Holy Spirit. 
The two great gifts of the Gospel are Remission of Sins and the Holy Spirit, Acts 2 : 38. 
The first deals with the pas,, the second with the future. 

The Holy Spirit seals the soul for eternity, Eph. 1:13; 4:30; 2Cor.1:22. He 
gives life, Rom. 8:10. He dwells in the believer, Rom. 8:9; John 14:16,17. Hewill 
teach and guide, John 14, 26; 15:13; 16:13. Help infirmities and teach you how to 
pray, Rom. 8:26. God who saves is also ad/e to keep, Jude 24; 2Tim.1:12; Cor.9:8, 

Moreover, this great gift of the Holy Spirit is the power for surmounting all diffi- 
culties and overcoming all temptations. Eph. 1 : 19-21, teaches us that this power is 
in us, that as the Holy Spirit raised Jesus and set Him far above ie just above) all 
principality and power, etc., ve, too, may expect to be raised up above the power of 
evil and the trial of circumstances, and thus be kept from falling. 

15 


eon eee ee 


cn 
GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


CHRISTIAN WORKERS’ POWER. 


I, Jesus was filled with the Holy Ghost, 
Luke 3:22; 4:14; 1: 18-21. 

II. He promised the same to His disciples, 
John 7: 38, 39; 16:13, 14; Acts 1:8; 2:4. 

III. Obligations laid upon us, assume that 
the same promise is given to us, Rom. 8:8, 
9, 14; Gal. 5: 16, 18, 25. 

IV. Instruments of our service ail under 
the Spirit's power, 1 Cor. 2:13; Rom. 8: 16, 
26; Eph. 6:17; 1 John 4:13; Jude 20, 21. 

V. Cautions concerning treatment of the 


Holy Spirit imposes responsibility, 1 John 
4:1-3; 1 Thess. 5:19; Eph. 4:30; Acts 
7:51. : 

VI. Incentives to active service are from 
His voice—urging to present victory. (Note, 
seven overcomes). Rev. 2:7, 11, 17, 26-29; 
2:5, 6, 12, 13, 21, 22. 

VII. Our witness-bearing joined with His 
—thus showing indivisible union now in 
Christ, John 15:26, 27; 17:20,21; Rev. 
19:9, 10. H. M. PARSONS. 


THE CHRISTIAN AT WORK. 


Acquire a spiritual knowledge of all parts 
of the word, and learn how to “rightly 
divide it."’ 

Learn by questioning the real spiritual con- 
dition of the individual you deal with. Be 
thorough. | 

Find readily and explain clearly from your 
open Bible, a few apt texts. 

Always hold up Christ as the only and all- 
sufficient Saviour. Work with the Holy 
Ghost. 

Pray rather than argue. Use as much as 
possible the very words of Scripture. 

Be earnest and urgent for an immediate 
decision, 2 Tim. 3: 16-17. 


Some classes met with : 

1. The self-righteous and careless. ‘No 
fear ; God is just; I never did anything very 
bad; will take my chances,’’ Jno. 6:29; I 
Cor. 16:22; Gen. 6:5; Jer. 17:9; Rom. 
3: 10-21; 1 Jno. 1: 10. 

2. Skeptic. ‘‘ Peculiar, can’t believe ; think 
for myself, etc., Ps. 14:1; Rom. 1:21, 22, 
28; Rom. 3:3; 2 Thess. 2:10; Jno. 3: 36; 
I Jno. 5: 10. 

3. Doubting Christians. ‘‘ Hope, try, no 
one can be sure."’ Stop hoping and trying, 
and “trust,” 1 Jno. 5:1, 13; Jno. 5:24; 
6:47; 10:28; Rom. 8: 31-39. 

4. Deceived formalists. ‘‘ Belong to the 


Church," Jno, 3:5-8; Rom. 2: 28-29; Gal. 
6:15; 2 Tim. 3:5; Matt. 7: 22, 23. 

5. Inconsistencies of professors. ‘‘ Hypo- 
crites—as gooci as they—it I can’t be better, 
etc.,”’ Matt. 7: 1-3; Jno. 21:22; Rom, 2:1- 
9; 14:4, 12; Jas, 4:12; Jude 14, 16, 

6. Backsliders, Prov. 14:14; Jer. 3:22; 
Mal. 3:7; Hos. 14:4; 11:8. David and 
Peter. 

7. Deeply convicted and despondent, Isa. 
1:18; 43:25; 44:22; Rom. 5:6; 1 Pet. 
2:24; 1 Jno. 1:7; 1 Tim. 1:15-17; Heb. 
PE SESS 11, 

8. ‘'So many thingsto give up."’ Receive 
the Lord Jesus Christ first, Jno. 1 : 12 ; Mark 
8: 35-37; Phil. 3:7-9; Luke 18:22; Rom, 
8: 16-18. 

9. How to believe, Rom. 10:10; Acts 
8:37; Jmo. 3:4-18; 5:25; Rev. 22:17. 

10, ‘If I felt, etc.,"’ Isa. 45:22; Rom. 
5:1; 4:5. Feeling three times, faith three 
hundred timesinthe N.T. A matter of Faith 
and Fact, rather than feeling. 

11, ‘' Fear I can’t hold out, having tried,” 
Isa, 41:13; Eph. 3:20; Phil. 1:6; Jno. 
10; 27-29; 2 Tim. 1:12; Jude 24. 

12. ‘Not to-night,’’ Gen, 6 : 3; Prov. 27:1; 
29:1: Matt. 24: 48-51; Luke 12: 20; 2 Cor. 
6:2; Heb. 3:15; Jas. 4: 13-17. 

E, P. MARVIN, 


29; Gal. 


‘ Hypo- 
be better, 
om, 2:I- 
6. 
er. 3:22, 
avid and 


dent, Isa. 
6H; 1 Pet. 
17; Heb. 


Receive 
12; Mark 
22; Rom, 


10; Acts 
117. 

b2; Rom. 
aith three 
br of Faith 


ng tried,” 
:6; Jno. 


rov. 27:1; 


bo: 2 Cor. 


ARVIN, 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 227 


THE CHRISTIAN REVIVED. 


I. The need of revival. 

(a) We need to be revived daily to follow 
the way God would have us go, Ps. 119: 37. 

(b) We need to be revived in God's right- 
eousness, Ps. 119: 40. 

(c) Also in faith, 2 Tim. 1: 5-6. 

(d) And in the truth, 2 Pet. 1: 13. 

(ce) In the joy of our salvation, Ps. 51: 12. 

(/) In the heart and spirit, Ps. 51 : 10. 

(g) In the spirit of our mind, Eph. 4:23. 

(h) For His name’s sake, Ps. 143: 2. 

II. How revived. 

(a) By the Holy Ghost, Titus 3:5; Acts 
1:8; 1 Cor. 2: 4. 

(6) By God's word, Ps. 119: 50, 93; John 
6:63; Ps. 19:7. 

III. Results of revival. 

(a) We rejoice in God, Ps. 85:6. 

(6) We keep His word, Ps. 119 : 88, 


(c) Have Spirit of Praise, Ps. 107: 1-9; 
103: I-5. 

(d) Renewal of worship, Ezra g : 8-9. 

(e) Victory in trouble, Ps. 138:7; 71: 20. 

(f/f) Spirit of prayer, Ps. 80: 18. 

(g) Keeps usin path of righteousness, Ps. 
23:3. 

(h) Gives us strength, Isa. 40:31; Ps. 
103: 5. 

(i) Gives us comforts, Isa. 57: 18. 

(k) Restores health to the soul, Jer. 30:17. 

(4). Comforts the sorrowful, Jer. 31:25. 

IV. Revival conditional. 

(a) We must be humble, Isa. 57:15; Ps. 
34:18. We must be contrite, Matt. 5:4; 
Luke 15: 20. 

(6) We must return and confess sin, Hos. 
5314-15; 6:1, 2. 

(c) And must wait on God, Isa. 40: 31. 

W. FLINT JONES, 


SOME OF THE WEAK THINGS GOD USES “0 ACCOMPLISH 
HIS PURPOSES. 


How full of comfort is the Bible to the 
dear Father's ‘'little ones,’’ His weak ones. 
In looking through its sacred pages we find 
so many instances where God, instead of 
selecting the great ones of the earth, the 
mighty ones, chose the weakest in order to 
demonstrate Hisown Almighty power. In Job 
26: 2 we tead: ‘‘ How hast thou helped him 
that is without power? How savest thou the 
arm that hath no strength?” And in Isaiah 
40:29, ‘‘To them that have no might He 
increaseth strength." 1 Cor. 1:27: ‘God 
hath chosen the weak things of the world to 
confound the mighty.” 2 Cor. 10:4: 
“ Mighty through God to the pulling down 
of strongholds." It ought to be clearly seen 
by all of His children that His plans have 
not changed in the least. May the Holy 


Ghost bless the following word pictures of 
‘‘ power in weakness" to the encouragement ' 
of the many who think they have no gift for 
service in the Master's vineyard. 

Among the many things that God makes 
use of are the following: 

1. A rod—See Exodus 4:2, 17; 8:5, 16; 
9:23; 10:13; 14:16; 17:9. 

2. An ass—Numbers 22 : 28; Luke 19: 34, 
35; 2 Pet. 2:16, 
. A ram’s horn—Joshua 6 : 5. 
. An ox goad—Judges 3 : 31. 
. A woman—]udges 4 : 9. 
. A nail—Judges 4:21 ; Eccles, 12: 11. 
. A barley cake—Judges 7 : 13. 
. Broken pitchers and trumpets —] udges 
7:20. 

9. A piece of millstone—Judges 9 : 53. 


Ww 


On An > 


10. Jaw-bone of an ass—Judges 15:15, 19. 
11, Left hands—Judges 20: 16. 

12. Shepherd's sling and five stones—1 
Sam. 17 : 40. : 
13. A cruse of oil—1 Kings 17: 16. 

14. A cloak—z Kings 2: 8. 

15. Valley full of ditches—z2 Kings 3 : 16. 
16. Empty vessels—2 Kings 4; 3. 

17. A worm—lIsaiah 41: 14, 15. 

18. A gourd—Jonah 4:6, 7. 

- 19. Babes—Matt. 21 ; 16, 

20. A cock—Mark 14: 72. 

21. A cup of cold water—Mark 9: 41. 

22. Five loaves and two fishes—Jno. 6:9, 
23. Clay—Jno. 9:6. 

24. A voice—Jno. 1:23; Luke 7:28. 

25. Five words—1 Cor. 14:9, 19. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


26. Helps—1 Cor. 12:28; Acts 18:27; 2 
Tim. 1 16. 

27. Succorers—The word means ‘running 
on the occasion of a cry,"’ Rom. 16: 2, 3. 

28. Repairers—lIsa. 58:12; and in Nehe- 
miah 3rd chapter, we find the word “'re- 
paired '’ some thirty-two times. 

29. Stoppers of chinks and strengtheners 
—Ezek. 27: 9 (see margin). 

30. Rags—Jer. 38:11; 39:14, 16, 17. 

31. Two mites—Mark 12: 42-44. A mite 
is the seventh part ofa piece of brass money. 
32. An alabaster box of ointment—Jno. 
12:3. 

33. Tears—Luke 7 : 44. 

34. A needle—Acts 9 : 39; Eccles. 9: 10. 

Ar. by J. E. W. 


THE WORK AND THE WORKER. 


I, The work. 


1. The work is to declare the testimony of 
Sod, 1 Cor. 2:1. 

2. And that is that all the world is guilty 
before God, Rom. 3:19. 

3. That God is not willing that any should 
perish, 2 Peter 3:9. 

4. '' That God so loved the world,” etc., 
John 3: 16, 

5. ‘‘ That Christ has borne our sins, "’ etc., 

.1 Peter 2:24; John 1: 29. 

6. That it is through Him the forgiveness 
of sins is preached, Acts 13: 38, 39. 

7. That God now commands all men every- 
where to repent, Acts 17 : 30. 

8. That the benefits of Christ's death are 
received through repentance toward God and 
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 
20:21. 

9. That thus believing in Christ, the sinner 
is at once saved, Acts 16:31; John 5:24; 
John 3 : 36. 


II. The worker. 


Gop's WoRK IN CHRIST COMES FIRST. 
THE BELIEVER’S WORK IS IN AND FROM HIM, 


1, There must be separation before he can 
be sent, John 17: 16-18. 

2. There must be communion before 
testimony, John 15:27; Acts 4:13, 20; 1 
John 1: 1-3, 

3. The believer must be loving Christ 
before teaching others, John <1: 15-17. 

4. Preaching is simply being a witness 
Acts 1:8, 21, 22; Acts 5: 32. 

5. In Acts 9:20, Saul believed, and 
‘“‘Straightway he preached Christ,’ John 
1341, 45; 4:28, 29. 

6. This ministry is received fromthe Lord 
Jesus, Acts 20: 24. 

7. The method of the law—doing that one 
may live—fails, see Rom, 10! 1-5- 

8. The method of the Gospel—life that 
one may do—puts Christ’s work first, and in 
God’s order, Rom. 10:6-17. — 

9. Gifts for service flow from being mem- 
bers in the body of Christ, see Rom. 12: 3-8;. 
Eph. 4:7, 11, 12; 1 Cor, 1224-31. 

to. God pours from filled vessels, Rom. 
15:29; 2 Cor. 4:7. 

11th and lastly—Our sufficiency is of God, 
2 Cor. 2:14,17; 3:5, 6. 


8:27; 2 
‘running 


2,3: 
n Nehe- 


ord ‘“re- 


gtheners 
’ 17. 
A mite 


ss money. 
ent— Jno. 


fore he can 


on before 
13, 20, I 


ing Christ 
5-17. 


a witness 


eved, and 
ist," John 


mthe Lord 
ng that one 


i—life that 
first, and in 


being mem- 
bm. 12% 3-8; 


issels, Rom. 


y is of God,, 


e 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 229 


THE PREACHER AND HIS WORK. 


By “PREDIGER,” St. Petersburg. 


Ww: take the liberty of reprinting the following from Mr. Spurgeon’s excellent maga- 
zine, Zhe Sword and Trowel, as it is calculated to be very helpful to those 
engaged in the Lord’s service, and is deserving of a wide circulation. Mr. Spurgeon 
adds in a footnote :—-‘‘A friend from abroad has sent us the following sententious 
sentences. They may be useful to others besides ministers ; but we wish our friend 
would put them in the way of preachers. May God bless each sentence !” 

eface.—This treatise, though very brief, is the result of many years reading. 

It lays no claim to originality ; the thoughts it contains are gathered from or suggested 
by others. May He whose servants it seeks to help, but without whose blessing it will 
be in vain, graciously use it ! 

The Minister.—A minister is set apart to glorify God and help men. 

A true minister dares not be other than a minister. 

Few men are so closely watched as ministers, and there are none whose inconsis- 
tencies do so much harm. 

Ministers are put in charge of souls, and will have to give account.of them. 

No man is fit to be a minister who would not joyfully live and die in the lowest 
sphere so long as he can serve his Lord. 

No one can so easily do harm as a minister. 

If you are seeking to be admired, it will a¢ /as¢ be better for you had you been a 
ploughman than a pastor. 

A trifling and inconsistent minister is a laughing-stock to bad men, and a sorrow 
to good ones. 

Responsibility.—“ If thou speaketh not to warn the wicked from his wicked 
way, to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity ; dt his blood will 
I require at thine hand.” 

As a minister, when I think who I am, and who sent me, and how awful the 
account I must soon render, I tremble. 

Our opportunities of doing arm are immense. My brother, a million years 
hence your influence will tell on souls! Take care, lest you lead men to ruin. 

If there be one sight in the universe calculated to inspire terror and dismay, iti s 
that of a faithless minister about to be consigned to his doom. 

Private Prayer.—Public teaching is useless without private prayer. 

A minister is in duty bound to bear his people daily to the throne of grace. 

If you wish to preach well you must pray much. 

Generalities are the death of prayer. 

Plead wth God before you plead for God. 

Better neglect your body than your soul, your meals than yoyr prayers. . 

He that lives most in prayer grows most in grace. 

Let prayer ascend when you wish blessing to descend. 

Neglect of prayer arises from want of faith : he who believes will pray. 

A little prayer does more than a great deal of study. 

The Sphere.—You turn the helm of your life when you chose the sphere of your 
work, 

Go where you can do most for men, not where you can get most /vom men. 

Be more concerned about your ability than about your opportunity, and about 
your walk with God than either. 

Your sphere is where you are most needed. 

He who called you to the ministry will give you a sphere of service. 

There is no place without its difficulties : by removing you may change them, it 
may be you will increase them ; but you cannot escape them. 


230 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


Those who push themselves into a sphere they are not fitted for in this life will 
regret it in the next. 
eee knows best where you can serve His people: ¢rust Him and He will place 
you tkere. 
The Pulpit.—The moments you spend in the pulpit will tell on the ages you 
must spend in eternity, 
The piety of the pulpit decides the piety of the pew. 
Never go into the pulpit without Christ. 
In the pulpit self and the concerns of time must be forgotten. 
There is no place where Christ is more ready to reveal Himself to His servants 
. than in the pulpit. 5 
How easy it is to dishonour God in the pulpit ! 
Thousands of souls have been lost through the mistakes of the pulpit. 
Every moment spent in the pulpit is privileged time. 
Public Prayer.—Remember that you are in the presence of God, and that you 
address Him. Never pray to be admired of men. 
Let the sermen be omitted rather than the prayers be slurred. 
The prayers should make the people feel ¢he reality of prayer. 
The prayers prepare the ground, the sermon sows the seed. 
The manner in praying does more than the matter in preaching. 
The Voice.—A gentle voice is of untold value. All can attain it. 
Feigned voices are the great causes of relaxed throats. 
He who seeks, by a feigned voice, to make men wonder, makes them smile. 
Speak oftener, and your voice will not fail so often. 
The voicedependson t he heart. 
If we think how we are saying a thing, our hearers will see it, and despise us for it. 
A man cannot walk well when he thinks ow he is walking, nors 1k well when 
he thinks Aow he is speaking. 
A man’s own heart ts influenced by the tone of his voice, and the t. his voice ts 
affected by the state of his heart. : 
Preaching.—You must live with God if you would preach for God. 
Manner tells quite as much as matter. 
Preach as you will wish you had preached when you stand before God. 
Ask often, “ What does Christ think of my preaching ?” 
One earnest man does more than ten eloquentones. 
Live well, and you will not preach badly. 
Preparation.—Without God’s blessing you will never prepare a sermon that 
- * you will not regret in eternity. 
The state of the heart decides the fate of the sermon. 
Never begin to prepare till you have clearly decided whether you want to gain 
men’s praise or save men’s souls. 
Prepare your heart, then your sermon. 
Prepare your sermon with the judgment-seat in view. 
In your preparation, remember that it may be the last sermon some who listen to 
you will ever hear. 
When preparing your sermon, forget yourself. 
If you desire to make a useless sermon, make a beautiful one. 
The Sermon.—Heart-sermons reach hearts. 
One weak point will injure ten strong ones. 
The Bible reiterates the same things again and again. 
Great sermons are given, not made. 
Harshness will psoduce resentment, gentleness, contrition. 
The strongest part of all great sermons is ‘the close. 
More depends on the last two minutes than on the first ten. 


The aim of our sermons should be to reform the heart rather than to inform the 


mind. 


pre 


THE WoRK AND WORKERs. 


—— — _— ee ae ne a 


- will Every sermon may be your last. f 
No sermon is a success which does not touch the heart and move the will. Aa 
place Make men remember the text. bie 


‘Texts and Divisions.—Choose your text for usefulness. 
Reject oa a which might strike, but would not help. 
It is God’s Word, not our word, that convicts and converts. 
Some can only be won to God by love, some can only be driven from sin by fear: 
use pleading and threatening as the Scriptures do. 
Value truth more than taste, souls more than symmetry. 
-vants Let divisions always be; 1. Useful. 2. Simple. 3. Concise. 
Style.—Simple language alone reaches the heart. 
Vanity will make a man speak grandly, piety plainly. 
Striking and special are synonyms, when ies g respecting sermons. 
Don’t whip with a switch that has the leaves on.. 
at you You will not move a man if you do not make him understand you. 
The Great Teacher never used a big word. 
Delivery.—To keep attention, mix questions with statements. 
Think of your hearers’ needs, and it will help you; of their criticism, and it will 
hinder you. 
In large assemblies speak more slowly than in smaller ones. 
Make each one feel that you are speaking to Aim. 
Your hearers think about what you think about. 
, Address the lowest, and you will reach the highest. 
Make men listen, and do not let them misunderstand. 


s you 


For whom do you preach—/o’ Christ, or for yourself ? 
is forit. 4 The Congregation.—Thin . more of the people than of the preacher. 
ll when Nearly three-fourths of every audience do not understand the great truths of 
salvation. 
yoice tS Get a great heart if you would like a large congregation. 


Twenty are hungry of heart to one hungry of head. 
It is easy to manage a congregation when they are kept near to Christ. 
Forsake God and your congregation will forsake you. 
Visiting.—“ Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these My 
brethren, ye have done it unto Je.” 
It is not the time of sickness so much as the time of convalescence that decides 
the future life. Remember this, and seize opportunities. 
ion that Let each one feel that you are his personal friend. 
Get others to talk: what a man says to you has more influence upon Az than all 
you can say to him. 
to gain “If a man have a hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not 
leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is 
gone astray?” 
If you neglect the sick and they die, it will be sad to think that you lost the last 
sten to opportunity of helping them ; if you neglect the sick and they recover, your power 
to influence them will be weakened for ever. 
Habits.—‘ Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord 


Jesus.” 
Principles and habits are as readily taught as Greek and Latin, and they are of 
vastly more importance. : 


Evil habits begin in cobwebs and end in chains. 
Good habits are begun with difficulty, but continued with joy. 
He who sees little does less. 
Read no book, do no act, harbor no thought that makes God less near, Christ less 
precious, eternity less real. 
the If piety decay, zeal will die. 


232 GOLD FROM OPIIIR. 


Have no self. 
Be actuated in everything by principle. 
A minister’s habits shculd be such as to impress men with the truth of h‘s char- 
acter and the pe of his calling. 
Books and Reeding.—The books you read will decide the life you live. 
The greater the man the fewer the books. 
A man of one book is a man of power. 
Py who wants to preach well should read Baxter's “ Reformed Pastor,” and read 
it often. 
No book published within the last thousand years has done so much to promote 
good preaching as Fénelon’s “ Dialogues on Eloquence.” 
Whitefield and Jay were great students of Matthew Henry. 
Rs man has ever become a truly great preacher who did not know and love the 
Bible. 
Read with a purpose, or read not at all. 
No one can estimate the result of giving or lending a book, 
Praise.—He who seeks praise seidom gains it. 
Praise maxes a wise man humble, a fool proud. 
A minister should be saddened by scme men’s praise. 
When men praise thee, ask, Will Christ accent me? 
Life praise is better than lip praise. : 
Christ praised Mary more than Martha. 
“ As the fining pot for silver, 1nd the furnace for gold ; sois a man to his praise.” 
Some meén will praise thee to try thee. 
If a good man praise ¢hee, praise God. 
Seek souls for Christ, not praise for self. 
“ How can ye believe which receive honor one of another? 
Success.—He who grasps authority seldom gains influence. 
He whe wishes to succeed must seek men’s welfare, not their “ Well done.” 
Do not prove truch too much, or you will make men doubt it. 
Affectation spoils good sermons, and makes bad ones ridiculous. 
The successful man is the man who has done most for others. 
You cas do all God calls you to do. 
What we do depends on what we ave. 
If our words are to have power with men, our lives must convince them of our 
sincerity. 
Miscellaneous.—All changes in life begin by a change in thought. 
You will not succeed if you have two objects. 
Aim to t2 a good public reader ; few are, but all ought to be. 
A. wise mau may be in haste, but not in a hurry. 
God helps by hindering. 
Nothing is good with God’s frown, nothing bad with His smile. 
Manner is smething with all, everything with some. 
Contradict lies by life. 
Be always at leisure to do good. 
If you are a hireling, flee when danger threatens. 
When you are willing to bear the guilt of a sin, it is not necessary to reprove it. 
You need not flee from temptation if you are willing to commit the sin. 
Uere are some of your Lord’s own words as a finish :— 
“Ye are My friends.’ “Lo, lam with you alway.” “My reward is with Me.” 
Watch and pray,” 


% 


ae 


h’s char- 


and read 


_ promote 


d love the 


1is praise.” 
” 


pne. 


em of our 


prove it. 


with Me.” 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 233 


WHY SHOULD CHRISTIANS BE SOUL WINNERS. 


J, Because they may be— 
a. By a happy and consistent life, Ps. 
49:3; 1 Pet. 3:1. 
b. By direct teaching, Ps. 51: 13. 
¢. By both life and teaching, 1 Cor. 
7:16. 
Wisdom essential, Prov. 11:30. Can be 
had, Jas. 1: 5. 
II. Because such become Fathers of the ex- 
cellent of the earth, 1 Ccr. 4:15; Ps. 16: 3. 
III. Because it is the greatest and Best 
work, 
The man who saves human life is es- 
teemed the greatest benefactor of our race, 
Jas. 5: 20. 


/ 


IV. Because it pays well— 

Each soul won isajewel, Mai. 3:17. 

Each jewel of more value than the 
world, Matt, 16: 26. 

What an immense revenue to the 
kingdom of our Master, therefore, 
must only a few bring. 

V. Because with perseverance success is 
certain, Gal. 6:9; John 15:16; Markg; 23. 

VI. Because it is the most Christ-like 
work, Matt. 9:13; Luke1g:10; Acts 1c: 38; 
Jno. 17:18; Jno. 13:15; Eph. 5:1, 2. 


GEO. THOM. 


WHAT TO PREACH. 


Jesus, Acts 8 ; 35. 

Jesus Christ, Acts 5: 42. 

Judgment, Acts 10: 42. 

Righteousness, Ps. 40:9; Acts 24:25. 
Repentance, Matt. 4:17. 

“Turn . . untothelivingGod," Acts 14:15. 
Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1; 23. 

The resurrection, Acts 17 : 18. 


The word, Acts 16:6; 2 Tim. 4:2. 
The word of faith, Rom. 10:8. 
Good tidings, Isa. 61:1; Acts 13: 32. 
Deliverance, Luke 4: 18; Col. 1: 13. 
Remission of sins, Luke 24 : 47. 
Peace, Eph. 2:17 
Kingdom of God, Luke 9: do. 
M. M. ARNOT. 


HOW TO USE THE SCRIPTURES. 


I. Indifferent. 

‘‘ Because I have called and ye refused; I 
have stretched out my hand, and no man re- 
garded; but ye have set at naught all my 
counsel, and would none of my reproof; I 
also will laugh at your calamity ; I will mock 
when your fear cometh. Then shall they 
call upon me, but I will not answer; they 
shall seek me early, but they shall not find 


me; for that they hated knowleclge, and did | 


not choose the fear of the Lord ; they would 
none of my counsel, they despised all my re- 
proof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit 


own devices. For the turning away of the 
simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of 
fools shall destroy them. But whoso 
hearkeneth unto me, sha!l dwell safely, and 
shall be quiet from fear ofevil,"’ Prov.1 24-33. 
‘‘And Jesus auswering, said unto them, 
Suppose ye that these Galilaans were sin- 
ners above all the Galilzans, because they 
suffered such things? I will tell your: 7; 
but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise 
perish,” Luke 13: 2, 3. 
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; 
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of 


of their own way, and be filled with their | thy you*h, and walk in the ways of thine 


heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but 
know thou, that for all these things God wiii 
bring thee into judgment,” Eccl. 11: 9. 

‘ How long halt ye betwe 1 twoopinions ?" 
If the Lord be God, follow Him,” 1 Kings 
18:21 


II. Penitent. 

‘But as many as receivéd Him, to them 
gave He power to become the sons of God, 
even to them that believe on His name,” 
John 1; 12. 

‘‘ And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the 
wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be 
lifted up: That whosoever believeth in Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life. 
For God so loved the world that He gave 
His only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in Him should not perish but have 
everlasting life,"’ John 3: 14-16. 

“And by Him all that believe are justified 
from all things, from which ye could nct be 
justified by the law of Moses,” Acts 13 : 39. 

‘‘But to him that worketh not, but be- 
lieveth on Him that justifieth the ungodly, 
his faith is counted for righteousness,’’ Rom. 
4:5. 

‘For ye are all children of God, by faith 
in Christ Jesus,”’ Gal. 3 : 26. 

III. Deferring 

‘‘ Boast not thyself of to-morrow, for thou 
kndéwest not what a day may bring forth,” 
Prov. 27:1. 

‘‘ Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, 
call ye upon Him while He is near. Let the 
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous 
man his thoughts; and let him return unto 
the Lord; and He will have mercy upon 
him; and to our God, for He will abundantly 
pardon,” Isa. 55 :6, 7. 

‘And he said, This will Ido. I will pull 
down my barns, and build greater ; and there 
will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. 
And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast 
much goods laid up for many years; take 
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But 
God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy 
soul shall be required of thee; then whose 


pS IE: eR AR EN REARS Seach rt SE SS Scone Pe en ape 


GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


—— 


shall those things be which thou hast pro- 
vided ?"’ Luke 12 : 18-20. 

‘For He saith, I bave heard thee in a 
time accepted, and in the day of salvation 
have I succored thee; behold now is the 
accepted time; behold now is the day of 
salvation,”’ 2 Cor. 6: 2. 

‘‘How shall we escape, if we neglect so 
great salvation; which at the first-began to 
be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed 
unto us by them that heard Him,” Heb. 2: 3. 

‘‘ But exhort one another daily while it is 
called to-day ; lest any of you be hardened 
through the deceitfulness of sin,’ Heb. 3: 13. 

‘‘Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith, 
To-day, if ye will hear His voice, harden 
not your hearts,"’ Heb. 3:7. 


IV. Faultfinders. 

‘Judge not that ye be not judged. For 
with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be 
judged,” Matt. 7:1. 

‘But we are sure that the judgment of 
God is according to truth, against them 
which commit such things. And thinkest 
thou this, O man, that judgest them which 
do such things, that thou shalt escape the 
judgment of God?” Rom. 2:2, 3. 

‘* Who art thou that judgest another man's 
servant? To his own master he standeth 
or falleth,"’ Rom. 14: 4. 

“So then every one of us shall give 
account of himself to God,"’ Rom. 14: 12. 

V. Good enough. 

‘The Lord looked down from heaven upon 
the children of men, to see if there were any 
that did understand and seek God, They 
are all gone aside, they are all together be- 
come filthy ; there is none that doeth good ; 
no, not one,"’ Psa. 14: 2, 3. 

‘For there is not a just man upon earth, 
that doeth good, and sinneth not," Eccl. 7: 20. 

‘* All we, like sheep, have gone astray: we 
have turned every one to his own way; and 
the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us 
all,"’ Isa, 53:6. ~ 

For all have sinned, and come short of 
the glory of God," Rom. 3:23. 


enema 


hast pro- 


thee in a 
f salvation 
ow is the 
the day of 


neglect so 
st: began to 
confirmed 
‘Heb. 2:3. 
while it is 
e hardened 
Heb. 3: 13. 
host saith, 
ice, harden 


dged. For 
ye shall be 


udgment of 
yainst them 
nd thinkest 
hem which 
escape the 


other man’s 
he standeth 


shall give 
. 14:12. 


eaven upon 
e were any 
od, They 
ogether be- 
oeth good ; 


pon earth, 
ccl. 7: 20. 

astray: we 
h way, and 
iquity of us 


e short of 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 235 


“If we say that we have nosin, we deceive 
ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we 
say that we have not sinned, we make Him 
a liar, and His word is not in us,” 1 John 
1: 8-10. 


VI. Backsliders. 


‘Thus saith the Lord, What iniquity have 
your fathers found in me, that they are gone 
far from me, and have walked after vanity, 
and are become vain? For my people have 
committed two evils; they have forsaken 
me, the fountain of living water, and hewed 
them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can 
hold no water. Thine own wickedness shall 
correct thee, and thy backslidings shall re- 
prove thee ; know therefore and see, that it 
is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast 
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear 
is not in thee, saith the Lord of hosts,’ Jer. 
2:5, 13, 19. 

‘Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that 
thou hast transgressed against the Lord thy 
God. Return, ye backsliding children, and 
I will heal your backslidings,” Jer. 3 : 13, 22. 

‘‘O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; 
for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. I 
will love them freely; for mine anger is 
turned away from him,” Hosea 15:1, 2, 4. 


VII. Can’t-give-up class. 

“Then said Jesus unto His disciples, If 
any man will come after me, let him deny 
himself and take up his cross, and follow me. 
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain 


the whole world, and lose his own soul?” 
Matt. 1: 24-27. 

‘‘ By faith Mcses, when he was come to 
years, refused to be called the son of 
Pharaoh’s daughter; choosing rather to 
suffer affliction with the people of God, than 
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. 
Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater 
riches than the treasuresin Egypt. . . . For 
He endured as seeing Him who is invisible," 
Heb. 11: 24-27. 

‘And He said unto them, Verily I say 
unto you, there is no mafi that hath left 
house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or 
children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who 
shall not receive manifold more in this 
present time, and in the world to come life 
everlasting,’’ Luke 18 : 29, 30. 


VIII. Unbelievers. 

“And He said unto them, Go ye unto all the 
world and preach the Gospel to every 
creature, He that believeth and is baptized, 
shall be saved; but he that believeth not, 
shall be damned,"’ Mark 16: 15, 16. 

‘T said therefore unto you that ye shall die 
in your sins; for if ye believe not that Iam 
He, ye shall die in your sias,"’ John 8: 24. 

“But the fearful, and unbelieving, and 
the abominable, and murderers, and whore- 
mongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and 
all liars, shall have their part in the lake 
which burneth with fire and brimstone; 
which is the second death,” Rev. 21: 8. 

R. G, PEARSON. 


236 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


A WORD TO WORKERS. 


By Lord Radstock. 


HERE are two passages in Exodus referring to the holy anointing oil, which is a 
scriptural type of the Holy Spirit. “The holy garments of Aaron shall be his 
sons’ after him, to be anointed therein ; and that son that is priest in his stead shall 
put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to 
minister,” Exod. 29:29. “And upon man’s flesh shall it not be poured,” Exod. 30; 
32. This is a very striking illustration of the giving of the Holy Spirit. We must be 
clothed upon, baptised znto, Christ, buried 7 Him, so that God sees, not ws, but His 
beloved Son, in whom He is well pleased. An imperfectly buried thing, with any part 
left uncovered, would be revolting and horrible ; so we must be guz¢e buried in Christ, 
and no part dfse/f left exposed—then the Holy Spirit descends upon us because we 
are in Him, but upon ourselves 27 the flesh can it not be poured. So, if we are really 
in Christ, the H.:'y Spirit must be ours because it is on Him ; ours must be a mew Life 
‘springing from wzthin. It is difficult for us to realize this, because our old nature is 
so hard to shake off—old habits, old failings, old sins; still they must die, and new 
habits and feelings must grow. A tree does not cease to live nor cease to be a tree 
because its leaves die and dry up and wither—no, these old faded leaves, no longer a 
part of the “ving tree, must fall off and be destroyed, and perish, and in the Spring 
new life shows itself, and the tree puts forth buds and blossoms, and is covered with 
green leavVes—so Christ says, “I am the Vine, ye «ve the branches,” not are to become 
so, but, with all our sinfulness, weakness, and failings we are dranches, joined to, nay, 
part of Christ, and so must banish self-will, self-consciousness, self-conceit, and self- 
judgment, and henceforth know fs will and “zs Spirit only; and it is just in propor- 
tion as we realize and aim after this, that He will be able to work zm ws and then 
throughus. Let us have much time of wazting on the Lord, getting to know His will. 
Some young Christians may be saying, “I do not know if I am sent or not.” ‘Then I 
would say, “ Wait till you do.” Suppose a servant were to come out and say, “I do 
not know if my master has sent me or not.” Why, you would say, “Then go to 
your master and find out.” If we cannot hear our Master’s voice, perhaps we are a 
little deaf; let us get closer to Him, and listen attentively. Suppose a friend tele- 
graphing to us, and we have a rvsty nail on our end of the wire, no message 
would come. So ome sinful thought, ome unkind feeling may be hindering our close 
communion with God. Let us try to recognize the Holy Spirit’s guiding in all the 
little things of our lives, the times we go in and out, the people we meet, and then the 
words we speak will be just out of A/zs fulness, spoken from hearts full to overflowing 
of Christ’s love ; our hands, Christ’s, to do His work—our feet, His, to do his errands. 
So let us think of ourselves more than ever before, as not our own, but His ; and when 
we are in perplexity or doubt, not knowing which way to turn, let us always just ask 
ourselves, “ What would Christ do were He in my place?” 

Take your Bibles and turn to Acts 7 : 29:—‘“* Then fled Moses at that saying, and 
was a stranger in the land of Midian forty years.” Moses made the mistake so com- 
mon to us poor human creatures—went on his mission without waiting for God to 
send him, and for God to show him the way. He failed, and no wonder ; then was 
sent into the wilderness for forty years, as it were to school, just to be much alone with 
God and learn of Him. Then he came forward again, filled with wisdom and power 
from on high, given to him by God, when Moses stood with Him on covenant ground 
and God revealed Himself unto him—went boldly into Pharaoh’s presence, saying, 
“Thus saith the Lord ;” and God worked through him, and wrought a mighty deliver- 
ance for His people. Let us take a lesson from Moses in our work for God. 

I. We must be sent of God.—It must be His voice that we hear calling us to 
work. Let us be sure that we are in the place where God would have us. 


which is a 
hall be his 
stead shall 
rregation to 
Exod. 30: 
We must be 
us, but His 
ith any part 
din Christ, 
because we 
ve are really 
ea mew life 
id nature is 
ie, and new 
1o be a tree 
no longer a 
1 the Spring 
covered with 
re to become 
ined to, nay, 
eit, and self- 
st in propor- 
ws and then 
ow His will. 
ot.” Then! 
say, “I do 
Then go to 
aps we area 
) friend tele- 
no message 
g our close 
g in all the 
and then the 
overflowing 
his errands. 
5 ; and when 
ays just ask 


saying, and 
ake so com- 
for God to 
r ; then was 
h alone with 
and power 
ant ground 
bnce, saying, 
rhty deliver: 
d 


| alling us to 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 237 


II. We must be taught of God.—If God has not revealed Himself to us, and 
given us our message, our words wi:l have mo power. But, if we are willing to be led 
by the Spirit of God, then we may go boldly forward, knowing that it is God’s work 
we are doing ; and let us not ve a 


( iscouraged though many years may pass without 
our seeing any apparent result. The Holy Spirit will just prompt us to speak a word 
here, to be silent there, to give a tract to one, to teach, or guide, or advise another ; 
and these little seeds, sown in the power of the Holy Ghost, may be made by Him 
fruitful and successful above all we may know or expect. 

III. We must be in direct communion with God.—A little girl asked why 
a lamp in a certain lighthouse burned always, and she was told there was a cistern of 
oil above and a pipe to convey it to the little lamp. Nothing could put the lamp out 
except the keeper stop the supply by turning the stop-cock the wrong way. This 
illustrates our spiritual life. The Holy Spirit may he had abundantly. Nothing 
hinders it unless we interpose something between. Let us see to it, then, that we are 
much with God, near to Him, and taking of His fulness minute by minute, If He is 
keeping our light burning, then we must shine ¢hrough Him and for Him. 


UNREALITY. 


FOR THE PRAYERFUL CONSIDERATION OF THOSE WHO SERVE THE LORD CHRIST. 
By C. Russell Hurditch. 


pP° we really believe what we preach? Put together cur preaching and our practice, 
and would there be a harmony between them ? 

When we preach the love of God to men, does that love fill our own hearts ? 

When we have to declare the fearful denunciations of vengeance upon the wicked, 
do we understand what we are saying, and does their pitiful condition become vea/ 
tous? 

When. we talk about hell and everlasting damnation, ave we positively any con- 
ception of the fearful doom of the ungodly ? 

Fellow-workers for Christ, it will be well for us to solemnly ask ourselves such 
questions as these in the very presence of God. 

Duncan Matheson, just before his death, said, “If God would spare my life, I 
would preach of ETERNITY as I never have done yet.” It is a mournful fact that many 
who profess to be the servants of the Most High have drivelled down to essay-reading 
in their pulpits ; and if the terrors of the world to come happen to be mentioned, it is 
in about the same style that a school-boy would gabble over his unpleasant lesson. 

But while this is so, do not let us point to the mote in their eye, and miss the 
beam in our own. Let those of us who are evangelists, and do nothing else but preach 
the Gospel, ask ourselves if we enter as we ought into the verities we preach. It is 
very easy to talk about heaven and hell, but if permanent good is to result from the 
preaching, the man who preaches must be vea/ about it. 

How much do we know of weeping day and night for the sins of the people? or 
of nights in prayer? ’ 

_ [heard but recently of a Christian worker, who went out into the fields at mid- 
night and asked God to show him what hell really was, so that he might be real in his 
preaching of it. Danot call him eccentric for doing it ; it might be well if qe did it. 
When there is downright reality there will be blessing. 

‘ The ever-recurring question, “ How to reach the masses,” might find an answer 
ere also. 

It is deplorably true that with all the agencies at work—including the latest 
Sensation if you like—the fringe of the masses has not been touched yet. Is it for. 


238 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


want of effort? It may be in some places even that ; but I verily believe it is for want 
of reality in Christians. This is the root of the thing, and the shoots may take the 
form of worldliness, pride, selfishness, idleness, and a hundred other things. Take 
any town or city you please. What might be done if every child of Godin that town 
or city was real in his belief, and carried it out practically. But what is the actual 
fact? That the Christian workers of every kind are in a sad minority in nearly every 
church, Will any sane man tell me that the idle majority REALL Y believe in the bliss 
of heaven and the terrors of hell? If they did, they COULD NOT bz IDLE. 


5 


THE BELIEVER “A VESSEL;” OR, HOW TO BE USEFUL. 
A WORD TO YOUNG CHRISTIANS. 


By F. E. Marsh. 


AUL, writing by the Holy Spirit in 2 Timothy, 2nd chapter, calls the believer many 
different names. 

In verse 1, a “Son.” Inverse 3, a “Soldier.” In verse 5,a “ Wrestler.” In verse 
6,a “Husbandman.” In verse 15, a “ Workman.” In verse 21, a “vessel.” In verse 
24, a “Servant of the Lord.” 

It is as a vesse/ we consider him now. 

In Hebrews 9:: 21, we find that the vessels in the tabernacle were sprinkled with 
blood; and we know it as the blood of Christ that forms the ground of our forgiveness, 
Eph. 1:7; cleanses, 1 John 1:7; justifies, Rom. 5:9; sanctifies, Heb. 13:11; brings 
us nigh, Eph. 2:13; keeps us nigh, Heb. 10: 19; through which peace has been made, 
Col. 1:20; and atonement, Lev. 17:11; that enables us to overcome, Rev. 12: 11. 

As believers in Christ we are sfrvink/ed vessels, sprinkled with the blood of Christ ; 
cr, in other words, by faith we see Jesus dying for us—bearing the consequence of our 
sin. Our faith, by the power of the Holy Spirit, lays hold of that fact, and all the 
value of what Jesus is and has done is reckoned to us; therefore we are no longer 
our own, but we belong to Him who has bought us with His own blood ; therefore we 
are blood-sprinkled and blood-bought vessels. 

If we look at Leviticus 11 : 32, we see that if any vessel touched anything that 
was dead or unclean, it had to be washed in water ; and if the believer’s garments— 
that is, the believers ways in the world—get defiled, we have the “water of the 
Word” that we need continually to resort to. ‘“Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse 
his way? By taking heed according to Thy Word,” Ps. 119: 9. 

As water is to the body, so the Word of God should be to us, Heb. 10:22. We 
should so hide it in our heart that we sin not against God. “ Continue in the Word,” 

ohn 8 : 31. ' 
‘ Again, in Exod. 40:9, we find that the vessels of the tabernacle were anointed 
with oti, It isa precious truth that the Spirit of Ged indwells every believer, 1 John 
2:27. The great need of the Church to-day is the unction from the Holy One—to be 
filled with the Holy Spirit, to live, walk, sow, war in, and be led of the Spirit ; and 
then the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5 :22, 23, would be seen in our life, and His power 
be manifest in our work and testimony. 

_In Acts 9:15, we find Paul called a chosen vessel to carry the Gospel to the 
Gentiles, and we find that we are chosen to salvation, 2 Thess. 2: 13, to holiness, 
Eph. 1 : 4, to service, Eph. 2 : 10. 

Then, again, we are sanctified (set apart) vessels, 2 Tim. 2:21; we find a very 
simple illustrat;on of sanctification in Exodus 32. The Levites first came out from 
their brethren tc the Lord ; so we are separated from the world to the Lord. Second, 


. for want 
‘take the 
zs. Take 
that town 
the actual 
axly every 
n the bliss 


FUL. 


iever mahy 


2 In verse 
» In verse 


inkled with 
forgiveness, 
‘11; brings 
been made, 
Tet. 

d of Christ ; 
ence of our 
and all the 
e no longer 
herefore we 


ything that 
garments— 
ater of the 
an cleanse 


0 : 22. We 
the Word,’ 


re anointed 
ver, 1 John 
One—to be 
pirit 5 and 
His power 


spel to the 
to holiness, 


find a very 
e out from 
i. Second, 


THE WORK AND WORKERS. 23y 


they had to put their swords upon their thighs and slay the disobedient; in like 
manner we must take “the sword of the Spirit, which its the Word of God,” in the 
power of the Spirit, and judge and cast away everything that would come in between 
us and God, and hinder our communion with Him. 

Again, in 2 Cor. 4:7, we are earthen vessels) Why? That God’s glory may 
shine through us. If we look in Judges, chapter 7, we find an illustration of this in 
Gideon. Observe what he and his followers were supplied with. 

1.—A Trumpet—we possess a trumpet—our voice. 

11.—A. Sword—Sword of the Spirit—the Word of God. 

11.—A& Pitcher—Our bodies to present for His service. 

IV.—A Light in the Pitcher—Christ in our hearts, to be manifested in our 
lives. And although the pitcher may be only a poor broken one, the light will be 
seen, not the pitcher. 

.In Isa. 22 : 24, we find there 2re different sized vessels; we are not all for the 
same work, as we see in 1 Cor. 12:28. Some of the Levites only carried the pins of 
the tabernacle, but they did their work; so we are, each of us, to ask the Lord, 
“What wilt thou have me to do?” then do it in the Lord’s way, guided by His Spirit, 
through His word ; do it in the power of the Spirit to the glory of God. 

Lastly, the Lord wants emp¢y vessels. In2 Kings 4: 3, 4, we have an illustration. 
Let us ask ourselves, “ Am ! an empty vessel?”’ for the Lord cannot fill us if we are 
not empty. 

Empty of self and filled with ‘he Spirit. 

Empty of pride and filled with humility. 

Empty of malice and filled with love. 

Empty of unbelief and filled with faith. 

May the Lord empty, and fill and use us Himself, to His own glory and others 
profit. 


SUGGESTIONS TO WORKERS FOR CHRIST. 


By Henry Bewley. 


EMEMBER, it is the Gospel of ¢he grace of God which you are privileged to make 
known, and that some of its simplest truths are the most important to be set 
forth, The nature and consequences of sin; the love of God in the gift of His Son; 
and the perfect work of the Lord Jesus, in, putting away sin by the sacrifice of Him- 
self, and ‘God’s declared acceptance of that work by raising Him from the dead—these 
are the great themes which you are called to make known ; but, remember, also, ‘+ is 
the Spirit alone that can effectually use them to awaken the conscience, and subdue 
the heart. 

In the Gospel, God is a giver, and man a receiver. Never forget that you are 
moving amongst ¢he spiritually dead, who need LIFE, and amongst ¢he guilty, who 
need PARDON. Itis through /athin Christ, and chrough faith alone, both are 
imparted. 

. Bear in mind that all power is of God, and that the Holy Ghost works in souls 
by means of the truth. Therefore, whether speaking in public or in private, carry the 
conviction with you, that you are but an instrument which the Spirit of God may use. 

Cherish the consciousness of your own weakness. Look to God in continual 
prayer for guidance, and lean on Him for strength. Forget not the words of the 
Apostle, “‘ When I am weak, then am I strong.” How was this? Because ¢henm he 
was cast on God, and God’s power was glorified in his weakness. 

As a child of God, receive, in the simplicity of child-like faith, every word which 


240 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


our Father addresses to you in the inspired volume. Daily, before you venture to 
abor amongst others, let your own soul be refreshed and strengthened out of the 
Word. Seek to realize an abiding sense of God’s love. If you be used to lead others 
into His presence, you need to glorify Him in your own soul, by that Holy serenity 
and joy which flow from the knowledge that all your sins have been washed away in 
His most precious blood, and that now you stand before God, accepted and acceptable 
“in the Beloved,” Rom. 5:2; Eph. 1:6. Communion with God in Christ is the secret 
of effective service. 

Beware of putting your own deductions from Scripture, and your reasonings about 
Scripture, in the place of God’sown Word. Donotconfoundthem. Give prominence 
to the words of inspiration. God's truth is not conveyed to us in words which man’s 
wisdom has taught, but which the Holy Ghost has taught, 1 Cor. 2:13. Much as you 
may say by way of explanation, come back to God’s own Word, and place confidence 
in it, as that which the Holy Ghost brings home to the conviction and conversion of 
the sinner. “The Sword of the Spirit is the Word of God.” 

Avoid long, vague, desultory conversations on a variety of subjects. It may be 
wise, On some occasions, to dwell on only one truth at a time. If the ear be not 
opened to hear, you gain nothing by a multiplicity of words and arguments, and you 
are thereby in danger of losing power, and of lowering the authority of Divine truth. 
A few words spoken on the solemn authority of God’s Word, are better than ten 
thousand in your own wisdom. 

Cherish tenderness towards others, remembering you are yourself a brand plucked 
from the burning—a cebtor to God’s sovereign grace. Never resent indignity or 
insult. Be clothed with the meekness and gentleness of Christ. You are unfit to be 
engaged in your Master’s work, if you cannot render “ blessing” for “cursing.” What- 
ever obloquy you may be called on to endure, bear it patiently, as from those who are 
not “in their right mind.” 

Finally, avoid everything which would grieve the Spirit of God; and let it be 
your constant aim to glorify Jesus ; so will the Lord honor your work, and give you a 
crown of rejoicing in the day of glory. 

“They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and 
ever.” Dan. 12:2. 


‘nture to 
it of the 
id others 
serenity 
away in 
ceptable 
the secret 


gs about 
minence 
ch man’s 
h as you 
nfidence 
ersion of 


may be 
r be not 
and you 
ne truth. 
than ten ‘ 


plucked | 
ignity or 
fit to be i 


wae ff “RAGMENTS THAT REMAIN... 


let it be 
ve youa 


‘ver and 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 


LEAVEN, 
By Mrs. George C. Needham. 


haga of Scripture, leaven is known as a corrupt, fermenting agent. It is 
employed in Scripture to symbolize that which is evil. With a few special 
exceptions, it was forbidden in the offerings of the Old Testament, Lev. 2:11. Like 
honey, its fermenting property disqualified it for Jehovah’s use. Salt, its opposite 
ard counteractant, was, however, never wanting in the sacrifices. 

Leaven, as set forth in Scripture, is somewhat remarkably associated with tne 
number three. It possesses Aree distinct characteristics : it is secret, diffusive, and 
contaminating. Then, ¢4rvee kinds of leaven are méntioned and warned against : the 
leaven of the Pharisees, the leaven of the Sadducees, and the leaven of Herod, Matt. 
16:6; Mark 8:15. Again, ¢iree definitions are given of typical leaven: it is false 
doctrine; it is hypocrisy; it is malice, Matt. 21:12; Luke 12:1; 1 Cor. §:8. 
While in the parable, the leaven, whatsoever that may be, was hid in ¢Avee measures 
of meal, Matt. 13 : 33. 

As to the New Testament use of the word leaven, we are not left to speculation 
concerning its application. Our Lord Jesus has Himself expressly explained it. We 
have Him saying, “ How is it that you do not understand that I spake it not to you 
concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the 
Sadducees? Then understood they how that he bade them not beware of the leaven 
of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees,” Matt. 16 : 11, 12. 

In connection with the threefold peculiarities of typical leaven we have just 
noted, let us observe how closely these characteristics are associated with ¢hvee cardinal 
Chg of Scripture, viz.: the Christian’s /azth, the Christian’s hope, and the Christian’s 
ove. 

I. The leaven of the Pharisees was hypocrisy. It invelved strenuous 
law-keeping, and external righteousness. It was a religion of ceremony, selfishness, 
and pride. It exalted the traditions of men, and made worthless the command- 
meats of God. Thus the leaven which our Lord cautioned against was a principle, 
which virtually by its teachings ¢gnored faith, and put sinful man upon the basis of 
meritorious works to effect his salvation. 

II. The léaven of the Sadducees was false doctrine. “For the Sadducees 
- there by no resurrection, neither angel nor spirit ; but the Pharisees confess both, 

cts 23:8. : 

Thus their teaching tended directly to undermine the believer's hope ; which hope 
centres itself in the doctrine of a blessed resurrection out from among the dead. 


[243] 


244 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


Twice in the Acts we have Paul linking the hope and the resurrection together as 
component parts of the fact, Acts 23:6; 24:15. The same truth is repeated in 
Rom. 8 : 23, 24. We are waiting for the redemption of the body ; and that is desig- 
nated as our being saved by Aope. Now there is intrinsic difference between faith 
and hope—that faith is the experience of present. confidence, while hope involves 
future expectation. Faith relates to the veracity of the word; hope pertains to its 
fulfilment. To deny the resurrection is to falsify the promise of the Second Coming of 
the Lord Jesus ; for until He returns, the Scriptures teach, there will be no resurrec- 
tion of the dead, and no establishment of the Millennial Kingdom of Christ, wherein 
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob shall be manifested as alive from the dead before the 
God of the living. 

Thus the leaven cf the Sadducees tended to corrupt and ruin the most vital, as 
well as the most precious, essential of Christian belief—the redemption of the body at 
the Second Coming of Christ. 

III. The leaven of Herod was malice. Personal hatred against the personal 
Jesus and His followers made notorious the careers of each of the seven atrocious 
Herods of the New Testament. The leaven of the Herodians involved any deceit 
that would prejudice and draw away disciples from the Lord Jesus, The public 
question that they put to Him, “ Master, is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?” 
was intended to entangle Him in political controversy, and weaken His authority over 
His disciples, Mark 12: 14. 

The leaven of Herod then means, as pertaining to belie .s now, any influence 
which sensualizes the heart, or makes the soul disloyal to the Lord Jesus. Hate and 
love cannot exist together towards one person. The Lord has Himself stated that he 
that is not for Him is against Him. : 

The Jeaven of Herod deliberately aimed to contaminate the Christian’s /ove. 
Thus we perceive that these three forms of leaven are the corruptions of those three 
divine factors in our great salvation which the Spirit of God has linked together— 
“Faith, Hope, Charity,” 1 Cor. 13: 13. 

Now, while it is generally conceded that Scripture writers employ leaven as a type 
of wickedness, yet some maintain that the parable of the leavened meal is the excep- 
tion to the ordinary rule ; and that in Matt. 13: 13“leaven stands for the wholesome, 
permeating influences of the Gospel, which are to diffuse themselves throughout the 
world, 

? Let us examine this interestin. case in the light of a few analogous Scripture 
acts. 

I. In every other identical instance save this, leaven is unquestionably the repre- 
sentative of things defiling and corrupting. 

II. Wherever meal is introduced in Scripture, its effects are good, nutritious, and 
healing. With meal Gideon sought to refresh the angel of God, Judges 6:19. With 
meal Solomon garnished his royal tables, 1 Kings 17:15. With meal the prophet of 
Jehovah was sustained—he who might have as easily been fed on angels’ manna, had 
meal been too coarse food for him, 1 Kings 4:22. With meal the poison in the pot 
was Aceon 2 Kings 4:41. Nowhere in the Bible is any evil thing spoken of 
meal. ; 

Now if leaven represents the Gospel, then of course meal must mean the worl, 
since this world is the sphere to which the operations of the Gospel are directed. But 
just here we encounter a difficulty. Our parable, which promised to run so smoothly 
in this groove, swings off the track. 

The world, in Scripture, is everywhere condemned as an evil, dead, corrupting 
thing. Between it and the meal we fail to discover any corréspondences by which the 
one could with suitableness represent the other. Therefore, the moment we change the 
ordinary use of leaven, as found everywhere else in Scripture, to this exceptional one, 
it involves likewise the setting aside of the uniformly good signification of meal, for 
an exceptional and bad one. 


OF 2PM Sermo, 


—<——<—<—— 


ther as 
ated in 
, desig- 
mn faith 
nvolves 
s to its 
ming of 
esurrec- 
wherein 
fore the 


vital, as 
body at 


personal 
atrocious 
ry deceit 
1e public 
or not?” 
ority over 


influence 
Hate and 
ed that he 


ian’s Jove. 
rose three 
ogether— 


as a type 
he excep- 
holesome, 
ghout the 


scripture 


the repre- 


itious, and 
19. With 
prophet of 
anna, had 
in the pot 
spoken of 


the world, 
cted. But 
hy smoothly 


corrupting 
+ which the 
change the 
tional one, 
fF meal, for 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN, 245 


III. In Scripture, woman is the type of the Church, a figure repeatedly enforced 
by illustration and exhortation. Indeed, the wedded woman, vith ar devotion and 
her frailty, is the favorite type of the Holy Spirit for setting forti: Christ’s tenderness 
for those whom He has redeemed, and thé responsive love and faithfulness of the 
redeemed Church herself, 1 Cor. 6:17; Eph. § : 31, 32. 

According to the common interpretation, this parable teaches that the Church is 
taking the Gospel, and secretly filling the world with its power, and that in the end the 
whole world will be a completely Gospel-leavened mass. We should like to believe 
this were not unsurmountable difficulties in the way. The whole weight of Scripture 
testimony is diametrically opposed to such exegesis. The world is now living under 
the power of Satan, 1 John 5:19. Evil, and not good, is the active principle in the 
world, John 14: 30. 

The children of disobedience are far more numerous and aggressive than the 
children of righteousness. The character of this dispensation is an e/ective one. God 
is taking out of, not infusing into, the world, a people for His name. The preaching 
of the Gospel in this age is not for the conversion, 7.¢., the leavening of the world, but 
for a witness unto the world, and for a testimony against its evil. ‘Simeon hath 
declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles to take out of them a people for 
His name,” Acts 15 . 14. 

“This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world FOR A WITNESS 
unto all nations.” “ But after this, I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of 
David ;” then will “¢he vrestdue of men seek after the Lord,” Matt. 24:14; Acts 
15:16, 17. 

So far from looking for the universal spread of righteousness, as the Church nears 
the termination of her earthly history, 2 Thess. 2: 1-4; 2 Tim. 3:1, 2, the days 
occurring just before the flood areto be repeated. Sensuality and unbelief will abound. 
Wars and intricate political disturbances will transpire, great indifference and great 
scorning will be manifested towards true religion, along with wide-spread blindness 
concerning the actual condition of the world. For men will be puffed up and filled 
with conceit, each fancying that their scheme shall speedily prove the great panacea 
for earth’s multiplied woes, Luke 21: 25-28 ; 2 Peter 3 : 3, 4. 

It may be necessary to state here that the expression “ Kingdom of Heaven” 
refers to the age of grace, or rather to the mysteries pertaining to this Christian dispen- 
sation. It is a term broad “as the law,” which signified the whole run of the Jewish 
age. As before the advent of Messiah, Mosaism was the only access to Jehovah, so, 
since the Cross, the faith of Christendom has been the only way of approach to God 
the Father. Unless we comprehend this broad bearing of the expression, we never 
can grasp the scope of our Lord’s parables. In Matt. 13, throughout, he was illustrating 
what the Christian dispensation would be; a mixture of good and evil down to the 
end, which was finally to result in the casting out the bad by the divine agency of 
angelic messengers, Hence the chapter is a record of partial failure ; and a vein of 
badness pervades several of its parables. Tares were sown with good seed ; birds 
found a temporary lodging in the mustard tree ; leaven was secreted in the meal ; bad 
fish were taken with the good; stony ground, greedy fowl, scorching sunlight, and 
thorns interfered with the growth and fruitage of the crop sown. Not that we are to 
understand for one moment that the Gospel in its /a/ results, will in any sense be 
a failure. But this is the age in which the Prince of this world rules ; in which an 
enemy is contesting the claims of Christ ; in which we are not taught to expect results 

commensurate with effort ; and this thirteenth of Matthew is precisely the place where 
we are explained all this. By and by shall come a millennial dispensation, wherein 
Gospel-sowing shall produce sixty and an hundred-fold. Now it will not do to array 
these parables before us as a medical student might set up three or four skeletons, and 
go to counting the bones, expecting to find the same number of wrist and ankle and 
rib bones in each. The parables are i**!.er like scenic effects, drawn sometimes jn 
bold, spare outlines, and sometimes in :ninuter detail, as may be necessary. 


GOLD FROM OPIIIR. 


In the parables our Lord appears to aim at general impressions rather than close 
minutiz. So the whole of Matt. 13 is a series of wora pictures unfolding one promi- 
nent fact, viz. : The mixture of good and evil which shall pervade this Gospel age to 
theend. With the exception of the assumption that the parable of the leaven teaches 
otherwise, not one of the rest emphasizes the idea of Gospe? victory. All through: it is 
the Gospel contending with difficulty. 

Since such is unquestionably the teaching of the Word concerning the character 
of this Church dispensation at its close, let us ponder the Parable of the Leaven with 
docile and reverent mind. Is it legitimate to mar the complete symmetry of truth for 


one pet theory? Is it for the confirmation and strengthening of any dogma to dislo- ° 


cate Scripture, depriving it of its proper support of joints, bands and sinews? If 
leaven ordinarily stands for false doctrine ; if meal is uniformly connected with bene- 
ficial results ; if woman is the frequent type of the Church-—have we not in hand the 
line of a simple clue to a correct understanding of the whole bearing of the parable? 
And do not facts and common discernment both attest that even in our day the 
parable is being fulfilled before our own experience? Is not the Church, she who was 
appointed to feed on the “ unleavened bread of sincerity and truth,” taking the leaven 
of ritualism, spiritualism, and sensualism, offspring of Phariseeism, Sadduceeism, and 
Herodism, and therewith making unto herself idolatrous cakes? and by her loathing 
of God’s own manna, corrupting her own spiritual health. ; 

She who was espoused unto one Bridegroom has gone after many lovers. She 
who was to eat of consecrated bread in the Holy Place has gone out into the camp 
to play the glutton. And some of her ministers are like her. They are “speaking 
perverse things to draw away disciples after them.” They are “ dealing deceitfully 
with the Word of God, and corrupting it.” They have turned away from “ sound doc- 
trine unto fables.” They knowingly “give beed to seducing spirits and doctrines of 
’ demons.” Their ears itch and Hate for something newer and fresher than the old 
doctrines of grace, established in type and cffcring. 

Manifestly, the woman herself has done the mischief. And this leavening principle 
mixed with the truth, which is nothing else than a spirit of distaste for the pure, simple, 
strong Word of God, will not cease in its penetrating influence till the whole mass is 
corrupted ; and that which is now a secret, subtle agent, will be openly manifested in 
the apostate Maz. of Sin, whose climax of iniquity will be his avowed denial of God in 
His tri-personanty. 

Let us then disabuse our minds of pernicious prejudice, and as children of the light 
gaze with wide open eyes upon fact. 

Leaven, which in itself is corruption, can never be anything else than evil. The 
leaven commanded to be put into the wave loaves was to teach the same idea—imper- 
fection in both Jew and Gentile, Lev. 23:17. Hence the burnt offering which accom- 
panied them. 

Great is our danger, lest the things we have heard run out from us as leaking 
vessels. May the Word of Christ, unmixed with false doctrine, dwell in us richly, 
fortifying us against the deceits of the Adversary. And let us heed the injunction so 
pertinent to our times, “‘ BEWARE OF LEAVEN.” 


1 close 
promi- 
age to 
eaches 
gl: it is 


aracter 
en with 
ruth for — 
o dislo- 
is? If 
h bene- 
and the 
arable ? 
day the 
vho was 
e leaven 
ism, and 
loathing 


rs. She 
he camp 
speaking 
eceitfully 
und doc- 
ctrines of 
1 the old 


principle 
Ry simple, 
e mass 1S 
ifested in 
f God in 


the light 
il. The 


—imper- 
lh accom- 


s leaking 
us richly, 
ction so 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 247 


SANCTIFICATION. 


1. General definition of sanctification. 
1. To make clean judicially in God’s sight, 
Heb. 2:11; Heb, 10:14; Heb. 9:13, 14: 


Heb. 10:29; Heb. 10:10; Heb, 13: 12. | 


2. ‘To set apart, or consecrate after purify- 
ing, Eph. 5:26, 27; 2 Tim. 2: 21. 

3. To devote a person already holy to a 
divine purpose, John 17 : 17, 19; John 17:26; 
John 10: 36, 

4. All things are holy that are used for 
acknowledged sons of God, 1 Tim. 4: 4, 5, 

5. Character of Christians in Corinth, 
what they were, 1 Cor.6:9, 11. What they 
are, 1 Cor, 6:11. 

6. Duty to treat with reverence a person | 
or thing sanctified, Matt. 6:9; Ex. 28; 1 
Peter 3:15; Deut. 32: 51. 

7. As a state, or condition of being, the 
believer is before God in a permanent state 
of holiness, Acts 20:32; Eph. 5:27; Acts 
26:18: 2 Tim. 1:9; 1 Cor. 6:11; Heb, | 
3:1; 2 Cor.6:19; 3 John 1:7. When the | 
believer discovers and appreciates what he 
is before God, he has ‘‘Rest in faith," or | 
“Holiness.” 

8. That man does not acquire perfection 
js inferred: (a) The exhortations in every 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
! 
i 


epistle. (6) The need of a high priest to in- 
tercede for believers. (c) Typical teaching 
of the mitre of the high priest. (d) Sin-water, 
under the old dispensation. 
the meat offering for the people. (f) Ex- 
perience of saints in all ages. (g) A deeper 
knowledge of the Scriptures, opening higher 
states of holiness. 


(e) Leaven in 


Il. How is the Scripture state of holi- 
ness brought about by God so that we can 
say we are holy? 

1. By uniting us with what is holy, Matt. 
23:17, 19; 1 Cor. 7:14; Eph. 
Cor, 1: 30; Col. 1: 22. 

2. Saints are in a permanent state of 
sanctification, 1 John 4:17. 

3. This permanent state of sar.ctitication 
before God should be realized by the believer 


rigg t 


in his own experience, Rom. 6:29, 22; 1 
Thess, 4:3, 7; 2 Cor.7:1; 1 Thess. 5:22, 
23; Thess. 3:72, 74. 

4. The believer should be in life what he 
is in fact before God, 1 Cor. 5:7,8; Heb. 
t2:%4; 1 Peter 1:22; 23; Rom. 12:1; 1 
Cor, 3:17; compare with Num. 19: 13, a2; 
Num, 5:3; Lev. 15:31; Enh. gi”. Tol. 
he eee 

TIX. Sanctification is by the Hi vy Syu.i. 

1. The Holy Spirit takes charg. >t . re 
believer in everything, for ed cation of holi- 
ness, John 3:5; 1 Pet. 1:2; 1 Cor. 6211; 
Titus 3:5,6. General leading of *liever 
by the Holy Spirit, Rom. 8:24; Phil. x29, 

a. The Holy Spirit specially as an agent, 
Eph. 4:30; 1 Cor, 3:16. Heuses the word 
of truth as a means of sanctification, John 
75:26; john 16:13, 14. All things are 
given by the Holy Spirit, 1 Cor, 2:12; x 
Cor. 1: 30, 

3. The Holy Spirit as the agent uses the 
word as the means, pointing tae believer to 
finished realities which are in Christ, true of 
the believer, 1 Cor. 5: 7,8; Eph. 3:16, 20; 
Gal. 5:24; Gal. 2:20; 2 Cor. 12:9; Kom. 
6; 1 Cor, 6:19; Eph. §: 1,2; 2 John 3:1, 
3; Rom. t2:1; Titus 2:12, 14; Col. 5:9, 
Xt, Fa, 45 John 29 Yx7. 29! 2. Cor. 38s 
John 10:36; 2 Cor. 4:49, 18; John 17:6, 
26; Eph. 1:16, 23; 1 Peter 2:9; Eph. 
1:4, 6. 

IV. The believer's full grown soaship. 

Rom, 8:23; John 14:16; John 20:17; 
Acts 2:23, John 20:23; Gal. 4.4,7; Eph. 
1:5; Heb. 2:10, 13; Gal. 4:5; Gal. 4:6; 
Rom. 8:15, 23; Rom. 8:15, 16. 

V. The two natures. 

Natureis thesum of the qualities that belong 
to 9. person or thing, inherently, Person is 
a distinctive thing identified with a nature. 

1, The flesh, Isaiah go: 6, 7; Rom. §:3; 
John 1:14; Rom. 8:6, & 

2, The flesh and the spirit ; their character, 


| works, and fruits, Gal. 5: 37,26; John x: 13) 


248 


Gal. 6:8; John 3:6; Rom. 8:5,9; 1 John 
3:4,10; Rom. 7: 18. 

3. The old man and the new: their 
character and deeds, Eph. 4:20, 22; Col. 
3:14. 

4. The natural man and the spiritual man, 
1 Cor. 2:12, 14; James 3:15; 1Cor, 3:1, 4; 
Jude 19. 

5. The evil man and heart; and the good 
man and his heart, Matt. 15:18, 20; Matt. 


12: 33, 35- 


6. The flesh and the spirit are like realms, 


or spheres, in which we live, Gal. 5:16, 18; 
Rom. 8: 4, 8; Gal. 5:25. 

7. Before God the sphere of the flesh has 
been swept away by the cross, Gal 5:24; 
Eph. 2:1, 5; Gal. 2:20; Col, 2:11, 13; 


GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


Gal. 6:14: x Cor. 1:18, 24; Rom. 8:3; 1 
Cor, 4:20; Rom. 6:6. 

8. All the sins ofthe believer were atoned 
for once for all by Christ, Rom. 3:23, 26; 
Heb. 9: 25, 26. 

9. Let believers live and walk in the 
Spirit, and they shall not fulfil the lusts of 
the flesh. Such a life is one of holiness, 
Gal. 5:25; Col. 1:12, 14; Rom. 8; 4, 8, 12; 
Col. 3:1, 5; Gal. 5:16, 18; Rom, 6:11, 13. 

VI. Walk as Christ walked. 

Heb. 2:10; Acts 3:15; Heb. 12:2; Acts 
5:31. Thesame word is used in these four 
passages, Christ is the princely leader of His 
people from this world beyond to a common 
heritage, where they will be crowned with 
Him, W. J. ERDMAN. 


THINGS WORTH HAVING. 


1 Tim. 4: 1-9. 


I. Peace with God. 

‘Therefore being justified by faith we 
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ,” Rom. 5:1; Col. 1:20; Luke 1: 79; 
2:14; John 14:27; 16:33; 20:19, 21, 26; 
Acts 10:36; Eph. 2:14-17; <sa 25:3. 

II, Redemption. 

‘In whom we have redemption through 
His blood, the forgiveness of sins according 
to the riches of His grace,"" Eph. 1:7; Rom. 
3:24; 1 Cor. 1 Jo; Heb. 9:12; 1 Peter 
1:18, 19; Tit. 2:14; Ps. r11:9; 130:7; 
Rev. 5:9. 

III. An high priest. 

‘We have such an high priest who is set 
on the right hand of the throne of the 
Majesty in the ‘heavens,’ Heb, 8:1; 2:17, 
18; 3:13 4:14-163 5°13, 2; 7:2%-27;9:24; 
13:11, 12; Ex, 28:12, 29, 38; Mal. 2:7; 
Rev. 8: 3, 4. 

IV. Access to the throne of grace. 

‘Through Him we both have access by 
one Spirit unto the Father,"" Eph. 2:18; 
3:12; Heb.10: 19-22; Rom. 5:2; John 
10:7-9; 14:6; x Peter 3:18; 1 John2:1,2; 
John 14: 13, 14. 


V. A well grounded hope. 

‘‘ Which hope we have as an anchor of the 
soul, both sure and steadfast, and which 
entereth into that within the veil,’ Heb. 
6:19; Rom. 5:5; 8:23, 243 12:123 15:4, 
13; Col. 1:5; 1 Thess. 2:19; 5:18; Tit. 
2:13; 1 Peter r:3; 1 John3:2, 3. 


VI. A building of God. 


"We know that if our earthly house of 
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a 
building of God, an house not made with 
hands, eternal in the heavens,"’ 2 Cor. 5:1; 
Jno. 14:2, 3; Luke 10:20; Matt. 6:20; 
Acts 7:55; Phil. 3:20, 21; Heb. 10:34; 
11:16; 13:14; x Thess. 4: 14-18. 


VII. A right to the tree of life. 


'* Blessed are they that have washed their 
robes [see Revised Version], that they may 
have right to the tree of life, and may enter 
in through the gates into’ the city,'’ Rev. 
22: tg; 263 Bigt gt tay & Jae. 5: 18.33; 
Prov. 3: 13-18; 13:12; Luke 23:43; Jno. 
1o:1; Acts 4:12; Heb. rr: 10, 


J. H. BROOKES. 


8:3; 1 


atoned 
23, 26; 


in the 
lusts of 
oliness, 
1, 8, 12; 
311, 53. 


2; Acts 
ese four 
r of His 
common 
1ed with 
MAN. 


hor of the 
hd which 
il,’ Heb. 
23 15:4, 
k 18; Tit. 


house of 
bh have a 
lade with 
or. 5:1; 
. 6:20; 

10:34; 


hed their 
hey may 
hay enter 
ly,’ Rev 
:14,.13; 
433, Jno. 


DKES. 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 249 


THINGS WORTH KNOWING. 


1 Thess. 1: 1-5. 


I, The worthlessness of the flesh or the 
badness of everything belonging to the 
nature with which we are born into the 
world. 

“I know that in me (that is in my flesh), 
dwelleth no good thing," Rom. 7:18; 8:7, 
8; Gal. 5: 19-21; Phil. 3:3; Eph. 2:1-3; 
John 3:5,6; Gen. 6:5; Job 14:4; Ps. 
51:5; Isa. 64:6; Jer. 17:9. 

II. The love of God for us. 

‘“We have known and believed the love 
that God hath to us,” 1 Jno. 4:16; Jno, 
3:16; Rom. 5:8; 2 Thess. 2:16; Eph. 
2:4-6; Tit. 3:4, 5; 1 Jno. 4: 8-10; Deut. 
7:7,8; 1 Kings 10:9; Isa, 63:9; Jer. 
Cate 

III. The grace of Jesus Christ our 
Lord. 

““Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that, thoug! He was rich, yet for 
your sakes he became poor, that ye through 
His poverty might be rich,’ 2 Cor. 8:9; 
Acts 15:11; Rom. 3:24-26; 5:20, 21; 
11:6; Gal. 1:6; Eph. 2:8; 2 Cor. 12:9; 
Rev. 22: 21. 

IV. The Holy Spirit. 

“The S) rit of truth whom the world can- 
not receive, because it seeth Him not, 
neither knoweth Him; ut ye know Him; 
for He | welleth with you, andshall-bein you," 


John 14:17; 15:26; 16:7-13; Acts 1:8; 
5:31, 32; 9:31; 10:44; Rom, 8:2, 9, 11, 
14, 16, 26; r Cor. 2:9-14; 2 Cor. 1:22; 
Gal. 4:6, 7. 

V. That we have eternal life. 

“These things have I written unto you 
that believe on the name of the Son of God, 
that ye may know that ye have eternal life,’ 
I Jno. 5:13; John 3:15, 36; 5:24; 6:40, 
47; 10°28; 17:2, 3; Rom. 6: 23; Gal. 6:8; 
THe Ft -ap gers t lon. ris, 2s ares: 
git, 

VI. That all things work together for 
our good. 

‘We know that all things work together 
for good to them that love God, to them 
who are the called according to His pur- 
pose,” Rom. 8:28; Gen. 1: 20; Deut. 8:3, 
16; Ps, 46:1-3; Prov. 18:10; 2 Cor. 4: 15- 
17; Phil. 1:19; Heb. 12: 6-11; Jas. 1: 2-4; 
Rom. 8: 35-39. 


VII. That a happy resurrection awaits 
us at the coming of the Lord. 

‘T know that He shall arise again in the 
resurrection at the last day," Jno. 11324; 
Isa. 25:8; 26:19; Dan. 12:2; Hos, 13:14; 
Matt. 22:29, 32; Luke 14:14; Jno, 5: 28, 
29; Acts 17:31, 32; 24:15; 1 Cor, 15:20, 
23, 42, 43; 1 Thess. 4: 13-18. 

J. H. BROOKES. 


THE GOOD SHEPHERD. 


Read Ps, 23. 


I. ‘Our Lord Jesus Christ, that great 
Shepherd of ‘he sheep,'’ Heb. 13: 20. 

II. He died for them, John ro: 11. 

III. Sought \hum, Ezek, 34: 11, 12; Matt. 
19: 12. 


IV. Takes care of them, Ps. 23:1, 2; Isa. 
40: 10, Il. 

V. Leads them, John ro: 3. 
’ VI. With them in death, Ps. 23: 4. 

VII. In glory,.Rev. 7: 16, 17. 


RT RG ETT MSE NE ENA Ri USEING 


250 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


SINS WITHHOLDING GOOD FROM US. 


Jeremiah was a faithful servant of God, 
and he declared to his people the whole 
counsel of God. Have you ever read through 
his prophecies? They are both tonic and 
stimulating. It is well to bring our spiritual 
nature under the influence of them. In one 
of his noble sermons, he says to the people, 
chap. 5:23: ‘' Your iniquities have turned 
away these things, and your sins have with- 
holden good things from you."' How sugges- 
tive that is! And how much we need to see 
it, for it is a side of the precious truth we do 
not often think of, notwithstanding that our 
experience of the fact stated here is so 
frequent. We are so to learn. And God 
mercifully gives us line upon line, precept 
upon precept, here a little and there a little. 
How then does sin withhold good things 
from us ? 


I. Sin cuts us off from the fountain of 
blessing, Isa. 59:2, f.c.; Jer. 2:12, 13; 
Jer. 17:13; Micah 3:4; Jer. 8:18. 

II. Sin changes our taste for, and our 
relish of good things, Rom. 1:21; Eph. 
4:18, 19; Jer. 4:22. 

III. Sin renders us unfit to receive 
blessings, Rom. 1 : 24, 25; Matt. 23: 37, 38. 

IV. Sin keeps back blessing from us, 
Isa. 59: 2, (second clause) ; Jer. 16:5; Jer. 
8:9. : 

V. Sin causes us to abuse even the good 
we receive, Jer. 7: 10, 11; Rom. 1: 23, 

VI, Sin brings spiritual death, Rom. 
5:12; Rom. 6: 23. 

Oh, how we shouid hate sin and turn away 
from it—and when it is upon us flee to the 
fountain of cleansing, « Jno. 1: 9. 

J. A. R. DICKSON. 


THE WAY. 


Read Heb, 10: 19-22; ‘‘I am the way,"' John 14 36. 


I. Many ways to hell, Juderr; Matt.7: 13. 

II. One way to heaven, John 10: 2. 

III. Jesus the way of holiness, Isa, 35: 8; 
Heb. 12:14. 


FRUIT BEARING. 


IV. Living way, Heb. 7: 25. 

V. Declared in the Gospel, Acts 16: 17. 

VI. Will be guided in the way, Isa: 30: 31; 
Job 17:9. 


John 15 :1-16. 


To abide in Christ is to remain just where | 


we were the day we trusted in Him as our 
Saviour, not losing faith in Him, nor the 
sense of our dependence upon His grace. So 
abiding in Him seven results follow. 

I. Fruit. 

“He that abideth in Me and I in Him, the 
same bringeth forth much fruit ; for without 
Me ye can do nothing,"’ verses 5,8; Matt. 
3:8; 7316-20; 21 43; John 4:36; Rom. 


6:21, 2@; Gxt. §:22, 23; Phil. r: 123 4:173. 


Heb, 12:11; 13:15; James 3:17, 18. 


Ii, Answered prayer. 

“If ye abide in me and my words abide 
in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall 
be done unto you,” verse 7; John 14:13, 


14; Matt. 21; 22; Mark 11:24; Luke 1rr:9- 


13; 18:1; Rom, 12:12; Eph. 6:18; 1 Thess. 
5:17; James 5:16-18; 1 Jno. 5:14, 15. 

III. Love. 

‘‘ As the Father hath loved me, so have I 
loved you; abide ye in my love,’’ verse 9; 
Revised Version: John 3:16; 17:23, 26; 
Rom, 5: 8-10; 8: 35-39; Eph. 2: 4-6; 3:17- 


of 


iin of 
» 133 


id our 
Eph. 


eceive 
37, 38: 
ym us, 
5; jer. 


e good 
23. 
Rom. 


rn away 
e to the 


SON. 


. 30:31, 


ids abide 
H it shall 
nh 14:13, 
hke LI :9- 

1 hess. 


15. 


b have I 
verse 9} 
: 23, 26; 

} 3117- 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 251 


19; 5:25-27; 2 Cor. 5:14,15; Gal.2:2c°' VI. Fellowship. 


I Jno. 4: 8-10, 19. 


IV. Obedience. 

‘If ye keep my commandments ye shall 
abide in my love ; even as I have kept my 
Father's commandments and abide in His 
love,’ verse 10; Luke 6: 46-49; Jno. 14: 2I1- 
23; Rom.6:16-18; 1 Cor. 7:19; 2 Cor. 


7:1; Eph. 5:1,2; 1 Thess.4:1; 2 Thess. |, 


1:8; 1 Peter 1: 14-16; 1 Jno.2:4, 53 3:22, 22. 


V. Joy. 

‘These things have I spoken +o you, 
that my joy in you might abide, and that 
your joy might be full,’ verse 11 (literal) ; 
Luke 2:10; 10:17, 20; Jno. 16:22, 24; 
Rom. 5:1, 23 14:17; 15:13; Phil. 4:4; 
1 Thess. 5:16; 1 Peter 1:5-8; 1 John 1: 1-4. 


‘Henceforth I call you not servants; for 
the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth; 
but I have called you friends; for all things 
that I have heard of my Father I have made 
known unto you,"’ verse 15; John 20:17; 
Matt. 12:50; Luke 12:41; Rom. 8:29; 
Heb. 2:11, 12; 1 Cor. 1:9: Eph. 1: 22, 23; 
5:30; 1 John 4:17. 

VII. Abiding fruit. 

‘Ye have not chosen me, but I have 
chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should 
go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit 
should abide,” verse 16; Ps. 1:3; 92:12- 
14; Prov. 11:30; Isa. 3: 10; Hos. 14:8; 2 
Cor.9:10; Rom. 7:4-6; Col. 1:10; Jas. 
5:7, 8; Rev. 22: 1-3. 

J. H. BROOKES. 


4 
HINDRANCES TO PRAYER. 


Text: “That your prayers be not hindered,” 1 Peter 3:7. 


Failure to obtain blessings sought in prayer 
not only robs and injures us and others, but 
dishonors God. We cannot, then, too care- 
fully seek to know how our prayers may be 
hindered, or too earnestly strive to avoid such 
hindrances. 

I. What reasons are given in the word 
of God for withholding answers to some 
prayers ? 

See Isa. 59:1, 2; Mark 11:25, 26; Ps. 
138:6; Matt.6:5; Jas.4:3; 1Sam.16:7; 
Ps. 66; 18. 


II. Is the fact that the results of prayer 
which are not immediately seen any proof 
that it is not, or will not be answered ? 

See and compare Job 30:20 with 42:8; 
Matt. 15:21-28; 2 Cor. 12:7-9; 1 Peter 
1:7; Jas. I: 3-4. 

III. What is the right course when the 
answer to prayer is or seems to be delayed ? 

See 1 Peter 5:6, 7; Dan. 9:23; Isa. 
58: 3-14; Gen. 32: 26, with Hosea 12: 4-6; 
Ps, 40:1, and 27:14. 


JUSTIFICATION. 


I, We are justified by Gop, the Author of 
it, Rom. 3: 26. 

II, We are justified by Grace, the Source 
of it, Rom. 3:24, 

III. We arejustified by BLoop, the Ground 
of it, Rom. 5:9. 


IV. We are justified by ResurREcTION, 
the Acknowledgment of it, Rom. 4: 25. 

V. Weare justified by Faitn, the Principle 
of it, Rom. 5:1. 

VI. We are justified by Works, the Mani- 


festation of it, Jas. 2: 14-26. 


Romans is the exhibition of the gospel of 
God, chap. 1/1. It is a treatise from the 
pen of inspiration upon the question: ‘‘ How 
can a man be justified with God?" Job 
25:4. 

This epistle takes man as it finds him, with. 
and without religion, and never leaves him 
till it sets him down “‘ just with God.” 

The first seventeen verses may be looked 
upon as the introduction. From verse 18 
to 32 we have man without law, without 
religion; left to the teachings of nature, Acts 
17°30; Acts 14: 14-17. 

Chap. II. Man with the law—with re- 
ligion. 

Chap. III. God's verdict of both, last 
clause of 22nd verse and 23rd vérse. ‘All 
have sinned and come short of the glory of 
God." See also Rom. 5:8. ‘‘Enemies,” 
Rom. 11:32. ‘‘ Shut up in unbelief.” 

Chap. IV. $ustification by faith without 
works, Eph. 2:9. 

Chap. V. ‘‘ Ungodly,” ‘‘Sinners,” ‘* Ene- 
mies,"’ are justified by faith, not for faith. 

Chap. VI. Dead to sin by virtue of our 
union with a dead and risen Christ. 

Chap. VII. Loosed from the old husband 
—the law—and married to another. Read 


GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


STUDIES IN THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. 


6th verse: ‘‘ But now weare loosed from the 
law, having died to that wherein we were 
held,’ etc. Alford. . 

Chap. VIII. God for us, 31st verse ; Christ 
for us, verse 34; Spirit for us, verse 26. 
Therefore no condemnation, 8:1; John 5: 
24, and no separation, verse 35 and verse 39, 
with Jude 24. 

Chap. IX, The answer to the question: 
‘Are the promises of God to Israel made 
void by the calling of the Gentiles ? 

Chap. X. Israel's rejection of Christ. 

Chap. XI. God's Jewish bride disowned, 
Isa. 54:5, 6,- until the ‘‘Fulness of the 
Gentiles be come in,’’ verse 25, 7.e., the 
gathering out in grace of a bride to Christ. 

Chap. XII, Practical consecration of 
justified ones; ministry to God, to the 
Church, to the world. 

Chap. XIII. Holy living in view of the 
appearing of Jesus. The aspect of our walk 
toward the world. 

Chap. XIV. Theaspect of our walk toward 

ir brethren. 

Chap. XV, Church fellowship, and fellow- 

ship in the gospel. 

Chap. XVI. God's interest in every mem- 
ber of His family. R. M’J., Jr. 


JESUS, THE FRIEND. . 


. The sinner's friend, Matt. 11:19. 
. My friend, Cant. 5: 16. 
. Who satisfies, Cant. 5:1. 
4. Who sticketh closer than a brother, 
Prov. 18:24. 
5.. The unchanging friend, Prov. 17 ; 17. 
6. Thesurety, Prov. 6:1. 
7. Who dies, John 15: 13. 
8. Who reproves, Prov. 27: 6. 


WwW bd He 


9g. Who counsels, Prov, 27:9, 10. 

to. Communion, Prov. 27: 17. 

11. Resurrection, John 11:11. 

My Beloved is my friend. Christians need 
an object for their heart. Joy clings, 17 
Matt, Jesus only. His photograph: alto- 
gether lovely. My beloved. No fear. 


Welcome. Paul. Loved me. My friend. 


HENRY MOOREHOUSE. 


ft Yn =: ~~, 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 253 


JOSEPH—JESUS. 


n the By Alf. Sandham. 
were 
JOSEPH. Jesus, 
*hrist The Well Beloved......... avekel Canwas - Gen. 7.8 Luke 3 : 22. 
» 26. Sent to seek missing ones................ 15-16 Luke 19 : Io. 
an §: Sent by his father with a message of love.. “ 14 John 3: 16. 
: Was a willing messenger..........+. 4... 5 13 Heb. 10:7. 
Se 39) Did not cease his journey till he came to 
where they were...........cceeee cece Oo AGA Phil. 2 : 7,8. 
stion : Found them at Dothan (the “law” or 
made POSTE Oss ie co 'e View en Che POLED xi 17 Gal. 3: 13. 
OVC lice iki ccenrerdsemeeuices its II Mark 15; Io. 
A Hated because he testified against them 
nh. {4 ra 
4 CAE CIRNSO) oc. Fagan cease kieses John 7:7. 
duis The more he spake of his coming supe- 
of the riority, the more they hated him....... :) John 8 : 59. 
¢., the Conspired against, to be slain............ §f 18 John 5:18, 
hrist. Plans laid to deceive as to his disappearance “ 31, etc. Matt. 28 : 13, 14. 
on of Brethren said, “ See what will become of his 
to the GOMER eiviir sce) 6 ag cee t arene tiers “ Mark 15 : 29. 
Sold by advice of one of his brethren 
“ Judah” (Judah, Hebrew; Judas,Greek) “ 26, 27 Mark 14: 10, 20. 
of the Those who sold him acknowledged they had ‘ 
nr walk BNO er CCR ERORRL>. RES GR “ 42:21,22 Matt. 27 : 4. 
‘ Endured temptation untainted............ 39:7-14 Heb. 4:15; 
toward Luke 4 : 1-13. 
Was faisely condemned........... ieup co: See Matt. 26:59, 60; 
fellow- Luke 23: 14, 15. 
Was numbered with transgressors........ “ 40:2, 3 Isa. 53: 12; 
Matt, 27 : 38. 
y mem- 
» JR. send 


: LILIES. 
By Miss Katie A. Clarke. 
‘ Consider the Lilies," Luke 12 : 27, 


OD must have thought it worth our while studying flowers, or surely He would not 

have given such a command. _If we bear in mind that “a// Scripture is given by 
inspiration—and is profitable,” even apparently unimportant passages must contain 
some lessons ; the Holy Spirit only opens our eyes to behold the wondrous things in 
God’s Book. ‘“Consider”—the Greek would read “perceive distinct!ly—learn 
thoroughly.” 

The lily is mentioned seven times in the Bible, (not including parallel passages.) 

1. Christ—the Lily of the Valley. Song of Solomon 2:1. 

2. Christ—His sweetness, lips like lilies. Song of Solomon 5 : 13. 

3. Christ—feeds a..ong His lilies.” Song of Solomon 2 : 16. 

4. Christ—gathers His lilies. Song of Solomon 6: 2. 


254 GOLD FROM OPHIK. 


5. Church—a lily among thorns. Song af So!omon 2: 2, 

6. Christian—shall grow as.a lily. Hosea r4: 5. 

7. Christian—learn to trust from the lilies. Mati. 6 : 28 

There are many varieties of this flower. Let us consider a few of them and try 
and gather some precious lessons. 

f. The Lily of the Valley.—emblematic of Jesus Christ—“ I am the Lilyof the 
Valley,” S. of S.2:1. As its pure sweet blossom is almost hidden among the dark 
leaves, so the beauty of Jesus is invisible to those who do not seek for Him. “He 
hath no form or comeliness,” “no beauty that we should desire Him,” but to those 
who find Him, Heis “the Lily of the Valley ”—“ the fairest among ten thousand,” 
“the altogether lovely one.” It is a low-growing plant—those who would gather its 
blossom must stoop. So Jesus “humbled Himself even unto death”—and all who 
wish to be partakers in His exaltation must first partake of His humiliation. “He 
that humbleth himself shall be exalted.” Low at His cross we will grow sweet. We 
become like those whom we love and with whom we most associate. 

II. The Lilies of the Field,—These speak to us of God’s loving care for His 
children—“ If He so clothe the grass shall He not clothe you?” He looks after, tends 
and beautifies the wild lily of the field, and shall He not care for His own? “Are we 
not much better than they?” Therefore let us “be anxious for nothing,” Phil. 4 :6, 
(R.V.), for “your Father knoweth what things we have need of,” Matt.6:32. “Have 
faith in God” and “rest in His love.” 

Ill. The Lily of the Garden.—Referred to in the Song of Solomon as typical 
of the Church of Christ or the individual believer—purchased by the Gardener— 
planted by His hand on His own premises, watched over, pruned, watered, and at last 
gathered, when it has reached perfection, adorn His own palace or be worn in His 
bosom. So the Christian—bought with His precious blood—planted in His garden— 
watered by His word—(Hos. 14:5), pruned by afflictions, is to grow, sweet, pure, 
beautiful, as the cultivated lily—so that at last the Gardener can say, as He gazes on 
the perfect blossom, ‘‘ Thou art all fair, my love,” and stooping, gathers His lily to 
bloom more abundantly in the richer soil above. 

IV. The Haster Lily.—Blossoming in its annual beauty at the Easter tide— 
fit emblem of our coming glorious resurrection. “Except a seed die it remaineth 
alone ; if it die it bringeth forth fruit.” Jesus died—and Jesus lives—and every leaf 
is witness of His resurrection—every flower a silent messenger from Him who made 
it, and the language of every Easter lily is, ‘‘ He was dead, He is alive forever more, 
and because He lives we ‘hall live also.” 

V. The Water Lily.—Its beautiful snowy leaves seem to‘repeat again and 
again the words of Jesus, “ Consider the lilies—even Solomon in all his glory was not 
arrayed like one of these.” It floats above the water where it can be seen, but its root 
is deep down in the earth, so the believer must have the foundation “ within the veil ” 
—our citizenship is in Heaven.” It is pure and sweet—and the Christian is perfect 
through the comeliness of Christ, Ezek. 16:14. Gather a water lily in full bloom, but 
put it in the dark, and it soon closes; so the follower of Jesus cannot and need not live 
in the shade; the Sun of Righteousness is ever brightly shining. It is also worth a 
thought that as the water lly cannot live in the dark, neither can it live without water. 
No more can the Christian live without the water of the Word. We cannot gather the 
lily off any other kind of plant, so neither can we have the sweet qualities of the lily 
without constantly and faithfully communing with and following after our Great 
Example, “The Lily of the Valley.” Let us “learn of Him who is meek and lowly of 
heart,” and as we learn we unconsciously grow like Him, so that as our Beloved walks 
among His lilies, He may be satisfied with the fruit of His labor. 


nd try 


-of the 
> dark 

“ He 
. those 
isand,” 
her its 
ill who 

“ He 
t. We 


for His 
r, tends 
Are we 
il. 4:6, 
“Have 


3 typical 
‘dener— 
d at last 
1 in His 
rarden— 
et, pure, 
bazes On 
5 lily to 


r tide— 
maineth 
ery leaf 
ho made 
br more, 


ain and 
was not 

its root 
he veil ” 

perfect 
bom, but 
not live 
worth a 
ht water. 
ther the 
the lily 
r Great 
lowly of 
d walks 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 


GOSPEL TEMPERANCE HINTS. 


1, Licensing murder, Esther 3. 
2. Wine in and wit out, Esther r. 


3. Drunkenness and defeat, 1 Kings 20: 12- 


21; 16: 8-10. 
4. Money and your life, 1 Kings 21. 


5. The money interests of wrong-doing, ro 


Acts 19: 23-34. 


6. The woes of wine, Isa. 5 : 10-25; 10: 1-3. 


7. License laws, Isa. 28: 1-7, 13-22. 
8. ‘‘Rum, and old Jeroboam,” 2 Kings, 
15:27-29; 1736-23. 
g. The physical benefits of temperance, 
Dan, 1 : 8-20. 
. Intemperance and sacrilege, Dan. 5. 
11. Rumsellers as robbers, 1 Kings 20: 1-9, 
12. Wisdom and wine, Prov. 2: 10-22. 


HARMONIES AND CONTRASTS IN GENESIS 
AND REVELATION. 


By Miss Katie Clarke. 


I, HARMONY. 


Genesis. 


‘‘The Tree of life in the midst of the 


Garden,"' Gen. 2:9. 
Precious stones, Genesis 2: 12. 


The gold of that land is good, Gen. 2: 12. 


God walked in the garden, ‘Gen. 3: 8. 
No need of Temple, Gen. 3: 8. 


A river flowing through the garden, Gen. 


2:10, 


Adam gave names to every creature, Gen. 


2:20, 
First rainbow, Genesis 9: 13. 
Lamb—First recorded sacrifice, Gen, 4 : 4. 
Man made in God's likeness, Gen. 1 : 27. 


All that is pleasant to the eye, Gen. 2: 9. 


‘All that is good for food,"’ Gen. 2:9. 

Judgment on Sodom and Gomorrah, Gen. 
19: 24. : 

Marriage of first Adam—his bride, part of 
his. own life, taken from his side while he 
was asleep, Gen. 2 : 21-25. 


Revelation. 


‘In the midst . . . the tree of life,”’ Rev. 
22:2, and 2:7. 

‘‘ Garnished with all manner of precious 
stones,’’ Rev. 21: 19. 

The streets of the city were pure gold, 
Rev. 21: 18. 

God dwells with His people, Rev. 21: 3. 

‘‘No Temple therein,’’ Rev. 21: 22. 

‘A pure river of water of life," Rev. 22: 1. 


Christ gives a new name, Rev. 2:17; 3:12. 


Rainbow round the throne, Rev. 4 : 3. 

‘‘ Lamb as it had been slain,’’ Rev. 5:6. 

Complete in His likeness, Rev. 22:4; Ps. 
VETS 2 

‘Eye hath not seen—what God hath pre- 
pared,’ Rev. 21:11. 

The hidden manna, Rev. 2:17. 

Judgment on the world, Rev. 8: 13. 


Marriage of second Adam—His bride 
bought with His own life; the spear that 
pierced His side in death (sleep), gave to the 
Church her life, Rev. 19:7. 


255, 


GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


II, CONTRASTS. 


Genesis. Revelation. 


One gate, Gen. 3: 24. Many (12) gates, Rev. 21: 21. 
Flaming sword to keep the gate, Gen, Gates never shut, Rev, 21: 25. 
3:24. 
Abel—the first shepherd, Gen. 4: 2. Christ, chief Shepherd, all His flock in the 
fold, Rev. 14: 1. 
Light created, Gen. 1: 16. The Lamb is the light, Rev. 21 : 23. 
‘In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat | ‘The Lamb.. ..shall feed them,” Rev. 
bread,’’ Gen. 3:19. 7:17. 
Heavens created, Gen. 1:8. Heavens passed away, Rev. 21: 1 
Naked, Gen, 3: 10. Clothed ia white, Rev. 19: 8. 
‘* Summer and winter, day and night, shall ‘There shall be time no longer,’' Rev, 
not cease,”’ Gen. 8: 22. 10:6. 
Earth destroyed by water, Gen. 7: 17-24. Earth destroyed by fire, Rev. 6: 14-17; 2 
| Peter 3; 10 
A few saved on Mount Ararat, Gen. 8: 4 Many saved on Mount Sion, Rev. 14:1. 
Neath, Gen. 4:8. No more death, Rev. 21: 4 ; a 
First promise of the Saviour, Gen. 3:15. Saviour acknowledged as king, Rev. 5: 12, I 
13 I 


‘arp and musical instruments first made, Harps used in praising, Rev ¢:& 


Gen. 4:21. 

‘* Paradise lost," Gen. 3: 23. : ‘Paradise re-gained,”’ Rev. 7 : 14. 

Sin entered through disobedience, Gen. He hath put in their hearts, to fulfil His 
3:6. will, Rev. 17: 17. 

Earth created, Gen. 1: 7. Earth passed away, Rev. 21:1. 

Night, Gen. 1: 5. No night there, Rev. 22: 5. 

Seas, Gen. 1: 19. No more sea, Rev. 21:1. 

Sun and moon, Gen. 1: 16, 17. No need of sun or moon, Rey, 20: 23. 

Garden, home for man, Gen. 2: 8. City, home for nations, Rev. 21 : 10. 

First appearance of Satan, Gen. 3: 1. Satan's final doom, Rev. 20: ro. 

Curse, Gen. 3:17. No more curse, Rev. 22: 3. 

Driven from the tree of life, Gen. 3: 24. Welcome back to it, Rev. 22:2. 

Confusion of tongues, Gen. 11: 9. Union of all tongues, Rev. 7: 9. 

Going out from the Lord's presence, Gen. Forever in the Lord's presence, Rev. 14:1. 
4:16. 


Scattered over all the earth, Gen. 11: 8. All kindreds of the earth united, Rev. 7: 9. 


SUOD WORKS. 


I, The duty of good works, Matt. 5:16; { 10:32; Acts 10:38; Acts2:22; John 14: 10; 
Titus 2:14; 2 Tim. 3:17; ,James 3:17; | 9:4. 
Titus 3:8. . Ill. The author of good works, Phil. 
TI, Our example in good works, John | 1:6; John 15:5; Eph. 2: 10. 


sk in the 


pO: 23- 
: 10. 


bhn 14 : 10; 


bres, Phil. 


FRAGMENTS THAT ReMAIN. 287 


CONDITIONS OF SUCCESSFUL PRAYER. 


“Ye ask and receive not—because ye ask 
amiss,” Jas. 4: 3. 

I, Forgiveness of enemies, Mark 17 : 24- 
26; Col. 3:13; Matt 18: 19-22; Matt. 5: 23- 
24. 

II, Confession, Man. 9: 4, 8, 20, 23. 

III. Sincerity, Ps. 66: 18. 

IV, Faith, Heb. 11:6; Jas. 1: 5-7 


V. Perseverance or importunity, Luke 
II: I-13. 

VI. Earnestness, Jer, 29:13 

VII. In the name of Jesus, John 14: 13, 
14; 15:16, 

VIIl. Dependence on the Holy Spirit, 
Rom, 8:26; Eph, 6:18. 

W. RODWELL. 


A TRUE WOMAN—FROM THE BIBLE STANDPOINT. 


She will first of all have her heart opened 
by the Lord—as Lydia, Acts 16: 14. 

Then she will be ready to follow Jesus 
anywhere, through ‘‘evil report or good re- 


port,’’ even to the cross if need be, as the 
| Christ, as Phebe, Rom. 16:1. 


Marys, Mark 15: 40, 41. 

She will not be united to any but a Chris- 
tian. Seé Ex. 2:1; 2 Cor. 6: 14. 

Her husband's heart can safely trust in 
her, Prov. 31: 11. 

She will prove a “helper in Christ Jesus,’’ 
Rom. 16: 3. 

The moito of her house will be, ‘‘As for 
me and my house we will serve the Lord,’’ 
Josh. 24: 15. 

Her children will early be brought to Jesus 
as the ‘‘Mothers of Salem"’ brought their 
little ones for Him to bless, Matt. 19: 13, 14. 

Her children will be consecrated ‘to God's 
service as was Hannah's sun Samuel, 1 Sam, 
1:27, 28. 

She will look well after all in her house, 
Prov. 31: 17. 

She will be hospitable, as was Lydia, Acts 
16:15, 

She will not only be willing to receive 
God’s people into her home, but will be ready 
to bestow ‘‘ much labor”’ on them, as Mary, 
Rom. 16:6. 

She will work for the poor, as Dorcas, Acts 
9: 36-39. 

She will be ready to serve Jesus at all 

‘mes, as Martha, John 12; 2. 


"7 


She will be equally ready to sit at Jesus’ 
feet in communion, as Mary, Luke 10: 39. 

She will labor much “in the Lord,” as 
did Persis, Rom, 16:12. 

She will be a helper to the Church of 


She will be modest in dress and her chief 
adornment will be her good works, 1 Tim. 
2:9, Io, 

Instead of adorning her own person, she 
will give of her treasure to the Lord, as the 
Israelite women did, Ex: 35:22, and Ex. 
38 8. 

She will be able to give good advice to 
others, as did Mary, mother of Jesus, John 
2:5; 

She will ‘‘ have faith in God,"’ as the 
woman of Canaan, Matt. 15: 28. 

She will meditate on the Word of God 
and keep it in her heart, as Mary, the Mother 
of Jesus, Luke 2: 19. 

She will give of her time and work, not to 
sew for bazaars, etc., but to help on the 
Lord's cause, as the women of Israel did 
when the Tabernacle was to be built, Ex. 
35:25, 26. 

Her lips will be rul<d by the law of kind- 
ness and her conversation will show wisdom, 
Prov. 31; 26. 

She will be pure—discreet—and keep to 
her own house, not to be gossiping in other 
folks’ houses, Tit. 2: 4, 5. 

She will not be a busy-body—but “ study 


258 


to be quiet and mind her own business,” 1 
Pet. 4:15. — 

She will be diligent, Prov. 31 : 19. 

She will be benevolent, Prov, 31: 20. 

She will be gracious, Prov. 11: 16. 

She will be “' faithful in all things," 1 Tim. 
3:11, Le. 

She will be separate from the world and 
act as becometh a ‘‘daughter of the Lord 
God Almighty,"’ 2 Cor. 6: 17, 18. 

She ‘ will publish the tidings" of salvation, 
Ps. 68: 11, R.V, 

She will be ready, as the women at the 
grave, to hasten and tell others of a Risen 
One. First see, then tell, John 20: 18. 

She will not live at ease, Isa. 32: 9-11. 

She will be waiting and watching for the 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


Bridegroom's coming, as the virgins should 
have done, Matt. 25: 1-4. 

She will be instrumental in saving others, 
as the woman of Samaria, John 4: 39. 

She will take all her sorrows to Jesus, 
John 11:2, 3. 

She will be qualified by God for His 
service, and therefore must be successful, 
Acts 1: 14, and 2: 18. 

‘‘ She shall be praised,"’ Prov. 31: 30. 

She is valuable—'‘ her price—far above 
rubies,"’ and the wise man's question, ‘‘ who 
can find"’ such a one, shows that this kind 
are not very plentiful. * 

The first step to a beautiful and successful 
life is letting the Lord into your heart, Prov. 
31; 10. 

Miss KATIE A. CLARKE, 


SEVEN THINGS ABOUT SALVATION. 


I, It is a Common Salvation, Jude 3; in 
the sense that it is provided for all, adapted 
to all, offered to all, and needed byall. See 
Rom. 3: 22, 23; Isa. 45: 22. 

II. A Free Salvation, Jno. 3:16; 6: 32, 33; 
Rom. 5:18; Rev. 22:17; Isa. 55:1; Jno. 
7:37; Matt, 11:28; Rev. 21:16; Jno. 6: 
35; 4:10; Rom. 6:23. 

III. A Personal Salvation, Psa. 25:5; 35: 
3; Isa, 12:2; Mat. 16:15; Rom. 10:9; Phil. 
2:12. 

IV. A Present Salvation, 2 Cor. 6:2; Luke 


7:50; 14:17; 19:9. 


The great husbandman, Isa. 50:6; 52:14; 


53:4, etc.; Luke 19:41; 22:44; John 12:24; 


Heb. 5:7, 8. 


His followers, Acts 20:19, 24; 1 Cor. 
4:9, etc.; 2 Cor. 4:10, 11; 2 Cor, 11:23, 


etc, 


SOWING AND REAPING, 


V. A Powerful Salvation, Luke 1: 68, 69; 
Psa.18:2; Matt, 1:21; Rom. 1:16; Heb. 
7:25; Isa. 63:1. 

VI. An Eternal Salvation, Heb. 5:9; 9: 
12; Jno. 10:28; 2Cor. 4:17; 5:1; Jno. 
3:15; Rom. 6:23; Isa. 45:17; 51:16; I 
Jno. 5: 11; Jno. 4:14. 

VII. “o escape if we neglect it, Heb. 2!:3; 
10:28, 29; 12:25; Jno. 3:18; 1 Jno. 5:12; 
Jno. 3: 36. 

Miss CLARA CHARLES. 


COMING AGAIN. 
REJOICING—BRINGING SHEAVES. 

His great husbandman, Ps. 22:30, 31; 
110:3; Isa. 53:11; Luke 10:21; Eph. 
5:27; Heb. 2:13; 12:2. 

His followers, John 4:36; 2 Cor, 4:14; 
Phil, 4:1; 1 Thess. 2: x9-20. G. P. 


—_~ 


————— 


should 
others, 
Jesus, 


or His 
cessful, 


30. 
r above 
1, ‘* who 
his kind 


accessful 
rt, Prov. 


L.RKE,. 


1:68, 69; 
16; Heb. 


. 5:9; 9: 
13 Jno. 


1:16; I 


Heb. 2!:3; 
no. 5:12; 


RLES. 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN, 259 


A STUDY IN THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. 


I. He is a Son, 1:2, 5; 3:6; 5:8; 7:28. 

II. He is the Son of God, 1:5; 4:14; 
5:5: 6:6: 7:3; 10:29. 

III. He is God, 1: 8-10; 3:3, 4. 

IV. He is as the Son superior to angels. 

(a) As to name, 1:4-5; 1:7. (6) As to 
rank, 1:6; 1:8-9;.1:3; 8:1; 10:12; 12:2. 
{c) As to office, 1:10; 1:2; 1:13. 

V. Heisas the Son superior to the prophets 
as the mediators of divine revelation, 1 ; 1-2. 

VI. He is the Son superior to Moses in 
the House of G: ", 3:5-6. 

VII. He is superior to Joshua as leading 
into the promised rest, 4: 8-14, 

VIII. He is the Apostle of God, above all 
sent from God, 3:1; 2:3. 

IX. He is Man, 2:6, 11, 14,17; 5:1, 7. 

(a) And so could suffer, 2: 9-10; 2: 14-18; 
4:15; 5:8; 9:25-26; 10:19-20; 13:12. 
(6) And live by faith, 2:13, 18; 5:7: 12:2. 

X. He is the Son of Man, 2: 5-8. 

(a) Wasa little while lower than the angels, 
2:7. (b) Is still waiting for His dominion, 
2:8; 1:13. (¢) Is still waiting for His 
fellow-heirs, 3:14; 3:1:2:10;4:9; 9:28; 
10: 36, 37; 10:16; 13:14; 12: 25-28. 


GOD IS 


God IS love, 1 John 4:8,16. First clause, 
God being loved, He cannot help loving; 
every object of the creation is loved by God, 
and that love is shown by the care He exer- 
cises over them, Matt. 10:29; Luke 12:6. 

I. God loves the sinnez. 

John 3:16; John 15: 13; 1 John 3:15. 

Shown by God the Father in making pro- 
vision for salvation, Gen. 3:15; Rom. 5:8; 
John 3:16; 1 John 4:9, ro. 

II. God the Father loves His children. 

Pre-eminently, Rom. 8: 38, 39; Eph. 3:17. 

III. God the Son is love. 

Gal. 2:20. His loveequal to the Father's, 
John 15:9. His love isshown for His own 


* 


XI. He is a Mediator of a better covenant, 
8:6-13; g:1-10; 10;:14-18—of the new 
covenant, 9: 15-22; 12: 24. 

XII. He is surety of a better covenant, 
7319-22, 

XIII. He is the perfection of the begin- 
nings and shadows of the old covenant, 
IO: 1; 7:23 5:12:14; 6; 1-3. 

XIV. He is a priest from God, 5: 4-6-10; 
322; 7:28; 10: 5-7, 

XV. He is a priest and from among men, 
2:10; 4:15; 5:1. 

XVI. He is a great priest, 10:21. ‘‘ High” 
is in the Greek “ great."’ 

XVII. He is a High Priest, 2:17; 3:1; 
4:14,15; 8:1. 

XVIII. He is a great High Priest, 4: 14. 

(a) Superior to the Aaronic order, 8: 4-6; 
10:1-4; 7:28; 7:11, 18, 19, (6) After the 
order of Melchizedek, 5:1": 7:3. (c) Made 
with an oath, 7; 20-22; 7.28. (d) Abiding, 
and with an untransferable priesthood, 5:6; 
7:16, 23,25; 10:12. (e) Kingly, 7:2; 7:14. 

W. J. ERDMAN. 


LOVE. 


in His care for them and their comfort, John 
14:26, 18; John 15: 26; John 16:7. 


IV. God the Spirit is love. 


Is shown in His guiding and comforting, 
John 16:13; John 14: 26; 1 John 2: 20-27. 

Believers have the anointing from the 
Father, as well as from the Son, even as the 
Son is anointed by the Father, hence the 
Spirit is the token that we are in the Father 
and the Son; without it we are nene of His. 
The Spirit poured on Christ the Head, is by 
Him diffused through all His members. Itap- 
pears that we are the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 
12:27; Rom. 12:5; Eph. 1:22, 33; Eph. 
4:12; Col. 1:24. 


eee ower et oe se ee ee 


aptieenesi cree 


260 


V. Safety and rest in His love. 

John 10:28, 29. THe BELieEveER finds a 
resting place in His love, John 15:10; 
Rom. 5:5; 1 John 4: 16. 

VI. Surely such love demands our love. 

Matt. 22:37; Luke 19:27; Eph. 1:4; 
Eph. 3:17. This should not be a slavish 
love, but it should be that kind of reciprocal 
love which exists between a fond parent and 
child, Eph. 5:1,2; 1 John 3:1; Gal. 4: 5- 
7; 1 John 4:15-18. Notservants but friends, 
John 15:15. So that there is fellowship or 
partnership between Christ and His own, 1 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


— 


Cor. 1:9. God's children then should be so 
in harmony with their Father and Elder 
Brother that they will be absorbed into 
Christ's life, 1 Cor. 3:9; Col. 3:12; Gal. 
2:20; Col. 2:20; Col. 3:3; risen with Christ, 
Col. 2:10. Suffer with Christ, x Pet. 4:14; 
Rom. 8:17. As Christians are united to God 
as children and to Christ-in one common 
body of brotherhood by Jove, they should 

VII. Love one another. 

1 John 4:21; John 13; 34,55; John15: 12, 
Without love we are nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 

Cc. H. ELLIOTT, 


“GOD AND LITTLE CHILDREN.” 


The Mosaic legislation was Divine. God 
employed Moses as His instrument. In the 
Mosaic Jegislation we mark a marvellous 
advance in dealing with the children, 
beyond that attained even by the wisest 
nations and foremost thinkers of antiquity. 
It is full of tenderest affection; while the 
treatment of little ones by other legislators 
was pitiless and inhuman, The Spartans 
exposed the weak and the mis-shapen to die; 
and they reared the healthy and the well-knit 
with a harsh and brutal severity. In Plato’s 
Republic children were to be bred up in com- 
munities, ignorant of their parents, and, in 
his scheme, belonging to the State only, the 
parental relation being nothing. Andin how 
maiy nations has it been a part of religion, 
to give the fruit of the body for the sins of 
the soul; either casting them into the 
Ganges, or causing them to pass through the 
fire unto Moloch. Now take up into your 
minds God's thoughts toward the children. 

I. God elaims the children, Ezek. 18: 4; 
Ex. 13:2; Num. 3:12, 13; Matt. 19:14, 

II. He makes a distinction between the 
children of Lzlievers and unbelievers, 1 Cor. 
7:19. And it is of believing parents’ child- 


ren that the Scriptures principally treat. 
Those in covenant relation with Himself. 
Those only can realize their obligation and 
fulfil their duty. 

III. They are His choicest blessing, Gen. 
33:5; 48:9; Ps. 127:3; 128. (Hebrew— 
a possession, a portion assigned of God). 

IV. He gives command (1) as to their train- 
ing, Deut. 6: 4-9; Prov. 26:6; Jno, 21:15. 
(2) As totheir treatment. (a) To be corrected, 
Prov. 22:15; 29:15; 23:13, 14. (b) Not to 
be provoked, Eph. 6:4. (3) To be provided 
for, 2 Cor. 12:14, 

V. He gives promises. (1) Of the Holy 
Spirit, Isa, 44:3; Acts 2:38, 39. (2) Of 
their faith, Isa. 59:21. (3) Of their godly 
integrity, Ps. 45:16; Prov. 20:7. 

Vi. He goes beyond parental dealing—and 
gives them (1) commands, Col. 3:20; (2) 
Promises, Prov. 3: 1-10. 

VII. He uses them as types of character for 
His kingdom, Matt, 18: 3. 

VIII, God’s thought of the children finds 
its fullest declaration in this fact, Gal. 4:4; 
Matt. 2:11; Isa. 9: 6. 


J. A. R. DICKSON. 


— 


ild be 30 
d Elder 
ped into 
12; Gal. 
th Christ, 
et. 4:14; 
d to God 
common 
should 


yhn 15:12. 
yr. 13. 


LIOTT. 


yally treat. 
h Himself. 
igation and 


ssing, Gen. 
(Hebrew— 
bf God). 
their train- 
Jno, 21. 15. 
be corrected, 
(b) Not to 
be provided 


bf the Holy 
ho. (2) OF 
their godly 
7. 
Yealing—end 
1. 3:20; (2) 


character for 


hildren finds 
t, Gal. 4:43 


FICKSON. 


4 


FRACMENTS THAT REMAIN, 261 


THE TEN VIRGINS—WHO ARE THEY? 
By W. A. Pariane. 


HRISTIAN mer who hold the doctrines of grace, and who at the same time know 
not dispensationai truth, find it exceedingly difficult, if not impessible, to recon- 
cile the teaching of such parables as that of the ten virgins with what the word of God 
says in other places as to the security of the believer. We see, for instance in this 
parable, that the foolish as well as the wise are virgins (a term symbolic of good 
and not of evil) : that they, equally with the wise, are waiting for the Bridegroom ; tiey, 
too, have oil in their lamps (which are “ going out,” not gone out) ; and when they are 
‘old to go and buy, they at once respond to the advice; apparently they are in the 
same position as the five wise (with the single exception that they have no oil in their 
vessels), and yet according to the common exposition, they fall away and are lost ; if 
so, how is this to be reconciled with the truth that “ He which hath begun a good 
work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ”? Is there any explanation 
possible of thisapparent contradiction? If we regard this, and other kindred parables, 
simply as vehicles to convey certain moral teaching, there is not, but if we recognize 
the fact that they set forth not only practical truths, but also the character of the age 
at certain periods in its history, we shall find that the supposed contradiction shall 
vanish. 

In this parable of the ten virgins there are three prominent questions which sug- 
gest themselves :— ; 

I, What is meant by the term “kingdom of heaven”? 

II. What period of time in the age is indicated by the word “then” ? 

III. What company of persons do the ten virgins represent ? 

I, What is meant by the term “kingdom of heaven” ? 

Time and space will not permit to enter here into an exposition of the expression 
“kingdom of heaven” as used in the word of God. Jt may be briefly said that the 
Scriptures speak of the kingdom ina two-fold sense, sometimes as the kingdom in 
mystery, the kingdom and patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, that stage of the kingdom 
in which we dwell, sometimes as the kingdom in manifestation, the kingdom and 
glory, that state of the kingdom for which we wait. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ came proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom, proving His 
Messiahship by His :niracles, and the kingdom in glory (a foretaste of which was given 
on the Mount of Transfiguration) would have been manifested had the Jewish nation 
received the king ; but they rejected Him, they would not have Him to reign over them, 
and therefore the kingdom in glory was placed in abeyance, and instead we have the 
kingdom in mystery, the kingdom and patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is now 
infested by tares, ruled by the fowls of the air (the children of the wicked one), leavened 
by the false doctrine of the apostate woman, having within it bad fish as well as good, 
and things that offend, which will remain until He whose right it is to reign, comes 
and casts out of His kingdom all things that offend, ani chem that do iniquity. The 
kingdom of heaven, which commenced with the ministry uf the Lord Jesus and which 
in this age is the “kingdom and patience,” is that constitution of persons or things 
which frofessedly acknowledges His authority, and the condition of the kingdom at 
certain periods in its history is described in the gospel of Matthew by various parables, 
of which th's is one. 

II. What period of time in the age is here indicated by the word 
“then.” 

To understand this we must go back to the 24th chapter, of which this parable is a 
continuation. In reply to the questions of the disciples in the third verse, “ when shall 


262 GOLD FROM OPHIR, 


these things be,” etc., our Lord amongst other things speaks of two special events, viz.: 
‘the great tribulation,” vide verse 21, and His Coming in glory, verse 29. (It may 
just be observed here em passant that this chapter relates almosi, if not altogether 
exclusively, to the Jewish people ; this can easily be shown from Scripture). We find 
the first of thcse two events spoken of by Daniel 12; 1, in almost similar language to 
that used by our Lord, and again in Rev. 7: 14, where it is called specifically #he great 
tribulation. Zechariah 14:1-5, gives us a detailed account of the events, without 
speaking of it distinctly by name. 

In Deniel 12:1, we see that this time of unexampled trouble is connected with the 
deliverance of the Jewish nation. 

In Zech, 14: 1-5, we find that the time of Israel’s distress and deliverance is con- 
nected with the time <f the appearing of the Lord w7th His saints. 

In Matt. 24: 29, we find that the great tribulation is followed immediately by the 
coming of the Lord in: glory. 

In Rev. 7, we find the sealing of the elect remnant of Israel, and the description 
of the white-robed multitude who have come out of ¢he great tribulation takes place 
after the events described in the 6th chapter, of which compare verses 12 and 13 with 
2g and 30 of Matt. 24. 

So, by comparing these special incidents spoken of by our blessed Lord with other 
Scriptures, we learn that there are certain events which almost synchronize, viz., the 
great tribulation, the deliverance of Israel, and the Coming of the Lord in glory with 
His saints. “Then” (at this time) so it would appear, shall the kingdom of heaven be 
likened unto ten virgins, etc. 

lI. What company do the ten virgins represent ? 

Not the Church of God, for Matt. 24 : 29, says, “They shall see the Son of Man 
coming in the clouds with power and great glory.” And we are expressly told in Col. 
3: 4, that, “ When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with 
Him in glory.” When He comes in glory His church is with Him, and this agrees 
with what the prophet Zechariah says in chapter 14: 5, “The Lord my God shall come 
and all the saints wh Him.” (‘ Him,” not “Thee” being the more correct reading). 
Now if the saints are wth Him at this time when He appears to deliver the Jewish 
remnant, they must have been caught up to be with Him at a period anterior to this. 
But there is another standpoint from which we can see that the ten virgins are not 
the Church of God.. The Church of God is the bride of Christ ; now the virgins and 
the bride are distinct persons (no one would ever think of confounding the brides- 
maids with the brides) ; the virgins are the guests who go forth to meet the bridegroom. 

Those acquainted with Jewish customs say that the marriage festivities commenced 
at the house of the bride’s father; that they lasted, in the case of a maid, seven days, 
and that the concluding feast was held at the house of the bridegroom, to which, 
accompanied by the bride, he returned at the close of the seventh day, when his friends 
went out to meet him with torches to escort him home, the term “ marriage” being 
applied to all the festivities both to the opening and closing feast, and to this our 
Lord refers in Luke 12 : 36, where He says, “And ye yourselves like unto men that 
wait for their Lord when He will return /vom the wedding.” 

Dr. Peters quotes Dean Trench as saying that this parable is based on the 
assumption that it is the bridegroom returning with the bride, and says that the Syriac, 
Coptic, and Vulgate versions insert the word “bride,” and read, “ went forth to meet 
the bridegroom and the bride.” Wycliffe’s Bible says, “the husband and the wife.” 
Cranmer’s Bible, “the bridegroom (and the bride ).” The Rheims version, “ the bride- 
groom and the bride.” De Sacy’s French Testament has “ ?epoux et epouse.” If wé 
turn to the 45th Psalm, we tind the distinction drawn there between “ the queen in gold 
of Ophir,” she who is to be brought tothe king in raiment of needlework, and, “ the 
virgins that be her fellows” who shall bear her company ; there is no confusion here 
as to the bride being the virgins ; they are “ her fellows,” but not herself. 

The 24th Matt. is essentially Jewish, connected with them and dealing with them 


ts, ViZ.: 
‘It may 
ogether 
Ve find 
uage to 
le great 
without 


vith the 
. is con- 
y by the 


cription 
es place 
13 with 


th other 
viz., the 
ory with 
saven be 


of Man 
din Col. 
ear with 
is agrees 
all come 
reading). 
e Jewish 
r to this. 

are not 
gins and 
e brides- 
Hegroom. 
Mnmenced 
yen days, 
o which, 
s friends 
e” being 
) this our 

en that 


h on the 
e Syriac, 


hion here 


ith them 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. - 263 


as a nation, and this parable of the ten virgins speaks of an event synchronous with 
those recorded in that chapter. The commencement of the Messianic week of Daniel 
(the seven years) sees (so far as we can judge) the rapture of the Church of God, and 
the commencement of the marriage supper; the end of the week sees the return of 
the Bridegroom wth His Bride, when the elect remnant of the Jewish race (who groanin 
under the oppression of Antichrist, have been longing and waiting for the Messiah 
shall recognize in that Messiah when He appears the Lord Jesus of Nazareth whom 
they have pierced, and “shall mourn for Him as one mourneth for His only son” ; 
that Messiah who coming w7¢h His saints in manifested glory, shall take to Himself 
His great power and reign, when of Israel he shall say, “it is my people,” and they 
shall say, “ Jehovah is my God.” May He hasten the day, 


GRACE. 
By Bella Clarke. 


Y grace we are called, 1 Tim. 1:9; Gal. 1:15. 
By grace we are forgiven, Eph. 1:7. 
By grace we are saved, Eph. 2: 5, 8. 
By grace we are justified, Rom. 3:24; Titus 3:7. 
By grace we are made possessors of eternal life, Rom. 5: i 
By grace we are strengthened, 2 Tim. 2:1. 
We are to stand in grace, 1 Peter 5:12; Rom. 5:2. 
We are to grow in grace, 2 Peter 3 : 18. 
We are to be established in grace, Heb. 13 : 9. 
We are to testify of the gospel of grace, Acts 20: 24. 
We are to look to the word of grace for power, Acts 20 : 32. 
Grace changes our fF *sition, Rom. 6: 14. 
Grace changes our life, 1 Tim. 1:13, 14; 1 Cor. 15:10. 
Grace changes our conversation, 2 Cor. I : 12. 
Grace changes our thoughts, Rom, 12 : 3. 
Gives us strength to meet every trial, 2 Cor. 12 : 7-9. 
Wisdom for Christian work, f Cor. 3:9, Io. 
To the least child of God it is given, Eph. 3:8; Eph. 4:7. 
A sufficient supply for all time. “ Enough for each, enough for a//, enough for 
evermore,” 2 Cor. 9:8. 
No danger of it running short, James 4:6; 1 Peter 1:2. 
We have a “God of all grace”—and a Saviour “ fii! of grace” to draw from, 
I Peter 5:10; John 1: 14. 
Our whole salvation is of grace, Titus 2: 11. 
It was grace brought Christ from the glory down to earth, 2 Cor. 8:9; Phil. 
2: 6-8. 
It is grace that takes us from earth into the glory, Eph. 2:6; Eph. 1 : 20, 21 


Oh! the fulness of His grace, 


Rich and boundless, great and free; y 
Making sinners, poor and lost, 
Heirs of God, with Him to be: ‘ 


Human lips would fail to tell 
Half the sweet and wondrous story ; 
How He brings «1s by His grace, 
All the way from sin to glory ; 
But when we reach that glory brig’.t, and our faith is changed to sight, 
‘ Then these tongues shall sweetly sing all the praises of our King. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE 


I, ‘I will strengthen thee,’’ verse ro. 
II. ‘I will help thee,"’ verse to 
promise is enough, because 

a fact. 
III. ‘‘1I will uphold thee,’ verse ro. 
sustains, His arms are underneath. 


His 


13. Help in service. 

V. ‘Fear not; I will help thee,’ verse 13. 
He is our co-partner. See how God avsures 
and re-assures His timid child. 

VI. ‘‘ Fear not thou WORM Jacob, I will 
help thee,"’ verse 14. ‘‘ When I am weak, 
then am I strong,"’ 2 Cor. 12:10. Here we 
see that God takes as an illustration the 
lowliest of His creatures as showing forth 
the littleness of the believer and the utter 
weakness of his strength. 

VII. ‘‘ I will make thee a sharp threshing 
instrument,’’ verse 15, His word, too, is 


‘lis presence :s | 


He | 
| See Rom. 8: 38, 39 
IV. ‘I will hold thy right hand," verse | 


“| WILLS” OF ISATAG 4ist. 


sharper than ally 
4:12, 14 

VIII. '' I will hear them,” verse 17. '' His 
ear is ever c pened to their ery," 
IX. ‘‘ I will not forsake them 


two-edged sword, Heb 


verse 17 


X. ‘‘I will open rivers,’ verse 18 Re 
freshment. He does not say ‘‘rivulets," 
‘ brooks,” or ‘' creeks,"’ but RIVERS. 

XI. '' IT will make the wilderness a pool of 
water,’’ verse 18. When a saint is filled 
with the Holy Spirit the Gospel will spread 
like a mighty pool of water. His testimony 
will then have weight and influence. 

XII. ‘I will plant in the wilderness,” 
verse 19. ‘‘And what the Lord plants the 
devil cannot pull up or destroy,” Jno. 10:28. 

XIII. ‘‘I will set,” verse 19. Blessed be 
God for full assurance and establishment in 
the truth, Jno. 5: 24. J. E. W. 


OUR CALLING. 


* Paul, servant of Jesus Christ, called to be 
an apostle—separated unto the Gospel, called 
to be saints—among whom are ye also,"’ Rom. 
ES15. 736. 

. Called. 
. Out of darkness, 1 Pet. 2:9. 
. To eternal life, 1 Tim. 6: 12. 
. By the name of the Lord, Deut, 28: io. 
To be sons of God, 1 Jno. 3:1. 
. To the peace of God, Col. 3: 15. 
. To liberty, Gal. 5 : 13, f.c. 
. To fellowship, 1 Cor, 1:9. 
. To follow Christ, 1 Pet. 2:21. 
. To the marriage supper, Rev. 19:9. 
. To glory, 2 Pet. 1: 3, l.c. 
Walk worthy of your calling, Eph. 4: 1. 
II. Separated. 
1. Brought near to God, Num. 16:9. 
2. Out from the world, 2 Cor. 6: 17-18. 
3. Love not the world, 1 Jno, 2: 15. 


SOON ANUS wW DH 


be 
o 


4. Be not yoked with unbelievers, 2 Cor 
6:14. 
5. To bethe Lord’s inheritance, 1 Kings 8 
53. 
6. Reproached by the world, Luke 6: 22. 
. The Lord goes with us, Ex. 33: 16. 
. Separate from other people, Lev. 20: 


g. A Fountain for separation, Zec, 13: 1, 
(marg). 
III. Called to be a servant. 
1. Servants of God, 1 Pet. 2: 16, lc. 
2, Servants chosen, Isa. 43: 10. 
. Servants of God only, Isa. 44: 21. 
. Ready to hear, 1 Sam. 3: 10, l.c. 
. Ready to obey, Jno. 2:5. 
. Ready to do anything, 2 Sam. 15: 15. 
. It is a great calling, Isa. 49: 6. 
. It is to be oure:: © 
20340. 


G7 


1 Kings 


vil, Hel 


rz, \\ aw 
verse 17 


» 18 Re 
rivuleta," 
RS. 

3 a pool of 
t is filled 
vill spread 
testimony 
e. 
ilderness,”’ 
plants the 
no. 10:28. 
Blessed be 
ishment in 


rs, 2 Cor 
1 Kings 8 
hke 6: 22. 
b3: 16. 


Lev. 20: 


ec, 13: 1, 


ihe. 


“Bt; 
t:c. 


15:15. 


1 Kings 


- FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 265 


9. His servants are joyful, Isa. 65 : 14, f.c. V. Called to be a saint. 

10. His servants have plenty, Isa. 65: 13. 1, Keepsthe feet of His saints, 1 Sam. 2: 9, 
11. His servants are called by His name, | f.c. 
Isa. 65: 15, l.e.; Acts 11: 26, l.c. 

12. He shows them His power, Deut. 3: 24. 
¥3, He helps them, Luke 1 : 45. 

14. He maintains their cause,1 Kings 8: 59. 
15. He confirms their word, Isa. 44:26, f.c. 
16. Remembers them, Ps. 105: 42. 

17. Takes pleasure in them, Ps. 35: 27. 

18. Shall be with Him forever, Jer. 12: 26. 
tg, Shall serve Him forever, Rev. 22: 3. 

IV Called to be an apostle. 10. They shall be the judges, Ps. 149: 9. 

1. Apostie--a messenger sent forthonim- | 11, They shalltake the kingdom, Dan. 7:18. 
portant busiazess, t Thess.2:4. Putintrust | 12, Christ shall be glorified in His saints 
at His coming, 2 Thess. 1: ro. 

13. ‘‘Among whom are ye also—the called 
of Jesus Christ,""—God is no respecter of 
persons, Rom. 2:11; Job 34:19. 


Preserves their souls, Ps. 97: 10. 
Preserves their way, Prov. 2: 8, l.c. 
They are His delight, Ps. 16: 3. 
They are His inheritance, Eph. 1: 18. 
Makes known to them His riches, Col. 
I ; 26-27. 

7. They ha.e no want, Ps. 34:9. 

8. He intercedes for them, Rom. 8:27. 

g. Their death is precious, Ps. 116: 15. 


OE RE 


with the Gospel, 


2. Ul Hiessage-—--'' whatsoever I command 
thee,” Jer. 1:7, |, 
3. Toall we can reatli; Mark 16:15. 


4. Time—in season, out of season, 2 Tim. The Word of His grace—able to build you 
4:2. up, and give you an ‘inheritance among all 
5. All our attention, our business, 1 Kings | them which are sanctified, Acts 20: 32. 
20. 40. Called—chosen—separated to be apostles— 


6. No time to be lost, 1 Sain. 21: 8, Le. servants—saints of the most high God. 
7, The message shall be successful, | Walk worthy of your vocation, 
55:11, Miss KATIE A, CLARKE 


ON THE NUMBER 7 


It has Leen said that ‘' the cor ur- | 6. The seven petitions in the / ord’s Prayer, 
rence in Scripture of the number seven is t! [uke 11:2 4. 


result of nothing short of Divine intention.”’ 7.4 séyen sayings On the cross, Luke 


This number has been traced in one form or | 23:34; joi 16-28; Litke 74/43; Matt. 
another in nearly every book in the Old | 27:46; John 19:30; Falke aa: 46 
Testament and the New. It is wonderfull) 8. The seven blessings f the thn 
associated with the history of the life and | Key., chapters 1, 14, 16, 19, 2 


the number expressive of per- 
» of suffering 
fferings of 


teaching of our Lord. Note Seven i 


we , ‘ ‘ : saa the Ad 
1. The seven stages of His history in Phil. fection. We see the perf 
in Peter’s seven refere ices to the 


2:6-9. 

2. The seven characteristics of His wisdom Chel t,t Prete chaptrs tS9 55 perfec- 
rik ‘ tion of benevolence in the seven gifts of 
in Prov, 3: 15-18. Christ, Joh 4:10, 6:5; 13:18; 14°27: 

3. The seven parables in Matt. 13 16:9; 19:8; 17 he pérfection of 

4. The seven miracles in John, chapters 2, | glory in the seven ‘Hage which are associ. 
4, 5, 6,9, iI. ated in Eph rand =, with Oh: Hig 

5. The seven prayers in Luke, chapters 3, | Church, Eph, 1:6. £2, 14, 17, 18; 3: 44, a. 
5. 6,9, II, 22. HENRY THORNE. 


WHAT THE LORD’S SUPPER TELLS OUT TU [HE BELIEVER. 


There are seven precious thoughts con- 
nected with the Lord’s Supper. 

I. Sins put away. 

That is the first grand, soul-cheering 
thought connected with this beautiful ordi- 
nance, Isa. 1:18; 43:25; 44:22; 53:45; 
Matt. 1:21; Acts 13:38, 39; Rom. 5: 6-8; 
Heb. 1: 1-3. 

II. Eternal life. 

The Life died that we dead sinners might 
live, Jno. 3:14-18; 3:36; 5:24; 6:37-40; 
10; 28-30; I Jno. 5:1; 5:4, 9-13. 

III. It tells out the guiding and keeping 
power of Jesus, our great High Priest. 

Like the cloudy pillar by day, and pillar 
of fire by night, that guided and protected 
Israel, so Jesus is our leader, by the Spirit, 
Jno. 16:13-15. Not only that He keeps; 
‘‘He is able to keep that which we have 
committed unto Him,” Jude 24. See also 
Rom. 5: 8-11. 

IV. It speaks of ‘‘separation.” 

The blood separated Israel from Egypt. 
The blood was placed on the side-posts and 
lintels. 'They—Israel—were shut in to God, 
and the Egyptian world shut out; the blood 
the line of demarcation. Indeed, there can 
be no true unity without separation. That 
was the mighty power for soul-winning and 


Rain an absolute necessity ; sustains life ; 
long absence of rain entails suffering and 
death. In the Scriptures water is the symbol 
of spiritual life; its absence spiritual death. 


1. Rain withheld because of sin, 1 Kings 


8:35. 
2. Rain comes in due season, Lev. 26:4; 

Deut. 11: 14, 20. 

3. God's word drops as rain, Deut. 32:2 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


BIBLE THOUGHTS ON RAIN. 


holy living in the early Church. See Acts 
5:13, 14; 2 Cor. 6: 14-18. 

V. The unity of the body. 

Oh, what deep need in these days of a 
knowledge of this glorious truth! Christ the 
Head, we the members of His body. This 
the Holy Spirit's own figure, 1 Cor. 12: 12- 
31; Eph. 4:1-16; 5:15-32. ‘‘One bread" 
—‘‘one loaf,’ 1 Cor. 10: 16, 17. 

VI. Our pilgrim character. 

The table of the Old Testament was set 
in a wilderness; so is this, if it be truly the 
‘‘Lord’s Table.’ The world rejects Jesus 
as of old; so does it reject the true disciple 
of this day. We are ‘travellers through 
this worldly wilderness,’ Ex. 12: 8-17; Col. 
3: 1-11. The Lord’s table shows us that 
there can be no fellowship with the workers 
of iniquity; hence a separate table. 

VIL. Ut speaks eloquently of the coming 
of our Lord, 

“As oft as ye eat this bread, and drink 
this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death #ill 
He come.’ How much there is in the Word 
about Hiscomingagain! Always, too, do we 
find the sanctification of the believer con- 
nected with the doctrine of the ‘‘ coming of 
Christ,”’ 1 Jno, 3:1-3; and many other sim- 
ilar passages, J. E. W. 


4. Rainissent in answer to prayer, Jas. 5:18. 

5. There is clear shining after rain, 2 Sam. 
23:4. 

6. God will rain snares upon the wicked, 
Ps. 30-0, 

7. But He will rain righteousness upon the 


| godly, Hosea 10:12. (Note contrast between 
| the righteous and unrighteous.) 


J. E. W. 


VER. 


ee Acts 


1ys of a 
hrist the 
y. This 
(| 14: 12- 


» bread” 


- was set 
truly the 
cts Jesus 
e disciple 
. through 
125 Col. 
; us that 
e workers 


> 
“+ 


1e coming 


nd drink 
death till 
the Word 
too, do we 
ever con- 
coming of 
bther sim- 


Jas. 5318. 
in, 2 Sam. 


e wicked, 


upon the 
t between 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN, 267 


FIVE SMOOTH STONES FROM THE BROOK. 


The way to slay the Goliaths of sin and 
unbelief is simply to take the Word of the 
Lord and hurl it at them. In these days of 
light regard for God’s testimony, when 
many who even wear eccle: iastical livery are 
seeking to destroy faith in the plenary in- 
spiration of the Scriptures it behoves us to 
stand like heroes in defence of ‘‘ the faith 
once for all delivered to the saints."’ Goliath 
of old defiantly sneered at the youth who 
came out to do battle with him, but God 
was with David, and soon demonstrated to 
the waiting expectant hosts that He could 
use the ‘‘ weak things of this world’’ to ac- 
complish His divine purposes, He inspired 
David to take ‘five smooth stones from the 
brook.’’ These, with the shepherd's sling, 
constituted David's entire armament: but 
with these he slew the giant, and Israel’s 
host reaped a mighty victory, while God got 
the glory. So, if the servant of God will 
only heed His instruction, and seek to be- 
come thoroughly furnished by diiigent study 
of His Word, rightly dividing the same, 
he will ‘‘ become mighty to the pulling down 
of strongholds."’ 


There are five fundamental facts in the 
Bible, arranged in very beautiful order by 
the Holy Spirit, namely : Man's Ruin, Man’s 
Redemption, Man’s Regeneration, Man's 
Sanctification, and Man's Glorification. 
They are Five Smooth Stones from the 
Brook of God, 


I. Man’s Ruin. 

If one died for all, then were all dead,” 
2 Cor. 5:14; see also Eph. 2: 1-3; Gen, 
6:5; Isa. 1: 4-6. 

II. Man’s Redemption. 

‘*Foras much as ye know that ye were 
not redeemed with corruptible things, .... 
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of 
a lamb without blemish and without spot," 
t Pet. 1:18, 19, See also Lev. 17:11; Ex. 
12:14; and for many other passages on this 
theme trace out the references, ~ 


III. Man's Regeneration. 

‘Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a 
man be bornagain, he cannot see the kingdom 
of God,” Jno. 3:3. Also rt Pet. 1:23; Jas. 
1:18; Jno. 13143; Jno. 10:28; 1 Cor. 3 :6,7. 

IV, Man's Sanctification. 

‘I beseech you therefore, brethren, by 
the mercies of God,” etc., Rom. 12:1, 2. 
1. The God, or judicial, side of the question, 
t Cor, 1:30; Col. 3:3; Col. 2:10; Heb. 
5:9. 2, The man, or experimental, side of 
the question, 1 Cor. 6:15, 16; 1 Jno, 24 15, 
$97}: Cols33 5; 2. 

V. Man’s Glorification. 

‘Beloved, now are we the sons of God; 
and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; 
but we know that when He shall appear, we 
shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as 
He is," 1 Jno. 3:2; Jno. 14: 1-3. 


J. E. w. 


UNION WITH CHRIST. 


Believers are— 

1. Crucified with Christ, Rom. 6:6. 
2. Dead with Christ, Rom. 6: 8. 

3. Buried with Him, Rom, 6: 4. 


4. Planted together in the likeness of His . 


death, Rom, 6: 5, 
5. Planted together in the likeness of His 


resurrection, Rom. 6:5. 


6. Quickened together, Eph. 2: 5 
7. Raised up together, Eph. 2 : 6 
8. Sitting together in Heavenly places 
Iiph. 2:6 
g. Living together, 1 Thess, 5 : to. 
10. Working together, Mark 16: 20 
11. Suffering together, Rom. 8: 17 
12. Glorified together, Rom, 8 : 17. 


268 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE SECRET OF SUCCESSFUL PRAYER. 


I. Faith. 

Ask in faith, nothing wavering, Jas. 1 :6. 

Believe that ye receive, and ye shall have, 
Mark 11: 24. 

Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believ- 
ing, ye shall receive, Matt. 21 : 22. 

According to your faith be it unto you, 
Matt. 9: 29. 

As thou hast believed, so be it done unto 
thee, Matt. 8 : 13. 

The prayer of faith shall save the sick, 
James 5:18. 

II. In the name of Jesus. 

Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that 
will I do, Jno. 14: 13, 14. 

III. Submission to God’s will. 

If we ask anythin « according to His will, 
He heareth us, 1 Jno. 5:14. 


IV, Obedience, 

Whatsoever we ask we receive of Him, 
because we keep His commandments, i Jno. 
3122. 

The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous 
man availeth much, Jas. 5: 17. 

The prayer of the upright is His delight, 
Prav, 15:8. 

He heareth the prayer of the righteous, 
Prey, t&. a0 

it Ay Man doeth His will, him He heareth, 
Jno. 9: 13, 


a 


Contrast :—If I regard iniquity in my 
heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psa. 66 : 18. 

V. Sincerity. 

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call 
upon Him in truth, Ps, 145: 18.’ 

Let us draw near with a true heart, Heb. 
10 ; 22. 

Use not vain repetitions, Matt. 6 :7. 

VI. Boldness and confidence. 

Ask, and it shall be given you, Matt. 7:7. 

Let uscome boldly . . that we may obtain, ‘ 
Heb. 4: 16. 

Having boldness . . let us draw near in 
full assurance, Heb. 10; 19, 22. 

VII. Humility. 

If My people will humble themselves 

. then will I hear, 2 Chron. 7: 14. 

He forgetteth not the cry of the humble, 
Ps. 9:12. 

lhou hast heard the desire of the humble, 
Ps, 10; 17. 

VIII. Abiding anu delighting in God, 

If ye abide in Me. . . ye shall ask what 
ye will, and it shall be done, Jno. 15: 7. 

Delight thyself in the Lord, and He shall 
give thee the desires of thy heart, Ps. 37:4 

IX. Union with others in prayer. 

Iftwo of you shall agree it @hall be 
done for them, Matt, 14) tu 

Footsteps of Truth, 


HOW SHOULD WE PRAY? 


I. Boldly, Eph, 3:t@; Heb. 4:16; 10:19, 
20. 
Il. In faith, Heb. 10:22; James 1: 6, 
Ill, Without ceasing, Luke 18: 1; 21: 36. 
IV. Constantly, Eph. 6:18; Roni, 12:12. 
V. Earnestly, Matt.6: 7; Isa. 55:6; 26:9. 
VI. Believingly, Jer. 29: 13. 
VII. In the name of Christ, John 16:23, 
a6 3 14:13. 
VIII, Expecting answers, Mark 11: 24. 


IX. In resignation to God's will, Matt.6: 10 
X, Revevently, Pa, 89:7; Heb. 12; 28. 
Ki. In humility, Ps, 10:17; Isa. 57: 15. 
XII, And prayer will be answered, john 
14:133 15:7; 16:24; Isa, 58:9; 65:24. 
In believing faith let us ‘come boldly to 
the throne of grace, and pour out our hearts 
before Him,"' who waits to be gracious and 
todo for us ‘exceeding abundantly above 
all that we ask or think:,’' Eph. 3: 20. 


y in my 
1.66: 18. 


that call 
art, Heb. 
$9. 


Matt. 7:7. 
ay obtain, 


w near in 


hemselves 
ie humble, 


ie humble, 


n God, 
asl what 
15:9. 

1 He shall 
Ps. 37:4 
er, 

it ahall be 


Truth, 


fatt.6:10 
12:28. 

. 57: 15: 
ered, john 
65:24. 

b boldly to 
our hearts 
hcious and 
intly above 


20. 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 269 


THE POWER OF GOD. 


I. The Gospel is the Power of-God, Rom. |- V. The Believer is kept by the Power of 


1:16; John3:16; 5:24. God, 1 Pet. 1: 5. 
II. Christ is the Power of God, 1 Cor. VI, The Enduement of Power, Luke 24: 
1324. 49; Acts 1:8. 
hep Mn Cross is the Power of God, 1 VII. The Power of His resurrection, Phil. 
IV. Faith only can stand in the Power of Bi 0h Kick’ 
God, 1 Cor. 2:5. J. E. W. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF PRAYER. IN JAMES 5. 


I, Individual prayer, ‘‘ let him pray,” V. Fervent prayer, ‘‘the effectual fervent 
verse 13. prayer,’’ verse 16. 

II. United prayer, ‘‘ Let them pray,” verse VI. Definite prayer, ‘‘that it might not 
14. rain,’’ verse 17, 


III. Believing prayer, ‘‘The prayer of 
faith,’’ verse 15. 


VII. Effectual prayer, ‘‘ He prayed again, 


; and the heavens gave rain," verse 18. 
IV. Intercessory prayer, ‘‘Pray one for | 


another,’’ verse 16. ay 
THE TRIUNE SALVATION. 

I. Salvation Past, Heb. 9: 24-26; Heb t Thess. 1: 8-z¢ 1 Thess, 4: 13-18; Phil 
tO} ii, 17 | JONI § i a4) @ PAF 9) 14-21 Eph 

Il. Salvation Present, Heb, 712@§; Jude | Ret Th er if 
a4} Phil 116 tion for the sinner, Heb. 2 

I1f, Salvation Future, a Thess, 2{ 14-17; EW 

ta % 
BACKSLIDING, 
I. Is turning from God, 1 Kings 11:9. VI. Brings its own punishment, Pro 
Il. Is leaving the first love, Rev. 2:4 14:14} Jer. 2: t9, 


j iid Vil. Pahottations to return from, 2 Chron 
i the simplicity of the bBo 
III. Is departing from the simplicity & iki tu a4 jb) Hone 


; 2 Cor. 1a; Gal. 3: 1-3; 5:4; ; 
is! gl Tt " j mn qi 5t47 VIII. Sin of, to be Gonfessed, Iva. 49:42 
IV. God is displeased at, Ps. 78: §9, §9 t4j Jer. 9119, 14 
V. Warnings against, Ps. 85:8; 1 Cor. IX. Pardon of, promised, 2 Chron. 7:14; 
10312, Jer. 9:14; 32320; 36:3. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


BIBLE MARKING. 


W. P. Webster in Y. M. C. A. Watchman. 


}F greatly aids a worker, in looking up passages bearing on any particular truth, to 

have them indicated by fa, or Gp, or Xd, or other similar abbreviation. Perhaps 
he knows just where they are ; even then he is helped by the mark, because his eyes 
are spared all unnecessary work in the finding. And while he is running through the 
chapters, he can cull out verse after verse, by the dozen it may be, which had not occur- 
red to his mind. He may not discard his concordance, of course ; but his concord- 
ance is not always with him ; or, if bound up with his Bible, it may be incomplet 
and meagre ; and, then, it is trying to the eyes to turn repeatedly back and forth 
between the text and a pack of references in the back part of the book. 

Marking one’s Bible leads one to read thoughtfully. What are the teachings 
of this verse? and this? and this? And if the reading is slow, no matter; a few 
verses thus perused are better than a few chapters rapidly skimmed over. 

While I donot dissuade from more full annotations, 1 would suggest that the 
more one writes, ‘he more risk one runs of encumbering the margin with crude or 
commonplace jottings which occupy valuable space, and are often of noservice. Only 
germ thoughts or well digested observations are entitled to be thus noted in any one’s 
Bible. But the abbreviations need take but little space, and half a dozen can easily be 
set against any one verse. 

As a running index to the historic contents of my Bible, I have found a system of 
underlining the significant words,to be helpful. (f the margin were wide, I should 
prefer to write a marginal running index, but my . agster being faulty in this respect, 
I resort tothe other mode. I illustrate: “Gideon and all the people” “ pitched beside 


the well of Harod”—“fearful and afraid” “returned”—‘“number” “that lapped,” 
“three hundred men”—“all the rest” “ bowed down”—“so” “he” “retained those 
three hundred men.” “Midianites,” “ Amalekites,” “children of the East,” “along 
in the valley like grasshoppers ”—“ when Giaeon was come ”—“ the three companies 
blew the trumpets and brake the pitcheis ”—“ the Lord set every man’s sword against 
his fellow ”—“Israel” “pursued.” The above is Judges 7. Again: “Ye shall bring 


your offering” —“ burnt sacrifice ”—“ meat offering’ —“‘ peace offering” —“sin offering,” 
“atonement,” “offering of Aaron and of his sons,” “law of the trespass offering” 
—“law of” “peace offering”—“ The Lord spake”—“Take Aaron”—“ poured of 
the anointing oil upon Aaron's head,”—“ Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle”— 
“ glory of the Lord”—“ Nadab and Abihu” “ offered strange fire”—“ the Lord spake 
unto Aaron ”—“ Moses spake unto Aaron,” The above is my running index, by simply 
underlining the words which I have quoted, of the first ten chapters of Leviticus. 

It suits my fancy to underline, for this purpose, in black. If one writes annota- 
tions in black, it is well to write simple abbreviations in red, to prevent confusion. If 
black is used in underlining an historic index, it is essential that a different color be 
used in underlining for moral and spiritual purposes; red is probably best. 

Let me just add that, if any one likes the system of abbreviations, he can mark 
hundreds of useful passages in a very little while, if he will look them up by the help 
of his concordance or a text book, taking one subject at atime. One more suggestion: 
In the unpremeditated use, in a meeting, of any passage which some one else has read, 
the abbreviations wili often suggest thoughts which have engaged one in some previous 
careful study of the text. 

Nove.—No system of Bible-marking can be proposed which will satisfy all Bible 
students. Some are positively opposed to aay marking except on separate slips of 
paper. “Keep your Bible clean ” is their advice, and the arguments for their position 
are forcible. Others reject any but the simplest mode of marking, as a line down the 
margin against the verse marked. Others adopt some complicated system, using 


truth, to 
Perhaps 
his eyes 
‘ough the 
not occur- 
, concord- 
icomplet 
and forth 


teachings 
er; a few 


st that the 
1 crude or 
rice. Only 
any one’s 
n easily be 


system of 
, 1 should 
is respect, 
hed beside 
t lapped,” 
ined those 
t” “ along 
ompanies 
rd against 
shall bring 
offering,” 
offering” 
poured of 
lernacle”— 
ord spake 
by simply 
icus. 

bs annota- 
fusion. If 
t color be 


can mark 
the help 
ggestion : 
b has read, 
€ previous 


y all Bible 
e slips of 
ir position 
down the 
em, using 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN, 271 


en 


signs, abbreviations, underlinings, different colored inks, etc. ; but each one’s method 
having peculiarities original with himself. 

To encumber ones Bible with too many and unnecessary markings will defeat 
their object, for where the whole is emphasized alike, nothing is emphasized at all. 
Every verse marked like every other verse would be worse than useless, of cowrse. 
And the margins written full of merely surface thoughts are no improvement over the 
clean white margins as they came from the printer, 


SEED AND SOWERS; OR, TRACT DISTRIBUTION. 
J. £. Moncrieff. 


OW many there are who, humanly speaking, would never have heard the Gospel 

but for tracts. Sermons, addresses, personal dealing, the reading of books, all, 

of course, are means of grace and greatly blessed, but they still leave room for the 

tract. How often a man who would neither listen to preaching, nor open a religious 
book, has received a m.ssage from God through the agency of a tract or text. 

A tract has this advantage, that it may be both written nd read without distrac- 
tion. A calm, well-thought-out, and well-arranged tement, calculated to arrest, 
impress, and convince the careless, it does not repel by its length, and is willing to 
accommodate itself to the reader’s convenience. At his leisure, when his mind is free; 
when circumstances are favorable ; it may be in the silent watches of the night, o 
the mighty deep, upon the hillside, or the quiet country road, where no human voice 
disturbs, he reads his tract, and the Spirit makes it to him as the voice of God, calling 
to repentance and to newness of life. 

Many and many a time has the truth contained in a tract proved as the “still small 
voice” which aroused the conscience, or the finely pointed and divinely guided arrow 
which has found its way between the joints of the harness, and produced conviction and 
conversion in the hitherto hard and unbelieving heart. It is certainly desirable that 
tracts should be attractive in appearance, and got up in such a way as is like to ensure 
their being preserved or circulated. Even though they should cost a little more, they 
are worth the money, because they are likely to last much longer, and to be circulated 
more readily, than the flimsy leaflets which too often, it is to be feared, meet the same 
fate as the handbills which are distributed in the streets. 

Few Christians need grudge the price of good tracts, for surely few things in the 
present day are cheaper. Besides, there are always many of God’s people who are 
willing to pay for tracts for those whe are willing to distribute them ; and no one who 
is really anxious to engage in this work need be long without a supply of good tracts to 
give. It is not so much the want of tracts that is felt, as the want of the necessary faith 
and courage on the part of God’s people generally to make a more plentiful and prayer- 
ful use of them. 

an excellent plan is to place texts, tracts, or little books in envelopes, which niay 
or may not be closed, and which may be left in any sheltered spot where they are likely 
to be found before long. This sort of scattering may perhaps not commend itself so 
much to some as personal distribution, but, nevertheless, it has its place, and has had 
blessed results. 

Those who are really anxious to lose no opportunity of doing good in this way will 
do well never to be without some precious seed to scatter in their walks abroad, or 
wherever they may happen to be. They should also remember that it his been said 
with truth that “a wise man makes more opportunities than he finds,” and they should 
deeply and solemnly realise the fact that a lost opportunity may be a lost eternity to 

some poor soul. 

Tracts may be dropped into a letter-box, or in at an open door or window—may be 


aan eacnne 7g cane 


M27, - & 
Le) is a ®¥ A) Vig 
4 od Pf 4}: \Y ox 
ZG x 4 ww ae ee 
ZG <6 
62 ef 
Ze | s28 
<= : : = | ge? 
So awa be 
w = ss ei ee 
<hr 2I| =) 3i eRe 
=F ee ae port 
5 
=O 


272 - GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


nn ae —- wire ainsi a PRESESEA 


left n the house, the shop, the waiting-room, the railway carriage, the cab, between th: 
leaves of books, under a sheltering ledge, in a hole in the wall, on a garden seat, ina 
message-basket, a hat, or a pocket—anywhere, ir fact, where they are likely to be found. 
Many opportunities will occur to those who look for them, and the outlook for original 
plans adds to the interest of the work. Possibly the finder might sometimes be 
impressed and induced to read by the very singularity of the place where the tract was 
found. 

Dear Christian reader, if you have hitherto neglected this means of usefulness, so 
easy and yet so biessed in its results, resolve that you will do so no longer, but that, 
from this time, you will constantly, prayerfully, and hopefully by this means sow the 
seed of the Word, and be assured a day will come when you will realise with great joy 
that your sowing was not in vain, 


‘‘ Broadcast thy seed ! 
Although some portion may be found 
To fall on uncongenial ground, 
Where sand, or shard, or stone may stay 
Its coming into light of day; 
Or when it comes,*some pestilent air 
May make it droop, and wither there— 
Be not discouraged; some will find 
Congenial soi!, and gentie wind, 
Reircshing dew and ripening shower, 
To bring it into beauteous flower, 
From flower to fruit; to glad thine eyes, 
And fill thy soul with sweet surprise. 
Do good, and Ged will bless thy deed— 

Broadcast thy seed!" 


THOUGHTS ON UNITY. 


ry E. Venn. 


I. A Threefold Entreaty for Unity, 1 Cor. 1 : 10, 

1. “ That ye all speak the same thing.” Oneness of voice, 2 Chron. 5 : 13. 

(a) Oneness in confession—There is “ One Lord and His name one.” The fruit 
of our lips is “ Confessing to His name,” Heb. 13:15, Greek. But, alas! what sau 
confessions do we hear! “I am of Paul,” etc., etc. 

(4) Oneness of testimony—They were enriched with all utterance and knowledge 
in Him, yet what uncertain sounds were made! Every one had a doctrine, an inter - 
pretation ; some declaring there was no resurrection. 

If oneness of confession be not maintained, unity in testimony raust be lost. 

2. “That there be ro divisions among you.” Oneness of heart, Acts 4:32. Un- 
broken fellowship with the Father and with His Son, Jesus Christ, wil! produce, and 
maintain unhindered, “fellowship of the Spirit” in the saints one with another. 

3. “That ye be perfecily joined together in the same mind, and ia the same 
judgment.” This oneness of mind is extremely difficult—-an utter impossibility untii 
“We have the mind of Christ ;” and thie we have only as every thought is brought 
into captivity to the obedience of Christ, by the power and teaching of the Holy 
Spirit through the Word. And when “this mind” is in us, “which was also in Christ 
Jesus,” we shall tread the same pathway of humility and obedience, Phil. 2 : 5-8. 

By one Spirit, baptised into one body, 1 Cor. 12:13, they had one Lord, ch, 1 : 2, ome 
God and Father, 1 : 3, and were called into ove fellowship of their calling,5:9: “M 
dove, My undefiled is but ome,” Cant. 6:9. Where this is remembered and maintained, 
variety of gift will “keep the unity of the Spirit,” and strengthen the oneness of the 


— 


veen the 

eat, ina 
be found. 
- original 
times be 
tract was 


alness, SO 
but that, 
s sow the 
great joy 


The fruit 
! what sau 


knowledge 
, an inter - 


B lost. 

:32. Un- 
oduce, and 
her. 

the same 
bility untul 
is brought 
the Holy 
o in Christ 
75-8. 
lh, I 3 2, 0”e 
19: “M 
aintuined, 
ess of the 


= 


‘ FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN, 273 


body; but when forgotten, opulence of gift will increase spiritual weakness, poverty, 
Se by dividing the saints, developing the flesh, and displaying carnal 
wisdom. 

II. A Threefold Question, 1 Cor, 1 : 13. 
yf oe ‘Is Christ divided?” Division in the Church is a sad dishonor to the person 
of Christ. 

2. “ Was Paul crucified for you?” Nolessa wrong to /%e work of Christ. 

3. ‘ Were ye baptised in the name of Paul?” A depreciation also of the power 
and preciousness of the name of the Lord Jesus. 

When teachers take the false honor of becoming the founders and leaders of 
separate factions in the Church of God, the person, work, and name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ are alike dishonored. 


DECORATIONS FOR CHURCHES. 
By E. P. Marvin. 


A= is being employed more and more to “beautify the sanctuary ” and to render 

the administration of the Gospel “attractive” to the worid. Several books have 
lately been printed for instruction in church decoration, and especially in ecclesiastical 
entertainments. I wish to direct all churches that mean to be “up with the times,” to 
a rich variety of inscriptions or mottos, suitable for walls, windows, ceiling, pulpit, 
gallery or organ. There is no copyright upon them, and in some cases, if they are 
appropriately selected, I will agree to furnish an approved artist to do the lettering free, 
“for the good of the cause.” 

These inscriptions may all be tound in an old book printed aad sold for a small sum, 
in New York City, by the American Bible Society. Here are a few sample selections 
and adaptations :— 

I. A high church filled with sectarian zeal, and fostering the stimulus of divisions, 
1 Cor. 1: 10-13; Phil. 2: 3. 

II. A church with secular trustees, chosen. to represent the world and help “run 
the church,” 2 Cor. 6: 14-18; Acts 6: 2, 3. 

{II. Appropriate to the annual pew auction, when Money-bags buys his place, 
and the Lord’s poor are assigned Be 3 2 2:1-73 John 2: 14-16. 

IV. Especially appropriate to the Sunday Dress Parade, when spring fashions 
appear, 1 Tim. 2:9, 10; I Pet. 3: 3, 4. 

V. For any people who were bound to build “the finest church in town” and 
remain bound by a mortgage, Rom. 13:8; Prov. 22:9. 

VI. Mole for “banks of flowers and fruits,” covering the pulpit platform, Gen. ' 
4:33 Jude rr. 

i For a church about to suspend all operations and take a midsummer vacation, 
I Cor. 15:58; 2 Tim. 4:2. 

VIII. For “Imitation churches,” that are lapsing into the observance of papal 
holidays, Gal. 5:1; Gal. 4:9, 10. 

IX. For a church that has a preacher who tries to be sensational, rationalistic, or 
smart, and to svin out of his little empty head some novelty or “Jatest thought.” This 
should be read to him by the senior deacon, or elder, just before he rises to “ preach,” 
2 Tim. 4: 1-8; Rev. 22: 18, 19. 

X. Something for the choir loft, when occupied by persons who, under the inspira- 
tion of brandy and vanity “shout lies to heaven” for sanctuary worship, Col. 3 : 16; 
Exod. 20: 7. 

XI. For churches that are allied with play-house and club-room as bureaus of 
amusements and caterers, Luke 19:45, 46; 1 Cor, II : 22. 

XII..If any church finds all the foregoing selections applicable, just one more 
should be added to cover all, Rev. 3 : 13-20. 

18 


1. As sinners we gaze upon substitution, 
Gen. 22:2. 


2. AS ‘warriors we obtain victory, Ex. 
17 10. 

3. Worshippers in the presence of God, Ex. 
24:%, Q-II. 

4. As intercessors on the behalf of others, 1 
Kings 18 : 42. 


SEVEN KINDS 


I. Spirit of Anti-Christ, 1 Jno. 4: 3. 

II. Spirit of Bondage, Rom. 8:15. 

III. Spirit of Divination, Acts 16: 16. 

IV. Spirit of Dumbness, etc., Mark g: 17. 


eeienes epi 


I. We must put away abominations, and 
then v 2 have the promise that God will be 
with us, 2 Chron, 15:0; Deut. 31 :6, 7,8, 2%. 

II. Be of good courage and take the Word 
of God for your guide, and you will prosper, 
Josh, 1:6, 9, 18; 1 Chron, 22: 13. 

III, We must go to work, 1 Chron. 28; 20. | 


« 


EE 


I, The first is the wisdom that cometh 
from below. It is designated as,— 

1, Earthly, Phil. 3:18, 19. 

2. Sensual, Jude 16-19. 

3. Devilish (Phariseeism), John 8: 44. 
Sowing error is devilish, | latt. 13: 39. c.f. 
Matt. 13:24-30. The unsanctified tozgue 
devilish, Jas. 3:6. ‘ 

II. The second is the wisdom that 
cometh from above. It is termed, — 

1. Pure, Ps. 24:4; Matt. 5:8; 1 Pet. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


SOME OF THE MOUNTAIN SCENES IN SCRIPTURE. 


5. As privileged friends gazing uoon His 
glory, Mark 9 :2. 

6. As waiting ones looking by faith upon 
things which are eternal, Rev. 21: 9. 

7. As reigning ones in resu:rection glory we 
shall be associated with Him when He reigns 
over a redeemed earth, when the ‘law shall 
again go forth from Mount Zion,” Zech. 
14:9, 10, 11; Rev..2:5,6, 7; 3:12, 21. 

Ar. by J. E. W. 


OF SPIRITS. 


V. Spirit of fear, 2 Tim. 1:7. 
VI. Spirit of Jealousy, Num. 5: 14. 
VII. Spirit of Slumber. Rom. 11:8, 


COURAGE. 


IV. We are exhorted to play the man, 
2 Sam, 10: 12, 
V. We should waii on the Lord, Ps. 27: 14. 
VI. He will also strengthen, Ps. 3r : 24. 
VII. We should exhort others to be of 
good courage, Isa. 41: 6. 
J. E. W. 


TWO KINDS OF WISDOM. 


1:15, 16; Rom, 12:1; 1 Cor. 5:7; 2 Cor. 
6: 14-18; 2 Cor. 7:1. 

2. Peaceable, Isa. 32: 17,18; Heb. 12: 11. 

3. Gentle, Titus 3:1, 2; 2 Tim. 2:24. 

4. Easy to be entreated (or persuaded), 
1 Cor. 4:13. 

s, Full of mercy and good fruits, Matt. 
5:7; John 15: 1-16. 

6. Without partiality, James 2 : 1-13. 

7. Without hypocrisy, Rom. 17: 9-21. 

J. BE. W. 


JRE. 
ng uvon His 


yy faith upon 
21 39. 

ction glory we 
1en He reigns 
1¢ ‘law shall 
Zion,’’ Zech. 
3:12, 21. 

y J. E. W. 


lay the man, 


rd, Ps. 27: 14. 
Ps. 3F : 24. 
ers to be of 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN, 


275 


POU er meme nee ee as 
SAFETY, CERTAINTY, AND ENJOYMENT. 


I, Safety. 

I. Through the atonement, or in virtue 
thereof, believers are made safe from the 
power of the adversary, See Rom. 5 8-11; 
2 Cor. 5: 18-20; x John 4: ro, 

2. Men did not assist in making atone- 
ment. Christ accomplished it all alone. 
Had men engaged to assist, there would 
have been no redemption. Man spoils all 
he touches, See John 1:29; Acts 4:10, 
12; 1 Thess. 1:10; Heb, 2 '9; I Pet. 2:2r. 

3. The atonement was the perfect work of 
the perfect man. And we find thar only 
through faith in His atonement can the 
guilty sinner he saved, Rom. 3:25; Gal. 
2: 13,14. It was the blood that sheltered 
the Israelites in Egypt, and only the blood. 

II. Certainty, 

1. The certainty of this safe: y orsalvation 
is produced by faith in what God says, Eph. 
3:12; 2 Tim. 1:12; Heb. 10:22, 

2. Assurance comes through belief of the 
Gospel, Col. 2:2, 

3. We may be certain as toour election, 1 
Thess. 1 : 4, 

4. Certain as to our redemption, Job 19:25. 

5. Certain of our adoptien, Rom. 8:16 31 
Jno. 3 : 20. ; 


6. Certain of our salvation, Isa, 12: 2. 

7. Certain of eternal life, x Jno. §: 13. 

8. Certain of the never-failing love of God, 
Rom. 8 ; 38, 39. 

9. Certain of our union with God and 
Christ, Eph. 5 +303 I Jno. 2: 5. 

to, Certain of peace having been made 
with God by our Lord Jesus Christ, Rom, 
Lis 

tr. Certain of pieservation, Ps. 3:6; Ps. 
27: 3-5. 


III. Enjoyment. 


I. ‘Lhe Word affords joy, Neh. 8:12; Jer. 
15: 16, 

2. The Christian rejoices for salvation, 
Ps, 21:1. 

3. He rejoices over deliverance from 
bondage, Ps, 105 : 43. 

4. The joy of saints should be abundant, 
2 Cor. 8:2 
. Should be exceeding, Ps, _ ;: 6; 68: 3. 
- Is unspeakable, 1 Pet, 1:8. 
. This joy is full of glory, x Pet. 1:8. 
. It should also be constant, 2 Cor. 6: ro, 
- Evermore, 1 Thess. 5:16; Ps, 23. 


© ON AW 


J.E.w. | 
tH 
i 
IN ORDER THAT OUR PRAYERS MAY BE ANSWERED. 
I. WE MUST as) in the name of Jesus, VII. WE MUST pray forall saints at the 
5:7; 2 Cor. John 14 : 13, 14, same time, Eph. 6:18. j 
II. WE MUST be abiding in Him and VIII. WE MUST be intelligent as to 
; Heb, 12:11. His Word in us, John 15:7. God's mind, Jude 20, Eph. 6:18, 
Pim, 2:24. 


III. WE MUST be keeping His com- 
mandments, 1 John 3 : z2, 
IV. WE MUST give thanks at the same 


it 
IX. WE MUST have no hard feelings Hy 


r persuaded), toward any one, Mark 11 225, i 


X. WE MUST NOT ‘Babble,’ Matt. i 
fruits, Matt. time, Phil. 4:6. S97. 2, i 
V. WE MUST be watching for answer, | XI. WE MUST NOT ask for fi shly li 
$2: 1-13. Col. 4:2. desire, James 4:3. 
, 141 Q-at. ; VI, WE MUST speak spiritual things XII. WE MUST NOT doubt 3 God will 
J. E. W. Jirst, Matt. 6: 33. | keep His word Mark 11524; 1 John5:14, 15, 


Isaac, Genesis 22:11, 12—son of piomise. 
Joseph, Genesis 37 : 3—king’s treasurer. 
Moses, Exod«'s 2 : 1o—deliverer ; lawgiver. 
Samuel, 1 Sam. 1 : 27—child of prayer. 
Samuel, 1 Sam. 2: 18—servant of God. 
Samuel, 1 Sam. 3: 1o—high priest. 
David, 1 Sam. 16: 11, 12—king. 
Little lad, 1 Sar. 20 : 35 —Go’l uses boys. 
Widow’s'son, 1 Kings 17:22—God cared 
for boys. 
Shunamite’s son, 2 Kings 4 : 36, 37—CGod 
cares for boys. — 


I. Sin must not reign, Rom. 6: 12. 

II. Body dead bevause of sin, Rom. 8: ro. 

III, Should present our bodies a sacrifice, 
Rom. 12:1. 

IV. Our bodies are not for fornication, 1 
Cor, 6:13. , 

V. Fornication is sin against the body, 1 
Cor. 6: 18. 

Vi. Body temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 
Cor. 6: 19. 


Webster defines conscience to be, '' The 
knowledge of our acts, states, or characters, 
as right or wrong; the faculty, power, or 
principle, which decides on the lawfulness of 
our actions and affections, and approves or 
condemns them; the moral faculty; the 
moral sense."’ 

Blackstone writes of « ‘Court of con- 
science, established for the recovery of small 
debts, in London, or other trading cities or 
districts,”’ : 

Whewel! says that ‘‘ Conscience is the rea- 
son, employed about questions of right and 
wrong, and accompanied with the sentiments 
of approbation and condemnation.” 

Shakespeare : ‘‘ Conscience makes cowards 
of us all.” 


CONSCIENCE. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


BOYS OF THE BIBLE. 


Azariah, 2 Kings 15:2, 3—a boy king. 
Jesus, Luke 2: 42-46—He can sympathize 


with a boy. 


“Set Him in the midst," Matt. 18: 2— 


Jesus loves boys. 


Little lad, John 6: 9—boy on hand to help 


1 in the miracle. 


Timothy, 2 Tim. 3: 15—evangelist. 
God has used boys all the way along and 


uses them to-day. 


W. H, PERKINS. 


BIBLE FACTS ABOUT OUR BODIES. 


VII. We must glorify God in our bodies 


1 Cor. 6: 20. 


VIII, We must keep the body under, 1 


Cor. 9: 27. 


IX. Christ should ever be magnified in our 


bodies, Phil. 1; 20. 


X. This body of humiliation shall be 
changed, Phil. 3:21. 


J. E. W. 


% 

The Bible tells us a great dea) about con- 
science: 

I. We read of a seared conscience, r Tim. 


4:2. 
II. An awakened conscience, John 8:9. 
III. A purged conscience, Heb. 9:9; 9: 14; 

10:2} 10: 22. 

IV. A nure conscience, Acts 24:16, 1st 
clause; 1 Tim. 3:9; 2 Tim.1:3. A good 
~omscience, Acts 2:31; 1 Tim. 1:5; 1 Pet. 2: 
19; 3:16; 3:21. 

V. Aconscience void of offence, Acts 24: 
16, last clause. 

VI. A weak conscience, 1 Cor, 8:12; 8:7. 

VII. A defiled conscience, Titus 1 : 15. 

VIII. A witnessing conscience, Rom. 2:15; 
9:1; 2Cor, 1:12. J. E. W. 


oy king. 
sympathize 


tt. 18: 2— 
and to help 


elist. 
‘along and 


-RKINS. 


our bodies 
ly under, 1 
nified in our 


n shall be 


J. E. Ww. 


| about con- 
ence, r Tim. 


fohn 8:9. 
.9:9,; 9:14; 


24:16, 1st 
3. A good 
5; 1 Pet.2: 


ce, Acts 24: 


8:12; 8:7. 
us I: 15. 

, Rom. 23153 
J. E. W. 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 277 | 
cnc ceaaeee ee i OE Dole an IRAE 


sti renee Atala iilcnasmsmieis cin stolen 


BIBLE HOMILETICS, 


I. The Matter of Preaching. 


1. ‘The preaching which God bids, Tonah 


3:2. 


2. Not a dream nor human conception 


Jer. 23: 28. 


3. Solemn warnings from God, Ez. 33: 7.9. 
4. Most gracious Gospel invitations, Luke 


14:17. 


5. Jesus Christand Him crucified, 1 Cor, 


2:2. 


6. The Word, in apostacy and rejection, 2 


Tim. 4: 1-5, 
7. All Scripture, 2 Tim. 3: 16, 
II. The Manner of Preaching. 


quences, Ez. 2:7. 


| 
| 
| 
| speech, Neh. 8:8, 


3. With special spiritual adaptation, 2 Tim. 


4. Not as an artist, but divine oracle, 1 


Boe 


Cor, 2:1, 4, 5, 13. 


5. With great sincerity and earnestness, 


Acts 20: 31. 
6. With absolute divine authority, Matt. 
7:29. 
7. With a beseeching, persuasive spirit, 2 
Cor. 5: 18-21. 
E. ’. MARVIN, 


CLEAVING, OR STICKING TO. 


I. The believer should stick to God's testi- 
Monies, Psa. rrg ; 31. 


II. Should become so identified with the 
word that he would cleave to it, as did the 
hand of Eleazer, the son of Dodo, one of 
David's mighty men, to the sword, 2 Sam. 
23: Io. 


III. He should cleave to the Lord, Deut. 
10: 20; Acts rr :23, 


TV. A man should cleave unto his wife. 


No sanction in the Bible for divorce, save 
adultery. “Husbands, love your wives," 
Gen. 2:24; Eph. 5:25. 

V. The Lord sticketh closer than a loving 
brother, Prov. 18: 24. 

VI. So close that there will never be 
Separation, Job41: 17; Rom. 8; 38, 39; Phil. 
1:6; Jno. 10:28, 

VII. For disobedience, the Lord sendeth 
affliction upon His saints, Psa, 38:2; Heb. 
12: 5-12, J. E. W. 


. esr 
THINGS THE CHRISTIAN SHOULD DO CONTINUALLY. 


I. Should seek the face of the Lord con- 
tinually, 1 Chron. 16:11, Psa. 109: 15. 

II. Should praise the Lord continually, 
Psa. 71:6. : 

III, Should pray Continually, Acts 6:4; 
1 Thess. 5:17 Péa, 94: ts. 

TV. Should magnify the Lord Continually, 
Psa, 70: 4. 


V. Should’ hope continually, Psa, 71: ra. 

VI. Should keep God’s ‘word continually, 
Psa. 119: 44, T1g:try, Jno. 15:7; r Jno. 
a % 

VII. The Lord will guide theé continually, 
Isa. 58: 11, 


J. E. Ww. 


1. With absolute fearlessness of conse- 


2. With great plainness and simplicity of 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE IMPRECATORY PSALMS. 


Dr, W. Kay. 


*HRISTIANS who have listened to their Divine Master praying for His murderers 

are often perplexed when they read Psalms like the 35th, 69th, and 1ooth, which 

breathe so stern, and, it might even seem, vindictive a spirit. A few remarks on this 
point may not be out of place. 

I, We have plain evidence that David in his personal transactions was singularly 
free from vindictiveness. 

It is scarcely possible to imagine greater.provocation than he received from his 
bitter and malignant persecutor, Saul. What intensity of hatred rankled in the breast 
of him who authorised Doeg, the Edomite, to slay eighty-five ministering priests, and 
to massacre the whole population of the city of Nob, because Abimelech had done a 
trifling act of kindness to David! Yet on two occasions, when this implacable foe 
was Waite in his power, he let him go uninjured; simply addressing him thus: “The 
Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee; but my hand 
shall not be upen thee. ... The Lord ve judge, and judge between me and thee, 
and sec, and plead my cause, and vindicate me out of thy hand,” 1 Sam, 24: 12-15 ; 
comp. 26 : 9-20. 

Surely we may amply to him the words in which St. Peter described the meekness 
of the Divine Sufferer Himself: “He committed Himself to Him that judgeth 
righteously,” 1 Pet. 2 :2.. 

II. It is remarkable, tiiat in the very strongest of the Imprecatory Psalms we 
have clear proof of more than meekness, of the persevering love of the sufferer. So 
in Psalm 35. ‘‘ They reward me evil for good, to the desolating of my soul. As for 
me, when they fell sick, my clothing was sackcloth : I afflicted my soul with fasting, 
and my prayer, it returns into my bosom.” In 69,: “That which I had never taken, 
did I then make good ... , I wept out my soul with fasting; ana thot was turned 
into reproaches against me.” In Iog: “In return for my love they persecute me; 
and I am all prayer. And they laid evil on me in return for good, and hatred for 
my good will.” 

III. How, then, it is asked, are we to explain those prayers for punishment? A 
simple key for unlocking the difficulty is supplied by 2 Chr. 6: 21-23. Solomon is 
there entreating God to let His mercy rest upon the Temple. His first petition is that 
when any prayed toward that place, Gcd would hear from heaven, “and forgive.” 
His second petition runs thus: “Ifa man sin against his neighbor, and an oath 
be laid on him to make him swear, and the oath come before Thine altar in this 
house; then hear from heaven, and do, and judge Thy servants, by requiting the 
wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head, and by justifying the righteous 
by giving him according to his righteousness.” Now, unquestionably there was 
nothing ‘ indictive, nothing contrary to the spirit of meekness, in this prayer. The 
retribution asked for was good for all. That the unjust should triumph over the 
righteous was not good for any. That would have undermined the foundations of the 
Israelic Theocracy ; would have thrown a stumbling block in the way of the pious ; 
would have hardened the ungodly in their sins, comp. 10: 12; 12:13 14:63 58:11; 
64:9; 73:2-14; 74:20. If God were not to punish the high-handed violators of 
law and right, then would Israel be less favored than the generality of heathen nations, 
amongst whom providential retribution on’impious pride and violence was confidently 
aren for by the more religious class of minds. 

IV. These Psalms, then, may be viewed as the outpourings of a spirit animated 
by the highest love of truth and righteousness and goodness, zealous for the m in- 
ing 9 of God’s honor— nay, and anxious for the recovery of the bold transgrcssor 

imself, 


nurderers 
th, which 
ks on this 


singularly 


from his 
the breast 
riests, and 
id done a 
acable foe 
wus: “The 
t my hand 
» and thee, 
24 :12-153 


. meekness 
at judgeth 


Psalms we 
fferer. So 
ul. As for 
ith fasting, 
ever taken, 
as turned 
becute me 5 
hatred for 


ment? A 
Solomon is 
tion is that 
d forgive.” 
d an oath 
Itar in this 
huiting the 
righteous 
there was 
nyer. The 
over the 
ions of the 
the pious ; 
6; 58:11; 
iolators of 
en nations, 
onfidently 


animated 
the main- 
] nspr essor 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN: 279 


This last aim shines through most manifestly in 10:15; “Break Thou the arm 
of the wicked and bad man ; so, when Thou inquirest into his wickedness, Tnou shalt 
find none.” When the imprecation assumed its most solemn form, it was like the 
excommunication pronounced by the Apostle, “a delivering unto Satan for the 
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord,” 1 Cor. 
5:5. In cases of less heinousness, the end hoped for was the present recovery of the 
offender. It is recorded of Czesarius of Arles, that when he suffered injurious treat- 
ment from anyone, his practice was to pray: “ May God pardon thy sins! May God 
take thy sins away! May God punish thy sins in order that they may not cleave to 
thee ! May God correct thy errors in this world!” (Neander’s Memor. p. 357.) This 
way of viewing the subject has been singularly illustrated by the experiences of 
modern reformatory philanthropists. “Ifthe sentimentalists cast righteous retribution 
for the past out of their penal theories, they abandon one of the most powerful means 
which God has created for arousing that ‘ godly sorrow’ which is the first beginning 
and the only safe foundation for a genuine reformation of character,” W. L. Clay: 
The Prison Chap'ain, p. 365. 

V. It is not difficult now to answer the question : In what way are these Psalms to 
be viewed, when they are recited in public worship ? 

Surely they are like the echoes of the thunders of Sinai launched against wilful, 
unrepunting sinners. These have not been silenced by the Gospel. “ For the wrath 
of God is revealed (by the Gospel) against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of 
men who hold the truth in unrighteousness, 1 Rom. 1:18. That epistle, in which the 
tender love of the -high priest of the human race is most largely set forth, warns us 
that “ our God is aconsuming fire,” Heb, 12:25 ; comp. 10:27, 31; Rom. 2:5; 2 Tim. 
4:14; Rev. 6:16, 17. 

+ Sin is an utterly hateful thing, that must be exterminated out of God’s universe. 
This is revealed plairly. Into the holy city “shall in no wise enter anything that 
defileth,” Rev. 21:27: comp. Ps. 101:8; 104:35. The Psalms proclaim thisirreconcilable 
antagonism between God’s kingdom and all that is selfish in man. They “ to whom 
the Word of the Lord came,” in old times were by these Psalms placed under a necessity 
of either departing from iniquity or pronouncing sentences upon themselves. 

Here, then, is the answer to the question propounded above. When these awful 
words are heard in church, they are to be listened to as warnings from the invisible 
world against allowing any of the accursed thing to cleave to ourselves. They tell us 
how God of old “judged his people ;” how “every transgression and disobedience 
received a just recompense of reward.” They leave us toinfer “how much sorer 
punishment,” Heb. 10:29, is justly due to those who slight the obligat’ ‘s laid on them 
by Christ their gracious Saviour. 

“When any of yu,” says Ceesarius, “is singing the verse of the Psalms where it 
is said, ‘ Let the proud be put to shame,’ 119 : 78, let him be earnest to avoid pride, that 
he may escape everlasting shame. When we sing, ‘Thou wilt destroy all them that 
are seduced away from Thee,’ 68:27, let us strive to escape from all evil desires ; 
and as often as sinners are cursed in the Psalms, let us endeavor to fice s.0m sin, lest 
we be found to curse ourselves with our own mouth.” (In the App, to vol. 5 of St. 
Augustine's Works, p, 335 F., 336 A). 


THE UNDYING WORM. 


Dr. Alex. Whyte. 


O man in this life, not even the man who has studied the Book of God, and his own 
41‘ heart, and the moral and spiritual Jaws of God best, knows what the unquenchable 
fire means, nor what it is to be. Christ said there were many things impossible for 
Him to tell His disciples, but He told them enough to save their souls from Tophet. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


a ee 


No doubt it was impossible even for Carist Himself to tell us what the fire of hell in 
reality is. The whole state of human existence after death, and especially our existence 
after the day of judgment, is so mysterious—it must be in everything so unlike our 
present state of existence—that it may have been impossible even for Him to tell more 
than He has here told us. He is our sole and supreme authority on all matters con- 
nected with sin, death, and judgment. He has left other fields for other men to 
explore, but He alone knew this field, and He has explored it for us, And three times 
in this passage, as if to show there can be no mistake about it, He employs the terrible 
figure of the “‘unquenchable fire.” Since He is silent as to what the fire is, we cannot 
so much as touch the border of the mystery that hangs about the dreadful word. God 
help us to point the lost to Christ, so they shall never make the horrible discovery as 
to what the fire really is! The unquenchable fire we cannot in this world either taste 
or understand, but the undying worm all taste. That cruel worm is already at work in 
very many svuls. What is the worm that dieth not, but a sin-laden conscience 
awakened when it is too late; when the day of mercy is clean gone for ever, and the 
door of hope is shut and locked? In some men’s bosoms the pain of that worm is 
raging incessantly, bieaching their faces, making their hair grey, because its time is 
short. In many a man this worm is almost as'eep because it has all eternity before 
it, to waken up and do its work. 

We do not need to go beyond Scripture to study this worm of remorse, for this, 
like everytlfing else, is inthe holy Book. We hear the cry of this awakened conscience 
in Cain, in Saul, in Judas. And all profane literature, worthy of the name, is full of the 
sam horror; because literature is life, and life is full of that horror, Our own hearts, 
alas! are not stainless. There are men and women whose ashy faces show that they 
are suffering from that which no physician can get at—the sleepless tooth of the worm 
of God. Moralists and theologians call it remorse ; Christ calls it the undying worm, 
In truth it is God Almighty Himself. It is the righteous Judge, in His righteous anger, 
making His wrath felt in those who are preparing themselves to be the vessels of His 
wrath. But when all is said, this remains true, that in no living man has that worm 

‘ever awakened in full fury, not even in Judas himself, or in the most miserable man 
here who has sinned against light as Judas never did.... 

What a book the Bible is! and what a fool is he who neglects or goes against it. 
What discoveries it makes to us of things otherwise undiscoverable and unimaginable 
by us. It opens at one time tie eternity of the past, and shows us our election of grace; 
at another time it shows us the eternity that is to come, where we see our fathers, and 
the saints before us, rejoicing in glory. It takes us to Gethsemane, and leads us up to 
Calvary; while again, under its awful guidance, we stand in anticipation before the 
great white throne. It shows us the sons of God in the glories of heaven; it lays our 
ear to the door of hell, and lets us kear the weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth 
of old fellow-worshippers, as they lie with the fire around them, and the undying worm 
in their boso1 1s. 

With all the sinner’s sleeping draughts and comforts he cannot command a quiet 
night here in his earthly body. When the remembrance of the past begins, his midnight 
bed is sometimes let down as with coffin curtains into the caverns of Tophet, and he 
tastes in the night-watches a little of what an eternity of remorse will be. No wonder 
they say in the morning, “You have not slept.” He was remembering his lifetime. 
He saw the long-forgotten past in the light of God’s law. Like angry ghosts there 
stood around his bed the souls whose destruction he had had a hand in long ago; the 
households he had ruined ; the hearts he had broken or beclouded, and boasted about it; 
the friends he had betrayed; the men whose good name he had done his best to 
dishonor. What a company, like a nest of hornets, passes around his bed, till he is 
able to say that he understands now, better than all his teachers, what is the worm that 
dieth not, and the consuming fire that is not quenched. If one night watc* on earth 
oath made so terrible. what will the awful night be on which no morning will ever 

wner.... 


nn ———e 


‘e of hell in 
ir existence 
y unlike our 
to tell more 
iatters con- 
er men to 
three times 
the terrible 
we Cannot 
vord. God 
scovery as 
sither taste 
at work in 
conscience 
‘r, and the 
it worm is 
its time is 
lity before 


se, for this, 
conscience 
s full of the 
wn hearts, 
v that they 
f the worm 
ing worm, 
ous anger, 
sels of His 
that worm 
rable man 


against it. 
maginable 
n of grace; 
thers, and 
Is us up to 
before the 
it lays our 
ig of teeth 
ying worm 


nd a quiet 
3 midnight 
et, and he 
Jo wonder 
s lifetime. 
osts there 
ago; the 
d about it; 
is best to 
till he is 
worm that 
~ on earth 

will ever 


FRAG! ENTS THAT REMAIN. 


snes menihiaeineenttiieuntaiiiind 


CORRUPT THINGS, 


I. A corrupt spring, Prov. 25:26; Gen. 


6: 12. 
II, Corrapt doings, Ezek. 20: 44. 


III. Corrupt words, Dan. 2:9; or, ‘' an- 


other Gospel,” 
IV. Corrupt minds, 1 Tim, 6:5, 


rotten.) 


to corrupt, Mait. 6 +19, 20, 
J. E. W. 


FOURTEEN GREAT FACTS IN JOHN 6. 


I. We are given by God to Christ, 37; 39. 


II. We are drawn to Christ, 44. 
III. We are come to Christ, 35, 45. 
IV. We believe in Christ, 47, 

V. We see Christ, 40. 


VI. We live by Christ, and are sustained 


by Him, 51, 57. 


VII. We feed on Christ, and its results 


to us, 54, 56. 
VIII. We are taught by Christ, 45. 
IX. We are witnesses for Christ, 69. 


X. We ar the abiding ones in Christ, 56. 
XI. We have everlasting life in Christ, 


49: 47. 


XII, We have Christ, the True Bread from 


Heaven, 32. 


XIII. We shall be raised up by Christ, 39, 


49, 44, 54. 


XIV. Weare sure ofall these Divine bless- 
ings, because that Christ is the Son of the 


living God, 69. W: H. 


NOAH’S ARK AS A TYPE OF CHRIST, 


I. When the ark was provided death 
threatened ail, Gen. 6: 5-7; Rom. 3:23; 


Rom. 5:12; Eccl, 7:20; Rom. 6:23; Ez, 
18:4, 


II. It was a God-provided refuge,.Gen. 6: 
13, 14; John 3:16; x John 4: ro. 


IIT, It was the only refuge, Gen. 6: 17, 18; 
Acts 4:12; John 14:6. 


IV. It was perfectly safe, Gen. 7:10-16; 
John ‘3:15, 18; John 10:28, 29, 30; John 
6:47. 


V. All who entered lived, Gen. 8; 15-20; 
John 5:24; 1 Cor, 15:22; John6 : 40. 
VI. All who remained outside died, Gen. 


7 +21-23; John 3: 36; John 5:40; 1 John 
5:12. 


Vil. There came a time when it was too 


late to find refuge, Gen. 7:16; Matt. 25:10; 
Luke 13: 25-28; Proy. x : 24-28. 


VIII. Dear friend, where do you stand, 
outside or inside? Remember there is no 
middle class, and when the door is shut, 
however near we may stand it will be of no 
avail; we must either be shut in with Christ 
in thé glory, brighter than human heart can 
conceive, 2 Cor, 2:9,10; Isa. 64:4; Rev. 
21’: 3, 4, 10-23; or shut out in everlasting 
darkness and despair, Matt. 8:12; Matt. 1 33 
42, 50; Matt. 22:13; Jude 13. Which shall 
it be? “To be almost saved is to be al- 
together lost."’ 


“ So near the door and the door stood wide, 
Close to the port but not inside ; 
Near to the ark, yet not within, 
Almost persuaded to give up sin; 
Almost persuaded to count the cost, 
Almost a Christian, and yet lost.” 


BELLA CLARKE, 


281 


V. Corrupt trees, Matt. 7:17 (bad, putrid 


VI. Corrupt communications, Eph. 4 : 29. 
VII. A country where nothing can enter 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


THE BELIEVER’S SINS. 


They are atoned for, Lev. 4:35; blotted 
out, Isa. 44:22; borne, 1 Pet. 1:24; cast 
behind God's back, Isa 38:17; castinto the 
depths of the sea, Mic. 7:20; cleansed, 1 
John 1:7; covered, Ps, 32:1; Christ died 
for them, rt Cor, 15: 3; Christ gave Himself 
for them, Gal. 1:4; Christ made to be sin, 
2 Cor. 5:21; Christ offered to bear them, 
Heb. 9:28; Christ suffered for them, 1 Pet. 
3:18 Christ the propitiation for them, 1 
Toh 2:2; dead to them, Rom 6:2; des- 
troyed, Rom, 6:6; finished, Dan. 9: 24; 
forgiven, Eph. 1:7; God’s face hid from 
them, Ps. 51:10; laid on Christ, Isa. 53:6; 
laid aside, Heb. 12:1 ; made anend of, Dan. 
9:24; made free from them, Rom. 6: 22; 


It is wonderful how much there is in the 
New Testament about the word Take. It 
seems to involve us in much responsibility, 
that we have to put forth our spiritual hauds 
and take,or let our hands hang downand refuse 
to take what is so graciously offered. We have 
each the power of spiritual receptibility ; oh 
that we may use it! Just listen to this list of 
the word Take in the New Testament. In 
the whole Bible the word Take, or Taking, 
or Taketh is used over 500 times. The 
command to Take is more specially used in 
the New Testament, and is a most solemn 
admonition to all of us; therefore let us 
Take heed. 

I. ‘‘ Take these things hence,” John 2: 16, 

II, ‘‘ Take heed, therefore, how ye hear,” 
Luke 8; 18, 

III. ‘‘ Take My yoke upon you,” Matt. 11: 
29. ‘ oe 
IV. ‘‘ Take ye away thestone,” John 2 : 39. 

V. ‘*Take unto you the whole armour of 
God,” Eph. 6: 13. 

VI. ‘ Take theshield of Faith," Eph. 6: 16. 


not beheld, Num. 23:21: not dealt with in 
us, Ps, 103: 10; not found, Jer. 1:20; not 
imputed, Rom. 4:8; not having dominion, 
Rom, 6:14; not mentioned, Ezek. 33:16; 
passed away, Zech. 3:4; passed by, Mic. 7: 
18; pardoned, Mic. 7:18; purged, Heb. 1: 3; 
put away, Heb.g:26; remitted, Acts 10: 43; 
removed, Ps. 103:12; subdued, Mic. 7:19; 
taken away, John 1:29; unremembered, 
Heb. 10:17; washed, Rev. 1:5; white as 
snow, Isa. 1: 18. 

Would it not be well to leave them where 
God has put them through the death of His 
Son, by the Holy Spirit, and go forth under 
the constraining leve of Christ, to testify of 
all this grace ? J. H. B. 


ey 


TAKE IT AT ONCE. 


VII. ‘‘Take the helmet of Salvation,” 
Eph. 6: 17. 

VIII. And (Take) ‘‘the sword of the 
Cpirit,” Eph, 6: 17, 

IX. ‘Take wrong,” 1 Cor, 6: 7. 

X. ‘Take up thy cross,"’ Matt. 16: 24, 

XI. “ Take, eat; this is My Body,” Matt. 
26: 26, 

XII, ‘‘Take the Water of Life freely,” 
Rev. 22: 17. 

The only thing we are not to take is Thought. 

XIII. ‘‘Take no thought,” for life, for body, 
for raiment, nor forthe morrow; St. Luke 
explains it. ‘‘ Live not in careful suspense,” 
12:29. (Margin). 
. And He offers us His peace, too; peace 
through His blood. He is our peace. Oh, 
do, do, do, let us take His peace. We do 
ourselves grievous wrong, and we vex His 
Holy Spirit, if we do not appropriate His 
dying gift, His legacy of Peace. 

An anecdote may help you to see what I 
mean. 

An aged widowed grand-aunt of mine 


salt with in 
1; 20; not 
; dominion, 
zek. 33:16; 
by, Mic. 7: 
1, Heb. 1:33 
Acts 10:43; 
Mic. 7:19; 
emembered, 
5; white as 


them where 
leath of His 
forth under 
to testify of 
J. H. B. 


Salvation,’’ 


ord of the 


oy 
tt. 16: 24. 
Body,’’ Matt. 


Life freely,” 


ke is Thought. 
life, for body, 
w; St. Luke 
ul suspense,” 


e, too; peace 
peace. Oh, 
race. We do 
l we vex His 
propriate His 


o see what I 


nt of mine 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN, 283 


rn — - - 


who, like Anna of old, '' served God day and 
night with fastings and prayers, and spoke of 
Him,” etc., etc., was sitting meditating, as 
her custom was, in her room, when a nephew 
was ushered in to see her. 

In the course of conversation he said, 
‘Aunt, I want to be sure that you will give | 
me a legacy when you die, and that is what 
I want,” said he, as he pointed to a piece of 
solid silver on her sideboard. 

‘Take it at once, take it at once, my boy, 
and then you will not wish me dead." 

So I say to you, dear Christian, “ Take 
your legacy, ‘take it at once.’"" Take the 
peace Christ left you; it can never be re- 
voked. Remember He was dead only three | 
days. He is alive again, and gone in to ad- 
minister His own will, His gifts, His legacy. | 
He will see they are carried out. No fear | 
of His will being disputed, His will is His | 


pence ce OED ee 


Father's will. ‘I and my Father are one.” 
Take it at once, : 

You may carry this peace away with you 
even as my great aunt's nephew did his silver 
salver. It was his from that day forward. 
‘Go in peace” are the words of Jesus to 
every one who touches His garment in faith. 
Repentance towards God is one-half of our 
belief, and Faith toward the person and 
work of the Lord Jesus Christ is the other 
half, both equally true and important. 

But there is no peace unless we take Jesus 
at His word, ‘Goin peace.” Oh, take it at 
once. Oh, let us carry His golden Salver of 
Peace away with us to sweeten our daily 
cup, and gladden our hearts with His joy, 
‘That your joy may be full.” Let others 
see your joy, even as my third cousin showed 
his wife the ‘‘ Take it at once" Salver. 

EMILY LEAKEY. 


A CARD FOR THE ANXIOUS. 


The following, printed on two sides of a | 
tinted card, should be widely circulated; it | 
seeks to point the anxious to Christ. the true | 
foundation :— 

THE LORD SAVES. 

I, He is all our Salvation: those only | 
who have Christ have everlasting life, 
John 3:16; 1 John 5:12. 

The Father, the Son, and the Spirit are 
one God, one Lord, united in saving all 
believers. 

Satan is real, sin is real, hell is real; and, 
precious truth! the Saviour is real, His 
righteousness ‘s r2al, and heaven is real. 

No theory, Church, Ministry, ‘' Priest,” 
‘** Pope," ‘‘ Sacraments,”’ or ‘‘Good Works,” 
or all together, can ever save any one soul— | 
Jesus only can save, Ps. 62:2-6; Matt. 1:21. | 

II. Salvation is all of grace. 

The gift of God, as free as the air we | 
breathe! it is all 1n Curist; clearly made | 


known throughout the Bible; is revealed By 
THE SPIRIT to all who seek, and it is 
III. Enjoyed in believing, Rom. 15: 13. 
Those who have the Lord and trust alone 


| in Him, are saved. All who have Ci ‘st 


have the Father, and are in His bosom, Jo 
1:18, 
HAVE YOU CHRIST? 

Do you believe that He is present with 
you? And do you trust Him and obey Him, 
and none other? Can you say, ‘ Christ is 
all, and Heismine?’ If so, youhaveeternal 
life, John 5 : 24. 

Having Christ Himself is being in the 
Way. 

Having Christ Himself is having the 
Truth. 

Having Christ Himself is having the Life, 
John 14:6. 

He saves by His precious blood al! who 
truly trust Him. 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


His death is our life, and His life is our 
strength, 


He is our perfection to delight in for ever, 
Col. 2:10. 


Behold His beauty, Ps. 27: 4. 


Be satisfied with Himself, and grow like 
Him, 2 Cor. 3: 18. 


Those are most unwise who allow anything 


to come between their soul and the Lord 
Himself, 1 Thess, 1: 9-10; and 4: 16-17. 

Read His w-rd with prayer for grace to 
know ana do His will. 

Having the Lord, a blessed reality yourself, 
seek to make Him known to others by calm, 
meek, loving conduct. 

And always mention His name with be- 
coming reverence. 


SELF-DELUSION. 


I, Self - delusion characteristic of the 
wicked, Ps. 49: 18. 

II. Prosperity frequently leads to self- 
delusion, Ps.30:6; Hosea 12:8; Luk, 12:17-19. 

III. Obstinate sinners often given up to 
sel{-delusion, Ps. 81:11, 12; Hosea 4:17; 
2 Thess. 2:10, 11. 

IV. Is exhibited in thinking we are pure, 
Prov. 30: 12. 


V. Better than others, Luke 18: rr. 

VI. Have a species of peace while in sin, 
Deut. 29: 19. 

VII. That God will not punish us for sins, 
Jer. 5: 14. 

VIII. Fatai course of self-delusion, Matt. 
7:23; 24:48-51; Luke 12:20; 1 Thess, 5:3. 

J. E. W. 


17. 
ace to 


urself, 
y calm, 


ith be- 


I. 
e in sin, 


for sins, 
yn, Matt. 


ess. 5:3. 
E. W. 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 285 


THE CLEANSING OF THE BELIEVER FROM DAILY DEFILE- 
MENT: IS IT BY “BLOOD” OR BY “WATER?” 


ag is of the greatest importance to see clearly the distinction between that which 
has been done once for all at the cross and that which is continuous, and often 
repeated in the believer’s existence. 

The Lord Jesus, ‘when He had by Himself purged our sins, sat down on the 
right hand of the Majesty on High,” Heb. 1 : 3. 

To that hour God had looked forward from “ before the foundation of the world,” 
an expression that occurs in connection with “the fore-ordaining of the Lamb,” whose 
precious blood, shed in due time at the cross, formed the groundwork of that purpose 
of infinite grace: Compare Eph. 1:4, and Peter 1: 19, 20. : 

When that atoning death was accomplished, when Jesus cried, “it is finished,” 
and bowed His heaa in death, all was donde that ever will be done towards God on 
account of sin. 

Past, present, and future are in God’s reckoning gathered into one focus at the 
cross. There “the Lord hath made to meet on Him the iniquity of us all,” Isa. 53: 
6, margin, ‘This man, after He had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down 
at the right hand of God. .... For by one offering He hath perfected for ever them 
that are sanctified,” Heb. 10: 12-14. 

On the ground of ‘his one offering God has acted from the time of His grace 
bestowed on Adam and Eve till the present hour, whether in justifying the ungodly, 
or in forgiving the sins of his erring children. 

We sing— 

“ Happy day! Happy day ! 
When Jesus washed my sins away.” 


‘ But by this we mean the day when first by faith we saw that our sins had been purged 


by the one offering eighteen centuries ago. In. othe: words, faith reckons, as God 
reckons, that ¢éme places no sface between the day when Jesus died and the day wheh 
I believed. By faith I am taken back in Spirit to the very spot and hour when Jesus 
died for me. It is all as plain and as real as if for me alone He had died but yesterday. 

Strictly speaking, then, the purging of our sins was effected on Calvary. But, in 
striking contrast to this, justification is invariably referred to the day when first we 
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. It is never said that our sins are washed away “‘ by 
faith ;” but it is said that we are “justified by faith,” Rom 5:1. It is only as a guilty 
sinner believes the Gospel that he receives the benefit of the one offering. Then, and 
not till then, God justifies him. From that moment he passes, in God’s reckoning, 
out from condemnation and death into righteousness and life. He is no longer in 
God’s reckoning a sinner, a branch of the corrupt and condemned Adam tree, but a 
son of God in Christ, and partaker of the life of the New Man—Christ Jesus. 

This justification—this passing from death into life—this regeneration is never, 
in Scripture, spoken of as being repeated. 

It is the act of G< d’s grace toward the believing sinner, based upon, and insepar- 
able from, the one offering—the purging of sin effected on Calvary, solely through the 
Blood of Christ. 

But if we re clear as to this, next arises the question, what is meant by such a 
passage as “ lood of Jesus Christ, His Son. cleanseth us from all sin?” and also, 
closely allied to this, what is meant by the figure of cleansing by water? 

Now, it seems to us that much of the obscurity that surrounds this subject in 
many minds arises from not seeing clearly that this great subject has two sides—which 
we would call the Goaward and the manward. On God’s part all is settled, all is clear, 
all is perfect. It is from God’s side of the subj-ct that the 10th of Hebrews is written. 


‘ 


eacahdindcaticieama: 


setae acest 


At ee a me tena as nem 


SRE TONE CIOS I at 


tit roses meena nt ne nanan 


Cs psininendeabdconeacaeidi cana oasis Squats eases te ees 
a renter nena neta amr eT 


GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


286 


“ Perfected for ever” is that which characterises it. But the other side has to do with 
my experience, my conscience, and is, therefore, affected by the measure of my faith 
and of my obedience. 

The moment I apprehended by faith the glorious announcement that my sins 
had been laid upon Jesus, as my substitute, and purged by Mis blood, so that God’s 
righteous demands were fully met, and that I was, consequently, discharged from the 
guilt of my sins—the burden that had lain upon my heart was gone ; in other words, 
the crimson stain of guilt that defiled my conscience, and kept ne far off from God, 
and in perpetual bondage and terror, was removed ! 

This was what is called cleansing, as pertaining to the conscience. This is not the 
removal of my sin from before God, but the removai of it from my heart and 
conscience, 

Its removal from before God was effected by “tne blood,” and the “blood alone.” 
Its removal from my conscience is effected by a threefoldagency. The spirit, the wate, 
and the blood have all had a part in it, yet not a separate part, for these three are one. 

This is divinely illustrated in the ordinance of the red heifer, Num. 19. There 
was but the one offering It was wholly burnt. Even the blood was burned with the 
rest, ver. 5. ‘ 

The ashes, therefore, contained in type all the permane.:t value of the offering. 
They always showed forth the fact that one offering had been made, on the ground of 
which defilements were to be removed not once, but many times, from many persons, 
and throughout their wilderness experience. 

But together with the ashes there had to be always “ running water ”—literally 
“living water.’ In many sc~iptures it is plain that water represents the Word of God. 
Compare Ps. 119:9, Eph. 5 :26; compare, also, John 13: to with 15:3 and 17:17. 
But “iiving water” represents the Werd of God in the living power and efficacy of 
the Holy Spirit. See John 7 : 38, 39. 

Is it not, therefore, evident, that the cleansing of the conscience is effected by the 
Holv Spirit, through the Word of God, bringing home to the heart in power the 
b’essed truth (typified by the ashes) that sin has indeed been put away once for all? 
The whole Gospel truth concerning the value of the blood of Christ, is that which 
alone can purge the conscience, Heb. 9:14. This is the “ashes of the red heifer ;” 
the Word of God i: the means by which the truth is conveyed to the believing soul, 
and it is by the living energy of the Holy Spirit that it is made effectual in cleansing 
the conscience and in restoring communion. 

The moment a child of God is conscious that he has sinned, that sin operates as 
a stain pon his conscience, and interferes with his confidence in drawing near to God. 
In other words, it mars communion. In such acase what God instructs is INSTANT 
CONFESSION. 


“If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and cleanse 
us from all unrighteousness,” Jno. 1:9. That is equal to saying, if we come to Him 
with the defilement, whatever it be, He will not only forgive, as a father forgives a 
penitent child, but He will convey afresh to the conscience the sense of forgiveness, 
and restore to the confidence and communion that the sin had marred. 


This He will do, not by a new offering, but by referring the defiled conscience 
anew to the same blood-shedding, by the same unchanging Word, and by the power 
of the Holy Spirit. It is true that a believer in this present dispensation stould 
“have no more conscience of sins,” Heb. 19:2. Not that if hecommit sin it should 
not trouble his conscience, but at, provision having been made in the one offering of 
Jesus for perpetual cleansing, ' is his privilege to obtain without delay the forgiveness 
and cleansing which are ever ecady for him in Christ Jesus, according to the riches 
of God’s grace, Eph. 1:7. 

There is another sense in which Scripture speaks of cleansing by the Word. It 
is not the cleansing of the conscience, but the cleansing of “the way,” Ps. 119: 9. It 


do with 
ry faith 


my sins 
t God’s 
‘om the 
- words, 
m God, 


not the 
art and 


| alone.” 
2 wate, 
are one. 

There 
with the 


offering. 
ound of 
persons, 


-literally 
of God. 
Bevan es 
ficacy of 


d by the 
wer the 
for all? 
At which 
eifer ;”’ 
g soul, 
eansing 


rates as 
to God. 
TANT 


cleanse 
to Him 
gives a 
iveness, 


hscience 
B piwer 
should 
should 
ering of 
iveness 
b riches 


brd. It 
:9. It 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 


is the application of the pure and holy teachings of the Word of God to my feet and 
my hands—in other words, to my walk and my actions. 

Though once and forever washed from our sins in the blood of Christ, we cannot 
acceptabl, serve the Lord except as our hands and ow feet are continually brought to 
the laver. Christ is that laver for us. May our hands and our feet evermore be sub- 
mitted to Him, that we ray be sanctified by that Word which is truth, and which tells 
not only of His death for us, but also of His will concerning us.—Se/ected, 


WAS THE APOSTLE PETER EVER IN ROME? 


OR, SOME BIBLE FACTS FOR ROMAN CATHOLICS. 


By C. Russel Hurditch. 7 


|e eyo his life of Christ, the beloved physician Luke has given us a history of the 
» founding of the Church of Christ, and of special events connected with it for nearly 
thirty years after the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost. 

In this history we find the names of two men distinguished above the rest; to 
each was a special service appointed, and, as may be expected, the localities of their 
respective ministrations agreed with the service so appointed. Peter, the apostle to 
the circumcision, is found in Judzea, Samaria, Galilee, and Syria, but not in Europe, or 
in the chief city of the Gentiles—Rome. 

. Peter was at Jerusalem in an upper room re Acts tet '4, 12, 13, 15, 
. Publicly preaching at Jerusalem ME .. Acts 2: 5-14. 

. In the temple es es a es tae ol Sa ah ae Fs 

. Before the high priest and his kindred .. Acts 4:6, 8, 13, 16. 
. Condemning liars and healing the sick .. Acts 5: 1-16. 

. Peter was sent from Jerusalem to Samaria .. Acts 8:1 


. Paul stayed fifteen days with Peter at Jerusalem 
. Peter passed through all quarters, probably of 


Samaria, Galilee, and Judza, to Lydda 


. He was at Joppa, near to Lydda 
. He went from Joppa to Czesarea 
. He was at the Jerusalem council 
. He was released from prison 


He was at the second council at Jerusalem 


. He was at Antioch oF a es 
. The Epistle to the Romans is supposed to have 


been written. In it the apostle Paul sends salu- 
tations to twenty-seven Christians, but he does 
not mention Peter ¢ - a ‘a 

Paul arrived at Rome, and nothwithstanding 
that there were twenty-seven belovedand much- 
honored Christians there, the chief of the Jews 
at Rome represents the Christian religion as 
a sect everywhere spoken against; plainly 
the apostle of the circumcision was not then 
Bishop of Rome. 


4. 
Acts 9:26; Gal. 1:18-21. 


Acts 9: 31, 32. 
Acts 9 : 36-43. 
Acts Io, 

Acts 11; 2. 

Acts 12: 1-19, 25. 
Acts 15 : 4-7. 
Gal. 2:11. 


Romans 16. 


Paul wrote six epistles from Rome—to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, 
Colossians, to Timothy and Titus. He does not mention Peter in any one of them. 


288 GOLD FROM OPHIR. 


It is admitted that the Second Epistle to Timothy was written in A.D. 66 ; after 
mentioning the departure of Demas, Crescens, and Titus, he says, “Only Luke is with 
me,” but adds nothing about Peter, 

Peter wrote no epistle either to or from Rome; but he sends salutations from the 
saints at Babylon, where probably there were some Jewish families left from the 
Nebuchadnezzar captivity. 

We again appeal to those who know more of the life of Simon Peter than the 
evangelist Luke, to tell us when he set his foot in Rome ; and if he never was in 
Rome, whence proceed the fables concerning his bishopric in the imperial city? 

The first recorded mention of Peter as Bishop of Rome is by Eusebius, in the 
time of Constantine, about 250 years after the death of the apostle to the circumcision 
a special time of Christianising and glorifying Rome. 


3 after 
is with 


‘om the 
mm the 


1an the 
was in 


in the 
ncision 


INDEX. 


[The * refers to Articles Contribuied and Collaied.| 


Boston's ‘ Fourfold State,’ illustra- 


tions from é 34 
Cain ‘ A : : : + 32,42 
Certain bills of indictment against 

man ‘ ; F ; : 
*Closing thoughts on the subject of 

ruin ; ; ; : ; 38 


Death—eternal, spiritual, temporal 8,9 
Regulations about . ; : 20 
The inevitable resuit of sin . : 
The penalty of, is attached to 

man as the offspring of Adara 37 


The wages of sin is , ; + 15, 23 
Debtatype ofsin ; ; . 22 
Disease, physical , ‘ ; ; 22 

*Dress, the mystery of ‘ ; + 30 


*God no respecter of persons; or, 


There is no difference. ; 10 
The grace of, is brought to man 37 


GOLD. 
PAGE, PAGE, 
' Gold, brass resembles ‘ : tg Gold is precious * : ; ‘ I 
Is found in the earth ; ; I Stands the fire ; ‘: ; I 
Is liable to grow dim , é 2 Takes prominent placein Scripture 1 

RUIN. 

PAGE. | PAGE, 
Adam, tae sin of, not merely an in- Leavenatypeofsin , : : 22 
considerate act . yi 42 Leprosy a type of sin ° + 20, 22,27 
All have sinned : ; : re # Moral, ° : 5 21 
A photograph of the natur:1 man ; 15 Lost man, the condition of g 9 


Man and his members, God’s own 
description of , Paiuits ° 

A photograph of the natural , 15 
A slave to sin ‘ . : 
By nature, a child of the devil 
Cannot please God ‘ , 
Certain bills of indictment against 
Comes short of the glory of God 
Fallen, conscious of his guilt . 
Goes astray from his birth . : 
Intellectually depraved 
Inward!y corrupt 
ishelpless . . 
The condition of lost , 
The fall of : ; : : 
The grace of God is brought to 
The natural, a child of wrath 
Total depravity of . , i; 6, 
Was first made in image of God 
What is the character of ‘ 
What sin can do for a 


cad 
Mm Hoo 


MN Aw Aa OO CoN? SI 


&e 


6 
9 
6 
7 
15 


Man’s alienation from God, marks of 
Conscience is defiled . . 
Fall, the devil the cause of . 
Present fallen state, five things about 
Great darknessof understanding 
In his fallen state is guilty and 
condemned . 
In his fallen state is miserable 
Is helpless ; i 
Is vile, depraved . 
Ruined condition described by God 
*Moral law, the use of, in convincing 
the sinner of his sin ‘ 


*Ruin, ad thoughts onthe subject 
te) wos Peo ee tt 


Sin, all men are born in and commit 
*And sinnership . 
Bible illustrations of defilement of 


A cage of unclean birds . ° 
Defiled aernents ; 
Dogs . : 
Leprosy 20, 21, 


Regulations about death . ‘ 
Regulations about sacred duties 
Regulations about social life . 
Sepulchres . , ° 
Spots and blemishes 
Swine . ; 
The red heifer . 
* Deceivableness, unprofitableness of 
Described 4 
Entrance of, into the world 
How brought into the world 
Immediate consequences of 
Infatuated passions of sinuers after 
In God's sight . ; ; ‘ 
The body of 
*The feat, i 
The law of 
The only remedy for. 
The progressive character of 
The reign of 
“The use of the moral law in con- 
vincing the sinner of his 
The wages of . 15, 
Three steps in the Bible interpre- 
tationof . 
Two solemn facts about — 


PAGE, 


8 
7 
6 
16 
16 


14 


Sin (continued). 


Types and figures of j 22 

rdcn, grievous, intolerable 22 

Cage full of unclean birds 22 

Captivity ; 22 

Eraoked perverse ‘ 22 

Death : ; : + Reaten | 

Debt . ‘ ‘ : ; 22 

Floods ~ . : ‘ «#8 

Fountain of impurity ‘ ; 22 

Girdle, cleaving to a man 22 

Leaven ‘ 3 : . 22 

Leprosy . : 20, 22, 27 

Physical disease ; : . 22 

Poison, venom . ; ‘ - 22 

Slavery F ‘ ; ; 22 

Spots and stains . ° o (a2 

The body of sin . oe 22 

The law of sin . ; ‘ - 22 

The old man ; 4 ‘ 22 

The reign of sin ‘ 23 

The wages of sin . ; 23 

Viate of Sodom : : e. 22 

Words expressive of . 23 

Wounds and bruises ¥ 22 

Whatis. : 41 

Wrat it can do for a man 15 

What it has entailed . * ete 

Words expressive of 23 

Sinned, all have 14 

Sinner, every, is a moral suicide 23 

The soul of the,isdead . . 38 

Sins, dark groups of many 23 

The condition of lost man : et 

The fall of man : ‘ ' é 6 

*The mystery of dress : ’ + 30 

*The root of the tree 36 
*The use of the moral law in convincing 

the sinner of his sin 24 
*There in no difference; or, God no 

respecter of persons 10 
Three steps in the Bible interpretation 

of sin ‘ ‘ 14 

Two solemn facts about sin 26 
The deceivableness and unprofitable- 

ness ofsin . ‘ 26 

The progressive character of sin 27 


Unbelievers, all,aredead . . 21,38 


“able 22 
ae 22 


INDEX. 291 


villa bitiddnabetoneidaiecac saree dgie a eelettalhnihnantaine 
REDEMPTION, 
PAGE PAGE. 
“Altar, the. : ; ; . 96 | *God, nearness to ? ; : 74 
Atonement as defined by the Bible 59 |. “Peace with . yay oa oe 
*How to present the, to inquirers 66 | *God’s covenants founded on the blood 
*Or reconciliation ear |, agli ey te a IR ERR Sa 49 
Seven precious factsconcerning . 59 Goel-Redeemer, the EO eR ae 
*The day of , ‘ 53 
Inquirers, how to present the atone- 
é ‘ ment to ‘ ‘ : ‘ 66 
Suni eet oe from all sin . ae “Isaiah 53, a new translation of 70 
Se Chieti ee eesiay oan Jesus as Redeemer and Deliverer from 
nected with the goo 73 Pe oN ey ae, 78 
Atonement or reconciliation , 73 ao oe and Redeemer . 6g 
Deliverance from the pit 73 The pean ag’ Bg Se eens 82 
Forgiveness ofsins , 74 Fer pe Od OE 
ustification . : : : 74 Jesus Christ, the finished work of 
eno BOON oc i ea wether ut 62, 75, 81 
Peace withGod . |, 74 | Justification Ce iG Oe ae 
Redemption . ‘ eee 
*The . A : : : : ge *Lamb, the, for the burnt offering , 93 
Uses and applications of the 60, 61 
Blotting out . ; : ; ; 80 | *Pit, deliverance from the ; : 298 
Brought by God; or, The glories of 
Christ in the epistle to the Heorews 51 | *Redemption pies ore 


*Burnt offering, the lamb for the 04 


Christ in Old Testament type and 
Similitude . ‘ : ; 52 
The blood of ‘ ; , i Bt 
The death of ; ; ; 
The glories of, in the epistle to 


Redemption : : ; 64, 
*As taught and illustrated in Bible’ 63 
“Closing thoughts on tHe Subject of 96 


*The four-fold , 4 : ; gI 
By His almighty power, - gt 
'Y His own precious blood : QI 


Christ redeems,from all lawlessness gI 
Our bodies have to be redeemed 92 


. the Hebrews j F : 51 
he precious blood of , i » 88 , 
Witness to the sufferingsof 86 | “Scapegoat, the, and the live goat » 68 
Sin, where God puts ; ; 72 
*Sins, forgiveness of . ‘ ; 74, 31 
*Day of atonement, the j : + 53 | *Substitution—a word for everybody 89 
REGENERATION, 
PAGE, PAGE, 
Born again, yemust be : * 103 | God drove out the man , + 103 
*Again, ye must be; or, Our regen- 
eration : ; 11r | *Kingdom, how to obtain an entrance 
OftheSpirit .  . 104, I15 MO tee es 103 
Christ: not a teacher of the old 
Nature . , ; ‘ I1t | *Life, the Spirit of Pe er eee 
How the new nature is seta 113 
The absolute necessity of a new New birth, Biblical description of the 110 
nature 112 Results ofthe : ‘ + a2 
The ; : ‘ TIO, 121 


The old nature unchanged and 


unchangeable, 112 


What is the : . eee! 


*Unchanged and unchangeable 


Regeneration . ee 
Ascribed to Christ . : . 


Christ, the coming of, practical truths 
as to the walk of the Christian in 
connection with . 

The glories of, in Zech. 6: 11- 13. 


The second coming of, and events 


PAGE. 
New nature, absolute necessity of a 112 


How the, is implanted 113 
Born of the Spirit i 104, 115 
Born of water . va 
The Son of man lifted up 116 


*Old nature, Christ not a teacher of 111 


I1i2 


106 
106 


RESURRECTION, 


PAGE. 


14I 
141 


The second c: ming of 142, 148, 150 


connected therewith 150 

The second coming of, the true 
key to the study of the Bible. 153 

Death and the Lord's eomng con- 
trasted : 150 

*Is He the King of Terrors or the 
Prince of Peace ? 146 
Dispensational truth in Genesis 148 
*Heavenly home, the . : + 144 
Jesus, second coming of 148 
An appeal to sinners . 148 

A eg not a spiritual com- 
. 148, 153 
Attitude of the early church to 148 
Believers and the judgment . 149 
Coming of the Lord to theearth 149 
Motives arising fromthe doctrine 148 
Order of eventsin Christ’s coming 149 

Practical duties tenett by the 
doctrine . : 148 

Relation of the coming to Israel, 
‘ the church and the world 149 
"The believer reigns with Christ 149 


Regeneration (continued). 


Ascribed to God . i . 106 
Ascribed to the Spirit | i : 106 
Ascribed to the Word . : 106 


*Closing thoughts on the subject of 122 
*Ye must be born again; or, Our ‘111 


Son of man, the, lifted up . ‘ 116 
Spirit, action of, mysterious ; . 104 
*Bornofthe , ‘ : 104, 115 
*Of life, the . A : : » 107 


Jesus, second coming of (continued). 


The resurrections ; oo oe 149 
Warning against stipes F 148 
Judgments, the . . . 142 


*Last days, characteristics of the—a 


contrast , 143 
*Looks, the three—backward, upward, 
onward ; . 152 
Lord's coming, practical uses of the 143 
Death and the, contrasted ‘ 150 
The promise of the ‘ i . 145 


Millennium, there can be no, until 
Christ comes... . . 154 


Resurrection, false theories ereisz uc 


the , : : - 136 
Manner of the , ; : ‘ 134 

*Of the body ‘ ‘ ‘ <> 127 

Of the eattecns ; ; : 128 

Of the wicked . . ; 129 
The, and the Kingdom ; - 138 
The hope of the : ; 138 
What is it that rises at the . . 135 
Who effects the ; 3 138 
The time of the i ‘ ‘ 130 
Resurrections, different . . 128, 149 
*Scriptures, the prophetic . . 157 


3, 149 


157 


INDEX, 
ea am cease a rence cla scum com emen Ieee aati 


THE HCLY SPIRIT, 
PAGE, | 


*Holy Ghost, the f ; : . 197 
ffice of , ‘ ‘ ‘ , 181 
Power of _ , : ‘ ‘ . 81 
Holy Spirit, the . .° ,° 165 
“And character , : ‘ » 36s 
*And service, : ‘ 184 
*And the believer . ; ‘ - 176 
“And tbe hearing of faith , ‘ 186 
Anointing of i : P . 179 
Bible notes on , A , A 179 
Born of ; f ; : . 174 
Character of _ , : , ; 183 
Dwells within His people , + 175 
Emblems of _ , ; : 166, 181 
Gift of , A ; ‘ . 165 
God's special gift to us 187 


How our needs are met by the 


PAGE, 
Holy Spirit, the (continued). 

IsGod_ , : : 165 
Living in the power of - 192 

Manifestation of, given to every 
man j ‘ ; 168 
Names and titles of . ; ; 173 
*Never leaves His dwelling place , 175 
Notes on . ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 166 
*Not received in, or by, working . 187 
OfGod . ’ ‘ ‘ : 178 
"Personality of , . 61 
Person of . ; j ‘ 165, 180 

*Power of; or, The two great fami- 
lies—natural and spiritual 174 


“Received by the hearing of faith 187 


The seven operations of, in John 180 


promises of , ; . 180 Types of . , 173 
In our salvation ; ; é 168 Work of sre ' + 166, 182 
In Ephesians ; ‘ 172, 178 Work of, in believers : » 182 
Is a person , i F - 165, 180 “Work of, previous to Pentecost 169 
THE SCRIPTURES, 
PAGE. PAGE, 
*Bible, how to study the : 208, 212 | *Notes on the four Gospels 201 
Studiesonthe , ; : . 209 
*Study, brief miscellaneous hintson 210 *Scriptures, the prophetic + 157 
The, is the Word of God ‘ 209 
*The precious . ; * 207 | Truth and the believer ; 202 
The , ' ; ; + 198, 208 
Gleanings from the 1roth Psalm 206 
Glorious things in the glorious Book 202 *Word of God, the . : : 199, 209 
*Golden bells and pomegranates; or, What the, accomplishes . 205 
Word and life ce ae What tke, is to the godly 202 
*Word, how t> read the ‘ 203 
*Infidels, a short method with - 199 The ministering of the 206 
_ The power of God’s 198 
“Moses the author of the Book of The —two meanings ; ; 205 
Genesis , ‘ : ‘ + 203 Thy—admonitions to read it + 197 
THE WORK AND WORKERS, 
PAGE PAGE, 
“Believer, the, ‘a vessel’; or, How to Evangelists, rulesfor . . , 299 
_be useful ; : i ‘ Rae & 
Bible notes for students : ; 220 "Inquiry room, hints for the oe 
Christian, the, at work ; ; . 226 : : ; 
Revived , : : : : 227 | *Plain words on plain speaking . 223 
Workers’ power . ; ; , 226 | *Preacher, the, and his work 229 
Christians, why should, be soul winners 233 | Preach, what to . ; + 6 9233 


INDEX. 


a —— 


PAGE, PAGE, 


Scriptures, how to use the . 233] *Unreality .  . Site er pi ee 
Servants, characteristics of God's 221 
Service, characteristics of God’s . . 221 Weak things, some of the, God uses to 
Strength for . ‘ ‘ : 222 accomplish His purposes . + 227 
The glory of . 222 | Why should God's people work. 221 
*Soul- witiners racticul hints to 217 | Work and the worker gon a el 
Why should Christians be . . 233 | *Workers, a word to j 236 
Students, Bible notes for ‘ 220 *For Christ, suggestions to. - 23g 


FRAGMENTS THAT REMAIN. 
PAGE, 


Anxious, a card for the . : - 283 | MountainscenesinScripture . . 274 
Backsliding . . ak eieedeer” 269 | Noah’sarkasatypeof Christ . 281 
Believer’s sins, the 282 | Number 7, on the ; ° ? . 265 
*Believer, the cleansing of the, from 
daily defilement ; is it by ‘‘ blood"’ Our calling . : ° ; ; 264 
or by ‘“water’’? : . 285 
Bible homiletics . F ; A 277 | *Peter, was the apostle,ever in Rome? 287 
*Bible marking . . . 270] Prayer, characteristics of, in James 5 269 
Bodies, our, Bible facts about ; 276 Conditions of successful '. ; 257 
Boys of the Bible : j . 276 Hindrancesto , . p . 251 
The secret of successful . 268 
Christian, things he; should do con- Prayers, what we must doin order that 
tinually ; ; + a7 our, may be answered : + 275 
Christ, union with ; ; , 267 | Pray, how should we? . ‘ R 268 
*Churches, decorations for ‘ . 273 | *Psa ms, theimprecatory . : . 278 
Cleaving or sips t to ‘ ‘ 277 
Conscience : ‘ : » 276] Rain, Bible thoughts on 266 
Corrupt things : : ; 4 281 Romans, studies in the epistle to the 252 
(Courage. . . : . . 274 


*Seed and sowers; or, tract distribution 271 


Fourteen great facts in John 6 . 281 Safety, certainty and enjoyment . 275 
Fruit bearing ‘ A ; , 250 | Salvation, sevefi things about f 258 
Thetriune . : ‘ ; . 269 
*Genesis and Revelation, harmonies and Sanctification , ; F ? 247 
contrasts in ; ; j . 235 Self delusion ‘ i . 284 

God and litile children +. ; ' 260 | Sins withholding good from us ; 250 ’ 
Islove . ; ; ’ ; - 259 | Sowing and reaping ; ; - 258 
The power of . j ; ; 269 | Spirits, seven kinds of . 274 
Good Shepherd, the . ‘ . . 249] Stones, five smouth, from the brook 267 

Works. : ; i 256 

Gospel buss: sales hints . . 255| Take it at once ; ‘ : ; 282 
“Grace. . i ’ 263 | Things worth having ; ; . 248 
Worth knowing ; 249 


Hebrews, a study in the epistle to the 259 | *Tractdistribution; or, seed and sowers 271 


I wills, the, of Isaiah 41st . ‘ . 264 | *Unity, thoughtson . i ; + 2972 
Jesus, the friend . : . : 252 | *Virgins, the ten, who arethey? , 261 
oseph—Jesus x ‘ : . 253 

Justlagatlon ; ; ; : «ope RE y, the , ‘ : + 250 

: Wisdom twokinds of 274 
*Leaven eee ; ; ‘ . 243 Woman, a true, from the Bible stand- 

*Lilies - ‘ : e : ° 253 point ‘ ‘ ’ ‘ F 257 

Lord’s Supper, what the, tells out to Works, good ; ‘ : . 256 


the believer’ . . ° . 266 | *Worm, the undying : . : 279 


