Sim Miller 


GRACE 


GRACE 


: BY 
LEWIS SPERRY CHAFER 


Author of ‘‘Hr Tuar Is Sprriruar,’’ “‘Satvarion,’’ ‘‘Satan,’” 
‘True EvancELisM, oR SOUL-WINNING BY PRAYER,”’ 
“Tue Kinepom 1n History aND 
Prornecy,’’ Etc. 


PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
THE SUNDAY SCHOOL TIMES COMPANY 
1922 


Copyright, 1922, 
By LEWIS SPERRY CHAFER 


First Edition, 4000 copies, June, 1922 
Second Edition, 3000 copies, December, 1922 


THIS BOOK IS 
AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED TO THE LATE 


CYRUS INGERSON SCOFIELD, D.D., 
FOR MANY YEARS MY 
FRIEND, COUNSELOR, TEACHER, 
WHO IN HIS GENERATION EXCELLED AS 
CHAMPION AND EXPONENT OF GRACE 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


HROUGH false emphasis by many religious 

leaders, Christianity has become in the esti- 
mation of a large part of the public no more than an 
ethical system. The revealed fact, however, is that 
the supreme feature of the Christian faith is that 
supernatural, saving, transforming work of God, 
which is made possible through the infinite sacrifice 
of Christ and which, in sovereign grace, is freely be- 
stowed on all who believe. God has given instruc- 
tion to those who are saved, it is true, as to the 
manner of life which is consistent with their new 
heavenly calling and standing in Christ; but in its 
spiritual blindness, the world, led by its blind leaders, 
sees in Christianity only the rule of life which is 
secondary. The blindness of the world at this point, 
with the consequent neglect of all that is vital in the 
Christian faith, is both anticipated and explained in 
the Word of God. 

The two foundation truths which determine all 
spiritual perception are that, by divine arrangement, 
(1) the Spirit is given only to those who are saved, 
and (2) spiritual understanding is made to depend 
exclusively on the presence of the Spirit of God in 
the heart. 

The precise body of truth which may be under- 
stood only through the ministry of the indwelling 
- Spirit is described as, ‘“‘things’’ related to the Fa- 


vil 


Vili Author’s Preface 


ther, ‘‘things’’ related to the Son, ‘‘things’’ related 
to the Spirit, ‘‘things’’ to come, and ‘‘the kingdom of 
God.’’ We read: 

‘‘But the natural man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: 
neither can he know them, because they are 
Spiritually [by the Spirit] discerned’’ (1 Cor. 2:14). 

‘‘Except a maw be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God’’ (John 3:3). 

‘*Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot 
receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth 
him”’ (John 14:17). 

‘‘But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that 
are lost: in whom the god of this world hath blinded 
the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of 
the glorious gospel of Christ . . . should shine unto 
them’’ (2 Cor. 4:3, 4). 

‘““The world by wisdom knew not God’’ (1 Cor. 
1:21); 

“‘He that is spiritual judgeth [discerneth] all 
things, yet he himself is judged of no man’’ 
(1 Cor. 2:15). 

‘Now we have received . . . the spirit which is of 
God; that we might know the things that are freely 
given to us of God’’ (1 Cor. 2:12). 

‘‘Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he 
will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak 
of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall 
he speak: and he will shew you things to come. He 
shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and 
shall shew it unto you. All things that the Father 
hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of 
mine, and shall shew it unto you’? (John 16: 13-15). 


Author’s Preface ix 


**But the anointing which ye have received of him 
abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach 
you: but as the same anointing teacheth you of all 
things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath 
taught you, ye shall abide in him’’ ( 1 John 2: 27). 

““Kye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have 
entered into the heart of man, the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love him. But God 
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the 
Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of 
God’’ (I Cor. 2: 9,10), 

‘‘Through faith we understand’’ (Heb. 11:3). 

Spiritual understanding is not, therefore, de- 
pendent upon human sagacity or learning; it depends 
only on the teaching of the indwelling Spirit. Pos- 
sessing this Biblical testimony, misunderstanding at 
this point is without excuse. 

Likewise, the terms upon which men may now be 
saved and thus receive the Spirit are as clearly de- 
fined in the Scripture. Salvation is by grace 
through faith. It is the result of the transforming 
work of God for man, and not the result of the work 
of man for God. It is that which God does for the 
one who trusts the Saviourhood of Christ. By that 
trust, Christ is personally received as the divine 
Redeemer who shed His blood as a sufficient ransom 
for the guilt and penalty of sin, as the One who 
reconciles by having taken away the sin of the world, 
and as the divine Propitiation who, as Substitute, 
met every indictment brought against the sinner 
under the holy government of God. 

Since the Spirit is given only to those who are 
saved through faith in Christ, they alone are able to 


y* 


x Author’s Preface 


receive the particular body of truth which the Spirit 
teaches. Neglect of this fundamental, unalterable 
fact is the key-error of all modernism. 

It is assumed by the modernist that any person 
whose education has qualified him to be an authority 
in matters of human learning, regardless of the new 
birth and the indwelling Spirit, is also qualified, be- 
cause of that learning, to speak with authority con- 
cerning the things of God. 

That the leaders of modernism are unregenerate 
men and therefore themselves spiritually blind is 
self-revealed by their attitude toward that truth 
which forms the only basis upon which, according to 
the Scriptures, a soul may be saved. When men 
avowedly disbelieve that the death of Christ was 
vicarious and substitutionary, they have rejected the 
only grounds upon which, according to the Word of 
God, the saving work of God righteously can be 
wrought for the sinner. Rejecting the saving truth 
of the Gospel, these men could not be saved upon any 
promise or provision of God. Though educated, 
religious, and sympathetic to the ethical ideals of the 
Bible, such men, being unregenerate, are of necessity 
totally blind to all that body of truth which is said 
to be imparted by the indwelling Spirit. Preaching 
and teaching under these limitations, Christianity is 
represented by these men as a system of ethics only. 

The first step in spiritual understanding is the 
knowledge of God as Father. ‘‘Neither knoweth 
any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom- 
soever the Son will reveal him’’ (Mt. 11:27). ‘‘And 
this is life eternal, that they might know thee the 


Author’s Preface xi 


only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast 
sent’’ (John 17:3). 

Until God becomes real to the heart By the direct 
ministry of Christ as Saviour, all His ways and 
works are unreal. Not knowing God, the unregen- 
erate mind is not satisfied with the explanation of 
the origin of things which declares that God directly 
created things as they are. To such a mind, it is 
actually easier to believe in a supposed natural de- 
velopment from nothing to something, and to hide all 
attending problems resulting from this theory behind 
the mists of a measureless past. If God is not real, 
there could be no inerrant Book; the Bible must be 
fallible as man; nor could God be manifest in the 
flesh ; the Son of God must be of illegitimate birth, and 
though the greatest of all teachers, to them, He is 
really no more divine than ordinary mortals. These 
blind guides are forced to give some explanation to 
the meaning of the death of Christ. They there- 
fore contend that He died as an heroic martyr, a 
loyal patriot, as a wonderful moral example of for- 
titude, or to show the wickedness of sin. They 
utterly reject the only reason given in the Word of 
God for the death of Christ—He died that others 
might not die. They brand this saving truth as 
‘‘immoral,’’ and ‘‘unworthy of the goodness of God.”’ 
They understand little of the resurrection of Christ, 
His present ministry in heaven, and nothing of the 
revelation that He is coming again. To these 
religious leaders, there is no supernatural; for God 
is not real. There could be no immediate salvation 
through the Spirit. The salvation in which they be- 


xii Author’s Preface 


lieve is assumed to be the result of a self-created 
character, and the life to be lived is represented only 
as an heroic struggle of the flesh. If unregenerate 
men could understand anything better than this, the 
Word of God would be proven untrue. 

It is equally true, that, those who are spiritually 
blind are unconscious of their blindness until they are 
saved by the grace and power of God through 
Christ. Coming thus into the light, they testify, as 
all who have ever been saved have testified: ‘‘ Where- 
as I was blind, now I see.’’ They, like all the un- 
saved, could be aware of their blindness if they would 
receive the testimony of God concerning their own 
limitations; but this is precisely what they will not 
do. Therefore, a notable neglect of the most vital 
truths of Scripture and the denial of the essential 
glories of divine grace is to be expected from these 
religious leaders who reject the only grounds of 
salvation through the substitutionary death of Christ. 

Modernists content themselves with borrowing 
some ideals from the Bible while reserving the right 
to reject whatever is not desired. Those portions 
which are acceptable to the unregenerate mind are 
received and taught as being authorative on the basis 
of the fact that these ideals are in the Bible. Here, 
indeed, is strange inconsistency on the part of men 
who pride themselves on their scientific reasonings. 

The unsaved preacher or teacher, being able to 
comprehend only the ethical teachings of the 
Scriptures, is a living proof of the truthfulness of the 
divine Testimony. He cannot see the kingdom of 
God. He sees nothing of the glories of divine grace 
—the things of the Father, the things of Christ, the 


Author’s Preface Xill 


things of the Spirit, and things to come. He blindly 
ignores every dispensational division of the Word of 
God and is, therefore, free within himself to draw 
material from the kingdom teachings of Christ and 
from the law of Moses while constructing his world- 
improvement, sociological theories which he imposes 
on a Christ-rejecting world. 

Men of this character are sufficiently numerous in 
this day of apostacy to be responsible for the present- 
day impression that the sole objective of Christianity 
is the improvement of human conduct. Being blind 
to the real principles and purposes of saving grace, 
they teach that it makes little difference what is be- 
lieved, it is the life that counts. Against this is the 
overwhelming testimony of the Word of God that 
every aspect of salvation and every blessing of divine 
grace in time and eternity is conditioned only on 
what is believed. 

Influenced by these misunderstandings concerning 
the Truth, few serious-minded young men will 
choose to enter the ministerial profession; for it 
would mean the assumption of the role of a mere 
moralist. Common modesty generally precludes 
such an assumption. On the other hand, when the 
essential message of Christianity is seen to be the 
measureless, transforming grace of God with all of its 
eternal glories in the new creation in Christ, it is a 
challenge to the deepest impulses of the heart, and 
offers a ministry for which one may well sacrifice all. 

Christians are ambassadors for Christ and are com- 
missioned to preach the Gospel to every creature. 
This ministry does not consist in either the education 
or the moral improvement of lost men while they are 


XiV Author’s Preface 


on their way to hell; it is the proclamation of the 
mighty, redeeming, transforming grace of God which 
offers eternal life and eternal glory to all who will 
believe. 

If it shall please God to use this exposition in any 
measure to the unfolding of the riches of His grace, 
the labor expended in its preparation will not have 
been in vain. This very inadequate treatment con- 
cerning the grace of God is committed to Him that 
He may in some way use its message to the glory 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Lewis SPERRY CHAFER. 
June, 1922. 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE SECOND 
EDITION 


The kind reception accorded to the first edition of 
this book is cause for thanksgiving to God. Appre- 
ciation has been general and far exceeding the merit. 
If there has been any blessing gained from the read- 
ing of these pages, praise should be given to Him to 
whom it alone belongs. As in the days of the Apostle 
Paul, the great issues of pure grace are sure to call 
out sincere question from those who, perchance, 
through a legalistic training do not comprehend its 
’ infinite glories. Such has been the kindly criticism 
of a very few out of the many. 

After reviewing the book more carefully, could I 
recast it at all, I should perhaps give still greater 
emphasis to the exposition of the second of the two 
fundamental facts concerning the life under grace. 
The first being that, under grace, a separate, com- 
plete, and wholly independent rule of life is purposed 
for the child of God. Of that enough has been writ- 
ten. The second truth which might profitably be 
more fully developed is that of the new manner of 
life which is first wrought as a purpose in the heart 
by the Spirit and is then lived out in the power of 
the same Spirit, accompanied by that heavenly joy 
which always attends the realization of heavenly 
desires. Everything in the walk under grace contem- 
plates an overflowing, Spirit-filled life, and there is 
no provision for any other. The carnal Christian is 
not urged to try to live a spiritual life; he is rather 

xv 


xvi Author’s Preface to the Second Edition 


besought to yield himself to God, apart from which 
there can be no Spirit-filling with its realization of 
power. 

The divine provision and plan for a life under 
grace is a perfect system in itself and rightfully 
cannot be combined or even compared with any other. 
The successive steps in this system are: (1) The 
age-characterizing fact of the Spirit indwelling every 
believer; (2) The filling with the Spirit resulting in 
a joyous, abounding delight in the whole will of God; 
And, (3), the imparted, enabling power of the Spirit 
which is sufficient for a complete realization of that 
will. 

Is this grace-system a success? Is it really practi- 
cal? Does the impelling love of a mother’s heart 
provide a better care for her child than would be 
provided by a heartless obedience to a statute of the 
State requiring such care? The true answer is ob- 
vious. If it is practical and if it be true that the 
power of inwrought grace is the one and only divine 
program for the life of the children of God in this 
age, how important is this body of truth! Under 
this relationship all human responsibility centers in 
that adjustment of heart by which alone the divine 
power may be realized. 

If this great theme is new its careful and prayer- 
ful study with an open mind may lead to the dis- 
covery of the only way by which the divine glory may 
be realized through a human life. 

May the blessing of God rest increasingly upon this 
testimony to His infinite grace. 


Lewis Sperry CHAFER. 
December 1922 


CONTENTS 


SYNOPSIS 
CHAPTER ONE. THE THEME 


SEVEN FUNDAMENTAL Facts ABoutT GRACE . 


First, Grace is not Withheld Because of Demerit . 

Second, Grace Cannot be Lessened Because of De- 
ment. ae cae as eee a 

Third, Grace Cannot Incur- a Debt % 

Fourth, Grace is not Exercised in the Just Payment 
of a Debt . 


Fifth, Grace is Never the Over-Payment of a Debt 


Sixth, Grace does not Appear in the Immediate Di- 
wine Dealings with the Sins of the Un- 
saved. 

Seventh, Grace does not Appear i in the Immediate Di- 
wine Dealings with the Sins of the Saved 


CHAPTER TWO. SALVATION BY GRACE . 


I. Tourer Divine MOTIVES IN GRACE . 


First, Men are Said to be Saved that Good 
Works may Result ‘ 
1. Works as required under the law : 
2. Works as the proper test of saving faith ; 
3. Works as indicative of the attitude of heart 
toward the grace of God . 
Second, Men are Said to be Saved Because of the 
Benefits which accrue to Them . . 
Third, Men are Said to be Saved for the Mani- 
festation of Divine Grace 


Ii. Taree Principles WuicH Cannot Co-ExIstT wit 
GRACE Ais ate DROR EA iia area 210 Pe a 
First, Any Recognition of Human Guilt 
Second, Any Recognition of Human Obligation . 
Third, Any Recognition of Human Merit . 


xvii 


XVII11 


Contents 


III. Tue Gracious Work oF Gop FoR MAN . 


IV. 


First, The Finished Work of Christ 

Second, The Convicting Work of the ee 
Third, The Saving Work of God. . 3 
Fourth, The Keeping Work of God 

Fifth, The Delivering Work of God . 
Sixth, The Work of God in Christian Growth 
Seventh, The Final Presenting Work of God . 


THe GRACE oF GoD IS SOVEREIGN . 


CHAPTER THREE. SAFE-KEEPING IN GRACE . 


I. Tue Keeping Power or Gop THROUGH GRACE IS IN- 


II. 


Ii. 


CLUDED IN EVERY CONSIDERATION OF THE PRINCI- 
PLES OF GRACE : 

First, There Must be the Disposal of Every Con- 
demnation which Divine Righteousness Could Im- 
pose Because of Sin . 

Second, There Must be a ; Disposal of Every Human 
Obligation 


Third, There Must a6 a | Disposal of Beery. Howe 
Merit 


Tue Keeping Power oF Gop THROUGH GRACE IS 
IMPLIED IN EVERY REVELATION WHEREIN IS PRE- 
SENTED THE TRUTH THAT GRACE REACHES INTO 
THE CoMING AGES FOR ITS CONSUMMATION . 


THE KEEPING PowrER oF Gop THROUGH GRACE IS 
INDICATED BY THE MANIFOLD PROVISIONS AND 
SAFEGUARDS WuicH Hr Has Mane To THat ENpD 


First, The Power of God 

Second, The Love of God . 

Third, The Prayer of the Son of God . : 

Fourth, The neuer: Death of the Son of 
God . ; 

Fifth, The Resurrection of the Son of God , 

Sixth, The Present Advocacy of the Son of God 

Seventh, The Intercession, or Shepherdhood, of the 
Son of God ; ; 

Eighth, The Regenerating Work of ‘the Spirit 

Ninth, The Spirit’s Indwelling . ae: 

Tenth, The Baptism with the Spirit 5 

Eleventh, The Sealing with the Spirit : 

Twelfth, The New Covenant Made in His Blood . 


Contents 


xix 


PAGH 


CHAPTER FOUR. THE LIFE UNDER GRACE . 


INTRODUCTIVE . 


Section OnE. GRACE PROVIDES A PARTICULAR 
RULE OF LIFE Roar: 


I. THe CHRISTIAN’s DaAiLy LIFE IS TO BE Dace 
ONLY BY THE TEACHINGS OF GRACE . ‘ 

iI. THe Law is ExcLupED FROM THE GRACE Toda 
INGS OF CHRIST . F 

Ill. Tue Law is ExcLupED FROM THE wceneae OF 
THE APOSTLES . 

IV. Tur PERSONAL Gone OF THE peas 
PAUL IS AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE TEACHINGS 
oF GRACE : 

First, ‘And unto the Tes I Boek Ge as a eee 3 

Second, “To Them that are Under the Law, as 
Under the Law” . 

Third, “To Them that are Without Law, as With- 
out Law’ : 

Fourth, “Not Being Without Law to God, but Un- 
der the Law to Christ’ A 


Section Two. THH THACHINGS OF THE LAW . 


I. As To THE MEANING OF THE WorD LAW as USED 
IN THE SCRIPTURES . eS a Sean | ERS 


First, The Ten Commandments . 

Second, The Whole System of Government for Is- 
rael in the Land . 

Third, The Kingdom Rule of Messiah. . 

Fourth, The Whole Revealed Will of God for ‘any 
Individual, or Nation, when Contempla- 
ted as a Covenant of Works which is to 
be Wrought in the Energy of the Flesh 

Fifth, Any Rule of Conduct Prescribed by Men . 

Sixth, Any Recognized Principle in Operation . 

Seventh, The Necessary Sequence Between a Cause 
and its Effect : aR ae 


TI.- As To THE RELATION THE LAW SUSTAINS TO THE 
TIME OF ITS REIGN : ; 
First, The Law Began its Reign at Mount Sinm 
Second, The Reign of the Law was Terminated with 
the Death of Christ . Aa para fe eae 


80 


xx Contents 


PAGE 

TIl. As To THE APPLICATION OF THE LAW . . . 119 

Srecrion TureeE. THE KINGDOM THACHINGS . . 122 
Section Four. CONTRASTS BETWEEN LAW AND 

GRACE TEACHINGS ..--=. 143 


I. Tury Present INDEPENDENT, SUFFICIENT, AND 
CoMPLETE SYSTEMS OF DIVINE RULE IN THE 
EARTH WN - 2 ahs. CRASS eke ee ae 


First, The Similarity and Dissimilarity Between 

the Teachings of the Law of Moses and 

the Teachings of Grace. . 152 
Second, The Similarity and Dissimilarity Between 

the Teachings of the Law of Moses and 

the Teachings of the Kingdom. . 157 
Third, The Similarity and Dissimilarity Between 

the Teachings of i aah and the Laws eo’ 


the Kingdom . . . 161 
1. The Beatitudes . . 165 
2. The similitudes of the righteous in the king- 

dom . 170 
3. Christ interprets ‘the law im its relation to 

the kingdom . . BREA a Wal 
4. Mere externalism rebuked. . 173 
5. Prayer for the kingdom, and in the kingdom 174 
6. The law governing riches in the kingdom . 176 
7. The Father's care over the children of the 

kingdom Seed : 176 
8. Warning against judgment of others. : AIT 
9. Warning against false prophets . . . 177 
10. Three determining statements iene acid the 

kingdom ae pox ees eis 178 


II. Tur OrpER VARIES AS TO THE SEQUENCE OF THE 
DIVINE BLESSINGS AND THE HUMAN OBLIGATION 182 

IiI. Brcause or DirFERENT DEGREES OF DIFFICULTY 

AND DIFFERENT DEGREES OF DIVINE ENABLE- 
NUON GT se eae wi ees) a plontae Sea ea ee POE 
First, The PBS of ges : SU Set ba 195 
Second, The Laws of the Kingdom : 


Rares 
Third, The Teachings of Grace . ete Sieh ch 
Section Five. THE LAW DONE AWAY... . 215 


I. Tue Actuat Written Instructions or BotTH 
THE TEACHINGS OF THE LAW OF MOSES AND THE 
Kinepom aRE Done Away .. .. . . 216 


Contents XXi 
PAGD 
First, The Passing of the Law of Moses is the 
Haplicit Teaching of the New Testament 
Scriptures. 216 
Second, The Error of Co-mingling the Law of the 
Kingdom with the Teachings of Grace . 231 
1. The two systems cannot co-exist . . . 232 
2. It is not necessary to combine them. . . 233 


II. Tue Law CovENANT OF WORKS, IN ALL OF ITS 
APPLICATION, WHICH CONDITIONS BLESSING 
AND ACCEPTANCE WITH GOD ON PERSONAL 
Micnir=. 16 DONE GAWAY on een, at cep tet eek oO 


Til. Tue Law PRINCIPLE oF DEPENDENCE ON THE 
ENERGY OF THE FLESH, IN PLACE OF THE 
GRACE PRINCIPLE OF DEPENDENCE ON: THE 
PowkR OF THE INDWELLING SPIRIT, 18 DONE 
PANU Wan eam Bl eee kee RU reve Sys sexe Wika ai ntay. ca eo) 


TV JUDAISM. IS -DONBU AWAY sears ee) le! ex ke 88 


Section Six. THH SABBATH, A TEST QUESTION . 244 


I. THe Brericat TestTIMoNy REGARDING THE JEWISH 


SABBATH... Besa 247 
First, The Period mre Aone to Moses . . . 247 
Second, The Period from Moses to Christ . . . 280 


Third, The Period Represented by the Gospels . 254 
Fourth, The Period Represented By the Acts and 


the Epistles ay . 256 
Fifth, The Sabbath in Prophecy acme tate Se raea ney AtY4 
1. The cessation of the sabbath . . . . . 262 
2. The reestablishment of the sabbath . . . 263 
Sixth. The Exact DO ee Ge. les pias BBE 
II. THe BrsricAL TESTIMONY CONCERNING THE LORD’S 
AVA ei yh oe Ve oer ane SER nn tease ha ieee ee eset OSD 
‘First, The Reason for the Observance of the Day 266 
1. The Mosaic system has ceased. . 266 
2. A new day is divinely appointed under grace 269 
3. A new day is indicated by important events . 272 
4. The new day typifies the new creation . . 276 
5. The new day is typical of unmerited grace . 276 
6. The new day began to be observed with the 
resurrection . BN ae Vat 
a. Hvidence from the ‘Scriptures Aaah Meee athe, 
b. Evidence from the early fathers . . . 278 


7. The new day has been blessed of God. . . 281 


Xxil Contents 


PAGE 
Second, The Biblical Observance of the Lord’s Day 282 
1. The Lord’s day belongs to a particular people 283 


2. The Lord’s Day is not subject to rules . . 286 
3. The manner of the observance of the Lord’s 
Day may be extended to all days . . 292 
a. The true sabbath under grace. . . . 294 
b. The millennial sabbath . . . . . «. 297 
III. Crrrain CuRRENT ERRORS. . . sph ppt) 
Section Seven. CHRIST, THE ee ee SPHERE 
UNS GRAOGE tans . 301 
Le Ynerne Mine ras . 306 
First, Christ, the Roheces of ‘Fie Boliepes Pov 
tions . 307 
Second, Christ, the Sphere of the Believer’s Posses- 
sions . : . 312 
l. A new standing in Christ . joer. “Rote 
2. A new life in Christ . . 313 
3. The new presence and power of the Spirit . 313 
4. A new inheritance . . - 3 Ole 
B.A newmneneniyas \ 2G en ea Re EAS 
6. \oAlccess 560. God) evi io Sy ee eee eee ee of anon oes 
7. The Word. of God . 320 
Third, Christ, the Sphere of ‘the Believer’s Safe- 
Keeping : 321 
Fourth, Christ, the Sphere ef ‘the Believer’s Asso- 
ciation. . 322 
1, “With God the Father... .. . dee: 322 
2. With Christ the: Sonn 2.2 Afb a he eee Oa 
3. “With the Spirit of God... .. .. =... 8ae 
4. With Satan and his emissaries . . . . 824 
Bo SWiteR: the sangels cn (iS Ree ee ORE: 
CP With thes world ance ee ee eee 
a. To. the: 2orld-system. 5 le Ss Be 
b. To human governments . .-. . . . 325 
ce. To the unsaved indiwidual . . . .... 827 
7. With the whole body of Christ. . 327 
a. A Christian’s relation to other Christians 
im general . . . 328 


Det Christian’s relation to those who are 
in authority in the assembly of believers 330 
ce. The relation of Christian husbands and 
wives 331 
d. The relation of Christian parents and chil- 


EN ne ke MG Ve Sars eb | 


Contents Xxill 


PAGE 

e. The relation of Christian masters and serv- 
ants... 331 
f. A Christian’s obligation to an erring brother 332 
g. A Christian’s obligation to a weak brother 333 


io Sl oy “You, al See. be hone Aine Cees See FOO: 
First, A New Divine Take Be ciee Vaso ae manger oO 
Second, 4 New Hnabling Power . . . . . |. 337 
1. Christian character . . 337 
a. Is the sin-nature controlled by eradication? 339 
b. Is the sin-nature controlled by rules? . 341 
ce. Is the sin-nature controlled Mat the Spirit? 34} 
2. Christian conduct . . 342 
a. The perfect law of liberty pCa tee tee Oe 
b.- The taw_of- ewpediency oie a BATE 
ce. The law of love . siesta: 
Third, Christ in You the Hope of Glory : 348 
l. Christ, the manifestation AS God Ged of the 
Church eee 3 349 
2. The indwellling Gira a here hee _ 350 
CHAPTER FIVE. CONCLUSION AND APPEAL . . 353 
END OH SOB IMCS te alr gah Arete baal Nl) gy Rlate cs ROOD. 


INDEX—OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS. 2. 9.-% 2.) 2 867. 


GRACE 


CHAPTER 1 
THE THEME 


HE exact and discriminate meaning of the word 
LE grace should be erystal clear to every child of 
God. With such insight only can he feed his own 
soul on the inexhaustible riches which it unfolds, and 
with such understanding only can he be enabled 
clearly to pass on to others its marvelous, trans- 
forming theme. Here is a striking illustration of 
the fact that very much may be represented by one 
word. When used in the Bible to set forth the grace 
of .God in the salvation of sinners, the word grace 
discloses not only the boundless goodness and kind- 
ness of-God toward man, but reaches far beyond and 
indicates the supreme motive which actuated God in 
the creation, preservation and consummation of the 
universe. What greater fact could be expressed by 
one word? 

The meaning of the word grace, as used in the New 
Testament, is not unlike its meaning as employed in 
common speech,—but for one important exception, 
namely, in the Bible the word often represents that 
which is limitless, since it represents realities which 
are infinite and eternal. It is nothing less than the 
unlimited love of God expressing itself in measureless 
grace. 


The word favor is the nearest Biblical synonym 
3 


\ 


4 Grace 


for the word grace. In this connection it may be 
observed that the one thought which is almost ex- 
clusively expressed in the New Testament by the 
word grace, is, in the Old Testament, almost exclu- 
sively expressed by the word favor. Grace is favor, 
and favor is grace. Thus, in considering the Bible 
teaching on this great theme, equal attention should 
be given to all passages wherein either the word grace 
is used or favor is found. Grace means pure un- 
recompensed kindness and favor. What is done in 
grace is done graciously. From this exact meaning 
there can be no departure; otherwise grace ceases to 
be grace. To arrive at the scope and force of the 
Bible doctrine of salvation by grace alone we need 
to follow consistently the path indicated by the exact 
meaning of the word. 


SEVEN FUNDAMENTAL Facts ABout GRACE. 


First. Grace is not Withheld ‘Because of Demerit. 


This fact about grace is more evident, perhaps, 
than any other. It is the sense of demerit more than 
anything else which impels a soul to ery out for the 
kindness and benefits of grace. So, also, grace finds 
its greatest triumph and glory in the sphere of 
human helpessness. Grace ceases to be grace if God 
is compelled to withdraw it in the presence of human 
failure and sin. In fact, grace cannot be exercised 
where there is the slightest degree of human merit 
to be recognized. On the other hand the issue of 
human sin must be disposed of forever. Christ the 
Lamb of God, having taken away the sin of the 
world, has by His cross forever disposed of the con- 


The Theme 5 


demnation of sin. He has by the cross created an 
entirely new relation between God and man. Con- 
sequently, men are now either accepting or reject- 
ing Christ who has borne their sins. ‘‘He that 
believeth on him is not condemned: but he that 
believeth not is condemned already, because he hath 
not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of 
God’’ (John 3:18). There is no middle ground. 
All questions of demerit have been banished. Thus 
- God is righteously free to exercise grace in every 
case. Salvation is by grace alone. 


Second. Grace Cannot be Lessened Because of 
Demertt. 

God cannot propose to do less in grace for one who 
is sinful than He would have done had that one been 
less sinful. Grace is never exercised by Him in mak- 
ing up what may be lacking in the life and character 
of a sinner. In such a case, much sinfulness would 
eall for much grace, and little sinfulness would call 
for little grace. The sin question has been set aside 
forever, and equal exercise of grace is extended to all 
who believe. It never falls short of being the 
measureless saving grace of God. Thus grace could 
not be increased; for it is the expression of His in- 
finite love: it could not be diminished; for every 
limitation that human sin might impose on the action 
of a righteous God has, through the propitiation of 
the cross, been dismissed forever. 

God does not ignore or slight the fact of human 
guilt and sin; for He has met these issues perfectly 
and finally for all men in the death of His Son. 
There remains no demerit, nor degrees of demerit, 


6 Grace 


to be considered or recognized. By grace there is 
now offered alike to all men all the infinite resources 
of the saving power of God. The grace of God is, 
therefore, exercised in perfect independence of human 
sin, or any degree of human sin. 


Third. Grace Cannot Incur a Debt. 


An act is in no sense gracious if under any con- 
ditions a debt is incurred. Grace, being unrecom- 
pensed favor, is necessarily unrecompensed as to 
obligations which are past, unrecompensed as to ob- 
ligations which are present, and unrecompensed as 
to obligations which are future. Grace must always 
remain unadulterated in its generosity and benefit. 
How emphatically this is true of the grace of God 
towards sinners! Yet how often this aspect of divine 
salvation is perverted! Infinite and eternal trans- 
formations are wrought by the power of God when 
He exercises His grace. He is thereby glorified and 
sinners are saved. Such far-reaching results cannot 
fail to satisfy and delight Him eternally; but He 
remains unrecompensed for His salvation through 
grace. What He does He bestows as a gift. Right- 
fully a benefit cannot be called a gift if it is paid for 
before, at the time, or after. This is a fundamental 
truth of the Word of God, and it is imperative that 
it be kept free from all confusing complications. 

‘When a recompense for the gift of God is proposed, 
every element of salvation is obscured, and the true 
motive for Christian service is sacrificed as well. 
The Seriptures everywhere guard these two truths 
from such perversion; for, in the Bible, salvation 
is always presented as a gift, an. unrecompensed 


The Theme *) 


favor, a pure benefit from God (John 10:28; Rom. 
6:23). And, in like manner, no service is to be 
wrought, and no offering is to be given, with a view 
to repaying God for His gift. Any attempt to com- 
pensate God for His gift is an act so utterly out of 
harmony with the revealed Truth, and exhibits such 
a lack of appreciation of His loving bounty, that it 
cannot be other than distressing to the Giver. All 
attempts to repay His gift, be they ever so sincere, 
serve only to frustrate His grace and to lower the 
marvelous kindness of God to the sordid level of 
barter and trade. How faithfully we should serve 
Him, but never to repay Him! Service is the 
Christian’s means of expressing his love and devotion 
to God, as God has expressed His love to those whom 
He saves by the gracious thing He has done. Chris- 
tian service for God should be equally gracious. 

It therefore becomes those who have received His 
gifts in grace to be jealous for the purity of their 
motives in service for Him. Unwittingly the grace 
of God is too often denied by well-meaning attempts 
to compensate God for His benefits. No semblance 
of the most vital facts about divine grace can be 
retained unless salvation is, in its every aspect, treated 
as a gift from God, and Christian service and faith- 
fulness is deemed to be only the expression of love 
and gratitude to God. 

According to the Scriptures, salvation is never 
conditioned on human faithfulness, or on the promise 
of human faithfulness. There is no payment re- 
quired, past, present, or future. God saves un- 
meriting sinners in unrelated, unrecompensed, un- 
conditioned, sovereign grace. Good works should 


8 Grace 


follow; but with no thought of compensation. 
Christians are ‘‘created in Christ Jesus unto good 
works’’ (Eph. 2:10); they are to be a ‘‘peculiar 
people, zealous of good works’’ (Tit. 2:14); and 
‘they which have believed in God might be careful 
to maintain good works’’ (Tit. 3:8). Thus, and 
only thus, are ‘‘good works”’ related to the gracious 
salvation from God through Christ Jesus. Grace 
is out of question when recompense is in question. 


Fourth. Grace is not Exercised in the Just Pay- 
ment of a Debt. 

The fact is self-evident that the payment of an 
honest debt could never be an act of grace. In no 
circumstances, however, is the recognition of this 
truth more important than when grace is declared 
to be the present divine plan for the salvation of 
sinners. If God should discover the least degree 
of merit in the sinner, this, in strict righteousness, 
He must recognize and duly acknowledge. By such 
a recognition of human merit, He would be dis- 
charging an obligation toward the sinner and the 
discharge of that obligation toward the sinner would 
be the payment, or recognition, of a debt. ‘‘Now 
to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of 
grace, but of debt’’ (Rom. 4:4). 

It is therefore imperative that every vestige of 
human merit shall be set aside completely if an op- 
portunity is provided whereby pure grace may be 
exercised in the salvation of men. For the sole pur- 
pose that pure grace might be exercised toward men, 
the human family has been placed under the divine 
judicial sentence of sin. It is obviously true that all 


The Theme 9 


men are sinners both by nature and by practice; but 
the present divine decree goes far beyond this evident 
state of smfulness wherein one man might be deemed 
to be more, or less, sinful than another; for God, in 
this dispensation, which began with the cross, has 
pronounced an equal and absolute sentence of judg- 
ment against all, both Jew and Gentile. Men are 
now ‘‘already condemned’’ (John 3:18); they are 
“children of disobedience’’ (Eph. 2:2); not on the 
ground of their own sinfulness, but on the ground 
of their federal headship in fallen Adam. Men are 
now judicially reckoned to be ‘‘in unbelief’’ (Rom. 
11:32); they are ‘‘under sin’’ (Rom. 3:9; Gal. 
3:22); and they are ‘‘guilty’’ (Rom. 3:19). Thus 
all human merit has been disposed of absolutely and 
forever, and there is no longer the slightest possi- 
bility that, because of personal merit, a divine obli- 
gation may now exist toward any individual. The 
sole divine object in thus universally and judicially 
disposing of all human merit is clearly revealed: 
“For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that 
he might have merey upon all’? (Rom. 11:32). 
Also, ‘‘But the scripture hath concluded all under 
sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might 
be given to them that believe’’ (Gal. 3:22). 

That God now saves sinners by grace alone and 
apart from every human merit is the teaching of 
His Word: ‘‘For by grace are ye saved though faith; 
and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: not 
of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his 
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good 
works, which God hath ‘before ordained that we 
should walk in them’’ (Eph. 2:8-10). 


10 Grace 


In this passage the only order which can exist 
between divine grace and human merit is made 
clear. Man is permitted to do nothing until God 
has done all that His grace designs. ‘‘Good works’’ 
grow out of, and are made possible by, the gracious 
work of God. To this exact order all revelation 
concerning divine grace is in agreement. 

A striking emphasis is given to the fact that God 
now saves by grace alone when the Biblical doctrines 
of salvation by grace and the believer’s rewards for 
service are contrasted. Salvation, being always and 
only a work of God for man, is always and only by 
grace alone; while rewards, being always and only 
that which is merited by the faithful service of the 
Christian, are always and only based on works. Hu- 
man merit is always in view in the divine bestow- 
ment of rewards; and the grace of God is never 
mentioned im connection with His bestowment of 
rewards (1 Cor. 3: 9-15; 9: 18-27; 2 Cor. 5:10). So, 
also, human works are never included as forming 
any part of the divine plan of salvation by grace. 

An act ceases to be gracious, therefore, when it 
is a recognition of merit, or the payment of a just 
debt. ‘‘Being justified freely [without cause] by 
his grace through the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus’’ (Rom. 3:24). 


Fifth. Grace is Never the Over-payment of a 
Debt. 


Grace is no longer grace if it is complicated in the 
slightest degree with the payment of a just debt. 
It can never be that which is added to, or a part 


The Theme | II 


of, a righteous transaction. A bounty may be added 
to the payment of a debt,—an extra amount above 
the full measure due; but in no case should this 
extra amount be considered a matter of pure grace. 
The character of the bounty thus added would, of 
necessity, be qualified to some extent by the relation 
of the bounty to the debt. The bounty will be either 
more, or less, than it would have been had it stood 
alone. Inevitably it will be affected to some degree 
by the righteous transaction with which it is com- 
bined. In the Word of God, as in common usage, the 
word grace, in its exact meaning, precludes any com- 
plications with other acts or issues however righteous 
and just. Grace speaks of a gift, not of barter or 
trade however unequal. It is pure kindness, not 
the fulfilling of an obligation. An act in order to 
be gracious must stand disassociated and alone. 
Divine salvation is, therefore, the kindness of God 
toward sinners. It is not less than it would be had 
they sinned less. It is not more than it would be 
had they sinned more. It is wholly wumrelated to 
every question of human merit. Grace is neither 
treating a person as he deserves, nor treating a 
person better than he deserves. It is treating a 
‘person graciously without the slightest reference to ' 
his deserts. Grace is infinite love expressing itself 
in infinite goodness. 

Through the death of Christ by which He took 
away the sin of the world, and through the divine 
decree which has constituted all to be ‘‘under sin,’’ 
grace is free to save in every case, and only grace 
can save in any case. Divine grace is never decreased 


12 Grace 


or increased. It offers a standardized, unvarying 
blessing to every individual alike. The blessing is 
measureless since it represents in every case no less 
than all that God, being actuated by infinite love, 
can do. 


Sixth. Grace does not Appear in the Immediate 
Divine Dealings with the Sins of the Unsaved. 


It is probable that no point in the Gospel of 
God’s saving grace is sO misunderstood, and, con- 
sequently, so misstated as the revealed truth con- 
cerning the immediate divine dealings with the sins 
of the unsaved. It seems most difficult for the mind 
to grasp the fact that, as revealed in God’s Word, 
God does not deal with any sin in mercy, or len- 
iency. The sinner is never forgiven because God 
is big-hearted enough to remit the penalty, or to 
waive the righteous judgments. Any presentation 
of divine forgiveness which represents God as 
directly exercising clemency toward a sinner is a 
fatal detraction from the meaning of the cross of 
Christ, and is a disastrous misrepresentation of the 
truth contained in the Gospel of His saving grace. 
Those who dare to preach the Gospel should give to 
the cross its true place of vital importance as given 
to it in the Word of God. How can God utter a 
more alarming warning on this point than is dis- 
closed in the revelation of the unrevoked anathema 
upon all who pervert the Gospel of grace? ‘‘But 
though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other 
gospel unto you than that which we have preached 
unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, 
so say I now again, If any man preach any other 


The Theme 13 


gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him 
be accursed’’ (Gal. 1:8, 9). 3 

Turning from human speculation to the Scrip- 
tures of Truth, we discover one basic fact: The 
Lamb of God has already ‘‘taken away’’ the sin of 
the world (John 1:29). The fact that Christ, as 
Substitute, has already borne the undiminished 
righteous judgments of God against sin, is the sole 
ground upon which divine forgiveness is now exer- 
cised. The forgiveness of God toward sinners, there- 
fore, is not an immediate act of grace; it is rather a 
judicial pardon of a debtor in view of the fact that 
his debt has been fully paid by Another. We could 
not know how much He paid; yet, though unable 
to measure redemption, we may rejoice in the fact 
that all, even to the measure of the righteous reckon- 
ing of God, is absolutely and eternally paid by Christ. 
It is not a question of the relative benefits which 
might possibly accrue to the sinner under one form 
of forgiveness or another,—were he forgiven gra- 
ciously, or in strict justice; it is a question of the 
basis upon which any divine forgivness can be ex- 
tended righteously. This righteous basis has been 
provided in the cross. By Gospel preaching, sin- 
ners are to be told that they may now stand forever 
pardoned before God: not because God is gracious 
enough to excuse their sins; but because there is 
plentiful redemption through the blood that has 
been shed (Rom. 3:24; Eph. 1:7). Being free to 
forgive at all, God is free to forgive perfectly. Onno 
other ground can the marvelous statement,—‘‘ having 
forgiven you all trespasses’’ (Col. 2:13), be under- 
stood. This Scripture is addressed to Christians and 


14, Grace 


it exactly defines the scope of divine forgiveness which 
is theirs. It likewise indicates the measure of for- 
giveness which is offered to the unsaved. 

When God thus forgives, absolutely and eternally, 
through the cross of Christ He is acting as Judge. 
By this judicial decree, He sets aside forever all 
condemnation. Such judicial forgiveness, which 
guarantees an unchangeable standing and position in 
sonship, should not be confused with the Father’s 
forgiveness toward His sinning child, which is wholly 
within the family relationship, and which restores 
lost fellowship and joy to the child of God. 

Every unsaved person is under the three-fold sen- 
tence of sin. He is a sinner by practice, a sinner 
by nature, and a sinner by divine decree. God deals 
with this three-fold aspect of sin by a three-fold 
achievement in grace. There is forgiveness for man 
in view of the fact that he is a sinner by practice; 
there is imputed righteousness for man in view of 
the fact that he is a sinner by nature; and there is 
the divine decree of justification for man in view of 
the fact that he is a sinner who, by divine decree, is 
‘Sunder sin.’’ 

Judical forgiveness itself is not an act of grace, 
nor is judicial forgiveness a mere act of divine 
clemency for some particular sins of present moment 
to the sinner: judicial forgiveness covers all sin, 
and by it the sinner is, as to possible condemnation, 
pardoned forever. This pardon covers all sins past, 
present, or future. God the Righteous Father will, 
in infinite faithfulness, correct and chasten His sin- 
ning child, and the sinning child will need to con- 
fess his sin in order to be restored into fellowship 


The Theme 15 


with his Father; but the Father will never condemn 
His child (John 3:18; 5:24; Rom. 8:1R. V.; I Cor. 
11:31, 32). The forgiveness of God toward the sin- 
ner is, then, made possible only through the cross and 
is never an act of immediate grace, and, when it is 
free to be extended at all, it is boundless. It con- 
templates and includes all sin. It forever absolves 
and acquits the sinner. 

Though divine forgiveness results in a position for 
the sinner wherein there is no condemnation, this 
fact should in no wise be confused with the deeper 
aspect of God’s saving grace wherein He justifies 
the sinner. Forgiveness cancels every debt before 
God, but justification declares the sinner to be for- 
ever judicially righteous in the eyes of God. One 
is subtraction, the other is addition; and both are 
righteously made possible through the cross. 

Of the various divine undertakings in the salva- 
tion of a sinner, some are acts of divine justice, and 
some are acts of the immediate, super-abounding 
grace of God. Those acts which deal with human 
unworthiness and sin are acts of justice. These in- 
elude forgiveness, justification, death to the law, free- 
dom from the law, and the whole new creation. All 
this is made possible through the cross of Christ and, 
therefore, is not accomplished by an act of immediate 
grace. On the other hand, those aspects of salvation 
wherein God is revealed as imparting and bestowing 
His benefits are said to be immediate acts of grace. 
These include the gift of eternal life, the imputed 
righteousness of God, and every spiritual blessing. 
Limitless grace is seen in the love of God which pro- 
vided the cross; but when that cross is provided, 


16 Grace 


every saving act that is based upon it becomes an 
act of justice, rather than an act of immediate grace. 
“‘That he might be just, and the justifier of him 
which believeth in Jesus’’ (Rom. 3: 26).* 


Seventh. Grace does not Appear in the Immediate 
Divine Dealings with the Sins of the Saved. 


The divine dealings with the sins of the saved are 
similar to the divine dealings with the sins of the un- 
saved in one particular, namely, what God does in 
either case is done on the ground of the cross of Christ. 
By that cross all sin, whether it be that of saint or 
sinner, has been righteously judged, and the ransom 
price, which satisfies every demand of infinite holi- 
ness, has been paid. By His death, Christ provided 
the sufficient ground for both the salvation of the 
unsaved, and the restoration of the saved. It is 
because of what has already been accomplished in 
the cross concerning the sin of the world, that the 


1 Under grace, the salvation of a sinner is declared in about 
115 passages to depend only on believing, and in about 35 pas- 
sages to depend on faith, which is but a synonym of believ- 
ing. The Scripture everywhere harmonizes with this over- 
whelming body of truth. Without due consideration of the 
precise bearing of this revelation on the doctrine of grace, 
zealous workers have proposed to add certain conditions to 
the plan of salvation other than believing. (1) It is not, 
“believe and pray.” In view of His grace, it is in no 
wise necessary, or fitting, to implore God to save. (2) 
It is not “believe and confess sin.’ Confession of sin, 
which is the one condition upon which a saint may be 
restored to fellowship, is never imposed on the unsaved. 
Confession is foreign to the ground on which they stand. 
(3) It is not “believe and confess Christ before men.” 
This condition, though imposed in the kingdom teachings of 
Christ (Mt. 10: 32), is not, and could not be, a condition of 
salvation under grace. Romans 10:9 is given its final order 


The Theme y, 


unregenerate are freely forgiven and justified. This 
is a part of God’s saving grace, and is wrought on the 
sole condition that they believe; while the regenerate 
are forgiven and cleansed on the sole condition that 
they confess. These two requirements indicated 
by these two words, it will be noted, are wholly dif- 
ferent. The human obligation as represented by 
each word is exactly adapted in each ease to the 
precise relationships which, on the one hand, exist 
between God and the unsaved, and, on the other 
hand, exist between God and the saved. The salva- 
tion of the sinner is unto wnion with God: the res- 
toration of the saint is unto communion with God. 
Believing and confessing are two widely differing 
human conditions, or obligations, and should never 
be confused or interchanged. The lost are never 
saved by confessing, and the saved are never re- 
stored by believing. 

That there is no greater demand imposed upon 
and force in verse 10. There confession is seen to be the 
the expression of salvation which has been received by 
believing. It is primarily the voice of the new-born babe 
in Christ speaking to its Father,—“Abba Father.” Multi- 
tudes have been saved who were deprived of any opportunity 
of a public confession. (4) It is not “believe and be bap- 
tized.” Mark 16: 16 is the one instance in Scripture where 
these two conditions are linked together. Not only is the 
context—Mark 16: 9-20—omitted in the oldest manuscripts, 
but the omission of the word baptized from the negative 
statement, “he that believeth not shall be damned,” is evidence 
that baptism is not the essential condition in the positive 
statement. (5) It is not “believe and repent.” About six 
times these two conditions are thus joined in the Scriptures 
which are addressed to the unsaved in this dispensation, 
and for obvious reasons. Over against this, it should be 


considered that believe, or faith, is used, apart from the 
word repentance, no less than 150 times; the Gospel by John 


18 Grace 


the unsaved than that he believe, and no greater 
demand imposed upon the saved than that he con- 
fess, is due to that which Christ accomplished on 
the cross. He wrought in behalf of sinner and 
saint in bearing the sin of the world, and every re- 
quirement of infinite justice is met for all in the 
finished work of Christ. In the one case, there is 
nothing left to be done but to believe; while in the 
other case, there is nothing left to be done but to 
confess. 

The revealed attitude of God toward all men is 
that of grace alone. Therefore He does not need to 
be coaxed or persuaded. With His hand out- 
stretched to bestow all that His grace can offer, it is 
highly inconsistent to plead with Him to be gracious, 


which was written that men might be saved, does not use 
repentance in any form of the word; and the Book of Romans, 
which was written to unfold the whole doctrine of salvation, 
like the Gospel by John, does not once condition salvation on 
repentance, or anything other than believing. Repentance, 
which means “a change of mind,” is never excluded from the 
terms of salvation; it is included as an essential part of be- 
lieving. There is no Scriptural warrant for the grace-con- 
fusing practise of some who insist that repentance and be- 
lieving are separate obligations to be imposed on the unsaved. 
It is impossible for a person to believe who does not repent. 
In believing, he will experience that change of mind which 
turns from all else unto Christ as the Object of trust. Meas- 
ureless harm has been done to souls when it has been taught 
that a self-imposed repentance must precede faith in Christ. 
Such insistence ignores every vital aspect of saving grace. 

. Saving faith is more than a belief in historical facts 
concerning Christ; it is to rely on Christ, to depend on His 
saving grace, and to receive Him; it is to believe the record 
,God has given concerning His Son. In preaching the Gospel, 
;emphasis should not fall on the mere human act of believing; 


\it should fall, rather, on the precise message which is to be 
\believed. 


The Theme 19 


or to coax Him to be good. By the unvarying teach- 
ing of God’s Word, and by the inexorable logic of 
the accomplished value of the cross, the forgiveness 
and blessing of God to the unsaved is conditioned 
upon believing, and te the saved it is conditioned 
upon confessing. 

1 John 1:1 to 2:2 is the central passage in the 
Bible wherein the divine method of dealing with the 
sins of Christians is stated. A portion of this most 
important passage is as follows: ‘‘If we confess our 
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness... . 
My little children, these things write I unto you, that 
ye sin not [be not sinning]. And if any man sin, 
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins: 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world.’’ 

According to this Scripture, four vital elements 
enter into that divine forgiving and cleansing which 
constitutes the restoration of a sinning saint: (1) 
Confession is the one and only condition on the 
human side; (2)Absolute forgiveness and cleans- 
ing is promised on the divine side; (3) The Christian, 
while sinning, has been safe as to divine condemna- 
tion, because of his Advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the righteous; and (4) Divine 
forgiveness and cleansing is exercised toward the 
believer in unchallenged faithfulness and justice 
because Christ is ‘‘the propitiation for our 
sins,”’ 

In this transaction, as it is thus disclosed, the 
believer makes no disposition of his own sin; that 


20 Grace 


has been made for him. So, also, the Advocate 
makes no excuses for the sinning Christian, nor does 
He plead for the clemency of the Father in behalf of 
the believer who has sinned. The Advocate presents 
the sufficiency of His own blood to meet the condemna- 
tion of every sin. The Father does not act in gracious 
kindness when forgiving and cleansing the believer: 
He acts in strict faithfulness to His convenant and 
promise of eternal keeping, and in strict justice 
because of the shed-blood. Such is the unchanging 
value of the propitiation which Christ made in His 
blood. 

It should also be noted that, according to this 
revelation, the sinning saint is never before any tri- 
bunal other than that of his own Father. The eternal 
relationship between the Father and His child ean 
never be set aside. The Father may correct and 
chasten His erring child (1 Cor. 11:31, 32; Heb. 
12:3-15), and through confession the child may be 
restored to the place of fellowship; but all of this 
is wholly within the inner circle of the family and 
household of God. Condemnation, which would ex- 
pel the child from the place of a son, is forever 
past. Nor does the sinning Christian draw on the 
merey and favor of God when he is restored to 
fellowship in the household of God. How easily 
mercy and favor might be exhausted and overdrawn! 
On the contrary, the Christian, sheltered under the 
blood of propitiation, and standing in the merit of 
his Advocate, is on a basis where no past offences 
have accumulated against him; for he is cleansed 
and forgiven under the legal justice of the Father. 
The justice of God is made possible and is right- 


The Theme 21 


eously demanded in view of the shed-blood of His 
own Son. 

Let it not be supposed that this divine plan of 
restoration of the child of God to the Father’s fel- 
lowship will react in an attitude of carelessness on 
the part of the Christian. The sufficient answer to 
this challenge is three-fold: (1) True confession is 
the expression of a very real repentance, or change 
of mind, which turns from the sin. This is the 
exact opposite of becoming accustomed to the sin, 
or becoming careless with regard to it. (2) This 
very revelation is given, we are told, not to encour- 
age, or license us to sin; but rather that ‘‘ye sin 
not’’ (be not sinning). According to the Scrip- 
tures and according to human experience, the be- 
liever’s safety in the faithfulness and justice of the 
Father and the advocacy and propititation of the 
Son, is the greatest incentive for a holy life. It is 
clearly revealed that God has, by other and suffi- 
cient means, guarded against all careless sinning on 
the part of those whom He has eternally saved 
through the merit of His Son. And (3) God can 
righteously deal with sin in no other way than 
through the absolute value of the blood of His Son; 
but when sin has been laid on the Substitute, it 
ean never be laid back on the sinner, or on any 
other. Jn the cross of Christ, the question of 4 
possible condemnation because of sin is adjusted 
forever. Mercy and grace can never be co-mingled 
with divine justice. Boundless grace is disclosed in 
the provision of a perfect propitiation for the sins of 
the believer; but the application of the propitita- 
tion is never gracious; it is none other than the 


22 Grace 


faithfulness and justice of the Father. Therefore 
grace does not appear in the forgiving and cleansing 
of the Christian’s sins. 


RESTATEMENT 


It may be concluded that the word grace, as used 
in the Bible in relation to divine salvation, represents 
the uncompromised, unrestricted, unrecompensed, 
loving favor of God toward sinners. It is an un- 
earned blessing. It is a gratuity. God is absolutely 
untrammeled and unshackled in expressing His in- 
finite love by His infinite grace (1) through the death 
of His Lamb by whom every limitation which human 
sin could impose has been dispelled, (2) through the 
provision which offers salvation as a gift by which 
human obligation has been forever dismissed, and (3) 
through the divine decree by which human merit has 
been forever deposed. Grace is the limitless, unre- 
strained love of God for the lost, acting in full eompli- 
ance with the exact and unchangeable demands of His 
own righteousness through the sacrificial death of 
Christ. Grace is more than love; it is love set abso- 
lutely free and made to be a triumphant victor over 
the righteous judgment of God against the sinner. 

Having examined into the meaning of the word 
grace, the three-fold divine ministry and undertak- 
ing in grace should be considered. It will be observed 
that : 

I. God saves sinners by grace, 

II. God keeps through grace those who are saved, 
and, 

III. God teaches in grace those who are saved and 
kept how they should live, and. how they may 
live, to His eternal glory. 


CHAPTER II 
SALVATION BY GRACE 


CRIPTURE discloses the fact that the power and 
S resources of God are more taxed by all that enters 
into the salvation of the soul than His power and re- 
sources were taxed in the creation of the material 
universe. In salvation God has wrought to the 
extreme limit of His might. He spared not His own 
Son, but delivered Him up for us all. He could 
do no more. 

Four aspects of His saving grace are now to be 
examined: (1) Three divine motives in grace, (2) 
Three principles which cannot co-exist with grace, 
(3) The gracious work of God for man, and (4) 
Saving grace is sovereign grace. 


I. THREE DIVINE MOTIVES IN GRACE, 


In the Bible, three motives are assigned to God gor 
the salvation of sinners. These motives are to be 
considered in what seems to be the order of their 
importance; beginning with that which seems to be 
the least and moving on to that which seems to be 
the greatest. 


First. Men are Said to be Saved that ‘‘Good 
Works’’ may Result. 


A statement of this truth is found in Eph. 2:10: 


‘‘Hor we are his workmanship, created in Christ 
23 


24 Grace 


Jesus unto good works, which God hath before or- 
dained that we should walk in them.’’ Few por- 
tions of the Scriptures present more of the essentials 
of salvation than this passage. It should be con- 
sidered in its various revelations: 


““We are his workmanship.’’ 


Whatever enters into the transformation of the 
individual at the time he is saved is wholly a work 
of God for man. It is in no wise related to any work 
which man might do for God. According to the 
Scriptures, God alone can save, and God alone can 
keep. All that will have been done when God’s saving 
work is completed, will be seen to be ‘‘his workman- 
ship.’’ 


““Created in Christ Jesus.’’ 


The divine work in behalf of a saved person is 
nothing less than a new creation. He has passed 
through the creative hand of God a second time and 
has become a new creature. The result is a new 
birth,—a regeneration by the Spirit. This new crea- 
tion is organically related to Christ as a branch is in 
the vine, and as a member is in the human body. So 
the believer is im Christ. He is ‘‘created in Christ 
Jesus.”’ 


*‘Unto good works.’’ 


Never is the sinner created in Christ Jesus by good 
works. The divine purpose is here revealed. Good 
works are possible only to those who are ‘‘ecreated 
in Christ Jesus.’’ This truth is twice stated in the 
Epistle to Titus: ‘‘Who gave himself for us, that 


Salvation by Grace 25 


he, might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify un- 
to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works’’; 
‘This is a faithful saying, and these things I will 
that thou affirm constantly, that they which have 
believed in God might be careful to maintain good 
works. These things are good and profitable unto 
men’’ (2: 14; 3: 8). So, also, this is the order of 
truth in the great doctrinal Epistles. The work of 
God for man is first stated. After this, and growing 
out of this, is a new obligation which is the appeal for 
the faithful work of man for God. It is the reason- 
able demand for a life corresponding to the transfor- 
mation which God hath already wrought in the 
believer through His saving grace. 


““Which God hath before ordained that we should 
walk in them.’’ 

This phrase limits and qualifies the exact scope 
of the ‘‘good works’’ which form the new obligation 
of the one who is ‘‘ecreated in Christ Jesus.’’ These 
works are particular and definite. They are none 
other than those good works which have been before 
ordained for each believer. Such ‘‘good works’’ 
can be discovered and realized only as the life is 
wholly yielded to the will of God. 

Three revelations concerning the place and value 
of human works in relation to salvation should be 
distinguished : 

1. Works as required under the Law. 

In all this body of Truth, human works are set 
forth as being meritorious. It was because of human 
works that divine blessings were bestowed. This 
was an essential characteristic of law-relationships 
to God, and it is the exact opposite of grace-rela- 


26 Grace 


tionships. Under grace, it is because of divine bless- 
ings that human works are wrought. The law was 
exactly and appropriately applied by Christ to the 
lawyer when He said: ‘‘This do and thou shalt 
live’? (Lk. 10:28. Cf Mt. 22:34-40; Mk. 12: 28-34. 
See, also Mt. 19: 16-26; Mk. 10:17-30; Lk. 18: 18- 
30). 

2. Works as the proper test of saving faith. 

This aspect of truth is taught by James (2: 14-26). 
In this Scripture it is declared that true salvation 
will be manifested outwardly by good works. This 
should be expected when salvation is said to be ‘‘unto 
good. works.’’ Such good works will serve to justify 
the saved one in the eyes of the world. This is but 
the counterpart of the more fundamental doctrine 
that justification before God is by faith alone (Rom. 
5:1). An important exception to all this is the 
fact that a saint may, for a time, be walking ‘‘in 
darkness.’’ At such a time there will be abnormal 
results in his life before God and before the world. 


3. Works as indicative of the attitude of heart 
toward the grace of God. 

Works which are impelled by the consciousness 
of a right relation to God through His grace, are 
treated as works of obedience and unto life eternal; 
while works of any character which are wrought 
apart from saving faith are treated as works of dis- 
obedience unto indignation and wrath (Rom. 2:1- 
16). One manner of life represents the obedience 
of faith; the other manner of life represents the dis- 
obedience of unbelief. 


Salvation by Grace 27 


The first purpose of God in saving men to be 
mentioned, and which seems to be least, is, then, the 
good works whick are made possible only through the 
salvation that is wrought by His power and grace. 
If this revelation concerning our salvation ‘‘unto 
good works’’ stood alone,—which, alas, it too often 
is supposed to do,—the work of God for man would 
be greatly limited and misrepresented. Under a sol- 
itary emphasis on this aspect of the divine purpose 
in the salvation of men, God is made to appear as a 
heartless taskmaster directing infinite undertakings 
and interested in humanity only to the extent of the 
service that He can derive from man. And, should 
their productiveness cease through age or weakness, 
they inevitably must be thrown into the refuse. 
Happily this divine motive in the salvation of men 
does not stand alone. 


Second. Men are Said to be Saved Because of the 
Benefits which Accrue to Them. 

This motive is stated in John 3:16: ‘‘For God so 
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life.’’ By this Scripture, God 
is said to be moved in man’s salvation because of two 
priceless blessings which will thus be bestowed on the 
one who believes: (1) That he ‘‘should not perish’’ 
and (2) that he should ‘‘have everlasting life.’’ 

This divine motive would seem all-sufficient, and 
it is, again, and too often, the only motive which is 
considered by many. Individual salvation with its 
personal benefits is now challenged by some writers 
and teachers as being selfish and narrow. This chal- 


28 Grace 


lenge is both unwarranted and wicked. Salvation 
must be individual by its very nature, and the eternal 
benefits to the individual who receives the gift and 
grace of God are beyond comprehension. These per- 
sonal benefits are the expression of the very essence 
of the love and favor of God. To challenge them is 
no less a sin than to discredit the wisdom and good- 
ness of God. The Scriptural safeguard against an 
over-emphasis on the human advantage and benefit 
in salvation does not consist in discrediting the tre- 
mendous revelations regarding individual salvation; 
it consists rather, in the exposition of the just balance 
of truth which is gained from the added revelation 
concerning the third and far greater motive in the 
salvation of men, to wit: 


Third. Men are Said to be Saved for the Mani- 
festation of Divine Grace. 


The final and supreme motive of God in the salva- 
tion of men is declared in Eph. 2:7: ‘‘That in the 
ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of 
his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ 
Jesus.”’ 

Accompanying this declaration of the supreme pur- 
pose of God, a statement is made concerning the sav- 
ing work of God for the individual. By this saving 
work, men are ‘‘made alive’’ who were ‘‘dead in tres- 
passes and sins,’’ and are ‘‘raised’’ and made to 
“‘sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,’’ 
who were ‘‘without Christ . . . having no hope, and 
without God in the world.’’ By these two revela- 
tions regarding the present estate of the saved, two 


Salvation by Grace 29 


essential aspects of the divine undertaking in man’s 
salvation are disclosed: (1) That which is wrought 
m man,—represented by the gift of eternal life, and 
(2) that which is wrought for man, even the eternal 
positions in Christ,—represented by the fact that 
an individual being saved, is now seated in the 
heavenly in Christ Jesus. 

What, then, is the supreme motive in the salvation 
of men? The answer is clear: ‘‘That in the ages 
to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his 
grace in [by means of] his kindness [that gracious, 
saving thing he does] toward us through Christ 
Jesus.’’ God’s supreme motive is nothing less than 
His purpose to demonstrate before all intelligences,— 
principalities and powers, celestial beings, and ter- 
restial beings,—the exceeding riches of His grace. 
This God will do by means of that gracious thing 
which He does through Christ Jesus. All intelli- 
gences will know the depth of sin and the hopeless 
estate of the lost. They will, in turn, behold men 
redeemed and saved from that estate appearing in the 
highest glory,—like Christ. This transformation 
will measure and demonstrate the ‘‘exceeding riches 
of his grace.’’ 

The supreme purpose of God is to be realized 
through the salvation of men by grace alone. So 
fully does that supreme purpose now dominate the 
divine undertakings in the universe that everything 
in heaven and in the earth is contributing solely to 
the one end. ‘To gain the realization of this supreme 
purpose, this age, which continues from the death of 
Christ to His coming again, was ushered in. These 


30 Grace 


long centuries of human struggle were decreed for 
this one purpose. No vision which is less than this 
will prove sufficient. Men with blinded eyes do not 
see afar off. To such the world is moving on by mere 
chance, or to the supposed consummation of some 
human glory in the earth. Eyes thus blinded see 
naught of the glory of heaven; minds thus darkened 
understand nothing of the supreme purpose of God in 
the demonstration of the exceeding riches of His 
grace. But, when this age is consummated it will 
be clearly seen by all beings in heaven and in the 
earth that these centuries of the on-moving universe 
have been designed for no other reason than the 
realization of the supreme purpose of God in the sal- 
vation of men by grace alone. The out-calling of 
the ‘‘church which is his body’’ from both Jews and 
Gentiles is tha out-working of Gdod’s purpose to 
gather into one heavenly company all the redeemed 
of this age. The supreme purpose is realized in their 
salvation and this design was the ‘‘mystery,’’ or 
sacred secret, which was hid in other ages, but which 
is now revealed to ‘‘holy apostles and prophets’’ of 
this dispensation. The ministry entrusted to the 
Apostle Paul was, ‘‘To make all men see what is the 
fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning 
of the world hath been hid in God, who created all 
things by Jesus Christ: to the intent that now unto 
the principalities and powers in heavenly places 
might be known by the church the manifold wisdom 
of God, according to the eternal purpose which he 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord’’ (Eph. 3: 9-11). 
Israel must remain blinded wntil this purpose is 
realized (Rom. 11:25), and the mystery of iniquity 


Salvation by Grace 31 


must work wnti this heavenly company is saved and 
taken away with the removal of the restraining 
Spirit of God (2 Thes. 2:7). 

It may be added, as well, that the other divine 
motives in the salvation of men, already mentioned, 
only contribute to the realization of the one supreme 
motive. The ‘‘good works’’ of those who are saved 
are the ‘‘effectual working’’ of every part of the 
body making ‘‘increase of the body’’ (Eph. 4:16), 
and the results of that saving grace which is exercised 
toward the sinner—that he should not perish but 
have everlasting life—are only to the end that all of 
the saved ones together may demonstrate in the ages 
to come the exceeding riches of His grace. 

And, again, the purpose of God, which is to shew 
the exceeding riches of His grace, reaches beyond the 
boundaries of this age and is the supreme divine pur- 
pose in the whole creation, preservation, and consum- 
mation of the universe. Christ is declared to be the 
cause, center, purpose and benefactor of all creation. 
‘‘All things are created by him, and for him: and 
he is before all things, and by him all thing consist”’ 
(Col. 1: 16, 17), but the important aspect of all sal- 
vation centers in the fact that ‘‘through the blood of 
his cross’’ He is to reconcile all things unto Himself. 
“‘And you, that were sometimes alienated and ene- 
mies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he 
reconciled in the body of his flesh through death’’ 
(Col. 1:21, 22). Of all the aspects of His eternal 
Person, the emphasis falls on the fact that, He 
was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. 
Even those who are redeemed by His precious blood 
and who are the outshining manifestation of the 


32 Grace 


grace of God, were chosen in Him ‘‘before the founda- 
tion of the world’’; moreover, the ‘‘good works’’ of 
those who are saved, which are unto the proclamation 
of the Gospel of His saving grace, were ‘‘before or- 
dained’’ that they should walk in them. So, like- 
wise, sweeping on into the ages to come, we are told 
that of all the glories that will belong to the Lord of 
Glory, that glory which was given unto Him because 
of His redeeming love will be all-surpassing: ‘‘ Who, 
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to 
be equal with God: but made himself of no reputa- 
tion, and took upon him the form of a servant, and 
was made in the likeness of men: and being found 
in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and 
given him a name which is above every name: that 
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of 
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things 
under the earth; and that every tongue should con- 
fess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God 
the Father’’ (Phil. 2:6-11). It is declared of Him 
that He is ‘‘appointed heir of all things’’; by Him 
the ages were programmed; He is the brightness of 
the Father’s glory, and the express Image of His 
Person; and he upholdeth all things by the word of 
His power. But to what purpose is this marvelous 
unfolding of His eternal Being if it is not to relate 
His Deity to His present saving grace; to accomplish 
which, it is stated, He, having ‘‘by himself purged 
our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty 
on high’’ (Heb. 1:2, 3)? Thus absolutely does the 
whole universe throughout the program of the ages 


Salvation by Grace 33 


center about the sacrificial death of the Son of God, 
by whom that heavenly company are to be redeemed, 
purified, transformed, and translated into the eternal 
manifestation of the riches of grace. 

The complete manifestation of divine grace which 
is to be revealed in the glory will be by means of all 
that combines in Christ—the Glorious Head, together 
with His redeemed Body, every member of which 
will have been transformed into His very image. 
What a spectacle for angels and archangels, prin- 
cipalities and powers, mankind and demons! Yea, 
what a spectacle for God Himself; for He will then 
gaze on that surpassing manifestation of His grace 
to His own ‘‘exceeding joy’’ (Jude 24)! 

Divine grace could have had no place in this uni- 
verse until sin had entered. Through creation, the 
wisdom and power of God had been disclosed; but 
there had been no unveiling of God’s love for the un- 
deserving, since there had been no occasion for its 
manifestation. This statement does not imply that 
we are to sin that grace may abound. There is a wide 
difference between the fact that God permitted sin to 
enter the world, and the thought that thereby God l- 
censes man to sin. Whether there have been greater 
motives which have actuated God in permitting sin to 
enter the world than He has revealed, none can say. 
It is certain, however, that the greatest motive that He 
has been pleased to reveal is to be inferred from the 
fact that grace cannot be exercised where there is 
no demerit, and that He designs above all else that 
His saving grace shall have an actual and adequate 
demonstration in all the ages to come. How could 
it be otherwise? What poverty of experience would 


34 Grace 


reign in a universe that had never dreamed of true 
heart-compassion, the incomparable joy of forgiving 
and being forgiven, or that never would have heard 
the victory song of the redeemed! A universe which 
otherwise would have been, with all its magnificence 
of celestial glory, as cold, unyielding, and unap- 
proachable as the law of infinite righteousness itself, 
has been colored and warmed by the penitent’s tears, 
and by the unveiling of the unfathomable grace of 
God toward the sinful. Highest of all revealed 
glories,—and who can measure its relative import ?—, 
the boundless grace of God is being manifested 
through the salvation of sinners. Such is the spec- 
tacle concerning which angelic hosts and human 
throngs will marvel, and about which they will sing 
throughout the ages of the ages to come. 

Returning to Eph. 3: 8-11 we read that the Apostle 
Paul was sent to preach the ‘‘unsearchable riches 
of Christ.’? Such riches could be brought to light 
only by means of the fact of sin and its cure through 
the cross of Christ. The Apostle was also sent ‘‘to 
make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery 
[sacred secret], which from the beginning of the 
world hath been hid in God, who created all things 
by Jesus Christ.’? This sacred secret is, according 
to the preceding context, the calling out and saving 
in this age of a company from both Jews and Gentiles, 
which company is the true ‘‘church which is his 
body.’’ By the salvation of these, He purposes to 
unveil before all heavenly hosts His greatest dis- 
play of wisdom as it is seen in the manifestation 
of His bosom of love through the coming of Christ 


Salvation by Grace 35. 


into the world to redeem the lost. For we read: 
‘“To the intent that now unto the principalities and 
powers in heavenly places might be known by the 
ehurch the manifold wisdom of God, according to the 
eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus 
our Lord.’’ 

At no point can tolerance be given to the theory 
that the Innocent Man in the Garden of Eden was 
God’s first and highest ideal, that sin entered in 
spite of God, and that redemption is an after-thought 
—the best available remedy in view of the wreckage 
of sin. It is a redeeméd sinner who takes the highest 
place in glory. This redemption was in view before 
all creation. The finite mind is soon overwhelmed 
in the contemplation of the eternal facts and pur- 
poses of God; but there is much that we may under- 
stand when we read, first, concerning the coming of 
Christ into the world to redeem by His precious 
blood: ‘‘Who verily was foreordained before the 
foundation of the world, but was manifest in these 
last times for you’’ (1 Pet. 1:20); ‘‘The Lamb 
slain from the foundation of the world’’ (Rev. 13: 8) ; 
and, ‘‘Him, being delivered by the determinate coun- 
sel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and 
by wicked hands have crucified and slain’’ (Acts 
2:23). And, second, when we read concerning the 
eternal purpose of God in the saved: ‘‘Elect ac- 
cording to the foreknowledge of God the Father’’ 
(1 Pet. 1:2), and, again, ‘‘For whom he did fore- 
know, he also did predestinate to be conformed to 
the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn 
among many brethren. Moreover whom he did pre- 


36 Grace 


destinate, them he also called: and whom he called, 
them he also justified: and whom he justified, them 
he also glorified’’ (Rom. 8:29, 30). 

It is evident, therefore, that the supreme motive of 
God in the creation, preservation, and consummation 
of the universe, in the permission of evil to enter the 
world, and in the mighty undertakings of salvation 
as it is now offered to sinful men through the death 
and resurrection of Christ, is that His ‘‘riches of 
grace’? may be disclosed to all intelligences within. 
the whole scope of creation. 

If the supreme motive of God is to reveal His grace, 
then salvation must be by grace alone, or the eternal 
purpose of God must fail. Hence we read: ‘‘For 
by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of 
yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest 
any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, 
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God 
hath before ordained that we should walk in them’’ 
(Eph. 2:8-10); ‘‘Now to him that worketh is the 
reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. But to. 
him that worketh not, but believeth on him that jus- 
tifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteous- 
ness’? (Rom. 4:4, 5); ‘‘And if by grace, then it 
is no more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace. 
But if it be of works, then is it no more grace: other- 
wise work is no more work’? (Rom. 11:6); ‘‘But 
we believe that through the grace of the Lord 
Jesus Christ we shall be saved’? (Acts 15:11). On 
no other basis can grace be manifested than by salva- 
tion which is wholly unrelated to human merit or 
works. 


Salvation by Grace 37 


fl. THREE PRINCIPLES WHICH CANNOT CO-EXIST 
WITH GRACE. 


It has been shown that the three essential prin- 
eiples which antagonize and if permitted would frus- 
trate the principle of pure grace are set aside in 
this age for the sole purpose that grace may prevail 
uncomplicated and uncompromised. The divine an- 
nulling of every opposing principle to pure grace 
is not only natural, but necessary, if the supreme 
divine purpose of this age is the manifestation of 
grace and that purpose is to be realized. The three 
essential principles already mentioned and which can 
never co-exist with pure grace are: 


First. Any Recognition of Human Guilt. 


God must be free to exercise grace without the 
slightest limitation because of human demerit and 
sin; for grace would no longer be grace if its benefits 
are withheld from the sinner in the least degree be- 
cause of sin. Grace can only be exercised where every 
question of unworthiness has been banished forever. 
This God has accomplished in the cross, and for the 
purpose that His supreme manifestation of grace may 
be realized unto infinite perfection. The Lamb of 
God has taken away the sin of the world, and God 
has laid on Him the iniquity of us all. By these and 
many other Scriptures it is revealed that the grace- 
opposing principle of sin and demerit has been re- 
moved from before the eyes of God for all men. 
Thus, and only thus, could divine grace be exercised 
toward all men. But since God through the death 


38 Grace 


of Christ has, in the absolute sense, dealt with the 
sin of the whole world, He is now free by the exer- 
cise of grace, in the absolute sense, to lavish its riches 
upon the chief of sinners without reservation or dimi- 
nution. Divine grace thus awaits on divine justice; 
for only as the last demand of infinite righteousness 
against sin has been paid can divine grace be exer- 
cised. There can be no admixture of these principles 
wherein divine justice is partly satisfied and to such 
an extent God is partly free to act in grace. Every 
vestige of demerit must be removed before God can 
exercise grace. This vital truth about grace cannot 
be too strongly emphasized. The operations of di- 
vine grace can never overlap or share in any aspect 
of the operations of divine justice; but when divine 
justice has finished its work and abandoned the field 
forever, divine grace is free to occupy the field alone 
in the full blaze of its infinite glory. 

Thus grace now ‘‘reigns through righteousness’’; 
but it is grace alone that reigns. A righteous throne 
of awful justice, wrath, and blasting judgments has 
become ‘‘a throne of grace.’’ Such is the marvel of 
God’s infinite favor. Such is the good news which 
is to be proclaimed to a ruined world; for it is grace 
alone that is now offered to hell-deserving sinners. 
Only by the absolute removal of the condemnation of 
all sin could the way be made clear for the absolute 
manifestation of the grace of God. 


Second. Any Recognition of Human Obligation. 


No more can grace remain grace, if by its benefits 
there is created and imposed the slightest obligation 
for payment or remuneration. Grace is unrecom- 


Salvation by Grace 39 


pensed favor. Its riches must be bestowed and re- 
ceived only on the ground that it is an uncomplicated 
gift. ‘I give unto them eternal life,’’ and ‘‘The gift 
of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord’’ 
(John 10:28; Rom. 6:28). 

In order that the field might be absolutely clear 
for the manifestation of uncomplicated divine grace, 
God has perfectly eliminated every work of man— 
past, present, and future—from the terms of salva- 
tion by grace: ‘‘not of works, lest any man should 
boast’’; and, ‘‘if by grace, it is no more works’’; 
*“Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned 
of grace, but of debt. But to him that worketh not, 
but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his 
faith is counted [reckoned] for righteousness’’; 
“Not by works of righteousness which we have done, 
but according to his mercy he saved us.’’ Man must 
take salvation as a gift. He need only believe in 
order to be saved. The complete setting aside of 
human obligation as payment for divine blessings is 
the only ground upon which God can be free to act 
in unlimited divine grace toward sinners; but every 
human work and obligation is now set aside, and 
pure grace is offered to all men in the Gospel of the 
grace of God. 


Third. Any Recognition of Human Merit. 


This third opposing principle to divine grace has 
been disannulled by the fact that humanity is now 
stripped of every conceivable merit before God. As 
has been stated, revelation concerning the present re- 
lation of fallen man to God goes far beyond a dis- 
closure of the fact that man is a sinner both by 


40 Grace 


nature and by practice. This of itself would be a 
sufficient cause for condemnation; but, beyond all 
this, God has now pronounced an_ all-inclusive, 
judicial, condemning sentence on the whole race, 
both Jew and Gentile. By this universal sentence 
every individual has been reduced to the lowest level, 
so far as human merit before God is concerned. In 
the affairs of men, there is a legitimate field in 
which they may compare themselves one with another 
as to relative moral character and action; but such 
comparison is now completely eliminated from all 
divine estimations of unregenerate men. This im- 
portant fact is one of the characterizing features of 
this age and forms an essential factor in the present 
supreme purpose of God in which He purposes to 
manifest His grace. Apart from this judicial sen- 
tence against all men, the grace of God could never 
be manifested. The following Scriptures disclose 
this present universal decree of divine judgment 
against all men, and in considering them it is im- 
portant to note that this universal judgment is 
not a mere estimation of the various degrees of 
human guilt; it is an arbitrary leveling of every 
human being to a basis which is absolutely without 
merit or standing before God. 

‘‘For we have before proved both Jews and Gen- 
tiles, that they are all under sin’’ (Rom. 3:9); 
‘But the scripture hath concluded all under sin, that 
the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given 
to them that believe’’ (Gal. 3:22); ‘‘For God hath 
concluded them all [Jew and Gentile] in unbelief 
[disobedience,] that he might have mercy upon all’’ 
(Rom. 11: 382) ; ‘‘That every mouth may be stopped, 


Salvation by Grace 4I 


and all the world may become guilty before God’’ 
(Rom. 3:19). It is true that ‘‘all have sinned, and 
eome short of the glory of God,’’ which indicates 
that man is a sinner by practice; but it is a far 
deeper revelation that all, by judicial sentence, are 
under ‘‘sin’’ and ‘‘unbelief’’ and are all now equally 
““guilty’’ before God. 

In exact agreement with the present universal 
leveling of all humanity to the place of supreme 
and unconditioned condemnation is the equally im- 
portant revelation that, through the substitutionary 
death of Christ for all men as Sin-Bearer (John 1: 29; 
2 Cor. 5:14, 19), the ground of universal divine 
condemnation is no longer the sins which men have 
committed and which Christ has borne; but rather 
the condemnation is now because of the personal 
rejection of the Saviour who bore the gin.t. This is 
set forth in His Word: ‘‘He that believeth on him is 
not condemned: but he that believeth not is con- 
demned already, because he hath not believed in the 
name of the only begotten Son of God’’ (John 3: 18) ; 

1Should question be raised at this point as to the fact 
that a vast portion of humanity have not actually rejected 
a Saviour since they have had no knowledge of the Gospel, 
it should be borne in mind that two divine provisions have 
been determined for this age, and they are interdependent: 
(1) God has commissioned that the Gospel of His grace shall 
be preached to every creature, and, (2) every creature will 
stand or fall, according to his personal attitude toward this 
Gospel of saving grace. The fact that the messengers have 
failed to bear the message to every creature has created 
a situation in the world about which the divine provisions 
are not revealed; nor could they be revealed reasonably. 
The essential age-characterizing fact must stand,—Ged holds 
men as condemned, or not condemned, on the sole basis of a 
personal rejection, or acceptance, of all that is revealed in 
the Gospel of His grace. 


42 Grace 


‘‘But he that believeth not shall be damned’’ (Mark 
16:16). In confirmation of the fact that men are 
now condemned because of unbelief, it should be 
noted that when the Spirit of God approaches the 
unsaved to convince them of sin, He does not shame 
them, or blame them, concerning the sins they have 
committed; He rather convicts them of one sin only: 
“Of sin, because they believe not on me’’ (John 
16:9). So, also, Christians are said to be free from 
all condemnation on the sole ground that they have 
believed on the Saviour: ‘‘He that believeth on him 
is not condemned’’ (John 3:18. Cf 5:24; Rom. 
8:1; 1 Cor. 11: 32; 2 Cor. 5:19). 

The conclusion to be derived from this investiga- 
tion into the present standing of man before God 
is that he is universally ‘‘condemned,’’ “‘under sin,’’ 
and reckoned to be in ‘‘unbelief.’’ This divine 
decree permits of no variations or gradations. It 
represents the very lowest level of standing before 
God to which it is possible for any human being to 
descend, and all unregenerate men are now placed on 
that level. 

At this point God offers but one remedy. That 
remedy is Grace. By the complete removal of all 
consideration of human merit, God is now uncon- 
ditionally free to act in grace in behalf of man. On 
no other ground could grace be exercised. Hence 
all preaching of law-observance, or moral reform, 
to unregenerate men is unwarranted, misleading, 
and is contrary to the essential fact of divine grace; 
for no moral appeal, or appeal to human works, 
can be made apart from the assumption that, should 
unregenerate people comply with such appeals, they 


Salvation by Grace 43 


would not be discredited to the same extent before 
God as they would otherwise be.* 

In this dispensation there is no middle ground for 
half-good people. Men are either utterly condemned 
under the universal decree of the Judge of all the 
earth, or they are perfectly saved and safe in the 
grace of God as it is in Jesus Christ. 

It is either Christ or Heil. 

The divine objective in reducing humanity to 
the lowest level of all conceivable grades of human 
standing before God is not merely to give adequate 
expression to His hatred of evil: it is the expression 
of His infinite gooduess and love; for only thus 
could the riches of His grace be extended to them. 
He has reckoned them to be in unbelief ‘‘that he 
might have mercy [grace] upon all’’; and ‘‘The 
scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the 
promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to 
them that believe.’’ Only when human merit has 
thus been removed forever, can divine grace under- 
take its saving work. 

The grace of God which is offered so freely to the 
Sinner is not a variable quantity which might be 
adapted to the different degrees of human sinful- 
ness; it is an unchangeable whole. It is standard- 
ized and cannot be increased or diminished. It is 
all that God can ever do for the sinner in time or 
eternity. It is as infinite as He is infinite. Such 
measureless grace is now freely offered to the sin- 
ner. He has but to receieve Christ in whom all 

iLet it be restated that there is, in the field of human 
government and social order, a legitimate recognition of 


varying degrees of moral fitness; but these find no place as 
a basis of divine grace, or as the ground of salvation. 


44 Grace 


fulness dwells. Men are either ‘‘under sin,”’ or 
‘onder grace.’’ They are, in the most unequivocal 
sense, either lost or saved. 

In order that grace might be measured in all its 
limitless riches and glory, the objects of that grace 
are lifted from the lowest level of human standing 
before God to the highest pinnacle of heavenly glory. 
Everything has been divinely arranged so that this 
transition may be a measurement of divine grace. 
To this end the widest extremes that are possible for 
God to decree in human positions have been deter- 
mined. Such is the present low estate of the lost 
under the universal divine decree, and such will be 
the exalted estate of the saved in the highest glory 
when grace shall have completed its work. Of no 
archangel has the Lord prayed as He has prayed for 
the objects of His grace: ‘‘Father, I will that they 
also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I 
am; that they may behold my glory, which thou 
hast given me’’ (John 17:24). These two extremes, 
represented by the present estate of the lost, on the 
one hand, and the coming heavenly glory of the 
saved when finally transformed into the very image 
of Christ, on the other hand, are the boundaries 
which measure the infinite grace of God. The posi- 
tional transference of man from the lowest level 
that divine judgment can decree to the highest alti- 
tude of heaven, the change from a death-doomed, hell- 
deserving sinner to a son of God and a partaker of 
the eternal glory, are demonstrations of the measure- 
ment of His own grace which God has decreed and 
with which He is to be forever satisfied. 


Salvation by Grace 45 


Since God’s grace is to be manifested in glory, it 
is required that every aspect of the saving trans- 
formation shall be wrought in grace alone. All human 
merit is of necessity excluded. So, also, since the 
ultimate estate of the saved in glory is to be such 
that they will then be ‘‘like Christ’? and ‘‘con- 
formed to the image’’ of God’s Son, and ‘‘faultless 
before the presence of his glory,’’ it is equally de- 
manded that this divine transformation shall be free 
from every human touch. Such measureless results 
ean be secured and guaranteed only as the work of 
God is uncombined with any human work. The best 
human work could but mar and spoil the divine ideal. 
‘Therefore it is by grace that ye are saved through 
faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of 
God: not of works, lest any man should boast (Eph. 
aro,0): 

Having in the most absolute sense disposed of the 
three grace-opposing principles—human sin, human 
obligation, and human merit,—God, in the same ab- 
solute sense, is now free to lavish His undiminished 
grace upon whomsoever He will. He purposes thus to 
manifest His grace: not merely as a selfish gratifi- 
cation of display on His part; but rather as a satis- 
faction of His love which knows no bounds. 

Only as grace is seen to be the realization of the 
supreme purpose of God, can the expressions used in 
the Scriptures concerning the outflow of that grace 
be understood. The resources of language have 
been exhausted in the attempt to indicate the infinite 
grace of God in terms of human speech. Probably 
these resources of language have been more exhausted. 


46 Grace 


at this point than concerning any other theme of the 
Word of God. How could it be otherwise? God 
through grace purposes the realization of the great- 
est undertaking and accomplishment in all the uni- 
verse. The following Scriptures unfold the limitless 
character of His grace: 

‘‘And of his fulness have all we received, and 
grace for [added to, or heaped upon] grace’’ (John 
1:16); ‘‘Abundance [superabundance] of grace’’ 
(Rom. 5:17); ‘‘But where sin abounded, grace did 
much more abound’”’ (superabound. Rom. 5:20); 
‘“What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, 
that grace may abound?’’ (superabound. Rom. 6:1) ; 
‘‘And by their prayer for you, which long after 
you for the exceeding [above measure] grace of 
God in you”’ (2 Cor. 9:14); ‘‘The abundant [more | 
than enough] grace’’ (2 Cor. 4:15). 

Grace heaped upon grace, superabounding, and 
without measure, is the description given of the limit- 
less outflow of divine favor. The grace of God be- 
longs to the realm of the infinite. His measureless 
love and goodness are released from every restraint. 
They are unshackled and free. The supreme divine 
objective is then, that infinite love may manifest it- 
self in superabounding grace. His love is knowledge- 
surpassing, infinite, and eternal. So, also, is His 
grace. 


TI, THE GRACIOUS WORK OF GOD FOR MAN, 


The uncomplicated work of God for man, which is 
to measure His grace, is presented in the Word of 
God in seven major aspects: 


Salvation by Grace 47 


First. The Finished Work of Christ. 


This is no less than the combined values of His 
redemption, reconciliation, and propitiation, as these 
aspects of His cross are related to the whole world 
lost in sin (1 Tim. 2:6; 2 Cor. 5:19, 20; 1 John 2:1, 
2). This aspect of the divine work is forever 
‘*finished’’ for every soul, and its glorious achieve- 
ment is the good news of the Gospel of saving grace. 


Second. The Convicting Work of the Spirit. 


By this work of God the Gospel of His saving grace 
is revealed to the mind and heart of the unsaved by 
the Spirit of God. He convinces of sin, of right- 
eousness, and of judgment (John 16:7-11). Only by 
this illuminating work of the Spirit can the Satan- 
blinded mind of the unsaved (2 Cor. 4:3, 4) under- 
stand the way of life in Christ Jesus. 


Third. The Saving Work of God. 


This divine undertaking includes every aspect of 
the work of God that is accomplished at the instant 
when the sinner believes on Christ. It is no less than 
many transforming miracles which are wrought in- 
stantaneously and simultaneously in the saving power 
of God. 


Fourth. The Keeping Work of God. 


The clear Biblical testimony is to the effect that 
the believer is kept always and only through the grace 
and power of God. Because of the work of Christ on 
the cross, God is presented as not only being free to 
save meritless sinners; but He is presented as being 


48 Grace 


free to keep those whom He has saved. Under legal 
relationships men endured in order that they might 
be saved (Mt. 24:13). Under grace relationships 
men endure because they are saved (John 10:28). 
God alone is ‘‘able’’ to keep. 


Fifth. The Delivering Work of God. 


The Christian who is perfectly saved from the guilt 
and penalty of sin needs also to be saved from the 
reigning power of sin. God alone can save in any 
case, and therefore deliverance from sin, weakness and” 
failure is provided, not by human effort, but by the 
power of the indwelling Spirit; and is secured, not 
on the principle of works, but on the principle of 
faith. ‘‘Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil 
the lust of the flesh’’ (Gal. 5:16). Deliverance, too, 
is always and only a work of God. 


Sixth. The Work of God in Christian Growth. 


Too often Christian growth is confused with spirit- 
uality, or deliverance from the power of sin. A very 
immature believer, as to growth, may be delivered 
and be in the full blessing of the Spirit. He has yet 
much to learn from experience and from the Word of 
God; but this need not limit his immediate blessing of 
heart and life. In fact only spiritual Christians 
grow. Carnality in life means perpetual babyhood in 
spirituality. ‘‘But grow in grace, and in the knowl- 
edge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ’’ (2 Pet. 
3:18) ; ‘‘But we all, with open face beholding as in a 
glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same 
image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of 
the Lord’’ (2 Cor. 3:18). 


Salvation by Grace 49 


Seventh. The Final Presenting Work of God. 


It is the final and consummating work of God to 
present the believer faultless before the presence of 
His glory to His own exceeding joy. It is promised 
that when we see Him we shall be ‘‘like him.’’ We 
shall then be conformed to the image of the Son of 
God. 

No one will persuade himself that he will assist 
in this final transformation and translation. No 
more can any believer assist in any of these aspects 
of the work of God. Salvation is the work of God 
alone. It is from Him, by Him, and unto Him. In 
every stage of the development it is the work of God 
alone which ean avail, and that work is now provided 
and offered in marvelous grace. Particular em- 
phasis is needed at this point. Salvation is of God; 
and man’s responsibility is only that of being a re- 
eipient of it. Man is called upon to make only 
such personal adjustment to God as will place him in 
the normal position to receive the divine blessing. 
The undertaking is of such a character that man can 
contribute in no wise to its accomplishment. It aims 
to reproduce the very perfection of Christ Himself, 
which perfection would be ruined could man touch 
it. And it is all to the demonstration of the grace of 
God in the ages to come and hence, as certainly, 
precludes the thought of any complication with human 
merit, else the greatest motive of God which has been 
working from before the foundation of the world 
would be defeated,—a contingency impossible in the 
light of revelation. 

According to the Scriptures, the human element 


50 Grace 


is never included beyond the essential adjustment 
of man to the work of God. This human responsi- 
bility is always expressed in terms which suggest 
that man is the recipient of the benefits of the work 
of God. Some of these Bible terms are: ‘‘Believe,’’ 
“‘Receive,’’ ‘‘Faith,’’ ‘‘By me if any man enter in,’’ 
‘“‘Come unto me,’’ ‘‘Whosoever will may come,”’ 
‘‘Whosoever calleth,’? ‘‘Turned to God,’’ being 
‘‘Reconciled to God.’’ Thus it is seen that man is 
saved from the guilt and penalty of sin, not by 
expiating his own sins, but by believing in the One 
who has suffered in his stead. After he is thus 
saved, he is delivered from the power of sin in his 
daily life, not by anxious striving, but by yielding 
and by relying on the all-sufficient, indwelling Spirit. 
He will be saved from the presence of sin into the 
coming glory and likeness of Christ, not by any 
effort or human device, but by the power which 
wrought in Christ to raise Him from the dead, and 
by which he will be translated instantly from the 
earth to heaven. In every instance the divine re- 
sponsibility is seen to be within the sphere of the 
actual accomplishment of the mighty undertaking; 
but man’s responsibility is in the sphere of the re- 
ception of that work. The whole transaction is free 
from every consideration of remuneration, barter, 
or trade. It is the love of God expressing itself in 
His gracious work for those who, within themselves, 
will ever be hopelessly undeserving and therefore 
eternally debtors to infinite grace. 

Salvation is the work of God for man; it is not the 
work of man for God. 

Salvation is the bestowal and actual impartation of 


Salvation by Grace eT 


eternal life; it is not the beauties and artifical imita- 
tions of ethical living. 

Salvation is the imputed righteousness of God; it 
is not the imperfect righteousness of man. 

Salvation is according to the faithful calling of 
God; it is not according to the fitful carefulness of 
man. 

Salvation is a divine reconciliation; it is not a 
human regulation. 

Salvation is the canceling of all sin; it is not the 
cessation from some sin. 

Salvation is being delivered from, and dead to, the 
law; it is not delighting in, or doing, the law. 

Salvation is divine regeneration; it is not human 
reformation. 

Salvation is being acceptable to God; it is not be- 
coming exceptionally good. 

Salvation is completeness in Christ; it is not com- 
petency in character. 

Salvation is possessing every spiritual blessing; it 
is not professing any special betterment. 

Salvation is always and only of God. It is never of 
man. It is the unsearchable riches of Christ. It is 
unto good works which God hath before ordained 
that we should walk in them." 


IV. THE GRACE OF GOD IS SOVEREIGN. 


Not every member of the human family will be in- 
eluded in the glorious, grace-revealing company of 
the redeemed in heaven. Nothing is more clearly 
taught in the Scriptures than this; but the salvation 
of those who are being gathered into that company, 


1 See appendix on page 358. 


‘52 Grace 


it is revealed, will be according to the sovereign pur- 
pose of God, and not according to any merit in the 
individual. There are two fields of divine under- 
taking wherein the work of God stands alone: (1) 
The creation of the universe and (2) the redemption 
of sinners. Certain aspects of work, however, are 
entrusted to men. They are appointed to preach 
the Gospel to the lost, to edify the saints by teaching, 
and to co-operate in the gathering and care of the 
assemblies of believers. Yet even this human service 
is impotent apart from the enabling power of the 
Spirit of God. 

So, also, while God is sovereign in the salvation 
of men, He has allowed sufficient latitude within the 
larger circles of His unalterable purpose for the ex- 
ercise of the human will. ‘‘Whosoever will may 
come.’’ This is the invitation to the unsaved. Like- 
wise He addresses the believer concerning the possible 
blessings of a Spirit-filled life by such words of 
human responsibility as ‘‘yield,’’ ‘‘reckon,’’ and 
‘‘eonfess.’’ It is equally revealed in the Scriptures 
that such action of the human will is never apart 
from the divine enablement. God must move the 
heart of the unsaved: ‘‘No man can come to me, 
except the Father which hath sent me draw him”’ 
(John 6:44). He must move the heart of the saved 
as well: ‘‘For it is God which worketh in you both 
to will and to do of his good pleasure’’ (Phil. 2:13). 

There is no Biblical ground for the theory that 
even the minutest detail of the eternal purpose of 
God will ever be uncertain because of a supposed un- 
anticipated action of the human will. God cannot 
be disappointed, defeated, or surprised. The glorious 


Salvation by Grace 53 


company of the redeemed will, therefore, be gathered 
according to an ‘‘election of grace.’’ 

Two out-standing facts are disclosed in the Scrip- 
tures in regard to the attitude of God toward this 
world: (1) Back of the secondary question of 
the human choice for which man is held responsible, 
is the more important fact that God has permitted 
men to be born and live who He as certainly knows 
will reject His grace with all the woe that their 
choice entails. Thus there is no escape from the 
fundamental fact of the sovereignty of God by em- 
phasizing the superficial issues of a human choice. 
And (2) God is under the compelling force of His 
own boundless love to be the Saviour of all men. He 
so loved the world that He gave His only begotten 
Son that whosoever believeth on Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life. Thus, if divine 
love for a lost world can form any incentive in the 
heart of God, according to the Scriptures, there is 
formed an equal incentive toward all. These state- 
ments are seemingly contradictory one to the other, 
and the solution of the problem they present is 
never found in seeking to minimize the one in the hope 
of preserving the other. Theological systems have 
been developed, made their appeal, and failed at this 
very point. The solution of the problem is never 
found in the range of human reason; it is perfectly 
solved in the range of divine righteousness. Being 
unable to penetrate the infinite issues involved, man 
may rest on the absolute righteousness of God. The 
glorified saint, looking back over the steps of the di- 
vine accomplishment, will then see that all God did 
was right. Here faith alone can minister rest to the 


54 Grace 


soul. The consummation of the age will be seen to 
be according to infinite wisdom, love, and power. It 
will be to the eternal satisfaction of God whose ten- 
der heartedness is boundless and whose justice can 
never be diminished. It will be all-satisfying to His 
saints; for it is declared that they will be ‘‘satisfied’’ 
when they awake in His likeness. The Gospel of the 
grace of God is to be preached to all men with an 
appeal to their will. The result will be a selection 
and election according to sovereign grace. It will be 
in absolute accord with infinite goodness, and the re- 
sult will be to His own exceeding joy. 

Every form of evangelism which tends to force 
the decision of the will beyond the sovereign move- 
ments of the Spirit on the hearts of men is fraught 
with infinite perils. 

No emphasis on the importance of preaching the 
Gospel of grace in its purity can be too strong. 
Biblical preaching must present saving grace with 
no admixtures of limitations because of human sin, 
human obligation, or human merit. Only thus can 
there be the fullest co-operation of the Spirit of God, 
and only thus can the messenger be saved from the 
unrevoked anathema which is pronounced (Gal. 1:8, 
9) on all those who pervert the Gospel of the grace 
of God. 


CHAPTER III 
SAFE-KEEPING IN GRACE 


OT only is the believer said to be saved by grace, 
but he is said to ‘‘stand’’ in grace. The word 
stand, as used in the New Testament, gives expression 
to the thought of continuing and enduring, and to 
“‘‘stand’’ in grace is to abide unchanged, to endure, 
and to continue in grace. We read: ‘‘We have ac- 
cess by faith into this grace wherein we stand’’ 
(Rom. 5:2), and, ‘‘This is the true grace of God 
wherein ye stand’’ (1 Pet. 5:12). 

The continued exercise of divine grace toward the 
Christian is the one and only basis upon which he 
may hope to endure; for, as certainly as grace is 
the one and only basis upon which God can save a 
meritless sinner, so certainly grace alone is the basis 
upon which God ean righteously keep him saved. 
Having begun in the Spirit, or wholly in the power 
and grace of God, there is no hope for continuance 
to be found in the flesh, or the resources of human 
strength. Human ability can no more maintain a 
right standing before God than it can attain such a 
standing. 

Since the application of divine grace for the sal- 
vation of the sinner precedes, in point of time, the 
application of that grace for the keeping of the one 


who is saved, it is perhaps permissible to contem- 
55 


56 Grace 


plate the operation of divine grace in a two-fold 
classification—the grace which saves, and the grace 
which keeps. But, on the other hand, an over-em- 
phasis of this two-fold classification is misleading in 
the extreme; for in no sense are there two efforts, or 
operations, of divine grace. The keeping ministry 
of God in grace is but the realization of that which 
is purposed, programmed, and wholly provided for 
in His saving ministry in grace. In reality, God of- 
fers no saving ministry of grace which does not in- 
clude and guarantee His keeping ministry of grace. 
The varied operations of divine grace in behalf of 
the sinner which contemplate his every need to the 
end of eternity are one indivisible purpose of God. 
The wholly artificial, two-fold classification of the 
ministries of grace into that which saves, and that 
which keeps, has been emphasized by certain theo- 
logical systems. These systems, while professing to 
believe in the doctrine of salvation by grace, ignore 
or repudiate at the same time, the doctrine of the 
keeping power of God through grace. The pro- 
moters of these systems have contended that God 
in grace might save a sinner for the moment; but the 
endurance in that salvation would, of necessity, be 
conditioned on human merit and works. In other 
words, the saved one would remain saved only as 
long as he remained good. Such a conception of 
saving grace is so far removed from the fundamental 
ground upon which all grace must be based, that it 
must be concluded that the framers and supporters 
of these doctrines have in no sense discovered the 
true character of saving grace and are, therefore, 
unable to advance on the true lines of revelation 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 7 


which lead to the perfectly secured consummation of 
all saving grace. This consummation is no less than 
the keeping of the saved one throughout all time and 
eternity. Multitudes who have been trained in these 
false doctrines are saved, but they are saved in spite 
of their doctrines, and those who are saved have in 
every case been kept from the moment they were 
saved; not because they remained good, but because 
of the fact that unmerited favor is provided for 
every one who is saved by grace. 

Since there is a difference as to time of application 
of the indivisible operations of divine grace and since 
certain theological systems have forced this division 
to the point of an avowed belief and confidence to- 
ward the grace which saves, and to the point of avowed 
disbelief and discredit toward the grace which keeps, 
grace will be treated throughout this and remaining 
chapters as though it were subject to this two-fold 
classification. 

The fact that God keeps the saved one on a grace 
principle alone has been anticipated already in the 
preceding chapters; but turning to a more specific 
consideration of the fact and force of divine grace as 
related to the keeping power of God, the subject may 
be given a three-fold classification: (1) The keep- 
ing power of God through grace is included in every 
consideration of the principles of grace. (2) The 
keeping power of God through grace is implied in 
every revelation wherein is presented the truth that 
grace reaches into the coming ages for its consum- 
mation. (38) The keeping power of God through 
grace is seen in the manifold provisions and safe-~ 
guards which He has made to that end. These three: 


58 Grace 


viewpoints of the keeping power of divine grace are 
essential. 


I. THE KEEPING POWER OF GOD THROUGH GRACE IS 
INCLUDED IN EVERY CONSIDERATION OF THE PRINCIPLES 
OF GRACE. 


If God has found a way whereby He can right- 
eously save hell-deserving, meritless sinners, apart 
from all complications with human resources or limit- 
ations, He has, by the continued application of those 
principles, found a way whereby, without reference 
to merit or demerit, the saved one can be kept saved 
to the ages of the ages. This, though most reasonable, 
is purely a question of divine revelation, and, there- 
fore its consideration should not be influenced by ra- 
tionalistic systems of thought. From observation of 
the natural workings of the human mind, it may be 
concluded that it is a greater test of faith for the 
individual to repose on the keeping, power of God 
through grace, than it is to repose on the saving power 
of God through grace; yet, as has been stated, to have 
accepted the true grace principles in salvation is to 
be committed to those selfsame principles which, 
in turn, form the very basis of the keeping power of 
God through grace. To restate——The basis upon 
which God can exercise grace in the salvation of the 
sinner is three-fold: (1) There must be the disposal 
of every condemnation which divine righteousness 
‘could impose because of sin. This has been per- 
fectly accomplished in the cross of Christ. (2) There 
must be a disposal of every human obligation. This 
has been provided in the offer of salvation to man as 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 59 


a gift from God. And, (3) there must be a disposal 
of all human merit. This has been supplied by the 
divine decree which places the whole world ‘‘under 
sin’’ before God. If these great principles of grace, 
which belong to salvation, shall be applied and con- 
tinued to the believer after he is saved, there is 
formed thereby, the same righteous freedom for the 
infinite love of God to be exercised to its own satis- 
faction in the eternal keeping of the one who has been 
saved. With more specific reference to these three 
principles in grace, it may be observed: 


First, There must be the Disposal of Every Con- 
demnation which Divine Righteousness could Impose 
Because of Sin. 


Since the problem of the keeping power of God is 
related only to the believer, the crucial question 
which is confronted at this point may be stated thus: 
Are the sins which Christians commit after they are 
saved divinely judged and disposed of in the cross 
equally with the sins of the unsaved? The Scripture 
is clear on this point: ‘‘And he is the propitiation 
for our [Christians] sins: and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world’’; ‘‘The 
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us [Christ- 
jians|] from all sin’’ (1 John 1:7; 2:2). To these 
passages may be added all the Scripture which con- 
templates the universality of the efficacious death of 
Christ for sin; for sin is stm in any and every case, 
whether it be committed by the saved or the unsaved, 
and it can be cured only by the precious blood of the 
Son of God. All sin taken together formed the un- 
measurable burden which was laid on Him. The 


60 Grace 


supposition that the sins of Christians were excluded 
from the redeeming work of Christ, can be enter- 
tained only without serious thought. Equally erro- 
neous is the supposition that God does not deal judi- 
cially with the Christian’s sins until they are com- 
mitted. Every sin that humanity—saved or unsaved 
—had. committed, or ever would commit, was dealt 
with in perfect divine judgment by Christ at the 
cross. He was God’s Lamb that ‘‘taketh away the 
sin of the world.’’ Being universal, this divine 
judgment contemplated the sin of the saved as much 
as the sin of the unsaved. 

As certainly, then, as grace may be extended to 
the unsaved on the basis of the fact that Christ has 
already borne the condemnation of his sin, so cer- 
tainly grace may be extended and continued to the 
saved on the basis of the fact that Christ has already 
borne the condemnation of the Christian’s sin. In 
this dispensation, the unsaved are not said to be con- 
demned primarily because of their sins which Christ 
has borne; they are condemned because they do not 
believe on Christ who bore their sins. ‘‘He that 
believeth not is condemned already, because he hath 
not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of 
God’’ (John 3:18). In like manner, the Christian 
will never be condemned because of the sin which 
Christ has borne. So, also, the Christian, having ac- 
cepted Christ, can never be condemned for lack of 
saving faith. It is therefore said: ‘‘Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and be- 
lieveth on him that hath sent me, hath everlasting 
life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is 
passed from death unto life’’ (John 5:24). ‘‘There 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 61 


is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in 
Christ Jesus’? (Rom, 8:1, R. V.). ‘‘He that be- 
lieveth on him is not condemned’’ (John 3:18). 

By this Scripture it is seen that the cross of Christ 
is the foundation of the Christian’s eternal security 
and standing in grace; but it should never be disas- 
sociated from the supplementary, though wholly un- 
related, truth that God, while never condemning 
either the saint or the sinner because of sin, since 
Christ has died, does undertake, upon an entirely 
different basis, to safeguard the Christian from every 
practice of sin, and He chastens, where there is need, 
as only a righteous Father can do. 

Does sin unsave the Christian? This is a fair 
question, and if it be answered in the affirmative, 
there are but two possible positions in which the 
Christian might stand: he must, at a given time, 
be either sinlessly perfect, or a lost soul. There 
could be no intermediate ground. The true reply to 
this important question will be found (1) in the 
Seriptures and (2) in human experience. 

1. Revelation not only infers, but directly states 
that Christians sin. It also presents the cure for 
such sin, which, it may be added, is wholly different 
from that which is provided for the cure of the sins 
of the unsaved. This body of truth, both directly 
and indirectly, constitutes a very large proportion of 
the Epistles of the New Testament; for the Epistles 
are written to believers only, and disclose both the 
believer’s eternal standing and his present state be- 
fore God. This message, while plainly declaring that 
Christians do sin, as plainly declares that Christians 
are not condemned. This seeming moral inconsis- 


62 Grace 


tency is not adjusted by blindly supposing the Chris- 
tian to be lost because of his sin; it is adjusted by 
that higher morality made possible through the death 
of Christ, which, alas, too few have comprehended or 
acknowledged, either for their salvation or keeping. 

2. Human experience also testifies to the indisput- 
able fact that Christians do remain saved in spite of 
their evident imperfections and sin. This fact must 
not be slighted. Christians are now standing, and 
the continuance of any Christian as such for an hour, 
or a moment, is a final proof that there is some divine 
provision for their keeping; for in no sense could it 
reasonably be supposed that they are standing in any 
goodness or perfection of their own. The fact that 
they are now standing, is final proof, also, that they 
are neither lost when they sin, nor sinless when they 
remain saved. They are, rather, ‘‘kept through the 
power of God,’’ and that power is not only directly 
exercised in their behalf; but it has been made right- 
eously free to act through the shed blood of the 
Lamb of God. Sin does not overcome the blood; it 
is blood that overcomes sin. 

Thus grace is extended toward the believer for 
time and eternity, not on the ground of impossible 
perfection, nor by slighting the fact of sin; it is ex- 
tended to him because it is the Father’s good pleasure 
to keep His child, and the Father is unconditionally 
free to do this through the blood that has been shed. 


Second, There Must be a Disposal of Every Human 
Obligation. 


It is most evident from the Scriptures that every 
human work has been set aside and salvation is now 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 63: 


offered to men, only as the gift of God. There are, 
no payments to be made, past, present, or future; 
else grace is no longer grace. This fact is the second 
foundation principle of grace as grace is exercised, 
toward the sinner. This aspect of divine favor is. 
equally effective when grace is exercised toward the 
Christian. Do Christians pay their way, or do they, 
by their good lives and service, make it imperative 
for God to keep them saved? The answer is evident. 
There could be no peace of heart under such rela- 
tions to God. Who could ever assure himself that 
he had accomplished all his Christian duty, or com- 
plied with all the demands found in the holy ideals 
of God? Who can repay God for the riches of His 
grace? To attempt to do so, is to place a sordid 
value on the priceless treasures of heaven’s glory. 
God proposes to keep every believing soul, for He 
has said, ‘‘I will in no wise cast out.’’ But His keep- 
ing will not be on a basis of exchange wherein Chris- 
tian faithfulness, as important as it is, will be made 
the purchasing medium of the measureless goodness 
and blessing of God. He will keep by grace alone. 


Third, There Must be a Disposal of Every Human 
Merit. 


Through the divine decree, as has been seen, every 
human merit has been set aside in order that pure 
grace might reign unchallenged and uncomplicated. 
That salvation might be by grace alone, God has re- 
moved every possible conflicting issue which might 
arise because of human merit. The whole human 
family is now ‘‘under sin’’; for only thus are they 
objects of pure grace. Such grace can be exercised 


64 Grace 


only toward the meritless. Salvation is based on the 
loving goodness of God and never on the supposed 
worthiness of the sinner. In like manner, God is now 
equally free to continue the exercise of His boundless 
grace toward the Christian without reference to the 
Christian’s merit. All that the love of God may 
prompt Him to do in grace, He is free to do. His 
unconditional covenant of eternal blessings is the 
guaranty of His abiding purpose. This leads to the 
consideration of the second elassification : 


Il. THE KEEPING POWER OF GOD THROUGH GRACE 
IS IMPLIED IN EVERY REVELATION WHEREIN IS PRE- 
SENTED THE TRUTH THAT GRACE REACHES UNTO THE 
COMING AGES FOR ITS CONSUMMATION. 


Through the cross of Christ, which has dealt with 
sin, and through His decree against all human obli- 
gation and merit as related to salvation, God is right- 
eously free to preserve His child forever. And since 
His supreme purpose in all the ages will not be real- 
ized until the sinner is saved, transformed into the 
image of Christ, and lifted up to the highest glory, 
He will continue the exercise of His grace toward 
every believer until the divine objective is consum- 
mated. How perfectly He has delivered Himself from 
every limitation! How absolutely gracious are all His 
ways with those whom He saves! And how irresist- 
ible is His purpose and power! 

The great covenant promises of salvation are not 
limited to the moment when the sinner accepts the 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 65 


saving grace that is in Christ Jesus; they all reach on 
and guarantee every step of the way from the first 
moment of faith to the last moment of fruition. 
Even the word salvation, in its largest Biblical mean- 
ing, covers all that is past, all that is present, and all 
that is future, in the out-working of the grace of God 
for the one who believes. ‘‘He which hath begun a 
good work in you will perform it until the day of 
Jesus Christ’? (Phil. 1:6). ‘‘For God so loved the 
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoso- 
ever believeth in him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life’? (John 3:16). In the great prom- 
ises of grace there is no measurement as to time, nor 
any human condition imposed other than believing. 
“But as many as received him, to them gave he power 
[right] to become the sons of God, even to them that 
believe on his name’’ (John 1:12). ‘‘He that be- 
lieveth on the Son hath everlasting life’’ (John 3: 
36). ‘‘ Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth 
my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath 
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemna- 
tion; but is passed from death unto life’’ (John 
5:24). ‘‘And him that cometh to me I will in no 
wise cast out’’ (John 6:37). ‘‘For I am not 
ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power 
of God unto salvation to every one that believeth’’ 
(Rom, 1:16). ‘‘That he might be just, and the 
justifier of him which believeth in Jesus’’ (Rom. 
3:26). ‘‘For Christ is the end of the law for right- 
eousness to every one that believeth’? (Rom. 10:4). 
Such is the unalterable and unconditional covenant 
of God in grace. 


66 Grace 


I. THE KEEPING POWER OF GOD THROUGH CRACE 
IS INDICATED BY THE MANIFOLD PROVISIONS AND SAFE- 
GUARDS WHICH HE HAS MADE TO THAT END. 


The eternal purposes of God in grace can never 
fail since He has anticipated and provided for every 
emergency that could arise. Some of these provisions 
are: 


First. The Power of God. 


His power, which is supreme, is ceaselessly en- 
gaged in the keeping of His own unto the realization 
of His eternal purpose. Able is the great New Tes- 
tament word that is used to indicate the omnipotent 
power of God. By use of this word, God is said to 
be of sufficient power to do whatever is predicated 
of Him. ‘‘My Father, which gave them me, is greater 
than all; and no man [nothing] is able to pluck them 
out of my Father’s hand’’ (John 10:29). ‘‘For I 
am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor an- 
gels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things pres- 
ent, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature [created being], shall be able to 
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ 
Jesus our Lord’’ (Rom. 8:38, 39). ‘‘Who art thou 
that thou judgest another man’s servant? to his own 
master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden 
up: for God is able to make him stand’’ (Rom. 14: 4). 

And God ‘‘is able to do exceeding abundantly 

1It should be observed that there is no reference in this 
list either to things past, or to sin, as having possible power 


to separate the believer from God. The past and all sin is 
under the blood and, therefore, not even to be considered. 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 67 


above all that we ask or think’’ (Eph. 3:20). ‘‘Ac- 
cording to the working whereby he is able even to sub- 
due all things unto himself’’ (Phil. 3:21). ‘‘For 
I know whom [I have believed, and am persuaded that 
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto 
him against that day’’ (2 Tim. 1:12). ‘‘For in 
that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is 
able to succor them that are tempted’’ (Heb. 2:18). 
‘Wherefore he is able also to save them to the utter- 
most [without end] that come unto God by him”’ 
(Heb. 7:25). ‘‘Now unto him that is able to keep 
you from falling, and to present you faultless before 
the presence of his glory with exceeding joy’’ (Jude 
24). ‘‘And being fully persuaded that, what he 
has promised, he was able to perform’’ (Rom. 4:21). 
‘“What shall we then say to these things? If God 
be for us, who can be against us?’’ (Rom. 8:31). 


Second. The Love of God. 


Not only is God able to do according to His eternal 
purpose, but His love as a supreme motive will never 
fail. ‘‘ Having loved his own which were in the world, 
he loved them unto the end’’ (without end, John 
13:1). ‘‘But God commendeth his love toward us, 
in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for 
us. Much more then, being now justified by his blood, 
we shall be saved from wrath through Him. For 
if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God 
by the death of his Son, much more, being recon- 
ciled, we shall be saved by his life’’ (Rom. 5: 8-11). 
As he loved the unsaved enough to give His Son to 
die for them, even when they were ‘‘yet without 
strength’’ and ‘‘enemies’’; ‘‘Much more then, being 


68, Grace 


now justified by his blood’’ and ‘‘reconciled,’’ they 
shall be ‘‘saved from wrath through him,’’ and 
“‘saved by his life.’’? Such is the unchangeable love 
of God. ‘‘Much more”’ than His love for the ‘‘ene- 
mies,’’ which drew out the unspeakable gift of His 
Son, is His love for His own who are now ‘‘justified’’ 
and ‘‘reconciled.’’ So, also, there is a boundless as- 
surance as to the future: ‘‘saved from wrath through 
him,’’ which points to the unchangeable position of 
the believer ‘‘in Christ,’’ and ‘‘saved by his life’’ 
which points to the living presence and ministry of 
Christ in glory. With such provisions, God’s love can 
know no disappointment concerning those whom He 
has saved in grace. 


Third. The Prayer of the Son of God. 


Christ prayed while here on earth: ‘‘I pray for 
them: I pray not for the world, but for them which 
thou hast given me; for they are thine. And all mine 
are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in 
them. And now I am no more in the world, but these 
are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, 
keep through thine own name those whom thou hast 
given me, that they be one, as we are. While I was 
with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: 
those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of 
them is lost, but the son of perdition.’’ ‘‘I pray 
not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, 
but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.’’ 
‘‘Neither pray I for these alone, but for them 
also which shall believe on me through their word’’ 
(John 17: 9-12, 15, 20). It is wholly impossible that 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 69 


any prayer of the Son of God should be unanswered. 
Too much emphasis cannot be placed on this assuring 
fact. While the “‘son of perdition,’’ who was never 
saved, was lost that, in his case, ‘‘the Scripture might 
be fulfilled,’’ the Son of God could say of the saved 
ones: ‘‘And none of them is lost.’’ Thus, since He 
has prayed, as well, for ‘‘them also which shall be- 
lieve on me through their word,’’ He will yet say, of 
ali believers: ‘‘And none of them is lost,’’ and in 
the same manner will the Scriptures be fulfilled in the 
presentation of every saved one in glory. 

As Christ began to pray for his own while He was 
yet here in the world, so He has continued to pray for 
them, and will continue to pray for them, in heaven: 
““Seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them’’ 
(Heb. 7:25). Who can measure the security of the 
children of God when they are the objects of the cease- 
less intercession of the Son of God, whose prayer can 
never be denied? 


Fourth. The Substitutionary Death of the Son of 
God. 


The death of the Son of God is the sufficient answer 
to the condemning power of sin; even as sin appears 
before the righteous throne of God. Not even the un- 
saved are now condemned because of sin which Christ 
has borne; how much more are the saved free from 
condemnation through the death of Christ! Thus 
the Holy Spirit boldly inquires: ‘‘Who is he that 
gondemneth?’’ The answer He also gives: ‘‘It is 
Christ that died’’; ‘‘There is therefore now no con- 
demnation to them which are in Christ Jesus’’; 


70 Grace 


‘When I see the blood, I will pass over you.’’ The 
eternal purpose of God in grace is assured through 
the death of the Son of God. 


Fifth. The Resurrection of the Son of God. 


When he is saved, every believer partakes of the 
resurrection life of the Son of God. He receives a 
new life from God. It is the gift of God which is 
eternal life, and it is ‘‘Christ in you, the hope of 
glory.’’ Speaking of this imparted life, Christ said: 
“‘T am come that they might have life,’’ and, ‘’ He 
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life.’’ 
So, again, ‘‘I give unto them eternal life; and they 
shall never perish’’ (John 3:36; 10:10, 28). It is 
the imperishable life of the eternal Son of God which 
is imparted to every believer. God never gave this 
gift in blindness, not knowing what might be the 
future character of the one He thus saved. He knew 
the end from the beginning. He anticipated every 
failure and sin; yet, through Christ, He can assure 
us that, having received the gift of eternal life, we 
shall never perish. According to the unalterable gift 
of eternal life, made possible through the death and 
resurrection of the Son of God, the purposes of God 
in grace are secured. 


Sixth. The Present Advocacy of the Son of God. 


The Lord Jesus Christ is now ‘‘appearing’’ in the 
presence of the Father as Advocate for every one who 
is saved by grace. As Advocate, He is concerned 
with the actual sins of the Christian. He is not there 
before the Father making excuses for their sins, nor 
is He imploring the Father to be merciful; He is 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 71 


rather presenting His own blood before that throne 
as the answer toe the condemnation of every sin. ‘‘If 
any man sin, we [Christians] have an advocate with 
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous’’ (1 John 2: 
1). In Rom. 8:34, assurance is given by four great 
facts that the child of God will never be condemned. 
One of these is that Christ ‘‘is even at the right hand 
of God.’’ To the same purpose it is declared in 
Heb. 9: 24, that ‘‘Christ is not entered into the holy 
places made with hands, which are the figures of the 
true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the 
presence of God for us.’’ In view of the presence 
of the Advocate before the Father’s throne, meeting 
the force of every sin, even meeting the challenge 
of Satan who is there to accuse the brethren night 
and day before God (Rev. 12:10), there can be no 
doubt remaining as to the realization of the eternal 
purposes of God in grace. 


Seventh. The Intercession, or Shepherdhood, of 
the Son of God. 


The intercession of Christ extends beyond His 
present ministry of prayer for the saved, which has 
just been considered, and includes, as well, His shep- 
herd-care over them. As Shepherd, He is guarding 
their path against the snares of the evil one, and guid- 
ing their feet in the ways of His blessing and peace. 
Peter knew nothing of the fact that Satan had de- 
signs against him, or that Christ had anticipated 
those designs and had prayed for him. All this was 
revealed to him when Christ said: ‘‘Simon, Simon, 
behold, Satan hath desired to have you [obtained 
thee by asking], that he may sift you as wheat: but 


72 Grace 


I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not’’ (Lk. 
22:31, 32). Peter’s ignorance of that which had 
transpired in heaven concerning him did not change 
the fact that he was, nevertheless, under the shep- 
herd-care of Christ the Lord. So it is at every mo- 
ment concerning the child of God. 

As Shepherd and Intercessor, Christ is now the 
High Priest in heaven for His own. The priesthood 
ministry of the old dispensation was continually in- 
terrupted by the dying of the priests; but this Priest 
—Christ—hath an ‘‘unchangeable priesthood,’’ and 
that is assured because ‘‘he continueth ever’’—Christ 
will never die again. His priesthood will never 
cease. Because of this it is also said: ‘‘ Wherefore 
he is able also to save them to the uttermost [without 
end] that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth 
to make intercession for them’’ (Heb. 7: 23-25). 
He will save them as long as He lives, which is forever. 

David, too, had learned of the shepherd-care of 
his Lord: for he said, ‘‘The Lord is my shepherd; I 
shall not want.’’ His confidence concerning the fu- 
ture which is expressed by the words, ‘‘I shall not 
want,’’ is that which is even more to be expected in 
the believer of this dispensation, who has all the 
added revelation regarding the present ministry 
of Christ in heaven. The instructed believer is thus 
made certain that the eternal purposes of God in 
grace will never fail. 


Eighth. The Regenerating Work of the Spirit. 
By the regenerating work of the Spirit the believer 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 73 


is made a legitimate child of God. God being actu-| 
ally his Father, he is impelled by the Spirit to say, 
‘Abba, Father.’’ Being born of God, he has par- 
taken of the ‘‘divine nature,’’ and, on the groun 
of that birth, he is an heir of God, and a joint-hei 
with Christ (John 1:13; 3:3-6; Tit. 3:46; 1 Pet. 
1:23; 2 Pet. 1:4; 1 John 3:9). 1 

The impartation of a nature is an operation so. 
deep that the nature thus imparted is never said to 
to be removed for any cause whatsoever. This state- 
ment may be verified from the Scriptures. The vital 
fact of relationship through birth is never said to be 
disannulled. Thus, again, the fulfillment of the 
eternal purpose of God in grace is to be anticipated 
with unwavering confidence. 


satewnial — 


Ninth. The Spirit’s Indwelling. 


The fact that the Spirit of God now indwells every | 
believer may also be verified from the Word of God | 
(John 7: 37-39; Rom. 5:5; 8:9; I Cor. 2:12; 6:19; | 
1 John 3:24). It is also clearly revealed that the | 
Spirit has come to ‘‘abide’’ in the heart He has once | 
entered. This abiding presence of the Spirit is in | 
answer to the prayer of the Son of God, which prayer 
cannot be unanswered. ‘‘And I will pray the Father, | 
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may 
abide with you for ever’’ (John 14:16). The Chris- | 
tian may ‘‘grieve,’’ and ‘‘quench’’ (resist) the Spirit; 
but there is no Scripture which teaches that the / 
Spirit will be grieved away, or quenched away. So 
long as the Spirit indwells, the eternal purposes of 
God in grace are sure, and He must abide forever. — 


\ 


74 Grace 


Tenth. The Baptism with the Spirit. 


The Christian has been so vitally united to Christ 
by the baptism with the Spirit that he is said to be 
“in Christ,’’ and Christ is said to be ‘‘in’’ the be- 
liever. According to the Seriptures, there is no 
other meaning to the baptism with the Spirit than 
this (1 Cor. 12:13). Thus, being placed by the Spirit 
in organic union with Christ, the believer is related 
to Christ as the branch is to the vine, or as a mem- 
ber of the human body is to its living head. Be- 
cause of this most vital union to Christ through the 
baptism with the Spirit, the believer is said to be 
a partaker in all that Christ is, all that Christ has 
done, and all that Christ will ever do. This is a 
limitless theme since it opens before one the eternal 
realities of an unchangeable identification with Christ. 
One of these eternal realities is ‘‘ the imputed right- 
eousness of God.’’ This garment in which every be- 
liever is now clothed. and because of which he is now, 
and will be forever, accepted before God, is reckoned 
unto him because he is ‘‘in Christ’’: ‘‘That we 
might be made the righteousness of God in him’’ (2 
Cor. 5:21); ‘‘But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, 
who of God is made unto us... righteousness’’ 
(1 Cor. 1:30); ‘‘That I may win Christ, and be 
found in him, not having mine own righteousness, 
. . . but that which is through the faith of Christ, 
the righteousness which is of God by faith’’ (Phil. 
3:8, 9). ‘In him’’ we are made nigh through the 
blood of Christ, and we are ‘‘made accepted in the 
beloved.’’? There is a righteousness from God which 
is wnto all and upon all who believe (Rom. 3:22). 


Safe-Keeping in Grace a5 


This is the imputed righteousness of God. It covers 
the Christian, because he is ‘‘in Christ,’’ and God sees 
him only as Christ is seen. Being ‘‘in Christ’’ he is 
in God’s sight what Christ is. This position is that 
of being accepted as a living member in the body, 
of which Christ is the living Head. God sees the 
member only in the body of His Son. As long, then, 
as Christ abides and is Himself what He is—the 
very righteousness of God—, so long the member of 
His body will abide under the imputed righteousness 
of God. Thus the eternal purposes of God in grace 
are certain through the baptism with the Spirit. 


Eleventh. The Sealing with the Spirit. 


Likewise, every believer is now sealed with the 
Spirit. The immediate value of this accomplishment 
seems to be more for the sake of God, than for the 
sake of the believer. This particular ministry is men- 
tioned only three times in the New Testament; but it 
is of vital import: ‘‘Who hath also sealed us, and 
given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts’’ (2 Cor. 
1:22); ‘‘Having also believed, ye were sealed with 
the Holy Spirit of promise’’ (Eph. 1:13, R. V.); 
‘¢And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye 
are sealed unto the day of redemption’’ (Eph. 4:30). 
It is also said of Christ that He was sealed of the 
Father (John 6:27. Cf Isa. 42:1). The sealing of 
the believer with the Spirit is ‘‘unto the day of re- 
demption.’’ It is the very presence of the Spirit in 
the heart. He is the Seal. The thing accomplished 
by His sealing is so vital and enduring that it pre- 
cludes the possibility of interruption or deflection. 
Thus, as for reasons given above, the eternal purposes 


/ 


ee 


eee SSE 


ee 
en 


76 Grace 


of God in grace are to be received without distrust, 
because of the sealing with the Spirit. 


Twelfth. The New Covenant made in His Blood. 


The several great covenants into which God has 
been pleased to enter with men are either conditional 
covenants, or unconditional covenants. A covenant 
is conditional whenever it is made to depend at any 
point on the faithfulness of man. The law as given 
by Moses was a conditional covenant. Its terms might 
be stated in the words, ‘‘If ye will do good, I will 
bless you.’’ On the other hand, a covenant is un- 
conditional when it stands as a simple declaration 
from God as to what He purposes to do, and without 
relation to the faithfulness, or unfaithfulness, of 
man. The Abrahamic Covenant (Gen. 12:1-4; 13: 
14-17; 15: 1-7; 17: 1-8) is an unconditional covenant. 
It will be seen that God relied at no point on the 
character or conduct of Abraham. He simply de- 
elared to Abraham what He purposed to do. This 
was based on Abraham’s faith; but not on Abraham’s 
faithfulness. The covenant was, and is, assured 
through the faithfulness of God alone. In like man- 
ner, the New Covenant made in His blood, by which 
every Christian is now related to God, is an 
unconditional covenant. It is God’s declaration 
of what He proposes to do for the one who 
places his faith in Christ. Belief in Christ, it 
should be noted, is not a condition within the 
covenant; it is the one condition of entrance into 
the covenant. Turning to the great promises of the 
keeping of God through grace, it -will be discovered 
that they are always unconditional. These promises 


Safe-Keeping in Grace a9 


are made to depend only on the goodness and faith- 
fulness of God. As a fruitage of the saved life, good 
works are closely related to the Christian’s life under 
God, and are the ground of all future rewards; but 
human works, as important as they are, do not enter 
as a condition into either the divine plan of salva- 
tion by grace, or of divine keeping through grace. 
This, too, may be verified from the Word of God. 
Three very brief and unconditional promises of 
eternal security are here given: ‘‘I will in no wise 
east out’’ (John 6:37); ‘‘They shall never perish’’ 
(John 10: 28); and, ‘‘shall not come into condemna- 
tion’’ (John 5:24). Under such unconditional 
promises the eternal purposes of God in grace may be 
received with unwavering confidence. 

Certain passages, it should be noted, have been in- 
terpreted by some writers to teach that, in spite of 
this overwhelming body of revelation concerning the 
purpose and power of God in grace, the Christian 
who is truly saved might be lost again. The pas- 
sages are worthy of careful consideration but such 
consideration cannot be entered into here. Scripture 
does not present a contradiction, and, as must be con- 
eluded from what has gone before, it will be found 
upon careful examination of these Scriptures, con- 
sidering their context and dispensational character, 
that there is no Scripture which lessens the force, 
or discredits the revelation, concerning the eternal 
purposes of God in grace. 

Salvation by grace is, then, the indivisible whole of 
God’s redeeming purpose in Christ and that which 

1See author’s book Salvation for extended analysis of 
these passages. 


78 Grace 


rescues a sinner from the lowest depths of human 
standing, and transforms, preserves, and presents 
that sinner in the highest eternal glory. At infinite 
cost, God has made Himself free to do all of this. His 
unmeasured love will suffer Him to do no less in 
behalf of every one who comes to Him through His 
Son. Divine grace is God’s all. It is the expression 
of the last degree of His love. In no sense could 
He exercise a part of His grace. It must be all or 
none. He must save perfectly for all time and eter- 
nity, or not at all. There is no other salvation offered 
in the Word of God. 

Failure to trust in Christ alone is disclosed when 
salvation is supposed to depend on anything other 
than believing in Christ, and when security is made 
to depend at any point whatsoever on human faith- 
fulness. Men are saved and kept in sovereign grace 
through simple faith in Christ alone. This is the 
heart of the Gospel of divine grace. If any other 
Gospel than his be preached, it must fall under the 
unrevoked anathema of God (Gal. 1:8, 9). 

The zeal engendered by modern religious move- 
ments which are even accompanied with signs and 
wonders is no guaranty of sound doctrine. The en- 
thusiasts responsible for these movements almost uni- 
versally deny that salvation is by simple faith in 
Christ, and that the grace of God will keep those who 
are saved as His own forever. Those who discredit 
the absolute reign of grace in the salvation and keep- 
ing of a soul, should ponder well the fact that there 
is no other way of salvation. 

We have thus complete evidence that the eternal 
purposes of God in grace are unalterable, since His 


Safe-Keeping in Grace 79 


keeping power through grace is included in every con- 
sideration of the principles of grace, His keeping 
power is implied in every revelation in which is pre- 
sented the truth that grace reaches into the coming 
ages for its consummation, and His keeping power 
is indicated by the manifold provisions and safe- 
guards which He has made to that end. Should 
His eternal purpose fail by the slightest degree, the 
object of salvation, the object of the death and resur- 
rection of Christ, and the object of creation itself, 
will have failed. It shall not fail; for the mouth 
of the Lord has spoken it. 


CHAPTER IV 
THE LIFE UNDER GRACE 


Introductive. 


The salvation in grace which God accomplishes for 
those who believe includes, among other things, the 
placing of the saved one in position as a son of God, 
a citizen of heaven, and a member of the family and 
household of God; and, since every position demands 
a corresponding manner of life, it is to be expected 
that a rule of conduct as exalted as heaven itself 
will be committed to the believer. This is precisely 
what we find; for grace not only provides a perfect 
salvation and eternal keeping for the one who be- 
lieves on Christ; but grace provides, as well, the in- 
struction for the daily life of the one who is saved, 
while he is being kept through the power of God. This 
instruction for the daily life, it will be found, is a 
particular revelation from God to Christians only. As 
it is wholly gracious in character, it is entirely sep- 
arate from, and independent of, any other rule of life 
which is found in the Word of God. The Bible, being 
the one Book from God for all people of all the 
ages, contains the detailed expression of the will of 
God concerning the manner of life of various dis- 
pensational classes of people as they are related to 
God in different periods of time, and under the sev- 


eral corresponding covenants. Among these rev- 
80 


The Life under Grace 81 


elations, is the rule of conduct regarding the daily 
life of those who are saved by grace in this dis- 
pensation which occupies the time between the cross 
and the second coming of Christ. This gracious rule 
of life is complete in itself and stands alone in the 
Seriptures, disassociated from any other and uncom- 
plicated. It is the teachings of grace. 

The remainder of this discussion will be occupied, 
in the main, with the identification and application of 
the extended body of Scripture relative to the teach- 
ings of grace. The value of knowing this revelation 
eannot be estimated, (1) because no Christian may 
hope to live well-pleasing to God who does not know 
the facts of the revealed will of God for his daily 
life, and (2) because appalling ignorance exists on 
every hand concerning these vital truths and distinc- 
tions of the Word of God. 

No careful reader of the New Testament can fail to 
observe the fact that doctrinal strife obtained at the 
very opening of the Christian dispensation. This 
controversy was concerned mainly with the question 
of whether law or grace furnishes the governing 
principle for Christian conduct. Although the 
New Testament contains specific and lengthy warnings 
against both the legalizers and their teachings, and 
their systems are therein proven to be opposed to the 
doctrines of pure grace, their successors from genera- 
tion to generation to the present time have ever 
sought to discredit the grace of God. Their messages, 
though steeped in error, have often exhibited great 
zeal and sincerity; but zeal and sincerity, greatly to 
be desired when well directed, fail utterly in God’s 
sight as substitutes for a consistent presentation of 


82 Grace 


the truth. The only hope of deliverance from the 
false doctrines of legalizing teachers is through un- 
prejudiced consideration of the exact revelations of 
Scripture. This examination of the Scriptures should 
be free from a blind following of the teachings of 
men, and should be made with a heart willing to re- 
ceive ‘‘reproof’’ and ‘‘correction’’ from the Word of 
God as well as ‘‘instruction in righteousness’’ (2 Tim. 
3:16). Only the one to whom these teachings are 
erystal clear can appreciate the transcendent value 
of understanding the teachings of grace. 

In presenting this introductory consideration of 
the extensive theme of the teachings of grace, it is 
necessary in some instances to assume conclusions the 
fuller proof of which are taken up in subsequent 
treatments of the discussion. Likewise, in complet- 
ing the various lines of argument, repetition at cer- 
tain points is unavoidable. 


THE LIFE UNDER GRACE 
(continued) 


SECTION ONE 


GRACE PROVIDES A PARTICULAR RULE OF LIFE 


In chapter 2 of the Epistle by Paul to Titus, be- 
ginning at verse 11, we read: ‘‘For the grace of 
God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all 
men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and 
worldy lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and 
godly, in this present.world [age] ; looking for that 
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great 
God and our Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself 
for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, 
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous 
of good works.’’ 

Two widely different ministries of grace are set 
forth in this passage: 

First, the grace of God which bringeth salvation 
hath appeared unto all men. This, it is clear, refers 
to the saving grace of God which has come into the 
world by Christ Jesus, and is now to be proclaimed to 
all men. It is a message for all men, since its pro- 
visions are universal and its invitation is to ‘‘whoso- 
ever will.’’ Grace upon grace is bestowed both now 
and unto the consummation of the ages upon those 
who believe. 


Second, the passage reveals, as well, that it is the 
83 


84 Grace 


same grace which has brought salvation to all men, 
that teaches ‘‘us.’? The word us, it should be ob- 
served, does not refer to the wider class of all men 
mentioned before; but it refers only to the company 
of those who are saved. The importance of this 
distinction is evident; for whatever grace proposes 
to teach, its teachings are addressed only to those who 
are saved by grace. This qualifying aspect of the 
teachings of grace is not limited to this one passage, 
though that would suffice; it is an out-standing char- 
acteristic of the whole body of grace teachings as they 
appear throughout the New Testament. These teach- 
ings, being addressed to Christians only, are never 
intended to be imposed on the Christ-rejecting in- 
dividual, or the Christ-rejecting world. This fact 
cannot be emphasized too forcibly. The Word of 
God makes no appeal to the unsaved for a betterment 
of life. There is but one issue in this dispensation 
between God and the unregenerate man, and that is 
neither character nor conduct; it is the personal ap- 
peal of the Gospel of the grace of God. Until the 
unsaved receive Christ, who is God’s gift in grace, 
no other issue can be raised. Men may moralize 
among themselves, and establish their self-govern- 
ments on principles of right conduct; but God is 
never presented in the unfoldings of grace as seek- 
ing to reform sinners. Every word regarding the 
quality of life is reserved for those who are already 
rightly related to Him on the greater issues of sal- 
vation. 

Could it be demonstrated that God has made the 
slightest moral appeal to the unregenerate other 
than that which is implied in the Gospel invitation, 


The Life under Grace 85 


then it must be admitted that, should that moral ap- 
peal be complied with by any individual, that in- 
dividual would have moved nearer to God. The 
works of man would become meritorious, and thereby 
a third classification of humanity would be created, 
standing somewhere between those who are ‘‘under 
sin’’ and those who are ‘‘in Christ,’’ or ‘‘under 
grace.’’ In this age, no such intermediate group of 
people is possible. If such a class existed, they could 
not be saved; for they would no longer be fit objects 
of grace. Men are either lost and condemned ‘‘un- 
der sin,’’ or wholly and eternally saved by grace in 
Christ Jesus. The common practice of presenting 
the great standards of Christian living indiscrimin- 
ately to mixed congregations by preaching, and to 
people in general through public print, is a tragedy 
of infinite proportions. If the unsaved are present 
when the teachings of grace are discussed, there 
should be a Gospel appeal made by which the un- 
saved are classified and excluded from any share 
in those teachings. Apart from this appeal, it is 
impossible to save the unregenerate from receiving 
the impression that God is now seeking their refor- 
mation before He seeks their regeneration. Nothing 
is more wholesome for the unsaved than lovingly to be 
reminded that they, according to the Word of God, 
have no part in the Christian life, and that they are 
shut up to the acceptance of Christ. Saving results 
are sure to follow the continued, clean-cut, discrim- 
inating preaching of the Word in its right appli- 
cation to both the saved and the unsaved. It is 
alarming to the unsaved to be warned that they are 
lost until they receive Christ, and such faithful 


86 Grace 


preaching, being the Truth of God, is owned and 
used of the Spirit of God. 

Nothing need be said here of the crime against 
high heaven which is committed by men who are 
purposely urging moral betterment on the unsaved 
in lieu of the Gospel of grace. The unrevoked an- 
athema of God rests upon them; ‘‘But though we, 
or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel 
unto you than that which we have preached unto 
you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so 
say I now again, If any man preach any other gos- 
pel unto you than that ye have received, let him be 
accursed’’ (Gal. 1:8, 9). There is a possibility, how- 
ever, that, through carelessness or ignorance, some, 
whose intentions are good, may make the same fatal 
error in presenting God’s Truth. As certainly as 
the exercise of pure grace is the supreme divine 
purpose unto the eternal glory, so certainly to hinder 
an understanding of that grace, or to mislead one 
soul by a misstatement, is the supreme blunder. 
How momentous is the practice of preaching and of 
personal work, both for those who hear and for those 
who speak! Well might the high crime of dealing 
damnation to the souls of men in the name of Chris- 
tian preaching be treated, from a mere humanitarian 
viewpoint, with a thousand-fold greater penalty than 
the crime of dealing deadly poison to the bodies of 
men. Sinners are to be saved by grace. It is Sa- 
tan’s device to complicate this simple fact with the 
lesser issues of Christian living. 

The teachings of grace, it will be found, comprise 
all of the teachings of the Epistles, the Acts, and 
also certain portions of the Gospels apart from their 


The Life under Grace 87 


mere historical features. Returning to the passage 
already quoted from Titus, we discover that only a 
portion of the whole appeal of the teachings of grace 
are mentioned in this Scripture; but here the be- 
liever is taught that he is to deny ungodliness and 
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, godly, 
and looking for the personal return of his Lord 
from heaven. This describes a life of peculiar devo- 
tion and sweetness. Thus would God ‘‘purify 
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good 
works.”’ 

According to the Scriptures, Christians are con- 
fronted with a two-fold danger: On the one hand, 
they may go in the way of the irresponsible, careless 
sin of the Gentiles, or, on the other hand, they may 
go into the legality of the Jews. They may ‘‘walk 
as do the Gentiles,’’ or they may ‘‘fall from grace.”’ 
They are warned as much against the one mistake 
as against the other. The doctrines of grace may 
be so perverted that, while there is a holy horror of 
slipping into careless sin, it is deemed most pious 
to assume the cursing burden of law. The teachings 
of grace give equal warning against the sin of turn- 
ing either in the way of Gentiles or in the way of 
the Jews. 

In discovering the fact and scope of the teachings 
of grace, it will be noted that, (1) The Christian’s 
daily life is to be directed only by the teachings of 
grace, (2) The law is excluded from the grace teach- 
ings of Christ, (3) The law is excluded from the 
teachings of the Apostles, and (4) The life and ser- 
vice of the Apostle Paul is an illustration of a life 
which is lived under grace. 


88 Grace 


I, THE CHRISTIAN’S DAILY LIFE IS TO BE DIRECTED 
ONLY BY THE TEACHINGS OF GRACE. 


In exact accord with the fact that Christians are 
to be governed only by the teachings of grace, the 
Biblical appeal in grace never contemplates an ob- 
servance of the law. Through the death of Christ, 
the law is not only disannulled; but, as a rule of 
life, it is never mentioned, or included in the teach- 
ings of grace. It is rather excluded. The believer 
is to walk by a ‘‘rule,’’ but that rule, it will be seen, 
is never an adaptation of the law (Cf Gal. 6:16; 
Phil. 3:16). This important fact should be ecare- 
fully verified by the reading of all the Epistles. 
It is impossible to refer here to this extensive body 
of Seripture beyond a very few illustrative passages. 
In the following Scriptures, as in all grace teachings, 
the law, it will be found, is not once applied to be- 
lievers: 

‘Wor we are his workmanship, created in Christ 
Jesus unto good works, which God hath be- 
fore ordained that we should walk in them’’ 
(Eph. 2:10). 

“For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; 
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy 
Ghost. For he that in these things serveth Christ 
is acceptable to God, and approved of men. Let us 
therefore follow after the things which make for 
peace, and things wherewith one may edify another’’ 
(Rom. 14:17-19). 


“‘And this I pray, that your love may abound yet 


The Life under Grace 89 


more and more in knowledge and in all judgment; 
that ye may approve things that are excellent ; that ye 
may be sincere and without offence till the day of 
Christ; being filled with the fruits of righteousness, 
which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise 
of God’’ (Phil. 1:9-11). 

‘Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, 
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are 
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things 
are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if 
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think 
on these things. Those things, which ye have both 
learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, 
do: and the God of peace shall be with you”’ (Phil. 
4:8, 9). 

““But God forbid that I should glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world 
is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in 
Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, 
nor uncireumcision, but a new creature [creation]. 
And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be 
on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God”’ 
(Gal. 6: 14-16). 

‘‘Ror we through the Spirit wait for the hope of 
righteousness by faith. For in Christ Jesus neither 
circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision ; 
but faith which worketh by love’’ (Gal. 5:5, 6.) 

‘“But now the righteousness of God without the 
law is manifested, being witnessed by the law and 
the prophets’’ (Rom. 3:21). 

‘‘For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth’’ (Rom. 10:4). 


go Grace 


‘‘But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make 
no provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof’’ 
(Rom. 13:14). 

‘‘False brethren. . . .who came in privily to spy 
out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that 
they might bring us into bondage: to whom we gave 
place by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the 
truth of the gospel might continue with you”’ (Gal. 
2:4, 5.) 

‘‘Ror it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, 
to lay upon you no greater burden than these neces- 
sary things; that ye abstain from meats offered to 
idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, 
and from fornication: from which if ye keep your- 
selves, ye shall do well’’ (Acts. 15: 28, 29). 

“As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have 
written and concluded that they observe no such 
things’”’ (issues of the law. Acts 21:25). 

“‘Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled 
again with the yoke of bondage’’ (Gal. 5:1). 

By these passages, selected from the whole body 
of New Testament teaching concerning the believer’s 
walk in grace, it is seen that the teachings of grace 
do not include the precepts of the law as such; but 
that they exclude those precepts. However, no vital 
principle contained in the law is abandoned. It will 
be observed that these principles of the law are 
earried forward and are restated in the teachings of 
grace; not as law, but as principles which are re- 
vised, adapted, and newly incorporated in the issues 
of pure grace. 


The Life under Grace 91 


tl, THE LAW IS EXCLUDED FROM THE GRACE TEACH- 
INGS OF CHRIST. 


Concerning the admixture of the principles of law 
and grace, it will be seen that these principles are 
wholly separated in the teachings of Christ. Are 
Christians to keep the law as the rule of their con- 
duct either because of a command from Christ, or 
because of the example of Christ? No light will be 
gained on these questions until the two-fold aspect 
of the ministry of Christ is distinguished. Accord- 
ing to Rom. 15:8, 9, Christ was, first, ‘‘a minister 
of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm 
the promises made unto the fathers’’; and, second, 
‘‘that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy.’’ 
This two-fold distinction obtains at every point in 
the Gospels and Epistles. So, also, it obtains in the 
Old Testament types and prophecies relating to 
Christ. Christ sustained a particular and unique 
relation to the nation Israel as the One who fulfilled 
the great Messianic covenants given to that people. 
At the opening of His ministry He said, ‘‘I am not 
sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel’’ 
(Mt. 15:24); and when, at the same time, sending 
His disciples out with the Jewish message of ‘‘the 
kingdom of heaven,’’ He instructed them, saying, 
‘Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any 
city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, 
preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand”’ 
(Mt. 10:5-7). As a Jew, and as the Consolation 
and Hope of Israel, He personally acknowledged, 


92 Grace 


kept, taught, and enforced the law. As the Saviour 
and Hope of the world, He established the new man- 
ner of life and relationship which belongs to the be- 
liever under grace. Speaking to the Jewish ruler, 
Christ said: ‘‘If thou wilt enter into life, keep the 
commandments’’ (Mt. 19:17).1. True to the Jewish 
dispensation, He said with reference to the law of 
Moses: ‘‘This do and thou shalt live’’; but when 
contemplating the cross and Himself as the bread 
come down from heaven to give His life for the 
world, He said: ‘‘This is the work of God, that ye 
believe on him whom he [God] hath sent’’ (John 
6:29). These opposing principles are not to be 
reconciled. They indicate that fundamental distinc- 
tion which must exist between those principles that 
obtain in an age of law, on the one hand, and an age 
of grace, on the other hand. 

What interpretation should be given, then, to the 
word commandments as used by Christ or as related 
to Christ, according to the following passages: ‘‘If 
ye love me, keep my commandments’’; ‘‘He that 
hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is 
that loveth me’’; ‘‘If ye keep my commandments, 
ye shall abide in my love’’; ‘‘And hereby we do 

1In the Synoptic Gospels, life, it should be noted, is some- 
times that aspect of divine blessing which is provided for 
those who enter the kingdom of heaven (Note Mt. 18: 1-10; 
25: 31-46), and being somewhat different, should not be con- 
fused with the present gift of God, which is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. One was offered, and is 
yet to be granted, on the basis of faithful, law-keeping 
works: the other is gained only through the grace which is 
by Jesus Christ our Lord. One is provided for the age to 


come (Lk. 18: 30). The other is a present possession; for He 


has said: “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
life” (John 3: 36). 


The Life under Grace 93 


know that we know him, if we keep his, command- 
ments’’; ‘‘And whatsoever we ask, we receive of 
him, because we keep his commandments, and do 
those things that are pleasing in his sight’’; 
“‘He that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in 
him, and he in him’’; ‘‘By this we know that we 
love the children of God, when we love God, and 
keep his commandments’’; ‘‘Teaching them to ob- 
serve all things whatsoever I have commanded you’’; 
and, ‘‘Blessed are they that do his commandments”’ 
(John 14:15, 21; 15:10; 1 John 2:3; 3:22, 24; 
5:2; Mt. 28:20; Rev. 22:14)? Is Christ here re- 
quiring the commandments as given by Moses? 

In considering this crucial question, it should be 
noted that, when dealing with Jews as such, He gave 
no ‘‘commandments’’ of His own relative to the 
rule of their lives. He recognized only the law of 
Moses and the law of the kingdom. In matters of 
life-relationship to God He said, ‘‘What readest 
thou in the law?’’; but when He began to instruct 
those who were saved by grace through His cross, 
He began to announce what He was pleased to term 
‘“‘my commandments.’’ This term is not found in 
all the Gospels until the record is given of His fare- 
well words in the upper room on the night before 
His death (John, chapters 13-17).1. This is most 
significant; for it is evident that the upper-room 
discourse was addressed, not to Israelites, but to 
those who were ‘‘clean’’ through the word He had 
spoken to them. In this portion of the Scriptures, 
the cross is treated as an accomplished fact (John 


1 Mt. 28: 20 not only follows the cross, in point of time; but 
also follows the forty-days post-resurrection teaching con- 
cerning the kingdom of God as recorded in Acts 1: 3. 


94 Grace 


16:11. Cf 12:31); the whole body of teaching is 
dated by Christ beyond the cross by the words, 
‘And now I have told you before it come to pass, 
that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe’’ 
(14:29); and, finally, the only reference to the law 
in this great message of the upper room is so stated 
as to place those Jews to whom He was speaking out- 
side its authority: ‘‘But this cometh to pass, that 
the word might be fulfilled that is written in their 
[not your] law’’ (John 15:25). 

The upper-room discourse is the genesis of the 
Epistles of the New Testament; for in it, in germ 
form, the great doctrines of grace are announced. 
The phrase my commandments is reserved until this 
grace-revelation, because this term refers to the 
teachings of grace, rather than to the law. 

Added proof that the term, my commandments, re- 
fers to the teachings of grace may be seen when the 
passages which indicate the character of His com- 
mandments are considered. Some of these are: 
‘A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love 
one another; as I have loved you’’; ‘‘This is my 
commandment, That ye love one another, as I have 
loved you’’; ‘‘And this is his commandment, That 
we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus 
Christ, and love one another, as he gave command- 
ments’’; ‘‘And this commandment have we from 
him, That he who loveth God love his brother 
also’; ‘‘For this is the love of God, that we keep 
his commandments: and his commandments are not 
grievous’’;* ‘‘T rejoice greatly that I found of thy 


1 This could not be said of the law of Moses; for of that law 
it is written: “Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a 


The Life under Grace 95 


children walking in truth, as we have received a 
commandment from the Father. And now I be- 
seech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new com- 
mandment unto thee, but that which we had from the 
beginning, that we love one another.’’ To this the 
Apostle Paul has added a testimony concerning the 
commandments of the Lord. By the testimony of 
Paul, the whole teaching of grace, as set forth by 
himself, is related to the commandments of the Lord: 
*‘Tf any man think himself to be a prophet, or spirit- 
ual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write 
unto you are the commandments of the Lord’’; 
‘“For ye know what commandments we gave you by 
the Lord Jesus’’; ‘‘Bear ye one another’s burdens, 
and so fulfil the law of Christ’’ (John 13:34, 15:12; 
1 John 3:23; 4:21; 5:3; 2 John 4:5; 1 Cor. 14: 37; 
1 Thes.-4:2; Gal. 6:2). 

The ‘‘commandments’’ of Christ are not, there- 
fore, the law, or any aspect of the law; they rather 
constitute ‘‘the law of love,’’ and ‘‘the perfect law 
of liberty.’’ They enter into the teachings of grace 
as those teachings are set forth by Christ, and by 
those to whom He gave authority and command- 
ment (Mt. 28:18; Acts 1:3; Lk. 24:46-48; Heb. 
2:3, 4). 
yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neithe: our 
fathers nor we were able to bear?” (Acts 15:10). Reference 
is here made to the law of Moses, and to place it on the 
children of grace is to “tempt God.” It is an unbearable 
“yoke”; but Christ said, when anticipating the relation- 
ships of grace, “My yoke is easy, and my burden is light” 
(Mt. 11:30). Christians are not to be “entangled” with 
the “yoke of bondage” (Gal. 5:1). So, also, the “old 
commandment” of 1 John 2:7, is, in 3:11, seen to be the 
game message of grace. 


96 Grace 


il. THE LAW IS EXCLUDED FROM THE TEACHINGS 
OF THE APOSTLES. 


From the teaching of the Apostles it will be seen 
that the principles of law and grace are not to be 
mixed. There can be no question but that their 
teachings are exactly according to Christ’s message 
concerning grace. As an example, and in harmony 
with the teaching of all the Apostles, it may be ob- 
served that the Apostle Paul spoke by the authority 
of Christ (1 Tim. 1:1;: Tit. 1:3;°1 Thes. 4:25; 
1.Cor. 15:3; Gal. 1:11, 12;~Eph. 3:1-11).. It-is 
equally evident that he contended only for the bles- 
sings of pure grace. At no point would he suffer 
the principle of law to intrude. The Jewish ele- 
ment in the early church was slow to abandon the 
law, and there is evidence that, by the provisions 
of men, a double standard was suffered to exist for 
a time—one, a legality for the Jews, and the other, 
pure grace for the Gentiles. This fact of a double 
standard is revealed in connection with the first 
council of the church in Jerusalem (Acts 15: 19-21. 
Cf 21:18-26); but the Apostle Paul never counte- 
nanced this double standard (Rom. 1:16, 17). The 
change from law to grace was revolutionary, and the 
age-long covenant of works did not readily yield to 
the new teachings of grace, nor has it wholly yielded 
to this day. There are some who, ignorant of the 
dispensational divisions of God’s Word, and seeking 
to qualify the clear grace teachings of the Apostle 
Paul, are encouraging themselves in legalism on the 
strength of the fact that Christ kept and vindicated 


The Life under Grace 97 


the law in the days of His particular ministry to 
Israel. The teaching of these legalists is a circum- 
vention of the whole revelation of divine grace. 


Ivy. THE PERSONAL EXPERIENCE OF THE APOSTLE 
PAUL IS AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE TEACHINGS OF GRACE. 


The personal position and practice of the Apostle 
Paul is evidence that the principles of law and grace 
should not be mixed. The Spirit has prompted the 
Apostie to make a seven-fold exhortation to believers 
to be followers of himself (1 Cor. 4:6; 11:1; Phil. 
3:17;4:9;1 Thes. 1:6; 2 Thes.3:7,9). This appeal 
was warranted because his doctrine was revealed to 
him from Christ (Gal. 1:11, 12; Eph. 3:1-10), and 
was in fact, therefore, the very teachings of Christ; 
because he was an Apostle; and because his own at- 
titude toward Judaism and his own experience was a 
living illustration of the power of a life in grace. 

The Epistles of Paul are an uncompromising pro- 
test against the intrusion of law, or any phase of 
law, into the reign of grace. Among very many 
Scriptures, there is one passage in particular which 
reveals the Apostle’s own position. Speaking of his 
hope of a reward because of faithful service, he pro- 
ceeds to describe the details of that service. In 
this connection he is incidentally led to disclose his 
own position at that time, as compared to other pos- 
sible positions before God. We read: ‘‘For though 
I be free from all men, yet have I made myself serv- 
ant unto all, that I might gain the more. And unto 
the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the 
Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the 


98 Grace 


law, that I might gain them that are under the law; 
to them that are without law, as without law, (being 
not without law to God, but under the law to Christ), 
that I might gain them that are without law’’ (1 Cor. 
9:19-21). These various relationships should be 
considered : 


First. ‘‘And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, 
that I might gain the Jews.’’ 


Was not the Apostle a Jew? Did he not make 
that his boast (Phil. 3:4, 5)? He was a Jew by 
origin, birth, and training; but when he became 
saved by grace he passed over onto new ground where 
there ‘‘is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor 
uncireumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: 
but Christ is all, and in all’’ (Col. 3:11). In like 
manner, Gentiles when saved, are no longer Gentiles 
in the flesh: ‘‘ Wherefore remember, that ye being 
in times past Gentiles in the flesh, ... now in 
Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made 
nigh by the blood of Christ’? (Eph. 2:11-13). The 
new creation in Christ is in view here. Through 
the new birth by the Spirit, a new humanity is being 
formed, and, though drawn from both Jews and Gen- 
tiles, it is neither Jew nor Gentile; it is the Church 
of God—the redeemed of all generations from Pen- 
tecost until the Lord returns for His own. Accord- 
ing to the Scriptures, humanity is now classified 
under three major divisions: ‘‘Give none offence, 
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the 
church of God’’ (1 Cor. 10:32). The Apostle made 
an effort to become ‘‘as a Jew, that he might gain 
the Jews.’’ Thus he left his own position, as it 


The Life under Grace 99 


were, to adapt himself to the position of the Jew. To 
what length he went, it is not revealed. As regard- 
ing himself, it is clear, however, that he everywhere 
disclaimed every Jewish relation to God. There are 
very many questions which might be discussed be- 
tween a Jew and a Christian; but the Apostle passed 
these by that he might get to the heart of the 
Jew with the one issue of the Gospel of the grace of 
God. 


Second. ‘‘To them that are under the law, as un- 
der the law, that I might gain them that are under 
the law.”’ 


While it is evident that the law was never ad- 
dressed to any outside the one nation Israel, and also 
that, since the death of Christ, no Jew, Gentile, or 
Christian is now under the law either for justifica- 
tion, or as a rule of life (which statement will re- 
ceive fuller proof at another place), there was a mul- 
titude of people in Paul’s day, both Jews and Chris- 
tians, as there are to-day, who have placed them- 
selves under the law. This does not suggest that 
God has placed them there, or that He recognizes 
them as standing in their self-imposed position. 
However, having assumed a position under law they 
are morally obligated to ‘‘do the whole law’’ in the 
interests of consistency. It is not a mere repetition, 
then, when the Apostle makes reference first to the 
Jews and then to those that are under the law. The 
important point to be observed here is that the Apos- 
tle did not consider himself to be under the law; 
for he represents himself as leaving his own position 
that he might approach the man who is under the 


100 Grace 


law. What endless discussions might he have waged 
with the one who was under the law! He set all 
these questions aside that he might rather present 
the more vitally important blessings of grace. The 
supreme issue was not, and is not, one of correcting 
the outward life by the application of one rule or 
another: it was, and is, one of believing on Christ 
unto salvation by grace. When that is accomplished, 
and because of the very character of salvation, the 
saved one, of necessity, is subject only to the govern- 
ing principles of grace. 


Third. ‘‘To them that are without law, as with- 
out law, ... that I might gain them that are with- 
out law.’’ 


Thus the Apostle implies that, as to the rule of 
his life, he is not ‘‘without law.’’ The class re- 
ferred to as being ‘‘without law’’ is not the heathen 
to whom no missionary has ever gone; it refers, 
rather, to the great Gentile world to whom the law 
was never addressed. To these the Apostle went, 
acknowledging as he went, that he, as a Christian, 
had no part with the lawless and ungoverned. 


Fourth. ‘‘Not being without law to God, but un- 
der the law [literally, inlawed] to Christ.’’ 


Here the Apostle reveals the exact truth as to his 
own relation to God as a Christian. It is unfor- 
tunate that the theological discussion which has pro- 
ceeded on the supposition that a Christian must 
either be under the law of Moses, or else be absolutely 
lawless and ungoverned, could not have made place 
for the fact that there is a third ground of relation- 


The Life under Grace IOI 


ship to God which is neither the law of Moses, nor 
the ungoverned lawlessness of the world. To be 
““mlawed to Christ’’ is to be under the teachings of 
grace as a rule of life.. These teachings include the 
‘“commandments’’ of Christ which are addressed to 
Christians as such in the upper room, and these 
“‘commandments’’ of Christ have been taken up, en- 
larged, and advanced, under the guidance of the 
Spirit in the book of the Acts and the Epistles of 
the New Testament. They constitute a separate and 
sufficient rule of life for the believer which is 
divinely adapted to his position in grace, and these 
great governing principles of grace are addressed to 
the believer alone, and not to the Christ-rejecting 
world. The message of God to the unsaved world 
is that they believe on the Saviour who is offered to 
them in limitless grace. The message to the saved 
is that they ‘‘walk worthy’’ of the calling where- 
with they are called. 


THE LIFE UNDER GRACE 
(continued) 


SECTION TWO 


THE TEACHINGS OF THE LAW 


In seeking an understanding of the teachings of 
grace, it is necessary to give due consideration to the 
teachings of the law; for, according to the Scriptures, 
the latter, with its covenant of works, is the one prin- 
ciple which is opposed to the teachings of grace. 
The law may be considered in a three-fold way: (1) 
As to the meaning of the word Jaw as used in the 
Bible; (2) As to the relation the law sustains to 
the time of its reign; and, (3) As to the applica- 
tion of the law. 


I. AS TO THE MEANING OF THE WORD LAW AS USED 
IN THE SCRIPTURES. 


The foundation of all divine law is the Person of 
God. What He requires is only the expression of 
what He is. Since He is holy, just and good, His 
ideals, standards and requirements must be holy, 
just and good. The ideals and ways of fallen men 
are, of necessity, far removed from these divine 
standards which reflect the character of God. Com- 
parison of these two standards has ever demonstrated 


the measure of human failure. Throughout the his- 
102 


The Life under Grace 103 


tory of God’s dealings with the world this comparison 
has brought into bold relief the unmeasured gulf 
which exists between God and man, between holiness 
and sin, and the complementary revelation of the 
divine compassion which led God to bridge that gulf. 

The word law, as commonly used, means a rule 
which regulates conduct. It naturally implies the 
adequate authority and power on the part of the 
law-giver for its enforcement, and the proper penalty 
to be inflicted in case of its violation. The use of the 
word in the Bible is, however, much wider than its 
common usage. At least a seven-fold use of the 
word Jaw is found in the Word of God. 


First, The Ten Commandments. 


The Ten Commandments have the peculiar distinc- 
tion of having been written by the finger of God on 
tables of stone. They are therefore the direct writ- 
ings of God. They are themselves a crystallization 
of the entire law given to Moses. They are summar- 
ized by Christ when He said to the Jewish lawyer: 
‘‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. 
This is the first and great commandment. And the 
second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself. On these two commandments hang all 
the law and the prophets’? (Mt. 22:36-40). The 
Apostle Paul summarized the law in two great state- 
ments: ‘‘Love is the fulfilling of the law’’; and, 
‘‘Por all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in 
this; Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself’’ (Rom. 
13:10; Gal. 5:14). So, also, James has written: 
‘‘Tf ye fulfil the royal law according to the scrip- 


104 Grace 


ture, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, ye do 
well’’ (Jas. 2:8). Inno sense is the law applied to 
the believer by these Scriptures; they merely imply 
that the law is fulfilled by the exercise of that love 
which is most vitally the duty of every child of God. 

That this limited declaration of commandments 
from God is termed ‘‘the law,’’ is proven beyond 
question in Rom. 7:7-14. In this passage the Apos- 
tle records: ‘‘I had not known lust, except the law 
had said, Thou shalt not covet.’’ The same precept 
is also called a commandment; for he goes on to say: 
‘“‘But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, 
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence.’’ Fur- 
ther, it is evident that the Decalogue is the heart of 
the law as the law is stated in the Old Testament. 
Particular emphasis is given to the fact that the Com- 
mandments are a part of the law, because there are 
those who teach that the whole law might be set aside 
without affecting the Ten Commandments. They 
claim that these commandments were never any part 
of the law, and, though the reign of the law ceased 
with the death of Christ, the binding authority of 
the Ten Commandments did not cease. The Bible 
teaches that the Commandments are a part of the 
law, and though their principles are restated under 
grace, the Commandments ceased to be the rule of 
conduct when Christ fulfilled the law, and it came 
to its end in Him. 


Second. The Whole System of Government for 
Israel in the Land. 


The law in this larger aspect was divided into 
three major parts: 


The Life under Grace 105 


1. The Commandments, which were the revealed 
law of God relative to His righteous will. Of this 
revelation, the Decalogue was the center (Ex. 20: 
1-17). 

2. The Judgments, which were the revealed law 
of God relative to the social life of Israel (Ex. 21:1 
to 24:11). 

3. The Ordinances, which were the revealed will 
of God relative to the religious life of Israel (Ex. 
24:12 to 31:18). 

This three-fold governing system of law covered all 
divine requirements which were imposed on an Israel- 
ite in the land. The three divisions of the system 
were both interrelated and interdependent. This 
three-fold system provided its own instruction as 
to what was good, and its own prohibitions against 
that which was evil. In the prescribed sacrifices its 
own divine remedy was provided for the wrong com- 
mitted. No other provision for a broken law has 
ever been disclosed to man than that of the animal 
sacrifices, and the final, and fulfilling sacrifice of the 
cross where every demand of the law was met forever. 
The projection of the Commandments into this dis- 
pensation disassociated from the ritual and sacrifices 
to which they are interrelated, is done with seem- 
ing plausibility only at the expense of one of the 
most vital dispensational distinctions in the Word of 
God. 


Third. The Kingdom Rule of Messiah. 


The still future dispensation of the reign of Mes- 
siah, which will be the fulfillment of all God’s cov- 
enants with Israel, is to be a reign of pure law. 


106 Grace 


This, it will be seen at a later point of the discus- 
sion, is proven both by the precise statements of 
Seripture, and by a careful study of the character 
of those injunctions which constitute the laws of the 
kingdom, and which find their application in the yet 
future dispensation of the kingdom. 


Fourth, The Whole Revealed Will of God for any 
Individual, or Nation, when Contemplated as a Cov- 
enant of Works which is to be Wrought in the En- 
ergy of the Flesh. 


The essential principle of the law was embodied in 
the covenant of works. The divine blessing was 
conditioned on the performance of the entire law of 
God. Under the new covenant of grace, the undi- 
vided, undiminished, divine blessing is first bestowed 
by God’s favor, and by this bestowal, an obligation 
is created for a life corresponding to the divine bless- 
ing. When any work is undertaken for God by which 
it is hoped thereby to gain divine favor, that work 
is wrought of necessity on the basis of pure law. 
On the other hand, when any work is undertaken 
for God because it is recognized that divine favor 
and blessing already have been received, it is wrought 
in harmony with pure grace. Thus the highest ideal 
of grace if prostituted by the motive of securing 
divine favor, takes on the character of law. 

Moreover, the will of God for the daily life of the 
one who is perfectly saved in grace has been clearly 
revealed by extended and explicit injunctions, or be- 
seechings. These injunctions and beseechings, be- 
ing gracious and heavenly in character, anticipate 
the imparted and inwrought enabling power of the 


The Life under Grace 107 


indwelling Spirit for their fulfillment. The coven- 
ant of grace is a covenant of faith. Thus when the 
injunctions or teachings of grace are attempted in the 
strength of the flesh, the very teachings of grace 
thereby become, in principle, a covenant of works. 
Therefore any revelation of the righteous will of God 
for any individual or company of individuals is, 
apart from the one exception of a personal reliance 
of faith on the power of the Spirit, a covenant of 
works, or a law of God. One illustration may 
suffice : 

In Romans 8:4 the statement is made that the 
‘‘righteousness of the law’’ is to be fulfilled in us, 
rather than by us. To this end Christ has died, and 
to this end the energizing Spirit has been sent into 
the world (8:2, 3). The phrase, ‘‘the righteousness 
of the law,’’ which is here said to be fulfilled in us, 
proposes more than a fulfillment of the limited de- 
mands found in the Mosaic system; it proposes noth- 
ing less than the divine energy of the Spirit realiz- 
ing continuously every aspect of the revealed and 
unrevealed will of God in the believer. It is con- 
diticned on one thing only: ‘‘Who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the Spirit.’’ 

No better example of a man-made, self-imposed law 
ean be found than the experiences of every unsaved 
person who is trying, even in the slightest degree, to 
live the Christian life. He is doing what he does 
with a view to being accepted of God, not because 
he is accepted; and he is doing what he does in the 
energy of the flesh, not in the power of the Spirit. 
Tio such an one, the Christian’s manner of life in 
grace is only a yoke of bondage. 


108 Grace 


Likewise, there is reference to the whole will of 
God in the following Scriptures wherein that revela- 
tion is termed the law: ‘‘For I delight in the law 
of God after the inward man’’ (Rom. 7:22). There 
is the possibility of a wide difference between what 
is indicated by the two terms, ‘‘The law of Moses,”’ 
and ‘‘The law of God.’’ The law of Moses is the ° 
law of God, but the law of God may be much more 
than the law of Moses. ‘‘ Whosoever committeth sin 
transgresseth also the law: for sin is the transgression 
of the law’’ (1 John 3:4). Since the Decalogue 
contained no reference to the great issues of Chris- 
tian service and prayer, or the details of the char- 
acter of the believer’s walk in the world, no one, 
upon serious thought, will be willing to limit this 
great definition of sin as merely the transgression 
of the law of Moses. ‘‘The sting of death is sin; and 
the strength of sin is the law’’ (1 Cor. 15:56). Sin, 
again, is nothing less than failure in any aspect of the 
will of God. When this fuller requirement of the 
will of God is considered in its present application 
under grace, it is termed ‘‘the perfect law of liberty’’ 
(Jas. 1:25. Cf Rom. 8:21; 1 Cor. 8:9; 10:29; 
2 Cor. 8:17; Gal. 2:4; 5:1-13; Jas. 2:12). 


Fifth. Any Rule of Conduct Prescribed by Men. 


Here the use of the word law is extended to the 
regulations men may make among themselves. We 
read: ‘‘But we know that the law is good, if a man 
use it lawfully; knowing this, that the law is not 
made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and 
disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners’’ (1 Tim. 
1:8,9). ‘And if a man also strive for masteries, yet 


The Life under Grace 109 


is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully’? (2 Tim. 
225. Cf Mt.-20:.15:; Lk. 20:22). 

Again, to this classification of law as being man- 
made, may be added any self-imposed law. Thus 
the law of Moses or the law of the kingdom when 
assumed as a rule of life by Jews, Gentiles, or Chris- 
tians, becomes a man-made and self-imposed law. 
It is written: ‘‘For when the Gentiles [the same 
is equally true now of Jews or Christians], which 
have not the law, do by nature [usage] the things 
contained in the law, these, having not the law, are 
a law unto themselves’? (Rom. 2:14). The law, 
though not addressed to them is self-imposed and 
becomes to that extent a mere man-made obligation. 


Sixth. Any Recognized Principle in Operation. 


In this aspect of the meaning of the word law it 
is seen to be used as the equivalent of power. In 
common usage, reference is made to the law of gravi- 
tation. Which is likewise the power of gravitation. 
Thus it is used in the Word of God: ‘‘For the law 
[power] of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath 
made me free from the law [power] of sin and death”’ 
(Rom. 8:2). 


Seventh. The Necessary Sequence Between a 
Cause and its Effect. 


This particular aspect of the use of the word law 
is seen in Rom. 7:21: ‘‘I find then a law, that, when 
I would do good, evil is present with me.’’ 

Discrimination of these widely different meanings 
of the word law is imperative for a right understand- 
ing of this great theme in the Scriptures. 


I10 Grace 


tl. AS TO THE RELATION THE LAW SUSTAINS TO THE 
TIME OF ITS REIGN. 


The Scriptures teach that the law given by Moses, 
which was a covenant of works, was given from God 
to man at a particular time. The human family had 
walked before God upon the earth for upwards of 
2500 years prior to the imposition of the law. Thus 
it had been demonstrated that God is able to deal 
with men in the earth without reference to the law 
of Moses. 

In the Word of God the period between Adam and 
Moses is particularly contrasted with the dispensation 
of the law. The revelation is final: ‘‘ Wherefore, as 
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by 
sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all 
have sinned: (For until the law sin was in the 
world: but sin is not imputed where there is no law. 
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even 
over them that had not sinned after the similitude 
of Adam’s transgression)’’ (Rom. 5:12-14). 

Physical death, the unavoidable penalty for sin, 
antedates the giving of the law, and death reigned 
from Adam to Moses; but sin was not ‘‘impuited’’ 
where there was no law. As it does now, death 
reigned over sinless infants, good people, and bad 
people alike. Sin, in this connection, is evidently 
the inbred fallen-nature which all have received from 
Adam; and not the transgressions personally com- 
mitted. Thus the penalty—death—is due to the 
fallen-nature which all have received and is not due 
to individual transgressions. Since the sin-nature 


The Life under Grace ¥1I 


from Adam is universal, its penalty is universal. 
Should one member of the human family be de- 
livered from the possession of the sin-nature, the 
fact would be proven by a like deliverance from its 
penalty—death. None are delivered from physical 
death so long as Christ tarries. It is ‘‘by the offence 
of one’’ that ‘‘judgment came upon all men to con- 
demnation’’ (Rom. 5:18). 

The all important distinction between the sin- 
nature of man, which is the universal possession, and 
the personal wrongdoing of the individual, is main- 
tained throughout the Scriptures, including the 
revelation of the cross. There are two aspects of the 
death of Christ as that death is related to sin: He 
died ‘‘for our sins,’’ which fact is the basis of the 
divine cure for personal sin by justification (Rom. 
3:21 to 5:11); and He died ‘‘unto sin,’’ which fact 
is the basis of the divine cure for the reigning power 
of the sin-nature (Rom. 6:1 to 8:4). 

Sin and death reigned from Adam to Moses be- 
cause sin, in its essence, is the fallen-nature itself, 
and death is its penalty ; but sin, which is the personal 
wrongdoing of the individual, ‘‘is not imputed where 
there is no law.’’ Thus is the relation of man and 
God described covering the great period between 
Adam and Moses. 

The pertinent question—‘‘ Wherefore then serveth 
the law?’’—is both propounded and answered in the 
Seriptures (Gal. 3:19). Continuing we read, the 
law ‘‘was added because of transgressions.’’ That 
is, it was ‘‘added’’ to give to sin the augmented 
character of transgression. Sin had always been evil 
in ‘itself and in the sight of God; but it became 


112 Grace 


disobedience after that the holy commandments were 
disclosed. The fact of the sin-nature is not changed 
by the introduction of the law; it was the character 
of personal wrongdoing which was changed. It was 
changed from sin, which is not imputed where there 
is no law, to sin which is the rebellion against the 
command of God, and which must reap all the punish- 
ment attendant upon broken law. Israel, to whom 
the commandments were given, being a chosen, ex- 
alted people, were, by the imposition of the law, con- 
stituted a more responsible people before God; but 
they were wholly unable to keep the law. The giving 
of the law to Israel did not result in an obedient 
people; it rather proved their utter sinfulness and 
helplessness. The law became a ministry of con- 
demnation to every one who failed to keep it. Nor 
did the giving of the law really tend to their better- 
ment at heart, or retard the power of sin; it provoked 
them to sin. As the Apostle says: ‘‘But sin, taking 
occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all 
manner of concupiscence’’ (Rom. 7.8). 

There can be no question as to the righteous char- 
acter of the law; for it is written: ‘‘ Wherefore the 
law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, 
and good. Was then that which is good made death 
unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might ap- 
pear sin, working death in me by that which is good; 
that sin by the commandment might become exceed- 
ing sinful’? (Rom. 7: 12-13). Thus the purpose of 
the giving of the law is stated: ‘‘That sin by the 
commandment might become exceeding sinful.’’ 

Apart from the Man Christ Jesus, there was uni- 
versal failure in the keeping of thelaw. This is not 


The Life under Grace £13 


to say that the law was imperfect in itself. The 
universal failure in keeping the law is the revelation 
of the helplessness of man under the power of ‘‘sin 
in the flesh.’’ Two passages give evidence as to the 
failure of the law through the weakness of the flesh 
to which it made its appeal: ‘‘For what the law could 
not do, in that it was weak through the flesh’’ (Rom. 
8:3); and, ‘‘But now, after that ye have known God, 
or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to 
the weak and beggarly [poverty-stricken] elements, 
whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?’’ (Gal. 
4:9). The appeal is strong: Why, after having 
come to know the power of God through the Spirit, 
do ye turn to a relationship to God which as a means 
of victory and blessing has always been, and must 
always be, ‘‘weak’’ and ‘‘poverty-stricken’’? 

The law was never given as a means of salvation 
or justification: ‘‘Therefore by the deeds of the law 
there shall no fiesh be justified in his sight: for by 
the law is the knowledge of sin’’ (Rom. 3:20. Cf 
Gal. 3:11, 24). Though given as a rule of conduct 
for Israel in the land, it, because of the universal 
failure in its observance, became a curse (Gal. 
3:10), condemnation (2 Cor. 3:9), and death (Rom. 
7:10-11). The law was effective only as it drove the 
transgressor to Christ. It became a means of turning 
the people to God for His mercy as that mercy is 
provided in Christ. The law was a ‘‘schoolmaster,’’ 
or child trainer, to bring the offender to Christ. 
This was immediately accomplished in his turning 
to the sin-offerings which were provided, and which 
were the type of Christ in His death; but more 
fully, was this accomplished when the dispensation 


114 Grace 


itself came to its end in the death of Christ. ‘‘The 
law made nothing perfect, . . . but the bringing in 
of a better hope,’’ and the law was a ‘‘shadow of 
good things to come’’ (Heb. 7:19; 10:1). 

The reign of the law is limited to a period of about 
1500 years, or from Sinai to Calvary—from Moses to 
Christ. These boundaries are fixed beyond question 
in the Word of God. 


First. The Law Began its Reign at Mount Sinai. 


The law was never imposed upon any people or 
generation before it was given to Israel at the hand 
of Moses. ‘‘And Moses ealled all Israel, and said 
unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judg- 
ments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye 
may learn them, and keep, and do them. The Lorp 
our God made a covenant with us in Horeb. The 
Lorp made not this covenant with our fathers, but 
with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this 
day’’ (Deut. 5:1-3). When the law was proposed, 
the children of Israel deliberately forsook their posi- 
tion under the grace of God which had been their 
relationship to God until that day, and placed them- 
selves under the law. The record is given thus: 
‘‘And Moses went up unto God, and the Lorp ealled 
unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt 
thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the chil- 
dren of Israel; Ye have seen what I did unto the 
Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles’ wings, 
and brought you unto myself. Now therefore, if ye 
will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, 
then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above 
all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall 


The Life under Grace 115 


be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. 
These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the 
children of Israel. And Moses came and ealled for 
the elders of the people, and laid before their faces 
all these words which the Lorp commanded him. 
And all the people answered together, and said, All 
that the Lorp hath spoken we will do. And Moses 
returned the words of the people unto the Lorp’’ 
(Ex. 19: 3-8). 

While it is certain that Jehovah knew the choice 
the people would make, it is equally certain that their 
choice was in no way required by Him. His de- 
seription of the relation they had sustained to Him 
until that moment is most tender and pleading: ‘‘Ye 
have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how 
I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto 
myself.’’ Such is the character of pure grace. By 
it the sinner is carried on eagles’ wings and brought 
to God. It is all of God. Until that hour they 
had been sustained in the faithfulness of Jehovah 
and without the slightest reference to their wicked- 
ness; but His plan and purpose for them had re- 
mained unchanged. He had dealt with them accord- 
ing to the unconditional covenant of grace made with 
Abraham. The marvelous blessedness of that grace- 
relationship should have appealed to them as the 
priceless riches of the unfailing mercy of God, which 
it was. The surrender of the blessings of grace 
should have been allowed by these people on no con- 
dition whatever. Had they said at the hearing of 
the impossible law, ‘‘None of these things can we 
do. We crave only to remain in that boundless 
mercy of God, who has loved us, and sought us, and 


116 Grace 


saved us from all our enemies, and who will bring 
us to Himself,’’ it is evident that such an appeal 
would have reached the very heart of God. And the 
surpassing glory of His grace would have been ex- 
tended to them without bounds; for grace above all 
else is the delight of the heart of God. In place of 
the eagles’ wings by which they were carried unto 
God, they confidently chose a covenant of works when 
they said: ‘‘All that the Lorp hath spoken we will 
do.’’ They were called upon to face a concrete choice 
between the mercy of God which had followed them, 
and a new and hopeless covenant of works. They 
fell from grace. The experience of the nation is 
true of every individual who falls from grace at the 
present time. Every blessing from God that has 
ever been experienced came only from the loving 
mercy of God; yet with that same blasting self-trust, 
people are now turning to a dependence upon their 
works. It is far more reasonable and honoring to 
God to fall helpless into His everlasting arms, and 
to acknowledge that we rely on His grace alone. 
Upon the determined choice of the law, the moun- 
tain where God was revealed became a terrible spec- 
tacle of the unapproachable, holy character of God. 
‘‘And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, 
because the Lorp descended upon it in fire: and the 
smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, 
and the whole mount quaked greatly. ... And the 
Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, 
lest they break through unto the Lorp to gaze, and 
many of them perish’? (Ex. 19: 18-21). He who had 
brought them to Himself under the unconditional 
blessings of His grace, must now warn them lest they 


The Life under Grace £17 


break through unto the Lorp and perish. That the 
burning mountain was a sign of the unapproachable- 
ness of God under the new covenant of works, is 
again declared in Heb. 12:18-21. Speaking there of 
the glory and liberty of grace, it is said: ‘‘For ye 
are not come unto the mount that might be touched, 
and that burnt with fire, nor unto blackness, and 
darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a trumpet, 
and the voice of words; which voice they that heard 
intreated that the word should not be spoken to them 
any more: (For they could not endure that which 
was commanded, And if so much as a beast touch 
the mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through 
with a dart: and so terrible was the sight, that 
Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake:). But ye 
are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the 
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an in- 
numerable company of angels, to the general as- 
sembly and church of the firstborn, which are written 
in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the 
spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the 
mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of 
sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of 
Abel.’’ By this passage, the great contrast between 
the relationship to God under the law covenant of 
works, and the relationship to God under grace, is 
set forth clearly. Under their works, Israel could 
not come unto God lest they die; but under grace 
they were carried on eagles’ wings unto God, and so, 
under grace, all come unto God, and to Jesus, and to 
the blessed association and glory of heaven itself. 

The children of Israel definitely chose the covenant 
of works, which is law, as their relationship to God. 


118 Grace 


In like manner, every individual who is now under 
the law, is self-placed, and that law under which he 
stands is self-imposed. In every case such relation- 
ship is clung to in spite of the appeal of pure grace. 
Had the legalists minds to understand and hearts to 
feel, they would realize that there is no access to God 
by a covenant of works and merit. To such as seek 
to come to Him by the law, God is as unapproachable 
as flaming Sinai. 


Second. The Reign of Law was Terminated with 
the Death of Christ. 


The truthfulness of the statement that the reign of 
the law was terminated with the death of Christ is 
to be determined by the Word of God, rather than 
by the traditions and suppositions of men. The law, 
when given, was only a temporary, or ad iterim, 
dealing ‘‘until the seed should come’’ (Gal. 3:19), 
and the ‘‘seed’’ is Christ (3:16). This conclusive 
passage (vs. 22-25) continues: ‘‘But the Scripture 
hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by 
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that 
believe.’’ The distinction between Jew and Gentile 
is broken down and all are ‘‘under sin.’’ There is 
provided and offered in Christ a new access and 
relationship to God. It is ‘‘through Christ’’ and ‘‘in 
Christ.’’ It is gained upon a principle of faith alone. 
Christ is the object of faith. It is nothing less than 
the ‘‘promise by faith of Jesus Christ,’’ and it is 
given to them who ‘“‘believe.’? Thus the new cov- 
enant of grace through faith in Christ is placed in 
contrast to the old covenant of works. The passage 
goes on to state: ‘‘But before faith. [the new prin- 


The Life under Grace 119 


4 


ciple in grace] came, we [Paul is here speaking as a 
Jew of his own time] were kept under the law, shut 
up unto the faith which should afterwards be re- 
vealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster 
[child leader] to bring us unto Christ, that we might 
be justified by faith [the new principle in grace]. 
But after that faith [the new principle in grace] is 
come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster’’ (the 
law). 

As a standard of holy living, the law presented the 
precise quality of life which was becoming a people 
who were chosen of God and redeemed out of the 
bondage of Egypt. At the cross, a new and perfect 
redemption from sin was accomplished for Jew and 
Gentile alike. The redemption from Egypt was a 
type of the redemption from sin. As the redemp- 
tion from Egypt created a demand for a correspond- 
ing holy life, so the redemption from sin creates 
a demand for a corresponding heavenly walk with 
God. One is adapted to the limitations of the natural 
man; the other is adapted to the infinite resources 
of the spiritual man. One is the teaching of the 
law; the other is the teaching of grace. 


i. AS TO THE APPLICATION OF THE LAW. 


The law was given only to the children of Israel. 
This statement admits of no discussion when the 
Seriptures are considered. A very few passages from 
the many are here given: ‘‘And Jesus answered 
him, The first of all the commandments is, Hear, 
O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord: and thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart”’ 


120 Grace 


(Mk. 12: 29-30) ; ‘‘And what nation is there so great, 
that hath statutes and judgments so righteous as all 
this law, which I have set before you this day?’’ 
(Deut. 4:8); ‘‘ And Moses called all Israel, and said 
unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judg- 
ments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye 
may learn them, and keep, and do them. The Lorp 
our God made a covenant with us in Horeb. The 
Lorp made not this covenant with our fathers, but 
with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day’’ 
(Deut. 5:1-3). The message given from the mount 
was that great covenant of works of the law con- 
tained in the Ten Commandments, which is here in- 
cluded in the ‘‘statutes and judgments.’’ This 
covenant was never made with any other nation or 
people; for God made no covenants with people other 
than Israel. ‘‘The Lorp gave me the two tables of 
stone, even the tables of the ecovenant’’ (Deut. 9:11). 
Speaking of the covenants in relation to Israel, it 
is said: ‘‘ Who are Israelites; to whom pertaineth the 
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the 
giving of the law, and the service of God, and the 
promises; whose are the fathers, and of whom as 
concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, 
God blessed forever’? (Rom. 9:4, 5). Speaking of 
the Gentiles it is said: ‘‘ Wherefore remember, that ye 
being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, . . . that at 
that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from 
the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the 
covenants of promise, having no hope, and without 
God in the world’’ (Eph. 2:11, 12). 

It is expressly declared that the Gentiles have not 
the law: ‘‘For when the Gentiles, which have not the 


The Life under Grace [21 


law, do by nature [usage] the things contained in 
the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto 
themselves’? (Rom. 2:14). In harmony with this, 
Pontius Pilate, a Gentile ruler, denied any respon- 
sibility to Israel’s law: ‘‘Then said Pilate unto 
them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your 
law’’ (John 18:81). 

We conclude, therefore, that the law which was 
given by Moses was a covenant of works, that it was 
“‘added’’ after centuries of human history, that its 
reign was terminated by the death of Christ, that it 
was given to Israel only, and that, since it was never 
given to Gentiles, the only relation that Gentiles can 
sustain to it is, without any divine authority, to 
impose it upon themselves. Additional proof of 
these facts concerning the law are yet to be presented. 


THE LIFE UNDER GRACE 
(continued) 


SECTION THREE 


THE KINGDOM TEACHINGS 


According to the Scriptures, all time is divided 
into seven periods, or dispensations. The Bible is 
occupied, in the main, with the last three of these 
periods. All that lies between Exodus, chapter 19, 
and Revelation, chapter 20, is the unfolding of the 
exact scope and character of these three ages. These 
ages are: The age of the law of Moses, which is 
measured by the duration of the reign of that law, 
or from Sinai to Calvary; The age of the kingdom, 
which is measured by the earth-reign of the King, 
or from the second coming of Christ when He comes 
to occupy His throne (Mt. 25: 31), to the bringing in 
of the eternal state in the new heavens and new 
earth (Rev. 21:1; 1 Cor. 15: 24-28); And lying be- 
tween the age of the law of Moses, which is wholly 
past, and the age of the kingdom, which is wholly 
future, there is the present age of grace, bounded by 
the death of Christ, on the one hand, and by His 
second advent, on the other. The revelation con- 
cerning the out-standing ordinance for this age also 
marks the limit of duration of the age itself with 
a future event—dateless, but never-the-less sure: 
““For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this 


cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till he come.’’ 
122 


The Life under Grace 123 


Due recognition of the essential character of each 
of these ages is the key to the understanding of the 
exact manner of the divine rule in each age. The 
rule of God in each ease is adapted to the conditions 
which obtain. Since the respective characteristics 
of the ages are widely different, the manner of the 
divine rule is correspondingly different. The prac- 
tice of confusing these three ages in respect to their 
characteristics and the manner of the divine rule in 
each is common, and is, doubtless, the greatest error 
into which many devout Bible interpreters fall. It 
is perhaps easier to confuse the present age with 
that which immediately precedes it, or with that 
which immediately follows it, than to confuse it with 
conditions which are more remote; although there 
need be no confusion of these immediately suceeding 
but sharply separated periods of time, for they are 
divided by age-transforming events. The age of the 
law of Moses is separated from the present age of 
grace by the death of Christ, when He bore the 
curse of the law and finished the work by which man 
may stand justified before God forever, and justified 
as he could not have been justified by the law of 
‘Moses. The age of grace is separated from the age 
of the kingdom by the second coming of Christ to 
the earth—the time when He comes to reign, to 
bind Satan, to terminate human governments, and to 
cause righteousness and peace to cover the earth as 
the waters cover the face of the deep. 

The divine government could not remain the same 
in the earth after the world-transforming, spiritual 
victories of the cross, as it had been under the law 
of Moses. So, likewise, the divine government can- 


124 Grace 


not remain the same in the earth after the world- 
transforming temporal victories of the second coming, 
as it has been under the reign of grace. All this is 
reasonable; but, what is far more impelling and 
compelling, this is what is precisely revealed by God 
in His Word. 

There are, then, three separate and distinct sys- 
tems of divine government disclosed in the Scriptures, 
corresponding to three separate and distinct ages 
to be governed. 

In respect to the character of divine government, 
both the age before the cross and the age following 
the return of Christ represent the exercise of pure 
law; while the period between these two ages repre- 
sents the exercise of pure grace. It is imperative, 
therefore, that there shall be no careless co-mingling 
of these great age-characterizing elements, else the 
preservation of the most important distinctions in 
the various relationships between God and man are 
lost, and the recognition of the true force of the 
death of Christ and His coming again is obscured. 

Kingdom teachings will be found in those Psalms 
and prophecies of the Old Testament which antici- 
pate the reign of Messiah in the earth, and in the 
kingdom portions of the Gospels. These teachings 
as found in the Old Testament and the New are 
purely legal in essence; both by their inherent char- 
acter, and by the explicit declaration of the Word of 
God. The legal requirements of the kingdom teach- 
ings are greatly advanced, both in severity and de- 
tail, beyond the requirements of the law of Moses. 
This intensification of legal requirements, as it ap- 
pears in the kingdom teachings, should not be looked 


The Life under Grace 125 


upon as a mere continuation of the law of Moses. 
The kingdom teaching is a system complete and 
perfect in itself. Moreover, this intensification of 
legal requirements in kingdom revelations does not 
move the teachings of the Mosaic law nearer the heart 
of the teachings of grace. On the contrary, it re- 
moves them still farther in the opposite direction, 
inasmuch as the teachings of the kingdom increase 
‘the burden of meritorious workers over that which 
was required by the law of Moses. In the kingdom 
law, anger is condemned in the same connection 
where only murder had been prohibited in the law 
of Moses, and the glance of the eye is condemned 
where only adultery had previously been forbidden. 

The kingdom Scriptures of the Old Testament are 
occupied largely with the character and glory of 
Messiah’s reign, the promises to Israel of restoration 
and earthly glory, the universal blessings to Gen- 
tiles, and the deliverance of creation itself. There 
is little revealed in the Old Testament Scriptures 
concerning the responsibility of the individual in 
the kingdom; it is rather a message to the nation as 
a whole. Evidently the details concerning individual 
responsibility, were, in the mind of the Spirit, re- 
served for the personal teaching of the King, at the 
time when the kingdom would be ‘‘at hand.’’ As 
to the reign of the King, two important disclosures 
are made in the kingdom portions of the Old Testa- 
ment: (1) His will be a rigid reign of righteous- 
ness that shall go forth from Jerusalem with swift 
judgment upon the sinner (Isa. 2:1-4; 11:1-5); and 
(2), according to the new covenant which He wiil 
have made with his people, He will have put His laws 


126 Grace 


into their minds, and will have written them on their 
hearts (Jer. 31: 31-40; Heb. 8:7-12). The writing 
of the law upon the heart is a divine assistance to- 
ward the keeping of the kingdom law which was in 
no wise provided under the reign of the law of Moses. 
However, the written law on the heart, as it will be in 
the kingdom, is not to be compared with the power of 
the indwelling Spirit which is the present divine en- 
ablement provided for the believer under grace. 

Under the new covenant, God will have put away 
the former sin of the nation forever. This, it is 
revealed, He is free to do through the blood of His 
Son who, as God’s Lamb, took away the sin of the 
world (Mt. 13:44; Rom. 11:26, 27). 

The great key words under the Mosaic system were 
““law’’ and ‘‘obedience’’; the great key words in the 
present age are ‘‘believe’’ and ‘‘grace’’; while the 
great key words in the kingdom are ‘‘righteousness’’ 
and ‘‘peace.’’ The following are brief excerpts from 
the Old Testament Scriptures bearing on the king- 
dom: 

“‘The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw con- 
cerning Judah and Jerusalem, And it shall come to 
pass in the last days, that the mountain of the 
Lorp’s house shall be established in the top of the 
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and 
all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall 
go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the moun- 
tain of the Lorp, to the house of the God of Jacob; 
and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk 
in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, 
and the word of the Lorp from Jerusalem. And he 
shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke 


The Life under Grace 127 


many people: and they shall beat their swords into 
plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: 
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither 
shall they learn war any more’’ (Isa. 2: 1-4). 

‘And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem 
of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots: and 
the Spirit of the Lorp shall rest upon him, the spirit, 
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel. 
and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of 
the Lorp; and shall make him of quick understanding 
in the fear of the Lorn: and he shall not judge after 
the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing 
of his ears: but with righteousness shall he judge the 
poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the 
earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of 
his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay 
the wicked. And righteousness shall be the girdle of 
his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins’’ 
(Isa. 11:1-5). 

“‘And I will gather the remnant of my flock out 
of all countries whither I have driven them, and will 
bring them again to their folds; and they shall be 
fruitful and increase. And I will set up shepherds 
over them which shall feed them: and they shall 
fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be 
lacking, saith the Lorp. Behold, the days come, 
saith the Lorp, that I will raise unto David a right- 
eous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and 
shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In 
his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell 
safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be 
ealled, THe Lorp Our RiauHTsousness.... And 
they shall dwell in their own land’’ (Jer. 23: 38-8). 


128 Grace 


‘‘Ror the children of Israel shall abide many days 
without a king, and without a prince, and without a 
sacrifice, and without an image, and without an 
ephod, and without teraphim: afterward shall the 
children of Israel return, and seek the Lorp their 
God, and David their King; and shall fear the Lorp 
and his goodness-in the latter days’’ (Hosea 3: 4,5).* 

Turning to the New Testament Scriptures bearing 
on the kingdom, it is important first to consider 
again the two-fold character of the work and teach- 
ings of Christ. He was both a minister to Israel to 
confirm the promises made unto the fathers, and a 
minister to the Gentiles that they might glorify God 
for His merey (Rom. 15:8, 9). These two widely 
different revelations are not separated in the Scrip- 
tures by a well-defined boundary of chapter and 
verse; they are intermingled in the text and are to 
be identified wherever found by the character of the 
message and the circumstances under which it is 
given. This, it should be remembered, is the usual 
divine method of presenting truth. To illustrate: 
there is no chapter and verse boundary in the pro- 
phetice books of the Old Testament between that por- 
tion of the Scriptures which presented the immediate 
duty of Israel, and that portion of the Scriptures 
which presented their future obligation in Messiah’s 
kingdom. The prophets, while unfolding both of 
these widely differing obligations, co-mingle these 
messages in the text and the different messages are 
discerned only through an observance of the character 

1 Note additional passages: Ps. 72: 1-20; Isa. 4: 2-5; 9: 6, 73 
14: 1-8; 35: 1-10; 52: 1-15; 59:20 to 60: 22;> 62: 1-12; 


66: 1-24; Jer. 31:36, 37; 33: 1-26; Joel 3: 17-21; Amos 
9: 11-15; Zeph. 3: 14-20; Zech. 14: 16-21. 


The Life under Grace 129 


of the truth revealed. Likewise, there is, to some 
extent, a co-mingling in the Gospels of the message of 
the kingdom and the teachings of grace. Moreover, 
these teachings were given while the law of Moses 
was in full authority. In harmony with the demands 
of that dispensation, many recognitions of the Mosaic 
system are embedded in the teachings of Christ. 
The Gospels are complex almost beyond any other 
portion of Scripture, since they are a composite of 
the teachings of Moses, of grace, and of the king- 
dom. In attempting to discover and to identify the 
kingdom teachings of Christ as they are co-mingled 
with the teachings of grace, and of the law, it is of 
value to note the peculiar feature of each Gospel: 

The Gospel by Matthew is a message to Israel of 
her King and His kingdom. In that Gospel He is 
introduced first as the ‘‘Son of David’’ (1:1), which 
title immediately relates Him to the Davidie cov- 
enant, and that covenant eternally secures for Israel 
a throne, a King, and a kingdom. Christ, being the 
Son of David, is the Messiah-King—the Hope and 
Consolation of Israel. While this Gospel is primarily 
of the King and His kingdom, the closing portion is 
of Christ as the Son of Abraham. 

The Gospel by Mark presents Christ as the Servant 
of Jehovah. It records more concerning His service 
than of His teaching, and, like Matthew’s Gospel, it 
is almost wholly addressed to Israel. 

The Gospel by Luke presents Christ in His human- 
ity, and, while written to Jews, the avowed purpose 
of the writer is to ‘‘set in order’’ and establish the 
‘“eertainty of those things which are most surely be- 
lieved among us.’’ This certainty of testimony is 


130 Grace 


thus sealed: ‘‘Having had perfect understanding of 
all things from the very first’’ (‘‘from above.’’ Cf 
John 3:31;-19- 11; Jas. 1:17; 3:15, 17). 

The Gospel by John was also written for a partic- 
ular purpose: ‘‘But these are written, that ye might 
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and 
that believing ye might have life through his name’’ 
(20:31). Thus the saving grace of God in Christ is 
declared to be the theme of this Gospel. While the 
ministry of Christ to Israel is acknowledged by the 
words, ‘‘He came to his own, and his own received 
him not’’ (1:11), the Gospel by John is primarily 
of the grace of God in salvation through Christ. The 
Gospel by John divides the teachings of Christ into 
two parts: chapters 1 to 12, the grace of God that 
saves; and chapters 13 to 16, and 19 to 21, the grace 
of God that teaches. 

From this brief consideration of the four Gospels 
it may be concluded that those teachings of Christ 
which confirm the covenants made unto the fathers, 
or Israel, will be found primarily in the Synoptic 
Gospels, and that these kingdom teachings are erys- 
tallized in the first portion of the first Gospel. The 
position of this kingdom portion in the context of 
the Scriptures is also significant—following immedi- 
ately, as it does, on the Old Testament. The Old 
Testament closed with its great hopes unrealized and 
its great prophecies unfulfilled. These hopes were 
based on covenants from Jehovah, to which He had 
sworn with an oath. These covenants guarantee to 
the nation an earthly kingdom in their own land, un- 
der the abiding reign of Messiah, sitting on the throne 
of His father David. No such promise was fulfilled 


The Life under Grace 13a 


in the Old Testament period. The kingdom as pro- 
vided for in the faithfulness of Jehovah was revealed 
in the Old Testament only in predictive prophecy. 
No such kingdom situation existed when Christ was 
born. It is expressly declared that Israel’s great 
hope and consolation was yet in expectation when 
Christ came (Lk. 1: 31-338; 2:25). The children of 
Israel were then largely scattered among the nations 
and their land was under the authority of Rome. 
At this point and under these circumstances, a new 
message went forth: ‘‘The kingdom of heaven is at 
hand.’’ It was proclaimed by the forerunner—John 
the Baptist (Mt. 3:1-2), by Christ (Mt. 4:17), and 
by His disciples (Mt. 10: 5-7). The strongest prohi- 
bition was imposed against the giving of this message 
to any Gentile, or even to a Samaritan (Mt. 10:5, 6. 
Cf 15:24). The message, though brief, was calcu- 
lated to arouse all the national longings of the people 
to whom it was spoken. The messengers needed no 
analytical training to sense the exact meaning of their 
theme. As instructed Israelites, the kingdom hope 
had been their expectation and meditation from birth. 
Later on, and in contrast to this, their utter slowness 
of heart to understand the new facts and teachings of 
grace is most obvious. Even when, after His resur- 
rection, Christ had given forty days of instruction in 
things pertaining to the kingdom of God, they said: 
‘‘Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the king- 
dom to Israel?’’ (Acts 1:6), so little had they 
grasped the meaning of His death and the immediate 
purpose of grace. On the other hand, there is no 
record that the messengers needed or received one 
moment of exposition as to the meaning of the mes- 


132 Grace 


sage relative to the Gospel of the kingdom before they 
were sent forth to deliver it. It was evidently 
Israel’s hope. 

The phrase, the kingdom of heaven, is peculiar to 
the Gospel by Matthew, and refers to the rule of God 
in the earth. In that particular, it is to be dis- 
tinguished from the kingdom of God, which is the rule 
of God throughout the bounds of the universe. One, 
in certain aspects, is included in the other, and there 
is, therefore, much that is common to both. The 
Messianic rule of God in the earth was the theme of 
the prophets; for the prophets only enlarged on the 
covenants which guaranteed a throne, a King, and a 
kingdom, over regathered Israel, in that land which 
was sworn to Abraham. The term, the kingdom of 
heaven, was used by Christ to announce the fact that 
the covenanted kingdom blessings were ‘‘at hand.’’ 
This good news to that nation was the ‘‘gospel of the 
kingdom,’’ and should in no wise be confused with 
the Gospel of saving grace. 

The national hope was centered in the genuineness 
of the claims of both the King and His forerunner. 
The evidence was carefully weighed, it may be 
believed, and it was found unimpeachable; but the 
wickedness of heart prevailed. They imprisoned the 
forerunner, who was later beheaded by Herod, and 
they crucified the King. Both the forerunner and 
the King fulfilled prophecy in respect to the office of 
each in every detail. The forerunner was the voice of 
one crying in the wilderness. The King was of the 
seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Judah, a son of 
David, born of a virgin, in Bethlehem of Judea, He 
came out of Egypt, and was called a Nazarene. At 


The Life under Grace 133 


His birth He was proclaimed, ‘‘King of the Jews.’’ 
In His public ministry He took up the message of a 
King. At His entrance into Jerusalem He was hailed 
as Israel’s King. At His trial before Pilate, He 
claimed to be a King. And He died under the ac- 
cusation, ‘‘This is Jesus, the King of the Jews.’’ 
The crown of thorns had no significance in relation 
to His sacrificial death for sin: it was the emblem of 
the nation’s derision for His kingship claim. They 
thus fulfilled by act the very prophecy the King 
had made: ‘‘We will not have this man to rule over 
us.’’ There should be no confusion at this point. 
The rulers of the nation who demanded His death 
were not personally rejecting a Saviour, as sinners 
are rejecting Him now; they were rejecting their 
King. They did not say, ‘‘We will not believe on the 
Saviour to the salvation of our souls’’; they said, ‘‘ We 
have no king but Cesar.”’ 

The rejection of the King was according to ‘‘the 
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God’’ 
(Acts 2:23); for His rejection and humiliation were 
foreshadowed in the types, and foreseen in the pro- 
phecies of the Old Testament; He was the ‘‘Lamb 
slain from the foundation of the world.’’ At every 
step in the record His rejection and death are said to 
be the fulfilling of the Scriptures. It is recorded of 
Him in sixteen passages that He, by His rejection and 
death, fulfilled the Old Testament Scriptures. It is 
also recorded of Him in nine passages that He was the 
fulfillment of Old Testament prophecies concerning 
the King. 

The first ministry of Christ was, then, to Israel as 
her King. In this He appeared; not as a personal 


134 Grace 


Saviour, but as her long expected Messiah; not as a 
Lamb, but as a Lion; not as a sacrifice by which a 
Church—the spotless Bride—might be purchased to 
Himself from among all nations, but as the Son of 
David, with every right to David’s throne, over Israel, 
at Jerusalem, in the land of promise. In the Synoptic 
Gospels, there is, therefore, no record of any step to- 
ward the formation of the Church, or any reference to 
that great purpose, until, from His own nation, His 
rejection as King is evident. According to the Syn- 
optic Gospels, the early teachings of the King were of 
that nation, and were in no wise related to the great 
results which would afterwards be accomplished 
through His death and resurrection in the calling out 
of His Church from all the nations of the earth. 
Upon His rejection, He began to speak, in antici- 
pation of His death, of the formation of His Church, 
and of His coming back again to the earth. He 
likewise related the sure fulfillment of every covenant 
with Israel to the time of His return. 

Was, then, the Gospel of the kingdom, as announced 
by John, by Christ, and by His disciples, a bonafide 
message? Did it really mean what it announced? 
Was Israel’s long predicted kingdom at hand? If so, 
and had they received their King, what would have 
become of the divine purposes of redemption as they 
were to be accomplished through His death? These 
questions are insistently asked to-day ; but the answers 
are not difficult. 

The Gospel of the kingdom was a bonafide message 
to Israel. To treat it otherwise, is to accuse God of 
trickery and deception. It is likewise a serious mis- 
representation of all the related Scriptures to apply 


The Life under Grace 135 


the message and teaching of the King to the present 
purposes of God in this age of grace. All confusion 
which arises concerning the kingdom message in its 
relation to the cross arises. from the failure to recog- 
nize the important distinction between the divine 
viewpoint and the human viewpoint. It is only 
another application of the rationalistic trick of play- 
ing the free will of man against the sovereignty of 
God. On the human side, there was a clear-cut issue 
with unrestrained power to choose, or reject, the King. 
On the divine side, there was a genuine offer of the 
kingdom in the Person, presence and ministry of the 
King ; but back of this was the foreknowledge of God 
which was absolute as to the choice they would make. 
Their choice would be but the outworking of the eter- 
nal purpose of God in Christ, and for that choice they 
would be held guilty. On the divine side, it is said: 
‘Therefore they could not believe’’ (John 12:39), 
and on the human side, it is said: ‘‘They hated me 
without a cause’’ (John 15:25). Is this the only 
example of such a problem in the Scriptures? By no 
means. 

Every dispensation represents a new divine pur- 
pose in the testing of man. In every case man is seen 
to fail, and to be guilty before God; yet we behold 
God patiently and faithfully bringing man face to 
face with the issues involved. After a brief experi- 
ence in the wilderness, He took Israel to Kadesh 
Barnea where He provided and offered an immediate 
entrance into their own land. The choice was theirs; 
they refused to enter. They were guilty. God knew 
they would refuse to enter the land; yet His offer was 
genuine, and His purposes were realized. In chas- 


136 Grace 


tisement, God sent them back into the wilderness for 
forty years of added discomfort. In His own time, 
and by His own power, they finally entered the land. 
This portion of Israel’s history may be taken to be 
typical. When Christ came, the nation had then 
experienced over five hundred years of trial in dis- 
possession of their land and the vacancy of David’s 
throne. When their Messiah came, they refused the 
divine provisions centered in the King, and, as typi- 
fied at Kadesh, they returned to what has now proven 
to be two thousand years of added affliction. The 
day is coming, however, when, according to the faith- 
fulness of God, they will receive their King and abide 
under His undimmed glory. 

Turning to the Old Testament, the student is con- 
fronted with the problem of the right adjustment as 
to the time of fulfillment of two great lines of proph- 
ecy concerning Christ. On the one hand, He was pro- 
phesied to come as a Monarch whose reign and 
kingdom would be everlasting (Cf 2 Sam. 7:16; Ps. 
72: 1-20; 89: 35-37; Isa. 9:6, 7). The thought of His 
death is foreign to this body of prophecy. It is no 
function of a king to die,—‘‘Long live the king!”’ 
But, on the other hand, there is prophecy equally as 
explicit regarding the sacrificial, substitutionary death 
of Christ (Ps. 22:1-21; Isa. 53:1-12). Manifestly, 
these two lines of undertaking could not be accom- 
plished simultaneously. Christ could not be the 
resistless, undying King, and be an unresisting sacri- 
fice, at one and the same time. It was this very time- 
element in the problem which Peter declared was not 
disclosed to the prophets. He writes: ‘‘Of which 
salvation the prophets have inquired and searched 


The Life under Grace 137 


diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should 
come unto you: searching what, or what manner of 
time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did sig- 
nify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of 
Christ, and the glory that should follow’’ (1 Pet. 
1:10, 11). Since the present age of grace and its 
purpose was not revealed to the writers of the Old 
Testament, the time-element relating these two lines 
of prophecy could not be disclosed. When the full- 
ness of time came, it pleased God to present His King 
in fulfillment of prophecy and according to all His 
covenants to Israel. Both by the ‘‘determinate coun- 
sel and foreknowledge of God’’ and by the free choice 
of the nation, the King was rejected and crucified. It 
is evident, therefore, that the prophecies concerning 
the King and His earthly kingdom remain unfulfilled 
to this hour. They are not forgotten or abandoned. 
Neither are they receiving a spiritual fulfillment. 
They are yet to be fulfilled when the King returns to 
the earth. 

In like manner, the same clear light as to the divine 
purpose is revealed through Daniel when he predicts 
the order of events to be fulfilled in the period be- 
tween his own time and that of the reign of Messiah. 
In this prophecy the ‘‘cutting off of Messiah’’ pre- 
cedes the reign of the King. Thus did God anticipate 
what would take place; but this in no wise lessens 
the exercise of free choice on the part of the nation 
Israel in rejecting the King. 

It is puerile to assert that the cross of Christ was 
held in jeopardy until Israel’s choice concerning the 
King had been consummated. Let those who traffic 
in such tricks of argument be consistent to the point 


138 Grace 


of applying their rationalism to all the great issues 
wherein the sovereignty of God and the free will of 
man are found to meet. The ministry of Christ was 
genuine. He was a minister to the circumcision to 
confirm the promises made unto the fathers. He was 
likewise the open door into the grace of God that Gen- 
tiles might glorify God for His merey. Though real, 
His rejection as King was the necessary step in all 
redemption, and God in faithfulness will yet fulfill 
every covenant related to the throne, the King, the 
nation, and the land. This He will do when the King 
comes back to the earth again. 

It has been necessary to outline the relation of the 
covenanted, earthly kingdom to the first advent of 
Christ, in order that the kingdom teachings of Christ 
may be seen in their true setting. 

Referring to the first section of the Gospel by 
Matthew (chapters 1 to 12), wherein the Gospel of 
the kingdom is preached to Israel, it will be found 
that this precise message of the kingdom Gospel was 
first announced by John the Baptist, of whom it is 
said: ‘‘For this is he that was spoken of by the 
prophet EHsaias, saying, The voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, 
make his paths straight’? (Mt. 3:1-3);. it was an- 
nounced by the King Himself (Mt. 4:17) ; and by the 
disciples (Mt. 10:5-7).. Embedded in this context 
wherein only the Gospel of the kingdom is in view, 
and completely bounded by the records of these proc- 
lamations, is the ‘‘Sermon on the Mount,’’ which is 
evidently, the Manifesto of the King (Mt. 5:1 to 
7:29). In this Manifesto the King declares the 
essential character of the kingdom, the conduct which 


The Life under Grace 139 


will be required in the kingdom, and the conditions 
of entrance into the kingdom. This kingdom rule of 
life is purely legal, both in its inherent qualities and 
by its own claim (Mt. 7:12). It is, however, very 
different from the law as given by Moses. In the 
kingdom teachings, as has been stated, the commands 
of Moses are advanced into requirements vastly more 
impossible as to detail, and this does not relieve, but 
rather intensifies, its character as strictly legal. 
Christ does not disown the principles of the law in the 
unfoldings of kingdom requirements any more than 
He does in all His dealings with Israel before His 
death. He is rather presenting a new degree and 
standard of law which is adapted to the conditions 
which shall obtain in the kingdom, and which He con- 
trasts with the law of Moses. The great kingdom 
words— righteousness and peace—are dominant, and 
there is never a reference either to salvation, or grace. 
Nor is there the slightest reference to those great 
realities of relationship which belong to the new crea- 
tion wrought by Christ through His death and resur- 
rection. Such a complete omission of any reference 
to any feature of the present age of grace, is a fact 
which should be carefully weighed. 

The minute accuracy of the Scripture is seen in 
Christ’s use of the phrase my commandments. Dur- 
ing the days of His ministry to the nation Israel, He 
enforced the commandments of Moses, and spoke of 
the new principles which were to be applied in the 
kingdom as ‘‘these sayings of mine,’’ and ‘‘I say unto 
you’’; but at no time did He use the term my com- 
mandments until He used it with His disciples in the 
upper room, and at the time when He was unfolding 


140 Grace 


the new principles which were to condition the daily 
living of those who should stand on resurrection 
ground, in the new creation, and under grace. It is 
also significant that the first use of the term com- 
mandment in this grace message is when He said, ‘‘A 
new commandment I give unto you’’ (John 13:34). 
There is, therefore, a possible limitation to be placed 
on the extent of the responsibility imposed by Christ 
in His great commission wherein He said: ‘‘teaching 
them to observe all things whatsoever I have com- 
manded you’’ (Mt. 28:20). It is hardly probable 
that He intends all the Mosaic law, the governing 
principles of the kingdom, and the teachings of grace, 
to be combined and applied to those who receive the 
message of the great commission. 

In the teachings of the kingdom, the characterizing 
phrase is, ‘‘hear and do’”’ (Mt. 7: 24), while the char- 
acterizing phrase under grace is ‘‘hear and believe’’ 
(John 5:24). The essential character of the teach- 
ings of the kingdom as they are contrasted with the 
teachings of Moses, and as they are contrasted with 
the teachings of grace, will, at another point of the 
discussion, be considered at length. 

There is a sense in which the kingdom of God, as 
the rule of God in the hearts of individuals, is present 
in the world to-day. This should not be confused 
with the Messianic kingdom which is to be set up over 
a nation, and extended through them to all nations, 
with the King ruling, not in the individual heart, but 
on the throne of David, in the city of Jerusalem. As 
the King came nearer to His death, and the rejection 
became more evident, He made mention of that aspect 
of the rule of God in the individual heart which was 


The Life under Grace 141 


to characterize the hitherto unannounced age of grace. 
The following passage (like Mt. 13: 1-52), taken from 
the later teachings of Christ as recorded by Luke, is 
an example: ‘‘And when he was demanded of the 
Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come, he 
answered them and said, The kingdom of God 
cometh not with observation [outward show]: neither 
shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the 
kingdom of God is within you’’ ( in your midst. Lk. 
17: 20, 21). 

In no sense could it be truthfully said that the king- 
dom of God was in the hearts of those Christ-rejecting 
Pharisees. There was, however, a real sense in which 
the kingdom of God was to be, as it is now, in the 
hearts of individual believers; but the direct state- 
ment of Christ is to the effect that the kingdom was 
then, in the Person of the King, in their midst. So, 
also, the phrase, the kingdom of God cometh not with 
outward show, anticipates the present aspect of the 
rule of God in the individual heart; but after this, 
and according to all prophecy, the kingdom of heaven 
will come with outward show. There is much promise 
of a transformed earth, which condition will be 
ushered in, not by unseen forces and processes; but 
through the resistless power and presence of the re- 
turning King. 

So, also, He could say to Israel: ‘‘The kingdom of 
God is come nigh unto you’’ (Lk. 10:9). As cer- 
tainly as the King was before the nation, so certainly 
their kingdom was before them, and this was the 
appeal of the Gospel of the kingdom which was given 
to ‘‘the children of the kingdom’’ only. When the 
King was rejected, His kingdom was rejected. When 


142 Grace 


His kingdom was rejected and its realization delayed 
until the return of the King, the application of all 
Seripture which conditions life in the kingdom was 
delayed, as well, and will be delayed as long as the 
King tarries. This necessary delay is easily accepted 
with reference to the earthly, national glory, which is 
the theme of the kingdom teachings of the Old Testa- 
ment; but it is equally true that there is a necessary 
delay in application of the last detail of human obli- 
gation related to the earthly kingdom as set forth in 
the New Testament. 

The kingdom teachings are a sufficient and complete 
statement of all that it will be necessary for one to 
know concerning the terms of entrance into, and con- 
duct in the Messianic kingdom on the earth. Much 
in these kingdom teachings is similar to that which is 
found in the teachings of Moses. Much is similar, 
also, to the teachings of grace; but these facts do not 
constitute these teachings an indivisible whole, nor do 
they justify a careless co-mingling of these great 
systems of rule in the earth. The characterizing 
elements in each will be found to be those principles 
which are peculiarly applicable to the dispensation to 
which they belong, rather than in the principles 
wherein they are similar. 


THE LIFE UNDER GRACE 
(continued) 


SECTION FOUR 


CONTRASTS BETWEEN LAW AND GRACE TEACHINGS 


Having considered the fact that God provides 
different rules of life, as recorded in the Scriptures, 
to fit His succeeding dispensational dealings with 
man, it is important to consider the wide difference 
which exists between the principle of law, and the 
principle of grace, as applied to the divine govern- 
ment of man. 

While the purpose of this section is to emphasize 
the fact that the three systems of divine government 
are essentially separate, each one from the others, and 
each one, being wholly complete and sufficient in it- 
self, is in no wise exchangeable for either of the 
others, and cannot be co-mingled; it should be ob- 
served that there are important fields of Bible inter- 
pretation and instruction besides the limited aspect 
of truth which is suggested by the various rules of 
conduct. The Scriptures unfold many highways of 
truth with unbroken development from ‘‘the blade, 
then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.’’ 
The important features of this unity in the Scriptures 
are: 

“1. The revelation concerning God. He is first 
revealed in the Old Testament by His names and 
143 


144 Grace 


works, and to this the New Testament adds the 
fuller emphasis upon the Trinity, the relation of 
the Persons of the Godhead to mankind, and the 
various aspects of saving grace. The continuity of 
the Old Testament testimony concerning Christ was 
proven by Himself on the Emmaus road, as it is re- 
corded: ‘‘Beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he 
expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things 
concerning himself’? (Lk. 24:27). 

2. Prophecy and its fulfillment. Every recorded 
instance of the fulfillment of prophecy shows that 
every detail of the prediction was fulfilled to the let- 
ter. 

3. The union between type and antitype. Al- 
most every important truth of the New Testament 
was typified and foreshadowed in the Old Testament. 
This fact proves the symmetry of all Scripture (See 
Cor, IOsIsb. 

4. The revelation concerning Satan and evil. In 
this body of revelation, likewise, the Bible story is 
uninterrupted, save for the new material added in 
the development of the divine message. 

5. The doctrine of man and his sin. The exact 
manner of the application of the divine remedy for 
sin varies from dispensation to dispensation; but 
there is no variation in all the record concerning the 
essential facts of human failure, and the gracious, 
divine remedy through blood alone. 

6. The requirement of holiness in the conduct of 
saints. While there is wide difference between the 
rules of conduct which are imposed in the various 
ages, there is unity in the revelation that a holy man- 
ner of life is the divine requirement in every age. 


The Life under Grace 145 


7. The continuity of purpose mm the program of 
the ages. In this aspect of the truth it should be ob- 
served that, while each age possesses a character ex- 
elusively its own, the divine purpose throughout all 
the ages is one, ending in the ultimate consummation 
which God has decreed. This fact is stated in Heb. 
1:2. Speaking of God as revealed in, and related 
to, the Son, it is written: ‘‘By whom he program- 
med the ages’’ (literal). . 

Such is the wonderful unity of the Scriptures 
throughout; but in no sense are the various systems 
regulating human conduct the same, and the exact 
application of these systems must be guarded at 
every point. If truth for the children of God under 
grace is to be drawn from the teachings of the law of 
Moses, or the kingdom, it should be acknowledged 
that it is taken from a system foreign to grace, and 
that it is applicable only by way of illustration. 

These governing principles differ in three partic- 
ulars: (1) They present independent, sufficient, 
and complete systems of divine rule in the earth. 
(2) In these systems the order varies as to the se- 
quence of the divine blessing and the human obliga- 
tion. (3) These systems differ according to the 
degree in which the divine enablement has been pro- 
vided. 


I. THEY PRESENT INDEPENDENT, SUFFICIENT, AND 
COMPLETE SYSTEMS OF DIVINE RULE IN THE EARTH. 


As has been stated, there are three of these sys- 
tems of divine government. (1) The teachings of 
the law of Moses; (2) The teachings of grace; 


146 Grace 


and (8) The teachings of the kingdom. Naturally 
there is field here for wide expansion, since these 
three systems of authority occupy the major portion 
of the Bible. A brief review only of the essential 
character of these systems is here given: 


(1) The Teachings of the Law of Moses. 


This rule of life was revealed from God and ac- 
cepted by Israel at Sinai, and was at no time ad- 
dressed to the nations of the world. It was a pecul- 
iar form of government for a peculiar people, and 
accomplished a peculiar purpose in condemning the 
failure of man and in leading him to Christ. Its 
full detail is revealed in the writings of Moses; but 
the history of Israel under the law occupies the rest 
of the Old Testament, and the major part of the 
Gospels up to the record of the death of Christ. In 
the doctrinal teachings of the New Testament, very 
much additional light is given to the character and 
purpose of the law of Moses. There the law is held 
in contrast with the teachings of grace. There, also, 
as will be seen more fully in the later discussion, 
the law is represented as having passed out of force 
through the death of Christ; and, it may be observed, 
that, after the death of Christ, the law is in no in- 
stance treated as being directly in force. 

The law of Moses was complete within itself. It 
was sufficient to regulate the conduct of an Israelite 
under every circumstance that might arise. No 
other rule of life had been revealed during the days 
in which the law of Moses was in effect, hence there 
was no temptation for Israel to complicate her gov- 


The Life under Grace 147 


erning principle with any other. In her relation 
to God, that nation remained for fifteen hundred 
years under pure law. ‘‘The law was given by 
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.”’ 


(2) The Teachings of Grace. 


Like the teachings of the law of Moses, the teach- 
ings of grace have not applied to men in all ages. 
These teachings were revealed from God through 
Christ and His apostles. Moreover, they are never 
addressed to the world as applicable to it in the pres- 
ent age; but are addressed to a peculiar people who 
are in the world, but are not of the world. These 
teachings constitute the divine instruction to the 
heavenly citizen and unfold the exact manner of life 
that such a citizen is expected to manifest even here 
in the earth. The full detail of this rule of life is 
found in portions of the Gospels, portions of the 
Book of Acts, and the Epistles of the New Testament. 
As light is given in these particular Scriptures of the 
New Testament by way of contrast, concerning the 
character and purpose of the law of Moses, so, in like 
manner, the very foundations of grace and its re- 
lationships are laid in the types and prophecies of 
the Old Testament. It is revealed that God dealt 
graciously with the human family from Adam to 
Moses; but it is also revealed that the precise form 
of divine government which is the present teaching 
of grace was not then disclosed, nor was it applied 
to men until the reign of the law had been termin- 
ated in the death of Christ. It is likewise revealed 
that the death of Christ was the necessary founda- 


148 Grace 


tion for the present, full manifestation of super- 
abounding grace. It is equally as certain from rev- 
elation that the teachings of grace will apply to the 
children of God under grace as long as they are in 
the world, and these principles will cease to rule, of 
necessity, when the people to whom they alone apply 
are gathered out and taken from the earth at the 
coming of Christ. This period between the death of 
Christ and His coming again is not characterized in 
the Scriptures as a time when the supreme purpose 
of God is the governing of the nations of the earth; 
this age is rather spoken of as ‘‘the times of the 
Gentiles’’ in all matters of human government in the 
earth. Nor is this age the period in which God is 
realizing the fulfillment of His unchanging coven- 
ants with the nation Israel; that nation is now said 
to be scattered, peeled, blinded, broken off, and hated 
of all nations, and they are to remain so to the end of 
the age. This age is not the time of the salvation 
of society; that great undertaking is clearly in the 
purpose of God, but it is reserved for the age which 
is yet to come. The present age is characterized by 
a unique emphasis on the individual. The death 
of Christ contemplated above all else the need of 
the individual sinner. The Gospel of grace, which 
the death of Christ made possible, is an appeal to 
the indwidual alone, and the very faith by which it 
is received is exercised only by the individual. The 
message of grace is of a personal faith, a personal 
salvation, a personal enduement of the Spirit, a per- 
sonal gift for service, and a personal transformation 
into the image of Christ. The company of individ- 
uals thus redeemed and transformed, are to be in the 


The Life under Grace 149 


ages to come the supreme manifestation of the riches 
of God’s grace. Unto this eternal purpose the whole 
universe was created and all ages have been pro- 
grammed by God. The glory of this dispensation is 
lost to a large extent when the reign of the law is 
intruded into this age which followed the death of 
Christ, or when the social order of the kingdom, 
promised for a future age, is expected before the 
return of the King. The Bible affords no basis for 
the supposition that the Lord will come to a per- 
fected social order. At His coming He will gather 
the saved to Himself, but the wicked He will judge 
in righteousness. The transcendent glory of this 
age is that grace which will have been either accepted 
or rejected by the individual. 

The teachings of grace are perfect and sufficient 
in themselves. They provide for the instruction of 
the child of God in every situation which may arise. 
There is no need that they be supplemented, or aug- 
mented, by the addition of precepts from either the 
law of Moses, or the teachings of the kingdom. 


(3) The Teachings of the Kingdom. 


The teachings of the kingdom have not been ap- 
plied to men in all the ages; nay, more, they have not 
yet been applied to any man. Since they anticipate 
the binding of Satan, a purified earth, and the per- 
sonal reign of the King, they cannot be applied until 
God’s appointed time when these accompanying con- 
ditions on the earth have been brought to pass. The 
kingdom laws will be addressed to Israel and beyond 
them to all the nations which will enter the kingdom. 
It will be the first and only universal reign of right- 


150 Grace 


eousness and peace in the history of the world. One 
nation was in view when the law of Moses was in 
force in the earth; the individual is in view during 
this age of grace; and the whole social order of man- 
kind will be in view when the kingdom is set up in 
the earth. 

The reign of the King is never said to be ushered 
in by a gradual process of world improvement; it is 
introduced suddenly and with great violence. The 
return of the King to rule is lke a smiting stone, 
and will demolish the structure of world empires, 
will grind them to powder, and will scatter them as 
the wind scatters the chaff of the summer threshing 
floor (Dan. 2: 31-45). Satan and the satanic decep- 
tion will have been removed from the earth, Israel 
will have realized the glory of her covenants, and 
the long predicted blessing will have come upon all 
the Gentiles, and upon creation itself. The church 
is not once mentioned in relation to the teachings of 
the kingdom, nor are those teachings applied to her; 
for her part in the kingdom is not to be reigned 
over, but to reign with Christ—her Head. She, be- 
ing the Bride of the King, is His consort. She will 
still be under the heavenly teachings of grace, and 
her home will be in the bosom of the Bridegroom in 
the ivory palace of the King. The King will reign 
with a rod of iron. Sin and iniquity will be rebuked 
instantly and judged in perfect righteousness. Clear 
conception of the glory of the kingdom is lost if it is 
confused with the age of grace which precedes it, 
or with the sinless new heavens and new earth of 
the eternal state which follows it. The kingdom 


The Life under Grace 151 


closes with a demonstration of the failure of man and 
thus it adds the last message of the converging testi- 
mony to the wickedness of the fallen heart, and to the 
fact that in the exceeding grace of God alone is their 
salvation. 

The teachings of the kingdom are found in por- 
tions of the Psalms, the kingdom prophecies of the 
Old Testament, and the kingdom teachings in the 
Synoptic Gospels. These teachings are complete and 
sufficient to direct the life of the children of the 
kingdom in every condition that may arise under 
the rule of the King. There is no need that these 
teachings be supplemented or augmented by addi- 
tions from either of the other governing systems. 

Under God’s classification, there are only three 
major divisions of the human family—‘‘The Jew, 
the Gentile and the church of God.’’ Wherever they 
are mentioned in any portion of the Bible they are 
recognized as distinctly separate peoples, and it is 
important to follow the divine record concerning 
each from its beginning to its end. 

The Jew, or Israel, began with Abraham, was fav- 
ored in relationship to God above all the nations of 
the earth for fifteen hundred years in the promised 
land, is the object of all of Jehovah’s purposes and 
covenants in the earth, is now as free from the law, 
and is as effectually shut up to the Gospel of the 
grace of God as are the Gentiles, and will yet inherit 
the limitless blessings of all the kingdom covenants 
in the earth. 

The Gentile began with Adam, received no direct 
instruction or covenant from Jehovah in all the ages 


152 Grace 


past, is now the object of appeal, with the Jew, in 
the Gospel of grace, and will share in the glory of 
the kingdom to come, when the divine blessing will 
be poured out on all the Gentiles (Acts. 15:17). 

The Church began with the death of Christ and 
the descent of the Spirit, is the divine objective 
in this age, is a heavenly people taken from both 
Jews and Gentiles, and will reign with the King as 
His Bride, in the ages to come. 

Since there is so wide a difference in the character 
of these ages—of law, of grace, and of the kingdom 
—and in the peoples of the earth—the Jew, the 
Gentile, and the Church—as they stand related to 
God throughout the ages, it is to be expected that 
there will be a variation in the divine government 
according to the essential character of the several 
ages. This is not only reasonable; it is the precise 
teaching of the Bible. Since these great governing 
systems are wholly separate and sufficient in them- 
selves, and since there is much which is held in com- 
mon in them all, a brief comparison of the systems 
is here undertaken: 


First. The Similarity and Dissimilarity Between 
the Teachings of the Law of Moses and the Teachings 
of Grace. 


In this discussion, the law of Moses will be lim- 
ited to the Decalogue; for no legalist proposes to 
earry forward into grace the judgments which gov- 
erned the social life of Israel, or the ordinances which 
governed their religious ritual in the land. How- 
ever, the moral commandments of the Decalogue are 
almost universally imposed upon the church by these 


The Life under Grace Ea 


legalists. In justification of this imposition, the plea 
is usually made that apart from the direct applica- 
tion of the Decalogue there could be no divine au- 
thority or government in the earth. 

In no sense does this question involve the issues of 
world government; for God has never addressed 
either the teachings of the law, or the teachings of 
grace to the whole world. The world has borrowed 
certain moral precepts from the Bible for its self- 
government; but it does not follow that God has ac- 
cepted the world on the basis of the teachings of 
the law, or the teachings of grace. In reality, the 
world is shut up to the one appeal of the Gospel 
of grace. Until this appeal is heeded, the individual 
is neither under law, nor grace, as a rule of life; 
but is ‘‘under sin.’’ 

The issue is, therefore, between law and grace as 
governing principles in the life of the Christian. 
Must Christians turn to the Decalogue for a basis of 
divine government in their daily lives? Scripture 
answers this question with a positive assertion: ‘‘Ye 
are not under the law, but under grace.’’ If this be 
true, are the great moral values of the Decalogue 
discarded? By no means; for it will be seen that 
every moral precept of the Decalogue, but one, has 
been restated with increased emphasis in the teach- 
ings of grace. These precepts do not reappear under 
grace in the character and coloring of the law, but, 
rather, in the character and coloring of pure grace. 
The following brief comparison will demonstrate the 
fact that the moral values of the law are reincorpora- 
ted in the teachings of grace. 


154 


1. “Thou shalt have no 
other gods before me.” 


2. “Thou shalt not make 
unto thee any graven image; 
. .. thou shalt not bow down 
to them nor serve them.” 


3. “Thou shalt not take the 


name of the LORD thy God 
in vain.” 


4. “Remember the sabbath 
day to keep it holy.” 


5. “Honour thy father and 
thy mother.” 


6. “Thou shalt not kill.” 


7. “Thou shalt not com- 
mit adultery.” 


8. “Thou shalt not steal.” 


9. “Thou shalt not bear 
false witness.” 


10. “Thou shalt not covet.” 


Grace 


1. “We... preach unto 
you that ye should turn from 
these vanities unto the living 
God” (Acts 14: 15). 


2. “Little children, keep 
yourselves from idols” (1 
John 5:21). 


3. “But above all things 
brethren, swear not, neither 
by heaven, neither by the 
earth, neither by any other 
oath” (Jas. 5:12). 


such command is 
in the teachings of 


4. No 
found 
grace. 


5. “Children obey your 
parents in the Lord: for this 
is right” (Eph. 6:1). 


6. “Whosoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer: and ye 
know that no murderer hath 
eternal life abiding in him” 
(1 John 3:15). 


7. “Neither fornicators, nor 
idolaters, nor adulterers . . 
shall inherit the kingdom of 
God” (1 Cor. 6:9, 10). 


8. “Steal no more” 


(Eph. 
4: 28). 


9. “Lie not” (Col. 3:9). 


10. “Covetousness, let it not 
be named among you” (Eph. 
5:3). 


The Life under Grace 155 


While some principles of the Mosaic law are re- 
stated under grace, those aspects of the law which are 
foreign to grace are omitted. The command to keep 
the seventh day is omitted wholly. This fact and 
the reason thereof will be considered more at length 
later in the discussion. So, also, the one promise of 
the Decalogue is omitted. This promise occurs in 
connection with the precept concerning the obedience 
of children. It reads: ‘‘Honour thy father and thy 
mother; that thy days may be long upon the land 
which the Lorp thy God giveth thee.’’ The fact 
that the law presented a promise to obedient chil- 
dren is pointed out in the New Testament (Eph. 6: 
1), with no inference that the promise is in effect now; 
but as a reminder of that which obtained under the 
law. It would be difficult for any individual, or 
child, in the Church to establish a claim to a God- 
given land, or to demonstrate that any law now ob- 
tains by which long life is guaranteed to those who 
are now obedient to parents. Again, concerning 
Israel and her relation to the land it is written: 
‘““Trust in the Lorp, and do good; so shalt thou 
dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed’’; 
‘““The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell 
therein for ever’’; ‘‘For the upright shall dwell 
in the land’’ (Ps. 37:3, 29; Prov. 2:21). No land 
has been given to the Christian. He is a ‘‘stranger 
and pilgrim’’ here, an ‘‘ambassador,’’ a citizen of 
heaven. If he is taught in the Scriptures, he is not 
looking for a long life here; but he is looking for the 
coming of his Lord. He is not clinging to this life; 
for “‘to depart, and to be with Christ, . . . is far bet- 
ter.’’ The serious manner in which people apply an 


156 Grace 


Old Testament promise, impossible under grace, to 
themselves is a revelation of the measure of inatten- 
tion with which the Scriptures are too often read and 
quoted. Since every adaptable precept of the law is 
restated in grace, it is not necessary to violate the 
Scriptures by forcing the law into the sphere of 
grace. 

The Decalogue, in its moral principles, is not only 
restated in grace, but its principles are greatly am- 
plified. This is illustrated, again, by the same pre- 
cept concerning the obedience of children. In the 
teachings of grace, the whole issue of obedience is 
taken up at length, and to this are added the instruc- 
tions to parents as well. Under the teachings of 
grace, the appeal of the first commandment is re- 
peated no less than fifty times, the second twelve 
times, the third four times, the fourth (about the 
sabbath day) not at all, the fifth six times, the sixth 
six times, the seventh twelve times, the eighth six 
times, the ninth four times, and the tenth nine times. 

Yet further, that which is even more vital should 
be noted: The teachings of grace are not only grac- 
ious in character and of the very nature of heaven 
itself, but they are extended to cover the entire 
range of the new issues of the life and service of the 
Christian. The Ten Commandments require no life 
of prayer, no Christian service, no evangelism, no 
missionary effort, no gospel preaching, no life and 
walk in the Spirit, no Fatherhood of God, no union 
with Christ, no fellowship of saints, no hope of salva- 
tion, and no hope of heaven. If it is asserted that we 
have all these because we have both the law and grace, 
it is replied that the law adds nothing to grace but 


The Life under Grace 157 


confusion and contradiction, and that there is the 
most faithful warning in the Scriptures against this 
admixture. 

A few times the teachings of the law are referred 
to by the writers of the Epistles by way of illus- 
tration. Having stated the obligation under grace, 
they cite the fact that this same principle obtained 
under the law. There is, however, no basis here 
for a co-mingling of these two governing systems. 

The law of Moses presents a covenant of works 
to be wrought in the energy of the flesh; the teach- 
ings of grace present a covenant of faith to be 
wrought in the energy of the Spirit. 


Seeond. The Similarity and Dissimilarity Be- 
tween the Teachings of the Law of Moses and the 
Teachings of the Kingdom. 


As will be seen more fully further on, these two 
systems of divine government are both legal in char- 
acter and order. If this is true, it is to be expected 
that there is much in common between them. (1) 
They are similar because they are both based on a 
covenant of works. (2) They are similar because 
of elements which are common to both. (3) They 
are dissimilar because of certain points in which 
they differ. 


1. They are similar because they are based on a 
covenant of works. 

The nature of a covenant which is based on human 
works is obvious. Whatever God promises under 
such a covenant, is conditioned on the faithfulness of 
man. Every blessing under the law of Moses was so 


158 Grace 


conditioned, and every blessing in the kingdom re- 
lationship will be found to be so ordered. Turning 
to the kingdom teachings of Christ wherein the is- 
sues of personal conduct and obligation in the king- 
dom are taken up, it will be seen that all the king- 
dom promises to the individual are based on human 
merit. The kingdom blessings are reserved for the 
poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the pure in 
heart, and the peace maker. It is a covenant of 
works only and the emphatic word is ‘‘do.’’ ‘‘This 
do and thou shalt live,’”’ is the highest promise of 
the law. As men judge, so shall they be judged. A 
tree is approved, or rejected, by its fruits. And not 
every one that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of 
‘‘my Father’’ which is in heaven. As the individual 
forgives, so will he be forgiven. And except per- 
sonal righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of 
the scribes and Pharisees, there shall be no entrance 
into the kingdom of heaven. To interpret this right- 
eousness which is required to be the imputed right- 
eousness of God, is to disregard the teaching of the 
context, and to introduce an element which is not 
once found in this whole system of divine govern- 
ment. The kingdom teachings of the ‘‘Sermon on 
the Mount’’ are concluded with the parable of the 
house built on the rock. The key to this message is 
given in the words, ‘‘Whosoever heareth these say- 
ings of mine, and doeth them.”’ 

Turning to the law of Moses, we discover that it 
presents no other relation to God for the individual 
than this same covenant of works: ‘‘And it shall 
come to pass, that if thou shalt hearken diligently 


The Life under Grace 159 


unto the voice of the Lorp thy God, to observe and 
to do all his commandments which I command thee 
this day [including the Decalogue], that the Lorp 
thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the 
earth: and all these blessings shall come on thee, and 
overtake thee ... Blessed shalt thou be... ’’ 
(Deut. 28:1-14). ‘‘But it shall come to pass, if thou 
wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lorp thy God, 
to observe and to do ali his commandments and his 
statutes which I command thee this day; that all 
these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake 
thee . . . Cursed shalt thou be... ”’ (Deut. 28: 15- 
68). ‘‘Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy 
days may be long upon the land which the Lorp thy 
God giveth thee’’ (Ex. 20:12). ‘‘All that the 
Lorp hath spoken we will do’’ (Ex. 19:8). ‘‘Mas- 
ter, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? He said 
unto him, What is written in the law? how readest 
thou? And he answering said, Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God .. . And he said unto him, Thou hast 
answered right: this do, and thou shalt live’’ (Lk. 
10: 25-28). 

By these references to the law of Moses and the law 
of the kingdom, it may be seen that both of these 
systems are based wholly on a covenant of works. 


2. They are similar because of elements which are 
common to both. 


In the law of the kingdom, the Mosaic law is car- 
ried forward and intensified. ‘‘Think not that I am 
come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not 
come to destroy but to fulfil. For verily I say unto 
you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle 


160 Grace 


shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. 
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least 
commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be 
called the least in the kingdom of heaven. ... Ye 
have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou 
shalt not kill... But I say unto you, That whoso- 
ever is angry with his brother without a cause shall 
be in danger of the judgment. ... Ye have heard 
that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not 
commit adultery; but I say unto you, That *whoso- 
ever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath com- 
mitted adultery with her already in his heart’’ (Mt. 
5:17-28. Cf 31-48; 6:1-18, 25-34). ‘‘Therefore all 
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to 
you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the 
prophets’ (Mt. 7:12). 

By these illustrative passages it is clear that the law 
of Moses and the law of the kingdom are similar in 
that they contain elements which are common to both. 


3. They are dissimilar because of certain points 
an which they differ. 


In the law of the kingdom, certain features are ad- 
ded which are not found in the law of Moses. These 
new features can be mentioned here only in part. 

It has been revealed in the Scriptures above quoted 
that the law is intensified in the kingdom teachings. 
From these no element of the law of Moses has been 
subtracted. Rather, to the Mosaic revelation are ad- 
ded the kingdom teachings of Christ concerning mar- 
riage and divorce, the taking of an oath, and the per- 
sonal obligation to others. The law demanding ‘‘an 
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth’’ is replaced 


The Life under Grace 161 


by required submission. The other cheek is to be 
turned, the second mile is to be traveled, and to him 
that asketh, there is to be no refusal. Even the 
enemies are to be loved. These things are to be done 
*‘that ye may be the children of your Father which is 
in heaven,’’ and are only further evidences that in 
fact and force they issue from the covenant of works. 
There is a new appeal for sincerity in alms-giving, 
in prayer, and in fasting. There is a new revelation 
concerning prayer; but it is prayer for the kingdom 
and according to conditions in the kingdom alone. 
Special instruction is given concerning the use of 
riches in the kingdom and also concerning anxiety 
and care. 


Third. The Similarity and Dissimilarity Between 
the Teachings of Grace and the Laws of the Kingdom. 


The importance of an unprejudiced consideration 
of these Scriptures which disclose the whole field 
of comparison between the teachings of grace and the 
laws of the kingdom cannot be too strongly empha- 
sized. The theme is extensive, but an outline-treat- 
ment only can be given here. While this study of 
contrasts should be extended into all the kingdom 
teachings of the Gospels, the plan will be to follow 
a brief analysis of the Manifesto of the King as re- 
corded in Matthew, chapters 5 to 7, and to compare 
the various precepts there revealed with the precepts 
given to the believer under grace. It will be neces- 
sary, also, to compare these precepts with the king- 
dom teachings of the Old Testament; for it will be 
found that the teachings of the kingdom presented 
in Matthew, chapters 5 to 7, are in exact accord 


162 Grace 


with the Old Testament predictions regarding the 
kingdom, and are almost wholly in disagreement with 
the teachings of grace. 

In Luke 16:16 it is written: ‘‘The law and the 
prophets were until John: since that time the king- 
dom of God is preached, and every man presseth into 
it.”? The message of John the Baptist was some- 
thing new. It was in no sense the preaching of the 
‘law and the prophets’’ as a direct application of 
the Mosaic system. Nevertheless, his preaching was 
purely legal in character. An important exception 
to this is found in the Gospel by John. In that Gos- 
pel, the characterizing words, selected from all the 
sayings of John the Baptist are, ‘‘Behold the Lamb 
of God, which taketh away the sin of the world’’ 
(1:29). The Gospel by John is distinctly of salva- 
tion and grace through believing, and the selection 
of this one message from John the Baptist beautifully 
illustrates the mind and purpose of the Spirit in the 
selection of material for the construction of that 
Gospel of divine grace. This exceptional word from 
John the Baptist, fitted to the message of grace in 
the Gospel by John, should not be confused with his 
legalistic preaching as recorded in the Synoptic Gos- 
pels, where his real ministry as the forerunner is 
set forth. What he preached, is clearly stated in 
Luke 3:7-14: ‘‘Bring forth therefore fruits worthy 
of repentance . . . And the people asked him, saying, 
What shall we do then? He answered and saith unto 
them, He that hath two coats, let him impart to him 
that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do 
likewise. Then came also publicans to be baptized, 
and said unto him, Master, what shall we do? And 


The Life under Grace 163 


he said unto them, Exact no more than that which 
is appointed you. And the soldiers likewise de- 
manded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And 
he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither 
accuse any falsely; and be content with your wages.’’ 

The intense emphasis on the covenant of meritor- 
ious works is obvious in this message; but John did 
not preach Moses and the prophets. The law and the 
prophets were until John. It is to be concluded 
that the preaching of John the Baptist was wholly 
new, and was according to his mission as herald 
of the King; but that message is legalistic, and not 
gracious. It is a covenant of works, and not a cov- 
enant of faith. 

Added light is also given in Luke 16:16 as to the 
kingdom character of John’s preaching. The divine 
rule in the earth which Matthew terms ‘‘the king- 
dom of heaven’’ is by Luke termed ‘‘the kingdom of 
God.’’ This is justified since the kingdom of 
God includes the kingdom of heaven, or the earth- 
rule of the King. Since Matthew and Luke are so 
evidently referring to the same divine rule in the 
earth, and often reporting the same message when 
employing these two phrases, it is conclusive that 
Luke’s use of the term, ‘‘the kingdom of God,’’ here, 
and elsewhere, is with reference to the limited divine 
rule in the earth. Into that kingdom, men who en- 
ter are said to be ‘‘pressing in.’’ ‘‘To crowd one- 
self in,’’ is the literal meaning, and the word sug- 
gests intense human effort, and implies the need of 
merit, which is required for entrance into the king- 
dom. 

There are at least three major distinctions which 


164 Grace 


will appear when the teachings of grace are con- 
trasted with the teachings of the kingdom. 

(1) In the kingdom message, hope is, in the main, 
centered in the kingdom of heaven, and, in Mark 
and Luke, in that aspect of the kingdom of God which 
corresponds with the kingdom of heaven. This, it 
should be remembered, is not heaven: in this con- 
nection, it is the rule of the Messiah-King in the 
earth. However, the larger rule of the kingdom of 
God is mentioned once (Mt. 6:33), and at a point 
when all the divine interests are in view, and three 
times the kingdom message holds the anticipation 
of heaven itself before its children (Mt. 5:12; 6:20; 
7:23). In the teachings of grace it is heaven itself 
which is in view, with never a reference to the king- 
dom of heaven, other than that the saints shall reign 
with the King. Christians, on the other hand, are 
often related to the larger sphere of the kingdom of 
God (See John 3:3). 

(2) These two lines of teaching may be identified, 
also, by the use of the great words they employ. 
According to both the Old Testament and the New, 
righteousness and peace are the great words of the 
kingdom. The ‘‘Sermon on the Mount’’ is the ex- 
pansion of the full meaning of the personal righteous- 
ness which is required in the kingdom. The great 
words in this age are believe and grace. Not once do 
these words appear in connection with the kingdom 
teachings of Matthew, chapters 5 to 7. Mercy is un- 
folded in grace, rather than in righteousness. 

(3) The kingdom teachings, like the law of Moses, 
are based on a covenant of works. The teachings of 
grace, on the other hand, are based on a covenant of 


The Life under Grace 165 


faith. In the one case, righteousness is demanded; 
in the other it is provided, both imputed and im- 
parted, or inwrought. One is of a blessing to be 
bestowed because of a perfect life, the other is of a 
life to be lived because of a perfect blessing already 
received. 

Too often it has been supposed that the kingdom 
reign of Messiah will be a period of sinlessness on the 
earth, corresponding to the new heavens and new 
earth which will follow. Every Scripture bearing 
on the kingdom emphasizes the moral conditions 
which will obtain in the kingdom. Because of the 
binding of Satan, and the immediate judgment for 
sin, the high moral requirements in the kingdom will 
be possible; but there will be evil to judge, the enemy 
will persecute, and many who have professed will fail 
because they have not actually done the will of the 
King. So great will be the moral advance in world 
conditions in the kingdom over the present age, that 
righteousness will then ‘‘reign’’; while at the present 
time, righteousness ‘‘suffers’’ (2 Tim. 3:12). 

The various topics presented in the ‘‘Sermon on 
the Mount,’’ are here considered in order: 


1. The Beatitudes (Mt. 5: 1-12). 


This kingdom message opens with the record of the 
nine-fold blessing which is promised and provided 
for the faithful child of the kingdom. These bless- 
ings are won through merit. This is in sharp con- 
trast to the blessings in the exalted position of the 
Christian to which he instantly attains through Christ 
at the moment he believes. 

a. ‘‘Blessed are the poor in spirit [humble]: for 


166 Grace 


theirs is the kingdom of heaven.’’ As the little 
child, ‘‘of such is the kingdom of heaven.’’ In the 
Old Testament vision of the coming manifestation of 
the King, it is said: ‘‘I dwell in the high and holy 
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble 
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive 
the heart of the contrite ones’’ (Isa. 57:15). To the 
Christian it is said: ‘‘Put on therefore, as the elect 
of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, 
humbleness of mind’’ (Col. 3:12). These virtues are 
not put on by the Christian to gain heaven; much less 
the kingdom of heaven. They are put on because 
these elements of character belong to the one who is 
already ‘‘elect of God, holy and beloved.’’ Christ is 
the pattern (Phil. 2:8), and God resists aught but 
humbleness of mind (Jas. 4:6). In the teachings of 
grace, ‘‘put on’’ does not mean to pretend, or assume; 
it is the manifestation of the life through the power 
of the Spirit (See Eph. 4: 24; 6:11; Col. 3:12). 

b. ‘‘Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be 
comforted.’’ Mourning does not belong to the Bride 
of Christ. To her a different message has been given: 
‘‘Rejoice, and again I say, Rejoice.’’ Mourning is 
the portion of Israel until her King comes, and when 
He comes, it will be ‘‘to proclaim the acceptable year 
of the Lorp, and the day of vengeance of our God; to 
comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that 
mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, 
and the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of 
praise for the spirit of heaviness’’ (Isa. 61:2, 3. Of 
Isa. 51:3; 66:13; 35:10; 51:11; Zech. 1:17). 

ec. ‘‘Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the 
earth.’’ Under grace, meekness is wrought in the 


The Life under Grace 167 


believer by the Spirit, and is never rewarded; but the 
judgments of the King will be to ‘‘reprove with 
equity for the meek of the earth’’ (Isa. 11:4. Cf Isa. 
29:19; Zeph. 2:3; Ps. 45:4; 76:9). The earth is 
to be inherited in the kingdom reign. The glory of 
the King will be in the earth. It could hardly be 
supposed that the meek are inheriting the earth now, 
or that this is any promise to the Church, to whom no 
earthly promise is made. Those who are kept by the 
power of God through faith unto salvation ready to 
be revealed in the last time, have an inheritance in- 
corruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, 
reserved in heaven. 

d. ‘‘Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst 
after righteousness: for they shall be filled.’’ The 
Christian may crave a closer walk with God; but he 
is already ‘‘made the righteousness of God in him.”’ 
In distinetion to this, righteousness is that quality 
which must be attained in the kingdom (Mt. 5:20). 
‘“‘For Zion’s sake will I not hold my peace, and for 
Jerusalem’s sake will I not rest, until the righteous- 
ness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation 
thereof as a lamp that burneth. And the Gentiles 
shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory’”’ 
(Isa. 62:1, 2. CE Ps. 72:1-4; 85:10; 11, 13; Isa. 
11:4, 5). 

e. ‘‘Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain 
mercy.’’ The exact condition revealed in this prom- 
ise should be carefully considered ; for in this passage, 
merey from God is made to depend wholly on the 
exercise of mercy toward others. This is pure law. 
Under grace the Christian is besought to be merciful, 
as one who has already obtained mercy (Eph. 2:4, 5; 


\ 


168 Grace 


Tit. 3:5). The mercy of God will go forth in grace 
to the nation Israel when He gathers them into their 
own land (Ezk. 39:25); but He will, at the same 
time, deal with them as individuals by law: ‘‘But the 
mercy of the Lorp is from everlasting to everlasting 
upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto 
children’s children; to such as keep his covenant, and 
to those that remember his commandments to do 
them”’ (Ps. 103: 17, 18). ‘‘Therefore hath the Lorp 
recompensed me according to my righteousness, ac- 
cording to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight. 
With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful; 
and with the upright man thou wilt shew thyself up- 
right; with the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and 
with the froward thou wilt shew thyself froward’’ 
(Ps. 18: 24-26). Under grace, He is rich in mercy, 
even when we were ‘‘dead in sins.”’ 

f. ‘‘Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see 
God.’’ Opposed to this, and under grace it is written: 
‘“But we see Jesus,’’ and ‘‘God, who commanded the 
light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our 
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory 
of God in the face of Jesus Christ’’ (Heb. 2:9; 2 Cor. 
4:6). In Christ, God now is revealed to the believer, 
while the kingdom promise to the pure in heart is that 
they shall see God. The kingdom promises continue: 
‘‘He that walketh righteously, and speaketh up- 
rightly. . . . Thine eyes shall see the king in his 
beauty’’ (Isa. 33: 15-18). ‘‘Who shall ascend into 
the hill of the Lorp? or who shall stand in his holy 
place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart’’ 
(Ps. 24:3, 4). 

g. ‘“‘Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall 


The Life under Grace 169 


be called the children of God.’’ Peace is one of the 
two great words in the kingdom. The King who is 
“‘the Prince of Peace,’’ shall so reign that righteous- 
ness and peace shall cover the earth as waters cover 
the face of the deep (Cf Ps. 72:3, 7). In that king- 
dom there will be special distinction given to the one 
who promotes peace. ‘‘They shall be called the 
children of God.’’ Under grace, no one is consti- 
tuted a child of God by any works whatsoever. 
‘“For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ 
Jesus’’ (Gal. 3:26). 

h. ‘‘Blessed are they which are persecuted for 
righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven.’’ Again, the issue is righteousness. The 
Christian, on the contrary, suffers with Christ and 
for His sake, and his reward is in heaven. ‘‘But all 
these things will they do unto you for my name’s 
sake’’ (John 15:21). ‘‘All that will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution’’ (2 Tim. 3:12). 

i. ‘‘Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and 
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against 
you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding 
glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so per- 
secuted they the prophets which were before you.’’ 
The believer is called to suffer for Christ’s sake: 
“‘For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not 
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his 
sake’’ (Phil. 1:29). ‘‘If we suffer, we shall also 
reign with him’’ (2 Tim, 2:12). It should be noted 
that when the children of the kingdom are compared 
to any class of men in suffering, they are taken back 
+o prophets which were before them, and not to the 
saints who comprise the body of Christ. 


170 Grace 


Concluding these observations concerning the nine 
beatitudes, attention should be given to the fact that, 
in contrast to the nine-fold, self-earned blessing of 
the kingdom, the believer under grace is to expe- 
rience a nine-fold blessing which is produced im him 
by the direct power of the indwelling Spirit. A eare- 
ful comparison should be made of the nine-fold bles- 
sing which is promised under the kingdom, with the 
nine-fold blessing which is prepared under grace. 
It will be seen that all that is demanded under the 
law of the kingdom as a condition of blessing, is, 
under grace, divinely provided. The two aspects 
of life which are represented by these two groups of 
characterizing words are most significant. The total 
of all the blessings in the kingdom is not comparable 
with the superabundant ‘‘fruit of the Spirit’’—‘‘love, 
joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, 
meekness, temperance’’ (self-control, Gal. 5:22, 23). 
The very tense of the verb used is important. Under 
grace, the fruit of the Spirit ‘‘is,’’ which indicates 
the present possession of the blessing through pure 
grace; while under the kingdom, the blessing 
‘‘shall be’? to such as merit it by their own 
works. 


2. The similitudes of the righteous in the king- 
dom (Mt. 5: 13-16). 


In this portion of Seripture the children of the 
kingdom are likened to the salt of the earth, and the 
light of the world. ‘‘Salt,’’ as a figure, is not so used 
in the teachings of Moses or in the teachings of 
grace. However, the Christian is said to be ‘‘light 
in the Lord,’’ and is exhorted to ‘‘walk’’ as a child 


The Life under Grace 171 


of the light (Eph. 5:8). Again, ‘‘Ye are all the 
children of light, and the children of the day’’ 
(1 Thes. 5:5). But, concerning Israel in her com- 
ing kingdom blessing, it is said: ‘‘I the Lorp have 
ealled thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, 
and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of 
the people, for a light to the Gentiles’’; ‘‘I will also 
give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest 
be my salvation unto the end of the earth’’; ‘‘Then 
shall thy light break forth as the morning’’; ‘‘And 
the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the 
brightness of thy rising’’; ‘‘The Lorp shall be thine 
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall 
be ended’’ (Isa. 42:6; 49:6; 58:8; 60:3, 20). Still 
another contrast appears in this connection: The 
Christian is appointed to manifest Christ (1 Pet. 
2:9); but the children of the kingdom are appointed 
to manifest their good works (Mt. 5:16). 


38. Christ interprets the law wn its relation to the 
kingdom (Mt. 5: 17-48). 

This Scripture declares that the law shall not pass 
until it is fulfilled. This has to do with observance, 
for it is added: ‘‘Whosoever therefore shall break 
one of these least commandments .. . shall be called 
the least in the kingdom of heaven.’’ It is the law 
of Moses intensified. In so doing, Christ transfers 
the obligation from the outward act to the attitude 
of the heart. This intensifies, rather than relieves, 
its legal character. It carries with it the most 
scorching condemnation possible to law. The Chris- 
tian is not under law. He has no ‘‘altar’’ other than 
Christ (Heb. 13:10). The altar is always related 


172 Grace 


either to the Mosaic system, or to the coming king- 
dom, and is intensely legalistic in character. Con- 
cerning the kingdom it is said: ‘‘Their burnt-offer- 
ings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine 
altar’’ (Isa. 56:7. Cf 60:7; Ezk. 43:13-27; Zech. 
14:20). The child of the kingdom must agree with 
his adversary quickly, lest he be east into prison 
where there is no degree of mercy available (5:25, 
26). To the child of God it is said: ‘‘If it be pos- 
sible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all 
men’’ (Rom. 12:17-21). The high standard of gen- 
erous submission is, in the kingdom teachings, substi- 
tuted in place of the exact equity of the law of Moses 
(5: 88-48). In place of the principle of ‘‘an eye for 
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,’’ the other cheek is to 
be turned, the cloak is to be added to the coat, the 
second mile is to be traveled, no goods are to be with- 
held from him that asketh, and enemies are to be 
loved. This is not to be done as an expression of a 
high position already received in grace: it is to be 
done meritoriously that ‘‘ye may be the children of 
your Father which is in heaven.’’ Such relations 
between men will be required and practised in the 
day when the King shall reign in righteousness and 
Satan is bound. The teachings of grace concerning 
murder, adultery, divorce, and swearing, are all 
clearly stated in the Scriptures. 

In this portion of the ‘‘Sermon on the Mount,’’ 
the extreme legal penalty for wrong-doing is im- 
posed (5: 20-22, 29, 30). Is any child of God under 
grace in danger of judgment, or the awful penalty 
of hell fire? Argument is uncalled for in the light 
of the Scriptures: ‘‘Verily, verily, I say unto you, 


The Life under Grace 173 


He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that 
sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come 
into condemnation [judgment]; but is passed from 
death unto life’? (John 5:24); ‘‘And I give unto 
them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither 
shall any man [created thing] pluck them out of my 
hand’’ (John 10:28); ‘‘There is therefore now no 
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus’’ 
(Rom. 8:1). 

.It is quite true that believers will be judged by 
Christ as to the character of their life and service, 
that the Father chastens every son whom He re- 
ceiveth, and that the Apostle Paul suggested that he 
might visit a certain church with a rod; but how dif- 
ferent is all this from the penalty of hell fire which 
is unconditionally imposed on the children of the 
kingdom because of their sin! How imperfectly be- 
lievers realize, when they turn from grace, the awful 
penalties of the law and the meaning of eternal dam- 
nation! How precious, too, that such ignorance of 
the law does not change the abiding, divine covenant 
of grace into which the believer has been brought 
through faith in Christ! 


4, Mere externalism rebuked (Mt. 6:1-7, 16- 
18; 7: 21-29). 

In the kingdom, a spirit of vain show as the ac- 
tuating motive in alms-giving, offering of prayer, and 
professions of devotion, will be judged instantly. On 
the other hand, these things, if done in secret, will 
be rewarded ‘‘openly.’’ Such recompense should not 
be confused with the rewards for service which are 
promised the Christian at the judgment seat of 


174 Grace 


Christ. Humble faithfulness in the kingdom will re- 
ceive its immediate recognition from the King. 


5. Prayer for the kingdom, and in the kingdom 
(Mt. 6:8-17; 7: 7-11). 


What is commonly called ‘‘The Lord’s Prayer,’’ 
but what is, in reality, the prayer that the Lord 
taught His disciples when contemplating the king- 
dom, is not intended to be a ritual prayer. He said: 
‘‘ After this manner therefore pray ye.’’ The prayer 
is directly concerned with the issues of the coming 
kingdom. ‘‘Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done 
in earth, as it is in heaven.’’ Of the great themes 
mentioned in this model kingdom prayer, but one is 
taken up for special comment and emphasis. It is 
as though the Spirit of God was seeking to save the 
reader from any confusion at this point. This spec- 
ial comment amplifies the one petition: ‘‘And for- 
give us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.’’ The 
divine comment on this reads: ‘‘For if ye forgive 
men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also 
forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their tres- 
passes, neither will your Father forgive your tres- 
passes.’’ This, again, is purely legal. Forgiveness 
on the part of the Christian is enjoined; but it is 
enjoined in agreement with the exalted principle of 
grace: ‘‘Tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even 
as God for Christ’s sake hath forgiven you’’; 
““Even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye’’ (Eph. 
4:32; Col. 3:13. Cf 1 John 1:9). The legal 
character of this great kingdom prayer should not 
be overlooked because of sentimental reasons grow- 
ing out of early training. 


The Life under Grace E75 


Attempts have been made to relate this divine for- 
giveness, which is conditioned on a forgiving atti- 
tude of the sinner, with the Father’s present for- 
giveness toward the believer who is under grace. 
Such an interpretation is as foreign to the precise re- 
lationships which belong to grace as it would be if 
the passage were said to teach the present divine for- 
giveness of the unsaved. Present forgiveness for 
both the unsaved and the saved is a matter of pure 
grace, and the divine conditions which are imposed 
are in perfect harmony with this fact. In this age, 
the unsaved are forgiven as a part of the entire ac- 
complishment in salvation on the one condition that 
they believe (Eph. 4: 32), and the saved are forgiven 
on the one condition that they confess (1 John 1:9). 
These two words do not represent meritorious works; 
they represent the simple adjustment of the heart 
to that which is already provided in the grace of 
God. The cross has changed things for all. <A cov- 
enant purely of law-works is stated in the passage 
in question. Such a covenant is the very foundation 
of all kingdom teaching; but it is wholly foreign to 
the teachings of grace. Christ, as some claim, must 
not be presented as a stern, austere Ruler. The 
marvel is that He is ever anything else. God’s holi- 
ness is not subject to gracious leniency toward sin. 
Apart from the cross where redemption’s price has 
been fully paid, there could be nothing but the con- 
suming fire of judgment; but, since God in infinite 
love has provided a Substitute, there is boundless 
grace. In this age, God is dealing with men on the 
ground of His grace as it is in Christ. His deal- 
ings with men in the coming age are based on a very 


176 Grace 


different relationship. At that time, the King will 
rule with a rod of iron. There is no word of the 
cross, or of grace, in the kingdom teachings. This 
prayer is, by its own expression, a kingdom prayer. 

The whole basis of appeal in this prayer, as in 
7: 7-11, is the faithfulness of the Father to His chil- 
dren in the kingdom. The basis of appeal in prayer 
during the days before Christ, or under Moses, was 
the faithfulness of Jehovah to His covenants. The 
basis of appeal in prayer under grace is that of the 
believer’s present union and identification with 
Christ. Access is provided only through Christ 
(Heb. 10:19, 20), and the new argument of appeal 
in prayer is, in the name, and for the glory, of 
Christ. Long after He had taught His disciples the 
kingdom form of prayer, and after He had turned 
to the teachings of pure grace He said: ‘‘ Hitherto 
have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall 
receive, that your joy may be full’’ (John 16: 24). 
The kingdom form of prayer omits every feature of 
the essential note of prevailing prayer under grace. 


6. The law governing riches in the kingdom 
(Mt. 6: 19-24). 
The right use of riches, as under grace, will be re- 


warded in heaven, and there is no compromise: ‘‘ Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon.”’ 


7. The Father’s care over the children of the 
kingdom (Mt. 6: 25-34). 

This portion of the Scriptures is one of surpassing 
sweetness. As God clothes the lillies of the field, so 
will He clothe those who rest in Him by faith; but 


The Life under Grace 77 


here His care is only for such as seek first the king: 
dom of God and His righteousness: while, under 
grace, His care is unconditioned by any human work 
or merit: ‘‘Casting all your care upon him; for he 
eareth for you’’; ‘‘Be careful for nothing’’ (1 Pet. 
5:7; Phil. 4:6). The same principle of divine care 
was presented under the law of Moses; but in the 
form of pure law: ‘‘Cast thy burden upon the 
Lorp, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never 
suffer the righteous to be moved’’ (Ps. 55: 22). 


8. Warning aganst judgment of others (Mt. 7: 
1-6.). 

This kingdom law is unyielding: ‘‘Judge not, 
that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye 
judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure 
ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.’’ One 
under grace has passed beyond all judgment, by vir- 
tue of his acceptance in Christ who died for him 
(John 5:24). He may be chastened by his Father, 
which is a form of judgment (1 Cor. 11: 27-32) ; but 
such judgment is never said to be the return of his 
own sin back upon his own head, as is prescribed 
in this portion of the kingdom teaching. 


9. Warnings against false prophets (Mt. 7:15- 
20.). 


‘‘Beware of false prophets, which come to you in 
sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening 
wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits.’’ The 
warning here is against false prophets who are to be 
discerned by the quality of their lives. The warn- 
ing to the children of God under grace is against 


178 Grace 


false teachers who are to be discerned by their doc- 
trine concerning Christ (2 Pet. 2:1; 2 John 7-11): 
never by their lives; for outwardly, false teachers 
are said to appear as the ‘‘ministers of Christ,’’ and 
to be directly under the power of Satan who himself 
appears as an angel of light (2 Cor. 11:13-15). 
The attractive personality of the false teacher affords 
great advantage as a background for the appeal 
he makes for his doctrine. 


10. Three determining statements concerning the 
kingdom. 


a. ‘‘For I say unto you, That except your righteous- 
ness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and 
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom 
of heaven’’ (Mt. 5:20). Exposition is unnecessary 
concerning this passage. It is the foundation of all 
the demands for entrance into the kingdom of heaven. 
It should in no wise be confused with the believer’s 
entrance into heaven through Ahe finished work of 
Christ: ‘‘Not by works of righteousness which we 
have done, but according to his mercy he saved us’’ 
(Tit.-3: 5): 

b. ‘Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that 
men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for 
this is the law and the prophets’? (Mt. 7:12). 
This passage stands as a conclusion of the whole ap- 
peal of this kingdom teaching. It is as a key to all 
that has gone before. The legal principle, restated 
in this passage, is not said to be any part of the 
teachings of grace: it is rather ‘‘the law and the 
prophets.”’ 

e. ‘‘Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is 


The Life under Grace 179 


the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to 
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: 
because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, 
which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find 
it’’ (Mt. 7:13, 14). Under the conditions laid down 
in the kingdom teachings, life is entered by a per- 
sonal faithfulness (Mt. 5:29, 30; 18:8, 9; Lk. 10: 
25-28). When this same exhortation is stated in the 
Gospel by Luke (13:24), it opens with the words, 
‘‘Strive to enter in at the strait gate.’’ The word 
strwe is a translation of agonizomai, which means 
to agonmize. It suggests the uttermost expenditure 
of the athlete’s strength in the contest. Such is the 
human condition that characterizes all the kingdom 
passages which offer entrance into life. An abrupt 
ehange is met when turning to the Gospel by John, 
which Gospel was written to announce the new mes- 
sage of grace, which is, that eternal life may be had 
through believing. No two words of Scripture 
more vividly express the great characterizing re- 
lationships in law and grace than agonize, and be- 
lieve. Grace is the unfolding of the fact that One 
has agonized in our stead, and life is ‘‘through his 
name,’’ and not by any degree of human faithful- 
ness, or merit. 

There is a dangerous and entirely baseless senti- 
ment abroad which assumes that every teaching of 
Christ must be binding during this age simply be- 
eause Christ said it. The fact is forgotten that 
Christ, while living under, keeping, and applying 
the law of Moses, also taught the principles of His 
yet future kingdom, and, at the end of His ministry 
and in relation to His cross, He also anticipated the 


180 Grace 


teachings of grace. If this three-fold division of 
the teachings of Christ is not recognized, there can 
be nothing but confusion of mind and consequent 
contradiction of truth. 

Again, it is not unreasonable to recognize that 
these kingdom teachings should directly apply to a 
yet future age. The Bible is the one revelation from 
God to all peoples of all the ages. It is not difficult 
to understand that much of the Scripture applies to 
conditions which are now wholly in the past; nor 
should it be difficult to understand that some of the 
Seripture applies to conditions which are wholly 
of the future. How else shall we know of the fu- 
ture? Certain revelations are of the coming trib- 
ulation period and are in no sense applicable to the 
present time. Who has ever prayed that his flight 
should not be on a sabbath day? Yet Christ com- 
manded that prayer to be prayed (Mt. 24:20). 

In like manner, the use of the word ‘‘whosoever’’ 
in Mt. 7:24 does not imply. that all the people of all 
the ages are addressed. It is more reasonable to 
believe that it applies to the people living under the 
conditions of the period which the passage describes. 
The all-inclusive word he is used by Christ when 
He said, ‘‘But-he that shall endure unto the end, the 
same shall be saved’’ (Mt. 24:18) ; but nothing could 
be more contradictory to the teachings of grace than 
the principle set forth in this passage. There will 
be a salvation in the tribulation for those who endure 
its trials to the end. Under grace, the believer 
endures because he 7s saved. If the word ‘‘whoso- 
ever’? in Mt. 7:24 includes those who are saved by 


The Life under Grace 18 


grace, then they have been thrust into the blasting 
covenant of works which that passage proposes, and 
grace is wholiy sacrificed. 

Thus it may be concluded that the teachings of 
the law, the teachings of grace, and the teachings of 
the kingdom, are separate and complete systems of 
divine rule which are perfectly adapted to the varied 
conditions in three great dispensations. The teach- 
ings of Moses and the teachings of the kingdom are 
purely legal, while the instructions to the believer of 
this dispensation are in conformity with pure grace. 
There is much that is held in common within all these 
rules for conduct; but this is no justification for their 
admixture. All that in the law appertains to life un- 
der grace is preserved and restated from the law in 
the great injunctions and beseechings of grace. To 
transgress these bounds, is to frustrate grace, and to 
complicate the individual with the system of law in 
such a manner as to make him a debtor to do the whole 
law. The law cannot be broken or divided. It stands 
as a unit. To undertake any part of it, is to be 
committed to it all. Nothing could be more unreas- 
onable, or more unscriptural, than to borrow some 
portions from the law system, either that of Moses, 
or of the kingdom, and, at the same time, reject 
other portions. He who will choose the law must, 
to be consistent, do the whole law (Rom. 10:5), and 
if he shall break it at one point, he is guilty of all 
(Jas. 2:10). How precious are the riches of grace 
in Christ Jesus! How sweet and fitting to the child 
of God in grace are the heavenly beseechings of 
grace! 


182 Grace 


Il. THE ORDER VARIES AS TO THE SEQUENCE OF THE 
DIVINE BLESSING AND THE HUMAN OBLIGATION. 


The second major distinction between the teach- 
ings of law and the teachings of grace is seen in the 
varying order between the divine blessing and the 
human obligation. This variation is found to exist 
when the principle of grace is compared with the 
principle of law in any form of the law whatsoever. 
It is equally true of the law of Moses, the law of the 
kingdom, or, when legally stated, of the larger con- 
ception of the law as being the whole revealed will 
of God. When the human obligation is presented 
first, and the divine blessing is made to depend on 
the faithful discharge of that obligation, it is of and 
in conformity with pure law. When the divine 
blessing is presented first, and the human obligation 
follows, it is of and in conformity with pure grace. 
The varying orders under law and grace may be 
stated in the words ‘‘do and live’’: or ‘‘live and do.’’ 
In the case of the law, it is do something with a view 
to being something; in the case of grace, it is be 
made something with a view to doing something. 
Is the Christian who is under grace saved and kept 
by good works, or is he saved and kept unto good 
works? The law said ‘‘If you will do good, I will 
bless you’’; grace says, ‘‘I have blessed you, now 
do good.’’ Under the law, man lives well to become 
aecepted of God; under grace man lives well since it 
becomes one to live well who is already accepted. 
The law presents first a human work to be done: 
grace always presents first a divine work to be be- 


The Life under Grace 183 


lieved. Law begins with the question as to what 
man ought to do; grace begins with the question as to 
what God has already done. Every word of the law 
revelation is thus made to be a conditional covenant 
of human works: while every word of the grace rev- 
elation is made to be an unconditional covenant of 
divine works. 

The instructions given to Israel under Moses, and 
the instructions proposed for the government of the 
yet future kingdom in the earth, are purely legal in 
their character. The farewell word of Moses to 
Israel as recorded in the closing chapters of Deuter- 
onomy is the erystallization of the whole law of 
Moses. One passage is the heart of this message: 
““And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken dil- 
igently unto the voice of the Lorp thy God, to ob- 
serve and to do all his commandments which I com- 
mand thee this day, that the Lorp thy God will set 
thee on high above all nations of the earth: and all 
these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, 
if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lorp thy 
God. Blessed shalt thou be . . . But it shall come to 
pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the 
Lorp thy God, to observe to do all his command- 
ments and his statutes which I command thee this 
day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and 
overtake thee: Cursed shalt thou be’’... (Deut. 
28: 1-68). 

Every teaching of the kingdom which contemplates 
the responsibility of the individual is, in like man- 
ner, based on a covenant of human works, and is, 
therefore, purely legal in character. This may be 
observed in all the kingdom teachings of the Old 


184 Grace 


Testament, and the kingdom teachings of the New 
Testament. Grace is extended to the nation when, 
apart from all merit, she is placed in her land, and 
restored to divine blessing; but the rule of the King 
will be on the basis of pure law, and the responsi- 
bility of the individual to that rule necessarily will 
be in conformity to the same. Beyond what has 
gone before in the discussion, this fact will need but 
a passing illustration from the kingdom teachings 
of the New Testament: 

“‘Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the 
earth’’; ‘‘Blessed are the merciful: for they shall 
obtain mercy’’; ‘‘Except your righteousness shall 
exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, 
ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven’’; 
‘“‘For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heay- 
enly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive 
not men their trespasses, neither will your Father 
forgive your trespasses’’; ‘‘Judge not, that ye be not 
judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall 
be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall 
be measured to you again’’; ‘‘Not every one that 
saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the king- 
dom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my 
Father which is in heaven . . . Therefore whosoever 
heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I 
will liken him unto a wise man’’ (Mt. 5:5, 7, 20; 
6:14, 15; 7:1, 2, 21-24). To this may be added 
all other kingdom teachings of the New Testament. 

The kingdom teachings, likewise, are to be disting- 
uished from the teachings of grace by the order 
which each presents between the divine blessing and 
the human obligation. The word of the kingdom 


The Life under Grace 185, 


is, he that heareth my words and doeth them shall 
be blessed (Mt. 7:24). The word of grace is, he 
that heareth my words and believeth them shall be 
blessed (John 5:24). 

In the teachings of grace, the gracious, divine 
blessing always precedes, and is followed by the 
human obligation. This is the order maintained 
throughout the great doctrinal Epistles of the New 
Testament. These Epistles are therefore subject to 
a two-fold division. In the first division, the mighty 
undertakings of God for man are disclosed: while in 
the second division the saved one is besought and. 
exhorted to live on the plane to which he has been 
brought in the exceeding grace of God. The first 
division of the Book of Romans is the unfolding of 
the saving grace of God toward sinners, which is ex- 
tended to them on the sole condition that they be- 
lueve (1:16; 3:22, 26; 4:5; 10:4); the second di- 
vision is an appeal for a corresponding manner of 
daily life, which life is ‘‘reasonable’’ in view of the 
results which God has already achieved in sovereign 
grace. This appeal is stated in the first verse of the 
second section: ‘‘I beseech you therefore, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies: 
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is: 
your reasonable service’? (Rom. 12:1). The Book 
of Ephesians opens with three chapters in which 
there is not one requirement for human conduct ; it: 
is the unfolding of the marvelous grace of God in 
bringing the believer to the exalted heavenly posi-. 
tions which are his in Christ. The opening verse of 
the second section is a condensation of all that fol- 
lows: ‘‘I therefore, the prisoner of the Lordy, be- 


186 Grace 


seech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation [call- 
ing] wherewith ye are called’? (Eph. 4:1). So, in 
like manner, the Book of Colossians opens with a 
portion which is devoid of even a semblance of an 
appeal in matters of conduct, since it is occupied 
with the unfolding of the glory of Christ and the 
fact of the perfect standing of the believer in Him. 
The second portion is an appeal: not for the human 
works which might induce God so to bless the sinner; 
but for works which are consistent with the present, 
God-wrought, glorious union with Christ: ‘“‘If ye 
then be risen with Christ, seek those things which 
are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of 
God’’ (Col. 3:1). 
The grace order between the divine blessing and 
the human obligation is preserved in every offer 
of salvation to the sinner and in every purpose 
looking toward the preservation of the saint. Sinee 
this is the basis of the divine purpose in the ages and 
the only hope of the sinner, or the saint, it should not 
be questioned upon a superficial consideration of the 
Scriptures. There is the widest possible difference 
between the two replies of Christ to practically the 
same question: ‘‘What shall I do to inherit eternal 
life?’’ Answer :— ‘‘This do, and thou shalt live.’’ 
Again: ‘‘What shall we do, that we might work the 
-works of God?’’ Answer:—‘This is the work of 
God, that ye believe on Him whom he hath sent.”’ 
One answer is related to the law of the kingdom: 
the other is related to grace, wherein Christ is seen 
as the ‘‘living bread which came down from heaven: 
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever.’’ 
It is to be concluded, therefore, that the sinner 


The Life under Grace 187 


is saved by grace apart from every human demand 
other than that he receive that grace as it is for him 
in Christ, and that the saint is kept by grace wnto 
good works; but not by good works. The righteous 
Father must imsis¢ on the good works in the life of 
His child; but He does not make these works the con- 
dition of His faithfulness. This is the vital distine- 
tion, then, between the order relating divine blessing 
with human obligation in the two systems—law and 
grace. One is a covenant of pure works; the other is 
a covenant of pure grace." 

Since the covenant of grace which is based on 
human faith was established in the promises made 
to Abraham, the covenant of the law, made four 
hundred years later, and added only for a temporary 
purpose, cannot disannul it. The reign of law, with 
its covenant of works, ceased with the death of Christ. 
Its purpose had been accomplished, and its appointed 
time had expired. Thus the by-faith principle which 
was announced in the Abrahamic covenant is 
brought again into force through the death of Christ. 
The divine blessing is now unto him that ‘‘worketh 
not, but believeth on him that justifieth the un- 
godly.’’ ‘‘Abraham believed God, and it was 
counted unto him for righteousness.’’ ‘‘Now it was 
not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to 

1 Consideration should be given to the fact that rewards, 
which are bestowed in addition to the blessing of the sav- 
ing grace of God, are offered to the saved one on the principle 
of merit; and, on the other hand, grace was offered to the 
people under the law, in addition to the demands of the 
law, in the provisions of the sacrifices. In no case do 
these added blessings condition the exact character of the 


covenant of grace, on the one hand, or the covenant of 
works, on the other hand. 


188 Grace 


him; but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if 
we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord 
from the dead; who was delivered for our offences, 
and was raised again for our justification’? (Rom. 
4:3, 5, 24, 25). By this Scripture it is announced 
that the by-faith principle of the Abrahamic cov- 
enant is continued and now offered through the 
sacrificial death of Christ. This fact is restated 
thus: ‘‘So then they which be of faith are blessed 
with faithful Abraham. For as many as are of the 
works of the law are under the curse: for it is writ- 
ten, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all 
things which are written in the book of the law to do 
them. .. . The law is not of faith’’ (Gal. 3: 9-12). 
The law was a covenant of works; but the works 
always failed through the weakness of the flesh, and 
the law then became, of necessity, a condemnation 
and curse. According to this same Scripture, the 
holy will of God is not ignored in grace: ‘‘Christ 
hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being 
made a curse for us’’ (3:13). This, it must be ob- 
served, was wrought under the one great purpose: 
““That the blessing of Abraham [acceptance in the 
imputed righteousness of God] might come on the 
Gentiles through Jesus Christ’’ (3:14). 

After declaring that the law has passed, either as 
the grounds of the justification of the sinner (Gal. 
3:24), or as the rule of life for the believer (Gal. 
3:25), the Apostle challenges the law-ridden Chris- 
tians at Galatia to consider the fact and force of two 
great covenants which can in no wise co-exist. He 
therefore points out that one gave way to the other: 


The Life under Grace 189 


“‘Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law [and he 
is writing to Christians only, concerning the law 
as a rule of their lives], do ye not hear the law? 
For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one 
by a bondmaid, the other by a freewoman. But he 
who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; 
but he of the freewoman was by promise. Which 
things are an allegory : for these are the two covenants. 
[the by-works covenant which would depend on the 
flesh and the by-faith covenant which would depend 
only on God}; the one from the mount Sinai, which 
gendereth to bondage, which is Agar [the bondmaid]. 
For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia [where the 
Mosaic law was given], and answereth to Jerusalem 
which now is, and is in bondage with her children 
[Israel]. But Jerusalem which is above is free, 
which is the mother of us all [typified by Sarah, who 
illustrates the by-faith principle which depends on 
God alone]. For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren 
that bearest not [suggesting the utter helplessness: 
of the flesh before God]; break forth and ery, thou 
that travailest not: for the desolate hath many 
more children than she which hath an husband 
for the arm of flesh on which one might depend]. 
Now we, brethren [Christians], as Isaac was, are 
the children of promise [we have been saved by 
faith]. But as then he that was born after the flesh 
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even 
so it is now. Nevertheless what saith the scripture? 
Cast out the bondwoman [not merely her offspring, 
but the whole by-works principle which she repre- 
sents] and her son: for the son of the bondwoman. 


190 Grace 


shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman. So 
then, brethren, we are not children of the bond- 
woman, but of the free’’ (Gal. 4: 21-31). 

It was concerning the promise of the supernatural 
birth of Isaac that Abraham believed God, and that 
belief was counted unto him for righteousness. 
Afterwards, Abraham turned to the flesh in the 
birth of Ishmael (Gen. 16:1-4). This two-fold fact 
illustrates, with all the perfection of the Word of 
God, the two covenants—one of faith, and the other 
of works. The lapse in Abraham’s faith typified 
the intrusion of an age of law. So, also, the relation- 
ship with Agar represents what man can do in his 
effort to be accepted of God. The supernatural re- 
lationship with Sarah represents what God can do for 
one who will believe. The marvels of grace are in- 
dicated by the multitudinous offspring of Sarah: 
not that her physical seed, Israel, are the children of 
faith; but they, being more exalted than the children 
of Agar, typify the surpassing victory of God through 
grace. There can be no co-mingling, or compromis- 
ing, of these two great covenants. ‘‘What saith 
the Scripture?’’ should be the end of discussion. 
The testimony is, ‘‘Cast out the bondwoman and her 
son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir 
with the son of the freewoman.’’ The by-works 
principle of the law, and the by-faith principle of 
grace, cannot co-operate, or co-exist, either in the 
salvation of the sinner, or in the rule of life for the 
believer. 

The by-works principle of the law is not limited to 
the fleshly effort to do the particular things found 
in the law of Moses, and the law of the kingdom. 


The Life under Grace I9I 


It is the fleshly effort to do anything by which one 
seeks to become acceptable to God. Therefore, when 
the teachings of grace are attempted with a view to 
being accepted of God, they become purely legal in 
their character. In like manner, when the elements 
which are contained in the law and restated under 
grace are attempted in the power of the Spirit and 
on the basis that acceptance with God is already 
gained through Christ, these precepts become purely 
gracious in their character. This principle may be 
extended to the larger sphere of any and all self- 
imposed law, regardless of Bible injunctions. In 
which case it will be seen that the doing of any good 
works with a view to being accepted of God, is purely 
legal in character; contrawise, the doing of any good 
works because one believes himself to be accepted 
through Christ, is purely gracious in character. The 
legalist may thus enter the field of the teachings of 
grace and suppose himself to be subject to the whole 
Bible, when, in reality, he has no conception of the 
blessings and relationships in grace. A person either 
chooses to accept Christ in the confidence that Christ 
is all he will ever need to make himself acceptable to 
God, or he chooses to depend on the best that he can 
do for himself by good works. The latter is the nor- 
mal bent of the natural mind. The proposition of 
becoming acceptable to God by being good, appeals to 
the fallen heart as the only reasonable thing to 
do, and, apart from that which it has pleased God to 
reveal concerning grace, it 7s the only reasonable 
thing to do. It therefore becomes a question of be- 
lieving the Record God has given concerning His 
Son (1 John 5:10). 


192 Grace 


Since there is so much delusion in a counterfeit, 
the person most difficult to reach with the Gospel of 
divine grace is the person who is trying to do all 
that a Christian ought to do, but is doing it as a means 
of becoming accepted before God. His willing ac- 
knowledgment of the value of the Christian life, his 
unquestioned reception into the fellowship of believ- 
ers, and his real sincerity in all Christian activities, 
eonstitute his greatest hindrance. Such an one is 
more deluded than the person who acknowledges no 
relationship to God. Both fall short and are lost 
through their failure to believe on Christ as the all- 
sufficient Saviour; but, naturally, the person who has 
no false hope is more apt to become conscious of the 
fact that he is lost than is the person who believes 
he is a Christian. The law cannot save, and the one 
who transforms the teachings of grace into a legal 
system by attempting to do them in order that he 
may be right with God, is too often still unsaved. 

Turning to meritorious works as a basis of salva- 
tion, be those works a precise counterfeit of a true 
Christian life, is to be under a by-works relation 
to God, and therefore to be under condemnation; for 
by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in 
His sight. Turning to meritorious works as the basis 
of keeping after one is saved, or as a rule of life for 
the saved, is to return to a by-works relation to God, 
from which one has already been saved. It is to fall 
from grace, and to lose the liberty wherewith Christ 
has made us free. The by-works principle can no 
more avail for our keeping, than it can avail for our 
salvation. As God could provide Abraham with a 


The Life under Grace 193 


seed under an unconditional covenant, so, under the 
same unconditional covenant, He could guarantee 
the future of that seed even to the time when their 
number shall exceed the stars of the heavens. Like- 
wise, under the present unconditional covenant of 
grace made in the blood of Christ, God can guaran- 
tee the future security of every child of His under 
grace. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by 
grace; to the end the promise might be sure (Rom. 
4:16). 

Lastly, the covenant of works is ‘‘cast out’’ be- 
eause it is fulfilled and superseded by the fuller and 
more perfect covenant of faith. All that the cov- 
enant of works contemplated as a result of a life- 
time of human struggle, is instantly accomplished in 
the power of God through the covenant of faith. By 
faith in Christ, the believer is made the righteousness 
of God in Him, and made accepted in the Beloved. 
This is a perfection of relationship with God to which 
no human works could ever attain, and to which 
human works can add nothing. Being related to God 
through the by-faith principle, the whole object of 
law-works is more than fulfilled. Thus the law is 
ended in the death of Christ. The bondwoman is 
cast out. Christ is the end of the law for righteous- 
ness to every one that believeth. 

Amazing indeed, is the blindness of heart that is 
not instructed by the tragic experience of failure 
on the part of the countless millions who have been 
lost under the by-works covenant! Yet men are still 
turning to their own works, both moral and religious, 
in the vain hope that through them they may be ac- 
cepted of God. To such He must ever be as unap- 


194 Grace 


proachable as the mountain of awful fire, thunder, 
lightning, and earthquake; but to the one who turns 
to the sufficiency which is in Christ, God becomes 
the Father of all mercies, and His power and grace 
are exercised in the behalf of that one for all time 
and eternity. The awful throne of God’s holy judg- 
ments becomes a throne of infinite grace. To one 
thus saved, and whose security is guaranteed, the 
by-works covenant of the law is in no wise adapted 
as a rule of hfe; for that covenant looks beyond to 
a time of acceptance still future, when the flesh shall 
have completed its task. Only the teachings of 
grace are consistent for one who is saved by grace. 
Those teachings alone counsel him as to that manner 
of life which is in accord with his present position 
in grace. 

The second major distinction between the rule of 
law and the rule of grace is, then, that these two 
systems are opposites in reference to the order be- 
tween the divine blessing and the human obligation, 
and this holds true for any life or service whatsoever 
which may be undertaken. 


I. BECAUSE OF DIFFERENT DEGREES OF DIFFICULTY 
AND DIFFERENT DEGREES OF DIVINE ENABLEMENT., 


The three rules of life—the law of Moses, the law 
of the kingdom, and the teachings of grace—are 
widely different because of two facts: (1) The re- 
quirements of the manner of life under them are far 
from uniform, and (2) these systems differ in the 
degree of divine enablement which is provided in 


The Life under Grace 195 


each. These two facts are so closely related with these 
governing systems that it is necessary to consider 
these two facts in their relation to each rule of life: 


First, The Law of Moses. 


In discussing the law as a regulation for human 
conduct, attention should be given, 


1. As to the measure of requirement which is im- 
posed. 


The standard of conduct presented by the law of 
Moses was limited in its requirements to the extent 
that its demands were imposed on even unregenerate 
men. The Mosaic law was addressed to the natural 
man, and, it is evident, its requirements did not 
exceed his limitations; yet because of the weakness 
of the flesh, these demands were never actually ful- 
filled by any person other than Christ. 


2. As to the degree of divine enablement. 


There is no hint in connection with the proclama- 
tion of the law of Moses of any divine enablement 
being provided for the keeping of that law. God 
addressed those commandments to men, and the re- 
sult was no more than the unaided flesh would pro- 
duce. The law dispensation, extending over a period 
of fifteen hundred years, thus became a demonstra- 
tion of the universal failure of man under the reign 
of pure law. Christ, through His death, became the 
end of the reign of law; as He, through His death, 
is the end of confidence in self-works for all who 
put their trust in Him. 


196 Grace 


Second. The Law of the Kingdom. 
Again, attention should be given, 


1. As to the measure of requirement which is m- 
posed. 


The standard of conduct which will be required un- 
der the law of the kingdom is, as has been seen, ad- 
vanced and intensified in its demands beyond that 
which is presented under the law of Moses. In the 
kingdom rule, portions of the Mosaic law are exten- 
ded beyond the overt act to include the very thought 
and intent of the heart. Added to this, there are 
entirely new requirements concerning matters of per- 
sonal yieldedness and devotion to God which are 
foreign to the Mosaic system. 


2. <As to the degree of divine enablement. 


The degree of divine enablement which will ob- 
tain under the rule of the kingdom is seen in three 
provisions: (a) The environment, (b) the iaclined 
heart, and (ce) the outpoured Spirit. 

(a) The environment in the kingdom will be that 
of a purified, transformed earth; creation will be de- 
livered from its present bondage and corruption; 
Satan will be bound and confined to the abyss; and 
the subjects in the kingdom will realize the immedi- 
ate power and inspiration of the personal reign of 
the King, which will be extended over all the earth. 

(b) Added to this is the revealed fact that the 
King will have inclined the hearts of His people to 
do His holy will. This great promise is made to 
Israel as a vital part of the new covenant under 


The Life under Grace 197 


which Israel, during the reign of her Messiah King, 
will yet live in her own land (Cf Jer. 31: 33-87; 
Heb. 8:7-12). These kingdom blessings will also 
be extended to the nations of the earth (Isa. 11: 
10). 

In the propheey by Moses concerning the attitude 
of heart which Israel will experience when restored 
to her own land, we read: ‘‘And the Lorp thy 
God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers 
possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do 
thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers. And 
the Lorp thy God will circumcise thine heart, and 
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lorp thy God with 
all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may- 
est live. ... And thou shalt return and obey the 
voice of the Lorp, and do all his commandments 
which I command thee this day’’ (Deut. 30:5-8. Cf 
Hos. 2: 14-23; Zeph. 3:14-20; Rom. 11:26, 27). 

So, again, in the new covenant it is stated: ‘‘Be- 
hold, the days come, saith the Lorn, that I will 
make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and 
with the house of Judah: not according to the cov- 
enant that I made with their fathers in the day that I 
took them by the hand to bring them out of the land 
of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although 
I was an husband unto them, saith the Lorp: but 
this shall be the covenant that I will make with the 
house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lorp 
I will put my law in their inward parts, and write 
it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they 
shall be my people. And they shall teach no more 
every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, 
saying, Know the Lorp: for they shall all know me, 


198 Grace 


from the least of them unto the greatest of them, 
saith the Lorp: for I will forgive their iniquity, 
and will remember their sin no more’’ (Jer. 31: 31- 
34. Cf Heb. 8: 8-12). 

(ec) The promise concerning ‘‘the last days’’ for 
Israel, according to Joel 2: 28-32, is that the Spirit 
is to be poured out upon all flesh. He records fur- 
ther: ‘‘And your sons and your daughters shall 
prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your 
young men shall see visions: and also upon the ser- 
vants and upon the handmaids in those days will I 
pour out my Spirit. And I will shew wonders in the 
heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars 
of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, 
and the moon into blood, before the great and the ter- 
rible day of the Lorp come. And it shall come to 
pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the 
Lorp shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in 
Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lorp hath said, 
and in the remnant whom the Lorp shall call.”’ 

That this great promise began to be fulfilled at 
Pentecost, is explicitly stated by Peter in his sermon 
on that day. It must be borne in mind, however, 
that Peter’s reference to Joel’s prophecy concerning 
the kingdom was made in connection with the re- 
newed appeal to Israel, extended at Pentecost, that 
she repent and receive her Messiah whom she had 
slain. As the Gospel was extended to Gentiles in the 
formation of the Church, the abiding ministries of 
the Spirit became evident, and the final outpouring 
of the Spirit which, according to Joel, is to character- 
ize the inception of the kingdom in the earth, awaits 
the return and enthronement of the King. 


The Life under Grace 199 


Little is revealed as to the enabling power of 
the Spirit for the individual’s life and conduct in the 
Kingdom. Doubtless, to some extent, such power will 
be imparted. The particular emphasis falls on the 
national glory as suggested by the phrase ‘‘all flesh,’’ 
and the individual is said to be moved to prophesy 
and to see visions and to dream dreams. 

Thus will Israel be situated in the kingdom. She 
will have her added responsibilities in the larger de- 
mands of the kingdom law, and she will have the 
added advantage of the kingdom environment, the 
inclined heart to do the will of the King, and upon 

her the Spirit will be poured out. 


Third, The Teachings of Grace. 


The standard of conduct prescribed under the 
teachings of grace is immeasurably more difficult to 
maintain than that prescribed either by the law of 
Moses, or the law of the kingdom. It is as much 
higher than these as heaven is higher than the earth. 
Similarly, the divine enablement provided under 
grace is nothing less than the infinite power of the 
indwelling Spirit. 

The teachings of grace are addressed only to the 
supernatural man who is both born of the Spirit and 
indwelt by the Spirit. These teachings are such as 
naturally belong to a citizen of heaven. Since the 
saving work of God places the believer in the heavenly 
positions in Christ, and transfers his citizenship from 
earth to heaven, it is only consistent that he should be 
required to walk as it becometh a citizen of heaven. 
This, it is evident must be a supernatural life. Turn- 
ing to the Seriptures which reveal the position and 


200 Grace 


responsibility of the child of God under grace, it is 
found that a superhuman manner of life is proposed 
and that a supernatural power is provided for its 
exact and perfect execution. These are two of the 
most vital facts concerning the teachings of grace 
and they should be observed with great care: 


1. As to the character of the requirements which 
are imposed. 


The manner of life which is enjoined under grace 
is superhuman. This aspect of the teachings of 
grace may be seen at every point. A very few 
passages will suffice by way of illustration: 

“‘Casting down imaginations, and every high 
thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of 
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to 
the obedience of Christ’’ (2 Cor. 10:5); ‘‘That ye 
should shew forth the praises [virtues] of him who 
hath called you out of darkness into his marvel- 
lous light’’ (1 Pet. 2: 9); ‘‘Giving thanks always 
for all things unto God’’ (Eph. 5: 20); ‘‘That ye 
walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called’’ 
(Eph. 4: 1); ‘‘Walk in the light’’ (1 John 1: 7); 
‘*Walk in love’’ (Eph. 5:2); ‘‘Walk in the Spirit’’ 
(Gal. 5:16); ‘‘Grieve not the holy Spirit of God’”’ 
(Eph. 4: 30); ‘‘Quench not the Spirit’’ (1 Thes. 5 
7a). 

There is no question as to the superhuman char- 
acter of these injunctions. What human resource 
is able to reproduce the very virtues of Christ? Who 
is able to give thanks always for all things? Who 
will be able so to live that he will not grieve the Hoby 


The Life under Grace 201 


Spirit, nor quench the Spirit? This demand is for 
a superhuman manner of life, and the passages 
quoted are only representative of the whole character 
of the teachings of grace. These teachings surpass 
the standards of the law of Moses in the measure in 
which infinity surpasses the finite. When unfolding 
the high character of the teachings of grace, Christ 
said: ‘‘A new commandment I give unto you, That 
ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also 
love one another’’; ‘‘This is my commandment, That 
ye love one another, as I have loved you’’ (John 18: 
34; 15:12). The new commandment is in contrast 
to an old commandment of Moses: ‘‘Love thy neigh- 
bour as thyself.’’ These Scriptures may be taken as 
a fair illustration of the difference between the stan- 
dards of the law of Moses, and the standards of grace. 
Under the Mosaic system, love for others was to be in 
the degree in which one loved himself: under grace 
it is to be in the degree in which Christ has loved us 
and given His life for us (1 John 3:16). 

The standards of the teachings of grace surpass the 
standards of the laws of the kingdom. The same ex- 
ample—of love one for another—will again illustrate. 
The requirement in the kingdom on this point is 
stated thus: ‘‘Ye have heard that it hath been said, 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. 
But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them 
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and 
pray for them which despitefully use you, and perse- 
cute you; that ye may be the children of your Father 
which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on 
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just 
and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love 


202 Grace 


you, what reward have ye? Do not even the publi- 
cans the same?’’ (Mt. 5: 43-46). 

This is a great advance over the standard of love 
demanded under the law of Moses. There love was 
required to a limited degree; but nothing was said 
concerning the necessary attitude toward the enemy. 
Christ implies that the law of Moses proposed love for 
the neighbour and hate for the enemy. The degree of 
love expected under the ideals of the kingdom is only 
such as might reasonably be expected from the heart 
that has been inclined to do the kingdom law. It 
bears no comparison to the standards of love which 
are proposed under grace. Consider, first, that love 
under grace is the ‘‘fruit of the Spirit’’ (Gal. 5:22). 
Literally, ‘‘the love of God is shed abroad [gushes 
forth] in our hearts by [out from] the Holy Ghost 
which is given unto us’’ (Rom. 5:5). This both 
guarantees the exact reproduction in the child of God 
of the love of Christ—‘‘as I have loved you’’—and 
destroys every ground of personal reward for such 
love. The believer is not said to be rewarded for 
those graces which are not his own, but which are 
produced in him by the indwelling Spirit. On the 
other hand, love, according to the standards of the 
kingdom is distinctly said to be a matter for personal 
reward. By such love for enemies, the children of 
the kingdom will be the children of their Father which 
is in heaven. This, it is evident, is made to depend 
on self-wrought conformity to the Father who Him- 
self is benevolent to His enemies. In the ‘‘Sermon 
on the Mount,’’ the Spirit is not once mentioned nor 
is any divine enablement suggested. 

Consider, also, that love, as anticipated in the 


The Life under Grace 203 


teachings of grace, is the very heart of the Evangel 
and evangelism. By the imparted, divine compas- 
sion for the lost which brought Christ from heaven 
to earth and took Him to the cross to die, under grace, 
men are to be impelled to win souls. Such divine 
compassion for souls has been the dynamic of all 
soul-winning work from Pentecost until now. It was 
the experience of the Apostle Paul as disclosed in his 
testimony: ‘‘I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, 
my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy 
Ghost, that I have great heaviness and continual sor- 
row in my heart. For I could wish that myself were 
accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen 
according to the flesh’’ (Rom. 9:1-3). There was no 
occasion for the Apostle to be accursed from Christ, 
nor did he expect to be; but he was willing to be. 
Thus was the love of Christ, who bore the sin of 
others, definitely reproduced in the one in whom the 
Spirit wrought. True passion for the salvation of 
men is not a manifestation of love springing out of 
human nature. It must be imparted from God. 
Therefore evangelism is neither expected nor required 
in either the law of Moses, or the law of the kingdom. 

By this very partial treatment of the varying de- 
erees of difficulty presented in these dissimilar rules 
of conduct, it may be seen that the standards under 
grace are infinitely higher than the standards of 
either the law of Moses, or the law of the kingdom. 
They are superhuman. 


2. As to the divine enablement. 


A supernatural power is provided for the exact and 
perfect execution of the superhuman rule of life un- 


204. Grace 


der grace. There is no aspect of the teachings of grace 
which is more vital than this, or which so fully dif- 
ferentiates these teachings from every other rule of 
life in the Bible. Under grace, the all powerful, 
abiding, indwelling and sufficient Holy Spirit of God 
is given to every saved person. This statement is 
abundantly established by revelation (John 7: 37-39; 
Rom. 5:5; 8:9;.1-Cor. 2242; 6:19; Gal..3:2;.4 
Thes. 4:8; 1 John 3:24; 4:13),1 and is assumed in 
every teaching of grace. The superhuman manner 
of life under grace is not addressed to some spiritual 
company alone within the whole body of Christ; it 
is addressed to all believers alike. The imposition 
of this superhuman manner of life upon all believers 
alike, carries with it the revelation that all have the 
supernatural power by which to live according to the 
superhuman standards. This, it is evident, is accord- 
ing to the teaching of the Word of God. 

The character of pure grace is destroyed when the 
reception of the Spirit into the individual heart is 
made to depend on any human merit, goodness, or 
personal consecration whatsoever. In 1 Cor. 6:19, 20 
we read: ‘‘What? know ye not that your body is 
the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which 
ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye 
are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in 
your body, and in your spirit, which are God’s.’’ 
The law element is excluded here. Under the law, it 
would have been written: ‘‘Glorify God in your 
bodies and spirit and ye shall become temples of the 

1 Careful study will disclose the fact that Lk. 11: 13; Acts 


5:32; 8: 12-17; 19: 1-7; Eph. 1:18 do not contradict this 
positive doctrine of Scripture. 


The Life under Grace 205 


Holy Spirit.’’ Under grace, believers are temples of 
the Spirit without reference to merit, and this is true 
of every aspect of their salvation. The fact that 
they are temples of the indwelling Spirit is the basis 
of this appeal for a holy life. A consideration of 
1 Cor. 5:1, 2, 18; 6: 1-8 will give abundant evidence 
of the meritless condition of the Corinthian saints at 
the time the Spirit addressed this appeal to them 
through the Apostle Paul. The earnest supplication 
is for a daily life which corresponds to the wonderful 
fact that they are already temples of the Spirit. 

There is an important distinction to be noted be- 
tween the indwelling and the infilling with the Spirit. 
No Scripture asserts that all believers are filled with 
the Spirit. The filling with the Spirit, which is the 
requirement for an experience of blessing and the ex- 
ercise of divine power, is an issue which should be 
considered wholly apart from the revelation concern- 
ing the indwelling Spirit. 

The fact that the Spirit indwells every believer is 
peculiar to the age of grace. In the law dispen- 
sation, for particular divine purposes, certain indi- 
viduals were, at times, filled with the Spirit; but 
there is no revelation stating that every Israelite, be- 
ing under the law, was a temple of the Spirit. In 
like manner, under the law, there was no abiding 
character to the relationship between the Spirit and 
individuals upon whom He came (Ps. 51:11). The 
Spirit came upon them, or departed, according to the 
sovereign purpose of God. Under grace, the Spirit 
is not only given to every believer, but He never 
withdraws. This assurance is based on the unfailing 
prayer of Christ (John 14:16). This is in precise 


206 Grace 


accordance with the conditions embodied in the 
covenant of grace. Should human merit determine 
His abiding presence, then, under that relationship, 
the basic principle of grace would be superseded by 
the principle of law-works. The entrance of the 
Spirit into the heart, and His abiding presence there, 
is a part of the saving and keeping power of God, 
which is by grace alone. The revelation of the New 
Testament with regard to the indwelling, abiding 
Spirit in every believer is in full agreement with the 
doctrine of pure grace. 

When considering the question of the enabling 
power of the Spirit in the individual lives of the 
children of the kingdom, it will be seen from the 
Scriptures that, at the opening of that period at least, 
the Spirit is to come upon all flesh, and the indi- 
vidual will prophesy, dream dreams, and see visions 
(Joel 2: 28-32; Acts 2: 16-22); but there is no reve- 
lation to the effect that this will be an abiding pres- 
ence and ministry, since it is related to mighty signs 
and wonders in nature which accompany the second 
advent of Messiah. And, in like manner, there is no 
revelation concerning the enabling power of the 
Spirit for conduct in the daily life of the individual 
in the kingdom. The kingdom teachings of the 
Scriptures do not emphasize the work of the Spirit. 
Any divine provision for personal enablement in 
daily life, it would seem from a careful examination 
of the Scriptures, is foreign to every aspect of law- 
rule; whether it be that of Moses, or that of the king- 
dom. 

So vital is the fact that the enabling Spirit is now 
given to every believer as a part of salvation by 


The Life under Grace BOF 


grace, that it is presented as a fundamental char- 
acteristic of this age. This is the dispensation of the 
indwelling Spirit. We read: ‘‘But now we are de- 
livered from the law, that being dead wherein we 
were held; that we should serve in newness of spirit 
[Spirit], and not in the oldness of the letter’? (Rom. 
7:6). Thus the new enabling power of the Spirit 
characterizes this age, as the ‘‘oldness of the letter’’ 
characterized the age that is past. Likewise cir- 
cumcision is now ‘‘of the heart,’’ in the Spirit, and 
not in the ‘‘letter’’ (Rom. 2: 29), or as it was in the 
flesh under the law. Again, ‘‘Who also hath made 
us able ministers of the New Testament; not of the 
letter, but of the spirit [Spirit] : for the letter killeth, 
but the spirit [Spirit] giveth life’’ (2 Cor. 3:6). 
Reference in this passage is not made to different 
methods of interpreting Scripture—a spiritualizing, 
or a literal method; but to two dispensations with 
their different methods of divine rule. ‘‘The letter 
killeth’’—such is the inevitable ministry of the law; 
‘‘But the spirit giveth life’’—divine life, spiritual 
vitality, energy, and power is provided for the believer 
under grace, and for every believer alike. Thus it is 
revealed that the blessing of the indwelling Spirit is 
an essential characteristic of this age. 

If the manner of life under grace is superhuman, 
so, also, the provided enablement is supernatural, and 
is as limitless as the infinite power of God. Since 
God has proposed a humanly impossible manner of 
life, He has, in full consistency, provided the Spirit 
who giveth life. Too much emphasis cannot be 
placed on the fact that, since God has proposed the 
impossible rule of life and provided the sufficient 


208 Grace 


Spirit, the believer’s responsibility is thereby 
changed from being a struggle of the flesh to being a 
reliance on the Spirit. Grace thus introduces a new 
problem for the believer’s life which is wholly for- 
eign to every aspect of the law. It is the problem of 
the adjustment of the heart to the holy presence of 
the Spirit, and of maintaining the unbroken attitude 
of dependence on the Spirit. The new principle of 
achievement consists in getting things accomplished 
in the believer’s daily life and service by trusting 
the power of Another, rather than by trusting the 
energy of the flesh. The revelation concerning this 
new problem of life under grace constitutes the major 
part of the teaching of the Epistles. Not only is 
the faith principle directly taught in the Epistles; 
it is implied and assumed in every injunction under 
grace. The unfolding of the precise relationship be- 
tween the personality of the Spirit, and the person- 
ality of the believer, is not omitted. Experimentally, 
the believer, when empowered by the Spirit, will be 
conscious only of the exercise of his own faculties. 
The Spirit does not disclose His presence directly ; 
His ministry is to reveal and glorify Christ. His 
presence will be evidenced, however, by the victory 
that is wrought, which victory could be wrought only 
by the Spirit. 

Thus, either the by-works principle of the law, or 
the by-faith principle of grace, may be chosen by the 
believer as a method of achievement even within the 
deepest issues of Christian conduct and service. If 
these heaven-high demands are undertaken in the 
energy of the flesh, they become purely legal in char- 
acter; if they are undertaken in full reliance on the 


The Life under Grace 209 


provided energy of the Spirit, they are purely gra- 
cious in character. One is wholly within the scope 
of the covenant of the law, which covenant is based 
on works; the other is wholly within the scope of the 
covenant of grace, which covenant is based on faith. 
Thus the teachings of grace, when attempted in the 
energy of the flesh, become a legal code, the demands 
of which are the most impossible to meet. How very 
many Christians are under this aspect of law; even 
those who give some attention to the actual precepts 
of grace! 

There are two inseparable revelations given in the 
grace teachings of the New Testament. Each one is 
the counterpart, complement, and supplement of the 
other, and untold violence is done to the whole re- 
vealed purpose of God in this age when either one of 
these themes is made to stand alone. One theme is 
presented in that body of Scripture which sets forth 
the character of conduct that is becoming to the one 
who is already saved and safe in the grace of God; 
the other theme is presented in that body of Scrip- 
ture which sets forth the fact that the life in grace is 
to be lived in sole dependence on the enabling power 
of the indwelling Spirit. The latter body of Scrip- 
ture includes all the details and instructions concern- 
ing the life of faith, and the walk in the Spirit. It 
is obviously imperative that these two revelations 
shall not be separated. Otherwise, on the one hand, 
the teachings of grace will seem to be an impossible 
law-code, or, on the other hand, the walk in the 
Spirit will seem to be an uncharted, aimless pro- 
cedure. 

In the grace teachings of the New Testament, these 


210 Grace 


two aspects of truth are never separated. In adduc- 
ing proof of this, it is impossible in a work of this 
length to review every Scripture bearing upon this 
truth. Proceeding from the fact that the superhu- 
man manner of life under grace is taught in all the 
New Testament books beginning with the Gospel by 
John, there is space for only one quotation from each 
of these up to, and including, the Epistle to the 
Colossians. This body of Scripture discloses the 
truth that the life in grace is to be lived only by the 
enabling power of God: 

John 7:37-39. ‘‘In the last day, that great day 
of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man 
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that be- 
lieveth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his 
belly shall fiow rivers of living water. (But this 
spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on 
him should receive: for the Holy Ghost was not yet 
given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified).’’ 
Here the superhuman outflow of rivers of living 
water is distinctly said to be the result of the energy 
of the Spirit. 

Acts 1:8. ‘‘But ye shall receive power, after that 
the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be 
witnesses unto me.’’ The revelation here is that, 
apart from the power of the Spirit, there can be no 
vital witness unto Christ. 

Rom. 6:14; 8:4. ‘For sin shall not have domin- 
ion over you: for ye are not under the law, but un- 
der grace.’’ No enabling power was provided for 
the doing of the law; but such power is provided un- 
der grace. ‘‘That the righteousness of the law might 
be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but 


The Life under Grace 211 


after the Spirit.’’ No passage in the teachings of 
grace is more decisive than this. ‘‘The righteousness 
of the law,’’ referred to, is evidently no less than the 
whole will of God for His child under grace. This 
divine will is to be fulfilled in the believer; but never 
by the believer. 

I Cor. 12:4-7. ‘‘Now there are diversities of gifts, 
but the same Spirit. And there are differences of 
administrations, but the same Lord. And there are 
diversities of operations, but it is the same God which 
worketh [energiseth]| all in all. But the manifesta- 
tion of the Spirit is given to every man [Christian] 
to profit withal.’’ As all Christian service is by the 
exercise of a spiritual gift, these gifts are wholly rea- 
lized by the energy of the power of God. 

If Cor. 10:3-5. ‘‘For though we walk in the 
fiesh, we do not war after the flesh: (for the weapons 
of our warfare are not carnal [fleshly], but mighty 
through God to the pulling down of strong holds) ; 
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that 
exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and 
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedi- 
ence of Christ.’’ For this superhuman manner of 
life, the believer is to be ‘‘mighty through God.’’ 

Gal. 5:16. ‘‘This I say then, Walk in [by means 
of] the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the 
flesh.’’ This promise is as sure as it is far-reaching. 

Eph. 6:10, 11. ‘‘Finally, my brethren, be strong 
in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on 
the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand 
against the wiles of the devil.’’ True overcoming 
. strength is none other than the imparted ‘‘power of 
God.”’ 


212 Grace 


Phil. 2:13. ‘‘For it is God which worketh in you 
both to will and to do of his good pleasure.’’ Here 
the divine enablement reaches to the very molding 
of the desires of! the heart, and to the full accomplish- 
ment of those desires. 

Col. 2:6. ‘‘As ye have therefore received Christ 
Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him.’’ In this Scrip- 
ture the very same faith-principle, by which alone 
a soul can be saved, is continued as the principle by 
which alone he is to walk. 

The whole aspect of grace, which provides a super- 
natural sufficiency for the superhuman, heavenly con- 
duct, and which is the believer’s reasonable life and 
service, is summed up in two great doctrines of the 
New Testament: 

a. The superhuman manner of life is to be Christ- 
like. He is the pattern: ‘‘Let this mind be in you, 
which was also in Christ Jesus’’ (Phil. 2:5); ‘‘As 
he is, so are we in this world’’ (1 John 4:17); 
‘‘Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, 
that ye should follow his steps’’ (1 Pet. 2:21); 
‘‘For to me to live is Christ’’ (Phil. 1:21). To be 
inlawed to Christ (1 Cor. 9:21) is to be committed 
to the very standard of which He is the ideal. There- 
fore the Christian’s standard is superhuman, and 
beyond the power of human achievement. 

b. It is the supreme purpose of the indwelling 
Spirit to reproduce Christlikeness in the believer. The 
most comprehensive statement of the reproduction of 
Christ in the believer is found in Gal. 5:22, 28; 
‘But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long- 
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, tem- 
perance’’ (self-control). Every word, as here used, 


The Life under Grace 213 


represents a superhuman quality of life. It is an 
exact description of the life of Christ; but Christ- 
likeness is never gained by the energy of the flesh. 
These virtues are not found in human nature; they 
are the ‘‘fruit of the Spirit.’? Under the law, that 
degree of love is required which is possible to the 
natural man; under grace, the divine love is wrought 
in the heart by the Holy Spirit. This is true of all 
the superhuman demands under grace. They are 
wrought into the life by the Spirit. The heavenly 
standard requires: ‘‘Rejoice in the Lord alway: 
and again I say, Rejoice’ (Phil. 4:4). This is 
humanly impossible, but the fruit of the Spirit is 
*“joy,’? and the Lord has said, ‘‘That they might 
have my joy fulfilled in themselves’’ (John 17:13). 
The standard of grace requires that ‘‘The peace 
of God’’ shall ‘‘rule in your hearts’? (Col. 3:15). 
Man has never achieved this, but the fruit of the 
Spirit is ‘‘peace,’’ and Christ has said: ‘‘My peace 
I give unto you’’ (John 14:27). The nine-fold fruit 
of the Spirit represents the true Christian graces, 
since under grace, this fruit is produced in the heart 
and life by the Spirit. 

Likewise, Christian service is to be superhuman. 
It is the outflow of ‘‘rivers of living water’’; but 
‘this spake he of the Spirit’’ (John 7: 37-39). It 
is the full proof of ‘‘that good, and acceptable, and 
perfect, will of God’’ (Rom. 12:2); but, ‘‘it is God 
which worketh in you both to will and to do of his 
good pleasure’’ (Phil. 2:13). It is all supernatur- 
ally wrought; for it is the exercise of a spiritual 
_ gift—a ‘‘manifestation of the Spirit’’ (1 Cor. 12:7). 
As Christian character is the composite of the in- 


214 Grace 


wrought graces, so Christian service is an imparted 
‘‘orace.’’ ‘‘But unto every one of us is given grace 
according to the measure of the gift of Christ’’ (Eph. 
4:7); and, ‘‘But the manifestation of the Spirit is 
given to every man to profit withal’’ (1 Cor. 12:7). 

Divine grace, inwrought and imparted by the in- 
dwelling Spirit, results in a manifestation of the very 
graciousness of God in and through the heart of the 
believer. It is in no sense an imitation of God’s 
graciousness; it is a reproduction by the indwelling 
Spirit of that graciousness in the life and service of 
the believer. This truth is one of the most extensive 
doctrines of the New Testament (Cf Rom. 12: 3-6; 
15:15; 1 Cor. 1:4; 3:10; 15:10; 2 Cor. 1:12; 4:15; 
621-83 8316; 7,.9; 928,14; 12:9; Gal. 2: 95 Koh: 
3:2-8; 4:7, 29; Phil. 1:7; Col. 3:16; 4:6; 2 Thes. 
1:12; 2 Tim. 2:1; Heb. 4:16; 12:15; Jas. 4:6; and 
2 Pet. 3:18). 

It may be concluded, then, that there are three 
major distinctions between law and grace: (1) They 
are unlike because they impose separate and sufficient 
rules of life, which are, in their character, either 
wholly legal or wholly gracious; (2) They are un- 
like because there are in these systems opposite or- 
ders between the human obligation and the divine 
blessing; and (3) They are unlike because the re- 
quirements of these systems of divine rule differ, 
with corresponding revelations concerning divine en- 
ablement provided in each. 


THE LIFE UNDER GRACE 
(continued ) 


SECTION FIVE 
THE LAW DONE AWAY 


Since law and grace are opposed to each other at 
every point, it is impossible for them to co-exist, 
either as the ground of acceptance before God or 
as the rule of life. Of necessity, therefore, the Scrip- 
tures of the New Testament which present the facts 
and scope of grace, both assume and directly teach 
that the law is done away. Consequently, it is not 
in force in the present age in any sense whatsoever. 
This present nullification of the law applies not only 
to the legal code of the Mosaic system and the law 
of the kingdom, but to every possible application of 
the principle of law. The larger conception of the 
law, as before defined, is three-fold: (1) The ac- 
tual written instructions of both the teachings of 
Moses and the teachings of the kingdom; (2) The 
law covenant of works in all of its applications, which 
conditions blessing and acceptance with God on the 
ground of personal merit; And, (3) the law principle 
of dependence on the energy of the flesh, in place of 
the faith principle of a dependence on the power of 
the indwelling Spirit. It will also be seen that (4) 
Judaism is done away. 


That the law, in the widest three-fold meaning of 
215 


216 Grace 


the term, is now set aside, is revealed as a funda- 
mental fact in the divine economy of grace. That 
the law has now ceased, even in its widest meaning, 
should be considered with unprejudiced attention. 


I. THE ACTUAL WRITTEN INSTRUCTIONS OF BOTH THE 
TEACHINGS OF THE LAW OF MOSES AND THE KINGDOM 
ARE DONE AWAY. 


These actual written commandments, either of 
Moses or the kingdom, are not the rule of the beliey- 
er’s life under grace, any more than these systems are 
the basis of his salvation. The complete withdrawl 
of the authority of these two systems of law will now 
be considered: 


First, The Passing of the Law of Moses is the Ex- 
plicit Teaching of the New Testament Scriptures. 


An important and determining feature of this 
truth is found in the difference which is revealed be- 
tween the abiding, eternal character of the Abra- 
hamic covenant and the temporal, limited character 
of the law covenant of Sinai. The Abrahamic coy- 
enant anticipated both the earthly seed through Is- 
rael, and the spiritual seed that would stand related 
to God on the principle of faith. This covenant, be- 
ing without human condition, simply declares the 
unchanging purpose of Jehovah. It will be achieved 
in pure grace, apart from every human factor, and 
its accomplishments are eternal. On the other hand, 
the covenant of the Mosaic law was a temporary, ad 
interm, dealing with God, which was deliberately 
chosen by the nation Israel, and which applied to 


The Life under Grace 217 


them only. It was plainly designed to govern that 
people in their land, and for such time as might inter- 
vene between their acceptance of that covenant, and 
the coming of the promised Seed. The Seed is 
Christ. The coming of Christ into the world was 
the realization of the hope contained in the Abra- 
hamie covenant, and, of necessity, the termination 
of the ad interim reign of the law. We read: ‘‘For 
the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, 
was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through law, but 
through the righteousness of faith. For if they 
which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, 
and the promise [the Abrahamic covenant] made 
of none effect: because the law worketh wrath: for 
where no law is, there is no transgression [though 
there is sin]. Therefore it [the promise through 
Abraham] is of faith, that it might be by grace; 
to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; 
not to that only which is of the law [believing 
Israelites], but to that also which is of the faith 
[even believing Gentiles] of Abraham; who is the 
father [on a faith principle] of us all.... And 
therefore it [the faith] was imputed to him for right- 
eousness. Now it was not written for his sake alone, 
that it was imputed to him; but for us also, to whom . 
it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up 
Jesus our Lord from the dead’’ (Rom. 4: 13-24). 
Thus it is demonstrated that the law has no place 
in the divine dealings under grace. We read again: 

The law ‘‘was added... till the seed should 
come’’ (Gal. 3:19) ; but when the Seed did come, the 
authority of the Mosaic law was no longer required, 
or even possible, as a principle of divine rule. It 


218 Grace 


was the purpose of God to close every door of access 
to Himself, but one. This fact is next stated in the 
argument from the Scriptures: ‘‘But the scripture 
hath concluded all [both Jew and Gentile] under 
sin’? (Gal. 3:22). This, it has been seen, is more 
than a declaration that men are sinners by nature 
and by practice, and therefore subject to divine dis- 
pleasure; it is a universal, judicial decree which places 
the whole race absolutely without merit before God. 
From that position there is no escape other than 
through the exercise of pure grace on the part of 
God. The divine motive in the universal sentence 
of the race under sin is declared to be, according 
to that which follows in the text: ‘‘That the prom- 
ise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them 
that believe’’ (Gal. 3:22). Thus the ad interim 
reign of the law is completely annulled, and the 
divine blessing is now centered in Christ as the 
sole object of faith, being promised to them that be- 
lieve. The law principle is not retained as a pos- 
sible optional relationship to God: ‘‘There is none 
other name under heaven given among men, where- 
by we must be saved’”’ (Acts 4:12). 

It is important to observe, however, that, while 
God has completely terminated the reign of law by 
the death of Christ, so far as His relation to man is 
concerned, man is free to reject or distort the truth 
of God, and to impose the law obligation upon him- 
self. In such a case, it does not follow that God ae- 
cepts, or even recognizes, any self-imposed legalism. 
He could not do so. It does follow, however, that 
the self-constituted legalist, to be consistent with his 
own choice, should any part of the law be accepted as 


The Life under Grace 219 


binding, must observe the whole of the law to do it. 
The law was a unit. He that offendeth in one point 
is guilty of all; whatsoever the law saith, it saith to 
them that are under the law, and, he is a debtor to do 
the whole law. Since the law is done away, these 
statements can only apply to the one who, without 
divine sanction or recognition, has asswmed the obli- 
gation of the law. 

The following Scriptures disclose the fact that the 
law was never given to any people other than Israel: 
“‘Hear, O Israel’’ (Deut. 5:1) ; ‘‘ Who are Israelites ; 
to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and 
the covenants, and the giving of the law’’ (Rom. 
9:4); ‘‘For when the Gentiles, which have not the 
law, do by nature [practise] the things contained in 
the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto 
themselves’’ (Rom. 2:14); ‘‘Then said Pilate unto 
them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your 
law’’ (John 18:31); ‘‘Gallio said unto the Jews, If 
it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, O ye 
Jews, reason would that I should bear with you: but 
if it be a question of words and names, and of your 
law, look ye to it; for I will be no judge of such 
matters’? (Acts 18:14, 15). The chief captain of 
the Roman army wrote of Paul, ‘‘Whom I perceived 
to be accused of questions of their law’’ (Acts 
23:29). Paul answered for himself: ‘‘Neither 
against the law of the Jews, neither against the tem- 
ple, nor yet against Caesar, have I offended any thing 
at all’’ (Acts 25:8); ‘‘But this cometh to pass, that 
the word might be fulfilled that is written in their 
[not your] law’’ (John 15:25). 

There is no record of any assumption of the law 


220 Grace 


on the part of Gentiles before the death of Christ. 
At the cross, it will be seen, the divine application 
of the law ceased even for the Jews, and all—Jew 
and Gentile—were shut up to grace alone; but the 
Jews, because of unbelief, still persist in the ob- 
servance of the law which was given to them from 
God by the hand of Moses; while Gentiles, because 
of failure to recognize the meaning of the death 
of Christ and the essential character of pure grace, 
are assuming the law obligation. This many are 
doing, some as a means unto justification before God, 
and some who are saved by faith in Christ, as a rule 
of life. These two errors—that of the Jew and 
that of the Gentile—are clearly set forth in Scrip- 
ture. Of Israel it is said: ‘‘But even unto this 
day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their 
heart.’’ But in the case of an individual Jew re- 
ceiving Christ it is said: ‘‘Nevertheless when it 
[the heart of a Jew] shall turn to the Lord, the vail 
shall be taken away’’ (2 Cor. 3:15, 16). 

Turning to the Gentiles, there are two aspects of 
their assumption of the law: (1) With reference to 
the certainty of divine judgments on the Gentiles be- 
fore the cross, or during the period in which the law 
was divinely imposed on Israel, it is said: ‘‘For 
as many as have sinned without law shall also perish 
without law.’’ Then it is added concerning Israel, 
‘‘And as many as have sinned in the law shall 
be judged by the law’’ (Rom. 2:12). It is impos- 
sible that this Scripture offers an optional choice 
between justification by the law, and justification 
which is by faith alone; for the word is final relative 
to God’s dealing in this age: ‘‘By the deeds of the 


The Life under Grace 221 


law there shal] no fiesh be justified in his sight’’ 
(Rom. 3:20). Reference here is, without question, 
to conditions which did obtain when the law was in 
force. (2) Regarding assumption of the law by Gen- 
tiles it is said: ‘‘For when the Gentiles, which have 
not the law, do by nature, [practise] the things 
contained in the law, these, having not the law, are 
a law unto themselves: which shew the work of the 
law written in their hearts, their conscience also bear- 
ing witness, and their theughts the meanwhile ac- 
cusing or else excusing one another’’ (Rom. 2:14, 
15). Thus the anticipation of assumption of the 
law by Gentiles is revealed, and the precise effect 
of the law upon them. The conscience is molded 
and they stand before a self-imposed condemnation. 
To such there is no blessing. All that the legal 
conscience can do is to accuse or excuse for failure. 
Let it never be supposed that, because of self-im- 
posed legality and misguided conscience, there is 
any divine recognition of Gentiles as being under the 
law. God must be true to His eternal purpose as 
revealed in His Word, and men stand, or fall, be- 
fore Him now on the sole basis of their attitude to- 
ward His saving grace in Christ. Those who are now 
lost may honestly suppose that they do the will of 
God in perpetuating the principle of the law with 
its blasting curse; but they are lost notwithstanding, 
apart from Christ. It is the people of a past age 
who will be judged by the law. The Gentiles who 
now practise the things contained in the law are not 
said to be subject to divine judgment because of 
broken law: they are, by that self-imposed law, 
either self-accused, or self-excused, according as they 


222 Grace 


have created a conscience in regard to the law. 
The law produces the effect only of discomfort, mis- 
direction, confusion, and limitation of their own 
conscience. 

Before turning to the positive teaching of the 
Scripture relative to the passing of the law, it may 
be important to restate the three major aspects of 
the law, which are yet to be considered in this con- 
nection more at length: 

1. Both the commandments and requirements of 
the Mosaic system, and the commandments and re- 
quirements of the kingdom, are wholly legal in their 
character, and, together, comprise the written state- 
ment of the law; which law, it will be seen, is set 
aside during the present reign of grace. 

2. Every human work, be it even the impossible, 
heaven-high beseeching of grace, which is wrought 
with a view to meriting acceptance with God, is of 
the nature of a legal covenant of works, and, there- 
fore, belongs only to the law. Through the finished 
work of Christ, acceptance with God is perfectly se- 
cured; but that acceptance can be experienced only 
through a faith which turns from dependence on 
merit, and rests in Christ as the sufficient Saviour. 
In like manner, it will be seen, the whole proposi- 
tion of legal, meritorious acceptance with God has 
passed during the reign of grace. 

3. Again, any manner of life, or service, which 
is lived in dependence on the flesh, rather than in 
dependence on the Spirit, is legal in character and 
has passed during the present period in which grace 
reigns. It is written: ‘‘If ye be led of the Spirit, 
ye are not under the law’’ (Gal. 5:18). The law 


The Life under Grace 2.23 


made its appeal only to the flesh, and, therefore, to 
turn to the flesh, is to turn to the sphere of the 
law. 

The law, though wholly superseded by grace, may 
now be self-imposed. This may be done by turning 
for a rule of life to the written legal code of Moses, 
or of the kingdom; it may be done by turning to 
self-works as the basis of acceptance with God; or it 
may be done by depending on the energy of the flesh 
for power to live well-pleasing to God. Self-im- 
posed law, of whatever kind, is not acceptable to 
God; but it, like all human sin, may be chosen by the 
free will of man, and may be practised in opposition 
to the revealed will of God. 

In view of the positive Biblical statements rela- 
tive to the passing of the law, question may be raised 
as to the meaning of certain passages: 

Gal. 3:23. ‘‘But before faith came we were kept 
under the law.’’ This is in no sense the present 
experience of the unsaved before they accept Christ. 
The Apostle is here speaking as a Jew, and of those 
circumstances which could have existed only for the 
Jew of the early church who had lived under both 
the dispensation of Moses, and the dispensation of 
grace. Nevertheless, in the wider meaning of the law, 
before stated, all humanity was delivered by the 
death of Christ from the obligation of meritorious 
works, and from the necessity of depending on the 
flesh. ‘‘For as many as are of the works of the law 
are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every 
one that continueth not in all things which are writ- 
ten in the book of the law to do them”’; ‘‘Christ hath 
redeemed us from the curse of the law’’; ‘‘God send- 


224 Grace 


ing his own Son... condemned sin in the flesh: 
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in 
us’’ (Gal. 3:10, 13; Rom. 8:3, 4). 

1 Cor. 9:20. The Apostle said that he became “‘to 
them that are under the law, as under the law, that 
I might gain them that are under the law.’’ This 
is plainly a consideration of the whole class of people 
who have imposed the law upon themselves in any as- 
pect of the law whatsoever (Note Gal. 4:21). 

Rom. 4:14. ‘‘For if they which are of the law be 
heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of 
none effect.’’ This is equally true of all humanity 
when the larger aspects of the law are in view; but, 
it should also be pointed out that, the age-long 
designation of the Jews as being ‘‘of the law,’’ in 
contrast to Gentiles to whom no law was ever given, 
still obtained in the early church (Cf Rom. 2:23; 
4:16). 

Rom. 2:13. ‘‘For not the hearers of the law are 
just before God, but the doers of the law shall be 
justified.’? This is to state an inherent principle of 
the law. It was an absolute covenant of works. No 
one is now to be justified by the law (Cf Rom. 3: 20; 
Gal. 8:11). Again, ‘‘As it is written. For cir- 
cumeision verily profiteth, if thou keep the law: but 
if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is 
made uncircumcision’’ (Rom. 2:24, 25). This, like- 
wise, is a principle which belonged to the law. Fail- 
ure to keep the law was a discredit to God, and an 
insult to His righteousness (Cf Isa. 52:5). The 
same principle is a warning to all who attempt, or 
even contemplate, the keeping of the law (See, also 
Jas. 2:10). 


The Life under Grace 225 


Rom. 3:31. ‘‘Do we then make void the law 
through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the 
law.’’ The law has never been kept by those who 
tried to keep it. It is kept, however, by those who 
humbly acknowledge their helplessness to do any- 
thing well-pleasing to God, and who turn and find 
shelter in Christ who has met every demand of the 
law for them. Such, and only such have ever vin- 
dicated the holy law of God. The people who attempt 
to keep the law have always outraged the law. 

Rom. 7:16. ‘‘If then I do that which I would 
not, I consent unto the law that it is good.’’ The 
use of the word ‘‘law’’ throughout this whole context 
(7:15 to 8:13) is clearly of the wider sphere of the 
whole will of God, rather than the limited command- 
ments of Moses. Not once is Moses mentioned; but 
‘‘the law of God’’ is three times referred to (7: 22, 
20% 8:7): 

The complete passing, through the death of Christ, 
of the reign of the Mosaic law, even for Israel, is the 
extended testimony of Scripture. A few important 
passages which declare the fact of the passing of 
the law here given: 

John 1:16, 17. ‘‘And of his fulness have all we 
received, and grace for [added to] grace. For the 
law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came 
by Jesus Christ.’’ According to this passage, the 
whole Mosaic system was fulfilled, superseded, and 
terminated in the first advent of Christ. 

Gal. 3: 19-25. ‘‘Wherefore then serveth the law? 
It was added because of transgressions, till the seed 
should come to whom the promise was made . . . that 
the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given 


226 Grace 


to them that believe. But before faith came, we 
[Jews] were kept under the law, shut up unto the 
faith which should afterward be revealed. Where- 
fore the law was our schoolmaster [child-conductor] 
to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified 
by faith. But after that faith is come, we [Jews] 
are no longer under a schoolmaster’’ (the law). 
Comment is unnecessary concerning this uncondi- 
tional declaration as to the passing of the Mosaic 
system. 

Rom. 6:14. ‘‘For sin shall not have dominion over 
you: for ye are not under the law, but under grace.”’ 
While the direct message of this passage is of the en- 
ablement that is provided for the life under grace, 
which was never provided under the law, the pos- 
itive statement is made, ‘‘ Ye are not under the law.’’ 

Rom. 7: 2-6. ‘‘For the woman which hath an hus- 
band is bound by the law to her husband so long as 
he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed 
from the law of her husband. So then if, while her 
husband liveth, she be married to another man, she 
shall be called an adulteress: but if her husband 
be dead, she is free from that law; so that she is no 
adulteress, though she be married to another man. 
Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to 
the law by the body of Christ; that ye should be 
married to another, even to him who is raised from 
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. 
For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, 
which were by the law, did work in our members to 
bring forth fruit unto death. But now we are de- 
livered from the law, that being dead wherein we 


The Life under Grace 227 


were held; that we should serve in newness of spirit 
[Spirit], and not in the oldness of the letter.’’ 

Several important revelations are given in this 
passage. The relation of one who had been under 
the law (which was true of the Apostle Paul) to 
the teachings of grace was that of a wife to her second 
husband. The law, or obligation, of the wife to her 
husband ceases with his death. Should she be married 
to a second husband, she is then under an entirely 
new obligation. The sacrificial death of Christ was 
the ending of the reign of the law, which law is lik- 
ened to the first husband. ‘‘ Wherefore, my breth- 
ren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of 
Christ; that ye should be married to another, even 
to him who is raised from the dead.’’ Nothing 
eould be clearer than this. The Christian is now 
under obligation to Christ. He is ‘‘inlawed’’ to 
Christ. He has only to fulfil ‘‘the law of Christ.’’ 
Certainly it is most unreasonable to propose that a 
woman should try to be obligated to two husbands at 
the same time: yet this is the divine illustration of 
the error of co-mingling the teachings of law and the 
teachings of grace. Spiritual polyandry is offensive 
to God. 

In the new union which is formed with Christ, 
there is to be the bringing forth of fruit unto God. 
This is a reference to the fact that the Christian’s 
life and service is to be enabled by the power of God 
and therefore is superhuman. The Christian, it is 
clearly stated, is not only ‘‘dead to the law,’’ but is 
‘delivered from the law,’’ and every aspect of the 
law, that he should serve in ‘‘the newness of the 


228 Grace 


Spirit’’; for the teachings of grace are particularly 
characterized by the fact that they are to be wrought 
by the enabling power of the Spirit. The Christian 
is not to live and serve in ‘‘the oldness of the letter,’ 
which is the law. It is by vital union in the body 
of Christ as a living member that the believer is both 
absolved from every other relationship, and is made 
to be centered only in that which belongs to the living 
Head. Thus positively is it indicated that the oppos- 
ing principles of law and grace cannot co-exist as 
rules of conduct. 

2 Cor. 3:7-13. ‘‘But if the ministration of 
death, written and engraven in stones, was glorious, 
so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly 
behold the face of Moses for the glory of his coun- 
tenance; which glory was to be done away: how shall 
not the ministration of the spirit [Spirit] be rather 
glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation 
be glory, much more doth the ministration of right- 
eousness exceed in glory. For even that which was 
made glorious had no glory in this respect, by rea- 
son of the glory that excelleth. For if that which 
is done away was glorious, much more that which re- 
maineth is glorious. Seeing then that we have such 
hope, we use great plainness of speech: and not as 
Moses, which put a vail over his face, that the chil- 
dren of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of 
that which is abolished.”’ 

It is the law as crystallized in the Ten Command- 
ments which is in view; for that law alone was 
‘‘written and engraven in stones.’’ In the midst 
of the strongest possible contrasts between the reign 
of the teachings of the law and the teachings of 


The Life under Grace 229 


grace, it is declared that these commandments were 
‘done away,’’ and ‘‘abolished.’’ It should be rec- 
ognized that the old was abolished to make place 
for the new, which far excels in glory. The passing 
of the law is not, therefore, a loss; it is rather an 
inestimable gain. The striking contrasts which are 
presented in this whole context are here arranged in 
parallels: 


The Teachings of the Law The Teachings of Grace 

1. Written with ink. l. Written with the Spirit of 
the living Ged. 

2. In tables of stone. 2. In fleshy tables of the 
heart. 

3. The letter killeth. 3. The Spirit Biveth life. 

4. The ministration of death. 4. The ministration of the 
Spirit. 

5. Was glorious. 5. Is rather glorious. 

6. Done away. 6. Remaineth. 

7, Abolished. 7. We have such hope. 


Gal. 5:18. ‘‘But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are 
not under the iaw.’’ There is no place left for the 
law, and hence no occasion for its recognition. To 
be led of the Spirit is to realize a manner of life 
which surpasses and more than fulfills every ideal of 
the law. 

Eph. 2:15. ‘‘Having abolished in his flesh the en- 
mity, even the law of commandments contained in or- 
dinances.’’ 

Col. 2:14. ‘“‘Blotting out the handwriting of 
ordinances that was against us, which was contrary 
to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his 
eross.”’ 

John 15:25. ‘‘But this cometh to pass, that the 
word might be fulfilled that is written in their law.’’ 
This one and only reference in the upper-room dis- 


230 Grace 


course to the law of Moses is most significant. As 
has been shown, Christ, in this discourse, has taken 
His followers beyond the cross and is unfolding to 
them the very foundations of the new teachings of 
grace. These men were Jews; but in this teaching 
Christ does not speak to them as though the law of 
Moses was binding on them. He says ‘‘their law’’; 
not ‘‘your law,’’ thus indicating that these Jews who 
had come under grace were no longer under the 
reign of the law of Moses. 

By this Scripture not only is the whole law sys- 
tem definitely declared to be done away during the 
dispensation of grace; but it is noticeable that the 
law, as law, is never once applied to the believer as the 
regulating principle of his life under grace. This 
is not an accidental omission; it is the expression of 
the mind and will of God. 

Thus it may be concluded that the written law of 
Moses is not intended to be the rule of the believer’s 
life under grace. Yet, on the other hand, the abid- 
ing principles of the law which are adaptable to 
grace, are carried forward and restated under the 
teachings of grace; not as law, but reformed to the 
mold of infinite grace. This great fact is aptly il- 
lustrated by the experience of an American citizen 
who was in Germany at the breaking out of the re- 
cent war. Fleeing through Holland, he reached 
England with his pocket filled with German gold 
coin. This coin, bearing the German stamp, was of 
no value as currency in England; but, when melted 
and restamped in the mints of England, it bore all 
the value of coin in that realm. Thus the intrin- 
sic value of the gold of the law is preserved and re- 


The Life under Grace 231 


appears bearing the stamp of the new teachings of 
grace. . 

In applying the teachings of grace it is legitimate 
to point out that a similar principle obtained under 
the law of Moses, thus to demonstrate that the pre- 
cept in question represents the unchangeable char- 
acter of God; but it is both unscriptural and un- 
reasonable to apply the teachings of the Mosaic sys- 
tem directly to the children of grace. Since both 
the law of Moses and the teachings of grace are com- 
plete in themselves, neither one requires the ad- 
dition of the other, and to combine them is to sac- 
rifice all that is vital in each. Great importance 
should be given therefore to the positive, unvarying 
message to the believer which is stated in the words, 
““Ve are not under the law, but under grace.’’ 


Second. The Error of Co-mingling the Law of 
the Kingdom with the Teachings of Grace. 


If it be accepted that the Messianic, earthly king- 
dom, with Israel restored to her land in the full 
realization of all her covenants, under the reign of 
Christ sitting on the throne of David, has not been 
established, and there is now no semblance in the 
light of present world conditions of that kingdom 
on earth, then it follows that the laws and principles 
which are to govern in the kingdom, and which could 
apply only to conditions within that kingdom, are 
not yet applied by God to the affairs of men in the 
earth. It is not a question, as in the case of the law 
of Moses, of discontinuing that which has once been in 
force under the sanction of God; it is rather a ques- 
tion as to whether the kingdom laws, which have their 


232 Grace 


application of necessity in the future earthly king- 
dom of Messiah, should be imposed now on the chil- 
dren of God under grace. Definite proofs are needed 
to establish the fact that there are kingdom laws pre- 
sented in the Scriptures. These proofs have already 
been offered. Having granted that the kingdom laws 
are found in the Scriptures, should they be consid- 
ered as any part of the divine instruction now gov- 
erning the daily life of the Christian? Certainly it 
is no more difficult to believe that Scripture reveals 
a rule of life which is not yet in force because be- 
longing to a yet future age, than it is to believe that 
Seripture reveals a rule of life which is not now in 
force because belonging to an age which is wholly 
past. In considering the question as to whether 
the laws of the kingdom are to be applied to the 
Christian in this age, the fact that there is a com- 
plete system of kingdom ruling, and that this ruling 
is strictly legal in its character, is assumed on the 
basis of proofs already given. Certain vital issues, 
though already mentioned, should not be forgotten at 
this point: 


1. The two systems cannot co-exist. 


The laws of the kingdom, being legal in their char- 
acter, introduce those principles of relationships to 
God which can never co-exist with the relationships 
which obtain under grace. By such co-mingling of 
opposing principles, all that is vital in each system 
is sacrificed. On the one hand, the sharp edge of 
the law, which constitutes its sole effectiveness, is 
dulled by an admixture of supposed divine leniency ; 
on the other hand, the truth concerning the absolute 


The Life under Grace 233 


graciousness of God is corrupted by being commer- 
cialized, conditioned on the merit of man, and made 
subject to the persuasion of man. The principle 
of pure grace demands that God shall in no wise 
recognize human merit, and that He invariably 
shall be graciously disposed toward man, and there- 
fore needing at no time to be persuaded by man. 
God is never reluctant in the exercise of grace: in- 
stead, He seeks, draws, and entreats man. The prin- 
ciples of law and grace are mutually destructive, and 
doctrinal confusion follows the intrusion of any 
legal principle into the reign of grace. When law 
is thus intruded, not only is the clear responsibility 
of the believer under grace obscured, but the price- 
less attitude of God in grace, which He purchased 
at the infinite cost of the death of His Son, is 
wholly misrepresented. 

Since the kingdom rule is purely legal, and since 
the believer is not under law, it follows that he is 
not under the injunctions of the kingdom. 


2. It is not necessary to combine them. 


The laws of the kingdom are not required to be 
combined with the teachings of grace, since every 
item within those laws, which could have any present 
application, is exactly and amply stated in the teach- 
ings of grace. It is not necessary, then, for the be- 
liever to assume any law obligation whatsoever. 

When it is shown by Scriptural exposition that 
the laws of the kingdom are not applicable to the 
Christian under grace, opposition is sometimes 
aroused which is based on wrong personal training, 
habits of misinterpretation, and prejudice. The cost 


234 Grace 


of unteachableness should be weighed with much 
care; for the sacrifice of the liberty and blessing 
which belongs to uncomplicated grace is a loss too 
great for computation. By the right division of 
the Scriptures, the truth will be clearly seen that 
grace reigns uncomplicated and undiminished by 
law. 

The kingdom law is a complete and indivisible 
system in itself. It is therefore unscriptural, il- 
logical, and unreasonable to appropriate convenient 
and pleasing portions of this law, and to neglect 
the remainder. It should be considered that, as in 
the Mosaic system, to adopt some portions of the law 
is to be committed logically to all its teachings. 
“For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of 
the law, That the man which doeth those things shall 
live by them’’; ‘‘Cursed is every one that continueth 
not in all things which are written in the book of 
the law to do them’’; ‘‘And the law is not of faith: 
but, The man that doeth them shall live in them’’ 
(Rom. 10:5; Gal. 3:10, 12. Cf Lev. 18:5); ‘‘Now 
we know that what things soever the law saith, it 
saith to them who are under the law’’ (Rom. 3:19) ; 
‘Wor I testify again to every man that is circumcised, 
that he is a debtor to do the whole law’’ (Gal. 5:3). 
Not only are some aspects of the kingdom law never 
attempted by Christians (Cf Mt. 5: 42) ; but its whole 
character, being legal, is opposed to grace. 

The law of Moses is interrelated and wholly depend- 
ent on the sacrifices and ritual provided for Israel 
in the land. The laws of the kingdom are only re- 
lated to the yet future kingdom conditions which 
shall be in the earth under the power and presence of 


The Life under Grace 235 


the King when Satan is bound, creation delivered, 
and all shall know the Lord from the least unto the 
greatest. All harmony of truth is shattered when 
there is the slightest co-mingling of the principles 
of law and grace. Grace alone now reigns through 
Christ to the glory of God the Father, the Son, and 
the Holy Spirit. 


Il. THE LAW COVENANT OF WORKS, IN ALL OF ITS 
APPLICATION, WHICH CONDITIONS BLESSING AND AC- 
CEPTANCE WITH GOD ON PERSONAL MERIT, IS DONE 
AWAY. 


Under this conception of law, its scope is extended 
beyond the actual writings of the Mosaic system and 
the law of the kingdom, and includes, as well, any 
human action, whether in conformity to a precept of 
Seripture or not, which is attempted with a view to 
securing favor with God. The law formula is, ‘‘If 
you will do good, I will bless you.’’ It matters 
nothing what is undertaken as an obligation. It may 
be the highest ideal of heavenly conduct belonging 
to the teachings of grace, or it may be the simplest 
choice of moral action in daily life; but if it is at- 
tempted with a view to securing favor with God, 
such relationship to God is self-imposed, since it 
ignores His attitude of grace, and such attempt is 
purely legal in character and result. Let it be re- 
stated that the basic principle of grace is the fact 
that all blessings originate with God, and are of- 
fered to man graciously. The formula of grace is, 
“‘T have blessed you, therefore be good.’’ Thus it 
is revealed that the motive for right conduct under 


236 Grace 


grace is not to secure the favor of God, which already 
exists toward saved and unsaved to an infinite de- 
gree through Christ; it is rather a matter of consis- 
tent action in view of such divine grace. The un- 
saved are not urged to secure salvation by meritor- 
ious conduct, or even to influence God in their be- 
half by asking for salvation. Since God is revealed 
as standing with out-stretched hands, offering His 
greatest possible blessings in grace, and is moved to 
do so by His unchanging, infinite love, it illy becomes 
a sinner to fall before Him in an attitude of coaxing 
and beseeching, as though he were hoping to move 
God to be merciful and good. The message of grace 
is: ‘‘But as many as received him, to them gave he 
the power [right] to become the sons of God’’ 
(John 1:12). The eternal saving grace of God is 
offered to all who will believe. Moreover, the saved 
do not return to divine fellowship after a relapse into 
sin because they plead for divine forgiveness; their 
restoration is conditional on confession. They do 
not abide in divine fellowship because they seek, or 
merit, the light; they are istructed to ‘‘walk in the 
light’’ which is all theirs through riches of grace. 
In no case are divine blessings to be secured by 
human merit, or by pleading; they await the faith 
that will appropriate them. Every gift of divine 
love is provided and bestowed in pure grace; and 
not of necessity, nor as a payment, nor a recognition 
of human merit. Such lavishings of grace create 
a superhuman obligation for that manner of life 
which is consistent with the heavenly blessing and 
position which grace bestows; but the heavenly bless- 


The Life under Grace 237 


ing and position is never earned by even a super- 
human manner of life. 

The determining character of pure law is seen in 
the fact that it is a covenant of works wherein the 
divine blessing is conditioned on human merit. No 
semblance of this principle is to be found under 
grace, except that rewards are to be bestowed for 
faithful service upon those who have already entered 
into every present position and possession provided 
in grace. It therefore follows that, not only the writ- 
ten rules of the law, but the very principle of the 
law covenant of works, has been done away in this 
age of grace. 


Il. THE LAW PRINCIPLE OF DEPENDENCE ON THE EN- 
ERGY OF THE FLESH, IN PLACE OF THE GRACE PRINCIPLE 
OF DEPENDENCE ON THE POWER OF THE INDWELLING 
SPIRIT, IS DONE AWAY. 


The third and last major distinction between law 
and grace is seen in the attitude of heart-dependence 
which is maintained in view of any and all obliga- 
tion toward God. The law, being a covenant of 
works and providing no enablement, addressed itself 
to the limitations of the natural man. No more was 
expected or secured in return to its commands 
than the natural man in his environment could 
produce. The requirements under the law are, 
therefore, on the plane of the limited ability of 
the flesh. On the other hand, grace, being a coven- 
ant of faith, and providing the limitless enablement 
of the power of the indwelling Spirit, addresses it- 


238 Grace 


self to the unlimited resources of the supernatural 
man. The requirements to be met under grace are, 
therefore, on the plane of the unlimited ability of the 
Spirit. There is no divine injunction addressed to 
the unregenerate concerning his daily life. The Gos- 
pel of the saving grace of God alone is offered to him. 
The only divine injunctions now in force in the world 
are addressed to those who are saved, and these 
heaven-high standards are to be realized on the prin- 
ciple of faith toward the sufficiency of the indwell- 
ing Spirit, and never by dependence on the energy 
of the flesh. 

Thus, it may be seen, that any aspect of life, or con- 
duct, which is undertaken in dependence on the en- 
ergy and ability of the flesh is, to that extent, purely 
legal in its character; whether it be the whole re- 
vealed will of God, the actual written commandments 
contained in the law, the exhortations of grace, or 
any activity whatsoever in which the believer may 
engage. Dependence on the arm of the flesh is con- 
sistent only with pure law; dependence on the power 
of God is demanded under pure grace. Since there 
is no provision for the flesh in the plan of God for 
a life under grace, the law is done away. 


Iv. JUDAISM IS DONE AWAY. 


It is often inferred that Christianity is an out- 
growth or product of Judaism. In reality these two 
systems are as independent of each other as the twe 
opposing principles of law and grace. Being thus 
so widely different in their essential elements, they 
are, like the principles which they embody, as far 


The Life under Grace 239 


removed the one from the other as heaven is higher 
than the earth. One is of the earth, the old creation, 
and the flesh; the other is of heaven, of the new crea- 
tion, and the Spirit. As there are elements and 
threads of truth which run throughout the entire 
Bible, so certain features which belong to Judaism 
are seen to reappear in Christianity; but this ob- 
vious fact should not be made the basis of a supposi- 
tion that these systems are the same, or that one was 
merged into the other. God, holiness, Satan, man, 
sin, redemption, and the issues of eternity, are not 
only relevant facts of both Judaism and Christianity, 
but they are essential facts of all time, from its be- 
ginning to its end. It is true that the same God is 
the God of the Gentile as well as of the Jew, and 
that the Jew anticipated the value of Christ’s death 
by sacrifices, as we realize the value of His death 
through faith; but it does not therefore follow that 
God’s purposes and ways are the same with Israel 
as with the Church. 

When these two systems are confused, it is because 
the differentiating essentials which constitute the 
Jewish religion and Christianity are ignored. 


First. Considering Them as Rules of Life. 


The Olid Testament system of law is absolutely su- 
perseded by the new system under grace. Christians 
are not under law either for justification or for sanc- 
tification. When Christ said, ‘‘I came not to de- 
stroy, but to fulfil,’’ and that nothing should pass 
from the law until all was fulfilled (Mt. 5:17, 18), 
He was dealing with Israel while Judaism was still 
in foree, and anticipating the Messianic Kingdom 


240 Grace 


which, it is revealed, will be purely legal in its char- 
acter. 


Second. Considering Them under Their Respectwe 
Aspects. 


In the matter of service, there is nothing but con- 
trast between Judaism and Christianity. Israel, un- 
der Judaism, went in to perform a sacrifice; we go 
out to proclaim a sacrifice. Judaism had its ritual, 
its forms, and its ceremonies which were typical. 
Christianity could incorporate none of these since 
it provides a living union to Christ who is Substance 
and Antitype of all that Judaism prefigured. 


Third. Considering Them in Respect to Personal 
Relationship to God. 


Under Judaism, the nation was related to Him by 
the covenant of Sinai, the Abrahamic covenant being 
temporarily set aside until Christ should come (Gal. 
3:19), and individual Israelites were spiritually re- 
newed through their personal faith, though the ex- 
act character of their salvation is not revealed. But, 
under grace, all the positions and possessions of the 
believer in relation to God transcend the earthly 
promises of Israel. 

The message of Ephesians 2:18 to 3:10 does not 
teach that the Church is being built on the prophets 
of the Old Testament; reference is only to the 
prophets and apostles of the New Testament (Cf 4: 
11). In like manner, the ‘‘mystery’’ (3:6) is the 
formation of a new humanity—the Church—out of 
both Jews and Gentiles, and not a combining of Old 
Testament saints with New Testament saints. The 


The Life under Grace 241 


theological term, The Old Testament Church, has no 
Seriptural warrant (Acts 7: 38 is no exception, being 
merely a reference to an assembly of people). The 
true Church began at Pentecost, and was made pos- 
sible through the new outflow of grace in Christ 
Jesus,—by His death, resurrection, and ascension,— 
and the descent of the Holy Spirit. Similarly, Gen- 
tile branches are not grafted into Judaism, but into 
Christ (Rom. 11:17). He is the Vine. 

Judaism speaks of an earthly people and an earthly 
walk in the flesh. Christianity speaks of a heavenly 
people and of a heavenly walk in the Spirit. Since 
one is of the old creation, its people are under the 
curse of the First Adam, and its history closes in 
failure. Since the other is of the new creation, its 
people are ensphered in the resurrected Christ, and 
its history will be the consummation of the glory of 
divine grace. Christianity is indebted to Israel for 
the humanity of Christ and for the Oracles of God; 
but Israel, the people, must be distinguished from 
Judaism, the law system. Israel abides to the pres- 
ent hour, while Judaism, so far as divine recogni- 
tion goes, ceased with the death of Christ. Israel, 
like all the nations, was, as a whole, in Adam, lost 
and undone. While for Israel there was healing 
for sin and mercy from God, no one under Judaism 
had any clear vision or revelation of the new life and 
relationship under grace, which more than all else 
distinguishes Christianity. 

The new life and relationship which characterizes 
Christianity is Christ as the sphere of the new crea- 
tion. CHRISTIANITY Is CHRIST. It is the unlim- 
ited, unrestrained love of God in Christ and its 


242 Grace 


final result will be the unveiling of the glory of His 
grace in the ages to come. Judaism, through the 
nation Israel, purposed the highest glory in the earth. 
Christianity, through the Church, purposes the high- 
est glory in heaven. One is of the ‘‘first man’’ who 
is ‘‘of the earth, earthy.’’ The other is of the second 
Man, who is ‘‘the Lord from heaven.’’ 

Judaism was based on the law and, like the law, 
applied only to Israel and passed out of force with 
the death of Christ. So, likewise, Israel alone was 
delivered from the written commandments of Moses 
through the death of Christ. However, both Jew 
and Gentile were delivered by that death from the 
hopeless principle of human merit, and from the 
useless struggle of the flesh. 

The exalted quality of the law is never questioned. 
It is the expression of the very character of God. 
‘Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment 
holy, and just, and good’’ (Rom. 7:12). The law 
did not die; it was a race that died unto the law in 
Christ the Substitute. The holy demands of infinite 
righteousness can never change or pass away; but 
man may be changed in his exact responsibility to 
God and to certain particulars of His holy demands. 

The sanctity of the law is never preserved by those 
who attempt to keep it. The holy will of God was 
never wrought by any person other than Christ. The 
effort of man has universally failed. The supposi- 
tion that God will be pleased and honored by any 
fleshly attempt to do His will, is a delusion as old as 
the race. Those who try to keep the law, or try 
by their own effort to do the whole will of God, out- 
rage the law at every step by their absolute failure. 


The Life under Grace 243 


On the other hand, those who, in recognition of the 
righteous character of the law, bow before those holy 
demands, acknowledging their utter failure and in- 
ability to fulfil them, and who flee to Christ that 
they may stand in His redemption and partake of 
the very righteousness of God in Him and be shel- 
tered under the cross whereon He met every de- 
mand of the law for them, are the only ones who 
really uphold the law, or keep it. ‘‘Do we then make 
void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we es- 
tablish the law’’ (Rom. 3:81). ; 

We may conclude, then, that every aspect of the 
reign of the law has ceased with the death of Christ 
and the introduction of the reign of grace. There 
is no longer any obligation to do the things which 
are written in the law, only as they have been trans- 
ferred and restated under the teachings of grace; 
there is no longer any obligation to secure favor with 
God by human merit; and there is no longer any 
yoke of bondage, or impossible burden to do what no 
flesh has ever been able to do. There is perfect 
liberty and victory in the priceless provisions of 
grace; ‘‘For ye are not under the law but under 
grace.’’ 


THE LIFE UNDER GRACE 
(continued ) 


SECTION SIX 
THE SABBATH, A TEST QUESTION. 


The distinction between the reign of law and the 
reign of grace is at no point more sharply drawn than 
in the question of the observance of the seventh 
day of the week or the first day of the week; for these 
two days are symbolical of the dispensations to which 
they are related. Likewise, at no point is personal 
religious prejudice, which is born of early training 
and sentiment, more assertive than on the sabbath 
question. It was His liberal teaching on the obser- 
vance of the sabbath which, more than aught else, 
provoked the wrath of the Jewish leaders against 
Christ, and, it may be observed, there is no religious 
subject to-day which so draws out personal conviec- 
tions and opinions. The reason is evident. Few 
have really comprehended the exact character and 
principle of grace. To many, Christianity is a sys- 
tem of human works and character building from 
which merit accrues. And the observance of a sab- 
bath day presents extraordinary opportunities for 
the exercise of meritorious works. The question is 
a far deeper one than the observance, or the manner 
of observance, of a day. It is the fundamental ques- 


tion whether grace is to reign supreme in place of 
244 


The Life under Grace 245 


jaw, or whether it is to be co-mingled with law. 
The roots of this problem reach down to the bed- 
rock issue which forms the very structure of the two 
opposing principles of pure law and pure grace. 
For its solution, the question demands more than 
a superficial opinion. Truly the choice of a particu- 
lar day and the manner of its observance is a test 
question as to the individual’s intelligent adjustment 
to the whole grace revelation. As there can be no 
proper co-mingling of the reign of law and the reign 
of grace, there can be no proper co-mingling of ele- 
ments which, according to the Scriptures, are the 
essential features of these widely different days. A 
**Christian Sabbath’’ is a mis-nomer, and the very 
use of the term indicates inexcusable inattention to 
Bible terms, and an unchallenged freedom of mind 
and heart which is willing to sacrifice the richest 
treasures of grace by co-mingling them with law. 
It is not a problem of interpretation; it is a question 
of whether personal sentiment, prejudice, or igno- 
rance, shall blindly override the very foundation of 
the right divisions of Scripture. 

These two days, typical of two opposing govern- 
ing principles and two great dispensations, are abso- 
lutely unrelated. Of the whole Decalogue, it is the 
sabbath-day commandment only which is not car- 
ried forward in any manner whatsoever into the 
reign of grace, nor could it be. Failure to base the 
distinction between these age-representing days upon 
the essential character of their respective relation- 
ships—pure law and pure grace—is resulting in 
an almost universal confusion of mind on the sub- 
ject among Christians, and this, in turn, provides 


246 Grace 


the opportunity for present-day legalists to promote 
their Christ-rejecting heresies. 

Intelligent comprehension of pure law is clarifying 
to the mind, for its very oppositeness to pure grace 
safeguards a clear comprehension of grace. On the 
other hand, the greatest foe of such clear compre- 
hension of pure grace and its issues is the confusing, 
soul-wrecking and unscriptural admixture of these op- 
posing principles. This admixture is ruinous at 
every point; but at no point is it more destructive of 
Seriptural distinctions than in the confusion of a 
Jewish sabbath with the Christian’s day—the Lord’s 
day, or Sunday. 

Consideration at length might be given to many 
vital differences between the law obligations and the 
obligations under grace, such as circumcision, tithing, 
and sacrifices; but unlike the sabbath question, these 
issues are self-adjusting when the glory of grace in 
some measure is comprehended. To many, on the 
other hand, the sabbath question bulks largest as an 
essential of their religion. It, therefore, demands 
particular consideration. 

The reasons for this discussion are four: (1) It 
vitally determines the individual’s conception of, and 
blessing in, grace. (2) It, of necessity, determines 
the character of the believer’s conduct and measure 
of comprehension of his Scriptural obligation to 
God. (3) It is the central issue of a misleading 
heresy. And, (4) it is now urged as a national re- 
form, in which it is proposed to legislate a Jewish 
sabbath on a Christ-rejecting world. 

This consideration of the Sabbath question is based 
on the preceding analysis of the principles of law 


The Life under Grace 247 


and grace and this discussion cannot be followed 
clearly apart from an understanding of what has 
gone before. So, also, in so far as an earnest appeal 
may avail, the reader is besought to leave preju- 
dice behind, and to stand on the uncompromised 
““Thus saith the Lord.’’ 

Two major aspects of this subject are here con- 
sidered. (1) The Biblical testimony regarding the 
Jewish sabbath, and (2) The Biblical testimony con- 
cerning the Christian’s ‘‘Lord’s day.’’ To this is 
added (3) A consideration of certain current errors. 


I. THE BIBLICAL TESTIMONY REGARDING THE JEWISH 
SABBATH 


This theme is to be taken up in sub-divisions in 
which the Jewish sabbath is considered as related to 
various periods of time: 


First. The Period from Adam to Moses. 


Two theories obtain concering the question of sab- 
bath observance during this period. There are those 
who contend that the sabbath was committed to man 
in Eden, and there are those who contend that the 
sabbath was given to Israel only, at the hand of 
Moses. 

The first theory is usually advanced with a view 
to applying the institution of the sabbath to all 
men before the law even was given, in order that 
the sabbath law may be treated as now applicable 
to all men, even after the termination of the Mosaic 
law in the cross. This form of argument is not re- 
stricted to the Seventh-Day legalists; it is employed 


248 Grace 


by many writers and religious leaders who are at- 
tempting to transfer the Biblical authority concern- 
ing the Jewish sabbath to the observance of the Lord’s 
day. These, by Judaizing Christianity, are obscuring 
the truth about grace. 

When it is claimed that the sabbath obtained from 
Adam to Moses it is said: ‘‘The sabbath was divinely 
sanctified at creation.’’ This sanctification, it is true, 
is clearly stated in Gen. 2:1-8: ‘‘Thus the heavens 
and the earth were finished, and all the host of them. 
And on the seventh day God ended his work which 
he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from 
all his work which he had made. And God blessed 
the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it 
he had rested from all his work which God created 
and made.”’ 

When it is assumed that the sabbath was imposed 
on man at Eden, it is based on the supposition that 
this passage so teaches; which, however, the passage 
does not necessarily imply. And it should also be 
remembered that Genesis was not written until 
Moses’ time, and, when seeking for Biblical evidence 
regarding the pre-Mosaic observance of the seventh 
day it will be found that, unlike other religious 
activities, such as prayer, circumcision (Cf John 
7:22), and sacrifices the observance of which is re- 
corded of that period, there is no mention of a 
sabbath observance from creation to Moses. 

It is incredible that this great institution of the 
sabbath could have existed during all these centuries 
and there be no mention of it in the Scriptures deal- 
ing with that time. The words of Job, who lived five 


The Life under Grace 249 


hundred years and more before Moses, offer an illus- 
tration. His experience discloses the spiritual life 
of the pre-Mosaic saint, having no written Scrip- 
tures, and striving to know his whole duty to God. 
Job and his friends refer to creation, the flood, and 
many details of human obligation to God; but not 
once do they mention the sabbath. Again, it is im- 
possible that this great institution, with all that it 
contemplated of relationship between God and man, 
could have existed at that time and not have been 
mentioned in any portion of the argument of the 
book of Job. 

There is little force in the contention that a seven- 
day week was recognized as early as Jacob’s time, 
and therefore a sabbath day must have existed which 
marked off the week. The seven-day week is the 
natural fourth part of a lunar month and does not 
necessarily demand a sabbath day with religious sig- 
nificance for its measurement. Likewise, there is 
little force in the suggestion that Chinese history 
hints at the observance of one sacred day in every 
week. ‘Such argument, even if true, should not be 
set over against the positive testimony of the Scrip- 
tures. 

There is one passage which determines this ques- 
tion beyond all discussion. The following quotation 
from the confession of the priests and Levites under 
Nehemiah definitely fixes the time of the institution 
of the sabbath: ‘‘Thou camest down also upon 
Mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven, 
and gavest them right judgments, and true laws, 
good statutes and commandments: and madest known 


250 Grace 


unto them thy holy sabbath, and commandedst them 
precepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses 
thy servant’’ (Neh. 9:13, 14). The sabbath given to 
Israel as a sign (Ex. 31:12-17), was never given to 
Gentiles. There is no record that Gentiles ever rec- 
ognized the sabbath, either between Adam and Moses, 
or between Moses and Christ. The sabbath is of the 
law; but the law did not begin to reign until Moses 
(Rom. 5:12-14). 

It is to be concluded, then, that the sabbath was 
imposed upon Israel only and as a part of the law 
as given by Moses. 


Second, The Period from Moses to Christ. 


The sabbath began to be observed by Israel from 
the time of its institution through Moses. Invested 
with the character of a sign between Jehovah and 
the nation Israel, it was in no sense extended to 
Gentiles. These facts are disclosed in the following 
Seriptures: 

‘“‘The Lorp spake unto Moses, saying, Speak thou 
also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my 
sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me 
and you throughout your generations; that ye may 
know that I am the Lorp that doth sanctify you. 
Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy 
unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be 
put to death: for whosoever doeth any work 
therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his 
people. Six days may work be done; but in the 
seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the Lorp: 
whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he 
shall surely be put to death. Wherefore the chil- 

1See appendix A, page 300. 


The Life under Grace 251 


dren of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the 
sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual 
covenant. It is a sign between me and the children 
of Israel for ever: for in six days the Lorp made 
heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, 
and was refreshed’’ (Ex. 31: 12-17). 

Nothing but blind prejudice could apply this or 
any other Old Testament Scripture concerning the 
sabbath, to the Gentiles. The sabbath was a part of 
Israel’s law, and it was the possession of that law 
which distinguished that nation from all other 
peoples of the earth. 

It is equally erroneous to insist that the sabbath 
was always celebrated on the last day of the week. 
The sabbath, but for necessary exceptions, was the 
seventh in a series of seven, whether days or years. 
Of necessity it often fell on other days of the week 
as well as on Saturday. There were at least fifteen 
sabbaths which were fixed dates in their given month, 
and these sabbaths fell on those particular dates re- 
gardless of the day of the week.’ In one instance, seven 
sabbaths were counted from the fifteenth day of the 
month, and the day following that last sabbath of the 
seven, was Pentecost (Lev. 23:15, 16). These seven 
sabbaths, it is evident, became pre-determined dates 
by arbitrary reckoning from the first sabbath. So, 
likewise, the day that Christ was in the tomb was a 


1¥From Lev. 23: 37, 38, it has been claimed by some that 
these fixed sabbaths were extra sabbaths which were added to 
the regular sabbaths. This claim, however, is not supported 
by Num. 28:9, 10. The comparison of these important Scrip- 
tures reveals the fact that the word “besides’’ of Lev. 23: 37, 
38, does not indicate more sabbaths; but rather refers to 
additional offerings to be made over and above the regular 
sabbath offerings. 


a52 Grace 


fixed sabbath. It was the fifteenth of Abid, which by 
divine arrangement in that particular year fell on a 
Saturday. That this was a fixed sabbath is proven 
by the fact that the day before was ‘‘preparation”’ 
day (Mk. 15:42), which day was determined for the 
fourteenth of that month (Ex. 12:2, 6). Again, cer- 
tain working days were established days. The lamb 
must be taken on the tenth day of the first month and 
be killed, roasted with fire, and eaten on the four- 
teenth day of the month. Likewise, Abid sixteenth 
could in no wise have been a sabbath for that date 
was appointed as the beginning of harvest (Deut. 
16:9. Cf Lev. 23:15). All these labors would have 
been direct violations of the sabbath law; yet these 
ceremonies were appointed for certain pre-determined 
dates, and from time to time must inevitably 
have been in conflict with the pre-determined sab- 
baths. 

By all of this it is evident that the sacred character 
of the day belonged to its relative place in a series of 
seven days, and not to a particular day of the week. 

During the period from Moses to Christ in which 
the sabbath obtained under the direct sanction of 
God, it was, as the word sabbath indicates, a day of 
physical rest. It was binding on the whole nation 
Israel, and death was the penalty for its violation. 
No fire was to be kindled, no food prepared, no 
journey undertaken, no buying or selling permitted, 
and no burden to be borne. Even the land was to 
have its sabbaths (Ex. 31:12-17; 35:3; 16: 22-26; 
Neh. 10: 381; 18: 15-21; Lev. 25:4; 2 Chron. 36:21). 
The sabbath law, like all of the law, was so poorly 
observed that Jehovah finally carried the nation into 


The Life under Grace 253 


captivity with the declared purpose that the land 
might enjoy its sabbaths. | 

The sabbath was inter-related with the law, just as 
it is embedded in the heart of the Decalogue. The 
exact manner of its cbservance is revealed only in the 
teachings of Moses, and since the law was a covenant 
of human works, the sabbath was the divine provision 
for rest under that covenant. The modern conception 
of a sabbath, isolated from the laws which governed 
it, and adapted to the Christian dispensation as the 
day of religious activity, public meetings, Christian 
service, and worship, is entirely out of harmony with 
every Scripture bearing on the sabbath. It is taught 
by some that although the laws which conditioned the 
manner of sabbath observance have ceased, the recog- 
nition of the day, whether it be Saturday, or Sunday, 
remains as a binding obligation. The result of such 
teaching is the imposition of the observance of a day 
without any exact instruction as to the manner of such 
observance. This teaching is both inconsistent and 
unscriptural. Moreover, the unscriptural inconsist- 
ency is greatly increased when the celebration of the 
sabbath is changed from Saturday to Sunday, and is 
imposed on Gentiles. 

The sabbath was a vital institution under the reign 
of the law. It depended on the entire law system for 
its proper observance, and the law system depended 
on the sabbath for its normal action. The complete 
legal system stands, or falls, together. The Mosaic 
age was given over to the uncomplicated functioning 
of the entire law system; but that age, and all that 
characterized it, was, when Christ died, superseded by 
the reign of grace. 


254 Grace 


Third. The Period Represented by the Gospels. 


Much confusion concerning the sabbath is due to a 
failure to recognize the peculiar character of the 
period represented by the Gospels. It should be re- 
membered that Christ was first a ‘‘minister of the 
circumcision’’; He was ‘‘made under the law’’; and 
He lived and wrought under the law. The law did 
not pass at His birth. It passed at His death. Dur- 
ing the days of His ministry, He recognized, kept, 
and enforced the sabbath as an integral part of the 
whole Mosaic system. True, He insisted that the 
Mosaic system, and the sabbath in particular, be 
delivered from the encrusted teachings of men which 
had been superimposed on the law of Moses. These 
man-made additions to the law were held by the Jews 
to be as binding and sacred as the very Word of God. 
Because He ignored all else but the Word of God, 
Christ appeared as a liberalist on the question of the 
sabbath. He also claimed to be ‘‘Lord of the sab- 
bath,’’ which He was, and by virtue of that position, 
He had authority to change the sabbath, or, if He 
chose, to abolish it forever. A greater than Moses, 
through whom the law came, was in their midst. It 
is certain that He purposed to rescue the sabbath from 
being an enslaving institution and to restore its func- 
tions as a benefit to man. This He announced when 
He said: ‘‘The sabbath was made for man, and not 
man for the sabbath.’’ That is, man was not made 
to be sacrificed for a day; but the day was made for 
the blessing of man. 

Before His death, the sabbath was one of the most 
important issues in the experience and ministry of 


The Life under Grace 255 


Christ. However, it is both obvious and suggestive 
that He never mentioned that day in the upper-room 
discourse, nor is that day once mentioned as an obliga- 
tion in all of His post-resurrection ministry. It is 
inconceivable that the sabbath, which was so vital a 
part of the Mosaic system, should be omitted from 
these great age-characterizing teachings of Christ, if 
it was the purpose of God that this Jewish day should 
have any place in the present reign of grace. 

It has also been claimed that Christ extended the 
sabbath-keeping obligation to all men, when He said: 
“The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the 
sabbath.’’ This issue turns on the exact meaning of 
the word man as here used. Did Christ signify by 
this statement that the Jewish sabbath was by His 
authority extended to all men? Or did He use the 
word man in its more limited sense as applying only 
to the nation Israel? Two facts determine the answer: 
(1) The sabbath is never by any subsequent Scrip- 
ture applied to Gentiles, and (2) the word man is 
used in the Old Testament no less than 336 times 
when referring to Israel alone, and many times in the 
New Testament when referring only to Christians. It 
is said: ‘‘Christ is the head of every man’’; the Spirit 
“ig given to every man’’; ‘“‘If any man build on this 
foundation’’; ‘‘Every man shall have praise’’; ‘‘ That 
we maly present every man perfect in Christ J esus.”” 
In all these Scriptures the word man has only the 
limited meaning. It is therefore evident that Christ 
said, in harmony with all Scripture, that the sabbath 
was made for Israel; for there is no Biblical evidence 
that Christ ever imposed the Jewish sabbath on either 
Gentiles or Christians; but true to the law, He did 


256 Grace 


recognize its important place and obligation in rela- 
tion to Israel until the reign of the law should be ter- 
minated through His death. 


Fourth. The Period Represented by the Acts and 
the Epistles. 


In considering the sabbath question, great impor- 
tance must be attributed to the exact character of those 
teachings of the New Testament which come after the 
founding of Christianity through the death and resur- 
rection of Christ, and by the advent of the Spirit on 
Pentecost. 

It should be observed first that the law, as a rule of 
conduct, is not once applied to the Christian, and that 
these ‘Scriptures by overwhelming revelation, assert 
that the law has passed, through the death of Christ. 
They assert that the law has ceased both as a means of 
justification, and as a rule of life for the one who is 
justified (John 1:16, 17; Rom. 6:14; 7:1-6; 2 Cor. 
3:1-18; Eph. 2:15; Col. 2:14; Gal. 3:19-25). If it 
is claimed that the Decalogue, in which the sabbath is 
embedded, was not of the law, and therefore was not 
terminated with the death of Christ, this contention 
is disposed of completely by the reference in Rom. 
7: 7-14 to the last of the commandments, in which 
Scripture this commandment is explicitly mentioned 
as ‘“‘the law.’’ So, also, according to 2 Cor. 3: 7-14, 
that which was ‘‘written and engraven in stones’’— 
the Decalogue, including the sabbath day—is ‘‘done 
away’’ and ‘‘abolished.’’ 

It should be observed next that if an issue so vital 
as was the sabbath under the law is imposed on the 


The Life under Grace pxoiy| 


Church, it is ineredible (1) that the early Christians 
would not be reported as having at some time dis- 
charged their personal obligation to the sabbath, or 
(2) that the necessity of recognizing the sabbath 
would not be somewhere incorporated in the new 
teachings of grace. Turning to these Scriptures we 
discover : 


1. The sabbath in the Book of The Acts. 


The word sabbath is used nine times in the Acts, 
and wherever it is referred to as a day which is ob- 
served, it is related only to the unbelieving Jews, 
who, as would be expected, perpetuated, and who still 
perpetuate, the observance of the sabbath day. Not 
once in this Book is it stated, or even implied, that 
Christians kept a sabbath day. It is said that the 
Apostle Paul went into the synagogue of the Jews 
and reasoned with them every sabbath; but this can 
imply nothing more than that he took advantage of 
their gathering together on that day in order that he 
might preach to them. Such may be the experience 
of any missionary to the Jews to-day. 


2. The sabbath in the Epistles. 


Turning to the Epistles, it will be seen in this por- 
tion of the Scriptures, as in the Book of Acts, that no 
Christian is said to have observed a sabbath day. It 
is highly probable that some in the early church who 
were drawn into the observance of the law were also 
complicated with issues of sabbath keeping; but the 
Spirit of God has omitted every such incident, if such 
there was, from the pages of Scripture. Thus the 


258 Grace 


Inspired Record does not reveal the complication of 
one believer with the Jewish sabbath, even as an error 
in conduct; nor are sinners termed Sabbath breakers. 

Upon examination of the direct injunctions and 
doctrinal teachings of the Epistles, it is discovered 
that the word sabbath is used but once, the term 
seventh day is mentioned in one passage only, and the 
legalistic observance of a day is referred to but once. 
These passages deserve particular attention: 

Col. 2:16, 17. In the context in which this Serip- 
ture is found, the Apostle warns believers against any 
complicity with the law, or works-covenant, since they 
have been transferred to a position under grace. The 
passage states that they have been made ‘‘complete’’ 
in Christ, to which estate nothing could ever be added; 
hence for the one who is ‘‘in Christ,’’ the objective of 
all meritorious works is already gained, and the legal 
obligation to do good works is forever met (v. 10). 
The believer is also said to be ‘‘cireumcised with the 
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the 
body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of 
Christ.’’ Therefore, since the flesh, the one thing the 
law proposed to control, is, in the sight of God, put 
away, there is no need of the law. The Jewish child 
was circumcised on the eighth day, which was the first 
day of a new week following the passing of a com- 
pleted week. The circumcision on the eighth day, or 
first day of a new week, typified the deliverance from 
the old creation which would be accomplished for 
believers through the resurrection of Christ from the 
dead; for in that death He bore all the curse of the 
old creation. For this reason the believer under grace 
is not called upon to celebrate any aspect of 


The Life under Grace 259 


the old creation which was represented by the sab- 
bath (v.11). The one who is saved has been ‘‘ buried 
with him in baptism, wherein [the baptism] also ye 
are risen with him through the faith of the operation 
of God [his own faith in God’s power], who hath 
raised him from the dead.’’ The use of the aorist 
tense in connection with the reference to a burial with 
Him in baptism, places that burial as being contem- 
poraneous with the circumcision just mentioned. 
Therefore it is evident that the baptism with the 
Spirit which vitally relates the believer to Christ is in 
view (1 Cor. 12:18. Cf Gal. 3:27). In that bap- 
tism, as in no other, the Christian partakes of all that 
Christ is, and all that Christ has done. He shares in 
Christ’s crucifixion, death, burial, and resurrection 
(Rom. 6:1-10). With the old creation thus buried 
in the tomb of Christ, the believer is in no wise ob- 
ligated to any observance related to the old creation 
(v.12). Again, the believer has been delivered from 
the law by no less an undertaking than the nailing 
of the law with its handwritings and ordinances to 
the cross. After this great transaction, how can the 
child of God reasonably recognize the law in any 
respect whatsoever (v. 14)? ‘To the one who is thus 
complete in Christ, circumcised in Christ, buried with 
Christ, and delivered from the authority of all hand- 
writings and ordinances, the Apostle writes: ‘‘ Let no 
man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in 
respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the 
sabbath days [day]: which are a shadow of things to 
come; but the body [substance] is Christ.’’ All these 
~ were essential features of the law (1 Chron. 23:31; 
2 Chron. 2:4; 31:3), and as such were to cease in 


\ 


260 Grace 


the present age of Israel’s chastisement (Hos. 2:11), 
and are to be reinstated in the coming kingdom (Ezk. 
45:17). They were but shadows of the Substance— 
Christ. Having the Substance, the believer is warned 
against turning to the mere shadow. According to 
this Seripture, the law, which included the sabbath 
day, is abolished. If it is objected that the reference 
in this passage is to extra ceremonial sabbaths, the 
contention cannot be sustained; for the words here 
used are ton sabbaton, which are the exact words that 
are invariably used to designate the regular Jewish 
sabbath. 

It is significant, then, that in all the Epistles, 
wherein the believer’s obligation under grace is set 
forth, the only use of the word sabbath is under abso- 
lute prohibition concerning its observance, and that 
it is there held to be in conflict with the most vital 
and superseding elements of grace. 

Heb. 4:4. In this passage the one reference in all 
the Epistles to the seventh day is found. We read: 
‘‘For he spake in a certain place of the seventh day 
on this wise, And God did rest the seventh day from 
all his works.’’ As before, the occasion for this refer- 
ence to a seventh day is explicit in the context. In 
the whole passage (4:1-13) Hebrew Christians are 
warned lest, as their fathers failed to enter into rest 
‘under Joshua (v. 8), they themselves should fail to 
enter, experimentally, into the rest provided in the 
finished work of Christ, of whom Joshua was but a 
type. In the application of this passage, it may be 
noted that the rest under Christ is not for one day in 
the week, nor is it that sabbath-rest which was due 


The Life under Grace 261 


after a six-day strain of meritorious works. It is 
rather the abiding rest of faith in Another who, as 
Substitute, has wrought all the ‘‘works of God.”’ 
This blessed rest is promised ‘‘to him that worketh 
not.’? Likewise, it is in no sense the rest of death. 
It is rather the rest of Christ’s imparted, resurrection 
life, and that life is ceaselessly active. The extent 
and character of the activity of the new life in Christ 
is a violation of every commandment which enjoins 
a sabbath day of rest. 

Gal. 4:9, 10. At this point in this Epistle, the 
Apostle chides the Galatian believers for observing 
*“days’’ which are borrowed from the law, and tells 
them that by the keeping of legal days they have 
turned from grace to the law: ‘‘But now, after that 
ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how 
turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, 
whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? Ye ob- 
serve days, and months, and times, and years.’’ The 
phrase, ‘‘weak and beggarly elements,’’ is a descrip- 
tion of the character of the law. As a means of se- 
curing moral and spiritual conduct, the law was 
‘“‘weak’’ since its correct observance was impossible 
through the ‘‘weakness of the flesh’’ (Rom. 8:3). 
As a source of heart-blessing, the law was ‘‘beggarly’’ 
(lit. poverty stricken) as compared to the riches of 
grace in Christ Jesus. 

From this consideration of the Scriptures which 
describe and define the life of the believer after the 
cross, it is notable that in these Scriptures there is no 
example of the observance of a sabbath day by any 
_ believer, and no injunction for such observance. On 


262 Grace 


the other hand, there is the most conclusive teaching 
concerning the complete ending of the law by the 
death of Christ, and the most faithful warnings lest 
the believer shall become ensnared by complicity with 
sabbath-day observance. 


Fifth. The Sabbath in Prophecy. 


There are two distinct aspects of the sabbath in 
prophecy: (1) Concerning its cessation in this age of 
Israel’s chastisement, and (2) concerning its reestab- 
lishment when the present purpose in the Church is 
accomplished. 


1. The cessation of the sabbath. 


It is clear from Hos. 2:11 that the chastisement 
which was to fall on Israel, and which she is now 
experiencing, would be characterized by the cessation 
of all her solemn feasts and sabbaths: ‘‘I will also 
cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new 
moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.”’ 
Such is the unalterable decree of God, and had one 
word of this prophecy failed, He would have been 
proven untrue. These Jewish observances which were 
to cease included all her sabbaths. They ceased at 
the beginning of this age of grace, so far as any recog- 
nition from God is concerned. Otherwise, when will 
this prophecy be fulfilled? Uninstructed people may 
impose a solemn feast, or a Jewish sabbath, upon 
themselves; but this will accomplish no more than the 
creation of an abnormal conscience which either 
accuses or excuses but never satisfies the heart. Such 


The Life under Grace 263 


is the invariable effect of self-imposed law (Rom. 
2:14, 15). 


2. The reestablishment of the sabbath. 


Upon the completion of the present divine purpose 
in the Church, Israel’s sabbaths will be reinstated. 
This is assured both for the great tribulation which 
must precede the glorious coming of Christ, and for 
the kingdom age which follows that coming. Con- 
cerning the great tribulation it is said: ‘‘But pray ye 
that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the 
sabbath day’’ (Mt. 24:20). No Christian has ever 
been inclined to offer this prayer. The time of its 
fulfillment does not concern him, nor does he have 
any relation to a sabbath day. It will be in the ‘‘time 
of Jacob’s trouble,’’ and Israel’s sabbaths will then 
be observed again. Concerning the kingdom age we 
read: ‘‘And it shall come to pass, that from one new 
moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, 
shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the 
Lorp’’ (Isa. 66: 23) ; ‘‘Thus saith the Lorp Gop; The 
gate of the inner court that looketh toward the east 
shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath 
it shal] be opened, and in the day of the new moon it 
shall be opened’’ (Ezk. 46:1). This is according to 
all prophecy concerning the kingdom. It is then that 
Israel shall ‘‘do all his commandments,’’ including 
the sabbath (Deut. 30:8). The sabbath must be rein- 
stated; for it is a ‘‘perpetual covenant’’ and sign 
between Jehovah and Israel, except for such time as 
_He shall cause it to cease in His chastisement of that 
people (Ex. 31:16). 


264 Grace 


Sixth. The Exact Day. 


The supposition that an exact continuation of 
weekly sabbaths is now being kept by all who observe 
the seventh day, is without foundation. It should be 
noted: (a) No day is holy in itself. From the 
natural standpoint, all days are alike and are equally 
subject to the same physical conditions. A day is 
holy by divine decree, and that decree is subject to 
change at the appointment of God. By no means did 
the day always fall on Saturday, nor were the sab- 
baths always separated by six full working days. (b) 
The sabbath was to begin with sunset and end with 
sunset. This was simple enough when ordered for 
Israel in the small geographical boundaries of Pales- 
tine. It is far different when applied to the whole 
earth, and, as some dare to claim, to heaven as well. 
No uniformity of the observance of an exact day is 
possible over the whole earth. While some are keep- 
ing Saturday on one hemisphere, others are keeping 
Sunday (as sabbath) on the other. Should two per- 
sons start from a given point to go around the earth 
in opposite directions, and both observe each sabbath 
from sundown to sundown, upon their return to the 
starting point, one would be observing Friday and 
the other Sunday. The question of observing an 
exact day from sunset is even more perplexing in the 
far North. The sun sets there but once in six months. 
In that region, to be Biblical and exact, there must 
be a twelve-month sabbath, and a week of seven years. 
(c) The exact day in which God finished creation 
and rested is quite unknown. He rested on the sev- 
enth day; but it could hardly be proven that sun- 


The Life under Grace 265 


down on Friday night at a given place on the earth 
is the perpetuation of the exact moment when God 
began to rest from His work of creation. Who can 
trace the exact moment, day, or year, through Eden, 
the flood, the bondage in Egypt, and the dark ages? 
Yet apart from the assurance that Saturday at a given 
place on the earth is the exact day in rotation of 
weeks from creation, there is no basis for the claim 
to the sacredness of the exact time to be observed. 
Ignorant people are too often encouraged in the belief 
that they are actually celebrating the rest of God in 
creation when they observe the hours as they fall on 
Saturday in the locality where they chance to live. 
It is therefore the manner of the observance of the 
day, and not the exact time, which is in question. 
Shall it be the seventh day, or the first day? It must 
be one or the other; for there is nothing more un- 
reasonable, illogical, and unbiblical, than the observ- 
ance of the seventh day with confusion of Christian 
issues of worship and service, which is the practice of 
every sabbatarian, or the observance of the first day 
with confusion of the sabbath law, which is the pres- 
ent practice of Christendom. There would be little 
occasion for discussion of the question if the simple 
distinctions between law and grace were recognized. 


Il. THE BIBLICAL TESTIMONY CONCERNING THE LORD’S 
DAM. 


This aspect of truth will be considered under two 
general divisions: (1) The reason for the observance 
of the day, and (2) The manner of observance of the 
day. 


266 Grace 


First, The Reason for the Observance of the New 
Day. 


Even a cursory reading of those portions of Scrip- 
ture which condition the daily life of the Christian 
will reveal the fact that, while every other fundamen- 
tal principle of righteousness found in the Decalogue 
is restated in the teachings of grace, the sabbath is 
not once imposed upon the believer. On the contrary, 
as before shown, there is explicit warning against the 
observance of a sabbath day. This is a fact of reve- 
lation which should not be overlooked. 

Throughout the history of the church, a new day 
has been observed which superseded the Jewish sab- 
bath, and this change of days has not been contrary 
to the teaching of the Scriptures, as some insist; it 
has, rather, been according to the revealed plan and 
purpose of God. There are certain Biblical reasons 
for this change: 


1. The Mosaic system has ceased. 


The whole Mosaie system, including its sabbath day, 
has given way to the reign of grace. To this impor- 
tant truth sufficient proof has already been presented, 
but in spite of the clearest Biblical statement on this 
subject, there are two groups of professing Christians 
who evidently do not receive this divine testimony. 
(a) Those who persist in the observance of the sev- 
enth day; and (b) those who observe the first day, 
but who invest it with the character of the Jewish 
sabbath, and observe it on the authority of the law 
which was given to Israel by Moses. The position of 
these two classes should be considered separately : 


The Life under Grace 267 


(a) Those who persist in the observance of the 
seventh day, do so on the claim that, while the law 
passed away in the death of Christ, the Decalogue is 
not a part of the law and therefore it, with its sab- 
bath day, has not been abolished. The answer to this 
subtle argument is clear and conclusive. Not only is 
the Decalogue included and embedded in the Old 
Testament statement of the law, but, in the New Test- 
ament, the Decalogue, as has already been shown, is 
distinctly said to be ‘‘the law.’’ In Rom. 7:7, the 
Apostle Paul has written of the tendency of his own 
heart toward sin. He states: ‘‘I had not known sin, 
but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the 
law had said, Thou shalt not covet.’’ Thus he 
refers to the Tenth Commandment as ‘‘the law.’’ 

Furthermore, it is impossible now for any Jew or 
Gentile to keep the Ceremonial law of Moses, and thus 
it is evident that the New Testament warnings against 
law observance could not be a warning against an 
observance of the Ceremonial law. The Ceremonial 
law required for its observance the presence of Jeho- 
vah in the holy of holies, an altar, a priesthood and a 
temple in Jerusalem. All] these prerequisites for the 
observance of the Ceremonial law were withdrawn at 
the beginning of the present age. The church of 
Rome, in its attempt to continue the law system, pro- 
posed to meet this difficulty by creating its own altar, 
temple service, and priesthood, and alleges that the 
Lord is present in the consecrated bread. The warn- 
ings which are found under grace against the keeping 
of the law are of necessity applicable only to the Deca- 
logue, and not to the Ceremonial law. 

The Ceremonial law governed the precise manner 


268 Grace 


of the observance of the sabbath and there is great 
unreasonableness, with attending confusion, when the 
attempt is now made to keep the Jewish sabbath apart 
from the Ceremonial law. The class of legalists who 
now try to observe the seventh day, having no way 
to introduce the Ceremonial law, borrow the features 
of the new day of grace. They hold services, worship, 
and do much religious work on the seventh day, 
which, being strictly a day of rest, was never designed 
to be a day of activity, religious or otherwise, nor was 
such activity ever allowed on this day during the 
reign of the law. 

(b) There is even greater inconsistency in the 
position of those who recognize the first day of the 
week, but invest that day with the character of the 
sabbath, and keep the day on the authority of the law 
of Moses. Not only has the whole Mosaic system 
ceased with its sabbath and every requirement related 
to that day; but there could be no consistency in 
borrowing even one of the features of the Jewish sab- 
bath. This error of borrowing certain features of the 
Jewish sabbath is committed by both of these classes 
of legalists. The law of Moses was never subject to 
a partial observance. It is a unit; for ‘‘what things 
soever the law saith, it saith to them who are under 
the law;’’ and, ‘‘the man which doeth those things 
shall live by them;’’ and again, ‘‘cursed, is every one 
that continueth not in all things which are written in 
the book of law to do them.’’ There is no Scriptural 
warrant for a partial acceptance of the law, or a par- 
tial recognition of its sabbath day. The observance 
of the day with all its requirements must be perfectly 
kept, or not at all. The slightest recognition of the 


The Life under Grace 269 


least of all the features of the sabbath commits a per- 
son who attempts it to keep the whole law. It there- 
fore follows that the Christian who, while keeping the 
first day of the week, is influenced in the slightest 
degree by the law of Moses concerning a sabbath day, 
is, both by Scripture and reason, committed to keep 
every feature of the Jewish sabbath, as well as the 
whole Mosaic system. For example, the person who 
adopts even one feature of sabbath observance on the 
ground that it is enjoined by the law, is bound by 
that same sabbath law to stone to death every person 
who fails to keep any feature of that law. In fact, 
if he himself had been so guilty as to observe the first 
day of the week in place of the seventh, he must bow 
to the death penalty, in vindication of the righteous 
judgments of God. This death penalty is the uncom- 
promising provision made in God’s Word for sabbath 
breakers. 

The original heresy of the church was the attempted 
admixture of law and grace teachings. It is one of 
the most destructive heresies of the present hour, and 
at no point of contact do the opposing principles of 
law and grace become more clearly crystallized than 
in the question of the exact day which is to be ob- 
served. There is no ‘‘Christian Sabbath.’’? The 
new day which belongs to grace is in no way related 
to the sabbath. Observance must be either of one 
day or the other. To co-mingle them, as every legal- 
ist does, is to frustrate grace. 


2. A new day is divinely appointed under grace. 


This new day is also a particular day of the week 
and has been given a name which is in accordance 


270 Grace 


with its character. Its divine appointment is first 
recorded in a prophetic message: ‘‘The stone which 
the builders refused is become the head stone of the 
corner. This is the Lorp’s doing; it is marvellous in 
our eyes. This is the day which the Lorp hath made; 
we will rejoice and be glad in it’’ (Ps. 118: 22-24). 

In this Scripture, both the death and the resurrec- 
tion of Christ are in view. He was the rejected 
Stone, and His Father, through the resurrection, has 
made Him the Head Stone of the Corner. The resur- 
rection was appointed to take place on a certain day 
which the Lord had determined, and that day was by 
divine intention to be celebrated with joy and glad- 
ness. The divine commentary on this passage is 
given through the Apostle Peter as recorded in Acts 
4:10, 11: ‘‘Be it known unto you all, and to all the 
people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of 
Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from 
the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before 
you whole. This is the stone which was set at nought 
of you builders, which is become the head of the 
corner.”’ 

Therefore the day which the Lord had appointed 
when the rejected Stone would become the Head Stone 
of the Corner, is the day of His resurrection. This 
is the ‘‘ day which the Lorp hath made.’’ It is there- 
fore the Lord’s day. In that day we are to ‘‘rejoice 
and be glad.’’ This new day is the day to which the 
Apostle John made reference when he said, ‘‘I was 
in the Spirit on the Lord’s day’’ (Rev.1:10). These 
words of John were written fully sixty years after 
the death of Christ and at a time when the new day 


The Life under Grace 271 


had become the accepted day among all believers. 

The Lord’s day should in no wise be confused with 
“‘The Day of the Lorp.’’ One is the first day of every 
week, which is observed as a commemoration of the 
resurrection of Christ. The other is a prophetic 
period, which is still future, and which concerns 
Israel and the whole creation. 

The first Lord’s day was the pattern of all the 
Lord’s days that should follow. It began ‘‘very 
early in the morning,’’ when the risen Lord said, 
‘‘All Hail’’ (lit. rejoice)! It continued with His 
precious fellowship, and closed with His benediction 
of peace. From that early morning to its close it was. 
a day of worship, activity, and joy. The sabbath, 
on the other hand, with no less symbolical significance, 
began with the setting sun, which spoke of complete 
cessation of activity, and of perfect rest. 

The Christian has an unchangeable day. He may 
extend its observance to all days, but He cannot 
change the one day, which is divinely appointed, any 
more than Israel, or any one else, could change the 
divinely appointed seventh day. A change of the first 
day to another breaks the symbolic meaning of the 
day as it represents the true relationships under 
grace. It results in robbing Christ of that glory 
which is His alone. This is one of the wrongs com- 
mitted by all those who persist in an attempted 
seventh-day observance. The two days do not present 
an optional choice to the Christian. The choice be- 
tween these days is one which carries either accept- 
ance or rejection of the most vital relationships 
between Christ and the believer under grace. 


27% Grace 


3. A new day is indicated by important events. 


Beginning with the resurrection, and following it, 
every event recorded in the New Testament which had 
important religious significance fell on the first day 
of the week, or the Lord’s day. No greater emphasis 
through events could be given to this new day than 
that found in the teachings of grace, and, added to 
this, is the fact that in these same Scriptures the sab- 
bath day is wholly set aside. If it be claimed that 
there is no direct commandment for the keeping of 
the Lord’s day, it should be observed that there is 
explicit command against the observance of the sab- 
bath day, and that the lack of commandments con- 
cerning the Lord’s day is both in accordance with the 
character of the new day, and the entire order of 
grace which it represents and to which it is related. 
Mention should be made of the great events which 
fell on the first day of the week. 

a. On the first day of the week Christ arose from 
the dead. His resurrection is vitally related to the 
ages past, to the fulfillment of all prophecy, to the 
values of His death, to the Church, to Israel, to crea- 
tion, to the purposes of God in grace which reach be- 
yond to the ages to come, and to the eternal glory of 
God. Fulfillment of the eternal purposes related to 
all of these was dependent upon the coming forth 
of the Son of God from that tomb. He arose 
from the dead, and the greatness of that event 
is indicated by the importance of its place in 
Christian doctrine. Had not Christ arisen—He by 
whom all things were created, that are in heaven, and 
that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they 


The Life under Grace 273 


be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers, 
He for whom things were created, who is before all 
things, and by whom all things consist (hold together) 
—every divine purpose and blessing would have 
failed, yea, the very universe and the throne of God 
would have dissolved and would have been dismissed 
forever. All life, light, and hope would have ceased. 
Death, darkness, and despair would have reigned. 
Though the spiritual powers of darkness might have 
continued, the last hope for a ruined world would 
have been banished eternally. It is impossible for 
the mind to grasp the mighty issues which were at 
stake at the moment when Christ came forth from the 
tomb. At no moment of time, however, were these 
great issues in jeopardy. The consummation of His 
resurrection was sure, for omnipotent power was 
engaged to bring it to pass. Every feature of the 
Christian’s salvation, position, and hope was depend- 
ent on the resurrection of his Lord. Very much de- 
pended on the death of Christ, but every value of 
that death would have been sacrificed apart from the 
resurrection. When Christ arose from the dead, 
Christianity was born, and the new creation was 
brought into existence. There is nothing in the old 
order for the believer. He stands on resurrection 
ground. He belongs only to the new creation. God 
is faithful to all that He has wrought in Christ and 
He, according to His Word, will not suffer the child 
of the new creation to go back and celebrate the be- 
ginning of the old and fallen creation from which 
His child has been saved through infinite riches of 
grace. If the children of grace persist in relating 
themselves to the old creation by the observance of 


274 Grace 


the sabbath, it is evidence of their limitations in the 
knowledge of the Word and will of God; it is to fall 
from grace. 

Since the day of Christ’s resurrection is the day 
in which the new creation was formed, and all that 
enters into the Christian’s life and hope was brought 
into being, both according to Scripture and according 
to reason, the Christian can celebrate no other day 
than the Lord’s day. 

b. On the first day of the week Christ met His 
disciples in the new power and fellowship of His 
resurrection life. 

ce. On the first day of the week Christ symbolized 
the new resurrection fellowship by breaking bread 
with His disciples. 

d. On the first day of the week He gave them in- 
structions in their new resurrection ministry and 
life for Him. 

e. On the first day of the week He commanded the 
disciples to preach the new message to all the world. 

f. On the first day of the week Christ ascended 
into heaven as the ‘‘Wave Sheaf.’’ In fulfilling 
the Old Testament type and the eternal purpose of 
God, it was necessary that He should appear in 
heaven as the earnest of the mighty harvest of souls 
whom He had redeemed and who came out of that 
tomb with Him to share His eternal life and glory. 
So, also, He must, having accomplished the sacrifice 
for sin, present His own blood in heaven (Lev. 
16: 1-34; Heb. 9: 16-28). Having not yet ascended, 
He said to Mary, ‘‘Touch me not; for I am not yet 
ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren and 
say unto them, I ascend unto my father, and your 


The Life under Grace 275 


Father; and to my God, and your God’’ (John 
20:17). How little the mighty import of this mes- 
sage from Christ was understood then, and how little 
it is understood even now! That He ascended on 
that day is evident; for He said unto them at eve- 
ning of that day, ‘‘ Behold my hands and my feet, that 
it is I myself: handle me, and see’’ (Lk. 24:39). 
He had ascended to heaven, accomplished His work 
there, and returned to earth to complete His post- 
resurrection ministry. 

g. On the first day of the week He breathed on 
His disciples and imparted the Holy Spirit to them. 

h. On the first day of the week the Spirit descen- 
ded to take up His age-characterizing ministries in 
the world. 

i. On the first day of the week the Apostle Paul 
preached to the assembled believers at Troas. The 
Spirit of God has distinctly emphasized the fact that 
the Apostle was in Troas seven days. Of necessity, 
then, the stay in that city included both a seventh 
day and a first day of the week. The Apostle was 
thus free to choose either day for his public ministry 
to the assembled saints. The record reads: ‘‘We 

. came unto them to Troas . .. where we abode 
seven days. And upon the first day of the week,{ 
when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul’ 
preached unto them’’ (Acts 20: 6, 7). 

j. The Apostle commanded the Corinthian be- 
liever to ‘‘lay by him in store,’’ on the first day of 
the week, ‘‘as God hath prospered him’’ (1 Cor. 
16:2). 

k. On the first day of the week Christ appeared 
to John on Patmos in that revelation of Himself in 


276 Grace 


all His present resurrection, heavenly glory. He 
appeared to John on the Lord’s day. 


4. The new day typifies the new creation. 


The rite of circumcision, being accomplished on 
the eighth day, was a suggestion of the spiritual cir- 
cumcision of the flesh which Christ wrought by His 
death and resurrection. The eighth day was the first 
day following a completed week. It is thus a pic- 
ture of that new order which came through the death 
and resurrection of Christ. The Apostle writes: 
“In whom also ye are circumcised with the cireum- 
cision made without hands, in putting off the body of 
the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ’’ 
(Col. 2:11). Not only has the old nature been 
judged in the crucifixion, death, and burial of the 
Son of God, and the new victory in the resurrection 
life of Christ been made possible; but, for the be- 
liever, the old creation went into that tomb and a new 
creation with its heavenly power and glory came out. 
The old creation was abolished and with it the sab- 
bath which commemorated it. Only a new standing 
in the resurrected Christ abides and this both de- 
mands and provides a new day. That new day is the 
eighth day, or the first day following the ending of 
the old creation. 


5. The new day is typical of unmerited grace. 


The first day of the week is a type of the facts and 
relationships which are under grace; while the 
seventh day is a type of the: facts and relationships 
which are under the law. On the seventh day man 
rested from all his work. This is in harmony with 


The Life under Grace bia ral 


the law covenant of works, which required a man 
to do good in order that he might receive the bless- 
ing of God. Under the law, six days of faithful 
labor are followed by one day of absolute rest. On 
the other hand, the observance of the first day of the 
week is typical of the believer’s position under un- 
merited grace. He begins with a day of blessing 
before any works are wrought, and then he is ex- 
pected to live the following six days in the power and 
blessing he has received on that day. This is the 
order of the grace covenant of faith in which all 
saving grace is first bestowed as a gift from God, 
and is then followed by a life which is lived in the 
power of that new relationship with God. A day 
of rest belonged to a people who were related to 
God by works which were to be accomplished. A 
day of ceaseless worship and service belongs to a 
people who are related to God by the finished work 
of Christ. The seventh day was governed by an un- 
yielding, ironclad law. The first day is characterized 
by the latitude and liberty belonging to grace. The 
seventh day was observed with the hope that by 
it one might be accepted of God. The first day is 
observed with the assurance that one is already ac- 
eepted of God. The keeping of the seventh day was 
wrought by the flesh. The keeping of the first day 
is to be wrought by the indwelling Spirit. 


6. The new day began to be observed with the 
resurrection of Christ. 


It is claimed by a certain group of sabbatarians 
that the sabbath was kept by the early church until 
the day was changed by the Emperor Constantine in 


278 Grace 


the year 321 a.p., or even later by the Pope of Rome. 
There is no ground for this erroneous and misleading 
teaching. The sabbath was never changed. It could 
not be. A new and far different day in significance, 
which alone could belong to this age of grace, super- 
seded it. When this age is completed and law reigns 
again in the earth, the sabbath will be observed; but 
in no wise will man have changed the day. There is 
conclusive evidence that the first day of the week has 
been observed by the church from the very resurrec- 
tion of Christ. This evidence is found both (a) in 
the Scriptures and (b) in the writings of the early 
fathers: 

(a) Turning to the Epistles of the New Testament, 
wherein is conditioned the believer’s life under grace, 
we discover that there is prohibition against the ob- 
servance of a sabbath day, and that there is not one 
record that any Christian kept a sabbath day, even in 
error. On the other hand, there is abundant evi- 
dence, as has been seen, that the first day of the week 
was observed in the manner consistent with its signif- 
icance. 

(b) The testimony from the early fathers is also 
conclusive.* 

Eusebius, 315 a.pd., says: ‘‘The churches through- 
out the rest of the world observe the practice that 
has prevailed from Apostolic tradition until the 
present time so that it would not be proper to term- 
inate our fast on any other day but the resurrection 
day of our Saviour. Hence there were synods and 
_ 1These quotations from the early fathers are taken from 

Bowman’s Historical Evidence of the New Testament, Pgs. 


130-135; The Encylopedia Britannica under “Sunday ;” and 
Mosheim’s “Ecclesiastical History,’ Vol. I. Pg. 135. 


The Life under Grace 279 


conyocations of our Bishops on this question and 
all unanimously drew up an ecclesiastical decree 
which they communicated to churches in all places— 
that the mystery of the Lord’s resurrection should 
be celebrated on no other than the Lord’s Day.’’ 

Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, 300 A.p., says: ‘‘We 
keep the Lord’s Day as a day of joy because of him 
who rose thereon.’’ 

Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, 253 a.p., says: 
‘“‘The Lord’s Day is both the Ist, and the 8th day.”’ 

Tertullian, of Carthage, 200 a.D., says, speaking of 
the ‘‘sun-worshippers’’: ‘‘Though we share with 
them Sunday, we are not apprehensive lest we seem 
to be heathen.’’ 

Clement of Alexandria, 194 a. p., says: ‘‘The old 
sabbath day has become nothing more than a working 
day.”’ 

Trenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, 178 A.D., says: ‘‘The 
mystery of the Lord’s resurrection may not be cele- 
brated on any other day than the Lord’s Day.”’ 

Bardesanes, 160 A. p., says: ‘‘Wherever we be, all 
of us are called by the one name of the Messiah, 
namely Christians, and upon one day, which is the 
first day of the week, we assemble ourselves together 
and on the appointed days we abstain from food.”’ 

Justin Martyr, 135 4.D., says: ‘‘Sunday is the day 
upon which we all hold our communion assembly, 
because it is the first day on which God having 
wrought a change in the darkness and matter made 
the world and Jesus Christ our Saviour, on that day, 
rose from the dead and on the day ealled Sunday all 
who live in cities or in the country gather together in 
‘one place and the memoirs of the Apostles, or the 


280 Grace 


writings of the prophets are read as long as time per- 
mits.’? ‘‘On the Lord’s Day all Christians in the 
city or country meet together because that is the day 
of our Lord’s resurrection; and then we read the 
apostles and prophets. This being done, the president 
makes an oration to the assembly exhorting them to 
imitate and to practice the things which they have 
heard, and then we all join in prayer, and after that 
we celebrate the Lord’s Supper.’’ 

Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, 110 a. p., says: ‘‘If 
then those who walked in the ancient practices attain 
unto newness of hope no longer observing sabbaths, 
but fashioning their lives after the Lord’s Day, on 
which our life also arose through him, that we may 
be found disciples of Jesus Christ, our only teacher.”’ 

Barnabas, one of the Apostolic fathers, writing 70 
A. D., says: ‘‘Finally He saith, ‘Your present sabbaths 
are not acceptable to me. I shall make a new begin- 
ning of the eighth day, that is the beginning of an- 
other world,’ wherefore also we keep the Lord’s Day 
with joyfulness, the day also on which Jesus rose from 
the dead.”’ 

Also, the ‘‘Didache of the Apostles’’ 70 A. p., says: 
‘*On the Lord’s own Day gather yourselves together 
and break bread and give thanks.’’ 

By this line of unbroken testimony the evidence 
concerning the observance of the Lord’s day is ear- 
ried back to the days of the writings of the New Testa- 
ment. It is quite true that Emperors and Popes have 
made decrees regarding the first day of the week. 
Everything was done that could be done to persecute 
the Jew, and to abolish Jewish practices; but the Jew- 


The Life under Grace 281 


ish sabbath passed, and the new day came to be, not 
by the decree of man, but by the resurrection of Christ 
which brought in all that the Lord’s day signifies. 


7. The new day has been blessed of God 


Christians have observed the Lord’s day under the 
evident blessing of God for nearly 2000 years. Among 
them have been the most devout believers, the mar- 
tyrs, the missionaries, and a countless throng of those 
who would have passed through any trial or persecu- 
tion to know and do the will of God. It is a very 
serious charge to say that all these faithful saints 
have been disobedient, or as some sabbatarians now 
call all Christians who do not keep sabbath, ‘‘here- 
ties,’’ ‘‘deceivers,’’ ‘‘having the mark of the Beast,”’ 
and ‘‘blinded by Satan.’’ The Gospel of grace is by 
these people substituted by ‘‘another gospel’’ which 
is to the effect that only those who keep the sabbath 
will be saved, and they also teach that God has ‘‘for- 
saken His church’’ and that she is ‘‘abandoned to 
Satan who rules her.’’ In spite of the fact that God 
has never once imposed the sabbath upon the age of 
grace, they make the preaching of the sabbath their 
major theme, and in seeming bitterness, do not hesi- 
tate to hinder the good works of all who love and keep 
the Lord’s day. Along with the error of preaching 
the law in place of the Gospel, these sabbatarians hold 
and teach other misleading heresies and unbiblical 
doctrines. Being so much in error concerning many 
fundamental doctrines of the Bible, it is not strange 
that they persist in sabbath legality. 

The reasons for keeping the Lord’s day, or the first 


282 Grace 


day of the week, are clear and sufficient to those who 
will receive the teachings of God’s Word without 
prejudice. 


Second. The Biblical Observance of the Lord’s 
Day. 


The manner in which the first day of the week 
should be observed is clearly indicated by the very 
name which is given to it in the Scriptures. Being 
the Lord’s day, it is to be lived in that manner which 
will most honor and glorify the Lord. Whatever en- 
ters into the present relationship between the believer 
and his Lord, such as prayer, joyful worship, and 
service, will naturally characterize the observance of 
the day. Particular care should be exercised that no 
element of a Jewish sabbath be incorporated into the 
manner of the keeping of the Lord’s day. Not only 
does such an intrusion create confusion in the mind 
as to the meaning and purpose of the day, but it is 
a co-mingling of the elements of law and grace, and 
this, it is certain, is not according to the mind of God. 
The two days are similar only in one respect: they 
both sustain the ratio of one particular day in seven. 
There is not the slightest reason for any combination 
of their respective features. Should this exhortation 
to watchfulness lest these days be confused seem to be 
extreme, it should be remembered that only thus can 
a believer stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ 
has made him free, and not be entangled again in a 
yoke of bondage. Only thus can he be saved from 
violating the most precious aspect of his own relation 
to God under grace, and from disregarding the most 
vital injunctions of those Scriptures which condition 


The Life under Grace 283 


his life under grace. Christians have been saved from 
the curse of the law by the death of Christ (Gal. 
3:13). This marvelous deliverance has cost the sacri- 
fice of the Son of God, and it cannot be an unimpor- 
tant issue in the mind of God. The believer who 
would really keep the day in conformity to the re- 
vealed will of his Lord, should duly consider the fact 
that every aspect of sabbath observance is purely 
legal, and related only to law, and that Christ has 
died to save him from any complicity with the law. 
The observance of the Lord’s day as recorded in the 
New Testament, is free from every relationship to the 
Jewish sabbath. 

When contemplating the Scriptural observance of 
the Lord’s day, three considerations arise: (1) It be- 
longs to a particular people; (2) it is not subject to 
rules; and (8) its observance is not limited to one 
day. 


1. The Lord’s day belongs to a particular people. 


As the sabbath under the law belonged only to the 
nation Israel, so, in like manner, the new day in grace 
belongs only to those who are regenerated by the 
Spirit. In arriving at the full force of this state- 
ment, it should be noted: 


a. The Lord’s day, like every other aspect of 
grace, is an appeal to the individual believer only. 


As men are now saved by a personal faith, and 
afterwards their service is in the power of an indi- 
vidual gift by the Spirit, they walk alone in the 
‘Spirit, and they receive their own reward for faith- 
fulness to God. In conformity with this truth, there- 


284 Grace 


fore, the observance of the day is to be personal. The 
exact manner of its observance is a matter between 
the individual believer and his Lord. The Scriptures 
presuppose that the believer is a normal Christian to 
the extent that he is yielded to God and walking in 
the Spirit, that it will be his delight to do the will of 
God, and to rejoice above all else in the larger free- 
dom which the Lord’s day affords for worship and 
service. If perchance he is not thus yielded to God, 
no foreed, outward observance of the day will correct 
his carnal heart, nor would such an observance of a 
day be pleasing to God. 

No day has been committed to the Church as a 
body. Apart from the two exceptions that the be- 
liever is to consider his possible influence upon a 
weaker brother, and his own conduct in the light of 
expediency, the day is to be observed by the indi- 
vidual out of the fullness of his own heart. Beyond 
this there are no rules, nor could there be; for apart 
from this there is no possibility of continuing in those 
exact relationships which belong to grace. Concern- 
ing the observance of the Lord’s day the Apostle said: 
“‘Let every man [Christian] be fully persuaded in 
his own mind’”’ (Rom. 14:5). 


b. The Lord’s day is not for the unregenerate. 


The unsaved sustain no relation to the Lord’s day, 
since that day belongs only to the new creation, and 
therefore the pressing of the observance of a relig- 
ious day upon the individual who is unsaved, is mis- 
leading in the extreme; for it tends to the utter con- 
fusion of the Gospel of grace. God is not calling on 
the unsaved to keep a day to which they could in no 


The Life under Grace 285 


way be related. The issue between God and the sinner 
is the one issue which the new Gospel of grace has 
raised and imposed. It is a question as to whether he 
will believe on the Lord Jesus Christ unto forgiveness 
and eternal life. The person who observes a day 
while rejecting Christ as Saviour, is no nearer salva- 
tion or acceptance with God than he would otherwise 
be. That supposed merit, gained by keeping a day, 
may be the one thing that hinders him from discover- 
ing Christ as the Saviour for a meritless sinner. Men 
are not saved by any works whatsoever, and any 
teaching which misdirects them at this point is 
‘another gospel’’ and subject to the anathema of 
God (Gal. 1:8). If the motive in pressing the re- 
ligious observance of a day upon the unregenerate be 
for the moral and civie good of the community, the 
question should be answered as to whether the moral 
and civie betterment of the world is more important 
than the salvation of men. 


e. The Lord’s day ts not a national day. 


When a day is imposed upon the nation it is, with- 
out exception, upon the authority of the Jewish sab- 
bath of rest, and not on the authority of anything 
which obtains in the new creation. The error of this 
legalism needs no further exposition. God is certainly 
not imposing a legal sabbath on any nation, or the 
world, when He has given His Son to remove that 
whole law-eurse and to place men where they might 
be saved apart from works of their own. In this age 
God is represented as dealing with the individual 
‘only. In matters of human government, it is the 
““times of the Gentiles,’’ with all that is involved, and 


286 Grace 


no individual or nation is now accepted of God on the 
basis of human works. 

It is most imperative that a day of rest for man 
and beast be maintained by civic authority. No in- 
telligent person could vote otherwise; but the day 
should be enforced as all other humanitarian laws 
and other portions of the Decalogue are enforced, and 
not as a meritorious religious observance. At any 
cost the sabbath-observance stumbling-stone should be 
kept from the path of the unsaved. 


d. The Lord’s day and the children. 


The question often arises in the Christian home us 
to the manner in which the Lord’s day should be 
observed by children. Upon this subject a suggestion 
may be advanced: Until he is of age, the child is prop- 
erly under the direction of the parents and the gov- 
ernment of the home. He should live in conformity 
to the wishes and customs of the parents, but it is 
vitally important that the child should be brought to 
know Christ as a Saviour at the earliest possible 
moment. Then the Lord’s day becomes to him a 
matter of his own privilege and personal delight, and 
not a law prescribed by the parents. Care should be 
taken, as well, that the day of grace should not be- 
come a subject of dislike and prejudice in the mind 
of the child. 


2. The Lord’s day is not subject to rules. 


Such is the character of all the teachings of grace, 
and at this point the grace teachings are wholly in 
contrast to the teachings of all law. . The law contem- 
plated the people to whom it was addressed as being 


The Life under Grace 287 


children and thus subject to ‘‘tutors and governors.’’ 
Every detail of their prescribed life was a matter of 
explicit law. The flesh was in no way depended upon 
to direct itself. The believer under grace is an adult 
son in the Father’s house, with the wider latitude 
which belongs to the full-grown, self-responsible man. 
Therefore the teachings of grace are not explicit as to 
detail. They anticipate the immediate inner judg- 
ment by the indwelling Spirit. Under grace, great 
principles are announced, but the outworking of those 
principles is to be according to the leading of the 
Spirit in the individual. Liberality is enjoined, but 
the object and amount of the gift is a matter of 
prayerful dependence on the Spirit. As to service, 
every Christian is to be instant in season and out of 
season, but the gifts for service and the manner and 
place of their exercise is ‘‘as he will.’’ Prayer is to 
be offered without ceasing, but we know not what to 
pray for as we ought. However in this again, the 
Spirit helpeth our infirmities and He maketh inter- 
cession for us according to the mind of God. The 
believer’s life under grace is a ‘‘walk in the Spirit.’’ 
Step by step, every detail is to be wrought in the 
heart by the Spirit, and there are no more detail- 
rules for the observance of the Lord’s day than for 
the outworking of any other responsibility or privi- 
lege under grace. The flesh is not now to be controlled 
by laws; but by the Lordship of the Spirit. Not hav- 
ing specific rules for the keeping of the Christian’s 
day, and not duly considering the divine provision 
for a spiritual life in the power of the Spirit, men, 
‘hoping to keep control of the flesh, have turned to the 
Jewish sabbath laws and forced them onto the Lord’s 


288 Grace 


day. In so doing, they have repudiated one of the 
most vital accomplishments of the death of Christ, 
they have robbed believers of their liberty in grace, 
and, so far as their influence goes, they have degraded 
the full-grown sons of God to the level of mere chil- 
dren who are under ‘‘tutors and governors.”’ 

The real question is not, How shall we preserve the 
sacredness of the day unless we have laws and enforce 
them? It is rather, can the believer, to whom the 
day belongs, be trusted, when filled with the Spirit, to 
glorify God on the Lord’s day? Evidently there will 
be no failure to observe the day on the part of the 
Spirit-filled believer. But what of the great company 
of carnal Christians? Should they not be held by 
laws to the keeping of the day? In reply to this im- 
portant question it should be stated: The position of 
a carnal Christian is different from that of the un- 
saved. The Lord’s day belongs to the Christian, but 
it does not belong to the unregenerate. The Christian 
alone faces the problem related to the Lord’s day. 
The problem, therefore, resolves itself into this: Is 
God satisfied when the Christian’s life is merely a 
forced, outward conformity to unpleasant ideals? 
The answer is obvious. One of the essential glories 
of grace is that God-honoring manner of life which 
is an outflow and overflow of the heart. No painful 
observance of law will ever correct a carnal heart. 
The cure is found only in the right adjustment of the 
heart to the Spirit. Too often the Christian life is 
presented as being a matter of observing certain rules 
and sustaining a superficial outward conduct, to the 
neglect of the divinely provided, victorious, overflow- 
ing life in the Spirit. Notwithstanding the conster- 


The Life under Grace 289 


nation of the untaught legalist who proposes to regu- 
late Christian conduct by precept, the truth stands 
that the Lord’s day imposes no rules, and yields to no 
law. True to grace, there are, however, certain well- 
defined principles to be stated: 


a. It, being the Lord’s day, is to be lived’ well- 
pleasing to Him. 


This principle is the embodiment of all other prin- 
ciples related to the keeping of the Lord’s day; but 
the detail of this heaven-high ideal, as has been seen, 
cannot be determined by rules, nor can it ever be 
wrought by the flesh. There is but one exception: It 
has pleased the Lord to give minute instruction as to 
the manner of the observance of His memorial supper. 


b. The Lord’s day celebrates the resurrection of 
Christ. 


If this be true, then all obligation to observe the 
day of rest, which is related to the old creation, is 
excluded. The day is to be celebrated in the new life 
and service of the resurrected Christ. 


ce. The Lord’s day yields to no law. 


Like all law, the law of a certain day has been kept 
and fulfilled for the believer by Christ. There re- 
mains for the believer only overflowing praise and 
joyful service. The element of necessity has likewise 
passed. Men are not compelled to keep a day to be 
accepted of God. They, if saved, are already ac- 
cepted ‘‘in the beloved.’’ The day should be kept 
‘because of perfection in Christ, and not unto per- 
fection in Christ. 


\ 


290 Grace 


d. It isa day of personal delight. 


When the Lord’s day becomes a burden to the indi- 
vidual, to him it is no longer a day of grace. It is 
characterized by that attitude of heart which delights 
to do the will of God. When this day was prophetic- 
ally announced, it was said: ‘‘This is the day which 
the Lorp hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in 
it.’’? So, also, the first word from the lips of the 
resurrected Christ on the morning of His resurrection 
was, ‘‘All hail!’ (The word here is chairo, and 
means rejoice, or, O joy!.) The Lord’s day should 
be celebrated in the fullest experience of the ‘‘joy of 
the Lord.’’ 


e. The Lord’s day is a day for the largest Chris- 
tian activity. 

The risen Lord revealed the character of the day on 
that same early morning when He said: ‘‘G@o tell.”’ 
This is the obligation toward the new evangel, the giv- 
ing of which is to occupy every believer. As the Old 
Testament priests went in to perform a sacrifice, the 
New Testament priests,—all believers under grace,— 
are to go out to the ends of the earth to tell of the 
sacrifice which has been performed. The Lord’s day 
is not a day for selfish entertainment or amusement. 
It is not a day for idleness and rest. Its privileges 
should be, and will be, preserved by all who delight 
to do His will. It becomes an opportunity for many 
who are held by secular work during the days of the 
week, to offer the fuller service of prayer, worship, 
and testimony which belongs to their Lord. The in- 
structed Christian no longer labors to be accepted of 


The Life under Grace 291 


God, which was the obligation under the law; but he, 
being accepted in grace, labors to glorify his Lord who 
saves him. He has ceased from his own works, and 
though ceaselessly active, is working in the power and 
energy of the Spirit. His activity is not limited to 
one day, or to six days: it is ‘‘in season and out of 
season’’ according to the mind and will of the Spirit. 
Spirit-filled believers have always violated every fea- 
ture of a strict Jewish sabbath of rest when serving 
as ‘‘able ministers of the new convenant.’’ If led of 
the Spirit thus to serve, the resulting violation of the 
sabbath is in reality the work of the Spirit. It would 
be a herculean task, indeed, to attempt to prove that 
ali Christian service and activity exercised on the first 
day of the week for nineteen centuries has been offen- 
sive to God because it violated the demands of a sab- 
bath of rest, or that the neglect of the seventh day by 
all the believers of the Christian era, has, in the mind 
of God, merited the penalty of death. Yet this is 
the logical charge to be made against all these believ- 
ers unless it be admitted that they had individually 
entered, as a prerequisite to service, into the sabbath 
rest of that which is finished forever in the cross. 


f. The Lord’s day observance is to be governed 
by the law of expediency, and the law of love. 


The law of expediency permits the undertaking on 
the Lord’s day of only those things which are advis- 
able, advantageous, and suitable. Judgment in these 
things should be formed only in view of the Biblical 
teachings concerning the Lord’s day responsibility,— 
‘not the Jewish sabbath,—and in view of the need of 
others, and the possible influence which any partic- 


292 Grace 


ular action might have upon others. The Christian 
objective is not a slavish conformity to certain laws 
governing a day. It is concerned rather with the 
question as to what will most glorify Christ and ad- 
vance the cause of His saving grace in the earth. 

When adjusted to the law of love, the Christian 
will not exercise his own liberty in such a manner as 
to hinder and offend a weaker brother who through 
false teaching has developed a conscience toward a 
Jewish sabbath, nor will he rob others of the exercise 
of their own worship and service. Such issues have 
to be given due consideration when dealing with all 
questions of travel and of relationship to those who 
serve. 


3. The manner of the observance of the Lord’s 
day may be extended to all days. 


The Lord’s day observance alone is capable of being 
extended to all days; for in no wise could a Jewish 
sabbath be thus extended. It is evident, therefore, 
that the Apostle’s reference to the keeping of a day, 
as found in Rom. 14: 1-12, is a reference to the Lord’s 
day and not to a sabbath day. He writes: ‘‘Who art 
thou that judgest another man’s servant? to his own 
master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be 
holden up: for God is able to make him stand. 
One man esteemeth one day above another: another 
esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully 
persuaded in his own mind. He that regardeth the 
day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that regard- 
eth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. . . . 
For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of 


The Life under Grace 293 


Christ. . . . So then every one of us, shall give an 
account of himself to God.’’ 

The primary teaching of this passage puts the em- 
phasis on the fact that Christian conduct is largely a 
matter to be settled between the believer and his Lord. 
There need be no fear; ‘‘God is able to make him 
stand.’’ The passage might be understood as present- 
ing a contrast between a man who keeps one day, and 
a man who keeps no day at all. In such a case, God 
will deal with the wrong in His child, if wrong there 
be. In attempting to adjust such a situation, men 
might compel the erring one to observe a day, or, as a 
penalty for failure, exclude him from their fellow- 
ship. The divine method is to change the heart. 
This God alone can do. 

But in this particular instance it will be observed 
that concerning the man of whom it is said that he 
does not regard the day, it is also said that ‘‘unto the 
Lord he doth not regard it.’’ It is as much a matter 
of devotion to God in the ease of the one man as it is 
in the case of the other. It is therefore probable that 
the contrast is between the man who keeps one day 
as unto the Lord, and another man who keeps all days 
as unto the Lord. There must be sufficient room in 
the Christian fellowship for these two equally sincere 
men to live in joyful companionship in Christ. It 
would be quite human for each of these men to form 
mutually exclusive denominations for the conservation 
of his own peculiar convictions. This, however, would 
not be in harmony with the life under grace. The 
aan who esteems all days alike, extends the joyous 

worship, praise, and service belonging to the Lord’s 


294 Grace 


day into every day. This leads to the consideration 
of the fact that there is (a) a true sabbath under 
grace, and (b) there is yet to be a millennial sabbath 
in the earth. 


a. The true sabbath under grace. 


The sabbath under the law was a day. The sab- 
bath under grace is a life. The law, even of the 
sabbath, was but ‘‘a shadow of good things to come,’’ 
but Christ is now the Substance. The sabbath under 
grace knows no shadow. It is radiant with the glory 
of the resurrected Christ. 

In Hebrews 4: 1-16 there is full revelation concern- 
ing the sabbath under grace. This whole message is 
gathered up in one brief portion of the passage: 
‘There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of 
God. For he that is entered into his rest, he also hath 
ceased from his own works, as God did from his’’ 
(vs. 9, 10). There is no reference in this Seripture 
to the rest into which the Christian enters at death. 
It is rather, ‘‘For we which have believed do enter in- 
to rest’’ (v. 3). It is the rest of ‘‘him that worketh 
not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly”’ 
(Rom. 4:5), and the rest of the one who, ‘‘walking 
in the Spirit,’’ discovers that he does not fulfill the 
‘lust of the flesh, and who enters into the realization 
of the provision through the indwelling Spirit that 
the whole will of God is to be fulfilled in him, rather 
than by him. This great blessing is not restricted to 
a sabbath day; it is an unbroken sabbath life. The 
sabbath of the law was, then, a day of absolute rest; 
the sabbath under grace is a life which is delivered 
from all works of the flesh since Christ has wrought, 


The Life under Grace 295 


and is free from every dependence on the flesh since 
the Spirit has been given. No burden was allowed to 
be borne on the sabbath under the law; every burden 
is to be cast on the Lord in the sabbath of grace. The 
sabbath of the law was a day of rest for self; the sab- 
bath of grace is a rest from self. It is a life which is 
to be lived to the glory and praise of Another. In 
the sabbath under the law, man was to cease from do- 
ing his own will for one day in seven; in the sabbath 
under grace the believer is to be ey and 
wholly yielded to God.t 

Every vestige of the system which provided for the 
giving of one-seventh of the time in conformity to the 


1 There is significance in the fact that the Greek word for 
week is sabbaton, which also means sabbath. Thus in Mt. 
28:1, referring to the day of Christ’s resurrection, we have 
the possible literal reading: “At the end of the sabbath as it 
began to dawn on the first day of sabbaths” (Cf Mk. 16: 2, 9; 
Lk. 24:1; John 20:1, 19; Acts 13:14; 16:13). At least 
three expositions of this passage are possible. 

1. That there is no significance in the fact that the resur- 
rection day is called sabbath since it is the same Greek word 
for week. This is evidently the position taken by trans- 
lators generally. The one passage, “I fast twice in the 
week” (Lk. 18:12) would be difficult under a sabbath in- 
terpretation unless it be taken to mean, “I fast twice on the 
sabbath.” 

2. That the use of the word sabbaton in connection with the 
day of resurrection warrants the use of the phrase, Christian 
Sabbath, but the strong objection to this usage is the absolute 
prohibition in the Epistles against the sabbath day under 
any form whatsoever. 

3. That the resurrection morning was the first day of 
all the days which were to enter into the age of grace, and 
that age, so far as a sabbath is concerned, is a period in 
which the believer has entered into rest. Under this inter- 
pretation, the resurrection day was the first day of sab- 
baths, which series was to include every succeeding day 
‘until the Lord returns. 


296 Grace 


will of God, is removed, and in its place the every- 
day, unchanging experience of that good, and accept- 
able, and perfect will of God has been substituted. 
It is inconceivable that Christ was more devoted to 
His Father on one day than on another. To intrude 
the legal sabbath into the present order of fellowship 
with God, is to rob Him of six-sevenths of His glory 
in grace. 

It is true that the Christian has a day which is 
given to him from God, and this day is to be observed ; 
but its observance is never a matter of greater piety, 
devotion, or yieldedness to God than of any other day. 
Its observance consists in a larger freedom, because 
of the cessation of temporal cares, to do all that his 
heart is yearning to do all the days. The sabbath in 
grace is, therefore, an experience of all that enters 
into the highest ideals of the Christian’s life and de- 
votion to God. Blessed indeed are the children of 
God who learn to turn from holy days, from lenten 
seasons, and from all mere forms, if these even suggest 
the thought of fitfulness in fellowship and service 
with Christ. Doubtless, in spite of the glory of the 
true sabbath under grace, there will always be those 
who will continue to give their tenth, in place of giv- 
ing themselves and all that they are and have, and 
who will give a mere fraction of their time for devo- 
tion to God, rather than their lives. The true sabbath 
under grace is well stated in these words: ‘‘ Whether 
therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all 
to the glory of God’’ (1 Cor. 10: 81) ; ‘‘Be instant in 
season, out of season’’ (2 Tim. 4:2); ‘‘Pray without 
ceasing’’ (1 Thes. 5:17) ; ‘‘Giving thanks always for 


The Life under Grace 297 


all things’? (Eph. 5:20); ‘‘Rejoice evermore’”’ (1 
Thes. 5:16); and, ‘‘Be ye steadfast, unmoveable, al- 
ways abounding in the work of the Lord’’ (1 Cor. 
15:58). . 


b. The millennial sabbath. 


The sabbath, as a type, will have its final earthly 
fulfillment in the coming kingdom-reign of Christ. 
It seems probable that it will be at the end of its 
six thousand years of labor and oppression under the 
power of sin and Satan, that the earth will celebrate 
its predicted thousand-year, jubilee sabbath of rest. 
During that period the Church will be reigning with 
the King as His Bride, and Israel will again keep her 
seventh-day sabbath, but in the new enabling power 
which is to be provided in that age of the divine glory 
in the earth. Of that kingdom-age it is written: 
‘‘ And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon 
to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all 
fiesh come to worship before me, saith the Lorp’’ (Isa. 
66: 23). 


Ill. CERTAIN CURRENT ERRORS. 


A brief recapitulation of what has already been 
covered of the current errors on the sabbath question 
is here given in conclusion of this aspect of the 
teachings of grace. 


First. That the Sabbath Obtains from Creation 
to the End of Time. 


There is no Scripture upon which this claim may 


298 Grace 


be based, either for the period from Adam to the giv- 
ing of the law, or from the death of Christ until the 
end of the present age of grace. 


Second. That the Sabbath was Ever Given to Gen- 
tiles. 


The disastrous results of the prevalent custom 
of borrowing certain features from Judaism, in- 
eluding its sabbath, and intruding them into Chris- 
tianity cannot be too strongly emphasized. This 
error carries with it the obligation to keep the law in 
its totality, disregards one of the most vital accom- 
plishments of Christ in His death, and creates a condi- 
tion of hopeless confusion in all matters related to 
the right divisions of the Scriptures. 

The whole seventh-day error is a logical outcome 
of an assumed freedom to apply Jewish Scriptures to 
the Church of God. 


Third. That the Decalogue was Never a part of 
the Law, and Therefore the Sabbath of the Decalogue 
is Now Binding Though the Law is Done Away. 


This claim is silenced by the Scriptures. The Dec- 
alogue is included, incorporated, and embedded in 
the Old Testament statement of the law; and in the 
New Testament, the decalogue is explicitly declared 
to be ‘‘THE Law’”’ (Rom. 7:7). 


Fourth. That the Jewish Sabbath was Changed to 
the Lord’s Day. 


Emperors, Popes, church councils, and creeds have 
declared the obligation to observe the first day of the 
week as the sabbath. Such decrees have never 


The Life under Grace 299 


changed the sabbath to the Lord’s day. The sab- 
bath could not be changed. An entirely different 
day has been established by God Himself. This new 
day belongs to the transcendent realities of the new 
creation which was brought into existence through 
the resurrection of Christ. The Lord’s day is 
different from the sabbath in every consideration but 
one, namely, like the Jewish sabbath, it is a reserva- 
tion of one particular day in seven. 


Fifth. That the Lord’s Day Should be Called the 
Christian Sabbath. 

The practice of speaking of the Lord’s day as the 
Christian sabbath is wholly without Scriptural war- 
rant, and is no doubt more often the result of careless 
habit, or lack of due consideration of the Bible teach- 
ings, than of unbelief. 


Sixth. The Practice of Adopting Rules from the 
Jewish Sabbath Law to Supplement the Precious Ab- 
sence of Rules for the Lord’s Day. 

This blasting error should be judged without 
mercy, for it, in effect, drives every grace-aspect of 
the Lord’s day from the field, and induces one ‘‘to 
tempt God’’ (Cf Acts 15:10). The toleration of 
this error not only reveals a total misconception of the 
glories of grace, but it darkens counsel, and compli- 
cates the saving Gospel of Christ. 


Seventh. That the Universal Observance of a 
Sabbath, or Lord’s Day, Should be Required by Leg- 
islation of a Town, a State, or a Nation. 

This teaching, likewise, is foreign to Scripture. Let, 
those who are pursuing this idea pause to con- 


300 Grace 


sider whether their energy might not be employed in 
a manner which is more pleasing to Christ by heeding 
His last command to go into all the world and preach 
the Gospel, rather than to attempt to compel unwill- 
ing, Christ-rejecting hearts into a mere religious for- 
mality which only develops self-righteous Pharisees 
who are as surely doomed without Christ as though 
they had never heard of a holy day. 


APPENDIX A 


(continued from page 250) 


Ezekiel 20:10-12 is equally important in fixing the 
exact time when the sabbath law was imposed. We 
read: ‘‘Wherefore I caused them to go forth out 
of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wil- 
derness. And I gave them my statutes, and shewed 
them my judgments, which if a man do, he shall even 
live in them. Moreover also I gave them my sab- 
baths, to be a sign between me and them: that they 
might know that I am the LORD that sanctify them.’’ 

Likewise, from the historical narrative given in 
Exodus, chapter 16, it will be seen that the day which 
was seven days, or one full week, previous to that sab- 
bath which, so far as Scripture records, was first ob- 
served by man was not kept as a sabbath according 
to the Mosaic law; for on that day, which was seven 
days previous to the first recorded sabbath, the chil- 
dren of Israel are said to have journeyed from Elim 
to the Wilderness of Sin—a distance of over twenty 
miles. 


THE LIFE UNDER GRACE 
(concluded) 


SECTION SEVEN 


CHRIST, THE BELIEVER ’§ SPHERE IN GRACE 


There is probably no word of Scripture which more 
clearly defines the essential fact concerning the 
Christian than the phrase, ‘‘In Christ,’’ and as the 
Christian is the most important fact of all creation, 
there has never been a word uttered which was so 
far-reaching in its implication, or which is fraught 
with greater meaning to humanity than the phrase, 
“In Christ.’’ This phrase, with its equivalents, ‘‘In 
Christ Jesus,’’ ‘‘In Him,’’ ‘‘In the Beloved,’’ ‘‘By 
Him,’’ ‘‘Through Him,’’ and ‘‘With Him,’’ appears 
in the grace teachings of the New Testament no less 
than 130 times. This most unusual emphasis upon 
one particular truth is arresting, and its import must 
not be slighted. Over against the emphasis which is 
given to this truth in the teachings of grace, is the 
corresponding fact that there is no hint of a possible 
position in Christ in any teaching of the law or of the 
kingdom. The believer’s present position in Christ 
was not seen even in type or prophecy. In the ages 
past it was a secret hid in the mind and heart of God. 
He who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in 
Christ, ‘‘hath chosen us in him before the foundation 


of the world, that we should be holy and without 
301 


302 Grace 


blame before him in love: having predestinated us 
unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to him- 
self, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the 
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made 
us accepted in the beloved. In whom we have re- 
demption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, 
according to the riches of his grace; wherein he hath 
abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; 
having made known unto us the mystery [sacred 
secret] of his will, according to his good pleasure 
which he hath purposed in himself: that in the dis- 
pensation of the fulness of time he might gather to- 
gether in one all things in Christ, both which are in 
heaven, and which are on earth; even in him: in whom 
also we have obtained an inheritance, being predes- 
tinated according to the purpose of him who worketh 
all things after the counsel of his own will: that we 
should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted 
in Christ.”’ 

Who can comprehend the full scope of these eternal 
wonders? Knowing the limitation of the human 
heart, at this point the Apostle breaks forth into 
prayer: ‘‘ Wherefore I also, after I heard of your 
faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints, 
cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of 
you in my prayers; that the God of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the 
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of 
him: the eyes of your understanding [heart] being 
enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of 
his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his in- 
heritance in the saints.”’ 

Having thus prayed that the Christian may know 


The Life under Grace 303 


by divine illumination the hope of his calling and the 
riches of the glory of the inheritance which God now 
has in the saints, he continues to pray that they may 
also know by the same divine revelation, ‘‘the exceed- 
ing greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, 
according to the working of his mighty power, which 
he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the 
dead, and set him at his own right hand in the 
heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, 
and might, and dominion, and every name that is 
named, not only in this world, but also in that which 
is to come: and hath put all things under his feet, 
and gave him to be head over all things to the church, 
which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all 
in all’’ (Eph. 1: 2-23). 

Growing out of this glorious relationship in Christ, 
is a most natural responsibility to walk worthy of the 
calling ; but the issues of a daily life and the character 
of the conduct which should enter into it, though im- 
portant in their place, are lost and forgotten in the 
blaze of the eternal glory of that unchangeable grace 
which has brought the believer into the new creation 
an Christ Jesus. 

To be in Christ is to be in the sphere of His own 
infinite Person, power, and glory. He surrounds, He 
protects, He separates from all else, and He indwells 
the one in Him. He also supplies in Himself all that 
a soul will ever need in time or eternity. 

The union which is formed in Christ is deeper than 
any relationship the human mind has ever conceived. 
In His priestly prayer, in which He had advanced 
onto resurrection ground, and where He contemplated 
the glory of His finished work as having been already 


304 Grace 


accomplished (Cf John 17:11), Christ spoke of three 
unities within the sphere of one relationship: (1) The 
unity within the Persons of the Blessed Trinity, (2) 
the unity between the Persons of the Trinity and all 
believers, and (3) the unity between the believers 
themselves, since they are in Him. We read: ‘‘ Neither 
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall 
believe on me through their word; that they all may 
be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that 
they also may be one in us. . . . I in them, and thou 
in me, that they may be made perfect in one’’ (John 
17: 20-23). Who can fathom the depths of the reve- 
lation that the believer is related to Christ on the 
very plane of that oneness which exists between the 
Father and the Son? 

Again, Christ likens the union which exists between 
‘Himself and the believer to the vital, organic relation 
that exists between the vine and its living branch. 
The branch is in the vine and the life of the vine is 
an the branch; but the branch possesses no independ- 
ent life in itself. It cannot exist apart from the vine. 
The human child may outgrow dependence upon its 
parents and, in turn, support and sustain them; but 
the branch can never become independent of the vine. 
In like manner, the fruit and every manifestation of 
life in the branch is due to the ceaseless inflow of the 
vitality of the vine. The fruit is as much the fruit 
of the vine as it is the fruit of the branch (Cf John 
15:5; Rom. 7:4; Gal. 5:22, 23). Thus it is with the 
one who is in Christ. 

Considering the same fact of unity, the Apostle 
Paul likens Christ to the head and the believers to 
members in a body. This figure illustrates the same 


The Life under Grace 305 


vital, dependent relationship. The member in the 
body partakes of the merit and honor of the head, and 
the life and power of the head is imparted to the 
member. So perfect is this unity between the Head 
and the members of the body, that it is probable that 
Christ will never be seen in glory apart from His 
body, and the body will never be seen apart from 
Him (Cf 1 Cor. 12:12). 

From these illustrative Seriptures it will be ob- 
served that the unity between Christ and the believer 
is two-fold: The believer ig in Christ, and Christ is 
am the believer. The believer is in Christ as to posi- 
tions, possessions, safe-keeping, and association; and 
Christ is in the believer giving life, character and 
dynamic for conduct. 

It has already been pointed out that the upper- 
room conversation, recorded in John, chapters 13 
to 16, presents the grace teachings of Christ, and is 
the germ of all the truth that is found in the Epistles, 
which, in turn, contain the revelation of the essential 
fact of the new creation and the resulting obligation 
as to daily life. The doctrinal truth of the Epistles, 
which is the doctrinal truth of grace, is subject to the 
same two-fold division—what the saved one is in 
Christ, and the character and power of the daily life 
that will be experienced when the victorious energy 
of the indwelling Christ is imparted. 

At one point in the midst of the upper-room dis- 
course, Christ compressed the whole doctrinal struc- 
ture of grace into one brief phrase. This phrase 
is notable because it is the key to all the facts and 

relationships under grace, and because of its simplic- 
ity and brevity of language: 


306 Grace 


““Ve in me, and I in you”’ (John 14: 20). 

These two aspects of the truth under grace will be 
considered separately. (1) ‘‘Ye in me,’’ (2) “‘I in 
you.”’ 


I. ‘‘Ye In Me.”’ 


Every child of God is vitally united to Christ. He 
is placed in Christ by the baptism with the Spirit, 
which ministry of the Spirit is not only a part of sal- 
vation and therefore already accomplished for all 
who are saved, but it is distinctly said to be a minis- 
try that is wrought for all who believe on Christ. 
The Scriptures state: ‘‘For by one Spirit are we 
all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or 
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been 
all made to drink into one Spirit’’ (1 Cor. 12:18). 

This is the one passage in the Word of God which 
reveals the precise meaning and objective of the 
baptism with the Spirit. Since its meaning is clear, 
there is no excuse for the prevalent errors connected 
with this truth. Being accomplished for ‘‘all,’’ the 
baptism with the Spirit includes the one who has 
just been saved. Thus the time of its accomplish- 
ment is revealed. It is, of necessity, synchronous 
with salvation itself, and therefore a part of it. 
Likewise, the same passage presents the divine ob- 
jective which is accomplished by the Spirit’s baptism. 
It is ‘‘into one body,’’ and that believers may be 
‘*made to drink into one Spirit.’’ There was a time 
when the individual was not in Christ, which is the 
present estate of all who are unsaved. There fol- 
lows a time when the individual, being saved, is in 


The Life under Grace 307 


Christ. This great change consists in the fact that 
he has been placed in that vital organic union with 
Christ by the baptism with the Spirit. By the Spirit 
he has been baptized into the very body of Christ, 
and this ministry of the Spirit, likewise, unites all 
who are saved into a unity of their own; for they are 
‘‘made to drink into one Spirit.’’ 

There is no other work of God for the individual 
which seems to accomplish so much as the baptism 
with the Spirit; for by it the living union with 
Christ is established forever, and by virtue of that 
union the believer has entered the sphere of all 
heavenly positions and all eternal possessions which 
in grace are provided for him in Christ. To the 
Christian, Christ has become, in the divine reckoning, 
the sphere of his being, and this reckoning contem- 
plates all that the Christian is and all that he does.; 
Certain aspects of this truth, among many, are to 
be noted: 


First, Christ 1s the Sphere of the Believer’s Posi- 
tions. 


A sphere is that which surrounds an object on 
every side and may even penetrate that object. To 
be within a sphere is to partake of all that it is and 
all that it imparts. Thus the bird is in the air and 
the air is in the bird; the fish is in the water and 
the water is in the fish; the iron is in the fire and 
the fire is in the iron. Likewise, in the spiritual 
realm, Christ is the sphere of the believer’s position. 
He encompasses, surrounds, encloses, and indwells 
_ the believer. The believer is in Christ, and Christ 

is in the believer. Through the baptism with the 


308 Grace 


Spirit, the Christian has become as much an organie 
part of Christ as the branch is a part of the vine, or 
the member is a part of the body. Being thus con- 
joined to Christ, the Father sees the saved one only 
in Christ, or as a living part of His own Son, and 
loves him as He loves His Son (Eph. 1:6; John 
17:23). 

As an accompanying result of this vital union im 
Christ certain facts of relationship are created which 
are the believer’s new positions in Christ, and are 
the consequence of the work of God in grace. To 
present fully all the new positions into which the 
Christian is brought in Christ, would necessitate an 
analysis of all the great doctrinal portions of the 
Epistles. By way of illustration, a brief selection 
from these positions is here presented. Of the saved 
one it is said that he is: 

Elect and called of God (1 Thes. 1:4; 5:24). 

Redeemed by God through the blood of His Son 
(Col. 1:14). 

Reconciled to God by the death of His Son (2 Cor. 
D319) 

Sheltered eternally under the propitiation made 
in the blood of Christ (1 John 2:2). 

Forgiven all trespasses, past, present, and future 
(Col. 2:13). 

Condemned no more forever (Rom. 8:1). 

Justified freely by His grace (Rom. 3:24). 

Sanctified positionally, or set apart unto God in 
Christ (1 Cor. 1:30). 

Perfected for ever (Heb. 10:14). 


1A more complete analysis of the believer’s positions will 
be found in the author’s book Salvation. 


The Life under Grace 309 


Made meet to be a partaker of the inheritance of 
the saints in light (Col. 1:12). 

Made accepted in the Beloved (Eph. 1:6). 

Made the righteousness of God in Him (2 Cor. 
5:21). 

Made nigh te God in Christ Jesus (Eph. 2:18). 

A child and son of God (John 1:12; 1 John 3:3). 

Free from the law and dead to the law (Rom. 7:4, 
6). 

Delivered from the power of darkness (Col. 1:13). 

Translated into the kingdom of God’s dear Son 
(Col 113. 

Founded on the Rock Christ Jesus (1 Cor. 3:11). 

God’s gift to Christ (John 17:11, 12, 20; 10:29). 

Circumcised in Christ (Col. 2:11). 

An holy priest, chosen and peculiar (1 Pet. 2:5, 
a 

Object: of divine love, grace, power, faithfulness, 
peace, consolation (Eph. 2:4, 8; 1:9; Heb. 13:5; 
Col. 3:15; 2 Thes. 2:16). 

Object of Christ’s intercession (Heb. 7:25). 

His inheritance (Eph. 1:18). 

Seated in the heavenly in Christ (Eph. 2:6). 

A citizen of heaven (Phil. 3:20 R. V.). 

Of the family and household of God (Eph. 2:19; 
3:15). 

Light in the Lord (Eph. 5:8). 

In God, in Christ, and in the Spirit (1 Thes. 1:1; 
John 14:20; Rom. 8:9). 

Possessed with the first fruits of the Spirit. Born 
(John 3:6), baptized (1 Cor. 12:13), indwelt (1 Cor. 
6:19), and sealed (Eph. 4:30). 

Glorified (Rom. 8:30). 


310 Grace 


Complete in Him (Col, 2:10). 

Possessing every spiritual blessing (Eph. 1:3). 

Of these and all other positions which are the pres- 
ent possession of the child of God through his vital 
union with Christ, it may be said that they are: 


1. Invisible. 


The believer’s positions, like all things related to 
the Spirit, are invisible; but as is true of spiritual 
things, they are more real and abiding than visible 
things. ‘‘For the things which are seen are tem- 
poral; but the things which are not seen are eternal’’ 
(2 Cor. 4:18), and, ‘‘Whom having not seen, ye 
love’? (1 Pet. 1:8. Cf 1 Tim. 1:17; 6:16; Heb. 
11:27; 1 John 4:12). Even the present revelation 
by the Spirit is such as ‘‘Eye hath not seen.”’ 


2. Unexperienced. 


The positions in Christ are never subject to human 
experience. They produce no sensation by which 
they may be identified. They are taken by faith, and 
joyous appreciation may come as a result of believ- 
ing. 


3. Apprehended by faith. 


Faith is the new and effectual faculty of the spir- 
itual life. By it what is said in the Word of God 
is received as true. Such apprehension is, at best, 
only partial; but, notwithstanding the limitations of 
human knowledge, the positions are all perfect 
through Christ. Of this perfection, ‘‘the half has 
never been told.’’ 


The Life under Grace 311 


4. Contested. 


Seripture presents the warfare of Satan as being 
waged in the sphere of ‘‘the heavenly.’’ There is 
abundant assurance that Satan’s power can never 
spoil any aspect of the believer’s actual positions in 
Christ; but Satan is able, except as the believer lays 
hold by faith of the power of God, to hinder the life 
of blessing which should flow out of that vital union 
with Christ. 


5. Unmerited. 


Human merit, as in all the operations of grace, 
is excluded from the divine reckoning concerning 
these positions in Christ. They rest on the perfect 
merit of Christ. This is the very heart of the new 
standing before God. ‘‘In Christ Jesus ye who 
sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood 
of Christ’? (Eph. 2:13). 


6. Unchangeable. 


The standing and position of the child of God in 
Christ cannot be increased or decreased. It abides 
as He is, ‘‘the same yesterday, and to day, and for 
ever’’ (Heb. 18:8). 


7. ternal. 


Finally, since these positions 1 Christ are rela- 
ted to, and depend only on Christ, they will endure 
as long as He endures: ‘‘ Wherefore he is able also to 
save them to the uttermost [without end] that come 
-unto God by him’’ (Heb. 7:25). 


312 Grace 


These great positions and relationships in Christ 
are the result of the unrestrained outflow of the ex- 
ceeding grace of God. They, therefore, do not ap- 
pear in any teaching of the law of Moses or of the 
kingdom. These positions could not be gained by law- 
works or by any human merit. Correspondingly, 
the manner of life which they propose cannot be 
lived according to the law in the energy of the flesh. 
The whole system of grace is both inter-related and 
complete within itself and cannot yield to the prin- 
ciple of the law at any point whatsoever. 


Second, Christ is the Sphere of the Believer’s Pos- 
Sessions. 


Again the enumeration must be partial: 


1. A new standing in Christ. 


The new standing in Christ includes all the posi- 
tions under grace, a portion of which have just been 
enumerated. These positions are ‘‘the riches of 
grace in Christ Jesus.’’ The possession for a day 
even of one of these glories of grace would be well 
worth the trials and struggles of a lifetime. But 
in contrast to such a valuation, they are all gained, 
and all retained without struggle or trial; they are 
God’s gift in grace. Such wealth cannot be compre- 
hended by the unaided human mind. The Apostle 
prayed: ‘‘The eyes of your understanding [heart] 
being enlightened; that ye may know what is the 
hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory 
of his inheritance in the saints’? (Eph. 1:18); 
‘‘And to know the love of Christ, which passeth 
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the ful- 


The Life under Grace 313 


‘ness of God’’ (Eph. 3:19); ‘‘That ye might be 
filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom 
and spiritual understanding’’ (Col. 1:9). There 
are no limits to be placed on the possibility of the 
illumination of the mind by the Spirit. 


2. A new life in Christ. 


The Scriptures lay great emphasis upon the fact 
that the Christian possesses a new life from God. 
That life is imparted. Christ said: ‘‘I am come 
that they might have life, and that they might have it 
more abundantly’’ (John 10:10). The satanic 
eounterfeit of this fundamental truth is the teaching 
that the new life consists in a new manner of life,— - 
a new standard or ideal. A new life imparted will 
naturally result in a new manner of life; but no 
manner of life, old or new, constitutes the means 
through which the imparted life is gained. ‘‘The 
gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our 
Lord’’ (Rom. 6: 23) ; and, ‘‘I give unto them eternal 
life; and they shall never perish’’ (John 10:28). 
Life from God is bestowed through a new birth, re- 
sults in sonship, and secures the Fatherhood of God. 


3. The new presence and power of the Spirit. 


It is stated in Rom. 5:5 that ‘‘the Spirit is given 
unto us.’’ This is true of every person who is saved. 
The Spirit is the birth-right in the new life. By 
Him alone can the character and service that belongs 
to the normal daily life of the Christian be realized. 
_ The Spirit is the ‘‘All-Sufficient One.’’ Every vic- 
tory in the new life is gained by His strength, and 


314 Grace 


every reward in glory will be won only as a result 
of His enabling power. 


4. A new inheritance. 


The inheritance of the old creation in Adam was 
beyond description in its horror. It was to be ‘‘with- 
out Christ . . . having no hope, and without God in 
the world’? (Eph. 2:12). With Christ, God hath 
freely given us all things else (Rom. 8:32). The 
Christian’s inheritance is nothing short of ‘‘all 
things’’; for he is an heir of God, and a joint heir 
with Christ (Rom. 8:17). Peter writes: ‘‘ Blessed 
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
which according to his abundant mercy hath begot- 
ten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance in- 
corruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, 
reserved in heaven for you”’ (1 Pet. 1:3, 4). The 
present blessings of the presence and power of the 
Spirit are but an ‘‘earnest of our inheritance’? (Eph. 
1:14. Cf Acts 20: 32; 26:18; Col. 1:12; Heb. 9:15). 
This inheritance is a present possession which is 
sealed to the child of God under grace. In addition 
to the ‘‘all things’’ of Christ, it includes the ‘‘all 
things of the Father’’ (John 16:12-15), and these 
are to be revealed to the heart now by the Spirit 
(1 Cor. 2:9, 10); ‘‘The living God, who giveth us 
richly all things to enjoy’? (1 Tim. 6:17) ; ‘‘There- 
fore let no man glory in men. For all things are 
yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the 
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things 
to come; all are yours; and ye are Christ’s; and 
Christ is God’s’’ (1 Cor, 3: 21-28). 


The Life under Grace 315 


5. A new enemy. 


To be in Christ is to experience the same enmity 
and opposition from Satan which he entertains to- 
ward Christ. There is no enmity on Satan’s part 
toward the unsaved. They form a part of his world- 
system and are said to be under his power (Eph. 
2:2; Col. 1:13; 1 John 5:19, R:-V.; 2 Cor 4:38, 4). 
Satan’s enmity is against God and against the people 
of God because God, by His divine nature, is in 
them, and they are in Christ. We read: ‘Finally, 
be strong in the Lord, and the strength of his might. 
Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able 
to stand against the wiles of the devil. For our 
wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against 
the principalities, against the powers, against the 
world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual 
hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places’’ (Eph. 
6: 10-12. R. V.). 


6. Access to God. 


A mediator is required between God and man since 
God is holy and man is unholy. Job, who lived 
many centuries before Moses, gave utterance to his 
own sense of need of a mediator. Speaking of God he 
said: ‘‘For he is not a man, as I am, that I should 
answer him, and we should come together in judg- 
ment. Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, 
that might lay his hand upon us both’’ (Job. 9:82, 
33). There could be none to mediate between God 
and man unless God Himself should provide. This 
He did in the Person of His Son. It is written: 
“Now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God 


316 Grace 


is one’ (Gal. 3:20). A mediator must stand be- 
tween two parties; for there is no occasion that he 
mediate for one. The teaching of the Scriptures is 
that God mediated His own ease. That is to say, 
He stood between Himself and sinful man. ‘‘God 
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, 
not imputing their trespasses unto them’’ (2 Cor. 
5:19). God undertook through the death of His 
Son to protect the sacredness of His own holy stand- 
ards and law which had been outraged by sinful man, 
and at the same time to secure the welfare of the 
offender. This is the work of a mediator. Every 
demand of His holiness was met in Christ who, as 
Substitute, bore the judgment which God in righte- 
Ousness must impose, and every interest of the sin- 
ner was provided for in the marvels of saving grace 
which were set free through the death and resurrec- 
tion of Christ. Christ has thus become the one and 
only ground of meeting between God and man. ‘‘He 
is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours 
only, but also for the sins of the whole world’’ (1 
John 2:2). 

The present wide-spread tendency to slight the 
fact of the holy demands of God against sin and to 
assume that the sinner is free to come to God on 
the basis of divine goodness and mercy, is not only 
a gross misrepresentation of the truth of God’s 
Word, it is a satanic device to keep men from the 
salvation that is in Christ. The goodness and mercy 
of God can never be questioned, but that goodness 
and mercy has been exercised to the last degree of 
divine ability in the provision of a Mediator who is 
mighty to save. Christ said: ‘‘I am the light,’’ 


The Life under Grace G17 


“*T am the door,’’ ‘‘I am the way, the truth, and the 
life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.’’ 
There is, therefore, no approach to God for saint or 
sinner other than through the Mediator whom God 
has provided. All the types of the Old Testament 
which forshadowed the work of Christ for man were 
equally clear on this great truth. As the shed-blood 
of the animal sacrifices typified the efficacious blood 
of Christ, no individual of the Old Testament dis- 
pensation was permitted to come into the presence 
of God apart from the shedding and sprinkling of 
blood. Christ is the Mediator of a new and better 
covenant. His shed-blood is the antitype of all that 
was required in the sacrifices of the Old Testament; 
but in the present relation between God and man, the 
truth takes on an added reality and intensity which 
is beyond estimation. No man is now free to thrust 
himself into the presence of God simply because he 
wills to do so. Every door is closed but One. If 
God does not destroy the offender as He did in the 
old dispensation, it is not because the offense is any 
less worthy of death; it is because of His present 
attitude of longsuffering through grace. So much 
the more is man now obligated to respect the un- 
changeable truth that Christ is the only way to God. 
‘For there is one God, and one mediator between 
God and men, the man Christ Jesus’’ (1 Tim. 2:5). 
This mediation of the Son of God is seen in certain 
aspects: 


a. Access into the grace of God. 


_ It is through Christ and Him alone that we have 
access into the grace of God. ‘‘By whom also we 


318 Grace 


have access into this grace’? (Rom. 5:2). This is 
as true for the saved as it is for the unsaved. The 
unsaved are saved only through the grace which is in 
Christ Jesus. Likewise, the saved are kept and stand 
only through Christ, and all their relationship to 
God is through Christ alone. 


b. Access into fellowship with God. 


All communion and fellowship with God is on the 
basis alone of the Person and work of Christ. As 
the high priest of the old order went into the holy 
of holies once a year and communed with God, like- 
wise, the priest of the new order—the child of God— 
is free to enter the presence of God and there to 
abide. But as the priest of the old order was re- 
ceived before God only because he was under the 
sprinkled blood, with the same divine discrimination, 
the priest of the new order is received only because 
he is under the precious blood of Christ. God re- 
ceives His children into fellowship on the sole basis 
of the efficacious blood of Christ whether they under- 
stand this fact or not. How vitally important it is, 
however, that they should understand and give con- 
tinual heart-acknowledgment of all that Christ is to 
them! ‘‘Having therefore, brethren, boldness to 
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new 
and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, 
through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; and having 
an high priest over the house of God; let us draw 
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, 
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, 


The Life under Grace 319 


and our bodies washed with pure water’’ (Heb. 
10: 19-22). 


ce. Access to God in prayer. 


Christ is the only access to God in prayer. How 
misleading is the supposition that any one can reach 
the ear of God who will simply speak to Him! Apart 
from the Mediator Christ Jesus, there is no access to 
God in prayer and there can be no real prayer. The 
new basis of prayer in the present relationship to 
God is that, prayer is to be made in the Name of 
Christ. This is revealed by Christ in the upper room 

_and is a part of His unfolding of the glories of grace. 

“Tf ye shall ask anything in my name, I will do it’’; 
**And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the 
Father in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto 
have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye 
shall receive, that your joy may be full’’ (John 
14:14; 16:23, 24). God receives all His children 
when they pray; but He receives them in Christ, 
and their prayer is effectual and prevailing only 
as it is in the Name that is above every name, and on 
the ground of the blood that has been shed. 
How important, again, that the saved one under- 
stand this truth and that he come to God with full 
heart-acknowledgment of the Mediator—Christ! 

The unsaved have no access to God in prayer. 
“‘But,’’ it is often asked, ‘‘how then can they be 
saved, if they cannot ask God to save them?’’ The 
answer is simple: No person is ever saved because 
he asks God to do it. He is saved through grace 


320 Grace 


aniy wher he believes. God is offering salvation te 


mem He dees mot meed te be implered or meved in 
their behalf He has beem moved to give His Son to 

» What more could He det This marvelous gift 
ef His crace is for all whe will believe. 


Tt. The Werd of Ged. 


The written Werd of Ged is one of the priceless 
Pussessiems ef the child of Ged m Christ It is the 


unfailing ef all the revelation concerning the ma- 
jesty and grace of the Father, the salvation and glory 
that is Im the Sen, and the power and blessing that 
is im the Spirit, the facts about heaven and earth, 


aheut sim and salvation, abeut angels and Satan, 
aheut life and death, and all that is future and all 
that is past. “All seripture is given by inspiration 
ef Ged_ amd is profitable for deetrine, for reproof, 
fer correction, for instruction im righteousness: that 
She man of Ged may be perfect, throughly furnished 
unce all ceed works” (2 Tim. 3:16): “Thy word is 
= lamp uzie my feet, and a light unto my path” 
(@s. 118-1). 

The Word ef Ged is as a title deed to all that the 
Ciristiam pessesses im Christ. It is a covenant guar 
anty frem Ged which is sealed in heaven. Assur 
amce @f the divime grace and blessing is never left 
te depend em the changeable feelines, or vain mis- 


yuu that believe em the name of the Son of God; that 
ye may Know that ye have eternal life, and that ye 


The Life under Grace 321 


may believe on the name of the Son of God’’ (1 John 
5:13). | 


Third. Christ, the Sphere of the Believer’s Safe- 
Keeping. 

As the First Adam transmitted what he was to 
those who were born after the flesh, so the Last Adam 
transmits what He is to those who are born after 
the Spirit. The Christian’s standing is in Christ, 
and there will be no fall in the Last Adam. He is 
as secure as God can make him secure, for the preser- 
vation of the believer is not conditioned by the 
thought which he has about the matter; it is accord- 
ing to the purpose of God. As has been stated, all 
the eternal purposes of infinite grace are involved 
in the issue of the safe-keeping of each one who is 
in Christ. In like manner, the security of the Chris- 
tian is not merely the preservation of the possessions 
which together total his own inheritance; the believer 
is a part of the divine inheritance. God has an in- 
heritance in the Christian (Eph. 1:18). The real 
question becomes one, therefore, as to whether God 
is able to keep that which is His inheritance and 
whether He is disposed to keep. Against His power 
nothing can prevail, and He has paid the price—the 
blood of His own Son—to redeem this possession to 
Himself. Since He is free through the cross to do 
so, and His love is unending, it is inconceivable that 
He will not keep the one He has saved. He has 
sealed His inheritance unto the day of redemption. 

An illustration of the safe-keeping which results 
from being in Christ, is seen in the panoply which 


\ 


g22 Grace 


God has provided under which the believer may 
‘‘stand’’ against the strategies and warfare of Satan. 
‘‘Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, 
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and 
having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having 
your loins girt about with truth, and having on the 
breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with 
the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, 
taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able 
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And 
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the 
Spirit, which is the word of God’’ (Eph. 6: 13-17). 
The fact that Christ is the armour is a hidden 
beauty in this passage. He is the Truth, our Right- 
eousness, our Peace, our Faith, our Salvation, and the 
Word of God. Christ encompasses the believer and 
insulates him from the power of every foe. 


Fourth. Christ, the Sphere of the Believer’s 
Association. 


The believer’s association extends to every rela- 
tionship he sustains, and the character of these asso- 
ciations is molded in conformity to his position in 
Christ. Some of these relationships are: 


1. With God the Father. 


Through the death of Christ, and through the re- 
generating work of the Spirit, an individual who be- 
lieves is made a son of God by receiving the divine 
nature and is made to stand before God forgiven, 
righteous, and justified forever. He has entered the 
family and household of God, and the Father’s ten- 
der care, which is all that infinite grace can provide, 


The Life under Grace 323 


is over him. The unsaved do not know God; He 
is not in all their thoughts. They may know about 
God; but this is far short of knowing God. Such 
knowledge is only gained by the personal introduc- 
tion to the Father by the Son: ‘‘Neither knoweth 
any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomso- 
ever the Son will reveal him’’ (Mt. 11:27). And to 
know the Father signifies the possession of eternal 
life: ‘‘And this is life eternal, that they might 
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent’’ (John 17:3). 

God was not usually known as Father under 
the past dispensation. He was honored and trusted 
as a ‘‘covenant-keeping God.’’ The Psalmist wrote: 
‘‘Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lorp 
pitieth them that fear him’’ (Ps. 103:13). 


2. With Christ the Son. 


The extent of this relationship is limitless since 
it contains all that enters into the new sphere in 
Christ. It includes all that He is as Saviour and 
Lord; all that He is in partnership with the believer 
in service, in suffering, and in betrothal; and all that 
He is in the Christian’s fellowship, ‘‘and truly our 
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son 
Jesus Christ’’ (1 John 1:3). Christ is the object 
of ceaseless devotion and praise. 


3. With the Spirit of God. 


At this point, association is nothing less than 
identification itself in all matters of life, character, 
-and service; for the believer is appointed to live only 
by the power of the indwelling Spirit. The asso- 


324 Grace 


ciation with the Spirit is immediate and intimate be- 
cause He indwells every believer. The presence 
of the Spirit is not disclosed through human emotions 
and feelings; it is rather detected by the things which 
He does. 


4. With Satan and his emissaries. 


As has been stated, the believer is brought, through 
his new position in Christ, into a sphere wherein 
Satan’s enmity is directed against him as it is direc- 
ted against God. ‘‘For our wrestling is not against 
flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against 
the powers, against the world-rulers of this darkness, 
against the spiritual host of wickedness in the 
heavenly places’? (Eph. 6:12. R. V.). The victory 
is provided only through the indwelling Spirit: 
Because greater is he that is in you, than he that is 
in the world’”’ (1 John 4:4). 


5. With the angels. 


The angels are messengers or ministering spirits 
‘‘sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs 
of salvation’? (Heb. 1:14). While their care at- 
tends the child of God, it has not pleased God to give 
the Christian fellowship with them. Their ministry 


as messengers is revealed throughout the Word of 
God. 


6. With the world. 


The Christian is not of this world. He has been 
translated into the kingdom of Christ. He is a citi- 
zen of heaven, and his only relation to this world is 


The Life under Grace 325 


that of an ambassador and witness. He is in the 
enemy’s land; for Satan is ‘‘the god of this world.”’ 
The kingdoms of this world are given unto Satan 
under the permission and purpose of God (Lk. 4:6). 
The Christian is related to the world and all that is 
in the world only as he is related to it through Christ. 
This relationship is three-fold: 


a. To the world system. 


This is the whole sphere of human life with its 
institutions, ideals, and projects. Concerning this 
world-system the believer is thus warned: ‘‘Love not 
the world, neither the things that are in the world. 
If any man love the world, the love of the Father 
is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust 
of the fiesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride 
of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And 
the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he 
that doeth the will of God abideth for ever’’ (1 John 
2:15-17) ; ‘‘ And have no fellowship with the unfruit- 
ful works of darkness, but rather reprove them’’ 
(Eph. 5:11) ; ‘‘ Walk in wisdom toward them that are 
without, redeeming the time. Let your speech be al- 
ways with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may 
know how ye ought to answer every man’’ (Col. 4:5, 
6). 


b. To human governments. 


According to the Bible, these are under the direct 
authority of the Gentiles. The present is the times 
of the Gentiles (Lk. 21:24). Human government is 
of God only to the extent of His permissive will and 
the realization of His purpose; but the citizen of 


326 Grace 


heaven is instructed to be in subjection to govern- 
ments: ‘‘Let every soul be subject unto the higher 
powers. For there is no power but of God: the 
powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever 
therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance 
of God: and they that resist shall receive to them- 
selves damnation [judgment]. For rulers are not a 
terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou 
then not be afraid of the power? do that which is 
good, and thou shalt have praise of the same: for 
he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if 
thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth 
not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, 
a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth 
evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only 
for wrath, but also for conscience sake. For for this 
cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God’s minis- 
ters, attending continually upon this very thing. 
Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom 
tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom 
fear; honour to whom honour’’ (Rom. 138: 1-7); 
‘‘Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for 
the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as 
supreme; or unto governors, as unto them that are 
sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and 
for the praise of them that do well. For so is the 
will of God, that with well doing ye may put to 
silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and not 
using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but 
as the servants of God. Honour all men. Love the 
brotherhood. Fear God. Honour the king’’ (1 Pet. 
2: 18-17). 


The Life under Grace 327 


ce. To the unsaved indwidual. 


The consistent attitude of the Christian is the same 
as that of his Lord who died for lost men. As He is, 
so are we, and therefore we are to manifest His 
spirit in this world. 

Of his own attitude toward lost men, the Apostle 
Paul wrote: ‘‘For the love of Christ constraineth us; 
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then 
were all dead [all died in the Substitute] . . . Where- 
fore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, 
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now 
henceforth know we him no more’’ (2 Cor. 5: 14-16). 
Having beheld Christ as God’s Lamb which taketh 
away the sin of the world, and the One who died for 
all, and in whose death all have partaken, the 
Apostle says: ‘‘Henceforth know we no man after 
the fliesh.’’ The usual distinctions among men, of 
Jew and Gentile, rich and poor, bond and free, are 
submerged in the overwhelming estimation of that 
which is accomplished for all men through the death 
of Christ. The Apostle now recognizes them only as 
men for whom Christ has died. This conception of 
the estate of the unsaved is the normal one for all 
Christians, and it leads on to a reasonable service 
for Christ in soul-winning. 


7. With the whole body of Christ. 


The Epistles of the New Testament disclose the 
basis for a fellowship and kinship within the com- 
pany of the redeemed which exists in no other 
association of people in this world, and this union 
calls for a corresponding manner of conduct from the 


\ 


328 Grace 


Christian toward fellow-believers. This relation- 
ship is seven-fold: 


a. A Christian’s relation to other Christians m 
general. 


Love is revealed as the underlying principle of this 
relationship. It is embodied in the first command- 
ment of Christ in the grace teachings of the 
upper room: ‘‘A new commandment I give unto 
you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, 
that ye also love one another. By this shall all men 
know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to 
another’’ (John 13: 34,35). This same truth is set 
forth in many passages. ‘‘We know that we have 
passed from death unto life, because we love the 
brethren’’ (1 John 3:14); ‘‘And whether one mem- 
ber suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one mem- 
ber be honoured, all the members rejoice with it’’ 
(1 Cor. 12:26); ‘‘ And walk in love, as Christ also 
hath loved us’’ (Eph. 5: 2) ; ‘‘ Beloved, let us love one 
another: for love is of God’’; ‘‘Beloved, if God so 
loved us, we ought also to love one another’’ (1 John 
4:7,11); ‘‘Let brotherly love continue’’ (Heb. 
13:1) ; ‘Let love be without dissimulation.’’ This is 
one of the great passages on Christian love and care 
one for another. The whole context should be read 
(Rom. 12:9-16). ‘‘Put on therefore, as the elect of 
God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, 
humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering; for- 
bearing one another, and forgiving one another, if 
any man have a quarrel against any: even as Christ 
forgave you, so also do ye’’ (Col. 3:12, 18). 
‘‘Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion 


The Life under Grace 329 


one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be 
courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for 
railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye 
are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a bless- 
ing’’ (1 Pet. 3:8,9); ‘‘And above all things have 
fervent charity among yourselves: for charity shall 
cover the multitude of sins. Use hospitality one to 
another without grudging’’ (1 Pet. 4:8, 9). 

The Christian is called upon to recognize the 
vital union into which he has been brought by the 
baptism with the spirit: ‘‘I therefore, the prisoner 
of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the 
vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness 
and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one an- 
other in love; endeavoring to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace’’ (Eph. 4:1-3). 

Special emphasis is given as well to Christian kind- 
ness: ‘‘Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and 
clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, 
with all malice: and be ye kind one to another, 
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God 
for Christ’s sake hath forgiven you”’ (Eph. 4: 31, 32) ; 
‘‘That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in 
any matter: because that the Lord is the avenger of 
all such, as we also have forewarned you and testi- 
fied ;’’ ‘‘But as touching brotherly love ye need not 
that I write unto you: for ye yourselves are taught 
of God to love one another’? (1 Thes. 4:6,9); 
‘‘Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify 
one another, even as also ye do’’ (1 Thes. 5:11); 
‘‘Speak not evil one of another, brethren’’ (Jas. 
4:11). 

Christians are to submit one to another and in 


330 Grace 


honor prefer one another: ‘‘Submitting yourselves 
one to another in the fear of God’’ (Eph. 5:21); 
‘‘Tet nothing be done through strife or vainglory; 
but in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better 
than themselves. Look not every man on his own 
things, but every man also on the things of others’’ 
(Phil. 2:3, 4) ; ‘‘Likewise, ye younger, submit your- 
selves unto the elder. Yea, all of you be subject one 
to another, and be clothed with humility: for God 
resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble’’ 
(1 Pet. 5:5). 

The Christian’s gifts are to be especially directed 
to the need of the children of God: ‘‘As we have 
therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, 
especially unto them who are of the household of 
faith’’ (Gal. 6:10); ‘‘But whoso hath this world’s 
good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth 
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth 
the love of God in him?’’ (1 John 3:17). 

Prayer is to be offered for all saints: ‘‘Praying 
always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, 
and watching thereunto with all perseverance and 
supplication for all saints’? (Eph. 6:18) ; ‘‘Confess 
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, 
that ye may be healed’’ (Jas. 5:16). 


b. A Christian’s relation to those who are in 
authority m the assembly of believers. 


On this important question the Word of God is ex- 
plicit and comment is unnecessary : ‘‘Remember them 
which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto 
you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering 
the end of their conversation’’ (Heb. 18:7) ; ‘‘Obey 


The Life under Grace 331 


them that have the rule over you, and submit your- 
selves: for they watch for your souls, as they that 
- must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you’’ 
(Heb. 13:17); ‘‘And we beseech you, brethren, to 
know them which labour among you, and are over 
you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem 
them very highly for their work’s sake. And be at 
peace among yourselves’? (1 Thes. 5:12,13). To 
this body of truth should be added all of the pastoral 
Epistles. 


e. The relation of Christian husbands and wives. 

The grace teaching on this aspect of Christian 
relationship is also explicit: ‘‘Husbands, love your 
wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave 
himself for it;’’ ‘‘ Wives, submit yourselves unto your 
own husbands, as unto the Lord’’ (Eph. 5:22, 25. 
Cf Eph. 5: 21-33; Col. 3:18, 19; 1 Pet. 3:1-7). 


d. The relation of Christian parents and children. 

‘‘And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to 
wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admon- 
ition of the Lord;’’ ‘‘Children, obey your parents 
in the Lord: for this is right’’ (Eph. 6:1, 4. Cf Eph. 
6:1-4; Col. 3: 20,21). From this body of revelation 
it will be seen that the children of Christian parents 
are to be governed as in the Lord. One of the con- 
ditions which will characterize the last days of this 
age will be the disobedience of children (2 Tim. 3:2). 


e. The relation of Christian masters and servants, 


‘Servants, obey in all things your masters accord- 
ing to the flesh; not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; 


332 Grace 


but in singleness of heart, fearing God;’’ ‘‘Masters, 
give unto your servants that which is just and equal ; 
knowing that ye also have a Master in heayen’’ 
(Col. 3:22 to 4:1. Cf Eph. 6: 5-9). 


f. A Christian’s obligation to an erring brother. 


‘*Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye 
which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit 
of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be 
tempted’’ (Gal. 6:1) ; ‘“‘Now we exhort you, brethren, 
warn them that are unruly, comfort the feebleminded, 
support the weak, be patient toward all men’”’ 
(1 Thes. 5:14); ‘‘Now we command you, brethren, 
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye with- 
draw yourselves from every brother that walketh 
disorderly, and not after the tradition which ye re- 
ceived of us’’; ‘‘For we hear that there are some 
which walk among you disorderly, working not at 
all, but are busybodies . . . yet count him not as an 
enemy, but admonish him as a brother’’ (2 Thes. 
3:6, 11-15). 

A sharp distinction must be drawn at this point 
between a disorderly brother who is a busybody, 
shirking his honest toil, and careless in matters of 
Christian conduct, on the one hand, and a sincere 
believer who may disagree with another on a matter 
of interpretation, on the other hand. Endless eon- 
fusion and disgraceful contention has followed the 
exercise of unwarranted freedom among sincere 
believers in separating from each other over minor 
questions of doctrine. Should one fail to hold the 
true doctrine of Christ (2 John 9-11), that one can 
have no rightful place in a Christian communion; 


The Life under Grace 333 


but men have divided over secondary issues and have 
gone so far as to exclude earnest Christians from 
their fellowship with whom perchance they disagree 
in a minor question of doctrine. Such separation 
is unscriptural, a violation of the priceless unity of 
the Spirit, and foreign to the order of grace. There 
is Scripture teaching concerning Christian discipline, 
but. it does not necessarilly impose a penalty of 
separation. The brother who may have been over- 
taken in a fault is to be restored, and only by one 
who is himself spiritual. This he must do in the 
spirit of meekness considering his own utter weakness 
apart from the enabling power of God. No other 
may undertake this important service. If the erring 
brother proves to be persistent in his fault, it is 
required that he be debarred from the fellowship of 
believers until he has seen the error of his way. 
Equally sincere brethren must not break fellowship, 
however, over minor issues. Of those who are thus 
disposed, the Apostle writes: ‘‘Now I beseech you, 
brethren, mark them which cause divisions and 
offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have 
learned; and avoid them. For they that are such 
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; 
and by good words and fair speeches deceive the 
hearts of the simple’’ (Rom. 16:17, 18). 


g. A Christian’s obligations to a weak brother. 


The tender conscience of a weak brother must be 
considered. This important principle applies to very 
many questions of the day. In the Apostles’ time 
there was a grave question concerning the eating of 
meat which had been offered to idols and was after- 


334 Grace 


wards placed in the public market for sale. There 
were those who had only recently been saved and 
rescued from the grip of the power of idol worship. 
There were others who were so deeply prejudiced 
by their former experiences with idols that, while 
saved and free, they were not willing even to touch 
anything connected with an idol. It would be 
natural to say that the first class should know better 
than to be drawn back to idols, and that the second 
class should be made to give up their prejudice; but 
this is not according to the ‘‘law of love.’’ It is 
written: ‘‘Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, 
but not to doubtful disputations. For one believeth 
that he may eat all things: another, who is weak, 
eateth herbs. Let not him that eateth despise him 
that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not 
judge him that eateth: for God hath received him. 
Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant? 
to his own master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he 
shall be holden up: for God is able to make him 
stand’’ (Rom. 14: 1-4). 

From this passage it is clear that instruction is also 
given to the weaker brother to the intent that he shall 
not ‘‘judge’’ the Christian who, through years of 
Christian training and deeper understanding of the 
liberty in grace, is free to do what he himself in his 
limitations may not be able to do. There is hardly 
a more important exhortation for Christians to-day 
than this. The cure is clearly revealed: God reserves 
the right to correct and direct the life of His own 
child. Much hurtful criticism might be avoided if 
Christians would only believe this and trust Him to 
do with His own child what He purposes to do. God 


The Life under Grace 335 


is the master before whom alone the servant standeth 
or falleth. The passage continues: ‘‘But if thy 
brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou 
not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for 
whom Christ died. ... For meat destroy not the 
work of God. All things indeed are pure; but it is 
evil for that man who eateth with offense [to his own 
convictions]. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to 
drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stum- 
bleth, or is offended, or is made weak. Hast thou 
faith? have it to thyself before God. Happy is he 
that condemneth not himself in that thing which he 
alloweth. And he that doubteth is damned [con- 
demned] if he eat, because he eateth not of faith: for 
whatsoever is not of faith is sin’’ (Rom. 14: 15-23). 
‘‘Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law 
of Christ’’ (Gal. 6:2). 

Due regard for the conscience and liberty of others 
is two-fold: On the one hand, let the strong be chari- 
table toward the weak. On the other hand, let the 
weak desist from judgment of the strong. The result 
will be a mutual fellowship and an exercise of all the 
liberties of grace. 


ter: Awe OU, 


The believer’s new sphere consists not only in his 
place in Christ with its positions, possessions, safe- 
keeping, and associations; it consists as well, in the 
fact that Christ is in the believer. 

The Scriptures teach that God the Father (Eph. 
4:6), that God the Son (Col. 1:27), and that God 
the Spirit (1 Cor. 6:19) indwell every child of God. 


336 Grace 


No doubt the mystery of the unity of the Godhead is 
involved in this revelation; for it is also said that the 
Christian has partaken of the divine nature, and this 
divine nature is not identified as being one only of 
the three Persons of the Trinity. The divine nature 
is evidently the indwelling presence of God—Father, 
Son, and Spirit. There is a body of truth which 
teaches that God, in the unity of the three Persons, 
dwells in the heart of the child of God. Likewise 
there is an even greater body of Scripture which em- 
phasizes the indwelling of the believer by the indi- 
vidual Persons of the Godhead. When the full unity 
of God is in view, it is usually spoken of as the in- 
dwelling Christ. As indwelling the Christian, the 
Spirit of God is once spoken of as ‘‘the Spirit of 
Christ’’ (Rom. 8:9). 

It may be concluded, therefore, that the phrase J in 
you is to be received as referring to the whole divine 
Person—Father, Son, and Spirit. The result of this 
indwelling of Christ is three-fold: (1) A new divine 
life, (2) A new enabling power, and (3) A new ‘‘hope 
of glory.’’ 


First. A New Dwine Life. 


The branch is in the vine and the vine by its life 
and vitality is in the branch. Thus the believer is 
am Christ and Christ is in the believer. The new im- 
parted life is Christ, and is therefore eternal because 
He is eternal. When only the question of an un- 
broken manifestation of that new life is under 
consideration, it is said to depend on abiding in Christ 
as the sole condition. The believer’s place, or posi- 
tion, in Christ is neither attained, nor maintained, 


The Life under Grace 337 


through abiding in Him. That position is instantly 
wrought by the power of God through grace for every 
one who believes. Nor is the possession of the divine 
life, which is the indwelling Christ, secured by abid- 
ing in Him; it is the ‘‘gift of God.’’ However, the 
normal manifestation of that life does depend on 
abiding in Him. Abiding is simply the right adjust- 
ment between the Christian and his Lord. ‘‘If ye 
keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; 
even as I have kept my Father’s commandments, and 
abide in his love’’ (John 15:10). How important, 
then, it is that the Christian should understand 
precisely what is included and required in the com- 
mandments of Christ! As pointed out before, the 
commandments of Christ are only His grace teach- 
ings; this term being not once employed by Christ 
before He began in the upper room to unfold the 
believer’s life and walk in grace. 

Eternal, divine life, therefore, is Christ indwelling 
the believer by His Spirit and that life is the present 
possession of all who believe. The victories, joys, and 
fruits of that life depend upon abiding in Him which 
abiding is accomplished only by doing His will. 


Second. A New Enabling Power. 


The theme of the enabling power of God, being one 
of the most vital in the divine plan of grace, though 
before mentioned, should at this point be reviewed in 
its two-fold aspect: 


1. Christian character. 


Under the law relationship between God and man, 
' character was the product of the energy and struggle 


338 Grace 


of the flesh. This, too, is the conception of human 
character which is held by the world, and, alas, 
through false teaching, it is the only one in the minds 
of many Christians. It is commonly preached that 
the sum-total of an individual’s acts will determine 
his habits, the sum-total of his habits will determine 
his character, and the sum-total of his character will 
determine his destiny. Whatever may have been true 
under the law, this doctrine is foreign to grace. Des- 
tiny is not now determined by self-promoted char- 
acter ; it depends only on the faith which receives the 
saving grace of God. Heaven’s glory will not be a 
display of human character; it is to be the unveiling 
of the riches of grace in Christ Jesus. Nor is Chris- 
tian character a product of the flesh; it is ‘‘the fruit 
of the Spirit.”” The divine record of all that enters 
into true Christian character is stated thus: ‘‘But the 
fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance’’ 
(self-control, Gal. 5:22, 23). 

These graces are elements of divine character which 
are never found unless divinely wrought. They are 
‘‘the fruit of the Spirit.’”” They are never gained by 
struggle, long or short; they are the immediate ex- 
perience of every believer who comes into right 
adjustment with the Spirit. Therefore the way to a 
victorious life is not by self-development; it is 
through a ‘‘walk in the Spirit.’’ In the context in 
which the above passage appears, the Apostle also 
states: ‘‘This I say then, Walk in the Spirit [by means 
of the Spirit], and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the 
flesh’? (5:16). The believer’s responsibility is not 
the walk; it is rather that of yieldedness to the Spirit 


The Life under Grace 339 


who promotes the walk. When thus yielded, the re- 
sult is instant and perfect: ‘‘Ye shall, not fulfil the 
lust of the fiesh.’’ So long as the walk is continued 
by the power of the Spirit, this spiritual life will be 
experienced. Should the adjustment to the Spirit 
cease, the walk must cease, and the flesh will again be 
manifested. 

The New Testament term, ‘‘the flesh,’’ indicates 
the sum-total of what the natural man is—body, soul 
and spirit. Within this whole, and as a part of it, is 
the falien Adamic nature—sin. Three means for the 
control of the sin-nature are taught—two of which 
are the product of human reason and one the revealed 
provision of God: 


a. Is the sin-nature controlled by eradication? 


Though this theory is advanced by certain schools 
of thought it lacks the support of even one passage of | 
Seripture. It is accepted because it seems reasonable, | 
the thought being that if the source of sin is checked, 
would not the flow cease? Doubtless it would; but 
God has revealed no such program. 

If eradication of the sin-nature were accomplished, | 
| there would be no physical death; for physical death 
is the result of that nature (Rom. 5: 12-21) ; parents 
who had experienced eradication would, of necessity, 
generate unfallen chilren. But if eradication were 
secured, there would still be the conflict with the 
world, the flesh (apart from the sin-nature), and the 
devil; for eradication of these is obviously unscrip- 
tural and is not included in the theory itself. As 
God purposes to deal with the world, the flesh, and | 
~ the devil, thus He proposes to deal with the sin-nature 


340 Grace 


which is a part of the flesh. The full deliverance is 
by the overcoming power of the Spirit through the 
work of Christ on the cross. The work of Christ on 
the cross secured the judgment of the old nature 
(Rom. 6:6); but it also secured the judgment of the 
world (Gal. 6:14), the flesh (Gal. 5:24), and the 
devil (Col. 2:15). The work of Christ is a divine 
judgment which has made it righteously possible for 
God to control the world, the flesh and the devil as 
they may affect the believer. Within the flesh, and 
as a part of it, is the sin-nature. This nature is no 
more subject to eradication than is the world, the 
flesh, or the devil. The divine plan for the deliver- 
ance of the believer from the power of the sin-nature 
is exactly the same as for the deliverance from the 
other opposing principles. It is by the overcoming 
power of the Spirit made possible through the death 
of Christ. 

This provision brings the child of God into moment- 
by-moment dependence upon his Lord. It drives him 
to the most intimate relationship with God. Eradica- 
tion, if it were true, would tend to wean the Christian 
from Christ in the measure in which it would fit him 
to get on alone. In the midst of the description of 
the divine ideal for a spiritual walk, it is said that the 
victory is due to the fact that the Spirit is lusting 
against the flesh, therefore, when walking by means 
of the Spirit, ‘‘ye cannot do the things that ye other- 
wise would’’ (5:17). It is evident from this passage 
wherein the highest ideal of life is presented that the 
flesh is contemplated as being present, but it is under 
the control of the Spirit. 


The Life under Grace 341 


b. Is the sin-nature controlled by rules? 


It is proposed by others that the flesh shall be con- 
trolled by rules and regulations. The seeming sane- 
tion of the Scriptures for this theory is gained by 
turning to the law; for under the law, the flesh was 
to be governed by rules. The law-history of 1500 
years, however, is sufficient evidence of the failure of 
this method; yet it seems impossible for many to be 
delivered from the belief that a spiritual life may be 
gained by the keeping of rules. It is supposed that 
the divine ideal has been realized when people have 
been induced to attempt to regulate their lives by 
rules. 


ce. Is the sin-nature controlled by the Spirit? 


According to the Scriptures, such is the divine plan 
for the control of the flesh in the believer’s life under 
grace. It provides all that God desires or requires 
in any life, and brings the saved one into the closest 
fellowship with God, and into constant dependence 
upon the Spirit. It is the only victory possible for 
the Christian to experience; for it only is according 
to the purpose and Word of God. 

If the quality of the believer’s daily life is to be 
improved, what steps are to be taken? Will carnality 
and coldness of heart be corrected by enforcing rules 
of conduct? When a carnal Christian does not wish 
to do the will of God, will God be satisfied if that 
Christian merely complies externally with the law of 
God? The answer is obvious. God looks on the heart. 
In the provisions of grace, God proposes to change the 


342 Grace 


desires of the heart and to empower unto the full 
realization of these God-wrought desires. The law 
could work no change in the heart, nor can the 
attempt to keep rules; but the Spirit can change the 
desires. The law could give no enabling power; but 
he Spirit can. Therefore it is said: ‘‘But if ye be 
led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law’’ (Gal. 
5:18); and against the ‘‘fruit of the Spirit,’’ ‘‘there 
is no law’’ (Gal. 5:23); again, ‘‘For sin shall not 
have dominion over you: for ye are not under the 
law, but under grace’’ (Rom. 6:14). 


2. Christian conduct. 


The manner of the Christian’s life, including every 
activity of the child of God, is described in the Serip- 
tures by the words walk and conversation. This 
aspect of the truth is to be distinguished from the 
believer’s character. The walk refers to that which 
is outward ; while character—‘‘the fruit of the Spirit’’ 
—is inward. In point of importance, character is 
supreme; for out of the abundance of the heart the 
* mouth speaketh. Under grace, God proposes by the 
" Spirit first to create the heavenly motives and desires, 
: and then, by the same Spirit, to empower the life 
3 unto the full realization of those desires. While these 

- heavenly desires are said to be ‘‘the fruit of the 
_ Spirit,’”’ the resulting activities are said to be the exer- 

-eise of a ‘‘gift’’ through the Spirit. <A ‘‘gift,’’ like 
’ the ‘‘fruit’’ of the Spirit, is never a product of the 
| flesh nor any ability within the flesh. The Spirit may 
* choose to use the native ability, but a ‘‘gift’’ is the 
‘ direct undertaking of the Spirit in and through the 
human instrument. It is the Spirit doing a work and 


The Life under Grace 343 


using the one in whom He dwells to doit. Thus both 
Christian character and Christian conduct are de- 
pendent on the enabling ministration of the Spirit. 
This divine provision is not merely for crisis-moments 
in the experience of the Christian; it is for every 
moment, whether it be one of activity or one of rest. 

The divine standards for the believer’s character 
and conduct are superhuman. This is reasonable 
since he is a citizen of heaven. The superhuman 
manner of life becoming to a heavenly citizen is to be 
lived by the enabling, supernatural power of the 
Spirit. The Spirit has taken up His abode in the 
heart in order that He may undertake this for the 
child of God, and if He does not accomplish His work, 
it is because He is hindered by the carnality of an 
unyielded life. The problem of improvement in the 
conduct of a Christian is never solved by the applica- 
tion of laws, nor by exhorting and stimulating the 
flesh; it is only solved by adjustment to the Spirit. 
When Spirit-filled, the child of God is both moved 
to glorify God in every moment of life, and is 
enabled to realize that heavenly ideal. 

There is much said in the Scriptures about the 
Christian life being a ‘‘warfare,’’ a ‘‘fight,’’ and a 
‘‘race.’’ The Christian is to be watchful, steadfast, 
and unmovable. He is not exhorted to attempt to 
do what the Spirit alone can do; he is rather to main- 
tain the attitude of co-operation with, and yielded- 
ness to, and dependence on, the Spirit. 

The grace-manner of life in the Spirit will be lived 
according to the grace teachings. These teachings, 
or principles of life, are written both to prepare the 
Christian for an intelligent walk in the Spirit, and to 


344 Grace 


furnish a norm by which he may compare his daily 
life with the divine ideal. The grace teachings are 
not laws; they are suggestions. They are not de- 
mands; they are beseechings. They are not followed 
in order to gain acceptance or favor; they are ac- 
knowledged and followed in the glad assurance of 
present acceptance and completeness in Christ through 
grace. 

There are three laws, or principles, which character- 
ize the teachings of grace concerning the manner of 
the daily life of the believer: 


a. The perfect law of liberty. 


The child of God is free. He has been delivered 
from every aspect of the law—as a rule of life, as an 
obligation to make himself acceptable to God, and as 
a dependence on the impotent flesh. Likewise, he has 
been delivered from ideals and conventionalities of 
the world. He is as free in himself as though he had 
already passed on into heaven. He has been brought 
into the priceless liberty of grace. Against the 
spoiling of this liberty the Christian is to contend: 
‘*Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again with 
the yoke of bondage’”’ (Gal. 5:1). The actual experi- 
ence of contending for the preservation of liberty 
which is in Christ Jesus is foreign to the great mass 
of nominal Christians. Pressing in on every hand are 
the false teachings of a law-ridden church, the fleshly 
ideals of the world and its god, the natural rational- 
ism of the human mind, and the ever-present tendency 
to depend on self. Against all this, the fact of true 
liberty in Christ is little known. It is therefore im- 


The Life under Grace 345 


portant that the scope and character of Christian 
liberty be defined, and, in so doing, no,aspect of lib- 
erty is in view other than the liberty which belongs 
to the child of God under grace. 

The word liberty is defined thus: ‘‘The state of be- 
ing exempt from the dominion of others, or from 
restricting circumstances.’’ It is freedom to do 
according to one’s own preference and choice. It is 
emancipation. The thought of necessity and servi- 
tude is of the law. Grace glories in liberty and free- 
dom. 

Is it not imperative that the children of God should 
be placed within the bounds of reasonable law? 
Absolutely No! The Christian’s liberty to do pre- 
cisely as he chooses is as limitless and perfect as any 
other aspect of grace. But God has provided a suffic- 
jent safeguard which consists in the fact that the 
divine ideal is first wrought in the heart: ‘‘For it is 
God which worketh in you both to will and to do of 
his good pleasure’’ (Phil. 2:13). 

In this one passage, the whole divine scheme for the 
believer’s life under grace is crystallized. God can 
propose absolute liberty to the one in whom He is so 
working that the innermost choice is only that which 
He wills for him. Having molded the desires of the 
heart, He can give His child unbounded freedom. 
There is no other freedom in the world but this. By 
the inwrought ‘‘fruit of the Spirit,’? God Himself has 
determined the desires of the heart. The outworking 
of those desires will be according to His own energiz- 
ing power. 

Thus the character and the daily life of the Chris- 

‘tian is wrought on the basis of pure grace. As God 


\ 


346 Grace 


saves and keeps in grace apart from every human as- 
sistance and merit, so, in like manner, He proposes to 
produce the character and conduct of His child apart 
from every assistance or intrusion of the flesh. ‘‘Are 
ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now 
made perfect by the flesh?’’ (Gal. 3:3). In harmony 
with the whole program of divine grace, no other man- 
ner of life could be imposed on the believer than the 
one in which God alone undertakes and accomplishes. 
To be true to His own purposes in grace, He must 
not only create the motive and choice of the heart 
but He must provide the sufficient power for its exe- 
cution. 

Should it be objected that this is an idealism which 
is effective only with a limited company of believers 
who are so yielded to God as to be Spirit-filled, and 
that the great mass of carnal Christians must be held 
by rules, the reply would be that carnal Christians 
are no more subject to law than are the spiritual 
Christians. God does not countenance the attitude 
of the carnal Christian’to-the-extent of providing a 
rule of government for him. As He holds only one 


issue before the unsaved—the acceptance of Christ as 


, Saviour—likewise, He holds only one issue before the 


carnal Christian. That issue is not, ‘‘ Will you live 
in a way which is in harmony with your carnality?’’ | 
It is, rather, ‘‘Yield yourselves unto God, as those 
that are alive from the dead, and your members as 
instruments of righteousness unto God’’ (Rom. 6:18). 

The carnal Christian is abnormal. His position is 
perfect in Christ, but in character and conduct he 
violates the most precious principles and provisions 


‘ of grace. The divine ideal for the believer’s life un- 


The Life under Grace 347 


der grace remains unchangeable. When God is mold- 
ing the desires of the heart, there is liberty. When 
He is empowering the life, there is victory. 

Thus it may be seen that grace is not a way of 
escaping obedience to God; it is the only possible way 
in which true obedience can be secured. The Spirit- 
filled believer is never abandoned to self-will; he is 
““inlawed to Christ.’? God in grace does not lower 
standards; He proposes and gloriously realizes the 
very character and conduct of heaven. 


b. The law of expediency. 


Because of the Christian’s position and circum- 
stances in the world, the law of personal liberty in 
Christ is subject to the law of expediency. That 
which is expedient is to be chosen for two reasons 
which are stated in the Scriptures: ‘‘All things are 
lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient: all 
things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought 
under the power of any’’; ‘‘ All things are lawful for 
me, but all things are not expedient: all things are 
lawful for me, but all things edify not’’ (1 Cor. 6:12; 
10:23). Thus it is seen that the law of expediency 
contemplates the danger to the believer’s own life in 
the matter of personal habits or wmjury, and the 
responsibility to others in the matter of edification. 
Much that he is free to do, so far as his relation to 
God is concerned, he is not free to do when contem- 
plating his own personal good and the good of others. 
His manner of life must be adapted to the ignorance 
and prejudice of men to whom he is a witness for his 
Lord and whom he would seek to lead to Christ or 
‘to build up in the faith. Any sacrifice of personal 


348 Grace 


liberty will be made willingly if Christ thereby may 
be made known. When considering the law of expedi- 
ency, one does not ask, ‘‘ What harm is there in this, 
or that?’’ He rather seeks to know what is the good. 
In all your precious liberty, ‘‘see then that ye walk 
circumspectly’’ (Eph. 5:15). 


e. The law of love. 


Again the liberty of the Christian will be qualified 
by the love which he has for others. The sympathy 
of the unsaved must be gained and the conscience of 
the weaker brother must be considered: ‘‘But meat 
commendeth us not to God: for neither, if we eat, are 
we the better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse. 
But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours 
become a stumbling block to them that are weak. .. . 
Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will 
eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my 


_ brother to offend’’ (1 Cor. 8: 8-13). Liberty is easily 


PPS LEAL SE AONE gD 


_ set aside by those who would be ‘‘all things to all men 
that by all means’’ they might save some. The 


supreme example of the sacrifical principle of grace 
was manifested by Christ in His death: ‘‘He saved 
others; himself he cannot save’’ (Mk. 15:31). 


Third. Christ in You the Hope of Glory. 


The word mystery as used in the New Testament 
refers to a sacred secret, or something which was not 
revealed in the ages past, but is revealed in the present 
time. The body of truth which has been unfolded 
in the revelation contained in the mysteries is the 
present plan and purpose of grace. Among these 


The Life under Grace 349 


mysteries are two which are primary and around these 
the other mysteries are gathered. 


1. Christ the manifestation of God and of the 
Church. 


That portion of this truth which directly concerns 
and involves the child of God is regarding Christ as 
the Head of the Church which is His body, and the 
believers as ‘‘members in particular.’’ This figure 
speaks of identity. Being in Christ, the member of 
His body partakes of all that the Head has ever been, 
all that He is now, and all that He will ever be. So, 
also, being in Christ, the member of His body par- 
takes of all that Christ has ever done, of all that He 
is doing, and all that He will ever do. No human 
mind is able to grasp this revelation. Its inexhaust- 
ible riches will occupy the heart throughout the ages 
to come. 

In the letter to the Colossians the Apostle Paul, by 
the Spirit, unfolds the glory of Christ. He presents 
Christ as the manifestation of God, the One in whom 
all divine purposes center, and the One in whom, by 
the mystery of unity, the saved one is forever com- 
plete. He writes of the ‘‘mystery of God’’ which is 
Christ (2:2). From all Scripture it may be discov- 
ered that Christ is both the manifestation of God and 
the manifestation of the saints who are in Him. What 
God is, may be seen in Christ. So, likewise, what the 
saved one is may be seen in Christ. The Son of God 
is not only the Mediator between God and man and the 
Saviour of the lost; He is the manifestation of all 
that God is, and, at the same time, the manifestation 
‘of all that the believer isin Him. Christ has brought 


\ 


350 Grace 


God to man, and He has brought man to God. Man 
now sees God in Christ, and God now sees saved men 
in Christ. 

To the Christian, Christ is not only a position; He 
is also a possession. Through the marvels of divine 
grace, in the reckoning of God, whatever Christ is, the 
Christian is in Christ—‘‘Ye in me.’’ 


2. The indwelling Christ. 


Accordingly, the second primary sacred secret is 
that of the indwelling Christ,—‘‘I in you.”’ 

Turning again to the Colossian Epistle, we read: 
‘To whom God would make known what is the riches 
of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which 
is Christ in you, the hope of glory’’ (1:27). 

Being in Christ, is a position which can have no 
corresponding experience. This is not true of the 
mystery of the indwelling Christ. His presence may 
be discerned and thus become an assurance and guar- 
anty of every position and possession in Christ. The 
believer’s heavenly glories will be unveiled when the 
Lord returns to receive His own: ‘‘For ye are dead 
[ye died}, and your life is hid with Christ in God. 
When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall 
ye also appear with him in glory”’ (Col. 3:3, 4). Not 
only is Christ Himself the ‘‘hope of glory,’’ but, 
according to His own promise (John 14:1-3), that 
moment in which He will appear is a ‘‘blessed hope.’’ 
The presence of ‘‘Christ in you”’ is the imperishable 
“Shope of glory.’’ 

“‘Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus.’’ 

Both for want of space and that the thread of truth 
might not be broken, there has been but little men- 


The Life under Grace asak 


tion in this section of the truth that these great fea- 
tures and properties of grace, which grow out of the 
fact that Christ is now the sphere of the believer’s 
life, are not found, even to the slightest degree, in 
either the law of Moses or the kingdom teachings. 
These wonderful accomplishments in grace are what 
differentiate Christianity from Judaism. One is of 
the old creation with its earthly purpose and promise; 
the other is of the new creation with its heavenly 
glories. The believer could not be under law; he is 
‘‘inlawed to Christ.’’ He has been saved out of the 
world and is no longer a partaker of its past, its 
present, or its future. Its past is a record of sin 
and death; its present is a record of confusion under 
the permitted rule of ‘‘the god of this world’’; and 
the future will be a record of judgment. Law is 
adapted to the earth. It is the divine method of deal- 
ing with the people of the earth whether it be in the 
age which is past, or in the age which is to come. 

The child of God has been delivered from every 
aspect of the law. The code of rules contained in the 
law has been superseded by the injunctions and be- 
seechings of grace. The legal necessity of becoming 
accepted of God by human merit, has been super- 
seded by the divine accomplishment through grace 
wherein the Christian is already accepted and safe 
in Christ forever. And possessing the presence of 
God through the indwelling Spirit, the child of God is 
saved from that struggle and defeat of the flesh which 
characterized the law and because of which defeat, the 
law became a curse and an instrument of death. 

In place of the law there is grace. 

In place of condemnation there is salvation. F 


A 
tS 


352 Grace 


In place of death there is life. 

In place of ruin in Adam there is resurrection in 
Christ. 

In place of bondage there is liberty. 

In place of defeat there is victory. 

In place of hell there is heaven. 

‘“‘But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto 
his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have 
suffered a while, make you perfect, establish, 
strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and domin- 
ion for ever and ever. Amen.’’ 


CHAPTER V 
CONCLUSION AND APPEAL 


RACH, more than any other single word, is the 
expression of the sum-total of all that enters into 
Christianity. The various divine undertakings in 
grace have been stated in these pages and it has been 
seen that, through the work of Christ on the eross 
and through the divine purposes and decrees for this 
dispensation, it is through grace that hell-deserving 
sinners are saved, it is through grace that they are 
preserved and are to be presented like Christ in glory, 
and it is ‘‘under grace’’ that the saved one now lives. 
Being under grace, he is ‘‘dead’’ to the law, and 
“‘delivered’’ from the law, whether the law is con- 
ceived of as being a rule of life, an obligation to 
establish merit before God, or a reliance upon the 
energy of the flesh. 

On the other hand, the Christian is in no wise an 
outlaw. Since he is 7 Christ as the new sphere of 
both his standing and his state, he is now inlawed to 
Christ and is therefore under the governing principles 
of grace. These principles provide both an explicit 
and complete rule of conduct which is superhuman, 
and the enabling power of the indwelling Spirit which 
is supernatural. This manner of life which is to be 
lived in the power of the Spirit is addressed to, and 
designed for, the people of the new creation in Christ. 

353 


354 Grace 


These teachings of grace may be defined as, that sup- 
erhuman rule of life which grows out of acceptance 
with God and which is first wrought in the heart and 
then achieved by the enabling power of the Spirit. 
Grace makes all conformity to the will of God to be 
voluntary. Christian conduct and service must arise 
from within and be the expression of a free choice. 
Only such action is acceptable to God since it alone 
is in harmony with the new facts of relationship un- 
der grace. By faith in Christ the believer is instantly 
made complete in Him and the possessor of every 
spiritual blessing, the Spirit is given to indwell him, 
and he is ‘‘made accepted’’ in the Beloved. The 
Christian’s life must be keyed to these new facts, and 
when this new relationship under grace is really com- 
prehended, it is seen that there remains no ground for 
legality in any form whatsoever. 

The people who are now saved by grace are of a 
new order of beings. They are a new creation. The 
people of the old creation are ruined by sin; the 
people of the new creation are renewed by the Spirit. 
The people of the old creation are wholly lost; the 
people of the new creation are perfectly saved. The 
people of the old creation are doomed forever; the 
people of the new creation are entirely safe in Christ 
Jesus. The people of the old creation have always 
failed to realize the holy will of God in their daily 
lives; the people of the new creation may now live 
well-pleasing to God by the new provisions in grace. 
They may know unbroken victory even on the plane 
of the high ideals and standards of heaven. 

A clear understanding of the doctrines of grace will 
result in a discrimination between the transforming 


Conclusion and Appeal B55 


accomplishments of divine power through grace on 
the one hand, and the corresponding consistent man- 
ner of life which grows out of the salvation on the 
other hand. The relative importance of these two 
aspects of grace is also revealed. 

Failure on the part of religious leaders to recognize 
the all important, supernatural salvation which is in 
Christ for all who believe, is largely responsible for 
the present tendency to treat Christianity as though 
it is merely an ethical system, and as though its 
standards of living were designed of God to be applied 
to a Christ-rejecting world. The unregenerate can 
hardly be expected to see more in Christianity than its 
ethical teachings, but the people of God should be led 
on to the full knowledge of the great realities in grace. 

For those who attempt to explain the truth of God 
to others, there is need of a constant consideration of 
the measureless responsibility which accompanies any 
presentation of the Gospel. No amount of attention 
or painstaking study will be too great for the adequate 
preparation of a Gospel messenger. In the light of 
eternal issues it would be better that a tongue should 
be stilled in death rather than to voice misstatements 
concerning the way of salvation through Christ. 
Dealing with the destiny of men is a responsibility as 
limitless as eternity to which they hasten. The law 
of the state demands that a medical doctor who pro- 
poses to deal with the temporal, physical ills of man 
shall be fully educated for his task, subject to the 
closest examination by the government, and shall be 
held under severe legal penalty for any malpractice. 
All this is most reasonable and commendable; but how 
much greater is the responsibility of the person who 


356 Grace 


traffics in those issues which determine the destiny of 
the soul! The state could not assume to educate, ex- 
amine, and, in turn, punish the failure of those who 
assume to preach the Gospel to dying men. No human 
authority is capable of such action and no human 
sentence would be a proper penalty for the damage 
done through such failure. God alone must be the 
judge. 

Three passages when taken together state the divine 
appeal and warning: ‘‘And hath given to us the 
ministry of reconciliation’’; therefore, ““Study to 
shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word 
of truth’’; for, ‘‘ Though we, or an angel from heaven, 
preach any other gospel unto you than that which we 
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we 
said before, so say I now again, If any man preach 
any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, 
let him be accursed’’ (2 Cor. 5:18; 2 Tim. 2:15; Gal. 
1:8, 9). The order and force of this truth needs no 
comment, 

It is deplorable that Christian sentiment is not 
aroused to greater appreciation of the responsibility 
which is assumed by those who dare to preach, or 
to direct the steps of the lost. Good intentions and 
zeal cannot be substituted for the accurate knowledge 
of the exact facts which enter into the divine way of 
salvation by grace alone. The commission is given to 
every Christian and with it both the appeal for pains- 
taking study, and the warning as to the terrible con- 
sequences for the misstatement of the Gospel. 

Pause, reader, and consider! Are you attempting 
to explain the Gospel to others without the exact 


Conclusion and Appeal B57 


knowledge of your theme? Would you choose to take 
a remedy which had been compounded by a blind 
druggist? Are you persisting in error because of in- 
dolence, carelessness, or mere theological prejudice? 
Failure to state accurately the Gospel of saving grace 
may result in the damnation of the misguided, and 
the meriting, at least, of the anathema of God on the 
part of the blind guide. After due consideration, no 
sane person will treat these facts lightly. 

Again, the daily life and service of the one who is 
alive unto God must be recognized as assuming infinite 
proportions when its issues are seen. Nothing short 
of that manner of life which is normal under grace 
glorifies God. Nothing short of this will be fruit- 
bearing with its eternal rewards. Nothing short of 
this will result in that personal experience of over- 
flowing love, joy, and peace, without which the empty 
heart remains as a living witness against the truth of 
God. The importance of a daily life lived in the full 
measure of divine blessing provided under grace is 
likewise beyond human estimation. 

‘“Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things 
before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the 
error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness. 
But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be glory now and 
for ever. Amen.’’ 


APPENDIX (Continued from page 51) 


The phrase, “a second work of grace,” used by certain 
groups of professing Christians is opposed to the plain state- 
ments of Scripture and contradicts the most vital fact about 
divine grace. As has been seen, God, when free to act at all, 
releases the whole of His infinite grace as the expression of 
His infinite love. His grace, therefore, is without reserve, 
is super-abounding and limitless. Necessarily there are cer- 
tain aspects of development in the full realization of that 
which is wholly bestowed at the moment one is saved. Pro- 
vision is made for the child of God to “grow in grace” (never 
into grace), to be “kept by the power of God,” to be deliv- 
ered from the reigning power of sin, and to experience new 
power and blessing when rightly adjusted to the indwelling 
Spirit. He will eventually be presented faultless before the 
presence of the divine glory. If he sins, his restoration, for- 
giveness and cleansing will be accomplished on the ground of 
his salvation through the cross and in no case as another 
exercise of divine grace. The following Scriptures, descrip- 
tive of all believers, are conclusive on this question: 

“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heaven- 
lies with Christ” (Lit. Eph. 1:3). “For in him dwelleth all 
the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are complete in 
him, which is the head of all principality and power” (Col. 
2:9,10). “For all things are your’s; whether Paul, or 
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things 
present, or things to come; all are your’s; and ye are 
Christ’s; and Christ is God’s” (I Cor. 3:22. 23). “The living 
God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy” (I Tim. 6:17), 
Nothing remains to be added to the positions and possessions 
to which every saved one has been brought through grace. 

Though indwelt by the Spirit, not every believer is filled 
with the Spirit. The Spirit’s filling, experienced only through 
a right adjustment to God, is not limited to a “second” bless. 
ing. Continuous or repeated infillings are contemplated with 
corresponding blessings (Acts 2:4; 4:8, 31). The very tense 
of the verb used in Eph. 5:8 is decisive: “Be getting [con- 
tinuously] filled with the Spirit.” 

Deeper and more wonderful blessings are always awaiting 
the child of God, but in every case it will be seen that these 
are only the realization of that which was once and for all 
bestowed in the infinite, saving grace of God at the moment 
of believing. 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


: PacE 
ADU eat A CHYERE <V occlaser cheeks eieeee hin ne Sle a slaw shales etek BO 
Abrahamic Covenant defined ...... SOAR MaeraNe ASSO SOD ne ith 
Abrahaniie faith). ss sis avern 6 Severe es Mictsravelocster otrei cesta me PE rete 
Access into elena. WAGE AeOGh bs: ciulensocuslinrs winbelatere Bes EOE 318 
Access to- Godin os rece Se Teas torare rat vuabcio pe coean alone Evehsia lee eh OLD 
Access to God in prayer ...... mae 319 
Adam and human death ....... 110 
Ad interim aspect of the law ..... 216 
Advocacy —of -Ohrist 20 2. 0s ees fs 19 
Advocacy of Christ and ‘safe- -keeping f 70 
Age characteristics ...... AS eS Bho orelistokopeueley sis ielsvetenats . 123 
Age = divisions: 2 oi 6s wets BAe a IR occ ore At oN At a i lecaleueee. 
Age, its two divine purposes ............. Ric eee Bc eseene 41 
Bo) TCS ee ee REC Paiste sienabere use sabeneiscahe co icnate 353 
APDSALETO.. URSA VEO inc lave 9 wis. 57h O eo cel'on eis Ee an ee te F Ne cama 85 
Association with angels. A dePreiaa¥ alte tc holga Coane eee lo teae ESTE elie lsiaks . 3824 
Association with. Christ ... cc 6o s«dee Eye Be Aaa fh oe. 323 
Association with God the Father ............... Siviele cieLeayo ee 
Association with Satan and his emissaries ........ BAe esa ye OA: 
Association with the Spirit ..... Re ceharalotaysiet WA agit aaelare Rae pews -45) 
Association with the world .......... aeata teindajalteielteve. clelsis.e1e). UOeee 
Baptism with the Spirit ........ ae ieieiwie\e a elshahiears) oe 44,219.01 28 
ESOAPMOCS x iBT ALV ZOO xe xitsya Wel ene a ein a 0) 8 adage laie tole cuoneitrs cael sieha wie 16 
Believing, the one condition of salvation ...... 16, 18, 50, a3 
Carnal Christians not under rules ....... Bei in nhere oi siats SAU OLO 
Gharaeter, ) Christian 4556.65 <2 wikic- seed aieaNakene raters Ca AEM 
Christ and the Church - 184 
Christ and the Sabbath 254 


Christeas RINey ci. sew lsicains Bi sahio de 133 
Christ’s body, its unity Re 


Christ indwelling ... elated ER eh DOO 
Christ in two lines of ‘prophecy Soils a kaya) ccatentaac ceil cat ame taal es 136 
Ohrish in yOu, tHe enOpe HOF BIOL Yc zersis ois 'd sein bi ers. vhecata wes leben 348 
Christ’s relation to three dispensations ............ ABEL 91 
Christ, the believer's sphere in grace ..........-e2eee05% naeaOL 
Christ, the manifestation of God and the Church .......... 349 
@hrist-the Mediator) oie0.h. ieee ie 6 suai ahataviareie. oaveeteie eich 815 
RBIS br LON DAL LOLI ie se pee cite ea co alto ooo fa No eotins ia ated tapes aM crave sh glioa te 212 
Christ the sphere of the believer’s association ............ 822 
Christ the sphere of the believer’s position .............. 307 
Christ the sphere of the believer’s safe-keeping .......... 821 
Christian is free from Sabbath law .........c.eeeesereres 258 
Christian husbands and wives ...........-. Leaaess Ue Ke else OO 
Christian masters and servants ........... BWolpictotela le sharerveti oma 
Christian parents and children .......... end iorasd rat akane! oe ane 331 
Christian’s obligation to weak brother ..............200006 333 
Qhristian’s. position. (00.2 6... e FO One Oe ata Tists 303, 308 
Oyristian.s positron.) Certain) Facts) s\5 .ie7sppuniais’ e-cie 00; Grelele lene 310 
Christian’s position demands a manner of life .. 80 
Christian’s relation to authority in the Church 330 
Ohristian’s relation to the body of Christ .......... aN 327 
Ohristian’s relation to erring brother ............ AA bien ey 
Christian’s relation to human governments ........... Seen OLD 


Christian’s relation to other Christiams .............+..+. 828 
Christian’s relation to the ge otal ens he AOI as Ui Baa 


360 Index 


Christian’s relation to world system ..... ine opaite eo bale Se Pe 
Christian represents divine ideal .........ceeecrcessne 35 
“Obristian (Sabpath, -vaueiOrrOr ws. \p15) 2 ojenahaheia eisiedeiss Gaape epee oie 245 
Christian, BEPVICR > Sfeite le 2 os Whtiels oe a ae ale wieleletaie'ein le le oe ew 
Ghristian. service. actwated by love’ 25 22.6050 be. 0s po ne Moe a. 
Christian ‘to! live! wnder™ erate: oi. io eure «wis aro iw lois) © ome ole atebal 88 
Christian : tw040ki dancet =< £2. esa o ce aime oie wrsie es ele ale ole 87 
Christianity and Judaism contrasted ..........+..-- 239, 351 
CHETSHIADIGY cOIS)5 ODPISG aS sven. cr tleic) eo e. 0) 6, eiaietelelane) wielioiele alee inne 241 
Chur oh’ udisotetigety ter lac iconic aos eiebeesteke cic seie sane tes oun eee ie 332 
Church, its first heresy Poa chattel Al vaw alee eke eis aheaniats Wise ietenee 269 
Conclusion Sea ee cea ale cuanbie at bales mrnr-s laa lleycueitele le eheiinae 353 
Condemnation -equatapon, ally... ..0:<: <s,0.d:s.5wlelo\e © «cv satel als 9, 40 
Condemnation forever a tDOShe de. yeyete sacle \ss we inie sip is ene a eee ee 20, 59 
Condemnation removed for safe-keeping ........-.+-..+5 59 
OConduet, MOSTAR Mi). Fs cts wicis ole cles eyes oie pe! ose yet s Whepameaerete te 342 
Confession of Sin. i. 0 ices = erm aipitete micinie Narcise eee ct SAS 
Contrasts ¢betweent Jaw. cand race G25 Mo aias« <a 'diecwioniorsisr eye 143 
Contrasts between Moses’ law and kingdom law .......... 157 
MONTASIS 4 VICALA\ Spats | hes Sarees Se © oe eee Melle nays hs accede dats B51 
Covenant of works and faith contrasted .......-.... 115, 188 
Covenant of works, common to Moses and Kingdom ...... 157 
Covenant of: ‘works done “away” ..... 6.0): sivis vibie ols oleletese.6 - 235 
Cross not in jeopardy in kingdom offer ......... ba aetCle te ence 137 
Death of Christ and safe-keeping ....... Rete o/sintn aie eee 69 
Dedth Of OOhrist. £On W SENG cscs wc cena wen cee ellninieha Swiees ei 4, 13, 60, 69 
Decalogue and grace contrasted .......... Slo pdeeiee is ieee eat 154 
Dispensation sia oii « mietc) ane Sees alate iets ete legisla is Say 122 
Dipsensational testings ........ a Ries Bie) s mere wing phe vnateea te Meee) 
Does sin unsave the Christian ........ Weve lt Patni 61 
Doubtful passages and safe-keeping ........ AES St . TT 
Enablement differs in three systems .......... shatens Wane otters 94 
Enablement provided under grace ............ Be 5s ee OO NES aia 
Enablement provided in kingdom ............0eee00- oaw) 196 
Enablement provided in Mosaic system Cae ewes! LOR} ee) 
Enemy, the: (Chnistianis:® “vin. ke oes cise shew we wis ain eleeeinlead 815 
Epistles present faith-principle ....... eR ilatal ne SiS Rise sc ete nen 
HMradication: 22 esi ack wee e's elereiale we Were e Sects Sons enage Macatee 339 
Error concerning ‘sabbath: <4 ds 5.4 stlee meee cele ee hf 


Error of co-mingling kingdom and eg teachings Sige 


HIRPOAIONCY) 1 dss VA ar ene or tne aiere etn Se) eRGiatotrous MOA a 
Experience testifies to safe-keeping .....-...-cceeceeeeee 62 
Externalism rebuked .........-.-.00% SRS : Metra ae ty fs 
False prophets in: kingdoms. eens hija es eaeee aisle Meee tena ace Pees 
Mathers care: inthe (kingdom. a2, ee oe uehomine mole e meee Auman Beas 
Flesh not controlled by rules ........ Stecaie tes of iis Yo sebuNeUs ici seinMecaS 
Mleshh sith: mea rime. SG ele ete pak oe open ee emea poems Dewan ses 339 
Forgiveness, four divine conditions ......... eskilurehs’ oWeietabe tena 19 
Forgiveness perfect through Christ .............. Sherniet eres 14 
Forgiveness of unsaved not gracious ...... talatataretohenae te 12 
Gentiles have not the law ..........eeee0ee or aile ev aisiielie) wise Se 
Gentiles, two assumptions of the law .........ceceeevee 220 
Gifts; \ their /ministry:~ oF Ves se ARNE Usrovess erelbsteretece ere retis ieee 342 
Gospels described ........ ROTA S sronetelerevancnaletalcrsre ae eo) 
Gospel, its hindrances ........... asda, ls enebantoite dene, eer steno tetetS of, Oe 
Government, three systems .......... Tievier etoaly. rat's alatanarete sie meebo 
Grace abandoned’ at Sinai sf oe Oounniee eee eee Aveta reen tus Le 125 
Grace and the sins of the saved ....... Sear scat hess s laneN te acts 5 16 
Grace and the sins of the unsaved ....... aievavlataretaio tetera toe 12 


Grace cannot incur a debt 
Grace cannot pay a debt 
Grace cannot recognize guilt 


Index 361 


Grace cannot recognize merit ..........secseeeee2++ 89, 63 
Grace cannot recognize obligation ............+-.+0-+- 38, 62 
58 


Grace continued for safe-keeping ........--cecceecceees : 
Grace heaven’s manifestation ...-.....sccsesceseccsees, 45 
Grace inwrought and imparted ....... ats : 214 
AE TACOL IN MIROVONGIQN,” joie cnc .o.arctarecsiece an cietsieveie : 51 
Grace likened to 9 second husband 227 
Grace manifested in salvation ........ E 28 
Grace manifested through permitted sin 33 
Grace, meaning of the word ........ 3 
Grace never the over-payment of debt aS) HISD CI Oe 10 
Grace not lessened because of demerit .......-+....--- ares 5 
Grace not withheld because of demerit .............. ots 

Grace of God never less or more ........ eLerebevcneteie lates are 6, 11 
Grace precedes. all human works ......cccccccsrcveceve 

Grace,. ‘principle of action ........5 ccs es edepelledat con ellsere seu 191 


Grace provides a particular rule of life ................ 83 
Grace provides the Spirit’s eet a Sats Bae 

Grace saving and keeping contrasted 
Grace, Seripinre. terms. Used= 5.25 sate soo toes Sivlb eneuninls 0 80 
Grace teachings ........ ayatelcieeetd 
Grace teachings opposed to “Yaw eos. anne oh 
Grace teachings superhuman ........-ceccccccvasee: 200, 207 
Grace teachings surpass Moses or the kingdom pisipete caren Memeo: 


Graee teachings, two revelations .........ceccesseee--+ 209 
Grace the sphere of liberty ........ iietsiele cig isiemin cierh 2OOj0 BLO: 
Grace, three divine motives ... 23 
Grace, three major divisions ....... A 22 
Grece, three opposing principles aus 87 
Grace, two ministries ..... 83 
Gracious work of God for man 46 


PLICHWAVS) Of -ATUtD | sciler isis orole restore canistederenenace emcee 
Holy days abolished BSeN bate ohae eto reales 
SET OGO! OF ClOL Ys fa) sas Aelia ofthe, syn)’ cue ole ae re 
Human responsibility in salvation ...... A 
Husbands and wives ..........-.. sh avecarapale! ote 


AM PARIS VOM eile: cicrapcieyeictolegtioieysverelalecs aera ato © eta 

ER EORT ERG Cargo sieNg tere nce, Anise sae iaioxer neato tialla chaise 
Individual aspect of salvation ....... cere 
Indwelling of divine Persons ............ 4 
Indwelling of the Spirit and safe- -keeping See 
ivhertance, , Christian: 35 6.5/5) eee oie oo eles Be 
Intercession of Christ and safe-keeping ............ 
Israel’s' national hope ........... ee 


John’s Gospel defined .......- Leetonia 
John preached the kingdom_......... A 
John’s record of John the Baptist 
Judaism and Christianity contrasted 
Judaism pased on o MAW Srsich a Mesavcre' “5 
Jmdaisre, 7d0ne “AWAY. 2 ws eels cies sence 
Judgment of Picton § in) kingdom scr 0 s0.sie 


King of Israel rejected .........-... 
Kingdom, and outward show ....... 
Kingdom, determining statements ......-.seeeeee0% 
Kingdom, its characterizing phrase ........ 
Kingdom law interpreted by Christ .... 
Kingdom of heaven, a new message .. 
Kingdom of heaven defined .....-++.+eeeeeeeeee 
Kingdom offer real ........-. GEE SOL BIO COR aE IDO 
Kingdom rejected and "delayed Gracmnete la 
Kingdom riches ...... iasaaeveloncrhats 
Kingdom rule, two characteristics Soie te 
Kingdom, teachings. -- oo. 6. aces ce tee ce veccsece 


362 Index 


Kingdom teachings and grace teachings contrasted ...... 161 
163, 184, ae 352 

Kingdom teachings complete ........-. Sinstes ees 

Kingdom teachings purely legal ...........- 

Kingdom, the .aspects of rnle S52... 25 ce - ose wleplc ote 

Kingdom. transformation: ©. %% 2.5 <..+ +s os 6-65 

“Kingdom within you” ........+-2.--s.2ees 


Law, a complete system -........ +. eee e reece reece eereee 
Law, a principle in operation ...... oma 
Law and grace contrasted ...5...--...eeeeecer reese 
Law, any rule of conduct ....... Sai ate ole 
Law, as fiesh-dependence done away wi aie ates omental 
Law began ite Tole c At SIRAL oa ak =< wiernle ovine oo antes nimi 
TREW: _CONGOMINS cos he sie a sie ok ne ol Oe eile oorelnte clowns ieee reins 
Wis GOMNOM Cas tie cine © Saletemce te cremate ie eis ges oto) ciel mete evorntnre 
Fig Wo WON AWAY." sinieie es « sirisveinim wlas/o me slelews ise eietelel 

Law excluded from ‘Apostolic CEE TOY 2a SSP CEE Ec to 
Law excluded from grace teaching ................. 
Law excluded from grace teaching of Christ 
Law from Adam to Moses ........ 

Law given only to Israel ........... 

Law, important grace passages 
Law, Israel’s governing system ..........+.... 

Haw, s ate application’ = 2. sty sacs cele s ot ee meee meres 
Law, its righteous character ...... Bin tas 

Taw likened: to :a Brat. husband: ...... 5% Sse cles sei ee eee 
Law may be self-imposed ......... 4k 
Law not unto: justification ........ccb ec ces 
Law of expediency ......... Sie lce Nie lee Ni 
Daw. ‘of \ liberty). .0). 0.4% m fe sleet oie eusest scale Noite 
BW POLS ONO \ ere eiti lets Gicieeina schemata sinrets 
Law of Moses and. of the kingdom different | 
Law of Moses and of the kingdom similar 
Law passing, a great gain ............+.++-- é 
Law principles restated in grace .............. 
Law proposed, not imposed ............. 
Law related to cause and effect ........... 
Law sanctity upheld through faith ...... 
haw > selfimposed (saves ds ee owardtionie 
Law, the time of its reign 
Law, the whole will of God ............ 
Law, two Gentile assumptions 
aw written: On) StOmess <i. s|sk./ersyercesels es ete 
aberty, «what: db 38 o/c chee here 
Life as presented in the Gospels 
Life imparted .. 
Life under grace ...... 
Lord’s day, a day for activity 9 eee inks 
Lord’s day, a day for personal delight ..... 
Lord’s day and the new creation ....... eoessceses. 274, 276 
Lord’s day and the resurrection ....... ds Siecle anes | BVO P2389 
Lord’s day began with the resurrection 
Lord's day, Biblical testimony concerning 
Lord’s day and the children ............- adcleleraeereietece 286 
Lord's day belongs to a particular people ................ 283 
Lord’s day governed by expediency and love ............ 291 
Lord’s day has been blessed of God .......ccceccacsecee 281 
Lord’s day indicated by events ............0-- 
Lord’s day in harmony with grace 5 
Lord’s day in prophecy ........ 5 SERS eee 
Lord’s day, its Biblical observation ........... "282, 288, 289 
Lord’s day may be extended to all days. Seo Sie oisl wieae Resneoe eee 
Lord's: day. ‘not. ‘a, national “day «2.5 Genus ae oleleee eee es 
Lord’s day not for the unregenerate .................-- 284 
Lord’s day not subject to rules .....0.....++.++2+ 286, 289 
Lord’s day, reason for observance 


po eeceeteeceec ts se 6 . 


Index 363 


Lord’s day, the first sabbath in the new order .......-.. 295 
Lord’s day, three major aspects ..... atekei hate OK Bel httrevels Oe 
Love as required in three systems ....... ect coatntare 
Love of God in keeping His own ........... 
Bove; the heart. (of “the Byangel: ...:)..<0<ssse0e ee siecse 1202 
Luke's Gospel deine is) s nisi ciaicem ake olla eis 0 Neral sicle win Ne eave Thee 


Man innocent not God’s niet AGODA Waiaiial caine atmiaiarstrierl overs 35 


Mark’s Gospel defined ..... ee aeaey a Pcie 0 op eRe) 
Maclers | ANG AOLVADEs es catcsies sj Miele See ea ives areolge ote HOOD 
Matthew’s Gospel defined .......... Ree rion fae OR) 
Measure of enablement ............ Saieiely 196 
Measure of enablement under grace ete fetal tal axe 200 
Measure of enablement under Mosaic system ............ 195 
Middle ground ees id PRS crOOe ella tafe oie sila? Giese, vinieketexee SOU OS 
Millennial -Sabbath  ....4....... are isiofelevets (ac oG¥asmiclgie sreleiel peo 
Mosaic system abolished Sve eon Dioho-kzerasens evemoleka vests 216, 266 
Mosaic tenening ars oie Sec cw ee ieithoeiet eis ihecete are aieiots ate en LO: 
Mosaic teachings and grace teachings contrasted ........ 152 
Mosaic teachings purely legal ............ Rust tateiasinrerelcoue oo. 


Motive for conduct under grace ....... 
Motive for conduct under law ........... 
“My commandments” .......... Sieh slalenebntbetets elafaisiersial 1 aya Loo 


New Covenant and safe-keeping .......cssceccececcsors 16 
New day appointed under grace ........seccecccceeee 269 
New Testament kingdom teaching .........cceececveecee 128 


One issue to unsaved under grace :......ccccceseccccrs 84 
Order varies between law and grace .........eeeee.--.- 182 


Panoply of , Obristianic)..\.\<<js:- 22 + > 16 
PaTGLLs! BUG MCAMOATOT 1 Neaceate aiseletsleks. sisi clatovees 
Paul, his law and grace teachings ...... 
Paul, his personal experience mar Etats 
Paul, inlawed to Christ ........... 
Power of God in keeping His own. 

Prayer in the kingdom ......... 


Prayer for Christian’s safe- keeping SO gis cars cices 

IPEAVED (NO LONG'S oie. eae. scales 916 Asteria 

Preaching another Gospel ........cceeeess A 

Preaching the Gospel ...... ato total site). 

PBOBACCY. CWO OUNES sigrecaesis! s:0racurelonadaye cre sletetee. Ar ENORY RO BiB od G16} 
Regeneration and safe-keeping ................ Anes Oo 72 
HUGPOHTARCE GNC) Lath ma. « wise thareus i plakstaie whe vorallensials, «teers eee 17 
Restoration does not promote carelessness ...... Reatone letier oie coh 21 
Restoration of believer by confession ..........-2-.0e000- 
Resurrection and safe-keeping ........ 

Resurrection and the Lord’s day .... 

Revelation as to safe-keeping ............- 

MESOWEST il oa ies oe eleven vans ier ore te 8 eerste: 

ule: of lite=for the, Obristian: 6 5.0/6) eee 6 s0ie a's 

Rules related to sin-nature ........ i 5 

Sabbath a part of the law ........ 

Sabbath, a test question ........... 

Sabbath, a type of Christian’s rest ....... A 

Sabbath’ and the Book of Job ...... Sl elle: slaveuat ene 

Sabbath, Biblical testimony .......-.... 

Sabbath, certain errors ..... Sia atavolatetalalgy ions 

Sabbath in prophecy ...-...cceseeecverecccceceees 

Sabbath in the millennium ........ aravteralavatale 6 ales MAS MOP Ae 
Sabbath never imposed on Geniies Rislene, Beis loeiceee selects otemeiel, MDD 
Sabbath not perpetuated by Christ ...... Uae: hela ca edetalenoal el AOD. 


Sabbath observance impossible ........0.sceccescceesees 267 
Sabbath, trom Adam to. Moses’ “04 «is ecleiicceceveantcesne, OAs 


364, Index 


Sabbath, from Moses to Christ ...+.+.s+++: 

Sabbath, represented by the Acts .... 

Sabbath, represented by the Epistles - 

Sabbath’ question, reason for discussion 

Sabbath reestablished ............--- 

Sabbath,. the exact. day =........--++- or eo, ee 
Sabbath, the period so remctted by the Gospels ere orapetatelae 
Sabbath’ to C@ABE "=... 2s Bh chris bile ate Rip tar SE aig se ornate! 
Safe-keeping in grace. .....-. eee cee cere eer ceeeeeee 55, 
Safe-keeping indicated in divine provisions ......-+++-++. 
Safe-keeping- implied ..........0....--cececeecece Eroreotane 
Salvation: a) ‘gilt 22a ee ee ee ee dtets reins win ok we aiaials she, blake 
Salvation, a human benefit ........... Ba tO eS Se 
Salvation a manifestation of grace .......-.--- 5 aa Ba rela he 
Salvation and works ......... S Rat naia sieteicleiees PRR a yee 
Salvation=(by-ngrace 5. 20s 6 otis cbc wo ne wie * 36, 78, 186, 
Salvation, supreme divine purpose tad at se we Ma wallace ete 
Salvation through believing alone ........-. wiaile ate ere sled ais 
Salvation, two classes of divine WNdertakines: ~. wes < sees 
Salvation, what it is and is not .........-- ee ceeesvoees c 
Scripture co-mingles. truth. -. 6. ce cece wee cee ccecenecvss 
Scripture on passing of the law .......- 

Scripture on the kingdom ...... 

Scripture on two grace teachings 

Sealing with the Spirit ......... 

Sermon on the Mount, its setting ..........-.- os oe. 
Seven facts about grace ........... ee Siem bis se tee eles 
Similitudes of righteous in the kingdom | era Sel eits Tene te havea eter 
Sin-nature,- its. control. ............- ras lciw 60S Nims ails telorele te 
Sin: of Adame so eas owas oe ele ae sip wisi Sve als ale Ol ee ea reteloceiec 
Sin permitted for grace. yevelation Pee eee ee qiaiavel se ore 
Sovereignty of God and human will ..........0e-eseeeeee 
Sovereignty OF A ELACOr poe woes dee waivlie as unialeis =a sie sie w wiel sietelsle 
Spirit’s control of sin-nature ............. ehalulivers leleboneiate ts 
Spirit indwelling, age characterization ............ 205, 
Spirit indwelling or filling ..... hela Gilet nie iene telnet auehacrenette 


Spirit manifests Ohrigt ss 5 4 $6. .loe cle sete ois vie ee Dehra ees 
Spirit’s ministry in the kingdom 
Spirit received by faith 
Standing in Christ 


ed 


ee ee es ees 


Supernatural power provided under grace .......... 203, 
Teachings of the Apostle Paul ...... sty nie) tate wie ore toteee 
Teachings of Christ, not all pearls 2 now apetane tite cop ebevoneionets 
Weachings~’ Of) Grace asi ws eh ees wc eee eae 80, 147, 185, 


Teachings of grace never separated 
Teachings of grace, two revelations ... 
Teachings of the kingdom iets 
Teachings of the law of Moses ............-++-+5-- 102, 
Ten commandments defined 


The convicting work ........ Sa rasaceieretote REO Oe S 
The, delivering \work <5 sssccs-s & 2 «re nels aie eieieiete cle pieledspete : 
The finished work ........ 4 


The keeping work ..... 
The presenting work 
The saving work ... 
The work of God in. Christian growth — 
The testimony of early fathers to Lord’s day 
Three classes of people 
Three rules for conduct 
Throne of law or grace 
Withing + <% soca sacs ea 
Title deed ...... ASO) Bal ot stabale arhce eters tiene he eae EN ete 
o aspects of grace teachings 3.0 evel s sei epavein Sve se ccalere,'e oro sateiets 
Two covenants of Gal. 4: 21-31 SO ton Peek tk ss 
Two days typical. of: two: “principles. ov keke eon ek 
Two laws governing Christian relationship .........e..06 


Index 365 


MG LOLS BARTER OVIOND SpA Soa oa b6% ones ooo Friese COG 
EES SYSCMS CANNOL COCHISE |S Jad iissccscucdscsioverere¢cue. GRE 
Two systems need not be combined APTN a TROL POO TES 


ROE REID oid Aneto le 4 Ard A, ROLY IOCOE, eS hee. DAO 
Union with Christ ..... TOT a bess cvectizecveseree BOS, BOG 
Universal condemnation <~.......... ead te p 00d Hed bis vp , 40 
Unregenerate not under moral appeal ....... SEG re - 48, 84 
Unsaved without access to God... ec esereveee ria ee: 816 
Upper-room discourse described ......scccccevccccecs as 94 
LTONGNOL OL MEP DOOM Caxcipe sd debe seeudse seer? ost ASO 
Words, Vcc sess ews sesserervecvorese Feev sa ceepas 2 126 
Word of God er ra ee RES PM TY EOE PIO CW, 820 
Works as related to PERM Gio vi5i3 de Fee eo EB Sis 7, 23, 45, 186, 803 
SR OPRG TAA CORY OL FAME o vic.cs +0: ded, 49 5o)e, 89 7 Peter f: 26 
Works covenant cast ont ...---esseeee tederosgeece 190,200 
Works indicative of attitude toward grace .....+,+.--+4-- 26 
Works principle of the law ....+..++-+-+- PPP "106, 190, 208 
Works required under the law ........... PP EP 25, 186 


World not under any teaching ...-ccscccsscccvvccccserere 158 


“Ye in Me” weerccscsceee sveveesoveseddssocvevesesoss BOG 
Yoke, descriptive of the 14W ...ccsceceecovcssseseeseese 95 


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE 
TEXTS 


ENG sas Arar sey See eee LD 
GRO o ate lens felons ois e516 159 
19: 18-21 ase ear iee ek: 
BON EET le getis ese > 105 
DOSAD Ee 3. biirtis.csieieie opie) LOO 
21:1 to 24:11 a 105 


263 
e+. 250,251, 252 
252 


eee eee ereoese 


LEVITICUS 
16 :1-34 
18:5 


274 
234 


eco reece seee 


23:37,38 .. 


see ewer 


28: 9,10 


II SamMurL 
arceed Oil a Vsibitvovetekel eis ieielene 


I CHRONICLES 


TBD we ec clceces ces 


259 


II us 
31:3 


ee a ey 


soe eee eee eres 


36:21 


NEHEMIAH 
EAS AN Weate torobsueFatave cia 
10: 81 ehorsipiaveleccieteas 


JOB 
9 'S2, OSU veleve 


119: 105 


eee eee ee eae 


PROVERBS 
2 ho ers aye xe 


SOUL lo dcake oresave tate 
pan tea ts eae 

21-12 

66:7 


eee ereoee 


ee erecesecee 


oe eee ee oeoeoes 


66:13 


66: 23 


JEREMIAH 


81:36,87 ... 


3: 


17-21 


MOS 
9; 11-15 


ZEPHANIAH 
233 
3: 


eo 
ee 
eee eeteeece 
a 
eeeeeee 


ed 


- 198, 


er eeoeeseces 


eet eeee 


eee cere essce 


ere? 


14-20 


ZECHARIAH 
7 ee kf 


14: 16-21 


14: 20 


MaTTrHEW 


CHET OTT OT GT OUR 0 Co 
Bren sbrer LAA eran es 


to 12 
1 


Cr a 


: 13-16 
it Ho 
er bey es be 
: 17-28" 
: 17-48" 


coe 128, 


eeeee 


es 


ee aed 


OR By ae eee 
a rs 
tee ee wee seen 


Reese ee 
eases ee see LOL, 


re? 
eee eee eetre 
ee eesoceseesen 
eoreeeeteee 


evceereecee 


5220 csc cccresecess 
5: 20-22, 29, 30 


eee 


3 

Rol siete 21-24 ° 
Sk Trees . 
car Gee E 

SARS sn sees 
713,14 
: 21-29 
23 

2 


rere ire be ko 
139, 160, es 


ed 
ee 


"440, 180, 185 


91,131, isa 


Bil ehfenciee re cr Menu Ton os 


4 
10:5,6 
10: 5-7 


es 


ceee 


ee 


a 


eoccoecceee 48, 180 
180, 263 
gtd 


eee wee tees 


aay 


eeereereces 
es 


cee eeeecce 


a 


179 


Sy Ean ese SS 163 
ae 21 


tena Pees 


eee een roe 


Seeceresece 


Index 369 


20222 vsecesceccese 109 183 31 - oeeee es ees: 121,219 
ZIP24 eect sease 825 
2 


DB We sc elseielete cipiecaip cle 95 
MENG eiecn nie cee retals wakel shed k OM: 
LEAS Waviivieconp ioielntarelsisicteraleniese £O) 
Dib Oree: | eieeivie sarees eG 
: 228 Sovewecet eee CO,A00 
S16) ls ae ee ne 46 chine BD Or cimoricrwil er Th’ 
4:12 
5 
7 
8 


eves seceaee | 2S 


SOC Taare ae a celine -.. 809 LS SAAR Tcoslate cee eee Ob 
216.5. 27, 65 LA SUS elatetecalnnatcievacite mel Oe 
18 Oy te ay 42, 61 152.26 teeereceee 95, 299 
BE Ob stl oo ses vie ABD 15 SAMS his e's weieinlanioie OG 
BI ee nore aerate 65, 70 5 RQ Si hee ea TS Sie-eleistererereced Dix 
24 ... 15, 42, 60, 65, 77, A Din dO Simba siese acme OO 
se re ca, Reo siasciad she OO 
2 : 


Vda e ae ROS DTG 9g Tene soenagl9 
: eee ilar DNA iy Geeretereeiditre Ae AD yer yd 
spe aes dine ye TS ret epee ear ts 
7:37-89 . 78,204, 210, 213 AS18236 cue aces ose 06 
POs er eat se cess ZL it2 Overy iralgisllote merce mete O 
EO plOe 2S vee hia cis ators’ > a0 ADAM tre wine saig eroteeremen ed 
10:28 .... 89, 48, 77, ue DEB astecs.sielbe @ereieie sea ele 


26:18 woecccccceese 314 
LO YO Die <j0lnies s.cfevis 00, 508 


DSU La dale ae nlelais.sis s 
4 os 2 Pi oe tp ++ 65, 185 
TOE LO. LO ier <a)0is 130, 3 93 : 16, 17 ; 96 


Sie IF Ms Faces Re Pe es 26 
SAS Sm Cece een gL 


214° ....2.- 109, 121,129 
Tage eeecceee 221, 263 


° 


OD = O09 G9 0 Gd G9 00 OD bt 


a 
iN) 
© 


MBEAG! Wis otis oie du ty BOD 
gute An ares 207 
9 


SE BICONE SEDER Te 


8 11 ° i 
LT 211, ID) 20 eo sccig, BOD 
Sir i Os ag ea A ND cer 
D7 BODO i warele maces carp Oe 
DTS ot palsies sisaisie (hOOS 
DS ZA Hee 0's ole 6 060 010-0 44, 


716 CEES EE UN ESS: 224 
He SIC er on 67 
Sie cope elevatece eleiniere rein 26 
2 REA Eagle BBs 318 


RECESSES cia SaTRCECRECECRETECRE CER ISERIES 
a 
> 


5:5 ..... %38, 202, 204, aa 
SPC SD le chicane Pe 
BUSES) aicietalenie she see 3 
SARS £ eyes - 110, 250 
Be BI tack ans Ses a 46 
SR tink sine sis ee 
BR Bas ents & 5 46 
Gss-20r cies wiaea a sa peo 
G22 to Sze slew we ss 111 
Dak Sa GaSe Exelon os 340 
G2 2S) ons ees oe 346 
6:14 210, 226, 256, 342 
AEE Re ERY ARR 313 
Wt SCO: Dents slows 5 oe ee "256 
TG 2G Geos ws te ae 207 
DS ee aks kk ks Se 304 
5 ett: SL RA ORS Se 309 
iS eee Ati eee 207 
§tW (Be SS Sea ST 267, 298 
MW rh Ped varies Mintaro le 104, 256 
VPS PGA CAS eI SS 112 
pe Li St & Gee Sea 113 
Tish) Vas ew icneios 6 tee 242 
Line ee |b eee ae eS 112 
TOTS ROI G2 Be: Svarc cae 225 
MehG Ate wb aan eS 225 
BES Ud as otaverersoraiie tw Gis ore 109 
aT RRR Pe eit, Sie eae Se Rae 108 
BROS AS Secs AS Rive wears 225 
8:1 15, 42, 61, 173, 308 
SBS. Soe aoa eee 109 
CHA as HAs See eS 107 
SWOk oe Te eee hes 113, 261 
SIN BR Sale Sa Sa e 

(hi ch Re SSS SSS aS 107, 210 
ret dS Sa Sis gs oe 225 
By cic new oes 309, 836 
GaN S aR cen 314 
INES Ube Raa eR eres 108 
coeur! BRT oS Ratha ee 36 
SIRS SN ROS, Sy Rae ee 309 
So kee Sk ese A 67 
BSUS 4 e ere stele eas 314 
SS Senter Were’ cine ee SARUM 71 
SGhs Oa seks ie wb Sheler 66 
SERPS Eo Rime Manian one 203 
IRE BEARS ae eee 219 
WON AS Sa NI 120 


Index 


94°55 1 Sov pane we cumin ess peri 
34.2 FESS Vancconuanl) Son 
V4: 17-19 wrccccwers 88 
252 8 Oc. cslicuceunw Ons ean 
352.25 wa sine oslge Sans 214 
$6227, 28 inn dont akan pee 
I CORINTHIANS 

0 eR Se 214 
B= 30 Fc seme rae 5 4 
BS 9030. iss iee dna 

> mie ¢ Pag rst <cuccun ties aoe 
S$: 9-36 Oo dss 10 
8:10 inne 214 
Si kD on ee 309 
Sr BIS © ecw senwe 814 
CA eee a ee yc 97 
he Ag Se SA A 205 
Ee Se SS eS ER AS 205 
SPO hang kg Sa 154 
TOES Anak & cen ees 847 
6:19 . 78, 204, 809, 335 
Nk SO Sa AS, Sig 348 
BIS Awe aks ees 108 
Sr 2eAF VV awa 10 
Os 290-82 ae 98 
Re Meera 224 
BSE ON clea emrenee 212 


cag CORINTHIANS 


CT fm Him HB 09 09 09 09 09 09 C19 09 bl 


Sephora were a ts CoS 214 
PC eI ea 75 
ES Fp See Sa SS Seo 256 
GO QOS o)sy wine sls Synge 207 
GSES Rie citar he wa wee 228 
7 foe Se ANG ad SO » 256 

wae wee ebeeawes - 112 
LER LUISE MES WG Shs 220 
ny PES A Sees eeaeees 108 
Ye OE IN eat Lass OS 48 
Oye TN ee Shei Ronyens 47, 315 

Ris 0% wis oiniw inl eiers 168 
PO Neca eh laiee 46, 214 
Boas A Kgreeetthc eh acne vie 310 
SOR ak UiSie sels. ak 10 


Index 


LSE rele oneteis es asics SOT: 
a 


W4248-15 022. ee 178 
BOOT Soe tacts ae Od 


DS eanclricileleiiegte ser a eoO 
aes is 78, 86, eee 


eae ae wise siatoyswinie one) arse: 


3: PU 2A Wolelpir o aisiNe sees LO 
Le Saee Ser 188, 283 
Sig Lk Neleie o's o/s pees 188 
Deck OP fois shes 118 
a 111, 118, 217, 240 


BOO OR create 18 
9295-5 obs wesc e 228, 342 
Bras Bee eee 288 


ror) 
0 


RN ACI PR AERC TE 89 
slelejevetetals “48, "200, 211 


: . 340 
sevees 222, 229, 842 
Sisisieisteraietays 202 
«+. 170, 212, 304 
338 

se ctccesevecss 340 
Aolscslece)sieie eles ie ve.e/ ate, 
eeecccccccvce 95, 335 
toeescsoncvces B00 
scererecesesee 340 
PAL G 2 56 civ sivisiereicie’s 89 


seevervceveeee 88 


NaN 


dO Ree OTe 
AS 

&, 6, +e 

3 


ee 


eS) 
° 


is 


5 
5 
5: 
5: 
5: 
5: 
5: 
5 
5 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6: 


e 
cor) 


PHILIPPIANS 
1:6 


EPHESIANS 


1: 2- ae Sescvceecnes, B08 


i) 
fo} 
© 


DDD DD TEN VN TTL TU BB IB pa BIB. 9 G2 69 9 GD G9 69 GO 6989 ND RD NO RD RODD EDNT ED LOND ND DOND bt Al a et 
nw 
o 


Zig ahah . 
Big bsies Ur Oi ileiey eiaamien yes) Airs yy 
BLO iaieie intel abiaiersidheiel@eOBO 


APA 


3 diets elsleleieisicieie #1 65 
Lice oishelel sree sierals/sipiets ek a 


229-11 22. cecerence 


ca 
atest 


eres oert teers 


ee 


Pe 


Pe ed 


ed 


Ge TKO ES 


Teese a peers eae 8 


Bisieaveielietaie 6 13, 
oe eee 229, 256, 


DM GA ymca hiebasias 
1 


Ce 


THESSALONIANS 


as 
as 
a 
4: 
4: 
4:8 
4: 
5: 
5: 
5 
5 
5: 


ee ees 

eo ae 
ie id 
ary 


i ee i es 


Ce ed 
woe eeeesecreooes 
eee eeeressecone 


eee er eeeeesene 


Index 


89 
212 


II THESSALONIANS 
1212 | senarenn neice Oem 


AANWNKRRE 


II TeKrey 
Sis vialwile'e'eiete wieia.e 67 


09 09 BONO ED BO HH 
On ay 

H 

e 

ft 

ror) 

an 


OO op et OP Deal clin tel P| 


eecseesccresece 296 


4 

q 
re, 
p! 


Arie rer 83 
Sebessebeccees, G20 
Sis deisel atone eax 73 
oe Soin Sa ete ee by LOG, La 
esi eseaceececsn Op a0 


HEHE weocororol 
ame 


pws 


Ft CO CO 00 bet pa Pe COD 


S312 Bieweeu sess LOS 
215 cotenseccenes- 314 
BABS ee Betiacverelete chan mee ere 
: 24 ais: wleuellinyapabsteveles yes 

Ee Gs veioleceinleleloeheicieummll a 
LOS TA ccleie ce Seisiaiae Res SOS 
10: 19, 20 


O10. 00g ~TAT I A A By B90 


: Sey SOHO RCAC 
UD cDEL ONE toler citione morse 20 


Aoi UD etetciel eral salle ue aie 
ube Bk ce ge ron ba by’ 


13:1. ware cweeeeees ae 


373 


DQ  secaccesecse 114,175 
1 ncecccuscsccans 71 
1 


, Sighatehiniela les) ejs/she AT 
scisieiisrelee LOO 05,010 
93 


ee ee er 


ce recemeseesres 9D 


OT OP OT OT OT OT BR IB iB 69 69 G9 C9 G9 09 69 C9 69 C9 DD BY DD DD DO ND bt 


SBA ie He en eB O 
rtd pone eee TS 


Sealers Giole een LTT 


TT Pavan is CUDA Sata at cameng ste wer OT 
= cece ee eee ee ceese REVELATION ’ 
Bt 178 ee 


F Sra. gate cathy 2 A IO CPO Be AE 
BEB hi esiesccrces 40, 214 12010. cone che 71 
I Joun AE ae sag AAce ore 85 
WITto Pe SO ee tes es 19 20: woe bia ajstalaialetsvareie) i Loe 
IS se 5 cakes Baletetelerares' 3) SOAS DUM iat revere ere lavarereis/sie tt oe 
3 I CORIO oe yr Ae) 22514. ceeecacesccee 93 


Invaluable Books on Bible Truths 


LEWIS SPERRY CHAFER 


‘“‘SALVATION.’’ Foreword by W. H. Grifith-Thomas, D.D. 
Oloth, 722) PASS — mois winis o's ow oc welwls claw mics w wiesieiatie $1.00 


This book has received the highest press and personal com- 
mendation. It is a clear analysis of God’s saving grace. The 
great doctrines of the cross, salvation and the eternal security 
of the believer are unfolded. It is a hand book for every 
earnest Christian. 


“T use it constantly.’—Melvin E. Trotter. 
“HE THAT IS SPIRITUAL.’’ 
Oloths 1802 paresicn sm 0s wees sis mcklew s vic-ciciee sek R ere 


It defines true Christian living and unfolds the Bible teach- 
ing concerning spirituality,—what it is, and how it is secured. 
Few books have been more warmly received by Bible teachers 
and students. Nothing could be more important to Christians, 
and it corrects very much false teaching. 

“I thank God for this book.’—Paul Rader. 


“TRUE EVANGELISM.’’ Foreword to the first edition by the 
late Henry Varley of England. Foreword to the new and 
revised edition by Rev. A. B. Winchester, Toronto, Canada, 


New and enlarged edition, Cloth, 160 pages ........$1.00 


This book is a thoughtful message and is revolutionary in 
the work of soul-winning. It is a masterful development of the 
whole divine program in seeking and saving the lost. The au- 
thor does not urge more zeal in old methods; he presents an 
entirely different principle and order of procedure from the 
evangelistic plans and habits of to-day. The book is intensely 
Scriptural, constructive, and suggestive. All soul-winners should 
know every page of this book. 

“Best thing to the square inch ever written.”—Boston Busi- 
ness Man. . 


“The last and best word on the subject.’—A testimony from 
England. 


‘“‘THE KINGDOM IN HISTORY AND PROPHECY.’’ Fore- 
word by OC. I. Scofield, D.D. 


Fourth Edition. Cloth, 157 pages................$1.00 


The whole outline of Scripture teaching as to God’s plan and 
purpose in the earth. The questions, “What is the kingdom?” 
“What is the Church?” and ‘‘When and how will Christ return?” 
are answered from the Bible itself. 


“The present drift of the world and of the church seems to 
me a tremendous confirmation of the truth so well set forth in 
this brief volume.”—Rev. Henry OC. Mabie, D.D. 


‘*SATAN,’’ Foreword by Rev. OC. I. Scofield, D.D. 
New and revised edition, Cloth, 190 pages .........$1.00 


_ An accepted standard of exposition on this great subject both 
in England and America. Satan’s origin, sin, purpose, method, 
and end are unfolded. The book is a_ final answer to every 
modern cult. A multitude of good-meaning Christians are mis- 


led because they do not know Satan’s devices. This book has 
been a blessing to thousands. 


“Superb! Thoroughly Biblical and exh ive.’"—W. ; 
Oarroll, D.D. oo and exhaustive.’—W. Irving 


dim Miller 


panto 


titers 


Pea 


