GRACE  ABOUNDING  TO  THE 
CHIEF  OF  SINNERS 


THE 

"PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS" 


SERIES 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS.      By  JOHN  BUNYAN. 
With  Coloured  Illustrations  by  HAROLD  COPPING. 

GRACE  ABOUNDING.  By  JOHN  BUNYAN. 

With  Coloured  Illustrations  by  HAROLD  COPPING. 

THE  PEEP  OF  DAY.     By  the  Author  of  "  Line  Upon  Line, " 
With  Coloured  Illustrations  by  W.  J.  MORGAN  and  W.  S.  STAGEY. 

THE  DAIRYMAN'S  DAUGHTER. 

By  LEGH  RICHMOND,  M.A. 
With  Coloured  Illustrations  by  J.  FINNEMORE,  R.I. 

LINE  UPON  LINE.    Part  I. 

By  the  Author  of  "  The  Peep  of  Day." 
With  Coloured  Illustrations  by  W.  J.  MORGAN. 

LINE  UPON  LINE.    Part  II. 

By  the  Author  of  "The  Peep  of  Day." 
With  Coloured  Illustrations  by  W.  J.  MORGAN. 

THE  CHILDREN  ON  THE  KING'S  HIGHWAY. 

By  the  Rev.  CHARLES  BROWN,  D.D« 
With  Coloured  Frontispiece  by  HAROLD  COPPING. 

THE  OLDEST  CITY  IN  THE  WORLD. 

By  the  Rev.  CHARLES  BROWN,  D.D. 
With  Coloured  Illustrations  by  ARTHUR  DIXON. 

THE  KING'S  CUP-BEARER.     By  Mrs  O.  F.  WALTON. 
With  Coloured  Frontispiece  by  HAROLD  COPPING 
and  other  illustrations. 


The  R.T.S.,  4  Bouverie  Street,  London,  E.G. 4 

Of  all  Booksellers 


BUNYAN    IS    LOOKED    ON    WITH    SUSPICION 

It  began  therefore  to  be  rumoured  up  and  down  among  the  people 
that  I  was  a  witch,  a  Jesuit,  a  highwayman,  and  the  like 

[See  page  165 


GRACE  ABOUNDING  TO 
THE  CHIEF  OF  SINNERS 
IN   A   FAITHFUL   ACCOUNT    OF 
THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN 

OR 

A  BRIEF  RELATION  OF  THE  EXCEEDING 
MERCY   OF    GOD    IN   CHRIST   TO   HIM 

NAMELY 

IN  HIS  TAKING  HIM  OUT  OF  THE  DUNGHILL,  AND  CON- 
VERTING HIM  TO  THE  FAITH  OF  HIS  BLESSED  SON  JESUS 
CHRIST.  HERE  IS  ALSO  PARTICULARLY  SHEWED,  WHAT 
SIGHT  OF,  AND  WHAT  TROUBLES  HE  HAD  FOR  SIN  ;  AND 
ALSO,  WHAT  VARIOUS  TEMPTATIONS  HE  HATH  MET  WITH, 
AND  HOW  GOD  HATH  CARRIED  HIM  THROUGH  THEM 

THOROUGHLY  REVISED  BY  THE  EIGHTH  EDITION 

WITH 

EIGHT  COLOURED  ILLUSTRATIONS 
BY  HAROLD  COPPING 


London 

THE  RELIGIOUS  TRACT  SOCIETY 
4  BOUVERIE  STREET,  E*C4 


PR 


'Come  and  hear  all  ye  that  fear 
God,  andl  will  declare  what  He  hath 
done  for  my  soul.'~Psalm  J*v/.  16. 


Made  in  Great  Britain 


PREFATORY  NOTE 

THE  text  in  this  edition  is  as  nearly  as  possible  that 
of  the  eighth,  which  was  corrected  by  Bunyan  himself 
a  few  weeks  before  his  death.  The  text  of  'A 
Relation'  is  that  of  the  first  edition  of  1765.  A 
few  minor  changes  have  been  introduced  for  the 
convenience  of  the  reader.  The  use  of  capital 
letters  has  been  considerably  modified,  and  the 
orthography  has  been  in  places  modernized.  In 
some  few  instances  the  Scripture  references  have 
been  added  to  quotations  where  they  did  not  appear 
in  the  original.  It  must  be  remembered  that  Bunyan 
often  quoted  Scripture  inexactly,  and  it  has  not  been 
deemed  necessary  to  make  all  his  quotations  follow 
the  text  of  the  Authorized  Version, 

The  marginal  summary  is  not  a  part  of  the 
original,  but  has  been  prepared  for  this  edition  in 
order  that  it  may  correspond  with  the  Society's 
editions  of  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress.* 

7 


PREFATORY  NOTE 

The  illustrations  have  been  prepared  for  this  work 
by  Mr  Harold  Copping,  whose  illustrations  to  the 
i  Pilgrim's  Progress '  have  justly  attracted  much 
attention. 


CONTENTS 


1>AGE 


PREFATORY  NOTE  •  „  5 

A  PREFACE        .  •  .  .  .  1 1 

GRACE  ABOUNDING  TO  THE  CHIEF  OF  SINNERS,  paragraphs 

1-339       •  .  .  17 

A    Brief  Account  of   the  Author's  Call  to  the 

Work  of  the  Ministry          .  .  .147 

A  Brief  Account  of  the  Author's  Imprisonment   .        169 
The  Conclusion,  paragraphs  1-7  .  .  ->        180 

A  RELATION  OF   THE  IMPRISONMENT  OF  THE  AUTHOR  IN 

THE  MONTH  OF  NOVEMBER  1660      .  0  .183 

A  CONTINUATION  OF  THE  AUTHOR'S  LIFE  ,  ,,229 

A  BRIEF  CHARACTER  OF  THE  AUTHOR      ,  ,  .241 

POSTSCRIPT       .  •  <*  *  *  .243 


A  PREFACE 

OR,  BRIEF  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  PUBLISHING  THIS 
WORK.  WRITTEN  BY  THE  AUTHOR  THEREOF, 
AND  DEDICATED  TO  THOSE  WHOM  GOD  HATH 
COUNTED  HIM  WORTHY  TO  BEGET  TO  FAITH, 
BY  HIS  MINISTRY  IN  THE  WORD 

CHILDREN,  Grace  be  with  you.  Amen.  I  being 
taken  from  you  in  presence,  and  so  tied  up  that  I 
cannot  perform  that  duty,  that  from  God  doth  lie 
upon  me  to  you-ward,  for  your  farther  edifying  and 
building  up  in  faith  and  holiness,  etc.,  yet  that  you 
may  see  my  soul  hath  fatherly  care  and  desire  after 
your  spiritual  and  everlasting  welfare,  I  now  once 
again,  as  before,  from  the  top  of  Shenir  and  Hermon, 
so  now  from  the  lions'  dens,  from  the  mountains  of 
the  leopards  (Song  iv.  8),  do  look  yet  after  you  all, 
greatly  longing  to  see  your  safe  arrival  into  THE 
desired  Haven. 

I  thank  God  upon  every  remembrance  of  you ; 
and  rejoice,  even  while  I  stick  between  the  teeth  of 
the  lion  in  the  wilderness,  that  the  grace  and  mercy, 
and  knowledge  of  Christ  our  Saviour,  which  God 
hath  bestowed  upon  you,  with  abundance  of  faith 

ii 


PREFACE 

and  love;  your  hungerings  and  thirstings  after 
farther  acquaintance  with  the  Father,  in  the  Son; 
your  tenderness  of  heart,  your  trembling  at  sin,  your 
sober  and  holy  deportment  also,  before  both  God 
and  men,  is  a  great  refreshment  to  me ;  For  ye 
are  our  glory  and  joy.  i  Thess.  ii.  20. 

I  have  sent  you  here  enclosed,  a  drop  of  that 
honey  that  I  have  taken  out  of  the  carcase  of  a 
lion.  Judg.  xiv.  5-8.  I  have  eaten  thereof  myself, 
and  am  much  refreshed  thereby.  (Temptations, 
when  we  meet  them  at  first,  are  as  the  lion  that 
roared  upon  Samson ;  but  if  we  overcome  them,  the 
next  time  we  see  them,  we  shall  find  a  nest  of  honey 
within  them.)  The  Philistines  understand  me  not. 
It  is  something  of  a  relation  of  the  work  of  God 
upon  my  soul,  even  from  the  very  first,  till  now, 
wherein  you  may  perceive  my  castings  down,  and 
risings  up  :  for  He  woundeth,  and  His  hands  make 
whole.  It  is  written  in  the  Scripture,  Isa.  xxxviil 
19,  The  father  to  the  children  shall  make  known 
Thy  truth.  Yea,  it  was  for  this  reason  I  lay 
so  long  at  Sinai,  Exodus  xix.  16-19,  to  see  tne 
fire,  and  the  cloud,  and  the  darkness,  that  I  might 
fear  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life  upon  earth,  and 
tell  of  His  wondrous  works  to  my  children.  Psalm 
Ixxviii.  3-5. 

12 


PREFACE 

Moses,  Numb,  xxxiii.  i,  2,  writ  of  the  journeys 
of  the  children  of  Israel,  from  Egypt  to  the  land  of 
Canaan ;  and  commanded  also  that  they  did  remember 
their  forty  years'  travel  in  the  wilderness.  Thou 
shalt  remember  all  the  way  which  the  Lord  thy  God  led 
thee  these  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  to  humble  thee, 
and  to  prove  thee,  and  to  know  what  was  in  thine 
heart,  whether  thou  wouldst  keep  His  commandments, 
or  no.  Deut.  viii.  2.  Wherefore  this  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  do;  and  not  only  so,  but  to  publish 
it  also ;  that,  if  God  will,  others  may  be  put  in 
remembrance  of  what  He  hath  done  for  their  souls, 
by  reading  His  work  upon  me. 

It  is  profitable  for  Christians  to  be  often  calling 
to  mind  the  very  beginnings  of  grace  with  their 
souls.  //  is  a  night  to  be  much  observed  unto  the 
Lord,  for  bringing  them  out  from  the  land  of  Egypt. 
This  is  that  night  of  the  Lord  to  be  observed  of  all 
the  children  of  Israel  in  their  generations.  Exod. 
xii.  42.  0  my  God  (saith  David),  Ps.  xlii.  6,  my 
soul  is  cast  down  within  me  ;  therefore  will  I  remember 
thee  from  the  land  of  Jordan,  and  of  the  Hermonites, 
from  the  hill  Mizar.  He  remembered  also  the  lion 
and  the  bear,  when  he  went  to  fight  with  the  giant 
of  Gath.  i  Sam.  xvii.  36,  37. 

It  was    Paul's   accustomed    manner,    Acts   xxii., 

'3 


PREFACE 

and  that,  when  tried  for  his  life,  Acts  xxiv.,  even 
to  open  before  his  judges  the  manner  of  his  con- 
version :  he  would  think  of  that  day,  and  that  hour, 
in  which  he  first  did  meet  with  grace  ;  for  he  found 
it  supported  him.  When  God  had  brought  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  the  Red  Sea,  far  into  the 
wilderness,  yet  they  must  turn  quite  about  thither 
again,  to  remember  the  drowning  of  their  enemies 
there,  Numb.  xiv.  25,  for  though  they  sang  his 
praise  before,  yet  they  soon  forgat  his  works. 
Psalm  cvi.  12,  13. 

In  this  discourse  of  mine,  you  may  see  much; 
much  I  say,  of  the  grace  of  God  towards  me:  I 
thank  God,  I  can  count  it  much ;  for  it  was  above 
my  sins  and  Satan's  temptations  too.  I  can  remember 
my  fears  and  doubts,  and  sad  months,  with  comfort ; 
they  are  as  the  head  of  Goliah  in  my  hand:  there 
was  nothing  to  David  like  GoliaWs  sword,  even  that 
sword  that  should  have  been  sheathed  in  his  bowels  ; 
for  the  very  sight  and  remembrance  of  that  did  preach 
forth  God's  deliverance  to  him.  Oh!  the  remem- 
brance of  my  great  sins,  of  my  great  temptations, 
and  of  my  great  fear  of  perishing  for  ever !  They 
bring  afresh  into  my  mind,  the  remembrance  of  my 
great  help,  my  great  supports  from  heaven,  and  the 
great  grace  that  God  extended  to  such  a  wretch  as  I. 


PREFACE 

My  dear  children,  call  to  mind  the  former  days, 
and  years  of  ancient  times :  remember  also  your 
songs  in  the  night,  and  commune  with  your  own 
Hearts,  Psalm  Ixxvii.  Yea,  look  diligently,  and 
leave  no  corner  therein  unsearched  for  that  treasure 
hid,  even  the  treasure  of  your  first  and  second 
experience  of  the  grace  of  God  towards  you. 
Remember,  I  say,  the  word  that  first  laid  hold  upon 
you :  remember  your  terrors  of  conscience,  and  fear 
of  death  and  hell:  remember  also  your  tears  and 
prayers  to  God ;  yea,  how  you  sighed  under  every 
hedge  for  mercy.  Have  you  never  a  hill  Mizar  to 
remember?  Have  you  forgot  the  close,  the  milk- 
house,  the  stable,  the  barn,  and  the  like,  where  God 
did  visit  your  souls  ?  Remember  also  the  word*  the 
word,  I  say,  upon  which  the  Lord  hath  caused  you 
to  hope :  if  you  have  sinned  against  light,  if  you 
are  tempted  to  blaspheme,  if  you  are  drowned  in 
despair,  if  you  think  God  fights  against  you,  or  if 
heaven  is  hid  from  your  eyes;  remember  it  was 
thus  with  your  father;  but  out  of  them  all  the  Lord 
delivered  me. 

I  could  have  enlarged  much  in  this  my  discourse, 

of  my  temptations  and  troubles  for  sin ;  as  also  of 

the  merciful  kindness  and  working  of  God  with  my 

soul :  I  could  also  have  stepped  into  a  style  much 

B  15 


PREFACE 

higher  than  this,  in  which  I  have  here  discoursed, 
and  could  have  adorned  all  things  more  than  here  I 
have  seemed  to  do,  but  I  dare  not:  God  did  not 
play  in  tempting  of  me ;  neither  did  I  play,  when  I 
sunk  as  into  the  bottomless  pit,  when  the  pangs  of 
hell  caught  hold  upon  me ;  wherefore  I  may  not  play 
in  relating  of  them,  but  be  plain  and  simple,  and  lay 
down  the  thing  as  it  was ;  he  that  liketh  it,  let  him 
receive  it,  and  he  that  doth  not,  let  him  produce  a 
better.  Farewell. 

My  dear  Children, 

The  milk  and  honey  are  beyond  this  wilderness. 
God  be  merciful  to  you,  and  grant  that  you  be  not 
slothful  to  go  in  to  possess  the  land. 

JOHN  BUNYAN. 


GRACE  ABOUNDING  TO  THE 
CHIEF  OF  SINNERS 

OR, 

A  BRIEF  RELATION  OF  THE  EXCEEDING  MERCY  OF 
GOD  IN  CHRIST,  TO  HIS  POOR  SERVANT,  JOHN 
BUNYAN 

IN  this  my  relation  of  the  merciful  working  of  God 
upon  my  soul,  it  will  not  be  amiss,  if  in  the  first 
place,  I  do  in  a  few  words  give  you  a  hint  of  my 
pedigree,  and  manner  of  bringing  up  ;  that  thereby 
the  goodness  and  bounty  of  God  towards  me,  may 
be  the  more  advanced  and  magnified  before  the  sons 
of  men. 

2.  For  my  descent  then,  it  was,  as  is  well  known 
by  many,  of  a  low  and  inconsiderable  My  parenta&e 
generation ;  my  father's  house  being  and  descent 
of  that  rank  that  is  meanest,  and  most  despised  of 
all  the  families  in  the  land.  Wherefore,  I  have  not 
here,  as  others,  to  boast  of  noble  blood,  or  of  any 
high-born  state,  according  to  the  flesh  ;  though,  all 
things  considered,  I  magnify  the  heavenly  Majesty, 
for  that  by  this  door  He  brought  me  into  the  world, 
to  partake  of  the  grace  and  life  that  is  in  Christ  by 
the  gospel. 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

3.  But  yet,  notwithstanding  the   meanness   and 

inconsiderableness  of  my  parents,  it 
I  ero  to  school  ,  ~     ,  .    .          ,     .    , 

pleased  God  to  put  it  into  their  hearts, 

to  put  me  to  school,  to  learn  both  to  read  and 
write  ;  the  which  I  also  attained,  according  to  the  rate 
of  other  poor  men's  children  :  though,  to  my  shame,  I 
confess,  I  did  soon  lose  that  I  had  learned,  even 
almost  utterly,  and  that  long  before  the  Lord  did 
work  His  gracious  work  of  conversion  upon  my  soul. 

4.  As  for  my  own  natural  life,  for  the  time  that 
I  was  without  God  in  the  world,  it  was,   indeed, 
according  to  the  course  of  this  world  and  the  spirit 
that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience.     Eph. 
ii.  2,  3.  It  was  my  delight  to  be  '  taken  captive  by  the 
devil  at  his  will]  2  Tim.  ii.  26 ;  being  filled  with  all 
unrighteousness ;   the   which  did   also   so    strongly 
work,  and  put  forth  itself,  both  in  my  heart  and 
life,  and    that  from   a   child,  that  I  had  but  few 
equals  (especially  considering  my  years,  which  were 
tender,  being  but  few)  both  for  cursing,  swearing, 
lying,  and  blaspheming  the  holy  name  of  God. 

5.  Yea,  so  settled  and   rooted  was  I   in   these 
An  early  life  of      things,  that  they  became  as  a  second 
s"1  nature  to  me ;  the  which,  as  I  have 
also  with  soberness  considered  since,  did  so  offend 
the  Lord,  that  even  in  my  childhood  he  did  scare 
and    affrighten    me    with    fearful    dreams,   and   did 
terrify  me  with  fearful  visions.     For  often,  after  I 
have  spent  this  and  the  other  day  in  sin,  I  have  in 

18 


MY  DISTRESS  AS  A  CHILD 

my  bed  been  greatly  afflicted,  while  asleep,  with  the 
apprehensions  of  devils  and  wicked  spirits,  who  still, 
as  I  then  thought,  laboured  to  draw  me  away  with 
them,  of  which  I  could  never  be  rid. 

6.  Also   I    should,    at    these   years,   be    greatly 
afflicted     and     troubled     with     the     x  fear  the  tor. 
thoughts    of    the    fearful    torments     mentsofhen 
of  hell-fire;  still  fearing,  that  it  would  be  my  lot 
to  be  found  at  last  among  those  devils  and  hellish 
fiends,  who  are  there  bound  down  with  the  chains  and 
bonds  of  darkness,  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day. 

7.  These  things,  I  say,  when  I  was  but  a  child, 
but  nine  or  ten  years  old,  did  so  distress  my  soul, 
that  then  in  the  midst  of  my  many  sports  and  childish 
vanities,   amidst  my  vain  companions,   I   was   often- 
much  cast  down,  and  afflicted  in  my  mind  therewith, 
yet  could  I  not  let  go  my  sins :  yea,  I  was  also  then 
so  overcome  with  despair  of  life  and  heaven,  that  I 
should  often  wish,  either  that  there  had  been  no 
hell,  or  that  I  had  been  a  devil ;  supposing   they 
were  only  tormentors ;  that  if  it  must  needs  be,  that 
I  went  thither,  I  might  be  rather  a  tormentor,  than 
be  tormented  myself. 

8.  A  while  after  those  terrible  dreams  did  leave 

me.  which   also  I  soon   forgot ;    for 

j.j        .  ,  '     ,          Ringleader  in  all 

my  pleasures  did  quickly  cut  oft  the     manner  of  vice 

remembrance  of  them,  as  if  they  and  un^odliness 
had  never  been :  wherefore  with  more  greediness, 
according  to  the  strength  of  nature,  I  did  still  let  loose 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

the  reins  of  my  lust,  and  delighted  in  all  transgres- 
sions against  the  law  of  God :  so  that  until  I  came 
to  the  state  of  marriage,  I  was  the  very  ringleader 
of  all  the  youth  that  kept  me  company,  in  all 
manner  of  vice  and  ungodliness. 

9.  Yea,  such  prevalency  had  the  lusts  and  fruits 
of  the  flesh  in  this  poor  soul  of  mine,  that  had  not 
a  miracle  of  precious  grace  prevented,   I  had  not 
only  perished  by  the  stroke  of  eternal  justice,  but 
had  also  laid  myself  open,  even  to  the  stroke  of 
those  laws  which  bring  some  to  disgrace  and  open 
shame  before  the  face  of  the  world. 

10.  In  these  days  the  thoughts  of  religion  were 

very  grievous  to  me ;  I  could  neither 

Thoughts  of  ir  . 

religion  very  endure  it  myself,  nor  that  any  other 
should ;  so  that  when  I  have  seen 
some  read  in  those  books  that  concerned  Christian 
piety,  it  would  be  as  it  were  a  prison  to  me.  Then 
I  said  unto  God,  Depart  from  me,  for  I  desire  not  the 
knowledge  of  Thy  ways.  Job  xxi.  14, 15.  I  was  now  void 
of  all  good  consideration,  heaven  and  hell  were  both 
out  of  sight  and  mind;  and  as  for  saving  and  damning, 
they  were  least  in  my  thoughts.  0  Lord,  Thou 
knowest  my  life,  and  my  ways  were  not  hid  from  Thee  \ 

11.  But  this  I   well  remember,    that   though  I 
I  tremble  at  could  myself  sin  with  the  greatest  de- 
the  wickedness       light  and  ease,  and  also  take  pleasure 

of  my  com-  .  ° 

panions  m  the  vileness  or  my  companions; 

yet,  even  then,  if  I  had  at  any  time  seen  wicked 

20 


MERCIFUL  DELIVERANCES 

things,  by  those  who  professed  goodness,  it  would 
make  my  spirit  tremble.  As  once  above  all  the 
rest,  when  I  was  in  the  height  of  vanity,  yet  hear- 
ing one  to  swear,  that  was  reckoned  for  a  religious 
man,  it  had  so  great  a  stroke  upon  my  spirit,  that 
it  made  my  heart  ache. 

12.  But   God    did   not    utterly   leave   me,   but 
followed  me  still,  not  now  with  con-     j  twlce  escape 
victions,  but  judgments ;  yet  such  as     being  drowned 
were  mixed  with  mercy.    For  once  I  fell  into  a  creek 
of  the  sea,  and  hardly  escaped  drowning.     Another 
time  I  fell  out  of  a  boat  into  Bedford  river,  but,  mercy 
yet  preserved  me  alive :  besides,  another  time,  being 
in  a  field,  with  one  of  my  companions,  it  chanced 
that  an  adder  passed  over  the  highway,  so  I  having 
a  stick  in  my  hand,  struck  her  over  the  back ;  and 
having  stunned  her,  I  forced  open  her  mouth  with 
my  stick,  and  plucked  her  sting  out  with  my  fingers ; 
by  which  act  had  not  God  been  merciful  unto  me, 
I  might  by  my  desperateness,  have  brought  myself 
to  my  end. 

13.  This  also  I  have  taken  notice  of,  with  thanks- 
giving :    When  I  was  a  soldier,    I,     My  experiences 
with  others,   were  drawn  out  to  go     as  a  soldier 

to  such  a  place  to  besiege  it;  but  when  I  was  just 
ready  to  go,  one  of  the  company  desired  to  go  in  my 
room :  to  which,  when  I  had  consented,  he  took  my 
place;  and  coming  to  the  siege,  as  he  stood  sentinel,  he 
was  shot  in  the  head  with  a  musket-bullet  and  died. 

21 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

14.  Here,  as  I  said,  were  judgments  and  mercy, 
but  neither  of  them  did  awaken  my  soul  to  right- 
eousness ;  wherefore  I  sinned  still,  and  grew  more 
and  more  rebellious  against  God,   and  careless  of 
my  own  salvation. 

15.  Presently  after  this,  I  changed  my  condition 
My  first  into  a  married  state,  and  my  mercy 
marriage              was^    to   \\ght   UpOn    a   wife   whose 

father  was  counted  godly:  This  woman  and  I, 
though  we  came  together  as  poor  as  poor  might  be 
(not  having  so  much  household  stuff  as  a  dish  or  a 
spoon  betwixt  us  both),  yet  this  she  had  for  her 
part :  The  Plain  Man's  Pathway  to  Heaven  and 
The  Practice  of  Piety ;  which  her  father  had  left 
her  when  he  died.  In  these  two  books  I  would 
sometimes  read  with  her,  wherein  I  also  found  some 
things  that  were  somewhat  pleasing  to  me  (but 
all  this  while  I  met  with  no  conviction).  She  also 
would  be  often  telling  of  me  what  a  godly  man  her 
father  was,  and  how  he  would  reprove  and  correct 
vice,  both  in  his  house,  and  among  his  neighbours ; 
what  a  strict  and  holy  life  he  lived  in  his  days, 
both  in  word  and  deed. 

1 6.  Wherefore  these  books,   with  this  relation, 
I  am  influenced      though  they  did  not  reach  my  heart, 
by  good  books       to  awaken  it  about  my  sad  and  sinful 

^  state,  yet  they  did  beget  within  me  some  desires 
to  religion :  so  that  because  I  knew  no  better, 
I  fell  in  very  eagerly  with  the  religion  of  the  times  ,• 

22 


BUNYAN    AND   HIS    WIFE    READ    HER    FATHER'S    BOOKS 
In  thtte  books  I  would  sometimes  read  with  her 

[See  page  22 


MY  RELIGIOUS  ERRORS 

to  wit,  to  go  to  church  twice  a  day,  and  that  too 
with  the  foremost ;  and  there  should  very  devoutly, 
both  say  and  sing,  as  others  did,  yet  retaining  my 
wicked  life ;  but  withal,  I  was  so  over-run  with  the 
spirit  of  superstition,  that  I  adored,  and  that  with 
great  devotion,  even  all  things  (both  the  high-place, 
priest,  clerk,  vestment,  service,  and  . 

what  else)  belonging  to  the  church;     religion  of  the 
counting  all  things  holy   that  were 
therein   contained,    and    especially,    the   priest   and 
clerk    most    happy,    and    without    doubt,    greatly 
blessed,  because  they  were  the  servants,  as  I  then  >( 
thought,  of  God,   and  were  principal  in  the  holy 
temple,  to  do  His  work  therein. 

17.  This  conceit  grew  so  strong  in  a  little  time 
upon  my  spirit,  that  had  I  but  seen  a  priest  (though 
never  so  sordid  and  debauched  in  his  life),  I  should 
find  my  spirit  fall  under  him,  reverence  him,  and 
knit  unto  him;  yea,  I  thought,  for  the  love  I  did 
bear  unto  them  (supposing  them  the   ministers  of 
God),  I  could  have   laid  down   at  their  feet,   and 
have  been  trampled  upon  by   them ;    their  name, 
their  garb,  and  work  did  so  intoxicate  and  bewitch 
me. 

1 8.  After  I  had  been  thus  for  some  considerable 
time,  another  thought   came    in  my     Are  we 
mind ;    and    that   was,    whether   we     Israelites? 
were   of  the  Israelites  or  no  ?    For  finding  in   the 
scripture  that  they  were  once  the  peculiar  people  of 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

God,  thought  I,  if  I  were  one  of  this  race, 
my  soul  must  needs  be  happy.  Now  again,  I 
found  within  me  a  great  longing  to  be  resolved 
about  this  question,  but  could  not  tell  how  I 
should :  at  last  I  asked  my  father  of  it ;  who  told 
me,  No,  we  were  not.  Wherefore  then  I  fell  in 
my  spirit,  as  to  the  hopes  of  that,  and  so 
remained. 

19.  But  all  this  while,  I  was  not  sensible  of  the 
A  sermon  moved     Danger  and  evil  of  sin;  I  was  kept 
me  from  considering  that  sin  would  damn 
me,  what  religion  soever  I  followed,  unless  I  was 
found  in  Christ :  nay,  I  never  thought  of  Him,  or 
whether  there  was  such  a  One,  or  no.      Thus  man, 
while  blind,  doth  wander,  but  wearieth  himself  with 
vanity,  for  he  knoweth  not  the  way  to  the  city  of  God. 
Eccles.  x.  15. 

20.  But  one  day  (amongst  all  the   sermons  our 
parson  made)  his  subject  was,  to  treat  of  the  Sabbath 
day,  and  of  the  evil  of  breaking  that,  either  with 
labour,   sports   or   otherwise.      (Now,  I   was,  not- 
withstanding  my    religion,    one    that    took    much 
delight  in  all  manner  of  vice,  and  especially  that  was 
the  day  that  I  did  solace  myself  therewith)  :  where- 
fore   I    fell    in    my    conscience   under    his    sermon, 
thinking  and  believing  that  he  made  that  sermon 
on  purpose  to  show  me  my  evil  doing.     And  at  that 
time   I   felt  what  guilt  was,  though   never  before, 
that   I  can   remember;    but   then   I   was,   for  the 

24 


BUNYAN    HEARS    A    VOICE    FROM    HEAVEN 
Just  as  I  was  about  to  strike  it  the  second  time,  a  voice  did 


suddenly  dart  from  heaven  into  my  soul 


[See  page  25 


MY  SPORT  INTERRUPTED 

present,  greatly  loaden  therewith,  and  so  went  home 
when  the  sermon  was  ended,  with  a  great  burthen 
upon  my  spirit. 

21.  This,  for  that  instant  did  benumb  the  sinews 
of  my  best  delights,  and  did  imbitter  x  resistthe 
my  former  pleasures  to  me ;  but  hold,  influence 
it  lasted  not,  for  before  I  had  well  dined,  the  trouble 
began  to  go  off  my  mind,  and  my  heart  returned  to 
its  old  course :  but  oh !  how  glad  was  I,  that  this 
trouble  was  gone  from  me,  and  that  the  fire  was 
put  out,  that  I  might  sin  again  without  control! 
Wherefore,  when  I  had  satisfied  nature  with  my 
food,  I  shook  the  sermon  out  of  my  mind,  and  to 
my  old  custom  of  sports  and  gaming,  I  returned 
with  great  delight. 

- — 22.  But  the  same  day,  as  I  was  in  the  midst  of 
a  game  of  Cat,  and  having  struck  it  Avoicetomeat 
one  blow  from  the  hole,  just  as  I  was  Pla7 
about  to  strike  it  the  second  time,  a  voice  did 
suddenly  dart  from  heaven  into  my  soul,  which  said, 
Wilt  thou  leave  thy  sins  and  go  to  heaven,  or  have  thy 
sins  and  go  to  hell  ?  At  this  I  was  put  to  an  ex- 
ceeding maze;  wherefore  leaving  my  cat  upon  the 
ground,  I  looked  up  to  heaven,  and  was,  as  if  I  had, 
with  the  eyes  of  my  understanding,  seen  the  Lord 
Jesus  looking  down  upon  me,  as  being  very  hotly 
displeased  with  me,  and  as  if  He  did  severely  threaten 
me  with  some  grievous  punishment  for  these  and 
other  ungodly  practices. 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

23.  I  had  no  sooner  thus  conceived  in  my  mind, 
I  am  convicted       but>   suddenly,    this    conclusion    was 
of  sin  fastened  on  my  spirit  (for  the  former 
hint  did  set  my  sins  again  before  my  face),  That  I  had 
been  a  great  and  grievous  sinner,  and  that  It  was  now 
too  late  for  me  to  look  after  heaven  ;  for  CLrist  would 
not  forgive  me,  nor  pardon  my  transgressions.     Then 
I  fell  to  musing  on  this  also  ;  and  while  I  was  think- 
ing of  it,  and  fearing  lest  it  should  be  so ;  I  felt  my 

/  heart  sink  in  despair,  concluding  it  was  too  late; 
and  therefore  I  resolved  in  my  mind  I  would  go  on 
in  sin :  for,  thought  I,  if  the  case  be  thus,  my 
state  is  surely  miserable ;  miserable  if  I  leave 
my  sins,  and  but  miserable  if  I  follow  them;  a 
can  but  be  damned,  and  if  I  must  be  so,  I  had 
as  good  be  damned  for  many  sins,  as  be  damned  ' 
for  few./ 

24.  Thus  I  stood  in  the  midst  of  my  play,  before 
_    .       .  all  that  then  were  present :  but  yet  I 

I  return  desper-  * 

ateiytomysport  told  them  nothing:  but  I  say;  hav- 
ing made  this  conclusion,  I  returned 
desperately  to  my  sport  again ;  and  I  well  remember, 
that  presently  this  kind  of  despair  did  so  .possess 
my  soul,  that  I  was  persuaded  I  could  never  attain 
to  other  comfort  than  what  I  should  get  in  sin ;  for 
heaven  was  gone  already,  so  that  on  that  I  must  not 
think ;  wherefore  I  found  within  me  great  desire  to 
take  my  fill  of  sin,  still  studying  what  sin  was  yet  to 
be  committed,  that  I  might  taste  the  sweetness  of 

26 


FOLLOWING  AFTER  SIN 

it;  and  I  made  as  much  haste  as  I  could  to  fill  my 
belly  with  its  delicates,  lest  I  should  die  before  I 
had  my  desire  ;  for  that  I  feared  greatly.  In  these 
things,  I  protest  before  God,  I  lye  not,  neither  do 
I  feign  this  form  of  speech  ;  these  were  really, 
strongly,  and  with  all  my  heart,  my  desires  :  The 
good  Lord,  Whose  mercy  is  unsearchable,  forgive  me 
my  transgressions  I 

25.  And  I  am  very  confident,  that  this  temptation 
of  the  devil  is  more  usual  among  poor  creatures, 
than   many   are    aware   of,   even    to   over-run    the 
spirits  with  a  scurvy  and  seared  frame  of  heart,  and 
benumbing  of  conscience,  which  frame  he  stilly  and 
slily  supplieth  with  such  despair,  that,  though  not 
much    guilt   attendeth    souls,  yet    they  continually 
have  a  secret  conclusion  within  them,  that  there  is 
no  hope  for  them  ;  for  they  have  loved  sins,  there- 

fore  after   them   they  will  go.      Jer.    ii.    25,    and 
xviii.  12. 

26.  Now  therefore  I  went  on  in  sin  with  great 
greediness    of    mind,  still    grudging 

that  I  could  not  be  so  satisfied  with 


it.   as   I  would.     This  did  continue     me  for  my  un- 

.  ,  ,  ,  godliness 

with  me  about  a  month,  or   more  ; 

but  one  day,  as  I  was  standing  at  a  neighbour's 
shop  window,  and  there  cursing  and  swearing,  and 
playing  the  madman,  after  my  wonted  manner, 
there  sate  within,  the  woman  of  the  house,  and 
heard  me  ;  who,  though  she  also  was  a  very  loose 

27 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

and  ungodly  wretch,  yet  protested  that  I  swore 
and  cursed  at  that  most  fearful  rate,  that  she 
was  made  to  tremble  to  hear  me ;  and  told  me 
further,  that  I  was  the  ungodliest  fellow  for 
swearing,  that  she  ever  heard  in  all  her  life; 
and  that  1,  by  thus  doing,  was  able  to  spoil  all  the 
youth  in  the  whole  town,  if  they  came  but  in  my 
company. 

27.  At  this  reproof  I  was  silenced,  and  put  to 

I  am  silenced  by  secret  shame  5  and  that  too>  as  * 
the  reproof  thought,  before  the  God  of  heaven ; 

wherefore,  while  I  stood  there,  and  hanging  down 
my  head,  I  wished  with  all  my  heart  that  I 
might  be  a  little  child  again,  that  my  father 
might  learn  me  to  speak  without  this  wicked 
way  of  swearing;  for,  thought  I,  I  am  so  ac- 
customed to  it,  that  it  is  in  vain  for  me  to 
think  of  a  reformation ;  for  I  thought  it  could 
never  be. 

28.  But  how  it  came  to  pass,  I  know  not;  I  did 
I  leave  off  from  this  time  forward,  so  leave  my 
swearing  swearing,  that  it  was  a  great  wonder 
to  myselJ:  to  observe  it ;  and  whereas  before  I  knew 
not  how  to  speak  unless  I  put  an  oath  before,  and 
another  behind,  to  make  my  words  have  authority ; 
now  I  could,  without  it,  speak  better,  and  with  more 
pleasantness  than    ever   I   could   before.     All   this 
while  I  knew  not  Jesus  Christ,  neither  did  I  leave 
my  sports  and  plays. 

28 


OUTWARD  REFORMATION 

9.  But  quickly  after  this,  I  fell  into  company 
with  one  poor  man  that  made  pro- 

r  r       1-    •  u  T     V  A  poor  man 

fession  of  religion  ;  who,  as  J.  then     talks  pleasantly 


thought,  did  talk  pleasantly  of  the 

scriptures,  and  of  the  matters  of  re-     «*•*£  read  &* 

ligion;  wherefore   falling  into  some 

love  and  liking  to  what  he  said,  I  betook  me  to  my 

Bible,  and  began  to  take  great  pleasure  in  reading, 

but  especially  with  the  historical  part  thereof;  for 

as  for  Paul's  Epistles,  and  such  like  scriptures,  I 

could  not  away  with  them,  being  as  yet  ignorant, 

either  of  the  corruptions  of  my  nature,  or  of  the 

want  and  worth  of  Jesus  Christ  to  save  me. 

30.  Wherefore  I  fell  to  some  outward  reformation 

both  in  my  words  and  life,  and  did 

'  I  practise 

set  the  commandments  before  me  for     outward 

.  i  •  t  i        reformation 

my  way  to  heaven  ;  which  command- 
ments I  also  did  strive  to  keep,  and,  as  I  thought, 
did  keep  them  pretty  well  sometimes,  and  then  I 
should  have  comfort  ;  yet  now  and  then  should 
break  one,  and  so  afflict  my  conscience  ;  but  then 
I  should  repent,  and  say,  I  was  sorry  for  it,  and 
promise  God  to  do  better  next  time,  and  there  get 
help  again  ;  for  then  I  thought  I  pleased  God  as 
well  as  any  man  in  England. 

31.  Thus  I  continued  about  a  year;    all  which 
time  our  neighbours  did  take  me  to  be  a  very  godly 
man,  a  new  and  religious  man,  and  did  marvel  much 
to  see   such  a  great  and  famous  alteration  in  my 

29 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

life  and  manners;  and  indeed  so  it  was,  though 
yet  I  knew  not  Christ,  nor  grace,  nor  faith,  nor 
hope;  for,  as  I  have  well  seen  since,  had  I  then 
died,  my  state  had  been  most  fearful. 

32.  But,  I  say,  my  neighbours  were  amazed  at 

this  my  great  conversion,  from  pro- 
The  neighbours  .  J  r. 

amazed  at  my        digious    proraneness,    to    something 

like  a  moral  life;  and  truly,  so  they 
well  might;  for  this  my  conversion  was  as  great, 
as  for  Tom  of  Bethlehem  to  become  a  sober  man. 
Now  therefore  they  began  to  praise,  to  commend, 
and  to  speak  well  of  me,  both  to  my  face,  and 
behind  my  back.  Now  I  was,  as  they  said,  become 
godly ;  now  I  was  become  a  right  honest  man. 
But  oh !  when  I  understood  these  were  their  words 
and  opinions  of  me,  it  pleased  me  mighty  well. 
For,  though  as  yet  I  was  nothing  but  a  poor 
painted  hypocrite,  yet,  I  loved  to  be  talked  of  as 
one  that  was  truly  godly.  I  was  proud  of  my 
godliness,  and  indeed,  I  did  all  I  did,  either  to  be 
seen  of,  or  to  be  well  spoken  of,  by  men :  and 
thus  I  continued  for  about  a  twelve-month,  or  more. 

33.  Now  you  must   know,  that,  before   this,   I 

My  conscience         had    taken  much   deliSht    in    rinSin& 

and  bell-ringing  DUt  my  conscience  beginning  to  be 
tender,  I  thought  such  practice  was  but  vain,  and 
therefore  forced  myself  to  leave  it ;  yet  my  mind 
hankered ;  wherefore  I  would  go  to  the  steeple- 
house,  and  look  on,  though  I  durst  not  ring:  but 

3° 


BUNYAN    AT    THE    STEEPLE 

After  thit  I  would  yet  go  to  see  them  ring,  but  would  not  go  any 
farther  than  the  steeple-door 

[See  page  31 


HINDRANCES  OVERCOME 

I  thought  this  did  not  become  religion  neither; 
yet  I  forced  myself,  and  would  look  on  still,  but 
quickly  after,  I  began  to  think,  how  if  one  of  the 
bells  should  fall  ?  Then  I  chose  to  stand  under  a 
main  beam,  that  lay  overthwart  the  steeple,  from 
side  to  side,  thinking  here  I  might  stand  sure; 
but  then  I  should  think  again,  should  the  bell  fall 
with  a  swing,  it  might  first  hit  the  wall,  and  then, 
rebounding  upon  me,  might  kill  me  for  all  this  beam ; 
this  made  me  stand  in  the  steeple-door ;  and  now, 
thought  I,  I  am  safe  enough ;  for  if  the  bell  should 
now  fall,  I  can  slip  out  behind  these  thick  walls, 
and  so  be  preserved  notwithstanding. 

34.  So  after  this  I  would  yet  go  to  see  them 

ring,  but  would  not  go  any  farther 

I  resolve  to  flee 
than  the  steeple-door;   but  then  it 

came  into  my  head,  how  if  the  steeple  itself  should 
fall?  And  this  thought  (it  may  for  aught  I  know) 
when  I  stood  and  looked  on,  did  continually  so 
shake  my  mind,  that  I  durst  not  stand  at  the  steeple- 
door  any  longer,  but  was  forced  to  flee,  for  fear 
the  steeple  should  fall  upon  my  head. 

35.  Another  thing  was,  my  dancing;    I  was  a 
full  year  before  I  could  quite  leave     i  &ive  up 
that;    but    all    this    while,    when   I     danciflg 
thought  I  kept  this  or  that  commandment,  or  did, 
by  word  or  deed,  anything  that  I  thought  was  good, 
I  had  great  peace  in  my  conscience,  and  should  think 
with  myself,  God  cannot  choose  but  be  now  pleased 

c  31 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

with  me;  yea,  to  relate  it  in  mine  own  way,  I 
thought  no  man  in  England  could  please  God  better 
than  I. 

36.  But  poor  wretch  as  I  was!    I  was  all  this 
while  ignorant  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  going  about  to 
establish  my  own  righteousness ;  and  had  perished 
therein,  had  not  God  in  mercy  showed  me  more  of 
my  state  by  nature. 

37.  But  upon  a  day,  the  good  providence  of  God 

called  me  to  Bedford,  to  work  on  my 
I  listen  to  the  J  J 

women  at       calling ;  and  in  one  of  the  streets  of 

• j  O  ' 

that  town,  I  came  where  there  were 
three  or  four  poor  women  sitting  at  a  door,  in  the 
sun,  talking  about  the  things  of  God;  and  being 
now  willing  to  hear  them  discourse,  I  drew  near 
to  hear  what  they  said,  for  I  was  now  a  brisk  talker 
also  myself,  in  the  matters  of  religion ;  but  I  may 
say,  /  heard  but  understood  not ;  for  they  were  far 
above,  out  of  my  reach.  Their  talk  was  about  a 
new  birth,  the  work  of  God  on  their  hearts,  also 
how  they  were  convinced  of  their  miserable  state 
by  nature ;  they  talked  how  God  had  visited  their 
souls  with  His  love  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  with 
what  words  and  promises  they  had  been  refreshed, 
comforted,  and  supported,  against  the  temptations 
of  the  devil:  moreover,  they  reasoned  of  the 
suggestions  and  temptations  of  Satan  in  particular ; 
and  told  to  each  other,  by  which  they  had  been 
afflicted  and  how  they  were  borne  up  under  his 


BUNYAN    LISTENS    TO    THE    POOR    WOMEN    OF    BEDFORD 

/  came  where  there  were  three  or  four  poor  women  sitting  at  a  door, 

in  the  sun,  talking  about  the  things  of  God 

[See  page  32 


INSPIRING  CONVERSATION 

assaults.  They  also  discoursed  of  their  own 
wretchedness  of  heart,  and  of  their  unbelief;  and 
did  contemn,  slight  and  abhor  their  own  righteous- 
ness, as  filthy,  and  insufficient  to  do  them  any 
good. 

38.  And,  methought,  they  spake  as  if  joy  did 
make  them  speak ;  they  spake  with  such  pleasant- 
ness of  scripture  language,  and  with  such  appearance 
of  grace  in  all  they  said,  that  they  were  to  me,  as 
if  they  had  found  a  new  world ;  as  if  they  were 
people  that  dwelt  alone,  and  were  not  to  be  reckoned 
among  their  neighbours.     Numb,  xxiii.  9. 

39.  At  this  I  felt  my  own  heart  began  to  shake, 
and    mistrust    my   condition    to    be 

'  .11  I  am  ignorant 

naught ;    for  1   saw  that  in   all  my     of  the  new- 
thoughts  about  religion  and  salvation, 
the  new-birth  did  never  enter  into  my  mind  ;  neither 
knew  I  the  comfort  of  the  word  and  promise,  nor 
the  deceitfulness  and  treachery  of  my  own  wicked 
heart.     As  for  secret  thoughts,  I  took  no  notice  of 
them ;  neither  did  I  understand  what  Satan's  tempta- 
tions were,  nor  how  they  were  to  be  withstood,  and 
resisted,  etc. 

40.  Thus,  therefore,  when  I  had  heard  and  con- 
sidered what  they  said,  I  left  them. 

I  feel  I  lack  the 
and    went    about    my    employment     true  tokens  of  a 

again,  but  their  talk  and  discourse  truly  godly  "^ 
went  with  me ;  also  my  heart  would  tarry  with  them, 
for  I  was  greatly  affected  with  their  words,  both 

33 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

because  by  them  I  was  convinced  that  I  wanted  the 
true  tokens  of  a  truly  godly  man,  and  also  because 
by  them  I  was  convinced  of  the  happy  and  blessed 
condition  of  him  that  was  such  a  one. 

41.  Therefore  I  should  often  make  it  my  business 
to  be  going  again  and  again  into  the  company  of  these 
poor  people ;   for  I  could  not  stay  away ;  and  the 
more  I  went  amongst  them,  the  more  I  did  question 
my  condition ;  and  as  I  still  do  remember,  presently 
I  found  two  things  within  me,  at  which  I  did  some- 
times marvel  (especially  considering  what  a  blind, 
ignorant,  sordid  and  ungodly  wretch  but  just  before 
I  was).     The  one  was  a  very  great  softness  and 
tenderness  of  heart,  which  caused  me  to  fall  under 
the  conviction  of  what  by  scripture  they  asserted, 
and  the  other  was  a  great  bending  in  my  mind, 
to  a  continual  meditating  on  it,  and  on  all  other 
good  things,  which  at  any  time  I  heard  or  read  of. 

42.  By  these  things  my  mind  was  now  so  turned,  that 

it  lay  like  an  horse-leech  at  the  vein, 

My  mind  more  .,,         .  ~, .        ^ .       ^ 

fixed  on  things      still  crying  out,  ufttt,  G/w,  rrov.  xxx. 

etenrn!tying  I5  >  7ea>  it:  was  so  ^xed  on  eternity, 

and  on  the  things  about  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  (that  is,  so  far  as  I  knew,  though  as  yet, 
God  knows,  I  knew  but  little),  that  neither  pleasures, 
nor  profits,  nor  persuasions,  nor  threats,  could  loose 
it,  or  make  it  let  go  its  hold  ;  and  though  I  may  speak 
it  with  shame,  yet  it  is  in  very  deed,  a  certain  truth,  it 
would  then  have  been  as  difficult  for  me  to  have  taken 

34 


A  PRAYER  FOR  GUIDANCE 

my  mind  from  heaven  to  earth,  as  I  have  found  it 
often  since,  to  get  again  from  earth  to  heaven. 

43.  One  thing  I  may  not  omit :  There  was  a  young 
man  in  our  town,  to  whom  my  heart     l  meet  ^  old 
before  was  knit,  more  than  to  any     companion 
other,   but  he  being  a   most  wicked  creature  for 
cursing,  and  swearing,  and  whoreing,  I  now  shook 
him  off,  and   forsook   his   company ;   but  about  a 
quarter  of*  a  year  after  I  had  left  him,  I  met  him  in 
a  certain    lane,   and  asked  him   how  he    did:   he, 
after  his  old  swearing  and  mad  way,  answered,  he 
was  well.      But,  Harry,   said  I,   why  do  you  curse 
and  swear  thus  ?     What  will  become  of  you,  if  you  die 
in  this  condition  ?     He  answered  me  in  a  great  chafe, 
What  would  the  devil  do  for  company,  if  it  were  not 
for  such  as  I  am  ? 

44.  About  this  time  I  met  with  some  Ranters' 
books,  that  were  put  forth  by  some  of 

our  countrymen,   which  books   were     books  come^8 
also  highly  in  esteem  by  several  old     inprayyfohrands' 

professors;    some   of  these   I   read,     guidance  to 

read  them 
but    was    not    able    to    make    any 

judgment  about  them;  wherefore  as  I  read  in 
them,  and  thought  upon  them  (seeing  myself  unable 
to  judge),  I  would  betake  myself  to  hearty  prayer  in 
this  manner.  0  Lord,  I  am  a  fool,  and  not  able  to 
know  the  truth  from  error :  Lord,  leave  me  not  to  my 
own  blindness,  either  to  approve  of,  or  condemn  this 
doctrine  •  if  it  be  of  God,  let  me  not  despise  it ;  if  it  be 

35 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

of  the  devil,  let  me  not  embrace  it.  Lord,  1  lay  my 
soul  in  this  matter  only  at  Thy  foot,  let  me  not  be 
deceived,  I  humbly  beseech  Thee.  I  had  one  religious 
intimate  companion  all  this  while,  and  that  was  the 
poor  man  I  spoke  of  before  ;  but  about  this  time,  he 

also  turned  a  most  devilish  Ranter, 
wmpanfonTurns  and  gave  himself  up  to  all  manner  of 
RanterSh  filthiness,  especially  uncleanness  :  he 

would  also  deny  that  there  was  a 
God,  angel,  or  spirit ;  and  would  laugh  at  all 
exhortations  to  sobriety ;  when  I  laboured  to 
rebuke  his  wickedness  he  would  laugh  the  more, 
and  pretend  that  he  had  gone  through  all  religions, 
and  could  never  light  on  the  right  till  now.  He 
told  me  also,  that  in  a  little  time  I  should  see  all 
professors  turn  to  the  ways  of  the  Ranters.  Where- 
fore, abominating  those  cursed  principles,  I  left  his 
company  forthwith,  and  became  to  him  as  great 
a  stranger,  as  I  had  been  before  a  familiar. 

45.  Neither  was  this  man  only  a  temptation  to  me, 
but  my  calling  lying  in  the  country,  I  happened  to 
light  into  several  people's  company,  who  though 
strict  in  religion  formerly,  yet  were  also  swept  away 
by  these  Ranters.  These  would  also  talk  with  me 
of  their  ways,  and  condemn  me  as  legal  and  dark ; 
pretending  that  they  only  had  attained  to  perfection, 
that  could  do  what  they  would  and  not  sin.  Oh ! 
these  temptations  were  suitable  to  my  flesh,  I  being 
but  a  young  man  and  my  nature  in  its  prime ;  but 

36 


NEW  SIGHT  FOR  THE  BIBLE 

God,  who  had,  as  I  hoped,  designed  me  for  better 
things,  kept  me  in  the  fear  of  His  name,  and  did  not 
suffer  me  to  accept  such  cursed  principles.     And 
blessed  be  God,  Who  put  it  into  my 
heart  to  cry  to  Him  to  be  kept  and     answered.   The 

'  .  Bible  precious 

directed,    still    distrusting    my    own 

wisdom;  for  I  have  since  seen  .even  the  effects  of 

that  prayer,  in  His  preserving  me,  not  only  from 

Ranting  errors,  but  from  those  also  that  have  sprung 

up  since.     The  Bible  was  precious  to  me  in  those 

days. 

46.  And  now  methought,  I  began  to  look  into 
the  Bible  with  new  eyes,  and  read  as  I  never  did 
before,  and  especially  the  epistles  of  the  apostle  St 
Paul  were  sweet  and  pleasant  to  me ;   and  indeed  I 
was  then  never  out  of  the  Bible,  either  by  reading 
or  meditation ;  still  crying  out  to  God,  that  I  might 
know  the  truth,  and  way  to  heaven  and  glory. 

47.  And  as  I  went  on  and  read,  I  lighted  upon  that 
passage,  To  one  is  given,  by  the  Spirit,     ^y  understand- 
the  'word  of  wisdom;  to  another  the     ing  of  scripture 
word  of  knowledge  by  the  same  Spirit ;  and  to  another 
faith,   etc.      i    Cor.   xii.      And  though,  as  I  have 
since  seen,  that  by  this  scripture  the  Holy  Ghost 
intends,  in  special,  things  extraordinary,  yet  on  me 
it  did  then  fasten  with  conviction,  that  I  did  want 
things  ordinary,  even  that  understanding  and  wisdom 
that  other  Christians  had.     On  this  word  I  mused, 
and  could  not  tell  what  to  do,  especially  this  word 

37 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

1  Faith '  put  me  to  it,  for  I  could  not  help  it,  but 
sometimes  must  question,  whether  I  had  any  faith, 
or  no  ;  but  I  was  loath  to  conclude,  I  had  no  faith ; 
for  if  I  do  so,  thought  I,  then  I  shall  count  myself  a 
very  cast-away  indeed. 

48.  No,  said  I,  with  myself,  though  I  am  convinced 

I  am  an  ignorant  that  l  am  an  ignorant  sot,  and  that  I 
sot  want  those  blessed  gifts  of  knowledge 

and  understanding  that  other  people  have ;  yet  at  a 
venture  I  will  conclude,  I  am  not  altogether  faithless, 
though  I  know  not  what  faith  is ;  for  it  was  shewn 
me,  and  that  too  (as  I  have  seen  since)  by  Satan,  that 
those  who  conclude  themselves  in  a  faithless  state, 
have  neither  rest  nor  quiet  in  their  souls ;  and  I  was 
loath  to  fall  quite  into  despair. 

49.  Wherefore  by  this  suggestion  I  was,  for  a 

while,  made  afraid  to  see  my  want  of 

faith  5  but  God  would  not  suffer  me 
no,  a  trouble  to  thus  to  undo  and  destroy  my  soul,  but 

did  continually,  against  this  my  sad 
and  blind  conclusion,  create  still  within  me  such 
suppositions,  insomuch  that  I  could  not  rest  content, 
until  I  did  now  come  to  some  certain  knowledge, 
whether  I  had  faith  or  no,  this  always  running  in  my 
mind,  But  Low  if  you  want  faith  indeed?  But  how 
can  you  tell  you  have  faith  ?  And  besides,  I  saw  for 
certain,  if  I  had  not,  I  was  sure  to  perish  for  ever. 

50.  So  that  though  I  endeavoured  at  the  first  to 
look  over  the  business  of  Faith,  yet  in  a  little  time,  I 

38 


A  SORE  TEMPTATION 

better  considering  the  matter,  was  willing  to  put  my- 
self upon  the  trial  whether  I  had  faith  or  no.  But 
alas,  poor  wretch !  so  ignorant  and  brutish  was  I,  that 
I  knew  not  to  this  day  no  more  how  to  do  it,  than 
I  know  how  to  begin  and  accomplish  that  rare  and 
curious  piece  of  art,  which  I  never  yet  saw  or 
considered. 

5 1 .  Wherefore  while  I  was  thus  considering,  and 

being  put  to  my  plunge  about  it  (for 

The  temptation 
you  must  know,  that  as  yet  I  had  in  this     hot  upon  me  to 

matter  broken  my  mind  to  no  man,  work  a  miracle 
only  did  hear  and  consider),  the  tempter  came  in  with 
this  delusion,  That  there  was  no  way  for  me  to  know 
I  had  faith,  but  by  trying  to  work  some  miracle ;  urging 
those  scriptures  that  seem  to  look  that  way,  for  the 
enforcing  and  strengthening  his  temptation.  Nay, 
one  day,  as  I  was  between  Elstow  and  Bedford,  the 
temptation  was  hot  upon  me,  to  try  if  I  had  faith, 
by  doing  some  miracle ;  which  miracle  at  this  time 
was  this,  I  must  say  to  the  puddles  that  were  in  the 
horsepads,  Be  dry ;  and  to  the  dry  places,  Be  you 
puddles :  and  truly  one  time  I  was  going  to  say  so 
indeed;  but  just  as  I  was  about  to  speak,  this 
thought  came  into  my  mind;  But  go  under  yonder 
hedge  and  pray  first,  that  God  would  make  you  able. 
But  when  I  had  concluded  to  pray,  this  came  hot 
upon  me;  That  if  I  prayed,  and  came  again,  and 
tried  to  do  it,  and  yet  did  nothing  notwithstanding, 
then  to  be  sure  I  had  no  faith,  but  was  a  cast-away, 

39 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

and  lost  ;  nay,  thought  I,  if  it  be  so,  I  will  not  try 
yet,  but  will  stay  a  little  longer. 

52.  So  I  continued  at  a  great  loss  ;  for  I  thought, 

if  they  only  had  faith,  which  could  do 

twixt  theTdevii     so  wonderful  things,  then  I  concluded, 


"     that  for  tne  Present  J  neither  had  it, 
nor  yet  for  the  time  to  come,  were 
ever  like  to  have  it.     Thus  I  was  tossed  betwixt  the 
devil  and  my  own  ignorance,  and  so  perplexed,  especi- 
ally at  some  times,  that  I  could  not  tell  what  to  do. 

53.  About  this  time,  the  state  and  happiness  of 
Akind  of  avision     tnese  Poor  people  at  Bedford  was  thus, 
presented  to  me     jn  a  kind  of  a  vision,  presented  to  me, 
I  saw  as  if  they  were  on  the  sunny  side  of  some 
high  mountain,  there  refreshing  themselves  with  the 
pleasant  beams  of  the  sun,  while  I  was  shivering  and 
shrinking  in  the  cold,  afflicted  with  frost,  snow  and 
dark  clouds  :  methought  also,  betwixt  me  and  them, 
I  saw  a  wall  that  did  compass  about  this  mountain, 
now  through  this  wall  my  soul  did  greatly  desire  to 
pass  ;  concluding,  that  if  I  could,  I  would  even  go 
into  the  very  midst  of  them,  and  there  also  comfort 
myself  with  the  heat  of  their  sun. 

54.  About  this  wall  I  bethought  myself,  to  go  again 

How  I  get  and  agam,  still  Prying  as  I  went,  to 

through  a  wall       see  jf  I  could  find  some  way  or  passage, 

by  which  I  might  enter  therein  :  but  none  could  I 
find  for  some  time  :  at  the  last,  I  saw,  as  it  were,  a 
narrow  gap,  like  a  little  door-way  in  the  wall,  through 

40 


A  WONDERFUL  VISION 

which  I  attempted  to  pass :  Now  the  passage  being 
very  strait  and  narrow,  I  made  many  offers  to  get 
in,  but  all  in  vain,  even  until  I  was  well-nigh  quite 
beat  out,  by  striving  to  get  in  •  at  last,  with  great 
striving,  methought  I  at  first  did  get  in  my  head, 
and  after  that,  by  a  sideling  striving,  my  shoulders, 
and  my  whole  body ;  then  I  was  exceeding  glad, 
went  and  sat  down  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  so  was 
comforted  with  the  light  and  heat  of  their  sun. 

55.  Now  this  mountain,  and  wall,  etc.,  was  thus 
made    out    to    me  :    The    mountain     i  get  the  vision 
signified  the  church  of  the  living  God  :     explained 

the  sun  that  shone  thereon,  the  comfortable  shining  of 
His  merciful  face  on  them  that  were  therein ;  the 
wall  I  thought  was  the  word,  that  did  make  separa- 
tion between  the  Christians  and  the  world ;  and  the 
gap  which  was  in  the  wall,  I  thought,  was  Jesus 
Christ,  Who  is  the  way  to  God  the  Father.  John 
xiv.  6;  Matt.  vii.  14.  But  forasmuch  as  the  pas- 
sage was  wonderful  narrow,  even  so  narrow  that  I 
could  not,  but  with  great  difficulty,  enter  in  thereat, 
it  showed  me,  that  none  could  enter  into  life,  but 
those  that  were  in  downright  earnest,  and  unless 
also  they  left  that  wicked  world  behind  them ;  for 
here  was  only  room  for  body  and  soul,  but  not  for 
body  and  soul  and  sin. 

56.  This  resemblance  abode  upon  my  spirit  many 
days  ;  all  which  time  I  saw  myself  in  a  forlorn  and 
sad  condition,  but  yet  was  provoked  to  a  vehement 

41 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

hunger  and  desire  to  be  one  of  that  number  that 
did  sit  in  the  sunshine :  Now  also  I  should  pray 
wherever  I  was  :  whether  at  home  or  abroad ;  in 
house  or  field ;  and  would  also  often,  with  lifting  up  of 
heart,  sing  that  of  the  fifty-first  Psalm,  0  Lord,  con- 
sider my  distress  ;  for  as  yet  I  knew  not  where  I  was. 

57.  Neither  as  yet  could  I  attain  to  any  comfortable 

persuasion  that  I  had  faith  in  Christ : 

My  soul  _        .     _  •   r       • 

assaulted  with  but  instead  or  having  satisfaction 
here,  I  began  to  find  my  soul  to  be 
assaulted  with  fresh  doubts  about  my  future  happi- 
ness ;  especially  with  such  as  these,  whether  I  was 
elected  ?  But  how,  if  the  day  of  grace  should  now  be 
past  and  gone  ? 

58.  By  these  two  temptations  I  was  very  much 
1  am  disquieted      afflicted  and  disquieted ;  sometimes  by 
about  election        one?  anc}  sometimes  by  the  other  of 
them.     And   first,    to   speak    of    that    about    my 
questioning  my  election,  I  found  at  this  time,  that 
though  I  was  in  a  flame  to  find  the  way  to  heaven 
and  glory,  and  though  nothing  could  beat  me  off 
from  this,  yet  this  question  did  so  offend  and  dis- 
courage me,  that  I  was,  especially  sometimes,  as  if  the 
very  strength  of  my  body  also  had  been  taken  away 
by  the  force  and  power   thereof.     This   scripture 
did  also  seem  to  me  to  trample  upon  all  my  desires  ; 
//  is  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth  ; 
but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy.     Rom.  ix.  16. 

59.  With  this  scripture  I  could  not  tell  what  to  do : 

42 


A  PERPLEXING  QUESTION 

for  I  evidently  saw,  unless  that  the  great  God,  of 
His  infinite  grace  and  bounty,  had  voluntarily  chosen 
me  to  be  a  vessel  of  mercy,  though  I  should  desire, 
and  long,  and  labour  until  my  heart  did  break,  no 
good  could  come  of  it.  Therefore  this  would  stick 
with  me,  How  can  you  tell  that  you  are  elected?  And 
what  if  you  should  not  ?  How  then  ? 

60.  O  Lord,  thought  I,  what  if  I  should  not  in- 
deed ?     It  may  be  you  are  not,  said  the  Tempter ; 
it  may  be  so  indeed,  thought  I.     Why  then,  said 
Satan,    you  had  as  good    leave   off,  and  strive  no 
farther ;    for  if  indeed,  you  should  not  be  elected 
and  chosen  of  God,  there  is  no  talk  of  your  being 
saved;   For  It  is  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him 
that  runneth  ;  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy. 

61.  By  these  things  I  was  driven  to  my  wits'  end, 
not  knowing  what  to  say,  or  how  to     i  was  driven  to 
answer  these  temptations :   (indeed,  I     my  wits' end 
little  thought  that  Satan  had  thus  assaulted  me,  but 
that  rather  it  was  my  own  prudence  thus  to  start 
the    question) :    for    that    the    elect   only   attained 
eternal  life ;    that,   I  without  scruple  did  heartily 
close  withal ;  but  that  myself  was  one  of  them,  there 
lay  the  question. 

62.  Thus    therefore,    for    several    days,   I   was 
greatly  assaulted  and  perplexed,  and     x  wag   reatl 
was  often,  when  I  have  been  walking,     assaulted  and 
ready  to  sink  where  I   went,    with 

faintness  in  my  mind ;  but  one  day,  after  I  had  been 

43 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

so  many  weeks  oppressed  and  cast  down  therewith, 
as  I  was  now  quite  giving  up  the  ghost  of  all  my 
hopes  of  ever  attaining  life,  that  sentence  fell  with 
weight  upon  my  spirit,  Look  at  the  generations  of 
old,  and  see  ;  did  ever  any  trust  in  God,  and  were 
confounded? 

63.  At  which  I  was  greatly  lightened,  and  en- 
A  text  enlightens   couraged  in  my  soul ;  for  thus,  at  that 
and  encourages      very   instant,  it  was   expounded   to 

my  soul  _      .  7         ...  .. 

me :      Begin     at    the     beginning    of 

Genesis,  and  read  to  the  end  of  the  Revelations,  and  see 
if  you  canjlnd,  that  there  were  ever  any  that  trusted  in 
the  Lord,  and  were  confounded.  So  coming  home, 
I  presently  went  to  my  Bible,  to  see  if  I  could  find 
that  saying,  not  doubting  but  to  find  it  presently ;  for 
it  was  so  fresh,  and  with  such  strength  and  comfort 
on  my  spirit,  that  it  was  as  if  it  talked  with  me. 

64.  Well,  I  looked,  but  I  found  it  not ;  only  it 
abode  upon  me :  Then  did  I  ask  first  this  good  man, 
and  then  another,  if  they  knew  where  it  was,  but 
they  knew  no  such  place.     At  this  I  wondered,  that 
such  a  sentence  should  so  suddenly,  and  with  such 
comfort  and   strength,    seize,   and   abide  upon  my 
heart ;  and  yet  that  none  could  find  it  (for  I  doubted 
not  but  that  it  was  in  holy  scripture). 

65.  Thus  I  continued  above  a  year,  and  could  not 
I  find  the  text  in     find  the  place;  but  at  last,   casting 
the  Apocrypha         my   eye   upon    the  ^pocrypj}a   books, 

I  found  it  in  Ecclesiasticus,  Eccles.  ii.  10.     This,  at 

44 


IN  GREAT  DISTRESS 

the  first,  did  somewhat  daunt  me ;  but  because  by 
this  time  I  had  got  more  experience  of  the  love  and 
kindness  of  God,  it  troubled  me  the  less,  especially 
when  I  considered  that  though  it  was  not  in  those 
texts  that  we  call  holy  and  canonical ;  yet  forasmuch 
as  this  sentence  was  the  sum  and  substance  of  many 
of  the  promises,  it  was  my  duty  to  take  the  comfort 
of  it ;  and  I  bless  God  for  that  word,  for  it  was  of 
God  to  me :  that  word  doth  still  at  times  shine 
before  my  face. 

66.  After  this,  that  other  doubt  did  come  with 
strength  upon    me,    But  how  if  the     Mydoubtsasto 
day  of  grace  should  be  past  and  gone  ?     the  *  day  of 
How  if  you  have  overstood  the  time     gra 

of  mercy?  Now  I  remember  that  one  day,  as  I 
was  walking  in  the  country,  I  was  much  in  the 
thoughts  of  this,  But  h?w  if  the  day  of  grace  is 
past  ?  And  to  aggravate  my  trouble,  the  Tempter 
presented  to  my  mind  those  good  people  of  Bedford, 
and  suggested  thus  unto  me,  that  these  being  con- 
verted already,  they  were  all  that  God  would  save 
in  those  parts ;  and  that  I  came  too  late,  for  these 
had  got  the  blessing  before  I  came. 

67.  Now  I  was  in  great  distress,  thinking  In  very 
deed  that  this  might  well  be  so ;  wherefore  I  went 
up  and  down,  bemoaning  my  sad  condition ;  count- 
ing  myself  far   worse    than    a  thousand   fools   for 
standing  off  thus  long,  and  spending  so  many  years 
in  sin  as  I  had  done ;   still  crying  out,  Oh !  that  I 

45 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

had  turned  sooner!  Oh!  that  I  had  turned  seven 
years  ago !  It  made  me  also  angry  with  myself,  to 
think  that  I  should  have  no  more  wit,  but  to  trifle 
away  my  time,  till  my  soul  and  heaven  were  lost. 

68.  But  when  I  had  been  long  vexed  with  this 
Sweet  words         fear,  and  was  scarce  able  to  take  one 
come  to  me  step  more?  just  about  the  same  place 

where  I  received  my  other  encouragement,  these 
words  broke  in  upon  my  mind,  Compel  them  to 
come  in,  that  my  house  may  be  filled ;  and  yet  there  is 
room.  Luke  xiv.  22,  23.  These  words,  but 
especially  those,  And  yet  there  is  room,  were  sweet 
words  to  me  ;  for  truly  I  thought  that  by  them  I 
saw  there  was  place  enough  in  heaven  for  me ;  and 
moreover,  that  when  the  Lord  Jesus  did  speak  these 
words,  He  then  did  think  of  me  :  and  that  He  know- 
ing that  the  time  would  come,  that  I  should  be 
afflicted  with  fear,  that  there  was  no  place  left  for 
me  in  His  bosom,  did  before  speak  this  word,  and 
leave  it  upon  record,  that  I  might  find  help  thereby 
against  this  vile  temptation.  This  I  then  verily 
believed. 

69.  In  the  light  and  encouragement  of  this  word  I 

went  a  pretty  while ;  and  the  comfort 
The  words  ' 

encourage  me  a      was  the  more,  when  1  thought  that 

pretty  while  ^   Lord   Jegug   ^^   ^.^  Qn   me 

so  long  ago,  and  that  He  should  speak  those  words 
on  purpose  for  my  sake ;  for  I  did  think  verily,  that 
He  did  on  purpose  speak  them  to  encourage  me  withal. 


TYPES  AND  FIGURES 

70.  But  I  was  not  without  my  temptations  to  go 
back  again ;  temptations  I  say,  both     l  think  on 
from   Satan,    mine   own    heart,    and     Nebuchadnezzar 
carnal  acquaintance ;  but  I  thank  God  these  were 
outweighed  by  that  sound  sense  of  death,  and  of 
the  day  of  judgment,  which  abode,  as  it  were,  con- 
tinually in  my  view :  I  would  often  also  think  on 
Nebuchadnezzar ;  of  whom  it  is  said,   He  had  given 
him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.      Dan.  v.  1 8,  1 9. 
Yet,  thought  I,  if  this  great  man  had  all  his  portion 
in  this  world,  one  hour  in  hell-fire  would  make  him 
forget  all     Which  consideration  was  a  great  help 
to  me. 

71.  I  was  also  made,  about  this  time,  to  see  some- 
thing   concerning    the    beasts    that     i  see  something 
Moses  counted   clean   and  unclean:     concerning  types 
I  thought  those  beasts  were  types  of  men  ;  the  clean, 
types  of  them  that  were  the  people  of  God  ;  but  the 
unclean,  types  of  such  as  were  the  children  of  the 
wicked  one.      Now  I  read,   that  the  clean  beasts 
chewed  the  cud;  that  is,  thought  I,  they  show  us, 
we  must  feed  upon  the  word  of  God:  they  also 
parted  the  hoof.     I  thought  that  signified,  we  must 
part,  if  we  would  be  saved,  with  the  ways  of  ungodly 
men.      And  also,  in  further  reading  about  them,  I 
found,  that  though  we  did  chew  the  cud,  as  the 
hare ;  yet  if  we  walked  with  claws,  like  a  dog ;  or 
if  we  did  part  the  hoof,  like  the  swine,  yet  if  we  did 
not  chew  the  cud,  as  the  sheep,  we  were  still,  for  all 

D  47 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

that,  but  unclean :  for  I  thought  the  hare  to  be  a 
type  of  those  that  talk  of  the  word,  yet  walk  in  the 
ways  of  sin ;  and  that  the  swine  was  like  him  that 
parted  with  his  outward  pollutions,  but  still  wanteth 
the  word  of  faith,  without  which  there  could  be  no 
way  of  salvation,  let  a  man  be  never  so  devout. 
Deut.  xiv.  After  this,  I  found  by  reading  the  word, 
that  those  that  must  be  glorified  with  Christ  in 
another  world  must  be  called  by  Him  here  \  called  to 
the  partaking  of  a  share  in  His  word  and  righteous- 
ness, and  to  the  comforts  and  first-fruits  of  His  Spirit ; 
and  to  a  peculiar  interest  in  all  those  heavenly 
things,  which  do  indeed  prepare  the  soul  for  that 
rest,  and  house  of  glory,  which  is  in  heaven  above. 

72.  Here   again  I  was  at   a   very   great   stand, 
I  fear  lam  not       not  knowing  what  to  do,  fearing  I 
called  Was  not  called ;  for,  thought  I,  if  I 
be  not  called,  what  then  can  do  me  good  ?     None  but 
those  who  are  effectually  called  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.     But  oh !   how  I  now  loved  those  words 
that   spake  of  a   Christiaris   calling!   as  when   the 
Lord    said   to    one,   Follow    Me;    and    to    another, 
Come  after  Me :  and  oh,  thought  I,  that  He  would 
say  so  to  me  too  :  how  gladly  would  I  run  after  Him ! 

73.  I  cannot  now  express  with  what  longings  and 

breathings    in    my    soul,    I   cried   to 
I  continued  all  ' 

on  a  flame  to  be      Christ   to   call    me.       Thus   1  con- 
tinued for  a  time,  all  on  a  flame  to 
be  converted  to  Jesus  Christ;  and  did  also  see  at 


FAINT  AND  FEARFUL 

that  day,  such  glory  in  a  converted  state,  that  I 
could  not  be  contented  without  a  share  therein. 
Gold!  could  it  have  been  gotten  for  gold,  what 
would  I  have  given  for  it  ?  Had  I  had  a  whole  world, 
it  had  all  gone  ten  thousand  times  over  for  this,  that 
my  soul  might  have  been  in  a  converted  state. 

74.  How  lovely  now  was  every  one  in  my  eyes, 
that  I  thought  to  be  converted  men     What ,  thought 
and  women.  They  shone,  they  walked     of  converted 
like  a  people  that  carried  the  broad     people 

seal  of  heaven  about  them.  Oh!  I  saw  the  lot 
was  fallen  to  them  in  pleasant  places,  and  they  had  a 
goodly  heritage.  Psalm  xvi.  But  that  which  made 
me  sick,  was  that  of  Christ,  in  St  Mark,  He  goeth 
up  into  a  mountain,  and  calleth  unto  Him  whom  He 
would,  and  they  came  unto  Him.  Mark  iii.  1 3. 

75.  This  scripture  made  me  faint  and  fear,  yet 
it   kindled   fire   in   my    soul.     That 

*  .  I  still  feared 

which  made  me  fear,  was  this;  lest  Christ  would  not 
Christ  should  have  no  liking  to  me, 
for  He  called  whom  He  would.  But  oh !  the  glory 
that  I  saw  in  that  condition,  did  still  so  engage  my 
heart,  that  I  could  seldom  read  of  any  that  Christ 
did  call,  but  I  presently  wished,  Would  I  had  been 
in  their  clothes,  would  1  had  been  born  Peter  •  would 
I  had  been  born  John  ;  or,  would  1  had  been  by  and  had 
heard  Him  when  He  called  them,  how  would  I  have 
cried,  0  Lord,  call  me  also  /  But,  oh  !  I  feared  He 
would  not  call  me. 

49 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

76.  And  truly,   the  Lord  let  me  go  thus  many 
months   together,   and   shewed  me  nothing;  either 
that  I  was  already,  or  should  be  called  hereafter : 
but  at  last  after  much  time  spent,  and  many  groans 
to  God,  that  I  might  be  made  partaker  of  the  holy 
and  heavenly  calling ;  that  word  came  in  upon  me : 
I  will  cleanse  their  blood,  that  I  have  not  cleansed, 

for  the  Lord  dwelleth  in  Zion.  Joel  iii.  21.  These 
words  I  thought  were  sent  to  encourage  me  to 
wait  still  upon  God;  and  signified  unto  me,  that 
if  I  were  not  already,  yet  time  might  come,  I  might 
be  in  truth  converted  unto  Christ. 

77.  About  this  time  I  began  to  break  my  mind 

.  ^.^r   *  •          to  tnose  Poor  people  in  Bedford,  and 
Mr  Gifford  in-  r  ..  , 

vitesmetohis       to   tell   them    my    condition;     which 

when  they  had  heard,  they  told  Mr 
Gifford  of  me,  who  himself  also  took  occasion  to 
talk  with  me,  and  was  willing  to  be  well  persuaded 
of  me,  though  I  think  from  little  grounds :  but  he 
invited  me  to  his  house,  where  I  should  hear  him 
confer  with  others,  about  the  dealings  of  God  with 
their  souls;  from  all  which  I  still  received  more 
conviction,  and  from  that  time  began  to  see  some- 
thing of  the  vanity  and  inward  wretchedness  of  my 
wicked  heart ;  for  as  yet  I  knew  no  great  matter 
therein ;  but  now  it  began  to  be  discovered  unto  me, 
and  also  to  work  at  that  rate  as  it  never  did  before. 
Now  I  evidently  found,  that  lusts  and  corruptions 
put  forth  themselves  within  me,  in  wicked  thoughts 

50 


FAR  FROM  CONVERSION 

and  desires,  which  I  did  not  regard  before  ;  my 
desires  also  for  heaven  and  life  began  to  fail;  I 
found  also,  that  whereas  before  my  soul  was  full 
of  longing  after  God,  now  it  began  to  hanker  after 
every  foolish  vanity;  yea,  my  heart  Mysoulhankers 
would  not  be  moved  to  mind  that  after  every 
which  was  good ;  it  began  to  be 
careless,  both  of  my  soul  and  heaven ;  it  would  now 
continually  hang  back,  both  to,  and  in  every  duty; 
and  was  as  a  clog  on  the  leg  of  a  bird,  to  hinder 
me  from  flying. 

78.  Nay,    thought   I,    now   I    grow   worse   and 

worse :  now  I  am  farther  from  con- 

I  grow  worse 

version  than  ever  I  was  before,  and  worse 
Wherefore  I  began  to  sink  greatly  in  my  soul,  and 
began  to  entertain  such  discouragement  in  my  heart, 
as  laid  me  as  low  as  hell.  If  now  I  should  have 
burned  at  the  stake,  I  could  not  believe  that  Christ 
had  love  for  me  :  alas !  I  could  neither  hear  Him, 
nor  see  Him,  nor  feel  Him,  nor  favour  any  of  His 
things ;  I  was  driven  as  with  a  tempest,  my  heart 
would  be  unclean,  and  the  Canaanltes  would  dwell 
in  the  land. 

79.  Sometimes  I  would  tell  my  condition  to  the 
people  of  God;    which,  when  they     The  people  of 
heard,  they  would  pity  me,  and  would     God  P**  me 
tell  me  of  the  promises ;  but  they  had  as  good  have 
told  me,  that  I  must  reach  the  sun  with  my  finger, 
as  have  bidden  me  receive  or  rely  upon  the  promises : 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

and  as  soon  I  should  have  done  it.  All  my  sense 
and  feeling  were  against  me ;  and  I  saw  I  had  an 
heart  that  would  sin,  and  that  lay  under  a  law 
that  would  condemn. 

80.  These  things  have  often  made  me  think  of 
the  child  which  the  father  brought  to  Christ,  who, 
while  he  was  yet  coming  to  Him,  was  thrown  down  by 
the  devil,  and  also  so  rent  and  torn  by  him,  that  he 
lay  down  and  wallowed,  foaming.      Luke   ix.   42  ; 
Mark  ix.   20. 

8 1.  Further,    in    these    days,    I   would   find   my 
...      ,  ,  heart  to  shut  itself  up  against   the 

My  heart  shut  .  . 

up  against  the  Lord,  and  against  His  holy  word:  I 
have  found  my  unbelief  to  set,  as  it 
were,  the  shoulder  to  the  door,  to  keep  Him  out ; 
and  that  too  even  then,  when  I  have  with  many  a 
bitter  sigh,  cried,  Good  Lord,  break  it  open :  Lord, 
break  these  gates  of  brass,  and  cut  these  bars  of  iron 
asunder.  Psalm  cvii.  16.  Yet  that  word  would 
sometimes  create  in  my  heart  a  peaceable  pause, 
I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  Me. 
Isaiah  xlv.  5. 

82.  But  all  this  while,  as  to  the  act  of  sinning, 

I  was  never  more  tender  than  now: 

My  conscience  . 

sore,  I  go  my  hinder  parts  were  inward :  I  durst 

not  take  a  pin  or  stick,  though  but 
so  big  as  a  straw ;  for  my  conscience  now  was  sore, 
and  would  smart  at  every  touch :  I  could  not  now 
tell  how  to  speak  my  words,  for  fear  I  should  mis- 


ON  A  MIRY  BOG 

place  them.  Oh,  how  gingerly  did  I  then  go,  in 
all  I  did  or  said  !  I  found  myself  as  on  a  miry  bog, 
that  shook  if  I  did  but  stir,  and  was,  as  there,  left 
both  of  God  and  Christ,  and  the  Spirit,  and  all 
good  things. 

83.  But  I  observed,  though  I  was  such  a  great 
sinner    before    conversion,    yet    God    never    much 
charged  the  guilt  of  the  sins  of  my  ignorance  upon 
me ;  only  He  showed  me,  I  was  lost  if  I  had  not 
Christ,  because  I  had  been  a  sinner:  I  saw  that  I 
wanted    a    perfect    righteousness    to    present    me 
without  fault  before  God,  and    this    righteousness 
was  no  where  to  be  found,  but  in  the  Person  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

84.  But  my  original  and  inward  pollution ;  That, 

that  was  my  plague  and  affliction,  that 

J  l  More  loathsome 

I  saw  at  a  dreadful  rate,  always  in  mine  own  eyes 
putting  forth  itself  within  me;  that 
I  had  the  guilt  of,  to  amazement ;  by  reason  of  that, 
I  was  more  loathsome  in  mine  own  eyes  than  was  a 
toad,  and  I  thought  I  was  so  in  God's  eyes  too : 
Sin  and  corruption,  I  said,  would  as  naturally  bubble 
out  of  my  heart,  as  water  would  bubble  out  of  a 
fountain:  I  thought  now,  that  every  one  had  a 
better  heart  than  I  had ;  I  could  have  changed 
heart  with  any  body;  I  thought  none  but  the 
devil  himself  could  equalise  me  for  inward  wicked- 
ness and  pollution  of  mind.  I  fell  therefore  at  the 
sight  of  my  own  vileness  deeply  into  despair ;  for  I 

53 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

concluded,  that  this  condition  that  I  was  in,  could 
not  stand  with  a  state  of  grace.     Sure,  thought  I, 

I  am  forsaken  of  God ;   sure,  I  am 
'Sure,  lam  .  ' 

given  up  to  the       given    up    to    the    devil,    and    to   a 

reprobate    mind :     and    thus    I    con- 
tinued a  long  while,  even  for  some  years  together. 

85.  While  I  was  thus  afflicted  with  the  fears  of 
Two  things          m7  own  damnation,  there  were  two 
make  me  wonder     things  would  make  me  wonder;  the 
one  was,  when  I  saw  old  people  hunting  after  the 
things  of  this  life,  as  if  they  should  live  here  always  : 
the  other  was,  when  I  found  professors  much  dis- 
tressed and  cast  down,   when^they  met  with  .nut- 
ward  losses  ;  as  of  Lusbaiid^Js^dfe^jiiild^etc.     Lord, 
th might  T7  what  a-do  i&Jiere  about  such, little  things 
as  thesej     What  seeking   after  carnal    things,    by_ 
some,  and  what  grief  in  others  for  the.  loss  of  them.! 
if  they  SQ^muA-iabojiir  after,  and  ^shed^  so  many 
tears  for  the  thin^a_ii£_lliis_rjres£nt .Jdfe^lias£..amJ 
to  be-bemoanedp pitied^.  jmdjDrayed  fo_r !    My  soul 
is  dying,  my  soul  is  damning.     Were  my  soul  but 
in  a  good  condition,  and  were  I  but  sure  of  it,  ah ! 
how  rich  should  I   esteem  myself,  though  blessed 
but  with  bread  and  water!    I   should  count   those 
but    small    afflictions,    and    should    bear    them    as 
little     burthens.       A    wounded    spirit     who     can 
bear  / 

86.  And  though  I  was  much  troubled,  and  tossed, 
and  afflicted,  with  the  sight  and  sense  and  terror  of 

54 


TROUBLED  AND  TOSSED 

my  own  wickedness,  yet  I  was  afraid  to  let  this 
sight  and  sense  go  quite  off  my  mind :  for  I  found, 
that  unless  guilt  of  conscience  was 
taken  off  the  right  way,  that  is,  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  a  man  grew  rather 
worse  for  the  loss  of  his  trouble  of 
mind,  than  better.  Wherefore,  if  my  guilt  lay 
hard  upon  me,  then  I  should  cry  that  the  blood  of 
Christ  might  take  it  off:  and  if  it  was  going  off 
without  it  (for  the  sense  of  sin  would  be  sometimes 
as  if  it  would  die,  and  go  quite  away),  then  I  would 
also  strive  to  fetch  it  upon  my  heart  again,  by 
bringing  the  punishment  of  sin  in  hell  fire  upon  my 
spirit ;  and  should  cry,  Lord,  let  it  not  go  off  my 
heart,  but  the  right  way,  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and 
the  application  of  Thy  mercy,  through  Him,  to  my  soul ; 
for  that  scripture  lay  much  upon  me,  without 
shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission.  Heb.  ix.  22.  And 
that  which  made  me  the  more  afraid  of  this,  was, 
because  I  had  seen  some,  who  though  when  they 
were  under  wounds  of  conscience,  would  cry  and 
pray ;  yet  seeking  rather  present  ease  from  their 
trouble,  than  pardon  for  their  sin,  cared  not  how 
they  lost  their  guilt,  so  they  got  it  out  of  their 
mind :  now,  having  got  it  off  the  wrong  way,  it  was 
not  sanctified  unto  them ;  but  they  grew  harder 
and  blinder,  and  more  wicked  after  their  trouble. 
This  made  me  afraid,  and  made  me  cry  to  God  the 
more,  that  it  might  not  be  so  with  me. 

55 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

87.  And  now  I  was  sorry  that  God  had  made  me 

man,  for  I  feared  I  was  a  reprobate  : 

I  was  sorry  that      _ 

God  had  made  I  counted  man  as  unconverted,  the 
most  doleful  of  all  the  creatures. 
Thus  being  afflicted  and  tossed  about  my  sad  con- 
dition, I  counted  myself  alone,  and  above  the  most 
of  men  unblessed. 

88.  Yea,    I   thought   it    impossible   that   ever  I 

should  attain  to  so  much  goodness  of 
6         heart,  as  to  thank  God  that  He  had 


fishesS'etcrdS'  made  me  a  man.  Man  indeed  is 
the  most  noble  by  creation,  of  all 
creatures  in  the  visible  world;  but  by  sin  he  has 
made  himself  the  most  ignoble.  The  beasts,  birds, 
fishes,  etc.  I  blessed  their  condition  ;  for  they  had 
not  a  sinful  nature  ;  they  were  not  obnoxious  to  the 
wrath  of  God;  they  were  not  to  go  to  hell-fire 
after  death;  I  could  therefore  have  rejoiced,  had 
my  condition  been  as  any  of  theirs. 

89.  In  this  condition  I  went  a  great  while,  but 
I  get  comfort  by  when  comforting  time  was  come,  I 
a  sermon  heard  one  preach  a  sermon  on  these 

words  in  the  song,  Song  iv.  i,  Behold,  thou  art 
fair,  my  love,  behold,  thou  art  fair.  But  at  that  time 
he  made  these  two  words,  my  love,  his  chief  and 
subject  matter:  from  which,  after  he  had  a  little 
opened  the  text,  he  observed  these  several  con- 
clusions :  i.  That  the  church,  and  so  every  saved  soul, 
is  Christ's  love,  when  loveless.  2.  Christ's  love  with- 

56 


'THOU  ART  MY  LOVE' 

out  a  cause.  3.  Christ }s  love,  when  hated  of  the  world. 
4.  Christ's  love,  when  under  temptation  and  under 
destruction.  5.  Christ's  love,  from  first  to  last. 

90.  But  I  got  nothing  by  what  he  said  at  present ; 
only  when  he  came  to  the  application  of  the  fourth 
particular,   this  was  the  word  he  said ;  If  it  be  so, 
that   the   saved   soul  is    Christ's    love,   when    under 
temptation  and  desertion ;  then  poor  tempted  soul,  when  } 
thou  art  assaulted,  and  afflicted  with  temptations,  and 
the  hidings  of  God's  face,  yet  think  on  these  two  words, 
cMy  love/  still 

91.  So  as  I  was  going  home,  these  words  came 
again  into  my  thoughts;  and  I  well     Twowords> 
remember,  as  they  came  in,  I   said     '  my  love,'  make 
thus  in  my  heart,  What  shall  I  get 

by  thinking  on  these  two  words  ?  This  thought  had 
no  sooner  passed  through  my  heart,  but  these 
words  began  thus  to  kindle  in  my  spirit,  Thou  art 
My  Love,  thou  art  My  Dove,  twenty  times  together ; 
and  still  as  they  ran  in  my  mind,  they  waxed 
stronger  and  warmer,  and  began  to  make  me  look 
up;  but  being  as  yet,  between  hope  and  fear,  I 
still  replied  in  my  heart,  But  is  it  true,  but  is  it 
true?  At  which  that  sentence  fell  upon  me,  He 
wist  not  that  it  was  true,  which  was  done  by  the 
Angel.  Acts  xii.  9.  , 

92.  Then  I  began   to   give   place  to  the  word 
which  with  power,  did  over  and  over  make  this  joy- 
ful sound  within  my  soul,  c  Thou  art  My  Love,  thou 

57 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

art  My  Love,  and  nothing  shall  separate  thee  from  My 

My  heart  full  of     Love'     And  with  that  my  heart  was 
comfort  and  filled  full  of  comfort  and  hope,  and 

now  I  could  believe  that  my  sins 
should  be  forgiven  me ;  yea,  I  was  now  so  taken 
with  the  love  and  mercy  of  God,  that  I  remember 
I  could  not  tell  how  to  contain  till  I  got  home :  I 
thought  I  could  have  spoken  of  His  love,  and  have 
told  of  His  mercy  to  me,  even  to  the  very  crows 
that  sat  upon  the  ploughed  lands  before  me,  had 
they  been  capable  to  have  understood  me :  where- 
fore I  said  in  my  soul,  with  much  gladness,  Well, 
T  would  I  had  a  pen  and  ink  here,  I  would  write  this 
down  before  I  go  any  farther ;  for  surely  I  will  not 
forget  this  forty  years  hence.  But,  alas!  within 
less  than  forty  days  I  began  to  question  all  again ; 
which  made  me  begin  to  question  all  still. 

93.  Yet  still  at  times  I  was  helped  to  believe, 

that  it  was  a  true  manifestation  of 

A  text  warns 

me  of  a  coming      grace   unto  my  soul,  though  I  had 

lost  much  of  the  life  and  favour  of 
it.  Now  about  a  week  or  a  fortnight  after  this  I 
was  much  followed  by  this  scripture,  Simon, 
Simon;  behold,  Satan  hath  d'esired  to  have  you, 
Luke  xxii.  3 1 ,  and  sometimes  it  would  sound  so  loud 
within  me,  yea,  and  as  it  was,  call  so  strongly  after 
me,  that  once,  above  all  the  rest,  I  turned  my  head 
over  my  shoulder,  thinking  verily  that  some  man 
had  behind  me,  called  me  ;  being  at  a  great  distance, 

58 


A  VERY  GREAT  STORM 

methought  he  called  so  loud :  it  came,  as  I  have 
thought  since,  to  have  stirred  me  up  to  prayer,  and 
to  watchfulness :  it  came  to  acquaint  me,  that  a 
cloud  and  a  storm  was  coming  down  upon  me :  but 
I  understood  it  not. 

94.  Also,  as  I  remember,  that  time  that  it  called 
to  me  so  loud,  was  the  last  time  that     The  voice  loudly 
it   sounded  in  mine  ears;    but  me-     calls  to  me 
thinks  I  hear  still  with  what  a  loud  voice  these 
words,    Simon,    Simon,    sounded    in    mine    ears.      I 
thought  verily,  as  I  have  told  you,  that  somebody 
had  called  after  me,  that  was  half  a  mile  behind  me : 
and  although  that  was  not  my  name,  yet  it  made 
me  suddenly  look  behind  me,  believing  that  he  that 
called  so  loud,  meant  me. 

95.  But  so  foolish  was  I,  and  ignorant,  that  I 
knew  not  the  reason  of  this  sound ; 

x     i-   i  T   j  •  j  i_      i  i  r      i  I  muse  and 

(which  as  I  did  both  see  and  feel  soon  wonder  as  to  the 
after,  was  sent  from  heaven  as  an 
alarm,  to  awaken  me  to  provide  for  what  was  coming,) 
only  I  should  muse  and  wonder  in  my  mind,  to  think 
what  should  be  the  reason  of  this  scripture,  and 
that  at  this  rate,  so  often  and  so  loud,  should  still 
be  sounding  and  rattling  in  mine  ears :  but,  as  I 
said  before,  I  soon  after  perceived  the  end  of  God 
therein. 

96.  For,  about    the   space  of  a  month  after,  a 
very  great  storm  came  down  upon  me,  which  handled 
me   twenty  times  worse   than   all  I   had   met   with 

59 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

before ;  it  came  stealing  upon  me,  now  by  one  piece, 

A  very  great  then   b?  another  :  First>  a11  m7  com- 

storm  came  fort    was    taken  from     me  ;    then 

down  upon  me          ,     .  ,  c 

darkness    seized  upon    me ;     after 

which,  whole  floods  of  blasphemies,  both  against 
God,  Christ,  and  the  scriptures,  were  poured  upon 
my  spirit,  to  my  great  confusion  and  astonishment. 
These  blasphemous  thoughts  were  such  as  stirred 
up  questions  in  me  against  the  very  being  of  God, 
and  of  His  only  beloved  Son :  As,  whether  there 
were  in  truth,  a  God  or  Christ  ?  And  whether  the 
holy  scriptures  were  not  rather  a  fable,  and  cunning 
story,  than  the  holy  and  pure  word  of  God  ? 

97-  The  tempter  would  also  much  assault  me  with 
The  tempter  this,  HffW  can  you  tell  but  that  the 

assaults  me  Turks  had  as  good  scriptures  to  prove 

their  Mahomet  the  Saviour,  as  we  have  to  prove  our 
Jesus  is?  And,  could  I  think,  that  so  many  ten 
thousands,  in  so  many  countries  and  kingdoms,  should 
be  without  the  knowledge  of  the  right  way  to  heaven, 
(if  there  were  indeed  a  heaven)  ;  and  that  we  only, 
who  live  in  a  corner  of  the  earth,  should  alone  be  blessed 
therewith  ?  Every  one  doth  think  his  own  religion 
rightest,  both  Jews  and  Moors,  and  Pagans;  and  how 
if  all  our  faith,  and  Christ,  and  scriptures,  should  be 
but  a  think  so  too  ? 

98.  Sometimes  I  have  endeavoured  to  argue 
against  these  suggestions,  and  to  set  some  of  the 
sentences  of  blessed  Paul  against  them  ;  but  alas  !  I 

60 


SATANIC  SUGGESTIONS 

quickly  felt,  when  I  thus  did,  such  arguings  as  these 
would  return  again  upon  me,  Though  l  setthe  ^essed 
we  made  so  great  a  matter  of  Paul,  Paul  against  his 
and  of  his  words,  yet  how  could  I  tell, 
but  that  in  very  deed,  he  being  a  subtle  and  cunning 
man,  might  give  himself  up  to  deceive  with  strong 
delusions :  and  also  take  the  pains  and  travel,  to  undo 
and  destroy  his  fellows. 

99.  These  suggestions,  (with  many  others  which 
at  this  time  I  may  not,  and  dare  not     Thesesu^es- 
utter,  neither  by  word  or  pen,)  did     tions  continue 

,  :  '  .  .          with  fiery  force 

make  such  a  seizure  upon  my  spirit, 
and  did  so  overweigh  my  heart,  both  with  their 
number,  continuance,  and  fiery  force,  that  I  felt  as 
if  there  were  nothing  else  but  these  from  morning 
to  night  within  me  ;  and  as  though  indeed  there 
could  be  room  for  nothing  else ;  and  also  concluded, 
that  God  had,  in  very  wrath  to  my  soul,  given  me 
up  to  them,  to  be  carried  away  with  them,  as  with  a 
mighty  whirlwind. 

100.  Only  by  the  distaste  that  they  gave  unto 

my  spirit,  I  felt  there  was  something  in 

1  /      ,  7  ,  *  Something  in 

me  that  refused  to  embrace  them.  But  me  that  refused 
this  consideration  I  then  only  had,  to  embrace  them 
when  God  gave  me  leave  to  swallow  my  spittle  j 
otherwise  the  noise,  and  strength,  and  force  of  these 
temptations  would  drown  and  overflow,  and  as  it 
were,  bury  all  such  thoughts,  or  the  remembrance 
of  any  such  thing.  While  I  was  in  this  temptation, 

61 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

I  often  found  my  mind  suddenly  put  upon  it  to 
curse  and  swear,  or  to  speak  some  grievous 
thing  against  God,  or  Christ  His  Son,  and  of  the 
scriptures. 

101.  Now  I  thought,  surely  I  am  possessed  of  the 
I  am  possessed       devil:  at  other  times,  again,  I  thought 
of  the  devil  j  should  be  bereft  of  my  wits;   for 
instead  of  lauding  and  magnifying  God  the  Lord, 
with  others,  if  I  have  but  heard  Him  spoken  of, 
presently  some  most  horrible  blasphemous  thought 
or  other  would  bolt  out  of  my  heart  against  Him  ; 
so  that  whether  I  did  think  that  God  was,  or  again 
did  think  there  was  no  such  thing,  no  love,    nor 
peace,  nor  gracious  disposition  could  I  feel  within 
me. 

102.  These  things  did  sink  me  into  very  deep 
I  sink  into  very      despair ;   for   I   concluded   that  such 
deep  despair   '         thjngs    coul(j   not    possibly   be    found 

amongst  them  that  loved  God.  I  often,  when  these 
temptations  had  been  with  force  upon  me,  did  com- 
pare myself  to  the  case  of  such  a  child,  whom  some 
gipsy  hath  by  force  took  up  in  her  arms,  and  is 
carrying  from  friend  and  country.  Kick  sometimes 
I  did,  and  also  shriek  and  cry ;  but  yet  I  was  bound 
in  the  wings  of  the  temptation,  and  the  wind  would 
carry  me  away.  I  thought  also  of  Saul,  and  of  the 
evil  spirit  that  did  possess  him :  and  did  greatly  fear 
that  my  condition  was  the  same  with  that  of  his. 
i  Sam.  x. 

62 


PROVOKED  BY  THE  TEMPTER 

103.  In  these  days,  when  I  have  heard  others 
talk  of  what  was  the  sin  against  the 

Holy  Ghost,  then  would  the  tempter 

so  provoke  me  to  desire  to  sin  that     against  the  Holy 

Ghost 
sin,  that  I  was  as  if  I  could  not,  must 

not,  neither  should  be  quiet  until  I  had  committed  it ; 
now  no  sin  would  serve  but  that.  If  it  were  to  be 
committed  by  speaking  of  such  a  word,  then  I  have 
been  as  if  my  mouth  would  have  spoken  that  word, 
whether  I  would  or  no ;  and  in  so  strong  a  measure 
was  this  temptation  upon  me,  that  often  I  have  been 
ready  to  clap  my  hand  under  my  chin,  to  hold  my 
mouth  from  opening;  and  to  that  end  also,  I  have 
had  thoughts  at  other  times,  to  leap  with  my  head 
downward,  into  some  muckhill-hole  or  other,  to  keep 
my  mouth  from  speaking. 

1 04.  Now  again  I  beheld  the  condition  of  the  dog 
and  toad,  and  counted  the  estate  of 

every  thing  that  God  had  made,  far 
better  than  this  dreadful  state  of 
mine,  and  such  as  my  companions  were. 
Yea,  gladly  would  I  have  been  in  the  condition  of  a 
dog  or  horse  :  for  I  knew  they  had  no  souls  to  perish 
under  the  everlasting  weight  of  hell,  or  sin,  as  mine 
was  like  to  do.  Nay,  and  though  I  saw  this,  felt 
this,  and  was  broken  to  pieces  with  it ;  yet  that 
which  added  to  my  sorrow  was,  I  could  not  find, 
that  with  all  my  soul  I  did  desire  deliverance. 
That  scripture  did  also  tear  and  rend  my  soul  in  the 


X 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

midst  of  these  distractions,  The  wicked  are  like 
the  troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  rest,  whose  waters 
cast  up  mire  and  dirt.  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my 
God,  to  the  wicked.  Isa.  Ivii.  20,  21. 

105.  And  now  my  heart  was,  at  times,  exceeding 

M  heart  at  ^arc^ '  ^  ^  would  have  given  a  thousand 
times  was  ex-  pounds  for  a  tear,  I  could  not  shed 

ceeding  hard  .  ,     . 

one  :  no,  nor  sometimes  scarce  desire 
to  shed  one.  I  was  much  dejected,  to  think  that 
this  would  be  my  lot.  I  saw  some  could  mourn  and 
lament  their  sin ;  and  others  again,  could  rejoice  and 
bless  God  for  Christ;  and  others  again,  could 
quietly  talk  of,  and  with  gladness  remember  the 
word  of  God ;  while  I  only  was  in  the  storm  or 
tempest.  This  much  sunk  me,  I  thought  my  con- 
dition was  alone,  I  should  therefore  much  bewail 
my  hard  hap,  but  get  out  of,  or  get  rid  of  these 
things,  I  could  not. 

1 06.  While  this  temptation  lasted,  which  was  about 

a  year,  I  could  attend  upon  none  of  the 
These  tempta-  J  rV*  *  .« 

tions  lasted  ordinances  ot  God,  but  with  sore  and 

about  ayear          ^^  affliction>     Yea,  then  I  was  most 

distressed  with  blasphemies.  If  I  had  been  hearing 
the  word,  then  uncleanness,  blasphemies  and  despair 
would  hold  me  a  captive  there  :  if  I  have  been  reading, 
then  sometimes  I  had  sudden  thoughts  to  question 
all  I  read:  sometimes  again,  my  mind  would  be 
so  strangely  snatched  away,  and  possessed  with  other 
things,  that  I  have  neither  known,  nor  regarded,  nor 

64 


WANDERING  THOUGHTS 

remembered  so  much  as  the  sentence  that  but  now 
I  have  read. 

107.  In  prayer  also  I  have  been  greatly  troubled  at 
this  time  ;  sometimes  I  have  thought       ^^ 

I  have  felt  him  behind  me  pulling  my     troubled  in 
clothes  :  he  would  be  also  continually 
at  me  in  time  of  prayer,  to  have  done,  break  off, 
make  haste,  you  have  prayed  enough,  and  stay  no 
longer ;   still  drawing  my  mind  away.      Sometimes 
also  he  would  cast  in  such  wicked  thoughts  as  these ; 
that  I  must  pray  to  him,  or  for  him :  I  have  thought 
sometimes  of  that,  Fall  down ;  or,  if  thou  wilt  fall 
down  and  worship  me.     Matt.  iii.  9. 

1 08.  Also,  when  because  I  have  had  wandering 
thoughts  in  the  time  of  this  duty,  I  have  laboured  to 
compose  my  mind,  and  fix  it  upon  God ;  then  with 
great  force  hath  the  tempter  laboured  to  distract  me, 
and  confound  me,  and  to  turn  away  my  mind,  by 
presenting  to  my  heart  and  fancy,  the  form  of  a 
bush,  a  bull,  a  besom,  or  the  like,  as  if  I  should 
pray  to  these :  To  these  he  would  also  (at  sometimes 
especially)  so  hold  my  mind,  that  I  was  as  if  I  could 
think  of  nothing  else,  or  pray  to  nothing  else  but  to 
these,  or  such  as  they. 

109.  Yet  at  times  I  should  have  some  strong  and 
heart-affecting  apprehensions  of  God,  and  the  reality 
of  the  truth  of  His  gospel.    But,  oh !  how  would  my 
heart,  at  such  times,  put  forth  itself  with  unexpress- 
ible  groanings.     My  whole  soul  was  then  in  every 

65 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

word  ;  I  should  cry  with  pangs  after  God,  that  He 

would    be    merciful    unto   me;    but 

forth  ftseifPwith      then  I  should  be  daunted  again  with 


such  conceits  as  tnese  :  I  should  think 
that  God  did  mock  at  these  my  prayers, 
saying,  and  that  in  the  audience  of  the  holy  angels, 
This  poor  simple  wretch  doth  hanker  after  Me,  as  if  I 
had  nothing  to  do  with  My  mercy,  but  to  bestow  it  on 
such  as  he.  Alas,  poor  soul  !  how  art  thou  deceived!  It 
is  not  for  such  as  thee  to  have  favour  with  the  Highest. 
1  10.  Then  hath  the  tempter  come  upon  me,  also, 
Thetemptersaid,  with  such  discouragements  as  these: 

'You  are  very       You   are   very   hot  for  mercy,   but  I 

hot  for  mercy,  .  J     .        J 

but  I  will  cool        wilt  cool  you  ;  this  frame  shall  not  last 

always  :  many  have  been  as  hot  as 
you  for  a  spurt,  but  I  have  quenched  their  zeal 
(and  with  this,  such  and  such,  who  were  fallen  off, 
would  be  set  before  mine  eyes).  Then  I  should  be 
afraid  that  I  should  do  so  too  :  But,  thought  I,  I  am 
glad  this  comes  into  my  mind  :  well,  I  will  watch, 
and  take  what  care  I  can.  Though  you  do,  said 
Satan,  /  shall  be  too  hard  for  you  ;  /  will  cool  you 
insensibly,  by  degrees,  by  little  and  little.  What  care 
I,  saith  he,  though  I  be  seven  years  in  chilling  your 
heart,  if  I  can  do  it  at  last  ?  Continual  rocking  will 
lull  a  crying  child  asleep  :  1  will  ply  it  close,  but  I  will 
have  my  end  accomplished.  Though  you  be  burning 
hot  at  present,  I  can  pull  you  from  this  Jire  ;  I  shall 
have  you  cold  before  it  be  long. 

66 


SUPPORTS  IN  TEMPTATION 

in.  These  things  brought  me  into  great  straits; 
for  as  I  at  present  could  not  find  my-  j  was  brought 
self  fit  for  present  death,  so  I  thought,  iato  £reat  straits 
to  live  long,  would  make  me  yet  more  unfit;  for 
time  would  make  me  forget  all,  and  wear  even  the 
remembrance  of  the  evil  of  sin,  the  worth  of  heaven, 
and  the  need  I  had  of  the  blood  of  Christ  to  wash 
me,  both  out  of  mind  and  thought:  but  I  thank 
Christ  Jesus,  these  things  did  not  at  present  make 
me  slack  my  crying,  but  rather  did  put  me  more 

upon  it  (like  her  who  met  with  the 

,   ,  ^     .  These  things  did 

adulterer,  Deut.  xxn.  20),  in  which     not  make  me 

days  that  was  a  good  word  to  me,  slack  my  crymg 
after  I  had  suffered  these  things  a  while: — 1  am 
persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  etc.,  shall  be 
able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  Rom.  viii.  38,^39.  And  now 
I  hoped  long  life  would  not  destroy  me,  nor  make 
me  miss  of  heaven. 

112.  Yet  I  had  some  supports  in  this  temptation, 
though  they  were  then  all  questioned 

*  ,         .       -r        ...  i       r  The  scriptures 

by  me ;   that  in  Jer.  ///.   at  the  first     gave  me  support 

was  something  to  me;    and   so  was     tions7tempta~ 
the  consideration  of  verse  5  of  that 
chapter;  that  though  we  have  spoken  and  done  as 
evil   things  as  we  could,   yet  we  should  cry  unto 
God,  My  Father,  Thou  art  the  Guide  of  my  youth, 
and  shall  return  unto  Him. 

1 1 3.  I  had,  also,  once  a  sweet  glance  from  that 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

in  2  Con  v.  21  :  For  He  hath  made  Him  to  be  sin 

for  us,  Who  knew  no  sin.  that  we 
I  receive  com-  •  i  ,  i  i  i  •  /  /.  ^,  , 

fort  whilst  in  a       might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 

neighbour's  in  Ulmt     j  remember  that  one  day, 

as  I  was  sitting  in  a  neighbour's 
house,  and  there  very  sad  at  the  consideration  of 
my  many  blasphemies;  and  as  I  was  saying  in 
my  mind,  What  ground  have  I  to  say  that,  who 
have  been  so  vile  and  abominable,  should  ever  inherit 
eternal  life  ?  That  word  came  suddenly  upon  me, 
What  shall  we  say  to  these  things  ?  If  God  be  for  us, 
who  can  be  against  us?  Rom.  viii.  31.  That  also 
was  an  help  unto  me,  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live 
also.  John  xiv.  19.  But  these  words  were  but 
hints,  touches,  and  short  visits,  though  very  sweet 
when  present;  only  they  lasted  not;  but,  like  to 
Peter's  sheet,  of  a  sudden  were  caught  up  from  me, 
to  heaven  again.  Acts  x.  16. 

114.  But  afterwards  the  Lord  did  more  fully  and 

graciously  discover  Himself  unto  me, 

Afterwards  the  ,.,,,.,  , 

temptation  was  and  indeed,  did  quite,  not  only  de- 
liver me  from  the  guilt  that,  by  these 
things  was  laid  upon  my  conscience,  but  also  from 
the  very  filth  thereof;  for  the  temptation  was 
removed,  and  I  was  put  into  my  right  mind  again, 
as  other  Christians  were. 

1 15.  I  remember  that  one  day,  as  I  was  travelling 
into  the  country,  and  musing  on  the  wickedness  and 
blasphemy  of  my  heart,  and  considering  the  enmity 

68 


BY  THE  FIRE,  MUSING 

that  was  in  me  to  God,  that  scripture  came  into  my 
mind,  Having  made  peace  through  the     l  have  a      d 
blood  of  His  cross.     Col.  i.  20.     By     day  in  the 
which  I  was  made  to  see,  both  again 
and  again,  that  God  and  my  soul  were  friends  by 
His  blood  ;  yea,  I  saw  that  the  justice  of  God,  and 
my  sinful  soul  could  embrace  and  kiss  each  other, 
through  His  blood.     This  was  a  good  day  to  me  ;  I 
hope  I  shall  never  forget  it. 

1  16.  At  another  time,  as  I  sat   by  the  fire   in 
my  house,  and  was  musing  on  my 
wretchedness,   the   Lord   made   that 


also  a  precious  word  unto  me,  For  as-     with  solid  joy 

and  peace 
much  then  as  the  children  are  partakers 

of  flesh  and  blood,  He  also  Himself  likewise  took  part  of 
the  same,  that  through  death  He  might  destroy  him  that 
had  the  power  of  death,  that  Is  the  devil  ;  and  de- 
liver those  who  through  fear  of  death,  were  all  their 
lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  Heb.  ii.  14,  15.  I 
thought  that  the  glory  of  these  words  was  then  so 
weighty  on  me,  that  I  was  both  once  and  twice 
ready  to  swoon  as  I  sate  ;  yet  not  with  grief  and 
trouble,  but  with  solid  joy  and  peace. 

117.  At  this  time  also  I  sate  under  the  ministry 
of  holy  Mr  Giffbrd,  whose  doctrine,     The  ministr^ 
by  God's  grace,  was  much  for  my     of  holy  Mr 

LviK  S^-  j       •  u       Giffordwas 

stability.     This  man   made  it   much     much  for  my 

his  business  to  deliver  the  people  of    stabuity 

God  from  all  those   false  and  unsound  tests,  that 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

by  nature  we  are  prone  to.  He  would  bid  us  take 
special  heed,  that  we  took  not  up  any  truth  upon 
trust ;  as  from  this,  or  that,  or  any  other  man  or 
men;  but  to  cry  mightily  to  God,  that  He  would 
convince  us  of  the  reality  thereof,  and  set  us  down 
therein  by  His  own  Spirit  in  the  holy  word;  For, 
said  he,  if  you  do  otherwise,  when  temptations  come,  if 
strongly,  you  not  having  received  them  with  evidence 
from  heaven,  will  find  you  want  that  help  and  strength 
now  to  resist,  that  once  you  thought  you  had. 

1 1 8.  This  was  as  seasonable  to  my  soul,  as  the 
A  seasonable  former  and  latter  rains  in  their 
word  to  my  soul  season  (for  I  had  found,  and  that 
by  sad  experience,  the  truth  of  these  his  words: 
for  I  had  felt  no  man  can  say,  especially  when 
tempted  by  the  devil,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  but 
by  the  Holy  Ghost).  Wherefore  I  found  my  soul, 
through  grace,  very  apt  to  drink  in  this  doctrine, 
and  to  incline  to  pray  to  God,  that  in  nothing  that 
pertained  to  God's  glory,  and  my  own  eternal  happi- 
ness, He  would  suffer  me  to  be  without  the  con- 
firmation thereof  from  heaven;  for  now  I  saw 
clearly,  there  was  an  exceeding  difference  betwixt 
the  notion  of  the  flesh  and  blood,  and  the  revelations 
of  God  in  heaven :  also  a  great  difference  betwixt 
that  faith  that  is  feigned,  and  according  to  man's 
wisdom,  and  that  which  comes  by  a  man's  being 
born  thereto  of  God.  Matt.  xvi.  15;  i  John 
v.  i. 

70 


OUT  OF  THE  GRAVE'S  MOUTH 

119.  But,  oh!  now,  how  was  my  soul  led  from 
truth  to  truth  by  God !     Even  from 

the  birth  and  cradle  of  the  Son  of    from  truth  to 
God,    to   His  accession,  and  second 
coming  from  heaven  to  judge  the  world ! 

120.  Truly,  I  then  found,  upon  this  account,  the 
great  God  was  very  good  unto  me ; 

for,  to  my  remembrance,  there  was 
not  any  thing  that  I  then  cried  unto 
God  to  make  known,  and  reveal 
unto  me,  but  He  was  pleased  to  do  it  for  me ;  I 
mean,  not  one  part  of  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
but  I  was  orderly  led  into  it :  methought  I  saw 
with  great  evidence,  from  the  relation  of  the  four 
evangelists,  the  wonderful  work  of  God,  in  giving 
Jesus  Christ  to  save  us,  from  His  conception  and 
birth,  even  to  His  second  coming  to  judgment :  me- 
thought I  was  as  if  I  had  seen  Him  born,  as  if  I 
had  seen  Him  grow  up ;  as  if  I  had  seen  Him  walk 
through  this  world,  from  the  cradle  to  the  cross; 
to  which  also,  when  He  came,  I  saw  how  gently  He 
gave  Himself  to  be  hanged,  and  nailed  on  it  for  my 
sins  and  wicked  doings.  Also  as  I  was  musing  on 
this  His  progress,  that  dropped  on  my  spirit,  He  was 
ordained  for  the  slaughter,  i  Peter  i.  12,  20. 

121.  When    I    have    considered   also   the    truth 
of  His   resurrection,    and    have    remembered    that 
word,    Touch    Me  not,    Mary,    etc.,     I    have    seen 
as  if  He  had   leaped   out   of  the    grave's   mouth, 

7' 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

for  joy  that  He  was  risen  again,  and  had  got  the 

conquest    over    our    dreadful    foes. 
The  scriptures          T  ,  T    ,  ,         .         , 

confirm  me  in         John   xx.    17.     I  have    also   in   the 


sPirit>  see*  Him  a  man,  on  the  right 
hand  of  God  the  Father  for  me  ;  and 
have  seen  the  manner  of  His  coming  from  heaven, 
to  judge  the  world  with  glory,  and  have  been  con- 
firmed in  these  things  by  these  scriptures  following, 
Acts  i.  9,   10,  and  vii.  56,  and  x.  42;  Heb.  vii.  24 
and  ix.  28;  Rev.  i.  18;   i  Thess.  iv.  17,  18.     .. 
122.  Once  I  was  troubled  to  know  whether  the 
Lord  Jesus  was  man  as  well  as  God, 

The  divinity  and  j  Xj  n-  j    .      i 

manhood  of  the      and  God  as  well  as  man  :  and  truly, 


in  those  da7s?  let  men  Sa7  what  the7 
would,  unless  I  had  it  with  evidence 

from  heaven,  all  was  nothing  to  me  ;  I  counted 
myself  not  set  down  in  any  truth  of  God.  Well, 
I  was  much  troubled  about  this  point,  and  could  not 
tell  how  to  be  resolved  ;  at  last,  that  in  Rev.  v.  6 
came  into  my  mind  :  And  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne,  and  of  the  four  beasts,  and  in  the 
midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb,  as  it  had  been  slain. 
In  the  midst  of  the  throne,  thought  I,  there  is  the 
Godhead  ;  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  there  is  His 
manhood  ;  but,  oh  !  methought  this  did  glister  !  It 
was  a  goodly  touch,  and  gave  me  sweet  satisfaction. 
That  other  scripture  also  did  help  me  much  in  this> 
For  unto  us  a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given  ; 
and  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder  :  and 

72 


THE  QUAKER  CONTROVERSY 

His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the 
Mighty  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of 
Peace,  etc.  Isa.  ix.  6. 

1 23.  Also  besides  these  teachings  of  God  in  His 
word,   the  Lord   made   use  of  two     Iamconfirmed 

things  to  confirm  me  in  this  truth;     in  the  truth  by 

.  the  errors  of  the 

the    one    was    the     errors    of    the     Quakers  and  the 

Quakers,   and    the    other   was    the     S^0*"8111 
guilt  of  sin ;   for  as  the  Quakers  did  oppose   this 
truth,  so  God  did  the  more  confirm  me  in  it,  by 
leading  me  into  the  scripture  that  did  wonderfully 
maintain  it. 

124.  The  errors  that  this  people  then  maintained, 
were : — 

4 1.  That  the  holy  scriptures  were  not  the  word 
of  God. 

4  2.  That  every  man  in  the  world  had  the  spirit 
of  Christ,  grace,  faith,  etc. 

'3.  That  Christ  Jesus,  as  crucified,  and  dying 
sixteen  hundred  years  ago,  did  not  satisfy  divine 
justice  for  the  sins  of  the  people. 

4  4.  That  Christ's  flesh  and  blood  were  within 
the  saints. 

c  5.  That  the  bodies  of  the  good  and  bad  that 
are  buried  in  the  church-yard,  shall  not  arise  again. 

'  6.  That  the  resurrection  is  past  with  good  men 
already. 

'7.  That  that  man  Jesus,  that  was  crucified 
between  two  thieves,  on  mount  Calvary,  in  the 

73 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

land    of   Canaan,    by  Jerusalem,  was  not  ascended 
above  the  starry  heavens. 

4  8.  That  He  should  not,  even  the  same  Jesus 
that  died  by  the  hands  of  the  Jews,  come  again  at 
the  last  day ;  and  as  man,  judge  all  nations,'  etc. 

125.  Many   more    vile   and    abominable   things 
were  in  those  days  fomented  by  them,   by  which 
I  was  driven  to  a  more  narrow  search  of  the  scriptures, 
and   was   through   their  light    and  testimony,  not 
only  enlightened,  but  greatly  confirmed  and  comforted 
in  the  truth :  And,  as  I  said,  the  guilt  of  sin  did 
help  me  much ;  for  still  as  that  would  come  upon 
me,  the  blood  of  Christ  did  take  it  off  again,  and 
again,  and  again;  and  that  too  sweetly,  according 
to  the   scripture.     0  friends  !  cry  to  God  to  reveal 
Jesus  Christ   unto  you]    there  is  none  teacheth  like 
Him. 

126.  It  would  be  too  long  here  to  stay,  to  tell 

The  thin  s  of  ^ou  *n  Part^cular?  now  God  did  set  me 
Christ  openfed  down  in  all  the  things  of  Christ,  and 
how  He  did,  that  He  might  so  do, 
lead  me  into  His  words ;  yea,  and  also  how  He  did 
open  them  unto  me,  and  make  them  shine  before 
me,  and  cause  them  to  dwell  with  me,  talk  with 
me,  and  comfort  me  over  and  over,  both  of  His 
own  being,  and  the  being  of  His  Son,  and  Spirit, 
and  word,  and  gospel. 

127.  Only  this,  as  I  said  before,  I  will  say  unto 
you  again,  that  in  general,  He  was  pleased  to  take 

74 


LONGING  FOR  THE  LAST  DAY 

this  course  with  me  ;    first,    to    suffer   me    to   be 
afflicted  with  temptations  concerning 
them,   and   then   reveal    them    unto 


me:  as  sometimes  I  should  lie  under     afflicted  with 
..     r         .  temptations 

great  guilt  for  sm,  even  crushed  to 
the  ground  therewith  ;  and  then  the  Lord  would  show 
me  the  death  of  Christ  ;  yea,  so  sprinkle  my  con- 
science with  His  blood,  that  I  should  find,  and  that 
before  I  was  aware,  that  in  that  conscience,  where 
but  just  now  did  reign  and  rage  the  law,  even  there 
would  rest  and  abide  the  peace  and  love  of  God. 
through  Christ. 

128.  Now  I  had  an  evidence,  as  I  thought,  of  my 
salvation,  from   heaven,    with  many 

11  if  i_         .        .         Ihadanevi- 

golden  seals  thereon,  all  hanging  in  dencepfmy 
my  sight.  Now  could  I  remember  salvatlon 
this  manifestation,  and  the  other  discovery  of  grace, 
with  comfort;  and  should  often  long  and  desire 
that  the  last  day  were  come,  that  I  might  be  for 
ever  inflamed  with  the  sight,  and  joy,  and  com- 
munion of  Him,  Whose  head  was  crowned  with 
thorns,  Whose  face  was  spit  upon,  and  body  broken, 
and  soul  made  an  offering  for  my  sins.  For  whereas 
before  I  lay  continually  trembling  at  the  mouth  of 
hell,  now  methought  I  was  got  so  far  therefrom, 
that  I  could  not,  when  I  looked  back,  scarce  discern 
it  !  And  oh  !  thought  I,  that  I  were  fourscore  years 
old  now,  that  I  might  die  quickly,  that  my  soul 
might  be  gone  to  rest. 

75 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

129.  But  before  I  had  got  thus  far  out  of  these 

my  temptations,   I  did  greatly  lone: 
I  long  to  see 
some  ancient         to   see   some    ancient    godly    mans 


expenence  experience,     who     had     writ    some 

hundreds  of  years  before  I  was  born ; 
for  those  who  had  writ  in  our  days,  I  thought  (but 
I  desire  them  now  to  pardon  me)  that  they  had  writ 
only  that  which  others  felt ;  or  else  had,  through 
the  strength  of  their  wits  and  parts,  studied  to 
answer  such  objections  as  they  perceived  others 
were  perplexed  with,  without  going  down  themselves 
into  the  deep.  Well,  after  many  such  longings  in 
my  mind,  the  God,  in  Whose  hands  are  all  our  days 
and  ways,  did  cast  into  my  hand  (one  day)  a  book 
of  Martin  Luther  s;  it  was  his  Comment  on  the 
Galatians\  it  also  was  so  old,  that  it  was  ready 
to  fall  piece  from  piece  if  I  did  but  turn  it  over. 
Now  I  was  pleased  much  that  such  an  old  book 

God  did  cast  into      had  fallen  int°   m7   hand>    the   which 
my  hand  when  I  had  but  a  little  way  perused, 

Luther's  _    _         _  ...         .      ,  . 

Comment  on  I  found  my  condition  in  his  experi- 
ence, so  largely  and  profoundly 
handled,  as  if  his  book  had  been  written  out  of  my 
heart.  This  made  n£  marvel:  for  thus  thought  I, 
This  man  could  not  know  any  thing  of  the  state  of 
Christians  now,  but  must  needs  write  and  speak  the 
experience  of  former  days. 

130.  Besides,  he  doth  most  gravely  also  in  that 
book,    debate   of    the    rise   of   these    temptations, 


LUTHER  ON  GALATIANS 

namely,  blasphemy,  desperation,  and  the  like ; 
showing  that  the  law  of  Moses,  as  Ipreferthisbook 
well  as  the  devil,  death,  and  hell,  before  all  the 

,       ,  i        ,       i  books  (except 

hath  a  very  great  hand  therein:  the  Bible) that 
the  which,  at  first,  was  very  strange  ever  l  haveseen 
to  me ;  but  considering  and  watching,  I  found  it  so 
indeed.  But  of  particulars  here,  I  intend  nothing; 
only  this  methinks  I  must  let  fall  before  all  men — 
I  do  prefer  this  book  of  Martin  Luther  upon  the 
Galatlans  (excepting  the  Holy  Bible)  before  all 
the  books  that  ever  I  had  seen,  as  most  fit  for  a 
wounded  conscience. 

131.  And  now  I  found,  as  I  thought,  that  I  loved 

Christ  dearly :    Oh !  methought  my 

,  ;  °      .     J       I  felt  my  love  to 

soul  cleaved  unto  Him,  my  affections     Christ  as  hot  as 

cleaved  unto  Him;  I  felt  love  to 
Him  as  hot  as  fire ;  and  now,  as  Job  said,  /  thought  1 
should  die  in  my  nest ;  but  I  did  quickly  find,  that 
my  great  love  was  but  little ;  and  that  I,  who  had, 
as  I  thought,  such  burning  love  to  Jesus  Christ, 
could  let  Him  go  again  for  a  very  trifle, — God  can 
tell  how  to  abase  us,  and  can  hide  pride  from  man. 
Quickly  after  this  my  love  was  tried  to  purpose. 

132.  For  after  the  Lord  had,  in  this  manner,  thus 
graciously  delivered  me  from  this  great  and   sore 
temptation,  and  had  set  me  down  so  sweetly  in  the 
faith  of  His  holy  gospel,  and  had  given  me   such 
strong  consolation  and  blessed  evidence  from  heaven, 
touching  my  interest  in  His  love   through  Christ; 

77 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

the  tempter  came  upon  me  again,  and  that  with  a 
more  grievous  and  dreadful  temptation  than  before. 

133.  And  that  was,    To  sell  and  part  with  this 

most  blessed  Christ,  to  exchange  Him 
for  the  things  of  this  life,  for  any  thing. 

Iny  tiling  f°r  The  temptation  lay  upon  me  for  the 
space  of  a  year,  and  did  follow  me 

so  continually,  that  I  was  not  rid  of  it  one  day  in 

a  month :  no,  not  sometimes  one  hour  in  many  days 

together,  unless  when  I  was  asleep. 

134.  And  though,   in  my  judgment,  I  was  per- 
suaded,  that   those  who    were   once    effectually  in 
Christ  (as  I  hoped,  through  His  grace,  I  had  seen 
myself)  could  never  lose  Him  for  ever;   The  land 
shall  not  be  sold  for  ever,  for  the  land  Is  mine,  saith 
God.     Lev.  xxv.  23.     Yet  it  was  a  continual  vexation 
to  me,  to  think  that  I  should  have  so  much  as  one 
such  thought  within  me  against  a  Christ,  a  Jesus, 
that  had  done  for  me  as  He  had  done ;    and  yet 
then  I  had  almost  none  others,  but  such  blasphemous 
ones. 

135.  But  it  was  neither  my  dislike  of  the  thought, 
nor  yet  any  desire  and  endeavour  to  resist,  that  in 
the  least  did   shake   or  abate  the   continuation   or 
force  and  strength  thereof;    for  it   did  always,  in 
almost  whatever  I  thought,  intermix  itself  therewith, 
in  such  sort,  that  I  could  neither  eat  my  food,  stoop 
for  a  pin,  chop  a  stick,  or  cast  mine  eye  to  look  on 
this  or  that,  but  still  the  temptation  would  come, 

78 


TORTURED,  AS  UPON  A  RACK 

Sell  Christ  for  this,  or  sell  Christ  for  that ;  sell  Him, 
sell  Him. 

136.  Sometimes  it  would  run  in  my  thoughts, 
not  so  little  as  a  hundred  times  to-     A  hundred  tines 
Aether,  Sell  Him,  sell  Him,  sell  Him :     together  my 

,  .  ,     T  r          11         thoughts  were 

against  which,  I  may  say,  for  whole     *  Sell  Him,  sell 
hours  together,  I  have  been  forced       im>  s< 
to  stand  as  continually  leaning  and  forcing  my  spirit 
against  it,  lest  haply,  before  I  were  aware,  some 
wicked  thought  might  arise  in  my  heart,  that  might 
consent  thereto ;  and  sometimes  the  tempter  would 
make  me  believe  I  had  consented  to  it ;  but  then 
I  should  be,  as  tortured  upon  a  rack  for  whole  days 
together. 

137.  This  temptation  did  put  me  to  such  scares, 
lest  I  should  at  some  times,  I  say, 

J  1      I  was  scared 

consent    thereto,    and  be    overcome     lest  I  should 
i_  •  i_      i        t_      ^L  r  c     consent  thereto 

therewith,  that  by  the  very  force  of 

my  mind,  in  labouring  to  gainsay  and  resist  this 
v/ickedness,  my  very  body  would  be  put  into  action 
or  motion,  by  way  of  pushing  or  thrusting  with 
my  hands  or  elbows ;  still  answering,  as  fast  as  the 
destroyer  said,  Sell  Him;  I  will  not,  I  will  not,  I 
will  not,  I  will  not ;  no,  not  for  thousands,  thousands, 
thousands  of  worlds :  thus  reckoning,  lest  I  should, 
in  the  midst  of  these  assaults,  set  too  low  a  value  on 
Him ;  even  until  I  scarce  well  knew  where  I  was,  or 
how  to  be  composed  again. 

138.  At  these  seasons  he  would  not  let  me  eat 
F  79 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

my  food  at  quiet;  but,  forsooth,  when  I  was  set 

I  could  not  eat         at   the   table    at   m7  meat>  l  must   g° 
my  food  at  quiet     hence  to  pray ;  I  must  leave  my  food 

now,  just  now,  so  counterfeit  holy  also  would  this 
devil  be.  When  I  was  thus  tempted,  I  would  say 
in  myself,  Now  I  am  at  meat ;  let  me  make  an  end. 
No,  said  he,  you  must  do  It  now,  or  you  will  dis- 
please God,  and  despise  Christ.  Wherefore  I  was 
much  afflicted  with  these  things ;  and  because  of 
the  sinfulness  of  my  nature  (imagining  that  these 
were  impulses  from  God),  I  should  deny  to  do  it, 
as  if  I  denied  God,  and  then  should  I  be  as 
guilty,  because  I  did  not  obey  a  temptation  of 
the  devil,  as  if  I  had  broken  the  law  of  God 
indeed. 
V  139.  But  to  be  brief:  one  morning  as  I  did  lie  in 

After  much  m7   bed>    l   was>    as    at    other    times> 

striving  the  most    fiercely    assaulted    with    this 

thought  came,  .          J 

'Let  Him  go,  if  temptation,  To  sell  and  part  with 
Christ;  the  wicked  suggestion  still 
running  in  my  mind,  Sell  Him,  sell  Him,  sell  Him,  sell 
Him,  sell  Him,  as  fast  as  a  man  could  speak :  against 
which  also,  in  my  mind,  as  at  other  times,  I 
answered,  No,  no,  not  for  thousands,  thousands, 
thousands,  at  least  twenty  times  together:  but  at 
last,  after  much  striving,  even  until  I  was  almost 
out  of  breath,  I  felt  this  thought  pass  through  my 
heart,  Let  Him  go,  if  He  will ;  and  I  thought  also, 
that  I  felt  my  heart  freely  consent  thereto.  Oh! 

80 


WORDS  AS  FETTERS  OF  BRASS 

the  diligence  of  Satan  !     Oh !  the  desperateness  of 
man's  heart !  v 

140.  Now  was  the  battle  won,  and  down  fell  I, 
as  a  bird  that  is  shot  from  the  top     Down  fell  l  into 
of    a    tree,    into    great    guilt,    and     fearful  despair 
fearful  despair.      Thus   getting  out  of  my  bed,  I 
went  moping  into  the  field ;    but  God  knows,  with 
as  heavy  a  heart  as  mortal  man,  I  think,  could  bear ; 
where  for  the  space  of  two  hours,  I  was  like  a  man 
bereft  of  life ;  and,  as  now,  past  all  recovery,  and 
bound  over  to  eternal  punishment. 

141.  And  withal,  that  scripture  did  seize  upon 
my    soul :     Or  profane  person,    as    Esau,    who  for 
one  morsel  of  meat,  sold  his  birthright :  for  ye  know, 
how  that  afterward,  when  he  would  have  inherited 
the  blessing,  he  was  rejected ;  for  he  found  no  place 
of  repentance,  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears. 
Heb.  xii.  16,  17. 

142.  Now  was  I  as  one  bound,  I  felt  myself  shut 
up   unto    the    judgment    to    come; 

nothing  now,  for  two  years  together, 

would  abide  with  me,  but  damnation,     Jbid«  with  me 

but  damnation 

and  an  expectation  of  damnation :  I 
say,  nothing  now  would  abide  with  me  but  this, 
save  some  few  moments  for  relief,  as  in  the  sequel 
you  will  see. 

143.  These  words  were  to  my  soul,  like  fetters 
of  brass  to  my  legs,  in  the  continual  sound  of  which 
I  went  for  several  months  together.     But  about  ten 

81 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

or  eleven  o'clock  on  that  day,  as  I  was  walking 
This  sentence  under  an  hedge  (full  of  sorrow  and 
^£e(*uponme,  guilt,  God  knows),  and  bemoaning 
Christ  remits  all  myself  for  this  hard  hap,  that  such 
a  thought  should  arise  within  me, 
suddenly  this  sentence  rushed  in  upon  me,  The  blood 
of  Christ  remits  all  guilt.  At  this  I  made  a  stand 
in  my  spirit :  with  that  this  word  took  hold  upon 
me,  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  cleanseth 
us  from  all  sin.  i  John  i.  7. 

144.  Now  I  began  to  conceive  peace  in  my  soul, 

and   methought    I    saw,    as   if    the 
The  tempter  did  .. ,  f  .  , 

leer  and  steel  tempter  did  leer  and  steal  away  from 
away  from  me  m^  ^  bemg  ashamed  of  what  he 

had  done.  At  the  same  time  also  I  had  my  sin, 
and  the  blood  of  Christ,  thus  represented  to  me, 
That  my  sin,  when  compared  to  the  blood  of  Christ, 
was  no  more  to  it,  than  this  little  clod  or  stone 
before  me,  is  to  this  vast  and  wide  field  that  here 
I  see.  This  gave  me  good  encouragement  for  the 
space  of  two  or  three  hours;  in  which  time  also, 
methought,  I  saw,  by  faith,  the  Son  of  God,  as 
suffering  for  my  sins  :  but  because  it  tarried  not, 
I  therefore  sunk  in  my  spirit,  under  exceeding  guilt 
again. 

145.  But  chiefly  by  the  aforementioned  scripture 
concerning  Esaus  selling  of  his  birthright ;  for  that 
scripture  would  lie  all  day  long,  all  the  week  long, 
yea,  all  the  year  long  in  my  mind,  and  hold  me  down,  so 

82 


A  SAD  AND  CAREFUL  HEART 

that  I  could  by  no  means  lift  up  myself ;  for  when 
I  would  strive  to  turn  to  this  scripture  or  that,  for 
relief,  still  that  sentence  would  be  sounding  in  me ; 
For  ye  know,  how  that  afterwards,  when  he  would 
have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  found  no  place  of 
repentance,  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears. 

146.  Sometimes,  indeed,  I   should  have  a  touch 
from  that  in  Luke  xxii.    -21,  I  have 

WOW  V73.S  I  tOTG 

prayed  for  thee   that  thy  faith  fail    and  rent  for 
not-,    but    it  would  not  abide  upon     maflydays 
me  ;  neither  could  I,  indeed,  when  I  considered  my 
state,  find  ground  to  conceive  in  the  least,  that  there 
should  be    the  root  of  that   grace   in  me,  having 
sinned  as  I  had  done.     Now  was  I  tore  and  rent 
in  an  heavy  case  for  many  days  together. 

147.  Then  began  I  with  sad  and  careful  heart  to 
consider  of  the  nature  and  largeness  of     j  search  to  es 
my  sin,  and  to  search  into  the  word  of    a  word  of  pro- 
God,  if  I  could  in  any  place  espy  a  word 

of  promise,  or  any  encouraging  sentence,  by  which 
I  might  take  relief.  Wherefore  I  began  to  consider 
that  of  Mark  iii.  28  :  All  sins  shall  be  forgiven  unto 
the  sons  of  men,  and  blasphemies  wherewith  soever 
they  shall  blaspheme.  Which  place,  methought  at  a 
blush,  did  contain  a  large  and  glorious  promise  for 
the  pardon  of  high  offences  ;  but  considering  the 
place  more  fully,  I  thought  it  was  rather  to  be  under- 
stood, as  relating  more  chiefly  to  those  who  had,  while 
in  a  natural  estate,  committed  such  things  as  there 

83 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

are  mentioned ;  but  not  to  me,  who  had  not  only  re- 
ceived light  and  mercy,  but  that  had  both  after,  and 
also  contrary  to  that,  so  slighted  Christ  as  I  had  done. 

148.  I  feared,  therefore,  that  this  wicked  sin  of 

I  feared  my  sin        mine>    mi£ht   be    that    sin    unPardon- 

might  be  the  sin     able,  of  which  He  there  thus  speaketh. 

unpardonable  r»        /         /  77/7/7 

But  he  that  shall  blaspheme  against 

the  Holy  Ghost, hath  never  forgiveness,  but  is  in  danger  of 
eternal  damnation.  Mark  iii.  2  9.  And  I  did  the  rather 
give  credit  to  this,  because  of  that  sentence  in  the 
Hebrews:  For  you  know  how  that  afterwards,  when  he 
would  have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected ;  for 
he  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though  he  sought  it  care- 
fully with  tears.  And  this  stuck  always  with  me. 

149.  And  now  was  I  both  a  burthen  and  a  terror 
I  was  a  burthen      to  m7self  5  nor  did  I  ever  so  know, 

aS    n°W'     W^at   **    WaS    t0    ^e   wear7 

of  my  life,  and  yet  afraid  to  die. 
Oh !  how  gladly  now  would  I  have  been  anybody 
but  myself !  anything  but  a  man,  and  in  any  con- 
dition but  my  own !  For  there  was  nothing  did  pass 
more  frequently  over  my  mind,  than  that  it  was  im- 
possible for  me  to  be  forgiven  my  transgression,  and 
to  be  saved  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

150.  And  now  I  began  to  labour  to  call  again 

1  God  hath  let  t*me  t^iat  was  sPent  >  wishing  a  thou- 
me  go,  and  I  sand  times  twice  told,  that  the  day 

am  fallen '  ,          T     .        .  ,    . 

was  yet  to  come,  when  I  should  be 
tempted  to  such  a  sin ;  concluding  with  great  indig- 


THE  GREAT  TRANSGRESSION 

nation,  both  against  my  heart,  and  all  assaults,  how 
I  would  rather  have  been  torn  in  pieces,  than  be 
found  a  consenter  thereto.  But  alas  !  these  thoughts, 
and  wishings,  and  resolvings  were  now  too  late  to 
help  me  ;  this  thought  had  passed  my  heart,  God  hath 
let  me  go,  and  I  am  fallen.  Oh  !  thought  I,  that  it 
were  with  me  as  in  months  past,  as  in  the  days  when 
God  preserved  me  !  Job  xxix.  2. 

151.  Then   again,  being   loth  and  unwilling  to 
perish,  I  began  to  compare  my   sin     i  compare  my 
with  others,  to  see  if  I   could  find     sin  with  David's 
that  any  of  those  that  were  saved,   had  done  as  I 
had  done.     So  I  considered  David's  adultery,  and 
murder,  and  fotfnd  them  most  heinous  crimes ;  and 
those  too  committed  after  light  and  grace  received  : 
but  yet  by  considering  that  his  transgressions  were 
only  such  as  were  against  the  law  of  Moses,  from 
which  the  Lord  Christ  could,  with  the  consent  of 
His  word,  deliver  him  :  but   mine  was  against   the 
gospel ;  yea,  against  the  Mediator  thereof ;  I  had 
sold  my  Saviour. 

152.  Now  again  should  I  be  as  if  racked  upon 
the  wheel,  when  I  considered,  that,     jwasasjf 
besides  the  guilt  that  possessed  me,     racked  upon  the 
I  should  be  so  void  of  grace,   so  be- 
witched.   What,  thought  I,  must  it  be  no  sin  but  this? 
Must  it  needs  be  the  great  transgression?  Ps.  xix.  13. 
Must  that  wicked  one  touch  my  soul  ?     i  John  v.  1 8. 
Oh !  what  sting  did  I  find  in  all  these  sentences  ? 

85 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

153.  What,  thought  I,  is  there  but  one  sin  that 

is   unpardonable  ?   but    one   sin    that 
But  one  sin  un-        ,          ,  *      .  1-1  i  i 

pardonable,  and     layeth    the    soul    without  the   reach 

rthVt?beSuilty  of  God's  mercy;  and  must  I  be 
guilty  of  that  ?  must  it  needs  be 
that  ?  Is  there  but  one  sin  among  so  many  millions 
of  sins,  for  which  there  is  no  forgiveness ;  and 
must  I  commit  this  ?  Oh  !  unhappy  sin  \  Oh ! 
unhappy  man  \  These  things  would  so  break  and 
confound  my  spirit,  that  I  could  not  tell  what  to  do; 
I  thought  at  times,  they  would  have  broke  my  wits; 
and  still,  to  aggravate  my  misery,  that  would  run  in 
my  mind,  Tbu  know,  how,  that  afterwards,  when  he 
would  have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected. 
Oh  /  no  one  knows  the  terrors  of  those  days  but  myself. 

154.  After  this  I  began  to  consider  of  Peter's 
Peter's  sin  and       ^  which  he  committed  in  denying 
mine  his  Master:    and  indeed,  this  came 
nighest  to  mine  of  any  that  I  could  find,  for  he  had 
denied  his  Saviour,  as  I,  after  light  and  mercy  re- 
ceived ;  yea,  and  that  too,  after  warning  given  him. 
I  also    considered,   that    he   did  it    both  once   and 
twice  ;  and  that,  after  time  to  consider  betwixt.    But 
though  I  put  all  these  circumstances  together,  that, 
if  possible  I  might  find  help,  yet  I  considered  again, 
that  his  was  but  a  denial  of  his  Master,  but  mine  was, 
a  selling  of  my  Saviour.     Wherefore  I  thought  with 
myself,  that  I  came  nearer  to  Judas,  than  either  to 
David  or  Peter. 

86 


A  SON  OF  PERDITION 

155.  Here  again  my  torment  would  flame  out  and 
afflict  me ;  yea,  it  would  grind  me,  as 

'    ]  My  torment 

it  were  to  powder,  to  consider  the     flames  out  and 
preservation  of  God  towards  others,         lctsr 
while  I  fell  into  the  snare ;  for  in  my  thus  consider- 
ing of  other  men's  sins,  and  comparing  them  with 
mine   own,   I  could   evidently   see,  God   preserved 
them,  notwithstanding  their  wickedness,  and  would 
not  let  them,  as  He  had  let  me,  become  a  son  of 
perdition. 

156.  But  oh!  how  did  my  soul  at  this  time  prize 
the  preservation  that   God   did   set 

about  His  people!  Ah,  how  safely 
did  I  see  them  walk,  whom  God  had  £?sdpsee0^f out 
hedged  in!  They  were  within  His 
care,  protection,  and  special  providence:  though 
they  were  full  as  bad  as  I  by  nature ;  yet  because 
He  loved  them,  He  would  not  suffer  them  to  fall 
without  the  range  of  mercy :  but  as  for  me,  I  was 
gone,  I  had  done  it:  He  would  not  preserve  me, 
nor  keep  me;  but  suffered  me,  because  I  was  a 
reprobate,  to  fall  as  I  had  done.  Now  did  those 
blessed  places  that  speak  of  God's  keeping  His 
people,  shine  like  the  sun  before  me,  though 
not  to  comfort  me,  yet  to  show  me  the  blessed 
state  and  heritage  of  those  whom  the  Lord  had 
blessed. 

157.  Now  I  saw,  that  as  God  had  His  hand  in  all 
the  providences  and  dispensations  that  overtook  His 

87 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

elect;   so  He  had  His  hand  in  all  the  temptations 

-......;  that   they  had  to  sin  against  Him; 

God's  hand  in  ;  .  °    .  , 

the  temptations  not  to  animate  them  to  wickedness, 
but  to  choose  their  temptations  and 
troubles  for  them;  and  also  to  leave  them  for  a 
time,  to  such  sins  only  that  might  not  destroy,  but 
humble  them ;  as  might  not  put  them  beyond,  but 
lay  them  in  the  way  of  the  renewing  His  mercy. 
But  oh!  what  love,  what  care,  what  kindness  and 
mercy  did  I  now  see,  mixing  itself  with  the  most 
severe  and  dreadful  of  all  God's  ways  to  His  people ! 
He  would  let  David,  Hezekiah,  Solomon,  Peter,  and 
others,  fall ;  but  He  would  not  let  them  fall  into  sin 
unpardonable,  nor  into  hell  for  sin.  Oh!  thought 
I,  these  be  the  men  that  God  hath  loved ;  these  be 
the  men  that  God,  though  He  chastiseth  them,  keeps 
them  in  safety  by  Him ;  and  them  whom  He  makes 
to  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty.  But 
all  these  thoughts  added  sorrow,  grief,  and  horror 
to  me,  as  whatever  I  now  thought  on,  it  was  killing 
to  me.  If  I  thought  how  God  kept 
things  wrought  His  own,  that  was  killing  to  me;  if 
overthrow™211  *  thought  of  how  I  was  fallen  my- 
self, that  was  killing  to  me.  As  all 
things  wrought  together  for  the  best,  and  to  do 
good  to  them  that  were  the  called,  according 
to  His  purpose,  so  I  thought  that  all  things 
wrought  for  my  damage,  and  for  my  eternal  over- 
throw. 

88 


FROM  TROUBLE  TO  SORROW 

158.  Then  again  I  began  to  compare  my  sin  with 

the  sin  of  Judas,  that,  if  possible.  I 

1  I  compare  my 

might  find  if  mine  differed  from  that,  sin  with  the  sin 
which  in  truth  is  unpardonable :  and 
oh!  thought  I,  if  it  should  differ  from  it,  though 
but  the  breadth  of  an  hair,  what  a  happy  condition 
is  my  soul  in!  And  by  considering,  I  found  that 
Judas  did  this  intentionally,  but  mine  was  against 
my  prayer  and  strivings  :  besides,  his  was  committed 
with  much  deliberation,  but  mine  in  a  fearful  hurry, 
on  a  sudden :  all  this  while  I  was  tossed  to  and  fro 
like  the  locusts,  and  driven  from  trouble  to  sorrow; 
hearing  always  the  sound  of  Esau's  fall  in  mine 
ears,  and  the  dreadful  consequences  thereof. 

159.  Yet    this   consideration   about  Judas" s    sin 
was,  for  awhile,  some  little  relief  to  me ;  for  I  saw 
I  had  not,  as  to  the  circumstances,  transgressed  so 
fully  as  he.     But  this  was  quickly  gone  again,  for  I 
thought  with  myself,   there   might  be  more  ways 
than  one  to  commit   this  unpardonable  sin ;  also  I 
thought  there  might  be  degrees  of  that,  as  well  as 
of  other  transgressions;  wherefore,  for  aught  I  yet 
could  perceive,  this  iniquity  of  mine  might  be  such, 
as  might  never  be  passed  by. 

1 60.  I  was  often  now  ashamed  that  I  should  be 
like  such  an  ugly  man  as  Judas:  I     iwasashamed 
thought  also  how  loathsome  I  should     to  be  !ike  such 

an  ugly  man  as 

be  unto  all  the  saints  at  the  day  or     Judas 
judgment :  insomuch   that  now  I  could  scarce  see  a 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

good  man,  that  I  believed  had  a  good  conscience, 
but  I  should  feel  my  heart  tremble  at  him,  while 
I  was  in  his  presence.  Oh !  now  I  saw  a  glory  in 
walking  with  God,  and  what  a  mercy  it  was  to 
have  a  good  conscience  before  Him. 

1 6 1.  I  was   much   about   that  time  tempted  to 

content  myself  by  receiving  some  false 
opinion ;  as,  that  there  should  be  no 
thedayofjudg-  such  thing  as  a  day  of  judgment; 
that  we  should  not  rise  again ;  and 
that  sin  was  no  such  grievous  thing :  the  tempter 
suggesting  thus :  For  if  these  things  should  indeed 
be  true,  yet  to  believe  otherwise  would  yield  you  ease 
for  the  present.  If  you  must  perish,  never  torment 
yourself  so  much  beforehand :  drive  the  thoughts  of 
damning  out  of  your  mind,  by  possessing  your  mind 
with  some  such  conclusions  that  Atheists  and  Ranters 
use  to  help  themselves  withal. 

162.  But    oh!   when   such   thoughts    have    led 

,^,  through  my  heart,  how,  as  it  were. 

I  thought  the  .     .5         '  ' 

judge  stood  at       within  a  step,  hath  death  and  judg- 

the  door  i  •  •        i  11 

ment  been  in  my  view!  methought 
the  Judge  stood  at  the  door ;  I  was  as  if  it  was  come 
already;  so  that  such  things  could  have  no  enter- 
tainment. But  methinks,  I  see  by  this,  that  Satan 
will  use  any  means  to  keep  the  soul  from  Christ; 
he  loveth  not  an  awakened  frame  of  spirit ;  security, 
blindness,  darkness,  and  error,  is  the  very  kingdom 
and  habitation  of  the  wicked  one. 

90 


DAGGERS  IN  MY  SOUL 

163.  I  found  it  a  hard  work  now  to  pray  to  God, 
because  despair  was  swallowing  me 
up;    I    thought    I   was   as   with   a 


tempest,  driven  away  from  God  ;  for  hard  work  to 
always  when  I  cried  to  God  for 
mercy,  this  would  come  in,  'T/V  too  late,  I  am  lost, 
God  hath  let  me  fall  ;  not  to  my  correction,  but  con- 
demnation :  my  sin  is  unpardonable  ;  and  I  know, 
concerning  Esau,  how  that  after  he  had  sold  his  birth- 
right, he  would  have  received  the  blessing,  but  was 
rejected.  About  this  time  I  did  light  on  that 
dreadful  story  of  that  miserable  mortal  Francis 
Spira  ;  a  book  that  was  to  my  troubled  spirit,  as 
salt,  when  rubbed  into  a  fresh  wound  :  x  read  the  story 
every  sentence  in  that  book,  every  of  Francis  Spira 
groan  of  that  man,  with  all  the  rest  of  his  actions  in 
his  dolours,  as  his  tears,  his  prayers,  his  gnashing  of 
teeth,  his  wringing  of  hands,  his  twining  and  twist- 
ing, and  languishing,  and  pining  away  under  that 
mighty  hand  of  God  that  was  upon  him,  were  as 
knives  and  daggers  in  my  soul  ;  especially  that 
sentence  of  his  was  frightful  to  me,  Man  knows 
the  beginning  of  sin,  but  who  bounds  the  issues  thereof? 
Then  would  the  former  sentence,  as  the  conclusion 
of  all,  fall  like  an  hot  thunderbolt  again  upon  my 
conscience  ;  For  you  know  how  that  afterwards, 
when  he  would  have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  was 
rejected  ;  for  he  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though 
he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears. 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

164.  Then  should  I  be  struck  into  a  very  great 

trembling,  insomuch  that  at  sometimes 
Ifeltsucha  o> 

clog-ging  at  my  1  could,  ror  whole  days  together,  reel 
reason  of  my  my  very  body,  as  well  as  my  mind,  to 
shake  and  totter  under  the  sense  of 
this  dreadful  judgment  of  God,  that  should  fall  on 
those  that  have  sinned  that  most  fearful  and  un- 
pardonable sin.  I  felt  also  such  a  clogging  and  heat 
at  my  stomach,  by  reason  of  this  my  terror,  that  I  was, 
especially  at  some  times,  as  if  my  breast-bone  would 
split  asunder  ;  then  I  thought  of  that  concerning 
Judas,  who  by  falling  headlong,  he  burst  asunder  In 
the  midst,  and  all  his  bowels  gushed  out.  Acts  i.  1  8. 

165.  I  feared  also  that  this  was  the  mark  that 

the  Lord  did  set  on  Cain,  even  con- 

twine,and  shrink     tinual  fear  and  trembling,  under  the 
undermyburthen 


charged  on  him  for  the  blood  of  his  brother  Abel. 
Thus  did  I  wind,  and  twine,  and  shrink  under  the 
burthen  that  was  upon  me  ;  which  burthen  also  did 
so  oppress  me,  that  I  could  neither  stand,  nor  go, 
nor  lie,  either  at  rest  or  quiet. 

1  66.  Yet  that  saying  would  sometimes  come  into 
my  mind,  He  hath  received  gifts  for  the  rebellious. 
Psalm  Ixviii.  18.  The  rebellious,  thought  I!  why 
surely  they  are  such  as  once  were  under  subjection 
to  their  Prince;  even  those  who  after  they  have 
sworn  subjection  to  His  government,  have  taken  up 
arms  against  Him  ;  and  this,  thought  I,  is  my  very 

92 


GIFTS  FOR  THE  REBELLIOUS 

condition :  I  once  loved  Him,  feared  Him,  served  Him  ; 
but  now  I  am  a  rebel ;  I  have  sold  Him,  I  have  said, 
Let  Him  go,  if  He  will-,  but  yet  He  has  gifts  for 
rebels ;  and  then  why  not  for  me  ? 

167.  This  sometimes  I  thought  on,  and  should 
labour  to  take  hold  thereof,  that  some, 

>  I  was  like  a  man 

though  small  refreshment,  might  have     going  to  execu- 

been  conceived  by  me  ;  but  in  this  also 
I  missed  of  my  desire ;  I  was  driven  with  force  be- 
yond it ;  I  was  like  a  man  going  to  execution,  even 
by  that  place  where  he  would  fain  creep  in  and  hide 
himself,  but  may  not. 

1 68.  Again,  after  I  had  thus  considered  the  sins 

of  the  saints  in  particular,  and  found 

My  sms  beyond 

mine  went  beyond  them,  then  I  began  the  sins  of  the 
to  think  with  myself,  Set  the  case  I 
should  put  all  theirs  together,  and  mine  alone  against 
them,  might  I  not  then  find  some  encouragement? 
for  if  mine,  though  bigger  than  any  one,  yet  should 
be  but  equal  to  all,  then  there  is  hopes ;  for  that 
blood  that  hath  virtue  enough  in  it  to  wash  away 
all  theirs,  had  virtue  enough  in  it  to  do  away 
mine,  though  this  one  be  full  as  big,  if  not  bigger 
than  all  theirs.  Here  again,  I  should  consider  the 
sin  of  David,  of  Solomon,  of  Manasseh,  of  Peter,  and 
the  rest  of  the  great  offenders;  and  should  also 
labour,  what  I  might  with  fairness,  to  aggravate  and 
heighten  their  sins  by  several  circumstances. 

169.  I  should  think  with  myself  that  David  shed 

93 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

blood  to  cover  his  adultery,  and  that  by  the  sword 
of  the  children  of  Ammon  ;  a  work  that  could  not  be 
done,  but  by  continuance,  deliberate  contrivance, 
which  was  a  great  aggravation  to  his  sin.  But 
then  this  would  turn  upon  me :  Ah !  but  these 
were  but  sins  against  the  law,  from  which  there 
was  a  Jesus  sent  to  save  them;  but  yours  is  a 
sin  against  the  Saviour,  and  who  shall  save  you 
from  that? 

170.  Then  I  thought  on  Solomon,  and  how  he 

For  me,  no  more  sinned  in  loving  strange  women,  in 
sacrifice  for  sin  falling  away  to  their  idols,  in  building 
them  temples,  in  doing  this  after  light,  in  his  old  age, 
after  great  mercy  received :  but  the  same  conclusion 
that  cut  me  off  in  the  former  consideration,  cut  me 
off  as  to  this ;  namely,  that  all  those  were  but  sins 
against  the  law,  for  which  God  had  provided  a 
remedy  ;  but  1  had  sold  my  Saviour,  and  there  remained 
no  more  sacrifice  for  sin. 

171.  I  would  then  add  to  these  men's  sins,  the 
Manasseh's  sin,      sms  °^  Manasseh ;  how  that  he  built 
and  mine  altars  for  idols  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord;  he  also  observed  times,  used  enchantments,  had 
to  do  with  wizards,  was  a  wizard,  had  his  familiar 
spirits,  burned  his  children  in  the  fire  in  sacrifice  to 
devils,  and  made  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  run  down 
with  the  blood  of  innocents.     These,  thought  I,  are 
great  sins,  sins  of  a  bloody  colour,  but  yet  it  would 
turn  again  upon  me,  They  are  none  of  them  of  the 

94 


1 MINE  OUT-WENT  EVERY  ONE' 

nature  of  yours ;  you  have  parted  with  Jesus,  you 
have  sold  your  Saviour. 

172.  This  one  consideration  would  always  kill  my 

heart,  my  sin  was  point  blank  against 

'    ,  My  heart  killed 

my  Saviour]  and   that   too,  at  that 

height,  that  I  had  in  my  heart  said  of  Him,  Let  Him 
go,  if  He  will.  Oh !  methought  this  sin  was  bigger 
than  the  sins  of  a  country,  of  a  kingdom,  or  of  the 
whole  world,  no  one  pardonable ;  nor  all  of  them 
together,  was  able  to  equal  mine ;  mine  out-went 
them  every  one. 

173.  Now  I  should  find  my  mind  to  flee  from  God, 
as  from  the  face  of  a  dreadful  Judge,  yet  this  was  my 
torment,  I    could  not  escape   His  hand :    (//  is   a 

fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living 
God.  Hebrew  x.)  But,  blessed  be  His  grace,  that 
scripture,  in  these  flying  fits,  would  call,  as  running 
after  me,  /  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy 
transgressions  ;  and  as  a  cloud,  thy  sins  :  return  unto 
Me,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee.  Isaiah  xliv.  22.  This, 
I  say,  would  come  in  upon  my  mind,  when  I  was 
fleeing  from  the  face  of  God ;  for  I  did  flee  from 
His  face ;  that  is,  my  mind  and  spirit  fled  before 
Him ;  by  reason  of  His  highness,  I  could  not 
endure  :  then  would  the  text  cry,  Return  unto  Me ; 
it  would  cry  aloud  with  a  very  great  voice,  Return 
unto  Me,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee.  Indeed,  this 
would  make  me  make  a  little  stop,  and,  as  it  were, 
look  over  my  shoulder  behind  me,  to  see  if  I  could 
G  95 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

discern  that  the  God  of  grace  did  follow  me  with  a 
pardon  in  His  hand  ;  but  I  could  no  sooner  do  that, 
but  all  would  be  clouded  and  darkened  again  by 
that  sentence,  For  you  know,  how  that  afterwards, 
when  he  would  have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  found 
no  place  of  repentance,  though  he  sought  it  carefully 
with  tears.  Wherefore  I  could  not  refrain,  but 
The  text  fled>  though  at  some  times  it  cried, 

r^umr"did  Return,   return,   as   if  it  did  hollow 

hollow  after  me      after  me:    but  I  feared  to  close  in 
therewith,  lest  it  should  not  come  from  God  ;    for 
that  other,  as  I  said,  was  still  sounding  in  my  con- 
science,   For  you  know   that   afterwards,   when   he 
would  have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected,  etc. 
174.  Once  as  I  was  walking  to  and  fro  in  a  good 
man's  shop,  bemoaning  of  myself  in  my 

I  was  walking  .    ,  •  >  i  m-     •  u 

to  and  fro^in  a        sad  and  doleful  state,  afflicting  myself 

mans  shop  ^^  seif_abhorrence  for  this  wicked 
and  ungodly  thought  ;  lamenting  also  this  hard  hap 
of  mine  for  that  I  should  commit  so  great  a  sin, 
greatly  fearing  that  I  should  not  be  pardoned  ; 
praying  also  in  my  heart,  that  if  this  sin  of  mine  did 
differ  from  that  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Lord 
would  show  it  me.  And  being  now  ready  to  sink 
with  fear,  suddenly  there  was,  as  if 
at  t?e  window"1  there  had  rushed  in  at  the  window, 


the  n°ise  of  wind  uPon  me>  but   veI7 
pleasant,   and  as  if  I  heard  a  voice 

speaking,  Did'st  thou  ever  refuse  to  be  justified  by 

96 


A  GREAT  CALM 

the  blood  of  Christ  ?  and  withal,  my  whole  life  of 
profession  past,  was  in  a  moment  opened  to  me, 
wherein  I  was  made  to  see,  that  designedly  I  had 
not :  so  my  heart  answered  groaningly,  No.  Then 

fell,  with  power,  that  word  of  God 

'  The  word  of 

upon  me,  See  that  ye  refuse  not  Him     God  falls  upon 
that    speaketh.      Hebrew     xii.      25. 
This   made   a   strange   seizure   upon   my    spirit;    it 
brought  light  with  it,  and  commanded  a  silence  in 
my  heart,  of  all  those  tumultuous  thoughts,  that  did 
before  use,  like  masterless  hell-hounds,  to  roar  and 
bellow,  and  make  an  hideous  noise  within  me.     It 
showed  me  also  that  Jesus  Christ  had  yet  a  word  of 
grace  and  mercy  for  me,  that  He  had 

J  •        f  Silence  com- 

not,  as  I  had  feared,  quite  forsaken  manded  in  my 
and  cast  off  my  soul  ;  yea,  this  was  a 
kind  of  chide  for  my  proneness  to  desperation ;  a 
kind  of  threatening  of  me,  if  I  did  not,  notwithstand- 
ing my  sins,  and  the  heinousness  of  them,  venture 
my  salvation  upon  the  Son  of  God.  But  as  to  my 
determining  about  this  strange  dispensation,  what  it 
was,  I  know  not  ;  or  from  whence  it  came,  I  know 
not  ;  I  have  not  yet  in  twenty  years'  time  been  able 
to  make  a  judgment  of  it ;  /  thought  then  what  here 
I  should  be  loth  to  speak.  But  verily  that  sudden 
rushing  wind  was,  as  if  an  angel  had  come  upon  me  ; 
but  both  it,  and  the  salutation,  I  will  leave  until  the 
day  of  judgment :  only  this  I  say  it  commanded  a 
great  calm  in  my  soul ;  it  persuaded  me  there  might 

97 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

be  hope :  it  showed  me,  as  I  thought,  what  the  sin 
unpardonable  was,  and  that  my  soul  had  yet  the 
blessed  privilege  to  flee  to  Jesus  Christ  for  mercy. 
But  I  say,  concerning  this  dispensation ;  I  know  not 

yet  what  to  say  unto  it  :  which  was 
I  was  persuaded      J          .  *  ' 

there  might  be  also,  in  truth,  the  cause,  that  at  first  I 
did  not  speak  of  it  in  the  book  ;  I  do 
now  also  leave  it  to  be  thought  on  by  men  of  sound 
judgment.  I  lay  not  the  stress  of  my  salvation 
thereupon,  but  upon  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  the  promise; 
yet  seeing  I  am  here  unfolding  of  my  secret  things, 
I  thought  it  might  not  be  altogether  inexpedient  to 
let  this  also  show  itself,  though  I  cannot  now  relate 
I  began  to  mis-  ^e  matter  as  there  I  did  experience 
trust  again  j^  This  lasted  in  the  savour  of  it 

for  about  three  or  four  days,  and  then  I  began  to 
mistrust,  and  to  despair  again.  ' 

175.  Wherefore  still  my  life  hung  in  doubt  before 
My  life  hung  in  me>  not  knowing  which  way  I  should 
doubt  tip ;  only  this  I  found  my  soul  desire, 

even  to  cast  itself  at  the  foot  of  grace,  by  prayer 
and  supplication.  But  oh  I  'twas  hard  for  me  now, 
to  have  the  face  to  pray  to  this  Christ  for  mercy, 
against  Whom  I  had  thus  most  vilely  sinned  :  'twas 
hard  work,  I  say,  to  offer  to  look  Him  in  the  face, 
against  Whom  I  had  so  vilely  sinned ;  and  indeed,  I 
have  found  it  as  difficult  to  come  to  God  by  prayer, 
after  backsliding  from  Him,  as  to  do  any  other 
thing.  Oh!  the  shame  that  did  now  attend  me! 

98 


THERE  WAS  BUT  ONE  WAY 

especially  when  I  thought,  I  am  now  a-going  to 
pray  to  Him  for  mercy,  that  I  had  so  lightly 
esteemed  but  a  while  before !  I  was  ashamed  ;  yea, 
even  confounded,  because  this  villany  had  been 
committed  by  me  :  but  I  saw  that  there  was  but 
one  way  with  me ;  I  must  go  to  Him,  and  humble 
myself  unto  Him,  and  beg  that  He,  of  His  wonderful 
mercy,  would  show  pity  to  me,  and  have  mercy 
upon  my  wretched  sinful  soul. 

176.  Which,    when   the    tempter   perceived,  he 
strongly  suggested  to  me,  That  I  ought  not  to  pray 
to  God,  for  prayer  was  not  for  any  in  my  case ;  neither 
could  it    do    me    good,    because   I  had   rejected  the 
Mediator,  by  Whom  all  prayers  came  with  acceptance 
to  God  the  Father ;  and  without  Whom,   no  prayer 
could  come   into    His  presence :    wherefore   now    to 
pray,   is  but  to  add  sin   to  sin;  yea,   now  to  pray, 
seeing    God  has    cast  you   off,    is    the    next    way    to 
anger   and  offend   Him    more    than    you    ever    did 
before. 

177.  For  God  (saith  he)  hath  been  weary  of  you 
for  these  several  years  already,  because 

you  are  none  of  His;  your  bawlings 

in    His    ears,    hath   been   no   pleasant     is  no  pleasant 
TT-  17        r         TT      ,         voice  to  Him 

•voice  to  Him;   and  therefore  He  let 

you  sin  this  sin,  that  you  might  be  quite  cut  off ;  and 
will  you  pray  still?  This  the  devil  urged,  and  set 
forth  that  in  Numbers,  when  Moses  said  to  the 
children  of  Israel,  That  because  they  would  not  go 

99 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

up  to  possess  the  land,  when  God  would  have  them, 
therefore  for  ever  after  He  did  bar  them  out  from 
thence,  though  they  prayed  they  might  with  tears. 
Numbers  xiv.  36,  37,  etc. 

178.  As  it  is  said  in  another  place,  Exodus  xxi. 

.....         14,    The   man    that    sins    presumptu- 
Some  texts  did 

pinch  me  very  ously  shall  be  taken  from  God  s  altar, 
that  he  may  die ;  even  as  Joab  was 
by  King  Solomon,  when  he  thought  to  find  shelter 
there,  i  Kings  ii.  27,  28,  etc.  These  places  did 
pinch  me  very  sore  ;  yet  my  case  being  desperate, 
I  thought  with  myself,  I  can  but  die  ;  and  if  it  must 
be  so,  it  shall  once  be  said,  That  such  an  one  died 
at  the  foot  of  Christ  in  prayer.  This  I  did,  but 
with  great  difficulty,  God  doth  know;  and  that 
because,  together  with  this,  still  that  saying  about 
Esau  would  be  set  at  my  heart,  even  like  a  flaming 
sword,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life,  lest  I 
should  take  thereof  and  live.  Oh!  who  knows 
how  hard  a  thing  I  found  it,  to  come  to  God  in 
prayer ! 

179.  I  did  also  desire  the  prayers  of  the  people 

of  God  for  me,  but  I  feared  that  God 
God's     would  give  them  no  heart  to  do  it; 

people,  but  durst  vea  I  trembled  in  my  soul  to  think, 
not  ask  them  /  * 

that   some  or  other  of  them  would 

shortly  tell  me,  that  God  hath  said  those  words 
to  them,  that  He  once  did  say  to  the  prophet  con- 
cerning the  children  of  Israel,  Pray  not  for  this 

100 


BUNYAN   SEEKS    COMFORT 
/  took  an  opportunity  to  break  my  mind  to  an  ancient  Christian 

[See  page  101 


WHEREFORE  I  WENT  TO  GOD 

people,  for  I  have  rejected  them.  Jeremiah  xi.  14. 
So,  Pray  not  for  him,  for  I  have  rejected  him,  yea, 
I  thought  that  He  had  whispered  this  to  some  of 
them  already,  only  they  durst  not  tell  me  so ; 
neither  durst  I  ask  them  of  it,  for  fear  if  it  should 
be  so,  it  would  make  me  quite  beside  myself : 
Man  knows  the  beginning  of  sin  (said  Spira),  but 
who  bounds  the  issues  thereof? 

1 80.  About  this  time   I   took  an  opportunity  to 
'break  my  mind  to  an  ancient  Christian. 

i  /«.  Till-1  tel1  my case  to 

and  told  him  all  my  case  :  I  told  him     an  ancient 
also,    that  I    was   afraid  that   I   had 
sinned    the    sin    against    the  Holy  Ghost;   and    he 
told  me,  He  thought  so  too.     Here  therefore  I  had 
but  cold  comfort ;    but   talking  a  little  more  with 
him,  I  found  him,  though  a  good  man,  a  stranger 
to  much  combat  with  the  devil.     Wherefore  I  went 
to  God  again,  as  well  as  I  could,  for  mercy  still. 

1 8 1.  Now  also  did  the  tempter  begin  to  mock 
me  in  my  misery,  saying,  That  seeing 

I  had  thus  parted  with  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  provoked  Him  to  displeasure, 
Who  would  have  stood  between  my  soul  and  the  Jlame 
of  devouring  fire,  there  was  now  but  one  way  •  and 
that  was,  to  pray  that  God  the  Father  would  be  a 
Mediator  betwixt  His  Son  and  me  ;  that  we  might  be 
reconciled  again,  and  that  I  might  have  that  blessed 
benefit  In  Him,  that  His  blessed  saints  enjoyed. 

182.  Then  did  that  scripture  seize  upon  my  soul, 

101 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

He  is  of  one  mind,  and  who  can  turn  Him!  Oh!  I 
My  soul  is  rent  saw>  ^  was  as  easy  to  persuade  Him  to 
asunder  make  a  new  world,  a  new  covenant, 

or  a  new  Bible,  besides  that  we  have  already,  as  to 
pray  for  such  a  thing.  This  was  to  persuade  Him, 
that  what  He  had  done  already  was  mere  folly,  and 
persuade  Him  to  alter,  yea,  to  disannul  the  whole  way 
of  salvation.  And  then  would  that  saying  rend  my 
soul  asunder ;  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any 
other  •  for  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given 
among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved.  Acts  iv.  12. 
183.  Now  the  most  free,  and  full  and  gracious 

Nothing  did  words  of  the  S°sPel>  were  the  Sreatest 
twinge  my  con-  torment  to  me;  yea,  nothing  so 

afflicted  me,  as  the  thoughts  of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  remembrance  of  a  Saviour ;  because  I 
had  cast  Him  off,  brought  forth  the  villany  of  my 
sin,  and  my  loss  by  it,  to  mind  ;  nothing  did  twinge 
my  conscience  like  this :  every  time  that  I  thought 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  His  grace,  love,  goodness, 
kindness,  gentleness,  meekness,  death,  blood, 
promises,  and  blessed  exhortations,  comforts,  and 
consolations,  it  went  to  my  soul  like  a  sword ;  for 
still  unto  these  my  considerations  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
these  thoughts  would  make  place  for  themselves  in 
my  heart ;  Aye,  this  is  the  Jesus,  the  loving  Saviour, 
the  Son  of  God,  Whom  you  have  parted  with,  Whom  you 
have  slighted,  despised,  and  abused.  This  is  the  only 
Saviour,  the  only  Redeemer,  the  only  One  that  could  so 

102 


THE  TEMPTER  BEGAN  AFRESH 

love  sinners,  as  to  wash  them  from  their  sins  in  His 
own  most  precious  blood  ;  but  you  have  no  part  nor  lot  in 
this  Jesus  :  you  have  put  Him  from  you  ;  you  have  said 
in  your  heart,  Let  Him  go,  if  He  will.  Now,  there- 
fore, you  are  severed  from  Him;  you  have  severed 
yourself  from  Him  :  behold  then  His  goodness,  but  your- 
self to  be  no  partaker  of  it.  Oh  !  thought  I,  what 
have  I  lost,  what  have  I  parted  with  ! 
What  has  disinherited  my  poor  soul  !  what^asdfs-  '' 


Oh  !  'tis  sad  to  be  destroyed  by  the 
grace  and  mercy  of  God  ;  to  have  the 
Lamb,  the  Saviour,  turn  lion  and  destroyer.  Rev.  vi. 
I  also  trembled,  as  I  have  said,  at  the  sight  of  the 
saints  of  God,  especially  at  those  that  greatly  loved 
Him,  and  that  made  it  their  business  to  walk  con- 
tinually with  Him  in  this  world  ;  for  they  did,  both 
in  their  words,  their  carriages,  and  all  their  expressions 
of  tenderness  and  fear  to  sin  against  their  precious 
Saviour,  condemn,  lay  guilt  upon,  and  l  trembled  at 
also  add  continual  affliction  and  shame  God>s  Samuels 
upon  my  soul.  The  dread  of  them  was  upon  me,  and 
I  trembled  at  God's  Samuels,  i  Sam.  xvi.  4. 

184.  Now  also  the  tempter  began  afresh  to  mock 
my  soul  another  way,  saying,  That  Christ  indeed 
did  pity  my  case,  and  was  sorry  for  my  loss  ;  but  foras- 
much as  I  had  sinned  and  transgressed  as  1  had  done, 
He  could  by  no  means  help  me,  nor  save  me  from  what  I 
feared  :  for  my  sin  was  not  of  the  nature  of  theirs,  for 
Whom  He  bled  and  died  ;  neither  was  It  counted  with 

103 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

those  that  were  laid  to  His  charge,  when  He  hanged  on 
a  tree :  therefore,  unless  He  should  come  down  from 
heaven,  and  die  anew  for  this  sin,  though  Indeed  He  did 
greatly  pity  me,  yet  I  could  have  no  benefit  of  Him. 
These  things  may  seem  ridiculous  to  others,  even  as 
ridiculous  as  they  were  in  themselves,  but  to  me 
they  were  most  tormenting  cogitations  :  every  one 
of  them  augmented  my  misery,  that  Jesus  Christ 
should  have  so  much  love  as  to  pity  me,  when  yet 
He  could  not  help  me  ;  nor  did  I  think  that  the 
reason  why  He  could  not  help  me,  was,  because  His 
merits  were  weak,  or  His  grace  and  salvation  spent 
on  others  already,  but  because  His  faithfulness  to 
His  threatening,  would  not  let  Him  extend  His  mercy 
to  me.  Besides,  I  thought,  as  I  have  already  hinted, 
that  my  sin  was  not  within  the  bounds 
sin  was  not7  of  that  pardon,  that  was  wrapped  up 

in  a  Promise  5   and  if  nOt>  then  T  knew 
assuredly,  that  it  was  more  easy  for 

heaven  and  earth  to  pass  away,  than  for  me  to  have 
eternal  life.  So  that  the  ground  of  all  these  fears  of 
mine  did  arise  from  a  steadfast  belief  I  had  of  the 
stability  of  the  holy  word  of  God,  and  also  from  my 
being  misinformed  of  the  nature  of  my  sin. 

185.  But  oh!  how  this  would  add  to  my  afflic- 

_   .  L  , ,      tion.    to   conceit    that    I    should   be 

Scripture  would  . 

strike  me  down      guilty  or  such  a  sin,  for  which  He 

did  not  die.     These  thoughts  would 

so  confound  me,   and  imprison  me,  and  tie  me  up 

104 


BROKEN,  SCATTERED,  RENT 

from  faith,  that  I  knew  not  what  to  do.  But  oh  ! 
thought  I,  that  He  would  come  down  again  !  Oh  ! 
that  the  work  of  man's  redemption  was  yet  to  be 
done  by  Christ  !  how  would  I  pray  Him  and  entreat 
Him  to  count  and  reckon  this  sin  among  the  rest  for 
which  He  died  !  But  this  scripture  would  strike  me 
down  as  dead  ;  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead, 
dietb  no  more  ;  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over 
Him.  Rom.  vi.  9. 

1  86.  Thus,  by  the  strange  and  unusual  assaults 

of  the  tempter,  my   soul  was  like  a 

7       f  My  soul  driven 

broken  vessel,    driven    as    with    the     as  with  the 
winds,  and  tossed  sometimes  headlong 
into  despair  ;  sometimes  upon  the  covenant  of  works, 
and  sometimes  to  wish  that  the   new  covenant,  and 
the    conditions    thereof,   might    so    far  forth,   as    I 
thought  myself  concerned,  be  turned  another  way, 

and  changed,  But  in  all  these,  I  was 

,          i         .      ,  .  j  ,          I  was  as  those 

as  those  that  jostle  against  the  rocks  ;     that  jostie 


more  broken,  scattered  and  rent.      Oh  !     ^jsi  the 
the    un  -  thought  -  of    imaginations, 
frights,   fears,   and  terrors,    that  are  affected  by  a 
thorough  application   of  guilt  yielding   to  despera- 
tion !      This  is  the  man  that  hath  his  dwelling  among 
the  tombs  with  the  dead  ;  that  is  always  crying  out, 
and  cutting  himself  with  stones.     Mark  v.   i,   2,  3. 
But,  I  say,  all  in  vain  ;   desperation  will  not  comfort 
him,    the    old    covenant   will    not    save    him:    nay, 
heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  before  one  jot  or 

105 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

tittle  of  the  word  and  law  of  grace  will  fail  or  be 
removed.  This  I  saw,  this  I  felt,  and  under  this  I 
groaned;  yet  this  advantage  I  got  thereby,  namely, 
a  farther  confirmation  of  the  certainty  of  the  way  of 
salvation;  and  that  the  scriptures  were  the  word 
of  God.  Oh!  I  cannot  now  express  what  then  I 
saw  and  felt  of  the  steadiness  of  Jesus  Christ,  the 
rock  of  man's  salvation  :  What  was  done,  could  not 
be  undone,  added  to,  nor  altered.  I  saw,  indeed, 
that  sin  might  drive  the  soul  beyond  Christ,  even 
the  sin  which  is  unpardonable;  but  woe  to  him 
that  was  so  driven,  for  the  word  would  shut  him 
out. 

187.  Thus  I  was  always  sinking,  whatever  I  did 
I  was  always  think  or  do.  So  one  day  I  walked 
sinking  to  a  neighbouring  town,  and  sate  down 

upon  a  settle  in  the  street,  and  fell  into  a  very  deep 
pause  about  the  most  fearful  state  my  sin  had 
brought  me  to;  and  after  long  musing,  I  lifted  up 
my  head,  but  methought  I  saw,  as  if 
the  sun  that  shineth  in  the  heavens 


bourin*  taown'Sh-    did  Srudge  tO  Sive  %ht  ' 

the    very  stones  in  the  street,   and 

tiles  upon  the  houses,  did  bend  themselves  against 
me.  Methought  that  they  all  combined  together  to 
banish  me  out  of  the  world.  I  was  abhorred  of 
them,  and  unfit  to  dwell  among  them,  or  be  partaker 
of  their  benefits,  because  I  had  sinned  against  the 
Saviour.  O  how  happy  now  was  every  creature 

1  06 


FOR  A  TIME  OUT  OF  DOUBT 

over  I  was  !     For  they  stood  fast,  and  kept  their 
station,  but  I  was  gone  and  lost. 

1  8  8.  Then  breaking  out  in  the  bitterness  of  my 
soul,  I  said  to  myself  with  a  grievous 
sigh,    How    can  God  comfort  such  a     heaM,  e<This  sin 

wretch  !  I  had  no  sooner  said  it,  but     if  not  unto 

death' 
this  returned  upon  me,  as  an  echo 

doth  answer  a  voice  :  This  sin  is  not  unto  death.  At 
which  I  was,  as  if  I  had  been  raised  out  of  the 
grave,  and  cried  out  again,  Lord,  how  couldst  Thou 
find  out  such  a  word  as  this  !  For  I  was  filled  with 
admiration  at  the  fitness,  and  at  the  unexpected- 
ness of  the  sentence  •  the  fitness  of  the  word,  the 
Tightness  of  the  timing  of  it  ;  the  power,  and  sweet- 
ness, and  light,  and  glory  that  came  with  it  also, 
were  marvellous  to  me  to  find  :  I  was  now,  for  the 
time,  out  of  doubt,  as  to  that  about  which  I  was  so 
much  in  doubt  before  ;  my  fears  before  were,  that 
my  sin  was  not  pardonable,  and  so  that  I  had  no 
right  to  pray,  to  repent,  etc.,  or  that,  if  I  did,  it 
would  be  of  no  advantage  or  profit  to  me.  But  now, 
thought  I,  if  this  sin  is  not  unto  death,  then  it  is 
pardonable;  therefore  from  this  I  have  encourage- 
ment to  come  to  God  by  Christ  for  mercy,  to  con- 
sider the  promise  of  forgiveness,  as 
that  which  stands  with  open  arms 


to  receive  me  as  well  as  others.    This     agreat  easement 

therefore  was  a  great    easement   to 

my  mind,  to  wit,  that  my  sin  was  pardonable,  that  it 

107 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

was  not  the  sin  unto  death  (i  John  v.  16,  17).  None 
but  those  that  know  what  my  trouble  (by  their  own 
experience)  was,  can  tell  what  relief  came  to  my 
soul  by  this  consideration  :  it  was  a  release  to  me 
from  my  former  bonds,  and  a  shelter  from  the 
former  storm :  I  seemed  now  to  stand  upon  the 
same  ground  with  other  sinners,  and  to  have  as  good 
right  to  the  word  and  prayer  as  any  of  they. 

189.  Now  I  say,  I  was  in  hopes  that  my  sin  was 

not  unpardonable,  but  that  there  might 

Satan  did  now        i      r  c  i_     •     r       • 

lay  about  him        be  hopes  for  me  to  obtain  forgiveness. 

But  °h  '    h°W  Satan  did  now  Ia7  about 
him   for  to  bring  me   down   again! 

But  he  could  by  no  means  do  it,  neither  this  day, 
nor  the  most  part  of  the  next,  for  this  good  sentence 
stood  like  a  mill-post  at  my  back :  yet  towards  the 
evening  of  the  next  day,  I  felt  this  word  begin  to 
leave  me,  and  to  withdraw  its  supportation  from  me, 
and  so  I  returned  to  my  old  fears  again,  but  with 
a  great  deal  of  grudging  and  peevishness,  for  I  feared 
the  sorrow  of  despair ;  nor  could  my  faith  now  long 
retain  this  word. 

190.  But  the  next  day  at  evening,  being  under 
many  fears,  I  went  to  seek  the  Lord,  and  as  I  prayed, 
I  cried,  and  my  soul  cried  to  Him  in  these  words, 
with  strong  cries :  0  Lord,  I  beseech  Thee,  show  me 
that  Thou  hast  loved  me  with  everlasting  love.     Jer. 
xxxi.  j.     I  had  no  sooner  said  it,  but  with  sweetness 
this  returned   upon   me,   as  an  echo,  or  sounding 

108 


I  WENT  TO  BED  IN  QUIET 

again,  /  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love. 
Now  I  went  to  bed  in  quiet ;  also  when  I  awakened 
the  next  morning,  it  was  fresh  upon  my  soul ;  and  I 
believed  it. 

191.  But  yet   the  tempter  left  me   not;  for  it 
could  not  be  so  little  as  an  hundred 

Oh,  the  combats 

times,  that  he  that  day  did  labour  to  that  I  did  then 
break  my  peace.  Oh!. the  combats 
and  conflicts  that  I  did  then  meet  with ;  as  I  strove 
to  hold  by  this  word,  that  of  Esau  would  fly  in 
my  face  like  lightning :  I  should  be  sometimes  up 
and  down  twenty  times  in  an  hour ;  yet  God  did 
bear  me  up,  and  keep  my  heart  upon  this  word ; 
from  which  I  had  also,  for  several  days  together, 
very  much  sweetness,  and  comfortable  hopes  of 
pardon :  for  thus  it  was  made  out  unto  me,  /  loved 
thee  whilst  thou  wast  committing  this  sin,  I  loved  thcc 
before,  I  love  thee  still,  and  I  will  love  thee  for  ever. 

1 92.  Yet  I  saw  my  sin  most  barbarous,  and  a  filthy 
crime,  and  could  not  but  conclude,  and 

My  sin  a  bar- 
that  with  great  shame  and  astonish-     barous  and  filthy 

ment,  that  I  had  horribly  abused  the 
holy  Son  of  God :  wherefore  I  felt  my  soul  greatly 
to  love  and  pity  Him,  and  my  bowels  to  yearn  to- 
wards  Him ;    for   I    saw   He    was   still  my  friend, 

and   did   reward  me   good   for   evil ; 

,     ^  °.  I  had  a  hot  de- 

yea,  the  love  and  affection  that  then     sire  of  revenge- 
did    burn    within    to   my   Lord    and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  did  work  at  this  time  such  a 

109 


t       GRACE  ABOUNDING 

strong  and  hot  desire  of  revengement  upon  myself 
for  the  abuse  I  had  done  unto  Him,  that  to  speak  as 
I  then  thought,  had  I  had  a  thousand  gallons  of  blood 
within  my  veins,  I  could  freely  then  have  spilt  it  all, 
at  the  command  and  feet  of  this  my  Lord  and 
Saviour. 

193.  And  as  I  was  thus  in  musing,  and  in  my 
studies,   considering  how  to  love  the  Lord,  and  to 
express  my  love  to  Him,  that  saying  came  in  upon 
me,  If  Thou,  Lord,  shouldst  mark  iniquities,  0  Lord, 
who    should  stand  ?     But   there  is  forgiveness  with 
Thee,  that  Thou  mayest  be  feared.     Psalm  cxxx.  3,  4. 
These  were  good  words  to  me,  especially  the  latter 
part  thereof ;  to  wit,  that   there  is  forgiveness  with 
the  Lord,  that  He  might  be  feared ;  that  is,  as  then 
I  understood  it,  that  He  might  be  loved,  and  had 
in  reverence;   for    it   was    thus    made  out   to  me, 
That  the  great  God  did  set  so  high  an  esteem  upon 
the  love  of  His  poor  creatures,  that  rather  than  He 
would  go  without  their  love,  He  would  pardon  their 
transgressions. 

194.  And   now  was   that  word  fulfilled  on  me, 

and    I    was    also    refreshed    by    it; 
My  soul  at  this        _,,  ,  ,  /     / 

time  set  at  That  thou  mayest   remember  ana   be 

er  y  confounded,  and  never  open  thy  mouth 

any  more,  because  of  thy  shame,  when  I  am  pacified 
toward  thee  for  all  that  thou  hast  done,  saith  the 
Lord  God.  Ezek.  xvi.  63.  Thus  was  my  soul  at 
this  time  (and  as  I  then  did  think  for  ever)  set  at 

no 


WORDS  ON  WHICH  I  LEANED 

liberty  from  being  afflicted  with  my  former  guilt  and 
amazement. 

195.  But  before  many  weeks  were  gone,  I  be- 
gan to  despond  again,   fearing,  lest,     j  began  t?  des. 
notwithstanding   all    that  I   had   en-     pond  again 
joyed,  that  I  might  be  deceived  and  destroyed  at  the 
last;    for  this  consideration   came  strong    into   my 
mind,  That  whatever  comfort  and  peace  I  thought  I 
might  have  from  the  word  of  the  promise  of  life,  yet 
unless  there  could  be  found  in  my  refreshment,  a  con- 
currence and  agreement  in  the  scriptures,  let  me  think 
what  I  will  thereof,  and  hold  it  never  so  fast,  I  should 
find  no  such  thing  at  the  end ;  And  the  scripture  cannot 
be  broken.     John  x.  35. 

196.  Now  began  my  heart  again  to  ache,  and 
fear  I  might  meet  with  a  disappoint-     j  examine  my 
ment  at   last.     Wherefore   I    began     former  comfort 
with  all  seriousness  to  examine  my  former  comfort, 
and  to  consider  whether  one  that  had   sinned  as  I 
had  done,  might  with  confidence  trust  upon  the  faith- 
fulness of  God,  laid  down  in  those  words,  by  which 
I  had  been  comforted,  and  on   which  I  had  leaned 
myself:  but  now  were  brought  those  sayings  to  my 
mind.     For  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  were  once  en- 
lightened, and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were 
made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  have  tasted  the 
good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come,  if  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again  unto 
repentance.    Heb.  vi.  4-6.    For,  if  we  sin  wilfully,  after 

H  III 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  there 
remains  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin,  but  a  certain  fearful 
looking  for  of  judgment,  and  Jiery  indignation,  which 
shall  devour  the  adversaries.  Heb.  x.  26,  27.  As 
Esau,  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat,  sold  his  birthright. 
For  ye  know  how  that  afterward,  when  he  would 
have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected^  for  he 
found  no  place  of  repentance,  though  he  sought  it  care- 
fully with  tears.  Heb.  xii.  16,  17. 

197.  Now  was   the  word  of  the  gospel  forced 

from  my  soul  ;  so  that  no  promise  or 
I  have  neither  ,        -         ,    . 

foot-hold  or  hand-    encouragement  was   to  be  found  in 

the    Bible   for   me  :    and   now    would 


props  of  that  saying  work  upon  my  spirit  to 

scnpture  »*   • 

afflict  me,   Rejoice  not,   0  Israel,  for 

joy,  as  other  people.  Hos.  ix.  i.  For  I  saw  indeed, 
there  was  cause  of  rejoicing  for  those  that  held 
to  Jesus  ;  but  for  me,  I  had  cut  myself  off  by  my 
transgressions,  and  left  myself  neither  foot-hold,  or 
hand-hold,  among  all  the  stays  and  props  in  the 
precious  word  of  life. 

198.  And  truly,  I  did  now   feel  myself  to  sink 
into   a    erulph,    as    an   house   whose 

I  had  no  peace          r         »     •         •     j  j      T    j-j  1-1 

for  two  years         foundation  is  destroyed  ;  I  did  liken 

myself  in  this  condition,  unto  the 
case  of  some  child  that  was  fallen  into  a  mill-pit, 
who  though  it  could  make  some  shift  to  scramble  and 
sprawl  in  the  water,  yet  because  it  could  find  neither 
hold  for  hand  nor  foot,  therefore  at  last  it  must  die 


'MANY  DAYS'  ARE  NOT  FOR  EVER 

in  that  condition.  So  soon  as  this  fresh  assault  had 
fastened  on  my  soul,  that  scripture  came  into  my 
heart,  This  for  many  days.  Dan.  x.  14.  And 
indeed  I  found  it  was  so ;  for  I  could  not  be 
delivered,  nor  brought  to  peace  again,  until  well 
nigh  two  years  and  a  half  were  com- 

11       f   •  TTTI         r  *  feafed  this 

pletely  finished.      Wherefore    these     condition  would 
words,    though  in    themselves,  they 
tended  to  discouragement,  yet  to  me,  who  feared 
this  condition  would  be  eternal,  they  were  at  some 
times  as  an  help  and  refreshment  to  me. 

199.  For,    thought   I,    many    days    are    not    for 
ever,  many  days  will  have  an  end ;  therefore  seeing 
I  was  to  be  afflicted  not  a  few  but  many  days,  yet  I 
was  glad  it  was  but  for  many  days.     Thus,  I  say,  I 
would  recall  myself  sometimes,  and  give  myself  an 
help,  for  as  soon  as  ever  the  words  came  into  my 
mind,  at  first,  I  knew  my  trouble   would  be  long, 
yet  this  would  be  but  sometimes ;  for  I  could  not 
always   think  on  this,   nor  ever  be  helped  by  it, 
though  I  did. 

200.  Now  while  the  scriptures  lay  before  me, 
and  laid  sin  anew  at  my  door,  that     «Iwillpray. 

saying,  in  Luke  xviii.  i,  with  others,     "Tistonoboot,* 

said  Satan.    Yet 
did  encourage    me  to  prayer:    then     said  i,  «i  will 

the  tempter  laid   again  at   me  very     pray 
sore,    suggesting,    That   neither  the  mercy  of  God, 
nor  yet  the  blood  of  Christ,  did  at  all  concern  me,  nor 
could  they  help  me  for  my  sin ;  therefore  It  was  but 

"3 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

in  vain  to  pray.  Yet,  thought  I,  /  will  pray.  But, 
said  the  tempter,  your  sin  is  unpardonable.  Well, 
said  I,  I  will  pray.  Tis  to  no  boot,  said  he. 
Yet  said  I,  /  will  pray.  So  I  went  to  prayer  to 
God ;  and  while  I  was  at  prayer,  I  uttered  words 
to  this  effect :  Lord,  Satan  tells  me,  that  neither  Thy 
mercy,  nor  Christ's  blood,  is  sufficient  to  save  my  soul : 
Lord,  shall  I  honour  Thee  most,  by  believing  Thou  wilt, 
and  canst  ?  or  him,  by  believing  Thou  neither  wilt  not 
nor  canst  ?  Lord,  I  would  fain  honour  Thee,  by  believ- 
ing Thou  wilt  and  canst. 

201.  And  as  I  was  thus  before   the  Lord,  that 

I  could  not  think  scripture  fastened  on  my  heart  (O 
I  had  faith  man^  great  js  thy  fakh^  Mau>  xy  2g^ 

even  as  if  one  had  clapped  me  on  the  back,  as  I 
was  on  my  knees  before  God :  yet  I  was  not  able  to 
believe  this,  that  this  was  a  prayer  of  faith,  till  almost 
six  months  after ;  for  I  could  not  think  that  I  had 
faith,  or  that  there  should  be  a  word  for  me  to  act 
faith  on ;  therefore  I  should  still  be,  as  sticking  in 
the  jaws  of  desperation,  and  went  mourning  up  and 
down  in  a  sad  condition. 

202.  There  was  nothing  now  that  I  longed  for 

more  than  to  be  put  out  of  doubt,  as 
to  this  thing  in  question,  and  as  I 

doubt*  °Ut°f          was  vehementty  desiring  to  know,  if 

there  was  indeed  hope  for  me,  these 

words    came    rolling  into  my  mind,  Will  the   Lord 

cast    off  for    ever  ?   and  will  He  be  favourable  no 

114 


HIS  PROMISE  DOTH  NOT  FAIL 

more?  Is  His  mercy  clean  gone  for  ever?  Doth  His 
promise  fail  for  evermore  ?  Hath  God  forgotten  to 
be  gracious  ?  Hath  He  In  anger  shut  up  His  tender 
mercies?  Ps.  Ixxvii.  7-9.  And  all  the  while  they 
run  in  my  mind,  methought  I  had  still  this  as  the 
answer,  'Tis  a  question  whether  He  hath  or  no:  it 
may  be  He  hath  not.  Yea,  the  interrogatory  seemed 
to  me  to  carry  in  it  a  sure  affirmation  that  indeed 
He  had  not,  nor  would  so  cast  off,  but  would  be 
favourable :  that  His  promise  doth  not  fail,  and  that 
He  had  not  forgotten  to  be  gracious,  nor  would  in 
anger  shut  up  tender  mercy.  Something  also  there 
was  upon  my  heart  at  the  same  time,  which  I 
cannot  now  call  to  mind,  which,  with  this  text, 
did  sweeten  my  heart,  and  make  me  conclude,  that 
His  mercy  might  not  be  quite  gone,  nor  clean  gone 
for  ever. 

203.  At  another  time  I  remembered,  I  was  again 
much  under  this  question,  Whether 
the  blood  of  Christ  was  sufficient  to 
save  my  soul?  in  which  doubt  I  con- 
tinued  from  morning,  till  about  seven 
or  eight  at  night :  and  at  last,  when  I  was,  as  it 
were,  quite  worn  out  with  fear,  lest  it  should  not 
lay  hold  on  me,  these  words  did  sound  suddenly 
within  my  heart :  He  is  able.  But  methought, 
this  word  able,  was  spoke  loud  unto  me  ;  it  showed 
a  great  word,  it  seemed  to  be  writ  in  great  letters, 
and  gave  such  a  jostle  to  my  fear  and  doubt  (I  mean 

"5 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

for  the  time  it  tarried  with  me,  which  was  about  a 
day)  as  I  never  had  from  that,  all  my  life,  either 
before  or  after.  Heb.  vii.  25. 

204.  But  one  morning  as  I  was  again  at  prayer,  and 

trembling  under  the  fear  of  this,  That 
That  sentence  j     j-  /->    *          77/7  i 

darted  in  upon        no  word  of  God  could  help  me,  that 


Piece  of  a  sentence  darted  in  upon 
me,  My  grace  is  sufficient.  At 
this,  methought  I  felt  some  stay,  as  if  there  might 
be  hopes.  But,  oh  !  how  good  a  thing  it  is  for 
God  to  send  His  word  !  for,  about  a  fortnight 
before,  I  was  looking  on  this  very  place,  and  then  I 
thought  it  could  not  come  near  my  soul  with  comfort, 
therefore  I  threw  down  my  book  in  a  pet:  then 
I  thought  it  was  not  large  enough  for  me  ;  no,  not 
large  enough  ;  but  now  it  was  as  if  it  had  arms  of 
grace  so  wide,  that  it  could  not  only  enclose  me,  but 
many  more  such  as  I  besides. 

205.  By  these  words  I  was  sustained,  yet  not 
without  exceeding  conflicts,  for  the 
space  of  seven  or  eight  weeks;  for 
twenty  times  a  mv  peace  would  be  in  it,  and  out, 
sometimes  twenty  times  a  day  ; 
comfort  now,  and  trouble  presently  ;  peace  now,  and 
before  I  could  go  a  furlong,  as  full  of  fear  and  guilt 
as  ever  heart  could  hold.  And  this  was  not  only 
now  and  then,  but  my  whole  seven  weeks'  experience  : 
for  this  about  the  sufficiency  of  grace,  and  that  of 
Esau's  parting  with  his  birthright,  would  be  like 

116 


MY  GRACE  IS  SUFFICIENT 

a  pair  of  scales  within  my  mind ;  sometimes  one 
end  would  be  uppermost,  and  sometimes  again  the 
other;  according  to  which  would  be  my  peace  or 
trouble. 

206.  Therefore  I  did  still  pray  to  God,  that  He 
would   come   in   with  this  scripture     Therefore  I  did 
more  fully  on  my  heart ;  to  wit,  that     stm  Pray to  God 
He  would  help  me  to  apply  the  whole  sentence,  for 
as  yet  I  could  not :  that  He  gave,  that  I  gathered ; 
but  farther  I  could  not  go,  for  as  yet  it  only  helped 
me    to   hope  there   might  be  mercy  for  me ;    My 
grace  is  sufficient :  And  though  it  came  no  farther, 
it  answered  my  former  question,  to  wit,  That  there 
was   hope ;    yet  because   for   thee    was    left    out, 
I  was  not  contented,  but  prayed  to  God  for  that 
also.     Wherefore,  one  day,  when  I  was  in  a  meeting 
of  God's  people,  full  of  sadness  and  terror ;  for  my 

fears   again  were   strong   upon   me ; 

My  fears  again 

and,  as  I  was  now  thinking,  my  soul     were  strong 
was  never  the  better,  but  my  case 
most  sad  and  fearful,  these  words  did  with  great 
power  suddenly  break  in  upon  me  ;    My  grace   is 
sufficient  for  thee,  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for   thee,    three    times    together : 
And  oh !  methought  that  every  word  was  a  mighty 
word  unto  me ;    as  My,  and  grace,   and  sufficient, 
and  for  thee  •   they  were  then,  and  sometimes  are 
still,  far  bigger  than  others  be. 

207.  At  which  time  my   understanding  was  so 

117 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

enlightened,  that  I  was  as  though  I  had  seen  the 

My  understand-       Lord  Jesus   look   down  from  heaven, 

ing  enlightened  through  the  tiles  upon  me,  and  direct 
these  words  unto  me.  This  sent  me  mourning 
home  ;  it  broke  my  heart,  and  filled  me  full  of  joy, 
and  laid  me  low  as  the  dust  ;  only  it  stayed  not  long 
with  me,  I  mean  in  this  glory  and  refreshing 
comfort  ;  yet  it  continued  with  me  for  several  weeks, 
and  did  encourage  me  to  hope  :  but  as  soon  as  that 
My  soul  did  powerful  operation  of  it  was  taken 

hang  as  in  a  pair  from  my  heart,  that  other,  about 
of  scales,  some-  J  ' 

times  up,  and  Esau,  returned  upon  me  as  before  : 

:s  down  SQ  my  SQUJ  ^  fang  as  in  a  pair  of 


scales  again,  sometimes  up,  and  sometimes   down  ; 
now  in  peace,  and  anon  again  in  terror. 

208.  Thus  I  went  on  for  many  weeks,  sometimes 
comforted,  and  sometimes  tormented  ;  and  especially 
at  sometimes  my  torment  would  be  very  sore,  for  all 
those  scriptures  forenamed  in  the  Hebrews,  would 
be  set  before  me,  as  the  only  sentences  that  would 
keep  me  out  of  heaven.  ,  Then  again  I  would  begin 
to  repent  that  ever  that  thought  went  through  me  ; 
I  would  also  think  thus  with  myself:  Why,  how 
many  scriptures  are  there  against  me  ?  There  are  but 
three  or  four  ;  And  cannot  God  miss  them,  and  save 
me  for  all  them  ?  Sometimes  again  I  would  think, 
Oh  !  if  it  were  not  for  these  three  or  four  words,  now 
how  might  I  be  comforted  /  And  I  could  hardly 
forbear  at  some  times,  to  wish  them  out  of  the  book. 

118 


THE  CITY  OF  REFUGE 

209.  Then   methought  I  should   see  as  if  both 
Peter  and  Paul,  and  John,   and  all     j  thought  Peter 
the  writers,  did  look  with  scorn  upon     *nd  Paul  and 

.      ,     .  IT      John  did  look 

me,  and  hold  me  in  denson ;  and  as  if  with  scorn  upon 
they  had  said  unto  me,  All  our  words 
are  truth,  one  of  as  much  force  as  another :  it  is 
not  we  that  have  cut  you  off,  but  you  have  cast  away 
yourself.  There  is  none  of  our  sentences  that  you  must 
take  hold  upon,  but  these  and  such  as  these  ;  It  is  im- 
possible, Heb.  vi.  ;  there  remains  no  more  sacrifice  for 
sin,  Heb.  x.  And  it  had  been  better  for  them  not  to 
have  known  the  will  of  God,  than  after  they  had 
known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  commandment  delivered 
unto  them,  2  Peter  ii.  21.  For  the  Scriptures  cannot 
be  broken.  John  x.  35. 

210.  These,  as  the  elders  of  the  city  of  refuge, 
I   saw,   were  to  be  judges  both  of 

my  case  and  me,  while  I  stood  with  tIecSyofre°fuge 

the  avenger   of  blood  at  my  heels,  were  to  be  my 

•_»•  i-    •  r      i   i-  judges, 

trembling  at  their  gate  for  deliverance  ; 

also  with  a  thousand  fears  and  mistrusts,  I  doubted 
that  they  would  shut  me  out  for  ever.     Joshua  xx. 

3,4- 

211.  Thus     I    was    confounded,    not    knowing 
what  to  do,  or  how  to  be  satisfied  in     j  quaked  at  the 
this  question,  Whether  the  scriptures     apostles 
could  agree  in  the  salvation  of  my  soul  ?      I  quaked 
at  the  apostles  ;  I  knew  their  words  were  true,  and 
that  they  must  stand  for  ever. 

119 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

212.  And  I  remember  one  day,  as  I  was  in  divers 
I  was  in  divers       frames  of  spirit,  and  considering  that 
frames  of  spirit        thege  frames    were   according   to  the 

nature  of  several  scriptures  that  came  in  upon  my 
mind  ;  if  this  of  grace,  then  was  I  quiet ;  but  of  that 
of  Esau,  then  tormented.  Lord,  thought  I,  if  both 
these  scriptures  should  meet  in  my  heart  at  once,  I  wonder 
which  of  them  would  get  the  better  of  me.  So  me- 
thought  I  had  a  longing  mind  that  they  might  come 
both  together  upon  me ;  yea,  I  desired  of  God  they 
might. 

213.  Well,  about  two  or  three  days  after,  so  they 

did  indeed ;  they  bolted  both  upon 

Esau's  birth-  .'          ' 

right  began  to       me   at  a  time,    and  did   work    and 

WcLX  WG3.k  •  /•* 

struggle  strangely  in  me  for  a  while ; 
at  last  that  about  Esau's  birthright  began  to  wax 
weak,  and  withdraw,  and  vanish ;  and  this,  about 
the  sufficiency  of  grace  prevailed  with  peace  and 
joy.  And  as  I  was  in  a  muse  about  this  thing, 
that  scripture  came  in  upon  me,  Mercy  rejoiceth 
against  judgment.  James  ii.  13. 

214.  This  was  a  wonderment  to  me  ;  yet  truly, 

I  am  apt  to  think  it  was  of  God  :  for 
This  was  a  r  a 

wonderment  to       the  word  of  the  law  and  wrath,  must 

give  place  to  the  word  of  life  and 
grace ;  because,  though  the  word  of  condemnation 
be  glorious,  yet  the  word  of  life  and  salvation  doth 
far  exceed  in  glory.  2  Cor.  iii.  8-n.  Mark  ix. 
5-7.  John  vi.  37.  Also  that  Moses  and  Ellas 

120 


HIM  THAT  COMES,  HIM,  ANY  HIM 

must  both  vanish,  and  leave  Christ  and  His  saints 
alone. 

215.  This  scripture  also   did  now  most  sweetly 

visit  my  soul ;   And  him  that  cometh 

,  ,     7      .     . '  .      Oh  I  the  comfort 

to  Me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out.     Oh !     I  had  from  '  in 

the  comfort  that  I  had  from  this 
word,  in  no  wise!  As  who  should  say,  By  no 
means,  for  nothing  whatever  he  hath  done.  But 
Satan  would  greatly  labour  to  pull  this  promise  from 
me,  telling  of  me,  That  Christ  did  not  mean  me  and 
such  as  I,  but  sinners  of  a  lower  rank,  that  had  not 
done  as  I  had  done.  But  I  would  answer  him  again, 
Satan,  here  is  in  these  words  no  such  exception  ;  but 
him  that  co?nes,  him,  any  him:  him  that  cometh  to  Me  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out.  And  this  I  well  remember 
still,  that  of  all  the  slights  that  Satan  used  to  take 
this  scripture  from  me,  yet  he  never  did  so  much  as 
put  this  question,  But  do  you  come  aright  ?  And  I 
have  thought  the  reason  was,  because  he  thought  I 
knew  full  well  what  coming  aright  was ;  for  I  saw 
that  to  come  aright,  was  to  come  as  I  was,  a  vile 
and  ungodly  sinner,  and  to  cast  myself  at  the  feet  of 
mercy,  condemning  myself  for  sin.  If  ever  Satan 
and  I  did  strive  for  any  word  of  God 
in  all  my  life,  it  was  for  this  good 
word  of  Christ ;  he  at  one  end,  and  j£gjflcd' and 
I  at  the  other  :  Oh  !  what  work  did 
we  make  !  It  was  for  this  in  John,  I  say,  that  we  did 
so  tug  and  strive,  he  pulled,  and  I  pulled ;  but 

121 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

God  be  praised,  I  got  the  better  of  him  ;  I  got  some 
sweetness  from  it. 

216.  But   notwithstanding   all   these   helps,  and 
Wherefore  I          blessed  words  of  grace,  yet  that  of 
went  another         Esaifs  selling  of  his  birthright,  would 

way  to  work  .n  .  ,.  •      •  . 

still  at  times  distress  my  conscience  : 
for  though  I  had  been  most-  sweetly  comforted, 
and  that  but  just  before,  yet  when  that  came  into  my 
mind,  'twould  make  me  fear  again :  I  could  not  be 
quite  rid  thereof,  'twould  every  day  be  with  me  : 
wherefore  now  I  went  another  way  to  work,  even  to 
consider  the  nature  of  this  blasphemous  thought,  I 
mean,  if  I  should  take  the  words  at  the  largest,  and 
give  them  their  own  natural  force  and  scope,  even 
every  word  therein :  so  when  I  had  thus  considered, 
I  found,  that  if  they  were  fairly  taken,  they  would 
amount  to  this  ;  That  1  had  freely  left  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  His  choice,  whether  He  would  be  my 
Saviour  or  no;  for  the  wicked  words  were  these, 
Let  Him  go,  if  He  will.  Then  that  scripture  gave 
me  hope,  /  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee. 
Heb.  xiii.  5.  0  Lord,  said  I,  but  I  have  left  Thee. 
Then  it  answered  again,  But  I  will  not  leave  thee. 
For  this  I  thanked  God  also. 

217.  Yet  I  was  grievous  afraid  He  should,  and 

found  it  exceeding  hard  to  trust  Him, 
I  found  it  ex-  & 

ceeding-  hard  to      seeing  I  had  so  offended  Him :  I  could 

have  been  exceeding  glad  that  this 

thought  had  never  befallen  ;  for  then  I  thought  I 

122 


I  HAD  SO  OFFENDED  HIM 

could  with  more  ease  and  freedom  in  abundance, 
have  leaned  on  His  grace.  I  saw  it  was  with  me, 
as  it  was  with  Joseph's  brethren  ;  the  guilt  of  their 
own  wickedness  did  often  fill  them  with  fears  that 
their  brother  would  at  last  despise  them.  Gen.  1. 
15,  1 6,  etc. 

218.  Yet  above  all  the  scriptures  that  I  yet  did 
meet  with  that  in  Joshua  xx.  was  the 

I  was  convinced 

greatest  comfort  to  me,  which  speaks  that  I  was  a 
of  the  slayer  that  was  to  flee  for 
refuge  :  And  If  the  avenger  of  blood  pursue  the  slayer, 
then  saith  Moses,  they  that  are  the  elders  of  the  city  of 
refuge  shall  not  deliver  him  into  his  hands,  because  he 
smote  his  neighbour  unwittingly  and  hated  him  not 
aforetime.  Oh!  blessed  be  God  for  this  word:  I 
was  convinced  that  I  was  the  slayer ;  and  that  the 
avenger  of  blood  pursued  me,  I  felt  with  great  terror  ; 
only  now  it  remained  that  I  inquire  whether  I  have 
right  to  enter  the  city  of  refuge :  so  I  found,  that 
he  must  not,  who  lay  In  wait  to  shed  blood :  It 
was  not  the  wilful  murderer,  but  he  who  unwittingly 
did  it,  he  who  did  it  unawares  ;  not  out  of  spite,  or 
grudge,  or  malice,  he  that  shed  it  unwittingly:  even  he 
who  did  not  hate  his  neighbour  before.  Wherefore, 

219.  I  thought  verily  I  was  the  man  that  must 
enter,    because    I    had    smitten   my 

/       I  thought  venly 

neighbour  unwittingly,  ana  hated  Him     1  was  the  man 
not  aforetime.    I  hated  Him  not  afore- 
time  ;  no,  I  prayed  unto  Him,  was  tender  of  sinning 

123 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

against  Him ;  yea,  and  against  this  wicked  temptation 
I  had  strove  for  a  twelvemonth  before;  yea,  and 
also  when  it  did  pass  through  my  heart,  it  did  in 
spite  of  my  teeth :  wherefore  I  thought  I  had  a 
right  to  enter  this  city,  and  the  elders,  which  are 
the  apostles,  were  not  to  deliver  me  up.  This  there- 
fore was  great  comfort  to  me,  and  gave  me  much 
ground  of  hope. 

220.  Yet  being  very  critical,  for  my  smart  had 

made  me  that  I  knew  not  what  ground 
ground wassure  was  sure  enough  to  bear  me,  I  had 
enough  to  bear  one  question  that  my  soul  did  much 

desire  to  be  resolved  about ;  and  that 
was,  Whether  it  be  possible  for  any  soul  that  hath 
sinned  the  unpardonable  sin,  yet  after  that  to  receive, 
though  but  the  least,  true  spiritual  comfort  from 
God  through  Christ  ?  The  which  after  I  had  much 
considered,  I  found  the  answer  was,  No,  they 
could  not ;  and  that  for  these  reasons : — 

221.  First,  Because  those  that  have  sinned  that 
sin,  they  are  debarred  a  share  in  the  blood  of  Christ ; 
and  being  shut  out  of  that,  they  must  needs  be  void 
of  the  least  ground  of  hope,  and  so  of  spiritual 
comfort ;  For  to  such  there  remains  no  more  sacrifice 

for  sin.  Heb.  x.  26,  27.  Secondly,  Because  they  are 
denied  a  share  in  the  promise  of  life  :  //  shall  never 
be  forgiven  him  neither  in  this  world,  neither  in  the 
world  to  come.  Matt.  xii.  32.  Thirdly,  The  Son  of 
God  excludes  them  also  from  a  share  in  His  blessed 

124 


THEIR  VISAGE  CHANGED 

intercession,  being  for  ever  ashamed  to  own  them, 
both  before  His  holy  Father,  and  the  blessed  angels 
in  heaven.  Mark  viii. 

2,22.  When  I  had  with  much  deliberation  con- 
sidered of  this  matter,  and  could  not 

I  had  been  so 

but  conclude  that  the  Lord  had  com-     greatly 
forted  me,   and  that   too  after  this 
my  wicked   sin  :  then  methought  I  durst   venture 
to  come  nigh  unto  those  most  fearful  and  terrible 
scriptures,  with  which  all  this  while  I  had  been  so 
greatly  affrighted,  and  on  which  indeed,  before  I 
durst  scarce  cast  mine  eye  (yea,  had  much  ado  an 
hundred   times,    to  forbear   wishing     l  bg  an     ^c 

them  OUt  of  the  Bible),  for  I  thought      some  measure  of 

they  would  destroy  me ;  but  now, 
I  say,  I  began  to  take  some  measure  of  encourage- 
ment, to  come  close  to  them  to  read  them,  and  con- 
sider them,  and  to  weigh  their  scope  and  tendency. 

223.  The  which  when  I  began  to  do,  I  found  their 
visage  changed:  for  they  looked  not  l cametrembling 
so  grimly,  as  before  I  thought  they  to  the  sixth  of 
did :  and  first  I  came  to  the  sixth  of 
the  Hebrews,  yet  trembling  for  fear  it  should 
strike  me ;  which  when  I  had  considered,  I  found 
that  the  falling  there  intended,  was  a  falling 
quite  away;  that  is  as  I  conceived,  a  falling  from, 
and  absolute  denying  of  the  gospel,  of  remission  of 
sins  by  Jesus  Christ;  for,  from  them  the  apostle 
begins  his  argument,  verses  i,  2,  3,  4.  Secondly,  I 

125 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

found  that  this  falling  away,  must  be  openly,  even  in 
the  view  of  the  world,  even  so  as  to  put  Christ  to 
an  open  shame.  Thirdly,  I  found  those  he  there 
intended,  were  for  ever  shut  up  of  God,  both  in 

blindness,  hardness,  and  impenitency  : 
I  found  my  sin  Tj  .  •  •;/  j7  /  /  »  /  , 

was  not  the  sin      »  *s  impossible  they  should  be  renewed 

intended*06  aSain  unto  repentance.  By  all  these 

particulars,  I  found  to  God's  ever- 
lasting praise,  my  sin  was  not  the  sin  in  this  place 
intended. 

First,  I  confessed  I  was  fallen,  but  not  fallen  away ; 
that  is,  from  the  profession  of  faith  in  Jesus  unto 
eternal  life. 

Secondly,  I  confessed  that  I  had  put  Jesus  Christ 
to  shame  by  my  sin,  but  not  to  open  shame ;  I  did 
not  deny  Him  before  men,  nor  condemn  Him  as  a 
fruitless  One  before  the  world. 

Thirdly,  Nor  did  I  find  that  God  had  shut  me  up, 
I  found' it  hard  or  denied  me  to  come  (though  I  found 
work  to  come  jt  narcj  Work  indeed  to  come)  to  Him 
by  sorrow  and  repentance :  blessed  be  God  for 
unsearchable  grace! 

224.  Then  I  considered  that  in  the  loth  chapter 

of  the  Hebrews,  and  found  that  the 
The  Lord  knows 

my  sin  was  wilful  sin   tnere   mentioned,    is   not 

every  wilful  sin,  but  that  which  doth 
throw  off  Christ,  and  then  His  commandments  too. 
Secondly,  That  must  be  done  also  openly,  before  two 
or  three  witnesses,  to  answer  that  of  the  law,  verse 

126 


'LIKE  A  SPEAR  AGAINST  ME' 

28.  Thirdly,  This  sin  cannot  be  committed,  but  with 
great  despite  done  to  the  Spirit  of  Grace  ;  despising 
both  the  dissuasions  from  that  sin,  and  the  persua- 
sions to  the  contrary.  But  the  Lord  knows,  though 
this  my  sin  was  devilish,  yet  it  did  not  amount  to  these. 

225.  And  as  touching  that  in  the   I2th  of  the 
Hebrews,  about   Esau's    selling  of  his    birthright ; 
though  this  was  that  which  killed  me,  and  stood 
like  a  spear  against  me,  yet  now  I  did  consider,  First, 
that  his  was  not  a  hasty  thought  against  the  con- 
tinual labour  of  his  mind,  but  a  thought  consented 
to,  and  put  in  practice  likewise,  and  that  after  some 
deliberation,  Gen.  xxv.     Secondly,  It  was  a  public  and 
open  action,  even  before  his  brother,  if  not  before 
many  more ;  this  made  his  sin  of  a  far  more  heinous 
nature  than  otherwise  it  would  have  been.     Thirdly, 
He  continued  to  slight  his  birthright :    He  did  eat 
and  drink,  and  went  his  way :    thus  Esau  despised 
his  birthright,  yea,  twenty  years  after  he  was  found 
to  despise  it  still.      And  Esau  said,  /  have  enough, 
my  brother,  keep  that  thou  hast  unto  thyself.     Gen. 
xxxiii.  9. 

226.  Now  as  touching  this,  that  Esau  sought  a 
place  of  repentance ;  thus  I  thought  : 

First,   This  was  not    for  the  birth- 
right, but  the  blessing:  this  is  clear 
from     the      apostle,     and      is     dis- 
tinguished  by  Esau   himself;    He    took    away   my 
birthright    (that  is,  formerly)  ;    and  behold  now  he 
i  127 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

hath  taken  away  my  blessing.  Gen.  xxvii.  36. 
Secondly,  Now,  this  being  thus  considered,  I  came 
again  to  the  apostle,  to  see  what  might  be  the 
mind  of  God,  in  a  New-Testament  style  and  sense 
concerning  Esau's  sin ;  and  so  far  as  I  could  con- 
ceive, this  was  the  mind  of  God,  that  the  birthright 
signified  regeneration,  and  the  blessing,  the  eternal 
inheritance ;  for  so  the  apostle  seems  to  hint.  Lest 
there  be  any  profane  person,  as  Esau,  who  for  one 
morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birthright;  as  if  he  should 
say,  That  shall  cast  off  all  those  blessed  beginnings 
of  God,  that  at  present  are  upon  him,  in  order  to  a  new- 
birth  ;  lest  they  become  as  Esau,  even  be  rejected 
afterwards,  when  they  would  inherit  the  blessing. 

227.  For  many  there  are,    who,  in  the  day  of 
grace  and  mercy,  despise  those  things  which  are 
indeed  the  birthright  to  heaven,  who  yet  when  the 
deciding   day   appears,  will   cry  as  loud  as  Esau, 
Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us ;    but  then,  as  Isaac  would 
not  repent,  no  more  will  God  the  Father,  but  will 
say,   /  have   blessed  these,  yea,   and   they  shall  be 
blessed;    but    as    for    you,    Depart,   you    are    the 
workers    of  iniquity.      Gen.   xxvii.    32 ;    Luku    xiii. 
25-27. 

228.  When  I  had  thus  considered  these  scriptures, 

and  found  that   thus  to  understand 
The  hinder  part  ,  ,. 

of  the  tempest  them,  was  not  against,  but  according 
only  remained  tQ  other  scriptures  .  this  stiH  added 

further  to  my  encouragement  and  comfort,  and  also 

128 


THE  THUNDER  WAS  GONE 

gave  a  great  blow  to  that  objection,  to  wit,  That 
the  scriptures  could  not  agree  in  the  salvation  of  my 
soul.  And  now  remained  only  the  hinder  part  of 
the  tempest,  for  the  thunder  was  gone  beyond  me, 
only  some  drops  did  still  remain,  that  now  and  then 
would  fall  upon  me ;  but  because  my  former  frights 
and  anguish  were  very  sore  and  deep,  therefore  it 
oft  befall  me  still,  as  it  befalleth  those  that  have 
been  scared  with  fire.  I  thought  every  voice  was, 
Fire  /  fire !  Every  little  touch  would  hurt  my 
tender  conscience. 

229.  But  one  day,  as  I  was  passing  in  the  field, 
and  that  too  with  some  dashes  on 
my  conscience,  fearing  lest  yet  all 
was  not  right,  suddenly  this  sentence 
fell  upon  my  soul,  Thy  righteous- 
ness is  in  heaven ;  and  methought  withal,  I  saw  with 
the  eyes  of  my  soul,  Jesus  Christ  at  God's  right 
hand  :  there,  I  say,  was  my  righteousness  ;  so  that 
wherever  I  was,  or  whatever  I  was  doing,  God 
could  not  say  of  me,  He  wants  My  righteousness  ; 
for  that  was  just  before  Him.  I  also  saw  moreover, 
that  it  was  not  my  good  frame  of  heart  that  made 
my  righteousness  better,  nor  yet  my  bad  frame  that 
made  my  righteousness  worse  ;  for  my  righ^ous- 
ness  was  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  The  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever.  Heb.  xiii.  8. 

230.  Now  did  my  chains  fall  off  my  legs  indeed; 
I    was  loosed  from   my   afflictions   and   irons;   my 

129 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

temptations  also  fled  away;  so  that  from  that  time 
those  dreadful  scriptures  of  God  left  off  to  trouble 

My  chains  fall  me  :  now  went  *  a^so  home  rejoicing, 
off  my  legs  for  the  grace  and  love  of  God;  so 

when  I  came  home,  I  looked  to  see  if  I  could  find 
that  sentence ;  Thy  righteousness  is  in  heaven,  but 

I  went  home  COuld  not  find  such  a  Saying  ;  where- 

rejoicing  fore  my  heart  began   to  sink  again, 

only  that  was  brought  to  my  remembrance,  i  Cor. 
i.  30,  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption ; 
by  this  word  I  saw  the  other  sentence  true. 

231.  For  by  this  scripture  I  saw  that  the  Man 

Christ  Jesus,  as  He  is  distinct  from 
swlltj/a7peace  us>  as  touching  His  bodily  presence,  so 
with  God  fje  is  our  righteousness  and  sanctifica- 

through  Christ  6_ 

tion  before  God.  Here  therefore  I 
lived,  for  some  time,  very  sweetly  at  peace  with  God 
through  Christ;  Oh!  methought,  Christ!  Christ! 
there  was  nothing  but  Christ  that  was  before  my 
eyes :  I  was  not  now  (only)  for  looking  upon  this 
and  the  other  benefits  of  Christ  apart,  as  of  His 
blood,  burial,  or  resurrection,  but  considering  Him 
as  a  whole  Christ !  as  He  in  whom  all  these,  and  all 
His  other  virtues,  relations,  offices  and  operations  met 
together,  and  that  He  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God 
in  heaven. 

232.  'Twas  glorious  to  me  to  see  His  exaltation, 
and  the  worth  and  prevalency  of  all  His  benefits,  and 

130 


'HIS  VICTORY  ALSO  MINE* 

that  because  now  I  could  look  from  myself  to  Him 
and  should  reckon,  that  all  those  graces  of  God  that 
now  were  green  on  me,  were  yet  but 
like  those  cracked  groats  and  four- 
pence-halfpennies  that  rich  men  carry     g£ist's  exalta" 
in  their  purses,  when  their  gold  is  in 
their  trunks  at  home  :  Oh !  I  saw  my  gold  was  in  my 
trunk  at  home!     In  Christ  my  Lord  and  Saviour. 
Now  Christ  was  all ;  all  my  wisdom,  all  my  righteous- 
ness, all  my  sanctification,  and  all  my  redemption. 

233.  Further,  the  Lord  did  also  lead  me  into  the 
mystery  of  union  with  the  Son   of 

God;  that  I  was  joined  to  Him,  that 

I  was  flesh  of  His  flesh,  and  bone  of     union  with  the 

Son  of  God 

His  bone;  and  now  was  that  word 
sweet  to  me  in  Eph.  v.  30.  By  this  also  was  my 
faith  in  Him,  as  my  righteousness,  the  more  con- 
firmed in  me ;  for  if  He  and  I  were  one,  then  His 
righteousness  was  mine,  His  merits  mine.  His  victory 
also  mine.  Now  could  I  see  myself  in  heaven  and 
earth  at  once  :  in  heaven  by  my  Christ,  by  my  head, 
by  my  righteousness  and  life,  though  on  earth  by 
my  body  or  person. 

234.  Now  I  saw  Christ  Jesus  was  looked  upon  of 
God ;  and  should  also  be  looked  upon  by  us,  as  that 
common  or   public  person,    in  whom  all  the  whole 
body  of  His  elect  are  always  to  be  considered  and 
reckoned ;  that  we  fulfilled  the  law  by  Him,  died  by 
Him,  rose  from  the  dead  by  Him,  got  the  victory  over 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

sin,  death,  the  devil,  and  hell,  by  Him ;  when  He 
died,  we  died,  and  so  of  His  resurrection.  Thy 
dead  men  shall  live,  together  with  My  dead  body  shall 
they  arise,  saith  He.  Isa.  xxvi.  1 9.  And  again,  after 
two  days  He  will  revive  us,  and  the  third  day  He  will 
raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  His  sight.  Hosea 
vi.  2.  Which  is  now  fulfilled  by  the  sitting  down  of 
the  Son  of  Man  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  in 
the  heavens  ;  according  to  that  to  the  Ephesians,  And 
hath  raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  Eph.  ii.  6. 

235.  Ah!  these  blessed  considerations  and  scrip- 

I  am  moved  to  tures>  with  many  OtherS  °f  like 
Praise  nature,  were  in  those  days  made  to 

spangle  in  mine  eyes ;  so  that  I  have  cause  to  say, 
Praise  ye  the  Lord.  Praise  God  in  His  sanctuary, 
praise  Him  in  the  Jirmament  of  His  power ;  praise 
Him  for  His  mighty  acts :  praise  Him  according  to  His 
excellent  greatness.  Psalm  cl.  i,  2. 

236.  Having  thus  in  a  few  words  given  you  a 
taste  of  the  sorrow  and  affliction  that  my  soul  went 
under,  by  the  guilt  and  terror  that  this  my  wicked 
thought  did   lay  me  under;  and  having  given   you 
also  a  touch  of  my  deliverance  therefrom,   and  of 
the  sweet  and  blessed  comfort  that  I  met  with  after- 
wards,  which  comfort  dwelt  about  a    twelvemonth 
with  my  heart,  to  my  unspeakable  admiration :  I  will 
now  (God   willing),  before  I  proceed  any  farther^ 
give  you  in  a  word  or  two,  what,  as  I  conceive,  was 

132 


MY  SOUL  MUCH  IN  PRAYER 

the  cause  of  this  temptation  ;  and  also  after  that, 
what  advantage,  at  the  last,  it  became  unto  my  soul. 
237.  For  the  causes,  I  conceived  they  were  princi- 
pally  two:   of  which  tWO   also   I  was      The  cause  of  my 
deeply   convinced   all    the   time   this     temptations 
trouble  lay  upon  me.     The  first  was,  for  that  I  did 
not,  when  I  was  delivered  from  the  temptation  that 
went   before,    still   pray    to  God   to 
keep  me  from  the   temptations  that 


were  to  come  ;  for  though,  as  I  can     temptations  that 

0  .        were  to  come 

say  m  truth,  my  soul  was  much  in 
prayer  before  this  trial  seized  me,  yet  then  I 
prayed  only,  or  at  the  most  principally,  for  the 
removal  of  present  troubles,  and  for  fresh  discoveries 
of  His  love  in  Christ,  which  I  saw  afterwards  was 
not  enough  to  do  ;  I  also  should  have  prayed  that 
the  great  God  would  keep  me  from  the  evil  that 
was  to  come. 

238.  Of  this  I  was  made  deeply  sensible  by  the 
prayer  of   holy  David,  who  when  he   was   under 
present  mercy,  yet  prayed  that  God  would  hold  him 
back    from    sin    and    temptation    to    come  ;     Then, 
saith  he,  shall  I  be  upright,  and  I  shall  be  innocent 

from  the  great  transgression.  Psalm  xix.  13.  By 
this  very  word  was  I  galled  and  condemned  quite 
through  this  long  temptation. 

239.  That  was  also  another  word  that  did  much 
condemn  me  for  my   folly,   in  the   neglect  of  this 
duty.      Heb.   iv.    1  6  :   Let  us  therefore   come   boldly 

'33 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy, 
There  was  an^  fin(^ grace  t°   ^}e^P  m  t'tme  °f  need. 

fno^rword        This  I  had  not  done,  and  therefore 
that  did  much  \ 

condemn  me  for  was  thus  suffered  to  sin  and  fall,  ac- 
cording to  what  is  written,  Pray  that 
ye  enter  not  into  temptation.  And  truly  this  very 
thing  is  to  this  day  of  such  weight  and  awe  upon 
me,  that  I  dare  not,  when  I  come  before  the  Lord, 
go  off  my  knees,  until  I  intreat  Him  for  help  and 
mercy  against  the  temptations  that  are  to  come  ;  and 
I  do  beseech  thee,  reader,  that  thou  learn  to  beware 
of  my  negligence,  by  the  afflictions,  that  for  this 
thing  I  did  for  days,  and  months,  and  years,  with 
sorrow  undergo. 

240.  Another  cause  of  this  temptation  was,  that 
I  had  tempted  God ;  and  on  this  manner  did  I  do 
it :  Upon  a  time  my  wife  was  great  with  child,  and 
before  her  full  time  was  come,  her  pangs,  as  of  a 
woman  in  travail,  were  fierce  and  strongupon  her,  even 
as  if  she  would  have  fallen  immediately  in  labour,  and 
been  delivered  of  an  untimely  birth  :  now  at  this  very 
time  it  was,  that  I  had  been  so  strongly  tempted  to 
question  the  being  of  God ;  wherefore,  as  my  wife 
lay  crying  by  me,  I  said,  but  with  all  secrecy  imagin- 
able, even  thinking  in  my  heart,  Lord,  If  Thou  wilt  now 
remove  this  sad  affliction  from  my  wife,  and  cause  that 
she  be  troubled  no  more  therewith  this  night  (and  now 
were  her  pangs  just  upon  her),  then  I  shall  know  that 
Thou  canst  discern  the  most  secret  thoughts  of  the  heart. 

'34 


HE  KNEW  MY  SECRET  THOUGHTS 

241.  I  had  no  sooner  said  it  in  my  heart,  but  her 
pangs  were  taken  from  her,  and  she  was  cast  into  a 
deep  sleep,  and  so  continued  till  morning  ;  at  this  I 
greatly  marvelled,  not  knowing  what  to  think ;  but 
after  I  had  been  awake  a  good  while,  and  heard  her 
cry  no  more,  I  fell  asleep  also ;  so  when  I  awaked  in 
the  morning,  it  came  upon  me  again,  even  what  I 
had  said  in  my  heart  the  last  night,  and  how  the 
Lord    had   showed  me,    that    He    knew  my  secret 
thoughts,  which  was  a  great  astonishment  unto  me 
for  several  weeks  after. 

242.  Well,  about  a  year  and  a  half  afterwards, 

that  wicked  sinful  thought,  of  which 

,     f  i  That  wicked 

I  have  spoken  before,  went  through     thought,  'Let 

my  wicked  heart,  even  this  thought, 
Let  Christ  go,  if  He  will:  so  when 
I  was  fallen  under  the  guilt  for  this, 
the  remembrance  of  my  other  thought,  and  of  the 
effect  thereof,  would  also  come  upon  me  with  this 
retort,  which  also  carried  rebuke  along  with  it,  Now 
you  may  see  that  God  doth  know  the  most  secret  thoughts 
of  the  heart. 

243.  And  with  this,  that  of  the  passages  that  were 

betwixt  the  Lord,   and  His  servant 
-,.  ,          r  tl  .  .       i  I  am  like  Gideon 

Lriaeon,  fell  upon  my  spirit ;  how  be- 
cause that  Gideon  tempted  God  with  his  fleece,  both 
wet    and  dry,  when  he   should  have  believed  and 
ventured  upon  His  word  ;    therefore  the  Lord  did 
afterwards  so  try   him,  as  to  send  him  against  an 

'35 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

innumerable  company  of  enemies,  and  that  too,  as  to 
outward  appearance,  without  any  strength  or  help. 
Judges  vi.  7.  Thus  He  served  me,  and  that  justly, 
for  I  should  have  believed  His  word,  and  not  have  put 
an  if  upon  the  all-seeingness  of  God. 

244.  And  now   to   show   you   something  of  the 

advantages  that  I  also  have  gained 
pircelby°tkheen  tO  b7  this  temptation  :  and  first,  by  this 
glory  of  the  holi-  j  was  made  continually  to  possess  in 
ness  of  God  it  i_  i_ 

my  soul  a  very  wonderful  sense  both 

of  the  blessing  and  glory  of  God,  and  of  His 
beloved  Son ;  in  the  temptation  that  went  before, 
my  soul  was  perplexed  with  unbelief,  blasphemy, 
hardness  of  heart,  questions  about  the  being  of 
God,  Christ,  the  truth  of  the  word,  and  certainty 
of  the  world  to  come  :  I  say,  then  I  was  greatly 
assaulted  and  tormented  with  atheism,  but  now 
the  case  was  otherwise ;  now  was  God  and  Christ 
continually  before  my  face,  though  not  in  a  way  of 
comfort,  but  in  a  way  of  exceeding  dread  and  terror. 
The  glory  of  the  holiness  of  God,  did  at  this  time 
break  me  to  pieces ;  and  the  bowels  and  compassion 
of  Christ  did  break  me  as  on  the  wheel ;  for  I  could 
not  consider  Him  but  as  a  lost  and  rejected  Christ, 
the  remembrance  of  which,  was  as  the  continual 
breaking  of  my  bones. 

245.  The  scriptures  also  were  wonderful  things 
unto  me  ;  I  saw  that  the  truth  and  verity  of  them 
were  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven;    those 

136 


TEMPTATION  AND  PROMISE 

that  the  scriptures  favour,  they  must   inherit  bliss; 
but  those  that  they  oppose  and  con-     j  saw  that  ^ 
demn,  must  perish  for  evermore  :  Oh! 


this  word,  For  the   scriptures   cannot     the  keys  of 
be  broken,    would  rend   the   caul    of 
my  heart:    and   so  would    that    other,    Whose  sins 
ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  ;  but  whose  sins  ye  retain, 
they  are  retained.     Now  I  saw  the  apostles  to  be 
the   elders   of  the  city  of  refuge.     Joshua  xx.  4. 
Those  that  they  were  to  receive  in,  were  received 
to  life;  but  those  that  they  shut  out,  were  to  be 
slain  by  the  avenger  of  blood. 

246.  Oh  !  one  sentence  of  the  scripture  did  more 

afflict   and  terrify  my  mind,  I  mean 

,          .  One  sentence  of 

those  sentences  that  stood  against  me     scripture  did 

(as  sometimes  I  thought  they  every     S3gg£» 

one  did)  more,  I  say,  than  an  army     army  of  forty 
'  J1  J       thousand  men 

of  forty  thousand   men   that    might 

have   come  against  me.      Woe  be  to   him  against 
whom  the  scriptures  bend  themselves  ! 

247.  By  this  temptation  I  was  made  to  see  more 
into  the  nature  of  the  promises  than  ever  I  was 
before  ;  for  I  lying  now  trembling  under  the  mighty 
hand   of   God,   continually  torn   and   rent  by   the 
thundering    of   His  justice  :    this    made   me   with 
careful  heart,  and  watchful  eye,  with  great  fearful- 
ness  to  turn  over  every  leaf,  and  with  much  diligence, 
mixed  with  trembling,  to  consider  every  sentence, 
together  with  its  natural  force  and  latitude. 

137 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

248.  By  this  temptation  also  I  was  greatly  holden 

off  from  my  former  foolish  practice  of 
Like  a  man  .     '  «        i  i      r  • 

sinking,  I  would  putting  by  the  word  or  promise  when 
catch  at  all  I  saw  .  .  •  j  r 

it   came   into   my   mind ;    for   now, 

though  I  could  not  suck  that  comfort  and  sweetness 
from  the  promise,  as  I  had  done  at  other  times ;  yet, 
like  to  a  man  sinking,  I  would  catch  at  all  I  saw  : 
formerly  I  thought  I  might  not  meddle  with  the 
promise,  unless  I  felt  its  comfort,  but  now  'twas  no 
time  thus  to  do ;  the  avenger  of  blood  too  hardly 
did  pursue  me. 

249.  Now  therefore  I  was  glad  to  catch  at  that 
God  hath  a  word  which  yet  I  feared  I  had  no 
bigger  mouth  to     ground  or  right  to  own  ;  and  even  to 

speak  with,  than      f  ,    &.  '. 

I  a  heart  to  con-  leap  into  the  bosom  of  that  promise 
that  yet  I  feared  did  shut  its  heart 
against  me.  Now  also  I  should  labour  to  take 
the  word  as  God  hath  laid  it  down,  without 
restraining  the  natural  force  of  one  syllable 
thereof:  O!  what  did  I  now  see  in  that  blessed 
sixth  of  John :  And  him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will 
in  no  wise  cast  out.  John  vi.  37.  Now  I  began 
to  consider  with  myself,  that  God  hath  a  bigger 
mouth  to  speak  with,  than  I  had  a  heart  to  con- 
ceive with  ;  I  thought  also  with  myself,  that 
He  spake  not  His  words  in  haste,  or  in  an  un- 
advised heat,  but  with  infinite  wisdom  and  judg- 
ment, and  in  very  truth  and  faithfulness.  2  Sam. 
iii.  28. 

138 


SOME  GREAT  ENCOURAGEMENTS 

250.  I  should  in  these  days,  often  in  my  greatest 
agonies,  even  flounce  towards  the  pro- 
mise (as  the  horses  do  towards  sound 

ground^  that  yet  stick  in  the  mire); 
concluding  (though  as  one  almost  be- 
reft of  his  wits  through  fear)  on  this  I  will  rest  and 
stay,  and  leave  the  fulfilling  of  it  to  the  God  of 
heaven  that  made  it.     Oh !  many  a 
pull  hath  my  heart  had  with  Satan, 
for  that  blessed  sixth  of  John  :  I  did     Satan  for  John 
not  now,  as  at  other  times,  look  prin- 
cipally for  comfort  (though,  O  how  welcome  would 
it  have  been  unto  me !).     But  now  a  word,  a  word 
to  lean  a  weary  soul  upon,  that  it  might  not  sink  for 
ever !  'twas  that  I  hunted  for. 

251.  Yea,  often  when  I  have  been  making  to  the 
promise.  I  have  seen  as  if  the  Lord 

I  thought  of 

would  refuse  my  soul  for  ever  ;  I  was     Benhadad's 
r  «r  T  i      i  1-1  servants 

often  as  if  I  had  run  upon  the  pikes, 
and  as  if  the  Lord  had  thrust  at  me,  to  keep  me 
from  Him,  as  with  a  flaming  sword.  Then  I  should 
think  of  Esther,  who  went  to  petition  the  king 
contrary  to  the  law.  Esther  iv.  1 6.  I  thought  also  of 
Benhadad's  servants,  who  went  with  ropes  upon  their 
heads  to  their  enemies  for  mercy,  i  Kings  xx.  31, 
etc.  The  woman  of  Canaan  also,  that  would  not  be 
daunted,  though  called  dog  by  Christ,  Matt.  xv.  2  2,  etc., 
and  the  man  that  went  to  borrow  bread  at  midnight, 
Luke  xi.  5-8,  etc.,  were  great  encouragements  unto  me. 

J39 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

252.  I  never  saw  those  heights   and  depths  in 
grace,    and    love,   and    mercy,   as   I   saw  after    this 
temptation ;    great   sins   to   draw   out   great   grace ; 
and  where  guilt  is  most  terrible  and  fierce,  there  the 
mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  when  showed  to  the  soul, 
appears    most   high    and   mighty.      When  Job  had 
passed  through  his  captivity,  he  had  twice  as  much 
as  he  had  before.      Job  xlii.   10.     Blessed  be  God 
for  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     Many  other  things  I 
might  here  make  observation  of,   but  I  would  be 
brief,  and  therefore  shall  at  this  time  omit  them ; 
and  do  pray  God  that  my  harms  may  make  others 
fear  to  offend,  lest  they  also  be  made  to  bear  the 
iron  yoke  as  I  did. 

I  had  two  or  three  times,  at  or  about  my  de- 
liverance from  this  temptation,  such 
LrangSeUappre-       strange   apprehensions   of  the   grace 

tensions  of  the  of  God,  that  I  could  hardly  bear  up 
grace  of  God  .'  .  } 

under  it :  it  was  so  out  of  measure 

amazing,  when  I  thought  it  could  reach  me,  that  I 
do  think  if  that  sense  of  it  had  abode  long  upon  me, 
it  would  have  made  me  incapable  for  business. 

253.  Now  I  shall  go  forward  to  give  you  a  rela- 

The  Lord's  t*on  °^  otner  °^  tne  Lord's  dealings 

dealings  with  with  me  at  sundry  other  seasons,  and 

me  when  first  in  r    ,                       .           T     ,           , .  , 

fellowship  at  or  the  temptations  I  then  did  meet 

Bedford  withal.     I   shall  begin  with  what   I 

met  with  when  first  I  did  join  in  fellowship  with  the 
people  of  God  in  Bedford.  After  I  had  propounded 

140 


LORD'S  SUPPER  EXPERIENCES 

to  the  church,  that  my  desire  was  to  walk  in  the 
order  and  ordinances  of  Christ  with  them,  and  was 
also  admitted  by  them:  while  I  thought  of  that 
blessed  ordinance  of  Christ,  which  was  His  last 
supper  with  His  disciples  before  His  death,  that 
scripture,  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me,  Luke  xxii. 
1  9,  was  made  a  very  precious  word  unto  me  ;  for  by 
it  the  Lord  did  come  down  upon  my  conscience  with 
the  discovery  of  His  death  for  my  sins;  and  as  I 
then  felt,  did  as  if  He  plunged  me  in  the  virtue  of 
the  same.  But  behold,  I  had  not  been  long  a 
partaker  at  that  ordinance,  but  such  fierce  and  sad 
temptations  did  attend  me  at  all  times  therein,  both 
to  blaspheme  the  ordinance,  and  to  wish  some  deadly 
thing  to  those  that  then  did  eat  thereof:  that  lest  I 
should  at  any  time  be  guilty  of  consenting  to  these 
wicked  and  fearful  thoughts,  I  was  forced  to  bend 
myself  all  the  while,  to  pray  to  God  to  keep  me 
from  such  blasphemies  :  and  also  to  cry  to  God  to 
bless  the  bread  and  cup  to  them,  as 
it  went  from  mouth  to  mouth.  The 


reason    of   this    temptation,    I    have     from  blas- 

phemies 
thought  since,  was,  because  I  did  not 

with  that  reverence  that  became  me  at  first,  approach 
to  partake  thereof. 

254.  Thus  I  continued  for  three  quarters  of  a 
year,  and  could  never  have  rest  nor     At  the  last  the 
ease:  but  at  the  last  the  Lord  came     Lord  came  to  me 
in  upon  my  soul  with  that  same  scripture,  by  which 

141 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

my  soul  was  visited  before :  and  after  that,  I  have 
been  usually  very  well  and  comfortable  in  the 
partaking  of  that  blessed  ordinance ;  and  have,  I 
trust,  therein  discerned  the  Lord's  body,  as  broken 
for  my  sins,  and  that  His  precious  blood  hath  been 
shed  for  my  transgressions. 

255.  Upon  a  time  I  was  something  inclining  to 
I  was  inclining      a  consumption,  where  with  about  the 
to  a  consumption     Sprmg  i  was  suddenly  and  violently 

seized,  with  much  weakness  in  my  outward  man; 
insomuch  that  I  thought  I  could  not  live.  Now 
began  I  afresh  to  give  myself  up  to  a  serious 
examination  after  my  state  and  condition  for  the 
future,  and  of  my  evidences  for  that  blessed  world 
to  come  :  for  it  hath,  I  bless  the  name  of  God,  been 
my  usual  course,  as  always,  so  especially  in  the  day 
of  affliction,  to  endeavour  to  keep  my  interest  in  the 
life  to  come,  clear  before  mine  eyes. 

256.  But  I  had  no  sooner  began  to  recall  to  mind 
my  former  experience  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  my 
soul,   but  there    came    flocking   into   my   mind   an 
innumerable  company  of  my  sins  and  transgressions ; 
amongst  which  these  were  at  this  time  most  to  my 
affliction ;  namely,  my  deadness,  dulness,  and  cold- 
ness in  holy  duties ;    my  wanderings  of  heart,  of 
my   wearisomeness  in  all  good  things,  my  want  of 
love  to  God,  His  ways  and  people,  with  this  at  the 
end    of   all,    Are  these   the  fruits    of  Christianity? 
Are  these  tokens  of  a  blessed  man  ? 

142 


BETWEEN  TWO  CONSIDERATIONS 

257.  At  the  apprehensions  of  these   things   my 

sickness  was  doubled  upon  me ;  for 

T  •  i     •  •  i  My  former  ex- 

now  I  was  sick  m  my  inward  man,     perience  of  God's 

my   soul   was   clogged    with    guilt; 

now  also  was  my  former  experience 

of  God's  goodness  to  me,   quite  taken  out  of  my 

mind,  and  hid  as  if  they  had  never  been,  or  seen : 

now  was  my  soul  greatly  pinched  between  these  two 

considerations,   Live  I  must  not.  die  I 

1  .  '        .         Now  was  my 

dare   not.     Now  I  sunk  and  fell  in     soul  greatly 

my  spirit,  and  was  giving  up  all  for  pm 
lost ;  but  as  I  was  walking  up  and  down  in  the  house, 
as  a  man  in  a  most  woeful  state,  that  word  of  God 
took  hold  of  my  heart,  Te  are  justified  freely  by  His 
grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Rom.  iii.  24.  But  oh!  what  a  turn  it  made  upon  me  ! 

258.  Now  was  I  as  one  awaked   out  of  some 

troublesome    sleep    and    dream ;  and 

...  I'll  T      1  was  greatly 

listening  to  this  heavenly  sentence,  I     lightened  in  my 

was  as  if  I  had  heard  it   thus  ex- 
pounded to  me  :  Sinner,  thou  thinkest,  that  because  of 
thy  sins  and  infirmities,  I  cannot  save  thy  soul ;  but  behold 
My  Son  is  by  Me,  and  upon  Him  I  look,  and  not  on  thee, 
and  shall  deal  with  thee  according  as  I  am  pleased 
with  Him.     At  this  I  was  greatly  lightened  in  my 
mind,   and    made    to    understand,    that    God    could 
justify  a  sinner  at  any  time ;   it  was  but  His  looking 
upon  Christ,  and  imputing  His  benefits  to  us,  and  the 
work  was  forthwith  done. 
K  143 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

259.  And  as  I  was  thus  in  a  muse,  that  scripture 

also  came  with  great  power  upon  my 
£ve7ydandh  ™*  spirit,  Not  by  works  of  righteousness 
beautiful  in  my  tj}at  w£  Jjave  Jone>>  ^  accord'mg  to 

His  mercy  He  hath  saved  us,  etc. 
2  Tim.  i.  9  ;  Tit.  iii.  5.  Now  was  I  got  on  high,  I 
saw  myself  within  the  arms  of  grace  and  mercy ; 
and  though  I  was  before  afraid  to  think  of  a  dying 
hour,  yet,  now  I  cried,  Let  me  die:  Now  death 
was  lovely  and  beautiful  in  my  sight,  for  I  saw  We 
shall  never  live  indeed,  till  we  be  gone  to  the  other 
world.  Oh !  methought  this  life  is  but  a  slumber, 
in  comparison  with  that  above.  At  this  time  also  I 
saw  more  in  these  words,  Heirs  of  God,  Rom.  viii. 
1 7,  than  ever  I  shall  be  able  to  express  while  I  live 
in  this  world :  Heirs  of  God !  God  Himself  is  the 
portion  of  the  saints.  This  I  saw  and  wondered  at, 
but  cannot  tell  you  what  I  saw. 

260.  Again,  as  I  was  at  another  time  very  ill  and 
The  tempter  be-     weak,  all  that  time  also  the   tempter 
sets  me  again          d|d  beget  me  strongly   (for  I  find  he 

is  much  for  assaulting  the  soul ;  when  it  begins  to 
approach  towards  the  grave,  then  is  his  opportunity), 
labouring  to  hide  from  me  my  former  experience  of 
God's  goodness :  also  setting  before  me  the  terrors 

of  death,  and  the  judgment  of  God, 
I  was  as  one  i  •  • 

dead  before  insomuch  that  at  this  time,  through 

my  fear  of  miscarrying  for  ever 
(should  I  now  die),  I  was  as  one  dead  before  death 

144 


A  GREAT  CLOUD  OF  DARKNESS 

came,  and  was  as  if  I  had  felt  myself  already  descend- 
ing into  the  pit ;  methought  I  said,  There  were  no 
way,  but  to  hell  I  must:  but  behold,  just  as  I  was 
in  the  midst  of  those  fears,  these  words  of  the 
angel's  carrying  Lazarus  into  Abraham's  bosom 
darted  in  upon  me,  as  who  should  say,  So  it  shall 
be  with  thee  when  thou  dost  leave  this  world.  This 
did  sweetly  revive  my  spirit,  and  help  me  to  hope  in 
God  ;  which  when  I  had  with  comfort  mused  on  a 
while,  that  word  fell  with  great  weight  upon  my 

mind.  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  0 

.         .'  .         '         A0  I  became  both 

grave,  where  is  thy  victory?     \  Cor.     well  in  body  and 

xv.  55.     At  this  I  became  both  well     •***«"M 
in  body  and  mind  at  once,  for  my  sickness  did  presently 
vanish,  and  I  walked  comfortably  in  my  work  for  God 
again. 

261.  At  another  time,  though  just  before  I  was 
pretty  well  and  savoury  in  my  spirit,  yet  suddenly 
there  fell  upon  me  a  great  cloud  of  darkness,  which 
did  so  hide  from  me  the  things  of  God  and  Christ, 
that  I  was  as  if  I  had  never  seen  or  known  them  in 
my  life :  I  was  also  so  overrun  in  my  soul  with  a 
senseless  heartless  frame  of  spirit,  that  I  could  not 
feel  my  soul  to  move  or  stir  after  grace  and  life  by 
Christ  ;  I  was  as  if  my  loins  were  broken,  or  as  if  my 
hands  and  feet  had  been  tied  or  bound  with  chains. 
At  this  time  also  I  felt  some  weakness  to  seize  upon 
my  outward  man,  which  made  still  the  other  afflic- 
tion the  more  heavy  and  uncomfortable  to  me. 

145 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

262.  After   I    had   been  in  this  condition   some 

three  or  four  days,  as  I  was  sitting  by 
ZeeveSrfuchliS  the  fire,  I  suddenly  felt  this  word  to 

scripture,  I  must  sound  in  my  heart,  1  must  go  to  Jesus. 
go  to  Jesus?'  J  r 

At    this   my   former    darkness    and 

atheism  fled  away,  and  the  blessed  things  of  heaven 
were  set  in  my  view.  While  I  was  on  this  sudden 
thus  overtaken  with  surprise,  Wife  (said  I),  is  there 
ever  such  a  scripture,  /  must  go  to  Jesus  ?  She  said, 
she  could  not  tell ;  therefore  I  sat  musing  still,  to  see 
if  I  could  remember  such  a  place  :  I  had  not  sat  above 
two  or  three  minutes,  but  that  came  bolting  in  upon 
me,  And  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels ;  and 
withal,  Hebrews  twelfth,  about  the  mount  Sion,  was 
set  before  mine  eyes.  Heb.  xii.  22-24. 

263.  Then  with  joy  I  told  my  wife,  0!  now  I 

know,  I  know  !  But  that  night  was  a 

right*  never          good  nignt  to  me>  I  never  had  but  few 

better*  **™  better ;  I  longed  for  the  company  of 
some  of  God's  people,  that  I  might 
have  imparted  unto  them  what  God  had  showed  me. 
Christ  was  a  precious  Christ  to  my  soul  that  night ; 
I  could  scarce  lie  in  my  bed  for  joy,  and  peace,  and 

triumph,  through  Christ.     This  great 
The  scriptures 

blessed  to  me  glory  did  not  continue  upon  me  until 
for  many  days  morning?  yet  the  twelfth  of  the 

Author  to  the  Hebrews,  Heb.  xii.  22,  23,  was  a 
blessed  scripture  to  me  for  many  days  together  after 
this. 

146 


CONCERNING  MY  PREACHING 

264.  The  words  are  these :  Te  are  come  to  mount 
Sion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living     The  Lord 

God.  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to  an     showed  me 

'  wonderful  glory 

innumerable  company  of  angels,  to  the     in  every  one  of 

general  assembly  and  church  of  the 
first-born,  which  are  written  in  heaven;  and  to  God  the 
Judge  of  all,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect, 
and  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  New  Covenant,  and 
to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better  things 
than  that  of  Abel.  Through  this  blessed  sentence 
the  Lord  led  me  over  and  over,  first  to  this  word, 
and  then  to  that ;  and  showed  me  wonderful  glory 
in  every  one  of  them.  These  words  also  have  oft 
since  that  time,  been  great  refreshment  to  my  spirit. 
Blessed  be  God  for  having  mercy  on  me. 


A  brief  Account  of  the  Author's  Call  to  the  Work  of 
the  Ministry 

265.     AND  now  I  am  speaking  my  experience,  I 
will  in  this  place  thrust   in  a  word 

.  -i  •  i          God's  dealincr 

or  two  concerning  my  preaching  the  with  me  whiTst 
word,  and  of  God's  dealing  with  me 
in  that  particular  also.  For  after  I 
had  been  about  five  or  six  years  awakened,  and 
helped  myself  to  see  both  the  want  and  worth  of 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  and  also  enabled  to  venture 
my  soul  upon  Him ;  some  of  the  most  able  among 
the  saints  with  us,  I  say,  the  most  able  for  judgment 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

and  holiness  of  life,  as  they  conceived,  did  perceive 
that  God  had  counted  me  worthy 
to  understand  something  of  His  will 

b    HiS    ^ty   and     bleSSed   W0rd>   and 

had  given  me  utterance  in  some 
measure,  to  express  what  I  saw  to  others,  for 
edification  ;  therefore  they  desired  me,  and  that  with 
much  earnestness,  that  I  would  be  willing,  at  some- 
times to  take  in  hand,  in  one  of  the  meetings,  to 
speak  a  word  of  exhortation  unto  them. 

266.  The  which,  though  at  the  first  it  did  much 

At  first  it  did  dask  and  abas^  mv  sp'ir'^i  7et  being  still 
much  dash  and  by  them  desired  and  entreated,  I  con- 
sented to  their  request,  and  did  twice 
at  two  several  assemblies  (but  in  private),  though 
with  much  weakness  and  infirmity,  discover  my  gift 
amongst  them ;  at  which  they  not  only  seemed  to 
be,  but  did  solemnly  protest,  as  in  the  sight  of  the 
great  God,  they  were  both  affected  and  comforted ; 
and  gave  thanks  to  the  Father  of  mercies,  for  the 
grace  bestowed  on  me. 

267.  After  this,  sometimes,  when  some  of  them 

did  go  into  the  country  to  teach,  they 
would   also   that    I   should    go   with 

them;  where>  thoush  as  yet> l  did 

not,  nor  durst  not,  make  use  of  my 
gift  in  an  open  way,  yet  more  privately,  still,  as  I 
came  amongst  the  good  people  in  those  places,  I  did 
sometimes  speak  a  word  of  admonition  unto  them 

148 


THE  HOLY  GHOST  AND  PREACHING 

also ;  the  which  they,  as  the  other,  received  with 
rejoicing  at  the  mercy  of  God  to  me- ward,  professing 
their  souls  were  edified  thereby. 

268.  Wherefore,  to  be  brief;  at  last,  being  still 

desired  by   the   church,   after   some 

i  i         T       i         •  i       I  was  more  par- 

solemn    prayer    to    the    Lord,    with     ticularly  called 

fasting,  I  was  more  particularly  called 
forth,  and  appointed  to  a  more 
ordinary  and  public  preaching  of  the  word,  not  only 
to  and  amongst  them  that  believed,  but  also  to  offer 
the  gospel  to  those  who  had  not  yet  received  the 
faith  thereof;  about  which  time  I  did  evidently  find 
in  my  mind  a  secret  pricking  forward  thereto; 
though  I  bless  God,  not  for  desire  of  vain-glory  ;  for 
at  that  time  I  was  most  sorely  afflicted  with  the  fiery 
darts  of  the  devil,  concerning  my  eternal  state. 

269.  But  yet  could  not  be  content,  unless  I  was 
found  in  the  exercise  of  my  gift,  unto     l  could  not  bQ 

which  also  I   was  greatly  animated,     content  unless  I 
.     _  '      was  found  in  the 

not  only  by  the  continual  desires  of     exercise  of  my 

the  godly,  but  also  by  that  saying  of  s  t 
Paul  to  the  Corinthians :  7  beseech  you,  brethren  (ye 
know  the  household  of  Stephanas,  that  It  Is  the  first 
fruits  of  Achaia,  and  that  they  have  addicted  themselves 
to  the  ministry  of  the  saints)  that  ye  submit  yourselves 
unto  such,  and  to  every  one  that  helpeth  with  us,  and 
laboureth.  i  Cor.  xvi.  15,  16. 

270.  By  this  text  I  was  made  to  see  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  never  intended  that  men  who  have  gifts  and 

149 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

abilities,  should  bury  them  in  the  earth,  but  rather 
did  command  and  stir  up  such  to  the  exercise  of  their 
gift,  and  also  did  commend  those  that  were  apt  and 
ready  so  to  do.  They  have  addicted  themselves  to  the 
ministry  of  the  saints.  This  scripture,  in  these  days, 
did  continually  run  in  my  mind,  to  encourage  me, 
and  strengthen  me  in  this  my  work  for  God ;  I  have 
also  been  encouraged  from  several  other  scriptures 
and  examples  of  the  godly,  both  specified  in  the 
word,  and  other  ancient  histories :  Acts  viii.  4  and 
xviii.  24,  25,  etc. ;  I  Pet.  iv.  10;  Rom.  xii.  6;  Fox's 
Acts  and  Mon. 

271.  Wherefore,  though  of  myself  of  all  the  saints 

When  the  ^e  most  unwortny  >   7et  I>  but  with 

country  under-  prreat  fear  and  trembling  at  the  sight 

stood  they  came  6r                                          5.. , 

to  hear  by  of  my  own  weakness,  did  set  upon 

the  work,  and  did  according  to  my 
gift,  and  the  proportion  of  my  faith,  preach  that 
blessed  gospel  that  God  had  showed  me  in  the  holy 
word  of  truth :  which  when  the  country  understood, 
they  came  in  to  hear  the  word  by  hundreds,  and  that 
from  all  parts,  though  upon  sundry  and  divers 
accounts. 

272.  And  I  thank  God,  He  gave  unto  me  some 
I  had  not  measure  of  bowels  and  pity  for  their 

preached  long        souls,  which  also  did  put  me  forward 

before  some  be-  '  .  .... 

gantobe  to   labour,    with  great  diligence  and 

earnestness,  to  find  out  such  a  word 
as  might,  if  God  would  bless,  lay  hold  of,  and  awaken 


GOD  OWNS  ME  IN  HIS  WORK 

the  conscience  ;  in  which  also  the  good  Lord  had 
respect  to  the  desire  of  His  servant ;  for  I  had  not 
preached  long,  before  some  began  to  be  touched,  and 
be  greatly  afflicted  in  their  minds  at  the  apprehension 
of  the  greatness  of  their  sin,  and  of  their  need  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

273.  But  I  first  could  not  believe  that  God  should 
speak  by  me  to  the  heart  of  any  man,     j  could  not  be_ 

still  counting  myself  unworthy;    yet     lieve  that  God 

.        °       J  in      would  speak  by 

those  Who   thus  were  touched,  would      me  to  the  heart 

love  me,  and  have  a  particular  respect  of  anyman 
for  me ;  and  though  I  did  put  it  from  me,  that  they 
should  be  awakened  by  me,  still  they  would  confess 
it,  and  affirm  it  before  the  saints  of  God:  they 
would  also  bless  God  for  me  (unworthy  wretch  that 
I  am !)  and  count  me  God's  instrument  that  showed 
to  them  the  way  of  salvation. 

274.  Wherefore  seeing  them  in  both  their  words 

and  deeds  to  be  so  constant,  and  also  in     . . 

I  began  to  con- 

their  hearts  so  earnestly  pressing  after  elude  it  might  be 
the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  rejoic- 
ing that  ever  God  did  send  me  where  they  were  ;  then 
I  began  to  conclude  it  might  be  so,  that  God  had 
owned  in  His  work  such  a  foolish  one  as  I ;  and  then 
came  that  word  of  God  to  my  heart,  with  much 
sweet  refreshment,  The  blessing  of  him  that  was 
ready  to  perish,  is  come  upon  me  ;  and  1  caused  the 
widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy.  Job  xxix.  13. 

275.  At  this  therefore  I  rejoiced  ;  yea,  the  tears 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

of  those  whom  God  did  awaken  by  my  preaching, 
would  be  both  solace  and  encouragement  to  me: 
for  I  thought  on  those  sayings,  Who  is  He  then  that 
maketh  me  glad,  but  the  same  which  is  made  sorry  by 
me  ?  2  Cor.  ii.  2.  And  again,  If  I  be  not  an  Apostle 
to  others,  yet  doubtless,  I  am  unto  you :  for  the  seal 
of  mine  apostleship  are  ye  in  the  Lord,  i  Cor.  ix.  2. 
These  things,  therefore,  were  as  another  argument 
unto  me,  that  God  had  called  me  to,  and  stood  by 
me  in  this  work. 

276.  In  my  preaching  of  the  word,  I  took  special 
I  preached  what     notice  of  this  one  thing,  namely,  that 

the  Lord  did  lead  me  to  begin  where 
His  word  begins  with  sinners ;  that  is,  to  condemn 
all  flesh,  and  to  open  and  allege,  that  the  curse  of 
God  by  the  law,  doth  belong  to,  and  lay  hold  on  all 
men  as  they  come  into  the  world,  because  of  sin. 
Now  this  part  of  my  work  I  fulfilled  with  great  sense ; 
for  the  terrors  of  the  law,  and  guilt  for  my  transgres- 
sions, lay  heavy  on  my  conscience  :  I  preached  what  i 
felt,  what  I  smartingly  did  feel ;  even  that  under  which 
my  poor  soul  did  groan  and  tremble  to  astonishment. 

277.  Indeed,  I  have  been  as  one  sent  to  them 

from  the  dead :  I  went  myself  in 
I  have  been  as  .  .  .  ,  . 

one  sent  from  the     chains,  to  preach  to  them  in  chains; 

and  carried  that  fire  in  my  own  con- 
science, that  I  persuaded  them  to  be  aware  of.  I 
can  truly  say,  and  that  without  dissembling,  that 
when  I  have  been  to  preach,  I  have  gone  full  of 


MY  EXPERIENCE  AS  PREACHER 

guilt  and  terror,  even  to  the  pulpit  door,  and  there 
it  hath  been  taken  off,  and  I  have  been  at  liberty 
in  my  mind  until  I  have  done  my  work  ;  and 
then  immediately,  even  before  I  could  get  down  the 
pulpit  stairs,  I  have  been  as  bad  as  I  was  before  ; 
yet  God  carried  me  on,  but  surely  with  a  strong  hand, 
for  neither  guilt  nor  hell  could  take  me  off  my  work. 

278.  Thus  I  went  on  for  the  space  of  two  vears, 

crying   out  against    men's    sins,   and 
_  J  .   6  .       _  ,  6  For  two  years  I 

their  fearful  state  because  or  them,     cried  out  against 
After  which,  the  Lord  came  in  upon 
my  own  soul,   with  some  staid  peace  and  comfort 
through  Christ  ;  for  He  did  give  me  many  sweet  dis- 
coveries of  His  blessed  grace  through  Him  ;  where- 
fore now  I  altered  in  my  preaching  (for     j  altered  in  my 
still  I  preached  what  I  saw  and  felt)  ;     preaching 
now  therefore  I  did  much  labour  to  hold  forth  Jesus 
Christ  in  all  His  offices,  relations,  and  benefits  unto 
the  world  ;  and  did  strive  also  to  discover,  to  con- 
demn, and  remove  those  false  supports  and  props  on 
which  the  world  doth  both  lean,  and  by  them  fall 
and  perish,     On  these  things  also  I  staid  as  long  as 
on  the  other. 

279.  After  this,  God  led  me  into  something  of 
the  mystery  of  the  union  of  Christ  ; 

wherefore    that     I    discovered     and 


showed  to  them  also.     And,  when  I     union  with 

had   travelled    through    these    three 

chief  points  of  the  word  of  God,  about  the  space  of 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

five  years  or    more,   I   was   caught    in  my  present 

practice,  and  cast  into  prison,  where 
I  was  caught  '  . 

and  cast  into         I  have  lam  above    as   long  again  to 

confirm  the  truth  by  way  of  suffering, 
as  I  was  before  in  testifying  of  it  according  to  the 
scriptures,  in  a  way  of  preaching. 

280.  When  I   have  been   in  preaching,  I  thank 
God  my  heart  hath  often  all  the  time  of  this  and  the 
other  exercise,  with  great  earnestness  cried  to  God 
that  He  would  make  the  word  effectual  to  the  salva- 
tion of  the  soul  •  still  being  grieved  lest  the  enemy 
should  take  the  word  away  from  the  conscience,  and 
so  it  should  become  unfruitful :  wherefore  I  should 
labour  to  speak  the  word,  as  that  thereby,  if  it  were 
possible,  the  sin  and  person  guilty  might  be  par- 
ticularized by  it. 

281.  And  when  I  have  done  the  exercise,  it  hath 
gone  to  my  heart,  to  think  the  word  should  now  fall 
as  rain  on  stony  places ;  still  wishing  from  my  heart, 
Oh !  that  they  who  have  heard  me  speak  this  day, 
did  but  see  as  I  do,  what  sin,  death,  hell,  and  the 
curse  of  God  is ;  and  also  what  the  grace,  and  love, 
and  mercy  of  God  is,  through  Christ,  to  men  in 
such  a  case  as  they  are,  who  are  yet  estranged  from 
Him.     And  indeed,   I   did   often    say  in  my  heart 
before  the  Lord,  That  if  to  be  hanged  up  presently 
before  their  eyes,  would  be  a  means  to  awaken  them, 
and  confirm   them   in  the  truth,   I  gladly  should  be 
contented. 

'54 


CONTROVERSY  AVOIDED 

282.  For  I  have  been  in  my  preaching,  especially 
when   I  have  been   engaged   in   the 
doctrine  of  life  by  Christ,   without 


works,  as  if  an   angel  of  God  had     my  back  to  en- 

courage  me 
stood  by  at  my  back  to   encourage 

me  :  Oh  !  it  hath  been  with  such  power  and  heavenly 
evidence  upon  my  own  soul,  while  I  have  been  labour- 
ing to  unfold  it,  to  demonstrate  it,  and  to  fasten  it  upon 
the  conscience  of  others  ;  that  I  could  not  be  con- 
tented with  saying,  I  believe,  and  am  sure  ;  methought 

I  was  more  than  sure  (if  it  be  lawful  to  express 
myself)  that   those  things  which  then  I  asserted, 
were  true. 

283.  When   I   first  went    to   preach   the   word 
abroad,  the  doctors  and  priests  of  the 

country  did  open  wide  against  me. 

But  I  was  persuaded  of  this,  not  to     wide  against 

render  railing  for  railing  ;   but  to  see 

how  many  of  their  carnal  professors  I  could  con- 

vince of  their  miserable  state  by  the  law,  and  of 

the  want  and  worth   of  Christ  :    for,    thought   I, 

This    shall  answer  for  me   in    time  to    come,    when 

they  shall  be  for  my  hire  before   their  face.     Gen. 

xxx.  33. 

284.  I  never  cared  to  meddle  with  things  that 

were    controverted,    and   in    dispute 

I  meddled  not 

among  the  saints,  especially  things  of    with  things 

II  i  controverted 
the  lowest  nature  ;  yet  it  pleased  me 

much  to   contend  with  great  earnestness   for   the 

'55 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

word  of  faith,  and  the  remission  of  sins  by  the  death 
and  sufferings  of  Jesus  :  but  I  say,  as  to  other  things, 
I  should  let  them  alone,  because  I  saw  they  en- 
gendered strife;  and  because  that  they  neither  in 
doing,  nor  in  leaving  undone,  did  commend  us  to 
God  to  be  His  :  besides,  I  saw  my  work  before  me 
did  run  into  another  channel,  even  to  carry  an 
awakening  word  ;  to  that  therefore  did  I  stick  and 
adhere. 

285.  I  never  endeavoured  to,  nor  durst  make  use 

XV-     l8 


Idurstnotmake 

use  of  other  (though  I  condemn  not  all  that  do), 

for  I  verily  thought,  and  found  by 
experience,  that  what  was  taught  me  by  the  word 
and  spirit  of  Christ,  could  be  spoken,  maintained, 
and  stood  to,  by  the  soundest  and  be-st  estab- 
lished conscience;  and  though  I  will  not  now 
speak  all  that  I  know  in  this  matter,  yet  my  ex- 
perience hath  more  interest  in  that  text  of  scrip- 
ture, Gal.  i.  11,  12,  than  many  amongst  men  are 
aware. 

286.  If  any  of  those  who  were  awakened  by  my 
I  counted  myself  ministry,  did  after  that  fall  back  (as 
S^dStiSr1  sometimes  too  many  did),  I  can  truly 
salvation  of  say,  their  loss  hath  been  more  to  me, 

souls,  than  -r  r  -L-I  i 

being  made  than  ir  one  or  my  own  children,  be- 

Ch?fsrtiLi°fthe        g°tten  of  m7  own  bod7>  had  been 
world  gomg  to    its   grave:    I  think  verily, 

I  may  speak  it  without    any  offence  to   the  Lord, 


UNEXPECTED  RESULTS 

nothing  has  gone  so  near  me  as  that ;  unless  it  was 
the  fear  of  the  loss  of  the  salvation  of  my  own  soul. 
I  have  counted  as  if  I  had  goodly  buildings  and 
lordships  in  those  places  where  my  children  were 
born ;  my  heart  hath  been  so  wrapped  up  in  the 
glory  of  this  excellent  work,  that  I  counted  myself- 
more  blessed  and  honoured  of  God  by  this,  than  if 
He  had  made  me  the  emperor  of  the  Christian  world, 
or  the  lord  of  all  the  glory  of  the  earth  without  it ! 
Oh  these  words  !  He  which  converteth  the  sinner  from 
the  error  of  his  way,  shall  save  a  soul  from  death. 
James  v.  20.  The  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  tree  of 
life;  and he  that  winneth  souls  is  wise.  Prov.  xi.  30. 
They  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the 
firmament,  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness, 
as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever.  Dan.  xii.  3.  For 
what  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of  rejoicing  ? 
Are  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  at  His  coming  ?  For  ye  are  our  glory  and  joy. 
i  Thes.  ii.  19,  20.  These,  I  say,  with  many  others 
of  a  like  nature,  have  been  great  refreshments 
to  me. 

287.  I  have  observed,  that  where  I  have  had  a 
work  to  do  for  God,  I  have  had  first, 
as  it  were,  the  going  of  God  upon  my     t^0huegnh{  *%*  no 

spirit,  to  desire  I  might  preach  there :     g?°d»  ^i60* ,? id 

the  most  of  all 

1  have  also  observed,  that  such  and 
such    souls    in   particular,    have    been    strongly  set 
upon  my  heart,  and  I  stirred  up  to  wish  for  their 

'57 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

salvation ;  and  that  these  very  souls  have,  after 
this,  been  given  in  as  the  fruits  of  my  ministry. 
I  have  observed,  that  a  word  cast  in,  by-the-bye, 
hath  done  more  execution  in  a  sermon,  than  all  that 
was  spoken  besides:  sometimes  also,  when  I  have 
thought  I  did  no  good,  then  I  did  the  most  of  all; 
and  at  other  times,  when  I  thought  I  should  catch 
them,  I  have  fished  for  nothing. 

288.  I  have  also  observed,  that  where  there  has 
been  a  work  to  do  upon  sinners,  there  the  devil  hath 
begun  to  roar  in  the  hearts  and  by  the  mouths  of 
his   servants :    yea,    oftentimes,   when   the   wicked 
world   hath   raged   most,    there    hath    been    souls 
awakened  by  the  word :  I  could  instance  particulars, 
but  I  forbear. 

289.  My  great  desire  in  my  fulfilling  my  ministry 

My  desire  in  my  WaS  tO  S6t  int°  the  darkeSt  PlaC6S 
ministry  was  to  of  the  country,  even  amongst  those 
get  in  the  dark  t  ,  /»  i  rr  r 

places  of  the  people  that  were  farthest  oft  of  pro- 
country  fession ;  yet  not  because  I  could  not 
endure  the  light  (for  I  feared  not  to  show  my 

gospel  to  any)  but  because  I  found 
leanlnost  after  m7  spirit  did  lean  most  after  awaken- 
cc^vertinf^k  inS  and  converting  work,  and  the 

word  that  I  carried  did  lean  itself 
most  that  way  also ;  Yea,  so  have  I  striked  to 
preach  the  gospel,  not  where  Christ  was  named,  lest 
I  should  build  upon  another  mads  foundation.  Rom. 
xv.  20. 

158 


THAT  WHICH  DELIGHTED  ME 

290.  In  my  preaching  I  have  really  been  in  pain, 
and  have,    as    it    were,    travailed    to 

'  In  my  preaching 

bring  forth  children  to  God ;  neither     I  have  really 

could  I  be  satisfied  unless  some  fruits  brhfgforSi11 
did  appear  in  my  work.  If  I  were  'hUdrentoGod 
fruitless,  it  mattered  not  who  commended  me :  but 
if  I  were  fruitful,  I  cared  not  who  did  condemn. 
I  have  thought  of  that:  Lo !  children  are  an 
heritage  of  the  Lord  ;  and  the  fruit  of  the  womb  is  His 
reward. — As  arrows  are  in  the  hand  of  a  mighty 
man,  so  are  children  of  the  youth.  Happy  is  the  man 
that  hath  his  quiver  full  of  them :  they  shall  not  be 
ashamed,  but  they  shall  speak  with  the  enemies  in  the 
gate.  Psalm  cxxvii.  3-5. 

291.  It  pleased  me  nothing  to  see  people  drink 
in  opinions,  if  they  seemed  ignorant  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  the  worth  of  their  own  salvation,  sound  con- 
viction for  sin,  especially  for  unbelief,  and  a  heart  set 
on  fire  to  be  saved  by  Christ,  with  strong  breathings 
after    a    truly    sanctified    soul :    that    it    was    that 
delighted    me ;    those   were    the    souls    I    counted 
blessed. 

292.  But  in  this  work,  as  in  all  other,  I  had  my 
temptations  attending  me,  and  that  of  divers  kinds ; 
as  sometimes  I  should  be  assaulted  with  great  dis- 
couragement therein,  fearing  that  I  should  not  be 
able  to  speak  a  word  at  all  to  edification ;  nay,  that 
I  should  not  be  able  to  speak  sense  unto  the  people ; 
at  which  times  I  should  have  such  a  strange  faint- 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

ness  and  strengthlessness  seize  upon  my  body,  that 
my  legs  have  scarce  been  able  to  carry  me  to  the 
place  of  exercise. 

293.  Sometimes  again  when  I  have  been  preaching, 

I  have  been  violently  assaulted  with 
When  preaching  J 

I  have  been  thoughts  of  blasphemy,  and  strongly 


tempted  to  speak  the  words  with  my 
Was1ihemyf  mouth  before  the  congregation.  I 

have  also  at  some  times,  even  when  I 
have  begun  to  speak  the  word  with  much  clearness, 
evidence,  and  liberty  of  speech,  yet  been,  before 
the  ending  of  that  opportunity,  so  blinded  and  so 
estranged  from  the  things  I  have  been  speaking,  and 
have  been  also  so  straightened  in  my  speech,  as  to 
utterance  before  the  people,  that  I  have  been  as  if  I 
had  not  known,  or  remembered  what  I  have  been 
about  ;  or  as  if  my  head  had  been  in  a  bag  all  the 
time  of  my  exercise. 

294.  Again,  when  as  sometimes  I  have  been  about 
When  about  to      to  Preach  upon  some  smart  and  search- 

hafsu  S  ested         '1U%  Port^on  °f  tne  word,  I  nave  found 

•  What!  will*  the  tempter  suggest,  What  !  will  you 
Thl^condemns  '  preach  this  !  This  condemns  yourself; 
yourself  of  this  your  own  soul  is  guilty  ;  where- 

fore  preach  not  of  it  at  all  ;  or  if  you  do,  yet  so 
mince  it,  as  to  make  way  for  your  own  escape  ;  lest 
instead  of  awakening  others,  you  lay  that  guilt 
upon  your  own  soul,  that  you  will  never  get  from 
under. 

160 


THE  EVIL  OF  MY  OWN  HEART 

295.  But  I  thank  the  Lord,   I  have  been  kept 
from  consenting  to   these  so  horrid 
suggestions,    and     have     rather,    as     r^thS*han  deal 


Sampson,  bowed  myself  with  all  my 
might,  to  condemn  sin  and  trans- 
gression, wherever  I  found  it  ;  yea,  though  therein 
also  I  did  bring  guilt  upon  my  own  conscience  :  Let 
me  die  (thought  I),  with  the  Philistines,  Judges  xvi. 
29,  30,  rather  than  deal  corruptly  with  the  blessed 
word  of  God.  Thou  that  teachest  another,  teachest 
thou  not  thyself?  It  is  far  better  that  thou  do  judge 
thyself,  even  by  preaching  plainly  unto  others, 
than  that  thou,  to  save  thyself,  imprison  the  truth 
in  righteousness.  Blessed  be  God  for  His  help  also 
in  this. 

296.  I  have  also,  while  found  in  this  blessed  work 
of    Christ,    been    often    tempted    to 
pride  and  liftings  up  of  heart  :  and 

though  I  dare  not   say,  I  have    not     pride  and  lift- 

6  •     /'  ings  up  of  heart 

been  affected  with  this,  yet  truly  the 

Lord  of  His  precious  mercy,  hath  so  carried  it  towards 
me,  that  for  the  most  part  I  have  had  but  small  joy 
to  give  way  to  such  a  thing  :  for  it  hath  been  my 
every  day's  portion  to  be  let  into  the  evil  of  my  own 
heart,  and  still  made  to  see  such  a  multitude  of 
corruptions  and  infirmities  therein,  that  it  hath 
caused  hanging  down  of  the  head  under  all  my  gifts 
and  attainments  ;  I  have  felt  this  thorn  in  the  flesh, 
2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9,  the  very  mercy  of  God  to  me. 

161 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

297.  I  have  also  had,   together  with  this,   some 
Some  notable        notable  place  or  other  of  the  word 

word  has  come  presented  before  me,  which  word  hath 

to  me  with  some  .     .               ' 

piercing;  sentence  contained  in  it  some  sharp  and  piercing 

concerning  the  .          ,              .  ,  .            ~ 

perishing  of  the  sentence  concerning  the  perishing  of 
the  soul,  notwithstanding  gifts  and 
parts :  as,  for  instance,  that  hath  been  of  great  use 
to  me  :  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and 
angels ',  and  have  not  charity,  I  am  become  as  sounding 
brass,  and  a  tinkling  cymbal,  i  Cor.  xiii.  i,  2. 

298.  A  tinkling  cymbal  is  an  instrument  of  music, 
with  which  a  skilful  player  can  make  such  melodious 
and  heart-inflaming  music,  that  all  who  hear  him  play, 
can  scarcely  hold  from  dancing ;  and  yet  behold  the 
cymbal  hath  not  life,  neither  comes  the  music  from 
it,  but  because  of  the  art  of  him  that  plays  there- 
with ;   so   then   the    instrument    at   last  may  come 
to  nought  and  perish,   though  in  times  past  such 
music  hath  been  made  upon  it. 

299.  Just  thus  I  saw  it  was,  and  will  be,  with 
them  who  have  gifts,  but  want  saving  grace ;  they 
are  in  the  hand  of  Christ,  as  the  cymbal  in  the  hand 
of  David :   and   as   David  could  with   the  cymbal 
make  that  mirth  in  the  service  of  God,  as  to  elevate 
the   hearts   of  the  worshippers,  so  Christ  can  use 
these  gifted  men,  as  with  them  to  affect  the  souls  of 
His  people  in  His  church ;  yet  when  He  hath  done 
all,    hang   them   by,    as   lifeless,    though   sounding 
cymbals. 

162 


GRACE  BETTERTH  AN  KNOWLEDGE 

300.  This  consideration  therefore,  together  with 
some  others,  were  for  the  most  part,  as  a  maul  on 
the  head  of  pride,  and  desire  of  vain-glory.     What, 
thought  I,  shall  I  be  proud  because  I  am  a  sound- 
ing brass  ?     Is  it  so  much  to  be  a  fiddle  ?  hath  not 
the  least  creature  that  hath  life,  more  of  God  in  it 
than  these?     Besides,  I  knew  'twas     A  little  grace,  a 

lace  should  never  die.  but  these  must     little  love,  a  little 

of  the  true  fear 
cease  and  vanish  :  so  I  concluded,  a     of  God  is  better 

little  grace,  a]^e^TelJ_Httje_d[  the  than  *"  glfts 
true  fear  of  God,  is  better  than  all  the  gifts  i  yea, 
and  I  am  fully  convinced  of  it,  that  it  impossible  for 
souls  that  can  scarce  give  a  man  an  answer,  but  with 
great  confusion  as  to  method  ;  I  say,  it  is  possible 
for  them  to  have  a  thousand  times  more  grace, 
and  so  to  be  more  in  the  love  and  favour  of 
the  Lord,  than  some  who  by  the  virtue  of  the 
gift  of  knowledge,  can  deliver  themselves  like 
angels. 

301.  Thus    therefore   I   came   to   perceive,  that 
though  gifts  in  themselves  were  good,     Gifts  in  them. 
to    the    thing    for   which    they   are     ^J£|mpty 

designed,    to  wit,  the   edification    of    without  the 

,  •  -  •  i  power  to  save  a 

others  ;  yet  empty,  and  without  power     soul  if  they  be 

to   save   the   soul  of  him  that  hath     alone 
them,  if  they  be  alone :  neither  are  they,  as  so,  any 
sign  of  a  man's  state  to  be  happy,  being  only  a  dis- 
pensation of  God  to  some,  of  whose  improvement,  or 
non-improvement,  they  must  when  a  little  love  more 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

is  over,  give  an  account  to  Him  that  is  ready  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

302.  This  showed  me  too,  that  gifts  being  alone, 
were  dangerous,  not  in  themselves,  but  because  of 
those  evils  that  attend  them  that  have  them,  to  wit, 
pride,  desire  of  vain  glory,  self-conceit,  etc.,  all  which 
were  easily  blown  up  at  the  applause  and  commenda- 
tion of  every  unadvised  Christian,  to  the  endanger- 
ing of  a  poor  creature  to  fall  into  the  condemnation 
of  the  devil. 

303.  I  saw  therefore  that  he  that  hath  gifts,  had 
need  be  let  into  a  sight  of  the  nature  of  them,  to  wit, 
that  they  come  short  of  making  of  him  to  be  in  a 
truly  saved  condition,  lest  he  rest  in  them,  and  so  fall 
short  of  the  grace  of  God. 

304.  He  hath  cause  also  to  walk  humbly  with 
God  and  be  little  in  his  own  eyes,  and  to  remember 
withal,    that   his    gifts  are  not   his  own,  but   the 
churches  ;  and  that  by  them  he  is  made  a  servant  to 
the  church ;  and  he  must  also  give  at  last  an  account 
of  his  stewardship  unto  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  to  give 
a  good  account  will  be  a  blessed  thing. 

305.  Let  all  men  therefore  prize  a  little  with  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  (gifts  indeed  are  desirable),  but  yet 
great  grace  and  small  gifts  are  better  than  great  gifts 
and  no  grace.     It  doth  not  say,  the  Lord  gives  gifts 
and  glory,  but  the  Lord  gives  grace  and  glory ;  and 
blessed  is  such  an  one,  to  whom  the  Lord  gives  grace, 
true  grace  ;  for  that  is  a  certain  forerunner  of  glory. 


SLANDERS  AND  REPROACHES 

306.  But   when  Satan   perceived    that   his  thus 
tempting  and  assaulting  of  me,  would     Satai^  stifs  up 
not  answer  his   design;  to    wit,    to     the  minds  of  the 

.          .    .  ,          ,  ignorant  and 

overthrow  the  ministry,  and  make  it  malicious  to  load 
ineffectual,  as  to  the  ends  thereof:  mewith slanders 
then  he  tried  another  way,  which  was,  to  stir  up  the 
minds  of  the  ignorant  and  malicious  to  load  me  with 
slanders  and  reproaches :  now  therefore  I  may  say, 
that  what  the  devil  could  devise,  and  his  instruments 
invent,  was  whirled  up  and  down  the  country  against 
me,  thinking,  as  I  said,  that  by  that  means  they 
should  make  my  ministry  to  be  abandoned. 

307.  It    began    therefore    to   be 

rumoured  up  and   down  among  the     4it3f,  aTjesuit, 
people,  that  I  was  a  witch,  a  Tesuit,  a     and  a  highway- 

man 

highwayman,  and  the  like. 

308.  To  all  which,  I  shall  only  say,  God  knows  that 
I  am  innocent.     But  as  for  mine  accusers,  let  them 
provide  themselves  to  meet  me  before  the  tribunal  of 
the  Son  of  God,  there  to  answer  for  all  these  things 
(with  all  the  rest  of  their  iniquities)  unless  God  shall 
give  them  repentance  for  them,  for  the  which  I  pray 
with  all  my  heart. 

309.  But   that   which   was    reported    with    the 

boldest  confidence,  was,  that  I  had  my 

,  '  ,  J       It  was  reported 

misses,  my  whores,  my  bastards  ;  yea,     that  I  had  two 

two  wives  at  once,  and  the  like.     Now     wives  at  once 
these  slanders  (with  the  others)  I  glory  in,  because 
but  slanders,  foolish  or  knavish  lies,  and  falsehoods 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

cast  upon  me  by  the  devil  and  his  seed ;  and,  should 
I  not  be  dealt  with  thus  wickedly  by  the  world,  I 
should  want  one  sign  of  a  saint,  and  a  child  of  God. 
Blessed  are  ye  (said  the  Lord  Jesus)  when  men  shall  re- 
vile you  and  perse  cute  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil 
against  you  falsely  for  My  sake  ;  rejoice  and  be  exceeding 
glad,  for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven,  for  so  persecuted 
they  the  prophets  which  were  before  you.  Matt.  iv.  11. 

310.  These    things    therefore,    upon    mine   own 

account,  trouble  me  not;  no,  though 
^ey  were  twenty  times  more   than 

I  have  a  good  they  ar-e<  \  have  a  good  conscience, 
conscience  /  D 

and  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  me, 

as  an  evil-doer,  they  shall  be  ashamed  that  falsely 
accuse  my  good  conversation  m  Christ. 

311.  So  then,  what  shall  I  say  to  those  who  have 
thus  bespattered  me  ?  Shall  I  threaten  them  ?  Shall 
I  chide  them  ?    Shall  I  flatter  them  ?    Shall  I  entreat 
them  to  hold  their  tongues  ?   No,  not  I.    Were  it  not 
for  that  these  things  make  them  ripe  for  damnation, 
that  are  the  authors  and  abettors,  I  would  say  unto 
them,  Report  it,  because  'twill  increase  my  glory. 

312.  Therefore  I  bind  these  lies  and  slanders  to 

me  as  an  ornament ;  it  belongs  to  my 
Christian   profession   to   be   vilified, 

™e  as  an  oraa-       slandered,    reproached    and    reviled  ; 
and  since  all  this  is  nothing  else,  as 

my  God  and  my  conscience  do  bear  me  witness,  I 

rejoice  in  reproaches  for  Christ's  sake. 

166 


MY  FOES  MISS  THEIR  MARK 

313.  I  also  call  all  these  fools  or  knaves,  that  have 
thus  made  it  any  thing  of  their  business  to  affirm 
any  of    the   things   afore-named   of  me ;    namely, 
That  I  have  been  naught  with  other  women,  or  the 
like.     When  they  have  used  the  utmost  of  their 
endeavours,  and  made  the  fullest  inquiry  that  they 
can,  to  prove  against  me   truly,  that  there  is  any 
woman  in  heaven,  or  earth,  or  hell,  that  can  say, 
I  have  at  any  time,  in  any  place,  by  day  or  night,  so 
much  as  attempted  to  be   naught  with  them ;  and 
speak  I  thus  to  beg  my  enemies  into  a  good  esteem 
of  me  ?  No,  not  I :  I  will  in  this  beg  belief  of  no 
man;  believe  or  disbelieve  me  in  this,  all  is  a-case 
to  me. 

314.  My  foes   have  missed   their   mark  in  this 
their  shooting  at  me :  I  am  not  the     My  foes  h^ve 
man  :  I  wish  that  they  themselves  be     missed  their 

...  -rr     11      i        r        •  i       mark  m  this 

guiltless,  if  all  the  rormcators  and  their  shooting  at 
adulterers  in  England  were  hanged  up 
by  the  neck  till  they  be  dead,  John  Bunyan,  the 
object  of  their  envy,  would  be  still  alive  and  well. 
I  know  not  whether  there  be  such  a  thing  as  a 
woman  breathing  under  the  copes  of  the  whole 
heaven,  but  by  their  apparel,  their  children,  or  by 
common  fame,  except  my  wife. 

315.  And   in  this  I  admire  the  wisdom  of  God, 
that  He  made  me  shy  of  women  from     God  ma(je  me 
my  first  conversion  until  now.    Those     shy  of  women 
know,  and  can  also  bear  me  witness,  with  whom  I 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

have  been  most  intimately  concerned,  that  it  is  a 
rare  thing  to  see  me  carry  it  pleasant  towards  a 
woman  :  the  common  salutation  of  women  I  abhor  ; 
'tis  odious  to  me  in  whomsoever  I  see  it.  Their 
company  alone,  I  cannot  away  with  ;  I  seldom  so 
much  as  touch  a  woman's  hand ;  for  I  think  these 
things  are  not  so  becoming  me.  When  I  have  seen 
good  men  salute  those  women  that  they  have  visited, 
or  that  have  visited  them,  I  have  at  times  made  my 
objection  against  it ;  and  when  they  have  answered, 
that  it  was  but  a  piece  of  civility,  I  have  told  them, 
it  is  not  a  comely  sight.  Some  indeed  have 
urged  the  holy  kiss ;  but  then  I  have  asked  why 
they  made  baulks?  why  they  did  salute  the  most 
handsome,  and  let  the  ill-favoured  go  ?  Thus, 
how  laudable  soever  such  things  have  been  in  the 
eyes  of  others,  they  have  been  unseemly  in  my 
sight. 

316.  And  now  for  a  wind-up  in  this   matter,  I 

calling  not  only  men,  but  angels,  to 
God  has  been  '  '  . 

merciful  to  me,  prove  me  guilty  or  having  carnally  to 
and  has  kept  me  j  •  ,  -r 

do  with  any  woman  save  my  wife : 

nor  am  I  afraid  to  do  it  a  second  time  ;  knowing  that 
it  cannot  offend  the  Lord  in  such  a  case,  to  call  God 
for  a  record  upon  my  soul,  that  in  these  things  I  am 
innocent.  Not  that  I  have  been  thus  kept,  because 
of  any  goodness  in  me,  more  than  any  other;  but 
God  has  been  merciful  to  me,  and  has  kept  me  ;  to 
whom  I  pray  that  He  will  keep  me  still,  not  only 

168 


A  LONG  IMPRISONMENT 

from  this,  but  every  evil  way  and  work,  and  preserve 
me  to  His  heavenly  kingdom.     Amen. 

317.  Now  as  Satan  laboured  by  reproaches  and 
slanders,  to  make  me  vile  among  my  countrymen ; 
that,  if  possible,  my  preaching  might  be  made   of 
none  effect  ;  so  there  was  added  hereto,  a  long  and 
tedious    imprisonment,    that    thereby   I    might    be 
frightened   from    my    service   for    Christ,    and    the 
world  terrified,  and  made  afraid  to  hear  me  preach ; 
of  which  I  shall  in  the  next  place  give  you  a  brief 
account. 

A  BRIEF  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  AUTHOR'? 

IMPRISONMENT 

318.  Having   made    profession    of  the    glorious 
gospel  of  Christ  a   long  time,    and 

preached  the  same  about  five  years,  I     beeauseT"^ 

was  apprehended  at  a  meeting  of  good     sureties  would 

vv.       .  not  be  bound 

people  in  the  country  (among  whom,     that  I  should 

had  they  let  me  alone,  I  should  have 

preached  that  day,  but  they  took  me 

away  from  amongst   them),  and  had  me  before   a 

justice;  who,  after  I  had  offered  security  for  my 

appearing  at  the  next  sessions,  yet  committed  me, 

because  my  sureties  would  not  consent  to  be  bound 

that  I  should  preach  no  more  to  the  people. 

319.  At  the  sessions  after  I  was  indicted  for  an 
upholder  and  maintainer  of  unlawful  assemblies  and 

169 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

conventicles,  and  for  not  conforming  to  the  national 
worship  of  the  church  of  England  •  and  after  some 

conference  there  with    the    justices, 
I  was  sent  to  ,  ,.  ,   .        ,     v  ., 

prison,  where  I      they   taking  my  plain   dealing   with 


them  for  a  confession,  as  they  termed 
it,  of  the  indictment,  did  sentence  me  to 
a  perpetual  banishment,  because  I  refused  to  conform. 
So  being  again  delivered  up  to  the  jailer's  hands,  I 
was  had  home  to  prison,  and  there  have  lain  now 
complete  twelve  years,  waiting  to  see  what  God 
would  suffer  these  men  to  do  with  me. 

320.  In  which  condition  I  have  continued  with 

much   content,    through    grace,   but 
I  have  received       ,  .  ',  D  . 

much  conviction,     have  met  with   many   turnings  and 


my  heart>  both  from 

the  Lord,  Satan,  and  my  own  corrup- 
tions ;  by  all  which  (glory  be  to  Jesus  Christ)  I 
have  also  received  among  many  things,  much  con- 
viction, instruction,  and  understanding,  of  which 
at  large  I  shall  not  here  discourse  ;  only  give  you  a 
hint  or  two,  a  word  that  may  stir  up  the  godly  to 
bless  God,  and  to  pray  for  me;  and  also  to  take 
encouragement,  should  the  case  be  their  own  —  not 
to  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  them. 

321.  I  never  had  in  all  my  life  so  great  an  inlet 
into  the  word  of  God  as  now  :  those  scriptures  that 
I  saw  nothing  in  before,  are  made  in  this  place 
and  state  to  shine  upon  me  ;  Jesus  Christ  also 
was  never  more  real  and  apparent  than  now  ;  here 

170 


SCRIPTURE  CONSOLATIONS 

I    have    seen    and    felt   Him    indeed  :    Oh  !    that 

word,  We  have  not  preached  unto  you 

•     /       j    •    j     f  7  j  -d  i  *       I  have  seen  and 

cunningly     devised    jables,     2      ret.     felt  that  Jesus 

i.    1  6,    and   that,   God   raised  Christ     ne^efi^rereal 
from  the  dead,  and  gave  Him  glory,     and  apparent 
that  our  faith  and  hope  might  be  in 
God,  i  Pet.  i.   2t,  were  blessed  words  unto  me  in 
this  my  imprisoned  condition. 

322.  These  three  or  four  scriptures  also   have 

been  great  refreshments  in  this  con- 

j  .  .  T  i  T  t          I  have  been  able 

dition  to  me:  John  xiv.    1-4;  John     to*  laugh  at 

xvi.   33;    Col.  iii.   3,  4;    Heb.    xii. 


22-24.  So  that  sometimes  when  I  the  horse  nor  his 
have  been  in  the  savour  of  them,  I 
have  been  able  to  laugh  at  destruction,  and  to  fear 
neither  the  horse  nor  his  rider.  I  have  had  sweet 
sights  of  the  forgiveness  of  my  sins  in  this  place,  and 
of  my  being  with  Jesus  in  another  world  :  Oh  /  the 
mount  Sion,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  innumerable 
company  of  angels,  and  God  the  Judge  of  all,  and  the 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  and  Jesus,  have  been 
sweet  unto  me  in  this  place  :  I  have  seen  that  here, 
that  I  am  persuaded  I  shall  never,  while  in  this 
world,  be  able  to  express  :  I  have  seen  a  truth  in 
this  scripture,  Whom  having  not  seen,  ye  love;  in 
whom,  though  now  you  see  Him  not,  yet  believing,  ye 
rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory,  i  Pet. 
i.  8. 

323.  I  never  knew  what  it  was  for  God  to  stand 
171 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

by  me  at  all  turns,  and  at  every  ofler  of  Satan  to 

God  has  stood         afflkt  me'  etC'  3S  l   llaVe  f°Und  Him 
by  me  at  all  since  I  came  in  hither  :  for  look  how 

fears  have  presented  themselves,  so 
have  supports  and  encouragements  ;  yea,  when  I  have 
started,  even  as  it  were,  at  nothing  else  but  my 
shadow,  yet  God,  as  being  very  tender  of  me,  hath 

not  suffered  me  to  be  molested,  but 

I  have  often  said,  i  j       •  i  •  i 

were  it  lawful,  I  would  with  one  scripture  or  another, 
g°reltePrr&youble  strengthen  me  against  all  ;  insomuch 
that  I  have  often  said,  were  it  lawful, 
I  could  pray  for  greater  trouble,  for  the  greater  comfort's 
sake.  Eccl.  vii.  14;  2  Cor.  i.  5. 

324.  Before  I  came  to  prison,  I  saw  what  was 
For  a  year  coming,  and  had  especially  two  con- 

before  I  was         siderations  warm  upon  my  heart  :  the 

imprisoned  I  ,       ,  ,  . 

seldom  prayed       first  was,  how  to  be  able  to  encounter 
asked  for  death,  should  that  be  here  my  portion. 


patience  por  tjje  £rst  Qf  these^  that    scrjptlirej 

Col.  i.  n,  was  great  information  to  me,  namely,  to 
pray  to  God  to  be  strengthened  with  all  might,  according 
to  His  glorious  power,  unto  all  patience  and  long- 
suffering  with  joy  fulness.  I  could  seldom  go  to 
prayer  before  I  was  imprisoned  ;  but  for  not  so  little 
as  a  year  together,  this  sentence,  or  sweet  petition 
would,  as  it  were,  thrust  itself  into  my  mind,  and 
persuade  me,  that  if  ever  I  would  go  through  long- 
suffering,  I  must  have  all  patience,  especially  if  I 
would  endure  it  joyfully. 


RESIGNING  EARTHLY  THINGS 

325.  As  to  the  second  consideration,  that  saying 

(2   Cor.  i.   o)   was  of  great  use   to 

V-.  .,  fJ^i       If  I  would  suffer 

me,  But  we  had  the  sentence  of  death     rightly  I  must 

In  ourselves,  that  we  should  not  trust  in     ^nte^ceof  death 

ourselves,  but  in  God,  which  raiseth  the     uP.on  a11  earthly 

things 
dead.     By  this  scripture  I  was  made  to 

see,  That  if  ever  I  would  suffer  rightly,  I  must  first  pass 
a  sentence  of  death  upon  every  thing  that  can  properly 
be  called  a  thing  of  this  life,  even  to  reckon  myself, 
my  wife,  my  children,  my  health,  my  enjoyments,  and 
all  as  dead  to  me,  and  myself  as  dead  to  them. 

326.  The  second  was  to  live  upon  God  that  is 
invisible,  as  Paul   said  in  another  place  ;   the  way 
not  to  faint  is,   To  look  not  on  the  things  that  are  seen, 
but  at  the  things  that  are  not  seen  ;  for  the  things  that 
are  seen  are  temporal,  but  the  things  that  are  not  seen 
are  eternal.     And  thus  I  reasoned  with  myself,  if  I 
provide  only  for  a  prison,  then  the  whip  comes  at 
unawares ;  and  so  doth  also  the  pillory  :     Again,  if 
I    only   provide  for  these,    then   I  am   not  fit   for 
banishment.     Further,  if  I  conclude  that  banishment 
is  the  worst,  then  if  death  comes,  I  am  surprised  : 
so  that  I  see,  the  best  way  to  go  through  sufferings, 
is  to  trust  in  God  through  Christ,  as  touching  the 
world  to  come ;  and  as  touching  this  world,  to  count 
the  grave  my  house,  to  make  my  bed  in  darkness ;  to 
say  to  corruption,    Thou  art  my  father,   and  to   the 
worm,    Thou  art  my  mother  and  sister :   that   is,  to 
familiarize  these  things  to  me. 

'73 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

327.  But   notwithstanding  these  helps,   I  found 

myself  a  man  and  compassed  with  in- 
I  found  myself  a      r      .  . 
man  compassed      nrmities ;   the  parting  with  my  wife 

and  poor  children,  hath  often  been  to 
me  in  this  place,  as  the  pulling  the  flesh  from  the 
bones,  and  that  not  only  because  I  am  somewhat  too 
fond  of  these  great  mercies,  but  also  because  I 
should  have  often  brought  to  my  mind  the  many 
hardships,  miseries,  and  wants  that  my  poor 
family  was  like  to  meet  with,  should  I  be 
taken  from  them,  especially  my  poor  blind  child, 
who  lay  nearer  my  heart  than  all  besides :  Oh ! 
the  thoughts  of  the  hardship  I  thought  my  poor 
blind  one  might  go  under,  would  break  my 
heart  to  pieces. 

328.  Poor  child !  thought  I,  what  sorrow  art  thou 

,.       . .          like  to  have  for  thy  portion  in  this 
The  thought  my 

poor  blind  child  world  !  Thou  must  be  beaten,  must 
wmiid  ^reak  my  beg,  suffer  hunger,  cold,  nakedness, 
and  a  thousand  calamities,  though  I 
cannot  now  endure  the  wind  should  blow  upon  thee. 
But  yet  recalling  myself,  thought  I,  I  must  venture 
you  all  with  God,  though  it  goeth  to  the  quick  to 

leave  you  :  Oh !  I  saw  in  this  condi- 
I  was  as  a  man  J 

who  was  pulling    tion  I  was  as  a  man  who  was  pulling 

down  his  house        j  1*1  i_     i_      j      r  i_« 

upon  his  wife  and  down  his  house  upon  the  head  of  his 
children  wife  and  children ;  yet,  thought  I,  I 

must  do  it,  I  must  do  it :  and  now  I  thought  on  those 
two  milch  kine  that  were  to  carry  the  ark  of  God  into 

'74 


BUNYAN    PARTING    WITH    HIS    WIFE    AND    CHILDREN 

Because  I  should  have  often  brought  to  my  mind  the  many  hardships, 

miseries,  and  wants  that  my  poor  family  was  like  to  meet  with,  should 

I  bt  taken  from  them,  especially  my  poor  blind  child 

[See  page  174 


VENTURING  ALL  FOR  GOD 

another  country,  and  to  leave  their  calves  behind  them. 
i  Sam.  vi.  10-12. 

329.  But  that  which  helped  me  in  this  tempta- 
tion,   was    divers    considerations,    of     __. 

T       MI        The  Lord  said 

which,   three  in  special  here  I  will     I  will  cause  the 
name,  the  first  was  the  consideration     SeeweSinthe 
of  these   two  scriptures,   Leave   thy     time  of  evil' 
fatherless  children,  I  will  preserve   them  alive,  and 
let  thy  widows  trust  in  me:  and  again.   The  Lord 
said,  Verily  it  shall  be  well  with  thy  remnant,  verily, 
I  will  cause  the  enemy  to  entreat  thee  well  in  the 
time  of  evil,  and  in  time  of  affliction.     Jer.  xlix.  n  ; 

XV.    II. 

330.  I  had  also  this  consideration,  that  if  I  should 
not  venture  all  for  God,  I  engaged  God  to  take  care 
of  my  concernments :  but  if  I  forsook  Him  and  His 
ways,  for  fear  of  any  trouble  that  should  come   to 
me  or  mine,  then  I  should  not  only  falsify  my  pro- 
fession, but  should  count  also  that  my  concernments 
were  not  so  sure,  if  left  at  God's  feet,  whilst  I  stood 
to  and  for  His  name,  as  they  would  be  if  they  were 
under  my  own  care,  though  with  the  denial  of  the 
way  of  God.     This  was  a  smarting  consideration, 
and  as  spurs  unto  my  flesh.     That   scripture  also 
greatly  helped  it  to  fasten  the  more  upon  me,  where 
Christ   prays    against    Judas,   that   God  would  dis- 
appoint him  in  his  selfish  thoughts,  which  moved  him 
to   sell  his  Master.     Pray  read  it  soberly:   Psalm 
cix.  6-8,  etc. 

M  175 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

331.  I  had  also  another  consideration,  and  that 

was.   the   dread  of  the  torments  of 
I  had  a  dread  of 

the  torments  of  hell,  which  I  was  sure  they  must  par- 
take of  that  for  fear  of  the  cross,  do 
shrink  from  their  profession  of  Christ,  His  words  and 
laws  before  the  sons  of  men :  I  thought  also  of  the 
glory  that  He  had  prepared  for  those  that  in  faith, 

I  thought  also        and  love>  and  Patience,  stood  to  His 

of  the  glory  of       ways  before  them.     These  things,  I 

Christ  prepared  J 

for  those  who         say.    have    helped    me,    when    the 

ways  before  the      thoughts    of    the  misery   that  both 
sons  of  men  myself  and  mine,  might  for  the  sake 

of  my  profession  be  exposed  to,  hath  lain  pinching 
on  my  mind. 

332.  When  I  have  indeed  conceited  that  I  might 
be  banished  for  my  profession,  then  I  have  thought 
of   that    scripture :     They  were   stoned,   they    were 
sawn  asunder,   were    tempted,   were  slain  with    the 
sword,  they  wandered  about  in  sheep-skins,  and  goat- 
skins, being  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented,  of  whom  the 
world  was  not  worthy ;    for  all  they  thought  they 
were  too  bad  to  dwell  and  abide  amongst  them.     I 
have    also  thought  of   that  saying,  the  Holy  Ghost 
witnesseth  in  every  city,  that  bonds  and  afflictions  abide 
me.      I    have  verily  thought  that  my  soul    and   // 
have  sometimes  reasoned    about  the  sore    and   sad 
estate  of  a  banished  and  exiled  condition,  how  they 
were    exposed    to    hunger,    to    cold,    to    perils,    to 
nakedness,  to  enemies,  and  a  thousand  calamities; 


SATAN  LAID  HARD  AT  ME 

and  at  last,  it  may  be,  to  die  in  a  ditch,  like  a  poor 
and  desolate  sheep.  But  I  thank  God,  hitherto  I 
have  not  been  moved  by  these  most  delicate  reason- 
ings, but  have  rather,  by  them,  more  approved  my 
heart  to  God. 

333.  I  will  tell  you  a  pretty  business  :  —  I  was 
once  above  all  the  rest,  in  a  very  sad     j  will  tell  you  a 
and  low  condition  for  many  weeks  ;     pretty  business 
at  which  time  also,  I  being  but  a  young  prisoner, 
and  not  acquainted  with  the  laws,  had   this  lying 
much  upon  my  spirits,  that  my  imprisonment  might  end 
at  the  gallows  for  ought  that  I  could  tell.     Now  there- 
fore Satan  laid  hard  at  me,  to  beat  me  out  of  heart,  by 
suggesting  thus  unto  me  :   But  how 

.     ,      ,  ,.  I  had  this  lying 

if,  when  you  come  indeed  to  die,  you     much  upon  my 
should  be  in  this  condition  ;  that  is,  as 


not  to  savour  the  things  of  God,  nor     might  end  at  t^e 

gallows 
to  have  any  evidence  upon  your   soul 

for  a  better  state  hereafter  ?  (for  indeed  at  that 
time  all  the  things  of  God  were  hid  from  my 
soul). 

334.  Wherefore,  when  I  at  first  began  to  think 
of  this,  it  was  a  great  trouble  to  me  ; 
for  I  thought  with  myself,  that  in 


the  condition  I  now  was  in.  I  was  not     face  and  totter- 

ing knees 
fit  to  die,  neither  indeed  did  I  think 

I  could,  if  I  should  be  called  to  it  ;  besides,  I 
thought  with  myself,  if  I  should  make  a  scrambling 
shift  to  clamber  up  the  ladder,  yet  I  should  either 

177 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

with  quaking,  or  other  symptoms  of  fainting,  give 
occasion  to  the  enemy  to  reproach  the  way  of  God 
and  His  people  for  their  timorousness.  This,  there- 
fore, lay  with  great  trouble  upon  me,  for  methought 
I  was  ashamed  to  die  with  a  pale  face,  and  tottering 
knees,  in  such  a  cause  as  this. 

335-  Wherefore  I  prayed  to  God  that  He  would 
I  prayed  to  God  comfort  me,  and  give  me  strength  to 
for  comfort  and  do  and  suffer  me  what  He  should  call 
me  to ;  yet  no  comfort  appeared,  but 
all  continued  hid :  I  was  also  at  this  time,  so  really 
possessed  with  the  thought  of  death,  that  oft  I  was 
as  if  I  was  on  a  ladder  with  the  rope  about  my  neck  ; 
only  this  was  some  encouragement  to  me  ;  I  thought 
I  might  now  have  an  opportunity  to  speak  my  last 
words  to  a  multitude,  which  I  thought  would  come 
to  see  me  die ;  and,  thought  I,  if  it  must  be  so,  if 
God  will  but  convert  one  soul  by  my  very  last 
words,  I  shall  not  count  my  life  thrown  away,  nor 
lost. 

3360  But  yet  all  the  things  of  God  were  kept 

Thus  was  I  out  °^  my  B'lS^i  and  stiM  the  tempter 

tossed  for  many  followed  me  with,  But  whitber  must 
you  go  when  you  die  ?  what  will  be- 
come of  you  ?  where  will  you  be  found  in  another 
world  ?  what  evidence  have  you  for  heaven  and  glory, 
and  an  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctified? 
Thus  was  I  tossed  for  many  weeks,  and  knew  not 
what  to  do;  at  last  this  consideration  fell  with 

178 


A  FIXED  RESOLUTION 

weight  upon  me,  that  it  was  for  the  word  and 
way  of  God  that  I  was  in  this  condition,  wherefore 
1  was  engaged  not  to  flinch  an  hair's  breadth 
from  it. 

337.  I    thought   also,    that    God   might   choose 
whether  He  would  give  me  comfort 

now,  or  at  the  hour  of  death  ;  but  I 
might  not  therefore  choose  whether 
I  would  hold  my  profession  or  no ;  I 
was  bound,  but  He  was  free ;  yea,  'twas  my  duty  to 
stand  to  His  word,  whether  He  would  ever  look  upon 
me  or  save  me  at  the  last :  wherefore,  thought  I, 
save  the  point  being  thus,  I  am  for  going  on,  and 
venturing  my  eternal  state  with  Christ,  whether  I 
have  comfort  here  or  no ;  if  God  doth  not  come  in, 
thought  I,  I  will  leap  off  the  ladder  even  blindfold  into 
eternity,  sink  or  swim,  come  heaven,  come  hell,  Lord 
Jesus,  if  Thou  wilt  catch  me,  do ;  if  not,  1  will  venture 
for  Thy  name. 

338.  I  was  no  sooner  fixed  in  this  resolution,  but 
the  word  dropped  upon  me,  Doth  Job     l  am  resoived 

serve  God  for  nought  ?     As  if  the     (God  giving  me 

i,    j         -j       T       j      7-7  strength)  never 

accuser   had    said,    Lord,   Job   is    no     todenymypro- 

upright  man,  he  serves  Thee  for  bye-  fession 
respects  ;  hast  Thou  not  made  an  hedge  about  him,  etc. 
But  put  forth  now  Thine  hand,  and  touch  all  that  he 
hath,  and  he  will  curse  Thee  to  Thy  face.  How  now ! 
thought  I,  is  this  the  sign  of  an  upright  soul,  to 
desire  to  serve  God,  when  all  is  taken  from  him? 

179 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Is  he  a  godly  man  that  will  serve  God  for  nothing, 
rather  than  give  out !  Blessed  be  God !  then  I  hope 
I  have  an  upright  heart,  for  I  am  resolved  (God 
giving  me  strength)  never  to  deny  my  profession, 
though  I  have  nothing  at  all  for  my  pains  :  and  as 
I  was  thus  considering,  that  scripture  was  set  before 
me  :  Psalm  xliv.  12,  etc. 

339.  Now  was  my  heart  full  of  comfort';  for  I 
My  heart  filled  hoped  it  was  sincere:  I  would  not 
with  comfort  have  been  without  this  trial  for  much  ; 
I  am  comforted  every  time  I  think  of  it,  and  I  hope 
I  shall  bless  God  for  ever,  for  the  teaching  I  have 
had  by  it.  Many  more  of  the  dealings  towards 
me  I  might  relate,  But  these  out  of  the  spoils  won  in 
battle  I  have  dedicated  to  maintain  the  house  of  God. 
i  Chron.  xxvi.  27. 


THE  CONCLUSION 

i.  OF  all  the  temptations  that  ever  I  met  with  in 
my  life,  to  question  the  being  of  God,  and  truth 
of  His  gospel  is  the  worst,  and  the  worst  to  be 
borne ;  when  this  temptation  comes,  it  takes  away 
my  girdle  from  me,  and  removeth  the  foundation 
from  under  me :  Oh !  I  have  often  thought  of 
that  word,  Have  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth; 
and  of  that,  When  the  foundations  are  destroyed, 
what  can  the  righteous  do  ? 

1 80 


CONCLUDING  REFLECTIONS 

2.  Sometimes,  when  after  sin  committed,  I  have 
looked    for   sore    chastisement    from     SometimeS| 

the  hand  of  God,  the  very  next  that     ™hen  I  have 

been  comforted, 

I  have  had  from  Him,  hath  been  the     I  have  called 
, .  r  T  T  o  •  myself  a  fool  for 

discovery  of  His  grace,     sometimes,     sinking  under 

when  I  have  been  comforted,  I  have  trouble 
called  myself  a  fool  for  my  so  sinking  under  trouble. 
And  then  again,  when  I  have  been  cast  down,  I 
thought  I  was  not  wise,  to  give  such  way  to  comfort ; 
with  such  strength  and  weight  have  both  these 
been  upon  me. 

3.  I  have  wondered  much  at  this  one  thing,  that 
though  God  doth  visit  my  soul  with  never  so  blessed 
a  discovery  of  Himself,  yet  I  have  found  again,  that 
such  hours  have  attended  me  afterwards,  that  I  have 
been  in  my  spirit  so  filled  with  darkness,  that  I  could 
not  so  much  as  once  conceive  what  that  God  and 
that  comfort  was,  with  which  I  have  been  refreshed. 

4.  I  have  sometimes  seen  more  in  a  line  of  the 

Bible,  than  I  could  well  tell  how  to 

.  .  .1  have  seen  more 

stand    under;    and    yet    at    another     in  a  line  of  the 

time,  the  whole  Bible  hath  been  to     SSdSSitdi 
me  as  dry  as  a  stick ;  or  rather,  my     |^rto  stand 
heart    hath  been    so    dead    and    dry 
unto  it,  that  I  could  not  conceive  the  least  dram  of 
refreshment,  though  I  have  looked  it  all  over. 

5.  Of  all  fears,  they  are  best  that  are  made  by 
the  blood  of  Christ;    and  of  all  joy,   that  is   the 
sweetest  that  is  mixed  with  mourning  over  Christ: 

181 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Oh !  it  is  a  goodly  thing  to  be  on  our  knees,  with 
Christ  in  our  arms,  before  God :  I  hope  I  know 
something  of  these  things. 

6.  I  find  to  this  day  seven  abominations  in  my 

heart:  I.  Inclining  to  unbelief;  2. 
I  find  seven  _  , 

abominations  in      ouddenly    to    forget    the    love    and 

mercy  that  Christ  manifesteth ;  3. 
A  leaning  to  the  works  of  the  law;  4.  Wanderings 
and  coldness  in  prayer;  5.  To  forget  to  watch  for 
that  I  pray  for ;  6.  Apt  to  murmur  because  I  have 
no  more,  and  yet  ready  to  abuse  what  I  have ;  7.  I 
can  do  none  of  those  things  which  God  commands 
me,  but  my  corruptions  will  thrust  in  themselves. 
When  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with 
me. 

7.  These  things  I  continually  see  and   feel,  and 
am  afflicted  and  oppressed  with,  yet  the  wisdom  of 
God  doth  order  them  for  my  good  ;    i .  They  make 
me  abhor  myself;    2.  They  keep  me  from  trusting 
my  heart ;   3.  They  convince  me  of  the  insufficiency 
of  all  inherent  righteousness ;    4.    They  show  me 
the  necessity  of  flying  to  Jesus ;   5.  They  press  me 
to  pray  unto  God ;   6.  They  show  me  the  need  I  have 
to  watch   and   be  sober;    7.    And  provoke  me  to 
pray  unto  God,  through  Christ,  to  help  me,   and 
carry  me  through  this  world- 


182 


A  WARRANT  ISSUED 


A  RELATION  OF  MY  IMPRISONMENT  IN  THE 
MONTH  OF  NOVEMBER   1660 

WHEN,  by  the  good  hand  of  my  God,  I  had  for 
five  or  six  years  together,  without  any  interruption, 
freely  preached  the  blessed  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ;  and  had  also,  through  His  blessed  grace, 
some  encouragement  by  His  blessing  thereupon ;  the 
devil,  that  old  enemy  of  man's  salvation,  took  his 
opportunity  to  inflame  the  hearts  of  his  vassals 
against  me,  insomuch  that  at  the  last,  I  was  laid  out 
for  by  the  warrant  of  a  justice,  and  was  taken  and 
committed  to  prison.  The  relation  thereof  is  as 
followeth : — 

Upon  the  i2th  of  this  instant,  November  1660,  I 
was  desired  by  some  of  the  friends  r  go  to  samseii, 
in  the  country  to  come  to  teach  at  Beds.,  to  teach 
Samsellj  by  Har/ington,  in  Bedfordshire.  To  whom  I 
made  a  promise,  if  the  Lord  permitted,  to  be  with 
them  on  the  time  aforesaid.  The  justice  hearing 
thereof  (whose  name  is  Mr  Francis  Wingate),  forth- 
with issued  out  his  warrant  to  take  me,  and  bring 
me  before  him,  and  in  the  meantime  to  keep  a  very 
strong  watch  about  the  house  where  the  meeting 
should  be  kept,  as  if  we  that  were  to  meet  together 
in  that  place  did  intend  to  do  some  fearful  business, 
to  the  destruction  of  the  country  ;  when  alas !  the 
constable,  when  he  came  in,  found  us  only  with  our 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Bibles  in  our  hands,  ready  to  speak  and  hear  the 
word  of  God  ;  for  we  were  just  about  to  begin  our 
exercise.  Nay,  we  had  begun  in  prayer  for  the  bless- 
ing of  God  upon  our  opportunity,  intending  to  have 
preached  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  them  there 
present:1  but  the  constable  coming  in  preventedus.  So 

that  I  was  taken  and  forced  to  depart 
I  was  taken,  but       ,  -r>      i      i  T  i  •    j     i 

had  I  been  the  room.     But  had  I  been  minded  to 

have  PlaYed  the  coward,  I  could  have 


coward,  I  could  escaped  and  kept  out  of  his  hands. 
have  escaped  r 

For  when  I  was  come  to  my  friend  s 

house,  there  was  whispering  that  that  day  I 
should  be  taken,  for  there  was  a  warrant  out  to 
take  me  ;  which  when  my  friend  heard,  he  being 
somewhat  timorous,  questioned  whether  we  had 
best  have  our  meeting  or  not  ;  and  whether  it  might 
not  be  better  for  me  to  depart,  lest  they  should  take 
me  and  have  me  before  the  justice,  and  after  that 
send  me  to  prison  (for  he  knew  better  than  I  what 
spirit  they  were  of,  living  by  them)  :  to  whom  I 
said,  No,  by  no  means,  I  will  not  stir,  neither  will  I 

have  the  meeting  dismissed  for  this. 
Come,  be  of  good  r  {  .  , 

cheer  ;  let  us  not     Come,     be    or    good    cheer  ;    let    us 

not  be  daunted  ;  our  cause  is  good, 
we  need  not  be  ashamed  of  it;  to  preach  God's 
Word,  is  so  good  a  work,  that  we  shall  be  well  re- 

1  The  text  from  which  he  intended  to  preach  was,  Doth  thou 
believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ?  Jn.  ix.  35.  See  Preface  to  his 
Confession  of  Faith. 

l84 


RESOLVED  TO  KEEP  THE  MEETING 

warded,  if  we  suffer  for  that ;  or  to  this  purpose — 
(But  as  for  my  friend,  I  think  he  was  more  afraid 
of  me,  than  of  himself.)  After  this  I  walked  into 
the  close,  where  I  somewhat  seriously  considering 
the  matter,  this  came  into  my  mind,  That  I  had 
showed  myself  hearty  and  courageous  in  my  preach- 
ing, and  had,  blessed  be  grace,  made  it  my  business 

to     encouraere     others-,      therefore. 

T      .r    T      ,         '  Therefore, 

thought   I,    if   I    should    now    run,    thought  I,  if  I 

and  make  an  escape,  it  will  be  of  a     g^gS?* 

very  ill  savour  in  the  country.     For     yery  ill  savour  in 

'  '  the  country 

what  will  my  weak  and  newly-con- 
verted brethren  think  of  it,  but  that  I  was  not  so 
strong  in  deed  as  I  was  in  word?  Also  I  feared 
that  if  I  should  run  now  there  was  a  warrant 
out  for  me,  I  might  by  so  doing  make  them 
afraid  to  stand,  when  great  words  only  should 
be  spoken  to  them.  Besides  I  thought,  that  seeing 
God  of  His  mercy  should  choose  me  God  of  His 

to  go  upon  the  forlorn  hope  in  this     mercy  had 

,  i       r  i  chosen  me  as  the 

country ;   that  is,  to  be  the  first,  that     forlorn  hope  in 

should  be  opposed,  for  the  gospel;  this  country 
if  I  should  fly,  it  might  be  a  discouragement  to  the 
whole  body  that  might  follow  after.  And  further, 
I  thought  the  world  thereby  would  take  occasion 
at  my  cowardliness,  to  have  blasphemed  the  gospel, 
and  to  have  had  some  ground  to  suspect  worse  of  me 
and  my  profession,  than  I  deserved.  These  things 
with  others  considered  by  me,  I  came  in  again  to 

185 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

the  house,  with  a  full  resolution  to  keep  the  meet- 
ing, and  not  to  go  away,  though  I  could  have  been 
gone  about  an  hour  before  the  officer  apprehended 
me  ;  but  I  would  not  ;  for  I  was  resolved  to  see  the 
utmost  of  what  they  could  say  or  do  unto  me.  For 
blessed  be  the  Lord,  I  knew  of  no  evil  that  I  had 
said  or  done.  And  so,  as  aforesaid,  I  begun  the 

meeting.      But  being  prevented   by 
I  begun  the  ,  ,  ,   .  P    r  .          .  .      ,  / 

meeting,  but  the     the  constable  s  coming  in  with   his 

wSi^wi016      warrant    to    take    me,    I   could   not 

rant,  so  I  could      proceed.     But  before  I  went  away, 

not  proceed  *  /J 

1  spake  some  few  words  of  counsel 

and  encouragement  to  the  people,  declaring  to  them, 
that  they  saw  we  were  prevented  of  our  opportunity 
to  speak  and  hear  the  Word  of  God,  and  were  like 
to  suffer  for  the  same;  desiring  them  that  they 
would  not  be  discouraged,  for  it  was  a  mercy  to 
suffer  upon  so  good  account.  For  we  might  have 
been  apprehended  as  thieves  or  murderers,  or  for 
other  wickedness  ;  but  blessed  be  God  it  was  not 
so,  but  we  suffer  as  Christians  for  well  doing  :  and 
we  had  better  be  the  persecuted,  than  the  perse- 
The  constable  cutors,  etc.  But  the  constable  and 

and  the  justice's  the  justice's  man  waiting  on  us, 
man  would  not  ,J.  ,  .  ..,  .  . 

be  quiet  till  they  would  not  be  at  quiet  till  they  had 
had  me  away 


house.  But  because  the  justice  was  not  at  home 
that  day,  there  was  a  friend  of  mine  engaged  for 
me  to  bring  me  to  the  constable  on  the  morrow 

186 


'MY  CALLING/  AND  THE  LAW 

morning.  Otherwise  the  constable  must  have 
charged  a  watch  with  me,  or  have  secured  me  some 
other  way,  my  crime  was  so  great.  So  on  the  next 
morning  we  went  to  the  constable,  and  so  to  the 
justice.1  He  asked  the  constable 
what  we  did,  where  we  was  met 
together,  and  what  we  had  with  us? 
I  trow,  he  meant  whether  we  had 
armour  or  not;  but  when  the  constable  told  him 
that  there  were  only  met  a  few  of  us  together  to 
preach  and  hear  the  Word,  and  no  sign  of  anything 
else,  he  could  not  well  tell  what  to  say  :  yet  because 
he  had  sent  for  me,  he  did  adventure  to  put  out 
a  few  proposals  to  me,  which  were  to  this  effect, 
namely,  What  I  did  there?  And  why  I  did  not 
content  myself  with  following  my  calling?  for  it 
was  against  the  law,  that  such  as  I  should  be 
admitted  to  do  as  I  did. 

John  Bunyan.  To  which    I  answered,    That    the 
intent  of  my  coming  thither,  and  to 
other   places,    was    to   instruct,    and 
counsel  people  to  forsake  their  sins, 

and  close  in  with  Christ,   lest  they     sin  and  accept 

.  ,          '  ,         \      Christ 

did    miserably    perish;    and    that    I 

could  do   both   these  without  confusion    (to  wit), 
follow  my  calling,  and  preach  the  Word  also. 

At   which    words,    he 2    was    in    a    chafe,    as    it 

1  Justice  Wingate.  2  Ibid. 

187 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

appeared;  for  he  said  that  he  would  break  the 
neck  of  our  meetings. 

Bun.  I  said,  It  may  be  so.  Then  he  wished  me 
to  get  sureties  to  be  bound  for  me,  or  else  he 
would  send  me  to  the  jail. 

My  sureties  being  ready,  I  called  them  in,  and 

when   the  bond  for   my  appearance 
I  answered,  I  ,       ,  u      i_  i_         i 

should  not  leave      ^^s  made,  he  told  them,  that  they 

Wwd'of  God  was  bounci  to  keep  me  fr°m  preach- 
ing ;  and  that  if  I  did  preach,  their 
bonds  would  be  forfeited.  To  which  I  answered, 
that  then  I  should  break  them;  for  I  should  not 
leave  speaking  the  Word  of  God :  even  to  counsel, 
comfort,  exhort,  and  teach  the  people  among  whom 
I  came ;  and  I  thought  this  to  be  a  work  that  had 
no  hurt  in  it :  but  was  rather  worthy  of  commenda- 
tion, than  blame. 

Wingate.  Whereat  he  told  me,  that  if  they  would 
not  be  so  bound,  my  mittimus  must  be  made,  and  I 
sent  to  the  jail,  there  to  lie  to  the  quarter  sessions. 

Now  while  my  mittimus  was  making,  the  justice 

.     was  withdrawn ;  and  in  comes  an  old 
An  old  enemy  of 
the  truth  fell  to      enemy    to    the    truth,    Dr    Lmdale, 

who,  when  he  was  come  in,  fell  to 
taunting  at  me  with  many  reviling  terms. 

Bun.  To  whom  I  answered,  that  I  did  not  come 
thither  to  talk  with  him,  but  with  the  justice. 
Whereat  he  supposed  that  I  had  nothing  to  say  for 
myself,  and  triumphed  as  if  he  had  got  the  victory; 

188 


RECEIVING  GIFTS  FROM  GOD 

charging  and  condemning  me  for  meddling  with  that 
for  which  I  could  show  no  warrant ;  and  asked  me, 
if  I  had  taken  the  oaths  ?  and  if  I  had  not,  it  was 
pity  but  that  I  should  be  sent  to  prison,  etc. 

I  told  him,  that  if  I  was  minded,  I  could  answer 
to  any  sober  question  that  he  should  put  to  me. 
He  then  urged  me  again,  how  I  could  prove  it  law- 
ful for  me  to  preach,  with  a  great  deal  of  confidence 
of  the  victory. 

But  at  last,  because  he  should  see  that  I  could 
answer  him  if  I  listed,  I  cited  to  him 
that  verse  in  Peter,  which  saith,  As 
every  man  hath  received  the  gift,  even     j-"^er  him  if  l 
so  let  him  minister  the  same,  etc. 

Lind.  Aye,  saith  he,  to   whom  is  that  spoken? 

Dun.  To  whom,  said  I,  why  to  every  man  that  hath 
received  a  gift  from  God.  Mark,  saith  the  apostle, 
As  every  man  that  hath  received  a  gift  from  God, 
etc. ;  and  again,  You  may  all  prophesy  one  by  one. 
Whereat  the  man  was  a  little  stopt,  and  went  a 
softlier  pace  :  but  not  being  willing  to  lose  the  day, 
he  began  again,  and  said : — 

Lind.  Indeed,  I  do  remember  that  I  have  read  of 
one  Alexander  a  coppersmith,  who  did  much  oppose, 
and  disturb  the  apostles ; — (aiming  it  is  like  at  me, 
because  I  was  a  tinker). 

Bun.  To  which  I  answered,  that  I  also  had  read 
of  very  many  priests  and  pharisees,  that  had  their 
hands  in  the  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

189 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Lind.  Aye,  saith  he,  and  you  are  one  of  those 
scribes  and  pharisees  :  for  you,  with  a  pretence, 
make  long  prayers  to  devour  widows'  houses. 

Bun.  I  answered,  that  if  he  had  got  no  more  by 

preaching  and  praying  than  I  had 
I  said  if  he  got  *  i  .  , 

no  more  by  done,  he  would  not  be  so  rich  as  now 

praying?htndl       ne  was«     But   that  scripture  coming 

wlwSomso       int°     m7    mind>    Answer    mt    a  f°°l 
rich  as  now  he       according  to  his  folly,  I  was  as  spar- 

ing of  my  speech  as  I  could,  without 
prejudice  to  truth. 

Now  by  this  time  my  mittimus  was  made,  and  I 
committed  to  the  constable,  to  be  sent  to  the  jail  in 
Bedford,  etc. 

But  as  I  was  going,  two  of  my  brethren  met  with 

me  by  the  way,  and  desired  the 
If  I  would  come  ^  i  ,  , 

to  him  again  (the     constable    to    stay,    supposing    that 


the7   should  Prevail   with   the  justice, 

words  I  should  through  the  favour  of  a  pretended 
friend,  to  let  me  go  at  liberty.  So 
we  did  stay,  while  they  went  to  the  justice  ;  and 
after  much  discourse  with  him,  it  came  to  this  :  that 
if  I  would  come  to  him  again,  and  say  some  certain 
words  to  him,  I  should  be  released.  Which  when 
they  told  me,  I  said  if  the  words  was  such  that 
might  be  said  with  a  good  conscience,  I  should  or 
else  I  should  not.  So  through  their  importunity 
went  back  again,  but  not  believing  that  I  should  be 
delivered  :  for  I  feared  their  spirit  was  too  full  of 

190 


AN  INSINCERE  JUSTICE 

opposition  to  the  truth  to  let  me  go,  unless  I  should, 

in   something   or   other,    dishonour    my    God    and 

wound  my   conscience.      Wherefore, 

as  I   went,  I  lifted  up  my  heart  to 

God,   for   light  and    strength  to  be     heart  to  God  to 

kept,  that  I  might  not  do  any  thing 

that  might  either  dishonour  Him,  or  wrong  my  own 

soul,  or  be  a  grief  or  discouragement  to  any  that 

was  inclining  after  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Well,  when  I  came  to  the  justice  again,  there  was 
Mr  Foster  of  Bedford,  who,  coming  out  of  another 
room,  and  seeing  me  by  the  light  of  the  candle  (for 
it  was  dark  night  when  I  went  thither),  he  said  unto 
me,  Who  is  there  ?  John  Bunyan  ?  with  such  seem- 
ing affection,  as  if  he  would  have  leaped  on  my  neck 
and  kissed l  me,  which  made  me  somewhat  wonder, 
that  such  a  man  as  he,  with  whom  I  had  so  little 
acquaintance,  and,  besides,  that  had  ever  been  a 
close  opposer  of  the  ways  of  God,  should  carry  him- 
self so  full  of  love  to  me ;  but,  after-  ^^^  z  saw 
wards,  when  I  saw  what  he  did,  it  what  he  did» l 

7  .  7  remembered  the 

caused  me  to  remember  those  sayings,     words,  'Their 

Their  tongues  are  smoother  than  oil, 

but  their  words  are  drawn  swords. 

And    again,    Beware    of  men,    etc.     drawn  swords' 

When  1 2  had  answered  him,  that  blessed  be  God,  I 

was  well;   he  said,   What  is  the   occasion  of  your 

being   here?    or    to    that   purpose.       To    whom   I 

1  A  right  Judas.  2  Bunyan. 

N  191 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

answered,    that   I   was  at  a  meeting   of  people  a 

little  way  off.  intending  to  speak 
1  was  ata  meet-  •'-*•«  • 

ing  a  little  way      a    word     of     exhortation    to    them ; 

the  justice  hearing  thereof,  said  I, 
was  pleased  to  send  his  warrant  to  fetch  me  before 
him,  etc. 

Post.  So  (said  he),  I  understand  :  but  well,  if  you 
will  promise  to  call  the  people  no  more  together, 
you  shall  have  your  liberty  to  go  home ;  for  my 
brother  is  very  loath  to  send  you  to  prison,  if  you 
will  be  but  ruled. 

Bun.  Sir  (said  I),  pray  what  do  you  mean  by 
calling  the  people  together  ?  my  busi- 
ness  is  not  anything  among  them, 
w^en  tnev  are  come  together,  but  to 
exhort  them  to  look  after  the  salvation 
of  their  souls,  that  they  may  be  saved,  etc. 

Fost.  Saith  he,  We  must  not  enter  into  explica- 
tion, or  dispute  now;  but  if  you  will  say  you  will 
call  the  people  no  more  together,  you  may  have 
your  liberty ;  if  not,  you  must  be  sent  away  to 
prison. 

Bun.  Sir,  said  I,  I  shall  not  force  or  compel  any 
man  to  hear  me ;  but  yet,  if  I  come  into  any  place 
where  there  is  a  people  met  together,  I  should, 
according  to  the  best  of  my  skill  and  wisdom,  exhort 
and  counsel  them  to  seek  out  after  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls. 

Fost.  He   said,   That  was  none  of  my  work ;   I 
192 


MY  DUTY  TO  ALL  PEOPLE 

must  follow  my  calling ;  and  if  I  would  but  leave 
off  preaching,  and  follow  my  calling,  I  should  have 
the  justice's  favour,  and  be  acquitted  presently. 

Bun.  To   whom  I  said,  that  I  could  follow  my 
calling,  and  that  too,  namely,  preach-     ,  said  l  could 
iner  the  Word:  and  I  did  look  upon     follow  my  caii- 

.  i  i        i  i_     \.  T      iflg' namely, 

it  as  my  duty  to  do  them  both,  as  1     preaching  the 
.     .  .  word 

had  an  opportunity. 

Post.  He  said,  To  have  any  such  meetings  was 
against  the  law ;  and,  therefore,  he  would  have 
me  leave  off,  and  say,  I  would  call  the  people  no 
more  together. 

Bun.  To  whom  I  said,  that  I  durst  not  make 
any  further  promise  ;  for  my  conscience  would  not 
suffer  me  to  do  it.  And  again,  I  did  look  upon  it 
as  my  duty  to  do  as  much  good  as  I  could,  not  only 
in  my  trade,  but  also  in  communicating  to  all  people 
wheresoever  I  came  the  best  knowledge  I  had  in 
the  Word. 

Post.  He  told  me  that  I  was  the  nearest  the  Papists 
of  any,  and  that  he  would  convince  me  of  immediately. 

Bun.  I  asked  him,  Wherein  ? 

Post.  He  said,  In  that  we  understood  the  Scrip- 
tures literally. 

Bun.  I  told  him  that  those  that  were  to  be 
understood  literally,  we  understood 

*\  We  endeavoured 

them  so;  but  for  those  that  was  to     to  understand 

,  ,  j          i_         •  the  Scriptures 

be    understood    otherwise,    we    en-     literally  and 
deavoured  so  to  understand  them. 

'93 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Post.  He  said,  Which  of  the  Scriptures  do  you 
understand  literally  ? 

Bun.  I  said  this,  He  that  believes  shall  be 
saved.  This  was  to  be  understood  just  as  it  is 
spoken ;  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Christ  shall, 
according  to  the  plain  and  simple  words  of  the  text, 
be  saved. 

Post.  He  said  that  I  was  ignorant,  and  did  not 
understand  the  Scriptures  ;  for  how,  said  he,  can 
you  understand  them  when  you  know  not  the 
original  Greek?  etc. 

Bun.  To  whom  I  said,  that  if  that  was  his  opinion, 
that  none  could  understand  the  Scriptures  but  those 
that  had  the  original  Greek,  etc.,  then  but  a  very 
few  of  the  poorest  sort  should  be  saved  (this  is 
harsh) ;  yet  the  Scripture  saith,  That  God  hides 
these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent  (that  is, 
from  the  learned  of  the  world),  and  reveals  them 
to  babes  and  sucklings. 

Post.  He  said  there  were  none  that  heard  me  but 
a  company  of  foolish  people. 

Bun.  I  told  him  that  there  was  the  wise  as  well 

I  said  the  wise       aS   t^1G   f°°^s^  ^at  ^°  ^ear  me  5   anc* 

and  foolish  heard  again,  those  that  were  most  commonly 
counted  foolish  by  the  world  are  the 
wisest  before  God  ;  also,  that  God  had  rejected  the 
wise,  and  mighty,  and  noble,  and  chosen  the  foolish, 
and  the  base. 

Post.  He  told  me   that   I    made    people   neglect 
194 


CONDITIONAL  LIBERTY 

their  calling ;  and  that  God  had  commanded  people 
to  work  six  days,  and  serve  Him  on  the  seventh. 

Bun.  I  told  him  that  it  was  the  duty  of  people, 
(both  rich  and  poor),  to  look  out  for 

V    .  ,  i  j  11  I  told  him 

their  souls  on  them  days  as  well  as     (Foster)  that  it 
for  their  bodies ;  and  that  God  would     33? *£*£*£ 

have  His  people  exhort  one  another     look  out  after 

.  their  souls 

daily,  while  it  is  called  to-day. 

Post.  He  said  again  that  there  were  none  but  a 
company  of  poor,  simple,  ignorant  people  that  come 
to  hear  me. 

Bun.  I  told  him  that  the  foolish  and  the  ignorant  had 
most  need  of  teaching  and  information;  and,  therefore, 
it  would  be  profitable  for  me  to  go  on  in  that  work. 

Fost.  Well,  said  he,  to  conclude,  but  will  you 
promise  that  you  will  not  call  the  people  together  any 
more  ?  and  then  you  may  be  released  and  go  home. 

Bun.  I  told  him  that  I  durst  say  no  more  than  I 
had  said  ;  for  I  durst  not  leave  off  that  work  which 
God  had  called  me  to. 

So  he  withdrew  from  me,  and  then  came  several 
of  the  justice's  servants  to  me,  and  The  justice's 

told  me    that    I   Stood    SO   much   upon      servants  said  to 

,_..     .  ,  . .       me  I  stood  so 

a  nicety.     Their  master,   they  said,     much  upon  a 

was  willing  to  let  me  go ;  and  if  I     mcety 
would  but  say  I  would  call  the  people  no  more  to- 
gether, I  might  have  my  liberty,  etc. 

Bun.  I  told  them  there  were  more  ways  than 
one  in  which  a  man  might  be  said  to  call  the  people 

195 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

together.  As  for  instance,  if  a  man  get  upon  the 
market-place,  and  there  read  a  book,  or  the  like, 
though  he  do  not  say  to  the  people,  Sirs,  come 
hither  and  hear ;  yet  if  they  come  to  him  because 
he  reads,  he,  by  his  very  reading,  may  be  said  to 
call  them  together;  because  they  would  not  have 
been  there  to  hear  if  he  had  not  been  there  to  read. 
And  seeing  this  might  be  termed  a  calling  the  people 
together ;  I  durst  not  say,  I  would  not  call  them 
together;  for  then,  by  the  same  argument,  my 
preaching  might  be  said  to  call  them  together. 
Wing,  and  Post.  Then  came  the  justice  and  Mr 

We  had  a  little  F°Ster  tO  mG  *&™  »  (W6  had  a  Httle 
more  discourse  more  discourse  about  preaching,  but 
about  preaching  jDecause  ^Q  method  of  it  is  out  of  my 

mind,  I  pass  it)  ;  and  when  they  saw  that  I  was  at  a 
point,  and  would  not  be  moved  nor  persuaded, 

Mr  Foster,  the  man  that  did  at  first  express  so  much 
love  to  me,  told  the  justice  that  then  he  must  send  me 
away  to  prison.  And  that  he  would  do  well,  also,  if 
he  would  present  all  those  that  were  the  cause  of  my 
coming  among  them  to  meetings.  Thus  we  parted. 

And,  verily,  as  I  was  going  forth  of  the  doors,  I 

had  much  ado  to  forbear  saying  to 
I  earned  the  ,  'T£ 

peace  of  God         them  that  I  carried  the  peace  or  God 

along  with  me  ;  but  I  held  my  peace, 
and,  blessed  be  the  Lord,  went  away  to  prison,  with 
God's  comfort  in  my  poor  soul. 

After  I  had  lain  in  the  jail  five  or  six  days,  the 
196 


BACK  AGAIN  TO  PRISON 

brethren  sought  means,  again,  to  get  me  out  by 
bondsmen  ;  (for  so  ran  my  mittimus,  wag 
that  I  should  lie  there  till  I  could  find  daunted,  but 
sureties).  They  went  to  a  justice  at 
Elstow,  one  Mr  Crumpton,  to  desire  him  to  take 
bond  for  my  appearing  at  the  quarter  sessions.  At 
the  first  he  told  them  he  would ;  but  afterwards  he 
made  a  demur  at  the  business,  and  desired  first  to 
see  my  mittimus,  which  ran  to  this  purpose  :  That  I 
went  about  to  several  conventicles  in  the  county,  to 
the  great  disparagement  of  the  government  of  the 
church  of  England,  etc.  When  he  had  seen  it,  he 
said  that  there  might  be  something  more  against  me 
than  was  expressed  in  my  mittimus;  and  that  he 
was  but  a  young  man,  therefore  he  durst  not  do  it. 
This  my  jailor  told  me ;  and,  whereat  I  was  not  at 
all  daunted  but  rather  glad,  and  saw  evidently  that 
the  Lord  had  heard  me ;  for  before  I  went  down 
to  the  justice,  I  begged  of  God  that  if  I  might 
do  more  good  by  being  at  liberty  than  in  prison, 
that  then  I  might  be  set  at  liberty;  but  if  not, 
His  will  be  done;  for  I  was  not  altogether  with- 
out hopes  but  that  my  imprisonment  might  be  an 
awakening  to  the  saints  in  the  country,  therefore 

I  could  not  tell  well  which  to  choose  ; 

.'....  ,. ,  .        I  met  my  God 

only  1,  in  that  manner,  did  commit     sweetly  in  the 

the  thing  to  God.     And  verily,  at  my     prii 
return,  I  did  meet  my  God  sweetly  in  the  prison 
again,    comforting    of    me    and    satisfying    of   me 

197 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

that  it  was  His  will  and  mind  that  I  should  be 
there. 

When  I  came  back  again  to  prison,  as  I  was 
musing  at  the  slender  answer  of  the  justice,  this 
word  dropt  in  upon  my  heart  with  some  life,  For 
He  knew  that  for  envy  they  had  delivered  Him. 

Thus  have  I,  in  short,  declared  the  manner  and 
I  have  declared  occasion  of  my  being  in  prison; 

the  manner  of  my  where  I  lie  waiting  the  good  will  of 
being  in  prison  .  ° 

where  I  fie  God,  to  do  with  me  as  He  pleaseth ; 

waiting  the  ,  .  ,  ,     .         r 

good  will  of  knowing   that  not   one   hair  or  my 

head  can  fall  to  the  ground  without 
the  will  of  my  Father,  which  is  in  heaven.  Let  the 
rage  and  malice  of  men  be  never  so  great,  they  can 
do  no  more,  nor  go  any  further,  than  God  permits 
them ;  but  when  they  have  done  their  worst,  We 
know  all  things  shall  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God.  Farewell. 

Here  is  the  Sum  of  my  Examination  before  Justice 
KEELIN,  Justice  CHESTER,  Justice  BLUNDALE, 
Justice  BEECHER,  Justice  SNAGG,  etc. 

AFTER   I  had  lain    in  prison  above   seven   weeks, 

the  quarter-sessions  were  to  be  kept 
A  bill  of  indict-  .  _ ;.,  5 

ment  preferred       in  Bedford,  for  the  county  thereof, 

unto  which  I  was  to  be  brought ;  and 
when  my  jailor  had  set  me  before  those  justices, 
there  was  a  bill  of  indictment  preferred  against  me. 

198 


EXAMINED  BY  THE  JUSTICES 

The  extent  thereof  was  as  followeth :  That  John 
Bunyan,  of  the  town  of  Bedford,  labourer,  being 
a  person  of  such  and  such  conditions,  he  hath  (since 
such  a  time)  devilishly  and  perniciously  abstained 
from  coming  to  church  to  hear  Divine  service,  and 
is  a  common  upholder  of  several  unlawful  meetings 
and  conventicles,  to  the  great  disturbance  and  dis- 
traction of  the  good  subjects  of  this  kingdom, 
contrary  to  the  laws  of  our  sovereign  lord  the 
King,  etc. 

The  Clerk.  When  this  was  read,  the  clerk  of  the 
sessions  said  unto  me,  What  say  you  to  this  ? 

Bun.  I  said,  that  as  to  the  first  part  of  it,  I  was 

a  common  frequenter  of  the  Church 

r  /-*    j         A     j  ii  I was  a  common 

or  God.     And  was  also,  by  grace,  a     frequenter  of  the 

member  with  the  people,  over  whom     Church  of  God 
Christ  is  the  Head. 

Keelin.  But,  saith  Justice  Keelin  (who  was  the 
judge  in  that  court),  do  you  come  to  church  (you 
know  what  I  mean) ;  to  the  parish  church,  to  hear 
Divine  service  ? 

Bun.  I  answered,  No,  I  did  not. 

Keel  He  asked  me,  Why? 

Bun.  I  said,  Because  I  did  not  find  it  commanded 
in  the  Word  of  God. 

Keel.  He  said,  We  were  commanded  to  pray. 

Bun.  I  said,  But  not  by  the  Common  Prayer-Book. 

Keel  He  said,  How  then  ? 

Bun.  I  said,  With  the  Spirit.     As   the  apostle 
199 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

saith,  /  will  pray  with  the  Spirit,  and  with  the 
understanding,  i  Cor.  xiv.  15. 

Keel.  He  said,  We  might  pray  with  the  Spirit, 
and  with  the  understanding,  and  with  the  Common 
Prayer-Book  also. 

Bun.  I  said,  that  the  prayers  in  the  Common 
Prayer-Book  were  such  as  was  made 
by  other  men,  and  not  by  the 

pray  with  the  motions  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  within 
Spirit,  etc.  J  ,  ' 

our  hearts ;  and  as  I  said,  the  apostle 

saith,  he  will  pray  with  the  Spirit,  and  with  the 
understanding ;  not  with  the  Spirit  and  the  Common 
Prayer-Book. 

Another  Justice.  What  do  you  count  prayer? 
Do  you  think  it  is  to  say  a  few  words  over  before 
or  among  a  people  ? 

Bun.  I  said,  No,  not  so ;  for  men  might  have 
many  elegant,  or  excellent  words,  and  yet  not  pray 
at  all  ;  but  when  a  man  prayeth,  he  doth,  through 
a  sense  of  those  things  which  he  wants  (which 
sense  is  begotten  by  the  Spirit),  pour  out  his  heart 
before  God  through  Christ ;  though  his  words  be 
not  so  many  and  so  excellent  as  others  are. 

Justices.  They  said,  That  was  true. 

Bun.  I  said,  This  might  be  done  without  the 
Common  Prayer-Book. 

Another.  One  of  them  said  (I  think  it  was 
Justice  Blundale,  or  Justice  Snagg),  How  should  we 
know  that  you  do  not  write  out  your  prayers  first, 

200 


A  DISCUSSION  ON  PRAYER 

and   then    read   them    afterwards   to    the   people? 
This  he  spake  in  a  laughing  way. 

Bun.  I  said,  it  is  not  our  use,  to  take  a  pen  and 

paper,  and  write  a  few  words  there- 

'       .  .    .  It  is  not  our  use, 

on,  and  then  go  and  read  it  over  to     I  said,  to  write 

a  company  of  people. 

But  how  should  we  know  it,  said  he? 

Bun.  Sir,  it  is  none  of  our  custom,  said  I. 

Keel.  But  said  Justice  Keelin,  It  is  lawful  to  use 
the  Common  Prayer,  and  such  like  forms :  for 
Christ  taught  His  disciples  to  pray,  as  John  also 
taught  his  disciples.  And  further,  said  he,  Cannot 
one  man  teach  another  to  pray  ?  Faith  comes  by 
hearing ;  and  one  man  may  convince  another  of  sin, 
and  therefore  prayers  made  by  men,  and  read  over, 
are  good  to  teach,  and  help  men  to  pray. 

While  he  was  speaking  these  words,  God  brought 
that  word  into  my  mind,  in  the  eighth  of  the  Romans, 
at  the  2oth  verse.  I  say,  God  brought  it,  for  I 
thought  not  on  it  before :  but  as  he  was  speaking, 
it  came  so  fresh  into  my  mind,  and  was  set  so 
evidently  before  me,  as  if  the  scripture  had  said, 
Take  me,  take  me ;  so  when  he  had  done  speaking, 

Bun.  I  said,  Sir,  the  scripture  saith,  that  //  is  the 
spirit    that    helpeth    our    infirmities  • 
for   we    know  not  what  we  should 
pray  for  as  we  ought :  but  the  Spirit 
itself  maketh  intercession  for  us,  with 

is    and    groanings    which    cannot    be    uttered. 
201 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Mark,  said  I,  it  doth  not  say  the  Common  Prayer- 
Book  teacheth  us  how  to  pray,  but  the  Spirit.  And 
it  is  the  Spirit  that  helpeth  our  infirmities,  saith 
the  apostle ;  he  doth  not  say  it  is  the  Common 
Prayer-Book. 

And  as  to  the  Lord's  prayer,  although  it  be  an 
easy  thing  to  say,  Our  Father,  etc.,  with  the  mouth; 
yet  there  is  very  few  that  can,  in  the  Spirit,  say 
the  two  first  words  in  that  prayer ;  that  is,  that  can 
call  God  their  Father,  as  knowing  what  it  is  to  be 
born  again,  and  as  having  experience,  that  they  are 
begotten  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  which  if  they  do 
not,  all  is  but  babbling,  etc. 

Keel.  Justice  Keelin  said  that  that  was  a 
truth. 

Bun.  And  I  say  further,  as  to  your  saying  that 

I  say  men  may  one  man  ma7  convmce  another  of  sin, 
tell  each  other  and  that  faith  comes  by  hearing,  and 
of  their  sins,  but  .  •/  i 

the  spirit  must  that  one  man  may  tell  another  how 
he  should  pray,  etc.,  I  say  men  may 
tell  each  other  of  their  sins,  but  it  is  the  Spirit  that 
must  convince  them. 

And  though  it  be  said  that  faith  comes  by  hear- 
ing :  yet  it  is  the  Spirit  that  worketh  faith  in  the 
heart  through  hearing,  or  else  they  are  not  profited 
by  hearing.  Heb.  iv.  12. 

And  that  though  one  man  may  tell  another  how 
he  should  pray :  yet,  as  I  said  before,  he  cannot 
pray,  nor  make  his  condition  known  to  God, 

202 


THE  DISCUSSION  CONTINUED 

except  the  Spirit  help.  It  is  not  the  Common 
Prayer-Book  that  can  do  this.  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
shoiveth  us  our  sins,  and  the  Spirit  that  showeth  us 
a  Saviour,  Jn.  xvi.  16,  and  the  Spirit  that  stirreth 
up  in  our  hearts  desires  to  come  to  God,  for  such 
things  as  we  stand  in  need  of,  Matt.  xi.  27,  even 
sighing  out  our  souls  unto  Him  for  them  with 
groans  which  cannot  be  uttered.  With  other 
words  to  the  same  purpose.  At  this  they  were  set. 
Keel.  But  says  Justice  Keelin,  What  have  you 
against  the  Common  Prayer-Book  ? 

Bun.  I  said.  Sir.  if  you  will  hear 

1  I  shall  lay  down 

me.    I    shall  lay    down    my   reasons     my  reasons 

\         .  against  it 

against  it. 

Keel.  He  said  I  should  have  liberty;  but  first, 
said  he,  let  me  give  you  one  caution ;  take  heed  of 
speaking  irreverently  of  the  Common  Prayer-Book ; 
for  if  you  do  so,  you  will  bring  great  damage  upon 
yourself. 

Bun.  So  I  proceeded,  and  said,  My  first  reason 
was,  because  it  was  not  commanded  in  the  Word  of 
God,  and  therefore  I  could  not  use  it. 

Another.  One  of  them  said,  Where  do  you  find  it 
commanded  in  the  Scripture,  that  you  should  go  to 
Elstow,  or  Bedford,  and  yet  it  is  lawful  to  go  to 
either  of  them,  is  it  not  ? 

Bun.  I  said,  To  go  to  Elstow,  or  Bedford,  was  a 
civil  thing,  and  not  material,  though  not  commanded, 
and  yet  God's  Word  allowed  me  to  go  about  my 

203 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

calling,  and  therefore    if  it  lay  there,  then    to   go 

thither,    etc.     But    to   pray,    was    a 
I  said,  God's  r     ,        ~.    .    J  ,. 

word  allowed         great    part    or    the   Divine    worship 

Syc°alUngbOUt       of   God>  and  therefore    it   ought  to 
be   done   according   to   the   rule  of 
God's  Word. 

Another.  One  of  them  said,  He  will  do  harm  j 
let  him  speak  no  further. 

Keel.  Justice  Keelin  said,  No,  no,  never  fear 
him,  we  are  better  established  than  so ;  he  can  do 
no  harm ;  we  know  the  Common  Prayer-Book  hath 
been  ever  since  the  apostles'  time,  and  it  is  lawful 
for  it  to  be  used  in  the  church. 

Bun.  I  said,  Show  me  the  place  in  the  epistles, 
where  the  Common  Prayer-Book  is  written,  or  one 
text  of  Scripture,  that  commands  me  to  read  it,  and 
I  will  use  it.  But  yet,  notwithstanding,  said  I,  they 
that  have  a  mind  to  use  it,  they  have  their  liberty ; 
that  is,  I  would  not  keep  them  from  it ;  but  for  our 
parts,  we  can  pray  to  God  without  it.  Blessed  be 
His  name  ! 

With  that,  one  of  them  said,  Who  is  your  God  ? 
They  often  said  Beelzebub?  Moreover,  they  often 
I  was  possessed  said,  that  I  was  possessed  with  the 

with  the  spirit  of          .  I        " 

delusion,  and  of  spirit  or  delusion,  and  or  the  devil. 
All  which  sayings  I  passed  over ;  the 
Lord  forgive  them !  And  further,  I  said,  Blessed  be 
the  Lord  for  it ;  we  are  encouraged  to  meet  to- 
gether, and  to  pray,  and  exhort  one  another;  for 

204 


JUSTICE  KEELIN  VERY  RUDE 

we  have  had  the  comfortable  presence  of  God  among 
us.     For  ever  blessed  be  His  holy  name  ! 

Keel.  Justice  Keelin  called  this  pedler's  French, 
saying,  that  I  must  leave  off  my  canting.  The 
Lord  open  his  eyes ! 

Bun.  I  said  that  we  ought  to  exhort  one 
another  daily,  while  it  is  called  to-day,  etc. 

Keel.  Justice  Keelin  said  that  I  ought  not  to 
preach ;  and  asked  me  where  I  had  my  authority  ? 
with  other  such  like  words. 

Bun.  I  said  that  I  would  prove  that     j  said  j  would 
it    was    lawful   for    me,    and    such     prove  it  was 

i_      i_       TTT      j       f     lawful  for  me  to 

as   I   am,    to   preach  the  Word   or    preach  the  Word 
God. 

Keel.  He  said  unto  me,  By  what  Scripture  ? 

Bun.  I  said,  By  that  in  the  first  epistle  of 
Peter,  chap.  iv.  10,  n,  and  Acts  xviii.,  with  other 
Scriptures,  which  he  would  not  suffer  me  to 
mention.  But  said,  Hold ;  not  so  many,  which 
is  the  first? 

Bun.  I  said    this  :    As   every  man  hath  received 
the  gift,  even  so  let  him  minister  the 
same  unto  another,  as  good  stewards 
of  the    manifold  grace   of  God.       If 
any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the 
oracles  of  God,  etc. 

Keel.  He  said,  Let  me  a  little  open  that  Scripture 
to  you :  As  every  man  hath  received  the  gift ;  that 
is,  said  he,  as  every  one  hath  received  a  trade,  so  let 

205 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

him  follow  it.  If  any  man  have  received  a  gift  of 
tinkering,  as  thou  hast  done,  let  him  follow  his 
tinkering.  And  so  other  men  their  trades.  And 
the  divine  his  calling,  etc. 

Bun.  Nay,  sir,  said  I,  but  it  is  most  clear,  that 
I  would  have  ^e  aPostle  speaks  here  of  preaching 
fKedin")  wSuld6  the  W°rd '  if  ^  d°  but  comPare 

not  give  me  both  the  verses  together,   the   next 

leave  ,  .          r-        -r        i 

verse  explains  this  gift  what  it  is, 
saying,  if  any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  oracles 
of  God.  So  that  it  is  plain,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
doth  not  so  much  in  this  place  exhort  to  civil  callings, 
as  to  the  exercising  of  those  gifts  that  we  have 
received  from  God.  I  would  have  gone  on,  but  he 
would  not  give  me  leave. 

Keel.  He  said,  We  might  do  it  in  our  families, 
but  not  otherways. 

Bun.  I  said,  If  it  was  lawful  to  do  good  to  some, 

I  said  if  it  was  ^  was  ^aw^u^ to  d°  good  to  more.     If 

lawful  to  do  good  it    was  a   good  duty  to  exhort   our 

to  some,  it  was  ,,....'  .-          . 

lawful  to  do  good  families,  it  was  good  to  exhort  others  ; 

but  if  they  held  it  a  sin  to  meet  to- 
gether to  seek  the  face  of  God,  and  exhort  one 
another  to  follow  Christ,  I  should  sin  still;  for  so 
we  should  do. 

Keel.  He  said  he  was  not  so  well  versed  in 
Scripture  as  to  dispute,  or  words  to  that  purpose. 
And  said,  moreover,  that  they  could  not  wait  upon 
me  any  longer ;  but  said  to  me,  Then  you  confess 

206 


A  VINDICTIVE  SENTENCE 

the  indictment,  do  you  not  ?    Now,  and  not  till  now, 
I  saw  I  was  indicted. 

Bun.  I  said,  This  I  confess,  we  have  had  many 

meetings  together,  both  to  pray  to 

~    ,      D,  v  i      This  Iconfessed, 

God,  and  to  exhort  one  another,  and     we  had  many 


that  we   had  the    sweet  comforting 

presence  of  the  Lord  among  us  for     prayer  and 

,°,       TT.        hortation 

our  encouragement;   blessed  be  His 

name    therefore.       I    confessed    myself   guilty    no 

otherwise. 

Keel.  Then,  said  he,  bear  your  judgment.  You 
must  be  had  back  again  to  prison,  and  there  lie  for 
three  months  following  ;  and  at  three  months'  end, 
if  you  do  not  submit  to  go  to  church  to  hear  Divine 
service,  and  leave  your  preaching,  you  must  be 
banished  the  realm:  and  if,  after  such  a  day  as 
shall  be  appointed  you  to  be  gone,  you  shall  be 
found  in  this  realm,  etc.,  or  be  found  to  come  over 
again  without  special  licence  from  the  king,  etc., 
you  must  stretch  by  the  neck  for  it,  I  tell  you 
plainly  :  and  so  he  bid  my  jailor  have  me  away. 

Bun.  I  told  him,  as  to  this  matter,  I  was  at  a 
point  with  him  ;  for  if  I  were  out  of 
prison    to-day,   I    would   preach   the 
Gospel  again  to-morrow,  by  the  help 
of  God. 

Another.  To  which  one  made  me  some  answer: 
but  my  jailor  pulling  me  away  to  be  gone,  I  could 
not  tell  what  he  said. 

o  207 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Thus  I  departed  from  them ;  and  I  can  truly  say, 
My  heart  was  *  ^less  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  it, 
sweetly  re-  that  my  heart  was  sweetly  refreshed 

returning  to  in  the  time  of  my  examination,  and 

also  afterwards,  at  my  returning  to 
the  prison.  So  that  I  found  Christ's  words  more 
than  bare  trifles,  where  He  saith,  I  will  give  you  a 
mouth  and  wisdom,  which  all  your  adversaries  shall 
not  be  able  to  gainsay,  nor  resist.  Luke  xxi.  15.  And 
that  His  peace  no  man  can  take  from  us. 

Thus  have  I  given  you  the  substance  of  my 
examination.  The  Lord  make  this  profitable  to  all 
that  shall  read  or  hear  it.  Farewell. 


The  Substance  of  some  Discourse  had  between  the 
Clerk  of  the  Peace  and  myself;  when  he  came  to 
admonish  me,  according  to  the  tenor  of  that  Law, 
by  which  I  was  in  prison. 

WHEN  I  had  lain   in  prison  other  twelve  weeks, 

and   now   not    knowing    what    they 
The  clerk  of  the 

Peace  comes  to  intended  to  do  with  me,  upon  the 
third  of  April  1661,  comes  Mr  Cobb 
unto  me  (as  he  told  me),  being  sent  by  the  justices 
to  admonish  me ;  and  demand  of  me  submittance  to 
the  church  of  England,  etc.  The  extent  of  our  dis- 
course was  as  followeth. 

Cobb.  When  he  was  come  into  the  house  he  sent 
for  me  out  of  my  chamber ;  who,  when  I  was  come 

208 


ON  MEETING  WITH  OTHERS 

unto   him,    he    said,    Neighbour   Bunydn,   how  do 
you  do? 

Bun.  I  thank  you,  Sir,  said  I,  very  well,  blessed  be 
the  Lord. 

Cobb.  Saith  he,  I  come  to  tell  you,  that  it  is 
desired  you  would  submit  yourself  to  the  laws  of 
the  land,  or  else  at  the  next  sessions  it  will  go  worse 
with  you,  even  to  be  sent  away  out  of  the  nation, 
or  else  worse  than  that. 

Bun.  I  said  that  I  did  desire  to  demean  myself  in 
the  world,  both  as  becometh  a  man  and  a  Christian. 

Cobb.  But,  saith  he,  you  must  submit  to  the  laws 
of  the  land,  and  leave  off  those  meetings  which  you 
was  wont  to  have;  for  the  statute-law  is  directly 
against  it;  and  I  am  sent  to  you  by  the  justices  to 
tell  you  that  they  do  intend  to  prosecute  the  law 
against  you  if  you  submit  not. 

Bun.  I  said,  Sir,  I  conceive  that  that  law  by  which 
I  am  in  prison  at  this  time,  doth  not 
reach  or  condemn  either  me,  or  the 
meetings  which  I  do  frequent;  that 
law  was  made  against  those,  that  being  designed  to 
do  evil  in  their  meetings,  making  the  exercise  of 
religion  their  pretence,  to  cover  their  wickedness. 
It  doth  not  forbid  the  private  meetings  of  those  that 
plainly  and  simply  make  it  their  only  end  to  worship 
the  Lord,  and  to  exhort  one  another  to  edification. 
My  end  in  meeting  with  others  is  simply  to  do  as 
much  good  as  I  can,  by  exhortation  and  counsel, 

209 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

according  to  that  small  measure  of  light  which  God 
hath  given  me,  and  not  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the 
nation. 

Cobb.  Every  one  will  say  the  same,  said  he ;  you 
see  the  late  insurrection1  at  London,  under  what 
glorious  pretences  they  went ;  and  yet,  indeed,  they 
intended  no  less  than  the  ruin  of  the  kingdom  and 
commonwealth. 

Bun.  That  practice  of  theirs,  I  abhor,  said  I ;  yet 

I  look  upon  it  as  k  doth  nOt  follow  that>  because  the7 
my  duty  to  be-  did  so,  therefore  all  others  will  do  so. 

under  the  King's  I  look  upon  it  as  my  duty  to  behave 
myself  under  the  King's  government, 
both  as  becomes  a  man  and  a  Christian,  and  if  an 
occasion  were  offered  me,  I  should  willingly  mani- 
fest my  loyalty  to  my  Prince,  both  by  word  and 
deed. 

Cobb.  Well,  said  he,  I  do  not  profess  myself  to  be 
a  man  that  can  dispute ;  but  this  I  say,  truly,  neigh- 
bour Bunyan,  I  would  have  you  consider  this  matter 
seriously,  and  submit  yourself;  you  may  have  your 
liberty  to  exhort  your  neighbour  in  private  discourse, 
so  be  you  do  not  call  together  an  assembly  of  people ; 
and,  truly,  you  may  do  much  good  to  the  church  of 
Christ,  if  you  would  go  this  way ;  and  this  you  may 
do,  and  the  law  not  abridge  you  of  it.  It  is  your 
private  meetings  that  the  law  is  against. 

Bun.  Sir,  said  I,  if  I  may  do  good  to  one  by  my 

1  The  Venner  insurrection  is  here  referred  to. 
2IO 


DOING  GOOD  TO  ONE  OR  MANY 

discourse,  why  may  I  not  do  good  to  two  ?     And  if 
to  two,  why  not  to  four,  and  so  to  eight  ?  etc. 

Cobb.  Ay,  saith  he,  and  to  a  hundred,  I  warrant 
you. 

Bun.  Yes,  Sir,  said  I,  I  think  I  should  not  be  for- 
bid to  do  as  much  good  as  I  can. 

Cobb.  But,  saith  he,  you  may  but  pretend  to  do 
good,  and  instead,  notwithstanding,  do  harm,  by 
seducing  the  people  ;  you  are,  therefore,  denied  your 
meeting  so  many  together,  lest  you  should  do  harm. 

Bun.  And  yet,  said  I,  you  say  the  law  tolerates 
me  to  discourse  with  my  neighbour ; 
surely  there  is  no  law  tolerates  me  to 
seduce  any  one ;  therefore  if  I  may 
by  the  law  discourse  with  one,  surely 
it  is  to  do  him  good ;  and  if  I  by  discoursing  may  do 
good  to  one,  surely,  by  the  same  law,  I  may  do  good 
to  many. 

Cobb.  The  law,  saith  he,  doth  expressly  forbid 
your  private  meetings ;  therefore  they  are  not  to  be 
tolerated. 

Bun.  I   told  him  that  I  would  not  entertain  so 
much  uncharitableness  of  that  Parliament  in  the  35th 
of  Elizabeth,  or  of  the  Queen  herself,  as  to  think 
they  did,    by   that   law,   intend    the     Idefcndmyself 
oppressing    of   any  of   God's   ordin-     by  explaining 

°.       .         J  .        ,          and  upholding 

ances,  or  the  interrupting  any  in  the     the  law  of  the 

way  of  God ;  but  men  may,  in  the 

wresting  of  it,  turn  it  against  the  way  of  God ;  but 

211 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

take  the  law  in  itself,  and  it  only  fighteth  against 
those  that  drive  at  mischief  in  their  hearts  and 
meeting,  making  religion  only  their  cloak,  colour,  or 
pretence  ;  for  so  are  the  words  of  the  statute  :  If  any 
meetings,  under  colour  or  pretence  of  religion,  etc. 

Cobb.  Very  good ;  therefore  the  king,  seeing  that 
pretences  are  usually  in  and  among  people,  so  as  to 
make  religion  their  pretence  only ;  therefore  he,  and 
the  law  before  him,  doth  forbid  such  private  meetings, 
and  tolerates  only  public  ;  you  may  meet  in  public. 

JBun.  Sir,  said  I,  let  me  answer  you  in  a  similitude : 

Set  the  case  that,  at  such  a  wood 
Sir,  said  I,  let 

me  answer  you  corner,  there  did  usually  come  forth 
in  a  similitude  -,  .  j  .  -,  .  r  , 

thieves,  to  do  mischief ;  must  there 

therefore  a  law  be  made,  that  every  one  that  cometh 
out  there  shall  be  killed  ?  May  not  there  come  out 
true  men  as  well  as  thieves  out  from  thence  ?  Just 
thus  is  it  in  this  case  ;  I  do  think  there  may  be 
many  that  may  design  the  destruction  of  the 
commonwealth ;  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefore 
that  all  private  meetings  are  unlawful ;  those  that 
transgress,  let  them  be  punished.  And  if  at  any 
time  I  myself  should  do  any  act  in  my  conversation  as 
doth  not  become  a  man  and  Christian,  let  me  bear  the 
punishment.  And  as  for  your  saying  I  may  meet  in 
public,  if  I  may  be  suffered,  I  would  gladly  do  it. 
Let  me  have  but  meeting  enough  in  public,  and  I 
shall  care  the  less  to  have  them  in  private.  I  do  not 
meet  in  private  because  I  am  afraid  to  have  meetings 

212 


TO  ERR  OR  TO  BE  A  HERETIC 

in  public.  I  bless  the  Lord  that  my  heart  is  at  that 
point,  that  if  any  man  can  lay  any  thing  to  my 
charge,  either  in  doctrine  or  in  practice,  in  this 
particular,  that  can  be  proved  error  or  heresy,  I  am 
willing  to  disown  it,  even  in  the  very  market-place  ; 
but  if  it  be  truth,  then  to  stand  to  it  to  the  last  drop 
of  my  blood.  And,  Sir,  said  I,  you  ought  to  com- 
mend me  for  so  doing.  To  err  and 


to  be  a  heretic  are  two  things  :  I  am     proved  I  am 

guilty  of  error 
no  heretic,  because  1  will  not  stand     or  heresy,  I  will 

refractorily  to  defend  any  one  thing     disown  lt 
that  is  contrary   to  the  Word.     Prove  any   thing 
which  I  hold  to  be  an  error,  and  I  will  recant  it. 

Cobb.  But,  goodman  Bunyan,  said  he,  methinks  you 
need  not  stand  so  strictly  upon  this  one  thing,  as  to  have 
meetings  of  such  public  assemblies.  Cannot  you  sub- 
mit, and,  notwithstanding,  do  as  much  good  as  you  can, 
in  a  neighbourly  way,  without  having  such  meetings  ? 

Bun.  Truly,  Sir,  said  I,  I  do  not  desire  to  com- 
mend myself,  but  to  think  meanly  of  myself;  yet 
when  I  do  most  despise  myself,  taking  notice  of  that 
small  measure  of  light  which  God  hath  given  me,  also 
that  the  people  of  the  Lord  (by  their  own  saying), 
are  edified  thereby.  Besides,  when  I  see  that  the 
Lord,  through  grace,  hath  in  some  measure  blessed 
my  labour,  I  dare  not  but  exercise  that  gift  which 
God  hath  given  me  for  the  good  of  the  people. 
And  I  said  further,  that  I  would  willingly  speak  in 
public  if  I  might. 

213 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Cobb.  He  said,  that  I  might  come  to  the  public 
assemblies  and  hear.  What  though  you  do  not 
preach?  you  may  hear.  Do  not  think  yourself  so 
well  enlightened,  and  that  you  have  received  a  gift 
so  far  above  others,  but  that  you  may  hear  other 
men  preach.  Or  to  that  purpose. 

Bun.  I  told  him,  I  was  as  willing  to  be  taught  as 
to  give  instruction,  and  I  looked  upon 

I  said  I  was  as.  ,  jiir  -IT 

willing  to  be  it  as  my  duty  to  do  both  ;  for,  said  1, 
SslucSn0give  a  man  that  is  a  teacher,  he  himself 
may  learn  also  from  another  that 
teacheth,  as  the  apostle  saith,  We  may  all  prophesy 
one  by  one^  that  all  may  learn,  i  Cor.  xiv.  31. 
That  is,  every  man  that  hath  received  a  gift  from 
God,  he  may  dispense  it,  that  others  may  be  com- 
forted ;  and  when  he  hath  done,  he  may  hear  and 
learn,  and  be  comforted  himself  of  others. 

Cobb.  But,  said  he,  what  if  you  should  forbear 
awhile,  and  sit  still,  till  you  see  further  how  things 
will  go? 

Bun.  Sir,  said  I,  Wickllffe  saith,  that  he  which 
lsaid,'Wickliffe  leaveth  off  preaching  and  hearing  of 

saith,  he  who         the  Word  of  God  for  fear  of  excom- 

leaveth  off 

preaching  for         mumcation  of  men,  he  is  already  ex- 

communicated  of  God,  and  shall  in 
the  da7  of  j^gment  be   counted  a 
God'  traitor  to  Christ.1 

1  Bunyan  here  refers  to  a  translation  of  Wickliffe's  doctrines  in 
John  Foxe's  Martyrology,  a  favourite  book  of  his. 

214 


PROOF  BY  THE  BIBLE 

Cobb.  Ay,  saith  he,  they  that  do  not  hear  shall  be 
so  counted  indeed ;  do  you,  therefore,  hear  ? 

Bun.  But,  Sir,  said  I,  he  saith,  he  that  shall  leave 
off  either  preaching  or  hearing,  etc.  That  is,  if  he 
hath  received  a  gift  for  edification,  it  is  his  sin,  if  he 
doth  not  lay  it  out  in  a  way  of  exhortation  and 
counsel,  according  to  the  proportion  of  his  gift ;  as 
well  as  to  spend  his  time  altogether  in  hearing  others 
preach. 

Cobb.  But,  said  he,  how  shall  we  know  that  you 
have  received  a  gift? 

Bun.  Said  I,  Let  any  man  hear  and  search,  and 
prove  the  doctrine  by  the  Bible. 

Cobb.  But  will  you  be  willing,  said  he,  that  two 
indifferent  persons  shall  determine  the  case ;  and 
will  you  stand  by  their  judgment? 

Bun.  I  said,  Are  they  infallible? 

Cobb.  He  said,  No. 

Bun.  Then,  said   I,  it  is    possible   my  judgment 

may  be  as  good  as  theirs.     But  yet  I 

.„  .  ,  i  •       i  •  I  am  willing  to 

will  pass  by  either,  and  in  this  matter     be  judged  by  the 

be  judged  by  the  Scriptures;  I  am       cnPtures 
sure  that  is  infallible,  and  cannot  err. 

Cobb.  But,  said  he,  who  shall  be  judge  between 
you,  for  you  take  the  Scriptures  one  way,  and  they 
another  ? 

Bun.  I  said  the  Scripture  should :  and  that  by 
comparing  one  Scripture  with  another ;  for  that 
will  open  itself,  if  it  be  rightly  compared.  As 

215 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

for   instance,   if  under  the  different   apprehensions 

of  the   word   Mediator,    you    would 

tw«  wiiieopenlp"     know  the  truth  of  it,  the  Scriptures 

°Pen  h>  and   tel1  US   that  he  that  is  a 
mediator  must  take  up  the  business 

between  two,  and  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator 
of  one, — but  God  is  one,  and  there  is  one  Mediator 
between  God  and  men,  even  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 
Gal.  iii.  20 ;  i  Tim.  ii.  5.  So  likewise  the  Scripture 
calleth  Christ  a  complete,  or  perfect,  or  able  high 
priest.  That  is  opened  in  that  He  is  called  man, 
and  also  God.  His  blood  also  is  discovered  to  be 
effectually  efficacious  by  the  same  things.  So  the 
Scripture,  as  touching  the  matter  of  meeting  to- 
gether, etc.,  doth  likewise  sufficiently  open  itself 
and  discover  its  meaning. 

Cobb.  But  are  you  willing,  said  he,  to  stand  to  the 
judgment  of  the  church  ? 

Bun.  Yes,  Sir,  said  I,  to  the  approbation  of  the 

church  of  God;  (the  church's  iudg- 
I  told  him  I  did  v        ,  •     o     •  N 

look  upon  my-       ment  is  best  expressed  in  ocnpture). 

w^accTdlg      we  had  much  other  discourse  which 

to  all  righteous  \  cannot  well  remember,  about  the 
laws 

laws  of  the  nation,  and  submission  to 

governments  ;  to  which  I  did  tell  him,  that  I  did  look 
upon  myself  as  bound  in  conscience  to  walk  accord- 
ing to  all  righteous  laws,  and  that,  whether  there 
was  a  king  or  no ;  and  if  I  did  any  thing  that  was 
contrary,  I  did  hold  it  my  duty  to  bear  patiently  the 

216 


SUBMISSION  TO  AUTHORITY 

penalty  of  the  law,  that  was  provided  against  such 
offenders ;  with  many  more  words  to  the  like  effect. 
And  said,  moreover,  that  to  cut  off  all  occasions  of 
suspicion  from  any,  as  touching  the  harmlessness 
of  my  doctrine  in  private,  I  would  willingly  take 
the  pains  to  give  any  one  the  notes  of  all  my 
sermons  ;  for  I  do  sincerely  desire  to  live  quietly 
in  my  country,  and  to  submit  to  the  present 
authority. 

Cobb.  Well,  neighbour  Bunyan,  said  he,  but 
indeed  I  would  wish  you  seriously  to  consider  of 
these  things,  between  this  and  the  quarter-sessions, 
and  to  submit  yourself.  You  may  do  much  good 
if  you  continue  still  in  the  land ;  but  alas,  what 
benefit  will  it  be  to  your  friends,  or  what  good  can 
you  do  to  them,  if  you  should  be  sent  away  beyond 
the  seas  into  Spain,  or  Constantinople ',  or  some 
other  remote  part  of  the  world  ?  Pray  be  ruled. 

Jailor.  Indeed,  Sir,  I  hope  he  will  be  ruled. 

Bun.  I  shall  desire,  said  I,  in  all  godliness  and 
honesty    to    behave   myself    in    the     Iknownoevil 
nation,  whilst  I  am  in  it.     And  if  I     that  I  have  done 

'  .      ,         .  i     ,  in  this  matter.   I 

must  be  so  dealt  withal,  as  you  say,     speak  as  in  the 
I  hope  God  will  help  me  to  bear  what     presence  of  God 
they   shall  lay  upon   me.     I  know  no  evil  that  I 
have  done  in  this  matter,  to  be  so  used.     I  speak  as 
in  the  presence  of  God. 

Cobb.  You  know,  saith  he,  that  the  Scripture 
saith,  the  powers  that  be,  are  ordained  of  God. 

217 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Bun.  I  said.  Yes,  and  that  I  was  to  submit  to  the 
King  as  supreme,  and  also  to  the  governors,  as  to 
them  who  are  sent  by  Him. 

Cobb.  Well  then,  said  he,  the  King  then  com- 
mands you,  that  you  should  not  have  any  private 
meetings ;  because  it  is  against  his  law,  and  he  is 
ordained  of  God,  therefore  you  should  not  have 
any. 

Bun.  I  told  him  that  Paul  did  own  the  powers 

that  were  in  his  day,  to  be  of  God ; 

Hw  privies16       and  7et  ne  was  often  in  Prison  under 

obe  in*73  °f  t^em  **°r  a^  t^lat'      AlK*  a^S°'  t^LOUS^ 

Jesus  Christ  told  Pilate,  that  He  had 

no  power  against  him,  but  of  God,  yet  He  died 
under  the  same  Pilate ;  and  yet,  said  I,  I  hope  you 
will  not  say  that  either  Paul,  or  Christ,  were  such 
as  did  deny  magistracy,  and  so  sinned  against  God 
in  slighting  the  ordinance.  Sir,  said  I,  the  law  hath 
provided  two  ways  of  obeying :  the  one  to  do  that 
which  I,  in  my  conscience,  do  believe  that  I  am 
bound  to  do,  actively;  and  where  I  cannot  obey 
actively,  there  I  am  willing  to  lie  down,  and  to  suffer 
what  they  shall  do  unto  me.  At  this  he  sat  still, 
and  said  no  more ;  which  when  he  had  done,  I  did 
thank  him  for  his  civil  and  meek  discoursing  with 
me  ;  and  so  we  parted. 

O  !  that  we  might  meet  in  heaven  ! 

Farewell.     J.  B. 


218 


MRS  BUNYAN  AT  THE  ASSIZES 


Here  followeth  a  discourse  between  my  Wife  and  the 
Judges,  with  others,  touching  my  Deliverance  at 
the  Assizes  following  ;  the  which  I  took  from  her 
own  Mouth. 

AFTER    that    I    had    received    this    sentence    of 

banishing,   or   hanging,    from   them, 

and    after    the    former    admonition,     for  a  convicted 

touching    the    determination    of   the 

justices,   if   I   did  not    recant;    just 


when  the  time  drew  nigh,  in  which  King's  corona- 
I  should  have  abjured,  or  have  done 
worse  (as  Mr  Cobb  told  me),  came  the  time  in  which 
the  King  was  to  be  crowned.1  Now,  at  the  coronation 
of  kings,  there  is  usually  a  releasement  of  divers 
prisoners,  by  virtue  of  his  coronation  ;  in  which 
privilege  also  I  should  have  had  my  share  ; 
but  that  they  took  me  for  a  convicted  person,  and 
therefore,  unless  I  sued  out  a  pardon  (as  they  called 
it),  I  could  have  no  benefit  thereby,  notwithstanding, 
yet,  forasmuch  as  the  coronation  proclamation  did 
give  liberty,  from  the  day  the  King  was  crowned,  to 
that  day  twelvemonth,  to  sue  them  out  ;  therefore, 
though  they  would  not  let  me  out  of  prison,  as  they 
let  out  thousands,  yet  they  could  not  meddle  with 
me,  as  touching  the  execution  of  their  sentence; 
because  of  the  liberty  offered  for  the  suing  out  of 
1  April  23,  1661. 
219 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

pardons.  Whereupon  I  continued  in  prison  till  the 
next  assizes,  which  are  called  Midsummer  assizes, 
being  then  kept  in  August,  1661. 

Now,  at  that  assizes,  because  I  would  not  leave 

any  possible  means  unattempted 
My  wife  did  .  '  ...  ,  .  /»  t  T  T  i  i 

present  for  me        that  might  be  lawful,  I  did,  by  my 

toAug£st?66i  wife>  present  a  petition  to  the  judges 
a  petition  to  the  three  tjmes  that  i  might  be  heard, 
judges 

and  that  they  would  impartially  take 
my  case  into  consideration. 

The  first  time  my  wife  went,  she  presented  it  to 
Judge  Hale,  who  very  mildly  received 

it:   at  her  har4    telling  ner  that  ne 
byudge     would  do  her  and  me  the  best  good 

he  could ;  but  he  feared,  he  said,  he 
could  do  none.  The  next  day,  again,  lest  they 
should,  through  the  multitude  of  business,  forget 
me,  we  did  throw  another  petition  into  the  coach 

to  Judge  Twisdon ;  who,  when  he 
angrily  sSi  1°°  had  seen  it,  snapt  her  up,  and  angrily 

told  her  that  *  was  a  convicted  person, 

and  could  not  be  released,  unless  I 
would  promise  to  preach  no  more,  etc. 

Well,  after  this,  she  yet  again  presented  another 

to  Judge  Hale,  as  he  sat  on  the  bench, 

who,  as  it  seemed,  was  willing  to 
spirited  fellow  gjve  her  audience.  Only  Justice 

Chester  being  present,  stept  up  and  said,  that  I  was 
convicted  in  the  court,  and  that  I  was  a  hot-spirited 

220 


BUNYAN'S  WIFE  PLEADING  WITH  THE  JUDGES 

She  then  coming  into  the  chamber  with  a  bashed  face,  and  a 
trembling  heart,  began  her  errand  to  them  in  this  manner 

[See  page  221 


AN  APPEAL  TO  JUDGE  HALE 

fellow  (or  words  to  that  purpose),  whereat  he  waived 
it,  and  did  not  meddle  therewith.  But  yet,  my  wife 
being  encouraged  by  the  high-sheriff,  did  venture 
once  more  into  their  presence  (as  the  poor  widow 
did  before  the  unjust  judge)  to  try  what  she  could  do 
with  them  for  my  liberty,  before  they  went  forth  of 
the  town.  The  place  where  she  went  to  them,  was 
to  the  Swan-chamber,  where  the  two  judges,  and 
many  justices  and  gentry  of  the  country,  was  in 
company  together.  She  then  coming  into  the 
chamber  with  a  bashed  face,  and  a  trembling  heart, 
began  her  errand  to  them  in  this  manner : — 

Woman.  My  lord  (directing  herself  to  Judge  Hale), 
I  make  bold  to  come  once  again  to  your  Lordship,  to 
know  what  may  be  done  with  my  husband. 

Judge  Hale.  To  whom  he  said,  Woman,  I  told 
thee  before  I  could  do  thee  no  good ;  because  they 
have  taken  that  for  a  conviction  which  thy  husband 
spoke  at  the  sessions  :  and  unless  there  be  something 
done  to  undo  that,  I  can  do  thee  no  good. 

Woman.  My  lord,  said  she,  he  is  kept  unlawfully 
in  prison ;  they  clapped  him  up  before  there  was 
any  proclamation  against  the  meetings;  the  indict- 
ment also  is  false.  Besides,  they  never  asked  him 
whether  he  was  guilty  or  no;  neither  did  he 
confess  the  indictment. 

One  of  the  Justices.  Then  one  of  the  justices  that 
stood  by,  whom  she  knew  not,  said,  My  Lord,  he  was 
lawfully  convicted. 

221 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Worn.  It  is  false,  said  she ;  for  when  they  said  to 
him,  Do  you  confess  the  indictment?  he  said  only 
this,  that  he  had  been  at  several  meetings,  both 
where  there  were  preaching  the  Word,  and  prayer, 
and  that  they  had  God's  presence  among  them. 

Judge  Twisdon.  Whereat  Judge  Twisdon  answered 
very  angrily,  saying,  What,  you  think  we  can  do 
what  we  list ;  your  husband  is  a  breaker  of  the  peace, 
and  is  convicted  by  the  law,  etc.  Whereupon  Judge 
Hale  called  for  the  Statute  Book. 

Worn.  But,  said  she,  my  lord,  he  was  not  lawfully 
convicted. 

Chester.  Then  Justice  Chester  said,  My  lord,  he 
was  lawfully  convicted. 

Worn.  It  is  false,  said  she ;  it  was  but  a  word  of  dis- 
course that  they  took  for  a  conviction  (as  you  heard 
before). 

Chest.  But  it  is  recorded,  woman ;  it  is  recorded, 
said  Justice  Chester-,  as  if  it  must  be  of  necessity 
true,  because  it  was  recorded.  With  which  words 
he  often  endeavoured  to  stop  her  mouth,  having  no 
other  argument  to  convince  her,  but  it  is  recorded, 
it  is  recorded. 

Worn.  My  Lord,  said  she,  I  was  a  while  since  at 
London,  to  see  if  I  could  get  my 
husband's  liberty ;  and  there  I  spoke 

Beat[kwoto°dLord      with  m7  lord  Barkwood,  one  of   the 

House  of  Lords,  to  whom  I  delivered 

a  petition,  who  took  it  of  me  and  presented  it  to 

222 


TWO  ANGRY  JUDGES 

some  of  the  rest  of  the  House  of  Lords,  for  my 
husband's  releasement;  who,  when  they  had  seen 
it,  they  said,  that  they  could  not  release  him, 
but  had  committed  his  releasement  to  the  judges,  at 
the  next  assizes.  This  he  told  me ;  and  now  I  am 
come  to  you  to  see  if  any  thing  may  be  done  in  this 
business,  and  you  give  neither  releasement  nor  relief. 
To  which  they  gave  her  no  answer,  but  made  as  if 
they  heard  her  not. 

Chest.  Only  Justice  Chester  was  often  up  with 
this, — He  is  convicted,  and  it  is  recorded. 

Worn.  If  it  be,  it  is  false,  said  she. 

Chest.  My  lord,  said  Justice  Chester,  he  is  a 
pestilent  fellow,  there  is  not  such  a  fellow  in  the 
country  again. 

Twis.  What,  will  your  husband  leave  preaching  ? 
If  he  will  do  so,  then  send  for  him. 

Worn.  My  lord,  said  she,  he  dares  not  leave  preach- 
ing as  long  as  he  can  speak. 

Twis.  See  here,  what  should  we  talk  any  more 
about  such  a  fellow  ?  Must  he  do  what  he  lists  ? 
He  is  a  breaker  of  the  peace. 

Worn.  She  told  him  again,  that  he  desired  to  live 
peaceably,  and  to  follow  his  calling,  that  his  family 
might  be  maintained ;  and  moreover,  said,  My  Lord, 
I  have  four  small  children,  that  cannot  help  them- 
selves, one  of  which  is  blind,  and  have  nothing  to  live 
upon,  but  the  charity  of  good  people. 

Hale.  Hast  thou  four  children  ?  said  Judge 
P  223 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

Hale;  thou  art  but   a  young  woman  to  have  four 
children. 

Worn.  My  lord,  said  she,  I  am  but  mother-in-law 

to  them,  having  not  been  married  to 
Mrs  Bunyan  ' 

speaks  to  Judge     him  yet  full  two  years.     Indeed,  I  was 

with  child  when  my  husband  was  first 
apprehended  ;  but  being  young,  and  unaccustomed  to 
such  things,  said  she,  I  being  smayed 1  at  the  news, 
fell  into  labour,  and  so  continued  for  eight  days,  and 
then  was  delivered,  but  my  child  died. 

Hale.  Whereat,  he  looking  very  soberly  on  the 
matter,  said,  Alas,  poor  woman ! 

Twis.  But  Judge  Twisdon  told  her,  that  she  made 
poverty  her  cloak ;  and  said,  moreover,  that  he 
understood  I  was  maintained  better  by  running  up 
and  down  a  preaching,  than  by  following  my  calling. 

Hale.  What  is  his  calling  ?  said  Judge  Hale. 

Answer.  Then  some  of  the  company  that  stood 
by,  said,  A  tinker,  my  lord. 

Worn.  Yes,  said  she  ;  and  because  he  is  a  tinker, 
and  a  poor  man,  therefore  he  is  despised,  and  cannot 
have  justice. 

Hale.  Then  Judge  Hale  answered  very  mildly, 
saying,  I  tell  thee,  woman,  seeing  it  is  so,  that  they 
have  taken  what  thy  husband  spake  for  a  conviction ; 
thou  must  either  apply  thyself  to  the  King,  or  sue 
out  his  pardon,  or  get  a  writ  of  error. 

Chest.  But  when  Justice  Chester  heard  him  give 
1  'Smayed/  an  obsolete  contraction  of  <  dismayed.' 
224 


A  BRAVE  AND  FEARLESS  WIFE 

her  this  counsel;  and  especially  (as  she  supposed) 
because  he  spoke  of  a  writ  of  error,  he  chafed,  and 
seemed  to  be  very  much  offended;  saying,  My 
lord,  he  will  preach  and  do  what  he  lists. 

Worn.  He  preacheth  nothing  but  the  Word  of  God, 
said  she. 

Twis.  He  preach  the  Word  of  God!  said 
Twisdon;  and  withal,  she  thought  he  would  have 
struck  her;  he  runneth  up  and  down,  and  doth 
harm. 

Worn.  No,  my  lord,  said  she,  it  is  not  so;  God 
hath  owned  him,  and  done  much  good  by  him. 

Twis.  God !  said  he,  his  doctrine  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  devil. 

Worn.  My  lord,  said  she,  when  the  righteous 
Judge  shall  appear,  it  will  be  known  that  his 
doctrine  is  not  the  doctrine  of  the  devil. 

Twis.  My  lord,  said  he,  to  Judge  Hale,  do  not 
mind  her,  but  send  her  away. 

Hale.  Then  said  Judge  Hale,  I  am  sorry,  woman, 
that  I  can  do  thee  no  good ;  thou  must  do  one  of 
those  three  things  aforesaid,  namely,  either  to  apply 
thyself  to  the  King,  or  sue  out  his  pardon,  or  get  a 
writ  of  error ;  but  a  writ  of  error  will  be  cheapest. 

Worn.  At  which  Chester  again  seemed  to  be  in 
a  chafe,  and  put  off  his  hat,  and  as     judge  Chester 
she  thought,  scratched  his  head  for     very  angry 
anger :  but  when  I  saw,  said  she,  that  there  was  no 
prevailing  to  have  my  husband  sent  for,  though  I 

225 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

often  desired  them  that  they  would  send  for  him, 
that  he  might  speak  for  himself;  telling  them, 
that  he  could  give  them  better  satisfaction  than  I 
could,  in  what  they  demanded  of  him,  with  several 
other  things,  which  now  I  forget ;  only  this  I  re- 
member, that  though  I  was  somewhat  timorous  at 
my  first  entrance  into  the  chamber,  yet  before  I 
went  out,  I  could  not  but  break  forth  into  tears,  not 
so  much  because  they  were  so  hard-hearted  against 
me,  and  my  husband,  but  to  think  what  a  sad  account 
such  poor  creatures  will  have  to  give  at  the  coming 
of  the  Lord,  when  they  shall  there  answer  for  all 
things  whatsoever  they  have  done  in  the  body, 
whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  bad. 

So,  when  I  departed  from  them,  the  book  of 
statutes  was  brought,  but  what  they  said  of  it  I  know 
nothing  at  all,  neither  did  I  hear  any  more  from 
them. 


Some  Carriages  of  the  Adversaries  of  God's  Truth 
with  me  at  the  next  Assizes,  which  was  on  the 
of  the  Jirst  month,  1662. 


1  SHALL  pass  by  what  befell  between  these  two 
How  I  had  assizes,  how  I  had,  by  my  jailor, 

more  liberty  some  liberty  granted  me,  more  than 
at  the  first,  and  how  I  followed  my  wonted  course  of 
preaching,  taking  all  occasions  that  were  put  into  my 
hand  to  visit  the  people  of  God  ;  exhorting  them  to  be 

226 


LIBERTY  AND  IMPRISONMENT 

steadfast  in  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  take  heed 
that  they  touched  not  the  Common  Prayer,  etc.,  but 
to  mind  the  Word  of  God,  which  giveth  direction  to 
Christians  in  every  point,  being  able  to  make  the  man 
of  God  perfect  in  all  things  through  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thoroughly  to  furnish  him  unto  all  good 
works.  2  Tim.  iii.  1 7.  Also  how  I  having,  I  say, 
somewhat  more  liberty,  did  go  to  see  the  Christians 
at  London ;  which  my  enemies  hearing  of,  were  so 
angry,  that  they  had  almost  cast  my  jailor  out  of  his 
place,  threatening  to  indict  him,  and  to  do  what  they 
could  against  him.  They  charged  me  also,  that  I  went 
thither  to  plot  and  raise  division,  and  make  insurrec- 
tion, which,  God  knows,  was  a  slander ;  whereupon 
my  liberty  was  more  straitened  than  it  was  before  ;  so 
that  I  must  not  now  look  out  of  the  door.  Well,  when 
the  next  sessions  came,  which  was  about  the  loth  of 
the  nth  month  (1661),  I  did  ex- 
pect to  have  been  very  roundly  dealt 
withal ;  but  they  passed  me  by,  and  ™£JdIy dealt 
would  not  call  me,  so  that  I  rested 
till  the  assizes,  which  was  held  the  i9th  of  the  first 
month  (1662)  following;  and  when  they  came, 
because  I  had  a  desire  to  come  before  the  judge,  I 

desired  my  jailor  to  put  my  name  into 

J  J  r       r  i  j      l  wished  my 

the  calendar  among  me  felons,  and     name  to  be  put 
made  friends  of  the  judge  and  high- 
sheriff,  who  promised  that  I  should  be  called :  so 
that  I  thought  what  I  had  done  might  have  been 

227 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

effectual  for  the  obtaining  of  my  desire  :  but  all  was 
in  vain;  for  when  the  assizes  came,  though  my 
name  was  in  the  calendar,  and  also  though  both  the 
judge  and  sheriff  had  promised  that  I  should  appear 
before  them,  yet  the  justices  and  the  clerk  of  the 
peace,  did  so  work  it  about,  that  I,  notwithstanding, 
was  deferred,  and  was  not  suffered  to  appear:  and 
although  I  say,  I  do  not  know  of  all  their  carriages 
towards  me,  yet  this  I  know,  that  the  clerk  of  the 
One  of  my  peace  (Mr  Cobb)  did  discover  him- 

greatest  self  to  be  one  of  my  greatest  opposers : 

opposerawas  _          _  J  c  .    fr 

Cobb,  the  clerk  for,  first  he  came  to  my  jailor  and 
told  him  that  I  must  not  go  down 
before  the  judge,  and  therefore  must  not  be  put 
into  the  calendar;  to  whom  my  jailor  said,  that  my 
name  was  in  already.  He  bid  him  put  it  out  again ; 
my  jailor  told  him  that  he  could  not :  for  he  had 
given  the  judge  a  calendar  with  my  name  in  it,  and 
also  the  sheriff  another.  At  which  he  was  very 
much  displeased,  and  desired  to  see  that  calendar 
that  was  yet  in  my  jailor's  hand,  who,  when  he  had 
given  it  him,  he  looked  on  it,  and  said  it  was  a  false 
calendar ;  he  also  took  the  calendar  and  blotted  out 
my  accusation,  as  my  jailor  had  written  it  (which 
accusation  I  cannot  tell  what  it  was,  because  it  was 
so  blotted  out),  and  he  himself  put  in  words  to  this 
purpose :  That  John  Bunyan  was  committed  to 
prison ;  being  lawfully  convicted  for  upholding  of 
unlawful  meetings  and  conventicles,  etc.  But  yet 

228 


EFFORTS  FOR  LIBERTY  FAIL 

for  all  this,  fearing  that  what  he  had  done,  unless  he 
added  thereto,  it  would  not  do,  he  first  ran  to  the 
clerk  of  the  assizes ;  then  to  the  justices,  and  after- 
wards, because  he  would  not  leave  any  means  un- 
attempted  to  hinder  me,  he  came  again  to  my  jailor, 
and  told  him,  that  if  I  did  go  down  before  the  judge, 
and  was  released,  he  would  make  him  pay  my  fees, 
which  he  said  was  due  to  him ;  and  further,  told  him, 
that  he  would  complain  of  him  at  the  next  quarter 
sessions  for  making  of  false  calendars,  though  my 
jailor  himself,  as  I  afterwards  learned,  had  put  in  my 
accusation  worse  than  in  itself  it  was  by  far.  And 

thus  was  I   hindered  and  prevented 

I  was  hindered 

at    that    time    also    from    appearing     and  prevented, 

before  the  judge :  and  left  in  prison. 

Farewell. 

JOHN  BUNYAN. 

A  Continuation  of  Mr  BUNYAN'S  LIFE  ;  beginning 
where  he  left  off,  and  concluding  with  the  Time 
and  Manner  of  his  Death  and  Burial:  together 
with  his  true  Character,  etc. 

READER,  the  painful  and  industrious  author  of  this 
book,  has  already  given  you  a  faithful  Thisij?  a  friend>s 
and  very  moving  relation  of  the  narrative 
beginning  and  middle  of  the  days  of  his  pilgrimage 
on  earth;  and  since  there  yet  remains  somewhat 
worthy  of  notice  and  regard,  which  occurred  in  the 

229 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

last  scene  of  his  life,  the  which,  for  want  of  time,  or 
fear,  some  over-censorious  people  should  impute  it  to 
him  as  an  earnest  coveting  of  praise  from  men,  he 
has  not  left  behind  him  in  writing.  Wherefore,  as 
a  true  friend,  and  long  acquaintance  of  Mr  Bunyans 
that  his  good  end  may  be  known,  as  well  as  his  evil 
beginning,  I  have  taken  upon  me,  from  my  know- 
ledge, and  the  best  account  given  by  other  of  his 
friends,  to  piece  this  to  the  thread  too  soon  broke 
off,  and  so  lengthen  it  out  to  his  entering  upon 
eternity. 

He  has  told  you  at  large,  of  his  birth  and 
education ;  the  evil  habits  and  corruptions  of  his 
youth  ;  the  temptations  he  struggled  and  conflicted 
so  frequently  with,  the  mercies,  comforts,  and 
deliverances  he  found,  how  he  came  to  take  upon 
him  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel ;  the  slanders, 
reproaches  and  imprisonments  that  attended  him, 
and  the  progress  he  notwithstanding  made  (by  the 
assistance  of  God's  grace)  no  doubt  to  the  saving  of 
many  souls :  therefore  take  these  things,  as  he  himself 
hath  methodically  laid  them  down  in  the  words  of 
verity ;  and  so  I  pass  on  to  what  remains. 

After  his  being  freed  from  his  twelve  years' 
imprisonment  and  upwards,  for  nonconformity, 
wherein  he  had  time  to  furnish  the  world  with 
sundry  good  books,  etc.,  and  by  his  patience,  to  move 
Dr  Barlow,  the  then  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  and  other 
church-men,  to  pity  his  hard  and  unreasonable 

230 


RELEASED  FROM  PRISON 

sufferings,  so  far  as  to  stand  very  much  his  friends, 
in  procuring  his  enlargement,  or  there  perhaps  he  had 
died,  by  the  noisomeness  and  ill  usage  of  the  place. 
Being  now,  I  say,  again  at  liberty,  and  His  occupation 
having  through  mercy  shaken  off  his  when  at  liberty 
bodily  fetters, — for  those  upon  his  soul  were  broken 
before  by  the  abounding  grace  that  filled  his  heart, — 
he  went  to  visit  those  that  had  been  a  comfort  to 
him  in  his  tribulation,  with  a  Christian-like  acknow- 
ledgment of  their  kindness  and  enlargement  of 
charity ;  giving  encouragement  by  his  example,  if  it 
happened  to  be  their  hard  haps  to  fall  into  affliction 
or  trouble,  then  to  suffer  patiently  for  the  sake  of  a 
good  conscience,  and  for  the  love  of  God  in  Jesus 
Christ  towards  their  souls,  and  by  many  cordial 
persuasions,  supported  some  whose  spirits  began  to 
sink  low,  through  the  fear  of  danger  that  threatened 
their  worldly  concernment,  so  that  the  people  found 
a  wonderful  consolation  in  his  discourse  and  admoni- 
tions. 

As  often  as  opportunity  would  admit,  he  gathered 
them  together  (though  the  law  was  then  in  force 
against  meetings)  in  convenient  places,  and  fed  them 
with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  that  they  might 
grow  up  in  grace  thereby.  To  such  as  were  any- 
where taken  and  imprisoned  upon  these  accounts,  he 
made  it  another  part  of  his  business  to  extend  his 
charity,  and  gather  relief  for  such  of  them  as  wanted. 

He  took  great  care  to  visit  the  sick,  and  strengthen 
231 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

them  against  the  suggestions  of  the  tempter,  which 
at  such  times  are  very  prevalent ;  so  that  they  had 
cause  for  ever  to  bless  God,  Who  had  put  it  into 
his  heart,  at  such  a  time,  to  rescue  them  from  the 
power  of  the  roaring  lion,  who  sought  to  devour 
them  ;  nor  did  he  spare  any  pains  or  labour  in  travel, 
though  to  remote  counties,  where  he  knew  or 
imagined  any  people  might  stand  in  need  of  his 
assistance ;  insomuch  that  some,  by  these  visitations 
that  he  made,  which  was  two  or  three  every 
year  (some,  though  in  a  jeering  manner  no  doubt, 
gave  him  the  epithet  of  Bishop  Bunyari)  whilst  others 
envied  him  for  his  so  earnestly  labouring  in  Christ's 
vineyard;  yet  the  seed  of  the  Word  he  (all  this 
while)  sowed  in  the  hearts  of  his  congregation, 
watered  with  the  grace  of  God,  brought  forth  in 
abundance,  in  bringing  in  disciples  to  the  church  of 
Christ. 

Another  part  of  his  time  is  spent  in  reconciling 
differences,  by  which  he  hindered  many  mischiefs, 
and  saved  some  families  from  ruin,  and  in  such 
fallings-out  he  was  uneasy,  till  he  found  a  means  to 
labour  a  reconciliation,  and  become  a  peace-maker, 
on  whom  a  blessing  is  promised  in  holy  writ ;  and 
indeed  in  doing  this  good  office,  he  may  be  said  to 
sum  up  his  days,  it  being  the  last  undertaking  of  his 
life,  as  will  appear  in  the  close  of  this  paper. 

When  in  the  late  reign,  liberty  of  conscience  was 
unexpectedly  given  and  indulged  to  dissenters  of  all 

232 


A  GREAT  CONGREGATION 

persuasions,  his  piercing  wit  penetrated  the  veil,  and 
found  that  it  was  not  for  the  dis-  He  moved  with 
senters'  sakes  they  were  so  suddenly  caution  and  fear 
freed  from  the  hard  prosecutions  that  had  long 
lain  heavy  upon  them,  and  set  in  a  manner,  on  an 
equal  foot  with  the  Church  of  England,  which  the 
papists  were  undermining,  and  about  to  subvert :  he 
foresaw  all  the  advantages  that  could  have  re- 
dounded to  the  dissenters  would  have  been  no  more 
than  what  Polyphemus,  the  monstrous  giant  of  Sicily, 
would  have  allowed  Ulysses,  viz. :  That  he  would 
eat  his  men  first,  and  do  him  the  favour  of  being 
eaten  last :  for  although  Mr  Bunyan,  following  the 
examples  of  others,  did  lay  hold  of  this  liberty,  as  an 
acceptable  thing  in  itself,  knowing  God  is  the  only 
Lord  of  conscience,  and  that  it  is  good  at  all  times 
to  do  according  to  the  dictates  of  a  good  conscience, 
and  that  the  preaching  the  glad  tidings  of  the 
Gospel  is  beautiful  in  the  preacher  ;  yet  in  all  this 
he  moved  with  caution  and  a  holy  fear,  earnestly 
praying  for  the  averting  impending  judgments,  which 
he  saw,  like  a  black  tempest,  hanging  over  our  heads 
for  our  sins,  and  ready  to  break  in  upon  us,  and  that 
the  Ninevites'1  remedy  was  now  highly  necessary : 
hereupon  he  gathered  his  congregation  at  Bedford, 
where  he  mostly  lived,  and  had  lived  and  spent  the 
greatest  part  of  his  life ;  and  there  being  no 
convenient  place  to  be  had  for  the  entertainment  of 
so  great  a  confluence  of  people  as  followed  him  upon 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

the  account  of  his  teaching,  he  consulted  with  them 
for  the  building  of  a  meeting-house,  to  which  they 
made  their  voluntary  contributions  with  all  cheerful- 
ness and  alacrity;  and  the  first  time  he  appeared 
there  to  edify,  the  place  was  so  thronged,  that  many 
was  constrained  to  stay  without,  though  the  house 
was  very  spacious,  every  one  striving  to  partake  of 
his  instructions,  that  were  of  his  persuasion,  and 
show  their  good-will  towards  him,  by  being  present 
at  the  opening  of  the  place ;  and  here  he  lived  in 
much  peace  and  quiet  of  mind,  contenting  himself 
with  that  little  God  had  bestowed  upon  him,  and 
sequestering  himself  from  all  secular  employments, 
to  follow  that  of  his  call  to  the  ministry ;  for  as  God 
said  to  Moses ,  He  that  made  the  lips  and  heart,  can 
give  eloquence  and  wisdom,  without  extraordinary 
acquirements  in  an  university 

During  these  things,  there  were  regulators  sent 

He  opposed  the  int°  a11  cities  and  tOWnS  corPorate,  to 
regulators  new  model  the  government  in  the 

magistracy,  etc.,  by  turning  out  some,  and  putting  in 
others :  against  this  Mr  Eunyan  expressed  his  zeal 
with  some  weariness,  as  foreseeing  the  bad  conse- 
quence that  would  attend  it,  and  laboured  with  his 
congregation  to  prevent  their  being  imposed  on  in  this 
kind ;  and  when  a  great  man  in  those  days,  coming  to 
Bedford  upon  some  such  errand,  sent  for  him,  as  'tis 
supposed,  to  give  him  a  place  of  public  trust,  he 
would  by  no  means  come  at  him,  but  sent  his  excuse. 

234 


A  STAINLESS  REPUTATION 

When  he  was  at  leisure  from  writing  and  teach- 
ing, he  often  came  up  to  London,  and  there  went 
among  the  congregations  of  the  non-conformists,  and 
used  his  talent  to  the  great  good-liking  of  the 
hearers ;  and  even  some  to  whom  he  had  been 
mis-represented,  upon  the  account  of  his  educa- 
tion, were  convinced  of  his  worth  and  knowledge 
in  sacred  things,  as  perceiving  him  to  be  a  man 
of  sound  judgment,  delivering  himself  plainly  and 
powerfully;  insomuch  that  many,  who  came  mere 
spectators  for  novelty  sake  rather  than  to  edify  and 
be  improved,  went  away  well  satisfied  with  what 
they  heard,  and  wondered,  as  the  Jews  did  at 
the  Apostles,  viz.  :  Whence  this  man  should  have 
these  things;  perhaps  not  considering  that  God 
more  immediately  assists  those  that  make  it  their 
business  industriously  and  cheerfully  to  labour  in  His 
vineyard. 

Thus  he  spent  his  latter  years  in  imitation  of  his 
great  Lord  and  Master,  the  ever- 

.  Like  his  Master 

blessed  Jesus  ;  he  went  about  doing     he  went  about 
•,  T  i  ...         doing- good 

good,  so  that  the  most  prying  critic, 
or  even  Malice  herself,  is  defied  to  find,  even  upon 
the  narrowest  search  or  observation,  any  sully  or 
stain  upon  his  reputation,  with  which  he  may  be 
justly  charged  ;  and  this  we  note,  as  a  challenge  to 
those  that  have  the  least  regard  for  him,  or  them 
of  his  persuasion,  and  have  one  way  or  other 
appeared  in  the  front  of  those  that  oppressed  him; 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

and  for  the  turning  whose  hearts,  in  obedience  to 
the  commission  and  commandment  given  him  of 
God,  he  frequently  prayed,  and  sometimes  sought 
a  blessing  for  them,  even  with  tears,  the  effects  of 
which,  they  may,  peradventure,  though  undeservedly, 
have  found  in  their  persons,  friends,  relations,  or 
estates ;  for  God  will  hear  the  prayer  of  the  faithful, 
and  answer  them,  even  for  them  that  vex  them,  as 
it  happened  in  the  case  of  Job's  praying  for  the 
three  persons  that  had  been  grievous  in  their 
reproach  against  him,  even  in  the  day  of  his 
sorrow. 

But  yet  let  me  come  a  little  nearer  to  particulars 
and  periods  of  time,  for  the  better  refreshing  the 
memories  of  those  that  knew  his  labour  and  suffer- 
ing, and  for  the  satisfaction  of  all  that  shall  read 
this  book. 

After  he  was  sensibly  convicted  of  the  wicked 
state  of  his  life,  and  converted,  he  was  baptized  into 
the  congregation,  and  admitted  a  member  thereof, 
viz.,  in  the  year  1655,  and  became  speedily  a  very 
zealous  professor ;  but  upon  the  return  of  King 
Charles  to  the  crown  in  1660,  he  was  the  i2th  of 
November  taken,  as  he  was  edifying  some  good 
people  that  were  got  together  to  hear  the  word,  and 
confined  in  Bedford  jail  for  the  space  of  six  years, 
till  the  act  of  Indulgence  to  dissenters  being  allowed, 
he  obtained  his  freedom,  by  the  intercession  of 
some  in  trust  and  power,  that  took  pity  on  his 

236 


DISPUTING  WITH  SCHOLARS 

sufferings  ;  but  within  six  years  afterwards  he  was 
again  taken  up,  viz.,  in  the  year  1666,  and  was  then 
confined  for  six  years  more,  when  even  the  jailor 
took  such  pity  of  his  rigorous  sufferings,  that  he  did 
as  the  Egyptian  jailor  did  to  Joseph,  put  all  the  care 
and  trust  in  his  hand  :  When  he  was  taken  this  last 
time,  he  was  preaching  on  these  words,  viz.  :  Dost 
thou  believe  the  Son  of  God?  And  this  imprisonment 
continued  six  years,  and  when  this  was  over,  another 
short  affliction,  which  was  an  imprisonment  of  half 
a  year,  fell  to  his  share.  During  these  confinements 
he  wrote  the  following  books,  viz.  :  Of  Prayer  by 
the  Spirit  :  The  Holy  City's  Resurrection  :  Grace 
Abounding  :  Pilgrim's  Progress,  the  first  part. 

In  the  last  year  of  his  twelve  years'  imprisonment, 
the    pastor   of   the    congregation    at 
Bedford  died,  and  he  was  chosen  to 


that  care  of  souls,  on  the  i2th  of  „  ation 
December  1671.  And  in  this  his 
charge,  he  often  had  disputes  with  scholars  that 
came  to  oppose  him,  as  supposing  him  an  ignorant 
person,  and  though  he  argued  plainly,  and  by 
Scripture,  without  phrases  and  logical  expressions, 
yet  he  nonplussed  one  who  came  to  oppose  him  in 
his  congregation,  by  demanding,  Whether  or  no  we 
had  the  true  copies  of  the  original  Scriptures  ;  and 
another,  when  he  was  preaching,  accused  him  of  un- 
charitableness,  for  saying,  //  was  very  hard  for  most 
to  be  saved  ;  saying,  by  that  he  went  about  to 

237 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

exclude  most  of  his  congregation ;  but  he  confuted 
him,  and  put  him  to  silence  with  the  parable  of  the 
stony  ground,  and  other  texts  out  of  the  i3th 
chapter  of  St  Matthew,  in  our  Saviour's  sermon  out 
of  a  ship  ;  all  his  methods  being  to  keep  close  to 
the  Scriptures,  and  what  he  found  not  warranted 
there,  himself  would  not  warrant  nor  determine, 
unless  in  such  cases  as  were  plain,  wherein  no  doubts 
or  scruples  did  arise. 

But  not  to  make  any  further  mention  of  this  kind, 
it  is  well  known  that  this  person  managed  all  his 
affairs  with  such  exactness,  as  if  he  had  made  it  his 
study,  above  all  other  things,  not  to  give  occasion  of 
offence,  but  rather  suffer  many  inconveniences,  to 
avoid  being  never  heard  to  reproach  or  revile  any, 
what  injury  soever  he  received,  but  rather  to  rebuke 
those  that  did ;  and  as  it  was  in  his  conversation,  so 
it  is  manifested  in  those  books  he  has  caused  to  be 
published  to  the  world  ;  where  like  the  archangel 
disputing  with  Satan  about  the  body  of  Moses,  as 
we  find  it  in  the  epistle  of  St  Jude,  brings  no  railing 
accusation  (but  leaves  the  rebukers,  those  that 
persecuted  him)  to  the  Lord. 

In  his  family  he  kept  up  a  very  strict  discipline  in 
His  home  life  prayer  and  exhortation  ;  being  in  this 
and  example  j^  joshua^  as  the  good  man  ex- 
presses it,  viz.,  Whatsoever  others  did,  as  for  me 
and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord :  and  indeed 
a  blessing  waited  on  his  labours  and  endeavours,  so 

238 


DRAWING   NEAR  TO   DEATH 

that  his  wife,  as  the  Psalmist  says,  was  like  a 
pleasant  vine  upon  the  walls  of  his  house,  and  his 
children  like  olive  branches  round  his  table ;  for  so 
shall  it  be  with  the  man  that  fears  the  Lord,  and 
though  by  reason  of  the  many  losses  he  sustained  by 
imprisonment  and  spoil,  of  his  chargeable  sickness, 
etc.,  his  earthly  treasure  swelled  not  to  excess;  he 
always  had  sufficient  to  live  decently  and  creditably, 
and  with  that  he  had  the  greatest  of  all  treasures, 
which  is  content ;  for  as  the  wise  man  says,  That  is 
a  continual  feast. 

But  where  content  dwells,  even  a  poor  cottage 
is  a  kingly  palace,  and  this  happiness  he  had  all 
his  life  long;  not  so  much  minding  this  world,  as 
knowing  he  was  here  as  a  pilgrim  and  stranger,  and 
had  no  tarrying  city,  but  looked  for  one  made  with 
hands  eternal  in  the  highest  heavens :  but  at  length 
was  worn  out  with  sufferings,  age,  and  often  teaching, 
the  day  of  his  dissolution  drew  near,  and  death,  that 
unlocks  the  prison  of  the  soul,  to  enlarge  it  for 
a  more  glorious  mansion,  put  a  stop  to  his  acting  his 
part  on  the  stage  of  mortality;  heaven,  like  earthly 
princes,  when  it  threatens  war,  being  always  so 
kind  as  to  call  home  its  ambassadors  before  it  be 
denounced,  and  even  the  last  act  or  undertaking  of 
his,  was  a  labour  of  love  and  charity ;  for  it  so 
falling  out  that  a  young  gentleman,  a  neighbour  of 
Mr  Bunyarfs,  happening  into  the  displeasure  of  his 
father,  and  being  much  troubled  in  mind  upon  that 
Q  239 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

account,  and  also  for  that  he  heard  his  father 
purposed  to  disinherit  him,  or  otherwise  deprive  him 
of  what  he  had  to  leave ;  he  pitched  upon  Mr 
Bunyan  as  a  fit  man  to  make  way  for  his  submission, 
and  prepare  his  father's  mind  to  receive  him ;  and 
he,  as  willing  to  do  any  good  office,  as  it  could  be 
requested,  as  readily  undertook  it ;  and  so  riding  to 
Reading  in  Berkshire,  he  then  there  used  such 
pressing  arguments  and  reasons  against  anger  and 
passion,  as  also  for  love  and  reconciliation,  that  the 
father  was  mollified,  and  his  bowels  yearned  to  his 
returning  son. 

But  Mr  Bunyan,  after  he  had  disposed  all  things 

to  the  best  for  accommodation,  re- 
His  last  illness  .  r  .  ,  .  . 

turning  to  London,  and  being  over- 
taken with  excessive  rains,  coming  to  his  lodgings 
extremely  wet,  fell  sick  of  a  violent  fever,  which  he 
bore  with  much  constancy  and  patience,  and  ex- 
pressed himself  as  if  he  desired  nothing  more  than 
to  be  dissolved,  and  be  with  Christ,  in  that  case 
esteeming  death  as  gain,  and  life  only  a  tedious 
delaying  felicity  expected;  and  finding  his  vital 
strength  decay,  having  settled  his  mind  and  affairs, 
as  well  as  the  shortness  of  time,  and  the  violence 
of  his  disease  would  permit,  with  a  constant  and 
Christian  patience,  he  resigned  his  soul  into  the 
hands  of  his  most  merciful  Redeemer,  following  his 
pilgrim  from  the  City  of  Destruction,  to  the  New 
Jerusalem ;  his  better  part  having  been  all  along 

240 


SAFELY  "ACROSS  THE  RIVER" 

there,  in  holy  contemplation,  pantings  and  breathings 
after  the  hidden  manna  and  water  of  life,  as  by 
many  holy  and  humble  consolations  expressed  in  his 
letters  to  several  persons  in  prison,  and  out  of  prison, 
too  many  to  be  inserted  at  present.  He  died  at  the 
house  of  one  Mr  Struddock,  a  groce*,  at  the  Star  on 
Snow  Hill,  in  the  parish  of  St  Sepulchre's,  London,  on 
the  1 2th  of  August  1688,  and  in  the  sixtieth  year  of 
his  age,1  after  ten  days'  sickness ;  and  was  buried  in 
the  new  burying  place  near  the  Artillery  Ground ; 
where  he  sleeps  to  the  morning  of  the  resurrection, 
in  hopes  of  a  glorious  rising  to  an  incorruptible 
immortality  of  joy  and  happiness ;  where  no  more 
trouble  and  sorrow  shall  afflict  him,  but  all  tears  be 
wiped  away ;  when  the  just  shall  be  incorporated  as 
members  of  Christ  their  head,  and  reign  with  Him  as 
kings  and  priests  for  ever. 

A  brief  Character  of  Mr  JOHN  BUNYAN 

HE  appeared  in  countenance  to  be  of  a  stern  and 
rough  temper,  but  in  his  conversation  mild  and 
affable ;  not  given  to  loquacity  or  much  discourse  in 
company,  unless  some  urgent  occasion  required  it ; 
observing  never  to  boast  of  himself  or  his  parts,  but 
rather  seem  low  in  his  own  eyes,  and  submit  himself 

1  It  is  an  established  fact  that  John  Bunyan  died  on  Friday, 
August  31,  1688.  He  is  recorded  to  have  preached  his  last 
sermon  on  August  19. 

24I 


GRACE  ABOUNDING 

to  the  judgment  of  others,  abhorring  lying  and 
swearing,  being  just  in  all  that  lay  in  his  power  to 
his  word,  not  seeming  to  revenge  injuries,  loving  to 
reconcile  differences,  and  make  friendship  with  all ; 
he  had  a  sharp  quick  eye,  accompanied  with  an 
excellent  discerning  of  persons,  being  of  good  judg- 
ment and  quick  wit.  As  for  his  person,  he  was  tall 
of  stature,  strong  boned,  though  not  corpulent, 
somewhat  of  a  ruddy  face,  with  sparkling  eyes, 
wearing  his  hair  on  his  upper  lip,  after  the  old  British 
fashion  ;  his  hair  reddish,  but  in  his  latter  days,  time 
had  sprinkled  it  with  grey ;  his  nose  well  set,  but  not 
declining  or  bending,  and  his  mouth  moderate  large ; 
his  forehead  somewhat  high,  and  his  habit  always 
plain  and  modest.  And  thus  have  we  impartially 
described  the  internal  and  external  parts  of  a  person, 
whose  death  hath  been  much  regretted;  a  person 
who  had  tried  the  smiles  and  frowns  of  time ;  not 
puffed  up  in  prosperity,  nor  shaken  in  adversity; 
always  holding  the  golden  mean. 

In  him  at  once  did  three  great  worthies  shine. 
Historian,  poet,  and  a  choice  divine : 
Then  let  him  rest  in  undisturbed  dust, 
Until  the  resurrection  of  the  juste 


24* 


HUSBAND  AND  WIFE  REUNITED 


POSTSCRIPT 

IN  this  his  pilgrimage,  God  blessed  him  with  four 
children,  one  of  which,  named  Mary,  was  blind,  and 
died  some  years  before ;  his  other  children  were 
Thomas,  Joseph,  and  Sarah ;  his  wife  Elizabeth 
having  lived  to  see  him  overcome  his  labour  and 
sorrow,  and  pass  from  this  life  to  receive  the  reward 
of  his  work,  long  survived  him  not ;  but  in  1692  she 
died,  to  follow  her  faithful  pilgrim  from  this  world 
to  the  other,  whither  he  was  gone  before  her ;  whilst 
his  works,  which  consist  of  sixty  books,  remain  for 
the  edifying  of  the  reader,  and  praise  of  the  author. 

Vale. 


FINK 


Printed  in  Great  Britain 
by  Turnbull&SpcarSi  Edinburgh 


THE 
PERFECT  FRIEND 

A  new  Life  of  Our  Lord 

By 
ELEANOR  E.  HELME 

With  16  full-page  coloured  plates 
by  HAROLD  COPPING. 

Delightfully  produced  in  coloured 

picture  covers. 
Also    bound    in    cloth    boards. 


OF    ALL    BOOKSELLERS 


SIR  KNIGHT  OF 
THE  SPLENDID  WAY 

BY 

W.  E.  CULE 

With  six  beautiful  coloured 

illustrations 

BY 

J.    FlNNEMORE,    R.I. 

Sir  Constant,  having  seen  the  Vision, 
sets  out  down  the  Splendid  Way, 
where  he  has  many  adventures  before 
arriving  at  the  City  of  the  Great  King 

"  A  new  Pilgrim's  Progress" 


OF  ALL   BOOKSELLERS 


IN  THE  DAYS  OF 
THE    APOSTLES 

BY 

MARY  MOOYAART 

With  eight  full-page  coloured 
illustrations 

BY 
ARTHUR  TWIDLE 

Written  for  young  people,  this  illum- 
inating  study  links   all   the   accounts 
together,  providing  a  concise  and 

comprehensive  story 
j  : 

I 
j 

OF  ALL  BOOKSELLERS 

\  \ 


THE  KNIGHTS  OF 
A  GREAT  PRINCE 

THE  STORY  OF  WHAT  THE 

APOSTLES    OF    THE    LORD 

DID  AND  WROTE} 

BY 

J.  SINCLAIR  STEVENSON 

M.A. 

With   sixteen   coloured   pictures 

BY 
HAROLD  COPPING 

The    story    of    "  those    early    days " 

thrillingly  told  for  children,  and  with 

a  charm  and  in  a  style  that  will  prove 

irresistible  to  all  young  people 


OF  ALL  BOOKSELLERS 


BIBLE   HEROES 

A  series  of  Bible  Stories  printed  from 
a  new  type  and  illustrated  with  twenty- 
four  reproductions  in  colours  from  the 
original  paintings  by 

ARTHUR  DIXON 

AND 

ARTHUR  TWIDLE 

Delightfully  produced  in  coloured 

picture   boards.     Also   bound 
• 

in  cloth  boards 
: 
| 

: 


: 

OF  ALL  BOOKSELLERS 

\  \ 


JOEL: 
A  BOY  OF  GALILEE 

BY 

ANNIE  FELLOWS  JOHNSTON 

With  four  coloured  plates 

BY 
ARTHUR  TWIDLE 

The  story  of  an  ordinary  boy  among 

shepherds  and  fishermen,  woven  into 

the  Gospel  narrative  so  that  the  lad 

becomes  in  a  natural  and  fascinating     : 

way  a   witness   of   the   miracles   and 

other  chief   incidents   of  the   life   of 

Christ — related  with  the 

deepest  reverence 


OF  ALL  BOOKSELLERS 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


