LIBRAmiFPtJNCETON 

JUN  2  9  2007 


THEOLOGIC/' L  S  ,V1INARY 


r 

Ob 


If 


€ijt  Camfantrae  mhlt  for  ^cljools 
anil  CoUejjes. 


HAGGAl   AND   ZECHARIAH, 


aouDon:     C.    J.    CLAY    and    SONS, 

CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY   PRESS   WAREHOUSE, 

AVE   MARIA  LANE. 

©lassoijj:    50,  WELLINGTON  STREET. 


3Lap>ia:    F.  A.   RROCKHAUS. 

^.cbj  gorfe:   THE  MAOMILLAN  COMPANY. 

Bombag  anU  Calcutta:    MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd. 


[All  liights  rcsei'ved.] 


Ct)e  Camtiitijse  MUt  (or 

General  Editors  :— J.  J.  S.  PERofc^NE,QST).,9     1047 

FORMERLY    BiSHOP    OF    WORCEsW«5f>|- 

A.  F.  KIRKPATRICK,  D.D.,  ^^^  ^'^*'- 
Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew. 

^L-  ■ 


H^  S  a  A 

ZECHARIAH 

'^H  N0T^^Ni:/lN2.R0.DUCTI0N 
THK'  VEN.   T.   T.    PEROWNE,   B.D. 


ARCHDEACON   OF    NORWICH; 
LATE   FELLOW   OF   doRPUS   CHRISTI    COLLEGE,    CAMBRIDGE. 


STEREOTYPED  EDITION. 


(JDambrdrge ; 

AT   THE    UNIVERSITY   PRESS. 
«  1902 


First  Edition   1886. 
Reprinted  1888,    1890,   1893,   1897,   1902 


PREFACE 
BY    THE    GENERAL    EDITOR. 


The  General  Editor  of  The  Cambridge  Bible  for 
Schools  thinks  it  right  to  say  that  he  does  not  hold 
himself  responsible  either  for  the  interpretation  of 
particular  passages  which  the  Editors  of  the  several 
Books  have  adopted,  or  for  any  opinion  on  points  of 
doctrine  that  they  may  have  expressed.  In  the  New 
Testament  more  especially  questions  arise  of  the 
deepest  theological  import,  on  which  the  ablest  and 
most  conscientious  interpreters  have  differed  and 
always  will  differ.  His  aim  has  been  in  all  such 
cases  to  leave  each  Contributor  to  the  unfettered 
exercise  of  his  own  judgment,  only  taking  care  that 
mere  controversy  should  as  far  as  possible  be  avoided. 
He  has  contented  himself  chiefly  with  a  careful 
revision  of  the  notes,  with  pointing  out  omissions,  with 


PREFACE. 


suggesting  occasionally  a  reconsideration  of  some 
question,  or  a  fuller  treatment  of  difficult  passages, 
and  the  like. 

Beyond  this  he  has  not  attempted  to  interfere, 
feeling  it  better  that  each  Commentary  should  have 
its  own  individual  character,  and  being  convinced 
that  freshness  and  variety  of  treatment  are  more 
than  a  compensation  for  any  lack  of  uniformity  in 
the  Series. 


CONTENTS. 


I.    General  Introduction. 

Chapter    I.     The  Times  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah 
Chapter  II.     Chronological  Table 

11.    Introduction  to  Haggai. 

Chapter    I.     The  Prophet  Haggai    

Chapter  II.     Analysis  of  the  Book    

III.  Text  and  Notes 

IV.  Introduction  to  Zechariah. 

Chapter      I.     The  Prophet  Zechariah  

Chapter    II.     Unity  of  the  Book 

Chapter  III.     Analysis  of  the  Book 

V.    Text  and  Notes   

Appendix. 

Note  A.     On  the  Title,  The  Lord  of  Hosts 

Note  B.      On  Satan  

Index    


9—17 
18 


fQ — 22 
22 24 

25-46 


47-48 

49—57 
57—63 

65—149 


151— 153 

f  53— 157 
158—159 


The  Text  adopted  in  this  Edition  is  that  of  Dr  Scrivener's 
Cambridge  Parag)-aph  Bible.  A  few  variations  from  the  ordi- 
nary Text,  chiefly  in  the  spelling  of  certain  words,  and  in  the 
use  of  italics,  will  be  noticed.  For  the  principles  adopted  by 
Dr  Scrivener  as  regards  the  printing  of  the  Text  see  his  In- 
troduction to  the  Paragraph  Bible,  published  by  the  Cambridge 
University  Press. 


GENERAL   INTRODUCTION. 

CHAPTER    I. 

THE   TIMES   OF    HAGGAI   AND   ZECHARIAH. 

I.  It  was  at  a  critical  period  of  the  history  both  of  the  Jewish 
nation  and  of  the  world  at  large,  that  the  prophets  Haggai  and 
Zechariah  lived  and  prophesied.  By  the  taking  of  Babylon 
by  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  and  the  consequent  development  of  the 
Persian  Empire,  a  new  era  in  the  secular  history  of  the  world 
was  inaugurated.  With  that  event,  as  Dean  Stanley  has  pointed 
out\  we  pass  from  the  shadowy  region  of  "primaeval  history,"  as 
he  has  called  it,  to  the  middle  period  of  authentic  "classical 
history,"  which  intervenes  between  those  earliest  times  and  the 
"modern  history"  of  the  world.  But  with  the  taking  of  Babylon 
by  Cyrus  Jewish  history  also  entered  upon  a  new  epoch.  The 
overthrow  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  with  which  the 
previous,  and  as  it  might  well  have  seemed  the  final  stage  of 
that  history  had  closed,  preceded  only  by  a  few  years  the 
capture  of  Babylon.  The  Jewish  exiles  were  still  in  Babylon 
when  Cyrus  entered  it^.  It  was  his  conquest  of  it,  which  was 
the  immediate  cause  of  their  return  to  their  own  country  and  of 
the  rebuilding  of  their  city  and  temple.  These  last  events  were 
fraught  with  far  weightier  consequences  to  the  world  at  large, 
than  the  taking  of  Babylon,  or  than  any  transition  or  advance, 
however  great,  in  its  merely  secular  history  could  produce. 
They  led  the  way  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  in  which  the 
hope  of  the  human  race  was  bound  up.  They  were  a  necessary 
step  to  the  coming  of  Christ  and  to  the  introduction  of  Chris- 
tianity, with  the  inestimable   benefits  which    it  has    conferred 

^  Jewish  Churchy  vol.  III.  p.  46.  ^  Daniel  v. 


TO  INTRODUCTION. 

upon  mankind.  If  Jerusalem  had  not  been  rebuilt  and  the  ap- 
parently defunct  national  existence  of  its  people  revived,  as  by 
a  resurrection  from  the  dead^,  then,  humanly  speaking,  Christ 
could  not  have  been  born  and  died.  The  history  of  the  world, 
the  rise  and  fall  of  vast  empires  and  mighty  dynasties,  waits 
upon  and  subserves  the  history  of  the  sons  of  Abraham,  because 
in  the  purpose  of  God,  in  the  seed  of  Abraham  all  the  families 
of  the  earth  are  to  be  blessed. 

To  this  critical  and  important  period  the  two  prophets 
with  whom  we  are  now  concerned  undoubtedly  belong.  The 
Book  of  Ezra,  which  contains  the  history  of  the  return  from 
Babylon,  and  of  the  events  which  followed  immediately  upon 
it,  mentions  them  both  by  name,  and  describes  the  effect  upon 
the  people  of  their  prophecies,  of  which  the  written  records  are 
preserved  to  us  in  these  Books ^ 

2.  Scarcely  had  Cyrus  added  the  Babylonian  Empire  to  his 
dominions,  and  so  gained  for  himself  authority  alike  over  the 
Jewish  exiles  in  Babylon  and  over  Palestine  their  country,  when 
he  issued  an  edict  for  their  return.  This  to  the  Jews  was  no 
unexpected  event.  Not  only  had  their  captivity  and  the  length 
of  its  duration  been  foretold  by  the  voice  of  prophecy,  but  Cyrus 
had  been  spoken  of  by  name  as  their  deliverer ^  The  remark- 
able circumstances  which  have  been  commonly  supposed  to 
have  attended  his  capture  of  Babylon — "the  stratagems  by 
which  the  water  was  diverted,  first  in  the  Gyndes,  and  then  in 
the  Euphrates,"  "the  hundred  gates  all  of  bronze  along  the 
vast  circuit  of  the  walls,  the  folding  doors,  the  two-leaved  gates, 
which  so  carefully  guarded  the  approaches  of  the  Euphrates, 
opened  as  by  magic  for  the  conquerors'*;"  "must,  it  would 
seem,  have  belonged,  not  to  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  but  to  that  of 
Darius  Hystaspes....We  have  the  express  testimony  of  Cyrus 
himself  that  the  city  opened  its  gates  to  his  general  '  without 
fighting  or  battle'^."    But  the  capture  itself  and  the  safe  conduct 

1  Ezek.  xxxvii.  i — 14.  -  Ezra  v.  i,  2;  vi.  14. 

^  Jeremiah  xxv.  9 — 13;  xxix.  10 — 14;  Isaiah  xliv.  28. 
■*  Stanley's  Jewish  Churchy  vol.  iii.  p.  58. 
^  Prof.  Sayce,  Ezra  and  Nehenuah,  p.  16. 


INTRODUCTION.  ii 


of  the  returning  exiles  through  the  vast  desert  that  lay  between 
Chaldea  and  Palestine,  as  by  a  causeway  thrown  up  for  a  royal 
progress  or  the  advance  of  a  victorious  army,  had  been  an- 
nounced beforehand^  And  now  the  event  itself  vi^as  to  fulfil 
these  prophecies  and  satisfy  the  expectations  based  upon  them. 
The  time  to  favour  Zion  vi^as  come,  and  He  in  whose  hand  is 
the  king's  heart  to  turn  it  whithersoever  He  will,  as  the  streams 
of  water  are  guided  by  the  cultivator  into  the  channels  which  he 
has  prepared  for  the  irrigation  of  his  land^,  "stirred  up  the  spirit 
of  Cyrus"  to  perform  His  will. 

3.  The  edict  by  which  Cyrus  invited  the  captives  to  return, 
and  which  he  both  proclaimed  by  heralds  throughout  all  his 
kingdom  and  published  as  a  written  document,  is  preserved 
at  the  close  of  the  second  Book  of  Chronicles,  and  repeated  in 
a  fuller  form  in  the  opening  verses  of  the  Book  of  Ezra. 

"Jehovah,  the  God  of  heaven,"  so  it  ran,  "hath  given  me  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  earth ;  and  He  hath  charged  me  to  build  Him 
an  house  in  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  Judah.  Whosoever  there  is 
among  you  of  all  His  people,  his  God  be  with  him,  and  let  him 
go  up  to  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  Judah,  and  build  the  house  of 
Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel,  (He  is  the  God,)  which  is  in  Jeru- 
salem. And  whosoever  remaineth,  in  any  place  where  he 
sojourneth,  let  the  men  of  his  place  help  him  with  silver,  and 
with  gold,  and  with  goods,  and  with  beasts,  beside  the  freewill 
offering  for  the  house  of  God  that  is  in  Jerusalem ^" 

By  what  channel  this  "charge"  reached  Cyrus  we  are  not 
now  concerned  to  enquire.  It  may  have  been,  that  his  atten- 
tion had  been  directed  by  Daniel  to  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah, 
which  pointed  him  out  by  name  as  the  restorer  of  Israel.  It 
has  been  thought  that  the  monotheism  of  his  own  Persian 
religion  would  dispose  him  to  regard  with  favour  and  sympathy 
a  people,  whose  pure  monotheistic  creed  was  in  this  respect 
so  nearly  akin  to  his  own.  But  our  present  knowledge  derived 
from  the  recently  discovered  tablet  and  cylinder  inscriptions, 
renders   this  view  no  longer  tenable.     It  appears   now  to  be 

1  Isaiah  xliv.  28;  xl.  3,  4.  "  Proverbs  xxi.  i. 

2  Ezra  i.  2 — 4.   See  also  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  -22,  23,  and  i  Esdras  ii.  i 7. 


12  INTRODUCTION. 


certain  that  Cyrus  was,  on  his  own  testimony,  an  Elamite  rather 
than  a  Persian,  and  as  we  should  therefore  expect,  a  polytheist. 
His  conduct  towards  the  Jews  was  in  accordance  with  the 
general  policy,  the  reverse  of  that  of  his  Babylonian  and 
Assyrian  predecessors,  which  he  appears  to  have  adopted  J;o- 
wards  conquered  nations.  Instead  of  removing  them  from 
their  own  lands,  and  supplying  their  places  by  alien  peoples 
(as  had  been  done  in  the  case  of  the  Ten  Tribes  by  the  kings 
of  Assyria),  and  thus  creating  centres  of  sedition  and  disaffec- 
tion throughout  his  dominions,  he  sought  to  secure  their  good 
will  and  allegiance,  by  restoring  them  to  their  respective 
countries  and  to  the  free  practice  of  their  several  religions. 
With  heathen  nations  he  sent  back  the  images  of  their  gods. 
To  the  Jews,  who  had  learned  by  the  severe  discipline  of  their 
captivity  to  abhor  idols,  he  restored  their  sacred  vessels,  which 
Nebuchadnezzar  had  carried  away  from  Jerusalem  and  placed 
in  the  house  of  Merodach  his  god,  and  contributed  to  the  re- 
building of  their  Temple  and  the  worship  of  "  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  heaven^" 

4.  The  response  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  in  Babylon  to  the 
invitation  thus  addressed  to  them,  was  far  less  general  than  has 
sometimes  been  supposed.  The  earnest  supplication  of  Daniel 
for  the  holy  mountain  of  his  God^,  the  mournful  plaint  of  the 
Psalmist,  as  he  sat  down  by  the  waters  of  Babylon  and  wept 
when  he  remembered  Zion^,  have  not  unnaturally  perhaps  been 
taken  to  represent  the  spirit  and  feeling  of  the  people  at  large, 
during  the  seventy  years  captivity.  Yet  the  facts  of  the  return 
clearly  shew,  that  it  was  only  in  "  the  remnant "  that  the  pure 
spirit  of  religion  and  patriotism  was  in  reality  maintained. 
"  The  most  part  appear,  as  now,  to  have  been  taken  up  with 
their  material  prosperity,  and  at  best,  to  have  become  inured  to 
the  cessation  of  their  symbolical  worship,  connected  as  it  was 

with  the  declaration  of  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins Those 

who  thought  more  of  temporal  prosperity  than  of  their  high 
spiritual  nobility  and  destination,  had  flourished  doubtless  in 
that  exile,  as  they  have  in  their  present  homelessness,  as  wan- 


2  Daniel  ix.  10.  *  Psalm  cxxxvii. 


INTRODUCTION.  13 


derers  among  the  nations.  Haman  calculated  apparently  on 
being  able  to  pay  out  of  their  spoils  ten  thousand  talents  of 
silver,  some  ^300,000,000,  two-thirds  of  the  annual  revenue  of 
the  Persian  Empire,  into  the  king's  treasuries  \"  Those  who 
returned  are  described  as  "the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Judah  and 
Benjamin,  and  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  with  all  whose  spirit 
God  had  raised  (or  stirred  up)^"  But  the  expression,  "the 
priests  and  the  Levites,"  is  evidently  used  quite  generally,  and 
must  not  be  understood  to  imply  that  the  whole,  or  even  the 
greater  part  of  those  ecclesiastical  orders  went  back.  Though 
the  proportion  of  priests  in  the  caravan  was  large,  yet  of  the 
twenty-four  sacerdotal  courses  only  four  are  stated  to  have 
returned.  Of  the  Levites  there  were  only  seventy-four  indi- 
viduals together  with  128  singers  of  the  family  of  Asaph  and  139 
gate-keepers.  Their  helpers,  given  to  them  for  the  menial  work 
of  the  Sanctuary,  the  Nethinim  and  the  children  of  Solomon's 
servants,  numbered  392.  The  whole  company  that  returned 
with  Zerubbabel  consisted  of  42,360  free  men,  or  some  200,000 
free  persons  (men,  women  and  children),  together  with  7,337 
male  and  female  slaves,  of  whom  200  were  "  singing  men  and 
women  ^" 

5.  But  small  as  was  the  returning  band  when  compared  with 
the  whole  number  of  captives,  a  mere  "  remnant,"  as  their  pro- 
phets had  foretold,  in  comparison  of  the  nation  in  its  palmy  days, 
when  Israel  and  Judah  were  as  the  sand  upon  the  sea  shore  for 
multitude,  the  spirit  by  which  they  were  animated  appears  to 
have  been  that  of  high  devotion  to  their  country,  their  religion 
and  their  God.  The  joyousness  of  their  return  has  been  thus 
strikingly  depicted  : 

"  And  when  the  day  at  last  arrived  which  was  to  see  their 
expectations  fulfilled,  the  burst  of  joy  was  such  as  has  no  parallel 
in  the  sacred  volume :  it  is  indeed  the  Revival,  the  Second  Birth, 
the   Second  Exodus   of  the   nation.     There  was  now  'a  new 


^  Pusey,  Commentary  on  Haggai,  Introd.  p.  484. 
2  Ezrai.  5. 

*  Ezra  ii.     See  also  Vu?,G:y,  Commentary  on  Haggai ,  Inixo^.    Stanley, 
Jewish  Church,  vol.  ill.  pp.  84 — 86. 


INTRODUCTION. 


song/  of  which  the  burden  was  that  the  Eternal  again  reigned 
over  the  earth,  and  that  the  gigantic  idolatries  which  surrounded 
them  had  received  a  deadly  shock:  that  the  waters  of  oppression 
had  rolled  back,  in  which  they  had  been  struggling  like  drown- 
ing men  ;  that  the  snare  was  broken,  in  which  they  had  been 
entangled  like  a  caged  bird.  It  was  like  a  dream,  too  good  to 
be  true.  The  gaiety,  the  laughter  of  their  poetry,  resounded  far 
and  wide.  The  surrounding  nations  could  not  but  confess  what 
great  things  had  been  done  for  them.  It  was  like  the  sudden 
rush  of  the  waters  into  the  dry  torrent-beds  of  the  south  of 
Palestine,  or  of  the  yet  extremer  south,  of  which  they  may  have 
heard,  in  far  Ethiopia.  It  was  like  the  reaper  bearing  on  his 
shoulder  the  golden  sheaves  in  summer  which  he  had  sown 
amongst  the  tears  of  winter.  So  full  were  their  hearts,  that  all 
nature  was  called  to  join  in  their  thankfulness.  The  vast  rivers 
of  their  new  Mesopotamian  home,  and  the  waves  of  the  Indian 
Ocean,  are  to  take  part  in  the  chorus,  and  clap  their  foaming 
crests  like  living  hands.  The  mountains  of  their  own  native 
land  are  invited  to  express  their  joy:  each  tree  in  the  forests 
that  clothed  the  hills,  or  that  cast  their  shade  over  the  field,  is 
to  have  a  tongue  for  the  occasion^" 

That  this  high  ideal  was  realised  by  the  whole  returning  com- 
pany we  need  not  suppose.  That  tears  of  penitence  and  words 
of  prayer  mingled  with  their  strains  of  joy  we  must  not  forget. 
"They  shall  come  with  weeping,"  with  tears  of  chastened  if  of 
grateful  joy,  "  and  with  supplications  will  I  lead  them,"  God  had 
said  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah 2.  So  again  the  same  prophet  pic- 
tures their  return  :  "In  those  days  and  in  that  time,saith  the  Lord, 
the  children  of  Israel  shall  come,  they  and  the  children  of  Judah 
together,  going  and  weeping :  they  shall  go  and  seek  the  Lord 
their  God.  They  shall  ask  the  way  to  Zion  with  their  faces 
thitherward^"  But  the  jubilant  return  was  still  the  ideal  with 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  in  Prophet  and  in  Psalmist  had 
furnished  them ;  and  if  it  awaited  its  full  realisation  in  a  yet 
brighter  and  more  distant  future,  it  was  the  ideal  to  which  some, 

1  Stanley,  Jnvish  Church,  vol.  III.  pp.  78,  79. 
^  xxxi.  9.  ^  I.  4,  5. 


INTRODUCTION.  15 


we  may  well  believe,  of  those  "  whose  spirit  God  had  raised," 
even  then  in  measure  attained,  and  to  which  as  a  body  they 
aspired.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  was  their  strength.  In  that 
strength  they  faced  and  overcame  the  difficulties  and  dangers 
of  the  intervening  desert,  "a  hard,  gravel  plain,  from  the 
moment  they  left  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  till  they  reached 
the  northern  extremity  of  Syria ;  with  no  solace  except  the  occa- 
sional wells  and  walled  stations ;  or,  if  their  passage  was  in  the 
spring,  the  natural  herbage  and  flowers  which  clothed  the  arid 
soil.  Ferocious  hordes  of  Bedouin  robbers  then,  as  now,  swept 
the  whole  tract."  A  journey  of  nearly  four  months,  though  now 
it  is  usually  accomplished  in  about  two,  would  bring  them  to 
their  destination,  "  the  small  central  strip  of  the  country  round 
Jerusalem,  occupied  by  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,"  to 
which  the  larger  part  of  the  exiles  belonged ^ 

6.  True  to  the  object  for  which  they  had  been  invited  to 
return,  the  restored  exiles  set  themselves  at  once  to  rebuild  the 
temple  and  re-establish  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  For  this  Cyrus 
supplied  the  means  and  furnished  ample  directions '.  For  this 
some  of  the  chief  of  the  Fathers  on  their  arrival  at  Jerusalem 
offered  freely  ^  Their  first  step  was  to  re-construct  the  altar 
on  its  ancient  foundation'*,  that  so  sacrifice,  the  great  central 
rite  of  their  religion,  the  necessary  condition  of  access  to 
the  Holy  One,  might  immediately  be  resumed.  The  altar 
was  completed  and  dedicated,  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh 
month  of  the  same  year  in  which  they  left  Babylon.  On  the 
fifteenth  day  of  that  month  the  feast  of  Tabernacles  was  duly 
kept,  and  "  the  people,"  we  read,  "gathered  themselves  together 
as  one  man  to  Jerusalem^."  Henceforward  the  daily  sacrifice 
and  the  stated  festivals  according  to  the  law  of  Moses  were 
observed.  Negotiations  were  entered  into  without  delay  with 
the  Tyrians  and  Sidonians,  for  the  supply  of  timber  for  building 


^  Stanley,  Jewish  Church,  vol.  ill.  pp.  87,  88,  91. 
^  Ezra  vi.  i — 4.  ^  Ezra  ii.  68,  69. 

^  This  would  seem  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  expression,   "upon  his 
bases,"  Ezra  iii.  3;  "upon  his  own  place,"  i  Esdras  v.  50. 
^  Ezra  iii.  i — 4. 


i6  INTRODUCTION. 

the  Temple.  The  work  actually  commenced,  and  the  founda- 
tion of  the  Temple  was  laid  with  great  rejoicing,  mingled  how- 
ever with  the  lamentations  of  those  who  had  witnessed  the 
greater  glory  of  the  former  Temple,  in  the  second  month  of 
the  following  year.  Thus  far  all  had  progressed  favourably. 
The  spirit  of  the  people  rose  superior  to  all  obstacles  and 
hindrances,  and  the  great  work  which  they  had  in  view  bid 
fair  to  arrive  at  a  speedy  and  prosperous  issue. 

7.  But  a  serious  check  was  now  encountered,  and  a  delay 
of  some  fifteen  years  consequently  intervened.  The  Samaritans, 
their  neighbours  in  Northern  Palestine,  had  requested  to  be 
allowed  to  take  part  in  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple,  on  the 
plea,  "we  seek  your  God,  as  ye  do."  But  the  plea  was  ignored 
and  the  request  peremptorily  and  indignantly  refused.  "Ye 
have  nothing  to  do  with  us  to  build  an  house  unto  our  God," 
was  the  uncompromising  reply  ^  Offended  at  the  refusal  the 
Samaritans  made  representations  at  the  Persian  court,  with  a 
view  to  stop  the  work  in  which  they  were  counted  unworthy  to 
co-operate.  During  the  reigns  of  Cambyses  (the  Ahasuerus  of 
the  book  of  Ezra),  who  ascended  the  Persian  throne  on  the 
death  of  Cyrus,  and  of  the  usurper  Smerdis  (the  Artaxerxes  of 
the  same  book),  by  whom  he  was  succeeded,  the  representations 
of  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  prevailed,  and  the  building  of  the 
Temple  was  absolutely  prohibited.  It  was  not  till  Darius,  the 
son  of  Hystaspes,  on  the  overthrow  of  Smerdis,  was  placed 
upon  the  throne,  that  the  policy  of  Cyrus  was  resumed,  and 
favour  was  again  extended  to  the  community  at  Jerusalem. 

8.  It  is  at  this  juncture  that  the  prophets  Haggai  and  Zacha- 
riah  appear  upon  the  scene.  With  them,  as  we  learn  from  the 
book  of  Ezra,  the  resumption  of  the  Temple  works  originated. 
The  spirit  of  the  people  had  been  broken  by  obstacles  which 
appeared  insuperable.  Their  zeal  for  the  House  of  the  Lord 
had  grown  cold  through  the  long  delay.  They  had  come  to 
acquiesce  in  what  they  deemed  inevitable.  They  looked  on  the 
unfinished  work,  on  the  bare  foundations,  and  said,  "  the  time 
is  not  come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's   House  should  be  built." 

^  Ezra  iv.  2,  3. 


INTRODUCTION.  17 


They  turned  aside  to  selfish  objects  and  secular  pursuits.  On 
their  own  houses  they  bestowed  labour.  Them  they  decorated 
with  the  wainscot  of  cedar  which  had  once  been  deemed  the 
peculiar  ornament  of  the  Sanctuary  \  To  rouse  them  from  this 
state  of  lethargy  and  to  prepare  them  to  rise  to  the  new  oppor- 
tunity, which  the  changed  policy  of  the  Persian  government 
was  about  to  offer  them,  the  prophetic  call  came.  In  the  name 
of  the  God  of  Israel  which  was  upon  them,  it  summoned  them 
to  arise  and  work.  The  first  to  respond  to  it  were  the  rulers 
civil  and  ecclesiastical,  Zerubbabel  the  Prince  or  Governor,  and 
Joshua  the  High  Priest.  Whether  they  too  had  come  to  share 
in  any  measure  the  general  apathy,  or  whether,  unable  any 
longer  to  communicate  their  own  zeal  to  their  countrymen,  they 
had  perforce  been  idle,  we  do  not  know.  At  any  rate  they  now 
placed  themselves  at  the  head  of  the  movement  to  resume  the 
work.  A  further  hindrance  was  threatened  by  the  interference 
of  the  Satrap  of  Syria  and  other  Persian  officials,  to  whose 
immediate  authority  the  Jews  were  subject.  But  Darius,  to 
whom  the  matter  was  referred,  not  only  forbade  any  obstacle 
to  be  offered,  but  by  a  royal  decree  charged  the  revenues  of  the 
province  with  the  cost  of  rebuilding  the  temple  and  providing 
sacrifices.  Thus  encouraged  the  Jews  set  themselves  heartily 
to  the  work,  the  prophets  of  God  helping  and  inciting  them  still 
throughout.  They  "builded  and  they  prospered  through  the 
prophesying  of  Haggai  the  Prophet  and  of  Zechariah  the  son  of 
Iddo^."  In  four  years  time,  in  the  sixth  year  of  Darius,  the 
Temple  was  completed. 

^  Haggai  i.  ■2,  4. 

*''  Ezra  vi.   14.     See  also  i  Esdras  vi.  i,  2,   vii.  3,  where  Haggai  is 


called  Aggeus. 


HAGGAI 


INTRODUCTION. 


CHAPTER  II. 

CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 

The  following  table  represents  approximately  the  chrono- 
logical position  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  and  of  their  pro- 
phecies, with  reference  to  Jewish  history,  and  to  one  another. 

Aboiit 

B.  c.  536.     The  proclamation  of  Cyrus  for  the  return  of  the  captives. 
,,       ,,        7th  month  (October).     The  altar  built.     Sacrifice  resumed. 

The  feast  of  Tabernacles  kept. 
,,     535.     ^nd  month.     Foundation  of  the  Temple  laid. 
..     535 — 520.     Rebuilding  of  the  Temple  stopped  through  the   in- 
trigues of  the  Samaritans. 
,,     520.     The  work  resumed  through  the  prophecies  of  Haggai  and 

Zechariah  and  the  subsequent  decree  of  Darius. 
,,        ,,        (September)  Haggai's  first  prophecy,  ch.  i.  i — 11. 
,,        ,,        (October)  Haggai's  second  prophecy,  ch.  ii.  r — 9. 
,,       ,,        (November)  Zechariah's  first  prophecy,  ch.  i.  r — 6. 
,,       ,,        (December)  Haggai's  third  and  fourth  prophecies,  ch.  ii.  to 

— 19;  20 — 23. 
>5     519-     January)  Zechariah's  second  prophecy,  ch.  i.  7— vi.  15. 
,,     518.     (November)  Zechariah's  third  prophecy,  ch.  vii.  i — viii.  23. 
„     515.     (March)  The  Temple  completed. 
The  remaining  prophecies  in  the  book  of  Zechariah  (ch.  ix. — 
xiv.)  have  no  date  given  them  by  their  author.     Their  date  and 
authorship  are  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  the  Unity  of  the 
Book,  Introd.  to  Zechariah,  ch.  II. 

The  identification  of  the  Jewish  months  with  our  own  is  of 
course  only  approximate. 

The  Jewish  year  was  a  solar  year  and  its  inonths  coincided 
with  the  seasons.  It  ordinarily  consisted  of  12  months,  but  an 
intercalary  month  appears  to  have  been  introduced  from  time 
to  time,  in  order  to  bring  the  month  Abib  into  coincidence  with 
the  barley  harvest.  "  Variations  must  inevitably  exist  between 
(our)  lunar  and  the  (Jewish)  solar  month,  each  of  the  former 
ranging  over  portions  of  two  of  the  latter."  The  general  identi- 
fication given  above  is  sufficiently  near.  See  Diet,  of  Bible, 
Art.  Month,  where  the  whole  subject  is  fully  discussed. 


INTRODUCTION.  19 


INTRODUCTION   TO   HAGGAI. 
CHAPTER  I. 

THE   PROPHET  HAGGAI. 

Haggai  was  the  first  of  the  three  prophets,  who  belong  to  that 
final  stage  of  Jewish  history  which  began  with  the  return  from 
the  captivity  in  Babylon.  Two  of  them,  he  and  Zechariah, 
prophesied  at  its  commencement.  Malachi  followed  about  a 
hundred  years  later.  After  that,  the  voice  of  prophecy  was 
silent  for  four  centuries  till  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist. 

Of  the  personal  history  of  Haggai  scarcely  anything  is 
known.  His  name  has  been  thought  by  some  to  mean  "festive," 
and  to  be  indicative  of  the  joyous  character  of  the  predictions 
which  he  delivered ;  but  the  derivation  and  reference  are  alike 
uncertain.  His  tribe  and  parentage  are  not  told  us.  It  would 
seem  most  probable  that  he  was  among  the  captives  who  re- 
turned from  Babylon,  and  there  is  a  tradition  that  he  was  born 
during  the  exile  in  that  city.  It  has  been  held  indeed  by  some 
that  he  was  one  of  that  small  band  of  survivors,  who  having 
been  originally  carried  away  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  lived  to  revisit 
their  native  country.  The  only  ground,  however,  for  this  conjec- 
ture is  the  reference  to  the  Temple  "  in  her  first  glory"  in  ch.  ii. 
3,  of  his  prophecy,  a  reference  which  does  not  seem  in  itself 
sufficient  to  support  the  conjecture.  Tradition  has  also  made 
him  one  of  the  men  (Zechariah  and  Malachi  being  the  others), 
who  were  with  Daniel  when  he  saw  his  vision,  "by  the  side  of 
the  great  river  which  is  HiddekeP,  and  a  member,  after  his 
return  to  Jerusalem,  of  the  Great  Synagogue. 

In  addition  to  the  prophecy  which  bears  his  name,  that 
section  of  the  book  of  Ezra  which  extends  from  ch.  iii.  2  to 
vi.  22  (with  the  exception  of  ch.  iv.  6 — 23,  and  of  the  mention  of 

^  Daniel  x.  7. 


20  INTRODUCTION. 


Artaxerxes  ch.  vi.  14,  which  were  added  afterwards  by  Ezra,  as 
the  compiler  of  the  book)  has  been  ascribed  to  Haggai  as  its 
author.  The  minuteness  of  detail  and  the  graphic  description 
which  characterise  that  section  are  thought  to  "bespeak  an 
actor  in  the  scene  described,"  and  the  supposition  that  Haggai 
was  that  actor  is  held  to  be  confirmed,  by  many  coincidences 
in  style  and  diction  between  that  portion  of  the  book  of  Ezra, 
and  the  prophetical  book  of  which  Haggai  is  the  acknowledged 
author.  For  a  full  discussion  of  this  question  the  reader  is 
referred  to  the  article  in  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible  on  the 
book  of  Ezra,  by  the  present  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells. 

In  some  of  the  old  versions  (the  LXX.,  the  Vulgate,  and  the 
Peshito-Syriac)  the  names  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah  are  con- 
nected with  certain  Psalms.  In  some  cases  the  connection  is  not 
improbable,  in  so  far  as  the  Psalms  in  question  are  generally 
allowed  to  be  of  the  date  of  the  return  from  Babylon.  The  title 
for  example  of  each  of  the  four  Psalms  cxlv. — cxlviii.  is  in  the 
LXX.,  "Alleluia  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah."  But  though  the 
link  of  connection  is  interesting,  and  may  possibly  indicate 
some  special  use  or  adaptation  of  these  Psalms  by  the  two 
prophets,  there  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  ascribing  the  author- 
ship of  them  either  to  Haggai  or  to  Zechariah.  A  curious 
account  of  these  titles  is  given  by  one  ancient  writer,  who  says 
that  Haggai  was  the  first  to  sing  Hallelujah  in  the  restored 
Temple,  and  adds,  "  therefore  we  say.  Alleluia,  which  is  the  hymn 
of  Haggai  and  Zechariah'." 

The  style  of  Haggai  has  often  been  described  as  tame  and 
prosaic.  The  mantle  of  prophecy  had  fallen  upon  him,  it  is 
said,  from  the  earlier  prophets,  but  it  had  fallen  upon  him  in 
"shreds  and  tatters."  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  the  style  of 
Haggai  differs  widely  from  that  of  Isaiah,  for  example,  in 
his  grand  flights  of  impassioned  eloquence,  of  fervid  poetry 
and  prophetic  inspiration.  But  when  the  object  of  his  mission 
is  kept  in  view,  the  simplicity  and  severity  of  his  style,  so  far 
from  affording  any  reasonable  ground  of  objection,  is  a  proof 

*  Pseudo-Epiphanius,  de  vilis  Proph.  See  Diet,  of  Bible,  Art. 
Haggai,  and  Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright  on  Zechariah,  Introd.  p.  xx. 


INTRODUCTION.  21 


of  the  wisdom  of  Almighty  God,  who  adapts  His  means  to 
the  ends  which  He  contemplates,  and  chooses  and  equips  His 
workmen  for  the  work  to  which  He  calls  them.  There  is  no 
need  to  suppose,  as  some  have  done,  that  the  record  of  Haggai's 
prophecies  as  we  now  possess  it  is  fragmentary  and  incomplete ; 
that  we  have  notes  and  outlines  rather  than  a  full  report  of 
what  he  said.  He  may  indeed,  during  the  period  of  his  ministry, 
have  uttered  other  prophecies  and  exhortations  which  are  not 
preserved  to  us.  But  we  should  be  loth  to  think,  that  they 
differed  materially  from  those  now  extant  in  style  or  subject 
matter.  What  we  have  is  a  true  and  sufficient  sample  of  the 
whole,  even  if  it  be  not  itself  the  whole.  These  brief  sharp 
sentences  of  his  were  exactly  what  the  occasion  required,  better 
adapted  than  aught  else  would  have  been  to  the  purpose  which 
he  had  before  him.  It  should  ever  be  remembered  that  the 
Jewish  prophets  had  a  twofold  function  to  perform.  They  were 
preachers  of  righteousness  as  well  as  predicters  of  future  events. 
To  reform,  to  correct,  to  restore,  was  no  small  part  of  their 
vocation  and  ministry.  They  had  to  make  ready  a  people  for 
the  Lord,  as  well  as  to  awaken  and  keep  alive  the  expectation  of 
His  coming.  These  two  branches  of  their  work  were  in  perfect 
keeping  and  harmony  with  each  other.  They  were  but  different 
parts  of  one  great  whole,  different  forces  in  the  one  great 
onward  movement  which  characterised  the  Old  Testament  dis- 
pensation. If  the  promise  to  Abraham,  that  in  his  seed  all  the 
families  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed,  was  to  be  fulfilled,  then 
the  seed  of  Abraham  must  not  be  allowed  to  fall  utterly  away 
from  God.  By  correction  and  chastisement,  by  stern  rebuke 
and  severe  invective,  they  must  be  moved  from  time  to  time  to 
repentance  and  amendment.  If  correction  and  rebuke  were  to 
be  effectual,  they  must  be  accompanied  by  the  incentive  of  hope, 
and  by  the  renewal  of  the  promise  to  the  fathers.  The  preach- 
ing of  the  Baptist,  only  intensified  by  the  greater  nearness  of 
the  Kingdom,  was  in  substance  the  preaching  of  all  the  prophets 
who  had  preceded  him  :  "Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  Heaven 
is  at  hand."  But  in  the  prosecution  of  His  plan,  Almighty  God 
was  pleased  to  commit  the  two  parts  of  this  preaching  to  His 
Messengers  in  varying  measure  and  degree.     To  Haggai  the 


22  INTRODUCTION. 


former  and  severer  part  was  specially  committed.  On  the  latter 
and  brighter  topic  he  was  far  from  silent.  But  it  was  the  stem 
call,  "  Repent  ye,"  with  which  he  was  principally  charged.  And 
with  that  his  subject  matter  it  is  no  wonder  that  his  style  ac- 
cords. "  There  is  a  ponderous  and  simple  dignity  in  the  em- 
phatic reiteration  addressed  alike  to  every  class  of  the  com- 
munity, prince,  priest  and  people:  Be  strong^  be  strongs  be 
strong'^.  *  Cleave,  stick  fast,  to  the  work  you  have  to  do.'  Or 
again.  Consider  your  ways,  consider,  consider,  consider'^.  It  is 
the  Hebrew  phrase  for  the  endeavour,  characteristic  of  the 
gifted  seers  of  all  times,  to  compel  their  hearers  to  turn  the 
inside  of  their  hearts  outwards  to  their  own  view,  to  take  the 
masks  from  off  their  consciences,  to  *see  life  steadily,  and  to  see 
it  whole 'V 


CHAPTER  11. 

ANALYSIS   OF  THE   BOOK   OF   HAGGAI. 

I.     The  FiRsr  Prophecy  and  its  effects.     Ch.  I. 

The  Introduction.  The  date,  author  and  recipients  of  the  prophecy 
(ver.  i). 

The  prophecy  or  inspired  address,  ver.  2 — 11.  The  excuse  of  the 
Jews  for  their  delay  in  rebuilding  the  Temple,  that  the  time  for  it  had 
not  come  (ver.  2),  is  met  by  the  pointed  rebuke  that  they  found  no  such 
reason  for  delay  in  building  costly  and  luxurious  houses  for  themselves 
(ver.  3,  4). 

They  are  called  upon  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  seriously  to  lay  to 
heart  the  blight  and  disaster  that  rested  on  all  their  undertakings  (ver. 
5,  6);  and  having  traced  it  by  consideration  to  its  cause  (ver.  7),  to 
procure  its  removal  by  resuming  the  building  of  the  Temple  (ver.  8); 
for  it  was  the  neglect  of  this  that  had  brought  the  divine  displeasure 
in  famine  and  drought  upon  them  (ver.  9 — 11). 

1  Haggai  ii.  4.  "-^  H^ggai  i-  5»  7  5  "•  ^5.  »8- 

3  Stanley,  jfrcuish  Chnrch,  III.  10 r.  See  also  Dr  Pusey  on  Haggai, 
Inlrod. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  effects  of  the  prophecy,  vox.  x^ — 15. 

Moved  with  godly  fear,  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  and  the  people  who 
had  been  addressed  through  them,  promptly  obey  the  call  (ver.  12). 
Encouraged  in  their  obedience  by  an  assurance  of  the  divine  presence 
and  favour  in  their  undertaking  (ver.  13),  and  animated  by  the  quick- 
ening influences  of  the  divine  Spirit  within  them,  they  flock  with  alacrity 
to  the  work  (ver.  14),  and  within  a  month  from  the  first  utterance  of 
the  prophecy  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  is  being  vigorously  prose- 
cuted (ver.  15). 

II.  The  Second  Prophecy.    Ch.   II.     i — 9. 

After  a  month,  which  had  been  spent  by  the  Jews  in  active  exertions 
for  the  restoration  of  the  Temple  (ver.  i),  a  second  prophecy  is  addressed 
through  Haggai,  to  Zerubbabel  and  to  Joshua  and  to  the  people  at 
large  (ver.  2). 

Anticipating  the  depressing  effects  of  a  comparison  of  the  new  Temple 
with  the  old,  on  the  minds  of  those  who  had  seen  them  both,  and 
through  them  on  the  community  at  large  (ver.  3),  Almighty  God  urges 
them  to  carry  on  the  work  with  unabated  ardour,  on  the  ground  that 
He  is  with  them  (ver.  4),  in  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  which  He  had 
made  with  their  fathers  (ver.  5). 

And  the  rather  to  encourage  them,  He  foretells  a  shaking  of  the 
heavens  and  earth,  a  great  convulsion  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
(ver.  6),  which  shall  result  in  glory  to  the  Temple  which  they  now 
are  building,  greater  than  any  which  ever  belonged  to  that  earlier 
Temple,  whose  lost  splendour  they  deplore  (ver.  7 — 9). 

III.  The  Third  Prophecy.    Ch.  II.  10 — 19. 

Two  months  and  three  days  have  elapsed  since  the  last  prophecy,  or 
inspired  address,  when  Haggai  speaks  again  to  the  people  in  the  word 
of  the  Lord  (ver.  10). 

By  reference  to  the  priests,  as  the  authorised  expositors  of  the  Law 
(ver.  11),  he  elicits  the  decision  that,  whereas  ceremonial  sanctity  is 
conveyed  by  the  hallowed  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  only  to  that  with  which 
it  comes  into  first  and  immediate  contact,  and  does  not  extend  beyond 
that  limit  (ver.  12),  ceremonial  defilement  by  contact  with  a  corpse  has 
a  wider  range,  and  is  propagated  over  a  wider  sphere  (ver.  13). 

The  moral  principle  which  underlies  the  ceremonial  provision  ap- 
plies in  its  full  force  to  the  returned  captives.  It  is  the  gauge  of  their 
conduct,  and  the  explanation  of  God's  dealings  with  them.     Their  one 


24  INTRODUCTION. 

sin  in  neglecting  the  Temple  spreads  its  moral  pollution  over  "every 
work  of  their  hands,"  and  even  over  the  sacrifices  w^hich  they  offer 
on  that  altar,  which  they  vainly  hope  will  consecrate  themselves  and 
all  their  doings  (ver.  14). 

Once  again  the  prophet  urges  them  to  consider,  to  fix  their  attention 
on,  the  period  between  the  day  on  which  the  foundation  of  the  Temple 
was  completed  and  the  day  on  which  he  now  is  speaking  to  them. 
That  period  of  supineness  and  neglect  in  the  work  of  God's  House  had 
been  marked  throughout  by  dearth  and  blight  and  disappointment 
With  the  day  of  renewed  effort  and  rekindled  zeal,  in  which  this  pro- 
phecy is  uttered,  a  new  era  of  prosperity  shall  commence :  from  this 
day  will  I  bless  you.     ver.  15 — 19. 

IV.    The  Fourth  Prophecy.     Ch.  II.  20-23. 

A  second  time  on  the  same  day  the  prophet  is  moved  to  speak  in  the 
word  of  the  Lord  (ver.  20). 

To  Zerubbabel  in  his  official  and  typical  character  as  **  Governor  of 
Judah,"  the  message  is  addressed.  The  prediction  of  the  second  pro- 
phecy, "I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the  earth,"  is  repeated  and 
enlarged  (ver.  21,  22). 

But  amidst  the  universal  commotion  and  overthrow,  Zerubbabel 
shall  be  honoured  and  preserved  as  the  object  of  Jehovah's  choice 
(ver.  23). 


H  A  G  G  A  I, 


IN  the  second  year  of  Darius  the  king,  in  the  sixth  month,  1 
in  the  first  day  of  the  month,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord 
by  Haggai  the  prophet  unto  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel, 

Ch,  I.  1 — 11.    The  First  Prophecy. 

1.  Daritts  the  king\  Lit.,  Daryavesh.  ^'■Daryavcsh  is  a  more 
accurate  transcript  of  the  name  of  the  Persian  kings  than  Aapeios 
(Darius).  Darius  calls  himself  in  his  descriptions  Ddijaviish,  which 
means  the  'holder,'  or  'supporter.'"  Max.  Miiller  in  Pusey's  ^^^/t  <2A 
Daniel^  p.  570. 

This  was  IDarius  the  son  of  Hystaspes,  who  had  deposed  the  impostor 
Smerdis  and  succeeded  him  on  the  throne  of  Persia,  and  who  on  his 
accession  returned  to  the  policy  of  Cyrus  with  reference  to  the  Jews. 

Ihe  sixth  inonth'\  i.e.,  of  the  Jewish  year.  While  they  had  kings  of 
their  own  the  Jewish  historians  were  wont,  as  we  see  throughout  the 
Books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles,  to  date  events  by  the  years  of  their 
reigns.  Now  that  their  own  monarchy  was  at  an  end,  they  use  instead 
the  year  of  the  foreign  Sovereign  to  whom  they  were  tributary.  The 
transition  is  observable  in  ver.  8  of  2  Kings  xxv.  as  compared  with 
ver.  I.  But  the  months  are  still  those  of  their  own  calendar.  The 
sixth  month  was  called  Elul  after  the  return  from  Babylon.  (Neh.  vi. 
15;  I  Mace.  xiv.  27.) 

by  Haggai]  Lit.,  by  the  hand  of,  i.e.  by  his  means  or  instrumentality. 
And  so  in  ver.  3. 

Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel]  Both  in  the  history  of  the  return  in 
Ezra  (iii.  2,  8,  v.  2)  and  Nehemiah  (xii.  i)  and  in  the  genealogies  of 
our  Lord,  Matt.  i.  12;  Luke  iii.  27,  Zerubbabel  is  called  as  he  is  in 
this  book  the  son  of  Shealtiel  or  Salathiel.  But  in  i  Chron.  iii.  ig  he 
is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Pedaiah.  The  probable  explanation  of  the 
discrepancy  is  that  Shealtiel,  who  was  the  elder  brother  and  the  head 
of  the  family,  had  no  sons  of  his  own,  and  that  consequently  his  nephew 
Zerubbabel,  who  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  younger  brother  Pedaiah, 
became  the  heir  of  his  uncle  Shealtiel,  and  was  commonly  regarded 
and  described  as  his  son.  He  was  the  recognised  head  of  the  Jews 
in  Babylon,  "the  Prince  of  Judah,"  as  he  is  called  (Ezra  i.  8),  at  the 
time  when  the  decree  of  Cyrus  was  issued  for  their  return.     He  bears  a 


26  HAGGAI,    I.  [v.  I. 

governor  of  Judah,  and  to  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech  the 

leading  part  in  the  history  of  the  return,  and  of  the  events  which  fol- 
lowed immediately  upon  it.  He  was  among  the  first  to  respond  to  the 
prophetic  call  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah  (Hag.  i.  12).  Many  of  their 
prophecies  were  addressed  to  him  by  name  (Hag.  i.  i,  ii.  2,  21 ;  Zech. 
iv.  6);  and  his  spirit  was  specially  stirred  up  by  God  (Hag  i.  14)  to 
promote  the  reformation  of  the  people  and  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple. 
He  has  been  described  as  "a  man  inferior  to  few  of  the  great  characters 
of  Scripture,  whether  we  consider  the  perilous  undertaking  to  which  he 
devoted  himself,  the  importance,  in  the  economy  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment, of  his  work,  his  courageous  faith,  or  the  singular  distinction  of 
being  the  object  of  so  many  and  such  remarkable  prophetic  utterances." 
Smith's  Bible  Did.  Art.  Zcrubbabel.  The  fact  that  his  name  Zerubbabel 
(''scattered  to  Babylon,"  or  "born  at  Babylon,"  Gesenius)  was  changed, 
like  those  of  Daniel  and  his  companions,  to  the  Chaldee  name  Shesh- 
bazzar,  as  well  as  his  appointment  by  Cyrus  to  the  office  of  "Governor," 
makes  it  probable,  as  has  been  suggested,  that  he  was  in  the  service  of 
the  king  of  Babylon.  In  the  Apocryphal  account  of  the  return  from 
Babylon  contained  in  the  first  book  of  Esdras,  Zerubbabel  who  is  ap- 
parently regarded  by  the  writer  as  a  distinct  person  from  Sheshbazzar 
(Sanabassar,  i  Esdr.  ii.  12),  under  whom  the  Jews  returned  in  the  time  of 
Cyrus,  is  described  as  one  of  the  young  men  who  formed  the  body 
guard  of  king  Darius.  The  story  told  is,  that  three  of  these  young 
men  agreed  to  compete  before  the  king  as  to  which  of  them  could 
compose  and  write  the  wisest  sentence.  "The  first  wrote,  Wine  is  the 
strongest.  The  second  wrote.  The  king  is  strongest.  The  third  wrote, 
Women  are  strongest :  but  above  all  things  Truth  beareth  away  the 
victory"  (i  Esdr.  iii.  10 — 12).  To  this  third  sentence  which  was 
Zerubbabel's,  the  king  and  his  wise  men  awarded  the  palm,  and  its 
author,  on  being  invited  by  the  king  to  name  his  reward,  claimed  the 
fulfilment  of  the  vow  which  Darius  had  made  on  his  accession,  to  build 
Jerusalem  and  restore  the  holy  vessels  for  the  Temple.  (See  the  story 
in  full  I  Esdr.  ch.  iii.,  iv.;  and  for  the  additions  and  variations  of 
Josephus  Diet,  of  the  Bible,  Art.  Zerubbabel.) 

govenior\  The  foreign  name  {Pechah)  here  used  for  the  "Governor"  - 
of  the  Jews  is  again  a  badge  of  their  servitude.  The  word  itself  is  an 
interesting  one.  It  is  first  used  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  in  the  time  of 
Solomon  (i  Kings  x.  £5;  2  Chron.  ix.  14)  of  some  "governors  of  the 
country"  in  his  outlying  dominions  who  sent  him  a  yearly  supply  of 
gold.  Even  there  it  is  probably  a  foreign  title.  "It  seems  to  me  most 
probable,"  writes  Dr  Pusey,  "that  Solomon  adopted  the  title,  as  it 
already  existed  in  the  Syrian  territories,  for  it  is  not  said  that  he  'placed 
Pechahs,^  but  only  that  they  paid  him  gold.  Thus  the  name  'Rajah'  is 
continued  in  our  Indian  dominions."  We  next  find  it  when  Benhadad 
after  his  first  defeat  is  advised  to  depose  the  thirty-two  subordinate 
kings  who  helped  him,  and  to  put  Pechahs,  Syrian  Governors,  in  their 
place  (i  Kings  xx.  24).  "  Then,  still  in  that  neighbourhood,  and  in 
part  doubtless  in  the  same  country,  they  are  in  military  command  in 
Sennacherib's  army,  leading  doubtless  their  own  contingent  of  troops, 


vv.  2,  3.]  HAGGAI,   I.  27 

high  priest,  saying,  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying,  2 
This  people  say,  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  the 
Lord's  house  should  be  built.     Then  came  the  word  of  the  3 
Lord  by  Haggai  the  prophet,  saying, 

in  his  multitudinous  host  (2  Kings  xviii.  24).  Sennacherib  compares 
Hezekiah  to  one  of  the  '  Governors '  .of  the  subjugated  provinces,  which 
he  held  subdued  (Comp.  Is.  x.  8,  9;  2  Kings  xviii.  34).  Then,  in  each 
case  joined  with  Sagans,  Pechah  is  used  of  Babylonian,  (Jer.  li.  23,  57 ; 
Ezek.  xxiii.  6,  23)  and  Median  (Jer.  li,  28)  governors.  Daniel,  in  recount- 
ing the  Babylonian  governors,  places  the  Pechahs  the  third,  after  the 
Satraps  and  Sagans  (iii.  2,  3,  27).  Under  Darius,  they  are  not  immedi- 
ately united  with  the  Sagans,  but  still  are  enumerated  with  these  only, 
the  Satraps  and  the  haddaberin,  'privy  Councillors,'  vi.  8.  Somewhat 
later,  (Esth.  viii.  9,  ix.  3)  the  Pechahs  are  mentioned  without  the  Sagans, 
but  with  the  Satraps  and  the  'princes  of  the  provinces.'  In  the  times 
after  the  captivity  there  were  several  such  Pechahs,  westward  of  the 
Euphrates,  between  it  and  Judea  (Ezra  viii.  36;  Neh.  ii.  7,  9),  probably 
the  same  locality,  in  regard  to  which  the  name  was  first  used  under,, 
Solomon.  Specifically,  Tatnai  is  entitled  as  *  Pechah  beyond  the  river,' 
Ezra  v.  3,  vi.  6,  who  (although  apparently  he  dwelt  at  Jerusalem,  Neh. 
iii.  7)  is  yet,  in  the  same  rescript  of  Darius,  distinguished  from  'the 
Pechah  of  the  Jews'  (Ezra  vi.  7),  whom  naturally  there  was  most  occa- 
sion to  mention  (Hag.  i.  i,  14,  ii.  2,  21;  Mai.  i.  8;  Neh.  v.  14,  18, 
xii.  26)."  Pusey,  Book  of  Daniel^  p.  567  ;  where  also  the  possible  con- 
nection of  Pechah  with  Pashah  is  discussed  by  Max  Miiller. 

2.     speaketh\.  Lit.  saith,  the  same  word  as  throughout  the  verse. 

this  people\  possibly  used  as  a  term  of  reproach  :  comp.  ch.  ii.  14;  Is. 
viii.  II,  12. 

the  time  is  not  co7ne'\  Lit.,  not  time  to  come.  The  sentence  is  evi- 
dently elliptical,  and  there  is  much  difference  of  opinion  as  to  what 
should  be  supplied.  The  simplest  way  of  taking  it  appears  to  be,  "it 
is  not  (yet)  the  time  (for  it,  i.e.  the  matter  in  hand,  or  proposed  under- 
taking) to  come."  Then  what  that  matter  or  undertaking  is,  is  explained 
in  the  next  clause,  "the  time  of  the  House  of  Jehovah,  for  it  to  be 
built."  The  LXX.,  however,  and  other  Ancient  Versions  render.  The 
time  is  not  come  for  the  Lord^s  house  to  be  built,    R.  V.  margin. 

It  has  been  thought  by  some,  that  in  saying  the  time  was  not  come 
the  Jews  meant  to  allege,  that  the  seventy  years  of  desolation  which  had 
been  predicted  were  not  yet  fulfilled.  But  if  that  had  really  been  the 
case  their  excuse  would  have  been  valid.  "There  was  indeed,"  as 
Pusey  observes,  "  a  second  fulfilment  of  seventy  years,  from  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  B.C.  586,  to  its  consecration  in  the 
sixth  year  of  Darius,  B.C.  516.  But  this  was  through  the  wilfulness  of 
man  prolonging  the  desolation  decreed  by  God,  and  Jeremiah's  pro- 
phecy relates  to  the  people  not  to  the  temple."  It  is  clear  from  the 
sharp  rebuke  here  administered,  and  from  the  severe  judgments  with 
which  their  procrastination  *\ad  been  visited  (ver.  6,  9 — 11),  that  the 
excuse  was  idle  and  the  delay  worldly  and  culpable. 


28  HAGGAI,   I.  [v.  4—6. 

4  Is  it  time  for  you,  O  ye,  to  dwell  in  your  cieled  houses, 
And  this  house  lie  waste? 

5  Now  therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Consider 

your  ways. 

6  Ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  Httle ; 

4.  for  you,  0  ye]  Lit.,  for  you,  you  :  you,  yourselves,  R.  V.  The 
repetition  of  the  pronoun  is  emphatic,  "you  are  the  people  I  mean;" 
or  you  in  impHed  contrast  to  Almighty  God,  comp,  i  Sam  xxv.  24, 
where  Abigail,  anxious  to  appease  David's  anger  at  the  churlishness  of 
Nabal,  exclaims,  "upon  me,  my  Lord,  I  (am  the  person  at  fault),  let 
this  iniquity  be." 

your  cieled  houses]  Lit.  your  houses  cieled,  i.e.  your  houses  {and 
they  too)  cieled.  The  adjective  thus  added  w^ithout  an  article  has  the 
force  of  a  predicate  and  so  becomes  emphatic.  With  the  article  it 
would  form  part  of  the  subject.  Comp.  Ps.  cxliii.  10:  "Let  Thy  Spirit 
good  (as  it  is,  and  therefore  ready  to  help  and  guide  the  sinful  and 
A  infirm),  lead  me,"  &c.  The  translators  in  A.V.,  feeling  the  force  of 
the  adjective  as  a  predicate,  have  broken  the  first  part  of  the  sentence 
into  a  separate  proposition,  "Thy  Spirit  is  good,  lead  me,"  &c.  The 
Prayer-Book  version  is,  "Let  thy  loving  Spirit  lead  me,"  &c. 

deled]  Lit.  covered  or  tooarded.  The  word  is  used  with  reference 
to  the  roof  of  the  Temple,  which  was  high-pitched  like  our  modern 
roofs,  and  cieled  with  boards  within.  "  He  covered  the  house  with  beams 
(rafters)  and  boards  of  cedar,"  i  Kings  vi.  9.  It  is  also  used  of  the 
cieling  with  boards  of  Solomon's  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  i  Kings 
vii.  3,  and  of  some  kind  of  covering  or  boarding  (the  passage  is  obscure) 
of  his  "Porch  of  Judgment,"  i  Kings  vii.  7.  The  practice  was  luxurious 
and  magnificent  even  in  a  king  (Jer.  xxii.  14).  Yet  they  who  professed 
themselves  unable  to  restore  the  House  of  the  Lord  were  indulging  in 
it  in  their  own  houses.  They  built  costly  houses  for  themselves,  even 
using,  it  may  be,  to  decorate  them,  the  cedar  wood  which  had  been 
brought  for  the  Temple  (Ezra  iii.  7  ;  Diet,  of  the  Bible,  Art.  Zerubbabel), 
and  had  grown  indifferent  to  the  ruin  and  desolation  of  the  House  of 
God. 

5.  Consider]  Lit.  set  your  heart  upon,  consider  both  their  nature 
and  (as  what  follows  shews)  their  consequences;  both  what  they  are 
and  to  what  they  lead.  The  expression  consider ^  set  your  heart,  is 
used  by  Haggai  no  fewer  than  four  times  in  this  short  book,  i.  5,  7, 
ii.  15,  18. 

6.  Ye  have  sown  much,  &c.]  The  expostulation  is  very  abrupt  and 
forcible  in  the  Hebrew,  "  Ye  sowed  much,  but  to  bring  in  little  !  To 
eat,  but  not  to  satiety !  To  drink,  but  not  to  exhilaration  !  To  clothe 
(oneself),  but  not  for  warmth,  to  him  (the  wearer)!"  The  description 
refers  not  to  one  year,  but  to  many.  It  coincides  with  the  whole  period 
of  their  sloth  and  neglect  in  the  matter  of  the  Temple.  It  points  to  a 
double  judgment,  dearth  and  scarcity  in'the  fruits  of  the  ground,  and 
(what  often  accompanies  this,  for  the  ^ame  adverse  influences  which 


vv.  7—9.]  HAGGAI,   I.  29 


Ye  eat,  but  ye  have  not  enough ; 

Ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not  filled  with  drink ; 

Ye  clothe  you,  but  there  is  none  warm ; 

And  he  that  earneth  wages  earneth  wages  /<?  ptif  it  into  a 

bag  with  holes. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Consider  your  ways.  7 

Go  up  to  the  mountain,  and  bring  wood,  and  build  the  s 

house; 
And  I  will  take  pleasure  in  it,  and  I  will  be  glorified, 

saith  the  Lord. 
Ye  looked  for  much,  and  lo,  it  came  to  little ;  9 

blight  the  earth  are  injurious  to  the  human  frame)  want  of  power  in  the 
body  of  man,  to  assimilate  and  benefit  by  food  and  drink  and  clothing. 
he  that  earneth  wagesl  The  judgment  is  not  confined  to  the  fruits  of 
the  earth,  but  extends  to  all  branches  of  human  industry.  Disappoint- 
ment and  loss  mar  all  alike.  "The  labour  pictured  is  not  only  fruit- 
less, but  wearisome  and  vexing.  There  is  a  seeming  result  of  all  the 
labour,  something  to  allure  hopes;  but  forthwith  it  is  gone.  The 
heathen  assigned  a  like  baffling  of  hope  as  one  of  the  punishments  of 
hell."     Pusey. 

8.  Go  up  to  the  77ioimtain\  The  consideration  to  which  they  have 
twice  been  called  is  to  lead  to  action  and  amendment.  They  are  not 
only  to  repent,  but  to  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance. 

the  mountain\  This  is  clearly  not,  as  some  have  thought,  the  moun- 
tain on  which  the  Temple  stood,  "the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house," 
but  the  mountain  from  which  the  timber  for  building  was  to  be  fetched. 
It  might  possibly  mean  Lebanon,  from  which  they  were  to  cause  wood 
to  be  brought,  qui  facit  per  alium  facit  per  se,  but  the  words  sound 
more  like  a  call  to  immediate  personal  effort,  and  then  the  mountain 
would  be  the  mountainous  neighbourhood  generally  {hill  country y  R.V. 
margin),  to  which  they  were  themselves  to  go  and  bring  wood.  See 
Neh.  ii.  8,  where  "the  king's  forest"  would  seem  to  have  been  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem;  and  viii.  15,  where  possibly  "the  mount" 
means  the  Mount  of  Olives. 

/  will  be  glorified'\  "  The  meaning  may  be  either,  *  I  will  accept  it 
as  done  for  My  glory';  or,  *I  will  display  My  glory  in  it'  (see  ch.  ii.  9)." 
Annotated  Paragraph  Bible,  Rel.  Tract,  Soc. 

9 — 11.  Having  pointed  out  in  ver.  8  the  way  of  amendment  and 
prosperity,  the  prophet  resumes  in  these  verses  the  expostulation  of 
vv.  4—6,  and  again  insists  upon  the  depressed  condition  of  the  people 
and  its  cause. 

9.  Ye  looked  for  much,  &c.]  Lit.  to  look  (there  was  looking)  for 
mucli,  and  (It  came)  to  little !  Emphatic  as  ver.  6,  where  see  note. 
A  double  blight  and  curse  had  come  upon  them.  They  had  looked  for 
much,  had  expected  a  plentiful  harvest,  and  perhaps  the  appearance  of 
the  crops  had  warranted  the  expectation.     But   when  they  came  to 


30  HAGGAI,   I.  [vv.  lo,  ii. 

And  when  ye  brought  //  home,  I  did  blow  upon  it 
Why  ?  saitii  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Because  of  mine  house  that  is  waste, 
And  ye  run  every  man  unto  his  own  house. 
Therefore  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed  from  dew, 
And  the  earth  is  stayed /r^;;^  her  fruit. 
And  I  called  for  a  drought  upon  the  land,  and  upon  the 
mountains, 

gather  it  in  they  found  the  actual  yield  but  little,  less  even  perhaps 
than  they  had  originally  sown.  Pusey  quotes  the  seed  of  a  homer  shall 
yield  an  ephah,  i.e.  one  tenth  of  what  was  sown.  Is.  v,  lo.  And  when 
this  little  was  brought  home  into  the  garner,  even  that  melted  away  by 
mildew  or  waste  or  loss.  God  did  but  blow  upon  it  with  the  breath  of 
His  displeasure,  and  lo  it  was  gone,  as  though  instead  of  solid  grain  it 
had  been  chaff  of  the  summer  threshingfloor. 

and  ye  run,  &c.]  while  ye  run,  R.V.,  with  eager  zeal  and  interest  to 
build  and  adorn  it.  See  ver.  4.  The  word  run  is  used  in  the  same 
figurative  way  in  Psalm  cxix.  32;  Prov.  i.  16. 

10.  the  heaven  over  you,  &c.]  Lit.  upon  you  are  stayed  the  heavens. 
Some  understand  by  "  upon"  or  "  against"  you,  "on  your  account,"  on 
account  of,  or  in  punishment  of  your  sins  [for  your  sake,  R.V.  text). 
But  there  would  be  something  of  tautology  in  this,  because  the  same 
thing  has  been  said  in  the  first  word  of  the  verse,  * '  therefore "  (on 
account  of  what  has  been  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verses)  has  this 
judgment  come  upon  you.  It  is  better  therefore  to  take  it,  as  in  A.  V., 
and  R.V.  margin,  "the  heaven  over  you."  Compare  the  terms  in 
which  the  judgment  had  been  threatened  by  Moses,  "thy  heaven  that 
is  over  thy  head  shall  be  brass,"  Deut.  xxviii.  23. 

from  deiu\  not  rain  only,  but  even  dew  had  been  withholden. 
"  Coeli  non  solum  pluviam  non  dederunt,  sed  ne  rorem  quidem,  quo 
arentes  agri  saltem  humore  modico  temperarentur. "  Hieron.  We 
must  not  forget  how  copious,  and  therefore  how  important  to  the  hus- 
bandman, especially  in  the  absence  of  rain,  was  the  dew  in  Palestine. 
**  In  a  latitude  so  high  as  ours,  and  which  yet  has  a  mean  temperature 
higher  than  its  degrees  should  give  it,  the  chill  of  the  night  serves  only 
to  shed  fog  or  mist  upon  the  lower  stratum  of  air ;  but  in  warmer  cli- 
mates— and  in  no  country  is  it  more  so  than  in  Syria — the  vast  burden 
of  the  watery  element,  which  the  fervour  of  day  has  raised  aloft, 
becomes,  quickly  after  sunset,  a  prodigious  dew,  breaking  down  upon 
the  earth,  as  a  mighty  yet  noiseless  deluge. "  Isaac  Taylor,  Spirit  of 
Heb.  Poetry^  c.  iv.  pp.  85,  86. 

11.  a  drought']  The  Jewish  commentators  have  observed  a  parono- 
masia or  play  on  words,  as  between  the  fault  and  the  punishment.  My 
house  is  ^'^  waste*'  [chareb,  ver.  4,  9),  through  your  neglect,  and  your 
punishment  shall  be  a  ^^ drought'"'  (choreb).  *' Quasi  dicat;  quia  aedem 
meam  vastam  relinquitis,  ego  quoque  in  omnia  vestra  vastitatem  im- 
mittam."     Rosenni. 


vv.  12,  13.]  HAGGAI,    I.  31 

And  upon  the  corn,  and  upon  the  new  wine,  and  upon 
the  oil, 

And  upon  that  which  the  ground  bringeth  forth, 

And  upon  men,  and  upon  cattle,  and  upon  all  the  labour 
of  the  hands. 

Then  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  Joshua  the 
son  of  Josedech  the  high  priest,  with  all  the  remnant  of  the 
people,  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God,  and  the 
words  of  Haggai  the  prophet,  as  the  Lord  their  God  had 
sent  him,  and  the  people  did  fear  before  the  Lord.  Then 
spake  Haggai  the  Lord's  messenger  in  the  Lord's  message 
unto  the  people,  saying,  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord. 

labour]  The  word  here  used  means  properly  wearisome  labour,  toil 
(Gen.  xxxi.  42).  It  is  acoVos  rather  than  ^fyyov.  Here  of  course  it 
means  the  product  of  labour. 

Ch.  I.    12—15^    The  Effects  of  the  Prophecy. 

12.  the  remnant  of  the  people]  i.e.  not  the  rest  or  remainder  of  the 
people  beside  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  who  had  been  mentioned  by 
name,  but  "the  remnant"  in  what  came  to  be  a  technical  use  of  the 
word,  that  part  of  the  nation,  a  remnant  only  in  comparison  of  the 
whole,  which  returned  from  the  captivity  in  Babylon. 

and  the  words]  some  would  render  according  to  the  words,  but  the 
A.  V.  gives  a  satisfactory  sense,  and  the  construction  is  borne  out  by 
Jer.  xxvi.  5,  xxxv.  15. 

did  fear]  The  word  is  used  in  its  usual  O.  T.  sense  to  denote  the 
spirit  of  true  religion.  There  was  genuine  conversion  on  the  part  of 
the  people,  they  yielded,  not  the  unwilling  obedience  of  terror,  but  the 
hearty  service  of  godly  fear. 

13.  messenger]  The  word  is  that  commonly  used  for  an  angel  vsx  the 
O.T. ,  but  its  first  and  proper  meaning  is  messenger.  In  the  same  way 
in  the  N.T.,  the  same  word  (a77eXos)  is  used  generally  in  its  restricted 
sense  for  an  angel,  and  occasionally  in  its  wider  sense  for  a  messenger 
(Luke  vii.  27,  ix.  52;  James  ii.  25).  Haggai  is  the  only  prophet  who' 
uses  this  title  of  himself.  It  is,  to  say  the  least,  doubtful  whether 
Moses  as  a  prophet  is  intended  by  it  in  Num.  xx.  16.  Malachi  ("my 
angel  or  messenger")  has  it  for  the  only  name  by  which  we  know  him, 
and  he  uses  it  of  the  Jewish  priest  (ii.  7),  and  of  John  Baptist  the  fore- 
runner of  our  Lord,  and  of  our  Lord  Himself,  "the  messenger  of  the 
Covenant "  (iii.  i). 

/  am  with  yoii]  Lit.  I  witli  you.  This  short  but  all-sufficient  pro- 
mise, varied  sometimes  by  the  corresponding  expression  of  faith,  ^''God 
-tvith  us,""  or  by  the  record  of  its  fulfilment,  ^''Jehovah  was  with  him" 
shines  out  like  a  bright  star  in  times  of  darkness  and  need  to  individual 
saints,  and  to  the  Church  at  large  in  the  O.T.  It  is  given  to  Jacob  at 
Bethel  at  the  outset  of  his  journey  (Gen.  xxviii.  15);  to  Moses  at  the 


32  HAGGAI,    I.  [vv.  14,  15. 

14  And  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Zerubbabel  the  son  of 
Shealtiel,  governor  of  Judah,  and  the  spirit  of  Joshua  the 
son  of  Josedech  the  high  priest,  and  the  spirit  of  all  the 
remnant  of  the  people ;  and  they  came  and  did  work  in  the 

15  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  their  God,  in  the  four  and 
twentieth  day  of  the  sixth  month,  in  the  second  year  of 
Darius  the  king. 

Bush,  when  called  to  be  the  deliverer  of  his  people  (Ex.  iii.  12);  to 
Joshua,  when  he  took  up  for  completion  the  unfinished  work  of  Moses 
(Jos.  i.  5);  to  Jeremiah  at  his  entrance  on  the  difficult  work  of  prophe- 
sying (Jer.  i.  8).  It  was  fulfilled  to  Joseph  when  sold  a  slave  into 
Egypt  (Gen.  xxxix.  2),  and  when  made  a  prisoner  there  on  a  false  accu- 
sation (ver.  21).  It  was  the  battle-cry  of  the  Church  when  threatened 
with  the  invasion  of  the  proud  Assyrian  (Is.  viii.  10),  and  the  refrain  of 
her  song  of  victory  when  the  Assyrian  was  overthrown  (Ps.  xlvi.  7,  11). 
In  the  N.  T.  it  finds  its  full  accomplishment  in  Him  who  is  "Em- 
manuel, God  with  us"  (Matt.  i.  23).  Here  Haggai  sums  up  the  pro- 
mise of  all  needful  resources  for  the  work,  and  protection  from  the 
jealous  foes  who  had  so  long  hindered  it,  and  conveys  the  assurance 
of  a  prosperous  issue  in  the  few  short  words,  "I  with  you,  saith 
Jehovah." 

14.  the  Lord  stirred  up,  &c.]  It  would  seem  that  the  prevailing 
indifference  and  neglect  by  which  they  were  surrounded  had,  in  some 
measure  at  least,  damped  the  ardour  and  quenched  the  spirit  even  of 
Zerubbabel  and  Joshua.  It  needed  the  same  breath  of  heaven  which 
had  first  kindled  the  fire  of  divine  zeal  in  their  hearts,  to  rouse  the  now 
smouldering  embers  into  living  flame  again  [ivoL^w-wvp^iv  to  ^a/'to'/xa, 
1  Tim.  i.  6). 

came  and  did  work]  The  word  "came,"  may  here  be  little  more 
than  pleonastic,  but  perhaps  it  refers  to  the  coming  of  the  people  from 
the  neighbouring  towns  and  country  to  Jerusalem,  as  we  know  they  did 
when  the  altar  was  first  set  up  (Ezra.  iii.  i).  They  "did,"  or  executed 
work  (the  word  work  is  here  a  noun,  not  a  verb)  in  the  rebuilding  of 
the  Temple.     Comp.  Ezra  v.  i,  2. 

15.  The  note  of  time  in  this  verse  (which  obviously  belongs  to  this 
chapter,  and  not  as  in  some  editions  both  of  Heb.  and  LXX.  and  in 
some  MSS.  to  the  next)  seems  designed  to  shew  how  prompt  the 
response  was  to  the  prophet's  call.  Only  twenty-three  days,  little  more 
that  is  than  three  weeks,  had  sufficed  to  make  all  necessary  preparations, 
and  summon  workmen  from  all  the  neighbourhood  to  resume  the  work 
(ch.  1.  i). 

Ch.  it.    1 — 9.    The  Second  Prophecy. 

The  first  prophecy  had  been  one  of  severe  rebuke  and  earnest  call  to 
duty.  The  second  is  one  of  encouragement  to  those,  who  having 
promptly  obeyed  the  first,  were  in  danger  of  being  depressed  and  disap- 
pointed by  the  comparative  meagreness  and  unworthiness  of  the  results 


vv.  1—3.]  HAGGAT,    II.  33 

In  the  seventh  month,  in  the  one  and  twentieth  day  of  the  2 
month,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet  Haggai, 
saying,   Speak   now   to   Zerubbabel   the    son    of  Shealtiel,  2 
governor  of  Judah,  and  to  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech  the 
high  priest  and  to  the  residue  of  the  people,  saying, 

Who  is  left  among  you  that  saw  this  house  in  her  first  3 
glory? 

of  their  labours.  When  the  foundations  of  the  second  Temple  were  laid 
some  years  before  this,  we  read  of  the  distress  which  its  character  and 
dimensions  occasioned,  to  those  of  the  returned  captives  who  were  old 
enough  to  remember  the  former  Temple  in  its  glory.  The  joyous  shouts 
of  the  younger  portion  of  the  assembly,  who  rejoiced  to  see  the  sanctuary 
of  their  faith  restored,  blended  strangely  with  the  sad  lamentations  of  their 
elders,  who  mourned  over  the  departed  splendour  of  the  past.  Now 
that  a  month  of  vigorous  work  was  beginning  to  tell,  and  the  contrast 
which  had  been  apparent  even  in  the  foundations  stood  out  in  bolder 
relief  in  the  rising  walls  of  the  edifice;  now  that  many  an  "ancient 
man,"  laudator  temporis  acti,  had  passed  his  disparaging  comment  on 
each  new  feature  of  the  growing  structure,  and  told  with  fond  regret  of 
the  "exceeding  magnifical"  house  (i  Chron.  xxii.  5)  that  had  once  been 
there,  the  danger  of  dejection  and  discouragement  on  the  part  of  the 
people  was  inci-eased.  With  the  gracious  design  of  counteracting  this, 
Haggai  is  directed  to  deliver  a  prophecy,  which  stimulates  them  to 
carry  on  and  complete  their  undertaking,  not  only  by  the  assurance  of  the 
divine  presence  and  favour,  but  by  the  promise  that  in  God's  good  time 
that  house,  so  mean  and  despised,  should  be  filled  with  a  glory  that 
should  exceed  that  of  Solomon's  Temple  in  the  days  of  its  greatest 
magnificence. 

1—5.    The  Circumstances  out  of  which  the  Prophecy  arose. 

1.  In  the  seventh  month,  in  the  one  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month']  It 
has  been  pointed  out  that  this  was  the  seventh  and  last  day  of  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles  (Lev.  xxiii.  33 — 36,  39 — 43);  and  it  has  been  suggested 
that  the  depressing  contrast  between  the  former  Temple  and  the  present 
would  be  heightened  and  brought  home  to  the  people  by  the  rites  and 
services  of  the  festive  season.  "The  return  of  this  festal  celebration, 
especially  after  a  harvest  which  had  turned  out  very  miserably,  and 
showed  no  signs  of  the  blessing  of  God,  could  not  fail  to  call  up  vividly 
before  the  mind  the  difference  between  the  former  times,  when  Israel 
was  able  to  assemble  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  so  to  rejoice 
in  the  blessings  of  His  Grace  in  the  midst  of  abundant  sacrificial  meals, 
and  the  present  time,  when  the  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice  might  indeed  be 
restored  again,  and  the  building  of  the  temple  be  resumed,  but  in  which 
there  was  no  prospect  of  erecting  a  building  that  would  in  any  degree 
answer  to  the  glory  of  the  former  temple. "  Keil's  Minor  Prophets, 
Clark's  Theol.  Libr.    See  also  Pusey  ad  loc. 

3.      Who  is  left  among  you'i  &c.]      When  the  foundations  of  this 

HAGGAI  -2 


34  HAGGAI,    II.  [vv.  4,  5. 

And  how  do  ye  see  it  now? 

Is  it  not  in  your  eyes  in  comparison  of  it  as  nothing  ? 

Yet  now  be  strong,  O  Zerubbabel,  saith  the  Lord  ; 

And  be  strong,   O  Joshua,   son  of  Josedech,   the  high 

priest ; 
And  be  strong,  all  ye  people  of  the  land,  saith  the  Lord, 

and  work : 
For  I  a??i  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  : 
According  to  the  word  that  I  covenanted  with  you  when 

ye  came  out  of  Egypt, 

Temple  were  laid  in  the  second  year  of  Cyrus  there  were  many  such. 
Now  after  sixteen  more  years,  when  seventy  years  had  elapsed  since  the 
destruction  of  Solomon's  Temple,  the  number  must  have  been  greatly 
diminished.  Old  men  of  fourscore  years  or  thereabouts  they  must  now 
have  been. 

how  do  ye  see  it?^  Lit.,  what  (i.e.  of  what  kind)  do  ye  see  it. 
Comp.  I  Kings  ix.  13,  where  Hiram  in  displeasure  at  the  cities  given 
him  by  Solomon  exclaims,  "  what  cities  are  these  (pr.  quid  urbium  hoc, 
Gesen.)  which  thou  hast  given  me,  my  brother?" 

in  compaHson  of  it\  These  words  should  be  omitted  as  in  R.  V. 
They  were  inserted  in  A.V.  through  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Hebrew 
idiom. 

"  Besides  the  richness  of  the  sculptures  in  the  former  Temple,  every- 
thing which  admitted  of  it  was  overlaid  with  gold ;  Solomon  overlaid  the 
whole  house  with  gold,  until  he  had  finished  all  the  house,  the  whole 
altar  by  the  oracle,  the  two  cherubims,  the  floor  of  the  house,  the  doors 
of  the  Holy  of  Holies  and  the  ornaments  of  it,  the  cherubims  thereon, 
and  the  palm  trees  he  covered  with  gold  fitted  upon  the  carved  work ; 
the  altar  of  gold  and  the  table  of  gold,  whereupon  the  shewbread  was, 
the  ten  candlesticks  of  pure  gold,  with  the  flowers  and  the  lamps  and 
the  tongs  of  gold,  the  bowls,  the  snuff^ers  and  the  basons  and  the  spoons 
and  the  censers  of  pure  gold,  and  hinges  of  pure  gold  for  all  the  doors 
of  the  Temple.  The  porch  that  was  in  the  front  of  the  house,  twenty 
cubits  broad  and  120  cubits  high,  was  overlaid  within  with  pure  gold; 
the  house  glistened  with  precious  stones ;  and  the  gold  (it  is  added)  was 
gold  of  Parvaim,  a  land  distant  of  course  and  unknown  to  us.  Six  hun- 
dred talents  of  gold  (about  ;^4, 320,000)  were  employed  in  overlaying 
the  Holy  of  Holies.  The  upper  chambers  were  also  of  gold ;  the  weight 
of  the  nails  was  fifty  shekels  of  gold."     Pusey. 

4,  and  tuor^]  Lit.,  do,  so  David  says  to  Solomon,  "be  strong  and 
be  alert,  and  do,"  r  Chron.  xxviii.  20.  The  use  of  this  word,  "to  do," 
absolutely,  is  frequent  in  Hebrew,  often  of  Almighty  God  as  the  agent, 
the  context  defining  what  is  done.  See  Psalm  xxii.  3 1  j  Ezra  x.  4 ; 
Isaiah  xliv.  23;  Amos  iii.  6. 

5.  According  to  the  7t'ord]  The  words  "according  to"  are  wanting  in 
the  Hebrew,  but  are  properly  supplied  in  A.  V.  and  R.  V.     It  has  been 


v6.J  HAGGAI,    11.  35 

So  my  spirit  remaineth  among  you  :  fear  ye  not. 
For  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ;  Yet  once,  it  is  a  little 
while, 

proposed  to  regard  the  last  clause  of  ver.  4  as  parenthetical,  and  make  the 
beginning  of  this  verse  grammatically  dependent  on  the  word  "do"  in 
ver.  4.  It  would  then  read :  "Be  strong  and  do  (for  I  am  with  you,  saith 
the  Lord  of  Hosts)  the  word  that  I  covenanted  with  you,"  «S:c.  But 
such  a  construction  is  harsh  and  the  meaning  ehcited  unsatisfactory. 
The  first  clause  of  ver.  5  is  thrown  out  in  the  abrupt  forcible  style  of 
Haggai,  and  gives  the  ground  both  of  the  foregoing  and  of  the  following 
assurance.  The  ancient  covenant  with  their  fathers  is  as  it  were  called 
up  before  them  as  a  witness  to  the  truth  of  the  present  promises :  "  I  am 
with  you  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts — {'see,'  'remember,'  or  'there 
stands')  the  word  which  I  covenanted  with  you  when  ye  came  out 
of  Egypt ! — and  my  spirit  remaineth  among  you :  fear  ye  not."  The 
student  of  the  Greek  Testament  will  be  reminded  of  a  somewhat  similar 
consti-uction  in  St  Peter's  address  to  Cornelius  and  his  company,  {tov 
Xoyop,  K.T.X.  Acts  X.  36). 

so  fiiy  spirit  reniainetli\  Or,  and  my  spirit  abode,  R.  V.  Comp.  Is. 
Ixiii.  1 1 ;  Zech.  iv.  6. 

6—9.  The  Prophecy  Itself. 
In  accordance  with  the  ancient  covenant,  as  a  fresh  manifestation  of 
its  perpetual  virtue  and  undying  life  (for  "the  gifts  and  calling  of  God 
are  without  repentance,"  Rom.  xi.  29),  God  will  yet  again  interfere  on 
behalf  of  His  Church  and  people.  And  this  interference  shall  be  on  a 
scale  of  grandeur  surpassing  even  the  solemn  pomp  of  Mount  Sinai,  and 
shall  result  in  a  world-wide  fame  and  accumulated  glory  to  the  Temple, 
such  as  in  the  palmiest  days  of  old  it  had  never  known. 

6.  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts']  The  frequent  recurrence  of  this  expression, 
which  is  found  here  four  times  in  as  many  verses,  is  a  marked  feature 
of  the  prophecies  of  Haggai  and  of  Malachi,  and  of  some  sections  of 
that  of  Zechariah.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  an  appeal  to  the  power 
and  resources  of  Almighty  God,  either  as  here  to  awaken  the  confidence, 
or  as  elsewhere  to  subdue  the  contumacy  of  the  Jews.  The  expression 
is  properly  elliptical  for  "Jehovah  (the  God)  of  hosts."  See  Appendix, 
note  A. 

yet  once,  it  is  a  little  while]  It  has  been  proposed  to  render  this : 
"Vet  one  (a)  little  while,  and  I  will  shake,"  &c.  Luther  has,  Es  isl 
noch  ein  Kleines  dahin,  and  Calvin,  Adhuc  unum  modicum  hoc.  Simi- 
larly Maurer  and  Hengstenberg.  But  grammatical  considerations  are 
in  favour  of  the  A.  V.  and  R.  V. 

yet  once]  or,  once  again.  "By  the  word  jj/^/  he  looks  back  to  the  first 
great  shaking  of  the  moral  world,  when  God's  revelation  by  Moses  and 
to  His  people  broke  upon  the  darkness  of  the  pagan  world,  to  be  a 
monument  against  heathen  error  till  Christ  should  come ;  once  looks  on 
and  conveys  that  God  would  again  shake  the  world,  but  once  only, 
under  the  one  dispensation  of  the  Gospel,  which  should  endure  to  the 
end."     Pusey. 


36  HAGGAI,   II.  [v.  6. 

And  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and 
the  sea,  and  tlie  dry  land; 

a  little  while]  The  explanation  which  interprets  this  to  mean  little 
in  the  sight  of  God,  with  whom  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day,  is 
forced  and  unsatisfactory.  "The  prophet,"  as  Hengstenberg  points  out 
{Christol.  iii.  p.  270,  Clark's  Translation),  "lays  stress  upon  the  brevity 
of  the  time  in  this  case,  for  the  purpose  of  administering  consolation. 
But  only  what  is  short  in  human  estimation  would  be  fitted  to  accom- 
plish this."  Nor  is  it  better  to  say  that  the  517  years  which  were  to 
elapse  to  the  birth  of  Christ  were  a  little  while  "in  respect  to  the 
time  which  had  elapsed  from  the  fall  of  Adam,  upon  which 
God  promised  the  Saviour  Christ,"  or  "in  respect  to  the  Christian 
law,  which  has  now  lasted  above  1800  years,  and  the  time  of  the  end 
does  not  seem  yet  nigh."  Pusey.  500  years  is  not  a  little  while  in 
comparison  of  any  known  epoch  of  human  history.  The  true  explana- 
tion would  seem  to  be  that  it  is  not  the  actual  birth  of  Christ,  but  the 
preparation  forthat  eventin  the  "shaking  of  all  nations, "(ver.  7)  to  which 
the  little  while  refers.  The  whole  grand  future,  embracing  not  only  the 
first  but  the  second  coming  of  Christ  and  the  final  consummation  of  all 
things,  is  indeed  included  in  the  prophecy.  But  it  was  the  beginning  of 
the  great  drama,  not  its  last  act,  that  was  then  closely  at  hand.  That 
beginning  was  the  then  immediate  object  of  the  Church's  hope;  in  that 
she  was  to  welcome  the  promise  and  the  presage  of  all  that  should 
follow.  Time  alone  would  unfold  the  plot.  In  prophetic  prospect 
coming  events  were  confused  and  blended,  just  as  in  our  Lord's  great 
prophecy  were  the  circumstances  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  ol 
the  end  of  the  world.  But  the  beginning  was  near  at  hand.  "This 
shaking  commenced  immediately.  The  axe  was  already  laid  at  the  root 
of  the  Persian  empire,  whose  subsequent  and  visible  fall  was  but  the 
manifestation  of  a  far  earlier  one,  which  had  been  hidden  from  view." 
(Hengstenberg).  Our  Lord's  use  of  a  similar  expression  when  He  says 
to  His  disciples,  "A  little  while  and  ye  shall  not  see  me,  and  again  a 
little  while  and  ye  shall  see  me  "  (St  John  xvi.  17),  may  serve  to  illustrate 
its  significance  here.  On  His  lips  the  "little  while"  had  a  three-fold 
reference;  first  to  the  few  days  before  they  should  see  Him  again  in  His 
risen  body;  next  to  the  few  weeks  before  He  would  come  to  them  in 
the  Pentecostal  gift  of  His  Spirit;  lastly  to  the  interval,  which  in  the 
retrospect  will  seem  "a  little  while,"  before  His  second  personal  advent. 

/  7vill  shake  the  heavens,  &c.]  That  political  convulsions  are  here 
predicted  is  clear  from  the  clause  in  ver.  7,  "I  will  shake  all  na- 
tions ;  ■"'  as  well  as  from  the  passage,  ch.  ii.  21,  22,  which  clearly  refers 
back  to  this  prediction,  and  explains  the  shaking  of  the  heaven  and  the 
earth  by  the  words,  "I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  kingdoms,  and 
I  will  destroy  the  strength  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen,"  etc.  ver.  22. 
But  there  is  no  reason  to  exclude  physical  convulsions  also.  In  the 
earlier  revelation  of  God  on  Mount  Sinai,  to  which,  as  we  have  seen, 
tliere  is  an  allusion  here,  they  bore  a  prominent  part.  And  when,  as  the 
inspired  writer  to  the  Hebrews  teaches  us,  this  prophecy  shall  receive 
il5  final  accomplishmeTnt  in  the  "removing  of  those  things  that  are 


V.  7.]  HAGGAI,    If.  2,7 

And  I  will  shake  all  nations,  and  the  desire  of  all  nations  7 

shall  come  : 
And  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory,  saith  the  Lord  of 

hosts. 

shaken  as  of  things  that  are  made,  that  those  things  which  cannot  be 
shaken  may  remain,"  the  whole  material  frame  of  the  universe  will  be 
convulsed.     Hebrews  xii.  27,  with  1  Peter  iii.  10 — 12. 

7.  I  will  shake  all  nations]  "There  was  a  general  shaking  upon 
earth  before  our  Lord  came.  Empires  rose  and  fell.  The  Persian  fell 
before  Alexander's  ;  Alexander's  world-empire  was  ended  by  his  sudden 
death  in  youth  ;  of  his  four  successors  two  only  continued,  and  they, 
too,  fell  before  the  Romans  ;  then  were  the  Roman  civil  wars,  until 
under  Augustus,  the  temple  of  Janus  was  shut."  Pusey.  The  second 
and  third  of  Daniel's  four  great  kingdoms,  the  Medo-Persian  and  the 
Grseco-Macedonian,  and  (if  with  some  we  identify  it  with  the  successors 
of  Alexander  in  Syria  and  Egypt)  the  fourth  kingdom  also,  were  to  pass 
away  before  our  Lord  appeared.     Daniel  ii.  36 — 4.5. 

the  desire  of  all  nations  shall  come]  Setting  aside  various  other  ren- 
derings of  these  words  which  have  little  to  recommend  them — e.g.  "I 
will  shake  all  nations,  and  they  (all  nations)  shall  come  with  the  desire 
(the  desirable  things)  of  all  nations  (in  their  hands  as  offerings);"  or, 
"they  shall  come  to  the  desire  of  all  nations;"  or  yet  again,  "the 
choicest  of  nations,  nobilissimi  omnium  populortim,  shall  come," — and 
adhering  to  the  rendering  of  the  A.  V.,  we  have  two  principal  interpre- 
tations to  choose  between.  There  is  the  view  that  Christ  Himself  is 
here  spoken  of  as  "the  Desire  of  all  nations"  {et  veniet  desideratus 
gentibiis,  Vulgate),  i.e.  He  for  Whom  all  nations  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously yearn,  in  Whom  alone  all  the  longings  of  the  human  heart  find 
satisfaction.  Very  beautiful,  as  well  as  very  Christian,  is  the  idea  thus 
conveyed  :  Christ,  "//;<?  longed-for  of  the  nations  before  He  came,  by 
that  mute  longing  of  need  for  that  which  it  wants  as  the  parched  ground 
thirsteth  for  the  rain."  Archbishop  Trench  has  worked  it  out  in  some 
particulars  in  a  course  of  Hulsean  lectures  under  the  title,  "  Christ,  the 
Desire  of  all  nations,  or  the  unconscious  prophesyings  of  heathendom." 
But  interesting  as  is  this  view,  and  strong  the  temptation  to  maintain  it 
at  any  cost,  there  are  objections  to  it  which  cannot  satisfactorily  be 
overcome.  The  word  "desire"  is  in  the  singular  number,  the  verb 
"  shall  come  "  is  in  the  plural.  It  is  literally  "  the  desire  of  all  nations 
they  shall  come."  To  the  difficulty  of  understanding  this  of  a  person 
it  does  not  seem  a  sufficient  answer,  to  describe  it  as  "the  delicacy  of 
the  phrase,  whereby  manifoldness  is  combined  in  unity,  the  object  of 
desire  containing  in  itself  many  objects  of  desire  ;  "  as  "a  great  heathen 
master  of  language  said  to  his  wife,  'fare  you  well,  my  longings,'  i.e. 
she  who  manifoldly  met  the  longings  of  his  heart,  and  had  in  herself 
manifold  gifts  to  content  them^"  (Pusey).     Still  more  difficult  is  it  to 

'  It  has  recently  been  pointed  out  by  a  writer  in  the  Gtiardian  newspaper,  that 
the  words  here  quoted  by  Dr  Pusey,  "Valete,  rnea  desideria,  valete,"  do  not 
refer  to  his  wife  Terentia  alone,  but  to  his  wife,  son  and  daughter,  to  all  three  of 


38  HAGGAI,  II.  [w.  8,9. 

8  The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord 

of  hosts. 

9  The  glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater  than  of  the 

former,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  : 

make  this  view  harmonise  with  the  context.  The  following  verse  is, 
The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  It  is 
forced  and  unnatural  to  make  these  words  mean,  "  I  have  no  need  of 
gold  or  silver.  The  whole  wealth  of  the  world  is  mine.  I  could  adorn 
this  house  with  sil  ver  and  gold  if  1  would ;  but  such  things  are  worth- 
less in  my  sight.  I  will  fill  it  with  divine  and  spiritual  glory  instead." 
Comp.  Ps.  1.  TO — 12. 

We  are  led,  therefore,  to  adopt  another  view,  which  has  been  ac- 
cepted by  some  ancient  and  most  modern  commentators.  According 
to  it  the  passage  may  be  paraphrased  as  follows:  "I  will  shake  all 
nations,  and  the  desire  of  all  nations  (the  object  of  desire,  that  which 
each  nation  holds  most  desirable,  its  best  and  chiefest  treasure,  'the 
desirable  things,'  R.  V.)  shall  come  (the  plural  verb  denoting^ the  mani- 
foldness  and  variety  of  the  gifts);  and  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory, 
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine, 
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  However  distributed,  and  by  whomsoever 
possessed,  the  treasures  of  the  whole  world  are  still  in  my  hand,  and  I 
can  dispose  and  bestow  them  at  my  will.  Doubt  not,  therefore,  my 
promise  that  they  shall  be  poured  forth  as  willing  offerings  to  beautify 
and  adorn  my  house."  Thus  understood,  the  prophecy  agrees  sub- 
stantially with  many  other  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament.  Thus 
Isaiah  writes,  "The  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  converted  unto  thee, 
the  forces  (i.e. '  resources'  or  '  wealth :'  it  is  as  here  a  singular  noun  with 
a  plural  verb)  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  unto  thee : "  and  he  adds  in 
almost  verbal  accordance  with  this  prophecy  of  Haggai,  "they  shall 
bring  gold  and  incense,"  and  "I  will  glorify  the  house  of  my  glory," 
Isaiah  Ix.  5 — 7,  11,  13,  17.  See  also  Ixi.  6.  Nor  is  the  Messianic  refer- 
ence of  the  prophecy  excluded  or  obscured  by  this  interpretation.  He 
who  satisfies  the  desire  of  all  nations  will  call  forth  and  receive  the 
willing  offering  to  Himself  of  all  they  hold  most  desirable,  in  grateful 
acknowledgment  of  the  satisfaction  they  find  in  Him.  It  was  because 
the  babe  of  Bethlehem  was  the  desire  of  the  Eastern  sages  that  they 
first  fell  down  and  worshipped  Him,  and  then  opened  their  treasures 
and  presented  unto  Him  gold  and  frankincense  and  myrrh.  Reaching 
on  as  we  have  sren  to  the  consummation  of  all  things,  the  prophecy 
includes  all  Christian  gifts  and  offerings  to  the  temple  of  God,  ma- 
terial or  spiritual,  and  will  find  its  full  accomplishment  in  that  city  of 
which  it  is  written,  "the  kings  and  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  bring 
their  glory  and  honour  into  it."  Rev.  xxi.  24,  26.  (See  a  letter  on  the 
interpretation  of  this  passage  by  the  late  Bp.  Thirlwall,  Essays,  Ap- 
pendix, p.  467.) 

9.      The  glory  of  this  latter  house,  Sic.']     Rather,  the  latter  glory  of 

whom  the  Epistle  is  addressed.  A  glance  at  the  Epistle  (xiv.  2)  will  suffice  to  shew 
that  this  is  the  case,  and  that  consequently  they  have  no  bearing  upon  the  passage 
under  consideration. 


V.  la]  HAGGAI,    II.  39 

And  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the  Lord  of 

hosts. 
In  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  months  in  the  lo 

this  house  shall  be  greater  than  the  former  (as  in  R.V.) ;  the  Temple, 
whether  as  built  by  Solomon  or  now  rebuilt,  being  regarded  as  one  and 
the  same  house,  the  one  only  house  of  God.     See  ver.  3. 

The  glory  here  promised  is  first  and  most  obviously  material  glory, 
the  desirable  things,  the  precious  gifts  of  all  nations.  But  it  includes 
the  spiritual  glory,  without  which  in  the  sight  of  God  material  splen- 
dour is  worthless  and  unacceptable.  Christ  Himself,  present  bodily 
in  the  temple  on  Mount  Sion  during  His  life  on  earth,  present  spiri- 
tually in  His  Church  now,  present  in  the  holy  city,  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem, of  which  He  is  the  Temple  (Rev.  xxi.  22),  calling  forth  the 
spiritual  worship  and  devotion,  and  as  the  legitimate  and  necessary 
expression  of  that,  the  wealth  and  treasure  of  all  nations,  is  the  glory 
here  predicted.  But  all  this  is  rather  implied,  to  be  discerned  by  the 
Church  in  the  growing  light  of  its  fulfilment,  than  expressed,  to  be  un- 
derstood by  those  to  whom  the  prophecy  was  first  delivered. 

10—19.     The  Third  Prophecy. 

By  a  reference  to  the  ceremonial  law,  as  officially  interpreted  by  the 
priests  in  answer  to  questions  addressed  to  them,  Haggai  again  im- 
presses upon  the  people  the  truth,  that  the  dearth  and  distress  from 
which  they  had  hitherto  suffered  was  the  consequence  of  their  national 
sin  in  neglecting  to  rebuild  the  temple,  and  again  promises  that  now 
that  they  had  put  away  that  sin,  and  were  honestly  giving  themselves 
to  the  work  of  restoration,  the  blessing  of  God  should  rest  upon  them. 
The  sanctifying  influence  of  flesh,  which  by  being  offered  to  God  in 
sacrifice  had  become  holy,  could  only  extend,  so  the  priests  on  the 
authority  of  the  law  declared,  to  that  with  which  it  came  into  first  and 
immediate  contact.  Beyond  that  limit  its  efficacy  did  not  reach.  The 
thing  touched  by  it  was  itself  made  holy,  but  did  not  become  in  its 
turn  a  vehicle  of  holiness  to  anything  beyond.  Not  so,  however,  was  it 
with  that  which  by  contact  with  ceremonial  uncleanness  had  become 
polluted.  That  which  by  touching  a  corpse  had  contracted  defilement 
was  not  only  unclean  itself,  but  propagated  uncleanness,  and  conveyed  it 
to  everything  with  which  it  came  in  contact.  So  was  it  with  the  Jewish 
nation  in  the  sight  of  God,  as  represented  by  the  returned  captives. 
They  might  argue  indeed  that  they  had  rebuilt  the  altar  of  Jehovah  on 
their  first  return.  But  that  good  act,  if  it  stood  alone,  even  had  there 
been  no  subsequent  disobedience  to  vitiate  it,  would  only,  like  the  holy 
flesh  making  holy  the  garment  in  which  it  was  wrapped,  have  extended 
its  influence  a  little  way.  The  a4tar  would  have  sanctified  the  gift 
which  was  offered  upon  it.  On  the  other  hand  the  sin  of  the  people  in 
neglecting  to  rebuild  the  temple,  like  the  touch  of  the  corpse,  not  only 
contaminated  themselves,  but  brought  moral  pollution  and  consequent 
blight  and  disaster  upon  all  the  works  of  their  hands. 

10.     the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  month']     This  was  in 


40 


HAGGAI,  II.  Ivv. 


second  year  of  Darius,   came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by 

11  Haggai  the  prophet,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ; 

12  Ask  now  the  priests  concerning  the  law,  saying.  If  one  bear 
holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his  garment,  and  with  his  skirt  do 
touch  bread,  or  pottage,  or  wine,  or  oil,  or  any  meat,  shall 

13  it  be  holy?  And  the  priests  answered  and  said.  No.  Then 
said  Haggai,  If  one  that  is  unclean  by  a  ^ead  body  touch 
any  of  these,  shall  it  be  unclean  ?    And  the  priests  answered 

November  or  December.  The  people  had  now  for  three  months 
(i.  14,  15)  been  actively  engaged  in  the  v^^ork  of  restoration.  Two 
months  had  elapsed  (it.  i)  since  they  were  encouraged,  under  the 
depression  caused  by  the  comparative  meanness  of  the  second  temple, 
by  a  prophecy  of  the  surpassing  glory  which  should  accrue  to  it.  Their 
constancy  in  the  work  is  now  further  rewarded,  by  a  renewed  promise  of 
the  removal  of  the  blight  and  famine  which  their  neglect  had  caused , , 
and  of  the  full  return  of  plenty  and  prosperity. 

11.  Ask  now  the  priests  concerning  the  lawl  Lit.,  ask  of  the  priests 
law,  or  tlie  law.  The  construction  is  a  double  accusative  after  the 
verb  ask.  (Comp.  Is.  xlv.  11.)  The  Avord  law  may  be  used  here  and 
in  Malachi  ii.  7,  without  the  article,  in  the  sense  of  "instruction,"  or 
"direction."  Such  "law"  or  instruction  would,  however,  always  be 
derived  from  ^Hhe  law"  of  God  by  Moses,  of  which  the  priests  were 
the  authorised  interpreters.     Lev.  x.  11 ;  Deut.  xvii.  8 — 13,  xxxiii.  10. 

12.  If  one  bear]  Lit.  Lo  !  one  bears.  "See,  there  is  a  man  bear- 
ing— what  will  happen?"  An  emphatic  Oriental  way  of  saying,  "sup- 
pose, put  the  case,  that  one  bears."  So  in  Jeremiah  iii.  i  we  have, 
"  Lo !  a  man  puts  away  his  wife."  And  in  2  Chron.  vii.  13,  where  "if" 
occurs  three  times  in  A.V.  the  Hebrew  has  "lo"  the  first  and  second 
time,  and  "if"  the  third  time. 

holy  jiesJi\  i.e.  flesh  which  has  been  offered  in  sacrifice  to  God. 
Comp.  Jer.  xi.  15. 

the  skiri\  Lit.  the  wing.  So  vr^pv^,  irTepvyiov  are  used  for  the 
skirts  or  flaps  of  a  cloak  or  dress. 

meati  i.e.  food,  or  eatables.     LXX.  ^pQixa. 

the  priests  answered  and  said,  No]  In  Lev.  vi.  27  we  read  of 
the  sin-offering,  "Whatsoever  shall  touch  the  flesh  thereof  shall  be 
holy."  The  garment  therefore  in  which  the  flesh  was  carried  would  be 
holy,  but  the  holiness  would  not  extend,  so  the  priests  ruled  it,  to  any- 
thing which  the  garment  touched. 

13.  unclean  by  a  dead  body]  Lit.  unclean  by  a  person.  The  full 
phrase,  "a  dead  person,  or  body,"  occurs  Lev.  xxi.  11;  Num.  vi.  6; 
but  the  word  "dead"  is  often  left  to  be  understood  as  here  and  Lev. 
xxi.  I,  xxii.  4.  The  law  of  ceremonial  uncleanness  as  attaching  to 
death  (under  which  there  lay,  no  doubt,  the  moral  idea  that  death 
polluted  because  it  was  the  offspring  and  the  wages  of  sin)  is  found  in 
Num.  xix.  II — 22. 

s/iall  it  betinclcanl]     as  clearly  laid  down  in  Num.  xix.  22.     Com- 


V.  14.1  HAGGAI,    II.  41 

and  said,  It  shall  be  unclean.     Then  answered  Haggai,  and  ■ 
said, 

So  is  this  people,  and  so  is  this  nation  before  me,  saith 
the  Lord  ; 

And  so  is  every  work  of  their  hands ; 

And  that  which  they  ofter  there  is  unclean. 

pare,  for  the  moral  •counterpart,  James  ii.  10,  where  Dean  Plumptre 
observes:  "This  seems  at  first  of  the  nature  of  an  ethical  paradox, 
but  practically  it  states  a  deep  moral  truth.  If  we  wilfully  transgress 
one  commandment  we  shew  that  in  principle  we  sit  loose  to  all.  It 
is  but  accident,  or  fear,  or  the  absence  of  temptation,  that  prevents 
our  transgressing  them  also.  Actual  transgression  in  one  case  in- 
volves potential  transgression  in  all."  Canib.  Bible  for  Schools^ 
St  James,  p.  68. 

14.  This  verse  contains  the  application  to  the  present  case  of  the 
Jews  of  the  principles  brought  out  by  the  foregoing  questions.  The 
second  principle,  as  to  the  transmission  of  uncleanness,  is  first  applied 
in  the  former  clauses  of  the  verse,  while  the  first  principle,  as  to  the 
non-transmission  of  holiness,  is  referred  to  in  the  last  clause.  "So," 
resembling  the  case  just  described,  "  is  this  people  and  this  nation,  be- 
fore Me,  saith  the  Lord."  It  is  polluted  in  itself,  like  the  man  who  is 
"unclean  by  a  dead  body,"  through  its  disobedience,  and  neglect  of  my 
Temple.  "And  so,"  defiled  through  this  act  of  disobedience,  just  as 
whatever  he  touches  is  defiled  by  the  touch  of  him  who  has  had  contact 
with  the  dead,  "is  every  work  of  their  hands."  The  blight  that  rests 
on  all  their  industry  and  labour,  that  mars  and  withers  every  work  in 
which  their  hands  are  engaged,  is  the  punishment  and  the  proof  of  the 
moral  uncleanness,  which  residing  in  themselves  extends  to  all  that 
they  put  their  hand  to.  "And  that  which  they  offer  there,"  (on  the 
altar  which  they  have  built  to  My  Name  in  Jerusalem,)  so  far  from 
sanctifying  their  works,  as  they  vainly  think,  is  itself  through  the  per- 
vading influence  of  their  sin  "unclean."  The  sanctifying  influence  of 
the  altar  on  which  they  pride  themselves  would  at  best  but  have 
reached  a  little  way.  The  prevailing  power  of  their  disobedience  viti- 
ates all  such  sanctifying  influence,  and  renders  the  very  offerings  on  the 
altar  itself  unclean. 

this  people  and  so  is  this  nation]  See  ch.  i.  2.  The  addition  of  the  word 
"nation,"  the  word  commonly  used  for  the  heathen  nations  of  the 
world,  as  distinguished  from  the  Jews  who  were  the  "  people"  of  God, 
has  been  thought  to  be  a  further  sign  of  contempt  and  rejection.  But 
the  two  words  are  used  together  of  Israel  in  Zeph.  ii.  9,  where  no  such 
meaning  can  be  intended. 

there'\     On  the  altar  built  on  their  return  from  Babylon.     Ezra  iii.  3. 

15 — 19.  The  great  moral  lesson  of  the  Book  is  again  inculcated. 
Let  them  fix  their  attention  on  the  long  period  of  their  neglect  of  God 
and  His  House ;  the  eighteen  years  that  had  intervened,  between  the 
laying  of  the  foundation  of  the  Temple  and  the  24th  day  of  the  ninth 


HAGGAI,    II.  [vv.  15,  i6. 


And  now,  I  pray  you,  consider  from  this  day  and  upward, 
From  before  a  stone  was  laid  upon  a  stone  in  the  temple 

of  the  Lord  : 
Since  those  days  were,  when  one  came  to  a  heap  of  twenty 

measures,  there  were  but  ten  : 
When  one  came  to  the  pressfat  for  to  draw  out  fifty  vessels 

out  of  ^^  press,  there  were  but  twenty. 

month  of  the  second  year  of  Darius,  on  which  this  prophecy  was  uttered. 
Let  them  lay  to  heart  the  fact  that  it  had  been  throughout  a  period  of 
distress  and  dearth,  of  gloom  and  darkness.  Let  them  note  the  bright 
contrast,  the  plenty  and  prosperity,  which  their  return  to  God  and  care 
for  His  House  and  worship  should  immediately  introduce.  •'  From  this 
day  will  I  bless  you,  saith  the  Lord. " 

The  period  which  they  are  to  consider  is  first  described  in  ver.  15 — 17, 
and  then  again,  with  a  view  to  impress  the  lesson,  in  ver.  18,  19,  the 
limits  of  time  Iseing  now  more  clearly  defined,  and  the  promise  of 
blessing  introduced. 

15.  The  A.V.  is  a  little  obscure.  The  verse  may  be  rendered  more 
clearly  thus : 

And  now  consider,  I  pray  you,  from  this  day  (the  24th  day  of  the 
ninth  month,  on  which  the  prophet  was  speaking,  ver.  10 — 18)  and 
upward  (that  is  backward),  from  (the  time  when)  not  yet  stone  was 
laid  upon  stone  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord. 

This  is  the  other  limit  from  which  the  reckoning  is  to  be  made,  the 
time  when  the  foimdation  of  the  temple  had  been  laid,  but  no  further 
progress  in  building  had  taken  place,  no  "  stone  upon  stone"  had  been 
added.  It  answers  to  the  clause  in  ver.  iS,  "from  the  time  when  the 
temple  of  the  Lord  was  founded." 

16.  Since  those  days  were'X  Lit.  from  their  being.  We  may  supply 
either  "days"  as  in  A.V.  or  "things,"  since  those  things  were,  i.e. 
that  reprehensible  conduct  of  yours.  The  R.  V.  renders  happily, 
through  all  that  time. 

when  one  caine\     Lit.  to  come,  i.e.  there  was  coming,  or  one  came. 

twenty  measures']  The  word  "measures"  is  not  in  the  Hebrew. 
The  LXX.  supply  seahs,  {a&To),  the  Vulg.  bushels  (modiorum).  But 
the  word  is  perhaps  purposely  omitted,  because  the  prophet  wishes  to 
lay  stress  on  the  proportion.  The  heap,  which  when  it  was  laid  in  the 
bam  contained  twenty  m.easures  (what  measures  they  were  it  matters 
not  for  his  present  purpose),  was  found  by  the  owner  when  he  came  to 
use  it  to  have  dwindled  down  to  ten.  The  words  as  they  stand  are 
very  forcible,  "To  come  to  a  heap  of  twenty  and  there  were  ten." 

there  were]  The  introduction  of  the  verb  "were"  is  perhaps  intended 
to  be  emphatic:  q.  d.  "the  heap  was  expected  to  be  twenty,  it  was  (in 
real  existence)  ten."     And  so  again  lower  down  in  the  same  verse. 

pressfat]  i.e.  the  lower  vat  or  reservoir  into  which  the  must  squeezed 
out  from  the  grapes  in  the  press  or  upper  vat  flowed.  "From  the  scanty 
notices  contained  in  the  Bible,  we  gather  that  the  wine-presses  of  the 


.  17,  r8.]  HAGGAI,   II.  43 

I  smote  you  with  blasting  and  with  mildew  and  with  hail  17 

Jn  all  the  labours  of  your  hands ; 

Yet  ye  turned  not  to  me,  saith  the  Lord. 

Consider  now  from  this  day  and  upward,  x8 


Jews  consisted  of  two  receptacles  or  vats  placed  at  different  elevations, 
in  the  upper  one  of  which  the  grapes  were  trodden,  while  the  lower  one 
received  the  ex-pressed  juice.  The  two  vats  are  mentioned  together 
only  in  Joel  iii.  13: — *The  press  {gath)  is  full:  the  fats  {yekebim)  over- 
flow'— the  upper  vat  being  full  of  fruit,  the  lower  one  overflowing  with 

the  must The  two  vats  were  usually  dug  or  hewn  out  of  the  solid 

rock  (Is.  V.  2,  margin ;  Matt.  xxi.  33).  Ancient  wine-presses,  so  con- 
structed, are  still  to  be  seen  in  Palestine,  one  of  which  is  thus  described 
by  Robinson: — 'Advantage  had  been  taken  of  a  ledge  of  rock;  on  the 
upper  side  a  shallow  vat  had  been  dug  out,  eight  feet  square  and  fifteen 
inches  deep.  Two  feet  lower  down  another  smaller  vat  was  excavated, 
four  feet  square  by  three  feet  deep.  The  grapes  were  trodden  in  the 
shallow  upper  vat,  and  the  juice  drawn  off  by  a  hole  at  the  bottom 
(still  remaining)  into  the  lower  vat.*  B.  R.  III.  137,  603)."  Did.  of 
Bible,  Art.  Wine-press. 

ffty  vessels  out  of  the  press"]  Lit.  fifty  purah.  The  A.V.  supplies 
the  word  ^*  vessels'"  after  "fifty,"  just  as  it  does  ^^  measures''''  after 
"twenty,"  in  the  former  part  of  the  verse,  and  then  taking  the  word 
"  purah  "  to  mean  the  press  (as  it  does  in  Is.  Ixiii.  3,  the  only  other 
place  in  which  it  occurs),  again  supplies  "out  of"  before  it.  This 
preserves  the  parallelism  between  the  two  parts  of  the  verse.  Perhaps, 
however,  "purah"  may  here  mean  a  liquid  measure  (LXX.  /zerpTyrijs); 
possibly,  as  Keil  suggests,  "  the  measure  which  was  generally  obtained 
from  one  filling  of  the  wine-press  with  grapes;"  lit.  "fifty  wine- 
presses." The  earlier  copies  of  R.  V.  print  vessels  in  italics,  and  leave 
purah  untranslated.     The  mistake  however  has  now  been  corrected. 

17.  /  smote  you  with  blasting  and  with  mildew]  "Two  diseases  of 
the  corn  which  Moses  had  foretold  (Deut.  xxviii.  it.)  as  chastisements 
on  disobedience,  and  God's  infliction  of  which  Amos  had  spoken  of  in 
these  selfsame  words  (Amos  iv.  9).  Haggai  adds  the  hail  as  destructive 
of  the  vines  (Psalm  Ixxviii.  47)."     Pusey. 

labours]     Rather,  work.     R.  V. 

yet  ye  turned  not  to  me]  Lit.  yet  not  (no-sucli-tliing-as)  yourselves  to 
me.  The  word  "turning,"  or  a  similar  word,  maybe  supplied  from 
the  parallel  passage  in  Amos  iv.  9 :  "yet  there  was  no  turning  of  your- 
selves to  me."  The  negation  is  a  strong  one,  and  denies  any  single 
instance  of  such  turning. 

18.  from  this  day  and  upward]  The  Jews  are  again  exhorted  to  fix 
their  attention  upon  the  period  of  time  mentioned  in  ver.  15.  It  is  first 
described  as,  from  this  day  and  upward.,  or  backward.  Then  each 
limit  of  the  period  is  more  clearly  defined.  "This  day  "  is  "  the  four 
and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  month,"  on  which  this  prophecy  was 
uttered,   ver.    to.      The    "upward"  or    "backward"   extends   to  the 


44  HAGGAI,    II.  [v.  19. 

From  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  7nonth, 
Even  from  the  day  that  the  foundation  of  the  Lord's 

temple  was  laid,  consider  it. 
Is  the  seed  yet  in  the  barn  ? 
Yea,  as  yet  the  vine,  and  the  fig  tree,  and  the  pomegranate, 

and  the  olive  tree,  hath  not  brought  forth : 
From  this  day  will  I  bless  you. 

other  limit  from  which  the  reckoning  is  to  be  made,  viz.  "the  day  that 
the  foundation  of  the  Lord's  temple  was  laid,"  i.e.  the  day  when  the 
actual  foundation  was  completed  in  the  year  after  their  return  from 
Babylon.  This  is  made  clearer  in  R.  V.  by  the  substitution  of,  since 
the  day,  for  evenfj'om  the  day.  This  period  they  are  again  called  upon 
to  "consider,"  and  to  note  well  the  dark  cloud  of  adversity  that  brooded 
over  it. 

19.  Is  the  seed  yet  in  the  barn?]  i.e.  Is  it  any  longer  in  the  bam? 
Is  it  not  all  exhausted  and  used  up  ?  The  meagre  yield  of  the  blighted 
com  was  soon  consumed  and  the  granary  left  empty.  Some  have 
thought  that  by  "the  seed"  is  here  meant  what  would  be  required  to 
sow  the  land  for  another  year,  and  that .  the  dearth  and  distress  are 
heightened  by  the  fact  that  there  is  not  even  corn  enough  left  to  sow. 
But  as  the  word  is  frequently  used,  not  of  seed  corn,  but  of  produce 
(e.g.  I  Sam.  viii.  15;  Isaiah  xxiii.  3;  Job  xxxix.  12),  and  as  the  re- 
mainder of  the  verse  refers  to  produce,  it  is  better  taken  in  that  sense 
here. 

yea,  as  yet]  There  is  no  reason  to  depart  from  the  usual  meaning 
of  the  Hebrew  word  here  rendered  "as  yet,"  viz.  "unto,"  or  "as 
regards,"  "And  unto  or  as  regards  (extending  our  notice  from  the  corn 
to)  the  vine,  etc.  it  (i.  e.  each  one  of  these  trees)  hath  not  brought  forth 
(fmit)."  It  would  then  best  accord  with  the  English  idiom  to  leave 
the  word  untranslated,  as  in  R.  V.  The  rendering  of  A.  V.  is  however 
thought  by  some  to  be  supported  by  Job  i.  18  ;   i  Sam.  xiv.  19. 

from  this  day  will  I  bless  you]  It  might  be  asked,  why  not  from  the 
day  three  months  earlier  than  this  (ch.  i.  14,  15),  when  they  first  resumed 
the  building  of  the  temple  ?  It  has  been  suggested  in  explanation  that 
up  to  this  time,  though  they  had  indeed  begun  again  to  build,  they  had 
been  slack  and  remiss  in  their  efforts,  but  that  from  this  day,  instigated 
by  this  fresh  appeal  of  Haggai,  they  had  taken  a  new  departure  of  zeal 
and  earnestness,  and  that  consequently  from  this  day  the  blessing  was 
to  begin.  But  there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  this  was  so,  and  it  is 
therefore  better  to  suppose  that  up  to  this  day  the  effects  of  the  failure 
of  the  last  harvest  were  still  apparent,  and  no  outward  change  had  yet 
taken  place  in  their  prospects.  "He  would  then  say,  that  even  in 
these  last  months,  since  they  had  begun  the  work,  there  were  as  yet  no 
signs  for  the  better.  There  was  yet  no  seed  iti  the  barn,  the  harvest 
having  been  blighted,  and  the  fmit-trees  stripped  by  the  hail  before 
the  close  of  the  sixth  month,  when  they  resumed  the  work.  Yet  though 
there  were  as  yet  no  signs  of  change,  no  earnest  that  the  promise  should 


V.  20— 23-]  HAGGAI,    IT.  45 

And  again  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Haggai  in  so 
the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month,  saying,  Speak  to  21 
Zembbabel,  governor  of  Judah,  saying, 

I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the  earth ; 

And  I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  kingdoms,  22 

And  I  will  destroy  the  strength  of  the  kingdoms  of  the 
heathen ; 

And  I  will  overthrow  the  chariots,  and  those  that  ride  in 
them ; 

And  the  horses  and  their  riders  shall  come  down, 

Every  one  by  the  sword  of  his  brother. 

In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  23 


be  fulfilled,  God  pledges  His  word,  fro7n  this  day  I  will  bless  yott.^^ 
Pusey. 

Ch.  II.  20 — 23.    The  Fourth  Prophecy. 

In  a  short,  final  prophecy,  uttered  on  the  same  day  as  that  which 
preceded  it,  Haggai  addresses  Zerubbabel  as  the  Ruler  and  Represent- 
ative of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  Predecessor  and  Type  of  the  true 
King  of  the  Jews.  The  former  prediction  (ver.  6,  7)  of  the  shaking 
of  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  overthrow  of  mighty  nations  is  repeated. 
But  to  Zerubbal^el,  and  in  him  to  the  nation  which  he  represented, 
a  gracious  promise  of  safety  and  distinction  is  vouchsafed. 

20.     again]  the  second  time.     R.  V. 

22.  /  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  kingdoms,  &c.]  After  repeating, 
in  ver.  21,  the  prediction  of  ver.  6,  "I  will  shake  the  heavens  and 
the  earth,"  the  prophet  expands  in  this  verse  the  prediction  of  ver.  7, 
"  I  will  shake  all  nations."  This  is  made  more  clear  in  R.  V.  by  keep- 
ing the  same  English  word  nations  {heathen,  A.  V.)  for  the  same  Heb. 
word  in  this  verse  and  verse  7 .  The  terms  here  employed  are  too  wide 
to  be  satisfied  by  any  event  in  the  life  of  Zerubbabel :  "There  was  in 
Zerubbabel's  time  no  shaking  of  the  heaven  or  of  nations.  Darius  had 
indeed  to  put  down  an  unusual  number  of  rebellions  in  the  first  few 
years  after  his  accession ;  but,  although  he  magnified  himself  on  occa- 
sion of  their  suppression,  they  were  only  so  many  distinct  and  uncon- 
certed  revolts,  each  under  its  own  head.  All  were  far  away  in  the  dis- 
tant East.  The  Persian  empire,  spread  '  probably  over  2,000,000  square 
miles,  or  more  than  half  of  modern  Europe,'  was  not  threatened ;  no 
foreign  enemy  assailed  it ;  one  impostor  only  claimed  the  throne  of 
Darius.  This  would,  if  successful,  have  been,  like  his  own  accession, 
a  change  of  dynasty,  affecting  nothing  externally.  But  neither  were 
lasting,  some  were  very  trifling."  Pusey.  The  prophecy  reaches  forth 
to  the  more  distant  future,  and  still  awaits  its  full  accomplishment. 

shall  come  do^vn]    i.e.  be  brought  lo7v.     Comp.  Is.  xxxiv.  7. 


46  HAGGAI,   II.  [v.  23. 

Will  I  take  thee,  O  Zerubbabel,  my  servant,  the  son  of 

Shealtiel,  saith  the  Lord, 
And  will  make  thee  as  a  signet : 
For  I  have  chosen  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

23.  will  I  take  thee\  In  such  expressions  as  this  (comp.  Deut.  iv. 
20;  1  Kings  xiv.  21,  xxiii.  30)  the  word  "take"  simply  introduces  the 
following  action.  It  has  not  therefore  the  sense  which  some  have  here 
given  it,  "I  will  take  thee  into  my  care  and  protection." 

as  a  signet]  This  promise  is  referred  to  by  the  writer  of  the  Book 
Ecclesiasticus,  in  his  panegyric  of  the  "  famous  men  "  of  his  nation  : 
♦'  How  shall  we  magnify  Zorobabel  ?  even  he  was  as  a  signet  on  the 
right  hand,"  ch.  xlix.  11.  Among  the  Orientals  great  honour  and  im- 
portance attached  to  signets  or  seals.  They  were  often  "engraved 
stones  pierced  through  their  length  and  hung  by  a  string  or  chain  from 
the  arm  or  neck,  or  set  in  rings  for  the  finger"  (Song  of  Sol.  viii.  6; 
Jer.  xxii.  24).  "  The  custom  prevalent  among  the  Babylonians  of  carry- 
ing seals  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus  i.  195...  and  the  signet  ring  is 
noticed  as  an  ordinary  part  of  a  man's  equipment  in  the  case  of  Judah 
(Genesis  xxxviii.  18),  who  probably,  like  many  modern  Arabs,  wore  it 
suspended  by  a  string  (rendered  'bracelets'  in  E.  V.)  from  his  neck 
or  arm."     Diet,  of  Bible,  Art.  Seal. 

I  have  chosen  thee]  "With  these  words  the  Messianic  promise  made 
to  David  was  transferred  to  Zerubbabel  and  his  family  among  David's 
descendants,  and  would  be  fulfilled  in  his  person  in  just  the  same  way 
as  the  promise  given  to  David,  that  God  would  make  him  the  highest 
among  the  kings  of  the  earth  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  27).  The  fulfilment  culmi- 
nates in  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  David,  and  descendant  of  Zerubbabel 
(Matt.  i.  12;  Luke  iii.  27),  in  whom  Zerubbabel  was  made  the  signet- 
ring  of  Jehovah.  Jesus  Christ  has  raised  up  the  kingdom  of  His  father 
David  again,  and  of  His  kingdom  there  will  be  no  end  (Luke  i.  32,  33). 
Even  though  it  may  appear  oppressed  and  deeply  humiliated  for  the 
time  by  the  power  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen,  it  will  never  be 
crushed  and  destroyed,  but  will  break  in  pieces  all  these  kingdoms,  and 
destroy  them,  and  vidll  itself  endure  for  ever  (Dan.  ii.  44;  Heb.  xii.  28; 
I  Cor.  XV.  24)."     Keil  ad loc.  Clark's  Theological  Library. 


INTRODUCTION   TO    ZECHARIAH. 
CHAPTER   I. 

THE   PROPHET   ZECHARIAH. 

Of  the  Prophet  Zechariah,  as  of  his  colleague  and  contem- 
porary Haggai,  very  little  is  known.  He  tells  us  himself  that 
he  was  the  son  of  Berechiah  and  the  grandson  of  Iddo  (i.  i). 
And  though  in  the  Book  of  Ezra  he  is  called  "the  son  of  Iddo" 
(v.  I,  vi.  14),  the  simple  and  satisfactory  explanation  of  the 
apparent  discrepancy  seems  to  be,  that  while  the  historian  uses 
the  word  "  son "  in  its  less  restricted  sense  of  descendant,  and 
passes  over  Berechiah,  who  never  became  the  head  of  the 
family,  dying  probably  early  and  without  distinction,  the  pro- 
phet himself  gives  us,  as  it  is  natural  he  should  do,  the  actual 
order  of  descent.  If  the  Iddo  thus  spoken  of  is  to  be  identified, 
as  with  much  probability  he  may  be,  with  the  person  of  that 
name  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Nehemiah,  we  have  this  ex- 
planation confirmed  by  the  fact,  that  while  Iddo  is  among  the 
"priests"  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  (xii.  4), 
"Zechariah  of  Iddo"  takes  his  place  amongst  "the  priests,  the 
chief  of  the  fathers,"  under  Joiakim,  the  son  of  Joshua,  in  the 
next  generation  (ver.  12,  16).  If  this  view  be  adopted,  it  follows 
that  Zechariah  was  a  priest  as  well  as  a  prophet,  and  that,  since  "^ 
his  grandfather  was  still  living  when  the  first  caravan  returned 
under  Zerubbabel,  he  must  have  been  a  comparatively  young 
man  when  sixteen  years  later  he  entered  upon  his  prophetical 
office.  That  he  was  born  in  Babylon  is  highly  probable. 
Tradition  associates  him  with  Haggai  in  his  connection  with 


48  INTRODUCTION. 


the  Psalter  and  the  Liturgical  worship  of  the  restored  Temple,  and 
also  with  the  Great  Synagogue,  of  which  he  is  said  to  have  been 
a  member  (see  Introduction  to  Haggai,  Chapter  II.).  "The 
patristic  notices  of  the  Prophet  are  worth  nothing.  According 
to  these,  he  exercised  his  prophetic  office  in  Chaldaea,  and 
wrought  many  miracles  there ;  returned  to  Jerusalem  at  an 
advanced  age,  where  he  discharged  the  duties  of  the  priesthood, 
and  where  he  died,  and  was  buried  by  the  side  of  Haggai." 
Diet,  of  Bible,  Art.  Zechariah.  See  also  Zechariah  and  hts 
Prophecies,  Introd,  xvii.,  xviii.,  Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 

The  scanty  information  thus  obtained  accords  with  what 
little  may  be  gathered,  respecting  the  prophet,  from  his  un- 
doubted writings.  His  birth  and  early  education  in  Babylon 
account  for  his  frequent  use,  in  common  with  Ezekiel  and 
Daniel,  of  visions  and  allegories ;  the  Divine  Spirit  adapting 
Himself,  as  ever,  to  the  capacity  and  training  of  the  human  in- 
strument, in  imparting  His  revelations.  His  visions  themselves 
have  been  thought  to  be  "tinged  with  Persian  imagery,"  "as 
might  be  expected  from  one  whose  prime  had  been  spent  under 
Persian  rule."  "  He  saw  the  earth,  as  it  now  presented  itself  to 
the  enlarged  vision  of  those  who  had  listened  to  the  Wise  Men 
of  Chaldaea,  its  four  corners  growing  into  the  four  horns  that 
toss  and  gore  the  lesser  powers  of  the  world  (i.  i8,  19) ;  the 
celestial  messengers  riding  on  horses,  red  or  dappled,  hurrying 
through  the  myrtle-groves  that  then  clothed  the  base  of  Olivet, 
or  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  driving  in  chariots, 
each  with  its  coloured  horses,  to  and  fro,  across  the  Persian 
empire  (i.  8 — 11,  vi.  i — 8),  as  in  the  vast  machinery  of  the  post6 
for  which  it  was  celebrated  (Herod,  vili.  98  ;  Esther  iii.  13,  15), 
and  bringing  back  the  tidings  of  war  and  peace."  Jewish 
Church,  iii.  102.  It  has  also  been  pointed  out  {Diet  of  Bible\ 
that  "  the  vision  of  the  woman  in  the  ephah  is  oriental  in  cha- 
racter," and  that  Zechariah  "is  the  only  one  of  the  prophets  who 
speaks  of  Satan." 


INTRODUCTION. 


49 


CHAPTER   II. 

UNITY  OF  THE   BOOK  OF  ZECHARTAH. 

Much  difference  of  opinion  exists  amongst  scholars  upon  the 
question,  whether  the  Book  of  Zechariah,  as  it  now  stands  in 
our  Bibles,  is  the  work  of  a  single  author,  or  contains  the 
writings  of  two,  or  even  of  three,  different  persons,  which  have 
been  brought  together  under  one  title.  The  first  eight  chapters 
are  universally  ascribed  to  Zechariah.  The  remaining  six  are 
of  disputed  authorship.  In  dealing  with  this  and  similar  Biblical 
questions,  it  is  important  clearly  to  understand  that  they  are 
purely  critical  in  their  character,  and  must  be  discussed  and 
decided  on  grounds  of  scholarship  alone.  It  is  a  mistake  to 
suppose  that  the  higher  question  of  the  inspiration  and  authority 
of  the  Bible  is  involved  in  them.  It  may  be  quite  true  that 
those  who  are  agreed  on  this  latter  question  will  often  be  found 
on  the  same  side,  in  the  controversies  to  which  those  former 
questions  give  rise.  But  this  is  by  no  means  exclusively  the 
case  ;  and  the  interests  of  truth  and  of  scholarship,  which  is  the 
handmaid  of  truth,  alike  require  that  such  higher  considerations 
should  not  be  unnecessarily  introduced  into  investigations,  which 
are  properly  independent  of  them.  It  is  unworthy  of  a  scholar 
and  alien  from  the  calm,  candid  spirit  of  a  seeker  after  truth,  to 
taunt  an  opponent  with  the  name  of  "orthodox,"  or  "rationalist," 
instead  of  weighing  his  reasons,  and  accepting  or  refuting  the  ar- 
guments which  he  adduces.  A  moment's  reflection  will  suffice  to 
convince  us  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  acknowledge  unreservedly, 
as  an  integral  part  of  God's  Word  written,  and  to  reverence  ac- 
cordingly, a  Book  of  which  the  authorship  is  uncertain  or  un- 
known. Of  the  Book  of  Job,  of  many  of  the  Psalms,  of  the 
larger  part  of  the  historical  Books  of  the  Old  Testament,  we  do 
not  know  the  authors.  The  authorship  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  will  probably  be  a  moot  question  as  long  as  the  world 
lasts.     Yet  all  these  writings  hold  their  place  in  the  Canon  of 

ZECHARIAH  a 


INTRODUCTION. 


Scripture,  on  equal  terms  with  those  of  which  the  authorship 
is  undoubted. 

Approaching,  then,  in  this  spirit  the  particular  question  before 
us  of  the  unity  of  the  Book  of  Zechariah,  we  are  met  at  the  out- 
set by  the  fact,  that  its  unity  does  not  appear  ever  to  have  been 
doubted,  either  by  Jews  or  Christians,  till  our  own  countryman, 
Joseph  Mede,  avowed  his  disbelief  in  it  some  two  centuries 
ago.  The  first  of  the  considerations,  by  which  Mede  and  the 
earlier  critics  who  followed  him  were  led  to  their  conclusion, 
was  the  quotation  by  St  Matthew  (xxvii.  9)  of  the  well-known 
passage  in  our  present  Book  of  Zechariah  (xi.  12,  13),  as  a 
prophecy  not  of  his  but  of  Jeremiah's.  Regarding  the  Evangelist's 
reference  as  an  authoritative  correction  of  the  received  tradition 
on  the  subject,  they  set  themselves,  with  this  supposed  clue  in 
their  hands,  to  study  the  later  chapters  of  this  Book,  and  found 
in  their  contents  much  that  seemed  to  them  to  warrant  the  belief 
that  they  belonged  to  Jeremiah  or  his  times.  "There  is  no 
scripture,"  writes  Mede,  "  saith  they  are  Zachary's  ;  but  there  is 
scripture  saith  they  are  Jeremy's,  as  this  of  the  Evangelist." 
But  whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  argument  from  the  quota- 
tion in  the  New  Testament  (and  few  modern  scholars  will  be 
found  to  attach  much  importance  to  it),  the  fact  remains,  that 
Zechariah's  authorship  of  the  whole  Book  which  bears  his  name 
was  for  so  long  a  time  unquestioned.  And  it  is  a  fact,  which 
without  over-estimating  it,  has  a  right  to  have  its  due  weight  in 
the  controversy.  How  came  these  writings  to  be  collected  into 
a  single  volume  and  inscribed  with  a  single  name  ?  Ob  siniili- 
tudinem  argumenti^  Mede  would  reply.  But  the  reply  is  inad- 
missible, because  it  is  the  dissimilarity  of  the  contents  of  the 
former  and  latter  portions,  which  is  most  strongly  urged  by 
those  who  impugn  the  common  authorship  of  the  whole.  You 
cannot  first  say,  "  These  documents  are  so  unlike  in  style,  in 
subject-matter  and  in  the  historical  stand-point  of  their  writers, 
that  though  they  bear  a  common  name  we  are  unable  to  accept 
them  as  the  work  of  the  same  author,"  and  then  go  on  to  argue, 
"  Nevertheless,  it  is  easy  to  account  for  their  being  attributed  to 
the  same  author,  because  of  the  great  similarity  between  them  " 


INTRODUCTION. 


Except  as  regards  style  (for  criticism  of  style  was  and  is  a  thing 
unknown  to  Jews),  whatever  dissimilarity  exists  must  have  been 
felt,  at  least  as  forcibly,  by  the  compilers  of  the  Canon  as  it  is  by 
ourselves.  And  if  the  tradition  be  trustworthy,  that  Zechariah 
himself  took  part  in  its  compilation,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive 
how  he  could  have  allowed  the  utterances  of  one  or  more  earher 
and  anonymous  prophets  to  have  been  added,  without  note  or 
comment,  as  an  appendix  to  his  own.  To  say  that  some  of  the 
Psalms  are  anonymous,  and  yet  are  included  in  the  Psalter, 
which  as  a  whole  is  ascribed  to  David,  is  to  urge  a  wholly 
irrelevant  argument.  It  is  one  thing  to  insert  in  a  collection 
of  lyric  poems  some  compositions  by  unknown  authors,  and 
then  to  inscribe  the  book  with  the  name  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished and  principal  author  of  the  collection.  It  is  quite 
another  thing  to  introduce  into  a  series  of  twelve  compositions, 
each  bearing  its  author's  name,  one  or  two  documents,  of  greater 
bulk  than  some  of  the  twelve,  and  to  introduce  them,  neither  in 
their  chronological  place,  nor  at  the  end  of  the  series,  as  inde- 
pendent books,  similar  in  character,  though  of  unknown  or  un- 
declared authorship  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  the  series,  and  as  an 
avowed  continuation  of  one  of  the  compositions,  from  which, 
however,  they  stand  apart  both  in  date  and  contents. 

Nor  is  this  argument  for  the  unity  of  the  book  weakened,  as 
it  might  materially  be,  by  a  general  agreement  amongst  those 
who  controvert  it,  as  to  the  date  and  authorship  of  the  last  six 
chapters.  If  even  a  majority  of  competent  critics,  who  espouse 
that  side  in  the  controversy,  were  at  one  as  to  the  approximate 
time  in  which  the  later  Zechariah  or  Zechariahs  hved  and  pro- 
phesied, there  would  be  considerable  weight  in  their  conclusion. 
But  so  far  from  this  being  the  case,  not  only  do  they  differ  among 
themselves,  as  to  the  single  or  dual  authorship  of  these  chapters, 
but  in  assigning  a  date  to  them,  their  criticism,  as  Dr  Pusey  ex- 
presses it,  "  reels  to  and  fro  in  a  period  of  nearly  500  years,  from 
the  earliest  of  the  prophets  to  a  period  a  century  after  Malachi, 
and  that  on  historical  and  philological  grounds."  "One  must 
admit,"  writes  one  of  them,  "that  the  division  of  opinions  as  to 
the  real  author  of  this  section  and  his  time,  as  also  the  attempt  to 


4-2 


52  INTRODUCTION. 


iqjpropriate  single  oracles  of  this  portion  to  dijfferent  periods, 
leave  the  result  of  criticism  simply  negative;  whereas,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  view  itself,  since  it  is  not  carried  through  exe- 
getically,  lacks  the  completion  of  its  proof.  It  is  not  till  criticism 
becomes  positive^  and  evidences  its  truth  in  the  explanation  of 
details,  that  it  attains  its  completion ;  which  is  not,  in  truth, 
always  possible"  (Hitzig,  quoted  by  Pusey). 

The  principal  arguments,  which  have  been  adduced  on  both 
sides  of  the  controversy,  will  be  found  fully  and  impartially 
stated  in  the  Article  on  Zechariah,  in  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible,  and  reference  is  made  to  many  of  them  in  the  notes  of 
this  Commentary.  The  following  brief  summary  of  them  may 
be  sufficient  here. 

A.  The  objections  against  the  unity  of  the  Book  may  be 
classified,  generally,  under  two  heads  : 

1.  Differences  in  style  and  other  features  of  composition, 
pointing  to  difference  of  authorship. 

2.  Historical  and  chronological  references,  indicating  a  dif- 
ference in  the  time  at  which  the  writers  who  make  them  lived. 

I.  (i)  It  is  impossible  to  read  through  the  Book  of  Zechariah, 
as  it  now  stands  in  our  Bibles,  without  being  struck  by  the  great 
change  of  style,  which  meets  us  when  we  pass  from  the  earlier 
(chaps,  i. — viii.)  to  the  later  (chaps,  ix. — xiv.)  portion  of  the  Book. 
The  earlier  is  for  the  most  part  prosaic  and  unimpassioned  in 
style  and  diction.     The  later  is  full  of  poetic  fire  and  fervour. 

(2)  Special  phrases  and  idioms,  such  as  come  to  be  favourite 
forms  of  expression  with  a  writer,  and  peculiarities  which  serve 
to  identify  him,  are  found  in  each  of  the  two  divisions  of  the 
Book;  but  in  neither  case  do  those  of  one  division  occur  in  the 
other.  For  example,  the  phrases,  "  The  word  of  Jehovah  came 
unto  me"  (i.  7;  iv.  8;  vi.  9;  vii.  i,  4,  8;  viii.  i,  18),  "Thus  saith 
Jehovah  of  hosts"  (i.  4,  16,  17;  vi.  12;  viii.  2,  4,  6,  7,  9,  14,  19, 
20,  23),  "  I  lifted  up  my  eyes  and  saw"  (i.  18 ;  ii.  i ;  v.  i ;  vi.  i), 
are  found  repeatedly  in  the  first  division,  but  never  in  the 
second ;  while  the  common  phrase  of  the  second  division,  "  In 
that  day"  (ix.  16;  xi.  11 ;  xii.  3,  4,  6,  8,  9,  11;  xiii.  i,  2,  4;  xiv. 
4,  6,  8,  9,  13,  20,  21),  is  altogether  wanting  in  the  first. 


INTRODUCTION.  53 

(3)  Similar  differences  are  the  mention  of  his  own  name 
and  the  names  of  other  contemporary  persons  by  the  writer  of 
the  first  division  only  (i.  i,  7;  iii.  i ;  iv.  6;  vi.  10,  14;  vii.  i,  2,  8); 
his  notes  of  time  (i.  1,7;  vii.  i),  as  against  the  formula  of  intro- 
duction prefixed  to  separate  sections  of  the  second  division 
(ix.  i;  xii.  i);  and  the  disappearance  of  "Satan"  (iii.  i,  2),  and 
of  the  "  seven  eyes  "  (iii.  9 ;  iv.  lo),  from  the  later  portion  of  the 
Book. 

(4)  The  figures  and  imagery  of  the  two  divisions  have 
nothing  in  common.  The  visions  of  the  first  division,  with 
their  mystic  significance,  needing  an  angel  to  interpret  them, 
give  place  in  the  second  division  to  the  allegory  or  dramatic 
representation  of  the  wise  and  foolish  shepherds.  And  in  that 
division  only  the  images  of  the  shepherd  and  the  sheep,  and  of 
Jehovah  as  the  Captain  of  His  people,  with  the  warlike  accom- 
paniments of  charger  and  trumpet  and  weapons,  are  introduced. 

2.  The  objections  to  the  unity  of  the  Book  on  historical  and 
chronological  grounds  are  drawn  from  references  and  allusions, 
both  to  the  Jews  themselves  and  to  other  nations,  which  are  held 
to  argue  that  a  different  date  must  be  assigned  to  their  authors. 

(i)  As  regards  the  Jews  themselves,  it  is  urged  that  the 
general  scope  of  the  two  divisions  of  the  prophecy  proves  con- 
clusively, that  they  belong  to  different  eras  in  their  national 
history.  For,  while  the  former  division  is  directed  to  encou- 
raging them  to  rebuild  their  temple  and  city,  by  promises  of 
immediate  success  and  future  prosperity,  the  latter,  if  it  had 
appeared  at  the  same  time,  would  have  been  eminently  calcu- 
lated to  produce  a  precisely  opposite  effect.  Its  tendency  would 
have  been  to  discourage  and  deter  them,  inasmuch  as  it  abounds 
in  vivid  pictures  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  future 
miseries  of  the  nation. 

Other  considerations,  drawn  from  the  internal  history  of  the 
Jews,  which  seem  to  favour  an  earlier  date  for  the  closing  pro- 
phecies of  the  Book,  are  the  reference  to  the  two  Kingdoms  as 
still  standing  (ix.  10,  13 ;  x.  6),  while  at  the  same  time  the  union 
between  them  is  at  an  end  (xi.  14),  which,  when  regard  is  had  to 
the  threat  against  Damascus  (ix.  i),  might  seem  to  point  to  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


coalition  between  Israel  and  Damascus  against  Judah  (2  Kings 
xvi.  5,  6) ;  and  again  the  state  of  anarchy  predicted  (xi.  4 — 8), 
which  finds  its  parallel  in  the  period  immediately  following  the 
death  of  Jeroboam  II.  (2  Kings  xv.  8 — 15). 

(2)  As  regards  other  nations,  it  is  alleged  that  when  the 
later  chapters  were  penned,  "the  pride  of  Assyria  was  at  its 
height  (chaps,  x.,  xi.),  and  the  Jews  had  already  suffered  from 
it;"  and  also  that  "Egypt  and  Assyria  are  both  formidable 
powers"  (x.  9 — 11). 

The  conclusion  arrived  at  is,  that  whether  we  have  respect 
to  the  Jews  themselves  or  to  foreign  nations,  the  internal 
evidence  of  the  later  chapters  is  in  favour  of  their  being  the 
work  of  a  contemporary  of  Isaiah. 

The  same,  or  similar,  arguments  are  employed  by  those  who 
would  assign  different  dates  and  authors,  not  only  to  the  first 
and  second  divisions,  but  to  the  two  sections  of  the  second  di- 
vision of  this  Book. 

B.  All  these  objections  have  been  met,  by  what  have  been 
deemed  by  those  who  produced  them  satisfactory  answers. 

I.  In  contravention  of  the  objections  from  style  it  has  been 
alleged : 

(i)  That  the  difference  in  the  two  divisions  of  the  Book  is 
not  greater  than  may  be  reasonably  accounted  for  by  the  differ- 
ence of  subject-matter  in  the  two.  They  differ  "  as  the  style  of 
the  narrator  differs  from  the  style  of  the  orator."  And  this 
judgment  has  been  fortified  by  observing  that  when  prophecy 
proper,  as  distinct  from  narration  or  description,  enters  into  the 
first  division  of  the  Book,  the  style  at  once  approaches  more 
nearly  to  that  of  the  second  division  (e.g.  ii.  4 — 13). 

(2)  The  same  consideration  of  subject-matter,  together  with 
the  fact  that  the  prophet  is  dealing,  in  the  earlier  part  of  his 
Book,  directly  and  immediately  with  his  contemporaries,  and 
with  the  actual  condition  at  the  time  of  the  city  and  nation,  is 
thought  sufficiently  to  explain  his  introduction  into  that  part 
only  of  dates  and  names,  and  his  use  of  phrases,  which  in  the 
later  part  give  place  to  others  more  suited  to  his  altered  theme 
and  circumstances. 


INTRODUCTION.  55 

(3)  At  the  same  time,  it  is  pointed  out  that  there  are  pe- 
cuHar  forms  of  expression,  which  are  found  in  both  divisions  of 
the  Book,  as  for  example  vii.  14  with  ix.  8,  and  iii.  4  with  xiii.  2, 
where  the  Hebrew  forms  amount  to  what  may  be  regarded  as 
characteristic  phrases. 

2.  To  the  objections  connected  with  points  of  history  and 
chronology  counter- arguments  have  been  opposed  by  the  advo- 
cates of  the  integrity  of  the  Book. 

(i)  The  re-building  of  the  Temple,  it  has  been  said,  which 
was  the  immediate  object  of  Zechariah's  earlier  prophecies,  had 
long  been  accomplished  when  the  prophetic  Spirit  moved  him  to 
his  later  utterances.  There  was  no  risk,  therefore,  of  his  dis- 
couraging his  countrymen  from  doing  that  which  was  done 
already.  Not  now  to  urge  them  to  the  finished  task  of  former 
years,  but  to  unfold  before  them  and  the  Church  of  God,  for 
instruction,  for  warning  and  for  comfort,  the  future  to  which  the 
accomplishment  of  that  task  would  lead,  was  the  prophet  called. 
Nor  are  there  wanting,  as  it  has  further  been  pointed  out,  pre- 
dictions of  the  same  future,  of  the  same  Messianic  times  and 
events,  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  Book.  Its  two  parts  are 
not  conflicting  and  contradictory,  but  successive  and  comple- 
mentary oracles. 

So  again,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  reference  to  the  whole 
nation,  as  restored  to  their  own  land  and  to  the  favour  of  Al- 
mighty God,  is  common  to  both  divisions  of  the  Book ;  while 
the  identification  of  the  picture  in  xi.  8  with  the  period  after  the 
death  of  Jeroboam  II.  has  rightly  been  held  to  be  exceedingly 
precarious. 

(2)  As  regards  historical  allusions  to  other  nations  and  the 
conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  them,  it  has  in  like  manner  been 
shewn,  that  the  historical  position  of  the  writer  of  the  last  six 
chapters  of  Zechariah  is  not  inconsistent,  so  far  as  internal  evi- 
dence is  concerned,  with  a  post-exile  date.  Indeed  that  is  the 
date  which,  as  some  have  thought,  may  on  that  evidence  be 
most  satisfactorily  assigned  to  him. 

It  has  further  been  urged  as  a  weighty  argument  on  this  side 
of  the  controversy,  that  if  some  things  in  these  later  chapters 


56  INTRODUCTION. 


seem  to  favour  an  earlier  date  for  their  author,  his  evident 
familiarity  with  the  writings  of  the  prophets  of  the  period  of  the 
exile  is  in  itself  a  sufficient  and  conclusive  proof,  that  he  did  not 
live  before  them. 

It  may  be  said  then  generally,  from  this  brief  summary,  that 
if  the  objections  against  the  unity  of  the  Book  are  neither  few  nor 
frivolous,  the  counter-considerations  by  which  they  have  been 
met  are  of  at  least  equal  weight.  If,  for  example,  the  difference 
of  style  between  the  first  eight  and  the  remaining  six  chapters 
of  the  Book,  which  is  certainly  remarkable,  and  which  no  com- 
petent scholar  will  venture  to  deny,  has  been  urged  in  proof  of 
the  different  authorship  of  the  two  portions,  the  fact,  which  is  no 
less  incontrovertible,  that  the  style  of  the  same  writer  is  wont  to 
vary  greatly  with  his  subject,  may  be  insisted  upon  with  much 
reason  as  a  countervailing  argument.  A  writer  whose  narrative 
style  was  comparatively  tame  and  prosaic,  in  relating  visions 
which  he  had  seen,  or  events  in  which  he  had  taken  part,  might 
well  be  expected,  without  losing  his  identity,  to  rise  to  far  higher 
conceptions  and  more  eloquent  utterances  when  a  distant  and 
glorious  future  was  unfolded  before  him.  Examples  of  such  a 
change  of  style  are  common  both  in  sacred  and  secular  litera- 
ture. If,  again,  the  historical  allusions  of  the  later  chapters  are 
thought  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  date,  which  the  writer  of  the 
earlier  chapters  assigns  to  his  own  prophecies,  it  must  not  be 
forgotten,  that  a  reasonable  explanation  of  those  allusions  can 
be  given  on  the  supposition  of  the  unity  of  the  Book,  and  that 
the  whole  force  of  this  argument  has,  in  one  noteworthy  instance 
at  least,  been  neutralized  by  a  single  weighty  consideration  on 
the  opposite  side.  "  The  manifest  acquaintance  on  the  part  of 
the  writer  of  Zech.  ix. — xiv.,  with  so  many  of  the  later  prophets 
seemed  so  convincing  to  De  Wette  that,  after  having  in  the  first 
three  editions  of  his  Introduction  declared  for  two  authors,  he 
found  himself  compelled  to  change  his  mind,  and  to  admit  that 
the  later  chapters  must  belong  to  the  age  of  Zechariah,  and 
might  have  been  written  by  Zechariah  himself."     Diet,  of  Bible. 

The  conclusion,  theii^j^;.,^t  which  it  seems  not  unreasonable 
to  arrive  is,  that  while  vve^old  ourselves  open  to  give  candid 


INTRODUCTION.  57 

consideration  to  any  fresh  arguments  that  may  be  adduced,  or 
evidence  that  may  be  offered,  we  have  not  as  yet  sufficient 
ground  for  relinquishing  the  ancient  and  tenable  belief,  that  the 
Book  of  Zechariah  is  not  only  an  integral  part  of  the  Word  of 
God  and  of  the  inspired  prophecy  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  is 
also  throughout  the  work  of  the  author  whose  name  it  bears. 


CHAPTER    III. 

ANALYSIS   OF  THE   BOOK. 

The  Book  of  Zechariah  falls,  as  has  been  said,  into  two  prin- 
cipal parts,  very  dissimilar  in  style  and  in  the  form  and  vehicle 
chosen  to  convey  their  teaching ;  yet  really  combining  in  one 
harmonious  whole,  and  containing  a  continuous  revelation  of 
the  purposes  of  God  and  the  future  of  His  Church. 

It  will  be  sufficient  to  give  here  a  general  outline  of  the  con- 
tents of  the  Book.  A  more  detailed  analysis  of  the  several  parts 
will  be  found  at  the  commencement  of  each  section  in  the  fol- 
lowing Commentary. 

Part  I.  chaps,  i. — viii. 

I.     Introduction  to  the  whole  Book,  i.  i — 6,  consisting  of 

1.  Title  and  author's  name,  ver.  i ; 

2.  Call  to  repentance,  as  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the 
bright  future  afterwards  unfolded,  ver.  2 — 6. 

II.  A  series  of  eight  visions ^  with  accompanying  interpreta- 
tions, seen  by  the  pr  phet  on  the  same  night,  which,  like  dis- 
solving views,  melt  each  into  another,  and  so  gradually  open  up 
the  whole  prospect,  i.  7 — vi.  8. 

I.  A  band  of  horsemen  in  a  myrtle  grove  first  meet  the 
prophet's  view.  They  have  traversed  the  whole  earth,  and  report 
a  state  of  universal  repose,  without  a  sign  of  that  shaking  of  the 
nations  which  is  to  bring  deliverance  to  Israel.  But  the  dis, 
couraging  sentence  of  the  vision,  wl^jciyjfifcs  but  the  echo  of  the 
despondency  of  the  prophet  and  his*  people,  as  they  looked  on 


58  INTRODUCTION. 


the  actual  condition  of  all  around  them,  is  immediately  reversed 
by  a  promise,  addressed  to  faith,  that  all  adverse  appearances 
notwithstanding,  the  Temple  shall  be  completed  and  Jerusalem 
and  the  cities  of  Judah  be  rebuilt  and  prosper,  i.  7 — 17. 

2.  The  promise,  of  which  the  terms  are  so  far  merely 
general,  is  now  expanded  more  particularly.  Four  great  horns, 
representing  the  world  powers  that  had  oppressed  the  Jews, 
appear  on  the  scene,  and  are  presently  destroyed  by  four  arti- 
ficers, who  come  forth  against  them,  i.  18 — 21. 

3.  The  way  being  thus  cleared  by  the  destruction  of  the  ene- 
mies of  Judah,  the  next  vision  reveals  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem. 
A  man  with  a  measuring  line  comes  upon  the  stage.  But,  as  he 
is  about  to  mark  out  the  ground-plan  of  the  city,  he  is  stopped 
by  an  intimation  that  the  Jerusalem  of  the  future  shall  neither 
admit  of  walls,  because  of  its  overflowing  population,  nor  require 
them,  inasmuch  as  Jehovah  Himself  will  be  a  wall  of  fire  about 
her.  In  jubilant  strain,  as  the  vision  swells  far  beyond  the 
immediate  future,  her  children  are  called  upon  to  return,  and 
the  nations  of  the  earth  are  invited  to  join  themselves  to  Jehovah 
in  Zion,  ii.  i — 13. 

4.  In  the  next  two  visions,  the  restoration  of  the  Temple 
and  its  service  is  depicted.  Joshua,  tlie  High-Priest,  is  seen  in 
the  first  of  them,  clothed  in  the  sordid  garments  of  a  criminal 
and  arraigned  at  the  judgment-seat  by  a  stern  accuser.  But  he 
is  acquitted  by  the  interposition  of  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  and, 
arrayed  in  the  goodly  raiment  of  innocence,  receives  his  com- 
mission to  minister  before  God.  His  office,  he  is  assured,  is 
typical  of  a  greater  Priest  to  come,  and,  as  a  pledge  of  His 
coming  and  a  preparation  for  it.  Almighty  God  makes  the  com- 
pletion of  the  Temple  His  own  peculiar  care,  iii.  i — 10. 

5.  The  golden  candlestick  of  the  Tabernacle  is  next  seen, 
its  seven  lamps  fed  by  two  olive  trees,  one  on  either  side  of  it, 
denoting  mysterious  agencies,  by  which  the  grace  of  God  is 
conveyed  to  His  Church.  On  that  grace  the  vision  encourages 
Zerubbabel  to  rely,  for  by  virtue  of  it  he  shall  see  his  work  ac- 
complished, and  the  golden  lamps  shedding  forth  their  light 
in  the  completed  Temple,  iv.  i— 14. 


INTRODUCTION.  59 

6.  Passing  now  to  the  cleansing  and  sanctifying  of  the 
people  and  the  land,  the  prophetic  scenery  first  assumes  the 
form  of  a  vast  expanded  roll,  flying  rapidly  through  the  air  to 
denote  the  swiftness  with  which  its  mission  shall  be  executed. 
It  bears  inscribed  on  it  the  curse,  which  shall  descend  upon  the 
house  of  the  sinner,  and  consume  it  together  with  its  owner, 
V.  1—4. 

7.  To  this  vision  succeeds  another,  in  which  a  woman,  in 
whom  the  wickedness  of  the  land  is  personified,  is  pressed  down 
into  a  great  ephah,  or  measure,  and  carried,  fast  shut  up  in  it, 
by  swift  ministers,  into  the  land  of  Babylon,  the  proper  home 
of  all  iniquity,  v.  5 — 11. 

8.  The  visions  close  with  a  remarkable  scene,  in  which  four 
chariots  issue  from  the  valley  between  two  brazen  mountains, 
and  speed  forth,  as  the  messengers  of  Jehovah's  wrath,  till  His 
judgments  are  executed  upon  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  His 
anger  is  pacified,  vi.  i — 8. 

Resting,  thus,  on  the  then  present  circumstances  of  the  Jews, 
as  its  historical  basis,  the  prophecy  of  these  visions  deals  chiefly 
with  the  immediate  future — the  re-building  of  the  Temple  and 
city,  the  re-peophng  of  the  land,  the  restoration  of  the  Temple- 
service,  the  purifying  of  the  nation  ;  while  at  the  same  time,  both 
by  the  pregnant  terms  of  its  predictions  in  all  these  particulars, 
and  by  the  vistas  which  from  time  to  time  it  opens  up  in  its 
course,  it  reaches  forth  unmistakably  towards  a  more  distant  goal. 

III.  A  symbolical  action,  vi.  9 — 15,  which  forms  the  next 
section  of  this  part  of  the  Book,  and  which,  though  without  date, 
may  be  supposed  to  have  followed  closely  upon  the  visions,  is  a 
fitting  sequel  to  them  in  its  prophetical  character.  A  deputation 
had  arrived  at  Jerusalem,  bringing  offerings  towards  the  com- 
pletion of  the  Temple,  from  Jews  who  still  remained  in  the  land 
of  their  captivity.  Out  of  the  silver  and  gold  which  they  brought 
the  prophet  is  directed  to  make  crowns,  and  first  place  them  on 
the  head  of  Joshua,  the  High-priest,  and  then  hang  them  up  for 
a  memorial  in  the  Temple.  By  this  significant  action  it  was 
intimated  that  the  Temple  then  in  progress,  in  which  those 
crowns  were  hung,  should  be  finished  and  adorned  in  the  coming 


6o  INTRODUCTION. 

time  with  gifts  and  offerings ;  but  also  that  another  Priest  should 
in  due  course  arise,  who  should  be  a  King  as  well,  and  who  in 
a  truer  and  higher  sense  should  build  the  Temple  of  Jehovah. 

IV.  Answer  as  to  observance  of  Fasts ^  chaps,  vii.,  viii.  After 
a  silence  of  some  two  years,  the  prophet  again  speaks,  and  his 
prediction  moves  on  substantially  the  same  lines  as  those  which 
have  gone  before,  though  it  is  cast  in  a  different  mould.  The 
question  had  not  unnaturally  been  agitated  among  the  returned 
captives,  whether  they  ought  still  to  observe  the  national  fasts, 
which  had  been  instituted  in  connection  with  the  leading  inci- 
dents in  the  capture  and  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  On  the  one 
hand,  it  seemed  that  the  restoration  already  commenced  put  an 
end  to  these  observances.  On  the  other  hand,  the  still  feeble 
condition  and  doubtful  fortunes  of  their  church  and  nation  might 
be  construed  into  a  call  to  continued  fasting  and  humiliation 
before  God.  In  the  dilemma  thus  created,  they  seek  and  obtain 
an  authoritative  decision  through  the  prophet.  "In  language 
worthy  of  his  position  and  his  office,  language  which  reminds  us 
of  one  of  the  most  striking  passages  of  his  great  predecessor 
(Is.  Iviii.  5 — 7),  he  lays  down  the  same  principle  that  God  loves 
mercy  rather  than  fasting,  and  truth  and  righteousness  rather 
than  sackcloth  and  a  sad  countenance.  If  they  had  perished, 
he  reminds  them  it  was  because  their  hearts  were  hard  while 
they  fasted ;  if  they  would  dwell  safely,  they  must  abstain  from 
fraud  and  violence  and  not  from  food  (vii.  4 — 14)."  Diet,  of 
Bible.  To  urge  them  to  this  he  draws  again,  in  chapter  viii., 
a  glowing  picture  of  Jerusalem,  the  habitation  of  Jehovah,  the 
city  of  truth  and  holiness,  old  men  venerable  with  age  moving 
along  its  streets,  children  making  its  thoroughfares  resound  with 
their  mirth  and  pastimes,  plenty  and  prosperity  crowning  their 
land.  Then  shall  all  fasts,  he  assures  them,  be  turned  into 
festivals,  and  all  nations  worship  the  God  of  Israel  and  esteem 
it  an  honour  to  be  associated  with  a  Jew. 

Part  II.,  chaps,  ix. — xiv. 

After  a  lapse,  it  may  be,  of  many  years  (for  there  is  no  date 
to  this  second  division  of  the  Book),  when,  perhaps,  the  active 


INTRODUCTION. 


work  of  a  long  life  was  done,  Zechariah  is  again  called  to 
prophesy.  The  event,  which  was  the  immediate  subject  of  his 
earlier  prophecies,  had  now  become  an  accomplished  fact.  The 
Temple  was  restored  and  its  worship  resumed.  "Moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost "  {(^epofievos  vivo  Ili/eu/iaroy  'Aytov),  he  soars  now 
into  loftier  regions  of  prophetic  inspiration,  and  in  two  "burdens 
of  the  word  of  the  Lord,"  depicts  in  glowing  language  and  vivid 
imagery  the  nearer  and  more  distant  future  as  they  expand 
before  him. 

I.     The  Fi?'st  Burden,  chaps,  ix. — xi. 

He,  who  had  been  foretold  in  the  earlier  prophecies  of  the 
Book  as  the  Branch  or  Shoot,  and  who  was  to  be  a  King  as 
well  as  a  Priest  (iii.  8;  vi.  12,  13),  is  the  central  figure  of  both 
sections  of  this  Burden. 

1.  The  first  section,  The  Coming  of  the  King,  chaps,  ix.,  x., 
describes  His  advent  as  King  to  Zion,  and  its  consequences. 
The  section  opens  with  a  prophecy  of  the  destruction  of  the 
immediately  surrounding  nations  by  Alexander,  and  the  pre- 
servation of  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  his  invasion,  ix.  i — 8.  Then 
to  Zion,  thus  and  for  this  very  end  preserved,  her  King  comes 
in  lowly  majesty,  to  inaugurate  a  peaceful  rule  over  her  children, 
united  again  into  one  people,  and  over  the  heathen  nations  of 
the  world  ;  to  set  free  the  captives  of  Israel,  overthrow  their 
enemies,  and  raise  them  to  the  height  of  honour  and  prosperity, 
9 — 17.  Pausing  for  a  moment,  to  remind  his  countrymen  that 
these  and  all  good  things  must  be  looked  for  from  the  God  of 
Israel,  and  not  from  the  false  gods  and  diviners,  their  recourse 
to  whom  had  been  the  cause  of  all  their  troubles,  x.  1,2,  the 
prophet  resumes  his  theme.  The  bad  rulers,  who  for  their  sins 
had  been  set  over  them,  shall  make  way  for  worthy  leaders  in 
every  department  of  the  state.  Victory  is  again  promised  them, 
and  the  scattered  ten  tribes,  they  are  assured,  shall  be  gathered 
from  all  parts  of  the  world  to  their  ancient  dwelling-place  and 
their  fathers'  God,  x.  3 — 12. 

2.  The  second  section  of  this  Burden,  The  Rejection  of  the 
Shepherd,  chap,  xi.,  foretells  the  treatment,  in  His  character  of 


62  INTRODUCTION. 


Shepherd,  of  the  King  whose  coming  and  its  results  the  first 
section  had  described.  The  order,  however,  of  the  former  section 
is  reversed.  This  section  opens  with  a  graphic  picture  of  the 
consequences  of  the  events  which  it  afterwards  records.  On 
the  stately  forests  of  Lebanon  and  the  giant  oaks  of  Bashan  the 
storm  of  wrath  descends,  and  visits  in  its  onward  course  the 
lowlands  of  Jordan  and  the  south,  xi.  i — 3.  It  has  come  to 
avenge  the  insulting  rejection  by  His  people  of  Jehovah's 
Shepherd,  whom  the  prophet  is  directed  to  personate.  He 
describes  his  assumption  of  the  typical  office,  his  efforts  to 
discharge  it  faithfully,  his  failure  and  consequent  resignation  of 
it  in  disgust,  and  the  contumely  which  his  demand  for  his  wages, 
in  token  of  his  complete  discharge  from  it,  brought  upon  him, 
xi.  4 — 14.  The  section  terminates  with  a  prediction  of  the  cruel 
and  disastrous  rule  of  a  foolish  shepherd,  whom  again  the  pro- 
phet personates,  who  shall  be  set  over  the  people  as  a  punish- 
ment for  their  rejection  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  but  who  himself 
in  turn  shall  be  miserably  destroyed,  xi.  15 — 17. 

II.     The  Second  Burden^  chaps,  xii. — xiv. 

This  Burden,  like  the  First,  has  two  sections,  both  of  them 
concerned  with  events  which  are  almost  exclusively  still  future. 

1.  The  first  section^  xii.  i — xiii.  6,  depicts  the  hostile  gather- 
ing of  all  nations  against  Jerusalem,  and  their  overthrow  by  the 
intervention  of  Jehovah,  and  by  the  prowess  of  His  people, 
strengthened  and  inspirited  by  Him,  xii.  i — 9.  The  deliverance 
thus  vouchsafed  to  them  shall  be  followed,  so  the  prophet  inti- 
mates, by  a  national  repentance  and  by  deep  and  bitter  sorrow 
and  humiliation,  on  account  of  their  past  ingratitude  and  injury 
to  God  their  great  Benefactor,  xii.  10 — 14.  And  this  their 
penitence  shall  result  in  purification  from  past  defilement,  and 
in  future  amendment  and  utter  abhorrence  and  putting  away  of 
evil,  xiii.  i — 6. 

2.  The  second  section^  xiii.  7 — xiv.  21,  recurring  to  an  earlier 
period  than  that  with  which  the  first  section  is  mainly  occupied, 
goes  beyond  it  at  its  close  into  a  more  distant  future,  and  reaches 
finally  the  times  of  the  end.  Its  starting  point  is  the  smiting 
of  Jehovah's  Shepherd,  whose  rejection  the  First  Burden  had 


INTRODUCTION.  63 


recorded.  A  few  pregnant  sentences,  involving  the  history  of 
ages,  suffice  to  describe  the  consequences  of  the  smiting — 
the  scattering  of  the  sheep,  the  destruction  of  most  of  them, 
the  severe  but  salutary  discipline  and  ultimate  restoration  of 
the  remainder,  xiii.  7 — 9.  Then  the  scene  suddenly  changes. 
Once  again  the  city,  which  in  the  fact  of  the  present  and  the 
assured  promise  of  the  future  had  filled  already  so  large  a  place 
in  the  prophet's  contemplation,  on  which  he  had  looked  with 
his  bodily  eyes,  a  shapeless  mass  of  ruins  ;  which  he  had 
seen  in  the  far-reaching  vision  of  an  inspired  seer,  now  be- 
leaguered by  hostile  forces,  and  now  peaceful  and  prosperous, 
safe  and  happy  in  the  protection  of  Jehovah,  rises  before  him. 
The  city  is  already  in  the  hands  of  its  captors.  They  are 
dividing  its  spoil  in  the  midst  of  its  streets.  Fierce  warriors, 
of  every  nation  under  heaven,  are  filling  it  with  slaughter 
and  rapine,  and  leading  forth  its  children  into  captivity.  But 
Jehovah  Himself  becomes,  as  in  the  days  of  old,  the  champion 
of  His  people.  He  appears  suddenly  on  the  scene  in  person, 
attended  by  His  holy  ones,  and  with  the  accompaniment  of 
great  physical  convulsions,  to  effect  their  deliverance.  The 
discomfiture  of  their  enemies  is  complete  and  final,  xiv.  i — 7. 
The  conformation  of  the  land  is  now  changed.  Its  rugged 
and  mountainous  character  ceases.  It  becomes  a  vast  plain, 
out  of  which  Jerusalem  rises  proudly  on  high  as  the  metro- 
polis of  the  country,  Jehovah  Himself  dwelling  in  her  as 
King,  xiv.  8 — 11.  Going  back  again  to  the  destruction  of  her 
enemies,  out  of  which  this  prosperity  had  arisen,  the  prophet 
depicts  the  terrible  plagues  by  which  they  shall  be  consumed, 
xiv.  12 — 15,  and  the  homage  which  the  survivors  shall  be  com- 
pelled under  heavy  penalties  to  pay,  Kiv.  16 — 19.  The  Book 
closes  with  a  brief  but  striking  description  of  the  holiness  which 
shall  prevail,  as  the  great  climax  of  all.  No  distinction  of 
secular  and  sacred  shall  any  more  exist.  All  things  shall  be 
alike  sacred.  The  instruments  of  human  pomp  and  pride,  the 
commonest  objects  of  daily  hfe,  shall  be  consecrated  to  the 
service  of  God.  Holiness  to  the  Lord  shall,  when  that  day 
comes,  be  inscribed  on  all,  xiv.  20,  21. 


"  Lo,  thus  the  hearts  of  all  righteous  in  the  Old  Testament  from 
Adam  unto  Christ,  even  3974  years,  have  stood  only  upon  Christ :  in 
Him  was  their  comfort,  upon  Him  they  trusted,  it  was  He  whom  they 
longed  for,  and  in  Christ  Jesu  were  they  saved.  Therefore  hath  our 
Christian  faith  endured  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  is,  and 
continueth  still  the  only  true,  old,  undoubted,  and  fast  grounded  faith." 

Bishop  Myles  Coverdale. 

"This  gift  of  expounding  and  interpreting  the  Scriptures  was,  in 
St  Paul's  time,  given  to  many  by  special  miracle,  without  study  :  so 
was  also,  by  like  miracle,  the  gift  to  speak  with  strange  tongues,  which 
they  had  never  learned.  But  now,  miracles  ceasing,  men  must  attain 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin  tongues,  &c.  by 
travail  and  study,  God  giving  the  increase.  So  must  men  also  attain  by 
like  means  to  the  gift  of  expounding  and  interpreting  the  Scriptures." 

Archbishop  Grindal. 


ZECHARIAH, 


IN  the  eighth  month,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  1 
the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Bere- 
chiah,  the  son  of  Iddo  the  prophet,  saying, 

Chap.  I.    1 — 6.     Introductory  call  to  Repentance. 
1,     The  Author  and  date  of  his  first  Prophecy. 

the  eighth  month,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius]  The  Jews  after 
the  Captivity  substituted  for  the  years  of  the  reigns  of  their  own  kings, 
by  which  they  had  been  accustomed  lo  date  their  history,  those  of  the 
foreign  kings  to  whom  they  were  subject.  But  they  retained  their  own 
months,  though  with  altered  names.  The  eighth  month  had  before  been 
called  Bui  (t  Kings  vi.  38).  No  name  is  given  to  it  in  the  Bible  after 
the  return,  but  we  learn  from  the  Talmud  and  from  Josephus  that  it 
was  called  Marcheshvan.  This  name  has  been  supposed  to  be  "a 
purely  Hebrew  term,"  and  to  signify  "wet"  or  "rainy."  The  month 
coincides  with  our  November  and  with  the  rainy  season  in  Palestine. 
See  Diet,  of  the  Bible,  Art.  Month. 

Haggai's  first  prophecy  had  been  delivered  in  the  sixth  month,  and 
his  second  prophecy  in  the  seventh  month  of  this  same  year.  (Hag.  i. 
I,  ii.  I.) 

the  son  of  Berechiah]  called  elsewhere,  the  son  of  Iddo.  Ezra  v.  i ; 
Nehem.  xii.  16.     See  Introd.  to  Zech.  Chap.  i.  p.  47. 

2 — 6.  The  call  to  Repentance.  Zechariah's  first  message  is 
one  of  warning,  by  the  example  of  their  fathers  and  the  earlier  prophets. 
On  their  fathers,  as  they  well  knew,  the  displeasure  of  Almighty  God 
had  fallen  heavily  (ver.  2).  Now,  for  the  first  time  in  this  new  era 
of  their  history,  God  is  sending  to  them,  as  He  did  to  their  fathers  of 
old,  His  servants  the  prophets,  himself  and  Haggai,  with  a  call  to  re- 
pentance and  a  promise  of  reconciliation,  ver.  3.  Let  them  not  be 
like  their  fathers,  who  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the  remonstrances  of  the 
prophets  and  refused  to  amend,  ver.  4;  lest,  being  like  them  in  their 
sin,  they  should  be  like  them  in  their  punishment  also,  and  should  have 
with  them  to  confess,  in  the  bitter  experience  of  their  accomplishment, 
that  God's  unheeded  threatenings  would  surely  take  effect,  ver.  5,  6. 
zechariah  e 


66  ZECHARIAH,   I.  [vv.  2—4. 

The  Lord  hath  been  sore  displeased  with  your  fathers. 
Therefore  say  thou  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of 

hosts ; 
Turn  ye  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
And  I  will  turn  unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Be  ye  not  as  your  fathers,  unto  whom  the  former  prophets 

have  cried,  saying, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Turn  ye  now  from  your 

evil  ways,  zxi^from  your  evil  doings  : 

2.  sore  'displeased]  Lit.  displeased  with  displeasure.  I'he  addi- 
tion of  the  noun  serves  to  give  emphasis  to  the  verb.  Comp.  Luke  xxii. 
15.  What  a  commentary  on  this  "sore  displeasure"  was  the  scene  on 
which  the  prophet  and  his  hearers  gazed,  in  its  contrast  with  the  past : 
the  House,  which  had  once  been  "exceeding  magnifical,  of  fame  and  of 
glory  throughout  all  countries"  (i  Chron.  xxii.  5),  now  slowly  rising 
above  its  foundations,  the  poor  and  feeble  representative  of  its  former 
self:  the  city,  which  had  once  been  "beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of 
the  whole  earth,"  now  such  as  Nehemiah  some  seventy-five  years  after 
saw  it,  on  that  memorable  night  when  he  "on  his  mule  or  ass,  accom- 
panied by  a  few  followers  on  foot,  descended  into  the  ravine  of  Hinnom, 
and  threaded  his  way  in  and  out  amongst  the  gigantic  masses  of  ruin 
and  rubbish... ;  the  gate,  outside  of  which  lay  the  piles  of  the  sweepings 
and  offscourings  of  the  streets ;  the  masses  of  fallen  masonry,  extending 
as  it  would  seem  all  along  the  western  and  northern  side ;  the  blackened 
gaps  left  where  the  gates  had  been  destroyed  by  fire ;  till  at  last  by  the 
royal  reservoir  the  accumulations  became  so  impassable,  that  the  animal 
on  which  he  rode  refused  to  proceed"  (Stanley,  Jewish  Chwch,  Vol. 
III.  p.  125,  Neh.  ii.  12 — 15):  the  people,  once  "many  as  the  sand  which 
is  by  the  sea  in  multitude,  eating  and  drinking  and  making  merry" 
(i  Kings  iv.  20),  now  scattered  among  the  heathen,  represented  on  their 
native  soil  only  by  the  poor  and  subject  "remnant,"  to  whom  the  pro- 
phet addressed  himself! 

3.  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts]  See  note  on  Hag.  ii.  6.  In  this  verse 
the  phrase  occurs  three  times.  The  first  and  third  times  it  is  literally, 
"saith  Jehovah  of  hosts."  But  the  second  time  there  is  a  variation  in 
the  Hebrew  and  it  is  properly  "(it  is  the)  utterance,  or  oracle  of  Jehovah 
of  hosts."  The  same  interchange  of  the  two  forms  of  expression  is 
found  in  Hag.  i.  8,  9,  ii.  6 — 9. 

4.  the  former  prophets  have  cried]  Rather,  cried,  as  R.V.  The 
reference  is  not  to  any  one  particular  prophet  or  prophets,  in  whose 
writings  words  similar  to  these  may  be  found;  but  to  the  whole  body 
of  prophets,  who  had  preceded  Zechariah  and  Haggai,  and  of  whose 
message  in  the  discharge  of  the  didactic,  as  distinguished  from  the 
predictive  function  of  their  office,  the  substance  is  here  given.  Comp. 
Jerem.  vii.  25,  26. 

noxv]  i.e.  I  pray. 


vv.  5,  6.]  ZECHARIAH,    I.  67 

But  they  did  not  hear,  nor  hearken  unto  me,  saith  the 

Lord. 
Your  fathers,  where  are  they  ?  s 

And  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever  ? 
But  my  words  and  my  statutes,  which  I  commanded  my  6 

servants  the  prophets, 
Did  they  not  take  hold  of  your  fathers  ? 
And  they  returned  and  said.  Like  as  the  Lord  of  hosts 

thought  to  do  unto  us. 
According  to  our  ways,  and  according  to  our  doings,  so 

hath  he  dealt  with  us. 

iiiito  me\  whose  word,  and  not  their  own,  the  prophets  spoke, 
Comp.  Luke  x.  16. 

5,  6.  The  lesson  conveyed  by  these  two  verses,  which  must  be  taken 
together,  is  the  same  as  that  contained  in  the  words  of  Isaiah  (xl.  6,  8), 
'  *  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the 
field... The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth,  but  the  word  of  our  God 
shall  stand  for  ever."  There,  however,  the  lesson  has  reference  to 
God's  word  of  promise,  for  comfort  (comp.  i  Peter  i.  24,  25).  Here  it 
has  reference  to  His  word  of  threatening,  for  warning. 

6.  7ny  statutes]  or  decrees.  The  word  may  be  used  here,  as  it  is 
in  Zeph.  ii.  2;  Ps.  ii.  7  (in  both  which  places  it  is  rendered  decree  in 
A.  v.),  of  some  punishment,  which  God  had  purposed  or  decreed,  and 
threatened  by  His  prophets  to  send  upon  them  unless  they  repented. 
But  it  may  also  be  taken  to  refer,  as  it  commonly  does  in  the  O.  T.,  to 
the  "statutes"  of  the  Law,  sanctioned  by  rewards  and  punishments, 
which  it  was  the  office  of  the  prophet  to  repeat  and  enfoixe. 

take  hold  of\  Marg,  and  R.V.  overtake.  Comp.  Deut.  xxviii.  15,  45, 
where  the  same  word  is  used.  Pusey  quotes  the  well-known  words  of 
Horace,  "Rarely  hath  punishment  with  limping  tread  parted  with  the 
forerunning  miscreant." 

returned]  Rather  turned,  as  the  word  is  rendered  in  ver.  3,  4.  They 
were  brought  at  last  to  do,  what  before  they  had  refused  to  do,  ver.  4,  and 
what  you  are  now  intreated  to  be  wise  in  time  to  do,  ver.  3,  to  turn  from 
sin  and  turn  to  God. 

thought  to  do]  Comp.  Lam.  ii.  17,  where  the  penitent  confession  is 
uttered  by  Jeremiah,  as  the  representative  of  the  people,  almost  in 
the  words  here  recorded:  *'The  Lord  hath  done  that  which  he  had 
devised  (the  same  word  as  is  here  rendered,  "thought");  he  hath  ful- 
filled his  word  that  he  had  commanded  in  the  days  of  old." 

dealt  with  us]  Lit.  done  with  us.  As  He  thought,  or  purposed,  to 
do,  so  hath  He  done. 

^  The  Visions,  i.  7 — vi.  15.  Exactly  five  months  had  now  elapsed 
since  the  building  of  the  Temple  was  resumed,  as  the  fruit  of  Haggai's 
earnest  expostulation  (Hag.  i.  14,  15).  It  was  three  months  since 
Zechariah  had  uttered  the  call  to  repentance  with  which  his  Book  opens 

5—2 


68  ZECHARIAH,    1.  [v.  7. 

7  Upon  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  eleventh  month, 
which  is  the  month  Sebat,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius, 
came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zechariah,  the  son  of 

(i.  i);  and  in  the  mean  time  Haggai  had  again  spoken  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord,  in  his  concluding  prophecies  (Hag.  ii.  10 — 24).  On  the  basis 
of  the  repentance,  of  which  the  people  were  giving  practical  proof  in 
their  honest  endeavours  to  rebuild  the  Temple,  and  as  an  encourage- 
ment to  them  to  persevere  in  the  work,  Zechariah  now  unfolds  to  them 
God's  purposes  of  mercy,  as  they  had  been  unfolded  to  him  in  a  series 
of  eight  visions,  all  of  which  had  been  vouchsafed  to  him,  as  it  would 
seem,  in  a  single  night. 

7.  the  JHontk  Sebat]  or  Shebat,  R.V.  i.  e.  January  or  February.  The 
identification  of  the  Jewish  months  with  our  own  cannot  be  effected 
with  precision,  on  account  of  the  variations  that  must  inevitably  exist 
between  the  lunar  and  the  solar  months.  See  Gen.  Introd.,  Chap.  ii. 
p.  18. 

the  ivord  of  the  Lord]  The  visions  themselves  might  not  improperly 
be  called,  "the  word  of  the  Lord,"  inasmuch  as  they  are  the  medium 
of  communication  between  the  Divine  mind  and  the  minds  of  the  pro- 
phet and  the  people.  But  they  are  accompanied  not  only  by  the  spoken 
explanation  of  the  angel,  but  by  frequent  passages  introduced  by  the 
expression,  *' thus  saith  the  Lord  "  (i.  14,  r6,  17,  ii.  5,  8,  &c.),  so  that 
the  revelation  as  a  whole  may  fitly  be  described  as  "the  word  of  the 
Lord." 

The  First  Vision.  The  hojsemen  among  the  myrtle-trees,  i. 
8—17.  In  the  night  time,  in  prophetic  trance  or  vision,  Zechariah  sees, 
in  a  shady  valley  full  of  myrtle  trees,  a  man  (who  is  also  called  an  angel 
of  Jehovah  and,  as  it  would  seem,  Jehovah  Plimself)  seated  on  a  red 
horse,  and  behind  him  a  number  of  other  horsemen  on  horses  of  three 
different  colours,  ver.  8.  Wishing  to  know  the  meaning  of  what  he  sees, 
the  prophet  turns  for  information  to  an  angel  beside  him,  whose  office  it 
is  to  interpret  to  him  the  visions,  and  who  remains  by  him  for  that  pur- 
pose throughout  the  entire  series,  ver.  9.  In  answer  to  a  sign  made, 
or  an  enquiry  addressed  to  him,  by  this  interpreting  angel,  the  man  or 
angel  on  horseback  among  the  myrtles  explains  what  the  mission  of 
the  band  of  horsemen  had  been,  and  gathers  from  them  by  sign  or 
interrogation  the  result  of  that  mission,  ver.  10,  11.  Sympathising  with 
the  prophet  and  his  people,  in  the  disappointment  which  the  report  of 
the  horsemen  would  produce — for  it  told  that  the  promised  tokens  of  re- 
turning favour  to  Zion  were  not  yet  apparent,  the  leading  horseman,  the 
Angel  of  Jehovah,  intercedes  with  the  Almighty  on  their  behalf,  ver.  12. 
And  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  he  gives,  as  the  fruit  of  his  intercession, 
an  answer  of  encouragement  to  the  interpreting  angel  at  the  prophet's 
side,  vef.  13;  who  in  turn  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Zechariah  the  message 
of  Jehovah,  which  he  bids  him  proclaim  to  the  people,  that  despite  the 
world-wide  peace,  which  that  stationary  group  in  the  still  night  amidst 
the  secluded  myrtle- grove  at  once  symbolize  and  announce,  He  will 
speedily  arise  to  take  vengeance  on  their  enemies,  ver.  14,  17,  and  that 


V.  8.]  ZECHARIAH,    I.  69 

Berechiah,  the  son  of  Iddo  the  prophet,  saying,  I  saw  by  8 
night,  and  behold  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse,  and  he 
stood  among  the  myrtle  trees  that  were  in  the  bottom  ;  and 

then  the  Temple  shall  be  completed,  Jerusalem  rebuilt,  and  the  land  at 
large  become  inhabited  and  prosperous,  ver.  i^i,  17. 

8.  by  night\  or,  m  the  nighty  R.V.  As  the  Jewish  day  began  at 
sunset,  this  would  be  the  night  preceding  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the 
month.  If  so,  Zechariah  may  have  recited  these  visions  to  the  people 
for  their  encouragement,  on  the  very  day  on  which,  five  months  before, 
they  had  re-commenced  their  work  on  the  Temple.     Haggai  i.  14,  15. 

a  7na7i  riding  upon  a  red  horse'\  There  is  some  difficulty  in  deciding 
how  many  persons  take  part  in  this  vision.  If,  however,  we  suppose 
them  to  have  been 

I.     The  prophet; 

1.     The  company  of  horsemen  and  their  Leader; 

3.  The  interpreting  angel ; 
a  clear  and  satisfactory  idea  of  the  vision  is  obtained.  The  man  riding 
upon  a  red  horse,  the  Leader  of  the  company  of  horsemen,  appears 
again  in  ver.  10,  where  the  circumstance  of  his  "standing  among  the 
myrtle-trees"  is  repeated,  in  order  to  identify  him  with  the  horseman  of 
ver.  8.  In  ver.  11  he  is  called  "  the  Angel  of  the  Lord ;"  but  to  make  it 
clear  that  he  is  the  same  person  who  was  previously  described  as  *'  a 
man,"  his  "standing  among  the  myrtle  trees"  is  again  mentioned. 
Having  thus  been  defined  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  (and  he  is  the  only 
person  throughout  the  vision  to  whom  that  name  is  given)  he  is  re- 
ferred to  in  the  next  verse,  ver.  12,  by  that  title  only,  there  being  no 
further  need  to  mention  the  circumstance  of  his  standing  among  the 
myrtle  trees,  which  was  only  introduced  for  the  purpose  of  identifying 
him  with  the  "man"  of  ver.  8,  10.  In  ver.  13  he  who  is  "a  man"  in 
ver.  8,  and  "the  Angel  of  Jehovah"  in  ver.  11,  12,  becomes  perhaps  (see 
note  on  that  verse)  "Jehovah"  Himself.  If  this  view  be  adopted,  tlien 
only  one  other  angel  appears  upon  the  scene,  "the  angel  that  talked  or 
communed  with  me"  (ver.  9,  13,  14),  who  on  this  supposition  stands, 
as  it  were,  outside  in  this  as  he  does  in  all  the  subsequent  visions,  and 
is  only  employed  to  interpret  them  to  the  prophet. 

the  myrtles]  The  myrtle  is  said  to  be  indigenous  to  Palestine.  That 
it  abounded  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  at  this  period  of  Jewish 
history  we  learn  incidentally,  from  the  description  of  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles, which  was  held  under  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  "Go  forth,"  so  the 
proclamation  ran,  "unto  the  mount,  and  fetch  olive-branches,  and  pine- 
branches,  and  myrtle-branches,  and  palm-branches,  and  branches  of 
thick  trees,  to  make  booths,  as  it  is  written."     Nehem.  viii.  15. 

in  the  bottom]  i.e.  the  low,  deep  valley,  which  appears  to  have  been 
the  favourite  habitat  of  the  myrtle.  Comp.  "litora  myrtetis  laetissima, " 
"amantes  litora  myrtos."  Virgil,  Georg.  11. 112,  iv.  124.  Here  it  may 
well  have  been  the  valley  of  the  Kedron.  Others  render,  but  with  less 
probability,  "the  shady  (place)."  The  idea  that  the  "tabernacle"  or 
dwelling-place  of  God  is  intended  has  nothing  to  recommend  it. 


^o  ZECHARIAH,   I.  [v.  9. 

behind  him  were  there  red   horses,  speckled,  and  white. 

9  Then  said  I,  O  my  lord,  what  are  these  ?     And  the  angel 

that  talked  with  me  said  unto  me,  1  will  shew  thee  what 


red  horses^  speckled,  and  whitel  With  respect  to  the  first  and  last  of 
the  colours,  "red,"  i.  e.  bay  or  chestnut,  and  "  white,"  there  is  no  doubt. 
What  exactly  the  intermediate  colour  is,  "speckled,"  or  "bay"  (margin), 
"sorrel,"  R.V.,  must  remain  uncertain.  Much  ingenuity  has  been  ex- 
pended in  endeavouring  to  give  a  meaning  to  the  various  colours  of  the 
horses.  But  inasmuch  as  the  horsemen  have  been  on  the  same  mission, 
ver.  10,  and  all  bring  back  the  same  report,  ver.  11,  and  no  reference  is 
made  to  the  colour  of  their  horses  by  the  angel  who  interprets  the  vision, 
it  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  a  detail,  to  which  no  special  importance  is 
to  be  attached.  We  may  say  with  Calvin  (and  it  is  a  remark  of  general 
application  to  the  visions  and  parables  both  of  the  Old  Testament  and 
of  the  New),  "Si  contenti  simus  mediocritate,  nihil  hie  erit  adeo  per- 
plexum,  quin  saltem  facile  sit  sumniam  totius  vaticinii  colligere.  Sed 
multum  nocuit  curiositas  interpretum,  qui  dum  excutiunt  singulas 
syllabas,  pueriliter  ludunt  in  multis."  His  own  view  is,  that  the 
obscurity  in  which  the  vision  is  shrouded,  the  dark  night,  the  low 
valley,  the  sombre  myrtles,  is  intended  to  remind  the  prophet  that 
God's  judgments  are  unsearchable  and  His  ways  past  finding  out,  while 
the  angel  riders  are  a  help  to  his  human  weakness  to  understand  how, 
like  a  king  whose  couriers  are  continually  passing  to  and  fro  throughout 
his  dominions,  the  Almighty  is  intimately  acquainted  with  all  that  is 
done  upon  earth,  and  the  different  coloured  horses  picture  to  his  mind 
the  truth,  that  all  human  events,  whatever  be  their  complexion,  are  alike 
under  the  cognisance  and  control  of  the  never-failing  Providence,  which 
ordereth  all  things  both  in  heaven  and  earth;  and  we  may  add,  how- 
ever diverse  they  appear,  are  all  working  harmoniously  to  accomplish 
His  will. 

9.  0  my  lord]  This  question  is  addressed  to  the  interpreting  angel, 
of  whose  presence  we  are  for  the  first  time  made  aware  by  the  fact  that 
he  replies  to  it. 

the  angel  that  talked  with  me]  This  is  the  title  by  which  this  angel  is 
distinguished  throughout  the  visions:  i.  13,  14  (where  the  A.  V.  has 
'■'■communed  with  me"),  19,  ii.  3,  iv.  i,  4,  5,  v.  10,  vi.  4.  The  phrase 
has  been  variously  interpreted.  Some  would  render  "m  me,"  "in  that 
that  angel  formed  in  the  spirit  and  imaginative  power  of  Zechariah 
phantasms  or  images  of  things  which  were  foreshown  him,  and  gave 
him  to  understand  what  those  images  signified."  Others  take  it  to 
mean  '•^by  me,"  "the  prophet  being  the  channel  through  whom  the 
divine  revelations  were  made."  But  there  is  no  reason  to  depart  from 
the  rendering  of  the  A.  V.,  which  accurately  describes  the  office  of  the 
angel  as  actually  discharged  by  him  in  explaining  the  visions,  and 
which  is  supported  by  Hebrew  usage.  Comp.  Numb.  xii.  8,  where  it 
is  difficult  to  understand  how  God  should  speak  "face  to  face,"  either 
"in,"  or  "by,"  a  man. 


vv.  10—13.]  ZECHARIAH,    I.  71 

these  be.     And  the  man  that  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees  10 
answered  and  said,  These  are  they  whom  the  Lord  hath 
sent  to  walk  to   and   fro   through   the   earth.     And   they  n 
answered  the  angel  of  the  Lord  that  stood  among   the 
myrtle  trees,  and  said,  We  have  walked  to  and  fro  through 
the  earth,  and  behold,  all  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and  is  at 
rest.     Then  the  angel  of  the   Lord   answered   and  said,  le 
O  Lord  of  hosts,  how  long  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  on 
Jerusalem  and  on  the  cities  of  Judah,  against  which  thou 
hast  had  indignation  these  threescore  and  ten  years?     And  13 
the  Lord  answered  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  ivith 


10.  the  mart]  i.  e.  the  rider  on  the  red  horse  of  ver.  8,  who,  in  answer 
it  may  be  to  a  look  or  sign  from  the  interpreting  angel,  takes  upon  him- 
self to  "shew"  the  prophet  ''what  these  be." 

11.  the  angel  of  the  Lord\  The  man  on  the  red  horse,  who  as  it 
now  appears  is  an  angel  of  Jehovah  in  human  form,  having  told  Zecha- 
riah,  in  ver.  10,  what  the  other  riders  were,  now  turns  to  them  and  elicits 
from  them,  probably  by  sign  or  look,  the  fact  for  the  prophet's  informa- 
tion, that  they  had  traversed  the  earth  and  found  universal  peace  pre- 
vailing. 

12.  answered]  The  word  does  not  necessarily  mean  replied  to  a 
question,  but  has  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  more  general  signification  of 
speaking  in  a  manner  corresponding,  or  "answering"  to  the  circum- 
stances described  and  the  feelings  called  forth  by  them  (comp.  Job  iii.  2 
(margin);  Daniel  ii.  26;  Acts  v.  8).  Pitying  Zechariah  and  his  country- 
men in  the  disappointment,  which  the  answer  of  the  horsemen  (ver.  i  r) 
could  not  fail  to  cause  them,  inasmuch  as  it  told  of  rest  and  quiet, 
whereas  the  "shaking  of  all  nations"  was  the  predicted  sign  of  returning 
favour  to  Zion  (Hag.  ii.  7,  2t,  •22),  the  Angel  proceeds  to  speak  "answer- 
ably  "  to  this  feeling,  in  the  intercession  which  he  now  offers  on  their 
behalf.  His  sympathy  and  intercession  make  it  probable,  as  Calvin 
remarks  (though  he  offers  the  alternative  of  its  being  any  angel  you 
please),  that  this  Angel  of  the  Lord  was  "Christ  the  Mediator." 

these  threescore  arid  ten  years]  Comp.  Jerem.  xxv.  11;  Ezra  i.  i. 
The  meaning  is:  Why  art  Thou  still  angry  with  us,  when  the  appointed 
time  of  our  punishment,  the  seventy  years  of  our  captivity,  has  expired? 

13.  the  Lord]  i.  e.  Jehovah.  This  may  either  mean,  that  Almighty 
God  answered  from  heaven  the  intercession  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord 
(ver.  12),  not  to  himself  directly,  but  to  the  interpreting  angel,  bywords 
which,  whether  he  heard  them  himself  or  gathered  their  import  from  the 
angel's  address  to  him  (ver.  14),  the  prophet  knew  to  be  "good,  even 
comfortable; "  or  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  of  ver.  1 2  may  be  here  identified 
with  Jehovah  (comp.  Gen.  xviii.  i,  2,  13,  17,  22;  Joshua  v.  13,  vi.  2), 
and  represented  as  Himself  communicating  to  the  interpreting  angel  the 
answer,  which  He  had  received  from  heaven. 


72  ZECHARIAH,    I.  [vv.  14—17. 

T4  good  words   and  comfortable  words.     So   the   angel  that 
communed  with  me  said  unto  me,  Cry  thou,  saying, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ; 

I  am  jealous  for  Jerusalem  and  for  Zion  with  a  great 
jealousy. 

15  And  I  am  very  sore  displeased  with  the  heathen  that  are 

at  ease : 
For  I  was  but  a  little  displeased,  and  they  helped  forward 
the  affliction. 

16  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord;  I  am  returned  to  Jeru- 

salem with  mercies : 
My  house  shall  be  built  in  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
And  a  Hne  shall  be  stretched  forth  upon  Jerusalem. 

17  Cry  yet,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts; 

My  cities  through  prosperity  shall  yet  be  spread  abroad ; 


14.  I  am  jeaJous\  "I  have  been,  not  now  only,  but  in  time  past  even 
when  I  did  not  shew  it,  and  am  jealous,  with  the  tender  love  which 
allows  not  what  it  loves  to  be  injured."     Pusey.     Comp.  chap.  viii.  1. 

15.  heathen]  or,  nations,  R.V. 

at  ease]  as  described  in  ver.  11.     The  word  in  this  verse  is  the  same 
as  in  Is.  xxxii.  9,  11,  and  Ps.  cxxiii.  4. 
helped  forward]     Comp.  Is.  xlvii.  6. 

16.  Therefore]  because  I  am  thus  jealous  for  my  people  and  angry 
with  their  enemies. 

a  line]  i.e.  a  measuring  line,  to  mark  out  the  city  with  a  view  to  its 
being  rebuilt.  Comp.  Job  xxxviii.  5.  It  had  been  measured  before 
for  destruction,  1  Kings  xxi.  13;  Lam.  ii.  8. 

17.  be  spread  abroad]  Some  would  render  "overflow,"  comparing 
Prov.  V.  16.  But  the  more  usual  sense  of  the  word,  "spread  abroad,'" 
or  "disperse,"  gives  a  good  meaning.  Not  only  shall  the  Temple  be 
rebuilt,  and  the  metropolis  restored,  but  cities,  owned  and  blessed  by 
God  ("my  cities"),  shall  be  scattered  throughout  the  land. 

The  scope,  then,  of  the  first  vision  is  clear.  It  conveys  a  distinct 
promise  and  prophecy  of  three  future  events.  "My  house  shall  be 
built,"  ver.  16.  This  was  accomplished  four  years  later  in  the  sixth  year 
of  Darius  (Ezra  vi.  15).  "A  line  shall  be  stretched  forth  upon  Jeru- 
salem," ver.  16.  This  was  done  some  seventy  years  later,  when  the  city 
was  rebuilt  by  Nehemiah  (Neh.  vi.  15).  "My  cities  through  prosperity 
shall  yet  be  spread  abroad, "  ver.  1 7.  The  fulfilment  of  this  is  to  be  found 
in  the  history  of  the  Jews  under  the  Asmonean  princes.  Beyond  this 
the  first  prophecy  does  not  expressly  go ;  though  its  concluding  words, 
"  The  Lord  shall  yet  comfort  Zion,  and  shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem," 
are  at  least  an  implied  promise  of  better  things,  than  any  which  befell 
the  Jews  before  the  coming  of  Christ. 


vv.  18—21.]  ZECHARIAH,   I.  73 

And  the  Lord  shall  yet  comfort  Zion, 

And  shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem. 

Then  lift  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and  behold  four  horns.  18 
And  I  said  unto  the  angel  that  talked  with  me,  What  be  19 
these  ?     And  he  answered  me.  These  are  the  horns  which 
have    scattered    Judah,    Israel,    and   Jerusalem.     And    the  20 
Lord   shewed   me   four   carpenters.     Then   said    I,  What  21 

The  Second  Vision.  The  four  horns  and  the  four  workmen,  i. 
18 — 21.  (Heb.,ii.  I — 4.)  The  scene  changes.  The  first  vision  had  fore- 
told as  certain  the  punishment  of  the  heathen,  with  which  the  prosperity 
of  Israel  was  bound  up.  This  vision  takes  a  step  in  advance  and  depicts 
that  punishment  as  already  come.  The  prophet  turns  again  to  the  field 
of  view,  which  he  had  ceased  to  contemplate  while  he  gave  heed  to  the 
words  of  the  interpreting  angel,  or  pursued  the  thoughts  which  those 
words  suggested.  Looking  up,  he  sees  now  before  him  four  mighty 
horns.  The  beast,  or  beasts,  which  bear  them  are  hidden  from  his 
view.  The  horns  alone  stand  out  from  the  surrounding  gloom  (ver.  18). 
In  answer  to  the  question,  which  he  addresses  to  the  interpreting  angel, 
he  is  told  that  these  horns  represent  the  powers  which  have  scattered 
his  people  (ver.  19).  And  now  he  sees,  in  the  unfolding  of  this  vision 
granted  him  by  Jehovah,  four  artificers  or  smiths  coming  out  to  view, 
and  proceeding  one  towards  each  of  the  four  towering  horns  (ver.  20). 
In  answer  to  a  further  question  by  the  prophet,  the  interpreting  angel 
tells  him  that  these  artificers  are  come  to  demolish  and  drive  away 
these  horns  (ver.  21). 

18.  four  horns\  The  horn  is  a  symbol  of  honour  (i  Sam.  ii.  i; 
Job  xvi.  15),  and  of  power  (Jer.  xlviii.  25;  Amos  vi.  13).  Here  the 
latter  idea  is  prominent.  By  the  four  horns  some  understand  four  defi- 
nite powers  or  kingdoms,  either,  Babylonians,  Medes  and  Persians, 
Macedonians,  and  Komans,  in  accordance  with  the  visions  of  Daniel, 
chaps,  ii.  iv. ;  or,  inasmuch  as  the  horns  are  interpreted  in  ver.  ig  to  be 
powers  which  "have  (already)  scattered"  Judah,  Israel  and  Jerusalem, 
Assyria,  Egypt,  Babylon  and  Medo-Persia.  But  it  is  better  to  take  the 
number  four  generally  of  enemies  on  every  side,  or  towards  every  point 
of  the  compass. 

19.  Judah,  Israel  and  ferusalem^  The  two  tribes,  the  ten  tribes, 
and  the  capital  of  the  whole  nation.  So  inclusive  a  description  must  be 
held  to  refer  to  the  whole  Jewish  people,  so  that  the  vision  predicts  the 
overthrow  of  the  oppressors  of  Israel  as  well  as  of  Judah. 

20.  the  Lord'\  Jehovah,  from  whom  the  whole  series  of  visions 
proceeded,  ver.  7. 

four  carpenters'\  Rather,  artificers,  or  workmen;  {smiths^  R.V.). 
The  word  is  used  of  working  in  wood,  but  also  in  metals  and  in  stone. 
Isaiah  xliv.  12,  13;  2  Samuel  v.  11.  There  is  no  ground  for  the  idea 
that  these  artificers  represent  angelic  ministries.  They  rather  indicate 
generally  the  various  human  agencies,  corresponding  in  number  and 
variety  to  the  enemies  of  Israel,  by  the  instrumentality  of  which  those 


74  ZECHARIAH,    II.  [vv.  i,  2. 

come  these  to  do?  And  he  spake,  saying,  These  are  the 
horns  which  have  scattered  Judah,  so  that  no  man  did  Hft 
up  his  head :  but  these  are  come  to  fray  them,  to  cast  out 
the  horns  of  the  Gentiles,  which  lift  up  their  horn  over  the 
land  of  Judah  to  scatter  it. 
2  I  lift  up  mine  eyes  again,  and  looked,  and  behold,  a  man 
2  with  a  measuring  Hue  in  his  hand.     Then  said  I,  Whither 

enemies  should  be  overthrown.  "Comparat  gentes,  quse  infestse  fuerant 
Judseis,  cornibus :  postea  comparet  fabris  alios  hostes,  quorum  manu 
et  opera  utitur  Deus  ad  frangehdos  conatus  eorum  omnium,  qui  molesti 
erunt  ecclesiae."     Calvin. 

21.     he  spake\  i.e.  the  interpreting  angel. 

have  scattered^  Rather,  scattered,  R.V. 

to  fray  them\  Either  the  wild  animals  bearing  the  horns,  or  more  pro- 
bably the  nations  symbolised  by  them,  are  here  spoken  of  as  being 
"frayed,"  or  "panic-stricken."  In  the  following  word,  "to  cast  out," 
the  figure  of  the  horns  is  perhaps  resumed. 

The  Third  Vision.  The  man  with  the  measuring  line.  ii.  1 — 13. 
(Heb.,  ii.  5 — 17.)  The  vision  which  describes  the  destruction  of  her 
enemies  is  followed  by  another,  in  which  the  consequent  gj:£iwth,and 
prosperity  of  Jerusalem  are  depicted,  and  which  in  the  largeness  of  its 
•predictions  extends  into  the  more  distant  future.  The  prophet  sees 
now  upon  the  stage,  or  field  of  view,  a  young  man  with  a  measuring 
line  in  his  hand,  ver.  i.  He  asks  him  where  he  is  going,  and  is  answered, 
that  he  is  going  to  measure  Jerusalem,  ver.  2.  Upon  this,  the  interpret- 
ing angel  quits  the  prophet's  side  and  "goes  forth"  upon  the  stage  in 
pursuit,  as  it  would  seem,  of  the  man  with  the  measuring  line,  to  bid 
him  desist  from  his  purpose.  As  he  does  so,  he  is  met  by  another 
*  angel,  to  whom  he  delegates  the  errand  on  which  he  himself  had  started, 
j  and  whom  he  commissions  in  the  hearing  of  the  prophet  (thus  fulfilling 
his  office  as  "interpreter"  of  the  visions,  and  removing  the  false  impres- 
'  sion  which  the  man's  answer,  ver.  1,  had  created)  to  go  and  bid  the 
"young  man"  cease  from  measuring,  because  Jerusalem,  in  its  coming, 
populousness  and  security,  should  neither  admit  of  nor  require  walls, 
ver.  3 — 5.  The  exiles  still  remaining  in  Babylon  are  now  summoned  to 
leave  her,  ver.  6,  7,  for  God's  judgments  are  about  to  fall  upon  her,  ver.  8, 
9 ;  whereas  in  Zion,  to  which  they  are  invited  to  return,  He  will  dwell, 
ver.  10,  II,  making  it  again  His  portion  and  His  choice,  ver.  I'a,  extend- 
ing its  blessings  to  the  Gentiles,  ver.  11,  confirming  by  the  happy  event 
the  truth  of  this  prediction,  ver.  9,  1 1,  and  manifesting  Himself  as  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth,  ver.  13. 

Ch.  II. — 1.  a  man\  Probably  an  angel  in  human  form,  called  a 
"young  man,"  ver.  4,  where  see  note. 

a  measuring  Hne]  The  word  is  not  the  same  as  in  i.  16;  but  the 
promise  there  is  taken  up  here,  and  its  literal  fulfilment,  which  the 
action  of  the  man  with  the  line  seemed  about  to  secure,  is  merged  in  a 


w.  3—5.]  ZECHARIAH,    II.  75 

goest  thou  ?     And  he  said  unto  me,  To  measure  Jerusalem, 
to  see  what  is  the  breadth  thereof,  and  what  is  the  length 
thereof.     And  behold,  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went  3 
forth,  and  another  angel  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  said  4 
unto  him,  Run,  speak  to  this  young  man,  saying, 
Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  as  towns  without  walls 
For  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle  therein  : 
For  I,  saith  the  Lord,  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  5 

round  about, 
And  will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her. 

greater  blessing.     In  Ezek.  xl.  3,  Rev.  xi.  i,  xxi.  15,  a  reed  is  used,  in 
addition  to,  or  instead  of,  a  line  as  here. 

3.  went  fort/i]  from  the  place  where  he  was  standing  beside  me. 
Comp.  Is.  xxvi.  21. 

went  out]  Rather,  "went  forth,  the  Hebrew  word  being  the  same  as 
before.  This  second  angel  is  seen  going  forth  from  the  opposite  side  of 
the  stage  on  which  the  vision  appears,  to  meet  the  interpreting  angel  as 
he  went  forth. 

4,  and  said  unto  him]  Rather,  and  lie  said  unto  Mm;  i.e.  the 
interpreting  angel  said  to  the  second  angel  whom  he  met.  That  he 
might  remain  himself  near  the  prophet,  whose  interpreter  he  was 
appointed  to  be  throughout  the  whole  series  of  visions,  he  sent  his 
brother  angel  instead  of  going  himself  in  pursuit  of  the  man  with  the 
measuring  line,  who  by  this  time  had  passed  on  his  errand  out  of  the 
field  of  view,  giving  him  a  message  for  him  in  the  hearing  of  the 
prophet,  and  so  discharging  his  interpreting  function,  so  far  as  this 
vision  is  concerned. 

this  young  man]  Some  commentators  refer  this  to  Zechariah  himself, 
and  understand  it  to  be  the  second  angel  in  ver.  3,  who  meeting  the  inter- 
preting angel  bids  him  run  back  to  the  prophet  with  the  announcement 
that  follows.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  see  why  on  this  view  the  angel 
should  be  told  to  "run;"  whereas  on  the  view  taken  above  the  mes- 
senger is  directed  to  hasten  after  one  who  has  already  started  on  his 
errand,  and  the  scenic  character  of  the  vision  is  altogether  better  main- 
tained. 

as  towns  without  walls]  as  open,  unwalled  country  villages.  The 
word  is  rendered,  "unwalled  villages,"  Ezek.  xxxviii.  11,  and  is  there 
explained  to  be  places  where  men  are  "  at  rest  and  dwell  safely,  all  of 
them  dwelling  without  walls,  and  having  neither  bars  nor  gates." 
Comp.  Deut.  iii.  5;  Esther  ix.  19.  The  prophecy  of  this  and  the  next 
verse,  however  it  may  include,  yet  far  exceeds  the  rebuilding  of  the 
walls  by  Nehemiah,  or  any  prosperity  and  extension  into  suburbs  of 
Jerusalem,  that  has  yet  taken  place. 

6—13.  That  they  may  share  in  the  promised  favour  to  Zion,  but 
also  (and  this  is  put  first  and  urgently,  because  the  judgment  was 
imminent)  that  they  may  escape  the  coming  punishment  of  Babylon, 


76  ZECHARIAH,   II.  [vv.  6,  7. 

6  Ho,  ho,  co7ne  forth,  and  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north, 

saith  the  Lord  : 
For  I  have  spread  you  abroad  as  the  four  winds  of  the 
heaven,  saith  the  Lord. 

7  DeUver  thyself,  O  Zion,  that  dwellest  with  the  daughter 

of  Babylon. 

the  Jews  still  remaining  there  are  called  upon  to  return  to  their  own 
country. 

6.  Ho^  ho,  come  forth  and  flee]  The  words  "come  forth"  are  not  in 
the  Hebrew,  and  the  R.V.  omits  them :  Ho,  ho,  flee.  Some  would 
supply,  "hear:"  "Ho,  ho  (hear)  and  flee." 

the  land  of  the  north']  i.e.  Babylonia.     Comp.  Jer.  iii.  12,  18,  xxiii.  8. 

have  spread  yon  abroad]  Some  regard  this  as  a  promise  of  future 
extension,  consequent  upon  obedience  to  the  call  to  return  from  Babylon. 
But  it  is  rather  to  be  understood  of  their  past  dispersion,  from  which  the 
command  and  the  providence  of  God  are  now  recalling  them  and  saying, 
"flee  from  the  land  of  the  north,  and  from  the  four  winds  of  the  heaven, 
for  thereunto  have  I  scattered  you."  So  God  promises  by  Jeremiah 
that  they  should  say,  "  The  Lord  liveth,  which  brought  up  and  which 
led  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Israel  out  of  the  north  country,  and  from  all 
countries  whither  I  had  driven  them,"  xxiii.  8;  and  again,  "I  will 
bring  them  from  the  north  country,  and  gather  them  from  the  coasts  of 
the  earth,"  xxxi.  8. 

"  The  north  country,  although  its  capital  and  centre  was  Babylon,  was 
the  whole  Babylonian  empire,  called  '  the  north '  because  its  invasions 
always  came  upon  Israel  from  the  north.  But  the  Book  of  Esther 
shews  that  sixty  years  after  this  the  Jews  were  dispersed  over  the  127 
provinces  of  the  Persian  empire,  from  India  (the  Punjaub)  to  Ethiopia 
(Esther  i.  i;  iii.  8,  12 — 14;  viii.  5,  9);  whether  they  were  purposely 
placed  by  the  policy  of  the  conquerors  in  detached  groups,  as  the  ten 
tribes  were  in  the  cities  of  the  Medes,  or  whether,  when  more  trusted, 
they  migrated  of  their  own  accord."     Pusey. 

the  four  winds]  comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  31. 

7.  Deliver  thyself]  Lit.  "Ho,  Zion,  deliver  thyself:  thou  that 
dwellest  with,  &c."  The  reason  for  this  urgent  call  to  escape,  viz. 
the  impending  judgment  upon  Babylon,  follows  immediately,  ver.  8,  9. 
In  Uke  manner  Jeremiah  (1.  8,  10;  li.  6,  45),  and  before  him  Isaiah 
(xlviii.  14,  20),  connects  the  punishment  of  Babylon  with  the  escape 
of  Israel.  The  immediate  reference  of  those  prophecies  is  to  the  taking 
of  Babylon  by  Cyrus,  which  preceded  and  led  to  the  return  from  the 
70  years'  captivity.  But  the  prophecies  reach  on,  in  the  largeness  of 
their  terms,  to  the  final  and  utter  destruction  of  Babylon,  and  include 
such  later  calls  to  escape  as  that  of  Zechariah  here.  The  immediate 
reference  here  would  appear  to  be  to  one  or  both  of  those  occasions  in 
the  reign  of  Darius,  on  which  Babylon  "had  risen  against  the  Persians 
and  made  an  effort  to  regain  its  independence".  "What  these  dangers 
were  may  be  seen  from  the  great  inscription  of  Darius  cut  into  the  rock 


vv.  8— lo.]  ZECHARIAH,    11.  ^^ 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  8 

After  the  glory  hath  he  sent  me  unto  the  nations  which 

spoiled  you  : 
For  he  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye. 
For  behold,  I  will  shake  mine  hand  upon  them,  9 

And  they  shall  be  a  spoil  to  their  servants  : 
And  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me. 

Sing  and  rejoice,  O  daughter  of  Zion  :  ic 

For  lo,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith 
the  Lord. 

at  Behistun,  and  supposed  by  Sir  H.  Rawlinson  to  have  been  executed 
in  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius  (two  or  three  years  after  this  pro- 
phecy was  uttered).  That  inscription  records  two  great  rebellions  in 
Babylonia,  and  two  captures  of  the  city  of  Babylon,  one  effected  by 
Darius  in  person,  the  other  by  one  of  his  generals.  The  Jews  in  Baby- 
lon who  did  not  listen  to  the  prophetic  warning  suffered  no  doubt 
severely  in  the  confusions  of  that  period;  while  those  who  returned  to 
Palestine,  and  obeyed  the  command  to  flee  out  of  Babylon,  delivered 
their  souls,  that  is  their  lives,  and  were  not  cut  off  in  her  iniquity." 
Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright,  Bampton  Lectures,  1878. 

8.  after  the  glory\  rather,  after  glory.  There  is  no  article  to  shew 
that  there  is  a  reference,  as  has  been  supposed,  to  ver.  5,  so  that  it 
would  mean,  "after  the  glory  which  I  have  promised  has  come  upon 
Israel,"  &c.  The  more  probable  meaning  therefore  is,  "after,"  i.e.  in 
pursuit,  or  in  prosecution  of  glory  ;  to  get  the  glory,  to  manifest  My 
glory,  in  their  punishment  for  having  spoiled  My  people,  and  so  touched 
Me  in  the  apple  of  Mine  eye. 

hath  he  sent  me\  "hath  He  (Jehovah,  the  speaker),  sent  me  (the 
agent  commissioned).*'  We  should  have  expected,  "have  I  sent  thee," 
and,  "of  my  eye,"  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  especially  as  the  actual 
words  of  Jehovah  follow  in  the  next  verse.  But  such  changes  of  person 
are  not  uncommon  in  Hebrew. 

the  apple  of  his  eye'\  lit.  "the  cavity  or  gate  of  his  eye."  Comp. 
Deut.  xxxii.  10 ;  Ps.  xvii.  8,  where  however  the  Heb.  word  is  different. 

9.  shake  mine  hand\     Job  xxxi.  ^i;  Isaiah  xix.  16. 

a  spoil  to  their  servants^  They  "which  spoiled  you,"  ver.  8,  shall  be 
themselves  "a  spoil,"  and  that  to  those  whom  they  held  in  servitude, 
those  that  served  them  R.  V. 

hath  sent  me]  The  divine  mission  of  the  angel  who  foretells  these 
things  shall  be  attested  by  the  event.     Comp.  ver.  11,  iv.  9,  vi.  15. 

10.  /  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee]  This  prophecy  had  a  fulfilment, 
when  the  Temple  was  rebuilt  and  the  worship  of  God  was  resumed  on 
Mount  Zion.  But  it  had  a  higher  fulfilment  when  "the  Word  was  made 
flesh  and  dwelt  among  us"  (John  i.  14,  Malachi  iii.  i),  and  the  pro- 
mise of  the  Gentiles  being  joined  to  the  Lord,  ver.  rr,  was  also  accom- 


78  ZECHARIAH,   II.  [vv.  ii— 13. 

And  many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that  day, 

And  shall  be  my  people  : 

And  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee, 

And  thou  shalt  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent 

me  unto  thee. 
And  the  Lord  shall  inherit  Judah  his  portion  in  the  holy 

land, 
And  shall  choose  Jerusalem  again. 
Be  silent,  O  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord  : 
For  he  is  raised  up  out  of  his  holy  habitation. 


plished.     It  awaits  its  highest  fulfilment   in   both   particulars   in   the 
times  that  are  yet  future.     Rev.  vii.  15 ;  xxi.  3,  22 — 26. 

11.  bejoined'\join  themselves.     R.  V. 

12.  the  holy  land\  made  so  by  God  dwelling  there.    Comp.  Ex.  iii.  5. 
again\  shall  yet  choose  Jeriisalem.     R.  V. 

13.  he  silent']     Comp.  Hab.  ii.  20;  Zeph.  i.  7. 
raised  up]  waked  up.     R.  V. 

his  holy  habitatioii]  From  heaven,  "the  habitation  of  His  holiness" 
(Deut.  xxvi.  15;  Jerem.  xxv.  30),  where  He  had  seemed  to  dwell,  far 
off  from  the  affairs  of  earth,  Jehovah  should  arise,  or  awake,  and  come 
forth  to  judgment,  to  succour  His  people  and  discomfit  His  enemies. 
Let  all  flesh  be  hushed  before  Him  in  awful  silence. 

The  Fourth  Vision.  Joshua  the  High  Priest  before  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah,  iii.  i — 10.  The  former  visions  had  foretold  that  the  "rest"  of  the 
nations  should  be  disturbed  (i.  8 — 17),  that  the  enemies  of  Israel  should 
be  "cast  out"  (i.  18 — 21),  and  that  Jerusalem  should  become  the  habita- 
tion of  Jehovah  (ii.  i — 13).  But  in  order  to  the  fulfilment  of  these  pro- 
mises, there  must  be  a  moral  and  spiritual  reformation  of  the  people.  With 
this  the  next  vision  is  concerned.  Judgment  begins  at  the  house  of 
God  (comp.  Mai.  iii.  3).  The  prophet  sees  Joshua  the  High  Priest, 
the  representative  not  only  of  the  whole  priesthood,  but  also  of  the 
entire  nation,  standing  before  the  Angel  of  the  Lord.  At  his  right  hand 
stands  the  Adversaiy,  to  play  an  adversary's  part  against  him  (ver.  i). 
But  before  the  charge  can  be  preferred,  Jehovah  Himself  interposes 
and  rebukes  the  Adversary.  Would  the  same  hand,  He  asks,  that  had 
plucked  from  the  fire  the  brand,  charred,  blackened  and  half-consumed 
already,  cast  it  back  again  into  the  flames?  And  should  He,  who  had 
delivered  the  remnant  of  His  people  from  the  furnace  of  Babylon,  now 
listen  to  the  charges  of  the  accuser  and  yield  them  again  to  destruction? 
(ver.  2.)  Doubtless,  matter  of  accusation  is  not  wanting.  The  very 
garb  of  Joshua  testifies  against  him.  Instead  of  the  pure  white  linen  in 
which  the  High  Priest  should  have  been  arrayed,  he  is  "clothed  with 
filthy  garments "  (ver.  3).  But  this  obstacle  shall  by  an  act  of  mere 
grace  be  removed.  The  angel  attendants  are  commanded  to  take  away 
his  filthy  garments ;  while  their  action  is  interpreted  to  him  by  the  as- 


vv.  I,  2.]  ZECHARIAH,    III.  79 

And  he  shewed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest  standmg  before  3 
the  angel  of  the  Lord,  and  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand 
to  resist  him.     And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  2 

surance  that  his  iniquity  is  put  away,  and  the  promise  of  pure  raiment  is 
given  him  (ver.  4).  At  the  instance  of  the  prophet,  who  would  fain  see 
God's  High  Priest  arrayed  in  the  complete  attire  of  his  office,  a  fair 
mitre  is  added.  The  angel  of  Jehovah  stands  by  to  seal  by  his  presence 
and  approval  the  transaction  (ver.  5).  Nor  does  he  quit  the  scene  till 
he  has  revealed  to  Joshua  the  full  dignity  of  the  priesthood  to  which  he 
is  now  restored.  As  exercised  by  himself  and  his  successors,  it  shall, 
while  it  moves  in  the  ways  of  holy  obedience  in  the  restored  Temple  on 
earth,  move  also  in  spirit  among  the  heavenly  ministrations  of  angels 
(ver.  6,  7).  But  it  shall  furthermore,  by  virtue  of  its  typical  character, 
foreshadow  and  prepare  the  way  for  Him  who,  Himself  its  chief  corner- 
stone, shall  rear  the  true  Temple  on  which  the  eyes  of  Jehovah  are  fixed 
(ver.  8,  9),  who  by  one  act  shall  remove  iniquity  for  ever  (ver.  9),  and 
restore  prosperity  and  festal  joy  to  man  (ver.  10). 

Ch.  III. — 1.  he  shelved  ine\  i.e.  Jehovah,  from  whom  all  the  visions 
proceeded,  i.  7,  20,  shewed  me.     aaX  ^8ei^4  fioi.  Kvpios,  LXX. 

j^oshua]  called  in  the  Book  of  Ezra  Jeshua  (ii.  2;  iii.  2,  etc.).  His 
grandfather,  Seraiah,  was  taken  captive  by  Nebuzar-adan  after  the 
sacking  of  the  city  and  burning  of  the  Temple,  and  was  slain  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar at  Riblah  (2  Kings  xxv.  18 — 21).  Josedech,  or  Jehozadak, 
his  son,  the  father  of  Joshua,  was  at  the  same  time  taken  as  a  prisoner 
to  Babylon  (i  Chron.  vi.  15),  where  Joshua  probably  was  born.  During 
the  lifetime  of  Josedech,  while  the  Temple  was  in  ruins  and  the  people 
in  captivity,  the  High  Priesthood  was  in  abeyance.  After  an  interval 
of  about  52  years,  Josedech  being  now  dead,  the  office  was  revived  in 
the  person  of  his  son.  Joshua  was  the  first  of  the  third  or  last  series  of 
High  Priests,  those,  namely,  who  came  after  the  Captivity.  He  is  spoken 
of  Mdth  commendation  in  the  Book  of  Ecclesiasticus  (xlix.  1 2 ;  comp. 
I  Esdr.  v.  5,  48,  56),  and  is  made  a  special  type  of  the  Great  High 
Priest,  both  in  this  chapter  and  in  chapter  vi. 

standing  before  the  angel  of  the  LordX  as  before  his  judge,  Deut.  xix. 
17;  Joshua  XX.  6;  Rom.  xiv.  10;  Rev.  xx.  12.  The  Angel  of  the  Lord 
is  here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament,  He  to  whom  all  judgment 
is  committed  (John  v.  22).     See  note  on  i.  12. 

Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand]  The  great  Adversary  (for  Satan 
is  here  a  proper  name,  as  in  Job  i.  6 — 12;  ii.  i — 7)  here  assumes  the 
character  (Rev.  xii.  10)  and  occupies  the  place  (Psalm  cix.  6)  of  the 
accuser  in  the  trial.     See  Appendix,  note  B. 

to  resist  him]  Lit.  to  play-the-adversary  against  him;  to  be 
his  adversary,  R.  V.  The  verb  and  the  noun  (Satan)  have  the  same 
root.  The  charge  against  Joshua  has  been  thought  to  be  a  personal  one, 
and  reference  has  been  made  to  Ezra  x.  18,  to  prove  that  some  of  his 
sons  had  polluted  themselves  by  marrying  strange  wives.  The  passage 
in  Ezra  however,  is  at  least  60  years  later  than  the  vision  in  Zechariah. 
It  is  better  to  regard  the  intended  accusation  as  including  both  personal 


8o  ZECHARIAH,    III.  [vv.  3, 4. 

The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  Satan ; 

Even  the  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke  thee : 

Is  not  this  a  brand  pluckt  out  of  the  fire  ? 

Now  Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments,  and  stood 
before  the  angel.  And  he  answered  and  spake  unto  those 
that  stood  before  him,  saying,  Take  away  the  filthy  garments 
from  him.  And  unto  him  he  said.  Behold,  I  have  caused 
thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee,  and  /  will  clothe  thee  with 

and  official  transgressions,  his  own  sins  and  the  sins  of  the  people  (Heb. 
V.  3;  vii.  27).  Sin,  the  sin  of  the  man  and  of  the  order  to  which  he 
belongs,  of  the  individual  and  of  the  nation  which  he  represents,  stands 
in  the  way  of  the  promised  blessing,  and  must  first  be  put  away  before 
that  blessing  can  be  enjoyed. 

2.  The  Lord^  Jehovah,  who  in  ver.  i,  5,  6,  is  called  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah. 

hath  chosen  jferusalem']  comp.  i.  17;  ii.  12;  and  for  the  argument 
Romans  viii.  33.  The  election  or  choice  of  God,  as  an  act  of  free  grace, 
is  insisted  on  in  like  manner  in  the  earlier  history.  Deut.  iv.  37;  vii. 
7,  8;  X.  15. 

a  brand  pluckt  out  of  the  fire\  i.e.  saved  from  imminent  and  almost 
completed  destruction,  comp.  i  Cor.  iii.  15.  A  similar  expression 
occurs  in  Amos  iv.  11.  In  Isaiah  vii.  4,  "from  the  two  tails  of  these 
smoking  brands,"  the  same  figure  is  used  with  a  different  reference. 
The  two  hostile  kings  are  there  compared  to  wooden  stakes  or  pokers, 
which  had  been  used  to  stir  up  the  flames,  but  which  were  themselves 
now  well-nigh  burnt  out  and  consumed,  and  need  therefore  cause  no 
further  apprehension. 

3.  filthy  garments\  There  is  no  allusion  to  the  Roman  custom  of 
accused  persons  wearing  sordid  attire  at  their  trials  {reits  sordidatics,  Liv. 
ii.  54,  vi.  20).  Nor  is  there  any  ground  for  the  idea  that  "an  accusa- 
tion had  been  lodged  against"  Joshua  "in  the  Persian  Court;"  and 
that  "the  splendid  attire  of  the  High  Priest,  studded  with  jewels,  had 
been  detained  at  Babylon,  or,  at  least,  could  not  be  worn  without  the 
special  permission  of  the  king;  and  until  the  accusations  had  been 
cleared  away  this  became  still  more  impossible"  (Stanley,  after  Ewald, 
Jetvish  Chjirch,  iii.  103).  The  promise  of  the  vision  is  not  that  "the 
soiled  and  worn  clothing  of  the  suffering  exile  shall  be  replaced,  by  the 
old  magnificence  of  Aaron  and  of  Zadok;"  but  that  in  accordance  with 
the  constant  imagery  of  Holy  Scripture  and  with  the  express  statement 
of  ver.  4,  "I  have  caused  thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee,"  the  guilt 
and  pollution  of  sin  shall  be  replaced  by  spotless  purity  and  holiness 
(Lev.  xvi.  4;  Isaiah  Ixiv.  6;  Rev.  vii.  14;  xix.  8). 

4.  he']   i.  e.  the  Angel  of  Jehovah. 

those  that  stood  before  him]  Angels  of  inferior  order,  who  though  not 
previously  mentioned  were  in  attendance,  as  was  fitting,  upon  the  Angel 
of  the  Lord.  Compare  for  the  expression  Genesis  xli.  46;  Deut.  i.  38; 
Daniel  i.  5. 


vv.  5—7.]  ZECHARIAH,   III.  8t 

change  of  raiment.     And  I  said,  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  5 
upon  his  head.     So  they  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head,  and 
clothed  him  with  garments.     And  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
stood   by.     And   the   angel   of  the    Lord   protested  unto  6 
Joshua,  saying, 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  7 

If  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  and  if  thou  wilt  keep  my 

charge, 
Then  thou  shalt  also  judge  my  house,  and  shalt  also  keep 

my  courts. 
And  I  will  give  thee  places  to  walk  among  these  that 
stand  by. 

change  of  raiment\  The  Hebrew  word  here  used  only  occurs  beside 
in  Isaiah  iii.  22,  "changeable  suits  of  apparel,"  where  number  and 
variety,  frequent  changing,  rather  than  costliness  or  magnificence, 
though  that  of  course  may  be  implied,  appears  to  be  the  subject  of 
rebuke.  So  here  a  change  of  dress,  not  necessarily  different  in  kind, 
but  pure  instead  of  being  defiled,  is  promised.  The  R.  V.  however, 
renders  rich  apparel  here,  z.x\A  festival  robes  in  Isaiah. 

5.  And  I  said']  The  speaker  might  be  the  Angel  of  the  Lord, 
reciting  further  the  commands  which  he  had  given.  But  it  is  better  to 
suppose  that  Zechariah,  looking  on  with  intense  interest,  gives  vent  to 
his  feelings,  in  the  request  that  the  now  comely  attire  of  the  High 
Priest  should  not  be  left  incomplete. 

mitre\  The  word  is  not  the  same  (though  from  the  same  root)  as  that 
used  in  Exodus  xxviii.  4,  36 — 38;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  same 
thing  is  intended. 

stood  by\  i.e.  remained  in  the  same  position  that  he  had  occupied 
before,  to  superintend  and  sanction  the  proceedings, 

6.  protested]  i.e.  solemnly  and  earnestly  affirmed.  Comp.  Gen. 
xliii.  3;  Jer.  xi.  7;  where  the  same  Hebrew  word  is  used. 

7.  judge  my  house]  This  may  mean  "my  people,"  Num.  xii.  7; 
Hosea  viii.  i ;  the  Jewish  Church  being  spoken  of,  like  the  Christian, 
as  the  house  of  God,  i  Tim.  iii.  15.  "Judgment,  in  the  place  of  God, 
was  part  of  the  High  Priest's  office."  (Pusey.)  See  Deut.  xvii.  8 — 13. 
But  it  may  be  used  in  its  more  obvious  and  restricted  sense  (comp.  "my 
courts,"  in  the  parallel  clause)  of  the  Temple  with  its  priests  and 
ministers. 

places  to  walk]  a  place  of  access,  R.  V.  text ;  meaning  presumably  of 
access  to  God.  Thou  shalt  be  admitted  to  the  immediate  presence 
and  throne  of  God.  There  is  no  need,  however,  to  depart  from  the 
rendering  of  A.V.  and  R.  V.  margin.  Comp.  Ezek.  xlii.  4  for  the 
word,  and  see  next  note. 

among  these  that  stand  by]  i.  e.  among  the  angels,  who  were  still 
standing  round  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  in  attendance  upon  Him  as 
He  spoke,  ver.  4.     The  courts  and  chambers  of  the  material  house, 

ZECHARIAH  6 


82  ZECHARIAH,    III.  [w.  8,  9. 

Hear  now,  O  Joshua  the  high  priest,  thou, 

And  thy  fellows  that  sit  before  thee  : 

For  they  are  men  wondered  at : 

For  behold,  I  will  bring  forth  my  servant  the  BRANCH. 

For  behold  the  stone  that  I  have  laid  before  Joshua ; 

FO  tlie  promise  runs,  shall  be  places  where  angels  ever  come  and  go. 
The  obedient  priest  shall  realise  in  his  ministry  their  presence  and 
their  fellowship.  The  material  and  the  sensible  shall  fade  away  as 
it  were  from  his  sight,  lost  in  the  higher  glory  of  the  spiritual  and  the 
heavenly.  The  promise  directly  refers  to  the  ministry  of  Joshua  and 
his  fellows  and  successors  on  earth;  even  if  it  includes  a  pledge  of  a 
higher  ministry  after  death  :  "  In  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  I  will 
raise  thee  to  life,  and  give  thee  feet  walking  am  ng  these  Seraphim." 
Targum.  To  one  priest.,  we  know,  who  walked  in  the  ways  and  kept 
the  charge  of  the  Lord  (Luke  i.  6),  the  promise  was  literally  fulfilled 
by  the  appearance  of  an  angel  to  him  in  the  Temple  (ver.  11);  and  the 
readiness  with  which  the  people  surmised  what  had  happened  (ver.  ii) 
might  seem  to  shew  that  his  was  not  an  altogether  singular  and  unheard 
of  experience. 

8.  that  sit  before  thee']  not,  "who  are  now  (seen)  sitting,"  for  Joshua, 
the  High  Priest,  alone  appears  in  the  vision,  but  "who  are  accustomed 
to  sit,"  as  the  inferior  priests  ("thy  fellows")  before  the  High  Priest  to 
receive  his  commands.  So  "the  sons  of  the  prophets"  sit  before 
Elisha  for  instruction,  ^  Kings  iv.  38;  vi.  i ;  and  "the elders  of  Israel" 
in  like  manner  before  Ezekiel,  viii.  i ;  xiv.  i. 

for  they  are  77ien  wondered  atl  Rather,  men  of  sign,  or  type:  men 
which  are  a  sign,  R.  V.  "Men  who  in  their  persons  (and  office)  shadow 
forth  future  events.  Ezek.  xii.  6,  11;  xxiv.  24,  27."  Gesen.  This 
clause  is  a  quasi-parenthesis.  The  direct  address  is  interrupted,  and  a 
reason,  as  it  were,  given  for  making  it:  "To  Joshua  and  his  fellows  1 
foretell  the  coming  of 'my  servant.  Branch,'  because  they,  the  priesthood, 
in  all  their  office  and  ministry,  as  well  as  in  what  has  just  happened 
to  them  in  the  vision  in  the  person  of  their  chief,  are  types  of  Him." 

tny  servant']  A  frequent  name  of  Messiah  in  Isaiah,  e.g.  xlii.  i ;  xlix. 
6;  Hi.  J  5;  liii.  11.  In  Actsiii.  13,  26;  iv.  27,  30;  the  R.  V.  has  restored 
the  true  rendering  of  Trats,  "Servant,"  not  "Son,"  or  "Child."  This 
vision  is  thus  more  distinctly  Messianic  than  those  which  preceded  it. 

The  Branch]  Lit.  Branch,  or  Shoot,  or  Sprout;  the  word  being  used 
as  a  proper  name  without  the  article.  Comp.  vi.  12 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5 ;  xxxiii. 
15.  The  use  by  the  LXX.  of  avarokf},  "that  which  rises  or  springs 
up,"  for  Branch  in  these  passages  has  led  to  the  "Dayspring"  (rightly 
so  rendered  as  the  context  shews)  of  Luke  i.  78.  The  early  and  re- 
peated failures  of  succeeding  High  Priests  and  their  fellows  to  fulfil  the 
conditions  and  claim  the  privilege  of  ver.  7,  as  we  learn  from  the  Books 
of  Ezra  (x.  18)  and  Nehemiah  (xiii.  4,  5,  28,  29),  and  from  the  Gospel 
history,  must  have  made  this  promise  of  the  "Branch"  especially 
precious  to  the  faithful  while  they  waited  for  its  fulfilment  (Luke  ii.  38). 

9.  the  stone  that  I  have  laid]  set,  R.  V.     The  primary  and  imme- 


V.  9-1  ZECHARIAH,    III.  83 

Upon  one  stone  shall  be  seven  eyes  : 

Behold,  I  will  engrave  the  graving  thereof,  saith  the  Lord 

of  hosts, 
And  I  will  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one  day. 

diate  reference  is  to  the  Temple,  in  re-building  which  Joshua  was  then 
engaged.  The  "stone,"  which  was  perhaps  seen  lying  before  him  in 
the  vision,  is  most  probably  not  the  foundation-stone,  which  had  been 
laid  years  before,  but  the  head-stone  (iv.  7,  9),  which  would  complete 
the  building,  and  which  He,  with  whom  to  purpose  is  to  accomplish, 
here  announces  that  He  has  already  laid ;  so  certainly  shall  it  be  set  in 
its  place  in  due  time.  The  ultimate  reference  is  to  Him,  who  as  "the 
Branch"  should  hereafter  "build  the  temple  of  the  Lord"  (vi.  12),  of 
which  He  is  not  only  the  Foundation-stone  (Isaiah  xxviii.  16;  i  Peter 
ii.  4,  5),  but  also  the  chief  corner-stone  (Ps.  cxviii.  22;  Matt.  xxi.  42; 
Ephes.  ii.  20),  The  two  fulfilments  of  the  prophecy  are  intimately  con- 
nected. The  first  is,  in  the  purpose  of  God,  the  necessary  preparation 
for  the  second. 

upon  one  stone  shall  be  seven  eyes'l  are,  R.  V.  This  may  mean  that 
seven  eyes  shall  be,  or  are,  sculptured  upon  the  stone ;  though  in  that 
case  it  is  difficult  to  understand  the  force  of  the  word  "^;/^,"  or  the 
significance  of  the  prediction  as  regards  the  Temple  then  in  progress. 
Typically,  the  seven  eyes  sculptured  on  the  stone  might  be  held  to 
represent  Him  whom  the  stone  symbolises,  as  '■'■  having  the  seven  spirits 
of  God"  (Rev.  v.  6).  It  is  better,  however,  to  understand  the  words 
to  be  a  promise  that  the  seven  eyes  (i.e.  the  perfect  watchfulness  and 
care — seven  being  the  number  of  perfection)  of  God  shall  be  fixed 
upon  this  stone;  that  He  will  never,  so  to  speak,  take  His  eyes  off 
either  type  or  anti-type,  till  His  purpose  respecting  them  is  accomplished. 
So  Solomon  prays,  at  the  dedication  of  the  first  Temple,  that  God's 
"eyes  may  be  open  upon  it  night  and  day,"  to  hear  the  prayers  that  are 
offered  there,  i  Kings  viii.  29.  This  view  is  confirmed  by  iv.  10, 
where  the  eyes  of  Jehovah  are  said  to  rejoice  when  (fixed  as  we  are  here 
told  in  unwearying  solicitude  on  the  Temple)  they  see  the  plummet  in 
the  hand  of  Zerubbabel,  as  he  busies  himself  in  its  restoration. 

/  will  engrave  the  graving  thereof^  Supposing  the  eyes  to  have  been 
marked  out  for  cutting  upon  the  stone,  some  have  thought  that  God  in 
these  words  engages  that  He  Himself  will  cut  them  there.  This  clause, 
however,  is  ratiier  to  be  regarded  as  an  additional  promise.  My  eyes,  I 
have  said,  are  fixed  upon  the  stone.  My  hand  shall  engrave  upon 
it  whatever  is  needed  to  beautify  and  fit  it  for  the  place  of  honour  it  is  to 
hold.  The  word  here  used  for  "engrave"  occurs  three  times  in  Exodus 
xxviii.,  in  the  expression  "engravings  of  a  signet;"  twice  of  the  jewels 
in  the  High  Priest's  dress  (11,  21),  once  of  the  golden  plate  on  his 
mitre  (36).  It  is  used,  however,  of  a  bolder  kind  of  engraving,  more 
like  what  would  here  be  contemplated,  of  "cherubim,  lions  and  paJm 
trees,"  on  the  panels  of  the  "bases,"  on  which  the  lavers  were  set  in 
Solomon's  Temple,     (i  Kings  vii.  36). 

in  one  day]     It  is  possible  that  the  renewal  of  the  typical  expiation 

6—2 


84  ZECHARIAH,   III.  [v.  lo. 

In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
Shall  ye  call  every  man  his  neighbour, 
Under  the  vine  and  under  the  fig  tree. 

of  sin  in  "one  day,"  the  Day  of  Atonement  (Lev.  xvi.  21,  30,  34),  con- 
sequent upon  the  re-building  of  the  Temple  and  the  resumption  of  its 
services,  is  here  glanced  at.  But  the  goal  of  the  prophecy  is  **the  day 
of  Golgotha."  "A  Jewish  writer  confessed  the  mystery  while  he  said, 
^  One  day,  I  know  not  what  that  day  is.'  Ask  any  Christian  child, 
'  On  what  day  was  iniquity  removed,  not  from  the  land  only,  but  from 
all  lands?'     He  would  say,  'On  the  day  when  Jesus  died.' "     Pusey. 

10.  The  consequence  of  the  removal  of  the  iniquity  of  the  land  shall 
be  the  return  of  the  peaceful  and  prosperous  days  of  Solomon  (i  Kings 
iv.  25),  and  social  intercourse  and  festivity  shall  prevail  on  every  side. 
Micah  had  already  made  this  a  type  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  (iv.  4). 

"We  are  told  in  the  Talmud  (Yoma  vii.  4)  that  when,  on  the  great 
Day  of  Atonement,  the  high  priest  had  performed  the  various  duties 
of  that  solemn  day,  he  was  escorted  home  in  a  festive  manner,  and 
was  accustomed  to  give  a  festal  entertainment  to  his  friends.  The 
maidens  and  youths  of  the  people  went  forth  to  their  gardens  and 
vineyards  with  songs  and  dances ;  social  entertainments  took  place  on 
all  sides,  and  universal  gladness  closed  the  festival  of  that  solemn  day." 
Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright,  Bampton  Lectures,  pp.  77,  78. 

The  Fifth  Vision.  The  Golden  Ca7idlestick.  iv.  1 — 14.  Roused  by 
the  Interpreting  Angel  from  a  sleep  or  stupor,  into  which  he  appears  to 
have  fallen,  ver.  i,  the  prophet  sees  a  golden  candlestick  or  lamp-stand. 
Like  'that  originally  placed  in  the  Tabernacle,  it  has  seven  lamps, 
but  they  are  fed  by  a  bowl  placed  above  them,  from  which  the  oil  is 
conveyed  into  them  by  pipes,  ver.  2.  The  bowl  itself  is  supplied  with 
oil  by  two  olive-trees,  standing  one  on  either  side  of  the  lamp,  which 
empty  their  oil  into  the  bowl,  each  through  a  golden  tube,  ver.  3,  12. 
At  the  request  of  Zechariah,  ver.  4,  the  Interpreting  Angel,  with  some 
show  of  surprise  that  explanation  should  be  needed,  ver.  5,  explains  to 
him  the  meaning  of  the  vision.  It  is  intended  to  encourage  Zembbabel 
in  the  work  of  re-building  the  Temple,  by  impressing  upon  him  the 
truth,  that  as  that  candlestick  gave  forth  its  light,  in  silent,  ceaseless 
splendour,  unfed  and  untended  by  human  agencies,  so  the  work  in 
which  he  was  engaged,  of  restoring  the  material  Temple  and  setting  the 
golden  candlestick  in  its  place  again,  and  so  preparing  the  way,  first  for 
the  Jewish  Church,  and  then  for  the  Christian  Church,  which  that 
candlestick  symbolised  (Rev.  i.  20),  to  shine  in  the  world,  should  be 
accomplished,  not  by  human  resources,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  ver.  6. 
The  great  principle  involved  in  the  symbol  and  thus  enunciated  is 
now  applied  to  the  case  in  hand.  The  mountain  of  difficulty,  which 
stands  in  the  way  of  Zerubbabel,  shall  sink  down  into  a  plain.  With 
shouts  of  festive  joy  he  shall  set  in  its  place  the  crowning  stone  of  the 
edifice,  ver.  7.  Yet  again,  by  a  repeated  assurance  conveyed  to  the 
prophet  through  the  Angel,  ver.  8,  Jehovah  confirms  the  promise  to 
Zerubbabel,  that  his  hands  which  have  begun  shall  complete  the  work, 


I,  2.]  ZECHARIAH,    IV.  85 


And    the   angel   that   talked  with  me  came  again,  and  4 
waked  me,  as  a  man  that  is  wakened  out  of  his  sleep,  and  2 
said  unto  me,  What  seest  thou  ?     And  I  said,  I  have  looked, 
and  behold,  a  candlestick  all  of  gold,  with  a  bowl  upon  the 

and  prove  in  doing  so  the  divine  mission  of  the  angel,  ver.  9.  Despica- 
ble as  it  might  appear  in  its  feeble  beginnings  in  the  sight  of  man,  the 
eyes  of  Jehovah,  which  were  not  only  fixed  upon  it  with  unceasing 
watchfulness  (iii.  9),  but  ran  to  and  fro  through  the  whole  earth  to 
take  cognisance  of  and  deal  with  every  hindering  and  every  helping 
influence,  rejoiced  to  see  the  progress  of  that  house,  ver.  10.  Not 
satisfied  with  this  exposition  of  its  main  scope,  the  prophet  asks  for  in- 
formation as  to  some  of  the  details  of  the  vision.  What,  he  would  fain 
know,  is  the  significance  of  the  two  olive-trees,  ver.  11,  or  yet  more 
precisely,  of  the  two  branches  of  them,  which  through  the  two  golden 
tubes  empty  their  oil  into  the  bowl  of  the  lamp,  ver.  12.  The  answer, 
again  given  with  some  show  of  surprise  at  the  question,  ver.  13,  by  the 
Interpreting  Angel,  is  calculated  by  its  obscurity  rather  to  fix  attention 
on  the  chief  lesson  of  the  vision,  than  to  interpret  the  details  to  which 
reference  is  made.  Suffice  it  to  know  that  the  olive  trees  represent 
agencies,  by  which  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  is  pleased  to  supply  the 
requirements  of  His  Church,  ver.  14. 

Ch.  IV. — 1.  came  again  and  waked  me']  Or,  returned  and  zvaked 
me,  i.e.  waked  me  again.  Comp.  v.  i.  "The  prophet  intimates  that 
he  lay  as  one  weighed  down  with  ecstatic  sleep,  through  wonder  and 
astonishment  at  the  preceding  vision."  Rosenm.  Comp.  Dan.  viii.  18, 
27;  Luke  ix.  32. 

2.  J  have  looked]  Rather,  I  have  seen,  the  word  being  the  same  as 
in  the  Angel's  question,  What  seest  thou? 

A  candlestick  all  of  gold]  The  word  here  used  for  candlestick  (though 
not  restricted  to  that,  2  Kings  iv.  10)  is  always  used  of  the  candlestick 
in  the  Tabernacle,  That  too,  like  this,  was  "all  of  gold."  Ex.  xxv. 
31.  "It  has  been  calculated  to  have  been  worth  Z5>o76,  exclusive 
of  workmanship."  Diet,  of  Bible,  Art.  Candlestick.  In  Solomon's 
Temple  there  were  ten  candlesticks  (i  Kings  vii.  49;  2  Chron.  iv.  7; 
comp.  Jer.  Iii.  19),  either  in  addition  to,  or  instead  of,  the  one  in  the 
Tabernacle.  In  Zerubbabel's  Temple  one  candlestick  only  again  was 
seen,  as  we  learn  from  this  passage  and  i  Mace.  i.  23,  iv.  49;  as  well 
as  from  the  sculpture  on  the  Arch  of  Titus. 

a  bowl]  Rather,  its  bowl,  or  reservoir.  The  candlestick  in  the 
Tabernacle  had  no  bowl  of  this  kind.  The  "bowls"  which  it  had  (Ex. 
xxv.  31,  33,  34;  xxxvii.  17,  19,  20; — quite  a  different  Heb.  word  from 
that  here  used,  and  rendei-ed  cups  in  R.  V.)  were  ornaments  like  scallop- 
shells,  or  the  calix  of  a  flower,  on  the  shaft  and  branches  of  the  candle- 
stick. The  lamps  were  trimmed  daily  by  the  priests  (Ex.  xxvii.  21). 
"They  were  each  supplied  with  cotton  and  half  a  log  of  the  purest 
olive-oil  (about  two  wine-glasses)  which  was  sufficient  to  keep  them 
burning  during  a  long  night."  Diet,  of  Bible.  The  use  of  the  same 
word   as  here  for  the  bowl  of  a  hanging  lamp,  suspended  from  the 


86  ZECHARIAH,   IV.  [vv.  3—7. 

top  of  it,  and  his  seven  lamps  thereon,  and  seven  pipes  to 

3  the  seven  lamps,  which  were  upon  the  top  thereof:  and  two 
olive  trees  by  it,  one  upon  the  right  side  of  the  bowl,  and  the 

4  other  upon  the  left  side  thereof  So  I  answered  and  spake 
to  the  angel  that  talked  with  me,  saying.  What  are  these,  my 

5  lord  ?  Then  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  answered  and 
said  unto  me,  Knowest  thou  not  what  these  be"}    And  I  said, 

6  No,  my  lord.  Then  he  answered  and  spake  unto  me, 
saying,  This  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zerubbabel, 
saying, 

Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  spirit, 
Saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

7  Who   art  thou,   O   great  mountain?    before  Zerubbabel 

thou  shalt  become  a  plain  : 

ceiling  by  a  "silver  cord,"  the  giving  way  of  which  causes  the  lamp  to 
fall  to  the  ground  and  be  shattered,  Eccles.  xii.  6,  has  led  some  to  thuik 
that  the  lamp  in  Zechariah's  vision  was  hanging  also.  This,  however,  is 
improbable.  The  addition  of  the  bowl  to  the  holy  candlestick  has  its 
obvious  meaning:  "not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  spirit," 
ver.  6.  No  human  agency  is  now  needed.  The  bowl  yields  a  ceaseless 
supply  of  oil. 

seven  pipes  to  the  seven  lampsX  This  has  been  variously  interpreted  to 
mean  either  one,  two,  or  seven  pipes  connecting  each  lamp  with  the 
oil-bowl.  The  most  natural  interpretation  of  our  present  Hebrew  text 
is,  that  each  lamp  of  the  candlestick  was  connected  by  seven  pipes  with 
the  bowl  which  fed  it  with  oil,  and  that  the  large  and  perfect  number 
of  pipes  is  intended  to  symbolise  the  plentifulness  of  the  supply.  There 
ai'e  seven  pipes  to  each  of  the  lamps.     R.  V. 

3.  two  olive  trees]  We  learn  afterwards  (ver.  11,  12)  that  each  of 
these  had  a  fruit-bearing  "branch,"  which  "emptied  itself"  (its  oil)  by 
a  golden  tube  into  the  oil-bowl  of  the  candlestick.  Human  agency  is 
again  set  aside.     The  berries  become  oil  without  the  aid  of  man. 

6.  Not  by  mighty  &c.]  This  is  the  teaching  of  the  vision,  its  mes- 
sage from  Jehovah  to  Zerubbabel.  Fed  "without  hands"  (Dan.  ii.  34) 
with  oil  the  lamp  in  the  vision  shone  brightly.  So  without  the  re- 
sources of  human  "might  and  power,"  which  to  "these  feeble  Jews" 
(Neh.  iv.  2)  were  altogether  wanting,  but  by  the  "Spirit"  of  Jehovah, 
of  which  the  oil  was  a  symbol,  should  the  Church  shine  yet  again  on 
Mount  Sion,  and  eventually  as  the  Church  of  Christ  throughout  the  world. 

7.  great  moiintain]  Comp.  Is.  xl.  4;  xlix.  11;  Matt.  xvii.  20,  xxi. 
21 ;  I  Cor.  xiii.  2.  So  had  the  mountain-like  obstacles  of  the  power  of 
their  captors  (Ezra  i.  i),  and  the  unwillingness  of  the  people,  first  to 
return  (ver.  5),  and  then  to  persevere  in  the  work  (Hag.  i.  14),  already 
"become  a  plain,"  by  the  "Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  stirring  up  the  spirit  of 


vv.  8—14.]  ZECHARIAH,   IV.  Zy 

And  he  shall  bring  forth  the  headstone  the^'eof  with  shout- 
ings, crying^  Grace,  grace  unto  it. 
Moreover  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,      s 
The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation  of  this  9 

house ; 
His  hands  shall  also  finish  it; 
And  thou  shalt  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me 

unto  you. 
For  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things 'i  '^ 

For  they  shall  rejoice,  and  shall  see  the  plummet  in  the 

hand  of  Zerubbabel  with  those  seven ; 
They  are  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  which  run  to  and  fro 

through  the  whole  earth. 
Then  answered  I,  and  said  unto  him.  What  are  these  two  n 
olive  trees  upon  the  right  side  of  the  candlestick  and  upon 
the  left  side  thereof?     And  I  answered  again,  and  said  unto  i^ 
him.  What  be  these  two  olive  branches  which  through  the  two 
golden  pipes  empty  the  golden  oil  out  of  themselves?     And  >. 
he  answered  me  and  said,  Knowest  thou  not  what  these  bel 
And  I  said.  No,  my  lord.     Then  said  he.   These  are  the  ^ 


Grace,  g7'ace  unto  it]  i.e.  all  favour  rest  upon  it!  "Faveat  ei  Deus, 
faveant  homines."  Maurer. 

9,  thotc  shalt  knoiu,  &c.]  It  is  again  asserted  that  the  divine  mis- 
sion of  the  angel  shall  be  proved  by  the  accomplishment  of  that  which 
he  predicts.     Comp.  ii.  11 ;  Deut.  xviii.  22. 

10.  with  those  seven]     Rather,  even  these  seven,  as  in  R.  V. 

The  meaning  of  the  vei*se  is :  For  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small 
things?  (comp.  Hag.  ii.  3)  For  [seeing  that)  these  seven  eyes  of  Jehovah, 
which  run  to  and  fro  throughout  all  the  earthy  shall  rejoice  to  see  the 
plu7Twiet  in  the  hand  of  Zertibbabel.  Since,  then,  God  beholds  the  pro- 
gress of  the  work  with  joy  and  favour,  who  will  venture  to  despise  it? 

12.  olive  branches]  Having  seen  the  vision  (i — 3),  and  received  a 
general  explanation  of  it  {4 — 10),  Zechariah  now  desires  a  farther  ex- 
planation of  one  particular  feature  (11 — 14).  What,  he  asks,  are  the 
two  olive  trees  (n)?  and  then,  immediately  recasting  his  question  in 
more  exact  terms,  the  two  olive  branches?  The  word  is  allied  to,  if  not 
identical  with,  that  used  for  "ears  of  corn."  It  may  refer  to  the  pointed 
shape  of  the  twigs  of  the  olive  tree,  or  to  the  fact  that  these  branches 
were  studded  thick  with  berries,  like  the  grains  in  an  ear  of  corn. 
(Kimchi.) 

pipes]  Rather  tubes,  or  spouts;  the  word  being  different  from  that 
translated  "pipes,"  ver.  2.  Which  are  beside  the  two  golden  spouts,  that 
empty,  &c.     R.  \^ 


88 ZECHARIAH,   V.  [. 


two  anointed  ones,  that  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole 

earth. 
6      Then  I  turned,  and  lift  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and 
2  behold,   a   flying  roll.     And  he  said  unto  me,  What  seest 

thou?     And   I  answered,   I  see  a  flying  roll;   the  length 

14.  the  two  anointed  ones]  Rather,  sons  of  oU  (as  in  R  V.)  "Pro- 
bably not  as  themselves  anointed  (for  another  word  is  used  for  this 
and  the  whole  vision  has  turned  on  the  use  of  oil  as  an  instrument  of 
light,  not  of  anointing)  but  as  themselves  abundantly  ministering  the 
stream  which  is  the  source  of  light."  Pusey,  who  compares  the  ex- 
pression ''son  of  oil,"  i.e.  fertile  in  producing  oil,  Is.  v.  i.  The 
reference  here  is  generally  supposed  to  be  to  Zerubbabel  and  Toshuafas 
representing  the  kmgly  and  priestly  offices,  the  channels  through  which 
God  supplies  His  Church.  It  may  be  doubted,  however,  whether  the 
angel  does  not  purposely  avoid  giving  a  definite,  and  especially  a  human 
meaning  to  these  symbols.  The  tenor  of  the  whole  vision  is.  "bv  Mv 
Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  These  "sons  of  oil,"  then,  are  agents 
or  agencies,  near  to  God  and  beyond  our  ken,  "that  stand  by  the  Lord 
of  the  whole  earth."  With  this  view  would  seem  to  accord  the  fact, 
that  the  two  mysterious  "Witnesses,"  in  the  Book  of  Revelation  (xi.  4) 
are  spoken  of  as  being  ^^he  two  olive  trees... standing  before  the  God 
of  the  earth    ;  with  an  obvious  reference  to  Zechariah's  vision. 

iJ""^  ^.?^?  ^'T''';  ?'  ^^^'^"^  ^"^^'  ^-  '-4-  As  the  cleansing  of 
the  priesthood  m  the  fourth  vision  prepared  the  way  for  the  restored 
glory  of  the  Church  in  the  fifth,  so  the  cleansing  of  the  people,  by  the 
destruction  of  individual  sinners  in  the  sixth  vision,  and  by  the  ;emoval 
of  iniquity  itself  from  the  land  in  the  seventh,  prepares  the  M^ay  for 
the  d  htr'''"''^'  ^  ^''''^^  ^^^  complete  overthrow  of  their  enemies,  in 
Looking  up  again  the  Prophet  perceives  that  the  scene  has  changed 
once  more.  Instead  of  the  Golden  Candlestick  and  its  accompaniments, 
which  have  passed  out  of  view,  he  now  sees  a  large  roll  flying  through 
the  air,  ver  x,  and  in  answer  to  the  enquiry  of  the  Interpreting  Angd, 
tells  him  what  he  sees  and  how  great  are  its  dimensions,  ver.  2.  The 
Angel  explains  to  him  that  the  roll  is  the  vehicle  of  the  curse,  which  i^ 
bears  inscribed  upon  it,  and  which  it  is  commissioned  to  execute  upon 
impenitent  sinners,  whether  against  the  first  or  second  table  of  the  law. 
ver.  3.  The  swift  unerring  messenger  of  Jehovah  Himself,  it  shall 
enter  into  the  house  of  every  such  man  and  consume  it  utterly,  ver   4 

1.  I  turned  and  lift  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked]  Rather,  I  lifted  UT) 
mine  eyes  again  and  saw  a  flying  roll.  Its  flight  signified  the  swift 
coming  of  punishment;  its  flying  from  heaven  that  the  sentence  pro- 
ceeded from  the  judgment-seat  above. 

2.  the  length  thereof,  &c.]  The  roll  was  unfolded  and  opened  out 
The  dimensions  of  the  roll  seem  merely  to  be  mentioned  as  an  expres- 
sion of  the  prophet  s  wonder  at  its  size.     The  beholder  of  such  a  strange 


vv.  3,  4.]  ZECHARIAH,   V.  89 

thereof  is  twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  thereof  ten  cubits. 
Then  said  he  unto  me,  3 

This  is  the  curse  that  goeth  forth  over  the  face  of  the 

whole  earth  : 
For  every  one  that  stealeth  shall  be  cut  off  as  on  this  side 

according  to  it ; 
And  every  one  that  sweareth  shall  be  cut  off  as  on  that 

side  according  to  it. 
I  will  bring  it  forth,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  4 

And  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief, 
And  into  the  house  of  him  that  sweareth  falsely  by  my 

name : 
And  it  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  house, 

apparition  in  the  heavens  would  not  unnaturally  say  how  large  he  took 
it  to  be. 

3.  earth]     Rather  land,  i.  e.  the  land  of  Judah. 

every  one  that  stealetli]  The  breach  of  one  commandment  of  each 
table  of  the  law,  every  one  that  stealeth,  and  so  breaks  the  eighth  com- 
mandment in  the  second  table,  every  one  that  sweareth  (i.e.  falsely  by 
God's  name  ver.  4),  and  so  breaks  the  third  commandment  in  the  first 
table,  is  singled  out,  perhaps  because  these  were  then  the  most  prevalent 
sins  amongst  the  Jews,  as  typical  of  all  transgression.  "For  whoso- 
ever shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty 
of  all."     James  ii.  10,  11. 

on  this  side  according  to  it]  If  we  retain  this  translation  (or,  on  the 
one  side,  on  the  other  side,  R.  V.)  it  will  mean  that  the  roll  was  written 
on  both  sides,  and  that  on  the  one  side  was  inscribed  the  curse  against 
those  who  broke  the  first  table  of  the  law,  and  on  the  other  side  the 
curse  against  those  who  broke  the  second  table.  Some  however  translate 
for  every  thief  shall  he  driven  out  hence  [from  hence,  R.  V.  margin),  i.e. 
from  this  land,  according  to  it^  and  every  S7uearer  shall  be  driven  out  hence 
according  to  it.  The  objection  to  this  is,  that  in  the  following  verse  we 
learn  that  the  mission  of  the  curse  is  not  to  expel  sinners  from  the  land, 
but  to  consume  them  in  it.  If  with  Pusey  we  take  the  woi-d  "cut  off," 
A.  V.  to  mean  ^'•cleansed  away''''  [purged  out,  R.  V.),  as  something 
defiled  and  defiling,  which  has  to  be  cleared  away  as  offensive,  the 
objection  would  be  removed.  The  sinner  is  cleansed  away  from  the 
land  when  he  is  utterly  destroyed. 

4.  it  shall  remain]  abide,  R.  V.,  "until  it  has  accomplished  that 
for  which  it  was  sent,  its  utter  destruction."     Pusey. 

Mr  Wright  in  his  commentary  quotes,  in  illustration  of  the  curse 
abiding  till  it  has  accomplished  its  mission,  the  story  of  Glaucus  (Herod, 
vi.  86),  who  consulted  the  oracle  as  to  whether  he  were  at  liberty  to 
perjure  himself,  and  retain  for  his  own  use  a  sum  of  money  which  had 
been  committed  to  his  trust.  The  response  was  that  though  such  a 
course  would  be  for  his  present  gain,  "  yet  an  oath  hath  a  nameless  son. 


9°  ZECHARIAH,   V. 


l^^-  5—7- 

"^"stoneslherTor'  "  '''^^^^^^^^'^^'^^^^^^^^^^^^^the 
5      Then  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went  forth   and  s^iH 

unto  me  l.,ft  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  see  what  >  this  W 
^  goeth  forth      And  I  said,  What'u  it  ?     And  he    ai^   Th  s  ' 

an  ephah  that  goeth  forth.  He  said  moreover,  This  ,>  the  r 
7  resemblance  through  all  the  earth.     And  behold,  there  a,l 

handless  and  footless,  yet  swift  in  pursuit  till  he  seize  and  destroy  the 

ponp-^r^^-sTr^^^^^^^ 

tS:tX\^:i^S^  *^  '""  ^-^^  to  incur  the  guiit'rrSec'ut^l 

Jni,^=rX\S:.rz:-tfS  ;;rc-i,r^ 

view,  ver  5  Zechariah  sees  an  Ephah,  or  large  measure  IppeirZLThe 

enquiring  its  destination,  ver.  lo,  he  learns  from  the  Anlei  that  k  is  to 

5.  7aenf  /or^/t]  or,  came  forth.  During  the  intervals  between  the 
visions,  when  the  prophet  was  overpowered  by,  or  S?n  cortemplat  on 
of,  what  he  had  seen,  the  Interpreting  Angel  falls  into  the Semur 
exprt^/mLl^io^neT^"^  '^"^  ^'^'^^  ^  ^^P^^"^^  -  ^^^:^'^ 
cllif  vi^r^^  ''■'  ^^^^^^^^^Z^'-^^'  ^-  -  f--  the  surrounding  darkness  into 

"itfewfl"'''''"'"*''"";''^'   ^''-  tl'^'reye.    So  we  read  of  the  manna 

comrL^v.'xir;;:  eLI  Tr^6''^  ^^^  °'  ''■^^'"™'"  ^"^  ^■•"• 


vv.  8,  9.]  ZECHARIAH,   V.  91 

lift  up  a  talent  of  lead  :  and  this  is  a  woman  that  sitteth  in 
the  midst  of  the  ephah.     And  he  said,  This  is  wickedness,  s 
And  he  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  the  ephah  ;  and  he  cast  the 
weight  of  lead  upon  the  mouth  thereof.    Then  lift  I  up  mine  9 

all  the  land,"  inasmuch  as  they  are  now  no  longer  scattered _ over  it,  as 
in  the  preceding  vision,  but  gathered  up  in  one,  like  the  grains  of  corn 
in  a  measure.  It  is  better,  however,  to  give  a  wider  meaning  to  the 
word  "this,"  viz.  this  ephah,  with  all  that  you  will  see  in  the  vision* 
regarding  it,  is  the  resemblance  or  representation  of  the  wicked  through 
all  the  land,  and  of  what  shall  befall  them. 
the  earth']     Rather,  tlie  land. 

7.  a  talent  of  lead]  Rather,  a  circle  of  lead,  i.e.  a  thick  circular 
plate  or  lamina  of  lead,  which  formed  the  lid  or  cover  of  the  ephah,  ver. 
8;  round  piece,  R.  V.  margin.  This  the  prophet  saw  in  the  act  of 
being  "lifted  up"  from  the  mouth  of  the  ephah,  in  order  to  give  him  a 
view  of  its  contents. 

and  this]  which  now  comes  into  view  as  the  lid  is  raised.  To  indicate 
the  raising  of  the  cover  just  at  this  moment,  the  R.  V.  prints  the  first 
part  of  ver.  7  within  brackets. 

8.  This  is  wickedness]  This  woman  that  thou  seest  sitting  in  the 
ephah  represents  the  wickedness  of  the  whole  land,  gathered  up,  as  it 
were,  into  one  and  personified. 

the  weight  of  lead]  Lit.  tlie  stone  of  lead;  so  called,  either  because 
stones  were  used  as  weights  (comp.  our  English  word  "stone"),  or  be- 
cause the  leaden  lid  on  the  mouth  of  the  ephah  suggested  by  its  size 
and  weight  the  stone  cover  of  a  well.     Gen.  xxix.  2. 

upon  the  mouth  thereof]  Lit.  upon  her  mouth;  but  rightly  rendered 
thereof  as  the  reference  seems  plainly  to  be  to  the  ephah,  on  which  the 
angel  firmly  fixed  the  lid,  when  he  had  cast  down  the  woman  into  it. 

A  different,  but  less  satisfactory,  view  of  the  vision  has  been  taken. 
According  to  this  the  woman  is  seen  "having  in  her  hand  the  leaden 
weight  with  which  she  was  wont  to  traffic,  and  sitting  crouched  down 
in  an  empty  bushel  or  ephah,  as  if  that  were  her  true  seat  and  throne.... 
It  was  a  special  form  of  wickedness  that  was  here  pourtrayed,  namely, 
unrighteousness  as  it  manifests  itself  in  matters  of  weight  and  measure, 
or,  to  designate  it  in  our  Lord's  own  words,  'unfaithfulness  as  regards 
the  unrighteous  mammon'. ..But  'with  the  same  measure  that  ye  mete 
withal,  shall  it  be  measured  to  you  again.'  The  very  instrument  which 
the  woman  used  for  her  unholy  work  was  to  be  the  means  of  her  con- 
fusion. The  ephah  in  which  she  sat  was  made  the  chariot  in  which 
she  was  removed  from  the  land ;  and  the  angel,  with  righteous  indigna- 
tion, seized  the  woman  herself,  dashed  her  down  into  the  ephah  as  she 
was  about  to  rise  from  her  sitting  posture,  and  taking  hold  of  the  leaden 
weight,  flung  the  heavy  'stone  of  lead '  upon  her  mouth.  Thus  did  the 
angel  indicate  that  'wickedness'  would  be  a  subject  of  Divine  wrath. 
He  smote  her  in  the  mouth  wherewith  she  had  so  often  uttered  words 
of  lying  and  fraud;  and  did  so  with  the  very  instrument  with  which 


92  ZECHARIAH,   V.  [w.  lo,  ii. 

eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold,  there  came  out  two  women, 
and  the  wind  was  in  their  wings ;  for  they  had  wings  like 
the  wings  of  a  stork  :  and  they  lift  up  the  ephah  between  the 
earth  and  the  heaven.  Then  said  I  to  the  angel  that  talked 
with  me.  Whither  do  these  bear  the  ephah  ?  And  he  said 
unto  me.  To  build  it  a  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar :  and  it 
shall  be  established,  and  set  there  upon  her  own  base. 

she  was  wont  to  measure  her  ungodly  gain.  Thus  was  her  mouth 
stopped  (Ps.  cvii.  42;  Job  v,  16),  and  the  instrument  of  sin  was  made 
the  instrument  of  her  punishment."  (Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright.)  The 
moral  of  the  vision,  however,  is  not  the  destruction,  nor  even  the  pun- 
ishment of  wickedness,  but  its  expulsion  from  the  holy  land,  that  it  may 
go  to  its  own  place. 

9.     looked\     Rather,  saw. 

came  oui\  or  came  forth  (as  in  ver.  5,  6),  from  the  surrounding  dark- 
ness upon  the  stage  or  scene  of  the  vision. 

No  meaning  need  be  sought  for  the  details  of  this  verse.  They 
merely  convey  the  fact,  clothed  in  imagery  in  keeping  with  the  vision, 
that  wickedness  was  borne  swiftly  from  the  land.  "  Pertinent  haec  ad 
colorem  imaginis."     Maurer. 

11.  To  build  it  a  house]  The  word  "it"  is  feminine  (lit.  her),  and 
may  refer  either  to  the  ephah  or  to  the  woman,  as  the  words,  on  her 
own  base,  at  the  end  of  the  verse  may  also  do.  It  is  perhaps  simplest 
to  understand  the  reference  in  both  cases  to  be  to  the  woman,  whose 
destination  was  by  implication  asked  in  the  prophet's  question,  ver.  10. 
The  house  may  be  either  a  dwelling-place,  or  possibly  a  temple,  *'as 
Dagon  (i  Sam.  v.  1 — 5),  or  Ashtaroth  {lb.  xxxi.  10),  or  Baal  (2  Kings 
X.  23),  had  their  houses  or  temples,  a  great  idol  temple  in  which  the 
God  of  this  world  should  be  worshipped."     Pusey. 

in  the  land  of  Shijiar]  i.e.  Babylonia,  with  a  reference  perhaps  to 
**  that  first  attempt  to  array  a  world-empire  against  God,"  which  took 
place  in  "the  land  of  Shinar."     Gen.  xi.  2. 

it  shall  be  established]  i.  e.  the  house. 

and  set  there]  Rather,  and  she  (the  woman)  shall  be  made  to  rest 
there.  The  whole  verse  will  then  read,  as  in  R.  V.,  To  build  her  an 
house  in  the  land  of  Shinar:  and  when  it  is  prepared,  she  shall  be  set 
there  in  her  oiun  place. 

The  Eighth  Vision.  The  Four  Chariots,  vi.  r— 8.  In  this 
vision  four  chariots  appear  to  the  prophet  coming  upon  the  scene, 
along  the  valley  or  defile  between  two  mountains  of  brass  or  copper, 
ver.  I.  The  chariots  are  drawn  by  horses  of  different  colours,  ver. 
2,  3.  In  answer  to  the  prophet's  enquiry,  ver.  4,  the  Interpreting 
Angel  informs  him  that  these  chariots  represent  the  four  spirits  or 
winds  of  heaven,  which  are  coming  forth  from  the  immediate  pre- 
sence of  God,  charged  with  the  commands  which  He  had  there  laid 
upon  them,  ver.  5.     Of  three  of  these  chariots,  distinguishing  them  by 


V.  I.J  ZECHARIAH,   VI.  93 

And   I  turned,  and  lift  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and  6 
behold,   there   came   four  chariots  out  from    between  two 
mountains;    and  the  mountains  were  mountains  of  brass. 

the  colours  of  the  horses  which  are  yoked  to  them,  the  angel  then  an- 
nounces the  destination.  Passing  by  the  first  chariot  to  which  red  horses 
were  attached,  he  says  that  the  second  which  had  black  horses  was  on 
its  way  to  "the  north  country,"  the  land  of  Babylon,  to  be  followed 
thither  by  the  third  which  was  drawn  by  white  horses.  The  fourth 
chariot,  with  its  speckled,  or  piebald  horses,  was  about  to  visit  "the 
south  country,"  ver.  6;  but  inasmuch  as  its  horses  were  specially 
"strong,"  their  commission  was  extended,  and  the  whole  earth  granted 
them  for  their  course,  ver.  7.  Upon  this  the  Interpreting  Angel  cries 
aloud  to  the  prophet  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  that  by  the  mission  of 
these  His  messengers  of  wrath.  His  sore  displeasure  (chap.  i.  15)  against 
His  enemies  and  the  enemies  of  His  people  in  the  north  country  is 
appeased,  and  His  spirit  quieted,  ver.  8. 

1.     turned,  and  lift  up\     Rather,  lifted  up  again.     Comp.  v.  i. 

looked^     Rather,  saw. 

four  chariots]  These  have  very  commonly  been  identified  with  the 
four  great  powers  or  kingdoms  of  Daniel's  visions  (chap,  ii.,  vii. ).  The 
first  chariot,  as  to  the  destination  of  which  the  vision  is  silent,  will 
then  represent  the  Babylonian  empire,  of  which  the  power  was  already 
broken,  and  which  had  therefore  no  future  to  be  foretold.  The  second 
and  third  chariots  are,  on  this  supposition,  the  Medo- Persian  and  Ma- 
cedo-Grecian  empires,  by  which  successively  the  overthrow  of  Babylon, 
"the  north  country,"  was  to  be  completed;  while  the  fourth  chariot, 
the  power  of  Rome,  triumphing  first  over  Egypt,  "the  south  country," 
extends  its  victorious  sway  over  all  the  eartli.  This  view,  however,  is 
not  without  its  difficulties,  and  some  commentators  prefer  to  regard  the 
chariots  generally,  in  accordance  with  the  interpretation  put  upon  them 
by  the  Angel  (ver.  5),  as  swift  and  mighty  engines  of  destruction  (four 
in  number  like  "the  winds  of  heaven"),  which  fall  with  twofold  ven- 
geance (ver.  6)  on  Babylon  the  latest  enemy  of  Israel,  while  they  exe- 
cute wrath  also  upon  Egypt  {lb.),  her  earher  oppressor,  and  thus  cause 
that  "shaking  of  all  nations,"  which  was  the  promised  precursor  of 
good.     Hag.  ii.  7. 

two  moiintainsl  Lit.  the  two  mountains.  The  use  of  the  definite 
article  has  been  held  to  indicate  the  (well-known)  mountains,  either  of 
Zion  and  Moriah  (which,  however,  do  not  appear  to  have  been  generally 
regarded  by  the  Jews  as  two),  or  more  commonly  of  Zion  and  Olives. 
The  chariots  would  then  travel  along  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  This 
is  not,  however,  necessarily  the  force  of  the  article  (comp.  ^'•the  ephah," 
ver.  6).  It  may  only  mean  that  the  prophet  saw  the  chariots  coming 
into  view  between  "the  two  mountains,"  which  he  had  previously 
noticed  though  he  has  not  previously  mentioned  them,  as  the  side- 
scenes  of  the  picture. 

?nountains  of  brass]  Denoting,  perhaps,  that  the  great  powers  or 
agencies,  which  overthrow  empires  and  shape  the  destinies  of  nations, 


94  ZECHARIAH,  VI.  [vv.  2—7. 

2  In  the  first  chariot  were  red  horses;  and  in  the  second  cha- 

3  riot  black  horses ;  and  in  the  third  chariot  white  horses ; 

4  and  in  the  fourth  chariot  grisled  a?id  bay  horses.  Then  I 
answered  and  said  unto  the  angel  that  talked  with  me,  What 

5  are  these,  my  lord  ?  And  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto 
me,  These  are  the  four  spirits  of  the  heavens,  which  go  forth 

6  from  standing  before  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth.  The  black 
horses  which  are  therein  go  forth  into  the  north  country;  and 
the  white  go  forth  after  them ;  and  the  grisled  go  forth  to- 

7  ward  the  south  country.  And  the  bay  went  forth,  and 
sought  to  go  that  they  might  walk  to  and  fro  through  the 
earth :  and  he  said,  Get  ye  hejice^  walk  to  and  fro  through 
the  earth.     So  they  walked  to  and  fro  through  the  earth. 


as  they  come  forth  from  God  (ver.  5),  so  also  have  their  course  defined 
by  the  counsels  of  11  is  irresistible  and  immutable  will. 

2.  red  horses]  The  colours  of  the  horses  are  not  necessarily  signifi- 
cant (see  i.  8,  and  note  there).  They  have,  however,  been  interpreted, 
as  for  example  by  Pusey:  "Red,  as  the  colour  of  blood,  represented 
Babylon  as  sanguinary  (Rev.  vi.  4)."  "The  colour  black  doubtless 
symbolises  the  heavy  lot,  inflicted  by  the  Medo-Persians  [lb.  5,  6)." 
"White  is  a  symbol  of  joy,  glachiess  (Eccl.  ix.  8),  victory  (Rev.  vi.  2), 
perhaps  also,  from  its  relation  to  light  of  acute  intelligence."  "The 
grizzled,  the  Romans  in  their  mingled  character,  so  prominent  in  the 
lourth  empire  of  Daniel  (ii.  41 — 43)." 

3.  grisled  and  bay]  Rather,  spotted  and  active,  or  strong,  as  in 
margin  of  A.  V.  and  R.  V.  They  were  spotted,  perhaps  with  white  spots 
on  a  dark  ground,  "sparsis  pellibus  albo  dixit"  (Virgil,  Ec.  ii.  41); 
comp.  Gen.  xxxi.  10,  12.  In  addition  to  the  mention  of  their  distin- 
guishing colour,  they  are  said  here  to  be  active,  and  again  in  ver.  7, 
where  the  reason  for  this  characteristic  being  mentioned  appears  in  the 
request  which  they  make. 

5.  spirits]     Rather,  winds.     Comp.  Rev.  vii.  i. 

from  statiditig  before]  as  servants  to  receive  His  commands.  Psalm 
civ.  4. 

6.  the  black  horses  zvhich  are  therein]  Lit.  (that)  wlierein  are  tlie 
black  horses,  (they,  the  horses)  are  going  forth,  &c.,  i.e.  The  chariot 
lohercin  are  the  black  horses  goeth  forth,  &c.     R.  V. 

the  north  cozmtry]     The  land  of  Babylon,  see  ii.  6. 
the  south  country]  probably  Egypt.     Comp.  Dan.  xi.  5. 

7.  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth]  The  supposed  mixed  colour 
of  these  horses  has  been  thought  to  signify  a  mixed  exercise  of  judgment 
and  mercy  by  the  power  which  they  represent :  "  partim  ut  malis  supplicia 
irrogarent,  partim  ut  bonos,  si  qui  supersint,  defenderent."  Rosenm. 
But  the  scope  of  the  vision  seems  rather  to  point  to  judgment  exclusively. 


8— lo.]  ZECHARIAH,  VI.  95 


Then  cried  he  upon  me,  and  spake  unto  me,  saying,  Behold,  8 
these  that  go  toward  the  north  country  have  quieted  my 
spirit  in  the  north  country. 

And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  Take  of  ?, 

8.  cried  he  ttpon  me']  The  word  is  used  of  a  royal  proclamation 
cried  aloud  through  the  city.  Jonah  iii.  7.  Here  the  loud  call  of  the 
Angel  was  probably  intended  to  rouse  the  prophet's  attention  to  what 
was  the  chief  point  of  the  vision. 

quieted  my  spirii}  Lit.  liave  caused  my  spirit  to  rest,  which  was 
perturbed  before  with  sore  displeasure  against  my  enemies  (i.  15),  but 
is  now  at  rest  because  the  righteous  retribution  is  completed.  Others 
take  "spirit"  to  be  equivalent  here,  as  it  is  elsewhere  (Eccles.  x.  4; 
Prov.  xxix.  II,  in  which  latter  place,  as  here,  the  LXX  have  dvfxos),  to 
anger.  "Nave  made  my  a7tger  to  rest  on,  i,  e.  have  carried  it  thither  and 
deposited  it  there,  made  it  to  rest  upon  them  as  its  abode,  as  St  John 
says  of  the  unbelieving,  'the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.'"  Pusey. 
See  Ezek.  v.  13;  xvi.  42. 

Symbolical  Action.  Crowning  of  the  High-priest,  ^\.  9 — 15.  In 
another  of  the  "divers  manners"  (TroXurpoTrws,  Heb.  i.  i),  which  He  was 
l)leased  to  adopt,  Almighty  God  now  speaks  by  the  prophet.  The 
visions  of  the  night  give  place  to  a  literal  transaction  by  day,  which, 
however,  repeats  and  confirms  their  message.  Zechariah  is  directed  to 
go  to  the  house  of  Josiah  in  Jerusalem,  and  to  take  from  certain  Jews 
who  were  lodging  there  gold  and  silver,  a  portion  of  the  offerings  to  the 
House  of  God,  which  they  had  brought  from  their  brethren  still  in  exile, 
ver.  9,  10.  Of  this  gold  and  silver  he  is  to  make  a  crown,  and  put  it 
on  the  head  of  Joshua  the  High-priest,  ver.  11.  The  significant  action 
is  to  be  accompanied  by  a  prediction  in  the  name  of  Jehovali,  that 
in  due  time  there  shall  "grow  up  the  Branch,"  who  shall  be  the 
true  builder  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  who  shall  be  both  King  and 
Priest,  and  in  the  exercise  of  those  two  offices  the  author  and  dispenser  of 
peace,  ver.  12,  13.  Meanwhile,  in  gracious  remembrance  both  of  those 
who  have  brought  the  offerings  and  of  him  who  has  received  them  into 
his  house,  the  crown  which  has  been  placed  on  the  High-priest's  head 
is  to  be  hung  up  in  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  ver.  14,  where  it  will 
also  be  a  silent  prophecy  of  the  day  when  not  only  Jewish  exiles,  but 
Gentiles  also  who  are  now  "far  off,"  shall  be  builders  in  the  spiri- 
tual temple.  That  event,  when  it  comes  to  pass,  will  prove  the 
divine  mission  of  the  prophet ;  but  obedience  on  the  part  of  those  who 
hear  the  prophecy  is  the  condition  of  their  sharing  in  the  blessings 
of  its  fulfilment,  ver.  15. 

9.  came  unto  me]  There  is  no  note  of  time.  It  may  well  have 
been  shortly  after  the  night  on  which  Zechariah  saw  the  visions,  or  the 
day  on  which  he  told  them  to  the  people. 

10.  Take]  Lit.  to  take.  This  has  been  thought  to  be  a  general 
direction,  extending  to  all  that  they  had  brought,  "let  (their  offerings) 


96  ZECHARIAH,   VI.  [w.  ii,  12. 

them  of  the  captivity,  even  of  Heldai,  of  Tobijah,  and  of 
Jedaiah,  which  are  come  from  Babylon,  and  come  thou  the 
same  day,  and  go  into  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Zepha- 

11  niah ;  then  take  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns,  and  set 
them  upon  the  head  of  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech  the  high 

12  priest ;    and   speak  unto  him,   saying,    Thus  speaketh  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  saying, 

Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  The  BRANCH  ; 
And  he  shall  grow  up  out  of  his  place. 
And  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord  : 

be  received,  or  accepted;"  the  special  talcing  of  silver  and  gold  for  a 
particular  purpose  by  the  prophet  being  mentioned  in  the  next  verse. 
But  there  is  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  the  Jews  who  were 
rebuilding  the  temple  had  ever  any  scruple  about  receiving  such  offer- 
ings even  from  heathens  (Ezra  i.  4,  6,  7;  vi.  8 — 10),  so  that  such  a 
direction  would  have  been  superfluous.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  render 
with  A.  V.  '■'■take  {thouy  sc.  "silver  and  gold,"  the  direction  being 
interrupted  to  tell  the  prophet  where  to  meet  with  these  men,  and  re- 
sumed at  the  beginning  of  ver.  ii. 

//^<f  frt'//zz'?/>']  used  of  the  Jews  who  had  returned  from  exile  to  their 
own  land,  Ezr.  ix.  4,  x.  8;  but  also,  as  here,  of  those  who  were  still 
in  exile,  Ezek.  i.  i,  iii.  11,  15. 

ivhich  are  come  from  Babylon"]  This  clause  is  transposed  in  A.  V. 
from  the  end  of  the  verse  where  it  stands  in  the  Hebrew.  It  should  be 
left  there,  as  in  R.  V.,  and  rendered,  to  wMch  they  are  come  from 
Babylon.  It  will  then  read :  Take  of  the  captivity^  even  of  Heldai  oj 
Tobijah  and  ofjedaiah  {their  messengers  and  representatives) — and  come 
thou  {thyself  to  take  it  in  person),  even  come  into  the  house  of  Josiah 
the  son  of  Zephaniah,  to  which  they  have  come  from  Babylon — and  take 
silver  and  gold,  &c. 

11.  crozons]  The  plural  may  perhaps  be  used  for  one  crown  {a 
crown,  R.  V.  margin),  as  it  is  apparently  in  Job  xxxi.  36.  Or  there 
may  have  been  two  wreaths  or  fillets,  possibly  one  of  each  precious 
metal,  woven  into  a  crown.  In  ver.  14  where  the  word  again  occurs  it 
is  joined  with  a  verb  in  the  singular :  lit.  the  croiuns  {it)  shall  be.  In 
any  case  it  refers  exclusively  to  the  r^ya/ crown  or  crowns  (Rev.  xix.  12). 
The  High-priest's  mitre  is  never  called  a  crown. 

Josedech\     Jehozadak.     R.  V. 

12.  the  Branch]     See  chap.  iii.  8  and  note. 

out  of  his  place]  Lit.  from  under  Mm.  Comp.  for  the  expression 
Ex.  X.  23;  and  for  the  meaning  Is.  xi.  i;  liii.  2.  Other  less  satisfac- 
tory renderings  are,  it  shall  grow  up  tmder  Him,  i.  e.  all  things  fair  and 
good  shall  spring  up  and  flourish  under  Him.  Cf.  Pers.  Sat.  2,  38 : 
"quidquid  calcaverit  hie,  rosa  fiat"  (Maurer);  or,  *' He  shall  sprout 
forth  from  under  Himself,  i.  e.  send  forth  shoots  as  from  a  parent  stem." 
{SpeaJier's  Comment.) 


vv.  13—15]  ZECHARIAH,    VI.  97 

Even  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord  ; 

And  he  shall  bear  the  glory, 

And  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne; 

And  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne  : 

And  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both. 

And  the  crowns  shall  be  to  Helem,  and  to  Tobijah,  and 
to  Jedaiah,  and  to  Hen  the  son  of  Zephaniah,  for  a  memorial 
in  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  And  they  that  are  far  off  shall 
come  and  build  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  ye  shall 

13.  Even  he  shall  build'\  The  repetition  of  these  words  from  the 
preceding  verse  is  emphatic,  as  is  the  introduction  now  of  the  personal 
pronoun,  He.  It  is  as  much  as  to  say,  you  are  building  a  temple  of 
the  Lord,  but  the  building  of  the  true  temple  is  reserved  for  Him. 

bear  the  glory']  i.e.  the  royal  majesty,  as  the  word  is  used  Dan.  xi.  -zi ; 
I  Chron.  xxix.  25 ;  though  doubtless  there  lies  behind  such  glory  as  is 
spoken  of  John  i.  14,  xvii.  5;  Heb.  ii.  9. 

the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both]  This  has  been  ex- 
plained to  mean,  that  the  two  offices,  the  sacerdotal  and  the  regal, 
being  merged  in  the  one  person  of  Him,  who  "shall  be  a  priest  upon 
His  throne,"  shall  be  exercised  in  perfect  harmony,  as  though  a  treaty 
of  peace  were  ratified  between  them.  "The  counsel  of  peace,"  how- 
ever, would  seem  to  mean  more  than  this,  and  to  denote  a  counsel,  or 
measure,  devised  by  "them  both,"  of  which  the  fruit  would  be  peace  to 
those  whom  it  contemplated.  This  counsel,  by  which  peace  is  pro- 
cured and  bestowed  (Ephes.  ii.  14;  John  xiv.  27)  is  for  its  execution 
"between  them  both,"  i.e.  between  the  two  offices,  or  rather  between 
the  Holder  of  them  both  regarded  now  as  King  and  now  as  Priest. 
The  view  that  "them  both"  refers  to  the  Eternal  Father  and  Messiah, 
Jehovah  and  the  Branch,  though  it  has  been  ably  advocated,  is  scarcely 
warranted  by  the  context,  in  which  the  mention  of  Jehovah  is  not  suffi- 
ciently direct  and  prominent  to  sustain  such  a  reference. 

14.  Helem]  This  may  of  course  be  another  name  borne  by  the 
person  who  in  ver.  10  is  called  Heldai.  The  conjecture,  however,  that 
Helem  is  a  copyist's  error  for  Heldai,  the  difference  between  the  two 
Hebrew  words  being  slight,  is  not  improbable. 

to  Hen\  Rather  (as  in  R.  V.  margin),  to  the  favour,  or  kindness  of 
the  son  of  Zephaniah,  i.e.  the  crown  suspended  in  the  Temple  shall  be 
a  lasting  memorial,  not  only  of  the  zeal  and  piety  of  these  offerers  of 
gifts  from  a  far  off  land,  but  also  of  the  kindness  shewn  them  by 
Josiah  the  son  of  Zephaniah,  who  had  received  them  into  his  house, 
ver.  10.  "He  that  receiveth  a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  righteous 
man  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  reward."     Matt.  x.  41. 

15.  they  that  are  far  off]  Comp.  Ephes.  ii.  13,  17,  where  there 
is  perhaps  a  reminiscence  of  the  ol  fiaKpav  of  the  LXX.  here.  "The 
counsel  of  peace,"  and  the  "building  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,"  may 
also  have  been  in  St  Paul's  mind  when  he  wrote  that  passage. 

ZECHARIAH  7 


98  ZECHARIAH,   VII.  [w.  i,  2. 

know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  you.     And 

this  shall  come  to  pass,  if  ye  will  diligently  obey  the  voice  of 

the  Lord  your  God. 
7      And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of  king  Darius, 

that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Zechariah  in  the  fourth 
a  day  of  the  ninth  month,  even  in  Chisleu ;   when  they  had 

sent  unto  the  house  of  God  Sherezer  and  Regemmelech,  and 

if  ye  will  diligently  obey'\  The  meaning  is  not,  that  the  coming  and 
work  of  Messiah,  but  that  their  share  in  it  depended  on  their  obedience. 
1  Tim.  ii.  13;  Mai.  iv.  i,  2;  Heb.  iv.  9,  11. 

The  Deputation  from  Bethel.  Chaps,  vii.,  viii.  After  the  lapse 
of  nearly  two  years,  Zechariah  is  again  called  to  prophesy,  the  occasion 
of  his  doing  so  being  the  arrival  at  Jerusalem  of  a  deputation,  sent  from 
Bethel  to  enquire  whether  they  ought  still  to  observe  a  national  fast, 
which  had  been  instituted  in  the  time  of  the  captivity,  vii.  i — 3.  The 
answer  of  Almighty  God  by  the  prophet  falls  into  four  sections  (marked  by 
separate  paragraphs  in  R.  V.),  each  of  which  is  introduced  by  the  same 
formula,  vii.  4,  8;  viii.  i,  18.  The  return  in  the  last  of  these  sections 
(viii.  19)  to  the  question  out  of  which  the  whole  arose,  shews  that  the 
prophecy  is  really  one.  In  the  first  section  the  people  are  reminded 
that  their  fasting  and  feasting  had  alike  been  observances  terminating 
upon  themselves  and  devoid  of  religious  motive  and  spiritual  aim,  and 
consequently  unacceptable  to  God ;  in  accordance  with  the  teaching  of 
the  earlier  prophets,  in  the  times  of  Jerusalem's  prosperity,  vii.  4 — 7. 
In  the  next  section  the  substance  of  this  teaching,  as  insisting  on  moral 
reformation  and  not  on  outward  observances,  is  given ;  and  to  the 
neglect  of  it  are  traced  the  rejection  by  God  of  His  people,  and  the 
calamities  that  had  come  upon  them  in  their  captivity  and  dispersion, 
vii.  8—14.  Passing  now  to  a  happier  strain  of  hope  and  promise,  the 
prophetic  word  tells  of  the  bright  days  of  holiness  and  prosperity  in 
store  for  Jerusalem,  in  contrast  with  her  earlier  condition  of  distress  and 
discord,  and  urges  the  people,  on  the  strength  of  these  promises,  to  holy 
obedience,  viii.  i — 17.  The  concluding  section  predicts  that  the  ques- 
tion from  Bethel  shall  be  solved,  by  the  transformation  of  the  fasts  of 
their  captivity  into  joyful  feasts,  to  which  willing  multitudes  shall 
throng  from  all  parts  of  the  land;  heathen  nations  joining  also  in  their 
celebration,  and  counting  it  an  honour  and  protection  to  be  associated 
with  a  Jew,  viii.  18 — 23. 

Chap.  VII.    1—3.    The  Deputation  and  their  Question. 

1.  in  the  fourth  year^  This  was  nearly  two  years  after  Zechariah 
saw  his  visions  (i.  7),  and  about  the  same  time  before  the  completion  of 
the  Temple  (Ezr.  vi.  15).     See  General  Introd.  chap.  11.  p.  18. 

Chisleii]  Chislev.     R.  V. 

2.  when  they  had  sent  unto  the  house  of  God^  Rather,  And  (or  now) 
Bethel  sent.     " Now />%^;>/ <?/■  Bethel  had  sent."     R.  V.     Having  an- 


vv.  3—5.]  ZECHARIAH,   VII.  99 

their  men,  to  pray  before  the  Lord,  and  to  speak  unto  the  3 
priests  which  were  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  to 
the   prophets,  saying,  Should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month, 
separating  myself,  as  I  have  done  these  so  many  years  ? 

Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  unto  me,  say-  4 
ing,  Speak  unto  all  the  people  of  the  land,  and  to  the  priests,  5 
saying,  When  ye  fasted  and  mourned  in  the  fifth  and  seventh 
months  even  those  seventy  years,  did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  me, 

nounced  the  fact  and  the  date  of  the  word  of  Jehovah  coming  to  him 
again  in  ver.  i,  the  prophet  breaks  off,  as  it  were,  to  state  the  occa- 
sion of  its  coming  in  ver.  1,  3 — now,  why  it  came  was  that  Bethel  sent, 
&c.  Then  in  ver.  4  he  resumes  by  repeating  the  phrase  of  ver.  i,  "and 
(as  I  said)  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,"  and  passes  on  to  the 
message  itself.  We  have  a  similar  construction,  with  the  repetition  of 
the  word  "take"  vi.  lo,  11.  It  is  best  to  regard  Bethel  here  as  a  proper 
name.  It  was  one  of  the  cities  to  which  captives  had  returned  (Ezr.  ii. 
I,  28,  "everyone  unto  his  own  city"),  and  from  it  the  question  here 
pi-oposed  emanated. 

Sherezer  and  Regemt?ielech,  and  their  menl  It  is  better  to  take  these, 
as  in  A.  V.  and  R.  V.,  to  be  the  deputation,  or  persons  sent.  It  is 
possible,  however,  to  render,  when  Bethel,  viz.  Sharezer,  dfc.  sent  {men). 
In  that  case  Sharezer  and  Regem-melech  would  probably  be  the  chief 
men  of  the  city,  their  names  being  those  which  were  given  them  in 
Babylon.  For  Sharezer  comp.  Is.  xxxvii.  38;  2  Kings  xix.  37.  Regem- 
melech  has  been  supposed  to  be  an  official  title  and  to  signify,  "friend 
of  the  king." 

to  pray  be/ore]  Lit.  smooth  or  stroke  the  face  of,  i.e.  propitiate  or 
seek  the  favour  of.  Comp.  chap.  viii.  21,  22;  Ex.  xxxii.  11;  Ps.  xlv. 
12.  It  is  also  used  of  imploring  the  favour  of  man,  Job  xi.  19;  Prov. 
xix.  6. 

3.     unto  the  priests]     See  Hag.  ii.  11  and  note. 

zvhich  were  in]  ^R.  V. 

and  to  the  prophets]  i.e.  Haggai  and  Zechariah. 

Should  I  weep]  Similarly  the  sing.  num.  is  used  of  a  community  or 
nation,  Num.  xx.  18,  19;  Josh.  ix.  7,  and  elsewhere. 

in  the  fifth  month]  2  Kings  xxv.  8,  9;  Jerem.  lii.  12,  13,  from  a 
comparison  of  which  passages  it  appears  that  "from  the  seventh  to  the 
tenth  day  (of  the  fifth  month)  Jerusalem  was  in  flames  "  (Pusey).  While 
the  Temple  lay  in  ruins  the  Jews  had  marked  this  time  by  an  annual 
fast.  Now  that  it  was  being  rebuilt  the  question  naturally  arose,  should 
the  fast  be  continued? 

separating  myself]  Or,  abstaining  from  meat  and  drink  (ver.  5  with 
6),  and  from  aU  pleasure.  Is.  Iviii.  5. 

4—7.    The  Answer.     First  Section. 
6.     seventh  month]     This  fast  appears  to  have  been  observed  during 
the  captivity,  because  in  the  seventh  month  "the  murder  of  Gedaliah, 

7—2 


loo  ZECHARIAH,   VII.  [vv.  6— 9. 

6  even  to  me  ?     And  when  ye  did  eat,  and  when  ye  did  drink, 

7  did  not  ye  ^^A.  for  yourselves,  and  ^x\v^  for  yourselves  ?  Should 
ye  not  hear  the  words  which  the  Lord  hath  cried  by  the 
former  prophets,  when  Jerusalem  was  inhabited  and  in  pros- 
perity, and  the  cities  thereof  round  about  her,  when  men  in- 
habited the  south  and  the  plain  ? 

8  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Zechariah,  saying, 

9  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying, 
Execute  true  judgment, 

whom  the  king  of  Babylon  made  governor  of  the  land,  completed 
the  calamities  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  voluntary  but  prohibited  exile 
to  EgyiDt,  for  fear  lest  the  murder  should  be  avenged  on  them."  Pusey. 
See  2  Kings  xxv.  -25,  26;  Jerem.  xli. — xliii. 

even  to  me]  For  the  emphatic  repetition  of  the  pronoun  comp.  Hag. 
i.  4  and  note. 

6.  did  eat  and... did  drink]     Rather,  eat  and  drink,  as  R.  V. 

did  not  ye  eat  for  yourselves,  &c.?]  Lit.  is  it  not  you  who  are 
eating,  and  you  who  are  drinking?  i.  e.  is  it  not  simply  an  act  termi- 
nating upon  yourselves,  which  in  no  way  affects  Me?  Comp.  i  Cor. 
viii.  8. 

7.  Should  ye  not  hear  the  words]  Comp.  Is.  Iviii.  3 — 7 ;  i  Sam.  xv. 
■22.  To  that  old  teaching  it  is  that  you  have  need  to  take  heed  and 
return.  It  was  uttered  in  the  time  of  your  national  prosperity.  _  By 
neglecting  it  that  prosperity  was  lost.  Only  by  returning  to  it  can  it  be 
regained. 

the  south  and  the  plain]  two  of  the  three  divisions  of  the  territory 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah;  the  Negeb  and  the  Shepelah  (or  lowland,  R.  V.). 
Perhaps  the  third  division,  "the  hill  country,"  Luke  i.  39,  is  pointed  at 
in  the  words,  "Jerusalem  and  the  cities  thereof  round  about  her." 
Judg.  i.  9;  Obad.  [9  and  note. 

8—11.     The  Answer.     Second  Section. 

8.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came]  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that 
there  was  a  break,  or  interval  of  time,  between  the  sections  which  are 
introduced  by  this  formula.  The  frequent  appeal  to  Jehovah,  as  the 
Author  of  their  prophecies,  is  a  characteristic  of  the  post-captivity  pro- 
phets. Comp.  chap.  viii.  (in  which  the  phrase  "thus  saith  Jehovah," 
or  "Jehovah  of  hosts,"  occurs  thirteen  times),  Hag.  ii.  6,  note. 

9.  thus  speaketh]  Rather,  thus  saith.  Some  would  render,  thus 
said  the  Lord  of  hosts,  i.e.  to  your  fathers  by  the  former  prophets  (ver. 
7),  a  summary  of  whose  teaching  is  then  given,  ver.  9,  10.  But  a  com- 
parison of  viii.  I,  2  sq.  supports  the  rendering,  thus  saith,  &c.  always,  to 
you  now,  as  to  your  fathers  of  old.  Let  their  disobedience  and  its 
consequences,  ver.  11 — 14,  be  your  warning.  The  rendering,  Thus  hath 
the  Lord  of  hosts  spoken,  R.  V.,  comes  much  to  the  same  thing. 

Execute  true  judgment]  Lit.  Judge  judgment  of  truth.  The 
^xz.%Q.,  judgment  of  truth,  occurs  only  here  and  Ezek.  xviii.  8. 


vv.  10—14.]  ZECHARIAH,  VII. 


And  shew  mercy  and  compassions  every  man  to  his  brother  ; 
And  oppress  not  the  widow,  nor  the  fatherless,  the  stran-  10 

ger,  nor  the  poor ; 
And  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  against  his  brother  in 

your  heart. 
But    they  refused    to    hearken,    and   pulled   away   the  " 

shoulder, 
And  stopped  their  ears,  that  they  should  not  hear. 
Yea,  they  made  their  hearts  as  an  adamant  stone,  lest  12 

they  should  hear  the  law. 
And  the  words  which  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  in 

his  spirit  by  the  former  prophets  : 
Therefore  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Therefore  it  is  come  to  pass,  that  as  he  cried,  and  they  13 

would  not  hear ; 
So  they  cried,  and  I  would  not  hear,  saith  the  Lord  of 

hosts  : 
But  I  scattered  them  with  a  whirlwind    among   all   the  14 

nations  whom  they  knew  not : 
Thus  the  land  was  desolate  after  them,  that  no  man  passed 

through  nor  returned : 
For  they  laid  the  pleasant  land  desolate. 

11.  pulled  away  the  sJioi<Idcr'\     Neh.  ix.  29;  Hos.  iv.  16. 

stopped]  Lit.  made  heavy,  i.e.  dull.  Com  p.  Is.  vi.  10.  The  same 
word  is  used  of  the  eyes,  Gen.  xlviii.  10,  and  of  the  tongue,  Ex.  iv.  10. 

12.  an  adamant]  perhaps  diamond,  "so  called  from  its  cutting  and 
perforating  (the  original  meaning  of  the  word  being  a  sharp  point,  or 
thorn),  as  the  point  of  a  stylus  was  made  of  diamonds,  Jer.  xvii.  i." 
Gesen.  "  The  stone,  whatever  it  be,  was  hard  enough  to  cut  inefface- 
able characters  (Jer.  xvii.  i):  it  was  harder  than  flint  (Ezek.  iii.  9).  It 
would  cut  rocks ;  it  could  not  be  graven  itself,  or  receive  the  characters 
of  God."     Pusey. 

in  his  spirit]  Rather,  by  His  Spirit,  as  R.  V.  The  preposition  is 
the  same  as  in  the  next  clause,  by  the  hand  of  His  prophets.  The  Holy 
Ghost  was  the  Divine  Agent,  the  prophets  were  the  human  instruments. 
Comp.  Neh.  ix.  30. 

14.     with  a  whirlwind]     Amos  i.  I4;  Job  xxvii.  21. 

whom  they  knew  not]     Deut.  xxviii.  33;  Jer.  xvi.  13. 

after  them]  i,  e.  after  they  are  removed  from  it. 

passed  through  nor  returned]  as  we  say,  wetit  backward  and  forward, 
Ezek.  xxxv.  7.     See  note  on  ix.  8. 

they  laid]  Either  to  be  taken  impersonally,  ii  was  laid:  or  they  {the 
yews)  by  their  sins. 


[vv.  1—6. 

Again  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  to  me,  saying, 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ; 

I  was  jealous  for  Zion  with  great  jealousy, 

And  I  was  jealous  for  her  with  great  fury. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  I  am  returned  unto  Zion, 

And  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem  : 

And  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  a  city  of  truth  ; 

And  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  the  holy  moun- 
tain. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ; 

There  shall  yet  old  men  and  old  women  dwell  in  the 
streets  of  Jerusalem, 

And  every  man  with  his  staff  in  his  hand  for  very  age. 

And  the  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of  boys  and 
girls 

Playing  in  the  streets  thereof 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ; 

If  it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of  this 
people  in  these  days, 

Chap.  VIII.  1—17.     The  Answer.     Third  Section. 

1.  Agaift]     Rather,  And.     See  vii.  8,  note. 

2.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts]  "At  each  word  and  sentence,  in 
which  good  things,  for  their  greatness  almost  incredible,  are  promised, 
the  prophet  premises,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  as  if  he  would  say, 
Think  not  that  what  I  pledge  you  are  my  own,  and  refuse  me  not 
credence  as  man.  What  I  unfold  are  the  promises  of  God."  Jerome, 
quoted  by  Pusey. 

I  was]  Rather,  I  am.  Comp.  i.  14,  where  the  same  tense  is  so  ren- 
dered. 

with  great  fury]  i.e.  against  her  enemies,  as  i.  15. 

3.  I  am  returned... and  will  dwell]  A  repetition  of  the  promises  i. 
16;  ii.  10. 

a  city  of  truth]  Rather,  The  city  of  truth.  Comp.  ver.  16,  Zeph. 
iii.  13;  and  by  way  of  contrast,  Nah.  iii.  i. 

4.  6.  We  read,  as  a  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  that  in  the  days  of 
Simon,  in  the  times  of  the  Maccabees,  "the  ancient  men  sat  all  in  the 
streets,  communing  together  of  good  things"  (i  Mace  xiv.  9);  while 
our  Lord  alludes  to  the  games  of  children  in  the  market-place,  as  a 
familiar  incident  in  His  own  days.     Matt.  xi.  16,  17, 

6.  in  these  days]  Rather,  In  those  days  (as  in  R.  V. ),  viz.  in  which 
it  comes  to  pass.  "It  is  in  the  day  of  the  fulfilment,  not  of  the  antici- 
pation, that  they  would  seem  marvellous  in  their  eyes,  as  the  Psalmist 
says,  This  is  the  Lord's  doi?ig,  and  it  is  mar-vellous  in  our  eyes^  Pusey. 


w.  7— 9-]  ZECHARIAH,  VIII.  103 

Should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  my  eyes  ?  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ;  ; 

Behold,  I  will  save  my  people  from  the  east  country, 

And  from  the  west  country  ; 

And  I  will  bring  them,  and  they  shall  dwell  in  the  midst  s 
of  Jerusalem  : 

And  they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God, 

In  truth  and  in  righteousness. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Let  your  hands  be  strong,  9 
ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these  words  by  the  mouth  of  the 
prophets,  which  were  in  the  day  that  the  foundation  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  was  laid,  that  the  temple  might 

should  it  also  be  mat-ziel Ions']  Some  would  render,  ii  shall  also  be 
marvellous,  i.  e.  if  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  in  those  days  see  the  fair, 
prosperous  city  that  has  grown  out  of  these  blackened  ruins,  it  is 
marvellous  (as  it  will  be),  so  shall  it  be  also  in  My  eyes.  In  other 
words,  I  Myself  count  it  a  marvellous  work  that  I  will  achieve.  It  is 
better,  however,  to  take  this  clause  as  a  question,  as  in  A.  V.  and 
R.  v.,  and  to  understand  it  to  mean,  "the  things  that  are  impossible 
with  men  are  possible  with  God." 

7.  from  the  east  country,  and fro?7t  the  tvest  country]  Comp.  Is.  xliii. 
5,  6.     The  promise  is  larger  than  has  yet  been  fulfilled. 

8.  in  truth  and  in  righteousness]  "These  are  the  conditions  of  the 
covenant  on  both  sides."     Speak.  Comm. 

9—13.  These  verses,  introduced  by  the  phrase,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  and  beginning  and  ending  with  the  same  words,  Let  your  hands 
be  strong,  form  one  continuous  exhortation  to  persevere  in  rebuilding 
the  Temple.  The  exhortation  is  grounded  upon  a  comparison  of  their 
condition,  before  and  after  the  time  when  they  began  in  earnest  to  build 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  improvement  which  had  already  taken 
place  since  that  time  should  encourage  them  to  go  on  building,  cheered 
by  fresh  prophecies  and  promises  from  the  mouth  of  the  same  prophets 
who  had  urged  them  to  begin  the  work,  and  of  Him  whose  messengers 
of  good  they  were. 

9.  by  the  mouth]    Rather,  from  the  mouth.     R.  V. 

the  prophets^  which  were,  &c.]  Remember  that  "these  words"  of 
promise  (e.g.  ver.  3 — 8  supra)  which  you  are  hearing  in  "these  days" 
are  spoken  to  you  by  the  same  prophets  who  first  urged  you  to  the 
work,  and  whose  earlier  promises  then  made  are  already  being  fulfilled 
to  you,  ver.  10,  11 ;  Hag.  ii.  15 — 19. 

that  the  temple  might  be  built]  Rather,  even  the  temple,  tnat  it 
might  be  built,  as  R.  V.  This  clause  seems  to  be  added  to  shew  that 
it  is  not  the  first  laying  of  the  foundation,  which  was  followed  by  no 
further  progress  (Ezr.  iii.  10 — 12),  but  the  vigorous  resumption  of  the 


I04  ZECHARIAH,   VIII.  [vv.  10—13. 

10  be  built.  For  before  these  days  there  was  no  hire  for 
man,  nor  any  hire  for  beast ;  neither  was  there  any  peace 
to  him  that  went  out  or  came  in  because  of  the  affliction : 

11  for  I  set  all  men  every  one  against  his  neighbour.  But 
now  I  will  not  he  unto  the  residue  of  this  people  as  in  the 

12  former  days,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  For  the  seed  shall 
be  prosperous ;  the  vine  shall  give  her  fruit,  and  the  ground 
shall  give  her  increase,  and  the  heavens  shall  give  their 
dew ;  and  I  will  cause  the  remnant  of  this  people  to  possess 

13  all  these  things.     And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  as  ye  were 

work,  a  second  founding,  as  it  were,  with  a  view  to  building,  in  which 
"the  prophets"  (Ezr.  v.  i,  2)  bore  so  prominent  a  part,  that  is  here 
referred  10. 

10.  these  days]  Rather,  those  days,  in  which  you  began  to  build 
again. 

hire']  i.e.  return  for  his  labour.     See  Hag.  i.  6,  9 — 11. 

the  affliction]    Rather,  the  adversary.     Ezr.  iv.  4. 

every  one  against  his  neighbour]  This  was  the  third  evil  which  pre- 
vailed— dearth,  harassing  by  their  enemies,  their  own  dissensions — in 
those  days  when  the  Temple  lay  neglected. 

11.  now  I  will  not  be]  Rather,  now  (in  this  period  since  ye  began 
to  build)  I  am  not.     My  attitude  towards  you  is  already  changed. 

the  residue]  Rather,  the  remnant,  as  in  ver.  12,  i.e.  the  returned 
captives.     See  Hag.  i.  12,  and  note. 

12.  the  seed  shall  be  prosperous]  Lit.  The  seed  of  peace  (there 
shall  be).  This  gives  a  very  good  sense,  when  we  remember  that  the 
Hebrew  words  here  used  have  a  wide  meaning.  Seed  is  not  only  that 
which  is  sown,  but  sometimes  seed-tif?ie,  or  sowing  (Gen.  viii.  22), 
sometimes  produce  or  harvest  (Job  xxxix.  12).  Peace  \%  prosperity  and 
plenty.  So  that  the  words  may  be  paraphrased.  The  processes  of  agri- 
culture shall  prosper.  Another  rendering,  however,  according  to  which 
this  clause  is  in  apposition  with  the  words  immediately  following,  The 
seed  [or  plant)  of  peace,  namely,  the  vine,  shall  give,  &c.,  has  been 
strongly  supported.  The  vine  is  then  thought  to  be  called  "  the  seed 
of  peace,"  because  "it  can  only  flourish  in  peaceful  times,  and  not 
when  the  land  is  laid  waste  by  enemies."  But  one  fails  to  see  how  this 
is  a  peculiarity  of  the  vine.  It  would  seem  to  be  equally  true  of  corn 
and  other  products  of  the  earth.  Moreover,  such  an  apposition  destroys 
the  balance  of  the  three  following  clauses,  which  form  a  threefold  ex- 
pansion of  the  general  statement  with  which  the  verse  begins.  In  the 
Speaker's  Commentary  it  is  said,  "  The  vine  is  pre-eminently  a  plant  of 
peace."  But  in  all  the  passages  referred  to  in  support  of  the  assertion 
the  fig-tree  is  associated  with  the  vine.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  to  see 
how  the  vine  can  be  singled  out  as  tlte  plant  of  peace. 

to  possess]  Lit.  to  inherit.  Comp.  d  vikQv  KXrjpovoixrjaei  ravra, 
Rev.  xxi.  7. 


vv.  14— 17-]  ZECHARIAH,   VIII.  105 

a  curse  among  the  heathen,  O  house  of  Judah,  and  house 
of  Israel ;  so  will  I  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing : 
fear  not,  but  let  your  hands  be  strong.     For  thus  saith  the  ^^ 
Lord  of  hosts;  As  I  thought  to  punish  you,  when  your 
fathers  provoked  me  to   wrath,   saith  the   Lord  of  hosts, 
and  I  repented  not :  so  again  have  I  thought  in  these  days  's 
to  do  well  unto  Jerusalem  and  to  the  house  of  Judah  :  fear 
ye  not.     These  are  the  things  that  ye  shall  do;  Speak  ye  »6 
every  man  the  truth  to  his   neighbour;    execute   the 
judgment  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  gates :  and  let  none  17 
of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  hearts  against  his  neighbour ; 
and  love  no  false  oath :  for  all  these  are  things  that  I  hate, 
saith  the  Lord. 

13.  a  curse... a  blessing]  Either,  the  object  of  cursing  and  blessing, 
as  men  cursed  you  before  so  now  they  shall  bless  you  (Jer.  xxii.  9) ;  or 
a  formula  of  imprecation  or  benediction,  God  make  thee  like  them  (Jer. 
xxix.  22;  Gen.  xlviii.  20;  Ruth  iv.  11,  12). 

heathett]     nations,  R.  V. 

house  of  Judah,  and  house  of  Israel]  Not  only  the  two  tribes  but  the 
ten.     This  has  never  yet  been  fulfilled. 

14 — 17.  "  The  ground  upon  which  the  promise  rests  is  given  in 
vv.  14,  15,  and  it  is  closed  in  vv.  16,  17,  by  the  addition  of  the  condition 
on  which  it  is  to  be  fulfilled."     Keil. 

16.  the  Judgfuent  of  truth  and  peace]  Rather,  truth  and  the  judg- 
ment of  peace  Judge  ye,  as  in  R.  V.  margin.  Jerusalem  would  indeed 
"be  called  a  city  of  truth"  (ver.  3),  when  alike  in  the  private  intercourse 
of  her  citizens  {speak ye  every  one  the  truth  to  his  neighbour),  and  in  the 
public  administration  of  justice  {in  yotcr  gates,  Deut.  xxv.  7;  Job  v.  4), 
truth  reigned  supreme.  The  jndgrnent  of  peace  is  righteous  judgment, 
which  alone  secures  peace. 

"  If  ye  judge  righteousness,  there  will  be  peace  between  the  parties  in 
the  lawsuit,  according  as  our  rabbles  have  said  in  a  proverb  of  the  children 
of  men,  '  He  that  hath  his  coat  taken  from  him  by  the  tribunal,  let  him 
sing  and  go  his  way.'  And  they  have  adduced  in  proof  that  verse, 
'And  all  this  people  shall  also  go  to  their  place  in  peace  '  (Ex.  xviii. 
23).  '  All  the  people,'  even  he  that  is  condemned  in  judgment.  And 
our  rabbies  of  blessed  memory  have  interpreted,  and  the  judgment  of 
peace,  of  reconciliation,  for  it  is  said,  'What  sort  of  judgment  is  that  in 
which  there  is  peace  ?  They  answered,  '  That  of  arbitration.'  "  Kimchi 
(McCaul's  Trans. ),  quoted  by  Wright. 

18 — 23.    The  Answer.    Fourth  Section. 

In  coming  now  to  a  direct  answer  to  the  question,  out  of  which  the 
whole  prophecy  arose,  Almighty  God  enumerates  not  only  the  fast  of 
the  fifth  month  to  which  the  question  immediately  referred  (viii.  3),  but 


io6  ZECHARIAH,  VIII.  [vv.  18—23. 

18  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  unto  me,  saying, 

19  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  The  fast  of  the  fourth  mo7ith, 
and  the  fast  of  the  fifth,  and  the  fast  of  the  seventh,  and 
the  fast  of  the  tenth,  shall  be  to  the  house  of  Judah  joy 
and  gladness,  and  cheerful  feasts ;  therefore  love  the  truth 
and  peace. 

20  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ; 

//  shall  yet  cojiie  to  pass^  that  there  shall  come  people, 
And  the  inhabitants  of  many  cities  : 

21  And  the  inhabitants  of  one  city  shall  go  to  another,  saying. 
Let  us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  Lord, 

And  to  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  I  will  go  also. 

22  Yea,  many  people  and  strong  nations  shall  come 
To  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  Jerusalem, 

And  to  pray  before  the  Lord. 

23  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ; 

In  those  days  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  ten  men  shall  take 
hold  out  of  all  languages  of  the  nations, 

three  other  fasts  (one  of  which,  the  fast  of  the  seventh  month,  had  been 
already  mentioned,  vii.  5),  which  were  all  governed  by  the  same  general 
principles.     All  these,  He  promises,  shall  become  seasons  of  joy. 

19.  The  fast  of  the  fourth  month]  had  been  instituted,  because  on 
that  day,  under  the  extremity  of  famine,  Jerusalem  opened  her  gates  to 
Nebuchadnezzar.     Jer.  xxxix.  2,  3  ;  Hi.  6,  7. 

the  fast  of  the  tenth]  The  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  com- 
menced in  that  month.     2  Kings  xxv.  r ;  Jer.  xxxix.  i. 

therefore  love\  Lit.  and  (in  order  that  this  may  happen  to  you,  as  the 
condition  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise),  love  truth  and  peace. 
Comp.  ver.  16,  17. 

20 — 23.  The  joyful  change  shall  extend,  in  its  influence,  to  the 
heathen  nations  of  the  world.     Comp.  Is.  ii.  2,  3  ;  Micah  iv.  i,  2. 

20.  people]  Lit.  peoples.  Here  probably  the  tribes  of  Israel  (comp. 
Deut.  xxxiii.  3,  19,  where  the  word  is  used  in  that  sense).  In  ver.  22, 
majiy  peoples,  xtitxs  to  foreign  nations,  to  whom  the  prophecy  extends 
itself  in  that  and  the  following  verses. 

21.  speedily]  Lit.  come  let  us  go,  to  go,  which  may  merely  express 
the  earnestness  of  the  exhortation.  "Omnes  una  et  magno  studio." 
Rosenm. 

to  pray  before]  or  to  entreat  the  favour,  as  in  vii.  2. 

/  will  go  also]  The  response  of  one  city  to  the  invitation  of  another. 
In  like  manner  the  inhabitants  of  a  city  speak  of  themselves  in  the  sing, 
number,  i  Sam.  v.  10. 

23.  ten  men]  i.e.  a  large  number.  Comp.  Gen.  xxxi.  7;  Lev.  xxvi. 
26;  Num.  xiv.  22;  Neh.  iv.  \^. 


V.  I.]  ZECHARIAH,  IX.  107 

Even  shall  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of  him  that  is  a  Jew, 

saying, 
We  will  go  with  you  :  for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with 

you. 
The  burden  of  the   word   of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  9 

Hadrach, 

take  hold  of  the  skirt]     See  Hag.  ii.  12,  and  comp.  Is.  iv.  i. 

The  Burdens  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  Chaps.  IX. — XIV. 

Abruptly  and  with  no  preface  beyond  the  title,  The  Burden  of  the 
Word  of  the  Lord,  prefixed  to  each  of  them  (ix.  i ;  xii.  i),  the  later  pro- 
phecies of  Zechariah  are  introduced.  Each  of  the  two  groups  into 
which  they  are  collected  occupies  three  chapters,  and  each  appears  to 
fall  into  two  principal  sections. 

The  First  Burden,  chaps,  ix. — xi.,  is  principally  concerned  with 
the  history  of  the  chosen  people  up  to  and  including  the  first  coining  of 
Christ.  Christ  on  earth  is  the  central  figure  of  each  of  its  two  sections. 
The  coming  of  her  King  to  Zion  is  the  proper  subject  of  the  first 
section,  chap.  ix.  x.,  as  His  rejection  by  her,  under  the  title  of 
"Shepherd",  is  of  the  second,  chap.  xi. 

Chap.  IX.  1—8.    The  punishment  of  Israel's  enemies. 

The  first  section  opens  with  a  prediction  (ix.  i — 8),  from  which  the 
title  of  the  whole  of  this  first  group  of  prophecies  is  derived,  of  the 
judgments  of  God  upon  the  enemies  of  Israel  and  of  the  deliverance 
of  Jerusalem,  as  a  preparation  for  the  coming  of  her  King.  Jehovah, 
whose  eye  is  on  the  affairs  of  men,  will  punish  the  neighbours  and 
enemies  of  His  people  on  every  side,  the  Syrians  {ver.  i),  the  Phoeni- 
cians, in  spite  of  their  resources  and  their  wisdom  (ver.  2 — 4),  and  the 
Philistines  (ver.  5,  6).  This  last  nation  shall  be  converted  from  idolatry 
and  incorporated  into  the  family  of  God  (ver.  7).  Judah  and  Jeru- 
salem shall  be  protected  from  the  invading  armies  by  which  the  sur- 
rounding nations  are  scourged,  and  shall  await  in  safety  the  advent  of 
their  King  (ver.  8). 

1.  The  burden]  It  is  difficult  to  decide  between  the  meanings 
burden  and  utterance  {onus  and  effatiwi)  for  this  word,  which  is  of  fre- 
quent occurrence,  especially  in  Isaiah.  If  we  translate  burden^  it  will 
mean  the  heavy  judgment  of  Jehovah.  In  favour  of  this  is  the  fact 
that  the  word  is  almost  always  used  (Zech.  xii.  i;  Mai.  i.  1,  are  re- 
ferred to  as  exceptions,  but  the  second  of  these  passages  can  hardly  be 
called  so)  to  introduce  a  prophecy  of  judgment.  "The  sentence  issued 
against  an  individual  or  a  community  hung  as  a  heavy  weight,  which  at 
last  dragged  them  down."  {Speak.  Com.  on  Is.  xiii.  i.  Comp.  ^ 
Kings  ix.  25.)  On  the  other  hand,  from  the  use  of  the  cognate  verb  in 
the  sense  of  "taking  up,"  i.e.  "uttering,"  a  word  or  speech  (as,  "thou 
shalt  not  take  up  the  name  of  Jehovah,  thy  God,  in  vain,"  Ex.  xx.  7; 


io8  ZECHARIAH,  IX.  [v.  2. 

And  Damascus  shall  be  the  rest  thereof: 

When  the  eyes  of  man,  as  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  shall 

be  toward  the  Lord. 
And  Hamath  also  shall  border  thereby ; 
Tyrus,  and  Zidon,  though  it  be  very  wise. 

"He  took  up  his  parable,"  Num.  xxiii.  18),  many  prefer  to  render 
utterance,  or  oracle. 

in  the  lain/}  tipon  the  land,  R.  V. 

Hadf'och']  This  word,  which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  O.  T., 
caused,  till  recently,  much  perplexity  to  commentators.  Some  of  them 
explained  it  to  be  the  name  of  a  king,  others  of  an  idol,  while  others 
regarded  it  as  a  symbolical  name  composed  by  the  prophet.  The 
question,  however,  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  appears  to  have  been 
satisfactorily  set  at  rest,  by  its  being  discovered  in  the  Assyrian  inscrip- 
tions "in  the  catalogue  of  Syrian  cities  tributary  to  Nineveh."  Sir  H. 
Rawlinson,  quoted  by  Pusey,  says,  "  It  is  now  certain  that  there  was  a 
city  called  Hadrach  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Damascus  and  Hamath, 
although  its  exact  site  is  not  known... In  the  Assyrian  Canon  Hadrach 
is  the  object  of  three  Assyrian  expeditions." 

the  rest  thereof^  Or,  its  resting  place,  R.  V.,  i.e.  the  place  on  which 
it  (the  burden,  or  utterance,  of  the  word  of  the  Lord)  shall  light  and 
settle.     See  vi.  8,  and  note  there. 

•when  the  eyes  of  man,  &c.]  Or,  for  the  eye... is,  R.  V.  This  has 
been  explained  as  implying  "a  conversion  of  Gentiles,  as  well  as  Jews. 
For  man^  as  contrasted  with  Israel,  must  be  the  heathen  world,  man- 
kind. •  The  eyes  of  all  must  needs  look  in  adoration  to  God,  expect- 
ing all  good  from  Him,  because  the  Creator  of  all  provided  for  the 
well-being  of  all.' "  Pusey.  Or,  since  the  context,  which  is  minatory 
in  tone,  seems  not  to  admit  of  this  interpretation,  the  words  have  been 
thus  paraphrased:  "When  the  fulfilment  of  the  oracles  takes  place 
upon  Hadrach  and  Damascus,  and  the  wrath  of  God  descends  upon 
those  cities  and  districts,  the  eyes  of  the  nations  as  well  as  those  of  the 
people  of  Israel  will  look  towards  Jehovah,  and  marvel  at  the  wonders 
of  judgment  which  will  then  be  performed  in  their  sight  in  accordance 
with  the  solemn  warnings  of  the  prophet."  Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 
It  is,  possible,  however,  to  render,  for  to  JehovaJi  is  (i.  e.  Jehovah  has) 
an  eye  on  man,  and  on  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  the  sense  being  that 
of  such  passages  as  Jer.  xxxii.  19,  and  Ps.  x.  14. 

2.  shall  border  thereby']  i.  e.  as  it  is  near  Damascus  in  situation  and 
like  it  in  character,  so  shall  it  be  the  neighbour  or  companion  of  Da- 
mascus in  the  calamities  which  shall  come  upon  it.  The  clause  may, 
however,  be  rendered,  And  also  Hamath,  -which  borders  toy  it  (Da- 
mascus), shall  be  its  rest,  i.e.  the  rest  of  the  burden  of  the  Lord,  as 
Damascus  was  said  to  be  in  the  former  verse.  Which  bordereth  thereon, 
R.  V. 

though  it  be  very  wise]  Or,  because  she  is,  R.  V.  This  is  best  re- 
ferred to  Tyre,  the  words,  "and  Zidon,"  being  almost  parenthetical, 


vv.  3,  4.]  ZECHARIAH,    IX.  109 

And  Tyrus  did  build  herself  a  strong  hold, 
And  heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust, 
And  fine  gold  as  the  mire  of  the  streets. 
Behold,  the  Lord  will  cast  her  out, 
And  he  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea ; 
And  she  shall  be  devoured  with  fire. 

"Tyre  with  Zidon."  Though  Sidon  was  the  mother  city  it  had  long 
been  eclipsed  by  Tyre,  to  which  in  the  predictions  of  other  prophets 
(Is.  xxiii. ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  xxviii.),  as  here  (ver.  3,  4),  the  chief  place  is 
assigned.  The  "wisdom"  of  Tyre  is  specially  mentioned  by  Ezekiel, 
"Behold,  thou  art  wiser  than  Daniel"  (xxviii.  3),  and  as  here  (ver.  3)  its 
practical  application  to  the  amassing  of  wealth  is  noted  (ver.  4,  5),  and 
this  is  made  the  cause  of  the  judgment  that  comes  upon  her  (ver.  6,  7). 

3.  a  strong  hold\  There  is  a  paronomasia,  or  play  on  the  words 
'Tyre'  and  'stronghold,'  in  the  Hebrew.  The  reference  is  to  the 
strongly  fortified  position  of  Tyre,  which  when  Alexander  attacked  it 
"was  situated  on  an  island,  nearly  half  a  mile  from  the  mainland.  It 
was  completely  surrounded  by  prodigious  walls,  the  loftiest  portion  of 
which  on  the  side  fronting  the  mainland  reached  a  height  not  less  than 
150  feet;  and  notwithstanding  his  persevering  efforts  he  could  not  have 
succeeded  in  his  attempt,  if  the  harbour  of  Tyre  to  the  north  had  not  been 
blockaded  by  the  Cyprians,  and  that  to  the  south  by  the  Phoenicians, 
thus  affording  an  opportunity  to  Alexander  for  uniting  the  island  to  the 
mainland  by  an  enormous  artificial  mole."  Diet,  of  Bible,  Art.  Tyre. 
"  Plurimum  fiduciae  Tyro  munitionibus  insulae  et  prasparatis  rerum 
copiis."     Diod.  Sic.  xvii.  40. 

as  the  dust'\     Comp.  Job  xxvii.  16;  2  Chron.  ix.  27. 

4.  cast  her  out]  Or,  dispossess  her,  R.  V.  Lit.  take  possession  of 
her,  i.e.  by  ejecting  her  and  coming  into  her  place.  Comp.  Ex.  xxxiv. 
24.     Ewald  renders  less  satisfactorily  wilt  impoverish  her. 

her  pozvt-r  iyi  the  sed\  The  order  of  the  Hebrew  words  is,  shall  smite 
in  the  sea  her  power ;  where  "power"  does  not  mean  only,  though  it 
may  possibly  include,  her  bastions  and  fortifications  (Ps.  xlviii.  14, 
cxxii.  7),  but  is  to  be  taken  in  its  widest  sense.  "The  scene  of  her 
pride  was  to  be  that  of  her  overthrow;  the  waves  which  girt  her  round 
should  bury  her  ruins  and  wash  over  her  site.  Even  in  the  sea  the 
hand  of  God  should  find  her  and  smite  her  in  it  and  into  it,  and  so 
that  she  should  abide  in  it. "     Pusey. 

devoured  with  fire]  "  Proudly  confident  in  the  strength  of  their 
island  fortress,  the  Tyrians  mocked  the  attempts  of  Alexander  to  reduce 
their  city.  Every  engine  of  war  suited  for  defence  had  been  stored  up 
in  their  bulwarks,  and  every  device  which  their  skilful  engineers  could 
suggest  was  had  recourse  to,  and  for  a  time  with  marked  success.  *  Ye 
despise  this  land  army  through  confidence  in  the  place  that  ye  dwell  in 
as  an  island,  but  I  will  show  you  that  ye  dwell  on  a  continent,'  was  the 
language  of  Alexander  (Q.  Curtius.  de  reb.  gest.  Alex.  Magn.  IV.  2). 
The  shallow  channel  between  the  mainland  and  the  island  was  at  last 


no  ZECHARIAH,    IX.  [vv.  5—7. 

Ashkelon  shall  see  //,  and  fear ; 

Gaza  also  shall  see  it,  and  be  very  sorrowful, 

And  Ekron ;  for  her  expectation  shall  be  ashamed ; 

And  the  king  shall  perish  from  Gaza, 

And  Ashkelon  shall  not  be  inhabited. 

And  a  bastard  shall  dwell  in  Ashdod, 

And  I  will  cut  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines. 

And  I  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his  mouth, . 

bridged  over  by  a  huge  dam  of  earth  erected  after  repeated  failures,  and 
the  city  which  had  stood  a  five  years'  siege  from  the  Assyrians,  a  thirteen 
years'  siege  from  the  Chaldseans,  was  taken  after  a  short  siege  of  seven 
months  by  Alexander.  Ten  thousand  of  its  brave  defenders  were  either 
massacred  or  crucified"  (2,000  were  crucified,  from  6,000  to  8,000  are 
said  to  have  been  massacred),  "the  rest  were  sold  into  slavery,  none 
escaped  save  those  who  were  concealed  by  the  Sidonians  in  the  ships. 
Q.  Curtius  adds  distinctly  (iv.  4)  that  'Alexander  having  slain  all,  save 
those  who  fled  to  the  temples,  ordered  the  houses  to  be  set  on  fire.'" 
Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 

5.  her  expectation\  The  cities  of  Philistia,  to  which  (ver.  5 — 7)  after 
the  subjugation  of  Syria  (ver.  i,  2)  and  Phoenicia  (ver.  3,  4),  the  scourge 
passed,  had  naturally  looked  to  Tyre  to  check  the  course  of  the  invader 
and  so  save  them  from  his  onslaught. 

the  king  shall  perish  from  Gaza]  Rather,  a  king.  The  prediction  is, 
not  that  the  then  reigning  monarch  should  perish,  but  that  monarchical 
government  should  cease.  No  argument  can  be  drawn  from  this  in 
favour  of  the  ante-captivity  date  of  this  prophecy.  It  had  been  the 
policy  of  the  Assyrians,  Chaldseans  and  Persians  to  leave  tributary  kings 
in  the  countries  which  they  subdued.  Hence  their  own  monarchs 
assumed  the  title  of  "king  of  kings"  (Ezr.  vii.  12;  Ezek.  xxvi.  7  ;  Dan. 
ii.  37),  and  as  Herodotus  states  it  was  the  custom  of  the  Persians  to  put 
honour  upon  the  sons  of  the  kings  whom  they  had  deposed  and  promote 
them  to  the  sovereignty  of  their  fathers  (iii,  15).  Alexander  on  the 
contrary  pursued  an  entirely  different  plan  and  aimed  at  a  consolidated 
empire.  Such  tributary  monarchies  were  therefore  abolished  by  him. 
Hegesias,  a  writer  contemporary  with  Alexander,  states  that  the  king 
of  Gaza  was  brought  alive  to  the  conqueror  after  the  capture  of  the 
city,  which  in  spite  of  the  fate  of  Tyre  had  held  out  for  five  months. 
There  is  considerable  difficulty  in  reconciling  the  statements  of  different 
writers  on  this  point,  but  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  ruler 
of  Gaza  bore  the  title  of  "king"  at  that  time. 

6.  a  bastard]  The  word  only  occurs  here  and  in  Deut.  xxiii.  2 
^3,  Heb.).  There  it  is  probably  used  of  one  born  of  incest  or  adultery. 
{Speaker's  Co/mnentary,  Vol.  I.  pt.  ii.  p.  884.)  Here  perhaps  it  is  em- 
ployed rather  as  a  term  of  contempt,  "a  mixed  and  ignoble  race"  {a 
bastard  raccy  R.V.  margin),  than  in  its  strictly  literal  sense.  The  LXX. 
who  render  U  wopvijs  in  Deut.  have  here  dXXo7e»'?7s. 

7.  his  blood  out  of  his  mouth,  &c.]     Lit.,  bloods,  i.  e.  blood  as  shed 


V.  8.]  ZECHARIAH,   IX.  in 

And  his  abominations  from  between  his  teeth  : 
But  he  that  remaineth,  even  he,  shall  be  for  our  God, 
And  he  shall  be  as  a  governor  in  Judah, 
And  Ekron  as  a  Jebusite. 

And  I  will   encamp   about  mine  house  because  of  the  a 
army, 

(comp.  Gen.  iv.  lo).  According  to  Calvin  the  Philistine,  the  nation 
personified,  is  here  compared  to  a  wild  beast  from  whose  jaws  the  prey 
which  he  is  devouring  is  torn.  "  Abominationes  enim  intelligit  quic- 
quid  injusta  violentia  ad  se  traxerant.  Et  comparat  eos  feris  bestiis, 
quae  non  modum  carnem  devorant,  sed  etiam  hauriunt  sanguinem 
ipsum,  et  lacerant  criidas  carnes."  The  objection  to  this  interpretation 
is  that  the  word  rendered  "abominations"  can  hardly  refer  to  the 
victims  or  the  spoils  of  the  cruelty  or  rapacity  of  the  Philistine.  It  is  a 
word  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  O.  T.  and  is  used  almost  always 
(Nah.  iii.  6,  "abominable  filth,"  is  an  exception)  of  "  idols  in  that  they 
were  abominations."  (Comp.  i  Kings  xi.  5,  7 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  13;  and 
Dan.  xi.  31  with  Matt.  xxiv.  15,  t6  ^diXvy/xa  rrjs  ifyrj/jubaews).  It  is 
probably  best  therefore,  with  the  majority  of  modern  commentators,  to 
understand  the  reference  to  be  to  idolatrous  sacrifices  eaten  by  the  wor- 
shippers with  the  blood.  From  these  pollutions  the  survivors  of  the 
Philistines  should  be  cleansed  and  so  prepared  for  that  incorporation 
into  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  which  the  remainder  of  the  verse 
predicts. 

dut  he  that  remaineth^  Rather,  and  he  too  shall  remain  (or,  be  a 
remnant,  R.V.)  for  our  God.  "Of  the  Philistines  too,  as  of  Israel" 
(but  may  it  not  be,  as  of  the  other  nations  mentioned  in  these  verses?), 
"fz  remnant  shall  be  saved.  After  this  visitation  their  idolatry  should 
cease;  God  speaks  of  the  Philistine  nation  as  one  man;  He  would 
wring  his  idol-sacrifices  and  idol-enjoyments  from  him;  he  should  exist 
as  a  nation,  but  as  God's."     Pusey. 

as  a  governor]  Lit.,  the  head  over  a  thousand,  a  chiliarch.  A 
chieftain,  R.V.  The  tribes  of  Israel  both  during  the  Exodus  (Num.  i. 
16,  x.  4),  and  after  their  settlement  in  Canaan  (Josh.  xxii.  ^i,  30; 
I  Sam.  X.  19;  Micah  v.  i)  were  diAdded  into  thousands.  The  word 
here  used  for  the  chief  of  such  a  division  is  used  again  for  a  Jewish  chief 
in  this  Book  (xii.  5,  6).  Elsewhere  it  is  commonly  used  of  the  chiefs  of 
Edom  (Gen.  xxxvi.  15  seq.;  i  Chron.  i.  51 — 54).  The  meaning  is  that 
the  Philistine,  the  nation  personified  as  before,  shall  take  his  place, 
ruler  and  people,  as  one  of  the  divisions  of  the  Jewish  nation. 

Ekron  as  a  Jebusite]  The  Jebusites  had  held  their  own  in  the  midst 
of  the  chosen  people,  possessors  of  the  stronghold  of  Sion  up  to  the 
time  of  David  (Josh.  xv.  63) ;  but  at  last  had  been  merged  and  lost  in 
Israel.  So  should  it  be  with  the  Philistines,  who  are  here  intended  by 
Ekron.  They  too  shall  be  absorbed  into  the  Jewish  church  and 
nation,  when  the  ultimate  goal  of  the  prophecy  is  reached. 

8.     about  viine  house]    Rather,  for  my  Louse.    It  is  a  kind  of  dativus 


112  ZECHARIAH,    IX.  [v.  8. 

Because  of  him  that  passeth  by,  and  because  of  him  that 

returneth : 
And  no  oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any  more  : 
For  now  have  I  seen  with  mine  eyes. 

commodi.  I  will  pitch  my  camp  for  (the  sake  of,  the  protection  of)  my 
house,  i.e.  either  of  the  Temple,  or  of  the  people.     Comp.  iii.  7,  note. 

because  of}  Lit.  from,  which  may  mean,  so  as  to  defend  it  from  the 
army,  from  him  that  passeth  by,  &c.  The  R.V.  renders,  against  the 
army,  that  none  pass  through  or  return. 

that  passeth  by,  and... that  returneth}  This  is  referred  by  Pusey  to 
"Alexander,  who  passed  by  with  his  army  on  his  way  to  Egypt,  and 
returned  having  founded  Alexandria."  But  the  use  of  the  phrase  in  the 
more  general  sense  of  "going  backward  and  forward,"  both  in  this  Book 
(vii.  14,  note)  and  in  the  only  other  places  where  it  occurs  in  the  O.T. 
(Ex.  xxxii.  27;  Ezek,  xxxv.  7),  shews  that  the  reference  is  more  general, 
to  the  overrunning  of  the  land  by  an  invading  army.  The  fact  that  of 
the  four  places  in  which  alone  this  phrase  occurs  two  are  in  this  Book 
and  one  in  each  division  of  the  Book,  is  in  favour,  so  far  as  it  goes,  of  a 
single  authorship. 

jtow  have  I  seen  with  ?nine  eyes}  God  is  said  to  "  see,"  when  He  so 
takes  notice  of  the  actions  of  men  as  to  interpose,  as  He  here  promises 
to  do,  for  the  deliverance  of  His  people  and  the  destruction  of  their 
enemies.  Ex.  ii.  25;  iii.  7,  9.  Comp.  ver.  i  supra.  "Nihil  aliud  ex- 
primere  verba  possunt,  quam  velle  Jovam  in  populum  suum  ej usque 
hostes  jamjam  intentos  habere  oculos,  ut  ilium  servet,  hos  perdat." 
Maurer. 

The  story  of  Alexander's  visit  to  Jerusalem,  as  it  is  gathered  from 
Josephus  {Ant.  Bk.  XI.  c.  8)  and  from  the  Talmud  is  thus  related  by 
Dean  Stanley.  After  the  conquest  of  Tyre  and  Gaza,  Alexander  had 
approached  Jerusalem,  when  "suddenly  from  the  city  emerged  a  long 
procession,  the  whole  population  streamed  out,  dressed  in  white.  The 
priestly  tribe,  in  their  white  robes;  the  High  Priest,  apparently  the 
chief  authority  in  the  place,  in  his  purple  and  gold  attire,  his  turban  on 
his  head,  bearing  the  golden  plate  on  which  was  inscribed  the  ineffable 

name  of  Jehovah It  was  at  the  sunrise  of  a  winter  morning,  long 

afterwards  observed  as  a  joyous  festival,  when  they  stood  before  the 
king.  To  the  astonishment  of  the  surrounding  chiefs  Alexander  de- 
scended from  his  chariot  and  bowed  to  the  earth  before  the  Jewish 
leader.  None  ventured  to  ask  the  meaning  of  this  seeming  frenzy,  save 
Parmenio  alone.  'Why  should  he,  whom  all  men  worship,  worship 
the  High  Priest  of  the  Jews?'  'Not  him,'  replied  the  king,  'but  the 
God  whose  High  Priest  he  is  I  worship.  Long  ago,  when  at  Dium  in 
Macedonia,  I  saw  in  my  dreams  such  an  one  in  such  an  attire  as  this, 
who  urged  me  to  undertake  the  conquest  of  Persia  and  succeed '...Hand 
in  hand  with  the  High  Priest,  and  with  the  priestly  tribe  running  by  his 
side,  he  entered  the  sacred  inclosure,  and  offered  the  usual  sacrifice,  saw 
with  pleasure  the  indication  of  the  rise  of  the  Grecian  power  in  the 
prophetic  books,  granted  free  use  of  their  ancestral  laws,  and  specially 


V.  9-]  ZECHARIAH,  IX.  113 

Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion  ;  s 

Shout,  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem  : 

Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee: 

He  is  just,  and  having  salvation ; 

of  the  year  of  jubilee  inaugurated  so  solemnly  a  hundred  years  before 
under  Nehemiah,  promised  to  befriend  the  Jewish  settlements  of  Baby- 
lonia and  Media,  and  invited  any  who  were  disposed  to  serve  in  his 
army  with  the  preservation  of  their  sacred  customs."  Jewish  Church, 
Vol.  III.,  Lect.  xlvii.  Without  denying  that  the  story  is  in  a  legendary 
dress,  we  may  admit  the  "  probability"  of  Alexander's  visit  to  Jerusalem, 
and  the  certainty  that  the  city  was  spared,  and  the  people  favoured  by 
him,  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  Zechariah's  prophecy. 

9—17.    The  Coming  of  the  King.    " 

The  great  event  for  which  all  that  had  been  foretold  in  the  preceding 
verses  of  the  chapter,  and  indeed  all  the  preceding  history  of  Israel 
and  of  the  world,  had  been  a  preparation,  and  in  which  as  purposed 
and  promised  by  God  was  the  pledge  of  Israel's  preservation  for  its  ac- 
complishment, is  now  announced  and  its  consequences  are  unfolded. 
Sion  is  called  upon  to  welcome  with  exultation  her  just  and  lowly 
King,  who  comes  to  her  in  humble  state  (ver.  9),  whose  kingdom  of 
peace  shall  cover  all  the  land  and  embrace  all  nations  (ver.  10),  and 
who,  mindful  of  His  covenant  with  her,  shall  give  deliverance  to  the 
captives  of  Israel  (ver.  11,  12).  Using  them,  now  once  more  an  united 
nation,  as  the  instruments  of  His  warfare  (ver.  13),  Himself  fighting 
for  them  and  manifesting  Himself  as  their  Protector  (ver.  14),  He  will 
make  them  victorious  over  all  their  enemies  (ver.  15),  and  will  promote 
them  to  safety  and  honour  (ver.  16),  magnifying  His  "goodness"  and 
His  "beauty"  in  the  prosperity  with  which  He  crowns  them  (ver.  17). 

9.  thy  King  cometh^  The  reference  to  Christ,  the  true  King  of 
Israel,  is  direct  and  immediate.  Even  if  the  prophecy  be  placed  before 
the  exile,  no  event  in  Jewish  history  answers,  even  typically,  to  this 
prediction.  After  the  exile  no  Jewish  ruler  bore  the  title  of  King. 
"The  prophet  here  briefly  shews  the  manner  in  which  the  church  is  to 
be  restored,  namely,  because  a  King  will  come  forth  of  the  tribe  and 
family  of  David,  to  bring  all  things  to  their  pristine  order.  And  this 
line  of  argument  constantly  occurs  in  the  Prophets,  since  the  hope  of 
the  ancient  people  rested,  as  ours  does,  on  Christ."     Calvin. 

unto  ihee\  not  only  to  thee  locally,  but  for  thy  benefit.  "  He  teaches 
us  that  this  King  will  not  come  for  His  own  sake,  as  earthly  princes 
rule  after  their  own  lust,  or  for  their  own  advantage :  but  that  this 
kingdom  will  be  shared  by  the  whole  people,  because,  that  is,  of  the 
prosperous  condition  which  it  will  introduce."     Calvin. 

having  salvation']  Rather,  saved.  The  Jewish  and  Christian  (LXX. 
(Twfwj/;  Vulg.  salvator)  versions  render  actively,  "Saviour."  But  there 
is  no  need  to  depart  from  the  grammatical  and  usual  (Deut.  xxxiii.  29 ; 
Ps.  xxxiii.  16;  Is.  xlv.  17)  meaning  of  the  word.  "He  trusted  in 
Jehovah  that  He  would  deliver  Him,"  was  not  only  a  prediction  of  the 

ZECHARIAH  S 


114  ZECHARIAH,    IX.  [v.  lo. 

Lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass, 
And  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass. 
.      And  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraim, 

taunt  of  His  enemies  (Matt,  xxvii,  43),  but  an  exposition  of  the  ruling 
principle  of  the  mediatorial  work  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  And  as  the 
reward  of  that  trust  He  was  "saved."  Heb.  v.  7.  At  the  same  time, 
as  Calvin  (whose  whole  note  on  this  verse  is  worth  consulting)  points 
out,  the  active  signification  of  saving  others  is  really  included  in  the 
passive  of  being  saved  Himself.  For  inasmuch  as  the  King  comes  not 
ibr  Himself  but  "for"  Sion  (see  last  note),  He  is  "just  and  saved"  not 
for  Himself  but  for  her.  "Si  veniret  sibi  privatim,  esset  etiam  sibi 
Justus  et  servatiis,  hoc  est,  utilitas  justitiae  et  salutis  resideret  penes 
ipsum  solum,  vel  in  ejus  persona.  Sed  quum  aliorum  respectu  venerit, 
etiam  in  eorum  gratiam  et  justitia  et  salute  praeditus  est.  Ergo  justitia 
et  salus  quarum  hie  fit  mentio  pertinent  ad  totum  corpus  Ecclesise, 
neque  restringi  debent  ad  personam  Regis... Neque  certe  humanitus 
loquendo  dicemus  Regem  esse  salvum  et  integrum,  si  expulsus  sit  a  suo 
imperio ;  si  deinde  ab  hostibus  vexentur  subditi,  vel  pereant  in  totum." 

l(nvly\  or  meek,  irpatjs.  LXX.  and  Matt.  xxi.  5.  The  sense,  "afflict- 
ed," which  the  Heb.  word  will  bear,  and  which  Pusey  says  is  neces- 
sarily contained  in  it,  does  not  seem  to  be  the  prominent  one  here;  but 
rather  the  meekness  and  lowliness  (Matt.  xi.  29)  of  His  character  and 
coming. 

?//>on  an  ass]  In  keeping  with  and  as  an  illustration  of  His  "lowliness." 
"In  itself  it  would,  if  insulated,  have  been  unmeaning.  The  Holy 
Ghost  prophesied  it,  Jesus  fulfilled  it,  to  shew  the  Jews  of  what  nature 
His  kingdom  was."  Pusey.  So  Calvin  observes  that  the  prophecy 
was  at  once  metaphorical  and  literal.  "Nam  propheta  intelligit 
Christum  fore  quasi  obscurum  hominem,  qui  sese  non  extollet  supra 
communem  vulgi  modum.  Hie  est  genuinus  sensus.  Verum  est:  sed 
tamen  hoc  non  obstat,  quominus  Christus  etiam  ediderit  hujus  rei  speci- 
men, ubi  asinum  ilium  conscendit." 

the  foal  of  an  ass'\  Lit.  of  she-asses ;  i.e.  such  as  those  animals  bear. 
So  Jephthah  is  said  (Judges  xii.  7)  to  have  been  buried  "in  the  cities  of 
Gilead;"  i.e.  (as  the  A.  V.  and  R.  V.  supply)  in  "one of"  them.  Comp. 
Gen.  xix.  29,  xxxvii.  31.  The  clause  is  added  to  define  more  exactly 
the  words,  "upon  an  ass:"^z/m  upon  a  colt,  R.  V.  It  was  upon  the 
colt  that  our  Lord  actually  rode.  The  Evangelist's  addition,  "whereon 
never  man  sat"  (Mark  xi.  2),  would  seem  to  indicate  that  it  was  chosen, 
rather  than  the  mother,  on  account  of  the  sacred  use  to  which  it  was  to 
be  put.     Comp.  Num.  xix.  2;   1  Sam.  vi.  7;  Luke  xxiii.  53. 

10.  /  will  cut  off]  Like  Himself  and  His  advent  shall  the  charac- 
ter of  His  kingdom  be.  Not  by  weapons  of  earthly  warfare  shall  it  be 
estabhshed.  As  a  kingdom  of  peace  it  shall  cover  the  widest  extent  of 
the  promised  land,  and  thence  extend  over  all  the  heathen  nations  of 
the  world.  Compare  Isaiah's  prophecy  (ix.  4 — 6):  "for  every  greave 
of  the  warrior  tramping  with  noise,  and  every  (military)  cloak  rolled 
in  blood  shall  be  consigned  to  burning  as  fuel  of  fire.     For  unto  us  a 


V.  II.]  ZECHARIAH,    IX.  115 

And  the  horse  from  Jerusalem, 
And  the  battle  bow  shall  be  cut  off: 
And  he  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  heathen : 
And  his  dominion  shall  be  from  sea  even  to  sea, 
And  from  the  river  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth. 
As  for  thee  also,  by  the  blood  of  thy  covenant 
I  have  sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is 
no  water. 

Child  is  born... and  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder,  and  His 
name  shall  be  called... the  Prince  of  Peace.  Of  the  increase  of  His 
government  and  of  peace  there  shall  be  no  end." 

front  Ephraim\  The  use  of  this  name  to  denote  the  ten  tribes  (comp. 
ver.  13  and  x.  7)  is  not,  as  has  been  alleged,  conclusive  as  to  the  ante- 
captivity  date  of  this  part  of  this  Book.  It  is  true  that  the  name  is  not 
so  used  in  "acknowledged  post-captivity  writings,"  but  it  does  not 
follow  that  because  a  writer  so  uses  it,  he  is  not  a  jiost-captivity  writer. 
In  chap.  viii.  13  of  this  Book,  which  is  confessedly  written  after  the 
captivity,  the  "liouse  of  Judah"  and  the  "house  of  Israel"  are  dis- 
tinguished. And  in  a  prophecy  during  the  captivity,  and  why  not 
therefore  in  one  after  it?  the  ten  tribes  are  distinguished  from  the 
two  by  this  veiy  name  of  Ephraim.     Ezek.  xxxvii.  15 — 28. 

from  sea  even  to  sea,  &c-]  Identical  with  Ps.  Ixxii.  8,  where  Dean 
Perowne  quotes  Pusey  {Daniel,  p.  480),  "From  the  Mediterranean, 
their  Western  boundary,  to  the  encircling  sea  beyond  Asia's  utmost 
verge;  and  from  their  Eastern  boundary,  the  river,  the  Euphrates, 
uuto  the  cuds  of  the  earth,'''  and  adds,  "But  perhaps  we  have  only  a 
poetical  expression,  not  to  be  construed  into  the  prose  of  geography, 
or  to  be  explained  (as  by  Rashi  and  others)  as  indicating  the  extent  of 
territory  laid  down  in  Exod.  xxiii.  31." 

11.  As  for  thee  a/so]  Lit.  also  thou,  i.  e.  as  rec^nrds  thee  (O  daughter 
of  Sion),  I  will  also  (in  addition  to  all  that  has  been  promised,  ver.  9, 
10)  liberate  thy  captives."  So  Maurer:  "Gaude,  Sionia!  veniet  rex 
tuus  tibi,  Justus  cet. ;  removebuntur  instrumenta  belli,  alta  pax  erit; 
auctum  erit  imperium  tuum  mirum  in  modum ;  etiam  captivos  tuos,  qui 
in  terris  exteris  detinentur,  tibi  restituam  memor  foederis  facti  cud? 
majoribus." 

by  the  blood  of  thy  covenant]  because  of,  &c.  R.  V.,  i.e.  the  covenant 
which  I  have  made  with  thee.  Exod.  xxiv.  5 — 8.  Comp.  for  the  higher 
reference,  Matt.  xxvi.  28;  Heb.  ix.  15. 

the  pit  wherein  is  no  water]  The  "pit,"  Gen.  xl.  15,  or  "house  of 
the  pit,"  Exod.  xii.  29;  Jer.  xxxvii.  16,  as  denoting  the  nature  of  its 
dungeons,  which  may  in  some  cases  have  been  actually  empty  wells 
(comp.  Gen.  xxxvii.  24),  is  a  common  name  for  a  prison  in  the  O.  T. 
The  expression,  "wherein  is  no  water,"  is  probably  added  to  emphasize 
the  horrors  of  such  a  dungeon.  "  The  prisoner  in  the  land  of  his  enemies 
was  left  to  perish  in  the  pit  (Zech.  ix.  11).  The  greatest  of  all  de- 
liverances is  that  the  captive  exile  is  released  from  the  slow  death  of 

8—2 


ii6  ZECHARIAH,   IX.  [w.  12—14. 

Turn  ye  to  the  strong  hold,  ye  prisoners  of  liope  : 

Even  to  day  do  I  declare  that  I  will  render  double  unto 

thee  ; 
When  I  have  bent  Judah  for  me,   filled  the  bow  with 

Ephraim, 
And  raised  up  thy  sons,  O  Zion,  against  thy  sons,   O 

Greece, 
And  made  thee  as  the  sword  of  a  mighty  man. 
And  the  Lord  shall  be  seen  over  them, 

starvation  in  it  (Is.  li.  14).  The  history  of  Jeremiah,  cast  into  the 
dungeon  or  pit  (Jer.  xxxviii.  6,  9),  let  down  into  its  depths  with  cords, 
sinking  into  the  filth  at  the  bottom  (here  also  there  is  no  water),  with 
death  by  hunger  staring  him  in  the  face,  shews  how  terrible  an  instru- 
ment of  punishment  was  such  a  pit.  The  condition  of  the  Athenian 
prisoners  in  the  stone-quarries  of  Syracuse  [Thuc.  vii.  87),  the  Persian 
punishment  of  the  airddoi  (Ctesias,  Fers.  48),  the  oubliettes  of  mediaeval 
prisons  present  instances  of  cruelty  more  or  less  analogous."  Bid/g 
Diet.,  Art.  "Pit." 

12.  This  verse  coheres  closely  with  the  verse  which  precedes  it,  and 
a  full  stop  should  be  printed  at  the  end  of  it,  as  in  R.  V.  There  is  a 
sharp  contrast  between  the  stronghold  here  and  the  pit  there.  And  the 
prisoners  of  hope  in  this  verse  are  ih.e  prisoneis  to  whom,  while  yet  in  the 
pit,  the  promise  and  hope  of  deliverance  had  been  given  in  that  verse. 

strong  hold]  There  may  be  a  reference  to  the  hill  of  Zion,  or  to  the 
rocky  fastnesses  of  Palestine,  to  which  the  exiles  who  had  escaped  from 
the  pit  or  dungeon  in  Babylon  were  to  turn,  or  return;  but  it  may  be 
merely  a  figurative  expression  (comp.  Ps.  xl.  1),  and  certainly  is  so  in 
its  higher  spiritual  and  Christian  application  (Luke  iv.  18 — 21). 

prisoners  of  hope]  Comp.  7/  KTiais  uireTayr]  iir  i\TrL8i,  k.  t.  X.,  Rom. 
viii.  20,  •2T. 

double]  Comp.  Is.  Ixi.  7.  From  Exod.  xvi.  2-2,  Job  xlii.  10,  it  would 
appear  that  this  means  a  very  large  and  full  measure  (lit.  twice  as  much 
as  before)  of  blessing  and  prosperity. 

13 — 17.  The  prophecy  now  moves  forward,  and  takes  for  its  ground- 
work a  later  epoch  in  the  future  histoiy  of  the  Jews.  As  their  deliverance 
from  their  enemies  without  fighting,  in  the  times  of  Alexander  (ver.  i — 8), 
was  foretold  as  the  pledge  and  type  of  Messiah's  kingdom  of  peace 
(ver.  9 — 12),  so  their  victories  over  the  Seleucidae,  in  the  times  of  the 
Maccabees,  are  in  these  verses  foretold  as  the  pledge  and  type  of 
Messiah's  victories  over  all  His  enemies. 

13.  bent]  Lit.  trodden,  because  the  foot  was  placed  on  the  bow  in 
bending  it.  The  warriors  of  Israel  are  weapons  in  the  hand  of  God. 
Judah  is  the  bow,  Ephraim  the  arrow,  the  sons  of  Zion  are  now  raised 
"or  lifted  up  by  Him  as  a  spear  (comp.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  18,  where  the  Heb. 
word  is  the  same),  now  wielded  as  a  sword. 

The  R.  V.  gives  the  tenses  in  this  verse  more  accurately :  For  I  have 
bent,  I  have  filled,  &c.,  and  I  will  stir  up,  and  will  make,  &c. 


vv.  15—17.]  ZECHARIAH,    IX.  117 

And  his  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning : 

And  the  Lord  God  shall  blow  the  trumpet, 

And  shall  go  with  whirlwinds  of  the  south. 

The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  defend  them ;   and  they  shall  is 

devour, 
And  subdue  with  sling  stones ; 

And  they  shall  drink,  and  make  a  noise  as  through  wine ; 
And  they  shall  be  filled  like  bowls,  and  as  the  corners  of 

the  altar. 
And  the  Lord  their  God  shall  save  them  in  that  day  as  i6 

the  flock  of  his  people  : 
For  they  shall  be  as  the  stones  of  a  crown,  lifted  up  as  an 

ensign  upon  his  land. 
For   how   great   is   his  goodness,  and  how  great  is  his  17 

beauty ! 

14.  whirlwinds  of  the  south'\  which  were  the  most  vehement  and 
destructive.     Is.  xxi.  i ;  Job  xxxvii.  9. 

15.  The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  defend  the?n'\  See,  for  examples  of  the 
first  fulfilment,  i  Mace.  iii.  16 — 24,  iv.  6 — 16,  vii.  40 — 50. 

devour]  It  is  not  said  what  they  shall  devour.  Calvin  takes  this 
and  what  follows  literally  of  eating  and  drinking,  i.e.  of  enjoying 
plenty:  " Adjungit  etiam  fore  illis  copiam  panis  et  vini,  ut  saturentur." 
Others,  as  Pusey,  supply  "their  enemies"  after  "devour"  and  take  it 
as  an  image  of  "destruction  or  absorption  only,  as  in  that,  thott  shall 
consume  [lit.  eat'\  all  the  people  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  deliver  thee, 
Deut.  vii.  16."  Comp.  Num.  xiv.  9.  But  then  no  adequate  sense  is 
given  to  the  following  clauses,  Thou  shall  drink,  &c  It  seems  best  to 
regard  the  whole  as  a  figurative  description  of  a  wild  beast  devouring 
its  prey :  they  shall  devour  (the  flesh  of  their  enemies,  comp.  Num.  xxiii. 
24);  they  shall  tread  on  (them,  as  on)  sling  stones;  they  shall  drink 
(their  blood)  and  make  a  noise  as  through  wine;  they  shall  be  filled  (with 
it)  like  botvls  (which  hold  the  blood  of  the  sacrifices),  like  the  corners 
of  the  altar  (round  which  it  is  copiously  poured).    See  Lev.  iv.  7,  18,  30. 

sling  stones]  Comp.  Job  xli.  28,  29.  The  comparison  of  the  Israelites 
to  the  precious  "stones  of  a  crown"  in  the  next  verse  favours  the  view 
that  their  enemies  themselves,  and  not  the  weapons  which  they  hurl  at 
them,  are  here  compared  to  the  "stones  of  a  sling."  "Their  enemies 
shall  fall  under  them,  as  harmless  and  as  of  little  account,  as  the  sHng- 
stones  which  have  missed  their  aim  (or  spent  their  force),  and  lie  as  the 
road  to  be  passed  over."     Pusey. 

16.  lifted  up  as  an  ensign  upon]  Rather,  raised  aloft  over,  or  perhaps, 
shining,  or  glittering.  So  R.  V.  lifted  on  high  over.  Margin,  glittering 
upon. 

17.  his  goodness... his  beauty]  i.e.  either  Israel's  {their  prosperity, 
R.  V.  margin),  as  thus  delivered  and  honoured  by  God  (comp.  Hos.  xiv. 


Ii8  ZECHARIAH,   X.  [v.  i. 

Corn  shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful,  and  new  wine 
the  maids. 
10      Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in  the  time  of  the  latter  rain ; 
So  the  Lord  s^a//  make  bright  clouds, 

6),  or  God's,  the  exclamation  being  drawn  from  the  prophet  by  the 
consideration  of  the  great  things  he  had  been  commissioned  to  make 
known.  "The  goodness  and  the  beauty  are  the  goodness  and  beauty 
of  God,  whose  great  doings  had  been  his  theme  before."  Pusey,  who 
quotes  Osirius :  "  The  prophet,  borne  out  of  himself  by  the  consideration 
of  the  Divine  goodness,  stands  amazed  while  he  contemplates  the  beauty 
and  Deity  of  Christ :  he  bursts  out  with  unwonted  admiration !  How 
great  is  His  goodness,  who  to  guard  His  flock  shall  come  down  on 
earth  to  lay  down  His  life  for  the  salvation  of  His  sheep !  How  great 
His  beauty,  who  is  the  brightness  of  the  glory  and  the  Image  of  the 
Father,  and  comprises  in  II is  Godhead  the  measure  of  all  order  and 
beauty!" 

Chap.  X.     The  Prophecy  continued. 

This  chapter  is  not  a  new  prophecy  but  a  continuation  and  expansion 
of  the  promises  made  in  chap.  ix.  The  coincidences  of  thought  and 
even  of  language  (as  Maurer  points  out)  are  numerous  and  striking 
(see  the  references  in  the  notes  below).  The  first  two  verses  of 
the  chapter  are  intimately  connected  both  with  what  precedes  and 
with  what  follows  them,  so  that  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to 
which  of  the  two  paragraphs  they  properly  belong  to.  The  promise 
of  abundance  of  corn  and  wine,  ix.  17,  leads  the  prophet,  true  to  his 
vocation  to  reform  the  present  while  he  predicts  the  future,  to  call  upon 
his  countrymen  to  look  for  these  blessings  from  the  hand  of  God, 
ver.  I,  and  not  from  idols  and  diviners  who  had  only  deceived  them 
and  brought  calamities  upon  them,  ver.  •2.  The  evil  rulers,  who  for 
their  sins  had  been  set  over  them,  shall,  however  (he  foretells  in 
resumption  of  the  prophecy  of  the  former  chapter),  be  replaced  by  true 
leaders,  ver.  3,  4,  who  shall  lead  them  to  victory,  ver.  5.  The  ten  tribes 
shall  share  with  the  two  the  promised  blessings,  ver.  6,  7.  From  all 
parts  of  the  earth  shall  they  be  brought  back  to  their  own  land, 
ver.  8 — 10,  God  Himself  being  as  of  old  their  Leader,  ver.  11,  and  shall 
serve  Him  there,  ver.  12. 

1.  the  latter  raht]  Would  you  have  even  now  a  measure  at  least 
of  the  promised  abundance,  seek  it  of  Jehovah ;  look  to  Him  for  the 
rain  that  prepares  (Ps.  Ixv.  9,  10),  as  well  as  for  the  crowning  gift 
itself  (lb.  ver.  11)  of  "corn"  and  "wine."  The  latter  rain  fell  in  ISIarth 
or  April  and  served  to  swell  the  grain  now  coming  to  maturity.  The 
former  rain  fell  in  the  autumn.  (Deut.  xi.  14;  Joel  ii.  -23.  Comp. 
Jer.  iii.  3.) 

so  the  Lord  shall  make  bright  douds'\  Rather,  it  is  the  Lord  who 
makes  lightnings  (as  in  the  margin,  or,  even  of  the  Lord  that  maketh 
lightnings,  R.V. ),  which  usher  in  and  accompany  rain:  therefore  of 
Him  must  you  ask  it.     Comp.  "He  hath  made  lightnings  for  the  rain," 


vv.  2— 4.]  ZECHARIAH,   X.  119 

And  give  them  showers  of  rain, 

To  every  one  grass  in  the  field. 

For  the  idols  have  spoken  vanity,  a 

And  the  diviners  have  seen  a  lie, 

And  have  told  false  dreams ; 

They  comfort  in  vain  : 

Therefore  they  went  their  way  as  a  flock, 

They  were  troubled,  because  there  was  no  shepherd. 

Mine  anger  was  kindled  against  the  shepherds,  3 

And  I  punished  the  goats  : 

For  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  visited  his  flock  the  house  of 

Judah, 
And  hath  made  them  as  his  goodly  horse  in  the  battle. 
Out   of  him   came   forth   the   corner,   out   of  him    the  4 

nail, 

Ps.  cxxxv.  7.  ''For  the  rain;  i.e.  so  that  the  rain  follows  the  light- 
ning; see  Jer.  x.  13,  li.  16.  The  lightning  is  supposed  to  precede  the 
rain.  A  common  Arabic  proverb  says  of  a  man  who  turns  out  other 
than  was  expected  of  him,  that  he  Hghtens  but  does  not  rain. "  Dean 
Perowne. 
grass]    Rather,  herb,  including  food  for  man,  Gen.  i.  29. 

2.  idols\  Lit.  teraphim.  They  were  of  human  form,  whether  busts 
or  full-length  figures,  and  were  apparently  sometimes  (i  Sam.  xix.  13), 
if  not  always  (Gen.  xxxi.  19),  of  life  size.  Compare,  for  the  use  of 
them  in  divination,  as  here,  Ezek.  xxi.  21. 

they  comfort  in  vain]  when  they  promise  rain  and  fruitful  seasons. 
Comp.  Jer.  xiv.  22. 

therefore  they  went  their  way]  therefore  (because  they  have  had 
recourse  to  idols  and  diviners)  they  (the  Israelites)  wander  and  stray 
about  to  their  hurt,  like  sheep  without  a  shepherd. 

3.  was  kindled... punished... hath  made]  is  kindled... will  punish... shall 
makey  R.  V. 

the  shepherds]  who  though  they  were  "no  (true)  shepherds,"  yet 
retained  the  name  and  office.  Quite  parallel  is  the  passage  in  Ezekiel 
(xxxiv.  5,  6  with  7—10);  where  also  (ver.  17—22),  as  here,  the  rulers 
and  principal  men  are  spoken  of  as  "goats,"  as  well  as  "shepherds." 

his  goodly  horse]  Comp.  ix.  13  ;  and  for  the  image  of  the  war-horse, 
Job  xxxix.  19 — 25. 

4.  out  of  him  came  forth]  Rather,  from  him  (Judah)  shall  come 
forth.  Comp.  Jer.  xxx.  21.  Some,  however,  take  it  to  mean  "from 
Him,  Jehovah,  shall  proceed,"  &c.     Comp.  Ephes.  iv.  11. 

the  corner]  i.e.  the  corner-stone^  which  was  the  stay  and  ornament  of 
the  whole  building.     Is.  xxviii.  16 ;  Ephes.  ii.  20. 

the  nail]  or  peg,  from  which,  firmly  fixed  and  stable,  the  furniture 
of  the  house  could  be  suspended.     Is.  xxii.  23,  24. 


ZECHARIAH,   X.  [vv.  5-8. 


Out  of  him  the  battle  bow,  out  of  him  every  oppressor 

together. 
And  they  shall  be  as  mighty  metiy  which  tread  down  their 

enemies 
In  the  mire  of  the  streets  in  the  battle : 
And  they  shall  fight,  because  the  Lord  is  with  them, 
And  the  riders  on  horses  shall  be  confounded. 
And  I  will  strengthen  the  house  of  Judah, 
And  I  will  save  the  house  of  Joseph, 
And  I  will  bring  them  agai7i  to  place  them ;  for  I  have 

mercy  upon  them : 
And  they  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast  them  off: 
For  I  a?n  the  Lord  their  God,  and  will  hear  them. 
And  they  of  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a  mighty  man, 
And  their  heart  shall  rejoice  as  through  wine : 
Yea,  their  children  shall  see  it,  and  be  glad ; 
Their  heart  shall  rejoice  in  the  Lord. 
I  will  hiss  for  them,  and  gather  them  ;  for  I  have  redeemed 

them  : 

oppressor]  or,  ruler,  as  in  R.  V.  margin,  a  sense  which  the  word  will 
bear  in  Is.  iii.  12 ;  Ix.  17.  Every  ruler,  civil  and  military,  "the  corner- 
stone," "the  nail,"  "the  battle-bow,"  shall  proceed  from  Judah,  blessed 
by  God,  or  from  God,  as  His  gift  to  Judah,  as  the  need  of  the  state 
requires.  Calvin,  however,  and  others  would  give  the  word  its  more 
common  sense,  and  understand,  civil  rulers  for  the  well-being  of  the  state, 
"the  corner,"  "the  nail;"  military  leaders,  for  its  defence  and  extension, 
"the  battle-bow;"  governors  to  keep  in  subjection  provinces  annexed 
and  conquered  by  the  battle-bow,  "the  oppressor." 

5.  Comp.  ix.  15. 

6 — 12.  The  return  of  the  whole  nation  to  their  own  land. 

6.  brifig  them  again  to  place  them]  A  single  word  in  Hebrew, 
which  however  is  irregular  in  form,  and  may  be  referred  to  either  of 
two  regular  forms,  meaning  respectively,  "I  will  cause  them  to  return," 
"I  will  cause  them  to  dwell."  The  A.V.  with  the  Jewish  commen- 
tators, followed  by  Rosenm.  and  Pusey,  regards  the  combination  of  the 
two  forms  as  designed  by  the  writer  to  combine  the  two  ideas.  (Comp. 
Jer.  xxxii.  37.)  It  is  more  probable,  however,  that  one  only  of  the  two 
ideas  is  here  intended,  I  will  bring  them  again  (or,  cause  them  to  dwells 
margin),  R.  V. 

7.  as  through  wim]     Comp.  ix.  15. 

8.  /  wzV/  hiss  for  them]  "  Formerly  God  had  so  spoken  of  His 
summoning  the  enemies  of  His  people  to  chastise  them  (Is.  vii.  18,  19; 
v.  26,  -27).     He  would  gather  them  like  the  countless  numbers  of  the 


w.  9— II.]  ZECHARIAH,   X. 


And  they  shall  increase  as  they  have  increased. 
And  I  will  sow  them  among  the  people  : 
And  they  shall  remember  me  in  far  countries ; 
And  they  shall  live  with  their  children,  and  turn  again. 
I  will  bring  them  again  also  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
And  gather  them  out  of  Assyria; 

And  I  will  bring  them  into  the  land  of  Gilead  and  Leba- 
non; 
And  place  shall  not  be  found  for  them. 
And  he  shall  pass  through  the  sea  with  affliction, 

insect  creation,  which  if  united  would  irresistibly  desolate  life.  He 
would  summon  them  as  the  bee-owner,  by  his  shrill  call,  summons  and 
unites  his  own  swarm.  Now,  contrariwise,  God  would  summon  with 
the  same  His  own  people.  The  fulfilment  of  the  chastisement  was  the 
earnest  of  the  ease  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  mercy."     Pusey. 

as  they  have  increased^  i.e.  formerly  in  Egypt.  Exod.  i.  7,  la.  "Mul- 
tiplicabuntur  in  exsilio,  ut  multiplieati  fuerunt  in  ^gypto."  Jarchi, 
quoted  by  Maurer.     Comp.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  10,  11. 

9.  1  will  sow  them  among  the  people]  peoples,  R.  V.  Their  disper- 
sion among  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  not  be  for  their  destruction, 
but  like  the  sowing  of  corn,  which  is  scattered  broad-cast,  not  that  it 
may  be  lost  and  perish,  but  that  it  may  bring  forth  much  fruit.  Corap. 
Hos.  ii.  17^.  "Ego  eos  multiplicabo,  ut  dispersio  in  populis  non  videatur 
esse  divisio,  sed  sementis  operatic,  et  liberorum  et  nepotum  segete 
multiplicata  vivant  cum  filiis  suis."     Hieron. 

they  shall  live]     Comp.  Ezek.  xxxvii.  14. 

turn  again]  or,  return  to  God.  Jer.  iii.  11,  14;  Is.  x.  21.  The 
consequent  return  to  their  own  land  is  promised  in  the  next  verse. 

10.  Egypt... Assyria]  It  is  of  Ephraim,  or  the  ten  tribes,  that  the 
prophet  is  here  speaking.  In  ver.  3 — 6  of  this  chapter  the  promise  is 
to  the  house  of  Judah.  In  ver.  6  the  house  of  Joseph  is  introduced  as 
sharing  in  it.  In  ver.  7 — \i  this  part  of  the  promise  is  exclusively 
pursued.  Hence,  there  is  no  mention  here  of  the  return  of  the  two 
tribes  from  Babylon,  not  because,  as  has  been  alleged,  this  prophecy 
was  written  before  their  captivity,  but  because  (not  only  was  that 
return  already  open  to  them  all  and  an  accomplished  fact  to  many  of 
them,  but)  they  are  not  contemplated  here.  In  like  manner  Hosea 
speaks  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  as  the  countries  from  which  Ephraim 
should  return  (xi.  11). 

Gilead,  Lebanon]  the  territory  assigned  to  these  tribes  on  the  E.  and 
on  the  W.  of  Jordan. 
place  shall  not  be  found]    Comp.  Is.  xlix.  10. 

11.  he]  i.  e.  Jehovah,  as  He  did  through  the  Red  Sea,  when  He  gave 
the  first  great  deliverance  to  His  people. 

with  affliction]  i.e.  to  His  enemies.  Comp.  Exod.  xiv.  24,  25,  27, 
^v.  3 — 7.  This  is  perhaps  the  best  rendering  of  this  difficult  and  much 
disputed  clause.      The  sea  of  affliction,  R.  V. 


122  ZECHARIAH,   X.    XI.  [w.  12;  i. 

And  shall  smite  the  waves  in  the  sea, 
And  all  the  deeps  of  the  river  shall  dry  up  : 
And  the  pride  of  Assyria  shall  be  brought  down, 
And  the  sceptre  of  Egypt  shall  depart  away. 
12      And  I  will  strengthen  them  in  the  Lord  ; 

And  they  shall  walk  up  and  down  in  his  name,  saith  the 
Lord. 
11      Open  thy  doors,  O  Lebanon,  that  the  fire  may  devour  thy 
cedars. 

smite  the  waves]  Comp.  Exod.  xv.  8.  See  also  Is.  xi.  15,  16,  where 
a  similar  reference  occurs  to  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea. 

the  river]  "\.  e.  the  Nile,  as  the  Heb.  word  used  indicates. 

12.  walk  up  and  down]  i.e.  ^MX^WQ  iht  coxxxsQ  oi  their  \iwe%.  Comp. 
Mic.  iv.  5  J  Coloss.  iii.  7. 

Chap.  XI.    The  rejection  of  the  Shepherd. 

In  this  chapter,  which  forms  the  second  section  of  the  First  Burden, 
we  have,  so  to  speak,  a  companion  picture  to  that  drawn  in  the  first 
section.  If  that  picture,  however,  was  bright  with  the  coming  of  the 
King,  the  victories  He  would  achieve  and  the  blessings  He  would  bestow, 
this  picture  is  dark  with  His  rejection  and  the  disastrous  consequences 
which  it  would  entail.  The  chapter  opens  with  a  vivid  description  of 
these  consequences,  ver.  i — 3.  The  desolating  scourge,  approaching  as 
it  ever  did  from  the  north,  overthrows  the  pride  of  Lebanon  and 
Bashan,  ver.  i,  2,  and  then,  sweeping  southward  down  the  Jordan 
valley,  falls  upon  the  shepherds  of  Israel,  ver.  3.  The  causes  which 
led  to  this  judgment  are  treated  of  in  the  next  paragraph,  ver.  4 — 14. 
In  obedience  to  the  command  of  Jehovah,  ver.  4,  the  charge  of  the  flock, 
which  had  been  impiously  slaughtered  and  sold  by  former  shepherds, 
ver.  5,  whom  God  in  His  displeasure  had  suffered  to  maltreat  them, 
ver.  6,  is  undertaken  by  a  good  shepherd,  whom  the  prophet  personates, 
and  who  endeavours  to  restore  the  comeliness  and  unity  of  the  flock, 
ver.  7,  and  to  cut  off  its  oppressors,  ver.  8  a.  Wearied,  however,  and 
disgusted  with  the  want  of  sympathy  which  he  encounters,  the  shepherd 
reUnquishes  his  thankless  task,  ver.  8  b— 11.  He  asks  for  his  wages, 
as  his  work  was  finished,  and  receives  the  paltry  and  insulting  purchase- 
money  of  a  slave,  ver.  12,  which  at  the  bidding  of  Jehovah  he  casts 
away  in  scorn,  ver.  13,  and  completes  the  abandonment  of  the  work 
which  he  had  undertaken,  ver.  14.  Then,  in  the  remaining  paragraph, 
or  sub-section,  of  the  chapter,  ver.  15—17,  the  prophet  is  directed  to 
assume  a  new  and  opposite  character,  and  to  personate  a  foolish 
shepherd,  ver.  15,  whose  neglect  and  cruelty  should  fall  heavily  on  the 
flock,  ver.  16,  but  whom  terrible  vengeance  should  ultimately  overtake, 
ver.  17. 

1.  Open  thy  doors,  O  Lebanon]  The  passage  is  highly  poetical  and 
dramatic,  but  in  its  first  reference  literal  and  physical.  In  the  path 
of  the  invading  army  stands  Lebanon,  at  once  the  pride  and  bulwark 


w.  2, 3.]  ZECHARIAH,   XI.  123 

Howl,  fir  tree ;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen ;  because  the  mighty  3 

are  spoiled : 
Howl,  O  ye  oaks  of  Bashan ;  for  the  forest  of  the  vintage 

is  come  down. 
There  is  a  voice  of  the  howling  of  the  shepherds ;  for  their  3 

glory  is  spoiled : 
A  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young  lions  \  for  the  pride  of 

Jordan  is  spoiled. 

of  the  land.  As  the  priestly  herald  of  the  approaching  host  {quasi  esset 
Dei  fetialis,  Calv.),  the  prophet  summons  it  to  open  wide  an  access, 
and  to  surrender  to  the  reckless  torch  of  the  fierce  foe  its  goodly  pines 
and  noble  cedars.     Comp.  2  Kings  xix.  1^',  Is.  xxxvii.  24,  xiv.  8. 

2.  Jir  tree]  or  cypress.  It  is  uncertain  what  tree  is  meant.  See 
Diet,  of  Bible,  Art.  "Cypress." 

for  the  cedar  is  fallen]  Grand  trees  as  were  the  firs,  or  cypresses, 
the  cedars  were  grander  still.  The  fall  therefore  of  the  latter  might 
well  make  the  former  howl  in  despair  at  their  own  assured  fate.  "Nam 
si  cedris  haud  parcitur,  aliis  arboribus,  quae  minoris  quam  illae  pretii 
sunt,  multo  minus  parcetur."     Rosenm. 

the  mighty]  i.e.  the  mighty  trees,  "prsestantes  scil.  arbores,  cedri," 
Rosenm.,  who  compares,  ''''z.  goodly  cedar,"  Ezek.  xvii.  23,  where  the 
Heb.  word  is  the  same.  Possibly,  however  (especially  as  the  clause 
is  additional  or  parenthetical  and  mars  the  symmetry  of  the  parallelism), 
it  is  thrown  in  to  suggest  the  figurative  or  allegorical  reference  to  the 
rulers  and  chiefs  of  Israel  which  lies  behind  and  goes  together  with  the 
literal  reference.     The  goodly  ones,  R.  V. 

Bashan]  Compare  the  association  of  "Gilead  and  Lebanon,"  chap.  x. 
10.  "From  the  heights  of  Lebanon  the  destructive  storm  sweeps  down 
on  the  land  of  Bashan,  and  the  oaks,  the  pride  of  the  land  (with  their 
kindly  shade  from  the  burning  heat),  are  hkewise  felled  by  the  enemy 
to  meet  the  wants  of  the  invading  army,  and  to  construct  his  means  of 
offence  and  defence,"     Wright. 

forest  of  the  vintage]     Rather,  inaccessible  forest. 

3.  There  is  a  voice]  More  literally  and  forcibly,  A  voice  of  the 
howling  of  the  shepherds!  R.  V. 

the  shepherds]  Here  again  the  figurative  reference  appears  through 
the  literal.  Comp.  x.  3,  and  ver.  5  below.  But  the  literal  reference 
holds  good.  "The  desolating  storm  sweeps  from  the  highlands  to  the 
lowlands.  The  very  shepherds  are  forced  to  howl,  because  their 
splendour  is  laid  waste,  namely,  the  pasture  lands,  in  which  they  were 
wont  to  tend  and  feed  their  flocks  in  the  days  of  peace  and  quiet.  The 
conflagration  extends  even  to  the  south  of  the  land.  Judah  is  wrapped 
in  flames.  The  close  thickets  which  fringed  the  Jordan  river  as  it  ran 
along  through  the  territory  of  the  southern  kingdom  are  consumed  by  the 
fire....  'The  pride  of  Jordan'  is  rendered  desolate,  and  hence  the  voice  of 
the  roaring  of  lions  is  heard  wailing  over  the  general  ruin."     Wright. 

young  lions]     Comp.  Jer.  xxv.  36 — 38,  xlix.  19. 


124  ZECHARIAH,   XL  [w.  4— 7. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  my  God  ;  Feed  the  flock  of  the 

slaughter ; 
Whose  possessors  slay  them,  and  hold  themselves  not  guilty: 
And  they  that  sell  them  say,  Blessed  be  the  Lord  ;  for  I 

am  rich : 
And  their  own  shepherds  pity  them  not. 
For  I  will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  saith 

the  Lord  : 
But  lo,  I  will  deliver  the  men 
Every  one  into  his  neighbour's  hand,  and  into  the  hand  of 

his  king : 
And  they  shall  smite  the  land,  and  out  ot  their  hand  I  will 

not  deliver  them. 
And  I  will  feed  the  flock  of  slaughter,  even  you,  O  poor  of 

the  flock, 
ver.  4 — 14.     The  rejection  by  them  of  Jehovah's  shepherd  is  the 
cause  ot  the  calamity  which  is  to  fall  upon  them.     "Subjicit  rationem 
cur  Deus  tarn  severe  agere  cogitet  cum  populo  suo,  quoniam  insanabilis 
sit  eorum  malitia."     Rosenm. 

4.  Feed^  The  person  addressed  is  Zechariah.  The  passage  is  dramatic. 
The  prophet  is  represented  as  personating,  inclusively  perhaps,  as  is  so 
generally  the  case  in  O.T.  prophecy,  the  long  line  oi  Jehovah's  true 
shepherds,  but  chiefly  and  ultimately  the  Good  Shepherd  of  whom  they 
all  were  types.  Compare,  as  illustrating  the  rejection  alike  of  the  whole 
typical  order  and  of  the  Antitype,  St  Stephen's  words :  "  Which  of  the 
prophets  have  not  your  fathers  persecuted?  and  they  have  slain  them 
which  shewed  before  of  the  coming  of  the  Just  One,  of  whom  ye  have 
been  now  the  betrayers  and  the  murderers. "  Acts  vii.  52.  "Hicautem 
non  recitat  propheta  simpliciter  quale  mandatum  ipse  acceperit  a  Deo : 
sed  in  genere  docet  semper  Deum  officio  boni  et  fidi  pastoris  defunctum 
fuisse  erga  Judseos.  Suscipit  igitur  propheta  in  se  personam  omnium 
prophetarum."     Calv. 

flock  of  the  slaughter]  Rather,  of  slaughter,  R.  V.,  i.e.  exposed  to 
slaiighie? ,  as  ver.  5  explains.  Comp.  Ps.  xliv.  22,  where  "sheep  for 
the  slaughter,"  or  "sheep  appointed  to  be  slain"  (P.  B.  V.)  is  literally, 
"sheep  of  slaughter." 

5.  possessors}  Rather,  buyers.  The  flock  of  which  the  prophet 
was  commanded  to  take  charge  had  been  bought  and  slain  without 
compunction,  and  sold  for  gain,  with  a  complacent  "bless  the  Lord"  at 
the  good  price  they  fetched. 

6.  the  men]  Rather,  man.  This  verse  at  once  gives  the  reason  of 
the  misery  described  in  ver.  5,  viz.  Jehovah's  displeasure,  and  interprets 
the  parable  of  the  flock.  They  of  whom  I  am  speaking  are  "the  in- 
habitants of  the  land  (of  Judaea);"  they  are  not  sheep  but  "men." 
Comp.  Ezek.  xxxiv.  31. 

7.  And  I  will  feed'\    Rather,   So   I   fed,   in   accordance  with   the 


vv.  8— u.]  ZECHARIAH,   XI.  125 

And  I  took  unto  me  two  staves ;  the  one  I  called  Beauty, 
and  the  other  I  called  Bands ;  and  I  fed  the  flock.     Three  8 
shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one  month ;  and  my  soul  lothed 
them,  and  their  soul  also  abhorred  me.     Then  said  I,  I  will  9 
not  feed  you :  that  that  dieth,  let  it  die ;  and  that  that  is  to 
be  cut  off,  let  it  be  cut  off;  and  let  the  rest  eat  every  one  the 
flesh  of  another.     And  I  took  my  staff,  even  Beauty,  and  cut  10 
it  asunder,  that  /  might  break  my  covenant  which  I  had 
made  with  all  the  people.     And  it  was  broken  in  that  day :  " 
and  so  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon  me  knew  that 

command  given  me  in  ver.  4.  Comp.  "and  I  fed,"  at  the  end  of  this 
verse. 

even  yoti\  or,  therefore:  i.e.  "So  I  fed  the  flock  of  slaughter:  there- 
fore (because  I  had  been  commanded  to  do  so,  fed  I)  the  poor  of  the 
flock."     R.  V.  adopts  A.  V.  margin :  verily  the  poor  of  the  flock. 

two  staves]  two,  instead  of  one  as  on  becoming  shepherd  he  would 
naturally  have  done,  to  denote,  as  the  names  given  them  imply,  that 
his  twofold  aim  in  discharging  his  ofiice  would  be  to  ensure  the  come- 
liness and  the  unity  of  the  flock.  The  latter  name,  "Bands,"  refers 
specially  to  the  union  between  Tudah  and  Israel. 

8.  Three  shepherds... in  one  month]  This  has  been  understood  to 
refer  either  to  three  historical  persons,  e.g.  Zachariah,  Shallum  (•z  Kings 
XV.  8,  13)  and  some  third  usurper,  not  mentioned  in  the  history,  of  the 
same  time,  or  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  Antiochus  Eupator  and  Demetrius  I., 
in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees  (though  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  these 
could  have  been  called  shepherds  of  Israel) ;  or  else  to  the  three  offices  of 
king,  priest  and  prophet.  But  all  these  references  break  down,  and  it 
is  better  to  take  the  words  generally,  as  describing  the  prompt  and 
vigorous  action  of  Jehovah's  shepherd  in  dealing  with  the  evil  shepherds 
(x.  3),  as  well  as  in  feeding  the  flock.  '"''  Mensis  untcs  hie  capitur  pro 
exiguo  tempore:  //vjautem  pastores  significant  multos  indefinite."  Calv. 

and  my  soul  lothed  them\  or,  but,  &c. :  for,  R.  V.  At  this  point 
the  prophet  begins  to  describe  the  failure  of  his  good  offices  towards  the 
flock,  and  the  mutual  antipathy  that  sprang  up  between  him  and  them. 

10.  the  people]  Lit.  tlie  peoples.  This  may  mean  either  (i)  the 
nations  of  the  earth,  in  which  case  the  sense  will  be  that  the  prosperity 
which  the  shepherd  on  assuming  office  had  guaranteed  to  the  flock,  and 
of  which  his  staff  "Beauty"  was  the  symbol,  was  assured  to  them  by  a 
covenant,  so  to  speak,  into  which  he  had  entered  with  all  nations  not 
to  molest  them  (comp.  Hos.  ii.  18;  Job  v.  23):  or  (2)  the  tribes  of 
Israel,  in  which  sense  the  word  is  used  Deut.  xxxiii.  3;  Hos.  x.  14. 

11.  it  zvas  broken]  i.e.  the  covenant. 

the  poor  of  the  flock]  "  The  rest  were  blinded :  those  who  listened  to 
God's  word,  observed  His  prophet,  waited  on  him  and  observed  his 
words,  knew  from  the  fulfilment  of  the  beginning,  that  the  whole  was 
God's  vvord."     Pusey. 

•waited  upon  me]  gave  heed  unto  me,  R.  V. 


126  ZECHARIAH,  XI.  [vv.  12—14. 

12  it  was  the  word  of  the  Lord.  And  I  said  unto  them,  If  ye 
think  good,  give  me  my  price  ;  and  if  not,  forbear.     So  they 

J3  weighed  ^r  my  price  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  And  the  Lord 
said  unto  me,  Cast  it  unto  the  potter:  a  goodly  price 
that  I  was  prised  at  of  them.  And  I  took  the  thirty 
pieces  of  silver,  and  cast  them  to  the  potter  in  the 

14  house  of  the  Lord.     Then  I  cut  asunder  mine  other  staff, 

12.  price]  Rather,  wages,  or  kif-e,  R.  V.  This  demand  is  made  by 
the  prophet  not  "in  order  to  try  whether  the  people  would  submit  them- 
selves further  to  his  guidance"  (Wright),  but  to  signify  the  complete 
abandonment  of  his  office  of  shepherd.  It  is  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I 
will  be  no  more  your  shepherd :  give  me  therefore  my  wages,  that  I 
may  go  my  way."  It  is  further  designed  to  bring  out  in  bold  relief  the 
mutual  aversion  and  contempt,  that  had  sprang  up  between  the  shepherd 
and  the  flock  (ver.  8).  He  asks  as  one  who  cares  not  whether  his  request 
be  granted:  "Give,  or  forbear."  They  reply  by  a  gift  more  insulting 
than  refusal. 

forbear]  "ne  date;  q.d.  non  sum  de  mercede  admodum  sollicitus, 
licet  jure  mihi  debeatur.  Exprimit  summam  indignationem,  ut  si  quis 
alicui  suam  ingratitudinem  exprobrat."     Rosenm. 

thirty  pieces  of  silver]  The  value  of  a  slave.  Exod.  xxi.  32.  Comp. 
Hos.  iii.  2. 

13.  Cast  it]  "as  a  thing  vile  and  rejected,  as  torn  flesh  was  to  be 
cast  to  dogs  (Exod.  xxii.  31),  or  a  corpse  was  cast  unburied  (Is.  xiv.  19), 
or  the  dead  body  of  Absalom  was  cast  into  the  pit  (2  Sam.  xviii.  r;), 
or  the  dust  of  the  idol-altars  into  the  brook  Kidron  by  Josiah  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  12),  or  the  idols  to  the  moles  and  the  bats  (Is.  ii.  20),  or  Judah 
and  Israel  from  the  face  of  God  into  a  strange  land  (2  Kings  xiii.  23); 
Coniah  and  his  seed,  a  vessel  in  which  is  no  pleasure,  into  a  land 
which  they  knew  not  (Jer.  xxii.  28),  or  the  rebels  against  God  said, 
let  us  cast  away  their  cords  from  us  (Ps.  ii.  3),  or  wickedness  was  cast 
into  the  Ephah  (Zech.  v.  8) ;  once  it  is  added,  for  loathing  (Ezek. 
xvi.  5)."     Pusey. 

a  goodly  price]  or,  the  goodly  price,  R.  V.     This  is,  of  course,  ironical. 

to  the  potter  in  the  house  of  the  Lord]  to  the  potter;  because  his 
business  was  to  make  the  most  worthless  of  vessels,  the  last  and  least 
"to  honour"  of  those  found  "in  a  great  house"  (2  Tim.  ii.  20),  and 
thus  the  unworthiness  of  the  "price"  was  shewn,  as  being  only  de- 
serving of  such  a  destiny.  In  the  house  of  the  Lord:  both  because  He 
it  was  who,  whether  in  the  person  of  His  servants  or  of  His  Son,  was 
the  real  subject  of  the  insulting  valuation,  and  also  because  a  formal 
and  national  character  was  given  to  the  transaction,  by  its  thus  taking 
place  before  Jehovah  and  in  His  House.  This  explanation,  which 
seems  to  be  the  simplest  and  most  satisfactory,  of  this  confessedly 
difficult  passage,  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  supposition  that  the 
potter  was  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  when  the  pieces  of  silver  were 
cast  contemptuously  down  there.     It  is  enough  if,  in   the  vision  or 


vv.  15,  i6.]  ZECHARIAH,   XL  127 

even  Bands,  that  I  might  break  the  brotherhood  between 
Judah  and  Israel. 

And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Take  unto  thee  yet  the  15 
instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd. 

For  lo,  I  will  raise  up  a  shepherd  in  the  land,  16 

Which  shall  not  visit  those  that  be  cut  off, 

Neither  shall  seek  the  young  one, 

Nor  heal  that  that  is  broken, 

Nor  feed  that  that  standeth  still : 

But  he  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat. 

And  tear  their  claws  in  pieces. 

symbolical  action  of  Zechariah,  they  were  in  some  way  clearly  declared 
to  be  for  him. 

Like  the  earlier  prophecy  of  the  King  (ix.  9),  this  prophecy  of  the 
Shepherd  is  remarkable  for  its  literal  fulfilment.  The  "thirty  pieces 
of  silver"  were  literally  the  "goodly  price"  paid  for  Him,  "whom  they 
of  the  children  of  Israel  did  value.  "The  potter"  was  literally  the 
recipient  of  it,  as  the  purchase-money  of  his  exhausted  field  for  an 
unclean  purpose  (Matt,  xxvii.  5 — 10). 

14.  /  cut  asunder  mine  other  staff]  to  signify  both  the  completion 
of  the  rupture  between  the  shepherd  and  the  flock,  with  which  he  had 
now  nothing  more  whatever  to  do,  and  also  the  second  evil  con- 
sequence of  that  rupture,  which  would  befall  the  flock.  Its  beauty  was 
gone  already :  its  unity  would  now  be  gone  also. 

15—17.  The  foolish  shepherd,  ver.  15;  the  misery  he  inflicts  upon 
the  flock,  ver.  16;  and  his  doom,  ver.  17. 

15.  the  instrtunents  of  a  foolish  shepherd]  There  is  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  "the  instruments,"  the  staff  and  scrip,  of  a  foolish  shepherd 
differed  from  those  of  a  wise  one,  and  90  in  themselves  indicated  his 
character.  The  command  is:  "Again  take  to  thee  (as  thou  didst  before, 
ver.  7)  the  instruments  of  a  shepherd,  (but  this  time  let  him  be)  a  foolish 
one."  The  punishment  of  rejecting  the  Good  Shepherd  was  to  be  not 
only  the  loss  of  Him,  but  the  substitution  of  an  evil  shepherd  in  His  place. 

16.  cut  off]  i.e.  destroyed,  or  lost.  See  ver.  9,  and  comp.  Exod. 
xxiii.  23.  "Pastores  seduli  requirunt  siquid  est  perditum,  vel  siquid 
evanuit  in  grege:  et  hoc  intelligit  Zacharias  per  visitationem.''     Calvin. 

the  young  one]  Rather,  the  scattered,  lit.  the  dispersion,  to  iaKopiria- 
fUvov,  LXX.     dispersum,  Jerome. 

feed  that  that  standeth  still]  Rather,  nourish  that  that  standeth  (firm). 
TO  oXoKX-npov.  LXX.  that  which  is  sound,  R.  V.  Pusey  compares  the 
petition  in  the  Litany,  "that  it  may  please  Thee  to  strengthen  such  as 
do  stand."  Another  view  is  that  they  that  stand,  are  the  sheep  which 
stand  still,  unable  through  weakness  and  weariness  to  go  forward.  But 
the  word  seems  always  to  be  used  of  standing  firmly,  not  of  coming 
to  a  stand-still  through  infirmity. 

claius]     Rather,  hoofs.     Like  a  voracious  man,  who  not  content  with 


128  ZECHARIAH,   XI.  [v.  17. 

Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd  that  leaveth  the  flock ! 

The  sword  shall  be  upon  his  arm,  and  upon  liis  right  eye : 

His  arm  shall  be  clean  dried  up, 

And  his  right  eye  shall  be  utterly  darkened. 

eating  the  flesh  of  the  fat,  tears  to  pieces  and  sucks  the  goodness  out  of 
the  very  hoofs.  "  Videtur  diffringere  ungulas  esse  hominis  voracis,  ipsas 
ungulas  frangentis  et  exsudentis. "  Maurer.  For  a  like  picture  both  of 
neglect  of  duty  and  of  cruelty  in  a  shepherd  see  Ezek.  xxxiv.  4. 

17.  idol  shepherd^  Rather,  wortliless  shepherd:  lit.  shepherd  of 
nothingness^  or  worthlessness.   Comp.  "  physicians  of  no  value,"  Job  xiii.  4. 

leaveth  the  flock]    Comp.  John  x.  12. 

the  sword]  To  be  taken  perhaps  metaphorically  of  punishment  or 
visitation:  "per  gladium  quamlibet  speciem  pcenre  designat."  Calv. 
The  particular  kind  of  punishment  then  follows,  in  the  withering  of  the 
arm  and  blinding  of  the  eye. 

The  Second  Burden.  Chaps,  xii. — xiv.  Like  the  First  Burden  of 
the  Word  of  Jehovah,  this  Second  extends  over  three  chapters  and 
contains  two  chief  sections  or  prophecies.  Of  these  the  first  reaches 
from  xii.  i  to  xiiL  6;  the  second  is  conaprised  in  the  remainder  of  the 
Book. 

The  First  Section  contains  three  subdivisions,  viz.  Jehovah's  pro- 
tection of  His  people  from  their  enemies,  xii.  i — 9;  their  penitent 
sorrow  for  sin,  xii.  10 — 14;  their  worthy  fruits  of  repentance,  xiii.  1  —  6. 

Chap.  XII.  1 — 9.    Jehovah's  protection  of  His  people. 

As  in  the  former  Burden,  the  first  section  opens  with  a  general  Title 
(printed  as  such  in  R.  V.),  very  similar  to  that  of  the  First  Burden 
(ix.  i),  and  belonging  like  that  to  the  whole  group  of  prophecies  which 
follow.  The  coming  oracle  proceeds  from  Jehovah,  the  Creator  of  the 
universe  and  of  man ;  able  therefore  to  accomplish  what  He  predicts, 
ver.  I.  All  nations  shall  gather  against  Jerusalem,  which  shall  prove 
to  them  like  a  cup  of  which  they  drink  but  to  totter  and  fall,  ver.  2,  or 
a  heavy  stone  which  only  wounds  and  crushes  those  who  essay  to  lift  it, 
ver.  3.  Horse  and  rider  alike  in  the  armies  that  gather  against  her 
shall  be  panic-stricken  and  blinded,  ver.  4,  while  the  rulers  of  the 
country  shall  acknowledge  her,  thus  rendered  by  God  impregnable,  as 
the  bulwark  of  their  land,  ver.  5,  and  shall  take  courage  to  attack  and 
consume  the  discomfited  foe  around  her  walls,  so  that  she  stands  forth 
again  a  free  and  populous  city,  ver.  6.  Thus  the  country  at  large  shall 
have  its  share  from  God  in  the  glory  of  the  victory,  and  so  all  rivalry 
between  it  and  the  capital  shall  be  excluded,  ver.  7.  The  capital, 
however,  shall  under  the  protection  of  the  Almighty  be  worthy  of  its 
position  as  the  abode  of  heroes,  while  the  royal  family  shall  lead  the 
nation  no  less  worthily  than  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  did  of  old  time, 
ver.  8.  And  all  this,  because  God  Himself  will  make  it  His  aim  to 
destroy  all  the  enemies  of  His  people,  ver.  9. 


w.  I,  2.]  ZECHARIAH,   XII.  129 

The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  for  Israel,  saith  the  12 
Lord, 

Which  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens,  and  layeth  the  foun- 
dation of  the  earth, 

And  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him. 

Behold,  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  trembling  unto  2 
all  the  people  round  about, 

When  they  shall  be  in  the  siege  both  against  Judah  and 
against  Jerusalem. 

1.  The  bzirden\     See  ch.  ix.  i,  note. 
for  Israel'^     Rather,  concerning  Israel. 

sattJi]  Rather,  the  saying,  oracular  utterance,  of  Jehovah :  as  in 
Ps.  ex.  I.     The  clause  is  in  apposition  with  the  first  clause  of  the  verse. 

which  stretcheth  forth,  &c.]  In  view  of  the  wonderful  and  almost 
incredible  promises  that  follow,  an  appeal  is  made  to  the  creative  power 
of  Jehovah,  that  so  the  peopje  may  not  "stagger  at  the  promise  of  God 
through  unbelief,"  but  be  "fully  persuaded  that  what  He  has  promised, 
lie  is  able  also  to  perform." 

2.  ctip  of  trembling]  Rather,  bowl  of  reeling.  The  word  is  used 
of  the  bowl  or  bason  in  which  the  blood  of  the  Paschal  lamb  was 
caught,  Exod.  xii.  21,  of  the  bowls  used  in  the  Temple  service,  i  Kings 
vii.  50,  and  more  generally,  2  Sam.  xvii.  28.  Jerusalem  stands  forth 
like  some  vast  bowl  or  bason,  round  which  all  nations  gather,  eager 
to  swallow  down  its  inviting  contents.  But  the  draft  proves  to  be  far 
other  than  they  anticipated,  and  they  reel  and  stagger  back  from  it, 
confused  and  discomfited.  A  similar  figure,  though  of  a  "cup"  (a 
different  Hebrew  word),  occurs  frequently  elsewhere,  e.g.  Ps.  Ixxv.  8; 
Is.  li.  17,  -22 ;  Jer.  li.  7. 

people]  peoples,  R.  V.,  and  so  in  ver.  3,  4,  6. 

when  they  shall  be  in  the  siege,  &c.]  This  is  a  clause  of  considerable 
difficulty.  The  rendering  in  the  text  of  A.  V.  cannot  be  maintained. 
That  in  the  margin  is,  as  Pusey  remarks,  "too  elliptical."  The  same 
may,  with  him,  be  said  of  the  rendering  which  has  found  supporters 
both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  and  also  upoti  ytidah  shall  it  be  {to 
be,  or  to  fight")  in  the  siege  against  Jerusalem;  i.e.  either  "it  shall 
happen  to  Judah"  voluntarily,  through  civil  war,  or  (since  that  idea 
is  alisolutely  contradicted  by  the  full  alliance  and  agreement  between 
Judah  and  Jerusalem  described  in  ver.  5,  6),  "it  shall  be  incumbent 
upon  Judah,"  because  he  shall  be  compelled  against  his  will  by  the 
invading  nations  to  join  them,  to  take  part  in  the  siege.  Pusey's  own 
rendering,  which  is  that  adopted  in  R.  V.,  is,  "And  also  upon  Judah 
will  it  be  in  the  siege  against  Jerusalem,  i.  e.  the  burden  of  the  word 
of  the  Lord,  which  was  upon  Israel,  should  be  upon  Judah."  The 
objection  to  this  is  that  the  reference  to  the  beginning  of  ver.  i  for  a 
subject  to  the  verb  "it  shall  be"  is  remote  and  confusing.  On  the 
whole  it  is  perhaps  best  to  render,  "And  also  on  (or  over)  Judah  it 

ZECHARIAH  Q 


I30  ZECHARIAH,  XII.  [vv.  3—5. 

And  in  that  day  will  I  make  Jerusalem  a  burdensome 
stone  for  all  people: 

All  that  burden  themselves  with  it  shall  be  cut  in  pieces, 

Though  all  the  people  of  the  earth  be  gathered  together 
against  it. 

In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord, 

I  will  smite  every  horse  with  astonishment,  and  his  rider 
with  madness : 

And  1  will  open  mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah, 

And  will  smite  every  horse  of  the  people  with  blind- 
ness. 

And  the  governors  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their  heart, 

The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  my  strength 

In  the  Lord  of  hosts  their  God. 

(i.e.  the  protection  and  deliverance  implied  in  the  first  clause  of  the 
verse)  shall  be,  in  the  siege,"  &c.  Signal  as  was  the  deliverance  of 
Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  it  did  not  extend  beyond  the  city 
itself  (2  Kings  xviii.  13;  Is.  xxxvi.  i).  Now  the  country  at  large 
should  share  in  the  deliverance  of  the  capital. 

3.  a  Imrdensotnc  stone]  because,  as  it  immediately  follows,  it  proves 
too  heavy  for  every  one  who  attempts  to  lift  it,  and  slipping  from 
his  grasp  wounds  and  lacerates  him.  There  may  possibly  be  a 
reference  to  the  custom,  if  indeed  it  existed  so  early  as  the  time  of 
Zechariah,  which  Jerome  describes  as  prevailing  in  Palestine  in  his 
days.  "It  is  the  custom,"  he  says,  "in  the  cities  of  Palestine,  and  to 
the  present  day  throughout  all  Judaea  the  ancient  practice  is  obsei-ved, 
that  in  villages,  towns  and  forts  round  stones  of  very  great  weight  are 
placed,  at  which  the  youth  are  wont  to  exercise  themselves,  and 
according  to  their  differing  strength  to  lift  them,  some  to  the  knees, 
others  to  the  navel,  others  to  the  shoulders  and  head;  some  exhibiting 
the  greatness  of  their  strength,  raise  the  weight  above  their  head  with 
both  their  hands  straight  up." 

cut  ill  pieces]  sore  wounded^  R.  V. 

4.  astonishment]  This  and  the  two  following  words,  madness^ 
blindness,  occur  together  also  in  Deut.  xxviii.  28,  in  a  description  of 
God's  judgments  upon  Israel,  as  here  upon  the  armies  that  gather 
against  Jerusalem. 

/  will  open  mine  eyes  upon]  i.e.  will  regard  with  favour.  Comp. 
Ps.  xxxii.  8. 

5.  the  governors]  chieftains,  R.  V.,  and  so  in  ver.  6. 

shall  be]  Rather,  are.  When  they  see  the  rout  and  discomfiture  of 
her  enemies  around  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  (ver.  2 — ^4),  the  rulers  of  the 
land,  speaking  as  the  mouthpiece  of  the  people  at  large,  shall  joyfully 
acknowledge  her  to  be  the  strength  of  the  country  by  the  help  of 
Jehovah,  her  Gcd. 


w.  6-8.]  ZECHARIAH,    XII.  131 

In  that  day  will  I  make  the  governors  of  Judah  like  a  6 

hearth  of  fire  among  the  wood, 
And  like  a  torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf; 
And  they  shall  devour  all  the  people  round  about,  on  the 

right  hand  and  on  the  left : 
And  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  again  in  her  own  place, 

even  in  Jerusalem. 
The  Lord  also  shall  save  the  tents  of  Judah  first,  7 

That  the  glory  of  the  house  of  David 
And  the  glory  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
Do  not  magnify  themselves  against  Judah. 
In  that   day  shall  the  Lord   defend  the  inhabitants  of  s 

Jerusalem ; 
And  he  that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day  shall  be 

as  David ; 

6.  a  heaTt]i\  Rather,  pan.  The  word  is  used  in  r  Sam.  ii.  14 
of  a  "pan,"  or  cooking  vessel.  Elsewhere  it  is  a  bason  or  laver,  Exod. 
XXX.  18,  28;  I  Kings  vii.  38;  and  once  a  pulpit  or  platform,  2  Chron. 
vi.  13.  Here  the  figure  would  seem  to  be  of  a  chafing-pan  full  of  fire 
set  among  wood  or  faggots. 

in  a  sheaf  \  among  sheaves,  R.  V. 

7.  the  tents  of  "jfudah  first\  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  when 
the  besiegers  shall  reel  back  like  drunken  men  from  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem  (ver.  2),  smitten  with  panic  by  God  (ver.  4),  the  first  to  fall 
upon  them  and  put  them  to  the  sword  shall  be,  not  the  inhabitants 
of  the  besieged  city  by  sallying  forth  from  their  walls,  though  they 
by  their  gallant  and  successful  defence  had  rightly  been  regarded  as  the 
bulwark  of  the  whole  land  (ver.  5),  but  the  inhabitants  of  the  open 
country,  who  shall  have  the  honour  of  consuming  their  adversaries 
(ver.  6),  and  so  of  saving  first  themselves  and  then  the  capital,  which 
as  the  result  of  their  prowess  shall  be  completely  delivered. 

that  the  gloy,  &c.]  The  human  agents  are  to  have  each  their  due 
share  of  honour.  (Comp.  ver.  5.)  But  to  God  alone  the  glory  really 
belongs.  "I  will  make,"  ver.  2,  3,  6;  "I  will  smite,"  ver.  4;  "Jehovah 
shall  save,"  ver.  7.  Compare  "my  strength  in  Jehovah  of  hosts,  their 
God,"  ver.  5.  "  Sensus  est,  gloriam  victi  hostis  non  penes  Hierosolymi- 
tanos  futuram,  quippe  post  superatum  demum  hostem  ex  urbe  exituros, 
sed  penes  Judam,  qui  supra  ver.  6  dicebatur  ignis  instar  hostes  circum- 
quaque  absumturus ;  aut  penes  ipsum  potius  Jovam,  qui  hostes  amentia 
et  csecitate  percusserit  (ver.  4),  Judam  vero  robore  induerit  ad  hostes 
jamjam  confusos  ulterius  debellandos."     Rosenm. 

do  not  magnify  the7nselves'\  be  not  magnified,  R.  V. 

8.  he  that  is  feeble... as  David']  But  this  foremost  action  on  the 
part  of  Judah  shall  not  argue  any  pusillanimity  on  the  part  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  To  them  too  shall  the  protection  of  Jehovah 
extend.     Even  the  weak  among  them  (comp.  i  Sam.  ii.  4,  where  the 

9—2 


132  ZECHARIAH,   XII.  [vv.  9,  10. 

And  the  house  of  David  shall  be  as  God, 

As  the  angel  of  the  Lord  before  them. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day, 

That  I  will  seek  to  destroy  all  the  nations 

That  come  against  Jerusalem. 

And  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the 

inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
The  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  : 

word  here  rendered  "feeble"  is  put  in  contrast  to  a  hero  or  mighty 
man)  shall  be  valiant  as  David. 

the  Jwuse  of  David]  While  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  at  large  shall 
be  thus  strengthened  and  ennobled,  the  royal  house  (comp.  Is.  vii.  13) 
shall  maintain  its  supremacy. 

as  the  angel,  &c.]     Comp.  Exod.  xiv.  19,  xxiii.  20;  Acts  vii.  38. 

9.  I  will  seek]  i.e.  I  will  make  it  viy  aim,  upon  which  I  am  intent, 
and  which  I  will  carry  out.  It  is  true,  as  Mr  Wright  points  out,  that 
xw  the  only  other  passage  in  which  this  phrase  is  used  of  Almighty  God, 
the  intention,  though  "manifested  clearly  and  distinctly,"  was  abandoned 
(Exod.  iv.  24).  But  it  does  not  follow  that  "this  passage  is  not  an 
absolute  promise  of  the  utter  destruction  of  the  nations,"  but  only  a 
promise  conditional  upon  the  future  conduct  of  the  Jews.  The  passage 
as  a  whole  is  quite  against  such  a  supposition.  The  verse  would  be  a 
strange  anti-climax,  if  after  such  promises  as  are  contained  in  ver.  2 — 8 
it  only  asserted,  "My  aim  shall  be  to  do  all  this  that  I  have  promised 
in  glowing  terms;  but  all  may  be  frustrated  and  come  to  nought  through 
the  unfaithfulness  of  man." 

10 — 14.    The  penitent  Sorrow  of  the  People  for  Sin. 

The  conversion  (xii.  10 — 14)  and  moral  reformation  (xiii.  i — 6)  of 
the  people  shall  accompany  their  deliverance  from  their  enemies  (xii. 
T — 9).  On  the  royal  house  and  the  royal  city  first  God  will  pour  out 
His  Spirit,  and  as  the  consequence  they  shall  regard  Him,  whom  they 
have  pierced  and  wounded  by  their  sins,  with  the  deepest  sorrow  and 
bitterness  of  soul,  ver.  10.  The  mourning  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  such 
as  to  recall  that  which  was  occasioned  by  the  great  national  calamity 
of  the  death  of  Josiah  in  battle,  ver.  11.  But  the  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit  and  the  penitent  grief  called  forth  by  it  shall  extend  to  the  whole 
nation,  so  that  every  family  throughout  the  land,  the  sexes  apart,  shall 
form  itself  into  a  separate  gx-oup  of  mourners,  ver.  12 — 14. 

10.  /  will  pour]  The  word  denotes  the  abundance  of  the  effusion. 
Comp,  Joel  ii.  28  [Heb.,  iii.  i].  "Quod  verbum  doni  largitatem  et 
copiam  indicat. "     Rosenm. 

the  house  of  David ^  &c.]  Because  they,  restored  to  their  proper  place 
and  dignity  (ver.  8),  are  as  it  were  the  head  of  the  nation.  But  from 
the  head  the  holy  unction  shall  flow  to  the  whole  body  (^'the  land" 
ver.  [2).     Comp   Ps.  cxxxiii.  2. 

the  spirit  of  g7'ace  and  of  supplications]  i.e.  the  Spirit  which  conveys 


V.  II.]  ZECHARIAH,    XII.  133 


And    they  shall    look    upon   me   whom  they  have 
pierced, 

And  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his 
only  son, 

And  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitter- 
ness for  his  firstborn. 

In  that  day  shall   there  be  a  great   mourning  in   Jeru-  u 
salem. 

As    the    mourning   of   Hadadrimmon    in    the    valley   of 
Megiddon. 

grace  and  calls  forth  supplications.  The  word  "grace"  is  not  here 
used  in  its  primary  sense  of  the  favour  of  God  towards  man,  but  in  that 
secondary  sense,  with  which  readers  of  the  N.  T.  are  familiar,  of  the 
effects  of  that  favour  in  man,  by  the  gifts  and  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  See  John  i.  16;  i  Cor.  xv.  10;  and  for  the  expression,  "the 
Spirit  of  grace,"  Heb.  x.  29,  where,  as  Dean  Alford  shews,  the  second 
member  of  the  "alternative  very  neatly  put  by  Anselm;  Spiritiii  sanclo 
gratis  datOy  vel gratiam  da}iti,^'  is  to  be  accepted. 

upon  me  zvhom  they  have  pierced^  unto  me,  R.  V.  The  Speaker  is 
Almighty  God.  The  Jews  had  pierced  Him  metaphorically  by  their 
rebellion  and  ingratitude  throughout  their  history.  They  pierced  Him, 
literally  and  as  the  crowning  act  of  their  contumacy,  in  the  Person  of 
His  Son  upon  the  Cross,  John  xix.  37.  Comp.  Rev.  i.  7.  "Confixerant 
ergo  Deum  Judsei  quum  mrerore  afficerent  ejus  Spiritum.  Sed  Christus 
etiam  secundum  carnem  ab  illis  transfixus  fuit.  Et  hoc  intelligit  Joannes, 
visibili  isto  symbolo  Deum  palam  fecisse  non  se  tantum  olim  fuisse  in- 
digne  provocatum  a  Jud^eis;  sed  in  persona  unigeniti  Filii  sui  tandem 
cumulum  fuisse  additum  scelestae  impietati,  quod  ne  Christi  quidem 
lateri  pepercerint."  Calv.  There  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  adopting 
with  Ewald  and  others  the  reading,  upon  him. 

his  only  son]     Comp.  Jer.  vi.  26;  Amos  viii.  ro. 

11.  Hadadrimvion]  This  is  generally  supposed,  on  the  authority  of 
Jerome,  to  have  been  a  city  near  Jezreel,  called  in  his  day  Maximinian- 
opolis,  in  the  valley  of  Megiddo,  and  the  place  where  Josiah  was  fatally 
wounded  by  Pharaoh-Nec-ho,  king  of  Egypt.  Both  accounts  of  Josiah's 
death  state  tliat  it  was  "at,"  or  "in  the  valley  of"  Megiddo,  that  his 
wound  was  received  (2  Kings  xxiii.  29;  2  Chron.  xxxv.  22),  while  the 
fuller  account  in  the  Book  of  Chronicles  not  only  affirms  the  national 
character  of  the  mourning  for  him  at  the  time,  "  all  Judah  and  Jerusalem 
mourned  for  Josiah,"  but  informs  us  that  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  probably 
in  some  dirge  composed  for  the  occasion,  "lamented  for  him,"  and  that 
the  anniversary  of  his  death  long  continued  to  be  observed  as  a  day  of 
national  calamity.  "  All  the  singing  men  and  the  singing  women  spake 
of  Josiah  in  their  lamentations  to  this  day,  and  (they)  made  them  an 
ordinance  in  Israel ;  and  behold  they  are  written  in  the  lamentations. " 
"The  grief  of  the  people  at  the  fall  of  their  brave  and  pious  king  at  the 


134  ZECHARIAH,  XII.  [w.  12—14. 

And  the  land  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart ; 

The  family  of  the  house  of  David  apart,  and  their  wives 

apart ; 
The  family  of  the  house  of  Nathan  apart,  and  their  wives 

apart ; 
The  family  of  the  house  of  Levi  apart,  and  their  wives 

apart ; 
The  family  of  Shimei  apart,  and  their  wives  apart; 
All  the  famihes  that  remain. 
Every  family  apart,  and  their  wives  apart. 

age  of  thirty-nine  years  was  extraordinarily  deep.  It  seemed  as  though 
a  gloomy  foreboding  would  take  possession  of  their  minds  that  his  fall 
really  involved  that  of  the  realm  itself,  of  which  he  had  been  the  last 
great  prop.  Long  years  after,  the  elegies  composed  on  him  by  Jeremiah, 
and  sung  among  the  people,  were  still  preserved,  and  were  repeated 
with  a  sad  pleasure  on  the  days  set  apart  for  the  commemoration  of  the 
royal  hero."     Ewald. 

12,  13.  David... Nathan... Levi... Shimei\  Two  families  are  singled 
out,  the  kingly  and  the  priestly,  as  examples  of  the  rest.  And  in  each 
case,  to  shew  the  pervading  character  of  the  grief,  the  family  or  tribe  is 
first  described  by  its  general  and  inclusive  name,  and  then  one  branch 
of  it  is  mentioned,  to  indicate  that  to  every  part  and  division  the  wide- 
spread mourning  shall  extend.  "This  sorrow  should  be  universal  but 
also  individual,  the  whole  land,  and  that  family  by  family;  the  royal 
family  in  the  direct  line  of  its  kings,  and  in  a  branch  from  Nathan, 
a  son  of  David  and  whole  brother  of  Solomon  (i  Chron.  iii.  5),  which 
was  continued  on  in  private  life,  yet  was  still  to  be  an  ancestral  line 
of  Jesus  (Luke  iii.  31) ;  in  like  way  the  main  priestly  family  from  Levi, 
and  a  subordinate  line  from  a  grandson  of  Levi,  the  family  of  Shimei 
(Num.  iii.  21);  and  all  the  remaining  families,  each  with  their  separate 
sorrow,  each  according  to  Joel's  call  (ii.  16),  let  the  bridegroo?n  go  forth 
of  his  chamber  and  the  bride  out  of  her  closet,  each  denying  himself  the 
tenderest  solaces  of  life."     Pusey. 

The  prophecy  began  to  be  fulfilled,  so  soon  as  the  actual  piercing 
had  taken  place,  when  "all  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  sight, 
beholding  the  things  which  were  done,  smote  their  breasts  and  returned." 
(Luke  xxiii.  48.)  The  fulfilment  was  continued  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
when  those  to  whom  it  was  said,  "God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus 
whom  ye  have  crucified  both  Lord  and  Christ,  were  pricked  in  their 
heart."  (Acts  ii.  36,  37.)  It  has  gone  on  ever  since;  but  it  awaits  a 
larger  and  more  exact  realisation,  when  all  Israel  shall  be  saved,  as  it  is 
written,  "There  shall  come  out  of  Sion  the  Deliverer,  and  shall  turn 
away  ungodliness  from  Jacob."     (Rom.  xi.  26.) 

Chap.  XIII.  1—6.    Worthy  fruits  of  Repentance. 

The   mourning  for   sin   thus  produced   and   exhibited  (xii.    10— 1 4) 


vv.  I,  2.]  ZECHARIAH,   XIII.  135 

In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  13 

To  the  house  of  David  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jeru- 
salem 

For  sin  and  for  uncleanness. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  2 
hosts, 

That  I  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the  idols  out  of  the  land, 

shall  be  the  precursor  of  cleansing  from  sin,  for  which  ample  and 
lasting  provision  shall  be  made,  ver.  i ;  and  of  amendment  of  li^e. 
Idolatry  and  superstition  shall  be  banished  and  forgotten,  ver.  1.  If 
any  one  shall  venture  to  play  the  false  prophet,  his  own  parents  shall  be 
the  first  to  inflict  on  him  the  prescribed  penalty  of  death,  ver.  3.  So 
dangerous  and  suspected  will  the  prophetic  office  become,  that  the  false 
prophets  will  be  ashamed  and  afraid  to  avow  their  calling  and  assume 
their  garb,  ver.  4.  They  will  profess  themselves,  when  questioned,  to 
have  been  simple  hinds  from  their  youth,  ver.  5 ;  and  if  the  charge 
against  them  be  enforced  by  an  appeal  to  the  wounds  on  their  bodies, 
as  proofs  of  the  idolatrous  rites  which  they  have  practised,  or  of  the 
punishment  which  has  already  overtaken  them  as  false  prophets,  they 
will  seek  to  meet  it  by  an  evasive  and  misleading  reply,  ver.  6. 

1.  In  that  day]  The  day,  or  period,  so  often  mentioned  before 
(xii.  3,  4,  6,  8,  9,  11),  in  which  this  whole  prophecy  shall  be  fulfilled. 

a  fountain  opened. .  .for  sin  and  for  uncleanness]  The  form  of  the 
promise  is  Jewish,  the  substance  Christian.  For  the  lustral  waters  of 
the  Law,  the  "water  of  sin"  (Num.  viii.  7)  and  the  "water  of  un- 
cleanness" (Num.  xix.  9,  where  the  word  is  the  same  as  here,  though 
rendered,  "water  of  separation,"  A.  V.  and  R.  V.),  which  were  con- 
tained and  renewed  in  bowl  or  laver,  and  which  did  but  "sanctify  to 
the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  shall  be  substituted  the  living  fountain 
of  the  Gospel,  opened  once  but  remaining  open  ever  (comp.  dvpa 
Tjveciiy/j.ii'r}  Rev.  iv.  i),  which  "purges  the  conscience  from  dead  works 
to  serve  the  living  God."     (Heb.  ix.  13,  14;  i  John  i.  7.) 

2.  /  w/7/  cut  off]  Forgiveness  (ver.  i )  is  the  middle  term  between 
godly  sorrow  (xii.  10 — 14)  and  amendment  (xiii.  2 — 6).  It  has  been 
argued  that  the  sins  which  are  here  said  to  be  abandoned  were  not  the 
prevalent  sins  of  the  Jews  after  the  captivity,  and  that  therefore  the 
prophecy  must  be  assigned  to  an  earlier  date.  But  the  fact  that  this 
was  the  case,  so  far  as  it  is  a  fact,  may  be  claimed  as  completing  the 
then  present  and  historical  basis,  on  which  Zechariah,  writing  after  the 
captivity,  grounded,  as  is  the  wont  of  the  O.  T.  prophets,  the  greater 
future  which  he  was  commissioned  to  reveal.  Jerusalem  had  already 
proved  and  should  presently  prove  again  to  be  a  "bowl  of  reeling," 
and  a  "burdensome  stone"  (xiii.  2,  3)  to  the  enemies  who  sought  to 
hinder  the  re-building  of  the  Temple  and  city.  (Ezra  vi.  6,  7,  11,  12; 
Neh.  iv.,  vi.)  Already  "the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications"  had 
been  poured  upon  the  people  and  had  moved  them  to  penitent  sorrow 
for  their  sins  (Jer,  1.  4,  5),  and  throughout  the  era  of  the  return  it 


136  ZECHARIAH,  XIII.  [vv.  3,  4. 

And  they  shall  no  more  be  remembered  : 

And  also  I  will  cause  the  prophets  and  the  unclean  spirit 

to  pass  out  of  the  land. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  //^^/ when  any  shall  yet  prophesy, 
Then  his  father  and  his  mother  that  begat  him  shall  say 

unto  him,  Thou  shalt  not  live ; 
For  thou  speakest  lies  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  : 
And    his    father   and   his  mother   that   begat  him  shall 

thrust  him  through  when  he  prophesieth. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day, 
That  the  prophets  shall  be  ashamed  every  one  of  his 

vision,  when  he  hath  prophesied ; 
Neither  sliall  they  wear  a  rough  garment  to  deceive : 

should  in  like  manner  be  poured  upon  them.  (Ezra  ix.,  x.  i ;  Neh. 
viii.  9,  ix.)  Already  had  they  set  themselves  to  "cut  off  the  names 
of  the  idols,"  and  to  "cause  the  prophets  and  the  unclean  spirit  to 
pass  out  of  the  land."  (Ezra  vi.  21,  x.  i — 44;  Neh.  ix.  38,  x.  28 — 30, 
xiii.  I — 9,  23 — 31.)  But  all  these  things,  the  prophet  assures  them,  are 
but  as  the  scanty  drops,  the  harbingers  of  the  abundant  shower,  or  the 
few  ripe  ears,  the  firstfruits  of  the  plentiful  harvest.  In  the  coming 
age  of  Messiah,  the  King  (chap,  ix.)  and  Shepherd  (chap,  xi.)  of  Israel, 
when  the  Spirit  shall  indeed  be  poured  from  on  high,  and  the  true 
Fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness,  the  spiritual  counterparts 
of  deliverance,  of  penitence,  of  amendment  shall  flourish  in  the  Church 
of  Christ.  (Comp.  as  regards  the  terms  of  this  verse,  "idols," 
"prophets,"  "unclean  spirit,"  i  John  v.  21,  iv.  i).  But  beyond 
that  is  another  age,  in  which  in  all  its  particulars,  and  with  a  com- 
pleteness, it  may  be,  and  exactness  of  detail  which  it  had  never  before 
attained  to,  the  whole  prediction  shall  be  fulfilled. 
the  unclean  spii-it\     Comp.  r  Kings  xxii.  22. 

3.  his  father  and  his  mother]  In  holy  zeal  they  would  carry  out 
the  law%  "thine  hand  shall  be  first  upon  him  to  put  him  to  death." 
Deut.  xiii.  6,  9. 

4.  shall  be  ashamedl     Pu?ey  compares  Acts  xix.  18 — 20. 
hath  prophesied']     Rather,  prophesieth,  as  R.  V. 

a  rough  garment]  Lit.  a  cloak  of  hair  :  a  hairy  mantle,  R.  V. 
The  word  for  cloak,  or  cape,  is  that  used  for  the  mantle  of  Elijah  (i 
Kings  xix.  13,  19;  2  Kings  ii.  13,  14),  "the  cape  or  wrapper,  which, 
with  the  exception  of  a  strip  of  skin  or  leather  round  his  loins,  formed, 
as  we  have  every  reason  to  believe,  his  sole  garment."  Bibl.  Diet.,  Art. 
Mantle.  This  cloak  or  cape  was  either  woven  of  camels'  hair  or  was  per- 
haps a  sheep's  skin  {fxTjXbrri^s  LXX.  Comp.  2  Kings  i.  8  ;  Gen.  xxv.  25 ; 
Matt.  iii.  4).  It  would  seem  from  this  passage  that  it  had  been  worn 
by  succeeding  prophets  in  imitation  of  Elijah,  and  so  had  come  to  ba 
regarded  as  the  badge  of  a  prophet. 


5,6.]  ZECHARIAH,   XIII.  137 


But  he  shall  say,  I  am  no  prophet,  I  ai7i  a  husbandman  3  5 

For  man  taught  me  to  keep  cattle  from  my  youth. 

And  one  shall  say  unto  hhn,  What  are  these  wounds  in  6 

thine  hands  ? 
Then  he  shall  answer,  Those  with  which  I  was  wounded 

in  the  house  of  my  friends. 

5.  a  husbandmaii\  Lit.  one  tilling  the  ground,  as  Gen,  iv.  2. 
Comp.  Amos  vii.  14,  where  however  there  is  no  repudiation  as  here 
of  the  prophetical  office. 

taught  me  to  keep  cattle'\  or  possessed  me  as  a  serf,  or  chattel  : 
adscriptus  glcb(Z.     I  have  been  made  a  bondman,  R.  V. 

6.  wounds  in  thine  hands']  Lit.  between  thy  hands ;  i.  e.  probably, 
on  thy  breast :  between  thine  arms,  R.  V.  Comp.  "between  his  arms," 
i.e.  in  his  back,  2  Kings  ix.  24;  "between  your  eyes,"  i.e.  on  your 
foreheads,  Deut.  xi.  18.  The  interrogator,  in  liis  zeal  against  false 
prophets,  is  still  unsatisfied,  and  detecting  wounds,  or  scars,  on  the 
breast  of  the  quondam  false  prophet,  charges  them  upon  him  as  proofs 
of  his  guilt,  because  he  regards  them  either  as  self-inflicted  in  the 
service  of  idols  (1  Kings  xviii.  28),  or  as  given  him  by  his  parents, 
from  whose  righteous  indignation  he  had  escaped  wounded,  when  they 
went  about  to  kill  him  (ver.  3). 

in  the  house  of  my  friends]  If  this  be  a  confession  of  guilt,  we 
muft  understand  it  to  mean  that  the  accused  person  now  admits  the 
charge  brought  against  him  in  the  second  of  the  two  forms  suggested 
in  the  last  note:  "  Yes,  it  is  true  that  I  did  play  the  false  prophet,  and 
this  is  the  merited  punishment  which  those  who  loved  me  inflicted  on 
me."  "Haec  vulnera  et  has  accepi  plagas  parentum  meorum  judicio 
condemnatus,  et  eorum  qui  me  non  oderant  sed  amabant.  Et  in 
tantum,  fugato  mendacio,  Veritas  obtinebit,  ut  etiam  ipse,  qui  suo 
punitus  est  vitio,  recte  perpessum  se  esse  fateatur."  Hieron.  The 
"lovers"  cannot  mean  the  false  gods  or  idols,  in  whose  service  it  might 
have  been  supposed  that  he  had  been  wounded.  Such  gods  or  idols 
are  indeed  appropriately  called  the  "lovers,"  or  paramours,  of  the 
Jewish  Church  as  a  whole,  which  is  regarded  as  the  bride  or  spouse 
of  Jehovah  (Hos.  ii.  7,  10,  12;  Ezek.  xvi.  33,  36,  37);  but  the  figure 
is  quite  inadmissible  in  the  case  of  an  individual  prophet.  Those  who 
do  not  regard  this  clause  of  the  verse  as  a  confession  of  guilt  see  in  it 
either  an  allusion  to  the  loving  though  severe  discipline  of  youth,  or 
an  evasive  answer  which  is  purposely  indefinite  and  obscure. 

The  reference  which  Dr  Pusey  and  others  have  seen  in  this  verse  to 
our  Lord  and  to  the  prints  of  the  nails  in  His  hands  is  in  a  high  degree 
forced  and  arbitrary.  It  cannot  possibly  be  reconciled  with  the  pre- 
ceding context,  with  which  the  verse  intimately  coheres.  "  Quidam  hoc 
traxerunt  ad  Christum,"  writes  Calvin,  "quia  dicit  Zacharias  manibus 
inflicta  esse  vulnera;  sed  illud  est  nimis  frivolum,  quia  satis  constat 
sermonem  prosequi  de  falsis  doctoribus,  qui  abusi  fuerant  Dei  nomine 
ad  tempus." 


138 ZECHARIAH,   XIII.  [^ 


The  Seco7id  Section.  XIII.  7— XIV.  21. 
The  purification  and  final  glory  of  Israel. 
This  Second  Section  of  the  Second  Burden  and  conclusion  of  the 
whole  Book  describes  the  purifying  chastisement  that  shall  come  upon 
the  people,  xni.  7-9  ;  the  great  final  conflict  and  deliverance  of  Jeru- 
salem, XIV.  1—7 ;  the  prosperity  of  the  transformed  and  renovated  city 
and  land,  Jehovah  being  King,  8— n;  the  destruction  of  the  hostile 
nations,  12—15,  and  homage  of  the  residue,  16—19;  and  the  perfect 
holmess  of  Jerusalem,  as  the  crown  of  all,  ■20,  21. 

XIII-  7—9.  The  purifying  chastisement. 
The  smiting  of  the  Shepherd  shall  lead  to  the  dispersion  of  the  flock, 
which  shaU  not,  however,  be  universal,  ver.  7 ;  for  while  two-thirds  of 
It  shall  perish,  one-third  shall  be  spared,  ver.  8,  and  shall  be  brought 
by  the  refining  process  of  affliction  into  happy  and  intimate  relationship 
with  God,  ver.  9.  '^ 

The  opening  of  the  section  is  apparently  abrupt,  and  Ewald  and 
other  critics  would  accordingly  transfer  these  verses  to  the  end  of 
chap.  XI.  The  difficulty  cannot  satisfactorily  be  removed  by  the  view 
(adopted  by  Mr  Wright)  that  in  the  preceding  verses  (2—6)  "much 
more  is  described  than  a  sound  reaction  against  the  pretences  of  false 
prophets,  and  that  "the  age  is  represented  as  impatient  of  any  such 
supernatural  claims,"  a  temper  of  mind,  which  is  held  to  have  been 
precisely  that  which  led  the  Jews  of  that  day  to  reject  the  claims  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  so  to  become  the  authors  of  the  smiting  of  the 
Shepherd.  Such  a  view  mars  the  sequence  of  the  foregoing  prophecy, 
the  deliverance,  the  penitence,  the  cleansing,  the  amendment,  and 
nioreover  it  was  not  because  He  claimed  to  be  a  prophet,  nor  because 
they  were  impatient  of  any  such  claim  (for  they  both  expected  and 
recognised  it,  John  i.  21,  vi.  14,  ix.  17;  Luke  vii.  16,  xxiv.  19;  Matt. 
''fA'*'J'/r^'?"^P-  ^^f^-  '^^"'-  5)'  b^t  because  "He  made  Himself  the  Son 
cu  V,  r  ^^'^'  ^^'  '^^^^  the  Jews  took  their  part  in  the  smiting  of  the 
Shepherd.  The  true  explanation  of  the  apparently  abrupt  transition  is  to 
be  found  in  the  fact  that  this  section  is  rather  parallel  with,  than  con- 
secutive upon  the  earlier  section  of  this  burden.  (Comp.  the  parallel 
series  of  visions,  the  seals,  the  trumpets,  the  vials,  in  the  Apocalypse.) 
Having  opened  the  future  in  the  first  section  up  to  the  great  moral 
reformation  of  the  end,  the  prophet  now  turns  back  again  to  a  point 
even  earlier  than  that  with  which  that  section  commenced,  and  opens 
It  again  by  a  new  vista  from  the  smiting  of  the  Shepherd  to  the  same 
goal  of  perfect  holiness  which  he  had  reached  before.  At  the  same 
time  he  guards  against  the  mistake,  which  the  promises  of  the  earlier 
section  might  have  fostered,  that  the  goal  was  to  be  reached  without 
discipline.  "  Adhuc  bona  et  jucunda  prsedixit  vates.  Ne  autem  qui 
hcec  legerent  in  banc  inducerentur  opinionem,  populi  Judaici  con- 
ditionem  futuris  temporibus  fore  immunem  ab  omni  molestia  et  calami- 
tate,  jam  annunciat  priusquam  Jova  populum  suum  repurget  atque 
revocat  m  perfectum  ordinem,  gravissimas  clades  fore  intennedias." 
Rosenm.     At  the  same  time,  there  may  possibly  be  such  a  connection 


V.  7.]  ZECHARIAH,   XIII.  139 

Awake,  O  sword,  against  my  shepherd,  and  against  the  7 

man  that  is  my  fellow, 
Saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  : 
Smite    the    shepherd,    and    the    sheep    shall    be 

scattered  : 

of  thought  between  ver.  6,  7,  as  is  suggested  by  Stier  [Meden  yesu^ 
Matt.  xxvi.  31).  "There  is  a  transition  in  the  parallel  of  'wounds' 
and  'wounded'  of  ver.  6,  with  the  'wound'  ('smite,'  the  same 
root)  of  ver.  7,  which  signifies — In  a  quite  different  sense  '  will  the 
/rw^  Prophet  and  Shepherd  suffer  iox.  the  guilt  of  others:  let  Himself 
be  smitten  by  them  who  hate  Him,  because  He  loves  them,'  " 

7.     Awake,  O  s'word'\    We  have  a  similar  apostrophe  in  Jer.  xlvii.  6. 

my  shepherd^  This  may  refer  primarily  to  any  Jewish  king  or  ruler, 
for  even  a  heathen  king  raised  up  by  God  to  befriend  His  people  is 
called  by  Him  "My  shepherd,"  Is.  xliv.  28.  But  it  is  at  the  same 
time  a  distinct  prophecy  of  Christ.     See  chap.  xi.  4,  note. 

my  fellow]  The  word  occurs  only  here  and  in  Leviticus,  where  it 
is  frequently  found  (e.g.  vi.  2  [Heb.,  v.  ^i];  xix.  15,  17),  and  is  usually 
rendered,  "neighbour,"  6  trXrialov,  LXX.  In  its  highest  sense  it 
belongs  exclusively  to  the  Shepherd  who  could  say,  "I  and  my 
Father  are  one."    John  x.  26 — 30. 

True  to  the  sound  canon  of  interpretation  which  he  always  adopts, 
Calvin,  while  fully  acknowledging  the  reference  of  this  passage  to 
Christ  and  its  complete  fulfilment  in  Him,  contends  that  just  as  the 
prediction  of  "a  prophet"  in  Deuteronomy  (xviii.  15)  embraces  the 
whole  prophetical  order,  as  well  as  "the  Prophet  "  to  whom  they  all 
gave  witness,  so  here,  while  the  Chief  Shepherd  is  distinctly  pointed 
at,  the  shepherds  of  God's  people  generally  are  included,  and  called  His 
"fellows,"  because  they  are  associated  with  Him  in  the  work  of 
government.  "  Sicuti  ergo  Christus  primatum  obtinet  inter  prophetas, 
et  ideo  bene  aptatur  ad  ilium  locus  Mosis ;  ita  etiam  quoniam  pastorum 
est   princeps   et  caput,  merito  hoc   competit  in   ejus  personam.     Sed 

generalis  tamen  est  prophetse  doctrina Hsec  ratio  est  cur  vocentur 

socii  Dei,  propter  conjunctionem  scilicet,  quia  sunt  co-operarii  Dei, 
quemadmodum  Paulus  etiam  docet  (i  Cor.  iii.  9).  Denique  eodem 
sensu  vocat  propheta  pastores  Dei  socios,  quo  Paulus  vocat  ipsos 
(Tvvepyovs.^^  In  applying  this  canon,  however,  to  the  prophecies  of 
the  O.  T.  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  as  the  stars  grow  pale  before 
the  rising  sun,  so  as  the  coming  of  Christ  draws  near,  typical  persons 
and  offices  fade  more  and  more  out  of  sight,  and  the  terms  and  reference 
of  the  promises  belong  more  immediately  and  exclusively  to  Him. 

the  sheep  shall  be  scattered]  In  interpreting  this  prophecy  of  His  own 
death  and  its  consequences,  our  Lord  seems  to  restrict  the  "sheep" 
here  to  the  Apostles,  of  whom  we  are  told  that,  when  He  was  appre- 
hended, they  all  "forsook  Him  and  fled"  (Matt.  xxvi.  31,  56).  We 
may  say,  with  Bengel,  that  "  the  disciples  were  the  representatives  of 
the  whole  flock  (instar  totius  gregis)  which  should  afterwards  be  ga- 


HO  ZECHARIAH,   XIII.  [vv.  8,  9. 

And  I  will  turn  mine  hand  upon  the  little  ones. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  ^/la^  in  all  the  land,  saith  the 

Lord, 
Two  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off  a7id  die  ; 
But  the  third  shall  be  left  therein. 
And  I  will  bring  the  third  par^  through  the  fire, 
And  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined. 
And  will  try  them  as  gold  is  tried  : 
They  shall  call  on  my  name,  and  I  will  hear  them  : 
I  will  say,  It  is  my  people  : 
And  they  shall  say,  The  Lord  is  my  God. 

thered  by  them."  But  with  Zechariah  the  flock  is  the  Jewish  Church, 
and  it  is  belter  therefore  to  regard  our  Lord's  words  as  intimating  the 
completeness  of  the  dispersion  which  the  prophet  had  foretold.  Not 
only  the  flock  at  large,  which  had  rejected  Him  as  their  shepherd,  but 
even  His  own  sheep,  the  faithful  poor  ("the  poor  of  the  flock,"  chap, 
xi.  II ;  the  "little  ones  "  of  this  verse)  shall  be  scandalized  at  first  and 
flee  away  from  the  Cross. 

I  will  turn  mine  hand  upoii\  For  correction,  but  in  mercy,  ver.  8,  g. 
Comp.  Is.  i.  25,  where  the  phrase  is  used  in  the  same  sense.  Stier 
has  some  interesting  remarks  on  the  reference  to  this  part  of  the 
prophecy  in  our  Lord's  promise  to  His  disciples  in  Matt.  xxvi.  32. 
"The  hand  and  power  of  God  in  the  risen  Shepherd  returned  from 
death  is  turned  upon  them  and  gathers  them  together." 

8.  in  all  the  land]  i.e.  of  Palestine,  which  agrees  with  the  view 
taken  above  that  "the  flock  "  is  the  Jewish  church  and  people. 

two  parts^  Comp.  1  Sam.  viii.  2.  This  was  terribly  fidfilled  in  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans. 

9.  the  third  part]     Comp.  Rom.  xi.  5. 

Chap.  XIV.  1 — 7.    The  final  Conflict  and  Deliverance. 

All  nations  shall  come  against  Jerusalem.  The  city  shall  be  taken, 
with  the  attendant  horrors  of  barbarous  warfare,  and  half  its  popu- 
lation enslaved,  ver.  i,  2.  Then  Jehovah  shall  appear,  as  in  olden 
time,  to  deliver  His  people,  ver.  3.  Beneath  His  feet,  as  He  descends 
upon  the  Mount  of  Olives,  the  mountain  shall  cleave  asunder,  the 
two  parts  moving  northward  and  southward,  and  being  separated  by  a 
wide  valley  running  east  and  west,  ver.  4.  By  this  valley  (which  shall 
reach  across  the  ravine  of  Kedron  up  to  the  city  wall)  the  people  that 
remain  shall  flee  from  Jerusalem,  as  they  fled  from  the  earthquake  in 
Uzziah's  time.  Jehovah  shall  come  with  all  His  holy  ones,  ver.  5,  and 
this  "day  of  the  Lord,"  unlike  all  other  days  and  known  to  Him  alone, 
shall  be  marked  by  strange  phenomena  of  mingled  light  and  darkness, 
and  shall  have  for  its  evening  the  dawn  of  the  everlasting  day,  ver. 
6,7. 


vv.  1—4.]  ZECHARIAH,   XIV.  141 

Behold,  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  14 

And  thy  spoil  shall  be  divided  in  the  midst  of  thee. 
For  I  will  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalem  to  battle ;   2 
And  the  city  shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses  rifled,  and  the 

women  ravished ; 
And  half  of  the  city  shall  go  forth  into  captivity, 
And  the  residue  of  the  people  shall  not  be  cut  off  from 

the  city. 
Then   shall  the  Lord  go  forth,  and  fight  against   those  3 

nations. 
As  when  he  fought  in  the  day  of  battle. 
And  his  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the  mount  of  4 

Olives, 

1.  the  day  of  the  Lord  comdh]  Lit.  a  day  to  (or,  of)  Jehovah,  i.  e. 
which  is  in  a  special  manner  His.  The  previous  prophecy  (xiii.  7—9)  is 
now  expanded,  attention  being  concentrated,  however,  on  the  city  rather 
than  on  the  land  (xiii.  8),  and  on  the  final  act  rather  than  on  the  long 
previous  process  of  purifying  discipline.  It  is  impossible  satisfactorily 
to  adapt  the  terms  of  this  prophecy,  either  to  the  taking  of  Jerusalem 
under  the  Maccabees,  or  to  its  destruction  by  the  Romans.  As  Pusey 
well  remarks,  "  those  who  explain  it  solely  of  this,  are  obliged  to  mingle 
explanations  partly  literal,  as  that  Jerusalem  should  be  the  earthly 
Jerusalem  which  was  destroyed,  partly  metaphorical,  as  to  the  mount 
of  Olives,  its  division  into  two  parts,  &c."  It  should  moreover  be 
observed  that  there  is  no  word  here  of  the  city  being  destroyed. 

in  the  midst  of  thee\  So  complete  shall  be  the  subjugation  of  the 
city,  that  the  enemy  shall,  in  perfect  security,  portion  out  her  spoil 
amongst  the  victorious  hosts  in  the  very  midst  of  her. 

2.  all  nations']  Comp.  Joel  iii.  2,  9 — 11;  Ezek.  xxxviii.,  xxxix. ; 
Rev.  XX.  7 — 9. 

3.  in  t?t.e  day  of  battle']  Some,  as  Calvin,  refer  this  generally  to 
God's  manifold  interpositions  on  behalf  of  His  people,  throughout  the 
course  of  their  history ;  but  it  is  better  to  confine  it  to  the  first  great 
typicJii  interposition,  when  the  word  of  command  was,  "Jehovah  shall 
fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  hold  your  peace  "  ;  and  even  the  enemy  was 
fain  to  confess,  "Jehovah  fighteth  for  them  against  the  Egyptians," 
Exod.  xiv.  14,  25 ;  comp.  Habak.  iii.  15.  A  comparison  may  perhaps 
be  suggested  between  the  dividing  of  the  Red  Sea  (Ps.  cxxxvi.  13), 
and  of  the  Mount  of  Olives  as  here  predicted. 

4.  the  77ioiint  of  Olives]  Comp.  Acts  i.  12.  "The  mount  of  Olives 
is  the  central  eminence  of  a  line  of  hills,  of  rather  more  than  a  mile 
in  length,  overhanging  the  city,  from  which  it  is  separated  only  by 
the  narrow  bed  of  the  valley  of  the  Brook  of  Cedron.  It  rises  187 
feet  above  mount  Zion,  295  above  mount  Moriah,  443  above  Geth- 
semane,  and  lies  between  the  city  and  the  wilderness  toward  the  Dead 
Sea."     Pusey. 


142  ZECHARIAH,   XIV.  [vv.  5,  6. 


Which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east, 

And  the  mount  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof 

toward  the  east  and  toward  the  west, 
And  there  shall  be  a  very  great  valley ; 
And  half  of  the  mountain  shall  remove  toward  the  north, 
And  half  of  it  toward  the  south. 
And  ye  shall  flee  to  the  valley  of  the  mountains  ; 
For  the  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach  unto  Azal : 
Yea,  ye  shall  flee,  like  as  ye  fled  from  l;cfore  the  earthquake 
In  the  days  of  Uzziah  king  of  Judah  : 
And  the  Lord  my  God  shall  come, 
A7id  all  the  sainis  with  thee. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day, 
That  the  light  shall  not  be  clear,  7ior  dark  : 

a  very  great  valley']  The  cleft  in  tlie  mountain  which  is  to  form 
this  valley  will  run  E.  and  W.,  and  will  be  caused  by  the  two  parts  of 
the  divided  mountain  moving  N.  and  S. 

5.  to  the  valley  of  the  77io7(iitains\  Rather,  by  tlie  valley  of  My  moun- 
tains, i.  e.  a  way  of  escape  from  the  city  shall  be  opened  to  you  along 
the  valley  formed  by  My  mountains,  those  mountains,  that  is,  which  I 
have  just  made  for  that  very  purpose,  by  cleaving  the  mount  of  Olives. 

unto  Azal]  Jerome  and  others  render,  very  fiear,  "  usque  ad  proxi- 
mum."  If,  however,  Azal  is  a  proper  name,  it  denotes  some  then 
familiar  locality,  either  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  newly-formed 
valley,  or  more  probably  at  its  western  extremity,  close  to  the  walls 
of  Jerusalem.  In  any  case  the  meaning  is  that  the  way  of  escape  shall 
be  made  easy. 

the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah]  There  is  no  mention  of  this 
in  the  historical  books.  The  references  to  it  here  and  in  Amos  i.  i 
show  that  it  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  people  and  was  long 
remembered.  The  story  of  Josephus  (see  Stanley,  Jeivish  Church, 
II.  439)  connecting  it  with  Uzziah's  attempt  to  burn  incense  {1  Chron. 
xxvi.  19)  is  probat)ly  only  an  embellishment  of  this  passage  of  Zecha- 
riah.     Ewald  puts  the  earthquake  in  "one  of  the  first  years  of  Uzziah." 

all  the  saints]  Rather,  holy  ones,  i.  e.  angels.  Comp.  Deut.  xxxiii. 
i\  Matt.  XXV.  31;  Jude  14. 

with  thee]  i.e.  with  the  Lord,  to  whom  the  prophet  turns  in  direct 
address.  These  abrupt  changes  of  person  are  not  uncommon  in  Hebrew. 
See  chap.  ii.  8,  note. 

6.  the  light  shall  not  be  clear,  nor  dark]  Rather,  there  shall  not 
"be  light,  the  bright  ones  shall  be  contracted ;  as  in  R.  V.  margin, 
i.e.  the  heavenly  bodies  shall  be  darkened.  It  shall  be  a  day  of  deep 
gloom.  Comp.  "The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  darkened,  and  the 
stars  shall  withdraw  their  shining,"  Joel  iii.  15,  and  Matt.  xxiv.  29:, 
Rev.  vi.  12,  13. 


vv.  7—9.]  ZECHARIAH,   XIV.  143 

But  it  shall  be  one  day  which  shall  be  known  to  the  7 

Lord, 
Not  day,  nor  night : 
But  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  at  evening  time  it  shall  be 

light. 
And  it  shall  be  in  that  day,  s 

That  living  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem : 
Half  of  them  toward  the  former  sea, 
And  half  of  them  toward  the  hinder  sea  : 
In  summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be. 

And  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth :  9 

In  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Lord,  and  his  name  one. 

7.  one  day]  i.e.  an  unique  day,  unlike  any  oiher : ^rorsus  singulaj-is. 
Maurer.     Comp.  Ezek.  vii.  5,  and  for  the  idea  Jer.  xxx.  7. 

shall  be  known  to  the  Lord]  Rather,  is  known,  R.  V.  Comp.  Mk. 
xiii.  32.  "Quo  temporis  momento  ingruet  soli  Deo  est  notuni." 
Maurer. 

not  day  nor  night]  Neither  wholly  day  nor  wholly  night,  but  a 
chequered  mixture  of  both.  The  new  creation  shall  be  ushered  in,  as 
the  first  was,  by  a  day  of  lurid  gloom  and  "darkness  visible,"  which 
shall  not,  however,  deepen  into  night,  but  brighten  at  its  close  into  the 
everlasting  dawn.     "At  evening  time  there  shall  be  light." 

8 — 11.    The  Prosperity  of  the  Land. 

Perennial  streams  flowing  from  Jerusalem  both  to  the  E.  and  to  the 
W.  shall  irrigate  and  fertilise  the  land,  ver.  8.  One  God  shall  be  wor- 
shipped without  a  rival,  ver.  9.  The  whole  face  of  the  country  shall 
become  a  level  plain,  Jerusalem  alone  standing  aloft  on  its  ancient  hills, 
ver.  10,  the  populous  abode  of  blessing  and  security,  ver.  11. 

8.  former  sea^... hinder  sea]  Rather,  eastern  sea,  western  sea,  R.V. : 
i.e.  the  Dead  Sea  on  the  E.,  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea  on  the  W. 
Comp.  Ezek.  xlvii.  i;  Joel  iii.  18.  This  would  be  the  natural  water- 
shed, the  whole  country  being  level  and  Jerusalem  alone  elevated  above 
it,  ver.  10. 

in  Slimmer  and  zVz  winter]  "ut  aquae  istaa  nee  gelu  constringantur 
hiemis,  nee  iestatis  nimio  fervore  siccentur."  Hieron.  Comp.  by  way 
of  contrast.  Job  vi.  15 — 20. 

9.  the  earth]  Rather,  the  land,  as  in  ver.  10.  The  wider  scope  is 
virtually  included,  but  is  not  here  directly  under  consideration. 

shall  there  be  one  Lord,  &c.]  Rathery  Jehovah  shall  he  one,  &c., 
i.e.  He  shall  be  one  in  the  recognition  and  worship  of  men,  as  He  is 
unchangeably  in  His  essence  and  in  fact. 

and  his  name  one]  i.  e.,  as  Calvin  who  discusses  this  clause  at  length 
points  out,  not  only  shall  one  supreme  God  and  fountain  as  it  were  of 
Deity  be  acknowledged — for  many  even  of  the  heathen  acknowledged 
that — but   His   manitold   revelations   of  Himself  shall   no   longer   be 


144  ZECHARIAH,   XIV.  [v.  lo. 

lo      All  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  from  Geba  to  Rim- 
mon  south  of  Jerusalem  : 
And  it  shall  be.  lifted  up,  and  inhabited  in  her  place, 

regarded  as  so  many  distinct  and  inferior  deities,  but  as  parts  and 
aspects  of  the  one  sole  Name  by  which  He  makes  Himself  known  to 
men.  Even  the  Three  Persons  of  the  blessed  Trinity  are  included  in  the 
One  Name.     Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

10.  turned  as  a  plani\  i.e.  changed  so  as  to  become  as,  or  like, 
a  plain.  Some  would  render,  as  the  Arabah  (R.  V.)  or  Jordan  valley, 
a  meaning  which  the  word  will  bear.  Dean  Stanley  writes,  "As  a 
general  rule,  Palestine  is  not  merely  a  mountainous  country,  but  a  mass 
of  mountains,  rising  from  a  level  sea-coast  on  the  west,  and  from  a  level 
desert  on  the  east,  only  cut  asunder  by  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  from 
north  to  south,  and  by  the  valley  of  Jezreel  from  east  to  west.  The 
result  of  this  peculiarity  is,  that  not  merely  the  hill-tops,  but  the  valleys 
and  plains  of  the  interior  of  Palestine,  both  east  and  west,  are  them- 
selves so  high  above  the  level  of  the  sea  as  to  partake  of  all  the  main 
characteristics  of  mountainous  history  and  scenery.  Jerusalem  is  of 
nearly  the  same  elevation  as  the  highest  ground  in  England,  and  most 
of  the  chief  cities  of  Palestine  are  several  hundred  feet  above  the 
Mediterranean  Sea."  {Shiai  a?id  Palestine,  p.  129;  see  also  p.  170.) 
The  "plain,"  therefore,  which  the  prophet  here  pictures  to  himself, 
may  be  a  table-mountain  or  elevated  platform,  all  other  hills  and 
mountains  sinking  down  to  the  present  level  of  the  "valleys  and  plains" 
of  Palestine,  and  leaving  Jerusalem  standing  aloft  on  this  elevated  base, 
the  queen  like  city  and  mistress  of  the  world. 

"  See  Salem  built,  the  labour  of  a  God  ! 
Bright  as  a  sun  the  Sacred  City  shines; 
All  kingdoms  and  all  princes  of  the  earth 
Flock  to  that  light;    the  glory  of  all  lands 
Flows  into  her;    unbounded  is  her  joy, 
And  endless  her  increase." 
Geba"]     A  town  of  Benjamin,  Josh.  xxi.  17;   i  Chron.  vi.  60;  Neh. 
xi.  31.     It  is  spoken  of,  as  it  is  here,  as  the  northern  boundary  of  the 
kingdom  of  Judah,  in  1  Kings  xxiii.  8.   "Exactly  in  accordance  with  this 
(the  mention  of  the  position  of  Geba  in  i  Sam.  xiii.  3)  is  the  position  of 
the  modern  village  of  yeba,  which  stands  picturesquely  on  the  top  of 
its  steep-terraced  hill,  on  the  very  edge  of  the  great  Wady  Suweinit.... 
Standing  as  it  does  on  the  south  bank  of  this  important  wady — one  of 
the  most  striking   natural   features  of  this   part  of  the  country — the 
mention  of  Geba  as  the  northern  boundary  of  the  lower  kingdom  is  very 
significant."     Bible  Diet.  Art.  "Geba." 

Rini?non]  A  town  in  the  south  of  Palestine,  Josh.  xv.  21,  32,  allotted 
to  Simeon,  lb.  xix.  r,  7.     Its  site  is  now  unknown. 

it  shall  be  lifted  up]  she  shall  be  lifted  up,  R.  V.,  i.  e.  Jerusalem,  which 
has  just  been  mentioned,  shall  retain  its  former  elevation,  when  all  the 
country  round  has  sunk  into  a  plain.     "Humiliatis  omnibus  circumqua- 


vv.  II,  12.]  ZECHARIAH,   XIV.  145 

From  Benjamin's  gate  unto  the  place  of  the  first  gate, 
unto  the  corner  gate, 

And  fro?n  the  tower  of  Hananeel  unto  the  king's  wine- 
presses. 

And  men  shall  dwell  in  it,  and  there  shall  be  no  more  utter  n 
destruction  \ 

But  Jerusalem  shall  be  safely  inhabited. 

And  this  shall  be  the  plague  where^e////^  the  Lord  will  12 
smite  all  the  people 

That  have  fought  against  Jerusalem ; 

Their  flesh  shall  consume  away  while  they  stand  upon 
their  feet, 

que  montibus  collibusqvie,  urbs  primaria  Judse  totiusque  orbis  terrarum 
(ver.  9,  cf.  Mic.  iv.  i),  immota  suo  loco,  data  et  conspicua  mansura 
dicitur."     Maurer. 

from  Benja/niii's  gate']  These  limits  cannot  be  defined  with  certainty ; 
but  it  seems  probable  that  "the  gate  of  Benjamin"  is  identical  with 
"the  gate  of  Ephraim"  (2  Kings  xiv.  13;  Neh.  viii.  16,  xii.  39),  a  gate, 
that  is,  in  the  N.  wall  of  the  city,  which  led  to  the  territory  of  Benjamin 
and  then  to  that  of  Ephraim  beyond,  and  which  was  therefore  called 
indifferently  by  either  name.  If  we  suppose  that  this  gate  stood  in  the 
middle  of  the  N.  wall,  we  have  the  breadth  of  the  restored  city, 
measured  from  it,  first  westward  to  "the  corner  gate"  (a  Kings  xiv.  13; 
2  Chron.  xxv.  23;  Jer.  xxxi.  38),  which  was  at  the  N.W.  corner  of  the 
wall,  and  then  eastward  to  "the  first  gate"  (tlic  same  perhaps  as  that 
called  "the  old  gate,"  Neh.  xii.  39),  which  was  at  the  N.E.  corner. 
The  length  of  the  city  is  given,  from  the  tower  of  Hananeel  (Neh.  iii.  r, 
xii.  39;  Jer.  xxxi.  38)  in  the  N.  to  "the  king's  winepresses"  in  the  S. 
The  site  of  these  winepresses  has  not  been  discovered,  but  it  is  not 
improbable  that  they  were  in  or  near  "the  king's  garden"  (Neh. 
iii.  15),  at  the  S.E.  extremity  of  the  city. 

11.  utter  destructioii\  Lit.  curse,  afadefia  ovk  ^arai  iri..  LXX. 
Comp.  Rev.  xxii.  3. 

12 — 15.  The  Destruction  of  Hostile  Nations. 
The  deliverance  and  prosperity  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  accomplished 
by  a  terrible  plague  sent  upon  those  who  fought  against  her,  ver.  12; 
and  by  a  panic  which  shall  cause  them  to  slay  one  another,  ver.  13, 
and  also  by  the  courage  and  prowess  of  Judah.  The  wealth  of  their 
enemies  shall  be  the  spoil  of  the  Jews,  ver.  14;  while  the  consuming 
pestilence  shall  extend  to  all  the  cattle  in  the  hostile  camp,  ver.  15. 

12.  the  people]     Lit.  peoples,  as  R.  V.,  i.e.  nations. 

their  flesh]  Lit.  Ws  flesh,  i.  e.  the  flesh  of  each  one  of  them ;  and  so, 
his  eyes,  his  tongue;  though,  to  show  that  the  plague  is  at  once  individual 
and  universal,  it  is  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  "  in  their  mouth  ". 

while  they  stand  upon  their  feet]    Lit.  and  lie  standing  upon  his 

ZECHARIAH  lO 


146  ZECHARIAH,   XIV.  [vv.  13,  14. 

And  their  eyes  shall  consume  away  in  their  holes, 

And  their  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their  mouth. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day, 

That  a  great  tumult  from  the  Lord  shall  be  among 
them ; 

And  they  shall  lay  hold  every  one  on  the  hand  of  his 
neighbour, 

And  his  hand  shall  rise  up  against  the  hand  of  his  neigh- 
bour. 

And  Judah  also  shall  fight  at  Jerusalem  ; 

And  the  wealth  of  all  the  heathen  round  about  shall  be 
gathered  together, 


feet.  The  plague  comes  upon  them  in  a  moment,  as  they  stand  in 
serried  ranks  before  tlie  holy  city.  "Appalling,  horrible  picture! 
standing  ojt  their  feet,  yet  their  flesh  mouldering  away,  as  in  a  grave- 
yard, their  sightless  balls  decaying  in  their  holes,  the  tongue  putrefying 
in  their  mouth,  a  disgust  to  themselves  and  to  others."  Pusey. 
holes\  sockets,  R.V. 

13.  tumult^  Comp.  i  Sam.  xiv.  20,  where  the  same  word  is 
rendered  "discomfiture,"  and  where,  as  also  in  Jud.  vii.  22;  2  Chron. 
XX.  23,  the  foes  are  described,  as  here,  as  fighting  against  one  another 
in  their  panic. 

14.  at  Jertisalciji\  This,  or  in  ycrusalein,  and  not  against  JeriisalcDi 
(R.  V.  and  margin,  A.  V.),  which  would  be  a  wholly  meaningless  and 
irrelevant  statement  here  (comp.  xii.  2,  note),  is  the  rendering  that 
must  be  adopted.  There  is  no  question  here  of  the  strength  or  allies  of 
the  opposing  force,  but  only  of  the  threefold  cause  of  their  destruction, 
viz.  (i)  the  plague  sent  by  God,  ver.  12;  (2)  mutual  slaughter,  ver.  13; 
(3)  the  onslaught  of  Judah,  rallying  to  defend  the  capital,  ver.  14. 
"A  still  further  element  of  'confusion'  would  be  added  to  the  adversaries. 
When  Jonathan  gained  his  wonderful  victory  over  the  Philistines'  garrison 
at  Michmash,  there  was  a  confusion  caused  by  God  in  the  ranks  of  the 
Philistines  (i  Sam.  xiv.  20),  which  resulted,  as  here,  in  a  terrible  con- 
flict taking  place  in  their  own  ranks.  Those  Hebrews  who  on  that 
occasion  were  with  the  Philistines,  as  well  as  Israelites  who  had  fled 
into  the  holes  or  fastnesses  of  the  mountains,  plucked  up  courage  when 
they  saw  the  confusion  of  their  adversaries,  and  stood  up  boldly  against 
them.  Thus  in  the  picture  here  given,  when  the  ranks  of  the  enemies 
are  thinned  by  pestilence  and  mutual  slaughter,  the  prophet  represents 
the  whole  of  the  people  of  Judah,  not  merely  those  who  had  escaped 
out  of  the  city,  but  also  those  who  were  outside  its  walls,  as  once  more 
fighting  at  Jerusalem,  or  in  its  very  streets,  against  the  terror-driven, 
plague-stricken,  God-confounded  foe."     (Rev.  C.  H.  H.  Wright.) 

the  heathen']  the  nations,  R.  V.,  as  in  ver.  16,  where  the  same  Heb. 
word  is  translated  "nation"  in  A.  V. 


vv.  15—17.]  ZECHARIAH,   XIV.  I47 

Gold,  and  silver,  and  apparel,  in  great  abundance. 

And  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the  horse,  15 

Of  the  mule,  of  the  camel,  and  of  the  ass, 

And  of  all  the  beasts  that  shall  be  in  tht^se  tents,  as  this 

plague. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every  one  that  is  left  of  iS 

all  the  nations 
Which  came  against  Jerusalem 
Shall  even  go  up  from  year  to  year 
To  worship  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
And  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles. 

And  it  shall  be,  that  whoso  will  not  come  up  17 

Of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  unto  Jerusalem 
To  worship  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts, 


15.  tents\  camps,  R.  V. 

as  this  plague]  viz.  that  described  in  ver.  13,  Comp.  for  this  including 
the  cattle  in   he  curse,  Deut.  xiii.  15;  Josh.  vii.  24. 

16—19.    The  Homage  of  the  Residue  of  the  Nations. 

The  deliverance  of  Israel  and  judgments  on  her  enemies  shall  have  a 
converting  influence  on  the  residue  of  the  Gentiles,  who  shall  become 
worshippers  of  Jehovah,  and  keep  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  every  year 
at  Jerusalem,  ver.  16.  From  any  nation  that  refuses  so  to  worship 
rain  shall  be  withheld  as  a  punishment,  ver.  17.  Egypt,  the  ancient 
foe  of  Israel,  shall  be  liable  to  the  same  punishment,  ver.  18,  which 
shall  fall  upon  all  nations  that  neglect  the  feast,  ver.  19. 

16.  the  feast  of  tabernacles']  The  Jews  had  been  required  to  appear 
three  times  in  the  year  before  God  at  His  sanctuary.  Of  the  Gentile 
nations,  distant  as  they  are  and  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  earth, 
only  one  such  appearance  is  required.  Various  reasons  have  been 
suggested  why,  out  of  the  three  great  festivals,  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
is  selected:  because  it  fell  in  autumn  when  travelling  is  most  con- 
venient ;  because,  as  a  thanksgiving  festival  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth, 
it  was  one  in  which  all  nations  might  more  readily  take  part ;  or  (which 
is  more  probable),  because  it  was  the  last  and  greatest  festival  of 
the  Jewish  year,  gathering  up  into  itself,  as  it  were,  the  year's  worship, 
and  at  the  same  time  typifying  the  ingathering  of  all  nations  into  the 
Church  of  God.     Comp.  Rev.  vii.  9. 

"From  every  clime  they  come 
To  see  thy  beauty,  and  to  share  thy  joy, 
O  Sion  1    an  assembly  such  as  earth 
Saw  never,  such  as  heav'n  stoops  down  to  see." 

17.  will  not  come  up]  goeih  not  up.    R.  V. 


148  ZECHARIAH,   XIV.  [vv.  18—20. 

Even  upon  them  shall  be  no  rain. 

And  if  the  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up,  and  come  not,  that 

have  no  rain; 
There  shall  be  the  plague,  where 7<:^///^  the  Lord  will  smite 

the  heathen 
That  come  not  up  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles. 
This  shall  be  the  punishment  of  Egypt, 
And  the  punishment  of  all  nations 
That  come  not  up  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles. 
In  that  day  shall  there  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses, 
HOLINESS  UNTO  THE  LORD  ; 
And  the  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls 

before  the  altar. 

no  rain']  Comp.  i  Kings  xvii.;  Lu.  iv.  25;  Amos  iv.  7,  8.  *'PIuvi3e 
defeclus  omnem  fere  quae  inde  oiiri  in  iliis  terris  solet  comprehendit 
calamitatem,  annonae  caritatem,  seditiones,  pestem."     Rosenm. 

18.  that  have  no  rahi]  Rather,  then  not  on  them,  &c.  The  words 
are  an  exact  and  obviously  intended  repetition  of  the  first  words  of  the 
clause  at  the  end  of  ver.  17,  the^i  not  on  them  shall  there  be  rain.  The 
writer,  however,  seems  to  have  broken  off  his  sentence  suddenly,  when 
he  had  written,  then  not  on  thejn,  perhaps  from  the  remembrance  that 
Egypt  was  not  directly  dependent  upon  rain  like  other  countries  (Deut. 
xi.  10,  11),  and  instead  of  finishing  it  with  the  words  shall  there  be  rain, 
to  have  changed  its  form,  and  written  "(upon  them)  there  shall  be  (in 
its  equivalent  form,  and  ultimately  owing  to  the  same  cause— for  the 
rising  of  the  Nile  which  fertilizes  Egypt  is  due  to  the  rainfall)  the 
plague,  &^c.  The  LXX.  escape  the  difficulty  by  omitting  the  negative, 
Kal  iwl  TovTous  ^arrat  7}  Trrwcrts :  "  even  upon  them  shall  be  the  plague." 

19.  piinishment]  Lit.  sin,  as  in  margin  of  A.  V.  and  R.  V.,  but 
sin  here  as  manifested  in  its  consequences.  Comp.  Lam.  iii.  39,  where 
it  is  literally,  a  man  for  his  sins. 

20,  21.    The  perfect  and  crowning  holiness  of  Jerusalem 
and  judah. 

The  ornaments  of  worldly  pomp  and  warlike  power  shall  be  as 
truly  consecrated  as  the  very  mitre  of  the  High  Priest,  and  every  vessel 
used  in  the  meanest  service  of  the  Temple  as  holy  as  the  vessels  of  the 
altar  itself,  ver.  20.  Nay  every  common  vessel  throughout  the  city  and 
the  whole  land  shall  be  so  holy  as  to  be  meet  for  the  service  of  the 
sanctuary,  and  every  profane  person  shall  be  for  ever  banished  from 
the  house  of  the  Lord,  ver.  21. 

20.  Holiness  unto  the  Lord]  Holy  unto  the  Lord,  R.  V.,  and  so  in 
ver.  1 1  ;  Exod.  xxviii.  36. 

pots  in  the  Lord's  house]  i  Sam.  ii.  14;  1  Chron.  xxxv.  13. 
botuls  before  the  altar]  chap.  ix.  15,  note. 


V.  21.]  ZECHARIAH,  XIV.  149 

Yea,  every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in  Judah  shall  be  holiness  21 

unto  the  Lord  of  hosts  : 
And  all  they  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  take  of  them, 

and  seethe  therein  : 
And  in  that  day  there  shall  be  no  more  the  Canaanite  in 

the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

21.  take  of  them']  All  distinction  between  sacred  and  secular  shall 
be  at  an  end,  because  all  shall  now  be  alike  holy. 

the  Canaanite]  a  Canaanite,  R.  V.  Some  would  render,  the  mer- 
chant, a  meaning  which  the  word  bears  in  Job  xli.  6  [Heb.,  xl.  30]; 
Prov.  xxxi.  24,  and  understand  the  prediction  to  be,  that  as  any  and 
every  vessel  that  came  to  hand  would  serve  his  purpose,  the  sacrificer 
would  no  longer  need  to  buy  a  special  vessel,  and  therefore  the 
traffickers  in  such  wares  (comp.  John  ii.  14;  Matt.  xxi.  12)  would  cease 
to  frequent  the  Temple  courts.  The  whole  scope  of  the  passage,  how- 
ever, is  in  favour  of  the  view  that  "the  Canaanite"  here  means  any 
unclean  person,  whether  heathen  who  had  not  accepted  the  rehgion 
and  consecrated  himself  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  (Nehem.  xiii.  4 — 9  ; 
Acts  xxi.  28,  29),  or  Jew  who  in  heart  and  life  was  no  better  than  a 
heathen  (comp.  "O  thou  seed  of  Chanaan  and  not  of  Juda,"  Story  of 
Susanna,  ver.  56).  The  true  scope  of  the  prophecy  is  that  city  of 
which  it  is  written,  "There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  that 
defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination  or  maketh  a  lie: 
but  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life,"  Rev.  xxi.  27. 


'lAOT   KAINA   llANTA    llOia 


APPENDIX. 

Note  A. 
On  the  Title,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts:' 

Tins  title  of  Almighty  God  occurs  in  different  forms  in  the  Old 
Testament.  In  addition  to  the  form,  "Jehovah  [of]  hosts,"  so  common 
in  these  Books  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  we  have,  "Jehovah  God  [of] 
hosts"  (Ps.  lix.  6,  Ixxx.  5),  "God  [of]  hosts"  (Ps.  Ixxx.  15),  "Lord 
Jehovah  [of]  the  hosts"  (Amos  ix.  5],  and  "Jehovah  God  of  hosts" 
(Jer.  V.  14,  XV.  16).  Of  these  forms  the  last  is  the  only  one  which  is 
grammatically  complete,  and  from  it  we  are  led  to  conclude  that  in 
each  of  the  other  cases  we  have  an  abbreviated  form,  which  written 
in  full  would  be  "Jehovah,  God  of  hosts,"  "Jehovah  God,  the  God 
of  hosts,"  "God,  the  God  of  hosts,"  "Lord  Jehovah,  the  God  of 
hosts." 

As  regards  usage,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  this  title  does  not  occur 
in  any  of  its  forms  in  the  Pentateuch,  nor  in  the  Books  of  Joshua,  Judges, 
or  Ruth,  nor  in  the  writings  of  Solomon  or  the  Book  of  Job.  In  the 
historical  Books  in  which  it  is  found  it  is  most  frequent  in  Samuel,  more 
rare  in  Kings,  and  rarer  still  in  Chronicles.  In  the  Psalms  it  is  common 
and  in  most  of  the  Prophets,  with  the  exception  of  Ezekiel  and  Daniel, 
by  whom  it  is  never  used. 

The  meaning  and  origin  of  the  title  seem  clearly  to  be  indicated  by 
the  history  of  its  use.  Its  introduction  is  contemporaneous  with  the 
rise  of  the  Jewish  monarchy.  The  Books  of  Samuel  are  the  record  of 
that  rise,  and  in  i  Samuel  i.  3  the  title  occurs  for  the  first  time.  But 
with  the  Jewish  monarchy  the  Jewish  army  took  a  new  departure.  No 
doubt  from  the  time  of  the  Exodus  a  certain  military  organisation  existed 
amongst  the  Israelites.  Not  only  the  battle  with  Amalek  (Exod.  xvii.) 
and  the  subsequent  engagements  with  the  enemies  whom  they  en- 
countered on  their  journey,  but  the  prescribed  order  of  march  through 
the  wilderness,  in  which  each  tribe  formed  a  military  division  preceded 
by  its  banner  (Numb.  ii. ),  and  the  recognized  subdivisions  into  thou- 
sands and  hundreds  with  their  corresponding  officers  (Numb.  xxxi.  14, 


152  APPENDIX. 


48,  54),  bear  witness  to  the  fact.  But  at  that  time  there  was  no  standing 
army.  The  whole  male  population,  "from  twenty  years  old  and  up- 
ward," was  regarded  as  "able  to  go  forth  to  war"  (Numb.  i.  20,  22). 
The  campaigns  of  Joshua,  abounding  as  they  do  in  feats  of  bold  daring 
and  resistless  courage,  combined  with  successful  stratagem,  shew  no 
acquaintance  on  the  part  of  the  Israelites  with  the  science  of  warfare, 
and  afford  no  proof  of  their  material  advance  in  military  training  and 
equipment.  With  the  monarchy  there  came  a  change.  One  object 
that  they  had  in  desiring  a  king  was  that  he  might  "go  out  before  them, 
and  fight  their  battles"  (i  Sam.  viii.  20).  Saul,  when  he  came  to  the 
throne,  found  the  condition  of  the  people  in  this  respect  very  much  at 
the  low  ebb  to  which  the  miserable  times  of  the  Judges  had  reduced 
them  (Judges  v.  8;  i  Sam.  xiii.  22).  One  of  the  early  acts  of  his 
reign  was  the  formation  of  "the  nucleus  of  a  standing  army"  (1  Sam. 
xiii.  2).  This  was  developed  and  organised  by  David,  who  was  pre- 
eminently a  warlike  king  (See  Diet,  of  Bible,  Art.  Army). 

It  was  only  necessary  that  this  newly  developed  militai-y  idea  should 
be  engrafted,  as  it  could  not  fail  to  be,  upon  the  theocratic  idea  which 
was  the  ruling  principle  of  the  Jewish  nation,  to  suggest  and  render 
popular  the  phrase,  I'he  Lord  of  hosts,  as  an  appellation  of  the  God  of 
Israel.  Such  an  association  of  ideas  was  already  familiar  to  the  Jewish 
mind,  and  had  already  found  expression  in  Jewish  literature.  The  first 
great  victory,  on  the  birthday  of  the  nation,  was  achieved  for  them 
by  God  alone  without  their  co-operation.  "The  Lord  shall  fight  for 
you,  and  ye  shall  hold  your  peace,"  was  the  order  of  that  day  (Ex.  xiv. 
14).  But  the  national  song  of  triumph  not  only  ascribed  the  victory  to 
Jehovah  alone,  but  depicted  Him  as  a  warrior,  going  forth  single-handed 
as  the  champion  of  His  people  to  encounter  and  overthrow  their  enemies. 
"Jehovah  is  a  man  of  war:  Jehovah  is  His  name"  (Ex.  xv.  3).  On 
the  eve  of  the  war  which  resulted  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan,  there 
appeared  to  Joshua  "a  man  over  against  him  with  his  sword  drawn  in 
his  hand,"  the  place  of  whose  feet  was  holy  ground,  from  whom,  as 
from  his  superior  officer,  he  received  full  and  explicit  directions  for  the 
taking  of  Jericho,  and  who  in  almost  verbal  anticipation  of  the  title 
we  are  considering,  was  at  once  "Jehovah,"  and  "Captain  of  the  host 
of  Jehovah"  (Josh.  v.  13— vi.  5). 

Such  appears  to  be  the  most  simple  and  natural  account  to  be  given . 
of  the  origin  and  general  adoption  among  the  Jews  of  this  title  of  God. 
Its  frequent  occurrence  in  the  writings  of  the  post-captivity  prophets 
may  perhaps  be  accounted  for,  by  the  sad  familiarity  with  armed  hosts 
and  the  array  of  battle  which  the  nation  had  acquired  in  the  siege  and 
capture  of  Jerusalem,  and  in  their  subsequent  contact  in  Babylon  with 
some  of  the  great  military  powers  of  the  world.  The  almost  utter 
extinction  of  what  were  once  the  hosts  of  Jehovah  among  themselves, 
may  well  have  led  them  to  cling  more  tenaciously  to  a  title,  which  set 
Him  before  them  as  "the  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel,"  with  whom  "is 
no  restraint  to  save  by  many  or  by  few."  Possibly  the  absence  of 
human  hosts  for  their  defence  may  have  suggested  the  thought,  that 
other  hosts,  whether  the  inhabitants  (Ps.  ciii.  20,  21),  or  the  influences 
(Judg.  V.  20)  of  heaven,  were  at  the  command  of  Him  who  claimed 


APPENDIX.  153 


that  title  for  Himself.  But  this  would  be  rather  an  adaptation  and 
expansion  of  the  primary  idea,  than  the  primary  idea  itself.  And  it 
must  moreover  be  remembered,  that  when  once  a  title,  whether  of  God 
or  man,  has  been  adopted  into  the  vocabulary  of  a  people,  it  comes  to 
be  used  as  a  proper  name  without  distinct  and  conscious  reference  to 
the  special  meaning  which  it  conveys. 


Note  B. 
On  Satan. 

In  this  vision  of  Joshua  the  High  Priest  before  the  Angel  of  the  Lord, 
the  personality  of  Satan  and  his  malicious  attitude  towards  mankind  ai-e 
brought  out  with  a  clearness,  which  is  of  very  rare  occurrence  in  the 
Old  Testament.  He  stands,  in  visible  form  as  one  of  the  dramatis 
personcB,  at  the  right  hand  of  Joshua.  The  object  of  his  appearance  on 
the  scene  is  "to  play  the  adversary  against  him."  But  this  rare  con- 
ception of  Satan  occurs  in  a  Book  which,  so  far  as  this  portion  of  it  is 
concerned,  is  confessedly  of  post-exile  date.  It  may  reasonably  there- 
fore be  asked.  Does  the  conception  itself  belong  exclusively  to  the 
period  in  which  we  here  meet  with  it?  Is  it  so  properly  a  late  concep- 
tion, as  to  furnish  a  safe  criterion  for  determining  the  date  of  any  Old 
Testament  Book?  Is  it  so  certainly  absent  from  undoubtedly  early 
Books,  as  well  as  so  plainly  present  in  one  at  least  of  the  unquestionably 
later  Books,  that  we  may  regard  its  presence  as  a  trustworthy  indication 
of  the  lateness  of  the  age  in  which  an  author  lived? 

In  considering  this  question  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  the  whole 
Scripture  doctrine  of  Satan,  both  as  gathered  from  the  partial  and 
occasional  intimations  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  as  developed  in  the 
full  revelation  of  the  New  Testament,  is  virtually  included  in  the  history 
of  the  Fall.  It  is  true  that  the  complete  unmasking  of  the  Tempter, 
the  authoritative  identification  of  the  Serpent  with  the  Devil,  waited 
for  Gospel  times.  Then  it  was  that  the  Adversary  of  all  the  ages  stood 
convicted,  as  "that  old  serpent  called  the  Devil  and  Satan"  (Rev.  xii. 
9),  and  that  the  ancient  promise  of  victory  was  claimed  for  the  conflict, 
which  through  all  time  the  Church  had  waged  against  him :  "The  God 
of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly"  (Rom.  xvi.  20). 
But  in  the  mean  time  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  Old  Testament 
Church,  possessing  from  the  first  that  history  and  that  promise,  must 
have  gained  some  insight  into  the  existence  and  working  of  the  great 
enemy  of  man.  If  with  Bishop  Horsley  (Sermon  xvi)  we  concede,  that 
"by  considering  the  denunciation  of  the  serpent's  doom,  in  connection 
only  with  that  particular  story  of  which  it  was  a  part,  without  any 
knowledge  of  later  prophecies  and  revelations,"  an  " uninstructed 
heathen  "  would  conclude  that,  '  'this  was  no  common  serpent  of  the  field, 
but  some  intelligent  and  responsible  agent,  in  the  serpent  form,"  how 
can  we  deny  the  like  and  indeed  far  greater  intelligence  and  perception 


154  APPENDIX. 


to  the  inspired  writers  of  the  Old  Testament  ?  The  growth  of  doc- 
trine in  the  Old  Testament,  no  less  than  in  the  New,  is  a  growth, 
not  of  accretion,  but  of  development.  It  is  the  growth  of  the  oak 
from  the  acorn,  rather  than  of  the  building  from  the  foundation.  It  is 
impossible  to  read  the  frequent  and  fervid  eulogies  of  Old  Testament 
saints,  when  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  are  their  theme  (as 
for  example  in  the  xixth  and  cxixth  Psalms),  without  being  convinced, 
that  they  found  more  in  them  than  we  sometimes  suppose.  The  study 
as  well  as  the  observance  of  those  Scriptures  was  commended  to  the 
Church  by  the  last  of  the  prophets  (Mai.  iv.  4),  to  be  pursued  by  her 
during  the  long  interval  till  the  coming  of  Christ.  And  to  such  study  is 
to  be  attributed  in  no  small  degree,  not  only  the  awakened  popular  ex- 
pectation, but  the  advanced  popular  doctrinal  knowledge,  which  was 
prevalent  when  He  came  (e.g.  John  iv.  25,  xi.  24). 

The  recognition,  however,  of  this  truth  still  leaves  the  actual  develop- 
ment of  doctrine  a  question  of  history  and  of  fact.  The  law  of  growth 
being  established,  the  growth  itself  in  accordance  with  that  law  has 
yet  to  be  ascertained.  It  is  quite  conceivable,  and  is  indeed  what  we 
should  expect  from  our  knowledge  of  the  methods  of  Divine  procedure, 
that  the  true  conception  of  Satan  should  have  been  contained  as  in  the 
germ  in  the  history  of  the  Fall,  and  yet  should  for  the  most  part  have 
lain  dormant,  till  the  requirements  of  the  Church  in  later  ages  occa- 
sioned its  expansion.  We  may  decline  to  believe  that  the  Jews  learned 
their  true  doctrine  of  God  and  Satan,  from  the  false  doctrine  of  Persian 
dualism  with  which  they  came  in  contact  in  the  land  of  their  captivity. 
But  we  may  nevertheless  believe  that  Almighty  God  took  occasion  from 
that  contact,  to  arm  His  Church  against  the  seductive  influence  of  the 
error  which  confronted  them,  by  expanding  and  unfolding  for  them  the 
truth  which  they  already  possessed.  That  such  a  picture  as  this  vision 
of  Zechariah  furnishes,  in  which  the  true  relations  of  Jehovah  and  Satan 
are  vividly  pourtrayed  in  bright  contrast  to  the  fabled  contests  between 
Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  should  have  appeared  at  such  a  juncture  of  Jewish 
history  is  entirely  in  accordance  with  the  order  of  revelation.  When, 
however,  we  proceed  to  enquire  whether,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Church 
did  remain  in  comparative  ignorance  on  this  subject  until  the  times  of 
the  exile,  we  find  but  scanty  data  upon  which  to  form  our  decision.  The 
early  historical  Books  are  silent  on  the  question.  With  the  exception 
of  its  provisions  against  witchcraft  and  kindred  arts  (Ex.  xxii.  18;  Deut. 
xviii.  10 — 12),  and  the  possible  reference  contained  in  the  mention  of 
Azazel  (Lev.  xvi.),  the  Law  of  Moses  is  equally  reticent.  The  notice  of 
the  "evil  spirit  from  the  Lord"  which  troubled  Saul  (i  Sam.  xvi.  14), 
and  the  account  of  his  dealings  with  the  witch  of  Endor  (ch.  xxviii.)  are 
scarcely  an  advance  upon  our  earlier  information.  In  the  vision  of  Micaiah 
we  have  for  the  first  time,  since  the  history  of  the  Fall,  anything  that  can 
be  regarded  as  a  distinct  intimation  of  the  existence  of  a  personal  evil 
spirit.  It  is  true  that  Hengstenberg  {Kingdom  of  God  in  the  O.  T.  II. 
195,  Clark's  Trans.)  and  others  understand  by  "the  spirit"  (i  Kings 
xxii.  21)  "personified  prophecy,  prophecy  taken  as  a  whole,  without 
regard  to  the  distinction  between  true  and  false  prophecy."  But  it  is 
very  difficult  to  conceive  that  the  "lying  spirit"  and  the  spirit  of  truth 


APPENDIX.  155 


should  have  been  looked  upon  as  identical,  and  not  only  so  but  alike 
divine,  in  source  and  origin,  and  only  antagonistic  and  contradictory  by 
virtue  of  the  opposite  moral  characters  of  the  human  agents  by  whom 
they  spoke.  The  view,  that  by  "the  spirit"  is  meant  the  particular 
spirit  or  angel,  whose  service  the  occasion  required,  is  rather  an  evasion 
than  a  solution  of  the  difficulty.  By  interpreting  the  phrase  of  Satan, 
we  bring  the  vision  of  Micaiah  into  harmony  with  the  earlier  and  later 
revelations  both  of  his  personality  and  of  the  nature  and  method  of  his 
influence  upon  the  human  race.  It  becomes  too  in  this  way  an  inter- 
mediate link  between  Genesis  and  Zechariah  in  the  chain  of  doctrine. 
The  supreme  and  absolute  dominion  of  Jehovah  is  fearlessly  asserted. 
It  is  He  who  puts  the  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  Ahab's  prophets  (ver. 
23),  just  as  in  the  New  Testament  it  is  He  who  sends  men  "strong 
delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie"  (2  Thess.  ii.  11).  Nay  it  is 
He,  whose  spirit  (ver.  24),  in  the  sense  of  being  permitted  and  employed 
by  Him,  the  lying  spirit  is.  And  yet  the  freedom,  within  the  limits 
prescribed  by  Him,  and  the  responsibility  to  Him,  of  agents  human  and 
superhuman  is  steadfastly  maintained. 

The  Book  of  Job  furnishes  almost  the  only  other  important  contri- 
bution to  our  present  enquiry.  The  1st  and  2nd  chapters  of  that  Book 
contain  the  fullest  development  of  the  doctrine  of  Satan  to  be  found  in 
the  Old  Testament.  His  relation  both  to  God  and  to  man,  as  there 
described,  is  in  complete  harmony  with  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment concerning  him,  of  which  it  is  a  striking  anticipation.  That  he  is 
in  absolute  subjection  to  the  Almighty,  and  can  only  act  at  all  by  His 
permission,  and  then  only  within  the  limits  which  He  prescribes  (i.  12, 
ii.  6),  is  in  keeping,  as  has  already  been  observed,  with  the  uniform  tenor 
of  Holy  Scripture.  St  Paul's  "thorn,  or  stake,  in  the  flesh"  was  "the 
messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  him;"  and  yet  it  was  "given  him"  by  the 
Lord,  to  whom,  as  the  supreme  Author  and  Disposer  of  it,  he  prayed  for 
its  removal  (2  Cor.  xii.  7,  8).  That  the  design  of  Satan,  in  the  case  of 
Job  as  in  that  of  St  Paul,  was  malicious,  though  Almighty  God  in  both 
cases  overruled  that  evil  design  and  caused  it  to  subserve  His  own  higher 
design  of  good  to  the  sufferer,  can  hardly  be  doubted.  The  words  of  the 
Psalmist  with  reference  to  his  enemies,  "They  only  consult  to  cast  him 
down  from  his  excellency"  (Ixii.  4),  express  the  obvious  aim  of  Satan  in 
his  action  against  Job.  The  progressive  revelation  does  not  indeed 
arm  him  as  yet  with  that  awful,  mysterious,  spiritual  power  over  the  human 
mind  and  spirit,  which  the  New  Testament  appears  to  ascribe  to  him 
(John  xiii.  2;  Acts  v.  3;  2  Cor.  iv.  4;  Ephes.  vi.  16).  But  his  power 
over  men's  bodies  and  the  outward  conditions  of  the  world  and  nature 
is  not  only  of  the  same  kind  as  that  ascribed  to  him  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment (comp.  Job  i.  13 — 19,  ii.  7,  with  Luke  xiii.  16;  Acts  x.  38;  i 
Thess,  ii.  18;  Rev.  ii.  10),  but  is  used  as  we  have  seen  for  the  same 
ends.  If  we  are  not  told  explicitly  that  he  himself  suggested  or  had  the 
power  to  suggest  directly  to  Job,  to  do  that  with  which  he  had  charged 
him  by  anticipation  (i.  11),  yet  he  finds  a  human  agent,  who  shall  take 
occasion  from  the  calamities  which  have  come  upon  him  to  urge  him  to 
justify  the  charge  (ii.  9).  And  in  this  too  we  have  a  striking  parallel  to 
the  method  which  he  appears  to  have  adopted,  when  our  Lord  detected 


156  APPENDIX. 


and  rebuked  him  lurking  behind  and  employing  the  unwitting  agency 
of  His  favoured  Apostle  (Matt.  xvi.  23).  Nor  should  we  omit  to 
notice  another  point  of  resemblance  in  the  influence,  if  the  expression 
may  be  allowed,  which  he  is  described  as  exercising  upon  the  Almighty. 
"Thou  movedst  me  against  him,  to  destroy  him  without  cause,"  are  the 
words  of  God  Himself  respecting  it.  It  would  appear,  indeed,  that  as 
the  consequence  of  our  Lord's  triumph  on  the  cross  (Coloss.  ii.  15; 
Heb.  ii.  14),  and  ascension  into  heaven.  Satan  has  no  longer  access 
thither  to  prefer  hie  accusations  (Luke  x.  18;  Rev.  xii.  7 — 13).  But 
the  vision  of  Satan  in  heaven,  which  our  Lord  Himself  relates  to  His 
disciples  before  His  crucifixion,  agrees  remarkably,  as  regards  the  point 
in  question,  with  the  vision  in  Job.  "Simon,  Simon,"  He  exclaims, 
"Satan  desired  to  have  you,"  asked  for  you,  the  twelve,  and  obtained 
his  request,  as  both  the  word  used  {i^7jTi]ffaTo  vfids,  Luke  xxii.  31)  and 
the  sequel  of  the  history  shew,  "that  he  might  sift  you  as  wheat."  As 
in  the  case  of  Job,  he  obtained  permission  of  Almighty  God  to  test  with 
malicious  purpose  the  disciples.  The  covmter-intercession  of  the  great 
Mediator  is  a  new  feature  in  the  New  Testament  description,  but  in 
other  respects  there  is  much  in  common  between  the  two  passages. 

Two  other  Old  Testament  passages  remain  to  be  noticed.  In  one 
of  these  (r  Chron.  xxi.  i,  where  the  word  is  without  the  article)  there 
is  a  remarkable  advance  in  the  doctrine  of  the  subject.  As  in  other 
instances  the  relation  of  Satan  to  Almighty  God  is  one  of  subordination. 
What  Satan  is  here  said  to  do,  is  ascribed  in  the  parallel  passage  in 
Samuel  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  i)  to  God  Himself,  by  whose  permission  it  was 
done.  But  here  only  in  the  Old  Testanient  is  Satan  invested  with 
power  to  suggest  evil  thoughts  to  the  minds  of  men,  and  stir  up  evil 
passions  and  impel  to  sinful  actions.  "  Satan,"  we  are  told,  "stood  up 
against  Israel,  and  provoked  David  to  number  Israel."  The  Books  of 
Chronicles,  it  must  be  remembered,  in  which  this  description  occurs, 
are  generally  allowed  to  be  of  post-exile  date,  and  are  not  improbably 
held  to  have  a  common  authorship  with  the  Book  of  Ezra. 

In  the  other  passage,  above  referred  to,  it  may  be  questioned  whether 
Satan  is  really  intended,  or  whether  the  Psalmist  only  desires  for  his 
enemy,  that  when  he  is  brought  to  trial  he  may  not  only  have  an  "un- 
righteous judge"  to  pass  sentence  upon  him,  but  a  malicious  "adver- 
sary" to  plead  against  him  (Ps.  cix.  6,  where  see  Dean  Perowne's  note). 
But  whether  preference  be  given  with  R.  V.  to  "an  adversary,"  or 
with  A.  V.  to  "vSatan"  as  the  rendering  in  this  place,  the  date  of  the 
Psalm  is  uncertain,  and  the  mere  occurrence  of  the  word  contributes 
little  to  our  investigation. 

On  a  review  then,  of  the  evidence  which  these  passages  afford,  the 
development  of  the  doctrine  of  Satan  does  not  seem  to  be  sufficiently 
marked  and  decisive  in  post-exile  as  compared  with  earlier  times,  to 
warrant  us  in  regarding  it  as  a  safe  criterion  by  which  to  test  the  age  of 
anv  Old  Testament  Book.  Two  indeed  of  the  five  passages  which 
have  been  noticed,  those  in  Zechariah  and  in  Chronicles,  undoubtedly 
belong  to  post-exile  times.  But  they  differ  from  the  probable  descrip- 
tion in  Kings,  rather  in  the  different  aspect  than  in  the  fuller  revelation 
of  Satan  which  they  give.     All   three   grow   out,  so   to   speak,    like 


APPENDIX.  157 


branches  from  a  common  root,  of  the  original  revelation  contained  in 
Genesis.  The  passage  in  Job,  if  it  could  certainly  be  assigned  to  the 
late  age  which  some  writers  have  claimed  for  it,  might  be  held  indeed 
decisively  to  turn  the  scale.  But  the  arguments  in  favour  of  an 
earlier  date  for  Job  are  too  weighty,  to  be  counterbalanced  by  so  pre- 
carious a  consideration  as  this. 


INDEX. 


Adamant,  loi 

angel,  interpreting,  70 

annotated  Paragraph  Bible,  29 

answer,  to,  71 

atonement,  day  of,  84 

Azal,  142 

Babylon,  taking  of,  9,  10,  76 

—       rebellions  in,  77 
Bashan, 123 

bowl  of  reeling,  129;  of  candlestick,  85 
brand,  80 
branch,  82 
burden,  107 

calendar,  Jewish,  i3 
candlestick,  85 
Canaanite,  149 
carpenter,  73 
criticism,  49 
Cyrus,  II 

Darius  Hystaspes,  25 
dates,  65 

desire  of  all  nations,  37 
dew,  30 

earthquake,  142 
Egypt,  148 
ephah,  90 
exiles,  12 — 15 

fasts,  105,  106 
fellow,  Jehovah's,  139 
fir-tree,  123 
fountain,  135 

Gaza,  no 

Geba,  144 

Glaucus,  89 

God  with  us,  31,  32 

gold  in  first  Temple,  34 

governor,  26,  27 

Hadadrimmon,  133 

Hadrach,  108 

Haggai,   connection   with    Psalter,   20; 

with  Book  of  Ezra,    19,   20;  personal 

history,  20 ;  style,  20 — 22 


hair,  cloak  of,  136 

Helem,  97 

Hen,  97 

history,  epochs  of,  g 

holy  flesh,  39 

horn,  73 

horses,  colour  of,  70,  94 

hosts,  Lord  of,  35,  152 

Tddo,  47 

idol  shepherd,  128 

Jebusite,  iii 

Jerusalem,    ruins    of,    66;    Alexander's 

visit  to,  112;  capture  of,  140;  gates  of, 

145;  deliverance  of,  146 
Job,  Book  of,  155 
Jordan,  123 
Joshua,  or  Jeshua,  79 
Josiah,  133 
judgment  of  peace,  105 

Kedron,  69 

Lebanon,  122 
little  while,  a.  36 

measuring  line,  74 
Mcde,  Joseph,  50 
messenger,  31 
mitre,  81 

months,  18,  25,  65 
myrtles,  69 

north  country,  76 

oil,  sons  of,  88 
olive  branches,  87 
olive  trees,  86 
Olives,  Mount  of,  141 
oppressor,  120 

Palestine,  mountainous,  144 

Pechah,  see  Governor 

pipes,  86,  87 

pit,  115 

potter,  126 

press-fat,  42 

prophets,  21 


INDEX. 


159 


Purah,  43 

raiment,  change  of,  81 

remnant,  31 

return  from  Babylon:  number,   12,   13; 

spirit,  13 — 15;  the  journey,  15 
Rimmon,  144 
roll  flying,  88 

Sagan,  see  Governor 

Samaritans,  16 

Satan,  79,  153 

seed  of  peace,  104 

Shealtiel,  or  Salathiel,  25 

Sheshbazzar,  Sanabassar  or  Zcrubbabcl, 

26 
signet,  46 
sit  before,  82 


stone,  lifting  the,  130 
style,  56 

Tabernacles,  Feast  of,  33,  147 
Taylor,  Isaac,  30 
Temple,  Solomon's,  34 
teraphim,  119 
Tyre,  109 

young  man,  75 

Zechariah's  birth  and  parentage,  47 
part  in  Psalter,  48;  orientalism,  ib.\ 
patristic  notices  of,  ib. 

Zerubbabel:  parentage,  25;  character 
and  work,  25,  26 ;  name,  ib. ;  apocry- 
phal story  of,  ib. 


©ambtitige: 


PRINTED    BY   J.    &    C.    F.    CLAY, 
AT   THE    UNIVER^TY   PRESS. 


W^t  Camftntise  %iW  for  ^cl)Ools 
anti  Colleges. 


M  ALACH  I. 


I 


k 


aonton:    C.   J.   CLAY   and   SONS, 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY   PRESS   WAREHOUSE, 

AVE   MARIA   LANE. 

©lasQoiji:    50,   WELLINGTON    STREET. 


ILcijJjig:    F.   A.   BROCKHAUS. 
i^cfaj  gork:    THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY. 
JSombap:    E.   SEYMOUR  HALE. 


[All  Eights  reserved.] 


Zljt  Cainljritijje  MUt  for  ^tljools 
anti  ColUjjes* 

General  Editor:—].  J.  S.  PEROWNE,  D.D., 
Bishop  of  Worcester. 


MALACHI, 

IV/TIl  NOTES  AND  INTRODUCTION 


BY 

THE   VEN.    T.    T.    PEROWNE,    B.D. 

ARCHDEACON    OF   NORWICH; 
LATE    FELLOW   OF   CORPUS   CHRISTI    COLLEGE,    CAMBRIDGE. 


STEREOTYPED    EDITION 


CAMBRIDGE: 

AT  THE   UNIVERSITY    PRESS. 
I9OI 


First  Edition   1890.     Reprinted  1893,    1896,    1901. 


PREFACE 
BY    THE    GENERAL  EDITOR. 


The  General  Editor  of  The  Cambridge  Bible  for 
Schools  thinks  it  right  to  say  that  he  does  not  hold 
himself  responsible  either  for  the  interpretation  of 
particular  passages  which  the  Editors  of  the  several 
Books  have  adopted,  or  for  any  opinion  on  points  of 
doctrine  that  they  may  have  expressed.  In  the  New 
Testament  more  especially  questions  arise  of  the 
deepest  theological  import,  on  which  the  ablest  and 
most  conscientious  interpreters  have  differed  and 
always  will  differ.  His  aim  has  been  in  all  such 
cases  to  leave  each  Contributor  to  the  unfettered 
exercise  of  his  own  judgment,  only  taking  care  that 
mere  controversy  should  as  far  as  possible  be  avoided. 
He  has  contented  himself  chiefly  with  a  careful 
revision  of  the  notes,  with  pointing  out  omissions,  with 


PREFACE. 


suggesting  occasionally  a  reconsideration  of  some 
question,  or  a  fuller  treatment  of  difficult  passages, 
and  the  like. 

Beyond  this  he  has  not  attempted  to  interfere, 
feeling  it  better  that  each  Commentary  should  have 
its  own  individual  character,  and  being  convinced 
that  freshness  and  variety  of  treatment  are  more 
than  a  compensation  for  any  lack  of  uniformity  in 
the  Series. 


%*  The  Text  adopted  in  this  Edition  is  that  of  Dr  Scrivener's 
Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible.  A  few  variations  from  the  ordi- 
nary Text,  chiefly  in  the  spelling  of  certain  words,  and  in  the 
use  of  italics,  will  be  noticed.  For  the  principles  adopted  by 
Dr  Scrivener  as  regards  the  printing  of  the  Text  see  his  Intro- 
duction to  the  Paragraph  Bible,  published  by  the  Cambridge 
University  Press. 


INTRODUCTION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE   PROPHET  AND   HIS   OFFICE. 

Of  the  latest  of  the  Old  Testament  Prophets  we  know 
nothing,  beyond  such  insight  into  his  character  as  the  study  of 
his  Book  affords  us.  Even  his  name  is  of  doubtful  import. 
The  simplest  and  most  natural  view,  which  regards  Malachi  as 
his  personal  appellation,  is  indeed  the  most  probable.  But 
from  the  meaning  of  the  word,  "my  angel",  or  "my  messenger", 
as  Jerome  renders  it,  and  from  the  prominence  given  in  this 
Book  to  the  idea  of  "the  Messenger  of  Jehovah",  some  critics 
have  concluded  that  Malachi  is  the  official  title,  either  of  some 
unknown  man  or  even  of  an  angeP,  by  whom  these  prophecies 
were  delivered,  or  of  Ezra,  according  to  an  ancient  Jewish 
tradition 2,  whose  personal  identity  is  thus,  in  a  manner,  lost 
in  the  office  which  he  bears.  Accepting  Malachi,  however,  as 
properly  the  name  of  the  prophet,  we  may  not  improbably  re- 
gard it  as  an  abbreviated  form  of  Malachiah^,  "the  messenger 
of  Jehovah",  just  as  Abi  is,  we  know,  the  equivalent  of  Abiah"*, 
and  Uri^  has  been  thought  to  be  an  abbreviation  of  Uriah. 

1  "  Malachy,  which  is  called  the  angel  of  the  Lord,"  2  Esdras  i.  40. 
ev  Xetpi  ayyiXov  avroO,  Mai.  i.  i  LXX. 

*  "Malachi  autem  Hebraei  Ezram  sestimant  sacerdotem,"  Jerome. 
The  Targum  also  identifies  him  with  Ezra. 

3  The  LXX.  have  MaXaxias  as  the  title  of  his  Book. 

^  2  Kings  xviii.  2  with  2  Chron.  xxix.  i. 

5  Exod.  xxxi.  2;  Ezra  X.  24. 


INTRODUCTION. 


But  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  prophet's  name,  whether 
personal  or  official,  conspicuous  as  it  is  by  its  very  isolation 
and  by  the  use  made  of  it  in  the  prophecy  which  it  introduces, 
is  intended  to  be  significant.  He  who  bears  it  is  the  last  of 
"the  goodly  fellowship"  of  the  Prophets  of  the  Old  Testament. 
He  will  tell  us,  by  it,  and  by  the  absence  of  all  information 
about  himself  besides  it,  what  his  office  and  theirs  really  is. 

They  had  been  known  before  by  various  significant  titles — 
the  Prophet\.  the  Seer^,  the  Gazer^,  (as  it  has  been  rendered) — 
during  the  long  ages  of  preparation,  in  which  Almighty  God 
had  employed  them  to  instruct  and  correct  His  people,  to  unfold 
His  purposes,  and  to  reveal  His  will. 

Not  however  as  Seer  or  as  Prophet,  but  by  a  name  unknown, 
in  this  application  of  it,  to  former  ages,  as  Messeuj^er  o(  Jehovdh, 
will  this  latest  of  the  prophets  proclaim  his  mission.  It  was 
as  though  in  those  last  times  of  the  earlier  dispensation,  when 
it  was  already  "becoming  old  and  waxing  aged,  and  nigh  unto 
vanishing  away"'*,  some  communication  with  heaven,  more  direct 
and  immediate  than  even  that  which  the  prophet  had  supplied, 
was  recognised,  alike  in  the  need  and  in  the  expectation  of 
the  Church.  Some  one  sent  forth  from  God  to  man,  was  what 
man  looked  and  longed  for  now.  Haggai  had  already  claimed 
for  himself  to  be  "the  Lord's  messenger,  speaking  in  the  Lord's 
message  unto  the  people^".  Malachi  takes  up  the  word,  and 
extends  it  to  another  great  typical  order,  appointed  to  deal  with 
men  on  God's  behalf  by  the  performance  of  significant  rites  and 
by  the  oral  exposition  of  the  Law.  "The  priest's  lips",  he  avers, 
"should  keep  knowledge,  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his 
mouth :  for  he  is  the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  hosts*'."  For  him- 
self, and  by  implication  for  his  own  order,  he  accepts  it  unre- 
servedly.    "Jehovah's   messenger"  is   all   that  he   cares  to  be 

1  fc<"'33  I  Sam.  X.  5,  10 — 12;  2  Kings  ii.  3,  5,  7,  15.  Comp.  Gen. 
XX.  7;  .Ps.  cv.  15. 

2  ^^?"l  I  Sam.  ix.  9;  2  Chron.  xvi.  7,  10;  Isaiah  xxx.  10. 

3  nin  I  Chron.  xxi.  9.  Comp.  Is.  i.  i.  The  three  names  occur 
together  i  Chron.  xxix.  29. 

^  Hebrews  viii.  13  R.V.  ^  Haggai  i.  13;  comp.  Is.  xliv.  26. 

*  Mai.  ii.  7  ;  comp.  Eccles.  v.  5,  and  see  note  there  in  this  Series. 


INTRODUCTION. 


known  as,  or  to  be.  In  that  name  of  happy  omen,  at  once  personal 
and  official,  he  merges  his  individuality  and  sums  up  his  history. 
Looking  forward  to  the  next  prophet  to  himself,  who  after  four 
centuries  should  at  once  complete  the  old  order  and  introduce 
the  new,  he  has  on  him  also  no  other  title  to  bestow.  "  Behold," 
the  prediction  runs,  "I  will  send  my  messenger,  and  he  shall 
prepare  the  way  before  me^."  And  He  to  Whom  "beat  all  the 
prophets  witness",  Who  was  in  the  highest  sense  "Sent"2  by 
God",  whose  whole  revelation  is  the  one  word  Gospel  or  Good- 
message^,  is  foreseen  and  foretold  as  appropriating  to  Himself  in 
the  highest  and  truest  sense  the  same  title  :  "The  Lord  whom  ye 
seek  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple,  even  the  Messenger  of  the 
covenant,  whom  ye  delight  in^."  "The  eventful  consummation 
to  which  he  looks  is  the  arrival,  not  of  the  Warrior-King  or  the 
Invisible  Majesty  of  Heaven,  but  of  the  Messenger  who  should 
enforce  the  treaty  which  had  been  made  of  old  time  between  God 
and  His  people,  which  had  of  late  been  renewed  by  Nehemiah^." 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  PROPHET'S  TIMES. 

We  are  able  to  fix  within  well-defined  limits  the  time  at  which 
Malachi  lived  and  prophesied.  That  his  place  in  the  Canon  is 
chronologically  correct  cannot  reasonably  be  doubted.  He  is 
almost  universally  admitted  to  have  been  the  last  of  the  Old 
Testament  prophets.  That  he  lived  after  the  Captivity  is  certain. 
That  he  was  later  than  Haggai  and  Zechariah  appears  from  the 
manner  in  which  he  refers  to  the  Temple  worship,  as  now  fully 
restored  and  as  an  acknowledged  and  accustomed  thing.  The 
stern  rebukes  of  Haggai  and  the  heavy  chastisements  of  Almighty 
God  had  descended  upon  the  people,  because  through  their 
irreligion  and  supineness  the  Lord's  House  was  not  built^  The 
sharp  reproofs  of  Malachi  are  called  forth  by  the  mercenary 

1  Mai.  iii.  i.  *  John  ix.  7.  x.  36. 

8  evayyiXiov. '  *  Mai.  iii.  i;  comp.  Is.  xlu.  19. 

8  Stanley,  yewish  Church,  iii.  145.         *  Haggai  i.  4,  9,  u.  15— 19' 

MALACHI  2 


lo  INTRODUCTION 


services  and  niggardly  and  unworthy  offerings,  by  which  the  re- 
stored House  and  renewed  worship  of  Jehovah  are  dishonoured^ 
Some  have  supposed  that  Malachi  prophesied  shortly  before 
the  Reformation  of  Ezra  in  449  B.C. ;  as  otherwise  we  might 
have  expected  him  to  refer  directly  or  indirectly  to  that  event. 
But  a  comparison  of  his  prophecy  with  the  Book  of  Nehemiah 
shows  such  a  similarity  in  the  circumstances  by  which  they 
were  surrounded,  as  warrants  the  conclusion  that  he  is  rather 
to  be  associated  with  that  great  Reformer.  It  has  been  truly 
said  that  "the  last  chapter  of  Canonical  Jewish  history  is 
the  key  to  the  last  chapter  of  its  prophecy".  If  Nehemiah 
complains,  "They  have  defiled  the  priesthood,  and  the  cove- 
nant of  the  priesthood  and  of  the  Levites"^;  Malachi  in  almost 
identical  words  exclaims,  "Ye  have  corrupted  the  covenant  of 
Levi,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts''^.  If  the  Governor  sets  himself 
unflinchingly  to  reform  the  abuses  connected  with  the  for- 
bidden marriage  of  foreign  and  heathen  wives,  the  Prophet 
unsparingly  denounces  the  wrong  done  to  the  Jewish  wives  who 
were  put  away  in  order  to  make  room  for  these  unlawful  alliances, 
and  declares  that  Almighty  God  will  not  accept  the  offering 
placed  upon  an  altar,  which  is  bathed  with  the  tears  and  sur- 
rounded by  the  lamentations  of  these  injured  and  insulted 
women*.  If  the  one  exerts  his  authority  to  cause  "the  tithe 
of  the  corn  and  the  new  wine  and  the  oil"  to  be  brought  into 
the  treasuries  of  the  Temple,  the  other  lifts  up  his  voice  to  pro- 
nounce in  God's  name  a  curse  upon  those  by  whom  they  were 
withheld^  It  is  true  that  the  name  of  Malachi  does  not  occur, 
nor  indeed  does  any  reference  to  him,  in  the  histories  of  Ezra 
and  Nehemiah,  though  Haggai  and  Zechariah  are  distinctly 
mentioned  in  the  record  of  the  first  Return.  But  the  omission 
may  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  him  to  have  been  raised  up 
a  little  later,  to  supplement  the  work  of  Nehemiah  and  to  follow 
him,  perhaps  after  a  short  interval,  in  reproving  his  countrymen 


^  Mai.  i.  6 — 10,  12 — 14,  iii.  8 — 12. 
2  Neh.  xiii.  29.  ^  Mai.  ii.  8. 

*  Neh.  xiii.  23 — 27  with  Mai.  ii.  10 — 16. 
'^  Neh.  xiii.  10—12  with  Mai.  iii.  8 — 12. 


INTRODUCTION.  ii 

for  the  same  sins  into  which  they  were  already  relapsing.  "And 
indeed",  as  Ewald  remarks,  "it  is  no  less  important  than  con- 
sistent in  itself  that  even  the  setting  sun  of  the  Old  Testament 
days  should  still  be  reflected  in  a  true  prophet,  and  that  the  fair 
days  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  should  in  him  be  glorified  more 
nobly  still." 

CHAPTER  III. 

STYLE  AND  CONTENTS  OF  THE  BOOK. 

1.  Style.  The  prophecy  before  us  is  eminently  practical  in 
its  character.  It  is  almost  throughout  minatory  in  tone.  The 
dark  page  of  the  prophet's  roll,  though  illumined  at  its  close  by  a 
gleam  of  the  coming  glory,  is  for  the  most  part  inscribed  with 
denunciation  and  threatening  and  rebuke.  And  with  these  its  con- 
tents the  style  of  the  Book  accords.  It  is  not  wanting,  however,  in 
literary  merit.  It  has  elements  both  of  grace  and  power.  If  he 
soars  not  to  the  sublime  heights  of  Isaiah,  nor  unfolds  the  mystic 
visions  of  Ezekiel  and  Zechariah,  the  writer  moves  with  firm 
and  dignified  tread  along  his  humbler  and  more  trodden  path. 
He  is  concise  and  yet  lucid ;  energetic  and  yet  collected.  There 
is  peculiar  force  in  his  manner  of  making  the  object  of  his  rebuke 
turn  upon  him  with  a  sharp,  short  question,  which  he  uses  as  a 
point  of  vantage  to  repeat  and  expand  his  charges ^  Admitting 
the  possibihty  of  such  questions  having  been  actually  addressed 
to  the  prophet  in  his  personal  intercourse  with  the  people,  during 
a  previous  oral  delivery  of  his  prophecies,  we  must  still  recognise 
the  embodiment  of  them  in  the  written  record,  which  forms  a 
clear  and  connected  whole,  as  a  characteristic  of  a  pointed  and 
vigorous  style. 

2.  Conte?tts.  The  argument  flows  on  in  a  continuous  course, 
without  any  very  marked  transitions,  or  interruptions.  The  Book 
consists,  however,  of  two  principal  parts,  having  considerable 
resemblance  to  each  other  in  their  subject-matter,  and  finding 
their  common  meeting  point  in  the  great  central  truth  enunciated 
in  chapter  iii.  6.     To  this,  which  is  itself  only  an  expansion  of 

^  i.  2,  7,  ii.  14,  17,  iii.  7,  8,  13. 

2 — 2 


12  INTRODUCTION. 


the  truth,  with  the  solemn  announcement  of  which  the  prophet's 
message  is  inaugurated  (ch.  i.  2),  the  former  section  of  the  Book 
leads  up,  while  the  latter  section  is  developed  from  it.  The  im- 
mutability of  God,  in  both  aspects  of  His  unchanging  love  to 
Israel  (comp.  Jer.  xxxi.  3),  is  at  the  root  of  all  His  controversy, 
and  is  the  key  to  all  His  dealings  with  His  people.  They  are 
not  ^'consumed",  though  their  sins  deserve  it,  or  His  promise 
would  fail :  they  must  be  purified  and  to  that  end  chastened,  or 
His  holiness  would  cease.  The  argument  of  this  Book  may  be 
gathered  up  in  the  word  of  God  to  Israel  by  an  earlier  prophet: 
"You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth,  there- 
fore I  will  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities"^  That  is  the 
summary  of  His  whole  revelation,  the  epitome  of  their  entire 
history ;  and  therefore  it  is  the  fitting  subject  of  this  last  Book  of 
the  Old  Testament. 


Afialysis  of  Contents. 

Cn.  I.  1.    Title. 

This  Book  is  the  oracle  or  weighty  message  of  Jehovah  to  His 
people  Israel,  conveyed  to  them  by  one  whose  significant  name,  "My 
Messenger  ",  proclaims  his  office. 

Ch.  I.  2—5.     Introductory  Appeal. 

The  ground  of  His  whole  controversy  and  of  all  His  dealings  with 
them,  of  all  the  rebuke  and  threatening,  of  all  the  comfort  and  promise, 
that  Malachi  is  commissioned  to  convey,  is  the  love  which  Jehovah  has 
ever  had  for  His  people.  The  proof  of  His  love,  if  they  demand  it,  is 
to  be  found  in  the  contrast  between  their  own  history  and  the  history  of 
another  nation,  allied  to  them  by  the  closest  ties  of  ancestry  and  blood. 
From  twin  brothers,  alike  sons  of  Isaac  and  of  Abraham,  Israel  and 
Edom  had  sprung.  Yet  of  Israel's  history  the  brief  but  pregnant 
summary  is,  /  loved  Jacobs  whereas  on  Edom's  history,  in  the  deso- 
lation and  ruin  of  his  country  and  the  hopeless  failure  of  his  efforts  to 
return  and  restore  (as  Israel  had  done  after  his  captivity  in  Babylon),  is 
written  the  everlasting  sentence  of  irrevocable  doom,  /  hated  Esau. 
While  the  one  land,  as  men  read  in  its  perpetual  desolation  the  proof 
that  the  wrath  of  heaven  rests  upon  it,  shall  be  called,  the  border  of 
wickedness,  from  the  othei-,  the  border  of  Israel,  safe  beneath  the  shelter 
of  the  Almighty  and  witnessing  as  it  were  from  afar  the  destruction 
of  Edom,  shall  ascend  the  song  of  praise,  fehovah  be  magnified, 

^  Amos  iii.  2. 


INTRODUCTION.  13 

Tart  I.     Ch,  I.  6— III.  6.     Rebuke  and  threatened  punish- 
ment OF  THE  PRIESTS  AND  PEOPLE. 

Ch.  I.  6—14.  Rebuke  of  the  Priests.  Turning  with  startling  abrupt- 
ness to  the  priests,  who  as  the  appointed  guides  and  teachers  of  the 
people  (ii.  7)  were  chiefly  responsible  for  their  misconduct,  the  prophet 
rebukes  them  in  the  name  of  Jehovah.  They  withhold  from  Him  alike 
the  filial  honour  which  is  due  to  Him  as  a  Father,  and  the  reverent 
fear  which  He  can  claim  as  a  Master  {v.  6).  And  if  they  ask  the 
proof  of  so  grave  a  charge,  it  is  patent  in  the  fact  that  they  offer  Him 
such  offerings  as  a  human  governor  would  reject  with  scorn  at  their 
hands  (;vv.  7,  8).  If  they  seek  another  proof  let  them  intercede,  if  they 
dare,  for  the  people  with  Him  whom  they  have  so  insulted,  and  see 
whether  He  will  deign  to  accept  their  prayer  {v.  9).  So  great  is  His 
indignation  against  them,  that  He  would  fain  see  the  doors  of  His 
Temple  closed,  and  the  fire  on  His  altar  quenched  {v.  10),  and  the 
pure  and  world-wide  service  of  the  future  established  instead  (v.  11). 
Unworthy  indeed  in  contrast  with  tjiat  is  the  service  now  rendered  by 
priests,  who  murmur  at  the  smallness  of  their  gains  {v.  12),  and  grudge 
the  labour  they  bestow,  and  bring  and  suffer  to  be  brought  in  sacrifice 
animals  diseased  and  blemished,  or  taken  by  force  from  their  lawful 
owners  {v.  13).  The  curse  shall  inevitably  fall  on  the  offerer  who  thus 
wilfully  insults  and  defrauds  the  High  Majesty  of  heaven  {v.  14). 

Ch.  II.  I — 9.      Threatened  punishment  of  the  Priests. 

To  the  priests,  again  pointedly  addressed,  a  solemn  command  to 
amend  is  given  {v.  i).  They  will  disobey  it  at  their  peril;  for  the 
threatened  curse  of  the  Law,  transforming  into  itself  the  very  blessings  they 
enjoy,  is  hanging  over  them,  and  indeed  has  already  begun  to  fall  upon 
them  (z/.  2).  If  they  persist  in  their  evil  courses,  the  withering  blight 
shall  descend  upon  the  fruits  of  the  earth ;  and  their  worthless  sacrifices 
shall  be  flung  back  in  their  faces,  like  the  filth  and  offal  that  strewed  the 
Temple  courts  on  some  great  Feast-day,  and  they  themselves  shall  be 
swept  forth  together  with  it  as  an  unclean  thing  {v.  3).  Thus,  by 
avenging  their  breach  of  it,  will  Jehovah  make  plain  to  them  His 
resolve  to  maintain  His  ancient  covenant  with  Levi  {v.  4);  that 
covenant,  which  while  it  bestowed  life  and  peace  demanded  holy  fear, 
and  to  which  the  priesthood  in  its  palmy  days  held  fast  in  reverence  of 
spirit  {v.  5),  in  truth  of  doctrine,  in  righteousness  of  judgment,  in 
godliness  of  life,  and  as  a  consequence  of  these  in  its  wholesome  in- 
fluence on  the  people  (v.  6).  Such  should  be  the  character  and  teaching 
of  the  priest,  as  the  messenger  of  Jehovah  (z/.  7);  and  it  is  because  these 
priests  have  so  grievously  come  short  of  it  (z'.  8),  that  contempt  and 
disgrace  have  already  overtaken  them  (z/.  9). 

Ch.  II.  10 — 16.    Rebuke  of  the  People  for  heathen  marriages  and  divorce* 

But  beside  this  desecration  of  Divine  worship,  a  great  social  evil 
calls  for  stern  rebuke.  In  face  of  the  admitted  truth,  that  as  children 
of  one  Father  the  chosen  people  are  all  brethren,  they  wrong  one 
another  and  profane  the  sanctity  to  which  their  race  is  pledged  {v.  10), 


14  INTRODUCTION. 

by  taking  commonly  in  marriage  the  worshippers  of  heathen  gods 
{v.  ii).  Condign  punishment  shall  fall  on  all  who  thus  transgress 
{v.  17).  For  on  this  evil  another  follows.  The  very  altar  of  God  is 
covered  with  the  tears  of  the  weeping  women  who  flock  around  it,  and 
the  offering  is  thereby  rendered  unacceptable  {v.  13)  Why  is  it  not 
accepted,  do  they  ask?  Because  Jehovah,  the  Lord  of  the  altar,  has 
been  witness  of  the  unfaithfulness,  consummated  by  divorce,  of  which 
they  have  been  guilty  towards  the  wives,  to  whom  they  were  bound  by 
the  tender  recollections  of  youthful  love,  by  the  intimate  companion- 
ship of  married  life,  and  by  the  solemn  covenant  which  united  them  to 
each  other  {v.  14).  Their  conduct  is  an  infringement  of  the  primseval 
law,  declared  by  the  creation  of  a  single  pair  and  their  union  into  one 
flesh,  that  by  pure  monogamy  is  the  sanctity  of  the  race  assured  {v.  15). 
Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  covenant  people,  regards  with  hatred  the 
practice  of  divorce  and  the  man  who  defiles,  as  it  were,  with  cruelty 
and  wrong  the  robe  of  cherishing  protection  which  he  ought  to  spread 
over  the  wife  of  his  youth  (z/.  16). 

Ch.  II.  17 — III.  6.     Rchike  of  the  People  for  profane  impiety. 

Evils  such  as  these,  ecclesiastical  and  social,  having  their  root  in  hearts 
destitute  of  the  fear  of  God  (iii.  5),  bear  their  legitimate  fruit  in  open  im- 
piety, and  in  the  profane  challenge  addressed  to  Him  to  make  good  His 
title  to  be  "the  God  of  judgement"  (ii.  17).  The  challenge  is  promptly 
taken  up.  Preceded  by  a  messenger  to  prepare  His  way,  He  whom 
they  profess  to  seek  and  desire  shall  suddenly  appear  (iii.  i).  But 
terrible  shall  be  His  coming  {v.  2).  Beginning  with  the  fountain-head, 
He  shall  restore  purity  of  worship  by  leforming  the  priesthood  with 
searching  severity  {w.  3,  4).  Proceeding  to  the  nation  at  large.  He 
shall  cleanse  away  from  it  all  that  offends  in  act  and  principle  {v.  5). 
And  this  will  He  do,  because  unchangeable  in  name  and  in  nature,  His 
covenant  will  He  not  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  hath  gone  out  of  His 
lips.  The  sons  of  Jacob  are  chosen  to  be  His  people :  therefore  they 
are  not  consumed.  They  are  chosen  to  be  a  holy  people,  for  on  no 
other  condition  could  they  possibly  be  His  people :  therefore  they  must 
be  purified  and  refined  (z/.  6). 

Part  II.    Cii.  III.  7 — IV.  3.     Renewed  Rebukes,  Threaten- 
INGS  AND  Promises. 

This  brief  but  pregnant  statement  (iii.  6),  in  which  he  has  gathered 
up  all  that  went  before  in  his  Book,  the  prophet  now  uses  as  a  fresh 
starting-point,  from  which  to  travel  over,  though  with  no  mere  sameness 
of  iteration,  what  is  in  effect  the  same  course  as  before.  This  Second 
Part  of  the  prophecy  consists  (as  is  indicated  by  the  paragraphs  in  R.  V.) 
of  two  sections  (iii.  7 — 12  ;  iii.  13 — iv.  3),  followed  by  a  brief  con- 
clusion of  the  whole  Book  (iv.  4 — 6).  In  the  first  of  these  sections  the 
people  are  again  charged  with  withholding  from  Almighty  God  His 
due  in  tithes  and  offerings  (iii.  7 — 12;  comp.  i.  6 — 14).  In  the  second, 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God  is  declared  to  be  already  silently  dis- 


INTRODUCTION.  15 

criminating  between  the  open  profanity  of  the  wicked  (iii.  13 — if; 
comp.  ii.  17)  and  the  secret  piety  of  the  godly  (iii.  16),  and  to  be 
awaiting  the  destined  day  of  its  full  manifestation  (iii.  17 — iv.  3;  comp. 
iii.  I — 6).  The  Book  closes  with  a  call  to  preparation  for  that  pre- 
dicted day  by  obedient  remembrance  of  the  Law  (iv.  4),  and  expectation 
of  the  coming  messenger  (iv.  5,  6;  comp.  iii.  i,  ist  clause). 

Ch.  III.  7 — 12.     Rebuke  in  the  matter  of  tithes  and  offerings. 

From  the  long-continued  course  of  rebellion,  in  which,  but  that 
"Jehovah  changes  not"  they  would  long  since  have  been  "consumed", 
they  are  called  upon  to  return  to  the  path  of  obedience  {v.  7).  The 
charge  against  them,  to  which  they  insolently  and  repeatedly  demur, 
is  brought  home  to  them  in  the  definite  shape  of  "robbing  God",  and 
that  in  "tithes  and  offerings"  [v.  8).  The  "curse"  is  their  due  as 
a  nation  (z;.  9);  but  the  way  of  blessing  is  open  to  them  still  (z/.  10). 
The  curse  may  yet  be  rolled  away  {v.  11),  and  blessing  eminent  and 
conspicuous  succeed  in  its  place  (z'.  12). 

Ch.  III.  13 — IV.  3.     The  righteous  jitdgntent  of  GoJ. 

Repealing  the  charge  of  open  impiety  which  he  had  already  made 
(ii.  17),  and  meeting  their  virtual  denial  of  it  {v.  13)  by  a  recital  of  the 
impious  language  which  they  used  {v.  14)  and  the  profane  conclusion  at 
which  they  arrived  {v.  15),  the  prophet  sets  over  against  these  the  secret 
converse  among  themselves  of  the  godly  remnant,  and  declares  that 
even  now  the  righteous  Judge  discerns  between  the  two,  and  that  already 
"  names  are  written  in  heaven,"  of  those  whom  He  will  claim  for  His  own 
in  the  day  of  His  discriminating  action  [^v.  16,  17).  In  that  day  all 
men  shall  "return"  from  their  wanderings  in  doubt  and  defiance,  and 
acknowledge  the  justice  of  the  discerning  sentence  (z'.  18).  For  while 
the  wicked  shall  be  consumed  as  with  the  breath  of  a  furnace  (iv.  1),  on 
the  righteous  the  sun  of  righteousness  shall  arise  with  beneficent  and 
healing  power,  restoring  them  to  joyful  liberty  (z/.  2)  and  making  them 
triumphant  over  their  foes  [v.  3). 

Cii.  IV.  4 — 6.    Conclusion  of  the  Book. 

In  view  of  a  future  at  once  so  awful  and  so  desirable,  they  are 
called  upon,  by  dutiful  obedience  to  the  Law  which  God  has  !.;iven 
them  (z/.  4),  and  in  expectation  of  the  final  precursor  of  "the  great  and 
terrible  day,"  whoui  ile  promises  them,  to  avert  the  threatened  curse 
(z/z/.  5,  6). 


MALACHI. 


1  'T^HE  burden   of  the  word   of   the   Lord   to   Israel  by 

i     Malachi. 
2 1  have  loved  you,  saith  the  Lord. 
Yet  ye  say,  Wherein  hast  thou  loved  us  ? 
Was  not  Esau  Jacob's  brother  ?  saith  the  Lord  : 
Yet  I  loved  Jacob, 
3  And  I  hated  Esau, 
And   laid   his  mountains  and   his  heritage  waste   for   the 
dragons  of  the  wilderness. 

Ch.  I.  I.    Title. 

1.  burden]  either  burderiy  from  its  weighty  character  as  a  Divine 
announcement,  or  oracle  as  that  which  is  'taken  up'  (Ex.  xx.  17: 
Numb,  xxiii.  18)  by  the  speaker.  See  note  on  Zech.  ix.  i  in  this 
Series. 

Malacht]     See  Introd.  pp.  7 — 9. 

Ch.  I.    2 — 6.    Introductory  Appeal. 

These  verses  form  an  exordium  to  the  whole  Book.  The  ungrateful 
disposition  of  the  people  and  the  unchanging  love  of  God  are  in  view 
in  all  that  follows. 

2.  J  have  loved you\  I  have  loved  you  with  an  everlasting  (Jerem. 
xxxi.  3)  and  unchangeable  (Rom.  xi.  i(^)  love.  This  is  the  keynote 
of  all  that  follows.  On  this  rests  Jehovah's  claim  to  the  filial  honour 
and  reverential  fear  which  had  been  withheld  from  Him  (i.  6) ;  on  this 
the  patient  forbearance  of  the  present  (iii.  6),  and  the  bright  promise 
of  the  future  (iv.  ■2).  This  is  the  light  that  casts  the  dark  shadow 
of  the  people's  ingratitude  across  the  prophet's  page,  and  that  shines 
through  and  beyond  the  darkness,  unquenched  and  unquenchable. 

Wherein]  These  short  pointed  questions  are  a  characteristic  of 
Malachi's  style,  and  lend  great  force  to  it.     See  Introd.  p.  11. 

/  loved  yacob]  The  proof  of  this  is  contained  in  the  implied  con- 
trast which  follows,     Comp.  Gen.  xxv.  23;  Rom.  ix.  10 — 13. 

3.  for  the  dragons]    Rather,  jackals.     The  unusual   form  of  the 


4-6.]  MALACHl,    I. 


Whereas  Edom  saith,  We  are  impoverished, 

But  we  will  return  and  build  the  desolate  places ; 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 

They  shall  build,  but  I  will  throw  down ; 

And  they  shall  call  them,  The  border  of  wickedness. 

And,  The  people  against  whom  the  Lord  hath  indignation 

for  ever. 
And  your  eyes  shall  see,  and  ye  shall  say. 
The  Lord  will  be  magnified  from  the  border  of  Israel. 

A  son  honoureth  his  father,  and  a  servant  his  master : 
If  then  I  be  2i  father,  where  is  mine  honour? 
And  xil  be  di  master,  where  is  my  fear  ? 

word  here  (fern,  instead  of  masc.  as  elsewhere)  has  led  many  to  render, 
dwellings  (LXX.  dibfiara  iprifxov;  and  Syr.).  But  the  derivation  and 
meaning  are  not  satisfactory.  Rather,  with  R.V.,  I  made  his  mountains 
a  desolation,  and  gave  his  heritage  to  the  jackals  of  the  wilderness. 
Unless  indeed  we  neglect  the  accents  and  adopt  a  third  rendering,  which 
seems  still  better  to  preserve  the  parallelism,  /  made  his  mountains  a 
desolation,  and  his  heritage  a  wilderness  for  jackals. 

The  desolation  of  Edom  here  referred  to  was  in  all  probability  caused 
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  in  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  (xlix. 
17 — 22.  Comp.  xxvii.  3 — 6).  See  Obadiah,  Introd.  pp.  20,  22,  in  this 
Series. 

4.  impoverished^  Rather  (with  R.V.  text,  and  so  in  Jer.  v.  17), 
beaten  down.  "So  Ephraim  said  of  old  'in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of 
heart,  The  bricks  are  fallen  down,  but  we  will  build  with  hewn  stones: 
the  sycomores  are  cut  down,  but  we  will  change  them  into  cedars.' 
Is.  ix.  9,  TO."     Pusey. 

return  and  build~\  This  rendering  is  retained  in  R.V.,  but  as  there 
is  no  evidence  that  Edom  was  carried  away  captive  'return  and  build' 
is,  probably,  according  to  a  well-known  Heb.  idiom  = '  rebuild. '  (Comp. 
Ezek.  xxvi.  8,  12 — 14.)  This  Israel  'loved'  of  God  had  done,  but 
Esau  'hated'  of  Him  should  not  do. 

border"]  i.e.  land,  or  territory,  as  in  ver.  5  below.  It  is  frequently 
rendered  coasts,  in  A.V.,  e.g.  i  Sam.  xi.  3,  7. 

for  ever]  For  the  subsequent  history  of  Edom,  as  fulfilling  this 
prediction,  see  reference  to  Obadiah  in  note  on  v.  3  above. 

5.  your  eyes  shall  see]  Unharmed  and  in  safety  yourselves  you 
shall  witness  the  overthrow  of  Edom  (comp.  Ps.  xci.  7,  8). 

will  be  magnified  from]  Rather,  be  magnified  over.  It  is  an  ascrip- 
tion of  praise  (comp.  Ps.  xlviii.  i)  to  God  who  extends,  as  it  were, 
His  tutelary  care  over  Israel,  while  utter  destruction  overtakes  Edom. 
The  contrast  with  Edom  is  emphasized  by  the  insertion  of  the  personal 
pronoun,  "_j/^  (Jews)  shall  say." 


i8  MALACHI,   I.  [yV'7yS. 

Saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  unto  you,  O  priests,  that  despise 

my  name. 
And  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  despised  thy  name  ? 

7  Ve  offer  polluted  bread  upon  mine  altar ; 
And  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  polluted  thee  ? 

In  that  ye  say,  The  table  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible. 

8  And  if  ye  offer  the  blind  for  sacrifice,  is  it  not  evil  ? 
And  if  ye  offer  the  lame  and  sick,  is  it  not  evil  ? 
Offer  it  now  unto  thy  governor; 

Will  he  be  pleased  with  thee,  or  accept  thy  person?  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts. 

Ch.  I.  e— III.  6.    Rebuke  and  threatened  punishment  of 
THE  Priests  and  People. 

Ch.  I.  6 — 14.     Rebuke  of  the  Priests. 

O  priests'^  On  them  first  the  rebuke  justly  falls,  because  they  were 
chiefly  responsible  for  the  ungrateful  return  made  by  the  people  to 
the  love  of  Jehovah.  But  in  them,  as  its  representatives,  the  whole 
nation  is  addressed  and  reproved. 

7.  Ye  offer  polluted  dread]  i.e.  sacrifices.  The  word  is  often  used 
in  this  sense  and  rendered  7^<7^;  e.g.  Lev.  iii.  ii,  i6.  Elsewhere  th^ 
sacrifices  are  called,  the  bread  or  food  of  God.  Lev.  xxi.  6,  8;  Ezek. 
xliv.  7. 

Their  duty,  as  expounders  of  the  Law  (ch.  ii.  7),  was  to  refuse  to 
ofter  such  sacrifices  when  they  were  brought  to  them,  and  to  teach 
the  people  that  they  were  expressly  forbidden.  Lev.  xxii.  17 — 25; 
Deut.  XV.  21.  "Sacerdotes  debuerant  ilia  omnia  rejicere,  et  potius 
claudere  Templum  Dei,  quam  ita  promiscue  admittere  quae  Deus  sibi 
offerri  prohibuerat."     Calvin. 

polluted  thei\  Comp.  "ye  have  pi-ofaned  me,"  Ezek.  xiii.  19,  R.V. 
*'It  is  a  bold  expression.  God  speaks  of  our  aces  with  an  unveiled 
plainness,  which  we  should  not  dare  to  use."     Pusey. 

ye  say]  by  your  conduct,  if  not  in  words. 

8.  if]  Rather,  When.  Their  poverty  since  the  return  from 
Babylon  might  possibly  be  urged  by  them  as  an  excuse  for  this. 

is  it  not  evil?]     Rather,  it  is  no  evil!,  ironically,  as  in  R.V. 

offer  it]  The  R.  V.  renders,  present  it,  with  a  view  no  doubt  to 
indicate  that  it  is  not  the  same  Hebrew  word  as  is  rendered  offer  in 
V.  7  and  in  the  former  part  of  this  verse. 

thy  governor]  It  is  a  foreign  title,  Fechah,  that  is  here  used,  and  so 
a  badge  of  the  continued  servitude  of  the  nation ;  though  it  may  have 
been  borne  at  this  time  by  Jews,  as  it  was  by  Zerubbabel  at  the  Return 
from  the  Captivity.     See  note  on  Haggai  i.  i. 

accept  thy  person]  i.e.  regard  thee  with  favour,  as  in  v.  9,  and 
elsewhere.  The  phrase,  however,  often  occurs  in  a  bad  sense  of  exer- 
cising partiality,  e.g.  Lev.  xix.  15;  Psalm  Ixxxii.  :. 


vv.  9— II.]  MALACHI,  I. 


And  now,  I  pray  you,  beseech  God  that  he  will  be  gracious  9 

unto  us: 
This  hath  been  by  your  means : 
Will  he  regard  your  persons  ?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Who  is  there  even  among  you  that  would  shut  the  doors  for  lo 

fiought  ? 
Neither  do  ye  kindle  ^f/-^  on  mine  altar  for  nought. 
I  have  no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
Neither  will  I  accept  an  offering  at  your  hand. 
For  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto  the  going  down  of  n 

the  same 
My  name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles ; 

9.  beseech  God]  lit.  stroke  or  smooth  the  face  of  God,  i.e.  propitiate 
or  seek  the  favour  of  God.  See  Dan.  ix.  13;  Psalm  xlv.  12,  and  note 
on  Zech.  vii.  i. 

It  is  not  a  call  to  repentance,  but  a  challenge  to  put  it  to  the  proof 
whether,  their  conduct  being  such  as  it  is  ("this  hath  been  by  your 
means"),  God  will  regard  them  in  the  discharge  of  their  office  as 
intercessors  for  the  people. 

this  hath  been]  such  irreverence  as  has  been  described  above.  Or  if 
we  follow  the  more  exact  marginal  rendering  both  of  A.V.  and  R.V., 
"This  hath  been,"  i.e.  such  offerings  have  been  received,  "from  your 
hand." 

.   regard  y Ota-  persons]     Rather,  accept  any  of  your  persons,    R.V. 
Is  there  one  of  you  whose  person  He  will  accept? 

10.  Who  is  there  even  ^c.  Rather,  with  the  majority  of  modern 
commentators  and  with  R.V.  Oh,  that  there  were  one  among  you 
that  would  shut  the  doors,  that  ye  might  not  kindle  [fire  on]  my 
altar  in  vain ! 

Better  no  sacrifices  at  all  than  such  sacrifices  as  these.  Better  a 
Temple  closed  than  a  Temple  profaned.     Comp.  Is.  i.  12,  13. 

the  doors]  not  of  the  Sanctuary  or  Temple  proper  (j'ao's),  but  either 
of  the  inner  court  in  which  the  altar  stood,  or  perhaps  of  the  whole 
sacred  inclosure  (le/ao/').  Comp.  2  Chron.  xxviii.  24,  xxix.  3;  Acts 
xxi.  30. 

an  offering]  The  Hebrew  word  [minchah]  is  that  commonly  used 
for  vegetable,  as  distinguished  from  animal  sacrifices  (Psalm  xl.  7; 
Jer.  xvii.  26;  Dan.  ix.  27).  Here  however,  as  elsewhere  (Gen.  iv.  4,  5; 
iSam.  ii.  17;  Zeph.  iii.  to),  it  has  the  more  general  sense  of  offerings 
of  any  kind.  The  proper  meaning  of  the  word,  with  which  this  general 
sense  most  nearly  accords,  is  a  gift.  See  Gen.  xxxii.  14,  19,  21, 
xliii.  II. 

11.  For]  "I  will  no  longer  accept  the  local  and  polluted  offering, 
for  I  will  substitute  for  it  a  pure  and  universal  offering."  "He  taketh 
away  the  first,  that  he  may  establish  the  second." 

my  name  shall  be  great]  The  A.V.  supplies  shall  be  here  and  twice 
again  in  this  verse  {incense  shall  be  offered;  my  name  shall  be  great),  and 


20  MALACHI,    I.  [v.  II 

And  in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  unto  my  name, 

and  a  pure  offering  : 
For  my  name  shall  be  great  among  the  heathen,  saith  the 

Lord  of  hosts. 

the  R.V.  is^  though  with  shall  be  in  the  margin.  The  reference  may 
well  be  to  the  present  as  foreshadowing  the  future ;  to  the  spiritual  offering 
of  prayer  and  praise  already  offered  in  their  synagogues  and  irpoffevxaL 
by  the  Jews  of  the  Dispersion,  whereby  proselytes  were  won,  and  the 
way  prepared  for  the  New  Dispensation  and  the  abolition  of  the  Temple 
ritual.  The  view  that  Almighty  God  is  here  recognising  the  worship  of 
the  heathen  world  as  in  reality  offered  to  Him  is  quite  inadmissible.  The 
whole  tenor  of  the  Old  Testament  emphatically  contradicts  it,  and  the 
teaching  of  the  New  Testament  is  accordant  and  explicit:  "The  things 
which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice,  they  sacrifice  to  devils  and  not  to  God"  (i 
Cor.  X.  20,  cited  from  Deut.  xxxii.  17),  The  terms  of  the  prophecy  itself 
forbid  such  an  interpretation:  for  Jehovah  Himself  expressly  declares 
that  incense  and  offering  are  offered  to  //is  name,  and  that  //is  name 
is  great. 

The  prophecy  of  this  verse  is  at  once  repeated  and  expounded  by  our 
Lord  Himself.    John  iv.  21 — 24. 

incense  shall  be  offered  unto  my  name,  and  a  pure  offering'\  There 
has  been  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  grammatical  construction  of 
this  clause,  but  the  arrangement  and  rendering  of  A.V.  is  retained  in 
R.V.  and  has  the  support  of  many  critical  authorities. 

By  "incense"  and  "offering"  we  are  to  understand  those  "spiritual 
sacrifices"  of  prayer  and  praise  (Heb.  xiii.  15)  and  almsgiving  (ib. 
ver.  16;  Philip,  iv.  18)  and  self-dedication  (Rom.  xii.  i),  which  all 
Christians  as  a  "holy  priesthood"  (i  Pet.  ii.  5)  are  privileged  to  offer, 
and  which  are  "acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ".  The  more 
enlightened  among  the  Jews  recognised  such  spiritual  sacrifices  under 
the  typical  offerings  of  the  ceremonial  law,  and  they  were  therefore  in 
no  danger  of  giving  a  material  interpretation  to  a  prophecy  like  this. 
Before  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled  it  had  come  to  be  a  matter  of  popular 
Jewish  belief  and  practice  that  incense  was  the  symbol  of  prayer.  (Luke 
i.  9,  10).  The  Psalmist  saw  the  same  spiritual  significance  in  "incense" 
and  "offering"  {minchah,  as  here,  Ps.  cxli.  2).  It  has  been  supposed 
that  by  the  ^ering^  or  minchah,  of  this  verse,  the  bread  and  wine  inthe 
Lord's  Supper  are  intended.  But  if  that  be  the  case  we  have  here  a 
prophecy  of  the  universal  offering  of  literal  incense  also;  for  by  no 
sound  canon  of  interpretation  can  we  give  a  material  sense  to  one  {offer- 
ing) and  a  figurative  sense  to  the  other  {incense)  of  two  words  which  are 
thus  placed  by  a  writer  in  the  same  category.  And  then  it  follows  that 
incense  is  as  necessary  a  part  of  Christian  worship,  as  "the  bread  and 
wine,  which  the  Lord  hath  commanded  to  be  received." 

It  has  been  too  hastily  assumed  that  the  early  Christian  writers  put 
this  interpretation  on  the  minchah  here  foretold.  Justin  Martyr,  for 
example,  affirms  that  Almighty  God  in  this  passage  declares  by  anti- 
cipation His  acceptance  of  those  who  offer  the  sacrifices  prescribed  by 
Christ,  that  is  to  say  "those  sacrifices  which  in  the  eucharist  of  the 


vv.  12—14.]  MALACHI,  I.  21 

But  ye  have  profaned  it,  in  that  ye  say,  12 

The  table  of  the  Lord  is  polluted ; 

And  the  fruit  thereof,  even  his  meat,  is  contemptible. 

Ye  said  also,  Behold,  what  a  weariness  is  it !  13 

And  ye  have  snuffed  at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ; 

And  ye  brought  that  which  was  torn,  and  the  lame,  and  the 

sick ; 
Thus  ye  brought  an  offering : 

Should  I  accept  this  of  your  hand  ?  saith  the  Lord. 
But  cursed  be  the  deceiver,  which  hath  in  his  flock  a  male,     m 
And  voweth,  and  sacrificeth  unto  the  Lord  a  corrupt  thing: 

bread  and  cup  are  ofifered  by  Christians  in  every  part  of  the  earth." 
But  he  presently  makes  it  clear  that  it  is  not  the  bread  and  cup  them- 
selves that  he  means.  "I  too  assert,"  he  says,  "that  prayers  and  giving 
of  thanks,  ofifered  by  worthy  worshippers,  are  the  only  sacrifices  which 
are  perfect  and  acceptable  to  God.  And  these  alone  moreover  have 
Christians  learned  to  offer  even  in  the  memorial  of  their  dry  and  liquid 
sustenance,  in  which  too  the  remembrance  is  made  of  the  passion  which 
for  their  sakes  the  Son  of  God  endured."     {Dial,  cum  Tryph.  §  177.) 

12.  have  profaned]  Rather,  profane,  R.V.  lit.  axe  (habitually)  pro- 
faning. 

tAe  table  of  the  Lord  &c.]  The  reference  is  to  the  maintenance 
of  the  priests  by  their  share  in  the  sacrifices.  After  allowing  un- 
worthy sacrifices  to  be  offered  [v.  8),  they  complained  that  their  service 
at  the  altar  was  inadequately  remunerated,  and  murmured  at  their 
allotted  portion  as  "contemptible".  The  expression,  "the  fruit  thereof," 
is  very  doubtful.  The  word  occurs  again  (K'ri)  Is.  Ivii.  19,  but  there 
the  K'thibh  is  311  Probably  it  should  be  omitted  here  altogether. 
The  mistake  may  have  arisen  from  a  scribe  beginning  to  write  3*J1  instead 
of  nT331.  Then  he  put  dots  over  the  first  word  d*Ji  to  denote  that  it 
was  to  be  cancelled,  but  this  was  overlooked.  Jerome  explains  it  of  the 
fire  on  the  altar,  taking  also  v^^?  as  a  verb,  'cum  igne  qui  illud 
devorat,'  which  of  course  is  wrong.     The  LXX  render  it  rb.  iiriTidi/xeva^ 

13.  w/iat  a  weariness  is  it !]  i.e.  the  service  of  the  Sanctuary. 
torn]  Rather,  taken  by  violence.    R.V. 

ye  brought  an  offering]  Rather,  ye  bring  the  offering,  R.V.  The 
reference  is  perhaps  to  "  the  (stated,  public)  offerings,"  which  the  priests 
provided  out  of  the  Temple  funds  entrusted  to  them  (Neh.  x.  32,  33). 
Comp.  "the  offering  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,"  iii.  4.  By  purchasing 
cheap  and  unworthy  animals  they  would  increase  their  own  portion  of 
the  fund.  But  vv.  12,  14  make  it  clear  that  similar  abuses  were  tolerated 
in  the  private  sacrifices  of  individuals. 

14.  a  corrupt  thing]  or,  a  blemished  thing,  R.V.  The  word  is  femi- 
nine, and  the  meaning  may  perhaps  be,  that  for  a  perfect  male,  which 


22  MALACHI,  II.  [vv.  1—3. 

For  I  am  a  great  King,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
And  my  name  is  dreadful  among  the  heathen. 
2  And  now,  O  ye  priests,  this  commandment  is  for  you. 

2  If  ye  will  not  hear,  and  if  ye  will  not  lay  //  to  heart, 
To  give  glory  unto  my  name,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 

I  will  even  send  a  curse  upon  you,  and  will  curse  your 

blessings : 
Yea,  I  have  cursed  them  already,  because  ye  do  not  lay  it 

to  heart. 

3  Behold,  I  ivill  corrupt  your  seed, 

And  spread  dung  upon  your  faces,  eve7i  the  dung  of  your 
solemn  feasts; 

he  has  in  his  flock  and  therefore  could  offer,  as  the  law  required  (Lev. 
xxii.  18,  19),  he  substituted  a  blemished  female. 

■    Ch.  II.    1 — 9.    Threatened  Punishment  of  the  Priests. 

1.  0  ye  priests\  The  discourse  turns  again  in  direct  appeal  to  the 
priests.  The  exact  order  of  the  words  is  emphatic  :  And  7tow,  for  you 
is  this  command77ieni,  O  priests. 

this  commandinent'\  Some  commentators  would  make  "command- 
ment" here  mean  purpose,  or  decree,  and  refer  it  to  the  punishment  threat- 
ened in  vv.  2^-4.  There  seems  no  reason,  however,  to  depart  here  and 
in  V.  4  from  the  usual  meaning  of  the  word.  The  passage  [yv.  2 — 4) 
is  a  commandment  to  reform,  with  threatened  consequences  if  they 
disobey  it. 

2.  a  curse]  Rather,  the  curse,  as  R.V.  See  Deut.  xxvii.  26; 
xxviii.  15. 

your  blessings]  i.e.  the  good  gifts  which  I  have  bestowed  upon  you. 
Comp.  Ps.  Ixix.  22  [Heb.  23]. 

3.  corrupt]  Rather,  reprove,  margin  A.V. ;  or  reb-uke,  R.V. 
Comp.  ch.  iii.  11:  "I  will  rebuke  (the  same  word)  the  devourer." 
God  will  wither  with  His  rebuke  the  seed  so  that  it  shall  not  germinate, 
or  shall  not  come  to  maturity.  Thus  the  priests  would  suffer  both  in 
tithes  and  in  offerings  (Joel  i.  2 — 13). 

•  The  LXX.  (reading  VY\\  for  T^H  render,  dcpopi^co  v/xiv  rbv  w/xoVf 
"I  set  apart  for  you  the  shoulder,"  that  being  the  part  of  the  victim 
reserved  for  the  priest.  Lev.  vii.  34.  Ewald,  "I  will  rebuke  your  (the 
priests')  arm." 

of  your  solejnn  feasts]  If  this  rendering  be  retained,  it  will  of  course 
mean  the  dung  of  the  sacrifices  offered  at  such  feasts.     The  R.V.  has 

feasts  in  the  margin,  but  sacrifices  in  the  text. 

The  figure  is  very  forcible.  It  is  as  though  Jehovah  sees  nothing  in 
the  droves  of  diseased  and  blemished  animals  that  are  brought  to  His 
altar  on  some  great  Festival,  but  the  mass  of  filth  and  offal  that  neces- 
sarily accompanies  the  sacrifice.  It  is  all  one  vast  abomination ! 
Flinging  back  in  holy  indignation  the  polluted  offerings  into  the  faces 


4-6j  MALACHI,    II.  23 


And  one  shall  take  you  away  with  it. 

And  ye  shall  know  that  I  have  sent  this  commandment  4 

unto  you, 
That  my  covenant  might  be  with  Levi,  saith  the  Lord  of 

hosts. 
My  covenant  was  with  him  of  life  and  peace ;  5 

And  I  gave  them  to  him  j^r  the  fear  wherewith  he  feared  me, 
And  was  afraid  before  my  name. 

The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth,  6 

And  iniquity  was  not  found  in  his  lips  : 
He  walked  with  me  in  peace  and  equity, 
And  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity. 

of  the  unworthy  priests,  He  overwhelms  them  beneath  the  foetid  heap, 
and  thus  they  are  swept  forth  with  it  from  the  sacred  precincts.  Comp. 
Exod.  xxix.  14,  I  Kings  xiv.  10. 

one  shall  take  you]  It  is  more  in  accordance  with  our  English  idiom 
to  render,  with  R.V.,  ye  shall  be  taken.  Comp.  Is.  ix.  5:  "His  name 
shall  be  called";  lit.  "he  (one)  shall  call  His  name". 

4.  might  be]  i.e.  might  continue  {porro  staret.  Maurer).  Whe- 
ther they  heard,  or  whether  they  forbore,  they  should  learn  in  the 
issue,  that  God  had  sent  them  "this  commandment"  to  repent  on 
penalty  of  so  dire  a  punishment,  in  order  that  the  ancient  covenant  of 
Levi,  of  which  the  holiness  of  the  priests  was  an  integral  part,  might 
stand  fast.     What  that  covenant  was  is  immediately  stated  in  w.  5 — 7. 

5.  My  covenant  &.C.]    Comp.  Num.  xxv.  12,  13;  Nehem.  xiii.  29. 
for  the  fear  wherewith  he  feared  me]     Lit.  I  gave  thevi  (viz.  life  and 

peace  :  I  fulfilled  my  part  of  the  covenant)  to  him  (as)  fear,  (i.e.  on 
condition  that  he  should  fulfil  his  part  of  it),  that  he  might  fear  (R.V.) ; 
and  (he  did  fulfil  it,  for)  he  feared  Me,  and  was  afraid  before  (stood  in 
awe  of,  R.V.)  My  name, 

6.  The  law  of  truth]  Teaching,  as  a  function  of  the  priesthood, 
entered  into  the  original  idea  and  constitution  of  the  office  (Deut.  xxxiii. 
10;  Lev.  x.  11),  and  was  revived  in  connection  with  it  after  the  return 
from  Babylon  (Ezra  vii.  10,  25;  Nehem.  viii.  i — 8).  To  be  without 
"a  teaching  priest"  was  a  national  calamity  (-2  Chron.  xv.  3). 

And  iniquity]  Rather  And  unrighteousness,  R.V.  This  clause 
refers  perhaps  to  the  judicial  decisions  of  the  priest  (Deut.  xvii.  8 — 13), 
as  being  without  respect  of  persons  and  uninfluenced  by  bribes.  (Deut. 
xvi.  18,  19.) 

he  walked  with  me  kc]  Comp.  Gen.  V.  22,  24;  vi.  9.  The  walk  of 
the  priest,  in  the  peace  of  a  right  relation  to  God,  and  the  tiprightness 
(R.V.)  of  a  holy  life,  accorded  with  his  teaching  and  his  judicial  sen- 
tences, and  as  the  result  of  both  he  turtud  many  away  front  iniquity, 

•'What  a  history  of  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  conversion  of 
sinners  in  those,  of  whom  the  world  knows  nothing;  of  whose  work- 
ing, but  for  the  three  words  {many  he-turned-away  from-iniqiiit)i)  in 


24  MALACHI,   II.  [vv.  7—10. 

7  For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge, 
And  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth  : 
For  he  is  the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

8  But  ye  are  departed  out  of  the  way ; 

Ye  have  caused  many  to  stumble  at  the  law ; 
Ye  have  corrupted  the  covenant  of  Levi,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts. 

9  Therefore  have  I  also  made  you  contemptible  and  base 

before  all  the  people, 
According  as  ye  have  not  kept  my  ways, 
But  have  been  partial  in  the  law. 
10  Have  we  not  all  one  father  ? 

the  closing  book  of  the  Old  Testament,  we  should  have  known  .no- 
thing !"     Pusey. 

7.  For']  And  in  all  this  he  only  fulfilled  his  duty,  for  such  in  life 
and  doctrine  ought  the  priest,  as  the  messenger  of  Jehovah  to  the 
people,  to  be. 

messenger]     See  Introduction  ch.  I.  p.  13. 

8.  at  the  law]  This  rendering  is  quite  defensible  (Lev.  xxvi.  37; 
Nahum.  iii.  3) ;  and  the  idea  of  the  Law  itself  being  made  the  stum- 
bling-block of  the  people,  by  the  tortuous  interpretations  put  upon  it  by 
the  priests  and  byjjimr  inconsistent  conduct,  is  forcible,  and  is  in  keep- 
ingwiththe  representationofChrist~  Himself  as  a  "stumbling-stone"  (Is. 
viii.  14 ;  Rom.  ix.  32,  33).  As  however  the  figure  of  the  Law  as  a  road  or 
path  in  which  men  should  walk  smoothly  and  safely  is  of  very  constant 
occurrence  in  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  possible  to  render  "in  the  law", 
with  R.V.  and  A.V.  margin. 

corrupted  the  covenant  of  Levi]  Compare  Nehemiah's  complaint, 
and  the  example  he  gives,  Neh.  xiii.  28,  29. 

9.  been  partial]    Lit.  had  respect  of  persons.  R.V. 

Ch.  II.     10—16.     Rebuke  of  the  People  for  Heathen 
Marriages  and  Divorce. 

The  transition  from  the  former  section  is  less  abrupt  than  at  first 
sight  it  seems  to  be.  The  people  at  large  are  now  addressed  directly,' 
and  not  merely  incidentally  as  before  (i.  14);  but  the  priests  are  still 
clearly  in  view,  both  as  probably  themselves  guilty  of  the  sin  denounced 
(comp.  Ezra  x.  18;  Nehem.  xiii.  28),  and  as  conniving  at  it  by  with- 
holding or  wresting  the  sentence  of  the  Law  against  it  (ii.  8,  9).  P'rom 
the  Covenant  too  with  Levi  {v.  8)  the  transition  is  natural  to  the 
wider  Covenant  with  the  fathers  {v.  lo).  The  prophet  lays  down 
(v.  10)  the  principle  on  which  the  whole  rebuke  rests;  and  then 
deals  with  their  transgression  of  it,  first  by  heathen  marriages  {w.  11, 
12),  and  secondly,  as  a  consequence  of  this,  by  the  divorce  of  their 
lawful  wives  {vv.  13 — 16). 

The  word  deal-treacherously  is  a  key-word  to  the  section.  See  w.  10, 
II,  14,  15,  16. 


vv.  II— 13..1  MALACHI,    II.  25 

Hath  not  one  God  created  us? 

Why  do  we  deal  treacherously  every  man  against  his  brother, 

By  profaning  the  covenant  of  our  fathers  ? 

Judah  hath  dealt  treacherously, 

And  an  abomination  is  committed  in  Israel  and  in  Jeru- 
salem ; 

For  Judah  hath  profaned  the  holiness  of  the  Lord  which 
he  loved, 

And  hath  married  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god. 

The  Lord  will  cut  off  the  man  that  doth  this,  the  master 
and  the  scholar, 

Out  of  the  tabernacles  of  Jacob, 

And  him  that  offereth  an  offering  unto  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

And  this  have  ye  done  again, 

10.  one  father]  i.  e.  God,  as  the  parallelism  suggests.  Comp.  John 
viii.  41.  The  reference  to  Abraham,  though  of  course  admissible 
(Matt.  iii.  9;  John  viii.  39),  is  less  satisfactory. 

his  brother]  Out  of  the  common  Fatherhood  springs  a  common  bro- 
therhood which  intensifies  the  wrong.  So  St  Paul  writes,  with  refer- 
ence to  a  similar  subject,  i  Thess.  iv.  6.  It  may  however  only  mean 
"one  against  another." 

the  covenant  of  our  fathers]     Exod.  xxxiv.  10 — 16;  Deut.  vii.  i — 4. 

11.  the  holiness  of  the  Lord]  Comp.  Lev.  xi.  44;  i  Thess.  iv.  7.  This 
is  better  than  sanctuary  of  the  Lord,  R.V.  margin.    Comp.  rd  ayia,  LXX. 

which  he  loved]  In  like  manner  Almighty  God  is  said  to  love 
righteousness  z.nd  Judgment.     Ps.  xi.  7;  xxxiii.  5;  Is.  Ixi.  8. 

the  daughter  of  a  strange  god]  "As  those  who  acknowledge,  wor- 
ship and  serve  the  true  God  are  called  His  sons  and  daughters  (Deut. 
xxxii.  19),  so  they  that  worshipped  any  strange  god  are,  by  like  reason, 
here  called  the  daughters  of  that  god.  Hence  the  Jews  say,  '  He  that 
marrieth  a  heathen  woman  is  as  if  he  made  himself  son-in-law  to  an 
idol'."     Pocock. 

12.  the  man]    Rather,  to  the  man,  as  R.V.,  i.e.  out  of  his  family. 
the  master  and  the  scholar]     Rather,  as  A.V.  margin  and  R.V.,  him 

that  waketh  and  him  that  answereth.  It  is  a  proverbial  expression, 
like  "him  that  is  shut  up  and  him  that  is  left  at  large"  (i  Kings  xxi. 
21),  meaning  all  without  exception.  It  is  taken  from  sentries  or  watch- 
men who  as  they  go  their  rounds  give  their  challenge  and  receive  the 
watch- word  in  reply.  In  the  same  sense  the  Arabs  say,  *no  one  crying 
out,  and  no  one  answering,  i.e.  no  one  alive'.  See  Gesen.  Thes.  p.  1004  a. 
him  that  offereth]  nor  shall  the  religious  service,  whether  of  priest  or 
layman,  avert  his  doom. 

13.  again]  Lit.  second.  The  first  evil  of  marrying  heathen  wo- 
men was  accompanied  by  a  second,  the  cruel  treatment  and  divorce 
("putting-away,"  v.  16)  of  their  lawful  wives,  which  is  now  dealt 
with,  vv.  13—16. 


26  MALACHI,  II.  [vv.  14,  15. 

Covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  tears,  with  weeping, 

and  with  crying  out, 
Insomuch  that  he  regardeth  not  the  offering  any  more, 
Or  receiveth  it  with  good  will  at  your  hand. 

14  Yet  ye  say,  Wherefore  ? 

Because  the  Lord  hath  been  witness  between  thee  and  the 

wife  of  thy  youth, 
Against  whom  thou  hast  dealt  treacherously : 
Yet  is  she  thy  companion,  and  the  wife  of  thy  covenant. 

15  And  did  not  he  make  one  ?     Yet  had  he  the  residue  of  the 

spirit. 

covering  the  al/ar]  The  weeping  crowd  of  insulted  and  divorced 
wives  turn  to  God,  as  their  only  refuge,  so  that  the  courts  of  His  Tem- 
ple resound  with  their  sad  complaints,  and  His  very  altar,  round  which 
they  gather,  is  bathed,  as  it  were,  with  their  tears. 

crying  ont\  Rather,  sighing*,  R.  V.,  as  the  same  word  is  rendered 
in  Ps.  Ixxix.  II ;  or  groaning",  Ps.  cii.  20^ 

14.  hath  been  witness]     Com  p.  Gen.  xxxi.  50. 

of  thy  covenant]  To  the  tender  recollection  of  "the  kindness  of 
youth  and  the  love  of  espousals"  (Jerem.  ii.  2),  and  the  binding  force  of 
years  since  spent  together  in  intimate  companionship,  there  is  added  the 
solemn  obligation  of  the  marriage  contract,  "the  vow  and  covenant 
betwixt  them  made",  of  which  God  is  here  said  to  be  the  "witness", 
and  which  is  elsewhere  called,  "the  covenant  of  God",  Prov.  ii.  17. 

15.  did  not  he  niake  one?]  The  interpretation  of  this  very  difficult 
verse  follows  in  the  main,  though  with  some  variety  of  detail,  one  or 
other  of  two  lines. 

(i)  By  "one"  here  Abraham  is  held  to  be  intended,  who  is  called 
"one"  in  Isaiah  Ii.  1  (lit.  "for  one  I  called  him";  "  I  called  him  alone", 
A.V. ;  "when  he  was  but  one  I  called  him",  R.V.),  and  in  Ezekiel 
xxxiii.  24  ("Abraham  was  one").  The  words  are  thus  regarded  as 
spoken  by  the  Jews,  who  seek  to  shelter  themselves  from  the  prophet's 
censure  under  the  example  of  Abraham.  "Did  not  one  (Abraham)", 
say  they,  "do  it  (that  of  which  you  complain  in  us,  when  he  took  to 
•  wife  Hagar,  the  Egyptian)?  And  yet  he  had  the  residue  of  the  spirit" 
(comp.  Num.  xxvii.  18:  "Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  a  man  in  whom  is  the 
spirit").  "And  wherefore",  the  prophet  replies,  "(did)  the  one  (do  it)? 
He  was  seeking  (not  as  you  are  the  gratification  of  his  lust,  but)  a  seed 
of  God"  (the  son  whom  God  had  promised  him.  Gen.  xvi.  2).  "There- 
fore", seeing  that  Abraham's  example  avails  you  nothing,  "take  heed." 
If  this,  however,  were  the  argument,  we  might  have  expected  the  pro- 
phet to  reply,  that  so  far  from  divorcing  (as  they  were  doing)  his  proper 
wife,  it  was  Hagar  and  not  Sarah  whom  Abraham  sent  away,  so  soon 
as  disagreement  arose. 

(2)  The  other  line  of  interpretation  is  that  adopted  in  A.V.  and  re- 
tained in  R.V.    According  to  it  the  prophet  recalls  them  (as  our  Lord 


V.  i6.]  MALACHI,   II.  27 

And  wherefore  one?     That  he  might  seek  a  godly  seed. 

Therefore  take  heed  to  your  spirit, 

And   let  none  deal    treacherously  against  the  wife  of  his 

youth. 
For  the  Lord,   the  God   of  Israel,   saith   that   he   hateth  16 

putting  away : 
For  one  covereth  violence  with  his  garment,  saith  the  Lord 

of  hosts : 
Therefore   take    heed    to    your    spirit,   that    ye   deal    not 

treacherously. 

does  in  His  argument  with  the  Jews  on  the  same  subject,  Mark  x.  2 — 9) 
to  the  original  institution  of  marriage  and  relation  of  the  sexes.  "  Did 
not  He  (God)  make  one  (one  man,  and  out  of  him  one  woman,  and  the 
twain  'one  flesh')?  And  (yet)  the  residue  of  the  spirit  (of  life,  comp. 
Gen.  vii.  22 :  'the  breath  of  the  spirit  of  life')  was  His  (so  that  He  could, 
had  it  pleased  Him,  have  created,  for  example,  one  man  and  many 
women).  And  why  (did  He  make)  the  one?  He  sought  (what  only 
by  the  purity  and  integrity  of  the  maniage  bond  can  be  secured)  a 
godly  seed." 

16.  the  God  of  Israel^  who  has  given  them  His  law.  His  relation 
to  the  people  aggravates  their  guilt. 

hateth  putting  awny\  Lit.  For  he  (Jehovah)  hateth  putting  away 
(divorce),  saith  Jehovah,  &c. 

It  is  true  that  divorce  was  permitted  by  the  Law  of  Moses,  in  certain 
cases  (Deut.  xxiv.  i — 4);  but  that,  as  our  Lord  teaches,  was  only  a  con- 
cession to  "the  hardness  of  their  hearts"  (Matt.  xix.  8),  and  "from  the 
beginning  it  was  not  so  ".  The  rendering  of  A.V.  margin,  which  is  also 
that  of  the  LXX.  and  Targum,  "if  he  hate  her,  put  her  away",  makes 
the  prophet  call  upon  those  whom  he  is  rebuking  to  avail  themselves  of 
the  provision  of  the  Law,  as  the  least  of  two  evils:  q.d.  "better  divorce 
her  if  you  hate  her,  as  the  Law  allows  you  to  do,  than  retain  her  as 
your  wife  only  to  subject  her  to  insult  and  cruelty".  But  apart  from 
other  objections,  this  interpretation  loses  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  motive 
of  divorce  in  the  two  cases  was  entirely  different,  and  that  such  advice, 
in  the  case  here  under  consideration,  is  tantamount  to  saying,  "  If  you 
wish  to  marry  a  heathen  woman,  get  rid  of  your  lawful  wife  first  by 
divorcing  her." 

for  one  covereth. .Ms  garment^  Rather,  and  him  that  covereth  his 
garment  with  violence  (R.V.)  (do  I  hate),  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Two  things,  in  relation  to  the  subject  in  hand.  Almighty  God  declares 
that  He  hates.  He  hates  "putting  away",  for  it  is  a  violation  of  His 
primaeval  law,  "What  God  hath  joined  together,  let  not  man  put 
asunder."  And  He  hates  ill-treatment  by  the  husband  of  his  wife, 
which  stains  and  pollutes,  as  it  were,  the  garment  of  protection  which 
he  is  bound  to  spread  over  her.  By  "his  garment"  many  commentators 
understand  "his  wife".  But  no  such  Hebrew  use  of  the  word  has  been 
adduced,  and  the  Arabic  use  which  is  alleged  is  not  conclusive. 

3—2 


28  MALACHl,    III.  [vv.  17;  i. 

»7  Ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  with  your  words. 
Yet  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  wearied  him  ? 
When  ye  say,  Every  one  that  doeth  evil  is  good  in  the  sight 

of  the  Lord, 
And  he  dehghteth  in  them ; 
Or,  Where  is  the  God  of  judgment? 
3  Behold,   I   will  send    my   messenger,  and   he   shall 

prepare  the  way  before  me  : 
And  the  Lord,  whom  ye  seek,  shall  suddenly  come  to  his 

temple, 

Ch.  II.  17— III.  6.    Rebuke  of  the  people  for  profane 

IMPIETY. 

17.  With  another  abrupt  transition  the  prophet  passes  to  a  new 
though  cognate  subject.  The  abuses  in  connection  with  Divine  worship 
and  the  social  evils  which  he  has  already  rebuked  culminate  in  avowed 
unbelief  {with  your  words),  as  to  the  justice  of  Almighty  God  and  His 
moral  government  of  the  world.  Though  the  righteous  Judge  be  strong 
and  patient,  yet  is  He  "wearied",  His  longsuffering  worn  out,  by  blas- 
phemous charges  of  favouring  and  delighting  in  the  wicked,  or  by  the 
profane  challenge  to  shew  Himself,  if  He  be  indeed  "the  God  of  judge- 
ment ". 

wearied]  Comp.  Isaiah  xliii.  23,  24. 

JV/ie/'d  is,  &.C.]     Comp.  Isaiah  v.  19;  2  Peter  iii.  4. 

III.  1.  God  Himself  takes  up  {7'v.  i — 6)  the  challenge^'**  Where  is 
the  God?"  &c. 

mjy  messenger]  They  had  been  provided,  in  the  priests,  with  a 
standing  order  of  "messengers"  of  Jehovah  (ii.  7).  From  time  to  time 
His  special  "messengers",  the  prophets  (Haggai  i.  13),  had  been  sent  to 
them.  The  last  of  such  prophets,  bearing  as  his  only  name,  "Jehovah's 
messenger",  was  now  exercising  his  office  among  them.  But  a  yet 
more  special  "messenger"  is  to  inaugurate  that  coming  of  Jehovah 
which  they  profess  to  desire.    See  Matt.  xi.  10;  Mark  i.  2;  Luke  vii.  27. 

prepare  the  way>\  Comp.  Isaiah  xl.  3;  and  for  the  nature  of  the 
preparation,  "by  preaching  of  repentance",  Matt.  iii.  i — 12. 

the  Lord]  "He  who  had  before  spoken  of  Himself  in  the  first 
person  ("I  will  send"),  now  speaks  of  Himself  in  the  third  person." 
Maurer.  For  a  similar  change  of  person,  which  is  not  uncommon  in 
Hebrew,  see  ii.  16  above.  "  We  are  sure  He  which  spake  those  words 
was  (Jehovah)  the  Lord  of  hosts',  and  we  are  as  sure  that  Christ  is  that 
Lord  before  whose  face  John  the  Baptist  prepared  the  way."  Pearson 
on  the  Creed.     Article,  Our  Lord. 

ye  seek... ye  delight  in]  A  reference,  not  without  irony,  to  the  demand 
of  z;.  17,  "where  is"  &c. 

his  temple]  He,  then,  who  comes  is  the  Lord  of  the  Temple.  Hag. 
ii.  9. 


vv.  2,  3.]  MALACHI,    III.  29 

Even  the  messenger  of  the  covenant,  whom  ye  delight  in : 

Behold,  he  shall  come,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

But  who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming  ? 

And  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth  ? 

For  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fullers'  sope : 

And  he  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver  : 

even  the  messenger  of  the  covenant']  The  R.V.,  by  printing  "and" 
in  the  text  instead  of  "even"  (which  however  it  retains  in  the  margin), 
and  also  by  the  punctuation  which  it  adopts,  leaves  room  for  the  view 
that  "the  messenger  of  the  covenant"  is  to  be  identified,  not  with  "the 
Lord",  but  with  "the  messenger"  spoken  of  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse, 
who  is  to  "prepare  the  way"  before  Him :  "  And  the  Lord,  whom  ye  seek, 
shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple;  and  the  messenger  of  the  covenant, 
whom  ye  delight  in,  behold  he  cometh,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts".  The 
weight  of  argument,  however,  seems  clearly  to  preponderate  in  favour 
of  identifying  the  "Messenger  of  the  Covenant"  with  "the  Lord",  who 
shall  "suddenly  come  to  His  temple".  For  thus  the  idea  of  the  messen- 
ger, which  pervades  this  prophecy  (see  Introd.  pp.  13,  14)  culminates  (as 
do  the  Old  Testament  ideas  of  the  prophet,  the  priest  and  the  king)  in 
the  Messiah,  who  is  in  the  highest  sense  the  Messenger  of  God  to  man. 
The  Angel,  or  Messenger,  whose  presence  in  the  Church  was  recognised 
from  the  beginning  (Acts  vii.  38;  Exod.  xxiii.  20,  21,  xxxii.  34,  xxxiii. 
2,  14;  Isaiah  Ixiii.  9),  follows  up  these  "preludings  of  the  Incarnation" 
by  being  "made  flesh  and  dwelling  amongst  us".  The  covenant,  which 
was  before  the  Law  (Gal.  iii.  17)  and  yet  by  virtue  of  its  later  intro- 
duction "a  new  covenant"  (Jer.  xxxi.  31—34;  Heb.  viii.  7 — 13), 
He  comes,  in  fulfilment  of  promise  and  prophecy  (Isaiah  xlii.  6,  Iv.  3), 
as  its  Messenger  and  Mediator  (Heb.  xii.  24),  to  inaugurate  and  ratify 
with  His  blood  (Matt.  xxvi.  28;  Heb.  xiii.  20);  while  He  vindicates 
His  claim  to  be  "the  God  of  judgement"  whom  they  desired,  by  the 
work  of  discriminating  justice  which  He  performs  [vv.  2 — 5). 

2.  a  refiner'' s Jire\    Comp.  Matt.  iii.  12. 

fullers''  sope]  "The  process  of  fulling  or  cleansing  cloth,  so  far  as  it 
may  be  gathered  from  the  practice  of  other  nations,  consisted  in  treading 
or  stamping  on  the  garments  with  the  feet  or  with  bats  in  tubs  of  water, 
in  which  some  alkaline  substance  answering  the  purpose  of  soap  had 
been  dissolved.  The  substances  used  for  this  purpose  which  are  men- 
tioned in  Scripture  are  nitre,  Prov.  xxv.  20 ;  Jer.  ii.  22,  and  soap,  Mai. 
iii.  2....  The  juice  also  of  some  saponaceous  plant,  perhaps  Gypsaphila 
struthium,  or  Saponaria  officinalis,  was  sometimes  mixed  with  the  water 
for  the  like  purpose,  and  may  thus  be  regarded  as  representing  the  soap 
of  Scripture."  Diet,  of  Bible,  Art.  P^uller.  But  probably  borax  is 
meant. 

3.  he  shall  sit]  The  expression  gives  "pictorial  effect"  (Hengst.)  to 
the  description.  Comp.  "He  shall  stand  and  feed"  &c.,  Micah  v.  4, 
for  a  similar  "pictorial  effect". 

The  figure  of  the  fuller  is  dropped  and  the  idea,  common  to  both 
figures,  prosecuted  under  this  alone. 


30  MALACHI,   III.  [vv.  4,  5. 

And  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi,  and  purge  them  as 
gold  and  silver, 

That  they  may  offer  unto  the  Lord  an  offering  in  righteous- 
ness. 

4  Then  shall  the  offering  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  be  pleasant 

unto  the  Lord, 
As  171  the  days  of  old,  and  as  in  former  years. 

5  And  I  will  come  near  to  you  to  judgment; 
And  I  will  be  a  swift  witness 

the  sons  of  Levi]  "Judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God." 
I  Pet.  iv.  17.  Those  who  had  been  first  in  offending  (i.  6 — ii.  9)  shall 
first  be  dealt  with.  The  judgment  of  the  people  at  large  as  offenders 
also  (ii.  10 — 17)  shall  follow  {v.  5). 

purge  them]  The  woid  is  used  of  "straining"  wine,  Isaiah  xxv.  6; 
but  more  frequently,  as  here,  of  refining  precious  metals.  Job  xxviii.  1 ; 
I  Chron.  xxviii.  18,  xxix.  4;  Ps.  xii.  7. 

The  accumulation  of  words,  refine,  purify,  purge,  gives  force  to  the 
description. 

that  they  may  offer... an  offering]  More  exactly,  and  they  shall  oflFer 
...offerings,  R.V.;  the  plural  being  doubtless  adopted  to  denote,  what 
the  Hebrew  expresses,  the  continuous  act  of  offering. 

in  righteousness]  Not  only  in  outward  conformity  with  the  Law,  as 
contrasted  with  "the  lame  and  the  sick"  (i.  8,  13)  but  in  pure  affection 
of  heart  and  holiness  of  life.  Comp.  Luke  i.  6.  On  the  similar  expression 
"sacrifices  of  righteousness".  Psalm  iv.  5  [Heb.  6],  Dean  Perowne 
observes,  "The  phrase  occurs  first  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  19,  and  denotes  either 
(a)  sacrifices  that  God  will  accept,  because  they  are  offered  not  merely 
according  to  the  ritual  of  the  Law,  but  with  clean  hands  and  pure 
hearts  (Isaiah  xxix.  1 3) ;  or  [b)  fitting  sacrifices,  such  as  past  sin 
requires,  in  order  to  put  it  away."  In  the  first  of  these  senses  it  is 
used  here. 

4.  former]  i.e.,  as  margin  and  R.V.,  ancient.  See  ch.  ii.  5,  6;  Jerem. 
ii.  2,  3. 

5.  to  judi^ment]  This  is  the  answer  to  the  challenge  of  the  people 
at  large,  "Where  is  the  God  o{ judg77tentV  The  "messenger"  shall 
be  sent.  The  Lord  of  the  temple  shall  suddenly  follow  him  {v.  i). 
His  first  work  shall  be  to  purify  the  priesthood  {w,  2 — 4).  That  ac- 
complished, He  shall  open  His  solemn  assize  for  the  people  generally 

{^-  5)- 

a  swift  zvitness]  What  need  of  further  witnesses,  when  the  Judge 
Himself  is  Witness  also !  "  How  great  the  dread  of  judgment,  when 
He  is  witness  and  judge!  Witness  too  He  is  against  all  'sorcerers' 
and  'adulterers',  for  these  crimes  are  perpetrated  in  secret,  and  shall 
thus  be  brought  forth  to  light,  that  they  be  hid  no  longer."  Jerome, 
quoted  by  RosenmuUer.  We  have  a  similar  example  of  the  identity  of 
Judge  and  Witness,  Ps.  1.  6,  7. 

By  "-swiff'  is  denoted  not  only  the  alacrity  of  the  witness,  but  the 


vv.  6,  7.]  MALACHI,    III.  31 

Against  the  sorcerers,  and  against  the  adulterers,  and  against 

false  swearers, 
And  against  those  that  oppress  the  hireling  in  his  wages, 
The  widow,  and  the  fatherless. 
And  that  turn  aside  the  stranger  from  his  right ^  and  fear 

not  me, 
Saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

For  I  avi  the  Lord,  I  change  not ;  6 

Therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed. 

Even  from  the  days  of  your  fathers  ye  are  gone  away  from  7 
mine  ordinances,  and  have  not  kept  them. 

suddenness  with  which  the  judgment  falls :  "  not  only  that  which  happens 
without  delay,  but  also  that  which  bursts  unexpectedly,  after  an  interval 
of  time,  upon  those  who  forgetful  of  warnings  are  living  in  security. 
In  that  sense  the  day  of  final  judgment  is  predicted  as  al^uidios  and 
sudden,  Luke  xxi.  34."     Rosenm.     Comp.  "suddenly",  v.  1  above. 

from  his  right]  These  words  are  added  both  in  A.V.  and  R.V.  The 
fuller,  though  somewhat  different  expression,  "turn  aside  ('pervert' 
A.V.,  'wrest'  R.V.)  the  judgment  of  the  stranger",  occurs  Deut.  xxiv. 
17,  xxvii.  19.  All  the  sins  enumerated  in  this  verse  are  condemned  in 
terms  in  the  Law. 

fear  not  me\  To  this  as  to  their  root  all  the  sins  already  mentioned 
are  traced  up,  while  at  the  same  time  many  who  were  free  from  gross 
outward  sins  are  by  this  condemned. 

6.  For  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not]  Rather:  For  I,  the  Lord, 
change  not :  therefore  (lit.  and)  ye,  sons  of  Jacob,  are  not  consumed. 
The  unchangeableness  of  Him,  whose  name,  Jehovah,  "I  am,"  is  the 
exponent  of  His  nature,  is  appealed  to  as  the  ground  ("for")  of  His 
dealings  with  Israel.  He  changes  not  in  His  promises  and  purposes  of 
grace  (Rom.  xi.  29);  therefore,  in  spite  of  their  rebellions  and  provocations, 
the  sons  of  Jacob  are  still  preserved.  It  is  the  same  argument  that  is 
expanded  in  Psalm  Ixxxix.  28 — 37. 

Ch.  III.  7— IV.  3.    Renewed  Rebukes,   Threatenings  and 
Promises. 

Ch.  III.  7 — 12.    Rebuke  in  the  matter  of  Tithes  and 
Offerings. 

7.  Even  from  the  days  of  your  fathers]  Omit  even,  with  R.V.  The 
connection  with  v.  6  is  well  given  by  Pusey:  "Back  to  those  days  and 
from  them,  ye  are  gone  away  from  My  ordinances.  'I  am  not  changed 
from  good;  ye  are  not  changed  from  evil.  I  am  unchangeable  in 
holiness;  ye  are  unchangeable  in  perversity.'" 

gone  away]  Rather,  turned  aside,  R.V.,  as  the  same  word  is  trans- 
lated elsewhere,  e.g.  Deut.  xvii.  20,  xxviii.  14;  Josh,  xxiii.  6;  and  with 


32  MALACHI,   III.  [vv.  8-IO 

Return  unto  me,  and  I  will  return  unto  you,  saith  the  Lord 

of  hosts. 
But  ye  said,  Wherein  shall  we  return  ? 
Will  a  man  rob  God  ?     Yet  ye  have  robbed  me. 
But  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee  ? 
In  tithes  and  offerings. 

Ye  are  cursed  with  a  curse  :  for  ye  have  robbed  me, 
Even  this  whole  nation. 
Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse, 
That  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house. 
And  prove  me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 

the  metaphor  completed,  turned  aside  from  the  way,  Exod.  xxxii.  8; 
Deut.  ix.  12. 

Return  unto  me\  Comp.  Zech.  i.  3,  where  the  word  [turn,  A.V.)  is 
the  same. 

8.  ye  have  robbed^    Rather,  rob;  lit.  are  robbing:  it  is  still  going  on. 
tithes]    By  the  Law  of  Moses  (i)  "the  tenth  of  all  produce,  as  well  as 

of  flocks  and  cattle,  belongs  to  Jehovah  and  must  be  offered  to  Him" 
(Lev.  xxvii.  30,  32) ;  and  (2)  this  tenth  is  "assigned  to  the  Levites  as  the 
reward  of  their  services"  (Num.  xviii.  21,  24).  Nehemiah  in  his  day  had 
to  deal  once  and  again  with  the  evil  here  rebuked.  Notwithstanding 
the  "sure  covenant"  into  which  they  had  entered  (Neh.  ix.  38  with  x. 
32 — 39),  he  had  occasion,  on  his  return  to  Jerusalem  after  an  absence 
of  a  few  years,  to  reform  them  again  in  this  very  particular  (xiii.  to — 14). 

9.  a  curse']  Rather,  the  curse.  The  threatened  curse  has  already 
fallen  upon  you.     See  ch.  ii.  2  with  iii.  11. 

have  robbed]     Rather  rob,  as  in  z'.  8. 

The  pronouns  in  the  Hebrew  are  emphatic  :  Me  ye  are  robbing.  And 
the  evil  is  not  confined  to  the  priests  (ch.  i.  6 — 8,  12 — 14),  but  extends 
to  "the  whole  nation". 

10.  all  the  tithes]  More  exactly,  the  whole  tithe,  R.  V.  Cf.  Deut. 
xxvi.  12. 

the  storehouse]  This  may  have  been  the  "great  chamber",  or  "lean- 
to",  surrounding  the  second  Temple  on  three  sides,  and  consisting  of 
three  stories,  each  containing  several  rooms,  which  had  been  perverted 
from  its  original  purpose  as  a  receptacle  of  the  tithes  and  offerings,  and 
assigned  by  the  High-priest  to  Tobiah,  but  which  Nehemiah  had  re- 
stored to  its  proper  use  again  (Neh.  x.  38,  xiii.  5 — 9,  12,  13).  It  is  not 
improbable  that  the  "chambers",  which  abutted  to  the  height  of  three 
stories  on  the  walls  of  Solomon's  Temple,  were  intended  in  like  manner 
for  storehouses  (i  Kings  vi.  5,  6).  In  the  great  Reformation  under 
Hezekiah  such  chambers  were  "prepared",  either  built  or  restored,  in 
some  part  of  the  Temple  area,  to  receive  the  enormous  influx  of  tithes 
and  offerings  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  ir,  12). 

vieat]  The  Hebrew  word  properly  means  "prey",  or  "booty".  It 
has,  however,  the  same  meaning  of  "food"  as  here  in  Prov.  xxxi.  15 
(comp,  XXX.  8  for  the  verb  in  the  same  sense),  and  in  Ps.  cxi.  5. 


vv.  11  —  13.]  MALACHI,    111.  33 

If  I  will  not  open  you  the  windows  of  heaven, 

And  pour  you  out  a  blessing,  that  fkere  shall  not  be  room 

enough  to  receive  it. 
And  I  will  rebuke  the  devourer  for  your  sakes, 
And  he  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  of  your  ground ; 
Neither  shall  your  vine  cast  her  fruit  before  the  time  in  the 

field,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
And  all  nations  shall  call  you  blessed  : 
For  ye  shall  be  a  delightsome  land,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Your  words  have  been  stout  against  me,  saith  the  Lord. 
Yet  ye  say,  What  have  we  spoken  so  much  against  thee? 


the  windows  of  heaven\    Comp.  Gen.  vii.  ri,  viii.  1 ;  2  Kings  vii.  2,  19. 

that  there  shall  not  be  room  enough  to  receive  it]  Heb.  till  not  enough. 
The  ellipsis  has  been  supplied  in  various  ways :  "till  there  be  not  (barely) 
enough,  but  much  more  than  enough,  i.e.  abundance";  or  "till  there 
be  no  longer  sufficiency  with  Me,  or,  as  that  can  never  be,  in  boundless 
measure".  The  rendering,  however,  of  A.V.  and  R.V.,  is  the  simplest 
and  most  satisfactory. 

The  history  of  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah  had  already  afforded 
an  example  of  the  reward  of  faithful  obedience,  in  the  matter  of  tithes 
and  offerings,  in  overflowing  abundance  bestowed  upon  them  by  God. 
1  Chron.  xxxi.  10. 

11.  the  devotirer'\  lit.  eater,  i.e.  any  insect,  especially  the  locust,  that 
would  devour  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  The  same  verb  is  used  ol  the 
ravages  of  four  insects,  "probably  different  kinds  of  locusts,  or  locusts  in 
different  stages  of  growth"  (R.V.  marginal  note),  Joel  i.  4, 

The  threatened  curse  was  the  "rebuke"  (ch.  ii.  3,  note)  of  the  seed: 
the  promised  blessing  is  the  "rebuke"  of  the  devourer. 

cast  her  fruit  before  the  time"]  lit.  miscarry.  Comp.  "a  miscarrying 
womb",  Hos.  ix.  14;  "miscarrying  ground",  2  Kings  ii.  19,  21.  So 
Pliny  speaks  of  "arborum  abortus".  (Pusey  after  Gesen.)  In  Rev. 
vi.  13  we  read:  "the  stars  of  the  heaven  fall  unto  the  earth,  as  a  fig 
tree  casteth  her  unripe  figs,  when  she  is  shaken  of  a  great  wind." 

12.  call  you  blessed'\  or  happy,  R.V.,  as  vav.  15.  fiaKapioua-ip  uyttas, 
LXX.     Comp.  fjt.aKapiov<Ti  /xe,  Luke  i.  48,  and  James  v.  ir. 

Ch.  III.  13— IV.  3.     The  righteous  judgment  of  God. 

13.  have  been  stout]     See  ii.  17.     Comp.  Job  xxi.  14,  15;  Jude  15. 
so  much]     Omit  so  much  here,  and  ofteUy  v.  16.      The  force  of  the 

Hebrew  conjugation  is  "reciprocal"  (Gesen.),  to  speak  "together",  or 
"one  with  another".     Comp.  Ps.  cxix.  23;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  30. 

It  was  not  the  perplexed  questioning  of  a  devout  heart  (Ps.  Ixxiii.), 
nor  the  secret  cogitation  of  an  ungodly  heart  (Ps.  xiv.  1),  but  the  open 
blasphemy  of  those  who  "sat  in  the  seat  of  the  scorner"  (Ps.  i.  i). 


34  MALACHI,    III.  [w.  14—16. 

14  Ye  have  said,  It  is  vain  to  serve  God  : 

And  what  profit  is  it  that  we  have  kept  his  ordinance, 
And  that  we  have  walked  mournfully  before  the  Lord  of 
hosts? 

15  And  now  we  call  the  proud  happy; 

Yea,  they  that  work  wickedness  are  set  up ; 
Yea,  they  that  tempt  God  are  even  delivered. 

16  Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another : 

14.  kept  his  ordinance]  lit.  observed  his  observance.  Kept  his 
charge^  R.V. 

It  is  the  same  tendency  to  regard  mere  outward  observance  as  true 
religion,  which  earlier  prophets  had  denounced  (i  Sam.  xv.  22;  Isaiah 
Iviii.  I — 4),  and  M'hich  culminated  in  the  Pharisaism  of  New  Testament 
times  (John  xviii.  28). 

walked  mournfully]  With  outward  signs  of  mourning:  "in  mourning 
apparel",  R.V.  as  a  sign  of  humiliation  and  contrition.  Comp.  Joel  ii. 
13;  Is.  Iviii.  5;  Matt.  vi.  16 — 18. 

There  may  possibly  be  a  reference  to  the  frequent  national  Fasts 
which  were  observed  after  the  return  from  Babylon.  See  Zech.  vii. 
3,  5,  viii.  19. 

15.  ive  call  the  proud  happy]  The  word  "we  is  emphatic,  and  suggests 
a  reference  on  the  part  of  the  speakers  to  v.  12  above:  "  Thou  sayest 
that  all  nations  -shall  call  them  that  obey  Thee  happy;  zve^  on  the 
contrary,  call  the  proud  rebels  against  Thee  happy." 

set  up]  Rather,  built  up,  as  A.V.  margin,  and  R.V.  Comp.  Jer. 
xii.  16;  Job  xxii.  23. 

they  that  tempt,  &c.]  Rather,  yea,  they  tempt  God,  and  are  de- 
livered, as  R.V.  The  persons  are  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  clause, 
"  they  that  work  wickedness  ". 

In  this  as  in  the  earlier  section  of  the  prophecy  the  rebuke  and 
denunciation  of  evil  leads  up  to  the  prediction  of  impending  judgment. 
In  the  earlier  section  the  discriminating  nature  of  the  coming  judgment 
is  not  lost  sight  of  It  will  purify  as  well  as  destroy  (iii.  3,  4  with  5).. 
But  in  this  latter  section  this  feature  of  discrimination  becomes  more 
prominent.  And  the  thought  is  added,  for  the  comfort  of  the  godly, 
that  the  discriminating  judgment  exists  already  (iii.  i6,  17),  though  its 
manifestation  must  be  waited  for  till  "the  day"  comes  (z/.  18).  The 
day  in  which  all  men  shall  "discern  between  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked,  between  him  that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serveth  Him  not", 
will  be  the  day,  not  of  the  inception,  but  of  "the  revelation  of  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God"  (Romans  ii.  5). 

16.  Then]  When  they  heard  "the  hard  speeches  which  ungodly 
sinners  spake  against  Him"  (Jude  15),  then  they  spake  one  to  another 
wordsof  reverent  trust  and  love  and  piety.  "The  more  the  ungodly  spake 
against  God,  the  more  these  spake  among  themselves  for  God'."    Pusey. 

Some   modern   commentators,   however   (e.g.   Maurer  and  Hitzig), 


V.  17.]  MALACHI,    III.  35 

And  the  Lord  hearkened,  and  heard  //, 

And  a  book  of  remembrance  was  written  before  him 

For  them  that  feared  the  Lord,  and  that  thought  upon  his 

name. 
And  they  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  i 

In  that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels ; 

regard  vv.  14,  15  as  the  substance  of  what  the  godly  spake  one  to 
another;  and  this  view,  unsatisfactory  as  it  is,  appears  to  be  that  of  the 
LXX. :  ravra  KaTeXaXTjaav  ol  (po^otj/xeuoi  rbv  KOpiov,  ^Kaaros  irpos  rbv 
■ir\ri<rlov  aurov. 

spake  often'\     Omit  often.     See  note  on  z/.  13  above. 

a  book  of  remembrance]  Canon  Rawlinson  (in  The  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary, on  Esther  vi.  3)  says,  "  It  was  a  settled  principle  of  the 
Persian  government  that  '  Royal  Benefactors '  were  to  receive  an 
adequate  reward.  The  names  of  such  persons  were  placed  on  a 
special  roll  (Herod,  viii.  85),  and  great  care  was  taken  that  they 
should  be  properly  recompensed  (see  Herod,  in.  140,  V.  11,  viii.  85; 
Thucyd.  i.  138;  Xen.  HeL  iii.  i.  §  6,  &c.).  It  is  a  mistake,  however, 
to  suppose  (Davidson)  that  they  were  always  rewarded  at  once. 
Themistocles  was  inscribed  on  the  list  in  B.C.  480,  but  did  not  obtain 
a  reward  till  B.C.  465.  Other  'benefactors'  waited  for  months  (Herod. 
V.  11)  or  perhaps  years  {ib.  ix.  107)  before  they  were  recompensed." 
The  figure  of  a  Book  of  record  or  remembrance,  as  kept  or  directed  to 
be  kept  by  Afmighty  God,  is  of  early  as  well  as  of  very  general  occur- 
rence in  Holy  Scripture.  Moreover  there  was  a  'Recorder'  in  the  court 
of  the  Hebrew  kings.  See  Exod.  xvii.  14,  xxxii.  32;  Psalm  Ixix.  28; 
Dan.  vii.  10;  Luke  x.  ao;  Revelation  xx.  12. 

thought  upon]  Gesenius  compares  "which  shall  wot  regard  silver". 
Is.  xiii.  17;  "he  regardeth  no  man",  Is.  xxxiii.  8;  "we  esteemed  him 
not",  Is.  liii.  3;  in  all  which  places  the  same  Hebrew  word  is  used.  In 
all  these  places  in  Isaiah  (though  not  here  in  Malachi)  the  LXX.  have 
XoyL^ofiai  as  the  equivalent,  which  is  the  word  employed  by  St  Paul  in 
a  similar  sense,  ravra  Xoyi^ecrde,  Philip,  iv.  8. 

17.  in  that  day  when  I  make  tip  my  jewels]  This  rendering  is  sup- 
ported by  the  Hebrew  accents,  and  is  adopted  substantially  in  R.V. 
margin,  tvherein  I  do  make  a  peculiar  treasure.  The  phrase,  however, 
to  make  a  treasure,  is  awkward  and  unusual,  and  it  seems  every  way 
better  to  take  the  word  (for  it  is  really  one  word)  a-peculiar-treasure  as 
exegetical  of  the  former  part  of  the  verse :  They  sliall  be  mine,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts... (aj)  a  peculiar  treasure.  This  accords  with  the 
early  use  of  the  same  word  by  Almighty  God  with  reference  to  Israel 
(Exod.  xix.  5 ;  Deut.  vii.  6,  xiv.  2,  xxvi.  t8).  And  it  leaves  us  free  to  give 
the  same  meaning  to  the  intermediate  clause,  in  the  day  that  I  do,  or 
make,  here  and  in  ch.  iv.  3.  That  clause  is  rendered  by  many  commen- 
tators, and  in  R.V.  text,  in  the  day  that  I  do  make.  (Comp.  Ps.  cxviii.  24.) 
But  the  frequent  use  in  the  O.T.  of  the  verb  here  employed,  absolutely 
and  without  any  subject  expressed,  to  denote  the  doing  or  working  of 


36  MALACHI,    III.  IV.  [vv.  i8;  i,  2. 

And  I  will  spare  them,  as  a  man  spareth  his  own  son  that 
serveth  him. 
18  Then  shall  ye  return,  and  discern  between  the  righteous 
and  the  wicked, 
Between  him  that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serveth  him 
not. 
4  For  behold,  the  day  cometh,  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven ; 
And  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be 

stubble  : 
And  the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up,  saith  the 

Lord  of  hosts, 
That  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor  branch. 
2  But  unto  you  that  fear  my  name  shall  the  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness arise 

the  Almighty,  the  nature  of  that  doing  or  working  being  undefined,  or 
easily  deducible  from  the  context,  support  the  rendering  of  R.V.  margin, 
in  the  day  that  I  do  this.  Perhaps,  however,  it  would  be  better  to  leave 
the  subject,  as  it  is,  unsupplied,  and  render,  in  that  day  when  I  do, 
(or  act)  i.e.  when  observation  and  purpose  and  promise  pass  into  action. 
Comp.  Psalm  xxii.  31  [Heb.  32];  Isaiah  xliv.  23,  xlviii.  11 ;  Jerem.  xiv. 
7;  Dan.  viii.  24.  This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  emphatic  personal 
pronoun,  when  I  act,  both  here  and  in  iv.  3.  The  LXX.  render  in  this 
verse,  d%  Tj/x^pav  rjv  eydi  iroLci;  but  in  iv.  3,  iv  ry  r)ixipq,  ri  iyia  Trotw. 

18.  return,  and  discern]  When  "judgment  shall  return  unto 
righteousness"  (Ps.  xciv.  15),  when,  that  is,  the  judgement  of  God 
shall  not  only  be,  as  it  ever  is,  but  be  seen  to  be  righteous,  then 
not  only  shall  "all  the  upright  in  heart  follow  it"  with  glad  approval, 
but  those  who  have  impiously  called  it  in  question  \mi.  14,  15)  shall 
witness  and  confess  the  justice  of  the  discriminating  sentence. 

IV.  1.  the  day]  i.e.  "  the  day"  predicted  in  the  preceding  verse,  with 
which  this  verse  coheres  closely.  The  commencing  of  a  new  chapter 
here  in  A.V.  (and  LXX.,  after  Vulg.,  though  not  in  our  present  Hebrew 
Bibles)  is  unfortunate.  The  R.V.  rightly  prints  from  iii.  1 3  to  iv.  3  in- 
clusive in  a  continuous  paragraph. 

that  shall  durn  as  an  oven]  Rather,  it  bumeth  as  a  furnace,  R.V. 
Comp.  7]  yap  ijfxipa  SriXdjcrei,  6tl  iu  irvpl  airoKoKjuirTeTaL,  for  the  day 
shall  declare  it,  because  it  {the  day)  is  revealed  in  fire,  i  Cor.  iii.  13. 

all  the  proud... all  thcU  do  wickedly]  The  judgment  passed  on  them 
by  the  scoffers  (iii.  15)  shall  be  signally  reversed. 

root  nor  branch]  A  sudden  change  of  figure  from  the  straw  or 
"stubble"  to  the  tree  which  succumbs  to  the  raging  fire,  till  neither 
root  nor  branch  remains. 

2.  the  Sun  of  righteousness]  The  capital  letter  with  which  "Sun" 
is  printed  in  A.V.  is  of  the  nature  of  a  comment.  It  suggests  at  once  to 
the  reader  the  personal  and  Messianic  reference  of  the  word.     But  it  is 


V.  2.]  MALACHI,    IV.  37 

With  healing  in  his  wings ; 

better  to  print  "sun"  with  R.V.;  not  as  denying  or  obscuring  the  ulti- 
mate and  designed  reference  to  Christ,  but  as  exhibiting  it  in  a  manner 
more  agreeable  to  the  genius  of  Old  Testament  prophecy  and  to  the  re- 
quirements of  the  context.  The  key- thought  of  this  whole  paragraph  is 
righteousness.  God's  righteousness  has  been  proudly  and  defiantly  called 
in  question  by  "the  wicked":  it  has  been  humbly  tiusted  in  and  waited 
for  by  "the  righteous"  (v.  i8).  The  day  of  its  manifestation  is  at 
hand.  That  discriminating  day  shall  award  to  each  their  righteous 
recompense.  To  the  wicked  it  shall  come  as  a  burning  furnace  to 
consume  them:  upon  the  righteous  it  shall  dawn  as  a  day  of  which  the 
very  sun  that  makes  it  is  righteousness.  Just  as  in  the  material  world 
the  shadows  and  distortions  and  illusions  of  night  vanish  before  the  light 
of  the  rising  sun,  which  shows  all  things  as  they  really  are,  so  in  the 
moral  world  the  sun  of  righteousness  shall  put  to  flight  the  difficulties 
and  perplexities,  the  inequalities  and  anomalies,  which  have  been  the 
trial  of  the  faithful  and  the  weapon  of  the  scoffer.  No  place  for  them 
shall  be  found,  when  the  sun  of  righteousness  shall  dawn  from  new 
heavens  upon  a  new  earth,  "  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness". 

But  this  explanation  of  the  phrase  only  prepares  the  way  for  the 
personal  and  Messianic  reference.  To  every  Jew  the  thought  of  God 
Himself  as  a  Sun  was  familiar  (Psalm  Ixxxiv,  ii  [Heb.  12];  Isaiah  Ix. 
19).  His  religion  taught  him  to  look  for  deliverance  and  blessing,  not 
from  the  diffusion  of  a  quality  or  attribute,  but  from  the  manifestation 
of  a  Personal  God.  And  it  no  less  plainly  taught  him  that  that  mani- 
festation would  be  consummated  in  "the  righteous  Branch"  who  should 
"execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  land"  (Jerem.  xxiii.  5).  For  us 
the  Sun  of  righteousness  is  none  other  than  "Jesus  Christ,  the  righteous" 
(i  John  ii.  i),  "the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  who  shall  give  at  that 
day  a  crown  of  righteousness  unto  all  them  that  love  His  appearing" 
(2  Tim.  iv.  8). 

with  healing  in  his  wings']  Comp.  "the  wings  of  the  morning", 
Ps.  cxxxix.  9.  In  both  cases  the  rising  of  the  sun  is  compared,  not  to 
the  use  of  the  wings  in  flight,  but  to  lifting  them  tip,  or  spreading  them 
out.  In  the  Psalm  the  suddenness  and  rapidity  with  which  this  is  done, 
when  the  sun  "flares  up  from  behind  the  mountain-wall  of  Moab,"  is 
the  point  of  comparison  (Comp.  "the  morning  spread  upon  the  moun- 
tains," Joel  ii.  2 ;  and  the  swift  travelling  of  the  light  across  the  land- 
scape in  our  own  country,  when  the  sun  emerges  from  a  cloud  on  a  windy 
day).  Here  the  healing  virtue  of  the  outstretched  wings  is  in  view. 
"A  pleasant",  and  a  wholesome,  "thing  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the 
sun."     Eccles.  xi.  7. 

In  Syria  "  the  Sun  god  was  the  central  object  of  worship....  It  was 
here  too  that  his  special  symbol  was  the  solar  disk  with  wings  issuing 
from  either  side  to  denote  his  omnipresent  energy.  The  winged  solar 
disk  may  have  been  originally  of  Babylonian  invention,  but  it  passed  at 
an  early  time  to  the  other  Semitic  populations  of  the  East.  We  find  it 
above  the  figure  of  a  king  on  a  monolith  from  Birejik  now  in  the  British 
Museum,   and  it  is  specially  characteristic  of  the  monuments  of  the 


38  MALACHI,  IV.  [vv.  3—5. 

And  ye  shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall. 

3  And  ye  shall  tread  down  the  wicked ; 

For  they  shall  be  ashes  under  the  soles  of  your  feet 
In    the    day    that    I    shall   do    this^    saith    the    Lord    of 
hosts. 

4  Remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses  my  servant, 

Which  I  commanded  unto  him  in  Horeb  for  all  Israel, 
With  the  statutes  and  judgments. 

5  Behold,  I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet 

Before  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful  day  of  the 
Lord: 

Hittites."  Prof.  Sayce,  Annual  Address  (1889)  to  the  Victoria  Insti- 
tute on  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  at  Tel  El-Amarna,  p.  2. 

grcnv  up\  Rather  gambol,  R.  V.  aKipTT^a-ere,  LXX.  Comp.  Jerem. 
1.  II,  "ye  are  wanton",  R.V. 

calves  of  the  stall]   ws  /Aocrxapta  iK  Secr/xwy  dveifiipa,  LXX. 

3.     asAes]  to  which  the  "stubble"  has  been  reduced,  v.  i. 

Ma/  /shall  do  this]    Rather,  when  I  do,  or  work.     See  note  on  iii.  17. 

Cn.  IV.  3—6.     Concluding  Exhortation  {v.  4)  and  Promise 

{vv.  5,  6). 

Remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses]  The  revelation  of  God  is  always  con- 
tinuous. Each  fresh  step  is  evolved  out  of,  and  is  in  harmony  with, 
those  which  went  before.  To  "remember"  the  past  is  to  prepare  for 
the  future.  The  exhortation  here  is  a  direction  to  the  Church  in 
prospect  of  the  four  centuries  which  would  elapse,  before  any  other 
prophet  should  arise  and  the  promise  [tw.  5,  6)  be  fulfilled. 

To  the  more  careful  study  of  the  law,  in  the  wider  sense  of  the  O.  T. 
Scriptures,  to  which  this  exhortation  led,  may  be  traced  much  of  the 
advance  in  theological  knowledge  which  we  find  among  the  Jews  in 
the  time  of  our  Lord. 

which  I  co77imanded  unto  him  in  Horeb]  A  statement  like  this,  put' 
by  an  inspired  prophet  into  the  mouth  of  God  Himself,  has  an  import- 
ant bearing  on  the  historical  character  and  date  of  composition  of  the 
Pentateuch. 

with  the  statutes  and  judgments]  Rather  {consisting  in)  statutes  and 
judgements:  "even  statutes  and  judgments",  R.V.:  "(Nempe)  statuta 
et  judicia."  Calv.  The  words  are  explanatory  of  the  nature  of  the  law. 
Comp.  Deut.  iv.  8;  Lev.  xxvi.  46. 

6.  Elijah  the  prophet]  The  reading  of  the  LXX.,  "Elijah  the  Tish- 
bite"  {tov  Qea^LTrjv),  has  been  thought  to  indicate  their  belief  that  the 
actual  return  of  Elijah  to  earth  is  here  foretold.  Some  have  traced  the 
same  belief  in  the  appropriation  by  the  vSon  of  Sirach  to  the  literal 
Elijah  of  Malachi's  description  of  the  work  of  the  coming  prophet  [v.  6) 


V.  6.]  MALACHI,   IV.  39 

And   he  shall  turn   the   heart  of  the  fathers   to   thee 

children, 
And  the  heart  of  the  children  to  their  fathers, 
Lest  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  ivith  a  curse. 

(Ecclus.  xlviii.  10) ;  though  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  the  passage 
proves  anything  more  than  his  acquaintance  with  our  prophecy.  The 
behef,  however,  was  certainly  current  among  the  Jews  in  our  Lord's 
time  (Matt.  xvii.  10;  Mark  ix.  11;  John  i.  21).  Nor  does  it  follow  that 
the  belief  was  unfounded,  because  He  Himself  distinctly  claims  the 
prophecy  for  John  the  Baptist,  identifying  him  at  the  same  time  with 
the  "messenger"  foretold  by  Malachi  (Matt.  xi.  10,  14,  xvii.  12,  13). 
The  prophecy  had  z.  first  fulfilment  in  the  Baptist,  who  went  before  the 
face  of  the  Lord  "in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah",  to  do  the  work 
here  described  (Luke  i.  17).  In  one  sense  he  was  "Elias  which  was 
for  to  come";  but  in  another  sense,  and  on  his  own  confession  (John 
i.  21),  he  was  not.  For  the  prophecy  awaits  a  second  and  (as  some 
believe)  more  literal  fulfilment ;  and  as  the  typical  Elijah  came  before 
Christ's  first  Advent,  and  "  they  knew  him  not,  but  did  unto  him  what- 
soever they  listed",  so  before  His  second  Advent  shall  another  Elijah 
come  "and  shall  restore  all  things."     (Matt.  xvii.  10 — 13). 

6.  he  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers']  The  "fathers"  here  are  the 
patriarchs,  whom  the  prophet  regards  as  estranged  from  their  degenerate 
"children",  or  descendants,  and  ceasing  to  acknowledge  them  on 
account  of  their  unworthy  character  and  conduct.  (Comp.  Isaiah  Ixiii. 
16;  Matthew  iii.  9.)  When  "the  heart  of  the  children  is  turned  to 
their  fathers",  so  that  they  seek  to  imitate  their  example  and  walk  in 
their  ways,  or,  in  other  words,  when  "the  disobedient"  are  turned  "/<? 
7i'alk  in  the  wisdom  of  the  just"  (Luke  i.  17,  R.V.),  then  the  heart  of 
the  fathers  will  turn  to  them  again  in  paternal  recognition  and  love. 

Some  think  (and  the  rendering  with,  R.V.  margin,  instead  of /^,  favours 
the  view),  that  the  prophet  refers  to  a  state  of  discord  and  dissension 
between  contending  sections  of  the  Jewish  people,  the  old  conservative, 
the  young  revolutionary,  such  as  would  need  the  intervention  of  a 
powerful  prophet  to  correct.  But  is  there  any  proof  that  this  was  the 
state  of  society  with  which  John  Baptist  had  to  deal?  Was  not  rather  the 
whole  nation  corrupt  and  in  need  of  being  restored  to  its  pristine  purity? 

with  a  curse]  The  Masoretic  direction  is  to  read  again  at  the  end  of 
this  Book  the  last  verse  but  one  (iv.  5),  in  order  to  avoid  concluding 
with  the  ominous  word  "curse"  or  "ban";  and  the  LXX.,  presumably 
with  the  same  object,  place  v.  4  after  vv.  5,  6.  Yet  the  dark  close  of 
the  Old  Testament,  "Lest  I  come  and  smite  with  the  curse",  rightly 
understood,  is  the  truest  preparation  for  the  bright  opening  of  the  New, 
"Behold,  1  am  come  to  bless  !" 


INDEX. 


Covenant  of  Levi,  23 ;  of  marriage,  26 ; 
messenger  of  ihe,  29 

Devourer,  the,  probably  the  locust,  33 
Divorce,  as  permitted   by   the    Law  of 

Moses,  27;  as  practised  in  the  time  of 

Malachi,  ib. 

Edom,  see  Esau 
Elijah,  his  twofold  coming.  38 
Esau,  or  Edom,  contrasted  with  Jacob, 
or  Israel,  16 

Fuller's  soap,  29 

Garment,  figurative  meaning  of,  27 
Gazer,  8 

Jewels,  or  peculiar  treasure  of  God,  35 

Malachi,  his  history  unknown,  7;  his 
name,  ib.  ;  his  date,  9 — 11 ;  his  style, 
II,  12 

Marriage,  primaeval  law  of,  26;  with 
heathen  wives,  25 

Messenger,   the   name    of   Malachi,   7 ; 


a  title  of  priests,  8 ;  of  prophets,  ib. ; 
of  John  Baptist,  9  ;  of  Christ,  ib. 

Nehemiah,  nearly  contemporary  with 
Malachi,  10 

Priest,  the,  an  intercessor,  19;  a  teacher, 

24 ;  a  messenger,  ib. 
Prophet,  other  names  of  the,  8 

Remembrance,  a  book  of,  Persian  and 
Biblical  use  of  the  phrase,  35 

Righteousness,  sacrifices  in,  30;  sun  of, 
36,  37 

Seer,  8 

Storehouse,  in  the  Temple,  32 

Style,  of  later  Old  Testament  writers, 

1 1 ;  of  Malachi,  ib. 
Sun,  of  righteousness,  36,  37 ;  wings  of 

the,  37  . 

Sun-god,  worship  of  the,  in  Syria,  1,1 

Tithes,  the  Jewish  law  of,  3a 

Windows,  of  heaven,  33 


Cambridge:  printed  by  j.  &  c.  f.  clay,  at  the  university  vress. 


THE   PITT   PRESS   SERIES. 


COMPLETE    LIST. 


Author 

Aeschylus 
Aristophanes 

>  > 

Demosthenes 
Euripides 


Herodotus 

Homer 

>> 

>i 

»> 

>» 
Lucian 

Plato 
Plutarch 


Sophocles 
Thucydides 


25000 
29/9/03 


GREEK. 

Work 

Prometheus  Vinctus 

Aves— Plutus— Ranae 

Vespae 

Nubes 

Olynthiacs 

Heracleidae 

Hercules  Furens 

Hippolytus 

Iphigeneia  in  Aulis 

Medea 

Hecuba 

Helena 

Alcestis 

Orestes 

Book  V 

M       VI,  VIII,  IX 

„     VIII  1—90,  IX  r— 89 
Odyssey  ix,  x 

M  XXI 

M  XI 

Iliad  VI,  XXII,  XXIII,  xxiv 

Iliad  IX,  x 

Somnium,  Charon,  etc. 

Menippus  and  Timon 

Apologia  Socratis 

Crito 

Euthyphro 

Protagoras 

Demosthenes 

Gracchi 

Nicias 

Sulla 

Timoleon 

Oedipus  Tyrannus 

Book  III 

Book  VI 

Book  VII 


Editor 

Rack  ham 

Green 

Graves 


Price 
il6  eixch 


Glover 

Beck  &  Headlam 

Gray  &  Hutchinson 

Had  ley 

Headlam 

Hadley 
Pearson 

Hadley 

Wedd 

Shuckburgh 


Edwards 

Nairn 

Edwards 

Lawson 

Heitland 

Mackie 

Adam 


J.  &  A.  M.  Adam 
Holden 


Jebb 
Spratt 

Holden 


3/6 
2/6 
3/6 
V- 
2/- 
2/6 
2/6 
2/6 
3/6 
2/6 
4/6 

,  3/- 
4/-  each 
2/6  each 
2/6  each 

,  "/■ 
2/-  each 

2/6 

3l6 

2/6 
2/6 
4/6 
4/6 
6/. 

1: 

6/- 
4/- 

r         ,  5/- 

5/- 


THE  PITT  PRESS  SERIES, 


GREEK  continued. 


Author 

Work 

Editor 

Frice 

Xenophon 

Agesilaus 

Hailstone 

2I6 

^^ 

Anabasis  Vol.  I.    Text 

Pretor 

3/- 

>i 

Vol.  II.    Notes 

i> 

4/6 

„ 

I,  n 

>• 

4/- 

„           I,  III,  IV,  V 

II 

«/-  each 
2/6  each 

„            11,  VI,  VII 

>» 

Hellenics  i,  II 

Edwards 

3/6 

„ 

Cyropaedeia  I 

Shuckburgh 

./6 

II 

" 

•  » 

2/- 

t« 

III,  IV,  V 

Holden 

5/- 

ft 

„               VI,  VII,  VIII 

,, 

5/- 

ti 

Memorabilia  i 

Edwards 

2/6 

•» 

LATIN. 

»» 

2/6 

Bede 

Eccl.  History  in,  iv 

Lumby 

7/6 

De  Bello  Gallico 

Com.  I,  III,  VI,  viii 

Peskett 

1/6  each 

»• 

„      ii-iii,  and  VII 

,, 

al-  each 

>> 

1,      i-iii 

•» 

3/- 

„        IV-V 

,, 

»/6 

It 

De  Bello  Civili.    Com.  i 

Peskett 

3/- 

II 

„         ,,          Com.  Ill 

,, 

./6 

Cicero 

Actio  Prima  in  C.  Verreni 

Cowie 

1/6 

II 

De  Amicitia 

Reid 

3/6 

De  Senectute 

II 

3/6 

>i 

De  Officiis.     Bk  iii 

Holden 

•il- 

11 

Pro  Lege  Manilla 

Div.   in  Q.  Caec.  et  Actio 

Nicol 

1/6 

Prima  in  C.  Verrem 

Heitland  &  Cowie       3/- 

>t 

Ep.  ad  Atticum.     Lib  li 

Pretor 

3/- 

i» 

Orations  against  Catiline 

Nicol 

./6 

•1 

Philippica  Secunda 

Peskett 

3/6 

Pro  Archia  Poeta 

Reid 

%h 

It 

II    Balbo 

11 

1/6 

It 

„    Milone 

I) 

«/6 

•f 

„    Murena 

Heitland 

3/- 

>t 

1,    Plancio 

Holden 

4/6 

*• 

,1    Sulla 

Reid 

3/6 

Somnium  Scipionis 

Pearman 

'^h 

Cornelius 

Nepos  Four  parts 

Shuckburgh 

1 16  each 

Horace 

Epistles.     Bk  i 

II 

./6 

•I 

Odes  and  Epodes 

Gow 

5/- 

1) 

Odes.    Books  i,  ill 

2/-  ecu:k 

»» 

„        r>ooks  II,  IV ;  Epodes    „ 

1 16  each 

Satires.     Book   i 

1 1 

^/- 

Juvenal 

Satires 

DuflF 

5/- 

THE  PITT  PRESS  SERIES. 


Author 

Llvy 


,,  (adapted  froii 
Lucan 

>> 
Lucretius 

Ovid" 


LATIN  conlinueU. 
Work 
Book  I 
M     n 

„       IV,  IX,  XXVII 

M  VI 

„     V 

,,      XXI,  XXII 

i)  Story  of  the  Kings  of  Rom 


Editor 

\l.  ].  Edwards 
Conway 
Stephenson 
Marshall 
Whihley 
Dimsdale 


/;/  t/i 


Pbaedrus 
Plautus 


Quintus  Curtlus 
Sallust 


Tacitus 

Terence 
Vergil 


Prtce 

Press 

2/6 

2/6  eac/i 

lie 

2/6 
•2/6  each 


Pharsalia.     Bk  i 

De  Bello  Civili.     lik  vii 

Book  III 
„     V 

Fasti.     Book  vi 

Metamorphoses,  Bk  i 

,,  Bk  viij 

Fables 

Epidicus 

Stichus 

Trinummus 

Alexander  in  India 
(^"aliline 
Jugurtha 

Agricola  and  Germania 
Hist.     Bk  I 
Hautontimorumenos 
Aeneid  1  to  xii 
Bucolics 
Georgics  i,  11,  and  in,  iv 
Comi>lete  Works,  Vol.  i,  Text 
i>  »         Vol.  II,  Notes 


G.  M.  Edwards    '       r/6 
Heitland  &  Haskins   j/6 


Postgate 
Duff 

>> 
Sidgwick 
Dowdall 
Summers 
Flaiher 
Gray 
Fcnntll 
Gray 

Heitland  &  Raven 
Summers 


2/- 

,/6 

1/6 
./6 

t 

7/6 


Stephenson 
Davies 
Gray 
Sidgwick 


2/6 
3/6 
.V6 
2/- 
2/6 

3/- 

2/6 

3/- 

I  /6  ddcA 

./6 
2/-  eacA 

4/6 


FRENCH. 

T/ie  Volumes  marked  *  contain  Vocabulary. 


About 
*Biart 
Boileau 
Corneille 

)» 
De  Bonnechose 


Delavigne 

>> 
De  Lamartine 
De  Vigny 


Le  Roi  des  Montagues 

Quand  j'etais  petit,  Pts  i,  ii 

L'Art  Poetique 

La  Suite  du  Menteur 

Polyeucte 

Lazare  Hoclie 

Bertrand  du  Gucsclin 

;,     Part  II 
Louis  XI 

Les  Enfants  d'Edouard 
Jeanne  d'Arc 
La  Canne  de  Jonc 

3 


Ropes 

Boielle 

Nichol  Smith 

Masson 

Braunlioltz 

Colbeck 

Leathes 

Eve 
>> 
Clapin  &  Ropes 
Eve 


2/- 


':ach 
2I6 
2/. 

$ 

2/- 
2/- 
1/6 
1/6 


THE   PITT  PRESS  SERIES. 


FRENCH  continued. 


Author 

Work 

Editor 

Price 

*Dumas 

La  Fortune  de  D'Artagnan 

Ropes 

2/- 

*Enault 

Le  Chien  du  Capitaine 

Verrall 

1\- 

Erckraann-Chatrian     La  Guerre 

Clapin 

3(- 

55 

Waterloo 

Ropes 

3- 

Le  Blocus 

»> 

3/- 

Madame  Therese 

»> 

3/- 

Ilistoire  d'un  Conscrit 

3/- 

Gautier 

Voyage  en  Italic  (Selections) 

Payen  Payne  In  the  Press 

Guizot 

Discours  sur  I'Histoire  de  la 

Revolution  d'Angleterre 

Eve 

2/6 

*Malot 

Remi  et  ses  Amis 

Verrall 

2/- 

* 

Rcmi  en  Angleterre 

55 

2/- 

Merimee 

Colomba   {Abridged) 

Ropes 

% 

Mich3let 

Louis  XI  &  Charles  the  Bold 

,j 

Moliere 

Le  Bourgeois  Gentilhomme 

Clapin 

lie 

>i 

L'Ecolc  des  Femmes 

Saintsbury 

2/6 

Les  Precieuses  ridicules 

Braunholtz 

2/. 

>» 

, ,       {A  b7-idged  Edition) 

,, 

I/- 

5» 

Le  Misanthrope 

>> 

2/6 

L'Avare 

»5 

2/6 

*Perrault 

Fairy  Tales 

Rippmann 

1/6 

Piron 

La  Metromanie 

Masson 

2/- 

Ponsard 

Charlotte  Corday 

Ropes 

w- 

Racine 

Les  Plaideurs 

Braunholtz 

3/- 

,, 

, ,       {A bridged  Edition ) 

'» 

l/- 

,, 

Athalie 

Eve 

2/- 

Saintine 

Picciola 

Ropes 

^/- 

Sandeau 

Mdlle  de  la  Seigliere 

55 

2/- 

Scribe  &  Legouv6    Bataille  de  Dames 

Bull 

2/- 

Scribe 

Le  Verre  d'Eau 

Colbeck 

2/- 

Sedaine 

Le  Philosophe  sans  le  savoir 

Bull 

^1- 

Souvestre 

Un  Philosophe  sous  les  Toits 

Eve 

^1- 

^j 

Le  Serf  &  Le  Chevrier  de  Lorraine     Ropes 

2/- 

* 

Le  Serf 

5) 

1/6 

Spencer 

A  Primer  of  French  Verse 

3/- 

Stael,  Mme  de 

Le  Directoire 

Masson  &  Protherc 

2/- 

>> 

Dix  Annees  d'Exil  (Book  II 

chapters  i — 8) 

» 

^1- 

Tliierry 

Lettres    sur    I'histoire     de 

France  (xiil— xxiv) 

1* 

2/6 

,, 

Recits  des  Temps  Merovin- 

giens,  I — III 

Masson  &  Ropes 

3/- 

ViUemain 

Lascaris  ou  les  Grecs  du  xv®  Siecle        Masson 

2/. 

Voltaire 

Xavier  de 
IVIaistre 


Histoire  du  Siecle  de  Louis 

XIV,  in  three  parts      Masson  &  Prothero    2/6  eack 
La  Jeune   Siberienne.     Le)    ^^^^^^ 

Lepreux  de  la  Cit e  d' Aoste ) 


1/6 


THE  PITT  PRESS  SERIES. 
GERMAN. 

The  Volumes  marked  *  contain   Vocabulary, 


A  uthor 

Work 

*Andersen 

Eight  Fairy  Tales 

Beuedix 

Dr  Wespe 

Freytag 

Der  Staat  Friedrichs  des 

Grossen 

,, 

Die  Journalisten 

Goethe 

Knabenjahre  (1749— 176 1) 

>j 

Hermann  und  Dorothea 

Iphigenie 

*  Grimm 

Selected  Tales 

Gutzkow 

Zopf  und  Schwert 

Hacklander 

Der  geheime  Agent 

Haufif 

Das  Bild  des  Kaisers 

ii 

Das  Wirthshaus  im  Spessart 

tt 

Die  Karavane 

* 

Der  Scheik  von  Alessandria 

Immermann 

Der  Oberhof 

*Klee 

Die  deutschen  Heldensagen 

Kolilrauscli 

Das  Jahr  181 3 

Lessing 

Minna  von  Barnhelm 

Lessing  &  Gellert    Selected  Fables 

Meudelssoliu 

Selected  Letters 

Raumer 

Der  erste  Kreuzzug 

Riehl 

Culturgeschichtliche 

Novellen 

Die  Ganerben  &  Die  Ge- 

rechtigkeit  Gottes 

Schiller 

Wilhelm  Tell 

n 

{^Abridged  Edition) 

i> 

Geschichte  des   dreissigjah- 

rigen  Kriegs  Book  III. 

}) 

Maria  Stuart 

l» 

■    Wallenstein  I.  (Lager  and 

Piccolomini) 

M 

Wallenstein  IL  (Tod) 

Sybel 

Prinz  Eugen  von  Savoyen 

Uhland 

Ernst,  Herzog  von  Schwaben 

Ballads  on  Ger^ian  History 
German  Dactylic  Poetry 


Editor 

Price 

Rippmann 

2/6 

Breul 

3/- 

Wagner 

^/; 

Eve 

2/6 

Wagner  &  Cartmell 

^z- 

>>                  i» 

3/6 

Breul 

3/6 

Rippmann 

3/- 

Wolstenholme 

3/6 

E.  L.  Milner  Barry 

3/- 

Breul 

3/- 

Schlottmann 

&  Cartmell 

3/- 

Schlottmann 

3/- 

Rippmann 

./6 

Wagner 

hi- 

Wolstenholme 

ll- 

Cartmell      [/«  the  Press 

Wolstenholme 

3/- 

Breul 

3/- 

Sime 

3/- 

Wagner 

^A 

Wolstenholme 

3/- 

ti 

3/- 

Breul 

2/6 

>> 

1/6 

>$ 

3/- 

It 

3/6 

>i 

3/6 

3/6 

Quiggin 

2/6 

Wolstenholme 

3/6 

Wagner 

i\' 

» 

3/- 

THE  PITT  PRESS  SERIES, 


ENGLISH. 

Author 

Work 

Editor                  Prict 

Bacon 

Histoiy  of  the  Reign  of 

King  Henry  VII 

Lumby                  3/- 

>» 

Essays 

West           3/6  &  5/- 

New  Atlantis 

G.  C.  M.  Smith  1/6 

Cowley 

Essays 

Lumby                  4/- 

Defoe 

Robinson  Crusoe,  Part  I 

Masterman           2/- 

Earle 

Microcosmography 

West           3/-  &  4/- 

Gray 

Poems 

Tovey         4/-  &  5/- 

Kingsley 

The  Heroes 

E.  A.  Gardner     2/- 

Lamb 

Tales  from  Shakespeare 

Flather                 1/6 

Macauiay 

Lord  Clive 

Innes                     1/6 

>> 

Warren  Hastings 

1/6 

i; 

William  Pitt  and  Earl  of  Chatham     ,,                       2/6 

Lays  and  other  Poems 

Flather                 1/6 

Mayor 

A  Sketch  of  Ancient  Philosophy 

from  Thales  to  Cicero 

3/6 

M 

Handbook  of  English  Metre 

%■ 

More 

History  of  King  Kichard  III 

Lumby                3/6 

,, 

Utopia 

3/6 

Milton 

Arcades  and  Comus 

Verity                    3/- 

%t 

Ode  on  the  Nativity,  L'Alle- 

2/6 

gro,  11  Penseroso  &  Lycidas 

»» 

Samson  Agonistes 

2/6 

;} 

Sonnets 

1/6 

Paradise  Lost,  six  parts 

„                2/-  each 

Pope 

Essay  on  CritUBBm 

West                     2/- 

Scott 

Marmion 

Maslerman          2/6 

>> 

Lady  of  the  Lake 

2/6 

>f 

Lay  of  the  last  Minstrel 

Flather                 2/- 

i« 

Legend  of  Montrose 

Simpson               2/6 

Lord  of  the  Isles 

Flather                  2/. 

>> 

Old  Mortality 

Nicklin                 2/6 

Kenilworth 

Flather  [///  the  Press 

Shakespeare 

A  Midsummer-Night's  Dream 

Verity                    1/6 

?i 

Twelfth  Night 

1/6 

>» 

Julius  Caesar 

1/6 

»» 

The  Tempest 

1/6 

>> 

King  Lear 

1/6 

«i 

Merchant  of  Venice 

1/6 

«> 

King  Richard  II 

1/6 

f» 

As  You  Like  It 

1/6 

)} 

King  Henry  V 

1/6 

)) 

Macbeth 

.      ,,                    1/6 

Hamlet 

,,        Tn  the  Press 

Shakespeare 

&  Fletcher  Two  Noble  Kinsmen 

Skeat                    3/6 

Sidney 

An  Apologie  for  Poetrie 

Shuckbureh          xl- 

Wallace 

Outlines  of  the  Philosophy  of  Aristotle                     4/6 

THE   PITT  PRESS  SERIES. 
ENGLISH  coutiiuied. 


Author 


Work 


Editor 


Prict 


West 

Elements  of  English  Grammar 

2/6 

jj 

English  Grammar  for  Beginners 

i/- 

»» 

Key  to  English  Grammars 

3/6  net 

Carlos 

Short  History  of  British  India 

•/- 

Mill 

Elementary  Commercial  Geography 

1/6 

Bartholomew 

Atlas  of  Commercial  Geography 

5/- 

Robinson 

Church  Catechism  Explained 

ih 

Jackson 

The  Prayer  Book  Explained.     Part  I 

2I6 

i> 

Part  II 

MATHEMATICS. 

In  the  Press 

Ball 

Elementary  Algebra 

4/6 

Euclid 

Books  I— VI,  XI,  XII                              Taylor              t^l- 

,j 

Books  I— VI 

4/- 

•« 

Books  I— IV                                               , 
Also  separately 

.        .            3/- 

1} 

Books  I,  &  II;  III,  &  IV;  v,  &  vi;  xi, 

&  XII  1/6  each 

(« 

Solutions  to  Exercises  in  Taylor's 

Euclid                                          W.  W 

Taylor     10/6 

And  separately 

i» 

Solutions  to  Bks  I— iv                           „ 

6/- 

i> 

Solutions  to  Books  vi.  xi                     „ 

6/. 

HobsonJcJeSRop  Elementary  Plane  Trigonometry 

4/6 

Loney 


Smltli,  C. 


Hale,  G. 


Elements  of  Statics  and  Dynamics  7/6 

Part  I.    Elements  of  Statics  4/6 

„     II.    Elements  of  Dynamics  7^\(i 

Elements  of  Hydrostatics  4/6 

Solutions  to  Examples,  Hydrostatics  5/- 

Solutions  of  Examples,  Statics  and  Dynamics  7/6 

Mechanics  and  Hydrostatics  4/6 

Arithmetic  for  Schools,  with  or  without  answers  3/6 

Part  I.   Chapters  i — viii.    Elementary,   with 

or  without  answers  i\- 

Part  II.     Chapters  IX— xx,  with  or  without 

answers  2/- 

Key  to  Smith's  Arithmetic  7/6 


London:   C.  J.  CLAY  and  SONS, 

CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS   WAREHOUSE, 

AVE    MARIA    LANE. 

GLASGOW  :  50,  Wellington  Stkket. 
7 


Sije  (!rami)Lilige  Bible  foe  ^cljools 
antr  (B"olleges. 

General  Editors  : 
J.  J.  S.  PEROWNE,  D.D.,  Formerly  Bishop  op  Worcester 
A.  F.  KIRKPATRICK,  D.D., 

Lady  Margaret  Professor  op  Divinity. 

Extra  Fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  with  Maps  when  required. 
New  Volumes. 
I  and  H  Chronicles.  Rev.  W.  E.  Barnes,  D.D.     2s  Qd  net 
Psalms.    Books  II  and  III.    Prof.  Kirkpatrick,  D.D     '^s  net 
Psalms.   Books  IV  and  V.   Prof.  Kirkpatrick,  D.D.   2s.  net. 
Song  of  Solomon.    Rev.  Andrew  Harper,  B.D.     Is  6d  net 

°**i?^°^o^^^it^-     ^^^^^-  I-— X3CXIX.     Rev.  J.  Skinner', 
D.D.     2s.  6tZ.  net. 

Chaps.  3CI..— LXVI.   Rev.  J.  Skinner.  D.D.    2s.  6rZ  net 

Book  of  Daniel.    Rev.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.     2si  M  net 
^^ifT^^   Timothy   6c  Titus.     Rev.   A.  E.   Humphreys, 
M.A.    2s.  net. 

Cfte  Smaller 
Cambrftigt  aSible  for  ;^rl)ooIs;. 

Now  Ready.     With  Maps.     Price  Is.  each  vohime. 
Book  of  Joshua.    Rev.  J.  S.  Black,  LL.D. 
Book  of  Judges.     Rev.  J.  S.  Black,  LL.D. 
First  Book  of  Samuel.    Prof.  Kirkpatrick,  D.D. 
Second  Book  of  Samuel.     Prof.  Kirkpatrick,  D.D. 
First  Book  of  Kings.     Prof.  Lumby,  D.D. 
Second  Book  of  Kings.     Prof.  Lumby,  D.D. 
Ezra  &  MTehemiah.     The  Rt.  Rev.  H.  E.  Ryle,  D.D. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Matthew.     Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Mark.     Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Luke.    Very  Rev.  F.  W.  Farear,  D.D. 
Gospel  according  to  St  John.     Rev.  A.  Plummer,  D.D. 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.     Prof.  Lumby,  D.D. 

ClK  Cambnbcye  (greek  Cesftament 

for  Schools  null  (SITolkges. 

General  Editors:   J.  J.  S.  PEROWNE,  D.D., 
J.  ARMITAGE  ROBINSON,  D.D. 
New  Volumes. 
BpisUetothePhiUppians.  Rt.Rev.H.C.G.MouLE.D.D.  2s.  Gd. 
Epistie  of  St  James.     Rev.  A.  Care,  M.A.     2s.  G(L 
Pastoral  EpisUes.   Rev.  J.  H.  Bernard,  D.D.     3s.  6d. 
Book  of  Revelation.    Rev.  W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A.     5s. 


aonOott:    C.   J.   CLAY   and   SONS, 

CAMBRn)GE   WAREHOUSE,    AVE   MARIA  LANE. 

©laggofaj:    50,  WELLINGTON  STREET. 

Eeipjifl:   P.  A.  BROCKHAUS. 

^&a  lork:    THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY. 

CAMBRIDGE:     PEINTBD    BV    J.    &    C.    P.    CLAY,    AT    THB    UNIVBBSITT    PRBSS. 

8 


THE    CAMBRIDGE     BIBLE    FOR 
SCHOOLS    AND    COLLEGES. 

General  Editors: 

J.  J.  S.  Perowne,  D.D.,  formerly  Bishop  of  Worcester. 

A.  F.  KiRKPATRicK,  D.D.,  Lady  Margaret  Professor  of 

Divinity. 

Guardian.  — *  *  It  is  diffictilt  to  commend  too  hi^rhly  this  exrclhnt  series:' 
Academy —'' Nearly  every  boolz  of  the  Bible,  with  the  exception  of 
those  included  in  the  Pentateuch,  has  nozv  been  included  in  this  excellent 
series,  excellent  alike  for  its  clear  and  convenient  arrangement,  for  the 
hicrh  scholarship  of  most  of  its  editors,  and  for  the  liberal  attitude  which 
many  of  tJwn  adopt  toivards  tfiatters  of  criticism. 

Church  Review.— "77?^  'Cambridge  Bible,'  started  so  many  years 
ao-o,  and  so  firmly  established  by  this  time  in  its  unique  position,  is  nearing 
its  completion:'' 

Baptist  Magazine.-"  ^^w^n/x  of  forty  volumes  have  already  been 
contributed  to  the  invaluable  '  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools  and  Colleges 
and  the  ttvo  latest  {.Chronicles  and  Proverbs)  xvill  %vell  sustain  the  high 
character  of  the  Series:' 

Church  Sunday  School  Magazine.—"  We  cannot  imagine  any  safer 
or  more  helpful  commentaries  for  the  student  of  Holy  Scripture. 

Sunday  School  Chronicle.-"  r/^^r^  are  no  better  books  in  exposition 
of  the  different  parts  of  Scripture  than  those  contained  m  the  Cambridge 
Bible  for  Schools  and  Colleges.  The  series  has  long  since  established  its 
claim  to  an  honourable  place  in  the  front  rank  of  first-rate  comnientar^^^^^^^ 
and  the  teacher  or  preacher  tvho  masters  its  volumes  will  be,  like  Apollos, 
'  mighty  in  the  Scriptures:  All  conscientious  and  earnest  students  of  the 
Scriptures  ozve  an  immense  debt  to  the  Cambridge  University  P/^fff'^ 
mi  for  Schools  and  Colleges.  Take  if  for  all  m  all,  it  ^^  frobably  the 
most  useful  commentary  alike  on  the  Old  Testament  and  on  the  New  that 
has  been  given  us  in  recent  years :^ 

lOOOO 

4/8/03 


1     CAMBRIDGE   BIBLE  FOR  SCHOOLS  6-   COLLEGES. 


Chronicles.  Christian  World. — "An  admirable  addition  to  the 
well-known  Cambridge  Bible  Series.  Dr  Barnes  has  done  his  work 
thoroughly  well,  and  has  given  us  a  commentary  on  Chronicles,  which 
is  decidedly  the  best  to  be  found  in  English,  in  spite  of  the  limitations 
imposed  by  the  series  in  which  it  appears." 

Lilerature. — "  An  edition  which  deserves  much  praise." 

Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  Guardian. — "  Professor  Ryle's  Commentary 
is  quite  the  best  work  on  these  books  accessible  to  the  English  reader." 

The  Book  of  Job.  Spectator. — "  Able  and  scholarly  as  the  Introduc- 
tion is,  it  is  far  surpassed  by  the  detailed  exegesis  of  the  book.  In  this 
Dr  Davidson's  strength  is  at  its  greatest.  His  linguistic  knowledge, 
his  artistic  habit,  his  scientific  insight,  and  his  literary  power  have  full 
scope  when  he  comes  to  exegesis." 

Methodist  Recorder. — "Already  we  have  frequently  called  attention 
to  this  exceedingly  valuable  work  as  its  volumes  have  successively  ap- 
peared. But  we  have  never  done  so  with  greater  pleasure,  very  seldom 
with  so  great  pleasure,  as  we  now  refer  to  the  last  published  volume, 
that  on  the  Book  of  Job,  by  Dr  Davidson,  of  Edinburgh.... We  cordially 
commend  the  volume  to  all  our  readers.  The  least  instructed  will  under- 
stand and  enjoy  it ;  and  mature  scholars  will  learn  from  it." 

Psalms.  Book  I.  Church  Times. — "It  seems  in  every  way  a  most 
valuable  little  book,  containing  a  mass  of  information,  well-assorted, 
and  well-digested,  and  will  be  useful  not  only  to  students  preparing  for 
examinations,  but  to  many  who  want  a  handy  volume  of  explanation  to 
much  that  is  difficult  in  the  Psalter We  owe  a  great  debt  of  grati- 
tude to  Professor  Kirkpatrick  for  his  scholarly  and  interesting  volume." 

Psalms.  Books  n.  and  III.  Critical  Review.  — "  The  second  volume 
of  Professor  Kirkpatrick's  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Psalms  has 
all  the  excellent  qualities  which  characterised  the  first.. ..It  gives  what 
is  best  in  the  philology  of  the  subject.  Its  notes  furnish  what  is  most 
needed  and  most  useful.  Its  literary  style  is  attractive.  It  furnishes  all 
that  is  of  real  value  in  the  form  of  introduction,  and  it  has  a  studious 
regard  for  the  devout  as  well  as  intelligent  understanding  of  the  Psalms." 

Psalms.  Books  IV.  and  V.  Record. — *'  We  are  glad  to  welcome 
the  third  and  concluding  volume  of  Dr  Kirkpatrick's  admirable  work' 
on  the  Psalms.  It  is  not,  indeed,  drawn  up  with  a  view  to  the  needs 
of  Hebrew  students;  but  for  educated  readers  ignorant  of  Hebrew  it  is, 
in  our  opinion,  by  far  the  most  useful  aid  to  the  study  of  the  Psalms— 
learned,  cautious,  reverent." 

Christian. — "The  introduction  and  notes  are  learned  and  luminous, 
and  students  will  consult  the  book  with  delight.  On  critical  questions, 
the  editor  is  not  extreme,  but  he  frequently  goes  further  than  we  like. 
A  reverent  spirit  pervades  the  pages,  whether  expository  of  critical. " 

Proverbs.  London  Quarterly/  Review. — "Such  a  volume  has  been 
greatly  needed,  and  students  vri[\  be  very  thankful  for  a  little  book 
whose  merits  they  will  more  and  more  appreciate  as  they  use  it.  It  is 
beautifully  written  and  full  of  suggestive  comments." 


OPINIONS  OF   THE  PRESS. 


Job — Hosea.  Guardian. — "  It  is  difficult  to  commend  too  highly 
this  excellent  series,  the  volumes  of  which  are  now  becoming  numerous. 
The  two  books  before  us,  small  as  they  are  in  size,  comprise  almost 
everything  that  the  young  student  can  reasonably  expect  to  find  in  the 
way  of  helps  towards  such  general  knowledge  of  their  subjects  as  may 
be  gained  without  an  attempt  to  grapple  with  the  Hebrew ;  and  even 
the  learned  scholar  can  hardly  read  without  interest  and  benefit  the  very 
able  introductory  matter  which  both  these  commentators  have  prefixed 
to  their  volumes." 

Isaiah.  Chapters  I— XXXIX.  Professor  W.  H.  Bennett  in  the 
British  Weekly, — "  Dr  Skinner's  name  on  the  title-page  of  this  book 
is  a  guarantee  for  extensive  and  exact  scholarship  and  for  careful  and 
accurate  treatment  of  the  subject.  This  little  volume  will  more  than 
sustain  the  high  reputation  of  the  series  in  which  it  appears... readers 
will  look  forward  with  much  interest  to  Dr  Skinner's  second  volume  on 
chapters  xl — Ixvi." 

School  Guardian. — "This  last  addition  to  'The  Cambridge  Bible  for 
Schools  and  Colleges,'  is  a  most  valuable  one,  and  will  go  far  to 
increase  the  usefulness  of  what  we  have  no  hesitation  in  cSling  the 
most  useful  commentary  for  school  purposes.  There  ought  to  be  two 
copies,  at  least,  of  this  in  every  parish — one  in  the  clergyman's  and  the 
other  in  the  teacher's  library." 

Jeremiah.  Church  Quarterly  Revieiv. — "The  arrangement  of  the 
book  is  well  treated  on  pp.  xxx.,  396,  and  the  question  of  Baruch's 
relations  with  its  composition  on  pp.  xxvii.,  xxxiv.,  317.  The  illustra- 
tions from  English  literature,  history,  monuments,  works  on  botany, 
topography,  etc.,  are  good  and  plentiful,  as  indeed  they  are  in  other 
volumes  of  this  series." 

EzeMel.  Guardian. — "No  book  of  the  Old  Testament  stands 
more  in  need  of  a  commentator  than  this,  and  no  scholar  in  England 
or  Scotland  is  better  qualified  to  comment  upon  it  than  Dr  A.  B. 
Davidson.  With  sound  scholarship  and  excellent  judgement  he  com- 
bines an  insight  into  Oriental  modes  of  thought  which  renders  him  a 
specially  trustworthy  guide  to  a  book  such  as  this.... His  commentary 
may  be  safely  recommended  as  the  best  that  has  yet  appeared.  Nor  is 
it  unlikely  that  it  will  remain  the  best  for  some  time  to  come." 

Joel  and  Amos.  Church  Bells. — "  Professor  Driver's  latest  con- 
tribution to  the  Cambridge  Bible  cannot  but  shed  lustre  and  value  on 
this  already  praiseworthy  attempt  to  aid  our  students  of  Bible  history 
and  doctrine.  The  introduction  and  notes  place  this  book  among  the 
best  handbooks  to  the  Prophets'  lives,  work,  and  mission." 

Nahum,  Habaklrak  and  Zephaniah.  Critical  Review. — **  No  better 
guide  to  these  three  prophets  could  be  wished  than  Dr  Davidson's  little 
book.  His  commentaries  on  Job  and  Ezekiel  are  perhaps  the  best  in 
this  excellent  series,  and  the  present  work  is  equal  to  its  predecessors." 

Guardian. — "  Prof.  Davidson  has  laid  all  students  of  the  Old 
Testament  under  a  fresh  debt  of  gratitude  by  the  publication  of  tJbis 
scholarly  little  volume.    It  is  quite  the  best  commentary  on  these  books 


CAMBRIDGE  BIBLE  FOR  SCHOOLS  6-   COLLEGES, 


that  has  yet  appeared.... Small  as  it  is,  the  volume  is  well  worthy  to 
take  its  place  by  the  side  of  the  same  author's  invaluable  commentaries 
on  Job  and  Ezekiel." 

Spectator. — "We  may  say  without  hesitation  that  Professor  David- 
son's guidance  is  amply  satisfactory.  The  theological  student  or  the 
preacher  who  may  have  to  deal  with  the  subject  cannot  do  better  than 
consult  him." 

First  Book  of  Maccabees.  Bookman. — "Useful  at  once  to  the 
theological  student  and  the  serious  reader  of  the  Bible.  The  notes  are 
exceedingly  interesting  and  are  careful  summaries  of  the  best  research." 

Ediuational  Thncs. — **  An  excellent  school  and  college  edition." 

St  Matthew.  English  Churchman. — "The  introduction  is  able, 
scholarly,  and  eminently  practical,  as  it  bears  on  the  authorship  and 
contents  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  original  form  in  which  it  is  supposed 
to  have  been  written.  It  is  well  illustrated  by  two  excellent  maps  of 
the  Holy  Land  and  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee." 

St  Mark.  Expositor. — "  Into  this  small  volume  Dr  Maclear,  besides 
a  clear  and  able  Introduction  to  the  Gospel,  and  the  text  of  St  Mark, 
has  compressed  many  hundreds  of  valuable  and  helpful  notes.  In 
short,  he  has  given  us  a  capital  manual  of  the  kind  required — containing 
all  that  is  needed  to  illustrate  the  text,  i.e.  all  that  can  be  drawn  from 
the  history,  geography,  customs,  and  manners  of  the  time.  But  as  a 
handbocfk,  giving  in  a  clear  and  succinct  form  the  information  which 
a  lad  requires  in  order  to  stand  an  examination  in  the  Gospel,  it  is 

admirable 1  can  very  heartily  conamend  it,  not  only  to  the  senior 

boys  and  girls  in  our  High  Schools,  but  also  to  Sunday-school  teachers, 
who  may  get  from  it  the  very  kind  of  knowledge  they  often  find  it 
hardest  to  get. " 

St  Luke.  Spectator. — **  Canon  Farrar  has  supplied  students  of 
the  Gospel  with  an  admirable  manual  in  this  volume.  It  has  all  that 
copious  variety  of  illustration,  ingenuity  of  suggestion,  and  general 
soundness  of  interpretation  which  readers  are  accustomed  to  expect 
from  the  learned  and  eloquent  editor.  Anyone  who  has  been  accus- 
tomed to  associate  the  idea  of  'dryness'  with  a  commentary,  should  go 
to  Canon  Farrar's  St  Luke  for  a  more  correct  impression.  He  will 
find  that  a  commentary  may  be  made  interesting  in  the  highest  degree, 
and  that  without  losing  anything  of  its  solid  value.. ..But,  so  to  speak, 
it  is  too  good  for  some  of  the  readers  for  whom  it  is  intended. " 

St  John.  English  Churchman. — "The  notes  are  extremely  scho- 
larly and  valuable,  and  in  most  cases  exhaustive,  bringing  to  the 
elucidation  of  the  text  all  that  is  best  in  commentaries,  ancient  and 
modern." 

Acte.  School  Guardian. — "  We  do  not  know  of  any  other  volume 
where  so  much  help  is  given  to  the  complete  understanding  of  one  of 
the  most  important  and,  in  many  respects,  difficult  books  of  the  New 
Testament." 

Romans.  Expositor. — "The  *  Notes'  are  very  good,  and  lean,  as 
the  notes  of  a  School  Bible  should,  to  the  most  commonly  accepted 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 


and  orthodox  view  of  the  inspired  author's  meaning;  while  the  Intro- 
duction, and  especially  the  Sketch  of  the  Life  of  St  Paul,  is  a  model 
of  condensation.  It  is  as  lively  and  pleasant  to  read  as  if  two  or  three 
facts  had  not  been  crowded  into  well-nigh  every  sentence." 

Epheslans.  Baptist  Magazine. — **  It  seems  to  us  the  model  of  a 
School  and  College  Commentary— comprehensive,  but  not  cumbersome; 
scholarly,  but  not  pedantic." 

Guardian.— "  It  supplies  matter  which  is  evidently  the  outcome  of 
deep  study  pursued  with  a  devotional  mind. " 

Phillppians.  Pecord.— "There  are  few  series  more  valued  by 
theological  students  than  *The  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools  and 
Colleges/  and  there  will  be  no  number  of  it  more  esteemed  than  that 
by  Mr  H.  C.  G.  Moule  on  the  E/>lstlg  to  the  Philippians.'" 

Colossians.    Record.— ''Those  who  have  already  used  with  pleasure 
and  profit  Mr  Moule's  volumes  of  the  same  series  on  Ephesians  and 
Philippians  will  open  this  little  book  with  the  highest  expectations. 
They  will  not  be  disappointed....... No  more  complete  or  trustworthy 

volume  has  been  contributed  to  this  series." 

Expository  Times. — "This  is  now  the  Commentary  on  Colossians  and 
Philemon  to  have  at  your  hand,  whether  you  are  schoolboy  or  scholar, 
layman  or  clergyman." 

Thessaloaians.  Academy.— ''^Ix  Findlay  maintains  the  high  level 
of  the  series  to  which  he  has  become  contributor.  Some  parts  of  his 
introduction  to  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  could  scarcely  be 
bettered.  The  account  of  Thessalonica,  the  description  of  the  style  and 
character  of  the  Epistles,  and  the  analysis  of  them  are  excellent  in  style 
and  scholarly  care.  The  notes  are  possibly  too  voluminous  ;  but  there 
is  so  much  matter  in  them,  and  the  matter  is  arranged  and  handled  so 
ably,  that  we  are  ready  to  forgive  their  fulness.. ..Mr  Findlay's  com- 
mentary is  a  valuable  addition  to  what  has  been  written  on  the  letters 
to  the  Thessalonian  Church." 

Baptist  Magazine.— ''lAx  Findlay  has  fulfilled  in  this  volume  a 
task  which  Dr  Moulton  was  compelled  to  decline,  though  he  has  rendered 
valuable  aid  in  its  preparation.  The  commentary  is  in  its  own  way  a 
model— clear,  forceful,  scholarly— such  as  young  students  will  welcome 
as  a  really  useful  guide,  and  old  ones  will  acknowledge  as  giving  in 
brief  space  the  substance  of  all  that  they  knew." 

Tuuotliy  and  Titus.  The  Christian.— ''The  series  includes  many 
volumes  of  sterling  worth,  and  this  last  may  rank  among  the  niost 
valuable.  The  pages  evince  careful  scholarship  and  a  thorough  acquaint- 
ance with  expository  literature ;  and  the  work  should  promote  a  more 
general  and  practical  study  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles." 

Hebrews.  Baptist  Magazim.—'' Uikc  his  (Canon  Farrar's)  com- 
mentary on  Luke  it  possesses  all  the  best  characteristics  of  his  writing. 
It  is  a  work  not  only  of  an  accomplished  scholar,  but  of  a  skilled 
teacher." 


6    CAMBRIDGE  BIBLE  FOR  SCHOOLS  6-   COLLEGES, 


James.  Expositor. —  "It  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  by  far  the  best 
exposition  of  the  Epistle  of  St  James  in  the  English  language.  Not 
schoolboys  or  students  going  in  for  an  examination  alone,  but  ministers 
and  preachers  of  the  Word,  may  get  more  real  help  from  it  than  from 
the  most  costly  and  elaborate  commentaries." 

The  Epistles  of  St  John.  Churchman. — •'  This  forms  an  admirable 
companion  to  the  'Commentary  on  the  Gospel  according  to  St  John,' 
which  was  reviewed  in  The  Churchman  as  soon  as  it  appeared.  Dr 
Plummet  has  some  of  the  highest  qualifications  for  such  a  task ;  and 
these  two  volumes,  their  size  being  considered,  will  bear  comparison 
with  the  best  Commentaries  of  the  time." 

Revelation.  Guardian. — "This  volume  contains  evidence  of  much 
careful  labour.  It  is  a  scholarly  production,  as  might  be  expected  from 
the  pen  of  the  late  Mr  W.  H-  SiMCOX.,..The  notes  throw  light  upon 
many  passages  of  this  difficult  book,  and  are  extremely  suggestive.  It 
is  an  advantage  that  they  sometimes  set  before  the  student  various 
interpretations  without  exactly  guidmg  him  to  a  choice." 

Weshyan  Methodist  Sunday -School  Record. — "We  cannot  speak 
too  highly  of  this  excellent  little  volume.  The  introduction  is  of  the 
greatest  possible  value  to  the  student,  and  accurate  scholarship  is 
combined  with  true  loyalty  to  the  inspired  Word.  There  is  much  more 
matter  of  practical  utility  compressed  into  this  volume  of  pp.  174  than 
is  contained  in  many  a  portentous  tome." 


Wcii  Sbmaller  orambtibgc  23ible  for  Sbc!)ools. 

Sunday-School  Chronicle. — '^VVe  can  only  repeat  what  we  have 
already  said  of  this  admirable  series,  containing,  as  it  does,  the  scholar- 
ship of  the  larger  xvork.  For  scholars  in  our  elder  classes,  and  for  those 
preparing  for  Scripture  examinations,  no  belter  commentaries  can  be  put 
into  their  hands." 

Record. — '*  Despite  their  small  size,  these  volumes  give  the  substance 
oj  the  admirable  pieces  of  work  on  which  they  are  founded.  We  can  only 
hope  that  in  many  schools  the  class-teaching  will  proceed  on  the  lines  these 
commentators  suggest. ^^ 

Educational  Review. — "  The  Smaller  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schooh 
is  unique  in  its  combination  of  small  compass  with  great  scholarship.... 
For  use  in  lower  forms,  in  Sunday-schools  and  in  the  family,  we  cannot 
suggest  better  little  manuals  than  these.'" 

Literary  World. — ^''All  that  is  necessary  to  be  known  and  learned  by 
pupils  in  jioiior  and  elementary  schools  is  to  be  found  in  this  series. 
Indeed,  much  more  is  provided  than  should  be  required  by  the  exatfiiners. 
We  do  not  ktww  what  more  could  be  done  to  provide  sensible,  interesting, 
and  solid  Scriptural  instruction  for  boys  and  girls.      The  Syndics  of  the 


OPINIONS  OF   THE  PRESS. 


Cambridge  University  Press  are  rendering  great  sendees  both  to  teachers 
and  to  scholars  by  the  publication  of  such  a  valuable  series  of  books,  in 
which  slipshod  work  could  not  have  a  place  " 

Christian  Leader. — ^^  For  the  student  of  the  sacred  orcules  who  utilizes 
hours  of  travel  or  moments  of  waiting  in  the  perused  of  the  Bible  there 
is  nothing  so  handy,  and,  at  the  same  time,  so  satisfying  as  these  little 

books Nor  let  anyone  suppose  that,  because  these  are  school-books, 

therefore  they  are  beneath  the  adult  reader.  They  contain  the  very  ripest 
results  of  the  best  Biblical  scholarship,  and  that  in  the  very  simplest 
porm." 


Joshna.  School  Guardian. — "This  little  book  is  a  model  of  what 
editorial  work,  intended  for  the  use  of  young  students,  should  be ;  and 
we  could  scarcely  praise  it  more  highly  than  by  saying  that  it  is  in 
every  way  worthy  of  the  volumes  that  have  gone  before  it." 

Schoolmistress.  —  "A  most  useful  little  manual  for  students  or 
teachers." 

Judges.  Educational  News  (Edinburgh).  —  **The  book  makes 
available  for  teaching  purposes  the  results  of  ripe  scholarship,  varied 
knowledge,  and  religious  insight. " 

Schoolmaster. — "The  work  shows  first-rate  workmanship,  and  may 
be  adopted  without  hesitation." 

Samuel  I.  and  II.  Saturday  Review. — "Professor  Kirkpatrick's 
two  tiny  volumes  on  the  First  and  Second  Books  of  Samuel  are  quite 
model  school-books;  the  notes  elucidate  every  possible  difficulty  with 
scholarly  brevity  and  clearness  and  a  perfect  knowledge  of  tlfe  subject." 

Kings  I.  Wesleyan  Methodist  Sunday-School  Record. — "Equally 
useful  for  teachers  of  young  men's  Bible  classes  and  for  earnest  Bible 
students  themselves.  This  series  supplies  a  great  need.  It  contains 
much  valuable  instruction  in  small  compass.  '* 

St  Mark.  St  Luke,  Guardian. — "  We  have  received  the  volumes 
of  St  Mark  and  St  Luke  in  this  series.... The  two  volumes  seem,  on  the 
whole,  well  adapted  for  school  use,  are  well  and  carefully  printed,  and 
have  maps  and  good,  though  necessarily  brief,  introductions.  There  is 
little  doubt  that  this  series  will  be  found  as  popular  and  useful  as  the 
well-known  larger  series,  of  which  they  are  abbreviated  editions." 

St  Luke.  Wesleyan  Methodist  Sunday-School  Record. — "  We  cannot 
too  highly  commend  this  handy  little  book  to  all  teachers." 

St  John.  Methodist  Times. — "A  model  of  condensation,  losing 
nothing  of  its  clearness  and  force  from  its  condensation  into  a  small 
compass.  Many  who  have  long  since  completed  their  college  curriculum 
will  find  it  an  invaluable  handbook." 

Acts.  Literary  World. — "The  notes  are  very  brief,  but  exceedingly 
comprehensive,  comprising  as  much  detail  in  the  way  of  explanation  as 
would  be  needed  by  young  students  of  the  Scriptures  preparing  for 
examination.  We  again  give  the  opinion  that  this  series  furnishes  as 
much  real  help  as  would  usually  satisfy  students  for  the  Christian 
ministry,  or  even  ministers  themselves." 


THE  CAMBRIDGE  GREEK  TESTAMENT 

FOR   SCHOOLS  AND   COLLEGES 

with  a  Beylsed  Text,  based  on  the  most  recent  critical  authorities, 

and  English  Notes. 

OPINIONS   OF  THE   PRESS. 

Expositor. — *'  Has  achieved  an  excellence  which  puts  it  above  criti- 
cism.^'' 

Expository  Times. — "  We  could  not  point  out  better  handbooks  for 
the  studejit  of  the  Greeks 

The  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.  London  Quarterly  Re7jiew. — "This 
is  a  first  rale  piece  of  work,  furnished  with  all  the  Critical  notes  that  a 
student  of  the  text  needs,  and  enriched  by  many  excellent  quotations 
from  divines  and  commentators.... It  will  well  repay  every  student  to 
get  this  little  volume  and  master  it." 

Pastoral  Epistles.  Educational  Times. — '  *  Dr  Bernard's  introductions 
and  textual  notes  leave  nothing  to  be  desired.  They  are  learned,  literary 
in  tone,  and  very  helpful  to  the  young  student." 

Guardian. — "This  new  volume  of  the  Cambridge  Greek  Testament 
will  be  welcome  to  many  students,  both  because  it  supplies  a  distinct 
want  and  because  it  supplies  it  well.  Dr  Bernard's  work  is  throughout 
clear,  sensible,  scholarlike,  and  orthodox." 

Tx}ndon  Quarterly  Reviezu. — '  *  Dr  Bernard's  fine  book  is  a  welcome 
addition  to  the  Cambridge  Greek  Testament.  The  notes  are  not  only 
valuable  for  the  student,  but  often  supply  new  light  for  the  preacher." 

Tablet. — "  Dr  Bernard's  edition  deserves  high  praise.  Intended 
primarily  'for  schools  and  colleges,'  it  will  be  found  useful  by  many 
whose  school  or  college  days  are  long  since  past." 

Churchman. — *'  This  admirable  book  should  supply  a  distinct  want 
—that  of  a  manual  edition  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles  in  Greek,  with  an 
introduction  and  notes,  which  are  on  a  level  with  the  best  and  most 
recent  scholarship — in  fact,  the  volume  strikes  us  as  so  thoroughly 
trustworthy,  and  so  eminently  useful,  that  we  believe  it  will  rapidly 
become   a   recognized   textbook   in   all    examinations    preparatory   to 

ordination We    most    heartily    commend    this    book — whose    size 

is  certainly  no  measure  of  its  value  or  usefulness — to  all  who  would 
study  the  Pastoral  Epistles  to  their  own  personal  advantage  and  with  a 
view  to  the  improvement  of  their  ministerial  work. " 

St  James.  Athcnxum. — "This  is  altogether  an  admirable  text- 
book. The  notes  are  exactly  what  is  wanted.  They  shew  scholarship, 
wide  reading,  clear  thinking.  They  are  calculated  in  a  high  degree  to 
stimulate  pupils  to  inquiry  both  into  the  language  and  the  teaching  of 
the  Epistle." 

Revelation.  Journal  of  Education. — **  Absolute  candour,  a  feeling 
for  Church  tradition,  and  the  combination  of  a  free  and  graceful  style  of 
historical  illustration  with  minute  scholarship  characterise  this  work. 
We  vnsh  we  had  more  work  of  the  same  kind  in  the  present  day,  and 
venture  to  think  that  a  mastery  of  this  unpretentious  edition  would 
prove  to  many  a  means  of  permanently  enlarging  the  scope  of  their 
studies  in  sacred  literature."  

Cambridge:  printed  bv  j.  and  c.  f,  clay,  at  the  university  press. 


gL\'a?an7!?c'hariah:«ithno«sand 


Hagga 


Princeto 


n  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Ubrary 


B44ecE.  3831 

0B-2B-0732180     HS    '& 


