FROM   THE   LIBRARY   OF 

THE  LATE   ISAAC  J.   GREENWOOD 

PRESENTED   TO 

THE  NEW  YORK   PUBLIC   LIBRARY 

BY   HIS    DAUGHTERS 
ELIZA   R.  and  MARY  M.  GREENWOOD 

AUGUST,   1919 


Spitrgeon'a  Sermons. 

From  the  Chicago  Standard. 
Robert  Carter  &  Brothers  issue  in  ten  volumes  a  very 
excellent  edition  of  Sfiurgeon's  Sermons.     They  are  neatly 
grouped   in  a  box,  and   have   much   the   appearance   of  a 
library  in  themselves.     While  by  no  means  presenting  the 
well  known  aspect  of  "  cheap  books,"  these  sermons  are 
after  all  furnished  at  a  surprisingly  low  price,— one  dollar 
per  volume;  ten  dollars  for  the  entire  set.     No  man  need 
trouble  himself  to  either  praise  or  criticise  the  sermons  of 
C.  H.  Spurgeon.     They  have  been  read  everywhere,  and 
the  thousands  and  thousands  of  such  readers  have  their 
own  opinion — and  that  a  most  favorable  one — as  to  their 
merits.     It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that,  as  sermons,  they 
stand  alone;  combining  with  their  pure  evangelical  doc- 
trine,  a  directness,   a  simplicity,   a  transparency  and   an 
effectiveness  of  style,  unequalled  by  any  other  published 
sermons,  by  men  now  in  the  pulpit,  or  by  tho£e  of  other 
generations.     It  is  not  necessary  to  claim  for  them  great- 
ness in  the  usual  sense  of  that  word.     They  are  unique  in 
this,  that  they  are  so  perfect  as  sermons.     Taken  down, 
stenographically,  while  in  process  of  delivery,  afterwards 
revised  and  prepared  for  the  press,  they  have  all  the  glow 
of  the  true  preacher's  inspiration  while  in  the  full  tide  of  his 
message,  and  yet  are  singularly  correct  in  style— as  much 
so,  probably,  as  if  composed  and  written  down  in  the  quiet 
of  the  study.     For,  as  a  colloquial  speaker,  addressing  the 
people  in  their  own  vernacular,  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  no  su- 
perior in  this  age;  and  what  he  says  in  the  pulpit  might 
almost  go  to  the  printer  without  any  of  that  careful   re- 
vision which  notwithstanding  he  conscientiously  gives  it. 


WORKS  OF  C.  H.   SPURGEON. 


SPURGEON'S  SERMONS.     New  and  neat  edition.     10  vols.,  i2mo.      .$10.00 

Any  volume  sold  separately  at 1.00 

"These   sermons  are  thoroughly  Scriptural,  earnest,  and  simple,  and  full  of 
that  intense  earnestness  which  always  marks  Mr.  Spurgeon's  preaching." — Pres- 
byter i  a  ft. 
MORNING  BY  MORNING.     i2mo 1.00 

85,000   HAVE   BEEN  SOLD   IN   ENGLAND. 

EVENING  BY  EVENING.     i2mo 1.00 

6o,000    HAVE    BEEN   SOLD    IN    ENGLAND. 

"Practical,  pleasant,  suggestive,  helpful,  and  well  adapted  to  the  masses  of 
the  people.  The  invalid  in  the  sick-room,  the  head  of  the  house  at  family  wor- 
ship, the  Christian  in  his  chamber,  the  pastor  desiring  thoughts  for  the  prayer- 
meeting,  will  find  these  volumes  instructive  and  precious." — Morning  Star. 

LECTURES   TO  STUDENTS. 100 

THE  SAINT  AND  SAVIOUR 1.00 

TYPES  AND  EMBLEMS 1.00 

THE  PRESENT  TRUTH.     New  volume  of  sermons 1.00 

HANDS  FULL   OF  HONEY, 

And  Other  Sermons  Preached  in  1883.     i2mo 1.00 

COMMENTING  AND    COMMENTARIES. 1.00 

"  This  volume  has  few  equals,  if  any." — Literary  World. 

GEMS  FROM  SPURGEON. 1.00 

FEATHERS  FOR  ARROWS 1.00 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK 75 

320,000    HAVE   BEEN   SOLD    IN    ENGLAND. 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  PICTURES 75 

100,000   HAVE    BEEN    SOLD    IN    ENGLAND. 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK  AND  PICTURES.     In  one  volume  .     1.00 
GLEANINGS  AMONG    THE  SHEA  VES 60 


ROBERT  CARTER  6-  BROTHERS. 

Any  of  the  above  sent  by  mail  postage  prepaid  on  receipt 
of  the  price. 


Hands   Full   of    Honey 


AND     OTHER     SERMONS 


PREACHED    IN    fSSj 


C.    H.     SPURGEON 

Of  London 


NEW    YORK 

ROBERT    CARTER    &    BROTHERS 

530  Broadway 

1884 

\ 


1/ 


793193 

- 


NOTE   BY   THE    AMERICAN   PUBLISHERS. 


The  wide  circulation  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Earlier 
Sermons,  preached  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  it 
is  believed  will  give  a  peculiar  interest  to  these 
latest  discourses  of  a  great  preacher  still  in  the 
vigor  of  life. 

New  Yoke,  March,  1884. 


CONTENTS 


I.  Hands  full  of  Honey 9 

II.  On  Laying  Foundations 31 

^m.  Herein  is  Love 53 

^ylV.  The  best  War-Cry 75 

Y.  Earnest  Expostulation 96 

VI.  The  Bridegroom's  Parting  Word 118 

VII.  The  Tent  dissolved  and  the  Mansion  Entered.   139 

^VIII.  Christ  in  You 161 

IX.  Glory 183 

X.  Knock 204 

^ — XI.  Imitators  of  God 226 

XII.  Buying  without  Money 248 

^<XIII.  The  Voice  from  the  Cloud  and  the  Voice   of 

the  Beloved 270 

XIV.  Accepted  of  the  Great  Father 292 

s — XV.  On  Humbling  Ourselves  before  God  .     .     .     .312 

XVI.  The  Luther  Sermon  at  Exeter-Hall      .     .     .334 

XVH.  Blessed  Promises  for  Dying  Outcasts.     .     .     .  356 


HANDS   FULL    OF   HONEY. 

January  28,  1883. 

"And  Samson  turned  aside  to  see  the  carcase  of  the  lion:  and,  behold, 
there  was  a  swarm  of  bees  and  honey  in  the  carcase  of  the  lion.  And  he 
took  thereof  in  his  hands,  and  went  on  eating,  and  came  to  his  father  and 
mother,  and  he  gave  them,  and  they  did  eat:  but  he  told  not  them  that 
he  had  taken  the  honey  out  of  the  carcase  of  the  lion."—  Jueoes  xiv.  8,  9. 

It  was  a  singular  circumstance  that  a  man  unarmed 
should  have  slain  a  lion  in  the  prime  of  its  vigor;  and 
yet  more  strange  that  a  swarm  of  bees  should  have  taken 
possession  of  the  dried  carcase,  and  have  filled  it  with 
their  honey.  In  that  country,  what  with  beasts,  birds, 
and  insects,  and  the  dry  heat,  a  dead  body  is  soon 
cleansed  from  all  corruption,  and  the  bones  are  clean 
and  white:  still  the  killing  of  the  lion,  and  the  finding  of 
the  honey,  make  up  a  remarkable  story.  These  singular 
circumstances  became  afterwards  the  subject  of  a  riddle; 
but  with  that  riddle  we  have  no  concern  at  this  time. 
Samson  himself  is  a  riddle.  He  was  not  only  a  riddle- 
maker;  but  he  was  himself  an  enigma  very  difficult  to 
explain:  with  his  personal  character  I  have  at  this  time 
little  or  nothing  to  do.  We  are  not  to-day  resting  at 
the  house  of  "  Gaius,  mine  host,"  where  the  pilgrims 
amused  themselves  with  a  dish  of  nuts  after  dinner; 
but  we  are  on  the  march,  and  must  attend  to  the  more 
important  matter  of  refreshing  and  inspiriting  those  who 
are  in  our  company.  Neither  are  we  going  to  discuss 
difficulties;  but  as  Samson  took  the  honey  without  being 


10  HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY. 

stung,  so  would  we  gain  instruction  without  debate. 
We  have  in  these  days  so  much  to  do,  that  we  must 
make  practical  use  of  every  incident  that  comes  before 
us  in  the  word  of  God.  My  one  design  is  to  cheer  the 
desponding  and  stir  up  all  God's  people  to  greater  dil- 
igence in  his  service.  I  conceive  that  the  text  may 
legitimately  be  employed  for  this  purpose.  By  the  help 
of  the  divine  Spirit,  even  after  this  lapse  of  time,  we 
may  find  honey  in  the  lion. 

The  particular  part  of  the  incident  which  is  recorded 
in  these  two  verses  appears  to  have  been  passed  over  by 
those  who  have  written  upon  Samson's  life:  I  suppose 
it  appeared  to  be  too  inconsiderable.  They  are  taken 
up  with  his  festive  riddle,  but  they  omit  the  far  more 
natural  and  commendable  fact  of  his  bringing  forth  the 
honey  in  his  hands  and  presenting  it  to  his  father  and 
mother.  This  is  the  little  scene  to  which  I  direct  your 
glances.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  Israelitish  hero  with 
a  slain  lion  in  the  background,  standing  out  in  the  open 
road  with  his  hands  laden  with  masses  of  honeycomb 
and  dripping  with  honey,  which  he  holds  out  to  his 
parents,  makes  a  fine  picture,  worthy  of  the  greatest 
artist.  And  what  a  type  we  have  here  of  our  Divine 
Lord  and  Master,  Jesus,  the  conqueror  of  death  and  hell. 
He  has  destroyed  the  lion  that  roared  upon  us  and  upon 
him.  He  has  shouted  "victory"  over  all  our  foes.  "  It 
is  finished"  was  his  note  of  triumph:  and  now  he  stands 
in  the  mid*t  of  his  church  with  his  hands  full  of  sweet- 
ness and  cmsolation,  presenting  them  to  those  of  whom 
he  says,  '* these  are  my  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother." 
To  each  one  of  us  who  believe  in  him  he  gives  the  lus- 
cious food  which  he  has  prepared  for  us  by  the  over- 
throw of  our  foes;  he  bids  us  come  and  eat  that  we  may 
have  our  lives  sweetened  and  our  hearts  filled  with  joy. 


HANDS   FULL    OF   HONEY.  11 

To  me  the  comparison  seems  wonderfully  apt  and  sug- 
gestive: I  see  our  triumphant  Lord  laden  with  sweet- 
ness, holding  it  forth  to  all  his  brethren,  and  inviting 
them  to  share  in  his  joy. 

But,  beloved,  it  is  written,  "  As  he  is,  so  are  we  also 
in  this  world."  All  that  are  true  Christians  are,  in  a 
measure,  like  the  Christ  whose  name  they  bear,  and 
it  is  to  his  image  that  we  are  finally  to  be  conformed. 
When  he  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is;  and  meanwhile,  in  proportion 
as  we  see  him  now,  "  we  are  changed  into  the  same 
image,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  t lie 
Lord."  The  Samson  type  may  well  serve  as  the  symbol 
of  every  Christian  in  the  world.  The  believer  has  been 
helped  by  divine  grace  in  his  spiritual  conflicts,  and  he 
has  known  "the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world, 
even  our  faith."  He  has  thus  been  made  more  than  a 
conqueror  through  him  that  loved  us,  and  now  he  stands 
in  the  midst  of  his  fellow-men  inviting  them  to  Jesus. 
With  the  honey  in  his  hands,  which  he  continues  still  to 
feast  upon,  he  displays  the  heavenly  sweetness  to  all 
that  are  round  about  him,  saying,  "0  taste  and  see  that 
the  Lord  is  good:  blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in 
him." 

I  have  before  now  met  with  that  popular  artist  Gus- 
tave  Dore,  and  suggested  subjects  to  him.  Had  he 
survived  among  us,  and  had  another  opportunity  oc- 
curred, I  would  have  pressed  him  to  execute  a  statue  of 
Samson  handing  out  the  honey:  strength  distributing 
sweetness;  and  it  might  have  served  as  a  perpetual  re- 
minder of  what  a  Christian  should  be — a  Conqueror  and 
a  Comforter,  slaying  lions  and  distributing  honey.  The 
faithful  servant  of  God  wrestles  with  the  powers  of  evil; 
but  with  far  greater  delight  he  speaks  to  his  friends  and 


12  HANDS   FULL    OF   HONEY. 

companions,  saying,  "  Eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and 
let  your  souls  delight  themselves  in  sweetness."  Set  the 
statue  before  your  mind's  eye,  and  now  let  me  speak 
about  it. 

Three  touches  may  suffice.  First,  the  believer's  life  has 
its  conflicts;  secondly,  the  believer  s  life  has  its  stveets;  and, 
thirdly,  the  believers  life  leads  him  to  communicate  of  those 
sweets  to  others.     Here  is  room  for  profitable  meditation. 

I.  First,  then,  the  believer's  life  has  its  conflicts.  To 
become  a  Christian  is  to  enlist  for  a  soldier.  To  become 
a  believer  is  to  enter  upon  a  pilgrimage,  and  the  road  is 
often  rough:  the  hills  are  steep,  the  valleys  are  dark, 
giants  block  the  way,  and  robbers  lurk  in  corners.  The 
man  who  reckons  that  he  can  glide  into  heaven  without 
a  struggle  has  made  a  great  mistake.  No  cross  no  crown : 
no  sweat  no  sweet:  no  conflict  no  conquest.  These  con- 
flicts, if  we  take  the  case  of  Samson  as  our  symbol,  begin 
early  in  the  life  of  the  believer.  While  Samson  was  a 
child,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  moved  him  in  the  camps  of 
Dan — see  the  last  verse  of  the  thirteenth  chapter;  and 
as  soon  as  he  was  on  the  verge  of  manhood,  he  must 
match  himself  with  a  lion.  God  who  intended  that  his 
servant  should  smite  the  Philistines,  and  should  check 
their  proud  oppression  of  his  people  Israel,  began  early 
to  train  the  hero  for  his  life's  conflict.  So,  when  Samson 
was  going  to  seek  a  wife,  he  turned  aside  into  the  vine- 
yards of  Timnath,  and  a  lion  roared  upon  him.  Yes,  and 
the  young  believer,  who  as  yet  has  not  wrestled  with 
the  powers  of  darkness,  will  not  be  long  before  he 
hears  the  roar  of  the  lion,  and  finds  himself  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  great  Adversary.  Very  soon  we  learn  the 
value  of  the  prayer,  "  Deliver  us  from  the  evil  one ! " 
Most  of  the  Lord's  servants  have  been  men  of  war  from 


HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY.  13 

their  youth  up.  Without  are  fightings  even  when  within 
there  are  no  fears.  This  early  combat  with  the  savage 
beast  was  intended  by  God  to  let  him  know  his  strength 
when  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  train  him 
for  his  future  combats  with  Israel's  enemies.  He  that  is 
to  smite  the  Philistines  hip  and  thigh  with  a  great 
slaughter,  until  he  has  laid  them  heaps  on  heaps  by  his 
single  prowess,  must  begin  by  rending  a  lion  with  his 
naked  hands.  He  was  to  learn  war  in  the  same  school 
as  another  and  a  greater  hero,  who  afterwards  said, 
"  Thy  servant  slew  both  the  lion  and  the  bear,  and  this 
uncircumcised  Philistine  shall  be  as  one  of  them." 

Soldiers  are  made  by  war.  You  cannot  train  veter- 
ans or  create  victors  except  by  battles.  As  in  the  wars 
of  armies  so  is  it  in  spiritual  contests:  men  must  be 
trained  for  victory  over  evil  by  combat  with  it.  Hence 
"  it  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  bare  the  yoke  in  his  youth" ; 
for  it  will  not  gall  his  shoulders  in  after  years.  It  is 
assuredly  a  dangerous  thing  to  be  altogether  free  from 
trouble:  in  silken  ease  the  soldier  loses  his  prowess. 
Look  at  Solomon,  one  of  the  greatest  and  wisest,  and 
yet,  I  might  say,  one  of  the  least  and  most  foolish  of 
men.  It  was  his  fatal  privilege  to  sit  upon  a  throne  of 
gold  and  sun  himself  in  the  brilliance  of  unclouded 
prosperity,  and  hence  his  heart  soon  went  astray,  and 
he  fell  from  his  high  places.  Solomon  in  his  early  days 
had  no  trouble,  for  no  war  was  then  raging,  and  no 
enemy  worth  notice  was  then  living.  His  life  ran 
smoothly  on,  and  he  was  lulled  into  a  dreamy  sleep, 
the  sleep  of  the  voluptuous.  He  had  been  happier  far 
had  he  been,  like  his  father,  called  from  his  earliest  days 
to  trial  and  conflict;  for  this  might  have  taught  him  to 
stand  fast  upon  the  pinnacle  of  glory  whereon  the 
providence  of  God  had  placed   him.     Learn,    then,   0 


14  HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY. 

young  brother,  that  if,  like  Samson,  you  are  to  be  a  hero 
for  Israel,  you  must  early  be  inured  to  suffering  and 
daring,  in  some  form  or  other.  When  you  step  aside 
and  seek  for  meditation  in  the  quiet  of  the  vineyard  a 
young  lion  may  roar  upon  you;  even  as  in  the  earliest 
days  of  your  Lord  and  Master's  public  service  he  was 
led  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil. 

These  conflicts,  dear  friends,  may  often  be  very  terrible. 
By  a  young  lion  is  not  meant  a  whelp,  but  a  lion  in  the 
fulness  of  its  early  strength;  not  yet  slackened  in  its 
pace,  or  curbed  in  its  fury  by  growing  years.  Fresh 
and  furious,  a  young  lion  is  the  worst  kind  of  beast  that 
a  man  can  meet  with.  Let  us  expect  as  followers  of 
Christ  to  meet  with  strong  temptations,  fierce  persecu- 
tions, and  severe  trials,  which  will  lead  to  stern  conflicts. 
Do  not  reckon,  thou  that  art  yet  putting  on  thy  harness, 
that  thou  shalt  soon  put  it  off,  or  that  when  thou  puttest 
it  off  it  will  be  quite  as  bright  as  it  is  to-day.  It  will  be 
dimmed  with  blood  and  dust,  and  battered  by  many  a 
blow;  perhaps  thy  foe  may  find  a  way  to  pierce  it,  or  at 
least  to  wound  thee  between  its  joints.  I  would  have 
every  man  begin  to  be  a  soldier  of  the  cross,  but  I  would 
at  the  same  time  have  him  count  the  cost;  for  it  is  no 
child's  play,  and  if  he  thinks  it  will  be  such,  he  will  be 
grievously  disappointed.  A  young  believer  will,  on  a 
sudden,  have  a  doubt  suggested  to  him  of  which  he 
never  heard  before;  and  it  will  roar  upon  him  like  a 
young  lion  ;  neither  will  he  see  all  at  once  how  to  dispose 
of  it,  Or  he  may  be  placed  in  singular  circumstances 
where  his  duty  seems  to  run  counter  to  the  tenderest 
instincts  of  his  nature;  here,  too,  the  young  lion  will  roar 
upon  him.  Or,  one  for  whom  he  has  an  intense  respect 
may  treat  him  ill  because  he  is  a  follower  of  Christ,  and 
the  affection  and  respect  which  he  feels  for  this  pei'son 


HANDS    FULL    OF   HONEY.  15 

may  make  his  opposition  the  more  grievous:  in  this  also 
it  is  with  him  as  when  a  lion  roareth.  Or  he  may  suffer 
a  painful  bereavement,  or  sustain  a  severe  loss;  or  he  may 
have  a  disease  upon  him,  with  consequent  pains  and  de- 
pressions, and  these  may  cast  the  shadow  of  death  upon 
his  spirit;  so  that  again  a  young  lion  roars  upon  him. 
Brother,  sister,  let  us  reckon  upon  this,  and  not  be  dismayed 
by  it,  since  in  all  this  is  the  life  of  our  spirit.  By  such 
lessons  as  these  we  are  taught  to  do  service  for  God,  to 
sympathize  with  our  fellow  Christians,  and  to  value  the 
help  of  our  gracious  Saviour.  By  all  these  we  are  weaned 
from  earth  and  made  to  hunger  for  that  eternal  glory 
which  is  yet  to  be  revealed,  of  which  we  may  truly  say, 
"  No  lion  shall  be  there,  neither  shall  any  ravenous  beast 
go  up  thereon."  These  present  evils  are  for  our  future 
good:  their  terror  is  for  our  teaching.  Trials  are  sent 
us  for  much  the  same  reason  that  the  Canaan i tea  were 
permitted  to  live  in  the  Holy  Land,  that  Israel  might  learn 
war.  and  be  equipped  for  battles  against  foreign  foes. 
These  conflicts  come  early,  and  they  are  very  terrible; 
and,  moreover,  they  ♦happen  to  us  when  loe  arc  least  pre- 
pared/or them.  Samson  was  not  hunting  for  wild  beasts; 
he  was  engaged  on  a  much  more  tender  business.  He 
was  walking  in  the  vineyards  of  Timnath,  thinking  of 
anything  but  lions,  and  "  behold,"  says  the  Scripture, 
"a,  young  lion  roared  against  him."  It  was  a  remark- 
able and  startling  occurrenee.  He  had  left  his  father 
and  mother  and  was  quite  alone;  no  one  was  within 
call  to  aid  him  in  meeting  his  furious  assailant.  Human 
sympathy  is  exceedingly  precious,  but  there  are  points 
in  our  spiritual  conflict  in  which  we  cannot  expect  to 
receive  it.  To  each  man  there  are  passages  in  life  too 
narrow  for  walking  two  abreast.  Upon  certain  crags  we 
must  stand  alone.     As  our  constitutions  differ,  so  our 


16  HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY. 


trials,  which  are  suited  to  onr  constitutions,  must  differ  also. 
Each  individual  has  a  secret  with  which  no  friend  can 
intermeddle;  for  every  life  has  its  mystery  and  its  hid 
treasure.  Do  not  be  ashamed,  young  Christian,  if  you 
meet  with  temptations  which  appear  to  you  to  be  quite 
singular:  we  have  each  one  thought  the  same  of  his  i 
trials.  You  imagine  that  no  one  suffers  as  you  do, 
whereas  no  temptation  hath  happened  unto  you  but 
such  as  is  common  to  man,  and  God  will  with  the  temp- 
tation make  a  way  of  escape  that  you  may  be  able  to 
bear  it.  Yet  for  the  time  being  you  may  have  to  enter 
into  fellowship  with  your  Lord  when  he  trod  the  wine- 
press alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  him. 
Is  not  this  for  your  good?  Is  not  this  the  way  to 
strength  ?  What  kind  of  piety  is  that  which  is  depend- 
ent upon  the  friendship  of  man  ?  What  sort  of  religion 
is  that  which  cannot  stand  alone?  Beloved,  you  will 
have  to  die  alone,  and  you  need  therefore  grace  to  cheer 
you  in  solitude.  The  dear  wife  can  attend  you  weeping 
to  the  river's  brink,  but  into  the  chill  stream  she  cannot 
go  with  you ;  and  if  you  have  not  ci  religion  which  will 
sustain  you  in  the  solitudes  of  life,  of  what  avail  will  it 
be  to  you  in  the  grim  lonesomeness  of  death  ?  Thus  I 
reckon  it  to  be  a  happy  circumstance  that  you  are 
called  to  solitary  conflict  that  you  may  test  your  faith, 
and  see  of  what  stuff  your  hope  is  made. 

The  contest  was  all  the  worse  for  Samson,  that  in  ad- 
dition to  being  quite  alone,  "  there  was  nothing  in  his 
hand."  This  is  the  most  remarkable  point  in  the  narra- 
tive. He  had  no  sword  or  hunter's  spear  with  which 
to  wound  the  lordly  savage:  he  had  not  even  a  stout 
staff  with  which  to  ward  off  his  attack.  Samson  stood 
an  unarmed,  unarmored  man  in  the  presence  of  a  rag- 
ing beast.     So  we  in  our  early  temptations  are  apt  to 


HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY.  Yf 

think  that  we  have  no  weapon  for  the  war,  and  we  do 
not  know  what  to  do.  We  are  made  to  cry  out,  "  I  am 
unprepared!  How  can  I  meet  this  trial?  I  cannot 
grasp  the  enemy  to  wrestle  with  him.  What  am  I  to 
do?"  Herein  will  the  splendor  of  faith  and  glory  of 
God  be  made  manifest,  when  you  shall  slay  the  lion,  and 
yet  it  shall  be  said  of  you  "  that  he  had  nothing  in  his 
hand" — nothing  but  that  which  the  world  sees  not  and 
values  not. 

Now,  go  one  step  further,  for  time  forbids  our  linger- 
ing here.  I  invite  you  to  remember  that  it  was  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  that  the  victory  teas  won.  We  read,  "  And 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  upon  him,  and  he 
rent  him  as  he  would  have  rent  a  kid."  Let  the  Holy 
Spirit  help  us  in  our  trouble  and  we  need  neither  com- 
pany nor  weapon;  but  without  him  what  can  we  do? 
Good  Bishop  Hall  says,  "  If  that  roaring  lion,  that  goes 
about  continually  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,  find  us 
alone  among  the  vineyards  of  the  Philistines,  where  is 
our  hope?  Not  in  our  heels,  he  is  swifter  than  we:  not 
in  our  weapons,  we  are  naturally  unarmed:  not  in  our 
hands,  which  are  weak  and  languishing;  but  in  the 
Spirit  of  God,  by  whom  we  can  do  all  things.  If  God 
fight  in  us,  who  can  resist  us?  There  is  a  stronger  lion 
in  us  than  that  against  us." 

Here  is  our  one  necessity, — to  be  endowed  with  power 
from  on  high:  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Helped  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  the  believer's  victory  will  be  complete: 
the  lion  shall  not  be  driven  away  but  rent  in  pieces.  Girt 
with  the  Spirit's  power,  our  victory  shall  be  as  easy  as  it 
will  be  perfect :  Samson  rent  the  lion  as  though  it  were 
a  little  lamb,  or  a  kid  of  the  goats.  Well  said  Paul,  "  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengthened  me." 
Sin  is  soon  overcome,  temptations  are  readily  refused,  af- 


18  HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY. 

fliction  is  joyfully  borne,  persecution  is  gladly  endured, 
when  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  peace  resteth  upon  us. 
"With  God  all  things  are  possible;"  and  as  the  be- 
liever is  with  God,  it  cometh  to  pass  that  all  things 
are  possible  to  him  that  believeth. 

If  we  were  surrounded  by  all  the  devils  in  hell  we 
need  not  fear  them  for  an  instant  if  the  Lord  be  on  our 
side.  We  are  mightier  than  all  hell's  legions  when  the 
Spirit  is  mightily  upon  us.  If  we  were  to  be  beaten 
down  by  Satan  until  he  had  set  his  foot  upon  our 
breast,  to  press  the  very  life  out  of  us,  yet  if  the 
Spirit  of  God  helped  us  we  would  reach  out  our  hand, 
and  grasp  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word 
of  God,  and  we  would  repeat  the  feat  of  Christian  with 
Apollyon,  when  he  gave  the  fiend  such  grievous  wounds 
that  he  spread  his  dragon  wings  and  flew  away.  Where- 
fore fear  not,  ye  tried  ones,  but  trust  in  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  your  conflict  shall  speedily  end  in  victory.  Some- 
times our  conflict  is  with  past  sin.  We  doubtfully  en- 
quire, "  How  can  it  be  forgiven  ? "  The  temptation 
vanishes  before  a  sight  of  the  dying  Redeemer.  Then 
inbred  lust  roars  against  us,  and  we  overcome  it  through 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  for  "the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Sometimes  a  raging  cor- 
ruption, or  a  strong  habit,  wars  upon  us,  and  then  we 
conquer  by  the  might  of  the  sanctifying  Spirit  of  God, 
Avho  is  with  us  and  shall  be  in  us  evermore.  Or  else  it 
is  the  world  which  tempts,  and  our  feet  have  almost 
gone;  but  we  overcome  the  world  through  the  victory 
of  faith:  and  if  Satan  raises  against  us  the  lust  of  the 
flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  all  at 
once,  we  are  still  delivered,  for  the  Lord  is  a  wall  of  fire 
round  about  us.  The  inward  life  bravely  resists  all  sin, 
and  God's  help  is  given  to  believers  to  preserve  them 


HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY.  19 

from  all  evil  in  the  moment  of  urgent  need;  even  as  he 
helped  his  martyrs  and  confessors  to  speak  the  right 
word  when  called  unprepared  to  confront  their  adver- 
saries. Care  not,  therefore,  oh  thou  truster  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  how  fierce  thine  enemy  may  be  this  day !  As 
young  David  slew  the  lion  and  the  bear,  and  smote  the 
Philistine  too,  even  so  shalt  thou  go  from  victory  to  vic- 
tory. "  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous,  but  the 
Lord  delivereth  him  out  of  them  all."  Wherefore,  with 
a  lion-like  spirit,  meet  lions  which  seek  to  devour  you. 

II.  Now,  then,  we  come  to  our  second  head,  which  is: 
the  believer's  life  has  its  sweets.  We  are  not  always 
killing  lions,  we  are  sometimes  eating  honey.  Certain 
of  us  do  both  at  a  time;  we  kill  lions  and  yet  cease  not 
to  eat  honey:  and  truly  it  has  become  so  sweet  a  thing 
to  enter  into  conflict  for  Christ's  sake,  that  it  is  a  joy  to 
contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints.  The  same  Lord  who  hath  bidden  us  "quit  your- 
selves like  men;  be  strong,"  has  also  said,  "  Rejoice  in 
the  Lord  alway;  and  again  I  say,  rejoice." 

The  believer's  life  has  its  sweets,  and  these  are  of  the 
choicest :  for  what  is  sweeter  than  honey?  What  is  more 
joyful  than  the  joy  of  a  saint  ?  What  is  more  happy  than 
the  happiness  of  a  believer?  I  will  not  condescend  to 
make  a  comparison  between  our  joy  and  the  mirth  of 
fools;  I  will  go  no  further  than  a  contrast.  Their  mirth 
is  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot,  which  spit  fire, 
and  make  a  noise  and  a  flash,  but  there  is  no  heat,  and 
they  are  soon  gone  out:  nothing  comes  of  it,  the  pot  is 
long  in  boiling.  But  the  Christian's  delight  is  like  a 
steady  coal  fire.  You  have  seen  the  grate  full  of  coals  all 
burning  red,  and  the  whole  mass  of  coal  has  seemed  to 
be  one  great  glowing  ruby  and  everybody  who  has  come 
into  the  room  out  of  the  cold  has  delighted  to  warm  his 


20  HANDS   FULL    OF   HONEY. 

hands,  for  it  gives  out  a  steady  heat  and  warms  the 
body  even  to  its  marrow.  Such  are  our  joys.  I  would 
sooner  possess  the  joy  of  Christ  five  minutes  than  I 
would  revel  in  the  mirth  of  fools  for  half  a  century. 
There  is  more  bliss  in  the  tear  of  repentance  than  in  the 
laughter  of  gaiety;  our  holy  sorrows  are  sweeter  than 
the  worldling's  joys.  But,  oh,  when  our -joys  grow  full, 
divinely  full,  then  are  they  unspeakably  like  those  above, 
and  heaven  begins  below.  Did  you  never  cry  for  joy? 
You  say,  perhaps,  "Not  since  I  was  a  child."  Nor  have 
1 ;  but  I  have  always  remained  a  child  as  far  as  divine 
joy  is  concerned.  I  could  often  cry  for  joy  when  I  know 
whom  I  have  believed  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able 
to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  him. 

Ours  is  a  joy  which  will  bear  thinking  over.  You  can 
dare  to  pry  into  the  bottom  of  it  and  test  its  foundation. 
It  is  a  joy  which  does  not  grow  stale;  you  may  keep  it  in 
your  mouth  by  the  year  together,  and  yet  it  never  cloys; 
you  may  return  to  it  again,  and  again,  and  again,  and 
find  it  still  as  fresh  as  ever.  And  the  best  of  it  is  there 
is  no  repentance  after  it.  You  are  never  sorry  that  you 
were  so  glad.  The  world's  gay  folk  are  soon  sick  of  their 
drink;  but  we  are  only  sorry  that  we  were  not  gladder 
still,  for  our  gladness  sanctifies.  We  are  not  denied  any 
degree  of  joy  to  which  we  can  possibly  attain,  for  ours 
is  a  healthy,  health-giving  delight.  Christ  is  the  fulness 
of  joy  to  his  people,  and  we  are  bidden  to  enjoy  him  to 
the  full.  Christians  have  their  sweets,  and  those  are  as 
honey  and  the  honeycomb,  the  best  of  the  best. 

Of  these  joys  there  is  plenty;  for  Samson  found,  as  it 
were,  a  living  spring  of  honey,  since  he  discovered  a 
swarm  of  bees.  So  abundant  was  the  honey  that  he  could 
take  huge  masses  of  the  comb  and  carry  it  in  his  hands, 
and  go  away  with  it,  bearing  it  to  others.     In  the  love 


HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY.  21 

of  Christ,  in  pardoned  sin,  in  acceptance  in  the  Beloved, 
in  resting  in  God,  in  perfectly  acquiescing  in  his  will,  in 
the  hope  of  heaven,  there  is  such  joy  that  none  can  meas- 
ure it.  We  have  such  a  living  swarm  of  bees  to  make 
honey  for  us  in  the  precious  promises  of  God,  that  there 
is  more  delight  in  store  than  any  of  us  can  possibly  real- 
ize. There  is  infinitely  more  of  Christ  beyond  our  com- 
prehension than  we  have  as  yet  been  able  to  comprehend. 
How  blessed  to  receive  of  his  fulness,  to  be  sweetened 
with  his  sweetness,  and  yet  to  know  that  infinite  goodness 
still  remains.  Perhaps  some  of  you  have  enjoyed  so 
much  of  Christ  that  you  could  hardly  bear  any  more; 
but  your  largest  enjoyments  are  only  as  tiny  shells  filled 
by  a  single  wave  of  the  sea,  while  all  the  boundless  ocean 
rolls  far  beyond  your  ken.  We  have  exceeding  great 
joy,  yea,  joy  to  spare.  Our  Master's  wedding  feast  is 
not  so  scantily  furnished  that  we  have  to  bring  in  another 
seat  for  an  extra  guest,  or  murmur  to  ourselves  that  we 
had  better  not  invite  at  random  lest  we  should  be  incom- 
moded by  too  great  a  crowd.  Nay,  rather  the  pillared 
halls  of  mercy  in  which  the  King  doth  make  his  feast  are 
so  vast  that  it  will  be  our  life-long  business  to  furnish 
them  with  guests,  compelling  more  and  more  to  come  in 
that  his  house  may  be  filled,  and  that  his  royal  festival 
may  make  glad  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  hearts. 

Dear  friends,  if  you  want  to  know  what  are  the  ele- 
ments of  our  joy,  I  have  already  hinted  at  them,  but  I 
will  for  a  moment  enlarge  thereon.  Our  joys  are  often 
found  in  the  former  places  of  our  conflicts.  We  gather  our 
honey  out  of  the  lions  which  have  been  slain  for  us  or 
by  us. 

There  is, 'first,  our  sin.  A  horrible  lion  that!  But  it 
is  a  dead  lion,  for  grace  has  much  more  abounded  over 
abounding  sin.     Oh,  brothers  I  have  never  heard  of  any 


22  HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY. 

dainty  in  all  the  catalogue  of  human  joys  that  could  match 
a  sense  of  pardoned  sin.  Full  forgiveness !  Free  forgive- 
ness !  Eternal  forgiveness.  See,  it  sparkles  like  dew  of 
heaven.  To  know  that  God  has  blotted  out  my  sin  is 
knowledge  rich  with  unutterable  bliss.  My  soul  has  be- 
gun to  hear  the  songs  of  seraphim  when  it  has  heard 
that  note,  u  1  have  blotted  out  thy  sins  like  a  cloud,  and 
as  a  thick  cloud  thine  iniquities."  Here  is  choice  honey 
for  you ! 

The  next  dead  lion  is  conquered  desire.  When  a  wish 
has  arisen  in  the  heart  contrary  to  the  mind  of  God,  and 
you  have  said — ll  Down  with  you  !  I  will  pray  you  down. 
You  used  to  master  me;  I  fell  into  a  habit  and  I  was  soon 
overcome  by  you;  but  I  will  not  again  yield  to  you.  By 
God's  grace  I  will  conquer  you ''  ; — I  say,  when  at  last 
you  have  obtained  the  victory  such  a  sweet  contentment 
perfumes  your  heart  that  you  are  filled  with  joy  un- 
speakable; and  you  are  devoutly  grateful  to  have  been 
helped  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  master  your  own  spirit. 
Thus  you  have  again  eaten  spiritual  honey. 

When  you  are  able  to  feel  in  your  own  soul  that  you 
have  overcome  a  strong  temptation,  the  fiercer  it  was 
and  the  more  terrible  it  was  the  louder  has  been  your 
song  and  the  more  joyful  your  thanksgiving.  To  go 
back  to  Mr.  Bunyan  again ;  when  Christian  had  passed 
through  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death  during  the 
night,  and  when  he  had  come  entirely  out  of  it  and  the 
sun  rose,  you  remember  he  looked  back.  (A  pause). 
He  was  long  in  taking  that  look,  I  warrant  you.  What 
thoughts  he  had  while  looking  back.  He  could  just  dis- 
cern that  narrow  track  with  the  quagmire  on  one  side 
and  the  deep  ditch  on  the  other;  and  he  could  see  the 
shades  out  of  which  the  hobgoblins  hooted  and  the  fiery 
eyes  glanced  forth.     He  looked  back  by  sunlight  and 


HANDS    FULL    OF  HONEY.  23 

thought  within  himself,  "  Ah  me  !  What  goodness  has 
been  with  me !  I  have  gone  through  all  that,  and  yet 
I  am  unharmed  !  "  What  a  happy  survey  it  was  to  him  ! 
Ah,  the  joy  of  having  passed  through  temptation  without 
having  defiled  one's  garments  !  How  must  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  and  Abednego  have  felt  when  they  stepped 
out  of  the  fiery  furnace,  and  were  not  even  singed,  neither 
had  the  smell  of  fire  passed  upon  them.  Happy  men 
were  they  to  have  lived  in  the  centre  of  the  seven-times- 
heated  furnace  where  everything  else  was  consumed. 
Here  again  is  "a  piece  of  an  honeycomb." 
_  We  find  honey  again  from  another  slain  lion;  namely, 
our  troubles  after  we  have  been  enabled  to  endure  them. 
This  is  the  metal  of  which  our  joy-bells  are  cast.  Out  of 
the  brass  of  our  trials  we  make  the  trumpets  of  our  tri- 
umph. He  is  not  the  happy  man  who  has  seen  no  trouble ; 
but  "  blessed  is  he  that  endureth  temptation,  for  when  he 
is  tried  he  shall  receive  a  crown  of  life  that  fadeth  not 
away." 

Death,  too.  Oh,  the  honey  that  is  found  in  dead  death. 
Death  is  indeed  dead.  We  triumph  over  him,  and  are 
no  more  afraid  of  him  than  little  children  are  of  a  dead 
lion.  We  pluck  him  by  the  beard,  and  say  to  him,  uO 
death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave,  where  is  thy  vic- 
tory ?  "  We  even  look  forward  to  the  time  of  our  de- 
parture with  delight,  when  we  shall  leave  this  heavy 
clay  and  on  spirit  wings  ascend  unto  our  Father  and 
our  God.  You  see  there  is  rich  store  of  honey  for  God's 
people ;  and  we  do  not  hesitate  to  eat  it.  Let  others  say 
as  they  will,  we  are  a  happy  people,  happy  in  Christ, 
happy  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  happy  in  God  our  Father.  So 
that  believers  have  their  sweets. 

III.     But  the  third  is  the  point  I  want  to  dwell  upon : 

THE  BELIEVERS  LIFE  LEADS  HIM  TO  COMMUNICATE  OF  THESE  SWEETS. 


24  HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY. 

As  soon  as  we  have  tasted  the  honey  of  forgiven  sin  and 
perceived  the  bliss  that  God  has  laid  up  for  his  people  in 
Christ  Jesus,  we  feel  it  to  be  both  our  duty  and  our  privi- 
lege to  communicate  the  good  news  to  others.  Here 
let  my  ideal  statue  stand  in  our  midst:  the  strong  man, 
conqueror  of  the  lion,  holding  forth  his  hands  full  of 
honey  to  his  parents.  "We  are  to  be  modelled  according 
to  this  fashion. 

And,  first,  we  do  this  immediately.  The  moment  a 
man  is  converted,  if  he  would  let  himself  alone,  his  in- 
stincts would  lead  him  to  tell  his  fellows.  I  know  that 
the  moment  I  came  out  of  that  little  chapel  wherein  I 
found  the  Saviour,  I  wanted  to  pour  out  my  tale  of  joy. 
I  could  have  cried  with  Cennick — 

"  Now  will  I  tell  to  sinners  round, 

What  a  dear  Saviour  I  have  found; 
I'll  point  to  thy  redeeming  blood, 
And  say,  '  Behold  the  way  to  God  ! '  " 

I  longed  to  tell  how  happy  my  soul  was,  and  what  a  de- 
liverance I  had  obtained  from  the  crushing  burden  of 
sin.  I  longed  to  see  all  others  come  and  trust  my  Lord 
and  live  !  I  did  not  preach  a  sermon,  but  I  think  I 
could  have  told  out  all  the  gospel  at  that  first  hour.  Did 
not  you,  my  friend,  feel  much  the  same?  Did  not  your 
tongue  long  to  be  telling  of  what  the  Lord  had  done  for 
you  ?  Perhaps  you  are  one  of  those  proper  and  retiring 
people  who  are  greatly  gifted  at  holding  their  tongues; 
and  therefore  you  left  the  feet  of  Jesus  in  silence, — si- 
lence which  angels  wondered  at.  Is  that  why  you  have 
held  your  tongue  ever  since  ?  Perhaps  if  you  had  begun 
to  speak  then  you  would  have  continued  your  testimony 
to  this  day.  I  repeat  my  assertion  that  it  is  the  instinct 
of  every  newborn  soul  to  communicate  the  glad  tidings 


HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY.  25 

which  grace  has  proclaimed  in  his  heart.  Just  as  Samson 
had  no  sooner  tasted  of  the  honey  than  he  carried  a  por- 
tion of  it  to  his  father  and  mother,  so  do  we  hasten  to 
invite  our  neighbors  to  Christ.  My  dear  young  friend, 
as  soon  as  ever  you  know  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  open  your 
mouth  in  a  quiet,  humble  way,  and  never  allow  yourself 
to  be  numbered  with  the  deaf  and  dumb.  Let  no  one 
stop  you  from  unburdening  your  heart.  Do  not  follow 
the  bad  example  of  those  who  have  become  dumb  dogs 
because  of  their  cowardice  at  the  beginning. 

The  believer  will  do  this  first  to  those  who  are  nearest  to 
him.  Samson  took  the  honey  to  his  father  and  mother 
who  were  not  far  away.  With  each  of  us  the  most  nat- 
ural action  would  be  to  tell  a  brother  or  a  sister  or  a 
fellow-workman,  or  a  bosom  friend.  It  will  be  a  great 
joy  to  see  them  eating  the  honey  which  is  so  pleasant  to 
our  own  palate.  It  is  most  natural  in  a  parent  at  once  to 
wish  to  tell  his  children  of  divine  love — have  you  all 
done  so?  You  pray  for  your  children,  but  many  of  you 
would  be  the  means  of  answering  your  own  prayers  if 
you  would  talk  with  them  one  by  one.  This  may  appear 
difficult,  but  once  commenced  it  will  soon  grow  easy: 
and,  indeed,  if  it  be  difficult  we  should  aspire  to  do  it 
for  that  very  reason.  Should  we  not  do  many  a  difficult 
tiling  for  him  who  overcame  all  difficulties  for  us?  At 
the  least,  do  not  deny  to  your  own  children  the  personal 
testimony  of  their  father  or  their  mother  to  the  surpassing 
power  of  grace  and  the  unutterable  sweetness  of  divine 
love.     Tell  it  to  those  who  are  nearest  to  you. 

The  believer  will  do  this  as  best  he  can,  Samson,  you 
see,  brought  the  honey  to  his  father  and  mother  in  a 
rough  and  ready  style,  going  on  eating  it  as  he  brought 
it.  If  I  wished  to  give  honey  to  my  father  and  mother 
I  should  do  it  up  rather  daintily :  I  would  at  least  put  it 


26  HANDS  FULL    OF  HONEY. 

in  as  respectable  a  dish  as  our  kitchen  could  afford:  but 
there  were  no  plates  and  dishes  out  there  in  that  Timnath 
vineyard,  and  so  his  own  hands  were  the  only  salvers 
upon  which  Samson  could  present  the  delicacy, — "he 
took  thereof  in  his  hands,  and  came  to  his  father  and 
mother,  and  he  gave  them,  and  they  did  eat."  Perhaps 
you  think,  "  If  I  am  to  speak  to  any  person  upon  true 
religion,  I  should  like  to  do  it  in  poetry."  Better  do  it 
in  prose,  for  perhaps  they  will  take  more  notice  of  your 
verse  than  of  your  subject.  Give  them  the  honey  in  your 
hands,  and  if  there  is  no  dish  they  cannot  take  notice  of 
the  dish.  "  Ay,  but  I  should  like  to  do  it  very  properly," 
says  one;  "it  is  a  very  important  matter,  I  should  like 
to  speak  most  correctly."  But  my  judgment  is,  that,  as 
you  will  not  be  likely  to  attain  to  correct  speech  all  in  a 
hurry,  and  your  friends  may  die  while  you  are  learning 
your  grammar  and  your  rhetoric,  you  had  better  tell 
them  of  Jesus  according  to  your  present  ability.  Tell 
them  there  is  life  in  a  look  at  Jesus.  Tell  them  the  story 
simply,  as  one  child  talks  to  another.  Carry  the  honey 
in  your  hands,  though  it  drip  all  round:  no  hurt  will 
come  of  the  spilling,  there  are  always  little  ones  waiting 
tfor  such  drops.  If  you  were  to  make  the  gospel  drip 
about  everywhere,  and  sweeten  all  things,  it  would  be 
no  waste,  but  a  blessed  gain  to  all  around.  Therefore, 
I  say  to  you,  tell  of  Jesus  Christ  as  best  you  can,  and 
never  cease  to  do  so  while  life  lasts. 

But  then  Samson  did  another  thing,  and  every  true 
believer  should  do  it  too :  he  did  not  merely  tell  his  parents 
about  the  honey,  but  he  took  them  some  of  it.  I  do  not 
read,  "And  he  told  his  father  and  mother  of  the  honey," 
but  I  read,  "  and  he  took  thereof  in  his  hands."  Nothing 
is  so  powerful  as  an  exhibition  of  grace  itself  to  others. 
Do  not  talk  about  it,  butj^arry  it  in  your  hands.     "  I 


HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY.  27 

cannot  do  that,"  says  one.  Yes,  you  can,  by  your  life, 
your  temper,  your  spirit,  your  whole  bearing.  If  your 
hands  serve  God,  if  your  heart  serves  God,  if  your  face 
beams  with  joy  in  the  service  of  God,  you  will  carry 
grace  wherever  you  go,  and  those  who  see  you  will  per- 
ceive it.  You  will  hardly  have  need  to  say,  "Come  and 
partake  of  grace;"  for  the  grace  of  God  in  you  will  be 
its  own  invitation  and  attraction.  Let  our  lives  be  full 
of  Christ  and  we  shall  preach  Christ.  A  holy  life  is  the 
best  of  sermons.  Soul-winning  is  wrought  by  a  winning 
life  more  surely  than  by  winning  words. 

Take  note,  also,  that  Samson  did  this  with,  great  modesty. 
We  have  plenty  of  people  about  nowadays  who  could 
not  kill  a  mouse  without  publishing  it  in  the  Gospel 
Gazette;  but  Samson  killed  a  lion  and  said  nothing  about 
it.  He  holds  the  honey  in  his  hand  for  his  father  and 
mother — he  shows  them  that;  but  we  are  specially  in- 
formed that  he  told  not  his  father  or  his  mother  that  he 
had  taken  it  out  of  the  carcase  of  the  lion.  The  Holy 
Spirit  finds  modesty  so  rare  that  he  takes  care  to  record 
it.  In  telling  your  own  experience  be  wisely  cautious. 
Say  much  of  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  you,  but  say 
little  of  what  you  have  done  for  the  Lord.  You  need  not 
make  much  effort  to  be  brief  on  that  point,  for  I  am 
afraid  that  there  is  not  much  of  it,  if  all  were  told.  Do 
not  utter  a  self- glorifying  sentence.  Let  us  put  Christ 
to  the  front,  and  the  joy  and  blessedness  that  comes  of 
faith  in  him ;  and  as  for  ourselves,  we  need  not  speak  a 
word  except  to  lament  our  sins  and  shortcomings. 

The  sum  of  what  I  have  to  say  is  this, — if  we  have 
tasted  any  joy  in  Christ,  if  we  have  known  any  consola- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  if  faith  has  been  to  us  a  real  power, 
and  if  it  has  wrought  in  us  peace  and  rest,  let  us  com- 
municate this   blessed  discovery  to  others.     If  you  do 


28  HANDS   FULL    OF   HONEY. 

not  do  so,  mark  you,  you  will  have  missed  the  very  ob- 
ject for  which  God  has  blessed  you.  I  heard  the  other 
day  of  a  Sunday-school  address  in  America  which  pleased 
me  much.  The  teacher,  speaking-  to  the  boys,  said, 
'•  Boys,  here's  a  watch,  what  is  it  for  ?  "  The  children  an- 
swered, "To  tell  the  time."  "  Well,"  he  said,  "suppose 
my  watch  does  not  tell  the  time,  what  is  it  good  for?" 
"  Good-for-nothing,  sir."  Then  he  took  out  a  pencil. 
"  What  is  this  pencil  for?"  ik-  It  is  to  write  with,  sir." 
"Suppose  this  pencil  won't  make  a  mark,  what  is  it 
good  for?"  "Good-for-nothing,  sir."  Then  he  took  out 
his  pocket-knife.  "Boys,  what  is  this  for?  "  They  were 
American  boys,  and  so  they  shouted, — "  to  whittle  with," 
— that  is  to  experiment  on  any  substance  that  came  in 
their  way  by  cutting  a  notch  in  it.  "Bat,"  said  he, 
"  suppose  it  will  not  cut,  what  is  the  knife  good  for  ?  " 
"  Good-for-nothing,  sir."  Then  the  teacher  asked,  "  What 
is  the  chief  end  of  man?"  and  they  replied,  "To  glorify 
God."  "But  suppose  a  man  does  not  glorify  God,  what 
is  he  good  for  ?  "  "  Good-for-nothing,  sir."  That  brings 
out  my  point  most  clearly;  there  are  many  professors  of 
whom  /will  not  say  that  they  are  good-for-nothing,  but 
methinks  if  they  do  not  soon  stir  themselves  up  to  glorify 
God  by  proclaiming  the  sweetness  of  God's  love  it  will 
go  hard  with  them.  Kemember  how  Jesus  said  of  the 
savourless  salt  "  henceforth  it  is  good  for  nothing." 
What  were  you  converted  for  ?  What  were  you  forgiven 
for?  What  were  you  renewed  for?  What  have  you 
been  preserved  on  earth  for  but  to  tell  to  others  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation  and  so  to  glorify  God  ?  Do,  then, 
go  out  with  your  hands  full  of  the  honey  of  divine  love 
and  hold  it  out  to  others. 

You  must  assuredly  do  good  by  this ;  you  cannot  pos- 
sibly do  harm.     Samson  did   not  invite  his  father  and 


HANDS    FULL    OF   HONEY.  29 

mother  to  see  the  lion  when  he  was  alive  and  roaring, 
— he  might  have  done  some  hurt  in  that  case,  by 
frightening  them,  or  exposing  them  to  injury;  but  he 
settled  the  lion  business  himself,  and  when  it  came 
to  honey  he  knew  that  even  his  mother  could  not  be 
troubled  about  that;  therefore  he  invited  them  botli  to 
share  his  gains.  When  you  get  into  a  soul-conflict,  do  not 
publish  your  distress  to  all  your  friends,  but  fight  man- 
fully in  God's  name;  but  when  you  possess  the  joy  of 
Christ  and  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  and  grace  is  abundant 
in  your  soul,  then  tell  the  news  to  all  around.  You  can- 
not do  any  hurt  by  such  a  proceeding:  grace  does  good, 
and  no  harm,  all  its  days.  Even  if  you  blunder  over  it 
you  will  do  no  mischief.  The  gospel  spilled  on  the 
ground  is  not  lost.  Good,  and  only  good,  must  come  of 
making  known  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ, 

It  will  be  much  better  for  you  to  tell  of  the  sweets  of 
godliness  than  it  will  be  to  make  riddles  about  the  doc- 
trine of  it.  Samson  afterwards  made  a  riddle  about  his 
lion  and  the  honey;  and  that  riddle  ended  in  fighting 
and  bloodshed.  We  have  known  certain  Christians 
spend  their  lives  in  making  riddles  about  the  honey  and 
the  lion,  by  asking  tough  doctrinal  questions  which  even 
angels  cannot  answer:  "Riddle  me  this,"  they  say,  and 
then  it  has  ended  in  a  fight,  and  brotherly  love  has 
been  murdered  in  the  fray.  It  is  much  better  to  bring 
your  hands  full  of  honey  to  those  who  are  needy,  and 
present  it  to  them  that  they  may  eat  of  it,  than  it  is  to 
cavil  and  discuss.  Xo  hurt  can  come  of  telling  what 
the  Lord  has  done  for  your  soul,  and  it  will  keep  you 
out  of  mischief.  Therefore,  I  would  stir  up  all  Christian 
people  to  continue  from  day  to  day  exhibiting  to  needy 
sinners  the  blessedness  of  Christ,  that  unbelievers  may 
come  and  eat  thereof. 


30  HANDS   FULL    OF  HONEY. 

By  doing  this  you  will  be  blessing  men  far  more  than 
Samson  could  bless  his  parents,  for  our  honey  is  honey 
unto  eternity,  our  sweets  are  sweets  that  last  to  heaven, 
and  are  best  enjoyed  there.  Call  upon  others  to  taste 
and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good,  and  you  shall  have  there- 
in much  joy.  Yon  shall  increase  your  own  pleasure  by 
seeing  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  prospering  in  your  hand. 
What  bliss  awaits  useful  Christians  when  they  enter 
into  heaven,  for  they  shall  be  met  there  by  many  who 
have  gone  before  them  whom  they  were  the  means  of 
turning  to  Christ.  I  do  often  inwardly  sing  when  I  per- 
ceive that  I  can  scarce  go  into  any  town  or  village  but  what 
somebody  hunts  me  up  to  say  to  me,  "  Under  God  I  owe 
my  salvation  to  your  sermons  or  to  your  books."  What 
will  be  the  felicities  of  heaven  when  we  shall  meet  those 
who  were  turned  to  righteousness  by  our  holding  forth 
the  word  of  life  !  Oar  heaven  will  be  seven  heavens  as 
we  see  them  there.  If  you  have  done  nothing  but  ex- 
hibit in  your  lives  the  precious  results  of  grace  you  will 
have  done  well.  If  you  have  presented  to  your  com- 
panions truths  that  were  sweetness  itself  to  you,  and 
tried  to  say  in  broken  accents  "  Oh  that  you  knew  this 
peace  ! "  it  shall  give  you  joy  unspeakable  to  meet  those 
in  glory  who  were  attracted  to  Christ  by  such  a  simple 
means. 

God  make  you  all  to  be  his  witnesses  in  all  the  circles 
wherein  you  move. 


II. 

ON    LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

> 
January  21,  1883. 

"  And  why  call  ye  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things  which  I 
say  ?  Whosoever  cometh  to  me,  and  heareth  my  sayings,  and  doeth 
them,  I  will  shew  you  to  whom  he  is  like:  He  is  like  a  man  which  built 
an  house,  and  digged  deep,  and  laid  the  foundation  on  a  rock:  and  when 
the  flood  arose,  the  stream  beat  vehemently  upon  that  house,  and  could 
not  shake  it:  for  it  was  founded  upon  a  rock.  But  he  that  heareth,  and 
doeth  not,  is  like  a  man  that  without  a  foundation  built  an  house  upon 
the  earth;  against  which  the  stream  did  beat  vehemently,  and  immedi- 
ately it  fell;  and  the  ruin  of  that  house  was  great." — Luke  vi.  46-49. 

These  parables  describe  two  classes  of  hearers;  but  they 
say  nothing  of  those  Avho  are  not  hearers.  Their  posi- 
tion and  prospects  we  must  infer  from  what  is  said  of 
hearers.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  come  into  the 
world  to  tell  us  of  the  Father's  love,  and  never  man 
spake  as  he  spake,  and  yet  there  are  many  who  refuse 
to  hear  him.  I  do  not  mean  those  who  are  far  away,  to 
whom  the  name  of  Jesus  is  well-nigh  unknown,  but  I 
mean  persons  in  this  land,  and  especially  in  this  great 
and  highly-favored  city,  who  wilfully  refuse  to  hear  him 
whom  God  has  anointed  to  bring  tidings  of  salvation. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  is  proclaimed,  I  was  about  to  say,  upon 
the  house-tops  in  this  city ;  for  even  in  their  music-halls 
and  theatres  Christ  is  preached  to  the  multitude,  and  at 
the  corners  of  our  streets  his  banner  is  lifted  up;  and 
yet  there  are  tens  of  thousands  to  whom  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  is  as  music  in  the  ears  of  a  corpse.  They 
shut  their  ears  and  will  not  hear,  though  the  testimony 


32  ON   LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

be  concerning  God's  own  Son,  and  life  eternal,  and  the 
way  to  escape  from  everlasting  wrath.  To  their  own 
best  interests,  to  their  eternal  benefit,  men  are  dead: 
nothing  will  secure  their  attention  to  their  God.  To 
what,  then,  are  these  men  like?  They  may  fitly  be 
compared  to  the  man  that  built  no  house  whatever,  and 
remained  homeless  by  day  and  shelterless  by  night, 
When  worldly  trouble  comes  like  a  storm  those  persons 
who  will  not  hear  the  words  of  Jesus  have  no  consola- 
tion to  cheer  them ;  when  sickness  comes  they  haA^e  no 
joy  of  heart  to  sustain  them  under  its  pains;  and  when 
death,  that  most  terrible  of  storms,  beats  upon  them 
they  feel  its  full  fury,  but  they  cannot  find  a  hiding 
place.  They  neglect  the  housing  of  their  souls,  and 
when  the  hurricane  of  almighty  wrath  shall  break  forth 
in  the  world  to  come  they  will  have  no  place  of  refuge. 
In  vain  will  they  call  upon  the  rocks  to  fall  upon  them, 
and  the  mountains  to  cover  them.  They  shall  be  in 
that  day  without  a  shelter  from  the  righteous  wrath  of 
the  Most  High.  Alas,  that  any  being  who  wears  the 
image  of  man  should  be  found  in  such  a  plight!  Home- 
less wanderers  in  the  day  of  tempest!  How  my  soul 
grieves  for  them  !  Yet,  what  excuse  will  those  men  in- 
vent who  have  refused  even  to  know  the  way  of  salva- 
tion ?  What  excuse  can  the  tenderest  heart  make  for 
them  ?  Will  they  plead  that  they  could  not  believe  ? 
Yet  they  may  not  say  that  they  could  not  hear;  and 
faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of 
God.  Oh  my  friend,  if  the  word  of  God  comes  to  you, 
and  you  decline  to  hear  it,  and  therefore  do  not  believe 
in  Jesus,  but  die  in  your  sins,  what  is  this  but  soul-sui- 
cide? If  a  man  die  of  a  disease  when  infallible  medicine 
is  to  be  had,  must  not  his  death  lie  at  his  own  door  ?  If 
a  man  perish  of  hunger  when  bread  is  all  around  him  and 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  33 

others  feed  to  the  full,  and  he  will  not  have  it,  will  any 
man  pity  him  ?  Surely  not  a  drop  of  pity  will  be  yielded 
to  a  lost  soul  wherewith  he  may  assuage  the  torment  of 
his  conscience,  for  all  holy  intelligences  will  perceive 
that  the  sinner  chose  his  own  destruction.  This  shall 
ever  press  upon  the  condemned  conscience,  "You  knew 
the  gospel,  but  you  did  not  attend  to  it:  you  knew  that 
there  was  salvation,  and  that  Christ  was  the  Saviour, 
and  that  pardon  was  proclaimed  to  guilty  men,  but  you 
would  not  afford  time  from  your  farm  and  from  your 
merchandise,  from  your  pleasures  and  from  your  sins, 
to  learn  how  you  could  be  saved.  That  which  cost  God 
so  clear  you  treated  as  a  trifle.  Ah,  my  dear  friends, 
may  none  of  you  belong  to  the  non-hearing  class.  It  is 
not  to  such  that  I  shall  this  morning  address  myself, 
and  yet  I  could  not  enter  upon  my  discourse  without  a 
word  of  loving  expostulation  with  them.  Let  me  part 
with  them  by  quoting  the  warning  word  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  "See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh.  For 
if  they  escaped  not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on 
earth,  much  more  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn  away 
from  him  that  speaketh  from  heaven." 

Our  earnest  attention  will  now  be  given  to  thos 
who  are  hearers  of  the  word,  and  are  somewhat  affected 
by  it.  All  hearers  are  builders  of  houses  for  their  souls: 
they  are  each  one  doing  something  to  set  up  a  spiritual 
habitation.  Some  of  these  go  a  considerable  distance 
in  this  house-building,  and  even  crown  the  structure  by 
publicly  confessing  Christ.  They  say  unto  him,  "  Lord, 
Lord":  they  meet  with  his  followers,  and  join  with  them 
in  reverence  to  the  Master's  name;  but  they  do  not  obey 
the  Lord;  they  hear  him,  but  they  fail  to  do  the  things 
which  he  says.  Hence  they  are  mistaken  builders,  who 
fail  in  the  foundation,  and  make  nothing  sure  except 


34  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

that  their  house  will  come  down  about  their  ears. 
Others  there  are,  and  we  trust  they  will  be  found  to  be 
many  among  us,  who  are  building  rightly,  building  for 
eternity;  constructing  a  dwelling-place  with  basis  of 
rock,  and  walls  of  well-built  stone,  of  which  the  Lord 
Christ  is  both  foundation  and  corner-stone. 

I  am  anxious  to  speak  at  this  time  to  those  who  are 
just  beginning  to  build  for  eternity.  I  am  indeed  happy 
to  know  that  there  are  many  such  among  us.  May  the 
Holy  Spirit  bless  this  sermon  to  them. 

I.  Our  first  subject  will  be  a  common  temptation  with 
spiritual  builders.  A  common  temptation  with  hearers 
of  the  word,  according  to  the  two  parables  before  us,  is 
to  neglect  foundation-work,  to  get  hurriedly  over  the 
first  part  of  the  business,  and  run  up  the  building 
quickly.  They  are  tempted  to  assume  that  all  is  done 
which  is  said  to  be  done;  to  take  it  for  granted  that 
all  is  right  which  is  hoped  to  be  right;  and  then  to 
go  on  piling  up  the  walls  as  rapidly  as  possible.  The 
great  temptation,  I  say,  with  young  beginners  in  relig- 
ious life,  is  to  scamp  the  foundation,  and  treat  those 
things  lightly  which  are  of  the  first  importance.  The 
same  temptation  comes  to  us  throughout  the  whole  of 
life,  but  to  young  beginners  it  is  especially  perilous: 
Satan  would  have  them  neglect  the  fundamental  princi- 
ples upon  which  their  future  hope  and  character  are  to 
rest,  so  that  in  a  future  trying  hour,  from  want  of  a 
solid  foundation,  they  may  yield  to  evil,  and  lose  the 
whole  of  their  life-building. 

This  temptation  is  all  the  more  dangerous,  first,  be- 
cause these  young  beginners  have  no  experience.  Even  the 
most  experienced  child  of  God  is  often  deceived;  how 
much  more  the  pilgrim  who  has  but  just  entered  the 
wicket-gate !    The  tried  saint  sometimes  mistakes  that  for 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  35 

a  virtue  which  is  only  a  gilded  fault,  and  he  fancies  that 
to  be  genuine  which  is  mere  counterfeit;  how,  then, 
without  any  experience  whatever,  can  the  mere  babe  in 
grace  escape  deception  unless  he  be  graciously  preserved  ? 
Newly  awakened,  and  rendered  serious,  earnest  hearts 
get  to  work  in  the  divine  life  with  much  hurry,  seizing 
upon  that  which  first  comes  to  hand,  building  in  heedless 
haste,  without  due  care  and  examination.  Something 
must  be  done,  and  they  do  it  without  asking  whether  it 
is  according  to  the  teaching  of  the  Lord.  They  call 
Jesus  "  Lord";  but  they  do  what  others  say  rather  than 
what  Jesus  says.  Satan  is  sure  to  be  at  hand  at  such 
times  that  he  may  lead  the  young  convert  to  lay  in  place 
of  gospel  repentance  a  repentance  that  needs  to  be  re- 
pented of,  and  instead  of  the  faith  of  God's  elect  a  proud 
presumption  or  an  idle  dream.  For  that  love  of  God 
which  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  he  brings  mere 
natural  affection  for  a  minister;  and  he  says,  "There, 
that  will  do:  you  must  have  a  house  for  your  soul  to 
dwell  in.  There  are  the  materials,  pile  them  up."  Like 
children  at  play  upon  the  beach,  the  anxious  heap  up 
their  sand-castles,  and  please  themselves  therewith,  for 
they  are  ignorant  of  Satan's  devices.  I  am  for  this  cause 
doubly  anxious  to  save  my  beloved  young  friends  from 
the  deceiver.  The  common  temptation,  is,  instead  of 
really  repenting,  to  talk  about  repentance ;  instead  of  heart- 
ily believing,  to  say,  "I  believe,"  without  believing;  in- 
stead of  truly  loving,  to  talk  of  love,  without  loving; 
instead  of  coming  to  Christ,  to  speak  about  coming  to 
Christ,  and  profess  to  come  to  Christ,  and  yet  not  to 
come  at  all.  The  character  of  Talkative  in  Pilgrim's 
Progress  is  ably  drawn.  I  have  met  the  gentleman 
many  times,  and  can  bear  witness  that  John  Bunyan  was 
a  photographer  before  photography  was  invented.     Chris- 


36  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

tian  said  of  him  "He  talketh  of  prayer,  of  repentance, 
of  faith,  and  of  the  new  birth ;  but  he  knows  but  only  to 
talk  of  them.  I  have  been  in  his  family,  and  his  house 
is  as  empty  of  religion  as  the  white  of  an  egg  is  of  savor." 
We  have  too  many  such  persons  around  us  who  are,  as 
to  what  they  say,  everything  that  is  to  be  desired,  and 
yet,  by  what  they  are  proven  to  be,  mere  shams.  As 
tradesmen  place  dummies  in  their  shops,  papered  and 
labelled  to  look  like  goods,  while  yet  they  are  nothing 
of  the  sort,  so  are  these  men  marked  and  labelled  as 
Christians,  but  the  grace  of  God  is  not  in  them.  Oh 
that  you  young  beginners  may  be  on  the  alert,  that  you 
be  not  content  with  the  form  of  godliness,  but  are  made 
to  feel  the  power  of  it. 

There  is  this  to  help  the  temptation  too,  that  this  plan 
for  the  'present  saves  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  Your  mind 
is  distressed,  and  you  want  comfort;  well,  it  will  comfort 
you  to  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,"  though  you  do  not  the  things 
that  Christ  says.  If  you  admit  the  claims  of  Jesus  to 
be  Lord,  even  though  you  do  not  believe  on  him  for  sal- 
vation, and  so  neglect  the  main  thing  which  he  com- 
mands, yet  you  will  find  some  ease  in  the  admission. 
He  bids  you  repent  of  sin,  trust  his  blood,  love  his  word, 
aud  seek  after  holiness;  but  it  is  much  easier  to  admire 
these  things  without  following  after  them  in  your  life. 
To  feign  repentance  and  faith  is  not  difficult,  but  gen- 
uine godliness  is  heart- work,  and  requires  thought,  care, 
sincerity,  prayerfulness,  and  watchfulness.  Believe  me, 
real  religion  is  no  sport.  He  that  would  be  saved  will 
find  it  to  be  no  jesting  matter.  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
suffereth  violence"  ;  and  he  that  is  easy  about  the  thing, 
and  thinks  it  is  nothing  more  than  the  conjuror's  "  Heigh, 
presto,  done,"  has  made  a  fatal  mistake.  "Strive,"  saith 
Christ,   "  to   enter   into    the    strait    gate."     The    Spirit 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  37 

striveth  in  us  mightily,  and  often  works  us  to  an  agony. 
The  crown  of  eternal  glory  is  not  won  without  fighting, 
nor  the  prize  of  our  high  calling  received  without  run- 
ning; yet  by  just  making  a  holy  profession,  and  by  prac- 
ticing an  outward  form,  a  man  imagines  that  the  same 
result  is  produced  as  by  seeking  the  Lord  with  his  whole 
heart,  and  believing  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  it  were  so,  there 
would  be  a  fine  broad  road  to  heaven,  and  Satan  himself 
would  turn  pilgrim.  Believe  me,  dear  hearers,  this  sav- 
ing of  trouble  will  turn  out  to  be  a  making  of  trouble, 
and,  before  matters  end,  the  hardest  way  will  turn  out  to 
be  the  easiest  way. 

This  kind  of  building  without  foundation  has  this  ad- 
vantage to  back  up  the  temptation, — it  enables  a  man  to 
run  up  a  religion  very  quickly.  He  makes  splendid  prog- 
ress. While  the  anxious  heart  is  searching  after  truth 
in  the  inward  parts,  and  begging  to  be  renewed  by  grace, 
his  exulting  friend  is  as  happy  as  he  can  be  in  a  peace 
which  he  has  suddenly  obtained  without  question  or  ex- 
amination. This  rapid  grower  never  asks,  "  Has  my  re- 
ligion changed  my  conduct?  Is  my  faith  attended  by 
a  new  nature?  Does  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  me? 
Am  I  really  what  I  profess  to  be, -or  am  I  but  a  bastard 
professor  after  all  ?  "  Xo,  he  puts  aside  all  enquiry  as  a 
temptation  of  the  devil.  He  takes  every  good  thing  for 
granted,  and  votes  that  all  is  gold  which  glitters.  See 
how  fast  he  goes !  The  fog  is  dense,  but  he  steams 
through  it,  heedless  of  danger !  He  has  joined  the 
church:  he  has  commenced  work  for  God:  he  is  boasting 
of  his  own  attainments:  he  hints  that  he  is  perfect.  But 
is  this  mushroom  building  safe  ?  Will  it  pass  muster  in 
the  last  great  survey?  Will  it  stand  should  a  tempest 
happen  ?  The  chimney-shaft  is  tall,  but  is  it  safe  ?  Ay, 
there's  the  rub.     This  is  the  question  which  makes  an 


88  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

end  of  much  of  the  boasting  which  is  all  around  us.  Jt 
is  better  to  tremble  at  God's  word  than  boldly  to  pre- 
sume. It  is  better  to  be  fearful,  lest  after  all  we  may  be 
castaways,  than  to  harden  one's  forehead  with  vain  con- 
fidence. When  a  man  travels  upon  a  wrong  road,  the 
faster  he  runs  the  further  he  will  go  astray.  Remember 
the  advice  to  hasten  slowly,  and  the  old  proverb  which 
saith,  "The  more  haste  the  less  speed."  If  you  build 
quickly  because  you  build  without  a  foundation,  your 
time  and  toil  are  thrown  away. 

How  common,  how  deceptive  is  this  temptation  !  For 
the  young  beginner,  the  man  who  is  just  aroused  to  seek 
the  Lord,  will  find  a  great  many  to  help  Mm  in  his  mistake, 
should  he  neglect  the  foundation.  Kind,  good,  Christian 
friends  often,  without  a  thought  of  doing  so,  help  to 
mislead  seeking  souls.  "  Yes,"  they  say,  "  you  are  con- 
verted," and  so  perhaps  the  person  would  be  if  all  he 
said  was  true;  but  then  it  is  said  without  feeling;  it  comes 
from  the  lip  only,  and  does  not  come  from  the  heart; 
and  therefore  it  is  ruinous  to  encourage  him.  A  kindly 
assurance  from  a  Christian  friend  may  breed  false  confi- 
dence, if  that  assurance  was  mistakenly  given.  In  these 
days  we  do  not  meet  with  many  Christians  who  err  by 
dealing  too  severely  with  converts;  the  shot  strikes  the 
other  target.  Our  forefathers  were  possibly  too  suspic- 
ious and  jealous;  but  nowadays  we  nearly  all  err  in  the 
opposite  direction:  we  are  so  anxious  to  see  everybody 
brought  to  Christ,  that  our  wish  may  tend  to  delude  us 
into  the  belief  that  it  is  so.  We  are  so  willing  to  cheer 
and  comfort  those  who  seek  the  Lord,  that  we  may  fall 
into  the  habit  of  prophesying  smooth  things,  and  thus 
shun  everything  which  tends  to  probe  and  test,  lest  it 
should  also  discourage.  Let  us  beware  lest  we  cry, 
"  Peace,  peace,"  where  there  is  no  peace,     It  will  be  a 


ON   LAVING    FOUNDATIONS.  39 

sad  thing  to  breed  hypocrites  when  we  were  looking  for 
converts.  I  have  heard  of  one  who  had  been  into  the 
Enquiry  Room  a  dozen  times,  and  when  on  another  oc- 
casion she  was  invited  to  go  there  she  said,  "  I  really  do 
not  know  why  I  should  go,  for  I  have  been  told  that  I  was 
saved  twelve  times  already,  and  I  am  not  a  bit  better  than 
before  they  told  me  so."  It  would  be  better  to  send 
some  home  weeping  rather  than  rejoicing.  Many  a 
wound  needs  the  lancet  more  than  the  plaster.  You 
may  be  comforted  by  well-meant  assurances  of  tender 
friends,  and  yet  that  comfort  may  be  all  a  lie.  I  there- 
fore warn  you  against  any  peace  except  that  which 
comes  from  doing  that  which  Jesus  commands,  or  in 
other  words,  against  any  confidence  except  that  which 
rests  in  Jesus  only,  and  is  attended  with  repentance, 
faith,  and  a  life  of  obedience  to  your  Lord. 

No  doubt  many  are  encouraged  in  slight  building  by 
the  fact  that  so  many  professors  are  making  a  fair  shoiv, 
and  yet  their  building  is  without  foundation.  We  cannot 
shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  in  all  churches  there  are 
persons  who  have  no  depth  of  spiritual  root,  and  we  are 
afraid  no  real  spiritual  life.  We  cannot  root  them  up, 
though  we  fear  that  they  are  tares,  for  we  are  assured 
that  we  should  unavoidably  root  up  the  wheat  with  them, 
and  this  our  Master  forbids.  There  is  nothing  about 
their  outward  conduct  which  we  could  lay  hold  upon  as 
a  proof  of  their  being  deceivers,  and  yet  a  cold  chill 
runs  through  us  when  we  talk  with  them,  for  they  have 
no  warmth,  and  no  life,  and  nothing  of  the  Lord  about 
them.  We  miss  in  their  conversation  that  sweet  spirit- 
uality, that  holy  unction,  that  blessed  humility,  which 
are  sure  to  be  present  when  men  are  truly  familiar  with 
the  Lord,  and  have  entered  into  living  union  with  him. 
People  of  this  order  mix  up  with  us  in  our  holy  convoca- 


40  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

tions,  and  when  they  come  across  the  newly-awakened 
ones,  they  talk  of  divine  things  in  such  an  off-hand 
and  flippant  manner  that  they  do  serious  mischief. 
They  speak  about  conversion  as  if  it  were  a  mere  triflv, 
a  matter  as  easy  as  kissing  your  hand;  and  so  those  who 
are  hopeful,  and  over  whom  our  hearts  are  yearning,  are 
turned  aside  by  them.  Young  people  are  apt  to  think, 
"So-and-so  is  a  member  of  the  church,  and  he  is  never 
very  precise.  If  a  lukewarm  profession  satisfies  him, 
why  should  it  not  satisfy  me !  "  Ah,  my  dear  friends, 
but  you  would  not  say  so  in  business.  If  you  knew  a 
man  was  trading  without  capital  and  likely  to  come  to 
bankruptcy,  you  would  not  say,  "  I  may  do  the  same."' 
If  you  saw  a  man  venturing  into  deep  water  who  could 
not  swim,  and  you  felt  sure  that  he  would  ultimately 
sink,  you  would  not  follow  his  example  and  be  drowned 
too.  No,  no;  let  these  frothy  professors  be  beacons  to 
you.  Get  away  from  Mr.  Talkative,  lest  he  make  you 
as  hollow  a  drum  as  himself.  Beware  of  loose  professors, 
who  are  as  wreckers'  lights  that  hire  men  upon  the  rocks. 
Make  sure  work  for  eternity,  and  bid  triflers  begone. 

Again,  there  is  always  at  the  back  of  all  this  an  in- 
ducement to  build  without  a  foundation  because  it  will 
not  be  known,  and  possibly  may  not  be  found  out  for  years. 
Foundation-work  is  quite  out  of  sight,  and  the  house  can 
be  got  up  and  be  very  useful  in  a  great  many  ways,  and 
it  may  stand  a  good  while  without  the  underground 
work;  for  houses  without  foundations  do  not  tumble 
down  at  once;  they  will  stand  for  years;  nobody  knows 
how  long  they  may  keep  up,  perhaps  they  may  even  be 
inhabited  with  comfort  till  the  last  great  flood.  Death 
alone  will  discover  some  impostures.  Hence,  because 
the  ill-founded  house  will  do  for  the  present,  and  can  be 
used,  and  may  bring  immediate  comfort,  many  people 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  41 

consider  it  economical  to  leave  out  the  foundation  as 
a  needless  superfluity.  If  they  are  questioned  as  to  their 
vital  godliness  they  grow  angry: — "  What  business  have 
you  to  enter  into  my  private  business  ?  Why  should  you 
meddle  with  the  secrets  of  my  soul  ?  "  Ah,  dear  friend,  if 
we  were  cruel  to  you,  and  wished  you  to  be  deceived,  we 
would  hold  our  tongues,  or  speak  to  you  with  the  voice  of 
flattery ;  but  as  we  love  you,  and  as  we  hope  to  be  bi 
in  years  to  come  through  your  true  and  holy  consecra- 
tion to  Christ,  we  are  intensely  earnest  that  you  should 
begin  aright,  We  would  have  you  build  that  which  will 
not  need  to  be  pulled  down  again,  work  that  will  stand 
•  when  the  waters  are  out  and  the  stream  beasts  vehe- 
mently upon  it.  I  dread  that  any  man  should  perish 
without  religion,  but  I  dread  far  more  that  any  man 
should  perish  with  it,  finding  his  faith  to  have  been 
false  after  all.  If  you  do  build,  build  what  is  worth 
building:  if  you  must  be  builders  for  your  souls,  and 
surely  you  must,  or  else  be  shelterless,  than  take  heed 
on  what  foundation  you  build,  and  bo  careful  what  ye 
build  thereon,  lest  after  all  you  suffer  the  loss  of  all  your 
labor  in  that  last  tremendous  day.  How  sad  it  will 
seem  to  dwell  near  the  gates  of  heaven,  and  spend  your 
lives  among  those  who  are  to  be  its  future  inhabitants, 
and  then  for  want  of  sincerity  and  truth  to  be  shut  out 
of  the  celestial  city.  How  terrible  to  find  out  by  expe- 
rience that  there  is  a  back  way  to  the  gates  of  hell  even 
from  the  gates  of  heaven.  God  grant  it  be  not  so  with 
one  of  us  here  present.  0  ye  builders,  care  not  merely 
for  the  present,  but  build  for  death,  and  judgment,  and 
eternity ! 

This  part  of  our  discourse  is  not  only  for  young  people, 
but  for  us  all — for  old  as  well  as  young.  Depend  upon 
it,  there  is  not  one  man  among  us  but  what  has  need  to 


42  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

search  himself,  and  see  whether  the  foundation   of  his 
faith  has  been  truly  laid  or  no. 

II.  So  I  advance  to  the  second  step,  and  there  we 
will  consider  a  wise  precaution  which  safe  builders  never 
forget.  They  dig  deep,  and  never  rest  till  they  get  a 
good  substantial  foundation:  they  are  glad  to  get  to  the 
bottom  of  all  the  loose  earth  and  to  build  on  the  rock. 
Let  me  commend  this  wise  precaution  to  all  of  you. 

Follow  the  text  and  learn  to  see  to  your  sincerity.  The 
Lord  Jesus  says  "  Why  call  ye  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do 
not  the  things  which  I  say  ?  "  May  the  Holy  Ghost 
make  you  true  to  the  core.  Be  afraid  to  say  a  word 
more  than  you  feel.  Never  permit  yourself  to  speak  as 
if  you  had  an  experience  of  which  you  have  only  read. 
Let  not  your  outward  worship  go  a  step  beyond  the  in- 
ward emotion  of  your  soul.  If  Christ  be  truly  your  Lord 
you  will  obey  him:  if  he  be  not  your  Lord  do  not  call 
him  so.  It  is  a  great  point  in  all  your  religious  thoughts, 
beliefs,  words,  and  acts  to  have  the  heart  moving  in  all. 
It  is  an  awful  thing  to  make  a  high  profession  of  sanctity, 
and  yet  live  in  the  indulgence  of  secret  vice:  such  per- 
sons will  listen  to  my  observation  and  commend  me  for 
my  faithfulness,  and  yet  continue  in  their  hypocrisy. 
This  is  most  painful.  These  men  can  speak  the  Jew's 
language,  and  yet  the  tongue  of  Babylon  is  more  natural 
to  them:  they  follow  Christ,  but  their  hearts  are  with 
Belial.  Ah,  me!  My  soul  is  sick  at  the  thought  of 
them.  Be  true  !  Be  true  I  If  truth  will  carry  you  no 
further  than  despair,  better  that  you  stop  in  despair  than 
gain  a  hope  by  a  lie.  Do  not  live  on  fiction,  profession, 
presumption.  Eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  feed  only 
upon  the  truth.  Remember  that  when  you  build  with 
the  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  of  mere  notion  you  are  only 
gathering  materials  for  your  own  funeral  pile  in  that 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  43 

day  when  the  fire  shall  devour  all  lovers  and  makers  of 
a  lie.  Be  true  as  steel !  Every  wise  builder  for  his  soul 
must  mind  that. 

The  next  thing  is  thoroughness.     For  observe,  accord- 
ing to  our  Lord,  the  wise  builder  digged  deep.     You  can- 
not do  a  right  thing  too  well.     Dig  deep  if  you  do  dig  a 
foundation.     If  it  be  repentance,  let  it  be  an  intensely 
earnest  repentance,  including  a  vehement  hatred  of  every 
form  of  sin.     If  you  make  confession  before  God,  confess 
with  your  very  soul,  and  not  with  your  lips  only:  Jay 
bare  your  spirit  before  the  glance  of  Deity.     If  it  be  faith 
that  you  talk  of,  believe  right  up  to  the  hilt.     Do  not  go 
in  for  that  kind  of  sceptical  believing  which  is  so  com- 
mon nowadays.     If  thou  believest,  believe:  if  thou  re- 
pentest,  repent.     In  the  purging  of  the   soul  there  is 
nothing  like  sweeping  out  every  particle  of  the  old  leaven 
of  falsehood;  and  in  bringing  in  the  good  things  into  the 
heart  there  is  nothing  like  bringing  in  everything  that 
Christ  prescribes,  that  of  his  fulness  we  may  receive,  not 
only  grace,   but  grace  for  grace,  grace  upon  grace,  all 
the  grace  that  is  needed.     Be  downright  in  everything. 
The  wise  builder  dug  through  the  earth,  and  continued 
his  digging  till  he  reached  the  rock;  and  then  he  dug 
into  the  rock,  and  struck  out  a  trench  wherein  he  might 
lay  his  foundation;  for  he  could  not  be  content  unless 
he  made  sure  and  thorough  work  of  it.     Sincerity  and 
thoroughness  are  fine  building-materials. 

Next  to  that  add  self-renunciation;  for  that  is  in  the 
parable.  When  a  man  digs  a  deep  foundation  he  has 
much  earth  to  throw  out.  So  he  that  builds  for  eternity 
has  a  great  deal  to  get  rid  of.  Self-trust  must  go  at  the 
beginning;  love  of  sin  must  follow;  worldliness,  pride, 
self-seeking,  all  sorts  of  iniquity,— these  must  be  cast 
aside.     There  is   very  much  rubbish,  and  the  rubbish 


44  ON   LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

must  go.  You  cannot  make  sure  work  for  eternity 
without  clearing  away  much  which  flesh  and  blood 
would  like  to  retain.  See  ye  to  this,  and  count  the  cost. 
Then  must  come  solid  principle.  The  man  who  is  de- 
termined that  if  he  does  build  he  will  build  securely,  digs 
down  to  the  rock.  He  says,  "  I  believe  in  God,  he  is  my 
helper.  I  believe  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  on  his  atoning 
sacrifice  and  living  intercession  I  build  my  eternal  hopes. 
I  also  build  on  the  doctrine  of  grace,  for  the  Lord  hath 
said  it, — By  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith.  I  build 
on  Scripture:  nothing  but  the  warrant  of  the  word  will 
do  for  me."  What  God  has  said  is  a  rock:  what  man 
teaches  is  mere  shifting  sand.  What  a  blessed  thing  it 
is  to  get  down  to  the  eternal  principles  of  divine  verity! 
You  that  pick  up  your  religion  from  your  mothers  and 
fathers;  you  that  follow  it  because  it  happened  to  be  in 
the  family;  what  are  you  worth  in  the  day  of  trouble? 
You  are  blown  down  like  a  booth,  or  a  hut  of  boughs. 
But  you  that  know  what  you  believe,  and  why  you  be- 
lieve it,  you  who,  when  you  put  your  foot  down,  know 
what  you  are  standing  upon,  and  are  persuaded  that  you 
have  firm  rock  beneath  yon;  you  are  the  men  who  will 
stand  fast  when  mere  pretenders  are  hurled  out  of  their 
place.  Oh,  my  dear  seeking  friends,  fix  upon  true  prin- 
ciples, and  be  not  content  with  falsehood. 

These  truthful  principles  must  be  firmly  adhered  to. 
Bind  your  building  to  the  rock.  A  house  will  not  stand 
merely  because  it  is  on  the  rock;  you  must  get  its  foun- 
dation into  the  rock.  The  house  must  take  a  grip  of  the 
rock,  and  the  rock  must  grasp  the  house.  The  more  you 
can  get  the  house  to  be  a  bit  of  the  rock,  and  the  rock, 
;ss  it  were,  to  grow  up  into  the  house,  the  more  secure 
you  are.  It  is  of  no  use  saying,  "  Yes,  I  confide  in 
Christ,   in  grace,   in  revelation,"  unless  your  very  life 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  45 

enters  into  these  things,  and  they  enter  into  you.  Hypo- 
crites, Job  says,  are  stolen  away  in  the  night;  so  easily 
are  they  removed.  The  inventor  of  some  new  notion 
comes  along,  cracks  up  his  novel  wares,  and  silly  souls 
are  at  once  taken  in  by  him.  Christ  may  go,  grace  may 
go,  and  the  Bible  may  go,  too:  their  new  master  has 
them  wholly  in  his  power.  We  want  not  such  unsub- 
stantial men;  we  care  not  for  these  speculating  builders 
whose  carcases  are  all  around  us.  We  have  had  enough 
of  castles  in  the  air;  we  need  true  men,  who  will  stand 
fast  like  the  mountains  while  errors,  like  clouds,  blow 
over  them.  Remember  the  huge  shaft  at  Bradford,  and 
how  many  were  slain  by  its  fall,  and  let  it  teach  you  to 
hold  hard  to  foundation  truths,  and  never  depart  from 
them. 

The  man  in  the  second  parable  did  not  build  as  he 
should ;  what  may  I  say  of  him  ?  I  will  say  three  words. 
First,  he  was  a  man  who  had  nothing  out  of  si<jld:  you 
could  see  all  his  house  when  you  looked  at  it.  If  you 
can  see  all  a  man's  religion  at  a  glance  he  has  no  religion 
worth  having.  Godliness  lies  most  in  secret  prayer,  pri- 
vate devotion,  and  inward  grace.  The  wise  builder  had 
the  most  costly  part  of  his  house  buried  in  the  ground; 
but  the  other  man  showed  all  that  he  had  above  ground. 
He  is  a  poor  tradesman  who  has  no  stock  but  that  which 
he  puts  into  the  window.  He  will  not  last  long  who  has 
no  capital.  He  cannot  long  stand  who  has  no  backbone 
within.     Beware  of  a  religion  of  show. 

Next,  this  man  had  nothing  to  hold  to.  He  built  a 
house,  but  it  stood  upon  the  loose  soil:  he  easily  dug 
into  that,  and  stuck  up  his  house;  but  his  walls  had  no 
holdfast.  Beware  of  a  religion  without  holdfasts.  But 
if  I  get  a  grip  upon  a  doctrine  they  call  me  a  bigot. 
Let  them  do  so.     Bigotry  is  a  hateful  thing,  and   yet 


46  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

that  which  is  now  abused  as  bigotry  is  a  great  virtue, 
and  greatly  needed  in  these  frivolous  times.  I  have 
been  inclined  lately  to  start  a  new  denomination,  and 
call  it  "the  Church  of  the  Bigoted."  Everybody  is  get- 
ting to  be  so  oily,  so  plastic,  so  untrue,  that  we  need  a 
race  of  hard-shells  to  teach  us  how  to  believe.  Those 
old-fashioned  people  who  in  former  ages  believed  some- 
thing, and  thought  the  opposite  of  it  to  be  false,  were 
truer  folk  than  the  present  time-servers.  I  should  like 
to  ask  the  divines  of  the  broad  school  whether  any 
doctrine  is  worth  a  man's  dying  for  it.  They  would 
have  to  reply,  "  Well,  of  course,  if  a  man  had  to  go  to 
the  stake  or  change  his  opinions,  the  proper  way  would 
be  to  state  them  with  much  diffidence,  and  to  be  ex- 
tremely respectful  to  the  opposite  school."  But  suppose 
he  is  required  to  deny  the  truth?  "Well,  there  is  much 
to  be  said  on  each  side,  and  probably  the  negative  may 
have  a  measure  of  truth  in  it  as  well  as  the  positive. 
At  any  rate,  it  cannot  be  a  prudent  thing  to  incur  the 
odium  of  being  burned,  and  so  it  might  be  preferable  to 
leave  the  matter  an  open  question  for  the  time  being." 
Yes,  and  as  these  gentlemen  always  find  it  unpleasant  to 
be  unpopular,  they  soften  down  the  hard  threatenings  of 
Scripture  as  to  the  world  to  come,  and  put  a  ^>lor  upon 
every  doctrine  to  which  worldly-wise  men  object.  The 
teachers  of  doubt  are  very  doubtful  teachers.  A  man 
must  have  something  to  hold  to,  or  he  will  neither  bless 
himself  nor  others.  Bring  all  the  ships  into  the  pool; 
but  do  not  moor  or  anchor  one  of  them ;  let  each  one  be 
free !  Wait  you  for  a  stormy  night,  and  they  will  dash 
against  each  other,  and  great  mischief  will  come  of 
this  freedom.  Perfect  love  and  charity  will  not  come 
through  our  being  all  unmoored,  but  by  each  having 
his  proper  moorings  and  keeping  to  them  in  th©  name  of 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  47 

God.  You  must  have  something  to  hold  to;  but  the 
builder  in  the  parable  had  not,  and  so  he  perished. 

The  foolish  builder  had  nothing  to  resist  outward  cir- 
cumstances. On  summer  days  his  house  was  a  favorite 
resort,  and  was  considered  to  be  quite  as  good  as  his 
neighbor's  in  all  respects.  Frequently  he  rubbed  his 
hands  and  said,  "  I  do  not  see  but  what  my  house  is 
quite  as  good  his,  and  perhaps  a  little  better:  the  fact 
is,  I  had  a  few  pounds  to  spare  which  I  did  not  bury  in 
the  ground  as  he  did,  and  with  it  I  have  bought  many 
a  little  ornament,  so  that  my  habitation  has  a  finer  look 
than  his  building."  So  it  seemed;  but  when  the  torrent 
came  raging  down  the  mountain  side,  his  building,  hav- 
ing nothing  wherewith  to  resist  the  violence  of  the  flood, 
fell  down  at  once,  and  not  a  trace  of  it  remained,  when 
the  storm  had  ceased.  Thus  do  men  fail  because  they 
offer  no  resistance  to  forces  which  drive  them  into  sin; 
the  great  current  of  evil  finds  in  them  victims,  and  not 
opponents. 

III.  Thirdly,  we  will  now  gather  from  our  text  a  set 

OP  ARGUMENTS,  URGING  US  TO  TAKE  CARE  OF  THE  FOUNDATION.   1 

will  glance  over  these  arguments,  wishing  much  that  I 
had  time  to  enforce  them.  The  first  is  this.  We  ought 
to  build  axith  a  good  foundation  at  the  beginning,  be- 
cause otherwise  ice  shall  not  build  well  in  any  other  part 
of  the  house.  Bad  work  in  the  foundation  influences  all 
the  rest  of  the  courses.  In  the  Revised  Version  at  the 
end  of  the  forty-eighth  verse  instead  of  "For  it  was 
founded  upon  a  rock,"  we  read,  "Because  it  had  been  well 
builded."  The  house  was  built  well  at  the  bottom,  and 
that  led  the  workmen  to  put  in  good  work  all  the  way 
up,  so  that  all  through  "it  had  been  well  builded."  The 
other  man  built  badly  underground,  and  did  the  same 
up  to  the  roof.     When  you  get  into  the  habit  of  slovenly 


48  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

work  in  secret  the  tendency  is  to  be  slovenly  in  public 
too.  If  the  underground  part  of  our  religion  is  not 
firmly  laid  upon  Christ,  then  in  the  upper  part  there 
will  be  rotten  work,  half-baked  bricks,  mud  instead  of 
mortar,  and  a  general  scamping  of  everything.  When  a 
great  Grecian  artist  was  fashioning  an  image  for  the 
temple  he  was  diligently  carving  the  back  part  of  the 
goddess,  and  one  said  to  him,  "You  need  not  finish  that 
part  of  the  statue,  because  it  is  to  be  built  into  the  wall." 
He  replied,  "The  gods  can  see  in  the  wall."  He  had  a 
right  idea  of  what  is  due  to  God.  That  part  of  my  re- 
ligion which  no  man  can  see  should  be  as  perfect  as  if 
it  were  to  be  observed  by  all.  The  day  shall  declare  it. 
When  Christ  shall  come  everything  shall  be  made  known, 
and  published  before  the  universe.  Therefore  see  to  it 
that  it  be  fit  to  be  thus  made  known. 

See,  again,  that  we  ought  to  have  good  foundations 
when  we  look  at  the  situation  wliereon  the  house  is  to  be 
built.  It  is  clear  from  this  parable  that  both  these 
houses  were  built  in  places  not  far  from  a  river,  or 
where  streams  might  be  expected  to  come.  Certain 
parts  of  the  South  of  France  are  marvellously  like  Pal- 
estine, and  perhaps  at  the  present  moment  they  are 
more  like  what  the  Holy  Land  was  in  Christ's  clay  than 
the  Holy  Land  now  is.  When  I  reached  Cannes  last 
year  1  found  that  there  had  been  a  flood  in  the  town. 
This  flood  did  not  come  by  reason  of  a  river  being  swol- 
len, but  through  a  deluge  of  rain.  A  waterspout  seems 
to  have  burst  upon  the  hill-side,  tearing  up  earth,  and 
rocks,  and  stones,  and  then  hurrying  down  to  the  sea. 
it  rushed  across  the  railway  station  and  poured  down 
the  street  which  led  to  it,  drowning  several  persons  in 
its  progress.  When  I  was  there  a  large  hotel — I  should 
think  five  stories  high— was  shored  up  with  timber,  and 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  49 

was  evidently  doomed;  for  when  this  stream  rushed 
down  the  narrow  street  it  undermined  the  lower  courses 
of  the  building,  and  as  there  were  no  foundations  at 
all  able  to  bear  such  a  test  the  whole  erection  was 
rendered  unsafe.  The  Saviour  had  some  such  case  in 
his  mind's  eye.  A  torrent  of  water  would  come  tear- 
ing down  the  side  of  the  mountain,  and  if  a  house 
was  built  on  the  mere  earth,  it  would  be  carried  away 
directly,  but  if  it  were  fastened  into  the  rock  so  that  it 
became  part  and  parcel  of  it,  then  the  flood  might  rush 
all  around  it,  but  it  would  not  shake  the  walls.  Be- 
loved builder  of  a  house  for  your  soul,  your  house  is 
so  situated  that  one  of  these  clays  there  must  come 
great  pressure  upon  it.  "  How  do  you  know?"  Well, 
I  know  that  the  house  wherein  my  soul  lives  is  pitched 
just  where  winds  blow,  and  waves  rise,  and  storms  beat. 
Where  is  yours  ?  Do  you  live  in  a  snug  corner  ?  Yes, 
but  one  of  these  times  you  will  find  that  the  snug  corner 
will  be  no  more  shielded  than  the  open  riverside;  for  God 
so  orders  providence  that  every  man  has  his  test  sooner 
or  later.  It  may  be  that  you  think  yourself  past  tempta- 
tion, but  the  idea  is  a  delusion,  as  time  will  show.  Per- 
haps from  the  very  fact  that  you  seem  quite  out  of  the 
way,  a  peculiar  temptation  may  befall  you.  Therefore, 
I  do  pray  you,  because  of  the  exposed  condition  of  your 
life's  building,  build  upon  a  good  foundation. 

The  next  argument  "i,  build  deep,  because  of  the  ruin 
which  will  result  from,  a  bad  foundation.  The  foolish 
builder's  house  was  without  a  foundation.  Notice  that 
word,  "  without  a  foundation."  Write  down  the  expression 
and  see  whether  they  apply  to  you  or  not.  What  hap- 
pened to  this  house  without  a  foundation  ?  The  stream 
beat  vehemently  on  it.  The  river's  bed  had  long  been 
dry,  but  suddenly  it  was  flooded,  and  the  torrent  rolled 


50  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

with  tremendous  power.  Perhaps  it  was  persecution, 
perhaps  it  was  prosperity,  perhaps  it  was  trouble,  per- 
haps it  was  temptation,  perhaps  it  was  prevalent  scepti- 
cism, perhaps  it  was  death;  but,  anyhow,  the  flood  beat 
vehemently  upon  that  house;  and  now  we  read  the  next 
word, — "And  immediately  it  fell."  It  did  not  stand  a  pro- 
longed assault,  it  was  captured  at  once.  "  Immediately 
it  fell."  What!  in  a  minute,  all  that  fair  profession 
gone?  "  Immediately  it  fell."  Why,  that  is  the  man 
I  shook  hands  with  the  other  Sunday,  and  called  him 
"Brother,"  and  he  has  been  seen  drunk  !  or  he  has  been 
in  the  frivolous  assembly,  using  unhallowed  language  ! 
or  he  has  become  an  utter  doubter  all  on  a  sudden  !  It 
is  sorrowful  work  burying  our  friends,  but  it  is  much 
more  sorrowful  work  to  lose  them  in  this  fashion:  and 
yet  so  they  vanish.  They  are  gone:  even  as  Job  saith 
"  the  east  wind  carrieth  him  away  and  he  departeth." 
"Immediately"  they  fall,  and  yet  we  thought  so  highly 
of  them,  and  they  thought  so  highly  of  themselves.  "  Im- 
mediately it  fell";  their  profession  could  not  endure  trial, 
and  all  because  it  had  no  foundation. 

Then  it  is  added,  "  And  the  ruin  of  that  house  was 
igreat."  The  house  came  down  with  a  crash,  and  it  was 
the  man's  all.  The  man  was  an  eminent  professor,  and 
hence  his  ruin  was  all  the  more  notable.  It  was  a  great 
fall  because  it  could  never  be  built  up  again.  When  a 
man  dies  a  hypocrite  certainly  there  is  no  hope  of  resti- 
tution for  him.  By  the  stream  the  very  debris  of  the 
ruined  house  was  swept  away ;  nothing  was  left.  Oh, 
men,  if  you  lose  a  battle  you  may  fight  again  and  win 
another ;  if  you  fail  in  business  you  may  start  again  in 
trade  and  realize  a  fortune;  but  if  you  lose  your  souls  the 
loss  is  irretrievable.  Once  lost,  lost  for  ever.  There  will 
be  no  second  opportunity      Do  not  deceive  yourselves 


ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS.  51 

about  that.     Therefore,  dig  deep,  and  lay  every  stone 
most  firmly  upon  the  foundation  of  rock. 

For  lastly,  and  perhaps  this  will  be  the  best  argument, 
observe,  the  effect  of  this  good,  sure  building,  this  deep  build- 
ing. We  read  that  when  the  flood  beat  upon  the  wise 
man's  house  "  it  could  not  shaJee  it."  That  is  very  beauti- 
ful. Xot  only  could  it  not  carry  it  away,  but  "it  could 
not  shake  it."  I  see  the  man :  he  lost  his  money  and  be- 
came poor,  but  he  did  not  give  up  his  faith:  "  It  could  not 
shake  it."  He  was  ridiculed  and  slandered,  and  many 
of  his  former  friends  gave  him  the  cold  shoulder;  but 
"  It  could  not  shake  it."  He  went  to  Jesus  under  his 
great  trial  and  he  was  sustained:  "  It  could  not  shake  it." 
He  was  very  sick  and  his  spirit  was  depressed  within 
him,  but  still  he  held  his  confidence  in  Christ:  "It  could 
not  shake  it."  He  was  near  to  die;  he  knew  that  he 
must  soon  depart  out  of  this  world,  but  all  the  pains  of 
death  and  the  certainty  of  dissolution  could  not  shake 
him.  He  died  as  he  lived,  firm  as  a  rock,  rejoicing  as 
much  as  ever,  nay,  rejoicing  more,  because  he  was  nearer 
to  the  kingdom  and  to  the  fruition  of  all  his  hopes.  "It 
could  not  shake  it."  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  have  a  faith 
which  cannot  be  shaken.  I  saw  one  day  a  number  of 
beech  trees  which  had  formed  a  wood:  they  had  all  fallen 
to  the  ground  through  a  storm.  The  fact  was  they  leaned 
upon  one  another  to  a  great  extent,  and  the  thickness  of 
the  wood  prevented  each  tree  from  getting  a  firm  hold 
of  the  soil.  They  kept  each  other  up  and  also  constrained 
each  other  to  grow  up  tall  and  thin,  to  the  neglect  of 
root-growth.  When  the  tempest  forced  down  the  first 
few  trees  the  others  readily  followed  one  after  the  other. 
Close  to  that  same  spot  I  saw  another  tree  in  the  open, 
bravely  defying  the  blast,  in  solitary  strength.  The  hur- 
ricane had  beaten  upon  it,  but  it  had  endured  all  its  force 


52  ON  LAYING    FOUNDATIONS. 

unsheltered.  That  lone,  brave  tree  seemed  to  be  better 
rooted  than  before  the  storm.  I  thought,  "  Is  it  not  so 
with  professors  ?  "  They  often  hold  together,  and  help 
each  other  to  grow  up,  but  if  they  have  not  firm  per- 
sonal roothold,  when  a  storm  arises  they  fall  in  rows.  A 
minister  dies,  or  certain  leaders  are  taken  away,  and 
over  go  the  members  by  departure  from  the  faith  and 
from  holiness.  '  I  would  have  you  be  self-contained,  grow- 
ing each  man  into  Christ  for  himself,  rooted  and  grounded 
in  love  and  faith  and  every  holy  grace.  Then  when  the 
worst  storm  that  ever  blew  on  mortal  man  shall  come,  it 
will  be  said  of  }Tour  faith,  "  It  could  not  shake  it."  I  be- 
seech you  who  are  now  seeking  Christ  to  take  care  that 
you  build  well,  that  you  may  stand  long  in  our  Zion, 
.steadfast  and  immovable.  God  grant  it  for  Christ's  sake. 
Amen. 


III. 

"HEREIN  IS  LOVE." 

February  18,  1883. 

"  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent 
his  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins.  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us, 
we  ought  also  to  love  one  another." — 1  John  iv.  10,  11. 

The  law  commands  love;  indeed,  all  its  precepts  are 
summed  up  in  that  one  word  "love."  More  widely  read 
it  runs  thus:  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy 
strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind;  and  thy  neighbor  as 
thyself':  yt  all  this  amounts  only  to  "  Thou  shalt  love." 
But  the  law  by  reason  of  our  depravity  never  pro- 
duced love.  We  were  commanded  to  love,  but  we  did 
no  such  thing.  The  spirit  that  is  in  us  is  selfish,  and  it 
lusteth  to  envy  and  to  enmity.  Whence  come  wars  and 
fightings  among  us?  Come  they  not  from  our  lusts? 
Since  the  Fall  man  has  become  man's  bitterest  foe  upon 
the  earth,  and  the  world  is  full  of  hating,  slandering, 
struggling,  fighting,  wounding,  and  slaying:  all  that 
law  can  do  is  to  show  the  wrong  of  enmity,  and 
threaten  punishment;  but  it  cannot  supply  an  unregen- 
erate  heart  with  the  fountain  of  love.  Man  remains  un- 
loving and  unlovable  till  the  gospel  takes  him  in  hand 
and  by  grace  accomplishes  that  which  the  law  could 
not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh.  Love  is 
winning  many  hearts  to  lie  kingdom  of  God,  and  its 
reign   shall   extend   till  love  shall  rule  over  the  whole 


5 J:  "HEREIN   IS    LOVE." 

earth,  and  so  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  set  up  among 
men,  and  God  shall  dwell  among  them.  At  the  present 
moment  love  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  people 
of  God.  Jesus  said,  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that 
ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another';  and 
John  said,  "We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death 
unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  The  man 
whose  spirit  is  selfish  has  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  and 
kk  if  any  man  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none  of 
his."  The  man  whose  spirit  is  that  of  envy  and  con- 
tention is  evidently  no  follower  of  the  lowly  and  lov- 
ino;  Jesus,  and  those  who  do  not  follow  Jesus  are  none 
of  his. 

They  that  are  Christ's  are  filled  with  his  love.  "  Every 
one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God.  He 
that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God;  for  God  is  love." 
God  is  the  centre  of  the  believer's  love;  the  saints  are 
an  inner  circle  specially  beloved,  and  all  mankind  are 
embraced  within  the  circumference  of  the  ring  of  love. 
"He  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in 
him";  and  he  alone  is  a  child  of  God  whose  spirit  is 
kindly  and  affectionate,  and  who  seeks,  wherever  he  is, 
to  promote  peace,  goodwill  towards  men. 

The  saints  begin  with  love  to  God.  That  must  ever 
hold  the  highest  place;  for  God  is  the  best  and  noblest 
being,  and  we  owe  him  all  our  hearts.  Then  comes,  tor 
Jesus'  sake,  love  to  all  who  are  in  Christ.  There  is  a 
peculiarly  near  and  dear  relationship  existing  between 
one  child  of  God  and  all  the  rest.  Loving  him  that 
begat,  we  love  all  them  that  are  begotten  of  him.  Should 
not  a  child  love  his  brothers  with  a  tender,  peculiar 
affection?  This  principle  of  love,  once  implanted,  in- 
duces in  the  heart  of  the  converted  man  a  love  towards 
all  mankind.     Not  that  he  can  take  any  complacency 


"HEREIN  IS   LOVE."  55 

in  the  wicked;  God  himself  cannot  do  that;  his  holiness 
abhors  all  iniquity.  The  love  desired  is  not  the  love  of 
complacency,  but  the  love  of  benevolence ;  so  that  we 
wish  well,  and  to  the  utmost  of  our  power  would  do 
well,  unto  all  those  that  dwell  upon  the  face  of  the  earth. 
In  this  holy  charity,  this  unselfish  love,  be  ye  imitators 
of  God  as  dear  children.  Our  heavenly  Father  is  kind 
to  the  unthankful  and  to  the  evil,  and  so  must  we  be; 
desiring  that  even  the  most  abandoned  may  yet  be  res- 
cued and  made  right  and  good.  Love  desires  to  create 
that  which  is  lovable  even  in  the  most  unlovable  of 
mankind,  and  God  helping  the  effort,  she  suceeds. 

I  hear  one  say,  "This  is  a  vast  idea.  Are  we  to  love 
at  this  rate?  Where  is  the  love  to  come  from?  Our 
hearts  are  narrow,  men  are  unworthy,  provocations  are 
numerous,  another  spirit  is  abroad  in  the  world:  where 
is  this  love  to  come  from  ? — this  flood  of  love  which  is 
to  cover  the  tops  of  the  mountains  of  man's  un worthi- 
ness ?"  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  springs  of  the  sea? 
or  hast  thou  walked  in  search  of  the  depths  ?  Yes,  by 
the  leadings  of  God's  Spirit  we  will  search  out  the  springs 
of  the  sea  of  love.  Only  in  one  place  shall  we  find  love 
enough  for  our  supreme  purpose,  which  is  also  the  pur- 
pose of  the  Lord  himself.  There  is  one  shoreless  ocean 
into  which  we  may  be  baptized,  and  out  of  which  we 
may  be  filled  until  we  overflow.  Where  is  the  unfailing 
motive  of  love  ?  For  love  is  tried,  and  hardly  put  to  it 
to  hold  her  own.  Can  we  find  a  motive  that  will  never 
fail  even  toward  the  most  provoking  of  mankind?  Can 
we  find  an  argument  for  affection  which  shall  help  us 
in  times  of  ingratitude,  when  base  returns  threaten  to 
freeze  the  very  heart  of  charity?  Yes,  there  is  such  a 
motive;  there  is  a  force  by  which  even  impossibilities 
of  love  can  be  accomplished,  and  we  shall  be  supplied 


56  "HEREIN  IS   LOVE." 

with  a  perpetual  constraint  moving  the  heart  to  cease- 
less charity. 

Come  with  me,  then,  in  the  first  place,  to  notice  the 
infinite  spring  of  love — "Herein  is  love,  not  that  we 
loved  God,  but  that  God  loved  us;"  secondly,  let  us  ob- 
serve the  marvellous  outflow  of  that  love — "  God  sent  his 
Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins;"  and  then,  thirdly, 
let  us  notice  the  overflow  of  that  love  in  as,  when  it  fills 
our  hearts  and  runs  over  to  others — "Beloved,  if  God  so 
loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another." 

I. First,     THE    INFINITE    STRING    OF    LOVE.       OllT    text    lias 

two   words  upon  which  I  would  place   an   emphasis — 
"not"  and  "bid." 

The  first  is  "not,"  "Herein  is  love,  not" — "not 
that  we  loved  God."  Very  naturally  many  conclude 
that  this  means  "  not  that  we  loved  God  first,"  That 
is  not  exactly  the  truth  taught  here,  but  still  it  is  a 
Weighty  truth,  and  is  mentioned  in  this  same  chap- 
ter in  express  words — "  We  love  him  because  he  first 
loved  us"  (verse  nineteen).  The  cause  of  love  in  the 
universe  is  not  that  man  loved  God  first.  No  being 
in  existence  could  love  God  before  God  loved  him ;  for 
the  existence  of  such  a  being  is  due  to  God's  pre- 
vious love.  His  plans  of  love  were  all  laid  and  many 
of  them  carried  out  before  we  were  born ;  and  when  we 
were  born  we  none  of  us  loved  God  first  so  as  to  seek 
after  God  before  he  sought  after  us,  so  as  to  desire  rec- 
onciliation with  God  before  he  desired  reconciliation  with 
us.  No ;  whatever  may  be  said  about  freewill  as  a  theory, 
it  is  never  found  as  a  matter  of  fact  that  any  man,  left 
to  himself,  ever  woos  his  God,  or  pines  after  friendship 
with  his  Maker.  If  he  repents  of  sin  it  is  because  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  first  visited  him  and  shown  him  his 
sin ;  if  he  desires  restoration  it  is  because  he  has  first  of 


"HEREIN  IS    LOVE."  57 

all  been  taught  to  dread  the  wrath  of  God  and  to  long 
for  holiness. 

"  No  sinner  can  be  beforehand  with  thee; 
Thy  grace  is  most  sovereign,  most  rich,  and  most  free." 


le 
Oil. 


We  inscribe  a  negative  in  black  capital  letters  upon  tl 
idea  that  man's  love  can  ever  be  prior  to  the  love  of  G 
That  is  quite  out  of  the  question. 

"  Not  that  we  loved  God."  Take  a  second  sense — that 
is,  not  that  any  man  did  love  God  at  all  by  nature,  whether 
first  or  second;  not  that  we,  any  one  of  us,  ever  did  or 
ever  could  have  an  affection  towards  God  while  we  re- 
mained in  our  state  by  nature.  Instead  of  loving  God, 
man  is  indifferent  to  God.  "No  God,"  saith  the  fool  in 
his  heart,  and  by  nature  we  are  all  such  fools.  It  is  the 
sinner's  wish  that  there  were  no  God.  We  are  atheistical 
by  nature,  and  it"  our  brain  does  not  yield  to 'atheism,  yet 
our  heart  does.  We  wish  that  we  could  sin  according 
to  our  own  will,  and  that  we  were  in  no  danger  of  being 
called  to  account  for  it.  God  is  not  in  all  our  thoughts, 
or  if  he  does  enter  there  it  is  as  a  terror  and  a  dread.  Nay, 
worse  than  that:  man  is  at  enmity  with  God  by  wicked 
works.  The  holiness  which  God  admires  man  hath  no  lik- 
ing for;  the  sin  which  God  abominates  has  about  it  sweet- 
ness and  fascination  for  the  unrenewed  heart;  so  that 
man's  ways  are  contrary  to  the  ways  of  God.  Man  is 
perverse;  he  cannot  walk  with  God,  for  they  are  not 
agreed;  he  is  all  evil,  and  God  is  all  goodness,  and  there- 
fore no  love  to  God  exists  in  the  natural  heart  of  man 
He  may  say  that  he  loves  God,  but  then  it  is  a  god  of 
his  own  inventing,  and  not  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the 
Bible,  the  only  living  and  true  God.  A  just  God  and  a 
Saviour  the  natural  mind  cannot  endure:  the  carnal  mind 
is  enmity  against  God,  and  is  not  reconciled  to  God,  neither 


58  "HEREIN  IS    LOVE:' 

indeed  can  be.  The  unregenerate  heart  is,  as  to  love,  a 
broken  cistern  which  can  hold  no  water.  In  our  natural 
state,  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no  not  one;  so  is 
there  also  none  that  loveth  God,  no,  not  one. 

We  come  nearer  to  John's  meaning  when  we  look  at 
this  negative  as  applying  to  those  who  do  love  God. 
"  Not  that  we  loved  God," — that  is,  that  our  love  to  God, 
even  when  it  does  exist,  and  even  when  it  influences 
our  lives,  is  not  worthy  to  be  mentioned  as  a  fountain  of 
supply  for  love.  The  apostle  points  us  away  from  it  to 
something  far  more  vast,  and  then  he  cries,  "  Herein  is 
love."  I  am  looking  for  "  the  springs  of  the  sea,"  and 
you  point  me  to  a  little  pool  amid  the  rocks  which  has 
been  filled  by  the  flowing  tide.  I  am  glad  to  see  that 
pool :  how  bright !  how  blue !  how  like  the  sea  from  whence 
it  came  !  Bat  do  not  point  to  this  as  the  source  of  the 
great  waterfloods:  for  if  you  do  I  shall  smile  at  your 
childish  ignorance,  and  point  you  to  yon  great  rolling 
main  which  tosses  its  waves  on  high.  What  is  your 
little  pool  to  the  vast  Atlantic?  Do  you  point  me  to 
the  love  in  the  believer's  heart,  and  say,  "  Herein  is  love  !  " 
You  make  me  smile.  I  know  that  there  is  love  in  that 
true  heart;  but  who  can  mention  it  in  the  presence  of 
the  great  rolling  ocean  of  the  love  of  God,  without  bottom 
and  without  shore?  The  word  not  is  not  only  upon  my 
lip  but  in  my  heart  as  I  think  of  the  two  things,  "not 
that  we  loved  God,  but  that  God  loved  us."  What  poor 
love  ours  is  at  its  very  best  when  compared  with  the  love 
wherewith  God  loves  us! 

Let  me  use  another  figure.  If  we  had  to  enlighten 
the  world,  a  child  might  point  us  to  a  bright  mirror  re- 
flecting the  sun,  and  he  might  cry,  "Herein  is  light!" 
You  and  I  would  say,  "  Poor  child,  that  is  but  borrowed 
brightness;  the  light  is  not  there,  but  yonder,  in  the  sun: 


"HEREIN  IS   LOVE"  59 

the  love  of  saints  is  nothing  more  that  the  reflection  of 
the  love  of  God.  We  "have  love,  but  God  is  love.  When 
I  think  of  the  love  of  certain  saints  to  Christ,  I  am  charmed 
with  it;  for  it  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  not  to  be  despised. 
When  I  think  of  Paul  the  Apostle  counting  all  things 
but  loss  for  Christ;  when  I  think  of  our  missionaries  go- 
ing one  after  another  into  malarious  parts  of  the  African 
coast,  and  dying  for  Christ;  and  when  I  read  the  Book 
of  Martyrs,  and  see  confessors  standing  on  the  fagots, 
burning  quick  to  the  death,  still  bearing  witness  to  their 
Lord  and  Master, — 1  do  rejoice  in  the  love  of  saints  to 
their  Lord.  Yet  this  is  but  a  streamlet;  the  unfathom- 
able deep,  the  eternal  source  from  which  all  love  proceeds, 
infinitely  exceeds  all  human  affection,  and  it  is  found  in 
God,  and  in  God  alone.  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we 
loved  God,  but  that  God  loved  us." 

Let  us  contrast  our  love  to  God  with  his  love  to  us. 
Dear  brethren,  we  do  love  God,  and  we  may  well  do  so, 
since  he  is  infinitely  lovable.  When  the  mind  is  onee  en- 
lightened it  sees  everything  that  is  lovable  about  God. 
He  is  so  good,  so  gracious,  so  perfect  that  he  commands 
our  admiring  affection.  The  spouse  in  the  Song,  when 
she  thought  of  her  beloved,  mentioned  all  manner  of 
beauties,  and  then  cried,  "Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely.'' 
It  is  natural,  therefore,  that  one  who  sees  God  should 
love  him.  But,  now,  think  of  God's  love  to  us:  is  it  not 
incomparably  greater,  since  there  was  nothing  lovely  in 
us  whatever,  and  yet  he  loved  us  ?  In  us  there  is  by 
nature  nothing  to  attract  the  affection  of  a  holy  God,  but 
quite  the  reverse;  and  yet  he  loved  us.  Herein,  indeed, 
is  love ! 

When  we  love  God  it  is  an  honor  to  us;  it  exalts  a 
man  to  be  allowed  to  love  a  Being  so  glorious.  A  phi- 
losopher once  wrote  that  tor  a  man  to  speak  of  being  the 


60  "HEREIN  IS   LOVE." 

friend  of  God  was  too  daring,  and  in  the  reverence  of 
this  thoughtful  heathen  there  was  much  to  admire;  for 
indeed  there  is  an  infinite  difference  between  the  glorious 
God  and  the  sinful  creature  man.  Though  God  in  con- 
descension allows  us  to  call  him  friend,  and  Jesus  says, 
"  Ye  are  my  friends  !  "  yet  this  is  beyond  reason,  and  is  a 
sweet  revelation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  What  an  uplifting 
there  is  in  it  for  us!  On  the  other  hand,  God's  love  to 
us  can  add  nothing  to  him ;  it  gives,  but  receives  not. 
Divine  love  can  have  no  recompense.  That  he,  the  In- 
finite, should  stoop  to  love  the  finite:  that  he  the  infi- 
nitely pure  should  love  the  guilty,  this  is  a  vast  conde- 
scension. See,  moreover,  what  it  involved;  for  this  love 
rendered  it  necessary  that  in  the  person  of  his  dear  Son 
God  should  be  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men,"  should 
make  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  should  even  be  num- 
bered with  the  transgressors.      "  Herein  is  love  !  " 

When  we  love  God  we  are  gainers  by  the  deed.  He 
that  loves  God  does  in  the  most  effectual  manner  love 
himself.  We  are  filled  with  riches  when  we  abound  in 
love  to  God;  it  is  our  wealth,  our  health,  our  might,  and 
our  delight.  But  God  gains  nothing  by  loving  us.  I 
hardly  like  to  set  the  two  in  contrast,  for  our  love  is 
so  poor  and  pitiable  a  thing  as  compared  with  the  im- 
measurable love  of  God. 

It  is  our  duty  to  love  God;  we  are  bound  to  do  it. 
As  his  creatures  we  ought  to  love  our  Creator;  as  pre- 
served by  his  care  we  are  under  obligation  to  love  him 
for  his  goodness:  we  owe  him  so  much  that  our  utmost 
love  is  a  mere  acknowledgment  of  our  debt.  But  God 
loved  us  to  whom  he  owed  nothing  at  all;  for  whatever 
might  have  been  the  claims  of  a  creature  upon  his  Crea- 
tor, we  had  forfeited  them  all  by  our  rebellion.  Sinful 
men  had  no  rights  towards  God  except  the  right  of  being 


"HEREIN  IS   LOVE."  61 

punished.  Yet  the  Lord  manifested  boundless  love  to  our 
race,  which  was  only  worthy  to  be  destroyed.  Oh  words! 
How  ye  fail  me  !  I  cannot  utter  my  heart  by  these  poor 
lips  of  clay.  Oh  God,  how  infinite  was  thy  love  which 
was  given  without  any  obligation  on  thy  part,  freely 
and  unsought,  and  all  because  thou  wiliest  to  love — 
yea,  thou  dost  love  because  thou  art  love.  There  was 
no  cause,  no  constraint,  no  claim  why  thou  shouldest 
love  mankind,  except  that  thine  own  heart  led  thee  so 
to  do.  What  is  man  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him? 
11  Herein  is  lore,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  God 
loved  us." 

I  have  thus  pointed  out  the  well-head  of  love :  let  us 
draw  from  it,  and  from  none  other.  If  you  go  into  the 
world  and  say,  "  I  am  to  love  my  fellow-men  because  I  love 
God,"  the  motire  is  good,  but  it  is  questionable,  limited, 
and  variable.  How  much  better  to  argue — I  am  to  love 
my  fellow-men  because  God  loves  me.  When  my  love 
grows  cold  towards  God,  and  when  by  reason  of  my. 
infirmity  and  imperfection  I  am  led  even  to  question 
whether  I  do  love  God  at  all,  then  my  argument  and 
my  impulse  would  fail  me  if  it  came  from  my  own  love 
to  God;  but  if  I  love  the  fallen  because  God  loved  me, 
then  I  have  an  unchanging  motive,  and  unquestionable 
argument,  and  a  forcible  impulse  not  to  be  resisted : 
hence  the  apostle  cried,  "The  love  of  Christ  constrain- 
eth  us."  It  is  always  well  for  a  Christian  to  have  the 
strongest  motive,  and  to  rely  upon  the  most  potent  and 
perpetual  force,  and  hence  the  apostle  bids  us  look  to 
divine  love,  and  not  to  our  own.  "Herein  is  love,"  saith 
he,  "not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  God  loved  us." 
So  far  the  "  not." 

Let  us  turn  to  the  "but."     "  But  that  he  loved  us." 
I  have  nothing  new  to  say,  nor  do  I  wish  to  say  any- 


62  "HEREIN   IS    LOVE." 

thing  new;  but  I  should  like  you  to  meditate  on  each 
one  of  these  words: — "He  loved  us"  Three  words,  but 
what  weight  of  meaning!  "He"  who  is  infinitely  holy 
and  cannot  endure  iniquity, — "He  loved  us"  ;  "He,v 
whose  glory  is  the  astonishment  of  the  greatest  of  intelli- 
gent beings, — "He  loved  us."  "He"  whom  the  heaven 
of  heavens  cannot  contain,  "loved  us."  "He"  who  is 
God  all-sufficient,  and  needs  nothing  of  us,  neither  can 
indeed  receive  anything  at  our  hands, — "  He  loved  us." 
What  joy  lies  sleeping  here !  Oh,  that  we  could  wake 
it  up !  What  hope,  too,  for  hopeless  sinners,  because 
"God  loved  us."  If  a  man  could  know  that  he  was 
loved  of  all  his  fellow-men,  if  he  could  have  it  for  certain 
that  he  was  loved  by  all  the  angels,  doted  on  by  cherubim 
and  seraphim,  yet  these  were  but  so  many  drops,  and 
all  put  together  could  not  compare  with  the  main  ocean 
contained  in  the  fact  that  "  God  loved  us." 

Now  ring  that  second  silver  bell:  "  He  loved  us."  I 
do  not  think  that  the  apostle  is  here  so  much  speaking 
of  God's  special  love  to  his  own  elect  as  of  his  love  to 
men  in  general.  He  saw  our  race  ruined  in  the  fall, 
and  he  could  not  bear  that  man  should  be  destroyed. 
Lord,  what  is  man  that  thou  dost  visit  him  in  love  ? 
Yet  he  did  so  visit  him.  The  Lord's  love  made  him 
lament  man's  revolt,  and  cry,  "I  have  nourished  and 
brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against 
me"  ;  whereupon  he  bade  heaven  and  earth  witness  to 
his  grief.  He  saw  that  sin  had  brought  men  into 
wretchedness  and  misery,  and  would  destroy  them 
for  ever;  and  he  would  not  have  it  so.  He  loved 
them  with  the  love  of  pity,  with  the  love  of  sweet 
and  strong  benevolence,  and  he  declared  it  with  an 
oath:  "As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure 
in  the  death  of  him  that  cUeth,  but  that  he  turn  unto 


"HEREIN  IS   LOVE."  63 

me  and  live."  "Herein  is  love."  But  if  you  and  I  be 
reconciled  to  God  we  can  lay  the  emphasis,  each  one  for 
himself,  upon  this  word  love,  and  vievw  it  as  special,  ef- 
fectual, electing  love.  Let  each  believer  say,  "He  loved 
me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  Then  what  force  is  in  my 
text:  "He  loved  us":  it  is  not  enough  that  he  pitied  us, 
or  spared  us,  or  helped  us;  but  "he  loved  us."  It  has 
often  made  me  rise  from  my  seat  to  think  that  God  loves 
me !  I  could  not  sit  still  and  hear  the  thrilling:  truth. 
Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me:  it  is  high,  I 
cannot  attain  unto  it.  It  is  sweet  to  be  loved  even  by 
a  dog;  it  is  sweet  to  be  loved  by  a  babe;  it  is  sweet  to 
be  loved  by  a  friend;  it  is  sweet  to  be  loved  by  God's 
people;  but,  oh  !  to  be  loved  of  God,  and  to  know  it! — 
this  is  paradise.  Would  a  man  want  any  other  hea- 
ven than  to  know  for  certain  that  he  enjoyed  the  love 
of  God  ? 

Xote  the  third  word.  "  He  loved  us" — "  us," — the 
most  insignificant  of  beings.  There  is  an  anthill  some- 
where; it  is  no  matter  to  you  where  it  is.  It  teems  with 
ants.  Stir  the  nest,  and  they  swarm  in  armies.  Think 
of  one  of  them.  No;  you  do  not  need  to  know  anything 
about  him  !  His  business  is  no  concern  of  yours;  so  let 
him  go.  But  that  ant,  after  all,  is  more  considerable  to 
you  than  you  are  to  God.  "  All  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  are  reputed  as  nothing."  What  are  you  even  in 
this  great  city ! — one  man,  one  woman  in  London,  in 
England,  in  the  population  of  the  world, — what  a  cipher 
you  are !  Yet  what  is  the  population  of  this  world  com- 
pared with  the  universe  ?  I  suppose  that  all  these  stars 
which  we  see  at  night,  all  the  countless  worlds  within 
our  range  of  vision,  are  but  as  a  little  dust  in  a  lone  cor- 
ner of  God's  great  house.  The  whole  solar  system,  and 
all  the  systems  of  worlds  we  have  ever  thought  of,  are 


64  "HEREIN  IS    LOVE" 

but  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket  compared  with  the  boundless 
sea  of  creation;  and  even  that  is  as  nothing  compared 
to  the  infinite  God:  and  yet  u  He  loved  us" — the  insig- 
nificant creatures  of  an  hour.  What  is  more,  he  loved 
us  though  in  our  insignificance  we  dared  to  rebel  against 
him.  We  boasted  against  him;  we  cried,  "  Who  is  Je- 
hovah?" We  lifted  up  our  hand  to  fight  with  him. 
Ridiculous  rebellion!  Absurd  warfare!  Had  he  but 
glanced  at  us  and  annihilated  us,  it  would  have  been  as 
much  as  we  could  merit  at  his  hands;  but  to  think  that 
he  should  love  us, — love  us,  mark  you,  when  we  were  in 
rebellion  against  him.     This  is  marvellous. 

Observe  that  the  previous  verse  speaks  of  us  as  being- 
dead  in  sin.  "  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  tow- 
ard us,  because  that  God  sent  his  only-begotten  Son  into 
the  world,  that  we  might  live  through  him."  Then  we 
were  dead,  dead  to  all  goodness,  or  thought  or  power,  of 
goodness,  criminals  shut  up  in  the  condemned  cell;  and 
yet  God  loved  us  with  a  great  love  even  when  we  were 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Child  of  God,  God's  love 
to  you  to-day  is  wonderful;  but  think  of  his  love  to  you 
when  you  were  far  gone  in  rebellion  against  him.  When 
not  a  throb  of  holy,  spiritual  life  could  be  found  in  your 
entire  being;  yet  he  loved  you  and  sent  his  Son  that  yon 
might  live  through  him.  Moreover,  he  loved  us  when 
we  were  steeped  in  sin.  Does  not  our  text  tell  us  so? 
for  he  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and 
this  implies  that  we  needed  to  be  reconciled.  Our  right- 
eous Judge  was  angry  with  us;  his  righteous  wrath 
smoked  against  our  evil,  and  yet  even  then  "  He  loved 
us."  He  was  wroth  with  us  as  a  Judge,  but  yet  he  loved 
us:  he  was  determined  to  punish,  and  yet  resolved  to 
save. 

This  is  a  world  of  wonders  !     I  am  utterly  beaten  by 


"HEREIN  IS   LOVE."  65 

my  text.  I  confess  myself  mastered  by  my  theme.  But 
who  among  us  can  measure  the  unfathomable  ?  "  Here- 
in is  love,"  that  God  freely,  out  of  the  spontaneous  mo- 
tion of  his  own  heart,  should  love  us.  This  is  the  argu- 
ment for  love;  this  is  the  inexhaustible  fountain  out  of 
which  all  love  must  come.  If  we  desire  love,  may  we 
come  and  fill  our  vessels  here  and  bear  it  out  to  others. 
Love  springing  from  our  own  bosoms  is  flat,  feeble  and 
scant;  but  the  love  of  God  is  a  great  deep,  for  ever  fresh 
and  full  and  flowing.  Here  are  those  springs  of  the  sea 
of  which  we  spake:  "  Herein  is  love  !  " 

II.  I  want  your  attention  a  little  longer  while  I 
speak  as  best  I  can  upon  the  marvellous  outflow  of  that 
love.  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that 
he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for 
our  sins."  Beloved,  the  love  of  God  is  seen  in  creation: 
he  that  studies  the  mechanism  of  the  human  frame  and 
of  its  surroundings  will  see  much  of  divine  kindness 
therein.  The  love  of  God  is  to  be  seen-in  providence: 
he  that  watches  the  loving  hand  of  God  in  daily  life  will 
not  need  to  look  far  before  he  sees  tokens  of  a  Father's 
care.  But  if  you  want  to  know  when  the  great  deep  of 
God's  love  was  broken  up,  and  arose  in  the  fulness  of  its 
strength  to  prevail  over  all;  if  you  would  see  it  revealed 
in  a  deluge,  like  Noah's  flood,  you  must  wait  till  you  see 
Jesus  born  at  Bethlehem  and  crucified  on  Calvary;  for  his 
mission  to  men  is  the  divinest  manifestation  of  love. 

Consider  every  word:  "  He  sent  his  Son."  God  "sent." 
Love  caused  that  mission.  If  there  was  to  be  reconcili- 
ation between  God  and  man,  man  ought  to  have  sent  to 
God;  the  offender  ought  to  be  the  first  to  apply  for  for- 
giveness; the  weaker  should  apply  to  the  greater  for 
help;  the  poor  man  should  ask  of  him  who  distributes 
alms;  but  "Herein  is  love"  that  God  "sent."     He  was 


gg  "HEREIN   IS    LOVE:' 

first  to  send  an  embassy  of  peace.  To-day  "  we  are  am- 
bassadors for  Christ,  as  though.  God  did  beseech  you 
by  us:  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to 
God."  Oh,  the  wonder  of  this,  that  God  should  not  wait 
till  rebellious  men  had  sent  to  his  throne  for  terms 
of  reconciliation,  but  should  commence  negotiations  him- 
self! 

Moreover,  God  sent  such  an  One :  he  "  sent  his  Son,"  If 
men  send  an  embassy  to  a  great  power  they  select  some 
great  one  of  their  nation  to  wait  upon  the  potent  prince; 
but  if  they  are  dealing  with  a  petty  principality  they 
think  a  subordinate  person  quite  sufficient  for  such  a 
business.  Admire,  then,  the  true  love  of  the  infinitely 
gracious  God,  that  when  he  sent  an  embassy  to  men  he 
did  not  commission  an  angel  nor  even  the  brightest 
spirit  before  his  throne;  but  he  sent  his  Son, — oh,  the 
love  of  God  to  men !  He  sent  his  equal  Son  to  rebels 
who  would  not  receive  him,  would  not  hear  him,  but 
spat  upon  him,  scourged  him,  stripped  him,  slew  him  ! 
Yes,  "he  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  freely  delivered 
him  up  for  us  all."  He  knew  what  would  come  of  that 
sending  of  him,  and  yet  he  sent  him. 

"Jesus,  commission' d  from  above, 
Descends  to  men  below, 
A.nd  shows  from  whence  the  springs  of  love 
In  endless  currents  flow. 

"He,  whom  the  boundless  heaven  adores, 
Whom  angels  long  to  see, 
Quitted  with  joy  those  blissful  shores, 
Ambassador  to  me ! 

"To  me,  a  worm,  a  sinful  clod, 

A  rebel  all  forlorn : 
.  A  foe,  a  traitor,  to  my  God, 

And  of  a  traitor  born.'* 


"HEREIN   IS   LOVE."  67 

Note  farther,  not  only  the  grandeur  of  the  ambassa- 
dor, but  the  tenderness  of  the  relationship  existing 
between  him  and  the  offended  God.  "  He  sent  his  Son." 
The  previous  verse  says,  "  His  only-begotten  Son."  We 
cannot  speak  of  God  except  after  the  manner  of  men, 
for  God  in  all  his  glory  is  incomprehensible;  but  speak- 
ing after  the  manner  of  men,  what  must  it  have  cost  Je- 
hovah to  take  his  only  Son  from  his  bosom  to  die  ?  Christ 
is  the  Father's  self;  in  essence  they  are  one:  there  is  but 
one  God.  We  do  not  understand  the  mystery  of  the  Trin- 
ity in  unity,  but  we  believe  it.  It  was  God  himself  who 
came  hither  in  the  person  of  his  dear  Son:  he  underwent 
all:  for  we  are  "  the  flock  of  God  which  he  hath  purchased 
with  his  own  blood."  Remember  Abraham  with  the 
knife  unsheathed,  and  wonder  as  you  see  him  obey  the 
voice  which  says,  "Take  now  thy  son,  thine  only  son, 
Isaac,  whom  thou  lovest,  and  offer  him  for  a  sacrifice." 
Remember  yet  again  that  the  Lord  actually  did  what 
Abraham  in  obedience  willed  to  do:  he  gave  up  his  Son  ! 
"It  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  him;  lie  hath  put  him 
to  grief."  Christ's  death  was  in  fact  God  in  human  form 
suffering  for  human  sin;  God  incarnate  bleeding  because 
of  our  transgressions.  Are  we  not  now  carried  away  with 
the  streams  of  love?  I  speak  my  best,  .my  brethren  ;  but 
if  my  words  were  what  they  ought  to  be  they  would  set 
your  souls  on  fire.  Is  not  all  heaven  still  astounded  at 
the  death  of  the  Only-begotten  ?  It  has  not  recovered 
from  its  amazement  that  the  heir  of  all  things  should 
bow  his  head  to  death.  How  can  I  fitly  tell  you  how 
much  God  loved  the  world  when  he  gave  his  Only-be- 
gotten to  die  that  sinners  might  live  ! 

Go  a  step  further.  "  God  sent  his  Son  to  be  aprojntia- 
tion"  that  is,  to  be  not  only  a  reconciler,  but  the  recon- 
ciliation.    His  sacrifice  of  himself  was  the  atonement 


68  "HEREIN   IS    LOVE:' 

through  which  mercy  is  rendered  possible  in  consistency 
with  justice.  I  have  heard  men  say  with  scorn  that  God 
required  a  sacrifice  before  lie  would  be  reconciled,  as  if 
that  were  wrong  on  the  part  of  the  Judge  of  all.  But 
let  me  whisper  in  their  ears:  God  required  it,  it  is  true, 
for  he  is  just  and  holy;  but  God  found  it  himself.  Re- 
member that — Jehovah  found  the  ransom  which  he  de- 
manded. It  was  himself,  his  own  Son,  one  with  himself, 
that  became  the  propitiation  and  the  reconciliation.  It 
was  not  that  God  the  Father  was  unkind,  and  could  not 
be  placated  unless  he  smote  his  Son;  but  that  God  the 
Father  was  so  kind  that  he  could  not  be  unjust,  so  su- 
premely loving  that  he  must  devise  a  way  by  which  men 
could  be  justly  saved.  An  unjust  salvation  would  have 
been  none  at  all.  The  Lord  found  the  reconciliation — I 
will  not  say  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  though  that  is 
true:  I  will  not  say  in  the  death  of  Christ,  though  that 
is  true;  but  I  will  put  it  in  Scriptural  words,  and  here  we 
have  it  in  1  John  ii.  2:  "He" — that  is,  Jesus  himself — 
"is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins."  The  sent  one  in  him- 
self, as  well  as  in  all  that  he  did  and  all  that  he  suffered, 
is  the  reconciliation  between  God  and  man.  "  Herein 
is  love!"  for  in  order  that  there  might  be  peace  and 
love  between  man  and  God,  God  finds  the  sin-offering. 
becomes  himself  the  atonement,  that  love  might  reign 
supreme. 

What  seems  to  me  the  most  wonderful  thing  of  all 
is  that  the  Lord  Jesus  should  deal,  not  only  with  our 
sorrow,  but  with  our  sin;  for  "  he  is  the  propitiation  for 
our  sins.11  That  God  should  deal  with  us  as  to  our  vir- 
tues, if  we  had  any;  that  he  should  deal  with  us  as  to 
our  love,  if  we  had  any,  might  not  seem  so  difficult;  but 
that  he  should  send  his  Son  to  dwell  with  us  as  sinners — 
ay,  and  to  come  into  contact  with  our  sins,  and  thus  to 


"HEREIN  IS   LOVE."  fi9 

take  the  sword,  not  only  by  its  hilt,  but  by  its  blade,  and 
plunge  it  into  his  own  heart,  and  die  because  of  it,  this 
is  a  miracle  of  miracles.  0  friends,  Christ  never  gave 
himself  for  our  righteousness,  but  he  laid  down  his  life 
for  our  sins.  He  viewed  us  as  sinners  when  he  came  to 
save  us.  "  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners." If  I  had  not  found  Christ  till  this  very  minute, 
I  hope  I  should  find  him  now  as  my  mind  drinks  in  this 
doctrine.  By  God's  Spirit  there  seems  to  me  to  be  such 
a  window  opened  that  even  despair  may  see  the  light, 
for  if  the  thing  which  God  sent  his  Son  to  deal  with  was 
the  sin  of  man,  then  I,  even  though  I  am  nothing  but  a 
mass  of  loathsomeness  and  sin,  may  yet  enjoy  the  infi- 
nite love  of  God.  Oh,  guilty  ones,  hear  these  words, 
which  are  more  sweet  than  music,  and  fuller  of  delight 
than  all  poetry;  for  even  the  harps  of  angels  never  rise 
to  higher  measures  than  these  which  I  do  so  poorly  and 
simply  rehearse  in  your  ears, — even  these  glad  tidings, 
that  God  who  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  whom 
ye  have  offended,  wills  not  that  you  die,  but  loves  you 
so  greatly  that  he  opens  up  a  road  of  reconciliation 
through  the  body  of  his  own  dear  Son.  There  was  no 
other  way  by  which  you  could  be  reconciled  to  God,  for 
had  he  reconciled  you  to  a  part  of  himself  and  not  to 
his  justice,  you  had  not  been  in  very  truth  at  all  recon- 
ciled to  God.  It  is  now  to  God  completely  just,  holy, 
whose  anger  burns  against  sin;  it  is  to  him  that  you  are 
reconciled  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  through  the  laying 
down  of  his  life  for  men.  Oh  that  God  would  bless  this 
to  all  who  hear  the  glad  tidings  ! 

III.  We  come  at  last  to  think  of  the  consequent  out- 
flow of  love  froai  us, — "  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we 
ought  also  to  love  one  another."  Our  love  then  to  one 
another  is  simply  God's  love   to  us,  flowing  into  us,   and 


70  "HEREIN   IS    LOVE." 

Bowing  out  again.  Thai  is  all  it  is.  "Herein  is  love, 
not  thai  we  loved  God,  but  that  God  loved  us,"  and  then 
we  love  others.  You  have  soon  a  noble  fountain  in  a 
continental  city  adorning  a  public  square.  See  how  the 
water  leaps  into  the  air;  and  then  it  Falls  into  a  circular 
basin  which  tills  and  pours  out  its  Fulness  into  another 
lower  down,  and  this  again  Hoods  a  third.  Hear  the 
merry  plash  as  the  waters  Fall  in  showers  and  cataracts 

from    basin    to    basin  !      It'  you    stand    at   the    lower  basin 

and  look  upon  it  and  say,  "Herein  is  water;"  that  is 
true,  ami  will  bo  true  of  the  next  higher  one,  ami  s<> 
forth;  but  if  you  would  express  the  truth  as  to  where  the 
water  really  is,  you  may  have  to  look  tar  away,  perhaps 
upon  a  mountain's  Bide,  For  there  is  a  vast  reservoir  From 
which  pipes  are  laid  to  bring  these  waters  ami  Force  them 
to  their  height  that  they  may  descend  so  beautifully. 
Thus  the  love  we  have  to  our  Fellow-creatures  drops 
from  us  like  the  descending  silvery  cataract  from  the 
full  basin,  but  the  first  source  o(  it  is  the  immeasurable 
love  of  God  which  is  hidden  away  in  his  very  essence, 
which  never  changes,  ami  never  can  bo  diminished. 
Herein  is  love!  If  you  ami  1  desire  to  love  our  fellow 
Christians  and  to  love  the  fallen  race  ^\'  man,  wo  must. 
bejoined  ow  to  the  aqueduct  which  conducts  love  from 
this  eternal  source,  or  else  we  shall  soon  fail  in  love. 

Observe,  brethren,  thou,  that  as  the  love  of  God  is  the 
source  of  all  true  love  in  us,  so  a  sense  of  that  love  stim- 
ulates us.  Whenever  you  fool  that  you  love  God  you 
overflow  with  love  to  all  God's  people;  1  am  sure  you 
do.  It  is  when  you  gel  to  doubt  the  love  of  God  that 
you  grow  hard  and  cold:  but  when  you  are  fired  with 
the  love  of  a  dying  Saviour  who  gave  himself  lor  you, 
you  feel  as  if  you  loved  every  beggar  in  the  street,  ami 
you  long  to  bring  every  harlot  to  Christ's  dear  feet ;  you 


"HEREIN   /'.    LOVh  71 

cannot  belp  it.  Man,  if  Christ  baptizes  your  heart  into 
his  love,  you  will  be  c  with  it,  and  filled  with  it. 

Your  love  will  respect  tl  rod's  love 

I  for  the  same  reasons.  God  loves  men;  bo  will 
you;  God  loves  them  when  there  is  /jo  good  in  thorn,  and 
you  will  love  them  in  the  same  Sometimes  the 

wickedness  of  men  kindles  in  the  heart  of  a  true  Chris- 
tiana r  affection  for  them.  The  deeper  down  they 
are  the  more  they  want  a  Saviour.  Did  not  our  Mora- 
vian brethren  feel  when  they  went  out  as  missionaries 
that  they  would  prefer  to  go  first  to  the  most  barbarous 

?     for  they  -aid.  "The  more  degraded  th< 

more  they  net  d  ;<  Saviour."     And  should  not  the  mission- 

:  - 1  j - i t  make  believers  feel,  if  men  are  sunk  until  they 

low  as  brutes,  and  a  devils,  that  this  is 

u  for  our  being  to  bring  them 

to  Christ?     i  hop';  that  abominable  spirit  which  used  to 

come  in  amoi  tian  people  has  been  kicked  away 

to  its  father  the  devil,  where  it  ought  to  be:  I  mean  the 

spirit  which  d  the  poor  and  the  fallen.     \Vh<*n   I 

beard  peopl  >d  of  looking 

after  such  riff-raff?"  I  have  been  saddened.    The  church 

of  God  fe<  mis  of  the  meanest  are  precious,— 

thai  t<>  gave  the  most  foul,  the  most  ignorant,  the  most 

ded,  the  most  brutalized  man  or  woman  that 
Ij'vok  is  an  object  worthy  of  the  effort  of  the  whole  church, 
since  God  thpught  hy  of  the  death  of  Jesus  rhrist, 

he  might  bring  sinners  dead  in  sin  to  live  unto 
himself 

Brothers  and  sisters,  wo  shall  not  h  I  the 

truth  unless  we  feel  that  our  love  to  men  must  be  prac- 
tical,  becau  e  God's  love  to  us  was  so.  His  love  did 
not  li'-  pent  uj)  like  the  waters  in  the  javerns  of 

the  earth,  hut  it  welled  up  like  the  waters  in  the  days 


72  "HEREIN  IS   LOVE." 

of  Noah,  when  we  read  that  the  fountains  of  the  great 
deep  were  broken  up.  In  the  gift  of  the  Lord  Jesus  we 
behold  the  reality  of  divine  love.  When  we  see  the 
poor  we  must  not  say,  "  Be  ye  wanned;  be  ye  filled;  1 
am  sorry  for  yen  ";  but  we  must  let  our  love  relieve  them 
from  our  stores.  If  we  see  the  ignorant  we  must  not 
say,  "Dear  me,  the  church  is  neglecting  the  masses;  the 
church  must  wake  up":  but  we  must  bestir  ourselves  ami 
struggle  ourselves  to  win  sinners.  If  there  be  any  near 
you  who  an-  degraded,  do  not  say,  "I  wish  somebody 
would  go  after  them."  No;  go  alter  them  yourself.  We 
have  each  one  a  mission:  let  that  mission  be  fulfilled. 

Our  love  ought  to  follow  the  love  of  God  in  one  point, 
namely,  in  always  seeking  to  produce  reconciliation.  It 
was  to  this  (-ml  that  God  sent  his  Son.  lias  anybody  of- 
fended you?  Seek  reconciliation.  "  Oh,  but  I  am  the 
offended  party."  So  was  ( Jod,  and  he  went  straight  away 
and  sought  reconciliation.  Brother,  do  the  same.  "Oh, 
but  I  have  been  insulted."  Just  so:  so  was  God:  all  the 
wrong  was  towards  him,  yet  he  sent,  "Oh,  but  the  party 
is  so  unworthy."  So  are  you;  but  "God  loved  you  and 
sent  his  Son."  (Jo  you  and  write  according  to  that  eopy. 
I  do  not  mean  that  this  love  is  to  come  out  of  your  own 
heart  originally,  but  I  do  mean  that  it  is  to  flow  out  of 
your  heart  because  God  has  made  it  to  flow  into  it. 
You  are  one  of  those  basins  of  the  fountain;  love  has 
poured  into  you  from  above,  let  it  run  over  to  those  who 
are  below.  Go  forth  at  once,  and  try  and  make  reconcil- 
iation, not  only  between  yourself  and  your  friend,  but 
between  every  man  and  (Jod.  Let  that  be  your  object. 
Christ  has  become  man's  reconciliation,  and  we  are  to 
try  and  bring  this  reconciliation  near  to  every  poor  sin- 
ner  that  comes  in  our  way.  We  are  to  tell  him  that 
(ynn{  in  Christ  is  reconciled;  we  are  to  say  to  him,  "He 


"HEREIN  IS   LOVE."  73 

is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  not  for  ours  only, 
but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  Mark  that  word ! 
It  tallies  with  that  other,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God, 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  God  is  now 
able  to  deal  on  gospel  terms  with  the  whole  race.  We 
need  never  think  that  we  shall  meet  with  men  to  whom 
God  will  not  consent  to  be  reconciled.  The  propitiation  is 
such  that  whosoever  comes  to  God  shall  be  received 
through  it.  God  is  always  within  to  receive  every  soul 
that  comes  to  him  by  Jesus  Christ.  "God  so  loved  the 
world,  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son,  that  whoso- 
ever believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  ever- 
lasting life."  Your  work  and  mine  is  reconciliation,  and 
everything  that  tends  that  way. 

When  we  have  done  all,  what  then  ?  We  shall  have 
nothing  whereof  to  glory.  Suppose  a  man  should  be- 
come so  loving  that  lie  gave  himself  wholly  up  for  his 
fellow-creatures,  and  actually  died  for  them,  would  he 
have  anything  to  boast  of?  Head  my  text  over  again. 
t;  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one 
another"  ;  so  that  if  you  get  to  the  highest  point  of  self- 
sacrifice  you  will  never  be  able  to  boast,  for  you  have 
only  then  done  what  it  was  your  duty  to  have  done. 
Thus  you  see  the  highest  grade  of  Christianity  excludes 
all  idea  of  salvation  by  works,  for  when  we  come  up  to 
its  utmost  pitch,  if  we  give  our  body  to  be  burned  for 
love,  yet  still  we  have  done  no  more  than  it  was  our  duty 
to  have  done,  considering  the  tremendous  obligations 
under  which  the  love  of  God  has  laid  us. 

If  you  had  to  manage  waterworks  for  the  distribution 
of  water  all  over  this  city,  and  there  was  a  certain  pipe 
into  which  you  poured  water,  and  none  ever  came  out 
at  the  other  end,  do  you  know  what  you  would  do? 
You  would  take  it  out  and  say,  "This  does  not  suit  my 


74  "HEREIN  IS   LOVE" 

purpose :  I  want  a  pipe  that  will  give  out  as  well  as  re- 
ceive." That  is  exactly  what  the  Lord  desires  of  us. 
Do  not  selfishly  say,  "  I  want  to  sit  down  and  enjoy  the 
love  of  God.  I  shall  never  say  a  word  to  anybody  about 
Christ.  I  will  never  give  a  poor  creature  so  much  as  a 
brass  farthing;  but  I  want  to  sit  down  and  be  solaced 
with  the  love  of  God."  If  you  think  thus,  you  are  a 
pipe  plugged  up ;  you  are  of  no  use ;  you  will  have  to  be 
taken  out  of  the  system  of  the  church;  for  the  system 
of  love-supply  for  the  world  requires  open  pipes,  through 
which  love  divine  may  freely  flow.  May  the  Lord  clear 
you  and  fill  you,  so  that  out  of  you  there  may  contin- 
ually flow  rivers  of  living  water.     Amen. 


IV. 

THE  BEST  WAK-CRY. 

March  4,  1883. 

"The  Lord  his  God  is  with  hini,  and  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among 
them." — Numbers  xxiii.  21. 

It  was  a  singular  spectacle  to  see  the  king  of  Moab  and 
his  lords  climbing  to  the  tops  of  the  craggy  rocks,  ac- 
companied by  that  strange  being,  the  Eastern  prophet 
Balaam.  They  are  seeking  to  look  upon  Israel  with  the 
evil  eye,  and  flash  down  cnrses  upon  her  tents  in  the 
plain  m  beneath.  You  see  them  gazing  down  from  the 
mountains  upon  the  encampment  in  the  wilderness  be- 
low, even  as  vultures  from  aloft  spy  out  their  prey.  They 
watch  with  keen  and  cruel  eyes.  Cunning  and  malice 
are  in  their  countenances.  How  Balak  longs  to  crush  the 
nation  which  he  fears !  They  are  secretly  endeavoring 
by  spell  and  enchantment  to  bring  evil  upon  the  people 
whom  Jehovah  has  chosen  and  led  into  the  wilderness. 
Yen  see  them  offering  their  seven  bullocks  and  their 
seven  rams  upon  the  seven  altars  which  they  have  set 
up  upon  Pisgah's  rocks;  and  Balaam  retires  to  wait  until 
the  afflatus  shall  come  upon  him,  and  he  shall  be  able  to 
prophesy.  In  all  probability  Moses  knew  nothing  about 
this  at  the  time;  and  certainly  the  people  below  knew 
nothing  of  the  foul  conspiracy.  There  lay  the  tribes  in 
the  valley,  unaware  that  mischief  was  brewing,  and 
quite  unable  to  meet  the  dark  design  even  if  they  had 
been  aware  of  it.     What  a  mercy  it  was  for  them  that 


76  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

they  were  guarded  by  a  Watcher,  and  a  holy  one,  whose 
eyes  can  never  slumber.  How  true  it  is — "  I  the  Lord 
do  keep  it;  I  will  water  it  every  moment:  lest  any  hurt 
it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day."  The  Lord's  eyes  are 
fixed  upon  Balaam  the  hireling,  and  Balak  the  Son  of 
Zippor :  in  vain  do  they  weave  the  enchantment  and  work 
the  divination;  they  shall  be  utterly  ashamed  and  con- 
founded. They  were  baffled  in  their  machinations,  and 
utterly  defeated  in  their  schemes,  and  that  for  one  single 
reason :  it  is  written, "  Jehovah  Shammah — the  Lord  is  there." 
God's  presence  in  the  midst  of  his  people  is  as  a  wall  of  fire 
round  about  them,  and  a  glory  in  their  midst.  The  Lord 
is  their  light  and  their  salvation,  whom  shall  they  fear  ? 
At  this  present  time  God  has  a  people,  a  remnant  ac- 
cording to  the  election  of  grace,  who  still  dwell  like 
sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves.  When,  as  a  part  of  the 
Lord's  church,  we  look  at  our  surroundings,  we  see  much 
that  might  cause  us  alarm;  for  never,  either  day  or  night, 
is  Satan  quiet,  Like  a  roaring  lion  he  goeth  about,  seek- 
ing whom  he  may  devour:  he  plots  in  secret  his  crafty 
devices:  if  it  were  possible  he  would  deceive  even  the 
very  elect.  This  prince  of  darkness  has  on  earth  many 
most  diligent  servants,  compassing  sea  and  land  to  make 
proselytes,  laying  out  all  their  strength,  and  using  all 
their  craft  and  cunning  if  by  any  means  they  may  de- 
stroy the  kingdom  of  God,  and  blot  out  the  truth  from 
under  heaven.  It  is  saddest  of  all  to  see  certain  men 
who  know  the  truth  in  some  degree,  as  Balaam  did,  enter- 
ing into  league  with  the  adversary  against  the  true  Israel. 
These  combine  their  arts,  and  use  all  possible  means  that 
the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  church  that  holds  it, 
may  utterly  be  destroyed.  If  the  church  be  not  destroyed 
it  will  be  no  thanks  to  her  enemies,  for  they  would  swal- 
low her  up  quick.     When  we  look  upon  the  signs  of  the 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  77 

times  our  heart  grows  heavy ;  for  iniquity  abounds,  the 
love  of  many  waxes  cold,  many  false  spirits  have  gone 
abroad  into  the  earth,  and  some  whom  we  looked  upon 
as  helpers  are  proving  themselves  to  be  of  another  order. 
What  then  ?  Are  we  dismayed  ?  By  no  means,  for  thai 
same  God  who  was  in  the  midst  of  the  church  in  the 
wilderness  is  in  the  church  of  these  last  days.  Again 
shall  her  adversaries  be  defeated.  Still  will  he  defend 
her,  for  the  Lord  has  built  his  church  upon  a  rock,  and 
the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  her.  The  rea- 
son of  her  safety  is  this : — 

"  God  in  the  midst  of  her  doth  dwell; 
Nothing  shall  her  remove; 
The  Lord  to  her  a  helper  shall, 
And  that  right  early,  prove." 

( )urtext  declares  the  grand  safeguard  of  the  church  of  <  rod, 

ensuring  her  against  every  peril  known  and  unknown, 
earthly  or  Satanic; — "Jehovah  his  God  is  with  him,  and 
the  shout  of  a  king  is  among  them." 

May  the  Holy  Spirit  help  me  while  I  try  to  speak  first 
upon  Gods  presence  with  his  people;  secondly,  upon  there- 
suits  of  that  presence;  and.  thirdly,  upon  hoto,  lij  the  grace, 
of  God,  that  presence  may  bepresi  rved  continually  amongst  us. 
I.  First,  let  me  speak  a  little  upon  God's  presence 
among  his  people.  It  is  an  extraordinary pres\  nee,  for  God's 
ordinary  and  usual  presenee  is  everywhere.  Whither 
shall  we  flee  from  his  presenee?  He  is  in  the  highest 
heaven  and  in  the  lowest  hell:  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is 
upon  the  high  hills,  and  his  power  is  in  all  deep  places. 
This  knowledge  is  too  high  and  wonderful  for  us:  yet 
everywhere  is  God,  for  in  him  we  live  and  move  and  have 
our  being.  Still  there  is  a  peculiar  presence;  for  God 
was  among  his  people  in  the  wilderness  as  he  was  not 


78  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

among  the  Moabites  and  the  Edomites  their  foes,  and  God 
is  in  his  church  as  he  is  not  in  the  world.  It  is  a  peculiar 
promise  of  the  covenant  that  God  will  dwell  with  his 
people  and  walk  among  them.  By  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  the  Lord  is  with  us  and  in  us  at  this  hour.  He 
saith  of  his  church,  "Here  will  I  dwell,  for  1  have  de- 
sired it."  This  is  much  more  than  God's  being  about  us; 
it  includes  the  favor  of  God  towards  us,  his  considera- 
tion of  us,  his  working  with  us.  An  active  nearness 
to  bless  is  the  presence  of  which  we  speak. 

Here  wTe  may  say  with  great  reverence  that  God  is 
with  his  people  in  the  cntlrcness  of  his  nature.  The  Fa- 
ther is  with  us,  for  the  Father  himself  loveth  us.  Like 
as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them 
that  fear  him.  He  is  near  to  us,  supplying  our  needs, 
guiding  our  steps,  helping  us  in  time,  and  tutoring  us 
for  eternity.  God  is  where  his  children  are,  hearing 
every  groan  of  their  sorrow,  marking  every  tear  of 
their  distress.  The  Father  is  in  the  midst  of  his  family, 
acting  a  fathers  part  towards  them.  "  Lord,  thou  hast 
been  our  dwelling-place  in  all  generations."  He  is  never 
far  from  any  into  whose  breasts  he  has  put  the  spirit  of 
adoption  whereby  we  cry,  "Abba,  Father!"  Come, 
ye  children  of  God,  rejoice  in  this:  your  heavenly  Fa- 
ther has  come  unto  you,  and  abides  with  you.  We 
have  also  the  presence  of  the  divine  Son  of  God.  Said 
he  not  to  his  apostles,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even 
unto  the  end  of  the  world  "  ?  Have  we  not  this  for  our 
joy  whenever  we  come  together,  that  we  meet  in  his 
name,  and  that  he  still  says,  "  Peace  be  unto  you,"  and 
manifests  himself  unto  us  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world. 
Many  of  you  know  most  delightfully  what  it  is  to  have 
fellowship  with  God,  for  "  truly  our  fellowship  is  with 
the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ";  and  this  fel- 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  79 

lowship  were  not  ours  if  we  were  not  made  nigh,  by  his 
precious  blood.  Very  near  are  we  to  the  heart  of  Christ; 
he  dwells  with  us;  yea,  he  is  one  with  us.  Peculiarly  this 
presence  relates  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  Jt  is  he  who  repre- 
sents the  Lord  Jesus  who  has  gone  from  us.  We  have 
a  double  portion  of  Christ's  spirit,  because  we  see  him 
now  that  he  is  taken  up;  even  as  Elisha  had  a  double 
portion  of  Elijah's  spirit,  according  to  the  prophet's  say- 
ing, "If  thou  see  me  when  I  am  taken  from  thee,  it  shall 
be  so  unto  thee";  that  is,  a  double  portion  of  my  spirit 
shall  rest  upon  thee.  It  was  expedient  that  our  Lord 
and  Master  should  go,  that  the  Spirit  might  be  given. 
That  Spirit  once  outpoured  at  Pentecost  has  never  been 
withdrawn.  He  is  still  in  the  midst  of  this  dispensation, 
working,  guiding,  quickening,  comforting,  exercising 
all  the  blessed  office  of  the  Paraclete,  and  being  for  us 
and  in  us  God's  advocate,  pleading  for  the  truth,  and  for 
us.  Yes,  dear  friends,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  are  in  the  midst  of  the  true  church  of  God  when 
that  church  is  in  a  right  and  healthy  state;  and  if  the 
triune  God  be  gone  away  from  the  church,  then  her 
banners  must  trail  in  the  dust,  for  her  warriors  have 
lost  their  strength.  This  is  the  glory  of  the  church  of 
God — to  have  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
the  love  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  communion  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  be  her  never- failing  benediction.  What 
a  glory  to  have  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  manifesting 
the  Godhead  in  the  midst  of  our  assemblies,  and  blessing 
each  one  of  us. 

For  God  to  dwell  with  us :  what  a  condescending  presence 
this  is !  And  will  God  in  very  truth  dwell  among  men  ? 
If  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  him,  will  he 
abide  among  his  people  ?  He  will !  He  will !  Glory 
be  to  his  name !     "  Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are 


80  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost?"  Gocl  chvelleth  in  us. 
Wonderful  word  !  Who  can  fathom  the  depth  of  this 
grace?  The  mystery  of  the  incarnation  is  equalled  by 
the  mystery  of  the  indwelling.  That  God  the  Holy 
Ghost  shall  dwell  in  our  bodies  is  as  extraordinary  as 
that  God  the  Son  should  inhabit  that  body  which  was 
born  of  the  blessed  virgin.  Strange,  strange  is  this, 
that  the  Creator  should  dwell  in  his  creatures,  that  the 
Infinite  should  tabernacle  in  finite  beings.  Yet  so  it  is, 
for  he  has  said,  ';  Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee." 

What  an  awe  this  imparts  to  every  true  church  of  God  ! 
You  may  go  in  and  out  of  certain  assemblies,  and  you 
may  say,  "Here  we  have  beauty!  here  we  have  adorn- 
ment, musical,  ecclesiastical,  architectural,  oratorical, 
and  the  like !  "  but  to  my  mind  there  is  no  worship  like 
that  which  proceeds  from  a  man  when  he  feels — the  Lord 
is  here.  What  a  hush  comes  over  the  soul !  Here  is 
the  place  for  the  bated  breath,  the  unsandalled  foot,  and 
the  prostrate  spirit.  Now  are  we  on  holy  ground.  When 
the  Lord  descends  in  the  majesty  of  his  infinite  love  to 
deal  with  the  hearts  of  men,  then  it  is  with  us  as  it  was 
in  Solomon's  temple  when  the  priests  could  not  stand  to 
minister  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  filled  the  place. 
Man  is  set  aside,  for  God  is  there.  In  such  a  case  the 
most  fluent  think  it  better  to  be  silent;  for  there  is  at  times 
more  expressiveness  in  absolute  silence  than  in  the  fittest 
words.  "  How  dreadful  is  this  place  !  this  is  none  other 
but  the  house  of  God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of  heaven." 
For  why  ?  Because  Jacob  had  said,  "  Surely  the  Lord  is  in 
thisplace."  We  regard  the  lowliestassemblies  of  the  most 
illiterate  people  with  solemn  reverence  if  God  be  there: 
we  regard  the  largest  assemblies  of  the  wealthiest  and 
most  renowned  with  utter  indifference  if  God  be  not  there. 

This  is  the  one  necessary  of  the  church :  the  Lord  God 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  81 

must  be  in  the  midst  of  her,  or  she  is  nothing.  If  God 
be  there,  peace  will  be  within  her  walls,  and  prosperity 
within  her  palaces;  but  if  the  Lord  be  not  there  woe 
unto  the  men  that  speak  in  his  name,  for  they  shall  cry  in 
bitterness,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report?  "  Woe  unto 
the  waiting  people,  for  they  shall  go  away  empty!  Woe 
unto  the  sinners  in  a  forsaken  Zion,  for  them  comes  no 
salvation !  The  presence  of  God  makes  the  Church  to 
be  a  joyful,  happy,  solemn  place:  this  brings  glory  to 
his  name  and  peace  to  his  people;  but  without  it,  all 
faces  are  pale,  all  hearts  are  heavy. 

Brethren,  this  presence  of  God  is  dearly  discerned  by 
the  gracious,  though  others  may  not  know  it.  Yet  me- 
thinks  even  the  ungracious  in  a  measure  perceive  it, — com- 
ing into  the  assembly  they  are  struck  with  a  secret  some- 
thing, they  know  not  what;  and  if  they  do  not  immedi- 
ately join  in  the  worship  of  the  present  God,  yet  a  deep 
impression  is  made  upon  them  beyond  any  that  could 
be  caused  by  the  sound  of  human  speech,  or  by  the 
grandeur  of  outward  show.  They  feel  awed,  and  retire 
abashed.  Certainly  the  devil  knows  where  God  is, — 
none  better  than  he.  He  hates  the  camp  of  which  Je- 
hovah is  the  leader;  against  it  he  doubles  his  enmity, 
multiplies  his  plots,  and  exercises  all  his  power.  He 
knows  where  his  kingdom  finds  its  bravest  assailants, 
and  he  therefore  attacks  their  head-quarters,  even  as 
did  Balaam  and  Balak  o_f  old. 

Let  us  look  at  Balaam  for  a  moment.  May  we  never 
run  in  the  way  of  Balaam  for  a  reward;  but  let  us  stand 
in  his  way  for  a  moment  that  he  may  be  our  beacon. 
This  man  had  sold  himself  for  gold,  and  though  he  knew 
God  and  spoke  under  inspiration,  yet  he  knew  him  not  in 
his  heart,  but  was  willing  to  curse  God's  people  for  hire. 
He  was  thwarted  in  his  design  because  God  was  there. 


82  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

It  is  worth  our  while  to  see  what  kind  of  a  God  Jehovah 
is  in  Balaam's  estimation.  He  describes  our  God  in  verse 
nineteen, — "  God  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  lie;  neither 
the  son  of  man  that  he  should  repent:  hath  he  said,  and 
shall  he  not  do  it?  or  hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not 
make  it  good?"  Balaam  perceived  that  the  God  who 
was  in  the  midst  of  his  people  is  not  a  changeable  God, 
not  a  false  God,  not  one  who  promises  and  forgets,  or 
promises  and  eats  his  words,  or  promises  what  he  cannot 
and  will  not  perform.  The  God  of  Israel  is  faithful  and  true, 
immutable,  unchanging:  every  one  of  his  promises  shall 
be  fulfilled:  none  of  his  words  shall  fall  to  the  ground. 
"Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it? — hath  he  spoken, 
i\  nd  shall  it  not  come  to  pass  ?  "  What  a  joy  it  is  to  have 
such  a  God  as  this  among  us, — a  promise-making  and  a 
promisedteeping  God;  a  God  at  work  for  his  people,  as  he 
has  declared  he  would  be;  a  God  comforting  and  cheering 
his  people,  and  fulfilling  in  their  experience  that  which 
his  word  had  led  them  to  expect.  This  God  is  our  God 
for  ever  and  ever;  he  shall  be  our  guide  even  unto  death. 
My  dear  friends,  we  sometimes  hear  men  talk  of  the 
failure  of  the  church.  We  are  afraid  that  some  churches 
do  fail.  Wherever  failure  occurs,  the  bottom  of  it  is  the 
absence  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  for  he  cannot  fail.  I  heard 
one,  speaking  of  the  district  in  which  he  lives,  say,  "We 
are  a  religious  people ;  almost  all  the  people  attend  a  place 
of  worship,  but,"  he  added,  "  I  am  bound  to  add  that  of 
spiritual  life  we  have  few  traces.  One  church  has  given 
up  its  prayer-meetings;  another  feels  that  its  entertain- 
ments are  more  important  than  its  worship,  and  another 
is  notorious  for  worldliness."  This  is  a  testimony  as 
terrible  as  it  is  common.  The  worst  thing  that  can  be 
said  of  any  Christian  community  is  this:  "Thou  hast  a 
name  to  live  and  art  dead."     "Thou  art  neither  cold  nor 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  83 

hot."  Our  Lord  Jesus  says,  "I  would  thou  wert  cold  or 
hot.  So  then  because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and  neither 
cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spew  thee  out  of  my  mouth."  A 
church  without  life  and  zeal  makes  Christ  sick;  he  can- 
not bear  it.  He  can  put  up  with  downright  godlessness 
sooner  than  with  a  profession  of  religion  out  of  which 
the  life  and  the  power  are  gone,  since  it  has  cooled  down 
into  lukefwarmness.  This,  then,  we  should  pray  for  con- 
tinually— the  presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  his  people. 

"Great  Shepherd  of  thine  Israel 
Who  didst  between  the  cherubs  dwell, 
And  ledd'st  the  tribes,  thy  chosen  sheep, 
Safe  through  the  desert  and  the  deep: 

Thy  church  is  in  the  desert  now ; 

Shine  from  on  high,  and  guide  us  through; 

Turn  us  to  thee,  thy  love  restore; 

We  shall  be  saved,  and  sigh  no  more." 

II.  To  whet  your  desire  for  this  let  me  pass  on  to 
the  second  head  of  my  subject,  which  is  briefly  to  de- 
scribe THE  RESULTS  OF  THIS  DIVINE  PRESENCE.       Some  of  these 

results  are  mentioned  in  the  conU  ct.     One  of  the  first  is 

leading — ''God  brought  them  out  of  Egypt"  (verse  22). 
The  best  critics  give  us.  another  rendering:  "God  is 
bringing  them  out  of  Egypt."  When  God  is  in  the 
midst  of  his  people  he  is  leading  them,  so  that  we  may 
cheerfully  sing  that  song,  "He  leadeth  me;  he  leadeth 
me,"  and  go  on  with  David  to  word  it,  "  He  leadeth 
me  beside  the  still  waters."  We  want  no  other  leader 
in  the  church  when  Ave  have  God ;  for  his  eye  and  arm 
will  guide  his  people.  I  am  always  afraid  of  having 
human  rules  in  a  church,  and  equally  fearful  of  being 
governed  by  human  precedents.  I  am  afraid  of  power 
being  vested  in  one,  or  two,  or  twenty  men;  the  power 
must  be  in  the  [.ord.  himself     That  church  which  has, 


84  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

God  in  the  midst  of  it  rules  itself,  and  goes  right  with- 
out any  other  guidance  but  that  which  comes  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  working.  Such  a  church  keeps  together 
without  aiming  at  uniformity,  and  goes  on  to  victory 
even  though  it  makes  no  noise.  That  movement  is  right 
which  is  led  by  God,  and  that  is  sure  to  be  all  wrong 
which  is  led  in  the  best  possible  way  if  God  be  absent, 
Organization  is  all  very  well,  but  I  sometimes  feel  in- 
clined to  join  with  Zwingle  in  the  battle  when  he  said, 
"In  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  let  all  loose:"  for 
when  everybody  is  free,  if  God  be  present  everybody  is 
bound  to  do  the  right.  When  each  man  moves  accord- 
ing to  the  divine  instinct  in  him  there  will  be  little  need 
of  regulations:  all  is  order  where  God  rules.  Just  as  the 
atoms  of  matter  obey  the  present  power  of  God,  so  do  sep- 
arate believers  obey  the  one  great  impelling  influence. 
Oh,  for  God  to  be  in  the  church  to  lead  it:  and  it  shall 
be  rightly  guided.  Do  not  fall  in  love  with  this  partic- 
ular system  or  that,  my  brother;  do  not  cry  up  this 
scheme  of  working  or  that!  Get  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
almost  any  shape  that  spiritual  life  takes  will  be  a  form 
of  energy  suitable  for  the  particular  emergency.  God 
never  leads  his  people  wrongly.  It  is  for  them  to  follow 
the  fiery,  cloudy  pillar;  though  it  lead  them  through  the 
sea,  they  shall  traverse  it  dry-shod;  though  it  lead  them 
through  a  desert,  they  shall  be  fed;  though  it  bring  them 
into  a  thirsty  land,  they  shall  drink  to  the  full  of  water 
from  the  rock.  We  must  have  the  Lord  with  us  to  guide 
us  into  our  promised  rest. 

The  next  blessing  is  strength.  "  He  hath  as  it  were 
the  strength  of  an  unicorn  "  (verse  22).  It  is  generally 
agreed  that  the  creature  here  meant  is  an  extinct  species 
of  urus  or  ox,  most  nearly  represented  by  the  buffalo 
of  the  present  period.     This  gives  us  the  sentence, — "He 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  85 

hath  as  it  were  the  strength  of  a  buffalo."  When  God 
is  in  a  church,  what  rugged  strength,  what  massive  force, 
what  irresistible  energy  is  sure  to  be  there !  And  how 
untamable  is  the  living  force!  You  cannot  yoke  this 
buffalo  to  everybody's  plough:  it  has  its  own  free  way 
of  living,  and  it  acts  after  its  own  style.  "When  the  Lord 
is  with  a  church  her  power  is  not  in  numbers,  though 
very  speedily  she  will  increase;  her  power  is  not  wealth, 
though  God  will  take  care  that  the  money  comes  when 
it  is  needed:  her  power  lies  in  God,  and  that  power  be- 
comes irresistible,  untamable,  unconquerable.  Force  and 
energy  are  with  the  Lord.  I  do  fear  me  that  what  many 
bodies  of  Christian  people  need  is  this  force.  Examine 
yonder  religious  body:  it  is  huge,  but  it  lacks  muscle; 
it  is  a  fine-looking  organization,  but  soul,  sinew,  back- 
bone are  wanting.  Where  God  is  there  is  sure  to  be  life- 
force.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  descended  upon  the  first 
saints  they  began  to  speak  with  wondrous  power;  and 
though  they  were  persecuted,  they  were  not  subdued. 
No  bit  could  be  put  into  their  mouths  to  hold  them  in, 
for  they  went  everywhere  preaching  the  word.  Of  the 
true  Israel  it  shall  be  said — his  strength  is  as  the  strength 
of  the  buffalo:  it  cannot  be  controlled  or  conquered. 

The  next  result  is  safety.  "  Surely  there  is  no  en- 
chantment against  Jacob,  neither  is  there  any  divina- 
tion against  Israel."  The  presence  of  God  quietly  baf- 
fles all  the  attempts  of  the  evil  one.  I  have  noticed,  dear 
brethren,  in  this  church,  where  we  have  had  God's  pres- 
ence in  a  great  measure,  that  all  around  us  people  have 
gone  off  to  this  opinion  and  to  the  other  fancy,  yet  our 
members  as  a  rule  have  stood  firm.  Persons  say  to  me, 
"  Do  you  not  sometimes  answer  the  scepticisms  of  the 
day?"  I  answer,  Xo.  They  do  not  come  in  my  way. 
"Do  not  modern  opinions  trouble  your  church?"     They 


86  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

have  not  done  so.  Why?  because  God  is  there,  and  spirit- 
ual life  in  vigorous  exercise  does  not  fall  a  victim  to  dis- 
ease. A  gracious  atmosphere  does  not  agree  with  modern 
doubt.  When  people  fall  into  that  evil  they  go  where 
the  thing  is  indulged,  or  at  least  where  it  is  combated; 
where  in  some  way  or  other  they  can  develop  their  love 
of  novelty  and  foster  the  notion  of  their  own  wisdom. 
Infidelity,  Socinianism,  and  modern  thought  can  make 
no  headway  where  the  Spirit  is  at  work.  Enchantment 
does  not  lie  against  Israel,  and  divination  does  not  touch 
Jacob.  If  a  church  will  keep  to  truth,  keep  to  God,  and 
do  its  own  work,  it  can  live  like  a  lamb  in  the  midst  of 
wolves  without  being  torn  in  pieces.  Have  God  with 
you,  and  not  only  the  evil  of  doctrinal  error  but  every 
other  shall  be  kept  far  from  you.  There  was  even  when 
Christ  w^as  in  the  Church  a  Judas  in  the  midst  of  it;  and 
even  in  the  apostles'  days  there  were  some  that  went  out 
from  them  because  they  were  not  of  them,  for  if  they  had 
been  of  them  doubtless  they  would  have  continued  with 
them ;  hence  we  may  not  expect  to  be  without  false  breth- 
ren. But  the  true  safety  of  the  church  is  not  a  creed,  not 
an  enactment  for  expelling  those  who  violate  the  creed; 
the  presence  of  God  alone  can  protect  his  people  against 
the  cunning  assaults  of  their  foes. 

Upon  these  words  "  there  is  no  enchantment  against 
Jacob,  no  divination  against  Israel,"  suffer  a  few  sen- 
tences. There  are  still  a  few  foolish  people  in  the  world 
who  believe  in  witchcraft  and  spells,  but  ye,  beloved,  if 
you  love  the  Lord,  throw  such  nonsense  to  the  winds. 
Do  you  not  hear  people  talk  about  this  being  lucky  and 
that  unlucky  ?  This  notion  is  heathenish  and  unchristian. 
Never  utter  such  nonsense.  But  even  if  there  were  such 
things  as  witchcraft  and  divination,  if  this  house  were 
fqll  of  devils  an4  thQ  fti?  swarmed  with  invisible  sprites, 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  87 

of  an  evil  sort,  yet  if  we  be  the  people  of  God,  surely 
there  is  no  enchantment  against  us.  Divination  cannot 
touch  a  child  of  God:  the  evil  one  is  chained.  Where- 
fore be  of  good  courage :  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us? 

Further  than  that,  God  gives  to  his  people  the  next 
blessing,  that  is  of  his  so  working  among  them  as  to  make 
them  a  wonder,  and  cause  out-siders  to  raise  enquiries 
about  them.  "According  to  this  time  it  shall  be  said  of 
Jacob  and  of  Israel,  What  hath  God  wrought?"  Is  not 
that  a  singular  thing?  Here  is  Balaam  with  his  seven 
altars,  and  seven  bullocks,  and  seven  rams,  and  here  is 
Balak,  and  they  are  all  going  to  compass  some  dreadful 
evil  against  Israel.  The  prophet  is  a  man  of  great  skill 
in  the  occult  arts:  and  what  does  God  say  ?  In  effect  he 
says, — From  this  hour  in  which  you  try  to  curse  them  I 
will  bless  them  more  than  ever,  until  I  will  make  them 
say,  and  their  enemies  say,  "What  hath  God  wrought?" 
Brethren,  there  is  another  question,  "  What  hath  Israel 
wrought?"  I  am  glad  that  Israel's  work  is  not  my  sub- 
ject just  now,  because  I  should  make  a  very  wretched 
sermon  out  of  it;  we  have  better  music  in  the  words, 
"What  hath  God  wrought?"  Let  me  tell,  not  what  I 
have  done,  but  what  God  has  done;  not  what  human 
nature  is,  but  what  God's  nature  is,  and  what  the  grace 
of  God  will  work  in  the  midst  of  his  people.  If  God  be 
with  us  we  shall  be  signs  and  wonders,  until  those  about 
us  shall  say,  "  What  is  this  that  God  is  doing?"  Yes, 
in  you,  poor  Jacob,  wrestling,  halting  on  your  thigh, 
men  shall  see  marvels  and  cry,  "  What  hath  God  wrought?" 
Much  more  shall  it  be  so  with  you,  my  brother  Israel, 
you  who  have  prevailed  and  won  the  blessing;  you  are 
as  a  prince  with  God,  and  you  shall  make  men  enquire, 
11  What  hath  God  wrought  ?  " 


88  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

When  God  is  with  his  people  he  will  give  them  power 
of  a  destructive  kind.  Do  not  be  frightened.  Here  is  the 
text  for  it:  "Behold,  the  people  shall  rise  up  as  a  great 
lion,  and  lift  up  himself  as  a  young  lion" — that  is,  as  a 
lion  in  the  fulness  of  his  vigor, —  "he  shall  not  lie  down 
until  he  eat  of  the  prey,  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  slain. "' 
God  has  put  into  his  church,  when  he  is  in  it,  a  most 
wonderful,  destructive  power  as  against  spiritual  wicked- 
ness. A  healthy  church  kills  error,  and  tears  in  pieces 
evil.  Not  so  very  long  ago  our  nation  tolerated  slavery 
in  our  colonies.  Philanthropists  endeavored  to  destroy 
slavery;  but  when  was  it  utterly  abolished?  It  was 
when  Wilberforce  roused  the  church  of  God,  and  when 
the  church  of  God  addressed  herself  to  the  conflict,  then 
she  tore  the  evil  thing  to  pieces.  I  have  been  amused 
with  what  Wilberforce  said  the  day  after  they  passed  the 
Act  of  Emancipation.  He  merrily  said  to  a  friend  when 
it  was  all  done,  "  Is  there  not  something  else  we  can 
abolish?"  That  was  said  playfully,  but  it  shows  the 
spirit  of  the  church  of  God.  She  lives  in  conflict  and 
victory;  her  mission  is  to  destroy  everything  that  is 
bad  in  the  land.  See  the  fierce  devil  of  intemperance 
how  it  devours  men  !  Earnest  friends  have  been  labor- 
ing against  it,  and  they  have  done  something  for  which 
we  are  grateful,  but  if  ever  intemperance  is  put  down,  it 
will  be  when  the  entire  church  of  God  shall  arouse  her- 
self to  protest  against  it.  When  the  strong  lion  rises  up 
the  giant  of  drunkenness  shall  fall  before  him.  "He 
shall  not  lie  down  until  he  eat  of  the  prey,  and  drink  the 
blood  of  the  slain."  I  augur  for  the  world  the  best  results 
from  a  fully  aroused  church.  If  God  be  in  her  there  is  no 
evil  which  she  cannot  overcome.  This  crowded  London 
of  ours  sometimes  appals  me, — the  iniquity  which  reigns 
and  rages  in  the  lower  districts,  the  general  indifference 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  89 

and  the  growing  atheism  of  the  people, — these  are  some- 
thing terrible;  but  let  not  the  people  of  God  be  dismayed. 
If  the  Lord  be  in  the  midst  of  us  we  shall  do  with  this 
as  our  sires  have  done  with  other  evils :  we  shall  rise  up 
in  strength,  and  not  lie  down  till  the  evil  is  destroyed. 
For  the  destructions,  mark  you,  of  God's  people,  are  not 
the  destructions  of  men  and  women;  they  consist  in  the 
overthrow  of  sin,  the  tearing  in  pieces  of  systems  of  ini- 
quity. This  it  is  which  God  shall  help  his  church  to  do, 
he  being  in  the  midst  of  her. 

Once  more:  the  results  of  God's  presence  are  to  be 
seen,  not  only  in  the  context,  but  in  other  matters  which 
we  have  personally  experienced  and  hope  to  experience 
more  fully  still.  Note  them.  When  God  is  in  a  church 
there  is  a  holy  awe  upon  the  hearts  of  his  people;  there  is 
also  a  childlike  trustfulness  and  hopefulness,  and  conse- 
quent courage  and  joy.  When  the  Lord  is  in  the  midst  of 
his  people  the  ordinances  of  his  house  are  exceeding  sweet ; 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  become  divinely  painted 
pictures  of  our  burial  in  Christ,  and  of  our  life  through 
him;  the  preaching  of  the  word  drops  as  dew  and  distils 
as  the  rain;  the  meetings  for  prayer  are  fresh  and  fervent ; 
we  want  to  stay  in  them  hour  after  hour,  we  feel  it  such 
a  happy  thing  to  be  there.  The  very  house  wherein  we 
meet  grows  beautiful  to  us;  we  love  the  place  where  our 
Lord  is  wont  to  meet  with  us.  Then  work  for  Christ  is 
easy,  nay,  delightful;  God's  people  never  want  urging 
on,  they  are  eager  for  the  fray,  when  the  Lord  is  with 
them.  Then,  too,  suffering  for  Christ  becomes  pleasant, 
yea,  any  kind  of  suffering  is  easily  borne. 

"I  can  do  all  things,  or  can  bear 
All  sufferings,  if  my  Lord  be  there : 
Sweet  pleasures  mingle  with  the  pains, 
While  his  left  hand  my  head  sustains." 


00  THE    BEST    WAR- CRY. 

Then  prayer  grows  abundant  all  over  the  church,  both 
in  private  and  in  public.  Then  life  is  made  vigorous; 
the  feeblest  becomes  as  David,  and  David  like  the  angel 
of  the  Lord.  Then  love  is  fervent;  unity  is  unbroken; 
truth  is  esteemed,  and  the  living  of  truth  in  the  life 
is  sought  after  by  all  the  people  of  God.  Then  effort 
is  successful;  the  church  enlarges  the  bounds  of  her 
tent,  for  she  breaks  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on 
the  left.  Then  her  seed  inherits  the  Gentiles,  and  the 
desolate  places  are  inhabited.  Then  God  gives  unto 
her  the  holy  energy  with  which  she  vanquishes  nations. 
When  God  is  with  her  she  becomes  like  a  sheaf  of  fire 
in  the  midst  of  the  stubble,  and  consumes  her  adver- 
saries round  about.  "  Fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the 
sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners,"  is  a  church 
which  has  God  in  her  midst. 

But  now  notice  one  thing  in  my  text,  and  with  that 

1  close  this  description.  Where  God  is,  we  are  told, 
"  The  shout  of  a  Icing  is  among  them"  What  is  the  shout 
of  a  king?  When  great  commanders  are  known  to 
have  come  into  a  camp  what  a  thrill  of  joy  it  causes 
among  their  trusty  warriors.  When  the  soldiers  have 
been  much  dejected  it  has  heen  whispered  in  their  tents — 

"  The  king  has  come  to  marshal  us, 
All  in  his  armor  dressed," 

and  from  that  moment  every  man  has  cheered  up.  At 
the  sight  of  the  king  as  he  comes  riding  into  the  camp 
the  host  raises  a  great  shout.  What  means  it?  It  is 
a  shout  of  loyal  love— they  are  glad  to  welcome  their 
leader.  So  is  it  with  us  when  we  sing — 
"The  King  himself  comes  near," 
we  are  all  as  glad  as  glad  can  be.  Those  who  cannot 
come  out  to  see  their  prince,  because  they  are  lying 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  91 

on  their  sick  beds  in  hospital,  clap  their  hands,  while 
even  the  little  children  in  their  mothers'  arms  join  in 
the  general  joy.  "The  king  is  come,"  say  they,  and 
his  presence  kindles  their  enthusiasm  till  they  make  the 
hills  ring  again.  You  know  how  the  stern  Ironsides 
felt  when  Cromwell  came  along;  every  man  was  a  hero 
when  he  led  the  way.  They  were  ready  for  any  ad- 
venture, no  matter  how  difficult,  as  long  as  their  great 
chief  was  there.  That  enthusiasm  which  was  inspired 
by  Alexander,  and  by  Napoleon,  and  by  other  great 
commanders,  is  the  earthly  image  of  the  spiritual  fervor 
felt  by  the  church  when  the  Lord  Jesus  is  in  her  midst. 
What  next?  When  the  King  comes  and  they  have 
received  him  with  enthusiasm,  he  cries,  "Now  is  the 
hour  of  battle;"  and  at  once  a  shout  goes  up  from  his 
warriors  who  are  eager  for  the  fight.  When  a  clan 
of  Highlanders  was  led  to  the  battle  by  their  chief 
he  had  only  to  show  them  the  enemy  and  with  one 
tremendous  shout  they  leaped  upon  them  like  lions. 
It  is  so  with  the  people  of  God.  When  God  is  with 
us  then  are  we  Btfoltg,  resolute,  determined.  The 
charge  of  the  servants  of  God  is  as  the  rush  of  a  hurri- 
cane against  a  bowing  wall  and  a  tottering  fence.  In 
God  is  our  confidence  of  victory.  With  God  present 
no  man's  heart  fails  him;  no  doubt  enters  the  host. 
"Be  strong:,  and  quit  yourselves  like  .men,"  is  the  word 
that  is  passed  round,  for  their  king's  eye  makes  them 
brave  and  the  presence  of  his  majesty  secures  them 
triumph.  My  brethren,  let  us  cry  to  God,  entreating 
him  to  be  among  us.  This  it  is  that  you  want  in  your 
Sunday-schools,  in  your  mission  halls,  in  your  street 
preaching,  in  your  tract  distributing;  it  is  this  that 
I  want  beyond  everything  when  I  have  to  speak  to 
you  in  this  vast  house.     If  1  could  hear  the  sound  of 


92  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

my  Master's  feet  behind  me  I  would  .speak  though  I 
were  lying  upon  the  borders  of  the  grave;  but  if  God 
be  gone  I  am  bereft  of  power.  What  is  the  use  of  words 
without  the  Spirit?  We  might  as  well  mutter  to  the 
whistling  winds  as  preach  to  men  without  the  Lord. 
0  God,  if  thou  be  with  us  then  the  shout  of  a  King 
is  among  us,  but  without  thee  we  pine  away. 

III.  Thirdly,  let  us  look  at  a  very  important  point, 
and  a  very  practical  one   too:  What  can   be  done  for 

THE    SECURING    AND    PRESERVING    OF    THE    PRESENCE  OF  GOD  WITH 

the  chur«h  ?  This  is  a  matter  that  would  require  several 
sermons  to  discuss  it  fully;  but  I  notice  that  there  is 
something  even  in  the  conformation  of  a  church  to  secure 
this.  God  is  very  tolerant,  and  he  bears  with  many 
mistakes  in  his  servants  and  yet  blesses  them;  but 
depend  upon  it,  unless  a  church  is  formed  at  the  very 
outset  upon  scriptural  principles  and  in  God's  own  way 
sooner  or  later  all  the  mistakes  of  her  constitution  will 
turn  out  to  be  sources  of  weakness.  Christ  loves  to 
dwell  in  a  house  which  is  built  according  to  his  own 
plans,  and  not  according  to  the  whims  and  fancies  of 
men.  The  church  ought  not  to  set  up  as  her  authority 
the  decrees  of  men,  either  living  or  dead;  her  ruler  is 
Christ.  Associations  formed  otherwise  than  according 
to  Scripture  must  fail  in  the  long  run.  I  wish  Chris- 
tians would  believe  this.  Chillingworth  said,  "The 
Bible,  and  the  Bible  alone,  is  the  religion  of  Protest- 
ants." That  is  not  true.  Certain  Protestants  have 
tacked  many  other  things  to  the  Bible;  and  they  are 
suffering  as  the  result  of  their  folly,  for  they  cannot  keep 
their  church  from  becoming  Popish.  Of  course  they 
cannot:  they  have  admitted  a  little  leaven  of  Popery, 
and  it  will  leaven  the  whole  lump.  The  dry  rot  in 
one  part  of  the  house  will  spread  throughout  the  whole 


THE    BEST    WAR-CRY.  93 

fabric  sooner  or  later.  Let  us  be  careful  to  build  on 
the  foundation  of  Christ,  and  then  let  every  man  take 
heed  how  he  build  thereon ;  for  even  if  the  foundation 
is  good,  yet  if  he  build  with  hay  and  stubble  the  fire 
will  cause  him  grievous  loss. 

But  next,  God  will  only  dwell  with  a  church  which 
is  full  of  life.  The  living  God  will  not  inhabit  a  dead 
church.  Hence  the  necessity  of  having  really  regen- 
erated people  as  members  of  the  church.  We  cannot 
secure  this  in  every  case  with  all  our  watching:  tares 
will  grow  among  the  wheat.  But  if  the  admission  of 
unregenerate  men  is  usual,  and  there  are  no  restrictions, 
then  the  Lord  will  be  grieved  and  leave  us.  God  dwell- 
eth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands:  he  has  nothing 
to  do  with  bricks  and  mortar;  he  dwells  in  living  souls. 
Remember  that  text:  "God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead, 
but  of  the  living,"  and  it  bears  this  sense  among  others, 
that  he  is  not  the  God  of  a  church  made  up  of  uncon- 
verted people.  Oh  that  we  may  all  live  unto  God,  and 
may  that  life  be  past  all  question. 

That  being  supposed,  we  next  notice  that  to  have  God 
among  us  we  must  he  full  of  faith.  Unbelief  gives  forth 
such  a  noxious  vapor  that  Jesus  himself  could  not  stop 
where  it  was.  His  strength  was  paralyzed : — "  He  could 
not  do  mighty  works  there  because  of  their  unbelief." 
Faith  creates  an  atmosphere  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
can  work:  meanwhile  the  Spirit  of  God  himself  creates 
that  faith,  so  that  it  is  all  of  his  own  working  from  first 
to  last.  Brothers,  sisters,  do  you  believe  your  God  ?  Do 
you  believe  up  to  the  hilt?  Alas,  too  many  only  believe 
a  little  !  But  do  you  believe  his  every  word  ?  Do  you 
believe  his  grandest  promises  ?  Is  he  a  real  God  to  you, 
making  his  words  into  facts  every  day  of  your  lives  ? 
Jf  so,  then  the  Lord  is  among  us  as  in   the  holy  place 


9-4  THE    BEST    WAR-CRY. 

Faith  builds  a  pavilion  in  which  her  king  delights  to 
sit  enthroned. 

With  that  must  come  prayer.  Prayer  is  the  breath 
of  faith.  1  do  not  believe  God  will  ever  be  long  with  a 
church  that  dees  net  pray:  and  I  feel  certain  that  when 
meetings  for  prayer,  when  family  prayer,  when  private 
prayer,  when  any  form  of  prayer  comes  to  be  at  a  dis- 
count, the  herd  will  leave  the  people  to  learn  their  weak- 
ness. Want  of  prayer  cuts  the  sinews  of  the  church  for 
practical  working;  she  is  lame,  feeble,  impotent,  if  prayer 
be  gone.  It*  anything  be  the  matter  with  the  lungs  we 
fear  consumption:  prayer-meetings  are  the  lungs  of  the 
church,  and  anything  the  matter  there  means  consump- 
tion to  the  church,  or  at  best  a  gradual  decline,  attended 
with  general  debility.  Oh,  my  brothers,  if  we  want  to 
have  God  with  us,  pass  the  watchword  round.  "Let  us 
pray."  Let  us  pray  after  the  fashion  of  the  widow  who 
was  importunate  and  would  not  he  repulsed;  remember, 
it  is  written,  "Men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to 
faint."     Where  prayer  is  fervent  God  is  present. 

Supposing  there  is  this  faith  and  prayer,  we  shall  also 
need  holiness  of life.  You  know  what  Balaam  did  when 
he  found  he  could  net  curse  the  people.  Satanic  was  his 
advice,  lie  bade  the  king  of  Moab  seduce  the  men  of 
fsrael  by  the  women  of  Moab  that  were  fair  to  look  upon; 
these  were  to  fascinate  them  by  their  beauty,  and  then 
to  invite  them  to  their  idolatrous  rites,  which  rites  were 
orgies  of  lust:  he  hoped  that  the  lewdness  of  the  people 
would  grieve  the  Lord  and  cause  him  to  leave  them  and 
then  Moab  could  smite  them.  He  sadly  succeeded.  If 
it  had  not  been  for  Phineas  who  in  holy  wrath  drove  his 
javelin  right  through  a  man  and  woman  in  the  very  act 
of  sin,  sparing  none  in  the  vehemence  of  his  zeal,  Israel 
l«*.i  been  quite  undone.     So  in  a  church.     The  devil  will 


THE    BEST    WAR-CR\. 

work  hard  to  lead  one  into  licentiousness,  another  int& 
drunkenness,  a  third  into  dishonesty,  and  others  into 
worldliness.  If  he  can  only  get  the  goodly  Babyloni.sU 
garment  and  the  wedge  of  gold  buried  in  an  AchaiM 
tent,  then  Israel  will  be  chased  before  her  adversaries. 
God  cannot  dwell  in  an  unclean  church.  A  hoi} 
abhors  the  very  garments  spotted  by  the  flesh.  Be  ye 
holy  as  Christ  is  holy.  Do  not  take  up  with  this  Ger- 
man-silver electrotype  holiness,  which  is  so  much  boasted 
of  nowadays.  Do  not  be  deluded  into  self-righteousi 
but  seek  after  real  holiness;  and  if  you  do  find  it  you 
will  never  boast  about  it:  your  life  will*  speak,  but  your 
lips  will  never  dare  to  say,  "See  how  holy  I  am."  Real 
holiness  dwells  with  humility,  and  makes  men  aspire 
after  that  which  yet  lies  beyond  them.  Be  holy,  upright, 
just,  straight,  true,  pure,  chaste,  devout.  God  send  us 
this  behavior,  and  then  we  shall  keep  him  among  .us  as 
long  as  we  live. 

Lastly,  when  we  have  reached  to  that,  let  us  have 
practical,  consecration.  God  will  not  dwell  in  a  house 
which  does  not  belong  to  him.  Xo,  the  first  thing  with 
any  one  of  us  is  to  answer  this  question: — Dost  thou 
give  thyself  up  to  Christ,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  to  live 
lor  him  and  to  die  for  him?  Wilt  thou  give  him  all  that 
thou  hast  of  talent  and  ability,  and  substance,  and  time, 
and  life  itself?  Where  there  is  a  church  made  up  of 
consecrated  people,  there  God  will  remain,  and  there  he 
will  make  a  heaven  below,  and  there  the  shout  of  a  king 
shall  be  heard,  and  there  his  strength  shall  be  revealed, 
and  there  his  glory  shall  be  seen  even  as  it  is  beheld  on 
high.  The  Lord  send  us  this,  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen 
and  Amen. 


EARNEST  EXPOSTULATION. 

April  1,  1883. 

"Or  despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodness  and  forbearance  and 
longsuffering;  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  re- 
peutance." — Romans  ii.  4.. 

The  apostle  is  intensely  personal  in  his  address.  This 
verse  is  not  spoken  to  us  all  in  the  mass,  but  to  some 
one  in  particular.  The  apostle  fixes  his  eyes  upon  a 
single  person,  and  speaks  to  him  as  "Thee"  and  "Thou." 
"  Despisest  thou  the  riches  of"  his  goodness  and  forbear- 
ance and  longsuffering;  not  knowing  that  the  goodness 
of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance  ?  "  It  should  ever  be 
the  intent  of  the  preacher  to  convey  his  message  to  each 
hearer  in  his  own  separate  individuality.  It  is  always  a 
very  happy  sign  when  a  man  begins  to  think  of  himself 
as  an  individual,  and  when  the  expostulations  and  invi- 
tations of  the  Gospel  are  seen  by  him  to  be  directed  to 
himself  personally.  I  will  give  nothing  for  that  indi- 
rect, essay-like  preaching  which  is  as  the  sheet  lightning 
of  summer,  dazzling  for  the  moment,  and  flaming  over 
a  broad  expanse,  but  altogether  harmless,  since  no  bolt 
is  launched  from  it,  and  its  ineffectual  fires  leave  no  trace 
behind.  I  will  give  nothing  for  that  kind  of  hearing 
which  consists  in  the  word  being  heard  by  everybody  in 
general  and  by  no  one  in  particular.  It  is  when  the 
preacher  can  "Thee"  and  "Thou"  his  hearers  that  he  is 


EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION.  97 

likely  to  do  them  good.  When  each  man  is  made  to 
say,  "This  is  for  me,"  then  the  power  of  God  is  present 
in  the  word.  One  personal,  intentional  touch  of  the  hem 
of  Christ's  garment  conveys  more  blessing  than  all  the 
pressure  of  the  crowd  that  thronged  about  the  Master. 
The  laying  of  his  healing  hand  upon  the  individual  who 
was  suffering  had  more  virtue  in  it  than  all  those  hea 
venly  addresses  which  fell  from  his  lips  upon  minds  that 
did  not  receive  the  truth  for  themselves.  I  do  pray  that 
we  may  come  to  personal  dealings  with  the  Lord  each 
one  for  himself,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  convince 
each  man  and  woman,  according  as  the  case  may  stand 
before  the  living  God.  0  my  hearer,  thou  art  now  to  be 
lovingly  spoken  with :  I  speak  not  to  you  as  unto  many, 
but  unto  thee,  as  one  by  thyself. 

Observe  that  the  apostle  singled  out  an  individual 
who  had  condemned  others  for  transgressions,  in  which 
he  himself  indulged.  This  man  owned  so  much  spiritual 
light  that  he  knew  right  from  wrong,  and  he  diligently 
used  his  knowledge  to  judge  others,  condemning  them 
for  their  transgressions.  As  for  himself,  he  preferred 
the  shade,  where  no  fierce  light  might  beat  on  his  own 
conscience  and  disturb  his  unholy  peace.  His  judgment 
was  spared  the  pain  of  dealing  with  his  home  offences 
by  being  set  to  work  upon  the  faults  of  others.  He  had 
a  candle,  but  he  did  not  place  it  on  the  table  to  light  his 
own  room;  he  held  it  out  at  the  front  door  to  inspect 
therewith  his  neighbors  who  passed  by.  Ho  !  my  good 
friend,  my  sermon  is  for  thee.  Paul  looks  this  man  in 
the  face  and  says,  "Therefore  thou  art  inexcusable,  0 
man,  whoever  thou  art,  that  judgest:  for  wherein  thou 
judgest  another  thou  condemnest  thyself;  for  thou  that 
judgest  doest  the  same  things:"  and  then  he  pointedly 
says  to  him:  "Thinkest  thou  this,  0  man,  that  judgest 


98  EARNEST    EXPOSTULATION. 

them  which  do  such  things,  and  does!  the  Bame,  that 
thou  shalt  escape  the  judgment  o\'  God?"  Well  did 
the  apostle  aim  that  piercing  arrow;  it  hits  the  centre  of 
the  target  and  strikes  a  Folly  common  to  mankind.  The 
poet  of  the  night-watches  wrote, — 

"  All  men  think  all  men  mortal  bul  themselves." 

As  truly  might  1  say,  "  All  men  think  all  men  guilty  but 
themselves."  The  punishment  which  is  due  to  sin  the 
guilty  reckon  to  be  surely  impending  upon  others,  but 
they  scarce  believe  thai  ii  can  ever  fall  upon  themselves. 
A  persona]  doom  for  themselves  is  an  idea  which  they 
will  not  harbor :  if  the  dread  thought  should  lighl  upon 
them  they  shake  it  off  as  men  shake  snow-llakes  from 
their  cloaks.  The  thought  oi'  personal  guilt,  judgment, 
and  condemnation  is  inconvenient;  it  breeds  t^o  much 
trouble  within,  and  so  they  refuse  it  lodging.  Vain  men 
go  maundering  on  their  way,  whispering  of  peace  and 
safety;  doting  as  if  God  had  passed  an  act  of  amnesty 
and  oblivion  tor  them,  and  had  made  lor  them  an  ex- 
ception to  all  the  rules  vi'  justice,  and  all  the  manner  of 
his  courts.  Ho  men  indeed  believe  that  they  alone  shall 
go  unpunished V  No  man  will  subscribe  to  that  notion 
when  it  is  written  down  in  black  and  white,  and  yet  the 
mass  i)i'  men  live  as  it'  this  were  true:  I  mean  the  mass 
of  men  who  have  sufficient  light  \i^  condemn  sin  in  others. 
They  start  back  from  the  fact  oi'  their  own  guiltiness  and 
condemnation,  and  go  on  in  their  ungodliness  as  if  there 
were  no  great  white  throne  for  them,  no  last  assize,  no 
judge,  no  word  oi'  condemnation,  and  no  hell  oi'  wrath. 
Alas,  poor  madmen,  thus  to  dream!  O  Spirit  ol*  Truth, 
save  them  from  this  fatal  infatuation. 

Sin  is  always  on   the   downward  grade,  so  that  when 
a  man  proceeds  a  certain  length  he  inevitably  goes  be- 


EARNEST   EXPOS  Tl  7. A  TfON.  00 

yond  it,  The  person  addressed  by  the  apostle  firsl  thought 
cape  judgment,  and  then  he  came  to  think  lightly  of 
the  goodness,  forbearance,  and  longsufferingof'God.  He 
thinks  he  shall  escape  in  the  future,  and  because  of  that 
he  despises  the  present  goodness  and  longsuffering  of 
the  Most  High.  Of  course  he  does,  [f  he  does  not  be- 
in  the  terrors  of  the  world  to  come  for  himself,  he 
naturally  reckons  it  to  be  a  small  thing  to  have  been 
spared  their  Immediate  experience.  Barren  tree  as  he  is, 
he  does  nol  believe  thai  he  will  ever  be  cut  down,  and 
therefore  he  feels  no  gratitude  to  the  dresser  of  the  vine- 
yard for  pleading,  t:  Lei  it  alone  yet  another  year,  till  I 
dig  aboul  it,  and  dung  it."  I  wish,  as  God  shall  help  me, 
to  drive  hard  at  the  consciences  of  men  upon  this  matter. 
I  would  be  to  you,  my  careless  friend,  what  Jonah  was 
to  Nineveh:  I  would  warn  you,  and  bestir  you  to  repent-* 
auce.  oh  that  the  Holy  Ghosl  would  make  this  sermon 
effectual  for  the  arousing  of  every  unsaved  soul  thai  shall 
hear  or  read  it. ! 

I.   First,  let  me  speak  this  morning  to  thee,  o  unre 
generate,  impenitent  man,  concerning  the  goodni 

GoD  WHICH  THOU  HAST  EXPERIENCED.       Thou   hast    known  the 

goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  longsuffering  of  God. 
According  to  the  text,  "riches"  of  these  have  been  spent, 
up*. ii  unconverted,  ungodly  men,  and  upon  thee  as  one 
of  them.  Let  me  speak  with  thee  first,  O  man,  and 
remind  thee  how  favored  thou  hast  been  of  God  by  be- 
ing made  a  partaker  of  "the  richness  of  his  goodness." 
In  ninny  cases  this  is  true  of  temporal  things.  Men 
may  ho  without  the  fear  of  God,  and  yet,  for  all  that, 
God  may  l><-  pleased  f<>  prosper  their  endeavors  in  busi- 
ness. They  sn<-'''-(-d  almosl  beyond  their  expectation— 
I  mean  some  of  them ;  probably  the  description  applies 
to  thee.     They  rise  from  the  lowest  position  $  and  accu- 


100  EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION. 

mulate  about  them  the  comforts  and  luxuries  of  life. 
Though  they  have  no  religion,  they  have  wit,  and  pru- 
dence, and  thrift,  and  so  they  compete  with  others,  and 
God  permits  them  to  be  winners  in  the  race  for  wealth. 
Moreover,  he  allows  them  to  enjoy  good  health,  vigor 
of  mind,  and  strength  of  constitution:  they  are  happy 
in  the  wife  of  their  youth,  and  their  children  are  about 
them.  Theirs  is  an  envied  lot.  Death  seems  for  awhile 
forbidden  to  knock  at  their  door,  even  though  he  has 
been  ravaging  the  neighborhood;  even  sickness  does 
not  molest  their  household.  They  are  not  in  trouble  as 
other  men,  neither  are  they  plagued  like  other  men. 
Abraham  had  to  prepare  a  Machpelah,  and  David 
mourned  over  his  sons;  but  these  have  had  to  make 
scant  provision  for  family  sepulchre:  a  hedge  has  in 
rery  deed  been  set  about  them  and  all  that  they  have. 
f  know  that  it  is  thus  with  many  who  do  not  love  God, 
and  have  never  yielded  to  the  entreaties  of  his  grace. 
They  love  not  the  hand  which  enriches  them,  they  praise 
not  the  Lord  who  daily  loadeth  them  with  benefits. 
How  is  it  that  men  can  receive  such  kindness,  and  yield 
no  return  ?  0  sirs,  you  are  to-day  blessed  with  all  that 
need  requires;  but  I  pray  you  remember  that  you  might 
have  been  in  the  depths  of  poverty.  An  illness  would 
have  lost  you  your  situation;  or  a  slight  turn  in  trade 
would  have  left  you  bankrupt.  You  are  well  to-day; 
but  you  might  have  been  tossing  to  and  fro  upon  a 
bed  of  sickness,  you  might  have  been  in  a  hospital, 
about  to  lose  a  limb.  Shall  not  God  be  praised  for 
health  and  freedom  from  pain?  You  might  have  been 
shut  up  in  yonder  asylum,  in  the  agonies  of  madness. 
A  thousand  ills  have  been  kept  from  you;  you  have 
been  exceedingly  favored  by  the  goodness  of  the  Most 
High.     Is  it  not  so  ?     And  truly  it  is  a  wonderful  thing 


EA  RNES  T   EXPOS  TULA  TION.  1 01 

that  God  should  give  his  bread  to  those  that  lift  up 
their  heel  against  him,  that  he  should  cause  his  light 
to  shine  upon  those  who  never  perceive  his  goodness 
therein,  that  he  should  multiply  his  mercies  upon  un- 
godly men  who  only  multiply  their  rebellions  against 
him,  and  turn  the  gifts  of  his  love  into  instruments  of 
transgression. 

Furthermore,  this  goodness  of  God  has  not  only  come 
to  you  in  a  temporal  form,  0  impenitent  man,  but  it  has 
also  visited  you  in  a  spiritual  manner.  Myriads  of  our 
fellowmen  have  never  had  an  opportunity  of  knowing 
Christ.  The  missionary's  foot  has  never  trodden  the 
cities  wherein  they  dwell,  and  so  they  die  in  the  dark. 
Multitudes  are  going  downward,  downward;  but  they 
do  not  know  the  upward  road:  their  minds  have  never 
been  enlightened  by  the  teachings  of  God's  word,  and 
hence  they  sin  with  less  grievousness  of  fault.  You  are 
placed  in  the  very  focus  of  Christian  light,  and  yet  you 
follow  evil!  Will  yon  not  think  of  this?  Time  was 
when  a  man  would  have  to  work  for  years  to  earn 
enough  money  to  buy  a  Bible.  There  were  times  when 
he  could  not  have  earned  one  even  with  that  toil:  now 
the  word  of  God  lies  upon  your  table,  you  have  a  copy 
of  it  in  almost  every  room  of  your  house;  is  not  this  a 
boon  from  God?  This  is  the  land  of  the  open  Bible. 
and  the  land  of  the  preached  word  of  God:  in  this  you 
prove  the  richness  of  God's  goodness.  Do  you  despise 
this  wealth  of  mercy?  Possibly  you  have  enjoyed  the 
further  privilege  of  sitting  under  a  ministry  which  has 
been  particularly  plain  and  earnest:  you  have  not  had 
sermons  preached  before  you,  they  have  been  preached 
at  you:  the  minister  has  seized  upon  you  and  tngged 
at  your  conscience,  as  though  he  would  force  you  to 
the  Saviour,     With  cries  and  entreaties  yon  have  been 


102  EARNEST    EXPOSTULATION. 

invited  to  your  heavenly  Father,  and  yet  you  have  not 
come.      Is  this  a  small  thing? 

What  is  more,  you  have  been  favored  with  a  tender 
conscience.  When  you  do  wrong  you  know  it,  and 
smart  for  it.  What  mean  those  wakeful  nights  after 
you  have  yielded  to  a  temptation  ?  What  means  that 
miserable  feeling  of  shame  ?  that  fever  of  unrest  ?  You 
find  it  hard  to  stifle  the  inward  monitor,  and  difficult  to 
resist  the  Spirit  of  God.  Your  road  to  perdition  is  made 
peculiarly  hard;  do  you  mean  to  follow  it  at  all  costs, 
and  go  over  hedge  and  ditch  to  hell? 

You  have  not  only  been  aroused  by  conscience,  but 
the  good  Spirit  has  striven  with  you,  and  you  have  been 
almost  persuaded  to  be  a  Christian.  Such  has  been  the 
blessed  work  of  the  Spirit  upon  your  heart  that  you  have 
at  times  been  melted  down,  and  ready  to  be  moulded 
by  grace.  A  strange  softness  has  come  over  you,  and 
if  you  had  not  gathered  up  all  your  evil  strength,  and 
if  the  devil  had  not  helped  you  to  resist,  you  had  by 
this  time  dropped  into  the  Saviour's  arms.  Oh,  the 
riches  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  have  thus  wooed  you, 
and  pressed  his  love  upon  you  !  You  have  scarcely  had 
a  stripe,  or  a  frown,  or  an  ill  word  from  God;  his  ways 
have  been  all  kindness,  and  gentleness,  and  longsuffer- 
ing  from  the  first  day  of  your  memory  even  until  now. 
"  Despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodness?"  0  man, 
answer  this,  I  implore  thee. 

The  apostle  then  dwells  upon  the  riches  of  "forbear- 
ance."  Forbearance  comes  in  when  men  having  of- 
fended, God  withholds  the  punishment  that  is  due 
to  them;  when  men,  having  been  invited  to  mercy, 
have  refused  it,  and  yet  God  continues  to  stretch  out 
his  hands,  and  invite  them  to  come  to  him.  Patient 
endurance  of  offences  and  insults  has  been  manifested 


EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION.  103 

by  God  to  many  of  you,  who  now  hear  these  words  of 
warning.  The  Lord  knows  to  whom  I  speak  and  may 
he  make  you,  also,  know  that  I  am  speaking  to  you, 
even  to  you.  Some  men  have  gone  back  to  the  very 
sin  of  which  for  awhile  they  repented:  they  have  suf- 
fered for  their  folly,  but  have  turned  again  to  it  with 
suicidal  determination.  They  are  desperately  set  on 
their  own  ruin,  and  nothing  can  save  them.  The  burnt 
child  has  run  to  the  fire  again;  the  singed  moth  has 
plunged  again  into  the  flame  of  the  candle:  who  can 
pity  such  self-inflicted  miseries  ?  They  are  given  over 
to  perdition,  for  they  will  not  be  warned.  They  have 
returned  to  the  haunt  of  vice,  though  they  seemed  to 
have  been  snatched  from  the  deep  ditch  of  its  filthiness. 
They  have  wantonly  and  wilfully  returned  to  their  cups, 
though  the  poison  of  former  draughts  is  yet  burning  in 
their  veins.  Yet,  despite  this  folly,  God  shows  forbear- 
ance towards  them,  They  have  grievously  provoked 
him  when  they  have  done  despite  to  his  word,  and  have 
even  turned  to  laughter  the  solemnities  of  his  worship, 
against  their  own  consciences,  and  to  their  own  confu- 
sion :  yet  when  his  hand  has  been  lifted  up  he  has 
withdrawn  it  in  mercy.  See  how  God  has  always  tem- 
pered his  providence  with  kindness  to  them.  He  laid 
them  low  so  that  they  were  sore  sick,  but  at  the  voice 
of  their  moaning  he  restored  them.  They  trembled  on 
the  brink  of  death,  yet  he  permitted  them  to  recover 
strength;  and  now,  despite  their  vows  of  amendment, 
here  they  are,  callous  and  careless,  unmindful  of  the 
mercy  which  gave  them  a  reprieve. 

Did  you  ever  think  what  is  included  in  the  riches 
of  forbearance.  There  are  quick  tempered  individuals 
who  only  need  to  be  a  little  provoked,  and  hard  words 
and  blows  come  quick  and  furious:  but,  oh,  the  forbear- 


104  EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION. 

ance  of  God  when  he  is  provoked  to  his  face  by  ung  idly 
men  !  By  men,  I  mean,  who  hear  his  word,  and  yet 
refuse  it!  They  slight  his  love,  and  yet  he  perseveres 
in  it.  Justice  lays  its  hand  on  the.  sword,  but  mercy 
holds  it  back  in  its  scabbard.  Well  might  each  spared 
one  say, — 

"0  unexhausted  Grace, 

0  Love  unspeakable  ! 

I  am  not  gone  to  my  own  place; 

1  am  not  yet  in  hell ! 
Earth  doth  not  open  yet, 

My  soul  to  swallow  up. 
And,  hanging  o'er  the  burning  pit, 
I  still  am  forced  to  hope." 

Our  apostle  adds  to  goodness  and  forbearance  the 
riches  of  i'loivjsuffering.,}  We  draw  a  distinction  be- 
tween forbearance  and  longsuffering.  Forbearance  has 
to  do  with  the  magnitude  of  sin;  longsuffering  with  the 
multiplicity  of  it:  forbearance  has  to  do  with  present 
provocation;  longsuffering  relates  to  that  provocation 
repeated,  and  continued  for  a  length  of  time.  Oh.  how 
long  doth  God  suffer  the  ill  manners  of  men  !  Forty 
years  long  was  he  grieved  with  that  generation  whose 
carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness.  Has  it  come  to  forty 
years  yet  with  you,  dear  hearer?  Possibly  it  may  have 
passed  even  that  time,  and  a  half-century  of  provocation 
may  have  gone  into  eternity  to  bear  witness  against 
you.  What  if  I  should  even  have  to  say  that  sixty  and 
seventy  years  have  continued  to  heap  up  the  loads  of 
their  transgressions,  until  the  Lord  saith,  "  I  am  pressed 
down  under  your  sins;  as  a  cart  that  is  full  of  sheaves 
I  am  pressed  down  under  you."  Yet  for  all  that, 
here  you  are  on  praying  ground  and  pleading  terms 
with  God;  here  you  are  where  yet  the  Saviour  reigns 


EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION.  105 

upon  the  throne  of  grace;  here  you  are  where  mercy  is 
to  be  had  for  the  asking,  where  free  grace  and  dying 
love  ring  out  their  charming  bells  of  invitation  to  joy 
and  peace  !  Oh,  the  riches  of  his  goodness,  and  for- 
bearance, and  longsuffering.  Threefold  is  the  claim : 
will  you  not  regard  it?  Can  you  continue  to  despise  it! 
I  should  like  to  set  all  this  in  a  striking  light  if  I 
could,  and  therefore  I  would  remind  you  of  who  and 
wThat  that  God  is  who  has  exhibited  this  goodness,  for- 
bearance, and  longsuffering  to  men.  Eemember  how 
great  he  is.  When  men  insult  a  great  prince  the  of- 
fence is  thought  to  be  highly  heinous.  If  any  one 
should  openly  insult  our  own  beloved  Queen,  and 
continue  to  do  so,  all  the  nation  would  be  clamor- 
ous to  have  the  impertinence  ended  speedily.  We  can- 
not bear  that  a  beloved  ruler  should  be  publicly  insulted. 
And  what  think  you  of  the  sin  which  provokes  God  ? 
which  to  his  face  defies  him  ?  and  in  his  very  courts  re- 
sists him?  Shall  this  always  be  forborne  with?  Is 
there  not  a  limit  to  longsuffering?  Goodness  also  adds 
another  item  to  the  provocation;  for  we  naturally  say, 
11  Why  should  one  so  good  be  treated  so  cruelly  ?  "  If 
God  were  a  tyrant,  if  he  were  unrighteous  or  unkind,  it 
were  not  so  much  amiss  that  men  stood  out  against 
him;  but  when  his  very  name  is  love,  and  when  he 
manifests  the  bowels  of  a  Father  towards  his  wandering 
children  it  is  shameful  that  he  should  be  so  wantonly 
provoked.  Those  words  of  Jesus  were  extremely  touch- 
ing when  he  pointed  to  his  miracles,  and  asked,  "For 
which  of  these  things  do  you  stone  me  ?"  When  I  think 
of  God  I  may  well  say — for  which  of  his  deeds  do  you 
provoke  him?  Every  morning  he  draws  the  curtain  and 
glads  the  earth  with  light,  and  gives  you  eyes  to  see  it; 
he  sends  his  rain  upon  the  ground  to  bring  forth  bread 


106  EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION. 

for  man,  and  he  gives  you  life  to  eat  thereof — is  this  a 
ground  for  revolting  from  him  ?  Every  single  minute  of 
our  life  is  cheered  with  the  tender  kindness  of  God,  and 
every  spot  is  gladdened  with  his  love.  I  wonder  that 
the  Lord  does  not  sweep  away  the  moral  nuisance  of  a 
guilty  race  from  off  the  face  of  earth.  Man's  sin  must 
have  been  terribly  offensive  to  God  from  day  to  day, 
and  yet  still  he  shows  kindness,  love,  forbearance.  This 
adds  an  excessive  venom  to  man's  disobedience.  How 
can  he  grieve  such  goodness?  How  can  divine  good- 
ness fail  to  resent  such  base  ingratitude? 

Think  also  of  God's  Vnoideiltje;  for  he  knows  all  the 
transgressions  of  men.  "What  the  eye  does  not  see  the 
heart  does  not  rue,"  is  a  truthful  proverb;  but  every  trans- 
gression is  committed  in  the  very  presence  of  God.  so  that 
penitent  David  cried,  "  Against  thee,  thee  only  have  I 
sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  thy  sight."  Transgression 
is  committed  in  the  sight  of  God,  from  whose  eyes  noth- 
ing is  hidden.  Rem  ember  also,  that  the  Lord  never  can 
forget;  before  his  eyes  all  things  stand  out  in  clear  light 
not  only  the  things  of  to-day,  but  all  the  transgressions 
of  a  life.  Yet  for  all  this  he  doth  forbear.  With  evil 
reeking  before  his  face,  he  is  slow  to  anger,  and  waiteth 
that  he  may  be  gracious. 

All  this  while,  remember,  the  Lord  is  great  in  power. 
Some  are  patient  because  they  are  powerless;  they  bear 
and  forbear  because  they  cannot  well  help  themselves; 
but  it  is  not  so  with  God.  Had  he  but  willed  it,  you  had 
been  swept  into  hell ;  only  a  word  from  him  and  the  impeni- 
tent had  fallen  in  the  wilderness,  and  their  spirits  would 
have  passed  into  the  realms  of  endless  woe.  In  a  moment 
the  Lord  could  have  eased  him  of  his  adversary ;  he  could 
have  stopped  that  flippant  tongue,  and  closed  that  lust- 
ful eye  in  an  instant.     That  wicked  heart  would  have 


EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION.  107 

failed  to  beat  if  God  had  withdrawn  his  power,  and  that 
rebellious  breath  would  have  ceased  also.  Had  it  not 
been  for  long-suffering  you  unbelievers  would  loug  since 
have  known  what  it  is  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  an  angry 
God.  Will  you  continue  to  grieve  the  God  who  so  pa- 
tiently bears  with  you. 

Be  it  never  forgotten  that  sin  is  to  God  much  more 
intolerable  than  it  is  to  us.  He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to 
behold  iniquity.  Things  which  we  call  little  sins  are 
great  and  grievous  evils  to  him:  they  do,  as  it  were, 
touch  the  apple  of  his  eye.  "Oh,  do  not,"  he  says,  "do 
not  this  abominable  thing  that  I  hate!"  His  Spirit  is 
grieved  and  vexed  with  every  idle  word  and  every  sen- 
sual thought;  and  hence  it  is  a  wonder  of  wonders  that 
a  God  so  sensitive  of  sin,  a  God  so  able  to  avenge  him- 
self of  his  adversaries,  a  God  who  knows  the  abundance 
of  human  evil,  and  marks  it  all,  should  nevertheless  ex- 
hibit riches  of  goodness  and  forbearance  and  longsuffer- 
ing:  yet  this  is  what  you,  my  ungodly  hearer,  have  been 
experiencing  many  a  long  year.  Here  let  us  pause;  and 
oh  that  each  one  who  is  still  unsaved  would  sing  most 
sincerely  the  words  of  Watts, 

"  Lord,  wo  have  long  abused  thy  love, 
Too  long  indulged  our  sin, 
Our  aching  hearts  e'en  bleed  to  see 
What  rebels  we  have  been. 

"  No  more,  ye  lusts,  shall  ye  command, 
No  more  will  we  obey ; 
Stretch  out,  O  God,  thy  conq'ring  hand, 
And  drive  thy  foes  away." 

IT.  Come  with  me,  friend,  and  let  me  speak  to  thee 

Of  THE  SIX   OF  WHICH  THOU  ART  STSPECTED.        Hear    lllC,   UUCOn- 

verted  sinner:  the  sin  of  which  thou  art  suspected  is 
this,— "  Despisest  thou  th*  riches  of  his  goodness  and 


108  EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION. 

forbearance  and  longsuffering  ?  "  The  Lord's  goodness 
ought  to  be  admired  and  to  be  adored,  and  dost  thou 
despise  it?  His  goodness  ought  to  be  wondered  at  and 
told  as  a  marvel  in  the  ears  of  others,  and  dost  thou  de- 
spise it !  That  I  might  rake  thy  conscience  a  little,  lend 
me  thine  ear. 

Some  despise  God's  goodness,  forbearance,  and  long- 
suffering,  because  they  never  even  gave  a  thought  to  it. 
God  has  given  you  life  to  keep  you  in  being,  and  he  has 
indulged  yon  with  his  kindness,  but  it  has  not  yet  oc- 
curred to  you  that  this  patience  is  at  all  remarkable  or 
worthy  of  the  smallest  thanks.  You  have  been  a  drunk- 
ard, have  you  ?  a  swearer  ?  a  Sabbath  breaker  ?  a  lover 
of  sinful  pleasure?  Perhaps  not  quite  so;  but  still  you 
have  forgotten  God  altogether,  and  yet  he  has  abounded 
in  goodness  to  you:  is  not  this  a  great  wrong?  The 
Lord  saith,  "Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth:  I 
have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have 
rebelled  against  me.  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and 
the  ass  his  master's  crib:  but  these  my  creatures  do  not 
know,  my  favored  ones  do  not  consider.''  Why,  you 
have  no  such  forbearance  with  others  as  God  has  had 
with  you.  You  would  not  keep  a  dog  if  it  never  fol- 
lowed at  your  heel,  but  snarled  at  you:  you  would  not 
even  keep  a  potter's  vessel  if  it  held  no  water,  and  was 
of  no  service  to  you;  you  would  break  it  in  pieces,  and 
throw  it  on  the  dunghill.  As  for  yourself,  you  are  fear- 
fully and  wonderfully  made,  both  as  to  your  body  and 
as  to  your  soul,  and  yet  you  have  been  of  no  service  to 
your  Maker,  nor  even  thought  of  being  of  service  to  him. 
Still,  he  has  spared  you  all  these  years,  and  it  has  never 
occurred  to  you  that  there  has  been  any  wonderful  for- 
bearance in  it.  Assuredly,  0  man,  thou  despisest  the 
long-suffering  of  thy  God. 


EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION.  109 

Others  have,  perhaps,  thought  of  it,  but  have  never  se- 
riously meditated  thereon.  When  we  offend  a  man,  if  we 
are  right-minded,  we  not  only  note  the  fact  with  regret, 
but  we  sit  down  and  weigh  the  matter,  and  seek  to  rec- 
tify it;  for  we  would  not  be  unjust  to  any  person,  and 
if  we  felt  that  we  had  been  acting  unfairly  it  would  press 
upon  our  minds  until  we  could  make  amends.  But  are 
there  not  some  of  you  who  have  never  given  half  an 
hour's  consideration  to  your  relation  to  your  God  ?  He 
has  spared  you  all  this  while,  and  yet  it  has  never  oc- 
curred to  you  to  enter  into  your  chamber  and  sit  down 
and  consider  your  conduct  towards  him.  It  would  seem 
to  be  too  much  trouble  even  to  think  of  your  Creator. 
His  longsuffering  leads  you  to  repentance,  but  you  have 
not  repented :  in  fact,  you  have  not  thought  it  worth  your 
while  to  consider  the  question  at  all:  you  have  thought 
it  far  more  important  to  enquire,  "  What  shall  I  eat  and 
what  shall  I  drink?"  Bread  and  broadcloth  have  shut 
out  the  thought  of  God.  Ah  me,  you  will  stand  at  his 
judgment  bar  before  long — and  then  ?  Perhaps  ere  this 
week  is  finished  you  may  have  to  answer,  not  to  me,  but 
unto  him  that  sits  upon  the  throne;  therefore  I  do  im- 
plore you  now,  for  the  first  time  give  this  matter  thought. 
Despise  no  longer  the  goodness  and  longsuffering  of 
God. 

This  longsuffering  is  despised,  further,  by  those  who 
have  imagined  that  God  does  not  take  any  great  account  of 
ivhat  they  do.  So  long  as  they  do  not  go  into  gross  and 
open  sin,  and  offend  the  laws  of  their  country,  they  do 
not  believe  that  it  is  of  any  consequence  whether  they 
love  God  or  not,  whether  they  do  righteousness  or  not, 
whether  they  are  sober  and  temperate,  or  drunken  and 
wanton:  whether  they  are  clean  in  heart  by  God's  Spirit, 
or  defiled  in  soul  and  life.     Thou  thinkest  that  God  is 


110  EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION. 

altogether  such  an  one  as  thyself,  and  that  he  will  wink 
at  thy  transgression  and  cover  up  thy  sin;  but  thou  shalt 
not  find  it  so.  That  base  thought  proves  that  thou  de- 
spisest  his  longsuffering. 

Some  even  get  to  think  that  the  warnings  of  love  are 
so  much  wind,  and  that  the  threatenings  of  God  will  never 
be  fulfilled.  They  have  gone  on  for  many  years  without 
being  punished,  and  instead  of  drawing  the  conclusion 
that  the  longer  the  blow  is  in  falling  the  heavier  it  will 
be  when  it  does  come,  they  imagine  that  because  it  is 
long  delayed  the  judgment  will  never  come  at  all;  and 
so  they  sport  and  trifle  between  the  jaws  of  death  and 
hell.  They  hear  warnings  as  if  they  were  all  moon- 
shine, and  fancy  that  this  holy  Book,  with  its  threaten- 
ings, is  but  a  bugbear  to  keep  fools  quiet.  If  thou 
thinkest  so,  sir,  then  indeed  thou  hast  despised  the 
goodness  and  forbearance  and  longsuffering  of  God. 
Do  you  imagine  that  this  forbearance  will  last  for  ever  ? 
Do  you  dream  that  at  least  it  will  continue  with  you  for 
many  years  ?  I  know  your  secret  thoughts :  you  see  other 
men  die  suddenly,  but  your  secret  thought  is  that  you 
will  have  long  space  and  ample  time:  you  hear  of  one 
struck  down  with  paralysis,  and  another  carried  off  by 
apoplexy,  but  you  flatter  yourselves  that  you  will  have 
plenty  of  leisure  to  think  about  these  things.  Oh,  how 
can  you  be  so  secure?  How  can  you  thus  tempt  the 
Lord  ?  False  prophets  in  these  evil  days  play  into  men's 
hands  and  hold  out  the  hope  that  you  may  go  into  the 
next  world  wrong,  and  yet  be  set  right  in  the  end.  This 
is  a  vile  flattery  of  your  wicked  hearts;  but  yet  remem- 
ber that  even  according  to  their  maunderings  centuries 
may  elapse  before  this  fancied  restoration  may  occur.  A 
sensible  man  would  not  like  to  run  the  risk  of  even  a 
year  of  agony     Half-an-houv  of  acute  pain  is  dreaded  by 


EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION.  Ill 

most  people.  Can  it  be  that  the  very  men  who  start 
back  from  the  dentist's  door,  afraid  of  the  pinch  which 
extricates  an  aching  tooth,  will  run  the  risk  of  years  of 
misery  ?  Take  the  future  of  the  impenitent  even  on  this 
footing,  it  is  a  tiling  to  be  dreaded,  and  by  every  means 
avoided.  I  say,  these  flattering  prophets  themselves,  if 
rightly  understood,  give  yon  little  enough  of  hope;  but 
what  will  come  to  you  if  the  old  doctrine  proves  to  be 
true  and  you  go  away  into  everlasting  fire  in  hell,  as 
the  Scripture  puts  it  ?  Will  you  live  an  hour  in  jeopardy 
of  such  a  doom  ?  Will  you  so  despise  the  longsuffering 
and  forbearance  of  the  Lord  ? 

I  will  not  enlarge  and  use  many  words,  for  I  am  myself 
weary  of  words:  I  want  to  persuade  you  even  with  tears. 
My  whole  soul  would  attract  you  to  your  God,  your  Fa- 
ther. I  would  come  to  close  quarters  with  you,  and  say, 
Do  you  not  think  that,  even  though  you  fall  into  no  doc- 
trinal error,  and  indulge  no  hazy  hope  as  to  either  resti- 
tution 01  annihilation,  yet  still  it  is  a  dreadful  despising 
of  God's  mercy  when  you  keep  on  playing  with  God,  and 
saying  to  his  grace,  "Go  thy  way  for  this  time;  when  I 
have  a  more  convenient  season  I  will  send  for  thee"? 
The  more  gentle  God  is  the  more  you  procrastinate,  and 
the  more  in  tenderness  he  speaks  of  pardon  the  more  you 
transgress.  Is  this  generous?  Is  it  right?  Is  it  wise? 
Can  it  be  a  fit  and  proper  thing  to  do?  Oh,  my  dear 
hearer,  why  will  you  act  thus  shamefully?  Some  of  you 
delight  to  come  and  hear  me  preach,  and  drink  in  all  I 
have  to  say,  and  you  will  even  commend  me  for  being 
earnest  with  your  souls;  and  yet,  after  all,  you  will  not 
decide  for  God,  for  Christ,  for  heaven.  You  are  between 
good  and  evil,  neither  cold  nor  hot.  I  would  ye  were 
either  cold  or  hot ;  I  could  even  wish  that  ye  either  thought 
this  word  of  mine  to  be  false,  or  else  that,  believing  it  to 


112  EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION. 

be  true,  you  at  once  acted  upon  it.  How  can  you  incur 
the  double  guilt  of  offending  God  and  of  knowing  that 
it  is  an  evil  thing  to  do  so?  You  reject  Christ,  and  yet 
admit  that  he  ought  to  be  received  by  you!  You  speak 
well  of  a  gospel  which  you  will  not  accept  for  yourselves- ! 
You  believe  great  things  of  a  Saviour  whom  you  will  not 
have  to  be  your  Saviour!  Jesus  himself  says,  "If  I  tell 
you  the  truth,  why  do  you  not  believe  me  ?  " 

"  Despisest  thou  the  Ion  gauffering  of  God  ?  "  Dare  you 
do  it?  I  tremble  as  I  think  of  a  man  despising  God's 
goodness.  Is  not  this  practical  blasphemy?  Darest  thou 
do  it?  Oh,  if  thou  hast  done  it  hitherto,  do  it  no  more. 
Ere  yon  sun  goes  down  again,  say  within  thy  heart,  "  I 
will  be  a  despiser  of  God's  goodness  no  longer;  I  will 
arise  and  go  unto  my  Father,  and  I  will  say  unto  him, — 
Father,  I  have  sinned.  I  will  not  rest  until  in  the  pre- 
cious blood  he  has  washed  my  sins  away." 

III.  In  closing  this  sermon  I  desire  to  remind  thee,  0 
ungodly  man,  of  the  knowledge  of  which  thou  art  forget- 
ful. Read  my  text: — "  Despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his 
goodness  and  forbearance  and  longsnffering;  not  haow- 
ing  that  the  goodness  of  Gorf  hadetJi  thee  to  repentance?" 
Now  there  are  many  here  who  know  as  a  matter  of  doc- 
trine that  the  goodness  of  God  leads  them  to  repent- 
ance, and  yet  they  do  not  know  it  as  a  practical  truth 
affecting  their  lives:  indeed,  they  so  act  that  it  is  not 
true  to  them  at  all.  Yet,  if  they  do  not  know  this  they 
are  wilfully  ignorant;  not  willing  to  retain  in  their  minds 
a  fact  so  disagreeable  to  them.  Xone  are  so  blind  as 
those  who  will  not  see:  but  he  who  does  not  see,  and  yet 
hath  eyes,  has  a  criminality  about  his  blindness  which 
is  not  found  in  that  of  those  who  have  no  sight.  Dear 
hearer,  whether  you  know  this  truth  or  not,  I  would  re- 
mind you  that  God's  patience  with  you  is  meant  to  lead 


EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION.  113 

you  to  repentance.  "How?"  say  you.  Why,  first  by 
giving  you  an  opportunity  to  repent.  These  years,  which 
are  now  coming  to  a  considerable  number  with  you,  have 
been  given  you  in  order  that  you  might  turn  to  God.  By 
the  time  you  were  twenty-one  you  had  sinned  quite 
enough;  perhaps  you  had  even  then  begun  to  mislead 
other  youths,  and  to  instruct  in  evil  those  under  your 
influence.  Why  did  not  God  take  you  away  at  once? 
It  might  have  been  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  if  he  had 
done  so;  but  yet  you  were  spared  till  you  were  thirty. 
Did  not  each  year  of  your  lengthened  life  prove  that  the 
Lord  was  saying,  "I  will  spare  him,  for  perhaps  he  will 
yet  amend  and  think  upon  his  God.  I  will  give  him 
more  light,  and  increase  his  comforts;  I  will  give  him 
better  teaching,  better  preaching;  peradventure  he  will 
repent."  Yet  you  have  not  done  so.  Have  you  lived  to 
be  forty,  and  are  you  where  you  were  when  you  were 
twenty?  Are  you  still  out  of  Christ?  Then  you  are 
Avorse  than  you  were;  for  you  have  sinned  more  deeply 
and  you  have  provoked  the  Lord  more  terribly.  You 
have  now  had  space  enough.  What  more  do  you  need? 
When  the  child  has  offended,  you  say,  "Child,  unless  you 
beg  pardon  at  once,  I  must  punish  you  ":  would  you  give 
a  boy  so  many  minutes  to  repent  in  as  God  has  given  vmi 
years?  I  think  not.  If  a  servant  is  continually  robbing 
you;  if  he  is  careless,  slothful,  disobedient,  you  say  to 
him,  "I  have  passed  over  your  faults  several  times,  but 
one  of  these  days  I  shall  discharge  you.  I  cannot  al- 
ways put  up  with  this  slovenliness,  this  blundering,  this 
idleness:  one  of  these  times  you  will  have  to  go."  Have 
you  not  so  spoken  to  your  female  servant,  and  thought 
it  kind  on  your  part  to  give  her  another  chance?  The 
Lord  has  said  the  same  to  you;  yet  here  you  are,  a  liv- 
ing but  impenitent  man;  spared,  but  spared  only  to  mul- 


114  EA  RNES  T   EXPOS  Tl  LA  TION. 

tiply  your  transgressions.  This  know,  that  his  forbear- 
ance gives  you  an  opportunity  to  repent;  do  not  turn  it 
into  an  occasion  for  hardening  your  heart. 

But  next,  the  Lord  in  this  is  pleased  to  give  a  sug- 
gestion to  yon  to  repent.  It  seems  to  me  that  every  morn- 
ing when  a  man  wakes  up  still  impenitent,  and  finds 
himself  out  of  hell,  the  sunlight  seems  to  say,  "  I  shine 
on  thee  yet  another  day,  as  that  in  this  day  thou  mayst 
repent,"  When  your  bed  receives  you  at  night  I  think 
it  seems  to  say,  u  I  will  give  you  another  night's  rest, 
that  you  may  live  to  turn  from  your  sins  and  trust  in 
Jesus."  Every  mouthful  of  bread  that  comes  to  the 
table  says,  "  I  have  to  support  your  body  that  still  you 
may  have  space  for  repentance."  Every  time  you  open 
the  Bible  the  pages  say,  "  We  speak  with  you  that  you 
may  repent."  Every  time  you  hear  a  sermon,  if  it  be 
such  a  sermon  as  God  would  have  us  preach,  it  pleads 
with  you  to  turn  unto  the  Lord  and  live.  Surely  the 
time  past  of  your  life  may  suffice  you  to  have  wrought 
the  will  of  the  Gentiles.  "The  times  of  your  ignorance 
God  winked  at,  but  now  commandeth  men  everywhere 
to  repent."  Do  not  life  and  death,  and  heaven  and  hell, 
call  upon  you  so  to  do  ?  Thus  you  have  in  God's  good- 
ness space  for  repentance,  and  a  suggestion  to  repent, 

But  something  more  is  here;  for  I  want  you  to  notice 
that  the  text  does  not  say,  "The  goodness  of  God  calleth 
thee  to  repentance,"  but  "  leadeth  thee."  This  is  a  much 
stronger  word.  God  calls  to  repentance  by  the  gospel; 
God  leads  to  repentance  by  his  goodness.  It  is  as  though  he 
plucked  at  your  sleeve  and  said,  "  Come  this  way."  His 
goodness  lays  its  gentle  hand  on  you,  drawing  you  with 
cords  of  love  and  bands  of  a  man.  God's  forbearance  cries, 
"  Why  wilt  thou  hate  me  ?  What  wrong  have  I  done 
thee?     I  have  spared  thee;   I  have  spared  thy  wife  and 


EARNEST    EXPOSTULATION.  115 

children  to  thee;  I  have  raised  thee  up  from  the  bed  of 
sickness;  I  have  loaded  thy  board;  I  have  filled  thy 
wardrobe;  1  have  done  thee  a  thousand  good  turns; 
wherefore  dost  thou  disobey  ?  Turn  unto  thy  God  and 
Father,  and  live  in  Christ  Jesus." 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  have  not  received  rich 
temporal  favors,  yet  the  Lord  still  leads  you  to  repentance 
by  a  rougher  hand;  as  when  the  prodigal  fain  would 
have  filled  his  belly  with  husks,  but  could  not,  and  the 
pangs  of  hunger  came  upon  him;  those  pains  were  a 
powerful  message  from  the  Father  to  lead  him  to  the 
home  where  there  was  bread  enough  and  to  spare.  "  The 
goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance."  Oh,  that 
thou  wouldest  yield  to  its  sweet  leadings,  and  follow  as 
a  child  follows  the  guidance  of  a  nurse.  Let  thy  crosses 
lead  thee  to  the  cross;  let  thy  joys  lead  thee  to  find  joy 
in  Christ. 

Do  you  not  think  that  all  this  should  encourage  yon  to 
repent,  since  God  himself  leads  you  that  way?  If  God 
leads  you  to  repentance  he  does  not  mean  to  cast  you 
away.  If  he  bids  you  repent,  then  he  is  willing  to  ac- 
cept your  repentance,  and  to  be  reconciled  to  you.  If 
he  bids  you  change  your  mind,  it  is  because  his  own 
mind  is  love.  Repentance  implies  a  radical  change  in 
your  view  of  things,  and  in  your  estimate  of  matters;  it 
is  a  change  in  your  purposes,  a  change  in  your  thoughts 
and  in  your  conduct,  If  the  Lord  leads  you  that  way 
he  will  help  you  in  it.  Follow  his  gracious  leading  till 
his  divine  Spirit  shall  lead  you  with  still  greater  power 
and  still  greater  efficacy,  till  at  last  you  find  that  he  has 
wrought  in  you  both  repentance  and  faith,  and  you  are 
saved  in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting  salvation.  If 
"  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance,"  then 
be  sure  of  this,  that  the  goodness  of  God  will  receive 


116  EARNEST   EXPOSTULATION. 

thee  when  thou  dost  repent,  and  thou  shalt  live  in  his 
sight  as  his  well-beloved  and  forgiven  child. 

I  close  now,  but  I  am  sorry  so  to  do,  for  I  have  not 
pleaded  one-half  as  I  could  have  wished.  Yet  what 
more  can  1  say  ?  I  will  put  it  to  yourselves.  If  yon 
were  in  God's  stead,  could  you  bear  to  be  treated  as  von 
have  treated  him  ?  If  you  were  all  goodness  and  tender- 
ness, and  had  borne  with  a  creature  now  for  thirty  or 
forty  years,  how  would  you  bear  to  see  that  creature 
still  stand  out,  and  even  draw  an  inference  from  your 
gentleness  to  encourage  him  in  his  rebellion  ?  Would 
you  not  say,  u  Well,  if  my  longsuffering  makes  him 
think  little  of  sin,  I  will  change  my  hand.  If  tender- 
ness cannot  win  him,  I  must  leave  him ;  if  even  my  love 
does  not  affect  him,  I  will  let  him  alone.  He  is  given 
unto  his  evil  ways — I  will  cease  from  him,  and  see  what 
his  end  will  be"?  0  Lord,  say  not  so,  say  not  so  unto 
any  one  in  this  house,  but  of  thy  great  mercy  make  this 
day  to  be  as  the  beginning  of  life  to  many.  0  that  hearts 
may  be  touched  with  pity  for  their  slighted  Saviour,  that 
they  may  seek  his  face  !  Here  is  the  way  of  salvation: 
"Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  You  know  how  the  Master  bade  us  put  it, 
"  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to 
every  creature:  he  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall 
be  saved."  First,  we  are  to  preach  faith,  whereby  we 
lay  hold  on  Christ;  then  baptism,  whereby  we  confess 
that  faith,  and  own  that  we  are  dead  and  buried  with 
Christ  that  we  may  live  with  him  in  newness  of  life. 
Those  are  the  two  points  he  bids  us  set  before  you,  and 
I  do  set  them  before  you.  Weary,  but  not  quite  wearied 
out,  0  impenitent  man,  I  plead  with  thee!  Though 
thou  hast  so  often  been  pleaded  with  in  vain,  once  more 
I  speak  with  thee  in  Christ's  stead,  and  say — Repent  of 


EARNEST  EXPOSTULATION.  117 

thy  sin,  look  to  thy  Saviour,  and  confess  thy  faith  in  his 
own  appointed  way.  I  verily  believe  that  if  I  had  been 
pleading  with  some  of  you  to  save  the  life  of  a  dog  I 
should  have  prevailed  with  you  a  great  while  ago.  And 
will  you  not  care  about  the  saving  of  your  own  souls  ? 
Oh,  strange  infatuation — that  men  will  not  consent  to 
be  themselves  saved;  but  foolishly,  madly,  hold  out 
against  the  mercy  of  God  which  leads  them  to  repent- 
ance. God  bless  you,  beloved,  and  may  none  of  you  de- 
spise his  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  longsuffering. 


VI. 

THE  BRIDEGROOM'S  PARTING  WORD. 

April  15,  1883. 

"  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,  the  companions  hearken  to  thy 
voice:  cause  me  to  hear  it." — Solomon's  Song  viii.  13. 

The  Song  is  almost  ended:  the  bride  and  bridegroom 
have  come  to  their  last  stanzas,  and  they  are  about  to 
part  for  a  while.  They  utter  their  adieux  and  the  bride- 
groom says  to  his  beloved,  "  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the 
gardens,  the  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice:  cause 
me  to  hear  it."  In  other  words — when  I  am  far  away 
from  thee,  fill  thou  this  garden  with  my  name,  and  let 
thy  heart  commune  with  me.  She  promptly  replies,  and 
it  is  her  last  word  till  he  cometh,  "  Make  haste,  my  be- 
loved, and  be  thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart  upon 
the  mountains  of  spices."  These  farewell  words  of  the 
Well-beloved  are  very  precious  to  his  chosen  bride.  Last 
words  are  always  noticed:  the  last  words  of  those  who 
loved  us  dearly  are  much  valued;  the  last  words  of  one 
who  loved  us  to  the  death  are  worthy  of  a  deathless  mem- 
ory. The  last  words  of  the  Lord  in  this  canticle  remind 
me  of  the  commission  which  the  Master  gave  to  his  dis- 
ciples or  ever  he  was  taken  up:  when  he  said  to  them, 
"  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature."  Then,  scattering  benedictions  with  both  his 
hands,  he  ascended  into  the  glory,  and  u  a  cloud  received 
him  out  of  their  sight,"     As  the  sermon  progresses  you 


THE   BRIDEGROOM'S  PARTING    WORD.  119 

will  see  why  I  say  this,  and  you  will  detect  a  striking 
likeness  between  the  commission  connected  with  the  as- 
cension and  the  present  adieu,  wherein  the  spiritual  Sol- 
omon saith  to  his  espoused  Solyma,  "  Thou  that  dvvellest 
in  the  gardens,  the  companions  hearken'  to  thy  voice: 
cause  me  to  hear  it." 

I.  We  will  get  to  our  text  at  once,  without  further 
preface,  and  we  notice  in  it,  first  of  all,  ax  appointed  resi- 
dence. The  bridegroom,  speaking  of  his  bride,  says, 
"  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens."  The  Hebrew  is 
in  the  feminine,  and  hence  we  are  bound  to  regard  it  as 
the  word  of  the  Bridegroom  to  his  bride.  It  is  the  mys- 
tical word  of  the  church's  Lord  to  his  elect  one.  He  calls 
her  "  Inhabitress  of  the  gardens  " — that  is  the  word.  So 
then,  dear  friends,  we  who  make  up  the  church  of  God 
are  here  addressed  this  morning  under  that  term,  "  Thou 
that  inhabitest  the  gardens."  - — ~T"" 

This  title  is  given  to  believers  here  on  earth,  first,  by 
way  of  distinction — distinction  from  the  Lord  himself. 
He  whom  we  love  dwelleth  in  the  ivory  palaces,  wherein 
they  make  him  glad:  he  is  gone  up  into  his  Father's 
throne,  and  has  left  these  gardens  down  below.  He 
came  down  awhile  that  he  might  look  upon  his  garden, 
that  he  might  see  how  the  vines  flourished,  and  gather 
lilies;  but  he  has  now  returned  to  his  Father  and  our  Fa- 
ther. He  watered  the  soil  of  his  garden  with  his  bloody 
sweat  in  Gethsemane,  and  made  it  to  bear  fruit  unto  life 
by  being  himself  laid  to  sleep  in  the  tomb  of  Joseph  of 
Arimathea:  but  all  this  lowly  work  is  over  now.  He 
does  not  dwell  in  the  gardens  as  to  his  corporeal  presence ; 
his  dwelling-place  is  on  the  throne.  Jesus  has  not  taken 
us  up  with  him;  he  will  come  another  time  to  do  that: 
but  now  he  leaves  us  among  the  seeds  and  flowers  and 
growing  plants  to  do  the  King's  work  until  he  comes. 


120  THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD. 

He  was  a  visitor  here,  and  the  visit  cost  him  dear;  but 
he  is  gone  back  unto  the  place  whence  he  came  out,  hav- 
ing finished  the  work  which  his  Father  gave  him:  our 
life-work  is  not  finished,  and  hence  we  must  tarry  awhile 
below,  and  be  known  as  inhabitants  of  the  gardens. 

It  is  expedient  that  we  should  be  here,  even  as  it  is 
expedient  that  he  should  not  be  here.  God's  glory  is  to 
come  of  our  sojourn  here,  else  he  would  have  taken  us 
away  long  ago.  He  said  to  his  Father,  "  I  pray  not  that 
thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou 
sliouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil."  He  himself  is  an 
inhabitant  of  the  palaces,  for  there  he  best  accomplishes 
the  eternal  purposes  of  love;  but  his  church  is  the  in- 
habitress  of  the  gardens,  for  there  she  best  fulfills  the 
decrees  of  the  Most  High.  Here  she  must  abide  awhile 
until  all  the  will  of  the  Lord  shall  be  accomplished  in 
her  and  by  her,  and  then  she  also  shall  be  taken  up,  and 
shall  dwell  with  her  Lord  above.  The  title  is  given  by 
way  of  distinction,  and  marks  the  difference  between  her 
condition  and  that  of  her  Lord. 

Next,  it  is  given  by  way  of  enjoyment.  She  dwells  in  the 
gardens,  which  are  places  of  delight.  Once  you  and  I 
pined  in  the  wilderness,  and  sighed  after  God  from  a 
barren  land.  We  trusted  in  man,  and  made  flesh  our 
arm,  and  then  we  were  like  the  heath  in  the  desert,  which 
seeth  not  when  good  cometh.  All  around  us  was  the 
wilderness  of  this  world,  a  howling  wilderness  of  danger, 
and  need,  and  disorder.  We  said  of  the  world  at  its  very 
best,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  Do  you  remem- 
ber how  you  roamed,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none? 
Your  way  was  the  path  of  darkness  which  leadeth  unto 
death.  Then  you  were  poor  and  needy,  and  sought 
water  and  there  was  none,  and  your  tongue  cleaved  unto 
the  roof  of  your  mouth  for  thirst.     Then  came  the  Lord 


THE  BRIDEGROOM'S  PARTING    WORD.  121 

that  bought  you,  and  he  sought  you  until  he  brought 
you  into  the  gardens  of  his  love,  where  he  satisfied  you 
with  the  river  of  the  water  of  life,  and  filled  you  with 
the  fruits  of  his  Spirit,  and  now  you  dwell  in  a  goodly 
land:  "The  fountain  of  Jacob  shall  be  upon  a  land  of 
corn  and  wine;  also  his  heavens  shall  drop  down  clew." 
Your  portion  is  with  the  Lord's  saints,  yea,  with  him- 
self; and  what  can  be  a  better  portion  ?  Is  it  not  as  the 
garden  of  the  Lord  ?  You  dwell  where  the  great  Hus- 
bandman spends  his  care  upon  you  and  takes  a  pleasure 
in  you.  You  dwell  where  the  infinite  skill  and  tender- 
ness and  wisdom  of  God  manifest  themselves  in  the  train- 
ing of  the  plants  which  his  own  right  hand  lias  planted; 
you  dwell  in  the  church  of  God,  which  is  laid  out  in  due 
order,  and  hedged  about  and  guarded  by  heavenly  power; 
and  you  are,  therefore,  most  fitly  said  to  dwell  in  the 
gardens.  Be  thankful:  it  is  a  place  of  enjoyment  for 
you:  awake  and  sing,  for  the  lines  have  fallen  unto  you 
in  pleasant  places.  Just  as  Adam  was  put  into  the  gar- 
den of  Eden  for  his  own  happiness,  so  are  you  put  into 
the  garden  of  the  church  for  your  comfort.  It  is  not  a 
perfect  paradise  of  bliss,  but  it  has  many  points  of  like- 
ness to  paradise:  for  God  himself  doth  walk  therein,  the 
river  of  God  doth  water  it,  and  the  tree  of  life  is  there 
unguarded  by  the  flaming  sword.  Is  it  not  written,  "  I 
the  Lord  do  keep  it:  I  will  water  it  every  moment;  lest 
any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day  "  ?  See,  be- 
loved, although  you  are  distinguished  from  your  Lord  by 
being  here  while  he  is  there,  yet  you  are  made  partakers 
of  his  joy,  and  are  not  as  those  who  are  banished  into  a 
salt  land  to  die  in  desolation.  The  Lord's  joy  is  in  his 
people,  and  you  are  made  to  have  a  joy  in  them  also:  the 
excellent  of  the  earth,  in  whom  is  all  your  delight,  are 
made  to  be  the  comrades  of  your  sojourning. 


122  THE  BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD. 

The  title  is  also  used  by  way  of  employment  as  well 
as  enjoyment.  Adam  was  not  put  in  the  garden  that  lie 
might  simply  walk  through  its  borders,  and  admire  its 
flowers,  and  taste  its  fruits;  but  be  was  placed  there  to 
keep  it  and  to  dress  it.  There  was  sufficient  to  be  done 
to  prevent  his  stagnating  from  want  of  occupation.  He 
had  not  to  toil  sufficiently  to  make  him  wipe  the  sweat 
from  his  brow,  for  that  came  of  the  curse:  "  In  the  sweat 
of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread:"  but  still  he  was  not 
permitted  to  be  idle,  for  that  might  have  been  a  worse 
curse.  Even  for  a  perfect  man  unbroken  leisure  would 
not  be  a  blessing.  It  is  essential  even  to  an  unfa  lien 
creature  that  he  should  have  work  to  do — fit  work  and 
honorable,  seeing  it  is  done  by  a  creature  for  the  great 
Benefactor  who  had  created  him.  If  we  had  not  our 
daily  tasks  to  fulfil,  rest  would  corrode  into  rust,  and 
recreation  would  soon  gender  corruption.  You  and  I  are 
set  in  the  garden  of  the  church  because  there  is  work 
for  us  to  do  which  will  be  beneficial  to  others  and  to  our- 
selves also.  Some  have  to  take  the  broad  axe  and  hew 
down  mighty  trees  of  error;  others  of  a  feebler  sort  can 
with  a  child's  hand  train  the  tendril  of  a  climbing  plant, 
Njor  drop  into  its  place  a  tiny  seed.  One  may  plant  and 
another  may  water:  one  may  sow  and  another  gather 
fruit.  One  may  cut  up  weeds  and  another  prune  vines. 
God  hath  work  in  his  church  for  us  all  to  do,  and  he  has 
left -us  here  that  we  may  do  it.  Our  Lord  Jesus  would 
not  keep  a  single  saint  out  of  heaven  if  there  were  not  a 
needs-be  for  his  being  here  in  the  lowlands,  to  trim  these 
gardens  of  herbs,  and  watch  these  beds  of  spices.  Would 
he  deny  his  well-beloved  the  palm  branch  and  the  crowia 
if  it  were  not  better  for  us  to  be  holding  the  priming- 
hook  and  the  spade  ?  A  school-book  wherewith  to  teach 
the  little  children  may  be  for  a  while  more  to  our  true 


THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD.  123 

advantage  than  a  golden  harp.  To  turn  over  the  pages 
of  Scripture  wherewith  to  instruct  the  people  of  God 
may  be  more  profitable  to  us  than  to  hear  the  song  of 
seraphim.  I  say,  the  Master's  love  to  his  own  which 
prompts  him  to  pray,  "  I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou 
hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I  am,  that  they  may 
behold  my  glory,"  would  long  ago  have  drawn  all  the 
blood-bought  up  to  himself  above,  had  it  not  been  the 
fact  that  it  is  in  infinite  wisdom  seen  to  be  better  that 
they  should  abide  in  the  flesh.  Ye  are  the  lights  of  the 
world,  ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth:  shall  the  light  and 
the  salt  be  at  once  withdrawn?  Ye  are  to  be  as  a  dew 
from  the  Lord  in  this  dry  and  thirsty  land;  would  ye  be 
at  once  exhaled?  Brothers,  have  you  found  out  what 
you  have  to  do  in  these  gardens?  Sisters,  have  you 
found  out  the  plants  for  which  you  are  to  care?  If  not, 
arouse  yourselves  and  let  not  a  moment  pass  till  you  have 
discovered  your  duty  and  your  place.  Speak  unto  him 
who  is  the  Lord  of  all  true  servants,  and  say  to  him, 
"Show  me  what  thou  wouldest  have  me  to  do.  Point 
out,  I  pray  thee,  the  place  wherein  I  may  serve  thee." 
Would  you  have  it  said  of  you  that  you  were  a  wicked 
and  slothful  servant?  Shall  it  be  told  that  you  dwelt 
in  the  gardens,  and  allowed  the  grass  to  grow  up  to 
your  ankles,  and  suffered  the  thorns  and  the  thistles 
to  multiply  until  your  land  became  as  the  sluggard's 
vineyard,  pointed  at  as  a  disgrace  and  a  warning  to 
all  that  passed  by?  "0  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gar- 
dens!" The  title  sets  forth  employment  constant  and 
engrossing. 

Dear  friends,  it  means  also  eminence.  I  know  many 
Christian  people  who  do  not  feel  that  they  dwell  in  the 
gardens.  They  reside  in  a  certain  town  or  village  where 
the  gospel  may  be  preached,  but  not  in  demonstration 


124  THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD. 

of  the  Spirit  and  in  power.  A  little  gospel  is  made  to 
go  ;i  long  way  with  some  preachers.  In  some  ministries 
there  is  no  life  or  power,  no  unction  or  savor.  The  peo- 
ple who  meet  under  such  preaching  are  cold  of  hearl  and 
dull  in  spirit;  the  prayer-meetings  arc  forgotten;  com- 
munion of  saints  lias  well-nigh  died  out;  and  there  is  a. 
general  deadness  as  to  Christian  effort.  Believe  me,  it, 
is  a  dreadful  thing  when  Christian  people  have  almost, 
to  dread  their  Sabbath  days;  and  I  have  known  this  to 
be  \\w  case.  When  you  are  called  to  hard  toil  through 
the  six  days  of  the  week  you  want  a  good  spiritual  meal 
on  the  Sabbath,  and  if  you  get  it,  you  find  therein  a 
blessed  compensation  and  refreshment.  Is  it  not  a  hea- 
venly joy  to  sit  still  on  the  one  day  of  rest,  and  to  be  [a\ 
with  the  finest  of  the  wheat  ?  I  have  known  men  made 
capable  of  bearing  great  trials  personal,  relative,  pe- 
cuniary, and  the  like  because  they  have  looked  hack- 
ward   upon   one   Sabbatic   least,   and    then    forward    to 

another.      They    have    said    in    their    hour  of  trouble, 

"Patience,  my  heart;  the  Lord's  day  is  coming,  when  I 
shall  drink  and   forget  my  misery.     I  shall  go  and  sit 

with  God's  people,  and  I  shall  have  fellowship  with  the 
Father  and  with  the  Son,  and  my  soul  shall  hi"  satisfied 
as  with  marrow  and  fatness,  till  I  praise  \\\r  Lord  with 
joyful  lips."  But  what  a,  sorry  case  to  dread  the  Sun- 
flay,  and  to  mutter,  "  I  shall  get  nothing  next  Sunday 
any  more  than  I  did  last  Sunday  except  some  dry  phil- 
osophical essay,  or  a  heap  of  the  childish  toys  and  lire- 
works    of    oratory,    or    the    same    dull     mumbling    of   a 

mechanical  orthodoxy."     oh,  brethren  and  sisters,  my 

text  is  scarcely  meant  for  those  who  dwell  in  such  des- 
erts, but,  it  speaks  with  emphasis  to  those  who  dwell 
where  sweet,  spiritual  fruits  are  plentiful,  where  odors 
and  perfumes  load    the  air,  where  the  land    lloweth  with 


THE    BRIDEGROOM'S    PARTING    WORD.  L25 

milk  and  honey.  It' any  of  you  happen  to  dwell  where 
Chrisl  is  sel  forth  evidently  crucified  among  you,  and 
where  your  hearts  do  Leap  for  very  joy  because  the  King 
himself  conies  near  to  feast  his  saints  and  make  them 
glad  in  his  presence,  then  it  is  to  yon  that  my  text  hath 
a  voice  and  a  call:  " Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens, 

in  the  choicest  places  of  all  [mmanuel's  land,  let,  nie  heal- 
thy voice." 

Vet.  one  more  word.     The  title  here  employed  is  not 

only  tor  eminence  hut  tor  'permanence.  "0  tho  that 
dwellest  in  the  gardens."  If  you  are  only  permitted  to 
enjoy  sound  gospel  teaching  now  and  again,  and  then 
are  forced  to  cry,  "'It  may  he  another  twelve  months 
before  I  shall  he  again  fed  on  royal  dainties/'  Then 
you  are  iii  a  trying  case,  and  you  need  to  cry  to  God 
lor  help:  hut,  blessed  are  those  who  dwell  in  the  good 
land,  and  daily  till  their  homers  with  heavenly  manna. 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house:  they  will  he 
still    praising    thee."      \'<>    spot,    on    earth    is    so    dear    to 

the  Christian  as  that  whereon  he  meets  his  Lord.  I 
can  understand  why  the  dew  asked  of  a.  certain  town 
that  was  recommended  to  him  as  good  for  business, 
11  Is  there  a  synagogue  there?"  Being  a  devout  man, 
and  finding  that  there  was  no  synagogue,  he  said  he 
would  rat  lua-  remain  where  trade  was  dull,  hut  where 
he  could  go  with  his  brethren  to  worship.  Is  it,  not  so 
with  us?  How  my  heart  has  longed  for  these  blessed 
assemblies!  Give  me  a  crust  and  ;i  full  gospel  rather 
than  all  riches  and  a  barren  ministry.  The  profitable 
hearing    of   the    word    is    the    greatest    enjoyment    upon 

earth  to  godly  men.  It  would  he  banishment  to  go 
where  <'V<'VV  week's  husiiiess  turned  into  a,  mint  of 
money  if  one  were  also  compelled  to  he  a  member  of 
an    unhappy,    quarrelsome,    or    inactive    church.      Our 


126  THE   BRIDEGROOM' S    PART  IXC,     WORD. 

greatest  joy  is  in  thee,  0  Jerusalem !  Let  our  tongue 
cleave  to  the  roof  of  our  mouth  if  we  prefer  thee  not 
above  our  greatest  joy  ! 

"How  charming  is  the  place 
Where  my  Eedeemer  God 
Unveils  the  beauties  of  his  face, 
And  sheds  his  love  abroad. 

"Not  the  fair  palaces, 

To  which  the  great  resort, 
Are  once  to  be  compared  with  this, 
Where  Jesus  holds  his  court." 

Beloved,  if  you  dwell  in  the  gardens  you  have  a  double 
privilege,  not  only  of  being  found  in  a  fat  and  fertile 
place,  but  in  living  there  continually.  You  might  well 
forego  a  thousand  comforts  for  the  sake  of  this  one 
delight,  for  under  the  gospel  your  soul  is  made  to  drink 
of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined. 

This,  then,  is  my  first  head — appointed  residence: — 
"Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens."  Is  not  this  a 
choice  abode  for  the  Lord's  beloved?  I  leave  you  to 
judge  how  far  this  describes  yourselves.  If  it  be  your 
case,  then  listen  to  what  the  Bridegroom  has  to  say 
to  you. 

II.  Secondly,  let  us  note  the  recorded  converse: 
"Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,  the  companions 
hearken  to  thy  voice."  She  was  in  the  gardens,  but 
she  was  not  quiet  there,  and  why  should  she  be  ?  God 
gives  us  tongues  on  purpose  that  they  should  be  used. 
As  he  made  birds  to  sing,  and  stars  to  shine,  and  rivers 
to  flow,  so  has  he  made  men  and  women  to  converse 
with  one  another  to  his  glory.  Our  tongue  is  the  glory 
of  our  frame,  and  there  would  be  no  glory  in  its  being 
for  ever  dumb.  The  monks  of  La  Trappe,  who  maintain 
perpetual  silence,  do  no  more  than   the  rocks  among 


THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD.  127 

which  they  labor.  When  God  makes  bells  he  means 
to  ring  them.  It  may  be  thought  to  be  a  desirable 
thing  that  some  should  speak  less,  but  it  is  still  more 
desirable  that  they  should  speak  better.  When  the 
tongue  indites  a  good  matter,  it  is  no  fault  if  it  be 
nimble  as  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer.  It  is  not  the 
quantity,  it  is  the  quality  of  what  we  say  that  ought  to 
be  considered. 

Now,  observe  that  evidently  the  spouse  held  with 
her  companions  frequent  infer  course, — "The  companions 
hearken  to  thy  voice."  She  frequently  conversed  with 
them.  I  hope  it  is  so  among  those  of  you  who  dwell 
in  this  part  of  Christ's  garden.  It  should  be  so :  "  Then 
they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another;" 
they  had  not  now  and  then  a  crack,  now  and  then  the 
passing  of  the  time  of  day,  but  they  held  frequent  con- 
verse. Heaven  will  consist  largely  in  the  communion 
of  saints,  and  if  we  would  enjoy  heaven  below  we  must 
carry  out  the  words  of  the  creed  in  our  practice, — "I 
believe  in  the  communion  of  saints."  Let  us  show  that 
we  do  believe  in  it.  Some  persons  sit  still  in  their  pews 
till  the  time  to  go,  and  then  walk  down  the  aisle  in 
majestic  isolation,  as  if  they  were  animated  statues. 
Do  children  thus  come  in  and  out  of  their  father's  house 
with  never  a  word  for  their  brothers  and  sisters?  I  know 
professors  who  float  through  life  like  icebergs  from 
whom  it  is  safest  to  keep  clear:  surely  these  partake 
not  of  the  spirit  of  Christ.  It  is  well  when  such  ice- 
bergs are  drawn  into  the  gulf  stream  of  divine  love 
and  melt  away  into  Christ  and  his  people.  There  should 
be  among  those  who  are  children  of  the  common  Father 
a  mutual  love,  and  they  should  show  this  by  frequent 
commerce  in  their  precious  things,  making  a  sacred 
barter  with  one  another.     I  like  to  hear  them  making 


128  THE   BRIDEGROOM'S  PARTING    WORD. 

sacred  exchanges:  one  mentioning  his  trials,  another 
quoting  his  deliverances;  one  telling  how  God  has  an- 
swered prayer,  and  another  recording  how  the  word 
of  God  has  come  to  him  with  power.  Such  converse 
ought  to  be  as  usual  as  the  talk  of  children  of  one  family. 
And  next,  it  should  be  willing  and  influential;  for  if 
you  notice,  it  is  put  here:  "Thou  that  dwellest  in  the 
gardens,  the  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice."  They 
do  not  merely  hear  it,  and  say  to  themselves,  "  I  wish 
she  would  be  quiet,"  but  they  hearken,  they  lend  an 
ear,  they  listen  gladly.  I  know  some  Christians  whose 
lips  feed  many.  I  could  mention  brethren  and  sisters 
who  drop  pearls  from  their  lips  whenever  they  speak. 
We  have  still  among  us  Chrysostoms,  or  men  of  golden 
mouths;  you  cannot  be  with  them  for  half  an  hour 
without  being  enriched.  Their  anointing  is  manifest, 
for  it  spreads  to  all  around  them.  When  the  Spirit  of 
God  makes  our  communications  sweet,  then  the  more 
of  them  the  better.  I  like  to  get  sometimes  under  the 
shadow  of  God's  best  people,  the  fathers  in  Israel,  and 
to  hear  what  they  have  to  say  to  the  honor  of  the  name 
of  the  Lord.  We  who  are  young  men  feel  gladdened 
by  the  testimonies  of  the  ancients;  and  as  for  the  babes 
in  grace,  they  look  up  to  the  gray-beards  and  gather 
strength  from  their  words  of  experience  and  grace.  If 
there  are  any  here  wdiose  language  is  such  that  others 
delight  to  listen  to  it,  it  is  to  such  that  my  text  is 
especially  addressed;  and  when  I  come  to  open  up  the 
latter  part  of  it  I  want  you  that  have  the  honeyed  tongues, 
I  want  you  who  are  listened  to  with  pleasure,  to  notice 
how  the  Beloved  says  to  you,  "The  companions  hearken 
to  thy  voice:  cause  me  to  hear  it."  Give  thy  Lord  a 
share  of  thy  sweet  utterances:  let  thy  Saviour's  ear  be 
charmed  as  well  as  thy  companion's  ears.     Come,  speak 


THE   BRIDEGROOM'S  PARTING    WORD.  129 

to  him  as  well  as  to  thy  brethren,  and  if  there  be  music 
in  thy  voice  let  that  music  be  for  the  Well-beloved  as 
well  as  for  thy  fellow-servants.  This  is  the  very  heart 
of  the  matter.  I  cannot  help  alluding  to  it  even  before 
we  have  fairly  reached  that  part  of  the  text.  The  con- 
verse of  the  bride  in  the  gardens  was  constant,  and  it 
was  greatly  esteemed  by  those  who  enjoyed  it, 

I  gather  from  the  text,  rather  by  implication  than 
otherwise,  that  the  converse  was  commendable;  for  the 
bridegroom  does  not  say  to  the  spouse,  "  Thou  that 
dwellest  in  the  gardens,  thy  companions  hear  too  much 
of  thy  voice."  No;  he  evidently  mentions  the  fact  with 
approval,  because  he  draws  an  argument  from  it  why 
he  also  should  hear  that  self-same  voice.  Brothers,  1 
leave  it  to  yourselves  to  judge  whether  your  communi- 
cations with  one  another  are  always  such  as  they  should 
be.  Are  they  always  worthy  of  you  ?  What  communi- 
cations have  ye  had  this  morning  ?  Can  I  make  a  guess  ? 
"Nice  and  fresh  this  morning."  "Quite  a  change  in  the 
weather."  Is  not  this  the  style?  How  often  we  instruct 
each  other  about  what  we  all  know  !  When  it  rains  so 
as  to  soak  our  garments  we  gravely  tell  each  other  that 
it  is  very  wet.  Yes,  and  if  the  sun  shines  we  are  all 
eager  to  communicate  the  wonderful  information  that  it 
is  warm.  Dear  me,  what  instructors  of  our  genera. tion 
we  are!  Could  we  not  contrive  to  change  the  subject? 
Is  it  because  we  have  nothing  to  say  of  love,  and  grace, 
and  truth  that  we  meet  and  part  without  learning  or 
teaching  anything?  Perhaps  so.  I  wish  we  had  a  lit- 
tle more  small  change  of  heavenly  converse:  we  have 
our  crowns  and  sovereigns  for  the  pulpit,  we  need  groats 
and  pence  for  common  talk,  all  stamped  with  the  image 
and  superscription  of  the  King  of  heaven.  0  Holy  Spirit 
enrich  us  after  this  sort.     May  our  communications  be 


130  THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD. 

such  that  if  Jesus  himself  were  near  we  might  not  be 
ashamed  for  him  to  hear  our  voices.  Brethren,  make 
your  conversation  such  that  it  may  be  commended  by 
Christ  himself. 

These  communications  were,  no  doubt,  very  beneficial. 
As  iron  sharpeneth  iron,  so  does  a  man's  countenance 
his  friend.  Oh,  what  a  comfort  it  is  to  drop  in  upon  a 
cheerful  person  when  you  yourself  are  heavy  !  What  a 
ballast  it  puts  into  your  ship,  when  you  are  a  little  too 
merry,  to  meet  with  one  in  sore  travail  who  bids  you 
share  his  burden  and  emulate  his  faith.  We  are  all  the 
better,  believe  me,  when  our  Lord  can  praise  us,  because 
the  companions  hearken  to  our  voices.* 

In  fact,  our  communications  with  one  another  ought 
to  be  preparatory  to  higher  communications  still.  The 
converse  of  saints  on  earth  should  be  a  rehearsal  of  their 
everlasting  communion  in  heaven.  We  should  begin 
here  to  be  to  one  another  what  we  hope  to  be  to  one 
another  world  without  end.  And  is  it  not  pleasant  to 
rise  from  communion  with  your  brethren  into  commun- 
ion with  the  Bridegroom  ? — to  have  such  talk  to  one  an- 
other that  at  last  we  perceive  that  truly  our  fellowship 
is  with  the  Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  ?  We 
thought  that  we  only  communed  with  our  brethren ;  but, 
lo  !  we  see  that  the  Lord  himself  is  here;  do  not  our  hearts 
burn  within  us?  We  two  are  talking  of  him,  and  now 
we  see  that  he  himself  is  here,  opening  to  us  the  Script- 
ures, and  opening  our  hearts  to  receive  those  Scriptures 
in  the  power  of  them.  Beloved,  let  us  try  if  we  cannot 
make  it  so,  that  as  we  dwell  together  as  church  members, 
and  work  together  in  one  common  vineyard,  we  may  be 
always  making  our  fellowship  with  each  other  a  grand 
staircase  of  fellowship  with  the  King  himself.  Let  us 
so  talk  that  we  may  expect  to  meet  Jesus  while  we  are 


THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD.  131 

talking.  How  sweet  to  hear  and  see  the  Master  in  the 
servant,  the  Bridegroom  in  the  bridegroom's  friend,  the 
Head  in  the  members,  the  Shepherd  in  the  sheep,  the 
Christ  in  every  Christian !  Thus  may  we  rise  "upon 
the  wings  of  hallowed  intercourse  with  holy  ones  to 
yet  more  hallowed  intercourse  with  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel. 

Thus  have  we  meditated  upon  two  things:  we  have 
noted  the  appointed  residence  and  the  recorded  con- 
verse.    We  know  what  we  are  talking  about. 

III.  Now  comes  the  pith  of  the  text:  invited  fellow- 
ship— "The  companions  hear  thy  voice:  cause  me  to  hear 
it."  It  is  beautiful  to  hear  the  Beloved  say  in  effect,  "I 
am  going  away  from  you,  and  you  see  me  no  more;  but 
I  shall  see  you :  do  not  forget  me.  Though  you  will  not 
hear  my  voice  with  your  bodily  ears,  I  shall  hear  your 
voices:  therefore  speak  to  me.  Unseen  I  shall  feed 
among  the  lilies;  unperceived  I  shall  walk  the  garden 
in  the  cool  of  the  day :  when  you  are  talking  to  others 
do  not  forget  me.  Sometimes  turn  aside,  and  when  you 
have  shut  to  the  door,  and  no  eye  can  see,  nor  ear  can 
hear,  then  let  me  hear  thy  voice:  it  has  music  in  it  to 
my  heart,  for  I  died  to  give  you  life.  Let  me  hear  the 
voice  of  your  prayer,  and  praise,  and  love." 

Now,  I  note  concerning  this  invitation,  first  of  all,  that 
it  is  very  loving  and  condescending  to  us  that  the  Lord 
should  wish  to  hear  our  voice.  I  do  not  wonder  that 
some  of  you  love  to  hear  my  voice,  because  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  blessed  it  to  your  conversion:  but  what  good 
has  Jesus  ever  derived  from  any  of  us  ?  Is  it  not  mar- 
vellous that  he,  the  infinitely  blessed,  should  want  to 
hear  our  voices  when  all  that  he  hath  heard  from  us  has 
been  begging,  sighing,  and  a  few  poor  broken  hymns? 
¥0Yi  do  ftQJ  Y(m\  rr    taffrf       ]  ■  ■■■irar's  voice,  do  you  ?     { 


132  THE   BRIDEGROOM'S  PARTING    WORD. 

expect  if  the  man  you  have  helped  a  score  of  times 
should  be  to-morrow  morning  at  your  door,  you  would 
say,  "Dear,  dear;  there  is  that  man  again."  Might  not 
the  Well-beloved  say  the  same  of  you?  "There  she  is 
a^-ain :  come  on  the  same  errand.  Come  to  confess  some 
new  faults,  or  to  ask  fresh  favors."  But  instead  of  being 
tired  of  us  our  Lord  says,  "  Let  me  hear  thy  voice."  0 
loving  Bridegroom  !  Must  he  not  love  us  very  truly  to 
ask  us  to  speak  with  him  ?  See,  he  asks  as  though  he 
begged  it  of  us  as  a  favor,  "  Let  me  hear  thy  voice.  Thy 
companions  hearken:  let  me  take  a  share  in  their  inter- 
course: they  find  thy  voice  pleasant,  let  it  be  a  pleasure 
also  to  me.  Come,  do  not  deny  me,  thy  heart's  best  be- 
loved !  Do  not  be  silent  unto  me !  Come,  speak  to  me 
with  thine  own  sweet  mouth." 

It  is  condescending  and  gracious,  and  yet  how  na- 
tural it  is !  How  like  to  Christ !  Love  ever  seeks  the 
company  of  that  which  it  loves.  What  would  a  husband 
say  if  his  wife  was  seen  to  be  chatty  and  cheerful  to 
everybody  else,  but  never  spoke  to  him  ?  I  cannot  sup- 
pose such  a  case :  it  would  make  too  sorrowful  a  house- 
hold. I  should  pity  the  poor,  broken-hearted  man  who 
should  be  forced  to  say,  "  My  beloved,  others  hear  thy 
voice,  and  admire  it,  wilt  thou  not  speak  to  me,  thy  hus- 
band ? "  0  believer,  will  you  let  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  it 
were  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  say  to  you,  "  You  talk  to 
everybody  but  to  me :  you  lay  yourself  out  to  please  every- 
body but  me:  you  are  a  charming  companion  to  every- 
body but  to  me?"  Oh,  our  Beloved,  how  ill  have  we 
treated  thee !  How  much  have  we  slighted  thee !  In 
looking  back,  I  fear  there  are  many  of  us  who  must  feel 
as  if  this  gentle  word  of  the  Lord  had  also  a  sharp  side 
to  it.  I  do  remember  my  faults  this  day.  The  text 
goes  like  a  dagger  to  my  soul,  for  1  have  spoken  all  day 


THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD.  183 

long  to  others,  and  have  had  scarce  a  word  for  him  whom 
my  soul  loveth.  Let  us  mend  our  converse,  and  hence- 
forth show  our  Lord  a  truer  love. 

We  may  truly  add,  that  this  invitation  to  fellowship 
is  a  blessed  and  profitable  request.  We  shall  find  it  so  if 
we  carry  it  out,  especially  those  of  us  who  are  called  by 
God  to  use  our  voices  for  him  among*  the  crowds  of  our 
companions.  I  address  some  brothers  and  sisters  here 
who  are  preachers  and  teachers.  What  a  relief  it  is, 
when  you  have  been  letting  the  companions  hear  your 
voice,  to  stop  a  bit  and  let  Jesus  hear  it !  What  a  rest 
to  leave  the  congregation  for  the  closet,  to  get  away 
from  where  they  criticise  you  to  one  who  delights  in 
you.  What  a  relief,  I  say.  And  what  a  help  to  our 
hearts!  Jesus  gives  us  sweet  returns  if  we  commune 
with  him,  and  such  as  speakers  greatly  need.  The  apos- 
tles said  that  they  would  give  themselves  to  the  word 
of  God  and  to  prayer.  Yes,  we  must  put  those  two  things 
together.  We  shall  never  fitly  handle  the  word  of  God 
without  prayer.  When  we  pray  we  are  taught  how  to 
speak  the  word  to  others.  Salvation  and  supplication 
are  a  blessed  pair.  Put  the  two  together,  so  that,  when 
you  speak  to  others  about  salvation,  you  do  it  after  hav- 
ing baptized  your  own  soul  into  supplication.  "The 
companions  hear  thy  voice:  cause  me  to  hear  it:  before 
thou  speakest  with  them  speak  to  me:  whilst  thou  art 
still  speaking  with  them  still  speak  with  me;  and  when 
thy  speaking  to  men  is  done,  return  unto  thy  rest  and 
again  speak  with  me." 

This  invitation  is  a  many-sided  one ;  for  when  the  bride- 
groom says,  "  Cause  me  to  hear  it,"  he  means  that  she 
should  speak  to  him  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  Frequently  we 
should  be  heard  in  praise.  If  thou  hast  been  praising 
the  Lord  in  the   audience   of  others,  turn   aside   and 


13 J:  THE   BRIDEGROOM'S  PARTING    WORD. 

praise  him  to  his  face.  Sing  thy  song  to  thy  Beloved 
himself.  Get  into  a  quiet  place  and  sing  where  only  he 
can  hear.  I  wish  we  had  more  of  that  kind  of  music 
which  does  not  care  for  other  audience  than  God.  Oh, 
my  God,  my  heart  shall  find  thee,  and  every  string  shall 
have  its  attribute  to  sing,  while  my  whole  being  shall 
extol  thee,  my  Lord  !  The  blessed  Virgin  had  none  with 
her  but  Elizabeth  when  she  sang,  "  My  soul  doth  mag- 
nify the  Lord,  and  my  spirit  doth  rejoice  in  God  my 
Saviour."  Oh,  let  the  Lord  hear  your  voice !  Get  up 
early  to  be  alone  with  him.  So  let  it  be  with  all  your 
complaints  and  petitions;  let  them  be  for  Jesus  only. 
Too  often  we  fill  our  fellow  creature's  ear  with  the 
sad  tale  of  all  our  care.  Why  not  tell  the  Lord  about  it, 
and  have  done  with  it?  We  should  employ  our  time 
far  more  profitably  if,  instead  of  murmuring  in  the  tent, 
we  enquired  in  the  Temple. 

Speak  with  Jesus  Christ,  dear  friends,  in  little  broken 
sentences,  by  way  of  frequent  ejaculation.  The  best  of 
Christian  fellowship  may  be  carried  on  in  single  syllables. 
When  in  the  middle  of  business  you  can  whisper,  "  My 
Lord  and  my  God !  "  You  can  dart  a  glance  upward, 
heave  a  sigh,  or  let  fall  a  tear,  and  so  will  Jesus  hear  your 
voice  !  When  nobody  observes  the  motion  of  your  lips  you 
may  be  saying,  "  My  Beloved,  be  near  me  now!  "  This 
is  the  kind  of  fellowship  which  your  Saviour  asks  of  you. 
He  says,  "The  companions  hear  thy  voice:  cause  me  to 
hear  it.  Be  sure  that  when  thou  speakest  with  others 
thou  dost  also  speak  with  me !  " 

This  is  such  a  blessed  invitation  that  I  think,  clear 
friends,  we  ought  to  avail  ourselves  of  it  at  once.  Come, 
what  say  you  ?  The  best  Beloved  asks  us  to  speak  with 
him,  what  shall  we  say  at  once?  Think  for  an  instant ! 
What  shall  I  say  ?     Perhaps  I  have  the  «tavt  of  yon,  be. 


THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD.  135 

cause  I  have  my  word  ready.  Here  it  is: — "Make  baste 
my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young 
hart  upon  the  mountains  of  spices."  "Why,"  say  you, 
"  that  is  what  the  Church  said  in  the  last  verse  of  the 
Song."  Exactly  so,  and  that  is  what  we  may  wisely  say 
at  this  moment.  We  cannot  improve  upon  it.  "Come 
quickly;  even  so,  come  quickly,  Lord  Jesus."  Often  and 
often,  then,  when  you  are  about  your  business,  say,  "Come, 
Lord  Jesus !  Come  quickly  !  "  It  is  a  sweet  frame  of 
mind  to  be  in  to  be  willing  to  invite  Christ  to  come;  and 
whenever  you  cannot  do  so  let  it  be  a  warning  to  you 
that  you  are  in  dangerous  waters.  I  can  imagine  a  man 
in  business  calling  himself  a  Christian  about  to  engage  in 
a  doubtful  transaction:  how  is  he  to  discern  the  danger? 
Let  him  ask  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  come  while  he  is 
doing  it.  "Oh  dear  no";  cries  one,  "I  had  rather  he 
should  not  come  until  that  matter  had  been  finished  and 
forgotten."  Then  be  you  sure  that  you  are  moving  in  the 
wrong  direction.  Suppose  you  think  of  going  to  a  cer- 
tain place  of  amusement  about  which  you  have  a  ques- 
tion, it  is  easy  to  decide  it  thus: — When  you  take  your 
seat  your  first  thing  should  be  to  bow  you  head  and  ask 
for  a  blessing,  and  then  say,  "  Lord,  here  I  sit  waiting 
for  thine  appearing."  "  Oh,"  say  you,  "  I  should  not 
want  the  Lord  to  come  there."  Of  course  you  would  not. 
Then  do  not  go  where  you  could  not  wish  your  Lord 
to  find  you.  My  text  may  thus  be  a  monitor  to  you, 
to  keep  you  from  the  paths  of  the  destroyer.'  Jesus 
says,  "Let  me  hear  thy  voice,"  and  let  thy  voice  utter 
these  desires, — "Even  so,  come  quickly;  come,  Lord 
Jesus ! " 

Alas,  time  reproves  me;  I  must  hasten  on. 

IV.  I  have  a  fourth  head,  which  shall  be  very  briefly 
handled.    I  find  according  to  the  Hebrew  that  the  text 


136  THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD. 

has  in  it  a  requested  testimony.  According  to  learned 
interpreters  the  Hebrew  runs  thus:  "Cause  to  hear  me" 
Now,  that  may  mean  what  I  have  said,  "  Cause  me  to 
hear;"  but  it  may  also  mean,  "Cause  them  to  hear  me." 
Now  hearken;  you  that  are  in  Christ's  garden:  make 
those  who  dwell  in  that  garden  with  you  to  hear  from, 
you  much  about  him.  In  the  church  every  one  has  a 
right  to  talk  about  the  Head  of  the  church.  Some  of 
our  brethren  in  this  Tabernacle  kindly  undertake  to 
speak  to  individuals  about  their  souls,  and  now  and 
then  they  receive  very  sharp  rebuffs.  What  right  has 
he  to  put  such  a  question?  How  dare  he  intrude  with 
personal  remarks  ?  What!  Is  the  man  poaching?  No: 
these  are  the  Lord's  preserves;  and  the  Lord's  game- 
keepers have  a  right  to  do  as  they  are  bidden  by  him. 
They  are  not  poaching  in  this  place,  for  they  are  on  the 
Master's  own  land.  Anywhere  inside  these  four  walls 
we  may  speak  to  anybody  about  Christ,  and  no  man 
may  forbid  you.  Speak  lovingly  and  tenderly  and  pru- 
dently; but  certainly  the  law  of  the  house  is  that  here 
we  may  speak  about  the  Lord  of  the  house.  There  are 
some  other  things  you  may  not  talk  about,  but  about  the 
Lord  Jesus  you  may  speak  as  much  as  you  will.  In  the 
garden,  at  any  rate,  if  not  in  the  wild  wilderness,  let  the 
Rose  of  Sharon  be  sweetly  spoken  of.  Let  his  name  be 
as  ointment  poured  forth  in  all  the  church  of  God. 

Again,  you,  according  to  the  text,  are  one  that  can 
make  people  hear,  so  that  "  the  companions  hearken  to 
thy  voice;"  then  make  them  to  hear  of  Jesus.  You  have 
the  gift  of  speech:  use  it  for  Christ  crucified.  I  always 
feel  regret  when  a  powerful  speaker  espouses  any  other 
cause  but  that  of  my  Lord.  Time  was  when  I  used  to 
wish  that  Milton  had  been  a  preacher,  and  instead  of 
writing  a  poem  had  proclaimed  the  gospel  to  the  multi- 


THE  BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD.  137 

tude.  I  know  better  now,  for  I  perceive  that  God  doth 
not  use  learning  and  eloquence  so  much  as  knowledge 
of  Christ  and  plain  speech ;  but  still  1  am  jealous  of  any 
man  who  can  speak  well  that  he  should  not  give  my 
Lord  the  use  of  his  tongue.  Well-trained  tongues  are 
rare  things,  and  they  should  be  all  consecrated  to  Christ's 
glory.  If  you  can  speak  to  the  companions — make  them 
hear  about  Christ:  if  you  can  speak  well,  make  them  to 
hear  attractive  words  about  Christ. 

If  you  do  not  speak  about  Christ  to  strangers,  do  speak 
to  your  companions.  They  will  hearken  to  you;  there- 
fore let  them  hearken  to  the  word  of  the  Lord.  I  have 
heard  of  men  who  called  themselves  Christians  who  yet 
never  spoke  to  their  children  about  their  souls,  never 
spoke  to  their  servants  nor  to  their  workpeople  about 
Jesus  and  his  love.  This  is  to  murder  souls.  If 
tongues  can  bless  and  do  not,  then  they  in  effect  curse 
men  by  their  silence.  If  you  have  a  voice,  make  the 
name  of  Jesus  to  be  sounded  out  all  around  you.  Many 
are  the  voices  that  strike  upon  the  ear:  the  world  is  full 
of  din,  even  to  distraction,  yet  the  name  which  is  above 
all  other  names  is  scarcely  heard.  I  pray  you,  my  breth- 
ren, you  that  are  like  silver  bells,  ring  out  that  name  o'er 
hill  and  dale.  As  with  a  clarion,  trumpet  forth  the  sav- 
ing name  of  Jesus  till  the  deaf  hear  the  sound  thereof. 
Whatever  is  left  out  of  your  testimony,  be  sure  that  Christ 
crucified  is  first  and  last  in  it.  Love  Christ  and  live  Christ ; 
think  of  Christ  and  speak  of  Christ.  When  people  go 
away  from  hearing  you  preach,  may  they  have  to  say, 
"He  kept  to  his  subject:  he  knew  nothing  but  Jesus." 
It  is  ill  when  a  man  has  to  say  of  preachers,  "  They  have 
taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I  know-not  where  they  have 
laid  him."  Yet  in  certain  sermons  you  meet  with  a  lit- 
tle about  everything  except  the  one  thing.     They  offer 


138  THE   BRIDEGROOM'S   PARTING    WORD. 

us  what  we  do  not  need;  but  the  need  of  the  soul  is  not 
supplied.  Oh,  my  brethren,  cause  Christ  to  be  heard. 
Hammer  on  that  anvil  always:  if  you  make  no  music 
but  that  of  the  harmonious  blacksmith  it  will  suffice. 
Ring  it  out  with  sturdy  blows — "Jesus,  Jesus,  Jesus 
crucified."  Hammer  away  at  that.  "  Now  you  are  on 
the  right  string,  man,"  said  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  when 
the  preacher  came  to  speak  upon  the  Lord  Jesus.  .  It 
needed  no  duke  to  certify  that.  Harp  on  that  string. 
Make  Jesus  to  be  as  commonly  known  as  now  he  is  com- 
monly unknown.  So  may  God  bless  you  as  long  as  you 
dwell  in  these  gardens,  till  the  day  break  and  the  shad- 
ows flee  away.     Amen. 


VII. 

THE  TENT  DISSOLVED  AND   THE  MANSION  ENTEKED. 

May  G,  1883. 

"For  we  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dis- 
solved, we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eter- 
nal in  the  heavens." — 2  Corinthians  v.  1. 

Paul  ranks  among  the  bravest  of  the  brave.  We  note 
also  with  admiration  how  the  hero  of  so  many  dangers 
and  conflicts,  who  could  glow  and  burn  with  fervor, 
was  yet  among  the  calmest  and  quietest  of  spirits.  He 
had  learned  to  live  beyond  those  present  circumstances 
which  worry  and  disturb;  he  had  stolen  a  march  upon 
the  shadows  of  time,  and  entered  into  possession  of  the 
realities  of  eternity.  He  looked  not  on  the  things  which 
are  seen,  but  he  set  his  whole  regard  on  the  things 
which  are  not  seen;  and  by  this  means  he  entered  into 
a  deep  and  joyful  peace  which  made  him  strong,  resolute, 
steadfast,  immovable.  I  would  to  God  that  we  had  all 
acquired  Paul's  art  of  being  "  always  confident," — his 
habit  of  having  the  inward  man  renewed  day  by  day. 
The  most  of  us  are  far  too  like  the  insect  of  the  summer 
hour,  which  sports  away  its  life  of  moments  among  the 
flowers,  and  lo  !  all  is  over.  Are  we  not  too  apt  to  live  in 
the  immediate  present  which  is  revealed  by  the  senses? 
The  ox  projects  no  thought  upward  or  beyond :  to  stand  in 
the  cool  brook  or  lie  down  in  the  fat  pasturage  is  its  all 
in  all :  even  thus  is  it  with  the  mass  of  men,  their  souls 
are  tethered  to  their  bodies,  imprisoned  within  the  cir- 


140  THE    TENT  DISSOLVED    AND 

cumstances  of  the  day.     If  we  could  be  completely  de 
livered  from  the  thraldom  of  things  seen  and  felt,  and 
could  feel  the  full  influence  of  the  invisible  and  the  eter- 
nal, how  much  of  heaven  we  might  enjoy  before    the 
celestial  shores  are  reached  ! 

Paul's  life  was  rough  and  stormy,  yet  who  might  no! 
desire  it?  Had  there  been  no  life  to  come,  he  would 
have  been  of  all  men  the  most  miserable,  for  he  was  one 
of  the  poorest,  most  persecuted,  most  despised,  most  slan- 
dered, most  wearied,  and  most  suffering  of  mortals:  and 
yet  if  I  had  to  put  my  finger  upon  happy  lives  I  should 
not  hesitate  to  select  among  the  foremost  the  life  of  the 
Apostle  Paul,  for  whom  to  live  was  Christ.  It  is  also  to 
be  specially  noted  as  to  his  happiness  that  he  had  a  rea- 
son for  it.  My  text  begins  with  the  word,  "  For."  Paul  is 
always  argumentative,  the  leaning  of  his  mind  is  in  that 
direction  ;  hence,  if  he  is  cast  down  he  has  a  reason  for  it. 
and  if  he  is  calm  he  can  show  just  cause  for  his  peace. 
Some  religionists  are  deliriously  happy,  but  they  cannot 
tell  you  why.  They  can  sing  and  shout  and  dance,  but 
they  can  give  no  reason  for  their  excitement.  They  see 
an  enthusiastic  crowd,  and  they  catch  the  infection:  their 
religion  is  purely  emotional;  I  am  not  going  to  condemn 
it,  yet  show  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  way.  The  joy 
which  is  not  created  by  substantial  causes  is  mere  frot  h 
and  foam,  and  soon  vanishes  away.  Unless  you  can  tell 
why  you  are  happy  you  will  not  long  be  happy.  If  you 
have  no  principle  at  the  back  of  your  passion  your  pas- 
sion will  burn  down  to  a  black  ash,  and  you  will  look  in 
vain  for  a  living  spark.  Some  professors  have  not  enough 
emotion,  their  hearts  are  too  small,  though  I  cannot  say 
that  their  heads  are  too  large;  but  there  are  others  whose 
hearts  are  their  main  force,  who  are  soon  on  fire,  blazing 
away  like  shavings  and  brushwood  when  first  the   flame 


THE    MANSION  ENTERED.  141 

lights  upon  them ;  but  their  brains  are  an  uncertain  quan- 
tity, never  sufficient  to  manage  the  furnace  of  their  emo- 
tions. It  was  not  so  with  Paul:  he  was  a  well-balanced 
man.  If  able  to  defy  the  present  and  rejoice  in  prospect 
of  the  future,  he  had  a  solid  reason  for  so  doing.  I  like 
a  man  who  is  fervent  and  enthusiastic,  and  yet  in  his 
fervor  is  as  reasonable  as  if  he  were  some  cool  logician. 
Let  the  heart  be  like  a  fiery,  high-mettled  steed,  but  take 
care  that  it  is  curbed  and  managed  by  discretion.  An 
instructed  Christian  man  is  rational  even  in  his  ecstasies: 
ready  to  give  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  him,  when 
that  hope  seems  to  rise  above  all  reason.  He  is  glad, 
gladdest  of  the  glad,  but  he  knows  the  why  and  the 
wherefore  of  his  gladness;  and  so  he  can  bear  the  cruel 
test  to  which  the  world  exposes  spiritual  joy.  The  true 
believer's  peace  can  answer  the  cavils  of  men  or  devils; 
it  can  justify  itself  in  its  opposition  to  all  appearances. 
This  is  a  house  built  upon  a  foundation,  a  tree  which  has 
a  firmly  settled  root,  a  star  fixed  in  its  sphere;  and  thus  it 
is  infinitely  superior  to  the  house  upon  the  sand,  the 
tree  plucked  up,  the  fleeting  vapor  of  mere  emotion. 
May  God,  the  Holy  Spirit,  instruct  us  so  that  we  may 
know  the  truth  out  of  which  solid  happiness  is  sure  to 
grow  ! 

I  see  in  the  text  before  us,  first  of  all,  a  catastrophe 
which  Paul  saw  to  he  very  'possible — "  If  our  earthly  house 
of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved";  secondly,  the  'provi- 
sion which  he  surely  knew  to  be  made  should  that  catastro- 
phe occur — "We  have  a  building  of  God,  a  house  not 
made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens";  and  thirdly, 
I  shall  dwell  for  a  minute  or  two  upon  the  value  of  this 
knowledge  to  Paul  and  to  the  rest  of  us  in  our  present  trying 
condition. 

I.   First,   then,   consider   the   catastrophe   which   paul 


142  THE    TENT  DISSOLVED    AND 

saw  to  be  very  possible  :  "  If  our  earthly  house  of  this  tab- 
ernacle were  dissolved." 

He  did  not  fear  that  he  himself  would  be  dissolved: 
he  had  not  the  slightest  fear  about  that.  The  catastro- 
phe which  he  looked  forward  to  is  known  among  us  by 
the  name  of  "  death  "  ;  but  he  calls  it  the  dissolving  of 
the  earthly  house  of  his  tabernacle;  the  taking  down  of 
his  tent-house  body.  He  does  not  say,  "  If  I  were  to  be 
destroyed,"  or  "  If  I  were  to  be  annihilated  "  ;  he  knows 
no  supposition  of  that  character;  he  feels  assured  that 
he  himself  is  perfectly  safe.  There  is  latent  within  the 
text  an  element  of  deep  quiet  as  to  his  real  self.  "  We 
know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were 
dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God."  The  "we"  is 
all  unharmed  and  unmoved;  if  our  house  were  dissolved 
toe  should  not  be  undone;  if  we  were  to  lose  this  earthly 
tent  we  have  "  a  building  of  God,  eternal  in  the  heavens." 
The  real  man,  the  essential  self,  is  out  of  harm's  way; 
and  all  that  he  talks  about  is  the  falling  to  pieces  of  a 
certain  tabernacle  or  tent  in  which  for  the  present  he  is 
lodging.  Many  people  are  in  a  great  fright  about  the 
future,  yet  here  is  Paul  viewing  the  worst  thing  that 
could  happen  to  him  with  such  complacency  that  he 
likens  it  to  nothing  worse  than  the  pulling  down  of  a 
tent  in  which  he  was  making  shift  to  reside  for  a  little 
season.  He  was  afraid  of  nothing  beyond  that,  and  if 
that  happened  he  had  expectations  which  reconciled  him 
to  the  event,  and  even  helped  him  to  anticipate  it  with  joy. 

Paul  was  not  absolutely  sure  that  his  body  would  be 
dissolved.  He  hoped  that  he  might  be  alive  and  re- 
main at  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  then  he  would  be 
changed  and  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord,  without  passing 
through  death.  Still,  he  was  willing  to  leave  this  in 
the  Lord's  hands,  and  when  he  saw  it  to  be  possible  that 


THE    MANSION  ENTERED.  143 

he  should  be  numbered  among  the  blessed  dead  who  die 
in  the  Lord  he  did  not  shrink  from  the  prospect,  but 
bravely  found  a  metaphor  which  set  forth  the  little  fear 
which  he  entertained  concerning  it. 

The  apostle  perceived  that  the  body  in  which  he 
lived  was  frail  in  itself.  Paul  was  accustomed  to  make 
tents.  I  do  not  suppose  he  ever  manufactured  any  very 
large  or  sumptuous  ones — probably  he  did  not  own  capi- 
tal enough  for  that,  but  he  was  a  tent  worker  and 
mender.  The  use  of  tents  was  common  enough  among 
the  Roman  people  in  Paul's  day.  The  gentry  delighted 
in  bright  pavilions  which  they  could  set  up  at  pleasure, 
and  the  commoner  folk  found  pleasure  in  spending  a 
part  of  their  time  under  canvas.  Whilst  he  was  sitting 
writing  this  letter  it  is  most  likely  that  Paul  had  a  tent 
or  two  to  repair  lying  near  his  hand,  and  this  suggested 
to  him  the  language  of  the  verse  before  us.  When  a 
tent  is  newly  placed  it  is  but  a  frail  structure,  very  far 
removed  from  the  substantiality  of  a  house;  in  that 
respect  it  is  exactly  like  this  feeble  corporeal  frame 
of  ours,  which  is  crushed  before  the  moth.  Paul  felt 
that  his  body  would  not  need  any  great  force  to  over- 
throw it;  it  was  like  the  tent  which  the  Midianite  saw 
in  his  dream,  which  only  needed  to  be  struck  by  a  barley 
cake,  and  lo !  it  lay  along.  A  house  of  solid  masonry 
may  need  a  crowbar  and  a  pick  to  start  its  stones  from 
their  places,  but  feebler  tools  will  soon  overturn  a  tent 
and  make  a  ruin  of  it.  The  body  is  liable  to  dissolution 
from  causes  so  minute  as  to  be  imperceptible — a  breath  of 
foul  air,  an  atom  of  poisonous  matter,  a  trifle,  a  mere 
nothing,  may  end  this  mortal  life.  I  hope  that  you 
and  I  duly  remember  the  frailty  of  our  bodies.  We 
are  not  so  foolish  as  to  think  that  because  we  are  in 
robust   health    to-day  we   must    necessarily    live   to   old 


144  THE    TENT  DISSOLVED    AND 

age.  We  have  had  among  ourselves  lately  abundant 
evidence  that  those  who  appear  to  be  the  healthiest  are 
often  the  first  to  be  taken  away,  while  feeble  persons 
linger  on  among  us,  whose  lives  are  a  continued  wonder 
and  a  perpetual  struggle.  When  we  think  of  the  brittle 
ware  whereof  our  bodies  are  made  it  is  not  strange  that 
they  should  soon  be  broken.  Is  it  not  a  wonderful 
thing  that  we  continue  to  live?  much  more  wonderful 
than  that  we  should  die  ?     Dr.  Watts  has  wisely  said — 

' '  Our  life  contains  a  thousand  springs, 
And  dies  if  one  be  gone; 
Strange  !  that  a  harp  of  thousand  strings 
Should  keep  in  tune  so  long." 

Some  small  affair  interferes  with  a  minute  valve  or  or- 
gan of  secretion,  mischief  is  engendered  by  it,  the  whole 
current  of  life  is  hindered,  and  by-and-by  death  ensues. 
It  is  a  very  delicate  process  by  which  dust  remains  ani- 
mated; a  thousand  things  can  stay  that  process,  and  then 
our  body  is  dissolved.  Paul,  therefore,  because  he  saw 
his  body  to  be  frail  as  a  bubble,  looked  forward  to 
the  time  when  the  earthly  house  of  his  soul  would  be 
dissolved. 

When  lie  was  writing  this  epistle  he  had  many  signs 
about  hint  that  his  body  would  be  dissolved.  His  many  la- 
bors were  telling  upon  him;  he  was  worn  down  with 
fatigue,  he  was  spent  in  his  Master's  service.  He  was 
so  full  of  the  heavenly  fire  that  he  could  never  rest: 
after  he  had  evangelized  one  city  he  was  forced  to 
hasten  to  another;  if  he  was  driven  out  of  one  village 
he  hurried  to  the  next,  for  he  was  eager  to  deliver  the 
message  of  salvation.  He  wore  himself  out  with  labor, 
and  he  felt,  therefore,  that  the  day  would  come  when 
his  body  would  give  way  under  the  intense  excitement 


THE    MANSION  ENTERED.  145 

of  his  life-agony.  In  addition  to  this  he  endured  cold 
and  hunger,  and  nakedness,  and  sickness,  and  infirmities 
brought  upon  him  by  his  missionary  self-sacrifice.  He 
had  a  hard  time  of  it  as  to  physical  endurance,  and  I 
should  think  there  was  scarcely  a  limb  of  the  man  that 
did  not  suffer  in  consequence  of  the  imprisonments,  scourg- 
ings,  stonings,  and  other  hardships  which  he  had  suf- 
fered. He  felt  that  one  of  these  days  in  all  probability 
the  house  of  his  tent  would  come  down  through  the 
violence  of  his  persecutors.  Once  he  most  touching! y 
spoke  of  himself  as  "such  an  one  as  Paul  the  Aged;" 
and  aged  men  cannot  get  away  from  the  consciousness 
that  their  body  is  failing.  Certain  crumbling  portions 
warn  the  old  man  that  the  house  is  dilapidated;  the 
thatch  which  has  grown  thin  or  blanched  tells  its  tale. 
There  are  signs  about  the  aged  which  warn  them  that 
their  earthly  house  was  not  built  to  stand  for  ever;  it  is 
a  tabernacle  or  tent  set  up  for  a  temporary  purpose,  and 
it  shows  signs  of  waxing  old,  and  being  ready  to  pass 
away.  Hence,  then,  Paul  was  led  to  feel  that  both  from 
the  natural  frailty  of  the  body,  and  also  from  the  injuries 
which  it  had  already  sustained,  there  was  before  him 
the  evident  probability  that  the  earthly  house  of  his 
tabernacle  would  be  dissolved. 

Besides,  Paul's  frail  body  had  been  subject  to  exceeding 
great  perils.  I  saw  the  other  day  an  encampment  of 
gipsies  out  upon  the  common;  many  of  this  wandering 
race  were  sitting  under  a  coarse  covering  sustained  by 
sticks,  I  should  exaggerate  if  I  called  them  poles;  and 
I  could  not  help  feeling  that  such  an  abode  was  all  very 
well  on  a  warm  day,  but  not  at  all  desirable  when  the 
east- wind  was  blowing,  or  a  shower  of  sleet  was  driving 
along,  or  a  deluge  of  rain  descending.  The  apostle's 
body  was  a  tent  which  was-  subjected  to  great  stress  of 


146  THE    TENT   DISSOLVED    AND 

weather.  God  had  not  screened  him  ;  though  one  of  the 
most  precious  men  that  ever  lived,  yet  he  was  exposed 
to  more  danger  than  almost  any  other  of  the  Lord's 
servants.  Here  is  his  own  account  of  the  matter:— 
"Thrice  was  I  beaten  with  rods,  once  was  I  stoned, 
thrice  I  suffered  shipwreck,  a  night  and  a  clay  I  have 
been  in  the  deep;  in  journeyings  often,  in  perils  of  waters, 
in  perils  of  robbers,  in  perils  by  mine  own  countrymen, 
in  perils  by  the  heathen,  in  perils  in  the  city,  in  perils  in 
the  wilderness,  in  perils  in  the  sea,  in  perils  among  false 
brethren  ;  in  weariness  and  painfullness,  in  watchings  often, 
in  hunger  and  thirst,  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  naked- 
ness." Well  might  he  reckon  that  ere  long  his  poor  shep- 
herd's shanty  would  give  way  under  such  rude  blasts. 

Besides,  Paul  knew  that  so  many  others  whom  he  had 
hnown  and  loved  had  already  died,  and  he  gathered  from 
this  that  he  would  himself  die.  There  used  to  sit  in  this 
house  a  brother  who  has  often  assured  me  that  he  should 
not  die,  and  that  if  any  Christian  man  did  die,  it  was  be- 
cause he  grieved  the  Lord.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  have 
missed  that  brother  for  many  months:  I  hope  he  has  not 
yet  disproved  his  own  theory;  but  I  am  sure  that  he  will 
do  so  sooner  or  later  unless  our  Lord  should  hasten  his 
advent,  Whenever  I  meet  with  an  enthusiast  who 
boasts  that  he  shall  never  die,  I  find  it  best  to  let  him 
wait  and  see.  One  fine  old  Irish  clergyman  has  fre- 
quently sought  to  instruct  me  in  the  art  of  being  im- 
mortal, and  he  has  been  grieved  and  angry  because  I 
never  set  much  store  by  the  long  life  which  he  offered 
me.  Though  an  old  man,  he  assured  me  that  he  should 
never  die ;  he  expected  in  a  short  time  to  throw  out  all  the 
infirmities  of  his  years  in  the  form  of  a  rash,  and  then 
he  should  be  as  vigorous  as  ever.  Alas!  the  good  rector 
is  buried,  and  his  crazy  brain  is  at  rest.     It  is  appointed 


THE   MANSION  ENTERED.  147 

unto  men  once  to  die.  I  should  have  thought  that  since 
so  many  of  the  excellent  of  the  earth  have  fallen  asleep, 
nobody  would  ever  have  been  so  mad  as  to  raise  a  ques- 
tion about  its  being  the  common  lot.  Our  crowded 
cemeteries  supply  ten  thousand  arguments  why  each 
one  of  us  may  expect  to  die  in  due  time.  This  earthly 
house  of  our  tabernacle  will  be  dissolved;  all  things 
unite  to  warrant  the  belief. 

Now,  brethren,  this  was  all  that  Paul  did  expect  on 
the  sad  side;  and  truly  it  is  not  much.  Ts  it?  Certain 
Swiss  peasants  not  very  long  ago  were  feeding  their 
flocks  on  one  of  the  lofty  upland  valleys.  On  one  side 
of  the  pasturage  stood  a  number  of  chalets,  or  wooden 
huts,  in  which  they  were  accustomed  to  live  during  the 
summer,  poor  shelters  which  were  left  as  soon  as  the 
winter  set  in.  One  day  they  heard  a  strange  rumbling 
up  in  the  lofty  Alps,  and  they  understood  what  it  meant; 
it  meant  that  a  mass  of  rock  or  snow  or  ice  had  fallen,  and 
would  soon  come  crushing  down  in  the  form  of  an  ava- 
lanche. In  a  brief  space  their  fears  were  realized,  for 
they  saw  a  tremendous  mass  come  rushing  from  above, 
bearing  destruction  in  its  course.  What  did  it  destroy  ? 
Only  the  old,  crazy  chalets:  that  was  all.  Every  man  of 
the  shepherds  was  safe,  and  untouched:  the  event  was 
rather  to  them  a  matter  which  caused  a  Te  Deum  to  be 
sung  in  the  village  church  below  than  a  subject  for 
mourning  and  sorrow.  They  said,  "The  avalanche  is 
terrible,  but  it  has  not  slain  the  aged  mother,  nor 
crushed  the  babe  in  its  cradle:  it  has  injured  none 
of  us,  but  only  buried  a  few  hovels  which  we  can 
soon  rebuild."  Their  case  is  a  picture  of  ours.  The 
avalanche  of  death  will  fall ;  but  0  ye  saints,  when  it 
comes  this  is  all  it  will  do  for  you — your  earthly  house 
will  be  dissolved !     Will  you  fret  over  so  small  a  loss? 


148  THE    TENT   DISSOLVED    AND 

No  evil  will  come  nigh  to  you:  the  poor  hut  of  the  body 
will  be  buried  beneath  the  earth,  but  as  for  yourself,  what 
will  you  have  to  do  but  to  sing  an  everlasting  Te  Deum 
unto  him  who  delivered  you  from  death  and  danger,  and 
raised  you  to  his  own  right  hand? 

It  would  not  long  affect  a  man  if  his  tent  should  be 
overthrown;  he  would  shake  himself  clear  of  it  and 
come  forth ;  it  would  not  otherwise  disturb  him.  So 
death  shall  not  affect  us  for  the  worst,  but  for  the  bet- 
ter; the  dissolution  of  this  hampering  frame  shall  give 
us  liberty.  To-day  we  are  like  birds  in  the  egg;  so  long 
as  the  shell  is  whole  we  are  not  free:  death  breaks  the 
shell.  Does  the  fledgling  lament  the  dissolution  of  the 
shell  ?  I  never  heard  of  a  bird  in  its  nest  pining  over  its 
broken  shell;  no,  its  thought  runs  otherwise:  to  wings, 
and  flight,  and  sunny  skies.  So  let  it  be  with  us.  This 
body  will  be  dissolved:  let  it  be  so;  it  is  meet  it  should 
be.  We  have  been  glad  of  it  while  we  have  needed  it, 
and  we  thank  God  for  the  wondrous  skill  displayed  in  it; 
but  when  we  no  longer  require  it  we  shall  escape  from 
it  as  from  imprisonment,  and  never  wish  to  return  to  its 
narrow  bounds.  Death,  as  it  pulls  away  our  sackcloth 
canopy,  will  reveal  to  our  wondering  eyes  the  palace  of 
the  King  wherein  we  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and,  therefore, 
what  cause  have  we  to  be  alarmed  at  it?  I  have  set 
out  the  whole  catastrophe  before  you,  and  surely  no  be- 
liever trembles  in  view  of  it. 

II.  So  now  we  pass  on  to  the  second  head,  the  provi- 
sion OF  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  PaUL  MOST  SURELY  KNEW.      Pie  kl'ie  W 

that  if  his  tent-dwelling  was  overthrown  lie  would  not  be 
without  a  home;  he  knew  that  he  would  not  have  to  open 
his  eyes  in  a  naked  condition,  and  cry,  "  Woe's  me, 
whither  am  I  to  fly?  I  have  no  dwelling  place."  Xo, 
he  knew  that  if  this  tent-house  were  gone  he  had  "a 


THE    MANSION  ENTERED.  1-40 

building  of  God."  Paul  was  not  afraid  of  going  to 
purgatory:  though  of  late  some  even  among  Protestants 
have  in  a  modified  form  revived  that  grim  fiction,  and 
have  told  us  that  even  believers  will  have  much  to  bear 
before  they  will  be  fit  for  eternal  happiness.  The  apos- 
tle held  no  such  opinion ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  wrote : 
"  We  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle 
were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God."  He  did  not 
expect  to  be  roasted  alive  for  the  next  thousand  years, 
and  then  to  leap  from  purgatory  to  Paradise,  but  he  did 
expect  to  go,  as  soon  as  ever  his  earthly  house  was  dis- 
solved, into  his  eternal  house  which  is  in  the  heavens. 
He  had  not  even  the  thought  of  lying  in  a  state  of  un- 
consciousness till  the  resurrection.  He  says,  "We  know 
that  if  the  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved 
we  have  [we  have  already]  a  building  of  God."  He  says 
not  "  we  shall  have  it,"  but  "  we  have  it " ;  "  we  know  that 
we  have  it,"  The  picture  seems  to  me  to  be  as  though 
one  of  you  should  dwell  in  his  garden  in  a  tent  for  a 
while.  Somebody  inquires  what  would  happen  if  a  gale 
of  wind  should  blow  your  tent  away  in  the  night,  "Oh," 
say  you,  "  I  have  a  house  over  yonder;  I  should  go  within 
doors  and  live  there."  What  a  comfort  to  know  that, 
whatever  occurs  to  our  temporary  gear,  we  have  a  fixed 
and  settled  abode  to  which  we  can  at  once  repair.  This 
makes  us  feel  independent  of  all  dangers,  and  helps  us 
joyfully  to  welcome  the  inevitable,  come  when  it  may. 

What  did  the  apostle  mean,  however?  for  this  text  is 
said  to  be  a  very  difficult  one.  He  meant,  first — the 
moment  his  soul  left  its  body  it  would  at  once  enter 
into  that  house  of  which  Jesus  said,  "  In  my  Father's 
house  are  many  mansions:  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would 
have  told  you."  Do  you  want  to  know  about  that  house? 
Read  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  and  learn  of  its  gates 


150  THE     TENT   DISSOLVED    AND 

of  pearl,  its  streets  of  gold,  its  walls  of  rarest  gems, 
of  the  river  which  windeth  through  it,  and  of  the  trees 
which  bear  their  fruit  every  month.  If  after  that  you 
desire  to  know  more  concerning  this  house,  I  can  but 
give  you  the  advice  which  was  given  by  John  Bunyan 
in  a  similar  case.  One  asked  of  honest  John  a  question 
which  he  could  not  answer,  for  the  matter  was  not 
opened  in  God's  word;  and  therefore  honest  John  bade 
his  friend  live  a  godly  life,  and  go  to  heaven,  and  see  for 
himself.  Believe  no  dreams,  but  bide  thy  time,  believing 
in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  shortly  know  all  about 
the  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens. 
Paul,  however,  did  mean  that  in  the  fulness  of  time 
he  would  again  be  clothed  upon  with  a  body.  He  re- 
garded the  waiting  time  as  so  short  that  he  almost  over- 
looked it,  as  men  forget  a  moment's  pause  in  a  grand 
march.  Ultimately,  I  say  he  expected  to  be  housed  in 
a  body:  the  tent-house  which  was  blown  down  and  dis- 
solved would  be  developed  into  a  building,  so  rich  and 
rare  as  to  be  fitly  called  "  a  building  of  God,  a  house  not 
made  with  hands."  This  also  is  our  prospect.  At  this 
present  in  this  mortal  body  we  groan  being  burdened, 
for  our  spirit  is  liberated  from  bondage,  but  our  body  is 
not  yet  emancipated,  although  it  has  been  bought  with 
a  price.  We  are  "waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the 
redemption  of  our  body,"  and  so  "the  body  is  dead  be- 
cause of  sin :  but  the  Spirit  is  life  because  of  righteous- 
ness." Our  soul  has  been  regenerated,  but  the  body 
waits  for  the  process  which  in  its  case  is  analogous  to 
regeneration,  namely,  the  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
Disembodied  saints  may  have  to  wait  a  few  thousand 
years,  more  or  less,  dwelling  in  the  Father's  house  above; 
but  there  shall  come  eventually  the  sounding  of  the  trum- 
pet and  the  raising  of  the  dead,  and  then  the  perfected 


THE    MANSION   ENTERED.  151 

spirit  shall  dwell  in  a  body  adapted  to  its  glory.  The 
certainty  of  the  resurrection  raises  us  above  the  dread 
which  would  otherwise  surround  the  dissolution  of  our 
body.  A  child  sees  a  man  throwing  precious  metal  into 
a  melting  pot,  and  he  is  sad  because  fair  silver  is  being- 
destroyed;  but  he  that  knows  the  business  of  the  refiner 
understands  that  no  loss  will  come  of  the  process;  only 
the  dross  of  that  silver  will  be  taken  away,  and  the  pure 
molten  mass  poured  out  into  a  comely  mould  will  yet 
adorn  a  royal  table.  Well,  my  brethren,  are  we  assured 
that  to  lose  this  vile  body  is  clear  gain  since  it  will  be  fash- 
ioned according  to  the  glorious  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus? 

Let  us  pass  on  1  'der  how  Paul  could  say  he  knew 

this.  This  wonderfully  enlightened  nineteenth  century 
has  produced  an  order  of  wise  men  who  glory  in  their 
ignorance.  They  call  themselves  "Agnostics."  or  know- 
nothings.  When  I  was  a  boy  it  would  have  seemed  odd 
to  rae  to  have  met  with  a  man  who  gloried  in  being  an 
ignoramus,  and  yet  that  is  the  Latin  for  that  Greek  word 
"  Agnostic."  Is  it  not  singular  to  hear  a  man  boastfully 
say.  -I  am  an  ignoramus"?  How  different  is  our 
apostle!  He  says  "we  know."  Whence  came  this 
confidence?     How  did  he  know? 

First,  Paul  knew  that  he  had  a  Father  in  heaven,  for 
he  felt  the  spirit  of  eon  ship:  he  knew  also  that  his  Fa- 
ther had  a  house,  and  he  was  certain  that  if  ever  he  lost 
the  tent  in  which  he  lived  he  should  be  sure  to  be  wel- 
comed into  his  own  Father's  house  above.  How  do  our 
children  know  that  if  ever  they  are  in  need  of  a  house 
they  can  come  home  to  us?  Did  they  learn  that  from 
their  tutors  at  school?  No,  their  childhood's  instinct 
teaches  them  that  our  house  is  their  home,  just  as 
chickens  run  under  the  mother-hen  without  needing  to 
be  trained.     Because  they  are  our  children  they  feel  that 


152  THE    TENT  DISSOLVED   AND 

as  long  as  we  have  a  house  they  have  a  house  too;  Paul, 
therefore,  unhesitatingly  said,  "We  know";  and,  breth- 
ren, we  know  the  same  through  like  confidence  in  our 
Father's  love.  In  the  house  of  the  many  mansions  we 
feel  quite  sure  of  a  hearty  welcome  in  due  time.  Shut 
out  from  our  Father's  home  we  cannot  be  !  Houseless 
wanderers  while  our  royal  Father  dwells  in  his  palace 
we  cannot  be  !  We  are  not  merely  hopeful  on  this  mat- 
ter, but  certain;  and  therefore  we  say,  "  We  know." 

Paul  knew,  again,  that  he  had  an  elder  brother,  and 
that  this  brother  had  gone  before  to  see  to  the  lodg- 
ing of  the  younger  brethren.  Paul  remembered  that 
Jesus  had  said,  "I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  yon,  and 
if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again, 
and  receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I  am  ye  may 
be  also."  So  Paul  had  no  question  whatever;  if  the 
Ford  had  gone  to  prepare  a  place  there  would  be  a  place 
for  him;  for  he  never  knew  his  divine  Ford  set  about 
anything  and  fail  therein.  Fan  we  not  all  trust  our 
Forerunner?  Have  we  any  doubts  of  him  who  has  en- 
tered within  the  veil  as  our  representative?  Xo;  as  we 
are  sure  that  Jesus  has  passed  into  the  heavens  on  our 
behalf,  so  are  we  sure  that  when  this  tent-house  body  is 
dissolved,  there  remains  a  rest  and  home  for  our  souls. 

Doubtless,  Paul  also  thought  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that 
blessed  One  who  deigns  to  live  with  us  in  this  frail 
house  of  clay,  which  is  in  many  ways  an  uncomfortable 
and  unsuitable  abode  for  him  by  reason  of  the  sin  which 
has  defiled  it.  He  condescends  to  dwell  in  these  mortal 
bodies,  and,  therefore,  when  we  leave  our  earthly  house 
he  will  leave  it  too ;  and  we  are  persuaded  that  a  place 
will  be  found  where  we  may  still  abide  m  fellowship. 
As  our  bodies  have  been  honored  to  entertain  the  Holy 
Ghost  we  may  be  sure  that  in  our  hour  of  need  he  will 


THE    MANSION  ENTERED.  153 

find  an  abode  for  us.  He  has  been  our  guest,  and  in  his 
turn  he  will  be  our  host;  this  we  know,  for  we  know  the 
love  of  the  Spirit.  He  who  has  made  our  body  his  tem- 
ple will  find  a  rest  for  our  souls.  Thus,  from  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  gather  assurance  that 
we  shall  not  wander  to  and  fro  unhoused,  even  though 
this  mortal  frame  should  be  dissolved. 

Besides,  let  me  tell  you  something.  Paul  knew  that 
when  he  died  there  was  a  Paradise  prepared,  for  he  had 
been  there  already.  You  remember  how  he  locked  up 
that  story  till  he  could  keep  it  no  longer,  and,  then,  fif- 
teen years  after  its  occurrence,  lie  let  out  the  blessed  se- 
cret. Let  me  read  his  words,  "  1  knew  a  man  in  Christ 
above  fourteen  years  ago,  (whether  in  the  body,  I  cannot 
tell;  or  whether  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell :  God  know- 
eth;)  such  an  one  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven.  And 
I  knew  such  a  man,  (whether  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the 
body,  I  cannot  tell:  God  knoweth;)  how  that  he  was 
caught  up  into  paradise,  and  heard  unspeakable  words, 
which  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  utter."  He  says  he  was 
taken  up  to  the  third  heaven :  it  was,  therefore,  idle  to 
tell  Paul  that  there  was  no  home  for  him  hereafter,  for 
he  had  seen  the  place.  "Well,"  say  you,  "7  have  not 
seen  it."  No;  but  you  fully  believe  the  witness  of  Paul, 
do  you  not?  For  my  own  part  I  am  sure  that  Paul 
would  not  say  that  which  is  false,  and  inasmuch  as  he 
went  into  the  third  heaven  or  paradise,  and  saw  it,  I  be- 
lieve that  there  is  such  a  place.  Remember  that  this  is 
the  place  to  which  the  Lord  Jesus  admitted  the  dying 
thief,  "To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."  This 
is  the  place  where  Jesus  is,  and  where  we  shall  be  with 
him  for  ever,  when  the  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle 
shall  be  dissolved. 

Yet,  again,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  you  and  I  know 


154  THE    TENT   DISSOLVED    AND 

that  when  this  earthly  tabernacle  is  dissolved  there  will 
be  a  new  body  for  us,  because  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
risen  from  the  dead.  In  my  mind  the  ultimate  answer 
to  ray  deepest  unbelief  is  the  fact  of  the  rising  of  Jesus 
from  the  dead.  No  matter  of  history  is  anything  like  so 
well  attested  as  the  fact  that  our  Lord  was  crucified,  dead 
and  buried,  and  that  he  did  upon  the  third  day  rise  again 
from  the  dead.  This  I  unhesitatingly  accept  as  a  fact, 
and  this  becomes  my  anchorage.  Inasmuch  as  Jesus  is 
the  representative  of  all  who  are  in  him,  it  is  as  cer- 
tain that  the  believer  will  rise  as  that  Jesus  has  risen. 
The  apostle  says,  "  We  know,"  and  remembering  these 
grand  truths  I  am  sure  that  his  words  are  not  a  bit  too 
strong.  Nay,  if  I  knew  any  word  in  the  English  lan- 
guage which  would  express  more  assurance  than  the 
word  to  know,  I  would  use  it  this  morning  for  myself. 
Much  more,  then,  might  the  apostle  use  it  for  himself. 

This  we  are  also  sure  of,  namely,  that  if  our  Lord 
Jesus  be  alive  and  in  a  place  of  rest  he  will  never  leave 
his  chosen  and  redeemed  ones  without  house  or  home. 
Where  he  has  found  a  throne  his  people  shall  find  a 
dwelling.     Delightful  is  our  old-fashioned  ditty — 

"  And  when  I  shall  die,  Receive  me,  I'll  cry, 
For  Jesus  has  loved  me,  I  cannot  tell  why; 
But  this  I  do  find,  we  two  are  so  joined, 
He  won't  be  in  glory  and  leave  me  behind." 

There  is  such  an  attachment  between  CkrisJ.  and  the 
believer;  yea,  more,  such  a  vital,  essential,  indissoluble, 
tender  marriage  union  that  separation  is  impossible.  As 
no  man  among  us  would  ever  be  content  to  see  his  wife 
in  prison  if  he  could  set  her  free,  or  to  leave  her  outside 
in  the  cold  when  he  could  bring  her  to  his  fireside  in 
comfort,  so  Christ,  to  whom  our  soul  is  espoused  in  eternal 


THE    MANSION  ENTERED.  155 

wedlock,  will  never  rest  until  he  has  brought  every  one 
of  his  own  beloved  to  be  with  him  where  he  is,  that  they 
may  behold  his  glory,  the  glory  which  the  Father  hath 
given  him.  No  believer  in  Jesus  has  any  doubts  about 
that.  I  am  sure  you  can  all  say,  as  Paul  did,  "  We  know 
that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved, 
we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with 
hands." 

"Ah,"  says  one,  "but  how  is  a  man  to  know  that  lie 
has  an  interest  in  all  this  ?  Suppose  I  do  know  that  the 
children  of  God  are  thus  favored,  how  am  I  to  know 
that  I  am  one  of  them  ?  "  I  invite  you  to  self-examina- 
tion on  this  point.  Dost  thou  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  with  all  thine  heart  ?  Then  it  is  written,  "  He 
that  believeth  in  me  though  he  were  dead  yet  shall  he 
live.  He  that  liveth  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never 
die."  Having  believed  in  Christ,  the  Apostle  knew  that 
he  was  safe ;  for  the  promises  are  to  believers,  and  if  any 
man  be  a  believer  every  promise  of  the  covenant  belongs 
to  him.  We  obtain  further  assurance  of  this  by  our  pos- 
sessing the  new  life.  Dear  friend,  have  you  entered  into 
a  new  world  ?  Do  you  feel  within  you  a  new  heart  and 
a  right  spirit?  Have  old  things  passed  away,  and  have 
all  things  become  new  ?  Are  you  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus  ?  Then  it  is  all  right  with  you :  that  new  life  can- 
not die,  your  new-born  nature  must  inherit  everlasting 
bliss.  "Fear  not,  little  flock;  it  is  your  Father's  good 
pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom."  In  addition  to  this, 
do  you  commune  with  God?  do  you  speak  with  Christ? 
None  perish  who  commune  with  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
Jesus  cannot  say  at  the  last  "  I  never  knew  you;  depart 
from  me;"  for  he  does  know  you,  and  you  know  him. 
"  Oh,"  say  you,  "  he  knows  enough  of  me,  for  T  am  always 
begging."     Just  so,  go  on  with  that  trade;  be  always  a 


156  THE    TENT  DISSOLVED   AND 

spiritual  mendicant.  The  Lord  of  love  will  never  cast 
away  a  pleading  suppliant:  he  who  frequents  the  throne 
of  grace  shall  infallibly  reach  the  throne  of  glory.  Be- 
side, does  not  "the  Spirit  itself  also  bear  witness  with 
our  spirit  that  we  are  the  children  of  God?"  And  it' 
children  and  heirs,  are  we  afraid  of  being  left  naked  in 
the  world  to  come?  I  hope  that  many  of  us  have  now 
reached  the  full  assurance  of  faith,  so  that  we  believe  and 
are  sure.  Can  you  not  say  each  one  for  himself, — "  I 
know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am  persuaded  that 
he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  him 
until  that  day"  ?  These  are  the  ways  in  which  believers 
know  that  they  are  believers,  and  then  by  the  word  of 
God  they  know  that  all  things  are  theirs,  so  that  if  their 
earthly  house  should  fail  they  would  be  received  into 
everlasting  habitations. 

III.  Lastly,  as  to  the  value  of  this  knowledge-  to  us. 
To  be  sure  that  when  this  body  dies  all  is  well,  is  not 
that  worth  knowing  ?  Secularists  twit  us  with  taking 
men's  minds  away  from  the  practical  present  that  they 
may  dream  over  a  fancied  future.  We  answer  that  the 
best  help  to  live  for  the  present  is  to  live  in  prospect  of 
the  eternal  future.  Paul's  confident  belief  that  if  his 
body  should  be  dissolved  he  would  be  no  loser,  kept  him 
from  fainting.  He  knew  what  the  worst  would  be,  and 
he  was  prepared  for  it.  Great  storms  were  out,  but  the 
apostle  knew  the  limit  of  his  possible  loss,  and  so  was 
ready.  All  we  can  lose  is  the  frail  tent  of  this  poor  body. 
By  no  possibility  can  we  lose  more.  When  a  man  knows 
the  limit  of  his  risk  it  greatly  tends  to  calm  his  mind. 
The  undiscoverable  and  the  unmeasured  are  the  worst 
ingredients  of  dread  and  terror:  when  you  can  gauge 
your  fears,  you  have  removed  them.  Our  apostle  felt 
that  he  had  been  sent  into  the  world  with  the  great  design 


THE    MANSION  ENTERED.  157 

of  glorifying  God,  winning  souls,  and  building  up  saints, 
and  he  was  fully  resolved  to  keep  to  the  ministry  which 
he  had  received.  He  argues  with  himself  that  his  most 
dangerous  course  would  be  to  faint  in  his  life-service,  for 
perseverance  in  his  calling  could  bring  with  it  no  greater 
risk  than  death,  and  that  he  summed  up  as  losing  a  tent 
and  gaining  a  mansion.  The  Roman  emperor  might 
strike  off  his  head,  or  a  mob  might  stone  him  to  death, 
or  he  might  be  crucified  like  his  Master;  but  he  made 
light  of  such  a  fate  !  It  was  to  him  only  the  coming- 
down  of  the  old  tent;  it  did  not  affect  his  undying  spirit; 
he  smiled  and  sang,  "  For  our  light  affliction,  which  is 
but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding 
and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 

The  prospect  of  his  heavenly  house  made  his  present 
trials  seem  very  light;  for  he  felt  like  a  man  who  so- 
journs for  a  night  at  a  poor  inn,  but  puts  up  with  it 
gladly  because  he  hopes  to  be  home  on  the  morrow.  If 
we  were  trying  tent  life  for  a  season  we  should  probably 
cry  out,  "A  fearful  draught  comes  in  at  that  corner! 
How  damp  it  is  under  foot!  How  cramped  up  one 
feels ! "  Yet  we  should  smile  over  it  all,  and  say,  "  It 
will  not  be  for  long.  We  shall  soon  be  in  our  house  at 
home."  Ah,  brethren,  an  hour  with  our  God  will  make 
up  for  all  the  trials  of  the  way.  Wherefore,  be  of  good 
courage,  and  press  on. 

This  changed  for  Paul  the  very  idea  of  death ;  death 
was  transformed  from  a  demon  into  an  angel:  it  was  but 
the  removal  of  a  tottering  tent  that  he  might  enter  into 
a  permanent  palace.  Some  of  God's  own  children  are 
much  troubled  through  fear  of  death,  because  they  do 
not  know  what  it  is.  If  they  were  better  taught  they 
would  soon  discover  in  their  present  source  of  sorrow  a 
subject  for  song.     I  would  like  here  to  say  that  I  have 


158  THE    TENT   DISSOLVED    AND 

known  some  of  my  Master's  doubting  and  fearing  ser- 
vants die  splendidly.  Do  you  remember  how  Mr.  Feeble- 
mind,  when  he  crossed  the  river,  went  over  dry  shod. 
Poor  soul,  he  thought  he  should  surely  be  drowned,  and 
yet  he  scarcely  wet  the  soles  of  his  feet.  I  have  known 
men  of  God  go  like  Jacob  all  day  long  weary  and  faint, 
feeling  banished  from  their  father's  house;  and  yet  when 
they  have  laid  their  head  down  for  their  final  sleep  they 
have  had  visions  of  angels  and  of  God.  The  end  of  their 
journey  has  made  amends  for  the  rough  places  of  the 
way.  It  shall  be  so  with  you,  brother  believer.  There 
is  usually  a  dark  place  in  every  Christian's  experience :  I 
have  seen  some  travel  in  sunlight  almost  the  whole  of 
the  way,  and  then  depart  in  gloom,  and  I  have  thought 
none  the  worse  of  them  for  it;  and  I  have  seen  others 
struggle  forward  through  a  fog  for  the  first  part  of  their 
pilgrimage,  and  then  come  out  into  cloudless  day.  At 
one  period  or  another  beneath  these  lowering  skies  the 
shadow  falls  across  our  way,  but  surely  "  light  is  sown 
for  the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the  upright  in  heart." 
As  I  have  thought  of  some  of  my  dear  brothers  and 
sisters  that  I  have  seen  die  very  sweetly,  and  I  have 
remembered  that  they  were,  in  life,  lowly  and  self-dis- 
trustful, I  have  compared  them  to  persons  who,  when 
they  drink  their  tea,  forget  to  stir  the  sugar  at  the  bot- 
tom of  the  cup.  How  doubly  sweet  the  drink  becomes 
as  they  near  the  bottom  :  they  have  more  sweetness  than 
they  can  well  bear.  Would  it  not  be  wise  to  stir  the  tea 
at  once  and  enjoy  the  sweetness  from  the  brim  to  the 
bottom  ?  This  is  the  benefit  of  faith  as  to  the  future,  for 
it  flavors  the  present  with  delight.  But  what  if  saints 
should  miss  immediate  comfort  for  awhile,  how  richly 
will  they  be  compensated  !  What  will  it  be  to  open  your 
eyes  in  heaven !     What  a  joy  to  fall  asleep  on  the  bed 


THE    MANSION   ENTERED.  159 

of  languishing  and  to  wake  up  amid  the  celestial  Halle- 
lujahs !  "  What  am  I  ?  Where  am  I  ?  Ah,  my  God  ! 
my  Christ !  my  heaven  !  my  all !  I  am  at  home."  Sorrow 
and  sighing  shall  flee  away.  Does  not  this  view  of  things 
give  a  transfiguration  to  death  ?  0  you  poor  unbelievers, 
how  I  pity  you,  since  you  have  no  such  glorious  hopes. 
0  that  you  would  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  and  enter 
into  life  eternal. 

Faith  had  such  an  effect  upon  Paul  that  it  made  him 
always  calm,  and  brave.  Why  should  he  be  afraid  of  a 
man  that  could  not  do  him  harm  ?  Even  if  his  persecu- 
tor killed  him  he  would  do  him  a  service.  What  had 
he  to  fear?  This  made  Paul  wise  and  prudent.  He 
could  use  his  judgment,  for  he  was-  not  fluttered.  He 
was  not  like  some  of  you  that  are  only  a  little  ill,  and 
straightway  you  are  filled  with  fright,  and  so  you  make 
yourselves  worse  than  you  otherwise  would  be,  so  that 
the  doctor  has  to  contend  with  an  affrighted  mind  as 
well  as  a  diseased  body.  He  who  is  calm,  restful,  happy 
is  already  on  the  road  to  a  cure.  He  is  quiet  because 
he  is  in  his  Father's  hands,  and  whether  he  lives  or  dies 
all  is  well;  and  this  conviction  helps  the  physician  to 
remove  his  bodily  malady.  I  say  again,  there  is  no  way 
to  live  like  learning  to  die,  and  he  who  can  afford  to  be 
careless  whether  he  lives  or  dies  is  the  man  who  will  so 
live  as  to  die  triumphantly.  Oh,  that  all  of  you  felt  the 
quiet  which  comes  of  trusting  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  How 
sad  to  know  that  you  may  die  at  any  moment,  and  to 
be  unprepared  for  the  change  !  I  do  not  wonder  that 
you  are  unhappy:  you  have  good  reason  for  being  so. 
Oh  that  you  were  wise,  and  would  make  the  future  sure 
by  faith  in  the  risen  Lord. 

In  Martin  Luther's  time,  and  before  his  era,  men  who 
had  lived  evil  lives  were  often  in  great  fear  when  they 


160  THE    TENT  DISSOLVED. 

came  to  die,  and  in  their  terror  they  would  send  to  a 
monastery  and  procure  a  monk's  dress  in  which  to  be 
buried.  What  a  foolish  fancy  !  Yet  so  it  was  that  they 
hoped  to  fare  better  in  the  day  of  judgment  for  being- 
wrapped  in  brown  serge,  and  covered  with  a  cowl!  Be 
ours  a  better  garment.  Here  is  a  wish  of  hoi}-  Ruther- 
ford— "  His  believed  love  shall  be  my  winding-sheet,  and 
all  my  grave-clothes;  I  shall  roll  up  my  soul,  and  sew  it 
up  in  the  web  of  his  sweet  and  free  love."  Is  not  that 
your  idea?  It  is  surely  mine!  If  we  are  laid  to  sleep 
in  such  a  cerecloth,  there  will  be  no  fear  of  our  waking. 
It  will  happen  to  us  as  to  the  man  who  was  laid  in 
Elisha's  grave,  and  at  once  arose  as  soon  as  he  touched 
the  prophet's  bones.  No  man  can  lie  dead  if  wrapped 
up  in  the  love  of  Christ,  for  his  love  is  life.  He  that  has 
touched  the  love  of  Christ  has  touched  the  heart  of  the 
life  of  God,  and  he  must  live.  So  let  us  give  ourselves 
up  to  that  divine  love,  and  trusting  in  our  Lord,  let  us 
go  onward  to  eternal  bliss  till  the  day  break  and  the 
shadows  flee  away:  let  us  triumph  and  rejoice  that  there 
is  prepared  for  us  a  "  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made 
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." 


IX. 

GLOKY ! 

May  20,  1883. 

"  Who  butli  called  us  unto  his  eternal  glory."— 1  Peter  v.  10. 

A  fortnight  ago,  when  I  was  only  able  to  creep  to  the 
front  of  this  platform,  I  spoke  to  yon  concerning  the 
future  of  our  mortal  bodies:*  "We  know  that  if  our 
earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have 
a  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal 
in  the  heavens."  On  the  next  Sabbath  day  we  went  a 
step  further,  and  we  did  not  preach  so  much  about  the 
resurrection  of  the  body  as  upon  the  hope  of  glory  for 
our  entire  nature,  f  our  text  being,  "Christ  in  you,  the 
hope  of  glory."  Thus  we  have  passed  through  the  outer 
court,  and  have  trodden  the  hallowed  floor  of  the  Holy 
Place,  and  now  we  are  the  more  prepared  to  enter  within 
the  veil,  and  to  gaze  awhile  npon  the  glory  which  awaits 
us.  We  shall  say  a  little — and  oh,  how  little  it  will  be 
— upon  that  glory  of  which  we  have  so  sure  a  prospect, 
that  glory  which  is  prepared  for  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 
of  which  he  is  the  hope  !  I  pray  that  our  eyes  may  be 
strengthened  that  we  may  see  the  heavenly  light,  and 
that  our  ears  may  be  opened  to  hear  sweet  voices  from 
the  better  land.  As  for  me,  I  cannot  say  that  I  will 
speak  of  the  glory,  but  I  will  try  to  stammer  about  it; 

*  "The  Tent  Dissolved  and  the  Mansion  Entered." 
f  "Christ  in  You." 


184  GLORY. 

for  the  best  language  to  which  a  man  Gan  reach  con- 
cerning glory  must  be  a  mere  stammering.  Paul  did 
but  see  a  little  of  it  for  a  short  time,  and  he  confessed 
that  he  heard  things  that  it  was  not  lawful  for  a  man 
to  utter;  and  I  doubt  not  that  he  felt  utterly  nonplussed 
as  to  describing  what  he  had  seen.  Though  a  great 
master  of  language,  yet  for  once  he  was  overpowered; 
the  grandeur  of  his  theme  made  him  silent.  As  for  us, 
what  can  we  do,  where  even  Paul  breaks  down  ?  Pray, 
dear  friends,  that  the  spirit  of  glory  may  rest  upon  you, 
that  he  may  open  your  eyes  to  see  as  much  as  can  at 
present  be  seen  of  the  heritage  of  the  saints.  We  are 
told  that  "eye  hath  not  seen,  neither  hath  ear  heard, 
neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things 
which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him."  Yet 
the  eye  has  seen  wonderful  things.  There  are  sunrises 
and  sunsets,  Alpine  glories  and  ocean  marvels  which, 
once  seen,  cling  to  our  memories  throughout  life;  yet 
even  when  nature  is  at  her  best  slie  cannot  give  us  an 
idea  of  the  supernatural  glory  which  God  has  prepared 
for  his  people.  The  ear  has  heard  sweet  harmonies. 
Have  we  not  enjoyed  music  which  has  thrilled  us?  Have 
we  not  listened  to  speech  which  has  seemed  to  make 
our  hearts  dance  within  us?  And  3-et  no  melody  of 
harp  nor  charm  of  oratory  can  ever  raise  us  to  a  con- 
ception of  the  glory  which  God  hath  laid  up  for  them 
that  love  him.  As  for  the  heart  of  man,  what  strange 
things  have  entered  it !  Men  have  exhibited  fair  fictions, 
woven  in  the  loom  of  fancy,  which  have  made  the  eyes 
to  sparkle  with  their  beauty  and  brightness;  imagination 
has  revelled  and  rioted  in  its  own  fantastic  creations, 
roaming  among  islands  of  silver  and  mountains  of  gold, 
or  swimming  in  seas  of  wine  and  rivers  of  milk;  but 
imagination  has  never  been  able  to  open  the  gate  of 


GLORY.  185 

pearl  which  shuts  in  the  city  of  our  God.  No,  it  hath 
not  yet  entered  the  heart  of  man.  Yet  the  text  goes  on 
to  say,  "  but  he  hath  revealed  it  unto  us  by  his  Spirit." 
So  that  heaven  is  not  an  utterly  unknown  region,  not 
altogether  an  inner  brightness  shut  in  with  walls  of 
impenetrable  darkness.  God  hath  revealed  joys  which 
he  has  prepared  for  his  beloved;  but  mark  you,  even 
though  they  be  revealed  of  the  Spirit,  yet  it  is  no  com- 
mon unveiling,  and  the  reason  that  it  is  made  known 
at  all  is  ascribed  to  the  fact  that  "the  Spirit  searcheth 
all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God."  So  we  see 
that  the  glory  which  awaits  the  saints  is  ranked  among 
the  deep  things  of  God,  and  he  that  would  speak  thereof 
after  the  manner  of  the  oracles  of  God  must  have  much 
heavenly  teaching.  It  is  easy  to  chatter  according  to 
human  fancy,  but  if  we  would  follow  the  sure  teaching 
of  the  word  of  God  we  shall  have  need  to  be  taught  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  without  whose  anointing  the  deep  things 
of  God  must  be  hidden  from  us.  Pray  that  we  may  be 
under  that  teaching  while  we  dwell  upon  this  theme. 

There  are  three  questions  which  we  will  answer 
this  morning.  The  first  is,  lohat  is  the  destiny  of  the 
saints?  —  "Eternal  glory,"  says  the  text.  Secondly, 
wherein  doth  this  glory  consist?  I  said  we  would  answer 
the  questions,  but  this  is  not  to  be  answered  this  side 
the  pearl-gate.  Thirdly,  what  should  he  the  influence  of 
this  prospect  upon  our  hearts?  What  manner  of  people 
ought  we  to  be  whose  destiny  is  eternal  glory  ?  How 
should  we  live  who  are  to  live  for  ever  in  the  glory  of 
the  Most  High? 

I.     First,  WHAT,  THEN,  IS  THE  DESTINY  OF  THE  SAINTS  ?       Our 

text  tells  us  that  God  has  "  called  us  unto  his  eternal 
glory"  "  Glory  !  "  does  not  the  very  word  astound  you? 
"  Glory !  "  surely  that  belongs  to  God  alone  !     Yet  the 


186  GLORY. 

Scripture  says  "  glory,"  and  glory  it  must  mean,  for  it 
never  exaggerates.  Think  of  glory  for  us  who  have 
deserved  eternal  shame  !  Glory  for  us  poor  creatures 
who  are  often  ashamed  of  ourselves!  Yes,  I  look  at  my 
book  again,  and  it  actually  says  "glory" — nothing  less 
than  glory.     Therefore  so  must  it  be. 

Now,  since  this  seems  so  amazing  and  astonishing 
a  thing,  I  would  so  speak  with  you  that  not  a  relic  of 
incredulity  may  remain  in  your  hearts  concerning  it.  I 
would  ask  you  to  follow  me  while  we  look  through  the 
Bible,  not  quoting  every  passage  which  speaks  of  glory, 
but  mentioning  a  few  of  the  leading  ones. 

This  glory  lias  been  promised.  What  said  David?  In 
the  seventy-third  Psalm  and  twenty-fourth  verse  we 
meet  with  these  remarkable  words:  "Thou  shalt  guide 
me  with  thy  counsel,  and  afterward  receive  me  to  glory." 
In  the  original  Hebrew  there  is  a  trace  of  David's  recol- 
lection of  Enoch's  being  translated ;  and,  though  the  royal 
Psalmist  did  not  expect  to  be  caught  away  without  dy- 
ing, yet  he  did  expect  that  after  he  had  followed  the  guid- 
ance of  the  Lord  here  below  the  great  Father  would  stoop 
and  raise  up  his  child  to  be  with  himself  for  ever.  He  ex- 
pected to  be  received  into  glory.  Even  in  those  dim  days, 
when  as  yet  the  light  of  the  gospel  was  but  in  its  dawn, 
this  prophet  and  king  was  able  to  say,  "Thou  shalt  after- 
ward receive  me  to  glory."  Did  he  not  mean  the  same 
thing  when  in  the  eighty-fourth  Psalm,  verse  eleven,  he 
said,  "The  Lord  will  give  grace  and  glory:  no  good 
thing  will  he  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly  "  ? 
Not  only  no  good  thing  under  the  name  of  grace  will 
God  withhold  from  the  upright,  but  no  good  thing  under 
the  head  of  glory.  No  good  of  heaven  shall  be  kept  from 
the  saints ;  no  reserve  is  even  set  upon  the  throne  of  the 
great  King,  for  our  Lord  Jesus  has  graciously  promised, 


GLORY.  187 

"  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  in 
my  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame,  and  am  set  down 
with  my  Father  in  his  throne."  "No  good  thing,"  not 
even  amongst  the  infinitely  good  things  of  heaven,  will 
God  "withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  If 
David  had  this  persuasion,  much  more  may  we  who  walk 
in  the  light  of  the  gospel.  Since  our  Lord  Jesus  hath 
suffered  and  entered  into  his  glory,  and  we  know  that 
we  shall  be  with  him  where  he  is,  we  are  confident  that 
our  rest  shall  be  glorious. 

Brethren,  it  is  to  this  glory  that  ice  have  been  called. 
The  people  of  God  having  been  predestinated,  have  been 
called  with  an  effectual  calling — called  so  that  they 
have  obeyed  the  call,  and  have  run  after  him  who  has 
drawn  them.  Now,  our  text  says  that  he  has  "called 
"is  unto  his  eternal  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  We  are 
called  to  repentance,  we  are  called  to  faith,  we  are  called 
to  holiness,  we  are  called  to  perseverance,  and  all  this 
that  we  may  afterwards  attain  unto  glory.  We  have 
another  Scripture  of  like  import  in  1  Thessalonians  ii.  12: 
— "  Who  hath  called  you  unto  his  kingdom  and  glory." 
We  are  called  unto  his  kingdom  according  to  our  Lord's 
vord,  "Fear  not,  little  flock;  for  it  is  your  Father's  good 
pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom."  We  are  called  to  be 
kings,  called  to  wear  a  crown  of  life  that  fadeth  not 
away,  called  to  reign  with  Christ  in  his  glory.  If  the 
Lord  had  not  meant  us  to  have  the  glory  he  would  nc" 
have  called  us  unto  it,  for  his  calling  is  no  mockery.  He 
would  not  by  his  Spirit  have  fetched  us  out  from  the 
world  and  separated  us  unto  himself  if  he  had  not  intended 
to  keep  us  from  falling  and  preserve  us  eternally.  Be- 
liever, you  are  called  to  glory;  do  not  question  the  cer- 
tainty of  that  to  which  God  has  called  you. 

And  we  are  not  only  called  to  it,  brethren,  but  glory 


188  GLORY. 

is  especially  joined  with  justification.  Let  me  quote  Ro- 
mans viii.  30: — "Moreover  whom  lie  did  predestinate, 
them  he  also  called:  and  whom  he  called,  them  he  also 
justified:  and  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified." 
These  various  mercies  are  threaded  together  like  pearls 
upon  a  string:  there  is  no  breaking  the  thread,  no  sep- 
arating the  precious  things.  They  are  put  in  their  order 
by  God  himself,  and  they  are  kept  there  by  his  eternal  and 
irreversible  decree.  If  you  are  justified  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  you  shall  be  glorified  through  Christ 
Jesus,  for  thus  hath  God  purposed,  and  so  must  it  be. 
Do  you  not  remember  how  salvation  itself  is  linked  with 
glory?  Paul,  in  "2  Timothy  ii.  10,  speaks  of  "  the  salva- 
tion which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory."  The 
two  things  are  riveted  together,  and  cannot  be  separated. 
The  saved  ones  must  partake  of  the  glory  of  God,  for 
for  this  are  they  being  prepared  every  day.  Paul,  in  the 
ninth  of  Romans,  where  lie  speaks  about  the  predestinating 
will  of  God,  says  in  the  twenty-third  verse:  "The  vessels 
of  mercy,  which  he  had  afore  prepared  unto  glory." 
This  is  the  process  which  commenced  in  regeneration, 
and  is  going  on  in  us  every  day  in  the  work  of  sanctifi- 
cation.  We  cannot  be  glorified  so  long  as  sin  remains 
in  us  ;  we  must  first  be  pardoned,  renewed,  and  sanctified, 
and  then  we  are  fitted  to  be  glorified.  By  communion 
with  our  Lord  Jesus  we  are  made  like  to  him,  as  saith 
the  apostle  in  2  Corinthians  iii.  18: — "But  we  all,  with 
open  face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord, 
are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory, 
even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  It  is  very  wonderful 
how  by  the  wisdom  of  God  everything  is  made  to  work 
this  way.  Look  at  the  blessed  text  in  2  Corinthians 
iv.  17,  where  Paul  says,  "  For  our  light  affliction,  which 
is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding 


GLORY.  189 

and  eternal  weight  of  glory;"  where  he  represents  that 
all  that  we  can  suffer,  whether  of  body  or  of  mind,  is  pro- 
ducing for  us  such  a  mass  of  glory  that  he  is  quite  un- 
able to  describe  it,  and  he  uses  hyperbolical  language  in 
saying,  "a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory."  Oh,  blessed  men,  whose  very  losses  are  their 
gains,  whose  sorrows  produce  their  joys,  whose  griefs 
are  big  with  heaven  !  Well  may  we  be  content  to  suffer 
if  so  it  be  that  all  things  are  working  together  for  our 
good,  and  are  helping  to  pile  up  the  excess  of  our  future 
glory. 

Thus,  then,  it  seems  we  are  called  to  glory,  and  we 
are  being  prepared  for  it;  is  it  not  also  a  sweet  thought 
that  our  present  fellowship  with  Christ  is  the  guarantee  of 
it  ?  In  Romans  viii.  17  it  is  said,  "  If  so  be  that  we  suffer 
with  him,  that  Ave  may  be  also  glorified  together."  Go- 
ing to  prison  with  Christ  will  bring  us  into  the  palace 
with  Christ;  smarting  with  Christ  will  bring  us  into 
reigning  with  Christ;  being  ridiculed,  and  slandered,  and 
despised  for  Christ's  sake  will  bring  us  to  be  sharers 
of  his  honor,  and  glory,  and  immortality.  Who  would 
not  be  with  Christ  in  his  humiliation  if  this  be  the  guar- 
antee that  we  shall  be  with  him  in  his  glory?  Remem- 
ber those  dear  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  Ye  are  they 
which  have  continued  with  me  in  my  temptations.  And 
I  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath  ap- 
pointed unto  me."  Let  us  shoulder  the  cross,  for  it  leads 
to  the  crown.  "  No  cross,  no  crown:"  but  he  that  has 
shared  the  battle  shall  partake  in  the  victory. 

I  have  not  yet  done,  for  there  is  a  text,  in  Hebrews 
ii.  10,  which  is  well  worthy  of  our  consideration,  tve  are 
to  be  brought  to  glory.  It  is  said  of  our  Lord  that  it  "  be- 
came him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing  many 
sons  unto  glory,  to  make  the  captain  of  their  salvation 


190  GLORY. 

perfect  through  sufferings."  See,  beloved,  we  are  called 
to  glory,  we  are  being  prepared  for  it,  and  we  shall  be 
brought  to  it.  We  might  despair  of  ever  getting  into 
the  glory  land  if  we  had  not  One  to  bring  us  there,  for 
t lie  pilgrim's  road  is  rough  and  beset  with  many  foes; 
but  there  is  a  "Captain  of  our  salvation,"  a  greater  than 
Bunyan's  Greatheart,  who  is  conducting  the  pilgrim 
band  through  all  the  treacherous  way,  and  he  will  bring 
the  "many  sons" — where? — "  unto  glory"  nowhere  short 
of  that  shall  be  their  ultimatum.  Glory,  glory  shall  surely 
follow  upon  grace;  for  Christ  the  Lord,  who  has  come 
into  his  glory,  has  entered  into  covenant  engagements 
that  he  will  bring  all  the  "  many  sons"  to  be  with  him. 

Mark  this,  and  then  I  will  quote  no  more  Scriptures: 
this  glory  ivill  be  for  our  entire  manhood,  for  our  body  as 
well  as  for  our  soul.  You  know  that  text  in  the  famous 
resurrection  chapter;  in  1  Cor.  xv.  43  Paul  speaks  of  the 
body  as  being  "sown  in  dishonor,"  but  he  adds,  "it  is 
raised  in  glory;"  and  then,  in  Philippians  iii.  21,  he  says 
of  our  divine  Lord  at  his  coming,  "Who  shall  change 
our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his 
glorious  body,  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is 
able  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself."  What  a 
wonderful  change  that  will  be  for  this  frail,  feeble,  suf- 
fering body !  In  some  respects  it  is  not  vile,  for  it  is 
a  wonderful  product  of  divine  skill,  and  power,  and 
goodness;  but  inasmuch  as  it  hampers  our  spiritual  nat- 
ure by  its  appetites  and  infirmities,  it  may  be  called  a 
"vile  body."  It  is  an  unhandy  body  for  a  spirit:  it  fits 
a  soul  well  enough,  but  a  spirit  wants  something  more 
ethereal,  less  earth-bound,  more  full  of  life  than  this  poor 
flesh  and  blood  and  bone  can  ever  be.  Well,  the  body 
is  to  be  changed.  What  alteration  will  it  undergo  ?  It 
will  be  rendered  perfect.     The  body  of  a  child  will  be 


GLORY.  191 

fully  developed,  and  the  dwarf  will  attain  to  full  stature. 
The  blind  shall  not  be  sightless  in  heaven,  neither  shall 
the  lame  be  halt,  nor  shall  the  palsied  tremble.  The 
deaf  shall  hear,  and  the  dumb  shall  sing  God's  praises. 
We  shall  cany  none  of  our  deficiencies  or  infirmities  to 
heaven.  As  good  Mr.  Keady-to-Halt  did  not  carry  his 
crutches  there,  neither  shall  any  of  us  need  a  staff'  to 
lean  upon.  There  we  shall  not  know  an  aching  brow, 
or  a  weak  knee,  or  a  failing  eye.  "The  inhabitant  shall 
no  more  say,  1  am  sick." 

And  it  shall  be  an  impassive  body,  a  body  that  will 
be  incapable  of  any  kind  of  suffering:  no  palpitating 
heart,  no  sinking  spirit,  no  aching  limbs,  no  lethargic 
soul  shall  worry  us  there.  No,  we  shall  be  perfectly  de- 
livered from  every  evil  of  that  kind.  Moreover,  it  shall 
be  an  immortal  body.  Our  risen  bodies  shall  not  be  ca- 
pable of  decay,  much  less  of  death.  There  are  no  graves 
in  glory.  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord,  for 
their  bodies  shall  rise  never  to  know  death  and  corrup- 
tion a  second  time.  No  smell  or  taint  of  corruption 
shall  remain  upon  those  whom  Jesus  shall  call  from  the 
tomb.  The  risen  body  shall  be  greatly  increased  in 
power:  it  is  "sown  in  weakness,"  says  the  Scripture,  but 
it  is  "raised  in  power."  I  suppose  there  will  be  a  won- 
derful agility  about  our  renovated  frame:  probably  it 
will  be  able  to  move  as  swiftly  as  the  lightning  flash, 
for  so  do  angels  pass  from  place  to  place,  and  we  shall 
in  this,  as  in  many  things  else,  be  as  the  angels  of  God. 
Anyhow,  it  will  be  a  "glorious  body,"  and  it  will  be 
"raised  in  glory,"  so  that  the  whole  of  our  manhood 
shall  participate  of  that  Avonderful  depth  of  bliss  which 
is  summed  up  in  the  word — "glory."  Thus  I  think  I 
have  set  before  you  much  of  what  the  word  of  God  saith 
upon  this  matter. 


192  GLORY. 

II.  Secondly,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  help  me  while  I 
try  very  hesitatingly  and  stammeringly  to  answer  the 
enquiry,  Wherein  doth  this  destiny  consist? 

Do  yon  know  how  much  I  expect  to  do?  It  will  be 
but  little.  You  remember  what  the  Lord  did  for  Moses 
when  the  man  of  God  prayed — "I  beseech  thee  show 
me  thy  glory  !  "  All  that  the  Lord  himself  did  for  Moses 
was  to  say,  "Thou  shalt  see  my  back  parts;  but  my  face 
shall  not  be  seen."  How  little,  then,  can  wre  hope  to 
speak  of  this  glory!  Its  back  parts  are  too  bright  for 
us:  as  for  the  face  of  that  glory,  it  shall  not  be  seen  by 
any  of  us  here  below,  though  by-and-by  we  shall  behold 
it.  I  suppose  if  one  who  had  been  in  glory  could  come 
straight  down  from  heaven,  and  occupy  this  platform, 
he  would  find  that  his  discoveries  could  not  be  communi- 
cated because  of  the  insufficiency  of  language  to  express 
such  a  weight  of  meaning. 

The  saints'  destiny  is  glory.  What  is  glory,  brethren  ? 
What  is  it,  I  mean,  among  the  sons  of  men?  It  is  gen- 
erally understood  to  be  fame,  a  great  repute,  the  sound 
of  trumpets,  the  noise  of  applause,  the  sweets  of  approba- 
tion among  the  crowd  and  in  high  places.  The  Queen  of 
Sheba  came  from  afar  to  see  the  glory  of  Solomon.  What 
was  that  glory,  brethren  ?  It  was  the  glory  of  a  rare 
wisdom  excelling  all  others:  it  was  the  glory  of  immense 
riches  expended  upon  all  manner  of  magnificence  and 
splendor.  As  for  this  last  glory  the  Lord  says  of  it  that 
a  lily  of  the  field  had  more  of  it  than  Solomon;  at  least, 
"Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of 
these."  Yet  that  is  what  men  mean  by  glory — rank,  po- 
sition, power,  conquest — things  that  make  the  ears  of 
men  to  tingle  when  they  hear  of  them — things  extraor- 
dinary and  rare.  All  this  is  but  a  dim  shadow  of  what 
God  means  by  glory;  yet  out  of  the  shadow  we  may  ob- 


GLORY.  193 

tain  a  little  inkling  of  what  the  substance  must  be. 
God's"  people  shall  be  wise,  and  even  famous,  for  they 
shall  "shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever."  God's  peo- 
ple shall  be  rich ;  the  very  streets  of  their  abode  are  paved 
with  gold  exceeding  rich  and  rare.  God's  people  shall  be 
singularly  honored  ;  there  shall  be  a  glory  about  them  un- 
rivalled, for  they  shall  be  known  as  a  peculiar  people, 
a  royal  priesthood,  a  race  of  beings  lifted  up  to  reveal 
their  Maker's  character  beyond  all  the  rest  of  his  works. 

I  reckon  that  glory  to  a  saint  means,  first  of  all, 
purified  character.  The  brightest  glory  that  really  can 
come  to  any  one  is  the  glory  of  character.  Thus  God's 
glory  among  men  is  his  goodness,  his  mercy,  his  justice, 
his  truth.  But  shall  such  poor  creatures  as  we  are  ever 
have  perfect  characters?  Yes,  we  shall  one  day  be 
perfectly  holy.  God's  Holy  Spirit,  when  he  has  finished 
his  work,  will  leave  in  us  no  trace  of  sin :  no  temptation 
shall  be  able  to  touch  us,  there  will  be  in  us  no  relics  of 
our  past  and  fallen  state.  Oh,  will  not  that  be  blessed? 
I  was  going  to  say  it  is  all  the  glory  I  want — the  glory 
of  being  perfect  in  character,  never  sinning,  never  judg- 
ing unjustly,  never  thinking  a  vain  thought,  never 
wandering  away  from  the  perfect  law  of  God,  never 
vexed  again  with  sin  which  has  so  long  been  my  worst 
enemy.  One  day  we  shall  be  glorious  because  the  devil 
himself  will  not  be  able  to  detect  a  fault  in  us,  and  those 
eyes  of  God,  which  burn  like  fire  and  read  the  inmost 
secrets  of  the  soul,  will  not  be  able  to  detect  anything 
blame-worthy  in  us.  Such  shall  be  the  character  of  the 
saints  that  they  shall  be  meet  to  consort  with  Christ 
himself,  fit  company  for  that  thrice  Holy  Being  before 
whom  angels  veil  their  faces.     This  is  glory  ! 

Next,  I  understand  by  "  glory  "  our  perfected  manhood. 
When  God  made  Adam  he  was  a  far  superior  being  to 


194  GLORY. 

any  of  us.  Man's  place  in  creation  was  very  remark- 
able. The  Psalmist  says,  "For  thou  has  made  him  a 
little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  hast  crowned  him  with 
glory  and  honor.  Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion 
over  the  works  of  thy  hands;  thou  has  put  all  things 
under  his  feet:  all  sheep  and  oxen,  yea,  and  the  beasts 
of  the  field ;  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea, 
and  whatsoever  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  seas." 
No  king  among  men  in  these  days  could  rival  Adam  in 
the  garden  of  Eden :  he  was  indeed  monarch  of  all  that 
he  surveyed,  and  from  the  lordly  lion  down  to  the  tiniest 
insect  of  all,  living  creatures  paid  him  willing  homage. 
Can  we  ever  rise  to  this  last  honor  ?  Brethren,  listen, 
"  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,  but  we  know 
that  when  Christ  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  him,  for 
we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  Is  there  any  limit  to  the 
growth  of  the  mind  of  a  man  ?  Can  we  tell  what  he 
may  reach?  We  read  of  Solomon  that  God  gave  him 
largeness  of  heart  as  the  sand  of  the  sea:  God  will  give 
to  his  people  glory  that  will  include  in  it  more  largeness 
of  heart  than  Solomon  ever  knew.  Then  shall  we  know 
even  as  we  are  known  by  God.  Now  we  see,  but  it  is 
$"  through  a  glass  darkly,"  but  then  we  shall  see  "  face 
to  face."  You  have  met  with  men  of  great  intellect  and 
you  have  looked  up  to  them :  but  assuredly  the  smallest 
babe  in  Christ  when  he  shall  reach  heaven  shall  have  a 
greater  intellect  than  the  most  profound  philosopher  who 
has  ever  astounded  mankind  by  his  discoveries.  We 
shall  not  always  be  as  we  are  to-day,  contracted  and 
hampered  because  of  our  little  knowledge,  and  our 
slender  faculties,  and  our  dull  perceptions.  Our  igno- 
rance and  prejudice  shall  vanish.  What  a  man  will 
become  we  can  scarcely  tell  when  he  is  remade  in  the 
image  of  God,  and  made  like  unto  our  divine  Lord  who 


GLORY.  195 

is  "  the  firstborn  among  many  brethren."  Here  we  are 
but  in  embryo:  our  minds  are  but  the  seeds,  or  the  bulbs, 
out  of  which  shall  come  the  flower  and  glory  of  a  nobler 
manhood.  Your  body  is  to  be  developed  into  something 
infinitely  brighter  and  better  than  the  bodies  of  men 
here  below:  and  as  for  the  soul,  we  cannot  guess  to  what 
an  elevation  it  shall  be  raised  in  Christ  Jesus.  There  is 
room  for  the  largest  expectation  here,  as  we  conjecture 
what  will  be  the  full  accomplishment  of  the  vast  intent 
of  eternal  love,  an  intent  which  has  involved  the  sacrifice 
of  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God.  That  can  be  no  mean 
design  which  has  been  carried  on  at  the  expense  of  the 
best  that  heaven  itself  possessed. 

Further,  by  "glory"  and  coming  to  glory  I  think  we 
must  understand  complete  victory.  Dwelling  in  the  age 
of  tlie  Romans,  men  said  to  themselves,  as  they  read  the 
Scripture*,  "What  does  the  apostle  mean  by  'glory  '?" 
and  they  could  scarcely  help  connecting  it  with  conquest, 
and  the  return  of  the  warrior  in  triumph.  Men  called 
it  glory  in  those  days  when  valiant  warriors  returned 
from  fields  of  blood  with  captives  and  spoil.  Then  did 
the  heroes  ride  through  the  streets  of  Rome,  enjoying  a 
triumph  voted  them  by  the  senate.  Then  for  the  while 
the  men  of  war  were  covered  with  glory,  and  all  the 
city  was  glorious  because  of  them.  As  Christians,  we 
hate  the  word  u  glory  "  when  it  is  linked  with  wholesale 
murder,  and  girt  in  garments  rolled  in  blood;  but  3-et 
there  is  a  kind  of  fighting  to  which  you  and  I  are  called, 
for  we  are  soldiers  of  the  cross;  and  if  we  fight  valiantly 
under  our  great  Captain,  and  rout  every  sin,  and  are 
found  faithful  even  unto  death,  then  we  shall  enter  glory, 
and  receive  the  honor  which  belongs  to  men  who  have 
fought  a  good  fight,  and  have  kept  the  faith.  It  will  be 
no  small  glory  to  obtain  the  crown  of  life  which  fadeth 


19G  GLORY. 

not  away.  Is  not  this  a  full  glory  if  we  only  place  these 
three  things  together,  a  purified  character,  a  perfected 
nature,  and  a  complete  victory? 

An  invaluable  ingredient  in  true  glory  is  the  divine 
approval  "  Glory  "  among  men  means  approbation:  it 
is  a  man's  glory  when  he  is  honored  of  his  Queen,  and 
she  hangs  a  medal  on  his  breast,  or  when  his  name  is 
mentioned  in  the  high  court  of  Parliament,  and  he  is  en- 
nobled for  what  he  has  done.  If  men  speak  of  our  ac- 
tions with  approval,  it  is  called  fame  and  glory.  Oh, 
but  one  drop  of  the  approbation  of  God  has  more  glory 
in  it  than  a  sea  full  of  human  praise;  and  the  Lord  will 
reward  his  own  with  this  holy  favor.  He  will  say, 
"  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,"  and  Christ  be- 
fore the  universe  will  say,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father."  Oh,  what  glory  that  will  be  !  They  were 
despised  and  rejected  of  men,  they  "wandered  about  in 
sheepskins  and  goatskins ;  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented ; " 
but  now  God  approves  them,  and  they  take  seats  among 
the  peers  of  heaven,  made  noble  by  the  approbation  of 
the  Judge  of  all.  This  is  glory  with  an  emphasis,  sub- 
stantial glory.  One  approving  glance  from  the  eye  of 
Jesus,  one  accepting  word  from  the  mouth  of  the  Father, 
will  be  glory  enough  for  any  one  of  us,  and  this  we  shall 
have  if  we  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth. 

But  this  is  not  all:  children  of  God  will  have  the  ghry 
of  reflecting  the  ghry  of  God.  When  any  of  God's  unfallen 
creatures  shall  wish  to  see  the  greatness  of  God's  good- 
ness, and  mercy,  and  love,  they  that  dwell  in  heaven 
will  point  out  a  glorified  saint,  Whenever  any  spirit 
from  far-off  regions  desires  to  know  what  is  meant  by 
faithfulness  and  grace,  some  angel  will  reply,  "  Go  and 
talk  with  those  who  have  been  redeemed  from  among 
men."     I   believe   that   you   and  I  will  spend  much  of 


GLORY.  197 

eternity  in  making  known  to  principalities  and  powers 
the  unsearchable  riches  of  the  grace  of  God.  We  shall 
be  mirrors  reflecting  God;  and  in  ns  shall  his  glory  be 
revealed.  There  may  be  myriads  of  races  of  pure  and 
holy  beings  of  whom  we  have  never  heard  as  yet.  and 
these  may  come  to  the  New  Jerusalem  as  to  the  great 
metropolis  of  Jehovah's  universe,  and  when  they  come 
there  they  will  gaze  upon  the  saints  as  the  highest  in- 
stances of  divine  grace,  wisdom,  power,  and  love.  It 
will  be  their  highest  pleasure  to  hear  how  eternal  mercy 
dealt  with  us  unworthy  ones.  How  we  shall  delight  to 
rehearse  to  them  the  fact  of  the  Father's  eternal  purpose, 
the  story  of  the  incarnate  God — the  God  that  loved  and 
died,  and  the  love  of  the  blessed  Spirit  who  sought  us 
in  the  days  of  our  sin,  and  brought  us  to  the  cross  foot, 
renewing  us  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds,  and  making  us 
to  be  sons  of  God.  Oh,  brothers  and  sisters,  this  shall 
be  our  glory,  that  God  shall  shine  through  us  to  the  as- 
tonishment of  all. 

Yet  I  think  glory  includes  somewhat  more  than  this. 
In  certain  cases  a  man's  glory  lie*  in  Ids  relationships.  If 
any  of  the  royal  family  should  come  to  your  houses  you 
would  receive  them  with  respect;  yes,  and  even  as  they 
went  along  the  street  they  would  be  spied  out,  and 
passers-by  would  say,  "That  is  the  prince!"  and  they 
would  honor  the  son  of  our  good  Queen.  But  royal 
descent  is  a  poor  business  compared  with  being  allied 
to  the  King  of  kings.  Many  angels  are  exceeding  bright, 
but  they  are  only  servants  to  wait  upon  the  sons.  I 
believe  that  there  will  be  a  kind  of  awe  upon  the  angels 
at  the  sight  of  men ;  when  they  see  us  in  our  glory  they 
will  rejoice  to  know  our  near  relation  to  their  Lord,  and 
to  fulfil  their  own  destiny  as  ministering  spirits  appointed 
to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.     No  pride  will  be 


198  GLORY. 

possible  to  the  perfected,  but  we  shall  then  realize  the 
exalted  position  to  which  by  our  new  birth  and  the  di- 
vine adoption  we  have  been  raise  I.  "  Behold  what  man- 
ner of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us  that  we 
should  be  called  the  sons  of  God."  Sons  of  God !  Sons  of 
the  Lord  God  Almighty  !  Oh  what  glory  this  will  be  ! 
Then  there  will  be  connected  with  this  the  fact  that 
we  shall  be  connected  with  Jesus  in  everything.  For  do 
not  you  see,  brethren,  it  was  because  of  our  fall  that 
Christ  came  here  to  save  men;  when  he  wrought  out 
a  perfect  righteousness,  it  was  all  for  us;  when  he  died, 
it  was  all  for  us;  and  when  he  rose  again,  it  was  all  for 
us?  And  what  is  more,  we  lived  in  Christ,  we  died  in 
him,  we  were  buried  in  him  and  rose  in  him,  and  we 
shall  ascend  into  heaven  to  reign  with  him.  All  our 
glory  is  by  Christ  Jesus  and  in  all  the  glory  of  Christ 
Jesus  we  have  a  share.  We  are  members  of  his  body; 
we  are  one  with  him.  I  say,  the  creatures  that  God  has 
made,  when  they  shall  come  to  worship  in  the  Xew  Je- 
rusalem will  stand  and  gaze  at  glorified  men,  and  with 
bated  breath  will  say  one  to  another  "These  are  the 
beings  whose  nature  the  Son  of  God  assumed!  These 
are  the  chosen  creatures  whom  the  Prince  of  heaven 
bought  with  his  own  blood."  They  will  stand  aston- 
ished at  the  divine  glory  which  will  be  manifested  in 
beings  emancipated  from  sin  and  hell -and  made  heirs 
of  God,  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ.  Will  not  even 
angels  be  surprised  and  awed  as  they  look  on  the  church 
and  say  to  one  another,  "  This  is  the  bride,  the  Lamb's 
wife  !  "  They  will  marvel  how  the  Lord  of  glory  should 
come  to  this  poor  earth  to  seek  a  spouse  and  that  he 
should  enter  into  eternal  union  with  such  a  people. 
Glory,  glory  dwelleth  in  Immanuel's  land!  Now  we 
are  getting  near  to  the   centre   of  it.     I  feel  inclined, 


GLORY.  199 

like  Moses,  to  put  off  my  shoes  from  off  my  feet,  for  the 
place  whereon  we  stand  is  holy  ground,  now  that  we 
are  getting  to  see  poor  bushes  like  ourselves  aglow  with 
the  indwelling  God,  and  changed  from  glory  unto  glory. 
And  yet  this  is  not  all,  for  there  in  heaven  ice  shall 
dwdl  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God.  We  shall  dwell 
with  him  in  nearest  and  dearest  fellowship!  All  the 
felicity  of  the  Most  High  will  be  our  felicity.  The 
blessedness  of  the  triune  Jehovah  shall  be  our  blessed- 
ness for  ever  and  ever.  Did  you  notice  that  our  text 
says,  "He  hath  called  us  unto  his  glory"?  This  out- 
shines everything:  the  glory  which  the  saints  will  have 
is  the  same  glory  which  God  possesses,  and  such  as  he 
alone  can  bestow.  Listen  to  this  text: — '-Whom  he 
justified,  them  lie  also  glorified."  He  glorifies  them, 
then  !  I  know  what  it  is  to  glorify  God,  and  so  do 
you,  but  when  we  poor  creatures  glorify  God  it  is  in  a 
poor  way,  for  we  cannot  add  anything  to  him.  But 
what  must  it  be  for  God  himself  to  glorify  a  man  !  The 
glory  which  you  are  to  have  for  ever,  my  dear  believing 
brother,  is  a  glory  which  God  himself  will  put  upon  you. 
Peter,  as  a  Hebrew,  perhaps  uses  a  Hebraism  when  he 
says  uhis  glory:"  it  may  be  that  he  means  the  best  of 
glory  that  can  be,  even  as  the  Jews  were  wont  to  say — 
"The  trees  of  God,"  when  they  meant  the  greatest  trees, 
or  "the  mountains  of  God,"  when  they  intended  the  high- 
est mountains;  so  by  the  glory  of  God  Peter  may  mean 
the  richest,  fullest  glory  that  can  be.  In  the  original 
the  word  "  glory  "  has  about  it  the  idea  of  "  weight,"  at 
which  the  apostle  Paul  hints  when  he  speaks  of  a 
"weight  of  glory."  This  is  the  only  glory  that  has 
weight  in  it,  all  else  is  light  as  a  feather.  Take  all 
the  glories  of  this  world  and  they  are  outweighed  by 
the  small  dust  of  the  balance.     Place  them  here  in  the 


200  GLORY. 

hollow  of  ray  hand,  all  of  them:  a  child  may  blow  them 
away  as  thistledown.  God's  glory  has  weight ;  it  is  solid, 
true,  real,  and  he  that  gets  it  possesses  no  mere  name, 
or  dream,  or  tinsel,  but  he  has  that  which  will  abide  the 
rust  of  ages  and  the  fire  of  judgment, 

The  glory  of  God  !  How  shall  I  describe  it !  I  must 
set  before  you  a  strange  Scriptural  picture.  Mordecai 
must  be  made  glorious  for  his  fidelity  to  his  king,  and 
singular  is  the  honor  which  his  monarch  ordains  for 
him.  This  was  the  royal  order.  "  Let  the  royal  ap- 
parel be  brought  which  the  king  useth  to  wear,  and  the 
horse  that  the  kingrideth  upon,  and  the  crown  royal  which 
is  set  upon  his  head :  and  let  this  apparel  and  horse  be 
delivered  to  the  hand  of  one  of  the  king's  most  noble 
princes,  that  they  may  array  the  man  withal  whom  the 
king  delighteth  to  honor,  and  bring  him  on  horseback 
through  the  street  of  the  city,  and  proclaim  before  him, 
Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  whom  the  king  de- 
lighteth to  honor."  Can  you  not  imagine  the  surprise 
of  the  Jew  when  robe  and  ring  were  put  upon  him,  and 
when  he  found  himself  placed  upon  the  king's  horse. 
This  may  serve  as  a  figure  of  that  which  will  happen  to  us : 
we  shall  be  glorified  with  the  glory  of  God.  The  best 
robe,  the  best  of  heaven's  array,  shall  be  appointed  unto 
us,  and  we  shall  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever. 

Highest  of  all  our  glory  will  be  the  enjoyment  of  God 
himself.  He  will  be  our  exceeding  joy:  this  bliss  will 
swallow  up  every  other,  the  blessedness  of  God.  "The 
Lord  is  my  portion,"  saith  my  soul.  "  Whom  have  1  in 
heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I 
desire  beside  thee."     Our  God  shall  be  our  glory. 

Yet  bear  with  me,  I  have  left  out  a  word  again:  the 
text  has  it,  "  Unto  his  eterned  glory."  Ay,  but  that  is 
the  gem  of  the  ring.     The  glory  which  God  has  in  re- 


GLORY.  201 

serve  for  his  chosen  will  never  come  to  an  end :  it  will 
stay  with  ns,  and  we  shall  stay  with  it,  for  ever.  It 
will  always  be  glory,  too;  its  brightness  will  never  be- 
come dim;  we  shall  never  be  tired  of  it,  or  sated  with  it. 
After  ten  thdusand  thousand  millions  of  years  in  heaven 
our  happiness  shall  be  as  fresh  as  when  it  first  began. 
Those  are  no  fading  laurels  which  surround  immortal 
brows.  Eternal  glory  knows  no  diminution.  Can  you 
imagine  a  man  being  born  at  the  same  time  that  Adam 
was  created  and  living  all  these  thousands  of  years  as  a 
king  like  Solomon,  having  all  he  could  desire  ?  His 
would  seem  to  be  a  glorious  life.  But  if  at  the  end 
of  seven  thousand  years  that  man  must  needs  die, 
what  has  it  profited  him  V  His  glory  is  all  over  now, 
its  fires  have  died  out  in  ashes.  But  you  and  I, 
when  we  once  enter  glory,  shall  receive  what  we  can 
neither  lose  nor  leave.  Eternity!  Eternity!  This  is 
the  sweetness  of  all  our  future  bliss.  Rejoice,  ye 
saintly  ones!  Take  your  harps  down  from  the  willows, 
any  of  you  who  are  mourning,  and  if  you  never  sang 
before,  yet  sing  this  morning — "God  has  called  us  unto 
his  eternal  glory,"  and  this  is  to  be  our  portion  world 
without  end. 

III.  I  can  only  find  time  for  a  few  words  upon  the 
concluding  head,  which  is — what   influence  should  all 

THIS  HAVE  UPON  OUR  HEARTS? 

I  think,  first,  it  ought  to  excite  desire  in  many  here 
present  that  they  might  attain  unto  glory  by  Christ 
Jesus.  Satan,  when  he  took  our  blessed  Lord  to  the 
top  of  an  exceeding  high  mountain,  tempted  him  to 
worship  him  by  offering  him  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
and  all  the  glories  thereof.  Satan  is  very  clever,  and 
I  will  at  this  time  take  a  leaf  out  of  his  book.  Will  you 
not  fall   down  and  worship  the  Lord  Jesus  when  he  can 


202  GLORY. 

give  you  the  kingdom  of  God  and  all  the  glory  tnereof, 
and  all  this,  not  in  pretence,  but  in  reality?  If"  there 
was  any  force  in  the  temptation  to  worship  Satan  for 
the  sake  of  the  glory  of  this  world,  how  much  more  rea- 
son is  there  for  urging  you  to  worship  the*  Son  of  God 
that  you  may  obtain  his  salvation  with  eternal  glory ! 
I  pray  the  Holy  Ghost  to  drop  a  hot  desire  into  many 
a  poor  sinner's  breast  this  morning  that  he  may  cry,  "  If 
this  glory  is  to  be  had,  I  will  have  it,  and  I  will  have 
it  in  God's  way,  for  I  will  believe  in  Jesus,  I  will  repent, 
I  will  come  to  God,  and  so  obtain  his  promise." 

Secondly,  this  ought  to  move  us  to  the  feeling  of 
fear.  If  there  be  such  a  glory  as  this- let  us  tremble  lest 
by  any  means  we  should  come  short  of  it.  Oh,  my  dear 
hearers,  especially  you  that  are  my  fellow  members, 
brother  church  officers,  and  workers  associated  with  me, 
what  a  dreadful  thing  it  will  be  if  any  one  of  us  should 
come  short  of  this  glory !  Oh,  if  there  were  no  hell,  it 
would  be  hell  enough  to  miss  of  heaven  !  What  if  there 
were  no  pit  that  is  bottomless,  nor  worm  undying,  nor 
fire  unquenchable,  it  would  be  boundless  misery  to  have 
a  shadow  of  a  fear  of  not  reaching  to  God's  eternal  glory? 
Let  us  therefore  pass  the  time  of  our  sojourning  here 
in  fear,  and  let  us  watch  unto  prayer  and  strive  to  enter 
in  at  the  strait  gate.  God  grant  we  may  be  found  of 
him  at  last  to  praise  and  honor! 

If  we  are  right,  how  this  ought  to  move  us  to  grati- 
tude. Think  of  this,  we  are  to  enjoy  "his  eternal  glory"! 
What  a  contrast  to  our  deserts!  Shame  and  everlasting 
contempt  are  our  righteous  due  apart  from  Christ.  If 
we  were  to  receive  according  to  our  merits,  we  should 
be  driven  from  his  presence  and  from  the  glory  of  his 
power.  Verily,  he  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins, 
nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  iniquities;  for,  after 


GLORY.  203 

all  our  transgressions,  he  has  still  reserved  us  for  glory, 
and  reserved  glory  for  us.  What  love  and  zeal  should 
burn  in  our  bosoms  because  of  this ! 

Last  of  all,  it  should  move  us  to  a  dauntless  courage. 
If  this  glory  is  to  be  had,  do  we  not  feel  like  the  heroes 
in  Banyan's  picture?  Before  the  dreamer  there  stood 
a  fair  palace,  and  he  saw  persons  walking  upon  the  top 
of  it,  clad  in  light,  and  singing.  Around  the  door  stood 
armed  men  to  keep  back  those  who  would  enter.  Then 
a  brave  man  came  up  to  one  who  had  a  writer's  ink-horn 
by  his  side,  and  said,  %iSet  down  my  name:"  and  straight- 
way the  warrior  drew  his  sword,  and  fought  with  all 
his  might,  until  he  had  cut  his  way  to  the  door,  and 
then  he  entered,  and  they  within  were  heard  to  sing — 

"Come  in,  come  in, 
Eternal  glory  thou  shalt  win." 

Will  you  not  draw  your  swords  this  morning,  and  fight 
against  sin,  till  you  have  overcome  it  ?  Do  you  not  desire 
to  win  Christ,  and  to  be  found  in  him  ?  Oh,  let  us  now 
begin  to  feel  a  passion  for  eternal  glory,  and  then  in  the 
strength  of  the  Spirit,  and  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  let  us 
press  forward  till  we  reach  it.  Even  on  earth  we  may 
taste  enough  of  this  glory  to  fill  us  with  delight.  The 
glory  which  I  have  described  to  you  dawns  on  earth 
though  it  only  comes  to  its  noontide  in  heaven:  the  glory 
of  sanctified  character,  the  glory  of  victory  over  sin, 
the  glory  of  relationship  to  God,  the  glory  of  union  with 
Christ, — these  are  all  to  be  tasted  in  a  measure  here 
below.  These  glories  send  their  beams  down  even  to 
these  valleys  and  lowlands.  Oh,  to  enjoy  them  to-day  and 
thus  to  have  earnests  and  foretastes  of  glory.  If  we 
have  them  let  us  go  singing  on  until  we  reach  the  place 
where  God's  eternal  glory  shall  surround  us,     Amen. 


"KNOCK!" 

May  27,  1883. 
"Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."— Matthew  vii.  12. 

I  have  no  doubt  that,  taken  very  strictly,  the  three  ex- 
hortations of  this  verse — which,  indeed,  are  but  one — 
were  first  of  all  intended  for  God's  believing  people.  It 
was  to  his  disciples  that  the  Lord  said,  "Cast  not  your 
pearls  before  swine;"  and  perhaps  certain  of  them  who 
were  poor  in  spirit  might  turn  around  and  say,  "  Lord, 
we  have  few  pearls;  we  are  too  poor  to  have  the  treasures 
of  thy  grace  so  plentifully.  Thou  hast  bidden  us  not  to 
give  that  which  is  holy  unto  dogs;  but  holiness  is  rather 
a  thing  we  seek  after  than  possess.1'  "  Well,"  saith  the 
Lord,  "you  have  only  to  ask  and  have;  ye  have  not  be- 
cause ye  ask  not;  you  have  only  to  seek  and  you  will  be 
sure  to  find,  for  holy  things,  like  rare  pearls,  are  to  be 
discovered  if  you  look  for  them ;  you  have  only  to  knock 
and  spiritual  secrets  shall  open  to  yon,  even  the  inner- 
most truth  of  God."  In  each  exhortation  our  Lord  bids 
us  pray.  Beloved,  let  us  abound  in  supplication.  Depend 
upon  it  that  failure  in  prayer  will  undermine  the  foun- 
dation of  our  peace  and  sap  the  strength  of  our  confidence ; 
but. if  we  abound  in  pleading  with  God  we  shall  grow 
strong  in  the  Lord,  and  we  shall  be  happy  in  his  love, 
we  shall  become  a  blessing  to  those  around  us.  Need  I 
commend  the  mercy-seat  to  you  who  wait   before  it? 


"KNOCK!"  205 

Surely  prayer  must  have  become  such  a  joy  to  you,  such 
a  necessity  of  your  being,  such  an  element  of  your  life, 
that  I  hardly  need  press  it  upon  you  as  a  duty,  or  invite 
you  to  it  as  a  privilege.  Yet  still  I  do  so/because  the 
Master  does  it  by  a  triple  exhortation.  A  threefold  cord 
is  not  easily  broken — let  not  my  text  be  neglected  by 
you.  Let  me  urge  you  to  repeated,  varied,  ever  inten- 
sifying prayer :  ask  !  seek  !  knock  !  Cease  not  to  ask  till 
you  receive;  cease  not  to  seek  till  you  find;  cease  not  to 
knock  till  the  door  is  opened  unto  you. 

In  these  three  exhortations  there  would  appear  to  be 
a  gradation:  it  is  the  same  thought  put  into  another 
shape,  and  made  more  forcible.  Ask — that  is,  in  the 
quiet  of  your  spirit,  speak  with  God  concerning  your 
need,  and  humbly  beg  him  to  grant  your  desires:  this  is 
a  good  and  acceptable  form  of  prayer.  If,  however, 
asking  should  not  appear  to  succeed,  the  Lord  would 
arouse  you  to  a  more  concentrated  and  active  longing; 
therefore  let  your  desires  call  in  the  aid  of  knowledge, 
thought,  consideration,  meditation,  and  practical  action, 
and  learn  to  seek  for  the  blessings  you  desire  as  men 
seek  for  hid  treasures.  These  good  things  are  laid  up 
in  store,  and  they  are  accessible  to  fervent  minds.  See 
how  you  can  reach  them.  Add  to  asking  the  study  of 
the  promises  of  God,  a  diligent  hearing  of  his  word,  a 
devout  meditation  upon  the  way  of  salvation,  and  all 
such  means  of  grace  as  may  bring  you  the  blessing. 
Advance  from  asking  into  seeking.  And  if  after  all  it 
should  still  seem  that  you  have  not  obtained  your  desire, 
then  knock,  and  so  come  to  closer  and  more  agonizing 
work:  use  not  alone  the  voice,  but  the  whole  soul;  exer- 
cise yourself  unto  godliness  to  obtain  the  boon ;  use 
every  effort  to  win  that  which  you  seek  after;  for  re- 
member that  doing  is  praying;  living  to  God  is  a  high 


206  "KNOCK!" 

form  of  seeking,  and  the  bent  of  the  entire  mind  is 
knocking.  God  often  giveth  to  his  people  when  they 
keep  his  commandments  that  which,  he  denies  to  them 
if  they  walk  carelessly.  Remember  the  words  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  how  he  said,  "  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my 
words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you."  Holiness  is  essential  to  power 
in  prayer:  the  life  must  knock  while  the  lips  ask  and  the 
heart  seeks. 

I  will  change  my  line  of  exposition  and  say:  ask  as  a 
beggar  petitions  for  alms.  They  say  that  begging  is  a 
poor  trade,  but  when  you  ply  it  well  with  God  no  other 
trade  is  so  profitable.  Men  get  more  by  asking  than  by 
working  without  prayer.  Though  I  do  not  discommend 
working,  yet  I  most  highly  commend  praying.  Nothing 
under  heave]]  pays  like  prevailing  prayer.  He  that  has 
power  in  prayer  has  all  things  at  his  call.  Ask  as  a  poor 
mendicant  who  is  hungry  and  pleads  for  bread.  Then 
seek  as  a  merchant  who  hunts  for  goodly  pearls,  looking 
up  and  down,  anxious  to  give  all  that  he  has  that  he 
may  win  a  matchless  treasure.  Seek  as  a  servant  care- 
fully looking  after  his  masters  interests  and  laboring 
to  promote  them.  Seek  with  all  diligence,  adding  to 
the  earnestness  of  the  beggar  the  careful  watchfulness 
of  the  jeweller  who  is  seeking  for  a  gem.  Conclude  all 
by  knocking  at  mercy's  door  as  a  lost  traveller  caught  out 
on  a  cold  night  in  a  blinding  sleet  knocks  for  shelter 
that  he  may  not  perish  in  the  storm.  When  you  have 
reached  the  gate  of  salvation  ask  to  be  admitted  by  the 
great  love  of  God,  then  look  well  to  see  the  way  of  en- 
tering, seeking  to  enter  in ;  and  if  still  the  door  seem 
shut  against  you,  knock  right  heavily,  and  continue 
knocking  till  you  are  safely  lodged  within  the  home  of 
love. 


"KjSroCK!"  207 

Once  again,  ask  for  what  you  want,  seek  for  what 
you  have  lost,  knock  for  that  from  which  you  are  ex 
eluded.  Perhaps  this  last  arrangement  best  indicates 
the  shades  of  meaning,  and  brings  out  the  distinctions. 
Ask  for  everything  you  need,  whatever  it  may  be:  if  it 
be  a  right  and  good  thing,  it  is  promised  to  the  sincere 
asker.  Seek  for  what  you  have  lost:  for  what  Adam  lost 
you  by  the  Fall,  for  what  you  have  lost  yourself  !>y  your 
neglect,  by  your  backsliding,  by  your  want  of  prayer: 
seek  till  you  find  the  grace  you  need.  Then  knock.  If 
you  seem  shut  out  from  comfort,  from  knowledge,  from 
hope,  from  God,  from  heaven,  then  knock,  for  the  Lord 
will  open  unto  you.  Here  you  need  the  Lord's  own 
interference:  you  can  ask  and  receive,  you  can  seek  and 
find;  but  you  cannot  knock  and  open, — the  Lord  must 
himself  open  the  door,  or  you  are  shut  out  for  ever.  God 
is  ready  to  open  the  door.  Remember,  there  is  no  cherub 
with  fiery  sword  to  guard  this  gate,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
the  Lord  Jesus  himself  openeth,  and  no  man  slmtteth. 
But  now  I  must  drop  this  line  of  things,  for  my  desire  is 
to  use  the  text  in  reference  to  those  who  are  not  yet 
saved. 

Last  Lord's-day,  when  we  preached  upon  glory,  we 
had  before  us  the  end  of  the  pilgrim  way.  It  was  a 
very,  very  happy  time;  for  in  meditation  we  reached  the 
suburbs  of  the  Celestial  City,  and  we  tasted  of  eternal 
glory.  This  morning  I  thought  we  would  begin  at  the 
beginning,  and  enter  in  at  the  wicket  gate  which  stands 
at  the  head  of  the  way  to  heaven.  Mr.  Bunyan,  in  his 
"  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  says,  "  Xow  over  the  gate  there 
was  written,  'Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.'" 
His  ingenious  allegory  is  always  as  truthfully  instructive 
as  it  is  delightfully  attractive.  I  concluded  that  this 
should  be  my  text.    If  it  be  thought  worthy  to  be  written 


208  "KNOCK!" 

over  the  gate  at  the  entering  in  of  the  way  of  life  it 
must  have  a  great  claim  upon  the  attention  of  those 
who  have  not  yet  started  for  glory,  but  are  anxious  to 
do  so.  May  God  the  Holy  Ghost  instruct  and  quicken 
them  while  we  hear  the  Lord  from  within  his  palace 
say,  "Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  i 

I.  First,  then,  dear  friend,  whoever  you  are,  if  you 
are  desirous  of  entering  into  eternal  life,  I  would  ex- 
pound to  you  the  inscription  over  the  gate,  by  saying, 

first,    THE    DOOR    OF    MERCY    MAY    APPEAR    TO    YOU    TO    BE    CLOSED 

against  you.  That  is  implied  in  the  text:  "Knock,  and 
it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  If  to  your  consciousness 
the  door  stood  wide  open,  there  would  be  no  need  of 
knocking;  but  since  in  your  apprehension  it  is  closed 
against  you,  it  is  for  you  to  seek  admission  in  the  proper 
way  by  knocking. 

To  a  large  extent  this  apprehension  is  the  result  of  your 
men  fears.  You  think  the  gate  is  closed  because  you 
feel  it  ought  to  be  so;  you  feel  that  if  God  dealt  with 
you  as  you  would  deal  with  your  fellow-men,  he  would 
be  so  offended  with  you  as  to  shut  the  door  of  his  favor 
once  for  all.  You  remember  how  guilty  you  have  been, 
how  often  you  have  refused  the  divine  call,  and  how 
you  have  gone  on  from  evil  to  evil,  and  therefore  yon 
fear  that  the  Master  of  the  house  has  already  risen  up 
and  shut  to  the  door.  You  fear  lest  like  the  obstinate 
ones  in  Noah's  day  you  will  find  the  door  of  the  ark 
closed,  and  yourself  shut  out  to  perish  in  the  general 
destruction.  Sin  lieth  at  the  door,  and  blocks  it.  Your 
desponding  feelings  fasten  up  the  gate  of  grace  in  your 
judgment.  Yet,  it  is  not  so.  The  gate  is  not  barred 
and  bolted  as  you  think  it  to  be;  though  it  may  be 
spoken  of  as  closed  in  a  certain  sense,  yet  in  another 
sense  it  is  never  shut.     In  any  case  it  opens  very  freely; 


"KNOCK!"  209 

its  hinges  are  not  rusted,  no  bolts  secure  it.  The  Lord 
is  glad  to  open  the  gate  to  every  knocking  soul.  It  is 
closed  far  more  in  your  apprehension  than  as  a  matter 
of  fact;  for  the  sin  which  shuts  it  is  removed  so  far  as 
the  believing  sinner  is  concerned.  Had  you  but  faith 
enough,  you  would  enter  in  at  this  present  moment;  and 
if  you  did  once  enter  in,  you  would  never  be  put  out 
ae;ain,  for  it  is  written,  "Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will 
in  no  wise  cast  out,"  If  you  could  with  holy  courage 
take  leave  and  license  to  come  in,  you  would  never  be 
blamed  for  it.  Fear  and  shame  stand  in  the  sinner's 
road,  and  push  him  back;  and  blessed  is  he  whose  des- 
perate need  forces  him  to  be  bold. 

One  thing  we  should  remember  when  we  fear  that 
the  door  is  closed  against  us,  namely,  that  it  is  not  so  fast 
closed  as  the  door  of  our  hearts  has  been.  You  know  the 
famous  picture  of  "The  Light  of  the  World."  It  seems 
to  me  to  be  one  of  the  finest  sermons  the  eye. has  ever 
looked  upon.  There  stands  the  Ever-Blessed,  knocking 
at  the  door  of  the  soul,  but  the  hinges  are  rusted,  the 
door  itself  is  fast  bolted,  and  wild  briars  and  all  kinds 
of  creeping  plants  running  up  the  door  prove  that  it  is 
long  since  it  was  moved.  You  know  what  it  all  means; 
how  continuance  in  sin  makes  it  harder  to  yield  to  the 
knock  of  Christ,  and  how  evil  habits  creeping  up  one 
after  another  hold  the  soul  so  fast  that  it  cannot  open 
to  the  sacred  knocking.  Jesus  has  been  knocking  at 
some  of  your  hearts  ever  since  you  were  children;  and 
still  he  knocks.  I  hear  his  blessed  hand  upon  the  door 
at  this  moment:  do  you  not  hear  it?  Will  you  not  open? 
He  has  knocked  long,  and  yet  he  knocks  again.  I  am 
sure  that  you  have  not  knocked  at  mercy's  door  so  long 
as  incarnate  mercy  has  waited  at  your  door.  You  know 
you   have   not.     How,  therefore,    can   you  complain   if 


210  "KNOCK!" 

there  should  be  an  apparent  delay  in  answering  your 
prayers?  It  is  but  to  make  you  feel  af'holy  shame  for 
having  treated  your  Lord  so  ill.  Now  you  begin  to  know 
what  it  is  to  be  kept  waiting,  what  it  is  to  be  a  weary 
knocker,  what  it  is  to  cry  "my  head  is  wet  with  dew 
and  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night."  This  will 
excite  you  to  repentance  for  your  unkind  behavior,  and 
also  move  you  to  love  the  more  intensely  that  gentle 
Lover  of  your  soul  who  has  shown  such  patience  towards 
you.  It  will  be  no  loss  to  you  that  the  door  was  shut 
for  awhile,  if  you  do  but  gain  a  penitent  heart  and  a 
tender  spirit. 

Let  me,  however,  warn  you  that  the  door  can  be  closed 
and  hept  shut  by  unbelief.  He  that  believeth  entereth 
into  Christ  when  he  believeth:  he  that  cometh  in  by  the 
door  shall  be  saved,  and  shall  go  in  and  out  and  find 
pasture ;  so  our  Lord  says  in  the  tenth  of  John.  "  He 
that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life,"  there  is  no 
question  about  that;  but  we  read  on  the  other  hand, 
"So  then  they  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief." 
Forty  years  the  tribes  were  in  the  wilderness,  going 
towards  Canaan,  yet  they  never  reached  the  promised 
land  because  of  unbelief.  And  what  if  some  of  you 
should  be  forty  years  attending  this  means  of  grace  ? 
Coming  and  going,  coming  and  going,  hearing  sermons, 
witnessing  ordinances,  and  joining  with  God's  people  in 
worship:  what  if  after  all  the  forty  years  you  should 
never  enter  in  because  of  unbelief?  Souls,  I  tell  you 
if  you  lived  each  one  of  you  as  long  as  Methuselah,  you 
could  not  enter  in  unless  you  believed  in  Jesus  Christ, 
The  moment  you  have  trusted  him  with  your  whole 
heart  and  soul  you  are  within  the  blessed  portals  of  the 
Father's  house,  but  however  many  years  you  may  be 
asking,  seeking,  and  knocking,  you  will  never  enter  in 


-KNOCK!"  211 

till  faith  comes,  for  unbelief  keeps  up  the  chain  of  the 
door,  and  there  is  no  entering  in  while  it  rules  your 
spirit. 

Do  you,  however,  complain  that  you  should  have  to 
knock  ?  It  is  the  rule  of  the  Most  High  Am  I  address- 
ing any  who  have  been  earnestly  praying  for  several 
months?  I  can  sympathize  with  you,  for  that  was  my 
case,  not  only  for  months,  but  even  for  years:  through 
the  darkness  of  my  mind  and  my  cruel  misapprehensions 
of  the  Lord,  I  did  not  find  peace  when  first  I  began  to 
ask  for  it,  although  I  also  sought  with  much  earnest- 
ness, going  to  the  house  of  God  every  time  I  could,  and 
reading  the  Bible  daily  with  a  burning  desire  to  know 
the  right  way.  I  did  not  enter  into  peace  till  I  had 
knocked  long  and  heavily.  Hearken,  therefore,  to  one 
who  knows  your  trouble,  and  hear  from  me  the  voice 
of  reason.  Ought  we  to  expect  to  enter  into  the  glori- 
ous house  of  mercy  without  knocking  at  its  door?  Is 
it  so  with  our  own  houses?  Can  every  straggler  care- 
lessly saunter  in?  Is  it  not  God's  way  in  the  world  to 
give  great  blessings,  but  always  to  make  men  knock 
for  them?  We  want  bread  out  of  the  earth,  but  the 
farmer  must  knock  at  the  door  of  the  earth  with  his 
plough  and  with  all  his  instruments  of  agriculture  ere 
his  God  will  hand  him  out  a  harvest.  Is  anything 
gained  in  this  world  without  labor?  Is  it  not  an  old 
proverb,  "No  sweat,  no  sweet:  no  pains,  no  gains:  no 
mill,  no  meal"?  And  may  we  not  expect  in  heavenly 
things  that  at  least  these  great  mercies  should  be  prayed 
for  with  fervency  before  they  can  be  bestowed?  It  is 
the  usual  rule  with  God  to  make  us  pray  before  he  gives 
the  blessing.  And  how  could  it  be  otherwise?  How 
could  a  man  be  saved  without  prayer?  A  prayerless  soul 
must  be  a  Christless  soul.     The  feeling  of  prayer,  the 


212  "KNOCK!" 

habit  of  prayer,  the  spirit  of  prayer  are  parts  of  salva- 
tion. Unless  it  can  be  said  of  a  man,  "Behold,  he 
prayeth!"  how  can  there  be  any  sort  of  hope  that  he 
knows  his  God,  and  has  found  reconciliation?  The 
prodigal  did  not  come  home  dumb,  neither  did  he  enter 
his  father's  house  in  sullen  silence.  No,  but  as  soon 
as  he  saw  his  father,  he  cried,  "Father,  1  have  sinned 
against  heaven."  There  must  be  speech  with  God,  for 
God  gives  not  a  silent  salvation. 

Besides,  to  make  us  knock  at  mercy  s  gate  is  a  great  bless- 
ing to  ourselves  upon  the  spot.  It  is  a  going  to  school 
for  us  when  we  are  set  to  plead  with  God  for  awhile 
without  realized  success.  It  makes  a  man  grow  more 
earnest,  for  his  hunger  increases  while  he  tarries.  If  he 
obtained  the  blessing  when  first  he  asked  for  it,  it  might 
seem  dog  cheap ;  but  when  he  has  to  plead  long  he  arrives 
at  a  better  sense  of  the  value  of  the  mercy  sought.  He 
sees  also  more  of  his  own  un worthiness  as  he  stands  outside 
mercy's  gate,  ready  to  swoon  away  with  fear;  and  so  he 
grows  more  passionately  earnest  in  pleading;  and,  whereas 
he  did  but  ask  at  first,  he  now  begins  to  seek,  and  he  adds 
cries  and  tears  and  a  broken  heart  to  all  the  other  ways 
of  his  pleading.  Thus  the  man,  by  being  humbled  and 
aroused,  is  getting  good  by  means  of  his  sorrow  while 
he  is  kept  for  a  while  outside  the  gate.  Beside  that,  lie 
is  increasing  his  capacity  for  the  future.  I  believe  I 
never  could  have  been  able  to  comfort  seekers  in  their 
anguish  if  I  had  not  been  kept  waiting  in  the  cold  my- 
self. I  have  always  felt  grateful  for  my  early  distress 
because  of  its  after  results.  Many  men,  whose  experi- 
ences are  recorded  in  books  which  are  invaluable  in  the 
Christian  library,  never  could  have  written  those  books 
if  they  had  not  themselves  been  kept  waiting,  hungry 
and  thirsty,  and  full  of  soul-travail,  ere  the  Lord  appeared 


"KNOCK!"  213 

to  them.  That  blessed  man,  David,  who  always  seems 
to  be — 

"  Not  one,  but  all  mankind's  epitome  " 

— the  history  of  all  men  wrapped  up  in  one — how  he 
pictures  himself  as  sinking  in  the  miry  clay  !  Lower 
and  lower  did  he  go  till  he  cried  out  of  the  depths,  and 
then  at  last  he  was  taken  up  out  of  the  horrible  pit,  and 
his  feet  were  set  on  a  rock  that  he  might  tell  to  others 
what  the  Lord  had  done  for  him.  Your  heart  wants  en- 
larging, dear  sir.  The  Lord  means  to  prepare  you  to  be- 
come a  more  eminent.  Christian  by  expanding  your  mind. 
The  spade  of  agony  is  digging  trenches  to  hold  the  water 
of  life.  Depend  upon  it,  if  the  ships  of  prayer  do  not, 
come  home  speedily  it  is  because  they  are  more  heavily 
freighted  with  blessing.  When  prayer  is  long  in  the 
answering  it  will  be  all  the  sweeter  in  the  receiving, 
like  fruit  which  is  well  ripened  by  hanging  longer  on 
tree.  If  you  knock  with  a  heavy  heart  you  shall  yet 
sing  with  joy  of  spirit;  therefore,  be  not  discouraged  be- 
cause for  a  while  yon  stand  before  a  closed  door. 

II.  Secondly,  a  door  implies  ax  opening.  What  is  a 
door  meant  for  if  it  is  always  to  be  kept  shut?  The 
wall  might  as  well  have  remained  without  a  break.  1 
have  seen  certain  houses  and  public  buildings  with  the 
form  and  appearance  of  doors  where  there  were  noue; 
the  sham  doorway  being  made  for  architectural  purposes; 
but  nothing  is  a  sham  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  I  lis 
doors  are  meant  to  open:  they  were  made  on  purpose 
for  entrance;  and  so  the  blessed  gospel  of  God  is  made 
on  purpose  for  you  to  enter  into  life  and  peace.  It 
would  be  of  no  use  to  knock  at  a  wall,  but  you  may 
wisely  knock  at  a  door,  for  it  is  arranged  for  opening. 
You  will  enter  in  eventually  if  you  knock  on,  for  the  gos- 


214  "KNOCK!" 

pel  is  good  news  for  men,  and  how  could  it  be  good  news 
if  it  should  so  happen  that  they  might  sincerely  come 
to  Christ  and  ask  mercy,  and  be  denied  it?  I  fear  that 
the  gospel  preached  by  certain  divines  sounds  rather 
like  bad  news  than  good  news  to  awakened  souls,  for  it 
requires  so  much  feeling  and  preparation  on  the  sinner's 
part  that  they  are  not  cheered  nor  led  to  hope  thereby. 
But  be  you  sure  that  the  Lord  is  willing  to  save  all  those 
who  are  willing  to  be  saved  in  his  own  appointed  way. 
A  dear  brother  beautifully  said  in  prayer  on  Monday 
night — "  Thou,  0  Lord,  art  perfectly  satisfied  with  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  if  we  are  satisfied  with  him,  thou  art 
satisfied  with  us."  That  is  the  gospel  put  into  a  few 
words.  God  is  satisfied  with  Christ,  and  if  you  are  sat- 
isfied with  Christ,  God  is  satisfied  with  you.  This  is 
glad  tidings  to  every  soul  that  is  willing  to  accept  the 
atonement  made,  and  the  righteousness  prepared  by  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

Dear  friend,  this  gospel  must  be  meant  to  be  received  by 
sinners,  or  else  it  would  not  have  been  sent.  "But," 
saith  one,  "  1  am  such  a  sinner."  Just  so.  You  are  the 
sort  of  person  for  whom  the  news  of  mercy  is  intended. 
A  gospel  is  not  needed  by  perfect  men;  sinless  men  need 
no  pardon.  No  sacrifice  is  wanted  if  there  is  no  guilt: 
no  atonement  is  wanted  where  there  is  no  transgression. 
They  that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician,  but  they  that 
are  sick.  This  door  of  hope  which  God  has  prepared 
was  meant  to  be  an  entrance  into  life,  and  it  was  meant 
to  open  to  sinners,  for  if  it  does  not  open  to  sinners  it 
will  never  open  at  all;  for  we  have  all  sinned,  and  so  we 
must  all  be  shut  out  unless  it  be  of  free  grace  for  those 
who  are  guilty. 

I  am  sure  this  door  must  open  to  those  ivho  have  nothing 
to  bring  with  them.     If  you   have   no   good  works,   no 


"KNOCK!"  215 

merits,  no  good  feelings,  nothing  to  recommend  you,  be 
not  discouraged,  for  it  is  to  such  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
most  precious,  and  therefore  most  accessible,  for  he. 
loves  to  give  himself  to  those  who  will  prize  him  most. 
A  man  will  never  have  Christ  while  he  has  enough  of 
his  own;  but  he  that  is  consciously  naked,  and  poor,  and 
miserable  is  the  man  for  Christ's  money,  he  it  is  that  has 
been  redeemed  by  price.  You  may  know  the  redeemed 
man,  for  he  feels  his  bondage,  and  owns  that  he  must 
remain  therein  unless  the  redemption  of  Christ  be  applied 
for  his  deliverance. 

Dear  friends,  that  door  of  hope  will  be  opened  to  you 
though  you  may  be  ignorant,  and  weak,  and  quite  un- 
able to  fulfil  any  high  conditions.  When  the  text  says, 
"Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  yon,"  it  teaches  us 
that  the  icay  of  winning  admission  to  the  blessing  is  simple, 
afld  suitable  to  common  people.  If  I  have  to  enter  in 
by  a  door  which  is  well  secured,  I  shall  need  tools  and 
science.  I  confess  I  do  not  understand  the  art;  you 
must  send  for  a  gentleman  who  understands  picklocks, 
"jemmies,"  and  all  sorts  of  burglarious  instruments:  but 
if  I  am  only  told  to  knock,  fool  as  I  am  at  opening  doors, 
I  know  how  to  knock.  Any  uneducated  man  can  knock 
if  that  is  all  which  is  required  of  him.  Is  there  a  person 
here  who  cannot  put  words  together  in  prayer?  Xever 
mind,  friend;  knocking  can  be  clone  by  one  who  is  no 
orator.  Perhaps  another  cries,  "  I  am  no  scholar."  Xever 
mind,  a  man  can  knock  though  he  may  be  no  philosopher. 
A  dumb  man  can  knock.  A  blind  man  can  knock.  With 
a  palsied  hand  a  man  may  knock.  He  who  knows  noth- 
ing of  his  book  can  still  lift  a  hammer  and  let  it  fall.  The 
way  to  open  heaven's  gate  is  wonderfully  simplified  to 
those  who  are  lowly  enough  to  follow  the  Holy  Spirit's 
guidance,  and  ask,  seek,  and  knock  believingly.     God 


216  "KNOCK!" 

has  not  provided  a  salvation  which  can  only  be  under- 
stood by  learned  men;  he  has  not  prepared  a  gospel 
which  requires  half-a-dozen  folio  volumes  to  describe  it: 
it  is  intended  for  the  ignorant,  the  short-witted,  and  the 
dying,  as  well  as  for  others,  and  hence  it  must  be  as 
plain  as  knocking  at  a  door.  This  is  it, — Believe  and 
live.  Seek  unto  God  with  all  your  heart  and  soul,  and 
strength,  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  door  of  his  mer- 
cy will  certainly  open  to  you.  The  gate  of  grace  is 
meant  to  yield  admission  to  unscientific  people  since  it 
shall  be  opened  to  those  who  knock. 

I  am  sure  this  door  will  open  to  you,  because  it  has 
been  opened  to  so  many  before  you.  It  has  been  opened  to 
hundreds  of  us  now  present.  Could  not  you,  dear  broth- 
ers and  sisters,  stand  up  and  tell  how  the  Lord  opened 
the  gate  of  his  salvation  to  you  ?  That  door  has  opened 
to  many  in  this  house  during  the  last  few  weeks.  We 
have  seen  persons  coming  forward  to  tell  how  the  Lord 
has  been  pleased  to  give  them  an  entrance  into  his  mercy, 
though  at  one  time  they  were  afraid  that  the  door  was 
shut,  and  they  were  ready  to  despair.  Well,  if  the  door 
has  been  so  often  opened  for  others,  why  should  it  not 
turn  on  its  hinges  for  you?  Only  knock,  with  faith  in 
God's  mercy,  and  before  long  it  shall  yield  to  your  im- 
portunity. 

It  is  for  God's  glory  to  open  his  door  of  greice,  and  that 
is  one  reason  why  we  are  sure  he  will  do  so.  We  cannot 
expect  him  to  do  that  which  would  be  derogatory  to  his 
own  honor,  but  we  do  expect  him  to  do  that  which  will 
glorify  his  sacred  attributes.  It  will  greatly  honor  the 
mercy,  the  patience,  the  love,  the  grace,  the  goodness, 
the  favor  of  God  if  he  will  open  the  door  to  such  an 
undeserving  one  as  you  are;  wherefore  knock.  Knock 
since  God  delights  to  give;  knock  at  a  door  which  every 


"KNOCK!"  217 

time  it  turns  on  its  hinges  unveils  his  greatness;  knock 
with  holy  confidence  at  this  present  moment,  for  "  it 
shall  be  opened  unto  you."  It  is  a  door  which  seems 
closed,  but  because  it  is  a  door,  it  must  be  capable  of 
being  opened. 

III.  Thirdly,  knock,  for  a  knocker  is  provided.  When 
persons  can  be  admitted  by  knocking,  a  knocker  is  usu- 
ally placed  on  the  door;  and  if  not,  we  often  see  the 
words,  no  admittance.  Before  bells  became  so  common, 
the  habit  of  knocking  at  the  door  was  well-nigh  univer- 
sal, and  people  were  accustomed  to  make  the  door  re- 
sound with  their  blows.  There  was  a  nail-head  for  the 
knocker  to  drop  upon,  and  people  used  to  smite  it  so 
heavily  that  it  became  remarked  that  such  blows  on  the 
head  were  killing,  and  hence  arose  the  mirthful  proverb, 
"as  dead  as  a  door-nail."  It  betokens  a  hearty  kind  of 
knocking,  which  I  would  have  you  imitate  in  prayer. 
Knock  at  heaven's  gate  as  earnestly  as  people  knocked 
at  doors  in  the  olden  times.  Have  you  not  had  knocks 
at  your  own  doors  which  could  be  heard  all  through  the 
house?  Some  of  our  friends  are  vigorous,  and  knock  as 
if  they  meant  coming  in.  It  may  be  that  gentle  folks 
give  such  tender  taps  that  they  are  not  heard  by  the 
servants,  and  so  they  have  to  wait;  but  these  I  am  speak- 
ing of  never  fall  into  that  error,  for  they  so  startle  every- 
body that  people  are  glad  to  let  them  in,  for  fear  they 
should  thunder  a  second  time.  In  this  style  let  us  pray: 
let  us  plead  in  downright  fashion,  and  never  cease  till 
we  gain  admission. 

I  have  said  that  the  Lord  has  provided  a  knocker. 
What  is  this  knocker?  First  of  all,  it  may  be  found  in 
the  promises  of  God.  We  are  sure  to  speed  well  when  we 
can  plead  a  promise.  It  is  well  to  say  unto  the  Lord, 
"Do  as  thou  hast  said."    What  force  abides  in  an  appeal 


218  "KNOCK!" 

to  the  word,  the  oath,  and  the  covenant  of  God.  If  a 
man  presents  to  another  a  promissory  note  upon  the  day 
on  which  it  is  due  he  expects  to  receive  the  amount 
stated  therein.  God's  promises  are  bills  of  exchange, 
and  he  will  duly  honor  them.  He  was  never  known 
to  dishonor  a  bill  yet,  and  he  never  will  do  so.  If  you 
can  only  quote  a  promise  applicable  to  your  condition, 
and  spread  it  before  the  Lord  in  faith,  and  say,  "Remem- 
ber this  word  unto  thy  servant  upon  which  thou  hast 
caused  me  to  hope,"  you  must  obtain  the  blessing.  Plead- 
ing the  promise  gives  such  a  knock  at  the  gate  of  heaven 
that  it  must  be  opened. 

The  great  knocker,  however,  is  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  If  a  person  were  to  call  upon  you  in  the 
name  of  some  dearly-beloved  son  who  is  far  away,  if  he 
brought  you  due  credentials,  and  a  letter,  saying,  "  Father, 
treat  the  bearer  well  for  my  sake,"  you  would  be  sure  to 
show  him  kindness ;  and  if  the  aforesaid  person  Avas  au- 
thorized to  receive  a  promised  amount  in  the  name  of 
your  son,  would  you  not  hand  out  the  money  ?  Now, 
when  we  go  to  God  and  plead  the  name  of  Christ,  it 
means  that  we  plead  the  authority  of  Christ,  that  we  ask 
>'of  God  as  though  we  were  in  Christ's  stead,  and  expect 
him  to  give  it  to  us  as  if  he  were  giving  it  to  Jesus. 
That  is  something  more  than  pleading  for  Christ's  sake. 
I  suppose  the  apostles  at  first  did  plead  with  God  for 
Christ's  sake,  but  Jesus  says  to  them,  "  Hitherto  ye  have 
asked  nothing  in  my  name."  It  is  a  higher  grade  of 
prayer,  and  when  we  get  to  pleading  Christ's  name  with 
the  Father,  then  do  we  gloriously  prevail.  At  a  Primi- 
tive Methodist  meeting  a  person  was  trying  to  pray,  but 
did  not  get  on  at  it,  and  presently  a  voice  was  heard 
from  the  corner  of  the  room,  "  Plead  the  blood,  brother! 
plead  the  blood  !  "     I  am  not  very  fond  of  such  interrup- 


"KNOCK!"  219 

tions,  yet  this  was  to  be  commended,  for  it  gave  the  right 
note,  and  set  the  pleader  in  his  right  place.  Plead  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  have  knocked  so 
that  you  must  be  heard. 

"Alas!"  says  one,  "I  see  the  knocker,  for  I  know 
something  of  the  promises  and  of  the  person  of  our  Lord, 
but  how  am  I  to  knock  ?  "  With  the  hand  of  faith.  Be- 
lieve that  God  will  keep  his  promise;  ask  him  to  do  so, 
and  thus  knock.  Believe  that  Jesus  is  worthy,  whose 
name  you  are  pleading,  and  so  knock  in  confidence  that 
God  will  honor  the  name  of  his  dear  Son.  "Alas!  my 
hand  is  so  weak,"  say  you.  Then  remember  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities.  Ask  him  to  put  his 
hand  upon  your  hand,  and  in  that  fashion  you  will  be 
able  to  knock  with  prevailing  vehemence.  I  beseech 
you  knock  with  all  the  strength  you  have,  and  knock 
often.  If  you  are  not  in  Christ,  my  dear  hearer,  do  not 
give  sleep  to  your  eyes  nor  slumber  to  your  eyelids  till 
you  have  found  him.  If  you  have  prayed  once,  go  and 
pray  again;  and  if  you  have  prayed  ten  thousand  times, 
yet  still  continue  in  prayer.  Knock  with  all  your  might, 
with  all  the  vigor  of  your  Spirit;  plead  as  for  life;  knock 
at  the  door  as  a  man  would  knock  who  saw  a  wolf  ready 
to  spring  upon  him.  Knock  as  one  would  knock  who 
found  himself  ready  to  die  of  cold  outside  the  door. 
Throw  your  whole  soul  into  the  work.  Say  unto  the 
Lord,  "  1  beseech  thee  have  mercy  upon  me,  and  have 
mercy  upon  me  now.  I  faint,  I  die,  unless  thou  manifest 
thy  love  to  me  and  take  me  into  thy  house  and  heart, 
that  I  may  be  thine  for  ever."  "Knock,  and  it  shall  be 
opened  unto  you."     There  is  the  knocker. 

IV.  Next,  to  you  who  are  knocking  at  the  gate  a 
promise  is  givex.  That  is  more  than  having  a  door  be- 
fore you,  or  a  knocker  to  knock  with.     The  promise  is 


220  "  KNOCK 7" 

above  the  gate  in  plain  words.  Read  it.  You  are 
growing  faint  and  weary;  read  the  promise,  and  grow 
strong  again.  "  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto 
you."  Observe  how  plain  and  positive  it  is  with  its 
glorious  "shall"  burning  like  a  lamp  in  the  centre  of  it 
In  letters  of  love  the  inscription  shines  out  amidst  all  the 
darkness  that  surrounds  you,  and  these  are  its  words, 
"  It  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  If  you  knock  at  the 
door  of  the  kindest  of  men  you  see  no  such  promise  set 
before  you,  and  yet  you  knock,  and  knock  confidently ; 
how  much  more  boldly  should  you  come  to  the  door  of 
grace  when  it  is  expressly  declared,  "  It  shall  be  opened 
unto  you" ! 

Remember  that  this  promise  was  freely  given.  Yon 
never  asked  the  Lord  for  such  a  word,  it  was  uttered  by 
spontaneous  goodness.  You  did  not  come  and  plead 
with  Jesus  for  a  promise  that  you  should  be  heard  in 
prayer.  Far  from  it — you  did  not  even  pray.  Perhaps 
you  have  been  living  in  the  world  forty  years,  and  have 
never  truly  prayed  at  all;  but  the  Lord  out  of  his  over- 
flowing heart  of  generous  love  has  made  this  promise  to 
you,  "  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  Where- 
fore do  you  doubt?  Do  you  think  he  will  not  keep  his 
word  ?  A  God  who  cannot  lie,  who  was  under  no  neces- 
sity to  promise,  freely  out  of  the  greatness  of  his  divine 
nature,  which  is  love,  says  to  a  poor  sinner,  "Knock, 
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  Oh,  be  sure  of  this, 
that  he  means  it;  and  till  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away  his  word  shall  stand,  and  neither  you  nor  any 
other  sinner  that  knocks  at  his  door  shall  be  refused 
admittance. 

This  inscription  has  encouraged  many  to  knock:  when 
they  have  been  ready  to  faint  and  give  up  all  further 
seeking,  they  have  read  again  the  cheering  lines,  "  Knock, 


"KNOCK!"  '221 

and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you,"  and  they  have  taken 
heart  and  made  the  gate  resound  again.  Now,  do  you 
think  God  will  tantalize  us,  that  he  will  make  fools  of 
us,  that  he  will  excite  hopes  in  poor  sinners,  for  the 
mere  sake  of  disappointing  them  ?  Will  he  induce  you 
to  knock  by  his  promise,  and  then  laugh  at  you  ?  Did 
the  God  of  mercy  ever  say,  "  I  called  and  you  came;  I 
stretched  out  my  hands  and  you  drew  near  to  me,  and 
yet  I  will  mock  at  your  calamity,  and  laugh  when  your 
fear  cometh"?  Why,  a  bad  man  would  scarcely  speak 
so :  such  an  act  would  be  more  like  Satan  than  God.  Do 
not  tolerate  the  thought  that  the  God  of  all  grace  could 
treat  a  seeker  thus;  if  it  ever  crosses  your  mind,  thrust 
it  away  and  say,  "He  that  taught  me  to  pray  has  there- 
by bound  himself  to  answer  prayer.  He  will  not  invite 
me  to  knock  in  vain  !  Therefore,  I  will  knock  again, 
only  this  time  more  vigorously  than  ever,  relying  upon 
his  word  and  his  truth."  Oh,  that  you  may  never  stop 
your  knocking  till  salvation's  door  is  entered  by  you! 
The  promise  of  the  Lord  was  given  freely,  and  on  the 
strength  of  that  promise  we  knock,  therefore  we  are 
sure  that  the  Lord  will  not  deny  his  trusting  servants. 
The  mercy  is  that  this  promise  is  meant  for  ell  knock- 
ers— "  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you"  The 
Lord  has  not  denied  to  you,  my  hearer,  the  privilege  of 
praying,  or  declared  that  he  will  not  answer  your  requests. 
You  may  knock,  and  you  may  expect  to  see  the  door 
open.  I  know  the  blessed  doctrine  of  election,  and  I  re- 
joice in  it;  but  that  is  a  secret  with  God,  while  the  rule 
of  our  preaching  is, — "Preach  the  Gospel  to  every  crea- 
ture." I  would,  therefore,  say  to  each  one  here,  "Knock, 
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  The  Lord  knows  who 
will  knock,  for  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his." 
But  knock,  my  friend,  knock  now,  and  it  will  soon  be 


222  ''  KNOCK!  " 

seen  that  you  are  one  of  God's  chosen  ones.  Remember 
the  story  of  Malachi,  the  Cornishman.  When  a  Meth- 
odist friend  had  some  money  to  give  him  he  smilingly 
said,  "Malachi,  I  do  not  think  I  shall  give  you  this 
money,  because  I  do  not  know  whether  you  are  predes- 
tinated to  have  it.  Will  you  tell  me  whether  you  are 
predestinated  to  have  it  or  not  ? "  Malachi  replied, 
"You  put  the  money  in  my  hand,  and  I  will  tell  you." 
As  soon  as  Malachi  had  the  sum  in  hand  he  knew  that 
he  was  predestinated  to  have  it;  but  he  could  not  know 
before  he  had  it  in  possession.  So  the  secret  counsel  of  the 
Lord  is  revealed  to  our  faith  when  it  gets  Christ  in  pos- 
session, and  not  before.  Knock  at  once.  If  you  are 
predestinated  to  enter,  I  know  you  will  knock,  and 
knock  till  you  are  admitted,  for  so  it  stands,  and  no 
exception  is  made  to  it — "Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened 
unto  you."  It  is  a  rule  with  the  Lord  that  to  him  that 
knocketh  it  shall  be  opened. 

Blessed  be  God,  this  text  of  mine  shines  out  as  if 
printed  in  stars,  and  it  continues  to  shine  from  day-dawn  of 
life  to  set  of  sun.  As  long  as  a  man  lives,  if  he  knocks  at 
God's  door,  it  shall  be  opened  unto  him.  You  may  have 
been  long  a  rebel,  and  you  may  have  heaped  up  your  sins 
till  they  seem  to  shut  out  all  hope  from  you,  but  still  knock 
at  Christ,  the  door,  for  an  opening  time  will  come.  Even 
if  it  were  with  thine  expiring  hand,  if  thou  couldst  knock 
at  mercy's  gate  it  would  open  to  thee;  but  put  not  off 
thy  day  of  knocking  because  of  God's  long-suffering 
mercy;  rather  to-day  knock,  knock  now  while  sitting  in 
the  pew,  and  if  you  are  not  answered  immediately,  as  T 
trust  you  will  be,  yet  go  home,  and  there  in  secret  cry 
unto  the  Lord,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless 
me.  I  am  lost  unless  thou  find  me;  I  am  lost  unless  I 
find  my  Saviour  and  Lord,   I  am  not  playing  at  prayer 


"  KNOCK!  "  223 

now,  my  very  soul  means  it;  T  must  have  Christ  or  else 
I  die  just  as  I  am;  1  east  myself  upon  him,  and  trust  his 
atoning*  sacrifice.  01),  manifest  thyself  to  me  as  a  par- 
doning God!"  I  will  be  bound  for  God  as  a  hostage 
that  he  will  answer  you.  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he 
heard  me;  and  since  then  I  have  never  doubted  of  any 
living  soul  but  that  if  he  too  will  seek  the  Lord  through 
Jesus  Christ  he  will  certainly  be  saved.  Oh,  that  you 
would  try  it!  The  Lord  move  you  thereto  by  his  own 
blessed  Spirit. 

V.  So  I  close  with  one  more  point.  When  the  door 
opens  it  will  be  a  glorious  opening  to  you.  "  Knock,  and 
it  shall  be  opened."  What  will  come  of  it  then  ?  Im- 
mediately you  who  have  knocked  will  enter.  If  you 
have  knocked  in  sincerity,  the  moment  you  see  Christ 
as  a  Saviour  you  will  accept  him  as  your  Saviour.  Enter 
into  Chrisl  by  faith.  Behold  he  sets  before  you  an  open 
door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it.  Do  not  hesitate  to  enter 
in.  Hitherto  you  have  thought  there  wore  many  diffi- 
culties and  obstacles  in  your  way.  but  indeed  it  is  not 
so — Believe  and  live.  When,  in  answer  to  your  knock- 
in-',  you  see  the  door  move,  then  arise,  and  tarry  not. 

Remember  that  the  opening  of  that  door  will  not 
only  give  you  entrance,  but  it  will  ensure  you  safety. 
He  who  once  enters  into  Christ  is  safe  for  ever.  Only 
pass  beneath  that  blood-besprinkled  portal,  only  rest  in 
the  house  of  the  Well-beloved,  and  you  shall  go  no  more 
out  for  ever.  The  life  which  he  bestows  is  eternal,  there- 
fore you  shall  not  die.  The  destroying  angel,  whenever 
he  may  take  his  flight,  must  pass  you  by.  Only  believe, 
and  you  are  saved;  only  trust  Christ  with  your  whole 
heart,  and  soul,  and  strength,  and  salvation  has  come 
unto  your  house,  and  you  have  come  unto  the  house  of 
salvation. 


224  "KNOCK!" 

But  then  there  shall  come  to  you  more  of  blessing: 
yet,  for  yours  shall  be  the  adoption.  Once  entered  in 
you  shall  abide  in  the  mansion  of  grace,  no  more  a 
stranger  or  a  guest,  but  like  a  child  at  home.  You  shall 
sit  at  the  Father's  table  and  eat  and  drink  as  a  son,  an 
heir,  a  joint  heir  with  Christ,  Yours  shall  be  the  liberty, 
the  plenty,  the  joy  of  the  great  house  of  love.  At  God's 
right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore,  and  these 
shall  be  your  heritage.  Yes,  and  more  than  that;  when 
you  have  once  entered  into  the  house  of  love  you  shall 
have  access  to  its  inner  chambers.  Even  the  vestibule 
of  God's  house  is  a  place  of  safety,  but  afterwards  the 
Master  of  the  house  shall  take  you  into  curious  rooms, 
and  show  you  his  treasures,  and  open  to  you  his  store- 
houses, so  that  you  shall  go  from  grace  to  grace,  from 
knowledge  to  knowledge,  and  glory  to  glory,  by  con- 
tinued progress.  All  this  can  only  be  understood  by  ex- 
perience, and  that  experience  can  only  be  obtained  by 
knocking. 

I  want  to  say  this,  and  I  have  done.  Some  people 
think  if  the}7  have  begun  to  pray,  and  are  a  little  in 
earnest,  that  this  is  enough.  Now,  praying  is  not  an 
end,  it  is  only  a  means.  Knocking  is  not  the  ultimatum  : 
you  must  enter  in.  If  any  of  you  are  seeking,  I  am  glad 
of  it;  if  you  are  knocking,  I  am  glad  of  it;  but  if  you 
say,  "I  am  perfectly  satisfied  to  stand  outside  the  door 
and  knock,"  then  I  am  grieved  for  you.  You  are  foolish 
to  the  last  degree,  because  you  are  resting  in  the  means 
as  if  they  were  the  end.  You  must  enter  by  the  door  or 
else  knocking  will  be  labor  in  vain.  Would  any  of  you 
be  content  *to  visit  a  friend,  and  merely  to  stand  for  an 
hour  or  two  outside  of  his  door  knocking.  Did  you  ever 
say,  "I  do  not  want  anything  more:  I  shall  sit-down 
comfortably  on  the  doorstep,  and  then  get  up  and  have 


"KNOCK!"  22o 

another  knock  or  two?"  Knocking  would  not  give  you 
a  dinner,  nor  do  your  business  for  you.  Knocking  is 
only  the  way  of  entrance,  but  if  you  stop  at  knocking  it 
is  poor  work.  The  most  earnest  praying  is  only  a  way 
of  getting  to  Christ:  the  gospel  itself  is,  "Believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Come, 
then,  to  Christ.  If  you  find  the  door  shut,  knock.  But 
oh,  remember,  the  door  is  not  really  shut;  it  is  only  so 
in  your  apprehension  !  Heaven's  gate  stands  open  night 
and  day.  At  once  believe  and  live.  Trust  in  the  merit 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  are  clothed  with  it;  trust  in  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  you  are  washed  in  it.  Faith  saves 
in  an  instant.  It  touches  Jesus,  and  the  healing  virtue 
pours  forth  from  his  garment's  hem :  faith  steps  over  the 
threshold,  and  the  soul  is  safe.  The  Lord  grant  that 
you  may  enter  in  at  once,  and  then  it  shall  be  our  joy, 
and  the  angels' joy,  and  the  great  Fathers  joy,  for  ever 
and  ever,  to  see  you  rescued  from  destruction ! 


XL 

IMITATOES  OF   GOD. 

June  10,  1883. 

"  Be  ye  therefore  followers  of  God,  as  dear  children." — Ephesiaks  v.  1. 

We  shall  read  the  text  as  it  should  more  properly  be 
translated:  "  Be  ye  therefore  imitators  of  God,  as  beloved 
children."  Upon  the  word  imitate  our  discourse  will 
hinge. 

The  division  into  chapters  is  often  most  unfortunate, 
and  in  this  case  it  causes  a  break  in  a  passage  which  in 
its  sense  is  one  and  indivisible.  The  apostle  had  said, 
"  Be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tenderhearted,  forgiving 
one  another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven 
you.  Be  ye  therefore  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children." 
He  has  forgiven  you,  therefore  imitate  him.  It  is  a  pity 
to  have  divided  the  argument  from  the  conclusion. 

Here,  while  your  minds  are  fresh,  let  me  remind  you 
that  this  is  Hospital  Sunday,  and  let  me  add  that  my 
text  is  an  argument,  and  a  powerful  one,  for  helping 
those  houses  of  mercy.  Your  Lord  would  have  you  kind 
one  to  another  and  tenderhearted;  but  how  can  we  be 
kind  and  '.tenderhearted  if  the  sick  poor  are  not  cared 
for?  When  all  the  machinery  and  all  the  medical  skill 
are  waiting  to  relieve  the  suffering  poor,  it  is  a  cry- 
ing shame  that  beds  in  hospitals  should  be  unused  be- 
cause of  want  of  funds;  yet  this  is  sadly  the  case,  and 
several  of  those  grand  institutions  are  running  into  debt. 


IMITATORS    OF    GOD.  227 

"We  may  ourselves  have  no  surgical  skill,  or  nursing  art, 
but  we  can  each  give  of  our  substance  to  aid  those  whose 
lives  are  consecrated  to  the  Christ-like  work  of  healing. 
We  cannot  be  kind  and  tenderhearted  unless  we  give 
according  to  our  ability  to  such  noble  institutions  as.  our 
hospitals.  Preachers  generally  put  the  application  at 
the  end  of  a  discourse,  but  on  these  warm  days  you  are 
apt  to  grow  tired,  and  therefore  I  put  the  application  at 
the  beginning,  that  you  may  not  give  faintly  and  scantily 
when  the  sermon  is  over.  All  sorts  of  religionists  are  con- 
tributing to  the  common  fund,  and  we  must  not  be  lack- 
ing. When  the  box  comes  round,  "  be  ye  imitators  of 
God,  as  clear  children,"  in  the  largeness  of  your  liberality 
and  the  freeness  of  your  gifts. 

The  apostle  urges  us  to  give  and  forgive.  If  ye  be 
imitators  of  God,  give,  for  he  is  always  giving.  Give, 
for  if  he  were  not  to  give,  our  lives  would  end;  give, 
for  he  giveth  unto  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth  not, 
nnd  every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above. 
B  -  ye  imitators  of  God,  the  constant,  generous  Giver, 
who  spared  not  his  own  Son.  Thanks  be  to  his  name 
for  that  unspeakable  gift!  Then  comes  that  which  to 
most  men  is  a  harder  task,  but  which  to  a  Christian  man 
is  a  delight — I  mean  to  forgive.  God  for  Christ's  sake 
hath  forgiven  us;  he  has  blotted  out  our  transgressions 
like  a  cloud,  and  cast  our  sins  into  the  depth  of  the  sea, 
plunging  them  into  oblivion;  therefore  let  us  forgive 
most  freely  all  that  have  done  us  wrong,  so  that  when 
we  bow  our  knee  we  may  say  without  hypocrisy,  "For- 
give us  our  trespasses  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass 
against  us."  Let  giving  and  forgiving  be  two  prominent 
features  of  our  lives  as  Christians — giving  to  the  needy 
and  forgiving  the  guilty;  giving  to  such  as  ask  of  us, 
and  forgiving  such  a,s  offend  us.     By  these  two  things, 


228  IMITATORS    OF    GOD. 

let  us  show  that  we  walk  in  love  as  Christ  also  hath 
loved  us.  He  has  given  himself  for  us,  and  through  his 
precious  blood  we  are  forgiven  our  iniquities;  let  us, 
therefore,  blend  giving  and  forgiving  into  one  God-like 
life,  imitating  our  God.  This  is  our  Father's  command- 
ment, let  it  be  our  delight. 

I.  With  this  as  a  preface,  let  us  now  come  closely  to 
the  text,  and  let  us  consider  the  precept  here  laid  down 
— "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children." 

I  note  upon  this  precept,  first,  that  it  calls  us  to  practi- 
cal duty.  .Many  precepts  of  the  word  of  God  are  thought 
by  men  of  the  world  to  be  unpractical,  but  even  in  those 
instances  they  are  in  error,  for  the  result  and  outcome 
of  such  precepts  produces  the  practical  holiness  which 
all  profess  to  desire.  In  this  instance  there  can  be  no 
cavil  at  the  too  spiritual,  sentimental,  or  speculative 
character  of  the  text;  there  can  be  no  question  as  to  the 
eminently  practical  character  of  the  exhortation — "Be 
ye  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children,''  for  it  points  to 
action,  continued  action  of  the  best  kind.  "  Be  ye  imi- 
tators " — that  is,  do  not  only  meditate  upon  God  and 
think  that  you  have  done  enough,  but  go  on  to  copy 
what  you  study.  Meditation  is  a  happy,  holy,  profitable 
engagement,  and  it  will  instruct  you,  strengthen  you, 
comfort  you,  inspire  your  heart,  and  make  your  soul 
steadfast;  but  you  may  not  stop  at  meditation,  you  must 
go  on  to  imitation  of  the  character  of  God.  Let  your 
spiritual  life  not  only  bud  and  blossom  in  devout.thought, 
but  let  it  bring  forth  fruit  in  holy  act.  Be  not  satisfied 
with  feeding  the  soul  by  meditation,  but  rise  up  from 
the  banquet  and  use  the  strength  which  you  have  gained. 
Sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  must  be  succeeded  by  follow- 
ing in  the  footsteps  of  Jesus. 

Neither  does  the  text  say  to  us,  "  Be  ye  admirers  of 


IMITATORS    OF   GOD.  229 

God."  This  we  ought  to  be,  and  shall  be  if  we  are  true 
Christians.  The  pure  in  heart  who  alone  can  truly  see 
God  are  filled  with  a  reverent  admiration  of  him.  With 
the  angels,  every  gracious  heart  exclaims,  "  Holy,  holy, 
holy,  Lord  God  of  hosts."  "There  is  none  holy  as  the 
Lord  "  (Sam.  ii.  2).  When  the  best  of  men  are  compared 
with  the  Lord  their  holiness  is  not  to  be  mentioned. 
"  Who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  God,  glorious  in  holiness?" 
But  we  cannot  rest  satisfied  with  rendering  such  admi- 
ration: we  must  prove  that  we  do  really  admire  by 
closely  copying.  The  world's  proverb  is  that  "imita- 
tion is  the  sincerest  form  of  flattery";  I  shall  alter  it, 
and  adapt  it  to  a  higher  use.  Imitation  of  God  is  the 
sincerest  form  of  admiring  him;  neither  can  we  believe 
that  you  know  God,  and  are  at  all  charmed  with  his 
holiness,  unless  you  endeavor,  as  he  shall  help  you,  to 
imitate  him  as  dear  children. 

Xeither  does  the  text  even  stay  at  adoration,  though 
that  is  a  sublime  height.  Adoration  springs  out  of 
meditation  and  admiration,  and  is  a  very  high  and 
noble  exercise  of  the  mind.  Perhaps  we  rise  to  the 
highest  possible  service  of  God  on  earth  when  we  are 
adoring  him:  this  is  the  engagement  of  saints  and 
angels  before  his  throne,  and  never  are  we  nearer 
heaven  than  when  we  follow  the  same  occupation  here 
below.  Beloved,  let  your  whole  lives  be  adoration.  Not 
only  on  Sabbaths,  and  at  certain  hours,  and  in  your  as- 
semblies, but  everywhere  adore  by  good  works — a  man- 
ner of  worship  which  is  as  real  and  acceptable  as  the 
most  reverent  public  service.  Remember  that  "  to  obey 
is  better  than  sacrifice," — holy  living  outshines  all  other 
solemnities.  To  love  is  to  adore;  to  obey  is  to  praise; 
to  act  is  to  worship.  If  ye  are  imitators  of  God  as  dear 
children  your  adoration  will  be  proved  to  be  sincere. 


230  IMITATORS    OF    GOD. 

Worship  unattended  by  imitation  is  feigned;  true  ado- 
ration dwelleth  not  in  words  only,  but  as  it  comes  from 
the  heart  so  it  affects  the  entire  nature  and  shows  itself 
in  the  daily  behavior.  Let  us  spread  our  adoration  over 
all  the  day,  til!  from  the  moment  when  we  open  our 
eves  till  we  close  them  again  at  night,  we  shall  be  prac- 
tically worshipping  the  Lord  by  reverencing'  his  law, 
delighting  in  his  commandments,  and  imitating  his 
character.  It  is  clear  that  the  precept  before  us  is 
eminently  practical.  You  who  boast  in  being  such 
practical  men  give  heed  to  this! 

Next,  this 'precept  treats  us  as  children,  treats  us  as  what 
we  are;  and  if  we  are  lowly  in  heart  we  shall  be  thank- 
ful that  it  is  worded  as  it  is.  Some  men  are  very  high 
and  mighty;  measured  by  their  own  rod  they  are  great 
men,  and  hence  they  must  be  original,  and  strike  out  a 
path  for  themselves.  You  are  not  commanded  to  do 
anything  of  the  kind:  the  path  is  laid  clown  for  you — 
"Be  ye  imitators."  This  is  a  similar  doctrine  to  that 
which  we  teach  to  boys  at  school.  You,  my  boy,  are 
not  to  invent  a  system  of  writing;  yours  is  a  much  easier 
task,  keep  to  your  copy,  imitate  every  letter,  ay,  every 
turn  and  twist  of  your  master's  hand.  Scholars  can 
only  learn  by  imitation,  and  we  are  all  scholars.  It 
may  be  something  to  aspire  to  be  the  head  of  a  school 
of  painting;  but  the  first  thing  for  the  young  artist  to 
do  is  to  copy.  He  who  cannot  copy  cannot  originate; 
depend  upon  that.  I  have  heard  great  outcries  about 
young  preachers  imitating,  but  I  would  suggest  that,  in 
their  early  efforts,  this  is  not  blameworthy.  What  more 
natural  than  that  Timothy  should  at  first  be  much  in- 
fluenced by  Paul's  manner  of  speech?  How  could  a 
man  become  an  artist  if  he  did  not  attach  himself  to 
some  school  of  painting,  and  sit  under  a  certain  master? 


IMITATORS   OF    GOD.  231 

He  may  be  of  the  French  school,  or  the  Italian  school 
or  the  Flemish  school,  but  he  must  begin  as  a  follower 
even  if  he  grows  up  to  be  a  leader.  When  he  has  been 
well  trained,  and  has  done  much  work,  he  may  outgrow 
his  master  and  become  an  original,  but  he  must  begin 
as  a  careful  copyist.  Here  you  are  invited  to  become 
imitators;  but  the  Master  is  such  an  one  that  you  will 
never  be  able  to  learn  all  that  he  can  teach,  and  so  strike 
out  a  better  path.  Though  you  be  immortal,  yet  through- 
out eternity  you  will  never  advance  beyond  your  model ; 
for  it  is  written,  "Be  ye  imitators  of  God."  Listen  to 
me,  ye  aspiring  minds:  if  ye  must  needs  be  original,  the 
most  wonderful  originality  in  this  world  would  be  for  a 
man's  character  to  be  a  precise  copy  of  the  character  of 
God:  in  him  there  would  be  novelty  indeed,  for  he  would 
be  like  him  whose  name  is  called  "  Wonderful."  When 
our  Lord  Jesus  exhibited  on  earth  the  character  of  God, 
his  life  was  so  original  that  the  world  knew  him  not; 
they  were  puzzled  and  amazed  at  the  sight  of  One  who 
was  so  like  unto  the  Father.  His  life  struck  men  as 
being  the  most  singular  thing  they  had  ever  seen;  and 
if  we  are  close  copyists  of  God  our  characters  will  also 
stand  out  in  relief,  and  we  shall  each  one  be  "a  wonder 
unto  many."  You  see  it  is  a  humbling  exhortation 
which  only  men  of  childlike  spirit  are  likely  to  regard. 
Wisely  does  the  Scripture  address  it  only  to  such — "Be 
ye  therefore  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children";  if  you 
are  not  his  children  you  cannot  imitate  him,  and  you 
will  not  even  desire  to  do  so. 

Observe  next,  that  while  it  thus  humbles  us,  this  pre- 
cept ennobles  us;  for  what  a  grand  thing  it  is  to  be  imi- 
tators of  God!  It  is  an  honor  to  be  the  lowliest  follower 
of  such  a  leader.  Time  has  been  when  men  gloried  in 
studying  Homer,  and  their  lives  were  trained  to  heroism 


232  IMITATORS    OF    GOD. 

by  his  martial  verse.  Alexander  carried  the  Iliad  about 
with  him  in  a  casket  studded  with  jewels,  and  his  mili- 
tary life  greatly  sprung  out  of  his  imitation  of  the  war- 
riors of  Greece  and  Troy.  Ours  is  a  nobler  ambition  by 
far  than  that  which  delights  in  battles,  we  desire  to  im- 
itate the  God  of  peace,  whose  name  is  love.  In  after 
ages,  when  men  began  to  be  a  less  savage  race,  and 
contests  of  thought  were  carried  on  by  the  more  edu- 
cated class  of  minds,  thousands  of  men  gloried  in  being 
disciples  of  the  mighty  Stagirite,  the  renowned  Aris- 
totle. He  reigned  supreme  over  the  thought  of  men  for 
centuries,  and  students  slavishly  followed  him  till  a 
greater  arose,  and  set  free  the  human  mind  by  a  more 
true  philosophy.  To  this  day,  however,  our  cultured 
men  remain  copyists,  and  you  can  see  a  fashion  in  phi- 
losophy as  will  as  in  clothes.  Some  of  these  imitations 
are  so  childish  as  to  be  deplorable.  It  is  no  honor  to 
imitate  a  poor  example.  But,  oh,  beloved,  he  who  seeks 
to  imitate  his  God  has  a  noble  enterprise  before  him:  he 
shall  rise  as  on  eagle's  wings.  We  are  copying  infinite 
goodness ;  we  seek  after  moral  perfection.  We  are  to 
be  u  blameless  and  harmless,  the  sons  of  God  without 
rebuke";  but  as  God  is  infinitely  more  than  that,  so  are 
we  to  rise  above  mere  innocence  into  actual  holiness. 
To  refrain  from  evil  is  not  enough,  we  must  be  filled 
with  all  goodness  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Is  not  this  a 
mark  worth  aiming  at?  Judge  ye  what  that  grace 
must  be  which  is  to  raise  us  to  this  height!  0  angels, 
what  happier  task  could  be  laid  before  you  ?  What 
higher  ambition  can  you  know?  God's  only-begotten 
Son,  who  is  this  day  Lord  of  all,  weareth  his  Father's 
image  in  his  glory,  even. as  on  earth  he  was  such  a  copy 
of  God  that  he  could  truly  say,  "he  that  hath  seen  me 
hath  seen  the  Father."     "I  do  always,"  said  he,   "the 


IMITATORS    OF    GOD.  233 

things  that  please  him."  The  perfect  Son  of  God  is  as 
his  Father  in  holiness.  You  see  your  calling,  brethren; 
to  a  high  place  in  the  rank  of  intelligences  you  are  bid- 
den to  ascend  by  God  himself.  In  this  respect  take  your 
seats  in  the  highest  room.  Imitate,  but  note  well  that 
ye  do  not  select  an  imperfect  example:  "  Be  ye  imitators 
of  God,  as  dear  children/' 

While  it  ennobles  u*j,  this  precept  tests  us — tests  us  in 
many  points.  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God  ; "  this  tests  our 
knowledge.  A  man  cannot  imitate  that  which  he  has 
never  seen.  He  who  does  not  know  God  cannot  pos- 
sibly imitate  him.  Do  you  know  God,  my  hearer? 
Have  you  turned  unto  him  with  repentance?  Have 
you  ever  spoken  with  him  in  prayer?  Have  you  had 
fellowship  with  him  in  Christ?  Can  you  say,  "  I  have 
set  the  Lord  always  before  me"?  You  cannot  possibly 
follow  a  copy  except  you  fix  your  eye  upon  that  copy, 
and  have  some  intelligent  knowledge  of  what  it  is.  We 
must  have  a  spiritual  idea  of  God  or  we  cannot  imitate 
him;  hence  the  need  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  How  can  we 
know  the  Lord  unless  the  Spirit  reveal  him  in  us? 

What  is  more,  this  precept  tests  our  love.  If  we 
love  God,  love  will  constrain  us  to  imitate  him ;  but  we 
shall  not  do  so  from  any  other  force.  We  readily  grow 
somewhat  like  that  which  we  love.  In  married  life 
persons  who  have  truly  loved,  though  they  may  begin 
with  great  dissimilarity,  will  gradually  be  conformed  to 
one  another  in  the  process  of  years.  Likeness  is  the 
natural  product  of  love;  and  so  if  we  love  God  truly 
we  shall  by  very  force  of  that  love  through  his  blessed 
Spirit  grow  more  and  more  like  unto  him.  If  we  do 
not  love  the  Lord  we  shall  not  follow  him,  but  if  we 
truly  love  him  we  shall  cry  with  David,  ''My  soul  fol- 
loweth  hard  after  thee;  thy  right  hand  upholdeth  me." 


234  IMITATORS    OF   GOD. 

Our  text  does  even  more  than  this:  it  tests  our  sin- 
cerity. If  a  man  is  not  really  a  Christian  he  will  take 
no  care  about  his  life;  but  in  the  matter  of  close  copy- 
ing a  man  must  be  careful;  a  watchful  care  is  implied 
in  the  idea  of  imitation.  You  cannot  copy  a  document 
without  being  intent  to  read  and  mark  each  word.  If 
I  sit  down  to  write  an  article  out  of  my  own  mind,  I 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  make  my  own  track,  and 
there  is  my  work,  such  as  it  is:  but  if  I  have  to  copy 
from  a  book,  then  I  must  needs  look  to  each  line,  and 
I  must  read  it  over  attentively,  for  otherwise  I  may  mis- 
represent the  writer  whose  language  I  transcribe.  In 
copying  from  nature  how  careful  the  artist  has  to  be 
at  every  touch,  or  he  will  fail  in  his  picture.  If  a 
sculptor  is  producing  a  replica  of  an  ancient  statue, 
he  must  keep  his  eyes  open  and  follow  every  line  and 
mark.  My  friend,  you  cannot  imitate  God  if  you  are 
one  of  that  sort  of  Christians  who  are  habitually  in  a 
condition  between  sleeping  and  waking,  with  one  eye 
a  little  open  and  the  other  closed.  Such  men  live  a 
slovenly  life,  and  attempt  a  sort  of  happy-go-lucky  re- 
ligion, which  may  be  right  or  which  may  be  wrong,  but 
its  character  they  cannot  tell,  for  they  run  with  their 
neighbors  and  never  examine  for  themselves.  Such 
people  live  at  random,  and  never  take  a  day's  life  at 
night  and  examine  it  to  see  its  faults;  thus  sin  grows 
upon  them  like  weeds  in  a  sluggard's  garden.  Such 
persons,  playing  at  hit  or  miss  with  holiness,  are  sure 
to  come  short  of  it;  but  he  that  is  in  earnest  will  give 
his  prayerful  thought  and  anxious  desire  to  it,  that  he 
may  become  in  very  deed  a  successful  imitator  of  God. 
He  will  also  call  in  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  thus 
be  led  into  holiness. 

Moreover,  the  precept  tests  us  as  to  our  spirit,  whether 


IMITATORS    OF    GOD.  235 

it  be  of  the  law  or  of  the  gospel.  k'Be  ye  imitators  of 
God,  as  dear  children":  not  as  slaves  might  imitate  their 
master — unwillingly,  dreading  the  crack  of  his  whip; 
but  loving,  willing  imitators,  such  as  children  are.  You 
do  not  urge  your  children  to  imitate  you;  they  do  this 
even  in  their  games.  See  how  the  boy  rides  his  wooden 
horse,  and  the  girl  imitates  her  nurse.  You  see  the 
minister's  little  boy  trying  to  preach  like  his  father; 
and  you  all  remember  the  picture  of  the  tiny  girl  with 
a  Bible  in  front  of  her  and  an  ancient  pair  of  spectacles 
upon  her  nose,  saying,  "Now  I'm  grandmamma."  They 
copy  us  by  force  of  nature:  they  cannot  help  it.  Such 
will  be  the  holiness  of  the  genuine  Christian.  He  is 
born  from  above,  and  hence  he  lives  above.  His  imita- 
tion of  God  springs  out  of  his  relationship  to  God.  Holi- 
ness must  be  spontaneous,  or  it  is  spurious.  We  cannot 
be  driven  to  holiness  like  a  bullock  to  his  ploughing; 
we  must  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward 
man.  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children,"  be- 
cause you  do  not  wish  for  anything  better  than  to  be 
like  your  Father,  and  have  no  ambition  in  the  world 
that  approaches  your  aspiration  to  be  holy  even  as  God 
is  holy,  according  to  that  word,  "  Be  ye  perfect  even  as 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect."  Have  you 
that  filial  spirit?  Have  you  a  burning  love  to  holiness? 
or  is  sin  your  delight,  and  God's  service  a  weariness? 
Where  your  pleasure  is  there  your  heart  is.  If  you  love 
evil  you  are  not  the  children  of  God  at  all,  and  cannot 
imitate  him  nor  render  to  him  any  acceptable  service 
whatever.  The  Lord  make  us  to  be  imitators  of  him, 
even  as  children  from  a  natural  bent  copy  their  parents. 
While  it  tests  us,  this  precept  greatly  aids  us.  It  is 
a  fine  thing  for  a  man  to  know  what  he  has  to  do,  for 
then  he  is  led  in  a  plain  path  because  of  his  enemies. 


236  IMITATORS    OF    GOD. 

What  a  help  it  is  to  have  a  clear  chart,  and  a  true  com- 
pass! We  have  only  to  ask, — "What  would  our  hea- 
venly Father  do  in  such  a  case?"  and  our  coarse  is  clear. 
As  far  as  we  are  capable  of  imitating  the  Lord  out  path- 
way is  plain.  We  cannot  imitate  God  in  his  power,  or 
omnipresence,  or  omniscience;  certain  of  his  attributes 
are  incommunicable,  and  of  them  we  may  say — they 
are  high  and  we  cannot  attain  to  them:  but  these  are 
not  intended  in  the  precept.  Creatures  cannot  imitate 
their  Creator  in  his  divine  attributes,  but  children  may 
copy  their  Father  in  his  moral  attributes.  By  the  aid 
of  his  divine  Spirit  we  can  copy  our  God  in  his  justice, 
righteousness,  holiness,  purity,  truth,  and  faithfulness. 
We  can  be  tenderhearted,  kind,  forbearing,  merciful, 
forgiving;  in  a  word,  we  may  walk  in  love  as  Christ 
also  hath  loved  us.  To  know  what  to  do  is  a  great  aid 
to  a  holy  life.  This  puts  us  into  the  light,  while  the 
poor  heathen  gropes  in  darkness,  for  his  false  gods  are 
monsters  of  vice  which  he  may  not  dream  of  imitating. 

Another  blessing  is  that  it  backs  us  up  in  our  po- 
sition; for  if  we  do  a  thing  because  we  are  imitating 
God,  if  any  raise  an  objection  it  does  not  trouble  us, 
much  less  are  we  confounded.  We  did  not  expect  when 
we  commenced  a  holy  life  that  everybody  would  ap- 
plaud us,  but  we  reckoned  that  they  would  criticise 
us;  and  so,  when  their  censure  conies,  we  are  supported 
by  the  consideration  that  those  who  blame  the  imitation 
find  fault  with  the  copy, — if,  indeed,  the  imitation  be 
well  done.  He  who  follows  God  minds  not  what  the 
godless  think  of  his  way  of  life.  A  clear  conscience  is 
our  portion  when  we  have  in  all  things  endeavored  to 
please  God. 

I  will  leave  my  first  head  when  I  have  made  one 
more  observation:  this  precept  is  greatly  for  our  usefulness 


IMITATORS    OF    GOD.  237 

— "Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children.''  I  do  not 
know  of  anything  which  would  make  us  so  useful  to 
our  fellow-men  as  this  would  do.  What  are  we  sent  into 
the  world  for?  Is  it  not  that  we  may  keep  men  in  mind 
of  God,  whom  they  are  most  anxious  to  forget?  If  we 
are  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children,  they  will  be  com- 
pelled to  recollect  that  there  is  a  God,  for  they  will  see 
his  character  reflected  in  ours.  I  have  head  of  an  atheist 
who  said  he  could  get  over  every  argument  except  the 
example  of  his  godly  mother:  he  could  never  answer 
that.  A  genuinely  holy  Christian. is  a  beam  of  God's 
glory  and  a  testimony  to  the  being  and  the  goodness 
of  God.  Men  cannot  forget  that  there  is  a  God  so  long 
as  they  see  his  servants  among  them,  dressed  in  the 
livery  of  holiness.  We  ought  not  only  to  be  reminders 
of  the  careless,  but  teachers  of  the  ignorant  by  our  walk 
and  conversation.  When  they  look  us  up  and  down, 
and  see  how  we  live,  they  ought  to  be  learning  some- 
what of  God.  Holy  men  are  the  world's  Bibles:  they 
read  not  the  Testament,  but  they  read  our  testimony. 

Brethren,  a  close  imitation  of  God  would  make  our 
religion  honorable.  The  ungodly  might  still  hate  it, 
but  they  could  not  sneer  at  it;  nay,  the  more  candid 
among  unbelievers,  perceiving  our  holiness  to  be  the 
result  of  our  faith,  would  say  nothing  against  it.  The 
name  of  Christ  would  not  be  so  evil  spoken  of  if  our 
lives  were  not  so  faulty.  Holiness  is  true  preaching, 
and  preaching  of  the  most  successful  kind.  What  a  sup- 
port it  is  to  the  preacher  when  he  has  a  people  around 
him  who  are  daily  witnessing  for  God  at  home  and  in 
business.  If  the  pastor  can  turn  to  his  church  and  say, 
"  See,  here,  what  the  doctrines  of  grace  can  do  !  See  in 
the  lives  of  our  church-members  what  the  Spirit  of  God 
can  produce;"  then  he  will  have  an  unanswerable  argu- 


238  IMITATORS    OF    GOD. 

merit  wherewith  to  silence  gainsayers.  Doth  not  the 
Lord  say.  "Ye  are  my  witnesses?"  Are  we  not  de- 
tained in  this  world  on  purpose  that  we  may  bear  testi- 
mony to  our  Lord  ?  How  can  we  bear  forcible  witness 
for  him  unless  our  lives  are  pure  ?  An  unclean  professor 
is  aTountain  of  scepticism,  and  a  hindrance  to  the  gospel. 
To  be  useful  we  must  be  holy.  If  we  would  bless  men 
as  God  blesses  them,  we  must  live  as  God  lives.  There- 
fore, "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children."  Thus 
much  upon  the  precept. 

II.  Secondly,  I  invite  you,  dear  friends,  as  we  are 
helped  of  God's  Spirit  to  weigh  the  argument.  The  argu- 
ment is  this,  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children.1 

First,  as  children.  It  is  the  natural  tendency  of  chil- 
dren to  imitate  their  parents:  yet  there  are  exceptions 
for  some  children  are  the  opposite  of  their  fathers,  per- 
haps displaying  the  vices  of  a  remoter  ancestor.  Absalom 
did  not  imitate  David,  nor  was  Rehoboam  a  repetition 
of  Solomon.  In  the  case  of  God's  children  it  is  a  necessity 
that  they  should  be  like  their  Father;  for  it  is  a  rule  in 
spirituals  that  like  begets  its  like.  Those  who  live  wick- 
edly are  the  children  of  the  Wicked  One:  no  proof  is 
wanted,  you  may  take  it  for  granted:  life  is  the  evidence 
of  nature.  Those  who  live  godly  and  righteously  in 
Christ  Jesus,  believing  in  him,  are  God's  children:  and 
though  the  godly  sin,  yet  they  do  not  love  sin,  nor  re- 
main without  repenting  of  it.  Holiness  of  life  is  the 
proof  of  regeneration,  neither  can  we  accept  any  other. 
"  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them,"  is  a  rule  of  uni- 
versal application.  God's  children  must  be  like  him. 
With  all  their  faults  and  failings  there  must  be  about 
their  lives  as  a  whole  a  likeness  to  God.  The  copy  may 
be  blurred,  but  it  is  a  copy.  I  say  to  any  man  here  who 
bears  the  name  of  Christian  and  professes  to  be  a  child 


IMITATORS    OF    GOD.  239 

of  God,  either  be  like  your  Father  or  give  up  your  name. 
You  remember  the  old  classic  story  of  a  soldier  in  Alex- 
ander's army  whose  name  was  Alexander,  but  when  the 
battle  was  raging  he  trembled.  Then  Alexander  said 
to  him,  "How  canst  thou  bear  the  name  of  Alexander? 
Drop  thy  cowardice,  or  drop  thy  name."  So  say  I  to 
those  who  are  unholy,  unclean,  impure,  unkind,  ungra- 
cious: be  like  God,  or  cease  to  bear  the  name  of  a  child 
of  God.  What  need  is  there  that  thou  shoiildest  aggra- 
vate thy  sin  by  pretending  to  a  character  which  thou 
dost  not  possess !  Be  like  Christ,  or  be  not  called  a 
Christian.  Do  not  play  the  Judas  unless  thou  hast  a 
mind  to  be  a  second  "son  of  perdition." 

The  argument,  then,  is  that  if  we  are  children  we 
should  imitate  our  Father;  but  it  is  also  said  "as  dear 
children."  Read  it  as  "  children  beloved."  Is  not  this  a 
tender  but  mighty  argument?  How  greatly  has  God 
loved  us  in  that  he  permits  us  to  be  his  children  at  all. 
"Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed 
upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  children  of  God." 
A  "  behold  "  is  placed  there,  as  if  it  were  a  thing  of  won- 
der. Do  you  not  wonder  at  it  in  your  own  case  that 
you  should  be  called  a  child  of  God?  Behold  the  love 
which  chose  you  when  you  were  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,  and  quickened  you  into  the  life  of  God!  Do  you 
not  remember  the  text — "As  many  as  received  him,  to 
them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to 
them  that  believe  on  his  name"?  What  love  was  that 
which  revealed  itself  in  your  new  birth  and  your  adop- 
tion, giving  you  thus  the  nature  and  the  status  of  a  child 
of  God  !  Furthermore,  since  you  have  been  a  child,  was 
there  ever  such  kindness  received  by  a  child  from  a 
father  as  you  have  received  ?  Behold,  he  dealeth  with 
you  as  with  sons.     You  could  not  wish  for  God  to  im- 


240  IMITATORS    OF   GOD. 

prove  upon  his  dealings  with  you,  since  he  acts  towards 
you  as  he  uses  to  do  unto  those  that  love  his  name.  Be- 
hold how  he  has  borne  with  your  ill  manners !  How  he 
has  put  up  with  your  mistakes  and  your  forgettings ! 
how  he  has  cared  for  you  in  all  your  cares,  helped  you 
in  all  your  difficulties,  and  pardoned  you  in  all  your 
sins!  I  do  not  know  what  you  have  to  say,  my  brother, 
but  this  I  can  say,  I  am  filled  with  admiration  at  the 
love  of  God  to  myself.  I  have  been  a  child  greatly  be- 
loved of  his  Father.  His  love  to  me  is  wonderful;  1  am 
a  deep  debtor  to  his  grace.  Are  you  not  the  same? 
Then  imitate  your  Father,  for  the  more  the  love  of  a 
child  to  his  Father  the  more  his  admiration  of  his  Father, 
and  the  stronger  his  desire  to  be  like  him  in  all  things. 
Let  it  be  so  with  you. 

However,  this  word  "as  clear  children"  bears  yet  an- 
other meaning.  Children  differ.  A  father  loves  all  his 
children,  but  he  cannot  be  said  in  all  respects  to  love  them 
all  alike,  for  some  force  him  to  love  them  beyond  the  rest. 
You  have  one  dear  son  who  lies  nearest  your  heart. 
What  a  sweet  child  he  is!  You  have  got  another  boy; 
— he  is  your  child,  and  you  love  him,  and  do  your  best 
with  him,  but  he  is  an  awkward  bit  of  stuff.  He  gives 
you  little  pleasure,  and  you  are  not  particularly  anxious 
to  have  him  about  you  all  day  long.  The  first  child 
loves  you  with  all  his  heart  and  strives  to  please  you. 
How  obedient  he  is!  How  content  and  happy!  In  all 
things  he  is  a  comfort  in  the  house.  Your  heart  binds  its 
tendrils  about  your  Joseph  more  closely  than  about  the 
wayward  boy:  you  do  not  make  a  favorite  of  him,  and  so 
excite  the  jealousy  of  the  others;  yet  you  must  own  to  a 
nearer  and  dearer  love  than  usual  when  you  think  of 
him.  You  cannot  help  your  heart  clinging  to  him;  his 
behavior  is  such  that  he  is  the  son  of  your  right  hand, 


IMITATORS    OF   GOD.  241 

and  he  has  a  tender  plaee  in  your  soul, — in  a  word,  he 
is  one  of  those  whom  the  text  calls,  "dear  children." 
Just  so  the  Lord  has  certain  dear  children.  Master 
Trapp  says,  "  God  hath  but  a  few  such  children."  I 
am  afraid  that  the  quaint  old  commentator  is  correct, 
and  that  few  imitate  the  Lord  as  they  should.  Yet  some 
of  the  Lord's  children  give  themselves  up  wholly  to  him, 
are  watchful  and  tenderly  obedient,  and  walk  in  such 
closeness  with  him  that  they  deserve  the  title  of  "  dear 
children."  Brethren,  aim  at  this.  Here  happiness  lies; 
here  heaven  lies  this  side  of  heaven  !  To  be  not  only 
children,  but  dear  children,  is  to  antedate  eternal  bliss. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  had  disciples,  but  of  some  he  said,  "Then 
are  ye  my  disciples  indeed."  Be  such.  May  the  Holy 
Spirit  make  you  such  !  Around  us  there  are  troops  of 
third-rate  Christians:  oh,  for  more  first-class  believers! 
We  have  many  who  appear  to  come  into  the  Father's 
house  at  mealtimes  to  get  a  bit  of  bread,  and  then  they 
are  off  again  into  the  world.  I  counsel  you  in  one  thing 
to  be  like  the  elder  brother,  to  whom  his  father  said, 
"  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine." 
"Blessed  are  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house."  Oh,  to  be 
of  David's  mind:  "I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
for  ever."  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  then,  in  so  high  a 
sense  that  ye  become  dear  children,  whose  one  thought 
is  how  to  please  their  father,  whose  sorrow  it  is  to  grieve 
him,  whose  beauty  it  is  to  be  like  him. 

III.  In  the  third  place,  I  desire,  dear  friends,  to  sug- 
gest encouragements.  Did  I  hear  one  cry,  "  Oh,  sir,  this 
imitation  of  God  is  beyond  us.  How  are  we  to  be  copy- 
ists of  God  ? "  I  will  encourage  you  by  giving  hints, 
which  you  can  work  out  for  yourselves. 

First,  God  has  already  made  you  his  children.  I  speak 
to  you  that  are  believers:  you  are  God's  sons  and  daugh- 


242  IMITATORS    OF    GOD. 

ters.  The  greater  work  is  done.  If  you  are  to  be  imita- 
tors of  God,  as  dear  children,  you  must  first  be  his 
children:  that  is  already  accomplished.  You  could  not 
have  made  yourselves  children  of  God,  but  he  has  done 
that  for  you.  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God." 
It  must  be  a  much  easier  thing  to  imitate  the  Father  than 
to  become  a  child.  You  might  adopt  a  child,  and  call 
it  yours,  but  you  could  not  make  it  really  your  offspring, 
do  what  you  might;  but  the  Lord  has  •'begotten  us 
again  unto  a  lively  hope."  We  are  "born,  not  of  blood, 
nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but, 
of  God";  and  by  this  new  birth  we  are  renewed  in  his 
image.  Hence  the  greater  part  of  the  task,  the  insur- 
mountable hill  of  difficulty,  is  over,  and  that  which  re- 
mains is  but  our  reasonable  service.  Should  not  the 
child  imitate  his  father?     Will  he  not  do  bo  naturally? 

Next  remember  that  God  has  given  you  his  nature 
already.  Does  not  Peter  speak  of  our  being  "partakers 
of  the  divine  nature,  having  escaped  the  corruption 
which  is  in  the  world  through  lust"?  It  remains  for 
you  to  let  the  new  nature  act  after  its  own  manner.  A 
well  of  living  water  is  within  you,  sing  ye  unto  it, 
i"  Spring  up,  0  well."  Let  the  holy  thing  that  has  been 
born  in  you  now  occupy  the  throne,  and  subdue  the  body 
of  this  death.  Pray  God  it  may.  It  seems  to  me  a  small 
thing  to  let  the  new  nature  have  scope  and  freedom 
compared  with  the  giving  of  that  nature.  A  clean 
heart  and  a  right  spirit  have  been  bestowed,  let  these 
show  themselves  in  clean  lives  and  right  feelings.  The 
living  and  incorruptible  seed  will  produce  a  harvest  of 
good  works,  water  it  with  your  prayer  and  watchful- 
ness. If  anything  doth  hinder  it,  repent  and  do  your 
first  works. 

Next,  the  Lord  has  given  you  his  blessed  Spirit  to  help 


tMlTATORS    OF    GOD.  243 

you.     "Lik  wi  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmity.*1 

Never  forget  that.  Things  impossible  with  men  are  pos- 
sible enough  to  the  Spirit  of*  God.  We  have  the  Spirit 
abiding  in  us,  vitalizing  our  whole  nature.  The  most 
beautiful  harp  yon  ever  saw  has  no  music  in  itself,  but 
must  be  struck  by  the  fingers  of  a  musician  ;  but  the  Holy 
Spirit  nial:  es  us  into  living  harps,  which  from  themselves 
pour  forth  a  natural  and  spontaneous  melody,  ie  not 
.  irvellous  ?  We  have  not  to  look  abroad  for  power 
to  be  holy,  for  the  Spirit  ofGodabideth  in  us,  and  work- 
eth  in  U-.  creating  in  us  "  the  spirit  of  power  and  of  love 
and  of  a  sound  mind."  Oh,  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit 
of  I  rod  !  Meanwhile,  it  ia  no  small  help  in  the  imitation 
of  God  to  have  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  (  hie,  and  to  be 
instructed  by  him.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  hence  he  '-an  teach  us  to  imitate  God;  he  is  also  the 
Spirit  of  holiness,  and  none  can  the  better  promote  our 
holiness;  Be  of  good  cheer!  With  such  a  Helper  you 
cannot  he  defeated. 

Again  rem  dear  friend,  that   the  Lord  allows 

you  to  commune  with  himself.  If  wo  had  to  imitate  a 
man,  and  yet  could  not  see  him,  we  should  find  it  hard 
work;  hut  in  I  we  can  draw  nigh  unto  God;  some 

of  ue  can  shut  the  closel  door  and  be  alone  with  God 
when  we  will,  we  can  even  walk  with  God  all  the  day. 
What  better  conditions  could  wo  be  under  for  imitating 
ourGod?  Nearne  God  brings  likeness  to  God.  The 
more  you  Bee  God,  the  more  of  God  will  be  seen  in  you. 
You  know  the  Persian  story  of  the  scented  clay.  One 
gaid  to  it.  "Clay,  wb  nee  hast  thou  thy  delicious  per- 
fume?" Itanswered:  "  1  was  aforetime- nothing  but  a 
pieee  of  common  clay,  but  I  lay  long  in  the  sweet 
Bociety  of  a  rose  till  I  drank'  in  its  fragrance  and  became 
perfumed  myself."     Oh,  if  you  dwell  much  with  God  in 


244  IMITATORS    OF   GOD. 

seasons  of  retirement,  and  abide  with  him  in  all  the 
affairs  of  life,  you  will  be  changed  into  his  image.  As 
surely  as  the  type  will  make  its  impress  upon  the  paper, 
and  the  seal  will  stamp  itself  upon  the  wax,  so  will  the 
Lord  impress  himself  upon  you,  and  stamp  his  image 
upon  you  if  you  dwell  in  him. 

This  ought  also  to  inspire  you  with  ardor  to  remem- 
ber that  you  have  to  imitate  God  or  you  cannot  go  to 
heaven,  for  this  is  one  of  the  main  delights  of  heaven, 
to  be  like  Christ  because  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is. 
"  They  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God." 
His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads;  that  is  to  say,  the 
character  of  God  shall  be  most  conspicuous  in  them. 
Surely  that  which  is  to  be  our  destiny  eternally  should 
be  our  desire  to-day.  We  should  strive  after  holiness 
according  to  his  working  who  worketh  in  us  mightily. 
We  must  become  close  copyists  of  God  that  we  may 
enjoy  everlasting  communion  with  him.  May  his  Spirit 
work  us  to  that  end. 

IV.  Now  by  turning  our  subject  a  little  round  we 
shall  close  with  certain  ixferexces.  I  have  hitherto  spo- 
ken only  to  saints,  but  here  is  an  inference  for  seekers. 
11  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children;"  what  do  [ 
infer  from  this?  I  inter  that  God  is  ready  to  forgive 
those  who  hare  offended  Mm.  0  you  that  have  never  been 
pardoned,  listen  to  this:  the  Lord  must  be  ready  to  for- 
give. We  are  to  make  God  our  pattern,  but  if  God  were 
unwilling  to  forgive  he  could  not  be  a  pattern  to  us. 
We  are  to  be  ready  to  pass  by  the  offences  of  others, 
therefore  if  God  is  set  forth  as  our  example  he  must  cer- 
tainly be  more  ready  to  forgive  than  any  of  us  can  be. 
0  you  that  are  covered  with  sin  to-day,  I  wTould  urge  you 
to  catch  at  this  fact.  Suppose  I  were  to  bid  you  imitate 
your  earthly  father  in  frankly  and  freely  forgiving  all 


IMITATORS    OF    GOD.  245 

who  vexed  him;  then  you  might  reply  "  Do  yon  know 
my  father?  "  If  I  answered  "Yes,"  you  would  say,  "Is 
he  really  a  fair  example  of  patience  and  forgiveness  ?  for 
I  offended  him  some  time  ago,  and  I  have  always  been 
afraid  to  go  to  him,  lest  he  should  refuse  to  receive  me." 
If  I  could  answer,  "Yes,  your  father  is  an  example  that 
you  may  safely  follow  in  that  respect,"  then  you  would 
reply,  "  I  will  go  home  to  him  and  tell  him  that  I  desire 
his  forgiveness,  and  am  sorry  to  have  caused  him  pain." 
0  poor  sinners,  you  do  not  know  what  a  forgiving  spirit 
the  heavenly  Father  has.  He  gave  his  son  Jesus  that 
he  might  be  able  to  pass  by  our  sins  and  yet  be  the 
righteous  Judge  of  men.  There  have  been  good  men 
in  the  world  who  have  delighted  to  pass  by  offences. 
Some  here  present  have  been  taught  of  the  Lord  till  it 
has  become  easy  and  pleasurable  to  overlook  injuries 
and  forget  wrongs;  but  our  heavenly  Father  is  much 
more  kind,  and  with  far  more  delight  blots  out  the  sinner's 
iniquities.  They  said  of  Cranmer  that  he  was  more  than 
ready  to  forgive,  for  he  always  returned  good  for  evil. 
It  was  a  common  saying,  "Do  my  lord  of  Canterbury 
an  ill  turn,  and  he  will  be  your  friend  as  long  as  you 
live."  That  was  fine;  but  my  lord  of  Canterbury  was 
nothing  in  gentleness  compared  with  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  The  holy  Leighton, 
also,  was  of  such  a  gentle  spirit  that  one  day  when  he 
went  out  for  a  walk  and  came  back  he  could  not  get 
into  his  own  house,  for  it  was  locked  up,  and  his  servant 
had  gone  away  for  a  day's  fishing  without  leave  or  no- 
tice. All  the  good  man  said  was,  "John,  next  time  you 
go  fishing,  please  to  let  me  know,  or  at  least  leave  me 
the  key,  so  that  I  may  open  the  door."  That  was  all. 
If  even  men  have  come  up  to  such  a  degree  of  patience, 
much   more   will  you  find  longsuffering  in   God.     Oh, 


246  IMITATORS    OF    GOD. 

trembler,  do  believe  that  our  Father  in  heaven  is  willing 
to  forgive  you.  You  backsliders,  you  great  sinners,  have 
right  thoughts  of  God,  and  come  to  him  at  once  for  rec- 
onciliation. There  is  forgiveness  with  him.  "  He  de- 
lighteth  in  mercy."  "The  Lord  is  good,  and  ready  to 
forgive." 

Christian  friends,  is  there  one  among  you  who  thinks 
God  will  not  keep  his  promise  to  him.  Now,  listen. 
God  is  an  example  to  us,  therefore  he  will  surely  keep  Ms 
word.  He  must  be  faithful  and  true,  for  you  are  bidden 
to  copy  him.  If  God  could  be  false  to  his  word  we  could 
not  be  exhorted  to  imitate  him,  and  therefore  we  are 
sure  that  he  is  faithful  and  true,  because  we  are  bidden 
to  imitate  him  closely.  You  may  be  sure  that  every 
word  of  his  will  stand  fast,  for  he  would  have  us  righteous 
and  upright  in  all  our  ways.  "God  is  not  unrighteous 
to  forget  your  work  and  labor  of  love  which  ye  have 
showed  towards  his  name." 

Another  inference — only  a  hint  at  it — is,  if  you  are 
told  to  be  "imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children,"  then  you 
may  depend  upon  it  the  Lord  is  a  dear  Father.  The  dear 
children  of  God  have  a  dear  Father.  We  may  rest  as- 
sured that  he  will  be  kind  and  tender  to  us,  since  he 
would  have  us  loving  towards  himself.  I  know  you 
are  heavy  in  spirit  at  this  time :  I  know  you  are  depressed 
and  troubled;  but  your  Father  island  and  good.  Be- 
lieve it  if  you  cannot  see  it.  If  reason  says  that  he  deals 
somewhat  harshly  with  you,  for  he  chastens  you,  re- 
member that  this  is  his  way  with  his  beloved.  Has  he 
not  said,  "As  many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten"? 
These  stripes  are  seals  of  love.  Chastisement  is  a  high 
proof  of  wise  affection.  Your  heavenly  Father  is  much 
better  to  you  than  you  are  to  him.  He  is  dearer,  and 
kinder,  and  more  loving  as  a  Father  than  you  have  been 


IMITATORS    OF    GOD.  247 

as  a  child  to  him.     Rejoice  in   jour  Father  though  you 
cannot  rejoice  in  yourself. 

Lastly,  when  the  text  says,  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God," 
if  bids  us  keep  on  imitating  him  as  long  as  we  live: 
therefore  I  conclude  that  God  will  always  be  to  us  what 
he  is.  He  will  continue  in  his  love  since  he  makes  that 
love  the  example  of  ours.  God  will  persevere  in  bring- 
ing us  home  to  heaven,  for  he  teaches  us  to  persevere, 
and  make  this  a  part  of  our  likeness  to  himself.  The 
Lord  will  not  turn  away  his  heart  from  us;  he  will  not 
fail  nor  be  discouraged:  having  begun  to  make  us  meet 
for  heaven  he  will  never  stay  his  hand  till  that  work  is 
done.  Wherefore  rest  ye  upon  the  immutable  goodness 
of  your  Father,  and  pray  for  grace  evermore  to  imitate 
him  until  ye  come  to  see  his  face.  May  his  presence  be 
with  you,  and  may  he  give  you  rest.     Amen. 


XII. 

BUYING  WITHOUT  MONEY. 

June  17,  1883. 

'  He  that  hatli  no  money;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat." — Isaiah  lv.  1. 

There  is  a  semicolon  in  our  translation,  but  we  need  not 
take  notice  of  it.  It  should  not  be  there,  since  the  text 
is  the  second  of  two  parallel  sentences  arranged  accord- 
ing to  the  method  of  Hebrew  poetry. 

"Ho,  every  one  that 'thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters, 
And  he  that  hath  no  money,  come,  buy,  and  eat." 

We  have  before  us  the  figure  of  a  merchant  selling 
his  wares,  and  crying  like  a  chapman  in  the  market, 
"  Ho  !  "  To  attract  attention  he  calls  aloud,  "  Come  ! 
Come!  Come!"  three  several  times;  and  he  adds  to 
this  the  cry  of  "Buy!  Buy!"  Shall  the  Great  King 
thus  liken  himself  to  a  trader  in  the  market  earnest  to 
dispose  of  his  goods?  It  is  even  so,  and  I  therefore  call 
upon  you  to  admire  the  mercy  of  the  Lord. 

In  the  fifty-third  and  fifty-fourth  chapters  this  Divine 
Merchantman  has  been  spreading  out  his  wares.  What 
treasures  they  are!  Look  to  the  fifty-third  chapter: 
what  see  you  there  ?  Behold  that  pearl  of  great  price, 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Behold  him  wounded  for  our 
transgressions,  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities.  This  is 
so  costly  a  treasure  that  heaven  and  earth  could  not 
match  it.     Where  else  should  we  find  a  sacrifice  for  sin, 


BUYING     WITHOUT   MONEY.  249 

a  justifier  of  many?  This  anointed  One  of  God,  upon 
whom  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  laid — who  would 
not  have  him  to  be  his  Saviour?  Surely  with  such  a 
treasure  to  display  we  ought  not  to  cry  long  for  buyers. 
for  every  truly  wise  man  will  exclaim,  "This  is  what  1 
need:  a  Saviour,  and  a  great  one.  An  atonement  for  sin 
is  the  one  thing  needful  to  me."  To  this  you  are  invited 
in  these  words,  "He  that  hath  no  money,  come,  buy, 
and  eat." 

In  the  fifty-fourth  chapter  the  Divine  Merchantman 
sets  forth  the  rare  possession  of  Ms  everlasting  love.  Read 
from  verse  seven,  "  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken 
thee;  but  with  great  mercies  will  I  gather  thee.  In  a 
little  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee  for  a  moment;  but 
with  everlasting  kindness  will  I  have  mercy  on  thee, 
saith  the  Lord  thy  Redeemer.  For  the  mountains  shall 
depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed;  but  my  kindness  shall 
not  depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my 
peace  be  removed,  saith  the  Lord  that  hath  mercy  on 
thee."  What  more  can  be  set  forth  to  win  men's  hearts? 
First,  a  full  atonement  and  now  love  everlasting,  mak- 
ing a  covenant  confirmed  by  oath.  Shall  there  be  need 
often  to  cry,  "Come  and  buy,"  when  such  celestial  wares 
are  displayed  before  us? 

Added  to  this,  we  see  a  little  further  on  the  blessing 
of  heavenly  edification.  Notice  the  eleventh  verse: — "I 
will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colors,  and  lay  thy  founda- 
tions with  sapphires.  And  I  will  make  thy  windows  of 
agates,  and  thy  gates  of  carbuncles,  and  all  thy  borders 
of  pleasant  stones."  This  is  rare  building,  is  it  not? 
There  should  be  a  quick  market  for  such  an  array  of 
choice  things:  sapphires  and  agates — what  would  you 
have  more?  Here  are  all  manner  of  precious  stones, 
and    all    of  these    given    freely !     The   only   terms    are 


250  BUYING    WITHOUT  MONEY. 

"everything,  for  nothing!  Heaven  for  the  asking!" 
All  the  treasures  of  God  are  freely  bestowed  upon  the 
sons  of  men  who  are  willing  to  accept  them  as  gifts  of 
grace. 

As  if  this  were  not  enough,  the  Lord  brings  out  a 
fourth  blessing,  namely,  everlasting  safety  by  faith:  "  In 
righteousness  shalt  thou  be  established:  thou  shalt  be 
far  from  oppression;  for  thou  shalt  not  fear:  and  from 
terror;  for  it  shall  not  come  near  thee.  No  weapon  that 
is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper;  and  every  tongue 
that  shall  rise  against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt  con- 
demn." Security  is  worth  infinitely  more  than  gold. 
To  be  protected  by  Divine  wisdom  from  every  possible 
harm  is  the  portion  of  believers  in  Jesus.  To  be  saved. 
and  made  safe  for  ever,  is  not  this  worth  worlds?  Never 
was  there  a  market  like  the  gospel  market;  and  never 
were  such  wares  spread  out  before  the  eyes  of  men  as 
those  which  are  here  presented  to  yon.  I  shall  there- 
fore with  the  more  hopefulness  speak  to  those  who  have 
not  yet  been  buyers,  and  urge  upon  you  the  invitation 
of  the  text,  "  He  that  hath  no  money,  come  ye,  buy,  and 
eat." 

In  handling  this  text  we  shall  notice,  first,  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  buyer,  "-He  that  hath  no  money";  secondly, 
the  selection  of  this  particular  buyer — why  is  he  invite! 
beyond  all  others?  Thirdly,  the  'invitation  to  purchase, 
"Come,  buy.  and  eat";  and  fourthly,  we  shall  add  the 
assurance  that  this  gospel  market  is  no  deception,  for 
these  things  are  really  to  be  had. 

I.  First  then,  here  is  a  description  of  the  buyer.  I 
believe  he  is  here  this  morning.  I  hope  he  will  recog- 
nize his  own  portrait,  though  it  is  by  no  means  a  flatter- 
ing one.  It  is  truth  itself,  a  photograph  taken  by  the 
sunlight,  of  heaven.      It  is  the  portrait  of  a  poor,  penni- 


BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY.  251 

less,  broken-clown  creature  reduced  to  the  extremity  of 
want:  here  it  is — "  He  that  hath  no  money." 

Of  course,  by  this  is  meant  among  other  things  the 
man  who  literally  has  no  money.  Among  the  Jews  of 
our  Lord's  day  there  existed  an  idea  that  a  man  who  had 
money  was  at  a  great  advantage  with  regard  to  heavenly 
things,  so  that  when  the  Lord  said  "  How  hardly  shall 
they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom,"  they  ex- 
claimed with  wonder,  "  Who  then  can  be  saved?"  as  if 
they  thought  that  it*  the  rich  could  not  be  easily  saved 
then  none  could  be.  The  word  of  God  contains  nothing 
to  encourage  such  a  notion.  The  rich  man  is  never  ex- 
tolled in  the  Old  Testament,  but  he  is  often  spoken  of 
most  slightingly.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  Messiah  that 
"the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them,"  and  it 
is  the  glory  of  the  gospel  that  it  is  freely  provided  by 
the  bounty  of  God  for  the  beggar  on  the  dunghill.  Let 
no  man's  heart  fail  him  this  day  because  he  saith  "Silver 
and  gold  have  I  none."  Having  nothing,  yen  may  yet 
possess  all  things.  You  are  at  no  disadvantage  in  God's 
market  because  your  pocket  is  empty:  you  may  come 
penniless  and  bankrupt  and  receive  the  exceeding  riches 
of  his  grace.  But  we  understand  the  reference  of  the 
text  to  be  mainly  spiritual,  and  so  the  portrait  here  is 
that  of  a  man  who  has  no  spiritual  money,  no  gold  of 
goodness,  no  silver  of  sanctity, — he  it  is  that  is  invited 
to  come  and  buy  the  wine  and  milk  of  heaven. 

His  fancied  stock  of  natural  innocence  is  spent.  At  first 
he  thought  himself  to  be  pure  as  the  newly  fallen  snow, 
forgetting  the  question — How  can  he  be  clean  that  is 
born  of  a  woman?  They  told  him  that  lie  was  made  "a 
member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven"  while  he  was  yet  a  babe;  and 
thus  he  was  led  to  think  that  he  bad  started  life's  busi- 


252  BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY. 

ness  with  a  respectable  stock-in-trade.  He  knows  better 
now;  lie  has  seen  this  fancied  goodness  melt  away  like 
the  mist  of  the  morning.  He  has  gone,  like  the  prodigal, 
into  the  far  country,  and  therc^  he  has  wasted  his  sub- 
stance till  not  a  groat  remains.  If  he  searches  himself 
through  and  through  he  cannot  find  a  relic  of  innocence; 
the  whole  head  is  sick  and  the  whole  heart  faint:  from 
the  sole  of  the  foot  even  to  the  head  he  is  all  wounds, 
and  bruises,  and  putrefying  sores.  There  is  no  health 
in  him.  Innocence  is  utterly  gone,  if  it  was  ever  there. 
He  thought  that  he  had  accumulated  some  little  sav 
ings  of  good  works;  but  his  imaginary  righteousness  funis 
out  to  he  counterfeit.  Mad  he  not  been  honest?  had  he 
not  been  sober?  had  he  not  attended  a  place  of  worship, 
and  repeated  forms  of  prayer?  Did  not  all  this  make 
up  a  little  fortune  of  righteousness?  He  thought  so, 
but  then  he  was  ignorant  and  deluded:  he  knows  better 
now,  for  he  has  found  out  that  all  his  righteousness  is 
base  metal:  he  could  not  pass  a  penny's  worth  of  it  in 
the  shop  of  his  own  conscience,  much  less  in  the  market 
of  heaven;  he  knows  that  it  would  at  once  be  detected, 
and  nailed  to  the  counter.  He  finds  that  his  silver  is 
white  metal  of  the  basest  sort,  and  that  his  gold  is  a 
sham:  he  has  not  the  face  to  offer  it  anywhere;  yea.  he 
is  so  afraid  of  being  seized  by  justice  as  a  coiner  that, 
like  a  wise  man,  he  has  hidden  his  sham  righteous 
ness  in  the  earth,  and  has  run  away  from  it,  He  is  now 
more  afraid  of  his  righteousness  than  of  his  unrighteous 
ness.  He  would  think  it  just  as  possible  for  him  to  be 
saved  by  cursing  and  swearing  as  by  the  merit  of  his 
own  works.  His  good  works  are  in  ill  odor  with  his 
conscience,  for  he  sees  them  to  be  defiled  within  and 
without  with  sin:  a  rottenness  is  in  the  bones  of  his 
righteousness,  and  thus  he  is  without  merit  of  any  sort. 


BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY.  253 

See  his  poverty:  his  original  stock  is  gone,  and  all  his 
savings  have  melted  away ! 

He  is  in  a  still  worse  plight,  for  he  is  also  too  poor 
to  get  anything:  the  procuring  power  is  gone,  for  he  has 
"no  money."  Now  that  he  has  come  into  his  sober 
senses  he  would  repent,  but  he  cannot  find  a  tender 
heart;  he  would  believe,  but  he  cannot  find  faith.  He 
has  no  money;  that  is  to  say,  nothing  wherewith  he 
can  procure  those  good  things  which  are  necessary  unto 
salvation  and  eternal  life.  He  sees  them  all  before  him, 
like  many  a  poor  man  who  walks  the  streets  of  London, 
and  sees  just  what  he  wants  behind  the  glass  of  the 
shop  window;  but  he  puts  his  hand  into  his  pocket,  and 
despairingly  passes  on,  for  he  has  no  money.  As  with- 
out money  nothing  is  to  be  bought  in  the  world's  mart, 
so  is  this  poor  man  afraid  that  no  blessing  of  grace  can 
ever  be  his  because  he  has  no  good  thing  to  offer,  no 
righteousness  to  give  in  exchange.  If  God  would  sell 
him  even  a  pennyworth  of  righteousness  he  has  not  the 
penny  to  buy  it  with;  and  if  the  Lord  would  pardon  all 
his  sins  for  one  sixpenny  worth  of  holiness,  he  has  not 
so  much  as  that  to  offer — he  lias  no  money. 

Moreover,  his  stock  with  which  to  trade  is  gone.  Money 
makes  money,  and  he  that  has  a  little  to  begin  with  may 
soon  have  more;  but  this  man,  having  no  stock  to  start 
with,  cannot  hope  to  be  rich  towards  God  in  and  by 
himself.  He  cannot  open  the  smallest  shop,  or  sell  the 
most  trifling  wares,  for  he  has  no  money  to  start  with. 
Even  the  poorest  will  buy  a  few  matches  and  hawk  them 
about  the  streets,  but  this  poor  creature  has  "no  money," 
and  cannot  even  invest  a  twopence  in  goods.  He  has  no 
power  even  to  think  aright,  much  less  to  act  aright,  so 
as  to  become  pleasing  to  God:  he  is  as  much  without 
strength  as  without  merit.     Not  only  is  lie  without  good, 


254  BUYING     WITHOUT   MONEY. 

but  lie  appears  to  himself  to  be  without  power  to  get 
good.  He  is  a  broken  trader  who  cannot  again  try  his 
fortune,  for  he  has  "  no  money."  He  is  worse  than  a 
common  beggar,  for  he  does  not  even  know  how  to  beg 
— "  We  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought." 
He  needs  even  to  be  taught  how  to  beg.  What  a  pass 
to  come  to ! 

There  is  your  portrait,  my  poor  friend!  Do  you 
recognize  it  ?  I  hope  you  do.  I  hear  you  say,  "  Yes, 
that  is  myself.  I  am  without  money."  Then  to  you 
the  word  of  this  salvation  is  sent — "  He  that  hath  no 
money,  come,  buy,  and  eat." 

"No  money!"  Then  he  cannot  pay  his  old  debts. 
His  sins  rise  up  before  him,  but  he  cannot  make  amends 
for  them.  What  a  long  file  is  needed  to  hold  the  record 
of  his  debts;  it  must,  be  deep  as  the  bottomless  pit,  and 
high  as  heaven.  He  owes  ten  thousand  talents,  and  has 
"nothing  to  pay":  he  has  not  a  stiver,  he  has  no  money 
whatever!  He  is  reduced  to  bankruptcy,  and  cannot 
pay  a  farthing  in  the  pound. 

Moreover,  he  cannot  meet  Ids  present  expenses.  Poor 
man!  he  must  live;  he  must  eat  the  bread  of  heaven, 
and  he  must  drink  of  the  water  of  life:  but  he  has  noth- 
ing with  which  to  procure  these  good  things.  His  soul 
hungereth,  yea,  even  fainteth  after  the  mercy  of  God, 
but  he  has  no  price  with  which  to  procure  it.  This 
day  he  would  pluck  his  eyes  out  to  be  pleasing  with 
God:  but  he  has  nothing  to  offer  which  the  Lord  could 
accept.  He  is  reduced  to  such  beggary  that  like  the 
prodigal  he  cries,  "I  perish  with  hunger." 

He  cannot  face  the  future.  He  hardly  dares  to  think 
of  it;  and  yet  the  thought  of  it  will  come  in.  He  re- 
members the  needs  which  will  surround  him  on  a  dying 
bed,  and  the  terrible  demands  of  the  resurrection  morn- 


BUYING    WITHOUT  MONEY.  255 

ing  when  the  ringing  trump  shall  introduce  him  to  the 
dread  Assize,  and  he  shall  stand  before  his  God  to  render 
his  account.  He  knows  that  he  cannot  answer  him  for 
one  sin  of  a  thousand.  He  dreads  the  thought  of  the 
world  to  come!  He  has  nothing  with  which  to  meet 
the  demands  of  the  eternal  future.  He  lias  "no  money," 
nothing  that  will  pass  current  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
He  is  brought  to  the  last  stage  of  spiritual  destitution; 
poverty  has  come  upon  him  like  an  armed  man.  This 
is  a  terrible  plight  to  be  in:  yet  I  wish  that  every  sinner 
here  might  be  reduced  to  it,  for  when  he  is  so  reduced 
and  brought  low,  grace  will  come  in,  and  the  tide  will 
turn. 

The  only  hope  for  a  man  who  has  "  no  money  "  must 
be  outside  himself.  It  is  idle  for  him  to  look  into  his 
own  coffers:  he  must  look  away  from  himself;  and  his 
only  chance  in  thus  looking  is  to  appeal  to  charity,  and 
plead  for  mercy's  sake.  He  cannot  buy — it  is  only  God's 
mercy  that  talks  about  his  buying:  he  must  beg,  he 
must  entreat  for  love's  sake.  This  is  an  essential  part 
of  spiritual  poverty;  and  I  would  that  every  unregen- 
erate  person  knew  that  in  him  there  dwelleth  no  good 
thing,  and  that  lie  were  convinced  that  he  must  look 
out  and  look  up  for  salvation,  and  that  upon  the  ground 
of  mercy,  since  he  cannot  expect  to  obtain  any  blessing 
upon  the  footing  of  justice,  or  as  a  matter  of  debt. 

This  is  the  man  who  is  called  to  buy  heaven's  wine 
and  milk.  Do  you  want  a  fuller  portrait  of  him  ?  Look 
at  the  twenty-first  verse  of  the  fourteenth  of  Luke's  Gos- 
pel, where  he  that  made  the  feast  said,  "Bring  in  hither 
the  poor  and  the  maimed  and  the  halt  and  the  blind." 
This  man  is  so  poor  that  he  cannot  buy  bread,  so  maimed 
that  he  cannot  run  for  it,  so  halt  that  he  cannot  stand 
up  to  receive  it,  and  so  blind  that  he  cannot  see  it;  yet 


256  BUYING     WITHOUT   MONEY. 

such  a  person  we  are  to  bring  into  the  royal  banquet  of 
mercy.  If  you  would  like  another  photograph  turn  to 
Revelation  iii.  17,  18:  "Thou  knowest  not  that  thou  art 
wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked." 
This  portrait  was  taken  by  John,  who  had  an  eagle's  eye, 
and  saw  deep  into  the  inward  misery  of  the  heart.  To 
the  "wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and 
naked,"  the  Lord  says,  "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold 
tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou  may  est  be  rich;  and  white 
raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed,  and  that  the  shame 
of  thy  nakedness  do  not  appear;  and  anoint  thine  eyes 
with  eyesalve,  that  thou  mayest  see."'  Gospel  riches 
are  sent  to  remove  our  wretchedness,  and  mercy  to  re- 
move our  misery.  It  is  to  these  wretches,  these  blind 
beggars,  these  naked  vagrants,  that  the  gospel  is  sent. 
This  day  I  have  to  present  the  promise  of  God  and  the 
exhortation  of  mercy  to  those  who  have  failed  in  life, 
who  are  down  at  the  heel,  broken  and  crushed.  Oh,  you 
utterly  lost  ones,  to  you  is  there  opened  a  door  of  hope. 
The  Lord  has  come  into  the  market,  and  he  bids  you  buy 
of  him  without  money  and  without  price. 

II.  Xow  a  minute  or  two  upon  the  second  point:  the 
selection  of  the  buyer.  It  is  a  strange  choice,  and  it 
leads  to  a  singular  invitation,  "  He  that  hath  no  money; 
come,  buy,  and  eat."  In  the  streets  round  about  this 
Tabernacle,  especially  on  a  Saturday  evening,  you  may 
note  the  salesmen  standing  before  their  shops,  and  cry- 
ing out  vociferously,  "Buy!  Buy!  Buy!"  No  one  can 
refuse  to  hear  their  noise;  but  if  they  knew  that  a  per- 
son had  no  money.,  I  think  they  would  save  their  breath 
so  far  as  he  is  concerned.  They  want  ready-money  cus- 
tomers, and  plenty  of  them.  What  would  be  the  use  of 
crying,  "Buy!  Buy!"  to  a  man  whose  purse  is  empty? 
Yet  these  are  the  very  persons  whom   the  Lord  selects, 


BUYING    WITHOUT  MONEY.  257 

and  to  them  he  cries,  "  Come,  buy,  and  eat."     What  is 
the  reason  ? 

Well,  first,  these  need  mercy  most.  Oh,  poor  souls,  when 
the  Lord  Jesus  looks  on  you  he  does  not  look  at  what 
you  have,  but  at  what  you  have  not.  He  does  not  look 
at  your  excellences,  but  at  your  necessities.  He  is  not 
looking  out  for  man's  fulness  but  for  man's  emptiness. 
The  Lord  Jesus  never  gave  himself  for  our  righteousness; 
but  he  "gave  himself  for  our  sins."  Salvation  is  by  grace, 
and  it  is  presented  to  those  who  are  lost,  for  they  are  the 
people  whom  it  will  suit:  how  should  those  who  are  not 
lost  value  salvation  ?  I  say  that  God  selects  the  most 
poverty-stricken  first  because  this  character  most  needs 
his  pitying  love.  The  greatness  of  your  necessity  is  that 
which  gives  you  a  first  call  from  the  God  of  all  grace. 
Not  merit,  but  demerit;  not  desert  of  reward,  but  desert 
of  wrath,  is  the  qualification  for  mercy. 

Again,  this  character  is  chosen  because  he  is  such  an 
one  as  vM  exhibit  in  his  own  -person  thepoiver  of  divine  grace. 
If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  takes  one  that  is  wretched,  and 
miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,  and  if  he  sat- 
isfies all  his  necessities  by  being  riches  for  his  wretched- 
ness, comfort  for  his  misery,  wealth  for  his  poverty,  eves 
for  his  blindness,  and  raiment  for  his  nakedness,  then  all 
the  world  will  see  what  a  great  Saviour  he  is.  and  how 
wonderfully  his  salvation  meets  the  necessities  of  the 
case.  If  you  and  I  were  only  little  sinners  I  do  not  see 
how  Christ  could  be  anything  but  a  little  Saviour  to  us; 
and  if  he  only  met  our  smaller  wants,  a  small  supply 
would  suffice.  Ah,  friends,  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in 
him  should  all  fulness  dwell,  and  he  wills  that  this  ful- 
ness should  be  seen.  When  he  takes  a  man  whose  needs 
are  as  large  as  the  sea,  whose  wants  are  as  many  as  the, 
sands  on  the  shore,  whose  danger  is  deep  as  the  bottom- 


2o8  BUYING    WITHOUT  MONEY. 

less  pit,  and  whose  sin  is  black  as  Tophet's  midnight; 
and  when  he  makes  that  man  into  a  child  of  God  and  an 
heir  of  heaven,  ah,  then  all  intelligences  are  amazed,  and 
cry  out,  "  What  a  Saviour  is  this  !  What  precious  blood 
is  this !  What  a  fulness  this  must  be  which  satisfies 
such  immeasurable  wants  !  "  As  it  is  one  end  of  Christ's 
work  to  glorify  divine  grace,  therefore  he  calls  first  upon 
those  who  have  the  most  need,  for  in  them  his  grace  will 
be  best  displayed. 

Next,  the  Lord  Jesus  delights  to  make  evident  thefreeness 
of  Ms  grace.  Now,  if  those  were  first  called  who  have 
the  money  of  merit,  it  might  be  imagined  that  they  had 
paid  their  way:  but  if  those  are  called  who  have  no  good 
thing  in  them,  it  is  clear  that  grace  is  free.  When  a 
poor  wretch  cannot  do  a  stroke  of  work,  or  contribute  a 
button  to  you,  then  your  lodging  him  must  be  of  pure 
charity,  and  nothing  else.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  very  jeal- 
ous of  the  freeness  of  his  grace:  he  will  not  let  a  sixpence 
of  our  merit  cross  his  hand,  lest  we  should  glory  in  our 
flesh,  and  think  that  we  have  made  Jesus  rich. 

If  you  ask  me  yet  again  why  is  he  that  hath  no  money 
so  expressly  called,  I  would  answer,  because  he  is  the  kind 
of  man  that  icill  listen.  The  man  who  is  needy  is  the  man 
that  will  hearken  to  the  tidings  of  a  full  and  free  supply. 
It  is  the  guilty  man  who  loves  to  hear  of  pardon,  it  is 
the  bond-slave  whose  ear  is  charmed  with  the  word  "  re- 
demption." If  you  are  no  sinner  you  will  not  care  about 
a  Saviour.  Only  real  sinners  rejoice  in  a  real  atonement. 
The  Lord  sends  the  gospel  to  every  creature  under  heav- 
en ;  but  he  knows,  as  we  do,  that  the  most  of  men  will 
not  regard  it,  for  they  fancy  that  they  need  it  not:  but 
if  there  is  one  that  has  no  merit  or  claim  he  will  listen 
^with  eagerness  to  the  tidings  of  mercy  for  him.  He 
that  hath  no  money  is  the  man  for  Christ's  money.     He 


BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY.  259 

that  is  shivering  in  his  nakedness  will  rejoice  to  be 
clothed.  A  wretched  sinner  jumps  at  mercy  like  a  hun- 
gry fish  leaping  at  the  bait.  When  a  soul  is  empty  then 
it  longs  for  the  fulness  of  Christ,  but  not  till  then.  Full 
souls  quarrel  over  honeycombs,  they  are  not  sweet  enough 
for  them  ;  but  to  the  hungry  man  even  every  bitter  thing 
is  sweet.  A  man  who  is  conscious  of  sin  will  not  quibble 
about  the  way  of  grace,  but  if  p.ardon  is  to  be  had  he 
will  have  it  at  once:  whoever  may  be  silent,  you  will 
hear  his  voice  crying  aloud,  "Thou  Son  of  David,  have 
mercy  on  me  !  " 

Let  me  add  that  such  an  empty,  penniless  soul,  when 
he  does  get  mercy,  will  prize  it  and  praise  it.  He  that 
has  been  shut  up  in  the  dark  for  years  values  the  light 
of  the  snn.  He  that  has  been  a  prisoner  for  months, 
how  happy  he  is  when  the  prison  doors  are  opened,  and  he 
is  at  liberty  again  !  Let  a  man  once  get  Christ,  who  has 
bitterly  known  and  felt  his  need  of  him,  and  he  will 
prize  him  beyond  all  things,  and  find  his  sole  delight  in 
him.  The  impotent  man  at  the  beautiful  gate  of  the 
temple,  when  his  ankles  received  strength,  walked,  ay, 
and  ran,  ay,  and  leaped.  He  leaped,  praising  God,  be- 
fore all  the  people.  Fie  could  not  do  enough  to  show  his 
delight  and  his  gratitude.  Oh,  for  a  few  leaping  Chris- 
tians. The  Lord  Jesus  loves  us  to  prize  the  mercy  which 
cost  him  so  dear.  Shall  he  die  on  the  tree  and  give  us 
blessings  to  treat  with  contempt?  Xo,  no.  We  will 
love  him  much  because  of  his  priceless  gifts  to  us. 
Therefore  the  Well-beloved  delights  to  invite  those  who 
manifestly  have  no  merit,  and  no  spiritual  power,  because 
he  knows  that  when  they  taste  of  his  love  they  will  over- 
flow with  praise  to  his  name  for  ever  and  ever.  You  have 
heard  of  the  old  woman  who  said  that  if  ever  she  got  to 
heaven  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should  never  hear  the  last  of 


260  BUYING    WITHOUT  MONEY. 

it;  many  of  us  are  of  that  mind:  we  shall  never  praise 
the  Lord  sufficiently  throughout  eternity.  If  I  do  but 
once  cross  the  golden  threshold,  and  stand  within  the 
pearly  gate,  my  heart,  my  soul,  my  tongue  shall  extol 
my  Redeemer  world  without  end.  This  shall  be  the  one 
and  only  contention  among  the  birds  of  Paradise,  who 
shall  sing  the  most  sweetly  to  the  praise  of  infinite  com- 
passion. None  of  us  will  yield  the  palm  in  that  contest; 
we  will  see  which  can  sink  lowest  in  sense  of  obligation, 
which  can  rise  highest  in  adoring  love.  Singers  are 
wanted  for  the  celestial  choirs  and  there  are  no  voices 
so  sweet  as  those  which  have  known  the  force  of  spirit- 
ual hunger  and  thirst:  these  take  the  alto  notes,  and  sing 
"Glory  to  God  in  the  highest." 

In  any  case,  be  the  reason  what  it  may,  it  is  clear  that 
there  are  special  invitations  issued  for  the  royal  feasts, 
and  these  are  all  directed  to  those  whose  need  has  reached 
the  extremity  of  distress. 

But  I  may  not  linger.  How  I  wish  that  I  knew  how 
to  preach.  I  long  with  my  whole  heart  to  use  great 
plainness  of  speech.  I  would  not  utter  a  single  sentence 
which  would  seem  to  have  the  wisdom  of  words  in  it. 
I  aim  not  at  fine  language,  but  only  to  get  at  poor  sinners' 
hearts.  Oh  that  I  could  bring  the  sinner  to  his  Saviour. 
Oratory  has  been  the  curse  of  the  Christian  church;  it 
has  hidden  the  cross  under  roses,  and  taken  men's  minds 
away  from  Christ.  To  strain  after  eloquence  when 
preaching  the  gospel  is  a  sin  worthy  of  eternal  destruc- 
tion. To  point  the  sinner  to  Christ  must  be  our  sole  de- 
sire. Pray  for  me,  brethren  and  sisters,  as  I  go  on,  for 
I  need  aid  from  the  Holy  Ghost. 

HI.  I  have  now  in  the  third  place  to  notice  the  invi- 
tation. The  man  who  has  no  money  is  to  come,  buy,  and 
eat.     It  looks  odd  to  tell  a  penniless  man  to  come  and 


BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY.  261 

buy,  does  it  not?  and  yet  what  other  word  could  be 
used?  Come  and  buy,  has  a  meaning  of  its  own  not  to 
be  otherwise  expressed. 

In  buying  there  are  three  or  four  stages,  and  the  first 
is  desiring  to  have  the  thing  which  is  exhibited.  The 
man  who  buys  has  first  the  wish  that  the  property  in 
the  article  should  be  vested  in  himself.  Will  you  not 
desire  that  Christ,  that  forgiveness,  that  eternal  life, 
that  salvation  should  become  yours?  Do  you  not  long 
for  the  Lord  to  grant  it  to  you  ?  Men  in  the  streets,  as 
I  have  said  before,  cry  "Buy!  buy!"  because  buying 
means  business.  They  are  not  unwilling  that  people 
should  stop  and  look  at  their  goods — they  even  ask  them 
to  walk  in  and  see  for  themselves;  but  they  aim  at  find- 
ing buyers  and  not  gazers.  If  a  man  were  to  come  into 
the  shop  and  turn  over  all  the  goods,  and  never  purchase 
anything,  the  tradesman  would  begin  to  cry,  "Buy! 
buy!"  with  quite  another  accent;  for  he  does  not  want 
a  crowd  to  look  at  him,  but  he  wants  people  to  buy 
of  him.  Many  of  you  who  are  here  this  morning  have 
only  come  to  hear  what  the  preacher  has  to  say,  and  to 
criticise  his  style  and  language;  I  pray  you  rise  to  some- 
thing better  than  that.  Come,  and  buy !  Let  us  do 
business  this  morning  for  God,  and  for  our  own  souls. 
Do  not  waste  the  precious  market-day  of  the  Sabbath. 
People  come  and  go,  and  hear  sermons,  and  read  books, 
and  all  for  a  sort  of  amusement;  they  do  not  come  to 
downright  business  with  the  Lord.  See,  how  they  select 
striking  sentences  and  cull  sparkling  and  delightful  ex- 
tracts, and  take  notes  of  telling  anecdotes;  but  all  this 
is  comparatively  wasting  time.  "Come,  buy!  Buy! 
Buy!"  Do  you  mean  business?  Then,  come  and  buy. 
Do  not  stand  huckstering  by  the  year  together.  Come 
to  terms,  and  make  an  end  of  hesitation.     If  you  have, 


262  BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY. 

no  desire  you  will  not  buy,  and  I  shall  effect  no  sales. 
Again  I  cry,  "Come,  buy,  and  eat."  Oh  that  the  Spirit 
may  work  in  you  that  strong  desire  without  which  no 
man  will  ever  buy!  Alas!  there  are  thousands  who  are 
always  discussing  knotty  points,  not  because  they  have 
a  wish  to  understand  the  gospel,  but  because  they  do 
not  care  to  come  to  serious  dealings.  Perhaps  you  have 
read  the  story  of  a  governor  of  one  of  the  American 
States  who  called  at  a  hotel  where  there  was  a  colored 
waiter,  who  was  well  known  to  hold  Calvinistic  opinions, 
and  was,  therefore,  made  the  butt  for  many  a  jest.  So 
the  Governor  said  to  him,  "  Sam,  you  do  not  really  be- 
lieve that  doctrine  of  election,  do  you  ?  "  "  'Deed  I  do, 
sah,"  said  he.  "Well,  then,"  replied  the  Governor, 
"tell  me  whether  I  am  elect  or  not."  "Sah,"  said  the 
negro,  "  I  did  not  know  you  were  a  candidate,  and  I 
know  nothing  about  a  man's  being  elected  if  he  has  not 
put  up  for  it."  Now,  that  is  common  sense.  It  is  a 
business-like  way  of  answering  an  absurd  question. 
Certain  people  who  are  not  even  candidates  for  heaven 
will  yet  shelter  themselves  behind  wrong  ideas  of  pre- 
destination— playing  with  the  blessings  of  grace  instead 
of  desiring  them.  Have  you  not  seen  a  man  with  a 
pack  stand  at  a  door  trying  to  sell  a  few  trinkets  to  a 
servant.  He  does  not  mind  half-an-hour's  talk  about  his 
goods;  but  when  at  last  he  finds  that  the  maid  does  not 
mean  buying,  see  how  he  shuts  up  his  boxes,  folds  up 
his  packages,  and  indignantly  takes  himself  off,  saying 
by  his  gestures,  "  I  wish  I  had  not  wasted  so  much  time 
over  you."  It  is  just  so  with  earnest  preachers;  they 
grow  sick  at  heart  when  they  see  that  men  will  not 
come  to  business.  They  cry,  "Who  hath  believed  our 
report  ?  "  and  are  anxious  to  carry  their  heavenly  burden 
to  another  people.     Oh,  dear  hearers,  let  us  not  have  to 


BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY.  263 

shake  off  the  dust  of  our  feet  for  a  testimony  against 
you  !  Oh,  that  you"  would  hunger  and  thirst  after  Christ 
and  his  salvation,  and  then  we  should  soon  do  a  trade 
with  you. 

"  Buy  ": — This  means  next  to  agree  to  terms,  for  there 
cannot  be  any  purchasing,  however  much  the  buyer  de- 
sires to  buy  and  the  seller  to  sell,  till  they  agree  to  terms. 
Now,  our  difficulty  with  God's  goods  is  this:  whereas 
ordinarily  the  buyer  cannot  be  brought  up  to  the  seller's 
price,  in  our  case  we  cannot  get  men  doicn  to  God's  price. 
They  will  persist  in  offering  something  as  a  price.  They 
tark  to  us  thus — "  I  cannot  be  saved,  for  I  do  not  see 
any  good  thing  in  myself.  Sir,  if  I  had  a  deep  sense  of 
need,  then  I  could  be  saved";  or,  "Sir,  if  I  could  pray 
better";  or,  "Sir,  if  I  had  more  repentance,  or  more 
love,  I  could  then  believe  in  Jesus."  Oh,  yes,  if  you  had 
a  price  in  your  hand,  you  would  pay  for  heaven's  bless- 
ings, would  you  not?  But  then,  you  see,  they  are  not 
presented  to  you  upon  such  terms.  Price  is  out  of  the 
question.  God's  terms  are  that  there  shall  be  no  terms 
of  purchase  at  all:  you  are  to  be  nothing,  and  Jesus  is 
to  be  your  all  in  all.  When  you  will  come  down  to  that, 
then  take  the  goods,  the  bargain  is  made;  eternal  life  is 
yours. 

The  next  thing  in  a  purchase  is  that,  when  the  terms 
are  carried  out,  the  buyer  appropriates  the  goods  to  himsetf. 
If  I  buy  a  thing  it  is  mine,  and  I  take  it  into  my  posses- 
sion. You  do  not  see  a  man  buy  a  thing  and  then  leave 
it  behind  him  for  the  seller  to  do  as  he  likes  with  it.  In 
the  things  of  God  you  are  to  appropriate  the  blessing  to 
yourself.  Put  out  the  hand  of  faith,  and  say,  "  Here  is 
Christ  for  a  sinner.  I  am  a  sinner,  and  I  take  Christ  to 
be  my  Saviour.  Here  is  washing  for  the  filthy:  I  am 
filthy,  and  I  wash.     Here  is  a  robe  of  righteousness  for 


264  BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY. 

the  naked:  I  am  naked,  I  take  the  raiment  to  be  mine." 
Make  Christ  your  own,  and  he  has  made  you  his  own. 
Take  the  Lord  by  an  appropriating  act  of  faith  to  be 
yours  for  ever,  and  the  bargain  is  struck. 

But  the  text  says  a  little  more  than  that — it  says, 
'•  Buy,  and  eat"  as  much  as  to  say,  make  it  yours  in  the 
most  complete  sejise.  If  a  man  buys  a  loaf  of  bread  it 
is  his:  but  if  he  eats  it,  then  all  the  lawyers  in  the  world 
cannot  dispute  him  out  of  it — he  has  it  by  a  possession 
which  is  not  only  nine  points  of  the  law,  but  all  the  law. 
When  a  poor  soul  hath  confidence  enough  to  take  Christ 
and  to  live  upon  him  as  his  own,  saying,  "  This  Christ  is 
able  to  save  me,  I  take  him  into  me  and  I  am  saved," 
why,  the  devil  himself  cannot  unsave  you.  What  is  to 
divide  him  from  Christ  ?  There  is  the  bath,  and  I  wash 
therein  and  am  clean :  what  then  ?  Who  can  obliterate 
the  fact  that  I  have  washed  ?  The  righteousness  of 
Christ  is  bestowed  upon  me,  and  put  on  by  me,  who  can 
tear  off  that  glorious  dress?  Christ  fed  upon  is  ours 
beyond  all  question.  No  method  of  possession  is  more 
sure  and  safe  than  that  of  eating  what  you  have  bought. 
Feed,  then,  on  Christ,  the  bread  of  heaven,  and  though 
you  be  in  yourself  the  poorest  of  the  poor,  yet  he  is 
yours  for  ever  and  ever. 

See,  then,  the  blessed  invitation,  the  whole  of  God's 
mercy  in  Christ,  infinite  love  and  boundless  compassion 
are  to  be  had  for  no  price  at  all;  they  are  freely  given  to 
every  man  who  has  no  money  with  which  to  procure 
them.  The  height  of  love  meets  the  depths  of  poverty 
and  fills  them  up.  He  that  has  nothing  is  invited  to 
have  all  things,  for  he  is  the  person  for  whom  they  were 
provided  in  the  eternal  purposes  of  God. 

IY.  I  conclude  now  by  saying  a  few  things  by  way 
of  assurance,  to  show  that  this  is  all  real  and  true  and  no 


BUYING    WITHOUT  MONEY.  265 

make-believe.  Every  needy,  thirsty  soul  may  have  this 
day  all  the  grace  of  God.  Oh,  may  the  Spirit  of  God 
make  him  willing,  he  shall  have  all  the  blessings  of  the 
covenant  of  grace  to  be  his  own  for  ever  and  ever  !  This 
is  no  sham ;  there  is  an  honest  offer  made  to  every  one 
who  is  conscious  of  soul-poverty  ! 

For,  first,  it  is  not  GocTs  way  to  mock  men.  He  hath 
himself  declared,  "  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob, 
seek  ye  my  face  in  vain."  God  has  not  said  one  thing  in 
one  place  and  another  in  another  to  contradict  himself. 
He  has  not  in  the -Scriptures  bidden  men  to  come  to  him 
with  the  promise  that  he  will  not  cast  them  out,  all  the 
while  meaning  of  some  of  them  that  he  will  cast  them 
out.  No,  there  are  no  exceptions  made  in  the  promises 
of-God  to  empty  sinners  who  come  to  him.  You  must 
not  dream  of  exceptions  which  do  not  exist.  Jesus  says, 
"  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out,"  and 
this  includes  all  who  come.  I  am  speaking  to  some  this 
morning  who  have  come  across  the  Atlantic  and  are  not 
yet  saved:  you  may  have  been  careless  and  thoughtless 
all  your  lives,  but  if  you  come  to  Jesus  Christ  this  morn- 
ing he  will  not  refuse  you  his  salvation.  Many  have 
come  in  from  the  country  to-day:  oh,  that  this  may  be- 
come their  spiritual  birthday  !  Come  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  my  friend,  and  he  will  welcome  you.  He  never 
did  reject  one,  and  he  never  will.  He  will  not  find  pleas- 
ure in  tantalizing  you.  He  is  too  good,  too  true,  to  be- 
come a  deceiver  even  to  one  poor  lonely  seeker.  His 
word  of  promise  to  you  is  true  and  real:  every  word  is 
full  of  meaning,  sweeter  meauing  than  you  dream  of. 
Grace  shall  be  had  by  you  at  once  if  you  will  but  take 
it  "  without  money  and  without  price."  Men  mock 
men,  but  God  never  deludes.  We  may  say  of  him 
"  Thy  word  is  truth." 


266  BUYING    WITHOUT   MONEY. 

Note  that  these  mercies  must  be  really  meant  to  be 
given  gratis  to  the  poor,  because  God  is  under  no  necessity 
to  sell  his  benefits.  He  is  not  impoverished :  he  is  so  rich 
that  none  can  add  anything  to  his  wealth.  All  things 
are  his,  therefore  he  must  give  freely,  since  it  would  be 
beneath  his  all-sufficiency  to  be  chaffering  for  compensa- 
tion, or  demanding  a  price  at  a  creature's  hand.  He 
means  the  penniless  to  have  everything  for  nothing, 
since  nothing  can  be  imagined  to  be  a  price  to  him. 
If  a  poor  tradesman  began  to  give  away  his  goods  you 
would  say,  "There  is  some  trick  about  this";  but  when 
the  Most  High  God,  the  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth, 
who  has  everything,  freely  gives  to  us,  then  there  can  be 
no  design  for  his  own  advantage:  his  motive  must  be 
pure  compassion. 

There  is  no  adequate  price  that  ive  could  bring  to  God 
for  his  mercy.  How  could  there  be  ?  Would  it  be  mercy 
if  it  could  be  bought  ?  Grace  is  without  price  because 
it  is  priceless.  You  can  buy  gold  if  you  will:  there  is 
some  medium  of  exchange  for  the  purchase  of  every 
finite  thing;  but  what  medium  of  exchange  could  there 
be  for  the  purchase  of  infinite  blessings?  Huge  heaps 
of  such  things  as  the  native  Africans  call  money  would 
be  of  no  value  to  us,  and  what  self-righteous  men  call 
merit  is  utterly  despicable  to  God.  Is  there  any  compar- 
ison between  a  man's  giving  all  his  wealth  and  the  pos- 
session of  eternal  glory  ?  No  comparison  can  be  insti- 
tuted between  metals  and  spiritual  joys.  As  you  cannot 
bring  any  price,  I  do  pray  you  believe  that  God  is  honest 
when  he  declares  that  he  will  give  you  pardon  of  sin 
and  all  the  blessings  of  his  grace  of  God  without  money 
and  without  price.  You  cannot  have  them  otherwise; 
do  believe  that  he  means  you  to  receive  them  by  grace. 
Remember  that  Jesus  must  be  meant  for  sinners,  i'orifsin- 


BUYLXG    WITHOUT   MONEY.  267 

nershad  not  existed  there  never  would  have  been  a  Saviour. 
When  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  set  up  in  business  to  save  he 
must  have  known  there  was  no  sphere  for  his  operations 
except  among  sinners,  and  hence  he  entered  on  his  office 
with  the  view  of  saving  sinners.  If  a  doctor  comes  into 
a  town,  and  there  is  nobody  ill,  and  it  is  certain  that  no- 
body ever  will  be  ill,  he  had  better  drive  off  somewhere 
else:  he  will  do  most  business  where  there  is  most  sick- 
ness. When  Christ  Jesus  became  a  soul-physician  he 
had  his  eye  on  the  spiritually  sick,  and  on  them  alone. 
They  are  the  patients  who  make  up  his  practice,  and 
they  only.  If,  then,  thou  art  sick  even  unto  death,  put 
thy  case  into  the  hands  of  Christ,  for  he  will  heal  thee. 

Remember,  too,  that  it  must  be  true  that  God  will 
give  these  blessings  to  men  who  have  no  merits,  and 
will  bestow  them  as  gifts,  because  Jesus  Id  nisei f  is  a  gift. 
Did  anybody  ever  dream  of  buying  Christ?  Stand  at 
the  foot  of  the  cross  and  say  to  yourself,  "  Could  I  ever 
have  procured  this  vast  display  of  love  by  any  merit  of 
mine?  Could  I  have  done  anything  which  could  have 
merited  that  the  Son  of  God  should  become  man,  and 
that  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man  he  should  die  such 
a  death  as  this  for  me?"  Salvation  must  be  a  gift,  for 
Jesus  is  a  gift.  Away  with  your  sacraments,  your  cere- 
monials, your  prayers,  your  alms,  your  good  works,  if 
these  are  made  the  brass  pence  with  which  you  hope  to 
buy  such  inestimable  things  as  pardon,  sonship,  heaven  ! 
Salvation  is  seen  to  be  such  when  it  is  given  to  those 
who  have  no  money  of  their  own. 

Beside  that,  Christ  is  all.  Men  have  no  notion  what 
Christ  is  when  they  talk  of  getting  ready  for  Christ,  or, 
bringing  something  to  him.  What  would  you  bring  to 
Christ?  Everything  is  in  Christ,  and  therefore  you  can- 
not bring  anything  to  him.     ;' Oh,   but,"  say  you,   "I 


2G8  BUYING    WITHOUT  MONEY. 

must  come  with  a  broken  heart,"  I  tell  you  no,  you 
must  come/or  a  broken  heart  "Oh,  but  I  must  come 
with  a  sense  of  need."  I  tell  you  that  a  true  sense  of 
need  is  his  work  in  you.  True  repentance  and  a  sense 
of  need  spring  from  his  grace,  and  you  must  get  them 
from  him  without  money  and  without  price.  "Ah,  but 
I  must  he  something."  Say,  rather,  you  must  be  nothing. 
We  cannot  drill  this  into  men's  brains:  nay,  if  we  were 
to  use  steam  power  to  work  upon  the  mind,  we  could  not 
get  this  thought  fixed  in  their  proud  hearts.  They  will 
cling  to  merit,  they  must  he  something,  feel  something, 
say  something,  do  something.  Out  of  the  way  with  your 
somethings  !  Subside  into  nothingness.  The  Spirit  of 
God  brooded  of  old  over  chaos,  so  that  order  was  clearly 
his  work;  and  when  the  mind  seems  to  be  all  chaos  and 
darkness,  then  the  Spirit  of  God  is  sure  to  work,  and  the 
Lord's  voice  is  heard,  saying,  "  Let  there  be  light !  "  Go  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  just  as  you  are,  you  will  never  be  better 
— you  may  be  worse;  go  now,  just  as  you  are,  to  Jesus, 
and  buy  and  eat  without  money,  means,  or  merit, 

One  thing  more  I  would  say,  and  that  is  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  blessedly  free  from  all  clogging  conditions 
because  all  supposed  conditions  are  supplied  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Wo  have  heard  of  men  advertising  to  give  things  away,  but 
when  you  read  the  advertisement  carefully  you  find  that 
you  are  to  pay  after  all:  the  gospel  is  not  so,  its  freedom 
is  real.  Many  a  good  thing  is  to  be  had,  but  when  you 
see  how  it  is  to  be  obtained,  you  say  to  yourself  "  the 
conditions  shut  me  out:"  but  the  conditions  of  eternal 
life  shut  no  man  out  who  needs  to  be  saved  and  wills  to 
be  saved.  Over  the  gate  of  heaven  is  written  "  Come, 
and  welcome."  But  you  remind  me  that  it  says  "  Buy," 
and  you  insist  upon  it  that  therefore  you  must  pay.  Not 
so;  salvation  is  paid  for  already:  all  the  paying  has  been 


BUYING     WITHOUT   MONEY.  269 

done  by  him  who  opened  his  veins  to  find  the  only  price 
that  is  current  in  heaven — the  sin-atoning  blood.  If 
price  may  be  spoken  of — that  price  was  all  paid  long  be- 
fore you  were  born.  Nearly  nineteen  hundred  years  ago 
on  Calvary's  cross  the  purchasing  work  was  done,  and 
Jesus  bowed  his  head  and  said,  "It  is  finished."  Will 
you  add  to  that  which  is  finished  ?  Will  you  tag  on  your 
rags  to  the  Lord's  glistering  cloth  of  gold,  and  add  your 
base  farthings  to  the  infinite  price  which  he  poured 
forth  so  lavishly  at  the  foot  of  the  Eternal  Throne? 
Oh,  do  not  so.  To  yoke  you  with  Christ  can  never  be. 
You  and  Christ  together  !  An  archangel  and  an  emmet 
would  make  a  better  pair  than  you  yoked  with  Christ. 
Nay,  my  friend,  sink,  sink,  sink;  by  a  mighty  descent 
sink  to  nothing,  and  let  Jesus  rise,  rise,  rise,  till  he  fills 
the  whole  horizon  of  your  thoughts  and  hopes,  for  then 
are  you  saved.     Let  us  sing — 

"'Tis  done!  the  great  transaction's  done; 
I  am  my  Lord's,  and  he  is  mine: 
He  drew  me,  and  I  follow' d  on, 
Charm'd  to  confess  the  voice  divine." 


XIII. 

THE  VOICE  FROM   THE  CLOUD   AND   THE  VOICE  OF 
THE  BELOVED. 

June  24,  1883. 

"While  lie  yet  spake,  behold,  a  bright  cloud  overshadowed  them: 
and  behold  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  which  said,  This  is  my  beloved 
Sou,  iu  whom  J  am  well  pleased;  hear  ye  him.  And  when  the  disciples 
heard  it,  they  fell  on  their  face,  and  were  sore  afraid.  And  Jesus  came 
and  touched  them,  and  said,  Arise,  and  be  not  afraid." — Matthew 
xvii.  5,  6,  7. 

It  is  exceedingly  important  to  have  clear  evidences  of 
the  truth  of  our  holy  religion.  Sometimes,  1  dare  say, 
you  have  wished  that  God  would  speak  out  of  heaven 
in  your  hearing,  or  that  he  would  work  some  extraor- 
dinary marvel  before  your  eyes,  that  you  might  know 
beyond  all  question  the  truth  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus. 
This  desire  for  signs  and  wonders  is  no  new  thing. 
Ah,  my  dear  friends,  we  know  not  what  we  ask,  nor 
what  we  desire;  for  if  such  a  voice  were  to  come  to  us 
out  of  the  excellent  glory,  we  are  made  of  the  same 
flesh  and  blood  as  Peter,  and  James,  and  John,  and 
it  would  therefore  produce  the  same  effect  upon  us  as 
upon  them :  we  should  fall  upon  our  faces,  and  be  sore 
afraid.  Spirituals  must  grow  out  of  spirituals:  saving 
faith  can  never  be  produced  by  carnal  sight  and  hear- 
ing. The  Holy  Ghost  can  work  faith  in  us  apart  from 
any  form  of  miracle;  and  miracle  alone  can  never  create 
a  spiritual  faith.  Do  we  wish  to  receive  a  sign  in  order 
to  confirm  our  belief  in  God  ?  Suppose  that  we  had  it, 
we  should  soon  need  to  have  it  repeated,  for  unbelief 
dies  hard.     I  cannot  tell  how  often  we  should  need  to 


THE    VOICE   FROM   THE    CLOUD.  271 

hear  the  voice  out  of  the  cloud;  but  certainly  life  would 
soon  become  a  miseiy  to  us,  for  we  should  be  so  fre- 
quently lying  on  our  faces,  so  often  cast  into  a  swoon 
of  fear,  that  we  should  be  shattered,  and  nervous,  and 
incapable  of  the  ordinary  duties  of  life.  Like  Israel  at 
Sinai,  we  should  begin  to  entreat  that  the  Lord  would 
not  speak  to  us  any  more.  The  fact  is  that  the  voice  of 
God,  as  absolute  God,  is  too  awful,  too  majestic,  for  mor- 
tal ears,  and  the  sight  of  overwhelming  miracles  would 
put  such  a  strain  upon  the  human  mind  that  it  is  better 
for  us  to  be  without  them.  It  is  plain  from  the  example 
of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  that  even  the  lowest  form  of 
grace  does  not  grow  out,  of  frequent  miracles,  for  the 
tribes  fell  into  every  form  of  evil,  though  they  lived  on 
miracles,  and  even  ate  and  drank  the  result  thereof. 
Not  signs  and  wonders  without,  but  a  new  heart  within, 
is  the  grand  cure  for  unbelief.  Christ  in  you  is  the  hope 
of  glory  and  the  death  of  doubt:  anything  else  will  fall 
short  of  your  need. 

According  to  our  text,  what  is  wanted  is,  not  an 
audible  voice  of  God  to  confirm  the  evidences  of  our 
religion,  but  the  touch  and  the  voice  of  Christ  to  make 
us  conscious  within  ourselves  of  the  power  of  him  to 
whom  God  bears  witness.  Not  external,  but  internal 
evidences  are  what  we  need.  The  best  evidences  in 
the  world  are  what  we  call  experimental,  such  as  grow 
out  of  actual  experience.  It  is  a  better  thing  for  a 
man  to  live  near  to  Christ,  and  to  enjoy  his  presence, 
than  it  would  be  for  him  to  be  overshadowed  with  a 
bright  cloud,  and  to  hear  the  divine  Father  himself 
speaking  out  of  it.  The  voice  out  of  the  cloud  would 
but  dismay  and  distract:  the  voice  of  Christ  would 
cheer  and  comfort,  and  at  the  same  time  would  be  an 
equally  powerful  assurance  to  us  of  the  divinity  of  the 


272  THE    VOICE   FROM   THE    CLOUD   AND 

whole  matter.  Assurance  is  the  thing  which  we  so 
much  desire,  and  we  can  better  obtain  it  by  personal 
test  than  by  an}7  external  witness.  Brethren,  the  most 
profitable  thing  for  me  at  any  rate  is  not  so  much  to 
study  evidences  or  to  seek  them,  as  to  enjoy  the  gospel 
itself  by  personal  contact  with  the  Christ  of  God.  You 
may  be  told  that  this  is  the  bread  of  heaven,  but  you 
will  not  know  it,  however  heavenly  the  voice,  one  half 
so  vividly  as  if  you  eat  thereof  and  live:  then  shall  you 
know  when  Jesus  touches  you  and  bids  you  "  be  not 
afraid."  A  miraculous  interposition  would  crush  as  well 
as  convince;  a  spiritual  visitation  and  a  consoling  word 
will  convince  as  certainly,  and  it  will  comfort  at  the  same 
time. 

The  verses  which  I  have  selected  seem  to  me  to  teach 
us  just  this — that  even  the  voice  of  God  the  Father  would 
need  to  be  supplemented,  by  the  voice  and  by  the  touch 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  incarnate  Son,  or  else  we 
should  not  be  so  assured  as  to  become  active  witnesses 
for  gospel  truth.  To  preach  Christ  we  must  hear  Christ; 
no  other  voice  will  suffice  unless  he  speak  to  us. 

This  morning  I  propose  to  treat  the  subject  thus: 
first,  let  us  hear  the  voice  out  of  the  cloud;  and  then,  sec- 
ondly, let  us  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus.  May  the  Holy  Spirit 
sweetly  enable  us  to  hearken  diligently  in  each  case. 

I.  First:  Let  us  hearken  to  the  voice  that  speaketh  out 

OF  THE  CLOUD. 

Observe  at  the  outset  the  words,  "  Behold,  a  bright  cloud 
overshadowed  them."  When  God  draws  near  to  man  it 
is  absolutely  necessary  that  his  glory  should  be  veiled. 
No  man  can  see  his  face  and  live.  Hence  the  cloud,  in 
this  instance,  and  in  other  cases;  hence  that  thick  veil 
which  hung  over  the  entrance  to  the  most  holy  place; 
hence  the  need  of  the   incense  to  fill  that  place  with 


THE    VOICE    OF   THE   BELOVED.  273 

smoke  when  the  high  priest  once  in  the  year  went 
within  the  veil ;  hence  above  all  the  need  of  the  body 
and  the  manhood  of  Christ  that  the  Godhead  may 
be  softened  to  our  view.  The  God  shines  graciously 
through  the  man,  and  we  behold  the  brightness  of  the 
Father's  glory  without  being  blinded  thereby.  There 
must  be  a  cloud.  Yet  it  was  a  bright  cloud  which  in 
this  case  yielded  the  shadow,  and  not  a  thick  darkness 
like  that  which  became  the  canopy  of  Deity  at  the  giv- 
ing of  the  law.  Then  Mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a 
smoke,  and  the  Lord  sat  enthroned  amid  thick  dark- 
ness. On  other  occasions  we  read,  "  He  made  darkness 
his  secret  place;  his  pavilion  round  about  him  were  dark 
waters  and  thick  clouds  of  the  skies";  but  now  on  Tabor, 
where  God  bears  peaceful  witness  to  his  well  beloved  Son, 
he  veils  himself  in  a  brightness  significant  of  his  good 
pleasure  towards  the  sons  of  men. 

There  were  but  three  who  saw  this  <jlf>>'//  of  the  Trans- 
figuration, and  heard  the  Father's  voice;  such  Bi'gns  are 
not  for  unholy  eyes  and  ears.  There  were  sufficient  to 
bear  complete  witness,  for  "the  testimony  of  two  men 
is  true,"  and  "in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
the  whole  shall  be  established."  It  is  not  needful  that 
you  and  I  therefore  should  see  the  transfigured  Saviour: 
the  fact  of  the  transfiguration  is  quite  as  sure  as  if  we 
did  see  it,  for  three  men  saw  it  of  whose  truthfulness  we 
have  no  question.  It  is  not  needful  that  these  ears  should 
hear  the  attesting  words  of  the  divine  Father,  for  those 
three  apostles  heard  him  speak,  and  they  bore  witness 
thereof  by  their  honest  lives  and  martyr  deaths.  We 
know  that  their  witness  is  true,  and  to  us  to-day  tliere 
is  an  absolute  certainty  of  belief  that  the  Lord  God  Al- 
mighty did  with  an  audible  voice  declare  Jesus  of  Naz- 
areth  to  be  his  Son,  in  whom  he  is  well  pleased.     The 


274  THE    VOICE   FROM   THE    CLOUD   AND 

testimony  of  honest  men  is  all  that  we  can  have  about 
most  things,  and  we  are  accustomed  to  accept  it  and 
act  thereon;  in  this  case  we  may  be  as  sure  as  if  we  had 
ourselves  been  there,  and  bad  ourselves  seen  and  heard. 
It  is  a  very  instructive  fact  that  the  utterance  of  God 
out  of  the  cloud  teas  made  up  of  words  out  of  Scripture. 
We  are  told,  "  If  any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the 
oracles  of  God; "  and  what  honor  has  the  Father  put  upon 
holy  Scripture  here !  He  did  but  utter  three  brief  sen- 
tences, and  each  of  them  might  be  called  a  quotation. 
The  Lord  God  is  the  master  of  language,  for  he  is  the 
creator  of  tongues;  he  need  not,  therefore,  confine  him- 
self to  language  used  by  prophets  and  seers  in  the 
volume  of  inspiration,  and  because  he  did  so  in  this 
instance  we  conclude  that  he  intended  to  put  special 
honor  upon  the  words  of  Scripture.  The  occasion  was 
most  august,  yet  no  better  words  are  needed  by  the  Lord 
himself  concerning  his  own  Son  than  those  recorded  in 
former  ages  in  the  pages  of  Holy  Writ.  First  the  Fa- 
ther said,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son."  Turn  to  Psalm 
ii.  7,  and  there  you  read,  "Thou  art  my  Son/'  Then 
the  Father  said,  "In  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Look  to 
Isaiah  xlii.  1,  and  there  you  will  read  of  our  Lord  that 
he  is  called  "Mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth." 
This  passage  is  quoted  in  Matthew  xii.  18  in  a  rather 
different  form — "In  whom  my  soul  is  well  pleased,"  thus 
showing  how  nearly  the  words  agree  in  all  respects. 
Then  comes  the  last  word,  "  Hear  ye  him,"  which  is  a 
repetition  «»f  Deuteronomy  xviii.  15,  where  Moses  saith, 
"The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  Prophet 
from  the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy  brethren,  like  unto  me; 
unto  him  ye  shall  hearken ;  "  or  as  Stephen  puts  it,  "  him 
shall  ye  hear."  The  words  of  Moses  are  as  much  imper- 
ative as  prophetic,  and  contain  the  sense, — "hear  him." 


THE    VOICE    OF    THE    BELOVED.  275 

So  that  this  voice  of  the  Lord  utters  three  Bible  words, 
and  surely  if  the  Lord  speaks  in  the  language  of  Script- 
ure, how  much  more  should  his  servants?  We  preach 
best  when  we  preach  the  word  of  God.  We  may  be 
confident  in  what  we  say  when  we  preach  the  truth  in 
the  words  which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth,  and  endeavor 
to  convey  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  his  own  words. 
I  take  it  that  the  scriptural  ness  of  the  divine  witness  is 
noteworthy,  and  full  of  instruction. 

Coming  to  the  words  themselves,  the  Father  said, 
"This  is  my  beloved  Son."  "This."  As  if  he  called  their 
attention  away  from  Moses  and  Elias  and  said,  "  This  is 
he  of  whom  I  speak  to  you.  He  is  above  the  law  and  the 
prophets;  he  is  my  Son."  There  was  a  question  among 
the  Jews  who  the  Messiah  should  be:  they  believed  in 
the  Messiah,  but  they  did  not  know  when  he  would  come, 
nor  where,  nor  how;  and  hence,  when  he  did  come,  they 
made  a  mistake  and  missed  him.  Here  the  great  Father 
points  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  is  the  Son  of  Mary  as 
to  his  flesh,  and  he  says,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son.''  It 
is  a  word  of  demonstration  and  distinction,  by  which  lie 
marks  him  out  from  all  others  as  his  own  nearest  and 
dearest  one.  By  this  also  he  points  him  out  as  being- 
present  there  and  then;  not  as  yet  to  come,  but  as  act- 
ually with  them,  their  Master  and  friend.  "  This  is  my 
beloved  Son."  It  is  not  a  finger  pointing  into  history, 
but  a  hand  laid  upon  the  true  Messiah,  who  in  very 
flesh  and  blood  stood  before  them,  of  whom  they  after- 
wards said,  "  We  were  eyewitnesses  of  his  majesty,  For 
he  received  from  God  the  Father  honor  and  glory,  when 
there  came  such  a  voice  to  him  from  the  excellent  glory. 
This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased. 
And  this  voice  which  came  from  heaven  we  heard,  when 
we  were  with  him  in  th^  holy  mount."     In  this  very 


276  THE    VOICE   FROM   THE    CLOUD  AND 

place,  upon  this  Tabor,  Jesus  stood  among  them,  and 
the  Father  pointed  him  out,  saying,  "  This  is  my  beloved 
Son."  They  could  make  no  mistake  whatever  about  the 
person:  the  word  of  the  Lord  so  distinctly  pointed  him  out. 
While  it  thus  pointed  him  out  personally  as  being- 
present  it  separated  him  from  all  others,  and  set  him 
apart  by  himself  as  the  sole  and  only  one.  "  This  is 
my  beloved  Son,"  and  no  one  else  may  claim  that  title. 
Truly,  other  sons  are  the  Lord's  by  adoption  and  regen- 
eration, but  none  are  such  in  the  sense  in  which  the 
Lord  said,  "  Tins  is  my  beloved  Son."  Beyond  all  others 
and  in  a  special  sense  he  is  "the  only  begotten  Son." 
"  Unto  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time,  Thou 
art  my  son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee  ?  "  We  do 
not  understand,  we  cannot  understand,  the  doctrine  of 
the  eternal  filiation  of  the  Son  of  God.  I  suppose  it  to 
be  well-nigh  profane  to  endeavor  to  look  into  that  sub- 
lime mystery:  a  holy  delicacy  forbids;  and  besides,  the 
glory  is  too  bright :  we  lack  the  eyes  which  could  per- 
ceive anything  in  such  a  blaze  of  light.  This,  however, 
we  may  observe:  namely,  that  Jesus  is  not  the  Son  of 
God  so  that  the  idea  exactly  tallies  with  sonship  among 
men;  for  he  is  co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  the  Father; 
and  he  is  himself  called  "  the  Mighty  God,  the  everlast- 
ing Father."  He  is  not  of  fewer  years  than  the  Father, 
for  "in  the  beginning  was  the  Word."  Concerning  this 
matter  we  may  sing, — 

"Thy  generation  who  can  tell, 
Or  count  the  number  of  thy  years  ?  " 

Yet  doubtless  son  ship  is  the  nearest  approach  to  the 
great  mystery  which  could  be  found  among  human  simil- 
itudes, and  the  word  "Son"  is  the  nearest  description 
that  could  be  given  in  human  language.     Hence  the 


THE    VOICE    OF   THE   BELOVED.  277 

Father,  looking  at  Jesus  and  at  none  other  beside  him, 
says  of  him,  and  of  him  only,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son." 
He  says,  "  I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from  God."  He 
is  u  the  only  begotten  Son,"  which  is  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father.  Oh,  dear  friends,  how  we  ought  to  fix  our 
gaze  upon  Jesus!  He  is  a  most  singular  personality, 
the  wonder  of  wonders,  for  he  is  Son  of  God  as  truly  as 
he  is  Son  of  man.  Verily,  he  is  man,  and  we  err  not 
when  we  so  think  of  him,  for  he  both  suffered  and  died: 
yet  verily  he  is  God,  for  he  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  and 
upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power. 

"This  is  my  Sony  Moses  and  Elias  were  his  ser- 
vants— Jesus  alone  was  his  Son.  By  his  being  thus 
called  Son  we  are  taught  that  Jesus  is  of  the  same  nature 
as  God — is  indeed  God.  A  man  is  the  father  of  a  man ; 
a  man  is  not  the  father  of  that  which  he  makes  with  his 
own  hands,  such  as  a  statue  or  a  painting;  but  a  man  is 
the  father  of  another  who  is  of  the  same  nature  as  him- 
self, and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  of  the  same  nature  as 
God  in  all  respects — a  true  Son.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
is  equal  in  nature  to  the  Father,  and  therefore  he  counts 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  and  he  receives  the 
same  honor  and  worship  as  the  Father,  as  saith  the 
Scripture,  "that  all  men  should  honor  the  Son  even  as 
they  honor  the  Father.  He  that  honoreth  not  the  Son 
honoreth  not  the  Father  which  hath  sent  him." 

A  son  bears  the  likeness  of  his  father,  and  assuredly 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  described  as  "the  brightness  of  his 
Father's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  his  person";  so 
that  he  said  himself,  "He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen 
the  Father."  "  He  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God:" 
in  him  is  the  Godhead  better  seen  than  in  all  the  works 
of  creation. 

Not  only  is  there  a  likeness  between  them,  but  there 


278  THE    VOICE    FROM    THE    CLOUD   AND 

is  a  perpetual  union:  "I  and  my  Father  are  out."  "I 
am  in  the  Father,"  said  Christ,  "and  the  Father  in  me." 
This  leads  to  continual  communion  with  each  other,  and 
a  participation  in  plans  and  designs.  "The  Son  can  do 
nothing  of  himself,  but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  do: 
for  what  things  soever  he  doeth,  these  also  doeth  the 
Son  likewise.  For  the  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  show- 
eth  him  all  things  that  himself  doeth."  The  Lord  Jesus 
was  for  ever  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and  he  saith, 
"All  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  Father:  and  no 
man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the  Father:  neither  knoweth 
any  man  the  Father,  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomso- 
ever the  Son  will  reveal  him."  It  was  with  the  Son  of 
God  that  the  Father  took  counsel  when  he  said,  "Let  us 
make  man  in  our  own  image,  after  our  likeness."  Our 
Lord  knows  and  reveals  the  inmost  heart  of  the  Father; 
yea,  the  being  and  essence  of  God,  unknown  to  all  be- 
sides, are  with  him,  for  he  himself  is  "  God  over  all, 
blessed  for  ever,  Amen."  Let  us  never,  brethren,  think 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  without  the  lowliest  reverence  of  him 
as  very  God  of  very  God,  co-equal,  co-eternal  with  the 
Father.  While  we  call  him  Master  and  Lord  let  us  take 
care  that  we  render  unto  him  the  glory  which  is  duo 
unto  his  name.  There  must  be  no  trifling  with  him,  nor 
with  the  things  which  he  speaks,  for  he  is  Lord  of  all, 
and  to  him  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  shall 
confess  that  he  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father. 

For  a  minute  let  me  dwell  upon  this  declaration. 
"This  is  my  Son." — Does  it  not  teach  us  the  great  love 
of  God  to  us  guilty  creatures?  "  He  spared  not  his  own 
Son."  You  perceive  the  love  of  Abraham  to  God  when 
he  is  ready  to  offer  up  Isaac  at  the  Lord's  bidding.  Re- 
member the  words,  "Take  now  thy  son,  thine  only  son, 
Isaac,  whom  thou  Invest,  and  offer  him  for  a  hnv 


THE    J 'DICE    OF    THE   BELOVED.  279 

f  cling."  This  is  just  what  the  great  Father  did  for  us; 
and  vet  we  were  his  enemies,  living  in  alienation  and  in 
open  rebellion  against  him.  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  won- 
der, 0  earth  !  he  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  freely  de- 
livered him  up  for  us  all  !  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that 
we  loved  God,  but  that  God  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son 
to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins."  What  gratitude 
this  should  create  !  What  devotion  it  should  bring  ! 
"This  is  my  Son."  When  you  see  Jesus  on  Tabor  or  on 
Calvary,  you  see  God  giving  himself  to  us,  that  we  might 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life. 

Does  the  Father  say,  "This  is  my  Son"?  What  a 
Saviour  this  must  be  !  Mow  confidently  may  you  and  I 
trust  him  !  If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  no  common  per- 
son, but  nothing  less  than  God  himself,  who  shall  doubt 
his  power  to  save?  If  he  be  God's  only  begotten  Son, 
how  safely  we  may  trust  our  souls'  affairs  in  his  almighty 
hands!  He  is  indeed  "a  Saviour,  and  a  great  one!" 
"It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness 
dwell."  What  an  intercessor  have  we!  So  dear  to  him 
with  whom  he  pleads,  for  he  is  his  beloved  Son  !  What 
a  sacrifice  have  we  that  may  well  cover  all  our  sin,  for 
"he  gave  himself  for  us,  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to 
God,  for  a  sweet  smelling  savor."  However  black  our 
sin,  and  however  deep  our  despair,  we  may  readily  rise 
out  of  it  and  say,  "  Verily,  there  is  salvation  here!"  If 
the  Son  of  God  has  made  his  own  person  the  price  of 
our  redemption,  then  are  we  indeed  redeemed,  and  none 
can  hold  us  in  bondage. 

One  thing  more  is  worthy  to  be  noted  here.  If  the 
Father  says,  "This  is  my  Son,"  observe  the  graciousness 
of  our  adoption  !  With  such  a  son  the  Lord  had  no 
need  of  children.  He  did  not  make  us  his  children  be- 
cause he  needed  sons,  but  because  we  needed  a  father. 


280  THE    VOICE    FROM    THE    CLOUD   AND 

The  infinite  heart  of  the  Father  was  well  rilled  by  the 
love  of  the  Only-begotten.  There  was  enough  in  Jesus 
to  satisfy  the  love  of  the  divine  Father,  and  yet  he  would 
not  rest  till  he  had  made  him  "  the  firstborn  among  many 
brethren."'  Herein  we  ought  to  admire  exceedingly  the 
grace  of  God.  "Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
hath  bestowed  upon  us  that  we  should  be  called  the 
sons  of  God."  When  a  man  is  childless,  and  desires  an 
heir,  it  may  be  that  he  adopts  a  child  to  fill  the  vacancy 
which  exists  in  his  house;  but  the  heavenly  Father  had 
no  such  want,  for  he  saith,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son." 
Our  adoption  is,  therefore,  not  for  his  gain,  but  for  ours: 
it  is  a  matter  of  divine  charity,  arising  out  of  the  spon- 
taneous love  of  God.  Thanks  be  unto  the  Father 
(.verm ore  ! 

Do  you  remind  me  that  I  have  left  out  one  word? 
The  Father  said,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son.''  I  have  by  no 
means  forgotten  it,  for  though  I  cannot  speak  as  I  would 
upon  that  word  yet  it  is  exceedingly  sweet  in  my  ears. 
"This  is  my  beloved  Son."  We  none  of  us  know  how 
much  beloved  our  Lord  is  of  the  Father.  We  love  oar  chil- 
dren, we  love  them  as  our  own  souls,  we  could  not  meas- 
ure our  affection  for  them;  but  still  we  are  finite  and  so 
are  our  children,  and  the  finite  to  the  finite  yields  but  a 
finite  love;  but  here  is  an  Infinite  Father  with  an  Infi- 
nite Son,  and  he  loves  him  infinitely.  Why  should  he 
not?  He  is  most  near  to  him:  his  own  Son.  }X\\y 
should  he  not?  He  is  in  all  things  like  unto  him  in 
nature,  dignity,  character,  and  glory.  Why  should  he 
not  ?  For  he  in  all  things  doth  his  will.  Jesus  said, 
"  And  he  that  sent  me  is  with  me:  the  Father  hath  not 
left  me  alone;  for  I  do  always  those  things  that  please 
him."  If  we  had  such  a  son  as  God  has  in  Jesus  then 
we  should  love  him  indeed,  for  there  has  been  nothing 


THE    VOICE    OF   THE    BELOVED.  281 

in  the  Son  throughout  eternity  which  is  in  the  least  op- 
posed to  the  Father's  mind.  These  are  wonderful  words 
of  the  man  Christ  Jesus — ';  Therefore  doth  my  Father 
love  me,  because  1  lay  clown  my  life,  that  I  might  take 
it  again."  When  Solomon  speaks  of  wisdom,  which  is 
but  another  name  for  our  Lord  Jesus,  he  represents  him 
as  saying,  "  The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  of 
his  way,  before  his  works  of  old.  I  was  set  up  from 
everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was. 
When  he  gave  to  the  sea  his  decree,  that  the  waters 
should  not  pass  his  commandment:  when  he  appointed 
the  foundations  of  the  earth:  then  I  was  by  him,  as  one 
brought  up  with  him:  and  I  was  daily  his  delight,  re- 
joicing always  before  him."  He  has  been  in  the  bosom 
of  the  Father  from  of  old;  and  when  lie  left  the  bosom 
of  the  Father  it  was  to  do  his  Father's  will  and  to  be 
obedient  to  him  even  unto  death.  His  will  and  his  Fa- 
ther's will  are  perfectly  joined  together  in  one  spirit,  and 
therefore  we  cannot  fathom  the  depths  of  love  which  are 
indicated  in  these  words  which  came  from  the  Father 
who  himself  is  love;  he,  looking  at  his  own  Sun,  saith 
plainly,  " This  is  my  beloved  Son."  Oh,  that  we  might 
have  grace  to  trust  without  wavering  in  this  glorious 
Son  of  God ! 

Permit  me  now  to  introduce  to  you  the  second  of  the 
sentences:  " In  whom  I am  well  pleased."  I  have  heard 
it  quoted,  ''With  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  The  alter- 
ation cannot  be  tolerated:  it  robs  the  language  of  half 
its  sense.  True,  God  is  pleased  with  Christ,  but  that  is 
not  all  that  he  says  here:  he  is  pleased  in  him,  which 
means  not  only  that  God  is  eternally,  infinitely  pleased 
with  Jesus  Christ  himself,  but  that  God  himself  is  recon- 
ciled and  pleased  as  we  view  him  in  his  Son.  I  thought 
this  over  last  night  till  my  heart  seemed  ready  to  dance 


282  THE    VOICE   FROM   THE    CLOUD   AND 

for  joy,  for  I  thought — "then,  however  much  I  have  dis- 
pleased the  Father,  my  Lord  Jesus,  who  stands  for  me, 
has  pleased  him  more  than  I  have  displeased  him.  Mine 
is  finite  sin,  but  his  is  infinite  righteousness.  If  my  sins 
have  vexed  the  Lord  God,  yet  Christ's  righteousness  has 
pleased  him  more.  I  cannot  be  more  than  finitely  dis- 
pleasing to  God,  but  Jesus  is  infinitely  pleasing  to  him; 
and  if  he  stands  in  my  room,  and  place,  and  stead,  then 
the  pleasure  which  the  Father  derives  from  his  Son  is 
greater  than  the  displeasure  which  he  has  ever  felt  to- 
wards me/'  My  brethren,  how  displeased  the  great  God 
has  been  with  men.  He  said  that  it  repented  him  that 
he  had  made  men  upon  the  earth.  That  was  a  striking 
expression  which  is  used  in  Genesis  vi.  6:  "It  grieved 
him  at  his  heart."  He  seemed  to  grow  so  weary  of  man's 
wanton  wickedness  that  he  was  sorry  that  he  ever  made 
beings  capable  of  so  much  evil.  Yet  he  is  so  well  con- 
tent with  his  beloved  Son,  who  has  assumed  our  nature 
that  we  read  of  him,  "  The  Lord  is  well  pleased  for  his 
righteousness'  sake:  he  will  magnify  the  law,  and  make 
it  honorable."  (Is.  xlii.  21).  The  Lord  looks  down 
upon  those  who  are  in  Christ  with  an  intense  affection, 
and  loves  them  even  as  he  loves  the  Son,  for  that  is 
the  meaning  of  this  word,"  In  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 
All  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus  are  pleasing  to  God;  yea, 
God  in  Christ  looks  with  divine  satisfaction  upon  all  those 
who  trust  his  Son :  he  is  not  only  pleased,  but  well  pleased. 
If  you  are  pleased  with  Jesus,  God  is  pleased  with  you : 
if  you  are  in  the  Son,  then  you  are  in  the  Father's  good 
pleasure.  Out  of  Christ  there  is  nothing  but  divine  dis- 
pleasure for  you.  Concerning  you  who  are  out  of  Christ 
it  is  written,  "The  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  his  ad- 
versaries." Who  can  stand  before  his  indignation  ?  Who 
can  abide  the  fierceness  of  his  anger?     He  cannot  look 


THE    VOICE    OF    THE   BELOVED.  283 

on  sin  without  hatred.  He  says  of  sinners,  "  My  soul 
loathed  them,  and  their  soul  also  abhorred  me."  There 
is  no  peace  between  a  Christless  soul  and  God,  neither 
can  there  be.  But  when  a  poor  sinner  by  faith  enters 
into  Christ,  then  such  is  the  Father's  delight  in  Christ's 
person,  that  he  delights  in  all  that  are  in  him.  Jesus 
said,  "The  Father  him  self  loveth  you."  Godis  pleased  with 
every  hair  of  Christ's  head :  the  meanest  member  of  Christ's 
body  is  delightful  to  the  Father.  If  I  am  pleased  with 
a  man,  I  am  not  angry  with  his  foot  or  with  any  part  of 
him.  So,  then,  if  I  am  a  member  of  Christ,  if  I  am  joined 
unto  him- by  a  living,  loving,  lasting  union,  then  I  am 
well-pleasing  unto  God,  because  Jesus  is  well-pleasing 
to  him.  Indeed,  the  Scripture  speaketh  of  all  saints  as 
one  with  Christ;  they  are  so  perfectly  joined  unto  him 
that  they  are  one  body  with  him,  and  God  has  not  hatred 
to  some  part  of  the  body  and  love  to  another  part  of 
it,  Is  Christ  divided?  It  cannot  be.  The  Father  is 
well  pleased  with  the  entire  mystical  body  for  the  sake 
of  Jesus  Christ  its  head.  I  wish  I  could  speak  at  length 
upon  this;  but  I  might  weary  you  upon  this  close  and 
sultry  day,  when  your  spirit  truly  is  willing  but  your 
flesh  is  weak.  Oh,  the  charm  of  this  voice  of  God! 
Each  word  has  divine  emphasis  upon  it.  It  is  not  the 
voice  of  a  man,  but  of  the  Eternal  himself.  "This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 

Consider,  next,  the  third  word,  which  is,  "Hear  ye 
lain."  Listen  to  what  he  says;  remember  it  carefully; 
endeavor  to  understand  it;  heartily  accept  and  believe 
it;  confidently  trust  in  it,  and  cheerfully  obey  it,  All 
these  precepts  are  wrapt  up  in  the  expression  "  Hear  ye 
him";  as  we  could  prove  if  there  were  time  available. 
"Hear  ye  him":  it  is  as  if  the  Father  said,  "You  need 
not  hear  Moses  any  longer;  hear  ye  Mm.      You  need  not 


284  THE    VOICE   FROM    THE    CLOUD   AND 

listen  to  Elias  any  more;  hear  ye  my  Son."  There  are 
thousands  of  priests  in  the  world  who  say,  "Hear  us"; 
but  the  Father  says,  "Hear  him."  Many  voices  clamor 
for  our  attention:  new  philosophies,  modern  theologies, 
and  old  heresies  revived,  all  call  to  us  and  entreat  us  to 
hearken,  but  the  Father  says,  "Hear  him."  As  if  he 
said,  "  Hear  him  and  none  besides."  Does  any  man 
claim  to  be  a  successor  of  Christ?  The  Father  speaks 
of  no  succession,  but  bids  us,  "  Hear  him."  If  Jesus  were 
dead  and  Ins  prophetic  office  extinct  we  might  hear  others; 
but  since  he  liveth,  we  hear  the  celestial  voice  rolling 
along  the  ages  and  distinctly  crying,  "Hear  ye  him." 
Brethren  beloved,  do  not  hear  me  as  though  I  spake  of 
myself,  for  I  have  no  more  claim  upon  your  attention 
than  any  other  man.  I  speak  faultily,  for  I  know  but 
in  part,  and  prophesy  in  part.  So  far  as  I  speak  my  own 
mind,  I  speak  in  vanity  ;  but  if  1  speak  the  wrords  of  Christ, 
and  the  truth  which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  revealed,  then 
it  is  no  longer  I  that  speak,  but  Christ  himself  that  speaks, 
and  then  you  are  bound  by  the  word  from  the  Father, 
which  saith,  "Hear  ye  him."  Oh,  to  be  content  with 
hearing  Christ,  and  letting  other  voices  go  away  into  the 
eternal  silence.  Is  he  God's  Son?  Then  "hear  him." 
Is  he  God's  beloved  Son?  Then  "hear  him."  Is  the 
Father  well  pleased  with  him?  Then  "  hear  him."  Is 
the  Father  well  pleased  in  him,  and  with  you  in  him? 
Then  "hear  him."  What  less  can  you  do?  Ought  you. 
not  to  do  this  always,  and  with  all  your  might?  Peter, 
you  need  notjbuild  the  tabernacles:  the  Father  bids  you 
hear  Jesus,  your  Lord.  It  is  better  to  hear  Christ,  that 
is,  to  believe  his  teaching  and  obey  it,  than  it  would  be 
to  build  cathedrals  for  him,  much  more  such  frail  tents  as 
Peter  intended.  Peter,  you  need  not  cumber  yourself 
\with  much  serving,   and  play  the  Martha;  you   will  do 


THE    VOICE    OF   THE   BELOVED.  285 

better  if  you  sit  at  his  feet  with  Mary  and  hear  him. 
The  highest  honor  we  can  render  to  Christ  as  a  prophet 
is  to  hear  him,  trusting  him  in  his  promises  and  obeying 
him  in  his  precepts.  Jesus  came  on  purpose  to  teach, 
and  we  are  in  our  best  position  for  adoration  wThen  we 
lend  him  our  ears  and  hearts,  and  are  determined  to  be- 
lieve what  he  says,  and  to  do  what  he  commands. 

"This  is  my  beloved  Son:  hear  ye  him."  It  does 
seem  to  me  as  if  the  great  Father  said,  "7  have  spoken 
to  you  once,  with  my  own  voice,  and  I  see  you  fall  upon 
your  faces  with  fear;  evidently  you  cannot  bear  my  im- 
mediate presence.  I  see  your  faces  blanched  with  fright ; 
you  lie  prone  upon  the  ground,  stiff  with  dismay:  I  will 
speak  no  more  directly  from  myself;  I  have  made  my 
beloved  Son  your  Mediator;  hear  him."  The  Psalmist 
David  said,  "The  voice  of  the  Lord  is  powerful;  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  is  full  of  majesty.  The  voice  of  the 
Lord  shaketh  the  wilderness;  the  Lord  shaketh  the  wil- 
derness of  Kadesh."  Is  it  not  gracious  on  his  part  that 
he  should  no  more  speak  with  us  himself,  but  reveal 
himself  by  his  Son,  whose  name  is  "  the  Word  of  God'1? 
"Remember  what  Israel  said  at  Sinai  to  Moses,  the  typi- 
cal mediator:  "Speak  thou  with  us  and  we  will  hear;  but 
let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die."  To  this  the 
Lord  replied  to  Moses,  "They  have  well  said  all  that 
they  have  spoken."  The  Lord  recognized  at  once  the 
need  of  a  mediator,  and  he  finds  us  one  in  the  person  of 
the  Well-beloved  as  he  says,  "  Hear  ye  Mm."  It  is  like 
Pharaoh  saying  to  those  who  came  for  corn,  "  Go  unto 
Joseph."  This  day  God  saith  to  men,  "Come  not  to  me 
at  the  first:  go  to  my  Son.  No  man  cometh  to  the  Fa- 
ther but  by  Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  I  will  not  speak  with 
you,  for  you  are  but  dust  and  ashes,  and  you  would  be 
overwhelmed  by  the  thunder  of  my  voice.     Hear  ye  him." 


286  THE    VOICE   FROM   THE    CLOUD   AND 

Blessed  ordinance  of  that  gracious  One  who  knoweth 
oar  frame  and  remembereth  that  we  are  dust!  He  hath 
spoken  to  us  by  his  Son:  let  us  incline  our  ear  and  come 
unto  him,  let  us  hear  that  our  soul  may  live. 

This  links  on  the  first  part  of  my  discourse  to  the 
second,  upon  which  I  will  speak  as  briefly  as  I  can, 
though  the  subject  might  well  demand  a  full  sermon. 

II.  Secondly,  let  us  hear  the  voice  of  jescs.  The  Father 
himself  has  sent  us  to  Jesus,  and  unto  Jesus  let  us  go. 

''When  the  disciples  heard  it,  they  fell  on  their  face, 
and  were  sore  afraid.  And  Jesus  came  and  touched 
them,  and  said,  Arise,  and  be  not  afraid."  Dear  friends, 
I  think  you  will  be  cured  of  desiring  miracles,  and  of 
wishing  to  hear  voices  from  God,  if  you  well  consider 
the  effect  of  the  Divine  voice  upon  these  favored  apos- 
tles. You  could  not  bear  the  voice  divine  any  better 
than  they  could;  if,  indeed,  so  well.  I  hope  that  you 
will  now  be  content  with  what  the  Father  recommends 
to  you,  namely,  that  you  hear  his  beloved  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  The  apostles,  one  would  have  thought, 
needed  not  to  have  been  afraid,  for  they  were  holy  men; 
engaged  in  the  best  possible  business,  and  in  the  com- 
pany of  their  Lord  who  was  their  protector  and  friend; 
and  yet  such  is  the  amazing  power  of  the  glory  of  God 
upon  the  human  mind  that  they  fell  on  their  faces.  So 
was  it  with  Job,  and  Daniel,  and  Isaiah,  and  Habakkuk, 
and  all  such  holy  men:  the  presence  of  the  Lord  filled 
them  with  fear  and  trembling  and  self-abhorrence. 

See  how  Jesus  acts  to  his  three  disciples.  We  might 
have  thought  that  they  would  have  hastened  to  their 
Lord.  Why  did  they  not?  Why  did  they  not  cry  out 
to  him,  "Master,  we  perish?"  Why  did  not  Peter  say, 
as  he  did  on  another  occasion,  "If  it  be  thou,  bid  me 
to  come  unto  thee?"     No;  they  are  overpowered,  bewil- 


THE    VOICE    OF    THE   BELOVED.  287 

dered,  confounded:  the  glory  of  the  Lord  has  laid  them 
on  their  faces  as  dead,  and  a  sore  fright  is  upon  them. 
Then  the  incarnate  God,  their  Lord  and  yet  their  brother, 
interposes  his  sacred  ministry.  First,  lie  comes  to  them. 
Wycliffe's  version  puts  it,  "  He  came  nigh."  He  ap- 
proached to  them;  for  any  distance  is  painful  when  a 
heart  is  afraid.  Jesus  came  near  to  the  affrighted  three. 
This  is  the  beauty  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  he 
comes  so  near  to  us,  poor  troubled  ones,  when  we  are 
overwhelmed  with  the  glory  of  God  and  our  own  sense 
of  sin.  "The  man  is  near  of  kin  unto  us:  one  of  oni 
next  kinsmen."  God,  the  glorious,  must  ever  seem  to 
be  far  off  as  to  our  weakness,  however  near  he  comes  to 
us  in  condescending  grace.  He  is  in  heaven,  and  we 
upon  earth;  he  is  the  Creator,  and  we  are  the  creatures 
of  an  hour.  The  Lord  Jesus  comes  so  very  near  to  us 
because  he  bears  our  nature,  and  is  bone  of  our  bone  and 
flesh  of  our  flesh.  We  may  be  familiar  with  him,  and 
yet  incur  no  censure.  Little  children  climbed  his  knee, 
and  he  said,  "  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto  me." 
We  feel  that  we  may  come  where  children  are  welcomed  ; 
yea.  we  rejoice  that  when  we  cannot  come  to  him,  our 
Lord  Jesus  comes  to  us,  and  when  our  weakness  makes 
us  fall  upon  the  ground,  he  stoops  over  us  to  help  us  up. 
His  sympathy  makes  him  quick  to  draw  near,  and  calm 
our  troubled  breasts.  When  a  child  falls,  how  fast  the 
mother  runs  to  set  it  on  its  feet  again.  Yet  she  is  not 
more  in  haste  than  Jesus,  who  leaves  not  his  own  to  re- 
main long  in  their  distress.  He  draws  very  near  to  his 
poor,  fainting,  swooning  disciples.  He  will  not  leave 
them  comfortless,  he  will  come  unto  them.  He  is  the 
same  Christ  at  this  hour  as  in  the  days  of  his  flesh:  he 
is  still  in  the  habit  of  visiting  his  people  and  manifest- 
ing himself  to  them  as  he  doth  not  to  the  world.     Broth- 


288  THE    VOICE   FROM   THE    CLOUD  AND 

ers,  do  not  ask  evidence  any  more ;  do  not  begin  search- 
ing books  to  find  out  arguments  and  reasons.  Ask  Jesus 
to  come  to  you:  his  presence  will  stand  in  stead  of  all 
reasoning,  and  be  better  far.  Communion  with  Christ 
supplies  the  soul  with  irresistible  arguments  as  to  his 
being,  his  love,  his  power,  his  Godhead.  Actual  near- 
ness to  him  clothes  the  mind  with  a  coat  of  mail  which 
wards  off  every  arrow  of  unbelief.  Let  Christ  come  to 
us,  and  questions  and  doubts  are  heard  no  more.  Quib- 
blings  are  nailed  to  his  cross;  insinuations  fall  dead  at 
his  feet,  This  assurance  works  in  an  infinitely  better 
manner  than  if  out  of  yon  black  cloud  God  himself  were 
to  speak  to  us  in  thunder-tones. 

When  Jesus  came,  the  next  thing  he  did  was,  lie 
touched  them.  This  is  to  me  most  precious:  as  they  lie 
there  all  fainting  he  touches  Peter,  and  touches  James, 
and  touches  John,  just  as  in  after  days  we  read,  "  He 
laid  his  right  hand  upon  me,  saying  unto  me,  Fear 
not."  That  was  his  way  of  healing  those  diseased  with 
leprosy.  The  blind  man  he  touched  and  gave  him  sight, 
and  the  dead  maiden  was  thus  revived.  Oh,  the  power 
of  his  touch  1  Our  touch  of  Jesus  saves  us;  what  will 
not  his  touch  of  us  do?  We  are  so  much  made  up  of 
feeling,  after  all,  that  we  want  to  know  that  the  Lord 
really  feels  for  us,  and  will  enter  so  tenderly  into  our 
case  as  to  touch  us.  That  touch  reassures  our  fainting 
hearts,  and  we  know  our  Lord  to  be  Emmanuel,  God 
with  us.  Sympathy !  This  is  the  meaning  of  that 
human  touch  of  a  hand  which  is  nevertheless  divine. 
Oh,  how  sweetly  Christ  has  touched  us  by  being  a 
partaker  in  all  that  is  human  !  He  touched  us  every- 
where: in  poverty,  for  he  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head: 
in  thirst,  for  he  sat  by  the  well  and  said,  "Give  me  to 
drink:"  in   anguish,  for  he  was  betrayed  by  his  friend. 


THE    VOICE    OF   THE   BELOVED.  289 

He  has  touched  us  in  depression  of  spirit,  for  he  cried, 
"  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful  even  unto  death."  He 
is  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  "  for  he  was 
tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are."  An  absolute  God 
does  not  seem  to  touch  us  with  a  fellow-feeling:  he 
pities  us  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  yet  in  this  he 
is  above  us,  and  our  fears  prevent  our  reaching  up  to 
him:  for  tenderest  sympathy  in  adversity  a  brother 
must  be  born,  and  Jesus  is  that  brother.  We  are  frail 
and  sinful ;  and  Jesus  touches  us  in  both  respects,  for  he 
has  taken  our  flesh  and  carried  away  our  sins.  He  was 
''numbered  with  the  transgressors,"  thus  he  touched 
transgressors;  and  he  became  frail  even  as  we  are, 
until  at  last  he  said,  "I  am  a  worm,  and  no  man"; 
thus  he  touched  our  infirmities.  Dear  friends,  nothing 
so  cheers  the  heart  as  the  divine  touch  of  Christ,  for  if 
you  have  felt  it  you  will  bear  witness  that  contact  with 
his  wondrous  person  is  like  life  from  the  dead.  Virtue 
comes  out  of  Christ  to  us  when  his  garment's  hem  and 
our  finger  meet.  The  contact  of  grace  on  his  part  and 
faith  on  our  part  brings  into  us  strength,  light,  joy,  and 
all  else  that  is  laid  up  in  Jesus  to  meet  our  wants. 
The  hand  of  Jesus  is  laid  upon  us,  and  in  the  strength 
which  it  gives  a  man  might  dash  through  hell  and  climb 
to  heaven.  Ezra  said,  "  I  was  strengthened  as  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  my  God  was  upon  me."  Touched  with  the 
almighty  Sufferer's  sacred  sympathy,  we  glory  in  tribu- 
lation, and  triumph  in  death.  Is  not  this  more  effective 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  and  of  the  commis- 
sion of  Christ  than  if  the  Lord  God  should  again  speak 
out  of  a  cloud?  To  feel  the  wondrous  power  of  Christ 
strengthening  our  hearts,  surely  this  is  the  most  certain 
witness. 

Next  time  you  read  of  the  Ked  Sea,  and  of  God's  di- 


290 


THE    VOICE   FROM   THE    CLOUD   AND 


viding  it  for  his  people,  and  drowning  Pharaoh  in  the 
deep  waters,  do  not  say  to  yourself,  "I  wish  I  had  been 
there !  "  but  pray  God  to  make  a  way  for  you  through 
your  troubles,  and  to  dry  up  the  Red  Sea  of  your  sins, 
and  lead  you   into   Canaan.     Pardoned  sin  will   make 
you  rejoice  in  him.     It  must  have  been  a  fine  demon- 
stration of  God's  glorious  majesty  when  he  sent  a  thick 
darkness  over  all  the  land,  even  darkness  that  might  be 
felt.     For  my  part  I  count  it  a  more-to-be-desired  dem- 
onstration of  the  power  of  God  when  he  took  away  my 
thick   darkness   and    brought    me    into    his    marvellous 
light.     When  he.  turned  all  the  waters   of  Egypt  into 
blood,  so  that  they  loathed  to  drink  of  the  river  it  was 
a  sure  proof  that  God  was  there;  but  to  my  soul  it  was 
a  more  assuring  proof  when  he  turned  my  water  into 
wine,  and  made  my  ordinary  life  to  become  like  the  life 
of  those  in   heaven   by   his   sovereign   grace.     He    has 
raised  us  up  together   from   the  depths  of  our   natural 
ruin,  and  made  us  sit  together  in  the  heavenly  places,— 
is  not  this  as  great  a  proof  of  his  power  and  Godhead' as 
when  he  raised  up  Israel  from  the  brick-kilns,  and  set 
his  people  free  ?     It  was  a  sure  proof  of  God's  being  in 
Egypt  when  he  called  for  the  frogs,  and  they  came,  even 
into  the  king's  chambers;  but  what  a  proof  of  his  beino- 
with  us  is  given  to  our  mind  when  the  Lord  sweeps  out 
of  our  soul  all  the  frogs  of  fear  that  used  to  croak  within 
us,  even  in  the  king's  chambers  of  devotion  and  commun- 
ion.    We  could  not  worship  God  for  their  croaking,  but 
everywhere  we  were  defiled  and  disturbed  with  doubts 
and  fears,  and  when  Jesus  comes  and  clears  them   all 
away  it  is  a  kindlier  proof  and   more   effectual   to  the 
heart  than  a  thousand  plagues  could  be.     So  there  were 
two  actions  of  Christly  sympathy-Jesus  came  near,  and 
touched  them. 


THE    VOICE    OF    THE   BELOVED.  291 

But  always  the  great  thing  with  Jesus  is  his  word — 
lie  spake  to  them.  He  is  the  Word,  and  as  the  Word  he 
proves  his  Godhead.  "  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is, 
there  is  power."  Jesus,  after  he  had  touched  them, 
said,  "Arise,  be  not  afraid."  Precious  word!  "Arise, 
be  not  afraid."  When  the  word  of  Jesus  Christ  comes 
with  power  to  our  discouraged  souls,  and  we  are  made 
strong  in  confidence,  then  we  are  persuaded  of  the  truth 
of  the  gospel.  When  we  are  disabled  from  the  divine 
service  through  fear,  and  Jesus  renews  our  strength  by 
saying,  "Arise,"  so  that  we  are  able  to  work  again,  then 
do  we  believe  and  are  sure,  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our 
strength."  Whenever  the  blessed  Comforter  reveals 
Christ  to  us  so  that  we  are  cheered  and  made  glad 
in  the  midst  of  our  tribulations,  then  we  need  not  ask 
for  signs  and  wonders,  nor  for  voices  speaking  out  of  the 
cloud:  it  is  enough,  the  truth  is  sealed  in  our  consciences. 
The  voice  of  Christ  is  better  far  than  all  other  manifes- 
tations, for  it  does  not  leave  us  swooning  with  fear,  but 
sends  us  out  to  fight  the  battles  of  the  Lord. 

This  is  the  sum  of  what  I  have  spoken  unto  you. 
Ask  not  signs  and  wonders  which  God  will  not  give; 
but,  "Hear  ye  him."  Listen  to  Jesus  by  faith,  and  your 
personal  experience  of  his  presence  shall  be  to  you  ali 
that  you  need  by  way  of  assurance.  Live  on  Christ, 
live  in  Christ,  live  witli  Christ,  and  this  shall  be  better 
to  you  than  visions  or  bright  clouds,  or  celestial  voices, 
or  all  supposable  evidences.  This  shall  make  your  spirit 
leap  and  your  heart  rejoice,  till  the  day  break  and  the 
shadows  flee  away,  and  you  see  God,  even  the  Father, 
face  to  face  in  glory.  May  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  be  with  you  evermore.     Amen. 


XIV. 

ACCEPTED   OF   THE   GREAT   FATHER. 

July  15,  1883. 
"He  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  beloved."— Ephesians  i.  6. 

A  few  Sabbath  mornings  ago  I  spoke  to  you  upon  those 
memorable  words  of  the  great  Father,  "  This  is  my  be- 
loved Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  We  now  go  a 
step  farther,  and  see  how  the  love  of  God  to  his  beloved 
Son  overflows,  and  runs  like  a  river  of  life  to  all  those 
who  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  To  him  he  saith,  "This  is  my 
beloved  Son,"  and  then  he  turns  to  all  who  are  in  union 
with  him  and  says,  "These  also  are  my  beloved  for  his 
sake."  As  believers  we  are  assured  by  the  text  that  we 
are  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  to  the  praise  of  the  glory 
of  God's  grace.  Why  is  that  peculiar  title  here  used  ? 
It  might  have  been  said,  we  are  accepted  in  Christ,  or 
accepted  in  the  Mediator;  there  must  be  some  motive  for 
giving  him  this  special  name  in  this  place.  The  motive 
is  declared  to  be  that  we  may  praise  the  glory  of  divine 
grace.  God  did  not  want  for  a  beloved  when  he  made 
us  his  beloved:  his  heart  was  not  pining  for  an  object; 
his  affections  were  not  lone  and  desolate.  His  only-be- 
gotten Son  was  his  delig^ht,  and  there  was  room  enough 
in  him  for  all  the  Fathers  love;  it  was  ice  that  needed  to 
be  loved,  and  so  the  Beloved  is  mentioned  that  we  may 
remember  the  unselfishness  of  divine  grace.  He  makes 
us  his  beloved,  but  he  had  a  Beloved  before. 


ACCEPTED    OF   THE    GREAT  FATHER.  293 

We  are  also  reminded  that  we  are  "accepted  in  the 
Beloved"  to  let  us  know  that  God  has  not  shifted  his 
love — his  first  beloved  is  his  Beloved  still.  We  have  not 
supplanted  his  dear  Son,  nor  even  diverted  a  beam  of 
love  from  him.  The  Lord  has  called  us  beloved  who 
were  not  so,  and  made  us  a  people  who  were  not  a  peo- 
ple; but  he  has  not  withdrawn  a  grain  of  love  from 
Jesus,  whom  he  still  calls  "  mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul 
delighteth."  All  the  infinite  love  of  God  still  flows  to 
Jesus,  and  then  to  us  in  him.  It  pleased  the  Father  that 
to  him  a  fulness  of  love  should  be  given,  that  out  of  it 
wre  might  each  one  receive.  God's  love  to  us  is  his  love 
to  his  Son  flowing  in  a  hundred  channels.  For  his  sake 
he  makes  the  wedding-feast,  and  we  are  the  happy  guests 
who  sit  at  the  table.  Xot  for  our  sakes  is  this  done,  but 
for  Jesus'  sake,  that  so  it  might  be  all  of  grace.  His  per- 
petual acceptance  with  God  is  our  acceptance,  that 
nothing  legal,  nothing  whereof  we  might  boast,  might 
be  mingled  with  the  work  of  sovereign  grace. 

We  are  "accepted  in  the  Beloved."  Do  you  not  love 
that  sweet  title?  Is  it  not  the  highest  quality  of  the 
acceptance,  that  it  comes  through  such  an  One?  He  is 
beloved  in  the  highest  conceivable  degree  by  the  Father, 
and  in  this  you  imitate  the  great  God,  for  to  you  also 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  altogether  lovely.  He  is  your  Beloved 
as  well  as  God's  Beloved,  and  this  is  one  proof  that  you 
are  accepted;  for  all  who  truly  love  the  Son  are  approved 
by  the  Father.  Thus  saith  the  Scripture:  "Because  lie 
hath  set  his  love  upon  me,  therefore  will  I  deliver  him: 
I  will  set  him  on  high  because  he  hath  known  my  name." 
Is  Christ  your  Beloved?  Then,  as  he  is  the  Father's  Be- 
loved, you  and  the  Father  have  evidently  come  to  a 
sweet  agreement;  you  have  come  to  look  at  things  from 
the  same  standpoint  as  the  glorious  Jehovah;   the  Lord 


29 J:  ACCEPTED    OF   THE    GREAT  FATHER. 

and  you  evidently  have  a  mutual  interest  in  one  common 
person — the  incarnate  God.  Your  recognition  of  Christ 
as  your  Beloved  is  thus  a  sure  proof  that  you  are  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved.  See  you  not  this?  It  is  because 
he  is  the  Father's  Beloved  that  the  Father  loves  you  in 
him,  and  because  he  is  your  Beloved  therefore  you  have 
an  evidence  within  yourself  that  you  have  come  to  an 
agreement  with  the  Father,  and  so  to  an  acceptance  by 
him.  I  delight  in  being  accepted  all  the  more  because 
therein  I  am  still  further  linked  with  him  who  joins  God 
and  man  in  one  grand  affection. 

God's  love  of  his  dear  Son  covers  all  believers,  as  a 
canopy  covers  all  who  come  beneath  it.  As  a  hen 
covereth  her  chickens  with  her  wings,  so  God's  love  to 
Christ  covers  all  the  children  of  promise.  As  the  sun 
shining  forth  from  the  gates  of  the  morning  gilds  all  the 
earth  with  golden  splendor,  so  this  great  love  of  God 
to  the  Well-beloved,  streaming  forth  to  him,  enlightens 
all  who  are  in  Jiim.  God  is  so  boundlessly  pleased  with 
Jesus  that  in  him  he  is  altogether  well  pleased  with  us. 
Oh,  the  joy  of  this  blending  of  our  interests  with  those 
of  the  Well-beloved!  I  scarcely  know  whither  I  am 
borne  even  by  a  single  word  of  my  precious  text. 

Let  this  stand  for  our  preface,  and  now  let  us  come 
close  to  our  subject,  upon  which  I  do  not  desire  so  much 
to  descant  myself  as  to  lead  you  individually  to  meditate, 
and  personally  to  feed.  I  would  much  rather  put  the 
text  into  your  mouths  as  a  sweet  fruit  from  the  garden 
of  the  Lord,  most  mellow  and  ripe,  than  be  judged  my- 
self to  handle  it  well.  I  seek  not  to  exhibit  my  own 
skill  in  words,  but  I  long  that  you  may  be  refreshed  with 
the  marrow  and  fatness  of  the  choice  word.  I  desire 
that  you  may  this  morning  experimentally  enjoy  the 
precious  drop  of  honey  from  the  rock  Christ  Jesus  which 


ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER.  295 

is  contained  in  the  four  words — "Accepted  in  the 
Beloved."  Oh  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  make  you  enter 
into  the  treasures  which  they  contain  ! 

I.  I  will  begin  by  treating  the  text  by  way  of  con- 
trast. Brethren  and  sisters,  the  grace  of  God  hath  made 
us  to  be  this  day  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved  ";  but  it  was 
not  always  so.  As  many  of  us  as  have,  through  grace, 
believed  in  Christ  are  now,  to  a  certainty,  at  this  very 
moment  "accepted  in  the  Beloved";  but  in  times  past 
it  was  very  different.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  question,  nor 
of  imagination,  nor  of  sentiment;  but  a  matter  of  fact, 
declared  by  the  Holy  Ghost  himself,  that  the  Lord  hath 
"made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved";  but  it  was  far 
otherwise  a  little  while  ago.  What  a  contrast  is  our 
present  condition  of  acceptance  to  our  position  under 
the  law  through  Adam's  fall.  By  actual  sin  we  made 
ourselves  to  be  the  very  reverse  of  accepted,  for  we  were 
utterly  refused.  It  might  have  been  said  of  us,  "Repro- 
bate silver  shall  men  call  them,  because  God  hath  re- 
jected them."  Our  way  was  contrary  to  God's  way,  our 
thoughts   were   not  his  thoughts,  our  hearts  were  not 

; ording  to  his  heart.     Oh,  it*  he  had  dealt  with  us  then 

after  our  sins  what  must  have  become  of  us?  At  that 
lime  we  were  condemned,  "condemned  already,"  be- 
cause we  had  not  believed  on  the  Son  of  God.  ^Ye  had 
no  acceptableness  before  God;  he  could  take  no  compla- 
<  ■iicy  in  us;  his  pure  and  holy  eyes  could  not  look  upon 
u>,  we  were  so  full  of  everything  that  provoked  him  to 
jealousy;  but  now  we  are — (oh,  let  me  pronounce  it  like 
music!) — "accepted  in  the  Beloved."  The  criminal  is 
now  a  child,  the  enemy  is  now  a  friend,  the  condemned 
one  is  now  justified.  Mark,  it  is  not  said  that  we  are 
"acceptable,"  though  that  were  a  very  great  thing,  but 
we  are  actually  accepted ;  it  has  become  not  a  thing  pos- 


296  ACCEPTED    OF   THE    GREAT  FATHER. 

sible  that  God  might  accept  us,  but  he  has  accepted  us 
in  Christ,  Lay  this  to  your  soul,  and  m  ay  it  fill  you  with 
delight.  The  Lord  has  chosen  you:  he  has  received  you 
to  himself,  and  set  his  love  upon  you,  and  his  delight 
is  in  you  now.  What  a  contrast  from  what  you  were 
a  season  ago  in  your  own  consciousness,  in  your  own 
judgment.  Refresh  your  memories  a  little.  If  you 
passed  through  the  same  state  of  mind  as  I  did,  you 
loathed  your  very  selves  in  the  sight  of  God;  you  felt 
that  God  must  abhor  you,  for  you  abhorred  yourselves; 
you  saw  sin  to  be  exceeding  sinful,  and  that  sinful  thing 
was  permeating  your  entire  being,  saturating  your 
thoughts,  putrefying  your  aims,  making  3-011  to  be  corrupt 
and  offensive  in  the  sight  of  the  Most  High.  I  know  I 
felt  that  if  the  Lord  swept  me  away  with  the  besom  of 
destruction,  and  cast  me  into  the  lowest  hell,  I  well  de- 
served it.  But  now  that  condemnation  is  no  more  to 
be  dreaded;  Ave  receive  not  the  spirit  of  bondage,  but 
the  spirit  of  adoption.  Lift  up  your  eyes  out  of  the  thick 
darkness,  and  behold  the  light.  You,  Who  in  your  own 
judgment  were  cast  away  for  ever;  you,  who  thought 
that  the  Lord  would  never  be  favorable  to  you,  nor  blot 
out  your  sins,  are  this  day  accepted,  "accepted  in  the 
Beloved."  No  contrast  could  be  more  sharp  and  clear, 
and  no  reflections  could  be  more  joyful  than  this  contrast 
suggests  to  the  heart. 

Think,  again,  of  the  contrast  between  what  you  are 
now  and  what  you  would  have  been  had  not  grace 
stepped  in.  Left  out  of  Christ  as  we  then  were,  we 
might  at  this  time  have  been  going  from  sin  to  sin,  re- 
velling and  rioting  in  it,  as  so  many  do:  we  might  at 
this  moment  have  been  sinning  with  a  high  hand,  find- 
ing even  in  the  Sabbath-day  a  special  opportunity  for 
double    transgression.       In    our    daring    rebellion    we 


ACCEPTED    OF   THE    GREAT  FATHER.  297 

might  have  been  crying,  "The  better  the  day  the  better 
the  deed,"  and  so  might  have  shown  how  completely  we 
had  thrown  oft*  the  yoke  of  allegiance  to  the  great  King. 
Ay,  by  this  time  we  might  have  been  dead,  as  the  result 
of  our  own  sins.  The  measure  of  our  iniquity  might 
have  been  full,  and  we  might  have  been  in  hell.  Be 
startled,  my  soul,  at  this  thought,  that  nothing  but  in- 
finite longsuffering  has  kept  thee  out  of  the  pit  that  is 
bottomless,  "  where  their  worm  dieth  not.  and  their  fire 
is  not  quenched."  But,  brothers,  we  are  not  in  hell,  and, 
what  is  more,  we  never  shall  be,  for  those  iron  gates  can 
never  close  upon  a  soul  that  is  "accepted  in  the  Beloved," 
and  that  is  our  condition  now.  We  have  fled  Cor  refuge 
to  the  hope  set  before  us.  and  now  no  more  need  we  be 
in  terror  of  the  great  white  throne  and  the  righteous 
Judge,  and  the  stern  sentence,  "Depart,  ye  cursed." 
Clinging  to  the  cross,  and  beholding  ourselves  covered 
with  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  we  know  that  we  are 
saved,  and,  what  is  far  more,  we  are  accepted.  This  Mess- 
ed fact  is  true  of  those  who  might  have  been  among  the 
damned.  Our  laments  might  have  been  going  up  to-day 
amidst  the  wailings  of  the  wretched  who  are  eternally 
cast  away  from  hope;  and  now,  instead  thereof,  we  lift 
the  joyful  song  of  praise  unto  our  God.  and  bless  and 
magnify  his  name  in  whom  we  are  accepted  this  day. 
Oh,  my  soul,  sing  thou  thine  own  song  to  thy  Beloved — 

"Just  as  thou  art — how  wondrous  fair, 
Lord  Jesus,  all  thy  members  are  ! 
A  life  divine  to  them  is  given — 
A  long  inheritance  in  heaven. 

."Just  as  I  was  I  came  to  thee, 
An  heir  of  wrath  and  misery ; 
Just  as  thou  art  before  the  throne, 


298  ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER. 

1 '  Just  as  thou  art — nor  doubt,  nor  fear, 
Can  with  thy  spotlessness  appear; 
Oh  timeless  love  !  as  thee,  I'm  seen, 
The  'righteousness  of  God  in  him.'  " 

One  more  point  I  cannot  quite  pass  over,  and  that  is, 
the  contrast  between  what  we  now  are  and  all  we  ever 
could  have  been  in  the  most  favorable  circumstances 
apart  from  the  Beloved.  If  it  had  been  possible  for  us 
out  of  Christ  to  have  had  desires  after  righteousness, 
yet  those  desires  would  all  have  run  in  a  wrong  direc- 
tion; we  should  have  had  a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  ac- 
cording to  knowledge,  and  so,  going  about  to  establish 
our  own  righteousness,  Ave  should  not  have  submitted 
ourselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God.  We  should  have 
been  weaving  a  righteousness  of  our  own  with  heavy 
labor,  which  would  have  proved  no  better  when  com- 
pleted than  a  cobweb  that  could  never  conceal  our  nak- 
edness. At  this  moment  the  prayers  we  offered  would 
Meyer  have  been  received  at  the  throne;  the  praises  we 
presented  would  have  been  an  ill  savor  unto  God;  all 
that  we  could  have  aimed  to  accomplish  in  the  matter  of 
good  words,  had  we  striven  to  our  utmost,  would  have 
been  done  in  wilfulness  and  pride,  and  so  must  neces- 
sarily have  fallen  short  of  acceptance.  We  should  have 
heard  the  voice  of  the  Eternal  saying,  "Bring  no  more 
vain  oblations;  incense  is  an  abomination  unto  me";  for 
out  of  Christ  our  righteousness  is  as  unacceptable  as 
our  unrighteousness,  and  all  our  attempts  to  merit  ac- 
ceptance J  acrease  our  un worthiness.  Oh,  strive  as  ye 
will,  ye  self-righteous;  labor  as  ye  may  after  a  right- 
eousness off  your  own,  what  can  .come  of  it  but  confus- 
ion ?  Whence  is  it  that  the  people  labor  as  in  the 
very  fire  ?  This  shall  they  have  at  the  Lord's  hands — 
they  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow.     The  bed  is  shorter  than 


ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER.  299 

that  a  man  may  stretch  himself  on  it,  and  the  covering 
is  narrower  than  that  a  man  may  wrap  himself  in  it. 
Woe  is  unto  the  man  who  is  out  of  Christ,  wherever  he 
may  be.  In  any  case  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him. 
Bat  we  are  not  out  of  Christ,  we  are  not  striving  in  vain, 
we  are  not  spending  our  strength  for  naught,  for  here  is 
the  blessed  contrast,  we  are  "accepted  in  the  Beloved." 

A  touch  of  the  black  pencil  brings  out  the  bright 
lights,  and  therefore  I  have  laid  on  these  shades.  Such 
were  some  of  you,  but  now  ye  are  washed,  now  ye  are 
sanctified,  now  ye  are  justified,  now  ye  are  "  accepted 
in  the  Beloved."  Ail  glory  be  unto  the  grace  by  which 
we  have  received  this  heavenly  benefit. 

II.  Secondly,  we  will  say  a  little  by  way  of  explana- 
tion, that  the  text  may  sink  yet  deeper  into  your  hearts, 
and  afford  you  richer  enjoyment.  Recollect,  brethren, 
that  once  we  were  pitied  of  God  as  poor,  lost,  self-de- 
stroyed creatures:  that  was  in  a  degree  hopeful.  We 
were  chosen  of  God  while  in  that  pitiable  condition,  and 
although  forlorn,  wretched,  and  ruined,  yet  were  we 
marked  by  his  electing  love — this  was  still  more  en- 
couraging. Then  came  a  time  of  dealing  with  us.  and 
we  were  pardoned,  our  transgressions  were  put  away, 
we  were  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ  was  imputed  to 
us,  and  at  length  burst  forth  the  light  of  this  word,  "  He 
hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  Much  wont 
before  this,  but,  oh,  what  a  morning  without  clouds  rose 
upon  us  when  we  knew  our  acceptance  and  were  assured 
thereof.  Acceptance  was  the  watchword,  and  had  troops 
of  angels  met  us  we  should  have  rejoiced  that  we  were 
as  blest  as  they. 

Understand  that  this  acceptance  comes  to  us  entirely 
as  a  work  of  God — "He  ImUi  mrul-  us  accepted  in  the 


300  ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER. 

Beloved."  We  never  made  ourselves  acceptable,  nor 
could  we  have  done  so,  but  he  that  made  us  first  in 
creation,  hath  now  new  made  us  by  his  grace;  and  so 
hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved. 

That  this  was  an  act  of  pure  grace  there  can  be  im 
doubt,  for  the  verse  runs  thus,  "  Wherein  he  hath  made 
us  accepted  in  the  Beloved  " — that  is,  in  his  grace.  There 
was  no  reason  in  ourselves  why  we  should  have  been 
put  into  Christ,  and  so  accepted;  the  reason  lay  in  the 
heart  of  the  Eternal  Father  himself.  He  will  have  mercy 
on  whom  he  will  have  mercy,  and  by  this  will  we  were 
saved.  To  the  great  First  Cause  we  must  ever  trace  the 
motive  for  our  acceptance.  Grace  reigns  supreme.  It 
is  a  gracious  acceptance  of  those  who  but  for  grace  had 
been  rejected.  Do  notice  this,  and  dwell  upon  the  truth, 
glorifying  God  therein.  Again,  our  acceptance  is  "  in  the 
Beloved."  It  is  only  as  we  are  in  Christ  that  we  are  ac- 
cepted. Let  no  man  steal  out  of  Christ,  and  then  say. 
"  God  has  accepted  me."  Nothing  of  the  kind.  If  the 
Lord  views  you  apart  from  Christ,  whoever  you  may  be, 
you  are  a  thing  to  be  consumed,  and  not  to  be  accepted. 
"In  the  Beloved,"  that  is,  as  it  were,  within  the  gates 
of  the  city  of  refuge.  You  must  abide  within  that  wall 
of  fire  of  which  the  cross  is  the  centre,  or  else  you  are 
not  accepted.  You  must  remain  within  the  arms  of  the 
Well-beloved,  living  in  the  very  heart  of  Christ,  and  then 
you  shall  know  yourself  to  be  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved." 
For  Christ's  sake,  and  because  you  are  a  part  of  him,  you 
shall  be  approved  of  the  Father.  He  has  taken  you  into 
covenant  union,  so  that  you  can  say  with  the  favored 
apostle,  "Truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and 
with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  Therefore  the  Father  ac- 
cepts you,  because  he  cannot  dissociate  you  from  his 
Son,  nor  his  Son  from  you,  nor  think  of  Christ  without 


ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER.  301 

you,  nor  of  you  without  Christ;  hence  it  is  you  are  "ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved."     That  explains  the  words. 

The  following  remarks  may  make  the  sense  somewhat 
more  transparent.  No  man,  my  brethren,  can  be  ac- 
cepted of  God  while  he  is  guilty  of  sin,  so  that  our  ac- 
ceptance in  the  Beloved  involves  the  fact  that  our  sin  at 
this  moment  is  for  ever  put  away.  Covered  is  our  un- 
righteousness, and  therefore  from  condemnation  we  are 
free,  and  we  are  accepted.  Realize  this  truth.  It  does 
not  require  any  oratory  to  set  it  forth  ;  it  needs  only  that 
your  faith  should  fully  apprehend  it.  Realize  that  you 
are  forgiven  to-day.  With  your  eye  upon  the  wounds 
of  Christ,  say  unto  your  soul  by  the  Spirit,  "  1  am  with- 
out spot  or  wrinkle  in  the  sight  of  God;  for  Christ  hath 
washed  me  whiter  than  the  driven  snow."  He  has  said 
of  his  people,  "Ye  are  clean  every  whit."  Rejoice  in 
this.  You  could  not  be  accepted  if  he  had  not  made  you 
clean,  for  the  filthy  are  not  accepted  of  the  Lord. 

Neither  could  God  accept  a  man  devoid  of  righteous- 
ness. A  mere  colorless  person,  whose  sin  was  forgiven, 
but  who  had  no  righteousness,  could  not  be  acceptable 
with  him.  I  cannot  suppose  the  existence  of  such  a  be- 
ing; but  if  there  were  such,  he  would  be  like  one  who 
was  neither  cold  nor  hot,  and  must  be  spewed  out  of  ( rod's 
mouth.  He  that  is  accepted  with  God  must  be  positively 
righteous.  Very  well,  then,  if  he  has  made  believers 
"accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  they  that  believe  in  Christ 
are  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.  Mark  you,  they  are 
not  righteous  with  a  sham  righteousness,  an  imaginary, 
fictitious  righteousness;  no,  the  righteousness  which  is 
of  faith  is  the  most  real  righteousness  under  heaven.  The 
righteousness  of  works  may  be  questioned,  but  the  right- 
eousness of  faith  cannot  be,  for  it  is  the  righteousness  of 
God  himself.     Now  drink  that  in.     Do  not  let  me  hold 


302  ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER. 

it  up,  and  show  you  what  a  draught  it  is;  but  drink  it 
up  for  yourselves.  You  are  righteous  in  Christ,  or  else 
you  could  not  be  accepted.  Sin  is  gone,  and  righteous- 
ness is  positively  yours. 

Now  to  come  back  again.  If  we  be  indeed  "  accepted 
in  the  Beloved"  does  it  not  show  how  close,  how  real  our 
union  with  the  Beloved  must  be  ?  Do  we  even  share  in 
Christ's  acceptance  with  God  ?  Then  we  are  one  with 
him  in  everything.  Here  is  a  father  who  has  no  partic- 
ular interest  in  such  and  such  a  woman,  but  his  son 
takes  to  himself  that  woman  to  be  his  wife,  and  now  the 
loving  father  says,  "That  woman  is  my  daughter,"  and 
so  she  is  received  into  his  love  for  his  son's  sake.  He 
says  to  her;  "You  are  my  dear  son's  wife;  therefore  you 
are  my  daughter,  and  dear  to  me,  aud  welcome  to  my 
house  at  any  time."  Thus  it  is  with  the  great  God.  He 
says  to  us,  whom  Christ  has  espoused  unto  himself,  that 
we  may  be  his  bride  in  blessed  conjugal  union  for  ever 
and  ever,  "  Come  to  my  heart,  my  children,  for  he  is  my 
Son,  and  I  love  you  for  his  sake;  I  accept  you  in  him.'' 
Is  not  that  a  wonderful  union,  closer  than  the  marriage 
bond,  which  causes  us  to  share  in  Christ's  righteousness, 
so  that  the  holy  God  can  say  to  us  who  are  sinful  by 
nature,  "You  are  acceptable  to  me  because  of  your  con- 
nection with  my  Son  "  ?  If  a  woman  of  base  character 
were  married  to  the  best  of  men  it  would  not  make  her 
acceptable.  A  father  would  scarcely  know  what  to  do 
with  such  a  daughter-in-law:  we  should  try  and  carry  out 
our  relationship  as  far  as  we  could  with  all  kindness,  but 
we  could  hardly  say  that  such  a  person  brought  into  our 
family  by  marriage  would  be  acceptable  to  us;  but,  oh, 
the  Lord  sees  his  people  so  wrapped  up  in  Christ  that  he 
must  accept  them  in  him.  If  I  accept  a  man,  I  cannot 
quarrel  with  his  little  finger;  if  I  accept  a  man,  I  accept 


ACCEPTED    OF   THE    GREAT  FATHER.  303 

his  whole  body:  and  so,  since  the  Father  accepts  Christ, 
he  accepts  every  member  of  his  mystical  body.  If  I  am 
one  with  Christ,  though  I  be  but  as  it  were  only  the  sole 
of  his  foot,  and  exposed  oftentimes  to  the  mire  of  the 
streets,  yet,  because  the  glorious  Head  is  accepted,  the 
meanest  member  joined  in  living  union  to  that  Head  is 
accepted  too.  Is  not  this  glorious?  Can  you  get  a  firm 
hold  of  it?  Unless  you  intelligently  grasp  its  full  sig- 
nificance you  will  not  heartily  enjoy  this  unspeakable 
privilege.  But  if  your  faith  receives  and  welcomes  it, 
you  will  not  need  any  further  explanation.  You  are 
"accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  and  it  is  clear  that  there  is  a 
blessed  union  between  you  and  Christ.  The  acceptance 
which  the  Father  gives  to  Christ  he  gives  to  you.  Now, 
see  if  you  can  measure  it.  How  acceptable  is  Christ  to 
God?  Must  it  not  be  an  infinite  acceptance  ?. for  it  is  an 
infinite  Being  infinitely  accepting  an  infinitely  holy  and 
well-pleasing  One,  and  then  accepting  us  who  are  in 
him  with  the  self-same  acceptance.  Oh,  how  acceptable 
is  every  believer  to  the  eternal  Father  in  Christ  Jesus! 

III.  Can  we  get  a  step  farther?  Will  the  Holy  Spirit 
help  us  while  I  say  a  few  words  by  way  of  enlargement ? 
If  we  are  "accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  then,  first,  our  per- 
sons are  accepted:  we  ourselves  are  well-pleasing  to  him. 
God  looks  upon  us  now  with  pleasure.  Once  he  said  of 
men  that  it  repented  him  that  he  had  made  them,  but 
now  when  he  looks  at  his  people  he  never  repents  that 
he  made  us;  he  is  glad  he  made  us,  he  takes  delight  in 
us.  Look  at  your  own  children;  sometimes  they  grieve 
you,  but  still  you  are  pleased  with  them;  it  is  a  pleasure 
to  have  them  near  you;  and  if  they  are  long  out  of  your 
sight  you  grow  anxious  about  them.  They  are  coming 
home  for  their  holidays  soon :  they  are  glad  to  return 
home,   and   I   am   sure    their   mothers  are  glad  at  the 


304  ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT    FATHER. 

thought  of  seeing  them  again.  Our  Father  is  as  truly 
pleased  with  us:  our  very  persons  are  accepted  of  God. 
lie  delights  in  us  individually;  he  thinks  of  us  with  joy, 
and  when  we  are  near  to  him  it  gives  pleasure  to  his 
great  heart. 

Being  ourselves- accepted,  the  right  of  access  to  Him 
is  given  us.  When  a  person  is  accepted  with  God  he 
may  come  to  God  when  he  chooses;  he  is  one  of  those 
sheep  who  may  go  in  and  out  and  find  pasture;  he  is 
one  of  those  courtiers  who  may  come  even  to  the  l^ryal 
throne  and  meet  with  no  rebuff.  Xo  chamber  of  our 
great  Father's  house  is  closed  against  us;  no  blessing  of 
the  covenant  is  withheld  from  us;  no  sweet  smile  of  the 
Father's  face  is  refused  us.  He  that  accepted  us  gives 
us  access  into  all  blessings.  "See,  I  have  accepted  thee 
concerning  this  thing  also."  You  remember  the  story 
of  King  Ahasuerus  and  his  poor  trembling  spouse  Esther, 
how  she  ventured  in  at  the  peril  of  her  life,  for  if  her 
royal  lord  and  master  did  not  stretch  out  the  golden 
sceptre  then  the  guards  that  stood  about  the  throne 
would  cut  her  down,  the  queen  royal  though  she  was, 
for  daring  to  come  unbidden  into  the  despot's  presence; 
but  to-day,  when  you  and  I  come  to  God,  we  have  no 
fear  of  that  kind,  because  we  are  accepted  first;  he  hath 
already  stretched  out  to  us  the  golden  sceptre,  and  he 
bids  us  come  boldly.  All  is  well  between  us  and  him. 
We  have  access  with  boldness  into  this  grace  wherein 
we  stand. 

And,  being  accepted  ourselves,  our  prayers  are  also 
accepted.  Children  of  God,  can  you  sincerely  believe 
this?  Do  you  not  sometimes  pray  as  if  you  were  beg- 
gars in  the  street,  pleading  with  unwilling  persons  to 
give  you  a  gratuity  of  coppers  ?  I  believe  many  chil- 
dren of  God  do  so;  but  when  we  know  we  are  "ac- 


ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER.  305 

cepted  in  the  Beloved"  we  speak  to  God  with  a  sweet 
confidence,  expecting  him  to  answer  us.  To  us  it  is  no 
surprise  that  our  heavenly  Father  should  hear  our  prayers. 
He  does  it  so  often  and  so  generously  that  we  expect 
him  to  do  so  always.  It  is  a  way  of  his  to  hear  the 
prayers  of  the  Well-beloved.  When  unaccepted  men 
pray  they  pray  unaccepted  prayers,  and  when  accepted 
men  plead  with  God  he  says,  "  In  an  acceptable  time 
have  I  heard  thee,  and  in  a  day  of  salvation  have  I 
succored  thee."  When  God  delights  in  men  he  gives 
them  the  desires  of  their  hearts.  Oh,  the  splendor  of 
that  man's  position  who  is  "accepted  in  the  Beloved!" 
To  him  the  Lord  seems  to  say,  "Ask  what  thou  wilt, 
and  it  shall  be  given  to  thee,  not  even  to  the  half  of  my 
kingdom,  but  my  kingdom  itself  shall  be  thine :  thou  shalt 
sit  with  me  upon  my  throne."  Oh,  the  blessedness  of  be- 
ing "  accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  because  the  acceptance 
makes  our  prayers  to  be  as  sweet  incense  before  the  Lord  ! 
It  follows,  then,  as  a  pleasant  sequence,  that  our  gifts 
are  accepted,  for  those  who  are  accepted  with  God  find 
a  great  delight  in  giving  of  their  substance  to  the  glory 
of  his  name.  I.  know  that  when  money  is  wanted  for 
the  church  of  God,  and  one  of  the  brethren  goes  round 
to  collect  the  offerings,  the  subjects  of  the  kingdom  are 
wont  to  say,  "  Here  comes  the  tax-gatherer  again." 
Yes,  that  is  what  the  subjects  say.  Oh,  but  when  the 
children  are  about,  they  cry,  "Here  is  another  oppor- 
tunity of  presenting  an  offering  to  our  Father,  a  wel- 
come occasion  of  proving  that  our  love  to  him  is  pure, 
without  greed  or  grudging."  They  clap  their  hands  to 
think  that  they  may  come  before  the  Lord  with  their 
sacrifices.  Their  only  question  is,  "Will  he  accept  it? 
Oh,  what  would  I  not  give  if  I  did  but  know  that  he 
would  accept  it !  "     Many  a  poor  woman  will  take  her 


306  ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER. 

two  mites,  and  not  more  stealthily  than  joyfully  cast 
them  into  the  treasury,  as  she  says,  "  Will  he  really  ac- 
cept them  when  dropped  into  the  offering-box;  will  he 
even  know  about  them?"  And  some  of  God's  children  get 
schemes  into  their  heads  of  doing  great  things  for  God, 
but  they  say,  "  May  I  not  after  all  be  working  for  my- 
self? May  it  not  be  that  pride  and  vain-glory  so  leaven 
my  labors  that  'the  odor  of  a  sweet  smell,'  like  to  that 
'sacrifice  acceptable '  which  the  Philippians  presented, 
will  be  all  a- wanting."  Nay,  my  friends,  my  helpers 
in  every  good  work,  you  need  not  ask  that  question  if 
he  has  accepted  you,  for  the  accepted  man  brings  an 
accepted  offering.  It  is  wonderful  how  God  sees  good 
things  in  his  people  where  we  cannot  see  them.  He 
saw  in  Abijah  some  good  thing  towards  the  Lord  God 
of  Israel  when  perhaps  no  one  else  saw  it.  Mistress 
Sarah  once  made  a  rather  naughty  speech;  yet  there 
was  one  good  word  in  it.  I  doubt  very  much  if  any  one 
of  us  would  have  been  quick  enough  to  discern  it.  Yet 
the  Holy  Spirit  picked  out  that  one  word,  and  put  it 
into  the  New  Testament  to  her  praise.  She  spoke  un- 
believingly as  to  her  bearing  a  child  at  her  advanced 
age,  though  the  promise  was  pronounced  that  she  should 
bring  forth  a  son.  She  said,  "  Shall  it  be,  I  being  old, 
my  lord  being  old  also  ?  "  This  was  a  bad  speech,  but 
we  are  somewhat  startled  to  read  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, "As  Sarah  also  obeyed  her  husband  calling  him 
lord."  If  God  can  find  a  speck  of  good  in  us  he  will. 
Then  let  us  try  what  we  can  do  for  him.  Here  is  a 
great  lump  of  quartz,  but  if  the  Lord  can  see  a  grain  of 
gold  he  will  save  the  quartz  for  the  sake  of  it.  He  says, 
"Destroy  it  not,  for  a  blessing  is  in  it."  I  do  not  mean 
that  the  Lord  deals  thus  with  all  men.  It  is  only  for 
accepted  men  that  he  has  this  kind  way  of  accepting 


ACCEPTED    OF   THE    GRE'AT  FATHER.  307 

their  gifts.  Had  you  seen  me  when  a  young  man,  and 
an  usher,  walking  through  the  streets  with  rolls  of 
drawings  from  a  boys'  school,  you  would  have  guessed 
that  I  considered  them  of  no  value  and  fit  only  to  be 
consigned  to  the  fire;  but  I  always  took  a  great  interest 
in  the  drawings  of  my  own  boy,  and  I  still  think  them 
rather  remarkable.  You  smile,  I  dare  say,  but  I  do  so 
think,  and  my  judgment  is  as  good  as  yours.  1  value 
them  because  they  are  his,  and  I  think  I  see  budding 
genius  in  every  touch,  but  you  do  not  see  it  because 
you  are  so  blind.  1  see  it  since  love  has  opened  ray 
eyes.  God  can  see  in  his  people's  gifts  to  him  and  their 
works  for  him  a  beauty  which  no  eyes  but  his  can  per- 
ceive. Oh,  if  he  so  treats  our  poor  service,  what  ought 
we  not  to  do  for  him?  What  zeal,  what  alacrity  should 
stimulate  us!  If  wo  are  ourselves  accepted  our  sacri- 
fices shall  be  acceptable.  The  Almighty  will  permit  us 
to  be  called  his  servants,  and  we  shall  find  his  blessing 
resting  on  all  that  we  do.  If  the  tree  be  good  the  fruit 
is  good.  As  is  the  man,  so  is  his  strength;  and  as  is  his 
prestige,  so  is  his  power.  "  Accepted  in  the  Beloved"  has 
for  its  accompaniment  "God  hath  accepted  thy  works." 
IV.  We  have  thus  pursued  our  train  of  thought  in 
a  contrast,  an  explanation,  and  an  enlargement;  let  us 
now  indulge  in  a  few  reflections. 

"  Accepted  in  the  Beloved."  May  not  each  believer 
talk  thus  with  himself — I  have  my  sorrows  and  griefs, 
I  have  my  aches  and  pains,  and  weaknesses,  but  I  must 
not  repine,  for  God  accepts  me.  Ah  me!  How  one  can 
laugh  at  griefs  when  this  sweet  word  comes  in,  "ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved."  I  may  be  blind,  but  I  am 
"accepted  in  the  Beloved:"  I  may  be  lame,  I  may  be 
poor,  I  may  be  despised,  I  may  be  persecuted,  I  may 
have  much  to  put   up   with  in   many   ways,   but   really 


308  ACCEPTED    OP   THE    GREAT  E A  TITER. 

these  troubles  of  the  flesh  count  for  little  or  nothing 
to  me  since  1  am  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved." 

1  have  to  mourn  over  a  multitude  of  infirmities  and 
imperfections,  and  there  is  never  a  day  but  what  when 
night  comes  on  1  have  repenting  work  to  do,  and  feel 
compelled  to  fly  to  the  precious  blood  again  for  a  re- 
newed sense  of  pardon.  Yes,  but  I  am  ''accepted  in 
the  Beloved."  Ah  me,  I  have  been  struggling  with  this 
evil  and  that,  and  I  hope  T  have  got  the  victory,  though 
I  have  had  many  a  wound  in  the  battle:  yes,  but  I  am 
"accepted  in  the  Beloved."  1  have  just  now  been  blam- 
ing myself  for  my  shortcomings,  and  mourning  over  my 
many  slips  and  failures:  yes.  but  I  am  "accepted  in  the 
Beloved."  1  am  speaking  for  you,  or  at  least  I  am  trying 
to  interpret  your  meditations:  1  want  you  to  let  this 
blessed  fact  go  down  sweetly  with  you,  that  whatever 
may  be  the  trials  of  life,  whatever  the  burdens  that 
oppress  you,  whatever  the  difficulties  of  the  way,  what- 
ever the  infirmities  of  the  body,  whatever  the  frailties 
of  the  mind,  yet  still,  as  being  "in  the  Beloved"  you 
are  accepted.  Oh,  will  you  not  be  accepted  when  j^ou 
stand  where  golden  harps  ring  out  perpetual  hallelujahs, 
where  every  robe  is  spotless,  and  every  heart  is  sinless? 
Yes,  but  you  will  not  be  a  jot  more  accepted  then  than 
you  are  now,  in  all  this  noise,  and  strife,  and  turmoil  of 
evory-day  life,  for  you  are  "accepted  in  the  Beloved" 
vow.  Is  not  this  present  grace  in  the  highest  perfection  ? 
What  more  can  you  have  till  you  behold  the  unveiled  face 
of  infinite  love.     Drink  down  that  truth,  I  pray  you. 

Let  a  further  reflection  be  added  also  to  the  sweet- 
ness of  your  enjoyment.  Think  of  who  it  is  that  doth 
accept  you.  It  is  no  common  person  who  admits  us  to 
his  favor:  it  is  the  God  whose  name  is  Jehovah,  the 
jealous  God.      "  Holy,  holy,  holy,"  cry  the  seraphim  un- 


ACCEPTED    OE  THE    GREAT  E A  TITER.  309 

ceasingly,  and  nothing  that  is  defiled  can  ever  enter 
his  palace-gates,  nor  can  his  heart  endure  the  thought 
of  iniquity,  and  yet  it  is  he  that  hath  accepted  you. 
Did  your  brethren  cast  you  out?  Did  your  friend  con- 
demn you  ?  Did  your  own  heart  accuse  you  ?  Did  the 
devil  roar  upon  you?  What  matters  it,  for  he  hath  ac- 
cepted you.  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge 
of  God's  elect?  It  is  God  that  justifieth.  Who  is  he 
that  condemneth  ?  "  He  hath  made  us  "  accepted  in  the 
Beloved,"  and  if  that  be  so,  we  need  not  fear  what  men 
can  do  unto  us. 

Now,  just  think  again,  he  has  made  you  "accepted 
in  the  Beloved."  He,  that  is,  God,  has  accepted  you  in 
Christ.  Would  you  have  liked  any  other  way  of  accept- 
ance one  halt'  as  well  ?  For  my  part,  I  had  infinitely 
rather  receive  everything  through  Christ  than  reach  it 
for  myself.  Mercy  seems  so  much  the  sweeter  and 
the  better  from  the  fact  that  it  all  comes  from  that  dear, 
pierced  hand.  If  I  were  this  day  accepted  in  myself, 
I  should  fear  that  I  might  lose  my  acceptance,  for  I  am 
a  poor,  changeable  being,  but  if  I  am  "accepted  in  the 
Beloved,"  then  the  Beloved  will  never  change,  and  I 
always  must  and  shall  be  accepted,  come  what  may.  Is 
not  this  a  word  to  die  with  ?  We  will  meet  death  and 
face  his  open  jaws  with  this  word,  "  Accepted  in  the 
Beloved."  Will  not  this  be  a  word  to  rise  with  amidst 
the  blaze  of  the  great  judgment-day  ?  You  wake  up 
from  your  tomb,  lift  up  your  eyes,  and  ere  you  gaze 
upon  the  terrors  of  that  tremendous  hour,  you  say,  "  I 
am  accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  what  can  then  fill  you  with 
alarm?  For  ever  and  ever,  as  the  cycles  of  eternity  re- 
volve, will  not  this  be  the  core  and  centre  of  heaven's 
supremest  bliss,  that  still  we  are  "  accepted  in  the  Be- 
loved ?  "     I  hear  strange  theories  nowadays  of  what  may 


310  ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER. 

happen  to  the  saints :  they  tell  us  the  sinners  will  die  out, 
or  be  restored,  or  something  else;  for  they  are  not  con- 
tent with  the  Scripture  teaching  of  eternity,  but  must 
needs  invent  strange  notions  about  the  punishment  of 
the  ungodly.  Then  they  begin  to  picture  new  destiny 
for  saints  too,  and  the  heaven  of  our  fathers  has  sad 
doubts  cast  on  it.  I  care  not  for  their  dreams,  for  I  am 
"  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  It  matters  nothing  what  all 
the  eternities  can  reveal:  he  that  is  accepted  in  Christ, 
and  eternally  one  with  him,  has  nothing  before  him  at 
which  he  need  tremble. 

My  time  is  gone:  I  heard  the  warning  bell  just  now, 
and  so  I  must  forbear  to  amplify  on  the  many  reflections 
that  spontaneously  flow  out  of  our  text;  all  fitted  to 
stifle  anxious  care,  to  sweeten  mortal  life,  and  to  set  our 
souls  a-longing  for  the  home  which  is  above  where  so 
hearty  a  welcome  awaits  us. 

V.  And  now  I  wish  to  finish  with  this  one  practical 
use.  If  it  be  so  that  we  are  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved," 
then  let  us  go  forth  and  tell  poor  sinners  how  they  can 
be  accepted  too.  Are  you,  to-day,  though  unconverted, 
anxious  to  be  found  right  at  last?  Listen,  friend.  If 
you  want  to  be  accepted,  you  must  accept.  "  And  what," 
do  you  ask,  "must  I  accept?"  You  must  accept  Christ 
as  the  free  gift  of  God;  you  must  accept  Christ  as  God's 
way  of  accepting  you,  for  if  you  get  into  Christ  you  are 
accepted.  The  guiltiest  of  the  guilty  may  be  accepted 
in  Christ:  no  matter  how  great  and  grievous  their  trans- 
gressions may  have  been,  the  atoning  sacrifice  can  take 
all  their  guilt  away,  and  the  perfect  righteousness  can 
justify  the  most  heinous  sinner  before  God.  You  may 
be  accepted.  Listen.  If  you  come  to  Christ  now  and 
trust  him  you  will  be  accepted.  Never  did  one  come  to 
Christ  to  be  rejected.     You  shall  not  be  the  first.     Try 


ACCEPTED    OF  THE    GREAT  FATHER.  311 

it;  and  though  you  came  into  this  house  condemned  you 
shall  go  out  accepted,  if  you  come  now  and  hide  in  those 
dear  wounds  of  his  as  doves  do  hide  them  in  the  clefts 
of  the  rocks.  Listen  again.  It  is  not  only  that  you  may 
be  accepted;  it  is  rather  that  you  luill  be  accepted,  you 
cannot  but  be  accepted  in  Christ:  there  is  no  sort  of  fear 
nor  possibility  that  you  shall  come  to  Christ  and  be  cast 
out,  Christ  must  change,  truth  must  change,  God  must 
change  towards  his  Well-beloved,  he  must  cease  to  love 
him  ere  he  could  refrain  from  loving  a  soul  that  is  in 
him.  Guilty  as  you  are,  come  to  Christ  this  morning. 
Come,  despise  not  the  exhortation,  for  you  must  be  ac- 
cepted; it  cannot  but  be  that  you  should  be  accepted  if 
you  come.  And  you  shall  be  accepted  at  once.  If  at 
this  moment  you  are  as  vile  as  vile  can  be,  if  while  I 
speak  you  know  that  you  are  black  as  hell's  dark  night, 
yet  the  moment  that  you  come  to  Christ  you  are  "  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved."  Trust  him :  trust  him.  Have 
you  done  so  ?  Your  sin  is  gone ;  righteousness  is  imputed ; 
you  are  saved. 

And,  then,  to  close,  if  you  get  into  Christ  you  shall 
be  accepted  as  long  as  you  are  in  Christ,  and  as  the  grace 
of, God  will  never  let  you  go  out  of  Christ  you  shall  be 
accepted  for  ever,  "accepted  in  the  Beloved"  world 
without  end.  If  that  be  the  verdict  of  this  day  it  shall 
be  the  verdict  of  every  day  till  days  shall  be  no  more; 
the  hope  for  you  dying,  the  song  for  your  rising  again, 
the  verdict  which  shall  be  given  out  when  the  great  as- 
size shall  sit,  and  you  shall  be  tried  for  your  life  for  the 
last  time.  They  that  sit  in  judgment  shall  say,  "  Let 
that  man  go;  he  is  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  If  thou 
believest  in  Jesus  it  shall  be;  it  is  so;  it  shall  be  so 
for  ever  and  ever.  God  bless  you  all  by  his  good  Spirit, 
for  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


AV. 

ON  HUMBLING  OUKSELVES  BEFOKE  GOD. 

July  22,  1883.- 

' '  Humble  yourselves  therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that 
he  may  exalt  you  in  due  time." — 1  Petee  v.  G. 

Pride  is  so  natural  to  fallen  man  that  it  springs  up  in  his 
heart  like  weeds  in  a  watered  garden,  or  rushes  by  a 
flowing  brook.  It  is  an  all-pervading  sin,  and  smothers 
all  things  like  dust  in  the  roads,  or  flour  in  the  mill. 
Its  every  touch  is  evil  as  the  breath  of  the  cholera-fiend, 
or  the  blast  of  the  simoom.  Pride  is  as  hard  to  get  rid 
of  as  charlock  from  the  furrows,  or  the  American  blight 
from  the  apple-trees.  If  killed  it  revives,  if  buried  it 
bursts  the  tomb.  You  may  hunt  down  this  fox,  and 
think  you  have  destroyed  it,  and  lo  !  your  very  exulta- 
tion is  pride.  None  have  more  pride  than  those  who 
dream  that  they  have  none.  You  may  labor  against 
vainglory  till  you  conceive  that  you  are  humble,  and  the 
fond  conceit  of  youf  humility  will  prove  to  be  pride  in 
full  bloom.  It  apes  humility  full  well,  and  is  then  most 
truly  pride.  Pride  is  a  sin  with  a  thousand  lives;  it 
seems  impossible  to  kill  it,  it  flourishes  on  that  which 
should  be  its  poison,  glorying  in  its  shame.  It  is  a  sin 
with  a  thousand  shapes;  by  perpetual  change  it  escapes 
capture.  It  seems  impossible  to  hold  it;  the  vapory 
imp  slips  from  you,  only  to  appear  in  another  form  and 
mock  your  fruitless  pursuit.  To  die  to  pride  and  self  one 
would  need  to  die  himself. 

Pride  was  man's  first  sin,  and  it  will  be  his  last.      In 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD.        313 

the  first  sin  that  man  ever  committed  there  was  certainly 
a  large  admixture  of  pride,  for  he  imagined  that  he  knew 
better  than  his  Maker,  and  even  dreamed  that  his  Maker 
feared  that  man  might  grow  too  great.  It  has  been  ques- 
tioned whether  pride  was  not  the  sin  by  which  the  an- 
gels fell  when  they  lost  their  first  estate:  I  will  not  go 
into  any  controversy  upon  that  subject;  but  there  was 
certainly  pride  in  the  sin  of  Satan  and  pride  in  the  sin 
of  Adam.  This  is  the  torch  which  kindled  hell  and  set 
the  world  on  fire. 

Pride  is  a  ringleader  and  captain  among  iniquities: 
it  attaineth  unto  the  first  three  of  Satan's  champions. 
It  is  a  daring  and  God-defying  sin.  arraigning  divine 
justice,  as  Cain  did;  challenging  Jehovah  to  combat,  as 
Pharaoh  did;  or  making  self  into  God,  as  Nebuchadnez- 
zar did.  It  would  murder  God  if  it  could,  that  it  might 
fill  his  throne.  While  it  is  first  to  come,  and  first  in 
horrible  supremacy,  it  is  also  last  to  go.  As  Paul  said, 
"The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death."  I 
think  I  might  say  that  the  least  enemy  but  one  is  pride, 
for  even  at  our  death-bed  pride  will  be  found  in  attend- 
ance. In  his  last  moments  John  Knox  had  a  sharp  con- 
flict with  self-righteousness  though  he  had  preached 
against  it  with  all  his  might,  and  knew,  with  a  clearness 
seldom  given  to  men,  that  salvation  is  of  the  Lord  alone. 
Even  within  an  hour  of  glory  he  had  to  make  a  stand 
against  the  vile  thing,  the  pride  of  the  human  heart. 
Many  others  of  the  Lord's  valiant  ones  have  been  sorely 
assailed  by  the  same  crafty  foe,  which  shoots  with  feath- 
ered flatteries  shafts  of  destruction.  In  the  most  quiet 
minds  the  deadly  calm  of  self-conceit  may  be  found.  Our 
hearts  are  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  in  nothing  less 
to  be  trusted  than  in  this  matter  of  pride.  Even  while 
we  breathe  out  our  souls  unto  God  it  will  attempt  to  puff 


314        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES  BEFORE    GOD. 

us  up ; — yes,  it  will  puff  up  poor  dying  worms !  Brothers 
and  sisters,  for  certain,  you  and  I  are  in  danger  of  pride; 
possibly  we  are  even  now  victims  of  it:  let  us  be  on  our 
guard,  for  it  may  be  ruining  us  without  our  knowledge 
even  as  the  moth  in  secret  eats  up  the  garment,  or  as 
unseen  rust  cankers  the  hidden  treasure. 

Let  pride  lodge  where  it  may,  it  does  its  entertainer 
great  mischief,  for  it  bars  out  the  favor  of  God,  "  God 
resisteth  the  proud."  It  must  be  sent  adrift  ere  God  can 
visit  us  with  favor,  for  no  grace  comes  to  the  proud, 
"  but  he  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble."  Humility  is 
the  grace  that  attracts  more  grace.  As  money  makes 
money,  so  humility  increases  humility,  and  with  it 
every  other  spiritual  gift.  If  you  would  have  much  grace 
have  much  humility.  God  hath  assistance  for  the  humble 
but  resistance  for  the  proud.  You  know  how  he  fought 
Pharaoh.  What  blows  he  struck  at  the  haughty  mon- 
arch !  He  would  have  him  down  from  the  pinnacle  of 
defiance  one  way  or  another,  and  make  him  learn  in  bit- 
terness the  answer  to  his  own  insolent  question,  "Who 
is  the  Lord?"  Remember  how  Nebuchadnezzar  had  to 
eat  grass  like  an  ox  because  he  spake  with  haughty 
tongue.  Wherever  God  sees  pride  lifting  itself  on  high, 
he  resolves  to  level  it  with  the  dust.  He  draws  his  bow, 
he  fits  his  arrow  to  the  string,  and  pride  is  the  target 
that  he  shoots  at.  The  more  pride  enters  into  the  Chris- 
tian's heart  the  less  grace  will  enter  there,  and  the  more 
opposition  from  God  will  come  there;  for  pride  is  never 
so  hateful  to  God  as  when  he  sees  it  in  his  own  peo- 
ple. If  you  see  disease  in  a  stranger  you  are  very  sorry, 
but  if  you  discover  its  symptoms  in  your  own  child  your 
grief  is  much  more  deep.  A  viper  is  loathsome  anywhere ; 
but  how  it  would  make  you  start  if  you  saw  the  head 
of  one  of  those  creatures  peeping  out  from  the  bosom  of 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD.        315 

a  beloved  friend  !  So  pride  is  detestable  anywhere ;  but 
it  is  worst  in  those  whom  the  Lord  loves  best.  If  God 
sees  pride  in  a  David  he  will  smite  him  till  he  ceases 
from  his  high  thoughts;  or  if  it  be  in  a  Hezekiah  he  will 
abase  him ;  and  be  you  sure  that  if  the  Lord  sees  pride  in 
you  he  will  smite  you;  ay,  smite 'you  again  and  again 
till  you  wait  humbly  at  his  feet. 

All  this  I  have  given  by  way  of  preface,  but  I  think 
it  is  also  an  argument  which  may  ran  before  the  words 
of  the  text,  and  strengthen  them,  "  Humble  yourselves 
therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God." 

I  shall  handle  the  text,  not  at  any  great  length,  but 
for  practical  purposes,  in  three  or  four  ways.  May  the 
Holy  Spirit  bless  the  discourse. 

I.   First,  our  text  is  evidently  intended  to  bear  upon 

US  IN  OIK  CHURCH  LIFE. 

We  will  use  it  in  that  respect.  Observe  that  Peter 
has  been  speaking  to  the  elders,  and  telling  them  how 
they  should  behave  themselves  in  the  flock  over  which 
they  are  set  as  overseers.  Then  he  speaks  to  the  young- 
er members,  and  he  says,  "Sumbit  yourselves  unto  the 
elder."  He  says  to  all  church-members,  '-all  of  you  be 
subject  one  to  another,  and  be  clothed  with  humility"; 
and  it  is  in  the  same  context  that  he  writes,  "Humble 
yourselves  therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  F 
am,  as  a  member  of  a  church,  not  to  seek  honor  to  myself, 
but  I  am  to  walk  humbly.  I  am  not  to  make  it  in  any 
respect  the  object  of  my  Christian  life  to  be  esteemed 
among  my  fellow-Christians  so  as  to  have  influence  over 
them,  and  to  take  the  lead  among  them.  I  am  to  have 
far  humbler  motives  than  that.  I  am  to  think  very  little 
of  myself,  and  to  think  so  much  of  others  that  I  admire 
all  that  I  see  of  God's  grace  in  them,  and  am  glad  to 
learn  from  them  as  well  as  to  help  them  in  their  progress 


316        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES  BEFORE    GOD. 

to  heaven.  Each  one  of  us  should  think  little  of  himself 
and  highly  of  his  brethren.  I  cannot  say  that  all  of  us 
as  Christians  are  clothed  with  humility  as  we  should  be. 
I  am  afraid  that,  from  the  preacher  down  to  the  most 
obscure  member,  we  may,  every  one  of  us,  listen  with  awe 
to  the  injunction,  "  Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God,"  and  confess  that  we  fall  short  of  this  com- 
mand. Yet  I  may  honestly  add  that  in  this  church  I 
have  seen  more  submissiveness,  and  deference  to  others, 
and  less  of  ambitious  self-esteem  than  anywhere  else  in 
the  world.  I  have  spoken  nothing  less  than  bare  justice 
when  I  have  said  this.  Let  all  the  world  know  that  as 
a  pastor  I  can  in  this  point  praise  the  people  of  my  charge 
beyond  any  that  I  have  everjieard  of.  I  am  not  apt  to 
judge  too  favorably;  I  speak  as  I  have  seen,  and  this  is 
my  honest  testimony.  We  owe  our  union  and  prosperity 
under  God  to  the  readiness  of  most  of  the  brethren  to 
do  anything  and  everything  for  Christ  without  consider- 
ing ourselves. 

Now,  true  humility  in  our  church  relationship  will 
show  itself  in  our  being  willing  to  undertake  the  very  lowest 
offices  for  Christ.  Some  cannot  do  little  things:  they 
must  be  ordained  to  great  offices,  or  they  will  sulk  in 
indolence.  Genuine  humility  makes  a  man  think  it  a 
great  honor  to  be  a  doorkeeper  in  the  house  of  God,  or 
to  be  allowed  to  speak  a  word  to  a  little  child  about 
Jesus,  or  even  to  wash  the  saints'  feet.  I  am  sure, 
brethren,  that  those  who  are  not  willing  to  fulfil  the 
lesser  offices  will  never  be  used  by  Christ  to  mind 
the  greater  duties.  Humility  is  a  qualification  for 
greatness.  Do  you  know  how  to  be  little?  You  are 
learning  to  be  great.  Can  you  submit?  You  are 
learning  to  rule.  My  symbolic  sketch  of  a  perfected 
Christian    would    be    a    king    keeping    the    door,    or    a 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD.        317 

prince  feeding  lambs,  or,  better  still,  the  Master  wash- 
ing his  disciples'  feet. 

The  next  point  of  humility  is,  that  we  are  conscious  of 
our  own  incompetence  to  do  anything  aright  He  who  can 
do  all  things  without  Christ  will  end  in  doing  nothing. 
The  man  who  can  preach  without  divine  aid  cannot 
preach  at  all.  The  woman  who  can  teach  a  Bible-class 
cannot  teach  a  Bible-class.  Human  ability  without  the 
grace  of  God  is  only  puffed-up  inability.  Those  of  you 
who,  apart  from  supernatural  help,  feel  quite  sufficient 
for  any  kind  of  holy  service  are  miserably  deluded. 
Self-sufficiency  is  inefficiency.  The  fulness  of  self  is  a 
double  emptiness.  He  that  has  no, sense  of  his  weakness 
has  a  weakness  in  his  sense.  I  believe,  brethren  and 
sisters,  that  any  man  whom  God  uses  for  a  great  purpose 
will  be  so  emptied  out  that  he  will  wonder  that  ever  God 
uses  him  in  the  least  degree;  and  he  will  be  ready  to  hide 
his  head,  and  long  to  get  out  of  public  notice,  because 
he  will  feel  himself  to  be  utterly  unworthy  of  the  favor 
which  God  manifests  towards  him.  I  do  not  believe 
that  God  ever  fills  a  cup  which  was  not  empty;  or  that 
he  ever  fills  a  man's  mouth  with  his  word  while  that  man 
has  his  mouth  full  of  his  own  words.  Humble  yourselves 
therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God:  if  you  desire 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  bless  you,  be  purged  from 
your  own  spirit.  The  way  to  rise  into  God  is  to  sink  in 
your  own  self:  as  our  Lord  Jesus  descended  into  the 
depths,  that  he  might  rise  above  all  things  and  fill  all 
things,  so  we,  in  our  imitation  of  him,  must  descend  to 
the  uttermost  that  we  may  rise  to  the  highest. 

This  humility  will  show  itself,  next,  in  this — that  ice 
shall  l)e  witting  to  be  ignored  of  men.  There  is  a  craving 
in  the  heart  of  many  to  have  what  they  do  written  upon 
tablets,  and  set  up  in  the  market-places.     I  once  heard 


318        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD. 

a  professing  Christian  complain  bitterly  that  he  had  been 
ignored.  He  had  been  a  Sunday-school  teacher  for  years, 
and  yet  he  had  never  been  publicly  mentioned  by  any- 
one. Did  he  make  that  a  complaint?  He  might  far 
rather  have  rejoiced  in  his  quietude.  The  fierce  light  of 
public  notoriety  is  not  much  valued  by  those  upon  whom 
it  falls.  I  wish  some  people  would  ignore  me — at  least, 
all  next  week,  so  much  at  least  as  not  to  call  to  see  me, 
or  write  me  a  letter,  or  name  me  in  the  papers.  I  would 
be  happy  as  all  the  birds  in  the  air  to  be  ignored,  if  I 
might  be  let  alone,  and  allowed  peacefully  to  work  for 
God  with  his  sweet  smile  to  cheer  me  in  my  loneli- 
ness. Oh,  to  be  a  little  ant,  allowed  to  labor  on  at  God's 
bidding,  receiving  nothing  of  men  but  the  high  privilege 
of  being  let  alone !  A  saintly  soul  was  wont  to  pray, 
"  Grant  me,  0  Lord,  that  I  may  pass  unnoticed  through 
the  world  !  "  It  seems  to  me  to  be  one  of  the  highest 
delights  of  life  for  people  to  permit  you  to  work  for  God 
without  being  interrupted  by  their  praises  or  censures. 
When  I  have  seen  a  certain  great  artist  at  work,  I  have 
only  peeped  at  him  from  a  corner,  and  have  kept  out  of 
his  sunshine:  I  am  quite  sure  that  he  did  not  want  me  to 
express  m}7  valueless  opinion  about  his  glorious  crea- 
tions. To  have  people  for  ever  talking  about  you,  for 
you,  and  against  you  is  one  of  the  wearinesses  of  mortal 
life;  and  yet  some  people  sigh  for  the  fuss  that  others 
Avould  be  glad  to  be  rid  of.  Yes,  so  it  is.  It  is  but  a 
little  thing  that  certain  friends  have  done,  but  they  would 
like  much  made  of  it:  their  slender  alms  must  be  pub- 
lished at  the  corners  of  the  streets,  their  prosy  speech 
must  be  reported  in  all  papers.  Oh,  brothers,  do  not 
let  us  care  about  its  being  known  that  we  have  done 
our  part.  Let  it  be  done  as  to  God,  and  in  God's  sight; 
and  then,  as  to  what  our  fellow-mortals  shall  say,  let 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES  BEFORE    GOD.        319 

us  have  scant  concern;  for,  if  we  live  on  human  praise, 
we  shall  grow  not  only  proud,  but  vain,  which,  if  it  be 
not  more  wicked,  is  certainly  more  silly.  Serve  God,  and 
do  not  wish  to  have  a  trumpet  blown  before  you. 
Never  cry  with  Jehu,  "Come,  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  Go  on  serving  God  year  after  year,  though 
you  be  altogether  unknown,  feeling  it  quite  sufficient 
that  you  have  by  the  grace  of  God  served  your  genera- 
ation  and  honored  your  Redeemer.  This  would  be  a 
great  attainment  in  our  church  life  if  we  could  reach 
to  it. 

Brethren,  we  want  humility,  all  of  us,  in  our  church 
life,  in  the  sense  of  never  hint/  rough,  haughty,  arrogant, 
hard,  domineering,  lordly;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  factious, 
unruly,  quarrelsome,  and  unreasonable.  We  should  en- 
deavor to  think  very  carefully  of  those  who  are  poorest, 
for  fear  we  should  hurt  their  feelings;  and  very  notice- 
ably of  those  who  are  obscure,  lest  we  should  seem  to 
despise  them.  It  is  ours  never  to  take  offence,  and  to 
be  most  cautious  never  to  cause  it  even  by  inadvertence. 
He  that  is  set  as  a  leader  in  the  church  of  God,  let  him 
be  the  person  that  is  most  ready  to  bear  blame,  and 
least  ready  to  give  offence:  let  him  say,  "You  may 
think  what  you  please  of  me,  but  I  shall  lay  myself  out 
to  do  you  good,  and  to  be  your  servant  for  Christ's  sake." 
The  lower  you  can  stoop  the  greater  is  your  honor.  In 
the  eye  of  wisdom  no  piece  of  furniture  in  the  house  of 
God  has  greater  dignity  than  the  doormat.  If  you  are 
willing  to  let  others  wipe  their  feet  on  you,  then  shall 
Christ  Jesus  take  pleasure  in  you,  for  you  are  a  partaker 
of  his  lowly  mind.  Even  for  your  own  sake  it  will  be  wise 
to  occupy  a  humble  place,  for  in  the  vales  the  streams  of 
peace  are  flowing.  The  mountains  are  the  playground 
of  the  storm,  but  in  the  quiet  villages  the  dove  finds  her 


320        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD. 

shelter.  If  you  would  escape  from  ill-will,  aud  live  peace- 
ably with  all  men,  practice  the  maxims  of  an  influential 
man,  who,  when  asked  after  the  Revolution  how  he 
managed  to  escape  the  executioner'  s  axe,  replied,  "  I 
made  myself  of  no  reputation,  and  kept  silence." 

I  am  speaking  to  a  number  of  young  men  who  have 
begun  to  speak  for  Jesus  Christ  in  the  church;  let  me 
earnestly  entreat  them  to  take  great  notice  of  my  text, 
— "  Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God." 
Recollect,  you  cannot  do  any  good  except  "the  mighty 
hand  of  God  "  be  with  you;  therefore  be  humble,  and  look 
to  that  hand  for  all  success.  Feel  it  to  be  a  wonderful 
thing  that  the  mighty  hand  of  God  should  ever  use  you; 
therefore  lie  very  low  in  that  hand,  and  beneath  that 
hand,  for  thus  you  may  claim  the  promise  that  he  will 
exalt  you  in  due  time.  If  you  are  willing  to  look  after 
a  few  poor  people  in  a  village,  and  to  do  your  duty 
thoroughly  well  among  a  lowly  company,  you  shall 
have  a  larger  sphere  ere  long.  If  you  are  satisfied, 
young  brother,  to  stand  in  the  corner  of  the  street  and 
talk  about  Jesns  Christ  to  a  few  rough  folk,  you  shall 
find  hundreds  of  hearers  by-and-by.  If  you  are  willing 
to  be  nothing,  God  will  make  something  of  yon.  The 
way  to  the  top  of  the  ladder  is  to  begin  at  the  lowest 
round.  In  fact,  in  the  church  of  God,  the  way  up  is  to 
go  down;  but  he  that  is  ambitious  to  be  at  the  top  will 
find  himself  before  long  at  the  bottom.  "  He  that  ex- 
alteth  himself  shall  be  abased;  but  he  that  humbleth 
himself  shall  be  exalted."  Suffer,  my  younger  brethren, 
the  word  of  exhortation. 

II.  And  now,  secondly,  I  will  use  the  text  in  quite 
another  way — in  reference  to  our  behavior  in  our  afflic- 
tions. Here  let  every  tried  believer  listen  to  the  counsel 
of  the  Holy  Ghost. 


OiV  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    COD.        321 

Certain  of  us  are  never  long  together  without  af- 
fliction and  trial:  like  salamanders,  we  live  in  the 
flame,  passing  from  fire  to  fire.  As  by  a  succession 
of  shafts  we  descend  into  the  heart  of  the  earth,  going 
down  from  woe  to  woe;  we  had  need  learn  the  way  of 
these  dark  places.  Frequently  our  heavenly  Father's  de- 
sign in  sending  trial  to  his  children  is  to  make  and  keep 
them  humble;  let  us  remember  this,  and  learn  a  lesson  of 
wisdom.  The  advice  of  Peter  is  that  we  should  humble 
ourselves.  Many  people  have  been  often  humbled,  and 
yet  they  have  not  become  humble.  There  is  a  great 
difference  between  the  two  things.  If  God  withdraws 
his  grace  and  allows  a  Christian  man  to  fall  into 
sin,  that  fall  humbles  him  in  the  esteem  of  all  good 
men;  and  yet  he  may  not  be  humble.  He  may  never 
have  a  true  sense  of  how  evil  his  action  has  been ;  he 
may  still  persevere  in  his  lofty  spirit,  and  be  far  from 
humility.  When  this  is  the  ease  the  haughty  spirit  may 
expect  a  downfall.  The  rod  will  make  blue  wounds  when 
pride  abates  not  at  gentler  blows.  The  most  hopeful  way 
of  avoiding  the  humbling  affliction  is  to  humble  yourself. 
Be  humble  that  you  may  not  be  humbled.  Put  yourself 
into  a  humble  attitude,  and  draw  near  to  God  in  a  lowly 
spirit,  and  so  he  will  cease  from  his  chiding. 

And  do  this,  first,  by  untieing  whether  yon  have  been 
guilty  of  any  special  sin  of  pride.  You  are  suffering:  let 
the  rod  point  out  to  you  wherein  you  have  erred  through 
pride.  1  believe  that  David  was  afflicted  in  his  children 
because  he  had  been  proud  of  his  children,  and  had  in- 
dulged them.  When  there  is  a  breakage  in  the  house, 
it  is  generally  the  idol  that  is  broken.  Usually  our  sins 
lie  at  the  roots  of  our  sorrows.  If  we  will  repent  of  the 
sin,  the  Lord  will  remove  the  sorrow.  Have  you  been 
tried   in    your    worldly   possessions?      Were   you    ever 


322        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD. 

puffed  up  by  them  ?  Is  your  health  failing?  Did 
you  never  glory  in  your  bodily  strength  ?  Are  you 
deceived?  Were  you  never  boastful  of  your  own  wis- 
dom? Are  you  mourning  over  a  failure  in  character? 
Did  you  not  once  dream  that  you  were  past  temptation  ? 
Look  into  your  affliction  till  you  see,  as  in  a  glass,  what 
was  the  thing  you  were  proud  of,  and  then  take  the  idol 
down  from  its  pedestal,  humble  yourself  before  God,  and 
henceforth  worship  him  alone. 

In  your  affliction  humble  yourself  by  confessing  that 
you  deserve  all  that  you  are  suffering.  Is  it  poverty? — 
then,  dear  child  of  God,  own  that  you  deserve  poverty 
because  of  your  love  of  the  world.  Is  it  physical  pain  ? 
Then  own  how  every  erring  member  deserves  to  smart. 
It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  wrung  out  of  us  the  confession 
that  our  chastisement  is  less  than  our  deservings,  and 
that  the  Lord  is  not  dealing  with  us  after  our  sins,  nor 
rewarding  us  according  to  our  iniquities.  Is  there  a 
bereavement  in  the  house?  Then,  I  pray  you,  acknowl- 
edge that  if  God  were  to  visit  you,  as  he  did  Job,  and 
take  all  your  children  away  at  a  stroke,  yet  still  you  de- 
serve it  at  his  hands.  Confess  that  the  chastening  hand 
is  not  dealing  too  severely  with  you.  Humble  yourself, 
and  then  you  will  not  quarrel  with  your  grief. 

But,  more  than  that,  humble  yourself  so  as  to  submit 
entirely  to  God's  will.  Ask  the  Holy  Spirit  to  help  you 
in  this  act  of  self-humiliation  while  you  meekly  kiss  the 
rod.  Bov  yourself  before  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  ready 
to  receive  yet  harder  blows  if  God  so  pleases:  for  when 
your  will  entirely  yields  to  the  will  of  God,  it  is  highly 
probable  that  either  the  affliction  will  be  removed,  or 
else  the  sting  of  it  will  be  taken  away.  Down,  brother, 
down  in  the  dust  as  low  as  ever  you  can  get.  God  is 
evidently  dealing  with  you  as  with  a  son;  and  a  son's 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES  BEFORE    GOD.        323 

wisdom  lies  in  cheerful  submission  to  parental  disci- 
pline. When  a  child  is  under  his  father's  chastening 
hand,  it  will  not  help  him  to  kick,  and  quarrel,  and  say 
ill  words:  his  best  hope  lies  in  submitting  absolutely  to 
his  father's  good  pleasure.  When  that  is  done  the 
chastisement  will  soon  end.  Humble  yourself  therefore 
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God.  Yield  up  your  will  so 
as  to  have  no  suit-in-law  against  the  Lord,  no  difference 
as  to  his  goodness,  not  even  if  the  evil  you  dread  should 
actually  come,  and  come  in  the  worst  form.  Submit  to 
the  Lord's  will  as  the  rush  bends  to  the  wind,  or  as  the 
wax  yields  to  the  seal.  Pray  against  the  calamity  which 
moves  you  to  fear,  but  let  your  petition  always  end  with 
ki  Nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  Ask  that 
you  may  not  be  obliged  to  drink  the  bitter  draught,  but 
do  not  upset  the  cup,  nor  push  it  away.  There  let  it 
stand,  while  you  for  the  moment  supplicate  for  its  re- 
moval; and  when  there  comes  no  answer  to  your  prayer, 
then  take  it  up  meekly,  put  it  to  your  lips  resolutely, 
and  drink  right  on,  even  as  your  Master  drank  his  cup 
and  drained  it  to  the  dregs.  This  needs  the  help  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  truly  he  waits  to  help  us:  he 
delights  to  aid  us  in  such  holy  acts  of  submission. 
Nothing  is  better  for  us  in  our  time  of  tribulation 
than  to  bow  ourselves  in  lowliest  obeisance  before  the 
hand  of  God. 

Dear  friend,  what  can  be  the  use  of  striving  against 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  ?  It  is  a  mighty  hand :  we  cannot  re- 
sist it,  even  if  we  are  wicked  enough  to  attempt  rebellion. 
Jf  affliction  is  to  come  it  will  come,  and  come  with  all  the 
greater  sharpness  because  we  refuse  to  yield.  If  God 
appoints  a  trial,  we  cannot  escape  it.  What  can  be  the 
use  of  our  striving  against  divine  decrees?  It  will  only 
make,  our  sorrow  the  mQffi  --vi-ve.     When  the  ox  kicks 


324        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD. 

out  against  the  goad  the  iron  enters  the  deeper  into  its 
flesh;  but  when  the  bullock  hastens  on  its  way,  sensi- 
tive to  the  least  touch,  the  driver  scarcely  urges  it  again. 
The  tender,  sensitive  horse  scarcely  receives  a  stroke 
from  the  whip;  he  feels  it  too  much:  but  the  mule  that 
will  not  move  is  struck  again  and  again  for  his  obsti- 
nacy. So  will  it  be  with  us.  We  can  make  rods  for  our- 
selves by  wilfulness.  Oh  foolish  fingers,  which  prepare 
prickles  for  our  own  pillows  !  Humble  yourself,  therefore, 
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  and  by-and-by,  brother, 
you  shall  be  exalted  to  consolation  and  prosperity. 
Your  affliction  shall  bring  forth  the  comfortable  fruits 
of  righteousness.  You  shall  come  out  of  the  furnace 
purified  and  refined.  You  shall  have  more  knowledge, 
more  grace,  more  zeal,  more  of  every  excellence,  as  the 
result  of  sanctified  trial;  but  all  this  must  come  by  obe- 
dient resignation.  A  rebellious  heart  comes  out  of  af- 
fliction worse  rather  than  better.  Submit,  and  you  shall 
bejso  exalted  by  your  affliction  that  you  shall  bless  God 
for  it,  and  feel  that  you  would  not  have  missed  the 
trouble  for  ten  thousand  pounds  if  you  could  have  done 
so.  Heavy  tribulation  shall  bring  with  it  unspeakable 
preferment.  You  shall  be  exalted  to  a  higher  degree  in 
the  peerage  of  Christianity  by  battling  with  adversities. 
Therefore,  I  pray  you,  humble  yourselves  under  the  hand 
of  God. 

III.  Thirdly,  I  am  going  to  use  the  text  in  another 
way.  In  our  daily  dealings  with  God,  whether  in  afflic- 
tion or  not,  let  us  humble  ourselves  under  his  hand,  for 
so  only  can  we  hope  to  be  exalted. 

It  is  a  blessed  thing  whenever  you  come  to  God  to  come 
wondering  that  you  are  allowed  to  come,  wondering  that 
you  have  been  led  to  come;  marvelling  at  divine  election, 
that  the  Lord  should  ever  have  chosen  you  to  come;  won- 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD.        325 

dering  at  divine  redemption,  astonished  that  such  a  price 
should  have  been  paid  that  you  might  be  brought  nigh 
to  God.  It  is  well  to  draw  near  to  God  weighed  down 
with  gratitude  that  ever  the  Holy  Spirit  should  have 
deigned  to  work  effectual  calling  upon  you.  Humble 
yourself  under  the  mighty  hand  of  divine  grace,  which 
has  brought  you  into  the  family  of  love,  and  constantly 
say,  "Why  me,  Lord?  Why  me?"  A  grateful  walk  is 
a  gracious  walk,  and  there  is  no  gratitude  where  there 
is  no  humility.  Never  trace  the  difference  between  your- 
self and  others  to  your  own  free-will,  nor  to  any  better- 
ness  of  your  natural  disposition,  but  entirely  to  the  mercy 
and  grace  of  God,  which  have  been  freely  bestowed  on 
you.     Let  grace  be  magnified  by  your  grateful  heart! 

When  you  are  doing  this  be  very  humble  before  God, 
because  you  have  not  made  more  improvement  of  the 
grace  that  he  has  given  you.  You  are  chosen,  but  you 
are  not  as  choice  as  you  ought  to  be;  you  are  redeemed, 
but  you  are  not  so  much  your  Lord's  as  you  ought  to 
be;  you  are  called,  but  you  are  still  too  deaf  to  the  divine 
sail;  you  are  blessed,  enriched,  instructed,  adopted,  com- 
forted, with  heaven  before  you  and  everything  prepared 
on  the  road  thither;  but  what  a  poor  return  have  you 
made!  Always  feel  thus  humbled  in  reference  to  your 
God  and  his  grace.  When  you  are  doing  most,  and  God 
is  using  you  most,  always  feel  that  if  you  had  been  fit 
for  it  he  might  have  done  much  more  by  you — that  if 
you  had  been  meet  to  be  used  he  might  have  used  you 
far  more  extensively.  Thus  you  will  always  see  cause 
for  humility  even  when  you  discern  abounding  reason 
for  gratitude.  Walk  always  so  with  God  that  when  you 
stand  on  the  highest  point  you  still  feel,  "  I  might  have 
been  higher  but  for  my  own  fault.  I  have  not,  because 
I  have  not  asked,  or  because  I  have  asked   amiss.     I 


326        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD. 

have  not  become  as  rich  as  I  might  have  been  in  spirit- 
ual things,  because  I  have  not  been  as  diligent  in  my 
Lord's  business,  or  as  fervent  in  Spirit,  or  as  abundant 
in  serving  God  as  I  ought  to  have  been. 

Next,  humble  yourself,  dear  brother,  under  the  hand 
of  God  by  feeling  your  own  want  of  knowledge  when- 
ever you  come  to  God.  Do  not  think  that  you  under- 
stand all  divinity.  There  is  only  one  body  of  divinity, 
and  that  is  Christ  himself;  and  who  knoweth  him  to  the 
full  ?  When  even  his  love,  which  is  the  plainest  point 
about  him,  passeth  knowledge,  who  shall  know  Christ  in 
all  his  fulness?  Come  before  God  to  be  instructed  in 
the  knowledge  of  your  God  and  Saviour.  Do  not  think 
that  you  understand  providence,  for  I  am  sure  that  none 
of  us  do.  We  sometimes  think  that  we  could  manage 
things  a  great  deal  better  than  they  are  managed.  Many 
farmers  would  not  have  appointed  that  heavy  shower  for 
this  afternoon,  and  yet  that  downpour  was  essential  to 
the  general  well-being  of  the  universal  kingdom.  I  can- 
not tell  why,  but  it  was  so.  Everything  that  comes  by 
God's  appointment  is  a  cog  in  the  wheel  of  providence, 
and  if  that  cog  were  gone,  the  machinery  would  be  out 
of  order.  The  Lord  does  all  things  wisely:  only  a  vile 
pride  will  suspect  otherwise.  Consider,  0  man,  that  you 
do  not  know:  God  only  knows.  Little  children  some- 
times think  they  are  wise,  but  they  know  nothing:  wis- 
dom is  with  their  father,  not  with  them.  Let  us  be 
content  to  humble  ourselves  under  the  hand  of  God 
as  poor  know-nothings,  satisfied  that  he  knows  what 
is  best  for  us.  This  humility  is  the  vestibule  of  knowl- 
edge, the  corner-stone  of  true  philosophy.  Commence 
with  a  confession  of  ignorance,  or  you  will  never  be 
taught  of  the  Lord.  It  cannot  be  hard  to  confess  this, 
when  the  mighty  hand  of  the  Lord  jgj  g§§£  and  felt 


ON  HUMBLIXG    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD.        327 

One  point  concerning  which  I  should  like  every  one 
of  us  to  humble  ourselves  under  the  hand  of  God  is  about 
our  little  enjoyment  of  divine  things.  The  elder  brother 
in  the  parable  said,  "  Lo,  these  many  years  do  I  serve 
thee,  neither  transgressed  I  at  any  time  thy  command- 
ment: and  yet  thou  never  gavest  me  a  kid,  that  I  might 
make  merry  with  my  friends."  So  have  I  known  certain 
sincere  Christian  men  fall  into  a  horribly  legal  state  of 
mind.  They  have  always  been  very  regular  in  their 
living,  constant  in  their  religious  observances,  and  per- 
severing in  their  prayers,  and  yet  they  have  never  had 
much  joy:  but  they  see  a  poor  soul,  just  saved  from  sin, 
full  of  delight,  and  they  envy  him,  and  cry  out,  "Why 
is  a  fuss  made  over  such  a  sinner,  when  I  have  been  all 
these  years  a  Christian,  and  my  brethren  have  never  made 
any  rejoicing  over  me?  There  is  no  music  and  dancing 
about  me  !  Thou  never  gavest  me  a  kid  that  I  might 
make  merry  with  my  friends."  I  do  not  know  how  we 
could  make  a  fuss  over  some  of  the  elder  brothers:  they 
would  not  bear  it,  they  would  be  angry,  and  enquire,  in 
hard  and  surly  tones,  what  these  things  meant.  Mu.sio 
and  dancing  are  things  too  trivial  for  their  solid  souls. 
They  stand  outside  and  grumble,  and  we  cannot  warm 
them  into  a  revival  spirit.  They  are  freezing  outside 
the  door  of  our  happy  home.  Must  •they  always  stand 
there?  How  divinely  sweet  was  the  fathers  answer  to 
that  naughty  elder  brother  !  He  said  to  him,  "  Son,  thou 
art  ever  with  me.  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine."  That  is 
to  say,  "You  live  in  my  house.  You  are  with  me  as  my 
own  dear  son.  Everything  I  have  is  yours  by  heirship. 
Your  brother  had  his  portion,  and  he  spent  it,  but  all 
that  remains  to  me  is  yours."  Hence  his  short  commons 
had  been  of  his  own  appointing.  If  he  had  not  made 
merry  with  his  friends  it  was  his  own  fault,     Is  it  not. 


328        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES    BEFORE    GOD. 

much  the  same  with  us  if  we  have  been  dull  and  melan- 
choly; I  mean  those  of  us  who  are  believers?  Are  not 
all  things  ours?  Come,  let  us  humble  ourselves  under 
the  hand  of  God,  because  we  have  not  made  merry  with 
our  friends.  You  growling  Christians — if  you  growl  ir 
is  because  you  will  growl;  there  is  nothing  to  murmur, 
at.  You  who  never  have  a  happy  day,  who  never  have 
any  of  the  fervors  and  enthusiasms  of  young  beginners: 
whose  fault  is  that?  It  is  your  own.  You  might 
have  anything  in  the  Father's  house.  You  have  a  right 
to  rare  music  and  dancing,  for  you  are  ever  with  God, 
and  all  that  he  has  is  yours.  It  is  meet  that  we  should 
make  merry  and  be  glad;  and  if  we  are  dull  at  the  busi- 
ness of  holy  merry-making,  let  us  humble  ourselves  under 
the  hand  of  God  because  of  our  despondencies  and  mis- 
trusts. 0  my  soul,  if  thy  ceilings  are  painted  with  black 
instead  of  vermilion,  blame  thyself  alone,  and  not  thy  God. 
I  am  sure,  dear  friends,  if  any  of  us  will  go  over  our 
daily  lives  we  shall  find  plenty  of  reasons  for  humbling 
ourselves  under  the  hand  of  God.  It  is  really  dreadful 
how  a  man  can  serve  God  nobly  and  do  great  things 
and  yet  in  a  certain  matter  he  may  fail  sadly.  A  grand 
old  prophet  is  that  Jonah,  going  through  the  streets  of 
Nineveh,  and  bravely  delivering  the  Lord's  warning. 
Who  ever  did  the  like?  "  Yet  forty  days  and  Nineveh 
shall  be  overthrown"  is  the  word  which  he  hurls  into 
the  face  of  princes.  Grand  man !  One,  yet  a  conqueror 
of  myriads  !  Yes  !  But  look  at  him  a  day  or  two  after  ! 
Call  that  a  grand  man,  sitting  there  crying  because  the 
cucumber  that  grew  up  over  his  head  is  withered!  fret 
ting  because  a  worm  has  devoured  a  gourd !  He  is 
angry,  and  he  says  that  he  does  well  to  be  angry  about 
a  bower  of  melon-leaves.  Dear  me,  that  a  man  can  be 
so  great  in  noble  things  and  so  little  in  a  trifling  mat- 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD.        329 

ter !  How  many  have  like  cause  to  be  humble  before 
God!  Observe  that  good  man:  he  bore  the  loss  of  his 
property  with  holy  resignation,  but  he  lost  his  temper 
because  a  button  was  gone  from  his  linen.  Such  a  thing- 
has  often  happened.  Do  I  put  it  so  that  you  smile  at  it  ? 
It  would  be  better  to  weep  over  it.  As  you  think  about 
yourselves,  my  brethren,  recollect  the  causes  that  you 
have  to  be  humble  under  the  hand  of  God  because  of 
the  gross  weakness  by  which  you  have  shown  the 
natural  depravity  of  your  heart,  and  the  faultiness  of 
your  nature  apart  from  the  strengthening  Spirit  of  God. 

Hlimble  yourselves  therefore  under  the  hand  of  God 
as  creatures  under  the  hand  of  the  Creator.  We  are  the 
clay,  and  thou  our  potter,  0  Lord:  it  becomes  us  to  be 
lowly.  Humble  yourselves  under  the  hand  of  God  as 
criminals  under  the  hand  of  their  judge.  Cry,  "  Against 
thee,  thee  only,  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  thy 
sight:  that  thou  mightest  be  justified  when  thou  speak- 
est,  and  be  clear  when  thoujudgest."  Humble  yourselves 
under  the  hand  of  God — as  chastened  children  under  a 
father's  rod — for  he  chastens  us  for  our  profit,  and  right 
well  do  we  deserve  each  smarting  blow.  Humble  your- 
selves under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  lastly,  as  servants 
under  their  Lord's  word.  Ask  no  questions  about  your 
Master's  command,  but  go  and  do  it;  and  when  he  re- 
bukes you  for  shortcomings  answer  not  again,  but  accept 
the  reproof  with  bowed  head  and  tearful  eye,  acknowl- 
edging that  his  rebuke  is  well  deserved.  Humble  your- 
selves thus,  dear  brethren,  in  your  daily  lives,  and  God 
will  exalt  you  in  due  time. 

IV.  I  finish  by  using  my  text  with  all  the  earnestness 
my  soul  can  feel  in  reference  to  the  unconverted  part  of 
this  audience  in  our  seeking  forgiveness  as  sinners.  Oh, 
tender  Spirit  of  God,  help  me  now. 


330        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES  BEFORE    GOD. 

The  text  was  not  originally  meant  for  the  ungodly, 
but  it  may  fitly  be  applied  to  them.  If  you  would  find 
grace  in  God's  sight  and  live,  dear  unconverted  hearers, 
you  must  humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of 
God.  So  you  want  to  be  saved,  do  you?  The  way  of 
salvation  is,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  But," 
you  say,  "  I  cannot  understand  it."  Yet  it  is  very  sim- 
ple: no  hidden  meaning  lies  in  the  word:  you  are  simply 
bidden  to  trust  Jesus.  If,  however,  you  feel  as  if  you 
could  not  do  that,  let  me  urge  you  to  go  to  God  in  se- 
cret and  own  the  sin  of  this  unbelief;  for  a  great  sin  it 
is.  Humble  yourself.  Do  not  try  to  make  out  that  you 
are  good.  That  will  be  fatal,  for  it  will  be  a  falsehood 
which  will  shut  the  gate  of  grace.  Confess  that  you 
are  guilty.  When  a  man  is  clearly  and  manifestly  guilty 
it  is  of  no  use  his  standing  before  the  judge  and  begin- 
ning to  urge  his  own  merit:  his  best  course  is  to  cast 
himself  upon  the  mercy  of  the  court.  It  is  your  only 
course,  dear  soul,  the  only  one  that  can  avail  you.  Know 
that  you  have  transgressed,  and  feel  that  it  is  so.  Sit 
down  and  think  over  the  many  ways  in  which  you  have 
done  wrong,  or  failed  to  do  right.  Pray  God  to  break 
you  down  with  deep  penitence.  It  is  no  waste  of  time 
to  dig  out  foundations  when  you  build  a  house,  and  it 
is  no  superfluity  to  labor  after  a  deep  sense  of  sin. 

When  your  sin  is  confessed,  then  acknowledge  that 
if  justice  were  carried  out  towards  you,  apart  from  unde- 
served grace,  you  would  be  sent  to  hell.  Do  not  cavil 
at  that  fact,  Do  not  entertain  sceptical  questions  as  to 
whether  there  is  a  punishment  for  sin,  and  as  to  what  it 
will  be;  but  own  that,  whatever  it  is,  you  deserve  it. 
Do  not  fence  with  God  or  quarrel  with  Scripture;  but  as 
his  word  declares  that  the  wicked  shall  be  cast  into  hell 
with  all  the  nations  that  forget  God,  own  that  you  de* 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD.        331 

serve  to  be  so  dealt  with ;  for  you  do  deserve  it.  When 
this  is  acknowledged  you  are  on  the  road  to  mercy.  You 
have  almost  obtained  mercy  when  you  have  fully  sub- 
mitted to  justice.  You  have  in  a  measure  received  grace 
when  you  are  brought  to  own  your  sin  and  the  justice 
of  its  penalty. 

Then,  next,  accept  God's  mercy  in  his  own  way.  Do 
not  be  so  vain  as  to  dictate  to  God  how  you  ought  to  be 
saved.  Be  willing  to  be  saved  by  free  grace  through 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ;  for  that  is  God's  way.  Be 
willing  to  be  saved  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  for  that  also 
is  God's  way.  If  your  unbelief  begins  to  ask,  "  How  can 
it  be,  and  why  should  it  be  ?  "  cease  from  such  questions. 
Humble  yourself  and  say.  "God  says  it  is  so,  and  there- 
fore it  must  be  so;  "  if  God  says,  "  Believe,  and  be  saved," 
I  will  believe  and  be  saved ;  and  if  he  says,  "  Trust  Christ, 
and  live,"  I  will  trust  Christ  and  live.  If  a  man  had 
forfeited  his  life,  but  should  be  told  by  the  court  that  he 
shall  have  pardon  freely  given  to  him  if  he  will  freely 
accept  it — he  would  be  a  fool  if  he  began  to  enquire, 
"But  is  this  according  to  law?  Is  this  according  to 
precedent?  What  maybe  the  effect  of  this  pardon?" 
and  so  on.  These  enquiries  are  for  the  court,  not  for  the 
prisoner.  My  dear  man,  you  do  not  want  to  hang  your- 
self, do  you  ?  Yet  some  men  argue  against  their  own 
souls,  and  labor  to  find  out  reasons  why  they  should  not 
be  saved.  If  this  perverse  ingenuity  could  but  be  taught 
right  reason,  and  men  would  strive  to  find  out  why  they 
should  at  once  yield  themselves  to  God's  way  of  salva- 
tion, they  might  enter  into  comfort  and  rest  much  sooner. 
0  cavilling  sinner,  let  thy  artful  doubts  and  reasonings 
be  nailed  with  Jesus  to  the  tree.  Be  a  little  child,  and 
come  and  believe  in  the  salvation  which  is  revealed  in 
Jesus  Christ,     Trust  Christ  to  save  you,  and  he  will  do 


332        ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD. 

it,  as  he  has  saved  so  many  of  us,  to  the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  his  grace. 

"  Ah,"  say  you,  "  I  have  done  this,  but  I  cannot  get 
peace."  Then,  dear  friend,  sink  lower  down  !  sink  lower 
down!  Did  I  hear  you  soy,  "Alas,  Sir,  I  want  to  get 
comfort."  Cease  from  that,  Do  not  ask  for  comfort; 
ask  for  forgiveness,  and  that  blessing  may  eo.me  through 
your  greater  discomfort.  Sink  lower  down  !  Sink  lower 
down  !  There  is  a  point  at  which  God  will  surely  accept 
you,  and  that  point  is  lower  down.  "Oh,"  you  say,  "I 
think  I  have  a  due  sense  of  sin."'  That  will  not  do.  I 
want  you  to  feel  that  you  have  not  a  due  sense  of  sin, 
and  come  to  Jesus  just  so.  "Oh,  but  I  do  think  that 
I  have  been  brokenhearted."  I  should  like  to  see  you 
lower  than  that,  till  you  cry,  "  I  am  afraid  I  never  knew 
what  it  is  to  be  brokenhearted."  I  want  you  to  sink  so 
low  that  you  cannot  say  anything  good  of  yourself;  nay, 
nor  see  an  atom  of  goodness  in  yourself.  "When  you 
look  inside  your  heart  and  can  see  nothing  but  that 
which  would  condemn  you;  when  you  look  at  your  life 
and  see  everything  there  that  deserves  wrath;  then  you 
are  on  the  road  to  hope.  Come  before  God  a  criminal, 
in  the  prison  dress,  with  the  rope  about  your  neck.  You 
will  be  saved,  then.  When  you  confess  that  you  have 
nothing  of  your  own  but  sin — when  you  acknowledge 
that  you  deserve  to  die,  and  to  be  cast  away  for  ever — 
God  in  infinite  pity  will  let  you  live  through  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Many  years  ago  a  certain  prince  visited  the 
Spanish  galleys,  where  a  large  number  of  convicts  were 
confined,  chained  to  their  oars,  to  toil  on  without  relief; 
— I  think  nearly  all  of  them  condemned  to  a  life  sen- 
tence. Being  a  great  prince,  the  King  of  Spain  told  him 
that  he  might  in  honor  of  his  visit  set  free  any  one  of 
the  galley-slaves  he  chose.     He  went  down  among  them 


ON  HUMBLING    OURSELVES   BEFORE    GOD.        333 

to  choose  his  man.  He  said  to  one,  "  Man,  how  did  you 
come  here?"  He  replied  that  false  witnesses  swore  away 
his  character.  "  Ah  ! "  said  the  prince  and  passed  on. 
He  went  to  the  next,  who  stated  that  he  had  done  some- 
tiling  that  was  wrong,  certainly,  but  not  very  much,  and 
that  he  never  ought  to  have  been  condemned.  "  Ah  !  " 
said  the  prince,  and  again  passed  on.  He  went  the 
round,  and  found  that  they  were  all  good  fellows — all 
convicted  by  mistake.  At  last  he  came  to  one  who  said, 
"You  ask  me  why  I  came  here.  I  am  ashamed  to  say 
that  I  richly  deserve  it.  I  am  guilty,  I  cannot  for  a 
moment  say  that  I  am  not:  and  if  I  die  at  this  oar,  I 
thoroughly  deserve  the  punishment.  Tn  fact,  I  think  it 
a  mercy  that  my  life  is  spared  me."  The  prince  stopped 
and  said,  "  It  is  a  pity  that  such  a  bad  fellow  as  you 
should  be  placed  amongst  such  a  number  of  innocent 
people.  I  will  set  you  free."  You  smile  at  that;  but 
let  me  make  you  smile  again.  My  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
has  come  here  at  this  time  to  set  somebody  free.  He 
has  come  here  at  this  time  to  pardon  somebody's  sins. 
You  that  have  no  sins  shall  have  no  pardon.  You  good 
people  shall  die  in  your  sins.  But,  oh,  you  guilty  ones, 
who  humble  yourselves  under  the  hand  of  God,  my  Mas- 
ter thinks  that  it  is  a  pity  that  you  should  be  among 
these  self-righteous  people.  So  come  right  away,  and 
trust  your  Saviour,  and  obtain  life  eternal  through  his 
precious  blood ;  and  to  him  shall  be  glory  for  ever  and 
ever.     Amen. 


XVI. 

THE  LUTHER  SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

November  11,  1883. 

"For  in  Jesus  Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor 
uncircumcision;  but  faith  which  worketh  by  love."—  Galatians  v.  6. 

Paul  makes  a  clean  sweep  of  that  trust  in  the  externals 
of  religion  which  is  the  common  temptation  of  all  time. 
Circumcision  was  a  great  thing  with  the  Jew,  and  often- 
times he  trusted  in  it;  but  Paul  declares  that  it  availeth 
nothing.  There  might  be  others  who  were  glad  that 
they  were  not  Jews,  but  Paul  declares  that  their  uncir- 
cumcision availeth  no  more  than  its  opposite.  Certain 
matters  connected  with  godliness  are  external,  and  yet 
they  are  useful  in  their  places:  especially  is  that  the  case 
with  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper,  the  assembling  of 
ourselves  together,  the  reading  of  the  word,  and  public 
prayer  and  praise.  These  things  are  proper  and  profit- 
able; but  none  of  them  must  be  made  in  any  measure 
or  degree  the  ground  of  our  hope  of  salvation;  for  this 
text  sweeps  them  all  away,  and  plainly  describes  them 
as  availing  nothing  if  they  are  made  to  be  the  founda- 
tions of  our  trust. 

In  Luther's  day  superstitious  confidence  in  external 
observances  had  overlaid  faith  in  the  gospel;  ceremonies 
had  multiplied  excessively  under  the  authority  of  the 
Pope,  masses  were  said  for  souls  in  purgatory,  and  men 
were  actually  selling  indulgences  for  sin  in  the  light  of 
day.     When  God   raised   up   Martin   Luther,    who   was 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       335 

born  four  centuries  ago,  he  bore  emphatic  testimony 
against  salvation  by  outward  forms  and  by  the  power  of 
priestcraft,  affirming  that  salvation  is  by  faith  alone,  and 
that  the  whole  church  of  God  is  a  company  of  priests, 
every  believer  being  a  priest  unto  God.  If  Luther  had 
not  affirmed  it,  the  doctrine  would  have  been  just  as 
true,  for  the  distinction  between  clergy  and  laity  has 
no  excuse  in  Scripture,  which  calls  the  saints,  "  God's 
Meros" — God's  clergy,  or  heritage.  Again  we  read,  "Ye 
are  a  royal  priesthood."  Every  man  that  believes  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  anointed  to  exercise  the  Christian 
priesthood,  and  therefore  he  need  not  put  his  trust  in 
another,  seeing  the  supposed  priest  is  no  more  than  any 
other  man.  Each  man  must  be  accountable  for  himself 
before  God.  Each  one  must  read  and  search  the  Script- 
ures for  himself,  and  must  believe  for  himself,  and  when 
saved,  he  must  offer  up  himself  as  a  living  sacrifice  unto 
God  by  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  only  High  Priest  of  our 
profession.  So  much  for  the  negative  side  of  the  text, 
which  is  full  of  warning  to  this  Ritualistic  age. 

The  chief  testimony  of  our  great  Reformer  was  to  the 
justification  of  a  sinner  in  the  sight  of  God  by  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ,  and  by  that  alone.  He  could  fitly  have 
taken  this  for  his  motto,  "In  Jesus  Christ  neither  cir- 
cumcision availeth  anything,  nor  uncircumcision;  but 
faith  which  worketh  by  love."  He  was  in  the  xVugus- 
tinian  monastery  at  Wittenberg  troubled  and  perturbed 
in  mind;  and  he  read  there,  in  an  old  Latin  Bible, 
this  text, — "The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  It  was  a  new 
idea  to  him,  and  by  its  means  spiritual  light  entered  his 
soul  in  some  degree;  but  such  were  the  prejudices  of  his 
up-bringing,  and  such  the  darkness  of  his  surroundings, 
that  he  still  hoped  to  find  salvation  by  outward  perform- 
ances.    He    therefore    fasted   long,    till    he    was   found 


33 6       THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

swooning  from  hunger.  He  was  exceedingly  zealous 
for  salvation  by  works.  At  last  he  made  a  pilgrimage 
to  Rome,  hoping  to  find  there  everything  that  was  holy 
and  helpful:  he  was  disappointed  in  his  search,  but  yet 
found  more  than  he  looked  for.  On  the  pretended  stair- 
case of  Pilate,  while  in  the  act  of  climbing  it  upon  his 
knees,  the  Wittenberg  text  again  sounded  in  his  ear  like 
a  thunder-clap:  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  Up  he 
started  and  descended  those  stairs,  never  to  grovel  upon 
them  again.  The  chain  was  broken,  the  soul  was  free. 
Luther  had  found  the  light;  and  henceforth  it  became 
his  life's  business  to  flash  that  light  upon  the  nations, 
crying  evermore,  IC  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  The 
best  commemoration  which  I  can  make  of  this  man  is  to 
preach  the  doctrine  which  he  held  so  dear,  and  you  who 
are  not  saved  can  best  assist  me  by  believing  the  doc- 
trine, and  proving  its  truth  in  your  own  cases.  May  the 
Holy  Ghost  cause  it  to  be  so  in  hundreds  of  instances. 

I.  First,  let  us  inquire  what  is  this  faith  ?  We  are 
always  talking  about  it;  but  what  is  it  ?  Whenever  I  try 
to  explain  it,  I  am  afraid  lest  I  should  confuse  rather 
than  expound.  There  is  a  story  told  concerning  John 
Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  Good  Thomas  Scott,  the 
Commentator,  wrote  notes  to  it:  he  thought  the  "  Pil- 
grim's Progress"  a  difficult  book,  and  he  would  make  it 
clear.  A  pious  cottager  in  his  parish  had  the  book,  and 
she  was  reading  it  when  her  minister  called.  He  said 
to  her,  "Oh,  I  see,  you  are  reading  Bunyan's  k  Pilgrim's 
Progress.'  Do  you  understand  it  ?  "  She  answered  in- 
nocently enough,  "  Oh,  yes,  sir,  I  understand  Mr.  Bun- 
yan  very  well,  and  I  hope  that  one  day  I  shall  be  able 
to  understand  your  explanations."  I  am  afraid  lest  you 
should  say  when  I  have  done,  "  I  understand  what  faith 
is,  as  I  find  it  in  the  Bible,  and  one  day,  perhaps,  I  may 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       337 

be  able  to  understand  the  preacher's  explanation  of  it.r 
Warned  by  this,  I  will  speak  as  plainly  as  I  can. 

And  first,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  faith  is  not  a 
mere  creed-holding.  It  is  very  proper  to  say,  "  I  believe 
in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth,"  and  so  forth;  but  you  may  repeat  all  that  and  be 
no  "believer"  in  the  Scriptural  sense  of  that  term. 
Though  the  creed  be  true,  it  may  not  be  true  to  you;  it 
would  have  been  the  same  to  you  if  the  opposite  had 
been  true,  for  you  put  the  truth  away  like  a  paper  in  a 
pigeon-hole,  and  it  has  no  effect  upon  you.  "A  very 
proper  doctrine,"  you  say,  "  a  very  proper  doctrine,"  and 
so  you  put  it  to  sleep.  It  does  not  influence  your  heart, 
nor  affect  your  life.  Do  not  imagine  that  the  professing 
an  orthodox  creed  is  the  same  thing  as  faith  in  Christ. 
A  truthful  creed  is  desirable  for  many  reasons;  but  if  it. 
be  a  dead,  inoperative  thing,  it  cannot  bring  salvation. 
Faith  is  belief  of  the  truth;  but  it  is  more. 

Again,  faith  is  not  the  mere  belief  that  there  is  a  God, 
though  that  we  must  have,  for  we  cannot  come  to  God 
except  we  "believe  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder 
of  them  that" diligently  seek  him."  We  are  to  believe 
in  God — that  he  is  good,  blessed,  true,  right,  and  there- 
fore to  be  trusted,  confided  in,  and  praised.  Whatever 
he  may  do,  whatever  he  may  say,  God  is  not  to  be  sus- 
pected, but  believed  in.  .You  know  what  it  is  to  believe 
in  a  man,  do  you  not  ?  to  believe  in  a  man  so  that  you 
follow  him,  and  confide  in  him,  and  accept  his  advice? 
In  that  same  way  faith  believes  in  God — not  only  believes 
that  he  is,  but  finds  rest  in  his  character,  his  Son,  his 
promise,  his  covenant,  his  word,  and  everything  about 
him.  Faith  livingly  and  lovingly  trusts  in  her  God 
about  everything.  Especially  must  we  believe  in  what 
God  has  revealed  in  Scripture — that  it  is  verily  and  in- 


33S       THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

deed  a  sure  and  infallible  testimony  to  be  received  with- 
out question.  We  accept  the  Father's  witness  concern- 
ing Jesus,  and  take  heed  thereto  u  as  unto  a  light  that 
shineth  in  a  dark  place." 

Faith  has  specially  to  believe  in  him  who  is  the  sum  and 
substance  of  all  this  revelation,  even  Jesus  Christ,  who 
became  God  in  human  flesh  that  he  might  redeem  our 
fallen  nature  from  all  the  evils  of  sin,  and  raise  it  to 
eternal  felicity.  We  believe  in  Christ,  on  Christ,  and 
upon  Christ;  accepting  him  because  of  the  record  which 
God  has  given  to  us  concerning  his  Son,  that  he 
is  the  propitiation  tor  our  sins.  We  accept  God's  un- 
speakable gift,  and  receive  Jesus  as  our  all  in  all. 

If  I  wanted  to  describe  saving  faith  in  one  word,   I 
should  say  that  it  is  trust     It  is  so  believing  God  and 
so  believing  in  Christ  that  we  trust  ourselves  and  our 
eternal  destinies  in  the  hands  of  a  reconciled  God.     As 
creatures  we  look  up  to  the  great  Father  of  spirits;  as 
sinners  we  trust  for  the  pardon  of  our  sins  to  the  atone- 
ment of  Jesus  Christ;  as  being  weak  and  feeble  we  trust 
to  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  us  holy  and  to 
keep  us  so;  we  venture  our  eternal  interests  in  the  ves 
sel  of  free  grace,  content  to  sink  or  swim   with  it.      We 
rely  upon  God  in  Christ.     The  word   employed  to  se+ 
forth  faith  in  the  Scriptures  sometimes  signifies  to  lean. 
We  lean   with  all  our  weight  upon  our   God,  in  Jesus 
Christ.      We  hang  upon  Christ  as  a  vessel  hangs  upon 
the    nail.      "Kecurnbency"   was    a    term    by   which   the 
old  Puritans  used  to  describe  faith— a  lying,  or  leaning 
upon,   something  out  of  ourselves.     Guilty  as   I   am,   I 
believe  God's  word,  that  "the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin:"  trusting  to  that  blood  I 
know  that  I  am  cleansed  from  all  sin.     God  sets  forth 
Christ  to  be  a  propitiation ;  we  believe  that  he  is  a  pro- 


THE   LUTHER    SERMOX  AT  EXETER-HALL.       339 

pitiation,  and  we  take  him  to  be  our  propitiation  :  by  that 
appropriation  our  .sin  is  covered  and  we  are  free.  Faith 
is  the  grasping,  the  appropriating,  the  receiving  into 
one's  self,  of  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ.  I  sometimes  illus- 
trate it  by  that  passage  of  Paul  where  he  says,  "The 
word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth. "  When  a  morsel 
is  in  your  mouth,  if  you  desire  to  possess  it  so  as  never 
to  lose  it,  wnat  is  the  best  thing  to  do?  Swallow  if. 
Let  it  go  down  into  the  inward  parts.  Now  the  word 
that  we  preach  is,  according  to  the  Apostle,  "in  thy 
mouth";  suffer  it  then  to  go  down  into  thy  heart,  and 
thou  shalt  find  it  true  that  "  with  the  heart  man  be- 
lieveth  unto  righteousness;  and  with  the  mouth  confes- 
sion is  made  unto  salvation."  This  is  the  faith  which 
saves  the  soul. 

II.   In  the  second  place  we  will  consider,  why  faith 

IS  SELECTED  AS  THE  WAY  OF  SALVATION? 

I  would  remind  you  that  if  we  could  not  answer  this 
question  it  would  not  matter;  fur  since  the  Lord  has  ap- 
pointed believing  as  the  way  of  grace  it  is  not  ours  to 
challenge  his  choice.  Beggars  must  not  be  choosers: 
let  us  trust,  if  so  the  Lord  ordains. 

But  wo  can  answer  this  question  in  a  measure.  First, 
it  is  clear  that  no  oilier  way  i 's possible.  It  is  not  possible 
for  us  to  be  saved  by  our  own  merits,  for  we  have  broken 
the  law  already,  and  future  obedience,  being  already  due, 
cannot  make  up  for  past  defects. 

"Could  my  tears  for  ever  flow, 
Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know, 
All  for  sin  could  not  atone : 
Thou  must  save,  and  thou  alone." 

The  road  of  good  works  is  blocked  up  by  our  past  sins, 
and  it  is  sure  to  be  further  blocked  up  by  future  sins: 


310       THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

we  ought  therefore  to  rejoice  that  God  has  commended 
to  us  the  open  road  of  faith. 

God  has  chosen  the  way  of  faith  that  salvation  might 
be  by  grace.  If  we  had  to  do  anything  in  order  to  save 
ourselves,  we  should  be  sure  to  impute  a  measure  of  vir- 
tue to  our  own  doings,  or  feelings,  or  prayers,  or  alms- 
givings, and  we  should  thus  detract  from  the  pure  grace 
of  God.  But  salvation  comes  from  God  as  a  pure  favor 
— an  act  of  undeserved  generosity  and  benevolence,  and 
the  Lord  will,  therefore,  only  put  it  into  the  hand  of  faith 
since  faith  arrogates  nothing  to  herself.  Faith,  in  fact, 
disowns  all  idea  of  merit,  and  the  Lord  of  grace  therefore 
elects  to  place  the  treasure  of  his  love  in  the  hand  of 
faith. 

Again,  it  is  of  faith  that  tin  re  may  be  no  boasting;  for  if 
our  salvation  be  of  our  doings  or  feelings,  we  are  sure 
to  boast;  but,  if  it  be  of  faith,  we  cannot  glory  in  self. 
"Where  is  boasting  then?  It  is  excluded.  By  what 
law?  of  works?  Nay:  but  by  the  law  of  faith."  Faith 
is  humble,  and  ascribes  all  praise  to  God.  Faith  is 
truthful,  and  confesses  her  obligation  to  the  sovereign 
grace  of  God. 

I  bless  the  Lord  that  he  has  chosen  this  way  of  faith, 
because  it  is  so  suitable  for  poor  sinners.  Some  among  us 
to-night  would  never  have  been  saved  if  salvation  had 
only  been  prepared  for  the  good  and  righteous.  I  stood 
before  my  God  guilty  and  self-condemned.  No  youth 
ever  had  a  keener  sense  of  guilt  than  I  had.  When  I 
was  convinced  of  sin  I  saw  my  thoughts  and  desires  to 
be  vile  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  I  became  vile  in  my  own 
eyes  also.  I  was  driven  to  despair;  and  I  know  that  I 
could  never  have  been  cheered  by  any  plan  of  salvation 
except  that  which  is  of  faith.  The  covenant  of  works 
by  reason  of  our  weakness  affords  us  no  suitable  way  of 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       341 

hope  at  any  time,  but  under  certain  circumstances  we 
see  this  very  vividly.  Suppose  that  you  were  in  the  last 
article  of  death,  what  good  works  could  you  do?  Yon- 
der dying  thief  found  it  a  happy  thing  that  by  faith  he 
could  trust  the  Crucified  One,  and  before  set  of  sun  could 
be  with  him  in  Paradise.  Faith  is  a  way  suitable  for 
sinners,  and  especially  for  sinners  who  are  soon  to  die; 
in  some  sense  we  are  all  in  that  condition,  and  some  of 
us  peradventure  are  especially  so;  for  what  man  among 
us  knows  that  he  will  see  to-morrow's  dawn  ? 

I  bless  God  again  that  the  way  of  salvation  is  by  faith, 
because  it  is  a  way  open  to  the  most  unlearned.  What  fine 
theology  we  get  nowadays — deep  thinking  they  call  it. 
The  men  go  down  so  deep  into  their  subjects,  and  so  stir 
the  mud  at  the  bottom,  that  you  cannot  see  them  and 
they  cannot  see  themselves.  I  apprehend  that  teachers 
of  a  certain  school  do  not  themselves  know  what  they 
are  talking  about.  Now,  if  salvation  were  only  to  be 
learned  by  reading  through  huge  folios,  what  would  be- 
come of  multitudes  of  poor  souls  in  Bow,  and  Bethnal 
Green,  and  Seven  Dials?  If  the  gospel  had  consisted 
of  a  mass  of  learning,  how  could  the  unlearned  be  saved? 
But  now  we  can  go  to  each  one  of  them  and  say,  "  Jesus 
died." 

"  There  is  life  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One; 
There  is  life  at  this  moment  for  thee." 

However  little  you  may  know,  you  know  that  you  have 
sinned;  know,  then,  that  Jesus  has  come  to  put  away 
sin,  and  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  is  immediately 
forgiven,  and  enters  into  life  eternal.  This  brief  and 
blessed  gospel  is  suitable  to  all  cases,  from  princes 
to  peasants,  and  we  wonder  not  that  faith  was  selected 
as  the  way  of  salvation.  , 


312       THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

III.  But  now,  thirdly,  I  want  to  say  a  good  deal 
to-night  upon  another  question,  How  does  faith  operate? 
For  according  to  our  text,  it  is  "  Faith  which  ivorketh 
by  love."  It  is  a  living,  laboring,  loving  faith  which 
alone  saves  the  soul.  I  cannot  tell  you  what  hard 
things  I  have  heard  about  this  doctrine  of  salvation  by 
faith.  They  say  that  it  is  immoral.  I  have  heard 
immoral  men  say  so,  and  surely  they  ought  to  know. 
They  say  that  it  will  lead  to  sin;  and  those  who  say  so 
would,  I  should  think,  be  rather  pleased  with  it  for  that 
reason  if  they  believed  their  own  statement,  I  have 
never  heard  a  holy  man  charge  faith  with  leading  him 
into  sin.  I  know  no  man  that  follows  after  God  and 
lives  near  to  him  who  is  under  fear  that  faith  in  God  will 
tempt  him  to  transgress.  The  fact  is,  faith  does  noth- 
ing of  the  kind;  its  action  is  most  distinctly  the  reverse. 
Like  the  prudent  wife  in  the  Proverbs,  faith  will  do  a 
man  good  and  no  harm  all  the  days  of  his  life. 

First,  it  touches  the  mainspring  of  our  nature  Inj  creating 
love  within  the  soul.  What  is  wanted  now  for  the  de- 
graded classes  in  London  ?  Sanitary  regulations  ?  Cer- 
tainly, if  they  are  not  allowed  to  be  a  dead  letter  for  the 
want  of  some  one  to  carry  them  out.  New  houses? 
By  all  manner  of  means:  the  more  the  better.  Lower 
rents  ?  Assuredly,  for  no  one  has  a  right  to  get  an  ex- 
cessive rent  for  unhealthy  accommodation.  Higher 
wages  ?  Certainly,  we  could  all  of  us  do  with  a  little 
more.  Many  other  things  are  wanted.  While  yonder 
gin-palaces  remain  at  the  corners  of  the  streets  you  will 
not  make  much  headway  in  uplifting  the  masses;  and  I 
suppose  the  drink-shops  will  always  flourish  while  the 
taste  for  drink  remains.  Suppose  the  licensed  poison- 
shops  were  shut  up,  would  that  suffice  ?  I  think  not. 
There  are  men  and  women  in  London,  and  thousands 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       343 

of  them,  who,  if  they  were  put  into  the  cleanest  houses, 
and  were  a  mile  off  a  gin-shop,  would  still  drink  and 
still  turn  their  houses  into  piggeries.  What  is  wanted? 
Oh,  if  you  could  make  Christians  of  them!  Suppose 
they  could  be  born  again.  Suppose  they  could  be  made 
to  love  the  things  which  they  now  hate,  and  hate  the 
things  which  they  now  love.  New  hearts  and  right 
spirits  are  the  need  of  London's  outcasts.  How  can 
these  be  produced?  In  the  hand  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  this  is  exactly  what  faith  works  in  the  heart. 
Here  is  a  watch.  "It  wants  cleaning."  Yes,  clean  it. 
"It  does  not  go  now.  It  wants  a  new  glass."  Well, 
put  in  a  new  glass.  "  It  does  not  go  any  the  more.  It 
wants  new  hands."  Get  new  hands  by  all  means.  Still 
it  does  not  go.  What  is  the  matter  with  it?  The 
maker  says  that  it  needs  a  mainspring.  There's  the 
seat  of  the  evil:  nothing  can  be  right  till  that  is  recti- 
fied. Set  all  other  matters  going,  but  do  not  forget 
that  the  mainspring  is  the  chief  part  of  the  business. 
Faith  supplies  the  soul  with  a  powerful  spring  of  action. 
It  says  to  the  man,  "Thou  art  forgiven  through  the 
blood  of  Christ  who  died  for  thee:  how  dost  thou  feel 
towards  him?"  The  man  replies,  "I  love  the  Lord  for 
redeeming  me."  Loving  Jesus,  the  man  has  now 
within  his  soul  the  seed  of  every  good.  He  will  be- 
come a  holier  and  a  better  being;  for  he  has  begun  to 
love,  and  love  is  the  mother  of  holiness.  Is  any  service 
in  the  world  like  the  service  of  love  ?  You  have  a  ser- 
vant in  your  house,  fawning  and  obsequious;  but  if  you 
were  to  reduce  his  wages,  he  would  show  you  the  rough 
side  of  his  tongue  and  seek  another  situation.  You  do 
not  expect  any  more  of  him  than  that,  and  if  you  did, 
you  would  not  get  it.  How  different  was  an  old  ser- 
vant I  have  heard  of,  who,  when  his  master  went  down 


344       THE   LUTHER   SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

in  the  world,  was  content  with  half-pay;  and  when  he 
was  sorrowfully  told  that  he  must  go,  for  his  master 
could  not  afford  him  clothes,  he  made  his  old  ones  last 
him,  for  he  would  not  leave  his  master  in  his  old  age. 
He  would  rather  have  earned  bread  for  his  old  master 
than  have  left  him.  He  was  an  attached  servant  worth 
his  weight  in  gold:  there  are  few  such  servants  nowa- 
days, for  there  are  not  many  such  masters.  This  kind 
of  service  cannot  be  purchased;  but  its  price  is  above 
rubies.  When  the  Lord  leads  us  to  believe  in  Jesus,  we 
become  henceforth  his  loving  servants,  and  serve  him 
not  for  reward,  but  out  of  gratitude.  It  is  no  longer 
with  us  so  much  work  and  so  much  pay;  we  do  not 
fear  the  threat  of  hell  for  disobedience,  nor  do  we  look 
to  heaven  as  won  by  works.  No,  no;  our  salvation  is 
a  free  gift,  It  is  furnished  for  us  through  infinite  love 
and  supreme  compassion,  and  therefore  we  return  our 
heart's  warmest  affection.  Our  heart  clings  to  that  dear 
side  which  was  opened  for  us.  We  feel  a  tender  love 
to  those  dear  pierced  feet;  we  could  kiss  them  every 
day.  Those  blessed  hands  of  the  Crucified !  If  they 
do  but  touch  us,  we  are  strengthened,  honored,  com- 
forted. Jesus  is  altogether  lovely  to  us,  our  bosom's 
lord.  Faith,  instead  of  being  a  poor,  paltry  thing,  as 
some  imagine,  is  the  grandest  cause  of  love,  and  so  of 
obedience  and  holiness. 

Know,  again,  that  faith  puts  us  into  a  new  relation. 
We  are  bound  by  nature  to  be  the  servants  of  God;  but 
faith  whispers  in  our  ear,  "  Say  '  Our  Father,' "  and 
when  the  heart  has  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  the 
aspect  of  service  is  entirely  changed;  mercenary  service 
is  succeeded  by  loving  obedience,  and  our  spirit  is 
altered.  To  become  an  heir  of  God,  a  joint-heir  with 
Jesus,  is  to  elevate  work  into  delight,  labor  into  fellow- 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       345 

ship  with  God.     The  law  is  no  fetter  to  a  child  of  God : 
it  is  his  delight. 

Faith  removes  from  the  soul  that  form  of  selfishness 
which  aforetime  seemed  necessary.  So  you  hope  to  be 
saved  by  what  you  do,  do  you  ?  May  I  ask  you,  friend, 
whom  you  are  serving  in  all  this?  I  will  tell  you. 
You  are  serving  yourself.  All  that  you  do  is  to  win 
happiness  for  yourself.  How,  then,  are  you  serving  God? 
You  are  living  a  selfish  life,  though  it  be  tinged  with 
the  color  of  spirituality.  What  is  done  by  you  in  the 
matter  of  religion  has  no  object  but  that  you  may  be 
saved,  and  go  to  heaven.  Your  most  zealous  work  is 
all  for  self.  Suppose  I  say  to  you,  "  I  know  that  I  am 
saved:  I  know  that  Jesus  has  put  away  my  sin:  I  know 
that  he  will  not  permit  me  to  perish;" — why,  then  there 
is  room  in  my  case  for  the  service  of  the  Lord  because 
of  what  he  has  done  for  me.  Xow  I  have  not  myself  to 
save,  I  have  Christ  to  serve.  Gratitude  is  the  motive 
of  the  gospel,  and  under  its  power  unselfish  virtue  is 
possible,  but  not  upon  the  ground  of  legal  service. 
Pure  virtue,  it  seems  to  me,  is  a  sheer  impossibility  till 
a  man  is  saved,  because  it  always  must  partake  till  then 
of  the  low  and  grovelling  view  of  benefiting  himself  by 
what  he  is  doing.  When  once  the  great  transaction  is 
done,  and  you  are  saved,  then  you  are  lifted  up  into  a 
nobler  sphere,  and  you  say, 

"Then  why,  0  blessed  Jesu  Christ, 
Should  I  not  love  thee  well? 
Not  for  the  hope  of  winning  heaven 
Nor  of  escaping  hell; 

"  Not  with  the  hope  of  gaining  aught, 
Not  seeking  a  reward: 
But  as  thyself  hast  loved  me, 
0  ever-loving  Lord, 


346       THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

"  So  would  I  love  thee,  dearest  Lord, 
And  in  thy  praise  will  sing; 
Solely  because  thou  art  my  God, 
And  my  Eternal  King." 

Hence  faith  inspires  us  with  a  higher  motive  than  the 
law  can  suggest. 

Faith  soon  creates  love  to  man;  for,  if  the  Lord  Jesus 
has  saved  you,  my  brother,  you  will  speedily  desire  that 
others  may  be  saved  also.  You  have  tasted  of  this  honey, 
and  the  sweetness  upon  your  own  tongue  constrains  you 
to  invite  others  to  the  feast.  He  who  has  been  brought 
into  the  liberty  of  free  grace  would  set  free  every  cap- 
tive sinner  if  he  could. 

When  well  worked  out,  faith  means  harmony  with  God. 
It  creates  an  agreement  with  the  divine  will,  so  that 
whatever  pleases  God  pleases  us.  If  the  Lord  should 
set  the  believer  on  a  dunghill  with  Job,  he  would  still 
bless  his  name.  Faith  agrees  with  the  divine  precept 
which  it  desires  to  obey,  with  the  divine  doctrine  which 
it  desires  to  know  and  publish;  yea,  whatsoever  is  of 
God  faith  saith,  "It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  command, 
teach,  or  do  what  seemeth  him  good/' 

I  have  shown  you  that  faith  is  not  the  trifling  princi- 
ple which  its  deprecators  describe  as  "  Only  believe."  Oh, 
that  they  knew  what  it  is  only  to  believe.  It  is  the  set- 
ting free  of  the  mind  from  fetters.  It  is  the  dawn  of 
heaven's  own  day.  It  is  a  lifelong  struggle,  this  "Only 
believe,"  It  is  "the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on 
him  whom  lie  hath  sent." 

Brethren,  I  believe  that  a  humble,  persevering  faith  in 
God  is  one  of  the  highest  forms  of  adoration  that  ever 
reaches  the  throne  of  God.  Though  cherubim  and  sera- 
phim salute  the  Lord  with  their  "Holy,  holy,  holy"; 
though  the   whole   host  of  shining  ones  surround  the 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       347 

throne  with  perpetual  hallelujahs,  there  is  no  more  hearty 
reverence  given  to  God  thereby  than  when  a  poor  sin- 
ner, black  as  night,  cries  believingly,  "  Wash  me,  and  I 
shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  To  believe  in  the  pardon 
of  sin  is  a  wonderful  adoration  of  the  mercy  and  power 
of  God.  To  believe  in  a  constant  providence  is  a  sweet 
way  of  worshipping  God  in  his  power  and  goodness. 
When  a  poor  laborer  in  his  cottage,  needing  bread  for 
his  children,  kneels  down  and  cries,  "  Lord,  it  is  written 
'Thy  bread  shall  be  given  thee,  and  thy  water  shall  be 
'  sure,'  I  believe  thy  word,  and  therefore  I  look  to  thee  in 
my  necessity,"  he  renders  a  homage  to  the  truth  and 
faithfulness  of  God  such  as  Gabriel  could  not  give,  for 
he  never  knew  the  pinch  of  hunger.  To  believe  that 
God  will  keep  us  to  the  end  and  raise  us  to  his  glory 
is  more  honoring  to  God  than  all  the  hymns  of  the  glor- 
ified. From  us  dying  sons  of  earth,  when  we  confide  in 
his  promise,  there  arises  up  to  heaven  incense  of  a  sweet 
smell,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ. 

To  my  mind  there  is  also  this  about  faith — that  it  has 
a  marvellous  power  over  God.  Do  you  ask  me  to  retract 
that  expression?  Let  it  stand.  I  will  explain  it.  Faith 
overcomes  the  Highest  upon  his  throne.  Faith  in  an  in- 
ferior can  hold  a  superior  fast.  Some  years  ago  I  was 
walking  in  the  garden  one  evening,  and  I  saw  a  stray 
dog  about  whom  I  had  received  information  that  lie 
was  in  the  habit  of  visiting  my  grounds,  and  that  he 
did  not  in  the  least  assist  the  gardener,  and  therefore 
his  attentions  were  not  desired.  As  1  walked  along  one 
Saturday  evening  meditating  upon  my  sermon,  I  saw 
this  dog  busily  doing  mischief.  I  threw  my  stick  at 
him,  and  told  him  to  go  home.  But  what  do  you  think 
he  did?  Instead  of  grinding  his  teeth  at  me,  or 'hurry- 
ing off  with  a  howl,  he   looked  at  me  very  pleasantly, 


3±8       THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

took  up  my  stick  in  his  mouth,  and  brought  it  to  me, 
and  then,  wagging  his  tail,  he  laid  the  stick  at  my  feet. 
The  tears  were  in  my  eyes:  the  dog  had  beaten  me.  I 
said,  "Good  dog!  Good  dog;  you  may  come  here  when 
you  like  after  that."  Why  had  the  dog  conquered  me  ? 
Because  he  had  confidence  in  me,  and  would  not  believe 
that  I  could  mean  him  any  hurt.  To  turn  to  grander 
things:  the  Lord  himself  cannot  resist  humble  confi- 
dence. Do  you  not  see  how  a  sinner  brings,  as  it  were, 
the  rod  of  justice  to  the  Lord,  and  cries,  "  If  thou  smite 
me,  I  deserve  it,  but  I  submit  to  thee."  The  great  God 
cannot  spurn  a  trustful  heart.  It  is  impossible.  He 
were  not  God  if  he  could  cast  the  soul  away  that  im- 
plicitly relies  on  him.  This  is  the  power  of  faith,  then, 
and  I  marvel  not  that  the  Lord  should  have  chosen  it, 
for  believing  is  a  thing  most  pleasing  to  God.  0  that 
you  would  all  trust  him  !  God  lifts  his  sword  against 
you — run  into  his  arms.  He  threatens  you — grasp  his 
promise.  He  pursues  you — fly  to  his  dear  Son.  Trust 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross  in  his  full  atonement,  and  you 
must  be  saved. 

IV.  Now,  I  am  going  to  finish  in  a  way  suitable  to 
this  Luther  memorial.  You  have  -heard  a  great  deal 
about  Luther's  preaching  salvation  by  faith  alone.  Now 
let  us  turn  to  Luther's  life,  and  see  what  Luther  himself 
meant  by  it.  What  kind  of  faith  did  Luther  himself  ex- 
hibit by  which  he  was  justified? 

First,  in  Luther's  case,  faith  led  him  to  an  open  avowal 
of  ivliat  lie  believed.  Luther  did  not  mean  to  go  up  to 
heaven  by  the  back  stairs,  as  many  young  men  hope  to 
do.  You  wish  to  be  Christians  on  the  sly,  so  as  to  es- 
cape the  offence  of  the  cross.  Luther  did  not  refuse  to 
confess  Christ  and  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  him. 
He  knew  that  he  who  with  his  heart  believeth,  must 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       349 

also  with  his  mouth  make  confession,  and  he  did  so 
right  nobly.  He  began  teaching  and  preaching  the 
truth  which  had  enlightened  his  own  soul.  One  of  his 
sermons  displeased  Duke  George  of  Saxony;  but  as  it 
saved  a  lady  of  high  rank  Luther  did  not  fret.  He  was 
not  the  man  to  conceal  truth  because  it  was  dangerous 
to  avow  it.  Tetzel  came  with  his  precious  indulgences, 
and  his  releases  for  souls  in  purgatory.  Thousands  of 
good  Catholics  were  indignant;  but  no  one  would  bell  the 
cat.  Luther  called  Tetzel  "  servant  of  Pope  and  of  the 
devil,"  and  declared,  "As  he  came  among  us  practicing 
on  the  credulity  of  the  people,  I  could  not  refrain  from 
protesting  against  it,  and  opposing  his  odious  career." 
Without  mincing  words,  or  attempting  to  speak  politely, 
Luther  went  at  him  fearless  of  consequences.  He  be- 
lieved in  the  blessings  of  grace  "  without  money  and 
without  price,"  and  he  did  not  conceal  his  convictions. 
He  nailed  his  theses  to  the  church  door  where  all  might 
read  them.  When  astronomers  require  a  new  constel- 
lation in  the  heavens  let  it  be  "the  hammer  and  nails." 
0  you  who  make  no  profession,  let  this  man's  outspoken 
faith  rebuke  you  ! 

His  dauntless  valor  for  truth  caused  him  to  be  greatly 
hated  in  his  own  day  with  a  ferocity  which  has  not 
yet  died  out,  Luther  is  still  the  best  hated  man  in  cer- 
tain quarters.  Witness  the  vile  tracts  which  have  been 
produced  during  the  last  fortnight,  to  the  disgrace  of 
the  press  which  they  defile.  I  can  say  no  worse  nor 
better  of  them  than  that  they  are  worthy  of  the  cause 
in  whose  interest  they  are  issued.  Mention  the  name 
of  Luther  and  the  bond-slaves  of  Rome  gnash  their 
teeth.  This  intense  ill-feeling  proves  Luther's  power. 
Young  men,  I  do  not  know  what  your  ambition  may  be; 
but  I  hope  you  do  not  wish  to  be  in  this  world  mere 


350       THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

chips  in  the  porridge,  giving  forth  no  flavor  whatever. 
My  ambition  does  not  run  in  that  line.  I  know  that  if 
I  have  no  intense  haters,  I  can  have  no  intense  lovers; 
and  I  am  prepared  to  ha,ve  both.  When  right-hearted 
men  see  honest  love  of  truth  in  a  man,  they  cry,  "  He  is 
our  brother.  Let  him  be  our  champion."  When  the 
wrong-hearted  reply,  "Down  with  him!"  we  thank 
them  for  the  unconscious  homage  which  they  thus  pay 
to  decision  of  character.  No  child  of  God  should  court 
the  world's  approbation.  Certainly  Luther  did  not. 
He  pleased  God,  and  that  was  enough  for  him. 

His  faith  was  of  this  kind  also — that  it  moved  him  to 
a  hearty  reverence  for  what  he  believed  to  be  Holy  Scripture. 
I  am  sorry  that  he  was  not  always  wise  in  his  judg- 
ment of  what  the  Bible  contains;  but  yet  to  him  Script- 
ure was  the  last  court  of  appeal.  If  any  had  convinced 
Luther  of  error  out  of  that  book,  he  would  gladly  have 
retracted;  but  that  was  not  their  plan,  they  simply  said, 
"  He  is  a  heretic:  condemn  him  or  make  him  retract." 
To  this  he  never  yielded  for  an  instant.  Alas,  in  this 
age  numbers  of  men  are  setting  up  to  be  their  own  in- 
spired writers.  1  have  been  told  that  every  man  who 
is  his  own  lawyer  has  a  fool  for  his  client:  and  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that,  when  any  man  sets  up  to  be  his 
own  Saviour  and  his  own  revelation,  much  the  same 
thing  occurs.  That  conceited  idea  is  in  the  air  at  this 
present:  every  man  is  excogitating  his  own.  Bible.  Not 
so  Luther.  He  loved  the  sacred  book !  He  fought  by 
its  help.  It  was  his  battle-axe  and  his  weapon  of  war. 
A  text  of  Scripture  fired  his  soul ;  but  the  words  of 
tradition  he  rejected.  He  would  not  yield  to  Melanc- 
thon,  or  Zwingle,  or  Calvin,  or  whoever  it  might  be, 
however  learned  or  pious;  he  took  his  own  personal 
faith  to.   the  Scripture,  and  according  to  his  light  be 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT   EXETER-HALL.       351 

followed  the  word  of  the  Lord.  May  many  a  Luther 
be  in  this  place  ! 

The  next  thing  I  note  was  the  intense  activity  of  his 
faith.  Luther  did  not  believe  in  God  doing  his  own 
work,  so  as  to  lie  by  in  idleness  himself.  Not  a  bit  of 
it.  A  disciple  once  said  to  Mahomet,  '•  I  am  going  to 
turn  my  camel  loose,  and  trust  in  providence."  "No," 
said  Mahomet,  "trust  in  providence,  but  tie  up  your 
camel  carefully/'  This  resembled  Oliver  Cromwell's 
Puritan  precept,  "  Trust  in  God,  but  keep  your  powder 
dry."  Luther  believed  above  most  men  in  keeping  his 
powder  dry.  How  he  worked!  By  pen,  by  mouth,  by 
hand;  he  was  energetic  almost  beyond  belief.  He 
seemed  a  many-handed  man.  He  did  works  which 
would  have  taxed  the  strength  of  hundreds  of  smaller 
men.  He  worked  as  if  everything  depended  upon  his 
own  activity,  and  then  he  fell  back  in  holy  trust  upon 
God  as  though  he  had  done  nothing.  This  is  the  kind 
of  faith  which  saves  a  man  both  in  this  life  and  in  that 
which  is  to  come. 

Again,  Luther's  faith  abounded  in  prayer.  What  sup- 
plications they  were!  Those  who  heard  them  tell  us 
of  his  tears,  his  wrestlings,  his  holy  arguments.  He 
would  go  into  his  closet  heavy  at  heart,  and  remain 
there  an  hour  or  two,  and  then  come  forth  singing,  "I 
have  conquered,  I  have  conquered."  "Ah,"  said  he  one 
day,  "  I  have  so  much  to  do  to-day  that  I  cannot  get 
through  it  with  less  than  three  hours'  prayer."  I 
thought  he  was  going  to  say,  "  I  cannot  afford  to  give 
even  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  prayer;"  but  he  increased 
his  prayer  as  he  increased  his  labor.  This  is  the  faith 
that  saves — a  faith  that  lays  hold  on  God  and  prevails 
with  him  in  private  supplication. 

His  was  a  faith  that  delivered  him  entirely  from  the  fear 


352       THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

of  man.  Duke  George  is  going  to  stop  him.  "Is  he?" 
said  Luther.  "  If  it  were  to  rain  Duke  Georges  I  would 
gn."  He  is  exhorted  not  to  go  to  Worms,  for  he  will  be 
in  danger.  If  there  were  as  many  devils  in  Worms  as 
there  were  tiles  on  the  house-tops  he  would  be  there. 
And  he  was  there,  as  you  all  know,  playing  the  man 
for  the  gospel  and  for  his  God.  He  committed  himself 
to  no  man,  but  kept  his  faith  in  God  pure  and  unmin- 
gled.  Popes,  emperors,  doctors,  electors  were  all  as 
nothing  to  Luther  when  they  stood  against  the  Lord. 
Be  it  so  with  us  also. 

His  was  a  faith  that  made  him  risk  all  for  the  truth. 
There  seemed  no  hope  of  his  ever  coming  back  from 
Worms  alive.  He  was  pretty  sure  to  be  burned  like 
John  Huss;  and  the  wonder  is  that  he  escaped.  His 
very  daring  brought  him  safety  from  peril.  He  ex- 
pressed his  regret  that  the  crown  of  martyrdom  would, 
in  all  probability,  be  missed  by  him;  but  the  faith  which 
is  prepared  to  die  for  Jesus  was  within  him.  He  who 
in  such  a  case  saves  his  life  shall  lose  it,  but  he  that  loses 
his  life  for  Christ's  sake  shall  find  it  unto  life  eternal. 

This  was  the  faith  that  made  Luther  a  man  among 
men,  and  sewed  him  from  priestly  affectations.  I  do  not 
know  whether  you  admire  what  is  thought  to  be  very 
superior  religion:  it  is  a  thing  of  beauty,  but  not  of  use; 
it  ought  always  to  be  kept  in  a  glass  case;  it  is  made 
up  for  drawing-rooms  and  religious  meetings,  but  would 
be  out  of  place  in  a  shop  or  on  a  farm.  Now, -Luther's 
religion  was  with  him  at  home,  at  the  table  as  well  as 
in  the  pulpit.  His  religion  was  part  and  parcel  of  his 
common  life,  and  that  life  was  free,  open,  bold,  and  un- 
restrained. It  is  easy  to  find  fault  with  him  from  the 
superfine  standpoint,  for  he  lived  in  an  honest  unguard- 
edness.     My  admiration  kindles  as  I  think  of  the  hearty 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       353 

openness  of  the  man.  I  do  not  wonder  that  even  un- 
godly Germans  revere  him,  for  he  is* all  a  German,  and 
all  a  man.  When  he  speaks  he  does  not  take  his  words 
out  of  his  mouth  to  look  at  them,  and  to  ask  Melancthon 
whether  they  will  do;  but  he  hits  hard,  and  lie  has  spo- 
ken a  dozen  sentences  before  he  has  thought  whether 
they  are  polished  or  not.  Indeed,  he  is  utterly  indiffer- 
ent to  criticism,  and  speaks  what  he  thinks  and  feels. 
He  is  at  his  ease,  for  he  feels  at  home:  is  he  not  every- 
where in  his  great  Father's  house?  Has  he  not  a  pure 
and  simple  intent  to  speak  the  truth  and  do  the  right? 

I  like  Luther  with  a  wife  and  children.  I  like  to  see 
him  with  his  family  and  a  Christmas-tree,  making  music 
with  little  Johnny  Luther  on  his  knee.  I  love  to  hear 
him  sing  a  little  hymn  with  the  children,  and  tell  his 
pretty  boy  about  the  horses  in  heaven  with  golden  bri- 
dles and  silver  saddles.  Faith  had  not  taken  away  his 
manhood,  but  sanctified  it  to  noblest  uses.  Luther  did 
not  live  and  move  as  if  he  were  a  mere  cleric,  but  as  a 
brother  to  our  common  humanity.  After  all,  brethren, 
you  must  know  that  the  greatest  divines  have  to  eat 
bread  and  butter  like  other  people.  They  shut  their 
eyes  before  they  sleep,  and  they  open  them  in  the  morn- 
ing, just  like  other  folks.  This  is  matter  of  fact,  though 
some  stilted  gentlemen  might  like  us  to  doubt  it,  They 
feel  and  think  like  other  men.  Why  should  they  seem 
as  if  they  did  not?  Is  it  not  a  good  thing  to  eat  and 
drink  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  show  people  that  common 
things  can  be  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer? 
What  if  we  do  not  wear  canonicals,  and  so  on  ?  The 
best  canonicals  in  the  world  are  thorough  devotion  to 
the  Lord's  work;  and  if  a  man  lives  aright,  he  makes 
every  garment  a  vestment,  every  meal  a  sacrament,  and 
every  house  a  temple.     All  our  hours  are  canonical,  all 


354       THE   LUTHER   SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL. 

our  days  holy  days,  every  breath  is  incense,  every  pulse 
music  for  the  Most  High. 

They  tell  us  that  Luther  ignored  good  works.  It  is 
true  he  would  not  allow  good  works  to  be  spoken  of  as 
the  means  of  salvation;  but  of  those  who  professed  faith 
in  Jesus  he  demanded  holy  lives.  Luther  abounded  in 
prayer  and  charity.  What  an  almsgiver  Luther  was  ! 
I  fear  he  did  not  at  all  'times  duly  regard  the  principles 
of  the  Charity  Organization  Society.  As  he  goes  along, 
if  there  are  beggars  he  empties  his  pockets  for  them. 
Two  hundred  crowns  have  just  come  in,  and,  though  he 
has  a  family  about  him,  he  cries,  uTwo  hundred  crowns! 
God  is  giving  me  my  portion  in  this  life."  "Here,"  says 
he  to  a  poor  brother  minister,  "  take  half.  And  where 
are  the  poor?  Fetch  them  in.  I  must  be  rid  of  this!" 
I  am  afraid  that  his  Catherine  was  forced  at  times  to 
shake  her  head  at  him;  for.  in  truth,  he  was  not  always 
the  most  economical  husband  that  might  be.  In  alms- 
giving he  was  second  to  none,  and  in  all  the  duties  of 
life  he  rose  far  beyond  the  level  of  his  age.  Like  all 
other  men  he  had  his  faults;  but  as  his  enemies  harp 
on  that  string,  and  go  far  beyond  the  truth,  I  need  not 
dwell  upon  his  failings.  I  wish  that  the  detractors  of 
Luther  were  half  as  good  as  he.  All  the  glory  of  his 
grand  career  be  unto  the  Lord  alone. 

Lastly,  Luther's  faith  was  a  faith  that  helped  him  under 
struggles  that  are  seldom  spoken  of.  I  suppose  that  never 
man  had  greater  soul-conflict  than  Luther.  He  was  a 
man  of  heights  and  depths.  Sometimes  he  went  up  to 
heaven  and  he  sang  his  hallelujahs;  and  then  he  went 
down  again  into  the  abyss  with  his  "  misereres."  I  am 
afraid  that,  great,  vigorous  man  that  he  was,  he  had  a 
bad  liver.  *He  was  grievously  afflicted  in  body  in  ways 
which  I  need  not  mention ;  and  he  was  sometimes  laid 


THE   LUTHER    SERMON  AT  EXETER-HALL.       355 

aside  for  months  together,  being  so  racked  and  tortured 
that  he  longed  to  die.  His  pains  were  extreme,  and  we 
wonder  how  he  endured  them  so  well.  But  ever  be- 
tween the  attacks  of  illness  Luther  was  up  again  preach- 
ing the  word  of  God.  Those  desperate  struggles  with 
the  devil  would  have  crushed  him  but  for  his  faith.  The 
devil  seems  to  have  been  constantly  assailing  him,  and 
he  was  constantly  assailing  the  devil.  In  that  tremen- 
dous duel  he  fell  back  upon  his  Lord,  and,  trusting  in 
Omnipotence,  he  put  Satan  to  rout. 

Young  men,  I  pray  that  a  Luther  may  spring  up  from 
your  ranks.  How  gladly  would  the  faithful  welcome 
him  !  I,  who  am  more  a  follower  of  Calvin  than  of 
Luther,  and  much  more  a  follower  of  Jesus  than  of  either 
of  them,  would  be  charmed  to  see  another  Luther  upon 
this  earth. 

God  bless  you,  brethren,  for  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


XVII. 

BLESSED   PROMISES  FOK  DYING  OUTCASTS. 

December  2,  1883. 

"For  I  will  restore  health  unto  thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy 
wounds,  saith  the  Lord;  because  they  called  thee  an  Outcast,  saying, 
This  is  Zion,  whom  no  man  seeketh  utter." — Jeremiah  xxx.  17. 

The  promises  of  this  verse  will  be  exceedingly  sweet  to 
those  who  feel  their  personal  need  of  them;  but  those 
who  boast  that  they  are  neither  sick  nor  wounded  will 
take  no  interest  in  this  comfortable  word.  Those  who 
are  charmed  with  "themselves  will  see  no  charm  in  the 
beloved  Physician.  I  have  heard  of  certain  hungry 
travellers,  who  were  lost  in  the  wilderness,  and  came 
upon  a  bag  which  they  longingly  hoped  might  yield 
them  a  seasonable  supply  of  food.  They  were  near  to 
death's  door  by  starvation,  and  eagerly  opened  the  bag, 
but,  alas  !  it  contained  nothing  but  pearls,  which  they 
poured  out  contemptuously  upon  the  desert  sand  as 
things  of  no  use  to  them.  Even  so,  when  a  man  is  hun- 
gering and  thirsting  after  the  things  of  this  life,  and  all 
his  thoughts  are  taken  up  with  carnal  appetites,  carnal 
sorrows,  and  carnal  joys,  he  will  reject  as  worthless  the 
priceless  promises  of  God,  for  he  considers  that  they 
are  of  no  immediate  use  to  him.  Let  his  hunger  be  of 
another  sort,  let  his  heart  hanker  after  unsearchable 
riches,  let  his  soul  pine  for  eternal  love,  then  are  his 
views  of  things  entirely  changed,  and  to  buy  the  pearl 
of  great  price  he  would  gladly  sell  all  that  he  has.     Oh, 


BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.      357 

you  that  are  sick  at  heart,  here  is  a  word  for  you  from 
the  God  of  all  grace:  Jehovah  Rophi  himself  says,  "I 
will  restore  health  unto  thee."  Oh,  you  that  have  felt 
the  shafts  of  God  pierce  your  inmost  souls,  here  is  a 
word  from  him  who  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and 
bindeth  up  their  wounds:  "I  will  heal  thee  of  thy 
wounds,  saith  the  Lord."  Here  is  music  for  your  ear, 
honey  for  your  mouth,  comfort  for  your  heart.  But  if 
you  feel  you  have  no  sickness  and  no  wound,  no  weak- 
ness and  no  spiritual  need,  then  the  words  of  sacred 
consolation  will  pass  over  your  ear  as  a  meaningless 
sound,  having  no  voice  for  you.  Neither  shall  we  won- 
der at  this,  for  the  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician, 
but  they  that  are  sick:  healthy  men  care  not  to  hear  of 
medicines  and  remedies,  for  they  feel  no  need  of  them. 
This  thins  my  audience,  but  improves  it;  for,  while  it 
drives  away  the  conceited,  it  draws  the  needy  to  a  more 
careful  listening. 

Our  text  describes  a  serioys  plight,  mentions  a  special 
interference,  and  records  a  singular  reason  for  that  inter- 
ference. "When  wc  have  spoken  upon  each  of  these,  we 
shall  close  by  giving  you  a  suitable  advice.  'Sidy  the 
Spirit  of  God  bless  the  discourse. 

I.  First,  then,  taken  in  connection  with  the  verses 
which  precede  it,  our  text  describes  a  class  of  men  and 
women  who  are  in  a  serious  plight. 

These  people  suffer  under  two  evils.  First,  they  are 
sick  through  sin:  for  they  need  to  have  their  health  re- 
stored; and,  secondly,  they  are  wounded  for  their  sin 
by  the  chastisements  of  the  Lord,  so  that  there  is 
necessity  for  their  wound  to  be  healed.  They  are 
afflicted  with  the  distemper  of  evil,  and  also  by  dismal 
disquietude  of  conscience.  They  have  broken  God's 
commandments,  and  now  their  own  bones  are  broken. 


358     BLESSED    PROMISES  FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

They  have  grieved  their  God,  and  their  God  is  grieving 
them. 

Let  us  carefully  look  at  the  first  part  of  their  sad 
condition:  they  are  sick  with  sin,  and  that  disease  is  one 
which,  according  to  the  fifth  and  sixth  verses,  brings 
great  pain   and  trouble  into    men's   minds  when  they 
come  to  their  senses,  and  know  their  condition  before 
God.     At  first,  iniquity  numbs  the  conscience,  and  its 
tendency  is  to  sear  it  as  with  a  hot  iron.     It  may  be 
compared  to  a  stroke  of  paralysis,   which,  when  it  falls 
upon  a  man's  body,  takes  away  from  him  all  pain,  and 
makes  him    as  one  dead  in  the  parts  which  it  affects. 
Sin  paralyzes  the  consciences  of  the  ungodly.     At  first 
they  do  not  know  it  to  be  an  exceeding  great  evil;  they 
trifle  with  it;  it  is  a  basilisk,   whose  very  look  is  poi- 
sonous, and  yet  they  sport  with  it  as  though  it  were  a 
bird.     It  is  a  deadly  disease,  causing  the  soul  to  be  fall 
of  leprosy,  and  yet  men  will  exhibit  the  marks  of  it  as 
though   they   were  the    spots   of   God's    children.     But 
after  a  while,  when  the  conscience  is  awakened  by  judg- 
ments,   or    aroused    by    God's    word,    then    this    disease 
ceases  to  stupefy,  and  becomes  the  source  of  intolerable 
pain.     Read  these  words:  "For  thus  saith  the  Lord;  We 
have   heard  a   voice   of  trembling,   of  fear,  and  not  of 
peace.     Ask   ye   now,    and    see    whether   a    man    doth 
travail  with  child  ?  wherefore  do  I  see  every  man  with 
his  hands  on  his  loins,  as  a  woman  in  travail,  and  all 
faces  are  turned  into  paleness  ?  "     The  fiercest  form  of 
bodily  pain  is  here  selected  as  the  type  of  the  anguish 
caused  by  strong  conviction  of  sin.     Believe  me,  there 
can  be  nothing  in  the  world  so  terrible  as  to  feel  sin 
without  feeling  pardon;  to  know  yourself  to  be  guilty, 
and  not  to  know  how  to  get  the  guilt  removed.     Con- 
viction without  faith  is  an  earthly  hell.     Brethren,  you 


BLESSED   PROMISES  FOR   DYEVG    OUTCASTS.      359 

have  many  of  you  felt  it,  and  you  know  that  death 
itself,  if  there  were  no  hereafter,  would  be  preferable  to 
life  under  the  pressure  of  guilt,  "The  spirit  of  a  man 
will  sustain  his  infirmity;  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can 
bear?"  Sin  is  a  disease  of  the  spirit,  which  embitters 
the  central  fountain  and  well-spring  of  our  life,  till  gall 
and  wormwood  flavor  all  things.  Sin  felt  and  known 
is  a  terrible  kill-joy:  as  the  Simoom  of  the  desert  smites 
the  caravan  with  death,  and  as  the  Sirocco  withers 
every  herb  of  the  field,  so  does  a  sense  of  sin  dry  up 
peace,  blast  hope,  and  utterly  kill  delight,  If  those  who 
hear  me  are  oppressed  with  the  disorder  of  sin,  they  will 
rejoice  greatly  as  they  dwell  upon  the  words  of  our 
text,  "I  will  restore  health  unto  thee,  and  I  will  heal 
thee  of  thy  wounds." 

This  disease,  moreover,  is  not  only  exceedingly  pain- 
ful when  the  conscience  is  smarting,  but  it  is  altogether 
incurable,  so  fir  as  any  human  skill  is  concerned.  We 
are  told  in  the  twelfth  verse,  "Thus  saith  t\w  Lord,  Thy 
bruise  is  incurable,  and  thy  wound  is  grievous."  It 
would  be  much  easier  to  heal  a  man's  body  of  leprosy 
than  to  heal  a  man's  soul  of  sin.  It  is  a  disease  which 
takes  such  fast  hold  upon  the  nature,  and  so  entirely 
impregnates  the  mind  with  a  deadly  virus,  that  it  abides 
in  the  very  essence  of  manhood,  and  can  only  be  re- 
moved by  a  miracle.  It  is  far  more  possible  for  the 
Ethiopian  to  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots, 
than  for  a  man  who  is  accustomed  to  do  evil  to  learn  to 
do  well;  especially  to  love  to  do  well,  and  find  a 
pleasure  in  it.  If  this  were  a  matter  of  custom,  or  prac- 
tice only,  it  might  be  fought  with  and  overcome,  but 
inasmuch  as  it  is  a  matter  of  nature,  and  the  whole  head 
is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint  with  it,  no  human 
power  can  possibly  effect  a  cure.     Some  have  wept  over 


363     BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

sin,  but  tears  are  a  poor  lotion  for  a  disease  which  pene- 
trates to  the  core  of  the  heart.  Others  have  shut  them- 
selves up  alone,  and  retired  as  hermits  to  escape  from 
evil  by  solitude;  but  they  have  found  no  secret  place 
which  evil  could  not  enter.  Whither  shall  we  flee  from 
the  presence  of  sin  ?  When  it  has  once  laid  hold  upon 
our  nature,  if  we  take  the  wings  of  the  morning,  and 
fly  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  sea,  our  depravity  will 
still  be  with  us.  If  we  cover  ourselves  with  multiplied 
midnights,  sin  will  only  be  the  more  completely  in  its 
element.  Where  can  we  fly,  and  what  can  we  do,  to 
escape  from  this  terrible  force,  this  ever-present  mis- 
chief? This  poison  has  penetrated  all  our  nature,  so 
that  we  must  confess: — 

"  It  lies  not  in  a  single  part, 

But  through  my  frame  is  spread; 
A  burning  fever  in  my  heart, 
A  palsy  in  my  head." 

Neither  body,  soul,  nor  spirit  is  free  from  its  taint. 
At  all  hours  it  is  our  curse  and  plague;  over  all  places 
it  casts  its  defiling  influence;  in  all  duties  it  injures  and 
hinders  us.  To  those  who  know  this  there  is  a  music 
sweeter  than  marriage-bells  in  these  words, — "  I  will  re- 
store health  unto  thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds." 
The  incurable  shall  be  cured;  the  insatiable  malady  shall 
be  stayed. 

Further  on  we  are  told  that  this  disease  is  one  for 
which  there  is  neither  surgeon  nor  medicine: — "There 
is  none  to  plead  thy  cause,  that  thou  mayest  be  bound 
up:  thou  hast  no  healing  medicines.  Why  criest  thou 
for  thine  affliction  ?  thy  sorrow  is  incurable  for  the  mul- 
titude of  thine  iniquity:  because  thy  sins  were  increased, 
I  have  done  these  things  unto  thee."  What  a  disease 
this  must  be  for  which  there  is  no  physician,  since  the 


BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.      361 

direst  forms  of  human  disease  have  found  each  one  its 
specialist,  who  has  at  least  attempted  to  perform  a  cure; 
but  here  is  a  sickness  for  which  there  is  no  physician. 
Bad  men  do  not  pretend  to  heal  the  disease  of  sin;  they 
do  not  even  consider  it  to  be  a  disease,  and  they  care 
not  to  make  men  holy.  Good  men  are  very  far  from 
thinking  that  they  can  conquer  sin  in  others,  for  they 
cannot  even  overcome  it  in  themselves,  and  therefore 
they  never  set  up  to  be  physicians  in  such  a  case  as 
this.  No  human  hand  can  bind  up  this  wound:  no 
earthly  skill  can  touch  this  deeply-seated  complaint:  it 
is  past  all  mortal  surgery.  Yea,  and  the  prophet  adds, 
"There  is  no  healing  medicine":  none  has  ever  been 
known.  The  question  is  often  asked,  "  Is  there  no  balm 
in  Gilead?  Is  there  no  physician  there?"  The  answer 
to  that  question  is,  Xo,  there  is  no  balm  in  Gilead;  there 
never  was.  Balms  for  soul-mischiefs  do  not  grow  in  the 
fields  of  Gilead,  nay,  nor  on  Carmel  and  Sharon.  Phy- 
sicians of  sin-sick  souls  are  not  to  be  found  beneath  the 
skies:  the  other  question  proves  it, — "Why  then  is  not 
the  health  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  recovered  ?  " 
If  there  were  balms  and  physicians  for  her  disease  she 
would  have  been  healed  long  ago;  but  neither  salve  nor 
surgeon  can  be  found  among  the  sons  of  men.  Search 
through  all  the  lore  of  the  ancients,  and  you  shall  dis- 
cover no  remedy  for  sin ;  examine  all  the  inventions  of 
the  moderns,  and  you  shall  light  upon  no  physic  for  the 
love  of  evil.  Nothing  can  touch  it  save  one  thing,  and 
that  is  not  of  earth.  The  Lord  from  heaven,  upon  the 
cross,  did  bleed  a  balm  that  can  cure  this  wound,  and 
by  his  death  he  was  the  death  of  this  disease;  but  apart 
from  him  no  one  can  bind  up  our  wounds,  or  mollify 
them  with  ointment.  He  is  the  one  and  only  good  Sa- 
maritan for  the  spiritually  bruised:  he  alone  hath  wine 


362     BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

and  oil  suitable  for  our  wounds.  Are  my  hearers  brought 
to  feel  this  ?  Are  there  any  here  who  have  not  yet  found 
out  God's  way  of  salvation,  but  still  are  well  aware 
that  they  have  none  of  their  own?  I  am  thankful  you 
are  brought  so  far;  may  you  not  be  long  before  you  go 
much  further,  and  find  the  Lord  Jesus  able  to  heal  you 
of  every  disease.  You  are  for  ever  lost  unless  you  go 
to  him,  for  your  sickness  is  unto  death,  your  wound  is 
breeding  corruption,  and  none  can  give  you  health  for 
your  sickness,  or  healing  for  your  wound,  but  the  Lord 
Jesus,  who  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost. 

"When  wounded  sore  the  stricken  soul, 
Lies  bleeding  and  unbound, 
One  only  hand,  a  pierced  hand, 
Can  salve  the  sinner's  wound." 

This  disease  is  exceeding  dangerous,  because  it  insin- 
uates itself  into  the  heart,  and  takes  up  its  abode  there. 
If  apparently  it  be  for  a  time  driven  out,  it  returns  when 
we  least  expect  it.  Like  the  tree  which  is  cut  down,  it 
will  sprout  again;  at  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud.  It 
annoys  us  in  every  way;  it  hinders  our  aspirations,  for 
how  to  perform  that  which  we  would,  we  find  not;  it 
robs  us  of  comfort,  and  makes  us  groan,  being  burdened; 
it  enters  into  our  holiest  things,  chills  our  prayers, 
freezes  our  praise,  and  hampers  our  usefulness.  It  is 
evil,  only  evil,  and  that  continually.  How  gracious  is 
it  on  God's  part,  to  pity  a  creature  infected  with  this 
vile  distemper !  How  good  of  him  to  regard  our  iniquity 
rather  as  a  sickness  to  be  healed  than  as  a  crime  to  be 
punished  ! 

I  told  you  of  a  double  mischief  in  this  plight,  and  the 
second  mischief  is  that  this  person  has  been  wounded  for 
his  sin.  His  wounds  are  of  no  common  sort,  for  we  are 
told  in  the  fourteenth  verse  that  God  himself  has  wounded 


BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.      363 

him.  The  Lord  says,  "I  have  wounded  thee  with  the 
wound  of  an  enemy,  with  the  chastisement  of  a  cruel 
one,  for  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquity;  because  thy  sins 
were  increased."  God  in  infinite  mercy  determines  to 
make  the  sinner  see  and  feel  the  evil  consequences  of 
his  sin;  and  in  doing  this  he  makes  deep  wounds,  such 
as  an  enemy  would  give  who  felt  no  pity,  but  only 
wished  to  cause  pain.  The  Lord  knows  that  in  this 
work  slightness  is  of  no  avail,  and  therefore  he  strikes 
home,  and  cuts  deep.  He  does  not  play  with  consciences, 
but  his  chastisement  is  so  severe  that  men  think  him 
cruel.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  cruel  kindness,  and 
the  opposite  to  it  is  a  loving  cruelty,  a  gracious  severity. 
When  the  Lord  brings  sin  to  remembrance,  and  makes 
the  soul  to  see  what  an  evil  it  has  committed  in  trans- 
gressing against  God,  then  the  wound  bleeds,  and  the 
heart  breaks.  You  could  not  tell  the  blows  of  our  great- 
est Friend  from  those  of  our  worst  enemy  if  you  only 
judged  by  present  feeling.  Under  the  Lord's  hand 
the  soul  is  well-nigh  driven  to  despair.  Vain  hopes  are 
dashed  in  pieces  like  potsherds,  false  lights  are  quenched 
in  gloom,  and  joys  are  ground  to  powder.  It  is  in  love 
that  the  Lord  thus  judges  us,  and  chastens  us  that  we 
should  not  be  condemned  with  the  world.  The  smart 
is  sharp,  but  salutary.  The  Lord  wounds  that  he  may 
heal,  he  kills  that  he  may  make  alive.  His  storms  wreck 
us  upon  the  rock  of  salvation,  and  his  tempests  drive  us 
into  the  fair  havens  of  lowly  faith.  Happy  are  the 
men  who  are  thus  made  unhappy;  but  this  for  the  pres- 
ent they  know  not,  and  therefore  they  need  the  promise, 
"1  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds,  saith  the  Lord." 

The  blows  are  not  only  on  the  conscience,  but  when 
God  is  in  earnest  to  make  men  flee  from  their  sins,  he 
will  smite  them  anywhere  and  everywhere.     He  takes 


364     BLESSED   PROMISES  FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

away  the  delight  of  their  eyes  with  a  stroke ;  the  child, 
the  husband,  the  wife,  or  the  friend  is  laid  low;  for  the 
Lord  will  fill  our  houses  with  mourning  sooner  than  leave 
us  in  carnal  security.  He  takes  away  the  silver  and  the 
gold,  for  he  will  make  us  beggars  sooner  than  leave  us 
to  worship  the  idols  of  the  world.  The  oil  vat  is  burst, 
and  the  barn  is  burned;  for  he  will  not  permit  us  to 
bury  our  souls  in  earthly  things.  He  brings  the  body 
into  sickness,  and  the  mind  into  distress;  health  departs, 
and  the  robust  worker  is  stretched  upon  a  sick  bed ;  he 
groans  and  moans  under  the  hand  of  God.  God  is  in 
all  this  smiting  most  cruelly,  according  to  the  short- 
sighted judgment  of  men;  but  in  very  truth  he  is  tender 
and  gracious,  and  is  working  out  the  eternal  good  of 
the  sufferers.  Like  as  the  surgeon  uses  a  sharp  knife, 
and  cuts  far  down  into  the  flesh  when  he  would  eradi- 
cate some  deadly  ulcer,  even  so  does  the  Lord  in  true 
severity  wound  the  heart  until  he  gets  at  the  roots  of 
our  self-love. 

Surely,  a  man  is  in  a  wretched  plight  when  he  is 
diseased  with  sin,  and  then  bruised  by  divine  chastise- 
ment, but,  it  may  be,  he  adds  to  this  wounds  inflicted 
by  himself,  for  falls  into  sin  are  falls  that  break  the  bones. 
Many  a  man  will  have  to  go  limping  to  his  grave  be- 
cause of  his  transgressions.  Doubtless  David  did  so;  he 
never  recovered  what  he  lost  when  he  sinned  with  Bath- 
sheba.  Much  pain  comes  of  broken  bones,  especially 
when  you  have  broken  them  yourself,  through  your 
own  folly.  When  you  cannot  trace  an  affliction  to 
second  causes,  nor  look  upon  it  as  an  affliction  from 
God,  but  when  you  hear  conscience  whisper,  "Thou 
hast  procured  this  unto  thyself,"  then  the  wormwood  is 
mixed  with  gall,  and  the  suffering  knows  no  solace. 
If  thou  be  poor  because  thou  hast  squandered  thy  sub- 


BLESSED    PROMISES    FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.      365 

stance;  if  thou  be  sick  because  thou  hast  indulged  thine 
appetites  or  passions,  who  can  say  thee  a  word  of  cheer? 
If  thou  hast  lost  godly  friends  whom  thou  didst  once 
despise,  if  thou  art  by  sore  sickness  prevented  from 
going  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  which  was  formerly 
a  weariness  to  thee,  is  there  not  a  special  sharpness  in 
thy  grief? 

Now,  put  these  three  things  together — bones  broken 
through  thine  own  sin,  God  dealing  with  thee  in  the 
way  of  chastisement,  and  sin  felt  in  the  conscience  like 
a  grievous  disease;  and  I  think  I  said  not  too  much 
when  I  described  the  soul  as  in  a  serious  plight.  God 
help  the  man  who  is  in  such  a  case,  for  none  else  can. 
The  comfort  is  that  the  Lord  Jesus  does  help  such,  for 
so  his  gracious  promise  runs,  "  I  will  restore  health  unto 
thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds."  May  the 
Holy  Spirit  bless  this  first  head  to  many  of  you  ! 

II.  Our  second  consideration  fitly  falls  under  the  title  of 
A  special  interference.  The  poor  creature  is  in  desperate 
dolor;  but  the  God  of  pitying  love  comes  in,  and  I  beg 
you  to  notice  the  result. 

This  interference  is,  first  of  all,  divine.  "  /  will  re- 
store health  unto  thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy 
wounds."  The  infinite  Jehovah  alone  can  speak  with 
that  grand  Ego,  and  say,  "I  will,"  and  again,  "I  will.'' 
No  human  physician  who  was  worthy  of  the  name  would 
speak  thus.  He  would  humbly  say,  "  I  will  attempt  to 
give  you  health;  I  will  endeavor  to  heal  your  wounds;" 
but  the  Lord  speaks  with  the  positiveness  of  omnipotence, 
for  he  has  the  power  to  make  good  his  words.  All  others 
fail;  but  the  Lord  will  do  it.  Thou  canst  not  heal  thy- 
self; but  the  Lord  will  heal  thee.  And  who  is  this 
great  "I"  that  speaks  so  exceeding  boldly?  It  is 
none  other  than   he   that   made   the    heavens   and   the 


366     BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

earth,  and  sustaineth  all  things  by  the  power  of  his 
hand;  it  is  the  "I  am,"  the  everlasting  Jehovah,  whose 
word  has  boundless  power  in  it.  He  appears  in  the 
moment  of  man's  extremity,  and  when  there  is  no 
helper,  his  own  arm  brings  salvation.  Blessed  be  the 
Lord  who  forgiveth  all  our  iniquities,  who  healeth  all 
our  diseases. 

Note,  that  since  this  interference  is  divine  it  is  effectual. 
The  Lord  effectually  heals  all  those  on  whom  he  lays  his 
hand.  How  could  it  be  otherwise  ?  What  can  baffle 
the  Lord?  Can  anything  perplex  infinite  wisdom?  Is 
anything  difficult  to  almighty  power ?  "If  it  be  mar- 
vellous in  thine  eyes,  should  it  also  be  marvellous  in 
mine  eyes?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  He  speaks,  and  it 
is  done;  he  commands,  and  it  stands  fast.  When  there- 
fore God  says,  "  I  will  restore  health  unto  thee,"  health 
will  visit  the  wretch  who  lies  pining  at  death's  door. 
When  he  says,  "  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds,"  the 
deep  cuts  and  gashes  are  closed  up  at  once.  Glory  be 
to  the  name  of  the  Beloved  Physician!  Poor,  troubled 
heart,  where  are  you  this  morning?  Do  you  say,  "No- 
body can  cure  me?"  Thou  sayest  truly  if  thou  wilt 
make  one  exception,  and  that  exception  is  thy  God.  I 
tell  thee  he  can  heal  thee  now,  so  that  the  bones  which 
he  has  broken  shall  rejoice.  He  can  take  away  this 
disease  of  yours,  and  give  you  back  wholeness  as  though 
your  flesh  were  the  flesh  of  a  little  child,  and  you  shall  be 
clean ;  only  have  faith  in  him.  He  that  made  you  can 
make  you  anew.     Do  you  believe  this? 

Observe  that  this  interposition  performs  a  work  which 
is  most  complete,  for  it  meets  the  two-fold  mischief.  "  I 
will  restore  health  unto  thee:" — That  is  a  great  matter. 
When  a  man  grows  healthy  he  can  bear  a  wound  or 
two   without  being  too   much   overburdened;   but  God 


BLESSED   PROMISES  FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.      367 

does  nothing  by  halves,  for  having  restored  health  he 
then  adds  "  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds."  He  will 
heal  both  disease  and  wound.  There  is  no  condition 
into  which  the  heart  can  sink  but  what  the  Lord  is 
equal  to  the  raising  of  it  from  the  depths.  If  thou  art 
in  the  borders  of  Hades,  and  on  the  verge  of  hell,  yet  as 
long  as  thou  hast  not  passed  the  iron  gates  of  death  thy 
salvation  is  possible  with  God,  ay,  simple  and  sure  with 
God  if  thou  wilt  but  trust  in  his  well-beloved  Son. 
What  a  mercy  it  is  that  the  Redeemer  does  not  half 
save  us,  and  leave  us  to  finish  the  work !  He  does  not 
commence  and  do  a  part  of  the  cure,  and  then  say,  "  I 
must  leave  nature  to  work  out  the  rest."  No;  the  cure 
is  absolutely  complete:  "  I  will  restore  health  unto  thee, 
and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds."  Oh,  sick  and 
wounded  one,  go  just  as  thou  art.  and  throw  thyself  at 
Jesus'  feet,  and  say  unto  him,  "Keep  thy  promise,  Lord: 
I  am  come  with  thy  word  in  my  mouth  and  in  my  heart; 
be  as  good  as  thine  own  declaration,  and  restore  health  to 
me,  and  heal  me  of  my  wounds." 

Notice,  too,  how  sovereignly/Vee  this  promise  is.     It 

does  not  say,  "I  will  restore  health  unto  thee  if ." 

No,  there  is  no  "if;"  and  there  is  no  mention  of  a  fee. 
Here  is  healing  for  nothing.  Jesus  comes  to  give  us 
health  without  money  and  without  price,  without,  pence 
or  penance,  without  labor  or  merit.  1  admire  for  my 
part  the  splendid,  unconditional  character  of  this  prom- 
ise made  by  Jehovah  to  his  covenant  people.  Its  tenor 
is,  "  I  will."  There  is  no  sort  of  condition  or  demand. 
"Perhaps"  is  banished:  "peradventure  "  is  not  so  much 
as  hinted  at.  Come,  poor  guilty  soul,  thou  who  hast 
no  claim  on  God,  come  and  plead  the  divine  "I  will." 
Thou  canst  not  have  a  better  hand-hold  of  the  cove- 
nant angel  in  wrestling  with  him.     God's  promise  is  an 


3G8     BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

unconquerable  plea:  to  use  it  well  will  put  thee  among 
the  invincibles.  Come  then,  I  pray  thee,  and  just  say, 
"Lord,  it  is  so  written  in  thy  word;  therefore,  write  it, 
I  pray  thee,  on  the  page  of  my  experience." 

Notice  that,  although  it  be  thus  free  and  unconditional, 
yet  it  is  now  a  matter  of  covenant  certainty,  for  God  has 
made  the  promise,  and  he  cannot  turn  from  it.  To  every 
guilty  sinner,  conscious  of  his  guilt,  who  will  come  and 
confess  it  before  God,  this  promise  is  made  to-day,  "  I 
will  restore  health  unto  thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy 
wounds."  To  you,  dear  fellow-sinners,  as  much  as  unto 
Judah  and  Israel  of  old,  is  this  promise  sent:  if  you  will 
bring  your  sorrow  and  your  sin  before  the  eye  of  the 
all-merciful  Father,  and  plead  the  precious  blood  of  Christ. 
No  sick  one  shall  be  shut  out  from  this  hospital  of  love. 
If,  like  Job,  the  sinner  is  covered  with  sores  from  head 
to  foot;  and  if  he  only  feels  at  home  when  he  sits  on  a 
dunghill,  and  begins  to  scrape  himself  with  a  potsherd, 
yet  the  Lord  says,  "  I  will  heal  thee."  If  thy  sin  has 
made  thee  loathsome  to  thyself,  till  thou  criest  out  with 
one  of  old,  "  My  wounds  stink  and  are  corrupt,"  still  is 
the  Lord  Jesus  able  to  save  thee;  nay,  he  promises  to 
save  thee.  Grasp  thou  the  promise  by  the  hand  of  faith, 
and  thou  shalt  be  made  whole.  All  manner  of  sin  and 
of  iniquity  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men ;  ay,  and  all  ten- 
dencies to  sin,  and  all  taint  of  iniquity,  shall  be  removed 
from  men  if  they  will  trust  the  power  and  promise  of 
the  faithful  Lord.  Sinner,  his  touch  can  make  thee  clean 
at  once.  Trust  thou  that  hand,  I  say,  and  the  miracle 
shall  be  wrought. 

III.  But  now  I  come  to  a  third  point,  which  is  this — 
a  singular  reason.  "  I  will  restore  health  unto  thee,  and 
I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds,  saith  the  Lord;  because 
they  called  thee  an  Outcast,  saying,  This  is  Zion,  -whom  no 


BLESSED   TROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.      369 

man  seeJceth  after."  God  never  finds  a  reason  for  mercy 
in  the  sinner's  supposed  goodness.  He  looked  upon  this 
sick  one,  and  he  could  not  find  a  redeeming  feature  of 
beauty  by  which  the  blessing  might  be  won ;  therefore, 
he  did  not  look  at  the  sinner  at  all,  except  to  pity  him. 
Is  it  not  a  singular  thing  that  the  Lord  will  sooner  find 
a  reason  for  mercy  in  the  lying  mouths  of  the  wicked  than 
he  will  attempt  to  find  it  in  the  supposed  righteousness 
of  those  who  count  themselves  righteous?  He  says  not 
"  Because  you  were  holy  "  or  "  Because  you  had  good 
desires;"  but  "Because  they  called  thee  an  outcast/'  Who 
were  they  ?  Why,  the  jeerers,  and  mockers,  and  blas- 
phemers: the  Lord  actually  transforms  the  venom  of 
asps,  which  was  under  the  tongues  of  the  malicious,  into 
a  reason  for  his  mercy.  This  clearly  shows  how  God 
hates  the  very  notion  of  man's  merit;  but  it  also  shows 
that  he  will  find  a  reason  for  mercy  somewhere.  They 
called  poor  Zion,  when  God  seemed  to  have  given  her 
up,  "an  outcast;"  they  said,  "Nobody  goes  to  Jerusalem 
now:  there  was  a  temple  there  once,  but  it  is  a  wretched 
heap  now:  princes  dwelt  there  once,  but  now  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Jerusalem  are  a  set  of  beggars;  no  man  cares 
to  mix  with  them  ;  they  are  the  world's  castaways."  This 
roused  the  Lord's  pity.  "Oh,"  he  said,  "has  it  come  to 
this?  Have  they  dared  to  call  my  beloved  'an  outcast,' 
and  say  that  no  man  seeketh  after  her?  Then  I  will 
seek  her,  and  heal  her,  and  restore  her,  for  I  cannot  en- 
dure such  tauntings."  Xow,  if  there  is  a  poor  sinner  in 
the  world,  upon  whom  other  sinners,  who  are  just  as  bad 
in  their  heart,  begin  to  vent  their  scorn,  and  say,  "She 
is  an  outcast;"  then  the  God  of  mercy  seems  to  say,  "  Who 
are  you  that  you  should  talk  like  this?  You  are  as  vile 
yourselves,  and  yet  you  dare  to  look  down  upon  this 
poor,  selected  one,  as  if  she  were  so  much  worse  than 


370     BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

you.  Therefore,  I  will  save  that  despised  one,  and  will 
have  mercy  upon  the  rejected."  God's  tastes  and  man's 
differ  very  much.  Whom  man  despises  God  delights 
in;  and  whom  man  delights  in  God  despises.  It  often 
happens  that  when  a  transgressor  has  been  put  out  of 
the  synagogue  Jesus  finds  him  directly.  When  certain 
offenders  happen  to  transgress  in  a  particular  way,  which 
particular  way  is  scouted  and  denounced  by  the  bulk  of 
ungodly  people,  then  like  so  many  hounds  they  unite  to 
hunt  the  wretched  being  to  death,  but  the  Lord  Jehovah 
interposes  to  save;  as  if  he  would  say,  "Why  do  you 
this,  ye  hypocrites?  Wherefore  do  ye  denounce  those 
whose  sins  are  no  viler  than  your  own?"  I  believe  the 
Lord  Jesus  often  stands  as  he  did  with  the  woman  taken 
in  adultery,  and  cries,  "  He  that  is  without  sin  among 
you,  let  him  first  cast  a  stone  at  her."  Still  he  convicts 
men  in  their  consciences,  and  still  in  sweetness  of  mercy 
turns  to  the  poor,  condemned  one,  and  says,  "  Xeither 
do  I  condemn  thee;  go,  and  sin  no  more."  Where  are 
you,  poor  hunted  sinner?  You  are  somewhere  or  other 
in  the  crowd,  I  know.  They  told  you  yesterday  that 
they  would  never  associate  with  you  any  more.  You 
do  not  deny  your  wickedness:  still,  it  is  not  for  your 
fellow-sinners  to  be  hard  with  you,  for  they  are  not  your 
judges.  By  faith  take  this  promise  to  thyself:  "I  will 
restore  health  unto  thee,  because  they  called  thee  an 
outcast."  Thou  mayest  get  a  good  deal  out  of  it  if  thou 
hast  but  f'lith  to  do  so.  Now  that  the  world  has  cast 
thee  out,  t be  church  shall  take  thee  in:  now  that  the 
devil  seems  tired  of  thee,  Christ  shall  begin  with  thee: 
now  that  the  door  is  shut  against  thee  by  those  who 
once  delighted  in  thee,  Christ's  door  is  open  to  receive 
thee.  "Because  they  called  thee  an  outcast"  lie  calls 
thee  to  approach  him. 


BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.     371 

But  this  is  not  the  full  meaning*  of  the  text.  I  think 
it  means  that  GocTs  jealousy  is  aroused  against  those  who 
despise  his  people,  and  speak  ill  of  them.  Whatever  Zion 
might  be,  it  was  still  the  palace  of  God:  however  guilty 
Jerusalem  might  have  become,  it  was  still  the  holy  city, 
the  dwelliug-place  of  the  great  King.  The  Lord,  for  a 
while,  when  he  was  very  angry  with  Jerusalem,  on  ac- 
count of  its  great  iniquity]  gave  it  over  to  the  destroyer, 
and  it  was  laid  waste  and  burned  with  fire;  but  when 
he  heard  the  heathen  everywhere  saying,  "  As  for  those 
people,  they  are  outcasts,  and  as  for  that  city,  no  man 
seeks  after  it:"  then  the  Lord  said  to  himself,  "But  they 
are  my  people,  and  I  will  not  have  them  called  outcasts; 
and  this  is  my  city,  and  I  will  not  have  it  said  that  no 
man  seeks  after  it.  Her  name  shall  be  called  Hephzi- 
bah,  and  her  land  Beulah,  for  the  Lord  delighteth  in 
her."  His  love  burned  like  fire,  and  kindled  into  a  flame 
of  jealousy,  and  he  said,  "I  will  restore  health  to  her, 
and  shut  the  mouths  of  her  adversaries."  It  is  one 
thing  for  a  father  to  chasten  his  boy;  but  if,  when  he  is 
out  in  the  streets,  a  stranger  begins  to  kick  him,  his  fa- 
ther declares  that  it  shall  not  be.  He  arouses  himself 
to  defend  his  child,  the  same  child  that  just  now  he 
smote  so  heavily.  A  man  might  complain  of  his  wife 
if  she  had  vexed  him,  but  1  suppose  the  quickest  way  to 
put  him  in  good  temper  with  her  would  be  for  somebody 
else  to  find  fault  with  her.  "  What  business  is  that  of 
yours?"  says  he;  "I  will  not  have  my  wife  abused:  no 
man  shall  speak  against  her  in  my  presence."  That  is 
a  fair  parallel  to  the  case  of  our  God.  He  will  chasten 
his  people  in  measure,  but  the  moment  that  their  enemies 
call  them  outcasts  he  turns  his  anger  another  way  and 
releases  his  people.  Oh,  how  blessedly  does  good  come 
put  of  evil!     How  graciously  he  causes  the  wrath  of  man. 


372     BLESSED   PROMISES  FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

to  praise  him.  He  restores  health  to  Zion,  and  heals 
her  wounds  because  she  is  called  an  outcast. 

I  always  have  great  hope  for  the  entire  Church  of 
Christ  when  the  ungodly  begin  to  rail  and  revile.  They 
say,  ''Christianity  has  lost  its  power;  the  Church  is  an 
old  effete  institution;  no  people  of  culture  and  intelli- 
gence keep  to  the  old  book  and  the  old  faith.  The 
religion  of  Jesus  is  a  by-word  and  a  proverb  among 
learned  men."  Therefore,  I  am  confident  that  God  will 
return  to  his  Church,  and  magnify  his  truth.  As  surely 
as  he  lives  he  will  give  us  bright  days  and  glorious  days, 
because  they  call  his  true  Church  an  outcast,  whom  no 
man  seeketh  after.  I  like  to  read  in  man's  black  book, 
for  man's  revilings  will  lead  to  the  speedier  fulfilment 
of  God's  glorious  promises. 

"Let  Zion's  foes  be  fill'd  with  shame; 
Her  sons  are  bless' d  of  God; 
Though  scoffers  now  despise  their  name, 
The  Lord  shall  break  their  rod. 

"Oh,  would  our  God  to  Zion  turn, 
God  with  salvation  clad; 
Then  Judah's  harps  should  music  learn, 
And  Israel  be  glad." 

Appropriate  the  text  personally  any  of  you  who  have 
been  made  to  feel  that  you  are  outcasts.  One  said  to 
me  the  other  day,  talking  of  her  sin,  and  of  her  repent- 
ance, "Yet,  sir,  I  am  an  outcast."  That  word  pierced 
my  heart  like  a  dagger.  I  said,  "  Yes,  but  the  Church 
of  Christ  was  made  on  purpose  to  be  a  home  for  out- 
casts: here  is  a  new  household  for  you,  new  brothers 
and  sisters  for  you,  a  new  future  for  you;  for  now  you 
are  one  of  the  solitary  ones  whom  the  Lord  will  set  in 
families." 


BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.      373 

Some  of  us  were  never  called  outcasts  by  other  peo- 
ple, but  we  thought  ourselves  such.  I  once  felt  like 
Cain,  as  if  God  had  set  a  mark  upon  me  never  to  bless 
me;  like  an  outlaw,  condemned,  and  cast  away;  but 
when  I  reached  that  point  the  Lord's  mercy  revealed 
itself  to  me.  He  seemed  to  say,  "  Because  thou  hast 
called  thyself  an  outcast,  therefore  will  I  restore  health 
unto  thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds." 

I  should  like  to  say  a  word  that  would  be  comforting 
to  poor  hearts  that  are  greatly  down-trodden.  I  do  not 
feel  able  to  preach  at  all,  for  I  am  weak  and  weary;  but 
T  always  find  when  I  am  weak  the  Lord  says  somewhat 
by  me  which  is  just  the  thing  wanted  by  some  poor 
devil-hunted  soul  that  cannot  find  rest.  I  think  the 
Lord  puts  the  trumpet  out  of  order  on  purpose  to  draw 
from  it  a  different  note  from  what  it  gives  when  it  is  in 
proper  condition, — a  note  that  may  precisely  suit  some 
weary  ear  that  could  not  hearken  to  any  other  sound. 
May  the  Holy  Spirit  cause  it  to  be  so  now. 

IV.  I  am  going  to  finish  in  the  fourth  place,  by 
giving  a  little  suitable  advice.  I  will  suppose  that  I 
have  those  before  me  who  have  felt  their  disease  and 
their  wound,  and  have  been  healed  by  the  God  of  mercy. 
I  would  recommend  them  to  attend  to  certain  matters. 
The  first  thing  is,  take  care  that  you  live  very  near  your 
Physician.  I  notice  that  patients  come  up  from  the 
country  when  they  are  suffering  with  serious  complaints, 
and  they  take  lodgings  near  a  medical  man  who  is  in 
high  esteem  for  such  cases  as  theirs.  They  leave  the 
comforts  of  home,  and  let  their  business  go,  because  life 
is  precious,  and  they  need  a  helper  close  at  hand.  No 
one  blames  them  for  this;  in  fact  we  count  them  wise; 
let  us  learn  wisdom  from  their  example.  Now,  the 
Lord  has  healed  your  wound,  and  restored  health  to  you, 


374     BLESSED   PROMISES  FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS. 

therefore  abide  in  him;  never  leave  him,  nor  live  far 
away  from  him,  for  this  old  disease  of  yours  may  break 
out  on  a  sudden,  and  it  will  be  well  to  have  the  Healer 
close  at  hand.  It  will  be  best  to  entertain  him  constantly 
beneath  your  roof,  and  within  your  heart;  for  his  pres- 
ence is  the  wellspring  of  health  to  the  soul.  Abide  per- 
petually with  Christ,  and  then  the  sun  shall  not  smite 
you  by  day,  nor  the  moon  by  night:  dwelling  in  the 
secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  there  shall  no  evil  befall 
you,  neither  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  your  dwelling. 
This  disease  of  sin  may  cause  eruptions  when  we  least 
expect  it;  when  we  suppose  that  the  evil  leaven  will 
work  no  more  it  may  suddenly  gather  force,  and  the 
whole  body  of  our  nature  will  be  in  a  ferment  with  in- 
iquity. The  danger  is  near,  abide  therefore  near  your 
security.  Live  with  him  who  renews  your  youth  like 
the  eagle's,  and  restores  your  souls. 

I  recommend  you  often  to  put  yourself  under  his  search- 
ing examination.  Go  to  this  great  Physician,  and  ask 
him  to  look  into  your  hidden  parts,  to  search  you,  and 
try  you,  and  see  what  wicked  way  may  be  in  you,  that 
he  may  lead  you  in  the  way  everlasting.  A  man  may 
have  a  deadly  disease  upon  fcim  and  scarcely  be  aware 
of  it,  because  no  skilled  person  has  looked  upon  him,  and 
observed  his  symptoms:  and  in  spiritual  things  this  is  a 
common  mischief,  to  which  multitudes  fall  a  prey.  In- 
vite, therefore,  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  for  in  our 
most  honest  searches  we  miss  much,  and  we  are  natur- 
ally prejudiced  in  our  own  favor,  so  that  we  are  pretty 
sure  to  give  a  verdict  on  our  own  side;  and  this  may 
lead  to  final  and  fatal  self-delusion.  If  we  intrust  the 
search  to  him  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire  we  shall 
pot  be  deceived. 

J  recommend  vqu  from,  personal  experience  to  cm,V(Jt 


BLESSED   PROMISES   FOR    DYING    OUTCASTS.      375 

with  tltis  Doctor  every  day.  It  is  a  wise  thing  before  you 
go  downstairs  into  the  world's  tainted  atmosphere  to 
take  a  draught  of  his  Elixir  Vitce  in  the  form  of  renewed 
faith  in  him.  I  am  sure  at  night  it  is  an  admirable 
thing  to  purge  the  soul  of  all  the  perilous  stuff  which 
has  accumulated  through  the  day  by  full  confession  and 
renewed  confidence. 

Lay  bare  your  case  he/ore  him:  conceal  nothing;  beg 
of  him  to  deal  with  you  according  to  his  knowledge  of 
your  case.  Make  a  clean  breast  that  Christ  may  make 
a  sure  cure.  Conceal  no  symptom  however  threaten- 
ing, but  tell  him  all  the  truth.  He  cannot  be  deceived; 
do  not  attempt  it,  but  unbosom  every  secret  thing  be- 
fore his  all-surveying  gaze.  Entreat  him  to  search  both 
thoughts  and  affections,  designs  and  motives.  The  ill 
may  gather  in  secret  places  unless  his  discerning  eye 
shall  detect  the  growing  danger,  and  prevent  it  by  im- 
mediate action. 

Then  I  should  very  strongly  recommend  you  always 
to  obey  the  jirescriptions  of  the  great  Healer.  "  Whatsoever 
he  saith  unto  you,  do  it,"  Do  not  follow  a  part  of  his 
orders,  and  neglect  the  rest.  The  Lord  Jesus  must  be 
received  as  a  whole,  or  not  at  all.  Say  not  "  This  is  non- 
essential;" for  such  a  speech  is  flat  rebellion.  I  do  not 
believe  in  any  words  of  our  Lord  being  non-essential. 
They  may  not  be  essential  to  our  salvation,  but  every 
word  of  Christ  is  essential  to  our  spiritual  health  ;  neither 
can  we  disregard  the  least  of  his  precepts  without  suffer- 
ing loss  through  our  disobedience.  Be  very  careful  that 
you  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth ;  no  other  kind 
of  walking  is  safe  in  such  a  world  as  this.  Do  what  he 
bids  you,  as  he  bids  you,  and  it  shall  be  well  with  you. 

Take  care  also  to  exercise  great  confidence  in  this  Physi- 
cian,   Rely  upon  him  without  stint  or  question.     Your 


376     BLESSED    PROMISES   FOR   DYIXG    OUTCASTS. 

cure  is  working  wondrously  when  you  trnat  in  Jesus 
heartily.  Never  doubt  the  Saviour's  power  to  make 
you  perfectly  whole.  Our  Lord  never  can  be  baffled ; 
though  all  diseases  should  meet  in  one  person  he  would 
overcome  them  all.  Stick  to  this  with  unyielding  as- 
surance. Let  not  the  devil  force  you  to  doubt  the 
boundless  power  of  your  Lord.  When  our  Lord  Jesus 
set  up  to  be  a  Saviour,  he  understood  the  work  upon 
which  he  entered.  His  is  no  'prenticed  hand.  He  has 
never  had  a  failure  yet.  Never  did  a  soul  trust  him  for 
salvation  and  remain  unsaved;  and  you  shall  not  be  the 
first  to  defeat  his  skill.  Trust  him  with  all  your  heart. 
There  is  no  cause  to  doubt,  Distrust  is  what  you  have 
to  fear;  faith  is  your  strength. 

When  you  are  healed,  as  I  trust  you  are  already, 
speak  well  of  your  Benefactor.  Make  a  point  of  going 
round  to  your  neighbors,  if  you  find  them  sick,  and  tell- 
ing them  how  you  have  been  healed;  thus  will  you 
make  to  your  Lord  a  name  of  honor  and  renown.  Tell 
out  among  all  men  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  you.  I 
know  you  can  tell  them  that  story  though  you  are  nO 
orator.  When  you  were  restored  from  sickness  the 
other  day,  you  were  quite  able  to  inform  your  friends 
as  to  that  new  medicine  which  acted  like  a  charm,  and 
you  found  a  tongue  to  speak  well  of  your  doctor;  and  I 
am.  sure  you  have  ability  enough  to  declare  the  wonder- 
ful works  of  the  Lord  in  your  case.  "  Oh,  but  T  could 
not  embellish  the  tale  !  "  Do  not  attempt  to  embellish 
it;  for  that  would  only  spoil  it.  Tell  the  story  as  simply 
as  possible.  I  think  it  is  of  Mr.  Cecil  that  I  have  read  the 
following  incident,  A  friend  came  from  some  distance 
to  inform  him  of  a  medicine  which  was  to  relieve  him 
of  his  disorder.  This  friend  told  him  all  about  it,  and 
having  done  so,   entered   into   conversation   upon   the 


BLESSED   PROMISES  FOR   DYING    OUTCASTS.     377 

current  matters  of  the  day.  The  result  was  that  Mr. 
Cecil  was  greatly  interested  in  the  talk,  and  when  his 
friend  was  gone,  he  quite  forgot  every  ingredient  of 
the  wonderful  medicine.  Beware  of  allowing  the  many 
things  to  drive  the  one  thing  needful  out  of  your  friend's 
mind.  When  we  preach  fine  sermons  our  hearers  say, 
"That  was  prettily  put."  They  do  not  so  much  notice 
what  we  taught  as  how  we  taught  it;  and  this  is  a  great 
evil.  Even  so  if  you  go  and  talk  about  your  salvation 
to  your  neighbor,  and  narrate  it  eloquently,  she  will  say, 
'Mrs.  So-and-so  has  been  here,  and  told  me  about  her 
conversion  in  such  beautiful  language;  I  do  not  know 
that  I  ever  heard  such  elegant  sentences;  it  was  most 
delightful  to  hear  her."  What  did  she  say  ?  "  I  do 
not  know  what  she  said,  but  it  was  very  beautiful." 
Thus  many  a  sermon  or  Sunday-school  address  is  over- 
laid and  buried  under  its  own  robes.  Pity  that  those 
we  seek  to  bless  should  be  more  taken  up  with  our 
pretty  words  than  with  our  adorable  Master.  I  hope  I 
have  not  this  morning  fallen  into  the  evil  which  I  la- 
ment. Lest  I  should  have  done  so  in  any  measure  I 
would  make  my  text  my  banner,  and  display  it  again 
The  Lord  has  said,  "  I  will  restore  health  unto  thee. 
and  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds."  I  believed  that  word 
when  I  was  sick  and  wounded,  and  "  the  Lord  was 
ready  to  save  me:  therefore  we  will  sing  my  songs  to 
the  stringed  instruments  all  the  days  of  our  life  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord." 


530  Broadway,  New  York, 
March,  1884. 


ROBERT  CARTER  AND  BROTHERS' 
NEW    BOOKS. 


HANDS  FULL  OF  HONEY,  and  other  Sermons,  preached 
in  1883,  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon.     i2mo.     $1.00. 

THE  PRESENT  TRUTH.     New  Sermons  by  C.  H.  Spur- 
geon.    i2mo.     £1.00. 


Sermons.     10  vols.     i2mo  .     .  $10.00 

Any  ■volume  sold  separately  at%\.oo. 

Morning  by  Morning,     nmo  1.00 

Evening  by  Evening.     121110  .  1.00 

Types  and  Emblems.    i2mo  .  1.00 

Saint  and  Saviour.     i2mo    .  1.00 

Feathers  for  Arrows.    12010  1.00 

Lectures  to  Students.  12 mo  1.00 

Spurgeon's  Gems,     nmo    .     .  1.00 


Commenting  and  Commenta- 
ries.    i2mo $1.00 

John  Ploughman's  Talk  .     .       .75 

John   Ploughman's  Pictures. 

i6mo 75 

John  Ploughman's  Talk  and 

Pictures     121110 1.00 

Gleanings  among  the  Sheaves. 

iSmo 60 


THE    LIFE    AND     WORKS     OF     THOMAS     GUTH- 
RIE,  D.D.     New,  neat,  and  very  cheap  edition.     11  vols.     $10.00. 
Or,  separately,  as  follows  :  — 


Guthrie's    Autobiography 

and  Life.  2  vols.  i2mo  .  $2.00 
The  Gospel  in  Ezekiel.  121110  1.00 
The  Saint's  Inheritance  .  .  1.00 
The  Way  to  Life.  i2mo.  .  1.00 
On  the  Parables.  Illustrated.  1.00 
The  City  and  Ragged  Schools.  1.00 


Man   and    the    Gospel,   and 
Our    Father's   Business. 
In  1  vol.     i2mo      ....  $1.00 
Speaking  to  the  Heart.  i2mo    1.00 
Out  of  Harness.     i2mo    .     .     1.00 
Studies  of  Character,    nmo     1.00 


CARTERS'  RECENT  BOOKS. 


WORKS  OF  THE  REV.  T.  L.  CUYLER,  D.D. 

The  Empty  Crib.     241110.,  gilt  .  $1.00 
Stray  Arrows.     iSmo    ...       .60 
Cedar  Christian      i8mo     .     .       .75 
Thought    Hives.      With    Por- 
trait.    i2mo 1.  co 


Pointed  Papers,  nmo  .  .  $1.50 
From  the  Nile  to  Norway. 

i2mo L50 

God's  Light  on  Dark  Clouds. 

iSmo 75 


*A.  L.  O.  E.  LIBRARY.  New  and  very  beautiful  edition. 
Complete  in  50  volumes.  i6mo,  crimson  cloth.  Put  up  in  a  neat 
wooden  case.     Net,  $28.00. 

The  volumes  are  sold  separately  at  So  cents  each. 

*  OLIVE  LIBRARY.  40  large  i6mo  volumes,  containing 
i5jj4°  pages,  in  a  neat  wooden  case.  Net  (no  discount  to  S.  S.  Libra- 
ries), $25.00. 

INFORMATION  AND  ILLUSTRATION  for  Sermons 
and  Addresses.     By  G.  S.  Bowes,     nmo.     Si. 50. 

THE  PUBLIC  MINISTRY  AND  PASTORAL  METH- 
ODS OF  OUR  LORD.    By  W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.    Si. 50. 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  CHRISTIANITY.     By  Prof.  George 

S.  Morris.     121110.    Si. 75. 

HOW  SHALL  I  GO  TO  GOD  ?  By  Horatius  Bonar,  D.D. 
iSmo.     40  cents. 

THE   HUMAN   MIND.      By  Edward  J.  Hamilton,  D.D. 

Svo.     S3. 00. 

MOSES  AND  THE  PROPHETS.     By  Dr.  W.   H.  Green. 

i2mo.     Si. 00. 

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  SCRIPTURES  :  Their  Claims, 
History,  and  Authority.     By  A.  H.  Charteris,  D.D.    Svo.    £2-00. 

THE  LIFE  AND  LABORS  OF  ROBERT  MOFFAT, 

Missionary  to  Africa.     121110.     31-25. 

ARNOT  ON  THE  PARABLES.    New  edition.  i2mo.  $1.75. 


CARTERS'  RECENT  BOOKS. 


FROM    YEAR    TO    YEAR.      Hymns  and  Poems.     By  the 
Rev.  E.  H.  Bickersteth.     iSmo.     $1.25. 

FAITH    THURSTON'S    WORK.     By  the  author  of  "  Win 

and  Wear."     i2mo.     $1.25. 

THROUGH   THE   NARROWS.     By  W.  W.  Everts,  D.D- 

i6mo.     60  cents.  • 


HAUSSER'S     PERIOD 

New  edition.     i2mo.     §2.50. 


OF     THE     REFORMATION. 


J.    M.    DRINKWATER    CONKLIN'S    BOOKS. 
Rue's  Helps $1-50    I    Tessa    Wadsworth's     Disci- 


Electa:  A  Story 1.50    i 

Fifteen 1.50 

Bek's  First  Corner  ....  1.50 

Miss  Prudence 1.50 


pline $1-50 

Only  Ned 1.25 

Not  Bread  Alone     ....     1.25 
Fred  and  Jeanie 1.25 


AGNES    GIBERNE'S    BOOKS. 


Aimee  :  A  Tale  of  James  II.  . 
The  Day   Star;    or,  Gospel 

Stories  .  .  . 
The  Curate's  Home 
Floss  Silverthorn 
Coulyng  Castle  . 
Muriel  Bertram  . 
The  Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars 


The  World's  Foundations  .  $1.50 
Duties  and  Duties  ....  1.25 
Through  the  Linn  ....  1.25 
sweetbriar  .     .         .    ...    i.  so 

Jacob  Witherby 60 

Decima's  Promise 1.25 

Twilight  Talks 75 

Kathleen 1.50 


EMILY    SARAH    HOLT'S    BOOKS. 


Isoult  Barry $1.50 

Robin  Tremayne 1.50 

The  Well  in  the  Desert  .     .  1.25 

A^hcliffe  Hall 1.50 

Verena:  A  Tale 1.50 

The  White  Rose  of  Langley  1.50 

Imogen 1  50 

Clare  Avery 1.50 

Lettice  Eden 1.50 

For  the  Master's  Sake    .     .  1.00 


Lady  Sybil's  Choice      .     . 

.     1.50 

The  Maiden's  Lodge     .     . 

.     1.25 

Earl  Hubert's  Daughter 

.     1.50 

Joyce  Morrell's  Harvest 

.     1.50 

At  ye  Grene  Griffin   .     . 

1. 00 

Wearyholme 

.     1.50 

The  Way  of  the  Cross    . 

.      .60 

CARTERS'   RECENT  BOOKS. 


EMMA 

Poppies  and  Pansies      .     .     .  $1.50 

Dewdrops  and  Diamonds  .     .  1.50 

Rex  and  Regina 1.50 

Dayspring 1.50 

Ruby  and  Pearl 1.25 

A  Chip  of  the  Old  Block   .  .50 

Fkamilode  Hall 50 

Violet  and   Lily   Series.      6 

vols.,  i6mo,  in  a  box  .     .     .  3.00 

Sir  Valentine's  Victory  .     .  1.25 

Matthew  Frost 1  00 

Stellafont  Abbey    ....  1. 00 


MARSHALL'S    BOOKS. 

The  Little  Peat  Cutters  .  $  .50 
Roger's  Apprenticeship    .     .      .50 

Katie's  Work 50 

Consideration  for  Others  .       .50 

Little  Primrose 50 

The  Two  Margarets  ...  .50 
Primrose  Series.     The  above 

6  vols.,  i8mo,  in  a  box  .  .  3.00 
Between  the  Cliffs  .  .  .  1.00 
Little  Brothers  and  Sisters  1.00 
Stories    of  the    Cathedral 

Cities 1.50 


THE   EMPEROR'S    BOYS.     By  Ismay  Thorn.     $1.25. 
WILD   HYACINTHS.     By  Lady  Hope.    $1.50. 
MARJORIE'S   PROBATION.     By  J.  S.  Ranking.    $1.25. 
THE     CAGED     LINNET.      By    Mrs.    Stanley    Leathes. 


r-75 
I-7S 


SUSAN    WARNER'S    BOOKS. 

A    Story    of     Small    Begin- 
nings.    4  vols.,  i6mo,  in  a 

box $5-oo 

What  She  Could  ....  1.25 

Opportunities 1.25 

The  House  in  Town  .     .     .  1.25 

Trading 1.25 

The    Say     and     Do     Series. 

6  vols.,  i6mo,  in'  a  box     .     .  7.50 
Little     Camp    on     Eagle 

Hill 1.25 

Willow  Brook 1.25 

Sceptres  and  Crowns    .     .  1.25 

A  Flag  of  Truce  ....  1.25 

Bread  and  Oranges  .     .     .  1.25 

Rapids  of  Niagara    .     .     .  1.2s 


My  Desire 

The  End  of  a  Coil  .     . 
The  Letter  of  Credit 

Nobody 1.73 

Stephen,  M.D 1.75 

The  Old  Helmet      ....  2.25 

Melbourne  House     ....  2. go 

Pine  Needles 1.25 

King's  People,  The.     5  vols., 

i6mo,  in  a  box 7.00 

Walks  from  Eden  .  .  .  1.50 
House  of  Israel  ....  1.50 
Star  Out  of  Jacob  .  .  .  1.50 
Kingdom  of  Judah  .  .  .  1.50 
Broken  Walls  of  Jerusa- 
lem   1-25 


CARTERS'   RECENT  BOOKS. 


ANNA    B.    WARNER'S    BOOKS. 


The  Blue  Flag #1.25 

Tired  Church  Members    .     .       .50 

A  Bag  of  Stories 75 

Little     Jack's     Four    Les- 
sons      50 

Stories     of    Vinegar      Hill. 

3  vols.,  i6mo,  in  a  box  .     .     3.00 


Ellen  Montgomery's  Book- 
Shelf.   5  vols.,  i6mo,  in  a  box  $5.00 

Mr.  Rutherford's  Children  1.00 

Sybil  and  Chryssa    .     .     .  1.00 

Hard  Maple 1.00 

Carl  Krinken 1.00 

Casper  and  His  Friends   .  1.00 


DR.    RICHARD    NEWTON'S    BOOKS. 

$1 


The  Best  Things  .     . 
The  King's  Highway 
The  Safe  Compass 
Bible  Blessings     . 
The  Great  Pilot 
Bible  Jewels     .     . 
Bible  Wonders 
Nature's  Wonders 
Leaves  from  the  Tree 
Rills  from  the  Fountain 


25 


The  Jewish  Tabernacle  .     .  $ 
Giants,       and      Wonderful 

Things 1.25 

Rays  from  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness   1.25 

The  King  in  His  Beauty  .  1.2s 
Pebeles  from  the  Brook  .  1.25 
Covenant  Names  and  Privi- 


leges 


.50 


REV.   W.    W.    NEWTON'S    BOOKS. 


Little  and  Wise $1.25 

The  Wicket  Gate    ....     1.25 


The  Interpreter's  House 
The  Palace  Beautiful     . 


$1.25 
1.25 


BOOKS  BY  THE  AUTHOR  OF  "WIN  AND  WEAR. 

Win  and  Wear  Series.  *6  vols. 

i6mo $7.50 

The  Green  Mountain  Sto- 
ries.    5  vols.     i6mo  .     .     .     6.00 

Ledgeside     Series.       6    vols. 

i6mo 7. 50 

Faith  Thurston's  Work  .     .     1.25 


Highland     Series.        6   vols. 

i6mo $7.50 

Hester  Trueworthy's  Roy- 
alty     1.25 

Mabel's  Stepmother     .     .     .     1.25 

Butterfly's  Flights.     3  vols. 

i8mo 2.25 


JULIA    MATHEWS'    BOOKS. 

Drayton  Hall  Series.     6  vols.  $4.50 
Lawrence    Bronson's    Vic- 
tory     75 

Christy's  Grandson  ...      .75 


Allan  Haywood     .    .     .     .  $  .75 
Frank  Austin's  Diamond.       .75 

Eagle  Crag 75 

True  to  His  Flag     ...      .75 


CARTERS'   RECENT  BOOKS. 


JULIA    MATHEWS'    BOOKS  —  Continued. 


Golden        Ladder 
3  vols.     i6mo     . 


Series. 
5   vols. 


>3<oo 


Dare   to   Do    Right. 

i6mo 50 

Grandfather's  Faith    .     .     i.io 
"Our  Four  Boys i.io 


Giuseppe's  Home    ,     .     .     .  $i  10 

Nellie's   Stumbling-Block     i.io 

Susy's  Sacrifice      ....     i.io 

Katy     and     Jim,     containing 

"  Little      Katy  "       and 

"Jolly  and  Katy"     .    .     1.25 


JOANNA    H.    MATHEWS'    BOOKS. 


Bessie  Books.     6  vols.,  i6mo, 

in  a  box  ?7-5° 

At  the  Seaside      ....  1.25 

In  the  City 1.25 

And  her  Friends  ....  1.25 

Among  the  Mountains  .     .  1.25 

At  School 125 

On  her  Travels     .     .     .     .  1.25 

Flowerets.     6  vols.,  iSmo,  in  a 

box 3.60 

Little     Sunbeams.      6   vols., 

i6mo.,  in  a  box 6.00 

Belle  Powers'  Locket  .     .  1.00 

Dora's  Motto 1.00 

Lily  Norris'  Enemy  .     .     .  1.00 

Jessie's  Parrot      ....  1. 00 

Mamie's  Watchword      .     .  1.00 

Nellie's  Housekeeping  .    .  1.00 


Kitty      and      Lulu      Books. 

6  vols.,  i8mo,  in  a  box.     .  $3.60 

Miss  Ashton's  Girls.     6  vols.  7.50 

Fanny's  Birthday  Gift     .  1.25 

The  New  Scholars    .     .     .  1.25 

Rosalie's  Pet 125 

Eleanor's  Visit      ....  1.25 
Mabel  Walton's    Experi- 
ment      1.25 

Elsie's  Santa  Ci»aus      .     .  1.25 

Haps  and  Mishaps.     6  vols.  7.50 
Little   Friends   at  Glen- 
wood    1.25 

The  Broken  Mallet     .     .  1.25 

Blackberry  Jam    ....  1.25 

Milly's  Whims 1.25 

Lilies  or  Thistledown.     .  1.25 
Uncle  Joe's  Thanksgiving    1.25 


CATHERINE    SHAW'S    BOOKS. 


The  Gabled  Farm     .     .     .     .  $1.25 

Nellie  Arundel 1.25 

In  the  Sunlight 1.25 

Hilda.     121110 125 


I    Only  a  Cousin $1.25 

Out  in  the  Storm 5° 

i    Alick's  Hero 1-25 


Jean  Lindsay $1.25 

Dora  Hamilton's  Choice.     .     1.25 

Elsie  Gordon 1-25 

Uncle  Fred's  Shilling      .     .     1.25 


EMILY    BRODIE'S    BOOKS. 

Lonely  Jack $1-25 

Ruth's  Rescue 5° 

Nora  Clinton  ......     1-25 


V 


