N 


O 
FFEE 
RE 


nd 
ro) 


Fr FEFFEEE E 


Wee 
lee 


2 


MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE MATERIAL 1010a 
(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 


Hara (;OD CAST AWAY 
His PHQRLET: 


Me UP Mr mea Te ees oe 


Americ oar rae roan a saRlinas cams» 


—— 


1 “Gath God Cast Amway 
q Gis People?” 


BY 


C GAEBELEIN 


Gospel Publishing Bouse, 


54 WEST TWENTY-SECOND STREET, NEW YORK CITY. 


UPPER CANADA TRACT SOCIETY, 


102 Yon » Street, Toronto, Canada. 


1905. 


CAVEN LESRARY 
KNOX COLLEGE 
TORONTO 


76297. 


cree say) tr ieah: ay! 2 sterti nee) 


Ci aia: URS 


aS eal A aed haere a ag iy 


: 


CONTENTS. 


THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF ROMANS: PAGE, 
Chapter i.--The Question ............. Pisdeue cist eneeteus's 7 
ii.—‘‘ For I also am an Israelite’’....... CapeenEeses 15 


iii.—The Remnant—Israel’s Apostasy Not Complete. 20 
iv.—Israel’s Apostasy and Blindness Not Permanent. 30 


v.—‘' To Provoke Them to Jealousy’’.............. 36 

vi.—Their Reception—Life from the Dead.......... 42 

vii.—The Parable of the Olive Tree............. iter. 

viii.—A Mystery Made Known...... ERODE CHI ED OROOT 63 
CONCINSION 5 cos cay berate cseteneebacet enten 80 

ISRAEL IN THE PSALMS......... SeaCae BGer-oneTonocee Sores 85 
From Suffering to Glory...........0e0.0 A COME ROOD BOC HODL - 93 

& Great Proplistic Paaimt, 2.6 .ssccccses sere BERNE Ce ewes ee - 98 
Scenes of Desolation and App?1ls for the Son of Man........ 102 
The Dawning of the Millennium........ CRIA OE eas cecsce FOO 
.THE PROPHECIES OF BALAAM............ Deslaceleieaobe es bee es 107 
ERATAH SP ANMD RIT oie ccs ener sage ne cote nd Cte g ta aeees <tag 


WHaT OR?YHODOX JEWS BELIEVE ON THINGS TO COME.... 153 


ZIONISM, THE GREAT JEWISH NATIONAL MOVEMENT...... 179 
FE WISERCOTATIONICB ree eerie seme tre Aree eC eT Acai Ee Meeriurnta 205 
THE JEWISH POPULATION OF PALESTINE..........00 Serene 213 
TER ONORTHERNOPOWERR corn soar poe ee niente ieee ie 229 
TR MUASTAMIC QURSTION cc cds scree ts cieraeet onesie 243 
THREE WEEKS WITH JOSEPH RABINOWITZ......00..ccceees 271 


pSOPsHNPRInNPERRanTREROPE Derngreznes>> sovireeneepepnponengregntenrsrtynncs <r oesemnengegen aRRITR ARENT STaProRSTaENTRNT Pee rerreptnen rmenves esters ty eece se cian 


ROMANS XI. 


= FET SRT Te aT em PONE ere re NRT ee dt EE anes ie easel 1 MESS PORRAE Gy LENS TENT ve eT oe RS POPE MEMES ELLE ied Page Umar PEEPS DREE MMR RRP ESL ergs t oEM eS ReMeat Tm petite ety | SOMMERS MES «TEI 


a eae 


The Eleventh Chapter of Romans. 


CHAPTER I. 
THE QUESTION. 


HE eleventh chapter in the wonderful Epistle to the Ro- 
mans is perhaps the least studied of all in this Epistle 
of our salvation in Christ. It contains not alone deeply inter- 
esting truths, but it is of very great importance and puts be- 
fore us most solemn facts. In it the Holy Spirit unfolds the 
purposes of God concerning the earthly people He has chosen 
for Himself. The knowledge of Israel’s place and position 
in God’s reveaied plan is of incalculable importance. All 
the confusion in doctrine and practice we see about us, is 
more or less the result of a deplorable ignorance which exists 
throughout Christendom about Israel’s place and future. 
The carnalizing of the professing church has been the sad 
fruit of this ignorance. All Christendom attends to Israel’s 
earthly calling, and not only fails in it most miserably, but 
also dishonors God and His Word. 

If it were possible to straighten out the confusion existing 
about us in the professing church, the proper starting point 
would be, no doubt, to teach God’s purposes concerning Is- 
rael. However, this is impossible. The apostasy of Christ- 
endom is beyond recovery; the individual may still sce and 
learn the truth. 


Israel's place. 


Where in Ro- 
mans ? 


Three parts. 


Dispensational 
aaa 


8 


Let us first consider in what part of Romans we find the 
chapter we are about to study. 

Romans is divided into three great parts. The first sec- 
tion extends from chapter i-viii; the second contains chap- 
ters ix, x and xi; the last is from chapter xii-xvi. Over the 
first part we put the word “Salvation,” over the second 
“Dispensation,” and over the third “Exhortation.” 

This is how God makes His truth known, First He tells 
us what He has done for us in His Son, the Lord Jesus 
Christ; how rich and full His Grace is toward all who be- 
lieve, Jew and Gentile. Iu the next place He acquaints us 
with dispensation ; that is, how He, the Sovereign, dispenses, 
how He deals with Jew and Gentile. In dispensational 
truths He takes His child, so to speak, into confidence, be- 
cause He has made him a son and an heir, and He intro- 
duces him into the knowledge of His ways in government. 
Having shown us what He has done for us and what He has 
made us, as well as acquainted us with His plans, He speaks 
to us once more, showing what manner of men we should 
be; that is exhortation. Reverse this order, salvation, dis- 
pensation and exhortation, or leave one out, and there will 
be failure and confusion. 

Our chapter then stands in the second, the dispensational 
part, that great parenthesis, in which the Holy Spirit traces 
God’s righteous and merciful ways. At the end of the sal- 
vation part of this Epistle we find a chapter of summing up, 
the eighth. The second part has likewise such a climax, the 
chapter which is before us. It brings in not only the Jews, 
but the Gentiles, and in a measure the church of God. From 


9 


this chapter we can reach back over the entire history of 
Israel. From here we can learn their present condition and, 
above all, we can study their future and learn what. God 
will do yet in fulfillment of His oathbound covenants. 

There is, however, a special reason why the Holy Spirit 
in Romans introduces the three chapters, which form the 
second part. 

This is the following. In the first part, chapters i to viii, 
the Spirit of God shows that Jews and Gentiles have no 
righteousness and are lost, that there is not one that doeth 
good, no, not one. Then God reveals His righteousness and 
His salvation for Jew and Gentile, which is by faith. An 
old saint was asked what the three great lessons are which he 
had learned in his Christian experience, and he said :-“First, 
I learned that I have never done anything good in my life; 
secondly, that I could never do anything good; and, thirdly, 
that Christ has done it all.” This is precisely what is taught 
in the first part of Romans. 

Now after the guilt and lost condition of the Jew and Gen- 
tile are fully demonstrated, the Jew is left out of sight. In 
this dispensation of Grace God deals alike with the believing 
Jew and Gentile; there is no difference. The believing Jew 
and Gentile are under Grace, linked with the Second Man, in 
possession of a place in the Heavenlies and no longer on the 
earth, a Son and an Heir, like the Firstbegotten from the 
dead. 

But now comes an objection from the side of the Jew. 
You remember questions are frequently asked in Romans. 
The Jew now has a question, after he has heard all about 


A special reason 
for Romans ix, 
x, xi. 


All under Grace. 


An objection. 


10 


this salvation by Grace for him and for the Gentile, as well 
as the results of this salvation. 

This is the question: “What becomes of our national 
promises and blessings? God has promised us so much as a 

= uations? nation, and these promises are not kept yet; will He not 
fulfill them?” In other words, “Does God’s dealing in Grace 
with the Gentiles mean that He is through with us as a na- 
tion, that our people are now completely and finally rejected 
and these many promises contained in the oracles of God 
shall never find fulfillment?” 

This question is answered in the second part of Romans. 
In it the Holy Spirit shows how righteously and mercifully 
God deals with the Jews and Gentiles, and the end of the 
section, our chapter, shows most blessedly that God has not 
cast away His people and that a time of their fullness and 
reception is coming and all Israel shall be saved. 

A wimple chap The chapter in its construction is very simple. In the 
preceding one we read: “But Esaias is very bold, and saith, 
I was found of them that sought me not; I was manifested 
unto them that asked not after me. But to Israel he saith, 
All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a dis- 
obedient and gainsaying people.” The quotation is from 
Isaiah Ixv:1, 2, and in it the call of the Gentiles is plainly 
foretold as well as God’s attitude towards His own people 
Israel. Now if God is found of them (the Gentiles) and 
manifested unto them that asked not after Him, and if His 
own people have no answer to His hands stretched forth 
towards them, would one not be justified to say He hz cast 
away His people? The eleventh chapter therefore asks this 


penennenr sr 


areanen 


| 
, 
! 
1 
4 


pneeneannneenunraperetrn str 


as jah 


Siapeeesraecesy yo: iusizs sea tease 


S 
“ 


II 


very question: “Hath God cast away?” This question is 
the great superscription of this chapter The fact that God 
has not cast away His people is de.:.onstrated throughou 
the chapter and up to the 27th verse the Holy Spirit gives 
seven answers and proofs to this question that His people 
are not finally nor completely cast away. After this fact 
is demonstrated comes that great and sublime ending (verses 
28-36) corresponding io the ending of the doctrinal part of 
the Epistle in the eighth chapter. We shall foilow in our 
exposition these seven answers and proofs. 

These are the following: 

I. The conversion of Saul of Tarsus (verse 1). 

II. There is a remnant according to the election of 
Grace, hence Israel is not ccmpletely cast away (verses 2-6). 

III. The blindness of Israel i: partial and judicial. It 
is never complete nor final. The Scriptures prove this fact 
(verses 7-10). 

IV. Salvation has come to the Gentiles by their fall and 


by it God wishes to provoke thei to jealousy (verse I ¥). 


V. There is a promised fullness and receiving of Israel 
which according t- the prophetic Word will mean greater 
riches for the world, even life from the dead (verses 11-15). 


VI. The parable of the olive tree (verses 16-24). 
VII. The mystery made tmown (verses 25-27). 


We look 2° the question first and its answer. The answer 
is correctly translated “Far be the thought.” “God has not 
cast away His people whom ” ‘ce foreknew.” The question of 


Seven answers. 


Far be the 
thought. 


12 


the casting away of Israel* is of course a national question 
and not the question of the individual. God had foreknown 
His people and called them to a distinctive and peculiar 
place in the earth and for the government of the earth. The 
nation is called to be a peculiar treasure unto the Lord above 
all people, a kingdom of priests and a holy nation, a people 


prepared to show forth His praises. God’s gifts and calling 
are without repentance. Throughout the Word He declares 
that Israel should never cease to be a nation before Him 
and that they shall be at last that in the earth, as a nation, 
for which He called them. ‘Thus saith the Lord, which 
aa von giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the 
moon and of the stars for a light by night, which divideth 
the sea when the waves thereof roar; the Lord of hosts is 
His name; if those ordinances depar: from me, saith the 


er eee 


Lord, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being 
a nation before me forever. Thus saith the Lord: If heaven 
above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth 
searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of 
Jeremiah xxxi: Israel for all that they have done, saith the Lord” (Jere- 
miah xxxi:35-37). “For I am with thee, saith the Lord, 
to save thee; though I make a full end of all nations whither 
I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee, 
but I will correct thee in measure and will not leave thee al- 


soreyerteanersaeiOneeSeereereeste eas an 


eee ses 


ee 


Jeremial.xxx:11. together unpunished” (Jerem. xxx:11). Numerous other 


*We take it for granted that all our readers believe that /srael, 
God’s ancient people, the r ral seed of Abraham, is meant. How 
any one can speak in this chapter of a spiritual Israel and that the 
Church is meant is beyond our conception. 


eens | rr tirana mana maaRna ED 


13 


passages could be quoted in which God assures His people 
that He will never abandon chem forever. Their past his- 
tery proves this. Again and again God’s firstborn Son, 
Israel, (Ex. iv:22) had been disobedient, a stiffnecked peo- 
pie. They were punished and led into captivity, their city 
plundered and razed, their temple burned and land laid 
waste, and still God’s infinite mercy hovers over the people 
and the land and He never saith that He hath cas* them 
away. Then a part of the nation, the Jews, hed rejected 
their Messiah and King, who had come to His own; they 
had cried their awful “Away with Him!” “Crucify Him!” 
“His blood be upon us and upon our children!” Yet from 
that cross there came that wonderful prayer, “Father, for- 
give them for they know not what they do.” Again the 
offers of Grace are spurned by the nation, and those of the 
nation who had believed were bitterly persecuted and some 
murdered by their unbelieving brethren, and yet over all 
the Spirit of God hath put the assuring statement, “God 
hath not cast away His people whom He forekr >w.” The 
temple was laid in ruins once more, the natic:. peeled and 
scattered into the corners of the earth. Their saddest dis- 
persion began and with it trials and sufferings such as their 
previous history had not known, and still over this great dis- 
persion and all their terrible experiences the Spirit of God 
has placed these words: “God hath not cast away His peo- 
ple whom He foreknew.” 

What a different answer Christendom has to this ques- 
tion. If the Jew asks of Christendom the question about 
his national future, the promises of blessing and glory, he 


Exod, iv : 22. 


ene of 
hrist and 
dispersion. 


o 4 


How Christen- 
dom answers, 


Assurance of sal- 
vation. 


14 


receives a strange answer. Or if he turns to the great 
commentators on the Bible he finds teachings altogether 
opposite to the plain national promies, which belong still 
to his people. He is told that God hath cast them away 
and that there is nothing left for an earthly people. He 
hears that the church is Israel and all the promises given to 
the original Israel find now a spiritual fulfillment in the 
church. But the intelligent, orthodox Hebrew refuses to 
accept this spiritualizing mode of interpretation nor does he 
find anywhere throughout Christendom th:t his national 
promises and national glories are now fulfilled in a spiritual 
way in the church. If all this wrong and confusing interpre- 
tation of the Word of God, which does not distinguish be- 
tween Israel and the church, were true, and if it were true 
that God hath cast away totally and finally Israel, then we 
certainly would have to give up the belief in a verbally in- 
spired Bible. It would be true what higher criticism is con- 
stantly claiming, that the Jewish prophets were patriots and 
dreamers and not inspired by God. Furthermore, God’s 
gifts and calling would be not without repentance; God 
would have gone back upon His own word, and in conse- 
quence of this we as sinners of the Gentiles would have no 
assurance of our salvation. For who can assure us that 
God really means what He hath said about us in Ephesians 
if He hath cast away Israel and is not keeping His promises ? 
Will He net do the same with us? We learn therefore that 


the question of Romans xi is a very important one indeed. 


CHAPTER II. 
‘*fOR I AM ALSO AN ISRAELITE.”’ 


HE first answer to the important question “Hath God 
cast away His people?” is the great Apostle to the 
Gentiles himself. We read in the first verse, “For I also am 
an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Ben jamin. 
God hath not cast away His people whom He foreknew.”’ 
The Holy Spirit points then first of all to the Apostle and 
puts him b-fore us as a proof that God has not completely 
and finally rejected Israel. It is a significant fact that in each 
of the three chapters which compose the dispensational part 
of Romans the Apostle Paul stands in the foreground. “I 
say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing wit- 
ness with me in the Holy Spirit that I have great grief and 
uninterrupted pain in my heart, for I have wished, I myself, 
to be a curse from the Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen 
according to flesh.” Thus the ninth chapter begins and in the 
tenth we read of his prayer for Israel, not his prayer alone 
but surely the prayer of the Holy Spirit. “Brethren, the de- 
light of my heart and my supplication which I address to 
Sod for them is for salvation” (x:1). In our chapter, be- 
sides mentioning himself in the beginning, he says: “For I 
speak to you, the nations, inasmuch as I am Apostle of na- 
tions. I glorify my ministry; if by any means I shall pro- 
voke to jealousy them which are my flesh and shall save 
some from among them” (verses 13, 14). The instrument 
15 


a 


Rom. ix and x. 


is | 
in 
4 
| Baa 
; See? 
| hg 

\ 


Paul's love. 


16 


used to make known the mystery of God and the unsearch- 
able riches among the Gentiles declares his great love for his 
kinsmen and prays for their salvation. While Gentiles, the 
nations receive blessings, Israel is still “beloved for the 
Father’s sake” and not to be forgotten. 

But why is Paul personally mentioned immediately after 
the question concerning Israel’s position? It is generally 
said that by referring to himself he wishes to prove that it is 
possible for an Israelite to accept the Lord Jesus Christ and 
to be saved; he, an Israelite full of hatred against the Christ, 
had been saved, and this proves that God has not cast away 
His peo le. However, the question before us is not whether 
an individual Jew can be saved or cannot be saved; it is a 
iational question which is before us. Besides this, the pos- 
sibility of the salvation of Jews had been fully demonstrated 
on the day of Pentecost. The three thousand who believed 
on that day were all Jews, as well as the thousands who be- 
lieved after the memorable day of the outpouring of the 
Hoiy Spirit. We have therefore to look for a deeper mean- 


* ing of Paul’s prominence in this chapter. 


Paul’s conversion 
typical, 


1 Tim. i: 16, 


The key to this deeper meaning is the fact that tie Holy 
Spirit makes the conversion of Saul of Tarsus not alone 
very prominent, but also speaks of that event as a pattern. 
He has given us three lengthy accounts of it in the Book of 
Acts (chapters ix, xxii and xxvi). In First Timothy we 
read: “But for this reason mercy was shown me, that in 
me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long 
suffering, for a delineation of those that should hereafter 
believe on Him to eternal life” (1 Tim. 1:16). And again i: 


17 


is written: “And last of all He was seen of me also as of 
one born out of due time” (literally “an abortion”) (1 Cor. 
xv:2). These are inspired statements which tell us we have 
to seek for a deeper significance of the conversion of him 
who calls himself ‘a Hebrew of the Hebrews” (Phil. iii:5). 
It has often been remarked that Saul’s conversion is the 
model conversion and the different steps are reproduced in 
every genuine conversion. But this is far from being cor- 
rect. Saul of Tarsus’ conversion was an altogether unique 
one. There has, up to this time, never been a conversion like 
this one. Never again were the heavens opened and a light 
shone brighter than the sun; never again did a sinner, such 
a blind persecutor, behold Jesus in glory and hear His voice, 
and never again was one calk 1 in such a way “to be an elect 
vessel” and to bear the Name of the Lord “before both 
nations and kings and the sons of Israel.” His conversion 
is certainly not a pattern or outline of every other conversion 
and yet it is a delineation, a hypotyposis. 

All the great men of the Old Testament, priests, prophets 
and kings, were in their lives and experiences patterns, types. 
The great Apostle to the nations, making known the salva- 
tion to the nations, himself a Jew, is not less a type. Hi- 
wonderful conversion is typical of the future conversior 
the nation to whom he belonged according to the flesn. 
What God did in his case He can and will do for Israel in a 
future day. The conversion of Saul of Tarsus is the type 
and earnest of Israel’s conversion. In this light the full 
meaning of the quoted passages from the first Epistle of 
Timothy and Corinthians can be easily understood. In 


1 Cor. xv: 2. 


Saul of Tarsus. 


Type and earnest 
of Israel's con- 
version. 


acetone 


prillinrsasinsmmaninanseniuewenbrinresninieneestrewin east asses ass 


wseuamesonse: “~~ -sapesrennaneenas 


rasgueer santagnesinnsessteiiieniinnisrnapnrenapnevesesinettasS-TeSSPS=sRetnsss 0155 sass 


Out of due 
season. 


Israel's unbelief. 


Heaven opened. 


Zech. xii : i6-i4. 


‘ 
Saul’s conversion Christ showed mercy “the first” or “as a 


first one.” There are others to whom that mercy is to be 
shown and to whom mercy will come under the same circum- 
stances and by the same heavenly manifestation of the glori- 
fied Son of Man, and the people to whom this will happen is 
Istael. When we read of Paul that he saw the Lord as one 
born out of due season, it is the same thought which under- 
lies this statement. ‘he untimely birth, before the time, 
suggests another birth time as well as another birth, the 
birth of the nation, when Israel, the remnant of His people, 
will be born again by looking upon Him in glory, whom 
they have pierced. 

The comparison of Saul’s conversion with the future con- 
version of Israel as revealed in the prophetic Word is ex- 
tremely striking. The delineation is perfect. 

1. Saul of Tarsus in unbelief typifies the state of Israel 
as a nation throughout this present age. He was a learned 
Pharisee, a fierce persecutor, breathing out threatenings and 
slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, blind and un- 
believing. Such is Israel, another unbelieving Saul, and, 
like him, zealous for God without knowledge. 

2. The opened heavens, the vision and voice of the glori- 
fied Jesus, by which Saul of Tarsus was arrested in his 
career, are typical of the coming day when the heavens will 
be opened again and the Lord Jesus Christ will be mani- 
fested in power and in glory. At His second visible and 
glorious coming the remnant of Israel will behold Him and 
learn by His glorious appearing that Jesus is their Messiah 
and King (Zechariah xii:10-14, Matthew xxiv :29, 30, Revel. 


eases 


19 


i:7). The opened heavens, the great light flashing forth, 
the vision and voice of Jesus, the prostrate Saul there on 
the road to Damascus, was but a little sample of what God 
will do for the remnant of His earthly people and how they 
shail au last know Him and receive Him. 

3. Paul’s service to nations and kings foreshadows 
Israel’s coming ministry to the nations of the earth. Al! 
nations are yet to know the glory of the Lord, but world 
conversion is only possible after Israel is converted. 
Througk Israel all the naticns of the earth will at last be 
blessed. 

These three great facts seen in the conversion of Saul, 
typifying Israel’s unbelief, the manner and result of their 
conversi:!’. we shall follow throughout the chapter and learn 
from the scriptures some of the revealed details. We under- 
stand now why the Holy Spirit puts the Apostle Paul im- 
mediately after the questior. of the chapter is asked. What 
manifestation of the grace and wisdom of God! The instru- 
ment chosen to reveal the mysteries hidden in former ages 
and to complete the Word of God, the one to whom is given 
the full knowledge of the Gospel of Grace to be preached 
among the Gentiles, while Israel is set aside for a time, is 
also made a type, a pattern of what Israel is to be and to 
receive in the future, when God will arise and have mercy 
upon Zion. 


Israel's ministry. 


set A RE ae that 


pegormeeeten 


a 
! 


Historical evi 
dence. 


Elijah. 


CHAPTER III. 
HK REMNANT.—ISRAEL'S APOSTASY NOT COMPLETE. 


HE second answer to the important question and argu- 
ment that God has not cast away His people Israel is 
continued in verses 2-6. “God hath not cast away His 
people whom He foreknew. Know ye not what the Scrip- 
ture says in the history of Elias, how he pleads with God 
against Israel? Lord, they have killed Thy prophets, they 
have dug down Thine altars; and I have been left alone 
and they seek my life. But what says the divine answer to 
him? I have left to Aiyself seven thousand men who have 
not bowed the knee to Baal. Thus, then, in the present 
time also there has been a remnant according to election 


of grace. But if by grace, no longer works; since other- 


wise grace is no more grace.” 
It is historical evidence which is placed in these words 


before us. The Holy Spirit reaches back into the history 
of the nation and calls our attention to an important episode. 
The prophet Elijah lived in a time when almost everything 
among the professing people of God was being swept away 
into the apost: A great reformation took place; God 
had answered the call of Elijah on Mount Carmel by fire, 
and when the fire of the Lord consumed the burnt sacrifice, 
and the wood and the stones, and the dust, and licked up 
the water that was in the trench, and when all the people 


20 


sp Wl gi lh cad i 


: ee ee supactins 
” saniiahies | t0 si snenbcheniiamncitts Wieihabkasbiaubess sAUMMRMAM MM Sitebighbie viet cara haika toads eet 


sii Saba | eabacwnicLecinamniel Snot setName alae ana a ais iit cman eee 


21 


saw, they cried out: “Jehovah is God! Jehovah is God!” 
The prophets of Baal were slain there and then. The Lord 
also graciously opened the heavens and there was an abund- 
ance of rain. All this has a typical and dispensational mean- 
ing, which we cannot follow in detail at this time. The 
wonderful manifestation of the Lord out of the opened 
heavens, however, did not turn the people from the path of 
apostasy. A little while later Jezebel sent a messenger unto 
Elijah, saying, “So let the gods do to me, and more also, 
if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by to- 
morrow about this time” (1 Kings xix:2). Elijah, in the 
weakness of the flesh, fails and flees. We find him a day’s 
journey in the wilderness. There we see him under a 
juniper tree, and he requested for himself that he might die ; 
and said; It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for 
I am not better than my Fathers. But the Lord meets His 
servant. “What doest thou here, Elijah?” ‘And he said, 
I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts; for 
the children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant, thrown 
down Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets with the sword; 
and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life to take it 
away. Twice he repeats this wonderful tale born by a 
discouraged and unbelieving heart. But now comes the 
answer of the Lord to him. He tells him how mistaken he 
is about being left alone, the only Israelite who has not fal- 
len away. “Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, 
all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal and every 
mouth which hath not kissed him.” The Lord had a rem- 
nant, a faithful remnant, among His people even at the 


1 Kings xix : 2. 


A remnant. 


Israel's apostasy 
not complete. 


22 


time of their great apostasy. This is the thought and argu- 
The apostasy of Israel is never a complete 


ment here. 
remnant faithful to Him 


apostasy. The Lord has always a 
and the covenants among thera. In this respect the differ- 


ence of the apostasy of Israel and the predicted apostasy 
of Gentile Christendom is very marked. One of Israel’s 
race has expressed it very pointedly in the following words :* 
“The apostasy of Israel is not as the apostasy of Christen- 
dom. The apostasy of Christendom is incurable, but the 
apostasy of Israel is curable. Although Israel have rejected 
Jesus, they do not wish to reject God; they still believe in 
His Word; they still invoke His holy name. They still 
remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. They still, as 
the Apostle Paul says, have a zeal for God, although it is 
not according to knowledge. The children of Israel are 
like the brothers of Joseph. After they had sold Joseph 
into Egypt, they returned to their father Jacob, and then 
for a number of years their conduct was less blamable 
than it had been before. They seemed to have been anxious 
to please their father Jacob, and to walk before him in the 
right path. Still, there was upon their hearts the blood- 
guiltiness, in that they had delivered their brother Joseph 
into the hands of their enemies. And so it is with Israel 
now. There is still a godly remnant among them. There 
is still the fear of God and the acknowledgment of God be- 
Whereas, what is the history of apostate 
presented to us in the Scriptures, and 


fore their eyes. 
Christendom, as it is 


*Adolph Saphir. 


y Fee Se eccrine agree a REST 
(EEA abegieee mits 2 a tied backs iS ibe bid 1 shai Riad aged HS a od oe a ards a ss kta ee 
sisi iced gsi ha MAGS aa hd ORS gal aa tea a Baa ane i 


23 


the beginnings of which we can see already? First, people 
do not believe in Jesus as an atonement. They begin with that. 
They do not like the blood of Jesus. They like the character 
of Jesus very well. Then they give up Jesus too. Then 
they give up the Father too, and do not believe in creation. 
And then they become agnostics, and say they know nothing 
about it—whether there is a God or not—the worst thing 
that this world has ever seen, and the most insulting to God. 
And then they give up morality, as necessarily they must 
give it up; and then they fall into the most abject pessimism, 
and look upon man as a flower of the field, which 1s to-day 
and to-morrow is cast into the oven. This is the downward 
career of the Gentile apostasy. But in the Jewish apostasy 
there is still kept the connecting link, the golden thread— 
a spark dying, yet not dead, of a belief in God, however 
unenlightened, and in a future.” 

The Lord always has a remnant among His people and 
that remnant is the sign and evidence that He hath not cast 
away His people. 

We shall, however, show what we have to understand 
by “remnant ;” and the remnant that has been, and will yet 
be called, we shall fully investigate. 

The question concerning the remnant is a most interesting 
one. That the Lord has such a remnant according to the 
election of grace among His people is, as we have stated 
before, evide-e that He hath not cast them away. There is 
a double remnant which is to be considered. The remnant 
which has been in the beginning of this dispensation and 
the remnant which will yet be called for a definite work and 


Gentile and Jew- 
ish apostasy. 


A double rem- 
nant. 


Le eiibernincatcnsnimensita’ tommaeereat neta 


en enieeeenentiatitieriner 


sort sane nis taeesime mee 


24 


testimony at the time when Israel’s Hope will appear and 
the glorious promises made to the nation find their fulfill- 
ment. Between these two remnants, a remnant at the be- 


A past and fu- ginning of the present age and a remnant at the end, stands 


ture remnant. 


The church. 


another fact—the fact that the Body of the Lord Jesus 
Christ is composed of believing Jews and Gentiles and that 
through the preaching of the Gospel of Grace, not alone 
sinners of the Gentiles are added to that body, but a!-o Jews 
who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. As soon, then, as 
a Jew believes he ceases to be a Jew. His Hope is no longer 
national and earthly, but heavenly; he belongs no ionger to 
the earthly Jerusalem, but to the heavenly ; he has, like the 
believing Gentile, nothing to do with the law, its ordinances 
and ceremonies. It is impossible to speak of a remnant of 
Israel at this time, which is saved by Grace and which holds 
a specific national Jewish position in the earth. When the 
Holy Spirit gave the full revelation concerning the church, 
the body of the Lord Jesus Christ, we do not read anything 


The statusof the whatever about the believing Jew, who, as it is being 


believing Jew. 


Confusion. 


claimed, “should not sever his connection with the nation,” 
and who should still continue in keeping Jewish laws and 
feast days. All national distinctions cease in -hat body, and 
to preach that the believing Jew should continue to keep the 
seventh day, practice circumcision, keep the Passover and 
other feast days, is not alone nowhere taught in the Epistles 
in which the Word of God is completed, but such teaching 
is unscriptural and brings in a sad and confusing mixture 
which destroys the simplicity of the Gospel. 

Now in the beginning of this present age there certainly 


aul 


PIMP Tear ee) eee, tty 


‘Scat .pulaine a ada aia hele nia aa ; 
ca eg i 


= 

Se 
i, 

ae 

| 
* 


daaiheacandin hela 


iii 


& 


25 


was such a Jewish-Christian remnant in existence. To this 
the words of the apostle refer us. “Thus, then, in the present 
time there has been a remnant according to the election of 
Grace.” That remnant of Jewish believers is seen in the 
opening chapters of the Book of Acts. The three thousand 
saved on the day of Pentecost were all Jews. Soon there 
was a very strong assembly composed of Jewish believers in 
Jerusalem, who were faithful witnesses for the Lord Jesus 
Christ and who bore a faithful testimony in Jerusalem, 
which was fast ripening for the great judgment. Not alone 
in Jerusalem, but also in other parts of the land, Jews be- 
came believers and formed Jewish-Christian synagogues. 
When Paul went to Jerusalem the elders of the Jewish- 
Christian assembly said to him: “Thou seest, brother, how 
many myriads there are of the Jews who have believed, and 
are all zealous for the law. And they have been informed 
concerning thee that thou teachest all the Jews among the 
nations apostasy from Moses, saying that they should not 
circumcise their children, nor walk in the customs” (Acts 
xxi:21). Paul’s Gospel certainly teaches this, and it was 
the hour of his failure when he went back to the ceremonial 
law. But the passage tr's us that there were myriads of 
believers, all Jews wh tinued in the observance of the 
law. They went to the .unple to pray, kept the different 
feasts—in one word, they continued in all the Jewish cus- 
toms. God’s mercy was still lingering over Jerusalem and 
these Hebrew-Christian believers had hopes that the nation 
would yet receive their testimony and accept Him whom 
they had rejected. They were persecuted, beaten, some 


In the beginning. 


Myriads believ- 
ng. 


A transition 
period. 


Hebrews. 


Jerusalem fallen. 


26 


killed, their goods spoiled, cast out of the synagogue and 
the temple, and still they continued in their faithful testi- 
mony. It was a transition period, passing out of the old 
into the new. For a time such an attitude of Jewish be- 
lievers was undovhtedly justified. But then the Holy Spirit 
addressed an Epistle to these Hebrews, and that Epistle 
gives us not only a true insight into their condition and 
danger, their steadfastness and faithfulness, but it also re- 
veals how the Holy Spirit shows them the better things of 
the new covenant. No one can read the Epistle to the He- 
brews without being convinced that in this wonderful com- 
mentary to the levitical institutions, showing the fulfillment 
in Him who is a better priest, a priest after the order of 
Melchizedek, the Spirit of God aims at this very fact, that 
gl! ceremonies, all levitical observances, are to be discon- 
tinued. They were ail the shadows of better things. In the 
end of the Epistle He speaks that Word which showed these 
Hebrew believers their true position, “Let us go forth to 
Him without the camp, bearing His reproach” (Hebr. 
xiii :13). 

At last Jerusalem fell. The temple was destroyed. The 
people vere scattered. It was therefore made impossible 
for Jewish believers to continue in the position which they 
held for years. Jewish-Christian assemblies in their peculiar 
national character ceased in their existence. While in the 
beginning of this dispensation it was “to the Jew first,” that 
order was stopped with the full rejection of Jerusalem and 
the dispersion of the Jews. 

However, the existence of a remnant of believers among 


opi Naha asad IAA alpen 


27 


the nation, the myriads who had accepted the Lord as their 
Saviour and the Hope of Israel, was a definite proof that 
God had not completely cast away His people. It was proof 
that He was ready to deal with them according to His in- 
finite mercy. 


! A Jewish remnant in the sense of the apostolic days is no 
; longer possible. To teacu that such a remnant is to be gath- 
- ered now and to attempt the formation of Jewish national . 
4 assemblies of believing Hebrews, who continue as Jews No, national he 
4 though trusting in Christ, practicing circumcision, fasts and "” i 
. : other Jewish customs, is confusing and mars completely the 
t i doctrines of Grace and that revelation of all revelations, 
f 4 the church, which is His Body. We repeat it once more, 
t d the believing Jew at this time is not “gentilized,” as has 
- 3 been pressed so much from a certain side, but he becomes 
e : a member of the body of the Lord Jesus Christ, and has 
e 4 with every other believer a heavenly hope, a heavenly des- 
0) 4 tiny. When the Lord Jesus Carist comes to take His own 
S : unto Himself, every believing Jew, saved by Grace, will be 
: caught up to meet the Lord in the air. 
e : A fact in this connection must not be overlooked. The i 
le Lord has put His hand throughout this Christian dispensa- 
y : tion, in every century, upon hundreds and thousands of Jews, Ef 
ar : and through His Grace they have been saved, not a few of 
ne : them in a most remarkable way. The past century, the 
at F nineteenth, has had more witnesses in this respect than any : BE 
ad 3 other. Some of the best teachers, expositors of the Scrip- 
3 tures, were converted Hebre' We mention Adolf Saphir, Witnesses from : | 1 
ng | Dr. Edersheim, Neander, Cassel, Gottheil and Rabinowitz. aa 


ag atti 


posiebeceneaneteaninreasenuansennceinnnntrn=tne neve a oes : piensa rena 
preeensaronenenennsaneePeOSOe nnn cela cceacara . 


G 1 of the 
Kingdom. 
Matt. xxiv: 14? 


144,000. 


28 


Some of them were led out of the deepest darkness with 
thousands of others whose names are not so universally 
known. This, too, 1s an evidence that blindness has hap- 
pened only in part to Israel. 

But there is yet to be a Jewish remnant, a strong and 
mighty witness that God hath not cast away His people. 
This future remnant of believing Hebrews will be called as 
soon as the church is complete and removed from the earth.* 
This remnant to be called through Grace corresponds to the 
remnant of the beginning of this age. 

Their Gospel will be the Gospel of the Kingdom, “the 
Kingdom of the Heavens is at hand.” It will emanate from 
Jerusalem and will be declared among the nations (Matt. 
xxiv:14). Of this remnant, suffering and persecuted, we 
read in the Olivet discourse of our Lord. The Old Testa- 
ment Scriptures are full with prophecies concerning the 
faithful remnant of the endtime. The Book of Psalms 
can be understood only in the light of a believing remnant of 
Jews, suffering in the midst of the ungodly nation and deliv- 
ered by the coming of the King out of the opened heavens. 
The 144,000 sealed in Revelation vii are all Israelites and 
the company out of a!l nations and tongues, who come out 
of the great tribulation, and seen as overcome in the second 


——— 


*If it were true and scriptural that the Church is to pass through 
the great tribulation, it would also be perfectly in order to have a 
Jewish national assembly of Hebrew believers now. Indeed the es- 
tablishment of such would then be very desirable and would be a 
most definite mark of the endtime. On the other hand, it would 
produce two testimonies, a fact that cannot be harmonized with 
any of God’s dispensational teachings. 


eign ene eeRaE BRONTE: SRNR 


j 
: 
: 
= 
pi; 
= 
= 
= 
E 
a 
oT 
: 


29 


half of Revelation vii, are the fruits of the witness and 
labors of this Jewish remnant. That they do not belong to 
the church is evident from the scope of the Book of Reve- 
lation. The church is seen in glory in the crowned twenty- 
four elders in chapters iv and v. Only after the church is 
in the presence of the Lord can the remnant be called and 
sealed and begin its peculiar testimony. Now this fact that 
God has had a remnant and will yet call such a remnant 
proves that He hath not cast away ‘lis people. 


Pit 
Bt 


sii aaah aati Secaaiaige, aah Stas ress eats ie 


ean rere 


ae. 


aotakeasyeeatnastuesrestemrioes 


canal ee 


Blindness of 
Israel. 


Harm of certain 
Bible exposi- 
tion. 


CHAPTER_ IV. 


ISRAEL’S APOSTASY AND BLINDNESS NOT PERMANENT. 


HE next answer to the question of Romans xi and argu- 
ment of Israel’s position in God’s purposes is taken 
from the Old Testament Scriptures. 

“What is it then? What Israel seeks for, that he has not 
obtained; but the election has obtained, and the rest have 
been blinded, according as it is written, God has given to 
them a spirit of slumber, eyes not to see, and ears not to 
hear, unto this day. And David says, Let their table be for 
a snare, and for a gin, and for a falltrap, and for a recom- 
pense to them; let their eyes be darkened not to see, and bow 
down their back alway” (verses 7-10). 

It is here where commentaries have their say about the 
blindness of Israel and that God is completely through with 
the Jews. What a ridiculous way some persons liave in in- 
terpreting the Word of God. Some labor to prove that in 
the beginning of this chapter Paul means the “spiritual 
Israel” —the church—and not the literal Israel, but when the 
same expositors reach the verses which are before us now, 
they are very correct and orthodox in saying it is literal 
Israel. Such method of Bible exposition has done untold 
harm in confusing Christian believers, besides being dishon- 
oring to God. When the apostle speaks here of the election 
he means the believing part of the nation at all times, the 
remnant past, the remnant future, and all those who believe 
30 


Las8 | Liaise neNnlanbed ine oceannaineniee ma ~ 


31 


now in the Lord Jesus Christ. When he speaks of the rest 
being blinded he means the remainder of the nation, which 
does not believe. As they refused Him who spake, blind- 
ness judicially was put upon them. Now this judicial blind- 
ness must not be looked upon in a way as not a few have 
done it, and then by inference use it to build upon it such 
abominable doctrines as universal salvation. They reason 
God blinded them and they are not responsible for what they 
ca;not see. God will have mercy upon them all, and all 
Jews will be saved t last, all who died with this judicial 
blindness upon them. We shall take up this evil doctrine 
later in our exposition. 

The judicial blindness is not to be understood that every 
Jew born is born with this blindness upon him. Far ‘ye this 
thought! Every generation of Jews, in refusing the light 
which shines for all, in sharing the sin of their fathers in 
rejecting their b‘<ssiah, in persevering in their evil ways of 
unbelief, is put under the sentence of this judicial blindness. 
The Jew may see if he so chooses and he may refuse the 
light. God declared in His Word beforehand what would 
happen to th n in this respect. 

Before us are three quotations from the Old Testament 
Scriptures. The Hebrews divide the Old Testament into 
three parts: The _.aw, the Prophets, and the Writings. 
The Holy Spirit here quotes from each of these divisions. 
The passages quoted prove that such a judicial blindness is 
to come upon them according to God’s sovereign dealings. 
Now the most significant fact is that in none of these pas- 
sages to which the Holy Spirit calls our attention He teaches 


False inference, 


Judicial blind- 
ness, 


Three quota- 
tions, 


= a 


spe oeaier 


Sasa iy 


it ccecaeeet ieee areecmese=t teal 
casi ge PRR a = 


Blindness not 
final, 


Deut. xxix : 4. 


Isaiah xxix : 10. 


32 


that this blindness is to be permanent and final. There is no 
prophecy in the Scriptures which declares that the present 
blinded condition of Israel is their permanent condition. 

The three quotations from the Old Testament Scriptures 
teach us much on these lines. The first is taken from the 
Book of Deuteronomy, “Yet the Lord hath not given you an 
heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this 
day” (Deut. xxix:4). It is well known how wonderfully 
the whole future of Israel is predicted through Moses in 
the closing chapters of the last Book which he wrote by 
divine inspiration. Their whole history is outlined. They 
were to be a people blinded, forsaking God, to be scattered 
in consequence of it unto the corners of the earth. Their 
whole career of decline anc apostasy is made known. But 
alongside of all these prophecies of what should befall them 
and which were so literally fulfilled we find prophecics re- 
lating to their restoration and future blessing. There is 
not a word anywhere in the writings of Moses which declares 
that God would ever leave them under the curse and in the 
condition where God in His governmental dealings had to 
put them. 

If we turn to the prophets, we find that Isaiah xxix :10 is 
quoted: “For the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit 
of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes; the prophets and 
your rulers, the seers, hath He covered. And the vision of 
all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed. 
which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, 
I pray thee, and he saith, I cannot, for it is sealed.” How 
all this has been fulfilled in the judicial blindness, which has 


sem onsets tl Sl than een ieee tae rad 


Lg | en De 


ac) auerapnemapeinaeaaiod: stale 


aja | MNEs 


33 


come upon Israel! Eyes to see not and ears to hear not; 
they read their own Scriptures and worship the law as the 
breath of God and still they see not Him who is the End of 
the Law; nor do they hear His voice as He speaks in the 
Book. Their own Scriptures are indeed a sealed Book to 
them. But is this condition to prevail forever? Is there no 
hope for a change? Does Isaiah or any other prophet utter 
nothing but curse and blindness upon a disobedient people, 
for whom there is no hope? It is far different. Not alone 
do Isaiah and the rest of God's prophets reveal that the 
apostasy and judgment of Israel is only temporary, but their 
writings are full of glorious visions of that which is yet in 
store for the nation. It is true a Christian exposition of the 
Scriptures, lacking the illuminating power of the Holy 
Spirit has made sad havoc with these visions. These visions 
of a glorious future are almost universally applied to the 
church, and the blindness and curses left upon the Jews. 
Such unreasonable method of Bible interpretation as still 
upheld is disastrous and must result in the greatest con- 
fusion. 

We do not need to go outside of the chapter from which 
we have quoted to show that the judicial blindness is not the 
final state of Israel. In the closing verses of Isaiah xxix 
we have Jehovah’s comfortable word for Israel : 

“And in that day the deaf siall hear the words of the 
Book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and 
out of darkness. The meek also shall increase their joy in 
the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy 
One of Isracl. For the terrible one is brought to naught, 


Spiritualizing. 


Psalm Ixix:22-24. 


The sufferings of 
Christ. 


34 


and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity 
are cut off” (verses 18-20). This is a prophecy relating to 
the future. “That day” is the day of our Lord’s manifesta- 
tion in power and glory, and to the blind and deaf people 
blessings are promised. Throughout Isaiah’s vision we find 
hundreds of promises which belong to Israel and which were 
never fulfilled in the past. 

The third division of the Hebrew Bible, the Writings, is 
represented in the passage before us by a quotation from the 
Book of Psalms: “Let their table become a snare before 
them, and their very welfare a trap; let their eyes be dark- 
ened, that they see not, and make their loins continually to 
shake. Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let the 
fierceness of thine anger take hold of them. Let their habi- 
tation be desolate; let there be no dweller in their tents” 
(Psalm Ixix :22-24). 

David uttered these words through the Holy Spirit. The 
connection in which they stand is very significant. It is not 
David who relates his sufferings here, but the Spirit of Christ 
testifies beforehand concerning the sufferings which are in 
Christ and the rejection of the Messiah by His own people. 
“Reproach has broken my heart and I am full of heaviness ; 
and I looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and 
for comforters, but I found none. They gave me also gall 
for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to 
drink” (Psalm Ixix:20). All this was fulfilled in Christ. 
This very prophecy He remembered on the cross when He 
said, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, “I thirst.” 

The words of imprecation, which follow and which are 


. hi " , scanned kes inane aE ak 
sunnah | NMBA 2 NSTC AR Ss SRN Taanciatts ie & 


35 


quoted in our chapter, show what was to come upon the 
people who treated Him thus. Even so it has been. But 
shall they ever remain in that condition of rejection? Shall 
that awful cry “His blood be upon us and upon our children” 
continually be executed upon all future generations, or is a 
day coming when that precious blood in its atoning power 
will cover all Israel and blessing will take the place of the 
curse? We only need to turn to the close of this Psalm to 
find an answer once more. “For God will save Zion, and 
will build the cities of Judah; that they may dwell there and 
have it in possession. The seed also of His servants shall 
inherit it; and they that love His name shall dwell therein” 
(Psalm Ixix:35, 36). Here the future of Zion and the 
nation is given. The whole Book of Psalms is full of the 
praises of His redeemed people Israel, brought back to God 
and into their own land, with Jehovah as King dwelling in 
their midst. These praises are, of course, all future; but 
these Psalms tell us that God has not finally cast away His 
people. We learn therefore that the threatened and pre- 
dicted blindness of Israel, predicted in the Law, the Proph- 
ets, and the Writings, the entire Old Testament, has come to 
pass. But this blindness is not complete nor final. The Lord 
who brought blindness upon Israel will yet bless His people 
Israel with peace and do all He spake through the mouth 
of His holy prophets. 


SER’ 


Again: Far be 
the thought. 


Grace for Gen- 
tiles revealed. 


CHAPTER V 
‘“"Q PROVOKE THEM TO JEALOUSY.”’ 


W* find the next answer to our question in the eleventh 

verse. “I say, then, have they stumbled in order that 
they might fall? Far be the thought: but by their fall there 
is salvation to the nations to provoke them to jealousy.” We 
have learned before that the setting aside of Israel is not 
final, their blindness and hardness of heart is not to be their 
permanent condition. They did stumble indeed, but their 
stumbling was not for the sake of their fall. The second 
time we find in the chapter the emphatic “Far be the 
thought.” Put this thought as far away as possible from 
you, that God should permit His own people, His chosen 
people, the people whom He foreknew, to stumble in order 
that they might fall. A wonderful fact is now brought to 
our notice. God’s deep councils of mercy and wisdom are 
being put before us. “By their fall there is salvation to 
the nations.” 

This great fact is not altogether unknown in the predic- 
tions of the Old Testament Scriptures, though the extent is 
a new revelation, for we read in the Epistle to the Ephes- 
ians, that the fullness of the grace of God towards the 
nations (Gentiles) is one of the mysteries made known 
through Paul. “For this reason, I Paul, prisoner of the 
Christ Jesus for you Gentiles, if ye have heard of the dis- 


pensation of the grace of God which is given me to you- 
36 


ca ntsiaencbuatidad | dei dan atacbs> ice nsheb se eeest tite de nianiin Ahi AEN 


ij | het Sian acai etal OS abby Saat tebe 


37 


ward ; how that by revelation He made known unto me the 
mystery (as I wrote afore in a few words, whereby when 
you read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mys- 
tery of the Christ), which in other ages was not made 
known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto His 
holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; that the Gentiles 
should be fellowheirs and of the same body, and partakers 
of His promise in the Christ by the Gospel” (Eph. iii 71-6). 

We find, however, while the fact that the unsearchable 
riches of the Christ were tc eached among the Gen- 
tiles for the formation of the . ...1ch, which is His body, is 
a new revelation, that the very words in the verse before us 
point us back to the Old Testament. 

In Deuteronomy xxxii, the farewell song of Moses, a 
God-breathed song and wonderful prophecy, the Holy Spirit 
gives us a history of Israel. Their origin and calling, the 
mercy and goodness of God towards them, their disobedi- 
ence and apostasy, rejection and punishment, restoration 
and glorious future, all is clearly predicted and outlined. 
Let the infidel and higher critic answer the argument of 
supernaturalism contained in the song of Moses. He 
cannot; it is a miracle. 

Beginning at the fifteenth verse of that chapter we read: 
“But Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked: thou art waxen fat, 
thou art grown thick—thou art covered! Then he forsook 
God, which made him and lightly esteemed the rock of His 
salvation. They provoked Him to jealousy with strange 
gods, with abominations provoked they Him to anger. They 
sacrificed unto demons, not to God; to gods whom they 


Deut. xxxii. 


An inspired 
history. 


en 


Sa!vation to 
Gentiles. 


38 


knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your 
fathers feared not. Of the Rock that begat thee, thou art 
unmindful, and hast forsaken God that formed thee. And 
when the Lord saw it He abhorred them, because of the 
provoking of his sons, > .d of his daughters. And He said, 
I will hide My face from them, I will see what their end 
shall be; for they are a very froward generation, children 
in whom is no faith. They have moved Me to jealousy with 
that which is not God; they have provoked Me to anger 
with their vanities, and I will move them to jealousy with 
those that are not a people; I will provoke them to anger 
with a foolish nation.” 

Here we read of Israel’s apostasy. The Rock, whom they 
lightly esteemed, the Rock of His salvation, is none other 
than the Lord Jesus Christ. In consequence of their un- 
faithfulness and provoking God, the Lord would move them 
to jealousy with those which are not a people. We notice 
that this announcement comes in afte. their apostasy was 
fully established. And so it was in its fulfillment. When the 
Lord Jesus moved n the earth and preached the kingdom 
of the heavens, He did so to His own and there was no 
proclamation to the Gentiles. His disciples He commanded 
not to go in the way of the Gentiles, but to go only to the 
lost sheep of the house of Israel. After His resurrection, 
ascension and the pouring out of the Holy Spirit, His lov- 
ing hand is still outstretched towards His blinded, erring 
people. His mercy lingered over Jerusalem. The first 
part of the book of Acts is evidence of it. Only after the 
apostasy is fully manifested the instrument is called, the 


39 


Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul, to make known the fact, “sal- 
vation is come by their fall to the Gentiles to provoke them 
to jealousy.” 

In the ninth and tenth chapters of this epistle we find 
otic Old Testament passages, which give glimpses of the 
rejection of Israel, for a time and the call of the Gentiles, 
“Even us, whom He hath called, not of the Jews only, but 
also of the Gentiles. As He saith also in Osee, I will call 
them My people, which were not My people, and her be- 
loved, which was not beloved. And it shall come to pass 
that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not My 
people, there shall they be called the children of Gcd” 
(Rom. ix:25, 26, compare with Hosea i:10; ii:23). “But 
Esaias is very vold and saith, I was found of them that 
sought Me not; I was made manifest unto them, that asked 
not after Me. But to Israel He saith, All day long I have 
stretched forth My hands unto a disobedient and gain- 
saying people” (Rom. x:20, 21, and Isaiah Ixv:1-2). 

We are aware we are stating that, which is fully believed 
by all true believers who read and study God’s Word. It is 
not denied that after His own rejected Him, who is God 
manifested in the flesh, that He was preached to the Gen- 
tiles. By their fall salvation is come to the Gentiles, is 
generally believed throughout Christendom; but what is not 
known and little believed is the fact that salvation is come 
to the Gentiles, by their fall, in order to provoke them to 
jealousy. In this fact lies the argument that God has not 


cast away His people; for if He had cast Israel away, why 


should He wish to provoke them to jealousy? The fact that 


To provoke them 
to jealousy. 


To save some of 
them. 


The sin of Gen- 
tiles. 


40 


His aim is to provoke His earthly people to jealousy by hav- 
ing extended salvation to the Gentiles, they receiving bless- 
ings in Christ, is sufficient evidence that He is still occu- 
pied with His people. 

Furthermore, we read in this chapter that the provoking 
to jealousy is with the view of the salvation of some of 
them (verse 14). Such is the statement of the Apostle 
himself. How fully it brings out once more “God hath not 
cast away His people.” But has the divine purpose been 
realized? Has there been from the sides of the Gentiles 
in possession of salvation, a provoking to jealousy for Israel ? 
Have the Jews learned from Christianity that the Gentiles 
are in possession of the better things, which they and their 
fathers rejected? Alas! History gives a far different pic- 
ture, even up to the present time. In the first night vision 
of Zechariah* the accusation is prominent, “They (the Gen- 
tiles) have helped forward their (Israel’s) affliction.” So it 
has been for centuries; so it is in the twentieth century. 
Instead of provoking the Jews to jealousy, that some of 
them might be saved, the Gentiles have hated and bitterly 
persecuted the Jews, and by their unchristian, yea inhuman, 
cruel and wicked treatment of the Jews, the Jews instead of 
being moved to jealousy, have become more hardened and 


their afflictions have been increased. The sin against Israel 
is the sin of the Gentiles, it will be the sin for which they 
will be judged by Him, who is not only King of kings, but 
also the King of the Jews (Matt. xxv:31; Joel iii:1-3). 


*See our “Studies in Zechariah.” 


41 


And yet it has not been universally thus. In these last 
days especially many Christian believers have a loving and 
prayerful interest in Israel and realize the debt they owe to 
the Jew. More prayer is made, we believe, for Israel and 
for the peace of Jerusalem, than has been made since the 
days of the Apostles. And there is no doubt that ‘some of 
them” are being saved. 

We shall find with the next verse the connection which 
exists between the fact that salvation came by their fall to 
the Gentiles, and the fact that a time is coming when Israel 
will be received; the time of their fullness. It is one of the 
strongest arguments for Israel’s Hope and calling which 
follows. 

In conclusion of our meditation on this verse let us re- 
member that while salvation has come to the Gentiles by 
their fall, that salvation as it is offered now is not continu- 
ally to be offered to the world. The acceptable year of the 
Lord, having lasted for nearly two thousand years, is far 
spent, the dav of vengeance is at hand. 


eae” 


i 
{ 
E 
" 
. 
5 i 
j 
fl 
4 
‘ 
i 
| 
cu i 
i st 
i 
at 
i 4} 
hon 
a 


Glorifying His 
ministry. 


CHAPTER VI. 


THEIR RECEPTION—LIFE FROM THE DEAD. 


W* reach now a most important climax in this chapter. 

First the Holy Spirit pointed us to the Apostle Paul as 
a pattern of what God in His rich mercy will yet do for the 
people, whom He hath not cast away. Then we learned 
that Israel's apostasy is neither complete nor final, and in 
our last meditation the fact was before us that God per- 
mitted His people to fall, to be set aside for a time to bring, 
by their fall, salvation to the Gentiles, with the purpose in 
view “to provoke them to jealousy.” 

We are now led on in the wonderful ways of God. “But 
if their fall be the world’s wealth, and their loss the wealth 
of the nations, how much more their fulness? For I speak 
to you, nations, inasmuch as I am Apostle of the nations, 
I glorify my ministry; if by any means I shall provoke to 
jealousy them which are my flesh, and shall save some from 
among them. For if their casting away be the world’s 
reconciliation, what their reception, but life from the dead?” 
(verses 12-15). 

Let us notice that the apostle here glorifies his ministry 
as apostle of the nations. The whole epistle was addressed 
to the Romans, mostly believers from the Gentiles, living in 
Rome, later to become the prison of Paul and at last the 
seat of Christianity in its apostate and corrupt form. But here 
the apostle makes still more prominent that his word is 

42 


4s 


meant for those of the nations. He says: “I speak to you 
the nations.’ We have, therefore, before us a message, 
which is of special value and importance to Gentiles. We 
have learned before that Israel’s disobedience and fall 
brought salvation to the Gentiles. 

Thus their fall was the wealth of the world, their loss 
the wealth of the nations (or Gentiles) and their casting 
away the world’s reconciliation. But this is not all. All 
this is far from fulfilling that gracious promise made to the 
father of the nation, Abraham, when God told him “in thy 
seed all the nations of the earth shall be blest.” Israel’s fall, 
the means in God’s purpose to bring salvation to the nations, 
is not the final thing and the blessings the nations received 
by their fall is not the fullest blessing which God has in 
store for the nations of the world. There is a “much 
more” in Romans xi. In turning to the fifth chapter of 
this epistle we find the same two significant words used by 
the way of contrast. There it is the “much more” of sal- 
vation. “For if, when we were enemies we were reconciled 
to God by the death of His Son, much more, being recon- 
ciled, we shall be saved by His life” (Rom, v:10). Here it 
is the “much more” of dispensational blessing. 

The Gospel is preached now to the nations for one great 
purpose. This purpose is not the conversion of the world, 


but it is to take out of them a people for His name. (Acts 
xv:14). This people taken out or called out, is the church 
(ecclesia), the body of the Lord Jesus Christ, to which 
every true believer belongs. It is, like the human body, 
composed of so many members, a number, known to God 


Much more. 


A geste ot aR aha te Ro Rar. aE agg 


ig ea vagi tee 


1| 
| 
; 

i 

| 
t 
1 
i 


No world conver- 
sion now, 


Source of confu- 
anion. 


44 


alone. This body will be complete some day and then the 
preaching of the Gospel of grace must of necessity cease, 
and the offer of salvation in its present form and under 
present conditions as made to the nations, will come to an 
end. 2 

It is all wrong to speak of worl! conversion in this age, 
in which the body of thx Lord je». Christ is forming, 
There is absolutely not a single promise in the Gospels, nor 
in the epistles, nor in any part of the New Lestament which 
assures us of world conversion, or gives us a right to pray 
for, or expect tne conversion of the world by present agen- 
cies through the church. ‘The world will be converted. Na- 
tions will walk in the light of God, and the knowledge of the 
glory of the Lord will cover the earth as the waters cover 
the sea, the curse of sin will be removed, nations will learn 
war no more, righteousness and peace shall kiss each other ; 
all this and scores of other blessings will literally come to 
pass. But all these promises and predictions about subdued 
nations and a kingdom of peace extending from sea to sea 
are found exclusively in the Old Testament Scriptures and 
not in the New. 

It is a sad fact that Christendom has fearfully erred in 
the interpretation o: these predictions and turned the time 
and manner of their fulfillment upside down. In this 
awful error lies the cause of all the present day confusion 
and apostasy of the professing church. Israel, which is so 
prominently on the pages of the Old Testament in connection 
with these great blessings, has been interpreted to mean 
“the church.” The time in which the blessings are to be 


45 


realized, to be the age now, instead of the age which is to 
come. The declarations of the Lord about this age and its 
ending, like the days of Noah and Lot, have been completely 
ignored, and the same has been done with the God-breathed 
statements of the apostles in the epistles. Nearly the whole 


of Christendom attends to Israel’s earthly calling and, at- 
tempting to do a work which God never means to have 
done in this age, fails most shamefully in it. As one has 
said, “The spiritualizing of Israel’s promises has been the 
carnalizing of the church.” 

lf we turn to the Old Testament we find, as we have 
shown in our “Harmony of the Prophetic Word,” every- 
thing revealed in perfect order. The /ast event seen in Old 
Testament prophecy is always the kingdom come, the na- 
tions blest and under the rule of Jehovah; peace on earth 
and the deliverance of groaning creation. 

This great and last event of Old Testament prophecy, a 
subdued earth ruled over by the King of Righteousness and 
Peace, is preceded by the judgments of God executed in 
the earth and above all by the spiritual an: national resto- 
ration of His ancient people, Israel. The fullest blessing 
for nations and for the earth is altogether conditioned by 
Israel, as head of the nations, come into her God-given 
inheritance. Israel converted and restored will result in the 
conversion of the nations of the earth. But Israel’s conver- 
sion and restoration to the land will not be till the second 
coming of the Son of Man, the Lord Jesus Christ, in great 
power and glory. Everywhere in the Old Testament 
we find the Lord in Glory and with His majesty visibly re- 


46 


vealed first of all, and by His personal, visible and glorious 
mauifestation, His earthly people is delivered and Jerusalem 
restored. We have, then, three great events in Old Testa- 
ment prophecy, still future: 

1. The personal, visible and glorious manifestation of the 
Lord from heaven. This Lord is the Lord Jesus Christ. 

2. The conversion and national restoration of Israel. 

3. The result of Israel’s conversion and restoration, na- 
tions blest and going to Jerusalem to worship the Lord of 
Hosts, etc. 

This order cannot be reversed. It is the divine program. 
If we were to prove the above statements we could go 
through every prophetic book of the Old Testament and to 
the Psalms and point out hundreds of passages, where this 
is clearly taught. Read, as striking proofs, Zechariah 
ii 6-13; Isaiah lix :20-21, and read the Ix chapter. 

“The gifts and calling of God are without repentance,” 
we read later in our chapter. He has undertaken to bless 
nations and the earth through Israel, His earthly people. 
When Israel failed and was disobedient, He had another 
gracious way to reveal, salvation came to the Gentiles, to 
take out a people for His name. This is the work in the 
present age and that is a parenthesis. As soon as this is 
accomplished He resumes His work with Israel. 

And now we are able to understand the “much more” 
of dispensational truth. 

Israel is promised in the Old Testament Scrip- 
tures a fulness and a time when they shall be 
received. This fulness comes when the Lord comes in 


47 


power and glory as the King. Now, if God brought bles- 
sing to the nations by their fall, how much more will He 
less the nations when their fulnes comes. Through their 
fulness the whole world will receive the fullest blessing, 
blessings minutely given in the Old Testament and liter- 
ally to be fulfilled. 

tut there is a phrase in the passage before us which 
claims our special attention, “Their reception shall be life 
from the dead.” What does it mean, “life from the dead?” 
It is strange that this phrase should be interpreted as mean- 
ing « physical resurrection, Upon this passage, the pa »., 
“all Israel shall be saved,” and a few others, has been 
found the evil doctrine, unscriptural throughout, that all 
Jews who have lived will be raised from the dead, saved and 
unsaved, and they all will be brought back to the land to 
enjoy the blessings of the millennial kingdom. It is a larger 
Jewish Hope—a Jewish restitution of all things and conse- 
quently those who hold this evil doctrine are forced -to be- 
lieve also in a restitution of all things for Gentiles. When 
we reach the fact that “‘all Israel shall be saved” we expect 
to follow this more fully. 

Physical resurrection is here not at all in view. Nor is it 
in many passages in the Old Testament, where physical res- 
urrection is simply used as a type of a great change. It is so 
in the New Testament. Of the prodigal it is said “for this 
my son was dead and is come to life.” These literalists would 
never claim that he was physically dead. The vision of the 
valley fuli of dry bones is generally applied by these people 


who teach a restitution by resurrection. But the vision is 


Israel's fulness. 


Wrong teaching 


Is it physical 
resurrection ? 


48 


a vision to describe vividly the national resurrection of Is- 
rael and not a physical one. The dry bones are the whole 
house of Israel (Ez. xxxvii:12); but are these dry bones 
literally dry bones or are they used to typify Israel’s death 
spiritually and nationally? If they are literally dry bones 
how could they say: “Our bones are dried and our hope is 
lost; we are cut off for our parts’? Surely, literal dry 
bones have no mouth to speak. If we read that they are 
in graves and the Lord will open their graves, it means that 
He is bringing His people back fron their graves among 
the nations, where they are buried nationally. Numerous 
other passages could be cited in which physical resurrection 
is used to typify the spiritual and national revival of Israel. 

“Life from the dead” does not mean a literal resurrection. 
It has a double meaning. First it means when their recep- 
tion comes it will be for them, spiritually and nationally, 
life; they will live again spiritually and as a nation. 

In the second place the term means that the result of 
Israel’s reception, coming into the place of blessing, will be 
for the world at large “life from the dead.” This is identi- 
cal with the term, which the Lord uses in Matthew xix :28, 
“the regeneration,” it will be a great change which takes 
place, in resurrection power. 

There is one book which illustrates very strongly the pas- 
sage before us. It is the book so much belittled and ridi- 
culed in our day, the Book of Jonah. 

Our Lord said to the Pharisees, who demanded a sign 
from Him that no sign would be given them but the sign of 
the prophet Jonas. (Matt. xii:38.) He then spoke of 


49 


His coming resurrection foreshadowed by Jonah’s experi- 
ence. No doubt the proud and learned Pharisees turned 
away from Him; and with a smile the rationalistic Sadducee 
may have said, “What nonsense, Jonah never lived, it is 
all a myth, there is no resurrection,” etc. Oh, the adulter- 
ous generation! Modern Phariseeism and Sadduceeism, 
Higher Critics, etc., are likewise an adulterous gener- 
ation. They tell us what a beautiful book the book of Jonah 
is, what sublime lessons it teaches. But did Jonah ever 
live? Of course not, they say—he never lived, his life is 
a myth—how could a fish swallow a man? etc. Awful : 


consequences! Jesus uses the deliverance of Jonah as a 

type of His blessed resurrection, the foundation of our 

holy faith. If Jesus did not know that Jonah ever lived, 

if He used a mytii to typify His resurrection,—well, then, 

His resurrection may not have been a real one, and how 

could He be the Son of God? The story of 
Jonah’s life is in different respects typical of Christ, but it 

has still another meaning which makes known the divine wis- 

dom and inspiration. The life of nearly every servant of God 

in the Old Testament has a twofold typical application— 

the one, Christ, the Messiah, and the other, Israel, the 

chosen people of God. Follow out this thought and apply 

it to Joseph, David, Daniel, the prophets, etc. Jonah is a 

type of Israel. The whole history of the seed of Abraham, 

past, present, and future, is contained in a nutshell in that 

book. 
1. Jonah’s call. He is sent by Jehovah to preach to Its typleal mesn- 

Nineveh, He knows God while Nineveh is in darkness. 


50 


So God prepared Himself Israel a nation to show forth 
His praises. Salvation is of the Jews. Through them He 
desires to make known His loving xindness and His re- 
demption. In the seed of Abraham all the nations of the 
earth are to receive blessing. These are God’s gifts and 
calling. They are without repentance (Rom. xi:29). 

2. Jonah is disobedient. He turns his back upon God 
and flees from His face. He goes on board of a merchant- 
man. He goes in the opposite direction. Se Israel became 
an apostate people, and the Jew turns merchant. Forsook 
God and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. Like 
Jonah, disobedient to the heavenly vision, instead of being 
a blessing becoming a curse among the nations. 

3. Trouble soon comes upon Jonah, the disobedient ser- 
vant of God. The storm of disaster tosses his ship upon the 
wild waves of the angry sea. Everything is against him 
because he rebelled against God. Thus with the Jews. 
Misfortune after misfortune, storm after storm has broken 
over them since they rejected God and their King Messiah. 
They are tossed about by the nations. The sea always 
represents nations in the Word. 

4. Jonah does not deny his God and his nationality. He 
said, “I am a Hebrew and I fear the Lord, the God of 
heaven, which has made the sea and the dry land.” So the 
Jew in his apostasy still professes to be a believer in God, 
fears His name and does not deny that he is a Jew. 

5. Jonah is cast overboard. He is given up to the 
angry waves. He is seen struggling in the waves. Typical 
of the Jew being cast away, though not forever. 


51 


6. The men in Jonah’s ship when they saw that as soon 
as Jonah was in the water the waters calmed down, these 
men, who were all heathen, feared the Lord exceedingly, 
and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord and made vows. What 
a wonderful illustration of the very statement in this epistle: 
“By their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles.” The 
Gentiles have received salvation when the Jew was set 
aside nationally. 

7, Jonah is miraculously preserved in the belly of a 
sea monster. (There is nothing in the Hebrew to show that 
it was a whale.) He is to have his abode there for three 
days and three nights. He does not lose his life and exis- 
tence, but he is put into a grave and is there wo. derfully 
preserved. The Tew is likewise in his grave among the 
nations, nation | ‘2ad, but still God keeps the Jew as He 
did Jonah. © .w is God’s standing miracle. No infidel 
can explain at ., .1e Jew and his miraculous existence. 

8. Jonah was not digested by the fish. He remained there 
undigested. The nations have not digested the Jews. This 
people shall dwell alone and not be reckoned among the 
natioas. The Jew is still a Jew. Assimilation has failed. 

9. Jonah at the end of the appointed time commenced to 
repent in his grave. He cried to God. He wished himself 
back to His holy temple, ar’ he finished his prayer with the 
believing shout, “Salvation is of the Lord.” The Jews will 
also repent. There are unmistakable signs of a changed 
attitude of the Jew noticeable. Still, before that great 
national repentance comes, there will be likewise first a 
great tribulation. Like Jonah many are to-day desiring 


52 


for His holy temple, and they are getting ready to return 
to the land. At last they will acknowledge that salvation 
is of the Lord, and welcome their King with the shout 
“Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.” 

10. God made the fish vomit out Jonah. He that 
scattered Israel wiil zather them again. They will be 
brought back to the iand and restored. They will build the 
waste places, the desolations of many generations. The 
Word of God has hundreds of promises which belong to 
literal Israel and speak of a literal restoration. If we 
do not believe that, we might as well close the Bible and 
become Higher Critics, unbelievers, etc. 

11. Jonah is sent the second time, and he follows the 
command. So Israel is yet to fulfill its grandest mission. 
Their King, our coming Lord, will commission them again 
and send them forth to proclaim His salvation. Israel 
will then follow obediently. 

12. The whole city of Nineveh repented after hearing 
the apostate, the punished, and the restored Jew preach. 
A whole city was swept by a revival. The masses were 
saved. Now is the time for the salvation of individuals. 
There is no such thing at this present time as saving the 
masses or converting the wori. The masses will be saved 
and the world converted through the preaching of the Jews 
when they are converted and restored in the land and Jesus 
is crowned as their King and sits upon the throne of His 
Father David. 

This then illustrates, at least in part and in a faint way, 
what their reception is and means, “Life from the dead.” 


CHAPTER VII. 
THE PARABLE OF THE OLIVE TREE. 


[* the next place a parable is given to declare Israel’s posi- 

tion and hope as well as the relationship and responsibil- 
ity of the Gentiles. In this portion of our chapter we find 
some very solemn truths for Gentiles, and, indeed, as we ad- 
vance towards the end of this great dispensational chapter, 
the Hope of Israel shines brighter till we reach the declara- 
ton, that the Redeemer shall come out of Sion to turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob. 

“Now, if the first fruits be holy, the lump also; and if 
the root be holy, the branches also. Now if some of the 
branches have been broken out, and thou, being a wild olive 
tree, hast been graffed in amongst them, and hast become 
a fellow partaker of the root and fatness of the olive tree, 
boast not against the branches; but if thou bcast, it is not 
that thou barest the root, but the root thee. Thou wilt say, 
The branches have been broken out in order that I might be 
graffed in. Right: they have been broken out through un- 
belief, and thou standest through faith. Be not highminded, 
but fear; if God indeed has not spared the natural branches ; 
lest it might be He spare not thee. Behold then the good- 
ness and severity of God: upon them who have fallen, sever- 
ity, upon thee, goodness of God, if thou abide in goodness, 
otherwise thou also wilt be cut away. And they, too, if they 
abide not in unbelief, shall be graffed in; for God is able to 

53 


The parable. 


The Arstfruit. 


54 


graff them in again. For if thou hast been cut out of the 
olive tree, wild by nature, and, contrary to nature, hast been 
graffed into the good olive tree, how much more shall those, 
which are the natural branches be graffed into their own 
olive tree?” (verses 16-24). 

The parable is concerning a good and a wild olive tree, 
branches which were broken off and branches which were 
graffed in and branches which are threatened with being cut 
away, and the broken off ones to be graffed in again. Ex- 
hortations and solemn warnings are by this parable given 
and important dispensational teachings cluster around it. 

Before we ascertain the meaning of the olive tree, we 
briefly touch on the sentence “now, if the firstfruit be holy, 
the lump also.” The firstfruit does not mean anything out- 
side of Israel. Some Christians in these days talk about 
firstfruit, as if in the body of the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
church, there is a select number, which through selfdenial, 
service and suffering obtains a special place and enters into 
the God-given inheritance first. When we read in Romans 
viii of having the firstfruits of the Spirit, it applies to all 
true believers. In James i:18, “that we should be a certain 
firstfruits of his creatures,” it refers to Christian believers, 
who were Israelites by nature, and in Revel. xiv:4, “those 
who have been bought from men as firstfruits to God and 
to the Lamb,” it does not mean a part of the church, but the 
Jewish remnant. 

Here in Romans xi for the fuller understanding of the 
firstfruit, which is holy, and the lump, Num. xv:19-21 and 
Leviticus xxiii:15-17 have to be taken into consideration. 


55 


We cannot follow this in detail, but rather turn to the main 
argument of the passage before us. The good olive tree 
with a root and branches is to be considered first. What 
does this olive tree represent? It is a type of Israel. God 
hath chosen trees as types of His earthly people, because 
trees are rooted in the earth and extend their branches up- 
ward towards heaven and they yield fruit, for which He 
looks in His professing people. Jothai..s parable in Judges 
ix:7-15 has a dispensational aspect. The trees mentioned 
called to be king over the other trees are types of Israel 
and the bramble is typical of the Gentiles. The olive tree, 
the figtree and the vine, spoken of for the first time together 
in the above passage, are seen in different parts of the 
Scripture as representing Israel. The vineyard so carefully 
kept, in Isaiah v, and the vine yielding wild grapes, applies to 
this people. “Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt; thou 
hast cast out the nations, and planted it. . . Why hast thou 
broken down her hedges, so that all which pass by the wav 
do pluck her? The boar out of the wood doth waste it, and 
the wild beast of the field doth devour it” (Psalm Ixxx :8- 
14). “Yet I planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed; 
how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a 
strange vine unto me?” (Jerem. ii:21). 

Of the figtree as a type of Israel, we read in the New Tes- 
tament. The parable in Luke xiii:7-9 meant primarily 
Israel. The Lord came and sought fruit for three years. 
When no fruit was found the judgment sentence was car- 
ried out. it was cut down, but the root remained. In Mat- 
thew xxi:19 there is the record of a symbolical action «: 


The t of the 
g olive tres. 


Ps. Ixxx: 8, 


Jerem. ii : 21. 


Matth. xxi: 19 


The figtree. 


Evergreen. 


The root, 


56 


the Lord. “And when He saw a figtree in the way, He came 
to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said 
unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward forever. 
And presently the figtree withered away.” And the wither- 
ing away, the tree becoming dead in its outward appearance, 
stands for the cutting off of the nation during this age. 

But again the Lord said “Now learn a parable of the fig- 
tree; when his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, 
ye know that the summer is nigh” (Matt. xxiv:32). The 
figtree will bud again. The olive tree is not only mentioned 
here, but we read of it in Jeremiah xi:16: “The Lord called 
thy name a green olive tree, fair, and of goodly fruit: with 
the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and 
the branches of it have broken.” The olive tree typifies 
Israel in covenant relation with God. The olive tree stands 
for the Abrahamic covenant. The olive tree is evergreen. 
And so that covenant is lasting and forever, and changes 
not by changing seasons. Israel’s disobedience and faith- 
lessness does not annul it. 

A root is mentioned and that root is said to be holy (sep- 
arated). The root is the one with whom the covenant was 
‘nade, Abraham. But not alone he, but the root has three 
branches, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; the promise is re- 
peated to each. In Exodus iii:15 we read how God names 
Himself in connection with the children of Israel. “Thus 
shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The Lord God of 
your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the 
God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you; this is my name for- 
ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.” Why 


oc ee aaa 


57 


should He name Himself thus? Because in this root, Ab- 
raham, Isaac and Jacob He hath revealed Himself in type 
as Father in Abraham, as ‘od the Son in Isaac, and in over- 
coming the flesh and in guidance, as God the Holy Spirit 
in Jacob. And this root is holy, separated; so are the 
branches, that which springs out of the root. God’s purpose 
with Israel is, to have in them a separated, holy people. The 
root vouches for the final outcome. As wonderful as the 
beginning of that people has been in that separated One, so 
wonderful, even more so, is their future. 

On account of unbelief some of the branches were broken 
off. They lay on the ground, separated from the root, with- 
out life. 

A wild olive tree is seen next in the parable and the wild 
olive tree is grafied in amongst the branches and becomes 
a fellow partaker of the root and of the fatness of the olive 
tree. In the wild olive tree we have a picture of the Gen- 
tiles. It is, however, of the greatest importance that we 
see that it is not the true church, which is represented by the 
wild olive tree. This is often erroneously stated. Later we 
find the threat, and more than a threat, the fact that the wild 
olive tree branches are to be cut away, broken off, removed 
from the root, upon which they were graffed. This can 
never be true of the individual member of the body of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, nor of the true church as a whole. It is 
true that all believers are fellow partakers of the olive tree, 
and they stand by iaith. “Now, therefore, ye are no more 
strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints 
and of the household of God; and are built upon the foun- 


Broken off 
branches. 


The wild olive 
tree. 


> 
ee 


58 


} 
f 


q 
f 


dation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself 
being the chief cornerstone” (Eph. ii:19-20). The great 
mystery revealed is, “that the Gentiles should be fellowheirs, 
and of the same body, and partakers of His promise in 
Christ by the Gospel.” But to say that the wild olive tree 
represents the true church graffed in, would be far from the 

Gentiles and not truth. Gentiles are represented by it, all who are privil- 
eged to hear and be under the influence of that which is 
first of all Israel’s. When the branches, the natural branches, 
were broken off, God put the Gentiles upon the ground of 
responsibility, where Israel as a nation stood, and gives 
the Gentiles a chance and allows them to partake of the root 
and fatness of the olive tree. The natural branches are 
Israel and the branches graffed in contrary to nature are all 
Gentiles, who are in professing Christendom. The wild i 
olive tree represents the same “kingdom of heaven” as seen 
in its mystery form in the Gospel of Matthew in the seven i 
parables (chapter xiii). As we hc'1 this clearly in our 
mind, the meaning of all that is before us becomes very 
plain. 

The wild olive tree, or as we may say just as well, Christ- 
endom, is now solemnly addressed and warned in this par- 

I speak to you, able. It is still, “I speak to you, Gentiles.” 

First, there is the warning, “Boast not against the 
branches.” Then an answer is heard from the side of the 
wild olive tree. “Thou wilt say then, The branches have 
been broken out in order that I might be graffed in.” To 
which the Holy Spirit answers: “Right! They have been 
broken off through unbelief, and thou standest through 


59 


faith. Be not highminded, but fear; if God indeed has not 
spared the natural branches ; lest it might be, He spare not 
thee either.” 

This is a most striking and solemn warning as well a8 @ solemn warning. 
prophecy. We remember once more, that the epistle was 
sent to Rome and that from Rome proceeded later all the cor- 
ruption, that leaven, which leaveneth the whole lump. If 
the warning here had been heeded, Christendom, with its 
evil doctrines and practices, its highmindedness, unbelief, 
apostasy and corruption would have been an impossibility. 
But just that against which the Holy Spirit warns has come 
to pass. The Gentiles, having partaken of the covenant bles- 
sings of Israel, declare with a boasting spirit, “The branches 
were broken off that 1 might be graffed in,” and boast 

i against the branches. Instead of entering into God’s re- 
vealed purposes concerning the Jews, the Gentiles and the 
church of God, Christendom ignores them, and in a spirit of 
highmindedness and not fear, in unbelief, boasts of being an 
earthly and permanent institution, called to convert and 
civilize the world. Here is the root of all the confusion in 
Roman, Greek and Protestant Christendom, with its almost 
innumerable divisions. Christendom having forgotten, ig- 
noring or misunderstanding God’s purposes concerning Is- 
rael, has become a boasting, worldly organization, calling 
itself “Israel” and laying claim to promises which are Israel’s 
in the age to come. Then the Gentiles have turned against 
the Jews; having no faith that they are “‘still beloved for the 
Father’s sake,” and that God“‘hath not cast away His peop!e.” 
They have persecuted them and do so to the end of this age. 


a 


om gs ARERR Ets 


Boasting. 


Lacdicea. 


Cut off, 


60 


And this boasting of the wild olive tree is sccn in its com- 
pleteness in the last part of the ¢.. ond division of the book 
of Revelation, in the third chapter. There we nave the last 
phase, and the saddest one of professing Christendom, La- 
odicea. It is boasting in riches, increase of goods. Laodi- 
cea boasts of increase in institutions, millions to extend edu- 
cational work and philanthropic schemes to convert the 
world, but it is the usurpation of Israel’s place and calling. 

The warning is, of course, unheedea. God did not spare 
the natural branches, He will not spare the branches which 
were graffed in. And stronger still, He says: “Behold, 
then, the goodness and severity of God; upon them who have 
fallen, severity; upon thee, goodness of God, if thou shalt 
abide in goodness, otherwise thou shalt also be cut off.” 
How solemn these words are! Did Gentile Christendom 
abide in the goodness of God? Far from it! It has dis- 
honored Him and His Word and has made and is making a 
greater failure than the Jews did. The unbelief manifested 
especially in our day, in Christendom, is indeed greater than 
the unbelief of Israel ever was. 

“Thou also shalt be cut off.” This is the sentence which 
will be executed upon the wild olive tree. It corresponds 
with the word to Laodicea: “So, the: because thou art 
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out o 
iny mouth.” And this judgment is not very far away. The 
apostasy is developing rapidly and God will not permit for- 
ever His Holy Word to be trampled upon by Gentiles an 
He will not stand the ever increasing rejection of the Sor 
of His love and the denial of His Deity and Lordship from 


bpereceesren 


epee: irs 


61 


the sides of the wild olive tree. “Thou also shalt be cut off !’” 
How soon this may come to pass! The true cl rch, com- 
posed of all believers wi be taken ini glo and ‘en 
there remains that which boasts and is highminded id 
upon this professing Christ endon: the judgment will fall 

But this is not all. \ ‘ach a climax now in this won- 
lerful parable. “And they, too, :f they abide not in unbelief, 
shall be graffed in; for God is able again to graff them in. 
For if thou hast been cut out of the olive tree, wild by na- 
ture. and contrary to nature, hast been graffed into the g od 
olive tree, how much more shall they, which are the natu- 
ral branches, be graffed into their own olive tree,” 


From ; we learn two facts. T°: first act, God will 
graff tese broken off branches in again; ‘te will pu’ them 
back uson their own olive tree. And this fact brings us sack 
to the question, “Hath God cast awa His people *” S ~e! 
He has not. ‘The o tree the cowenant promises | 
rael is as green as li ree; ail that happe is t 

e branches, on account _mbeisef. were broken i 
the ha vhich broke “nern off, an which took ‘ie wild 


iv tr-e and gave the wild olive tree the Gentiles ¢ “hz 
h: vill take thee branches ame put them ba 
“life from the ead,” that which was c: 
ck: this means the restoration of Israe 
second fact is a stili more important one. It gives 
xe order in which these events will come to pass. First, 
vild olive tree, graffed ir fails, then the wild olive 
tree branches are cut off, anc a the third place bicken off 
pranches, Israel, will be gratted back upon their own good 


Grafted in again 


The order . 


62 


olive tree. To-day we witness the apostasy of Gentile Chris- 
tendom. The next event will be the rapture of the true 
church and upon that follows the cutting off of that which 
is only an empty profession, judgment upon apostate Christ- 
endom, and this is followed by God receiving Israel back. 
This is the teaching of the parable, Israel shall be received 
back ; that the broken off branches do not mean individuals 
is clear. How strange that men should teach, they mean in- 
dividuals which were cut off, and that . ll Jews, unbelieving, 
of all generations which ever existed will be made alive and 
brought back to the land to enjoy there all blessings promised 
to the faithful and believing remnant. 

Our next and last demonstration that God hath not cast 
away His people will lead us further in the order of events, 
when and how all Israel is to be saved. 


CHAPTER VIUJI. 
A MYSTERY MADE KNOWN. 


E have reached the final answer to the question: “Hath 


i 


As the seventh and last 
proof of Israel’s glorious future, it is the completest of all. 


God cast away His peopie.’ 


“For I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, of this mys- 
tery, that ye be not wise in your own conceits, that blindness 
in part has happened to Israel, untiJ the fulness of the nations 
as come; and so all Israel shall be saved. According as it 
is written, The Deliverer shall come out of Sion; He shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob. And this is the covenant 
from me to them, when I shall take away their sins” (verses 
25-27). These words are not addressed to Gentiles, and no 
longer does the apostle say, “I speak to you, Gentiles,” but 
they are addressed to “Brethren,” that is, true believers. 
It has the same meaning here as in Romans xii:1. He is 
now going to make known a secret, a mystery, which by 
revelation was made known to him and of which he does 
not want his brethren to be ignorant. It is known to every 
reader of the Word of God that the word “mystery” and the 
revelation of mysteries hid in former ages is found exclu- 
sively in the Pauline epistles. Our Lord in Matthew xiii, 
that great dispensational chapter, speaks of the mysteries of 
the kingdom of the heavens (verse 11). The seven parables 
contain mysteries concerning the present Christian age. In 
the espistles given by the Holy Spirit through the Apostle 
63 


The seventh. 


To brethren. 


Mystery. 


Seven mysteries. 


64 


Paul we find the full revelation of these secret things, hid 
in former ages, and now made known. What are these 
mysteries in the epistles of Paul? We can count seven. 
“And without controversy greai is the mystery of godliness : 
God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen 
of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the 
world, received up into glory” (1 Tim. iii:%0). This is the 
mystery of the blessed Gospel itself in all its fulness. In 
Colossians i:26-27, we have a second mystery: “ ee a 
the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, 
which is, Christ in you the hope of glory.” Here the blessed 
union of Christ and the believer is made known. In Ephes- 
ians iii and v we have a third and fourth secret. These are 
concerning the church, which is both His body znd His bride. 

Then in 1 Corinthians xv: 51 is a fifth mystery: “Behold, 
I show you a mystery. We shall not all sleep, but we shall 
all be changed.” It is the blessed secret about the coming 
of the Lord for the gathering of His saints, more fully riade 
known in 1 Thess, iv:16, 17. In 2 Thess, ii is the mystery 
concerning the iniquity and the final Antichrist, and here 
in Romans xi it is the mystery of Israel. 

These secret things made known through Paul in these 
epistles are of the greatest importance. Ignorance in these 
is disastrous, and the true Christian position, calling and 
privileges, as well as what the church is and the destiny of 
the church, cannct be grasped without a deeper knowledge 
of these mysteries made known. 

Not alone does Paul want the brethren to know the mys- 
tery here, that they may not be ignorant, but he adds “that 


65 


ye may not be wise in your own conceits.” This would be a 
very suitable word to put over Christendom, “they are wise 
in their own conceits.” It characterizes the present day con- 
fusion and falling away about us. And why is the profess- 
ing church wise in her own conceit? The answer is 
evident, because the professing church ignores the mysteries 
made known. What a change we would see in Christendom 
if the mystery of church, what the church is, the one body, 
etc., were known. If the mystery were believed about the 
union of the believer with Christ, the believer’s completeness 
in Him, how different all would be. Alas! Ged’s secrets 
are ignored and religious man rather follows traditions and 
great men, and this is why Christendom is wise in their own 
conceits. And what keeps us humble? What keeps us from 
following our own thoughts and imaginations and being 
wise in our own conceits? Certainly only our complete sub- 
mission under that which God has revealed. 

What then is the mystery here, which is made known 
about Israel? It is twofold. First, Israel’s blindness is only 
in part and, Israel’s blindness has a limit, it will last up to a 
certain time. So God hath not cast away His people; a 
time is coming when the partial blindness of Israel will 
cease. 

That blindness in part has happened to Israel, we saw al- 
ready in the parable of the olive tree, where we learned that 
some of the branches were broken off. But when that blind- 
ness is to be removed, we have not seen before in our 
chapter. Here is something altogether new. In the Old 
Testament Scriptures we read much about Israel’s judicial 


Wise in their own 
conceits, 


Twofold. 


Partial blind- 
ness. 


Until. 


Fulness, 


66 


blindness, the judgments to fall upon them as a nation, and 
also their future exaltation and blessing. But nowhere do 
we find definite information when the great event of Israel’s 
reception will take place. 

When our Lord, befcre His ascension, was asked by His 
disciples, “Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the 
kingdom of Israel?” He answered, “It is not for you to 
know the times or the seasons which the Father hath put in 
His own power” (Acts i:6, 7). Here in Romans xi:25 we 
have the secret made known and the time is given, when 
Israel's blindness will cease. “Until the fulness of the Gen- 
tiles be come in.” The fulness of the nations is to come in 
first. This is the great work which has first to be accom- 
plished, the next great event, and as soon as this fulness of 
the Gentiles has been brought in, Israel’s hour of salvation 
and blessing has come. 

The important question is next, What does this term 
“fulness of the Gentiles” mean? It certainly does not mean 
what that poor and unscholarly paraphrase of the New Tes- 
tament, known and circulated by the name of “the tweztieth 
century New Testament” has made it. That inferior trans- 
lation says: “that callousness has to some extent come upon 
Israel, and will continue until all the rest of the world has 
been gathered in.” These translators who call themselves 
“twenty eminent scholars” ( they have chosen to hide their 
identity) tell us that the Greek word (pleroma) means “all 
the rest of the world.” What an awful liberty these self- 
styled eminent scholars have taken with the Word of God! 
Pleroma does not mean all the rest of the world,” but its true 


= (aaa - 


eaten 


67 


meaning is “the full number,” or translated with one 
word “fulness.” The full number of the Gentiles, or fulness 
of the Gentiles has to be brovght in. 

This term is also to be distinguished from “the times of 
the Gentiles,” which are to be fulfilled. Thus we read Luke 
xxi:24, “Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, 
until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” Here, too, is 
an “until,” that little word of hope aud cheer for poor Israel. 
But the two terms, “times of the Gentiles (or nations)” and 
“fulness of the Gentiles” are not identical. 

It is well that we see the difference at this time. The 
times of the Gentiles will end suddenly. The times of the 
Gentiles began with Nebuchadnezzar, whose dream, divinely 
interpreted by Daniel (Dan. ii.) is a prophecy about the Gen- 
tiles, and in that dream we read how the times of the Gen- 
tiles will be fulfilled, what the end will be. The stone, sinites 
the great image at its feet, the ten toes, that future ten 
kingdom division of the Roman empire, this stone which 
pulverizes the image, is the second coming of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, visibly and gloriously. Then Jerusalem will be de- 
livered and will no more be trodden down by the Gentiles, 
but become the city of a great king. 

Now, the fulness of the Gentiles is something altogether 
different. This is an event, which occurs before the times of 
the Gentiles are fulfilled. After the fulness of the Gentiles 
has been brought in the times of the Gentiles will still go on 
till the sudden end, the great catastrophe, as seen from 
Daniel’s prophecy. 


The fulness of the Gentiles means a certain number, a 


Luke xxi : 24. 


Times of the 
Gentiles. 


The remnant, 


68 


number known to God alone, called out from the nations io 
constitute the church; in other words, the fulness of the Gen- 
tiles is the completion of the true church. As soon as the 
church is complete as to numbers, this fulness will be brought 
in, that is, into Himself in His own presence. A day is 
coming—and how soon it may be !—when the church is com- 
plete ; the last member has been added to the body and then 
that fulness is brought in. In Ephesians i:23, the church is 
called His body, the fulness (pleroma) of Him. An apos- 
tate “church” will be left behind amidst the so called “Chris- 
tian nations” and the Gentile age will end in its foretold 
tribulation and wrath. 

As soon then as the fulness of the Gentiles is brought in, 
the church, the body of the Lord Jesus Christ, complete, a 
change takes place with Israel. God begins to deal again 


with them in mercy and on a national basis. Thus we see 


in the book of Revelation after the removal of the church, 
that a remnant of Israel, 12,000 of each tribe is called and 
sealed (Revel. vii.) This is a believing remnant and the 
blindness is no longer upon them. And then, after the 
rapid fulfillment of the great prophecies concerning the 
time of the end, Israel prominently in the foreground, 
the blessed and glorious moment comes at last, when all 
Israel is saved. And so all Israel shall be saved. The “so,” 
the manner how they are being saved is given in the verse 
which follows: “According as it is written, The Deliverer 
shall come out of Sion; He shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob.” 

But what have we to understand by “all Israel shall be 


' 
be 
ie 
. 
; 
: 


SBR ND 


2D italtes? Fit Sie ie aan te oh aA 


SEpaTbesh. tigre: ve 


Seastaseaspersr ot tr Sos NH 


69 


the whole number of saved from the very beginning and in- 
cluding Jews as well as Gentiles. This is wrong for it is not 
the question of Gentile salvation, but of Israel’s salvation. 
Others teach that “all Israel” means literally all the Israel- 
ites who ever lived, the righteous as well as the unrighteous, 
the believing ones and the unbelievers, in one word that all 
Jews who ever lived, with perhaps a few exceptions, will be 
raised up at the time to which the above Scripture refers, 
and all will then be saved. This is a theory which might be 
called “Jewish Universalism,” for it is nothing less and of 
necessity must lead to a belief in the final salvation of all 
Gentiles. Indeed, the advocates of this theory of universal 
Jewish resurrection and universal Jewish salvation, hold the 
restitution of the Gentiles as well, that all unsaved, with the 
exception of a few wicked persons of a special class, will be 
raised from the dead at the beginning of the millennium and 
brought back to their former condition. A certain Henry 
Dunn is the modern advocate of this evil doctrine ; it has be- 
come widespread through the ‘Millennial Dawn heresy” and 
alas! thousands of Christian people have accepted it. How 
strangely such theories are read into the Word of God we 
learned but recently from a volume treating the Jewish ques- 
tion. Matthew xxiii :37-39 is used as an argument to show 
that “‘all Israel” includes the very people who rejected the 
Lord Jesus Christ in Jerusalem and all will be raised from the 
dead to see Him coming again and then be saved. The pas- 
sage reads: “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the proph- 
ets and stoneth them that are sent unto her! how often would 


saved?” Some, like Calvin, believe that “all Israel’? means What is “all 
srae: ?"" 


Evil doctrines. 


7° 


I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathers her 
Math. xxi:87-80. chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Behold, your 
house is left unto you desolate, For I say unto you, ye shall 
in no wise see me henceforth, until ye shall say, Blessed is 
He that cometh in the name of the Lord.” The argument 
first states that when the Lord says, “your house is left 
unto you desolate,” He meant, of course, the people who 
stood there, the generation which saw Him and rejected 
Him, the Lord of Glory. It is then claimed in the most rigid 
literalism we have ever seen in print, that when the Lord 
said, “Ye shall in no wise see me henceforth, until ye shall 
say, etc.,” that He meant that all those who stood there and 
saw Him for the last time in the temple, that all these indi- 
viduals shall see Him coming again and welcome Him with 
“Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.” Ac- 
cording to this belief all these wicked Pharisees and chief 
priests who rejected the Lord wilfully, who accused Him of 
driving out demons by Beelzebub, as well as the mass of 
people who cried, “Crucify Him, Crucify Him!” will be 
raised from the dead and then see the Lord coming and be- 
lieve on Him and be saved. That such is not the teaching 
of the Word of God, nor the teaching of the Scripture 
quo* 1 from Matthew, can easily be proven. The passage 
appeaxs only in the Gospel of Matthew, and this is the Gos- 
pel of the kingdom, the dispensational Gospel. All has a 
Jewish national aspect. Tine words before us are addressed 
to “Jerusalem” and to the nation, and Jerusalem and the 
nation will abide to the time when He comes again. At the 
time of His coming there will be a believing remnant wel- 


BOs) ae Heer ee 


ses ricer iene ER Tae 


71 


coming Him with the words He mentions, and these are a 
quotation from Psalm cxviii. The nation had rejected Him, 
but He looks to the time of His coming again, when others 
of the nation living in that day, shall wait for the heavens 
to open, and the cloud of glory to bring Him back. Indeed, 
these unbelieving Jews, these Elders and Pharisees, if they 
repented not in the offer made to them after the Cross (and 
perhaps many did) have gone to their place and await the 
resurrection of the wicked and not the resurrection of the 
just. But there is a verse which completely settles such 
argumentation as the one we have mentioned. In Matthew 
xxi :43, “Therefore, say I unto you, The kingdom of God 
shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth 
the fruits thereof.” The question is what nation does thc 
Lord mean here? The nation in His day had rejected Him 
and the kingdom is to be taken away from the nation— 
another nation is to receive the kingdom. 1 the argument 
is right that “all Israel” is to be saved, that all Jews, the 
very Pharisees, who heard the Lord speaking, who hated 
Him with a Satanic hatred, are to be raised from the dead 
and then receive the kingdom, why did the Lord not say 
so in plain words and give them such a promise? Here He 
states most positively that the kingdom shall be taken from 
you, and it must mean that generation living, and He does 
not say a word that they ever will get it back. Another 
nation is to receive it. That other nation is not the church, 
for the church does not inherit Israel’s earthly kingdom. 
The kingdom ts Israel’s, the other nation is the Israel of the 


Matth,. xxi ; 43, 


All Israel living 
when He 
comes, 


Zech, xiii : 8, 9. 


Ezekiel xx : 38, 


Judgment. 


72 


future, that remnant of His people living in the day of His 
glorious manifestation. 

We care not io follow other arguments which are ad- 
vanced to defend so unscriptural a doctrine. These argu- 
ments are flimsy indeed. “All Israel shall be saved” means 
the Israel living in that day, when the Lord is manifested 
in power and in glory. In the great tribulation, the time of 
Jacob’s trouble, the whole nation will be sifted as never 
before. 

“And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, saith the 
Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off and die, but the third 
shall be left therein” (Zech. xiii:8, 9). 

“And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and 
them that transgress against me, I will bring them forth 
out of the country, where they sojourn and they shall not 
enter into the land of Israel and ye shall know that I am the 
Lord” (Ezekiel xx:38). What will these restitutionists 
do with a passage like this? 

In Matthew xxiv, in the prophecy of our Lord concerning 
the great tribulation, we read it likewise. As it was in the 
days of Noah, so shall it be again. Judgment came and 
overiook the ungodly but Noah and his house was saved. 
So will it be, “One shall be taken (in judgment) and the 
other left” in the earth (Matt. xxiv, 37-41). Judgment and 
fire will sift the nation during that time of trouble. (Isaiah 
iv:4.) A remnant of the nation will pass through it all, 
while the ungodly who worshipped the false Messiah shall 
be swept away. It is this remnant which constitutes “all 


73 


Israel,” and which shall be saved. However, we must dis- 
tinguish this part of the nation saved in that day from the 
godly, believing remnant, which throughout the great tribu- 
lation, preaches the Gospel of the kingdom to the nations, the 
remnant, which is sealed, which suffers and overcomes, This 
remnant is clearly revealed throughout the prophetic Word. 
In Revelation xii we have the woman, who flees into the 
wilderness and is nourished there for a time, times and half 
a time (3% years), during the great tribulation; this is the 
part of the nation Israel, which is preserved. But at the 
close of the chapter we read, “And the dragon was wroth 
with the woman, and went to make war witli the remnant of 
her seed, which keeps the commandments of God and have 
the testimony of Jesus Christ” (Revel. xii:17). The rem- 
nant here is the believing, witnessing remnant. 

And now the manner of their salvation. “According as 
it is written, The Deliverer shall come out of Sion; He shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob.” This is the return of 
the Lord as Deliverer of His earthly people. He comes again 
to Zion and then out of Zion He shines forth in His mighty 
power as Deliverer. This a most precious portion we have 
reached. The fact given here, that the second coming of 
Christ in His majesty, for the salvation, deliverance and res- 
toration of His people, Israel, living in that day, is revealed 
throughout the Old Testament. It would be impossible to 
touch upon all the passages which teach it, and types which 
foreshadow this great event. 

Of the latter we mention the story of Joseph. There we 
see the man in power and glory, the man before whom the 


Rev. xii 


How saved. 


ayes Fae tars 


Joseph. 


Thomas. 


74 


knee had to be bowed, the Revealer of Secrets. And when 
his brethren came the second time, he made himself known to 
them. There he stood attired in his royal robe* with royal 
authority. Before him eleven trembling men, hungry, in 
tags and terror stricken. And now he begins in the tender- 
ness of his heart to weep and says: “Come near tome. . . . 
I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. . . . 
then he kissed all his brethren and wept upon them.” 
Blessed type of what it will be when He comes the second 
time and will “forgive them their sins and remember them 
no more.” 

Or we think of Moses. When he came the first time to 
his brethren to deliver them they rejected him and the 
second time, forty years after, when the tribulation had risen 
to its greatest height, they received him and ie led them 
forth. And in the New Testament we have a type in un- 
believing Thomas. When the Lord had appeared the first 
time after His resurrection to the shut in disciples, and 
Thomas was not there, he declared, “Except I shall see in 


*Grand is the scene in which Joseph makes himself known to his 
brethren. In the immense pillared hall, the walls of which are 
covered with mysterious hieroglyphics, there sits on a golden throne 
the second Pharaoh, his tall, beardless, statue-like figure, clothed 
in white byssus, his bave arms ornamented with golden bracelets, 
on his forehead the sacred golden serpent, and, through an in- 
terpreter, is speaking cold, threatening words to frightened weather- 
beaten shepherd strangers. These are conscience stricken, and 
growing pale, whisper one to another, “We are verily guilty con- 
cerning our brother.” Then the prince arises, descends from his 
throne, stretches his arms out towards them, and exclaims in well 
known Hebrew accents, “I am Joseph your brother.”—F. Better. 


ee mm 


75 


His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the 
print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, T will not 
believe” (John xx:25). Seven days pass by. Poor Thomas, 
how unhappy, in doubt and uncertainty he must have been! 
And after eight days again His disciples were within, and 
Thomas was with them. Then came Jesus, the doors bein, 
shut, and stood in the midst, and said, “Peace be unto you.” 
And what will He do. He who searches the hearts? Will 
He now condemn Thomas for his unbelief? Will He upbraid 
him for being so slow of heart? Not a word of it. “Then 
saith He to Thomas, Keach hither thy finger, and behold my 
hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my 
side; and be not fai.‘ less, but believing.” And Thomas 
answered Him: ‘My Lord and my God.” Surely, thus it 
will be again when they who knew Him not will behold 
Him, the pierced One. There are thousands of orthodox 
Jews living to-day who firmly believe in the coming of 
Messiah, thousands in whom a changed attitude towards 
the person of the Lord Jesus Christ is noticeable. Was He 
perhaps the Messiah or was He not the promised One? 
The question will be answered for them in that day. “Im- 
mediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sua 
be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the 
stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens 
shall be shaken. And then shall appear the sign of the Son 
of Man in heaven, and then shall all the tribes of the earth 
(land) mourn; and they shall see the Son of Man coming 
n the clouds of heaven with power and great glory” 
(Matt. xxiv: 29, 30). “Behold He cometh with clouds, 


Matth. xxiv: 
29, 30. 


7 


What a day! 


A prayer and a 
cloud. 


On the cloui. 


76 


and every eye shall see Him, and they also which pierced 
Him, and all the tribes of the land shall wail because of 
Him. Even so. Amen” (Revel.i:7). ‘And they shall look 
upon me, whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for 
Him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in 
bitterness for his firstborn” (Zech. xii:10, 11). What a day 
that will be! Tribulation has reached its height. There 
seems to be no escape. All at once there comes an ominous 
lull. The sun is gradually darkening and the moon dulls, 
while stars fall and the heavens and the earth are shaken. 
But what means that shining cloud up yonder? In the midst 
of the awe inspiring, fearful phenomena of nature, a cloud 
full of fire and glory! The remnant has been praying for 
divine interference, for a 1anifestation from above. “Oh, 
that Thou wouldest rend the heavens, that Thou wouldest 
come down” (Is. Ixxiv:1). They know at once from their 
own Scripture that that cloud is the Shekinah, the garment 
of Jehovah. Their whole past history comes up before them. 
Did not Jehovah dwell of old with our fathers and lead 
them? Did He not scatter our enemies? Surely this is 
Jehovah who shines forth! And so we hear them crying 
out in that dark, dark night. “Lo this is our God, we have 
waited for Him, and He will save us; this is the Lord; we 
have waited for Him, we will be glad and rejoice in His 
salvation” (Isaiah xxv:9). But the cloud comes near, 
flashes of glory light up the heavens (Hab. iii:3); the 
mighty light, like that light which fell upon Saul of Tar- 
sus, the Pharisee of the Pharisees, stronger than the midday 


sun, illumines everything. And again they glance upward 


\\ 

it 
} 
{ 
H 


77 


and behold sitting upon the cloud is one like the Son of Man 
(Daniel vii:13). Again they look upon that wonderful, 
wonderful scene and they see that Son of Man is pierced. 
And as it flashed upon the brethren of Joseph that the man 
in the royal robe is their brother, whom they had sold, thus 
it wll flash upon Israel, it is Jehovah-Jesus, whom they had 
rejected, their Messiah-King, who comes in power and great 
glory. Then they will say: “We hid as it were our faces 
from Him; He was despised and we esteemed Him not. 
Surely He hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows ; 
yet we did esteem Iiim stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. 
But He was wounded for our transgressions, He was 
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace 
was upon Him; and with His stripes we are healed” (Isa. 
liii:3-5). ‘And His feet shall stand in that day upon the 
mount of Olives” (Zech. xiv:4). He has come again in 
like manner as He went away. And then He will turn 
away ungodliness from Jacob and take away their sins. The 
iniquity of the land and the people is removed in one day. 
(Zech iii:9) : “Who hath heard such a thing ? who hath seen 
such things? Shall the land be made to bring forth in one 
day? or shall a nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion 
travailed, she brought forth her chiidren. . .. Rejoice with 
Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her; re- 
joice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her” (Isaiah 
Ixvi:8, 10). “And it shall come to pass afterward that I 
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and 
your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream 
dreams, your young men shall see visions” (Joel ii:28). 


Israel's confes 
sion, 


The result. 


ee 


poaggal {he 


ea sagened be tabeyuney > Tae gE OmrnNG POSE TPE 


et ris apd 5 te hat parent aynts 
tee aca EL tas altae 


Ta ees tp meta 


Eq 


78 


“Neither will I hide my face any more from them; for I 
have poured out my Spirit upon the house of Israel, saith "4 
the Lord God” (Ezek. xxxix:29). But we must refrain 
from quoting more from the promises and the glory which 
are Israel’s. There is not one word of all the gracious, 
blessed things, which the Lord has promised to Israel by 4 
the mouths of His holy prophets which will remain unful- 
filled in that day. 
The passage here, “the Redeemer shall come out of Zion,” 
is a quotation from two Old Testament Scriptures. Isaiah 
lix:20: “And the Redeemer shall come to Zion and unto 
them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.” 
The second, Psalm xiv:7: “Oh, that the salvation of Israel 
were come out of Zion! When the Lord bringeth back the 
captivity of His people, Jacob shall rejoice and Israel shall 
be glad.” 
May that day be hastened. May we pray earnestly, 
“Even so, come Lord Jesus ;” may He come soon to take us 
unto Hiumself and ihen it will be only a littie while and 
these glorious scenes will be enacted upon this earth, Jeru- 
salem will be delivered and become a pra‘se in the earth, 
and the scattered nation will be gathered by the great Shep- 
herd of Israel, the Lord Jesus Christ. 
fg or chang Righteousness and peace will kiss each other then and the 
knowledge of the glory of the Lord will cover the earth as 
the waters the deep. There will be singing in the heavens 
and singing on the earth, “Peace on earth and glory to God 
in the highest.” The center of rejoicing will be Jerusalem 
nnd a redeemed people, “Sing and rejoice, O daughter of 


79 


Zion; for lo, I come to dwell in the midst of Thee, saith 
the Lord. And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in 
that day and shall be for my people and I will dwell in the 
midst of Thee, and thou shalt know, that the Lord of hosts 
hath sent me unto thee” (Zech. ii:10, 11). 

Thus the great question: “Hath God cast away His 
people?” is fully answered. After our meditation on these 
wonderful answers we have learned why the Holy Spirit 
makes the answer so emphatic. Far be the thought! God’s 
own Word, faithfulness and righteousness, are at stake, [ff 
He had cast away His people, if there were no future for 
them, no fulfillment of Old Testament prophecies, then 
might we well close our Bibles and despair. 

All praise and glory to God for He hath not cast away 
His people. 


CONCLUSION. 


A ND now the conclusion. The doctrinal part of Romans 

has a grand and glorious summing up in Romans viii, 
beginning with the thirty-first verse: “What shall we then 
say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against 
us?” The dispensational section, Romans ix, x, and xi has 
also a sublime conclusion. 

‘“‘As regards the Gospel, they are enemies on your account ; 
but as regards election, beloved on account of the fathers. 
For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. 
Yor as indeed ve also have not believed in God, but now 
have been objects of mercy through the unbelief of these ; so 
these also have now not believed in your mercy in order that 
they also may be objects of mercy. For God hath shut up 
together all in unbelief, in order that He might show mercy 
to all. O depths of riches, both of wisdom and knowledge 
of God! How unsearchable His judgments, and untraceable 
His ways! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or 
who has been His counsellor? Or who has first given to 
Him, and it shall be rendered to him? For of Him, and for 
Him are all things. To Him be glory forever. Amen.” 

It is not our intention to follow these words in detail. 
Blessed it is to read once more the grand assurance, that 
God’s gifts and calling are without repentance; He will not 
go back on His Word. And Jews and Gentiles are all under 


mercy, which does not mean, that every Jew and Gentile 
80 


ES z 
3 
H 
3 

2 
Es 
i 
4 
4 


re 
a 


81 


. will receive mercy, as taught by that unscriptural “restitution 
4 of all things.” The Gentiles who believed, obtained mercy, 
and when at last the Lord comes again Israel will receive 


i 
3 
; 
: 
* 
: 


blessing, salvation, and enter on her inheritance through the 
sovereign mercy of God alone. And thus Jew and Gentile 
is a debtor to that wonderful mercy. 

It is this fact which brings forth the sublime doxology. 
What depths of riches both of wisdom and knowledge of 
God in God’s merciful dealings with the Gentiles and with 
the Jews! How unsearchable His judgments! How un- 


neem 


traceable His ways! May we even now join with our hearts 
in the praise of our God and our Father and delight our- 
selves more and more with His merciful ways. And as such 
who are saved by grace may we not forget that they are 
enemies as regards the Gospel on our account and as re- 
gards election, beloved for the Father’s sake. May we re- 
member Israel, His poor wandering, scattered sheep. May 
we not forget the debt we owe to that people, the people 
“whose is the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, 
and the lawgiving, and the service and the promises ; whose 
are the fathers ; and of whom according to flesh is the Christ, 
who is over all, God blessed forever” (Rom. ix :45). 


«ite 


Lin oben amma 


Y) 
= 
soil 
< 
7) 
oh 


— 


L. DN EE 


i 


= 


ISRAE 


<4 


puPempaeven pvt cerverete tg ys ayaa jong pretg, cypeeNe reety gene 32) oa“ RUNNER renee 
wees tte 


idicbesieisi Be aia Ea. Beas Be 


Uc bar! OM 8 poate, ie damabcadl 


Lise uasaboll. 


4 aie 


webldbabaais .-* 


‘ eraser gece 
“ Reicha Pe inh 


Palie dette ee ee 
MAD Mt) 


ants |PRBi taal ite 


Israel in the Psalms. 


HE book of Psalms, that precious collection of inspired 
songs, is a prophetic book. The instruments through 
whom the Spirit of God gave these hymns of praise and 
prayer are Moses, David, Asaph, Heman, Ethan, perhaps 
Solomon, and others. But these Psalms were not always ar- 
ranged in the order in which we have them now. They may 
be compared with a collection of beautiful and precious pearls 
lying together unstrung. This was their condition, till, we 
doubt not, another inspired Man of God came and arranged 
them in divine and perfect order, putting psalm to psalm. 
We do not know who this person was, but under the direc- 
tion of the Holy Spirit he picked up these beautiful gems 
of God-breathed songs, these wonderful prayers and hymns 
of praise, and as the jeweller does, who is to produce a 
gorgeous necklace of pearls and precious stones, this instru- 
ment of the Holy Spirit arranged them in such an order 
that the book of Psalms is in its order and progressive teach- 
ing from the first to the last Psalm, one of the most marvel- 
ous parts of the divine and infallible Book of books. 

It is not astonishing that this book of Psalms is so much 
loved by all saints, for every emotion and experiencé, which 
the soul is capable of, is mentioned and brought out in the 
Psalms. Millions of believers of the past centuries and up 
to the present time have received comfort, joy, encourage- 
ment, lich: and hope from the Psalms and found in them 

35 


Loved by all. 


86 


riches for their souls. The praise of God, the exaltation of 
His name, His work in creation, His goodness and mercy, 
His law and His word, sounded forth in the Psalms is 
perfect, and the believer, who accustoms himself in the 
power of the Spirit to follow the praises of these songs and 
who enters into them with his heart, will find great delight 
and blessing. 

Hore Peet used ‘It should also not be forgotten that the Lord Jesus Christ 
used this book of Psalms perhaps more than any other book 
of the Old Testament. He quoted from it in His public 
ministry and used the Psalms in meeting the Pharisees 
with their accusations. On the cross He remembered that 
unfulfilled prophecy of Psalm Ixix:21, and that the Scrip- 
tures might be fulfilled Tle said, “I thirs:’ (John xix :28). 
When the dark hour, the hour of deepest sorrow came, He 
cried, “My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me,” 
which is found in the twenty-second Psalm. He used the 
Psalms after His resurrection, “Go to my brethren” (John 
xx:17), and this in fulfillment of Psalm xx:22, “I will de- 
clare Thy name unto my brethren.” 

He also said unto them, after His resurrection: “These 
are the words which I spoke unto you, while J was yet with 
you, that all things must be fulfilled which were written 
in the law of Moses, and in the prophets and in the Psalms 
concerning me” (Luke xxiv:44). When He entered heaven 
and as glorified Man came into the presence of the Father, 
the Father welcomed Him, using His own Word to greet 
His beloved Son, in whom He delights “as Highpriest after 


retain hte SAioee RL ti. cchN"S" Stee A uae Nls 


the order of Melchizedek” (Heb. v:10), right translation, 


Bicetonetds nie kitts 


LR sbibaenetb einer) vader cnienenliniielabsbht eer tence 


87 


“saluted or welcomed by God,” and this is a quotation from 
the cx Psalm. From glory, in addressing the seven 
churches, the Lord still uses the Psalms. (Rev. ii:26, 27, 
compare with Psalm ii.) And He still waits on His Father’s 
throne for the fulfillment of many prophecies, which are 
predicted and celebrated in praise in many of the Psalms. 

This fact, that our adorable Lord used the Psalms so 
much, and most likely in the nights spent alone on the 
mountain tops, He poured out His heart in the language of 
the Psalms—this fact should make the Psalms exceedingly 
precious to our hearts. But why did He give the Psalms 
such a prominent place? Because in them His person, His 
humiliation and suffering, His exaltation and glory, are fully 
predicted and described. We should read and study the 
Psalms not so much to find comfort for ourselves there, but 
we should read this book to learn more of Himself, the One, 
who was made a little lower than the angels and who is 
and will be crowned with glory and honor. We can trace 
His earthly path of obedience and suffering in the Psalms. 
Never do we go amiss in the exposition of these songs when 
we apply the expressions as well as trust and obedience to 
the Lord Jesus Christ. But His glories, especially the 
coming glories, can we trace there likewise. His kingly 
glory, His world-wide kingdom and rule of righteousness 
are revealed. The book of Psalms is, therefore, a prophetic 
book. 

It does not alone give us prophecies about Christ, which 
were, as far as His first coming is concerned, literally ful- 
filled, and prophecies about His glory, which await ful- 


Should make 
them precious. 


His humiliation 
and glory. 


° 
FF 


FFEEFEEER 


EFEEE 


1.25 


MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE MATERIAL 1010a 
(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 


Genesis portion. 


88 


filment, but here we find also many prophecies which relate 
to Israel. Indeed, the Psalms enter into the entire history 
of God’s earthly people, their past as well as their future. 
Especially is it the godly remnant which has been repeated- 
ly mentioned in the previous chapters, which is revealed 
throughout the Psalms in a most striking manner. The 
coming end of the age, the events transpiring then in the 
land and in Jerusalem, the suffering which the remnant 
undergoes from the side of the unbelieving nations, the 
prayers, the so-called imprecatory prayers.* to consume the 
enemies, as well as prayers for deliverance, the answer to 
these prayers, the manifestation of the Lord out of the 
opened heavens, the overthrow of the enemies the restora- 
tion of Israel, the establishment of the kingdom, all and 
much else is given in the Psalms. Here is a rich mine to be 
explored; it is delightful to discover these precious things 
which are to come. How much more there is to find for us, 
if we only were not so slow of heart! 

It is a well known fact, that the Psalms are divided into 
five books. These five books correspond to the five books of 
Moses or the Pentateuch. So clear is the correspondency 
that the old rabbis called the Psalms, the Pentateuch of 
David. 

The Genesis portion of the Psalms extends from Psalm 


*These imprecatory prayers have often been denounced as in- 
human, ete. A Christian believer surely could not pray these. 
This is not the time to ask the fire of God’s vengeance to consume 
the enemies. But that time is coming. When the measure of the 
wickedness of the enemies is full, God will answer, 


ahaa 


1. SSN napaomtnmonaaiatlsi ict 


89 


i-xli, Many of the Messianic Psalms are found in this 
section. Its character is like Genesis. It begins with 
“Blessed is the raan” (Psalm i), which is the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and it ends with “Blessed is he that considereth the 
poor,” and this is the same Lord. The whole section ends 
with “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting 
and to everlasting” (Psalm xli:13). 

The Exodus part begins with Psalm xlii and ends with 
Psalm Ixxii. Like in the book of Exodus do we find here 
the suffering of Israel’s remnant and how they are delivered. 
This section is rich in dispensational foreshadowings of 
Israel’s future. It begins with the cry for the tabernacle 
and ends with the vision of the kingdom established. “He 
shall judge the poor of the people, He shall save the child- 
ren of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.” 
“He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the 
river unto the ends of the earth” (Psl. Ixxii:8). This 
section ends with a fuller praise than the first. “Blessed be 
the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only ¢oeth wondrous 
things. And blessed be His glorious name forever ; and let 
the whole earth be filled with His glory; Amen and Amen” 
(Psl. Ixxii:18, 19). 

The third book begins with Psalm Ixxiii and closes Ixxxix. 
The very beginning of this part makes it a Leviticus. The 
opening Psalms are the gift of the Spirit through Asaph 
and they celebrate the holiness of God. “Truly God is good 
to Israel, to such that are of a clean heart” (Psl. Ixxiii:1). 
This refers us to the remnant of Israel in the last days. The 
last Psalm in this section rehearses God’s wonderful doings 


Exodus. 


Leviticus. 


Neti HCA es a sah se i its Sepals sbaaebaa neaabauidiiaat, 


Numbers. 


Devteronomy, 


go 


in behalf of His people and puts before us the sure mercies 
of David, that is the full ratification of the Davidic cove- 
nant, and how One from David is exalted. “And I will 
make Him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth” 
(Psl. Ixxxix:27). The ending is “Blessed be the Lord for- 
evermore. Amen and Amen.” 

The fourth part or book extends from Psalm xc to Psalm 
cvi. This is in character like the book of N umbers, Here 
we see Israel in the wilderness; all her ways are traced, but 
Israel is seen in this section led out of that wilderness and 
come into her inheritance. The opening Psalm, the xc, is 
significant. It is the only Psalm we have, given by Moses, 
the leader of the peopie. It speaks of death and is rightly 
called the Psalm of the old creation ; the xci is the Psalm of 
the new creation. While in the ninetieth we see the first 
man, in the ninety-first we behold the second man, This is 
the shortest section. In the ciii Israel redeemed from all 
her backslidings sings her new song. “Bless the Lord, O 
my soul; and all that is within me, bless His holy name. 
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits. 
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities ; who healeth all thy dis- 
eases ; who redeemeth thy life from destruction ; who crown- 
eth thee with loving kindness and tender mercies.” Then 
comes the civ, the praise of nature. The cv and evi are the 
praise of His restored people and the doxology in the last 
verse of the cvi contains the nation’s praise : ‘Blessed be the 
Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, and let 
all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the Lord.” 

Still ‘nore interesting is the fifth or Deuteronomy part, 


1 ce mronait Ha 


9g! 


the last book in the Psalms. Like Deuteronomy, it puts 
vefore us the end of the ways of God with His people. This 
section begins with the cvii. and leads to the close of the 
book. 

The opening is highly instructive. “O give thanks unto 
the Lord, for He is guod; for His mercy endureth forever. 
Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom He hath re- 
deemed from the hand of the encmy, and gathered them out 
of the lands, from the East and from the West, from the 
North and from the South.” Deuteronomy shows us, in its 
closing chapters, how Israel is to be scattered into the cor- 
ners of the earth. All this has been and is being fulfilled. 
But there is also the promise that they should be gathered 
again“, . . Then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, 
and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather 
thee from all the nations whither the Lord thy God hath 
scattered thee” (Deut. xxx:3). Here in the cvii Psalm we 
find the fulfillment of this prophecy. This section, and 
with it the whole book, ends in a continued “Hallelujah.” 
Praise ye the Lord. All is praising Jehovah. Israel re- 
deemed, praises Him, the nations, all creation, everything 
that has breath praises Him. Here we have the great end 
of all things, the praise and worship of God. 

All this proves that Israel is the leading theme of the 
Psalms. Oh, that we, indwelt by the Holy Spirit, would 
take more time to search out His marvelous ways with His 
earthly people and learn from them the goodness, faithfu.- 
ness, mercy and holiness of Him who is our Saviour and 
Lord! 


The leading 
theme. 


A few helps 


ane cer — 


92 


It would be quite impossible to give all references in the 
Psaln.., which relate to Israel. We only give a few, which 
will help in the study of this book. 

Israel's prayers for deliverance are found in passages 
like the following : lii 71-7; vii:1, 2; xxxv:1-28; xliv:22-26 ; 
lix:1-5; Ixx:1, ete. 

Israel’s confession: i ; Ixi:1-5, etc. 

Prayers against her enemies: v :10; lviii :6-9, etc. 

The time of Jacob’s trouble: xiii; xiv; xx:1,2; xlii:1-4; 
lv :9-12; Ixxiv :19-23 ; xxix ; Ixxxiii, etc. 

Antichrist, the false Messiah : X:2; xliii:1; lii; liii:2o, 21. 

Assurance in faith: iii 8; iv; xxvii:5; xlvi:1-5; lvii; Ixi; 
xxx, etc. 

Deliverance, victory and the establishment of the king- 
dom: ix:5; xlv; Ixviii; Ixxii, and many others. 

Supremacy of Israel: xviii *41-45; xxvii:6; xlviii; Ixxxiv; 
Ixxxvii, etc. 

Praises out of Zion: IX:1I; XxXxX:I-12; xlvii:1-9; Ixvi; 
Ixxvi; Ixxxi; xcv; c, etc. 

The C lory of Zion and Jerusalem: xlvi °4-5; xlviii:2, 4, 12; 
Ixviii :21-23 ; Ixxxvii :1-2; ¢xxxii 214-18. 

The glorious rule: \xxii :2-7 5 XCvii 31-5 ; xcix :I-4; cx :6-7 ; 
cxlv :13, 16, 21. 

To illustrate the perfect and divine order in which all 
these events concerning the remnant of Israel is revealed, 
the suffering of the people, their wonderful deliverance and 
the events, which are connected with it, we shall give a more 
detailed exposition of some of the Psalms mentioned above. 
To appreciate fully their prophetic meaning, a number of 


ti mM sexs yien sanitised: “< 


| 
| 


4 carnaeebaeesenecsaeanc eae ranam saith nines | iit TE tense sainicmemenamnsicit iin nants tia Rett 


93 


these Psalms must be studied at one time. They are, as we 
said before, divinely arranged, one follows the other so as 
to bring out a prophetic picture. 

One of the mos* striking series of such Psalms leading us 
fro. suffering to glory, from tribulation to deliverance, 
are the seven Psalms, with which the second book begins. 


ik 


FROM SUFFERING TO GLORY. 
Psaims xlii-xlviii. 

In the forty-second Psalm we have a picture of the rem- 
nant of Israel thirsting after God, the living God. There 
are tears mentioned day and night, and the enemy which 
reproaches, “Where is thy God?” This reproach, which in 
the prophets comes always from the side of Gentiles, is 
uttered by them against the pious portion of Israel in the 
last days. Thus in Joel ii:17, that prophecy, which refers to 
the time of Jacob’s trouble, we find this reproach, ‘Spare 
thy people, O Lord, and give not their heritage to reproach, 
that the nations should rule over them; wherefore should 
they say among the people, Where is their God?” It is found 
in Psalm xxix :10 and in Mical. vii:10. In that passage the 
victory of Israel over the boasting enemy is predicted. The 
pious, God fearing remnant is seen afar off from the pres- 
ence of the Lord; they remember Him from the land of 
Jordan and of the Hermonites, from the hill of Mizar. 
(Verse 6.) They are in deep trouble and fearful upheavals. 


Joel fi: 17. 


In deep trouble. 


pene reneeseton 


i 
ut 
i 
mite 
At 


Their Hope. 


The wicked man. 


For Lijht and 
Truth is 


94 


“Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts ; 
all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me” (verse 7). 
Very significantly the same words are found in the book of 
Jonah, When Jonah, repentant in the belly of the fish, de- 
sires to be in the Lord’s presence in His holy temple, he said: 
“For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the 
seas; and the floods compassed me about; all thy billows 
and thy waves passed over me” (Jonah ii:1 7). And yet this 
whole Psalm, in spite of the complaint, the trouble and the 
reproach breathes confidence and hope in God. “Hope 
thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him, who is the health 
of my countenance and my God.” 

The forty-third Psalm is the continuation of the remnant’s 
suffering and pleading in prayer, as well as an expression 
of their faitn ‘n God and the coming deliverance, “Plead 
my cause against an ungodly nation” (verse I) they pray. 
The ungodly nation is the unbelieving part of Israel, which 
will be swept away by the wrath of God. “O deliver me 
from the deceitful and wicked man.” This man of wicked- 
ness and deceit is none other than the Man of Sin, the Son of 
Perdition, the final Anti-Christ, who is received as Messiah 
by the ungodly nation, but not by the remnant of Israel. 

Beautiful and instructive is their prayer in verse 3. “Send 
out Thy light and Thy truth; let them lead me; let them 
bring me unto Thy holy hill, and to Thy tabernacles.”” What 
is the meaning of sending out light and truth? The Lord 
Jesus Christ is the Light and the Truth and they are waiting 
on God to send Him forth and that He would lead them to 
the holy hill, A similar prayer is found in Psalm Ixxx: 


ssl paw 


95 


“Let Thy hand be upon the man of Thy right hand, upon 
the Son of man, whom Thou madest strong for Thyself.” 
The Psalm which follows, the forty-fourth, they remem- 
ber first of all before God, how in former times He had re- 
deemed His people and gave them victory not by their own 
power, but He the mighty God had stretched forth His arm 
and redeemed them by power. “For they got not the land 
in possession by their own sword, neither did their own 
arm save them; but Thy right hand, and Thy right arm, and 


the light of Thy a”: ‘e, because Thou hadst a favor 
unto them. Thou: ing, O God; command deliver- 
ances for Jacob. © gn T':ce will we push down our 


enemies ; through Thy name will we tread them under, that 
rise up against us.”” Thus will the remnant express their 
faith and hope in God. Then comes in this Psalm a sorrow- 
ful complaint of their sad condition in the time of Jacob’s 
trouble (verses 9-16). “But Thou hast cast us off, and put 
us to shame; and goest not forth with our armies * * * 
Thou givest us like sheep for meat and hast scattered us 
among the nations * * * Thou makest us a reproach 
to our neighbours, a scorn and a derision to them that are 
round about us.” The Psalm ends with a loud call to 
heaven for intervention. The trouble is at its height; the 
time of their extremity has come. ‘Awake, why sleepest 
Thou, O Lord? Arise, cast us not off forever. * * * 
Arise for our help, and redeem us for Thy mercy’s sake.” 

When they cry in this awful dark hour, the last days of 
the great tribulation, God answers them from above. 


Pleading. 


He has delivered. 


Raging nations, 


96 


This divine answer, the visible, personal and glorious 
manifestation of the Lord out of heaven, is seen in the 
Psalm which follows the xlv. The King appears in His 
Majesty and Glory. Who this King is in the forty-fifth 
Psalm, no higher critic need to tell the reader of the Word 
of God. The first chapter in Hebrews gives us the answer; 
the King is the Lord Jesus Christ. He comes with a sword; 
He comes to overthrow His enemies; He comes to receive 
His throne and the Kingdom. And His people is seen de- 
livered, brought into His presence to have earthly rule and 
dominion with Him. It is a wonderful prophecy of the 
Second Coming of the Lord as King, to deliver His earthly 
people, at the end of the age. The church, heavenly saints, 
are not mentioned in these Old Testament visions of Jeho- 
vah’s manifestation, because our blessed Hope is altogether 
a New Testament revelation. May His heavenly people be 
kept from putting themselves down to the earthly level of 
the Jewish Hope. 

And now the fifth Psalm in this series, the forty-sixth. 
We discover at once that the remnant does no longer pray 
for deliverance, for they are delivered ; neither do they long 
any more for the Lord’s presence, for He is with His peuple 
now. It is joyful confidence in God and assurance of the 
blessing which is theirs. From the sixth verse to the end 
there are the great results of His Coming made known. 

“The nations raged (Psalm li:I-3), the kingdoms were 
moved; He uttered His voice, the earth melted.” So it is 
yet to be. All is getting ready for the greatest confusion, 


Bi kia side linac tach 


97 


rebellion and bloodshed the world has ever seen, Nation 
will soon lift up sword against nation, but then all at once 
He will utter His voice. 

And the remnant of Israel breaks in joyfully: “The Lord 
of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge,” Israel 
still speaks in the two verses which follow: “Come, behold 
the works of the Lord, what desolations He has made in 
the earth.” Look now you bvasting Gentiles upon yon 
Christless and Godless civilization, you great institutions of 
lea ‘ing, Christian in name—anti-Christian in spirit, and 
behold the desolations, Bu. where are your men of war? 
Where are your quick-firing machine guns? Where are 
your torpedo boats and submarine boats ? 

“He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; He 
breaketh the bow and cutteth the spear in sunder; He 
burneth the chariot in the fire.” 

then the Lord speaks: “Be still, and know that 1 am 
God. I will be exalted among the notions. I will be ex- 
alted in the earth.” 

And Israel answers again: “The Lord of hosts is with us; 
the God of Jacob is our refuge.” 

The forty-seventh Psalm is Israel’s praise and worship of 
the King, and the seventh, the forty-eighth, Zion, Jerusalem 
the city of the great King, which is now a praise in the 
earth. Enough has been given to point the way through 
these seven Psalms, which lead from Suffering to Glory. 


Peace. 


98 


A GREAT PROPHETIC PSALM. 
Psalm Ixviii. 


i, The Lord Coming Scatter His Enemies and to 
Punish Them—“Let God arise, let His enemies be scattered, 
let them also that hate Him flee before Him” (verse 1). 
Numbers x :35 tells us that when the ark of the covenant was 
lifted up Moses said these words, When the Lord of Glory 
appear; the scattering of His enemies will take place. These 
enemies are the enemies of Israel. Kings of armies flee 
then (verse 12). “As smoke is driven away, So drive them 
away, as wax melteth before the fire, so let the wicked perish 
before the presence of God” (verse 2), 

2. The Manifestation of the Lord is Described.—‘He 
cometh forth and marcheth through the wilderness. The 
earth trembled, the heavens drop at the presenc- of God” 
(verses 7 and 8). 

3. His Manifestation in Mercy. Mercy Remembered in 
Judgment.—“A Father to the fatherless, and a judge of the 
widows.” The solitary set in families, Prosperity given 
back. The inheritance confirmed and a plentiful rain sent 
upon the land. 

4. Israel Restored and the C aptivity Ended.—“He bring- 


eth out the prisoners into prosperity” (verse 6). “The Lord 
said I wul bring again from Bashan, I will bring them again 
from the depths of the sea” (verse 22). This bringing 
back is not a so-called restitution of all things, which is no- 
where taught in the Word, but it is the restoration of all 
things, as spoken by the mouth of His holy prcphets (Acts 
iii:20). It is the bringing back of th -attered nation. The 


Vii: kid id neice aa cian 


99 


house of Israel, hid yet away, will be brought ack with the 
house of Judah. 

5. Israel Will Carry Out the Judgments of God.—“That 
thou mayest dip thy foot in blood, that the tongue of thy 
dogs may have its portion from thine enemies” (verse 23). 
“Kings of armies flee, they flee; and she that tarrieth at 
home divideih the spoil” (verse 12). 

6. Israel Will Have a Wonderful Salvation.—The 13th 
verse in the Psalm indicates that salvation. The win, ' of a 
dove covered with silver and her pinions with yellow gold 
speak of the Lord. Silver is redemption and gold stends 
for Glory. Israel will have Redemption and Glory. Th- 
people brought back, saved, restored, and having +: remacy 
in the earth. : 

7. Israel Will Be a Rejoicing Nation.—“Let the right- 
eous be glad, let them exult before God; yea, let them rejoice 
with gladness, Sing unto God, sing praises unto His name; 
cast up a highway for him that rideth through the desert. 
His name is Jah, and exult ye before Him” (verses 4-6). 
Israel will shout: “Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth 
us with benefits, even the God who is our salvation.” Gud 
is unto us a God of deliverances. Unto Jehovah the Lord 
belong the issues of death (verses 19, 20). This rejoicing 
will be in the earth, but in the heavenlies there will be His 
heavenly people around the throne rejoicing in unspeakable 
glory. 

8. Mount Zion Will Be the Place of His Glorious .Aani- 
festation during the Millennium.—‘The mountain of God, 
is it Bashan? A high mountain, is it Bashan? Why look 


100 


ye askance ye high mountains at the mountain which God 
has desire for His abode?’ Yes, Jehovah will dwell there 
for ever (verses 15 and 16). This mountain is His holy 
hill Zion. The Lord’s chariots are there. 

9. The Welcome to the King in His Sanctuary is De- 
scribed.—‘They have seen thy processions, oh God, even the 
processions of my God, my King, into the sanctuary. The 
singers went before, the minstrels followed after, in the 
midst the virgins playing upon timbrels. Bless ye God in 
the congregation, even the Lord, ye that are of the fountain 
of Israel.” 

10. The Ascended One Sends His Gifts and Leads Cap- 
tivity Captive —‘Thou hast ascended on high, Thou hast led 
capitivity captive; thou hast received gifts on account of 
man; yea, even the rebellious, that the Lord God may dwell 
among them” (verse 18). This is quoted in Ephesians iv :8, 
9, with the exception of the latter part, for in Ephesians the 
eifts concern the church and here it is Israel. This is the 
reason why “and for the rebellious” is left out in Ephesians, 
It was in part fulfilled when the descended One ascended. 
But He will descend again in His glory, and after the mani- 
festation of His glory, wrath and mercy, wrath upon the 
enemies and mercy and salvation for Israel, He will ascend 
again, and the angels of the Lord will after that be seen 
ascending and descending upon the Son of Man. The throne 
of His glory is in the heavens, seen by the dwellers in the 
earth. Over all the glory will be spread like a canopy (see 
Isaiah iv:6). 

11. Jerusalem, and in it the Temple of the Lord, will de 


10oI 


the Great Centre during the Millennium.—‘Because of Thy 
temple in Jerusalem kings shall bring presents unto thee” 
(verse 29). The representatives of nations will have to go 
up to Jerusalem for the greatest of feasts, the feast of tab- 
ernacles (Zech. xiv). 

12. Universal Peace Will Be Established—‘He hath 
scattered the nations that delight in war” (verse 30). These 
nations are now in existence. Military Christendom, as it 
has been correctly termed. Armed to the teeth, they are 
even now talking of a universal peace, of turning the spears 
into pruning hooks. Only the Prince of Peace can speak 
peace to the nations. He will break their ships and their 
devilish inventions for maiming and destruction of the body. 

13. The Conversion of the World Can Only Come After 
All This Has Taken Place. It is Mentioned at the End of 
the lxviti Psalm.—The following words are misquoted again 
and again, and looked for to be fulfilled even now; or, as 
others say, they have been fulfilled. ‘‘Princes shall come out 
of Egypt, Ethiopia shall haste to stretch out her hands unto 
God.” Only after Israel has been restored, and the gifts of 
the ascended One will have been given to the nation can the 
world be converted to God, All other teachings are unscrip- 
tural. 

14. Millennial Praises. The Psalm Closes with the Mil- 
lennial Hallelujah. The Kingdoms of the Earth, the King- 
doms of Our Lord Jesus Christ—“Sing unto God ye king- 
doms of the earth; oh, sing praises unto the Lord.” These 
are a few of the dispensational truths the Holy Spirit has 
revealed in this wonderful Psalm, 


state Oe ORSON Se 


Ht 
a. 
f 
i 


102 


SCENES OF DESOLATION AND APPEALS FOR 
THE SON OF MAN. 


Psalms Ixxix and Ixxx. 


HESE two Psalms, the seventy-ninth and eightieth, be- 
long together, and in them the Holy Spirit gives a 
picture of the condition of things in the great tribulation, the 
time of Jacob’s trouble, and how the people will cry to the 
Shepherd of Israel in the hour of their extremity for deliv- 
erance and salvation. 

The seventy-ninth Psalm shows the events in the tribula- 
tion, the desolation svoken of by Daniel, of which the Lord 
reminds His disciples in His Olivet discourse (Matthew 
xxiv). 

I. The Nations in the Inheritance, the Temple Defiled, 
Jerusalem Wasted (verse 1).—All this has been true before, 
and in this respect the Psalm has seen a partial fulfillment. 
Again the nations will fall into His inheritance and Jerusa- 
lem will once more be compassed about by armies (Zech. 
xiv). The Temple erected by the Jews, having been par- 
tially restored in unbelief, will be defiled by the man of sin, 
the wicked one, who will sit in the temple, saying that he 
is God and worshipped as God. These events belong all in 
the time of Jacob’s trouble. That this is nearing rapidly is 
seen by the fact that the restoration of the Jews in unbelief 
has commenced. How near then is our gathering unto the 
Lord? 

II. The Terrible Night of Suffering, Tribulation and 
Martyrdom in the Land.—The second verse shows that the 


103 


dead bodies of the servants are given by the enemies as 
meat unto the fowls of heaven and the flesh of saints unto 
the beasts of the earth. These servants and saints are not 
church saints. The saints are then in glory with the Lord. 
They are Jewish saints, men and women who refused to 
worship the beast and who waited for the salvation out of 
Zion. Revelation xix is a commentary to this verse. The 
beginning of that chapter shows the marriage of the Lamb. 
Heaven is then seen opened and the King of kings appears 
with His saints. This is followed by the supper of the great 
God, when the fowls of the air and the beasts of the field 
come to eat the flesh of the kings and captains—they did the 
same with the dead bodies of saints and now in the wrath 
this dreadful punishment falls upon them. In the twentieth 
chapter of Revelation these Jewish saints who suffered 
martyrdom are seen in Glory. 

And I saw thrones and they sat upon them, and judg- 
ment was given unto them, and I saw the souls of them 
that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus and for the 
word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, 
neither his image, neither had received his mark on their 
foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned 
with Christ a thousand years. 

The third verse in the Psalm presents a picture which is 
likewise seen in the Revelation: “Their blood have they 
shed like water round about Jerusalem; and there were 
non. to bury them.” The eleventh chapter of Revelations 
shows the two witnesses, two persons, witnessing during the 
great tribulation of Jerusalem. They will suffer death and 


Awful suffering. 


Wailing and cry- 
ing + God. 


‘othe Shepherd. 


104 


their bodies will lay unburied, gazed at by the corrupt 
multitu’es in the streets of Jerusalem for three days. Un- 
doubtedly the bodies of many Jewish saints will lie around 
unburied. 

III. Jn This Tribulation There Is Heard the Wailing 
and Crying of the Remnant (verses 4-13).—The center of 
it is the phrase: “Help us. O God of our salvation, for the 
glory of Thy name.” The cry includes prayer for forgive- 
ness: Remember not against us former iniquities—for de- 
liverance and cleansing, deliver us and purge away our sins 
for Thy name’s sake; for bringing back from the prison 
(Matthew v:25-26), that is from the captivity, verse ITI, 
and there is also prayer for the wrath to fall upon the na- 
tions and the proud, boasting anti-semitic kingdoms of the 
earth for not calling upon His name. 

However, the eightieth Psalm, which acquaints us with 
the believing cry of the Remnant of Israel for spiritual 
blessing and national restoration, when they are brought 
very low, and it seems as if they are to be swept completely 
away. But the days will be shortened then and the cry is 
heard and answered by the deliverer coming out of Zion 
and turning away ungodliness from Jacob. 

We give some of the leading thoughts of the eightieth 
Psalm. 

I. The Call Is to the Shepherd of Israel, the One that 
Dwells Above the Cherubim, to Shine Forth.—This is the 
Lord. He led them in the wilderness (1 Corinth. x:4). He 
made His tabernacle with them and His glory was seer. 
But long ago He had withdrawn and when He came, the 


105 


same Shepherd in the form of a servart, having emptied 
himself (of His glory), they receive. Him not, and like 
sheep they have been scattered, ever since like sheep with- 
out a shepherd. Still He who said, I am the good Shep- 
herd, is not only our Shepherd, but He is Israel’s Shepherd 
likewise, and will gather His poor, bleeding, outraged sheep 
and shine forth in His glory again for the salvation of His 
people (Ezek. xxxiv). 

II. The Prayer Is Repeated Three Times. 

Verse 3.—‘Turn us again, O God, and cause Thy face to 
shine and we shall be saved.” 

Verse 7.—‘Turn us again, O God of Hosts, and cause 
Thy face to shine and we shall be saved.” 

Verse 19.—"Turt: us again, O Lord God of Hosts, cause 
Thy face to shine and we shall be suved.” 

The name of God is not alike in these petitions. The first 
time in verse 3, it is Elohim, in the seventh verse Elohim 
Zebaoth, and in the last verse it is Jehovah Elohim Zebaoth. 

How significant this is! There is confession threefold 
and a heart acknowledgment that God, Jehovah Flohim 
Zebaoth, alone can help and His shining face will bring 
salvation. It is the cry for the appearing of the Sun of 
Righteousness, with healing beneath His wings. 

III. Their Restoration Is Made Prominent—Verses 8- 
16 must be studied with Isaiah v and Jeremiah xi:21. The 
hedges of that vineyard were broken down and the wild 
hoar came and wasted the land. Gentiles entered the land 
of Israel. All attempts of restoration failed. The last at- 
tempt made (a partial restorauon in unbelief) seemed to be 


The prayer. 


Their restora. 
tion. 


i 
i 

: tw 
i! 

! 

if 
Fi 
j 

# 

: 
i 
it 
- 
Hd 
a 
: 
i 
; 

rf 


The Son of Man. 


106 


successful for a time, but the enemy came in like a flood. 
But now comes the cry from believing lips and believing 
hearts, “Return, we beseech Thee, O Lord of Hosts, look 
down from heaven, and behold and visit Thy vine” (verse 
14). 

IV. Their Hope, the Son of Man, Whom God Made 
Strong for Himself, the Branch (verse 15).—‘“The Branch, 
that Thou madest strcng for Thyself.” “Let Thy hand be 
upon the man of Thy right hand, upon the Son of Man, 
whom Thou madest strong for Thyself.” (Verse 17.) 
Both verses mean the Lord Jesus Christ. They confess that 
there is a Son of Man at the right hand of the Father, and 
that their hopes for salvation center in Him. And the cry 
is to God that He may place Him where He belongs, that 
is upon His own throne and have Him shine forth in His 
Glory. Itis the cry “Blessed is He that cometh in the name 
of the Lord.” 

V. Israel Healed.—“‘So will not we go back from Thee; 
quicken us and we will call upon Thy name. Turn us again, 
O Lord God of hosts, cause Thy. face to shine; and we shall 
be saved.” May that happy day soon be when Israel is 
healed of all her backsliding. 


i 
THE DAWNING OF THE MILLENNIUM. 


Psalms xciii-c. 
Ps. xciii. This short F .im is a kind of keynote of the 
Psalms of praises which follow. It contains the glorious 
theme “Jehovah reigneth,” and the other Psalms to the one 


107 


hundredth give us the graud and glorious details of this 
reign. Jehovah has been manifested in the earth appareled 
with majesty and strength. The consequences of this mani- 
iestation are: The world established, the Throne which is 
of old also established, the rebellious floods, the angry waves 
broken and overcome (nations the eneimies of the Kingdom), 
God’s testimonies, which are very sure, fulfilled, and at last 
Holiness. A closer study will show that all these short 
sentences of the xciii Psalm are unfolded in their fullest 
meaning in every Psalm from the xcvi to the one hundredth 
Psalm. 

The ninety-fourth Psalm puts before us the events which 
will transpire right before the Lord, Jehovah-Jesus comes. 
The Psalm shows therefore Jewish history of the iast proph- 
etic week of Daniel. Let us luck at some of these events. 

There is first the plea and the cry to the God of venge- 
ance, not to a merciful father, but it is a cry for vetgeance, 
that the God of vengeance may shine forth (vers> 1). The 
second verse is still more intense. “Lift up iuyself, thou 
judge of the earth, render to the proud recompense.” This 
cannot be the prayer of the saints of this dispensation. 

And why this cry for the God of vengeance to appear to 
come and judge the proud? ‘The verses which follow give 
the answer. The wicked triumphs. Wickedness has the 
upper hand at last, and the workers of iniquity boast them- 
selves. The fifth verse shows that the wicked one and the 
workers of iniquity are breaking to pieces Jehovah’s people, 
and are afflicting His heritage (the land). Satan cast out 
from heaven into the earth will not find the saints, the body 


The keynote. 


Before He 
comes. 


Render recon)- 
pense. 


| 
| 
tt 
| 


tacaecriense nesitboebtbedl ahi. 


Sing unto 
Jehovah. 


108 


of the Lord Jesus Christ here to torment them, for they are 
then with the Lord in the air. His wrath will be against the 
people whom he well knows to be the con.'ng nation. Tribu- 
lation is from Satan, and it will be Jacob’s trouble. The 
waves of that awful storm which will then pass over the 
land and over the people are seen in this Psalm. 

But in the midst of it there is the faith and hope of the 
believing remnant. The second half of this Psalm speaks 
of this. Jehovah is their high tower and their only refuge. 
To Him they look and to Him has been the cry in faith. 
“Jehovah our God shall cut them off” (verse 23). 

The xcv Psalm begins with an exhortation to sing unto 
Jehovah. He has not yet been manifested. It is not yet 
“Sing unto Jehovah a new song.” As the moment draws 
nigh when at last He will rend the heavens and come down 
and His blessed feet shall stand once more upon the Mount 
of Olives, there is heard in Israel the exhortation to welcome 
Him. Perhaps Rev. xiv:6 and 7 speaks of this glad shout 
which the believing remnant will utter. 

In the first verse the rock of salvation is mentioned. Com- 
pare with Deuteronomy xxvii:15. “The rock of his salva- 
tion, which they lightly esteemed,” is the same rock which 
they now acknowledge and whom they desire to greet with 
a joyful noise. The Rock is Jehovah-Jesus. But in the 
second verse there is mentioned a joyful noise they make tu 
Him, the coming One, with Psalms. Once they did cry in 
Jerusalem when He entered the city, “Blessed is He that 
cometh in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel ;” but it 
was soon to be changed into “Crucify Him.” He turned 


109 


away then and told them they would not see Him again till 
they would cry “Blessed is He that cometh in the name of 
the Lord,” and in the meantime their house was to be left 
desol:te. Now He is coming again. Signs and wonders 
are seen in ithe heavens and on the earth, heaven and earth 
are shaken and stars fall from heaven. At last there appears 
the sign of the Son of Man in the heavens, the Shekinah 
cloud, and the cry will be upon believing Jewish lips again, 
“Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.” Psalm 
exviii :26; Matthew xxiii :39. 

Tne coming One, who comes to reign, is confessed by 
them as God and King. Verses 3-5. He has all power in 
heaven and on earth. Col. i:16, Next is the call to worship 
and to do homage to Him by bowing the knee. See Joseph's 
dream in Genesis xxxvii:7, and at last the brethren bowed 
their knees before the rejected One. Compare Isaiah xlv: 
23 with Phil. ii:1o. 

Verse seven contains likewise their confession. For He is 
our God. (Isaiah xxv:9.) And we are the people of His 
pasture, the sheep of His hands, (Ezekiel xxxiv :2-31.) 

This exhortation to praise and confession is followed by 
an exhortation to obey Him. (Verses 8-11.) The Lord 
Himself speaks. The entire nation stiff-necked, disobedient 
so long, will now hear. The wilderness wanderings are over 
and their backsliding will be healed by looking upon the 
Pierced One. They enter into the promised rest. (He- 
brews iii and iv.) The Psalm is quoted five times in these 
two chapters. 

The manifestation of Jehovah in Judgment and in Mercy, 


God and King. 


se | plop saps ume 


baie ys it 
Srvuastc$ eae 


Sec haibet 


Separate 


maior aa 


Hee ee 


sda 


His manifesta- 
tion. 


The earth sings. 


110 


the Lord coming with all His saints, comes in these proph- 
etic Psalms after the xcv Psalm. The exhortation to praise 
and obedience has been heard and the heavens opened, the 
long-expected One has come. The xcvi Psalm is the first 
of five Psalms which speak of the Lord’s millennial rule, 
His glory known over the earth and in the earth. Israel 
blessed, a holy people, nations rejoicing in salvation and the 
knowledge of the glory of the Lurd and groaning creation 
delivered. How near all these events are and how it be- 
hooves us to look into them and rejoice, not alone in the 
blessed hope that we shall soon see Him and be like Him, 
but also to rejoice in the glory which will surely spread 
ov: ~ the earth, 

ihe name of Jehovah stands three times in the beginning 
of the xcvi Psalm. First there is the singing of a new song 
unto Jehovah, Israel will sing this new song. Isaiah xii. 
They are now no longer the tail but the head. The last have 
become the first. 

But all the earth will likewise sing. How sad the igno- 
rance of God’s plans and purposes, which expects a rejoic- 
ing earth at this present time when Israel is still dispersed 
and unpardoned. The singing of a new song by Israel 
comes first, the singing of the earth follows. 

His salvation is then proclaimed, His glory declared and 
His marvellous works are seen among all the peoples. Israel 
will do this proclamation and make known the glory, signs 
and miracles will follow (verse 3). In verses 4-6 this proc- 
lamation is seen. Idolatry will be abolished. Nations will 
no longer turn to wood and stone to worship them. Whole 


= 
| 
| 
i 
: 


7 


11! 


nations will turn from idols to the true and living God. 
Satan will be bound to deceive the nations no more. Read 
carefully Jeremiah xvi:14-21. Notice there will be a second 
gathering of the Jews, this is followed by the confession of 
the Gentiles and their conversion (verse 19). 

The worship of the Lord as it will be in the earth and es- 
pecially in Israel, the glory due unto His name is described, 
verses 7-10. 

Bring an offering and come into His court stands in con- 
nection with the millennial temple, the great center of wor- 
ship on the earth, a house of prayer for all nations. (Ezek- 
iel xlvi.) 

The world is established that it cannot be moved. The 
overturning timcs—Ezekiel xxi:25-27—are over and the 
true form of government for the earth has been established. 
The Lord judges the peoples with equity. All nature falls 
in line and breaks forth in singing and rejoicing. The 
heavens and the earth, the sea, the field and al! the trees 
rejoice and sing and are glad. Read Isaiah xi:5-9; lv:12; 
xiii :6-17; xliv :23. 

Verse 13 reads—not “Before Jehovah for He cometh,” 
but “Before Jehovah for He is come. He judges tt a 
(Israel’s land) and from there He judges the world in tu- 
eousness.” 

The praise and glory continue in the xcvii Psalm. The 
Lord reigneth and all the earth is His and rejoices, the isles 
are glad. The foundation of His throne is righteousness and 
judgment. He is the true Melchizedek, a priest upon His 


throne. Psalm Ixxii:1-2. 


Worship. 


» 


{ 

F Ht 
He 
iia 
He 
ifs 


pres presenene wevrsv steerer ss 
piaersrsvanert rseye ve . 
‘ neers + 


prapteveniedge ven: ets Set evee sere 


112 


The clouds surround Him and from there flash forth the 
lightnings of His judgments. Fire devours the adversaries 
and He rules in the midst of His enemies. His lightnings 
lighten the whole world, the earth ‘rembles and the hills 
melt like wax. All this will be literal. Isaiah Ixvi :15-16; 
Habakkuk iii; Deut. xxxii:22; Psalm xviii:11, 

The Lord will descend on the day of His manifestation 
and He wll come back in like manner, His feet standing 
upon the Mount of Olives ; but the throne of His glory which 
will be shared by His saints is not in the earth, but over the 
earth, in the heavens, In the earth He will have built again 
the tabernacle of David, which was fallen down, and upon 
the throne of David there will sit and rule a Prince, who is a 
Son of David and vice-regent of the King of Kings, Eze- 
kiel xxiv :24; Ezekiel xliv:1-3. From the throne of glory in 
the heavens the angels of the Lord will ascend and descend 
upon the Son of Man. 

Verse 6 shows that His glorious throne is in the heavens. 
“The heavens declare His righteousness and all the peoples 
see His glory.” How will the heavens declare His righteous- 
ness? They are said to declare the glory of El, the mighty, 
but here it is His righteousness. Because the nations will 
look up into the heavens and see the heavenly, new Jeru- 
salem which at the end of the thousand years comes down 
from heaven. There is the throne of glory, and in that 
throne there are with Him the Son of Man, the glorified 
ones. He indeed is the first born among many brethren and 
the saints who even now are quickened and raised with 
Christ and seated in heavenly places with him, will then 


ti Le ROR Aaa LALEL EA ates 


biasatee abst 


Il, 


actually occupy that place. They are His glory, the riches 
of the glory of His inheritance in the saints will then be de- 
monstrated before the eyes of nations dwelling in the earth. 
No human tongue or pen can describe the coming glories. 
(Eph, i:*8.) 

The end of the xcvii Psalm speaks once more of the con- 
sequences of His shining forth and reign. 

The xcviii Psalm is much like the xcvi. The idols of the 
nations are not mentioned. The third verse is the key, “He 
hath remembered His mercy and His faithfulness towards 
the House of Israel.” This term, like many other passages. 
includes both the House of Judah and the House of Israel. 
The Psalm contains the praise of a nation born in a day, 
they sii.g the new song because salvation has come and th 
ends of the earth have seen His salvation. 

All the land (Israel’s land) shouts aloud, there is a break- 
ing forth, a singing, and with harps, cornets and trumpets, 
such a joyful noise as has never been heard in Israel and in 
the earth before. (Psalm Ixviii:25, 26.) And all else joins 
in. The sea roars and the fulness thereof, the world and the 
dwellers therein, the rivers clap hands, the hills sing for 
joy. It will be a universal singing time, above in the heav- 
ens, beneath in the earth, in Israel and among the nations, 
and nature will be no longer out of tune. 

Moses sang of it in his song when he said, Rejoice O ye 
nations with His people, for He shall avenge the blood of 
His servants, and will render vengeance to His adversaries 
and will be merciful unto His land, to His people (Deut. 
xxxli:43). And thus the Spirit declares through Paul, 


Shouting aloud. 


Grand finale. 


114 


“The receiving of them will be life from the dead” (Rom. 
xi:15). 

His rule and His victory is again put before us in the 
xcix Psalm. He reigneth. He dwells between the cheru- 
bim, the earth trembles. The living creatures of Ezekiel and 
Revelation are mentioned here. Zion has become His dwell- 
ing place. The mountain will be lifted up over all the other 
mountains, and in it the glory will be revealed and judg- 
ment executed from this spot. Isaiah ii and Micah iv. 
Jehovah is great in Zion. 

Three ti.1es in the Psalm declaration is made that Jeho- 
vah is holy. (Verses 3, 5 and 9.) 

The names of Moses, Aaron and Samuel, which are men- 
tioned here, were priests heard and accepted by God. Thus 
Israel will be like Aaron, Mcses and Samuel in worship an4 
in praise. The worship in the earth has for a centre the 
holy hill of Zion. (Verse 9.) 

The one hundredth Psalm is the grand finale. It is noth- 
ing but praise ; what else can there be when the earth is sub- 
jected unto Him, when Israel sings the new song and nations 
learn war no more, but bow before Jehovah, when groaning 
creation groans no more and the glory of the Lord covers 
the earth as the waters the deep. Praise from generation to 
generation. May this praise be now in all the saints of 
God, not alone for wh?’ we are in Him our Lord, but also 
for what He will do in tue day of His shining forth. 


THE PROPHECIES OF BALAAM. 


merce — pees strriree nenermcmeeregnnrrmnnvemasre or 2 Te erasbapeber Tn Pes Nt ey obee puesta 
oe oe 


maga ye yet fide es 


7 
‘ 
i 


The Prophecies of Balaam. 
NUMBERS XXIII AND XXIV. 


HE healing of Israel by the believing look on the Brazen 
Serpent stands at the end of their backsliding and mur- 
muring in the wilderness. It is highly typical of the atone- 
ment of the Son of God, and the complete healing through 
the same. Israel was victorious once more, and songs of 
praise and victory are heard in the camp. And now, after 
the sad history of their disobedience is almost ended, a 
prophet pronounces remarkable blessings over the wonder- 
ful nation, the nation so miraculously saved from Egypt, 
guided and kept and miraculously healed. This voice of 
prophecy comes from the lips of a Gentile, and a Gentile 
king hears the message first, in which, besides Israel, the 
King of Moab and all his Gentile successors are so emi- 
nently concerned. 

Balak (Waster) saw all that Israel had done to the 
Amorites. He knew that that people had come out of 
Egypt, and out of a cloud of glory a mysterious God had 
slain the proud hosts of Pharaoh. He was sore afraid ; 
the fate of the Egyptians and Amorites seemed to foretell 
his own ; his heart, therefore, is filled with fear and hatred, 
and he desired to oppose and curse Israel. He allied him- 
self with t' < elders of Midian. It is nothing less than the 
history of Anti-Semitism in a nutshell. Gentile nations, 
Christian in name, still hate and fear the people whom no 


117 


A Gentile 
prophet. 


Balak’s fear. 


Anti-Semitism. 


Who was 
m ? 


118 


Pharaoh and no svothsayer could overcome, a people diso- 
bedient, judged and suffering, still always conquering. 
The fear and hatred of Balak had its origiu in Satan, the 
prince of this world, the accuser and enemy of his people, 
and thus it is still. Like Balak, opposing Gentile nations 
and kingdoms will yet rise in fear and hatred against Israel 
before Israel’s coming King will sweep them aside, and 
what Balak heard from the prophet’s lips in his day—the 
complete destruction of the world-powers by the appearing 
of the Glorious King of Jeshurun—will be the fate of these 
nations. Balak, moved by Satan, sends for Balaa.a, a 
prophet and a soothsayer. Who was Balaam? His name 
is a terrible one, the Devourer of People; his father, Beor, 
the Consumer; his native place, Pethor, meaning ‘‘ inter- 
pretation.’’ He must have known Jehovah to some extent, 
for he asked of Him and God answered his request. At 
the same time he was known for his skill in cursing na- 
tions and for his readiness for gold and silver to destroy 
them by his powerful spells. He may have practiced his 
soothsaying for many years, becoming rich by it, when, 
probably, one day he heard of Jehovah, who had done such 
great things for and among the wandering nation. Most 
likely for selfish reasons he sought God, like Simon, the 
sorcerer, who offered the apostles money for the power to 
hcel the sick; thus Balaam may have desired the acquain- 
tance of God, seeking revelations from Him for the sake of 
gain, and Jehovah revealed Himself to him. It is very 
significant that Balaam is mentioned in that important pro- 
phetic Epistle of Jude, where he stands as a type in the 


eutien shibeblbnitimsioginns 14 ckckonits 


119 


great apostasy at the end of this age. ‘‘ They cast them- 
selves away into the error of Balaam for hire.’’ Balak, the 
representative of the anti-Semitic world-powers, and Ba- 
lasii:, the half-hearted prophet, a type of an apostate Chris- 
tendom, forming an alliance against Israel. 

We cannot follow the details of Balaam’s temptation and 
fall, nor can we tarry to consider the miracle of the speak- 
ing ass, which, alas, isin our times so often ridiculed by 
Christian people and so universally disbelieved. Balaam is 
permitted to go with the men who call him to Balak on 
condition that he is to speak only the words which God 
speaks to him. 

The parables which Balaam is obliged to give by the 
power of God, are divided into four parts. He utters them 
from three points, all mountain-tops. The first from the 
high places of Baal, the second from the summit of Pisgah, 
and the last from Peor. From these mountain-tops Balak 
and Balaam had a good view of the camp of Israel. Each 
one of the three points is nearer to the camp and a more 
complete view obtainable from them. It seems Balak tried 
to diminish the number of Israel and their strength in the 
eyes of Balaam, for hy ©k him first to a place from which 
he saw only a part, most part ‘he fourth part of the 
people. Seeing that 11s scheme failed, Balak took Balaam 
to Pisgah; from there the view was more complete, and 
then at last to Peor, from which point he saw the twelve 
tribes of Israel with their flags in camp. Upon each 
mountain Balaam had seven altars erected, and two sacri- 
fices, a bullock and a ram, arc brought upon each altar. 


The division of 
his parables. 


From the heights 
of Baal. 


120 


The whole proceedings were evidently calculated to make 
€ll as impressive and solemn as possible. On the heights 
of Baal, Balaam says to Balak: ‘‘I will go, may be Jehovah 
will come to meet me, and whatever He may say to mel 
will declare to thee.’? He went to a bare height and God 
met him there and put a word in his mouth. Next is Pis- 
gah; here Balaam tells Balak to stand by the burnt offer- 
ing, ‘‘ while,’’ he says, ‘‘I go to meet,”’ in the authorized 
version it says ‘‘ the Lord,’’ but that does not appear in the 
original. In Hebrew it reads, ‘‘I will go to meet—yon- 
der.’’ He tried to impress Balak once more with his 
mysterious power, and in proceeding to Mount Peor, 
Balak, utterly disheartened by the continued blessing of 
Israel from Balaam’s lips, demands that he is neither to 
curse nor to bless. Balaam. however, knows that it pleased 
the Lord to bless Israel; he no longer goes out to meet 
with enchantments; he drops the mask, and now the 
Spirit of God comes upon him. Balak’s anger is kindled 
after this third parable, and while he smites his hands to- 
gether the prophet opens his mouth once more and utters 
the sublimest of all his prophecies, after which he went to 
his place soon after to meet with his verrible fate. 


is 


And now we will glance at the parables themselves and 
study their wonderful meaning. The first from the heights 
of Baal: 


‘‘From Aram Balak hath brought me, 
The King of Moab—from the mountains of the East. 


mooie abacus: paint catlete cienersshs 


121 


Come curse me Jacob, 

Come and denounce Israel ! 

How shall I curse? God hath not cursed, 
How shall I denounce? The Lord hath not denounced, 
For from the top of the rocks I see Him 
And from the hilis I behold Him. 

Behold a nation that dwelleth alone, 

Not to be reckoned among the nations. 
Who counted the dust of Jacob? 

By number the fourth part of Israel. 

Let me die the death of Jeshurun, 

And let my last end be like his.’’ 


This first inspired utterance of Balaam speaks of the 
general character of Israel as the chosen people of God. 
It is, soto speak, the foundation, the key-note for all he 
is about to say by divine inspiration to Balak. We may 
divide this first parable into four parts. 

1. After stating the fact of Balak’s call and his wish that 
he should curse Jacob and denounce Israel, he states the 
impossibility to curse and to denounce —for God hath not 
cursed him, He hath not denounced him. In the original 
the name El, God, stands in connection with Jacob, and 
Jehovah, the covenant-keeping God, with Israel. When 
Balak’s deputation came to Balaam, God had said to him, 
‘‘ Thou shalt not curse the people, for they are blessed.’’ 
And now what God told him there in the secret place he is 
to speak here in public. J ‘s the truth which we find all 
through the Word of God, israel’s blessed calling, the seed 
of Abraham blest and to bea blessing. How many have 


Israel's char- 
acter. 


A blessed people. 


122 


tried to curse Jacob and to denounce Israel? They have 
never succeeded, for Isaiah’s vision has been fulfilled in 
all generations, ‘‘ No weapon that is found against thee 
shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee 
in judgment thou shalt condemn.’’ No magic, no voice, 
no power, no tongue can counteract the decree of God. 
Jacob and his seed is blest of God. Oh that men would 
understand it, but alas, they are wise in their own conceits, 
and boasting against the broken off branches they think of 
Jacob as accursed and denounce Israel, and thus dishonor 
God and make Him a liar. 

2. With his hands before his eyes, Balak gazes upon the 
fourth part of the Israelitish camp from the tops of the 
rocks and from the hill and sees a second general character- 


_ A separated istic of the people, namely, that Israel is to be a separated 
people. Israel is Ho-Am, the nation, and as such different 
from the nations and not to be reckoned among them. 

Here then we have the destiny of Israel, a destiny the 
same for all times—a peculiar people, separated from all 
other nations. As far as Old Testament times are con- 
cerned, this decree of God can hardly be denied ; but many 
Christians have stated and believe that in these New Testa- 
ment times Israel has ceased to be a peculiar people, and 
that there is no difference between them and the other na- 
tions. Experience, however, teaches differently. Truly 
the seed of Abraham is to-day mingling with the nations, 
scattered in fact among all the nations, and there tne sons 
of Jacob have not lost their peculiar characteristics. As- 
similation has been attempted, and quite often by them- 


# 


123 


selves, but rarely if ever has it been successful. God has 
kept Israel as His own separated people as truly as He has 
separated and keeps unto Himself by His Holy Spirit a 
spiritual, heavenly people, the church. All movements en- 
deavoring to rob Israel of its peculiarity and separation 
have failed, and thus Israel remains a stranger in a strange 
land. What a tremendous testimony the Zionistic movement 
at the beginning of this century is in this direction! It is 
a movement to establisk a Jewish state for the Jewish peo- 
ple in the Jewish land, and in itself a confession that as- 
similation with other nations is impossible. In speaking 
the Word of our God to the scattered Jews, God’s future 
purpose in Israel as a nation must not be overlooked. 

3. In the third place, we have the wonderful increase. An increasing 
‘* Who has counted the dust of Jacob?’’ The promise to sacks 
Jacob when he went out from Beer-Sheba was, ‘‘ Thy seed 
shall be as the dust of the earth.’’ It stands for the earthly 
promises and earthly blessings which are Jacob’s. Whata 
sight it mu;:t have been for Balaam and Balak, standing be- 
side their smoking altars, and down, way down in the 
desert, tent after tent is to be seen; but still it is only the 
fourth part, and appears like the dust of the earth—a peo- 
ple having passed through so much affliction and punish- 
ment, yet in spite of it all, strong and numerous as ever. 
In looking over the past, a still grander picture presents it- 
self tous. Israel has wandered through a greater desert 
and through greater afflictions and punishments than ever 
before ; they have been a people scattered and peeled, yet 
how wonderfully God has kept them, and more than ever a kept people, 


Sais SERA NMN NST ca 


A glorious 
people. 


From Mount 
Pisgah. 


3 124 


they are like dust, down-trodden yet ever increasing and 
multiplying, to the astonishment of their enemies. Who 
counted the dust of Jacob? The question is often asked, 
How many Jews are living to-day in the world? We tried 
to give a conservative estimate, still some tell us it is too 
low and others too high. The fact is no one seems to be 
able to get a correct number of the Jews living. Surely 
they are increasing rapidly all over the earth, and it is 
more true than ever before, ‘‘ Who counted the dust of 
Jacob?’’ 

4. Balaam’s exclamation forms a fitting conclusion to his 
first parable. ‘‘Let me die the death of Jeshurun and let 
my end be Jike his.’’ We do not think that Balaam had so 
much the physical death of Israel in view as he had their 
hope and glorious end, the glorious end of ages when the 
God of Jeshurun will reveal Himself once more for the sal- 
vation of His people and brings vengeance upon their ene- 
mies. Of that glorious eud which is Israel’s, that glorious 
morning after a night of storm and disaster, he has here 
the first glimpse, and in his next parable the Holy Spirit 
puts it before him and before Balak in detail. It remains 
only to be said that the contents of this first parable are in 
part a repetition of God’s promises to Abraham, but now 
the promise is not given to a member of Abraham’s family, 
but put into the mouth of a Gentile to transmit it to the 


Gentile king. 
II. 


Next they are on top of Mount Pisgah, on the fields of 
Zophim. Balaam, after having been away from Balak has- 


: 
| 
: 


125 


uns back, and filicd with a greater degree of inspiration, it 
szems, he bursts forth : 


‘Rise up Balak and hear ! 
Listen to me, son of Zippor ! 
God is not a man to lie ; 
Nor son of Adam to repent. 
Hath he said and will he not do it? 
Or spoken and shall not make it stand? 
Behold I have command to bless : 
Yea, he hath blessed and I cannot change it. 
He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob: 
Nor has he seen travail in Israel : 
Jehovah, his God is with him, 
The shout of a king is in his midst. 
God bringeth them out of Egypt: 
He hath streu;‘h like that of the wild ox: 
No enchantment there is against jacob, 
| There is no divination against Israel. 
In its time shall it be said of Jacch and of Israel. 
What hath God wrought? 
Behold the people rise up as a lioness ! 
And as a lion does he raise himself up ! 
He shall not lie do». till he eat of the prey, 
And drink the blood of the slain.’’ 


dadietste nainestbabbonatibhineatin a 


What an awful rebuke this was to unbelieving Balak. 4 rebuke to 
He surely had expected a change in the mind of that God . 
whose aid and help Balaam was to invoke. Maybe, he 
thoucht that God would once more, after a second request, 


oS ener 


God's gifts un- 
changeable. 


No iniquity in 
Jacob. 


126 


allow Balaam, as at the time when Balak’s princes came to 
him, to speak a more favorable word ; instead of that with 
an awful commanding voice—for thus it must have been— 
Balaam shouts to Balak to rise and listen. He hears now 
that God's promises to Israel are unchangeable, they can 
never be reversed. The same truth we have not alone 
from Balaam’s lips, but likewise from the lips of Paul, the 
servant of the Lord, who after giving his wonderful pro- 
phetic testimony concerning his own beloved Jewish na- 
tion, cries out in exaltation, ‘‘ The gifts and calling of God 
are without repentance.’’ God is ever the covenant-keep- 
ing God, and every word which has come from His loving 
heart through the prophets to His peuple Israel He will yet 
fulfill. Balak, in his unbelief and his ignorance, as well 
as his hatred against Israel, is, aias, a sad type of Christen- 
dom, apostate, disbelieving the promises of the God of 
Abraham, ignorant of His purposes concerning Israel, and, 
therefore, despising and cursing those whom they should 
honor and love. Again, in this parable, we notice four 
principal thoughts, which now bring us a step nearer to 
Israel, Israel’s calling and Israel’s future, just as Balaam 
and Balak were on Pisgah’s mountain-top nearer to the 
camp than on the heights of Baal. 

1. He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob nor seen travail 
(or perverseness) in Israel. This has ever been a mysteri- 
ous passage, and has not found many interpreters. It 
seems to us a very significant fact that in all of Balaam’s 
parables sin and guilt is never mentioned. However, it 
¢ es not say here that Israel is without iniquity or evil 


i 
| 


ROE nC Oven EW rene vee te cn Perret. Veer Seat anv eeTermaaynTEeTenre fn Vtec aren 


127 


travail, but the statement is that God hath not beheld 
iniquity and not seen perverseness in Israel. Truly Israel 
had sinned against God during their travels in the wilder- 
ness. Israel was likewise punished for it, but their apos- 
tasy was never hopeless. In all their iniquity and per- 
verseness they are still His beloved children, and the 
promise is theirs very definitely, that the seed of Israel can 
only be cast away for all that they have done if the heav- 
eus above can be measured and the foundations of the earth 
searched out beneath. (Jeremiah xxxi: 36, 37). That, of 
course, means that it will never come to pass, But more 
than that, to Israel belongs the promise of forgiveness, 
when, indeed, the eyes of God will not behold iniquity 
in Jacob nor will He see perverseness in Israel. In 
Micah, the last chapter and last three verses, is one of 
these sweet national promises to Israel, ‘‘ Who is a God 
like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the 
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retain- 
eth not his anger forever, because he delighteth in mercy. 
He will turn again and have compassion upon us; he will 
tread our iniquities under foot, and thou wilt cast all their 
sins into the depths of the sea. Thou wilt perform the 
truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou 
hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.” The 
Jews have a ceremony on their Nev Year’s Day when they 
goto brooks and empty their pockets into the running 
water, casting into it little pieces of paper, etc., repeating 
this entire passage, hoping that the time may soon come 
when God indved will do this for all Israel. The Gentile 


Jerem. xxxi: 
36. 


’ 


Micah vii. 


adie : 
; : ; ry : - 
z 7 apbsissebisRiaenviosh poke oil ~ wanes . » 
“ett weet tate arnhsihhtnadibemni atin: ene ins Toattind Aah it Sebi seth @Secencktns eS: abies math avverindinaovie ora ctu alien St athe 9 i HRN Ha araeli ks wa = Rakin! ROR Skea seated eabemeataaS - a cae 


Jehovah with 
Israel. 


Out of Egypt. 


Jerem, xvi. 


128 


nations in their unbelief and folly, their wickedness and 
iniquity, are hastening on to a judgment which in degree 
and power will, no doubt, surpass any previous judgment 
of Israel, while Israel is rapidly approaching the glories of 
her new birth when Balaain’s vision will be realized. God 
looking upon Israel and no iniquity, God beholds His peo- 
ple and no perverseness; their sins forgiven and remem- 
bered no more. 

2. In the second place notice the statement of Balaam, 
‘‘ Jehovah his God is with him, and the shout of a king in 
his midst.’’ This was true in part when Balaam looked 
upon the camp of Israel. I wonder if Balaam’s prophetic 
eye did pierce that cloud of glory, which in all its splen- 
dor was resting in the midst of Israel? Maybe it did. 
Maybe he saw in that cloud what the prophet Ezekiel saw 
in his vision, a throne, and upon the throne one like the 
Son of Man surrounded by the sign of the first covenant, 
arainbow. There was no king in the midst of Israel at 
that time ; Jehovah was king. Prophetically all points to 
the time when Israel’s travail and iniquity will have an 
end, and He whose name is ever Emanuel will be the King 
in the midst of His redeemed people. 

3. In the next place we notice that Balaam speaks of 
that deed of salvation, the redemption of Israel from the 


‘house of Egypt, which stands in the Old Testament as a 


type not only of our redemption in the blood of the Son of 
God, but likewise as the type of that future deed of God 
when He will gather His outcast children from the four 
corners of the earth. Thus we read in Jeremiah xvi., 


129 


‘Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it 
shall no more be said, The Lord liveth that brought up the 
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt ; but, The Lord 
liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land 
of the North and from all the countries whither he hath 
driven them, and I will bring them again unto their land 
that I gave unto their fathers.’’ It is important that in the 
next parable Balaam repeats the same words only in 
another connection. Connected with the fact in this para- 
ble that God brought Israel out of Egypt stands the state- 
ment that there is no enchantment against Jacob and no 
divination against Israel. Egypt could hold Israel for cen- 
turies, but Egypt’s wickedness ripened, and when the hour 
had come there was no power in the air nor upon the earth 
which could prevent the carrying out of the judgments of 
God upon Egypt and mercies upon Israel. No enchant- 
ment and no divination will ever frustrate God’s plan in 
the future. 

4. And then in the fourth place: In its time shall it be 
said of Jacob and of Israel, ‘‘ What hath God wrought ?”’ 
Just a glimpse is given here of that time of conquest in Is- 
rael and through Israel, when the people shall rise up as a 
lioness, when he shall not lie down till he has eaten the 
prey and drunk the blood of the slain; which not only 
Balaam in his next parables has to make plainer because 
the vision now hastens towards the end, but likewise 
which all the prophets from beginning to end have re- 
vealed. We shall see more of this in the third p»rable of 
Balaam. 


What hath God 
wrought ? 


130 


III. 


woos cal From the top of Peor Balaam now bcholds Israel abiding 
in their tents according to their tribes. The Spirit of the 
Lord comes upon him. It is no longer a meeting with the 
Lord and receiving it from Him, but the Spirit is upon 
him and through the Spirit he receives a higher revelation. 
He is now fully persuaded that Israel is to be blessed and 
he yields himself without resistance to God. 


‘‘ The oracle of Balaam, son of Beor, 
Even the oracle of the man with eyes that had been 
shut : 
His oracle wo heard the words of God, 
Who seeth with the vision of the Almighty ; 
Falling, but his eyes uncovered :— 
How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob! 
Thy tabernacles, O Israel ! 
As valleys are they spread forth ; 
As gardens by the river’s side; 
As aloe trees that Jehovah planted : 
As cedars beside the waters ! 
Water poureth from his buckets, 
And his seed is in many waters ; 
And his king shall be higher than Agag, 
And his kingdom shall be exalted. 
God bringeth him out of Egypt ; 
He hath strength like that of the wild ox 


He shall eat up the nations, his adversaries, — 
Yea, he shall break their bones, 


131 


And smite them through with his arrows,— 
He couched, he lay down as a lion ; 

And as a lioness,—who will rouse him ? 
Blessed is he that blesseth thee, 

And cursed is he that curseth thee !’’ 


Balaam conquered by God is now made to proclaim the 
victory of the nation of destiny and what God will do 
among them. 


1. We notice first a description of Israel: ‘‘ Goodly 
tents, beautiful tabernacles ‘ forth as valleys, gar- 
dens by the river side, aloe ;: .. and cedars beside the 


waters, waters poured from h‘; buckets, seed in many 
waters.’’ Every Sabbath day and at every feast com- 
manded by God in entering the synagogue this beautiful 
description of Israel’s happiness is chanted bv the ortho- 
dox Jews. Still it has not yet been realized, and whatever 
spiritual lessons for the church we may derive from it, we 
do not care to follow them at this time. Israel still living 
in miserable huts, no tabernacles among them, far from 
being like gardens by the riverside, and aloe trees and 
cedars beside the waters. Truly his seed in many waters, 
but not in honor and peace, but dishonor and unrest. The 
prophetic eye, however, sees it all accomplished, and Ba- 
laam’s vision leaps over centuries and centuries to the time 
of the end when Israel’s unbelief has ended and once more 
the tribes are gathering to take possession of the land, their 
glorious inheritance. When that great Sabbath day com- 
mences, that day of the Lord, Israel’s hope will be real- 
ized, and what the pious orthudox Jew to-day sees in faith 


ee 


Goodly tents. 


His seed in many 
waters. 


The great 
Sabbath. 


The king and 
poor eg 


He brings him 
out. 


and often repeats with tears in his eyes, will then be a 
blessed reality. How goodly are thy tents O Jacob, thy 
tabernacles O Israel. In the highly poetical strain we re- 
alize the type of the iiving Spirit, the water poured from 
His buckets. 

2. '. two lines Balaam speaks of the king and kingdom 
which is to be exalted. Agag was the title of the king of 
the Amalekites, the national enemy of Israel. Haman was 
an Agagite; he came from Auialek, a fitting type of the 
Antichrist, and here Balaam sees a king coming, who 
is higher than Agag, than all the powers which are 
anti-Semitic, and that king will have a kingdom which 
will be exalted. It is hardly necessary to enlarge upon 
this. 

3. We notice now for the second time the repetition, 
‘*God bringeth him out of Egypt,’’ but after the phrase, 
he hath strength like that of a wild ox, he changes his 
words. Inthe second parable we saw that he continues 
saying, ‘‘there is no enchantment against Jacob and no 
divination against Israel,’’ while in this he says after stat- 
ing ‘‘God bringeth hitu out of Egypt, he shall eat up the 
nations, his adversaries, yea, he sha!l break their bones and 
smite them through with his arrows.’’ It seems in the 
second parable Egypt of the past is meant, and in this par- 
able, it is Egypt of the future, as already quoted from Jer- 
emiah, the regathering of the people through the high and 
wonderful hand of the Lord. Connected with that second 
Egypt, that great and wonderful deed of Jehovah’s, when the 
whole nation will be redeemed and spirit-filled in that day ; 


133 


connected with that is the judgment of the nations, which are 
the adversaries of Israel. There is a wonderful similarity be- 
tween the story in Exodus and the future history of Israel, 
and ‘he nations still unwritten on the pages of history and 
only visible by eyes of faith in the word of our God, who 
will speak again and not keep silence. The words, ‘‘ he 
couched, he lay down asa lion and as tioness will rouse 
him,’’ is a quotation from Jacob’s prophecy of Judah, but 
here applied to the entire nation, which will become 
through the lion of the _.ibe of Judah the liones: who will 
lie down and spring upon its prey and drink the blood of 
the slain. The last stanza of the first part of the third 
parable is again a repetition of God’s promise to Abraham 
now seen in its fulfillment ; both declare from an enemy’s 
mouth how surely, how fully every utterance of God shall 
come to pass. 

However, the prophecy in these parables is still incom- 
plete, something is lacking which must be said. Step by 
step the Lord and the Spirit led Balaam up to the consum- 
mation, and while Balak’s anger is kindled and like a rav- 
ing maniac he stamps with his feet and smites his hands 
together, crying to Balaam, ‘‘I called thee to curse mine 
enemies and lo, thou hast altogether blessed them these 
three times, flee to thy place,’’ and while Balak denied him 
the honor he had promised, Balaam in a divine defiance, 
the fire of God burning forth from his eyes, turns once 
more to Balak and says, ‘‘ Behold I am going to my peo- 
ple; come, I will admonish thee whai this people shall do 
ynto thy people in the last days.’’ Then— 


Balak’s anger. 


134 


‘* The oracle of Balaam, son of Beor, 
Even the oracle of the man with eyes that had been 
shut ! 
The oracle of one that heareth the sayings of God 
And who knoweth the knowledge of the Most High ; 
Seeing with the vision of the Almighty ; 
Falling, but his eyes uncovered : 
I see him, but not now; 
I behold him, but not nigh: 
There hath come a star out of Jacob, 
And a sceptre hath risen out of Israel, 
And hath smitten through the sides of Moab, 
And dashed against each other all the sons of tumult. 
And Edom is a possession— 
Seir also a possession—his enemies ; 
And Israel doeth valiantly. 
Yea, out of Jacob one hath dominion, 
And destroyeth what is left from the city.’’ 


And he looked upon Amalek and took up his parable, say- 
ing— 


‘* Amalek first of the nations ! 
And his latter end, destruction !’’ 


And he looked at Kenites and took up his payable, saying— 


‘‘Firm is thy dwelling-place, 
And thy nest fixed in the rock ! 
But the Kenite shall be ruined, 
Until Asshur carry thee captive away.”’ 


135 
And he took up his parable, saying— 


*‘ Who shall live when God appointeth this ? 
And ships shall come from the coasts of Kittim, 
And shall afflict Asshur, and afflict Eber, 

And healso . . to destruction.’’ 


And Balaam rose up and went and returned to his place 
and Balak also went his way. 

This is the most remarkable parable of Balaam, and 
surely it is the very breath of God. He boasts himself of 
knowing the knowledge of the Most High, seeing with the 
vision of the Almighty. After this introduction he speaks 
again that he sees Him and beholds Him. However, not 
now and not nigh. We recollect that in the first parable 
he said likewise from the top of the rocks, ‘‘I see him and 
from the hills I behold him.’’ There it was the nation, 
here it isa person; namely, the King of Israel whose shout 
he had heard before among the wonderful people. The 
description of this coming King is glorious. First he sees 
him as a star coming out of Jacob, and then he calls him a 
sceptre risen out of Israel, smiting through the sides of 
Moab and turning against each other all the sons of tu- 
mult. In consequence of this Edom becomes his pos- 
session, likewise Seir ; all his enemies are conquered and 
Israel stands with the King and does valiantly. It is a 
very pronounced Messianic prophecy relating to the time 
when the kingdom is to be restored to Israel. Many 
teachers of God's word have made a sad mistake in apply- 
ing this prophecy to the time of the first coming of the 


Not now. 


His second 
coming. 


i36 


Lord Jesus Christ. The Jews recognize the prophecy as 
relating to the King Messiah. One of their false Messiahs 
was known by the name Bar-Chochva, the son of a star. 
We also notice that after he has taken Edom and Seir for 
his possession, Balaam says, ‘‘ Yea, out of Jacob one hath 
dominion and destroyeth what is left from the city.’’ In 
these words reference is made to his reign and rile in the 
coming age. The vital point of this last parable of Ba- 
laam is the prophecy concerning the fate of the Gentile 


The nations powers. We have first Moab, who is smitten through the 


sides; the sons of tumult are connected with Moab and 
who are dashed against each other; Edom and Seir, Ama- i 
lek, Asshur, Eber, and the ships comin, ‘rom the coast of 
Kittim. All these nations having passed away stand nev- 
ertheless in a very pronounced relation to the great day of 
the wrath of the Lord, when He whose right it is will ap- / 
pear once more. In fact they seem to come again to the 
front in the latter day. We will quote here a remarkable 
passage from the prophet Jeremiah, which relates to Moab. 
Jeremiah xlviii: 47, ‘‘ Yet will I bring again the captivity 
of Moab in the latter days, saith the Lord.’’ In chapter 
xlix :6, we read, ‘‘And afterward I will bring again the 
captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the Lord.’’ And 
in the 39th verse, ‘‘ But it shall come to pass in the latter 


the Lord.’’ All these nations have been judged in the 
past, and their descendants are hard to find, yet God knows 
and in His own way and in His own time He will have 


days that I will bring again the captivity of Elam, saith 
every one of His words fulfilled. 
t 
i 


137 


What else do we see in this last parable of Balaam than 
the judgment of the world-powers? Later Nebuchadnezzar, 
another Gentile ruler like Balak, had a dream, and he saw 
the great image, the wonderful picture of the four king- 
doms of the world; and Daniel, a true prophet of Jehovah, 
not like Balaam, interpreted the dream for Nebuchadnez- 
zar, Lut what Nebuchadnezzar dreamed and Daniel saw in 
his vision Balaam here sees in his last vision from the top 
of Peor. Wonderful description of the time when the 
stone cut out without hands smashes the proud image and 
reduces it to dust! Wonderful vision later seen by Zecha- 
riah, the four carpenters who are being raised up to con- 
quer the four horns who have scattered Israel, Judah and 
Jerusalem. (Zechariah i.) ‘There is no doubt that Asshur 
stands for the first of the Gentile empires, that is Babylon, 
and Eber probably for the other, the Medo-Persian, while 
Kittim, the Isles of the West, stand for the Greek and 
Roman rule. 

Oh that men were wise and would consider the word of 
our God; here, indeed, is the consummation of all wisdom 
and knowledge. Prophecy is a light that shineth in a dark 
place; it shineth until the day dawns, and it is our privi- 
lege and our duty that we take heed. May He who has 
spokeu to the children of men at sundry times and in 
divers manners help us by His Spirit to think His thoughts 
over with Uim, enter into His plans and purposes, and 
above all, to live for Him, our coming Lord. 


Judgment upon 
world-powers. 


a 
foal 
Zz. 
< 
< 
cs 
a 
< 
Y 


u 


Isaiah XI. aid XII. 


CHAPTER XI. 


T HE eleventh chapter is a continuation of the prophecy 
contained in thetenth. There we learn of the onslaught 
made upon Jerusalem by the enemy, the Assyrian, arid how 
he is arrested in his wicked endeavor by the sudden. ..'¥r- 
ing of the Lord. The Assyrian of Isaiah’s day is t... type 
of the last Assyrian, who is yet to fall in Israel’s land: 
Here we have a prophecy which reveals the Messiah and 
His Kingdom and shows the King in His beauty, the one 
who will break the Assyrian to pieces and slay the wicked 
one with the breath of His lips and establish His Kingdom, 
ruling in righteousness and peace. 

The chapter may be divided into three parts, which we 
briefly consider. 

I. King Messiah ; who He is and what He will do. 


‘And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse, 
aud a branch out of His roots shall be fruitful; aud the Spirit of 
Jehovah shall rest upon Him, the Spirit of wisdom and understand- 
ing, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge and 
of the fear of Jehovah. And His delight will be in the fear of 
Jehovah; and He shall not judge after the sight of His eyes, neither 
reprove after the hearing of His ears; but with righteousness shall 
He judge the poor, and reprove with equity the meek of the earth ; 
and He shall smite the earth with the rod of His mouth, and with 
the breath of His lips shall He slay the wicked. And righteousness 
shall be the girdle of His reins, and faithfulness the girdle of His 
loins’’ (verses 1-5). 


141 


The Assyrian. 


her = criti- 
cism's appli- 
cation. 


2 Thess. ii: 8. 


First and second 
coming. 


142 « 


We care not to follow the infidel views of recent years, 
which under the assumed name of ‘‘ higher criticism ’’ deny 


that these verses have any reference whatever to Messiah. 
They apply it to Hezekiah and Josiah as well as to others. 
These critics, ‘‘ wise in their own conceit,’’ prove only too 
well what spirit is leading them and to what these blind 
leaders of the blind shall come at last. Their deliberate aim 
is to rob the Lord Jesus Christ of 2s much of Ilis glory as 
they possibly can and deny nearly all predictions in the 
Word of God, which foretell His first and His second 
coming. And this they do in face of the most positive 
proofs of the Old and New Testaments. That the predic- 
tion before us refers exclusively to the Lord Jesus Christ is 
to our mind beyond controversy. Only He can be meant 
by these descriptions, who is Immanuel. Besides this do 
we find in the New Testament a part of the fourth verse 
quoted and directly applied to our Lord (2 Thess. ii: 8). 
We have, however, here again His first and second com- 
ing blended into one. ‘ihe passage is to be linked with the 
two other passages in previous chapters absolutely mes- 
We learn 
there that He is to be born of a virgin and the Son born zs 
Immanuel, that He will be from David and have His throne 
and government. 


sianic. We mean chapters vii: 14 and ix ‘6-7. 


In chapter xi:1-5 all this is still more 
expanded. His humble origin as Man stands first. From 
the passage in the ninth chapter one might conclude that 
this child to be born, this given Son would come when 
The 


prophecy here tells us that the royal house of David was to 


David’s house was still in a flourishing condition. 


aston mete 


sasanatisaannemne 


143 


be cut off first and after a long time a new shoot, a branch 
out of his roots, should spring forth and be fruitful. Jesse, 
who is mentioned here, the father of David, was a poor and 
humble man and out of such, a shoot should come forth. 

It may be compared with a magnificent tree, which is cut 
down, but the root remains in the ground, and out of this 
root comes a sprout. Thus when the house of David was 
reduced to almost nothing the shoot and the branch, the 
Zemach, as he is called in Zechariah, came forth. Upon 
Him was and is the fullness of the Spirit of Jehovah, and He 
is the One who will judge the earth, yea, the One who alone 
is fit and fitted to rule in righteousness and reprove with 
equity the meek of the earth. His work in redemption is 
of course not seen here, it is implied by being judge. ‘‘He 
(God) has set a day in which He is going to judge the 
habitable earth in righteousness by the 1/ax whom He has 
appointed, giving the proof of it to all in having raised 
Him from among the dead ’’ (Acts xvii: 31). 

And who is the wicked, whom He will slay with the 
breath of His lips? As indicated above, the Second 
Epistle to the Thessalonians gives the answer. It is the 
great head of the apostasy, the man of sin, the son of per- 
dition, the one who exalteth himself, the lawless one. It 
is not the Assyrian, but the Antichrist who sits in the tem- 
ple in Jerusalem (2 Thess. ii: 1-11). 


Il. Zhe Peace He brings after the wicked One is slain. 

“The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall 
lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and the 
fatted beast together, and a little child shall lead them. And the 
cow and the she-bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down 


Zemach. 


Acts xvil: 31. 


Prince of Peace. 


Jewish exposi- 
tion. 


144 


together ; and the lion shall eat straw lixe the ox. And the sucking 
child shall play on the hole of the adder, and the weaned child 
shall put forth his hand to the viper's den. They shall not hurt 
nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall be full 
of the knowledge of Jehovah, as the waters cover the sea. And in 
that day there shall be a root of Jesse, standing as a banner of the 
peoples; the nations shall seek it; and His resting place shall be 
glorious ’’ (verses 6-10). 


These blessed words speak of the peace which shall be on 
earth, when at last the Prince of Peace has come to rule in 
righteousness. They are, like almost every other gracious 
promise in the Old Testament, spiritualized and applied as 
being fulfilled in this present age. It is explained that 
through the grace of God man with an evil temperament 
can be changed from a tiger or a bear intoa lamb. Other 
equally ridicuious interpretations are made of these verses. 
Many years ago we talked with a Hebrew, who gave 
among many other arguments, why the Messiah could not 
have come yet, the passage before us, and he reasoned 
very strongly that inasmuch when you put a lamb in a cage 
with a tiger, the tiger will devour the lamb or a child 
playing with a poisonous viper will be bitten and die, that 
therefore Messiah had not yet come. He said when Mes- 
siah is here the bear and tiger would go together with the 
lamb and the calf without hurting them. When we told 
him, not knowing better at that time, that this must be 
explained in a spiritual way, the Jew wanted to know our 
authority for making these words mean something else. 
There is no authority for spiritualizing them. They mean 
literally that which they declare. The peace on earth 
includes the deliverance of groaning creation. 


cE TR 8 mnt 


a en mena 


ae 


a 


pe 


145 


When Adam was unfallen the mighty animals bowed 
before him, all was peace and harmony. When the second 
Man, the last Adam, takes personal control of the habita- 
ble earth, and all things are put in subjection under His 
feet, that peace and harmony will be restored. Thus it 1s 
written in the Epistle of our salvation, in Romans viii: 
‘For the anxious looking out of the creature expects the 
revelation of the sons of God, for the creature has been 
made subject to vanity, not of its will, but “y reason of 
him who has subjected the same, in hope that the creature 
itself also shall be set free from the bondage of corruption 
into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. For 
we know ‘iat the whole creation groans together and 
travails :. , © together until now’”’ (verses 18-23). The 
fulfillm >: .; this, tiie deliverance of groaning creation, 
means li. ray all of that which we read here in Isaiah xi. 
And when will it be? It will bein shat day. It is the day 
of the Lord, when He is manifested in Glory. This cor- 
responds to the statement in Romans viii, ‘‘ the revelation 
of the sons of God.’’ Christ the firstbegotten from the 
dead will be revealed and with Him the many sons He 
brings to Glory. 

The Jew has a fe. xt right to make the argument that 
Messiah has not come yet, for groaning creation is still 
undelivered. But he overlooks the fact that there is a first 
coming foretold in the prophets which was literally fulfilled, 
and that peace will come and the reign of peace when He 
comes the second time. And the great majority of Chris- 
tian believers hold that Christ came in humiliation, and 


The second man. 


Groaning cr-a- 
tion. 


Romans viii: 
18-23. 


World conver- 
sion. 


No fulfillment 
now. 


146 


they forget His second coming, which will be literal fulfill- 
ment of prophecy as was His first. 

World conversion is indicated in the passage before us 
in the sentence, ‘‘the nations shall seek it; and His 
resting place sha!! Le glorious.’’ 


III. Zhe Resioration of Israel. 


“And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set 
His hand again the second time to acquire the remnant of His 
people which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from 
Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from 
Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. A:d He shall lift upa 
banner to the nations, and shall assemvle the outcasts of Israel, 
and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners 
of the earth. And the envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the 
troubles of Judah shall be cut off; Ephraim will not envy Judah, 
and Judah will not trouble Ephraim; but they shall fly upon the 
shoulder of the Philistines towards the West; togethe shall they 
spoil the sons of the East; they shall lay their hand upon Edom 
and Moab, and the children of Ammon shall obey them. And 
Jehovah will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and 
with His mighty wind will He shake His hand over the river and 
will smite it into seven streams, and make men to go over dryshod. 
And there shall be a highway for the remnant of His people which 
will be left from Assyria ; like as it was to Israel in the day when 
He went up out of the land of Egypt’ (verses 11-16). 


It is of course all folly to look for a fulfillment of this 
passage in any past or p.csent event. Yet this is con- 
stantly done. It is the general opinion of commentators 
that these verses were fulfilled in the return of a remnant 
of Israel from the Babylonian captivity. This is so weak a 
claim that any one who reads the words carefully can 
point out the arguments which sweep this false exposition 
completely away. In the first place it is a second return 
from captivity and points therefore to a time beyond the 


aaa 


e_wceearerstthtthanastenmmanaanantaat A TTC te NeI 


147 


captivity in Babylon. In the second place the dispersion 
of Israel here from which they are brought back is world- 
wide, including the islands of the sea; the Babylonian 
captivity was net a world-wide dispersion into the four 
corners of the earth. It 7s all future. This great bring- 
ing back of Israel comes with His glorious return. 

Others who hold the second personal and premillennial 
coming of the Lord have at least partly tried to give this 
passage a present fulfillment. They speak of the destruc- 
tion of the tongue of the Egyptian sea, the smiting of the 
river, the drying up of Euphrates, etc., as if it had refer- 
ence to events in this present age. Thus some think the 
destruction of the tongue of the Egyptian sea means the 
cessation of the Turkish empire. We even heard it stated 
by a foreign missionary in Palestine that ‘the highway ”’ 
was a prophecy relating to the railroad from Jaffa to Jeru- 
salem (!!) Where will people end with their own private 
interpretation of prophecy? No, all is future and will 
come to pass when the Lord has come and gathers His 
people again. Then He gathers not only the dispersed of 
Judah, but also the outcasts of Israel, the ten tribes, and 
they will be one nation before Him. The song of praise of 
that restored people we shall read in the next chapter. 


Egyptian sea. 


Hf 


ees sek 


sereecepibverteert et sca 
seperti 


Praia 


Ecard 


Exodus xv. 


CHAPTER XII. 


[ is a wonderful little chapter which follows the 
eleventh. The praise which is uttered in it is the praise 
of redeemed Israel, brought back to Immanuel’s land, and 
richly blest there. The Lord will appear first and do all 
the wonderful things which passed before our view in the 
last chapter and then, when He has brought His people 
back the second time and they have seen their King in His 
Beauty and received Him at last, they will break forth in 
this glorious hymn of praise. Let us read the words first 
before we comment on it. 


‘‘ And in that day thou shalt say: 
Jehovah, I will praise Thee ; for though Thou wast angry with 


me, thine anger is turned away, and thou hast comforted me. 

Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust and not be afraid ; for 
Jehovah is my strength and song, and He is become my salvation. 

And with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. 

And in that day shall ye say, Give ye thanks to Jehovah, call 
upon His mame, declare His deeds among the peoples, make men- 
tion that His name is exalted. 

Sing Psalms of Jehovah, for He hath done excellent things ; 
this is known in all the earth. 

Cry aloud and shout, thou inhabitants of Zion; for great is the 
Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.’’ 


When Israel passed through the Red Sea and God had 
overcome their enemies and led His people forth, they 
sang a similar song of worship and praise. That great 
deed of Jehovah in overcoming all their enemies and de- 
livering them is the type of other deliverances of His 
earthly people and the song in Exodus xv is a foreshadow- 


148 


149 


ing of their future singing and rejoicing. However, their 
song after the passage through the Red Sea soon changed 
into murmuring. It will not be so when they are again in 
the land and their backslidirg is healed. The Holy One 
of Israel will be in their midst and the praise will continue. 
It will be a perfect and endless praise. 

In the previous chapter we ‘1d the description of the 
final deliverance of His people, and now we hear that 
perfect praise of a delivered and richly blessed nation. 

‘‘In that day ’’ it is to be, not now, but in the day of the 
Lord’s glorious manifestation. The praise to Jehovah is 
first of all for the comfort with which He has comforted 
His people. The long night of suffering and of woe is 
over; divine anger which hung over the people is passed, 
and the people acknowledge their sin, ‘‘ Thou wast angry 
with me.’’ The comfort is forgiveness and peace for Jeru- 
salem. How this simple praise and acknowledgment of 
redeemed Israel brings all the*blessed promises of the pro- 
phetic Word into view. ‘‘ For a small moment have I 
forsaken thee ; but with great mercies will I gather thee. 
In the outpouring of wrath have I hid my face from thee 
for a moment; but with everlasting loving kindness will I 
remember thee, saith Jehovah thy Redeemer’’ (Isa. liv:7, 8). 
‘‘ For they shall know me from the least of them unto the 
greatest of them, saith Jehovah; for I will pardon their 
iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more’’ (Jerem. 
xxxi:34). How sweet will be the rest and comfort for 
poor, stormi-tossed Israel at last. 


The second stanza of Israel’s hymn of praise :.. what 


‘In that day.” 


Igaiah liv :7, 8. 


Jerem, xxx: 84, 


Num. xxiv: 7, 


150 


Jehovah now is for them and what they have found in 
Him. And who is this Jehovah? Who is He whom they 
worship? Who is it whom they acknowledge as their 
salvation? Surely no other than the Lord who, when He 
came the first time, was rejected by His own. Our adora- 
ble Lord Jesus Christ is this worshipped Jehovah, for He 
is truly Jehovah (compare Isaiah vi:1 with John xii: 41). 
Long had Israel refused His salvation, refused Him who 
died for the nation, but now in praise they declare their 
perfect trust in Him and their deliverance from fear. 
‘‘Jah, Jehovah is my strength and song, and He is become 
my salvation.’’ He has healed His people and they ac- 
knowledge Him as their all. The word ‘‘Jah’’ means 
Jehovah, too, and yet there isa difference. ‘‘Jah’’ stands 
for Jehovah in His absolute self-existence. The third 
verse is the voice of the Lord calling upon His people in 
gracious promise: ‘‘ And with joy shall ye draw water out 
of the wells of salvation.’’ There will be an abundant flow 
of water, His Spirit aud His mercy will flow forth like a 
river. Then surely the earth will be full of the knowledge 
of Jehovah, as the waters cover the sea, and streams of 
iiving waters will flow forth from a redeemed people. 
What precious water Israel will draw and pour out from 
its buckets to water the dry places of the earth! (Num. 
xxiv: 7). 

Israel’s mission during the millennium is seen next. 
They will declare His deeds among the nations and mention 
His exalted name. The time of Psalm singing has begun, 

and like the book of Psalms which ends with ‘‘ Hallelu- 


151 


jahs,’’ which never end, ‘‘ Praise ye the Lord’’ will be Praise, 
heard from Israel’s lips and the nations will learn praise 
and worship from His earthly people, the head of the 
nations. ‘‘ Let this be known in all the earth.’’ 

And what is the glorious climax of Israel’s happiness 
and blessing in that day? Why does Zion cry aloud and 
shout? He Himself, the Holy One of Israel, the Lord, 
Israel’s King, the King of Kings, is in the midst of her. 
His glorious throne will be established in Mount Zion, and 
on top of that high mountain the joy of the whole earth 
will rest His Glory, seen by the indwellers of the earth 
(Psl. cxxxii: 13, 14). The angels will then ascend and ps. cxxxii:13,14 
descend upon the Son of Man and glory cover the earth. 


e 
‘ 


WHAT ORTHODOX JEWS BELIEVE 


ON THINGS TO COME. 


} 
| 
| 


What Orthodox Jews Believe on Things 


to Come. 
HE expression, ‘‘the poor blind Jew,’’ is quite often 
heard frou. the lips of Christian believers. Not very 
long ago we heard a preaciier give a sermc 20n the Kingdom 
of Sod. In the course o’ his address he pictured very vividly 
the ‘‘foolish’’ expectations of the Jewis people at the 
time when Jesus of Nazareth ap) . are mong His ow® 
and how they exsected Him to establish an earth.» kit 
dom, jewish and world-wid ‘(Or course,’ the pr=ac’ 
continue’ ‘‘they were blinded ad knew not th ; 
tures. they did indesstand that the king?om he 
Messiah is a spiritwal ym, = kingdom in d1 
the ~vorld, and ail the ld Testament descriptio s ci tl 
Jewisi: prophets have found and ime their fulf in 
e ‘tual kingdom of God or «echurch. T 
ness, hopec for a literal ifiliment, w er 
_ and never will come:,’’ etc. Poor ded | er | 


: should pity yourself instead of pitymg the blinded 

It is true the Jew expected the Messiah to establish 

.e kingdom of heaven in the earth ; and hac he not a per- 
ct right for such an expec-ation? What Serip' ral proof 
has the above preacher, anc with him hundreds of others, 
for the statement that ‘‘all she Old Testament predictions 


155 


Geutile blind- 
ness. 


Sake pi ae seme 


etre AP 


‘ 
4 


156 


of the Jewish prophets have found and find their fulfill- 
ment in the spiritual Kingdom of God or the church?’ 
Certainly, there is no Scriptural warrant for the spiritualiz- 
ing of Old Testament prophecy, applying all the promises 
of God given to Israel, which is always the seed of Abra- 
ham, to the church, to be realized in her in this present 
age. This is an awful delusion, and much, if not all, of 
the confusion, unbelief, higher criti ism and worldliness 
which exist to-day in Christendom have originated from 
robbing the Jew of his inheritance, and not rightly divid- 
ing the Word of Truth. 

Old Testament prophecy has been much better under- 
stood by the old synagogue than by most Christian com- 
mentators. Many a Christian Doctor of Divinity has with 
a few sentences dismissed the ‘‘ carnal’’ expectations of the 
Jews and the literal interpretations of the Rabbis, and 
erected his own phantom, but, nevertheless, the Jew with 
his ‘‘ carnal’’ expectations and literal interpretations holds 
the truth. Yonder old orthodox Jew faithfully keeping 
the law and daily expecting his Messiah, the Redeemer of 
Israel, waiting for Him and His kingdom, believing in all 
the prophets said concerning the restoration of ali things 
and Israel’s glory, is a far more inspiring sight to us than 
many a nominal Christian, who has no knowledge of the 
Word, and none at all of God’s purposes, and who moves 
in a little, narrow circle. Is it not remarkable that all per- 
secutions of the Jews, for nearly 1,900 years, all tortures 
and massacres, all false missionary methods, have not 
shaken the firm belief and hope in the sure word of 


157 


prophecy of the God of Abraham? This faith and hope, Still expecting 
which no Inquisition could quench, is not stubbornness ; it 

is divine. Only a small part of the Jewish nation has at 

least outwardly cast aside the hope of a future glory, and 

speaks of assimilation, which is so seldom seen. There are 

many orthodox Jews who wait as eagerly for the Messiah 

as the true Christian waits for God’s Son from heaven. 

The Jew has in his many and ancient writings a wonderful 

treasure, which a Christian never dreams of. The Targu- 

mim, Medrashim and the Talmudic literature is filled with 

valuable suggestions, read and understood by not many 
Gentiles. The Jew has in these writings a wonderful 
eschatology or teachings on the last things, the end of this 

present age, and the world to come, which will no doubt 

astonish many of our Christian friends. We hope to give 

a few of these remarkable statements made by the Rabbis, 

and give numerous quotations from their writings. All 

will be of the deepest interest to all true students of the 

Word. 

The great centre of Jewish eschatology is the Messiah. Messiah the 


There can be no salvation, universal blessing and peace un- 
til He comes. His coming is, therefore, the object of faith 
and hope of Israel. The New Testament puts before the 
‘ true believer that blessed hope of His coming again, as the 
only \rue hope for His church, Israel, and the world, in 
much the same way as the Rabbis in their writings do. 
The Rabbis have much to say on the person and work of 
the Messiah, the conditions and signs of His coming, the 
{ events connected with it. It is no easy task to collect the 


Messiah's J eity. 


158 


leading thoughts for Christian readers from the large 
amount of quotations which could be made. We call first 
the attention to the Jewish beiief of a Messiah who is pre- 
existent. 

The Pre-existence of the Messiah is often mentioned by 
the teachers of Isrsel. Shemoth rabba says whatever God 
created, He has created for His own glory. But seven 
things are mentioned which were called into existence by 
God before the creation of the world. Bereshith rabba says 
the law (Thorah) and the throne of glory were created be- 
fore the time; also the Patriarchs, Israel, the Temple and 
the name of the Messiah were pre-existent with God. The 
first aim of God in creation is Israel and the Temple, the 
last the Kingdom of the Messiah in the earth. According 
to Zanchuma, the seven things created by God in eternity 
are: ‘‘ The Thorah, the throne of glory, the Temple, the 
Patriarchs, Israel, the Messiah and repentance.’’ In /alkut 
Shimoni we find the Thora, Repentance, the Paradise, the 
throne of glory, the Temple and the Messiah. 

The beginning of the Gospel of John, ‘‘In tlie begin- 
ning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God 
was the Word,’’ contains the doctrine of the old syna- 
gogue. Asso much has been written on this, and not a 
few Christologies refer in defense of the eternal and abso- 
lute Deity of Christ to the old Jewish sources, we will not 
repeat what is well known. 

Messiah, when He comes, will find, according to the 
Rabbis, the world in a sad state and Israel in deep misery 


and ungodliness. We will give, however, in a later article 


159 


deeply interesting and important quotations from Talmu- 
dical literature concerning the conditions and signs of His 
coming--quotations which are significant because we meet 
statements which agree in every detail with the New Testa- 
ment predictions concerning the conditions which wi!l exist 
at the end of this present evil age and the signs of His 
coming. 

Because Israel has fallen so deep and a great and true re- 
pentance is neccssary, according to the Rabbis, the prophet 
Elijah will come before Messiah appears for the redemption 
and restoration of Israel. vijah as the forerunner of 
Messiah (Mal. iii : 23) was firmly believed in by the Scribes 
and Pharisees when Jesus of Nazareth lived (Matt. xix: 
10, 11). It is still believed by orthodox Jews. Prayers are 
made to God to send Elijah, the prophet, and every Pesach 
(Passover) night, when the beautiful and inspiring feast of 
the unleavened bread is opened, an extra cup filled with 
wine stands on the table for the prophet Elijah, while an 
empty chair is reserved for him at every circumcision. An 
old tradition says: ‘‘In the time when the Holy One, 
blessed is He, redeems Israel, three days before Messiah 
comes Elijah will appear. He will lift up his voice in the 
mountains of Israel, and will be heard from one end of the 
earth to the other (/a/kut). He will prepare the way. In 
Edijoth we read that he will clear up the genealogies. He 
will settle all difficulties in Israel; the money on account 
of which two are fighting remains deposited till Elijah 
comes (Baba metsia). 

His greatest work, however, is teaching and leading Is- 


= ae come 


Israel to repent, 


160 


raelto repentance. In the sayings of Rabbi Elieser it is 
recorded that Israel will never truly repent till Elijah 
comes. /alkut Shimoni says: ‘‘ Elijah cries and weeps on 
the mountains of Israe!, and calls out, ‘How long will you 
stand in a desolate and deserted land?’ But then for three 
days will he proclaim peace is coming for the world; even 
the wicked will rejoice; but he says to them, salvation is 
for Zion and her children, and not for you.”’ 

In this great work of callin. Israel to repentance and re- 
forming the nation, Zijah, according to the Rabbis, is as- 
sisted by the other great prophets of the Old Testament. 
Moses is especially mentioned. In Devorim rabba we notice 
the following very remarkable tradition: God said to 
Moses: ‘‘ Just as thou hast given thy life for Israel in this 
world, even so shall it be in the future one. When I shall 
send them the prophet Elijah, you both shall come to- 
gether.’’ The identity of the two witnesses in Revelation 
xi. has always been an open question with Biblical stu- 
dents. That they are persons, and not nations or systems, 
that they are witnessing in Israel’s land and to the people, 
is now little disputed. It is also generally believed that 
Elijah is one of these witnesses. Many people still hold 
that Enoch must be the other. More Scriptural reasons, 
however, are in favor of Moses. 

In Zargum jer. we read: ‘‘In the fourth night, when 
the world reaches the set time—the time of the redemption 
—and the iron yoke is to be broken, Moses will come out of 
the desert.’’ * * * Other prophets, especially Isaiah 
and Jeremiah, are likewise mentioned as forerunners. 


re maT NY a RR TT iT 


SET 


161 


Concerning the time of Messiah's coming, the rabbinical The a of His 


writers are likewise not silent. It is a Jewish belief, which 
many Christian teachers of the Word have adopted, 
namely, that the earth will exist in its present state for six 
thousand years, corresponding with the six days of the 
week, and to be followed by the seventh day—the seventh 
thousand, the everlasting Sabbach. ‘Two thousand years 
without the law, two thousand years under the law, and 
two thousand years under Messiah. According to many of 
their reckonings, the Messiah should have come long ago, 
a fact which is freely acknowledged by some, and the non- 
appearance of the Messiah is explained in different ways. 
Orthodox Jews say that God keeps Messiah from coming, 
so that Israel, His people, waiting stil! longer for Him, 
waiting in suffering and persecution, may receive in the 
end a greater reward. In /oma the question, “ Why does 
Messiah tarry ?’’ is answered with a statement that the sins 
of Israel prevent His coming. Others count the time of 
Messiah’s coming from the destruction of the Temple by 
Nebuchadnezzar, and the following very interesting note is 
found in Aboda zarra: Rabbi Chananja says: ‘‘ If some 
one should say to thee, four hundred years after the de- 
struction of the Temple: Buy this field for one piece of 
silver, though it is worth one thousand pieces, do not buy 
it, for in that time Messiah will come, and we will be re- 
deemed; why shouldst thou lose the money?” These 
writers have no doubt learned this counting from the de- 
struction of the Temple from the prophecy of Daniel, 
chapter ix. In other places the years 4231 and 4291 after 


Why He tarries. 


Setting the day. 


False Christs. 


Signs of His 
coming. 


162 


the creation of the earth are given as the years when Mes- 
siah will surely come. . 

In our times many Christian believers occupy themselves 
with figuring out the time when our blessed Lord wiil come 
again; this is not only unscriptural, but a snare. Much 
harm has come through the setting of days aud years, and 
the enemy has always used these failures to bring prophetic 
teachings into disrepute. The same setting of times and 
expectancy seems to have been the case at different times 
among the Jews, especially before Jesus of Nazareth ap- 
peared, and many times after that, when clever fanatics or 
deceivers rose up among the Jews, proclaiming themselves 
as Messiah, believed in by many, and ending in failure and 
shame. Zangwill in his book, ‘‘The Dreamers of the 
Ghetto,’’ gives a good history of one of these impostors. 
Very true, says the Zarzgum to Koheleth (Ecclesiastes), 
‘*the day on which the Messiah comes is a secret.’’ 

In the Gospel of Matthew we read that the disciples came 
to the Lord, while He rested on the Mount of Olives, and 
put twoquestionsto Him: ‘‘ Tell us when shall these things 
be, and what shall be the sign of Thy coming and of the 
end of the age?’’ These questions show that the disciples 
must have understood in some measure the future glory 
and coming again of their Lord and Master. ‘The most in- 
teresting fact, however, is in the question they put to Him 
about the sign of His coming. Much about the signs of 
the coming of Messiah is recorded in Jewish traditions, and 
it is a wonderful fact that the utterances of many of the 
old wise iaen and teachers in Israel agree with the sayings 


163 


of our Lord and His apostles. There can be no doubt that 
the Spirit of God did enlighten many of the old Jewish 
writers, and they foretell the conditions correctly which 
will prevail when the King of Glory comes. 

Bereshith rabba and the Medr, to Shir Hashirim (Song 
of Solomon) has many of these remarkable predictions, 
likewise the tract Shabbath, Sota, Pesikta, rab., Sanhedrin 
and the Ja/kut Shimoni. The signs given are signs among 
the nations and in Israel. The years preceding the coming 
of the Messiah are years of dissolution for the entire 
world, and that time is called ‘‘ The travail of the Mes- 
siah.’’ With travail Messiah is to appear. One kingdom 
will be against the other, and one will try to overcome the 
other. How clearly this corresponds with the Lord’s 
words, ‘‘ Ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars; na- 
tion shall rise against nation and kingdom against king- 
’» ‘The Rabbis state also that many plagues will come 
upon the entire earth, and that Israel will suffer with all 
the nations. Among the plagues are mentioned, ‘‘ the 
sword, pestilence, famine and tribulations.’’ At last there 
will be terrible signs in nature, in heaven and in earth, and 
a terrible earthquake will shake the foundation of the earth. 
(Pesikta and Sota.) It is indeed remarkable that the phy- 
sical phenomena are placed at the end of the tribulation by 
the Jewish writers, being the true place where they belong, 
in harmony with the words of Jesus: ‘‘ Immediately after 
the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and 
the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall 
from heaven and the powers of the heavens shall be 


dom. 


The travail of the 
Messiah. 


Earthquake, 


The time of 
Jacob's 
trouble. 


Antichrist. 


164 


shaken.’’ Sanhedrin says: In the last seven years before 
the Messiah, the Son of David, comes, every year will have 
its peculiar trouble, till at last, toward the end of the sev- 
enth year, the Messiah will come. 

But there are still more remarkable predictions which 
harmonize with Paul’s prophecies in 1 Tim. iv:1, etc., 
2 Tim. iii: 1-7, and other prophecies in the Old and New 
Testaments concerning the last days. Israel will have sunk 
down into the deepest depths of unbelief and wickedness. 
The wisdom of the teachers of the Scriptures will be hated, 
and the few who are afraid of sin are being despised, while 
the Law is no longer studied. All the good customs will 
be discontinued; no one hopes any longer for a Messiah. 
Before Messiah comes immorality will increase at a fright- 
ful rate. (The days of Lot.) Disobedience and violence 
against father and mother will be universal. The son will 
hate the father and the daughter lift up her hand against 
her mother. It will be a time when no truth is found in 
the earth—a time of universal lawlessness, anarchy. To 
make the confusion still greater, the tract Sanxhedrin says, 
that false Messiahs will appear. Again we refer the reader 
to the Olivet discourse of our Lord. He said: ‘‘ For there 
shall arise false Christs and false prophets, and they shall 
show great signs and wonders.’’ Rabbi Joshua says, con- 
cerning the repentance which Israel will do at last before 
Messiah comes: ‘‘ The Holy One will give to Israel a king, 
whose decrees and whose rule will be much harder than 
Haman’s, and under him Israel will repent.’’ This king no 
doubt is Antichrist, of whom Haman is a type. 


165 


The similarity in these Jewish writings with the New 
Testament is very striking. ‘This ought to be very con- 
vincing to the learned Hebrew, and help him to see in 
Jesus of Nazareth, Him who is the true Hope of His people. 

We desire to add to the interesting statements about the 
orthodox Jews’ belief concerning the time and conditions 
previous to Messiah’s coming the following quotations from 
the Medrash to Shir-Ha-Shirim : 

Rabbi Chija says: The days when Messiah comes there 
will be a great pestilence over the entire earth. All the 
wicked will perish. ‘‘ And the vines are in blossom ; they 
give forth their fragrance’’ (Song of Sol. ii: 13). This 
means the saved remnant, of whom Isaiah says (chapter 
iv: 3), ‘‘ And it shall come to pass that be that is left in Ziv . 
and he that remaineth in Jerusalem shall be called holy.’’ 

Rabbi Jochunan says: ‘‘ Seven years of trouble come be- 
fore Messiah comes.’’ The first year before the Son of David 
comes the prophecy of Amos (chapter iv: 7) will be ful- 
filled: ‘‘I also Lave withholden the rain from you,”’ etc. 
In the second year (of tribulation) there will be six months 
of famine. In the third year there will be the great fam- 
ine. Many men, women and children will die and the 
pious will be few. The Law and the Prophets will be for- 
gotten by the people of Israel. The last years will bring 
Signs in heaven and wars, and at the end of the seventh 
year the Son of David will come. 

Anotiier Rabbi says: ‘‘ When Messiah comes He will find 
no truth (Isaiah lix: 15). The generation He will find will 
be like dogs,’’ 


The remnant, 


Seven years’ 
trouble. 


Son of David. 


An interesting 
comparison. 


166 


Rabbi Levi says: When thou seest one generation after 
the other d-spising God and His Anointed, then thou may- 
est hope that the King Messiah will soon appear, as it is 
written in the Ixxxix Psalm, ‘‘ Wherewith Thine enemies 
have reproached, O Lord; wherewith they have reproached 
the footsteps of Thine Anointed.’’ But in the last verse of 
the Psalm we read, ‘‘ Blessed be the Lord for evermore. 
Amen and amen.’’ 

Much could be said on the teachings of the Old Syna- 
gogue concerning the person of the Messiah, His birth and 
coming into the world, etc. We call attention to the fact 
that in many of the rabbinical writings a parallel is drawn 
between Moses and Messiah (Zanchuma, Schemoth rabba, 
Jalkut Schimoni, etc.) Moses had received from the Lord 
the promise, I will raise them up a Prophet from among 
their brethren like unto thee. Peter, filled with the Holy 
Spirit, applies in his sermon this passage to the Messiah. 
The modern Jewish interpreters of the Word of God deny 
that the promise has any reference to the coming of the 
Messiah, but, as stated above, the older Jewish Rabbis 
speak of the Messiah as a second Moses. Just as Moses 
grew up in the house of Pharaoh, without Pharaoh know- 
ing that in his house the future judge through whom God 
was to avenge His people was dwelling, thus the Messiah, 
through whom God will judge the world, will dwell un- 
known in Edom—here the Roman empire ( 7anchuma and 
Schemoth rabba). ‘This is a very interesting comparison, 
which has escaped many a Christian commentator and 
preacher. Still more striking is the statement which we 


167 


find in Jal/kut Shimoni; ‘‘ Israel will be a long time in tribu- 
lation after the birth of His Redeemer.’’ Here we may no- 
tice again the story of Moses. Not till Moses came the 
second time was there a na’ ‘onal deliverance for Israel; 
however, he was their deliverer all the same, though re- 
jected for forty years. Israel is now in the experience of 
the tribulation in Egypt. waiting for the return of their 
Moses. On account of this parallel, the Messiah is called 
by the name the Deliverer. In Ruth rabba Moses is called 
the first Deliverer. As Moses led Israel out of Egypt, so 
shall the Messiah effect the last deliverance and lead His 
people from the dispersion into the Land of the Fathers 
(Beresh. rabba and Tanchuma). The Rabbis likewise be- 
lieve that this second great deliverance cannot take place 
without the judgment over the powers in the world (the 
nations), just as Pharaoh and his house was judged. The 
Targum Jonathan to Jsaiah has much te say on the conse- 
quences of that deliverance. Messiah will rebuild Jerusa- 
lem aud the Temple, and establish His Kingdom over the 
nations, etc. Of this more later. 

We have now to speak of a very strange and interesting 
doctrine in the orthodox Jewish belief, the teaching con- 
cerning Messiah, the Son of Joseph. According to this be- 
lief Israel has two persons who are their Messiah. The 
first one, Messiah the Son of Joseph, is to be killed and then 
will come the second, ¢he Messiah the Son of David. It 
seems to us there are two reasons for this belief. The first 
is the Jews knew of the early Christian teachings concern- 
ing a second coming, and they knew likewise the dancer 


Waiting for His 
return, 


Rebuilding Jeru- 
salem. 


Two Messiahs, 


which came from such teaching and hence this inventiox. 
In the second place the prophecy of a suffering and dying 
servant of the Lord or the Messiah (Isaiah liii.), was a 
. stumbling-block to them, and they were unwilling to 
believe this of the Son of David, with whom in their 
minds kingship and world-rule was closely associated, 
therefore another Messiah of an inferior degree must come 
before the victorious Son of David; and this Messiah, the 
Son of Joseph, is to suffer for Israel's sin, and to open 
the way for the coming of the King Messiah. We have 
spoken with many orthodox Jews on this doctrine, and 
proved to them from the Scriptures that there is only one 
Messiah, who suffered once, and who will come again in 
glory to build once more the tabernacle of Davie which is 
fallen down. We have pointed out to them, and that not 
without success, that when Messiah the Son of David will 
at last appear, He will have wounds in His hands, He will 
be the One who was pierced, and that His wounds in His 
hands are the final proof for His people Israel that He is 
their Elder Brother, Jesus of Nazareth, who suffered and 
died, is risen and glorified, seated at the right hand of Je- 
hovah, and now once more revealed in majesty and glory 
as the King of Kings. 

We give a few short quotations from the Rabbis about 
the Messiah the Son of Joseph and the Messiah the Son of 
David. The Targum to the Song of Solomon says: ‘‘ There 
are two persons who redeem thee, Messiah the Son of David 
and Messiah the Son of Ephraim (Joseph).”’ Emek Ham- 
melech caiis Him the Messiah, Son of Joseph, a descendant 


169 


of Jeroboam, and others say that He is the Redeemer for 
the ten tribes only. The Son of Joseph serves the Son of 
David. They are like Moses and Aaron together: the 
Messiah, Son of Joseph, is Aaron (Priest), and the Mes- 
siah, Son of David, Moses (King, Deliverer). Messiah, 
Son of Joseph, gathers the ten lost tribes together and leads 
them to Palestine. here He becomes the Leader of the 
ten tribes, but falls in battle against the armies of Gog aud 
Magog. Accordise to others, Messiah, Son of Joseph, is 
killed innocently in the service of His people, while the 
Messiah, Son of David, has an immortal body and life 
(Succa). The mos remarkable passage is the one found in 
Luchoth Ha-Brith ; ‘‘ The Messiah, Son of Joseph, will not 
come in His own interest but for the sake of Messiah, the 
Son of David; for Messiah, the Son of Joseph, gives His 
life and dies, and His blood shall make atonement for the 
sins of the people.’’ 

Oh, that poor blinded Israel could see to-day that there 
is truly a Messiah who has given His life and who died, in 
whom we have redemption through His blood. Oh, that 
they could understand that the blood of Jesus Christ His 
Son cleanses us from all sin. The remnant, according to 
the election of grace, is now being called and accepts Jesus, 
while the rest of the nation will continue in unbelief till, 
at the end of the great tribulation, the Son of David, this 
same Jesus, comes again, and then they will look upon Him, 
the Pierced One. 

The most interesting part in the old orthodox Jewish 
belief concerning the last things, is now before us. It i 


Priest and King. 


Atonement, 


tiga 
é 
te 
4g 
ae% 
i i 
# 
oe 
a a 
ae 
ees oo 
Bia 
; 
ire 
ab: 
2 
“tae 
¥ ta 
£28 #) 
S24 iin 
pe 
ite ian 
i 
ze 
4 
f 
hg 


jerk 


[eeibaiar series 


170 


Israel’s redemption and the first resurrection. The lat- 
ter is always connected with that coming salvation and 
restoration of Israel. We wished before that poor 
blinded Israel might to-day see that there is truly a Mes- 
siah who has given His life for the redemption of His people 
—but, alas! the nation as such does not see that in our day. 
But when we come to study the rabbinical writings and com- 
mentaries concerning the hope of Israel, the restoration and 
first resurrection, we soon find that we need no longer to pity 
Israel’s blindness, but it is now in order, to think of the blind- 
ness which in these things has happened to the Gentiles. 
The redemption of Israel and the first resurrection is 
connected in Jewish tradition with the appearing of the 
Messiah, the Son of David. He is called the Great Deliv- 
erer, and when He comes Israel will be delivered from the 
bondage of the nations which commenced with the destruc- 
tion of the temple by Nebuchadnezzar. Not only is Moses 
the first deliverer a type of the Messiah, the second one, 
but also the redemption from the house of bondage Egypt 
s a type of the greater deliverance from all nations. (Jere- 
miah xvi: 15, 16). According to Pestkia, Messiah begins 
that redemption like Moses did; He reveals Himself and 
then disappears for a time. A number of writings say that 
His disappearance will last for forty-five days, during 
which time there will be great trouble ou earth, while His 
faithful ones will be miraculously kept. After that time 
the Redeemer appears again, and the first thing He will do 
will be the destruction of the world power. The old Jew- 
ish synagogue understands by this world-power the fourth 


rae eRe 


171 


empire, and, of course, this means Rome. (Aboda-zora. 
Tanchuma, Theruma.) The Roman Empire is also called 
Edom because Esau, as the adversary of Jacob, is a type of 
Israel’s enemies. ‘This fourth empire in many places is 
spoken of as an empire full of enmity against God ; wick- 
edness and ungodliness will abound, and it stands in con- 
tra:t tc the Kingdom of Heaven, which begins only when 
Messiah is revealed. In Daniel vii: 23, we read: ‘‘The 
fourth beast shall be a fouth kingdom upon earth, which 
shall be diverse from all the kingdoms and shall devour the 
whole earth, and shall tread it down and break it in pieces. 
Aboda-zora says to this: ‘‘This fourth beast is wicked 
Rome, whose dominion is over the whole earth.’’ Every- 
where in Jewish tradition the thought is expressed that the 
Roman world power is to be conquered and destroyed when 
the Messianic Kingdom is ushered in. 

Every student of prophecy knows that the Old Testa- 
ment and the New Testament speak of a personal Anti- 
christ, in whom Satan and all wickedness is to be personi- 
fied, and that this wicked one will be destroyed by the 
coming Lord from Heaven. (Isaiah xi:4; lix:19, 20; 
Ezekiel xxviii: 1-17; 2 Thessalonians ii: 3, 8, etc.) The 
same leader of lawlessness and wickedness is spoken of in 
different rabbinical writings. He is mentioned asa mighty 
ruler who will stand in the time when Messiah comes at 
the head of the Roman Empire, and he will unite in him- 
self enmity against God and hatred against his people. 
This leader is called Avmilus. Targum Jonathan says to 
Isaiah xi: 4, ‘‘ This 47milus isthe last enemy of Israel, 


Roman power 
destroyed. 


Danie! vii : 23. 


Antichrist. 


3 4 
ed 
& 
.* 
a 
7 
$i 
rf 
tt 
; 


if 

7 
a: 
ix 
+s 
i 
fe 


ore 


di ft CN 


Resteration. 


172 


and Messiah will kill him with the word of His mouth and 
the breath of His lips.’’ 

Connected with this wicked leader whom Messiah will 
find in the earth when He comes, are great tribulations 
and much ‘weeping, while godliness and piety have almost 
ceased in the earth. Debarim rad. says, ‘‘ Israel said betore 
the Holy One, blessed be His name, how long shall we be 
trodden down and enslaved by his hand? The Lord said, 
Tell them the day dawns of which it is written, There 
shall come a star out of Jacob end a sceptre shall rise out 
of Israel.’ (Numbers xxiv.) When that star comes out 
of Jacob and burns the stubbles of Esau, according to 
Obadiah 18, then shall come My kingdom and My King. 
Mechilta says, ‘‘ It is unknown when the kingdom of David 
will be established and when the destruction of the world 
power is to take place.’’ The capital of the empire itself, 
that is Rome, will be destroyed. One book mentions the 
Jews as the instruments used in the destruction of Rome. 
The Roman Empire will be punished by the same plagues 
which came upon Egypt in the days of Moses, and like 


Egypt the Roman Empire will become a great wilderness. 
After this judgment and destruction Israel will be liber- 
ated, and will be gathered from all nations and led back by 
the powerful hand of Jehovah to the home-land. (Peskita.) 
This is certainly the true biblical teaching on Israel’s restor- 
ation. The restoration which we are privileged to see in 


our times in the Zionistic movement seems to be a mock 
restoration—that is, one in unbelief—which is- likewise 
foretold in prophecy. The true restoration will come after 


a 


PITTI IES 


reer rrr a 
xis SENET ever: 


173 


the King has been manifested in His glory. Shir rab. asks, 
‘Why does Messiah come? To gather the dispersed of 
Israel.’’ Divine power will in this gathering be mani- 
fested. According to the /a/kut even the winds will fight 
among themselves, and the north wind will say, ‘‘I will 
bring them back,’’ and the south wind will say, ‘‘ No, I 
will bring them;’’ but the Holy One will settle their 
dispute and they will all bring ther together. The ten 
tribes are also mentioned in a number of commentaries as 
becoming reunited with the two tribes, while others teach 
that the ten tribes have no hope in that direction. 

It certainly is a blessed fact that the orthodox Jew who 
sticks faithfully to the Word of God and believes in the 
teachings of the old Jewish synagogue, waits believingly 
for the manifestation of the King and for the fulfillment of 
the sure word of prophecy. Sureiy the time will come when 
there will be a great surprise in two directions. Israel 
waiting for that coming redemption and restoration will be 
surprised to find that Jesus of Nazareth, so long rejected, 
is He who has brought them salvation and is their own 
King and Lord; while Gentile nations, and in them Chris- 
tendom, will be surprised to find Israel restored, the kingdom 
people for this earth, then the head and no longer the tail. 

The rabbinical teachings make it clear that all Israel is 
to share the blessings of the Kingdom of the Messiah when 
He comes. Bereshith Rabba says, ‘‘ We shall cry aloud with 
joy. When? When the prisoners come up from Sheol, 
and the Shekinah is leading them, as it is written in 
Micah ii: 13. ‘‘The breaker is coming up before them ; 


Great surprises. 


174 


they have broken up, and have passed through the gate 
and are gone out by it; and their King shall pass before 
them, and the Lord at the head of them.’’ ‘The resurrec- 
tion of all the righteous dead takes place. According to 
Abarbanel and Kimchi the resurrection of the righteous 
dead comes after Israel has been restored to the land, while 
others teach that it will take place during the reign of Mes- 
siah. He is called in Medrash Tchillim Jinnon, because He 
raises the dead. Sanhedrin says, God gives the key to the 
resurrection of the dead tu Messiah. It is also taught that 
the resurrection from the dead, brought about by Messiah, 
will be the means to bring the nations of the earth to the 
knowledge of the One God. 

The resurrection will take place in the Holy Land, which 
is sometimes called the Land of the Living. Those who 
are not buried in the land are rolled in subterranean pas- 
sages to the land to be raised there. A great deal of super- 
stition is connected with this ‘‘rolling’’ of the dead. 

We read likewise of the sounding of a great trumpet. It 
is given in detail as follows: ‘‘ The Holy One takes a great 
trumpet and sounds it, and the tone is heard over the en- 
tire earth. The resurrection takes place under seven 
sounds from the trumpet. At the first sound, the whole 
earth is moved; at the second, the dust is separated ; at the 
third, the bones of the dead are gathered; at the fourth, 
the different members receive warmth ; at the fifth, they re- 
ceive skin and veins; at the sixth sound, the souls become 
reunited to the bodies; and, when the trumpet is heard the 
seventh time, they are raised up and stand upon their feet.’’ 


Poenisengtoigggunnsvens torn sey te 


175 


One of the strangest myths found in J ewish Eschatology 
is the one concerning a bone of the human body which is 
incorruptible. It is a small bone which cannot be de- 
stroyed, and it will be the starting point for the resurrec- 
tion of the body. Much is also said about the resurrection 
of the dead, whether the dead will have clothes or not. 
Sanhedrin says, The Corn of Wheat is laid into its grave 
clothed, and it comes to life ‘again in the same form; 
if that is the case with the corn of wheat, how much 
more will it be then with the human body? The resurrec- 
tion body will have no defects. Blindness, lameness, deaf- 
ness, etc., will be completely healed. After the living have 
been restored to the land and the dead have been raised, 
the glorious Messianic age, the Kingdom will commence, 
according to the Jewish belief. 

The Messianic age is called Olam Haboh, the world to 
come. With it begins the eternal life. The present age is 
called Olam Haze, this age. Shemoth Rab speaks beauti- 
fully of this present age as the tiime when the bride is 
called and the betrothal takes place, but the world to come, 
Olam Haboh, is the wedding. In this present age there are 
the little gifts to the bride, but in the days of Messiah the 
fullness of Jehovah will be given. The world to come or 
Messianic age begins, according to Bereshith Rab, with the 
rebuilding of the Temple, and it ends with the revolt of 
Gog and Magog. Jewish tradition holds that the Messianic 
age will bring a literal fulfillment of Old Testament 
prophecy. That fulfillment will be restoration and the full- 
ness of Israel. Oh, that such interpretation, so true and 


Resurrection 
body. 


ig ge 


gb oe ath of 
Age a ot 5 


Spapcemeerv etna? (meres re: eee 
saraseh pee ioat vera Ae 


nyeeets 


ti 
“a 
; 
7% 
174 


Jerusalem 
Metropolis. 


176 


vital, would be given to Christendom! Wonderful does 
the Talmud speak (Shadsath) of that restoration: ‘‘ All 
prophets have prophesied concerning the days of Messiah, 
but about the world to come the word is written, ‘‘ No eye 
hath seen.’’’ . . . Rabbi Joseph Albo says: ‘‘ The 
world to come will be revealed step by step.’’ 

How long will the Messianic age last? Many different 
answers are given to this question. Some say forty years, 
others one hundred, six hundred ; again, several speak of 
one thousand years, two thousand years, and Rabbi Abahu 
says seven thousand. 

The rebuilding of Jerusalem, and in it the temple, forms 
a good part of the discussions in rabbinical writings. The 
Holy One shall make Jerusalem inhabitable again, and the 
righteous will dwell there. The rebuilding of the city will 
take place when the scattered nation is restored, and not 
before. Jerusalem becomes then the Metropolis of the 
whole earth. Baba Bathra says that the doors of the city 
will be adorned with precious jewels. In this present age 
the land is marked by stones and trees, but in the world to 
come the landmarks will be pearls and costly stones. Jeru- 
salem will cover twelve square miles. The entire city will 
be lifted up higher and higher, till at last it will reach the 
throne of glory in the heavens. The City of God towers 
over everything in the world. It continues to expand, and 
becomes larger and larger, because in it all the exiles and 
many nations are to find a glorious shelter. Still higher 


than tae city is the temple of the Messianic age. The 


Targum says: ‘‘ Messiah will build the temple, which was 


177 


destroyed and desecrated on account of our sins. Several 
traditions say that Messiah will build the third temple. 
This third House of God will be the most glorious which 
ever stands in the earth. The last house will be more 
glorious than the first. It becomes the great centre of the 
world and for the nations. It is so high that all the world 
will see the glorious hill with its wonderful structure. The 
most wonderful hymns of praise and thanksgiving will be 
heard in that temple.”’ 

The sacrifices are again brought in the temple. Every- 
thing will be again like as it was in the olden times, with 
the exception that this temple is not only for Israel, but it 
is for all the nations. The whole law given through Moses 
will then be fulfilled. Messiah Himself will teach then His 
people. Still more is said in different traditions concerning 
the righteousness and blessedness of Israel and the nations 
in the Messianic age. ‘There is then a perfect peace be- 
tween God and Israel. Messiah, the Prince of Peace, will 
have accomplished this. Not only is there peace with God, 
but there is likewise peace for Israel, outwardly, for the 
world-powers which oppressed Israel are no more in exis- 
tence. The image of Nebuchadnezzar has been pulverized. 
(Berachoth.) The fruitfulness of the land returns, and it 
is so wonderful that the trees give a new fruit every day. 
The curse laid upon the woman is removed, and for the 
people of God there is no more death. The nations will 
serve Israel, and their lives will he greatly prolonged. 
God’s glory will agair be seen upon the human counte- 
nance. 


Messiah reign- 
ing. 


Pe 


at 
i ari, 


mee MOTT Venere 


spencer tctererenyer thet 


erage weneneciaats i Pe  aapet 


eto 


wie goes an a Rb bbred Ene 1r—-vana aed ngewe ghee 
eget rate ch esi, tiation renner se 


ee a 


ZIONISM, THE GREAT JEWISH 
NATIONAL MOVEMENT. 


in. rpm aleve. ert cea SSecmeais SOS ais TREES RBIS TENET 


= 


RE eT ies... Seidbiaie 


Zionism, the Great Jewish National 
Movement. 


HE birth of Zionism, the great revival of Jewish nation- 
alism, falls into the closing years of the nineteenth 
century. Never has there been such a wonderful and world- 
wide movement for national restoration among the Jews, 
since the day when Jerusalem fell, at the beginning of this 
Christian age. With this we do not say that the love and en- 
thusiasm for the land of the Fathers ever had died out in 
Jewish hearts. For centuries the poor scattered sheep of 
Israel repeated year after year, at the feast day of their great 
national birthday, “this year here, next year in Jerusalem,” 
and the tear-dimmed eyes of thousands looked towards the 
distant East. “If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right 
hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let 
my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if i prefer not 
Jerusalem above my chief joy” (Psl. cxxxvii). This has 
been always the sentiment of every true, orthodox Hebrew. 
After the first half of the nineteenth century was passed 
different appeals for colonization of Palestine were made and 
movements started to help along Jews who desired to return 
to the old home land. The Chovevei Zion, Lovers of Zion, 
society was the strongest. This society was founded in 
London and may be called the first great attempt of a restor- 
181 


Lovers of Zion. 


FFEFEEEE 
EEFEE 
EEE 


EF 
iz 
Fe 


2 WA Wes 


MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE MATERIAL 1010a 
(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 


Anti-Semitism. 


ation from the side of the Jews. The objects of the Lovers 
of Zion are the following: 


1. To foster the national idea in Israel. 

2. To promote the colonization of Palestine and neigh- 
boring territories by Jews by establishing new colonies, or 
by assisting those already established. 

3. To diffuse the knowledge of Hebrew as a living lan- 
guage. 

4. To better the moral, intellectual, and material status 
of Israel. 

The Chovevei Zion had much success both in colonization 
and in creating a strong national feeling among Hebrews. 
Other societies endeavoring the same followed the Lovers 
of Zion. In Berlin the society “Ezra” was started; in Vi- 
enna, “Kadimah”; in London, the “Benai Zion”; in New 
York, the “Shore Zion,” as well as others. All these may 
be termed forerunners of the greatest movement, Zionism. 
Since the arrival and almost miraculous growth of this na- 
tional revival among the Jews, these smaller societies have 
been forced into the background. 

It is a significant fact, which must not be overlooked, that 
Zionism, so suddenly called into existence, was born in a 
time of the fiercest persecution of the Jews, a persecution 
almost world-wide. It is true that the last decade of the 
much lauded nineteenth century, with its boasted progress 
and Christian (?) civilization, produced the vilest attacks 
of Anti-Semitism, and thousands and thousands of Jews 
suffered as much as their fathers did. It is not our intention 
to rehearse these deeds done by nations who call themselves 


183 


“Christian”; but it is only a few years, when the streets of 
Paris were filled with howling mobs crying, “Down with 
the Jews.” And what about Russia and her crimes against 
the Jews? What about the hundred thousand driven like 
cattle through the pale, created by the land of the north, and 
then wilfully forced out from house and home, from kin- 
dreds and friends, to look in distant countries for a refuge? 
Some were wandering from one European country to the 
other, footsore and disheartened, ever fulfilling the words 
in the Book, “no rest for the soles of their feet.” The great 
masses of Jews in Eastern Europe may well be called “the 
football of nations.” 


We must not forget Roumania and her inhuman treat- 
ment of the Jews in expelling them from her borders; nor 
Austria with her Anti-Semitism and Germany with her 


Ahlwardt and Stocker. Kishineff with its darkest deeds of 
blood and shame, that awful page of modern history is still 
vivid in the memory of the reader and needs no mention 
here. Persia, Algiers, Morocco, Egypt, Turkey and other 
countries all did their share in persecuting the seed of Abra- 
ham. One fact more, a fact as startling as it is significant. 
We have reference to the revival of the so-called “blood 
accusation.” It is the malicious and satanic accusation that 
Jews use for certain ceremonials the blood of Christians, 
whom they kill for this purpose. Some have declared that 
this lie was an exclusive growth during the middle ages, and 
that it could not prosper in the enlightened nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries. Careful research and present history 
reveals entirely different facts, In the year 1144 we find 


" Z ra bee oe ~ 2 es 
Jeveacse icveneaineeabpanmnin =a aaheeioiatl ashen: Hal 
Parana peeetrrss ernst ee asa 


seen pine ernest soinetttss 


a 
wrheatny premiere seat 
seaceng ogee 


7” 


Tact aocartncas tee 


ororanaivenr ty tient enrePaeenrvrnr ert 


pesnennpunnee eenmensnsterseerasssT are 72 


pemneeponeensenspnaetense: seaweed 


Great trouble. 


184 


the first case on record. Five other cases of the blood ac- 
cusation are recorded in the twelfth century. In the thir- 
teenth century fifteen cases are on record; in the fourteenth, 
nine cases; in the fifteenth, sixteen cases; in the sixteenth, 
thirteen cases; in the seventeenth, eight; in the eighteenth, 
fifteen, and in the nineteenth we have the record of thirty- 
nine cases. 

A number of these were made during the last ten years. 
On account of these baseless accusations 137 Jews were 
killed during the nineteenth century (that century of prog- 
ress!) and some 125 severely injured, and a much larger 
number imprisoned and harassed. This surely does not look 
as if this age is getting more enlightened and becoming more 
tolerant. It shows that there is as much, and perhaps more, 
superstition in the world and hatred against the Jew than 
ever before. Hebrews should learn a lesson here. Many 
dream of tolerance, and even Zionism thinks that with the 
foundation of a Jewish State persecutions will cease. This 
is an idle dream. Smouldering in the nations is still the same 
old hatred against the Jew, which may soon be fanned into 
a burning flame. From the Word of God, as taught in this 


‘volume, we learn that a great persecution for the Jews is 


coming, the great tribulation (Jeremiah xxx:7; Daniel xii! 
1). These persecutions of the present day are but harbin- 
gers of the last outbreak by the confederacies of nations 
against the Jew. 

And in these days of trouble and evil signs for the Jewish 
race Zionism came into existence. 

The founder of Zionism and successful leader of the 


185 


movement was Dr. Theodore Herzl. The people whom he Dr. Herai's 


so strangely united around his great ideal and enthused as 
no other leader of the Jews has done for 2,000 years and 
over, the people whom he organized and led on towards the 
goal, a Jewish State, are mourning now for him, for Herzl, 
in the prime of his manhood, was taken away by death 
from this earthly scene in July, 1904. Only after his death 
has it become evident how he was loved and honored 
amongst his people. Many mighty princes have fallen in 
Israel, but none seems to have been as much mourned and 
missed as Herzl. 

No doubt, the God of Israel, the keeper of His people, 
wants His covenant people to learn lessons by so suddenly 
removing the man, whom some called “their Moses,” and 
almost reverenced as “the Messiah.” The lesson for Zion- 
ists should be what God has so clearly shown in His Word, 


that not man but the Lord Himself will lead His people 
back and deliver them from the house of bondage, as He 
did of old. 


Zionism should have in its platform from their own Scrip- 
tures the words which are written in Deut. xxx :1-10, and 
trust in Him, who is able. 

To give a complete history of Zionism would be impos- 
sible in our pages; we can trace only part of it and point 
out a striking fact here and there. 

And who was this Dr. Th. Herzl? A tynical son of the 
people. Born on May 2, 1860, in one of the hotbeds of 
Anti-Semitism, Buda-Pest, he received his education in the 


Who was Dr. 
Herz! ? 


se sesctmargpsen gaps n tianonstinlcitiety 


a ed eae 


pas 


poeeeninetamepnecseavereerestoaer anne ey ett 


Congress, 


186 


University of Vienna, where he studied law and received 
there his title as Doctor of Laws (LL. D.). Early he turned 
to journalism and wrote a number of plays for the “Burg 
Theater,” of Vienna. Later he published several books and 
became ccanected with the “Neue Freie Presse,’ a strong 
German-Austrian newspaper owned by Jews and organ of 
the liberal party, which worked against Anti-Semitism. His 
work made it necessary to travel in France and England. 
He became early acquainted with the man who stood by him 
in his Zionistic labors, Dr. Max Nordau, of Paris. For 
several years he could feel the pulse of the ever rising Anti- 
Semitic agitation. From 1891 to 1895 Herzl resided in 
Paris; this was during the celebrated Dreyfus crse. No 
doubt the Anti-Semitic mutterings of a great coming storm 
to break over the entire Jewish race residing in Europe, was 
the spur for Herzl to write his famous “Der Judenstaat”’ 
(The Jewish State). 

After much opposition and preliminary work Herzl came 
more and more to the front. We cannot follow the whole 
develspment. In the early part of 1896 an English edition of 
“Der Judenstaat’” appeared, and in the summer of the same 
year he visited Constantinople. About six months later, 
“Die Welt” (The World), the great Zionistic newspaper, 
was begun, and in February the first Zionistic Congress was 
proposed. This first great Congress, one of the greatest 
events in modern Jewish history, was held in the city of 
Basle, in August, 1897. 

This Congress was a remarkable Jewish gathering. Eu- 


> ee ee 


187 


rope, America, Asia and Africa had sent their numerous 
delegates. What a scene it was! Several hundred Jews, 
all enthusiastic for the national idea. 

Following are the resolutions passed with unanimity by the 
Congress. They express, in very concise form, the aim and 
obiect of the Zionist movernert. 

“Zionism aims to procure for the Jewish people a right- 
fully secured home in Palestine. To attain this end the 
Congress has in view ine following measures: 1. Immigra- 
tion into Palestine of Jewish agriculturists and artisans. 
2. The organization and union of all Judaism by all proper 
means and by such general institutions as are compatible 
with the laws of nations. 3. The strengthening of the Jew- 
ish national consciousness. 4. Preparatory steps to obtain 
from the interested governments the necessary consent to the 
aims of Zionism.” 

One of the first things they did was to send a telegram to 
the Turkish Sultan, in which this monarch of the bloody 
hand received the thanks of the Congress for “the solicitude 
which he has manifested toward his Jewish subjects.” And 
it must be acknowledged thai the “unspeakable Turk” has 
not been as much of an anti-Semite by way of persecuting 
and oppressing the Jews in his domains, as the majority of 
the so-called Christian monarchs of Eurepe and their sub- 
jects. 

An executive committee of twenty-one, with headquar- 
ters at Vienna, has been chosen, which is charged with (1) 
propaganda, (2) diplomatic and financial negotiations, and 
(3) practical coloniza‘ion. 


Aim of Zionism. 


Orthodox ob; 
tion. i 


Among the leading thought was of course the purchase 
of land from the Sultan. There was a great deal of opposi- 
tion to the scheme by orthodox rabbis. We mention here 
especially one intelligent protest coming from a learned 
New York rabbi.* It is well worth reading: 

“It is remarkable that all prominent Hebrews are in favor 
of Zionism as an institution, though they are not united in 
favor of methods proposed py leading Zionites. But in a 
movement of this kind it is to be expected that much debate, 
many diverse opinions must be heard. Verhaps the whole 
impulse in the direction given to Zionism by Dr. Herzl and 
Max Nordau, the leading spirits of the approaching Zionist 
Conference, is wrong. Perhaps much of it is right. It 
must, however, be here stated that earnest Hebrews protest 
against the promulgation of any ideas which will interfere 
with the faithful discharge of the duties of citizenship in 
the land of their adoption or residence. Not that Dr. Herzl 
or Dr. Nordau propose any such. The feature in their pro- 
gramme which calls forth objection from leaders of Hebrew 
thought is the idea of obtaining Palestine by purchase from 
the Sultan of Turkey. But the Jewish question being pre- 
sented to the world now by the present Zionistic agitation 
brings to the fore certain points on which there should be 
a clear understanding. True Zionism is founded on the 
Bible. Any idea at variance with the teachings, direct or 
indirect, of the Bible, will ever be rejected by the vast ma- 
jority of Hebrews as not being true Zionism. It is for this 


*Dr, Pereira Mendes. 


189 


very sufficient reason that the purchase idea is rejected. 
The ‘Ye shall be redeemed not by money’ of the prophet 
(Isaiah lii:3) is taken literally in this connection, even 
though the inadvisability of obtaining possession of Pales- 
tine by such methods must be apparent. For a part of the 
programme of the re-establishment of a Jewish state is the 
gradual abolition of war, and the Hebrews would not or 
could not be expected to be prepared for war to defend a 
possession of the'r land. And, to avoid this, there must be 
an understanding between all the great powers and the 


Hebrews. It : be a private arrangement with Tur- 
key alone. ‘: “ton of the possession of Palestine must 
not be broug. ward ~t this juncture. The time is not 


ripe. It is a question tiat must be left for the guidance 
of the higher Power, which has shaped, does shape, and ever 
will shape, the destinies of the Hebrew nation.” 

Here is a bold and significant utterance. The rabbi who 
wrote these words believes in the Bible as the Word of God, 
however his voice and protest was not heard. 

Dr. Herzl was the leading figure of the Congress and 
almost idolized. We quote parts of his first address to the 
great Zionistic gathering: 

“As one of the callers of this Congress I have the honor 
assigned to me to bid you welcome. I shall do it in few 
words, for each of us will do good service to the cause if he 
uses sparingly the precious minutes of the Congress. In 
these three days we have many important matters before us. 
We mean to lay the foundation for the house that shall one 
day shelter the Jewish nation. The cause is so great that we 


Address by Dr. 
Herzl. 


erserne 


i 
i 
Hi 
hi 
i 
% 
a 
af 


uercegunvenesterser ioyWrweetr nes r 
sraieemervonnnontenenonsenenecrenniyinesett?#ts tier otra. t ere rereanesncenpeareroen "ies 


peste 


eanereneys|orte nenurrtes ere os 


“Srmcirsneuteprnpsss es needtan dard = 


tt ton 


a 


. 2 


190 


can speak of it only in simple language. We shall hear re- 
ports on the condition of the Jews in the various countries. 
You all are aware, if perhaps only vaguely, that this con- 
dit?-.a, with few exceptions, is not a happy one. We should 
hardly be here were it otherwise. The community of our 
misery has suffered a long interruption, although the various 
scattered portions of our people had to endure the same 
things everywhere. It has been reserved for our day, with 
its marvels of communication, to render possible a reunion 
and a mutual understanding between the separated ones. 
And iu this our time, so exalted in other respects, we find 
ourselves surrounded on all sides by the old hatred. Anti- 
Semitism is the modern name, only too well known to you 
all, of this outbreak. Its first effect upon the Jews of to-day 
was surprise, which changed into pain and anger. Perhaps 
our enemies do not know or realize at all, how deeply they 
have hurt in our inmost soul those of us whom possibly 
they did not intend to hit mainly. Modern Judaism, refined, 
cultured, which has outgrown the Ghetto, and has become 
disused from trafficking has received a stab to the heart. 
We can say this calmly to-day without raising the suspicion 
as though we wanted to appeal to the tear-glands of our 


opponents. We understand ourselves.” 


“Already Zionism has accomplished something remark- 
able, which has been considered impossible ere this, to wit. : 
the close affiliation of the most modern elements in Judaism 
with the most conservative. Since this has come about with- 
out unworthy concessions from either side, it is additional 


191 


proof, if such were needed, of the fact that we Jews are truly 
a nation. Such a union is possible only on a national basis. 


“Our movement, consequently, in order to be rational, 
has to aim openly at rightful guarantees, Colonization thus 
far has attained what it could. It has demonstrated the fit- 
ness of the Jew for agriculture. But the solution of the 
Jewish question it is not and cannot be in its present form. 
That is the reason why it ha. not found very many sympa- 
thizers. Why this? Because the Jews can calculate and can 
do it well. If there are nine million Jews and if it were 
possible to colonize an awally ten thousand of them in Pales- 
tine, the solution of the Jewish question along that line 
would require nine hundred years. That does not look 
practical. But the idea of setting ten thousand Jews annu- 
ally in colonies is simply preposterous. The Turkish gov- 
ernment would in that case resume at once the old prohibi- . 
tory policy, and that would be what we like. Tc think that 
Jews could be smuggled into t. 2 land of their fathers is a 
delusion. Nor would it be in our interest to go there pre- 
maturely. The immigration of the Jews signifies 2 mighty 
infusion and afflux of new forces into the land now impover- 
ished and into the whole Ottoman empire. His majesty, the 
Sultan, has had, however, the best experiences with his Jew- 
ish subjects, as he has been to them a kind sovereign. These 
are conditions, therefore, which are likely to lead to good 
results under wise and proper management. The financial 
aid which the Jews might render Turkey is not inconsider- 
able and would tend to the removal of many disadvantages 


192 


under which the land is now suffering. And if a part of the 
Oriental (Eastern) question is solved in the solution of the 
Jewish problem it will |. to the advantage of all civilized 
nations, The settling of the Jews in their country would 
also mean a betterment of the condition of the Christians in 
the Orient. 

“But it is not from this quarter only that Zionism may look 
for the sympathies of the nations. You know that the Jew- 
ish problem in many states has become a vexed one and a 
calamity for the government. To take the Jews’ part mea”s 
opposition from the inflamed masses. To antagonize the 
Jews is calamitous economically, by reason of the peculiar 
influence of the Jews upon the commerce of the world. Of 
this there are a number of examples. Finally, if the gov- 
ernment remain neutral toward the Jews, the latter find 
themselves without protection in the existing «. ter of things 
and take refuge in anarchism. Zionism, or self-help for the 
Jews, forms the outlet for these various and grave difficul- 
ties. Zionism is simp!y the. peacemaker. To be sure its 
lot will likely be that of most peacemakers—it will have to 
do the most fighting. 

“All this my friends and myself have said often. We shall 
not weary of saying it over and over until we are under. 
stou.. On this solemn occasion, when Jews from all coun- 
tries are assembled here in obedience to the old call of thc 
nation, to-day let us solemnly repeat our confession. What an 
inspiration to think that at this moment the hopes and expec- 
tations of hundreds of thousands of our people are centered 
upon our gathering. To distart lands, even across the 


193 


ocean, the next hour will carry the tidings of our delibera- 
tions and resolutions.” 

And even so it was. To distant lar.i., across the oceans, 
from continent to ccntinent, the news flashed and a na- 
tional fire was kindled among the Jews with that first con- 
gress, which still burns. 

The recond congress was held in the same place in Aug- 
ust, 1898, the third in 1899, also in Basle, and the fourth in 
London, in 1900. Heroic labor was done by Herzl and his 
associates. The foundation of a Zionist Bank +d Trust 
was suggested at the second congress and soon became es- 
tablished, and is now upon a solid basis. Herzl and his coi- 
mittee were received by the German Emper: ° at Jert. alc 
in 1898, and in May Dr. *Terzl had a numt © of audiences 
with the Sultan of Turkey. Twice more he paid his visit to 
the Porte and each time he had audiences with that sinister 
person, who still holds Palestine in his blood-stained grasp. 
Herzl was with the Sultan in January and August, 1902. 
He also was received by the King of Italy and the Pope. 
The fifth congress was held in 1901 and the sixth in the 
month of August, 1903. In this congress an offer was re- 
ceived by the British Government to permit a Jewish na- 
tional settlement in British East Africa. This offer and 
the deliberations which followed nearly caused a division of 
the ranks of Zionism. But the crisis is past. 

Of the remarkable growth of Zionism, its many organs in 
Jewish, German, Hebrew, English, Italian and other conti- 
nental languages, the hundreds and hundreds of societies 
started all over the world, the enthusiasm of Jews in Sydney, 


Remarkable 
growth. 


The Jewish 
State. 


194 


Australia, South Africa, New York, London, Paris, San 
Francisco, Montreal and in towns and villages, all this we 
have to pass over. It is not necessary to go into details. 
The movement is gaining continually, and though the leader 
is gone, the fiery enthusiasm remains. What further devel- 
opments will there be? Who will be the man, who takes 
Herzl’s place? All this will be interesting to see. 

We quote from the famous document of Herzl, the docu- 
ment, which only now is being fully appreciated by the 
Jews, “Der Jud-nstaat.”* In his introduction he says: 

“The Jewish question still exists. It would be useless to 
deny it. It is a remnant of the middle ages, which civilized 
nations do not even yet seem able to shake off, try as they 
will. They certainly showed a generous desire to do so 
when they emancipated us. The Jewish question exists 
wherever Jews live in perceptible numbers. Where it does 
not exist, it is carried by Jews in the course of their migra- 
tions. We naturally move to those places where we are not 
persecuted, and there our presence produces persecution. 
This is the case in every country, and will remain so, even 
in those most highly civilized—France itself being no excep- 
tion—till the Jewish question finds a solution on a political 
basis. The unfortunate Jews are now carrying Anti-Semit- 
ism into England; they have already introduced it into 
America. 

I believe that I understand Anti-Semitism, which is really 


are 
be 


*To those interested who would like the entire pamphlet we recom- 
mend the translation with preface published by the Maccabean 
Publishing Co., 320 Broadway, N. Y. Price 50 cents. 


195 


a highly complex movement. I consider it from a Jewish 
standpoint, yet without fear or hatred. I believe that I can 
see what elements there are in it of vulgar sport, of common 
trade jealousy, of inherited prejudice, of religious intoler- 
ance, and also of pretended self-defence. I think the Jewish 
question is no more a social than a religious one, notwith- 
standing that it sometimes takes these and other forms. It 
is a national question, which can only be solved by making 
it a political world-question to be discussed and controlled 
by the civilized nations of the world in council. 

We are a people—One people. 

We have honestly endeavored everywhere to merge our- 
selves in the social life of surrounding communities. It has 
not been permitted to us. In vain are we loyal patriots, our 
loyalty in some places running to extremes ; in vain do we 
make the same sacrifices of life and property as our fellow- 
citizens; in vain do we strive to increase the fame of our 
native land in science and art, or her wealth by trade and 
commerce. In countries where we have lived for centuries 
we are still cried down as strangers, and often vy those 
whose ancestors were not yet domiciled in the land where 
Jews had already made experience of suffering. The major- 
ity may decide which are the strangers ; for this, as indeed 
every point which arises in the commerce of nations, is a 
question of might. I do not here surrender any portion of 
our prescriptive right, for I am making this statement merely 
in my own name as an individual. In the world of to-day, 
and for an indefinite period it will probably remain so, might 
precedes right. Therefore it is useless for us to be loyal 


eibcsidoa We 
vat a 


srtgubeanjaternad pianrepatzetltsCteo 


ei 


sig neeaeeEPre: nT Webbe 


tae 
ry 
i 
: 
Y 
he 
4 
3 
H 
i 
iy 
2 


pies ctmwpalinces pics bint 


erlicaseisten oe 


Tra LecharsebeeomnecteisiciarG ANC 
Teel ope and HE EPs are 


ear aeees 


fosanseg he SexRiaeT GDL OG 


The plan. 


196 


patriots, as were the Huguenots who were forced to emi- 
grate. If we could only be left in peace. . . . 

But I think we shall not be left in peace. 

Oppression and persecution cannot exterminate us. No 
nation on earth has survived such struggles and sufferings 
as we have gone through.” 

The following is one of the most interesting utterances: 

“The whole plan is in its essence perfectly simple, as it 
must necessarily be if it is to come within the comprehension 
of all. 

“T et the sovereignty be granted us over a portion of the 
globe large enough to satisfy the reasonable requirements of 
a nation; the rest we shall manage for ourselves. 

“The creation of a new State is neither ridiculous nor im- 
possible. We have in our day witnessed the process in con- 
nection with nations which were not in the bulk of the mid- 
dle class, but poorer, less educated, and consequently weaker 
than ourselves. The governments of all countries scourged 
by Anti-Semitism will serve their own interests in assisting 
us to obtain the sovereignty we want. 

“The plan, simple in design, but complicated in execution, 
will be carried out by two mediums ; the Society of Jews and 
the Jewish Company. 

“The Society of Jews will do the preparatory work in the 
domains of science and politics, which the Jewish Company 
will afterwards practically apply. 

“The Jewish Company will see to the realization of the 
business interests of departing Jews, and will organize com- 

merce and trade in the new country. 


197 


“We must not imagine the departure of the Jews to be a 
sudden one. It will be gradual, continuous, and will cover 
many decades. The poorest will go first to cultivate the 
soil. In accordance with a preconcerted plan, they will con- 
struct roads, bridges, railways, and telegraphs ; regulate 
rivers, and build their own habitations ; their labor will 
create trade, trade will create markets, and markets will at- 
tract new settlers; for every man will go voluntarily, at his 
own expense and his own risk. The labor expended on the 
land will enhance its value, and the Jews will soon perceive 
that a new and permanent sphere of operation is opening 
here for that spirit of enterprise which has heretofore met 
only with hatred and obloquy. 

“If we wish to found a State to-day, we shall do it in the 
way which would have been the only possible one a thous- 
and years ago. It is foolish to revert to old stages of civili- 
zation, as many Zionists would like to do. Supposing, for 
example, we were obliged to clear a country of wild beasts, 
we should not set about the business in the fashion of 
Europeans of the fifth century. We should not take spear 
and lance and go out singly in pursuit of bears; we should 
organize a large and active hunting party, drive the animals 
together, and throw a melinite bomb into their midst. 

“Tf we wish to conduct building operations, we shall not 
plant a mass of stakes and piles on the shore of a lake, but 
we shall build as men build now. Indeed, we shall build in 
a bolder and more stately style than was ever adopted be- 
fore, for we now possess means which men never yet pos- 
sessed, 


Stim, 


i 
4 
*; 
rae 
ve, 
Se 
— 
at 
eee 
i 
i® 
is 
£4 


AI cate reenter erate 


198 


“The emigrants standing ‘-vvest in the economic scale will 
be slowly followed by those of a higher grade. Those who 
at this moment are living in despair will go first. They will 
be led Ly the mediocre intellects which we produce so su- 
perabundantly, and which are persecuted everywhere. 

“This pamphlet will open a general discussion on the Jew- 
ish question, avoiding, if possible, the creation of an opposi- 
tion party. Such a result would ruin the cause from the out- 
set, and dissentients must remember that allegiance or opposi- 
tion are entirely voluntary. Who will not come with us, 
may remain. 

“T et all who are willing to join us, fall in behind our ban- 
ner and fight for our cause with voice and pen and deed. 

“Those Jews who fall in with our idea of a State will 
attach themselves to the Society, which will thereby be au- 
thorized to confer and treat with governments in the name of 
our people. The Society will thus be acknowledged in its 
relations with governments as a State-creating power. This 
acknowledgment will practically create the State. 

“Should the powers declare themselves willing to admit 
our sovereignty over a neutral piece of land, then the Society 
will enter into negotiations ior the possession of this land. 
Here two territories come under consideration, Palestine 
and Argentina. In both countries important ¢xperiments in 
colonization have been made, though infiltration of Jews. 
An infiltration is bound to end in disaster. It continues till 
the inevitable moment when the native population feels it- 
self threatened, and forces the government to stop th fur- 


199 


ther influx of Jews. Immigration is conse quently futile un- 
less based on an assured supremac: 

“The Society of Jews will treat with the present mastc:s 
of the land, putting itself under the protectorate of the 
European Powers, if they prove friendly to the plan. We 
could offer the present possessors of the land enormous ad- 
vantages ; take upon ourselves part of the public debt, build 
new roads of traffic, which our presence in the country 
would render necessary, etc. The creation of our State 
would be beneficial to adjacent countries, because the culti- 
vation of a strip of land increases the value of its surround- 
ing districts in innumerable ways. 

“Shall we choose Palestine cr Argentina? We shall take 
what is given us, and what is selected by Jewish public 
opinion. The Society will settle both these points. 

“Argentina is one of the most fertile countries in the 
world, extends over a vast area, has a sparse population and 
a mild climate. The Argentine Republic would derive con- 
siderable profit from the cession of a portion of its territory 
to us. The present infiltration of Jews has certainly pro- 
duced some friction, and it would be necessary to enlighten 
the Republic c the intrinsic difference of our new move- 
ment. 

“Palestine is our ever-memorable historic home. The very 
name of Palestine would attract our people with a force of 
marvellous potency. Supposing His Majesty, the Sultan, 
were to give us Palestine, we could in return pledge our- 
selves to regulate the whole finances of Turkey. We should 

there form a portion of *’ > rampart of Europe against Asia. 


Palestine or 
Argentina ? 


P..:. stino the 
g al. 


What meaning 
has Zionism 
for Christians ° 


200 


an outpost of civilization as opposed to barbarism. The 
sanctuaries of Christendom would be safeguarded by as- 
signing to them an extra territorial status, such as is well 
known to the law of nations. We should form a guard of 
honor about these sanctuaries, answering for the fulfilment 
of this duty with our existence. This guard of honor would 
be the great symbol of the solution of the Jewish Question 
after eighteen centuries of Jewish suffering.” 


What significance has this great national revival among 
the Jews for us Christian believers? Has it any prophetic 
meaning? Is there anything in the prophetic Word, which 
foretells such a movement? These are the que tions often 
asked by interested students of ‘he Word of God. That 
Israel is to be restored to the land of the fathers, and a 
remnant of His people to possess the land and receive the 
long promised blessing, has been clearly proven by the Scrip- 
ture expositions contained in this volume. Zionism, we 
wish to say, is not the divinely promised restoraton of Israel. 
That restoration is brought about by the personal, visible 
and glorious coming of the Son of Man. Zionism is not the 
fulfilment of the large number of predictions found in the 
Old Testament Scriptures, vaich relate to Israel’s return 
to the land. Indeed, Zionism has very little use for argu- 
ments from the Word of God. It is rather a political and 
philanthropic undertaking. Instead of coming together to 
search their owr scriptures, humbling themselves before 
God, calling upon His name, trusting Him, that He is able 
to perform, what He has so often promised, they speak 


201 


about their riches, “ieir inisuence, their Colonial Bank and 
court the favor of the Sultan. The great movement is one 
of unbelief and confidence in themselves instead of God’s 
eternal purposes. It is therefore an attempt of the Jewish 
people to solve themselves the question of their national 
future and national welfare, without considering the spirit- 
ual and the divine side at all. If Zionism succeeds, and no 
doubt it will, it will be a partial retun: of the Jews in un- 
belief to their land. Is such a return anywhere foretold in 
the Scriptures? We do not know of a single passage which 
tells us that such should be the case and yet it is evident by 
all the predicted events which fall into the closing years of 
this present age, that in order that these events can be ful- 
filled, a part of the Jewish nation must be back in the land; 
while among them is the believing remnant, the great ma- 
jority will be unbelieving. 

Not alone that, but a temple must be built again (and 
quite often Zionists have mentioned this’ and a daily sacri- 
fice be brought (Dan. xi:31). Wes: ation a few Scrip- 
tures, which cannot be fulfilled except a part of the Jewish 
people dwell in Palestine. Zechariah xii; xiii and xiv; Dan- 
iel ix:37; xi and xii; Ezekiel xxxviii; Matthew xxiv, and 
similar passages. 

That one of the first things Zionism did was to send a tele- 
gram to the Sultan, expressing their thanks to him and later 
the Sultan sending his greetings to the congress, and that 
Dr. Herzl had repeated friendly audiences with the Sultan, 
whom he pictured as a kind-hearted (!) man, is very signif- 
icant. There are Scriptures which plainly tell us, that in 


Restoration in 
unbelief, 


202 


some future day a powerful ruler will make a covenant with 
the Jews, claiming to be their great friend and giving them 
great privileges in their own land. It foreshadows how 
these Scriptures may soon be fulfilled. There can be no 
doubt a great portion of the Jewish people is nationally 
aroused and a partial return of large numbers of them may 
soon be history. For us Gentiles this fact is a solemn re- 
minder that the sands of the times of the Gentiles are fast 
running out. For us Christian believers, who, like the 
Thessalonians, wait for His Son from heaven, it is a re- 
minder too that our gathering together unto Him is not far 
away. 


ik 


TWO HYMNS OF ZIONISM. 


I. 


God, we implore of Thee 

End Zion’s misery, 

Send her Thy aid! 

Send Thou her sons to heal 
Wounds which the years reveal, 
Woes which at last in weal 

For aye shall fade. 


God, loving, tender, good! 
As if in widowhood 

She weeps for Thee! 

Be once more reconciled, 


203 


As father pities child 
Pity her grief so wild, 
She weeps for Thee! 


Now bid her weep no more, 

Do Thou her sons restore— 
Love, gift from Thee! 

Make those who still would stay 
In other lands obey 

Thy holy law, that they 
World-priests may be! 


For some by Thy command 

Must live in ev’ry land 

To make Thee known! 

Priests to the world are we 

This is our destiny, ~ 

Till all shall hend her knee 

To Thee alone. —Dr. Pereira Men 


II. 


Now that the bond is welded 
And all our hearts agree, 
Let us be up and doing, 

Let “work” our watchword be. 
Our hands with zeal aud courage 
Shall in this cause be plied ; 

Yet keeping peace unbroken, 
With Wisdom as our guide. 


j 
4 
1 
4 
1 
) 


ig 
# 
iq 
' 
ig 
te 


ame 


ri 


204 


No vain and empty boasting 
Shall from our lips proceed ; 


Our vaunt shall be achievement, 
Our pride, the noble deed. 

Let zeal for high endeavor 
In ev’ry accent ring; 

Till our great hope accomplished 
New Psalms to God shall sing. 


O, long awaited moment, 
Dawn on the Jewish heart, 
When Israel’s ling’ring sorrow 
Shall from her soul depart ; 
When in the olden homestead 

And under Heaven’s ward, 
A nation ’mid the nations, 
His place shall be restored. 


In spite of foe’s resistance, 
In spite of weakling’s fears, 
We'll keep the truth here plighred 
Through all the coming years! 
And never rest or falter 
Until the goal we see; 
Released from slavish fetter, 
“New Israel” stands forth free! 


JEWISH STATISTICS. 


Jewish Statistics. 


[ is impossible to give the exact number of jews "ving in 

the world, for the simple reason that no census can be 
taken of them. Jn fulfillment of Prophecy they are now 
scattered into the corners of the earth and the islands of the 
sea. Perhaps there is no country, no nation, no territ>y 
in which the Jew is missing. But recently remnants of the 
Hebrew race were discovered in Africa, and there are Jews 
in the interior of China and elsewhere. Everywhere the 
Jew witnesses by his presence in the great dispersion to the 
truth of the Bible. 

Gentile hatred and superstition, especially in the middle 
ages, often attempted to make an end of the Jews. These 
attempts were the manifestation of the same power which 
prompted Haman of old to have all the Hebrews slain. 
Satan hates the Jews, because they are God’s earthly people 
with a wonderful destiny. And he hates them because He 
who has defeated him and who will make an end of his 
power shortly, came according to the flesh from that nation. 
Often the poor blinded Gentiles, instruments of Satan, tri- 
umphed because they thought the Jews were getting less and 
Icss and would soon be gone from the face of the earth. 
But like the bush Moses saw in the desert, the fire burned, 


20” 


No certainty 
about numbers, 


rei a 


pameneceenneniiert 


mprecmnsenircy erent 


Their preserva- 
tion a miracle. 


Jewish American 
Yearbook. 


208 


but the bush was not consumed, so the Jews were persecuted 

and not consumed, The preservation of the Jew is a miracle. 
Indeed, the greater the persecution, like in Egypt of old, 
the greater the increase. And what happens to the nations 
which touch the burning bush? Think of Spain, unhappy 
Spain. Over four hundred years ago they drove out the 
Jews from their country under the most cruel circumstances. 
To-day the sin of the fathers is visited upon the children. 
It is also said that Jewish financiers control every railroad 
in Spain; the whole country is unhappy and under a curse. 
God is faithful to His Word, ‘‘I will curse them that curse 
thee.”’ Russia is an illustration of this word in our days. 
She is getting a part payment for her cruelty to the Jew, 
the balance will be paid on the day of the Lord. 

That the Jewish people have wonderfully increased during 
the last fifty years is a startling fact. The natural increase 
is a sign of God’s favor upon them as His earthly people, 
“like the sand of the sea” they were to be and bye and bye in 
the kingdom age they will cover the whole face of the earth, 
and as they were a curse among the nations so will they be 
a blessing. 

Not many years ago we read in geographies and statistics 
that the Jews number about seven million. To-day no one 
would give this figure. The lowest estimate is ten million, 
and some state “ : eighteen and twenty million are nearer 
the truth. 

The new American Jewish Yearbook contains the follow- 
ing numbers: 


209 


THE BRITISH EMPIRE. 


England and Wales ....- 176,000 South PSTjEs BAGOOe BUT 30,000 
Scotland ....--.eeceees 8,200 Gibraltar .....-.-+++++ 2,000 
Freland: cacecaccnensw sce 3,808 Malta ....---seeeeeees 173 
Australasia ......--+++: 16,850 Aden ....-s-eeeeeeeers 3,000 
Canada and British Co- Cyprus ...eeeeee eee eees 119 

STAINES Becepmnconesec 25,000 Hong Kong ....-------- 143 
Barbadoes .....---++++> 21 Straits Settlement ..... 535 
Trinidad ........eeeee- 31 


Jamaica ...eseeeereeees Ueistk spcsataneeust 286,508 


ob Saw we 8 OT OS We ee 


GENERAL JEWISH STATISTICS. 


United States ......-+- 1,253,213 Netherlands .......---: 103,088 
British Empire .....--- 286,598 CuracaO .....--eees eres 103 
Abyssinia (Falashas).. 120,000 Surinam ........-++++ 1,121 
Argentine Republic .... 22,500 Persia ....-sceeeeee eee? 35,000 
Austria-Hungary ....- .2,076,378 Peru ....--eseeeeereees 498 
Belgium .....---+++++: 12,000 Roumania ......--++--+ 262,348 
Bosnia, Herzegovina .. 8,213. Russia ......+++eee eres 5,189,401 


ee are rte 3,000 Servia ..-. sere rere rere 6,000 


A ANE cee pit Septoria) Uae Hy i AO Fe 


Costa Rica ....----+e8- 43 Sweden and Norway... 3,402 

Guba: ice. cesermencans 4,000 Switzerland ......-++-- 12,264 

Denmark ....---++-++: 3,476 Turkey .....--.seerees 466,361 

France .....-seeee eee 90,000 Bulgaria .......-+++ 33,717 
Algeria ....-.+++e+es §7,132 Egypt .....cse eer eees 25,200 i 
Hirtis. cen ee eee 60,000 Grete: s.cscscsesncaee 1,150 


Germany (2)...-.+++:- 586,948 Turkistan and Afghan- ; 
t 


Be ee oe nies OF Ree oe meme eee ee 


Luxemburg ......e0 ee 1,201 ——— + 
Mexico .....-:eeceeees 1,000 FOotale Veccceteeeee 10,932,777 
Morocco ...ee eee ees 150,000 


Professor Heman, of Basle, Switzerland, a man who has 
been deeply interested in the Jews for many years and who : 
S 


Over 15 million. 


210 


has given the subject a careful study, has recently declared 
that the Jewish population of the world is at least 19,000,000. 

His estimate is that, in Europe 11,000,000 of Jews reside, 
and outside of Europe, 8,000,000. 

The United States has 1,000,000. In Europe, Russia has 
5,500,000; Austria-Hungary, 1,860,000; Germany, 568,000 ; 
Roumania, 300,000; Great Britain, 200,000; T urkey, 120,- 
000; Holland, 97,000; France, 77,000; Italy, 50,000; Bul- 
garia, 31,000; Switzerland, 12,000; Greece, 6,000; Servia, 
5,000; Denmark, 4,000; Sweden, 3,500; Belgium, 3,000; 
Spain, 2,500. Portugal has only 300 Jewish residents. 

We believe the statistics of the Jewish American Yearbook 
are too low and the statements of Mr. Heman are too high. 
Most likely fifteen and one-half millions of Jews living in 
the world in 1904 comes nearer the truth. 

The Jewish American Yearbook underestimates the Jew- 
ish Russian population and while in the main correct as 
regards Europe, the number of Jews living in non-European 
countries is placed much too low. 

We think, from close observation, that in the United 
States over one and one-half millions of Jews reside, and 


they are continually increasing; Jewish immigration is at 


present very large again. The largest Jewish city of the 
world is Greater New York, over 500,000 reside in this great 
metropolis. The New York Jewish quarter is the largest of 
its kind which ever existed in the history of the world. It 
has its own language, the Yiddish, its theatres and a semi- 
Oriental life is kept up. Here, as elsewhere, they are stran- 
gers in a strange land, though thousands call America their 


2il 


Palestine and New York a better Jerusalem, still they are 


“a people dwelling alone.” 
The continued increase of the seed of Abraham is one of 


the signs of the times. 


THE JEWISH POPULATION OF 
PALESTINE. 


The Jewish Population of Palestine. 


T HE return of Jews to Palestine has been very marked 
during the last ten years. The possibility that thous- 
ands may return is great. Up to 1832 European Jews were 
repeatedly banished from the land. In 1874 an accurate 
statistician gave the number of Jews living in Palestine as 
10,000. The same person, twenty years later, in 1894, esti- 
mates that 49,960 lived then in the leading towns of Pales- 
tine; an increase in tweny years of about 40,000. In the 
last ten years the Jewish population in Palestine has almost 
doubled. 

Jerusalem has never been such a “Jewish” city since the 
year 70 as it is to-day, and the city has, with its railroad 
station, electric lights, etc., quite a modern appearance. The 
Jews living in the land .re from almost every country of 
the world. This in itself is a significant fact. 

Some years ago we printed in “Our Hore” a series of 
articles on the Jews in Palestine and their condition. The 
information comes from a reliable source* and we give part 
of it now: 

1. The Jews of Palestine are very various as to origin ; 
they are indeed from all parts of the world. A rough divi- 
sion may be made into the Arabic-speaking and the Yiddish- 
speaking Jews. Of the first mentioned, the great 1aajority 


*E, W. Masterman, C. EL. 
215 


x 
a4 
- 
Fe 
ala 
tea 


erste cter perishes Abin eaten | eoPmese 


216 


are the Sephardim Jews, who have resided in the Turkish 
Empire for many generations. 

It is well known that at the time of the Crusades there 
were very few Jews in Palestine—probably at most not more 
than about a thousand. The Jews in Jerusalem itself were 
nearly all killed in 1099, by the Crusaders. After the fall of 
the Kingdom of Jerusalem they began to return, and early 
in the thirteenth century we hear of 300 Jewish rabbis from 
France and England coming to the Holy Land. The larger 
number, however, of the present Sephardim are descendants 
of those Jews who were driven out of Spain in 1492 bv the 
edicts of Ferdinand and Isabella. The majority of these 
have found their way to Palestine from other parts of the 
Turkish Empire, and notably from Constantinople. Through 
all their years of wandering since they left Spain they have 
maintained their Spanish—a Spanish which, of course (as in 
every language spoken by Jews), is amplified by the addi- 
tion of Hebraisms, but which keeps the leading character- 
istics of the Spanish of 466 years ago. All the Sephardim 
know Arabic, and those living in the North—in ancient 
Galilee and Syria—speak Arabic habitually, and have in the 
majority of cases completely dropped Spanish. It is very 
curious whereas the communities at Jerusalem, Hebron, and 
Jafia, etc., speak Spanish constantly, the same communities 
in Safed, Tiberias, and Damascus scarcely use any Spanish 
at all, During a residence of some months in Galilee I only 
met one or two persons who knew Spanish, and they were 
from Jerusalem. 

It will be convenient to class under this heading many 


217 


smaller groups of Eastern Jews. Of these, I would men- 
tion especially the Mugrabin or Marocco, the Yemenite and 
the Georgian or Circassian Jews. There are also many 
small communities of Jews from Aleppo, Bagdad, Persia 
and Bokhara, who keep themselves in many respects apart 
from others. 

The Mugrabin or Marocco Jews are particularly poor, 
and are probably the most degraded of all the Jewish com- 
munities. They speak the 4 rabic dialect of North Africa, 
from whence they come, and in some leading characteristics 
resemble the Mugrabin Arabs who have come to Palestine 
at various times. They are very closely identified with the 
Sephardim in religious ritual, 

The Yemen Jew is from South Arabia, and is distin- 
guished by his swarthy skin, his coal-black hair, his cork- 
screw forelock, and his complete familiarity with what is 
recognized in Jerusalem as the good dialect of Arabic. 
They are a poor community, mostly in rags, though they 
are hard-working. As they have been in Jerusalem only 
about a dozen years, and arrived penniless, they have not 
yet had time to establish a good position for themselves. 
Except for the cork-screw forelock, their appearance would 
never lead an inexperienced observer to suspect that he was 
looking upon * Jew. Many of them are very dark indeed— 
much darker than the Fellahin of the mountains. 

A very different community from the two mentioned is 
that of the Gourgee or Circassian Jews. These come from 
Kurdistan and still further north, In many of their physiog- 
nomical peculiarities, as well as in their dress, they resemble 


if 
if 
it 
if3 


TE apts cee Sateen 


the Circassians, who were once their neighbors. They are 
a fine, tall race, with long fair faces, generally dark hair 
and prominent features. They have none of the cringing 
servility of an average Ashkenaz Jew. As a community 
they are comparatively rich, and have established them- 
selves both inside and outside the walls of Jerusalem, and 
in smaller numbers in Jaffa. Russian and Georgian are 
their native languages, and many take advantage of their 
knowledge of the former to supply the necessity of the 
Russian pilgrims. 

The remaining Eastern Jews are from various parts of 
the Eastern Turkish Empire, from Persia, from Central 
Asia and India. Of these, the richest and most prosperous 
are the Jews from Bokhara, who form an increasing com- 
munity, and are now building some handsome houses a little 
way out of the city of Jerusalem. The Bokhara Jews are 
physically well developed, and both the Jews ahd Jewesses 
dress in cloths of the most fantastic colors, in which bright 
yellows and reds play a prominent part. Some of their 
garments remind one of the fantastic dresses forced upon 
the heretics condemned to be burnt by the Spanish Inquisi- 
tion. 

The second great community of Jews in Palestine, and 
the one which is yearly becoming of greater importance, is 
the Ashkenaz community. This is composed of Jews from 
Russia, Poland, Germany and Austria, chiefly. The charac- 
teristic Jew of Whitechapel is an Ashkenaz Jew. Although 
the community is primarily from the countries mentioned 
above, they come from most European countries, and by 


219 


secondary emigration, from North America, the Cape of 
Good Hope, and Australia. This class of Jews has only been 
allowed to settle in Palestine since 1832, before which date 
they were repeatedly expelled, The type is so well known to 
English people that it seems hardly worth while to enlarge 
upon it. They usually have fair hair and light eyes, but 
otherwise the cast of face appears to be much modified, 
according to whether they come from Russia, Germany of 
further west. Hooked noses, supposed vulgarly to be so 
characteristic of Jews, are not by any means common. The 
language of the Ashkenaz Jew is, as is well known, Yid- 
dish—a language which, while in its foundation German, 
differs greatly from it in pronunciation and grammatical 
construction. It is, too, corrupted by the individual speak- 
ing it, who introduces Russian, Polish, German or English 
into it, according to taste. It goes without saying that 
Yiddish is not Yiddish without a good sprinkling of Hebrew 
words. The Ashkenaz community are divided into two 
great groups, the Perushim and the Chassidim, from differ- 
ences in religious ritual which do not concern us here. It 
should be m-ntioned that there is a sprinkling of Jews from 
France, who, in proportion to their small numbers, have a 
great influence among the other Jews in the country, both 
intellectually and re::,iously. It is of great interest to every 
scientific observer to notice how completely the Jews, while 
remaining a separate people, have in physiognomy, in dress, 
and to a great extent in habit, become like the people among 
whom they have so long dwelt. The Sephardim Jew, the 
Yemenite, and the Mugs«bin, are all very like the Arabs of 


‘ 


220 


their respective places of long residence; the Georgian Jew 
is very much like the Circassian. Among the Ashkenaz 
Jews one finds many a Russian Jewess in outward appear- 
ance the image of the Russian pilgrim who haunts Jerusa- 
lem at Easter time, while many a comely Jewess from hap- 
pier surroundings in Gerrnany has an unmistakable German 
physiognomy.* 

The vast majority of the Jews are naturally Turkish sub- 
jects, and can claim no other protection. Many come into 
the country as subjects of other nations, but their children 
become subjects of the Ottoman Empire. Some years ago, 
many Jews made a great effort to come under the protection 
of Great Britain, but after considerable numbers were en- 
rolled as British subjects, /urther additions were prevented 
by order of the British Government. Most, if not all, the 
Bokhara and some of the Gourgee Jews are under Russian 
protection. 

Every community, even the small ones, is, in religious 
matters, governed by its own Chief Rabbi; but all the Jews 
of Palestine are officially under the Chief Rabbi of Jerusa- 
lem, who holds a firman fro:n the Sultan, has his own cavass 
or Turkish guard, and is, in Jerusalem, only second in au- 
thority to the Pashaw. Hitherto this official has always 
been drawn from the Sephardim community, but the Ash- 
kenazim, on account of their increasing numbers, are hoping 


*Intermarriage has, of course, in some cases modified the type. 
I know of two or three jet-black Negresses in Jerusalem who have 
become proselytes to the Jewish faith, and one has a son in whom 
the Negro type is quite evident. 


221 


to have one of their own number elected to the post before 
long. 

II. From this somewhat scanty account of the Jewish 
communities in Palestine let us now turn to their condition 
and prospects. It will be convenient in considering this to 
divide off the Jews of Palestine into four rough classes : 

(1) Those Jews who spend their whole time in purely 
religious occupations—é. £., the study of the sacred books— 
and those whose great object in coming to the country is to 
die or. holy soil. 

(2) Jews who have, perhaps, come to the country from 
religious motives, but who have still to earn their living to 
assist out their scanty “Haluka,” the allowance they receive 
from funds contributed by Jews of other countries for their 
support. 

(3) Those who have been brought up in the country, and 
have had to carn their own living unassisted. 

(4) Jews who have by various philanthropic agencies 
been settled in agricultural communities on the land. 

It should also perhaps be mentioned that there are besides 
these a considerable number of paupers subsisting on local 
charity. Some of these have got admission into the country 
in a state of penury, and have through various reasons been 
unable to rise above their poverty. It is well known that 
they generally do rise if their surroundings make it possible ; 
others are widows with children, whose husbands came into 
the country in perhaps enfeebled health, for religious pur- 
poses, or who, perchance, always lived “from hand to 


mouth.” Yet others are remnants of a time when it was 
thought that all the rising generation should learn only to 
read the Talmud and despise a trade. These very poor 
Jews occur of course in the large towns, but more especially 
in the two largest Jewish communities, Jerusalem and Safed. 
Some are beggars by profession. It must not be thought, 
as many would think who read the erroneous accounts pub- 
lished regarding Jerusalem, that a very large proportion 
belong to this class. It is a class much to be pitied, but not, 
I believe, so needy nor so large a class as in most European 
cities. 

(1) With regard to the Chachams (1. ¢., “sages,” in- 
cluded in class 1), who in all communities are supported 
for their religious duties, it is unnecessary to say much. 
They are, if sufficiently learned, fairly well provided for by 
the Haluka, which is collected for this purpose from all 
parts of the world. In the Sephardim community of Jeru- 
salem, the Chachams who devote their whole time to the 
study of the law, number upwards of 300 families, and 
from this number certain “messengers of the congregations” 
are deputed to travel all over the world to collect funds for 
the support of the whole body of religious men. They often 
travel far: I know one such messenger personally, who has 
visited on this errand almost every European country, as 
well as India, North Africa, and America. These messen- 
gers are well paid, and the posts are naturally coveted. 

Among the Sephardim almost all the Haluka goes to the 
chief men: there are a few minor appointments which help 


a few, but the great bulk of these Jews have no special 
fund, though there are many charitable institutions for pro- 
viding houses and other assistance. 

In the Ashkenaz communities, on the other hand, almost 
all the individuals receive some pecuniary assistance, but it 
varies very much according to the place from which it 
comes. 

The whole Ashkenaz community is divided into two great 
groups—the Perushim and the Chassidim—but each of these 
divisions is with respect to the Haluka subdivided: Thus, 
the Perushim Ashkenazim from Warsaw have a fund to 
divide among themselves sent from Warsaw; those from 
Minsk have another fund derived from that district, and so 
on. There are nine main subdivisions under the Jerusalem 
Perushim, and five under the Jerusalem Chassidim Jews. 
Not only does the Haluka vary very much according as to 
whence it comes, but as the communities in Europe, es- 
pecially in Russia, have got poorer, the Haluka has got less 
and less, and many of the Jews could not possibly live on it 
alone. 

Many of the Chachams among the Ashkenazim, however, 
have come to Palestine in extreme old age or in failing 
middle age to pass their declining years in studying the Law 
and the other sacred books on sacred soil, and to lay their 
bones within Holy Land. This is the case with great num- 
bers in the “colonies” around Jerusalem, and perhaps more 
so still in Safed, where most of the Ashkenazim belong to 
that category. 

A certain proportion of the members of the smaller com- 


224 


munities belong to this class. Not a few of this class have 
come with a good income, either sent to them from their old 
homes or derived from savings brought with them. 

(2) By easy steps we pass to the second class, where we 
find men who have come from purely religious motives, but, 
finding it impossible to manage on their Haluka, or, perhaps, 
marrying in middle life and burdening themselves thus with 
extra cares and expenses, are obliged to ‘lo something to 
earn a livelihood. Many of this latter class become tailors, 
small shopkeepers, etc., while among the Sephardim 
Chachams some may find extra remuneration as teachers and 
readers of the Mishna, offers of prayers with the sick, etc. 
Some have a kind of hereditary right to some assistance 
from some of the colleges (so-called) for .cading the 
Talmud, though they do not themselves necessarily study 
much. 

(3) We next come to the very interesting class of Jews 
who are earning their livelihood in the country in various 
ways, and with these I wish to deal somewhat more at 
length. It will be noticed that those previously mentioned 
are more or less living on the earnings of others and spend- 
ing money sent to them from other lands. Like so large a 
proportion of residents in the country, they live on the 
religious enthusiasm of their co-religionists in their old 
homes. 

The Jews engaged in business in Palestine are very 
numerous, and they belong to all classes of the community ; 
they are found in all parts of the country. Thus, if you 
visit the towns along the coast from Gaza to Beyrout you 


225 


will find in every place not only that there are Jews in 
business, but that a large proportion of the business is in 
their hands. There is no town of importance in the country 
without its representative of the nation, and in many villages 
you will find one or more Jews engaged in keeping a 
“general store,” or in “cobbling,” or in money-lending. 
When traveling in the country in 1893, I arrived with a 
party at an out-of-the-way village called El Burj, on the 
borders of the hill cou of Judea, about four hours’ ride 
from Lydda. Scarcel; the tents been set when out 
came the inevitable Jew; who this time was engaged in 
cheese-making for the benefit of the Fellahin. When jour- 
neying in 1894 in Upper Galilee, on the way to Tyre and 
Sidon, I stopped for the night at the little village of Rumash 
and there, sure enough, was the Jew and his little shop. 
In the miserable, squalid village of Jericho, in the mountain 
fastness of Kerak in Moab, and amongst the Bedouin of 
the Hauran (engaged in corn-buying generally), you will 
come across Jews. 

In Jerusalem, Jews have most of the money-changing 
and money-lending in their hands, and, except for some 
German shops, they do most of the general business. The 
cleverest of handicrafts are the Ashkenazim, who have most 
of the furniture-making, oli. -wood wo1', plumber’s work, 
watch and clockmaking, book-binding, printing, etc., while 
the Sephardim are most successful as drapers, fancy trim- 
ming sellers, etc. All classes, i. ¢., Mugrabin and Yemens, 
as well as those mentioned above, flourish as tailors, cobblers, 
rough tinmen, etc. 


226 


Many act as carriage-drivers in places where carriages 
are used, such as Jerusalem, Jaffa, etc., and the poorer ones 
carry loads on their Lacks, or go up and down the country 
s “mokarris” or = teers. Their cleverness and industry 
are indisputable. You may watch many a Jew ina miserable 
little place where he has scarcely room to move a leg, or 
under a tiny awning, sit tapping away at mending shoes or 
soldering together the many wonderful tin articles which he 
makes out of old petroleum tins. The competition is very 
great, and (as in the east of London) the Jew will work 
with a minimum margin of profit. A list of all the various 
trades followed by Jews in Palestine would fill a whole 
page; but to show that it is not only the rougher trades 
which are followed, I must mention that I know of Jews 
who are surgical instrument makers, chemists, electrical 
machinists, broom makers, etc. 

It goes without saying that the Jews derive a very great 
share of their custom in such places as Jerusalem and Jaffa 
from the various religious societies which exist there. They 
work also for the natives of the country; indeed, there is 
much work in the country, introduced by the spread of 
European ideas, which only Jews can at present do. There 
is, however, comparatively little work for so many Jews to 
do, and often the competition is so severe that the workers 
can scarcely get enough to live upon. There are very few 
more openings for Jews in the country, and I do not hesitate 
to say that, unless the general prosperity of the country 
increases in some extraordinary and unlooked for way, there 
cannot be much more opening for the Jews in these direc- 


227 


tions. The Fellahin, on the other hand, cannot support 
more Jews, useful as they might be to them in many ways, 


for the simple reason that they are so ground down by the 


Turkish Government that they have scarcely enough money 
for the bare necessities, let alone luxuries, of life. No 
doubt a certain number may find openings for work in the 
larger villages, where the simplest jew is a genius at hand- 
work compared with the average Fellah; but this at the 
outside must be confined to a hundred or two, and life in the 
villages cannot be very comfortable at the pest. Most of 
those who now get money in the villages have to itinerate 
widely if they are to get a sufficient profit out of their ex- 
pedition. very few Jews can get rich in Palestine. It is 
no uncommon thing for a poor and apparently pauper Jew 
to die in the midst of one of the communities, and for a bag 
of money—one or two hundred napoleons perhaps—to be 
found stowed away in some secret place. But such riches 
have seldom or never been earned in the covntry. It is the 
remains of money brought into the country from abroad. 
Many a poor Jew, having made his “pile,” packs up his 
goods with it and goes off to che Holy Land to end his 
days in peace. 


THE NORTHERN POWER. 


The Northern Power. 


ORE than once do we read in the prophetic Word, 

that the last troubler of the Jews will be a northern 

power, one coming from the North. (Joel ii:20; Micah v:5, 

6; Daniel xi; Ezekiel xxxviii and xxxix); other passages 

make this fact known. The Assyrian, so prominent in the 

first part of Isaiah’s vision, typifies that great northern one 
coming upon the Jews in the very last days. 

Can it be determined at this time which is that northern 
power? We do not hesitate at all to answer this question in 
the affirmative. The great land of the North must be Rus- 
sia. There are several reasons for it. 

1. Nearly six millions of Hebrews live in Russia to-day, 
and as nowhere else they are bitterly persecuted. Russia is 
the greatest enemy of the Jews among the nations in modern 
times. 

2. It is an open secret that Russia is striving to lay hold 
of Jerusalem and Palestine. Jerusalem is to become the 
great capital of the Greek church. 

3. From certain prophecies we can easily learn that Russia 
must be the northern power. For instance, in Ezekiel 
xxxvili:2 we read, correctly translated, “Son of man set 
thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, prince of Rosh, 
Meshech and Tubal.” Gog and Magog occupied in ancient 
times. the territory which belongs to Russia now. Rosh 
reminds us of Russia; Meshech of Moscow and Tubal of 
231 


Russia 


Russia in 
Palestine. 


232 


Tobolsk. And this prince of Rosh, Meshech and Tubal, 
brings a g-eat multitude with him (Ezek. xxxviii:5, 6). 
Russia has conquered and amalgamated many nations, in- 


cluding a good part of Asia. 

Very marked indeed are th lesigns Russia has on the 
Holy Land. Not very long ago, a very detailed account of 
Russia’s influence and diplomacy in Palestine appeared in 
one of the London papers. We give a portion of it: 

“The full importance of the German Emperor’s trip to 
the Holy Land, a visit made ostensibly in the future inter- 
ests of Gerinan commerce, was appreciated clearly by Rus- 
sian statecraft; for it led to renewed efforts under the guise 
of missionary zeal on the part of Russia. The rapid in- 
crease in the number of Russian churches a.id schools in 
Syria and Palestine of recent years did not escape the notice 
of M. Constans, the French Ambassador at the Porte. 
Three years ago that diplomat made the following remarks 
vwhen addressing the teaching staff of a French Jesuit school 
in Constantinople: ‘We have to meet terrible opponents— 
rivals who wish to undermine our influence, and to drive us 
forth from Palestine. The Protestants spend a great deai of 
money without success, but the Russians alone are danger- 
ous tous. Three years ago 9,000 children attended the Rus- 
sian schools in Syria, and now their number is 15,000. Ii 
this increase continues, then perhaps in ten years Russia will 
have given French influence there its coup de grace.’ 
These remarks were justified, to-day there are 155 Russian 
schools in Syria and Palestine. A Russian squadron, under 
Rear Admiral Krieger, and consisting of one cruiser, two 


233 
gunboats, and one torpedo-boat, appeared off Jaffa early 
last March. The vessels anchored for a week, while the 
admiral and the greater part of the crews went to Jerusalem 
by rail. This visit was really an object-lesson tor the crews, 
who could thus carry back to Russia glowing accounts of 
the “New Jerusalem,” which Russia is creating, and which 
one day may become of immense political importance. 
Among all the foreign Christian communities, Russia has 


taken the lead throughout the Holy Land, and especially 


in Jerusalem, in buying land and in building and establishing 
missions, schools, hospitals, and monasteries. The Russian 
‘New Jerusalem,’ with its fine modern buildings, forms a 
little town of itself; in fact, it is a fortress that commands 
Jerusalem. It consists of a mission house with a school and 
hospital, of a pilgrims’ shelter, of dwellings for clerical and 
lay officials, of the palace for the future Patriarch and the 
Consul-General, and of two churches, one of which, the 
cathedral, towers above the whole of Jerusalem. All these 
buildings are surrounded by a fortress-wall. Russia has 
bought one-third of the Mount of Olives, and enclosed it 
and the Gethsemane church by a wall; while from beyond 
the Jordan there can be seen the lofty Russian tower built 
on the summit of the Mount, and close to the Church of the 
Ascension. 

“It is a marked feature of Russian statecraft that it looks 
with no favoring eye upon individual effort, except and in 
so far as such effort may be turned to account in the inter- 
ests of the Empire. The Russian Palestine Society has ex- 
isted nearly a quarter of a century, and it plays a very impor- 


234 


tant part as the tool of Pan-Slavism in Syria and Palestine. 

Its president is the Grand Duke Serge, and among its mem- 

bers are the powerful leaders of the Pan-Slav movement. 

For many years the Russian Government refused to grant 

its protection to the Society ; but, when the stealthy advance 

of Russia had brought it practically within striking distance 
of the Euphrates Valley, and when Teutor activity in Pales- 
tine began to show signs of becoming a factor to be reckoned 
with, then did the Russian-Palestine Society succeed at last 
in gaining the ear of Russian officialism. The main object 
of the Society seems to be that of maintaining Russian 
schools in the Holy Land; in fact, the education of the child- 
ren of Syria and Palestine attracts a vast amount of atten- 
tion and money that could be spent to far greater profit in 
European Russia. Some portion of the vast sims of money 
raised in Russia by the Palestine Society is used in main- 
taining the schools referred to; another portion, however, 
is used for political purposes. For example, in the recent 
election of the Patriarch of Antioch there was no stint of 
Russian money to secure the election of a native instead of 
a Greek. In fact, Russia’s aim is to combat Greek at every 
point in the Holy Land. 

“Russia is sparing no expense in the task of educating the 
native children; thus, the leading scholars attending the 
schools for natives are sent to Russia, where they remain 
for two or three years ina seminary ; then, as a rule, a Rus- 
sian wife is found for them, and they return to Palestine as 

This fact explains the strong Russian leanings 


teachers. 
possessed by the Arabian teachers; and thereby Russia’s 


235 


influence in Syria and Palestine increases daily. The growth 


is slow and almost imperceptible, but it is none the less sure. 
“But France is not ti only nation which foresees the 


gradual destruction of its interests in Palestine by Russia's 


untiring activity, for the latter is aimed chiefly at the Greek 
church authorities who know well that the Russian Greek 


church is waiting only for the right moment to come when it 
can lay its hands upon the Greek Sepulchre and monasteries 
in Jerusalem, At present the Russians have no share in the 
Church of the Sepulchre ; but the Palestine Society is under- 
mining the influence of the Greek monastery © view to 
become owners of the Sanctuary, which is at present in the 
hands of the Greeks. The Porte offers no resistance to 
Russia’s secret plan of campaign, and owing to the lack of 
adequate support by the Turkish Government, the Greeks 
lost the Grecian Patriarchate in Damascus, and thereby 
Russia obtained another tool of great service in furthering 
Russia’s desire to become the Protector of the Orthodox 
church in Jerusalem and the Holy Land. As the Greek 
monks are nearly all Turkish subjects, they can look only 
to the Porte for protection and support, for they have no 
official claim upon Greece. The Greek church in Jerusalem 
is quite independent and self-governing, and it is connected 
with the other Orthodox Greek churches only by the bond 
of dogma. For centuries the Greeks living in Moldavia, 

Wallachia, ard South Russia have left by will large iracts of | 

land to the Greek monastry in Jerusalem. Recently Russia iy 
has seized all the land thus left to the Greek church, and it 
keeps three-fifths of revenue, or about £13,000, while only 


nent ncennennretenrncennrcnenranarprensaeewresanstnnns” WS cNSSee Ss nontasoae aca ase 


236 


two-fifths are sent to the Greek Patriarch in Jerusalem. 
Meanwhile, the stream of pilgrims from Russia is increasing 
steadily under favoring auspices of the Russian Govern- 
ment, and the fanatical, credulous moujiks carry back to 
Russia wonderful tales of the work that is being done by 
Russia in the birthplace of Christianity. Russia’s activity 
in Palestine has not attracted a great deal of attention so 
far among the Powers that cannct fail to be affected thereby 
sooner or later. Still, if once the holy places fall into Rus- 
sia’s hands, then the consequences wiil be grievous alike for 
the Greeks and for all the other nations who are interested 
in ‘the peace of Jerusalem.’ 

“Viewed from a political standpoint Russia’s ulterior mo- 
tives speak for themselves. Not only does the Holy Land 
possess a seaboard that could be turned to excellent advan- 
tage by Russia, but the old highroad leading from Asia Mi- 
nor into Egypt runs down through Syria across the battle- 
field of the Old World; moreover, if Russia can succeed in 
getting a strong footing in Syria, then she wil! have out- 
flanked the Bagdad Railway, which threatens to stem the 
stealthy and ceaseless advance of Russian ‘civilization.’ ’ 

In connection with this we quote from A. Burton’s “Rus- 
sia’s Destiny” 

“In view of the rapid and surprising advance of Russia’s 
influence, both in the West and East, it inay te of interest 
to our readers to give a few extracts from the will of Peter 
the Great, who died in 1725 A.D. This ambitious tyrant 


had formed schemes of conquest which of late years have 


been assuming shape and have been tending towards accom- 


237 


plishment. We copy from Russia, in Bohn’s Standard 
Library : 

“¢(7) The Russian nation must be constantly on a ‘war 
footing, to keep the soldiers warlike and in good condition. 
No rest must be allowed, except for the purpose of relieving 
the State finances, recruiting the army, or biding the favor- 
able moment for attack. By these means peace is made sub- 
servient to war, and war to peace, in the interest of the ag- 
grandizement and increasing prosperity of Russia. 

“*(3) No opportunity must be lost of taking part in the 
affairs and disputes of Europe, especially in those of Ger- 
many, which from its vicinity is one of the most direct in- 
terest tous. . . 

“*(8) We must keep steadily extending our frontiers— 
northward along the Baltic, and southward along the shores 
of the Black Sea. 

“*(g) We must progress as much as possible in the direc- 
tion of Constantinople and India. He who can get pos- 
session of these places is the real ruler of the world. With 
this view we must provoke constant quarrels at one time 
with Turkey and at another with Persia. We must establish 
wharves and docks in the Euxine, and by degrees make our- 
selves masters of that sea as well as of the Baltic, which is 
a doubly important element in the success of our plan. We 
must hasten the downfall of Persia, push on into the Persian 
Gu'f, and, if possible, re-establish the ancient commercial 
intercourse with the Levant through Syria, and force our 
way into the Indies, which are the storehouses of the world. 


Once there, we can dispense with English gold. 


Russia’s policy 
outlined by 
Peter the 

Great. 


ae 


ERE 


Sere 5 


ne caer 


exquvernena-soreremnerante nt aaa eeeneer re 


238 


“<(10) Moreover, we must teke pains to establish and 
maintain an intimate union with Austria, apparently coun- 
tenancing her schemes for future aggrandizement in Ger- 
many, and all the while secretly rousing the jealousy of the 
minor States against her. By this way we must bring it to 
pass that one or the other party sha!! seek aid from Russia, 
and thus we shall exercise a sort of protectorate over the 
country, which will pave the way for future supremacy. 

““(11) We must make the House of Austria interested 
in the expulsion of the Turks from Europe, and we must 
neutralize its jealousy at the capture of Constantinople, 
either by pre-occupying it with a war with the old European 
States or by allowing it a share of the spoil, which we can 
afterwards resume at our leisure. 

“*(12) We must collect round our house, as round a 
centre, all the detached sections of Greeks which are scat- 
tered abroad in Hungary, Turkey, and South Poland. We 
must make them look to us for support, and then, by estab- 
lishing beforehand a sort of ecclesiastical supremacy, we 
shall pave the way for Universal Sovereignty. 

“*(13) When Sweden is ours, Persia vanquished, Po- 
land subjugated, Turkey conquered—when our armies are 
united, and the Euxine and Baltic are in the possession of 
our ships, then we must make separate and secret overtures, 
first to the court of Versailles, and then to that of Vienna, 
to share with them the dominion of the world. If either of 
them accept our propositions, which is certain to happen if 
their ambition and self-interest are properly worked upon, 
we must make use of one to annihilate the other; this done, 


239 


we have only to destroy the remaining one by finding a 
pretext for a quarrel, the issue of which cannot be dou>tful, 
as Russia will then be already in absolute possession of the 
East, and of the best part of Europe. 

“*(14) Should the improbable case happen of both re- 
jecting the propositions of Russia, then our policy will be to 
set one against the other, and make them tear each other to 
pieces. Russia must then watch for and seize the favorable 
moment, and pour her already assembled hosts into Ger- 
many, while two immense fleets, laden with Asiatic hordes 
and convoyed by the armed squadrons of the Euxine and the 
Baltic, set sail simultaneously from the Sea of Azoff and the 
harbor «* Archangel; sweeping along the Mediterranean 
and |.  Jantic they will overrun France on the one side, 
whil many is overpowered on the other. When these 
coun. «s are fully conquered, the rest of Europe must fall 
easily and without a struggle under our yoke, Thus Eu- 
rope can and must be subjugated.’ ” 

This is the aim of Russia. Politicians of to-day may 
smile, yet many tremble at Russia’s aggressiveness. Napo- 
leon I. foresaw what many are waking up to in our day, 
and gave expression to his thoughts, while a captive at St. 
Helena, in the tc' “wing terms: 

“In the course of a few years Russia will have Constanti- 
nople, part of Turkey, and all Greece. This I hold to be as 
certain as if it had already taken place; all the cajolery and 

flattery that Alexander practiced upon me was to gain my 
consent to effect that object. I would not give it, foreseeing 
that the equilibrium of Europe would be destroyed. In the 


240 


natural course of things Turkey must fall to Russia; the 
Powers it would injure, and who would oppose it, are Eng- 
land, France, Austria, and Prussia. Now, as to Austria, 
it would be very easy to secure her assistance by giving her 
Servia and uther provinces bordering on the Austrian do- 
minions, reaching near to Constantinople. The only hypothe- 
sis that France and England will ever be allied with anything 
like sincerity will be to prevent this; but even this alliance 
will not avail. France, England, and Prussia united can- 
not prevent it. Russia ani Austria can at any time effect 
it; once mistress of Constantinople, Russia gets all the com- 
merce of the Mediterranean, becomes a great naval power, 
and God knows what may happen. The object of my in- 
vasion of Russia was to prevent this, by t’ e interposition 
between her and Turkey of a new State which I meant to 
call into existence as a barrier to her eastern encroach- 
ments.” 

We attach no importance to the mere opinions of men, 
however great they may be. There is One “who worketh 
all things after the counsel of His own will.” Man, though 
rebellious in heart against God, is but the tool in His hands 
to accomplish His purposes. God’s purpose is “in the dis- 
pensation of the fulness of times’—that dispensation so 
near at hand when Christ shall reign in righteousness and 
peace—it is His purpose “to gather together in one all 
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on 
earth; even in Him” (Eph. i:9-12). 

Christ, and not Russia, is to have “Universal Sovereign- 
ty,” and Russia, as Ezekiel xxxviii puts beyond a doubt, 


241 


together with the pomp of rebellious man (see Ezekiel 
xxxii), will “go down into the pit.” “Asshur (1. @., the 
Assyrian) is there, and all her company . . . all of them 
slain, fallen by the sword, which caused terror in the land 
of the living” (Ezekiel xxxii:22, 23). 


THE MESSIANIC QUESTION. 


The Messianic Question. 


By C. I. ScoFIELD. 


[ is unnecessary to say that “Messiah” and “Christ” are 
exactly equivalent terms ; that they mean, in themselves, 
no more than anointed. This word, though, has come to have 
a special application to that personage upon whom the coun- 
sels of God as unfolded in the Scriptures converge. Really 
the Messianic question, when we come to look at it closely, 
resolves itself into several questions. 

First of all, is it correct to say that there is any Messianic 
question? In other words, do the Scriptures contain a doc- 
trine of the Messiah? There are some persons (not by any 
means destitute of learning) who deny that rightly under- 
stood, the Old Testament contains any Messianic doctrine. 
They claim that it has been altogether read into these Scrip- 
tures, first, by rabbis of olden time, the scribes and rulers, 
and then taken up, amplified, and made central in evangeli- 
cal theology by Christian exegetes. So there is, as you see, 
really a question as to whether there is a Messianic question. 

I do not regard this contention as very important for 
the reason, if for no other, that it is not raised by any con- 
siderable number of persons. A little group of Jewish 
scholars and a little group of Gentile scholars very ‘“ad- 
vanced” as they call themselves do raise the question, but 
the great body of Jewish, as of Christian exegetes, maintain 
that there is a doctrine of the Messiah. Of course, they 

245 


There is a Mes- 
sianic question. 


Pa aad tee | te seapeiipigine jniedemetstooeet AE 


246 


disagree on the one point of the identity of Messiah; the 
Jews denying the Messiahship of Jesus of Nazareth, the 
Christian exegetes affirming it. 

If we answer this question in the affirmative, and say 
that there is a doctrine of the Messiah, we, of course, come 
to another question: Who and what is Mess’ 1? In other 
words, what marks of identity are attached to this personage 
in the Scriptures so that the world may be perfectly sure 
it is not deceived by an impostor; so that it will not be 
open to any one not the Messiah, to maintain a claim to the 
character, and thus falsely secure to himself the rights that 
properly belong to the true Messiah. 

Of course, if there is any prophetic testimony concerning 
such a coming one, the object of that testimony must be 
two-fold: First, to furnish these very marks of identity of 
which I speak; and secondly, to prepare the Jew: and 
through them the world, t receive this personage when 
he should come. These two things are evident: God would 
not send into the world one having such rights as we shall 
find to belong to Messiah, without in some efficient way 
providing for his authentication. To illustrate, I understand 
there is somewhere a young man who claims to be, not 
merely the Messiah of the Old Testament, but the actual 

historic Christ of the New Testament, and he has gathered 
a number of deluded people who believe in him, and upon 
whose credulity he is living. Now how do we know that 
he is an impostor? Because he does not answer to the 
prophetic portrait of Messiah. 

We come, then, to our second question: How may we 


247 


know the Messiah? What kind of person will he be? Of How may we 


what country? Of what ancestry? What works will he do? 

Thirdly, we come to the question of fundamental interest 
to us, as Christians, and surely, of no less interest to the 
candid Jew: Was Jesus the Messiah? A vast number of 
people (and no inconsiderable number of Jews) have, 
through all the ages, believed, with the Scriptures in their 
hards, that Jesus was the Messiah; and, surely, our Jewish 
friends who do not so receive Him, will admit that it is a 
question of supreme national and personal import to them 
whether he be indeed that personage. 

Now it is evident that an inquiry as to the second of these 
questions will indirectly answer the first. If we can find in 
Scripture certain marks of identity put upon and about a 
certain Coming One, that answers the question as to whether 
there is a doctrine of the Messiah, We shall not, of course, 
find the prophetic portrait there unless there is coming or 
already come, the original from whom the portrait was 
painted. If there is no dactrine of the Messiah in Scripture, 
we shall fail to find the portrait. If, on the other hand, we 
do find the portrait, then we must say that there is a 
Messianic doctrine, whoever the Messiah may turn out to be. 

It is also evident that the answer to the second question 
as to the marks of identity and of the conditions which 
must be fulfilled by the Messiah when He comes, will guide, 
and must guide us, in the answer to the third question: 
Ts Jesus of Nazareth the Messiah? If He is the Messiah, 
we shall know Him to be so becattse He answers exactly 
to every one of the Scriptural marks of identity given by 


Is Jesus of Naza- 
reth the Mes- 
siah ? 


A Biblical 
question. 


248 


1f in even one of 


the prophets. That must be the test. 
them—as tnany and as minute as they are—we find that 
then we must say however great the cost may 


Jesus fails, 
and opinions that he is not 


be to our hearts and thoughts 
the Messiah. If, on the other hand, he fills out in every 
detail the prophetic picture of Messiah, without one €X- 
it seems to me that, by ‘he same reasoning, 


ception, then, 
we are forced to say that 


and by the same logical necessity 
Jesus is the Messiah. 

I. This is a Biblical question ; it is not a question to be 
settled by appeal to theologians or rabbis. For it is per- 
fectly evident that a Jewish scholar, for instance, might 
marshal as many and as eminent authorities from among 
his own intellectual and thoughtful people against the Mes- 


siahship of Jesus, as a Christian could bring to its support. 
d therefore fallible 


That would be simply a clash of human an 
opinion, The question is not to be determined by a show 
of hands. We must gO back to the Old Testament and see 


for ourselves what doctrine of Messiah is there unfolded, and 


then test the claims of Jesus by that doctrine. 
Like all other parts of God’= revelation we sha ind it 


to proceed from the simple to th complex—from cutine | 


detail. It is the divine method of revelation to bezh wit! 
come otitline truth, and then gradually, with streke tp 
stroke of the brush, to put in the det: until we have 


fulness. “First the blade; then the car. then th full co 9 


in the ear” is the divine rule, We do not get th yak fit 


but the acorn, and afterward the oak 


Just so it is with all Scripture. We Shall find it tr 


cone A SAAT PT AA AAT DLE DE sided 


249 


this Messianic doctrine. It will began wsth 4 germ-truth 
and proceed with incr: asing detail from si icity *> com- 
plexity. Let me turn new to Genesis 1:14, 

“And the L: God said anto the serpent, inecause thou ha» cone 
this, thou art cursed Jt cattle, and above every beast of the 
field; upon thy belly shalt thou ¢0 and dust shalt thou eat all the Gen. ffi : 14, 15 
days of thy life. And Iw il put enmity between thee and the wo- 
man, and between thy seed her seed; it shali bruise thy head 
and thou shalt br ise his | 

Here lies in germ all redemptive and Messianic tru 
he woman’s seed is to inflict spon Saran, finally, a fat 
wou but in so doing, is t ter does not te! u 
h. and we will not ead into +t a word from  «bse« 
revelation, but does set us loexing for a dese: da 
that woman who shall victor’: as over Sata 
et us turn t esis X1i=#-3: 

“Now the Lord i o Aeam: Get thee 
a from thy kinds d irom father’s he st a 
tl “il shew thee. Ame I will m: thee a grea’ nat’ > I 

ess thee and ke thy na sreat; and tl a Gen. xii:1-3. 
And I wi: biess them th: jless thee, anc tizat 
thee: and ir thee shall ati fa ilie # the ea ssed.”” 


Now let us not treat these words unfairly. They are 
luminous in the light of what is to follow, but, certainly 
are not in themselves a promise that of te descendants of 
Abraham there should @ se a Messiah, | it you only 
to notice here that a ‘sessing is promised to this man 
Abraham for all the famiiies of the earth. That is all, but 


Gen, xv: 1-4. 


Gen. xvii: 19. 


250 


hold that much firmly in mind. I will read now from 
Genesis xv :1-4. 

“After these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a 
vision, saying, Fear not, Abram; I am thy shield, and thy exceeding 
great reward. And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt thou give me, 
seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of 
Damascus? And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no 
seed; and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir. And, behold, the 
word of the Lord came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine 
heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be 
thine heir.” 


Again in the xviii chapter, 18th verse: 


“Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty 
nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him.” 


Again, be sure to keep within the limits of the text. This 
is no promise of a personal Messiah; so far we have only 
a nation in which all nations are to be blessed. Let me, 
however, anticipate enough to say that I am going to con- 
nect by an indisputable chain of evidence, the Messiah with 
this promise. 

Of course, I am assuming that the Genesis story is fa- 
miliar to every one of you. You know that Abram had a 


. son born in his house named Ishmael. At this time he was 


the only son, and Abram besought God to fulfill in Ishmael 
the promises which I inave quoted, and this is God’s answer: 


“And God said, Sarah thy wife shali bear thee a son indeed; and 
thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant 
with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him” 
(Gen. xvii:19). 


251 


Here, you see, the principle of selection, of limitation, 
enters. And, of course, you see the bearing of it upon the 
identification of Messiah. Suppose an Ishmaelite comes to 
me and says: “I am the Messiah,” I am ready to say, “No, 
whoever the Messiah may be, you are not the Messiah, you 
are a descendant of Ish: nael, and not of Isaac. The Messiah 
must come through Isaac.” In this way, as we shall see, 
God narrows the possibilities of deception until they are 
wholly excluded. Ishmael and all his descendants are ex- 
cluded. The Messiah must come through Isaac. Let us 
now turn to Gen. xxviii:13, 14: 

“And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord 
God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac; the land whereon 
thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed; and thy seed shall 
be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the 


west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south; and in 
thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.” 


We have here, as you know, the scene at Bethel, where 
God entered into covenant with Jacob, the son of Isaac. 
And here again the principle of exclusion is seen. There 
had been another son, Esau, remember that; and that the 
Abrahamic promise passes over Esau to Jacob. No de- 
scendant of Esau may claim the Messianic title. 


And now we are to see eleven of the twelve tribes of 
Israel excluded: 


“Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise; thy hand 
shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father’s children shall 
bow down before thee. Judah is a lion’s whelp: from the prey, my 
son, tuou art gone up: he stoopeth down, he couched as a lion, and 


Gen, xlix : 8, 10, 


252 


as an old lion; who shall rouse him up? The sceptre shall not de- 
part from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh 
come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be” (Gen. 
xlix :8-10). 


You see how immensely the slender line of promise here 
gains in definiteness. Out of twelve tribes, one tribe is 
chosen, the tribe of Judah. From henceforth we look ex: 
pectantly to Judah only. It is not enough that the claim- 
ant of the Messiahship shall be an Israelite merely ; he must 
establish a Judaic descent. 

Here, for the first time, we have the word “sceptre” in- 
dicating kingly power. We also have the word “Shiloh.” 
The old Rabbis all agree that this is the description of Mes- 
siah as the Prince of Peace. The word Shiloh implies that. 
Notice another significant thing here. “To him shall the 
gathering of the people be.” A Messiah mark. The 
people are to gather to him as a center. 

In Numbers xxiii., xxiv. we have the successive prophetic 
visions of Balaam. I will read but one of them: 


“J shall see him, but not now: 1 shall behold him, but not nigh: 
there shall come a star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of 
Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the 
children of Sheth. And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall 
be a possession for his enemies; and Israe! shall do valiantly. Out 
of Jacob suaall come he that shall have dominion” (Num. xxiv :17- 
19). 


Here we have “sceptre” again. When God has added a 
detail He never leaves it behind any more; it is always car- 
ried on. You are to note, too, that in these passages, we 


253 


get, not only the idea of dominion, of rule, but also the idea 
of personality—‘I shall see him, but not now.” 

Let me anticipate an objection right here. Does not this 
mean the whole people of Israel? Does not the Messianic 
doctrine really concern a people, rather than a person, and 
is it not true that the promises which we Christians are apt 
to make personal, are after all, rather indefinite? That ques- 
tion is raised by some. But notice the words: “There 
shall come a Star out of Jacob, anda Sceptre shall rise out 
of Israel.” And to this we may add another statement con- 
temporary with it: 

“The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the 
midst of thee, of thy brethren like unto me; unto him ye shall 
hearken” (Deuteronomy Xviii 15). 


This passage, from the lips of Moses, adds one of the 
official titles of Messiah, The Sceptred One out of Israel is 


to be a Prophet also. 
Now we come to another limitation of the promise. It 


is the promise made to David concerning Solomon: 


“And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy 
fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out 
of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom. He shall build 
a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his king- 
dom for ever. I will be his father and he shall be my son. If ine 
commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with 
the stripes of the children of men; but my mercy shall not depart 
away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before 
thee. And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for 
ever before thee; thy throne shall be established for ever” (2 Sam. 


vii:14, 16). 


Deut. xviii : 15. 


2 Sam. vil : 14, 16. 


Isaiah xi: 1, 2. 


254 


Let us see how David understood this covenant. We 
have his last words in the xxiii chapter of 2 Samuel, verses 
I to 5: 

“Now these be the last words of David. David, the son of Jesse 
said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the 
God of Jacob, and the sweet Psalmist of Israel said: The Spirit 
of the Lord spake by me and his word was in my tongue. The God 
of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me: He that ruleth over 
men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. And he shall be as the 
light of the morning when the sun riseth, even a morning without 
clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shin- 
ing after rain. Although my house be not so with God; yet he 
hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, 
and sure.” 

Here are the last words of David, the sweet Psalmist of 
Israel ; his life stained with many sins, yet a man who loved 
God supremely. As he lay there dying, his last thoughts 
turned to that promise which God made concerning his seed. 

Let us see now how the prophets interpreted that promise: 

“And there shall come forth a rod out of the stere of Jesse, and 
a Branch shall grow out of his roots; and the spirit of the Lord 
shall rest upon him; the spirit of wisdom and understanding; the 
spirit of counsel and might; the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear 
of the Lord” (Isaiah xi:1, 2). 

Well, but some one says, this might have referred to any 
descendant of David. It might have referred to the line 

of King Josiah, for instance, who was of the Davidic line. 
Let us see. I will read the tenth verse: 

“And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand 
for an ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest 
shall be glorious,” 


255 


“In that day.’ What day? A day which has not yet 
dawned. Hear verse two: 

“And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his 
hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, 
which shall be left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, 
and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from 
Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. And he shall set up an 
ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, 
and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners 
of the earth.” 


When Isaiah wrote these words, the people had not gone 
into Assyria, and this prophecy has never been fulfilled 


down to this day. 

Let us now turn to the prophecy of Jeremiah. Of course, 
I pass over chapter after chapter in Isaiah which might 
be quoted. I want you to notice the word “Branch” as a 
mark of identification. 

“Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that 1 will raise unto 
David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and 
shall execute judgment and justice in the earth” (Jeremiah xxiii:5). 
“For thus saith the Lord, David shall never want a man to sit 
upon the throne of the house of Israel; neither shall the priests, 
the Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and 
to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice continually. And the 
word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord, 
If ye can break my covenant of the day and my covenant of the 
night, and that there should not be day and night in their season; 
then may also my covenant be broken with David, my servant, that 
he should not have a son to reign upon his throne” (Jeremiah 


Xxxiii:17-21). 


Here again is a narrowing of the whole Messianic out- 


Jere. xxiii : 


17-21. 


256 


look. We began with a promise that might have been ful- 
filled in any man born of woman; it was narrowed first into 
the man, Abram; then Ishmael and his posterity were ex- 
cluded and Isaac chosen; then Esau and his descendants 
were excluded and Jacob chosen; then out of the twelve 
sons of Jacob Judah was chosen, and now, out of all Judah, 
David and his line. Whoever the Messiah is, he must come 
from the kingly house of David, and therefore must be of 
Judah—a Jew. Do you not see how the marks of identity 
are accumulating? It would not do even for a Jew to say 
“T am the Messiah,” unless he could establish his Davidic 
descent. 

II. It seems to me that we are getting a very positive 
sort of Messianic doctrine, and very definite sort of Mes- 
sianic doctrine as well. 

And so far it has been perfectly simple and quite within 
the limits of the natural. But now we come to something in 
this line of descent which is miraculous. Turn back with 
me to the prophecy of Isaiah. I will read the 13th and 14th 
verses of the vii. chapter. 

“And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small 
thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also? 
Therefore the Lord Himself shall give you a sign; Behold a vir- 
gin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call His name Im- 
manuel.” 

You know the meaning of that word—‘“God with us.” I 
want you to observe that these words are addressed to the 
house of David. You know we speak sometimes of this or 
that part of Scripture as difficult to understand. Students 


257 


have come to me with the ix. chapter of Romans 
to say that they could not understand it; and people 
say that the passage I have just read is a difficult passage. 
The fact is, that the difficulty is not in understanding it, 
but in believing it. It is all plain enough. There could not 
be a simpler statement put into words. God promised to 
give the house of David a sign by which it might know the 
long promised One when He should appear. The sign would 
be that, in that house and family, a virgin should conceive 
and bear a son; therefore, of course, supernaturally and 
miraculously conceived. The explanation of so strange an 
event is in the name—Immanuel. 

Remember, I am reading now from the prophecy of Isaiah 
—Jewish scripture—and not from the New Testament. The 
immaculate conception and Deity of Messiah is, therefore, 
an Old Testament doctrine. The New Testament merely 
confirms it. 

And that doctrine, equally with all others, is to be re- 
ceived by faith. God makes the revelation clear enough; 
then it is to be believed. We know what it is—not always 
how it is. And how should it be otherwise? “My thoughts 
are not your thoughts, neither are my ways your ways, 
saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my 
thoughts than your thoughts.” And that is an absolutely 
necessary corollary to the postulate of a God. If His 
thoughts were no higher than my thoughts, He would be 
precisely of my dimensions, and I would not worship Him, 
neither would I give any heed to His book, 


Deity of Messiah 
in Old Testa- 
ment, 


Isaiah ix : 6,7. 


Recapitulation. 


258 


I will now turn to Isaiah ix ‘6, 7: 

“For unto us a child is born, unto vs a Son is given, and the 
government shall be upon His shoulder; and His name shall be 
called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the Everlasting 
Father, the Prince of Peace.” 

This is the same Davidic personage, marked by his pecu- 
liar kingly right, for the passage proceeds: 

“Of the increase of His government and peace there shall be 
no end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom, to 
order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from 
The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will 


henceforth, even for ever. 
perform this.” 

Let me recapitulate for a moment: 

(1) Messiah must be of the seed of Eve; that is to say, 
he must be human, a man. An angel cannot be Messiah. 
One of the Cherubim or Seraphim cannot be Messiah. 
Whatsoever else Messiah is, he is human. 

(2) He must be the seed of Abraham; a Hebrew, not a 
Gentile. 

(3) He must be of the line of Isaac and Jacob; not an 
Ishmaelite, nor an Edomite. 

(4) He must be of the tribe of Judah—a Jew. 

(5) He must be of the royal family of David, among 
the families of Judah. Even in Judah only David’s family 
can produce him. 

(6) He must ve miraculously born of a virgin mother. 

(7) He must be “Tmmanuel”—God with us; the mighty 
God, the everlasting Father. 

But how can the mighty God, the everlasting Father, be 


also a man? 


te 


259 


Where do these ideas ever come together again? In one 
of the four Gospels of the New Testament. There we find 
this statement. Understand me, I do not say an explanation, 
but a statement. God is not greatly concerned to explain 
Himself to us. This is the statement: “In the beginning 
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word 
was God. And the Word became flesh and dwelt among 
us” (John i:1, 14). 

And I submit that the statement is adequate and satisfy- 
ing. If the mighty God chose to become “flesh,” and to 
tabernacle among us it was, most evidently, within His 
power to do it. 


II. Is there nothing in addition to this? Nothine, for 
instance, as to the time when Messiah should appear. It is 
evident that the time of the birth of Messiah is, if revealed, 
a very important mark of identification. I think if we look 
at the prophecy of Daniel, we shall find there a very clear 
revelation as to the time Messiah should appear. Daniel 
ix :21-23. 

“Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, 
whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to 
fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation. 
And he informed me, and talked with me, and said O Daniel, I 
am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding. At the 
beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth, and 
I am come to shew thee; for thou art greatly beloved; there- 
fore understand the matter and consider the vision. Seventy weeks 


are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish 
the transgression, and to make an end of sins.” 


Dan. ix : 21-23, 


260 


Re,.iember Israel was now under punishment from God— 
not cast off, but punished by captivity for national sins. 

“And to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in ever- 
lasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and 
to anoint the Most Holy.” 

That is, to finally bring in the time, of which I shall speak 
when the subject of the millennium is before us, when a re- 
stored Israel, in full fellowship with the God of their fathers, 
shall be the channel of His blessings to the earth. 

“Know, therefore, and understand, that from the going forth 
of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the 
Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks and three score and two 
weeks: the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous 
times. And after three score and two weeks shall Messiah be cut 
off, but not for Himself; and the people of the prince that shall 
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary.” 

Now observe, between the time when Daniel was seeing 
visions and the prophesying in Babylon, and the destruction 
of Jerusalem in the year 70 A. D., the whole thing is limited. 
The coming of Messiah, and the cutting off of Messiah. 
must take place before the sweeping destruction of Jerusa- 
lem and the sanctuary. Whatever this seventy weeks means. 
it is a period (except the last week) that must fall between 
Daniel’s time and the year A. D. 70, for since the year 70, 
there has been no sanctuary in Jerusalem. There the temple 
was destroyed in that year, and has never been rebuilt. 
Here then, is another vastly important condition. The Mes- 
siah must not only possess the unique personality which we 


have been considering, but He must appear between the 
time when Daniel prophesied, say B. C. 538, and the time 
when Jerusalem was de.troyed, A. D. 70. So much for 
the time-limit. 

And now.we come to another condition which Messiah 
must meet. The prophet Micah foretells the very place of 
his nativity : 

But thou, Bethlehem-Ephratah, though thou be little among the 
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me 
that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of 
old, from everlasting (Micah. v:2). 

Here we have the Divine again. These words are plain 
and simple enough. Who is this ruler who is to come out 
of Bethlehem? It is He whose goings forth have been from 
everlasting. 

Bear in mind now, that, to the seven marks of identity 
in our recapitulation of a few minutes ago, we must now 
add that Messiah must appear between B. C. 538, and A. D. 
70, and that He must have Bethlehem-Ephratah for His 
birth place. So far all is clear. 

IV. But the very passage from Daniel which furnished 
us with the time-limit suggested also a difficulty. Up to 
that point we had been reading about a sceptred one, a 
mighty king of David’s line who was also the mighty God. 
But Daniel tells us distinctly that after a certain time “shall 
Messiah be cut off.” 

That raises a difficulty. What is this about a Divine King 
who is reigning victoriously over everything, being cut off, 
“but not for himself?” Now this difficulty is not to be ex- 


Micah v : 2, 


Zech. lil: 8. 


Psalm xxii. 


262 


f we turn to Isaiah and the Psalms. we 


plained away, for i 
See, for example, 


shafl find a great deal of the same sort. 
Isaiah lii:13: 


teholé my servant shall dea! prudently, h 
As many were astonished at thee; his 


shall be exalted and 


extofled, and be very high. 
visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than 
the sons of men.” 


But is it Messiah of whom Isaiah is talking? Compare 


Zechariah iii :8: 

“Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, ‘hou and thy fellews that 
sit before thee; for they are men vondered at; for behold I will 
bring ferth my servant, The Brancn.” 

What do we find David's son called throughout the 
prophets? Just these two names, “Branch” and “my ser- 
This certainly seems mysterious; here is Jehovah's 


to be extolled, exalted and very high, 


vant.” 
Servant who is going 
and vet his visage is to be more marred than any man. And 


the difficulty apparently gets more difficult as we goon. To 


return to Isaiah, read the lit. chapter I-9. 

Then we have the xxii Psalm, which most commentators 
Christian and some Jewisl—agree is Messianic, with its 
despairing cry, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me!” and its tragic burden of pierced hands and feet. Here 


we have then, on the one hand, a glorious king, in Himself 


Deity, so that He has all power, whose very name is Imman- 
uel—“God with us; yet, on the other hand, with His visage 
more marred than any man, His bones out of joint, dying 


with thirst, while His vesture is parted and lots cast for it. 


How can Messiah be a mighty king, and yet be such an ab- 


263 


ject sufferer? How can he be the great Davidic monarch 
restoring again the glory of Solomon’s house, and also a 
sacrifice bearing the sins and iniquities of Israel and ail the 
people? How can it be? Clearly, destinies so strongly cou- 
trasted could not be accomplished simultaneously. There is 
only one auswer possible, There is but one word which can 
link the gioriou* reigning with the suffering and the death, 
and that word is “resurrection.” Suppose that, in the divine 
purpose. the :aiyrhty drama is to be in two acts? Suppose 
the suffering Messiah and the glorious Messiah to be one, 
divided by Cath, reunited by resurrection? Suppose Mes- 
siah came, and was “cut off” as Daniel predicted, and sup- 
pose that His life came again ; then all the other and glorious 
side of the picture is still possible, is it not? If He did not 
come before A. D. 70 He can never come, and the prophets 
are false witnesses. If He came and died, and went into the 
grave and remained there, then God promised Israel and 
David something that He cannot perform; but if He came 
forth out of the grave. the earthly glory is all possible yet. 

Well, you say, but is not the doctrine of the resurrection 
a New Testament doctrine? Is it not something that Chris- 
tians invented to bridge this very difficulty, and make it 
possible to reconcile the prediction of Messiah's earthly 
ereatness, with the predictions of His humiliation aid death? 
No, indeed; resurrection is an Old Testament doctrine, as 
we shall presently see. 

As matter of belief you Christians—the great mass of 
you—practically reject the voluminous testimony of the 


prophets concerning the earthly glory and power of the Mes- 


siah “upon the throne of Davi 
Jews—the great mass of you—wi 


264 


testimony of your own prophets as to 


and death. Against both of 
“© fools, and slow of heart to 
The truth is that resurrec- 
s death to Messiah’s glory, 
lements and completes the 


proach of Jesus: 


that the prophets have spoken.” 
tion is the bridge from Messiah’ 
and that the Second Advent supp 


first. 


Now I want you to notice with me 
Testament passages upon the question 


for instance, Job xix :25: 


“For I know that iny 


at the latter day upon the earth; 


destroy this body, yet in my 


Job lived before the law, before the P 
Did not Job believe in resurrection ? 
to be food for worms, yet, said he, 


ten. 
body which was going 
“In my flesh shall I see 
and mine 


in the resurrection : 


eousness : 


ness.” 


and was David’s hope. 


and 


“As for me,” says David, “I 
I shall be satisfied when 


d” (Isa. ix:7); while you 
11 not receive the abundant 


Messiah’s humiliation 


you there is levelled the re- 


believe all 


just two or three Old 


of resurrection. Take, 


Redeemer liveth, and that 
and though, after my skin, worms 


flesh shall I see God.” 


He shall stand 


entateuch was writ- 


There was his 


God; whom I shall see for myself, 


see a promise concerning the Messi 


eyes shall behold, and not another.” 
In the xvii. Psalm and 15th verse, we hav 


e David’s faith 


will behold thy face in right- 
I awake with thy like- 


The resurrection is not a new doctrine ; it is as old as Job, 
Now let us turn to the x 
ah. 


vi. Psalm 
Many of the 


265 


old rabbis, as well as commentators, interpret the xvi. Psalm 
of Messiah. I will read the eighth verse: 

“I have set the Lord always before me: because He is at my 
right hand 1 shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad and 
my glory rejoiceth; my flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou wilt 
not leave my soul in sheol; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy 
One to see corruption.” 

Here is not only the doctrine of the resurrection, but a 
definite promise that Messiah should be raised from the 
dead. 

In Danie! xii:2, the matter becomes, if possible, more 
definite still: 

“And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall 
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting 
contempt.” 


Daniel went to the grave with the promise that he should 
stand in his lot at the end of the days. Resurrection then 
is the word that bridges the whole difficulty, which recon- 
ciles the apparent contradiction of so many scriptures. In 
other words, Messiah comes ; Messiah accomplishes all that 
is predicted of Him concerning suffering, humiliation and 
death; He rises from the grave, and comes again to set up 
the kingdom, and to complete the fulfillment of prophecy. 

V. But, it may fairly be asked, is not this doctrine of a 
second advent of Messiah to restore the Davidic monarchy 
and make good the multitudinous unfulfilled promises to 
Israel a mere invention to bolster the Messianic claims of 
Jesus? In other words, is it clearly taught in Scripture ? 

Every Jew familiar with the words of the Prophets 


Dan. xii: 2. 


Acts i:6. 


266 


is aware that whatever else Messiah does He must restore 
Israel or leave the great mass of prediction concerning Him 
unfulfilled. 

I turn to the first chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and 
begin at the sixth verse: 

“When they, therefore, were come together, they asked of Him, 
saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to 
Israel ?” 

Observe, the question was not at all as to whether He 
was going to restore the kingdom to Israel, but simply and 
only as to when He would do it. 

Remember, before you begin to say “how carnal, how 
material, how unspiritual are these men! Will they never 
understand Jesus,” that, indwelt by the Holy Spirit (John 
xx :22), with ui.derstandings opened to understand the Scrip- 
tures (Luke xxiv :45) they had been sitting forty days at the 
feet of the risen Lord while He taught them concerning 
kingdom iruth (Acts i:3). I think they had some ad- 
vantages over our commentators in the matter of prophetic 
study. Evidently they felt their understanding of kingdom 
truth to be complete except at one point—the time of the 
restoration. Here is Jesus’ answer: 

“And he said unto them, it is not for you to know the times 
ot the seasons, which the Father hath put in His own power.” 

Suppose one agent after another, fully authorized to speak 
for me, had promised in my behalf that at some time I would 
perform a certain action, and that, finally interrogated in 
person as to the time when I would perform that action I 

should say: “I decline to speak upon that point,” would it 


267 


not be a monstrous perversion to say that I thereby discred- 
ited my agents, and that my words must be understood as 
announcing that I intended never to perform the act? 

In the fifteenth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles it is 
distinctly stated that after gathering out of the Gentiles a 
people for His name, He will return. Sixteenth verse: 

“After this I will return, and wiil build again the tabernacle 
of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins 
thereof, and I wil! set it up; that the residue of men might seek 
after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom My name is called, 
saith the Lord, who doeth all these things.” 

Such ‘s the Messianic doctrine. 

And now we come to our final question, Was Jesus that 
Messiah? 

No one questions that Jesus was of the family of David. 
In all the record of His life, where He was brought into 
sharpest controversy with those who rejected utterly His 
Messianic claims, the objection never was made that He 
was not of the line of David. No one ever denied that 
He was a descendant of Abraham, or of the tribe of Judah, 
or born in Bethlehem of Judea. Don't you see that the sure 
and simple way to settle forever the claims of Jesus to be 
the Messiah, if he were indeed an impostor, was in the 
power of those who were rigidly examining those claims ? 
A disproof of his Davidic descent, or a disproof of his 
birth at Bethlehem, and every disciple would have left him 
at once. 

Then again: Immediately—certainly within fifty days— 


after Jesus’ death was accomplished, men went through 


Jesus is the 
Messiah. 


The proof. 


268 


Jerusalem and Judea preaching that He was riser from the 
dead. There, again, was an opportunity to end Fis cult by 
simply disproving the fact. Indeed, it . -ver could have sur- 
vived the disproof of even one of the eleven points of 
identification. 

At the present time no man can either establish or dis- 
prove a claim to Davidic ancestry. For that reason alone, 
Messiah must have come before the genealogical registers 
were destroyed. In Christ’s day the genealogical registers 
were open to all, and a Jewish man could prove his descent, 
but at present he cannot do so, therefore, the Messiah cannot 
appear for the first time now. Either the whole Messianic 
prophecy falls to the ground, or the Messiah has already 
appeared. 

The historic facts concerning Jesus of Nazareth are noto- 
rious, simple, undisputed. See how the lines of proof, of 
identity, converge upon Jesus, and upon no one else. 

1. He is a descendant of Eve—a Man. 

2. He is the seed of Abraham, may the very seed. 

3. He derives His Abrahamic ancestry through Jacob, 
not Esau; Isaac, not Ishmael. 

4. He is of the Tribe of Judah. 

3. He is David's Son, and heir of the Davidic covenant. 

6. He was miraculously conceived in the womb of a 
virgin. 

7. He proved His Deity by works beyond the power of 
man; by superhuman holiness; by the resurrection from the 
dead, and by His influence upon the world. 


269 


8. He appeared at precisely the right time according to 
Daniel’s prophecy. 

g. He was born, against all human probability, in Leti- 
lehem-Ephratah. 

10. He fulfilled the prophecies of Isaiah concerning His 
vicarious sacrifice. 

11. He died in precisely the manner foretold in Psalm 
xxii, His hands and feet were pierced, and His executioners 


cast lots upon His raiment. 


It is evident, (1) that no one could bring these signs upon 
himself; (2) that they are too numerous, specific and minute 
to leave an accidental fulfillment among the possibilities ; 
(3) that, therefore, the being in whom they all centre is the 
Messiah; and (4) that, since they all centre upon Jesus, it 
follows that He is Messiah. 

And now, a closing word to you, my Jewish readers. 
Some of you are looking for Messiah. Well, He is coming. 
That is the “blessed hope” of Jew, and Christian. Believe 
this, hold it fast, whatever betides. But I implore you by 
everything you hold dear, believe also that He has come. 
The humiliation, the sacrificial death is accomplished; the 
glory is coming. Between now and that time when Messiah 
shall come in glory, how unspeakably solemn and important 
is the question of our personal relation to Him. My friends 
—Jew and Gentile alike—"‘there is no other name given 
under heaven whereby we must be saved.” The thought of 
a sinner ever reaching God’s presence apart from sacrifice, 
is foreign to the whole of Scripture. What sacrifice can we 


A personal! word 


270 


offer? The temple is gone, the priesthood is gone, is there 
no sacrifice for us? Yes, there is; there ‘is the sacrifice of 
Messiah. I claim it and need no other. Having believed 
in that sacrifice, and received Him as the Messiah, the son 
of the Blessed—I await, in perfect peace, the time when He 
shall gloriously return toreceive me to Himself, and to reign 
on the earth. I may die before that time comes; even so { 
shall go to Him by virtue of that sacrifice, trusting in His 
shed blood. 

How is it with you? God has given you this chain of 
evidence, has affixed to that one person, among all the sons 
of men and sons of God, the marks of Messiah, will you 
now turn away from Him? Receive Him now. “te came 
unto His own, and His own received Him not, but as 
many as received Him, to them gave He power to become 
the sons of God.” Will you not say, and with heartfelt 
conviction: “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living 


God.” 


THREE WEEKS WITH JOSEPH 
RABINOWITZ. 


Three Weeks with Joseph Rabinowitz.’ 


By A. J. Gorpon, D. Dz. 


ERHAPS there is no man living whom the writer had more earn- 
estly desired to meet face to face than this Israelite of the New 
Covenant. Professor Delitzsch wrote several pamphlets and 

documents concerning him, evidently regarding him as possibly the 
most remarkable Jewish conversion to Christ since that of Saul of Tar- 
sus. We have followed with the profoundest interest the reports of 
his work in Russia since his confession of Jesus Christ as the Messiah; 
and we have read with no less interest his sermons and addresses 
which have appeared from time to time in print. 

Going to Chicago for a month’s service in connection with 
Mr. Moody’s World’s Fair Evangelistic Campaign, we found our- 
selves at our lodgings placed in the next room to a Russian guest, 
whose name was not yet told us. Hearing in the evening the 
strains of subdued and fervent Hebrew chanting, we inquired who 
our neighbor might be, and learned that it was one Joseph Rabin- 
owitz, of Russia; and thus, to our surprise, we found ourselves ner” 
neighbor to one whom we would have crossed the ocean to sec, with 
only a sliding door between us. Introduction followed, and then 
three weeks of study and communion together concerning the things 
of the kingdom, the memory of which will not soon depart. 

Before we detail the story of our summer Hebrew school at the 
feet of this Christian Gamaliel, let us repeat the story of his con- 
version as we have read it, and now heard it verified by himself. 

Joseph Rabinowitz was a lawyer residing in Kischineff, Southern 
Russia, a man of very wide and commanding influence among his He- 
brew brethren, as a scholar, a philanthropist anda lover of his nation. 
From a young man he had been a most diligeut and painstaking 
student of the Hebrew Scriptures, of the ‘Talmud, and of all related 
Jewish literature, so that at the age of forty, he says, ““T was likea 
man living in a house furnished with every article of furniture which 


* his was written some ten years ago. Since that time both of tiese beloved 
prethren, who loved His appearing, Gordon and Rabinowitz, have departed to be 
with the Lord. They are “ abseat from the body and present with the Lord.” 


273 


274 


money could buy, and yet the shutters of that house closed and cur- 
tains all drawn, so that I was in the dark, and knew not the meaning 
of my own learning till Jesus, the Light of the World, came in and 
illuminated all as ‘n a flash.” 

About ten years ago, Mr. Rabinowitz was selected, in connection 
with certain colonization efforts, to go to Palestine to secure land for 
Jewish emigrants who desired to flee from Russian persecution. When 
fitting himself out with guide-books for his contemplated jourrey, 
he was given a copy of the New Testament with him, as furnishing 
an admirable directory to the sacred places of Jerusalem and the 
vicinity. While walking about Zion and gazing upon its historic 
sites he carried in his pocket this yet unopened treasure. Going one 
day to the brow of the Mount of Olives, he sat down on that sacred 
hill and began contemplating the city as it lay at his feet. Then camea 
train of reflection and questioning : “Why this long desolation of the 
City of David? Why this scattering of my people to the ends of the 
earth? Why these fresh persecutions breaking forth against us in al- 
most every country of Europe?” While he pondered these sad 
questions he gazed toward the reputed Calvary, where that holy pro- 
phet of his nation had been crucified. As he did so, his eyes were 
opened ; he looked upon Him whom his nation had pierced. Ina 
flash the truth entered his heart : ‘We have rejected our Messiah ! 
hence our long casting off and dispersion by Jehovah ! He believed ; 
he cried out to Jesus, ‘‘ My Lord and my God,’’ and almost as sud- 
denly as Saul of Tarsus, Joseph Rabinowitz, from being a Hebrew 
of the Hebrews, has become an Israelite of the New Covenant, a dis- 
ciple of Jesus of Nazareth. He took out his New Testament, a 
guide-book in a sense undreamed of, and read the first passage that 
fell under his eye: ‘‘I am the vine, ye are the branches. 
Without Me ye can do nothing.” * I saw it in the twinkling of an 
eye,” said he. ‘Our Jewish bankers, with their millions of gold, 
can do nothing for us: our scholars and statesmen, with all their 
wisdom, can do nothing for us; our colonization societies, with all 
their influence and capital, can do nothing for us: our only hope is 
in our brother, jesus, whom we crucified, and whom God raised up 
and at His own right hand. ‘ Without Him wecan do notbing.’”’ 

We imagine the sensation which was caused in Russia when this 
emigrant Hebrew returned home and boldly announced far and wide, 
pvblicly in the synagogue and openly in the columns of the press, his 
acceptance of Jesus Christ as his Saviour and Lord. Persecution and 
obloquy were poured upon him from every quarter, and they of his 


275 


own household became his foes, but he had counted the cost. He 
joyfully and boldly maintained his testimony, till little by little the 
enmity was softened. Now he rejoices th=t one after another of his 
own family have joined him in confessing Christ, and preaching 
Him to their neighbors. 

By permission of the government, surprisingly grented, he has 
built a synagogue, where he assembles @ good congregation to listen 
to the Word of God from his lips ; and he says that his entire time is 
occupied from morning to night, week in and week out, in answer- 
ing letters from Jews who are distressed in mind concerning this 
great question, and in meeting inquirers coming sometimes hundreds 
of miles to talk with him of Jesus of Nazareth. What wonder that 
such a conversion, attended with such results, should have led Pro- 
fessor Delitzsch to hail the event as the first ripe fig’ on the long 
barren tree of rejected Israel, and as a cheering sign that for that 
people ‘‘ summer is nigh.” 

It seemed tous as we talked with this Israelite without guile 
day after day, and heard him pour out his soul in prayer, that we 
never wicnessed such ardor of affection for Jesus, and such absorbing 
devotion to His person and glory. We shall not soon forget the ta- 
diance that would come into his face as he expounded the Messianic 
Psalms at our morning and evening worship, and how, as here and 
there he caught a glimpse of the suffering of the glorified Christ, he 
would suddenly lift his hands and his eyes to heaven, in a burst of 
admiration, exclaiming with Thomas, after he had seen the nail- 
prints, ‘‘My Lord and my God !”’ So saturated is he with the letter 
as well asthe spirit of the Hebrew Scriptures that, to hear him talk, one 
might imagine it was Isaiah or some other prophet of the old dis- 
pensation that was speaking. 

“What is your view of inspiration?” we asked him, in order to 
draw him out on certain much-mooted questions of our time. “My view 
is," he said, holding up his Hebrew Bible, ‘ that this is the Word of 
God ; the Spirit of God dwells in it. When I read it I know that God 
is speaking to me, and when I preach it I say to the people, ‘Be silent 
and hear what Jehovah will say to you.’”’ ‘Ags for comparing the 
inspiration of Scripture with that of Homer or Shakespeare,” he con- 
tinued, ‘‘it is note question of degree but of kind. Electricity will pass 
through an iron bar, but it will not go through a rod of glass, however 
beautiful and transparent, because it has no affinity for it. So the Spirit 
of God dwells in the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures, because these 
are His proper mediums, but not in Homer or Shakespeare, because 


vo) 


FFEFEEEE 


FEEE 


eect 
— 
EF 
iz 
Fe 
———t 
NO 
(eo) 


No 
On 


MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE MATERIAL 1010a 
(ANSI and !SO TEST CHART No. 2) 


276 


He hasno affinity with these writings.” This sentence gives an in- 
stance of his vividness of illustration, of which he is a natural master. 

Some of Mr. Rabinowitz’s expositions and explanations of 
Scripture were exceedingly interesting. ‘ Show me a photograph 
of Kischineff,” he said one day, ‘‘and I can tell instantly whether it 
is correct, for I have lived there all my life. So when I read the 
New Testament, how vivid are its picti.res to one who has lived for 
years in Jewish history and traditions!’? Opening to Revelation 
xvi., he read, ‘‘ Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watch- 
eth and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his 
shame.’ This admonition of the Lord affected me very deeply 
when I first read it,’’ he said, ‘‘ for I knew at a glance its meaning. 
All night long the watchmen in the temple kept on duty. The over- 
seer of the temple was always likely to appear at unexpected hours 
to see if these were faithfully attendixg to their charges. If he 
came upon any watchman who had fallen asleep, he quietly drew 
his loose garments from him and bore them away as a witness 
against him when he should wake. My Lord is liable to come at 
any moment. He may come in the second watch or in the third 
watch, therefore I must be always ready, lest coming suddenly, he 
find me sleeping, and I be stripped of my garment.’’ 

‘Do you know what questioning and controversies the Jews have 
kept up over Zech. xii: 10?’’ he asked one day. ‘‘ ‘They shall look 
upon Me whom they have pierced.’ They will not admit that it is 
Jehovah whom they have pierced. Hence the dispute about the 
whom. But do you notice that this word is simply the first and last 
letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, Alev Tav? Do you wonder then, 
that I was filled with awe and astonishment when I opened to Rev. 
i:7, 8, and read these words of Zechariah, now quoted by John, 
‘ Behold, He cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see Him, and 
they also that pierced Him ;’ and then heard the glorified Lord say- 
ing, ‘I am the ALPHA AND OMEGA!’ Jesus seemed to say to ine, 
‘Do you doubt who it is whom you pierced? Iam the Aleph and 
Tav, the Alpha and Omega, Jehovah the Almighty.’’’ 

Rabinowitz is as clear as is Paul in the eleventh of Romans as to 
the divine order and plan for bringing the nations to God. After 
the present Gentile election and outgathering, he holds that the 
Jews are to be converted and restored to God’s favor in connection 
with the second advent of our Lord, and that then will follow world- 
wide salvation and the universal ingathering of the Gentiles. He is 
very positive, therefore, as to the meaning of the passage in the 


277 


fifteenth of Acts. ‘Simeon hath declared how God atthe first did 
visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for His name.”’ 
“That is what is going on now,” hesays. “ During Israel’s re- 
jection the elect church is being gathered.” ‘After this I will re- 
tnrn and build again the tabernacle of David that is fallen down,”’ 
etc. ‘This is very plainly the conversion and restoration of Israel,’’ 
he says. And when I urged that many spiritualize the words and 
apply them to the Christian Church, he replied, ‘‘ It will not be easy 
to make a Jew believe that, when the words in Amos, which are here 
quoted, plainly refer to the restoration of Israel ; and especially since 
the Jews have been praying this prayer from time immemorial, al- 
ways repeating it at the yearly Feast of Tabernacles: ‘O Thou Re- 
deemer, prosper those who seek Thee at all times ; raise up the tab- 
ernacle of David that is fallen, that it may no longer be degraded.’ ”’ 

“After the tabernacle of David sha'l be rebuilt, and national 
Israel saved,” he continues, ‘‘then, and then only, will come the times 
of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, in which all nations will 
be brought into obedience and subjection to Christ.’’ Such is his 
strong conviction, and the reader may find that he agrees with Peter 
in Acts iii: 19, 20, and with Paul in Rom. xi. 

Indeed, this Hebrew prophet is proclaiming most solemnly the 
impending advent of our Lord. He contends that without a clear 
proclamation of the second advent, Christians have no common 
ground on which to meet the Jews; that to spiritualize this doctrine, 
as many do, is fatal, since the predictions are so clear of a glorious 
and conquering Messiah as well as a suffering Messiah. If you 
spiritualize the second advent, you must allow the Jew to spiritual- 
ize the first, as he is always ready to do, and ycu have no basis on 
which to reason with him. Nothing co.ld be more thrilling and 
pathetic than to hear this latter-day prophet of Israel dilate on the 
blessedness and glory of his mation when it shall at last be brought 
bac into favor and fellowship with God. ‘The Gentile nations 
cannot come to their highest blessing till then,’’ he says, ‘“‘mor can 
our rejected and crucified Messiah see the travail of His soul and be 
satisfied until His kinsmen according to the flesh shall own and 
accept Him.” Then, with dramatic fervor and pathos impossible 
to describe, he said the following beautiful thing: ‘‘ Jesus, the gilori- 
fied Head of the Church, is making up His body now, my brother. 
Think you that my nation will have no place in that body? Yes, the 
last and most sacred place. When from India’s and China’s mil- 
lions, and from the innumerable multitudes of Africa and the islands 


st 


278 


of the sea, the last Gentile shall have been brought in, and His body 
made complete, there will still be left a place for little Israel—she 
will fill up the hole in His side, that wound which can never be 
closed till the nation that made it is saved.’’ 

Many other sayings of this remarkable man might be quoted 
had we space to insert them. He declares ‘must confidently that the 
Spirit is moving on his people as has not been the case since the 
dispersion. He is full of joy at the prospect of their speedy turning 
to the Lord. Emphatically he preaches that there is no hope but 
in the crucified Messiah. He must be received ; His blood must 
cleanse; His mercy must be gained before the J ewish nation can ever 
have rest. In one of his sermons he compares Israel to a little ship 
which has witnessed the wreck of many a proud craft—Assyria, 
Babylon, Greece and Rome—while this is the one nation that is never 
to perish, because of the unchanging covenant of Jehovah. He says: 

«Centuries ago it was wrecked, and broken were its masts, but 
up to the present day it sails among modern nations—a strange, 
weird-like ship. Its mariners are often in despair when the waves 
seem to swallow up their fragile vessel; many from among Israel 
seem to join other ships, and find a home there, and try to partake 
of the treasures of culture and modern development that adorn them. 
But soon the men of other nations rise against the mysterious 
sirangers from the old Oriental ship, and, not willing to tolerate 
them, fling them back into the waves, so that with difficulty and 
trepidation they return to the old wreck, on which the tears of their 
fathers have fallen abundantly. The storin rages, the clouds are 
dark, the hearts of the mariners fail them ; they cry out, ° Lord, save 
us, we perish! Sut the hour is coming when He who long 8g° rose 
in the little ship on the Sea of Galilee shall rise in the midst of 
them ; He shall rebuke the winds and the waves—it will become per- 
fectly still, and some shall sink down before His feet with the cry of 
Thomas, ‘My Lord and my God!’ and immediately Israel will be in 
the haven of rest, which remaineth for the chosen people of God.”’ 

It would not be possible to put on paper Rabinowitz’s fervid and 
dramatic exposition of Christ’s farewell to the temple: “* Behold, your 
house is left unto you desolate ; and verily I say unto you, Ye shall 
not see Me until the time comes when you shall say, Blessed is He 
that cometh in the name of the Lord!’? He pictured a Jew sitting 
in the door of his lonely house in the evening. Suddenly he catches 
a sight of a beloved and long separated friend approaching. He 
rises up and shouts out his salutation to him: ‘‘ Blessed is he that 


ee aoe ae ee ee 


oe 


279 


cometh in the name of the Lord.”” So shall Israel do when the 
spirit of grace and of supplication has been poured upou them; and 
they shall see Him whom they pierced coming to them. As 
they once cried, ‘“Crucify Him! erucify Him!’* now the cry, 
‘« Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord!’’ 

So when, on parting, I asked for his autograph, he wrote this in 
Hebrew as his farewell word : ‘‘ Blessed is He that cometh in the 
name of the Lord.”’ 


Genesis xxxvii:7....... 109 
Exodws iii: 15.....+-++- 56 
A aCe etc: 13 
Ds SEO 148 
Leviticas xxiii: 15-17... 34 
Numbers x:35........ 98 
XV :1Q-21..... 54 
BEV Feces cry 150, 172 
Deuteronomy xxvii: 15.. 108 
xxix : 4... 32 
Xxx 34 gI 

xxxii: 22, 
ASeaca es 37,112,113 
Judges ix: 7-15.....+++- 55 
1 Kings xix:2.........- 21 
Psalms Patten biss ister 89 
fic I= Fes cos 96 
Pal 9 x Pee 89 
ya Nabil Pree renee ox 78 
EEO 92 cece. 89 
xlif: 6..0...+6- 93 
pi bh SPY ieee 94 
xliv :9-16...... 95 
xlv-xlviii........ ..- 96-97 
TeGiliec...c0t1es 98-101 
} a? Sec oaetuanee 34-35 
iba) ae 3 a oucwce 86 
jo) OO 89 
jhe 2) tUargocueunt 89 
MPS 4) Bie moneos 102-104 
jf > > Muara 165-106 
bos 1+ eee go 
Gree ees go 
So Woe to uGuOES gI 
MCV =Crs nee t ewe a 107-108 

2 as 

= 


Psalms cxviii.........+- 71 

(ne Peele, Mae 151 

CXEXVIi........655 181 

Isaiah vii: 14........-- 142 

Pee Orn crust 142-171 

Mile cste oe ees Il 

MHL citscisssiecnee Il! 

ENV £Gu0 5 sceres 109 

ba 3) ECO Ot 32 

SHV 25. cs conse Ill 

Hil jis ccccwee of; 

IV 312...00008- It! 

| eepereper Pr TOL 171 

Peivtt oc css ca 76 

FEVE cco aRen Goet 10, 109 

Ixvi :15-16....... 112 

Jeremiah xi:16........ 56 

ENELC 34 cose: 149 

PUES EGR bog pete 56 

Ezekiel xx:38........ 72 

nS 9 \pre © Sree 112 

XxVvlii:1I-17...... 7t 

RAE cn gece 105, 109 

XXXVii 5 I2.....03. 48 

Sao 45 Sor: reo 78 

HV 21=3 5 e000 112 

Sivicnnescunecae: III 

Daniel, Gis ccscc secs. 67 

Sy huee Ave hr one 77,071 

Sk Ore ee IO" 201 

PNG ares. sae ste 184 

oan gearocer 201 

Hosea i: 16, ii: 23...... 39 

Joel ii: 17, 28.......... O57 7 

Gye nae aneeue 74 
2 


Amos iv:7..--++> “% 165 Act® XV:I4..-.eeeeeees 43 

Obadiah 18......+---+9: 172 xvii: 31.....- ayers 143 

Jonah ii..... eee es 94 HELI. cccvecevess 25 

Micah ii:13 ..-+eseeee 173,174 Romans feylll, 2. cnc eee 8,9 

Se (See ee 93 Sh Oo Ree 43 

vii; 18-20......- a 127 Wilh wicecane 80 

Habakkuk iii........--- 76, 112 $e catcn eae. 15 

Zechariah i: 20-21....-- 187 Pi voruenee 39 

Ee Pee ene 46, 79 xi: 8 ..36,50,63,66,114 

Sic. casesecenes 77 1 Corinthians x:4...-- 104 

xii: 10-I4.....- 18, 76 ae eer 17 

xiii :8-9.....--- 72 KV!5l...0: 64 

HIVE Geececerers 717 Coloectiansi......++- .. 64, 109 
iv......0++.+++ 101, 102 Philippians iii: 5....---- 17 | 
Malachi iii........--++: 159 1 Thessalonians iv...... 64 | 

Matthew v:25.-+-++++ 104 2 Thessalonians ii. .64,142,143,171 

xii: 38...+--+- 48 1 Timothy i:16......-- 16 

et 1 Ob 6 a 63 ee ee 64 

xix: 10, Il....- 159 ae Sere 164 

EX... s+ eee ws.» = 71,55 2 Timothy iii: 1-17...--- 164 

xxiii......-+--+- 69-79 Revelation i:7 ..-.--: 18, 76 

xXIT.....-. 28,56,72,71,75 ae eee 86 

EXV iBT. wee eee 40 CRS etaeoesstas 68 

Acts 1:6, Jo.ceeee vee 66 Gite he 28,29,68 

iii: 20....6e eee ee 98 oer . «73,103, 108 

So ater > AR Oe 16 
& < 


OUR HOPE 


S A MONTHLY MAGAZINE for the Study of the Word of 
I God, especially the Prophetic Word. The Notes on Prophecy 
and the Jews give monthly reliable information on the Zionistic 
movement; signs of the times, the increasing apostasy from the 
Faith once and for all delivered to the Saints. OUR Hops is not 
published in connection with a denomination, sect or party, nor 
does it represent any’ other organization or movement. 


Suacay ochool | -ssons are written by Dr. C. I. SCOFIELD, 
formerly of East Northfield, Mass. 


A. C. GAEBELEIN, 
Editor of ‘‘OuR HOPE,” 
80 Second Street, 


New York, N. Y. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 


SPECIAL PRICES FOR CLUBS. 


Agency for Dominion of Canada: 


UPPER CANADA TRACT SOCIETY 
102 Yonge Street, 
Toronto, Canada. 


Harmony + te Prophetic Word 


By THE Ep1ToR oF ‘'O”R HopE.”’ 


This book is a complete key to the Old Testament 
prophecy concerning the great coming events, such as 
The Great Tribulation, The Coming of the Lord, The 
Restoration of Israel, The Kingdom, etc. 


It has been highly recommended in England and this 
country. 


siIR ROBERT ANDERSON of London writes: 


‘*T have now read your book with real pleasure and much profit. 
‘The Harmony of the Prophetic Word’ you may well call it. No 
one of us who reads the Bible for himself will ever agree in all de- 
tails with anything written by another; but I have seldom read a 
book that commended itself to me more than yours, and in all main 
lines of teaching both my heart and my head went with you as I 
turned the pages. I rejoice that such a testimony as yours shonld 
be given to the grand scheme of Prophecy, which, after all, is the 
ground plan of the Bible on its manward side.”’ 


——— 


Price, 75 cents, post-paid. 


For Sale at 


80 SECOND STREET, 
New York City. 


UPPER CANADA TRACT SOCIETY, 
102 Yonge Street, Toronto, Canada. 


cement ne 


Studies in Zechariah. 


By A. C. GAEBELEIN. PRICE 50 CENTS POST-PAID. 


This is a complete commentary of the visions and prophecies of 
Zechariah. While there are numerous expositions of Daniel and 
Revelation, very few have attempted to produce an exegesis of 
Zechariah. The book has, therefore, been welcomed by the leading 
teachers of the Word es supplying a long-felt want. 


Pastor C. 1. SCOFIELD writes: 


“7 have read with delight and profit your most biblical and spiritual exposition 
of Zechariah, A really good and adequate work on Zechariah has long been a 
desideratum, and this, I am thankful to find, you have, under God, supplied. Can 
you not now give us & book on Joel ?” 


Dr. JAMES M. GRAY, of Chicago, writes: 


“T bave carefully read the ‘St 07: + IN ZecHARIAH' up until the 8th chapter, 
as they appeared monthly in Our Hop., ard have been so well pleased with them 
as to recommend them heartily to the students under my instruction, Their pub- 
lication in book-form will be a real boon to 6a” est Bible students, to whom the 
Prophet Zechariah is particularly difficult, ari who have neither the time or 
facility to search many and larger volumes.” 


Prof. WILLIAM R. NEWELL says: 


““T have examined your ‘Srupigs IN ZECHARIAH * and would like to commend 
them most heartily. 1 believe the Lord will greatly bless their issuance in a 
volume."’ 


EPISCOPAL RECORDER: 


“We can most heartily commend it as a very valuable contribution to the 
intelligent understanding of the great and precious prophecies of which it treats. 
It is scholarly, practical and evangelical, and we shall be glad if it has the wide 
circulation and close attention to which it is entitled.” 


OTHER PUBLICATIONS. 


Marmony of the Prophetic Word. By A. C. Gaebelein. A complete 
handbook for the understanding of Old Testament Prophecy, with 


Preface by C. I. Scofield. 212 pages; nicely bound in cloth....... weer 2060. 
QGospe! of Matthew. Vol. I. Chapters I-XIII. By A.C Gaebelein. 305 

pages; well bound in cloth; post-paid....-. cerereerers qescteccdees see. 81.00 
Studies In Joshua. By A. C. Gaebelein. A neat and b ‘pful pamphlet,. (Se. 
Jalatians. By C. 1. Scofield. An excellent exposition........srerees crry (Geo. 
Addresses on Prophecy. By C. I. Scofield, An excellent book. 134 

PAROS... ceceeecereererereees cegnctsccewsetsesersceseae> eereccecesceooceee 28c. 


Studies in Zechariah. By A. C. Gaebelein. A complete commentar 
of the Prophet of Glory. Very highly recommended by different 


teachers of the Word. Price, post-paid........+-++++++ sedbescecneseees 50c. 
The Son of God. By G. Bellet. Paper covers.......-+-+srerrrrrerererees 26c. 
Christ and the Scriptures. By Adolph Saphir, Revised American 

Edition. Paper cover, 25c.; sloth......- De Uschi ela toveriwatceersesna see 4000 
The Epistie to the Hebrews. By A. Saphir. The best exposition of 

this Epistle we know. 2 vols.......- cas pe esabelasons RecaRMareTeeReereee $2.00 
Joseph and His Brethren. Christ's First and Second Coming. By 

OE Choi ys a acts FARE CET EU CR ereneteycrtses ren eS +- seeenee tenn Soo 
The Predicted End of the Age and Medern ay Delusions. 

(Spiritism, Christian Science, etc.) By A.C. G...... +++ cetereate gucese Sc. 
The Genealogy of Jesus Christ. By A. Oo Givcsvecekee esens ees gatusie Sc. 
Christ's Goming and Forever with the Lord. By A.C.G......+ (Oc. 
Notes on @ Thess. ||. By A. 6: Goss pcs LEHES Cee ERETOSEEERESES Pence Sc. 
Parables of Balaam. By A. C.G.....--sereeerersseeeeees epee tineneaese 8c. 
Jonah and the Whale. By A. GiGi. ciisases eee oe Ee 2c. 
The Messiah and Israel. By A.C. Givcecserrcsccscevsccncsccsesesroenss (Sc. 
The Gospel of John. By W. J. Erdmab.....+++++es rPerey Tete Pavey s So. 
Absent from the Body. By C. Bie cenaeceveevecat soneerreeerestt opens Sc. 
Wonderful Israel. By £. P. Marvin ......seccceeeceererceeeeeteaeeenreeee? 3c. 


Also Tracts and Pamphlets for Hebrews in the following languages: English, 
Hebrew, Yiddish, Spanish, Dutch, Russian, Polish, Arabic and German. 


———— 


Acieane: A. C. GAEBELEIN, 
80 Second Street, 
New York City, N. Y. 


CAVEN LIBRARY. 


KNOX COLLEGE 
TORONTO 


