A   aUESTION   FOB 

1854, 


BY  THE 


KEY.   J.   C.  EYLE,  B.A.,    I 

CHBIST    CHURCH,  OXFORD, 

RECTOR   OF   HELMINGHAM,   SUFFOLK; 


Author  of  ^^Eow  Readest  Thou?"  ^^Eich  and  Foor,''  ^e. 


"  I  learn  to  believe  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  sanctifieth  me, 
and  all  the  elect  people  of  God." — Church  Catechism. 


I 


IPSWICH  : 

HUNT  &  SON,  12,  TAVERN  STREET. 

LONDON : 

WERTHEIM   &  MACINTOSH,  24,   PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

NISBET  &  Co.,  21,  BERNERS  STREET. 


Price  Two  Shillings  per  Dozen. 


TRACTS    AND    OTHER    'WORKS,    BY    THE    REV.    J.    C.    RYLB, 

'^nblisljctr  iiq  iiuit  k  #ini,  St-aiiern  %\xn\,  ^jisuiirl;. 

UNIFORM  SERIES  OF  12mo  TRACTS. 


At  2s.  per  Dozen, 

ALL  IN  ALL.    4th  edition,  20th  thousand 

ARE  YOU  AN  HEIR?    6th  edition.  30th 

thousand. 

ARE  YOU  FORGIVEN?   I2th  edition,  60th 

thousand. 
ARE    YOU    HOLY?       l^th    edition,    60th 
thousand. 

ARE  YOU   REGENERATE?      5th   edition, 

25th  thousand 
BE  ZEALOUS.    6th  edition, 30th  thousand 

CONSIDER  YOUR  WAYS!     9th  edition, 

45th  thousand. 
CROSS,  THE.    6th  edition.  30th  thousand 
DO  YOU  PRAY?  20th  edition,  100th  thous- 


and. 


17th  edition,    85 tl 


WHEAT  OR  CHAFF? 

thousand. 


12th   edition,  60th 

At  Is.  6d.  per  Dozen. 
A  WORD  TO  THE  CHURCHES.   4th  edition, 

20th  thousand. 

CHRIST  AND  THE  TWO  THIEVES.  lOth  edi- 
tion, 5'Jth  thousand. 

ONLY  ONE  WAY.    8th  edition,  40th  thous- 
and. 

PROVE  ALL  THINGS.    6th  edition,  30th 

tliousand. 

REMEMBER  LOT.    12th  edition,  60th  thou- 
sand. 

WHERE  ART  THOU?    8th  edition,  40th 

thousand 

At  6d.  per  Dozen. 

ARE  YOU  ASLEEP  ?  lOth  edit.  50th  thous. 

I  HAVE  SOMEWHAT  TO  SAY  UNTO  THEE- 

14th  edition,  80th  thousand. 

At  2s.  (jd.  per  Dozen. 
WHAT  IS  THE  CHURCH  ?   5th  edition.  25th 

thousand. 

At  3s.  per  Dozen, 
HOW  READEST  THOU?  lOih edition,  50th 

thousand. 

THE    SAME    AUTHOR. 


LIVING  OR  DEAD? 

thousand. 
OCCUPY  TILL  I    COME.     4th  edition,  20th 
thousand. 

PEACE!    BE   STILL!    4th  edition,  20th 

thousand. 
RICH  AND  POOR.  4th  edit.  20tli  thousand 

SHALL  YOU  BE  SAVED?  lOth  edition.  50tL 

thousand. 
WATCH  !    9th  edition,  45th  thousand. 

LARGER    WORKS,    BY 

AN  IMPORTANT  QUESTION.     Are  You  Forgiven  ?     Small  paper  edition, 

with  Notes.    48  pp.,  fancy  cover,  g-ilt  edges,  price  6d. 
ASSURANCE.    2  Tim.  iv.  6,  7,  8.     With  notes  and  extracts  from  writers  of 

the  seventeenth  century.     l8mo.  cloth  limp.  3rd  edition,  revised.     Price  Is. 
BE  NOT  SLOTHFUL,  BUT  FOLLOWERS-a  Funeral  Sermon,  preached  on 

Sunday,  July  29th,  1845,  in  Hehningham  church.    3rd  thousand      Price  Is. 
FAITH'S  CHOICE  — a  Sermon  on  Hebrews  xi.  24-26.     Price  6d, 
HOW  SHOULD  A   CHILD  BE  TRAINED?     Being  thoughts  on  Proverbs 

xxii.6      4:th  edition.     Price  3d   each,  or  2s.  6d.  per  dozen. 
HOME    TRUTHS.    4th  edition,  foolscap  8vo, extra  cloth  lettered.  Illustrated 

with  a  fine  engraving  of  Helminofham  Church,  and  Vignette  title.  3s.  6d. 

,,  Second  Series.     Illustrated  with  a  view  of  Helmingham 

Rectory,  and  Emblematical  Vignette.     3s.  6d. 
LITTLE    AND   WISE -an    address  to  children.      Small  8vo.,  neat  wrapper, 

illustrated  with  appropriate  Engravings.    8th  thousand,  price 4d. 
REGENERATION -a  tract  for  the  times.    104  pp.,  foolscap  8vo,  4^7t  edition, 

price  6d.  sewed,  limp  cloth  Is. 
SERMONS  TO  CHILDREN-a  6th  and  revised  edition  of  "Seeking  the  Lord 

Early."  and  "Children  Walking  in  Truth."  Fancy  Cover,  price  6d. 
SPIRITUAL  SONGS-Coloss.iii.l6.    Being  Sixty-two  Hymns  not  to  b3  found 

in  the  hymn  books  most  commonly  used  •    selected  by  the   Rev.  J.  C.  Ryle. 

4th  edition  ;  glazed  wrapper,  6d.  each  ;  or  fancy  cloth,  gilt  edges,  price  8d. 
YOUNG    MEN   EXHORTED -a   Sermon   to    Young  Men,  5th  edition,  20th 

thousand,  rcap8vo,68  pp.  cl. extra,  price  Is.;  neat  wrapper, 6d. 


HAVE  YOU  THE  SPIRIT  ? 


^^ Having  not  the  Spirit'' — Jude  19. 

Reader, 

I  t?,ke  it  for  granted  that  you  believe 
in  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  number  of  people  in  this 
country  who  openly  deny  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  is  happily  not  great.  Most  persons  have 
been  baptized  in  the  Name  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Crest.  Many  have  been 
taught  to  repeat  the  Belief,  or  Apostles'  Creed,  from 
their  youth  up.  Your  hps  have  probably  said  a 
thousand  times  the  solemn  words,  *'  1  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghost." 

But  notwithstanding  all  this,  I  wish  you  to  con- 
sider well  what  you  know  of  the  Holy  Spirit  be- 
yond His  name.  What  experimental  acquaintance 
have  you  with  the  Spirit's  work  ?  What  has  He  done 
for  you  ?  What  benefit  have  you  received  from 
Him  ?  You  can  say  of  God  the  Father,  *'  He  made 
me  and  all  the  world."  You  can  say  of  God  the 
Son,  "  He  died  for  me  and  all  mankind."  But 
can  you  say  anything  about  the  Holy  Ghost? 
Can  you  say  with  any  degree  of  confidence,  *'  He 
dwells  in  me,  and  sanctifies  me?"  In  one  word, 
Have  you  the  Spirit?  This  is  the  question  1  press 
upon  your  attention. 

Reader,  I  believe  the  question  to  be  one  of  vital 
importance  at  all  seasons.  I  hold  it  to  be  one  of 
special  importance  in  the  present  day.  I  consider 
that  clear  views  about  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
are  among  the  best  preservatives  against  the  many 


false  doctrines  which  abound  in  our  own  times.  Suffer 
me  then,  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  year,  to  lay 
before  you  a  few  things,  which,  by  God's  blessing, 
may  help  you  to  answer  the  inquiry, — Have  yoa 
the  Spirit  ? 

I.  Let  me  explain  the  immense  importance  of 
having  the  Spirit, 

II.  Let  me  point  out  the  great  general  prin- 
ciple by  which  alone  the  question  can  be  tried, — 
Have  you  the  Spirit  ? 

in.  Let  me  describe  the  particular  effects 
which  the  Spirit  always  produces  on  the  souls  in 
ivhich  He  dwells, 

I.  Let  me  in  the  first  place  explain  the  immense 
importance  of  having  the  Spirit, 

Jt  is  absolutely  necessary  to  make  this  point 
clear.  Unless  you  see  this,  I  shall  appear  like  one 
beating  the  air  all  through  this  tract.  Once  let 
your  mind  lay  hold  on  this,  and  half  the  work  I 
want  to  do  is  already  done  for  your  soul. 

1  can  easily  fancy  some  reader  saying,  *'I  do  not 
see  the  use  of  this  question  !  Supposing  I  have 
not  the  Spirit,  where  is  the  mighty  harm  ?  I  try 
to  do  my  duty  in  this  world.  I  attend  my  church 
regularly.  I  receive  the  sacrament  occasionally. 
I  believe  I  am  as  good  a  Christian  as  my  neigh- 
bours. I  say  my  prayers.  I  trust  God  will  par- 
don my  sins  for  Christ's  sake.  1  do  not  see  why  I 
should  not  reach  heaven  at  last  without  troubling 
myself  with  hard  questions  about  the  Spirit." 

Reader,  if  these  are  your  thoughts,  I  entreat 
you  to  give  me  your  attention  for  a  few  minutes, 
while  I  try  to  supply  you  with  reasons  for  thinking 
differently.  Believe  me,  nothing  less  than  your 
soul's  salvation  is  bound  up  in  the  question  before 
your  eyes. 

Remember  for  one  thing,  if  you  have  not  the 
Spirit,  you  have  no  part  in  Christ,  and  no  title 
to  heaven. 

The  words  of  St.  Paul  are  express  and  unmis- 


takeable  :  *'  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  he  is  none  of  his."  (Rom.  viii.  9.)  Tlie 
words  of  St.  John  are  no  less  clear  :  ''  Hereby  we 
know  that  he  abideth  in  us  by  the  Spirit  which  he 
hath  given  us."  (1  John  iii.  24.)  The  indwellinoj 
of  God  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  common  mark  of  all 
believers  in  Christ.  It  is  the  shepherd's  mark  on 
the  flock  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  distinguishing  tliem 
from  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  is  the  goldsmith's 
stamp  on  the  genuine  sons  of  God,  which  separates 
them  from  the  dross  and  mass  of  false  professors. 
It  is  the  King's  own  seal  on  those  who  are  his 
peculiar  people,  proving  them  to  be  Ilis  own  pro- 
perty. It  is  the  earnest  which  the  Redeemer  gives 
to  His  believing  disciples  while  they  are  in  the 
body,  as  a  pledge  of  the  full  redemption  yet  to 
come  in  the  resurrection  morning.  This  is  the  case 
of  all  believers.     They  all  have  the  Spirit. 

Let  it  be  distinctly  understood  that  he  who  has 
not  the  Spirit,  has  not  Christ.  He  who  has  not 
Christ,  has  no  pardon  of  his  sins, — no  peace  with 
God, — no  title  to  heaven, — no  well-grounded  hope 
of  being  saved.  His  religion  is  like  the  house 
built  on  the  sand.  It  may  look  well  in  fine  weathei\ 
It  may  satisfy  him  in  the  time  of  health  and  pros- 
perity. But  when  the  flood  rises,  and  the  wind 
blows, — when  sickness  and  troubles  come  up  against 
him,  it  will  fall  and  bury  him  under  its  ruins.  He 
lives  without  a  good  hope,  and  without  a  good  hope 
he  dies.  He  will  arise  again  only  to  be  miserable. 
He  will  stand  in  the  judgment  only  to  be  con- 
demned. He  will  see  saints  and  angels  looking  on, 
and  remember  he  might  have  been  among  them, 
but  too  late.  He  will  see  lost  myriads  around  him, 
and  find  they  cannot  comfort  him,  but  too  late. 
This  will  be  the  end  of  the  man  who  thinks  to  reach 
heaven  without  the  Spirit. 

Reader,  settle  these  things  down  in  vour  mem- 
ory,  and  let  them  never  be  forgotten.  Are  they 
not  worth  remembering-  ?  No  Holy  Spirit  in  you, 
— no  part  in  Christ !  No  part  in  Christ, — no  for- 
giveness  of    sins!      No   forgiveness   of    sins, — no 


6 

peace  with  God  !  No  peace  with  God, — no  title 
to  heaven  !  No  title  to  heaven, — no  admission  into 
heaven!  No  admission  into  heaven, —and  what 
then  ?  Aye  !  what  then  ?  You  may  well  ask. 
Whither  will  you  flee  ?  What  way  will  you  turn  ? 
To  what  refuge  will  you  run  ?  There  is  none 
at  all.  There  remains  nothing  but  hell.  Not 
admitted  into  heaven,  you  must  sink  at  last  into 
hell. 

Header,  mark  well  what  I  say.  Perhaps  it 
startles  you.  But  may  it  not  be  good  for  you  to 
be  startled  ?  Have  I  told  you  anything  more  than 
simple  scriptural  truth  ?  Where  is  the  defective 
link  in  the  chain  of  reasoning  you  have  heard? 
Where  is  the  flaw  in  the  argument  ?  I  believe 
in  my  conscience  there  is  none.  From  not  having 
the  Spirit  to  being  in  hell  there  is  but  a  long  flight 
of  downward  steps.  Living  without  the  Spirit,  you 
are  already  on  the  top.  Dying  without  the  Spirit, 
you  will  find  your  way  to  the  bottom. 

Remember  for  another  thing,  if  you  have  not 
the  Spirit,  you  have  no  holiness  of  hearty  and  no 
meetness  for  heaven. 

Heaven  is  the  place  to  which  all  people  hope  to 
go  after  death.  It  would  be'  well  for  many  if  they 
considered  calmly  what  kind  of  dwelling  place 
heaven  is.  It  is  the  habitation  of  the  King  of 
kings,  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity, 
and  it  must  needs  be  a  holy  place.  It  is  a  place  into 
which  Scripture  tells  us  there  shall  enter  in  nothing 
'*  that  defileth,  neither  whatsoever  wdrketh  abomi- 
nation." (Rev.  xxi.  27)  It  is  a  place  where  there 
shall  be  nothing  wicked,  sinful,  or  sensual, — nothing 
worldly,  foolish,  frivolous,  or  profane.  There,  let  the 
covetous  man  remember,  shall  be  no  more  money. 
There,  let  the  pleasure-seeker  remember,  shall  be 
no  more  races,  theatres,  novel -reading,  or  bills. 
There,  let  the  drunkard  and  the  gambler  remem- 
ber, shall  be  no  more  strong  drink,  no  more  dice, 
no  more  betting,  no  more  cards.  The  everlasting 
presence  of  God,  saints,  and  angels, — the  perpetual 
doing   of  God's   will, — the   complete   absence    of 


everything  which  God  does  not  approve, — these 
are  t!ie  chief  things  which  shall  make  up  heaven. 
It  shall  be  an  eternal  Sabbath  day. 

For  this  heaven  we  are  all  by  nature  utterly  un- 
fit. We  have  no  capacity  for  enjoying  its  happiness. 
We  have  no  taste  for  its  blessings.  We  have  no 
eye  to  see  its  beauty.  We  have  no  heart  to  feel  its 
comforts.  Instead  of  freedom,  we  should  find  it 
bondage.  Instead  of  glorious  liberty,  we  should 
find  it  constant  constraint.  Instead  of  a  splendid 
palace,  we  should  find  it  a  gloomy  prison.  A  fish 
on  dry  land,  a  sheep  in  the  water,  an  eagle  in  a 
cage,  a  painted  savage  in  a  royal  drawing-room, 
would  all  feel  more  at  ease  and  in  their  place  than 
a  natural  man  in  heaven.  *'  Without  hoUness  no 
man  shall  see  the  Lord."  (Heb.  xii.  14.) 

For  this  heaven  it  is  the  special  office  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  prepare  men's  souls.  He  alone  can 
change  the  earthly  heart,  and  purify  the  worldly 
affections  of  Adam's  children.  He  alone  can  bring 
their  minds  into  harmony  with  God,  and  tune  them 
for  the  eternal  company  of  saints,  and  angels,  and 
Christ.  He  alone  can  make  them  love  what  God 
loves,  and  hate  what  God  hates,  and  delight  in 
God's  presence.  He  alone  can  set  the  limbs  of 
human  nature,  which  were  broken  and  dislocated 
by  Adam's  fall,  and  bring  about  a  real  unity  be- 
tween man's  will  and  God's.  And  this  He  does  for 
everv  one  that  is  saved.  It  is  written  of  believers, 
that  they  are  '* saved  according  to  God's  mercy,"  bin 
it  is  *'  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  renewing 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  They  are  chosen  unto  salva- 
tion, but  it  is  "  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit," 
as  well  as  ''  belief  of  the  truth."  (Titus  iii.  5.  2 
Thess.  ii.  13.) 

Reader,  let  this  also  be  written  down  on  the 
tablet  of  your  memory.  No  entrance  into  heaven 
without  the  Spirit  fii^st  entering  your  heart  upon 
earth  !  No  admission  into  glory  in  the  next  life 
without  previous  sanctification  in  this  life !  No 
Holy  Spirit  in  you  in  this  world,  then  no  heaven  in 
the  world  to  come !     You  would  not  be  fit  for  it. 


8 

You  would  not  be  ready  for  it.  You  would  not 
like  it.  You  would  not  enjoy  it.  There  is  much 
use  made  in  the  present  day  of  the  word  '*  holy." 
Our  ears  are  wearied  with  "  holy  church/'  and 
**  holy  baptism/'  and  "  holy  days/'  and  **  holy 
water/'  and  *'  holy  services/'  and  *'  holy  priests." 
But  one  thing  is  a  thousand  times  more  important, 
and  that  is,  to  be  made  a  really  holy  man  by  the 
Spirit.  We  must  be  made  partakers  of  the  divine 
nature,  while  we  are  alive.  We  must  sow  to  the 
Spirit,  if  we  would  ever  reap  life  everlasting.  (2 
Peter  i,  4  ;  Gal.  vi.  8.) 

Remember  for  another  thing,  if  you  have  not 
the  Spirit,  you  have  no  right  to  he  considered  a 
true  Christian,  and  no  ivill  or  power  to  become 
one. 

It  requires  httle  to  make  a  Christian  according 
to  the  standard  of  the  world.  Only  let  a  man  be 
baptized  and  attend  some  place  of  worship,  and  the 
requirements  of  the  world  are  satisfied.  The  man's 
belief  may  be  not  so  inteUigent  as  that  of  a  Turk  : 
he  may  be  profoundly  ignorant  of  the  Bible.  The 
man's  practice  may  be  no  better  than  that  of  a 
heathen  :  many  a  respectable  Hindoo  might  put 
him  to  shame. — But  what  of  that  ?  He  is  an 
Englishman.  He  has  been  baptized.  He  goes  to 
church,  and  behaves  decently  when  there.  What 
more  would  you  have  ?  If  you  do  not  call  him  a 
Christian,  you  are  thought  very  uncharitable. 

But  it  takes  a  great  deal  more  than  this  to  make 
a  man  a  real  Christian  according  to  the  standard 
of  the  Bible.  It  requires  the  cooperation  of  all 
the  Three  Persons  of  the  Blessed  Trinity.  The 
election  of  God  the  Father, — the  blood  and  inter- 
cession of  God  the  Son, — the  sanctification  of  God 
the  Spirit, —  must  all  meet  together  on  the  soul 
that  is  to  be  saved.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost 
must  unite  to  work  the  work  of  making  any  child 
of  Adam  a  true  Christian. 

This  is  a  deep  subject,  and  one  that  must  be 
handled  with  reverence.  But  where  the  Bible  speaks 
with  decision,  there  we  may  also  speak  with  decision. 


9 

And  words  have  no  meaning,  if  the  work  of  the  Holy- 
Spirit  be  not  just  as  needful  in  order  to  make  a 
man  a  true  Christian,* as  the  work  of  the  Father 
or  the  work  of  the  Son.  "  No  man,"  we  are  told, 
''  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy 
Spirit."  (1  Cor.  xii.  3.)  True  Christians,  we  are 
taught  in  Scripture,  are  ''  born  of  the  Spirit. 
They  live  in  ^the  Spirit.  They  are  led  by  the 
Spirit.  By  the  Spirit  they  mortify  the  deeds  of 
the  body.  By  one  Spirit  they  have  access  through 
Jesus  unto  the  Father.  Their  graces  are  all  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit.  They  are  the  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  They  are  a  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit.  They  walk  after  the  Spirit. 
They  are  strengthened  by  the  Spirit.  Through 
the  Spirit  they  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness 
by  faith."  (John  iii.  6  ;  Gal.  v.  25 :  Rom.  viii.  13, 
14  :  Eph.  ii.  18  :  Gal.  v.  20  :  1  Cor.  vi.  19  :  Eph. 
ii.  22 :  Rom.  viii.  4 :  Eph.  iii.  16  :  Gal.  v.  5.)  These 
are  plain  Scriptural  expressions.  Who  will  dare  to 
gainsay  them  ? 

The  truth  is,  that  the  deep  corruption  of  human 
nature  would  make  salvation  impossible,  if  it  were 
not  for  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  Without  Him  the 
Father's  love  and  the  Son's  redemption  are  set  be- 
fore us  in  vain.  The  Spirit  must  reveal  them.  The 
Spirit  must  apply  them,  or  else  we  are  lost  souls. 

Nothing  less  than  the  power  of  Him  who  moved 
on  the  face  of  the  waters  in  the  day  of  creation, 
can  ever  raise  us  from  our  low  estate.  He  who 
said,  *'  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light," 
must  speak  the  word  before  any  one  of  us  will  ever 
rise  to  newness  of  life.  He  who  came  down  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  must  come  down  on  our  poor  dead 
souls,  before  they  will  ever  see  the  kingdom  of 
God.  Mercies  and  afflictions  may  move  the  surface 
of  our  hearts,  but  they  alone  will  never  reach  the 
inner  man.  Sacraments,  and  services,  and  sermons 
may  produce  outward  formality,  and  clothe  us  with 
a  skin  of  religion,  but  there  will  be  no  life.  Min- 
isters may  make  communicants,  and  fill  churches 
with  regular  worshippers.     The  almighty  power  of 


10 

the  Holy  Ghost  alone  can  make  true  Christians, 
and  fill  heaven  with  glorified  saints. 

Reader,  let  this  also  be  written  in  your  memory, 
and  never  forgotten.  No  Holy  Spirit, — no  true 
Christianity  !  You  must  have  the  Spirit  in  you,  as 
well  as  Christ /or  you,  if  you  are  ever  to  be  saved. 
God  must  be  your  lovini^  Father,  Jesus  must  be 
your  known  Redeemer,  the  Holy  Ghost  must  be 
your  felt  Sanctifier,  or  else  it  will  be  better  for  you 
never  to  have  been  born. 

Reader,  I  press  the  subject  on  your  serious  con- 
sideration. I  trust  I  have  said  enough  to  show 
you  that  it  is  of  vital  importance  to  your  soul  to 
**have  the  Spirit."  It  is  no  abstruse  and  mysterious 
point  of  divinity.  It  is  no  nice  question  of  which 
the  solution  matters  little  one  way  or  another.  It  is 
a  subject  in  which  is  bound  up  the  everlasting  peace 
of  your  soul. — **  Have  you  the  Spirit?'' 

You  may  not  like  the  tidings.  You  may  call  it 
enthusiasm,  or  fanaticism,  or  extravagance.  I  take 
my  stand  on  the  plain  teaching  of  the  Bible.  I 
say  that  God  must  dwell  in  your  heart  by  the 
Spirit  on  earth,  or  you  will  never  dwell  with  God 
in  heaven. — '*  Have  you  the  Spirit.'' 

"Ah  ! "  you  may  say,  **  I  do  not  know  much 
about  it.  I  trust  Christ  will  be  merciful.  I  hope 
1  shall  go  to  heaven  after  all.''  I  answer,  No  man 
ever  yet  tasted  of  Christ's  mercy,  who  did  not  also 
receive  of  His  Spirit. — No  man  was  ever  justified, 
who  was  not  also  sanctified. — No  man  ever  went  to 
heaven  who  was  not  led  there  by  the  Spirit. 

Reader,  to  have  the  Spirit  is  of  the  utmost  im- 
portance.— '*  Have  you  the  Spirit  ?  '' 

11.  Let  me,  in  the  second  place,  point  out  the 
great  general  rule  and  principle  by  which  the 
question  may  be  decided, — ''Have  you  the  Spirit,'^ 

I  can  quite  understand  that  the  idea  of  knowing 
whether  men  have  the  Spirit  is  disagreeable  to  many 
minds.  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  objections  which 
Satan  at  once  stirs  up  in  the  natural  heart.  "  It  is 
impossible  to  know  it,"  says  one  person,  "  it  is  a 


II 

deep  thing  and  bejond  our  reach." — *'It  is  too  mys- 
terious a  thing  to  inquire  into,"  says  another,  *'  we 
must  be  content  to  leave  the  subject  in  uncertainty." 
— "  It  is  wrong  to  pretend  to  know  anything  about 
it,"  says  a  third,  ''  we  were  never  meant  to  look 
into  such  questions.  It  is  only  fit  for  enthusiasts 
and  fanatics  to  talk  of  having  the  Spirit." — I  hear 
such  objections  without  being  moved  by  them.  I 
say  that  it  can  be  known  whether  a  man  has  the 
Spirit.  It  can  be  known.  It  may  be  known.  It 
oicght  to  be  known.  It  needs  no  vision  from  heaven, 
no  revelation  from  an  angel  to  discern  it.  It  needs 
nothing  but  calm  inquiry  by  the  light  of  God's 
Word.     Let  us  enter  upon  that  inquiry. 

All  men  have  not  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  regard  the 
doctrine  of  a  spiritual  light  within  enjoyed  by  all 
mankind  as  an  unscriptural  delusion.  I  believe  the 
modern  notion  of  universal  inspiration  to  be  a  base- 
less dream.  Without  controversy,  God  has  not  left 
Himself  without  a  witness  in  the  heart  of  fallen 
man.  He  has  left  in  every  mind  sufficient  know- 
ledge of  right  and  wrong,  to  make  all  men  respon- 
sible and  accountable.  He  has  given  to  every  child 
of  Adam  a  conscience.  But  He  has  not  given  to 
every  child  of  Adam  the  Holy  Ghost.  A  man  may 
have  good  wishes  like  Balaam,  do  many  things  like 
Herod,  be  almost  persuaded  like  Agrippa,  and  trem- 
ble like  Felix,  and  yet  be  as  utterly  destitute  of  the 
grace  of  the  Spirit  as  these  men  were.  St.  Paul  tells 
us  that  before  conversion,  men  may  ''know  Godwin 
a  certain  sense,  and  have  '^  thoughts  accusing  or 
excusing  one  another."  But  he  also  tells  us  that 
before  conversion,  men  are  "  without  God "  and 
**  without  Christ,"  have  no  hope  and  are  '^darkness" 
itself.  (Rom,  i.  21,  ii.  15;  Ephes.  ii.  12,  v.  8.)  The 
Lord  Jesus  Himself  says  of  the  Spirit,  *'The  world 
seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him,  but  ye  know 
him,  for  he  dwelleth  with  you  and  shall  be  in  you.*' 
(John  xiv.  17.) 

All  members  of  Churches  and  baptized  persons 
have  not  the  Spirit.  I  see  no  ground  in  Scripture 
for  saying  that  every  man  who  receives  baptism. 


12 

receives  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  we  ought  to 
regard  him  as  born  of  the  Spirit.  I  dare  not  tell 
baptized  people  that  they  all  have  the  Spirit,  and 
that  they  only  need  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  within 
them  in  order  to  be  saved.  1  see  on  the  contrary  that 
Jude  speaks  of  members  of  the  visible  Church  in 
his  day  as  *'  not  having  the  Spirit.*'  Some  of  them 
probably  had  been  baptized  by  the  hands  of  apos- 
tles, and  admitted  into  full  communion  with  the 
professing  Church.  No  matter !  they  "  had  not 
the  Spirit."  (Jude  19.) 

It  is  vain  to  attempt  to  evade  the  power  of  this 
single  expression.  It  teaches  plainly  that  ''having 
the  Spirit''  is  not  the  lot  of  every  man,  and  not 
the  portion  of  every  member  of  the  visible  Church 
of  Christ.  It  shows  the  necessity  of  finding  out 
some  general  rule  and  principle  by  which  the 
presence  of  the  Spirit  in  a  man  may  be  ascertained. 
He  does  not  dwell  in  every  one.  Baptism  and 
churchmanship  are  no  proofs  of  His  presence. 
How  then  shall  I  know  whether  a  man  has  the 
Spirit  ? 

Eeader,  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  a  man^s 
soul  can  only  be  known  by  the  effects  which  He 
produces.  The  fruits  He  causes  to  be  brought  forth 
in  a  man's  heart  and  life,  are  the  only  evidence  that 
can  be  depended  on.  A  man's  faith,  a  man's 
opinions,  and  a  man's  practice,  are  the  witnesses 
we  must  examine,  if  we  would  find  out  whether  a 
man  has  the  Spirit.  This  is  the  rule  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  ''Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit." 
(Luke  vi.  44.) 

The  effects  which  the  Holy  Spirit  produces  may 
always  be  seen.  The  man  of  the  world  may  not 
understand  them.  They  may  in  many  cases  be 
feeble  and  indistinct.  But  where  the  Spirit  is.  He 
will  not  be  hid.  He  is,not  idle  when  He  enters  the 
heart.  He  does  not  lie  still.  He  does  not  sleep. 
He  will  make  His  presence  known.  He  will  shine 
out  little  by  little  through  the  windows  of  a  man's 
daily  habits  and  conversation,  and  manifest  to  the 
world  that  He  is  in  him.     A  dormant,  torpid,  silent 


13 

indwelling  of  the  Spirit  is  a  notion  that  pleases  the 
minds  of  many.  It  is  a  notion  for  which  1  see  no 
authority  in  the  Word  of  God.  I  hold  entirely 
with  the  Homily  for  Whit-Sunday,  *'As  the  tree  is 
known  by  his  fruit,  so  is  also  the  Holy  Ghost." 

Reader,  in  whomsoever  1  see  the  effects  and  fruits 
of  the  Spirit,  in  that  man  I  see  one  who  has  the 
Spirit.  I  believe  it  to  be  not  only  charitable  to 
think  so,  but  presumption  to  doubt  it.  I  do  not 
expect  to  behold  the  Holy  Ghost  with  my  bodily 
eyes,  or  to  touch  Him  with  my  hands.  But  I  need 
no  angel  to  come  down  to  show  me  where  He  dwells. 
I  need  no  vision  from  heaven  to  tell  me  where  I 
may  find  Him.  Only  show  me  a  man  in  whom  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  to  be  seen,  and  1  see  one 
who  has  the  Spirit.  I  will  not  doubt  the  inward- 
presence  of  the  almighty  cause,  when  I  see  the 
outward  fact  of  an  evident  effect. 

Can  I  see  the  wind  on  a  stormy  day  ?  I  cannot. 
But  I  can  see  the  effects  of  its  force  and  power. 
When  1  see  the  clouds  driven  before  it,  and  the 
trees  bending  under  it, — when  I  hear  it  whistling 
through  doors  and  windows,  or  howling  round  the 
old  chimney  tops,  I  do  not  for  a  moment  doubt  its 
existence.  I  say  *Hhere  is  a  wind."  Just  so  it  is 
with  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul. 

Can  I  see  the  dew  of  heaven  as  it  falls  on  a 
summer  evening  ?  I  cannot.  It  comes  down  softly 
and  gently,  noiseless  and  imperceptible.  But  when 
I  go  forth  in  the  morning  after  a  cloudless  night, 
and  see  every  leaf  sparkling  with  moisture,  and  feel 
every  blade  of  grass  damp  and  wet,  I  say  at  once 
''  there  has  been  a  dew."  Just  so  it  is  with  the 
presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul. 

Can  I  see  the  hand  of  the  sower  when  I  walk 
through  the  corn-fields  ia  the  month  of  July  ?  I 
cannot.  I  see  nothing  but  millions  of  ears  rich  with 
grain,  and  bending  to  the  ground  with  ripeness. 
But  do  I  suppose  that  harvest  came  by  chance,  and 
grew  of  itself?  I  suppose  nothing  of  the  kind.  I 
know  when  I  see  those  corn  fields,  that  the  plough 
and  the  harrow  were  at  work  one  day,  and  that 


14 

a  hand  has  been  there  which  sowed  the  seed. 
Just  so  it  is  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul. 

Can  I  see  the  magnetic  fluid  in  the  compass- 
needle  ?  I  cannot.  It  acts  in  a  hidden  mysterious 
way.  But  when  I  see  that  httle  piece  of  iron  always 
turning  to  the  north,  I  know  at  once  that  it  is 
under  the  secret  influence  of  magnetic  power.  Just 
so  it  is  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul. 

Can  I  see  the  mainspring  of  my  watch  when  I 
look  upon  its  face  ?  I  cannot.  But  when  I  see  the 
fingers  going  round  and  telling  the  hours  and 
minutes  of  the  day  in  regular  succession,  I  do  not 
doubt  the  mainspring's  existence.  Just  so  it  is 
with  the  w^ork  of  the  Spirit. 

Can  I  see  the  steersman  of  the  homeward-bound 
iship,  when  she  first  comes  in  sight,  and  her  sails 
whiten  on  the  horizon?  I  cannot.  But  when  I 
stand  on  the  pier  head  and  see  that  ship  working 
her  course  over  the  sea  towards  the  harbour's 
mouth,  like  a  thing  of  hfe,  1  know  well  there  is  one 
at  the  helm  who  guides  her  movements.  Just  so  it 
is  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 

Reader,  I  charge  you  to  remember  this.  Estab- 
lish it  as  a  settled  principle  in  your  mind  that  if 
the  Holy  Ghost  really  is  in  a  man,  it  will  be  seen  in 
the  effects  He  produces  on  his  heart  and  life. 

Beware  of  supposing  that  a  man  may  have  the 
Spirit,  when  there  is  no  outward  evidence  of  His 
presence  in  the  soul.  It  is  a  dangerous  and  un- 
scriptural  delusion  to  think  so.  We  must  never 
lose  sight  of  the  broad  principles  laid  down 
for  us  in  Scripture.  ''  If  we  say  that  we  have 
fellowship  with  Him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie 
and  do  not  the  truth."  ''  In  this  the  children  of  God 
are  manifest  and  the  children  of  the  devil :  whoso- 
ever doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God."  (1  John 
i.  6.  iii.  10.) 

You  have  heard,  I  doubt  not,  of  a  wretched  class 
of  Christians  called  x\ntinomians.  They  are  persons 
who  boast  of  having  an  interest  in  Christ,  and  say 
they  are  pardoned  and  forgiven,  while  at  the  same 
time  they  live  in  wilful  sin  and  open  breach  of  God's 


15 

commandments.  You  have  been  told,  I  dare  say, 
that  such  persons  are  miserably  deceived.  They 
are  going  down  to  hell  with  a  lie  in  their  right 
hand.  The  real  believer  in  Christ  is  '*dead  to  sin.'' 
Every  man  that  has  real  hope  in  Christ  ''  purifieth 
himself  even  as  He  is  pure."  (1  John  iii.  3.) 

But  I  will  tell  you  of  a  delusion  quite  as  dangerous 
as  that  of  the  Antinomians,  and  far  more  specious. 
That  delusion  is  to  flatter  yourself  you  have  the 
Spirit  dwelling  in  your  heart,  while  there  are  no 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  to  be  seen  in  your  life.  I  firmly 
believe  that  this  delusion  is  ruining  thousands  as 
surely  as  Antinomianism.  It  is  just  as  perilous  to 
dishonour  the  Holy  Ghost  as  it  is  to  dishonour 
Christ.  It  is  just  as  offensive  to  God  to  pretend  to 
an  interest  in  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  as  it  is  to 
pretend  to  an  interest  in  the  work  of  Christ. 

Once  for  all,  I  charge  my  readers  to  remember 
that  the  effects  which  the  Spirit  produces  are  the 
only  trustworthy  evidences  of  His  presence.  To 
talk  of  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  you  and  yet 
being  unseen  in  your  life,  is  wild  work  indeed.  It 
confounds  the  first  principles  of  the  Gospel.  It 
confounds  light  and  darkness, — nature  and  grace, 
— conversion  and  unconversion, — faith  and  unbelief, 
— the  children  of  God  and  the  children  of  the  devil. 

There  is  only  one  safe  position  in  this  matter. 
There  is  only  one  safe  answer  to  the  question, 
*'  How  shall  we  decide  who  have  the  Spirit  ?  "  We 
must  take  our  stand  on  the  old  principle  laid  down 
by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  ''By  their  fruits  ye  shall 
know  them.''  (Matt.  vii.  20.)  Where  the  Spirit  is, 
there  will  be  fruit.  He  who  has  no  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  has  not  the  Spirit.  A  work  of  the  Spirit 
unfelt,  unseen,  inoperative,  is  a  positive  delusion. 
Where  the  Spirit  really  is,  He  will  be  felt,  seen, 
and  known. 

III.  Let  me,  in  the  last  place,  describe  the  par- 
ticular ejects  ivhich  the  Spirit  produces  on  the 
souls  in  which  He  dwells. 

I  regard  this  part  of  the  subject  as  the  most 


16 

important  of  all.  Hitherto  I  have  spoken  generally 
of  the  great  leading  principles  which  must  guide  us 
in  inquiring  about  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I 
must  now  come  closer,  and  speak  of  the  special 
marks  by  which  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
any  individual  heart  may  be  discerned.  Happily, 
with  the  Bible  for  our  light,  these  marks  are  not 
hard  to  find  out.  Reader,  I  invite  your  serious 
attention.  Come  and  learn  whether  you  have  on 
your  soul  the  marks  of  the  Spirit. 

Some  things  I  wish  to  premise  before  entering 
fully  into  the  subject.  It  is  needful  in  order  to  clear 
the  way. 

I  grant  freely  that  there  are  some  deep  mysteries 
about  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  I  cannot  explain  the 
manner  of  His  coming  into  the  heart.  ''  The  wind 
bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound 
thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and 
whither  it  goeth  ;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the 
Spirit.''  (John  iii.  8.)  I  cannot  explain  why  He 
comes  into  one  heart  and  not  into  another, — why 
He  condescends  to  dwell  in  this  man  and  not  in 
that.  I  only  know  that  so  it  is.  He  acts  as  a 
sovereign.  To  use  the  words  of  the  Church  Cate- 
chism, He  sanctifieth  ''  the  elect  people  of  God." 
But  I  remember  also  that  I  cannot  explain  why  I 
was  born  in  Christian  England,  and  not  in  heathen 
Africa.  I  am  satisfied  to  believe  that  all  God's  work 
is  well  done.  It  is  enough  for  me  to  be  in  the  King's 
court,  without  being  of  the  King's  counsel. 

I  grant  freely  that  there  are  great  diversities  in 
the  operations  by  which  the  Spirit  carries  on  His 
work  in  men's  souls.  There  are  differences  in  the 
ages  at  which  He  begins  to  enter  the  heart.  With 
some  He  begins  young,  as  with  John  the  Baptist 
and  Timothy.  With  some  He  begins  old,  as  with 
Manasseh  and  Zaccheus.  There  are  differences  in 
the  feelings  which  He  first  stirs  up  in  the  heart. 
He  leads  some  bv  strons^  terror  and  alarm,  like  the 
jailor  of  Philippi.  He  leads  some  by  gently  opening 
their  hearts  to  receive  the  truth,  as  Lydia,  the 
purple-seller.     There   are  differences  in  the  time 


V7 

occupied  in  eiFecting  this  complete  change  of 
character.  With  some  the  change  is  immediate 
and  sudden,  as  it  was  with  Saul  when  he 
journeyed  to  Damascus.  AVith  others  it  is  gradual 
and  slow,  as  it  was  with  Nicodemus  the  Pharisee. 
There  are  differences  in  the  instruments  He  uses  in 
first  awakening  the  soul  from  its  natural  death. 
With  some  He  uses  a  sermon,  with  others  the  Bible, 
with  others  a  tract,  with  others  a  friend's  advice, 
with  others  a  sickness  or  affliction,  with  others  no 
one  particular  thing,  that  can  be  distinctly  traced. 
All  this  it  is  most  important  to  understand.  To 
require  all  persons  to  be  squared  down  to  one 
kind  of  experience  is  a  most  grievous  mistake. 

I  grant  freely  that  the  beginnings  of  the  Spirit's 
work  are  often  small  and  imperceptible.  The  seed 
from  which  the  spiritual  character  is  formed  is  often 
very  minute  at  first.  The  fountain  head  of  the 
spiritual  life,  like  that  of  many  a  mighty  river,  is 
frequently  at  its  outset  a  little  trickling  stream. 
The  beginnings  therefore  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  a 
soul  are  generally  overlooked  by  the  world, — 
very  frequently  not  duly  valued  and  encouraged  by 
other  Christians, — and  almost  without  exception, 
thoroughly  misunderstood  by  the  soul  itself  which 
is  the  subject  of  them.  Let  that  never  be  forgotten. 
The  man  in  whom  the  Spirit  begins  to  work,  is 
never  hardly  aware  till  long  afterwards,  that  his 
state  of  mind  about  the  time  of  his  conversion,  arose 
from  the  entrance  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

But  still  after  all  these  concessions  and  allowances, 
there  are  certain  great  leading  effects  which  the 
Spirit  produces  on  the  soul  in  which  He  dwells 
which  are  always  one  and  the  same.  Those  who 
have  the  Spirit,  may  be  'led  at  first  by  different 
paths,  but  they  are  always  brought,  sooner  or  later, 
into  one  and  the  same  narrow  way.  Their  leading 
opinions  in  religion  are  the  same.  Their  leading 
desires  are  the  same.  Their  general  walk  is  the 
same.  They  may  differ  from  one  another  widely 
in  their  natural  character,  but  their  spiritual  char- 
acter, in  its  main  features,  is  always  one.     The 


18 

Holy  Ghost  always  produces  one  general  kind  of 
effects.  Shades  and  varieties  there  are,  no  doubt, 
in  the  experience  of  those  on  whose  hearts  He 
works,  but  the  general  outline  of  their  faith  and 
life  is  always  the  same. 

What  then  are  these  general  effects  which  the 
Spirit  always  produces  on  those  who  really  have 
Him  ?  What  are  the  marks  of  His  presence  in  the 
soul  ?  This  is  the  question  which  now  remains  to 
be  considered.  Let  us  try  to  set  these  marks  down 
in  order. 

1.  All  who  have  the  Spirit,  are  quickened  by 
Him,  and  made  spiritually  alive.  He  is  called  in 
Scripture,  "The  Spirit  of  life."  (Rom.  viii.  3.)  "It 
is  the  Spirit,"  says  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "  that 
quickeneth.''  (John  vi.  53.)  We  are  all  by  nature 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  We  have  neither  feel- 
ing nor  interest  about  religion.  We  have  neither 
faith,  nor  hope,  nor  fear,  nor  love.  Our  hearts  are 
in  a  state  of  torpor.  They  are  compared  in  Scrip- 
ture to  a  stone.  We  may  be  alive  about  money, 
learning,  politics,  or  pleasure,  but  we  are  dead 
towards  God. — All  this  is  changed  when  the  Spirit 
comes  into  the  heart.  He  raises  us  from  this  state 
of  death,  and  makes  us  new  creatures.  He  awakens 
the  conscience.  He  inclines  the  will  toward  God. 
He  causes  old  things  to  pass  away,  and  all  things  to 
become  new.  He  gives  us  a  new  heart.  He  makes 
us  put  off  the  old  man,  and  put  on  the  new.  He 
blows  the  trumpet  in  the  ear  of  our  slumbering 
faculties,  and  sends  us  forth  to  walk  the  world  as  if 
we  were  new  beings.  How  unlike  was  Lazarus  cor- 
rupting in  the  silent  tomb,  to  Lazarus  coming  forth 
at  our  Lord's  command !  How  unlike  was  Jairus' 
daughter  lying  cold  on  her  bed  amidst  weeping 
friends,  to  Jairus'  daughter  rising  and  speaking 
to  her  mother  as  she  was  wont  to  do !  Just  as  unlike 
is  the  man  in  whom  the  Spirit  dwells  to  what  he 
was  before  the  Spirit  came  into  him. 

Reader,  can  he  whose  heart  is  manifestly  full  of 
every  thing  but  God, — hard,  cold,  and  insensible, — 


19 

can  he  be   said  to  have  the  Spirit?     Judge  for 
yourself. 

2.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  are  taught  by  Him, 
He  is  called  in  Scripture,  ''  The  Spirit  of  wisdom 
and  revelation/'  (Eph.  i.  17.)  It  was  the  promise 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  He  shall  teach  you  all  things. 
He  shall  guide  you  into  all  truth.'"  (John  xiv.  26. 
xvi.  13.)  We  are  all  by  nature  ignorant  of  spiritual 
truth.  *^  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things 
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  They  are  foolishness  to  him." 
(1  Cor.  ii.  14.)  Our  eyes  are  blinded.  We  neither 
know  God,  nor  Christ,  nor  ourselves,  nor  the  world, 
nor  sin,  nor  heaven,  nor  hell,  as  we  ought.  We  see 
everything  under  false  colours. — The  Spirit  alters 
entirely  this  state  of  things.  He  opens  the  eyes  of 
our  understandings.  He  illumines  us.  He  calls  us 
out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light.  He  takes  away 
the  veil.  He  shines  into  our  hearts,  and  makes  us 
see  things  as  they  really  are.  No  wonder  that  all 
true  Christians  are  so  remarkably  agreed  upon  the 
essentials  of  true  religion.  The  reason  is  that  they 
have  all  learned  in  one  school — the  school  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  No  wonder  that  true  Christians  can 
understand  each  other  at  once,  and  find  common 
ground  of  communion.  They  have  been  taught  the 
same  language,  by  one  whose  lessons  are  never 
forgotten. 

Reader,  can  he  who  is  ignorant  of  the  leading 
doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  and  blind  to  his  own  state, 
— can  he  be  said  to  have  the  Spirit  ?  Judge  for 
yourself. 

3.  All  who  have  the  Spirit  are  led  by  Him  to  the 
Scriptures,  This  is  the  instrument  by  which  He 
specially  works  on  the  soul.  The  Word  is  called 
**the  sword  of  the  Spirit."  Those  who  are  born  again 
are  said  to  be  "  born  by  the  Word.''  (Ephes.  vi.  17  ; 
1  Peter  i.  23.)  All  Scripture  was  written  under 
His  inspiration.  He  never  teaches  anything  which 
is  not  therein  written.  He  causes  the  man  in  whom 
He  dwells  to  delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord.  Just 
as  the  infant  desires  the  milk  which  nature  has  pro- 
vided for  it,  and  refuses  all  other  food,  so  does  the 


20 

soul  which  has  the  Spirit,  desire  the  sincere  milk  of 
the  word.  Just  as  the  Israelites  fed  on  the  manna  in 
the  wilderness,  so  are  the  children  of  God  taught  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  feed  on  the  contents  of  the  Bible. 
Reader,  can  he  who  never  reads  the  Bible,  or 
only  reads  it  formally, — can  he  be  said  to  have  the 
Spirit  ?     Judge  for  yourself. 

4.  All  who  have  the  Spirit,  are  convinced  by 
Him  of  sin.  This  is  an  especial  office  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  promised  He  should  fulfil.  ''  When  he 
is  come  he  shall  reprove  the  world  of  sin."  (John 
xvi.  8.)  He  alone  can  open  a  man's  eyes  to  the 
real  extent  of  his  guilt  and  corruption  before  God. 
He  always  does  this  when  He  comes  into  the  soul. 
He  puts  us  in  our  right  place.  He  shews  us  the  vile- 
ness  of  our  own  hearts,  and  makes  us  cry  with  the 
publican,  ''  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  He 
pulls  down  those  proud,  self-righteous,  self-justif  jing 
notions  with  which  we  are  all  born,  and  makes  us 
feel  as  we  ought  to  feel, — ''  I  am  a  bad  man  and  I 
deserve  to  be  in  hell."  Ministers  may  alarm  us  for 
a  little  season.  Sickness  may  break  the  ice  on  our 
hearts.  But  the  ice  will  soon  freeze  again,  if  it  is 
not  thawed  by  the  breath  of  the  Spirit.  And  con- 
victions not  wrought  by  Him  will  pass  away  like 
the  morning  dew. 

Reader,  can  the  man  who  never  feels  the  burden 
of  his  sins,  and  knows  not  what  it  is  to  be  humbled 
by  the  thought  of  them, — can  he  have  the  Spirit  ? 
Judge  for  yourself. 

5.  All  who  have  the  Spirit,  are  led  by  Him  to 
Christ  for  salvation.  It  is  one  special  part  of  His 
office,  to  "testify  of  Christ,"  to  "  take  of  the  things  of 
Christ,  and  to  shew  them  to  us."  (John  xv.  26.  xvi. 
15.)  By  nature  we  all  think  to  work  our  own  way 
to  heaven.  We  fancy  in  our  blindness  that  we  can 
make  our  peace  with  God.  From  this  miserable 
blindness  the  Spirit  delivers  us.  He  shews  us  that 
in  ourselves  we  are  lost  and  hopeless,  and  that 
Christ  is  the  only  door  by  which  we  can  enter 
heaven  and  be  saved.  He  teaches  us  that  nothing 
but  the  blood  of  Jesus  can  atone  for  sin,  and  that 


21 

through  His  mediation  alone  God  can  he  just  and 
the  justifier  of  the  ungodly.  He  reveals  to  us  the 
exquisite  fitness  and  suitableness  to  our  souls  of 
Christ's  salvation.  He  unfolds  to  us  the  beauty  of  the 
glorious  doctrine  of  justification  by  simple  faith. 
He  sheds  abroad  on  our  hearts  that  mighty  love  of 
God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Just  as  the  dove 
flies  to  the  well-known  cleft  of  the  rock,  so  does  the 
soul  of  Him  who  has  the  Spirit  flee  to  Christ  and 
rest  on  Him. 

Reader,  can  he  who  knows  nothing  of  faith  in 
Christ,  be  said  to  have  the  Spirit?  Judge  for 
yourself. 

6.  All  who  have  the  Spirit,  are  by  Him  made 
holy.  He  is  ''  the  Spirit  of  holiness."  (Rom.  i.  4.) 
When  He  dwells  in  men,  He  makes  them  follow 
after  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness, 
meekness,  faith,  patience,  temperance.  He  makes 
it  natural  to  them  to  count  all  God's  commandments 
concerning  all  things  to  be  right,  and  to  hate  every 
false  way.  Sin  is  no  more  pleasant  to  them.  It 
is  their  sorrow  when  tempted  by  it.  It  is  their 
shame  when  they  are  overtaken  by  it.  Their  desire 
is  to  be  free  from  it  altogether.  Their  happiest 
times  are  when  they  are  enabled  to  walk  most 
closely  with  God.  Their  saddest  times  are  when 
they  are  furthest  off  from  Him. 

Reader,  can  those  who  do  not  even  pretend  to 
live  strictly  according  to  God's  will,  be  said  to  have 
the  Spirit  ?     Judge  for  yourself. 

7.  All  those  who  have  the  Spirit,  are  spiritually 
minded.  To  use  the  words  of  the  Apostle  Paul, 
"  They  that  are  after  the  Spirit,  mind  the  things 
of  the  Spirit."  (Rom.  viii.  5.)  The  general  tone, 
tenor,  and  bias  of  their  minds  is  in  favour  of  spirit- 
ual things.  They  do  not  serve  God  by  fits  and 
starts,  but  habitually.  They  may  be  drawn  aside 
by  strong  temptations;  but  the  general  tendency 
of  their  lives,  ways,  tastes,  thoughts,  and  habits, 
is  spiritual.  You  see  it  in  the  way  they  spend 
their  leisure  time,  the  company  they  love  to  keep, 
and  their  conduct  in  their  own  homes.     And  all  is 


22 

the  result  of  the  spiritual  nature  implanted  in  them 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Just  as  the  caterpillar,  when 
it  becomes  a  butterfly,  can  no  longer  be  content  to 
crawl  on  earth,  but  will  fly  upwards  and  use  its 
wings,  so  will  the  affections  of  the  man  who  has  the 
Spirit,  be  ever  reaching  upwards  toward  God. 

Header,  can  those  whose  minds  are  wholly  intent 
on  the  things  of  this  world,  be  said  to  have  the 
Spirit?     Judge  for  yourself. 

8.  All  that  have  the  Spirit  feel  a  conflict  within 
them,  between  the  old  nature  and  the  new.  The 
words  of  St.  Paul  are  true,  more  or  less,  of  all  the 
children  of  God,  ''  The  flesh  lusteth  against  the 
Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh,  so  that  ye 
cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would."  (Gal.  v.  17.) 
They  feel  a  holy  principle  within  their  breasts, 
which  makes  them  delight  in  the  law  of  God.  But 
they  feel  another  principle  within,  striving  hard 
for  the  mastery,  and  struggling  to  drag  them 
downwards  and  backwards.  Some  feel  this  conflict 
more  than  others.  But  all  who  have  the  Spirit, 
are  acquainted  with  it.  And  it  is  a  token  for  good. 
It  is  a  proof  that  the  strong  man  armed  no  longer 
reigns  within,  as  he  once  did,  with  undisputed 
sway.  The  presence  of  the-  Holy  Ghost  may  be 
known  by  inward  warfare  as  well  as  by  inward 
peace,  lie  that  has  been  taught  to  rest  and  hope 
in  Christ,  will  always  be  one  who  fights  and  wars 
with  sin. 

Header,  can  he  who  knows  nothino:  of  inward 
conflict,  and  is  a  servant  to  sin,  the  world,  and  his 
own  self-will,  can  he  be  said  to  have  the  Spirit  ? 
Judge  for  yourself. 

9.  All  who  have  the  Spirit,  love  others  who 
have  the  Spirit.  It  is  written  of  them  by  St.  John, 
"  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  to  life, 
because  we  love  the  brethren."  (1  John  iii.  14.) 
The  more  they  see  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  any  one, 
the  more  dear  he  is  to  them.  They  regard  him  as 
a  niember  of  the  same  familj^,  a  child  of  the  same 
Father,  a  subject  of  the  same  king,  and  a  fellow- 
traveller  with  themselves  in  a  foreign  country  to- 


23 

wards  the  same  father-land.  It  is  the  glory  of  the 
Spirit  to  bring  back  something  of  that  brotherly 
love  which  sin  has  so  miserably  chased  out  of  the 
world.  He  makes  men  love  one  another  for  reasons 
which  to  the  natural  man  are  fooHshness, — for  the 
sake  of  a  common  Saviour,  a  common  faith,  a 
common  service  on  earth,  and  the  hope  of  a  com- 
mon home.  He  raises  up  friendships  indepen- 
dent of  blood,  marriage,  interest,  business,  or  any 
worldly  motive.  He  unites  men  by  making  them 
feel  they  are  united  to  one  great  centre,  Jesus 
Christ. 

Reader,  can  he  who  finds  no  pleasure  in  the 
company  of  spiritually-minded  persons,  or  even 
sneers  at  them  as  saints, — can  he  be  said  to  have 
the  Spirit  ?     Judge  for  yourself. 

10.  All  who  have  the  Spirit,  are  taught  hy 
Him  to  pray.  He  is  called  in  Scripture,  "  The 
Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication."  (Zech.  xii.  10.) 
The  elect  of  God  are  said  to  cry  to  him  night  and  day. 
(Luke  xviii.  7  )  They  cannot  help  it.  Their  prayers 
may  be  poor,  and  weak,  and  wandering, — but  pray 
they  must.  Something  within  them  tells  them  they 
must  speak  with  God  and  lay  their  wants  before 
Him.  Just  as  the  infant  will  cry  when  it  feels 
pain  or  hunger,  because  it  is  its  nature,  so 
will  the  new  nature  implanted  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
oblige  a  man  to  pray.  He  has  the  Spirit  of  adop- 
tion, and  he  must  cry,  *'Abba,  Father."   (Gal.  iv.  6.) 

Reader,  can  the  man  who  never  prays  at  all,  or 
is  content  with  saying  a  few  formal  heartless 
words,  can  he  be  said  to  have  the  Spirit?  For 
the  last  time  I  say,  judge  for  yourself. 

Such  are  the  marks  and  signs  by  which  I  believe 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  man  may  be 
discerned.  1  have  set  them  fairly  down  as  they 
appear  to  me  to  be  laid  before  us  in  the  Scriptures. 
I  have  endeavoured  to  exaggerate  nothing,  and  to 
keep  back  nothing.  I  believe  there  are  no  true 
Christians  in  whom  these  marks  may  not  be  found. 
Some  of  them  no  doubt  stand  out  more  prominently 
in  some,  and  others  in  others.     My  own  experience 


24 

is  distinct  and  decided,  that  I  never  saw  a  truly 
godly  person,  even  of  the  poorest  and  humblest 
classes,  in  whom,  on  close  observation,  all  these 
marks  might  not  be  discovered. 

I  believe  that  marks  such  as  these  are  the  only 
safe  evidence  that  we  are  travelling  in  the  way  that 
leads  to  everlasting  life.  I  charge  every  one  who 
desires  to  make  his  calling  and  election  sure,  to  see 
that  these  marks  are  his  own.  There  are  high- 
flying professors  of  religion  1  know,  who  despise 
the  mention  of  ''  marks,"  and  call  them  ''  legal." 
I  care  nothing  for  their  being  called  legal,  so  long 
as  I  am  satisfied  they  are  scriptural.  And  with 
the  Bible  before  me  I  give  my  opinion  confidently, 
that  he  who  is  without  these  marks,  is  without  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

Show  me  a  man  who  has  these  marks  about  him, 
and  I  acknowledge  him  as  a  child  of  God.  He 
may  be  poor  and  lowly  in  this  world.  He  may  be 
vile  in  his  own  eyes  and  often  doubt  of  his  own 
salvation.  But  he  has  that  within  him,  which  only 
comes  from  above,  and  will  never  be  destroyed, 
even  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  God  is  his,  Christ 
is  his.  His  name  is  already  written  in  the  book 
of  life,  and  before  long  heaven  will  be  his  own. 

Show  me  a  man  in  whom  these  marks  are  not 
to  be  found,  and  I  dare  not  acknowledge  him  to  be 
a  true  Christian.  I  dare  not  as  an  honest  man.  I 
dare  not  as  a  lover  of  his  soul.  I  dare  not  as  a 
reader  of  the  Bible.  He  may  make  a  great  re- 
ligious profession.  He  may  be  learned,  high  in 
the  world,  and  moral  in  his  life.  It  is  all  nothing 
if  he  has  not  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  is  without  God, 
without  Christ,  without  solid  hopes,  and  unless  he 
changes,  will  at  length  be  without  heaven. 

And  now,  reader,  let  me  finish  this  tract  by  a  few 
practical  remarks  which  arise  naturally  out  of  the 
matter  which  it  contains. 

Would  you  know,  first  of  all,  what  is  your  own 
immediate  duty,  as  soon  as  you  have  read  this 
tract?     Listen,  and  1  will  tell  you. 

You  ought  to  examine  yourself  calmly   by  the 


25 

question  which  forms  its  title.  You  ought  to  ask 
yourself  seriously  how  it  is  with  your  soul.  Look 
away,  I  beseech  you,  for  a  few  minutes,  to  higher 
things  than  the  things  of  earth,  and  more  important 
things  than  the  things  of  time.  Bear  with  me, 
while  [  ask  you  solemnly  and  affectionately,  as  one 
who  desires  your  salvation, — Have  you  the  Spirit? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  think  all 
I  have  been  saying  is  true,  and  right  and  good.  I 
ask  whether  you  yourself,  who  are  reading  these 
lines,  have  within  you  the  Holy  Spirit? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  believe 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  the  church  of 
Christ,  and  that  all  who  belong  to  the  church,  are 
within  reach  of  His  operations.  I  ask  whether  you 
yourself  have  the  Spirit  in  your  own  heart  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  sometimes 
feel  strivings  of  conscience,  and  good  desires  flitting 
about  within  you.  I  ask  whether  you  have  really 
experienced  the  quickening  and  reviving  work  of 
the  Spirit  upon  your  heart  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  you  to  tell  me  the  day 
or  month  when  the  Spirit  began  His  work  in  you. 
Enough  for  me  if  fruit  trees  bear  fruit,  without 
inquiring  the  precise  time  when  they  were  planted. 
But  I  do  ask  are  you  bringing  forth  any  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  ? 

Remember,  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  are  a 
perfect  person,  and  never  feel  anything  evil  within. 
But  I  do  ask  gravely  and  seriously,  whether  you 
have  about  your  heart  and  life  the  marks  of  the 
Spirit? 

Reader,  I  hope  you  will  not  tell  me  you  do  not 
know  what  the  marks  of  the  Spirit  are.  I  have 
described  them  plainly.  I  now  repeat  them  briefly, 
and  press  them  on  your  attention.  1.  The  Spirit 
quickens  men's  souls.  2.  The  Spirit  teaches  men's 
hearts.  3.  The  Spirit  leads  to  the  word.  4.  The 
Spirit  convinces  of  sin.  5.  The  Spirit  draws  to 
Christ.  6.  The  Spirit  sanctifies.  7.  The  Spirit 
makes  men  spiritually-minded.  8.  The  Spirit  pro- 
duces inward  conflict.     9.    The  Spirit  makes  men 


26 

love  the  brethren.  10.  The  Spirit  teaches  to  pray. 
These  arc  the  great  marks  of  the  Holy  Ghost's 
presence.  Put  the  question  to  your  conscience  hke 
a  man, — Has  the  Spirit  done  anything  of  this 
kind  for  your  soul  ? 

Reader,  I  charge  you  not  to  lie  down  on  your 
bed  to-night  without  trying  to  answer  my  question. 
]  summon  you  before  you  sleep  to  bring  the  matter 
to  an  issue.  We  stand  at  the  end  of  an  old  year. 
We  live  in  an  old  worn-out,  sin-laden  world.  Who 
can  tell  what  a  year  may  bring  forth  ?  Who  shall 
live  to  see  1855  ?     Have  you  the  Spirit  ? 

Would  you  know  in  the  next  place,  what  is  the 
grand  deject  of  the  Christianity  of  our  times  ? 
Listen  to  me,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

The  grand  defect  I  speak  of  is  simply  this,  that 
the  Christianity  of  many  people  is  not  real  Chris- 
tianity at  all.  I  know  that  such  an  opinion  sounds 
hard  and  shockingly  uncharitable.  I  cannot  help 
that.  1  am  satisfied  that  it  is  sadly  true.  I 
only  want  people's  Christianity  to  be  that  of  the 
Bible.  But  I  doubt  exceedingly  in  many  cases, 
whether  it  is  so. 

There  are  multitudes  of  English  people,  I  believe, 
who  go  to  church  or  chapel  every  Sunday  merely 
as  a  form.  Their  fathers  or  mothers  went,  and  so 
they  go.  It  is  the  fashion  of  the  country  to  go, 
and  so  they  go.  It  is  the  custom  to  attend  a 
religious  service  and  hear  a  sermon,  and  so  they 
go.  But  as  to  real,  vital,  saving  religion,  they 
neither  know  nor  care  anything  about  it.  They 
can  give  no  account  of  the  distinctive  doctrines  of 
the  Gospel.  Justification,  and  regeneration,  and 
sanctification,  are  words  and  names  which  they 
cannot  explain.  They  may  have  a  sort  of  vague 
idea  that  they  ought  to  go  to  the  Lord's  table, 
and  may  be  able  to  say  a  few  vague  words  about 
Christ,  but  they  have  no  intelligent  notion  of  the  way 
of  salvation.  As  to  the  Holy  Gliost,  they  can  scarcely 
Fay  more  about  Him  than  that  they  have  heard 
His  name. 

Now  if  any  reader  of  this  tract  is  convinced  that 


27 

his  religion  is  such  as  I  have  described,  I  will  only 
warn  him  aifectionately  to  remember  that  such 
religion  is  utterly  useless.  It  will  neither  save, 
comfort,  satisfy,  nor  sanctify  the  soul.  And  the 
plain  advice  1  give  him  is  to  change  it  for  something 
better  without  delay.  Ilemember  my  words.  It 
will  not  do  at  the  last. 

Would  you  know,  in  the  next  place,  what  truth 
in  the  Gospel  lue  have  most  need  to  be  jealous 
about  in  this  day  ?     Listen,  and  1  will  tell  you. 

The  truth  about  which  I  beUeve  we  ought  to  be 
jealous  at  present,  is  the  truth  about  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  All  truth  no  doubt  is  constantly 
assailed  by  Satan.  I  have  no  desire  for  a  moment 
to  exaggerate  the  office  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  exalt 
him  above  the  sun  and  centre  of  the  Gospel,  Jesus 
Christ.  But  I  do  believe  that  no  truth  in  the 
present  day  is  so  frequently  lost  sight  of,  and  so 
cunningly  assailed,  as  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 
Some  injure  it  by  ignorant  neglect.  Their  talk  is 
all  about  Christ.  They  can  tell  you  something 
about  ''  the  Saviour."  But  if  you  ask  them  about 
that  inward  work  of  the  Spirit,  which  all  who 
really  know  the  Saviour  experience,  they  have  not 
a  word  to  say. — Some  injure  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
by  taking  it  all  for  granted.  Membership  of  the 
church,  participation  of  the  sacraments,  become 
their  substitutes  for  conversion,  and  spiritual  re- 
generation.— Some  injure  the  w^ork  of  the  Spirit 
by  confounding  it  with  the  action  of  natural  con- 
science. According  to  this  low  view,  none  but  the 
most  hardened  and  degraded  of  mankind  are  desti- 
tute of  the  Holy  Ghost. — Against  all  such  departures 
from  the  truth,  let  us  watch  and  be  on  our  guard. 
Let  us  beware  of  leaving  the  proportion  of  Gospel 
statements.  Let  our  watchwords  in  the  present 
day  be, — No  salvation  without  the  inward  work 
of  the  Spirit !  No  inward  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
unless  it  can  be  seen,  felt,  and  known!  No  work 
of  the  Spirit  which  does  not  show  itself  in  repen- 
tance towards  God,  and  living  faith  towards  Jesus 
Christ  ! 


28 

Would  you  know,  in  the  next  place,  the  reason 
why  ive  who  are  ministers  of  the  Gospel  never  de- 
spair of  any  one  who  hears  us,  so  long  as  he  lives  ? 
Listen,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

We  never  despair,  because  we  believe  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  W^e  might  well  despair,  when 
we  look  at  our  own  performances.  We  are  often 
sick  of  ourselves.  We  might  well  despair,  when 
we  look  at  some  who  belong  to  our  congregations. 
They  seem  as  hard  and  insensible  as  the  nether 
mill-stone.  But  we  remember  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
what  He  has  done.  We  remember  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  consider  that  He  has  not  changed.  He  can 
come  down  like  fire  and  melt  the  hardest  hearts. 
He  can  convert  the  worst  man  or  woman  among  our 
hearers,  and  mould  their  whole  character  into  a 
new  shape.  And  so  we  preach  on.  We  hope  be- 
cause of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Oh !  that  our  hearers 
would  understand  that  the  progress  of  true  religion 
depends  not  on  might  or  on  power,  but  on  the 
Lord's  Spirit!  Oh!  that  many  of  them  would 
learn  to  lean  less  on  ministers,  and  to  pray  more 
for  the  Holy  Spirit !  Oh  !  that  all  would  learn  to 
expect  less  from  schools,  and  tracts,  and  ecclesias- 
tical machinery,  and,  while -using  all  means  dili- 
gently, would  seek  more  earnestly  for  the  out- 
pouring of  the  Spirit. 

Would  you  know,  in  the  next  place,  what  yon 
ought  to  do,  if  your  conscience  tells  you  yo,u  have 
not  the  Spirit?     Listen,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

If  you  have  not  the  Spirit,  you  ought  to  go  at 
once  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  prayer,  and  be- 
seech him  to  have  mercy  on  you  and  send  you  the 
Spirit.  I  have  not  the  slightest  sympathy  with 
those  who  tell  men  to  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
the  first  place,  in  order  that  they  may  go  to  Christ 
in  the  second  place.  I  see  no  warrant  of  Scripture 
for  saying  so.  I  only  see  that  if  men  feel  they  are 
needy,  perishing  sinners,  they  ought  to  apply 
first  and  foremost,  straight  and  direct,  to  Jesus 
Christ.  I  see  that  He  Himself  says,  ''  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him   come  unto  me  and   drink."  (John 


29 

vii.  37.)  I  know  that  it  is  written,  "  He  hath 
received  gifts  for  men,  even  for  the  rebellious,  that 
the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them/'  (Psal. 
Ixviii.  18.)  I  know  it  is  His  special  office  to  bap- 
tize with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  in  Him  all  fulness 
dwells.  1  dare  not  pretend  to  be  more  systematic 
than  the  Bible.  I  believe  that  Christ  is  the  meet- 
ing place  between  God  and  the  sonl,  and  my  first 
advice  to  any  one  who  wants  the  Spirit  must  always 
be,  **  Go  to  Jesus,  and  tell  your  want  to  Him  J' 

Furthermore  1  would  say,  if  you  have  not  the 
Spirit,  you  must  be  diligent  in  attending  those 
means  of  grace  through  which  the  Spirit  works. 
You  must  regularly  hear  that  word,  which  is  His 
sword.  You  must  habitually  attend  those  assem- 
blies where  His  presence  is  promised.  You  must, 
in  short,  be  found  in  the  ivay  of  the  Spirit,  if  you 
want  the  Spirit  to  do  you  good.  Blind  Bartimeus 
would  never  have  received  sight,  had  he  sat  lazily 
at  home,  and  not  come  forth  to  sit  by  the  wayside. 
Zaccheus  might  never  have  seen  Jesus  and  become 
a  son  of  Abraham,  if  he  had  not  ran  before 
and  climbed  up  into  the  sycamore  tree.  The 
Spirit  is  a  loving  and  good  Spirit.  Bat  he  who 
despises  means  of  grace,  resists  the  Holy  Ghost, 

Header,  remember  these  two  things.  I  firmly 
believe  that  no  man  ever  acted  honestly  and  perse- 
veringly  on  these  two  pieces  of  advice,  who  did  not, 
sooner  or  later,  have  the  Spirit. 

Would  you  know,  in  the  next  place,  what  you 
ought  to  do,  if  you  stand  in  doubt  about  your  own 
state,  and  cannot  tell  whether  you  have  the  Spirit? 
Listen,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

If  you  stand  in  doubt  whether  you  have  the 
Spirit,  you  ought  to  examine  calmly  whether  your 
doubts  are  well-founded.  There  are  many  true 
believers,  I  fear,  who  are  destitute  of  any  firm 
assurance  as  to  their  own  state.  Doubtino*  is  their 
life.  I  ask  such  persons  to  take  their  Bibles  down, 
and  consider  quietly  the  grounds  of  their  anxiety. 
I  ask  them  to  consider  whence  came  their  sense  of 
sin,  however  feeble, — their  love  to  Christ,  however 


30 

fnint, — their  desire  after  holiness,  however  weak, — 
their  pleasure  in  the  company  of  God's  people, — 
their  inclination  to  prayer  and  the  word  ?  Whence 
came  these  things,  I  say  ?  Did  they  come  from 
y(»ur  own  hearti*  Surely  not !  Nature  bears  no 
such  fruit.  Did  they  come  from  the  devil?  Surely 
not.  Satan  does  not  war  against  Satan.  Whence 
then.  1  repeat,  did  these  things  come?  I  warn  you 
to  beware,  lest  you  grieve  the  Holy  Ghost  by 
doubting  the  truth  of  His  operations.  I  tell  you  it 
is  high  time  for  you  to  reflect  whether  you  have 
not  been  expecting  an  inward  perfection  which  you 
had  no  right  to  expect,  and  at  the  same  time 
thanklessly  undervaluing  a  real  work  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  actually  wrought  in  your  souls. 

A  great  statesman  once  said,  that  if  a  foreigner 
visited  England  for  the  first  time,  with  his  eyes 
bandaged  and  his  ears  open, — hearing  everything, 
but  seeing  nothing, — he  might  well  suppose  that 
England  was  on  the  road  to  ruin,  so  many  are  the 
murmurings  of  the  English  people.  And  yet  if 
that  same  foreigner  came  to  England  with  his  ears 
stopped  and  his  eyes  open, — seeing  everything  and 
hearing  nothing, — he  would  probably  suppose  that 
England  was  the  most  wealthy  and  flourishing 
country  in  the  world,  so  many  are  the  signs  of 
prosperity  that  he  would  see. 

Reader,  I  am  often  disposed  to  apply  this  remark 
to  the  case  of  doubting  Christians.  If  I  behoved 
all  they  say  of  themselves,  I  should  certainly  think 
they  were  in  a  bad  state.  But  when  I  see  them 
living  as  they  do, — hungering  and  thirsting  after 
righteousness, — poor  in  spirit, — desiring  holiness, 
— loving  the  name  of  Christ, — keeping  up  habits 
of  Bible  reading  and  prayer, — when  I  see  these 
things,  I  cease  to  be  afraid.  I  trust  my  eyes  more 
than  my  ears.  I  see  manifest  marks  of  the  Spirit's 
presence,  and  I  only  grieve  that  they  should  refuse 
to  see  them  themselves.  I  see  the  devil  robbing 
them  of  their  peace,  by  instilling  these  doubts  into 
their  minds,  and  I  mourn  that  they  should  injure 
themselves   by  beUeving   him.      Some  professors, 


31 

without  controversy,  may  well  doubt  whether  they 
have  the  Spirit,  for  they  have  no  si^ns  of  grace 
about  them.  But  many  nurse  up  a  habit  of  doubt 
in  their  minds  for  which  they  have  no  cause,  and 
of  which  they  ought  to  be  ashamed. 

Would  you  know,  last  of  all,  ivhat  yoit  ought  to 
dOy  if  you  really  have  the  Spirit,  Listen  to  me, 
and  I  will  tell  you. 

If  you  have  the  Spirit,  seek  to  be  *'  filled  with 
the  Spirit.''  (Ephes.  v.  18.)  Drink  deep  of  the 
living  waters.  Do  not  be  content  witli  a  little 
religion.  Pray  that  the  Spirit  may  fill  every  cor- 
ner and  chamber  of  your  heart,  and  that  not  an 
inch  of  room  may  be  left  in  it  for  the  world  and 
the  devil. 

If  you  have  the  Spirit,  "  grieve  not  the  Spirit." 
(Ephes.  iv.  30.)  It  is  easy  lor  believers  to  weaken 
their  sense  of  His  presence,  and  deprive  themselves 
of  His  comfort.  Little  sins  not  mortified, — little  bad 
habits  of  temper  or  of  tongue  not  corrected, — little 
compliances  with  the  world,  —  are  all  likely  to 
offend  the  Holy  Ghost.  Oh !  that  believers  would 
remember  this !  There  is  far  more  of  heaven  on 
earth  to  be  enjoyed,  than  many  of  them  attain  to ! 
And  why  do  they  not  attain  to  it?  They  do  not 
watch  sufficiently  over  their  daily  ways, — and  so  the 
Spirit's  work  is  damped  and  hindered,  lieader, 
the  Spirit  must  be  a  thoroughly  sanctifying  Spirit, 
if  He  is  to  be  a  Comforter  to  your  soul. 

If  you  have  the  Spirit,  labour  to  bring  forth 
all  "  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit."  (Galat  v.  22.)  Read 
over  the  list  which  the  xipostle  has  drawn  out,  and 
see  that  no  one  of  these  fruits  is  neglected.  Oh ! 
that  believers  would  seek  for  more  ''  love,"  and  more 
**joyP'  Then  would  they  do  more  good  to  all  men. 
Then  would  they  feel  happier  themselves.  Then 
would  they  make  religion  more  beautiful  in  the 
eyes  of  the  world. 

lieader,  1  commend  the  things  that  I  have 
written  to  your  serious  atttention,  at  the  beginning 
of  a  new  year.     Join  with  me  in  praying  that  the 


32 

year  1854  may  be  a  year  in  which  the  Spirit  may 
be  poured  out  from  on  high  more  abundantly  than 
He  ever  has  been  yet.  Pray  that  He  may  be 
poured  out  on  all  believers  at  home  and  abroad, 
that  they  may  be  more  united  and  more  holy. 
Pray  that  He  may  be  poured  out  on  Jews,  Mahom- 
etans, and'  heathen,  that  many  of  them  may  be 
converted. 

Pray  that  He  may  be  poured  out  on  Roman 
Catholics,  and  especially  in  Italy  and  Ireland. 
Pray  that  He  may  be  poured  out  on  your  own 
country,  and  that  it  may  be  spared  the  judgments 
it  deserves.  Pray  that  He  may  be  poured  out  on 
all  faithful  ministers  and  missionaries,  and  that 
their  numbers  may  be  increased  an  hundred-fold. 

Pray  that  He  may  be  poured  out  on  your  own 
soul,  that  if  you  know  not  the  truth,  you  may 
know  it, — and  that  if  you  know  it,  you  may  know 
it  better. 

Pray  not  least  that  He  may  be  poured  out  on  my 
soul,  that  I  may  be  kept  from  falling,  and  that  you 
and  I  may  meet  with  joy  at  the  Lord's  appearing. 


I  remain, 

Your  affectionate  Friend, 

J.  C.  RYLE, 


Helmingham^  Stoneham^ 
December^  1853. 


Hunt  &  Son,  Steam  Press,  Ipswich. 


