Lats : =) fe 


reaps oe 


Has 
” pt 
ie art 


beg eae 


HEAVEN: 
A Place—A City—A Home 


By Edward M. Bounds 


Fleaven: A Place—A City—A Home 
Cloth 


Possessed of a wonderfully full knowledge of 
Holy Scripture, a man of unswerving faith and mys- 
tical insight, Mr. Bounds writes with a certitude, con- 
fidence and joyous anticipation of the eternal felicity 
awaiting the faithful believer. 


Purpose in Prayer. Cloth 


«Tt is seldom that one finds a book on prayer that 
goes thoroughly enough into the subject, and at the 
same time with a deeply devotional spirit. Mr. Bounds 
has the gift of insight, and with this a faculty for se- 
lecting words to express precisely that which responds 
to the heart-hunger of those who are seeking spiritual 
enlightenment.”—Sunday School Times. 


Satan: His Personality, His Power, His 
Overthrow. Cloth 


With irrefutable logic backed by the testimony of 
Holy Scripture, it shows the Arch Enemy of mankind 
to bea Person—actual, literal, ever active for the de- 
struction of human souls. Indicates whereby Christian 
believers can withstand his assaults and how they 
may finally triumph. 


* HEAVEN: 


A Place—A City—A Home 


By 


EDWARD M. BOUNDS 


Author of ‘Purpose In Prayer,’ ” “Preacher 
and Prayer,” etc. 


uM we LIBRARY 
AIG) THE MASTER'S COLLEGE 
NEWHALL, CA 91321 


New Yorx CHICAGO 


Fleming H. Revell Company 


LONDON AND EDINBURGH 


Copyright, 1921, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


New York: 158 Fifth Avenue 
Chicago: 17 North Wabash Ave. 
London: 21 Paternoster Square’ 
Edinburgh: 75 Princes’ Street - 


Introduction 


DWARD McKENDRIE BOUNDS was 

k, born in Shelby County, Mo., August 15, 

1835, and died August 24, 1918, in Wash- 

ington, Ga. He was admitted to the bar, but was 

called into the Civil War as chaplain of the Fifth 
Missouri Regiment, too early to practice law. 

He married Miss Emmie Barnett of Eufaula, 
Ala., in 1876. By this union he became the father 
of two daughters, Mrs. Bounds Ficklin and Mrs. 
Bounds Barnett. His wife died in 1886, and later 
he was married to Miss Hattie Barnett, by whom 
he became the father of five children, Miss Elliza- 
beth Bounds, Miss Mary Willis and Miss Emmie, 
Osborn and Barnett. All his children are living. 

After serving several important churches in St. 
Louis and other places, south, he became Editor 
of the St. Louis Christian Advocate for eight years 
and, later, Associate Editor of The Nashville 
Christian Advocate for four years. The trial of 
his faith came to him while in Nashville, and he 
quietly retired to his home without asking even a 
pension. His principal work in Washington, 
Ga. (his home) was rising at 4 a. mM. and pray- 
ing until 7 a.m. He filled a few engagements as’ 

5 


6 INTRODUCTION 


an evangelist during the eighteen years of his life- 
work in Washington, Ga. 

While pastor in Atlanta, in 1905, the writer was 
informed that there was an apostolic man of prayer 
in Georgia that would aid the church in attaining 
a high altitude in spiritual things. The next mail 
carried a letter asking Mr. Bounds to come to our 
Convention for ten days’ preaching. Naturally we 
expected to see a man of imposing physique, but 
when he came we discovered that he was only 
about five and a half feet tall, but in him we met 
one of the greatest saints that, in our humble 
opinion, has appeared on the spiritual horizon in 
the last hundred years. 

He spoke the first afternoon on Prayer. No one 
seemed to be particularly impressed. The next 
morning at 4 A. M. we were amazed to hear him 
engaged in the most wonderful prayer we have 
ever listened to—a prayer that seemed to take in 
both Heaven and Earth. His sermons were all 
about Prayer and Heaven. Not one morning dur- 
ing his stay did he fail to make his prayers at 
the “ Great-While-Before-Day ” Hour. He cared 
nothing for the protests of the other occupants of 
his room at being awakened at that unheard-of 
hour. No man could have made more melting ap- 
peals for lost souls and back-slidden ministers than 
did Bounds. ‘Tears ran down his face as he 
pleaded for us all in that room. I know of no 
other man on earth to-day, who, if he had followed 


INTRODUCTION 7 


the same experiment at the same place, in the same 
room, but would have gone away defeated. But 
Bounds was all-powerful, all-commanding, all- 
victorious, when once he knew his cause was just. 

After that Convention we took him to our heart 
and never let him go. God sent him in answer to 
prayer to settle and establish the writer in the 
things of God that are foremost and supreme— 
Prayer, Preaching, and the study of the Bible. 

We were constantly with him, in prayer and 
preaching, for eight precious years. Not a foolish 
word did we ever hear him utter. He was one of 
the most intense eagles of God that ever penetrated 
the spiritual ether. He could not brook delay in 
rising, or being late for dinner. He would go with 
me to street meetings often in Brooklyn and listen 
to the preaching and sing with us those beautiful 
songs of Wesley and Watts. He often repri- 
manded me for asking the unconverted to sing of 
Heaven. Said he: ‘ They have no heart to sing, 
they do not know God, and God does not hear 
them. Quit asking sinners to sing the songs of 
Zion and the Lamb.” ‘To what mysterious order 
of men did Bounds belong, anyway? Have they 
clean gone out of the world? 

Few subjects are better fitted to afford interest 
in the mind of the fervent Christian reader than 
the subject Bounds has named: Heaven, A State, 
A City, A Home. He was so full of the “ Heav- 
enly Manna” that God produced through him the 


8 INTRODUCTION 


spiritual splendour that shines out of every chap- 
ter of his wonderful books. 

In 1912 I wrote him to come to Brooklyn, N. Y., 
and spend a while in praying for me and my 
church. Here are a few extracts from his personal 
letters to us at this time which show the depths of 
his thought for a Home in Heaven. 


“Washington, July 1, 1912: I am thinking 
more of going to Heaven than to New York. It is 
far better. But it is in God’s will. I would enjoy 
being with you. God seems to have opened the 
way. I will have to wait on God for New York 
or Heaven as I am now very feeble. With all love 
and prayer.” 


“December 12 and 13, 1912: You will pray 
much. I am turning to you and Chilton. 
One of you must help me to do the work on 
my manuscripts that I want finished and pub- 
lished. I could go to you and then you 
could help me in odd times by prayer and 
consultation. We would then be together as long 
as God lets me live for His great work. We 
can issue the books conjointly and you can keep 
them if necessary until I die—until God’s fitting 
time to publish.” On January 6, 1913, he writes 
as follows: “ Dearly Beloved: A good time pray- 
ing for you. Be at it early and late. Let your 
mind live in the spirit of prayer. The thought of 
heaven is sweet. I am right feeble, but will strive 
to work on and wait for God’s time for heaven.” 


He was growing weaker and nearing the other 
shore when he wrote this letter: 


INTRODUCTION 9 


“ April 21, 1913: God will manage our affairs 
if we will be filled with His affairs. I am trying 
to get matters in shape for my manuscripts. I am 
very feeble. I want to live for God, and then de- 
part and be with Christ. I have an unspeakable 
desire to know the future, to see it and enjoy it, 
and to be there—to see and enjoy. God bless 
you.” . 

The following letters I call dying messages to 


one whom he loved: 


“Washington, May 10, 1913: With all love 
and longing and prayers. God bless and keep you 
until eternal life. With many trials and tears, I 
am pressing on. I am still weak, but by sleeping in 
the day I can get through. When He is ready, I 
long for the heavenlies through Christ.” 


“Washington, Ga, May 22, 1913: Yours 
came. I have you in prayer, at it early and trying 
to be at it all the day. God bless you unto eternal 
life and hasten the day. Go out into the highways 
and hedges and compel them to come in. Bear 
your boys on your prayers to the doors of heaven. 
I am getting the book ready to send to England. 
Pray God to open the way for it to His glory. In 
love and faithful prayer as my strength will al- 
low.” 


He wrote one card dated June 26, 1913: 


“Washington, Ga.: In prayful sympathy and 
love. Hold to the old truth—double distilled.” 


The above card was the last word to us written 
by his own hand. On August 9, just before he 


10 INTRODUCTION 


died, his wife writes: “ He was glad to hear from 
you but soon forgets. My physician says he will 
never be well again. His last message to you is 
characteristic: ‘Tell him he is on the right line; 
press it. Have a high standard and hold to it.’” 

Then came the telegram announcing his home- 
going: 

“ Washington, Ga., August 24, 1913: Doctor 
Bounds went home this afternoon; funeral here 
to-morrow afternoon,—Hatrtie Bounps.” 


His prayer that his manuscripts be left until 
proper time for publishing has been answered. 
We have been working and compiling them for 
the space of six years, off and on, and have good 
reasons to believe that the Publishers will in due 
season issue them for the benefit of a world that 
sorely needs the golden thoughts of such a saint 
of God as was Edward M. Bounds. 

Homer W. Hopce. 

Brooklyn, N. VY. 


Contents 


HEAVEN, A PLACE F : A : 
HEAVEN, A City. Z ‘ 


Heaven: A Kincpom, A Crown, AN 
INHERITANCE : Q 


PARADISE AND ETERNAL LIFE 

HEAVEN AND ETERNAL LIFE 

HEAVEN AND THE Hoty Spirir . 4 
HEAVEN, A STATE : ; 
Graces WHICH Fit For HEAVEN 
LovE oF JESUS AND HEAVEN 

Looxinc TO HEAVEN . 

On A STRETCH FOR HEAVEN 
KNOWLEDGE OF HEAVEN 


CITIZENSHIP OF HEAVEN 

HEAVEN A Home : 
TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN . u 
THe Hope oF HEAVEN é F 
REUNION IN HEAVEN . - 2 


ir 


13 
31 


53 
59 
67 
72 
77 
88 
99 
105 
110 
115 
119 
124 
129 
I4l 
147 


1 
HEAVEN, A PLACE 


“Tf God had told me some time ago that He was about 
to make me as happy as I could be in this world, and then 
had told me that He should begin by crippling me in all my 
limbs, and removing me from all my usual sources of 
enjoyment, I should have thought it a very strange mode 
of accomplishing His purpose. And yet, how is His wisdom 
manifest even in this! for if you should see a man shut up 
in a close room, idolizing a set of lamps and rejoicing in 
their light, and you wished to make him truly happy, you 
would begin by blowing out all his lamps; and then throw 
open the shutters to let in the light of heaven.” 

—SAMUEL, RUTHERFORD. 


EAVEN isa place. Out of the region of 
all fancy it is taken and put into the 
realm of the actual, the local. ‘The 

revelations of the bare fact that death does not end 
all, death cannot end all; that man must exist to all 
eternity, that the future may be one of unutterable 
bliss,—that is the fact. This fact may have many 
colorings, many symbols, but these are not the main 
things, nor of the main thing. Heaven does not 
float around. It is not made of air, thin air. It is 
real, a country, a clime, a home sacred affinities 
draw to the spot. Divine assurance settles and 
fixes the fact. 
13 


14 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


Heaven might be a reality, but simply a state. 
In its location and grasp it might be airy, volatile. 
The Bible statement is of a place. One of the 
main ideas contained in the heavenly symbol, of a 
city, is place, location, a settled place, in contrast 
with a pilgrim state, unsettled and temporary. 

The strong argument for heaven as a place 
centers in, and clusters about Jesus. The man 
Jesus, bearing a man’s form, the body He wore on 
earth, has a place assigned Him—a high place. 


“‘ Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and 
given him a name which is above every name: That 
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of 
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things 
under the earth; And that every tongue should con- 
fess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God 
the Father” (Phil. 2: 9-11). 

“Whom he raised from the dead and set him at 
his right hand in the heavenly places, Far above all 
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, 
and every name that is named, not only in this world, 
but also in that which is to come: And hath put all 
things under his feet, and gave him to be head over 
all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness 
of him that filleth all in all” (Ephes. 1: 20-23). 


This excellence and dignity is all conclusive of a 
place of high honor, the best, the most royal in the 
heavenly world. 


“God who at sundry times and in divers manners 


HEAVEN, A PLACE 15 


spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, 
Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, 
whom he hath appointed heir to all things, by whom 
also he made the worlds; Who being the brightness 
of his glory, and the express image of his person, 
and upholding all things by the word of his power, 
when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down 
on the right hand of the Majesty on high” (Heb. 


£233): 


These all bespeak His place among the home 
places of God’s many mansioned country. ‘Who 
is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of 
God; angels and authorities and powers being 
made subject unto him.” 

These are figures of Christ’s exaltation and loca- 
tion. ‘They are figures of a place. Jesus wants us 
with Him. To see and share His glory. He 
dwells ina place. A place which honors and glori- 
fies His person and presence. His business is not 
to be enthroned and receive honor, but He is there 
for us, to prepare a place for us. 


“Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast 
given me, be with me where I am; that they may 
behold my glory, which thou hast given me” (John 
17:24). 


Heaven in the Bible is represented as a place in 
contrast with earth. The earth is a place, but un- 
stable, insecure, fleeting. Heaven is stable, secure, 
eternal. 


16 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


“ For here have we no continuing city, but we seek _ 
one to come” (Heb. 13:14). 


How marked the contrast between earth and 
heaven! Earth is but a pilgrim’s stay, a pilgrim’s 
journey, a pilgrim’s tent. Heaven is a city, per- 
manent, God-planned, God-built, whose founda- 
tions are as stable as God’s throne. 


“By faith Abraham, when he was called to go 
out into a place which he should after receive for 
an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out not know- 
ing whither he went. By faith, he sojourned in the 
land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in 
tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him 
of the same promise: For he looked for a city which 
hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God” 


(Heb. 11: 8-9). 


The Bible reveals heaven as a place. It is 
measured off, has its appointed metes and bounds, 
as definite place as a city, a walled city. It has its 
inside and its outside. Heaven is within the city, 
hell is without. 


“For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whore- 
mongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whoso- 
ever loveth and maketh a lie” (Rev. 22:15). 


Heaven is a place. Not airy, impalpable, de- 
localized, is heaven. “TI go,” said Jesus, “to pre- 
pare a place for you.” That means locality, some- 


HEAVEN, A PLACE 17 


thing settled. Heaven has its deep, strong color- 
ings, its metes and bounds on God’s map. 

In God’s house, Jesus declares, there are many 
mansions. ‘The New Version has it in the margin, 
“abiding places.” In God’s many homes, one 
home was to be theirs, a place, a home prepared 
for them. This was the solace to the disciples, 
saddened as they were. “ Going to prepare a place 
for them,” is the purpose and fact in regard to the 
going of Christ. Nothing can be simpler, more 
explicit, more downright honest than this revela- 
tion to them of Christ’s purpose and plans. As 
though He had said, “ Earth is a place where we 
have been abiding. We can abide together no 
longer here, but God has many other abiding 
places. I go to select one of these places for you; 
when it is ready I will come and take you there, 
and we will be together in place as well as in spirit, 
‘that where I am, there ye may be also.’” 
“United again,’ Alford says, commenting on this 
statement of our Lord. “ His taking His people 
to Himself to be where He is,” is begun in His 
Resurrection, carried on in the spiritual life, the 
making them ready for the place prepared. 
Jesus uses the term, “prepare a place.” The 

term means, make the necessary preparation, get 
‘everything ready, a figure drawn from the eastern 
custom of sending on before kings persons to level 
the roads and make them passable. Jesus is our 
pioneer, gone to prepare heaven for us. A place 


18 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


made ready it will be. Its antitype was Canaan, a 
place and a prepared place. Israel did not have to 
pioneer the way, build cities, or homes. Homes 
and cities were already built for them. They had 
to do nothing but simply to enter in, possess and 
enjoy. As Canaan was but a feeble type of 
heaven, so its preparation was but a faint shadow 
of the preparation which will be made for us in 
heaven, a city God-built, homes not made with 
hands, eternal in the heavens. 

As Jesus Christ drew near to the end, in the last 
conversation on the eve of His death, important 
things, most important, all important things, en- 
gaged His attention. He must commit to His dis- 
ciples the interests of His kingdom. Heaven was 
all important. Heaven was to be kept in eye and 
heart all the time. He speaks of heaven. Their 
deep spiritual life, their personal holiness, their 
conscious abiding in Christ, all this was all impor- 
tant. Of this Christ spake in His last words, 
sacred words, holy words, of the necessity of 
Christ-life and Christ-likeness. 

What could be clearer, more hope-giving, more 
conclusive than the utterance of Christ on the 
verge of His going away! His disciples were sor- 
rowfully impressed, deeply touched, and depressed 
by the fact of His leaving them. He challenges 
their faith in Himself and links Himself insepa- 
rably as the object of their faith with God. 

Peter views heaven as a place, an inheritance 


HEAVEN, A PLACE 19 


to be sought for, a possession awaiting us. He is 
scarcely less enraptured by the glorious vision and 
reversion, its location and certainty than Paul. 


“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy 
hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an 
inheritance, incorruptible, and undefiled, and that 
fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who 
are kept by the power of God through faith unto 
salvation ready to be revealed in the last time” 
(1 Peter 1: 3-5). 


This is no impalpable state without local habita- 
tion, or merely a name. It is located, named defi- 
nitely, and definitely described. 

John had a picture of heaven which located it. 
The picture is for charm, comfort and for strength. 


“After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, 
which no man could number, of all nations, and 
kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the 
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white 
robes, and palms in their hands; And cried with a 
loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which 
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. And 
all the angels stood round about the throne, and 
about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before 
the throne on their faces, and worshipped God. Say- 
ing, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and 
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be 

PROPERTY OF 
NORTHEASTERN BISLE INSTITUTE LIBRARY 


ESSEX FELLS, NEW JERSEY 


20 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. And one 
of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are 
these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence 
came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. 
And he said to me, These are they which came out 
of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and 
made them white in the blood of the Lamb. There- 
fore are they before the throne of God, and serve 
him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth 
on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall 
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither 
shall the sun light upon them, nor any heat. For the 
Lamb which is in the midst of the thone shall feed 
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of 
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes” (Rev. 7:9-17). 


“To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise,” 
was the answer of Jesus to the prayer of the dying 
thief. ‘Through the gates into the city,” repre- 
sents a place. So also “ Absent from the body to 
be present with the Lord ” indicates locality. Eji- 
jah and Enoch are in their bodies. 

The future of the saint will not be impalpable 
and transitory, but defined, limited, real as soul and 
body will be real. ‘The glorified will not be pil- 
grims, transient visitors, or tenants at will, but 
settled, permanent, walled, established by title, 
through eternity by warrantee deed, signed, sealed, 
recorded, possession given. No renters, no lessees 
of heaven, but all property and home-owners. 


HEAVEN, A PLACE 91 


Heaven’s patent is issued to guarantee right and 
title. In fact it is ours before we get there. It is 
reserved for us, it is guarded for us, our names of 
ownership are engraven, jeweled on our heavenly 
home. 

Heaven is a house, “a house not made with 
hands eternal in the heavens.” In this the apostle 
is drawing a contrast between a tent, its frailty, 
its temporary nature and the permanency of 
heaven. “ For we know,” says the apostle, “ that 
if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dis- 
solved we have a building of God, an house not 
made with hands eternal in the heavens.” 

All earthly houses however beautiful, costly, and 
enduring they may be, are made with earthly 
hands and subject to decay. The marks of their 
death are on them, laid in their very foundations. 
‘The houses of heaven are God-built, and are as en- 
during and incorruptible as their builder. We will 
have bodies after the resurrection, transfigured 
they will be after the model of Christ’s glorious 
body. ‘The transfiguration will refine and spir- 
itualize the substance of our bodies, but we will re- 
quire houses then to locate us as now. What 
houses they will be! fitted essentially for every use, 
employment, and enjoyment of the heavenly citi- 
zens, worthy of God their builder, reflecting honor 
on and bringing glory to Him by the untold beauty, 
magnificence, and grandeur of these God-built 
houses. Whatever the house as used by Paul in 


22 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


this extract may mean, whether it is used to signify 
the glorious body which shall be the habitation of 
our spirits, or whether he has reference to some 
glorious structure outside of ourselves, fitted for 
home uses, as our houses are, it is all the same God- 
built mansion for spirit, or for body and spirit 
immortalized. It is “a building of God not made 
with hands eternal in the heavens.’”’ It will be for 
us; we shall be in it. A thing of beauty and joy 
forever and ever, Amen! 

Paul again asserts the security and confidence 
of heaven: 


“We are always confident I say, and willing 
rather to be absent from the body and to be at home 
with the Lord” (2 Cor. 5:6). 


Home is always a place, the heart’s place, the 
place to which longings draw, and around which 
sweet memories cluster. 

Paul was caught up into paradise, into the third 
heaven. All these passages and others have in 
them, in intention and spirit, a place. Lazarus 
was carried by the angels and located in Abraham’s 
bosom. 

In the Bible the fact also is taken for granted 
that heaven is a place, stable, enduring, all attract- 
ive, in contrast with the veering nature and trans- 
itory conditions of our earth’s sojourn. If the 
description in the Revelation of John be in any 
wise a description of the material aspects of 


HEAVEN, A PLACE 23 


heaven, the place is one of matchless and exquisite 
beauty, “incorruptible, undefiled, that fadeth not 
away.” 

Stephen the first martyr was a man full of faith 
and the Holy Spirit. In the presence of a cruel 
murderous death and an infuriated mob, he had the 
sight and calm of heaven. 


“But he being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up 
steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, 
and Jesus standing on the right hand of God. And 
said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son 
of man standing on the right hand of God. Then 
they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their 
ears, and ran upon him with one accord, And cast 
him out of the city, and stoned him: and the wit- 
nesses laid down their clothes at a young man’s feet, 
whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen, 
calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my 
spirit. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud 
voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And 
when he had said this, he fell asleep” (Acts 7: 55- 
60). 


Jesus declares, “I came down from heaven.” 

He is declared in the sacred scriptures to be 
“The second man from heaven.” Much shall we 
learn from Him of heaven. From heaven He 
came, for heaven He suffered. In heaven He 
lived, to heaven He returned. Born in heaven, liv- 
ing in heaven, breathing the air of heaven, speak- 
ing the language of heaven, longing for heaven, 


24 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


it would be strange if we did not hear from His 
lips much of heaven. 

In familiar language He constantly impresses 
us with the fact that heaven is a place. What are 
the words in his memorable conversation with 
Nicodemus but a contrast of places—earth and 
heaven and His own identification, and location 
with the one! 


“Tf I have told you earthly things and ye believe 
not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly 
things? And no man hath ascended up to heaven, 
but he that came down from heaven, even the Son 
of man which is in heaven” (John 3: 12-13). 


We are well assured that we shall hear much 
from His lips of heaven. So He begins His Beati- 
tudes, “ Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven” (Matt. 5: 3). 

This sermon on the mount among His first ut- 
terances, if not the very first, begins with heaven. 
He teaches us to let our light shine that we may 
glorify our Father in heaven; that except our 
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the 
scribes and Pharisees we shall in no case enter into 
the kingdom of heaven. So He begins His divine 
mission and marvelous career with heaven ac- 
cepted, recognized as a matter of course, in full 
force and to the front. His first preaching was 
saturated with the idea of the principles of heaven. 
“ Repent,” He said, “ for the kingdom of heaven is 


HEAVEN, A PLACE 25 


at hand.” The first foundation stone of spiritual 
character is cemented, impregnated with the same. 
The first utterance of His first sermon is a beati- 
tude of the kingdom of heaven. The diamond of 
all diamonds of character is, “ Blessed are the pure 
in heart for they shall see God.” What includes, 
seeing, knowing, and loving God, but it includes 
and finds its full realization in heaven. To see 
God, to see Him in everything, in every tear that 
dims the eye or breaks the heart—that is heaven, 
heaven begun on earth. To see God—that is 
heaven, the highest heaven, heaven to all eternity. 
“For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then 
face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I 
know even as also Iam known” (1 Cor. 13: 12). 

He brings us into the presence of the children 
and their character, and we see the child’s inherit- 
ance, “if children then heirs.” ‘‘ Blessed are the 
peacemakers; for they shall be called the children 
of God” (Matt. 5: 9). 

The next Beatitude reads, “ Blessed are they 
which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” ‘This leads the 
way to the last: “ Blessed are they which are per- 
secuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the 
kingdom of heaven.” “ Blessed are ye, when men 
shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall 
say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my 
sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great 
is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they, 


LIBRARY 


26 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


the prophets which were before you” (Matt, 
5: 10-12). 

Jesus at the very beginning and in His first call 
to discipleship stimulates and connects that call 
with all the alluring weight, comfort, and hope of 
heaven. Heaven is at the foundation of the sys- 
tem of Jesus, its first thought, brightest hope, 
strongest faith. Their Father, He tells them, is in 
heaven, a place worthy the abode of God, and they 
must so demean themselves as to reflect glory on 
their Father in heaven. ‘The righteousness of 
His followers must exceed the righteousness of the 
Scribes and Pharisees, else the glories of heaven 
would never be theirs. The commonplace, gener- 
ally current piety will not bring heaven. Heaven in 
the teaching of Jesus is God’s throne. Earth His 
footstool. As the throne excels in honor, char- 
acter, material, and uses the footstool, so does 
heaven excel earth. How much, who can tell? 
He will not let. it get out of their mind that their 
Father is in heaven, a place, defined, located, and 
that they are His children; they must be like Him 
to share His character, imitate His conduct, to 
share His heaven. He keeps before us constantly 
that heaven is His home. ‘The Father’s character 
must be the children’s character, the Father’s con- 
duct, the children’s conduct, the Father’s place, the 
children’s place, the Father’s home, the children’s 
home. 


“Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt 


HEAVEN, A PLACE on 


love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I 
say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that 
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray 
for them which despitefully use you, and persecute 
you; That ye may be the children of your Father 
which is in heaven, for he maketh his sun to rise on 
the evil and the good, and sendeth his rain on the 
just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which 
love you, what reward have ye? do not even the 
publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren 
only, what do ye more than others? do not even the 
publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your 
Father which is in heaven is perfect” (Matt. 5: 43- 
48). 


He faces and prefaces duties with heaven as the 
home of our Father. Almsgiving, prayer and 
fasting take their coloring, and their obligation 
from “ Our Father who art in heaven.” Heaven 
is His dwelling place, and the very place itself re- 
ceives its glory from the Father. The Father’s 
name and the Father’s dwelling place are to be 
hallowed. Heaven is not only the home of God, 
but it is to be the pattern after which earth is to be 
fashioned. FEiarth ought to look to heaven, its har- 
mony, its beauty, its ecstasy, all due to implicit 
obedience to God’s will, and learn how to rival 
heaven. But instead earth is devoted to its own 
fashions, and is even ready to forget the higher 
and holier place after which it should type. 

Jesus keeps the place, the being, the order, and 


28 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


beauty of heaven, ever before us and hangs them 
all around the Father’s house, the trappings and 
decorations of His abode, saying, be like God. He 
is your Father. Children be like your Father. 
Heaven is Hishome. Make your home like His. 
Earth is unsafe, says Jesus. Thieves are here, 
treasures are lost here. Moths are here. Finest 
silks and costliest robes are eaten. Rust is here. 
Richest jewels and finest gold, costliest metals cor- 
rode and rust. Heaven is a place, as really as earth 
is a place, a place of absolute safety. ‘Thieves are 
never there. No robberies ever occur on its plains 
or in its cities. Moths are not known there. Its 
spotless robes have never been defiled by their 
touch. Its precious stones and metals know not 
the corroding touch of rust. All is pure, polished, 
glittering and forever secure. How emphatic and 
absolute the command for safety and obedience! 


“Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, 
where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves 
break through and steal: But lay up for yourselves 
treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth 
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor 
steal: For where your treasure is, there will your 
heart be also. The light of the body is the eye: if 
therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall 
be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole 
body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light 
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that dark- 
ness!” (Matt. 6: 20-23). 


HEAVEN, A PLACE 29 


How the divine teacher emphasizes heaven! 
He wants our hearts to be there. They must be 
there, if we ever get there. The heart is the soul, 
the being, the man. Safety isin heaven, Put your 
values there only, put your heart there. No 
tears are there to flood your heart, no sorrows 
there to break it, no losses there to grieve and em- 
bitter. Put your heart in heaven, says Jesus, that 
it may be sweet, and whole, and joyful. Put your 
treasures in heaven, says Jesus, and all will be light 
and clear, cloudless and strong. Don’t divide be- 
tween heaven and earth. If so, the light will be 
mixed, confused and confusing, and turn the dark- 
ness into darkness, all the darker for the light lost 
in it. Don’t divide between heaven and earth, 
says Jesus. 

“No man can serve two masters, for either he 
will hate the one and love the other; or else he will 
hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot 
serve God and mammon.” 

Anxiety about food and raiment, the fears hid- 
den in the womb of to-morrow, have mastered 
many a soul, breeded fears and disrooted faith. 
Jesus Christ shows that the cause of these anxie- 
ties and carefulness results from lack of faith in 
our Father in heaven, and as their only infallible 
cure, He puts on an absorbing pursuit of heaven; 
“ Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his right- 
eousness, and all these things shall be added to 
you.” He would quiet our anxieties by stressing 


30 HEAVEN, A PLACE 


the fact that our “ Heavenly Father knoweth that 
ye have need of all these things,” by linking us 
constantly with our Father, His ability and so- 
licitude for us. With heaven His abode and 
ours, Jesus would calm our hearts, and set them on 
heaven and its pursuits, which is impossible when 
earthly need and necessaries bewilder and engross. 
Heaven to Jesus is the real place. The Father’s 
place and home. 


Let others seek a home below, 

Which flames devour, or waves o’erflow, 
Be mine a happier lot, to own 
A heavenly mansion near the throne. 


Then fail this earth, let stars decline, 

And sun and moon refuse to shine, 

All nature sink and cease to be, 

That heavenly mansion stands for me. 
—William Hunter. 


IT 
HEAVEN AXCITY 


“T£ contentment were here, heaven were not heaven. I 
wonder that ever a child of God should have a sad heart, 
considering what his Lord is preparing for him. I know 
not a thing worth the buying but heaven.” 

—SAMUEL RUTHERFORD. 


HE, city is of heavenly and divine birth, 
shaped and built by God in heavenly mold 
with heavenly air about her. The 
heavenly life will come from God directly, and will 
be heavenly, not earthly. Many earthly things, by 
chance, by happenings and of direct purpose and 
appointment, shape our earthly lives, but in a di- 
rect and most evident and all inclusive way, our 
heavenly lives will be from God, and the air and 
conditions of heaven will shape them. Earth will 
not be forgotten, but the former things will 
scarcely be remembered. Nor will the things of 
old be considered, but crowded out, overwhelmed 
and retired by the magnificent grandeur, ever new 
and expanding glories of the present. Earth will 
be too little, its most sacred relations, its most 
pleasing things all too poor to come into mind in 
heaven. 
31 


32 HEAVEN, A CITY 


“And I, John, saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, 
coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as 
a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a 
great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tab- 
ernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with 
them, and they shall be his people, and God himself 
shall be with them, and be their God. And God 
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there 
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain: for the former 
things are passed away. And he that sat upon the 
throne said, Behold, I make all things new” (Rev. 
21: 1-5). 


A transfigured mind and memory, a purified 
thought and love, a transfigured body, shining like 
a sun in noonday splendor, which has no eclipse 
and fears no night—a transfigured heaven and 
earth—this will be the saint’s eternal inheritance. 

God’s power and glory making all things new— 
a bride adorned for her husband—the marriage 
hour—the bridal array—one and all are emblems 
of the beauty of the heavenly life. The marriage 
of heaven and earth on their festal day. Heaven 
the place of perfect beauty, perfect taste, perfect 
joy—the bridal life and all that life—this be heav- 
en’s honeymoon. ; 

The tabernacle has reference to the place where 
God dwells and manifested Himself to Moses. 
God will be essentially and immediately present 
with man in the heavenly world. God shall be 


HEAVEN, A CITY 33 


with them in a sense in which He is not with them 
in this life. They will draw their being and their 
blessing directly from Him without the aid of 
intermediaries. “ And I saw no temple therein: 
for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the 
temple of it. And the city had no need of the sun, 
neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of 
God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light 
thereof.” 

And again it is said: “ And they need no candle, 
neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth 
them light.” In this life we cannot understand 
this. Secondary causes are the agencies through 
which God ministers to us in this world. In that 
higher life these agencies will not intervene and 
hide God, but with open vision, face to face, we 
shall see Him. No temple there, no gorgeous tem- 
ple service, no brilliant sun to shine, no simpler 
service will be there. The glory of God, brighter 
than the light of a thousand suns, will be our light, 
and the mild sweet rays from the Lamb will cast 
their radiance over all the land, dispelling darkness 
and gloom and sorrow. “For there shall be no 
night there,” and to make it strong and clear it is 
declared, the second time, “‘ And there shall be no 
night there.” 

In heaven no tears will be shed, for God will 
wipe all tears from their eyes. “ There shall be no 
death, neither sorrow nor crying nor pain.”” What 
a changed world! How difficult to imagine such 


34 HEAVEN, A CITY 


a world! ‘Tears are the sad heritage of this life. 
Serrow and pain flow from a thousand sources, 
and deepen and widen and darken earth’s sorrow. 
Our sweetest relations give birth to our greatest 
sorrows. Our distresses often flow from our joys. 
Death reigns. All this will be changed, and every- 
thing which gives pain and sorrow anyway, will be 
forever barred from heaven. God will shut it out. 
How bright the eyes undimmed by a tear! How 
strong and free our souls and bodies will be, utter 
and eternal strangers to pain! How bright and 
joyous our hearts, with never a cloud, never a sor- 
row. How full of richest and largest life, un- 
touched by decay, unshadowed by - death, will 
heaven be! 

All things are to be made new. No marks of 
age, no common things, no freshened or repainted 
old things, but absolutely new, all things will be— 
a new world, a new life, a new career, a new his- 
tory, new environments, new conditions, new em- 
ployments, new destiny, all, all things will be new. 
World dreams, pictures, poetry, fiction, music— 
all have failed to give the faintest idea of that new 
world and its marvelous life, its melody, and 
charms. To live there is a rapture, ecstasy, in- 
effable, and full of glory. Its climax is, “ He that 
overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be 
his God, and he shall be my son.” It is the wonder 
and spectacle of angels. 

Type and shadow, precept and promise, both in 


HEAVEN, A CITY 35 


the Old and New Testaments are given tokens and 
seals of the saints’ inheritance after death. No 
truth is fuller in statement, more necessary to man, 
none more in accordance with God’s character, 
none more necessary to His glory, than the truth, 
and doctrine of heaven. An eternal heaven of un- 
sullied purity, of unalloyed bliss through its end- 
less years, is a doctrine which enables man and 
honors God. ‘The existence of heaven and its 
matchless perfection is a truth, based upon the ad- 
vent, the person and work of Jesus Christ, for He 
makes heaven. Christ is the way to heaven. 

Many are the lessons in the Bible, which declare 
in word, by figure and by picture the fact of 
heaven. Heaven lies beyond this life. It is located 
in another world. The boundary line, death, must 
be crossed ere its portals can be entered, its happy 
land possessed and enjoyed. 

Among the many varied illustrations by which 
the fact and nature of heaven are conveyed to us, 
that of a city is conspicuous. It seems to convey 
more clearly and fully the idea and characteristic 
of that unseen and to us unknown land. A city 
teems with life. A busy life-stirred and life-stir- 
ring scene is a city, life in its most opulent and 
strenuous form. Heaven is a city of life. It has 
never felt the touch, or chill of death. A life un- 
limited by conditions, or time, unrestrained by any 
of the environments of this earthly life. Graves 
have never been digged there, cemeteries are un- 


36 HEAVEN, A CITY 


known, tombstones and coffins are alien to that 
land. A city of life heaven is, majestic, glorious 
life—a life which knows no tears, never felt a sor- 
row—eternal, fadeless, decayless life. 

A city is a picture of closest union. Life there 
is forced into closest proximity. Unity, com- 
pactness, nearness, are the essentials to the city 
life. 

Heaven is the place of unity, nearness. Earth is 
broken into discord. Separation is the law of 
earth. There are no distances in heaven. Oceans 
and mountains are not. It is called the “ Beloved 
City.” Affections center there, longings go 
thither in strong restless current. Beloved of 
earth and beloved of heaven, the saintly of earth 
have turned their feet to heaven and placed their 
heart’s dearest love there. Angels hold it in tender- 
est love. Friends are there. In that city they 
have found their home. Centuries have come and 
gone since the tired feet of earth’s saintly pilgrims 
found sweet rest and home in that beloved city. 
None ever go out of that city. Love holds them. 
“The city of my God,” says Christ, “the city of 
the Living God. God hath prepared for them a 
city, a city that hath foundations, whose maker and 
builder is God.’ God has much to do, everything 
to do with that city. He drew its plans, digged and 
laid its deep foundations. God built it, God fitted 
it, God finished it. God lives in it. All life is 
there, all life direct from God, life in its fulness, 


HEAVEN, A CITY 37 


vigor, brightness. God is its life. Its maker and 
builder is God. 

God is its Architect and Contractor; no arch- 
angel’s matchless taste and incomparable genius 
were used in drafting the plan of this glorious city, 
this eternal inheritance. God drew the plan. The 
exhaustless stores of God’s own wisdom, His di- 
vine skill and faultless taste brought into perfect 
perfection the design of that City which was to be 
the abiding home of His children. Neither were 
the ability and resources of an archangel brought 
into requisition to execute the high and holy de- 
sign. God was its builder. He only could carry 
out the original. The God who laid the deep foun- 
dations of the world, and brought into being and 
order its mightily framed and mighty movements, 
condescends to enter again into the work of crea- 
tion, and builds a city as the superb home for His 
elect ones of earth. 

No night with its darkness rests as a pall on this 
heavenly city. It is emphatically called, “ the city 
of the living God.’”’ God is more immediately, more 
personally, more gloriously there than elsewhere. 
Life is there with God as its immediate source and 
supply, and it is life in its most opulent fulness, 
and redolent of all that is sweet, gracious, and at- 
tractive, and free from all that could in any way 
affect the perfection of its joy, or restrain or stint 
its endless advance. Glorious city—God-built, 
glorious inhabitants—who can paint its glories! 


38 HEAVEN, A CITY 


Who can picture the glories of its blissful inhab- 
itants? It would be a little heaven to see the city 
and get a sight of its ravished and princely citizens. 

It is a walled city, for protection, and jeweled 
are its walls. A city was a treasure deposit. Its 
walls its security. ‘The treasure safe. The New 
Jerusalem it is called not only in opposition to and 
distinction from the Old Jerusalem, but also to 
designate its freshness, forever new. Never is it 
to know decay or dulness. It is called the heav- 
enly Jerusalem to distinguish it from the earthly 
one, and also to emphasize its glories. The earthly 
Jerusalem was the center of Jewish hopes. Their 
hearts were there. No song, nothing but sadness 
and exile, when away from it. Their hearts were 
always trembling to that pole, their prayers were 
made with windows open to Jerusalem. All this 
but symbolizes what the heavenly Jerusalem should 
be tous. “If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my 
right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remem- 
ber thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my 
mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief 
joy.” Heaven ought to be far more to us than 
Jerusalem was to the Jew. In this “we groan 
earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our 
house which is from heaven.” 

These Bible symbols are designed to draw, stir 
and allure, and also to instruct us in the nature of 
heaven so far as earth by language can convey 
eternal and heavenly things. What is heaven, by 


HEAVEN, A CITY 39 


the Bible is called a city. This is a familiar Bible 
symbol of heaven—a city, a great city, a city that 
hath foundations, the city of the living God. It is 
not by accident that this term is a familiarized and 
favorite one. It is suggestive of heaven’s mani- 
fold nature. 

Out of deference to Jewish sanctities and devo- 
tion and as a memorial, it was called “ The New 
Jerusalem.” The Jew will find full compensation 
for the loss of his earthly Jerusalem in this new 
city which will endure eternally without decay of 
luster, renown or glory. 

The term “city” is a familiar type of the 
heavenly land and of the heavenly life, a city being 
the center of power and of life. A great city is 
heaven. All the principles and facts, of which the 
term city is the exponent, find their full expression 
there. A jeweled and a golden city express the 
unsurpassed loveliness and preciousness of that 
country and its life. The jewels are in the founda- 
tions of its walls and gold is the substance of which 
its pavements are made. The most costly materials 
of earth are used for the lowest and most common 
uses of heaven, and if its most common and mean- 
est things are jeweled and golden, we have no 
figures or values to represent the exceeding rich- 
ness of its higher things. A Great City it is, God’s 
capital, effulgent with all the glory of His presence. 

Heaven is called a city, in reference to the orig- 
inal meaning of the word city, “ fulness, throng.” 


40 HEAVEN, A CITY 


Heaven will be full. “An innumerable company 
which no man can number ” will gather within its 
walls. Not sparsely settled will heaven be. Its 
thoroughfares will be crowded, its golden pave- 
ments will be pressed by throngs of enraptured 
feet. 

The road to heaven is indeed narrow, the gate 
straight, and few there be that find it, but each 
community, each generation contributes its few, 
who dare to be singular, who are brave enough to 
walk and struggle alone, but on through the re- 
volving ages, the few precious ones are being 
housed in heaven until the aggregate will be great. 
If you and I miss that happy land, others will 
shoulder the cross, pass out of the popular, pleasing 
wide way, and make the solitary journey, and take 
our crown which we have so ignobly and foolishly 
lost. 

A city is the symbol of life in its magnificence, 
perfections and glory. Heaven will be the realiza- 
tion of all this. Doubtless in this figure of a city 
is found the closeness of sympathy, love, and fel- 
lowship which will abound there. 

It is called by Scripture designation and con- 
trast, “a continuing city.’ The inconstant, 
ephemeral nature of earth’s most substantial and 
social things is proverbial. Poetry and fiction 
speak of it. It is part of the sad experience of 
life, and the most cursory observation confirms ex- 
perience, that earth is mutable, its fairest flowers 


HEAVEN, A CITY 41 


fade away, and its most precious joys soon wither. 
But heaven is enduring. It is not the pilgrim’s inn. 
It is home, it abides, settled forever. 

A “prepared city,” ready, fitted up, complete. 
No virgin soil, nor virgin forests will salute us. 
There no toil in building homes, no taxing labor to 
build, arrange, culture will face us; but everything 
ready, everything anticipated, furnished, by a taste 
and care, a knowledge and ability which knows all 
wants, furnishes all comforts, supplies all luxuries, 
which stops not at expense. 

A “holy city” pure, unsullied in character, 
nothing which stains, nothing impure can gain an 
entrance there. Everything is as brilliant as the 
diamond and as pure. It is said to be great in its 
goodness and light, great in its attractive power, 
and great in frame, in beauty and in grandeur. All 
about the city is most exquisite in charms, 
most precious in value, most costly in richness. 

That it is a holy city is more to our purpose and 
for our good than its greatness. The term “holy ” 
—its origin baffles the critics to define with cer- 
tainty and clearness. It certainly means separated 
to God, devoted to Him. It certainly means pu- 
rity. Earthly cities are great, but their purity is 
not infrequently in the inverse ratio to their great- 
ness. In heaven greatness is never divorced from 
goodness. Not so on earth. Heaven is a city 
whose purity clarifies its atmosphere and causes it 
to sparkle and glitter like crystal. A city whose 


42 HEAVEN, A CITY 


light is in its purity, its brightness and permanency, 
an emanation from God and the Lamb. 


“ And there came unto me one of the seven angels 
which had the seven vials full of the seven last 
plagues, and talked with me saying, Come hither, I 
will shew thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife. And he 
carried me away in the spirit to a great and high 
mountain, and shewed me that great city, the holy 
Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God. 
Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto 
a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear 
as crystal; And had a wall great and high” (Rev. 
21: 9-12). 


It took the light and power of the Spirit and the 
perspective elevation and sublimity of a mountain 
top to view this city in its exhaustless magnificence 
and the dazzling charms of its ever increasing 
glory. What grandeur in that vision, the ecstasy 
of the spirit, the entrancing city, and the inspira- 
tion, awe, sublimity of the great and high moun- 
tains! All these heightened and made the view rav- 
ishing, but could transfer but a faint resemblance to 
the reality. It is a picture of exquisite and fadeless 
beauty, but a picture only. The life, the reality, 
the substance, no inspired trance, no grand and 
lofty mountain view could portray. 

She had “the glory of God ”—what is that? 
Who can tell? God was there, as we have been 
told, but “the glory of God,” the brightest, the 
highest, and the greatest display and revelations of 


HEAVEN, A CITY 43 


God, the most effulgent brightness of His uncre- 
ated glory. It is certainly the highest order of 
brightness, the completed exhibition of highest ex- 
cellence, the supreme beauty. All comprehensive 
of all glory is the expression, “ the glory of God,” 
not simply God, but the preéminent and conspicu- 
ous manifestation of all that is glorious, majestic, 
all glorious in God. ‘The revelation of God is this 
glory, and it forms the light, blessedness and splen- 
dor of the city. What a land! What a life! 
where the glory of God constitutes the loveliness 
and glory of the land. ‘The opulence and wealth 
of its life! Her light was like a stone most pre- 
cious. God’s glory the sun! The light coming 
from such a sun would dazzle and flame like earth’s 
most costly, beautiful, effulgent, and sparkling 
diamond. 

The walls and the gates find their expressive sig- 
nificance in Isaiah: ‘“ Thy walls are salvation and 
thy gates praise.” Behold I will lay thy stones 
with fair colors and lay thy foundations with 
sapphires, and will make the windows of agates 
and thy gates of carbuncles and all thy borders of 
pleasant stones. We have a strong city: “ Salva- 
tion will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.” 

The walls represent the strength and power of 
the salvation of the heavenly life. So evident and 
mighty are the forces of their salvation in heaven 
that it fills with transporting rapture and goes out 
with unrestrained, spontaneous and mighty energy: 


a4 HEAVEN, A CITY 


“After this I beheld and, lo, a great multitude, 
which no man could number, of all nations, and 
kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the 
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white 
robes, and palms in their hands: And cried with a 
loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth 
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the 
angels stood round about the throne, and about the 
elders and the four living creatures, and fell before 
the throne on their faces, and worshipped God, say- 
ing, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and 
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be 
unto our God for ever and ever. Amen” (Rev. 
7: 9-12). 


Salvation ought to be much to us on earth, in 
present joy, unspeakable and full of glory, and its 
most inspiring hope. But much as it is to us, it is 
much more to them in heaven. We have the rill, 
they its ocean streams; we have the glitter and 
mildness of its starlight, they have the sun in his 
unclouded strength. 

The wall is great and high: 


“And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, 
and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the 
Lamb. . . . And the building of the wall of it 
was of jasper: and the city was pure gold, like unto 
clear glass. And the foundations of the wall of the 
city were garnished with all manner of precious 
stones ” (Rev. 21: 14-19). 


The walls are for protection, the foundations of 


HEAVEN, A CITY 45 


which are twelve, which indicates their strength, 
while the jewels represent the beauty and precious- 
ness of its strength. ‘The heavenly life will be a 
protected life, walled in by massive strength and 
jeweled beauty, to adorn and enrich. We will be 
held in heaven. We will go out no more. The 
motives and influences which hold us to heaven will 
be strong, but not iron, dull, heavy and strong. 
Jasper are the walls and all the twelve foundations 
are gemmed with every variety of precious stones. 
The forces binding us to heaven will not imprison 
us, but will hold us there by forces as strong as 
walls of iron, and as resplendent as jasper—as 
strong as twelve foundations can make it, but as 
rich, as various, as brightly glorious, as the bril- 
liants which emblazon each. 

The building material of the walls of the city 
was jasper. We have in the third chapter this 
description of God: “And immediately I was in the 
Spirit: and, behold, a throne was set in heaven, and 
one sat on the throne. And he that sat was to look 
upon like a jasper and a sardine stone.” 

How remarkable are the walls of the heavenly 
city, made out of the same material! How closely 
God and His city are allied and unified, when this 
same book says: 

“Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the 
temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and 
I will write upon him the name of my God, and the 
name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, 


46 HEAVEN, A CITY 


which cometh down out of heaven, from my God: 
and I will write upon him my new name” (Rev. 
a: 12). 

The city was pure gold, transparent, and reflect- 
ing every form of beauty, far surpassing in rich- 
ness and purity and value any earthly gold. 

Its walls are made of jasper—foundations of 
jewels of every hue and value,—gates of pearl— 
city, pure transparent gold. All figures and values 
and beauty are exhausted in description. What 
can exceed these! No earthly values of wealth 
and loveliness! Earthly and angelic vocabularies 
are exhausted, and yet but the outside is described. 
What there is of wealth:and good inside defies all 
language to convey, all beauty to describe. Dia- 
monds and gold, all jewels, are valueless and mean 
and dull compared to that glorious city heaven, its 
life and its purified beings, the employments and 
engagements inside those gates of pearl, those walls 
of jasper. 

All these outward adornments, so unparalleled 
in their value and preciousness, are indicative in 
their richness and rareness of the principal joys 
and pursuits of the heavenly life. How godlike 
are the persons whose stable and precious charac- 
ters are represented by twelve jeweled foundations! 
What a glorious land whose light and purity glitter 
like brilliant diamonds, whose society is as flawless 
and pure as transparent gold. 

“Thy gates praise ’’—the gates were places of 


HEAVEN, A CITY 47 


council, wisdom, adornment and power. The gates 
were of one pearl each. ‘There are twelve of them, 
of unrivaled beauty, cost and purity. They are 
for entrances, and impress us with the unity, pu- 
rity, and worth of all who enter there. ‘‘ Those 
holy gates forever bar pollution, sin and shame.” 
The angels have much to do with the entrance into 
the heavenly gates, and much to do with the stay in 
there. All that is termed kingly, all that belongs 
to honor and glory, are in that heavenly city. 

The very pavement, trodden under foot, lowly, 
and dishonored, is made of earth’s purest gold, 
which mirror the forms of heavenly saints who 
walk along its streets. The forms are too beauti- 
ful to rest their shadows on any substance less 
precious than gold, and that gold refined and pol- 
ished to its highest perfection, and those forms too 
peerless in beauty, not to be reflected and con- 
stantly mirrored as they pass along. ‘These forms 
and images of perfect beauty add much to the 
charms of the city. 

In this world death reigns. There life reigns: 


“And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, 
clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God 
and of the Lamb. In the midst of the street of it 
and on either side of the river was there the tree of 
life which bore twelve manner of fruit, and yielded 
her fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree shall 
be for the healing of the nations. And there shall 
be no more curse, but the throne of God and the 


48 HEAVEN, A CITY 


Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve 
him” (Rev. 22: 1-3). 


It will be life in its full vigor, like a river, deep 
and exhaustless and wide. A river it will be, not 
a branch, nor well, but a river ever expanding, 
ever moving on. It is a river of water. All 
things in heaven will be to refresh and gladden and 
to give and increase life. A powerful river, it 
flows out of the throne of God. God’s throne is 
the symbol of God’s rule and God’s power. 
Heaven will be the place where God’s power shall 
be seen and felt. He will rule with unlimited 
power and absolute authority, but the issuance will 
be the “ river of the water of life, clear as crystal.” 
We are constantly reminded that heaven is all pu- 
rity. Its life is a river, full charged and strong in 
current, but transparent, mirroring, crystalline in 
its purity. 

The throne is not separate from the Lamb. The 
Son of God and His atoning sacrifice unite with 
the throne to make the full deep current of the 
heavenly life. In the heavenly world, through all 
its happy life, with every one of its teeming in- 
habitants, as the source of its most entrancing 
vision, as the school of its profoundest lessons, it 
will always and everywhere and in everything be 
“a Lamb as it had been slain.” Forever will the 
melody of heaven go on: 


“And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art 


HEAVEN, A CITY 49 


worthy to take the book, and to open the seals 
thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to 
God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, 
and people, and nation; And hast made us unto our 
God kings and priests, and we shall reign on the 
earth. And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many 
angels round about the throne, and the beasts, and 
the elders: and the number of them was ten thousand 
times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; 
Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that 
was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, 
and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing” 
(Rev. 5: 9-12). 


“The Lamb slain from the foundation of the 
world.” Every new avenue of delight, every new 
discovery in the heavenly life, will be the unfolding 
of the wonderful mystery, illimitable glories, and 
exhaustless power of the Lamb, the Christ cruci- 
fied, as well as the enthroned God. Everything in 
heaven will conspire to further the vigor, expan- 
sion, and glory of that life. The tree of life ever 
giving out its fruit, with the freshness, frequency, 
and energy of monthly crops, and the very leaves, 
are health-giving and invigorating. ‘The curse 
with its withering and deadening blight! All the 
dire effects of Adam’s fall shall be removed. No 
traces of the first man’s blasting steps shall be seen 
or felt. The cause of earth’s groaning and sighing 
shall be destroyed. 

Not the power of Adam, nor the dire effects of 


50 HEAVEN, A CITY 


sin inherited or committed, but the power of God, 
with all its benign and recreating energy and the 
power of the cross to redeem, renew and perfect, 
will be there. 

Service of the highest, most adoring and enrap- 
turing form will characterize heaven. All will be 
melody and praise, with not a discordant note in its 
melody. 

Of God, the inhabitants of heaven will have per- 
fect vision. That vision will be the melody, the 
study, and the pursuit of glorified spirits. To 
know God, and to know more and more of Him, 
will be the employment and bliss of heaven. They 
will be sealed for Him with His name in their fore- 
heads, the seat of intelligence. The sign of owner- 
ship, the distinctive mark of loyalty and consecra- 
tion to God, without the hands of church or priest, 
of sacrament or ceremony, rite or ritual, is placed 
on them, and they come in person to His person, 
and from Him they receive directly all His outlay 
of treasure each passing moment of the eternal life. 
All lesser lights are obscured, all intermediaries re- 
tired. God and Christ, with all the fulness of 
their Divine and eternal affluence, are in constant, 
personal contact and outgoing. The light of God’s 
presence hides and disperses all the feeble lights of 
earth. God shines with ineffable splendor on the 
glorified ones, and all the Divine potencies of the 
cross lift them to royal privileges. They are not 
only priests, but kings to God. Earth has no in- 
sight into the exalted glories into which its in- 


HEAVEN, A CITY 51 


habitants shall be lifted in heaven, no conception of 
the grandeur to which they shall be exalted: no 
thought or imagination of the scepter which will be 
put into the hands of the heirs when their inherit- 
ance is received. 

Does the vision of St. John transport and ravish 
us? ‘Then heaven is the place where our thirstings 
for Him are satisfied and our vision of Him is per- 
fect, glorious and ineffable. 

With what sublime and soothing verity does the 
Bible declare everywhere the ineffable superiority 
of the heavenly life, the heavenly home to this 
earthly life, and to this earthly home. Heaven 
robes the saints and transports them with a death- 
less, painless life. . Its length is eternal, its condi- 
tions are absolute, and there is eternal freedom 
from every form of evil—and the presence of 
every form of good and greatness. How glorious 
is this when its truth possesses us and lifts us above 
the earthly life with its incomparable littleness and 
its unmeasurable ills! The heavenly home—a 
crown of glory—a joy unspeakable and full of 


glory! 


“And there shall be no more curse; but the throne 
of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his serv- 
ants shall serve him: And they shall see his face; 
and his name shall be in their foreheads. And there 
shall be no night there; and they need no candle, 
neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth 
them light: and they shall reign for ever and ever” 
(Rev. 22: 3-5). 


52 HEAVEN, A CITY 


We are somewhat aware of the difficulties of in- 
terpretation when applied to the Revelation of 
John. The diversities and antagonism of con- 
struction are almost endless. But to whatever 
school of interpretation the truth may attach, one 
thing is sure that the description of the heavenly 
Jerusalem in its last chapters, if it be not primarily 
the description of heaven, it is a pattern of the 
heavenly, after which the earthly is to be shaped. 
As Moses’ tabernacle was the pattern of the heav- 
enly, so the literal, real heaven, the heaven of fact, 
and place, the third heaven where God abides and 
is seen in His unveiled glory, is photographed by 
John and presented as the model and final results 
of God’s work on earth. ‘The tabernacle was only 
showed to Moses in the mount, but the pattern of 
it was shaped by the original in heaven, and the 
Jew who studied and followed the pattern under- 
stood the principles and substance of the original. 
We study this picture of the heavenly to know 
what heaven is. 


To that Jerusalem above 
With singing I repair; 
While in the flesh, my hope and love, 
My heart and soul, are there: 
There my exalted Saviour stands, 
My merciful High Priest, 
And still extends his wounded hands, 
To take me to his breast. 
—Charles Wesley. 


III 


HEAVEN: A KINGDOM, A CROWN, AN 
INHERITANCE 


“ Happy will I be and forever happy, if after death I might 
hear the melody of those hymns and hallelujahs which the 
citizens of that celestial kingdom and the squadron of those 
blessed spirits sing in praise of the eternal king. This is 
that sweet music which St. John heard in the Revelation, 
when the inhabitants of heaven sang, ‘Let all the world 
bless thee, O Lord.’ To Thee be given all honor and 
dominion for a world of worlds.——Amen.” 

—JERrEMY TAYLOR. 


' ), YHAT magnificence and splendor are 
there in a kingdom! What ambitions 
by the desire of possessing a kingdom! 
What a stimulant this to noblest effort! Heaven 
is to be won as a kingdom is won. Heaven is to 
be struggled for as a kingdom is struggled for. 
Heaven is to stimulate as a kingdom stimulates. 
The work of grace in the human heart is called a 
kingdom, the kingdom of grace. Heaven is called 
a kingdom, the kingdom of glory. “Come ye 
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared 
for you ””—these are the words as Jesus rewards 
the honored ones who are on His right hand in the 
day of judgment: 
53 


54 HEAVEN: A KINGDOM 


“That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath 
called you unto his kingdom and glory,” warns 
Paul. Here we have a combination of the two, 
kingdom and glory. Magnificent combination! 
“Rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom,” says 
James. “Have an entrance administered abun- 
dantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ,” declares Peter. 


The future life is declared to be a throne: 


“To him that overcometh, will I grant to sit with 
me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set 
down with my Father in his throne” (Rev. 3: 21). 


A crown it is: “ Hold fast that thou hast, that 
no man take thy crown.” It is an incorruptible 
crown, a crown whose glory never dims, whose 
power never abates. Paul is speaking of the Isth- 
mian games and its runners, their strenuous self- 
denial and arduous efforts. ‘“ Now they do it to 
obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorrupt- 
ible.” 

Paul declares at the very point of death: 
“ Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of 
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, 
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but. 
unto all them also that love his appearing.” “A 
crown of righteousness,” awarded according to 
rigid demands of inflexible rectitude. “A crown 
of life!” “ Blessed,” says James, “ is the man that 
endureth temptation; for when he is tried, he shall 


A CROWN, AN INHERITANCE 55 


receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath 
promised to them that love him.” 

Peter declares, “And when the chief Shepherd 
shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that 
fadeth not away.” How it stimulates to the strict- 
est temperance and self-denial! 


“ Know ye not that they which run in a race run 
all, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may 
obtain. And every man that striveth for the mastery 
is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain 
a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible. I 
therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not 
as one that beateth the air. But I keep under my 
body and bring it into subjection; lest that by any 
means, when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway ” (1 Cor. 9: 24-27). 


This was the effect of this incorruptible crown 
on the chief of the apostles. 

How grand and imposing the awards of eternity 
are! Glory, all preéminence, and effulgence: A 
kingdom, authority, elevation and grandeur are in 
it! A throne, that has in it royal dignity, elevation, 
rule! A crown belongs to kingly heads, to con- 
querors, and heroes. Kingship belongs to it. 
Overcomers, conquerors, are they all who enter the 
realms of life. How greatly were Grecian athletes 
stimulated by the crown though perishable! But 
to win these perishable crowns, there were no toils 
they would not endure, no efforts they could not 


56 HEAVEN: A KINGDOM 


put forth. The gathered crowds, the spectators of 
their contest and carriage, the judge and the crown, 
at the end of the race—all these matchless ex- 
citants are presented as ensamples for us in our 
contest for heaven. 

In Revelation we have a sweeping declaration of 
heirship: “ For he that overcometh shall inherit all 
things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my 
son” (Chap. 21: 7). 

In Colossians we have a combination of reward 
and inheritance: “ Knowing that of the Lord ye 
shall receive the reward of the inheritance; for ye 
serve the Lord Christ.” 

Heaven is called an inheritance. It comes by 
relationship and heirship: 


“For ye have not received the spirit of bondage 
again to fear; but ye have received the spirit of 
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The spirit 
himself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are 
the children of God. And if children, then heirs; 
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ; if so be 
that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified 
together” (Rom. 8:15-17). And in Galatians 
(Chap. 4:6-7) we read: “And because ye are sons, 
God hath sent forth the spirit of the Son into your 
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art 
no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an 
heir of God through Christ.” 


Peter has a magnificent statement of the heirship 
and the future inheritance of the saints in heaven; 


A CROWN, AN INHERITANCE 57 


“ Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, which, according to his abundant mercy, hath 
begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrec- 
tion of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance, 
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, 
reserved in heaven for you who are kept by the 
power of God through faith unto salvation” (1 
Peter 1: 3-5). 


It is represented as a gift: “ The gift of God is 
eternal life.” 

This diversity and wealth of expression as to 
the character of heaven, and how it comes to us, 
is seen as a great “ reward ”’; a magnificent and im- 
perishable “inheritance” of fadeless beauty and 
unending richness; a “ prize,” the greatest of time 
or eternity; a “ gift,” unspeakable and indescrib- 
able in all its elements. The refined and refining 
stimulant of heaven has produced the saintliest 
saints, the most heroic heroes, the greatest con- 
querors, the most self-denying toilers. 

How strong are the stimulating forces that 
heaven awakens! We could not dispense with 
them, that is, when held in our mind and hearts as 
they ought to be held, in deepest conviction, in 
most ardent faith, and interested loyalty. These 
heavenly forces are always strengthening our 
weakness, elevating our depression, brightening 
our darkness—always calling us to purity and 
nobleness, always charging us to awaken to right- 
eousness and sin not. The mighty quickener of 


58 HEAVEN: A KINGDOM 


faith is heaven. ‘The only sure and solid founda- 
tion of hope is heaven. ‘The only solution of 
earth’s mysteries, the only righter of earth’s 
wrongs, the only divorce from earth to heaven, the 
only cure for worldliness, is heaven. We need 
such an infusion of heaven into our faith and hope 
as will create a homesickness for that blessed 
place. God’s home place is heaven. Eternal life 
and all good were born there and flourish there. 
All life, all happiness, all beauty, all glory, are na- 
tive to the home of God. 

And all this belongs to and awaits the heirs of 
God in heaven. What a glorious inheritance! 
What a pleasing prospect! 


’Tis God’s all-animating voice 
That calls thee from on high; 
*Tis his own hand presents the prize 
To thine aspiring eye— 


That prize, with peerless glories bright, 
Which shall new luster boast, 

When victors’ wreaths and monarchs’ gems 
Shall blend in common dust. 


Blest Saviour, introduced by thee, 
Have I my race begun; 
And, crowned with victory, at thy feet 
Pll lay my honors down. 
—Philip Doddridge. 


Ly, 
PARADISE, AND ETERNAL LIFE 


“Go on, and faint not. Something of yours is in heaven, 
beside the flesh of your exalted Saviour; and ye go on 
after your own. ‘Time’s thread’s shorter by an inch than it 
was. An oath is sworn and past the seals; whether af- 
flictions will or will not, ye must grow, and swell out of your 
shell, and live, and triumph and reign, and be more than a 
conqueror. For your Captain who leadeth you on is more 
than conqueror and He maketh you partaker of His con- 
quest and victory.” 

—SAMUEL RUTHERFORD. 


HE word “ paradise” is used by Paul as 
equivalent to the third heaven, the abode 
of God. So also the word paradise is 

used in Revelation, “ To him that overcometh will 
I give to eat of the tree of Life which grows in the 
midst of the paradise of God.” 

Paradise is a place separated, distinguished, em- 
phasized as a marked and distinct place, and as a 
place of eminent distinction and beauty,—as the 
abode of God and the angelic beings, and to which 
true Christians will be taken after death. God’s 
paradise—how matchless its beauty! How un- 
paralleled in every excellence, dignity and loveli- 
ness it must be! To that the thief was to be trans- 
lated—to be translated that day—-gracious home to 
him when that jeering and infuriated mob took him 

59 


60 PARADISE AND ETERNAL LIFE 


out that his cross might defame and cast equal 
odium on that of the Son of God. How, instead 
of increasing the ignominy and shame of Jesus, it 
added to the luster and power of that cross by lift- 
ing a robber from the shame and guilt of the cross 
to the glorious beauties of heaven! “To-day shalt 
thou be with me in paradise,” has given hope of 
immortality to many a sinner as he has lifted his 
prayerful, dying eyes, and said, “‘ Remember me.” 

Heaven is a place of rarest beauty and purity, 
but the sinful robbers go there, washed in the blood 
of the Lamb. “ With me ”—what exalted glory, 
supreme dignity, divine companionship, for a 
thief! How close the union, how infinite the con- 
descension of Jesus, to be the companion, and to 
share His glory and joy with him! One of the 
noblest memorials to the death of Jesus is that 
thief lifted from the cross of guilt to a throne of 
glory. The wonders of that death! What tongue 
can tell of its marvels, what imagination discover 
its miracles! This is one of them. “ To-day shalt 
thou be with me in paradise,” but that is only the 
beginning, the index printing to its untold volumes. 

In the notable conversation Jesus had with 
Nicodemus, the position to which He will elevate 


all who believe in Him is denominated “ eternal 
life.” 


“And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilder- 
ness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up; that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but 


es 


PARADISE AND ETERNAL LIFE 61 


have eternal life. For God so loved the world, that 
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever be- 
lieveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life” (John 3: 15-16). 


And again, in the fourth chapter (v. 36), the 
eternal glory is designated as eternal life, and it is 
the harvest of our faithful patient sowing and till- 
ing in this life. ‘“ And he that reapeth, receiveth 
wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal; that 
both he that soweth and he that reapeth may re- 
joice together.” 

The resurrection is unto life: 


“ Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the 
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, 
And shall come forth; they that have done good, 
unto the resurrection of life; and they that have 
done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation” (John 


me 20), 


That wonderful saying to Martha is the declara- 
tion of the same great truth that the crowning 
glory of the future is eternal life: 


“Jesus said unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. 
Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise 
again in the resurrection at the last day. Jesus said 
unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that 
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he 
live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall 
never die. Believest thou this? She said unto him, 
Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the 


62 PARADISE AND ETERNAL LIFE 


Son of God, which should come into the world” 
(John 2: 23-27). 


So also we hear Jesus say: 


“He that loveth his life shall lose it, and he that 
hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life 
eternal” (John 12:25). 


We come to that magnificent comforting prom- 
ise which Jesus gave to His disciples among His 
last talks with them before His death, while the 
gloom of Gethsemane and Calvary was on them 
and on Him: 


“Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in 
God, believe also in me. In my Father’s house are 
many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told 
you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I 
go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, 
and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there 
ye may be also” (John 14: 1-3). 


Heaven will relieve all the troubles of this life. 
Every earthly pain is to be eased, all fiery trials 
quenched, all tears dried by heaven. Jesus in this 
statement makes heaven a place; “I go to prepare 
a place for you. If I go and prepare a place for 
you—where I am ”—Jesus is local, and located in 
heaven. ‘There ye may be also. Somewhere in 
God’s house of many mansions does Jesus hold 
sway, sit up on His throne, and manifest His glory. 
There with their exalted Lord, His saints dwell in 


PARADISE AND ETERNAL LIFE 63 


eternal, unalloyed good. We cannot fail to see not 
only the purpose and inflexible decree of Jesus to 
have us in His Father’s house, but also the long- 
ings of His heart: “ Where I am, there ye may be 
also,’—an announcement of association and eter- 
nal union in felicity, honor and power. 

This comes out most fully in His sacerdotal 
prayer: ‘‘ Father, I will that they also whom thou 
hast given me, be with me where I am, that they 
may behold my glory, which thou hast given me.” 
Not idle speculations of that glory, but sharers as 
well as seers of that glory. That Jesus wants us 
with Him, is not a mere sentiment, to adorn or 
sweeten, but it is a declared, operative, and eternal 
decree, “ Father J will.” His heart and authority 
are in it. 

“‘T have the desire to depart and be with Christ 
which is far better,” says Paul. To be in heaven, 
is to be with Christ, “‘ at home with the Lord.” 

That Jesus has “gone to heaven to appear in 
the presence of God for us,” is true, and that by 
the mystery and ministry of His death, and the 
glory and wealth of His intercession, He is pre- 
paring a place for us and preparing us for the 
place, is also true. 

Jesus is exalted in heaven at the right hand of 
the throne of God. ‘The throne is the symbol of 
power, and the right hand the symbol of honor, 
glory, and majesty. So Jesus is exalted to the 
highest place in heaven to which God’s power can 


64 PARADISE AND ETERNAL LIFE 


raise Him. The apostle declares the exalted dig- 
nity of Jesus thus: “ According to the working of 
his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, 
when he raised him from the dead, and set him at 
his own right hand in the heavenly places, far 
above all principalities, and power, and might, and 
dominion, and every name that is named, not only 
in this world, but also in that which is to come: 
And hath put all things under his feet, and gave 
him to be the head over all things to the church; 
which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth 
all in all.” 

The highest position of legal glory is His, and 
we are to be with Him and share His place, and be 
partners with Him in all the splendors and emolu- 
ments of the eternal world. With what divine 
munificence and magnificence does God crown, 
exalt and glorify Jesus! So with the same ex- 
haustless munificence and magnificence the Son 
dispenses to His glorified ones the boundless wealth 
of heaven. 

What Jesus has done for us here in the startling 
and extravagant advent of Himself into this world, 
His humiliation and suffering unparalleled in the 
annals of time and of eternity,—these are the true 
mirrors of the wonderful, unspeakable, and in- - 
describable things which He will do for us in the 
other world, but only the faint reflection of them. 
For His ability is much increased, and the condi- 
tions far more favorable there, for Him to do for 


PARADISE AND ETERNAL LIFE 65 


us than when under the limitations which fettered 
Him here. 

What will be the material blessings and settings 
of that heavenly life, we cannot tell, but that they 
will be of the purest and most exquisite form and 
material, we may be well assured, and of the most 
reposeful and rapture-giving kind. 

Of one thing we are constantly reminded, that 
Jesus will be with us and will serve us ever like a 
shepherd feeding his flock, on the richest and best 
food of heaven, and leading us even to new and 
living fountains of bliss and knowledge and light. 
To have Jesus with us will be the acme and sum 
of all happiness, of all perfection, of all good. 
What beauty in His face! What wealth untold in 
His character! How illimitable His resources to 
bless, eternity only can unfold. 

This Christ, what matchless, indescribable 

charms has He here for those who are possessed of 
His love. The gifted and saintly Samuel Ruther- 
ford while in prison, overflowing with love, uses 
his great gifts, which by his great love are turned 
to poetry, to speak of Jesus and His loveliness: 
» “T never believed till now that there was so 
much to be found in Christ on this side death and 
heaven. Oh, the ravishments of heavenly joy 
which may be had here, in the small gleanings and 
comforts that fall from Christ.” 

If Jesus was so much to the gifted and holy 
Samuel Rutherford, while banished and a prisoner 


66 PARADISE AND ETERNAL LIFE 


and in this world, what must He be to those in 
heaven? What ineffable beauties must there be in 
the unfoldings of His character to the glorified! 
What a heaven it must be! It cannot be said too 
strongly we are bound to love heaven for Jesus’ 
sake. We are bound to long for heaven because 
Jesus is there. We are bound to be filled with 
transportation joy when the hour comes to go 
there, because it is the hour to see Jesus, the hour 
to meet Jesus, the hour to enjoy Jesus, and to enjoy 
Him forever, the hour to be with Him and to be 
with Him forever. 


O Paradise, O Paradise, 
Who doth not crave for rest? 
Who would not seek the happy land 
Where they that loved are blest; 


Where loyal hearts and true, 
Stand ever in the light, 

All rapture, through and through 
In God’s most holy sight? 


O Paradise! O Paradise! 
The world is growing old; 
Who would not be at rest and free 
Where love is never cold? 


V. 
HEAVEN AND ETERNAL LIFE 


“ After it was noised about that Mr. Valiant—for truth 
was taken with a summons by the same post as the other, 
and had this for a token that the summons was true, that 
‘his pitcher was broken at the fountain.’ When he under- 
stood it he called for his friends and told them of it. Then 
said he, ‘I am going to my Father’s and though with great 
difficulty I got hither yet now I do not repent me of all the 
trouble I have been at to arrive where I am.’ When the day 
that he must go over was come many accompanied him to 
the river-side, into which as he went he said, ‘ Death, where 
is thy sting? Grave, where is thy victory?’ So he passed 
over, and all the trumpets sounded for him on the other 
side.” 

—JoHNn BUNYAN. 


HE Bible makes much use of the term 
life as the central and fundamental idea 
of heaven, its enjoyments, employments 

and character. The term is almost too literal to 
be reckoned as a symbol. It is a most compre- 
hensive symbol, and its nearness to the literal but 
enhances its value as a symbol, 

The New Testament abounds in the use of this 
symbol. It is the sum and results of the Gospel. 
Faith plants the seed of eternal life in the heart, 
and it germinates and grows in the faithful heart 


through all the struggles and years of this life, but 
67 


68 HEAVEN AND ETERNAL LIFE 


it finds its eternal unfolding in fullest expansion 
and amplitude in heaven. “ As many as were or- 
dained to eternal life.” 

“To them who by patient continuance in well 
doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, 
eternal life” (Rom. 2: 7). 

“ Shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ.” 

“That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so 
might grace reign through righteousness unto 
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord” (Rom. 
5: 21). 

“ Reign in life!” What is that? This: “ But 
now being made free from sin, and become serv- 
ants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and 
the end everlasting life. For the wages of sin is 
death; but the gift of God is eternal life through 
Jesus Christ our Lord.” 

Paul in giving the reason why the true Christian 
groans to enter into heaven, says, ‘‘ For we that 
are in this tabernacle do groan being burdened, not 
for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, 
that mortality might be swallowed up of life.” 

To Timothy, Paul says, “ Lay hold on eternal 
life whereunto thou art called.” The rich he ex- 
horts in this wise: 

“That they do good, that they be rich in good 
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; 
Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation 
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on 
eternal life” (1 Tim. 6: 18-19). 


HEAVEN AND ETERNAL LIFE 69 


James designates heaven as a “ crown of life.” 
It is called “the resurrection of life.” The state- 
ments of the apostles and Christ with this symbol 
of heaven life, eternal life, implies that it is an 
eternal freedom from and opposition to death. In 
the term life is concentrated every good which man 
can desire to enjoy. “ Heaven is the possession, in 
the highest sense, of the first and last blessing of 
man, which has been well said to be the essence of 
all happiness.” Life is the state and affluence of 
heaven—immortal life, undecayed and undecaying, 
with no liability to decay or diminution. The 
state, environments and advances of the heavenly 
world are all life, more life, deeper, wider, sweeter 
life. Its book is the Book of life; its crowns of 
life are crowning; its river, the river of life; its 
tree, the tree of life; its water, the water of life. 

It was the all engrossing question of the young 
man who came to Jesus, “ What shall I do that I 
may inherit eternal life?’ How attractive and 
charmful this life! What a divine gift is this life! 
It is bounded by the cradle, the symbol of helpless- 
ness and want, and by death, the impersonation of 
all that is dark, painful, and terrific. Enfeebled 
by disease, hampered by sickness, and marred by 
sore distress, with severe struggles, sad disappoint- 
ments, yet to it we cling, for it we toil, and at last 
surrender it only in a despairing or triumphant 
struggle. 

But eternal life involves the untold, unimagined 


70 HEAVEN AND ETERNAL LIFE 


and fadeless glories of heaven! What measure- 
less wealth! What deathless raptures! What 
glorious intoxication! No description dare at- 
tempt its picture! The most exalted strains of 
music would be discord to the harmony of heaven 
and all brightest visions would turn into darkest 
midnight! All summer suns would chill like the 
ice of December when contrasted with the splendor 
of its nightless day. The most gifted, exalted and 
sweetest poetry of earth would be but dull prose in 
heaven. What is eternal life? Who can dream or 
imagine that life? Heaven has it! Heaven holds 
it! as the surprise of the saints as they leave earth 
and pass through the gates of the celestial city. 

Jesus is said to lead the heavenly inhabitants to 
“ fountains of living water.” In this we have the 
figure of life, ever new and continuous. Here is a 
life that refreshes, blesses and satisfies the soul as 
water refreshes, blesses and satisfies the body. 
Here is a constant unfolding of life, life to the full 
and overflowing, like a fountain, new discoveries 
of life, its hidden sources opened up, ever new, ever 
fresh. 

Heaven will be the pursuit of life, the employ- 
ment of life, the enjoyment of life, the increase of 
life. Its pursuits, its employment and its enjoy- 
ment will be eternal. Life in heaven will be a rap- 
ture, a bliss untold. All the man, mind, soul and 
spirit, will be widened and elevated, deepened, re- 
fined and beautified by it. Everything will con- 


HEAVEN AND ETERNAL LIFE 471 


spire to make that life supremely blest and su- 
premely glorious. Christ will feed that life on 
richest pasturage. Christ will lead that life to 
fountains of living water. “God will wipe away 
all tears” from the eyes of that life. 


The heavens shall glow with splendor, 
But brighter far than they 
The saints shall shine in glory, 
As Christ shall them array: 
The beauty of the Saviour, 
Shall dazzle every eye, 
In the crowning day that’s coming by and by. 


Our pain shall then be over, 
We'll sin and sigh no more; 
Behind us all of sorrow, 
And naught but joy before, 
A joy in our Redeemer, 
As we to him are nigh, 
In the crowning day that’s coming by and by. 


VI 
HEAVEN AND THE HOLY SPIRIT 


“The eye of flesh is not capable of seeing, nor the ear of 
hearing, nor the heart of understanding heaven and its 
glories. But there the eye, the ear, and the heart are made 
capable. Else how could we enjoy those things in heaven? 
The more perfect the sight, the more delightful will be the 
beautiful object. ‘The more perfect the appetite, the sweeter 
the food; the more musical the ear, the more pleasant the 
melody, and the more perfect the soul, the more joyous 
these joys, and the more glorious these glories.” 

—RICHARD BAX’TER. 


HE, Holy Spirit, in us, is said to be “ the 
earnest of heaven.” The “earnest” is 
the security and foretaste, and so the 

Holy Spirit is the certainty of heaven and its fore- 
taste. He puts the fact of heaven, the taste of 
heaven, the power of heaven and the ambition and 
toil for heaven, freshly, strongly and constantly in 
our hearts. The refrain and chorus are, “‘ Heaven 
is my home.” 


“Tn whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the 
word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in whom 
also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the 
Holy Spirit of promise. Which is the earnest of our 
inheritance until the redemption of the purchased 

72 


HEAVEN AND THE HOLY SPIRIT ‘7% 


possession, unto the praise of his glory” (Ephes. 
£: 13). 

“ Now he which establishes us with you in Christ, 
and hath anointed us is God, who hath also sealed us, 
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts” 
Se ea 


What do these great texts mean? ‘They present 
to us the ministry and work of the Holy Spirit as 
He forms in us the fact and experience of heaven, 
and shapes us in desire and in heavenliness, and in 
heavenly longings and heavenly fashion, at every 
point. 

The music and hope of heaven would fill and 
sweeten our lives if we lived in the full power of 
the Spirit. What transporting anticipations! 
What “ joy unspeakable and full of glory ” would 
brighten our living and our dying days! The 
Spirit’s power settles our faith, and quickens the 
sentiment about heaven. By the Spirit’s mighty 
workings, heaven becomes an assured, a sublime 
and a glorious fact. The power of the Holy Spirit 
puts us on the stretch for the good world, and puts 
in us a thirst for heaven. He gives us constant and 
enlarged tastes and visions of heaven, till all other 
tastes pall and all other visions are heavy and dull. 
He gives us notes of its harmony and all earth’s 
notes are discord. The power of the Spirit binds 
us to heaven because Jesus is there. We are bound 
to love it, think about it and be ravished by it, for 
Jesus is its center and glory. 


74 HEAVEN AND THE HOLY SPIRIT 


How. strongly and insistently does the Holy 
Spirit use heaven and its untold and manifold good 
to move saints to action, to awaken from death, to 
make zeal hot and love ardent. The Holy Spirit 
implants heaven in us. The Holy Spirit Himself, 
given to us, is God’s mark of ownership and se- 
curity. His authority is put on us. But it is not 
His sealing process, its condition, significance, or 
results in full, with which we have to do now, but 
of one phase, the earnest of future and eternal 
things. The Holy Spirit is the earnest of heaven 
tous. “ Earnest” means the pledge which, in pur- 
chase, is given that the contract will be faithfully 
and fully carried out. An earnest is part of the 
thing itself, given as a security that the whole will 
be given in its time. Through the Holy Spirit God 
gives us a part of heaven as a pledge of the full 
heaven when the time is ripe. The Holy Spirit is 
to us both a foretaste and a pledge of heaven. The 
first instalment of heaven is given by the Holy 
Spirit. 

The Holy Spirit makes much of heaven. He is 
Himself to us “ the earnest,” the pledge and fore- 
taste of heaven. He puts heaven in us when He 
puts Himself in us, and all our tastes, struggles, 
relishes and longings for heaven are the creations 
of His power and the sure tests of His presence. 
If there be no heavenly lookings, no heavenly, 
spirit, no heavenly yearnings in us, there is no 
Holy Spirit in us. God works in us a fitness for 


HEAVEN AND THE HOLY SPIRIT %5 


the heavenly world by the Holy Spirit and plants in 
us the heavenly mind and the heavenly image. 
The indwelling Spirit of God makes us unlike earth 
and like heaven, The Holy Spirit matures hope 
to its brightest luster, and enables the saint to 
“glory in tribulation” and “rejoice in hope of 
the glory of God.” 

Paul, by the spirit, made much of heaven. In 
his mid-career, fastened to life and earth by his 
strenuous toil, he pauses lest his unremitting toil 
should earthen him, and he records his loyalty to 
heaven and to Jesus, for in Paul’s estimation, and 
in every true estimate, they are one. “Iam ina 
strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and 
be with Christ which is far better.” We find him 
on the stretch always for heaven, always “ con- 
fident and willing rather to be absent from the 
body and to be at home with the Lord.” He is 
ever pressing on: “ Forgetting the things that are 
behind, and reaching forth to those things that are 
before, I press toward the mark for the prize of 
my high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” He is 
always “keeping his body under, and keeping it in 
subjection,” that he might not lose the incorruptible 
crown. At the close, his good battle fought, his 
course finished, the faith kept, heaven is still in 
full view, its crown gleaming brighter under Nero’s 
axe. It is the thought, the hope, the fact of heaven 
which forms Christian character and matures it 
into its unearthly beauty and perfection. 


%6 HEAVEN AND THE HOLY SPIRIT 


The stimulating demands of entering into eter- 
nal life could not be set forth with more terrific 
colorings and imperative exactions than by Jesus 
Christ. ‘If thy hand cause thee to stumble cut it 
off: it is good for thee to enter into life maimed, 
rather than having two hands to go into hell, into 
the unquenchable fire.” 

Heaven is termed a reward. “ Great is your re- 
ward in heaven,” says Christ to His persecuted and 
reviled disciples. And so in Revelation: “ And 
behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, 
to give every man according as his work shall be.” 
The meaning is dues paid for work. “For the 
Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father 
with his angels; and then he shall reward every 
man according to his works.” 


Then let the wildest storms arise; 
Let tempests mingle earth and skies; 
No fatal shipwrecks shall I fear, 
But all my treasures with me bear. 


If thou, my Jesus, still be nigh, 

Cheerful I live, and joyful die; 

Secure, when mortal comforts flee, 

To find ten thousand worlds in thee. 
—Philip Doddridge. 


vil 
HEAVEN, A STATE 


“And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude 

; saying, Hallelujah! for the Lord our God the 
iAbniphty reigneth. Let us rejoice and be exceeding glad, 
for the marriage of the Lamb is come and His wife hath 
made herself ready.”—REVELATION 19 : 6. 


EAVEN is a state as well as a place. 
Whatever the outward appearance may 
be, however entrancing to eye, how fasci- 

nating to ear, how pleasing to taste or touch, how 
ecstatic to feeling all the scenes and sounds, enjoy- 
ments and felicities may be, these are not the prime 
sources of its attraction. It is a state—a state of 
enthronement, elevation and freedom. It is eman- 
cipation. Much has been left behind of the old, the 
worn out and the burdensome, and much of new, 
the strange and the wonderful will be there. It will 
be a state of perfected knowledge. ‘Then we shall 
know even as we are known. God knows us per- 
fectly here. We will know Him and all things 
perfectly there. 


“ For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. 
But when that which is perfect is. come, then that 
which is in part shall be done away. When I was a 

77 


78 HEAVEN, A STATE 


child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I 
thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put 
away childish things. For now we see through a 
glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know 
in part; but then shall I know even as also I am 
known” (1 Cor. 13: 9-12). 


What will be the unspeakable benefactions in a 
state when we know all things perfectly! Neither 
height nor depth, nor breadth, nor length, in 
heaven and earth and hell that will not lie open 
to our knowledge in that exalted and perfected 
state where all mysteries will be gone. 

In the sixth chapter of Romans we have a state- 
ment vital to heaven: “ But now being made free 
from sin, and become servants to God, ye have 
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting 
life.” To “make free” is to emancipate. The 
negroes are free, no slavish chains enthrall them. 
A dual action is here seen. There is emancipation 
from sin and enslavement to God—an attitude of 
repulsion, of entire freedom from sin, and an at- 
titude of entire enslavement to God. ‘These bear 
the fruit of holiness if found in a heart where God 
reigns, from which sin is excluded. To such a 
state and to such a character heaven belongs by 
heirship, by right. Two struggles mark the true 
heavenly life—to be freed from sin, to be wholly 
devoted to God. 

How free can I be from sin? How thoroughly 
devoted to God can I be? ‘These are questions 


HEAVEN, A STATE 79 


which have engaged and often perplexed the holi- 
est of men. Too much time and thought have been 
given to these trying by theoretical or verbal state- 
ment to fix the limits. The Scriptures make 
strong affirmations at this point. The holy Board- 
man in Burmah says: 

“T find on reading the apostles’ writings that 
they address their fellow Christians and speak of 
themselves as persons that are dead to sin, buried 
with Christ into death. They are dead, and their 
lives are hid with Christ in God. They have cruci- 
fied the flesh with its affections and lusts. Their 
old man is crucified with Christ. They are dead 
to sin by consequence and are freed from sin. 
They cease from sin. Being born of God, they sin 
not, they cannot sin, they have overcome the world, 
the world is crucified to them and they to the 
world. 

“ Now these things are mentioned not only as 
things to be desired or sought after, but as already 
obtained. ‘Ye are dead—have crucified the flesh 
—have put off the old man—are freed from sin— 
hath ceased from sin.’ ” 

Thus queried this man of God. How many be- 
fore and since have raised the same questions? Of 
one thing we may be sure that the experience and 
attitude of Christian attainment and obtainment set 
forth in the New Testament is open to all Chris- 
tians of every age and every clime. Books on holi- 
ness may give us no light and theories may con- 


80 HEAVEN, A STATE 


fuse. But with our Bible before us and the open 
door of prayer, and the increasing light and power 
of the Holy Spirit, each can settle the question as 
a personal experience, keeping the divine statement 
ever before the mind, “ Free from sin and become 
the servants of God,” emancipation from sin most 
complete, enslavement to God most perfect, with 
the full possibilities of God’s grace, Christ’s blood, 
the power of the Holy Spirit and of faith—that 
God is “ able to do exceeding abundantly above all 
that we ask or think ”—that all things are possible 
to him that believeth—that “He that spared not 
his own Son but delivered him up for us all, how 
shall he not with him freely give us all things? ”— 
that God has given us all things in Christ—that by 
prayer we can have all that there is in Christ—that 
we are charged to “ be filled with all the fulness of 
God ”—that God is able to make us abound in all 
grace—that “always having all sufficiency in all 
things may abound to every good work ”’—that 
God can “ make us perfect in every good work to 
do his will, working in us that which is well pleas- 
ing in his sight ”—that God can make us, “ that 
we may stand perfect and complete in all the will 
of God.” All these wonderful and far-reaching 
Scriptural statements concerning the possibilities 
of grace, fully answer the question as to how free 
we can be from sin and how thoroughly we can be 
devoted to God. 

This “ fruit unto holiness’ 


> 


is absolutely neces- 


HEAVEN, A STATE 81 


sary as a prerequisite for heaven. “ Without holi- 
ness no man shall see the Lord.” Holiness is an 
imperative, inflexible, eternal condition of heaven. 
A holy God, a holy Jesus, a holy heaven, demand 
holiness among men as well as among angels. 
“Every man that striveth for masteries is temper- 
ate in all things. They do it to obtain a corruptible 
crown, but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run 
not as uncertainly, so fight I, not as one that beat- 
eth the air: But I keep under my body and bring 
it into subjection; lest that by any means when I 
have preached to others I myself should be a cast- 
away.” So writes Paul to the Corinthians. 

The heavenly-fitting virtue here stressed is that 
of temperance, self-control, the strong master of 
self under the law of strict self-denial. The 
apostle enforces the necessity of temperance by 
reference to the athlete who spent much time in 
training, and who denied himself of those things 
which were agreeable and in which they ordinarily 
indulged. Their training, temperance and strict 
self-denial were familiar and emphasized this vir- 
tue in a strong way. It is heaven of which the 
apostle is writing, and the presence of this temper- 
ance in all things, this self-control, was not only to 
be exercised in the higher realms of man’s nature, 
but the Christian’s bodily appetites were to feel the 
strong hand of this temperance. Not simply to be- 
come Christians was it necessary, but its daily and 
hourly exercise were necessary to continue Chris- 


82 HEAVEN, A STATE 


tians. Without it the highest range of Christian 
elevation and obtainment would keep one from be- 
coming a reprobate. “I keep under my body” 
means to strike heavily in the face so as to render 
black and blue a hard subject, so as to reduce it 
to self-control, and also bring the body into sub- 
jection and enslave it. “The body is the adver- 
sary considered as the seat of the temptations of 
Satan, and especially that of self-indulgence.” 

By self-control the pride, obstinacy and self- 
seeking appetites are to be restrained and broken 
down. The flesh and spirit are to be brought un- 
der the law of this heavenly race. No one is free 
from this law. The apostle declares elsewhere: 
“He that striveth for the mastery is not crowned 
except he strive lawfully.” An examination of the 
victors in the combats took place after the contest, 
and if it were found that the race had been won 
by unlawful means they were deprived of the prize. 
The law for the heavenly contestants is severe self- 
control. Without it all seeming success in the 
heavenly race will be rejected and discrowned. 

Heaven makes redemption full, the purchase 
complete, the possession perfect, the pledge sure. 
Even here we have the foretaste of the full heaven. 
Heaven is joy unmixed, eternal, rapturous. Here 
we have by the presence of the Holy Spirit, “ joy 
unspeakable and full of glory.” Even here we 
“rejoice evermore,” “ rejoice always.”’ To rejoice 
is the command of earth as well as the luxury of 


HEAVEN, A STATE 83 


heaven. Heaven is the place and state of perfect 
rest, but even here by the Holy Spirit peace reigns. 
Our “ peace flows as a river.” “ The peace of God 
which passeth all understanding shall keep your 
hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.” This is 
the type and beginning of heaven’s peace. ‘The 
kingdom of God in this world is “ Righteousness, 
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.” The kingdom 
of God in the next world will be but the perfection 
of righteousness, peace, and joy. “The redemp- 
tion of the purchased possession” is changed in 
the Revised Version to, “ Unto the redemption of 
God’s own possession.” God’s possession of us is 
by the Holy Spirit, not by redemption, not by being 
bought back only, but by God taking possession of 
us, by yielding ourselves to be filled, possessed, con- 
trolled, owned ‘by God, mastered absolutely by God. 
He is to have unlimited authority over us and su- 
preme unmixed control in us. That is God’s rule 
here, the precursor and earnest of His reign in the 
better world. Heaven will give us fullest posses- 
sion of God, and heaven will give God the fullest 
possession of us, But heaven is only for those who 
are God’s possession here. 

God’s Word reveals another land where the mis- 
fortune of poverty and the curse of crime never 
come, where a life of beggary and a death of the 
cross puts no stigma on character, no mark on the 
brow, no ostracism. Heaven is made up of the 
outlaws of earth, of earth’s banished ones. 


84 HEAVEN, A STATE 


Here is Scriptural description of such characters 
as will be found in heaven: 


“ They had trials of cruel mockings, and scourg- 
ings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They 
were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, 
were slain with the sword: they wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, 
tormented (of whom the world was not worthy) ; 
they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in 
dens and caves of the earth” (Heb. 11: 36). 


Wonderful grace which makes saints and im- 
mortals of earth’s defamed and ostracized ones! 

Wonderful association and companionship for 
our Lord, the beggar Lazarus and all holy beggars 
who have learned by their begging the secret of 
faith and who have the heart for heaven! Won- 
derful companionship and association for our ador- 
able and Divine Lord—a thief banned by earthly 
justice to the cross! wonderful power of that death 
to make the redeemed and glorious ones of heaven 
out of the refuse of earth, outof its beggarly crime! 
Glorious companionship of a beggar and robber to 
be with our Lord in Paradise! Royal exaltation 
and renown, to add to the glory of Himself and 
to the renown of Abraham, by making Lazarus, 
earth’s ostracized one, his own companion! How 
the false estimates, false reputations, false rewards 
of earth are reversed and rectified in Christ’s 
heaven! 


HEAVEN, A STATE 85 


In the parable of the rich man and Lazarus 
Jesus teaches us much of heaven as well as many 
sad and alarming lessons of hell. All men do not 
go to heaven. All men might go to heaven, but all 
men will not go to heaven. This we learn from 
the rich man, who in hell lifted up his eyes being 
in torments. Heaven is not subjected to the finan- 
cial and social influences of this world. Lazarus 
the beggar has no money, no friends, no social in- 
fluence. He has committed the unpardonable 
crime of earth, of being a beggar. He is ostra- 
cized, friendless, lives without money, dies without 
friends and is buried without tears. But heaven— 
who can understand it? It receives Lazarus, the 
beggar on earth, into more than kingly society; 
angels are his attendants, and he becomes the 
bosom friend and associate of Abraham, the rich 
man, the “ friend of God,” peerless in social eleva- 
tion. Heavenly society is not based on money nor 
any of its tributaries, incidents or accidents. Pu- 
rity of character reigns in heaven, but money does 
not. 

The favorite Bible word for heaven is “ glory,” 
which seems so especially suited to describe heaven. 
It means splendor, brightness, magnificence, excel- 
_ lence, preéminence, dignity, majesty in the sense of 
absolute perfection, a most glorious, a most exalted 
state, a glorious condition of blessedness. 

A happy state heaven will be. There might be 
perfection in knowledge and not bliss. There 


86 HEAVEN, A STATE 


might be progress and pain. There might 
be glory, effulgence and splendor, which would 
bring no calm to the breast, no joy to the heart. 
But heaven’s state will be one of supreme, unal- 
loyed happiness, with nothing to shadow its bright- 
ness, nothing to bring pain, or cause sorrow. 
There is ineffable joy, no void, no fear, no anxiety, 
no alloy. 

There are real joys in heaven. We are not ap- 
prised of their pursuits, their high vocations, but 
neither listlessness nor weariness will be known. 
Activity is the first and strongest impression given 
us of heaven, an activity too intense and profound 
to be intermitted or to be joyless. Their joys are 
of the highest and most engaging order, no fitful 
delights, no dreamy visions, but filling the heart, 
the mind, and the spirit. 

We can, perhaps, more readily appreciate its 
joys by negative statement than by the positive, by 
the ills we shall escape, as fully, or more so, than 
by the joys we shall inherit: 

“No sickness.” What an immeasurable bliss! 
“No pain.” What endless comfort and ease! 
“No sorrow,” no cloud, no night, no weariness, 
no bitterness, no anguish, no penitence, no remorse, 
no graves, no sighs, no tears, no sad laments, no 
broken hearts, no death-bed scenes, no dying there. 
Never a corpse, never a coffin, never a hearse, never 
a grave in all that happy, thrice blissful land. No 
funeral crowd ever wept, no sorrowing ones ever 


HEAVEN, A STATE 87 


pass through its streets, or walk along its cloudless 
highways. Not only is there an absence of these 
things, which destroy earth’s brightest bliss. Their 
absence is enough to form a delightful heaven. 
But there is positive good, “fulness of joy and 
pleasures forevermore.” 


No chilling winds, or poisonous breath, 
Can reach that healthful shore; 

Sickness and sorrow, pain and death, 
Are felt and feared no more. 


When shall I reach that happy place, 
And be forever blest? 

When shall I see my Father’s face, 
And in his bosom rest? 


VIII 
GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 


“The soul is renewed in the glory world. The body will 
be fashioned after the glorious body of Jesus Christ, and 
both will be joined together in an indestructible bond, 
clearer than the indestructible Moon, brighter than the Sun, 
and more resplendent than all the heavenly spheres. For 
having conquered and triumphed in the church militant, the 
saint is now sit down with Jesus on His throne. Hallelujah! 
The Lord God omnipotent reigneth, And His children 
shall reign with Him forever. 

“An unholy man cannot enter heaven, and were he in 
heaven, it would be no enjoyment to him, because it is not 
suited to him. The nature of resident must be suited to the 
place of residence. . . . There is a fellowship among the 
devils in hell, and with those who are of a diabolic nature, 
and we know that holy inhabitants of heaven are brethren 
with holy souls.” 


—ADAM CLARK. 


HE results of Paul’s profound and match- 
less argument on the resurrection of the 
body and its transfiguration for the 

heavenly world, is summarized and pointed thus: 
“ Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, 
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the 
Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is not 
in vain in the Lord.” ‘That is to be settled, fixed 


in purpose, not moved, firmly persistent, settled to 
88 


GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 89 


stay. Of King Rehoboam it is said, “ He did evil 
because he set not his heart to seek the Lord” 
(Revised Version). “He that wavereth is like a 
wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed. 
For let not that man think that he shall receive 
anything of the Lord. A double-minded man is 
unstable in all his ways.” Instability loses heaven. 
“My heart is fixed, oh God, my heart is fixed.” 
That is, his heart was seated, settled, immovable 
for heaven. No one goes to heaven whose heart 
is not already there. 

Perseverance is a heaven-winning grace, to be 
at it always, to stay at it all the time. The king of 
Israel lost his conquest because he smote on the 
ground but three times when he should have smit- 
ten twice that number. He missed by stopping. 
We miss heaven by not persevering. Faint-heart- 
edness, or weariness and letting go, are fatal con- 
ditions in the ascent to heaven. “ And let us not 
be weary in well doing, for in due season we shall 
reap, if we faint not.” It takes strength to gain 
heaven. ‘They need strong men there. They are 
strong who gain heaven. Much there will be in 
this life to create faint-heartedness and much to 
discourage. ‘To hold on will require resolute for- 
titude and persevering courage and steady ongo- 
ing. 

The ability to die is a heaven-gaining virtue. 
Paul says, “I die daily.” He wanted his dying 
fashioned after the perfect pattern of Christ, 


90 GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 


“ Confortned to his death.” “I am crucified with 
Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ 
liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the 
flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who 
loved me, and gave himself for me.” Again the 
apostle says: “ But God forbid that I should glory, 
save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by 
whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto 
the world.” 

Along the heavenly way the cross is to be borne. 
The cross is the true sign that we are in the heav- 
enly way. As Jesus bore the cross, so must all His 
true disciples do the same. As Jesus died on the 
cross to save from sin, so must we die to sin, to self 
and to the world, a painful death, but it is the 
crowning death. As Jesus went to His Father’s 
right hand from the cross, so we go to His right 
hand by way of the cross. If no shame of the 
cross, no joys of the crown. If no death of the 
cross, no life of the crown. If no depression of 
the cross, no elevation of the throne. “It is a 
faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we 
shall also live with him; If we suffer, we shall also 
reign with him; if we deny him he also will deny 
us.” 

In the first chapter of second Peter we have a 
catalogue of the heavenly-fitting graces! ‘ And 
besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith 
virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowl- 
edge, temperance ; and to temperance, patience; and 


GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 91 


to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly 
kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity.” 
The apostle has been writing of the wonderful 
provision God had made for our salvation. ‘“ Ac- 
cording as his divine power hath given unto us all 
things that pertain unto life and godliness, through 
the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory 
and virtue; whereby are given unto us exceeding 
great and precious promises; that by these ye might 
be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped 
the corruption that is in the world through lust.” 
We have in this statement a summary of God’s 
great outlay, laid out, laid down before us, and we 
are to contribute, besides what God has done, our 
quota, or, as the Revised Version says: “ Yea and 
for this very cause adding on your part all dili- 
gence,” introducing by the side of God’s great 
works, all diligence. In all things concerning 
heaven, diligence is a necessary virtue. Sustained, 
persevering, deeply interested effort, is a matter of 
vital importance. Sloth and ease, so criminal and 
so ensnaring in every department of earthly action 
and effort, are peculiarly so in the effort for 
heaven. Not to be in earnest about heaven—here 
is a crime of great magnitude, eternal in fatal con- 
sequences. At the very threshold of the way to 
heaven, we are confronted with the fact that he 
who would win eternal life must be deeply in 
earnest, and express that earnestness by most la- 
borious and persistent effort. To this struggle for 


92 GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 


heaven, every contestant must bring all diligence 
at the outset. Through all the way till the heavenly 
gates are entered, there can be no slacking of dili- 
gence. ‘This diligence is to be put forth to bring 
to being and perfection all the graces which fit for 
heaven. 

Faith is the first, the foundation stone. Faith 
builds on Jesus Christ. Here faith is the founda- 
tion on which the whole spiritual building is reared. 
A foundation will do no good and will be ruined if 
no house is built on it. The snow, the rain, the 
dew, the frost, the air, the sunshine, the breeze, 
will dissolve a foundation of adamant if no 
house be built on it. On faith’s foundation, by all 
diligence, the spiritual superstructure must be 
reared. ‘The word “add” is taken from the leader 
of a chorus, which means to bring forward and 
supply all things necessary to fit out the chorus. 
We are to add all things requisite to make the 
heavenly character complete and harmonious. 

Virtue is to be added. Virtue is an eminent en- 
dowment, a combination of all virtues, at least of 
many of them. In this place it means vigor, manly 
vigor, made of all manly qualities. Courage is a 
chief and distinguishing idea in virtue. Knowl- 
edge is general understanding and intelligence, that 
knowledge of Jesus and Divine things which in- 
struct. It involves the intelligent apprehension of 
Divine truths and a thorough conviction of their 
importance. This knowledge is gained in the Holy 


GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 93 


Bible and by the light of God’s Spirit. We are to 
seek the Spirit of revelation in the knowledge of 
Jesus. More and more are we to know of Jesus. 
More and more are we to “know Him and the 
power of His resurrection.” Knowledge is power 
and strength and light. We are to be deeply con- 
victed of the truths of religion, and must have a 
personal knowledge of what the Scriptures teach, 
and an intelligent grasp and apprehension of Bible 
facts and truths. Light and wisdom in the inner 
man—all these are to be added day by day as the 
lessons for heaven’s graduating day. 

Temperance follows, and this word is not limited 
in its meaning to intoxicants. It means self-gov- 
ernment. We have learned of ourselves by knowl- 
edge. Self-control comes in to bear its fruit of 
heavenly wisdom. The tempers and passions, ap- 
petites and desires, are all held in by the strong 
reins of temperance. It cannot be that intemper- 
ance can enter heaven. Desires are to be limited, as 
well as appetites and passion. A passionless man 
may be in excess through his desires after -noney, 
after business success and after pleasures. Self- 
governed for God—this expresses its meaning. 
Trained in the school of temperance for heaven— 
this is the idea. 

Patience comes to prominence again, and com- 
bines with these other graces to perfect in us the 
Christian character and fit us for the heavenly life. 
In this noble word there is always a background of 


94 GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 


manliness. It is the brave patience with which the 
Christian contends against the various hindrances, 
persecutions and temptations which befall him in 
his conflict with the inner self and outer world. 
It is that manliness which never loses heart or cour- 
age, never charges God foolishly, and is not hasty 
nor revengeful to man. 

Godliness, God-likeness, brings the heavenly 
racer into a heavenly atmosphere. He is no longer 
simply after virtue, knowledge, temperance, pa- 
tience, which are principles, facts, restraints, but 
after the pattern of a person. He is looking heav-_ 
enward for a pattern after which to shape his con- 
duct and character. He hears the law speaking 
through the soft tunes of the Gospel, “ Be ye holy 
for I am holy.” It is God who speaks, and the 
struggle for heaven reaches its brightest point 
when it begins to be a struggle to be like God. 
Higher relations than earth bind him, higher du- 
ties than those to man. He is rising to God. He is 
struggling for God’s perfect image, that he may 
be a reflection of the Divine Person. 

He has passed into the Divine family. His rela- 
tion to God gives him a new kinship to man. Love 
is to rule in a family circle. A brotherhood has 
been established, which is the family of God, the 
brotherhood of heaven. Brotherly Love is one of 
the germs of our conversion to God. One of the 
elements of the heavenly life. The brotherhood of 
earth is the type of the brotherhood of heaven. 


GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 95 


Grace has many of the natural virtues. It keeps 
and polishes these. While not exactly transformed, 
they are burnished and refined, and adorn human- 
ity with a richness not wholly their own. But 
grace must have its distinctive features which sepa- 
rate it from and elevate it above all other systems. 
It must be original and unrivaled in its super-ex- 
cellence. 

Paul, in the twelfth chapter of Romans, has a 
masterly and beautiful presentation of the practical 
side of piety, its most beautiful side, for in no shape 
is religion so lovely as when in action. The crown- 
ing grace is set forth by Paul in these words: “ Be 
kindly affectionate one to another; in honor pre- 
ferring one another.” ‘This is a costly grace; like 
the most precious gems, rare and only secured with 
great labor and cost. Where is this one to be 
found? Who exemplifies it? 

These jewels are found in God’s Word readily, 
they adorn almost every page; but to transfer them - 
to practical life among our fallen and marred race, 
is the point of chief difficulty. To transplant these 
sensitive and rare plants, so that they bloom and 
spread their odor in a strange soil, is a difficult 
and delicate task. These fine spiritual graces do 
not seem to be the product of this hurrying age. 
We value bulk rather than quality. These are the 
products of the Divine side of our religion, the 
proofs of its divinity. It must have something 
above the rude virtues which spring from the soil 


96 GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 


of humanity. ‘These heaven-induced graces must 
be seen and felt. The world demands this before 
it pays its homage. We are not barren of the or- 
dinary graces. It costs but little to fashion them. 
But these of the first water, how rare! 

It is the glory of Christianity not only to pre- 
sent an ideal of the highest type, but to supply 
practical illustrations. 

“Jn honor preferring one another.” This may 
be fitly termed the crowning grace. To put others 
along side of us, is generous and gracious, but to 
put them before us, is divine. To halt that they 
may catch up, would be kindly, but to stop and step 
aside that others may pass before us in a race for 
honor and place, is far above nature. To prefer 
others before ourselves in heart and action, seems 
to bewilder and dizzy our untried heads. It is too 
high. We sigh out in despair. We cannot attain 
to it. But faith says, “I can do all things through 
Christ who strengthens me.” ‘This crowning of 
others by discrowning self, this refusing that others 
may receive, is grievous to flesh and blood. Who 
can receive it? And yet it comes to us as a com- 
mand, in the form of law. But the New Testa- 
ment law unfolds the promise, and affords the 
helps to obedience. We are to do this—put others 
before ourselves. ‘This is the complete conquest — 
of self, and requires a great victory. He who has 
gained this is worthy a triumph through the gates 
into the City! Have we learned this lesson and 


GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 97 


gained this height? Have we received the crown 
of this grace? Can we in honor prefer another? 
Has the reign of ambition ceased, the love of the 
world been destroyed, and self crucified? The 
death of all these must enrich the soil ere it can 
produce this Divine fruit. 

It is as if God speaks thus to His people: “‘ You 
by your unwearied diligence furnish these graces, 
and I will furnish heaven. You seek these spiritual 
graces in their abounding fulness, and I will supply 
to you an abounding entrance into heaven.” So to 
gain heaven hereafter, we must of necessity gain 
these rich graces here. Heaven grows in the soil 
of the God-prepared heart. We seek heaven by 
seeking these heavenly virtues. 

Peter in concluding this earnest exhortation, so 
full of meaning, concerning those graces which fit 
us for heaven, gives us these words: “ For if these 
things be in you, and abound, they make you that 
ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the 
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.” ‘To fail in 
having, in abounding fulness, these heavenly 
characteristics, is to be blind to eternal matters, and 
short-sighted about heaven and all the things per- 
taining to it, and also to lose what we have already 
obtained. Past forgiveness amounts to nothing if 
we do not “add to” this initial step the succeeding 
stages, which mark the way to heaven. “ But he 
that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see 
afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged 


98 GRACES WHICH FIT FOR HEAVEN 


99 


from his old sins.” Again does this homely apostle 
call us to diligence, ongoing, and the addition of 
these graces to the sum already secured, as the only 
safeguard from backsliding and final apostasy. 
“Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to 
make your calling and election sure; for if ye do 
these things, ye shall never fall.” 

Then with a master stroke he shows the bearing 
of all this diligence, toil, and the securement of all 
these divine graces, on heaven: “ For so an en- 
trance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into 
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ.” Or, as the Revised Version has it, 
“For thus shall be richly supplied unto you the 
entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ.” 


Let cares like a wild deluge come, 
And storms of sorrow fall, 

So I but safely reach my home, 
My God, my heaven, my all. 


There I shall bathe my weary soul 
In seas of heavenly rest, 
And not a wave of trouble roll 
Across my peaceful breast. 
—Isaac Watts. 


IX 
LOVE OF JESUS AND HEAVEN 


“In heaven we shall live in our own element. We are now 
as the fish in a vessel of water, only so much as will keep 
them alive. But what is that to the ocean? We have here a 
little air let in to afford us breathing, but what is that to 
the sweet and fresh gales upon Mount Zion? Here we have 
a beam of the sun to lighten our darkness and a warm ray 
to keep us from freezing. But there we shall live in the 
light and be revived by its heat.” 

—RICHARD BAXTER. 


r | “\HE Apostle James says: “ Blessed is the 
man that endureth temptation, for when 
he is tried he shall receive the crown of 

life which the Lord hath promised to them that 

love him.” The great condition of this great re- 
ward, the crown of life, is Love. 

It would be impossible to overestimate the im- 
portance of love. Christ makes it the aim of the 
moral code and the fulfilment of all prophecy. It 
is called the royal law, and is said to be the fulfill- 
ing of that law; the bond of perfection, the test of 
discipleship, the first of the graces, and the shield 
on the day of judgment. 

In the thirteenth of first Corinthians it is pic- 
tured, and we gaze and admire, but rarely do we 

99 


100 LOVE OF JESUS AND HEAVEN 


transfer to practical life this the most beautiful of 
all things, and the most practical too. Love is not 
faith, though the only medium through which faith 
works. It is not hope, though it forms the sub- 
stance which hope colors and brightens. It is the 
most common thing, and the rarest, often on our 
lips, but seldom in our hearts, easiest to say and 
hardest to do. 

What is the description as thus given by Paul? 
It has passion, but neither envy nor jealousy have 
any place in that pure flame. It is clothed with 
humility, so that neither vanity nor pride inflate 
its heart, nor speak from its lips. Unseemly con- 
duct never mars its beauty, nor casts reproach nor 
suspicion on its fidelity. Self renders his scepter, 
and claims his rights with modesty, and meekness. 
It is never provoked to peevish irritation, not in- 
sulted to bitterness, and wrath. It does not suspect 
ill nor avenge wrongs. It is saddened by the 
triumphs of evil, but rejoicing in the success of 
truth. It is akin to God in its freedom from hasty 
and angry excitements, long-suffering, self-re- 
strained to evil but to the good mobile, and ever- 
flowing in kindness, usefulness, beneficence. 

It has strength to bear, is credulous for good, 
full of hope and cheer for the best, and waits pa- 
tiently, serene and gentle, when faith and fortitude 
and hope have almost failed. 

Such is the divine portraiture of this Divine love. 
Such are the principles on which Christ proposes 


LOVE OF JESUS AND HEAVEN 101 


to reconstruct human nature—sublime principles, 
sublimer purposes of the Son of God. Out of no 
other material does He propose to begin and com- 
plete His fair and costly building and make His 
heaven. 

Religion is shut up to this one principle. All 
else is foreign or false. It is the capsheaf, the 
commandment which completes, aggregates and 
dominates the whole; burnished, emphatic and 
pregnant with His life and death. The summary 
of that life and death is: “ Love one another.” 
This is the decalogue revised and completed—the 
Sinai of Calvary—the law of the Gospel. 

Love is the regenerating principle implanted in 
man’s heart by the Holy Ghost, and its perfection 
is the end for which he is to labor with incessant 
effort and incessant prayer. 

This love to Jesus implanted in the renewed 
heart has retired earth’s most sacred attachments 
and become the animating force and crown of our 
earthly lives. ‘‘ Where I am there ye may be also.” 
“To be at home with the Lord.” “To be with 
Christ which is far better.” ‘ Father, I will that 
those whom thou hast given me be with me where 
iam,” 

To love Jesus is to long to be with Him. To 
love Jesus is to think about Him. ‘To love Jesus is 
to obey Him, to obey Him readily and implicitly, 
not feebly and reluctantly. “If ye love me keep 
my commandments. If ye keep my command- 


102 LOVE OF JESUS AND HEAVEN © 


ments ye shall abide in my love.” The certainty of 
heaven is assured when we keep Jesus in the center 
of our hearts, in the center of our lives. He is to 
be the author of impulse and desire, of effort and 
action. ‘ Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do 
all in the name of the Lord Jesus.” 

Will you get to heaven? What is Jesus to you? 
Does He charm you? Does He draw you heaven- 
ward? Is it to be with Him that you seek heaven? 
Is He the fairest flower in all its garden? Is He 
the rarest and most precious of all its jewels? Is 
He sweeter than all its songs? 

Does He beget the longings for its blissful 
abodes? Does the desire to see and be with Him 
stir the profoundest ambition of your soul? Jesus 
and heaven are bound up together. To love Him 
with an untold passionate devotion is heaven be- 
gun, heaven continued, and heaven ended. Paul 
says: “I am now ready to be offered, and the time 
of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good 
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the 
faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous 
judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me 
only, but unto all them also that love his appear- 
ing.” 

The crown is not only personal to him, but uni- 
versal, only limited “ unto all them that love his 
appearing.” Here it is not simply love for Jesus 
personally, but love for the great fact which is to 


LOVE OF JESUS AND HEAVEN 103 


culminate in the great glory of Jesus. ‘To “love 
his appearing” there is the absolute necessity for 
loving His Person. The loving His coming is the 
test of loving His Person. We love the fact be- 
cause we love the Person. We are not charged to 
love any theory or opinion about the manner of 
His coming, or the time, but the fact. Let Him 
come when He will, how He will, and for what 
purpose He will. We love His coming because we 
love Him. “ Even so, come quickly, Lord Jesus,” 
and bring Thy heaven with Thee. 

The overcomers, the victorious ones, the con- 
querors, they are the heaven-crowned ones. Their 
valorous strength, their undaunted courage, their 
dire conflicts, their unyielding steadfastness, their 
holding fast even unto death; they who, by their 
Christian constancy and courage, keep themselves 
unharmed. and spotless from all the devices, as- 
saults, solicitations of the world, the flesh and the 
devil—these are crowned to the heavenly life. 

They have gained the victory over the devil; 
conquerors they are of him. “I write unto you 
young men because ye have overcome the wicked 
one.” ‘The spirit of antichrist they have over- 
come. “ For whatsoever is born of God overcom- 
eth the world; and this is the victory that over- 
cometh the world, even our faith. Who is he that 
overcometh the world but he that believeth that 
Jesus is the Son of God.” “He that overcometh 
shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and 


104 LOVE OF JESUS AND HEAVEN 


he shall be my son.” Blessed company! “ They 
all are robed in spotless white. And conquering 
palms they bear.” They are the victors. The con- 
flict is past, the battle has been fought, and the 
victory has been won and won forever. They are 
“more than conquerors through him that loved 
them.” ‘The blessed Jesus has always led them in 
triumph, and now they are with Him upon His 
throne in their last and great triumph. 

This love is born of the Spirit of God and is 
centered on Jesus Christ. Heaven depends on our 
love to the Saviour of sinners. We love heaven 
only as we love Him and as we seek for Him. 
This love is to be ardent and supreme. Jesus is the 
joy and glory of heaven. 


Do not I love thee, O my Lord? 
Then let me nothing love; 

Dead be my heart to every joy, 
When Jesus cannot move. 


Thou know’st I love thee, dearest Lord, 
But O, I long to soar 

Far from the sphere of mortal joys, 
And learn to love thee more! 


xX 
LOOKING TO HEAVEN 


“Salvation, salvation is the only necessary thing. This 
clay-idol, the world, is not to be sought; it is a-morsel not 
for you, but for hunger-bitten bastards. Contend for sal- 
vation. Your master, Christ, won heaven with strokes. It is 
a besieged castle, it must be taken with violence. Oh, this 
world thinketh heaven but at the next door, and that 
godliness may sleep in a bed of down, till it come to heaven! 
But that will not do it.” 

—SAMUEL RUTHERFORD. 


HE Christian’s attitude to heaven is one of 
desire. Paul puts it thus: “I am ina 
strait betwixt two, having the desire to 

depart and be with Christ, which is far better.” To 
set one’s heart upon, longing for heaven, a great 
desire for Jesus, to be with Him—that was Paul’s 
attitude. The very best Jesus has is for His dis- 
ciples. God gives Jesus the key to everything, and 
Jesus turns everything over to His followers. This 
ought to kindle and inflame desire. We ought not, 
we cannot move heavenward with a chilled heart, 
a cold purpose, a frigid resolution, “ For in this 
we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon 
with our house which is from heaven: If so be 


that being clothed we shall not be found naked.” 
105 


106 LOOKING TO HEAVEN 


It is, it must be, an earnest desire. We start to 
heaven in a flame and it ought to be fanned to an 
intense flame at each step. | 

The Christian’s attitude is toward heaven, not 
to die, merely to be unclothed of the present. It is 
not simply to get rid of the cumbrance of the tent- 
like bodies. It is not death, for death has no 
charms for the true Christian. He fears not to 
’ die, he fears not to live. Life has for him little 
charms apart from heaven. Death has no charms 
aside from heaven. 

The attitude is thus given by Paul: “For we 
that are in this tabernacle do groan, being bur- 
dened; not for that we would be unclothed, but 
clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed 
up of life.” This supposes a desire so full of light, 
of expectations, of longings, that it burdens. 
Heaven is so charmful to the unclouded vision of 
faith, so bright and deathless under the rosy hues 
of an immortal hope, that the present burdens be- 
come an intolerable load. ‘To stay is to live in the 
graveyard, to have a home in a decaying house, to 
be dying. Earth is a vast cemetery. Everything 
betokens death, breathes death and is dying. The 
desire of heaven is kindled at the fountain of life 
where we become sick of the dead and sick of the 
dying. The soul, having tasted of the spring of 
life, longs to bathe in its full river, and yearns to 
plunge in its immeasurable ocean. 

The attitude for heaven is the desire of life for 


LOOKING TO HEAVEN 107 


life, of life against death. Here death reigns, im- 
prisons and ruins. There life reigns, emancipates 
and enriches. We are impatiently patient for life 
eternal, life which is found nowhere else but in 
heaven. Sick of death, we aspire to life by living 
and longing for heaven. This groaning for heaven 
is not natural. Nature is of the earth, earthly. 
The Holy Spirit changes nature and fashions us 
for heaven. “ Now he that hath wrought us for 
the selfsame thing is God, who also hath given us 
the earnest of the Spirit.” 

God has fashioned us for this heavenly life. He 
implants in us these heavenly desires. When we 
stand thus attested to heaven, thus looking toward 
heaven, thus longing for heaven, these are the 
marks of God’s hand, the results of His work of 
grace in our hearts. He puts in us the Holy Spirit 
to keep the memory freighted with and alive to 
the fact of heaven, to keep the desires ardent for 
heaven, to keep the hands busy for heaven and to 
keep the taste sweet and fresh for heaven. God 
works this mighty heavenly work in us so that 
we look not at the things which are temporal, 
value not the things which are insipid and trans- 
itory, and strive not after the perishing things of 
earth. 

These are materialized and materializing times. 
Materialized times always make much of earth 
and little of heaven. True religion always makes 
little of earth and much of heaven. If God’s 


108 LOOKING TO HEAVEN 


watchmen are not brave, argus-eyed, and sleepless, 
religion will catch the contagion of the times, and 
think little of and struggle less for heaven. 

God makes much of heaven. He was the archi- 
tect and builder of its magnificence and glory. It 
is His dwelling place, His city, by preéminence, 
His capital, His metropolis, the home of His fam- 
ily, the dwelling place of His earthly elect. God 
fashions every child of His after the pattern of 
heaven, feeds every child of His on its food, trains 
every soldier of His for its warfare, and begets in 
every child of His insatiable thirstings for heaven. 
When the taste is dull heavenward and the eye dim 
heavenward, then the luster of God has faded 
from the spirit, the work of God is checked in the 
soul, the life of God pulsates feebly, and the love 
of God is chilled to the heart. 

“For this selfsame thing”—this heavenly 
fashion, these heavenly tastes and heavenly long- 
ings—says the apostle, “has God wrought in us 
and given us the earnest of his Spirit.”” Not only 
does this work of God wrought in us shape and 
mold us after the heavenly, but the true work of 
God in us gives a foretaste and pledge of the heav- 
enly. 

To the true Christian, heaven is not a mere 
sentiment, or poetry, or dreamland, but real solid 
and abiding granite in strength, home-drawing in 
sweetness and influence. God is never happier, 
never better to His earthly saints than when their 


LOOKING TO HEAVEN 109 


heavenly trend is strongly marked. Heavenly long- 
ings and heavenly goings are plainly and emphat- 
ically declared of the saints whose devotion to 
heaven has unloosed and estranged them from 
earth. He is not ashamed to be called their God. 
For them He hath prepared a city. What does 
God think of us who have no sighings for heaven, 
no longings for it; earth, earthly, earthened? 
God’s throne is in heaven. His power, person and 
glory are preéminently there. Does God attract 
and hold us? Then heaven attracts and holds. Do 
we thirst after God? 


Jerusalem, my happy home! 
Name ever dear to me! 

When shall my labors have an end, 
In joy and peace, and thee? 


When shall these eyes thy heaven-built walls 
And pearly gates behold? 

Thy bulwarks with salvation strong, 
And streets of shining gold? 


O when, thou city of my God, 
Shall I thy courts ascend, 

Where congregations ne’er break up, 
And sabbaths have ng end? 


XI 
ON A STRETCH FOR HEAVEN 


“God will manage our affairs if we are filled with His 
affairs. Be sure you are in God’s hands and not that of an 
ecclesiasticism. I am very feeble. I want to live for God 
and to depart and be with Christ. I have an unspeakable 
desire to know the future, to see it and enjoy it, and to be 
there to see and enjoy. Let us hold on to God.” 

—E. M. Bounps. 


N a stretch for heaven is the Christian’s 
6) attitude, with all his power taxed and 
strained in a movement, a conflict, a race 
for heaven. “ Know ye not that they which run 
in a race, run all, but one receiveth the prize? So 
run that ye may obtain. And every man that 
striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things. 
Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but 
we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as un- 
certainly; so fight I, not as one that beateth the air: 
But I keep under my body, and bring it into sub- 
jection: lest that by any means, when I have 
preached to others, I myself should be a castaway.” 
Here we have the picture of the heavenly athlete 
putting forth all his trained strength to win the 
prize of an incorruptible crown. ‘The Greek 
athlete, in his exhaustive exertion to win the cor- 
ruptible crown, is a favorite Bible illustration as a 
110 


ON A STRETCH FOR HEAVEN i111 


stimulant to stir men for heaven. The athlete has 
no eye but for the crown. Every part and particle 
of his strength is put under strain to secure that 
end, and we are charged to “so run that we may 
obtain.” 

Jesus impresses the same idea on the multitude 
in reply to the inquiry: “‘ Then said one unto him, 
Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said 
unto them, Strive to enter in at the straight gate; 
for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and 
shall not be able.” Strive means to agonize. It is 
the word for intensity of effort, and effort that in- 
cludes the outlay of the fullest strength in an ear- 
nest and impassioned way. 

In Hebrews, twelfth chapter, we have a most 
vivid picturesque declaration of the same great 
truth that heaven is gained only by the most in- 
tense and persistent effort, which taxes all the 
strength and demands the outlay of all possible 
energy to secure it. The old worthies are repre- 
sented as having gained the prize, and ranged them- 
selves as spectators of the renowned and exciting 
conflict, and Jesus Christ is set forth as having 
passed over and marked the way and seated Him- 
self at the goal to adjudge the race, and award the 
crown. ‘The racers are charged most solemnly, 
“ Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about 
with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside 
every weight, and the sin which doth so easily be- 
set us, and let us run with patience the race that is 


112 ON A STRETCH FOR HEAVEN 


set before us; looking unto Jesus, the author and 
finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set 
before him, endured the cross, despising the 
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the 
throne of God.” 

Where in all the pages of literature and appeals 
could there be a stronger call to throw all energy 
and all weight into the conflict? The issue trem- 
bles on the racer, his ability to run, to outstrip and 
to lay aside all things which embarrass, or impede 
progress. Heaven is staked on the issue. An in- 
corruptible crown is the reward of successful run- 
ning. Immortality and eternal life hang on the 
issue. 

Paul charges Timothy to be on the same stretch 
for heaven. The people will not be on the stretch 
for heaven if their preachers are not so. Paul de- 
sires Timothy to lay himself out in the race, to 
“fight the good fight of faith.” The word “ fight ” 
is one of intense effort—agonize the good agony. 
Paul had been writing to Timothy about the wish 
to be rich, the love of money and its pernicious 
and damning results. Then he charges him to flee 
as a man of God from these things, and as worldly 
men agonize with desire and toil after money, and 
so eagerly pursue after it in order to lay hold on 
earthly riches, so as a man of God he was to put 
out agonizing and continuous effort, not for earth 
and its money, but for heaven and its inestimable 
and imperishable riches. 


ON A STRETCH FOR HEAVEN § 113 


In the Epistle to the Philippians, we have a vivid 
view of Paul ona stretch for heaven: 

“That I may know him, and the power of his 
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, 
being made conformable unto his death; if by any 
means I might attain unto the resurrection of the 
dead. Not as though I had already attained, either 
were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I 
may apprehend that for which also I am appre- 
hended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my- 
self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, 
forgetting those things which are behind, and 
reaching forth unto those things which are before, 
I press toward the mark for the prize of the high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us, therefore, 
as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in 
anything ye be otherwise minded, God shall re- 
veal even this unto you.” 

Paul purposed to win heaven, not by his mar- 
velous conversion, nor by his high apostolate, but 
by laying himself out for heaven all his life. On 
a stretch for heaven Paul was, with all the energy 
of his imperial nature and with all the ardor and 
intensity he could command, “ forgetting those 
things which are behind,” in the eagerness and 
strength of his forward pressing. “ Reaching 
forth to those that are before,’ means stretching 
one’s self forward in eagerness, energy and in- 
tentiveness of pursuit. “I press toward the mark ” 
is the figure of running with swiftness and an 


114 ON A STRETCH FOR HEAVEN 


energy which is continued. All this indicates the 
most engaging and absorbing interest and effort, 
and shows a perseverance with all the forces 
stretched to their utmost tension, in order to hold 
the whole being to the farthest and fullest outlay 
of strength to gain the end. 

Paul, the great apostle, was on the full stretch 
for heaven. He could not afford to miss heaven. 
“T therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, 
not as one that beateth the air: But I keep under my 
body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any 
means, when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway.” ‘Thus does he express his 
feelings and purpose. An apostle, the chief one 
though he be, can only make sure of heaven by be- 
ing on the stretch after it always and everywhere. 
May this example stir us to the profoundest depths. 
“ Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark 
them which walk so as ye have us for an en- 
sample.” 


Racers of Christ, arise, 
Stand forth, prepare to run: 
Toward the goal lift up your eyes, 
And manfully go on. 


*Tis true the race is short, 
But then it is not long; 

Each racer soon will take his harp, 
And warble Zion’s song. 


XII 
KNOWLEDGE OF HEAVEN 


“Fasten your grips fast on Christ. Let not this clay por- 
tion of earth take up your soul. It is the portion of bas- 
tards, and ye are a child of God. Therefore, seek your 
Father’s heritage. Send up your heart to see the dwelling 
house and fair rooms in the New City. Fy, fy, upon those 
who cry, ‘Up with the world, and down with conscience 
and heaven!” 

—SAMUEL RUTHERFORD. 


HE Christian’s attitude to heaven is one 
of knowledge. 


“For we know that, if our earthly house of this 
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of 
God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens” (2 Cor. 5:1). 


The Christian stands in regard to the certainty, 
of death as all the living do. A frail fleeting Arab 
tent is his body, the heir of death and hastening to 
decay. But the Christian knows that “if this 
earthly house were dissolved, he has a house not 
made with hands eternal in the heavens.” 

It is real knowledge about heaven, not a mere 
wish, or hope so, or a happy guess, but assured 

115 


116 KNOWLEDGE OF HEAVEN 


knowledge, a fact communicated, knowledge im- 
parted. God has committed Himself in the strong- 
est way to give knowledge and assurance of heaven 
to every child of God. “ The Spirit himself bears 
witness ” to our adoption and heirship. In regard 
to this great fact of our names being written in 
the Book of Life, we are not left in ignorance. 
God seals us with the Holy Spirit which is the 
earnest as well as a witness. A witness bears testi- 
mony. ‘The earnest is both the pledge of heaven 
and its foretaste. Heaven he has in conscious re- 
alization, not in full measure, but in a measure re- 
alized. The true Christian is no agnostic. He 
knows some things. 

Heaven in this life is not to him as large a 
reality, but as much a reality as it will be when his 
feet are on the gold pavement of the heavenly city. 
Heaven pervades and sweetens his whole life. His 
faith brings to him the very substance of things 
hoped for, and his hope makes the present lumi- 
nous by its light and strong by its strength. Chris- 
tian faith and hope make the things of heaven real, 
conscious, tangible, experimented. How the 
knowledge of his home in heaven defies death, 
change, and misfortune! How attractive that 
knowledge makes it! A “ building of God, eternal 
in the heavens!” 

Human hands poison with decay our fairest 
earthly homes. The touch of human hands has 
defiled them. Death awaits them. Our palace 


KNOWLEDGE OF HEAVEN 117 


across the river draws us without regret, but with 
delight, away from our earthly tent, our clay hut. 
He has had but little of God, and none of the 
sweets of faith, who has not anticipated in the 
earthly the reality and joy of the heavenly. Are 
we to be tossed in uncertainty as to our home on 
high? Is there no blessed surety? Yes, we know. 
The Word of God tells us so. The Spirit of God 
has spoken it to our hearts, and left its sweetness 
and its picture there. We have been examining our 
title deeds lately. They are heavenly deeds, signed 
and sealed. The house is built, the lot is numbered, 
all named in our bond, and “ we know that if our 
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we 
have a building of God, a house not made with 
hands, eternal in the heavens.” Death makes no 
bankrupt of the Christian. It only brings him to 
his inheritance. Death is the best thing that can 
come to the Christian. It puts him in possession of 
his great fortune. It brings him to his home. We 
ought never to sigh; we should go through with 
radiance and triumph. We ought always and 
everywhere, like the saints of old, “to take joy- 
fully the spoiling of our possessions, knowing in 
ourselves that in heaven we have a better and en- 
during substance.” 


Thine earthly Sabbaths, Lord, we love; 
But there’s a nobler rest above: 

To that our lab’ring souls aspire, 

With ardent pangs of strong desire. 


118 


KNOWLEDGE OF HEAVEN 
No more fatigue, no more distress ; 
Nor sin nor hell shall reach the place; 


No sighs shall mingle with the songs 
Which warble from immortal tongues. 


No rude alarms of raging foes ; 
No cares to break the long repose; 
No midnight shade, no clouded sun, 
But sacred, high, eternal noon. 


O long-expected day, begin ; 

Dawn on these realms of woe and sin: 
Fain would we leave this weary road, 
And sleep in death, to rest with God. 


XIII 
CITIZENSHIP OF HEAVEN 


“Tove heaven. Let your heart be in it. Up, up and visit 
the new land and view the fair city, and the white throne 
and the Lamb—run fast for it is late.’ 

—SAMUEL RUTHERFORD. 


r “HE Bible puts our citizenship in heaven by 
such a naturalization force, that we are 
expatriated from earth, and have always 

the sighings of an exile for native land, and the 
weariness, longings and loneliness of pilgrims and 
strangers. The Bible puts all true Christians in 
the attitude of groaning after heaven, on a stretch 
for living for heaven. To them it is the only life, 
life indeed—to live for heaven, and to live in 
heaven. 

The term heaven signifies a place of exaltation 
and glory. It is God’s dwelling place. The im- 
mediate presence of God is there. It is the land of 
a higher order of beings and a higher order of 
things than exist on earth. 

It is called “ the third heaven ” from its loftiness 
and supremacy, in contrast with the lower heavens. 
This term has been fully accepted in modern piety 
as the designation of the place. The good man is 

119 


ERTY (¢ 


N 2) : PALO Tvs + 
£ ENSTITUTE fir 


120 CITIZENSHIP OF HEAVEN 


to lay up his treasures in heaven, on which his 
heart and eye are to be constantly fixed. Heaven 
is the place to which Jesus has gone, where He is 
preparing a place for us. Heaven is a place, a land 
very dear to the Christian’s heart. Heaven! how 
the heart ‘beats quicker and the eye grows brighter 
at the mention of it! The eye of faith holds it in 
vision, and to it the prayer of faith is lifted. ‘‘ Our 
Father” dwells there. Jesus came from heaven 
on His great mission. ‘The Holy Spirit came down 
from heaven. The bodies of Enoch and Elijah and 
of Christ are there. Perhaps the bodies of the 
saints who-came out of their graves when Jesus 
was raised from the dead are in heaven. The spir- 
its of all the holy dead are there. A holy place is 
heaven, a happy place it is. An innumerable com- 
pany are there, safe, blessed, tearless, and immor- 
tal. 

How heaven ought to draw on our hearts and 
lift us above earth! How it should fill our 
thoughts and brighten our hopes! Heaven ought 
to assuage our griefs, banish our fears, lift care 
from our hearts and make us immune to the ills of 
this life. Jesus was ever lifting His eye and heart 
to heaven, ever speaking and thinking of His Fa- 
ther in heaven, ever looking at heaven, that, sup- 
ported by its sight and joy, He might “ endure the 
cross and despise the shame.” He made much of 
heaven. .So also ought we to make much of 
heaven. It ought to be the land in which we live, 


CITIZENSHIP OF HEAVEN 121 


its atmosphere should surround us, its glories al- 
lure us and its deathless beauties fill eye and heart. 
It should be the aim of our lives, the goal of our 
ambition, the stimulant of every exertion. Our 
names should ‘be written there, our treasures laid 
up there. 

Heaven in symbol is native land, fatherland, 
home. 


“For our conversation is in heaven; from whence 
also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ ” 
(Phil. 3:20). 


The word, “ conversation,” the Revised Version 
changes to “ citizenship,” and in the margin it has 
“commonwealth.” ‘The word has to do with a 
state, a commonwealth, its laws, regulations and 
citizens. 

“To-day,” said Jesus to the dying thief, “ shalt 
thou be with me in paradise.” Paul said he “ was 
caught up into paradise,” the paradise of God, a 
place enclosed and beautiful, like the abode of our 
first parents, another name for Eden. ‘The name 
is transferred to the abode of the saints in heaven, 
which is called the “‘ Paradise of God.” ‘The first 
paradise was made for man, with every tree that 
is pleasant to the sight and good for food. Beauty 
and purity and innocence were there. These all 
will be in the second paradise in larger proportion. 
The first paradise: “ The Lord God planted a gar- 
den.” ‘The second paradise: “ God hath prepared 


122 CITIZENSHIP OF HEAVEN 


for them a city.” The contrast and advance are 
from a garden to a city. The first was man’s 
paradise. ‘The second, the “paradise of God.” 
Man was in the first paradise. God is in the sec- 
ond paradise. God visited the first paradise. He 
dwells in the second paradise! 

It involves the common well-being and happi- 
ness of the whole people, and not of any favored 
caste or class. The perfection of government is 
heaven, in which the well-being and happiness of 
each and all are secured and enjoyed to the fullest 
measure. 

In the last part of the above quotation, we have 
the idea of heaven as a place brought strongly out, 
“heaven, from whence also we look for the 
Saviour.” Jesus with His human body must oc- 
cupy a place, so represented constantly in the New 
Testament, and that place, heaven, and from that 
place, heaven, we look for Him to come and do His 
work of raising the dead and changing the bodies 
of His saints. 


“Who shall change our vile body, that it may be 
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to 
the working whereby he is able even to subdue all 
things unto himself” (Phil. 3:21). 


The Christian has his citizenship in heaven. His 
allegiance is to God, his loyalty to heaven. ‘The 
laws of heaven he is bound to obey. ‘The best 
citizen of heaven is the best citizen of earth. He 


CITIZENSHIP OF HEAVEN 123 


is bound by highest obligations to obedience, to 
virtue, to government. How it exalts to be a citi- 
zen of such a divine commonwealth! “I ama 
Roman,” carried with it in the days of Rome’s 
power, dignity and honor, safety and sacredness. 
“T am a citizen of heaven.” What dignity and 
nobility, purity and heavenliness, such citizenship 
ought to represent! 


O Paradise! O Paradise! 
I want to sin no more, 

I want to be as pure on earth 
As on thy spotless shore ; 


O Paradise! O Paradise! 
I greatly long to see 

The special place my dearest Lord 
In love prepares for me; 


Lord Jesus, King of Paradise, 
O keep me in thy love, 

And guide me to that happy land 
Of perfect rest above. 


XIV. 
HEAVEN A HOME 


“ Heaven is called a kingdom for its immense greatness, 
and a city because of its great beauty and population. It is 
full of inhabitants of all nations, where are many angels, 
and an infinite number of the just, even as many as have 
died since the death of Abel. And thither shall repair all 
such as shall die in Christ to the end of the world; and after 
the general judgment shall there remain forever invested in 
their glorious bodies. How happy will it be to live with such 
persons,” 


—JEREMY TAYLOR. 


HE Epistle to the Hebrews, eleventh chap- 
ter, speaking of Old Testament Saints 
says: 

“These all died in faith, not having received the 
promises, but having seen them afar off, and were 
persuaded of them, and embraced them, and con- 
fessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the 
earth. For they that say such things declare 
plainly that they seek a country.” The Revised 
Version changes this so that it reads: “ For they 
that say such things make it manifest that they are 
seeking after a country of their own.” Dean AI- 
ford, in his Commentary, translates it thus, “ That 


they seek after a home.” ‘The English word 
124 


HEAVEN A HOME 125 


“country,” does not give the idea strong enough. 
The word is defined, one’s native country, one’s 
fatherland, one’s own country. Heaven is our 
home, our fatherland. Here we are foreigners, 
pilgrims and strangers. The heart of a stranger, 
the loneliness and longing of a stranger, the efforts 
and weariness of the pilgrims, should be ours. 
The heart-sighing, the exiled yearnings, should de- 
clare to all plainly that we are not at home, that we 
are not native to these skies, but heaven-born, seek- 
ing the heavenly country. 

Heaven ought to draw and engage us. Heaven 
ought to so fill our hearts and hands, our manner 
and our conversation, our character and our fea- 
tures, that all would see that we are foreigners, 
strangers to this world, natives of a nobler clime, 
fairer than this. Out of tune, out of harmony, out 
of course; we must be with this world. The very 
atmosphere of the world should be chilling to us 
and noxious, its suns eclipsed and its companion- 
ship dull and insipid. Heaven is our native land 
and home to us, and death to us is not the dying 
hour, but the birth hour. Heaven should kindle 
desire, and like a magnet draw us upward to the 
skies. Duty, inexorable duty, fealty to God, alone, 
should hold us here. 

A beautiful, gifted young woman once said that 
she had not seen one minute for several years 
wherein she desired to live one moment longer for 
the sake of any other good in life but doing good, 


126 HEAVEN A HOME 


living to God and doing what might be to His 
glory. 

Paul was brought into a strait between desire 
and duty. Christ and heaven had his heart, but 
duty kept him in exile. ‘“ For me to live is Christ 
but to die is gain. But if I live in the flesh this is 
the fruit of my labor: yet what I shall choose I wot 
not. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a 
desire to depart and be with Christ which is far 
better. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more 
needful for you. And having this confidence, I 
know that I shall abide and continue with you all 
for your furtherance and joy of faith.” With 
Paul it was as it ever should be. Duty retires de- 
sire, and teaches it to wait till the glad hour of its 
fruition. 

Of those ancient believers spoken of in Hebrews 
11, we discover that they all were pilgrims and 
strangers on the earth with heavenly longings 
and heavenly seeking. Alas, for the hearts which 
are settled here! Heaven to them is a strange, an 
alien, a far-off land! A background these had. 
They had left the earthland and refused to go 
back to it. They had transferred their home and 
their home-land to the better and heavenly country. 
God noted their fidelity, heard their sighing, and 
noted seeking. He was not ashamed of them and 
built for them a city. It is God-built. That as- 
sures its location, its glory, its eternity, and its bliss. 

In writing to the Corinthians of the Christian 


HEAVEN A HOME 127 


attitude to heaven, Paul says, as we have it in the 
Revised Version, “We are willing rather to be 
absent from the body and to be at home with the 
Lord.” Here we have one of the strongest, sweet- 
est, most attractive symbols of heaven. Whatever 
there is in that place we call home—sacred, dear, 
restful, delightful, full of holy feelings and death- 
less ties, all these are predicted in a form ten thou- 
sand fold stronger and sweeter of heaven. 

At home in heaven! What welcome! What 
satisfaction! What rest to tired feet, and tired 
hearts! What a sense of security and confidence! 
The home feelings in full opulence of richest 
wealth! Nowhere on earth’s green, glad soil will 
the home feeling be so profound, so satisfying, so 
restful, and so happifying as in heaven. It is not 
only to be realized as home when we get there, but 
all along the way the home feeling is to draw and 
bind us to that heavenly world. ‘The homesick- 
ness for heaven is to alienate us from earth, make 
us sick at heart and beget pinings for home. 

With deep spiritual insight and the soundest 
spiritual philosophy did one of Scotland’s most 
gifted and saintly preachers say after visiting a 
beautiful Manse: “ The Manse is altogether too 
sweet. Other men could hardly live there without 
saying, this is my rest. I don’t think ministers’ 
manses should ever be so beautiful.” 

This is not splenetic, nor overdrawn, but the as- 
sertion of a great principle to guard against a great 


128 HEAVEN A HOME 


peril. Great earthly attachments lessen heavenly 
attachments. ‘The heart which indulges itself in 
great earthly loves will have less for heaven. 
God’s great work and often His most afflictive and 
chastening work is to unfasten our hearts from 
earth and fasten them to heaven, to break up and 
desolate the earthly home that we may seek a home 
in heaven. 


My heavenly home is bright and fair: 
Nor pain nor death can enter there; 
Its glittering towers the sun outshine ; 
That heavenly mansion shall be mine. 


Let others seek a home below, 

Which flames devour, or waves o’erflow, 

Be mine the happier lot to own 

A heavenly mansion near the throne. 
—Williiam Hunter. 


XV. 
TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 


“There is required patience on our part till the summer 
fruit of heaven be ripe for us. It is in the bud; but there 
be many things to do before our harvest come. And we 
take ill with it, and can hardly endure to set our paper-face 
to one of Christ’s storms, and to go to heaven with wet 
feet. . . . We love to carry a heaven to heaven with us, 
and would have two summers in one year, and no less than 
two heavens. But this will not do for us; one (and such a 
one!)may suffice us well enough. Christ got but one only, 
and shall we have two?” 

—SAMUEL RUTHERFORD. 


HE odium and persecution cast upon fol- 

lowers of God, goes like a knife to many 

a saintly heart and makes them “ men of 

sorrows and acquainted with grief.” They are shut 
out. Religion of the most heavenly type is cast 
out by religion. No persecutors are so heartless 
and relentless as religious persecutors. No hatred 
is so bitter as the world’s hatred. “If the world 
hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated 
you. If ye were of the world, the world would 
love his own; but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you. Remember the word that I 

129 


130 TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 


said unto you, The servant is not greater than his 
lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also 
persecute you.” 

But wherever these persecutions come from, and 
from whom they come, they become the means of 
purity and maturity. By them God’s people are 
purged and perfected. We are not to repine at 
them, nor be impatient under them! We are not 
to fight against them, nor murmur at them, but en- 
dure them, endure with sweetness and joy; says 
James: “‘ My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall 
into divers temptations ; knowing this, that the try- 
ing of your faith worketh patience. But let pa- 
tience have her perfect work, that ye may be per- 
fect and entire, wanting nothing.” This is the 
process. 

Paul brings to our minds the same view of 
trials. Putting Jesus Christ to the forefront, and 
our relation to Him of justification and its raptur- 
ous peace as the result of faith, that faith giving us 
fuller access to Him and a farther vision and a 
higher and firmer standing. It brings heaven into 
full view, with the presence of Christ and the 
glory of God shining through the door of un- 
clouded, undying hope! 


“And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, 
knowing that tribulation worketh patience; And pa- 
tience, experience; and experience, hope” (Rom. 


5:3). 


TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 131 


Every holy principle, every precious result, every 
fragrant sentiment, brought to us by faith in Jesus, 
is enlarged by tribulation. By it patience is made 
more patient, enriched in sweetness and in strength, 
and experience more firmly fixed, deeper rooted, 
made steadfast and immovable. Hope is enlarged 
in scope and vision, increased in luster, and its 
foundations are laid in jeweled adornment. ‘ We 
glory in tribulations.” Do we? Can we? Heaven 
in eye and heart enables us to do this strange work, 
for tribulations not only burnish and garnish our 
heavenly home, but add many rooms to its size and 
many gems to its beauty and value. 

Peter leaves his normal, prosy, thankless service 
of “stirring up pure minds by way of remem- 
brance,” and rises to vision, beatitude and anthem: 


“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy 
hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. To an 
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that 
fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who 
are kept by the power of God through faith unto 
salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. 
Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, 
if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold 
temptations: That the trial of your faith, being much 
more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it 
be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and 
honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. 


132 TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 


Whom having not seen ye love: in whom, though now 
ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory” (1 Peter 1:3). 

Here they all are—God the Father, Jesus and 
His resurrection, the Spirit and sanctification, 
hope, heaven, love and fiery trials. The trials 
clarify, refine, aid the beatific outburst, and 
swell the anthems unto praise and honor and 
glory. Trials have brought heaven into a clearer 
and nearer vision, perfected the faith, purified the 
love, and swelled the joy, till it becomes unspeak- 
able and full of glory. 

“ Counting it all joy ” is not simply resignation. 
That as a cardinal virtue and crowning grace, is 
scarcely recognized as a grace at all in times of 
robust faith. It is not the grace of folded arms 
and silent hearts, but it is “ Count it all joy.” It 
is, “ Glory in tribulations also.” Glory in tribula- 
tions like you glory in heaven, for they are one and 
inseparable. Rejoice greatly! Rejoice with “ joy 
unspeakable and full of glory.” Rejoice in the 
prospect of heaven. 

Glory in infirmities. Says Paul: “Therefore, 
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in ne- 
cessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ’s 
sake; for when I am weak, then am I strong.” 

The beatitudes are born here, and enlarged to 
their largest measure and most heavenly joy. 
“Blessed are they which are persecuted for right- 
eousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 


TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 133 


Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and per- 
secute you, and shall say all manner of evil against 
you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceed- 
ing glad: for great is your reward in heaven; for 
so persecuted they the prophets which were before 
you.” So says Christ, and He puts it among His 
diamond utterances, itself a diamond of the first 
water. Listen to Paul again: 


“For which cause we faint not; but though our 
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed 
day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for 
a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the 
things which are seen, but at the things which are 
not seen. For the things which are seen are tem- 
poral, but the things which are not seen are eternal ” 


(2.Cor. 16-18). 


How Paul discredits and eases the pang of every 
pain and persecution! “ Light affliction ””—light 
in weight and short in time. It is light compared 
with “the weight of glory.” It is short compared 
with the “ eternal weight of glory.” Highly prized 
and invaluable are these afflictions as they “ work 
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory.” Add this estimate to Christ’s words, 
“ Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your 
reward in heaven.” 

But these trials work this exceeding and eternal 
greatness of reward only while “we look not at 


134 TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 


the things which are seen but at the things which 
are unseen.” ‘The eyes are off of earth—eyes are 
on heaven. Eyes are off of the things of earth— 
eyes on the things of heaven. 

The reward is sure. The “ far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory” is ours. When eyes 
are on the earth, the things of earth fret and wear 
the trials into our heart’s core, and cause us to lose 
heaven and all the measureless and imperishable 
good which these trials bring. 

Paul takes the sum, and calculates and judges 
between the suffering of this life and the glory of 
the future life: “ For I reckon that the sufferings 
of this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us.” The 
saints of old had such an estimate of heavenly 
things and such a low estimate of earthly things, 
that poverty enhanced heavenly riches: ‘ They 
took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing 
in themselves that they had in heaven a better and 
enduring substance.” 

Peter couples the two thoughts, suffering and 
heaven, and asserts that it is a common principle to 
which they are not to be strangers: “ Beloved, 
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which 
is to try you, as though some strange thing hap- 
pened unto you. But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are 
partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that, when his 
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with 
exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name 


TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 1385 


of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory and 
of God resteth upon you: on their part, he is evil 
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.” 

Again Peter, when speaking of the devil, he de- 
clares the universality of affliction wherever saints 
are found: “Be sober, be vigilant; because your 
adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh 
about, seeking whom he may devour; whom resist 
steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflic- 
tions are accomplished in your brethren that are in 
the world. But the God of grace, who hath called 
us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that 
ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, estab- 
lish, strengthen, settle you.” 

Heaven is declared to be God’s eternal glory. 
These are words far beyond the dictionaries of 
earth. ‘The glory of earth’s greatest one, though a 
fading glory, would be much honor, enough to stir 
the mightiest ambition and gratify the loftiest as- 
piration. But God’s eternal glory! What meas- 
ure is equal to it? What words can define? What 
ambition compass? And yet to that we are called, 
to God’s glory! To God’s “ eternal glory,” awake 
ambition worthy of God! Awake hope as limitless 
as eternity and as endless! It is not to be revealed 
till we have suffered a while! Oh, happy suffer- 
ing! Oh, short suffering, indefinable in its short- 
ness and limited in its pain, when contrasted with 
God’s eternal glory, of which trials are the glory 
and the usher, 


136 TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN’ 


This chastening process often comes through 
persecutions from the hands of evil men and devils, 
and yet God holds the control and results of the 
process in His own hands. Nothing is outside of 
His power, nothing excluded from His control for 
the good of His children. “All things,” whether 
they be things from the devil or bad men, or the 
mistakes of good men; “we know that all things 
work together for good to them that love God, to 
them who are the called according to his purpose.” 
Nothing of the nature of persecution and affliction 
can hinder God from pressing His faithful elect 
ones on till they are glorified. 

“They that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution.” “In the world ye shall have 
tribulation.” “If we be dead with him, we shall 
also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also 
reign with him.” ‘These are axiomatic in the 
Christ life. There is no persecuting Romish power 
now, either pagan or papal. ‘Those fierce and cruel 
days are gone, perhaps forever, but there are petty 
persecutions. ‘The world still hates Christ’s saints, 
and a worldly church still ostracizes and bans God’s 
peculiar people. 

Dr, Adoniram Judson writes from Burmah to a 
friend in America: “ Remember, I pray you, that 
word of Brainerd. Do not think it enough to live 
at the rate of common Christians. True, they will 
call you uncharitable and censorious, but what is 
the opinion of poor worms of the dust that it 


TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 137 


should deter us from our duty? Remember that 
other word of the same holy man, ‘ Time is but a 
nioment, life a vapor, and all its enjoyments but 
empty bubbles and fleeting blasts of wind.’”’ Again 
Dr. Judson writes, “ Let me beg of you not to rest 
contented with the commonplace religion that is 
now prevalent.” 

Yet it is this rising above the commonplace, cur- 
rent religion that gives offense, that awakens oppo- 
sition, and kindles the fires of a petty, yet painful 
persecution. No person does much for God, no 
person seeks heaven in a real, honest, successful 
way, who does not rise above the average piety. 

The Apostle Paul charges Timothy to “ follow 
after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, 
meekness. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold 
of eternal life,”’ giving the most vital relation be- 
tween the “ following after” these things and the 
“laying hold of eternal life.” Heaven is won by 
winning the heavenly virtues. Ardent pursuit 
after the graces which constitute heaven is the only 
way to pursue heaven with ardor and gain the 
prize. To mature and perfect these graces is to be 
made ready for heaven, 

Patience is one of those fundamental Christian 
virtues in which we are schooled for the heavenly 
life. Paul, writing to Romans, says: “’To them 
who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for 
glory and honor and immortality, eternal life.” 
Again he says: “In your patience ye shall win your 


1388 TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 


souls,” as the Revised Version reads. Patience is 
defined as the grace of holding out, endurance, lit- 
erally staying, remaining behind, steadfastness. 
He is patient who is unswerved from his deliberate 
purpose and his loyalty to faith and piety by even 
the greatest trials and sufferings. Patience is a 
cardinal virtue in Christian character. Its impor- 
tance cannot be overrated. It is strong and sweet, 
the pillar of strength, the adornment of beauty. It 
does not succumb under suffering. It is self-re- 
strained. It does not retaliate wrongs. Brave it 
is, opposed to cowardice or despondency, and has 
nothing in common with wrath and revenge, a gen- 
tle grace of serenity and sweetness. It expresses 
its sweetness through every bruised and bleeding 
pore. It goes to make up a summary of the gospel 
power and grace. It is “ the kingdom and patience 
of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 

Patience is born and perfected in trial. ‘“‘ We 
glory,” says Paul, “in tribulation also, knowing 
that tribulation worketh patience.” In James we 
have this remarkable demand and_ statement: 
“ Count it all joy when ye fall into divers tempta- 
tions, knowing this that the trial of your faith 
worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect 
work that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting . 
nothing.” Count every trial joy, not resignation — 
simply, but joy, gladness. All joy, no part dis- 
tressful or sad. Joy at their coming, joy at their 
results. ‘This is the way perfection comes, ‘“ Per~ 


TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 139 


fect and entire, wanting nothing,’ every grace 
present, every grace mature. ‘Trials bring perfec- 
tion, maturity, fulness. God makes our fruit per- 
fect by perfecting our character, and character is 
perfected by trial. 

How necessary this patience is to the winning 
heaven we are not left in doubt. “For ye have 
need of patience, that, after ye have done the will 
of God, ye might receive the promises.” “Let us 
run with patience the race that is set before us.” 
Job is the illustration of patience because he held 
on to God without variance or shadow of turning 
through his manifold trials. ‘“‘ The Lord gave and 
the Lord hath taken away. Blessed be the name 
of the Lord,” is the language of patience in its un- 
disturbed, uncomplaining serenity and sweetness. 
“Though He slay me yet will I trust in Him,” is 
the language of patience in its endurance and per- 
severance. 

Impatience is the epidemic sin. Strong people 
are impatient, weak people are impatient, sick peo- 
ple are impatient, well people are impatient, old 
people are impatient, young people are impatient. 
All people try our patience. So how appropriate 
the trying, difficult, universal injunction, “ Be pa- 
tient toward all men”! Patience is necessary to 
fruit bearing. They who are ready to be reaped 
for the heavenly harvest, “keep the word and 
bring forth fruit with patience.” This grace seems 
to be slow, indolent and always waiting. Not so. 


140 TRIBULATION AND HEAVEN 


Christian patience is very quiet, often silent, but 
never lazy, “not slothful, but followers of them 
who through faith and patience inherit the prom- 
ises.” Heaven is for the patient spirit. Heaven 
is already possessed by the patient. Has patience 
possessed us? 


Who suffer with our Master here, 
We shall before his face appear 
And by his side sit down; 
To patient faith the prize is sure, 
And all that to the end endure 
The cross, shall wear the crown. 


Thrice blesséd, bliss-inspiring hope! 
It lifts the fainting spirits up, 
It brings to life the dead: 
Our conflicts here shall soon be past, 
And you and I ascend at last, 
Triumphant with our head. 
—Charles Wesley. 


XVI 
THE HOPE OF HEAVEN 


“ What was the earthly Paradise in Eden compared to that 
purchased by the second Adam, who is the Lord from 
heaven? It is a purchased possession. ‘The price it cost 
the purchaser every one knows. Having purchased it, He 
has gone to prepare it, to set it in order, to lay out His 
skill upon it. O what a place will Jesus make it—yes, has 
already made heaven. The very place should attract us.” 

—NEVINS. 


are dealing now, but the Christian grace of 

heaven, which is hope. ‘There is much delu- 
sion in the belief of a mere fact. Such belief is 
sterile and deludes if the fact is not fashioned into 
a principle. If the cold facts of Gospel history do 
not become the fertilizers of the sweet graces of the 
Spirit, then are they dead and deadening. ‘These 
facts of the Gospel as they exist in pages of his- 
tory, even though the pages be inspired, do not save 
until they enter into our experience and become the 
bone and blood of our spiritual life. The fact of 
heaven must be believed. The heaven of fact ex- 
ists all glorious and enduring, but this fact of 

141 


[: is not the bare fact of heaven with which we 


142 THE HOPE OF HEAVEN 


heaven must enter our experience, and then of this 
experience hope is born, the twin in beauty, intelli- 
gence and goodness, with faith and love. 

Hope is a mighty spiritual principle. So strong 
is it that the apostle centers all the forces of salva- 
tion in it. “‘ We are saved,” he says, “ by hope.” 
By it there comes into play all the energetic forces 
which save. ‘These forces are limp and forceless 
without hope. Heaven nourishes all the principles 
of a deep, conscious piety. The Christian never 
works so well, never suffers so well, never grows so 
well, as when heaven is in full view of his eyes. It 
is that which gives to hope its ripeness, richness 
and power. Only the saint who is after heaven 
with all the ardor and brightness of hope is truly 
saved. Doubt and fear flee away from such a sal- 
vation. 

By its characteristics is this heavenly hope dis- 
tinguished from all false hopes which perish. It is 
patient. Hope can wait, and lose none of its 
brightness, wait with serenity and sweetness, wait 
without murmuring and disquietude. It is “the 
patience of hope” which adds to its luster and 
sweetness. “ But if we hope for that we see not, 
then do we with patience wait for it.” 

It is termed a good hope, joined to everlasting 
consolation. What can be better than a hope which 
brings in everlasting consolation, a source of per- 
petual, unfailing joy! It is also termed a “ lively ” 
or “living hope.” Peter is telling how this true 


THE HOPE OF HEAVEN 143 


immortal hope came out of the grave of their dead 
hopes, so vitalized and immortalized by the resur- 
rection of Jesus Christ from the dead, “ to an in- 
heritance, incorruptible, undefiled and that fadeth 
not away.”’ Our hope has the imperishable life of 
Jesus Christ in it. It is called a blessed hope. 
Blessed and happy is-this hope! It has in it all the 
beatitudes and all happifying qualities. It makes 
us happy and ineffable, perennial, sure of happi- 
ness. 

True Christian hope is only seen by the heart’s 
eye. The Revised Version has it, “ The eyes of 
your heart enlightened that ye may know what is 
the hope of your calling.” Heart eyes and heav- 
enly light in which to see heaven. Our natural 
eyes and earthly lights do not show us “ the call- 
ing,” neither have they vision for “the riches of 
the glory of that inheritance ” on which hope feeds 
and lives. 

Hope while it flourishes by the afflictions of life, 
yet is formed of the gentlest and mildest graces. It 
combines meekness with fear. It is neither arro- 
gant, rude nor self-assertive, but is mild, retiring 
and reverential. It is a very patient grace. It 
perseveres, holds on, and is steadfast, strong to 
wait till its fruition comes, and saves from discon- 
tent, depression and weakness. 

Hope is one of the three great elements of Chris- 
tian character. It is found united with faith and 
love in order to give perfection, to establish Chris- 


144 THE HOPE OF HEAVEN > 


tian reputation, and to awaken thankfulness, be- 
cause it is so apparent and so robust. 


“ We give thanks to God always for you all, mak- 
ing mention of you in our prayers; remembering 
without ceasing, your work of faith, and labor of 
love, and patience of hope, in our Lord Jesus Christ, 
in the sight of God and our Father” (1 Thess. 1:2). 


While faith exhibits itself in active works love 
shows itself in exhaustive toil, hope brightens all, 
and bears all, declaring her sisterhood to the other 
graces by patient waiting. Hope’s bright endur- 
ance mightily sustains faith, and love gives to them 
unfaltering and unfainting courage. They are in- 
separably united in Christian life. 


“And now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; 
but the greatest of these is love” (1 Cor. 13:13). 


“Faith appropriates the grace of God in the 
facts of salvation. Love is the animating spirit of 
our Christian life, while hope takes hold of the 
future as belonging to the Lord, and to those who 
are His. ‘The kingdom of God, past, present and 
future is thus reflected in faith, love and hope.” 

How thoroughly hope impregnates the Gospel 
system! How essential it is to Christian charac- 
ter! How necessary to Christian struggles will be 
seen in.the many references to it in the New Testa- 
ment. 


THE HOPE OF HEAVEN 145 


“ Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the command- 
ment of God our Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, 
which is our hope” (1 Tim. 1:1). 


In this passage hope centers itself in our Lord 
Jesus Christ. He is our hope. We hang on Him, 
we center all in Him. 

This hope of a glorious Christ and a glorious 
heaven, a glorious and eternal future, is not a 
product of man’s nature, not born of his despair, 
not the outgrowth of his cheerful spirit, but it is a 
spiritual gift, a grace in germ and in fruitage. 


“ Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and 
peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, 
through the power of the Holy Ghost” (Rom. 15: 


13): 


Hope has its spring and being in God. Founded 
on faith in God, it floods the soul with joy and 
peace. It increases by the presence of the Holy 
Spirit working in us. Hope abounds more and 
more as we are filled with all the fulness of God. 
The whole plan of salvation, its mystery and the 
glory of its riches, are summarized by Paul: 
“ Christ in you the hope of glory.” Where Christ 
is, there this hope springs to its opulent fulness. 
Ail is barrenness, death and despair out of Christ. 

The hope of heaven is not a mere emotion. It is 
not fitful, but ever enduring and strong. It burns 
with a steady, often a brilliant light. It is not an 


146 THE HOPE OF HEAVEN 


accident, an accompaniment merely, not a mere 
incident of the religious life, but vital, funda- 
mental, organic. It goes into the being of vital 
godliness, as an essential principle. It dwells in 
the Holy of Holies, and is the High Priest of the 
inner sanctuary of the soul. It sanctifies the Lord 
God, and dwells where He dwells. 


“But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and 
be ready always to give an answer to every man 
that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, 
with meekness and fear” (1 Peter 3:15). 


In hope of that immortal crown 
I now the cross sustain, 
And gladly wander up and down, 
And smile at toil and pain: 
I suffer out my threescore years, 
Till my Deliverer come, 
And wipe away his servants’ tears, 
And take his exile home. 
—Charles Wesley. 


XVII 
REUNION IN HEAVEN 


* Strike your tent, O pilgrim, 
Gird your loins and follow on; 
Soon your journey’s ended, 
> Twill bring thee to thy God.’ 
—Craup L. Cuttton. 


UCH of deep and positive joy will spring 
M from the reunion of the broken and 

wasted loves and friendships of earth. 
We shall see our friends and associate with them in 
stronger and more hallowed ties, because we had 
been partners in the tears and toils of earth. The 
society of heaven stands out conspicuous, and in an 
intense manner. Its crowds, its multitudes, its 
city, all express association; and doubtless, while 
there will be no selfish and exclusive circles, there 
will be narrow, closer, select ones within the larger. 
Paul checks our sorrows and modifies our grief for 
our dead with these words: 


“But I would not have you ignorant, brethren, 
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow 
not, even as others which have no hope. For if we 
believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them 
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. 

147 


148 REUNION IN HEAVEN 


For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with 
a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with 
the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise 
first. Then we which are alive and remain shall 
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be 
with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with 
these words ” (1 Thess. 4: 13-18). 


What does Paul mean? That we are not to 
weep in despair over the graves of our loved ones 
who have left us) Why? Because we have hope. 
Hope of what? Of meeting them again; and with 
them, to meet the Lord and be forever with Him, 
and forever with them. “ Wherefore comfort one 
another with these words.” We shall see them 
again. We shall know them again. We shall be 
with them forever. ‘These are the points of com- 
fort in the apostle’s words. Divine comfort! 
which even here on earth makes us victors over 
death, takes his sting away, wipes the tears from 
our eyes, and wreathes our hearts with fadeless 
hopes. 

Many are the attractions of heaven, all of which 
should win us from the vain and perishing things 
of earth. First of all, Jesus, our Great High 
Priest, is there, the sun and center of that heavenly 
world. ‘Then the absence of so many things which 
make earth undesirable—sickness and sorrow, pain 
and death, with earth’s privations, its discomforts, 
its disappointments. But added to all these glori- 


REUNION IN HEAVEN 149 


ous things which should draw us as a strong mag- 
net to heaven, is the blessed hope of a glorious re- 
union with loved ones who left us and have gone 
on before. 

Not only does Paul give us an intimation of this 
pleasing prospect, but John, in Revelation, seventh 
chapter, in showing us the things he saw, when “a 
door was opened in heaven” to his gaze. He tells 
us who are in heaven—God, Jesus Christ, the 
Lamb of God, the angels, and those who “ have 
washed their robes and made them white in the 
blood of the Lamb.” 

Who are among these last named? ‘Think a 
moment. Look back over life and see in imagina- 
tion the faces of friends once loved, who broke 
away from us, and disappeared from view, and 
now are “before the throne.” Some of these 
were of our own households. Some whose vacant 
chairs are but sad reminders of them, “ absent 
from the body, but now present with the Lord.” 

Where are they? “ Before the throne of God,” 
in His presence in intimate association with their 
Redeemer, in heaven itself; where “ they serve him 
day and night.” Their faces peer at us over the 
walls of the Celestial City, their eyes look at us in 
imagination as we gaze heavenward, and their 
hands beckon us on in our heavenward journey. 

Shall we ever see them again? Yes, if faithful 
amid tribulation, and if our robes are washed in 
the blood of the Lamb. 


150 REUNION IN HEAVEN 


Will we know them in that unseen land of light 
and liberty and fulness of joy? By every token. 
For if Moses and Elijah were recognized on the 
Mount of Transfiguration; if Stephen knew his 
Lord as they were stoning him; if Dives in hell 
recognized Lazarus and Abraham though far off in 
heaven; if we do not lose our identity in heaven; 
and are in heaven the same identical persons we 
were here in this world; with the same peculiari- 
ties, the same specific make-up in our entire moral 
being; if memory holds its sway and performs its 
functions; then there need be no doubt whatever 
that we shall know one another in that land, where 
there is no death, neither sorrow nor crying, 
neither any more pain, nor separations, “ for the 
former things are passed away.” 

O, the blessed hope of a glad reunion with de- 
parted saints in the glory world! How they do 
attract us when we look that way! 

What vision of glory! What ecstasy came to 
the Apostle Paul, this saintly man, from his asso- 
ciation with Jesus Christ! 

Almost unnumbered are the illustrations of a 
truth so resonant of grace that Jesus Christ, even 
in this life, is the greatest treasure, the profoundest 
joy, the most gracious influence that can come to 
man. 

What earthly good can give joy like this? Death 
robs of.every crown of joy but this! Gold, fame, 
honor, empire, earthly success, all are silenced in 


REUNION IN HEAVEN 151 


the presence of death, which robs of all, separates 
from all! Jesus Christ only can give triumph over 
death. He holds the keys of death. Joy in Jesus 
Christ is unwithered by death’s touch. 


Come, let us anew Our journey pursue, 
With vigor arise, 
And press to our permanent place in the skies: 
Of heavenly birth, Though wand’ring on earth, 
This is not the place, 
But strangers and pilgrims ourselves we confess. 


At Jesus’s call We gave up our all; 
And still we forego, 
For Jesus’s sake, our enjoyments below: 
No longing we find For the country behind ; 
But onward we move, 
And still we are seeking a country above. 
—Charles Wesley. 


Frinted in the United States of America 


BIBLE STUDY 
——_——=——SSSSSSSE==!====w 


PHILIP MAURO Author of “God's Present Kingdom" 
Ruth: The Satisfied Stranger 


Izmo, 


The incidents narrated in the Book of Ruth have for 
their historical setting ‘‘the days when the judges ruled.” 
Ruth is rich in lessons applicable in a special way to the 
present democratic era of Christendom. ‘The author at- 
tempts to set forth in this volume some of the more strik- 
ing of these lessons; and also to show the significance of 
the foreshadowings of Redemption-glory contained in this 
lovely and deeply interesting portion of Scripture. 


F. B. MEYER, D.D. Author of Old Testament 


Characters 
Peter: Fisherman, Disciple, Apostle 


I2mo, 

Employing his unusual and widely-recognized gifts of 
delineation, Dr. Meyer presents a picturesque and intimate 
character-study of Peter, in which the various phases of 
his life are set forth—phases which trace his transforma- 
tion from the headstrong fisherman and denier of Jesus to 
the submissive servant and fearless champion of his Cruci- 
fied and Risen Lord. 


REV. J. J. ROSS, D.D. 


The Kingdom in Mystery 
A Study of the Parables of Our Lord Concern- 
ing the Kingdom of God. 12mo, 


An able examination of the Parables of Jesus and their 
teaching concerning the Kingdom of God. The “King- 
dom” as typified in Israel, in the present-day Christian 
Church, its growth, work, purposes and rewards are all 
passed under review in an able and even exhaustive fash- 
ion. A volume every preacher and teacher and Bible 
student should possess. 


HANDY POCKET EDITION 


Twentieth Century New Testament 
New Popular Size. Cloth, 


A new pocket edition of the modern English version of 
the New Testament, which is rapidly being accepted in 
Bible study circles as the approved version for the new 
age. Dr. Wilfred T. Grenfell says: ‘When I read the 
Bible to the Labrador fishermen I wish_them to under- 
stand every word, That is the reason I use the T. 
N. T. only.” 


EXPERIENCES OF LIFE 


ee 
DONALD HANKEY = Author of A Student in Arms” 


Letters of Donald Hankey 


With Introduction and Notes by Edward Mil- 
ler, M.A. Illustrated, Svo. 


“As a further revelation of the personality of the man 
who wrote ‘A Student in Arms,’ these personal letters 
possess an interest difficult to overestimate. They are inti- 
mate, human, appealing; they cover Hankey’s college 
days; the periods spent in foreign travel; the years in 
Australia, and the fateful months he spent in France as 
one of the immortal ‘First Hundred Thousand,’ and 
where he made the supreme sacrifice,’—Christian Work. 


ARTHUR PORRITT 


The Strategy of Life 


A Book for Boys and Young Men. Foreword 
by John Henry Jowett, D.D. i2mo. , 

“T wish that this little book might be placed in the hands 
of every boy and young man throughout the Anglo-Saxon 
world: Here we have preial guidance in the essential 
secrets which lie behind all Social Reconstruction; even 
the fashioning of character and the nourishing of life.”— 
Rev. J. H. Jowett. 


EDWARD LEIGH PELL Author of ‘Our Troublesome 


Leligious, Questions’ 
Bringing Up John 


A Book for Mothers and Other Teachers of 
Boys and Girls. 12mo, 


“Tt is not only a mother’s book, it is a book for fathers, 
for all teachers of children, and also for pastors, who will 
be especially interested in the author’s efforts to separate 
what Christ actually taught from the ideas which we have 
inherited from our pagan ancestors, and who will find in 
the volume abundant fresh material on the most pressing 
problem of our times.”—S, S, Times. 


A. H. McKINNEY 
Guiding Girlsto Christian Womanhood 


Iz2mo, 


In her progress towards maturity a girl requires some- 
thing richer, something of a more permanent, fundamental 
order. How this may be provided is set forth by a writer 
who knows, not only the adolescent mind, but the methods 
best calculated to enrich and develop the nature as life be- 
comes fraught with increasing responsibilities. The book 
has an excellent bibliography and list of activities suitable 
‘or growing girls, 


ma 


STUDIES AND ADDRESSES 


———— 


WILLIAM P. MERRILL, D.D. 


Pastor of Brick Presbyterian Church, New York 
The Common Creed of Christians 


Studies of the Apostles’ Creed. 12mo, 


The studies take the Creed as a recognized part of the 
worship and belief of the Christian Church and set forth 
some of its practical implications, and make clear what 
sort of lives can be lived when the articles of the Creed 
are actually acted on, instead of being merely professed. 


EDWIN LINCOLN HOUSE, D.D. 


The Glory of Going On 


and Other Life Studies. 12mo. 


These addresses have even a higher value than their 
literary quality. They voice genuine counsel and en- 
heartenment, based on the sound and sure foundation that 
life’s true greatness is never attained except by a con- 
formity with the will and purposes of God. 


JOHN EDWARD BUSHNELL, D.D. 


Summit Views and Other Sermons 


I2m0, 


Ratpu Connor says: “The author seems really to have 
caught that subtle, tender, comforting yet searching spirit 
that breathes through the immortal words of the divine 
Master. Every sermon will be found stimulating.” 


J. W. POR TER, D.D. Editor ‘** Western Recorder” 


Evangelistic Sermons 


I2mo, 

The sermons are distinctly along the old lines of evan- 
gelistic preaching. Repentance, faith, regeneration, Judg- 
ment, Heaven, and Hell are given their old-time place in 
these striking sermons. Will undoubtedly prove a valu- 
able addition to the evangelistic literature of our times. 


HERBERT BOOTH SMITH, D.D. 
Pastor Immanuel Presbyterian Church, Los Angeles, Cab, 


The New Earth and Other Sermons 


I2mo, 


Thoroughly devout, believing fervently in the ultimate 
triumph of the truth as it is in Christ, Dr. Smith pleads 
logically and earnestly for a new spirit of consecration 
and devotion commensurate with the problems of the hour, 


PRAYER AND EVANGELISM 


—— 


JOHN HENRY JOWETT, D.D. 
“Come Ye Apart” 


Daily Exercises in Prayer 
and Devotion. 12mo, 


“Once again is it possible to | 
see the richness of Dr. Jowett’s 
thoughts and distillations of 
spiritual truths, that sparkle 
from his rare gifts and literally 
to pack overmuch into very few 
words sone great eternal fact.” 
~Ghristian Work. 


i oe 
WILLIAM E. BIEDERWOLF, D.D. 
Lectures Delivered at Princeton Theological Seminary 


Evangelism : 

Its Justification, Its Operation and Its Value. 
¥2mo, cloth, 

Dr. Biederwolf’s calm, measured presentation of the 
methods best calculated to secure results whieh can be 
permanently conserved is especially weleome to-day. 
Among the phases discussed are: The doargaaay of 
Revival; The Preacher and His Message; Pastoral 
Evangelism; The Union Evangelistic Campaign; In- 
dividual Evangelism, etc., otc, 


EDWARD M. BOUNDS 


Purpose in Prayer 

I2m0o0, 

“The author of this helpful volume, an American, has 
attained a great vogue in Great Britain as a writer of 
devotional work of an unusually high order. Bounds 
understands prayer because he spreciead it and gave it 
paramount place in his daily life. He pleads with 


sionate earnestness for the enthronement of prayer in the 
heart and life of the Christian believer, 


A. B. SIMPSON, D.D. 


Songs of the Spirit 

With frontispiece, 1zamo, cloth, 

Dr. Simpson, founder of the Christian and Missionary 
Allianee, was a man of high and varied attainments. An 
eloquent preacher, a great organizer, he also possessed a 
graceful gift of devotional song. During his long ministry 
he wrote hundreds of pieces, many of which were hymns 
which have been set to music and are here published for 
the first time, 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 
————— — —_— _ ————————— —SE 


I. M. HALDEMAN 


Can the Dead Communicate with 
the Living? 12mo, 


Needless to say, Dr. Haldeman holds no brief for Spir- 
itism. On the eat = he strongly condemns its cultiva- 
tion and practice. A book that is awakening everyone to 
the peril of “spiritualism” among Christians, 


S. D. GORDON pee ieee 


Quiet Talks About 


——EEE—EE Ea 
5.) 
| Quiet Talks About 


: h 
Life After Death xe een | 
12mo, cloth, ee a 


) 
IM have been drilled, captivated to, 
apired to pray without author 

4 E ay teutha, 


new volume of “Quiet 
Talks” on a subject of more 
than usual interest to every one 
to-day. §. D. Gordon has some- 
thing to say, well worth thought- 
ful consideration. ‘‘One cannot 
describe these ‘quiet talks,’ they 
must be read to be thoroughly ap- 
preciated.”—Christian Observer. 


JAMES M. GRAY, D.D. 


Spiritism and the Fallen Angels 


From a Biblical Viewpoint. 12mo, : 


Beginning with a review of the present-day revival of 
Spiritism and how to meet it, Dr. Gray harks back to 
origins, the baleful influence of the eult from the earliest 
recorded history of the human race, 


FRANCIS K. BAXTER 
Does Telepathy Explain Spiritualism? 


I2mo, 


By a goodly array of argument Mr. Baxter essays to 
show that all phenomena connected with Spiritualism or 
Spiritism, can be accounted for in certain conditions of 
the subjective and subconscious human mind. 


COULSON KERNAHAN KERNAHAN Author of ‘God and the Ant” 
Spiritualism 
A Personal Experience and a Warning. 1I2mo, 


paper boards, 


““Can anyone,’ the author asks, ‘who accepts Christ go 
with easy conscience to Spiritualism to tell him the mys- 
teries upon which the lips of our Lord and Lazerus are 
sealed?’ ”’—Baltimore Southern Methodist. 


CHRIST’S LIFE AND INFLUENCE 
——— OSES 


J. PATERSON-SMYTH 


A People’s Life of 
Christ 


I2mo, net 


A life of Christ which the 
average person will read for the 
sheer pleasure of reading it. 
This new story of His earthly 
life ranks with the author’s best 
efforts. It leaves in every read- 
er’s mind a clean, consecutive, 
unbroken view of the life of 
Jesus, with all the main inci- 
dents and teachings in the right 
places. A book for which we’ve 
long waited. 


JOHN R. COATES 
The Christ of Revolution 


I2mo, net : 

‘This book shows Jesus as the author of the revolution 
that will ultimately transform the whole of human life. 
The day is at hand when the power of Jesus will be rec- 
ognized as the power of God Himself. It is imperative 
to see what was in His mind. Here is the Gospel, to 
neglect which is suicide. 


BERNARD WASHINGTON SPILMAN 


Field Secretary, Baptist Sunday School Board, 
Southern Baptist Convention 


A Study in Religious Pedagogy 


Our Lord’s Interview with the Woman of 
Samaria. 12mo, art board, net 

An able, well-received aid for Sunday school and Bible 
class teachers. It lucidly indicates the pedagogic prin- 
ciples underlying the memorable conversation Jesus had 
with the woman of Samaria. It should appeal to all who 
believe that the aim of every Bible and Sunday school 
teacher should be evangelistic. 


J. GREGORY MANTLE, D.D. 


The Counterfeit Christ 


Old Truths and the Problems of the Hour. 
{2mo, net _ 

Dr. Mantle is a lucid, forceful preacher. His work 
always reflects the logical mind and ripened thought, pre- 
sented in an eloquent, choicely-phrased medium of ex- 
pression. ‘This, his latest volume of addresses, represents 
some old Biblical truths trenchantly applied to the prob- 
lems and perplexities of the present hour. ‘ 


i 


. Al PEOPLE'S» 
LIFE OF 
CHRIST 


tT 
Mi 


A: 


231 Oo L&C /7 
BlESR-— 


236.24 . 
B665h 1SLy 


Bounds, Edward McKendree 
Heaven: a place - a city -a 
| home 

Dec i? 6] DATE DUE 


—$—— 


if 
LIBRARY ig] 


THE MASTER'S COLLEGE 
NEWHALL. CA 91321 


THE MASTER’S COLLEGE 


ee ~d —, ona 


eT 


