} 
' 
a 


VHER 


, SIE CEl 
@ 
\@ 


a aie 


PI aa i at api. 


* And 
or the gl 


niceeeelintltitistiintee cman, 


} ROS 


7 i >. 
(RAR ene oreeeenmcmere 
be 
’ 


HEAVEN; 


 aaacae IT IS; ITS INHABITANTS, AND HOW 
TO GET THERE, 


TIE CERTAINTY OF GOD’S PROMISE OF A LIFE BEYOND THE 
GRAVE, AND THE REWARDS THAT ARE IN 
STORE FOR FAITHFUL SERVICE, 


AS GLEANED FROM SACRED SCRIPTURE, 


Lok iit gem rSite, 


BY 


D. L. MOODY, 
HAMILTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 


** And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it 
or the glory of God did lighten /'t, and the Lamb is the light thereof.” 


Sessa Ray. 


ane ee a 


Dorontos 
| ROSE-BELFORD PUBLISHING COMPANY. 


MDCCCLXXXIL, 


| yJ3 
tie i OCT 24: 
HAMILTON PUSLIG Lig! 


; 
| 


CAL 


fort 


the 


| 
iner 


s 
| 


| 


whic 
M 
but 


ama 


I 


Tis little book, upon a subject thatis very dear to me, has been 


| carefully revised, and is sent forth in the hope that it may give com- 


ee 


fort and edification to many ; that the weak may be strengthened, 
the sorrowing consoled, and ihe despondent encouraged to look with 
increased faith to that fairest of fair cities ‘n the “‘ Better Land,” 
which is the home of the Redeemer and the redeemed, 

Many books have been published in this country in my name, 
but none of them with authority, and the only motive inspiring this 


small volume is that souls may be helped, 
D. L. MOODY, 


NorTHFIELD, Mass., 1880, 


Ss 


ITEAVEN, 


' 
i 
7 
! 


_ HAT unchangeable home is for you and for me 


Where Jesus of Nazareth stands ; 
The King of all kingdoms forever is he, 
And he holdeth our crows in his hands, 


‘Oh, how sweet it will be in that beautiful land, 
So free from all sorrow and pain ; 

With songs on our lips and with harps in our hands 
To meet one another again,” 


Its Hope. 


A GREAT many persons imagine that anything said 
about heaven is only a matter of speculation. They talk 
about heaven like the air. Now there would not have 
been so much in Scripture on this subject if God had 
wanted to leave the human race in darkness about it. 
All Scripture, we are told, is given by inspiration of God, 
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may 
be perfect—thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 
What the Bible says about heaven, is just as true as what 
it says about everything else. It isinspired. What we 
are taught about heaven could not have come to us in any 
other way but by inspiration. No one knew anything 
about it but God, and so if we want to find out anything 
about it, we have to turn to his Word. Dr. Hodge, of 
Princeton, says that the best evidence of the Bible being 
the word of God is to be found between its own two 
covers, It proves itself. In this respect it is like Christ, 
whose character proclaimed the divinity of his person. 
Christ showed himself more than man by what he did, 
The Bible shows itself more than a human book by what 
it says. It is not, however, because the Bible is written 


8 HEAVEN. 


with more than human skill, far surpassing Shakspeare 
or any other human author, and that its knowledge of 
character and the eloquence it contains are beyond the 
powers of man; that we believe it to be inspired. 

Men’s ideas differ about the extent that human skill 
can go; but the reason why we believe the Bible is in- 
spired, is so simple that the humblest child of God can 
comprehend it. If the proof of its divine origin lay in 
its wisdom alone, asimple and uneducated man might not 
be able to believe it. We believe it is inspired, because 
there is nothing in it that could not have come from God. 
God is wise, and God is good. There is nothing in the 
Bible that is not wise, and there is nothing in it that is 
not good. If the Bible had anything in it that was op- 
posed to reason, or to our sense of right, then, perhaps, 
we might think that it was like all the books in the 
world that are written merely by men. Books that are 
just human books, like merely human lives, have in them 
a great deal that is foolish and a great deal that is wrong. 
The life of Christ alone was perfect, being both human 
and divine. Not one of the other volumes, like the Ko- 
ran, that claim divinity of origin, agree with common 
sense. There is nothing at all in the Bible that does not 
conform to common sense. What it tells us about the 
world having been destroyed by a deluge, and Noah and 
his family alone being saved, is no more wonderful than 
what is being taught in the schools, that all of the earth 
we see now, and everything upon it, came out of a ball of 
fire, It is a great deal easier to believe that man was 


— 2 


ITS HOPE. 9 


-_-_—— - 


made after the image of God, than it is to believe as some 
young men and women are being taught now, that he 
was once a monkey. 

Like all the other wonderful works of God, this Book 
bears the sure stamp of its author. It is like him. 
Though man plants the seeds, God makes the flowers, and 
they are perfect and beautiful like himself. Men wrote 
what is in the Bible, but the work is God’s. The more 
refined, as a rule, people are, the fonder they are of the 
flowers, and the better they are, as a rule, the more they 
love the Bible. The fondness for flowers refines people, 
and the love of the Bible makes them better, All that is 
in the Bible about God, about man, about redemption, 
and about a future state, agrees with our own ideas of 
right, with our reasonable fears and with our personal 
experiences, All the historical things are told in the way 
that we know the world had of loo’ ing at them wken 
they were written. What the . ole tells about heaven 
is not half so strange as what Professor Proctor tells about 
the hosts of stars that are beyond the range of any teles- 
cope—and yet people very often think that science is all 
fact, and that religion is only fancy. A great many per- 
sons think that Jupiter and many more of the stars around 
us are inhabited, who cannot bring themselves to believe 
that there is a li» beyond this earth for immortal souls. 
The true Christian puts faith before reason, and believes 
that reason always yoes wrong when faith is put aside. 
If people would but read their Bibles more, and study 
what there is to be found there about heaven, they would 


10 HEAVEN. 


not be as worldly-minded as they are. They would not 
have their hearts set upon things down here, but would 
seek the imperishable things above. 


EARTH THE HOME OF SIN, 


It seems perfectly reasonable that God should have 
given us a glimpse of the future, for we are constantly 
losing some of our friends by death, and the first thought 
that comes to us is, “where have they gone?” Whena 
loved one is taken away from us, how that thought comes 
up before us! How we wonder if we will ever see them 
again, and where and when it will be! Then it is that 
we turn to this blessed Book, for there is no other book 
in all the world that can give us the slightest comfort ; 
no other book that can tell us where the loved ones have 
gone. 

Not long ago I met an old friend, and as I took him by 
the hand and asked after his family, the tears came trick- 
ling down his cheeks as he said: 

“T haven't any now.” 

“ What,” I said, “is your wife dead ?” 

“ Yes, sir.” 

“ And all your children too ?” 

“ Yes, all gone,” he said, “and I am left here desolate 
and alone.” 

Would any one take from that man the hope that he 
will met his dear ones again? Would any one persuade 
him that there is not a future where the lost will be 


ITS HOPE. 11 


en a ee 


found ? No, we need not forget our dear loved ones; but 
we may cling forever to the enduring hope that there 
will be a time when we can mect unfettered, and be blest 
in that land of everlasting suns, where the soul drinks 
from the living streams of love that roll by God’s high 
throne. 

In our inmost hearts there are none of us but have 
questionings of the future. 


‘* Tell me, my secret soul, 

O, tell me, Hope and Faith, 

Is there no resting place 

From sorrow, sin and death ? 

Is there no happy spot 

Where mortals may be blest, 

Where grief may find a balm 

And weariness a rest ? 
Faith, Hope and Love—best boons to mortals given— 
Waved their bright wings and whispered: ° 

Yes, in heaven !” 


There are men who say that there is no heaven. I was 
once talking to a man who said he thought that there 
was nothing to justify us in believing in any other heaven 
than we know here on earth. If this is heaven, it is a 
very strange one—this world of sickness, and sorrow, and 
sin. I pity from the depths of my heart the man or wo- 
man who has that idea. 

This world that so many think is heaven is the home 
of sin, a hospital of sorrow, a place that has nothing in it 
to satisfy the soul. Men go all over it and then want to 
get out of it, The more one sees of the world the less 


12 HEAVEN. 


~ 


they think of it. People soon grow tired of the bet plea- 
sures it has to offer. Some one has said that the world is 
a stormy sea, whose every wave is strewed with the wrecks 
of mortals that perish in it. Every time we breathe some 
one is dying. We all know that we are going to stay 
here but a very little while. Our life is buta vapour. It 
is just a mere shadow. 

We meet one another, as some one has said, salute one 
another, and pass on and are gone. And another has said, 
it is just an inch of time, and then eternal ages roll on; 
and it seems to me that it is perfectly reasonable that we 
should study this book, to find out where we are going, 
and where our friends are who have gone on before. The 
longest time man has to live, has no more proportion to 
eternity than a drop of dew has to the ocean. 


CITIES OF THE PAST. 


Took at the cities of the past. There is Babylon. It 
was founded by a woman named Semiramis, who had two 
millions of men at work for years building it. - It is noth- 
ing but dust now. Nearly a thousand years ago, some 
historian wrote that the ruins of Nebuchadnezzar’s palace 
were still standing, but men were afraid to go near them 
because they were full of scorpions and snakes, That's 
the sort of ruin that greatness often comes to in our own 
day. Nineveh is gone, Its towers and bastions have 
fallen. The traveller who tries to see Carthage, can’t see 
much of it. Corinth, once the seat of luxury and art, is 


ITS HOPE. 13 


only a shapeless mass. Ephesus long the metropolis of 
Asia, the Paris of that day, was crowded with buildings 
as large as the capitol at Washington. I am told it looks 
more like a neglected graveyard now than anything else. 
Granada is now the housing place of lions and jackals. 
It was once very grand, with its twelve gates and towers. 
The Alhambra, the palace of the Mohammedan kings, was 
situated there. Probably the animals play with the mon- 
archs’ bones. Little pieces of the once grand and beauti- 
ful cities of Herculanzeum and Pompeii are now being sold 
in the shops for relics. Jerusalem, once one of the grand- 
est cities of the universe, is but a shadow of itself. Thebes 
—for thousands of years, up almost to the coming of 
Christ, the largest and wealthiest city of the world—is 
now a mass of decay. Very little of Athens and many 
more cf the proud cities of olden times, remain to tell the 
story of their downfall. God drives his ploughshare 
through cities, and they are upheaved like furrows in the 
field. “Behold,” says Isaiah, “the nations are as a drop 
of a bucket, and are counted asthe small dust of the bal- 
ance ; behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing. 
All nations before him are as nothing; and they are 
counted to him less than nothing, and vanity.” 

See how Antioch has fallen! When Paul preached 
there, it was a superb metropolis, A wide street, over 
three miles long, stretching across the entire city, was 
ornamented with rows of columns and covered galleries, 
and at every corner stood carved statues to commemorate 
their great men, whose names even we have never heard 


14 HEAVEN. 


These are never heard of now, but the poor preaching tent- 
maker who came into its portals, stands out as the grand- 
est character in all history. The finest specimens of Gre- 
cian art decorated the shrines of the temples, and the baths 
and the aqueducts were such as are never approached in 
elegance now. Men then, as now, were seeking honours 
and wealth and mighty names, and seeking to enshrine 
their names and records in perishable clay. Within the 
walls, we are told, were enclosed mountains over seven 
hundred feet high, and rocky precipices and deep ravines 
gave a wild and picturesque character to the city of which 
no modern city gives usanexample. These heights were 
fortified in a marvellous manner, which gave to them 
strange and startling effects. The vast population of this 
brilliant city, combining all the art and cultivation of 
Greece with the levity, the luxury and the superstition of 
Asia, was as intent on pleasure as the population of any 
of our great cities are to-day. They had their shows, 
their games, their races and dances, their sorcerers, puz- 
zlers, buffoons and miracle-workers, and the whole people 
sought constantly in the theatres and processions, for 
something to stimulate and gratify the most corrupt de- 
sires of the soul. 

This is pretty much what we find the masses of the 
people in our great cities doing now. The place was even 
worse than Athens, for the so-called worship they in- 
dulged in was not only idolatrous, but had mixed up with 
it the grossest passions to which man descends. It was 


here that Paul came to preach the glad tidings of the gos- 


TN I KE KE IEEE i laE ec eal 


ITS NOPE. 15 


pel of Christ ; it was here that his converts were first cal- 
led Christians, as a nickname; the first time the name 
was ever used, all followers of Christ before that time hav- 
ing been called “saints” or “brethren.” As has been well 
said, out of that spring at Antioch, a mighty stream has 
flowed to water the worid. Astarte, the “Queen of Hea- 
ven,” whom they worshipped; Diana, Apollo, the Phari- 
see and Saducee, are no more, but the despised Christians 
yet live. Yet that heathen city, which would not take 
Christianity to its heart and keep it, fell. Cities that 
have not the refining and restraining influences of Chris- 
tianity well established in them, seldom do amount to 
much in the long run. They grow dim in the light of 
ages. Few of our great cities in this country are a hun- 
dred years old as yet. For nearly a thousand years this 
city prospered ; yet it fell. 


GOING TO EMIGRATE, 


I do not think that it is wrong for us to think and talk 
about heaven. I like to locate heaven, and find out all I 
can about it. I expect to live there through all eternity. 
If I was going to dwell in any place in this country, if I 
was going to make it my home, I would want to inquire 
about the place, about its climate, about the neighbours I 
would have; and about everything, in fact, that I could 
learn concerning it. Ifany of you were going to emi- 
grate, that would be the way you would feel. Well, we 
are all going to emigrate in a very little while to a coun- 


16 REAVEN. 
ci ia 


a 
try that ig very far away, We are going to Spend eter- 
nity in another world, a grand and glorious world where 


and listen and try to find out who is already there, and 
what is the route to take? Soon after J Was converted, 
an infidel asked me one day why J looked up when [I 
prayed. He said that heaven wag no more above than 
below us; that heaven was everywhere, Well, I was 


In the 17th chapter of Genesis it Bays that God went 
up from Abraham > and in the 3rd chapter of J ohn, that 
he came down from heaven, So, in the 1st chapter of 
Acts we find that Christ went Up into heaven (not down) 
and a cloud received him out of sight. Thus we see hea- 
ven is up. The very arrangement of the firmament about 
the earth declares the seat of God’s glory to be above uz, 
Job says, “Let not God regard from above,” and we find 
the Psalmist declaring “ the Lord is high above all nations, 
and his glory above the heavens,” 

Again in Deuteronomy, we find, “ who shall 80 up for 
us to heaven ?” Thus all through Scripture we find that 


a 


ITS HOPE. 17 


yond the firmament. This firmament, with its many 
bright worlds scattered through, is so vast that heaven 
must bean extensive realm. Yet this need not surprise us, 

It is not for short-sighted man to inquire why God 
made heaven so extensive that its lights along the way 
can be seen from any part or side of this little world. 

In the 51st chapter of the prophecy of Jeremiah we are 
told that: He hath made the earth by his power; he 
hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath 
stretched out the heaven by his understanding. Yet, how 
little we really know of that power, or wisdom, or under- 
standing! As it says in the 26th chapter of Job: Lo, 
these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is 
heard of him? but the thunder of his power, who can un- 
derstand ? 

This is the word of God. As we find in the 42nd chap- 
ter of Isaiah: Thus saith God the Lord, he that created 
the heavens and stretched them out ; hethat spread forth 
the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giv- 
eth bread unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that 
walk within. 

The discernment of God’s power, the messages of hea- 
ven; do not always come in great things. We read in the 
19th chapter of the first book of Kings: 


‘And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind 
rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord ; 
but the Lord was not in the wind ; and after the wind an earthquake ; 
but the Lord was not inthe earthquake : and after the earthquake 
a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire ; and after the fire a still 
small voice.” 


18 HEAVEN. 


It is as a stili small voice that God speaks to his chil- 
dren. Some people are trying to find out just how far 
heaven is away. There is one thing we know about it; 
that is, that it is not so far away but that God can hear 
us when we pray. I do not believe there has ever been 
a tear shed for sin since Adam’s fall in Eden to the pre- 
sent time, but God has witnessed that. He is not too far 
from this earth for us to go to him; and if there is a sigh 
that comes from a burdened heart to-day, God will hear 
that sigh. If there is a cry coming up from a heart bro- 
ken on account of sin, God will hear that cry. He is not 
so far away, heaven is not so far away, as to be inaccessi- 
ble to the smallest child. In the 7th chapter and 14th verse 
of 2nd Chronicles, we read : 


‘Tf my people which ave called by my name shall humble them- 
selves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked 
ways, then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sins, and 
will heal their land.” 


When I was in Dublin, they were telling me about a 
father who had lost a little boy, and he had not thought 
sbout the future, he had been so entirely taken up with 
this world and its affairs; but when that little boy, his 
only child, died, that father’s heart was broken, and every 
night when he got home from work, they would find him 
with his tallow candle and his Bible in his room, and he 
was hunting up all that he could find there about heaven. 
And some one asked him what he was doing, and he said 
he was trying to find out where his child had gone, and I 
think he was a reasonable man, I suppose there .is not a 


ITS HOPE. 19 


man or woman but has dear ones that are gone. Shall 
we close this book to-day ? or shall we look into it to try 
to find where the loved ones are? I was reading, some 
time ago, an account of a father, a minister who had lost a 
child. He had gone to a great many funerals, offering 
comfort to others in sorrow, bu: now the iron hand had 
entered his own soui, and a brother minister had come to 
otticiate and preach the funeral sermon; and after this 
minister got through speaking, the father got up, and 
standing right at the head of the coffin, looking at the 
face of that loved child that was gone, he said that a few 
years ago, when he had first come into that parish, as he 
used to look over the river he took no interest in the peo- 
ple over there, because they were all strangers to him and 
there were none over there that belonged to his parish. 
But, he said, a few years ago a young man came into his 
home, and married his daughter, and she went over the 
river to live, and when that child went over there, he be- 
came suddenly interested in the inhabitants, and every 
morning as he would get up he would look out of the 
window and look over there at her home. But now, said 
he, another child has been taken. She has gone over an- 
other river, and heaven seems dearer and nearer to me 
than it ever has before. 

My friends, let us believe this good old Book, that 
heaven is not a myth, and let us be prepared to follow 
the dear ones who have gone before. There, and there 
alone, can we find the peace we seek for. 


20 HEAVEN. 


en — ee oe 


SEEKING A BETTER COUNTRY. 


What has been, and is now, one of the strongest feel- 
ings in the human heart? Is it not to find some better 
place, some lovelier spot, than we have now? Itis for 
this that men are seeking everywhere ; and yet, they can 
have it, if they will; but instead of looking down, they 
must look wp to find it. As men grow in knowledge, 
they vie with each other more and more to make their 
homes attractive, but: the brightest home on earth is but 
an empty barn, compared with tie mansions that are in 
the skies. 

What is it that we look for at the decline and close of - 
life? Is it not some sheltered place, some quiet spot, 
where if we cannot have constant rest, we may at least 
have a fore-taste of what it is to be. What was it that 
led Columbus, not knowing what would be his fate, across 
the unsailed western seas, if it was not the bope of find- 
ing a better country? This it was that sustained the 
hearts of the Pilgrim Fathers, driven from their native 
land by persecution, as they faced an iron-bound, savage 
coast, with an unexplored territory beyond. They were 
cheered and upheld by the hope of reaching a free and 
fruitful country, where they could be at rest and worship 
God in peace. 

Somewhat similar is the Christian’s 1 ope of heaven, 
on!7 itis not an undiscovered country, and its attractions 
cannot be compared with anything we know on earth. 


oe 


=< 


ITS HOPE. 21 


oe ee 


Perhaps nothing but the shortness of our range of sight 
keeps us from seeing the celestial gates all open to us, and 
nothing but the deafness of our ears, prevents the joyful 
ringing of the bells of heaven. There are constant sounds 
around us that we cannot hear, and the sky is studded 
with bright worlds that our eyes have never seen. Little 
as we know about this bright and radiant land, there are 
glimpses of its beauty that come to us now and then 
‘We may not know how sweet its balmy air, 
How bright and fair its fl- wers ; 


We may not hear the songs that echo there, 
Through these enchanted bowers. 


‘¢ The city’s shining towers we may not see 
With our dim earthly vision, 
For death, the silent warder, keeps the key 
That opes the gates elysian. 


“ But sometimes when adown the western sky 
A fiery sunset lingers, 


Its golden gate swings inward noiselessly, 
Unlocked by unseen fingers. 


“ And while they stand a moment half ajar, 
Gleams from the inner glory 
Stream brightly through the azure vault afar, 
And half reveal the story.” 

It is said by travellers that, in climbing the Alps, the 
houses of far distant villages can be seen with great dis- 
tinctness, so that sometimes the number of panes of glass 
in a church window can be counted. The distance looks 
so short that the place seems almost at hand, but after 
hours and hours of climbing, it looks no nearer yet. This 


HAMILTON PUBLIC LidhAdi 


23 HEAVEN. 


is because of the clearness of the atmosphere. By per- 
severance, however, the place is reached at last, and the 
tired traveller finds rest. So sometimes we dwell in high 
altitudes of grace ; heaven seems very near, and the hills 
of Beulah are in full view. At other times, the clouds 
and fogs that come through suffering and sin cut off our 
sight. We are just as near heaven in the one case as we 
are in the other, and we are just as sure of gaining it if 
we only keep in the path that Christ hath trod. 

I have read that on the shores of the Adriatic sea, the 
wives of fishermen, whose husbands have gone far out 
upon the deep, are in the habit of going down to the sea- 
shore at night and singing with their sweet voices the 
first verse of some beautiful hymn. After they have sung 
it they listen until they hear brought on the wind, across 
the sea, the second verse sung by their brave husbands as 
they are tossed by the gale—and both are happy. Per- 
haps, if we would listen, we too might hear on this sea- 
tossed world of ours, some sound, some whisper, borne 
from afar to tell us where is a heaven which is our home; 
and when we sing our hymns upon the shores of earth, 
oorhaps we may hear their sweet echoes breaking in 
music upon the sands of time, and cheering the hearts 
of those who are pilgrims and strangers along the way. 
Yes we need to look up—out, beyond this low earth, and 
to build higher in oyr thoughts and actions, even here! : 

You know, when a man is going up in a balloon, he 
takes in sand as a ballast, and when he wants to mount 
a little higher, he throws out a little of the ballast, and 


HAMILTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 


ITS HOPE. 23 


then he will mount a little higher; he throws out a little 
more ballast, and he mounts still higher; and the higher 
he gets the more he throws out—and so the nearer we 
get to God the more we have to throw out of the things 
of this world, Let go of them ; do not let us first set our 
hearts and affections on them, but do what the Master 
tells us—lay up for ourselves treasures in heaven. 

In England I was told of a lady who had been bed- 
ridden for years. She was one of those saints that God 
polishes up for the kingdom ; for I believe that there are 
a good many saints in this world that we never hear about 
we never see their names heralded through the press ; 
they live very near the Master; they live very near hea- 
ven ; and J think it takes a great deal more grace to suf: 
fer God's will than it does to do God’s will; and if a per- 
son lies on a bed of sickness, and suffers cheerfully, it is 
just as acceptable to God as if they went out and worked 
in his vineyard. 

Now, it was one of those saints, and a lady, who said 
that fora long time she used to have a great deal ot 
pleasure in watching a bird that came to make its nest 
near her window. One year it came to make its nest, 
and it began to make it so low she was afraid something 
would happen to the young; and every day that she saw 
that bird busy at work making its nest, she kept saying 
“QObird, build higher!” She could see that the bird was 
going to come to grief and disappointment. At last the 
bird got its nest done, and laid its eggs and hatched its 
young ; and every morning the lady looked out to see if 


24 HEAVEN. 


the nest was there, and she saw the old bird bringing 
food for the little ones, and she took a great deal of 
pleasure in looking at it. But one morning she woke up 
and she looked out and she saw nothing but feathers 
scattered all around, and she said, “Ah, the cat has got 
the old bird and all its young.” It would have been a 
mercy to have torn that nest down. That is what God 
does for us very often—just snatches things away before 
it is too late. Now, I think that is what we want to say 
to church people—that if you build for time you will be 
disappointed. God says: Build up yonder. It isa good 
deal better to have life in Christ and God than anywhere 
else. Iwould rather have my life hid with Christ in God 
than be in Eden as Adam was. Adam might have re- 
mained in Paradise for 16,000 years, and then fallen, but 
if ours is hid in Christ, how safe! 


ITS INHABITANTS, 


se, LITTLE way! I know it is not far 
To that dear home where my beloved are, 
And still my heart sits, like a bird, upon 
The empty nest, and mourns its treasures gone, 
Plumed for their flight 
And vanished quite. 
Ah me! where is the comfort ? though I say 
They have but journeyed on a little way. 


‘* A little way ! At times they seem so near, 
Their voices even murmur in my ear, 
To all my duties loving presence lend, 
And with sweet ministry my steps attend. 
’T was here we met and parted company ; 
Why should their gain be such a grief to me? 
This sense of loss ! 
This heavy cross ! 
Dear Saviour, take the burden off, I pray, 
And show me heaven is but—a little way. 


“* A little way ! The sentence I repeat, 
Hoping and longing, to extract some sweet 
To mingle with the bitter ; from thy hand 
I take the cup I cannot understand, 

And in my weakness give myself to thee. 
Although it seems so very, very far 
To that dear home where my beloved are, 

I know, I know, 

It is not so ; 
Oh, give me faith to believe it when I say 
That they are gone—gone but a little way.” 

— ANONYMOUS, 


H's Inhabitants, 


—_——_ 


THE society of heaven will be select. No one who 
studies Scripture can doubt that. There are a good many 
kinds of aristocracy in this world, but the aristocracy of 
heaven will be the aristocracy of holiness. The humblest 
sinner on earth will be an aristocrat there. It says in the 
fifty-seventh chapter of Isaiah: For thus saith the High 
and Lofty One, thatinhabiteth eternity, whose nameis holy: 
I will dwell in the high and holy place with him that is 
of a contrite and humble spirit. Now what could be 
plainer than that? No one that is not of a contrite and 
humble spirit will dwell with God in His high and holy 
place. 

If there is anything that ought to make heaven near to 
Christians, it is knowing that God and all their loved ones 
will be there. What is it that makes home so attractive ? 
Is it because we have a beautiful home? Is it because 
we have beautiful lawns? Is it because we have beauti- 
ful trees around that home? Is it because we have 
beautiful paintings upon the walls inside? Is it because 
we have beautifui furniture? Is that all that makes 
home so attractive and so beautiful ? Nay, it is the 
loved ones init; it is the loved ones there, 


28 


HEAVEN. 


I remember after being away from home some time, I 
went back to see my honoured mother, and I thought in 
going back I would take her by surprise, and steal unex- 
pectedly upon her, but when I found she had gone away, 
the old place didn’t seem like home at all. I went into 
one room and then into another, and I went all through 
the house, but I could not find that loved mother, and I 
said to some member of the family, “ Where is mother ? ” 
and they said she had gone away. Well, home had lost 
its charm to me; it was that mother that made home so 
sweet to me, and it is the loved ones that make home so 
sweet to every one; it is the loved ones that are going to 
make heaven so sweet to all of us. Christ is there; God 
the Father, is there; and many, many that were dear to us 
that lived on earth are there—and we shall be with them 
by and by. 

We find clearly in the 18th chapter of Matthew, and 
the 10th verse, that the angels are there: Take heed that 
ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, 
that in heaven, their angels do always behold the face of 
my Father which is in heaven. 

The angeis do always behold the Father’s face! We 
shall have good company up there; not only they that 
. have been redeemed, but those that have never been lost ; 
those who have known what it is to transgress ; those who 
have never known what it is to be disobedient; those 
who have obeyed him from the very morning of creation. 

It says in another place, when Gabriel came down to 
tell Zachariah that he was to be the father of the fore- 


ITS INHABITANTS. 29 


ee ee ———— ne ee NES 


runner of Jesus Christ, Zachariah doubted him; he had 
never been doubted before; and that doubt is met with 
the declaration: “I am Gabriel, that standeth in the 
presence of the Almighty.” What a glorious thing to be 
able to say ! 

It has been said that there will be three things which 
will surprise us when we get to heaven—one, to find many 
there that we did not expect to find there; another, to 
find some not there whom we had expected; a third, and 
perhaps the greatest wonder, will be to find ourselves 
there. 

A. poor woman once told Rowland Hill that the way to 
heaven was short, easy and simple; comprising only three 
steps—out of self, into Christ, and into glory. We have 
a shorter way now—out of self and into Christ, and we 
are there. Asa dead man cannot inherit an estate, no 
more can a dead soul inherit heaven. The soul must be 
resurrected in Christ. Among the good whom we hope to 
meet in heaven, we are told, there will be every variety of 
character, taste, and disposition. There is not one man- 
sion there; but many. There are not only gates on the 
north ; but on the east three gates, and on the west three 
gates, and on the south three gates. From opposite 
quarters of the theological compass, from opposite quarters 


of the religious world, from opposite quarters of human 
life and character, thorugh different expressions of their 
common faith and hope, through different modes of con- 
version, through different portions of the Holy Scripture, 
will the weary travellers enter the Heavenly City, and 


30 HEAVEN. 


| meet each other—“not without surprise’—on the shores 
of the same river of life. And on these shores they will 
find a tree bearing, not the same kind of fruit always and 
at all times, but “twelve manner of fruits,” for every 
different turn of mind,—for the patient sufferer, for the 
active servant, for the holy and humble philosopher, for 
the spirits of just men now at last made perfect ; and “ the 
leaves of the tree shall be for healing,” not of one single 
church or people only, not for the Scotchman or the 
Englishman only, but for the “healing of the nations,’— 
the Frenchman, the German, the Italian, the Russian— 
for all those from whom it may be, in this, its fruits have 
been farthest removed, but who, nevertheless, have 
“hungered and thirsted after righteousness,’ and who 
therefore “ shall be filled.” 

An eminent living divine says: 

“When I was a boy, I thought of heaven as a great, 
shining city, with vast walls and domes and spires, and 
with nobody in it except white-robed angels, who were 
strangers to me. By and by my little brother died ; and 
I thought of a great city with walls and domes and spires, 
and a flock of cold, unknown angels, and one little fellow 
that I was acquainted with. He was the only one I knew 
at that time. Then another brother died; and there were 
two that I knew. Then my acquaintances began to die; 
and the flock continually grew. But it was not till I had 
sent one of my little children to his Heavenly Parent— 
God—that I began to think I had got a little in myself 
A second went; a third went; a fourth went; and by 


ITS INHABITANTS. 31 


——< 


that time I had so many acquaintances in heaven, that I 
did not see any more walls and domes and spires. I be- 
gan to think of the residents of the celestial city. And 
now there have so many of my acquaintances gone, that 
it sometimes seems to me that I know more in heaven 
than I do on earth.” 


WE WILL LIVE FOREVER 


It says in the 12th chapter of John and the 26th verse : 
If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, 
there shall also my servant be. 

I cannot agree with some people, that Paul has been 
sleeping in the grave, and is still there, after the storms 
of eighteen hundred years. I cannot believe that he who 
loved the Master, who had such a burning zeal for him, 
has been separated from him in an unconscious state, 
“Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, 
be with me where Iam; that they may behold my glory, 
which thou hast given me.” This is Christ’s prayer. 

Now when a man believes on the Lord Jesus Christ, he 
gets cternal life. A great many people make a mistake 
right there; “ He that believeth on the Son hath—h-a-t-h 
--hath eternal life;” it does not say he shall have it 
when he comes to die; it is in the present tense ; it is mine 
now—if I believe. Itis the gift of God, that is enough. 
You can’t bury the gift of God; you can’t bury eternal 
life. All the grave-diggers in the world can’t dig a grave 
large enough and deep enough to hold eternal life; all the 


32 TIFA VEN. 


eer a oe 


coffin-makers of the world can’t make a coffin large enough 
and deep enough to hold eternal life; that is mine; it is 
mine ! 

T believe when Paul said “ To be absent from the body 
and present with the Lord,” he meant what he said ; that 
he was not going to be separated from him for eighteen 
hundred years; that spirit that he got when he was con- 
verted he got from a new life and anew nature, and they 
could not lay that away in the sepulchre; they could not 
bury that that flew to meet its Maker. It may be he is 
not satisfied, a: 1 will not be until the resurrection, but 
Christ says: “ He wail see then the travail of his soul, and 
be satisfied.” Even the body shall be raised; this body, 
sown in dishonour, shall be raised in glory; this body 
which has put en corruption, shall put on incorruption, 
and this mortal shall put on immortality. It is only a 
question of time. The great morning of the world will, 
by-and-by, dawn upon the earth, and the dead shall come 
forth and shall hear the voice of him who is the resurrec- 
tion and the life. 

Paul says: If our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made 
with hands, eternal in the heavens. He could take down 
the clay temple, and leave that, but he had a better house. 
He says in one place: I am in astrait betwixt two; hav- 
ing a desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far 
better; nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful 
for me. To me, it is a sweet thought to think that death 
does not separate us from the Master. A great many peo- 


mgh 
it is 


body 
that 
teen 
con- 
they 
d not 
he is 


ITS INHABITANTS, 33 
ple are living continually in the bondage of death, but if 
T have eternal life, death cannot touch that ; it may touch 
the house I live in; it may change my countenance and 
send my body away to the grave, but it cannot touch this 
new life. To me it is very sad to think that so many pro- 
fessed Christians look upon death as they do. 

] received some time ago a letter from a friend in Lon- 
don, and I thought, as I read it, I would take it and read 
it to other people and see if I could not get them to look 
upon death as this friend does. He lost a loved mother. 
In England it is a very common thing to send out cards 
in memory of the departed ones, and they put upon them 
greal borders of black—sometimes a quarter of an inch of 
black border—but this friend has gone and put on gold; 
he did not put on black at all; she had gone to the golden 
city, and so he just put on a golden border; and I think 
it a good deal better than black. I think when our friends 
die, instead of putting a great black border upon ouv 
memorials to make them look dark, it would be better for 
us to put on gold. 

It is not death at all; it is life. Some one said toa 
person dying: “ Well, you are in the land of the living 
yet.” “No,” said he, “I am in the land of the dying yet, 
but [ am going to the land of the living; they live there 
and never die.” This is the land of sin and death and 
tears, but up yonder they never die. Itis perpetual life; 


_ it is unceasing joy. 


“Tt isa glorious thing to die,” was the testimony of 
Hannah More on her deathbed, though her li*e had been 
: 3 


34 HEAVEN. 


— oe 


sown thick with the rarest friendships, and age had not 
so weakened her memory as to cause her to forget those 
little hamlets among the cliffs of her native hills, or the 
mission-schools she had withsuch perseverance established, 
and where she would be so sadly missed. 

As some one has said: 


‘* There is a soft, a downy bed ; 
Tis fair as breath of even ; 
A couch for weary mortals spread, 
Where they may rest the aching head, 
And find repose—in heaven ! 


‘¢ There is an hour of peaceful rest, 
To mourning wanderers given. 
There is a joy for souls distressed 
A balm for every wounded breast, 
*Tis found alone—in heaven !” 


KNOWING OUR FRIENDS. 


Many are anxious to know if they will recognise their 
friends in heaven. Jn the 8th chapter of Matthew and 
the 11th verse, we read: And I say unto you, that many 
shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down 
with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of 
heaven. 

Here we find that Abraham, who lived so many hun- 
dreds of years before Christ, had uo% lost his identity, and 
Christ tells us that the time is coming when they shall 
come from the east and west, and shall sit down with 
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of God, 


ois EARS RY 5 ein 


and 
hall 
rith 

od, 


oa Rigi ERS ARs aA Ss PIB i tae 


SpeT ait REE 8 EK 


ITS INHABITANTS, 35 


eee SO Meee ee 


Those men had not lost their identity; they were known 
as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And if you will turn to 
that wonderful scene that took place on the Mount of 
Transfiguration, you will find that Moses, who had been 
gone from the earth 1,500 years, was there; Peter, James 
and John saw him on the Mount of Transfiguration ; they 
saw him as Moses; he had not lost his name. God says 
over here in Isaiah, “I will not blot your names out of 
the Lamb’s book of Life.” We have names in heaven ; we 
are going to bear our names there ; we will be known. 

Over in the Psalms it says: WhenI wake in his like- 
ness I shall be satisfiel. That is encugh. Want is writ- 
ten on every human heart down here, but there we will be 
satisfied. You may hunt the world from one end to the 
other, and you will not find a man or woman who is satis- 
fied; but in heaven we will want for nothing, It says in 
the 2nd chapter of the Ist Epistle of John, speaking to 
followers of Christ: 

‘* Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear 
what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall 
be like him ; for we shall see him as he is, 


‘‘ And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, 
even as he is pure.” 


Moreover it seems highly probable; indee {I think it is 
clearly taught by Scripture, that a great many careless 
Christians will get into heaven. There will be a great 
many who will get in by the skin of their teeth, or as Lot 
was saved from Sodom, so as by fire. They will barely 
cet in, but there will be no crown of rejoicing. But every- 


36 HEAVEN. 


ee 


On ES OR RNY ED 


body is not going to.rush intoheaven. There are a great 
many who won’t be there. You know we have a class of 
people who tell us they are going into the kingdom of 
God, whether they are converted or not. They tell us 
that they are on their way; that they are going there. 
They tell us all are going there; that the good, the bad 
and indifferent are all going into the kingdom, and that 
they will all be there; that there is no difference; and, 
in other words—if I may be allowed to use plain language 
—they give God the lie. But they say, “ We believe in 
the mercy of God;” so do I. J believe in the justice of 
God too; and I think heaven would be a good deal worse 
than this earth if an unrenewed man were permitted to 
go intoit. Why, if a man should live forever in this 
world in sin, what would become of this world? It seems 
as if it would be held <tself. Let your mind pass over the 
history of this country and think of some that have lived 
in it. Suppose they never should die; suppose they 
should live on and on forever in sin and rebellion; and 
do you think that God is going to take those men that 
have rejected his Son, that have rejected the offer of his 
mercy, that have rejected salvation, and have just tram- 
pled his law under their feet, and have been in rebellion 
against his laws down here? Do you suppose God is go- 
ing to take them right into his kingdom and let them 
live there forever? By no means! 


NO SALOONS IN HEAVEN, 


No drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. Now 


so to Pe SCRE IE a aS 


ate 


enw ecg 


2 Bho ROS a RR iS et 


ITS INHABITANTS. 


let tuose mothers that have sons who are just commenc- 
ing a dissipated life, wake up; and not rest day nor night 
until their boys are converted by the power of God's 
grace, because no drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of 
God. These moderate drinkers will become drunkards ; 
no man ever became a drunkard all at once. How the 
devil blinds these moderate drinkers! I do not know of 
any sin more binding than the sin of intemperance ; the 
man is bound hand and foot before he knows it. 

I was reading some time ago an account of snake-wor- 
hipping in India. I thought it was a horrible thing. I 
read of a mother who saw a snake come into her home 
and coil itself around her little infant only six months 
old, and she thought that the reptile was such a sacred 
thing that she did not dare to touch it; and she saw 
that snake destroy her child; she heard its pitiful cries, 
but dared not rescue it. My soul revolted as I read it. 
But I do not know but we have things right here in Amer- 
ica thatare just as bad as that serpent in India—serpents 
that are coming into many a Christian home, and coiling 
around many a son and binding them hand and foot, and 
the fathers and mothers seem to be asleep. 

O, may the Spirit of God wake us up! No drunkard 
shall inherit the kingdom of God; nor rum-seller either. 
Bear it in mind. “ Woe be to the man that putteth the 
bottle to his neighbour's lips.” I pity any professed Chris- 
tians who rent their property for drinking saloons ; I pity 
them from the depths of my heart. If you ever expect 
to inherit the kingdom of God, give it up. If you can 


38 HEAVEN. 


never rent your property to better purposes you had bet- 
ter let it stand empty. This idea that all is going well, 
and that all are going into the kingdom of God, whetier 
they repent or not, is not taught anywhere in the Scrip- 
ture. 

There will be no extortioners in heaven: those men 
that are just taking advantage of their brotbers ; of those 
men who have been unfortunate; whose families are sick : 
who have had to go end mortgage their property, and 
had snap-judgment taken against them by some man 
who has his hand at their throats, and takes every cent 
that he can get. That man is an extortioner. He shall 
not inherit the kingdom of God. I pity a man that gets 
money dishonestly. See the trouble that he has to keep 
it. It is sure to be scattered. If you got it dishonestly 
you can’t keep it; your children can’t keep it—they 
haven’t got the power. You see that all over the country. 
A man that gets a dollar dishonestly, had better make 
restitution and pay it back very quick or it will burn in 
his pocket, 


SOME WON'T GET IN, 


In the days of Noah we read that he waded as it were 
through the deluge. He was the only righteous man, but 
according to the theory of some people, the rest of those 
men who were so foul and so wicked—too wicked to live 
—Cod just took them and swept them all into heaven, 
aud left the only righteous man to go through this trial. 
Drunkairds, and thieves and vagabonds all went to hea- 


SGI Re WEBEL as 


ES Hi RIOR 


3 
¢ 
4 
& 
2 
3 
‘ 


cee iE 


Se a OSES SS Sg li, 


ITS INHABITANTS. 39 


ce an 


ven, they say. You might as well go forward and preach 
that “you can swear as much as you like, and murder as 
much as you have a mind to, and it will all come out 
right—that God will forgive you; God is so merciful.” 

Suppose the Governor of a State should pardon out 
every person that the Courts ever convicted, and are now 
lying in its jails and penitentiaries ; suppose he should let 
them all loose because he is so merciful that he could not 
bear to have men punished; I think he would not be Gov- 
ernor of that State long. These men who are talking 
about God being so full of mercy, that he is going to spare 
all, and take all men to heaven, would be the very men 
to say that such a Governor as that ought to be impeach- 
ed—that he ought not to be Governor. Let us bear in 
mind that the Scripture says there is a certain class of 
people who shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Now, 
I will give you the sanction—I will give the Scripture ; it 
is a good deal better to just give the Scripture for these 
things, and then if you don’t like it yca can quarrel with 
Scripture, and not with me. Let no man say that I have 
been saying who is going to heaven and who is not; I 
will let the Scripture speak for itself: “ Know ye not, 
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of 
God ?” 

But the unrighteous—the adulterers, the fornicators and 
thieves—these men may all inherit it if they will only 
turn away from their sins, “ Let the wicked forsake his 
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts ;” but if the 
unrighteous man says: “I will not turn away from sin; 


40 HEAVEN. 


I will hold on to sin and have heaven,” he is deceiving 
himself. 

A man that steals my pocket-book loses a good deal 
more than I do. I can afford to let him have my pocket- 
book a great deal better than he can afford to take it. See 
how much that man loses that steals my pocket-book. 


Perhaps he may get a few dollars; or he may steal my © 


coat; but he does not get much. See how much he has 
lost. Take an inventory of what that man loses if he 
loses heaven. Think of it. No thief shall inherit the 
kingdom of God. To any thief I would say: steal no 
more. Let him ask God to forgive him; let him repent 
of his sin and turn to God. If you get eternal Jife it is 
worth more than the whole world. If you were to steal 
the whole world, you wouldn’t get much, after all. The 


whole world don’t amount to much, if you have not eternal 


life with it, to enjoy yourself in the future, 


ITS HAPPINESS, 


é¢ 


& 


‘ 


et HAT! almost home?” ‘ Yes, almost home,” she said, 
/? And light scemed gleaming on her aged head. 
‘¢ Jesus is very precious !” Those who near 
Her bedside stood were thrilled those words to hear. 
‘*¢ Towards his blest home I turn my willing feet ; 


Hinder me not 3 I go my Lord to meet.” 
Silence ensued, She seemed to pass away, 


Serene and quict as that summer day. 

“Speak,” cried throngh tears her daughter, bending low, 
*¢One word, belovea mother, ere you go.” 

She spoke that word ; the last she spoke on earth, 

In whispering tones—that word of wondrous worth : 
“JESUS !” The sorrowing listeners caught the sound, 
But angels heard it with a joy profound. 

Back, at its mighty power, the gates unfold— 

The gates of pearl that guard the streets of gold, 

The harpers with their harps took up the strain, 

And sang the triumphs of the Lord again, 

As through the open portals entered in 

Another soul redeemed from death and sin, 

And as from earth the spirit passed away, 

To dwell forever in the realms of day, 

Those who were left to mourn could almost hear 

The strains of heavenly music strike the ear. 

And to their longing eyes by grace was given, 

An such a scene, as ’twere, a glimpse of heaven. 
—UNKNownN, 


dts Bappiness. 


oo) 


Ir there is one sound above another that will swing 
open the eternal gates, it is the name of Jesus. There 
are a great many pass-words and by-words down here, 
but that will be the countersign up above. Jesus Christ 
is the “Open Sesamé” to heaven. Any one that tries to 
climb up some other way, is a thief and arobber. But 
when we get in, what a joy above every other joy we can 
think of, it will be to see Jesus himself all the time, and 
to be with him continually. 

Isaiah has given this promise of God to every one that 
is saved through faith: Thine eyes shall see the King in 
his beauty ; they shall behold the land that is very far 
off. Some of us may not be able to get around the world. 
We may not be able to see any of the foreign countries ; 
but every Christian by-and-by is going to see a land that 
is very far off. This isour Promised Land. John Milton 
says of the saints that have gone already: 


“‘ They walk with God 
High in salvation, and the climes of bliss.” 


It’s a blissful climate up there. People down here look 
around a good deal to find a good climate where they 
won't be troubled by any of their pains or aches. Well, 


44 HEAVEN. 


the climate of heaven is so fine that no pains or aches can 
hold out against it. There will be no room to find fault. i 
| We will leave all our pains and aches behind us, and find H 
an everlasting health, such as earth can never know. H 
But you know the glory of Christ as reigning King of 
heaven, would be something too much for mortal eyes to 
stand. In the sixth chapter of the first-epistle to Timo- ; 
thy, we read of Christ as the blessed and only Potentate, if 
the King of kings, and Lord of lords; who only hath a 
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can ap- 
proach into; whom no man hath seen, nor can see. As 
mortals, we cannot see that light. Our feeble faculties 
would be dazzled before such a blaze of glory. 
In the Ist chapter and 28th verse of Ezekiel, we find ' 
where that prophet had a faint glimpse of it: 


‘* As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of 
rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This 
was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And 
when I saw it, I fell upon my face.” 


We are amazed at ordinary perfections now. Few of 4 
us can look the sun square in the face. But when this 4 
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, as Paul says, 4 
the powers of the soul will be stronger. We will be able 
to see Christ in his glory then. Though the moon be con- 
founded and the sun ashamed, yet shall we see him as he 
is, This is what will make heaven so happy. We all 
know that great happiness cannot be found on earth. 
Reason, revelation and the experience of six thousand 
years, all tell us that. No human creature has the power 


This 
And 


M4 
a 
y 
t 


ITS HAPPINESS. 4¢ 


——— ee 


to give it. Even doing good fails to give it right away, 
for owing to sin in the world even the best do not have 
perfect happiness here. They have to wait for heaven. 
although they may be so near it sometimes that they can 
see heralds of its joy and beauty, like Columbus saw the 
strange and beautiful birds hovering around his ships long 
before he caught sight of America. 

All the joys we are to know in heaven will come from 
the presence of God. This is the leading thought in all 
that the Scripture has to say on the subject. What life 
on this earth is without health, life in heaven would be 
without the presence sf God. God’s presence will be the 
very light and life of the place. It is said that one trans- 
lation of the words describing the presence of God is “a 
happy making sight.” It will be a sight like the return 
of the long-lost boy to his mother, or the first glimpse of 
your home after you have been a long time away. Some 
of you know how a little sunshine on a dark day, or the 
face of a kind friend in trouble, often cheersus up. Well, 
it will be something like that, only a thousand times bet- 
ter. Our perceptions of God will be clearer then, and 
that will make us love him all the more. 

The more we know God, the more we love him, A 
great many of us would love God more if we only could 
get better acquainted. It gives Christians while on earth 
a great deal of pleasure to think of the perfection of Jesus 
Christ, but how will it be when we see him as he is ? 


HEAVEN, 


WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM. 


Some one asked a Christian once what he expected to 
do when he got to heaven? He said he expected to spend 
the first thousand years looking at Jesus Christ, and after 
that he would look for Peter, and then for James, and for 
John, and all the time he could conceive of would be joy- 
fully filled with looking upon these great persons. But it 
seems to me that one look at Jesus Christ will more than 
reward us for all we have ever done for him down here; 
for all the sacrifices we can possibly make for him, iust 
to see him; and see only that. But we shall become 
like him when we once have seen him, because we shall 
have his spirit. Jesus, the Saviour of the world, will be 
there, and we shall see him face to face. 

It won’t be the pearly gates; it won't be the jasper 
walls, and the streets paved with transparent gold, that 
shall make it heaven to us. These would not satisfy us, 
If these were all, we would not want to stay there for- 
ever. I heard of achild whose mother was very sick ; 
and while she lay very low, one of the neighbours took 
the child away to stay with her until the mother should 
be well again. But instead of getting better, the mother 
died; and they thought they would not take the child 
home until the funeral was all over; and would never 
tell her about her mother being dead. So a while after- 
ward they brought the little girl home. First she went 
in the sitting-room to find her mother there; and she 


ITS HAPPINESS. 47 


er ee 


went from one end of the house to the other, and could 
not find her, At last she said, “Where is my mamma? * 
And when they told her her mamina was gone, the little 
thing wanted to go back to the neighbour's house again. 
Home had lost its attraction to her since her mother was 
not there any longer. No; it’s not the jasper walls and 
the pearly gates that are going to make heaven attractive. 
It is the being with God. We shall be in the presence of 
the Redeemer; we shall be forever with the Lord. 

There was a time when I used tothink more of Jesus 
Christ than I did of the Father; Christ seemed to be so 
much nearer to me because he had become the Days Man 
between meand God. In my imagination I put God away 
on the throne as a stern judge, but Christ had come in as 
the mediator, and it seemed as if Christ was much nearer 
to me than God, the Father. I got over that years ago, 
when God gave me a son, and for ten years I had an only 
son, and as I looked at the child as he grew up, then the 
thought came to me that it took more iove for God to give 
up his Son than it did for his Son to die. It would be 
much easier for me to go out and be put to death than to 
see the son of my bosom, my only son, led out and cruci- 
fied. Think of the love that God had for this world 
when he gave Christ up ! 

If you will turn to the 7th chapter of Acts and the 55th 
verse, you will find that when Stephen was being stoned 
he lifted up his eyes, and it seemed as if God just rolled 
back the curtain of time and allowed him to look into the 
eternal city and see Christ standing at the right hand of 


1A NEDA FTE ITE RIE I AES 


48 HEAVEN. 


RT a a er — 


pa 


God. When Jesus Christ went on high he led captivity 
captive and took his seat, for his work was done; his 
work was finished; but when Stephen saw him he was 
standing up, and I can imagine he saw that martyr fight- 
ing, as it were, single handed and alone, the first martyr, 
though many were to come after him. You can hear the 
tramp of the millions coming after him, to lay down their 
lives for the Son of God. But Stephen led the van; he 
was the first martyr, and as he was dying for the Lord 
Jesus Christ he looked ; Christ was standing to give him 
a welcome, and the Holy Ghost came down to bear wit- 
ness that Christ was there. How then can we doubt it ? 

A beggar does not enjoy looking at a palace. The 
grandeur of its architecture is lost upon him. Looking 
upon a royal banquet does not satisfy the hunger of a 
starving man. But seeing heaven is also having a share 
init. There would be no joy there, if we did not feel that 
some of it was ours. God unites the soul to himself. As 
it says in the 2nd Epistle of Peter, the 1st chapter and 4th 
verse, we are made partakers of the divine nature. Now 
if you put a piece of iron in the fire, it very soon loses ite 
dark colour, and becomes red and hot like the fire, but it 
does not lose its iron nature. So the soul becomes bright 
with God’s brightness, beautiful with God’s beauty, pure 
with God’s purity, and warm with the glow of his perfect 
love, and yet remains a human soul. We shall be like 
him, but remain ourselves. 

There is a fable that a kind-hearted king was once 
hunting in a forest, and found a blind orphan boy, who 


vity 
his 
was 
ght- 
rtyr, 
the 
sheir 
; he 
Lord 
him 
wit- 
L it? 


ITS HAPPINESS. 49 


a —————— eee er _ 


was living almost like the beasts. The king was touched 
with pity and adopted the boy as his own, and had him 
taught all that can be learned by one whois blind. When 
he reached his twenty-first year the king, who was also a 
great physician, restored the youth his sight, and took him 
to his palace, where surrounded by his nobles and all the 
majesty and magnificence of his court, he proclaimed him 
one of his sons, and commanded all to give him tieir hon- 
our and love. The once friendless orphan thus became a 
prince and a sharer in the royal dignity, and of all hap- 
piness and glory to be found in the palace of aking. Who 
can tell the joy that overwhelmed the soul of that young 
man, when he first saw the king of whose beauty and 
goodness and power he had heard so much! Who can 
tell the happiness he must have felt when he saw his own 
princely attire, found himself adopted into the royal 
family—honoured and beloved by all! 

Now, Christ is the great and mighty King who finds 
our souls in the wilderness of this sinful world. He finds 
us, as it says in the 3rd chapter of Revelations, “ wretched 
and miserable, and poor and blind and naked.” As it says 
in the 1st chapter of the same book, he “ washed us from 
our sins in his own blood,” and again the 61st chapter of 
Isaiah, he has clothed us with a spotless robe of innocence, 


“ with garments of salvation;” he has covered us “ with 
a robe of righteousness as a bridegroom decketh himself 
with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with 
jewels.” The mission of the gospel to sinners, as we find 


it m the 26th chapter of Acts, has been to open their eyes, 
4 


50 HEAVEN. 


and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the 
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgive- 
ness of sins and inheritance among them which are sancti- 
tied by faith that is in me. This is what Christ has done 
for every Christian. He has adorned you with the gift of 
grace and adopted you as his child, and as it says in the 
3rd chapter of 1st Corinthians: 

‘* All things are yours ; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or 


the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come— 
all are yours, and ye are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.” 


He has given you his own word to educate you for 
heaven ; he has opened your eyes so that now you see 
By his grace and your own co-operation your soul i_ 
being gradually developed into a more perfect resemblance 
to him, Finally, your Heavenly Father calls you home, 
where you will see the angels and saints clothed with the 
beauty of Christ himself, standing around his throne, 
and hear the word that will admit you into their society: 
Well done thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joy of thy Lord. In the 16th chapter of John, Christ 
himself says: All things that the Father hath are mine ; 
therefore, said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall 
show it unto you. All will be yours. Ah, how poor and 
mean do earthly pleasures seem by comparison. How,true 
those lines of a Scotch poet: 


* The world can never give 
The bliss for which we sigh ; 
’Tis not the whole of life to live, 

Nor all of death to die. 


ITS HAPPINESS. 1 


Beyond this vale of tears 
There is a life above, 
Unmeasured by the flight of years, 
And all that life is love.” 


OVER THE RIVER, 


There is joy in heaven, we are told, over the conver- 
sions that take place on earth. In the 15th chapter of 
Luke, and the 7th verse we read: I say unto you that 
likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repen- 
teth, more than over ninety-and-nine just persons which 
need no repentance. If there was going to be an election 
for President of the United States, there would be tre- 
mendous excitement—a great commotion. There is pro- 
bably not a paper from Maine to California that would 
not have something on nearly every page about the can- 
didate ; the whole country would be excited ; but I doubt 
if it would be noticed in heaven; I doubt if they would 
take any notice of it at all. If Queen Victoria should 
leave her throne, there would be great excitement through- 
out the nations of the earth; the whole world would 
be interested in the event ; it would be telegraphed around 
the world ; but it would probably be overlooked altogether 
in heaven. Yet if one little boy or one little girl, one 
man or one woman, should repent of their sins, this day 
and hour that would be noticed in heaven. They look 
at things differently up there ; things that look very large 
to us, look very small in heaven; and things that seem 
very small to us down here, may be very great up yonder, 


52 HEAVEN, 


- 


Think of it! By an act of our own, we may cause joy in 
heaven. The thought seems almost too wonderful to take 
in, To think that the poorest sinner on earth, by an act 
of his own, can send a thrill of joy through the hosts of 
heaven ! 

The Bible says: “There is joy in the presence of the 
angesl,’ not that the angels rejoice, but it is “in the 
presence” of the angels, I have studied over that a great 
deal, and often wondered what it meant. “Joy in the 
presence of the angels?” Now, it is speculation ; it may 
be true, or it may not ; but perhaps the friends who have 
left the shores. of time—they who have gone within the 
fold—may be looking down upon us; and when they seq 
one they prayed for when on earth repenting and turning 
to God, it sends a thrill of joy to their very hearts. Even 
now, some mother who has gone up yonder may be look- 
ing down upon a son or daughter, and if that child should 
say: “I will meet that mother of mine; I will repent ; 
yes, I am going to join you mother,” the news, with the 
speed of a sunbeam, reaches heaven, and that mother may 
then rejoice, as we read, “In the presence of the angels.” 

In Dublin, after one of the meetings, a man walked into 
the inquiry room with his daughter, his only one, whose 
mother had died some time before, and he prayed: “Oh 
God, let this truth go deep into my daughter's heart, and 
grant that the prayers of her mother may be answered to- 
day—that she may be saved.” As they rose up she pnt 
her arms about his neck and kissed him, and said: “1 
want to meet my mother; I want to be a Christian.” 


Sos 


ona i, Shaadi sealiebie: 


cee ree 


ITS HAPPINESS, 53 


That day she accepted Christ. That man is now a minis- 
ter in Texas. The daughter died out there a little while 
ago, and is now with her mother in heaven. What a 
blessed and joyful meeting it must have been! It may be 
a sister, it may be a brother, who is beckoning you over— 


‘‘ Over the river they beckon to me, 

Loved ones who’ve crossed to the farther side ; 
The gieam of their snowy robes I see, 

But their voices are drowned in the rushing tide. 
There’s one with ringlets of sunny gold, 

And eyes the reflection of heaven’s own blue ; 
He crossed in the twilight gray and cold, 

And the pale mist hid him from mortal view, 
We saw not the angels who met him there, 

The gates of the city we could not see ; 
Over the river, over the river, 

My bro*?..: stands waiting to welcome me.” 


Whoever it is, do not delay. 

the story is told of a father who had his little daugh- 
ter out late in the evening. The night was dark, and 
they had passed through a thick wood to the brink of a 
river, Far away on the opposite shore a light twinkled 
here and there in the few scattered houses, and farther 
off still, blazed the bright lamps of the great city to which 
they were going. The little child was weary and sleepy 
and the father held her in his arms while he waited for 
the ferryman, who was at the other side. At length they 
saw a little light; nearer and nearer came the sound of 
the oars, and soon they were safe in the boat, 

“Father,” said the little girl. 

“ Well, my child?” 


) 
i 
Fit 
om fi 
; 
: & 
3 
4} 
| 
‘i 
4] 
a 
4 
1 
i 
i 
7 
h 
ie fi 
i 
* i 
i 
4 
, 
i 


TES Pee EP 


SEE ee eee 


54 HEAVEN. 


— e. scnmsiiee 


“Tt’s very dark, and I can’t see the shore; where are we 
going ?” 

“The ferryman knows the way, little one; we will soon 
be over.” 

“QO, I wish we were there, father !” 

Soon in her home, loving arms welcomed her, and her 
fears and her tremor were gone. Some months pass by» 
and this same little child stands on the brink of a river 
that is darker and deeper, more terrible still. It is the 
River of Death. Thesame loving father stands near her: 
distressed that his child must cross this river and he not 
be able to go with her. For days and for nights he and 
her mother have been watching over her, leaving her bed- 
side only long enough for their meals, and to pray for the 
life of their precious one. For hours she had been slum- 
bering, and it seems as if her spirit must pass away with- 
cut her waking again, but just before the morning watch 
she suddenly awakes with the eye bright, the reason un- 
clouded, and every faculty alive. A sweet smile is play- 
ing upon her face. 

“Father,” she says, “I have come again to the river 
side, and am again waiting for the ferryman to come and 
take me across.” 

“Does it seem as dark and cold as when you went over 
the other river, my child ?” 

“Oh no! There is no darkness here. The river is 
covered with floating silver. The boat coming towards 
me seems made of solid light, and I am not afraid of the 
ferryman.” 

“Can you see over the river, my darling ?” 


ITS HAPPINESS. 55 


“Oh yes, there is a great and beautiful city there, all 
ulled with light; andI hear music such as the angels 
make !” 

“Do you see any one on the other side ?” 

“Why yes, yes, I see the most beautiful form; and he 
beckons me now to come. Oh, ferryman make haste! I 
know who it is! Itis Jesus; my own blessed Jesus, I 
shall be caught in his arms. I shall rest on his bosom— 
I come—I COME.” 

And thus she crossed over the river of Death, made like 
a silver stream by the presence of the blessed Redeemer. 


SOMETHING MORE, 


There is hardly a man anywhere, no matter how high 
up or how rich he may be, but will tell you, if you get his 
confidence, that he is not happy. There is something he 
wants that he cannot get, or there is something he has 
that he wants to get rid of. It is very doubtful if the 
Czar of all the Russians is a happy man, and yet he has 
about all he can get. Although Queen Victoria has 
castles, and millions at her command, and has besides, what 
most sovereigns lack, the love of her subjects, it is a ques- 
tion whether she gets much pleasure out of her position. 
If they love the Lord Jesus Christ and are saved, then 
they may be happy. If they know they will get into 
heaven like the humblest of their subjects, then they may 
rest secure. Paul, the humble tent-maker, will have a 
higher seat in heaven than the best und greatest sovereign 


i 
i 
: | 


ean AS TREE LEE SANS ANTES Me SME IPA LEM TELLS: OO OS 


= ig sD a 


56 HEAVEN. 


— 


that ever ruled the earth. If the Czar should meet John 
Bunyan, the poor tinker, up in heaven, he no doubt would 
find him the greater man. 

The Christian life is the only happy one. Something 
is always wanting. When we are young we have grand 
enterprises, but we soon spoil them by being toorash. We 
want experience, but then all the power to carry out our 
schemes is gone. “ Happy is the people whose God is the 
Lord.” The only way to be happy is to be good. The 
man who steals from necessity sins because he is afraid of 
being unhappy, but for the moment he forgets all about 
how unhappy the sin is going to make him. Man is the 
noblest and best thing on earth, as bad.as he is, and it is 
easy to understand how he fails to find true happiness in 
anything lower than himself. The only object better than 
ourselves is God, and that is all we can ever be satisfied 
with. Gold, that is mere dross dug up out of the earth, 
does not satisfy man. Neither does the honour and praise 
of other men. The human soul wants something more 
than that. Heaven is the only place to get it. No won- 
der that the angels who see God all the time are so happy. 

The publicans went to hunt up John the Baptist in the 
wilderness, to know what they should do. Some of the 
highest men in the land went out to consult the hermit to 
know how to get happiness. “ Whosoever trusteth in the 
Lord happy is he.” It is because there is no real happiness 
down here, that earth is not worth living for. It is be- 
cause it is all above, that heaven is worth dying for. In 
heaven there is all life and no death, In hell there is all 


wT 


—_ 


ITS HAPIINESS. 57 


a 


death and no life. Here on earth there is both living and 
dying, which is between the two. If we are dead to sin 
here we will live in heaven, and if we live in sin here we 
must expect eternal death to follow. 

Do you know that every sinner dies twice? They first 
become spiritually dead toe sin—that is the renewed soul. 
It then begins to feel the joy of heaven. The joys of 
heaven reach down to earth as many and as sure as the 
rays of thesun. Then comes physical death, which makes 
way for the physical heaven. Of course the old sinful 
body has to be left behind. We cannot take that into 
heaven. It will be a glorified body. Our bodies will be 
transfigured like Christ’s, 

Besides, there will be no temptation then. If there was 
no temptation in the world now, God could not prove us. 
He wants to see if we are loyal. That is why he put the 
forbidden tree in Paradise; that accounts for the Canaan- 
ite in Israel. When we plant a seed, after a time it dis- 
appears and brings forth a seed that looks much the same, 
but still it is a different seed. So our bodies and the bodies 
of those we know and love will be raised up, looking much 
the same but still not all the same. Christ took the same 
boy into heaven that was crucified on the cross, unless 
he was transformed in the cloud after the disciples lost 
sight of him. There must have been some change in the 
appearance of Christ after his resurrection, for Mary Mag- 
dalene, who was the first one who saw him, did not 
):now him, neither did the disciples, who walked and 
talked with him about himself, and even did not recog- 


i 

1 | 
4 1 
Hy | 
q i 
: | 
4 

4 

; ' 
H 


58 HEAVEN. 


a erage 


nise him until he began to ask a blessing at supper. 
Even Peter did not know him when he appeared on the 
sea-shore. Thomas would not believe it was Christ until 
he saw the scars of the nails and the wound in his side, 
But we will all know him in heaven. 

There are two things that the Bible makes as clear and 
certain as eternity. One is that we are going to see Christ, 
and the other that we are going to be like him. God will 
never hide his face from us there, and Satan will never 
show his. 

There is not such a great difference between grace and 
glory after all. Grace is the bud, and glory the blossom. 
Grace is glory begun, and glory is grace perfected. It 
won't come hard to people who are serving God down 
here to do it when they go up yonder. They will change 
places, but they won't change employments. 


HIGHER UP. 


The moment a person becomes heavenly-minded and 
gets his heart and affections set on things above, then life 
becomes beautiful, the light of heaven shines across our 
pathway and we don’t have to be all the time lashing our- 
selves and upbraiding ourselves because we are not more 
with Christ. Some one asked a Scotchman if he was on 
tne way to heaven, and he said: “ Why, man, I live there ; 
I am not on the way.” Hoe lived there. Now we want 
to live in heaven; while we are walking in this world it 
is our privilege to have our hearts and affections there, 
I once heard Mr. Morehouse tell a story about a lady in 


ITS HAPPINESS. 59 


London that found one of those poor, bedridden saints, 
and then she found a wealthy woman who was all the 
time complaining and murmuring at her lot. ‘Sometimes 
I think people that God does the most for in worldly 
things think the less of him and care less about him and 
are the most unproductive in his service. But this lady 
went around as a missionary visiting the poor, and she 
used to go and visit this poor bediidden saint, and she 
said if she wanted to get cheered up and her heart made 
happy she wonld go and visit her. [There is a place in 
Chicago, and has been for years, where a great many 
Christians have always gone when they want to get their 
faith strengthened; they go there and visit one of these 
saints. And a friend told me that she thought that the 
Lord kept one of those saints in most of the cities to en- 
tertain angels as they passed over the cities on errands of 
mercy, for it seems that these saints are often visited by 
the heavenly host.] Well, this lady missionary had wanted 
to get this wealthy woman in contact with this saint, and 
she invited her to go a number of times; and finally the 
lady consented to go, and when she got to the place she 
went up the first flight of stairs, and it was not very clean, 
and was dark. 

“ What a horrible place,” the lady said ; “ why did you 
bring me here ?” 


The lady smiled and she said, “It is better higher up.” 
And then they went up another flight, and it didn't 
grow any lighter, and she complained again, and the miss- 
ionary said, “It is better higher up.” .And then they 


peor i nr tra rr nt nen neon pia eiltimiamnaaeaas —- = = 


60 HEAVEN. 


went up another flight and it was no lighter, and the 
missionary kept saying, “It is better higher up.” And 
when they got to the fifth story they opened the door 
and entered a beautiful room, a room that was carpeted, 
and plants were in the window and a little bird was in a 
cage singing, and there was that saint just smiling, and the 
first thing the complaining woman had to say to her was, 

“It must be hard for you to be here and suffer.” 

“Oh, that is a very small thing 3 it is not very hard,” 
she said; “it is better higher up.” 

And so if things don’t go just right, if they don’t go to 
suit us here, we can say “ It is better higher up, it is bet- 
ter further on,” and we can lift up our hearts and rejoice 
aS we journey on towards home. 

You know those beautiful lines— 


‘¢ Beyond the smiling and the weeping, 

I shall be soon ; 

Beyond the waking and the sleeping, 

Beyond the sowing and the reaping, 
I shall be soon. 

Love, rest, and home ! 
Sweet Home ! 

Lord, tarry not, but come, 


‘* Beyond the rising and the setting, 
I shall be soon ; 

Beyond the calming and the fretting, 
Beyond remembering and forgetting, 
I shall be soon. 

Love, rest, and home ! 
Sweet Hope ! 
Lord, tarry not, but come.” 


The house of hine abode— 
The Church our blest Redeemer saved 
With his own precious blood. 


@s 
ts Bf LOVE thy kingdom, Lord, 


6 T love thy church, O God ! 
Her walls before thee stand, 
Dear as the apple of thine eye, 
And graven on thy hand. 


‘¢ For her my tears shall fall, 
For her my prayers ascend ; 
To her my cares and. toils be given 
Till toils and cares shall end. - Ee 


‘“* Beyond my highest joy 
I prize her heavenly ways, 
Her sweet communion, solemn vows, 
Her hymns of love and praise. 


“* Jesus, thou Friend divine, 
Our Saviour and our King, 
Thy hand from every snare and foo, 
Shall great deliverance bring. 


‘* Sure as thy truth shall last, 
To Zion shall be given 
The brightest glories earth can yield, 
And brighter bliss of heaven.” 
—Dwiaut. 


if SHINE in the light of God ; 


His likeness stamps my brow 
Through the valley of Death my feet have trod, 
And I reign in glory now ! 


No breaking heart is here, 
No keen and thrilling pain, 

No wasted cheek where the'frequent tear 
Hath rolled and left its stain, 


* * % * + * % 


O friends of mortal years, 
The trusted and the true, 

Ye are watching still in the valley of tears, 
But I wait to welcome you 


Do I forget ? Oh, no! 
For memory’s golden chain 

Shall bind my heart to the hearts below 
Till they meet to touch again 


Each link is strong and bright, 
And love’s electric flame 

Flows freely down, like a river of light, 
To the world from whence I came. 


Do you mourn when another star 
Shines out from the glittering sky ? 

Do you weep when the raging voice of war 
And the storms of conflict die i 


Then why should your tears run down, 
And your hearts be sorely riven, 

For another gem in the Saviour’s crown, 
And another soul in heaven ! 


—FRom an ENGuisu Frrienp, 


ITS CERTAINTY. 


+ 


Sts Gertainty, 


THERE are some people who go so much upon their rea- 
son that they reason away God. They say God is not a 
person we can ever see. They say God is a spirit. So 
he is, but he is a person too; and became a man and 
walked the earth once. Scripture tells us very plainly 
that God has a dwelling place. There is no doubt what- 
ever about that. A dwelling place indicates personality. 
God’s dwelling place is in heaven. He has a dwelling 
place, and we are going to be inmates of it. Therefore we 
will see him. 

In the 8th chapter and 30th verse of the first Book of 
Kings we read: 


“ And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy 
people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place : and hear thou 
in heaven thy dwelling place : and when thou hearest, forgive.” 


This idea that heaven is everywhere and nowhere is not 
according to Scripture. Heaven is God's habitation, and 
when Christ came on earth he taught us to pray: Our 
Father which art in heaven. This habitation is called 
“the city of eternal life.” Think of a city without a 
cemetery—they have no dying there. If there could be 
such a city as that found on this earth what a rush there 
5 


SAAS gt cee RE ee, 


—~ 


66 HEAVEN. 


Stree — 


would be to it! How men would seek to get into that 
city! You can’t find one on the face of this earth. A 
city without tears—God wipes away all the tears up yon- 
der. This is a time of weeping, but by-and-by there is a 
time coming when God shall call us where there will be 
no tears, A city without pain, a city without sorrow, 
without sickness, without death. There is no darkness 
there. The Lamb is the light thereof. It needs no sun, 
it needs no moon. The paradise of Eden was as nothing 
corapared with this one. The tempter came into Eden and 
triumphed, but in that city nothing that defileth shall ever 
enter. There will be no tempter there. Think of a place 
where temptation cannot come. ‘Think of a place where 
we will be free from sin; where pollution cannot enter, 
and where the righteous shall reign forever. Think of a 
city that is not built with hands, where the buildings do 
not grow old with time; a city whose inhabitants no cen- 
sus has numbered except the Book of Life, which is the 
heavenly directory. Think of acity through whose streets 
runs no tide of business, where no nodding hearses creep 
slowly with their burdens to the tomb; a city without 
griefs or graves, without sins or sorrows, without marriages 
or mournings, without births or burials; a city which 
glories in having Jesus for its king, angels for its guards, 
and whose citizens are saints! 

We believe this is just as much a place and just as much 
a city as New York is, or London or Paris. We believe 
in it a good deal more, because earthly cities will pass 


Perera ate ee 


OE ne) a 


away, but this city will remain forever. It has founde-: 


ee eS 


rd 


that 
A 
yon- 
21s a 
ill be 
rrow, 
kness 
) sun, 
thing 
n and 
lever 
place 
where 
enter, 
of a 
gs do 
»cen- 
is the 
treets 
creep 
thout 
ages 
hich 
hards, 


much 
blieve 
pass 


indea-' 


, 
sia a ial ats See Naira eA 


Sica 


Poe et 


7 
‘ 


ITS CERTAINTY. 67 


De a ne a ——— 


tions whose builder and maker is Ged. Some ot the 
grandest cities the world has ever known did not have 
foundations strong enough to last. 


INCENSE TO THE QUEEN OF HEAVEN. 


Take for instance Tyre and Sidon. They were rival 
cities something like New York and Philadelphia, or St. 
Louis and Chicago. When the patriarch Jacob gave his 
sons his blessing, he spoke of Sidon. In the splitting up 
of Canaan among the tribes of Israel by Joshua, Tyre and 
Sidon seem to have fallen to the lot of Asher, though the 
old inhabitants were never fully driven out. It says in 
the 3rd chapter of Mark : Jesus withdrew himself with his 
disciples to the sea, and a great* multitude from Galilee 
followed him, and from Judea and from Jerusalem, and 
from Idumcea and from beyond Jordan; and they about 
Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they heard what 
things he did, came unto him. We find in the 3rd chapter 
and 8th verse of Acts, moreover, that the captain of the 
guards who was taking Paul prisoner to appear before 
Ceesar at Rome, when the ship touched at Sidon let Paul 
go and visit some of his friends there to refresh himself. 
From this it has been inferred that at that time there 
must have been a Christian church there, although the 
people generally worshipped the Queen of Heaven, who 
was always represented as crowned withthe crescent moon. 

There are some persons now, you know, who adore a 
Queen of Heaven, whom they picture with the moon be- 


68 HEAVEN. 


ee ee, ay 


neath her feet. Even the Hebrews, when they saw “ the 
moon walking in brightness,” along the clear skies of 
Palestine, impressed by its beauiy, fell into the same 
idolatry. The children gather wood, says Jeremiah, and 
the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their 
dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour 
out drink offerings unto other gods. In enswer to the 
prophet’s reproof we find them saying, in the 44th chapter, 
beginning at the 16th verse : 

‘* As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of 
the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do 
whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense 


unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, 
as we have done.” 


Is it then any wonder that we should find addressed to 
them, a little farther on, this language: 

‘*So that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of 
your doings, and because of the abominations which ye have com- 


mitted ; therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, 
and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.” 


In the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in 
marriage, and there will be no queen in heaven. 

Tyre is mentioned by Joshua, as “a strong city,” and 
both Isaiah and Ezekiel speak of it. In fact there isa 
great deal in Scripture about it. Nebuchadnezzar, Alex- 
ander the Great, and other kings have fought over it, and 
hosts of lives have been lost in taking what is now a ruin. 
Alexander once destroyed it, but it was afterwards re- 
built, We find in the inspired Word of God descriptions 


4 
4 


Seehaln Nike Se eee 


i 


y 


a ee ee 


‘the 
3 of 
jame 
and 
their 
pour 
» the 
upter, 


ame of 
inly do 
incense 
to her, 


; 

Ef 

4 
3 
Hl 
‘ 
& 


sci ie hile a Sagkel aia ata Bere 


ITS CERTAINTY. 69 


of what this city once was, that exceed in beauty any- 
thing that history can tell us, The whole of the 27th 


chapter of Ezekiel is taken up with Tyrus, as it was called 
then : 


‘*O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a mer- 
chant of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord God: O 
Tyrus, thou hast said, [ am of perfect beauty. Thy borders are in 
the midst of the seas, thy builders have perfected thy beauty. They 
have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir ; they have taken 
cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee,” 


So it goes on: 


** Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou 


spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of 
Elishah was that which covered thee,” 


A little farther on it says: 


‘Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and 
thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and 
all thy men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which 
js in the midst of thee, sh \l fall into the midst of the seas in the 
day of thy ruin. Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, 
thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of the brightness ; I will 


cast thee to the ground, I wili lay thee before kings, that they may 
behold thee.” 


The terrible prophesies of its downfall have all been 
literally fulfilled. We find them in the 26th chapter he- 
ginning with the 3rd verse: 


“* Thus saith the Lord God : Behold I am against thee, O Tyrus, 
and will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea 
causeth his waves to come up. And they shall destroy the walls of 
Tyrug, and break down her towers : I will also scrape her dust from 


70 HEAVEN. 


—- a eer ee 


her, and make her like the top of a rock. It shall be a piece for the 
spreading of nets in the midst of the sea ; for I have spokenit, saith - 
the Lord God ; and it shall become a spvil to the nations.” 


Travellers now describe the site of Tyre as “a heap of 
ruins, broken arches and vaults, tottering walls and towers, 
with a few starving wretches housed amid the rubbish.” 
A large part of it is under water, a place to spread net, 
upon, and the rest has become indeed “ like the top of a 
rock.” 

Thus passes away the glory of the world. This book 
tells us of the glory of a city that we no longer see, but it 
has been. It tells us also of the glory of a greater city 
that we have not seen, but will if we but follow in the 
way. 


** Oh happy harbour of God’s saints ! 
O sweet and pleasant soil ! 
In thee no sorrow can be found, 
Nor grief nor care nor toil, 
Thy gardens and thy goodly walks 
Continually are green, 
Where grow such sweet and pleasant flowers 
As nowhere else are seen. | 
No candle needs, no moon to shine, 
No glittering star to light, 
For Christ the King of Righteousness 
Forever shineth bright.” 


_ f 
NC A SCOR AR LCR ae ig Ea EB ik BRR NEN * 


OUR NAMES RECORDED. 


i a ai sie Cais emus = penne 


We are told that one time just before sunrise, two men 
got into a dispute about what part of the heavens the sun 
would first appear in. They became so excited oyer it 


ol shinee amen lese i2 


es ae a ee 
en 


-_ 
& 


nae 


yr the 
saith 


ap of 
wers; 
bish.” 
1 net, 
0 of a 


; book 
but it 
r city 
in the 


ITS CERTAINTY. 71 


nr a a er 


that they fell to fighting, and beat each other over the 
head so badly that when the sun did come up neither of 
them could see it. So there are persons who go on dis- 
puting about heaven until they dispute themselves out of 
it, and more who dispute over hell until they dispute 
themselves into it. 

The Hebrews in their writings tell us of three distinct 
heavens. The air, the wind—the place where the birds 
fly,—is one heaven; the firmament where the stars are is 
another, and above that is the heaven of heavens, where 
God’s throne is, and the mansions of the Lord are—those 
mansions of light and peace which are the abode of the 
blessed, the homes of the Redeemer and the redeemed. 

This is the heaven where Christ is. This is the place 
we read of in Deuteronomy, where it says: Behold the 
heaven and the heaven of heavens is the Lord’s thy God, 
the earth also with all that therein is. 

In Corinthians, Paul speaking for himself, says : 


“T knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago (whether in 
the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body I cannot tell, 
God knoweth), so such an one was caught up to the third heaven.” 


Some people have wondered what that third heaven 
means. ‘That is where God dwells, and where the storms 
do not come. There sits the incorruptible judge. Paul, 
when he was caught up there heard things that it was 
not lawful for him to utter, and he saw things that he 
could not speak of down here. The higher up we get in 
spiritual matters, the nearer we seem to heaven. There 


HEAVEN. 


our wishes are fulfilled at last. We may cry out like 
the psalmist: One thing have I desired of the Lord, 
that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of 
the Lord all the days of my life to behold the beauty of 
the Lord! 

We are assured by Christ himself that our names will 
be written in heaven if we are only his. In the 10th 
chapter of Luke and the 20th verse it reads: Notwith- 
standing in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject 
unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are 
written in heaven. A little while before these words 
were uttered by the Saviour, calling together seventy of 
his disciples, he sent them forth in couples to preach the 
gospel to all men. There are people now-a-days who have 
no faith in revivals. Yet the greatest revival the world 
ever saw was during the three or four years that John 
the Baptist and Jesus were preaching, followed by the 
preaching of the apostles and disciples after Christ left 
the earth. For years the country was stirred from one 
end to the other. There were probably men then who 
stood out against the revival. They called it spasmodic, 
and refused to believe in it. It was a nine days’ wonder 
and would pass away in a little while, and there would be 
nothing left of it. No doubt men talked in those days 
just as they talk now. All the way down from Christ 
and his apostles there have been men who have opposed 
the work of God, and some of them professing to be dis- 
ciples of the Lord Jesus Christ, all because it has not been 
done in their way. When the spirit of God comes, he 


‘ 


ITS CERTAINTY. 73 


works in his own way. We must learn the lesson that 
we are not to mark out any channels for him to work in, 
for he will work in his own way when he comes, 

These disciples came back after their work. The spirit 
had worked with them, and the devils were subject to 
them, and they had power over disease, and they had 
power over the enemy, and they were filled with success. 
They were probably having a sort of jubilee meeting, and 
Christ comes in and says: rejoice not the spirits are sub- 
ject unto you; but rather rejoice because your names are 
written in heaven. This brings us face to face with the 
doctrine of assurance. I find a great many people up and 
down Christendom who do not accept this doctrine. They 
believe it is impossible for us to know in this life whether 
we are saved or not. If this be true, how are we going to 
get over what Christ has said as we find it here recorded ? 
If ny name is written in heaven, how can I rejoice unless 
I know it? These men were to rejoice that their names 
were already there, and whoever are children of God their 
names are there, sent on for registry before. 

A party of Americans a few years ago, on their way 
from London to Liverpool, decided that they would stop 
at the North-western Hotel, but when they arrived they 
found the place had beeu full for several days. Greatly 
disappointed, they took up their baggage and were about 
starting off, when they noticed a lady of the party prepar- 
ing to remain. 

“ Are you not going, too?” they asked. 

“Oh no,” she said, “I have good rooms all ready,” 


Ste eae Veer at Sn Nc 


74 HEAVEN. 


i i ns cn en ES ED 


“Why, how does that happen ?” 

“Qh,” she said, “I just telegraphed on ahead, a few days 
ago,” 

Now that is what the children of God are doing ; they 
are sending their names on ahead ; they are securing places 
in the mansions of Christ in time. If we are truly chil- 
dren of God our names have gone on before, and there will 
be places awaiting us at the end of our journey. You 
know we are only travellers down here. We are away 
from home. When the war was going on, the soldiers on 
the battle-field, the Southern soldiers and the Northern 
soldiers, wanted nothing better to live in than tents. 
They longed for the war to close that they might go home. 
They cared nothing to have palaces and mansions on the 
battle-field. Well, there is a terrible battle going on now, 
and by and by when the war is over God will call us home. 
The tents and altars are good enough for us while journey- 
ing through this world. It is only a night, and then the 
eternal day will dawn. 


THE BOOK OF LIFE, 


Two ladies met on a train not long ago, one of them go- 
ing to Cairo and the other to New Orleans. Before they 
reached Cairo they had formed a strong attachment for 
each other, and the Cairo lady said to the lady who was 
going to New Orleans: | 

“T wish you would stay for a few days in Cairo; I 
would like to entertain you,” 


ITS CERTAINTY. 
“ Well,” said the other, “I would like to very much, but 
I have packed up all my things and sent them ahead, and 
I haven’t anything only just what I have on, but they 
are good enough to travel in.” 

I learned a lesson there. I said, Almost anything is 
good enough to travel in, and it is a great deal better to 
have our joys and comforts ready for us in heaven, wait- 
ing until we get there, than to wear them out in our toil- 
some, trying, earthly journey. 

Heaven is the place of victory and triumph. This is 
the battle-field; there is the triumphal procession. This 
is the land of the sword and the spear ; that is the land 
uf the wreath and the crowr. Oh, what a thrill of joy 
will shoot through the hearts of all the blessed when their 
conquests will be made complete in heaven; when death 
itself, the last of foes, shall be slain, and Satan dragged as 
captive at the chariot wheels of Christ! Men may cavil 
and laugh and sneer as much as they will at this doctrine 
of assurance, but it is clearly taught in Scripture, never- 
theless. 

A great many laugh at the idea of there being books in 
heaven ; but in the 12th chapter of the prophecy of Dan- 
iel and the Ist verse, we find: 


‘¢ And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which 
standeth for the children of thy people ; and there shall be a time 
of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation, even to that 
same time ; and at that time the people shall be delivered, every 
one that shall be found written in the book,” 


There is a terrible time coming upon this earth; darkey 


76 HEAVEN. 


days than we have ever seen, and they whose names are 
written in the Book of Life shall be deliverec Then again, 
in the 6th chapter of Philippians and the 3rd verse, we 
read : 

‘* And I entreat thee, also, true yoke-fellow, help those women 


which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with 
other my fellow-labourers, whose names are in the Book of Life.” 


Paul, writing to the Christians at Philippi, where he 
had so much opposition, and where he was cast into jail 
says in effect: Just take my regards to the good brethren 
who worked with me and whose names are written in the 
Book of Life. This shows that they taught the doctrine 
of assurance in the very earliest days of Christianity. 
Why should we not teach it and believe it now ? 

T am told by Eastern travellers—men who have been 
in China—that they have in their courts two great books ; 
and when a man is tried and found innocent, they write his 
name down in the book of life. If he is found guilty, 
they write his name down in the book of death; and I 
believe firmly that every man or woman has his or her 
name in the Book of Death or the Book of Life. Your 
name can’t be in both at the same time. You can't be in : 
death and in life at the same time, and it is your own q 
privilege to know which it is. q 
In the 18th chapter of Revelation and the 8th verse, we 
read : 


“* And all that dwell upon the earth shali worship him [that is, 
the anti-Christ], whose names are not written in the Book of Life 
of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.” 


a 


nr eee een 


ITS CERTAINTY. 77 
And again, in the 20th chapter of Revelations and the 
12th verse: 
‘* And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God ; and 
the book was opened ; and another book was opened, which is the 


Book of Life ; and the dead are judged out of those things whi.h 
were written in the books, according to their works.” 


Again, in Revelations, 21st chapter and 27th verse : 


‘* And thers shall in no wise enter into it anything that defileth, 
neither whatsoever worketh abo nination, or maketh a lie ; but they 
which are written in the Lamb’s Book of Life.” 


There can be no true peace, there can be no true hope. 
there can be no true comfort, where there is uncertainty, 
I am not fit for God’s service ; I cannot go out and work 
for God if I am in doubt about my own salvation, 


NO ROOM FOR DOUBT. 


A mother has a sick child. The child is just hanging 
between lifeand death. There is no rest for that mother. 
You have some one on a train that is wrecked, and the 
news comes that twenty have been killed and wounded, 
and their names are not given; there is a terrible uncer- 
tainty, and there is no rest or peace until you know the 
facts. The reason why there are so many in the churches 
who will not go out and help others, is that they are not 
sure they are saved themselves. If I thought I was dying 
myself, I would be in a poor condition to save anyone else, 
Before I can pull anyone else out, I must have a firm foot- 
ing on shore myself. We can have this complete assur- 


78 HEAVEN. 


ance if we will. It does not do to feel we are all right, but 
we must know it. We must read our titles clear to man- 
sions in the skies; the apostle John says: Beloved, now 
are we the sons of God. He does not say we are going to 
be. 

People, when asked if they are Christians, give some of 
the strangest answers you ever heard. Some will say, if 
you ask them: “Well—well—well, I, I hope I am.” Sup- 
pose a man should ask me if Iam an American. Would 
I say “ Well I—well I—I hope iam?” I know that I 
was born in this country, and I know I was born of the 
Spirit of God more than twenty years ago. All the in- 
fidels in the world could not convince me that I have not 
a different spirit than I had before I became a Christian. 
That that is born of the flesh is flesh, and that that is 
born of the spirit is spirit, and a man can soon tell whe- 
ther he is born of the spirit by the change in his life. The 
spirit of Christ is a spirit of love, peace, joy, humility and 
meekness, and we can soon find out whether we have 
been born of that spirit or not; we are not to be left in 
uncertainty. Job lived back there in the dark ages, but 
he knew. The dark billows came rolling and surging up 
against him, but in the midst of the storm you can hear 
his voice saying: “I know that my Redeemer liveth.” 
He did not guess. 

A man may have his name written in the highest chron- 
icles down here, but the record may be lost; he may have 
it carved in marble and still it may perish; some char- 
itable institution may bear his name, and yet he may he 


ITS CERTAINTY. 79 


Ns ee ee 


soon forgotten ; but his name will never be erased from 
the scrolls that are kept above. Seeking to perpetuate 
one’s name on earth is like writing on the sand by the 
sea-shore ; to be perpetual it must be written on the eter- 
nal shores. No one thinks Pontius Pilate is a saint be- 
cause he is mentioned in the creed. It has been said that 
the way to see our names as they stand written in the 
Book of Life, is by reading the work of sanctification in 
our own hearts. It needs no miraculous voice from hea- 
ven, no extraordinary signs, no unusual fecling. We 
need only find our hearts desiring Christ and hating sin ; 
our minds obedient to the divine commands. 

We may be sure that belonging to some church is not 
going to save us, although every saved man ought to be 
connected with one. When Daniel died in Babylon, no 
ene had to hunt up any old church record to find out if 
he was all right. When ful was beheaded by Nero, no 
one had to look over te i sgister. 

They lived so ibxt the world knew what they were. 
Paul says: Le.n oer aud that he is able to keep what I 
have committed unto him against that day. There is as- 
surance. “Who shall separate us from the love of Christ ?’ 
he says, “neither life, nor death, nor angels, nor princi 


palities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to 
come.” He just challenges them all, but they could not 
separate him from the love that was in Christ. 

It is dishonouring to God to go on hoping and only hope 
ing that we “are going” te be saved. Yet there are 
some who ought not to have assurance. It would be an 


a s ee > 
eS aaa a anes Sa 5 or 


ees 
ET : : as a 
soe SG NRE TR EE SNC RE ho 


80 HEAVEN. 


ae i a a np 


ee ey 


unfortunate thing for any unconverted church member te 
have assurance. There are some who possess great assur- 
ance who ought not to have it—those whose lives do not 
correspond. This class is represented by the man at the 
wedding feast who did not have on a wedding garment. 


FALSE PROFESSIONS. 


They are like some lilies—fair to see but foul to smell 
They are dry shells with no kernei inside. The crusaders 
of old use to wear a painted cross upon their shoulders. 
So there are a good many now-a-days who take up cresses 
that sit. just as lightly—mere things of ornament—pass- 
ports to respectability, cheap make-believes, for a strug- 
gle that has never been made, and a crown that has never 
been striven for. 

You may very often see dead fish floating with the 
stream but you never saw a dead fish swimming against 
it. Well, that is your false believer ; that is the hypocrite. 
Profession is just floating down the stream, but confession 
is swimming against it, no matter how strong the tide. 
The sanctified man and the unsanctified une look at hea- 
ven very differently. The unsanctified man simply chooses 
heaven in preference to hell. He thinks that if he must 
go to either one he would rather try heaven. It is like a 
man with a farm who has a place offered him in another 
country, where there is saidto be a gold mine. He hates 
to give up all he has and take any risk. But if he is go- 
ing to be banished, and must leave and has his choice of 


smell 

uders 

Iders, 
rosses 
-pass- 
strug 
never 


h the 
ainst 
crite. 
ssion 
tide. 
hea- 
08es 
must 
ke a 
bther 
ates 
5 go- 
2 of 


= 5 Ceca eee eens eae 


| 
| 
N 
' 


ITS CERTAINTY. 81 


living in a wilderness or digging in a coal-pit, or else take 
the gold mine, then there is no hesitation. The unregene- 
rate man likes heaven better than hell, but he likes this 
world the best of all. When death stares him in the face 
thenhe thinks he would like to get to heaven. The truebe- 
liever prizes heaven above every thing else, and is always 
willing to give up the wor'd. Everybody wants to enjoy 
heaven after they die, but they don’t want to be heavenly 
minded while they live. To the Christian, it is a sure 
promise, and there is no room for doubt. 

The heir to some great estate, while a child, thinks more 
of a dollar in his pocket than all his inheritance. So 
even some professing Christians sometimes are more ela- 
ted by a passing pleasure than they are by their title to 
eternal glory. Ina little while we will be there. How 
glorious is the thought? Everything is prepared. That 
is what Christ went up to heaven for, In a little while 
we will be gone. We are— 

** Only waiting till the shadows 

Are a little longer grown, 

Only waiting till the glimmer 
Of the day’s last beam is flown : 

Then from out the gathered darkness, 
Holy, deathless stars shall rise, 

By whose light our souls shall gladly 
Tread their pathway to the skies.” 


eres er eon a 


ee 


APSA as 


ERUSALEM, my Home, 
Where shines the royal Throne, 
Each king casts down his golden crown 
Before the Lamb thereon. 
Thence flows the crystal River, 
And flowing on forever 
With leaves and fruits on either hand, 
The Tree of Life shall stand. 
In blood-washed robes, all white and fair, 
The Lamb shall lead his chosen there, 
While clouds of incense fill the air— 
Jerusalem, my Home. 


Jerusalem, my Home, 
Where saints in glory reign, 
Thy haven safe, O when shall [ 
Poor storm-tossed pilgrim, gain ? 
At distance dark and dreary, 
With sin and sorrow weary, 
For thee I toil, for thee I pray, 
For thee I long alway. 
And lo ! mine eyes shall see thee, too ; 
O, rend in twain, thou veil of blue, 
And let the Golden City through— 
Jerusalem, my Home ! 


—HOopkIns, 


xe eae 


* 


aR eit gi ies ing 


RR a he es cai ci 


orehs 


7 Uae 


INS, 


sceinttea =, | 
gl Sed Rae 


ihe RES: 


Paes 


sce y ite pata 


aio ieee ssh haar oi 


* 


ieee E SRS te pea eS PRES, 


St Uae eS 


Sts Hiches. 


No man thinks himself rich until he has all he wants 
Very few people are satisfied with earthly riches. If they 
want any thing at all that they cannot get, that is a kind 
of poverty. Sometimes the richer the man the greater the 
poverty. Somebody has said that getting riches brings 
eare; keeping them brings trouble; abusing them brings 
guilt ; and losing them brings sorrow. 

It’s a great mistake to make so much of riches as we do. 
But there are some riches that we cannot praise too much. 
They mever pass away. They are the treasures laid up in 
heaven for those who truly belong to God. No matter 
how riel or elevated we may be here, there is always 
something that we want. The greatest chance the rich 
have over the poor, is the one they enjoy the least—that 
of making themselves happy. Worldly riches never make 
any one truly happy. We all know, too, that they often 
take wings and fly away. Midas got gold, so that what- 
ever he touched turned into it, but he was not much the 
better for it with his long ears. There is a great deal of 
truth in some of these old fables. Money, like time, ought 
not to be wasted, but i pity that man who has more of 
either than he knows how to use, There is no truer say- 


86 HEAVEN. 


eS SE, | LT © crt 


ing than that man by doing good with his money, stamps, 
as it were, the image of God upon it, and makes it pass 
current for the merchandise of heaven; but all the wealth 
of the universe would not buy a man’s way there. Sal- 
vation must be taken as a gift for the asking. There is 
no man so poor that he may not be a heavenly millionaire. 


A BAD LIFE-PRESERVER. 


How many are worshipping gold to-day! Where war 
has slain its thousands, gain has slain its millions. Its 
history is the history of slavery and oppression in all ages. 
At this moment what an empire it has. The mine with 
its drudgery, the manufactory with its misery, the planta- 
tion with its toil, and the market and exchange with their 
haggard and care-worn faces—these are but specimens of 
its menial servants. Titles and honours are its rewards, 
and thrones are at its disposal. Among its counsellors are 
kings, and many of the great and mighty of the earth are 
its subjects. This spirit of gain tries even to turn the 

-globe itself into gold. 

It is related that Tarpeia, the daughter of the governor 
of the fortress situated on the Capitoline Hill in Rome, 
was captivated with the golden bracelets of the Sabine 
soldiers, and agreed to let them into the fortress if they 
would give her what they wore upon their left arms. The 
contract was made; the Sabines kept their promise. Ta- 
tius, their commander, was the first to deliver his brace- 
lets and shield. ‘The coveted treasures were thrown upon 


iM al tee Gv eet oe 


ITS RICHES. 87 


the traitress by each of the soldiers, till she sank beneath 
their weight and expired. 

Thus does the weicht of gold carry many a man down. 

When the Steamship Central America went down, sev- 
eral hundred miners were on board, returning to their 
early homes and friends. They had made their fortunes, 
and expected much harniness in enjoying them. In the 
first of the horror gold lost its attraction to them. Mhe 
miners took off their treasure-belts and threw them aside. 
Carpet bays full of shining gold-dust were emptied on the 
floor of the cabin. One of them poured out one hundred 
thousand dollars worth in the cabin, and bade any one 
take it who would. Greed was over-mastered, and the 
gold found no takers. Dear friends ! it is well enough to 
have gold, but sometimes it is a bad life-preserver. Some- 
times it is a mighty weight that crushes us down to hell 

The Rev. John Newton one day called to visit a family 
that had suffered the loss of all they possessed by fire 
He found the pious mistress and saluted her with : 

“T give you joy, madam.” 

Surprised, and ready to be offended, she exclaimed : 

“What! joy that all my property is consumed ?” 

“Oh no,” he answered, “ but joy that you have so much 
property that fire cannot touch.” 

This allusion to her real treasures checked her grief 
and brought reconciliation. As it says in the 10th chapter 
of Proverbs: In the house of the righteous is much trea- 
sure ; but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble. Ihave 
never seen a dying saint who was rich in heavenly trea- 


88 HEAVEN. 


ere 


sures who had any regret; I have never heard them say 
they had lived too much for God and heaven. 


GETTING WATER-LOGGED, 


A friend of mine says that he was at the River Mersey, 
in Liverpool, a few years ago, and a vessel had to be 
tow@g with a great deal of care into the harbour ; it was 
clear down to the water's edge, and he wondered why it j 
didn’t sink. Pretty soon there came another vessel, with- | 
out any help at all; it didn’t need any tug to tow it in, I 
but it sailed right up the Mersey past the other vessels; q 
and he made enquiry, and he found the vessel that had to 
be towed in was what they call water-logged—that it was 
loaded with lumber and material of that kind; and hav- 
ing sprung a leak had partially sunk, and it was very hard 
work to get into the harbour. Now, I believe there are 
a great many professsed Christians, a great many perhaps 

that are really Christians, who get water-logged. They 
have too many earthly treasures, and it takes nearly the 
whole church—the whole spiritual power of the church to 
look after these worldly Christians, to keep them from go- 
ing back entirely into the world. Why, if the whole 
church, were, as John Wesley said, “ hard at it, and always 
at it,” what a power there would be, and how soon we 
would reach the world and the masses; but we are not 
reaching the world because the church itself has become :. 
conformed to the world and worldly-minded, and, because 
80 many are wondering why they don’t grow in grace 


ITS RICHES. S. 


while they have more of the earth in their thoughts than 
God. 


The ministers would not have to urge people to live 
for heaven if their treasures were up there; they could 
not help it; their hearts would be there, and if their 
hearts were there their minds would be up there, and their 
life would centre towards heaven. They could not help 
living for heaven if their treasures were there. 

A little girl one day said to her mother, “ Mamma, my 
Sunday school teacher tells me that this world is only a 
place in which God lets us live a while, that we may pre- 
pare for a better world. But, mother, I do not see any- 
body preparing. I see you preparing to go into the 
country, and Aunt Eliza is preparing to come here; but I 
do not see any one preparing to go there; why don’t they 
try and get ready ?” 

A certain gentleman in the South before the war, had a 
pious slave, and when the master died they told him he 
had gone to heaven. 

The old slave shook his head, “ I’s fraid massa no gone 
there,” he said. 

“But why ? Ben,” he was asked. 

“Cos, when massa go North, or go a journey to the 
Springs, he talk about it a long time, and get ready. I 
never hear him talk about going to heaven; never see hiin 
get ready to go there !” 

So there are a good many who don’t get ready. Christ 
teaches in ths Sermon on the Mount to 


dn 


90 HEAVEN. 


— —— 


‘“¢ Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth 
and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal ; 
But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth 
nor ruei doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor 
steal, for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.” 


TREASURES OF THE HEART, 


It does not take a great while to tell where a man’s 
treasure is. In fifteen minutes’ conversation with most 
men you can tell whether their treasures are on earth or 
in heaven. Talk toa statesman about the country, and 
you will see his eye light up; you will find he has his 
heart there. Talk to some of these business men, and tell 
them where they can make a thousand dollars, and see 
their interest ; their hearts are there. You talk to these 
fashionable people who are living just for fashion, of its 
affairs, and you see their eyes kindle; they are interested 
at once; their hearts are there. Talk toa politician about 
politics, and you will see how suddenly he becomes inter- 
ested. But tall to a child of God, who is-laying up trea- 
sures in heaven, about heaven, about his future home, and 
see what enthusiasm. “ Where your treasure is, there 
will your heart be also.” 

Now, it is just as much a command for a man to lay up 
his treasures in heaven as it is that he should not steal. ¥ 
Some people think all the commandments are in those ten | 
| . that were given back on Sinai, but when Jesus Christ was % 
i , here, he gave us a good many other commandments. 4 
. ok There is another commandment in this Sermon on the 


SNA REN AS ie SON Me abl sh Ue 5, scaaiciaties — - 


i 
" 
4 


1an’s 
most 
th or 
-and 
is his 
d tell 
d see 
these 
pf its 
ested 
3 bout 
nter- 
trea- 
e,and 
there 


ay up 
steal. 
se ten 
Bt was 
ments. 
ay the 


ih ete Skint ne ATI A 


ITS RICHES. 91 


Mount, that we ought to “ seek first the kingdom of God 
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be 
added ;” and here is a command that we are to lay up our 
treasures in heaven and not on earth. The reason there 
are so many broken hearts in this land, the reason there 
are so many disappointed people, is because they have 
been laying up their treasures down here. 

The worthlessness of gold, for which so many are striv- 
ing, is illustrated by a story that Dr. Arnot used to tell. 

A ship bearing a company of emigrants, has been driven 
from her course and wrecked on a desert island, far from 
the reach of man. There is no way of escape; but they 
have a good stock of food. The ocean surrounds them, 
but they have plenty of seeds, and a fine soil, and a genial 
sun, so that there is no danger. Before the plans are laid 
an exploring party discovers a gold mine. There the 
whole party go to dig. They labour day after day and 
month after month. They get large heaps of gold. But 
spring is past, and not a field has been cleared, nota grain 
of seed putinto the ground. The summer comes and their 
wealth increases; but their stock of food growssmall. In 
the fall they find that their heaps of gold are worthless. 
Famine stares them in the face. They rush to the woods, 
they fell trees, dig up the roots, till the ground, sow the 
seed. It is too late! Winter has come and their seeds 
rots in the ground. They die of want in the midst of 
their treasures, 

This earth is the little isle; eternity the ocean round 
it; on this shore we have been cast. There isa living seed, 


<A 
%9Fy. Vy @ \’ 4 
JS 9 <q* ee 
=s a3 at 2 =i it 
> _ EEE a 
<8 a Eatin 3 xi] S, g = 
iy G6 = nO 
3° oll =I 3 PE 
32 nee o" 6 
EMS 
45>, i 
! >, Oe wae am. 
s? Rs \ ‘G &e oe VS 


92 DEAVEN. 


a ta 


but the mines of gold attract us. We spend spring 4 
and summer there; winter overtakes us in our toil; we , 
are without the Bread of Life, and we are lost. Let us 

then who are Christians, value all the more the home 
which holds the treasures that no one can take away. 

Dr. Muhlenberg, a Lutheran clergyman, has written 
beautifully. 


** Who would live alway, away from his God, 
Away from yon heaven, that blissful abode ; 


Where the rivers of pleasure flow o’er the bright plains, e 
And the saints of all ages in harmony meet, 
Their Saviour, and brethren transported, to greet ; 
While the anthems of rapture unceasingly roll, 
And the smile of the Lord is the feast of the soul ? 
That heavenly music, what is it I hear ? 
The nots of the harpers ring sweet on my ear, 
To see soft unfolding those portals of gold— 
y The king, all arrayed in his beauty, behold ! ‘ 
| Oh give me, oh give me, the wings of a dove, 
\ Let me hasten my flight to those mansions above ! 
Ay, tis now that my soul on swift pinions wou'd soar, 
And in ecstacy bid earth adieu evermore.’ 


A BLACK-BOARD LESSON, 


When I was in San Francisco a few years ago, I went i 
into a Sabbath school the first Sunday I was there. It . 
was a rainy day, and there were so few that the superin- 

| tendent thought of dismissing them, but instead, after- 
wards invited me to speak to the whole school as one class. 
The lessoa was that passage from the Sermon on the 

Mount: Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, 


eetniy ie 


spring 
il; we 
Let us 
> home 
. away. 
written 


ains, 


ar, 


», L went 
ere. It 
superin- 
nd, after- 
pne class. 

on the 


on earth, 


ITS RICHES. 93 


— ee ee — a 


where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves 
break through and steal. I invited a young man to the 
black-board, and we proceeded to compare a few things 
that some people have on earth, and a few things that 
other people have in heaven. 

“ Now,” said I, “name some earthly treasure.” 

They ail shouted “ gold.” 

“ Well, that is so,” I said, “ I suppose that is your great- 
est treasure out here in California, Now let us go on; 
what is another ?” 

A second boy shouted, “ lands.” 

“ Weli,” I said, “ we will put down lands.” 

“ What else do the people out here in California think 
a good deal of and have their hearts set on ?” 

They said “ houses.” 

“ Put that down; what else?” 

“ Pleasure.” 

“ Put that down.” 

“ Honour—fame.” 

“Put them down.” 

“ Business.” 

“ Yes,” I said: “a great many people have got their 
hearts buried in their business—put that down.” And, 
as if a littie afraid, one of them said “ dress,” and the 
whole school smiled. 

“Put that down,’ I said. “Why, I believe there are 
some people in the world who think more of dress than of 
any other thing. They just live for dress, I heard not 
long ago, from very good authority, of a young lady who 


94 HEAVEN. 


—— 


was dying of consumption, and she had just been living 
in the world and for the world, and it seemed as if the 
world had taken full possession of her, and she thought 
she would die Thursday night, and Thursday she wanted 
them to crimp her hair, so that she would look beautiful 
in her coffin. But she didn’t die Thursday night. She 
lingered through Friday, and Friday she didn’t want them 
to take her hair down, but to keep it up until she passed 
away. And the friends said she looked very beautiful in 
the coffin! Just what people wear—the idea of people 
having their hearts set upon things of that Find ! | 

“And what else, now?” Well, they were a little 
ashamed to say it, but one said, 

“Rum.” 

“Well,” I said, “put it down.” There is many a man 
thinks more of the rum-bottle than he does of the King- 
dom of God. He will give up his wife, he will give up his 
home and mother, and character and reputation forever 
for the rum-bottle. Many a man by his life is crying out, 

“Give me rum, and I will give you heaven, and all its 
glories. I will sell my wife and children. I will make 
them beggars and paupers. I will degrade and disgrace 
them for the rum-bottle. That is my treasure.” 

“*Qh, thou rum bottle! I worship thee,’ is the cry of 
many—they turn their backs on heaven with all its glories 
for rum. Some of them thought, when that little boy 
said ‘rum,’ tnat he made a mistake, that it was nota trea- 
sure, but itis a treasure to thousands.” Another one said, 
“ Fast horses,” 


living 

if the 

ought 

vanted 
autiful 
» she 
t them 
passed 
tiful in 
people 


a little 


a man 

e King- 

re up his 
h forever 
ing out, 

id all its 
ill make 

disgrace 


he cry of 
ts glories 
ittle boy 
rot a trea- 

one said, 


or 


—- 


ITS RICHES. 9 


Said I, “Put it down. There is many a man that 
thinks a good deal of fast horses, and he wants to go out 
and take a fast horse and drive Sunday, and spend his 
Sabbath in this way.” And after we finished, aad thought 
of every thing we could, I said, “Suppose we just take 
down some of these heavenly treasures.” 

“ And,” said I, “ What is there now that the Lord wants 
us to set our hearts and affections on?” and they all 
said, 

“ Jesus.” 

“That is good ; we will put him down first at the head 
of the list. Now what else?” And they said: 

“ Angeis,” 

“Put them down. We will have their society when 
we get to heaven. That is a treasure up there, really. 
What else ?” 

“Well, the friends that have died in Christ, that have 
fallen asleep in Christ.” 

“Putthem down. Death has taken them from us now, 
but we will be with them by and by. What else?” 

“ Crowns.” 

“Yes, we are going to have a crown, a crown of glory, 
a crown of righteousness, a crown that fadeth not away. 
What else ?” 

“The tree of life.” 

“ Yes,” I said, “the tree of life. We shall have a right 
to it. We can go to that tree and pluck its fruit, eat and 
live forever, What else?” 

“The river of life.” 


96 HEAVEN. 


“ Yes, we shall walk upon the banks of that clean river.” 

“ Harps,” another one said. 

Another one said “ psalms.” 

“Yes,” I said, “put them down. Those are treasures 
that we will have there,” 

“Purity.” 

“ Yes, there will be none but the pure there. White 
robes, without spot or wrinkle on our garments. A great 
many find many flaws in our characters down here, but 
by and by Christ will present us before the Father with- 
out spot and without wrinkle, and we shall stand there 
complete in him,” I said. “Can you think of anything 
else?” And one of them said: 

“ A new song.” 

“ Yes, we will have a new song. It is the song of Moses 
and the Lamb. I don’t know just who wrote it or how, 
but it will be a glorious song. I suppose the singing we 
have here on earth will be nothing compared with the 
songs of that upper world. Do you know the principal 
thing we are told we are going to do in heaven is singing, 
and that is why men ought to sing down here. We ought 
to begin to sing here so that it won't come strange when 
we get to heaven. I pity the professed Christian who 
has not a song in his heart-—who never feels like singing. 
It seems to me if we are truly children of God, we will 
want to sing about it. And so, when we get there, we 
can’t help shouting out the loud hallelujahs of heaven.” 

Then I said, “Is there anything else?” Well, they 
went on. I can’t give you all, because we had to have 


— 


n river.” 


treasures 


White 

A great 
here, but 
her with- 
and there 
anything 


r of Moses 
t or how, 
nging we 
with the 
principal 
s singing, 
e ought 
ge when 
tian who 
e singing. 
, we will 
here, we 
paven.” 

Tell, they 
to have 


Shiite aicab cde Selina idieesiit a 


ITS RICHES. 97 


two columns put down of the heavenly treasures, and we 
stood there a little while and drew the contrast between 
the earthly and the heavenly treasures. We looked at 
them a little while, and when we came to put them all 
down right along beside Christ, the earthly treasures look- 
ed pretty small, after all. What would all this world full 
of gold be compared with Jesus Christ? You that have 
Christ, would you like to part with him for gold? Would 
you like to give him up for all the honour the earth can 
bestow on you for a few months 0. a few years? Think 
of Christ! Think of the treasures of heaven. Andthen 
think of these earthly treasures that we have our hearis 
set upon, and that so many of us are living for. 

God blessed that lesson upon the blackboard in a mar- 
vellous way, for the man who had been writing down the 
treasures on the board happened to be an unconverted 
Sunday school teacher, and he had gone out there to Cali- 
fornia to make money, and his heart was set upon gold, 
and he was living for that instead of God. 

That was the idol of his heart, and do you know God 
convicted him at that blackboard, and the first convert 
that God gave me on the Pacific coast, was that man, and 
he was the last man that shook hands with me when I 
left San Francisco. He saw how empty the earthly trea 
sures were, and how grand and glorious the riches of 
heaven. Oh, if God would but open your eyes—and I 
think if you are honest and ask him to do it he will— 
he will show you how empty this world is in comparison 
with what he has in store, 

7 


Ny 


HEAVEN. 


EE 


98 


There are a great many people who are wondering why 
they don’t mount up on wings, as it were, and why they 
don’t make some progress in the divine life; why it is 
that they don’t grow more in grace. I think the reason 
is they have too many earthly treasures. We need not be 
rich to have our hearts set on riches. 

We need not go in the world more than other people to 
have our hearts there. I believe the Prodigal got into the 
far country long before his feet got there. When his heart 
got there he was there. And there is many a man who 
does not mingle so much in the world as others do, but hi 
heart is there, and he would be if he could, and God looks 
at the heart. 

Now, what we want to do is to obey the voice of the 
Master, and instead of laying up treasures on earth, lay 
them up in heaven. If we do that, bear in mind, we will 
never be disappointed. 

It is clear that idolators are not going to enter the king- 
dom of God. I may make an idol of my business; I may 
make an idol of the wife of my bosom ; I may make idols 
of my children. I don’t think you have got to go to hea- 
then countries to find men guilty of idolatry. I think 
that you will find a great many right here who have idols 
in their hearts. Let us pray that the spirit of God may 
banish those idols from our hearts, that we may not be 
guilty of idolatry ; that we may worship God in spirit and 
in truth. Anything that comes between me and God is 
an idol—anything, I don’t care. what it is; business is all 
right in its place, and there is no danger of my loving my 


‘ing why 
vhy they 
why it is 
ne reason 
ed not be 


people to 
t into the 
1 his heart 
man who 
Jo, but hi 

God looks 


ice of the 
earth, lay 
nd, we will 


r the king- 
bsg; I may 
nake idols 
go to hea- 
I think 
have idols 
God may 
nay not be 


spirit and 
and God is 
iness is all 
loving my 


ITS RICHES. 99 


family too much if i love God more; but God must have 
the first place; and if he don’t then the idol is set up. 


ALL ETERNITY FOR REST. 


Not the least of the riches cf heaven will be the posses- 
sion of these wants of the soul, which are so much sought 
after down here but are never found—such as infinite 
knowledge, perfect peace and satisfying love. Like a 
beautiful likeness that has been marred—daubed all over 
with streaks of black, and is then restored to its originat 
beauty, so the soul is restored to its full beauty of colour 
when it is washed in the blood of Jesus Christ. The sense- 
less image on the canvas cannot be compared however in 
any other way with the living, rational soul. 

Could we but see some of our friends who have gone 
on before ua we would very likely feel like falling down 
before them. John although he had seen so many strange 
things, when one of the bright angels stood before him to 
reveal some of the secrets of heaven, fell to worship him. 
He says in the last chapter of Revelation: 


‘And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I 
had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the 
angel which shewed me these things. Then saith he unto me, see 
thou do it not ; for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the 
prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book. Wor- 
ship God.” 


The diamond we know not only reflects the light, bug 
is a little sun shining by a light of its own. So the pol- 


100 HEAVEN. 


God and preserves its own personality as well. 

Among the wants which we have on earth is the thirst 
for knowledge. As much as sin has weak ened man’s men- 
tal faculties, it has not taken away any of his desire for 
knowledge. But with all his efforts, with all that he 
thinks he knows about astronomy, chemistry and geology, 
and the rest of the sciences, his knowledge of the secrets 
of nature is yet limited. 

There are ever so many things we don’t know. 

Thousands of astronomers have lived and died, and the 
ages of the world have rolled on, and it was but the other 
day, as it were, that they found out that the planet Mars 
had two mocas. Perhaps in ages to come some one will 
find out that they are not moons at all. This is what 
most of our human knowledge amounts to. 

There is not one of our college professors, and many of 
them have gone nearly everywhere the mind can reach, 
but is anxious to learn more and more, to find out new 
things, to make new discoveries. If we were as familiar 
with all the stars of the firmament as we are with our own 
earth, yet we would not be satisfied. 

Not until we are like God can we comprehend the in- 
finite. 

Even the imperfect glimpses of God that we get by 
faith, only intensify our desire for more. Yor now, as 
Paul says, in the 13th chapter of 1st Corinthians, we see 
through a glass darkly; but then face to face: now I 


ed 


ight of 


e thirst 
1's men- 
sire for 
that he 
reology, 
. secrets 


and the 
he other 
et Mars 
one will 
is what 


many of 
n reach, 
out new 
familiar 
our own 


1 the in- 


» get by 
now, as 
, we see 
t now I 


ITS RICHES. 101 


a en ee 


know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am 
known. The word Paul used, properly translated, is 
“mirror.” Now we see God, as it were, in a looking-glass 
—but then face to face. 

Suppose we knew nothing of the sun except what we 
saw of its light reflected from the moon? Weuld we not 
wonder about its immense distance, about its dazzling 
splendour, about its life-giving power? Now all that we 
see, the sun, the moon, the stars, the ocean, the earth, the 
flowers, and above all, man, are a grand mirror in which 
the perfection of God is imperfectly reflected. 

Another want that we have is rest. We get tired of 
toiling. Yet there is no real rest on earth. We find in 
the 4th chapter of Hebrews, beginning with the 9th verse : 

‘¢ There remaineth therefore arest to the people of God. For he 
that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from his own works, 


as God did from his. Let us labour therefore to enter into that 
rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief.” 


Now, while we all want rest, [think a great many peo- 
ple make a mistake when they think the church is a place 
of rast; and when they unite with the church they have 
a false idea about their position init. There are a great 
many that come in to rest. It says here: There remain- 
eth a rest for the people of God, but it don’t tell us that 
the church is a place of rest; we have all eternity to rest 
in. We are to rest by-and-by; but we are to work here, 
and when our work is finished, the Lord will call us home 
to enjoy that rest. There is no use in talking about rest 


a es oo a tee eS 


down here in the enemy’s country. We cannot rest in 
this world, where God’s Son has been crucified and cast 
out. I think that a great many people are going to lose 
their reward just because they have come into the church 
with the idea that they are to rest there, as if the church 
was working for the reward, instead of each one building © 
over against his own house, each one using all his influ- 
ence toward the building up of Christ’s kingdom. 

In the 14th chapter of Revelation and the 13th verse, 
it says : 

‘*And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, 
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, 


saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours ; and their 
works do follow them. 


Now, death may rob us of money. Death may rob us 
of position, Death may rob us of our friends; but there 
is one thing death can never do, and that is, rob us of the 
work that we do for God. That will live on forever. 
“ Their works will follow them?” Anything that we do 
outside of ourselves, and not with a mean and selfish mo- 
tive, that is going tolive. We have the privilege of setting 
in motion streams of activity that will flow on when we 
are dead and gone, | 

It is the privilege of every one to live more in the future 
than they do in the present, so that their lives will tell in 
fifty or a hundred years more than they do now. 

John Wesley’s influence is a thousand-fold greater to- 
day than it was when he was living. He still lives. He 


t rest in 
and cast 
x to lose 
> church 
» church 


building © 


is influ- 


th verse, 


e, Write, 
rth: Yea, 
and their 


setting 
hen we 


future 


ITS RICHES. 103 


ete = 


lives in the lives of thousand and hundreds of thousands 
of his followers, 

Martin Luther lives more to-day than he did centuries 
ago, when he was living in Germany. He only lived one 
life for a while. But now look at the hundreds and thou- 
sands and millions of lives that he is living. There are 
between fifty and sixty millions of people that profess to 
be followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, as taught by Mar- 
tin Luther, that bear his name. He is dead in the sight 
of the world, but his “ works do follow him.” He still 
lives, 

The voice of John the Baptist is ringing through the 
world to-day although nearly 1,900 years have passed 
away. Herod thought when he beheaded him that he was 
hushing his voice, but it is ringing all through the earth 
to-day. John the Baptist lives, because he lived for God ; 
but he has entered into the rest, an? “hi. works do fol- 
low him.” And if they can see what .: going on upon the 
earth, how much joy they must have up yonder to think 
that they have set these streams in motion, and that this 
work is going on—being carried on after them. 

If a man lives a mean, selfish life, he goes down in the | 
grave and his name and everything goes down in the 
grave with him. If he is ambitious to leave a record be- 
hind him, with a s fish motive, his name rots with 
his body. But if a man just gets outside of himself 
and begins to work for ‘iod, his name will live forever. 
Why, you may go to Scotland to-day, and you will find the 
influence of John Knox over every mountain in Scotland. 


104 HEAVEN. 


It seems as if you could almost feel the breath of that 
man's prayer in Scotland to-day. His influence still lives. 
‘Blessed are the dead who die in the Jord. They rest 
from their labours and their works do follow them.” 
Blessed rest in store; we will rest by and by; but we 
don’t want to talk about rest down here. . . . . . 

If I am to wipe a tear from the cheek of that fatherless 
boy, I must do it down here. It is not said in Scripture 
that we will have the privilege of doing that hereafter. If 
I am going to help some fallen man up that has been over- 
taken by sin, I must do it here. We are not taught any- 
where in Scripture that we are going to have the glorious 
privilege of working for God in the world to come.. We 
are not going to have the privilege of being co-workers 
with God m the future—but that is our privilege to-day. 
We may not have it to-morrow. It may be taken from 
us to-morrow; but we can enter into the vineyard and do 
something to-day before the sun goes down. We can do 
something now before we go to glory. 

Another want that we feel down here, is love. Hea 
ven is the only place where the conditions of love can be 
fulfilled, There it is essentially mutual. Everybody 
loves everybody else. In this world of wickedness and 
sin it seems impossible for people to be all on a perfect 
equality. When we meet people who are bright and 
beautiful and good, we have no difficulty in loving 
them. All the people of heaven will be like that. There 
will be no fear of misplaced confidences there. We wil 
never be deceived by those we love. When a suspicion 


— 


th of that 
still lives, 
They rest 
w them.” 
'; but we 
fatherless 
Scripture 
after. If 
een over- 
ght any- 
glorious 
ne.. We 
-workers 
> to-day. 
en from 
1 and do 
2 can do 


Hea 
> can be 
ry body 
288 and 
perfect 
ht and 
loving 

There 
e wil 
spicion 


ITS RICHES. 


105 


of doubt fastens "pon any one who loves, their happiness 


from that moment is atanend. There wil] be no suspi- 
cion there, 


** Beyond these chilling winds and gloomy skies, 
Beyond death’s cloudy portal, 


There is a land where beauty never dieg— 


Where love becomes immortal.” 


i 


1 


A eremarec mete 
eee A en 


Be 


ITS REWARDS, 


-OT here! not here! Not where the sparkling waters 
| Fade into mocking sands as we draw near ; 
Where in the wilderness, each footstep falters, 
I shall be satisfied ; but oh! not here ! 


There is a land where every pulse is thrilling 
With rapture earth’s sojourners may not know, 

Where heaven’s repose the weary heart is stilling, 
And peacefully life’s storm-tossed currents flow. 


Satisfied ? satisfied ? The spirit’s yearning 
For sweet companionship with kindred minds, 
The silent love that here meets no returning, 
The inspiration which no language finds— 


I shall be satisfied. The soul’s vague longing 
The aching void which nothin~ e-rthly fills? 

Oh ! what desires upon my soul are thronging 
As I look upward to the heavenly hills. 


Thither my weak and weary steps are tending, 
Saviour and Lord! with thy frail child abide, 

Guide me toward home, where all my wanderings ended, 
I then shall see thee, and ‘‘ be satisfied.” 


—ANONYMOUS. 


1g waters 
9 


ded, 


INYMOUS. 


dts Hetwards, 


Ir I understand things correctly, whenever you find a 
man or woman who is looking to be rewarded here for 
doing right, they are unqualified to work for God; be- 
cause if they are looking for the applause of men, looking 
for the reward in this life, it will just disqualify them 
for the service of God, because they are all the while 
compromising truth. 

They are afraid of hurting some one’s feelings. They 
are afraid that some one is going to say something against 
them, or there will be some articles written against them. 
Now, we must trample the world under our feet if we 
are going to get our reward hereafter. If we live for God 
we must suffer persecution. The kingdom of darkness 
and the kingdom of light are at war, and have been, and 
will be as long as Satan is permitted to reign in this 
world, and as long as the kingdom of darkness is per- 
mitted to exist, there will be a conflict, and if you want 
to be popular in heaven, and get a reward that shall last 
forever, you will have to be unpopular here. 

If you seek the applause of men, you can’t have the 
Lord say “ Well done” at the end of the journey. You 
can’t have both. Why? Because this world is at war 


110 HEAVEN, 


a 


with God. This idea that the world is getting better all 
the while is false. The old natural heart is just as much 
at enmity with God as it was when Cain slew Abel. Sin 
leaped into the world full grown in Cain, And from the 
time that Cain was born into the world to the present, 
man by nature has been at war with God, This wocld 
was not established in grace, and we have to fight “the 
world, the flesh and the devil;” and if we fight the world, 
the world won't like us; and if we fight the flesh, the 
flesh won’t like us. We have to mortify the flesh. We 
have to crucify the old man and put him under—and 
then we will get our reward, and it will be a glorious re- 
ward. 

It says in the 16th chapter of Luke and the 15th verse : 


‘‘ And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourseives 
before men ; but God knoweth your hearts : for that which is highly 
esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.” 


We must go right against the current of this wor'd 
If the world has nothing to say against us, we can be 
pretty sure that the Lord Jesus Christ has very little to 
say for us. There are those who do not like to go against 
the current of the world. They say they know this and 
that is wrong, but they do not say a word against it lest 
*t might make them unpopular. If we expect to get the 
reward we must fight the good fight of faith. For all 
such, as Paul has said, there is laid up a crown of right- 
eousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give 
us at that day. 


g better all 
ist as much 
Abel. Sin 
id from the 
he present, 
This world 
fight “the 
t the world, 
e flesh, the 
flesh. We 
under—and 
glorious re- 


15th verse : 
fy yourseives 
hich is highly 
od.” 


this wor'd 
we can be 


to get the 
For all 


shall give 


ITS REWARDS. 111 


a ee 


eat 0 ee a ms 


FEAR OF DEATH. 


How little we realize the meaning of the word eternity ! 
The whole time between the creation of the world and 
the ending of it would not make a day in eternity. In 
+’me, it is like the infinity in space, whose centre is every- 
where and whose boundary is nowhere. We read in this 
Kpistle to the Hebrews, in the 2nd chapter and 14th verse : 

“Forasmuch, then, as the children are partakers of flesh and 
blood, he, also himself, likewise took part of the same ; that through 
death he might destroy him that had the power of death-—that is 


the devil—and deliver them who through fear of death were all 
their lifetime subject to bondage.” 


There are a great many of God’s professed children who 
live in constant bondage, in the constant fear of death. I 
believe that it is dishonouring to God. I believe that it 
is not his will to have one of his children live in fear for 
one moment. If you know the truth as it is in Christ, 
there need be no fear; there need be no dread, because 
death will only hasten you on to glory; and your names 
are already there. 

And then the next thought is for those who are dear to 


us. I believe that it is not only our privilege to have our 


names written in heaven, but those of the children whom 
God has given us; and our hearts ought to go right out 
for them. The promise is not only to us, but to our chil- 
dren, Many a father’s and many a mother’s heart is bur- 
dened with anxiety for the salvation of their children. 
lf your own name is there, let your next aim in life be to 
get the children that God has given you, there also, 


OS'S 


12 HEAVEN. 
pee ee 

I have three children, and the greatest desire of my 
heart is that they may be saved ; that I may know that 
their names are written in the Book of Life. I may be 
taken from them early ; J may leave them in this chang- 
ing world without a father’s care; without a father to 
watch over them 3 and I have often said to myself I would 
rather have them come to my grave after T am dead and 
Sone, and drop a tear upon it, and Say, “my father, while 
he lived, cared for my soul,” than I would have them do 
anything else, 

A mother died in one of our Eastern Cities a few years 
4g0, and she had a large family of children, She died of 
consumption, and the children were brought in to her 
when she was dying. As the oldest one was brought in 
she gave it her las! message and her dying blessing ; and 


ing her end; that she was excited, and ag they went to 
take the little child from her, she said: « My husband, I 
charge you to bring all these children home with you.” 
And so God charges us ag parents to bring our children 
ome with us ) not only to have our Own names written 
in heaven, but those of our children also, 

An eminent Christian worker in New York told me a 
‘Story that affected me very much. 

A father had a son who had been sick some time, but 


desire of my 
ay know that 
fe. I may be 
in this chang- 
it a father to 
:yself I would 
am dead and 
father, while 
have them do 


s a few years 
She died of 
ht in to her 
s brought in 
blessing ; and 
and upon its 
ext one was 
ought in the 
pressed it to 
was hasten- 
hey went to 
husband, I 
with you.” 
ur children 
es written 


told mea 


| time, but 


ITS REWARDS. 


115 


ey Snene —_— 


he did not consider him dangerous ; until one day he came 
home to dinner and found his wife weeping, and he asked, 
“What is the trouble?” 

“There has been a great change in our boy since morn- 
ing,” the mother said, “and I am afrée d that he is dying ; 
I wish you to go in and sce him, and, if you think he is, 
I wish you to tell him so, for I cannot bear to tell him.” 

The father went in and sat down by the bed-side, and 
he placed his hand upon his forehead, and he could feel 
the cold, damp sweat of death, and knew its cold, icy hand 
was feeling for the chords of life, and that his boy was 
soon to be taken away, and he said to him: 

“ My son, do you know you are dying?” 

The little fellow looked up at him and said: 

“No; am [? Is this death that I feel stealing over me, 
father ?” 

“Yes, my son, you are dying.” 

“Will I live the day out ?” 

“No; you may die at any moment.” 

He looked up to his father, and he said: “ Well, I will 
be with Jesus to-night, won’t I, father ?” 

And the father answered: “Yes, my boy, you will 
spend to-night with the Saviour,” and the father turned 
away to conceal the tears, that the little boy might not 
see him weep; but he saw the tears, and he said: 

“ Father, don’t you weep for me; when I get to heaven 
I will go straight to Jesus, and tell him that ever since I 
can remember you have tried to lead me to him.” 


I would rather have my children say that of me after I 
8 


114 HEAVEN. 


-_—— ae a ee ee ee 


am dead and gone, or if they die before me I would rather 
they should take that message to the Master—that ever 
since they can remember I have tried to lead them to the 
Master—than to have a monument over me reaching to 
the skies. 

We ought not to look upon death as we do. Bishop 
Heber has written of a dead friend : 


** Thou art gone to the grave, but we will not deplore theo. 
Though sorrow and darkness encompass the tomb ; 
Thy Saviour has passed through its portals before thee. 
And the lamp of his love is thy guide through the gloom 3 
Thou art gone to the grave ; we no longer behold thee, 
Nor tread the rough paths of the world by thy side, 
But the wide arms of Mercy are spread to enfold thee, 
And sinners may hope, since the Sinless has died.” 


The roll is being called, and one after another summon- 
ed away, but if their names are there, if we know that 
they are there, saved, how sweet it is, after they have left 
us, to think that we shall meet them by and by; that we 
shall see them in the morn when the night has worn 
away. | 

During the late war a young man lay in a cot, and 
they heard him say, “ Here, here!” and some one went to 
his cot and wanted to know what he wanted, and he said, 
“Hark! hush! don’t you hear them?” “ Hear who?” 
was asked, “They are calling the rll of heaven,” he 
erid, and pretty soon he answered, “ Here !”—and he was 
gone. If our names are in the Book of Life, by and by 
when the name is called, we can say with Samuel, “Here. 


—_——— 


rould rather 
—that ever 
them to the 
reaching to 


lo, Bishop 


the gloom ; 
thee, 

side, 

thee, 

ed.” 


er summon- 
know that 
ey have left 
py ; that we 
has worn 


a cot, and 
pne went to 
nd he said, 
par who ?” 
eaven,” he 
nnd he was 
py and by 
el, “Here. 


ITS REWARDS. 115 


Lord Jesus,” and fly away to meet him. And if our child- 
ren are called away early, O, it is so sweet to think that 
they died in Christ; that the great Shepherd gathers 
them in his arms and carries them in his bosom, and that 
we shall meet them by and by. 


PAUL, THE CHRISTIAN HERO, 


The way to get to heaven is to be saved through faith 
in Jesus Christ. 

We get salvation as a gift, but we have to work it out, 
just as if we got a gold mine for a gift. 

I don’t get a crown by joining a church, or renting a pew. 

There was Paul. He got his crown. He had many a 
hard fight; he met Satan on a good many battle-fields, 
and he overcame him and wore the crown. It would take 
about ten thousand of the average Christians of this day 
to make one Paul. 

When I read the life of that Apostle, I blush for the 
Christianity of the nineteenth century. 
sickly thing. 

See what he went through. He, five times, was scour- 
ged. The old Roman custom of scourging was to take 
the prisoner and bind his wrists together and bend him 
over in a stooping posture, and, with sharp pieces of steel 
braided into a lash, the Roman soldier would bring the 
lash down upon the bare back of the prisoner and cut 
him through the skin, so that men sometimes died in the 
very act of being scourged. But Paul says, he was scour- 


Tt isa weak and 


116 


HEAVEN. 

ged five different times. Now if we should get one 
stripe upon our backs what a whining there would be ; 
there would be forty publishers after us before the sun 
went down, and they would want to publish our lives, 
that they might make capital out of it. But Paul says, 
Five times received I forty stripes, save one. That was 
nothing for him, Take your stand by his side. 

“Paul, you have been beaten by these Jews four times, 
and they are going to give you thirty-nine stripes more ; 
what are you going to do after you get out of the diffi- 
culty ; what are you going to do about it at all ?” 

“Do?” says he, “I will do this one thing; I will press 
towards the mark of the prize of my high calling ; Iam on 
my way to get my crown.” He was not going to lose his 
crown. “ Don’t think that a few stripes will turn me away, 
these light afflictions are nothing.” 

And so they put on thirty-nine more stripes. 

He had sprung into the race for Christ, as it were, and 
was leaping towards heaven. If you will allow me the 
expression, the devil got his match when he met Paul. He 
never switched off on to a side-track. He never sat down 
to write a letter to defend himself. All the strength that 
he had he gave to Christ. He never gave a particle to the 
world nor to himself to defend himself. This one thing 
I do, he said, 1 am not going to lose the crown. See that 
no man taketh your crown. 

Thrice was he beaten with rods. Take your stand 
again beside him. 

“ Now, Paul, they have beaten you twice, and they are 


ee 


1 get one 
would be ; 
re the sun 
1 our lives, 
Paul says, 
That was 
four times, 
‘ipes more ; 
ff the diffi- 
1 2” 
I will press 
g; [amon 
¢ to lose his 
nme away, 


were, and 
ow me the 
Paul. He 
r sat down 
ength that 
icle to the 
one thing 

See that 


bur stand 


they are 


ITS REWARDS. 117 


Te 


going to beat you again. What are you going to do? 
Are you going to continue preaching? If you are, let me 
give vou a little advice. Now, don’t be quite so radical ; 
be a little more conservative ; just use a little finer langu- 
age, and kind of cover up the cross with beautiful words 
and flowery sentences, and tell men that they are pretty 
good after all; that they are not so bad, and try and 
pacify the Jews; make friends with them, and get in with 
the worid, and the world -will think more of you. Don't 
be so earnest; don’t be so radical, Paul; now come, take 
our advice. What are you going to do?” 

“Do?” he says, “I do this one thing—I press towards 
the mark of the prize of my high calling.” So they put 
on the rods, and every blow lifts him nearer God. 

Take your stand again. They begin to stone him. 
That is the way they killed those who did not preach to 
suit them. 

It seems as if he was about to be paid back in his own 
coin, for when Stephen was stoned to death, Paul, then 
known as Saul, cheered on the crowd. 

“ Now Paul, this is growing serious; hadn’t you better 
take back some of the things you have said about Christ ? 
What are you going to do?” 

“Do?” he says, “if they take my life I will only get 
the crown the sooner.” 

He would not budge an inch. He had something that 
the world could not give ; he had soinething it could not 
take away; he had eternal life, and he had in store a 
crown of glory, 


HEAVEN. 


ee 


THESE LIGHT AFFLICTIONS, 


Three times was he shipwrecked ; a day and a night in 
the deep. Lcok at that mighty Apostle, a whole day and 
anight in the deep. There he was—shipwrecked, and for 
what? Wasittomake money? He was not after money. 
He was ju‘ going from city to city, and town to town, to 
preach the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ, and to lift up 
the cross wherever he had an opportunity. He went down 
to Corinth and preached eighteen months, and he didn’t 
have a lot of the leading ministers of Corinth to come on 
the platform and sit by his side when he preached. There 
was not a man that stood by him. When he got down to 
Corinth he didn’t have some of the leading business men 
to stand by him and advise him ; but the little tent-maker 
arrives in Corinth a perfect stranger, and the first thing he 
does is to find a place where he can makea tent; he does 
not go to a hotel; his means will not ailow it; but he 
goes where he can make his bread by the sweat of his 
brow. Think of that great Apostle making a tent, and 
then getting on the corner of a street and preaching, and 
perhaps once in a while he would get into a synagogue. 
but the Jews would turn him out; vhey didn’t want to 
hear him preach anything about Jesus the crucified. The 
Jews didn’t like that, and they turned him out, and after 
toiling eighteen months in that city, they took him outside 
of the city, and gave him thirty-nine stripes, and paid him 
off. ‘That was all the pay he got, and they sent him on 
to the next town, | 


.a night in 
le day and 
ed, and for 
‘ter money. 
to town, to 
1 to lift up 
went down 
1 he didn’t 
to come on 
ed. There 
rot down to 
siness men 
ent-maker 
st thing he 
t; he does 
t; but he 
eat of his 
tent, and 
hing, and 
magogue 
it want to 
ied. The 
and after 
m outside 
paid him 


nt him on 


ITS LEWARDS, 119 


ee a 


When I read of the life of such a man, how I blush to 
think how sickly and dwarfed Christianity is at the pre- 
sent time, and how many hundreds there are who never 
think of working for the Son of God and honouring Christ. 

Yet when he wrote that letter back to Corinth, we find 
him taking an inventory of some things he had. 

He is rich, he says: In journeyings, often in perils of 
water; in perils by my own countrymen; in perils by the 
heathen ; in perils in the city ; in perils in the wilderness ; 
in perils in the sea; in perils among false brethren. That 
must have been the hardest of all. In weariness, in pain- 
fulness, in watchings often; in hungering, in thirsting, in 
fasting often ; in cold, in nakedness ; and besides all these 
the care of all the churches. These are only some of the 
things that he summed up. Do you know what made 
him so exceedingly glad? It was just because he believed 
the Scripture; he believed that Sermon on the Mount. 
We profess to believe it ; we pretend to believe it; but 
few of us more than half believe it, Listen to one sen- 
tence in that sermon: Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for 
great is your reward in heaven when you are persecuted. 
Now this persecution was about all that Paul had. 

That was his capital, and he had a good deal of it; he 
had laid by a good many persecutions, and he was to get 
a great reward, Christ says: Rejoice and be exceeding 
glad, for great is your reward. If Jesus Christ called it 
great it must be wonderful. We call things great that 
may look very small to Jesus Christ; and things that look 
very small to us may look very large to Christ, and when 


120 HEAVEN. 


the great Christ, the Creator of heaven and earth, he who 
created the heavens and the earth by his mighty power, 
when he calls it a great reward, what must it be? 

Perhaps some people said to him: “ Now, Paul, you are 
meeting with too much opposition; you are suffering tou 
much.” 

Hear him reply: These light afflictions just for a mo- 
ment, work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory. 

“ These light afflictions,” he calls them. We would have 
called them pretty hard, pretty heavy, wouldn’t we ? 

But he says, “ These light afflictions are nothing ; think 
of the glory before me, and think of the crowning time; 
think of the reward that is laid up forme. I am on my 


way ; he will give it to me when the time comes;” and 
that is what filled his soul with joy; it was the reward 
that the Lord had in store for him. 


Now, my friends, let us just for a minute think of what 
he accomplished. Think of going out, as it were, among 
the heathen ; the first missionary to preach to these men, 
that were so full of wickedness and so full of enmity and 
bitterness, the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ, and to tell 
them that the man who died outside the walls of the city 
of Jerusalem the death of a common prisoner, a common 
felon, in the sight of the world, was the Christ; to tell 
them that they had to believe in that crucified man in or- 
der to get into the kingdom of God. 

Think of the dark mountain that rose up before him; 


th, he who 
hty power, 
e 2 

ul, you are 
ffering tov 


_ for a mo- 
nd eternal 


vould have 
t we ? 

ing; think 
ning time ; 
am on my 
nes ;” and 
he reward 


k of what 
re, among 
ese men, 
mity and 
nd to tell 
the city 
common 
; to tell 
An in or- 


bre him; 


ITS REWARDS. 12] 


— 


think of the opposition ; think of the bitter persecution, 
and then think of the trifles in our way. 


SONGS IN PRISON. 


But a great many worldly people think Paul’s life was 
a failure. Probably his enemies thought when they put 
him in prison it would silence him; but do you know 
that I believe to-day Paul thanks God more for prisons 
for stripes, for persecution and the opposition that he suf- 
fered, than anything else that happened to him here ? 

The very things we don’t like are sometimes the very 
best for us. 

Christians probably might not have these glorious epis- 
tles, if Paul had not been thrown into prison. There he 
took up his pen and began to write that letter to the 
Christians at Corinth. Look at the two epistles that he 
wrote at Corinth to the Corinthians, Look and see how 
much has been done for the world by these epistles. See 
what a blessing they have been to the Church of God; 
how they have thrown light on many a man’s life. But we 
might not have those epistles if it had not been for oppo- 
sition. 

No doubt John Bunyan blesses God more to-day for 
Bedford jail than anything that happened to him. Pro- 
bably we would not have the Pilgrim’s Progress if he had 
not been thrown into that jail. Satan thought he accom- 
plished a great deal when he shut Bunyan up twelve 
years and six months in that jail; but what a blessing it 


ee — 


Nearer a aeonnacudepnpo 


SB RA illite ea tlie atlantis a AEE ie = = SSS 
2 a 


129 HEAVEN. 


——_ 


was to the world; and I believe Paul blesses God to-day 
for the Philippian Jail, and for the opposition he encoun- 
tered in Rome, because it gave him time to write those 
blessed letters.. Talk of Alexander making the world 
tremble with the tread of his armies; and Ceasar and 
Napoleon’s power; but here is a little tent maker, who, 
without an army, moved the world. 

Why ? 

Because God Almighty was with him. 

He says in one place “ None of these things move me,” 
They threw him in prison; but it was all the same—it 
did not move him. When he was at Corinth and Athens 
preaching, it was all the same. He just pressed towards 
the mark of the prize of his high calling. If God wanted 
him to go through prisons to win the prize, it was all the 
same to him. They put him in prison, but they put the 
Almighty in with him, and he was so linked to Jesus that 
they could not separate them. He would rather be in 
prison with Christ than out of prison without him. He 
would a thousand times rather be cast into prison with 
the Son of God and suffer a little persecution for a few 
days here, than to be living without him. 

He went over into Macedonia. He heard the cry, “Come 
over into Macedonia, and help us.” He went over and he 
preached, and the first thing that happened to him was 
that he was put into the Philippians’ jail. Now, if he had 
been as faint-hearted as most of us, he would have been 
disappointed and cast down. There would have been a 
good deal of complaint. 


—— or 


od. to-day 
# encoun- 
rite those 
he world 
cesar and 
ker, who, 


1A0ve me,” 
same—it 
d Athens 
| towards 
d wanted 
as all the 
put the 
esus that 
her be in 
im. He 
on with 
a few 


, “Come 
and he 
11m was 
he had 
ve been 
been a 


ITS REWARDS. 123 


He would have said, “This is a strange Providence; 
what ever brought me here? I thought the Lord called 
me here; here I am in prison in a strange city ; how did 
I ever get here? how will I ever get out of this place? I 
have no money; I have no friends; I have no attorney ; 
I have no one to intercede for me, and here Iam.” Paul 
and Silas were not only in prison, but they made their 
feet fast in the stocks. There they were, in the inner 
prison, the inner dungeon, a dark, cold, damp dungeon. 
But at midnight those prisoners heard a strange voice. 
They had never heard anything like it before. They 
heard singing. I don’t know what song they suny, but I 
know one thing, it was not a doleful sound from the 
tombs. You know we have a hymn: “ Hark, from the 
tombs a doleful sound.” They didn’t sing that, but the 
Bible tells us they sang praises. That was a queer place 
to sing praises, wasn't it ? 

I suppose it was time for the evening prayers, and that 
they had just had their evening prayer and then sang their 
evening song. And God answered their prayers, and the 
old prison shook, and the chains fell off, and the prison 
doors were opened. Yes, yes; I have no doubt he thanks 
God in glory that he went to jail and that the Philippian 
jailor became converted, 


SWEPT INTO GLORY, 


But look at him at Rome. Nero has signed his death- 
warrant. Take your stand and lvok at the little man, 


124 HEAVEN. 


——— —— 


He is small; in the sight of the world he is contemptible ; 
the world frowns upon him. Go to the palace of the king 
and talk about that criminal—about Paul—and you will 
see a sneer on their countenances. 

“Oh, he is a fanatic,” they say “he has gone mad.” I 
wish the world was filled with such lunatics. I tell you 
what we want to-day is afew lunatics like him; men that 
fear nothing but sin and love no one but God. 

Rome never had such a conqueror within its limits. 
Rome never had such a mighty man as Paul within its 
boundaries. Although the world looked down upon him, 
and he looked very small and contemptible, yet in the 
sight of heaven he was the mightiest man that ever trod 
the streets of Rome. Probably there will never be another 
one like him that will ever travel those streets. The Son 
of God walked with him, and the form of the Fourth was 
with him. But go into that prison; there he is; they 
come to him and tell him that Nero has signed his death- 
warrant. He does not tremble ; he is not afraid. 

“Paul, are you not sorry you have been so zealous for 
Christ? It is going to cost you your life; if you had to 
live your life over again, would you give it to Jesus of 
Nazareth?” What do you think the old warrior would 
say ? 

See that eye light up as he says, “If I had ten thous- 
and lives I should give every one to Christ, and the only 
regret I have is that I did not commence earlier and serve 
him better; the only regret I have now is that I ever 
lifted my voice against Jesus of Nazareth.” 


oe 


emptible ; 
the king 
| you will 


mad.” I 
[ tell you 
men that 


ts limits. 
vithin its 
pon him, 
et in the 
2ver trod 
2 another 
The Son 
rth was 
is; they 
s death- 


plous for 
1 had to 

esus of 
> would 


thous- 
e only 
dserve 
I ever 


ITS REWARDS. 


125 


a a tn en ee 


oe — —= Se ee 


“ But they are going to behead you.” 

“ Well, they may take my head, but the Lord has my 
heart. I don’t care about my head; the Lord has my 
heart and has had it for years. They can not separate me 
from the Lord, and though my head may be taken off, we 
are not going to be separated.” And they led him out 

I don’t know; perhaps it was early in the morning, 
Profane history tells us that they led him two miles out 
of the city. Look at the little tent maker as he goes 
along through the streets of Rome with a firm tread. 
Look at that giant as he moves through the streets. He 
is on his way to the execution. Take your stand by his 
side and hear him talk. He is talking of the glory be- 
yond. 

He says: “ Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness. I shall be there to-night. I shall see 
the King in his beauty to-night. I have longed to be with 
him; I have longed to see him. This is my crowning 
day.” 

The world pitied him, but he did not need its pity 
He had something the world had not; he had a love and 
zeal burning within him which the world knew nothing 
about. Ah, the love that Paul had for Jesus Christ ! 

But the hour has come. The way they used to behead 
them in those days was for the prisoner to bend his head, 
and a Roman soldier took a sharp sword and cut it off. 
The hour had come, and with a joyful countenance, I can 
see Paul be:iding that blessed head of his, and that sword 
comes down and sets his spirit free. 


HEAVEN, 


If our eyes could look as Elisha’s looked, we would 
have seen him leap into a chariot of light like Elijah ; we 
would have seen him go sweeping through limitless space. 

Look at him now as he mounts higher and higher ; look 
at him, see him move up; up—up—up—ever upward. 

Look at him yonder! 

See! he is entering now the Eternal City of the glori- 
fied saints, the blissful abode of the Saviour’s redeemed. 
The prize he ~o long has sought is at hand. See yonder 
the gates ; how ‘hey fly right open. See the herald an- 
gels yonder on the shining battlements of heaven. Hear 
the glad shouts that is passed along, “ He is coming! he 
is coming!” And he goes sweeping through the pearly 
gates, up through the shining way, to the very throne of 


God, and Christ stands there and says, “ Well done, thou 


good and faithful servant ; enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord.” 


Just think of hearing the Master say that—that is 
enough for everything, is it not ? 

Oh friends, your turn and mine will come by and by, 
if we are but faithful; let us see that we do not lose the 
crown. Let us awake and put on the whole armour of 
God ; let us press into the conflict; it is a glorious priv- 
ilege; and then to us too, as to the glorified of old, will 
come that blessed welcome: “ Well done, thou good and 
faithful servant,” 


d, we would 
2 Elijah ; we 
nitless space. 
higher ; look 
> upward, 


of the glori- 
’3 redeemed. 

See yonder 
e herald an- 
ven. Hear 
coming ! he 
. the pearly 
y throne of 

done, thou 
joy of thy 


at—that is 


by and by, 
ot lose the 
armour of 
rious priv- 
of old, will 
| good and 


