tibvavy  of  Che  theological  Seminary 

PRINCETON  •  NEW  JERSEY 
PRESENTED  BY 

Professor  William  Kelly  Prentice 

BV  4253  .G2 

Gaebelein,  Arno  Clemens, 

1861-1945. 
His  riches — our  riches 


Bi$  Ricbes— Our  Ricbe$ 


JI  Gospel  message 


ARNO    C.    GAEBELBIN 


GOSPEL    PUBLISHING    HOUSE 

D.  T.  BASS,  Manager 

54  West  Twenty-second  Street,  New  York 


Introduction 


We  have  known  no  time  when  the  Lord 
had  more  need  of  Mr.  Valiant-for-Truth  and 
Mr.  Hold-fast-the-Faith  than  now.  Our 
friend  who  writes  this  book  is  one  of  the 
few  who  have  determined  to  know  nothing 
but  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified. 

This  little  book  touches  the  heart  of  the 
whole  Gospel.  In  its  first  part  it  renders  an 
adoring  tribute  to  His  essential  Deity  who  is 
rich  with  Divine  glory ;  in  the  second,  it  fol- 
lows Him  in  His  humiliation,  and  portrays 
that  mystery  of  vicarious  suffering  for  which 
the  Cross  is  the  perpetual  signal  and  sym- 
bol ;  and,  in  the  third,  we  are  led  up  to  those 
Ephesian  heights,  from  which  we  survey 
the  ultimate  Destiny  of  His  Redeemed 
Saints. 

This  book  is  eminently  adapted  to  save  sin- 
ners and  feed  saints.  We  prayerfully  com- 
mend it  to  the  loving  favor  of  our  God 
and  Father,  as  it  goes  forth  on  its  solemn 
mission,  persuaded  that  it  will  not  return 

Arthur  T.  Pierson. 


**  For  ye  know  the  Grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that,  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  your 
sakes  He  became  poor,  that  ye  through  His 
poverty  might  be  rich"  (2  Corinthians  viiiio.). 


HESE  beautiful  words,  which  we  find 
written  in  connection  with  Christian 
giving,  contain  the  blessed  Gospel  in  a  most 
precious  fullness.  Like  the  great  heart  of 
the  Gospel,  John  iii:i6,  it  is  so  very  simple 
and  yet  so  very  deep  that  its  depths  have 
never  been  fathomed. 

Manoah  had  seen  the  angel  of  the  Lord, 
and  when  he  asked  his  heavenly  visitor,  judges  xin :  18. 
What  is  thy  name  ?  He  answered,  Why  ask- 
est  thou  thus  after  my  name,  seeing  it  is 
"Wonderful"?  (marginal  reading).  And 
then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  did  wondrously 
before  Manoah  and  his  wife  and  ascended 
in  the  flame  of  the  altar.  The  Holy  Spirit 
through  the  prophet  Isaiah,  announcing  the 
birth  of  the  Saviour  and  the  gift  of  the  Son,isaiahix:6. 
gives  as  one  of  His  names  "Wonderful." 
Even  so  He  is.  He  is  wonderful  in  His 
Person  and  His  Work.  He  is  wonderful 
in  all  He  has  done,  in  what  He  is  doing 
and  in  all  He  will  yet  do.     His  words,  His 

(7) 


fiis  Riches— Our  Riches 

acts,  His  Love,  His  Grace,  His  mercy,  yea 
all,  is  wonderful.  Three  wonderful  facts 
are  found  in  the  above  verse.  Each  fact  is 
more  wonderful  than  the  other. 

First:     The   wonderful  fact:     He  was 

RICH. 

Secondly :  The  more  wonderful  fact :  He 

BECAME  POOR  FOR  OUR  SAKES. 

Thirdly:    The  most  wonderful  fact:    By 
His  poverty  we  are  rich. 

(8) 


The  wonderful  fact    Hk  was  rich. 


Cbc  wonderful  fact  Urn  tin  Cord 
Jesus  Christ  was  rich 

This  statement  leads  us  back  into  eter- 
nity. The  Riches  of  which  this  Word  speaks 
are  His  eternal  Riches.  He  ever  subsisted  in 
the  form  of  God  as  the  only  Begotten  of  the 
Father,  absolutely  one  with  Him.  With  the 
Father  before  the  world  existed,  "He  was 
rich."  But  who  is  able  to  penetrate  the 
mysteries  of  eternity  ?  The  wisdom  of  man, 
his  reasoning  and  imaginations  are  all  folly 
in  the  presence  of  such  a  stupendous  state- 
ment. We  have  to  turn  to  revelation  to  re- 
ceive glimpses  of  that  which  "eye  has  not 
seen,  nor  ear  heard"  to  listen  to  what  God 
in  His  Word  has  to  say  of  the  Riches  of  the 
Son  of  His  Love.  "No  man  knoweth  who  the  i,uke  x  -a*. 
3on  is  but  the  Father."  Thus  He  spake 
Himself.  But  it  is  blessedly  true  that  "God 
has  revealed  to  us  by  His  Spirit;  for  the i cor. h : to. 
Spirit  searches  all  things,  even  the  depths 
(ID 


Bis  RictKS-Our  Riches 

of  God.,,  What  then  do  the  Scriptures  say 
about  the  eternal  Riches  of  Him,  who  is  our 
Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  The  Word 
of  God  tells  us  that  the  Son  of  God  was  rich 
in  all  eternity  in  three  things.  He  was  rich 
in  Possessions,  rich  in  Love  and  rich  in 
Glory.  As  far  as  we  can  learn  from  reve- 
lation His  eternal  Riches  consisted  in  these 
three  things.  But  how  little  we  know  what 
they  all  include!  When  at  last  Grace  has 
brought  us  to  the  Father's  house,  where  we 
shall  behold  His  Glory,  when  we  shall  know 
as  we  are  known,  what  knowledge  of  His 
Riches  we  shall  then  enjoy !  And  yet  that 
which  is  made  known  about  His  Riches  is 
sufficient  to  fill  our  hearts  with  wonder  and 
our  lips  with  praises. 

Rich  in  Possessions.  Our  conception  of 
riches  in  possessions  are  limited.  If  we  fill 
the  hands  of  a  child  full  of  glittering  pen- 
nies, that  little  one  looks  upon  them  as 
great  riches.  The  great  ones  of  the  earth 
only  count  themselves  rich  when  they  can 
add  millions  to  millions,  houses  to  houses 
and  land  to  land.    If  the  whole  world  were 

(12) 


Bis  Riches— Our  Riches 

to  belong  at  some  time  to  one  person  and 
that  one  had  possession  of  all  the  gold  and 
silver,  the  precious  pearls  and  costly  stones, 
all  the  treasures  of  art,  yea,  all  the  treasures 
yet  hidden  in  the  mountains  and  hills  of  the 
earth,  how  rich  that  person  would  be!  It 
would  be  impossible  to  make  known  the 
riches  of  such  a  man.  Still  in  comparison 
with  Him  who  was  rich,  this  person  would 
be  only  a  poverty  stricken  beggar. 

What  does  it  mean,  He  was  rich  in  pos- 
sessions? Let  the  Scripture  give  the  an- 
swer. "For  by  Him  were  all  things  created, 
that  are  in  heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth, 
visible  and  invisible,  whether  thrones,  or 
dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers ;  all 
things  were  created  by  Him  and  for  Him.,, 

In  this  blessed  Word  we  find  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  Riches  of  the  Son  of  God.  All 
things  belong  to  Him,  for  He  created  them ; 
all  things  were  created  by  Him  and  for 
Him.  He  is  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and 
because  He  is,  they  belong  to  Him,  they 
are  His  and  consist  by  Him.  "The  earth  is 
the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof,  the  world 

(13) 


Bis  Kicbes— Our  Riches 


psaimxxiv:i.  and  they  that  dwell  therein."  None  other 
than  Jehovah,  the  One  who  ever  was  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Father,  is  it  who  speaks  in 
another  Psalm :  "Every  beast  of  the  forest 
is  mine,  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand 
hills.  I  know  all  the  fowls  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  are 
mine.  If  I  were  hungry,  I  would  not  tell 
thee,  for  the  world  is  mine,  and  the  fulness 

Psaim  l:  10-13.  thereof."  Again  He  saith  through  one  of 
His  prophets,  "The  silver  is  mine  and  the 
gold  is  mine."    And  then  the  great  sea  with 

Hag. ii:8.  its  fearful  and  mysterious  depths;  of  the 
sea  with  its  mighty  waves  it  is  written,  "The 
sea  is  His,  and  He  made  it."  How  great 
His  possessions ;  this  earth  He  created  with 

psalm  xcv:v.  all  its  wonders  and  beauties  belongs  to  Him. 
But  His  Riches  are  greater  still.  He 
created  the  things  that  are  in  heaven.  What 
a  wonderful  world  it  is  which  is  above! 
Well  did  the  holy  singer  cry  out  through 
the  Spirit  of  God,  "The  heavens  declare  the 
glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  showeth 
His  handiwork."     But  what  are  the  things 

Psaimxisri.    in  heaven?    What  are  these  stars  and  suns? 


Bis  Riches— Our  Riches 

The  human  eye  can  get  a  few  glimpses  of 
that  wonderful  creation.  There  are  stars 
and  planets  hundreds  and  thousands  of  times 
larger  than  our  earth.  The  Sun  is  over  a 
million  times  larger  than  our  planet.  It  is 
a  marvelous,  incomprehensible  ocean  of  fire. 
And  yet  the  star  Sirius  has,  it  has  been 
calculated,  a  force  of  light  equal  to  over 
140  suns  like  ours.  Stars  there  are  in  such 
wonderful  distance  from  our  planet  that 
light,  though  traveling  at  180,000  miles  a 
second,  ten  million  and  eight  hundred  thou- 
sand miles  a  minute  or  six  hundred  and 
forty-eight  million  miles  an  hour,  takes  sev- 
eral thousand  years  to  reach  our  earth.  And 
oh !  the  mysteries  hid  in  the  impenetrable 
depths  of  the  universe,  which  no  telescope 
can  reach ! 

And  in  the  heavens  are  the  innumerable 
angels ;  their  number  is  "ten  thousand  times 
ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of  thousands."  Rev-v:"» 
And  all  this  He,  who  is  the  image  of  God, 
created  and  by  right  of  creation  they  are  all 
His;  all  belongs  to  Him.  How  rich  He 
was  in  all  eternity! 

(15) 


Bis  Riches— Our  Riches 

Rich  in  Love.  God  did  not  become  Love, 
but  God  is  Love  and  has  always  been  Love. 
Love  needs  an  object.  The  object  of  the 
Love  of  God  in  all  eternity  was  He,  who  is 
called  "the  Son  of  His  Love.,,  In  that  re- 
markable passage  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs, 
which  can  only  refer  to  that  One,  we  read 
how  He  declares,  "I  was  daily  His  delight, 
rejoicing  always  before  Him."  In  the 
fourth  Gospel,  the  Gospel  of  John,  in  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  portrays  the  Lord  as  the 
Son  of  God,  we  learn  of  this  eternal  Love 
relation  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
Here  in  the  first  chapter  we  read  that  "the 
Word  was  with  God,"  and  that  He  was  "the 
only  begotten  Son,  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father." 

But  we  have  to  listen  to  His  own  precious 
words  as  they  came  from  His  lips  in  His 
high  priestly  prayer  to  hear  of  that  eternal 
Love  He  enjoyed,  a  Love  without  begin- 
ning. 

"Thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world."  What  words  these  are! 
Who  dares  to  add  to  them  or  attempt  to  de- 

(16j 


Bis  Riches— Our  Riches 

scribe  that  Love?  One  hears  almost  the 
solemn  caution  of  old  given  by  the  Lord. 
"Loose  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  foot ;  for  the 
place  where  thou  standest  is  holy."  All 
attempts  to  describe  that  Love  or  to  illus- 
trate it  must  fail.  What  that  Love  was  in 
all  eternity,  what  Riches  of  Love  He  en- 
joyed in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  what  de- 
light was  His,  no  Saint  has  ever  compre- 
hended. It  is  enough  to  know  before  the 
world  was  He  was  "the  Son  of  His  Love," 
in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  enjoying  the 
Riches  of  His  Love. 

Rich  in  Glory.  Love  puts  Glory  upon  the 
beloved  object.  The  Father's  Love  and  the 
Father's  Glory  was  His  in  all  eternity. 
Again  we  have  to  turn  to  His  own  words 
to  learn  of  His  eternal  glory.  When  He 
uttered  that  marvelous  prayer  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Father,  He  made  the  following 
request,  "And  now,  O  Father,  glorify  thou 
me  with  thine  own  self  with  the  glory, 
which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was.  johnxvH-.s. 
How  simple  and  definite  this  statement  is ! 
He  had  a  glory  with  the  Father  before  the 

im 


Bis  Kicftes— Oiir  Riches 

Hebr.  i:3.  world  was ;  yea,  he  was  the  effulgence  of 
the  Father's  glory.  But  who  can  tell  what 
that  glory  really  was?  What  human  eye 
could  fully  gaze  upon  that  glory  ?  Seers  of 
old  had  visions  of  the  Glory  of  the  Lord. 
They  saw  the  heavens  opened  and  got  faint 
glimpses  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Whose 
glory  was  it  they  beheld  ?  A  passage  in  the 
Gospel  of  John  gives  us  the  answer.  "These 

johnxii:4.  things  said  Esaias  when  he  saw  His  glory 
and  spoke  of  Him." 

The  prophet  Isaiah  saw  the  Lord  and  be- 
held His  glory,  and  the  New  Testament 
tells  us  that  it  was  the  glory  of  the  only 
begotten,  the  Son  of  God.  What  a  glory 
place  it  must  have  been  where  He  was  in  all 
eternity,  which,  while  on  earth,  He  called, 

johnxiv:3.  tne  Father's  house!  What  scenes  of  joy 
and  praise,  when  the  morning  stars  sang  to- 
gether and  the  sons  of  God,  the  holy  angels, 
clapped  their  hands  for  joy !  And  He  was 
the  center  of  that  Glory.  To  fully  under- 
stand it  all  we  must  wait  till  we  enter  that 
place  above  when  we  with  all  His  redeemed 


(18) 


Bis  Riches-Owr  Riches 

people  are  with  Him  and  when  He  will 
show  us  His  Glory. 

We  dare  not  add  another  word  to  that 
which  we  have  written.  Scripture  gives  us 
no  other  description  of  His  eternal  Riches, 
than  these  three — Riches  in  possessions ;  all 
is  His;  Riches  in  Love;  Riches  in  Glory. 
But  what  a  theme  to  meditate  upon !  What 
joy  in  believing  in  Him  "who  was  rich!" 
Full  enjoyment  of  the  blessed  Gospel  is  an 
impossibility  unless  we  have  His  eternal 
Riches  before  the  soul. 
(») 


The  more  wonderful  fact :  HE  became  poor 

FOR  OUR   SAKES. 


II. 

Cbe  more  wonderful  fact  that  Be 
became  poor  for  our  sakes 

If  we  have  wondered  at  His  eter- 
nal Riches,  how  much  greater  must 
be  our  amazement  that  such  a  One, 
whose  Riches  are  incomprehensible,  be- 
came poor.  Indeed  it  is  more  wonderful 
that  He  became  poor  and  furthermore  that 
He  became  poor  for  "your  sakes."  The 
precious  Gospel  text  before  us  enlarges  and 
expands  and  opens  up  the  gracious,  unfath- 
omable depths  of  God's  Love.  We  shall  find 
that  He,  who  was  so  rich,  became  so  poor, 
that  He  was  stripped  of  all  He  had.  And 
it  was  for  us,  reader !  it  was  for  your  sake. 
Ah !  can  we  ever  hear  enough  of  it  ?  Do  we 
ever  get  tired  of  hearing  the  old,  the  blessed 
story  of  His  Love?  There  are  such  who 
seem  to  have  gotten  beyond  this  precious 
Gospel.  "We  want  something  deeper  than 
the  Gospel,"  some  people  said  to  the  writer 
some  time  ago.    It  did  not  take  us  long  to 

(23) 


Bis  Ricbcs   Our  Riches 

find  out  that  they  never  had  fully  tasted  the 
sweetness  of  the  old,  old  story  of  Jesus  and 
His  Love.  The  one  who  knows  it  and  lives 
in  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son 
can  never  hear  it  enough.  The  more  we 
hear  the  more  we  realize  its  preciousness 
and  its  marvelous  depths.  No,  we  can- 
not get  beyond  the  Gospel. 

But  let  us  look  at  the  more  wonderful 
fact,  that  He  became  poor  for  your  sakes. 
What  does  it  mean?  Aye,  what  does  it 
mean!  The  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Philippians  gives  us  the  story  of 
this  more  wonderful  fact,  the  path  of  Him, 
who  came  from  Glory  to  this  dark,  sin 
cursed  earth.  Let  us  read  His  words  first 
of  all. 

"Who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God;  but 
made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took 
upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was 
made  in  the  likeness  of  men.  And  being 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  He  humbled 
Himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross." 

(24) 


Bis  Riches— Our  Riches 

And  first  of  all  we  mention  His  incar- 
nation. He  made  Himself  of  no  reputa- 
tion *  *  *  He  was  made  in  the  like- 
ness of  men,  fashioned  as  a  man.  The 
mighty  creator  who  in  the  hour  of  creation 
had  formed  the  body  of  man  out  of  the 
dust  of  the  earth,  took  upon  Himself  that 
same  form  and  entered  the  world  He  nad 
called  into  existence.  He  did  not  empty 
Himself  of  his  Deity ;  He  came  as  Jehovah 
manifested  in  the  flesh. 

We  read  the  holy,  blessed  facts  of  His 
entrance  into  the  world  in  the  Gospel  of 
Luke.  The  angel  Gabriel  said  to  Mary^ukei;^. 
after  He  had  announced  the  coming  birth  of 
the  Saviour,  "The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come 
upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest 
shall  overshadow  thee;  therefore  also  that 
Holy  Thing  which  shall  be  born  of  thee 
shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God."  And  then 
He  was  born.  On  the  bosom  of  Mary 
rests  He  who  ever  was  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father.  In  miserable  Bethlehem  He  begins 
His  earthly  life  as  a  little  babe. 

"And    she    brought    forth    her    First- 
(*) 


Bis  Ricfogs— Our  gidteg 

Luke  11:7.  born  son,  and  wrapped  him  in  swaddling 
clothes,  and  laid  Him  in  a  manger;  because 
there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  inn." 
What  poverty  it  was,  the  poverty  of  incar- 
nation !  For  Him  who  created  all,  who  has 
all,  whose  glorious  place  was  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  was,  for  Him  there 
was  no  room  and  His  first  resting  place  a 
manger.  And  yet  this  poverty  in  incarna- 
tion is  far  from  being  the  fullest  meaning  of 
that,  which  is  before  us  in  this  wonderful 
fact,  He  became  poor  for  our  sakes.  All 
the  poverty  of  the  incarnation  could  not  and 
cannot  give  peace  and  rest  for  the  con- 
science of  a  guilty  sinner.  There  is  a 
deeper  poverty  of  Him  who  was  rich,  than 
the  poverty  of  incarnation. 

It  has  not  pleased  the  Holy  Spirit  to  give 
us  a  record  of  the  Blessed  One  as  He  grew 
up  to  manhood.  There  is  just  one  record 
at  the  close  of  the  second  chapter  in  the 
Gospel  of  Luke,  when  He  spoke  that 
significant  word,  "How  is  it  that  ye  have 
sought  Me?  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be 
about  my  Father's  business?"     What  con- 

f26) 


I<ukeii:48. 


Wis  Ricbes-Our  Riches 

sciousness    of    His    Personality    and    His 
Work  they  reveal ! 

And  then  we  read,  "He  went  down  with 
them  and  came  to  Nazareth  and  was  sub- 
ject unto  them."  Nazareth  was  a  poor  lit- 
tle place  with  a  poor  reputation.  There 
He  went,  He  whose  fellowship  had  been 
from  everlasting  with  the  Father. 

Had  the  Holy  Spirit  given  us  the  story 
of  these  years  in  Nazareth  we  would  have 
to  read,  no  doubt,  a  story  of  poverty,  of 
toil  and  perhaps  want.  In  the  Gospel  of 
Mark  we  hear  Him  mentioned  as  ''the 
carpenter."  He  who  later  declared  in  the 
presence  of  the  Jews  in  the  Gospel  of  John 
"My  Father  worketh  hitherto  and  I  work,"  J°hnv:i7. 
worked  patiently,  toiled  on  for  years  with 
His  own  hands.  And  yet  these  years  of  toil 
and  poverty  in  Nazareth  do  not  make 
known  the  full  extent  of  His  poverty. 
Were  He  still  to  labor  and  to  toil  upon  the 
earth  and  live  here  in  deepest  poverty,  all 
this  could  not  save  a  single  soul  from  death 
nor  give  a  single  sinner  acceptance  with 
God. 

(27) 


Bis  Ricbes-Oiir  Riches 

How  poor  He  was  we  read  too  well  in 
the  Record  of  the  Gospels.  He  had  not 
where  to  lay  His  head.  "The  birds  have 
nests  and  the  foxes  have  holes,  but  the  Son 
of  Man  has  not  where  to  lay  His  head." 
Such  was  His  mournful  utterance;  and 
there  often  in  all  probability  was  no  resting 
place  for  that  blessed,  blessed  head. 

He  hungered  and  came  to  a  fig  tree 
and  found  nothing  there.  His  disciples,  too, 
who  had  followed  Him,  were  hungry  and 
plucked  the  ears  of  corn  on  the  Sabbath 
day.  Women,  the  weaker  vessel,  ministered 
unto  Him,  and  gave  to  Him,  who,  as  we 
have  seen  before,  saith,  "The  silver  and  gold 
is  mine  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand 
hills."  Great  as  this  poverty  was,  it  is  not 
that  poverty,  into  which  He  went,  for  our 
sake.  He  became  infinitely  poorer  than 
that. 

As  he  walked  in  humiliation  upon  the 
earth,  in  the  likeness  of  man,  though  poor 
outwardly,  poor  in  Nazareth,  poor  among 
His  own,  He  was  nevertheless  rich.  He 
still  enjoyed  the  riches  of  the  Father's  Love. 

(28) 


Bis  Riches— Our  Riches 

As  a  boy  He  speaks  of  "my  Father."  The 
Father's  smile  was  ever  about  Him  and  up- 
on Him.  God  could  do  nothing  else  but 
love  Him,  who  had  left  His  bosom  and  be- 
came man.  There  was  never  a  moment 
in  that  holy  spotless  life,  when  the  Father's 
presence  and  the  Father's  Love  were  lack- 
ing. How  precious  it  must  have  been  for 
Him  in  all  the  poverty  He  had  taken  upon 
Himself,  to  enjoy  the  presence  and  fellow- 
ship of  Him,  with  Whom  He  was  and  is 
One. 

And  so  as  He  walked  among  His  own, 
the  Father  was  with  Him.  The  Riches  of 
Love  He  still  possessed.  The  Father  open- 
ed His  heavens  above  Him  and  said,  "This  Matthew *r 
is  my  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased."  This  was  at  the  beginning  of 
His  ministry,  when  He  came  out  of  the 
waters.  The  same  voice  spoke  on  the  holy 
mountain  at  His  transfiguration,  when  His 
wonderful  Glory  is  upon  Him.  In  the 
nights  He  spent  in  the  desert  or  upon  the 
mountains  alone  He  enjoyed  the  loving 
fellowship  with  the  Father,    When  He  was 

(29) 


Bis  Kicbes— Otir  Kicbcs 

in  the  desert,  tempted  by  the  devil,  walk- 
ing among  the  wild  beasts,  the  loving  arms 
of  His  Father  were  about  Him. 

Beloved  reader!  the  fullest  meaning  of 
this  more  wonderful  fact,  He  became  poor 
for  your  sake  can  only  be  learned  in  one 
place  and  that  place  is,  the  Cross. 

In  the  story  of  the  Cross  do  we  find 
written  the  deepest  poverty  of  Him  who 
was  rich0  There  alone  we  see  what  it  did 
cost  God  to  bring  us  to  Himself. 

But  who  is  able  to  fully  understand  the 
poverty  of  the  Cross?  Jeremiah  amidst 
the  ruins  of  his  beloved  Jerusalem  broke 
lament,  i :  u.  out  in  the  most  pathetic  lament,  "Is  it  noth- 
ing to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by?  Behold 
and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my 
sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  me,  wherewith 
the  Lord  has  afflicted  me  in  the  day  of 
His  fierce  anger."  But  what  was  Jere- 
miah's sorrow  and  suffering  in  comparison 
with  the  one  the  Man  of  Sorrows  had  ?  He 
alone  could  say,  "Behold  and  see  if  there  be 
any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow."  The 
i  pet  i-n.       sufferings  of  the  blessed  One  had  all  been 

(30) 


Bis  Kicfres-Our  Riches 

minutely  predicted  by  His  own  Spirit 
throughout  the  Old  Testament.  They  were 
foreshadowed  in  the  sufferings  of  the  Old 
Testament  Saints,  such  as  Abel,  Isaac,  Jos- 
eph, Job,  David,  Daniel  and  others.  When 
He  came  He  fulfilled  them  all  and  suffered 
in  the  shame  and  poverty  of  the  cross.  But 
who  can  measure  the  agony  of  the  cross, 
through  which  that  holy  one  had  to  pass  ? 

The  so  called  old  masters,  great  painters, 
have  pictured  from  their  imagination  the 
crucifixion  scene.  These  paintings  may  be 
works  of  art  from  a  human  standpoint ;  spir- 
itually considered  they  are  miserable  pro- 
ductions, almost  blasphemies.  "There 
they  crucified  Him,"  is  all  the  Holy  Spirit 
tells  us  of  the  awful  act  itself.  Oh,what  must 
it  have  been  when  He  was  delivered  over 
into  the  hands  of  men,  when  He  who  was 
everlastingly  clothed  with  the  Father's 
Glory,  was  stripped  and  nailed  cruelly  to 
that  cross!  Bleeding  with  His  face  marred, 
carrying  upon  His  Blessed  head,  the  crown 
of  thorns,  He  is  lifted  up,  on  that  awful 
cross,  a   spectacle   for  human   and   super- 

(31) 


f>i$  fticbes— Oiir  Riches 

natural  beings.  There  He  hung  forsaken 
by  His  own,  left  alone  in  the  hours  of  His 
suffering. 

And  yet  if  we  were  to  stop  with  this  and 
say  that  we  have  descended  into  the  deepest 
place  of  the  poverty  of  Him  who  was  rich 
we  would  miss  the  mark.  Though  the  suf- 
fering and  the  shame,  the  sorrows  and  the 
agony,  were  so  great  that  they  cannot  be 
measured,  yet  do  they  not  give  us  the  fullest 
meaning  of  His  poverty. 

There  is  a  poverty  still  deeper  than  the 
physical  suffering  and  shame  on  the  cross. 
That  deepest  poverty  came  up  before  Him, 
when  He  was  in  the  garden  Gethsemane. 

"And  when  He  was  at  the  place,  He  said 
unto  them,  Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into 
temptation.  And  He  was  withdrawn  from 
Lukexxii:  them  about  a  stone's  cast,  and  kneeled  down 
and  prayed,  Saying  Father,  if  Thou  be  will- 
ing to  remove  this  cup  from  Me,  neverthe- 
less not  my  will,  but  Thine,  be  done.  And 
there  appeared  an  angel  unto  Him  out  of 
heaven,  strengthening  Him.  And  being  in 
agony  He  prayed  more  earnestly  and  His 

(32) 


ms  KscF)es-Our  Riches 

sweat  was  as  if  it  were  great  drops  of  blood 
falling  down  to  the  ground." 

Why  all  this  agony  ?  Did  He  shrink  from 
physical  suffering,  from  the  cross  and  its 
shame  ?  He  did  not,  but  was  ready  for  the 
joy  set  before  Him  to  endure  the  cross  and 
to  despise  the  shame.  He  knew  the  deepest 
poverty,  the  lowest  depths  into  which  He 
was  to  descend,  the  bitter  cup  He  was  to 
drink  to  the  last  bitter  drop;  on  account  of 
that  He  was  in  an  agony.  And  what 
then  is  the  deepest  poverty  of  the  Rich  One, 
the  Creator,  the  mighty,  glorious  Jehovah? 

"Now  from  the  sixth  hour  there  was 
darkness  over  all  the  land  unto  the  ninth 
hour.  And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli,  Eli,  lama 
sabachthani,  that  is  to  say,  My  God,  M^iY45_48i 
my  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  me?" 
In  that  darkness  which  enshrouded  Him, 
whose  garment  was  Glory  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world,  in  that  solemn, 
fearful  cry  which  came  from  His  lips  out 
of  that  darkness,  we  are  face  to  face  with 
the  poverty  of  Him  who  was  rich. 

(33) 


Bis  Kicbcs— Our  Riches 

Here  we  see  Him  stripped  of  all  that  He 
had.  The  Riches  of  Love,  the  Riches  of 
Glory  were  gone.  No  longer  is  there  above 
Him  the  Father's  smiling  face  but  in  its 
place  a  holy,  righteous  God,  whose  hand 
smites  the  Sufferer  on  the  cross.  That  Love 
which  He  always  enjoyed  as  the  Only  Be- 
gotten, which  was  His  delight  while  He 
walked  the  earth,  is  now  turned  into  the 
fearful  wrath  of  God.  Stripped  of  all,  smit- 
ten of  God,  He  who  knew  no  sin  was  made 
sin  for  us.  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  Me  ?"  It  is  the  only  time  the  Lord 
Jesus  addressed  the  Father  as  "My  God." 
But  what  did  it  mean?  What  did  it  mean 
for  God  to  put  His  hand  upon  that  beloved 
One  who  ever  was  His  delight,  who  pleased 
Him?  What  must  it  have  been  for  the 
Lamb  of  God  to  taste  that  awful  death,  He 
who  had  not  deserved  it ;  to  be  forsaken  of 
Him  with  whom  He  ever  was?  Shall  we 
ever  know  the  depth  of  His  suffering? 
Shall  we  ever  find  out  in  all  eternity  what 
it  cost  to  redeem  us?  Perhaps  we  shall 
never  know  "the  suffering  of  death"  through 

(34) 


gis  Riches— Oiir  Riches 

which  the  Lamb  of  God  had  to  pass, 
stripped  of  all  His  Riches,  alone,  forsaken 
on  that  Cross. 

And  now,  think  of  it,  "for  your  sake  He 
became  poor"  For  you,  dear  reader,  He 
came  into  the  world,  for  you  He  went  to 
that  cross,  for  you  He  drank  that  bitter  cup, 
for  you  He  was  forsaken  of  God. 

Well  may  we  sing: 

O  Christ,  what  burdens  bowed  Thy  head! 

Our  load  was  laid  on  Thee ; 
Thou  stoodest  in  the  sinner's  stead — 

To  bear  all  ill  for  me. 
A  victim  led,  Thy  blood  was  shed; 

Now  there's  no  load  for  me. 

Death  and  the  curse  were  in  our  cup — 

O   Christ,   'twas  full  for  Thee ! 
But  Thou   hast  drained  the  last  dark   drop, 

'Tis  empty  now  for  me. 
That  bitter  cup — love   drank  it  up; 

Left  but  the  love  for  me. 

Jehovah  lifted  up   His   rod — 

O  Christ,  it  fell  on  Thee! 
Thou  wast  forsaken  of  Thy  God; 

No  distance  now  for  me. 
Thy  blood  beneath  that  rod  has  flowed: 

Thy  bruising  healeth  me. 

(35) 


Bis  Kfebcs-Oiir  Riches 

The  tempest's  awful  voice  was  heard, 

O  Christ,  it  broke  on  Thee; 
Thy  open  bosom  was  my  ward; 

It  bore  the  storm  for  me. 
Thy  form  was  scarred,  Thy  visage  marred; 

Now  cloudless  peace  for  me. 

For  me,  Lord  Jesus,  Thou  hast  died, 

And  I  have  died  in  Thee; 
Thou'rt  risen:   my  bands  are  all  untied; 

And  now  Thou  liv'st  in  me. 
The  Father's  face  of  radiant  grace 

Shines  now  in  light  on  me. 

And  who  are  we  that  He  should  enter 
into  such  depths  of  poverty  and  be  for- 
saken by  God? 

Who  were  these  Corinthians  let  us  ask. 
The  First  Epistle  will  give  us  an  answer. 

"Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous 
shall  not  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God? 
Be  not  deceived:  neither  fornicators,  nor 
idolatoio,  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of 
themselves  with  mankind,  nor  thieves, 
nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers, 
nor  extortioners,  shall  inherit  the  King- 
dom of  God.  And  such  were  some  of 
you ;  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanc- 

(36) 


fiis  Ricbes— Our  Riches 

tified,  but  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our 

God."  I  Cor.  viro-u. 

What  an  awful  record  this  is!  Yet  for 
such  the  Son  of  God  came  down  and  be- 
came poor,  even  to  the  poverty  of  the 
Cross.  What  an  awful  record,  I  hear 
some  one  say,  and  adding,  as  it  is  done 
so  often,  so  deep  I  have  never  fallen.  In 
the  language  of  the  self-righteous  Pharisee,  Lllke 
the  nominal  Christians,  righteous  in  their  XYiil:^12- 
own  eyes  and  despising  others,  they  say 
"God,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  as 
other  men,  extortioners,  unjust,  adulter- 
ers or  even  as  this  publican.  I  fast  twice 
a  week,  I  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess." 
Reader,  is  this  your  language?  Is  this 
your  confession?  If  so  how  little  you 
know  of  yourself  and  how  little  of  the 
sweetness  of  the  precious  Gospel. 

"It  is  related  of  the  late  Bishop  Brooks, 
that,  having  to  preach  in  the  Massachu- 
setts penitentiary,  he  was  stricken  dumb 
as  he  saw  the  long  lines  of  fellowmen 
clad    in    the    livery   of   shame,    shamble, 

(3D 


His  Riches— Our  Riches 

lockstep,  to  their  places  in  the  chapel.  For 
he  said:  "How  may  I  preach  to  these 
men?  What  know  I  of  thieves,  murderers 
and  forgers?  I  have  done  none  of  these 
things.  Between  them  and  myself  is  a 
chasm,  hell  deep,  which  I  can  neither 
overpass  to  get  to  them,  nor  they  to  get 
to  me."  And  then  God  showed  him  his 
own  natural  heart.  Down  through  layers 
of  Puritan  tradition,  of  moral  habit,  in- 
herited from  generations  of  God-fearing 
ancestors,  the  revealing  ray  shot  and 
lighted  up  the  real  heart  underneath,  and 
the  man  of  God  saw  there  the  possibility 
of  every  crime  represented  in  the  long 
rows  of  furtive-eyed,  low-browed,  bestial- 
faced  humanity  before  him — and  then  he 
preached  to  them  as  a  sinful  man  to  sinful 
men." 

Listen  to  the  description  of  your  hef>rt, 
the  natural  heart  of  man,  as  given  by 
Him,  our  blessed  Saviour,  "Out  of  the 
heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders, 
adulteries,    fornications,    thefts,    false   wit- 


Matthew         ness,  blasphemies." 

zv:  1 19. 


(88) 


Bis  Riebcs-Qur  Rfebes 

All  these  evil  things  are  in  our  hearts. 
There  is  a  murderer  there  and  a  fornica- 
tor, a  thief  and  a  robber.  The  Grace  of 
God  may  have  kept  it  back,  from  the  full- 
est manifestation,  but  it  if  there.  How 
true  it  was  when  Rowland  Hill  cried  out 
when  he  saw  a  murderer  with  the  rope 
around  his  neck  led  to  the  gallows,  "There 
goes  Rowland  Hill,  if  it  were  not  for  the 
Grace  of  God."  Such  are  we.  Vile,  cor- 
rupt sinners ;  enemies  of  God.  Again  let 
me  point  you  to  the  Word  of  God,  what 
God  has  to  say  of  us,  "There  is  none  that  Rom.  m  •.  10-19. 
understandeth,  there  is  none  that  seeketh 
after  God.  They  are  all  gone  out  of  the 
way,  they  are  together  become  unprofit- 
able; there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no, 
not  one.  Their  throat  is  an  open  sepul- 
chre; with  their  tongues  they  have  used 
deceit;  the  poison  of  asps  is  under  their 
lips;  whose  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and 
bitterness ;  their  feet  are  swift  to  shed 
blood ;  destruction  and  misery  are  in  their 
ways,  and  the  way  of  peace  they  have  not 
known.     There  is  no  fear  of  God  before 

(39) 


Bis  Ricbcs-Our  Riches 

their  eyes  *  *  *  all  have  sinned  and 
come  short  of  the  glory  of  God." 

This  is  what  we  are  by  nature.  God 
Himself  tells  us  all  this  and  He  alone 
knows  the  depth  of  our  degradation,  of  our 
vileness,  our  sinfulness,  our  enmity  and 
ungodliness.  And  yet  knowing  it  all  He 
gave  the  best  He  could  give.  He  gave  up 
Him,  the  Son  of  His  Love.  Oh  listen! 
listen! — He  put  His  hand  upon  Him  in 
that  awful  poverty  of  the  cross  and  smote 
Him  in  our  place.  Oh!  wonderful,  won- 
derful Love !  It  passeth  knowledge  *  *  * 
"For  when  we  were  yet  without  strength, 
in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly. 
For  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one 
die;  yet  peradventure  for  a  good  man 
some  would  even  dare  to  die.  BUT  GOD 
commendeth  His  Love  toward  us,  in  that, 
while  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for 
us." 

Will  you  not  now  bow  your  head  and 
heart  in  the  Presence  of  God  and  believe 
the  record !  Take  your  place  before  Him 
as  a  vile,  lost,  guilty  sinner.     You  have 

(40) 


Bis  Ricbes— Oiir  Riches 

never  done  anything  good ;  you  can  never 
do  anything  good.  Unsaved  reader,  ac- 
knowledge yourself  a  vile  sinner  before 
God  and  believe  on  the  Son  of  God.  "For 
God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His 
only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  be- 
lieveth  on  Him  should  not  perish  but 
have  everlasting  life."  What  greater 
proof  could  God  give  of  His  Love  than 
the  one  He  has  given,  by  putting  His  be- 
loved Son  in  the  place  of  the  vilest  sinner. 
He  spared  not  His  beloved  Son  so  that 
He  could  be  able  to  spare  the  sinner,  who 
believes  on  the  Son.  He  became  poor 
*or  your  sakes,  for  your  sakes.  Do  you 
believe  it?  Will  you  accept  Him  as  your 
Saviour? 

O  Thou  who  didst  Thy  glory  leave, 
Apostate  sinners  to  retrieve 

From   nature's   deadly   fall, — 
Thou,    Thou   hast  bought  us    with   a  price; 
Our  sins  against  us  ne'er  can  rise, 

For  Thou  hast  borne  them  all. 

See  Him  for  our  transgressions  given; 
See  the  blest  Lamb  of  God  from  heaven, 

(41) 


Wis  Riches— Our  Riches 

For  us,  His  foes,  expire; 
Rejoice!  rejoice!  the  tidings  hear! 
He  bore,  that  we  might  never  bear, 

Th'  Almighty's  righteous  ire. 

And  we  who  have  believed  and  know 
Him,  know  that  He  died  for  us  we  who 
confess  with  the  great  apostle  "who  loved 
me  and  gave  Himself  for  Me,"  how  we 
need  a  greater  conception  of  that  mighty 
Love,  which  gave  Him,  that  Love  which 
went  to  the  cross  into  such  a  poverty. 
We  should  look  upon  every  unsaved  one, 
the  lowest,  the  most  miserable,  the  most 
unloveable  from  a  human  standpoint,  as 
one  for  whom  the  Son  of  God  gave  up 
His  eternal  Riches  and  became  so  poor. 

Look  at  the  ones  in  yonder  street  of 
our  great  cities.  How  often  we  see  them 
tottering  along  or  in  the  gutter.  There 
he  lies  covered  with  the  filth  of  the  street, 
perhaps  with  his  own  blopd  sunk  be- 
neath the  beast.  Ah !  look  upon  that  mis- 
erable one,  that  homeless  tramp,  as  one 
for  whom  the  Son  of  God  cried  upon  the 
cross  "My  God,  my  God  why  hast  thou 

(48) 


Bis  Ricbes-Oiir  Riches 

forsaken  me  ?"  For  Him  His  precious  blood 
was  shed,  for  that  one  He  tasted  that  awful 
death.  How  else  can  we  but  love  that 
poor,  miserable  sinner,  that  homeless  out- 
cast, whom  God  loved,  for  whom  God 
gave  His  Son,  for  whom  Christ  died.  We 
are  a  debtor  to  that  one.  The  Lord  fill 
our  hearts  with  that  burning  love  which 
He  has  for  poor  lost  sinners  that  we  may 
yearn,  yea  agonize  for  the  salvation  of 
those  for  whom  Christ  became  poor. 

(48) 


The  most  wonderful  fact :   By  His  poverty 

we  ARK  RICH. 


III. 
By  fiis  poverty  we  are  rich 

What  a  theme  we  have  for  our 
contemplation.  The  great,  the  deep, 
*he  unfathomable  poverty  of  the  Son 
if  God  on  the  cross  has  procured  us 
riches.  How  great  must  these  riches  be, 
which  are  for  poor  lost  sinners,  for  whom 
He  died  and  who  believe  on  Him?  We 
shall  find  indeed  that  while  the  Riches  of 
Christ  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the 
world  was  were  wonderful  and  the  fact  that 
such  a  One  became  so  poor  put  something 
still  more  wonderful  before  our  hearts,  yet 
the  most  wonderful  of  all  is  the  riches  God 
has  given  us  in  Him. 

This  is  the  fulness  of  the  blessed  Gospel, 
a  fullness  which  is  but  little  preached  and 
less  believed  in  these  days.  Some  empha- 
size in  Gospel  preaching  the  fact  of  the  for- 
giveness of  sin,  how  the  believing  sinner  is 
freely  justified  from  all  things.     A  great 

(47) 


l?is  Kicbcs    Our  Riches 

blessing  it  is  indeed  to  know  sins  are  for- 
ever put  away.  That  blessedness  David 
knew  when  he  wrote  the  Thirty-second 
Psalm. 
paL  xxxii:i-3.  "Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is 
forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered.  Blessed  is 
the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  no 
iniquity,  and  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no 
guile." 

But  forgiveness  is  only  a  small  part  of 
that  blessed  salvation.  Others  make  prom- 
inent the  impartation  of  the  new  life,  the 
eternal  life,  the  certainty  of  salvation  and 
the  deliverance  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
All  these  and  other  precious  things  are 
some  of  the  most  blessed  results  of  the  fin- 
ished work  of  the  Son  of  God  on  the  cross. 
There  is  however  a  higher  revelation  of 
what  the  believing  sinner,  saved  by  Grace 
has  in  that  blessed  One,  who  became  poor. 
The  fullest  blessing  in  Him  our  beautiful 
text  reveals.  We  have  become  rich  by 
Him. 

And  what  are  the  riches,  which  belong 

(48) 


Bis  Riches— Ow  Riches 

to  us  on  account  of  the  poverty  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ? 

How  rich  are  we  in  Him?  Have  you 
ever  thought  of  your  Riches  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ?  In  what  do  they  consist? 
I  will  not  keep  you  longer  from  that  which 
cheers  the  heart  of  the  writer,  that  which 
should  fill  all  our  hearts  with  constant 
praise  and  worship. 

We  are,  saved  by  Grace,  through  the  pov- 
erty of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  He 
was  forsaken  on  that  cross,  just  as  rich  as 
He  now  is  in  Glory  up  yonder. 

This  is  a  great  assertion.  It  is  a  won- 
derful claim  and  yet  it  is  true,  true  now, 
true  forever  and  ever,  throughout  the 
countless  ages  of  a  never  ending  eternity. 

And  let  us  first  of  all  ascertain  how  rich 
He  is  who  was  our  substitute  on  the  cross. 

Where  is  He  now?  The  tomb  could  not 
hold  Him;  He  could  not  see  corruption. 
The  Father  raised  Him  from  the  dead  and 
after  He  showed  Himself  after  His  pas- 
sion, He  was  received  up  into  Glory. 
What  a  scene  it  must  have  been  in  heaven 

(49) 


f>is  Riches— Our  Riches 

when  He  came  again  into  the  presence 
of  the  Father.  He  passed  through  the 
heavens.  With  that  cloud,  which  took 
Him  out  of  sight  of  the  gazing  disciples, 
He  was  ushered  into  the  presence  of  the 
Throne,  that  glorious  Throne,  the  great 
center  of  the  universe.  How  wondering- 
ly  the  angelic  hosts  must  have  stood 
about  as  He  returned  to  the  Father.  They 
knew  Him  there  before  He  took  upon 
Himself  the  form  of  man.  They  had  seen 
Him  down  on  the  earth.  They  were  with 
Him  in  the  desert  in  His  journeys,  in 
His  toil  and  service.  He  might  have 
commanded  a  legion  of  them  in  the  hour 
when  the  power  of  darkness  came  upon 
Him.  How  they  must  have  watched  Him 
as  He  hung  on  that  cross!  They  were 
present  when  the  resurrection  morn 
dawned  and  they  gave  the  disciples  the 
good  and  glorious  news  that  He  would 
pome  again  in  like  manner.  What  must 
it  have  been  to  the  Father,  our  loving 
God  and  Father,  the  God  and  Father  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  His  beloved 

(50) 


Wis  Kicbes— Our  Riches 

„^___      m 

Son  returned  to  Him?  He  gave  Him  up, 
He  smote  Him  on  that  cross,  in  the  sinner's 
place  and  now  He  comes  back  to  Him 
and  appears  in  His  presence  in  the  form 
of  Man,  the  glorified  Man.  A  human 
being  with  a  body  of  glory,  and  still  a 
body  of  flesh  and  bones,  comes  into  the 
presence  of  the  throne  of  God  and  that 
One  is  the  Son  of  God,  raised  from  the 
dead,  the  head  of  a  new  creation.  How 
unspeakably  grand  and  glorious  it  must 
have  been  when  He  came  thus  to  the 
Father. 

And  now  He  advances  to  that  Throne 
and  the  Father  welcomes  Him.  "Sit  Thou  Heb  *•  »nd  v- 
on  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thine  ene- 
mies thy  footstool."  "Thou  art  a  priest 
forever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec." 
And  perhaps  under  the  shouts  and  praises 
of  the  heavenly  hosts,  He  sat  down. 
Where  is  He  now?  He  is  back  with  the 
Father,  He  is  in  the  Father's  presence 
as  the  glorified  man.  And  did  God  do 
anything  else  besides  welcoming  Him,  giv- 
ing the  glorified  One,  with  that  body  in 


Bis  Riches— Ow  Riches 

which  the  nail  prints  are  still  seen,  a 
place  upon  His  throne?    Yea,  He  did! 

God  appointed  Him  heir  of  all  things. 
God  made  Him  heir  of  all  creation.  He  gave 
over  into  the  hands  of  the  glorified  man 
the  entire  universe.  All  power  in  heaven 
and  on  earth  He  gave  to  the  Son  of  His 
Love.  How  rich  is  He  then?  All  crea- 
tion belongs  to  Him.  He  is  the  rightful 
Lord  over  it  all. 

And  what  else  does  He  possess?  The 
Father's  Love.  The  Love  of  God  is  cen- 
tered upon  Him  once  more.  That  eter- 
nal Love  He  ever  knew  and  enjoyed,  the 
riches  of  that  Love  are  His  once  more. 
Oh !  how  God  must  love  Him,  that  lovely 
One,  who  did  His  will,  who  exalted  His 
eternal  righteousness  and  made  known 
His  Love  to  a  lost  and  guilty  world ! 

Is  there  anything  else,  which  He  has 
received,  when  He  ascended  upon  high? 
ii:g  I  look  again  and  cry  out:  "We  see  Jesus 
who  for  the  suffering  of  death  was  made 
a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  crowned 
with  Glory  and  Honour."    There  is  Glory 


Bis  Ricbes-Oiir  Riches 

upon  Him.  The  Father  put  Glory  upon 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  what  a  Glory 
it  must  be !  Who  can  tell  out  His  Glory? 
Who  can  describe  the  Glory  which  He 
has  upon  the  Father's  Throne,  which  He 
will  have  in  the  day  of  His  power,  when 
He  comes  again  as  Lord  of  lords  and 
King  of  kings? 

And  now  pause,  dear  reader.  He  was 
rich  in  all  eternity  in  three  things — in 
Possessions,  all  belonged  to  Him ;  in 
Love,  the  Only  begotten  of  the  Father; 
in  Glory,  the  Glory  of  God.  These  three 
things  He  gave  up.  He  laid  them  down- 
In  that  dark  period  when  He  hung  naked, 
alone,  forsaken  on  the  cross,  He  was 
stripped  of  all.  And  now  in  resurrection, 
we  see  Him  the  risen  Son  of  Man  and 
Son  of  God  back  with  the  Father.  All 
power  is  given  to  Him  and  He  is  the  heir 
of  all  things;  the  Father's  Love  is  upon 
Him  and  Glory  enshrouds  Him  once 
more.  Then  He  has  exactly  the  same 
riches,  which  He  had  before  the  world 

(63) 


Bis  Riches— Oiir  Riches 

was  only  with  this  difference,  He  is  now 
as  Man  in  the  Glory. 

Just  as  rich  as  He  is  the  glorified  One 
so  rich  is  the  vilest  sinner,  who  has  be- 
lieved on  Him,  who  is  washed  in  that 
precious  blood.  The  eternal  Riches  of 
Him  are  your  Riches,  child  of  God ! 

Open  your  eye  and  heart  wide  and  get 
just  a  faint  glimpse  of  the  Love  and 
Grace  of  God. 

He  saw  this  world  ruined;  men  rebels 
and  enemies  of  Him.  He  was  not  taken 
by  surprise  when  men  fell.  He  knew  it 
in  all  eternity.  He  had  made  provision  for 
it.  There  is  that  lovely  One  in  His  bos- 
om, by  whom  and  for  whom  all  things 
were  called  into  existence.  He  purposes 
to  have  others  in  the  place  of  sons  with 
that  One.  These  vile,  lost  sinners  are  to 
be  taken  out  of  the  power  of  darkness 
and  placed  alongside  of  that  only  One- 
to  share  His  inheritance,  the  Father's 
Love,  the  Glory  in  all  eternity.  How 
could  He  do  it?  He  gave  Him  up.  He  let 
Him  depart  into  that  dark,  dark  world.    He 

(M) 


gig  Kicfres-Our  Kicfres 

smote  Him,  as  we  saw,  on  the  cross.  And 
then  He  raised  Him  up,  victor  over  death 
and  grave,  and  took  Him  into  His  presence 
again,  seating  Him  at  His  own  right 
hand  in  the  Heavenly.  And  in  Him  He 
has  accomplished  His  wonderful  purpose 
to  have  sons  in  that  Son,  sharers  of  His 
Riches.  Could  man  ever  have  conceived 
such  a  plan?  Could  all  the  wisdom  of 
this  world  ever  have  discovered  such  a 
scheme?  The  Only  begotten  of  the  Fa-Heb. i:$. 
ther,  the  rich  One,  who  created  all  things 
was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels 
and  now  He  is  made  so  much  better  than 
the  angels,  obtaining  by  inheritance  a 
more  excellent  name  than  they.  And  all 
was  done  for  us  lost  sinners  that  we 
might  be  sons  with  Him  and  share  that 
place,  which  He  has  in  highest  Glory. 

Just  as  rich  as  He  is  in  the  Father's 
presence  so  rich  are  you,  so  rich  is  every 
believing  sinner. 

Are  we  anything  less  in  Him  than  Sons 
of  God  and  as  sons  Heirs  of  God?    "TheR<"»-   „ 

viii :  1 6,  17. 

Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spir- 

(55) 


Bis  Ricbcs   Our  Riches 

it,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God;  and 
if  children,  then  heirs  of  God,  and  joint 
heirs  with  Christ." 

Sonship  and  Heirship  are  inseparately 
connected.  We  are  Heirs  of  God  because 
as  believers  we  are  sons.  Our  inheritance 
is  nothing  less  than  the  inheritance  of 
Him  who  is  the  Firstbegotten  from  the 
dead.  God  appointed  Him  the  heir  of  all 
things  and  we  are  the  joint  heirs,  the  fel- 
low heirs  of  Christ.  Can  there  be  anything 
plainer  than  that  ? 

God  told  Abraham  to  walk  through  the 
land  which  He  had  promised  to  him  and 
to  his  seed.  We  can  readily  imagine  with 
what  joy  the  father  of  the  faithful  walked 
through  that  goodly  land,  with  its  green 
pastures,  springs  of  water,  rivers  and 
lakes,  how  his  eyes  delighted  in  gazing 
upon  the  beautiful  mountains.  Yet  he 
did  not  actually  possess  it  then,  but  in 
faith  he  enjoyed  it.  Our  God  and  Father 
does  not  ask  us  to  walk  through  a  land 
here  in  this  world.  He  tells  us  mor-  than 
that.     He  has  given  all  to  the  Son  of  His 

(56) 


Bis  Ricbes-Our  Riches 

Love,  the  whole  earth  belongs  to  Him, 
the  whole  universe;  and  because  it  belongs 
to  Him  it  belongs  to  us.  Lift  up  your  eyes 
and  look  to  the  heavens  above  with  its  won- 
derful mysteries,  its  countless  heavenly  bod- 
ies, its  unfathomable  space,  its  solar  systems 
beyond  the  reach  of  the  most  powerful 
telescope.  It  all  belongs  to  Him.  He 
holds  it  in  His  blessed  hands  and  it  be- 
longs to  us.  It  is  your  inheritance.  With 
Him  we  shall  be  in  the  possession  and  en- 
joyment of  the  heavens  and  the  earth. 
What  it  all  will  be,  how  great  our  riches 
are,  who  can  tell?  There  will  never  be 
reached  in  all  eternity  a  time  when  we 
have  come  to  the  end  of  our  riches  in 
Him,  with  whom  we  shall  spend  the  eter- 
nal ages. 

The  Father  wants  you  now  to  enjoy  in 
faith  your  riches.  What  are  all  posses- 
sions here  upon  this  earth,  though  men 
may  call  them  riches,  what  are  they  in 
comparison  with  our  riches  as  sons  of 
God  ?  They  are  but  soap  bubbles,  miserable 
toys  of  poverty,  which  ere  long  will  pass 

(57) 


fiis  Riches— Our  Riches 

away.  Child  of  God,  look  beyond.  In  wealth 
or  poverty,  in  abundance  or  want,  yea 
every  day  remember  your  eternal,  your 
abiding  riches  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Rejoice  in  faith  and  triumph  in  it,  over 
all  earthly  conditions  and  circumstances 
as  the  future  Heirs  of  God. 

The  riches  of  Love,  He  enjoys,  the 
Love  wherewith  He  is  loved  of  the  Father 
is  the  love  with  which  we  are  loved.  We 
are  the  sharers  of  the  same  love;  that  is 
why  believers  are  addressed  in  the  New 
Testament  as  "Beloved  of  God."  We  have 
to  listen  to  His  own  highpriestly  prayer 
in  John  xvii  to  realize  that  it  is  even  so. 
Here  He  tells  the  Father  all  about  Himself 
and  His  redemption  work  and  all  about  His 
own,  who  are  given  to  Him  by  the  Father. 
It  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  all  the  great 
fac?te  of  our  salvation,  our  standing  before 
God,  our  present  responsibilities  and  priv- 
ileges, our  future  glory  are  all  revealed 
by  Him,  the  author  and  finisher  of  the 
faith,  in  this  prayer.  This  prayer  with  its 
blessed  depths  may  be  called  the  germ 

(58) 


fiis  Ricbes-Oiir  Riches 

of  all  the  subsequent  unfoldings  of  the 
Gospel  of  Grace,  all  the  great  salvation 
truths  as  revealed  in  the  great  Pauline 
epistles  are  herein  mentioned.  These 
teachings  in  the  xvii  of  John  may  be 
grouped  around  seven  words  and  these 
are :  Salvation ;  Manifestation ;  Represen- 
tation ;  Identification ;  Sanctification ; 
Preservation  and  Glorification. 

Here  we  hear  Him  say  to  the  Father: 
"That  the  world  may  know  that  Thou  hast  John  xvii  -.23. 
sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them,  as  Thou 
hast  loved  me." 

And  again:  "That  the  love  wherewith Verse 25- 
Thou  hast  loved  me  may  be  in  them  and 
I  in  them." 

Then  it  is  truly  so,  the  love  wherewith 
the  Father  loves  the  Son,  is  the  love  where- 
with He  loves  each  who  belongs  to  Christ, 
who  by  believing  on  Him  is  in  Christ.  God 
is  Love  and  oh !  how  He  loves !  It  was 
love  which  gave  the  Only  Begotten  and 
the  object  in  view  that  He  might  be  able 
to  have  us  poor  sinners  sharing  that  eternal 
love. 

<59) 


Bis  Ricbcs-Our  Kicfres 

Take  hold  of  it  in  faith,  Beloved  of 
God;  in  Christ  Jesus,  where  Grace  has 
put  you,  there  is  for  you  from  the  side  of 
God  the  Father  nothing  but  love.  In  all 
reverence  we  say,  God  can  do  nothing 
but  love  those  who  are  His  children  by 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Learn  to  consider 
all,  even  the  darkest  and  the  strangest 
experiences,  in  the  light  of  His  love. 
Nothing,  nothing  can  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord. 

By  nature  and  by  practice,  far — 

How  very   far  from   God! 
Yet   now,   by   grace,    brought    nigh    to    Him, 

Through  faith  in  Jesus'  blood. 

So  nigh — so  very  nigh  to  God, 

I  cannot  nearer  be; 
For  in  the  person  of  His  Son, 

I  am  as  near  as  He. 

So  dear — so  very  dear  to  God, 

More  dear  I  cannot  be; 
The  love  wherewith  He  loves  the  Son, 

Such  is  His  love  to  me. 


(60) 


Bis  Kicbes-Oiir  Riches 

And  what  about  the  Glory?  How- 
great  the  Glory  He  has  revealed!  It  be- 
longs to  us  in  Him  and  with  Him.  We 
but  need  to  remind  ourselves  of  another 
utterance  in  His  prayer.  How  good  of 
Him  that  He  spoke  all  these  words  be- 
fore He  left  the  world.  His  disciples 
heard  Him  utter  these  words  and  from 
them  they  learned  His  love  and  their 
glorious  destiny.  And  we,  in  reading  the 
xvii  of  John  can  hear  Him  still  praying. 
Here  then  is  the  word  which  tells  us  of 
Glory:  "And  the  Glory  which  Thou  gav- 
est  me  I  have  given  them" — "Father,  I 
will  that  they  also  whom  Thou  hast  given  .  . 

J  °  John  xvii. 

me,  be  with  me  where  I  am  that  they  may     verses  22-24. 

behold  my  Glory  which  Thou  hast  given 

me." 

Is  this  not  sufficient?  We  shall  share 
His  glory!  We  shall  forever  be  with 
Him !  Our  bodies  of  humiliation  will  be 
fashioned  like  unto  His  glorious  body. 
We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is  and  shall  be 
like  Him.  Our  glorious  destiny  is  to  be 
conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  that 

<61) 


Bis  Kicbcs   Our  Riches 

He  might  be  the  firstborn  among  many- 
brethren.  At  last  glorified  with  Him  God 
will  show  the  exceeding  riches  of  His 
grace  in  His  kindness  towards  us  through 
Christ  Jesus. 

What  a  Glory  that  will  be!  Forever 
with  the  Lord  who  loved  Me  and  gave 
Himself  for  Me. 

And  soon  that  Glory  will  be  upon  us. 
The  Lord  is  at  hand!  The  blessed  mo- 
ment for  which  He  has  waited  upon  the 
Father's  throne  to  have  us  all  with  Him, 
for  which  generations  after  generations 
waited,  is  very  nigh,  even  at  the  door. 
Soon  we  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Bride- 
groom calling  His  beloved  Bride  to  come 
away,  to  come  into  His  presence  and  then 
we  shall  share  His  Riches. 

And  is  it  so — I  shall  be  like  Thy  Son? 
Is  this  the  grace  which  He  for  me  has  won? 
Father  of  glory,  (thought  beyond  all  thought!) — 
In  glory  to  His  own  blest  likeness  brought! 

Oh,  Jesus,  Lord,  who  loved  me  like  to  Thee? 
Fruit  of  Thy  work,  with  Thee,  too,  there  to  see 

(62) 


fiis  Kicbcs-Our  Riches 

Thy  glory,  Lord,  while  endless  ages  roll, 
Myself  the  prize  and  travail  of  Thy  soul. 

Yet  it  must  be:  Thy  love  had  not  its  rest 
Were  Thy  redeemed  not  with  Thee  fully  blest. 
That  love  that  gives  not  as  the  world,  but  shares 
All  it  possesses  with  its  loved  coheirs. 

Nor  I  alone;  Thy  loved  ones  all,  complete 
In  glory,  round  Thee  there  with  joy  shall  meet,— • 
All  like  Thee,  for  Thy  glory  like  Thee,  Lord, 
Object  supreme  of  all,  by  all  adored. 

But  alas !  how  poor  and  weak  our 
words  are !  How  dull  the  mind,  how  slow 
of  heart  to  believe  all  and  to  enjoy  it  all  I 

How  often  we  go  about  cast  down,  dis- 
appointed because  earthly  conditions,  the 
things  temporal,  did  not  turn  out  to  our 
comfort.  Perhaps  we  are  murmuring  or 
complaining.  If  our  hearts  were  fixed 
constantly  upon  the  Christ  of  God,  upon 
the  wonderful  Riches  which  are  His  in 
Glory,  which  belong  to  us,  there  would 
be  no  room  for  care  or  sorrow,  impatience 
or  distress,  it  would  be  all  praise  and 
thanksgiving. 

(63) 


Bis  Riches— Our  Riches 

It  is  this  which  the  Father  wants,  in 
which  He  delights.  He  loves  to  hear  the 
voice  and  praise  of  such,  who  were  once 
afar  off  and  now  brought  nigh,  giving 
thanks  in  that  precious,  adorable  name. 
He  loves  to  see  His  blood  bought  people 
rejoicing  in  His  Son. 

A  mother  in  Israel  came  to  praise  Him 
once.  Her  prayer  had  been  answered. 
And  as  she  pours  out  her  heart  the  Spirit 
of  God  opens  her  vision.  In  holy  joy  she 
cries  out :  "He  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of 
the  dust,  and  fifteth  up  the  beggar  from 
i  sam.  ii:&  ^he  dunghill,  to  set  them  among  princes., 
and  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of 
glory;  for  the  pillars  of  the  earth  are  the 
Lord's  and  He  has  set  the  world  upon 
them." 

A  great  conception  it  was  and  yet  it 
does  not  express  our  glorious  inheritance, 
our  riches  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Poor  beggars  upon  a  dunghill  we  are 
by  nature  and  that  blessed  One  who  came 
down  to  our  misery  took  us  from  the 
dunghill  to  where  He  is  into  His  Riches, 

(64) 


Bis  Kicbcs-Our  Ricbes 

to  His  Glory,  to  share  His  Throne.    Ah ! 
how  little  it  is  real  to  us!     How  little  our 
hearts  enter  into  it  all.    And  yet  our  God 
wants  us  to  enter  in  faith  into  these  won- 
derful  thoughts   of   love    towards   us   in 
Christ.     More  than  anything  else  the  true 
conception  of  our  Riches  in  Christ,  which 
we  shall  before  long  share  with  Him  in 
Glory,  will  keep  us  in  the  place  of  separ- 
ation and  teach  us  to  walk  worthy  of  the 
Lord.     With   such    Riches   in   view   and 
such  a  destiny,  how  holy  our  lives  should 
be !     If  these  Riches  are  ever  before  our 
soul  we  shall  be  satisfied  to  walk  in  His 
path,  the  path  of  humility  and  suffering, 
satisfied  to  be  nothing  now  and  sharing 
His  reproach.     How  easy  it  would  be  to 
take  the  lowest  place  and  with   joy  we 
would  welcome  all  that  humbles  us.  For 
His  sake  who  gave  up  all,  constrained  by 
"Jis  mighty  love  with  the  knowledge  of 
the  joy  set  before  us,  to  be  with  Him  as 
joint  heirs,  we  too  would  more  and  more 
endure  the   cross   and   despise   the   shame. 
It  is  our  greatest  need.    Oh  !  for  a  greater 

(65) 


fiis  Riches— Oiir  Riches 

vision  of  Him,  His  Glory,  His  Riches  and 
our  place  in  Him  now  and  with  Him  in 
all  His  Riches  and  Glory  before  long. 

But  not  only  are  we  to  share  all  that 
with  Him,  but  while  here  on  earth,  as 
saved  ones  passed  from  death  unto  life, 
waiting  for  Him  and  for  Glory,  we  are 
rich.  At  the  close  of  that  lovely  Epistle 
to    the    Philippians    we    read    this    word: 

Ph.*r:is.  "But  my  God  shall  supply  all  your  need 
according  to  His  Riches  in  Glory  in 
Christ  Jesus."  And  in  the  beginning  of 
Ephesians  we  read :  "Blessed  be  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 

3ph.i:3.  j^^  blessed  us  with  every  spiritual  bless- 
ing in  the  Heavenly  in  Christ. "  In  Colos- 
sians  we  hear  that  in  Him  dwelleth  all 
the  fullness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  and 
that  we  are  complete  in  Him.  Let  us  also 
remember  that  precious  word  which  we 
find  on  the  summit  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans :  "He  that  spared  not  His  own 
Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how 
shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give 
us  all  things?"     All  we  need  in  spiritual 

(66) 


m$  Hicbes-Our  Riches 

blessing,  in  strength,  in  power,  anything 
and  everything,  we  have  in  Him  who 
paid  for  it  on  the  cross,  who  became  so 
poor  that  we  might  be  so  rich.  How 
dreadful  if  we,  in  possession  of  such  rich- 
es, with  every  spiritual  blessing  at  our 
disposal,  with  a  Lord  who  is  ready  to  fill 
us  with  the  very  fullness  of  Himself,  if  we 
do  not  use  these  riches,  if  we  neglect  so 
great  salvation.  We  are  all  guilty  of  it. 
But  few  of  God's  people,  if  any,  live  up 
to  their  fullest  riches  in  Christ. 

Israel  failed  with  that  earthly  land  and 
did  not  take  possession  of  it;  we  fail  in 
not  entering  into  the  riches  we  have.  And 
if  Israel  had  gone  in  and  possessed  the 
whole  land  it  would  have  come  to  an  end 
of  the  land,  for  there  was  a  limit.  It  is  far 
different  with  the  riches  we  have  in 
Christ ;  we  can  never  exhaust  them ;  they 
are  like  Himself,  like  God,  infinite.  Oh, 
my  soul,  praise  Him,  praise  Him !  And, 
oh,  how  feeble  is  our  praise.  That  Love, 
these  riches,  pass  praises  indeed, 

(67) 


Bis  Riches— Ow  Riches 

It  passeth  praises!  that  dear  love  of  Thine, 
Lord  Jesus!  Saviour!  yet  this  heart  of  mine 
Would  sing  a  love  so  rich — so  full — so  free, 
Which  brough  a  rebel  sinner,  such  as  me, 
Nigh  unto  God. 

But  though  I  cannot  tell  or  sing  or  know 
The  fullness  of  Thy  love  while  here  below, 
My  empty  vessel  I  may  freely  bring — 

0  Thou  who  art  of  love  the  living  spring, 

My  vessel  fill. 

1  am  an  empty  vessel — scarce  one  thought 
Or  look  of  love  to  Thee  I've  ever  brought; 
Yet  I  may  come,  and  come  again  to  Thee 
With  this,  the  needy  children's  only  plea — 

"Thou  loves t  me!" 

Fill  me,  Lord  Jesus,  Saviour,  with  Thy  love; 
Lead,  lead  me  to  the  living  fount  above ! 
Thither  may  I  in  simple  faith  draw  nigh, 
And  never  to  another  fountain  fly, 
But  unto  Thee. 

Lord  Jesus,  when  Thee  face  to  face  I  see, 
When  on  Thy  lofty  throne  I  sit  with  Thee; 
Then  of  Thy  love  in  all  its  breadth  and  length, 
Its  height  and  depth,  its  everlasting  strength, 
My  soul  shall  sing. 

(68) 


Bis  Riches— Oiir  Riches 

And  how  true  it  is  that  we  understand, 
like  the  little  children  we  are,  but  little  of 
all  the  Riches  which  await  us.  We  are 
children,  but  when  He  comes  we  shall  be 
full  grown  sons ;  what  a  revelation  we 
shall  have  then  of  His  Riches  and  our 
Riches!  What  a  Glory  it  will  be  when  He 
has  His  completed  church  with  Him  and 
with  it  His  full  inheritance  in  the  Saints. 
What  a  Glory  when  He  comes  as  the 
Firstborn,  bringing  the  many  sons  with 
Him  to  glory!  We  shall  share  His 
Throne.  We  shall  reign  with  Him  over 
the  earth  and  have  control  with  Him  over 
the  works  of  His  hand.  And  then  it  shall 
roll  on,  the  mighty  song  of  praise,  but 
feebly  uttered  here  below  by  a  feeble  few : 
"Unto  Him  that  loveth  us  and  has  washed 
us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood  and 
has  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God 
His  Father,  to  Him  be  Glory  and  Do- 
minion forever  and  ever." 

Let  us  turn  more  to  the  Word  of 
Prophecy.  What  we  read  here  in  the 
Old  Testament  and  in  our  New  Testa- 


Bis  Ricbes-Our  Riches 

ment  prophetic  Book,  His  own  Revela- 
tion, which  He  received  from  God,  con- 
cerning the  coming  Glories  does  not  alone 
concern  Him,  but  it  concerns  us  as  His 
joint  heirs. 

And  now,  my  dear  reader,  are  you 
saved?  Do  you  belong  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ?  Do  you  know  this  marvelous 
Grace  of  tlie  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  for 
your  sakes  became  poor  that  you  might  be 
rich?  If  you  are  not  a  Christian,  not  yet 
saved,  still  a  stranger  to  that  Grace,  what 
hinders  you  from  accepting  Him  now? 
Let  me  tell  you  that  God  wants  you,  that 
God  more  than  wants  you,  He  loves  you. 
It  was  for  you  He  gave  His  beloved  Son ; 
for  you  He  forsook  Him  on  the  cross. 
Could  God  do  anything  more  than  that? 
And  now  the  good  news,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  has  accomplished  all  for  you  and 
God  invites  you  to  come.  He  tells  you 
that  all  is  ready,  He  wants  to  welcome 
you  home.  God  wants  you  to  come  out  of 
all  your  poverty  and  your  want,  out  of 
your  sin  and  guilt,  shame  and  confusion 

(70) 


Bis  Riches— Oiir  RfcfrMj 

into  the  Riches  of  His  own  Son.  Can  you 
doubt  this?  I  am  persuaded  you  cannot. 
It  is  too  clear,  too  simple  to  doubt  that 
God  does  want  the  lowest  and  the  vilest, 
to  give  them  the  Riches  of  Himself. 

Do  you  ask  the  conditions?  There  are 
none.  God  does  not  ask  you  to  do  any- 
thing, for  He  has  done  it  all.  All  He  asks 
that  you  come  just  as  you  are,  as  a  poor 
sinner  and  that  you  accept  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  your  Saviour,  by  trusting  in 
Him,  by  casting  yourself  upon  Him.  Are 
you  willing  to  do  it  now? 

Just  as  I  am — without  one  plea 

But   that   Thy   blood    was    shed    for  me, 

And  Thou  bidst  me  come  to  Thee 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

Just  as  I  am — poor,  wretched,  blind; 
Sight,  riches,  healing  of  the  mind, — 
Yea,  all  my  need  in  Thee  to  find, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

Just  as  I  am — Thy  love,  I  own, 
Has  broken  ev'ry  barrier  down; 
Now  to  be  Thine,  yea,  Thine  alone, 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

(71) 


pis  Ricbcs-Our  Riches 

Just  as  I  am — of  that  free  love, 
The  fullness  and  the  depth  to  prove, 
Here  for  a  season,  then  above — 

O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come! 

The  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord.  "He  that  believeth  on 
the  Son  hath  eternal  life."  All  God  asks 
is  that  you  accept  the  Riches,  which  the 
Son  of  His  Love  purchased  for  guilty  sin- 
ners on  the  cross.  Is  this  too  good  to  be 
true  ?  as  some  one  said.  If  you  say  so  and 
add  a  single  thing  to  it,  trying  to  do  your 
share  by  good  works  or  repentance,  then 
you  shut  yourself  out  from  that  Grace. 
Oh,  believe  it.  Christ  died  for  the  ungod- 
ly; He  died  for  you. 

His  anguish  of  soul  on  the  cross  hast  thou  seen? 

His  cry  of  distress  hast  thou  heard? 
Then  why,  if  the  terrors  of  wrath  He  endured, 

Should  pardon  to  thee  be  deferred? 

We  are  healed  by  His  stripes.    Wouldst  thou  add 
to  the  word? 

And  He  is  our  righteousness  made ; 
The  best  robe  of  heaven  He  bids  thee  put  on; 

O  couldst  thou  be  better  arrayed? 

(72) 


Bis  Kicfres— Our  Riches 

Then  doubt  not  thy  welcome,  since  God  hath  de- 
clared 
There  remaineth  no  more  to  be  done; 
Christ  once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  appeared, 
And  completed  the  work  He  begun. 

O  take,  with  rejoicing,  from  Jesus  at  once 

The  life  everlasting  He  gives; 
And  know  with  assurance  thou  never  canst  die, 

Since  Jesus  thy  righteousness  lives. 

And  should  you  reject  God's  offer  of 
free  salvation;  what  then?  It  is  almost 
impossible  for  the  writer  of  these  words 
to  believe  that  any  one  can  reject  such 
an  offer,  such  riches,  such  love.  And  yet 
it  is  sadly  true;  thousands  turn  their 
backs  upon  Him  who  died  for  them.  God 
grant  that  not  one  who  reads  these  lines 
may  reject  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Reader, 
if  you  should  reject  Christ  and  go  on  in 
unbelief,  in  selfrighteous  religiousness, 
what  then?  You  live  on  in  the  poverty, 
misery,  discontent,  unrest  of  the  natural 
man.  You  could  have  rest,  peace,  joy 
happiness  and  contentment  in  the  Lord 
Jesus.       You     chose     the     unrest.       But 

(73) 


Bis  Ricbes-Our  Riches 

is  that  all?  What  about  eternity? 
You  pass  into  eternity  having  rejected 
that  which  God  did  for  you.  Deliberately 
you  said,  No,  to  God,  and  instead  of  the 
eternal  Riches,  with  Him  who  loved  you 
so,  you  have  chosen  eternal  poverty,  eter- 
nal wrath,  eternal  shame.  Far  be  it  to 
enlarge  upon  these  solemn,  solemn  facts 
of  an  eternity  of  misery.  Such  it  must  be 
for  everyone  who  dies  rejecting  God's 
offer  of  salvation.  God's  righteousness 
demands  it. 

Once  more  we  repeat  the  text :  "For  ye 
know  the  Grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
that  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  your 
sakes  He  became  poor  that  by  His  poverty 
we  might  be  rich;"  "For  God  so  loved  the 
world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  Him 
should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life." 

(74) 


.  .  OUR   HOPE  .  . 

A  Monthly  Magazine  for  Bible 
Study,  especially  Prophecy 

EDITED  BY  A.  C.  GAEBELEIN 

This  Magazine  appears  monthly  in  64  pages,  containing  sound, 

safe  and  sane  Expositions  of  the  Word  of  God,  Notes  on 

Prophecy  and  the  Jews,  a  Daily  Scripture  Calendar, 

Question  Column,  etc. 

CONTRIBUTORS. 

Dr.  C.  I.  Scofikld,  A.  T.  Pierson,  Mrs.  Needham 

And  others. 

SUBSCRIPTION  PRICE,  $1  A.  YEAR. 

Sample  copies  free  to  any  part  of  the  world. 


«•  Studies  in  Zechariah." 

BY  A.  C.  GAEBELEIN. 

Dr.  C.  I.  Scofleld,  formerly  Pastor  of  Moody's  Church  in  East 
Northfield,  writes : 
"  A  really  good  and  adequate  work  on  Zechariah  has  long  heen 
a  desideratum,  and  this,  I  am  thankful  to  find,  you  have  under 
God  supplied." 

The  best  recommendation  is  that  the  Fifth 
Edition  is  in  the  Press. 

PRICE  50  CENTS,  POST-PAID. 

One  Year's  Subscription  to  ' '  Our  Hope "  and 
"  Studies  in  Zechariah  "  for  $  |  P25, 

ADDRESS: 

Publication   Office   "OUR   HOPE" 
80  Second  Street,   New  York. 


OTHER.   PUBLICATIONS. 


Hath  Cod  Cast  Away  His  People  ?  The  Great  Jewish 
Question.  By  A.  C.  Gaebelein.  The  Book  for  the 
Times.  Post-paid $1.00 

Gospel  of  Matthew.  In  Two  Large  Volumes  By  A. 
C.  Gaebelein.  Pronounced  the  Best  Exposition  of 
the  First  Gospel.    Well  bound  in  cloth.    Post-paid.     2.00 

Addresses  on  Prophecy.  By  C.  I.  Scofield.  An  excel- 
lent book.    134  pages 25c. 

The  Son  of  Cod.    By  G.  Bellet.    Paper  covers 25c. 

Christ  and  the  Scriptures.  By  Adolph  Saphir.  Re- 
vised American  Edition.    Paper  cover,  25c.     Cloth.     40c. 

The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     By  A.  Saphir.    The 

best  Exposition  of  this  Epistle  we  know.    2  vols...      2.00 

Joseph  and  His  Brethren.    Christ's  First  and  Second 

Coming.    By  A.  C.  G 1 5c. 

The  Predicted  End  of  the  Age  and  Modern  Day 
Delusions.  (Spiritism,  Christian  Science,  etc.) 
ByA.C.  G 5c. 

Kingdom  in  Old  Testament.    By  A  C.  G 10c. 

"His  Riches— Our  Riches."   A  Great  Gospel  Message. 

Paper,  25c.    Cloth 35c. 

The  Olivet  Discourse.  Matthew  xxiv  and  xxv.    Nicely 

bound.    By  A.  C.  G 50c, 

Christ's  Coming  and  Forever  with   the   Lord     By 

A.  C.  G I  Oc. 

Notes  on  2  Thess,  II.    By  A.  C.  G 5c. 

Parables  of  Balaam.    By  A.  C.  G 8c. 

Jonah  and  the  Whale.    By  A  C  G 2c. 

The  Messiah  and  Israel.    By  A  C.  G 15c. 

Absent  from  the  Body.    By  C.  H.  M 5c. 

Also  Tracts  and  Pamphlets  for  Hebrews  in  the  following 
languages  :  English,  Hebrew,  Yiddish,  Spanish,  Dutch,  Russian, 
Polish,  Arabic  and  German. 


Address : 
A.  C.  GAEBELEIN 

80  Second  Street,  New  York 


Date.,X>ue 

'    5}( 

| 

« 

* 

