mmm 

: : : 

ii 

' : : .:■  - 

iliM 


PiiiiiHiiPiS 

, 


: -:;;y 

i ill  BMf  ililRH ., 


illi  - , : r! 

Ui.y 


Hill 


1 


iiialiij 

Ji.il 


'•  i! 


v., 

;v'’:  ,i: 


" m 

ill 


>{  | ! 

liilii  fa  i 

!§n! 

i l l!  if!  I 

' :■  : : ii-  , . :Y 


Slpli'ili 

i'll,-!': 


■:  I:- 


I 


■ rim 


v 


:'!  : i- 


GOULD 

eastern  nazarene  college 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/holinessfalsetruOOiron 


HOLINESS 


TIE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRIE 


By  H.  A.  IRONSIDE 

Author  of  “ Notes  on  Proverbs,”  " Notes  on  Jeremiah,” 

” Notes  on  the  Minor  Prophets,”  ” Notes  on  the  Book  of  Esther,” 
“The  Mysteries  of  God,”  etc.,  etc. 


3^ 

A*  S,  LOIZEAUX 

“BURNBRAE” 


i 


1308 


BIBLE  TRUTH  PRESS 
19  W.  2 I st  ST.,  N.  Y. 


Printed  in  the  United  States 
of  America 


Contents 

Page 

Preface 5 

Part  I. — Autobiographical 

My  Conversion  to  God 7 

Holiness:  The  Great  Desideratum  ....  13 

Sunshine  and  Clouds 19 

The  Struggle  Ended 26 

Observations  on  the  Holiness  Movement  ...  35 

Part  II. — Doctrinal 

Sanctification : Its  Meaning 41 

Sanctification  by  the  Holy  Spirit — Internal  . . 50 

Sanctification  by  the  Blood  of  Christ — Eternal  . 59 

Sanctification  by  the  Word  of  God — External  Results  67 

Relative  Sanctification 79 

Dead  to  Sin,  and  Perfect  Love 85 

The  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  of  Fire  . . 91 

Perfection,  as  used  in  Scripture 101 

Cleansing  from  all  Sin,  and  the  Pure  in  Heart  . Ill 

The  Believer’s  Two  Natures 121 

Concluding  Remarks  on  “ The  Higher  Christian  Life”  132 


PREFACE 


OR  over  twelve  years  I have  considered  the 


advisability  of  penning  these  papers.  There 
seemed  some  good  reasons  why  it  might  not  be  wise ; 
there  seem  to  me  now  to  be  more  why  I should  un- 
dertake it. 

The  two  chief  reasons  that  have  come  before  me 
to  hinder  my  writing  them  heretofore  are  these : 

(a)  The  detailing  of  a large  measure  of  personal 
experience  is  necessarily  involved.  This  is  distaste- 
ful to  many,  and  to  none  more  than  to  myself.  But 
I have  been  much  impressed  lately  with  the  many 
instances  in  which  the  chief  of  the  apostles  uses  his 
own  experience  as  a warning  and  lesson  to  others 
who  would  put  confidence  in  the  flesh.  For  this  cause 
alone  I am  at  last  persuaded  to  narrate  my  own  en- 
deavors to  attain  perfection  by  following  the  so-called 
“ holiness  teaching.  ” There  can  surely  be  no  charge 
brought  against  me  of  glorying  in  self  in  so  doing. 
The  record  is  too  humiliating  for  that.  Nor  do  I 
desire  to  take  a morbid  satisfaction  in  detailing  my 
failures.  But  for  this  recital  of  my  past  errors  and 
present  blessedness  I have  not  only  apostolic  exam- 
ple, but  the  entire  book  of  Ecclesiastes  is  a similar 
record ; written  only  that  others  might  be  spared  the 
anguish  and  disappointment  of  treading  the  same 
weary  path. 

( b ) It  is  difficult  to  write  an  account  like  this 
without  apparent  criticism  of  the  organization  to 
which  I once  belonged,  both  as  to  its  methods 
and  its  doctrines.  This  I shrink  from.  I have  the 
fullest  sympathy  with  the  great  work  being  done 
among  the  “submerged”  in  the  larger  cities  of  the 


6 


PREFACE. 


world  by  these  self-denying  workers,  and  I would 
not  say  or  write  a word  to  hinder  any  who  thus 
seek  to  save  the  outcast  and  wayward.  I only  re- 
gret that  the  converts  are  not  given  a clearer  gospel, 
and  more  scriptural  instruction  afterwards.  Many 
of  my  old  “ comrades  ” are  still  toiling  as  I once 
toiled  in  what  they  believe  is  a God-raised-up  and 
God-directed  “Army”;  whose  teaching  they  con- 
sider to  be  fully  in  accord  with  Scripture;  and  I 
know  this  record  must  give  some  of  them  pain.  I 
would  spare  them  this  if  I could.  But  when  I reflect 
that  thousands  are  yearly  being  disheartened  and 
discouraged  by  their  teaching;  that  hundreds  yearly 
are  ensnared  into  infidelity  through  the  collapse  of 
the  vain  effort  to  attain  the  unattainable;  that  scores 
have  actually  lost  their  minds  and  are  now  inmates 
of  asylums  because  of  the  mental  grief  and  anguish 
resultant  upon  their  bitter  disappointment  in  the 
search  for  holiness;  I feel  I should  not  allow  senti- 
mental reasons  to  hinder  my  relating  the  unvar- 
nished truth,  in  the  hope  that  under  the  blessing  of 
God  it  may  lead  many  to  find  in  Christ  Himself  that 
sanctification  which  they  can  never  find  elsewhere, 
and  in  His  Cross  that  exhibition  of  perfect  love 
which  they  will  look  for  in  vain  in  their  own  hearts 
and  lives. 

Therefore  I send  forth  these  papers,  praying  that 
both  the  experimental  and  doctrinal  parts  may  be 
helpful  to  many  and  hindrances  to  none;  and  in 
commending  all  to  the  reader’s  spiritual  intelligence, 
I would  earnestly  beseech  him  to  “prove  all  things, 
and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.” 


HOLINESS:  THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


PART  ONE:  AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL 


MY  CONVERSION  TO  GOD 

IT  is  my  desire,  in  dependence  on  the  Lord,  to 
write  a faithful  record,  so  far  as  memory  now 
serves  me,  of  some  of  God’s  dealings  with  my  soul 
and  my  strivings  after  the  experience  of  holiness, 
during  the  first  six  years  of  my  Christian  life,  ere  I 
knew  the  blessedness  of  finding  all  in  Christ  This 
will  make  it  necessary  at  times,  I have  little  doubt, 
to  “speak  as  a fool” — even  as  the  apostle  Paul  did: 
but  as  I reflect  on  the  need  for  such  a record,  I think 
I can  say  with  him,  “Ye have  compelled  me.” 

If  I may  be  privileged  to  thereby  save  others  from 
the  unhappy  experiences  I passed  through  in  those 
early  years,  I shall  feel  abundantly  repaid  for  the 
effort  it  will  take  to  thus  put  these  heart- experiences 
before  my  readers. 

From  a very  early  age  God  began  to  speak  to  me 
through  His  Word.  I doubt  if  I could  go  back  to 
the  first  time  when,  to  my  recollection,  I felt  some- 
thing of  the  reality  of  eternal  things. 

My  father  was  taken  from  me  ere  his  features 
were  impressed  upon  my  infant  mind.  But  I never 
have  heard  him  spoken  of  other  than  as  a man  of 


8 


holiness: 


God.  He  was  known  in  Toronto  (my  birthplace)  to 
many  as  “The  Eternity  Man.”  His  Bible,  marked 
in  many  places,  was  a precious  legacy  to  me;  and 
from  it  I learned  to  recite  my  first  verse  of  Scrip- 
ture, at  the  age  of  four.  I distinctly  recall  learning 
the  blessed  words  of  Luke  19:  10,  “For  the  Son  of 
man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was 
lost.”  That  I was  lost,  and  that  Christ  Jesus  came 
from  heaven  to  save  me,  were  the  first  divine  truths 
impressed  on  my  young  heart. 

My  widowed  mother  was,  it  seems  to  me,  one  of  a 
thousand.  I remember  yet  how  I would  be  thrilled 
as  she  knelt  with  me  as  a child,  and  prayed,  “O 
Father,  keep  my  boy  from  ever  desiring  anything 
greater  than  to  live  for  Thee.  Save  him  early,  and 
make  him  a devoted  street-preacher,  as  his  father 
was.  Make  him  willing  to  suffer  for  Jesus’  sake,  to 
gladly  endure  persecution  and  rejection  by  the  world 
that  cast  out  Thy  Son;  and  keep  him  from  what 
would  dishonor  Thee.  ” The  words  were  not  always 
the  same,  but  I have  heard  the  sentiment  times 
without  number. 

To  our  home  there  often  came  servants  of  Christ — 
plain,  godly  men,  who  seemed  to  me  to  carry  with  them 
the  atmosphere  of  eternity.  Yet  in  a very  real  sense 
they  were  the  bane  of  my  boyhood.  Their  search- 
ing, “ Henry,  lad,  are  you  born  again  yet  ?”  or  the 
equally  impressive,  “Are  you  certain  that  your  soul 
is  saved?”  often  brought  me  to  a standstill;  but  I 
knew  not  how  to  reply. 

California  had  become  my  home  ere  I was  clear  as 
to  being  a child  of  God.  In  Los  Angeles  I first  be- 
gan to  learn  the  love  of  the  world,  and  was  impatient 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  9 

of  restraint.  Yet  I had  almost  continual  concern  as 
to  the  great  matter  of  my  salvation. 

I was  but  twelve  years  old  when  I began  a Sun- 
day-school and  set  up  to  try  to  help  the  boys  and 
girls  of  the  neighborhood  to  a knowledge  of  the  Book 
I had  read  ten  times  through,  but  which  had  still  left 
me  without  assurance  of  salvation. 

To  Timothy,  Paul  wrote,  4 4 From  a child  thou  hast 
known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make 
thee  wise  unto  salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus'"  (2  Tim.  3:  15).  It  was  this  latter  that 
I lacked.  I had,  it  seemed  to  me,  always  believed, 
yet  I dared  not  say  I was  saved.  I know  now  that  I 
had  always  believed  about  Jesus.  I had  not  really  be- 
lieved in  Him  as  my  personal  Saviour.  Between 
the  two  there  is  all  the  difference  that  there  is  be- 
tween being  saved  and  lost,  between  an  eternity  in 
heaven  and  endless  ages  in  the  lake  of  fire. 

As  I have  said,  I was  not  without  considerable 
anxiety  as  to  my  soul ; and  though  I longed  to  break 
into  the  world,  and  was  indeed  guilty  of  much  that 
was  vile  and  wicked,  I ever  felt  a restraining  hand 
upon  me,  keeping  me  from  many  things  that  I would 
otherwise  have  gone  into;  and  a certain  religiousness 
became,  I suppose,  characteristic.  But  religion  is 
not  salvation. 

I was  nearly  fourteen  years  old  when,  upon  re- 
turning one  day  from  school,  I learned  that  a serv- 
ant of  Christ  from  Canada,  well  known  to  me,  had 
arrived  for  meetings.  I knew,  ere  I saw  him,  how 
he  would  greet  me;  for  I remembered  him  well, 
and  his  searching  questions,  when  I was  younger. 
Therefore  I was  not  surprised,  but  embarrassed 


10 


HOLINESS: 


nevertheless,  when  he  exclaimed,  “Well,  Harry,  lad, 
I’m  glad  to  see  you.  And  are  you  born  again  yet?” 
The  blood  mantled  my  face;  I hung  my  head,  and 
could  find  no  words  to  reply.  An  uncle  present 

said,  “You  know,  Mr.  M , he  preaches  himself 

now  a bit,  and  conducts  a Sunday-school ! ” 

“ Indeed!  ” was  the  answer.  “Will  you  get  your 
Bible,  Harry  ? ” 

I was  glad  to  get  out  of  the  room,  and  so  went  at 
once  for  my  Bible,  and  returned,  after  remaining 
out  as  long  as  seemed  decent,  hoping  thereby  to  re- 
cover myself.  Upon  my  reentering  the  room,  he 
said,  kindly,  but  seriously,  “Will  you  turn  to  Rom. 
3:19,  and  read  it  aloud  ?” 

Slowly  I read,  “Now  we  know  that  what  things 
soever  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under 
the  law:  that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all 
the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God.”  I felt 
the  application,  and  was  at  a loss  for  words.  The 
evangelist  went  on  to  tell  me  that  he  too  had  been 
once  a religious  sinner,  till  God  stopped  his  mouth, 
and  then  gave  him  a sight  of  Christ.  He  pressed 
on  me  the  importance  of  getting  to  the  same  place 
ere  I tried  to  teach  others. 

The  words  had  their  effect.  From  that  time  till  I 
was  sure  I was  saved,  I refrained  from  talking  of 
these  things,  and  I gave  up  my  Sunday-school  work. 
But  now  Satan,  who  was  seeking  my  soul’s  destruc- 
tion, suggested  to  me,  “ If  lost  and  unfit  to  speak  of 
religious  things  to  others,  why  not  enjoy  all  the 
world  has  to  offer,  so  far  as  you  are  able  to  avail 
yourself  of  it  ? ” 

I listened  only  too  eagerly  to  his  words,  and  for 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


II 


the  next  six  months  or  thereabouts  no  one  was 
more  anxious  for  folly  than  I,  though  always  with 
a smarting  conscience. 

At  last,  on  a Thursday  evening  in  February,  1890, 
God  spoke  to  me  in  tremendous  power  while  out  at 
a gay  party  with  a lot  of  other  young  people,  mostly 
older  than  myself,  intent  only  on  an  evening’s  amuse- 
ment. I remember  now  that  I had  withdrawn  from 
the  parlor  for  a few  moments  to  obtain  a cooling 
drink  in  the  next  room.  Standing  alone  by  a re- 
freshment table,  there  came  home  to  my  inmost 
soul,  in  startling  clearness,  some  verses  of  Scripture 
I had  learned  months  before.  They  are  found  in 
the  first  chapter  of  Proverbs,  beginning  with  verse 
24  and  going  on  to  verse  32.  Here  wisdom  is  repre- 
sented as  laughing  at  the  calamity  of  the  one  who 
refused  to  heed  instruction,  and  mocking  when  his 
fear  cometh.  Every  word  seemed  to  burn  its  way 
into  my  heart.  I saw  as  never  before  my  dreadful 
guilt  in  having  so  long  refused  to  trust  Christ  for 
myself,  and  in  having  preferred  my  own  wilful  way 
to  that  of  Him  who  had  died  for  me. 

I went  back  to  the  parlor,  and  tried  to  join  with 
the  rest  in  their  empty  follies.  But  all  seemed  ut- 
terly hollow,  and  the  tinsel  was  gone.  The  light  of 
eternity  was  shining  into  the  room,  and  I wondered 
how  any  could  laugh  with  God’s  judgment  hanging 
over  us,  like  a Damocles’  sword  suspended  by  a hair. 
We  seemed  like  people  sporting  with  closed  eyes  on 
the  edge  of  a precipice,  and  I the  most  careless  of  all, 
till  grace  had  made  me  see. 

That  night,  when  all  was  over,  I hurried  home, 
and  crept  up-stairs  to  my  room.  There,  after  light- 


12 


holiness: 


ing  a lamp,  I took  my  Bible,  and,  with  it  before  me, 
fell  upon  my  knees. 

I had  an  undefined  feeling  that  I had  better  pray. 
But  the  thought  came,  “What  shall  I pray  for?” 
Clearly  and  distinctly  came  back  the  answer,  ‘ ‘ For 
what  God  has  been  offering  me  for  years.  Why  not 
then  receive  it,  and  thank  Him  ? ” 

My  dear  mother  had  often  said,  “The  place  to 
begin  with  God  is  at  Rom.  3,  or  John  3.”  To  both 
these  scriptures  I turned,  and  read  them  carefully. 
Clearly  I saw  that  I was  a helpless  sinner,  but  that 
for  me  Christ  had  died,  and  that  salvation  was 
offered  freely  to  all  who  trusted  in  Him.  Reading 
John  3:  16  the  second  time,  I said,  “That  will  do. 
O God,  I thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  loved  me,  and 
given  Thy  Son  for  me.  I trust  Him  now  as  my  Sa- 
viour, and  I rest  on  Thy  Word,  which  tells  me  I 
have  everlasting  life.” 

Then  I expected  to  feel  a thrill  of  joy.  It  did  not 
come.  I wondered  if  I could  be  mistaken.  I ex- 
pected a sudden  rush  of  love  for  Christ.  It  did  not 
come  either.  I feared  I could  not  be  really  saved 
with  so  little  emotion. 

I read  the  words  again.  There  could  be  no  mis- 
take. God  loved  the  world,  of  which  I formed  a 
part.  God  gave  His  Son  to  save  all  believers.  I 
believed  in  Him  as  my  Saviour.  Therefore  I must 
have  everlasting  life.  Again  I thanked  Him,  and 
rose  from  my  knees  to  begin  the  walk  of  faith.  God 
could  not  lie.  I knew  I must  be  saved. 


HOLINESS:  THE  GREAT  DESIDERATUM 


BEING  saved  my  self,  the  first  great  desire  that 
sprang  up  in  my  heart  was  an  intense  long- 
ing to  lead  others  to  the  One  who  had  made  my 
peace  with  God. 

At  the  time  of  which  I write,  the  Salvation  Army 
was  in  the  zenith  of  its  energy  as  an  organization 
devoted  to  going  out  after  the  lost.  It  had  not  yet 
become  popular,  a society  to  be  patronized  by  the 
world  and  used  as  a medium  for  philanthropic  work. 
Its  officers  and  soldiers  seemed  to  have  but  one 
aim  and  object — to  lead  the  weary  and  despairing 
to  the  Saviour’s  feet.  I had  often  attended  its 
services,  and  in  fact  had  frequently,  though  but  a 
child,  given  a “ testimony”  by  quoting  Scripture 
and  urging  sinners  to  trust  Christ,  even  while  I 
was  in  the  dark  myself.  Naturally  therefore,  when 
the  knowledge  of  salvation  was  mine,  I went  at  the 
first  opportunity,  the  night  after  my  conversion,  to 
an  “Army”  street-meeting,  and  there  spoke  for 
the  first  time,  in  the  open  air,  of  the  grace  of  God 
so  newly  revealed  to  my  soul. 

I suppose,  because  I was  but  a lad  of  fourteen 
and  fairly  familiar  with  the  Bible,  and  also  some- 
what forward — unduly  so,  I have  little  doubt — I 
was  at  once  cordially  welcomed  among  them,  and 
soon  became  known  as  “the  boy  preacher,”  a title 
which,  I fear,  ministered  more  to  the  pride  of  my 
heart  than  I had  any  idea  of  at  the  time.  For,  in 
fact,  in  my  new-found  joy  I had  no  conception  that 


14 


holiness: 


I still  carried  about  with  me  a nature  as  sinful  and 
vile  as  existed  in  the  breast  of  the  greatest  evil- 
doer in  the  world.  I knew  something  of  Christ  and 
His  love ; I knew  little  or  nothing  of  myself  and 
the  deceitfulness  of  my  own  heart. 

As  nearly  as  I can  now  recollect,  I was  in  the  en- 
joyment of  the  knowledge  of  God’s  salvation  about 
a month  when,  in  some  dispute  with  my  brother, 
who  was  younger  than  I,  my  temper  suddenly  es- 
caped control,  and  in  an  angry  passion  I struck  and 
felled  him  to  the  ground.  Horror  immediately 
filled  my  soul.  I needed  not  his  sarcastic  taunt, 
“ Well,  you  are  a nice  Christian!  You’d  better  go 
down  to  the  Army  and  tell  what  a saint  you’ve  be- 
come! ” to  send  me  to  my  room  in  anguish  of  heart 
to  confess  my  sin  to  God  in  shame  and  bitter  sor- 
row, as  afterwards  frankly  to  my  brother,  who  gen- 
erously forgave  me. 

From  this  time  on  mine  was  an  “ up-and-down 
experience,”  to  use  a term  often  heard  in  “testi- 
mony meetings.”  I longed  for  perfect  victory  over 
the  lusts  and  desires  of  the  flesh.  Yet  I seemed  to 
have  more  trouble  with  evil  thoughts  and  unholy 
propensities  than  I had  ever  known  before.  For  a 
long  time  I kept  these  conflicts  hidden,  and  known 
only  to  God  and  to  myself.  But  after  some  eight  or 
ten  months,  I became  interested  in  what  were 
called  “holiness  meetings,”  held  weekly  in  the 
“Army”  hall,  and  also  in  a mission  I sometimes 
attended.  At  these  gatherings  an  experience  was 
spoken  of  which  I felt  was  just  what  I needed. 
It  was  designated  by  various  terms:  “The  Sec- 
ond Blessing”;  “Sanctification”;  “Perfect  Love”; 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  15 

“Higher  Life”;  “Cleansing  from  Inbred  Sin”; 
and  by  other  expressions. 

Substantially,  the  teaching  was  this : When  con- 
verted, God  graciously  forgives  all  sins  committed 
up  to  the  time  when  one  repents.  But  the  believer 
is  then  placed  in  a lifelong  probation,  during  which 
he  may  at  any  time  forfeit  his  justification  and 
peace  with  God  if  he  falls  into  sin  from  which  he 
does  not  at  once  repent.  In  order,  therefore,  to 
maintain  himself  in  a saved  condition,  he  needs  a 
further  work  of  grace  called  sanctification.  This 
work  has  to  do  with  sin  the  root,  as  justification  had 
to  do  with  sins  the  fruit. 

The  steps  leading  up  to  this  second  blessing 
are,  firstly,  conviction  as  to  the  need  of  holiness 
(just  as  in  the  beginning  there  was  conviction  of 
the  need  of  salvation) ; secondly,  a full  surrender 
to  God,  or  the  laying  of  every  hope,  prospect  and 
possession  on  the  altar  of  consecration;  thirdly,  to 
claim  in  faith  the  incoming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a 
refining  fire  to  burn  out  all  inbred  sin,  thus  destroy- 
ing in  toto  every  lust  and  passion,  leaving  the  soul 
perfect  in  love  and  as  pure  as  unfallen  Adam. 
This  wonderful  blessing  received,  great  watchful- 
ness is  required  lest,  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve, 
he  deceive  the  sanctified  soul,  and  thus  introduce 
again  the  same  kind  of  an  evil  principle  which 
called  for  such  drastic  action  before. 

Such  was  the  teaching;  and  coupled  with  it  were 
heartfelt  testimonies  of  experiences  so  remarkable 
that  I could  not  doubt  their  genuineness,  nor  that 
what  others  seemed  to  enjoy  was  likewise  for  me  if 
I would  fulfil  the  conditions. 


i6 


holiness: 


One  aged  lady  told  how  for  forty  years  she  had 
been  kept  from  sin  in  thought,  word,  and  deed. 
Her  heart,  she  declared,  was  no  longer  “ deceitful 
above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,”  but  was 
as  holy  as  the  courts  of  heaven,  since  the  blood  of 
Christ  had  washed  away  the  last  remains  of  inbred 
sin.  Others  spoke  in  a similar  way,  though  their 
experiences  were  much  briefer.  Bad  tempers  had 
been  rooted  out  when  a full  surrender  was  made. 
Evil  propensities  and  unholy  appetites  had  been 
instantly  destroyed  when  holiness  was  claimed  by 
faith.  Eagerly  I began  to  seek  this  precious  boon 
of  holiness  in  the  flesh.  Earnestly  I prayed  for 
this  Adamic  sinlessness.  I asked  God  to  reveal  to 
me  every  unholy  thing,  that  I might  truly  surren- 
der all  to  Him.  I gave  up  friends,  pursuits,  pleas- 
ures— everything  I could  think  of  that  might  hinder 
the  incoming  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  consequent 
blessing.  I was  a veritable  “ book-worm,”  an  in- 
tense love  for  literature  possessing  me  from  child- 
hood; but  in  my  ignorant  desire  I put  away  all 
books  of  pleasurable  or  instructive  character,  and 
promised  God  to  read  only  the  Bible  and  holiness 
writings  if  He  would  only  give  me  “the  blessing.” 
I did  not,  however,  obtain  what  I sought,  though  I 
prayed  zealously  for  weeks. 

At  last,  one  Saturday  night  (I  was  now  away 
from  home,  living  with  a friend  a member  of  the 
“ Army  ”),  I determined  to  go  out  into  the  country 
and  wait  on  God,  not  returning  till  I had  received 
the  blessing  of  perfect  love.  I took  a train  at 
eleven  o’clock,  and  went  to  a lonely  station  twelve 
miles  from  Los  Angeles.  There  I alighted,  and, 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 

leaving  the  highway,  descended  into  an  empty  ar- 
royo,  or  water-course.  Falling  on  my  knees  beneath 
a sycamore  tree,  I prayed  in  an  agony  for  hours, 
beseeching  God  to  show  me  anything  that  hindered 
my  reception  of  the  blessing.  Various  matters  of 
too  private  and  sacred  a nature  to  be  here  related 
came  to  my  mind.  I struggled  against  conviction, 
but  finally  ended  by  crying,  “Lord,  I give  up  all — 
every  thing,  every  person,  every  enjoyment,  that 
would  hinder  my  living  alone  for  Thee.  Now  give 
me,  I pray  Thee,  the  blessing!  ” 

As  I look  back,  I believe  I was  fully  surrendered 
to  the  will  of  God  at  that  moment,  so  far  as  I un- 
derstood it.  But  my  brain  and  nerves  were  un- 
strung by  the  long  midnight  vigil  and  the  intense 
anxiety  of  previous  months,  and  I fell  almost  faint- 
ing to  the  ground.  Then  a holy  ecstasy  seemed  to 
thrill  all  my  being.  This  I thought  was  the  com- 
ing into  my  heart  of  the  Comforter.  I cried  out  in 
confidence,  “Lord,  I believe  Thou  dost  come  in. 
Thou  dost  cleanse  and  purify  me  from  all  sin.  I 
claim  it  now.  The  work  is  done.  I am  sanctified 
by  Thy  blood.  Thou  dost  make  me  holy.  I be- 
lieve ; I believe ! ” I was  unspeakably  happy.  I 
felt  that  all  my  struggles  were  ended. 

With  a heart  filled  with  praise,  I rose  from  the 
ground  and  began  to  sing  aloud.  Consulting  my 
watch,  I saw  it  was  about  half-past  three  in  the 
morning.  I felt  I must  hasten  to  town  so  as  to  be 
in  time  for  the  seven  o’clock  prayer-meeting,  there 
to  testify  to  my  experience.  Fatigued  as  I was  by 
being  up  all  night,  yet  so  light  was  my  heart  I 
scarcely  noticed  the  long  miles  back,  but  hastened 
2 


i8 


holiness: 


to  the  city,  arriving  just  as  the  meeting  was  begin- 
ning, buoyed  up  by  my  new-found  experience.  All 
were  rejoiced  as  I told  what  great  things  I believed 
God  had  done  for  me.  Every  meeting  that  day 
added  to  my  gladness.  I was  literally  intoxicated 
with  joyous  emotions. 

My  troubles  were  all  ended  now.  The  wilder- 
ness was  past,  and  I was  in  Canaan,  feeding  on  the 
old  corn  of  the  land.  Nevermore  should  I be 
troubled  by  inward  drawings  toward  sin.  My  heart 
was  pure.  I had  reached  the  desirable  state  of  full 
sanctification.  With  no  foe  within,  I could  direct 
all  my  energies  toward  vanquishing  the  enemies 
without. 

This  was  what  I thought.  Alas,  how  little  did  I 
know  myself;  much  less  the  mind  of  God! 


SUNSHINE  AND  CLOUDS 


FOR  some  weeks  after  the  eventful  experi- 
ence before  described,  I lived  in  a dream- 
ily-happy  state,  rejoicing  in  my  fancied  sinless- 
ness. One  great  idea  had  possession  of  my  mind; 
and  whether  at  work  or  in  my  leisure  hours,  I 
thought  of  little  else  than  the  wonderful  event 
which  had  taken  place.  But  gradually  I began  to 
“come  back  to  earth,”  as  it  were.  I was  now  em- 
ployed in  a photographic  studio,  where  I associated 
with  people  of  various  tastes  and  habits,  some  of 
whom  ridiculed,  some  tolerated,  and  others  sympa- 
thized with,  my  radical  views  on  things  religious. 
Night  after  night  I attended  the  meetings,  speak- 
ing on  the  street  and  indoors,  and  I soon  noticed 
(and  doubtless  others  did  too)  that  a change  came 
over  my  4 ‘ testimonies.”  Before,  I had  always  held 
up  Christ,  and  pointed  the  lost  to  Him.  Now,  al- 
most imperceptibly,  my  own  experience  became 
my  theme,  and  I held  up  myself  as  a striking  exam- 
ple of  consecration  and  holiness!  This  was  the 
prevailing  characteristic  of  the  brief  addresses 
made  by  most  of  the  “ advanced”  Christians  in  our 
company.  The  youngest  in  grace  magnified  Christ. 
The  ‘ 4 sanctified”  magnified  themselves.  A favor- 
ite song  will  make  this  more  manifest  than  any 
words  of  mine.  It  is  still  widely  used  in  Army 
meetings,  and  finds  a place  in  their  Song-  or  Hymn- 
books.  I give  only  one  verse  as  a specimen: 

“ Some  people  I know  don’t  live  holy  ; 

They  battle  with  unconquered  sin, 

Not  daring  to  consecrate  fully, 

Or  they  full  salvation  would  win. 


20 


holiness: 


With  malice  they  have  constant  trouble, 

From  doubting  they  long  to  be  free ; 

With  most  things  about  them  they  grumble ; 
Praise  God,  this  is  not  so  with  ME ! ” 

Will  the  reader  believe  me  when  I say  that  I 
sang  this  wretched  doggerel  without  a thought  of 
the  sinful  pride  to  which  it  was  giving  expression  ? 
I considered  it  my  duty  to  continually  direct  atten- 
tion to  “my  experience  of  full  salvation,”  as  it  was 
called.  “If  you  don’t  testify  to  it,  you  will  lose 
the  blessing,”  was  accepted  as  an  axiom  among  us. 

As  time  went  on,  I began  to  be  again  conscious 
of  inward  desires  toward  evil — of  thoughts  that 
were  unholy.  I was  nonplused.  Going  to  a lead- 
ing teacher  for  help,  he  said,  “These  are  but 
temptations.  Temptation  is  not  sin.  You  only  sin 
if  you  yield  to  the  evil  suggestion.”  This  gave  me 
peace  for  a time.  1 found  it  was  the  general  way 
of  excusing  such  evident  movings  of  a fallen  na- 
ture, which  was  supposed  to  have  been  eliminated. 
But  gradually  I sank  to  a lower  and  lower  plane, 
permitting  things  I would  once  have  shunned ; and 
I even  observed  that  all  about  me  did  the  same. 
The  first  ecstatic  experiences  seldom  lasted  long. 
The  ecstasy  departed,  and  the  “sanctified”  were 
in  very  little  different  from  their  brethren  who 
were  supposed  to  be  “only  justified.”  We  did  not 
commit  overt  acts  of  evil:  therefore  we  were  sin- 
less. Lust  was  not  sin  unless  yielded  to;  so  it  was 
easy  to  go  on  testifying  that  all  was  right. 

I purposely  pass  briefly  over  the  next  four  years. 
In  the  main  they  were  seasons  of  ignorantly  happy 
service.  I was  young  in  years  and  in  grace.  My 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


21 


thoughts  of  sin,  as  well  as  of  holiness,  were  very 
unformed  and  imperfect.  Therefore  it  was  easy, 
generally  speaking,  to  think  that  I was  living  with- 
out the  one,  and  manifesting  the  other.  When 
doubts  assailed,  I treated  them  as  temptations  of 
the  devil.  If  I became  unmistakably  conscious 
that  I had  actually  sinned,  I persuaded  myself  that 
at  least  it  was  not  wilful,  but  rather  a mistake  of 
the  mind  than  an  intentional  error  of  the  heart. 
Then  I went  to  God  in  confession,  and  prayed  to 
be  cleansed  from  secret  faults. 

When  but  sixteen  years  of  age  I became  a cadet; 
that  is,  a student  preparing  for  officership  in  the 
Salvation  Army.  During  my  probation  in  the  Oak- 
land Training  Garrison  I had  more  trouble  than  at 
any  other  time.  The  rigorous  discipline  and  en- 
forced intimate  association  with  young  men  of  so 
various  tastes  and  tendencies,  as  also  degrees  of 
spiritual  experience,  was  very  hard  on  one  of  my 
supersensitive  temperament.  I saw  very  little  ho- 
liness there,  and  I fear  I exhibited  much  less.  In 
fact,  for  the  last  two  out  of  my  five  months’  term  I 
was  all  at  sea,  and  dared  not  profess  sanctification 
at  all,  owing  to  my  low  state.  I was  tormented 
with  the  thought  that  I had  backslidden,  and  might 
be  lost  eternally  after  all  my  former  happy  experi- 
ences of  the  Lord’s  goodness.  Twice  I slipped  out 
of  the  building  when  all  were  in  bed,  and  made  my 
way  to  a lonely  spot  where  I spent  the  night  in 
prayer,  beseeching  God  not  to  take  His  Holy  Spirit 
from  me,  but  to  again  cleanse  me  fully  from  all  in- 
bred  sin.  Each  time  I ‘ 4 claimed  it  by  faith,”  and 
was  brighter  for  a few  weeks;  but  I inevitably 


22 


HOLINESS: 


again  fell  into  doubt  and  gloom,  and  was  conscious 
of  sinning  both  in  thought  and  in  word,  and  some- 
times in  unholy  actions,  which  brought  terrible  re- 
morse. 

Finally,  I was  commissioned  as  Lieutenant.  Again 
I spent  the  night  in  prayer,  feeling  that  I must  not 
go  out  to  teach  and  lead  others  unless  myself  pure 
and  holy.  Buoyed  up  with  the  thought  of  being  free 
from  the  restraint  I had  been  subjected  to  so  long, 
it  was  comparatively  easy  this  time  to  believe  that 
the  work  of  full  inward  cleansing  was  indeed  con- 
summated, and  that  I was  now,  if  never  before,  act- 
ually rid  of  all  carnality. 

How  readily  one  yields  himself  to  self-deception 
in  a matter  of  this  kind!  From  this  time  on  I be- 
came a more  earnest  advocate  of  the  second  bless- 
ing than  ever;  and  I remember  that  often  I prayed 
God  to  give  my  dear  mother  the  blessing  He  had 
given  me,  and  to  make  her  as  holy  as  her  son  had 
become.  And  that  pious  mother  had  known  Christ 
before  I was  born,  and  knew  her  own  heart  too 
well  to  talk  of  sinlessness,  though  living  a devoted, 
Christlike  life ! 

As  lieutenant  for  a year,  and  then  as  captain,* 
I thoroughly  enjoyed  my  work,  gladly  enduring 
hardship  and  privation  that  I fear  I would  shrink 
from  now;  generally  confident  that  I was  living 
out  the  doctrine  of  perfect  love  to  God  and  man, 
and  thereby  making  my  own  final  salvation 
more  secure.  And  yet,  as  I now  look  back,  what 

* Perhaps  I ought  to  explain  for  the  benefit  of  the  uninitiated 
that  a “captain ” has  charge  of  a corps,  or  mission.  A “lieuten- 
ant ” assists  a “ captain.” 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


23 


grave  failures  I can  detect — what  an  unsubdued 
will — what  lightness  and  frivolity — what  lack  of 
subjection  to  the  word  of  God — what  self-satisfac- 
tion and  complacency!  Alas,  ‘‘man  at  his  best  es- 
tate is  altogether  vanity.” 

I was  between  eighteen  and  nineteen  years  of 
age  when  I began  to  entertain  serious  doubts  as  to 
my  actually  having  attained  so  high  a standard  of 
Christian  living  as  I had  professed,  and  as  the  Army 
and  other  Holiness  movements  advocated  as  the 
only  real  Christianity.  What  led  to  this  was  of  too 
personal  and  private  a nature  to  publish;  but  it 
resulted  in  struggle  and  efforts  toward  self-crucifix- 
ion that  brought  disappointment  and  sorrow  of  a 
most  poignant  character ; but  it  showed  me  beyond 
a doubt  that  the  doctrine  of  death  to  nature  was  a 
miserable  sophism,  and  that  the  carnal  mind  was 
still  a part  of  my  being. 

Nearly  eighteen  months  of  an  almost  constant 
struggle  followed.  In  vain  I searched  my  heart  to 
see  if  I had  made  a full  surrender,  and  tried  to  give 
up  every  known  thing  that  seemed  in  any  sense 
evil  or  doubtful.  Sometimes,  for  a month  at  a 
time,  or  even  longer,  I could  persuade  myself  that 
at  last  I had  indeed  again  received  the  blessing. 
But  invariably  a few  weeks  would  bring  before  me 
once  more  that  which  proved  that  it  was  in  my  par- 
ticular case  all  a delusion. 

I did  not  dare  open  my  heart  to  my  assistants  in 
the  work,  or  to  the  “soldiers”  who  were  under  my 
guidance.  To  do  so  I felt  would  be  to  lose  all  in- 
fluence with  them  and  to  be  looked  upon  as  a back- 
slider. So,  alone  and  in  secret,  I fought  my  battles 


24 


holiness: 


and  never  went  into  a holiness  meeting  without 
persuading  myself  that  now  at  least,  I was  fully 
surrendered  and  therefore  must  have  the  blessing  of 
sanctification.  Sometimes  I called  it  entire  conse- 
cration and  felt  easier.  It  did  not  seem  to  be  claim- 
ing too  much.  I had  no  conception  at  the  time  of 
the  hypocrisy  of  all  this. 

What  made  my  distress  more  poignant  was  the 
knowledge  that  I was  not  the  only  sufferer.  An- 
other, one  very  dear  to  me,  shared  my  doubts  and 
anxieties  from  the  same  cause.  For  that  other  it 
eventually  meant  utter  shipwreck  of  the  faith;  and 
one  of  the  loveliest  souls  I ever  knew  was  lost  in 
the  mazes  of  spiritualism.  God  grant  it  may  not 
be  forever,  but  that  mercy  may  be  found  of  the 
Lord  in  that  day ! 

And  now  I began  to  see  what  a string  of  derelicts 
this  holiness  teaching  left  in  its  train.  I could 
count  scores  of  persons  who  had  gone  into  utter  in- 
fidelity because  of  it.  They  always  gave  the  same 
reason:  “ I tried  it  all.  I found  it  a failure.  So  I 
concluded  the  Bible  teaching  was  all  a delusion, 
and  religion  was  a mere  matter  of  the  emotions.” 
Many  more  (and  I knew  several  such  intimately) 
lapsed  into  insanity  after  floundering  in  the  morass 
of  this  emotional  religion  for  years — and  people 
said  that  studying  the  Bible  had  driven  them  crazy. 
How  little  they  knew  that  it  was  lack  of  Bible 
knowledge  that  was  accountable  for  their  wretched 
mental  state — an  absolutely  unscriptural  use  of  iso- 
lated passages  of  Scripture ! 

At  last  I became  so  troubled  I could  not  go  on 
with  my  work.  I concluded  to  resign  from  the  Sal- 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


25 


vation  Army,  and  did  so,  but  was  persuaded  by  the 
colonel*  to  wait  six  months  ere  the  resignation 
took  effect.  At  his  suggestion  I gave  up  corps 
work  and  went  out  on  a special  tour — where  I did 
not  need  to  touch  the  holiness  question.  But  I 
preached  to  others  many  times  when  I was  tor- 
mented by  the  thought  that  I might  myself  be 
finally  lost,  because,  “without  holiness  no  man 
shall  see  the  Lord”;  and,  try  as  I would,  I could 
not  be  sure  I possessed  it.  I talked  with  any  who 
seemed  to  me  to  really  have  the  blessing  I craved; 
but  there  were  very  few  who,  upon  an  intimate  ac- 
quaintanceship, seemed  genuine.  I observed  that 
the  general  state  of  “sanctified”  people  was  as 
low,  if  not  often  lower,  than  that  of  those  whom  they 
contemptuously  described  as  “only  justified.” 

Finally,  I could  bear  it  no  longer,  so  asked  to  be 
relieved  from  all  active  service,  and  at  my  own  re- 
quest was  sent  to  the  Beulah  Home  of  Rest,  near 
Oakland. 

It  was  certainly  time  ; for  five  years'  active  work, 
with  only  two  brief  furloughs,  had  left  me  almost  a 
nervous  wreck,  worn  out  in  body  and  most  acutely 
distressed  in  mind. 

The  language  of  my  troubled  soul,  after  all  those 
years  of  preaching  to  others,  was,  “Oh  that  I knew 
where  I might  find  Him!”  Finding  Him  not,  I 
saw  only  the  blackness  of  despair  before  me;  but 
yet  I knew  too  well  His  love  and  care  to  be  com- 
pletely cast  down. 


Answering  to  a bishop  in  other  denominations. 


THE  STRUGGLE  ENDED 


I HAD  now  been  for  over  five  years  laboring  in 
the  organization  with  which  I had  linked  my- 
self, and  ever  seeking  to  be  certain  that  I had  at- 
tained a sinless  state.  In  some  twelve  different 
towns  and  cities  I had  served,  as  I thought,  faith- 
fully, endeavoring  to  reach  the  lost,  and  to  make 
out  of  them  staunch  Salvationists  when  converted. 
Many  happy  experiences  had  been  mine,  coupled, 
however,  with  some  most  gloomy  disappointments, 
both  as  to  myself  and  others.  Very  few  of  our 
“converts’'  stood.  “Backsliders”  often  outnum- 
bered by  far  our  “soldiers.”  The  ex-Salvation 
Army  was  many  times  larger  than  the  original  or- 
ganization. 

One  great  reason  for  this  I was  blind  to  for  a long 
time.  But  at  last  it  began  to  be  clear  to  me  that 
the  holiness  doctrine  had  a most  baneful  influence 
upon  the  movement.  People  who  professed  con- 
version (whether  real  or  not  the  day  will  declare) 
struggled  for  months,  even  years,  to  reach  a state 
of  sinlessness  which  never  was  reached;  and  at  last 
they  gave  up  in  despair  and  sank  back  in  many 
instances  to  the  dead  level  of  the  world  around 
them. 

I saw  that  it  was  the  same  with  all  the  holiness 
denominations,  and  the  various  “Bands,”  “ Mis- 
sions,’’and  other  movements,  that  were  continually 
breaking  off  from  them.  The  standard  set  was  the 
unattainable.  The  result  was,  sooner  or  later,  utter 
discouragement,  cunningly-concealed  hypocrisy,  or 
an  unconscious  lowering  of  the  standard  to  suit  the 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


27 


experience  reached.  For  myself  I had  been  en- 
snared by  the  last  expedient  for  a long  time.  How 
much  of  the  second  there  was  I do  not  dare  to  say. 
But  eventually  I fell  a victim  to  the  first.  And  I 
can  now  see  that  it  was  a mercy  I did  so. 

When  I went  to  the  Home  of  Rest  I had  not  yet 
fully  given  up  seeking  for  perfection  in  the  flesh. 
I really  expected  great  things  from  the  six  months’ 
furlough  granted  me,  in  order  to  “find  myself,”  as 
it  were.  Closely  allied  to  the  Home  were  other 
institutions  where  holiness  and  faith-healing  were 
largely  dwelt  upon.  I felt  sure  that  in  so  hallowed 
an  atmosphere  great  things  would  be  accomplished. 

In  the  Rest  Home  I found  about  fourteen  officers, 
broken  in  health,  seeking  recuperation.  I watched 
the  ways  and  conversation  of  all  most  carefully,  in- 
tending to  confide  in  those  who  gave  the  best  evi- 
dence of  entire  sanctification.  There  were  some 
choice  souls  among  them,  and  some  arrant  hypo- 
crites. But  holiness  in  the  absolute  sense  I saw  in 
none.  Some  were  very  godly  and  devoted.  Their 
conscientiousness  I could  not  doubt.  But  those 
who  talked  the  loudest  were  plainly  the  least  spirit- 
ual. They  seldom  read  their  Bibles,  they  rarely 
conversed  together  of  Christ.  An  air  of  careless- 
ness pervaded  the  whole  place.  Three  sisters, 
most  devoted  women,  were  apparently  more  godly 
than  any  others;  but  two  of  them  admitted  to  me 
that  they  were  not  sure  about  being  perfectly  holy. 
The  other  one  was  non-committal,  though  seeking 
to  help  me.  Some  were  positively  quarrelsome 
and  boorish,  and  this  I could  not  reconcile  with 
theii  profession  of  freedom  from  inbred  sin.  I at- 


28 


holiness: 


tended  the  meetings  held  by  the  other  workers  I 
have  mentioned.  There  the  best  of  them  did  not 
teach  sinless  perfection;  while  the  manifestly  car- 
nal gloried  in  their  experience  of  perfect  love! 
Sick  people  testified  to  being  healed  by  faith,  and 
sinning  people  declared  they  had  the  blessing  of 
holiness!  I was  not  helped,  but  hindered,  by  the 
inconsistency  of  it  all. 

At  last  I found  myself  becoming  cold  and  cyni- 
cal. Doubts  as  to  everything  assailed  me  like  a le- 
gion of  demons,  and  I became  almost  afraid  to  let 
my  mind  dwell  on  these  things.  For  refuge  I 
turned  to  secular  literature,  and  sent  for  my  books, 
which  some  years  before  I had  foresworn  on  condi- 
tion that  God  would  give  me  the  “second  blessing.” 
How  little  I realized  the  Jacob-spirit  in  all  this! 
God  seemed  to  have  failed;  so  I took  up  my  books 
once  more,  and  tried  to  find  solace  in  the  beauties 
of  essays  and  poetry,  or  the  problems  of  history 
and  science.  I did  not  dare  to  confess  to  myself 
that  I was  literally  an  agnostic;  yet  for  a month  at 
least  I could  only  answer,  “I  do  not  know”  to 
every  question  based  on  divine  revelation. 

This  was  the  legitimate  result  of  the  teaching  I 
had  been  under.  I reasoned  that  the  Bible  prom- 
ised entire  relief  from  indwelling  sin  to  all  who 
were  wholly  surrendered  to  the  will  of  God.  That 
I had  thus  surrendered  seemed  to  me  certain. 
Why  then  had  I not  been  fully  delivered  from  the 
carnal  mind?  It  seemed  to  me  that  I had  met 
every  condition,  and  that  God,  on  His  part,  had 
failed  to  perform  what  He  had  promised.  I know 
it  is  wretched  to  write  all  this:  but  I see  no  other 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


29 


way  to  help  others  who  are  in  the  same  state  that  I 
was  in  for  that  awful  month. 

Deliverance  came  at  last  in  a most  unexpected 
way.  A lassie-lieutenant,  a woman  some  ten  years 
my  senior  in  age,  was  brought  to  the  Home  from 
Rock  Springs,  Wyo.,  supposedly  dying  of  consump- 
tion. From  the  first  my  heart  went  out  to  her  in 
deep  sympathy.  To  me  she  was  a martyr,  laying 
down  her  life  for  a needy  world.  I was  much  in 
her  company,  observed  her  closely,  and  finally  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  she  was  the  only  wholly  sanc- 
tified person  in  that  place. 

Imagine  my  surprise  when,  a few  weeks  after  her 
arrival,  she,  with  a companion,  came  to  me  one 
evening  and  begged  me  to  read  to  her;  remarking, 
“ I hear  you  are  always  occupied  with  the  things  of 
the  Lord,  and  I need  your  help.”  /the  one  to  help 
her!  I was  dumfounded,  knowing  so  well  the 
plague  of  my  own  heart,  and  being  so  fully  assured 
as  to  her  perfection  in  holiness.  At  the  very  mo- 
ment they  entered  my  room  I was  reading  Byron’s 
“ Childe  Harold.”  And  I was  supposed  to  be  en- 
tirely devoted  to  the  things  of  God!  It  struck  me 
as  weird  and  fantastic,  rather  than  as  a solemn 
farce — all  this  comparing  ourselves  with  ourselves, 
only  to  be  deluded  every  time, 

I hastily  thrust  the  book  to  one  side,  and  won- 
dered what  to  choose  to  read  aloud.  In  God’s  prov- 
idence a pamphlet  caught  my  attention  which  my 
mother  had  given  me  some  years  before,  but  which 
I had  dreaded  to  read  lest  it  might  upset  me ; so 
afraid  had  I been  of  anything  that  did  not  bear  the 
Army  or  Holiness  stamp.  Moved  by  a sudden  im- 


holiness: 


pulse,  I drew  it  forth  and  said,  4 ‘I’ll  read  this.  It 
is  not  in  accordance  with  our  teaching ; but  it  may 
be  interesting  any  way.”  I read  page  after  page, 
paying  little  attention,  only  hoping  to  soothe  and 
quiet  this  dying  woman.  In  it  the  lost  condition  of 
all  men  by  nature  was  emphasized.  Redemption 
in  Christ  through  His  death  was  explained,,  Then 
there  was  much  as  to  the  believer’s  two  natures, 
and  his  eternal  security,  which  to  me  seemed  both 
ridiculous  and  absurd.  The  latter  part  was  occu- 
pied with  prophecy.  Upon  that  we  did  not  enter. 
I was  startled  after  going  over  the  first  half  of  the 

book  when  Lieut.  J exclaimed,  “O  Captain,  do 

you  think  that  can  possibly  be  true  ? If  I could 
only  believe  that,  I could  die  in  peace ! ” 

Astonished  beyond  measure,  I asked,  “ What!  do 
you  mean  to  say  you  could  not  die  in  peace  as  you 
are  ? You  are  justified  and  sanctified;  you  have  an 
experience  I have  sought  in  vain  for  years;  and  are 
you  troubled  about  dying?”  “I  am  miserable,” 
she  replied,  “and  you  mustn’t  say  I am  sancti- 
fied. I cannot  get  it.  I have  struggled  for  years, 
but  I have  not  reached  it  yet.  This  is  why  I wanted 
to  speak  with  you,  for  I felt  so  sure  you  had  it  and 
could  help  me!  ” 

We  looked  at  each  other  in  amazement;  and  as 
the  pathos  and  yet  ludicrousness  of  it  all  burst  upon 
us,  I laughed  deliriously,  while  she  wept  hysteri- 
cally. Then  I remember  exclaiming,  “Whatever 
is  the  matter  with  us  all  ? No  one  on  earth  denies 
himself  more  for  Christ’s  sake  than  we.  We  suffer, 
and  starve,  and  wear  ourselves  out  in  the  endeavor 
to  do  the  will  of  God;  yet  after  all  we  have  no  last * 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  31 

ing  peace.  We  are  happy  at  times;  we  enjoy  our 
meetings;  but  we  are  never  certain  as  to  what  the 
end  will  be.” 

“Do  you  think,”  she  asked,  “ that  it  is  because 
we  depend  upon  our  own  efforts  too  much  ? Can  it 
be  that  we  trust  Christ  to  save  us,  but  we  think  we 
have  to  keep  saved  by  our  own  faithfulness — ?” 

“ But,”  I broke  in,  “ to  think  anything  else  would 
open  the  door  to  all  kinds  of  sin!  ” 

And  so  we  talked  till,  wearied  out,  she  arose  to 
go,  but  asked  if  she  and  others  might  return  the 
next  evening  to  read  and  talk  of  these  things  we 
had  gone  over — a permission  which  was  readily 
granted. 

For  both  Lieut.  J and  myself  that  evening’s 

reading  and  exchange  of  confidences  proved  the 
beginning  of  our  deliverance.  We  had  frankly 
owned  to  one  another,  and  to  the  third  party  pres- 
ent, that  we  were  not  sanctified.  We  now  began 
to  search  the  Scriptures  earnestly  for  light  and 
help.  I threw  all  secular  books  to  one  side,  deter- 
mined to  let  nothing  hinder  the  careful,  prayerful 
study  of  the  word  of  God.  Little  by  little,  the  light 
began  to  dawn.  We  saw  that  we  had  been  looking 
within  for  holiness,  instead  of  without.  We  realized 
that  the  same  grace  that  had  saved  us  at  first  alone 
could  carry  us  on.  Dimly  we  apprehended  that  all 
for  us  must  be  in  Christ,  or  we  were  without  a ray 
of  hope. 

Many  questions  perplexed  and  troubled  us. 
Much  that  we  had  believed  we  soon  saw  to  be  ut- 
terly opposed  to  the  word  of  God.  Much  more  we 
could  not  understand,  so  completely  warped  had 


32 


holiness: 


our  minds  become  through  the  training  of  years. 
In  my  perplexity  I sought  out  a teacher  of  the 
Word  who,  I understood,  was  in  fellowship  with 
the  writer  of  the  pamphlet  I have  referred  to 
above.  I heard  him  with  profit  on  two  occasions, 
but  still  was  in  measure  bewildered,  though  I be- 
gan to  feel  solid  ground  beneath  my  feet  once  more. 
The  great  truth  was  getting  a grip  of  me  that  holi- 
ness, perfect  love,  sanctification,  and  every  other 
blessing,  were  mine  in  Christ  from  the  moment  I 
had  believed,  and  mine  forevermore,  because  all  of 
pure  grace.  I had  been  looking  at  the  wrong  man 
— all  was  in  another  Man,  and  in  that  Man  for  me ! 
But  it  took  weeks  to  see  this. 

A booklet  blessed  to  many  proved  helpful  to  both 
of  us.  The  title,  “Safety,  Certainty,  and  Enjoy- 
ment,”* was  itself  a source  of  cheer.  Other  tracts 
were  given  me,  and  read  with  earnest  purpose, 
looking  up  every  reference,  searching  context  and 
other  passages  of  like,  or  apparently  opposite,  char- 
acter, while  daily  we  cried  to  God  for  the  knowl- 
edge of  His  truth.  Miss  J saw  it  ere  I did. 

The  light  came  when  she  realized  that  she  was 
eternally  linked  up  with  Christ  as  Head,  and  had 
eternal  life  in  Him  as  the  Vine,  in  her  as  the  branch. 
Her  joy  knew  no  bounds,  and  she  actually  improved 
in  health  from  that  hour,  and  lived  for  six  years 
after;  finally  going  to  be  with  the  Lord,  worn  out 
in  seeking  to  lead  others  to  Christ.  Many  will  be 
disappointed  to  know  that  she  maintained  her  com 


* A 4 cent  stamp  will  bring  this  to  the  reader.  Address  the 
same  Publishers. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


33 


nection  with  the  Army  to  the  last.  She  had  a mis- 
taken (I  believe)  notion  that  she  should  remain 
where  she  was,  and  declare  the  truth  she  had 
learned.  But  ere  she  died  she  repented  of  this. 
Her  last  words  to  a brother  (A.  B.  S.)  and  me,  who 
were  with  her  very  near  the  end,  were:  “I  have 
everything  in  Christ — of  that  I am  sure.  But  I 
wish  I had  been  more  faithful  as  to  the  truth  I 
learned  about  the  Body — the  Church.  I was  misled 
by  zeal  which  I thought  was  of  God,  and  it  is  too 
late  to  be  faithful  now  ! ” 

Four  days  after  the  truth  burst  upon  her  soul  in 
that  Home  of  Rest,  I too  had  every  doubt  and  fear 
removed,  and  found  my  all  in  Christ.  To  go  on 
where  I was,  I could  not.  Within  a week  I was 
outside  of  the  only  human  system  I had  ever  been 
in  as  a Christian,  and  for  many  years  since  I have 
known  no  head  but  Christ,  no  body  but  the  one 
Church  which  He  purchased  with  His  own  blood. 
They  have  been  happy  years;  and  as  I look  back 
over  all  the  way  the  Lord  has  led  me,  I can  but 
praise  Him  for  the  matchless  grace  that  caused 
Him  to  set  me  free  from  introspection,  and  gave 
me  to  see  that  perfect  holiness  and  perfect  love 
were  to  be  found,  not  in  me,  but  in  Christ  Jesus 
alone. 

And  I have  been  learning  all  along  my  pilgrim 
journey  that  the  more  my  heart  is  taken  up  with 
Christ,  the  more  do  I enjoy  practical  deliverance 
from  sin’s  power,  and  the  more  do  I realize  what  it 
is  to  have  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  that  heart 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  given  to  me,  as  the  earnest  of 
the  glory  to  come.  I have  found  liberty  and  joy 
3 


34 


holiness: 


since  being  thus  freed  from  bondage  that  I never 
thought  it  possible  for  a soul  to  know  on  earth, 
while  I have  a confidence  in  presenting  this  pre- 
cious truth  for  the  acceptance  of  others  that  con- 
trasts with  the  uncertainty  of  the  past. 

I purpose  dwelling  somewhat  fully  upon  the 
truth  that  wrought  my  deliverance,  in  the  second 
part  of  these  papers;  but  I desire,  ere  closing  the 
experimental  part,  to  sum  up  in  one  more  chapter 
my  impressions  of  the  Holiness  movement. 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  HOLINESS  MOVEMENT 


SINCE  turning  aside  from  the  perfectionist  soci- 
eties, I have  often  been  asked  if  I find  as  high 
a standard  maintained  among  Christians  generally 
who  do  not  profess  to  have  the  “ second  blessing’* 
as  I have  seen  among  those  who  do.  My  answer 
is  that  after  carefully,  and  I trust  without  preju- 
dice, considering  both,  I have  found  a far  higher 
standard  maintained  by  believers  who  intelligently 
reject  the  eradication  theory  than  among  those  who 
accept  it.  Quiet,  unassuming  Christians,  who  know 
their  Bibles  and  their  own  hearts  too  well  to  permit 
their  lips  to  talk  of  sinlessness  and  perfection  in  the 
flesh,  nevertheless  are  characterized  by  intense  de- 
votion to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  love  for  the  word 
of  God,  and  holiness  of  life  and  walk.  But  these 
blessed  fruits  spring,  not  from  self-occupation,  but 
from  occupation  with  Christ  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

The  great  professing  body  who  are  scarcely  clear 
or  pronounced  as  to  anything,  I do  not  here  take 
into  account.  I refer  rather  to  those  among  the 
various  denominations,  and  those  outside  of  all  such 
companies,  who  confess  Christ  boldly  and  seek  to 
be  a testimony  for  Him  in  the  world.  Compared 
with  these,  I repeat,  a far  lower  standard  of  Chris- 
tian living  is  found  amotig  the  so-called  holiness 
people. 

The  reasons  are  not  far  to  seek;  for  in  the  first 
place  the  profession  of  holiness  induces  a subtle 


36 


holiness: 


spiritual  pride  that  is  often  the  veriest  pharisaism, 
and  frequently  leads  to  the  most  manifest  self-con- 
fidence. And  secondly,  the  next  thing  to  saying  I 
live  without  sin,  is  to  say  that  nothing  that  I do  is 
sin.  Consequently,  the  teaching  of  holiness  in  the 
flesh  tends  to  harden  the  conscience  and  to  cause 
the  one  who  professes  it  to  lower  the  standard  to 
his  own  poor  experience.  Any  who  move  much 
among  those  in  this  profession  will  soon  begin  to 
realize  how  greatly  prevalent  are  the  conditions  I 
have  described.  Holiness  professors  are  frequently 
cutting,  censorious,  uncharitable  and  harsh  in  their 
judgment  of  others.  Exaggerations,  amounting  to 
downright  dishonesty,  are  unconsciously  encour- 
aged by  and  often  indulged  in  in  their  “ testimony  ” 
meetings.  The  rank  and  file  are  no  freer  from  vul- 
garisms, slangy  expressions,  and  levity  in  conversa- 
tion than  ordinary  persons  who  make  no  such  pro- 
fession; while  many  of  the  preachers  are  largely 
given  to  sensational  and  amusing  sermons  that  are 
anything  but  serious  and  edifying.  And  all  this, 
mark  you,  without  sinning ! 

The  apostle  Paul  emphasizes  “envy,  strife  and 
divisions”  as  evidences  of  carnality,  and  designates 
them  as  the  works  of  the  flesh.  Where  have  divi- 
sions, with  all  their  accompanying  evils,  been  more 
manifest  than  among  the  rival  holiness  organiza- 
tions, some  of  which  roundly  denounce  all  con- 
nected with  the  others  as  4 ‘ backsliders,”  and  “on 
the  road  to  hell”?  I have  heard  such  denuncia- 
tions on  many  occasions.  The  bitterness  existing 
between  the  Salvation  Army  and  the  various  off- 
shoots therefrom — the  Volunteers  of  America,  the 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


37 


discredited  American  Salvation  Army,  the  now 
defunct  Gospel  Army,  and  other  “armies” — may 
be  instanced  as  cases  in  point;  while  the  other  holi- 
ness societies  have  no  brighter  records.  I have  ob- 
served that  debt  and  its  twin  brother,  worry,  are 
as  common  among  such  professors  as  among  others. 
In  fact,  the  sinfulness  of  worrying  rarely  seems  to 
be  apprehended  by  them.  Holiness  advocates  have 
all  the  little  unpleasant  ways  that  are  so  trying  in 
many  of  us:  they  are  no  more  free  from  penurious- 
ness, tattling,  evil-speaking,  selfishness,  and  kin- 
dred weaknesses,  than  their  neighbors. 

And  as  to  downright  wickedness  and  unclean- 
ness, I regret  to  have  to  record  that  sins  of  a posi- 
tively immoral  character  are,  I fear,  far  more  fre- 
quently met  with  in  holiness  churches  and  missions, 
and  Salvation  Army  bands,  than  the  outsider  would 
think  possible.  I know  whereof  I speak;  and  only 
a desire  to  save  others  from  the  bitter  disappoint- 
ments I had  to  meet  leads  me  to  write  as  I do. 
Among  Christians  generally  there  are  failures  that 
shock  and  wound  the  sensibilities  of  many,  occur- 
ring from  time  to  time,  through  a lack  of  watching 
unto  prayer.  But  surely,  among  the  holiness  peo- 
ple, such  failures,  if  they  ever  occur,  do  so  at  very 
rare  intervals!  Would  that  I could  say  so.  Alas, 
it  is  far  otherwise ! The  path  of  the  holiness  move- 
ment (including,  of  course,  the  Salvation  Army)  is 
strewn  with  thousands  of  such  moral  and  spiritual 
breakdowns.  I would  not  dare  to  try  to  tell  of  the 
scores,  yea,  hundreds,  of  “sanctified”  officers  and 
soldiers  who  to  my  personal  knowledge  were  dis- 
missed from  or  left  the  “Army  ” in  disgrace  during 


holiness: 


38 

my  five  years’  officership.  It  will  be  objected  that 
such  persons  had  ‘‘lost  their  sanctification”  ere 
lapsing  into  these  evil  practices;  but  of  what  real 
value  is  a “ sanctification  ” that  leaves  its  possessor 
not  one  whit  more  to  be  relied  upon  than  one  who 
lays  claim  to  nothing  of  the  sort  ? 

On  the  other  hand,  I gladly  concede  that  both  in 
the  ranks  of  the  religious-military  society  of  which 
I was  once  a member,  and  in  other  holiness  organi- 
zations, there  are  many,  very  many,  pious,  devoted 
men  and  women  whose  zeal  for  God  and  self-abne- 
gation are  lovely  to  witness,  and  will  surely  be  re- 
warded in  “that  day.”  But  let  no  one  be  blinded 
by  this  to  suppose  it  is  the  holiness  doctrine  that 
has  made  them  such.  The  refutation  of  this  is  the 
simple  fact  that  the  great  majority  of  martyrs,  mis- 
sionaries and  servants  of  Christ  who  in  all  the 
Christian  centuries  have  “loved  not  their  lives  unto 
the  death,”  never  dreamed  of  making  such  a claim 
for  themselves,  but  daily  owned  their  sinfulness  by 
nature  and  constant  need  of  the  advocacy  of  Christ. 

The  testimonies  of  many  who  were  at  one  time 
prominent  in  other  organizations  where  holiness  in 
the  flesh  is  preached  and  professed  fully  agree  with 
mine  as  to  the  large  percentage  of  “ backslidings  ” 
from  virtue  and  personal  purity. 

Superstition  and  fanaticism  of  the  grossest  char- 
acter find  a hotbed  among  “holiness”  advocates. 
Witness  the  present  disgusting  “Tongues  Move- 
ment,” with  all  its  attendant  delusions  and  insani- 
ties. An  unhealthy  craving  for  new  and  thrilling 
religious  sensations,  and  emotional  meetings  of  a 
most  exciting  character,  readily  account  for  these 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


39 


things.  Because  settled  peace  is  unknown,  and 
final  salvation  is  supposed  to  depend  on  progress  in 
the  soul,  people  get  to  depend  so  much  upon  “ bless- 
ings,” and  “new  baptisms  of  the  Spirit/’  as  they 
call  these  experiences,  that  they  readily  fall  a prey 
to  the  most  absurd  delusions.  In  the  last  few 
years  hundreds  of  holiness  meetings  all  over  the 
world  have  been  literally  turned  into  pandemoni- 
ums where  exhibitions  worthy  of  a madhouse  or  of 
a collection  of  howling  dervishes  are  held  night 
after  night.  No  wonder  a heavy  toll  of  lunacy  and 
infidelity  is  the  frequent  result. 

Now  I am  well  aware  that  many  holiness  teach- 
ers repudiate  all  connection  with  these  fanatics; 
but  they  do  not  seem  to  see  that  it  is  their  doctrines 
that  are  the  direct  cause  of  the  disgusting  fruits  I 
have  been  enumerating.  Let  a full  Christ  be 
preached,  a finished  work  be  proclaimed,  the  truth 
of  the  indwelling  Spirit  be  scripturally  taught,  and 
all  these  excrescences  disappear. 

Perhaps  the  saddest  thing  about  the  movement 
to  which  I have  referred  is  the  long  list  of  ship- 
wrecks concerning  the  faith  to  be  attributed  to  its 
unsound  instruction.  Large  numbers  of  persons 
seek  “holiness”  for  years  only  to  find  they  have 
had  the  unattainable  before  them.  Others  profess 
to  have  received  it,  but  are  forced  at  last  to  own  it 
was  all  a mistake.  The  result  is  sometimes  that 
the  mind  gives  way  beneath  the  strain;  but  more 
frequently  unbelief  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Scrip- 
tures is  the  logical  result.  It  is  for  persons  danger- 
ously near  these  shoals  of  infidelity  and  darkness 
that  I have  penned  these  papers.  God’s  word  re- 


40  holiness: 

mains  true.  He  has  not  promised  what  He  will  not 
perform.  It  is  you,  dear  troubled  one,  who  have 
been  misled  by  faulty  teaching  as  to  the  true  na- 
ture of  sanctification,  and  the  proper  effects  of  the 
indwelling  Spirit  of  God.  Let  neither  gloomy  un- 
belief nor  melancholy  disappointment  hinder  your 
reading  the  chapters  that  are  to  follow,  and  then 
searching  the  Scriptures  daily  whether  these  things 
be  so.  And  may  God  in  His  rich  grace  and  mercy 
give  every  self-occupied  reader  to  look  away  to 
Christ  alone,  “who,  of  God,  is  made  unto  us  wis- 
dom: even  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption.” 


PART  II : DOCTRINAL 


SANCTIFICATION:  ITS  MEANING 

IN  commencing  our  inquiry  on  the  subject  of 
sanctification  as  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  it  is 
of  importance  first  of  all  that  there  be  a clear  un- 
derstanding of  the  meaning  which  writer  and  reader 
attach  to  the  word.  For  if  the  writer  have  one 
thought  in  his  mind  wheji  he  uses  this  expression, 
and  the  reader  be  thinking  of  something  totally 
different  as  he  peruses  the  treatise,  it  is  not  to  be 
supposed  that  a common  conclusion  will  ever  be 
reached. 

I propose,  then,  first  of  all,  to  let  the  theologians 
and  the  holiness  teachers  define  the  word  for  us; 
and  then  to  turn  to  Scripture,  there  to  test  their 
definitions.  Examples:  “ In  a doctrinal  sense  sanc- 
tification is  the  making  truly  and  perfectly  holy 
what  was  before  defiled  and  sinful.  It  is  a pro- 
gressive work  of  divine  grace  upon  the  soul  justi- 
fied by  the  love  of  Christ.  The  believer  is  gradu- 
ally cleansed  from  the  corruption  of  his  nature,  and 
is  at  length  presented  ‘faultless  before  the  pres- 
ence of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy.'  ” This  is  a 
fair  statement  of  the  views  held  by  ordinary  Prot- 
estant theologians,  and  is  taken  from  the  Bible  Dic- 
tionary edited  by  W.  W.  Rand,  and  published  by 
the  American  Tract  Society. 

The  secular  dictionary  definitions  generally  agree 
that  “ sanctification  is  an  act  of  God’s  grace,  where- 


42 


holiness: 


by  man's  affections  are  purified  and  exalted.”  And 
this,  it  will  be  observed,  practically  accords  with 
the  definition  already  given. 

Holiness  writers  are  very  explicit,  and  generally 
draw  attention  to  what  they  suppose  to  be  the  dif- 
ference between  justification  and  sanctification.  I 
shall  not  quote  any  of  their  authorities  as  to  this, 
but  put  the  teaching  in  my  own  language  rather, 
as  I often  taught  it  in  past  years.  My  reason  for 
this  is  that  all  holiness  professors  reading  these 
pages  may  be  able  to  judge  for  themselves  as  to 
whether  I was  “ clear  ” as  to  the  matter  when  num- 
bered among  them. 

Justification,  then,  was  supposed  to  be  a work  of 
grace  by  which  sinners  are  made  righteous  and 
freed  from  their  sinful  habits  when  they  come  to 
Christ.  But  in  the  merely  justified  soul  there  re- 
mains a corrupt  principle,  an  evil  tree,  or  “a  root 
of  bitterness,”  which  continually  prompts  to  sin. 
If  the  believer  obeys  this  impulse  and  wilfully  sins, 
he  ceases  to  be  justified;  therefore  the  desirability 
of  its  removal,  that  the  likelihood  of  backsliding 
may  be  greatly  lessened.  The  eradication  of  this 
sinful  root  is  sanctification . It  is  therefore  the 
cleansing  of  the  nature  from  all  inbred  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ  (applied  through  faith  when  a full 
consecration  is  made),  and  the  refining  fire  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  burns  out  all  dross  when  all  is  laid 
upon  the  altar  of  sacrifice.  This,  and  this  only,  is 
true  sanctification — a distinct  second  work  of  grace, 
subsequent  to  justification,  and  without  which  that 
justification  is  very  likely  to  be  lost! 

The  correctness  of  the  definition  will  I think,  be 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  4j 

acknowledged  by  even  the  most  radical  of  the  “ho- 
liness ” school. 

Now  let  ns  test  these  statements  by  Scripture. 
And  in  order  to  do  so  intelligently,  I purpose  first 
to  look  at  a number  of  passages  in  both  Testaments, 
and  see  if  in  any  of  them  either  of  the  definitions 
given  above  would  make  good  sense  and  sound  doc- 
trine. I would  observe  that  holiness  and  sancti- 
fication are  equivalent  terms;  both  words  being 
used  to  translate  the  one  Greek  or  Hebrew  noun. 
Twelve  prominent  examples  may  suffice  to  show 
how  the  term  is  used  in  our  Bibles. 

(1)  The  sanctification  of  inanimate  objects  is  dis- 
tinctly taught  in  the  Word: 

“Thou  shalt  anoint  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offer- 
ing, and  all  his  vessels,  and  sanctify  the  altar:  and 
it  shall  be  an  altar  most  holy.  And  thou  shalt 
anoint  the  laver  and  his  foot,  and  sanctify  it  ” (Ex. 
40:  10,  11). 

Are  we  to  suppose  any  change  took  place  in  the 
nature  of  these  vessels  ? or  was  there  any  evil  ele- 
ment rooted  out  of  them  ? 

Again,  in  Ex.  19:  23  we  read,  “Set  bounds  about 
the  mount  [Sinai],  and  sanctify  it.”  Was  any 
change  effected  in  the  composition  of  the  mountain 
when  God  gave  the  law  upon  it  ? Let  the  reader 
answer  fairly  and  honestly,  and  he  must  confess 
that  here  at  least  neither  the  theological  nor  the 
“holiness  ” definitions  apply  to  the  word  “sanctify.” 
What  it  does  mean  we  shall  see  later,  when  we  have 
heard  all  of  our  twelve  witnesses. 

(2)  People  can  sanctify  themselves,  without  any 
act  of  divine  power,  or  any  work  of  grace  taking 


44 


HOLINESS: 


place  within  them.  “Let  the  priests  also,  which 
come  near  to  the  Lord,  sanctify  themselves  ” (Ex. 
19:  22).  Were  these  priests  then  to  change  their 
own  natures  from  evil  to  good,  or  to  destroy  from 
within  themselves  the  principle  of  evil  ? Once 
more  it  is  the  readers’  province  to  judge.  I adduce 
the  witnesses:  they  must  be  the  jury. 

(3)  One  man  could  sanctify  another.  “Sanctify 
unto  Me  all  the  first-born:  ...  it  is  Mine”  (Ex. 
13:  2);  and,  again,  “The  Lord  said  unto  Moses, 
Go  unto  the  people,  and  sanctify  them;  . . . let 
them  wash  their  clothes”  (Ex.  19:  10).  What  in- 
ward change,  or  cleansing,  was  Moses  to  perform 
in  regard  to  the  first-born,  or  the  entire  people  of 
Israel  ? That  he  did  not  eliminate  their  inbred  sin, 
the  succeeding  chapters  amply  testify. 

(4)  Persons  can  sanctify  themselves  to  do  iniq- 
uity. “ They  that  sanctify  themselves,  and  purify 
themselves  in  the  gardens  behind  one  tree  in  the 
midst,  eating  swine’s  flesh,  and  the  abomination, 
and  the  mouse,  shall  be  consumed  together,  saith 
the  Lord”  (Isa.  66:  17).  How  monstrous  a sancti- 
fication was  this,  and  how  absurd  the  thought  of 
any  inward  cleansing  here ! 

(5)  The  Son  was  sanctified  by  the  Father.  “Say 
ye  of  Him  whom  the  Father  hath  sanctified,  and 
sent  into  the  world,  Thou  blasphemest;  because  I 
said,  I am  the  Son  of  God?”  (John  10:  36.)  They, 
not  He,  blasphemed;  and  equally  vile  would  be  the 
blasphemy  of  any  who  said  that  sanctification,  for 
Christ,  implied  a corrupt  nature  eradicated,  or  a 
perverse  will  changed.  He  was  ever  “that  Holy 
Thing  . . . called  the  Son  of  God.” 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


45 


There  are  not  wanting  “holiness”  advocates 
who  impiously  dare  to  teach  that  the  taint  of 
sin  was  in  His  being,  and  needed  elimination;  but 
they  are  rightfully  refused  fellowship,  and  their 
teaching  abhorred  by  all  Spirit-taught  Christians. 
Yet  He,  the  Holy  One,  was  “ sanctified  by  God  the 
Father,”  as  Jude  writes  of  all  believers.  Are  we 
to  suppose  the  expression  means  one  thing  in  rela- 
tion to  Christ,  and  quite  another  in  regard  to 
saints  ? 

(6)  The  Lord  Jesus  sanctified  Himself.  “For 
their  sakes  I sanctify  Myself,  that  they  also  might 
be  sanctified  through  the  truth”  (John  17:  19).  If 
either  of  the  definitions  given  above  is  to  stand, 
then  what  are  we  to  make  of  the  fact  that  He  who 
had  been  sanctified  by  the  Father,  yet  afterward 
sanctified  Himself  ? Is  it  not  plain  that  there  is 
some  great  discrepancy  here  between  the  theolo- 
gians, the  perfectionists,  and  the  Bible  ? 

(7)  Unbelievers  are  sometimes  sanctified.  “For 
the  unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by  (in)  the 
wife,  and  the  unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  by  (in) 
the  husband:  else  were  your  children  unclean;  but 
now  are  they  holy  [or  sanctified]”  (1  Cor.  7:  14). 
Here  the  life-partner  of  a Christian,  though  un- 
saved, is  said  to  be  sanctified.  Is  such  a one,  then, 
free  from  inbred  sin, or  undergoing  a gradual  change 
of  nature  ? If  this  be  too  absurd  for  consideration, 
sanctification  cannot  mean  either  of  the  experiences 
specified. 

(8)  Carnal  Christians  are  sanctified.  “ Paul,  called 
an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  through  the  will  of  God, 
and  Sosthenes  our  brother,  unto  the  Church  of  God 


46 


holiness: 


which  is  at  Corinth,  to  them  that  are  sanctified  in 
Christ  Jesns  ” “I  brethren,  could  not  speak  unto 
you  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto  carnal,  even  as 
unto  babes  in  Christ.  . . . For  ye  are  yet  carnal: 
for  whereas  there  is  among  you  envying,  and  strife, 
and  divisions,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walk  as  men  ? ” 
(i  Cor.  i:  i,  2;  3:  1,  3.)  Carnal,  and  yet  free  from 
inbred  sin?  Impossible!  Nevertheless  they  who 
are  declared  to  be  sanctified  in  chapter  1 are  said 
to  be  carnal  in  chapter  3.  By  no  possible  system 
of  logical  reasoning  can  the  class  of  the  latter  chap- 
ter be  made  out  to  be  different  from  those  ad- 
dressed in  the  former. 

(9)  We  are  told  to  follow  sanctification.  44  Follow 
peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness  [sanctification], 
without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord”  (Heb. 
12:  14).  In  what  sense  could  men  follow  a change 
of  nature,  or  how  follow  the  elimination  of  the  car- 
nal mind  ? I follow  that  which  is  before  me — that 
to  which  I have  not  yet  fully  attained  in  a practical 
sense,  as  the  apostle  Paul  tells  us  he  did,  in  Phil. 
3:  13-16. 

(10)  Believers  are  called  upon  to  sanctify  God! 
44  But  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts:  and  be 
ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that 
asketh  you  a reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with 
meekness  and  fear”  (1  Pet.  3:  15).  How  are  we  to 
understand  an  exhortation  like  this  if  sanctification 
implies  an  inward  cleansing,  or  making  holy  what 
was  before  unclean  and  evil  ? Is  it  not  manifest 
that  such  a definition  would  lead  to  the  wildest  va- 
garies and  the  grossest  absurdities? 

(11)  Persons  addressed  as  sanctified  are  afterward 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


47 


exhorted  to  be  holy.  4 4 Peter,  an  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ,  to  the  strangers  scattered  throughout  Pon- 
tus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia,  elect 
according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father, 
through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  unto  obedience 
and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  . . . As 
He  which  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in 
all  manner  of  conversation;  because  it  is  written, 
Be  ye  holy;  for  I am  holy”  (i  Peter  i:  i,  2,  15,  16). 
Think  of  the  incongruity  here  if  sanctification  and 
holiness  refer  to  an  inward  work  whereby  inbred 
sin  is  rooted  out  of  one’s  being!  The  sanctified  are 
exhorted  to  be  holy,  in  place  of  being  informed  that 
already  they  have  been  made  absolutely  that,  and 
therefore  need  no  such  exhortation. 

(12)  The  sanctified  are  nevertheless  declared  to 
be  perfected  forever.  44  For  by  one  offering  He 
hath  forever  perfected  them  that  are  sanctified” 
(Heb.  10:  14).  Who  among  the  perfectionists  can 
explain  this  satisfactorily  ? Nothing  is  commoner 
among  the  teachers  of  this  school  than  the  doctrine 
of  the  possibility  of  the  ultimate  falling  away  and 
final  loss  of  those  who  have  been  justified,  sancti- 
fied, and  have  enjoyed  the  most  marvelous  experi- 
ences ; yet  here  the  sanctified  are  said  to  be  forever 
perfected — consequently  shall  never  be  lost,  nor 
ever  lose  that  sanctification  which  they  have  once 
been  the  objects  of. 

After  carefully  hearing  these  twelve  witnesses,  I 
ask  my  readers,  Can  you  possibly  gather  from  these 
varied  uses  of  the  word  44  sanctification  ” any  hint  of 
a change  of  nature  in  the  believer,  or  an  elimination 
of  evil  implied  therein  ? I feel  certain  that  every 


48 


holiness: 


candid  mind  must  confess  the  word  evidently  has 
a very  different  meaning,  and  I design  briefly  to 
point  out  what  that  meaning  is. 

Freed  from  all  theological  accretions,  the  naked 
verb  “to  sanctify”  means  to  set  apart , and  the 
noun  “sanctification”  means,  literally,  separation. 
This  simple  key  will  unlock  every  verse  we  have 
been  considering,  and  bring  all  into  harmony  where 
discord  seemed  complete. 

The  vessels  of  the  tabernacle  were  separated  for 
divine  service,  even  as  Mount  Sinai  was  set  apart 
to  Jehovah  for  the  giving  of  the  law.  The  priests 
in  Israel  separated  themselves  from  their  defile- 
ment. Moses  separated  the  people  from  unclean- 
ness, and  set  apart  the  first-born  as  dedicated  to 
Jehovah.  The  apostates  in  Isaiah’s  day  set  them- 
selves apart,  on  the  contrary,  to  work  wickedness 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  The  Father  set  the  Son 
apart  to  become  the  Saviour  of  the  lost;  and  at  the 
end  of  His  life  on  earth,  His  work  accomplished, 
the  Lord  Jesus  separated  Himself  and  ascended  to 
glory,  there  to  become  the  object  of  His  people’s 
hearts,  that  they  might  thus  be  set  apart  from 
the  world  that  had  refused  and  crucified  their  Re- 
deemer. The  unbelieving  wife  or  husband,  if  linked 
with  a saved  life-partner  set  apart  to  God,  is  thereby 
put  in  an  external  relation  to  God,  with  its  privi- 
leges and  responsibility;  and  the  children  are  like- 
wise separated  from  those  who  never  come  under 
the  sound  of  the  truth.  All  Christians,  whatever 
their  actual  state,  be  they  carnal  or  spiritual,  are 
nevertheless  separated  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus;  and 
from  this  springs  the  responsibility  to  live  for  Him. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


49 


This  separation  is  to  be  followed  daily,  the  believer 
seeking  to  become  more  and  more  conformed  to 
Christ,  Persons  professing  to  be  Christians  and 
not  following  sanctification,  will  not  see  the  Lord; 
for  they  are  unreal,  and  have  no  divine  life.  The 
Lord  God  must  be  set  apart  in  our  hearts  if  our  tes- 
timony is  to  count  for  His  glory.  One  may  be  set 
apart  to  God  in  Christ,  and  yet  need  exhortation  to 
a practical  separation  from  all  uncleanness  and 
worldliness.  And,  lastly,  all  so  set  apart  are  in 
God’s  sight  perfected  forever,  as  to  the  conscience, 
by  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ  on  the  cross ; for  they 
are  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  and  eternally  linked 
up  with  Him.  Get  the  key,  and  every  difficulty 
vanishes.  Sanctification,  in  the  Christian  sense,  is 
therefore  twofold — absolute  and  progressive. 


SANCTIFICATION  BY  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT:  INTERNAL 


IN  closing  the  last  chapter  I remarked  that  sanc- 
tification is  both  absolute  and  progressive.  Ab- 
solute sanctification  is  by  the  one  offering  of  Christ 
on  the  cross,  and  will  be  treated  of  further  on. 
Progressive  sanctification  is  looked  at  in  two  ways: 
it  is  by  the  Spirit  and  by  the  Word. 

It  may  help  some  to  put  it  in  this  way: 
Sanctification  by  the  Spirit  is  internal.  It  is  an 
experience  within  the  believer. 

Sanctification  by  the  blood  of  Christ  is  eternal. 
It  is  not  an  experience ; it  is  positional;  it  has  to  do 
with  the  new  place  in  God’s  eternal  favor  occupied 
by  every  believer — an  unchanging  and  unchanged 
able  position,  to  which  defilement  can  never  attach, 
in  God’s  estimation. 

Sanctification  by  the  word  of  God  refers  to  the 
believer’s  outward  walk  and  ways.  It  is  the  mani- 
fest result  of  sanctification  by  the  Spirit,  and  goes 
on  progressively  all  through  life. 

I desire  to  group  together  four  scriptures  which 
refer  to  the  first  important  aspect  above  mentioned. 
Doctrinally,  perhaps,  I should  take  up  sanctifica- 
tion by  blood  first ; but  experimentally  the  Spirit’s 
work  precedes  the  knowledge  of  the  other. 

In  i Cor.  6 : 9,  io  we  read  of  a host  of  sinful  char- 
acters who  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 
The  nth  verse  immediately  adds,  ‘‘And  such  were 
some  of  you:  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sancti- 
fied, but  ye  are  justified,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.” 

Again,  in  2 Thess.  2:  13  we  read,  “But  we  are 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


51 


bound  to  give  thanks  always  to  God  for  you,  breth- 
ren beloved  of  the  Lord,  because  God  hath  from 
the  beginning  chosen  you  to  salvation  through  sanc- 
tification of  the  Spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth.” 

Closely  linked  with  this  is  the  second  verse  of  the 
opening  chapter  of  1 Peter:  “ Elect  according  to 
the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father,  through  sanc- 
tification of  the  Spirit , unto  obedience  and  sprink- 
ling of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.” 

The  fourth  verse  is  Rom.  15:  16:  “That  I should 
be  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Gentiles, 
ministering  the  gospel  of  God,  that  the  offering  up 
of  the  Gentiles  might  be  acceptable,  being  sancti- 
fied by  the  Holy  Ghost” 

In  all  these  passages  it  is  of  the  utmost  impor- 
tance, in  order  to  rightly  apprehend  the  truth  in- 
tended to  be  conveyed,  to  observe  that  sanctifica- 
tion by  the  Spirit  is  treated  as  the  first  beginnings 
of  God’s  work  in  the  souls  of  men,  leading  to  the 
full  knowledge  of  justification  through  faith  in  the 
blood-sprinkling  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Far  from  being  “the  second  blessing,”  subse- 
quent to  justification,  it  is  a work  apart  from  which 
none  ever  would  be  saved.  That  this  may  be  made 
plain  to  the  thoughtful  reader,  I purpose  a careful 
analysis  of  each  verse  quoted. 

The  Corinthians  had  been  characterized  by  the 
common  sins  of  men.  They  had,  like  the  Ephe- 
sians (chap.  2 : 1-5),  “walked  according  to  the  course 
of  this  age,”  lured  on  by  that  unholy  “spirit  that 
now  worketh  in  the  sons  of  disobedience/’  But  a 
great  change  had  taken  place  in  them.  Old  affec- 
tions and  desires  had  been  superseded  by  new  and 


52 


HOLINESS* 


holy  longings.  The  wicked  life  had  been  exchanged 
for  one  in  which  the  pursuit  after  godliness  was 
characteristic.  What  had  wrought  this  change  ? 
Three  expressions  are  used  to  convey  the  fulness 
of  it.  They  had  been  “ washed,  sanctified,  and  jus- 
tified”— and  all  “in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.”  Objective  and  sub- 
jective are  here  closely  linked  together.  The  work 
and  character  of  the  Lord  Jesus  had  been  presented 
as  set  forth  in  the  gospel.  He  alone  was  the  Sa- 
viour of  sinners.  But  in  the  application  of  that  sal- 
vation to  men  there  is  necessarily  the  subjective 
side.  Men  are  unclean  because  of  sin,  and  must  be 
“washed.”  The  “washing  of  water  by  the  word” 
(of  Eph.  5:  25,  26)  is  clearly  alluded  to.  The  word 
of  God  lays  hold  on  the  conscience,  and  men  are 
awakened  to  see  the  folly  and  wickedness  of  their 
lives — away  from  God,  and  walking  in  darkness. 
This  is  the  beginning  of  a moral  washing  that  goes 
on  all  through  the  believer’s  life,  and  of  which  I 
hope  to  treat  more  fully  later  on. 

But  now,  observe  carefully — the  same  word  of 
God  comes  to  all  men,  but  the  same  effect  is  not 
produced  in  all.  Christ  and  His  cross  is  preached 
to  an  audience  of  a hundred  unconverted  men. 
One  remains,  broken-hearted  over  his  sins  and 
seeking  peace  with  God,  while  ninety  and  nine  go 
away  untouched.  Why  the  difference  ? The  Holy 
Spirit  gives  power  to  the  Word,  plowing  up  the 
conscience  in  the  case  of  every  one  truly  converted, 
and  such  a one  is  separated,  set  apart  by  a divine 
work  within,  from  the  indifferent  multitude  to 
which  he  once  belonged.  It  is  here  that  sanctifica* 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


53 


tion  of  the  Spirit  applies.  It  may  be  some  time  ere 
he  finds  true  peace  with  God;  but  he  is  never  again 
a careless  sinner.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  laid  hold  of 
him  for  salvation.  This  is  beautifully  illustrated 
in  the  first  few  verses  of  our  Bibles.  The  world 
created  in  perfection  (see  Isa.  45:  18)  in  verse  1, 
is  described  as  fallen  into  a chaotic  condition  in 
verse  2.  “Without  form  and  void,”  and  covered 
with  a mantle  of  darkness:  what  a picture  of  fallen 
man  away  from  God!  His  soul  a moral  chaos,  his 
understanding  darkened,  his  mind  and  conscience 
defiled,  he  is  in  very  deed  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins;  “ alienated  and  an  enemy  in  his  mind  by  wick- 
ed works.”  All  this  the  ruined  earth  may  well 
speak  of. 

But  God  is  going  to  remake  that  world.  It  shall 
yet  become  a dwelling-place  for  man,  a fit  home  for 
him  during  the  ages  of  time.  How  does  He  go 
about  it  ? The  first  great  agent  is  the  Spirit;  the 
second,  the  Word.  “The  Spirit  of  God  moved  [or 
brooded]  upon  the  waters.”  Hovering  over  that 
scene  of  desolation,  the  Holy  Spirit  brooded;  and 
then  the  Word  of  power  went  forth.  “God  said, 
Let  light  be:  and  light  was.”  And  so  in  the  salva- 
tion of  fallen  man — the  Spirit  and  the  Word  must 
act.  The  brooding-time  comes  first.  The  Holy 
Spirit  quickens  through  the  message  proclaimed. 
He  awakens  men,  and  gives  them  a desire  to  know 
Christ  and  to  be  delivered  from  sin’s  power  and 
saved  from  its  judgment.  After  this  brooding  sea- 
son, or  as  a result  of  it,  the  heart  is  opened  to  the 
gospel  in  its  fulness;  and,  being  believed,  the  light 
shines  in  and  the  darkness  is  dissipated.  “God, 


54 


holiness: 


who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness, 
hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ  ” (2  Cor.  4:  6).  Thus  are  we  who  believe 
no  longer  children  of  the  night,  nor  of  darkness,  but 
of  the  day.  We  were  once  darkness:  now  we  have 
become  light  in  the  Lord.  But  ere  the  shining 
forth  of  the  light  there  was  the  Spirit’s  brooding. 
And  this  is  the  sanctification  referred  to  in  the  four 
passages  grouped  together  above.  Notice  the  or- 
der in  2 Thess.  2:  “ Chosen  to  salvation  through 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit” — the  divine  agency — 
“and  belief  of  the  truth” — the  Word  of  life  scat- 
tering the  darkness  and  bringing  in  the  light  of  the 
knowledge  of  salvation  through  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

It  is  the  same  in  1 Peter.  The  saved  are  elect, 
but  it  is  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  that  brings 
them  unto  the  obedience  and  blood-sprinkling  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Now  the  knowledge  of  justification 
is  mine  when  brought  by  the  Spirit  to  the  knowh 
edge  of  the  sprinkled  blood  of  Jesus.  It  is  faith 
apprehending  that  His  precious  blood  cleanseth  my 
soul  from  every  stain,  thus  giving  peace.  By  the 
Spirit  I am  brought  to  this,  and  to  begin  a life  of 
obedience — to  obey  as  Christ  obeyed.  This  is  the 
practical  effect  of  the  Spirit’s  sanctification. 

But  now  it  is  of  importance  to  realize  that  justifi- 
cation is  not  in  itself  a state.  It  is  not  a work  in 
the  soul,  but  a work  done  by  Another  for  me,  yet 
altogether  outside  of  me,  and  utterly  apart  from 
my  frames  and  feelings.  In  other  words,  it  is  my 
standing,  not  my  experience. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


55 


The  difference  between  the  two  may  be  illustra- 
ted thus:  Two  men  are  haled  into  court  charged 
with  the  joint  commission  of  a crime.  After  a full 
investigation,  the  judge  on  the  bench  justifies  them 
both.  They  are  free.  One  man,  hearing  the  de- 
cision, is  filled  with  delight.  He  had  feared  an  op- 
posite verdict,  and  dreaded  the  consequences.  But 
now  he  is  happy,  because  he  knows  he  is  cleared. 
The  other  man  was  even  more  anxious  and  gloomy. 
So  occupied  is  he  with  his  troubled  thoughts  that 
he  does  not  fully  catch  the  declaration  of  the  court, 
“Not  guilty.”  He  hears  only  the  last  word,  and 
he  is  filled  with  dismay.  He  sees  a loathsome 
prison  rising  before  him,  yet  he  knows  he  is  inno- 
cent. He  gives  utterance  to  words  of  despair  until 
with  difficulty  made  to  comprehend  the  true  status 
of  the  case,  when  he  too  is  filled  with  joy. 

Now  what  had  the  actual  justification  of  either 
man  to  do  with  his  state,  or  experience  ? The 
one  who  heard  and  believed  was  happy.  The  one 
who  misapprehended  the  decision  was  miserable; 
yet  both  were  alike  justified.  Justification  was  not 
a work  wrought  in  them.  It  was  the  judge’s  sen- 
tence in  their  favor.  And  this  is  ever  what  justifi- 
cation is,  whether  used  in  the  Bible  or  in  matters 
of  every-day  life.  God  justifies,  or  clears,  the  um 
godly  when  they  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  who 
bore  their  condemnation  on  the  cross.  To  con- 
found this  judicial  act  with  the  state  of  soul  of  the 
believer  is  only  confusion. 

“ But,”  says  one,  “ I do  not  feel  justified!  ” Jus- 
tification has  nothing  to  do  with  feeling.  The 
question  is,  Do  you  believe  God  is  satisfied  with 


56 


holiness: 


His  beloved  Son  as  your  substitute  upon  the  cross, 
and  do  you  receive  Jesus  as  your  substitute — your 
personal  Saviour  ? If  so,  God  says  you  are  justified; 
and  there  is  an  end  to  it.  He  will  not  call  back  His 
words.  Believing  the  gospel  declaration,  the  soul 
has  peace  with  God.  Walking  with  God,  there  is 
joy  and  gladness,  and  victory  over  sin  in  a practical 
sense.  But  this  is  state , not  standing. 

The  Holy  Spirit  who  quickens  and  sanctifies  at 
the  beginning,  leading  to  the  knowledge  of  justifi- 
cation through  faith  in  what  God  has  said  about  the 
blood-sprinkling  of  Jesus  Christ,  abides  now  in 
every  believer,  to  be  the  power  for  the  new  life, 
and  thus  for  practical  sanctification  day  by  day. 

In  this  way  the  offering-up  of  the  Gentiles — poor 
aliens,  heathen  of  all  descriptions,  strangers  to  the 
covenants  of  promise — is  made  acceptable  to  God, 
being  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  accompa- 
nies the  preaching — the  ministry  of  reconciliation — 
opening  the  heart  to  the  truth,  convincing  of  sin, 
of  righteousness  and  judgment,  and  leading  to  per- 
sonal faith  in  the  Son  of  God. 

I think  it  must  now  be  plain  to  any  who  have 
carefully  followed  me  thus  far  that  in  this  aspect  at 
least  sanctification  is  wrongly  designated  as  a “sec- 
ond blessing.  ” It  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  begin- 
ning of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul,  and  goes 
on  throughout  the  believer’s  life,  reaching  its  con- 
summation at  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  when  the 
saved  one,  in  his  glorified,  sinless  body,  will  be  pre- 
sented faultless  in  the  presence  of  God.  And  so 
Peter,  after  telling  the  Christians  to  whom  he  writes 
that  they  are  sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  very  properly 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


57 


proceeds  to  exhort  them  to  be  holy  because  He 
who  has  saved  them  is  holy,  and  they  are  set  to 
represent  Him  in  this  world. 

So  too  Paul,  after  affirming  the  sanctification  of 
the  Thessalonians,  yet  prays  that  they  may  be  sanc- 
tified wholly,  which  would  be  an  absurdity  if  this 
were  accomplished  when  first  sanctified  by  the 
Spirit.  ‘‘The  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you 
wholly;  and  I pray  God  your  whole  spirit  and  soul 
and  body  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Faithful  is  He  that  call- 
eth  you,  who  also  will  do  it”  (i  Thess.  5:  23,  24). 
There  is  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  final  result. 
Sanctification  is  God’s  work;  and  “I  know  that, 
whatsoever  God  doeth,  it  shall  be  forever”  (Eccl. 
3:  14).  “He  who  hath  begun  a good  work  in  you 
will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ  ” (Phil. 
1:  6). 

When  asked  for  scripture  as  to  the  term  “the 
second  blessing,”  the  perfectionist  will  generally 
refer  you  to  2 Cor.  1:  15.  There  Paul  writes  to 
the  Corinthians  (who,  as  declared  several  times 
over  in  his  first  epistle,  were  sanctified),  and  says, 
“ In  this  confidence  I was  minded  to  come  unto  you 
before,  that  ye  might  have  a second  benefit.”  The 
margin  reads,  “a  second  blessing.”  From  this 
simple  expression,  an  amazing  system  has  been  de- 
duced. It  is  taught  that  as  a result  of  Paul’s  first 
visit  to  Corinth  many  had  been  justified.  But  as 
the  carnal  mind  remained  in  them,  they  manifested 
it  in  various  ways,  for  which  he  rebukes  them  in 
his  first  letter.  Now  he  longs  to  get  to  them  again^ 
this  time  not  so  much  to  preach  the  gospel  as  to 


holiness: 


58 

have  some  “holiness  meetings,”  and  get  them  sanc- 
tified ! 

An  ingenious  theory  surely!  but  it  all  falls  to  the 
ground  when  the  student  of  Scripture  observes  that 
the  carnal  saints  of  the  1st  epistle  were  sanctified 
in  Christ  Jesus  (chap.  1:2);  had  received  the  Spirit 
of  God  (chap.  2:  12);  were  indwelt  by  that  Spirit 
(chap.  3:  16);  and,  as  we  have  already  noticed  at 
some  length,  were  “washed,  sanctified  and  justified 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of 
our  God”  (chap.  6). 

What  then  was  the  second  blessing  Paul  desired 
for  them  ? To  begin  with,  it  was  not  the  second 
blessing  at  all,  but  a second  blessing.  They  had 
been  blessed  by  his  ministry  among  them  on  the 
first  occasion,  as  they  learned  from  his  lips  and  saw 
manifested  in  his  ways  the  truth  of  God.  Like  any 
true-hearted  under-shepherd,  he  longs  to  visit 
them  again,  once  more  to  minister  among  them, 
that  they  may  receive  blessing,  or  benefit,  a second 
time.  What  could  be  simpler,  if  the  mind  were  not 
confused  by  faulty  teaching,  leading  to  one’s  read- 
ing his  thoughts  into  Scripture,  instead  of  learning 
from  it  ? 

From  the  moment  of  their  conversion,  believers 
are  “blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heav- 
enly places  in  Christ,”  and  the  Spirit  is  given  to 
lead  us  into  the  good  that  is  already  ours.  “All 
things  are  yours  ” was  written,  not  to  persons  per- 
fect in  their  ways,  but  to  the  very  Corinthians 
whom  we  have  been  considering,  and  that  before 
they  received,  through  the  apostle  Paul,  a second 
benefit 


SANCTIFICATION  BY  THE  BLOOD  OF  CHRIST: 
ETERNAL 

THE  great  theme  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
is  that  aspect  of  sanctification  which  has  been 
designated  positional,  or  absolute ; not  now  a work 
wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  the  glo- 
rious result  of  that  wondrous  work  accomplished  by 
the  Son  of  God  when  He  offered  up  Himself  to  put 
away  sin  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary.  By  virtue  of 
that  sacrifice  the  believer  is  forever  set  apart  to 
God,  his  conscience  purged,  and  he  himself  trans- 
formed from  an  unclean  sinner  into  a holy  wor- 
shiper, linked  up  in  an  abiding  relationship  with 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  for  “both  He  that  sanctifi- 
eth  and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one : for 
which  cause  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  breth- 
ren” (Heb.  2:  11).  According  to  1 Cor.  1:  30,  they 
are  “in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
. . . sanctification.”  They  are  “accepted  in  the 
Beloved.”  God  sees  them  in  Him,  and  looks  at 
them  as  He  looks  at  His  Son.  “As  He  is,  so  are 
we  in  this  world”  (1  John  4:  17).  This  is  not  our 
state.  No  believer  has  ever  been  wholly  like  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  a practical  way.  The  highest  and 
best  experience  would  not  reach  up  to  this.  But 
as  to  our  standing  (our  new  position),  we  are  reck- 
oned by  God  to  be  “as  He  is.” 

The  basis  of  all  this  is  the  blood-shedding  and 
blood-sprinkling  of  our  Saviour.  “Jesus  also,  that 
He  might  sanctify  the  people  with  His  own  blood, 
suffered  without  the  gate”  (Heb.  13:  12).  By  no 


6o 


holiness: 


other  means  could  we  be  purged  from  our  sins  and 
set  apart  to  God. 

The  main  argument  of  the  epistle  is  very  fully 
developed  in  chapters  8 to  io,  inclusive.  There  the 
two  covenants  are  contrasted.  The  old  covenant 
asked  of  man  what  it  never  got — that  is  perfect 
obedience;  because  it  was  not  in  man  to  give  it. 
The  new  covenant  guarantees  all  blessing  through 
the  work  of  Another;  and  from  the  knowledge  of 
this  springs  the  desire  to  obey  on  the  part  of  the 
object  of  such  grace. 

In  the  old  dispensation  there  was  a sanctuary  of 
an  earthly  order;  and  connected  with  it  were  ordi- 
nances of  a carnal  character,  which  nevertheless 
foreshadowed  good  things  to  come — the  very  bless- 
ings we  are  now  privileged  to  enter  into  the  enjoy- 
ment of. 

But  in  the  tabernacle  God  had  shut  Himself  away 
from  sinful  man,  and  He  dwelt  in  the  holiest  of  all. 
Man  was  shut  out.  Once  only  every  year  a repre- 
sentative man,  the  high  priest,  went  in  to  God, 
“but  not  without  blood.”  Every  great  day  of 
atonement  the  same  ritual  service  was  performed; 
but  all  the  sacrifices  offered  under  the  law  could 
not  put  away  one  sin,  or  “make  him  that  did  the 
service  perfect  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience.” 

The  perfection  of  Hebrews,  let  it  be  noted,  is 
not  perfection  of  character  or  of  experience,  but 
perfection  as  to  the  conscience.  That  is,  the  great 
question  taken  up  is,  How  can  a polluted  sinner, 
with  a defiled  conscience,  procure  a conscience  that 
no  longer  accuses  him,  but  now  permits  him  unhin- 
deredly  to  approach  God  ? The  blood  of  bulls  and 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


6 1 


of  goats  cannot  effect  this.  Legal  works  cannot 
procure  so  precious  a boon.  The  proof  of  it  is  man- 
ifest in  Israel’s  history,  for  the  continual  sacrifices 
proved  that  no  sacrifice  sufficient  to  purge  the  con- 
science had  yet  been  offered.  ‘‘For  then  would 
they  not  have  ceased  to  be  offered  ? because  that 
the  worshipers  once  purged  should  have  had  no 
more  conscience  of  sins”  (chap,  io:  2). 

How  little  do  holiness  professors  enter  into  words 
like  these!  “Once  purged!”  “No  more  con- 
science of  sins!  ” What  do  such  expressions  mean  ? 
Something,  dear  reader,  which,  if  but  grasped  by 
Christians  generally,  would  free  them  from  all  their 
questionings,  doubts,  and  fears. 

The  legal  sacrifices  were  not  great  enough  in 
value  to  atone  for  sin.  This  having  been  fully  at- 
tested, Christ  Himself  came  to  do  the  will  of  God, 
as  it  was  written  in  the  volume  of  the  book.  Doing 
that  will  meant  for  Him  going  down  into  death  and 
pouring  out  His  blood  for  our  salvation:  “By  the 
which  will  we  are  sanctified  through  the  offering  of 
the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all”  (10:  10). 
Obsevre,  then,  that  our  sanctification  and  His  one 
offering  stand  or  fall  together.  We  believe  the 
record,  and  God  declares  “we  are  sanctified.” 
There  is  no  growth,  no  progress,  and  certainly  no 
second  work,  in  this.  It  is  a great  fact , true  of  all 
Christians.  And  this  sanctification  is  eternal  in 
character,  because  our  great  Priest’s  work  is  done 
perfectly,  and  is  never  to  be  repeated,  as  the  fol- 
lowing verses  insist:  “For  by  one  offering  He 
hath  perfected  forever  them  that  are  sanctified” 
(ver.  14).  Could  words  be  plainer  or  language 


62 


holiness: 


more  expressive  ? He  who  doubts  shows  himself 
either  unwilling  or  afraid  to  rest  on  so  startling  a 
truth! 

That  one  true  sacrifice  effectually  purges  the  con- 
science once  for  all,  so  that  the  intelligent  believer 
can  now  rejoice  in  the  assurance  that  he  is  forever 
cleansed  from  his  guilt  and  defilement  by  the  blood- 
sprinkling of  Jesus  Christ.  Thus,  and  thus  only, 
the  sanctified  are  perfected  forever,  as  regards  the 
conscience. 

A simple  illustration  may  help  any  who  still  have 
difficulty  as  to  this  expression,  peculiar  to  Hebrews, 
“a  purged  conscience. ” A man  is  in  debt  to  an- 
other who  has  again  and  again  demanded  payment. 
Being  unable  to  pay,  and  that  because  he  has  un- 
wisely wasted  his  substance,  and  this  known  to  his 
creditor,  he  becomes  unhappy  when  in  the  latter’s 
presence.  A desire  to  avoid  him  springs  up  and 
takes  control  of  him.  His  conscience  is  uneasy  and 
defiled.  He  knows  well  he  is  blameworthy,  yet  he 
is  incapable  of  righting  matters.  But  another  ap- 
pears, who,  on  the  debtor’s  behalf,  settles  the  claim 
in  the  fullest  manner,  and  hands  to  the  troubled 
one  a receipt  for  all.  Is  he  now  afraid  to  meet  the 
other  ? Does  he  shrink  from  facing  him  ? Not  at 
all;  and  why?  Because  he  has  now  a perfect,  or  a 
purged,  conscience  in  regard  to  the  matter  that 
once  exercised  him. 

It  is  thus  that  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  has  met 
all  God’s  righteous  claims  against  the  sinner;  and 
the  believer,  resting  upon  the  divine  testimony  as 
to  the  value  of  that  work,  is  purged  by  the  blood 
of  Christ  and  “perfected  forever”  in  the  sight  of 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


63 


the  Holy  One.  He  is  sanctified  by  that  blood,  and 
that  for  eternity. 

Having  been  turned  from  the  power  of  Satan 
unto  God,  he  has  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  is  as- 
isured  of  an  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanc- 

Itified  by  faith  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  (Acts  26:  18). 

But  there  is  an  expression  used  farther  on  in  the 
chapter  that  may  still  perplex  and  bewilder  those 

I who  have  not  apprehended  that  profession  is  one 
thing,  and  possession  another.  In  order  to  be  clear 
as  to  this,  it  will  be  necessary  to  examine  the  whole 
passage,  which  I therefore  quote  in  full,  italicizing 
the  expression  referred  to.  “ For  if  we  sin  wilfully 
after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins, 
but  a certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and 
fiery  indignation  which  shall  devour  the  adversa- 
ries. He  that  despised  Moses’  law  died  without 
mercy  under  two  or  three  witnesses:  of  how  much 
sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought 
worthy  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of 
God,  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant , 
wherewith  he  was  sanctified , an  unholy  thing,  and 
hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace  ? ” (vers. 
26-29). 

In  what  we  have  already  gone  over  we  have  seen 
that  he  who  is  sanctified  by  the  one  offering  of 
Christ  upon  the  cross,  that  is,  by  His  precious 
blood,  is  perfected  forever.  But  in  this  passage  it 
is  equally  plain  that  one  who  counts  the  blood  of 
the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was  sanctified,  an  un- 
holy thing,  shall  be  forever  lost.  In  order  not  ta 
I miss  the  true  force  of  this  for  our  souls,  it  is  nec 


6 4 


holiness: 


essary  that  we  give  some  attention  to  what  we 
have  already  designated  ‘ 4 positional  sanctification.” 
Of  old  all  the  people  of  Israel,  and  all  who  were 
associated  with  them,  were  set  apart  to  God  both 
on  the  night  of  the  passover  and  afterwards  in  the 
wilderness.  But  this  did  not  necessarily  imply  a 
work  of  the  Spirit  in  their  souls.  Many  were 
doubtless  in  the  blood-sprinkled  houses  that  solemn 
night,  when  the  destroying  angel  passed  through  to 
smite  the  unsheltered  first-born,  who  had  no  real 
faith  in  God.  Yet  they  were  by  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb  put  in  a place  of  blessing,  a position  where 
they  shared  in  many  hallowed  privileges.  So  after- 
ward with  those  who  were  under  the  cloud  and 
passed  through  the  sea,  being  baptized  unto  Moses 
in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea.  All  were  in  the  same 
position.  All  shared  the  same  outward  blessings. 
But  the  wilderness  was  the  place  of  testing,  and 
soon  proved  who  were  real  and  who  were  not. 

At  the  present  time  God  has  no  special  nation,  to 
be  allied  to  which  is  to  come  into  a position  of  out- 
ward nearness  to  Him.  But  He  has  a people  who 
have  been  redeemed  to  Himself  out  of  all  kindreds 
and  tongues  and  peoples  and  nations,  by  the  pre- 
cious blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God.  All  who  ally 
themselves  by  profession  with  that  company  are 
outwardly  among  the  blood-sheltered:  in  this  sense 
they  are  sanctified  by  the  blood  of  the  covenant 
That  blood  stands  for  Christianity,  which  in  its  very 
essence  is  the  proclamation  of  salvation  through 
Christ’s  atoning  death.  To  take  the  Christian  place 
therefore  is  like  entering  the  blood-sprinkled  house. 
All  who  are  real,  who  have  judged  themselves  be- 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 

fore  God,  and  truly  confided  in  His  grace,  will  re- 
main in  that  house.  If  any  go  out,  it  proves  their 
unreality,  and  such  can  find  no  other  sacrifice  for 
sins ; for  all  the  typical  offerings  are  done  away  in 
Christ.  These  are  they  of  whom  the  apostle  John 
speaks  so  solemnly:  “They  went  out  from  us,  but 
they  were  not  of  us;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they 
would*  have  continued  with  us:  but  they  went  out 
that  they  might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were 
not  all  of  us”  (i  John  2:  19).  These  unreal  ones 
were  positionally  sanctified;  but  as  they  were  ever 
bereft  of  faith  in  the  soul,  they  “went  out,”  and 
thus  did  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace,  and  counted 
the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  they  were 
sanctified,  an  unholy  thing.  These  sin  wilfully, 
not  in  the  sense  of  failing  to  walk  uprightly  merely, 
but  as  utterly  abjuring,  or  apostatizing  from,  Chris- 
tianity, after  having  become  conversant  with  the 
glorious  message  it  brings  to  lost  men. 

But  where  it  is  otherwise,  and  the  soul  is  really 
resting  on  Christ,  positional  sanctification  becomes 
eternal:  because  the  sanctified  and  the  Sanctifier 
are,  as  we  have  seen,  linked  up  together  by  an  in- 
dissoluble bond.  Christ  Himself  is  made  unto 
them  wisdom,  and  this  in  a threefold  way:  He  is 
their  righteousness,  their  sanctification,  and  their 
redemption. 

Here  is  holiness!  Here  is  an  unassailable  right- 
eousness! Here  is  acceptance  with  God.  “Ye  are 


* The  italicized  addition,  “no  doubt,”  is  superfluous.  The 
passage  is  complete  without  it.  It  is  a positive  statement,  and 
admits  of  no  exception. 

5 


66 


holiness: 


complete  in  Him,”  though  daily  needing  to  humhle 
oneself  because  of  failure.  It  is  not  my  practical 
sanctification  that  gives  me  title  to  a place  among 
the  saints  in  light.  It  is  the  glorious  fact  that 
Christ  has  died  and  redeemed  me  to  God.  His  j 
blood  has  cleansed  me  from  all,  or  every,  sin;  and 
I now  have  life  in  Him,  a new  life,  with  which  guilt 
can  never  be  connected.  I am  in  Him  that  is  true. 
He  is  my  sanctification,  and  represents  me  before 
God,  even  as  of  old  the  high  priest  bore  upon  his 
mitre  the  words  “ Holiness  unto  the  Lord,”  and 
upon  his  shoulders  and  his  heart  the  names  of  all 
the  tribes  of  Israel.  He  represented  them  all  in 
the  holy  place.  He  was  typically  their  sanctifica- 
tion. If  he  was  accepted  of  God,  so  were  they. 
The  people  were  seen  in  the  priest. 

And  of  our  ever-living  High  Priest  we  may  well 
sing: 

u For  us  He  wears  the  mitre 

Where  holiness  shines  bright ; 

For  us  His  robes  are  whiter 
Than  heaven’s  unsullied  light.” 

That  there  should  be  a life  of  corresponding  de- 
votedness and  separation  to  God  on  our  part  no 
Spirit-taught  believer  will  for  a moment  deny,  as 
we  will  now  consider. 


SANCTIFICATION  BY  THE  WORD  OF  GOD: 
EXTERNAL  RESULTS 

IN  His  great  high-priestly  prayer  of  the  17th  of 
John,  our  Lord  says  of  the  men  given  to  Him 
by  the  Father,  “They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as 
I am  not  of  the  world.  Sanctify  them  through 
Thy  truth:  Thy  word  is  truth.  As  Thou  hast  sent 
Me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I also  sent  them 
into  the  world.  And  for  their  sakes  I sanctify  My- 
self, that  they  also  might  be  sanctified  through  the 
truth”  (vers.  16-19).  This  precious  passage  may 
well  introduce  for  us  the  subject  of  practical  sanc- 
tification— the  ordering  aright  of  our  external  ways, 
and  bringing  all  into  accord  with  the  revealed  will 
of  God. 

At  the  outset  we  shall  dp  well  if  we  get  it  fixed 
in  our  mind  that  this  is  very  closely  related  to  that 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit  to  which  our  attention 
has  already  been  directed.  The  Spirit  works 
within  us.  The  Word,  which  is  without  us,  is  nev- 
ertheless the  medium  used  to  do  the  work  within. 
But  I have  purposely  dwelt  separately  upon  the 
two  aspects  in  order  to  bring  the  clearer  before  our 
minds  the  distinction  between  the  Spirit’s  sanctifi- 
cation in  us,  which  is  the  very  beginning  of  God’s 
work  in  our  souls,  and  the  application  of  the  Word 
thereafter  to  our  outward  ways.  New  birth  is  our 
introduction  into  God’s  family;  but  although  born 
again,  we  may  be  dark  as  to  many  things,  and  need 
the  light  of  the  Word  to  clear  our  bewildered 
minds.  But  through  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit 


68 


holiness: 


we  are  brought  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling : we  ap- 
prehend that  Christ’s  atoning  death  alone  avails  for 
our  sins.  We  are  sanctified  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
and  able  to  appreciate  our  new  position  before  God. 
It  is  now  that  in  its  true  sen.se  the  walk  of  faith  be- 
gins, and  thereafter  we  need  daily  that  sanctifica- 
tion by  the  truth,  or  the  word  of  God,  spoken  of  by 
our  Lord. 

It  is  evident  that  in  the  very  nature  of  things 
this  cannot  be  what  some  have  ignorantly  called  ‘ 4 a 
second  definite  work  of  grace.”  It  is,  on  the  con- 
trary, a life — a progressive  work  ever  going  on,  and 
which  ever  must  go  on,  until  I have  passed  out  of 
the  scene  in  which  I need  daily  instruction  as  to 
my  ways,  which  the  word  of  God  alone  can  give. 
If  sanctification  in  its  practical  sense  be  by  the 
Word,  I shall  never  be  wholly  sanctified,  in  this 
aspect  of  it,  until  I know  that  Word  perfectly,  and 
am  violating  it  in  no  particular.  And  that  will 
never  be  true  here  upon  earth.  Here  I ever  need 
to  feed  upon  that  Word,  to  understand  it  better,  to 
learn  more  fully  its  meaning;  and  as  I learn  from 
it  the  mind  of  God,  I am  called  daily  to  judge  in 
myself  all  that  is  contrary  to  the  increased  light  I 
receive,  and  to  yield  to-day  a fuller  obedience  than 
yesterday.  Thus  am  I sanctified  by  the  truth. 

For  this  very  purpose  the  Lord  has  sanctified  or 
set  Himself  apart.  He  has  gone  up  to  heaven, 
there  to  watch  over  His  own,  to  be  our  High  Priest 
with  God  in  view  of  our  weakness,  and  our  Advo- 
cate with  the  Father  in  view  of  our  sins.  He  is 
there  too  as  the  object  of  our  hearts.  We  are 
called  now  to  run  our  race  with  patience,  looking 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  69 

unto  Jesus,  with  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us  and  the 
Word  in  our  hands,  to  be  a lamp  to  our  feet  and  a 
light  to  our  path.  As  we  value  it,  and  are  con- 
trolled by  its  precious  truth  made  good  to  us  in  the 
Spirit’s  power,  we  are  sanctified  by  God  the  Father 
and  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Himself.  For  in  the  17th 
of  John  He  makes  request  of  the  Father , “ Sanctify 
them  through  Thy  truth.”  In  Eph.  5:  25,  26  we 
read,  “ Christ  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  Himself 
for  it;  that  He  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the 
washing  of  water  by  the  Word.”  Here  it  is  Christ 
who  is  the  sanctifier,  for  He  could  ever  say,  “ I and 
the  Father  are  one.”  Here,  as  in  John,  sanctifica- 
tion is  plainly  progressive;  and,  indeed,  that  water- 
washing of  Ephesians  is  beautifully  illustrated  in 
an  earlier  chapter  of  John — the  13th.  There  we 
have  our  Lord,  in  the  full  consciousness  of  His 
eternal  Sonship,  taking  the  place  of  a girded  serv- 
ant to  wash  His  disciples’  feet.  Washing  the  feet 
is  indicative  of  cleansing  the  ways;  and  the  whole 
passage  is  a symbolical  picture  of  the  work  in  which 
He  has  been  engaged  ever  since  ascending  to 
heaven.  He  has  been  keeping  the  feet  of  His 
saints  by  cleansing  them  from  the  defilement  of 
the  way — those  earth-stains  which  are  so  readily 
contracted  by  sandaled  pilgrim-feet  pressing  along 
this  world’s  highways. 

He  says  to  each  of  us,  as  to  Peter,  “If  I wash 
thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  Me.”  Part  in  Him 
we  have  on  the  ground  of  His  atoning  work  and 
as  a result  of  the  life  He  gives.  Part  with  Him,  or 
daily  communion,  is  only  ours  as  sanctified  by  the 
water  of  the  Word. 


7o 


holiness: 


That  the  whole  scene  was  allegorical  is  evident 
by  His  words  to  Peter,  “What  I do  thou  knowest 
not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter.  ” Literal 
feet-washing  Peter  knew  and  understood.  Spirit- 
ual feet-washing  he  learned  when  restored  by  the 
Lord  after  his  lamentable  fall.  Then  he  entered 
into  the  meaning  of  the  words,  “ He  that  is  bathed * 
needeth  not  save  to  wash  his  feet,  but  is  clean  every 
whit.”  The  meaning  is  not  hard  to  grasp.  Every 
believer  is  bathed  once  for  all  in  the  “bath  of  re- 
generation” (Titus  3:  s,  literal  rendering).  That 
bathing  is  never  repeated.  None  born  of  God  can 
ever  perish,  for  all  such  have  a life  that  is  eternal, 
and  consequently  non-forfeitable  (John  10:  27-29). 
If  they  fail  and  sin,  they  do  not  need  to  be  saved 
over  again.  That  would  mean,  to  be  bathed  once 
more.  But  he  that  is  bathed  needs  not  to  have  it  all 
done  again  because  his  feet  get  defiled.  He  washes 
them  and  is  clean. 

So  it  is  with  Christians.  We  have  been  regener- 
ated once , and  never  shall  be  a second  time.  But 
every  time  we  fail  we  need  to  judge  ourselves  by 
the  Word,  that  we  may  be  cleansed  as  to  our  ways; 
and  where  we  daily  give  that  Word  its  rightful  place 
in  our  lives,  we  shall  be  kept  from  defilement  and 
enabled  to  enjoy  unclouded  communion  with  our 
Lord  and  Saviour.  “ Wherewithal,”  asks  the  psalm- 
ist, “shall  a young  man  cleanse  his  way?”  And 
the  answer  is,  “ By  taking  heed  thereto  according 
to  Thy  Word.” 


* As  many  now  know,  this  word  means  a complete  bath,  and 
differs  from  the  word  used  later  for  “ wash  ” in  the  same  verse. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  ji 

How  necessary  it  is  then  to  search  the  Scriptures, 
and  to  obey  them  unqestioningly,  in  order  that  we 
may  be  sanctified  by  the  truth!  Yet  what  indiffer- 
ence is  often  found  among  professors  of  a “second 
blessing”  as  to  this  very  thing!  What  ignorance  of 
the  Scriptures,  and  what  fancied  superiority  to 
them,  is  frequently  manifested! — and  that  coupled 
with  a profession  of  holiness  in  the  flesh  ! 

In  i Thess.  4:  3 there  is  a passage  which,  di- 
vorced from  its  context,  is  often  considered  decisive 
as  proving  that  it  is  possible  for  believers  to  attain 
to  a state  of  absolute  freedom  from  inbred  sin  in 
this  world:  “This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your 
sanctification.”  Who  can  deny  my  title  to  perfect 
holiness  if  sanctification  means  that,  and  it  is  God’s 
will  for  me  ? Surely  none.  But  already  we  have 
seen  that  sanctification  never  means  that,  and  in 
the  present  text  least  of  all.  Read  the  entire  first 
eight  verses,  forming  a complete  paragraph,  and 
see  for  yourself.  The  subject  is  personal  purity. 
The  sanctification  spoken  of  is  keeping  the  body 
from  unclean  practices,  and  the  mind  from  lascivi- 
ousness. 

Grossest  immorality  was  connected  with,  and  even 
formed  part  of  idolatrous  worship.  The  Greek 
mythology  had  deified  the  passions  of  fallen  man; 
and  these  Thessalonian  Christians  had  but  just 
“turned  to  God  from  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and 
true  God.”  Hence  the  special  need  of  this  exhor- 
tation to  saints  newly  converted,  and  who  were 
living  among  those  who  shamelessly  practiced  all 
these  things.  But  think  of  calling  for  this  upon  men 
freed  from  inbred  sin!  And  the  saints,  as  God’s 


72 


HOLINESS: 


temple  are  to  be  characterized  by  a clean  life,  not 
by  a life  polluted  by  fleshly  lusts 

Another  aspect  of  this  practical  sanctification 
is  brought  before  us  in  2 Tim.  2:  19-22.  We 
might  call  it  ecclesiastical  sanctification;  for  it 
has  in  view  the  faithful  believer’s  stand  in  a day 
when  corruption  has  come  in  among  professing 
Christians,  and  the  church  as  a whole,  viewed  in 
its  character  as  the  house  of  God,  has  fallen,  and 
become  as  a great  house  in  which  good  and  evil  are 
all  mixed  up  together.  It  is  a matter  of  most  sol- 
emn import  that,  whereas  here  and  elsewhere  in 
Scripture  he  who  would  walk  with  God  is  called  to 
separate  himself  from  unholy  associations  and  the 
fellowship  of  the  mixed  multitude,  even  though  it 
be  found  in  what  calls  itself  the  Church,  yet  there 
are  large  numbers,  who  testify  to  “living  without 
sin,”  who  nevertheless  are  united  in  church  (and 
often  other  forms  of)  fellowship  with  unbelievers 
and  professing  Christians  who  are  unholy  in  walk 
and  unsound  as  to  the  faith.  For  the  sake  of  such 
it  will  be  well  to  examine  the  passage  in  detail.* 

The  apostle  has  been  directing  Timothy’s  atten- 
tion to  the  evidences  of  increasing  apostasy.  He 
warns  against  striving  about  words  (verse  14),  pro- 
fane and  vain  babblings  (verse  16);  and  points  out 


* As  I penned  a paper  on  this  subject  some  time  ago  (published 
in  Help  and  Food  for  August,  1910,  under  the  title  “From  what 
are  we  called  to  purge  ourselves  in  2 Tim.  2?”),  I have  largely 
availed  myself  of  what  was  then  written,  in  the  following  para- 
graphs. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


73 


two  men,  Hymenaeus  and  Philetus,  in  verse  17,  who 
have  given  themselves  over  to  these  unholy  spec- 
ulations, and  have  thereby,  though  accepted  by 
many  as  Christian  teachers,  overthrown  the  faith 
of  some.  And  this  is  but  the  beginning,  as  the 
next  chapter  shows,  for  “evil  men  and  seducers 
shall  wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving  and  being  de- 
ceived” (3:  13). 

Now  I apprehend  that  the  first  verse  of  chapter  3 
follows  verse  iS  of  chapter  2 in  an  orderly,  con- 
nected manner.  The  apostle  sees  in  Hymenaeus 
and  Philetus  the  beginning  of  the  awful  harvest  of 
iniquity  soon  to  nearly  smother  everything  that  is 
of  God.  Go  on  with  these  men,  listen  to  them,  fel- 
lowship them,  endorse  them  in  any  way,  and  you 
will  soon  lose  all  ability  to  discern  between  good 
and  evil,  to  “take  forth  the  precious  from  the 
vile.” 

But  ere  depicting  the  full  character  of  the  rap- 
idly encroaching  conditions,  Timothy  is  given  a 
word  for  his  encouragement,  and  instruction  as  to 
his  own  path  when  things  reach  a state  where  it  is 
impossible  longer  to  purge  out  the  evil  from  the 
visible  church. 

“Nevertheless  the  foundation  of  God  standeth 
sure,  having  this  seal,  The  Lord  knoweth  them 
that  are  His.  And,  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the 
name  of  the  Lord*  depart  from  iniquity”  (or,  law- 
lessness) (verse  19).  Here  is  faith’s  encourage- 
ment, and  here  too  is  the  responsibility  of  faithful- 


4 See  the  Revised.  It  is  the  acknowledgment  of  the  Lordship 
of  Christ. 


74 


Holiness: 


ness.  Faith  says,  “Let  the  evil  rise  as  high  as  it 
tnay — let  lawlessness  abound,  and  the  love  of  many 
wax  cold — let  all  that  seemed  to  be  of  God  in  the 
earth  be  swallowed  up  in  the  apostasy — neverthe- 
less God’s  firm  foundation  stands,  for  Christ  has 
declared,  ‘Upon  this  rock  I will  build  My  Assem- 
bly, and  the  gates  of  Hades  shall  not  prevail 
against  it’  ”! 

But  this  brings  in  responsibility.  I am  not  to  go 
on  with  the  evil — protesting,  perhaps,  but  fellow- 
shiping  it  still — though  it  be  in  a reserved,  half- 
hearted way.  I am  called  to  separate  from  it.  In 
so  doing  I may  seem  to  be  separating  from  dear 
children  of  God  and  beloved  servants  of  Christ. 
But  this  is  necessary  if  they  do  not  judge  the  apos- 
tate condition. 

To  make  clear  my  responsibility  an  illustration 
is  given  in  verse  20:  “But  in  a great  house  there 
are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver,  but  also 
of  wood  and  of  earth;  and  some  to  honor,  and  some 
to  dishonor.”  The  “great  house  ” is  Christendom 
in  its  present  condition,  where  good  and  evil,  saved 
and  lost,  holy  and  unholy,  are  all  mixed  up  to- 
gether. In  1 Tim.  3:  15  we  read  of  “the  house  of 
God,  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  the 
pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth.”  This  is  what  the 
Church  should  ever  have  been.  But,  alas,  it  soon 
drifted  away  from  so  blessed  an  ideal,  and  became 
like  a great  man’s  house  in  which  are  found  all 
kinds  of  vessels,  composed  of  very  different  mate- 
rials, and  for  very  different  uses.  There  are  golden 
and  silver  vessels  for  use  in  the  dining-room;  and 
there  are  vessels  of  wood  and  earth,  used  in  the 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


75 


kitchen  and  other  parts  of  the  house,  often  allowed 
to  become  exceedingly  filthy,  and  at  best  to  be 
kept  at  a distance  from  the  valuable,  and  easily 
scratched  or  polluted,  plate  up-stairs. 

“If  a man  therefore  purge  himself  from  these, 
he  shall  be  a vessel  unto  honor,  sanctified,  and 
meet  for  the  Master’s  use,  and  prepared  unto  every 
good  work”  (verse  21).  The  parable  is  here  ap- 
plied. The  vessels  a.re  seen  to  be  persons.  And 
just  as  valuable  plate  might  stand  uncleansed  and 
dirty  with  a lot  of  kitchen  utensils  waiting  to  be 
washed,  and  then  carefully  separated  from  the  ves- 
sels for  baser  uses,  so  Timothy  (and  every  other 
truly  exercised  soul)  is  called  upon  to  take  a place 
apart,  to  ‘'purge  out  himself”  from  the  mixed  con- 
ditions, that  he  may  be  in  very  deed  “a  vessel  unto 
honor,  sanctified , and  meet  for  the  Master’s  use, 
prepared  unto  every  good  work.” 

Unquestionably  this  sanctification  is  very  differ- 
ent from  the  Spirit’s  work  in  the  soul  at  the  begin- 
ning, or  the  effect  of  the  work  of  Christ  on  the 
cross,  by  which  we  are  set  apart  to  God  eternally. 
It  is  a practical  thing,  relating  to  the  question  of 
our  associations  as  Christians.  Let  me  follow  out 
the  illustration  a step  further,  and  I think  all  will 
be  plain. 

The  master  of  the  great  house  brings  home  a 
friend.  He  wishes  to  serve  him  with  a refreshing 
drink.  He  goes  to  the  sideboard  looking  for  a sil- 
ver goblet,  but  there  is  none  to  be  seen.  A serv- 
ant is  called,  and  inquiry  made.  Ah,  the  goblets 
are  down  in  the  kitchen  waiting  to  be  washed  and 
separated  from  the  rest  of  the  household  vessels. 


76 


holiness: 


He  is  indignantly  despatched  to  procure  one,  and 
soon  returns  with  a vessel  purged  out  from  the  un- 
clean collection  below;  and  thus  separated  and 
cleansed  it  is  meet  for  the  use  of  the  master. 

And  so  it  is  with  the  man  of  God  who  has  thus 
purged  himself  out  from  what  is  opposed  to  the 
truth  and  the  holiness  of  God.  He  is  sanctified,  or 
separated,  and  in  this  way  becomes  “meet  for  the 
the  Master’s  use.” 

Of  course  it  is  not  enough  to  stop  with  separa- 
tion. To  do  so  would  make  one  a Pharisee  of  the 
most  disgusting  type;  as  has,  alas,  often  been  the 
case.  But  he  who  has  separated  from  the  evil  is 
now  commanded  to  “flee  also  youthful  lusts:  but 
follow  righteousness,  faith,  love,  peace,  with  them 
that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a pure  heart.”  To  do 
this,  what  need  there  is  of  the  daily  application  of 
the  word  of  God,  in  the  Spirit’s  power,  to  all  our 
ways ! 

And  this,  as  we  have  seen,  is  true  feet-washing. 
Through  the  Word  we  are  made  clean  at  new  birth. 
“ Now  are  ye  clean  through  the  word  which  I have 
spoken  unto  you”  (John  15  : 3).  That  Word  is 
likened  to  water  because  of  its  purifying  and  re- 
freshing effect  upon  the  one  who  submits  to  it.  In 
it  I find  instruction  as  to  every  detail  of  the  walk 
of  faith.  It  shows  me  how  I am  called  to  behave 
in  the  family,  in  the  church,  and  in  the  world.  If 
I obey  it  the  defilement  is  washed  out  of  my  life; 
even  as  the  application  of  water  cleanses  my  body 
from  material  pollution. 

Never  shall  I attain  so  exalted  a state  or  experi- 
ence upon  earth  that  I can  honestly  say:  Now  I am 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


77 


wholly  sanctified;  I no  longer  need  the  Word  to 
cleanse  me.  As  long  as  I am  in  this  scene  I am 
called  to  “ Follow  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness 
(or,  sanctification),  without  which  no  man  shall  see 
the  Lord”  (Heb.  12:  14).  This  one  passage,  rightly 
understood,  cuts  up  by  the  roots  the  entire  perfec- 
tionist theory ; yet  no  verse  is  more  frequently 
quoted,  or  rather  misquoted,  in  holiness  meetings! 

Observe  carefully  what  is  here  commanded:  We 
are  to  follow  two  things:  peace  with  all  men,  and 
holiness.  He  who  does  not  follow  these  will  never 
see  the  Lord.  But  we  do  not  follow  that  to  which 
we  have  attained.  Who  has  attained  to  peace  with 
all  men  ? How  many  have  to  cry  with  the  psalm- 
ist, “I  am  for  peace:  but  when  I speak,  they  are 
for  war”!  (Ps.  120:  7).  And  who  have  attained  to 
holiness  in  the  full  sense  ? Not  you,  dear  reader, 
nor  I;  for  “in  many  things  we  all  offend”  (James 
3:  2).  But  every  real  believer,  every  truly  con- 
verted soul,  every  one  who  has  received  the  Spirit 
of  adoption,  does  follow  holiness,  and  longs  for  the 
time  when,  at  the  coming  again  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  “He  shall  change  these  bodies  of  our  hu- 
miliation,” and  make  them  like  “the  body  of  His 
glory.”  Then  we  shall  have  reached  our  goal: 
then  we  shall  have  become  absolutely  and  forever 
holy. 

And  so  when  the  apostle  writes  to  the  Thessalo- 
nians,  in  view  of  that  glorious  event,  he  says:  “Ab- 
stain from  all  appearance  (every  form)  of  evil.  And 
the  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly;  and  I 
pray  God  your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be 
preserved  blameless  unto  (or?  in)  the  coming  of  our 


73 


holiness: 


Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Faithful  is  He  that  calleth  you, 
who  also  will  do  it”  (i  Thess.  5 : 22-24).  This  will  be 
the  glad  consummation  for  all  who  here  on  earth,  as 
strangers  and  pilgrims,  follow  peace  and  holiness, 
and  thus  manifest  the  divine  nature  and  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit. 

But  so  long  as  they  remain  in  the  wilderness  of 
this  world  they  will  need  daily  recourse  to  the  layer 
of  water — the  cleansing  word  of  God — which  of  old 
stood  midway  between  the  altar  and  the  holy  place. 
When  all  are  gathered  home  in  heaven  the  water 
will  no  longer  be  needed  to  free  from  defilement. 
In  that  scene  of  holiness  therefore  there  is  no  laver ; 
but  before  the  throne  John  saw  a sea  of  glass,  clear 
as  crystal,  upon  which  the  redeemed  were  stand- 
ing, their  trials  and  their  warfare  over. 

So  throughout  eternity  we  shall  rest  upon  the 
word  of  God  as  a crystal  sea,  no  longer  needed 
for  our  sanctification,  for  we  shall  be  presented 
faultless  in  the  presence  of  His  glory  with  exceed- 
ing joy. 

“ Then  we  shall  be  where  we  would  be; 

Then  we  shall  be  what  we  should  be ; 

Things  that  are  not  now,  nor  could  be, 

Then  shall  be  our  own.” 


RELATIVE  SANCTIFICATION 


OTHING  more  clearly  establishes  the  propo- 


sition we  have  been  insisting  on  throughout 
— that  sanctification  is  not  the  eradication  of  our 
sinful  nature — than  the  way  the  word  is  used  rela- 
tively, where  it  is  positively  certain  there  is  no 
work  of  any  sort  contemplated  as  having  taken 
place  in  the  soul  of  the  sanctified.  Having  care- 
fully considered  the  absolute  and  practical  aspects 
of  sanctification,  without  which  all  profession  is  un- 
real, it  may  now  be  profitable  to  weigh  what  God 
has  to  say  of  this  merely  outward,  or  relative,  ho- 


Already,  in  the  chapter  on  sanctification  by  blood, 
we  have  seen  that  a person  may  in  a certain  sense 
be  sanctified  by  association  and  yet  all  the  time  be 
unreal,  only  to  become  an  apostate  at  last. 

It  is  also  true  that  in  another  sense  people  are 
said  to  be  sanctified  by  association  who  are  the  sub- 
jects of  earnest,  prayerful  yearning,  and  may  yet — 
and  in  all  probability  will — be  truly  saved.  But 
they  are  sanctified  before  this,  and  in  view  of  it. 

The  seventh  chapter  of  i Corinthians  is  the  pas- 
sage which  must  now  occupy  us.  It  contains  the 
fullest  instruction  as  to  the  marriage  relation  that 
we  have  in  the  Bible.  Beginning  with  verse  io, 
we  read,  ‘ 4 And  unto  the  married  I command,  yet 
not  I,  but  the  Lord,  Let  not  the  wife  depart  from 
her  husband:  but  and  if  she  depart,  let  her  remain 
unmarried,  or  be  reconciled  to  her  husband:  and 


liness. 


So 


holiness: 


let  not  the  husband  put  away  his  wife.”  As  to  this, 
the  Lord  had  already  given  explicit  instruction,  as 
recorded  in  Matt.  19:  1-12. 

But  owing  to  the  spread  of  the  gospel  among  the 
heathen  of  the  Gentiles  a condition  had  arisen  in 
many  places  which  the  words  of  the  Lord  did 
not  seem  fully  to  meet,  having  been  spoken,  as 
they  were,  to  the  people  of  the  Jews,  separated  as 
a whole  to  Jerfbvah.  The  question  that  soon  be- 
gan to  agitate  the  Church  was  this : Suppose  a case 
(and  there  were  many  such)  where  a heathen  wife 
is  converted  to  God  but  her  husband  remains  an 
unclean  idolater,  or  vice  versa;  can  the  Christian 
partner  remain  in  the  marriage  relationship  with 
the  unconverted  spouse  and  not  be  defiled  ? To 
a Jew  the  very  thought  of  such  a condition  was  an 
offense.  In  the  days  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  certain 
of  the  returned  remnant  had  taken  wives  of  the 
surrounding  mixed  nations,  and  the  result  was  con- 
fusion. “Their  children  spake  half  in  the  speech  of 
Ashdod,  and  could  not  speak  in  the  Jews’  language, 
but  according  to  the  language  of  each  people” 
(Neh.  13:  24).  This  state  of  things  was  abhorrent 
to  the  godly  leaders,  who  did  not  rest  until  all  the 
strange  wives  had  been  put  away,  and  with  them 
the  children,  who  were  considered  likewise  unclean, 
and  a menace  to  the  purity  of  Israel. 

With  only  the  Old  Testament  in  their  hands, 
who  could  have  wondered  at  it  if  some  zealous, 
well-meaning  legalists  from  Jerusalem  had  gone 
like  firebrands  through  the  Gentile  assemblies 
preaching  a crusade  against  all  contamination  of 
this  kind,  and  breaking  up  households  on  every 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


8l 


hand,  counseling  converted  husbands  to  cast  out 
their  heathen  wives  and  disown  their  children  as 
the  product  of  an  unclean  relationship,  and  urging 
Christian  wives  to  flee  from  the  embraces  of  idola- 
trous husbands,  and,  at  whatever  cost  to  the  affec- 
tions, to  forsake  their  offspring,  as  a supreme  sac- 
rifice to  the  God  of  holiness  ? 

It  was  to  prevent  just  such  a state  of  affairs  that 
the  verses  that  follow  those  we  have  already  consid- 
ered were  penned  by  inspiration  of  the  God  of  all 
grace.  Concerning  this  anomalous  state  the  Lord 
had  not  spoken,  as  the  time  had  not  come  to  do  so. 
Therefore  Paul  writes:  “But  to  the  rest  speak  I, 
not  the  Lord:  If  any  brother  hath  a wife  that  be- 
lieveth  not,  and  she  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  him, 
let  him  not  put  her  away.  And  the  woman  which 
hath  a husband  that  believeth  not,  and  if  he  be 
pleased  to  dwell  with  her,  let  her  not  leave  him. 
For  the  unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by  the  wife , 
and  the  unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  by  the  husband: 
else  were  your  children  unclean ; but  now  are  they 
holy  [or,  sanctified].  But  if  the  unbelieving  depart, 
let  him  depart.  A brother  or  a sister  is  not  under 
bondage  in  such  cases : but  God  hath  called  us  to 
peace.  For  what  knowest  thou,  O wife,  whether 
thou  shalt  save  thy  husband  ? or  how  knowest  thou, 
O man,  whether  thou  shalt  save  thy  wife  ? ” (vers. 
12-16). 

What  an  example  have  we  here  of  the  transcend- 
ent power  of  grace ! Under  law  the  unclean  part- 
ner defiled  the  sanctified  one.  Under  grace  the 
one  whom  God  has  saved  sanctifies  the  unclean. 

The  family  is  a divine  institution,  older  than  the 
6 


82 


holiness: 


nations,  older  than  Israel,  older  than  the  Church. 
What  is  here,  and  elsewhere  in  Scripture,  clearly 
indicates  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  to  save  His 
people  as  households.  He  would  not  do  violence 
to  the  ties  of  nature  which  He  Himself  has  created. 
If  he  saves  a man  who  is  head  of  a household,  He 
thereby  indicates  that  for  the  entire  family  He  has 
blessing  in  store.  This  does  not  touch  individual 
responsibility.  Salvation,  it  is  ever  true,  is  “not 
of  blood”;  but  it  is,  generally  speaking,  God’s 
thought  to  deliver  His  people’s  households  with 
themselves.  So  he  declares  that  the  salvation  of 
one  parent  sanctifies  the  other,  and  the  children  too 
are  sanctified. 

Is  it  that  any  change  has  taken  place  within  these 
persons  ? Not  at  all.  They  may  still  be  utterly 
unregenerate,  loving  only  their  evil  ways,  despi- 
sing the  grace  and  fearing  not  the  judgment  of 
God.  But  they  are  nevertheless  sanctified! 

How  does  this  agree  with  the  perfectionists’  view 
of  sanctification  ? as  it  is  evident  the  word  here  can- 
not mean  an  inward  cleansing,  his  system  falls  to 
the  ground.  The  fact  is,  he  has  attached  an  arbitrary 
meaning  to  it,  which  is  etymologically  incorrect, 
Scripturally  untrue,  and  experimentally  false. 

In  the  case  now  occupying  us  the  sanctification  is 
clearly  and  wholly  relative . The  position  of  the 
rest  of  the  family  is  changed  by  the  conversion  of 
one  parent.  That  is  no  longer  a heathen  home  in 
God’s  sight,  but  a Christian  one.  That  household 
no  longer  dwells  in  the  darkness,  but  in  the  light. 
Do  not  misunderstand  me  here.  I am  not  speaking 
of  light  and  darkness  as  implying  spiritual  capacity 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


33 


or  incapacity.  I am  referring  to  outward  responsi- 
bility. 

In  a heathen  home  all  is  darkness;  there  is  no 
light  shining  whatever.  But  let  one  parent  of  that 
family  be  converted  to  God;  what  then?  At  once 
a candlestick  is  set  up  in  that  house  which,  whether 
they  will  or  no,  enlightens  every  other  member.  They 
are  put  in  a place  of  privilege  and  responsibility  to 
which  they  have  been  strangers  hitherto.  And  all 
this  with  no  work  of  God,  as  yet,  in  their  souls,  but 
simply  in  view  of  such  a work.  For  the  conversion 
of  that  one  parent  was  God’s  way  of  announcing 
His  gracious  desires  for  the  whole  family;  even  as 
in  the  jailer’s  case  He  caused  His  servants  to  de- 
clare, “Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved,  and  thy  house.”  The  last  few 
words  do  not  guarantee  salvation  to  the  household, 
but  they  at  once  fix  upon  the  jailer’s  heart  the  fact 
that  the  same  way  is  open  for  the  salvation  of  his 
house  as  for  himself,  and  that  God  would  have  him 
count  upon  Him  for  this.  They  were  sanctified 
the  moment  he  believed,  and  soon  rejoicing  filled 
the  whole  house,  when  all  responded  to  the  grace 
proclaimed.* 


This,  then,  is,  in  brief,  the  teaching  of  Holy 
Scripture  as  to  relative  sanctification  — a theme 
often  overlooked  or  ignored,  but  of  deep  solem- 


f nity  and  importance  to  Christian  members  of 
a I families  of  whom  some  are  still  unsaved.  “What 


* I desire  heartily  to  commend  here  an  excellent  work  on  this 
J subject  by  the  late  beloved  C.  H.  M.,  “Thou  and  Thy  House.” 
v Same  publishers. 


holiness: 


S4 

knowest  thou,  O wife,  whether  thou  shalt  save  thy 
husband  ? or  how  knowest  thou,  O man,  whether 
thou  shalt  save  thy  wife  ? M Labor  on;  pray  on; 
live  Christ  before  the  rest  from  day  to  day,  know- 
ing that  through  you  God  has  sanctified  them,  and 
is  waiting  to  save  them  when  they  see  their  need 
and  trust  His  grace. 

I cannot  pursue  this  theme  more  at  length  here, 
as  to  do  so  would  divert  attention  from  the  main 
theme  that  is  before  us;  but  I trust  that  the  most 
simple  and  uninstructed  of  my  readers  can  now 
perceive  that  sanctification  and  sinlessness  must  in 
the  very  nature  of  the  case  be  opposing  terms. 

And  with  this  paper  I bring  to  an  end  my  exami- 
nation of  the  use  of  the  actual  term  sanctification 
in  Scripture.  But  this  by  no  means  exhausts  the 
subject.  There  are  other  terms  still  to  be  exam- 
ined, the  meaning  of  which  the  perfectionists  con- 
sider to  be  synonymous  with  it,  and  to  teach  their 
favorite  theory  of  the  entire  destruction  of  the  car- 
nal mind  in  the  sanctified.  These  will  be  taken  up, 
the  Lord  willing,  in  a few  more  papers  in  contin- 
uance. 


85 


DEAD  TO  SIN,  AND  PERFECT  LOVE 

HAT  is  it  to  be  dead  with  Christ,  dead  to 


sin  and  to  the  rudiments  of  the  world  ? 


Upon  the  answer  to  this  question  hangs  the  truth 
or  error  of  the  perfectionist  system. 

In  commencing  our  inquiry  I would  remind  the 
reader  of  what  we  have  already  looked  at  (in  chap- 
ter 2)  as  to  the  distinction  between  standing  and 
state.  Standing  has  reference  to  what  I am  as 
viewed  by  God  through  the  work  of  His  Son.  State 
is  my  actual  condition  of  soul.  “That  I may  be 
of  good  comfort,”  says  Paul,  “when  I know  your 
state.  ” He  speaks  elsewhere  of  “ this  grace  wherein 
ye  stand .”  The  two  things  are  very  different. 

Death  with  Christ  has  to  do  with  my  standing. 
“Reckon  yourself  dead”  refers  to  my  state.  It 
should  readily  be  apprehended  that  no  one  but  the 
thieves  on  the  cross  ever  died  with  Christ  actually, 
and  one  of  them  was  lost.  Thomas  on  one  occasion 
said,  “ Let  us  also  go,  that  we  may  die  with  Him.” 
He  referred  to  a literal  death  with  Lazarus  and 
with  Christ,  for  whom  to  go  into  Judaea  seemed  to 
the  disciples  to  be  imperiling  His  life. 

But  Christ  is  now  living  in  glory;  and  it  is  nine- 
teen hundred  years  too  late  for  any  one  to  die  with 
Him,  so  far  as  experience  is  concerned.  Supposing 
the  “death”  of  Rom.  6 were  state  or  experience, 
therefore,  it  could  not  be  properly  described  as  dy- 
ing with  Christ,  but  as  Christ,  or  for  Christ.  To 
many  it  may  seem  needless  to  dwell  upon  this;  but 
no  one  would  think  so  who  is  familiar  with  the  mis- 


86 


holiness: 


use  of  the  expression  in  the  holiness  preaching  and 
perfectionist  literature  of  the  day. 

In  these  death  is  made  to  be  experience.  Believers 
are  exhorted  to  die.  They  try  to  feel  dead;  and  if 
in  measure  insensible  to  insult,  deprivation,  and 
praise  or  blame,  they  consider  they  have  died  with 
Christ;  never  realizing  the  illogical  use  of  the  lan- 
guage in  question.  When  did  Christ  have  to  die 
to  these  things  ? When  was  He  ever  annoyed  by 
blame  or  uplifted  by  praise  ? How  then  could  sto- 
ical resignation  be  likened  to  death  with  Him  ? 

One  verse  of  tremendous  import  puts  the  scrip- 
tural use  of  the  term  beyond  all  cavil:  “In  that 
He  died,  He  died  unto  sin  once  ” (Rom.  6:  io).  If 
it  be  said  that  I have  “died  with  Him,,,  it  must  be 
in  His  death,  and  to  the  same  things  to  which  He 
died.  What  then  are  we  to  learn  from  so  solemn 
a statement  ? 

Notice  one  thing  very  carefully.  It  does  not — 
could  not — say,  “In  that  He  died,  His  death  was 
the  end  of  inbred  sin”!  Yet  this  is  what  it  should 
have  said  if  my  death  with  Him  is  the  death  of  my 
inbred  sin.  But  this  could  never  be;  for  He  was 
ever  the  Holy  One  in  whom  was  no  sin. 

Yet  He  died  unto  sin.  In  what  sense?  Mani- 
festly as  taking  my  place.  As  my  Substitute,  He 
died  unto  sin  in  the  fullest  possible  sense — sin  in  its 
totality,  the  tree  and  the  fruit — but  all  mine,  not 
His!  “He  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me;  ” 
and  in  so  doing  He  died  unto  sin,  bearing  the  judg- 
ment of  God  due  to  me,  the  guilty  one.  God  “hath 
made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin;  that 
we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


87 


Him”  (2  Cor.  5:  21).  And  having  been  made  sin 
in  my  room  and  stead,  and  died  for  it,  He  has  done 
with  it  forever — He  has  died  unto  it  once  for  all, 
and  in  His  death  I see  my  death,  for  I died  with 
Him! 

When  and  where  did  I die  with  Him  ? There  on 
His  cross,  nineteen  centuries  ago,  when  He  died, 
“the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us 
to  God.”  There  I,  and  every  other  child  of  God, 
died  unto  sin  with  Him,  henceforth  to  live  unto 
God,  even  as  it  is  written,  “And  He  died  for  all, 
that  they  who  live  should  no  longer  live  to  them- 
selves, but  to  Him  who  died  for  them  and  has  been 
raised”  (2  Cor.  5:  14,  15,  N.  T.). 

Who,  that  desires  to  be  taught  of  God  and  to 
learn  alone  from  Scripture,  need  stumble  here  ? 
Christ’s  substitutionary  death  is  accounted  by  God 
as  my  death,  and  the  death  of  all  who  believe  in 
Him;  and  through  that  death  we  are  introduced 
into  our  new  standing  as  risen  from  the  dead, 
and  seen  in  Christ  before  His  Father’s  face.  “He 
hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved  ” (Eph.  1 : 
6).  This  is  my  new  and  glorious  position  because 
I have  died  with  Christ.  I need  not  try  to  die,  or 
pray  to  die,  or  seek  to  feel  dead  (absurdity  beyond 
expression!);  but  Scripture  says,  “Ye  have  died, 
and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God”  (Col.  3:3). 

The  practical  results  of  this  are  many.  Learn- 
ing that  I have  died  with  Christ,  I see  at  once  the 
incongruity  of  denying  this  in  my  practical  walk, 
or  in  any  way  owning  the  right  of  sin,  which  in- 
dwells me  still,  to  exercise  control  over  me.  It  was 
once  my  master,  but  Christ  has  died  to  sin — root, 


88 


holiness: 


branch,  and  fruit;  and  His  death  was  mine.  There- 
fore I must  in  faith  reckon  myself  to  be  dead  indeed 
unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ 
my  Lord.  Mark,  I do  not  reckon  the  sin  to  be 
dead,  or  uprooted,  or  anything  of  the  kind.  I 
know  it  is  there,  but  / am  dead  to  it.  Faith  reck- 
ons with  God,  and  says,  “In  Christ's  death  I died 
out  of  the  sphere  where  sin  reigns.  I will  not  obey 
it  therefore  any  longer."  And  while  walking  by 
faith,  “ sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you : for  ye 
are  not  under  law,  but  under  grace  ” (Rom.  6:  14). 
What  folly  to  speak  of  sin  not  having  dominion  if  it 
be  dead ! The  very  pith  and  marrow  of  the  apos- 
tle’s teaching  is  that  though  it  remains  in  my  mor- 
tal body,  I am  not  to  let  it  reign  there  (Rom.  6:  12). 

While  I live  in  this  world  I shall  never  be  actually 
free  from  sin’s  presence ; but  I can  and  should  be 
delivered  from  its  power.  God  hath  “condemned 
sin  in  the  flesh"  not  rooted  sin  out  of  the  flesh;  and 
as  I condemn  it  too,  and  refuse  all  allegiance  to  it, 
walking  in  the  Spirit  with  Christ  as  my  soul’s  ob- 
ject, I am  delivered  from  its  control.* 

I reckon  myself  dead  unto  sin  because  in  Christ  I 
died  to  it ; but  it  is  only  as  I keep  the  distinction 
between  the  two  phases  of  death  clear  in  my  mind 
that  I am  freed  from  confusion  of  thought. 

Hoping  I have  been  enabled  of  God  to  make  this 
plain  to  any  troubled  one,  I pass  on  to  consider  a 

* Let  me  here  earnestly  commend  to  the  serious  reader  Mr.  C. 
Crain’s  helpful  ‘ ‘ Readings  on  Romans,”  and  ‘‘God’s  Salvation  as 
set  forth  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,”  by  John  Fort.  “Deliv- 
erance : What  is  it?”  by  F.  W.  Grant,  might  be  profitably  con- 
sidered afterward. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


89 


question  often  asked  at  this  point:  “If  what  has 
been  taught  is  the  truth,  how  can  I be  perfect  in 
love  with  sin  still  dwelling  in  me  ? ” For  answer  to 
this  we  must  turn  to  1 John  4:  15-19.  To  avoid 
one-sidedness,  we  shall  quote  the  entire  passage; 
and  may  I ask  the  reader  to  weigh  every  word,  ob- 
serving too  that  I am  using  a literal  translation  in 
closer  accord  with  the  original  Greek  text  than  our 
much-prized  Authorized  Version  gives  in  this  partic- 
ular instance.  “Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus 
is  the  Son  of  God,  God  abides  in  him,  and  he  in 
God.  And  we  have  known  and  have  believed  the 
love  which  God  has  to  us.  God  is  love  ; and  he  that 
abides  in  love  abides  in  God,  and  God  in  him. 
Herein  has  love  been  perfected  with  us,  that  we 
may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment,  that 
even  as  He  is,  we  also  are  in  this  world.  There  is 
no  fear  in  love ; but  perfect  love  casts  out  fear:  for 
fear  has  torment;  and  he  that  fears  has  not  been 
made  perfect  in  love.  We  love  Him,  because  He 
has  first  loved  us.” 

Now,  with  the  passage  before  us,  allow  me  to 
ask  the  reader  four  questions: 

1st.  Whose  love  is  it  which  we  have  believed? 
See  the  answer  in  the  first  part  of  verse  16. 

2d.  Whose  love  is  it  in  which  we  are  called  to 
abide  ? Read  the  latter  part  of  the  same  verse. 

3d.  Where  do  we  find  perfect  love  manifested — 
in  me,  or  in  the  cross  of  Christ  ? Note  carefully 
verses  17  and  18. 

4th.  What  is  the  result  in  me  of  coming  into  the 
knowledge  of  love  like  this  ? The  19th  verse  sup- 
plies the  answer. 


9o 


holiness: 


Now  let  me  attempt  a paraphrase  of  the  passage, 
in  place  of  an  exposition,  which  for  so  simple  a 
scripture  seems  needless.  “Every  one  confessing 
the  truth  as  to  Jesus  is  at  one  mind  with  God,  hav- 
ing received  a new  divine  life,  and  thus  is  enabled  to 
enjoy  fellowship  with  God,  whose  mighty  love  we 
know  and  believe,  having,  indeed,  rested  our  souls 
upon  the  greatness  of  that  love  toward  us.  God 
Himself  has  been  revealed  as  love;  and  in  that  love 
we  dwell.  Knowing  its  perfection  as  manifested  in 
the  cross  of  Christ,  we  do  not  dread  the  day  of 
judgment,  because  we  know  that  love  has  already 
given  Jesus  to  bear  our  sins.  His  death  was  ours; 
and  now  God  sees  us  in  Him,  and  we  are,  in  God’s 
sight,  as  free  from  all  charge  of  guilt  as  His  Son. 
Therefore  we  have  no  fear,  for  it  is  impossible  that 
there  should  be  fear  in  love:  yea,  this  perfect  love 
of  God  has  banished  every  fear  which  could  only 
torment  us  if  this  love  had  not  been  apprehended. 
If  any  still  are  in  fear,  as  they  think  of  meeting 
God,  it  is  because  they  have  not  fully  seen  what 
His  love  has  done.  Their  apprehension  of  His  love 
is  still  very  imperfect.  But  where  His  love  is 
known  and  rested  in,  we  love  in  return,  for  perfect 
love  like  His  cannot  but  induce  love  in  its  object, 
when  truly  enjoyed.” 

Need  words  be  multiplied  ? Is  it  not  plain  that 
there  is  no  hint  of  that  perfect  love  being  devel- 
oped in  me,  and  thus  my  reaching  a state  of  perfec- 
tion in  the  flesh  ? On  the  contrary,  perfect  love  is 
seen  objectively  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  enjoyed 
subjectively  in  the  soul  of  the  believer. 


9* 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  AND  OF  FIRE 

IT  is  remarkable  how  many  expressions  from  the 
Scriptures,  of  diverse  and  widely  differing  mean- 
ings, are  pressed  into  service  by  the  perfectionists 
to  support  their  views,  and  supposed  by  them  to  be 
synonymous  with  St.  Paul’s  “second  benefit.”  We 
have  already  examined  some  of  them,  and  shown 
they  have  no  reference  whatever  to  the  theory  of  the 
eradication  of  inbred  sin  at  some  time  subsequent 
to  conversion.  Of  all  these  expressions,  the  one 
that  heads  this  chapter  is  ever  given  the  most 
prominent  place,  and  it  is  triumphantly  alleged, 
with  no  possibility  of  serious  refutal,  that  in  this  at 
least  we  certainly  have  what  to  many  in  the  be- 
ginning of  this  dispensation  was  a blessing  received 
after  having  been  born  again.  Were  not  the 
apostles  all  children  of  God  before  Pentecost  ? Did 
they  not  all  have  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins  > 
Surely.  Yet  who  can  deny  that  they  received  the 
Spirit  only  at  Pentecost  ? And  if  this  was  so  with 
them,  how  can  we  suppose  there  is  any  other  way 
now  of  becoming  fit  for  service  ? Each  individual 
must  have  his  own  Pentecost.  If  he  does  not,  he 
is  likely  to  miss  heaven  after  all.  And  here  the 
holiness  teacher  feels  sure  he  has  clinched  his 
favorite  doctrine  beyond  all  possibility  of  dis- 
proof. 

Some  distinguish  between  the  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  that  of  fire,  and  thus  make  a third 
blessing  (!);  but  the  majority  consider  the  two  as 
one, — the  Spirit  coming  upon  and  within  the  justi- 


92 


holiness: 


fied  man,  like  a flame  of  fire,  to  burn  out  all  evil 
and  impart  divine  energy.  Thus  they  sing: 

“ Refining  fire  go  through  my  heart, 

Illuminate  my  soul: 

Scatter  Thy  light  through  every  part, 

And  sanctify  the  whole.” 

We  must  therefore  turn  again  to  our  Bibles  and 
carefully  examine  all  that  is  thus  recorded  concern- 
ing the  Spirit’s  baptism,  noticing  too,  some  other 
operations  of  the  same  Spirit,  which  have  been 
greatly  misunderstood  by  many.* 

It  was  John  the  Baptizer  who  first  spoke  of  this 
spiritual  baptism.  When  the  people  were  in  danger 
of  giving  the  forerunner  an  undue  place,  he  pointed 
them  on  to  the  coming  One,  the  latchet  of  whose  san- 
dal he  felt  unworthy  to  unbind,  and  he  declared,  “I 
indeed  baptize  you  with  water  unto  repentance, 
but  He  that  comes  after  me  is  mighter  than  I,  . . . 
He  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  fire; 
whose  winnowing  fan  is  in  His  hand,  and  He  shall 
thoroughly  purge  His  threshing  floor,  and  shall 
gather  His  wheat  into  the  garner,  but  the  chaff  He 
will  burn  with  fire  unquenchable”  (Matt.  3:  11, 
12,  N.  T.). 

In  Mark’s  account  no  mention  is  made  of  fire. 
The  only  portion  of  John’s  declaration  quoted  is, 
“ There  comes  He  that  is  mightier  than  I after  me, 


* If  I could  feel  sure  that  all  my  readers  would  procure  a copy  of 
S.  Ridout’s  “ Lectures  on  the  Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,” 
I would  not  take  the  trouble  to  write  this  chapter.  But  if  any 
find  my  briefer  remarks  at  all  helpful,  let  me  urge  them  to  send 
for  this  larger  work,  which  the  same  publishers  will  gladly  supply. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


93 


the  thong  of  whose  sandals  I am  not  fit  to  stoop 
down  and  unloose.  I indeed  have  baptized  you 
with  water,  but  He  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  ” (Mark  i:  7,  8).  There  is  a reason  for  the 
omission  of  “and  fire,”  as  we  shall  see  in  a few 
moments. 

Luke’s  account  is  the  fullest  of  all.  After  telling 
of  John’s  mission,  by  emphasizing  the  large  place 
that  coming  wrath  had  in  it  (as  also  in  Matt.  3: 
7-10),  “The  axe,”  he  declares,  “is  already  applied 
to  the  root  of  the  trees;  every  tree,  therefore,  not 
producing  good  fruit,  is  cut  down  and  cast  into  the 
fire  ” (Luke  3:9).  But  who  will  execute  this  solemn 
sentence  ? Will  it  be  John  himself  or  Another  to 
come  after  him  ? And  if  Another,  will  His  coming 
be  alone  for  judgment  ? John  gives  the  answer 
farther  down:  “I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water, 
but  the  mightier  than  I is  coming,  . . . He  shall 
baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  fire ; whose 
winnowing  fan  is  in  His  hand,  and  He  will  thor- 
oughly purge  His  threshing  floor,  and  will  gather 
the  wheat  into  His  garner,  but  the  chaff  He  will 
burn  with  fire  unquenchable”  (vers.  16,  17,  N.  T.) 

In  the  Gospel  of  John,  again,  as  in  that  of  Mark, 
nothing  is  said  of  fire.  It  is  only,  “I  beheld  the 
Spirit  descending  as  a dove  from  heaven,  and  it 
abode  upon  Him.  And  I knew  Him  not;  but  He 
who  sent  Me  to  baptize  with  water,  He  said  to  me, 
Upon  whom  thou  shalt  see  the  Spirit  descending 
and  abiding  on  Him,  He  it  is  who  baptizes  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  And  I have  seen  and  borne  wit- 
ness that  this  is  the  Son  of  God  ” (chap.  1 : 32-34). 

The  only  other  promise  of  the  Spirit’s  baptism  is 


94 


holiness: 


that  given  by  the  risen  Lord  Himself  ere  His 
ascension,  as  recorded  in  Acts  1:5.  After  command- 
ing the  disciples  to  tarry  at  Jerusalem  for  the 
promise  of  the  Father  soon  to  be  fulfilled,  He  says: 
“ For  John  indeed  baptized  with  water,  but  ye  shall 
be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  not  many  days 
hence.,,  Again,  there  is  no  mention  of  fire. 

In  chap.  2 of  the  Acts  we  have  the  historical  ful- 
filment of  these  promises.  The  Holy  Spirit  de- 
scended from  heaven  and  enveloped  all  the  one 
hundred  and  twenty  believers  in  the  upper  room, 
baptizing  and  indwelling  them.  There  is  no  men- 
tion of  the  fire.  Instead  of  that  we  read  of  some- 
thing very  different.  “ Cloven  tongues,  like  as  of 
fire  sat  upon  each  of  them.”  Observe  the  state- 
ment carefully.  It  does  not  say  a baptism  of  fire, 
but  tongues,  having  the  appearance  of  fire,  sat 
upon  each  one.  Was  this  that  fiery  baptism  of 
which  John  spake  ? I think  not — and  for  a very 
good  reason. 

Twice  we  have  found  the  double  expression  used, 
“ He  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
with  fire.”  Three  times  we  have  seen  the  last  ex- 
pression omitted.  Why  this  difference  ? John  is 
addressing  a promiscuous  company  in  both  Mat- 
thew and  Luke.  Some  are  repentant,  waiting  for 
Messiah;  others  are  proud,  haughty,  hypocrites, 
and  unbelievers.  Some  are  humbly  baptized  in 
water,  as  signifying  the  death  their  sins  deserve. 
Others  evade  the  baptism,  or  would  undergo  it 
while  unrepentant.  John  says  in  effect:  Whether 
you  are  baptized  by  me  or  not,  you  shall  all  be 
baptized  by  the  coming  mighty  One,  either  by  the 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


95 


Holy  Spirit,  or  in  fire!  He  will  make  a separation 
between  the  true  and  the  false.  Every  corrupt 
tree  will  come  down  and  be  hurled  into  the  fire — 
baptized  in  the  fire  of  judgment. 

The  wheat  will  be  gathered  into  the  garner: 
they  will  be  the  Spirit-baptized  ones.  The  chaff 
will  be  cast  into  the  fire : this  will  be  their  baptism 
of  wrath. 

In  the  accounts  given  by  Mark,  John,  and  in  the 
Acts,  there  are  no  unbelievers  introduced.  Both 
John  and  Jesus  are  speaking  only  to  disciples.  To 
them  they  say  nothing  of  the  baptism  of  fire.  There 
is  no  judgment — no  wrath  to  come — for  them  to 
fear.  They  receive  the  promise  of  the  baptism  of 
the  Spirit  only,  and  this  was  fulfilled  at  Pentecost. 

From  this  point  on,  that  is  from  Acts  2,  we  never 
hear  again  of  this  baptism  as  something  to  be  waited 
for,  prayed  for,  or  expected.  The  promise  of  the 
Father  had  been  fulfilled.  The  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  had  taken  place.  There  was  never  another 
Pentecost  recognized  in  the  Church . Only  twice, 
thereafter,  is  the  baptism  so  much  as  mentioned  in 
the  New  Testament,  once  in  Peter’s  account  of 
the  reception  of  Cornelius  and  other  Gentiles  with 
him  into  the  Christian  company  (Acts  11:  16),  and 
then  in  Paul’s  epistle  to  the  Corinthians  where 
it  is  shown  to  be  something  past,  in  which 
all  who  were  believers  had  shared:  “By  one 
Spirit  are  ye  all  baptized  into  one  body,  whether 
we  be  Jews  or  Gentiles”  (1  Cor.  12:  13),  and  the 
epistle  is  addressed  to  “all  in  every  place,  who 
call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord” 
(1  Cor.  1:1).  Many  of  them  were  weak  Christians 


96 


holiness: 


many  were  carnal,  many  failed  to  enter  into  much 
of  the  glorious  truth  pertaining  to  the  New  Dis- 
pensation, but  all  were  baptized  by  the  one  Spirit 
into  the  one  body  of  Christ. 

We  must  therefore  enquire  carefully  what  that 
spiritual  baptism  accomplished,  and  why  it  took 
place  subsequent  to  the  new  birth  or  conversion 
of  the  apostles  and  other  believers  in  the  opening 
of  the  book  of  Acts. 

First,  let  it  be  noted,  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit 
was  a future  thing  until  Jesus  was  glorified.  It 
was  after  His  ascension  that  He  was  to  send  the 
Spirit,  who  had  never  hitherto  dwelt  upon  the 
earth.  While  Christ  was  here  the  Spirit  was  pres- 
ent in  Him,  but  He  did  not  then  indwell  believers. 
“ The  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,  because  Jesus 
was  not  yet  glorified.”  In  His  last  hours  with  His 
disciples  He  spoke  of  sending  the  Comforter,  and 
He  contrasted  the  two  dispensations  by  saying, 
“ He  hath  been  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.” 

Secondly,  observe  that  He  was  not  to  come  for 
the  cleansing  or  freeing  of  the  disciples  from  sin. 
True,  He  would  indwell  them,  to  control  them  for 
Christ  and  empower  them  for  holiness  of  life,  and 
for  authoritative  testimony.  But  His  special  work 
was  to  baptize  or  unite  all  believers  into  one 
body.  He  came  to  form  the  body  of  Christ  after 
the  Head  had  been  exalted  in  heaven,  as  Man,  at 
God’s  right  hand.  The  Saviour’s  work  on  the  cross 
cleanses  from  all  sin.  The  Holy  Spirit  unites  the 
cleansed  into  one  body  with  all  other  believers, 
and  with  their  glorified  Head. 

Thirdly,  the  body  being  now  formed,  individual 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


97 


believers  no  longer  wait  for  the  promise  of  the 
Father,  expecting  a new  descent  of  the  Spirit; 
but  upon  their  believing  they  are  sealed  with  that 
Holy  Spirit,  and  thus  are  linked  up  with  the  body 
already  in  existence. 

In  the  early  chapters  of  Acts  we  have  a number 
of  special  manifestations  of  the  Spirit,  owing  to  the 
orderly  formation  of  that  mystical  body.  In  Acts  2, 
the  one  hundred  and  twenty  in  the  upper  room 
are  baptized  into  one  body.  Those  who  believed  and 
were  baptized  with  water,  to  the  number  of  over 
three  thousand,  received  the  same  Spirit,  and  were 
thus  added  by  the  Lord  to  the  newly-constituted 
Church  or  assembly. 

In  Acts  8 the  word  of  life  overleaps  Jewish  boun- 
daries and  goes  to  the  Samaritans,  who  are  obliged 
to  wait  till  two  apostles  come  from  Jerusalem  ere 
they  receive  the  Spirit — “that  there  be  no  schism 
in  the  body.”  These  ancient  enemies  of  the  Jews 
must  not  think  of  two  churches,  or  two  bodies  of 
Christ,  but  of  one ; hence  the  interval  between  their 
conversion  and  the  reception  of  the  Spirit  upon  the 
laying  on  of  the  apostles’  hands.  The  Jews  and 
Samaritans  had  maintained  rival  religious  systems 
and  temples  for  hundreds  of  years,  and  the  conten- 
tion was  very  bitter  between  them  (see  Jno.  4:  19- 
22).  So  it  is  easy  to  see  the  wisdom  of  God  in  thus 
visibly  and  openly  uniting  the  converts  of  Samaria 
with  those  of  Jerusalem. 

In  Acts  10  the  circle  widens.  Grace  flows  out  to 
the  Gentiles.  Cornelius  (already  a pious  man, 
undoubtedly  quickened  by  the  Spirit)  and  all  his 
company  hear  words  whereby  they  shall  be  saved 

7 


98 


holiness: 


— brought  into  the  full  Christian  position — and  as 
Peter  preaches,  the  Holy  Ghost  falls  on  them  all 
upon  their  believing,  a manifestation  of  power 
accompanying  it,  as  a testimony  to  Peter  and  his 
companions; — they  spake  in  foreign  languages  by 
divine  illumination  of  the  mind  and  control  of  the 
tongue.  They  are  added  to  the  body. 

One  exceptional  instance  remains;  that  recorded 
in  Acts  19.  Apollos  has  been  preaching  the  bap- 
tism of  John  in  Ephesus,  knowing  not  the  gospel  of 
Christ’s  death  and  resurrection  and  the  Spirit’s  de- 
scent. He  was  carrying  to  the  dispersed  Jews  in  Gen- 
tile cities  the  message  of  John.  Instructed  by  Aquila 
and  Priscilla,  he  received  the  full  revelation  and 
went  on  to  Corinth.  Paul  followed  him  to  Ephesus, 
and  found  certain  disciples,  who  clearly  came  short 
of  the  Christian  place  and  walk.  To  them  he  said, 
“Did  ye,  upon  your  believing,  receive  the  Holy 
Spirit?”  They  replied,  “We  did  not  so  much  as 
hear  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had  come.”  * Now  Chris- 
tian baptism  is  “in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.”  So  Paul  asks,  “Unto 
what  then  were  ye  baptized  ? ” This  brings  all  out. 
They  answer,  “Unto  John’s  baptism.”  Upon  this  the 
apostle  preaches  the  truth  of  the  Christian  revela- 
tion, setting  forth  Christ  as  the  one  predicted  by 
John,  who  had  now  come,  died  and  risen,  and  who 
had  sent  the  Holy  Spirit  down  from  heaven.  They 
received  the  message  with  joy,  were  baptized  by 
authority  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  upon  the  imposi- 
tion of  Paul’s  hands,  received  the  Comforter.  They 


* See  the  Kevised  Version. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


99 


too  are  added  to  the  body,  and  the  transitional 
state  had  come  to  an  end. 

Thereafter  no  mention  is  ever  made  of  an  inter- 
val between  conversion  and  the  reception  of  the 
Spirit.  He  now  indwells  all  believers,  as  the  seal 
that  marks  them  as  God’s  (Eph.  i : 13-15;  see 
R.  V.),  whereby  they  are  sealed  till  the  day  of  the 
redemption  of  their  bodies  (Eph.  4:  30). 

If  any  have  Him  not,  they  are  none  of  Christ’s(Rom. 
8:9).  The  indwelling  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  adop- 
tion, “ whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.”  It  is  there- 
fore impossible  to  be  a child  of  God  and  not  have 
the  Spirit.  He  is  the  earnest  and  the  first-fruits  of 
the  coming  glory  (Rom.  8:  11-17,  23).  He  is  our 
Anointing,  and  the  youngest  babe  in  Christ  has  this 
divine  Unction  (1  John  2:  18-20,  27). 

Because  we  have  the  Spirit,  we  are  called  to 
“walk  in  the  Spirit,”  and  to  be  “ filled  with  the 
Spirit,”  that  thus  our  God  maybe  glorified  in  us 
(Gal.  5:  16;  Eph.  5:  18).  But  the  Spirit’s  indwelling 
does  not  imply  or  involve  any  alteration  in  or  re- 
moval of  the  old  carnal  nature,  for  we  read,  “The 
flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit 
against  the  flesh : and  these  are  contrary  one  to  the 
other,  so  that  ye  cannot  [or,  might  not]  do  the 
things  that  ye  would  ” (Gal.  5:  17). 

Believers’  bodies  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  we  are  called  to  guard  them  from  pollu- 
tion, and  hold  them  as  devoted  to  the  Lord.  It  is 
because  we  are  thus  made  members  of  Christ  and 
joined  to  the  Lord  that  we  are  exhorted  to  flee 
fornication  and  all  uncleanness  (1  Cor.  6:  12-20). 
How  utterly  opposed  to  the  so-called  holiness 


IOO 


holiness: 


system  would  exhortations  such  as  these  be ! Think 
of  teaching  a man  that  because  he  has  the  Holy 
Spirit,  all  tendency  to  sin  has  been  eliminated  from 
his  being,  and  then  exhorting  him  to  flee  fleshly 
lusts  which  war  against  the  soul  ! 

Because  I am  indwelt  by  the  Spirit  I am  called 
to  walk  in  a holy  way,  remembering  that  I am  a 
member  of  Christ’s  mystical  body  formed  by  the 
Spirit’s  baptism  at  Pentecost. 

The  baptism  of  fire  I shall  never  know.  That  is 
reserved  for  all  who  refuse  the  Spirit’s  testimony, 
who  shall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  when  the 
great  day  of  His  wrath  has  indeed  come.*  Then, 

“ Deep  down  in  the  hell  where  all  Christless  ones  go, 
Immersed  in  despair  and  surrounded  with  woe, 
They’ll  be  hurried  along  on  the  fiery  wave, 

With  no  eye  to  pity  and  no  arm  to  save.” 

God  grant,  my  reader,  that  you  may  never  know 
this  dreadful  baptism,  but  that  if  not  already  num- 
bered among  those  baptized  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
into  the  body  of  Christ,  you  may  now  receive  the 
Spirit  by  the  hearing  of  faith,  as  did  the  Galatians 
of  old  when  they  believed  the  things  spoken  by 
Paul  (Gal.  3:  2,  3). 


*If  any  object  to  this,  and  consider  the  fiery  baptism  to  be 
synonymous  with  the  “tongues  like  as  of  fire”  on  Pentecost,  I 
would  ask  them  to  carefully  read  again  Matthew’s  account  of 
John’s  ministry. 


lot 


PERFECTION,  AS  USED  IN  SCRIPTURE 

IT  is  a common  custom  with  one-sided  special 
pleaders  to  attach  arbitrary  meanings  to  certain 
words,  and  then  press  them  as  the  only  correct  defi- 
nitions. No  terms  have  suffered  more  in  this  re- 
spect than  the  words  “perfect”  and  “perfection,” 
as  found  in  our  English  version  of  the  Scriptures. 
From  the  first  publication  of  the  revered  John  Wes- 
ley’s “Plain  Account  of  Christian  Perfection”  to 
the  present  time,  it  seems  to  have  been  taken  for 
granted  that  by  perfection  we  are  to  understand 
sinlessness.  Yet  Mr.  Wesley  himself  did  not  ex- 
actly so  define  it,  and  he  seemed  to  fear  a radical 
use  of  the  doctrine  that  would  be  hurtful  to  souls, 
against  which  he  carefully  sought  to  guard  by  dis- 
tinguishing angelic,  Adamic,  and  Christian  perfec- 
tion. To-day  the  average  work  on  holiness  pictures 
the  perfect  Christian  as  a man  restored,  to  all  in- 
tents and  purposes,  to  the  Adamic  condition,  save 
that  the  usages  of  society  and  the  condition  of  men 
still  in  the  natural  and  carnal  state  demand  the  con- 
tinuance of  “ coats  of  skin!  ” 

It  will  be  well  for  us,  therefore,  to  turn  at  once 
to  Scripture  and  mark  the  use  of  the  expressions 
and  their  connection  as  we  have  already  done  in 
regard  to  the  word  “sanctification.”  It  is  not  by 
getting  dictionary  definitions  or  theological  expla- 
nations that  we  learn  the  exact  force  of  English 
words  when  used  to  translate  Hebrew  and  Greek 
originals,  but  by  observing  the  manner  in  which 
they  are  used  in  the  Bible.  For  instance,  in  any 


102 


holiness: 


ordinary  sermon  on  “ Perfection  ” the  attention  is 
generally  first  directed  to  Noah  and  Abraham.  Of 
the  former  we  read,  ‘ 4 Noah  was  a just  man  and 
perfect  in  his  generations,  and  Noah  walked  with 
God,,  (Gen.  6:9).  The  margin  gives  “upright” 
in  place  of  perfect,  though  either  word  would  prop- 
erly express  the  original.  Noah  was  an  upright 
man,  perfect  in  his  ways.  That  is,  he  was  one 
against  whose  behavior  no  charge  could  be  brought 
— until,  alas,  this  perfect  life  was  marred  by  the 
drunkenness  so  shamefully  exposed  by  heartless 
Ham.  Who  but  a biased  partizan  could  dream  of 
Noah’s  perfection  implying  freedom  from  inbred 
sin!  Yet  many  have  been  the  sermons  preached 
and  exhortations  based  on  this  statement  of  the  an- 
cient record,  in  which  he  has  been  held  up  as  an 
antediluvian  example  of  entire  sanctification. 

Even  in  ordinary  conversation  the  word  perfect 
is  used  as  here.  A teacher  says  of  a pupil  who  has 
successfully  passed  an  examination,  with  no  errors 
to  his  charge,  “He  is  perfect.”  Does  he  mean, 
“ sinless  ? ” 

To  Abram,  Jehovah  said,  “I  am  the  Almighty 
God;  walk  before  Me,  and  be  thou  perfect”  (Gen. 
17:  1).  Again  a glance  at  the  margin  would  help 
to  avoid  a wrong  conclusion.  “ Upright,”  or  “ sin- 
cere,” are  given  as  alternative  readings.  Yet  the 
zealous  advocate  of  a second  work  will  overlook  or 
ignore  this  altogether,  and  argue  that  God  would 
not  tell  justified  Abram  to  be  perfect  if  He  did  not 
mean  there  was  for  him  a deeper  work  which  He 
was  ready  to  perform  in  him,  whereby  all  carnality 
would  be  destroyed  and  the  patriarch  would  be- 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  103 

come  perfect  as  to  his  inward  state.  But  there  is 
no  such  thought  in  the  passage.  Abram  was  called 
to  walk  before  God  in  sincerity  of  heart  and  single- 
ness of  purpose.  This  was,  to  be  “ perfect.’' 

The  next  proof-text  generally  referred  to  comes 
after  the  lapse  of  many  centuries,  and  is  part  of  our 
Lord’s  sermon  on  the  mount:  “Be  ye  therefore 
perfect,  even  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is 
perfect”  (Matt.  5:48).  These  are  serious  words 
indeed,  and  we  do  well  not  to  pass  them  lightly  by. 

At  the  outset  we  may  observe  that  if  to  be  per- 
fect here  means  to  be  absolutely  like  God,  then  no 
Christian  has  ever  yet  attained  to  the  state  pre- 
scribed. Only  one  mentally  unbalanced  could  pre- 
tend to  such  perfection  as  this.  But  a careful  con- 
sideration of  the  preceding  instruction  will  make 
clear  at  once  what  is  meant.  The  Lord  had  been 
proclaiming  the  law  of  the  kingdom,  the  compel- 
ling power  of  grace.  He  bids  His  disciples  love 
their  enemies  and  do  good  to  their  accusers  and 
persecutors,  that  in  this  they  may  manifestly  be 
children  of  their  Father  in  heaven,  whose  loving 
favor  is  shown  to  just  and  unjust  alike.  He  does 
not  withhold  the  blessings  of  sunshine  and  rain 
from  the  evil-living  or  hateful,  but  shows  mercy 
to  all.  We  are  called  to  be  morally  like  Him.  To 
love  only  our  friends  and  well-wishers  is  to  be  on 
a level  with  any  wicked  man.  To  be  kind  to  breth- 
ren only  is  to  be  clannish  like  the  publicans.  But 
to  show  grace  and  act  in  love  toward  all  is  to  be 
perfect,  or  balanced,  like  the  Creator  Himself. 
Surely  all  Christians  strive  for  this  perfection — but 
who  dare  aver  that  he  has  fully  attained  to  it,  so 


1 04 


holiness.' 


that  he  is  never  unjust  or  partial  in  his  dealings 
with  others  ? 

Perfection  in  its  ultimate  sense  we  all  come  short 
of.  “Not  as  though  I had  already  attained,  either 
were  already  perfect, ” writes  the  apostle  Paul, 
“but  I follow  after,  if  that  I may  apprehend  that 
for  which  also  I am  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus. 
Brethren,  I count  not  myself  to  have  apprehended: 
but  this  one  thing  I do,  forgetting  those  things 
which  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those 
things  which  are  before,  I press  toward  the  mark 
for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus”  (Phil.  3:  12-14).  Could  disclaimer  of  per- 
fection, as  to  experience  and  attainment  in  grace, 
be  stronger  or  more  distinct  than  this  ? Whatever 
others  may  fancy  they  have  reached  to,  Paul  at 
least  was  not  one  of  the  perfectionists. 

Yet  in  the  very  next  verse  he  uses  another  word 
which  is  rendered  “ perfect  ” in  our  English  ver- 
sion; and  he  says,  “Let  us  therefore,  as  many  as 
be  perfect,  be  thus  minded.”  Is  there  contradic- 
tion, or  inconsistency,  here  ? No.  The  error  is  in 
the  mind  of  him  who  would  so  think.  “Perfect” 
in  verse  15  has  the  sense  of  “full  grown,”  and  re- 
fers to  those  who  have  passed  out  of  the  period  of 
spiritual  childhood.  They  are  such  as  have  become 
intelligent  in  divine  things ; and  one  way  in  which 
they  manifest  that  intelligence  is  by  confessing 
with  Paul  that  they  are  not  yet  perfect  as  regards 
experience. 

Christ  Jesus  has  apprehended,  or  laid  hold  of,  us 
with  a view  to  our  entire  conformity  to  His  own 
blessed  image.  We  are  predestinated  to  this,  as 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  lOg 

Rom.  8:  29  tells  us.  With  this  before  us,  we  press 
on,  forgetting  the  things  of  the  past,  and  reaching 
forth  to  this  glorious  consummation.  Then,  and 
then  only,  we  shall  have  come  to  Christian  perfec- 
tion. 4 ‘We  know  that  when  He  shall  appear,  we 
shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is  ” 
(1  John  3:  2). 

In  Heb.  6:  1 we  read  again  of  perfection;  and  in 
this  instance  one  can  readily  understand  how  a per- 
son uninstructed  as  to  the  true  scope  and  character 
of  that  epistle  might  easily  misapply  the  exhorta- 
tion, “ Let  us  go  on  unto  perfection.”  The  conten- 
tion of  the  holiness  teacher  as  to  this  is  generally 
as  follows:  These  words  are  clearly  addressed  to 
believers.  The  Hebrews  who  are  contemplated 
had  already  been  turned  to  God  in  conversion. 
They  were  undoubtedly  justified.  [One  might  add, 
“and  sanctified  too”  (!);  but  this  is  lost  sight  of; 
and  little  wonder,  for  it  would  not  agree  with  the 
theory.]  Therefore  if  such  persons  are  urged  to 
“go  on  unto  perfection,”  perfection  must  be  a sec- 
ond work  of  grace,  to  which  the  Lord  is  leading  all 
the  “merely  justified.” 

Now  none  could  successfully  deny  the  premise 
thus  stated;  but  granting  it  to  be  sound  and  unas- 
sailable, the  conclusion  drawn  by  no  means  neces- 
sarily follows. 

That  the  Hebrew  Christians  were  exhorted  to 
press  on  to  something  they  had  not  yet  reached  is 
clear.  But  that  this  was  identical  with  the  so-called 
“ second  blessing  ” is  not  at  all  clear. 

The  truth  is  that  the  Greek  word  “perfection” 
in  this  instance  is  only  another  form  of  the  word 


xo6  holiness: 

translated  “ perfect”  in  Phil.  3:  15,  which  we  have 
already  examined  and  seen  to  be  synonymous  with 
full-grown.  “ Let  us  go  on  to  full  growth  ” would 
be  a true  and  just  rendering,  and  is  not  at  all  am- 
biguous. It  implies  a proper  spiritual  develop- 
ment, such  as  should  be  before  all  young  believers, 
but  which  it  was  needful  to  press  upon  these  He- 
brews, as  they  were  dwarfed  or  stunted  Christians, 
because  of  not  having  cut  loose  from  Judaism  with 
its  withering,  blighting  influence. 

Paul  had  already  reproved  them  for  this  in  the 
previous  chapter.  Note  his  words:  “Ye  are  dull 
of  hearing.  For  when  for  the  time  ye  ought  to  be 
teachers,  ye  have  need  that  one  teach  you  again 
which  be  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of 
God:  and  are  become  such  as  have  need  of  milk, 
and  not  of  strong  meat.  For  every  one  that  useth 
milk  is  unskilful  in  the  word  of  righteousness:  for 
he  is  a babe.  But  strong  meat  belongeth  to  them 
that  are  of  full  age  [or  those  who  are  perfect],  even 
those  who  by  reason  of  use  have  their  senses  ex- 
ercised to  discern  both  good  and  evil”  (Heb.  5: 
n-14). 

We  learn  from  Acts  21  the  reason  why  these  He- 
brew believers  had  become  stunted  in  spirituality 
and  knowledge.  James,  himself  an  apostle,  to- 
gether with  all  the  elders  of  the  church  in  Jerusa- 
lem, met  together  to  receive  Paul  and  his  compan- 
ions upon  their  returning  thither;  and  after  hearing 
of  what  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles,  we 
are  told  “they  glorified  the  Lord,  and  said  unto 
him,  Thou  seest,  brother,  how  many  thousands  of 
Jews  there  are  which  believe,  and  they  are  all  zeal- 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  107 

ous  of  the  law  ” (ver.  20) : and  upon  this  they  base 
an  appeal  for  Paul  to  fall  in  with  certain  Jewish 
rites,  in  order  that  he  may  not  be  an  object  of  sus- 
picion. Anxious  to  propitiate  his  own  nation,  the 
great  apostle  agrees,  and  is  only  prevented  by  di- 
vine Providence  from  an  act  which  would  have 
been  clearly  contrary  to  the  9th  and  10th  chapters 
of  the  Hebrew  epistle.  Think  what  it  would  have 
meant  for  him  who  wrote,  “Now  where  remission 
of  these  is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin,”  if  he 
had  himself  assisted  in  offering  the  sacrifices  pre- 
scribed in  the  case  of  a Nazarite  who  had  fulfilled 
his  vow!  (Read  Num.  6:  13-21,  and  compare  with 
the  whole  account  in  Acts  21 : 23-26.)  This  failure 
God  mercifully  prevented,  though  at  the  cost  of 
His  dear  servant’s  liberty.  Afterward  the  vener- 
able apostle,  by  divine  inspiration,  wrote  the 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews,*  to  deliver  those  Jewish 
Christians  from  the  bondage  of  the  law  and  their 
subjection  to  the  ordinances  of  the  first  covenant. 

“Therefore,”  he  says,  in  chapter  6,  “leaving  the 
word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ,  f let  us  go  on  unto 
perfection;  not  laying  again  the  foundation  of  re- 
pentance from  dead  works,  and  of  faith  toward  God, 
of  the  doctrine  of  baptisms  (or  washings),  and  of 
laying  on  of  hands,  and  of  resurrection  of  the  dead, 


* I know  some  question  Paul's  authorship  of  Hebrews,  but  in 
my  judgment  Peter  settles  that  in  his  second  letter  to  the  Jewish 
believers.  See  2 Peter  3 : 15,  16. 

t The  A V.  is  misleading  here.  They  were  not  to  leave  any 
divine  principles,  but  the  word  of  the  beginning;  that  is,  all  teach- 
ing that  was  not  connected  with  Christ  risen  and  glorified  ! 


holiness: 


108 

and  of  eternal  judgment.  And  this  will  we  do  if 
God  permit”  (vers.  1-3). 

This  the  apostle  does  in  the  balance  of  the  epis- 
tle, as  he  unfolds  the  varied  lines  of  truth  connected 
with  Christ’s  priesthood,  the  new  covenant,  the  one 
sacrifice,  the  walk  of  faith,  and  the  Lord’s  disci- 
pline. This  vast  circle  of  the  truth  of  Christianity 
is  the  perfection  to  which  they,  and  we,  are  called 
to  go  on  to.  He  who  comprehends  and  enjoys  in 
his  soul  the  teaching  of  Hebrews — chapters  7 to 
13 — is  a perfect  Christian,  in  the  apostle’s  sense. 
He  is  now  full-grown,  and  able  to  partake  of  strong 
meat,  in  place  of  being  only  fit  to  feed  upon  milk. 
Into  that  glorious  outline  of  the  faith  of  God’s  elect 
I dare  not  attempt  to  go  here,  for  to  do  so  would 
but  divert  attention  from  the  subject  in  hand.* 

It  is  only  by  reverent  and  continued  reading  of 
the  Scriptures  that  any  can  thus  become  perfect. 
The  exhortation  to  Timothy  is  of  all  importance : 
“ Study  to  show  thyself  approved  unto  God,  a work- 
man that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  rightly  divi- 
ding the  word  of  truth”  (2  Tim.  2:  15).  In  the 
same  letter  Paul  writes : “ All  Scripture  is  given  by 
inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine, 
for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in  right- 
eousness ; that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect , thor- 
oughly furnished  unto  all  good  works  ” (chap.  3:16, 
17).  This  is  no  mystical,  inward  perfection,  but 
that  well  rounded  knowledge  of  the  mind  of  God 
which  His  word  alone  can  give.  He  who  does  not 

* Others  have  done  this  in  detail.  Mr.  S.  Ridout’s  u Lectures 
on  Hebrews,’ ’ and  W.  Kelly’s  “ Exposition  of  Hebrews,”  are  in- 
valuable. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  I09 

neglect  the  appointed  means  will  be  enabled  to  en- 
joy the  answer  to  the  prayer  with  which  Hebrews 
closes:  “Now  the  God  of  peace  . . . make  you  per- 
fect in  every  good  work  to  do  His  will,  working  in 
you  that  which  is  well-pleasing  in  His  sight,  through 
Jesus  Christ ; to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen”  (Heb.  13:  20,  21). 

One  other  passage  we  must  examine  before  dis- 
missing our  brief  study  of  perfection.  It  is  James 
3:1,2:  “ My  brethren,  be  not  many  masters,  know- 
ing that  we  shall  receive  the  greater  condemna- 
tion. For  in  many  things  we  offend  all.  If  any 
man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a perfect  man, 
and  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body.”  With 
what  we  have  already  gone  over,  this  verse  needs 
little  explanation.  James,  clearly,  did  not  possess, 
nor  did  he  know  of  any  one  who  did  possess,  the 
second  blessing  of  sinless  perfection.  He  speaks 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  tells  us  that  we  all  offend 
in  many  things.  If  a man  can  be  found  who  never 
offends  in  word — who  never  utters  an  unkind,  an 
untruthful,  or  an  idle  word — he  is  in  very  deed  a 
perfect  man;  but  has  he  all  sin  rooted  out  of  him  ? 
Far  from  it!  He  is  able  to  control  his  carnal  nature 
in  place  of  being  controlled  by  it;  he  is  “able  also 
to  bridle  the  whole  body.”  What  need  of  bridling 
the  body  if  all  tendency  to  sin  is  gone — if  inbred 
evil  is  eradicated  ? Is  it  not  plain,  on  the  face  of 
it,  that  the  perfect  man  is  not  a sinless  man,  but  a 
man  who  holds  himself  in  check,  and  is  not  under 
the  power  of  sin  that  still  dwells  in  him  ? Read  the 
entire  chapter  thoughtfully  and  prayerfully,  and  ask 
yourself  what  holiness  professor  has  ever  fully  met 


no 


holiness: 


the  requirements  of  this  standard  of  perfection. 
Who  among  all  the  people  of  God  never  has  to  con- 
fess failure  in  word  ? If  any  do  not , it  will  be  be- 
cause they  deceive  themselves,  and  the  truth  is  not 
controlling  the  heart  and  conscience. 

Briefly,  then,  I recapitulate  what  has  been  be- 
fore us. 

All  believers  are  called  to  walk  before  God,  as 
Noah  and  Abram,  in  uprightness  and  sincerity  of 
heart.  This  is  to  be  perfect  as  to  the  inward  life. 

In  so  doing  we  are  called  to  manifest  love  and 
grace  toward  all,  let  their  treatment  of  us  be  as  it 
may;  that  thus  we  may  be  perfect  in  impartiality 
as  is  our  Father — God. 

All  believers  are  called  to  pass  from  the  prim- 
ary classes,  in  the  great  school  of  divine  revelation, 
on  to  perfection;  that  is,  lay  hold  of  the  fulness 
of  what  God  has  graciously  been  pleased  to  make 
known  in  Christianity. 

But  none  are  perfect  in  the  absolute  sense; 
though  he  who  can  control  his  tongue  is  perfect  as 
to  ability  to  bridle  every  passion ; for  no  evil  thing 
that  works  in  man  is  more  wilful  than  the  tongue. 

When  we  behold  Him  who  is  perfect  in  wisdom, 
grace,  and  beauty,  we  shall  be  like  Him  where  He 
is  and  be  forever  perfected,  beyond  all  reach  of  sin 
and  failure. 

“ Let  us  therefore,  as  many  as  be  full-grown,  be 
thus  minded;  and  if  in  anything  ye  be  otherwise 
minded,  God  shall  reveal  even  this  unto  you.  Nev- 
ertheless, whereto  we  have  already  attained,  let  us 
walk  by  the  same  rule,  let  us  mind  the  same  thing” 
(Phil.  3:  15,  16). 


Ill 


CLEANSING  FROM  ALL  SIN,  AND  THE  PURE 
IN  HEART 


“Blessed  is  the  man  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin 
is  covered  [or,  atoned  for] . Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the 
Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity,  and  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile.  ” 
— Ps.  32  : 1,  2. 

“Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart:  for  they  shall  see  God.”-' 
Matt.  5 : 8. 


IFFERENT  as  they  may  seem  to  be  in  sub- 


ject-matter, the  two  passages  just  quoted  are 
most  intimately  linked  together.  The  blessedness 
therein  described  belongs  to  every  one  who  has 
honestly  turned  to  God  in  repentance  and  trusted 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  Saviour  whose  precious 
blood  cleanse th  from  all  sin. 

Those  who  fancy  they  see  in  this  wondrous 
cleansing  an  advance  on  Paul’s  declaration  that 
“by  Him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all 
things,”  thereby  betray  their  ignorance  of  Scrip- 
ture and  their  low  thoughts  of  the  value  attached 
by  God  to  the  atoning  work  of  His  beloved  Son. 
When  we  speak  of  justification,  we  think  of  the 
entirety  of  sin  and  of  sins,  from  the  charge  of  which 
every  believer  is  eternally  freed.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  thought  of  cleansing  suggests  at  once  that 
sin  is  defiling,  and,  till  purged  from  its  defilement, 
no  soul  can  look  up  to  God  without  guile,  and  thus 
be  truly  pure  in  heart. 

The  blessedness  of  psalm  32  is  not  that  of  a sin- 
less man,  but  of  a man  who,  once  guilty  and  de- 
filed, has  confessed  his  transgression  unto  the  Lord 
and  obtained  forgiveness  for  the  iniquity  of  his 


1 1 2 


holiness: 


sin.  But  he  has  also  found  in  the  divine  method 
of  cleansing  from  the  defilement  of  sin,  that  hence- 
forth the  Lord  will  not  impute  sin  to  the  one 
whose  evil  nature  and  its  fruit  have  all  been  cov- 
ered by  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ.  True  it  is 
that  David  looked  on  in  faith  to  a propitiation  yet 
to  be  made.  We  believe  in  Him  who  has  in  infi- 
nite grace  already  accomplished  that  mighty  work 
whereby  sin  is  now  forgiven  and  iniquity  purged. 
God  is  just,  and  cannot  forgive  apart  from  atone- 
ment. Therefore  He  justifies  the  ungodly  on  the 
basis  of  the  work  of  His  Son.  But  God  is  holy  like- 
wise, and  He  cannot  permit  a defiled  soul  to  draw 
nigh  to  Him;  therefore  sin  must  be  purged.  The 
two  aspects  are  involved  in  the  salvation  of  every 
believer. 

He  who  is  thus  forgiven  and  cleansed  is  the  man 
in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile ; he  is  the  one  who 
is  pure  in  heart.  He  has  judged  himself  and  his 
sins  in  the  presence  of  God.  He  has  nothing  now 
to  hide.  His  conscience  is  free  and  his  heart  pure 
because  he  is  honest  with  God  and  no  longer  seeks 
to  cover  his  transgressions.  All  has  come  out  in 
the  light,  and  God  Himself  then  provides  the  cov- 
ering; or,  to  speak  more  exactly,  God,  who  has  al- 
ready provided  the  covering,  brings  the  honest 
soul  into  the  good  of  it. 

This  is  the  great  theme  of  i John  i : 5-10,  to 
which  we  must  now  turn.  For  the  reader’s  conve- 
nience, I will  quote  it  in  full:  “This  then  is  the 
message  which  we  have  heard  of  Him,  and  declare 
unto  you,  that  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  dark- 
less at  all.  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


IX3 


Him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  the 
truth : but  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the 
light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin.  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive 
ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.  If  we  confess 
our  sins,  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our 
sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness. 
If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  Him  a 
liar,  and  His  word  is  not  in  us.”  Immediately  he 
adds  (though,  unfortunately,  the  human  chapter- 
division  obscures  the  connection),  “My  little  chil- 
dren, these  things  write  I unto  you  that  ye  sin  not. 
And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the 
Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous:  and  He  is  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins:  and  not  for  ours  only,  but 
also  for  [the  sins  of]  the  whole  world”  (chap.  2: 
1, 2). 

This,  then,  is  “the  message,”  the  great,  em- 
phatic message,  of  the  first  part  of  John’s  epistle — 
that  “ God  is  light,"  even  as  “ God  is  love  ” is  the 
message  of  the  last  part. 

How  solemn  the  moment  in  the  soul’s  history 
when  this  first  great  fact  bursts  upon  one ! “ God  is 
light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all.”  It  is  this 
that  makes  all  men  in  their  natural  condition,  un- 
saved and  unforgiven,  dread  meeting  Him  who 
“seeth  not  as  man  seeth,”  but  is  a “ discerner  of 
the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.” 

When  Christ  came  the  light  was  shining,  enlight- 
ening all  who  came  in  contact  with  it.  He  was 
Himself  the  light  of  the  world.  Hence  His  solemn 
words,  “This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is 

a 


HOLINESS: 


114 

come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness 
rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil. 
For  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,  nei- 
ther cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be 
reproved.  But  he  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the 
light,  that  his  deeds  may  be  made  manifest,  that 
they  are  wrought  in  God”  (John  3:  19-21).  The 
unrepentant  soul  hates  the  light,  and  therefore  he 
flees  from  the  presence  of  God  who  is  light.  But 
he  who  has  judged  himself  and  owned  his  guilt  and 
transgressions,  as  David  did  (in  psalm  32),  no 
longer  dreads  the  light,  but  walks  in  it,  fearing  no 
exposure,  for  he  has  already  freely  confessed  his 
own  iniquity.  The  day  of  judgment  can  hold  no 
terror  for  the  man  who  has  previously  judged  him- 
self thus,  and  has  then,  by  faith,  seen  his  sins 
judged  'by  God  upon  the  person  of  His  Son,  when 
made  sin  upon  the  cross.  Such  a man  walks  in  the 
light.  If  any  claim  to  be  Christians  and  to  enjoy 
communion  with  God  who  are  still  walking  in  the 
darkness,  they  “lie,  and  do  not  the  truth.” 

But  if  we  have  been  thus  exposed — if  we  turn 
from  darkness  to  light  and  walk  therein — then  “we 
have  fellowship  one  with  another;”  for  in  that 
light  we  find  a redeemed  company,  self-judged  and 
repentant  like  ourselves,  and  we  know  that  we 
need  not  shun  further  manifestation,  for  “the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanse th  us  from 
all  sin.” 

We  must  not  pass  hastily  by  this  much-abused 
and  greatly  misapplied  passage.  It  has  been  made 
to  teach  what  is  utterly  foreign  to  its  meaning. 
Among  the  general  run  of  “holiness”  teachers,  it 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


“5 


is  commented  upon  as  though  it  read:  “ If  we  walk 
up  to  the  light  God  gives  us  as  to  our  duty,  we  have 
fellowship  with  all  who  do  the  same ; and  having 
fulfilled  these  conditions,  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
His  Son  washes  all  inbred  sin  out  of  our  hearts, 
and  makes  us  inwardly  pure  and  holy,  freeing  us 
from  all  carnality.” 

Now  if  this  be  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  we  have  all  a large  contract  to  fulfil  ere 
we  can  ever  know  this  inward  cleansing.  We  must 
walk  in  a perfect  way  while  still  imperfect,  in  order 
to  become  perfect!  Could  any  proposition  be  much 
more  unreasonable,  not  to  say  unscriptural  ? 

But  a serious  examination  of  the  verse  shows 
there  is  no  question  raised  in  it  as  to  how  we  walk. 
It  is  not  a matter  of  walking  according  to  the  light 
given  as  to  our  duties;  but  it  is  the  place  in  which, 
or  where,  we  walk  that  is  emphasized:  “If  we 
walk  in  the  light."  Once  we  walked  in  the  dark- 
ness. There  all  unsaved  people  walk  still.  But  all 
believers  walk  in  that  which  they  once  dreaded — 
the  light;  which  is,  of  course,  the  presence  of  God. 
In  other  words,  they  no  longer  seek  to  hide  from 
Him,  and  to  cover  their  sins.  They  walk  openly 
in  that  all-revealing  light  as  self-confessed  sinners 
for  whom  the  blood  of  Christ  was  shed.  * 

Walking  thus  in  the  full  blaze  of  the  light,  they 
walk  not  alone,  but  in  the  company  of  a vast  host 
with  whom  they  have  fellowship — for  all  alike  are 
self-judged,  repentant  souls.  Nor  do  they  dread 
that  light  and  long  for  escape  from  its  beams;  for 
“the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,”  once  shed  on  Calvary’s 
cross,  now  sprinkled  upon  that  very  mercy-seat  in 


n6 


holiness: 


the  holiest  from  whence  the  light — the  Shekinah- 
glory — shines,  “ cleanse th  ns  from  all  sin.”  Liter- 
ally, it  is,  “ cleanseth  ns  from  every  sin.”  Why  fear 
the  light  when  every  sin  has  been  atoned  for  by 
that  precious  blood  ? 

The  moment  the  soul  apprehends  this  all  fear  is 
gone.  Mark,  it  is  no  question  of  the  blood  of  Christ 
washing  out  my  evil  nature — eliminating  “sin  that 
dwelleth  in  me  ” — but  it  is  that  the  atoning  work  of 
the  Son  of  God  avails  to  purge  my  defiled  con- 
science from  the  stain  of  every  sin  that  I have  ever 
been  guilty  of.  Though  all  the  sins  that  men 
could  commit  had  been  laid  justly  to  my  single  ac- 
count, yet  Christ’s  blood  would  cleanse  me  from 
them  all! 

He  therefore  who  denies  his  inherent  sinfulness, 
and  declares  he  has  not  sinned,  misses  all  the  bless- 
ing stored  up  in  Christ  for  the  one  who  comes  to 
the  light  and  confesses  his  transgressions.  It  is 
perhaps  too  much  to  say  that  verse  8 refers  to  holi- 
ness professors;  yet  such  may  well  weigh  its  sol- 
emn words:  “If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.”  Pri- 
marily it  describes  such  as  ignore  the  great  fact  of 
sin,  and  would  dare  approach  God  apart  from  the 
cross  of  Christ.  They  are  self-deceived,  and  know 
not  the  truth. 

But  it  is  surely  serious  enough  to  think  of  real 
Christians  joining  with  these,  and,  while  still  in 
danger  of  falling,  denying  the  presence  of  sin 
within  them.  Far  better  is  it  to  say,  honestly,  with 
Paul,  “I  know  that  in  me  (that  is,  in  my  flesh,) 
dwelleth  no  good  thing  ” (Rom.  7:  18). 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  117 

The  great  principle  on  which  God  forgives  sin  is 
declared  in  verse  9.  “If  we  confess,’*  He  must 
forgive,  in  order  to  be  faithful  to  His  Son,  and  just 
to  us  for  whom  Christ  died.  How  blessed  to  be 
resting,  not  only  on  the  love  and  mercy  of  God,  but 
on  His  faithfulness  and  justice  too!  To  deny  that 
one  has  sinned,  in  the  face  of  the  great  work  done 
to  save  sinners,  is  impious  beyond  degree;  and  the 
one  who  does  so  is  stigmatized  by  that  most  obnox- 
ious title,  “ a liar!  ” 

These  things  are  written  that  believers  might 
not  sin.  But  immediately  the  Holy  Spirit  adds, 
“If  any  man  sin,  we  [that  is,  we  Christians]  have 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous.”  My  failure  does  not  undo  His  work. 
On  the  cross  He  died  for  my  sins  in  their  totality; 
not  merely  the  sins  committed  up  to  the  moment 
of  my  conversion.  He  abides  the  effectual  propi- 
tiation for  our  sins,  and,  for  the  same  reason,  the 
available  means  of  salvation  for  the  whole  world. 
Trusting  Him,  I need  hide  nothing.  Owning  all,  I 
am  a man  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile.  Living 
in  the  enjoyment  of  such  matchless  grace,  I am 
among  the  pure  (or  single)  in  heart  who  see  God, 
revealed  now  in  Christ. 

To  be  pure  in  heart  is  therefore  the  very  oppo- 
site of  double-mindedness.  Of  some  of  David’s 
soldiers  we  read,  “They  were  not  of  double  heart;” 
or,  as  the  Hebrew  vividly  puts  it,  “not  of  a heart 
and  a heart.”  “A  double-minded  man  is  unstable 
in  all  his  ways,”  but  the  pure  in  heart  are  con- 
sciously in  the  light,  and  the  inward  man  is  thus 
kept  for  God. 


holiness: 


i 18 

In  the  man  of  Romans  7 we  see  described,  for  our 
blessing  and  instruction,  the  misery  of  double- 
mindedness; while  the  close  of  the  chapter  and  the 
opening  verses  of  chapter  8 portray  the  pure  in 
heart.  The  conflict  there  set  forth  has  its  counter- 
part in  every  soul  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
who  is  seeking  holiness  in  himself,  and  is  still  un- 
der law  as  a means  of  promoting  piety.  He  finds 
two  principles  working  within  him.  One  is  the 
power  of  the  new  nature;  the  other,  of  the  old. 
But  victory  comes  only  when  he  condemns  self  alto- 
gether, and  looks  away  to  Christ  Jesus  as  His  all , 
knowing  that  there  is  no  condemnation  to  those 
who  are  before  God  in  Him. 

The  man  in  Romans  7 is  occupied  with  himself, 
and  his  disappointment  and  anguish  spring  from 
his  inability  to  find  in  self  the  good  which  he  loves. 
The  man  of  Romans  8 has  learned  there  is  no  good 
to  be  found  in  self.  It  is  only  in  Christ;  and  his 
song  of  triumph  results  from  the  joy  of  having 
found  out  that  he  is  “complete  in  Him.”  But  it 
will  be  necessary  to  notice  these  much-controverted 
portions  of  the  word  of  God  more  particularly  when 
we  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  teaching  of 
Scripture  as  to  the  two  natures,  in  our  next  chap- 
ter; so  we  refrain  from  further  analysis  of  them 
now. 

Coming  back  to  the  central  theme  of  our  present 
paper,  I would  reiterate  that  “cleansing  from  all 
sin  ” is  equivalent  to  “justification  from  all  things,” 
save  for  the  difference  in  view-point.  Justification 
is  clearing  from  the  charge  of  guilt.  Cleansing  is 
freeing  the  conscience  from  the  defilement  of  sin. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  II9 

It  is  the  great  aspect  of  the  gospel  treated  in  the 
beginning  of  Hebrews  io. 

This  has  been  already  taken  up  at  some  length 
in  the  paper  on  ‘‘Sanctification  by  the  Blood  of 
Christ,”  and  I need  not  go  into  it  again  here,  save 
to  add  that  the  purging  of  the  conscience  there  re- 
ferred to  should  be  distinguished  from  maintaining 
a good  conscience  in  matters  of  daily  life.  In  He- 
brews 10  the  conscience  is  looked  at  as  defiled  by  the 
sins  committed  against  God,  from  which  the  ato- 
ning work  of  His  Son  alone  can  purge.  But  he 
who  has  been  thus  purged,  and  has  therefore  “no 
more  conscience  of  sins,”  is  now  responsible  to  be 
careful  to  have  always  a conscience  void  of  offence 
toward  God  and  man,  by  walking  in  subjection 
to  the  Word  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  By  so  doing  a 
“ good  conscience  ” will  be  enjoyed,  which  is  a mat- 
ter of  experience;  while  a “purged  conscience”  is 
connected  with  our  standing. 

Should  I,  by  lack  of  watching  unto  prayer,  fall 
into  sin,  and  thus  become  possessed  of  a bad  con- 
science, I am  called  upon  at  once  to  judge  myself 
before  God  and  confess  my  failure.  In  this  way  I 
obtain  once  more  a good  conscience.  But  as  the 
value  of  Christ’s  blood  was  not  altered  in  the  sight 
of  God  by  my  sin,  I do  not  need  to  seek  once  more 
for  a purged  conscience,  as  I know  the  efficacy  of 
that  atoning  work  ever  abides.  So  far  as  my  stand- 
ing is  concerned,  I am  ever  cleansed  from  all  sin; 
otherwise  I would  be  accursed  from  Christ  the  mo- 
ment failure  came  in ; but  in  place  of  this,  the  Word 
tells  one,  as  already  noted,  that  “if  any  man  sin, 
we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ 


120 


holiness: 


the  righteous;  and  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our 
sins.”  Satan  will  at  once  accuse  the  saint  who  sins; 
but  the  Father’s  estimation  of  the  work  of  His  be- 
loved Son  remaining  unchanged,  every  accusation 
is  met  by  the  challenge,  “The  Lord  rebuke  thee: 
...  is  not  this  a brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ? ” 
(See  Zech.  3:  2.)  And  at  once,  as  a result  of  the 
advocacy  of  Christ,  the  Holy  Spirit  begins  His  re- 
storing work,  using  the  Word  to  convict  and  exer- 
cise the  soul  of  the  failed  one,  and,  if  need  be,  sub- 
jecting him  to  the  rod  of  chastening,  that  he  may 
own  his  sin  and  unsparingly  judge  himself  for  ta- 
king an  unholy  advantage  of  such  grace.  When 
this  point  is  reached  a good  conscience  is  again  en- 
joyed. But  it  is  only  because  the  blood  cleanseth 
from  every  sin  that  this  restoring  work  can  be  car- 
ried on  and  the  link  not  be  broken  that  unites  the 
saved  soul  to  the  Saviour. 


121 


“Whosoever  is  Born  of  God  Doth  Not  Commit  Sin”;  or. 


THE  BELIEVER’S  TWO  NATURES 

E must  now  notice,  somewhat  at  length, 


what  is  practically  the  only  remaining  proof- 
text  for  the  theory  we  have  been  examining — that 
of  perfection  in  the  flesh.  We  turn  to  i John  3. 

“Whosoever  committeth  sin  transgresseth  also 
the  law  [or,  doeth  lawlessness;  lit.  trans. ];  for  sin 
is  the  transgression  of  the  law  [or,  sin  is  lawless- 
ness]. And  ye  know  that  He  was  manifested  to 
take  away  our  sins;  and  in  Him  is  no  sin.  Whoso- 
ever abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not:  whosoever  sinneth 
hath  not  seen  Him , neither  known  Him.  Little  chil- 
dren, let  no  man  deceive  you:  he  that  doeth  right- 
eousness is  righteous,  even  as  He  is  righteous.  He 
that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil;  for  the  devil 
sinneth  from  the  beginning.  For  this  purpose  the 
Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that  He  might  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil.  Whosoever  is  born  of  God 
doth  not  commit  sin;  for  His  seed  remaineth  in 
him:  and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God. 
In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest,  and  the 
children  of  the  devil:  whosoever  doeth  not  right- 
eousness is  not  of  God,  neither  he  that  loveth  not 
his  brother’’  (vers.  4-10). 

Let  the  reader  note  well  two  points  at  the  outset: 

First,  This  passage  speaks  of  what  is  characteris- 
tically true  of  all  who  are  born  of  God.  It  does  not 
contemplate  any  select,  advanced  coterie  of  Chris- 
tians who  have  gone  on  to  perfection  or  obtained  a 


122 


holiness: 


second  blessing.  And  it  is  folly  to  argue,  as  some 
hard-driven  controversialists  have  done — insubject 
alike  to  Scripture  and  to  reason — that  only  ad- 
vanced believers,  who  have  attained  to  holiness, 
are  born  of  God,  the  rest  being  but  begotten! 
This  position  is  not  tenable  for  a moment  in  view 
of  the  plain  declaration  in  the  same  epistle  that 
“ Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is 
born  of  God.” 

Second,  If  the  passage  proves  that  all  sanctified 
Christians  live  absolutely  without  sinning,  it  proves 
too  much;  for  it  also  tells  us  that  “ whosoever  sin- 
neth  hath  not  seen  Him,  neither  known  Him.” 
Are  the  perfectionists  prepared  to  own  that  if  any 
of  their  number  ‘ 4 lose  the  blessing”  and  fall  away, 
it  proves  that  they  never  did  know  God  at  all,  but 
were  hypocrites  all  the  days  of  their  former  pro- 
fession ? If  unwilling  to  take  this  attitude  toward 
their  failed  brethren  and  to  place  themselves  in 
the  same  category  when  they  fall  (as  they  all  do 
eventually),  they  must  logically  confess  that  “com- 
mitteth  sin”  and  “sinneth  not”  are  not  to  be  taken 
in  an  absolute  sense,  as  though  the  one  expression 
were  “falls  into  sin,”  and  the  other,  “never  com- 
mits a sin.” 

A little  attention  to  the  opening  verses  of  chap- 
ter 2,  which  have  already  been  noticed  in  our  pre- 
vious paper,  would  deliver  from  radicalism  in  the 
understanding  of  the  passage  now  before  us.  There, 
the  possibility  of  a believer  failing  and  sinning  is 
clearly  taught,  and  the  advocacy  of  Christ  pre- 
sented to  keep  him  from  despair.  “ If  any  man  sin, 
we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


I23 


the  righteous.”  No  interpretation  of  the  balance 
of  the  epistle  contradictory  to  this  clear  statement 
can  possibly  be  correct. 

John’s  epistle  is  one  of  sharp  contrasts.  He  deals 
in  abstract  statements.  Light  and  darkness  we 
have  already  seen  contrasted.  No  blending  of 
these  is  hinted  at.  John  knows  no  twilight.  Love 
and  hatred  are  similarly  contrasted  throughout  the 
epistle.  Lukewarmness  in  affection  is  not  here 
suggested.  All  are  either  cold  or  hot. 

So  it  is  with  sin  and  righteousness.  It  is  what  is 
characteristic  that  is  presented  for  our  considera- 
tion. The  believer  is  characteristically  righteous: 
he  does  righteousness,  and  sinneth  not:  that  is,  the 
whole  bent  of  his  life  is  good;  he  practises  right- 
eousness, and  consequently  he  does  not  practise 
sin.  With  the  unbeliever  the  opposite  is  the  case. 
He  may  do  many  good  acts  (if  we  think  only  of 
their  effect  upon  and  his  attitude  toward  his  fellow- 
men),  but  his  life  is  characterized  by  sin.  He 
makes  sin  a practice.  In  this  are  manifested  who 
are  of  God,  and  who  are  of  Satan. 

The  essence  of  sin  is — not  the  transgression  of 
the  law,  but  “lawlessness.”  No  scholar  questions 
now  the  incorrectness  of  the  Authorized  Version 
here.  Sin  is  doing  one’s  own  will — that  is  lawless- 
ness. This  was  what  marked  every  man  till  grace 
reached  him.  “ All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray; 
we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way;  and  the 
Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all  ” (Isa. 
53:  6).  He,  the  sinless  One,  was  manifested  to 
free  us  from  our  sins — both  as  to  guilt  and  power. 
“In  Him  is  no  sin.”  Of  none  save  Him  could 


124 


holiness: 


words  like  these  rightfully  be  used.  “ The  prince 
of  this  world  cometh,”  He  said,  “and  hath  noth- 
ing in  Me.” 

We  who  have  been  subdued  by  His  grace  and 
won  for  Himself  no  longer  practise  sin.  To  every 
truly  converted  soul  sin  is  now  a foreign  and  hate- 
ful thing.  “Whosoever  practiseth  sin  [literal  ren- 
dering] hath  not  seen  Him,  neither  known  Him.” 
This  verse  must  not  b£  lightly  passed  by.  It  is  as 
absolute  as  any  other  portion  of  the  passage.  No 
one  who  has  ever  known  Him  can  go  on  practising 
sin  with  indifference.  Backsliding  there  may  be — 
and,  alas,  often  is.  But  the  backslider  is  one  under 
the  hand  of  God  in  government,  and  He  loves  him 
too  well  to  permit  him  to  continue  the  practice  of 
sin.  He  uses  the  rod  of  discipline ; and  if  that  be 
not  enough,  cuts  short  his  career  and  leaves  the 
case  for  final  settlement  at  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ  (i  Cor.  3:  15;  11:  30-32,  and  2 Cor.  5:  10).* 

The  point  of  John’s  teaching  is  that  one  who  de- 
liberately goes  on  in  unrighteousness  is  not,  and 
never  has  been,  a child  of  God.  He  who  is  by  faith 
united  to  the  Righteous  One  is  himself  a righteous 
man.  The  one  persistently  practising  sin  is  of  the 
devil,  “for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning” 
— the  entire  course  of  the  evil  one  has  been  sinful 
and  wicked. 

The  9th  verse  gets  down  to  the  root  of  the  mat- 
ter, and  should  make  all  plain:  “Whosoever  is 


* Those  who  have  trouble  as  to  this  are  referred  to  a helpful 
paper  by  W.  Barker,  “Fallen  from  Grace  ; or,  Castaway.”  Price, 
6 cents. 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


125 


born  of  God  doth  not  commit  [or  practise]  sin;  for 
His  seed  remaineth  in  him:  and  he  cannot  sin  [or, 
be  sinning],  because  he  is  born  of  God.”  It  is  the 
believer  looked  at  as  characterized  by  the  new  na- 
ture who  does  not  sin.  True,  he  still  has  the  old 
carnal,  Adamic  nature ; and  if  controlled  by  it,  he 
would  still  be  sinning  continuously.  But  the  new 
nature,  imparted  when  he  was  born  again,  “not  of 
corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,”  is  now  the 
controlling  factor  of  his  life.  With  this  incorrupt- 
ible seed  abiding  in  him,  he  cannot  practise  sin. 
He  becomes  like  the  One  whose  child  he  is. 

The  doctrine  of  the  two  natures  is  frequently 
stated  and  always  implied  in  Scripture.  If  not 
grasped,  the  mind  must  ever  be  in  confusion  as  to 
the  reasons  for  the  conflict  which  every  believer 
knows  within  himself,  sooner  or  later. 

This  conflict  is  definitely  declared  to  go  on  in 
every  Christian,  in  Gal.  5:  16,  17.  After  various 
exhortations,  which  are  utterly  meaningless  if  ad- 
dressed to  sinless  men  and  women,  we  read,  “This 
I say  then,  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  ful- 
fil the  lust  [or  desire]  of  the  flesh.  For  the  flesh 
lusteth  [or  desireth]  against  the  Spirit,  and  the 
Spirit  against  the  flesh:  and  these  are  contrary  the 
one  to  the  other;  so  that  ye  cannot  [or  might  not] 
do  the  things  that  ye  would.”  The  flesh  here  is 
not  the  body  of  the  believer,  but  the  carnal  nature. 
It  was  so  designated  by  the  Lord  Himself  when  He 
said  to  Nicodemus:  “That  which  is  born  of  the 
flesh  is  flesh,  and  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is 
spirit.  Marvel  not  that  I said  unto  thee,  Ye  must 
be  born  again”  (John  3:  6,  7).  The  two  natures 


126 


holiness: 


are  there,  as  in  Galatians,  placed  in  sharp  contrast. 
The  flesh  is  ever  opposed  to  the  Spirit.  The  new 
nature  is  born  of  the  Spirit,  and  controlled  by  the 
Spirit;  hence  it  is  described  according  to  its  char- 
acter. Agreement  between  the  two  there  can  never 
be;  nevertheless,  there  is  no  instruction  as  to  how 
the  flesh  may  be  eliminated.  The  Christian  is  sim- 
ply told  to  walk  in  the  Spirit;  and  if  he  does,  he 
will  not  be  found  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh. 
This  is  the  man  who  “sinneth  not.” 

The  nature  of  the  conflict  is  fully  described  in  a 
typical  case — probably  the  apostle’s  own  at  one 
time — in  Rom.  7,  which  has  already  been  before 
us.  The  man  therein  depicted  is  undoubtedly  a 
child  of  God,  though  many  have  questioned  it. 
Some  suppose  him  to  be  a Jew  seeking  justification 
by  the  law.  But  the  subject  of  justification  is  all 
taken  up  and  settled  in  the  first  five  chapters  of  the 
epistle.  From  chapter  6 on,  it  is  deliverance  from 
sin’s  power  that  is  the  theme.  Moreover,  the  man 
of  Rom.  7 “ delights  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  in- 
ward man.”  What  unconverted  soul  could  speak 
like  this  ? The  “ inward  man  ” is  the  new  nature. 
No  Christless  soul  delights  in  what  is  of  God.  The 
“inward  man”  is  opposed  to  “another  law  in  my 
members,”  which  can  only  be  the  power  of  the  old 
nature,  the  flesh.  These  two  are  here,  as  in  John 
3 and  in  Gal.  5,  placed  in  sharp  contrast. 

Paul  is  describing  the  inevitable  conflict  that 
every  believer  knows  when  he  undertakes  to  lead  a 
holy  life  on  the  principle  of  legality.  Pie  feels  in- 
stinctively that  the  law  is  spiritual,  but  that  he 
himself,  for  some  unexplained  reason,  is  fleshly,  or 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


127 


carnal,  in  bondage  to  sin.  This  discovery  is  one  of 
the  most  heart-breaking  a Christian  ever  made. 
Yet  each  one  must  and  does  make  it  for  himself  at 
some  time  in  his  experience.  He  finds  himself  do- 
ing things  he  knows  to  be  wrong,  and  which  his  in- 
most desires  are  opposed  to;  while  what  he  yearns 
to  do  he  fails  to  accomplish,  and  does,  instead,  what 
he  hates. 

But  this  is  the  first  part  of  a great  lesson  which 
all  must  learn  who  would  matriculate  in  God’s 
school.  It  is  the  lesson  of  “no  confidence  in  the 
flesh”;  and  until  it  is  learned  there  can  be  no  true 
progress  in  holiness.  The  incorrigibility  of  the 
flesh  must  be  realized  before  one  is  ready  to  turn 
altogether  from  self  to  Christ  for  sanctification,  as 
he  has  already  done  for  justification. 

Two  conclusions  are  therefore  drawn  (in  vers.  16, 
17)  as  a result  of  carefully  weighing  the  first  part 
of  this  great  lesson.  First,  I consent  that  the  law 
is  good;  and,  in  the  second  place,  I begin  to  realize 
that  I myself  am  on  the  side  of  that  law,  but  there 
is  a power  within  me,  with  which  I have  no  desire 
to  be  identified,  which  keeps  me  from  doing  what  I 
acknowledge  to  be  good.  Thus  I have  learned  to 
distinguish  “sin  that  dwelleth  in  me  ” from  myself. 
It  is  a hateful  intruder,  albeit  once  my  master  in 
all  things. 

So  I have  got  this  far  (in  verse  18),  that  I know 
there  are  two  natures  in  me;  but  still,  “how  to 
perform  that  which  is  good  I find  not.”  Mere 
knowledge  does  not  help.  I still  do  the  evil  I 
hate,  and  I have  no  ability  to  do  the  good  I desire. 
Nevertheless  I am  a long  way  toward  my  deliver- 


128 


holiness: 


ance  when  I am  able  to  distinguish  the  two  laws, 
or  controlling  powers,  of  the  two  natures  within  my 
being.  After  the  inward  man,  I delight  in  the 
holy  law  of  God.  “ But  I see  another  law  (or  con- 
trolling power)  in  my  members,  warring  against 
the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  captivity 
to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members  ” (ver. 
23).  So  wretched  am  I made  by  repeated  failure, 
that  I feel  like  a poor  prisoner  chained  to  a dead 
body — which  nevertheless  has  over  me  a terrible 
control.  “ O wretched  man  that  I am!  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? ” This  is 
the  cry  that  brings  the  help  I need.  I have  been 
trying  to  deliver  myself.  I now  realize  the  impos- 
sibility of  this,  and  I cry  for  a Deliverer  outside 
myself.  In  a moment  He  is  revealed  to  my  soul, 
and  I see  that  He  alone,  who  saved  me  at  the  begin- 
ning, can  keep  me  from  sin’s  power.  “I  thank  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.”  He  must  be  my 
sanctification  as  well  as  my  redemption  and  my 
righteousness. 

In  myself,  with  the  mind,  or  the  new  nature,  I 
serve  the  law  of  God;  but  with  the  flesh,  the  old  na- 
ture, the  law  of  sin.  But  when  I look  away  from 
self  to  Christ,  I see  that  there  is  “no  condemna- 
tion to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  For  the 
law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made 
me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death”  (chap.  8: 
12).  I will  not  therefore  struggle  to  be  holy.  I 
will  look  up  to  the  blessed  Christ  of  God  and  walk 
in  the  Spirit,  assured  of  victory  while  occupied  thus 
with  Him  who  is  my  all.  “ For  what  the  law  could 
not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


129 


sending  His  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh, 
and  for  sin,  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh:  that  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us 
who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit  ” 
(vers.  3,  4). 

What  a relief  it  is,  after  the  vain  effort  to  eradi- 
cate sin  from  the  flesh,  when  I learn  that  God  has 
condemned  it  in  the  flesh,  and  will  in  His  own  good 
time  free  me  from  its  presence,  when  at  the  Lord’s 
return  He  shall  change  these  vile  bodies  and  make 
them  like  His  own  glorious  body.  Then  redemp- 
tion will  be  complete.  The  redemption  of  my  soul 
is  past,  and  in  it  I rejoice.  The  redemption  of  my 
body  is  yet  to  come,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  returns, 
and  this  mortal  shall  put  on  immortality. 

For  the  present,  walking  in  the  Spirit,  the  be- 
liever sins  not.  His  life  is  a righteous  one.  But 
he  needs  ever  to  watch  and  pray  lest  in  a moment 
of  spiritual  drowsiness  the  old  nature  be  allowed  to 
act,  and  thus  his  testimony  be  marred  and  his  Lord 
dishonored. 

I conclude  with  an  illustration  often  used,  which 
may  help  to  clear  up  any  difficulty  remaining  as  to 
the  truth  set  forth  in  1 John  3.  A man  has  an  or- 
chard of  seedling  oranges.  He  wishes  to  grow 
Washington  navels  instead.  He  therefore  decides 
to  graft  his  trees.  He  cuts  off  all  branches  close  to 
the  parent  stem  and  inserts  in  each  one  a piece  ta- 
ken from  a Washington  naval  tree.  The  old  fruit 
disappears  entirely,  and  new  fruit  is  now  on  the 
trees  in  keeping  with  the  new  nature  of  the  Wash- 
ington navel  inserted  in  them.  This  is  a picture  of 
conversion. 

9 


130 


holiness: 


A few  years  roll  by  and  we  are  taken  by  this  gen- 
tleman for  a walk  through  his  orchard.  On  every 
hand  the  trees  are  loaded  with  beautiful  golden 
fruit.  “ What  kind  of  oranges  are  these  ? ” we  ask. 
“These  are  all  Washington  navels,”  is  the  answer. 
“Do  they  not  bear  seedlings  now?”  we  inquire. 
“No,”  is  the  reply;  “a  grafted  tree  cannot  bear 
seedlings.”  But  even  as  he  speaks  we  catch  sight 
of  a small  orange  hanging  on  a shoot  low  down  on 
the  tree.  “What  is  that?  is  it  not  a seedling?” 
we  ask.  “Ah,”  he  answers,  “I  see  my  man  has 
been  careless;  he  has  allowed  a shoot  to  grow  from 
the  old  stem,  and  it  is  of  the  old  nature  of  the  tree. 
I must  clip  off  that  shoot ; ” and  so  saying, he  uses  the 
knife.  Would  any  one  say  he  spoke  untruthfully 
when  he  declared  that  a grafted  tree  bears  Washing- 
ton navels  only  ? Surely  not.  All  would  understand 
that  he  was  speaking  of  that  which  was  characteristic. 

And  so  it  is  with  the  believer.  Having  been 
born  again,  the  old  life,  for  him,  is  ended.  The 
fruits  of  the  flesh  he  is  now  ashamed  of.  The  old 
ways  he  no  longer  walks  in.  His  whole  course  of 
life  is  changed.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  now 
manifested,  and  he  cannot  be  sinning,  for  he  is  born 
of  God. 

But  the  pruning-knife  of  self-judgment  is  ever 
needed.  Otherwise  the  old  nature  will  begin  to 
manifest  itself;  for  it  is  no  more  eradicated  than  is 
the  old  nature  of  the  seedling  tree  after  having 
been  grafted.  Hence  the  need  of  being  ever  in 
subjection  to  the  word  of  God  and  of  unsparing 
self-judgment.  “Watch  and  pray  lest  ye  enter  into 
temptation.” 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  I3I 

To  deny  the  presence  of  the  old  nature  is  but  to 
invite  defeat.  It  would  be  like  the  orchardist  who 
refuses  to  believe  it  possible  that  seedlings  could 
be  produced  if  shoots  from  the  old  trunk  were  al- 
lowed to  grow  on  unchecked.  The  part  of  wisdom  is 
to  recognize  the  danger  of  neglecting  the  use  of  the 
pruning-knife.  And  so,  for  the  believer,  it  is  only 
folly  to  ignore  that  sin  dwells  in  me.  To  do  so  is  but 
to  be  deceived,  and  to  expose  myself  to  all  manner 
of  evil  things  because  of  my  failure  to  recognize  my 
need  of  daily  dependence  upon  God.  Only  as  I 
walk  in  the  Spirit,  looking  unto  Jesus  in  a self- 
judged  and  humble  condition  of  soul,  will  my  life 
be  one  of  holiness. 


132 


CONCLUDING  REMARKS  ON  44  THE  HIGHER 
CHRISTIAN  LIFE” 

HAVING  now  reviewed  the  various  expres- 
sions largely  misused  by  second-blessing  ad- 
vocates, I desire,  in  concluding  this  series  of  pa- 
pers, to  add  a few  practical  reflections  on  what  has 
been  called  “the  higher  Christian  life.”  It  is 
greatly  to  be  regretted  that  so  many  children  of 
God,  whose  conversion  one  cannot  question,  seem 
to  have  settled  down  in  apparent  contentment  with 
so  low  a standard  of  Christian  living.  Undoubtedly 
there  is  a life  of  power  and  spiritual  refreshment 
to  which  these  are  almost  total  strangers.  But  how 
are  they  to  enter  into  it  ? Certainly  not  by  the  un- 
scriptural  and  empty  system  we  have  been  discuss- 
ing. All  efforts  to  attain  sinless  perfection  in  this 
world  can  only  end  in  failure  and  leave  the  seeker 
disappointed  and  heart-sick. 

Is  there  not  then  a “ higher  life  ” than  that  which 
many  believers  enjoy?  The  true  answer  is  that 
there  is  but  one  life  for  all  God’s  children.  Christ 
Himself  is  our  life.  The  only  difference  is  that  in 
some  that  blessed  life  is  more  fully  manifested  than 
in  others,  because  all  do  not  give  Him  the  same 
place  in  their  heart’s  affections.  It  is  a sad  and 
unsatisfactory  thing  when  He  has  only  the  first 
place  in  our  hearts.  He  asks  for  the  whole  heart, 
not  a part — though  it  be  the  most  important  part.  If 
He  be  thus  enthroned,  and  reign  alone  in  the  seat  of 
«>ur  affections,  we  shall  surely  manifest  that  divine 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


133 


life  much  more  fully  than  if  the  world  and  self  are 
allowed  to  intrude  in  what  should  be  His  sole 
abode. 

The  apostle  John  is  the  New  Testament  writer 
whose  special  province  it  was  to  unfold  for  our 
learning  the  truth  about  divine  life.  In  his  Gospel 
he  portrays  the  life  as  told  out  in  the  only  begotten 
Son  of  God,  who  became  flesh  and  tabernacled  for 
a time  among  men ; showing  forth  in  all  His  ways 
“that  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father  and 
was  manifested  unto  us.”  In  his  epistles  John  sets 
forth  that  life  as  exhibited  in  the  children  of  God, 
who  by  faith  have  received  Him  who  is  the  life, 
and  in  whom  eternal  life  now  dwells.  As  these 
precious  portions  of  the  divinely-inspired  Word  are 
meditated  upon,  they  must  produce  in  the  soul  of 
every  devout  reader  a longing  desire  to  walk  more 
fully  in  the  power  of  that  life. 

No  human  theories  or  earth-born  principles  can 
help  us  here. 

“ This  does  not  come  with  houses  or  with  gold, 

With  place,  with  honor,  and  a flattering  crew ; 

’Tis  not  in  the  world’s  market  bought  and  sold.” 

Only  as  one  learns  to  refuse  everything  that  is  of 
the  flesh,  and  finds  everything  in  Christ  the  Second 
Man,  will  this  priceless  boon  be  enjoyed  of  a life 
lived  in  fellowship  with  God. 

He,  the  eternal  Son,  was  ever  the  fountain  of  life 
— the  source  whence  divine  life  was  communicated 
all  down  through  the  ages  to  all  who  received  the 
word  of  Gcd  in  faith  But  that  life  was  manifested 
on  earth  during  His  sojourn  here,  “and  the  life 


J34 


holiness: 


was  the  light  of  men.”  It  cast  light  on  every  man, 
bringing  out  in  vivid  contrast  what  was  in  them. 
But  it  is  not  in  incarnation  He  communicates  His 
own  life  to  us.  He  said  expressly,  “ Except  a corn 
of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth 
alone : but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit.” 
Accordingly  He,  the  Prince  of  life,  “tasted  death 
for  every  man,”  and  in  resurrection  showed  that 
He  was  indeed  “that  eternal  life  which  was  with 
the  Father”  from  all  past  ages,  and  had  for  a time 
been  displayed  on  earth. 

Having  burst  the  bands  of  death,  He  appeared  to 
His  disciples  as  the  ever-living  One,  forever  beyond 
death,  judgment,  and  condemnation  of  any  kind. 
It  was  as  such  He  breathed  on  them,  saying,  “Re- 
ceive ye  [the]  Holy  Spirit.”  He  was  speaking  as 
the  last  Adam,  a quickening  Spirit.  Henceforth 
they  are  to  understand  that,  while  they  have  not 
received  a different  kind  of  a life  from  what  was 
theirs  from  the  moment  they  received  Him  and 
were  born  of  God,  they  now  have  that  life,  with  all 
that  is  connected  with  it,  on  the  resurrection  side 
of  the  cross.  It  is  life  with  which  judgment  can 
never  be  connected.  They  are  linked  up  with 
Christ  risen,  and  they  are  called  to  manifest  this  on 
earth,  in  the  scene  where  He  has  been  rejected. 

So  true  Christian  life  is  nothing  more  nor  less 
than  the  manifestation  of  Christ.  “For  me  to  live 
is  Christ”  is  the  statement  of  the  apostle  Paul, 
“and  to  die  is  gain;  ” for  death  would  mean  to  “de- 
part and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better.” 

The  only  secret  of  living  Christ  is  occupation 
with  Christ.  And  it  is  for  this  God  has  given  us 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  *35 

such  abundant  fulness  in  His  Word.  Another  has 
well  said  that  if  the  Bible  were  merely  a guide- 
book to  show  the  way  to  heaven,  a very  much 
smaller  volume  would  have  sufficed.  Often  the 
gospel  has  been  clearly  told  out  in  a few-paged 
tract  or  booklet.  But  here  is  a book  of  over  one 
thousand  ordinary  pages,  and  all  of  it  “profitable  for 
doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction  and  instruction 
in  righteousness,  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  per- 
fect, thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works ;” 
and  the  one  great  subject  of  all  its  sixty-six  parts 
is  Christ . 

He  who  feeds  upon  its  sacred  pages  is  feeding  on 
Christ,  for  the  Word  written  but  declares  the  Word 
eternal.  To  “read,  mark,  learn  and  inwardly  di- 
gest ” this  divinely-inspired  unfolding  of  the  person 
and  work  of  Christ  is  the  paramount  requisite  for 
the  believer,  if  he  would  glorify  God  in  his  practi- 
cal ways. 

It  is  related  that  John  Bunyan  had  written  on  the 
fly-leaf  of  his  Bible,  “ This  book  will  keep  you  from 
sin,  or  sin  will  keep  you  from  this  book.”  It  is  a 
faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation.  Not 
for  power,  nor  for  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  nor  for  some 
special  blessing,  do  we  need  to  pray;  but  we  may 
well  join  with  David  in  the  earnest  petitions,  “ Open 
Thou  mine  eyes,  that  I may  behold  wondrous  things 
out  of  Thy  law.  . . . Give  me  understanding,  and 
I shall  keep  Thy  law;  yea,  I shall  observe  it  with 
my  whole  heart.  . . . Order  my  steps  in  Thy  Word: 
and  let  not  any  iniquity  have  dominion  over  me  ” 
(Ps.  1 19:  18,  34,  133).  By  “Thy  law”  is  meant  not 
merely  what  men  commonly  call  the  moral  law  of 


136 


HOLINESS: 


God,  but  His  entire  word,  so  blessedly  celebrated 
in  “the  psalm  of  the  laver”  (119). 

To  read  the  Word  in  a mere  intellectual  manner 
will  not  minister  Christ  to  the  soul.  Earnest,  de- 
vout study  of  the  Scriptures  must  never  be  divorced 
from  believing  prayer.  It  is  by  this  means  that  the 
soul  is  maintained  in  communion  with  God.  Prayer- 
less Bible-reading  becomes  dry  and  unprofitable, 
leaving  the  student  heady  and  cold-hearted.  But 
prayerful  meditation  on  the  inspired  pages  will 
nourish  the  soul  in  divine  affections. 

The  Word  reveals  Christ  to  us  for  food  and  ex- 
ample. It  makes  known  to  us  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit;  and  it  is  the  appointed  medium  for  the 
cleansing  of  our  ways. 

Not  by  trying  to  imagine  what  Jesus  would  do  in 
my  circumstances  do  I learn  how  a Christian  should 
conduct  himself  in  this  world;  but  by  searching  the 
Scriptures,  and  tracing  there  the  lowly  path  of 
heaven’s  anointed  One,  I discern  the  way  in  which 
He  would  have  me  to  walk.  It  is  forgetfulness,  or 
ignorance,  of  this  that  causes  so  many  shipwrecks, 
not  only  in  connection  with  “the  higher-life  move- 
ment,” but  among  believers  generally.  Human 
judgment  takes  the  place  of  the  revealed  will  of 
God,  and  grievous  disaster  is  often  the  result. 

The  second  point  is  of  equal  importance.  Every 
Christian,  is  indwelt  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  we  have 
already  seen.  He  has  the  power  required  for  holy 
living  therefore,  and  need  not  plead  and  wrestle, 
as  is  the  fashion  with  some,  for  “more  power,”  and 
“ more  of  the  Spirit.”  What  is  required  is  subjec- 
tion to  the  Word,  that  one  may  walk  in  the  Spirit 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


137 


A simple  illustration  has  been  helpful  to  many:  The 
believer  may  be  likened  to  a locomotive  engine, 
every  part  in  working  order  and  filled  with  the  pro- 
pelling steam — a fit  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
But  an  engine  thus  equipped  becomes  a source  of 
terrible  destruction  if  off  the  rails.  The  rails  are 
the  word  of  God.  Alas,  how  many  Spirit-indwelt 
people  have  created  havoc  by  wild,  uncontrolled 
emotionalism,  not  in  accordance  with  the  Holy 
Scriptures!  To  have  the  Spirit  does  not  guarantee 
that  one  will  be  guided  aright  unless  he  search  the 
Scriptures  and  allow  them  to  mark  out  his  course, 
any  more  than  to  be  well-equipped  and  full  of  steam 
guarantees  that  an  engine  will  proceed  in  safety  to 
its  destination  unless  it  be  upon  the  rails. 

The  third  statement  has  already  been  before  us 
in  the  paper  on  Sanctification  by  the  Word;  but  I 
would  press  it  again  upon  the  reader’s  attention 
that  the  Scriptures  are  the  water  given  for  our 
practical  cleansing  from  defilement  as  we  go  on  in 
our  appointed  way  through  this  scene.  Let  there 
be  unhesitating  self-judgment  the  moment  I find  my 
behavior  or  my  thoughts  and  the  word  of  God  in 
conflict,  and  I shall  undoubtedly  grow  in  grace  as 
well  as  in  knowledge. 

“There  are  three  who  bear  witness,  the  Spirit, 
and  the  water,  and  the  blood:  and  the  three  agree 
in  one  ” (1  John  5 : 7,  8,  R.  V.). 

The  blood  is  the  witness  of  propitiation,  and  tells 
of  Him  who,  having  died  for  our  sins,  is  Himself 
the  Mercy-seat,  to  whom  we  come  boldly,  as  unto  a 
throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need. 


13s 


holiness: 


The  water  is  the  word  of  God,  as  Eph.  5 : 2 6 and 
Ps.  1 19:  9 make  plain.  That  word  testifies  to  the 
advocacy  of  Christ,  as  a result  of  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  applies  the  word  to  the  heart  and  conscience 
of  the  child  of  God,  thus  cleansing  his  ways  and 
sanctifying  him  daily. 

But  the  three  must  never  be  separated.  “A 
threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken.  ” Christ  Jesus 
has  borne  my  sins,  and  lives  in  glory  to  be  my 
heart’s  loved  Object.  The  Spirit  dwells  in  my 
body,  to  be  the  power  of  the  new  life  and  to  guide 
me  into  all  truth.  The  word  is  the  medium 
through  which  I am  enlightened,  directed,  and 
cleansed. 

In  Eph.  5:  18-21  it  is  written:  “Be  not  drunk 
with  wine,  wherein  is  excess;  but  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit;  speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and  hymns 
and  spiritual  songs,  singing  and  making  melody  in 
your  heart  to  the  Lord;  giving  thanks  always  for  all 
things  unto  God  and  the  Father  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  submitting  yourselves  one  to 
another  in  the  fear  of  God.”  Here  is  the  life  that 
is  life  indeed,  lived  out  in  the  redeemed  on  earth. 
But  how  am  I to  be  “filled  with  the  Spirit?”  Is 
not  this,  after  all,  that  very  “second  blessing” 
which  I have  been  concerned  about?  Let  Col.  3: 
1 6,  17  give  the  answer:  “Let  the  word  of  Christ 
dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom;  teaching  and  ad- 
monishing one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and 
spiritual  songs,  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts 
to  the  Lord.  And  whatsoever  ye  do,  in  word  or 
deed,  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  giving 
thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by  Him.”  The  one 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE 


139 


passage  is  the  complement  of  the  other.  To  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  I must  let  the  word  of  Christ 
dwell  in  me  richly.  Then  will  the  blessed  results 
spoken  of  in  both  epistles  be  manifest  in  me. 

Nowhere  in  Scripture  is  it  taught  that  there  is  a 
sudden  leap  to  be  taken  from  carnality  to  spiritu- 
ality, or  from  a life  of  comparative  unconcern  as  to 
godliness  to  one  of  intense  devotion  to  Christ.  On 
the  contrary,  increase  in  piety  is  ever  presented 
as  a growth,  which  should  be  as  normal  and  natural 
as  the  orderly  progression  in  human  life  from  in- 
fancy to  full  stature  and  power.  In  Peter’s  first 
epistle  he  writes:  “Wherefore  laying  aside  all  mal- 
ice, and  all  guile,  and  hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and 
all  evil  speakings,  as  new-born  babes,  desire  the 
sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  that  ye  may  grow  there- 
by [unto  salvation,  R.  V.]:  if  so  be  ye  have  tasted 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious”  (1  Peter  2:  1-3).  And 
he  again  emphasizes  the  place  and  importance  of 
that  word  with  a view  to  growth  in  spiritual 
strength  when  he  says,  “According  as  His  divine 
power  hath  given  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain 
unto  life  and  godliness,  through  the  knowledge  of 
Him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory  and  virtue:  where- 
by are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises;  that  by  these  ye  might  be  partakers  of 
the  divine  nature,  having  escaped  the  corruption 
that  is  in  the  world  through  lust.  And  besides 
this,  giving  all  diligence,  add  to  [or,  have  in]  your 
faith  virtue;  and  to  virtue,  knowledge;  and  to 
knowledge,  temperance  ; and  to  temperance  pa- 
tience; and  to  patience,  godliness;  and  to  godli- 
ness, brotherly  kindness  ; and  to  brotherly  kind- 


140  HOLINESS  1 

ness,  charity.  For  if  these  things  be  in  yon,  and 
abound,  they  make  you  that  ye  shall  neither  be 
barren  nor  unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ”  (2  Peter  1:  3-1 1).  Here  is  depicted 
no  sudden  growth  of  spirituality  acquired  in  a mo- 
ment, as  a result  of  some  great  renunciation,  but  a 
steady,  sober  walk  with  God,  and  uninterrupted 
growth  in  grace  and  knowledge  through  feeding 
upon  the  Word,  and  giving  it  its  proper  place  in 
the  life. 

It  is  vain  to  reason  that  “there  can  be  no  true 
growth  until  holiness  be  first  obtained  by  faith.” 
Nowhere  does  the  Bible  so  teach;  and  it  is  self- 
evident  that  he  who  is  called  upon  to  lay  aside  all 
malice,  guile,  and  similar  evil  things,  has  not  been 
delivered  from  the  presence  of  a corrupt  nature. 
All  the  New  Testament  exhortations  to  godliness 
are  addressed  to  men  of  like  passions  with  our- 
selves, who  need  to  watch  and  pray  lest  they  enter 
into  temptation,  because  of  the  fact  that  sin  still 
dwells  in  them,  ever  ready  to  assert  itself  if  there 
be  not  continued  self-judgment. 

As  another  striking  example  of  this,  I would  have 
the  reader  notice  the  teaching  of  the  apostle  Paul 
in  regard  to  the  old  and  new  man,  in  the  epistles 
to  the  Ephesians  and  the  Colossians.  Beginning 
with  Eph.  4:  21,  he  writes:  “If  so  be  that  ye  have 
heard  Him,  and  have  been  taught  by  Him,  as  the 
truth  is  in  Jesus:  that  ye  put  off  concerning  the 
former  conversation  [or,  behavior]  the  old  man, 
which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts; 
and  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind;  and 
that  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  ere- 


THE  FALSE  AND  THE  TRUE  14I 

ated  in  righteousness  and  holiness  of  truth.  (See 
margin.)  Wherefore  putting  away  lying,  speak 
every  man  truth  with  his  neighbor:  for  we  are 
members  one  of  another”  (vers.  21-25).  And  he 
follows  this  up  with  exhortations  against  stealing, 
corrupt  communications,  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  bitterness,  wrath,  anger,  and  similar  unholy 
things.  How  out  of  place  such  instruction  if  he  is 
supposed  to  be  telling  the  wholly  sanctified  how  to 
behave ! Fancy  exhorting  a sinless  man  not  to 
grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  we  are 
sealed  until  the  day  of  redemption ! 

But  there  is  neither  confusion  nor  incongruity  if 
I see  that  “the  old  man”  stands  for  all  that  I was 
in  my  Christless  days.  That  man  is  now  put  off. 
In  his  place  I put  on  the  new  man;  that  is,  I am 
called  to  manifest  the  man  in  Christ. 

The  companion-passage  in  Colossians  is  even 
more  explicit:  “ But  now  ye  also  put  off  all  these; 
anger,  wrath,  malice,  blasphemy,  filthy  communi- 
cation out  of  your  mouth.  Lie  not  one  to  another, 
seeing  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his 
deeds;  and  have  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  re- 
newed in  knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him  that 
created  him:  where  there  is  neither  Greek  nor 
Jew,  . . . but  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all”  (Col.  3:  8- 
11).  And  upon  this  he  now  bases  a positive  exhor- 
tation to  put  on  (as  one  would  put  on  his  garments) 
“tender  mercies,  kindness,  humbleness  of  mind, 
meekness,  long-suffering,  ” and  a spirit  of  forgive- 
ness toward  all  men;  while,  as  a girdle  to  bind  all 
in  place,  he  counsels  the  putting  on  of  “love,  the 
uniting  bond  of  peace.” 


142  holiness:  THE  ^alSE  and  the  true 

To  practise  what  these  several  scriptures  incul- 
cate will  be  indeed  a higher  manifestation  of  Chris- 
tian living  than  we  generally  see,  and  this  is  the 
only  real,  practical  sanctification. 

In  closing  this  series  of  papers  on  a subject  so 
generally  misapprehended,  and  concerning  which 
controversy  has  been  rife  in  many  quarters  for 
years,  I commend  all  to  Him  whose  approbation 
alone  is  of  lasting  value,  and  whose  grace  it  is  that 
gives  the  soul  to  enjoy  in  some  little  measure  the 
preciousness  of  Him  in  whom  holiness  and  right- 
eousness have  been  fully  told  out  for  all  His  own. 
May  He  deign  to  use  these  faulty  pages  for  the 
blessing  of  His  people  and  the  glory  of  His  match- 
less name! 

I have  written,  I trust,  with  malice  toward  none 
and  charity  toward  all,  however  mistaken  some 
may  be  as  to  the  line  of  teaching  they  indorse. 
And  I gladly  bear  record  to  the  pious,  God-fearing 
lives  of  many  who  profess  the  “ second  blessing;  ” 
but  I have  no  manner  of  doubt  that  their  devoted- 
ness and  godliness  spring  from  a totally  different 
source  than  that  to  which  they  mistakenly  ascribe 
it,  namely,  to  the  very  thing  I have  been  here  in- 
culcating— meditation  on  the  word  of  God,  coupled 
with  a prayerful  spirit,  thus  leading  out  the  heart 
to  Christ  Himself.  Of  this  may  we  all  know  more 
until  we  see  Him  face  to  face  and  be  forever  wholly 
sanctified ! 


/ 


GOULD  LIBRARY 

EASTERN  NaZARENE  COLLEGE 

NEASE  LIBRARY  EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 

BT767  .167  1900X  GOULD 

Ironside,  Henry  All/Holiness,  the  false 


3 2999  00042  4833 


